Logical  st^ 


.n: 


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homilelic. 

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  Literatare^ 

on  the  verses  of  the  Bible,  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


Royal  Octaro,  CUth,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volume,  $2.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his 
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  sges  this  work  will  want  it."— Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet." — Christian. 

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  vers^e  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  v/ords,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
in  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts."— if etft- 
odist  Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  Inspired 
writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligencer. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 


Genesis,  Vol.  i. 

Genesis,  Vol.  2. 

Exodus. 

Leviticus  and  Numbers. 

Deuteronomy. 

Joshua,  Judges  and  Ruth. 


I.  AND  II.  Chronicles, 
Ezra,  Nehemiah  and 
Esther. 

Proverbs. 

The  Psalms,  Vol.  I:  i- 
xxvi. 


Isaiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxx. 

Jeremiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxii. 
eremiah,   Vol.    II:  xxiiL- 
Hi. 
Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  I. 
Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  II. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 


St.  Matthew. 
St.  Mark. 
St.  Luke,  Vol..  1. 
St.  Luke,  Vol..  2. 
St.  Luke,    Vol.  3. 
St.  John,    Vol.  1. 
St.  John,    Vol.  2. 
St.  John,    Vol.  3. 
Acts,  Vol.  1. 
Acts,  Vol.  2. 
Acts.  Vol.  3. 
Romans,  Vol.  1. 
Romans,  Vol.  2. 
Galatians. 
Ephesians. 

Index  Volume  to 


Philippians  and  C0L»SS1AN6. 

Thessalonians. 

First  Timothy. 

Second  Timothy,   Titub,   an© 

Philemon. 
Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 
Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 
James. 

First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1. 
First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 
Second  Corinthians. 
First  and  Second  Peter. 
First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

and  Jude. 
Revelation. 

Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00. 


Send  for  our  oircular  giving  speoial  offers. 

FLEMING    H.    REVELL     COMPANY 

NEW     YORK:    t58   Fifth  Avenue  CHICAGO:   80   Wabash  Avenue 

TORONTO  LONDON  EDINBURGH 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  SimUes,  Emblems,  lUustradons; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical,  and  Homiletic,  Gathered  frona 
s  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
literature,    on  the    Verses   of   the    Bible 


BY 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


PI  ILIPPIANS— COLOSSI ANS  - 


Nkw  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell   Company 

London    and    Edinburgh 


INTBODUOTION  TO  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE 
PHILIPPIANS. 

L  Thb  GnoimsTiROKS  or  thi  WRirnu — Julias  (Acta  zzviiL  16)  having  given  op 
hii  prisoner  to  Barrns  the  PrsBtorian  Prefect,  whose  doty  it  was  to  keep  in  onstody 
all  persons  who  were  to  be  tried  before  the  Emperor,  that  official,  instead  of 
confining  Paul  within  the  walls  of  the  Praetorian  Barrack,  indalgently  permitted 
him  to  reside  in  his  own  hired  house.  We  most  not  forget,  however,  that  he  was 
still  a  prisoner  nnder  military  cnstody,  chained  by  the  arm  day  and  night  to  one  of 
the  imperial  body-gaard — and  thns  Bnbjected  to  the  radeness  and  caprice  of  an 
inaolent  soldiery.  This  severity,  however,  was  indispensable  according  to  Roman 
law ;  and  he  received  every  indalgence  which  it  was  in  the  power  of  the  prefect  to 
grant  (Acts  zxviii.  80-31).  In  the  absence  of  his  accusers  the  progress  of  the 
apostle's  trial  was  necessarily  suspended,  for  the  Boman  courts  required  the 
personal  presence  of  the  prosecutor ;  and  the  trial  itself,  from  the  distance  from 
which  the  witnesses  would  have  to  be  summoned,  the  nature  of  Boman  legal  pro- 
cedure, and  the  adjonrnmeots  to  suit  the  Emperor's  convenience  might  well 
occupy  a  period  extending  from  August,  1.0.  61  to  the  beginning  of  juD.  63.  Mean- 
while the  prisoner  had  a  wide  sphere  of  action.  Not  only  "  the  crowd  which 
pressed  opon  him  daily,"  but  *'  the  care  of  all  the  Churches "  demanded  his 
constant  vigilance.  Though  tied  down  to  a  single  spot  he  kept  ap  a  constant 
intercourse,  by  his  delegates,  with  his  converts  throughout  the  empire,  and  with 
other  Oentile  Churches  who  had  not  seen  his  face  in  the  fiesh.  Luke,  his  fellow 
traveller,  remained  with  him  during  his  bondage ;  Timotheus,  his  beloved  son  in 
the  faith,  ministered  to  him  at  Borne,  as  he  had  done  in  Asia,  Macedonia,  and 
Achaia.  Tychions,  who  had  formerly  borne  him  company  from  Corinth  to 
EphcEus,  is  now  at  hand  to  carry  his  letters  to  the  shores  they  had  visited  together. 
Mark  it  is  delightful  to  find  now  ministering  obediently  to  the  very  apostle  who 
had  once  repudiated  his  services,  and  persevering  in  his  fidelity  to  the  end. 
Demas,  on  the  other  hand,  is  now  a  faithful  "  fellow  labourer"  of  the  apostle,  but 
in  a  few  years  we  shall  find  that  he  had  "  forsaken "  him,  **  having  loved  this 
present  world."  Among  the  rest  of  St.  Paul's  oompaniona  there  were  two  whom 
he  distinguishes  by  the  honourable  title  of  "  fellow  prisoners."  One  of  these  ia 
Aristarchus,  the  other  Epaphras.  With  regard  to  the  former  we  know  that  he  was 
a  Macedonian  of  Thesealonica,  whose  life  was  endangered  by  the  mob  at  Ephesus, 
and  who  embarked  with  St.  Paul  at  Csesarea.  The  other  was  a  Colossian  who 
most  not  be  identified  with  the  Philippian  Epaphroditus,  another  of  St  Paul's 
fellow  labourers.  But  of  all  the  disciples  now  ministering  to  St.  Paul  none  has  a 
greater  interest  than  the  fugitive  slave  Onesimus  who  was  returned  to  his  master 
as  a  "  brother  beloved."    {Conybeare  arid  Howson.) 

n.  Th«  Efistlbb  of  the  First  Boman  CAPTrvrrr. — 1.  Their  character  and  order 
The  charaoteristie  features  of  this  group  are  less  strongly  marked  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Philippians  than  in  the  others.      In  style,  tone,  and  prominent  ideas,  it  beaiS 


vi  INTBODUCTION  TO  ST.  PAUVB  EPISTLE  TO  TEE  PHIUPPIANS. 

a  mach  greater  resemblance  to  the  earlier  letters  than  do  the  Epistles  to  the  Coloa- 
siana  and  Ephesians.  Thus  it  forms  the  link  which  connects  these  two  Epistles 
with  those  of  the  third  apostolic  journey.  It  represents  an  epoch  of  transition  in 
the  religious  controversies  of  the  age,  or  a  short  breathing  space  when  one 
antagonistio  error  has  been  fought  and  overcome,  and  another  is  dimly  foreseen  ia 
th«  future.  The  apostle's  great  battle  hitherto  had  been  with  Pharisaic  Judaism  ; 
his  great  weapon  the  doctrine  of  grace.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippiaua  we  have 
the  spent  wave  of  this  controversy  (see  ch.  iii).  But  of  all  the  earlier  letters  it 
most  nearly  resembles  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  to  which  it  stands  next  in 
chronological  order.  At  least  I  do  not  think  that  so  many  and  so  close  parallels 
can  be  produced  with  any  other  Epistle  as  the  following  : — Phil.  i.  8,  4,  7,  8  with 
Rom.  L  8-11 ;  Phil.  i.  10  with  Rom.  ii.  18 ;  Phil.  ii.  8-11  with  Rom.  xiv.  9,  11 ; 
Phil.  ii.  2-4  with  Rom.  xii.  1&-19 ;  PhU.  iii.  3  with  Rom.  ii.  28,  L  9,  v.  11 ;  Phil, 
iii.  4-6  with  Rom.  xi.  1 ;  Phil.  iii.  9  with  Rom.  x.  8,  ix.  31-32;  Phil.  iii.  10-11,  21 
with  Rom.  vi.  5,  viiL  29 ;  Phil.  iii.  19  with  Rom.  vi.  21,  xvi.  18;  Phil.  iv.  18  with 
Rom.  xii.  1.  Several  verbal  coincidences  might  also  be  pointed  out.  But  if  these 
resemblances  suggest  as  early  a  date  for  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  as  circum- 
stances will  allow,  there  are  cogent  reasons  for  placing  the  others  as  late  as  possible. 
The  letters  to  the  Colossians  and  Ephesians  exhibit  an  advanced  stage  in  the 
development  of  the  Church.  The  heresies  which  the  apostle  here  combats  are  no 
longer  the  crude,  materialistic  errors  of  the  early  childhood  of  Christianity,  but  the 
more  subtle  speculations  of  its  maturer  age.  The  doctrine  which  he  preaches  is  not 
now  "  the  milk  for  babes,"  but  the  "  strong  meat "  for  grown  men.  He  speaks  to 
his  oonverts  no  more  "as  unto  carnal"  but  "as  unto  spiritual."  In  Ephesians 
especially  his  teaching  soars  to  the  loftiest  height  as  he  dwells  on  the  mystery  of  the 
Word  and  of  the  Church.  Here,  too,  we  find  the  earliest  reference  to  the  Christian 
hymn  (Eph.  t.  14)  showing  that  the  devotion  of  the  Church  was  at  length  finding 
expression  in  set  forms  of  words.  In  both  ways  these  Epistles  bridge  over  the  golf 
which  separates  the  pastoral  letters  from  the  apostle's  earlier  writings.  The  hefeBiet 
of  the  pastoral  letters  are  the  heresies  of  the  Colossians  and  Ephesians  grown  rank 
and  corrupt.  The  solitary  quotation  already  mentioned  is  the  precursor  of  the  not 
unfrequent  references  to  Christian  formularies  in  these  latest  of  the  apostle's 
writings.  And  then  the  directions  relating  to  ecclesiastical  government  which  are 
scattered  through  the  pastoral  Epistles  are  the  outward  correlative,  the  practical 
aequel  to  the  sublime  doctrine  of  the  Church  first  set  forth  in  its  fulness  in  the 
Epistle  to  the   Ephesians.     (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  2.  Their  value.     Truly,  prison 

literature  has  an  imperishable  interest  and  an  enduring  lesson  clinging  to  it.  John, 
in  the  exile  and  slavery  of  the  lonely  rock  of  Patmos,  around  which  the  storm-windi 
of  persecution  are  raging,  giving  forth  a  solemn  voice  of  comfort  and  warning  and 
direction  to  the  universal  Church,  as  "  the  awful  vision  of  coming  destiny "  ii 
unfolded  before  his  view — Paul,  here,  in  the  restraints  and  bonds  of  the  Roman 
Pretorinm  penning  his  Epistles — Luther  in  his  chamber  in  the  Wartbnrg,  trans- 
lating them  —  Bnnyan  in  his  prison  at  Bedford,  "  for  the  Word  of  God  and 
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,"  commencing  his  immortal  allegory  with  an  allusion  to 
his  personal  trials,  brief,  artless  as  this,  "  As  I  walked  through  the  wilderness  of 
this  world,  I  lighted  on  a  certain  place  where  was  a  den,  and  laid  me  down  in  that 
place  to  sleep," — these  and  many  similar  cases  prove  to  as  that  prison  walls,  to  the 
inner  eye  of  the  believer,  may  dilate  in  ever-widening  vistas  into  the  world  unseen. 
They  give  eminent  illustration  of  this  troth,  that  "  the  mouth  which  persecution 
closes  Ood  opens,  and  bids  it  speak  to  the  world."    (/.  Eutchinton,  D.D.) 

III.  Teb  Philtppun  Chubch. — 1.  Its  establishment  and  early  history.  In  Acts  xvi. 
we  learn  that  Paul  and  his  travelling  companions  were  directed  away  from  Asia  to  the 
Macedonian  city  of  riii'.ipin.     On  arriving  there  they  repaired  to  the  oratory  "by 


IKTBODVCTION  TO  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.   vn 

the  river  side,"  where  a  few  women  were  in  the  habit  on  the  Sabbath  ol  worshipping 
Ood.  It  was  not  in  the  eyuagogue,  as  at  Thessalonica,  but  in  the  free  air  of 
heaven  that  the  gospel  was  here  first  proclaioied.  During  this  apostolio  visit  of 
'•  certain  days  "  extent,  this  earliest  European  Church  was  formed.  As  this  city 
was  more  than  usually  representative  of  varied  nationalities  and  modes  of  life,  so 
was  the  infant  Church  which  arose  within  its  walls.  We  are  familiar  with  the  firat 
three  converts.  Lydia,  the  seller  of  purple,  whose  business  had  brought  her  from  her 
native  city  of  Thyatira,  heard  the  apostle's  message,  and  the  Lord  opened  her  heart 
to  receive  it.  Alongside  of  this  Asiatic  convert  there  stands  conspicnoas  the  Greek 
female  slave — the  girl  with  the  Pytho-spirit,  herself  superstitious,  and  ministering, 
ander  avaricious  masters,  to  the  degrading  superstition  of  others — she  too,  cleansed 
and  in  her  right  mind,  became  henceforth  a  willing  servant  of  Christ  Jeans.  Once 
more,  we  see  the  Boman  jailor,  bearing,  doubtless,  in  his  character  and  oondoot  all 
the  marks  of  pride  of  race  and  supercilious  contempt  of  others,  it  may  be,  hardened 
by  official  duties,  and  utterly  nnspiritnal  in  liis  personal  thonghta  and  aotions, 
brought  suddenly  to  exclaim,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  and  in  the  heart- 
acceptance  of  the  answer,  "  Eelieve  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thoa  ehalt  be 
eaved,  and  thy  house,"  at  length  rejoicing, — "  believing  in  God  with  all  his  hoase." 
When  we  contemplate  these  three  converts,  so  diilerent  in  nationality,  in  social 
position,  in  the  occupations  of  daily  life,  in  mental  training,  henceforth  one  in 
«entiment  and  work,  w€  see  even  thus  early  in  the  progress  of  Christianity  its 
adaptation  to  universal  needs,  and  its  claim  to  universal  dominion.  The  Chorch, 
whose  beginnings  we  can  so  clearly  trace,  grew  and  multiplied,  and  mightilj  pre- 
vailed. Almost  at  once,  at  least  long  before  this  Epistle  was  addressed  to  it,  it  had 
become  a  vigorous,  because  a  united  company — a  visible  corporation,  completely 
equipped  and  organized.  {J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.)  The  accusation  levelled  against 
St.  Paul  was  one  which  was  intimately  connected  with  the  peculiar  position  of 
Philippi  as  a  Eoman  colony — a  fragment,  as  it  were,  of  the  imperial  city  itself.  We 
note,  indeed,  that  at  this  very  time  (Acts  xviii.  2)  "  Claudius  had  commanded  all 
Jews  to  depart  from  Borne,"  and  it  is  at  least  probable  that  this  decree  of  banish- 
ment might  extend  to  the  Eoman  colonies  as  distinguished  from  the  ordinary 
provincial  cities.  Accordingly,  in  the  accusation  stress  is  laid  on  the  fact  that  the 
accused  were  "  Jews."  The  Church  was,  therefore,  mainly  a  Gentile  Chorch,  and 
its  attachment  to  the  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles  was  especially  strong  and  fervent. 
The  foundation  of  the  Church  had  been  laid  amidst  a  persecution  in  which  the 
Roman  magistrates  simply  played  into  the  hands  of  mob  violence,  and  we  gather 
from  the  Epistle  that  the  Church  had  still  to  undergo  "the  same  conflict"  of 
suffering  from  "  their  adversaries  "  "  which  they  had  seen  in  him."  It  grew  up 
under  the  bracing  air  of  trial,  with  a  peculiar  steadfastness,  warm-heartedness,  and 
simplicity,  apparently  unvexed  by  the  speculative  waywardness  of  Corinth,  or  the 
wUd  heresies  of  Ephesus  or  CoIdsssb.  Of  St.  Paul's  subsequent  visits  we  h»Te  no 
tull  record.  We  cannot  doubt  Ihat  he  visited  the  city  on  his  way  from  Ephesns  to 
Macedonia  and  Greece  (Acts  xx.  3).  The  common  tradition  dates  2  Cor.  from 
Philippi  on  that  occasion.  We  know  (Acts  xx.  6)  that  it  was  from  Philippi  that  he 
started  some  months  after,  on  his  last  jourr^ey  to  Jerusalem.  At  a  period  subse- 
quent to  this  Epistle  we  learn  (1  Tim.  i.  3)  that  St.  Paul,  apparently  after  a  visit, 
to  Ephesus,  "  went  into  Macedonia  "  after  his  first  captivity,  and  so  no  doubt  ful- 
filled his  hope  of  revisiting  this  beloved  Church.  {Bp.  Barry.)  2.  Its  later 
history.  A  whole  generation  passes  away  before  the  name  of  Philippi  is  again 
mentioned.  Early  in  the  second  century  Ignatius,  now  on  his  way  to  martyrdom 
at  Bome,  is  kindly  entertained  here  and  escorted  on  his  way  by  members  of  the 
Church.  This  circumstance  seems  to  have  given  rise  to  communications  with 
Polycarp,  the  Bishop  of  Smyrna,  in  which  the  Philippians  invite  him  to  address  to 
them  some  words  of  advice  and  exhortation.     Polycarp  responds  and  congratulates 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8, 


them  on  their  devotion  to  the  martyrs,  and  rejoices  that  "  the  sturdy  root  of  their 
faith,  famous  from  the  earliest  days,  still  survives  and  bears  fruit  imto  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."    He,  and  such  as  he,  cannot  "  attain  unto  the  wisdom  of  the  blessed 
and  glorious  Paul,"  who  taught  them  in  person,  and  wrote  to  them  instructionB 
which  they  would  do  well  to  study.     He  offers  many  words  of  exhortation,  more 
especially  relating  to  the  qualifications  of  widows,  deacons,  and  presbyters.     He 
warns  them  against  those  who  deny  that  Christ  has  come  in  the  flesh,  against  those 
who  reject  the  testimony  of  the  Cross,  against  those  who  say  there  is  no  resurrection 
or  judgment.     He  sets  before  them  for  imitation  the  example  "  not  only  of  the 
blessed  Ignatius,  and  Zosimos,  and  Bufus,  but  also  of  others  of  their  own  Church, 
and  Paul  himself,  and  the  other  apostles,"  who  have  gone  to  their  rest.     There  is, 
however,  one  cause  for  sorrow.      Valens,  a  presbyter,  and  his  wife  have  brought 
■caudal  on  the  gospel  by  their  avarice.     From  all  participation  in  their  crime 
Polycarp  exonerates  the  great  body  of  the  Church.     He  trusts  the  offenders  will  be 
truly  penitent :  and  he  counsels  the  Philippians  to  treat  them,  not  as  enemies,  but 
as  erring  members.    They  are  well  versed  in  the  Scriptures  and  will  not  need  to  be 
reminded  how  the  duty  of  gentleness  and  forbearance  is  enforced  therein.     With 
this  notice  the  Philippian  Church  may  be  said  to  pass  out  of  sight.     From  the  time 
of  Polycarp  its  name  is  very  rarely  mentioned;  and  scarcely  a  single  fact  is  recorded 
which  throws  light  on  its  internal  condition.   Here  and  there  the  name  of  a  bishop 
appears  in  connection  with  the  records  of  an  ecclesiastical  council.  On  one  occasion 
its  prelate  subscribes  a  decree  as  vicegerent  of  the  metropolitan  of  Thessalonica. 
But  though  the  see  is  said  to  exist  in  the  present  day,  the  city  itself  has  long  been 
a  wilderness.      Of  its  destruction  or  decay  no  record  is  left ;  and  among  its  ruins 
travellers  have  hitherto  failed  to  find  any  Christian  remains.    Of  the  Church  which 
stood  foremost  among  all  the  apostolic  communities  in  faith  and  love,  it  may  be 
literally  said  that  not  one  stone  stands  upon  another.     Its  whole  career  is  a  signal 
monument  of  the  inscrutable  counsels  of  God.     Bom  into  the  world  with   the 
brightest  promise,  the  Church  of  Philippi  has  lived  without  a  history  and  perished 
without  a  memorial.     {Bp.  Lightfoot.)        3.  Its  characteristics.   Its  members  were 
chiefly  Gentile.    There  is  not  a  single  Old  Testament  quotation  or  allusion  in  the 
Epistle  addressed  to  it.      It  is  exposed  to  persecution  from  without,  and  there  are 
tendencies  on  the  part  of  a  few  to  disunion  within,  but  there  is  much  calm  and  joyful 
service.  The  apostle  finds  little  to  reprove  and  much  in  the  warmest  terms  to  com- 
mend.    It  is  perhaps  quite  justifiable  to  institute  a  comparison  between  this  Euro- 
pean Church  of  Philippi  and  the  Asiatic  Church  of  Tbyatira.      The  first  convert, 
Lydia,  at  once  suggests  this.      We  may  regard  her  as  in  some  respects  the  actual 
founder  of  both.     We  know  that  at  FhiUppi  her  house  became  the  centre  of 
Christian  influences,  and  when,  therefore,  she  returned  to  her  own  home  in  Thya- 
tira,  she  would  certainly  not  be  less  active  and  zealous  there  than  she  had  been  ist 
the  city  of  her  casual  or  occasional  abode.  In  the  circle  of  her  friends,  and  probably 
these  were  many,  for  her  position  seems  to  have  been  one  of  affluence  and  influence, 
she  would  be  a  loyal  witness  for  Christ.     The  truth  thus  proclaimed  by  a  woman's 
lips,  and  illustrated  and  enforced  by  a  woman's  life,  could  not  fail  to  leave  its  deep 
and  abiding  impress  upon  the  Christian  communities  of  both  these  heathen  cities. 
And  so,  indeed,  we  find  it  to  have  been.  The  love  and  faith  exhibited  in  ministering 
works  which  in  our  risen  and  glorified  Lord's  message  to  the  angel  of  the  Church 
of  Thyatira  receive  their  due  award  of  praise,  these  are  equally  prominent,  indeed 
more  so,  in  Philippi.      The  Philippian  Church  on  three  separate  occasions  sent 
subsidies  to  relieve  Paul's  necessities.     We  may  therefore  be  warranted  in  tracing 
the  character  as  well  as  the  origin  of  these  two  Churches  to  the  one  source — the 
Impress  of  an  ardent  and  organizing  female  influence,  an  impress  visible  in  the 
benevolent  forms  which  their  faith  so  readily  assumed.     {J.  Hutchimcm.,  D.D.) 
The  Philippian  Church  was  eminently  free  from  errors  of  doctrine  and  irregularities 


INTnODUCTION  TO  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.   ix 

of  practice.  No  schism  eeems  to  have  divided  it ;  no  heresies  had  crept  into  ita 
faith  ;  no  false  teachers  had  perverted  its  allegiance.  One  fault  alone  seems  to  have 
needed  correction,  and  this  was  of  so  personal  and  limited  a  character  that,  instead 
of  denouncing  it,  Paul  only  needs  to  hint  at  it  gently  and  with  affectionate  entreaty. 
This  was  a  want  of  unity  between  some  of  its  female  members,  especially  Euodia 
and  Syutyche,  whom  Paul  begs  to  become  reconciled  to  each  other,  and  whose  fend, 
and  any  partisanship  which  it  may  have  entailed,  he  tacitly  and  considerately 
rebukes  by  the  constant  iteration  of  the  word  "  all  "  to  those  whom  he  can  only 
regard  as  one  united  body.  In  fact,  we  may  say  that  disunion  and  despondency 
were  the  main  dangers  to  which  they  were  exposed  ;  hence  "  all "  and  "  rejoice  " 
•re  the  two  leading  words  and  thoughts.    {Archdeacon  Farrar.) 

IV.  The  Epistle  to  the  Philippiamb. — 1.  Its  occasion.  It  arose  directly  out  of  one 
of  the  few  happy  incidents  which  diversified  the  dreary  uncertainties  of  St.  Paul's 
captivity.  This  was  the  visit  of  Epaphroditus,  a  leading  presbyter  of  the  Church 
of  Philippi,  with  the  fourth  contribution  by  which  that  loving  and  generous 
Church  had  ministered  to  his  necessities.  At  Borne  St.  Paul  was  unable  wita 
his  fettered  hands  to  work  for  his  livelihood,  and  it  it  possible  that  he  found 
no  opening  for  his  special  trade.  One  would  have  thought  that  the  Roman 
Christians  were  saflQcieutly  numerous  and  wealthy  to  render  it  an  easy  matter 
to  supply  his  necessities  ;  but  the  unaccountable  indifference  which  seems  to  have 
marked  their  relations  to  him,  and  of  which  he  complains  both  in  this  and  in 
his  later  imprisonment,  shows  that  much  could  not  be  hoped  from  their 
affection,  and  strangely  belied  the  zealous  respect  with  which  they  had  come 
thirty  or  forty  miles  to  greet  him.  It  is  of  course  possible  that  they  may  have 
been  willing  to  help  him,  but  that  he  declined  an  assistance  respecting  which 
he  was  sensitively  careful.  But  the  Pbilippians  knew  and  valued  the  privilege 
which  had  been  accorded  them  by  their  father  in  Christ  by  helping  him  in  his 
need.  It  was  the  cnstom  throughout  the  Empire  to  alleviate  by  friendly 
presents  the  hard  lot  of  prisoners,  and  we  may  be  sure  that  when  once  the 
Philippians  had  heard  of  his  condition,  friends  like  Lydia  and  other  converts, 
who  had  means  to  spare,  would  seize  the  earliest  opportunity  to  add  to  hia 
comforts.  Epaphroditus,  flinging  himself  into  the  service  of  the  gospel,  had  suc- 
cumbed to  the  unhealthiness  of  the  season,  and  been  prostrated  by  an  all  bat  fatal 
sickness.  The  news  of  this  illness  had  reached  Philippi,  and  caused  great 
solicitude  (ch.  ii.  26).  Paul  had  many  trials  to  bear,  and  the  death  of  his 
"  brother  "  would  have  plunged  him  in  yet  deeper  distress.  We  cannot  doubt 
that  he  pleaded  with  God  for  his  sick  friend,  aud  God  had  mercy  upon  him. 
Epaphroditus  recovered  ;  and  deeply  as  Paul  in  his  loneliness  and  discouragement 
would  have  rejoiced  to  keep  him  at  his  side,  he  yielded,  with  his  usual  unselfish- 
ness, to  the  yearning  of  Epaphroditus  for  his  home  and  of  the  Philippians  for  their 
absent  pastor.  He  therefore  sent  him  back,  and  with  him  the  letter  in  which  he 
expiessed  Lis  thankfulness  for  that  constant  affection  which  had  so  greatly  cheered 
his  heart.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  2.  Its  date  and  place.  The  indications  of 
these  are  unusually  clear.  It  is  written  "  in  bonds  "  (ch.  i.  7-13) ;  in  the  Pmtorium 
(i.  13)  ;  it  sends  greeting  from  the  "  saints  in  Cajsar's  household  "  (iv.  21)  ;  it  ex- 
presses an  expectation  of  some  crisis  in  his  imprisonment  (i.  20-26) ;  and  a  confident 
hope  of  revisiting  Philippi  (i.  26,  ii.  24).  All  these  indications  place  it  in  the  Roman 
imprisonment  of  St.  Paul,  which  we  know  to  have  lasted  without  trial  or  release  for 
"  two  whole  years,"  and  which  certainly  began  about  a.d.  61.  The  date  therefore 
must  be  fixed  about  the  year  a.d.  62  or  63.  (Bp.  Barry.)  3.  Its  genuineness. 
(1)  External  evidence.  This  is  very  strong.  In  all  the  ancient  catalogues  from  the 
Muratorian  (a.d.  170),  in  all  ancient  versions  it  is  placed  amongst  the  undoubted 
Epistles  of  St.  Paul.  In  the  Christian  writings  before  the  end  of  the  second  century, 


X  INTRODUCTION  TO  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS. 

knoulelge  of  it  rnay  be  distinctly  traced  ;  after  that  time  it  is  quoted  continnally. 
Thus,  in  the  Apostolic  Fathers,  to  say  nothing  of  slighter  indications,  Polycarp,  in 
his  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  expressly  declares  its  Pauline  authorship  and  quotes 
from  it,  as  does  the  "Testament  of  the  Twelve  Patriarchs"  dating  early  in  the 
second  century.  Perhaps  the  earliest  direct  quotation  of  it  is  in  the  Epistles  of  the 
Churches  of  Lyons  and  Vienne  (a.d.  177),  where  we  find  the  great  passage,  "  He 
being  in  the  form  of  God,"  Ac.  Then,  as  in  other  cases,  the  habit  of  quotation 
begins  in  Ireuseus,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  and  Teitullian,  and  continues  afterwards 
unbroken.  (2)  Internal  evidence.  This  rises  almost  to  demonstration.  The  strong 
marks  of  personality  which  we  trace  in  every  line,  the  unstudied  frequency  of 
historical  allusion  and  of  audesigned  coincidences  with  historical  records,  the 
simple  and  natural  occasion  of  writing,  in  the  reception  of  the  offerings  and  the 
illnesf  of  Epanhroditus,  the  absence  of  all  formal  doctrine  or  ecclesiastical  purpose, 
the  fulness  and  warmth  of  personal  affection — all  are  anmistakeaole  marks  of 
genuineness,  and  are  inconceivable  on  the  supposition  of  forgery.  The  character 
of  St.  Paul,  as  unconsciously  drawn  in  it,  is  unquestionably  the  same  character 
which  lives  and  glows  in  the  Corinthian  and  Galatian  Epistles  ;  and  yet  there  is  in 
it  an  indescribable  growth  into  greater  calmness  and  gentleness  which  corresponds 
remarkably  with  advance  of  age  and  change  of  circumstances.  There  are  also 
marked  similarities  both  of  style  and  expression  with  the  earlier  Epistles,  and  that 
mingling  of  identity  and  development  of  idea  which  is  notable  in  all  the  Epistles 
of  the  captivity.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  even  in  the  freest  speculation  of 
the  higher  criticism  there  are  but  few  examples  of  scepticism  as  to  the  genuineness 
of  this  Epistle.  {Ibid.)  4.  Its  character.  It  is  not  a  trumpet-note  of  defiance, 
like  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  It  is  not  the  reply  to  a  number  of  questions,  like 
the  First  to  the  Corinthians.  It  is  not  a  treatise  of  theology,  like  the  Epistle  to  the 
Bomans.  It  has  more  of  a  personal  character,  like  the  Second  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians  ;  but  it  is  poured  forth,  not  to  those  towards  whom  he  had  little  cause 
for  gratitude  and  much  need  for  forbearance — not  to  jealous  critics  and  bitter 
opponents — but  to  the  favourite  converts  of  his  ministry,  to  the  dearest  children  of 
his  love.  It  is  a  genuine  and  simple  letter — the  warm,  spontaneous,  loving  effusion 
of  a  heart  which  could  express  itself  with  unreserved  affection  to  a  most  kind  and  a 
most  beloved  Church.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  5.  Its  relation  to  the  gospel.  It 
may  be  taken  to  exhibit  the  normal  type  of  the  apostle's  teaching  when  not  deter- 
mined and  limited  by  individual  circumstances,  and  thus  to  present  the  essential 
substance  of  the  gospel.  Dogmatic  forms  are  the  buttresses  or  scaffold-poles  of  the 
building,  not  the  building  itself.  But  in  the  reaction  against  the  excess  of  dogma 
there  iB  a  tendency  to  lay  the  whole  stress  of  the  gospel  on  its  ethical  precepts. 
For  instance,  men  will  assume  and  even  avow  that  its  kernel  is  contained  in  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount.  This  conception  may  seem  healthy  in  its  impulse  and 
practical  in  its  aim,  but  it  is  dangerous  to  morality;  for  when  the  sources  are  cut 
off  the  stream  will  cease  to  flow.  Certainly  this  is  not  St.  Paul's  idea  of  the  gospel 
as  it  appears  in  this  Epistle.  If  we  would  learn  what  he  held  to  be  its  essence, 
we  must  ask  ourselves  what  is  the  significance  of  such  phrases  as  "  I  desire  you  in 
the  heart  of  Jesus  Christ,"  "  For  me  to  live  is  Christ,"  "  That  I  may  know  the 
power  of  His  resurrection,"  "I  have  all  strength  in  Christ  who  giveth  me  power." 
Though  the  gospel  is  capable  of  doctrinal  exposition,  and  is  eminently  fertile  in 
moral  results,  vet  its  substance  is  neither  a  doctrinal  system  nor  an  ethical  code, 
but  a  Person  and  a  Life.  (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  6.  Its  analysis.  I,  The  first  section 
(original  letter  ?).  1.  Introduction.  (1)  Salvation  (i.  1-2).  (2)  Thanksgiving  for 
their  fellowship  in  the  work  of  the  gospel,  specially  shown  towards  himself  (^-8). 
(3)  Prayer  for  their  fuller  knowledge  and  increase  of  fruitfulness  to  the  end  (9-11). 
2.  Declaration  of  the  position  at  Rome.  (1)  The  progress  of  the  gospel  through  his 
bonds.      Stimulating  preaching  of  the  gospel,  partly  in  good  will,  partly  in  strife. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  TEE  PEILIPPIANS.    xi 

but  in  any  case  a  cause  of  joy  (12-18).  (2)  His  own  division  of  feeling,  between  a 
desire  to  depart  and  a  willingness  to  remain  for  their  sakes,  which  he  knows  will  be 
realized  (19-26).  3.  Exhortation.  (1)  To  steadfast  boldness  under  persecution 
(27-30).  (2)  To  nnity  of  spirit  in  the  humility  and  self-sacrifice  of  the  mind  of 
Christ  Jesus  (ii.  1-4).  4.  The  doctrine  of  Christ.  (1)  His  humility  in  the 
Incarnation  (5-7).  (2)  His  humility  in  the  Passion  (8).  (3)  His  exaltation 
(9-11).  6.  Original  conclusion  of  the  Epistle.  (1)  Final  exhortation  to  obedience, 
quietness,  purity,  joy  with  him  in  sacrifice  (12-18).  (2)  Mission  and  commendation 
of  Timotheus  as  St.  Paal's  forerunner  (19-24).  (3)  Mission  and  commendation  of 
Epaphroditus  (25-30).  (4)  Final  "  farewell  in  the  Lord"  (iii.  1).  II.  The  second 
section  (postscript?).  1.  Practical  warnings — (1)  Against  Judaism,  by  the  example 
of  his  own  renunciation  of  all  Jewish  privileges  (2-10).  (2)  Against  claim  of  per- 
fection, again  enforced  by  his  own  example  (11-16).  (3)  Against  Antinomian 
profligacy,  as  unworthy  of  the  "citizens  of  heaven"  (17-21).  2.  Exhortations 
renewed — (1)  To  unity  (iv.  1-3).  (2)  To  joy,  thankfulness,  and  peace  (4-7).  (3) 
To  following  of  all  good  in  the  fulness  in  which  he  had  taught  it  (8-9).  3.  Acknow- 
ledgment of  offerings.  (1)  Rejoicing  in  their  renewed  care  for  him  (10-14).  (2) 
Remembrance  of  their  former  liberality  (15-17).  (3)  Thanks  and  blessing  (18-20). 
i.  Concluding  salutation  and  blessing.     (Bp.  Barry.) 

T.  TaouoHTS  BuooESTED  BT  TBS  EpisixE. — This  Epistle  is  not  only  the  noblest 
reflection  of  St.  Paul's  personal  character  and  spiritual  illumination,  his  large  sym- 
pathies, his  womanly  tenderness,  his  delicate  courtesy,  his  frank  independence,  his 
entire  devotion  to  his  Master's  service  ;  but  as  a  monument  of  the  power  of  the 
gospel  it  yields  in  importance  to  none  of  the  apostolic  writings.  Scarcely  thirty 
years  have  passed  since  one  Jesus  was  crucified  as  a  malefactor  in  a  remote  province 
of  the  empire  ;  scarcely  ten  since  one  Paul,  a  Jew  of  Tarsus,  first  told  at  Pbilippi  the 
story  of  His  cruel  death  ;  and  what  is  the  result?  Imagine  one,  to  whom  the  name 
of  Christ  bad  been  hitherto  a  name  only,  led  by  circumstances  to  study  this 
touching  picture  of  the  relations  between  St.  Paul,  bis  fellow  labourers,  his 
converts ;  and  pausing  to  ask  himself  what  nnseen  power  bad  produced  these 
marvellous  results.  Stronger  than  any  associations  of  time  or  place,  of  race  or 
profession,  stronger  than  the  instinctive  sympathies  of  common  interest  or  the 
natural  ties  of  blood  relationship,  a  mysterious  bond  unites  St.  Paul,  Epaphroditus, 
the  Philippian  converts ;  them  to  the  apostle,  and  him  to  them,  and  each  to  the 
other.  In  this  threefold  cord  of  love  the  strands  are  so  intertwined  and  knotted 
together,  that  the  writer  cannot  conceive  of  them  as  disentangled.  The  joy  of  one 
must  be  the  joy  of  all ;  the  sorrow  of  one  the  sorrow  of  all.  The  apostle's  language 
famishes  the  reply  to  such  a  questioner.  This  tinseen  power  is  the  "  power  of 
Christ's  resurrection."  This  mutual  love  is  diffused  from  the  heart  of  Jesus  Christ, 
beating  with  His  impulses  and  living  by  His  life.  When  the  contemporary  heathen 
remarked  how  "  these  Christians  loved  one  another,"  he  felt  that  he  was  confronted 
by  an  unsolved  enigma.  The  power  which  wrought  the  miracle  was  hidden  from 
him.  It  was  no  new  commandment  indeed,  for  it  appealed  to  the  oldest  and  truest 
impulses  of  the  human  heart-  And  yet  it  was  a  new  commandment ;  for  in  Christ's 
life  and  death  and  resurrection  it  had  found  not  only  an  example  and  a  sanation, 
but  a  power,  a  vitality,  wholly  unfelt  and  unknown  before.  To  all  ages  of  the 
Church — to  our  own  especially — tLis  Epistle  reads  a  great  lesson.  While  we  are 
expending  oar  strength  on  theological  definitions  or  ecclesiastical  rules,  it  recalls 
us  from  these  distractions  to  the  very  heart  and  centre  of  the  gospel — the  life  of 
Christ,  and  the  life  in  Christ.  Here  is  the  meeting-point  of  all  our  ilifferences,  the 
healing  of  all  our  feuds,  the  true  life  alike  of  irdividuals  and  Churches.  {Bp, 
Ligh^fooi.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTKATOE. 

PHILIPPIANS. 

CHAPTEB   L 

Vbbs.  1-8.  Panl  and  Tlmotheas,  tlie  servants  of  ClirlBt  Jesus,  to  all  thn  salnti 
In  Clirist  Jesus  wMcli  are  at  PMlippL — PauVt  greeting  to  the  Philippiana : — 1. 
Servants  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  most  royal  title  which  human  beings  can  assume. 
2.  Saints  take  precedence  of  bishops  and  deacons  forasmuch  as  character  la 
immortal,  while  office  is  but  temporary.  3.  All  blessing  is  with  the  absolute; 
even  the  chief  of  the  apostles  can  only  bless  ministerially,  not  primarily.  I.  Thh 
powEB  OF  MEUOBT.  Remembrance  is  a  very  heaven  or  hell.  Memory  follows 
man  like  his  own  shadow.  A  man  of  gladsome  recollections  can  never  ba 
absolutely  alone.  Whenever  the  apostle  took  an  excursion  across  the  mountains 
and  through  the  valleys  of  his  gone  lifetime  he  caught  sight  of  the  loving 
Philippians,  and  their  very  names  gladdened  him — as  a  long-absent  traveller 
might  be  gladdened  by  the  pinnacles  of  the  city  of  his  home.  II.  Mls  serves 
OoD  BT  AiDiKO  God's  SERVANTS.  Paul  thanked  God  for  the  blessing  of  kind, 
helpful  men.  III.  The  mobb  bmiaboed  and  busceptiblb  the  heabt,  the  more 
EASILY  CAM  8EBVICE  BE  BENDEBED  TO  IT.  It  is  easier  to  Win  the  benediction  of  a 
great  and  noble  heart  than  of  a  withered  and  sapless  bone.  Look  at  Elisha  and 
the  woman  of  Shunem ;  see  Christ  blessing  the  woman  for  her  one  box  of  nard  ; 
and  Paul  prostrating  himself  before  God  at  the  little  kindnesses  of  the  Philippians. 

IV.  How  GOOD  A  THING  IT  IS  TO  SERVE  THE  OBEAT,  AND  INFERENTIALLY,  HOW 
SUBLIME    A  THING   TO     LIVE   AND    DIE    IN   THE   SERVICE   OF   THE   GREATEST.       If    Paul 

remembered  these  benefactions,  he  has  also  left  this  testimony :  "  God  is  not 
nnrighteous  to  forget  your  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love."  In  both  cases  it 
is  a  question  of  memory.  Nor  will  God  forget  the  man  who  never  does  a  good 
deed.  V.  Each  of  ds  should  leave  a  memory  that  shall  be  cherished  and 
BLESSED.  A  noble  life  is  not  necessarily  made  up  of  great  efforts,  but  of  little  acts 
of  consideration,  well-timed  smiles  of  encouragement,  gentle  words  and  generous 
interpretations.  Not  one  of  us,  how  hidden  and  feeble  soever,  need  live  a  sterile 
life.  YI.  Every  man  mcst  detebmine  fob  himseu  the  memory  hb  leaves 
BEHIND  him  ;  whether  he  will  so  live  that  "  every  remembrance  "  of  him  shall 
induce  thankfulness  to  God,  or  his  name  be  a  burden  which  memory  would 
willingly  cast  off.  VII.  Paul  stands  forth  as  an  illustrious  man  whilb  thb 
Philippians  abb  not  known  to  us  by  more  than  theib  general  name.  The 
hidden  workers  are  not  on  that  account  to  deem  themselves  useless.  Where  would 
the  oak  be  but  for  invisible  agents?  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  apottolie 
$alutation  teaches — I.  What  we  ought  to  be.  Servants  of  Jesus  Christ ;  saints ; 
nseful  in  His  Ghnrch.  II.  What  we  need.  Grace ;  peace.  III.  Whence  thxsb 
blessings  flow.  From  God  :  from  Jesus  Christ.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  ble»nng$ 
of  the  gotpel : — I.  Theib  nature.  II.  The  boubcb  from  whence  they  are  derived. 
III.  The  channels  by  which  they  are  dispensed.  IV.  The  end  for  which  thej 
are  given.  That  we  may  be  holy,  useful.  {Ibid.)  Addresi  and  talutation  : — 
I.  The  authob.  1.  Paul  had  full  confidence  in  the  love  and  obedience  of  the 
Philippians.  Henoe,  as  in  Thessalonians,  he  drops  the  official  title,  because 
he  knew  that  no  rach  assertion  of  kis  claim  to  be  heard  and  obeyed  was  needed. 

1 


a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

2.  He  introduoes  the  name  of  Timothj  as  his  dear  friend,  well  known  to  th« 
Philippians.  This  was  natural,  but  was  only  a  coartesy.  The  letter  is  Paul's  alone, 
and  carries  with  it  full  apostolic  authority.  When  Timothy  is  referred  to  again  it 
is  in  the  third  person  (chap.  ii.  10).  3.  The  designation,  "  servants,"  d-c,  is  a 
beautiful  one.  James,  the  Lord's  brother,  similarly  begins  his  letter.  It  describes 
all  who,  by  taking  Christ  as  their  Master,  have  entered  into  true  freedom.  II.  The 
Chubch.  1.  Saints,  (1)  This  is  a  most  instructive  paraphrase  for  "Church." 
The  radical  thought  Ib  consecration.  Believers  are  by  their  Saviour's  grace 
separated  from  the  world  to  serve  God.  Our  secular  life  Christ  would  have  us 
make  holy.  We  are  apt  to  think  of  a  Christian  as  one  who  accepts  certain  doctrines 
and  performs  certain  services.  The  only  satisfying  proof  that  the  gospel  has  been 
believed  is  holiness  of  character.  (2)  The  secret  of  true  saintliness — '*  in  Christ 
JesuB."  Out  of  Christ  none  are  saints.  Believers,  because  they  are  "  in  Him,"  have 
within  them  the  pulsations  and  working  of  His  life.  (3)  All  the  saints  are 
addressed  to  show  the  warmth  of  the  apostle's  affection,  his  impartiality,  and  his 
desire  that  all  should  love  one  another.  2.  Bishops  and  deacons.  These  are 
mentioned  probably  because — (1)  Paul  wished  to  acknowledge  their  liberality 
through  Epaphroditus ;  or — (2)  To  support  their  authority,  which  may  have  been 
impugned  ;  or — (3)  In  reply  to  a  letter  subscribed  by  them,  as  in  Acts  xv.  22-23, 
in.  The  pbateb.  The  highest  form  of  Christian  life  is  seen  when  energetic  love  is 
fully  pervaded  by  a  spirit  of  gentleness  and  sympathy,  exhibiting  itself  in  true 

{>olitenesB  to  all  of  all  social  positions,  and  in  little  things  as  well  as  great.  Paul's 
etters,  written  in  the  midst  of  arduous  work,  yet  show  diligent  attention  to  all  the 
kindly  courtesies  of  social  life.  1.  From  "  grace,  "  the  free  favour  of  God,  come  all 
our  blessings.  Its  reference  here  is  to  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  favour  in 
the  enlightening  and  sanctifying  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Grace  to  transform 
the  naturally  sinful  into  the  likeness  of  the  sinless  Jesus  is  what  is  asked  of  God. 
2.  The  meet  companion  of  grace  is  peace,  springing  from  the  knowledge  of  God's 
love  in  Christ.  An  Eastern,  when  he  enters  a  house,  says,  "  Peace  be  to  this 
house,"  as  thoughtlessly  as  we  say,  "  Good  morning " ;  but  the  courtesies  of 
Christians  should  have  reality  of  significance.  3.  The  prayer  is  presented  to  God 
our  Father,  "  from  whom  cometh  every  good  gift,"  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  who 
humbled  Himself  that,  in  a  way  consistent  with  the  glory  of  the  Divine  character, 
'•  grace  and  peace  "  might  be  bestowed  on  man.  [R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  The 
talutation : — L  St.  Paul,  tbk  wbiteb.  1.  He  omits  his  apostolical  authority. 
The  term  apostle  is  not  added  here  nor  in  Thessalonians  and  Philemon.  Hia 
dignity  as  their  father  in  Christ  was  supreme  and  incontestable.  The  man  rather 
than  the  apostle  speaks  in  every  sentence.  The  spirit  of  his  apostolical  prerogative 
is  felt  all  the  more  because  of  the  absence  of  its  letter.  2.  He  unites  his  own 
name  with  that  of  Timothy,  whose  name  appears  with  his  for  a  fourth  time, 
because — (1)  Timothy  had  twice  visited  the  Phihppians  (Acts  xvi.  xix.),  and  was 
doubtless  endeared  to  them.  (2)  Paul  desired  to  invest  him  with  as  much  dignity 
as  possible.  (3)  He  was  probably  St.  Paul's  amanuensis,  and — (4)  perhaps  he  was 
BO  dear  to  his  father  in  the  gospel.  3.  The  bond  between  them  was  the  common 
service  of  Christ  Jesus.  The  apostolic  name  would  not  have  been  common.  It 
was  specific  and  unshared.  "  Servants"  in  a  sense  belongs  to  all  who  belong  to 
Christ.  But  here  the  term  has  relation  to  Christ  as  Lord,  who  assigns  to  all  and 
to  each  their  sphere  of  duty.  II.  Thb  Chctbch  ov  the  Pbiuppians.  1.  Its 
essential  spiritual  character.  "  All  the  saints,"  &o.,  is  the  most  profound  and 
sacred  definition  of  the  true  Church  which  the  New  Testament  contains.  (1) 
"All  "  suggests  the  whole  company  of  those  who  form  the  body  of  which  Christ 
is  the  Head,  the  bond  of  union  being  the  Holy  Ghost  common  to  both.  As  a 
spiritual  Church  on  earth  it  is  the  communion  of  those  who  (Col.  i.  2)  are  "  faith- 
ful "  as  believers  in  Jesus,  '•  saints  "  as  set  apart  from  the  world,  and  *'  brethren  " 
as  united  in  the  brotherhood  of  salvation.  (2)  "  Saints  in  Christ  Jesos  "  indicates — 
(a)  That  they  are  consecrated  to  God  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  redeemed  from  the  curse  of 
the  law  ;  no  longer  condemned  with  the  world  but  accepted  in  the  beloved.  Hence 
they  realize  the  ideal  relation,  a  holy  nation  and  a  peculiar  people.  (6)  That  they 
•re  not  with  Him,  followiug  Him  only,  but  **  in  Christ,"  in  whom  are  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  the  Holy  Ghost  and  all  His  influences ;  full 
redemption  and  all  its  powers  of  life  and  sanctity.  But  all  things  in  Him  arc 
ours,  (c)  All  this  being  true  we  are  furnished  with  a  safeguard  against  a  double 
error.  "There  is  a  tendency  to  regard  this  word  as  synonymous  with  Christian 
people  ;  but  we  must  not  suffer  it  to  become  merely  a  conventional  official  term. 


OHA».  X.]  PHILIPPIANS. 


On  the  other  hand  there  are  those  who  make  it  disparage  the  visible  Charch. 
But  here  "  saints  "  mean  those  who  are  baptized  into  the  visible  community,  and 
■ignifies  not  only  that  they  are  truly  members  of  Christ,  but  that  they  proftss  to 
belong  to  Him.  (3)  Each  individual.  The  glorious  prerogative  of  the  mystical 
fellowship  of  the  body  must  be  a  personal  possession.  2.  Its  outward  organic 
form.  (1)  This  is  the  earliest  reference  of  St.  Paul  to  ecclesiastical  order.  It  marks 
out  a  city  as  containing  one  visible  body,  not  necessarily  always  meeting  in  one 

Slaue,  but  under  one  united  government.  (2)  The  apostle  greets  the  Church  with  the 
iahops  and  deacons  as  one.  They  are  all  on  the  same  level  in  relation  to  the 
Divine  benediction.  It  is  a  debasement  of  Christian  language  which  makes  the 
ministerial  order  the  Church,  (3)  The  spiritual  and  visible  organization  must  ever 
be  found  in  one.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  without  its  counterpart  is  perfect 
"  in  the  Lord."  III.  The  Geeeting.  1.  As  an  apostolic  salutation  it  is 
pecuhar  to  St.  Paul.  It  is  pronounced  in  the  name  of  God.  It  is  not  even  in 
mspired  man  to  bless  his  fellow.  All  benediction  comes  from  God  as  all 
doxology  goes  back  to  Him.  2.  But  it  is  also  an  invocation  of  grace  and  peace 
upon  the  Christian  Church.  (1)  The  eternal  love  of  God  as  it  sends  the  Redeemer 
for  man'i  salvation  is  grace.  The  fruit  of  this  flowing  through  Christ  is  peace. 
(2)  The  invocation  should  be  our  petition.  All  the  people  who  receive  the 
benediction  and  hear  the  prayer  must  say  Amen.  {W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  Paul  and 
Timothy  (A  sermon  to  old  and  young) : — In  the  text  we  have  age  and  youth, 
autumn  and  spring,  the  golden  eventide  and  the  fair  light  of  early  days.  We 
Bee — I.  Age  and  ■xodth  together.  Not  separate,  looking  askance  at  each  other, 
divided  by  incompatibilities  or  jealousies,  but  in  union.  The  young  often  flee  from 
the  old  ;  the  old  are  often  impatient  with  the  young.  The  advantages  of  this 
union  are  obvious.  1.  The  old  will  contribute  the  wisdom  of  experience.  2.  The 
young  will  quicken  animation  and  hope.  II.  Though  age  and  youth  are  together 
AGS  TAKES  PRECEDENCE  OF  TouTH.  Paul  first.  A  principle  of  right  settles  all 
questions  of  priority.  It  is  not  beautiful  because  not  right  that  youth  should  take 
precedence.  There  are  many  ways  of  taking  virtual  precedence.  1.  Contradiction. 
8.  Impatience.  8.  Neglect.  lU.  Though  age  takes  precedence  of  youth  yet 
BOTH  ABS  KMGAGBD  IN  COMMON  SERVICE.  "  Servants,"  not  Paul  the  master.  See 
how  one  great  relationship  determines  all  minor  conditions  and  attitudes.  As 
between  themselves  Paul  was  father,  renowned,  senior ;  Timothy  was  son,  obscure, 
junior ;  but  as  before  Christ,  the  one  Lord,  they  were  both  servants.  The  Alps 
are  great  mountains  in  themselves,  but  are  less  than  pimples  in  relation  to  the 
world.  The  earth,  a  great  globe  in  itself,  is  a  speck  of  light  to  the  nearest 
star.  The  important  tradesman  in  a  small  town  is  lost  in  a  great  city.  The  right 
way  to  take  our  proper  measure  and  to  chasten  our  ambition  is  to  look  at 
the  highest  relationships  of  all.  The  great  man  dwindles  into  his 
proper  proportions  when  he  looks  at  the  Creator;  the  mighty  potentate 
as  he  looks  at  the  King  of  kings ;  the  philanthropist  as  he  looks  at  the  Saviour. 
The  noisy  rushing  train  seems  to  be  going  fast;  let  it  look  at  the  flying  stars 
and  be  humble.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  saints  at  Philtppi  : — Lessons  taught  by 
the  commencement  of  the  gospel  here.  1.  To  seonre  the  widest  diffusion  of  the  gospel, 
great  centres  should  be  the  first  places  chosen  for  the  concentration  of  its  forces. 
2.  The  gospel  of  universal  adaptation  has  a  world-wide  mission  (Rom.  i.  15, 16). 
The  three  hist  converts  embraced  different  nationalities,  employments,  social 
grades.  They  were  Lydia,  the  Oriental  trader  ;  the  Grecian  female  slave  and 
■oothsayer;  the  Roman  "keeper  of  the  prison."  "There  is  neither  Jew  nor 
Greek,  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free;  there  is  neither  male  nor  female, 
for  ye  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus."  Christ  has  demohshed  all  barriers  to  the 
exercise  of  Divine  mercy.  3.  The  duty  and  privilege  of  Christian  parents  to 
consecrate  their  children  and  home  to  Christ  (Acts  xvi.  15,  33,  34,  40).  4.  Civic 
distinctions,  subordinated  to  Christ,  will  further  the  gospel  and  adorn  the 
Christian  name.  Paul's  Roman  citizenship  gained  his  freedom  and  silenced 
his  enemies.  6.  His  chain  connects  the  history  of  Rome  and  PhUippi. 
6.  The  Christian's  spirit  can  defy  *'  the  inner  prison  "  to  suppress  .its  praise  oz 
prayer  (Acts  xvi.  25).  (O.  C.  Ballard.)  Philippi  was  anciently  called  Erenidei 
or  the  "  Springs  "  on  account  of  its  numerous  fountains  in  which  the  Gangitis  has 
its  sources.  Philip  (in  358  b.c.)  enlarged  the  old  town  and  fortihed  it,  and  named 
it  after  himself.  After  the  famous  battle  Augustus  conferred  special  honours  upon 
it,  and  made  it  a  Roman  colony.  A  military  settlement  had  been  made  in  it, 
chiefly  of  the  soldiers  who  had  fought  under  Antony,  so  that  it  was  a  protecting 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

garrison  on  the  confines  of  Macedonia.    A  colonia  was  a  reprodnction  in  miniatar« 

of  the  mother  city.   The  Koman  law  ruled,  and  the  Roman  insignia  were  everywhere 

seen.     The  mnnicipal  affairs  were  managed  by  decemvirs  or  praetors,  and  its  lands 

were  free  from  taxation.     It  thus  possessed  a  rank  far  above  that  of  a  municipium 

or  a  civitas  libera,  and  was  very  different  from  a  settlement  {airoiKia)  founded  by 

adventurers  or  emigrants.    Highly  favoured  as  Philippi  had  been,  it  was  in  need 

of  help.    Political  franchise  and  Boman  rites,  Greek  tastes  and  studies,  wide  and 

varied  commerce,  could  not  give  it  the  requisite  aid.     It  was  sunk  in  a  spiritual 

gloom,  which  needed  a  higher  light  that  Italian  jurisprudence  or  Hellenic  culture 

could  bring  it.    The  spear  and  phalanx  of  Macedonia  had  been  famous,  and  had 

carried  conquest  and  civilization  through  a  great  portion  of  the  eastern  world ;  the 

sun  of  Greece  had  not  wholly  set,  and  epicurians  and  stoics  still  sought  after 

wisdom ;  the  sovereignty  of  Borne  had  secured  peace  in  all  her  provinces,  and  her 

great  roads  not  only  served  for  the  march  of  the  soldier,  but  for  the  cortege  of  the 

trader ;  art  and  law,  beauty  and  power,  song  and  wealth,  the  statue  and  the  drama, 

survived  and  were  adored ;  but  there  was  in  many  a  heart  a  sense  of  want  and 

powerlessness,  an  indefinite  longing  after  some  higher  good  and  portion,  a  painless 

and  restless  agitation,  which  only  he  of  Tarsus  could  soothe  and  satisfy,  with  his 

preaching  the  God-Man — the  life  and  hope  and  centre  of  humanity.   Many  remains 

of  antiquity,  such  as  are  supposed  to  belong  to  the  forum  and  the  palace,  are  on  the 

site  of  Philippi.     The  Turks  now  call  it  Felibedjik.     (Professor  Eadie.)        With 

the  bishops  and  deacons. — As  St.  Paul  addresses  his  Epistle  to  all  the  faithful  at 

Philippi,  especially  distinguishing  them  from  the  bishops  and  deacons,  it  thus 

appears  clear  that  his  intention  is  that  all  true  Christians,  whatever  may  be  their 

condition  in  the  Church,  should  read  his  letters,  in  opposition  to  the  presumption 

of  those  who  deny  them  to  the  people.     Believers,  enjoy  boldly  the  right  which 

St.  Paul  has  given  you  in  his  writings.     Search  and  study  them  carefully.     You 

are  not  less  the  people  of  God  than  were  the  Philippians.     (J.  Daille.)        Order  of 

God : — The  Philippians  are  reminded  at  the  very  outset  that  God  is  not  the  author 

of  confusion,  but  of  order.    All  are  not  ministers,  though  all  are  members  of  the 

Church  of  Christ.    Let  those  who  form  the  congregation  duly  recognize  and  receive 

the  ministrations  of  those  who  are  set  over  them  in  the  Lord.    Let  them  not  forget 

discipline  in  privilege.     If  they  are  Christians  they  have  still  something  to  learn  : 

they  need  pastors  and  teachers,  even  though  they  have  but  one  Lord  and  Master. 

(Dean  Vaughan.)        Peace: — The  word  in  the  original  use  of  it  means  that  which 

binds  together.    There  thus  lies  in  the  very  term  a  testimony  to  eternal  truth,  that 

man  can  be  at  peace  only  when  all  his  varied  interests  are  "  bound  by  gold  chains 

about  the  feet  of  God."    The  multitude  of  the  angelic  host  praising  God  at  Jesus' 

birth  sang  of  "peace  on  earth."     The  multitude  of  human  worshippers  at  Jesus' 

triumphal  entry  into  the  city  of  David  sang  responsive  of  "peace  in  heaven." 

Peace,  then,  is  the  sign  and  seal  of  Christ's  kingdom,  both  in  its  state  of  patience 

here  and  in  its  state  of  glory  hereafter.    (/.  Hutchison,  D.D.)      Ministers  servants 

of  Christ : — Dr.  Parr,  in  his  life  of  Archbishop  Usher,  relates  that  while  that  prelate 

was  once  preaching  in  the  church  at  Covent  Garden,  a  message  arrived  from  the 

court  that  the  king  wished  immediately  to  see  him.    He  descended  from  the  pulpit, 

listened  to  the  command,  and  told  the  messenger  that  he  was  then,  as  he  saw, 

employed  in  God's  business,  but  as  soon  as  he  had  done,  he  would  attend  upon  tht 

king  to  understand  his  pleasure;  and  then  continued  his  sermon.        Christian 

peace :— -Christian  peace,  the  peace  which  Christ  gives,  the  peace  which  He  sheds 

abroad  in  the  heart,  is  it  aught  else  than  such  a  glorified  harmony — the  expelling 

from  man's  life  of  all  that  was  causing  disturbance  there,  all  that  was  hindering 

him  from  chiming  in  with  the  music  of  heaven,  all  that  would  have  made  him  a 

jarring  and  a  dissonant  note,  left  out  from  the  great  dance  and  minstrelsy  of  the 

spheres,  in  which  now  shall  mingle  for  ever  the  consenting  songs  of  redeemed 

men  and  elect  angels  ?    (Archbishop  Trench.)        Peace  : — Peace  is  the  opposite  of 

passion,  and  of  labour,  toil,  and  effort.     Peace  is  that  state  in  which  there  are  no 

desires  madly  demanding  an  impossible  gratification  ;  that  state  in  which  there  ii 

no  misery,  no  remorse,  no  sting.     (F.  W.  Robertson.)        Grace  a  continuity :— The 

acts  of  breathing  which  I  performed  yesterday  will  not  keep  me  alive  to-day  ;  I 

must  continue  to  breathe  afresh  every  moment,  or  animal  life  ceases.    In  like 

manner  yesterday's  grace  and  spiritual  strength  must  be  renewed,  and  the  Holy 

Spirit  must  continue  to  breathe  on  my  soul,  from  moment  to  moment,  in  order  to 

my  enjoying  the  consolations,  and  to  my  working  the  works  of  God.     (Toplady.) 

Orae4  comet /ton  God  .-—As  grace  is  at  first  from  God,  so  it  is  continually  from 


OHi».  I. J  PHILIPPIANS. 


fiim,  and  is  tnaiutained  by  Him,  as  much  as  light  in  the  atmosphere  is  all  day  long 
from  the  sun,  as  well  as  at  first  dawning,  or  at  sun-rising.  (J.  Edwards.)  The 
honour  of  serving  Ghrixt: — When  the  Spartan  king  advanced  against  the  enemy, 
he  had  always  with  him  some  one  that  bad  been  crowned  in  the  public  games  of 
Greece.  And  they  tell  us  that  a  Lacedaemonian,  when  large  sums  were  offered  him 
on  condition  that  he  would  not  enter  the  Olympic  lists,  refused  them.  Having 
with  much  difficulty  thrown  Lis  antagonists  in  wrestling,  one  put  this  question  to 
him,  "  Spartan,  what  will  you  get  by  this  victory?  "  He  answered  with  a  smile, 
"  I  shall  have  the  honour  to  fight  foremost  in  the  ranks  of  my  prince."  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Vers,  ft-11.  I  thank  my  God  upon  every  remembrance  of  you. — Retrospect  and 
forecast: — I.  The  retkospeot.  1.  Its  subject — "  fellowship  of  the  gospel." 
(1)  Their  mutual  delight  in  all  that  the  gospel  brings.  The  grace  that  saved  the 
apostle  was  that  which  saved  his  converts.  Having  a  common  faith  they  had  a 
bond  of  union.  (2)  Their  co-operation  in  all  attempts  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
gospel,  2.  The  emotions  it  awakened.  (1)  A  grateful  recognition  of  its  unbroken 
character.  Never  had  a  single  jar  arisen  between  them.  This  experience  was 
exceptional  with  Paul  as  it  is  with  ourselves.  In  looking  over  ten  years  of  work 
we  can  see  more  than  enough  to  prevent  our  review  from  being  one  of  nnmixed 
pleasure.  This  is  essential  to  check  pride.  (2)  Thankfulness  to  God,  the  sourca 
and  Bustainer  of  it.  This  also  is  exceptional.  We  thank  God  for  good  and  earnest 
men,  but  can  they  thank  God  for  our  co-operation  ?  II.  The  forecast.  It  is 
fonnded  on  the  same  co-operation.  1.  The  apostle's  confident  hope  in  regard  to 
their  future.  Confidence  in  character  is  of  tardy  growth,  and  is  often  disappointed. 
Paul's  was  based  on  two  grounds.  (1)  Their  character  had  not  failed  when  it  was 
severely  tested.  They  had  braved  the  ridicule  and  persecution  of  their  heathen 
neighbours  for  ten  years.  (2)  God,  being  who  and  what  He  is,  would  not  fail.  He 
would  bring  the  work  He  had  begun  to  completion ;  not,  however,  that  men  are 
passive  instruments  in  His  hands.  2.  The  staple  of  His  prayer.  It  is  a  prayer 
for  the  growth  of  that  which  already  exists  in  them  ;  and  one  which  implies  their 
active  co-operation  in  fulfilling  the  subject  of  His  petitions ;  that  their  love  may 
grow  in  knowledge  and  perception.  3.  The  remaining  portion  of  the  forecast 
refers  to  the  fruits  of  which  love,  knowledge,  and  a  powerful  moral  sense  are  the 
roots.  (1)  There  is  a  quick  choice  of  the  best  among  good  things  (ver.  10).  Not 
mental  and  spiritual  epicurianism.  (2)  Frankness  and  transparency,  and  therefore 
purity.  (3)  Blamelessness,  not  causing  offence  to  men ;  so  living  as  to  be  accep- 
table to  God.  (4)  Abundant  and  uninterrupted  fruitfulness.  {J.  J,  Goadby.) 
Pleasant  memories  and  bright  hopes: — The  apostle's  usual  practice  was  to  begin  with 
thanksgiving.  He  delights  to  recognize  good  in  those  to  whom  he  writes,  even 
where  there  is  much  to  reprove.  In  melancholy  contrast  stands  the  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians.  In  a  Christian  the  natural  outflow  of  gladness  is  in  thanks  to  our 
Father  in  heaven.  More  distinctively  Christian  is  it  when  the  heart  gives  thanks 
for  the  good  of  others  ;  but  most  of  all  when,  as  here,  for  the  spiritual  good  of 
others.  L  Ah  expression  of  qratitudb  for  the  past  history  of  the  PHruppiAN 
Chttroh  (vers,  3-5).  1.  Its  object — "  My  God."  The  "  my  "  well  illustrates  the 
broadening  influence  of  Christianity ;  its  tendency  to  slay  the  selfishness  of  the 
homan  heart.  The  wise  believer  knows  that  the  widening  of  the  range  of  blessing 
brings  no  diminution  of  individual  blessing.  2.  Its  occasion.  He  had  vividly 
before  him  "  the  kindness  of  their  youth,  the  love  of  their  espousals  "  to  the 
Saviour.  With  this  good  beginning  he  knew  that  their  history  since  had  on  the 
whole  accorded.  How  rare  in  any  age  such  a  Church  I  How  sweet  to  a  pastor 
Buoh  a  memory.  3.  Its  form.  (1)  When  a  minister  sees  God's  blessing  plainly 
resting  on  his  work,  his  sense  of  gratitude  impels  him  with  peculiar  power  to 
prayer.  This  is  the  proper  and  healthful  influence  of  gratitude  to  God  for  any 
gift  (2)  Prayer  offered  with  thankfulness  will  be  distinguished  by  gladness,  4. 
Its  ground.  Every  true  Church  is  an  association  for  advancing  the  gospel.  (1)  This 
fellowship  was  first  and  fundamentally  with  Christ.  (2)  In  Him  they  had  "fellow- 
ship  in  relation  to  the  gospel  "  with  each  other.  The  advancement  of  each  other's 
piety  and  peace  and  the  extension  of  the  gospel  was  an  object  of  definite  pursuit. 
(3)  This  fellowship  was  with  all  Christians — with  their  friend  Paul  for  example. 
II.  Thb  expression  of  gratitude  fob  ah  assured  hope  in  regard  to  the 
FUTURE.  1.  Every  work  of  God  is  good,  particularly  His  work  of  saving  grace, 
which  makes  sinful  men   "good."     Paul  believed  that  the  same  grace  would 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  h 

bring  the  good  work  to  completeness.  God  does  not  do  things  by  halvaa. 
2.  Having  this  happy  conviction  Paul  is  confident  that  the  good  would  b» 
carried  on  "  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ  " — the  day  of  the  resurrection 
when  body  as  well  as  soul  will  be  glorified.  3.  But  diligence,  watchfulness,  and 
pi-ayer,  is  necessary  "  to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure."  The  persever- 
ance of  the  saints  is  a  perseverance  in  faith  and  holiness.  {R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.) 
The  tnie  xpirit  of  prayer : — I.  Thanksgivino  (ver.  3).  II.  Petition  (ver.  4).  III. 
Confident  faith  (ver.  6).  IV.  Christian  chakitt  (vers.  7-8).  V.  Intercession 
(vers.  9-10).  VI.  Holt  purpose.  VII.  Praise,  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Here  are— I. 
Pleasant  memories.  Inspiring  gratitude,  joy,  prayer.  11.  Confident  hopes.  The 
work  is  begun  ;  must  be  continued ;  completed.  III.  Loving  fellowship.  In 
bonds;  in  the  defence  of  the  gospel;  in  the  enjoyment  of  special  grace.  {Ibid.) 
Blessed  remembrance  and  joyful  prayers : — I.  The  remembrance.  No  one  looked 
back  T«ith  deeper  solicitude  on  past  labours  than  Paul.  Memory  plays  an 
imporNnt  part  in  secular,  religious,  and  national  life.  It  influences  the  present 
and  cfsts  its  shadow  on  the  future.  1.  Look  at  the  general  religious  aspect  of  the 
subject.  The  history  of  the  Church  is  full  of  imperishable  monuments  of  life  and 
character.  This  history  has  created  an  enthusiasm  which  has  resulted  in  acts  of 
the  highest  importance  and  use.  Some  histories  debase,  this  elevates ;  some 
depress,  this  strengthens.  2.  Look  at  the  particular  religious  history  of  this  sub- 
ject. The  history  of  this  Church  was  interwoven  with  the  apostle's  liveliest 
interest.  He  was  the  founder  of  it,  and  it  developed  virtues  which  excited  his 
warmest  admiration.  So  there  are  tender  recollections  of  the  work  of  grace 
clustering  around  every  particular  Church.  If  we,  at  any  time,  are  cold  or 
despondent,  let  us  open  the  chronicles  of  the  Churches  of  our  early  days,  gather 
around  us  the  warm  hearts  which  cheered  us  then,  and  though  dead  they  will  speak 
to  us  words  of  life  and  encouragement.  II.  The  prayers.  We  call  prayer  "  the 
burden  of  a  sigh,  the  falling  of  a  tear."  There  is  that  in  our  life  which  lends 
sorrow  to  prayer.  Much  of  this,  however,  is  wrong — lamentation  over  pardoned 
."ins,  &o.  We  are  under  an  obligation  to  approach  the  throne  of  grace  with  joy.  1. 
We  may  look  at  this  in  its  general  aspect.  It  arose  from  an  absence  of  selfish 
desires,  and  absorption  in  the  condition  and  want  of  others.  Paul's  heart  was 
bound  up  with  the  interest-s  of  the  Church.  At  Philippi  there  was  everything  to 
evoke  spiritual  joy.  Paul,  therefore,  joyfully  prayed  for  a  larger  blessing.  Let  na 
approach  God  with  praise  for  the  prosperity  of  the  Church,  and  with  prayer  for  its 
increase.  2.  If  we  narrow  our  field  of  observation  every  Christian  must  feel 
thankful  for  his  new  heart.  If  the  glory  of  creation,  the  goodness  of  providence, 
excites  gratitude,  much  more  this  the  chiefest  of  God's  works.  Let  us  sap- 
plicate  its  further  periection.  {Weekly  Pulpit.)  Christian  remembrances : — 
I.  Inspire  gratitude.  II.  Provoke  prayer.  III.  Awaken  joy.  IV.  Cement 
fellowship.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Happy  memories  those — 1.  That  are  prompted  by 
the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  That  recall  the  past  joy  of  harvest.  3.  That  cause  to  abide 
with  us,  fruit  long  since  reaped.  4.  That  link  us  still  in  association  with  distant 
but  kindred  spirits.  5.  That  evoke  perennial  gratitude  to  God.  6.  That  enrich 
our  own  moral  worth.  They  "  shall  be  had  in  everlasting  remembrance,"  whose 
life  on  earth  gives  birth  to  memories  such  as  these.  {G.  G.  Ballard.)  A  cheerful 
prisoner : — At  midnight  in  the  Philippian  prison  Paul  and  Silas  sang  praises  to 
God.  The  same  joyous  spirit  breathes  through  this  Epistle.  And  yet  now  he  was 
a  prisoner  at  Rome.  I.  The  sorrow  op  his  imprisonment  is  tempered  by  hi» 
thought  of  God.  1.  He  recognizes  God  as  his  God.  He  knows  that  God  has  led 
him  and  redeemed  him,  and  that  nothing  can  separate  him  from  His  love  (Psa. 
zxiii.  ;  Ixiii.  2).  As  it  was  with  Paul  and  David,  so  it  may  be  with  us.  "  Whom 
have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee."  II.  The  sorrow  of  his  separation  from  thb 
Philippians  is  lightened  by  thought  of  their  welfare.  1.  He  remembered 
them  in  his  thanksgivings.  (1)  For  their  fellowship  with  each  other  in  the  gospel. 
(2)  He  had  confidence  in  its  continuance.  2.  He  remembered  them  in  his  suppli- 
cations. (1)  That  their  mutual  affection,  knowledge  of  truth,  and  spiritual  per- 
ceptions might  increase.  (2)  That  they  might  be  preserved  pure  and  without 
offence  to  the  day  of  Christ.  (3)  That  they  might  be  filled  with  the  fruits  of 
righteousness.  Conclusion  :  Looking  to  God  he  felt  thankful ;  thinking  on  what 
God  had  wrought  by  him,  and  praying  for  its  perfection,  he  was  happy.  Here  is 
the  secret  of  ministerial  joy.  {Family  Churchman.)  My  God: — I.  Between 
God  and  him  thbrs  was  a  becipeocal  community  of — 1.  Being.  2.  Love.  3.  Sym- 
pathy.    4.  Effort.    Blessed  consummation  of  life  when  myself,  as  the  court  of  fina) 


CHAP.  1.]  PHILIPPIANS. 


•ppeal,  gives  place  to  "  my  God."  Then  '*  He  calls  a  worm  Hii  friend,  He  calls 
Himself  my  God."  II.  Tmi  obound  or  this  eklationship.  1.  He  is  my  Master, 
my  Provider,  my  Bedeemer,  my  Father,  my  Friend.  "  Whose  I  am  and  whom  I 
serve."  2.  Faith  gathers  ap  these  long-forgotten  links,  and  welds  them  into  a 
golden  chain,  whereby  the  heart  is  consciously  rebound  to  God.  Appropriating 
faith  commands  the  fulness  of  God's  heart  and  the  omnipotence  of  His  hand.  III. 
Its  effect.  Deeper  than  any  mere  channel  of  its  communication,  true  gratitude 
has  its  spring  in  the  immediate  and  responsive  fellowship  existing  between  the  soul 
and  God.  (G.  G.  Ballard.)  The  introduction  to  the  Epittle : — Masters  of  the  ai-t 
of  elocution  teach  us  that  the  business  of  the  exordium  is  to  gain  the  good  will  of 
those  to  whom  we  speak.  In  fact,  as  hatred,  dislike,  and  indifference  close  the 
entrance  to  men's  hearts,  it  is  necessary  when  we  desire  to  persuade  them  that 
first  of  all  we  should  prepare  their  minds,  and  fill  them  with  a  prepossession  in 
oar  favour,  so  that  our  arguments  may  be  received  into  their  understandings.  To 
this  end  the  apostle  labours  in  vers.  1-12.     {J.  DailM.) 

Vers.  4-5.  Always  In  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you  all  making  request  wltb 
Joy. — I.  The  quality  of  the  apostle's  peayeb.  1.  Prayer  may  be  varied  according 
to  the  spiritual  mood  of  the  suppliant.  In  some  instances  prayer  may  hardly  rise 
beyond  a  mere  duty ;  in  other  cases  it  may  become  the  supreme  joy  of  the  heart. 
'2.  The  mood  need  not  impair  the  sincerity.  You  may  pursue  the  same  journey 
through  a  thick  and  troubled  atmosphere,  as  well  as  through  the  brightness  and 
calm  of  the  summer  light ;  the  path  is  the  same,  the  goal  is  the  same,  the  purpose 
is  the  same,  yet  in  the  one  case  the  soul  may  sit  as  a  bird  with  folded  wings,  and  in 
the  other  it  may  be  soaring  and  singing  through  the  streaming  glory.  II.  Its 
OBJECT.  Fellowship  in  the  gospel  I  take  to  mean  unanimity,  entircness  of  accord, 
and  I  see  no  reason  why  the  apostle  himself  should  not  be  included  in  that  fellow- 
ship. 1.  The  centralizing  influence  of  God's  redeeming  and  sanctifying  idea.  No 
agent,  principle,  doctrine,  has  done,  or  can  do,  so  much  in  the  education  and  con- 
solidation of  heart-power  as  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Paul  thanks  God  for  their 
mutual  accord,  and  this  may  exhaust  the  grammatical  significance  of  his  language  ; 
but  the  fact  that  he  is  joyfully  thankful  for  this  unanimity  brings  us  into  the 
presence  of  the  sublime  idea — 2.  That  Christianity  is  the  most  influential  of  all 
heart-uniting  forces.  (1)  Men  who  are  one  in  Christ  are  united  in  the  highest 
ranges  of  their  nature.  They  are  not  one  necessarily  in  the  lower  and  temporary 
appetences  of  their  manhood,  but  in  the  vitalities  of  their  being.  (2)  Death  cannot 
break  the  seal  that  binds  the  friendships  of  the  good.  (3)  Distance  cannot  divide 
the  sympathetic.  Paul  is  in  Bome ;  his  friends  are  at  Philippi ;  but  in  the  great 
globe  heart  of  the  apostle  Bome  and  Philippi  are  but  different  names  of  the  same 
place.  The  union  of  the  Church  is  guaranteed  by  the  immortality  of  the  principles 
on  which  it  is  founded.  The  moral  is  the  immortal.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Th* 
joy  of  the  faithful  minister  aver  the  progress  of  the  gospel: — I.  Joy  always.  II.  Joy 
IK  EVEEY  PEAYEB.     III.  JoY  ovEE  ALL.     {J,  Lyth,  D.D.)  Pure  joy  : — I.  SpBlNOfl 

from  Divine  communication.  II.  Socceeds  a  previous  sorrow.  III.  Is  sdpeeiob 
to  human  surroundings.  IV.  Is  sustained  by  answered  prayer.  (G.  C.  Ballard.) 
Intercession  for  others : — I.  An  exalted  privilege.  II.  A  holt  duty.  IIL  A 
HAPPY  EMPLOYMENT.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Present  rewards  of  Christian  work: — L 
Work  done  creates  grateful  remembrances.  II.  Grateful  bemembeanceb  create  a 
zest  for  prayer.  III.  Prayee  deepens  joy.  (G.  G.  Ballard.)  Fellowship  and  pro- 
gress-.—Y.  Fellowship.  1.  The  bond  of  union — Christ.  The  attraction  was 
irresistible  to  all  who  had  come  near  enough  to  feel  the  force  of  the  magnet  of 
Divine  love.  This  power  directed  all  faculties,  possessions,  desires,  in  the  same 
course.  As  He  had  not  lived  for  Himself  neither  did  they.  The  result  was 
brotherly  union.  As  all  the  rivers  flow  to  find  one  common  rest  in  the  sea,  so  their 
melted  hearts  ran  into  the  one  fellowship — the  Church.  Here  they  found  protection 
from  the  chill  of  the  world  and  the  storm  of  persecution.  Weak  faith  was 
strengthened;  the  timid  heart  emboldened;  unity  begat  strength  and  numbers, 
and  augmented  influence.  The  communal  life  brought  together  a  vast  capital  to 
be  invested  in  the  cause  which  was  so  dear  to  their  own  heart.  2.  Concerted 
action.  The  Christian  communities  existed  as  much,  if  not  more,  for  external 
labour  as  for  internal  edification.  As  no  Christian  lived  to  himself,  the  vhole 
Church  ooald  not  possibly  confine  its  wealth  of  power  and  influence  within  its  own 
circle.  They  lived  one  for  another  that  all  might  live  for  the  salvation  of  the  world. 
The  idea  generally  attached  to  a  community  is  that  it  exists  exclosiTely  for  the 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

benefit  of  its  own  order,  but  the  Christian  society  is  bnilt  on  the  principle  of  give 
in  order  to  receive.  The  Christians  at  Philippi  met  for  prayer  and  for  general 
improvement,  in  order  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  to 
the  world.  3.  The  transmission  of  moral  influence  is  only  possible  through  s/m- 
pathetic  media.  The  best  cable  chain  would  not  convey  an  electric  message  any 
distance,  but  a  small  copper  wire  would  do  so  round  the  globe.  Divine  truth  must 
proceed  from  the  heart  of  the  Church,  and  be  anointed  with  the  unction  of  pure 
motives  and  tender  sympathies,  to  accomplish  its  mission  among  men.  The 
experimental  expression  of  the  truth  is  the  most  powerful  and  successful.  IL 
Pekseverance — "from  the  first  day  until  now."  The  converts  had  not  relapsed 
into  idolatry,  nor  were  any  idolatrous  practices  incorporated  in  their  worship. 
They  had  resisted  all  worldly  influences.  The  converts  held  on  their  way,  pro- 
gressing in  knowledge  and  the  Christian  graces.  When  the  apostle  looked  towards 
this  Church,  he  saw  signs  of  growth  and  increased  vigour.  1.  True  Christian 
fellowship  absorbs  the  whole  man,  thought,  desire,  association,  and  progression. 
It  is  the  family  of  God,  with  ample  room  for  the  development  of  human  nature. 
Of  all  fruitfulness,  true  manhood  is  the  greatest.  The  consummation  of  fellowship 
is  found  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  2.  Christian  fellowship  absorbs  all  time  and 
service.  From  the  first  day  to  the  last,  and  from  the  last  day  on  through  eternity 
its  bonds  are  unrelaxed.  It  is  not  a  temporary  engagement,  but  an  everlasting 
covenant.  Some  of  its  forms  must  undergo  changes,  but  its  essence  is  the  same, 
even  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  communion  with  the  saints. 
(Weekly  Pulpit.)  Our  fellowship  in  tlie  gospel : — I.  How  obiginated.  II.  What 
IT  IMPLIES.     III.  What  IT  REQUIRES.     (J.  Lyth,D.D.)        True  gospel  fellowship : — 

1.  Lives  which  adorn  it.  2.  Hearts  which  beat  for  it.  3.  Lips  which  testify  for 
it.  4.  Hands  which  work  for  it.  5.  Gifts  which  extend  it.  (G.  G.  Ballard.) 
PauVs  activity  and  pray er fulness : — While  his  life  was  one  of  unexampled  activity, 
it  was  also  one  of  continual  prayerfulness.  These  two  aspects  of  his  life  are 
mutually  explanatory.  His  activity  was  unwearied,  just  because  his  prayerfulness 
was  unceasing.  His  religion  was  a  life,  and  the  heart  of  that  life  was  prayer.  The 
risen  and  exalted  Saviour's  words  uttered  regarding  him  at  his  conversion  held  good 
ever  afterwards  :  "  Behold,  he  prayeth."  "  As  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,"  he 
had  all-prayer  as  the  weapon  of  his  warfare.    (J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.) 

Vet,  6.     "Being  confident  of   this  very  thing." — Spiritual  culture: — I.  Thb 

BIGNS    WHEREBY    WE    MAY    KNOW    GOD    HAS   BEGUN  THIS  GRACIOUS  WORK.       1.    The  sigUS 

are  not  to  be  sought  in  any  set  methods  or  patterns  by  which  God  is  supposed  to 
begin  His  work  of  training  the  soul  for  Himself.  His  ways  are  endless.  Some 
souls  have  to  be  smitten  :  for  others  a  gentle  look  is  enough,  e.g.,  Saul  and 
Zacchaeus.  2.  There  are  certain  impressions  and  effects  produced  by  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel  or  by  the  ways  of  God  in  His  providence  which  are  sometimes 
mistaken  for  signs  of  a  gracious  work.  The  consequences  of  sin  may  fill  the  con- 
science with  remorse,  and  vows  made  to  begin  a  new  life.  A  sense  of  happiness 
springs  up  in  emotional  natures  on  a  very  superficial  acquaintance  with  religion 
and  its  responsibilities.  Nor  is  the  sign  found  in  a  head  well  informed.  3,  What 
then  is  the  sign?  Love  to  God,  Christ,  man,  showing  itself  in  trust  and  obedience, 
and  goodness.  II.  The  conditions  under  which  this  good  work  will  be 
PERFECTED  BY  GoD.  1.  Remember  that  so  long  as  you  are  in  this  world  the  work 
is  incomplete.  For  the  development  of  a  soul  in  Christ's  likeness  time  is  necessary. 
"  First  the  blade,"  &c.  Some  are  discouraged  because  they  cannot  see  the  full  corn 
at  once.  If  it  is  time  for  the  full  corn,  however,  do  not  be  satisfied  with  the  ear  or 
blade.     It  is  the  indolent  man  who  thinks  he  has  only  to  believe  once  for  all. 

2.  You  must  concur  in  God's  work  as  it  advances  from  stage  to  stage  till  it  is  com- 
pleted in  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  Growth  proceeds  slowly  if  it  is  to  endure. 
Mushrooms  spring  up  in  the  night  but  they  soon  decay.  {R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  Paul's 
confidence  was — I.  Totally  isolated  from  Judaism  and  self  (Philip,  iii.  3-7).  IL 
Grounded  solely  in  Christ.  1.  As  his  medium  of  access  to  the  mind,  the  heart, 
the  power  of  God  (Eph.  iii.  12).  2.  As  the  repository  of  all  his  interests  (2  Tim.  i. 
12).  3.  As  being  united  to  Him  by  love-bonds  which  neither  the  mere  incidents  of 
life,  nor  satanic  power  could  sever  (Rom.  viii.  38,  39).  III.  A  means  of  perpetuat- 
IKG  living  relations  BETWEEN  HIM  AND  THE  Chubches  which  he  had  formed.  He 
expresses  his  confidence — 1.  In  the  sympathy  of  the  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  i.  14,  15  ; 
ii.  3).  2.  In  the  steadfastness  of  the  Galatians  in  Christianity  (Gal.  v.  10).  8.  In 
4b«  obedience  of  the  Thessalonians  to  his  teaching  (2  Thess.  iii.  4).    4.  In  the 


CHAP.  I.]  PHILIPPIANS. 


purity  and  intelligence  of  the  Romans  (Rom.  xv.  14).  5.  In  the  final  perfectnesa 
of  the  Philippians.  IV.  The  seed  he  lived  to  disseminate  amono  men.  (G.  G, 
Ballard. )  Confidence  and  completion: — I.  Of  what  was  Paul  confident  ? 
1.  That  the  work  of  salvation  in  this  people  would  be  perfected.  They  were  running 
a  race,  and  he  was  confident  that  they  would  receive  the  prize.  They  were  the 
workmanship  of  the  Divine  redeeming  hand ;  Paul  was  confident  that  the  work 
would  not  be  forsaken  by  the  Workman.  That  God  would  perfect  this  work. 
••  It  is  God  that  worketh  in  you."  Paul  knew  that  his  own  influence  was  nothing, 
except  as  it  was  the  medium  and  the  vehicle  of  the  influence  of  God.  3.  That  the 
work  would  be  finished  in  the  day  of  the  Lord.  In  that  day  every  work  will  be 
tried  as  by  fire.  Gad's  work  in  this  people  would  appear  then  to  be  perfected.  A 
Bublime  persuasion,  this  I  To  stand  on  some  moorland  and  see  some  young  oaks 
planted,  and  feel  quite  confident  that  they  would  grow  to  perfection  ;  to  visit 
a  dockyard  slip,  and  to  see  the  timbers  of  the  keel  of  a  first-rate  man-of-war  laid 
down,  and  to  feel  confident  that  she  would  answer  every  trial  of  her  strength,  until 
she  had  rendered  full  service  to  the  nation  ;  to  be  present  at  some  important  public 
undertaking,  and  to  feel  sure  that  it  would  be  noble,  and  prosperous,  and  of 
national  benefit ;  to  hear  the  birth  cry  of  a  human  being,  and  to  feel  confident  that 
its  path  from  the  cradle  to  the  sepulchre  would  be  that  shining  brighter  and 
brishter  unto  perfect  day,  are  all  glorious  positions ;  but  they  cannot  be  compared, 
80  far  as  true  greatness  and  moral  grandeur  are  concerned,  with  the  position  of  Paul 
here.  The  sublimity  of  this  persuasion  is  largely  connected  with  the  love  of  Paul's 
heart.  The  multitude  are  thoughtless,  indifferent,  and  careless  about  each  other, 
or  they  are  envious  and  malicious.  But  this  is  true,  sincere,  pure  Christian  love, 
which  writes,  "  Being  confident  of  this  very  thing."  II.  On  what  did  Paul's 
OONFiDENOE  best  ?  1.  Ou  the  character  and  resources  of  the  Worker.  It  does  not 
rest  on  the  Church.  Not  because  Church  polity  is  all  right,  because  you  are 
thoroughly  orthodox,  nor  because  your  modes  of  worship  are  just  what  they  ought 
to  be.  The  foundation  of  his  confidence  was  God  in  Christ.  Men  fail  in  work  by 
loss  of  means  and  of  power,  by  change  of  purpose,  by  their  dependence  upon  others, 
and  by  reason  of  death.  But  it  is  not  tbus  with  the  Creator.  2.  On  the  nature 
and  quality  of  the  work  about  which  he  is  assured.  The  work  is  remedial  to  the 
creature,  and  supremely  honourable  to  the  redeeming  God.  3.  On  the  fact  that 
the  commencement  of  this  work  was  by  God  Himself.  The  beginning  is  the  pledge 
of  the  consummation.  Even  a  wise  man  docs  nothing  at  random.  4.  On  the  fact 
that  a  day  is  fixed  for  exhibiting  this  work  in  all  its  completeness.  The  day  of 
Christ,  without  redemption,  would  indeed  be  a  dark  day.  5.  He  happens  to  blend 
with  all  this  his  own  experience  of  the  faithfulness  and  wealth  of  the  redeeming 
God — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  III.  How  did  this  confidence  operate  on 
Paul?  1.  It  did  not  prevent  Paul  praying  for  these  people.  2.  It  gave  fervency 
and  gladness  to  his  intercessions.  3.  It  did  not  keep  Paul  from  exhorting  the 
people  and  directing  them  to  the  use  of  means.  Conclusion :  Cherish  such  con- 
fidence concerning  yourselves  and  each  other,  but  be  devoutly  careful  not  to  abuse 
it.  (S.  Martin.)  Divine  workmanship : — I.  Its  highest  sphebe — man  (Eph.  ii. 
10).  II.  Its  chosen  instrumentality — holy  men  (1  Cor.  iv.  9).  HI.  Its  SIodel 
— Divine  perfeetness  (Matt.  v.  48).  IV.  Its  law  op  accomplishment— gradual  but 
certain  progression — "  begun,  perform."  V.  Its  guabantee  of  completion — God's 
will.  His  willingness  is — 1.  Revealed  in  His  word.  2.  Embodied  in  Christ  the 
Foundation.  8.  Ratified  by  experience.  4.  Plighted  to  us  in  the  earnest  of  the 
Spirit.  (G.  G.  Ballard.)  "  A  good  work"  : — I.  The  good  work.  1.  Its  nature. 
A  new  creation  (Eph.  ii.  10),  without  which  we  have  neither  will  nor  power  to 
perform  good  works  (Phil.  ii.  13).  2.  Its  property.  It  is  a  good  work  because — (1) 
It  is  begun  by  a  good  God  (Psa.  xxv.  8).  (2)  It  is  wrought  out  for  a  good  purpose 
(Col.  i.  12).  (3)  It  is  performed  with  a  good  end  in  view  (Rom.  viii.  30;  Heb.  xii. 
14).  II.  The  grounds  op  Paul's  confidence  that  this  good  work  would  bb 
COMPLETED.  1.  The  perfections  of  God's  works  (Deut.  xxxii.  4)  in  creation,  pro- 
vidence, and  grace.  2.  The  atonement  of  Christ  (John  x.  15).  3.  The  Christian's 
union  to  Christ  (John  xiv.  19).  4.  The  earnest  of  the  Spirit  (2  Cor.  i.  22).  6.  The 
nature  of  the  life  Christ  gives  (John  x.  28).  6.  The  mtercession  of  Christ 
(Heb.  vii.  29  ;  John  xi.  42,  xvii.  24).  {S.  Barnard.)  The  good  work  within  t — 
I.  A  OBACious  OPERATION.  1,  It  is  good.  Why?  Because — (1)  God  the  best  of 
beings  is  the  author  of  it.  He  is  the  author  of  the  wisdom  that  designed  it ;  the 
influence  which  begins,  continues,  and  completes  it;  the  holiness  which  is  its 
pattern ;  the  love  which  it  displays ;  the  means  whereby  it  is  performed.     (2)  lit 


10  TEE  BIBILCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  % 

effects  are  good,     (a)  In  respect  of  the  soul  that  is  the  subject  of  it,  which  passefl 
from  death  unto  life,  from  sin  to  holiness,  &o.    {b)  In  respect  to  families.    When  thig 
good  work  is  begun  in  the  hearts  of  parents  religion  with  all  its  pleasantness  and 
peace  dwells  in  the  house,  and  God  commands  His  blessing,      (c)  Upon  ministers, 
who  thereby  are  made  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel,     (d)  Upon  the  Church,  whose 
increase  and  prosperity  is  the  edification  and  comfort  of  individual  believers,    (e) 
To  the  world.    Every  convert  exercises,  like  salt,  a    purifying   aud  preserving 
influence.     (/)  On  heaven  itself  (Luke  xv.  10).     (3)  Its  end  and  completion  are 
good.     The  soul  is  born  for  glory,     2.  It  is  a  work.     (1)  It  is  primarily  and  chiefly 
the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     He  removes  all  obstacles  from  the  heart,  and 
gives  the  truth  free  course  over  the  inner  man.     (2)  It  is  begun  and  carried  on  by 
means   of  the  Word,  which  is  the  power  of  God  unto   salvation.      (3)  AU    the 
faculties  of  the  soul  which  is  the  subject  of  it  are  brought  into  lively  and  diligent 
exercise  :  serious  thought,  anxious  inquiry,   restless  desire,    fervent  prayer,   re- 
pentance, faith,  love.    II.  Its  important  situation — "in  you."     Not  only  in  the 
head  but  in  the  heart.     1.  It  is  evident  that  it  is  an  inward  work  from  the  many 
figures  which   denote  it — temple ;  inner  man ;  good  seed.     2.  How  does  it  exist 
then  ?     (1)  As  light  in  the  mind.     (2)  As  love  shed  abroad  in  the  heart.     (3)  As 
peace  in  the  conscience.     Conclusion:  1.  This  inward  religion  will  be  evidenced  by 
corresponding  fruits  without.      2.  You  in  whom  this  good  work  is  be  thankful,  for 
"  by  the  grace  of  God  you  are  what  you  are."    Be  anxious,  watchful,  prayerful,  too, 
that  it  may  go  on.     3.  You  in  whom  it  is  begun,  but  fear  that  it  is  not,  compare 
what  your  feelings  and  desires  are  with  what  they  were.      4.  You  who  think  it  is 
within  you,  but  whose  life  proves  that  it  is  not  fear,  and  tremble.     5.  You  who 
show  no  desire  for  it — if  there  is  not  a  good  work  in  you,  there  is  an  evil  work  there, 
evil  in  its  origin,  effects,    end.      Contemplate     your    danger.      {Congregational 
Rememhrancer.)        I.  A  wonderful  fact,     "He  who  began  the  work."     1.  The 
work  is  Divine.     No  part  of  God's  work  bears  so  distinctly  the  signs  of  divinity 
(James  i.  18).     Human  agency  is  the  channel.    2.  The  work  is  gracious.     Wisdom 
is  here  and  power,  but  goodness  is  a  special  feature.     God's  compassion  in  the 
gospel  is  a  power  to  make  us  good.      To  make  men  wise,  rich,  happy,  healthy,  is 
a  great  work — but  to  make  them  good  is  better  (2  Thess.  ii.  16-17).      3.  The  work 
is  progressive.     The  stages  of  spiritual  life  are  like  those  of  physical  life  advancing 
towards  manhood.    II.  A  glorious  certainty.      1.  The  resources  of  God   are  in- 
exhaustible (Isa.  xlvi.  9-10).     2.  The  faithfulness  of  God  is  unfailing  (Hos.  ii.  20). 
3.  Perfection  is  God's  end  in  everything.     (Weekly  Pulpit.)    Whether  this  good 
work  relates  entirely  to  the  special  act  of  beneficence  which  had  called  forth  thia 
Epistle  may  be  fairly  disputed.     Taken  upon  this  narrow  ground  the  apostle's  joy 
would  be  but  the  refinement  of  selfishness.      Eather  he  lays  down  a  great  principle 
respecting  the  Divine  method  of  working,  viz.,  to  begin  is  to  finish,  and    that 
principle,  wide  enough  to  encompass  the  universe,  will  also  comprehend  every 
detail  of  Christian  service.     I.  God  works  by  a  plan — to  prepare  manhood  for  the 
final  day — a  period  of  time,  or  a  perfection  of  development;  the  "  day  "  of  death, 
of    judgment,   or  of  the  completeness  of  Christian  manhood.      II.  God  is  not 
FICKLE  IN  THE  FBOSECUTiON  OF  His  PURPOSES.      He  begins  not  that  He  may  conduct 
an  experiment,  but  that  He  may  perform  a  design.      III.  God  has  so  revealed 
HmsELF  in  the  education  of  the  individual  and  the  training  of  society  as  to  justift 

THK  MOST  EMPHATIC  EXPRESSION  OF  "  CONFIDENCE  "  ON  THE  PART  OF  HiS  ChURCH,      The 

past  fortells  the  future.  When  the  world  was  young  it  needed  Elijahs,  Ezekiels, 
and  Daniels ;  but  the  richer  the  world  becomes  in  history  the  louder  and  sweeter 
will  be  its  tone  of  coufideuce.  God  cannot  publish  any  amended  edition  of  Himself. 
You  may  therefore  make  the  past  the  source  of  the  widest  inferences.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  The  perseverance  of  the  saints : — The  passage  suggests — I.  That  reai 
BBLioioN  IS  A  WORK  UPON  THE  HEART.  1,  In  Opposition  to  the  mere  profession  of 
orthodox  sentiments  and  opinions.  The  truth  may  be  held  in  unrighteousness. 
Christ  is  not  only  set  forth  a  propitiation  before  His  people,  but  is  made  unto  them 
"  wisdom,"  <fec.  The  gospel  must  be  received  as  well  as  believed.  2.  In  opposition  to 
%  bare  attendance  upon  the  prescribed  duties  of  religion.  This  will  indeed  follow 
but  only  as  a  means,  not  as  an  end.  II,  That  this  work  is  a  good  work.  1.  It  has 
respeot  to  the  immortal  soul.  2.  It  qualifies  for  fellowship  with  God  the  chief 
good.  8.  It  is  productive  of  good  fruits.  4.  Its  fruiiion  is  glory.  III.  That  rr  u 
XBB  rBOTiNOS  ov  GoD  TO  BEGIN  THIS  WORK.  Every  other  cause  is  inadequate. 
lY.  That  whsbstbb  God  beginb  a  wobk  of  obace  He  will  carry  it  om  and  perfect 
9,    1,  He  cannot  be  at  a  loss  to  accomplish  the  work  He  has  commenced.    As  it  is 


OHAP.  1.]  PHILIPPIANS.  11 

not  more  difficult  to  orsate  than  to  uphold,  bo  it  is  as  easy  for  Him  to  communicate 
great  supplies  of  grace  as  it  was  to  bestow  it  at  the  first.  2.  To  suppose  otherwise 
would  be  altogether  inconsistent  with  His  purposes  of  grace  and  love.  3.  But  God 
will  perfect  His  work  by  the  use  of  means.  (1)  Secret  prayer.  (2)  Perusal  of  His 
Word.     Hence  perseverance  is  not  only  a  privilege  but  a  duty.      V.  That  the 

SECOND     COMING     OF    ChBIST    18    THE     PERIOD    WHEN    THE    WORK    OF    GR.\CE    SHALL    BE 

PERFECTED  AND  PUBLICLY  RECOGNIZED.  {Congregational  Remembrancer.)  Satiotiji- 
nation  and  perseverance: — Sanctification,  unlike  the  act  of  justification,  ia 
a  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  will  not  be  completed  till  the  soul  is 
perfected  in  glory.  It  is  the  gradual  transformation  of  the  renovated  but 
imperfect  heart  continued  until  this  corruptible  shall  put  on  incorruption. 
L  This  work  consists  in — 1.  A  gradual  purification  of  our  nature.  Regeneration 
is  the  first  act,  but  by  mournful  experience  Paul  knew,  and  we  know,  that 
the  remains  of  depravity  are  left  behind.  These  it  is  the  work  of  sanctification 
to  remore.  (1)  It  clarifies  the  sight  of  believers,  enabling  them  more 
distinctly  to  discern  Diviue  things.  (2)  It  purges  the  conscience,  causing  it  to 
pronounce  more  correctly  on  the  relations  of  the  conduct  to  the  law  and  to  the 
gospel.  (3)  It  brings  to  light  the  lines  of  the  Divine  image  already  engraven  on 
the  heart.  2.  A  correspondent  purification  of  our  lives  so  that  our  obedience 
gradually  approaches  nearer  the  standard  of  holiness  (Eph,  ii.  10).  (1)  Evil 
propensities  are  diminished.  (2)  The  graces  produced  by  regeneration  are 
strengthened :  Faith,  humility,  love.  II.  The  motives  which  shodld  inddck  cs 
lo  SEEK  IHI8  SANCTIFICATION.  1.  God  commands  it.  2.  The  love  of  Christ  urges 
it.  3.  We  can  only  be  prepared  for  glory  by  it.  4.  It  alone  will  enable  us  to  glorify 
God.  (J.  Foot,  D.D.)  The  day  of  Jesus  Christ: — Man  has  his  day;  Christ 
ehaJ  have  His.  When — 1.  His  toil  and  suffering  shall  be  remunerated.  2.  His 
government  be  vindicated.  3.  His  glory  be  revealed.  4.  All  men  be  brought  into 
closest  relations  with  Him.  5.  His  kingship  receive  universal  recognition  on 
whose  head  are  many  crowns.  That  day  is — (1)  The  goal  of  the  human  race.  (2) 
The  terminus  of  history.  (3)  The  fulness  of  time.  For  it  Paul  longed,  watched, 
waited,  lived.  (G.  G.  Ballard.)  The  present  dispensation : — I.  Exoelleth  in 
QLORT  the  former.  II.  Is  incomplete  in  its  results  as  yet.  III.  Is  cdlminativb  to 
a  higher  and  final  glory.  IV.  Is  rich  in  spititual  forces.  V.  Is  one  in  which 
Divine  operations  for  man's  welfare  are  all  pervasive.  VI.  Is  marvellous 
IN  ITS  history.  VII.  Is  ACCUMULATIVE  in  its  events  towards,  and  formative  of,  a 
future  TIME.  Former  dispensations  gradually  opened  the  path  of  man  from  the 
gaUt  of  Eden  to  the  altar  of  atonement :  this  dispensation  shall  terminate  in 
dissipating  the  shame  of  the  cross  by  the  glory  of  the  Eedeemer's  kingdom.  (Ibid.) 
The  danger  and  security  of  the  Christian : — The  dangers  which  attend  the  gpiritual 
life  are  of  the  most  appalling  character.  The  life  of  a  Christian  is  a  series  of 
miracles.  See  a  spark  living  in  mid  ocean,  see  a  stone  hanging  in  the  air,  see 
health  blooming  in  a  lazar-house,  and  the  snow-white  swan  among  rivers  cf  filth, 
and  you  behold  an  image  of  the  Christian  life.  The  new  nature  is  kept  alive 
between  the  jaws  of  death,  preserved  by  the  power  of  God  from  instant  destruc- 
tion ;  by  no  power  less  than  Divine  could  its  existence  be  continued.  When  the 
instructed  Christian  sees  his  surroundings,  he  finds  himself  to  be  like  a  defenceless 
dove  flying  to  her  nest,  while  against  her  tens  of  thousands  of  arrows  are  levelled. 
The  Christian  life  is  like  that  dove's  anxious  flight,  as  it  threads  its  way  between 
the  death-bearing  shafts  of  the  enemy,  and  by  constant  miracle  escapes  unhurt. 
The  enlightened  Christian  sees  himself  to  be  like  a  traveller,  standing  on  the 
narrow  summit  of  a  lofty  ridge ;  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left  are  gulfs 
unfathomable,  yawning  for  his  destruction  ;  if  it  were  not  that  by  Divine  grace  his 
feet  are  made  like  hinds'  feet,  so  that  he  is  able  to  stand  upon  his  high  places,  he 
would  long  ere  this  have  fallen  to  his  eternal  destruction.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  faithfulness  of  God: — Grandly  did  the  old  Scottish  believer,  of  whom  Dr. 
Brown  tells  us  in  his  "  HorsB  Subsecivse,"  respond  to  the  challenge  of  her  pastor 
regarding  the  ground  of  her  confidence.  "  Janet,"  said  the  minister,  "  what  would 
you  say,  if  after  all  He  has  done  for  you,  God  should  let  you  drop  into  hell  ?  " 
"E'en's  (even  as)  He  likes,"  answered  Janet.  "  If  He  does.  He'll  lose  mair  than 
I'll  do."  At  first  sight  Janet's  reply  looks  irreverent,  if  not  something  worse.  As 
we  contemplate  it,  however,  its  sublimity  grows  upon  ub.  Like  the  Psalmist  she 
could  say,  "I  on  Thy  Word  rely"  (Psa.  cxix.  114,  metrical  version).  If  His  Word 
were  broken,  ii  His  faithfulness  should  fail,  if  that  foundation  could  be  destroyed, 
teoly  He  would  lose  more  than  His  trusting  child.    (Clerical  Library.)        The 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ^ 

perfection  of  God's  workt : — Show  me  for  once  »  world  abandoned  and  throwm 
aside  half  formed ;  show  me  a  universe  cast  oft  from  the  Great  Potter's  wheel, 
with  the  design  in  outline,  the  clay  half  hardened,  and  the  form  unshapely  from 
incompleteness.  Direct  me,  I  pray  you,  to  a  star,  a  sun,  a  satellite — nay,  I  will 
challenge  you  on  lower  ground :  point  me  out  a  plant,  an  emmet,  a  grain  of  dust 
that  hath  about  it  any  semblance  of  incompleteness.  All  that  man  completes,  let 
him  polish  as  he  may,  when  it  is  put  under  the  microscope,  is  but  roughly  finished, 
because  man  has  only  reached  a  certain  stage,  and  cannot  get  beyond  it ;  it  is 
perfection  to  his  feeble  optics,  but  it  is  not  absolute  perfection.  But  all  God'a 
works  are  finished  with  wondrous  care ;  He  as  accurately  fashions  the  dust  of  a 
butterfly's  wing,  as  those  mighty  orbs  that  gladden  the  silent  night.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  basis  of  Paul's  confidence  .'—B-Q  had  one  great  historical  in- 
stance to  commend  his  theological  inference.  For  he  knew,  with  all  the  depth  and 
intensity  of  a  late  and  reluctant  realization,  that  the  whole  history  of  his  own 
people  had  been  one  vast  illustration  of  the  truth  on  which  he  relied.  In  them, 
far  back,  in  the  very  childhood  of  the  race,  God  had  begun  a  good  work:  patriarchs, 
psalinists,  prophets  had  by  faith  been  confident  that  He  would  perform  it :  and  He 
had  actually  performed  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ,  until  His  first  coming. 
From  the  call  of  Abraham  to  the  Incarnation  one  purpose  had  been  steadfast,  one 
work  had  moved  on  a  line  determined  from  the  beginning — all  that  vast  period, 
with  its  surprises  and  disasters,  its  restless  shiftings,  its  immeasurable  contrasts, 
had  been  spanned  by  one  dominant  conception  —  through  all  that  seemed  so 
disorderly  and  aimless  there  had  sped  the  evolution  of  one  supreme  design — from 
first  to  last  one  thought  held  good,  one  will  pressed  on — and  He  who  came  at 
last  could  look  back  across  the  centuries  to  that  majestic,  solitary  form  upon  the 
far-distant  watch-tower,  and  could  declare — "  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see 
My  day :  and  he  saw  it  and  was  glad."  (J.  Paget,  D.D.)  Means  of  progress 
in  the  Divine  life  : — Man  is  not  formed  in  his  infancy,  but  passes  through  several 
stages  which  bring  him  gradually  to  perfection  ;  one  polishes  his  memory,  another 
sharpens  his  mind ;  this  strengthens  his  judgment,  and  that  embellishes  his 
manners  ;  so  is  it  with  the  work  of  piety.  For  this  new  man  who  must  be  brought 
to  perfection,  can  only  be  so  by  various  degrees.  He  has  his  infancy  before  he 
attains  his  riper  years.  As  in  the  schools  of  painters  they  first  draw  the  figures 
with  the  pencil,  and  then  add  the  colouring,  giving  them  at  different  sittings  and 
with  much  labour  the  last  gloss  of  perfection,  which  in  the  studies  of  those  which 
they  adorn  steals  the  senses  of  the  beholders ;  so  in  the  school  of  God,  the  faithful 
are  begun  and  the  work  sketched,  and  then  they  are  polished  and  finished.  Her© 
this  work  is  well  begun ;  but  it  can  only  be  finished  in  heaven.  We  are  the  pencil 
sketch  of  the  work  of  God  to  which  He  daily  adds  some  touch ;  but  the  last 
finishing  stroke  we  shall  not  receive  till  the  great  day  of  the  Lord.  {J.  Dailli.) 
The  perseverance  of  the  saints  does  not  supersede  human  effort : — If  any  of  you  should 
be  well  assured  that,  in  a  certain  line  of  business,  you  would  make  a  vast  sum  of 
money,  would  that  confidence  lead  you  to  refuse  that  business,  would  it  lead  yon  to 
lie  in  bed  all  day,  or  to  desert  your  post  altogether  ?  No,  the  assurance  that  yoa 
would  be  diligent  and  would  prosper  would  make  you  diligent.  I  will  borrow  a 
metaphor  from  the  revelries  of  the  season,  such  as  Paul  aforetime  borrowed  from 
the  games  of  Greece — if  any  rider  at  the  races  should  be  confident  that  he  was 
destined  to  win,  would  that  make  him  slacken  speed  ?  Napoleon  believed  himself 
to  be  the  child  of  destiny,  did  that  freeze  his  energies  ?  To  show  you  that  the 
certainty  of  a  thing  does  not  hinder  a  man  from  striving  after  it,  but  rather 
quickens  him,  I  will  give  you  an  anecdote  of  myself:  it  happened  to_me  when  I 
was  but  a  child  of  some  ten  years  of  age,  or  less.  Mr.  Eichard  Knill,  of  happy 
and  glorious  memory,  an  earnest  worker  for  Christ,  felt  moved,  I  know  not  why, 
to  take  me  on  his  knee,  at  my  grandfather's  house,  and  to  utter  words  like  these, 
which  were  treasured  up  by  the  family,  and  by  myself  especially,  "  This  child," 
said  he,  "  will  preach  the  gospel,  and  he  will  preach  it  to  the  largest  congregations 
of  our  times."  I  believed  his  prophecy,  and  my  standing  here  to-day  is  partly 
occasioned  by  such  belief.  It  did  not  hinder  me  in  my  diligence  in  seeking  tc 
educate  myself  because  I  believed  I  was  destined  to  preach  the  gospel  to  large 
congregations ;  not  at  all,  but  the  prophecy  helped  forward  its  own  fulfilment ;  and 
I  prayed,  and  sought,  and  strove,  alwavs  having  this  Star  of  Bethlehem  before  me, 
that  the  day  should  come  when  I  should  preach  the  gospel.  Even  so  the  belief 
that  we  shall  one  day  be  perfect,  never  hinders  any  true  believer  from  diligence, 
but  is  the  highest  possible  Incentive  to  make  a  man  struggle  with  the  corruptiont 


CHAP.  I.]  PEILIPPIANS.  13 

of  the  flesh,  and  seek  to  p^reevere  according  to  God's  promise.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  permanence  and  sacrificial  character  of  the  work  of  grace  : — These  words,  found 
linked  together  more  than  once  in  Pauline  usage,  e.g.,  2  Cor.  viii.  6,  Gal.  iii.  3, 
have  probably  a  sacrificial  import.  They  are  used  in  describing  religious  cere- 
monials, and  especially  the  ritual  of  sacrifice.  The  metaphor  then  may  be  this : 
just  as  t,  sacrifice,  when  once  it  is  solemnly  inaugurated,  is  carried  through  with 
all  the  appropriate  rites  to  its  completion,  so  every  work  of  grace  in  the  believer's 
heart,  being  not  only  God's  work,  but  a  work  which  is  an  offering  presented  unto 
Him,  will  be  carried  on  to  its  proper  consummation.  Nothing  will  be  allowed  to 
come  in  the  way,  so  as  to  render  it  a  half-finished,  a  mutilated,  an  imperfect  thing. 
Begun,  it  must  be  "performed."  Paul  is  now  writing  to  a  Christian  community 
composed  for  the  most  part  of  those  who  had  once  been  heathen  ;  his  language 
therefore  purposely  takes  appropriate  colouring  from  their  former  but  now  forsaken 
rites.  There  is,  he  would  say,  a  sacrifice  carried  on  witbin  their  souls,  a  work  of 
grace,  a  work  shown  in  Christian  liberality,  which  God  will  not  permit  to  remain 
mutilated  and  incomplete.  This  explanation  is  all  the  more  probable  in  view  of  a 
similar  figure  found  in  ii.  17.  There  substantially  the  same  metaphor  appears 
distinctly  on  the  surface,  which  at  least  hes  only  hidden  here.  It  reminds  us  of 
the  infinite  solemnity  belonging  to  every  good  work  wrought  within  us  and  wrought 
by  us.  It  is  "  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleasing  to 
God."  But  the  apostle  directs  the  thought  forward  to  the  final  completion  of  this 
service,  "  until  tbe  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  {J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.)  The  day  of 
Jetiu  Christ: — That  is  the  goal  of  our  race.  That  is  the  point  to  which  every 
Christian  eye  is  directed.  Every  other  day  of  our  lives,  every  other  day  of  the 
world's  existence,  is  a  day ;  a  common,  ordinary,  casual  day  and  no  more  :  this  is 
the  day.  It  is  sometimes  so  called  without  fui  ther  epithet  or  explanation  11  Cor. 
iii.  13;  Heb.  x.  25).  Do  we  remember,  do  we  live  lu  the  remembrance  of  all  that 
is  involved  in  it?  The  day  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  day  which  is  His  altogether;  the 
day  which  shall  reveal  Him  as  He  is,  disclose  His  real  greatness,  put  down  every 
rival  power,  and  erect  His  throne  for  ever  as  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords. 
Where  shail  we  be  then  ?  Shall  we  be  among  those  slothful  and  distbedient 
servants  who  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destmction  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord  ?  or  rather  among  those  who  have  been  long  waiting  for  Him  with  loins 
girt  and  lights  burning,  and  to  whom  the  day  of  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  will 
be  also  the  day  of  their  own  final  manifestation  as  the  sons  of  God?  {Dean 
Vaugharu) 

Vera.  7-11. — I  liave  you  In  my  heart. — Abounding!  of  love : — I.  Was  it  a  slip  of 
tho  pen  when  Paul  wrote  "  I  have  yov  in  mt  heart  "  ?  Will  he  modify  it  7  No, 
he  will  make  it  more  than  it  was.  Lest  it  should  be  supposed  that  it  was  only  his 
manner  of  speech,  and  that  he  is  only  uttering  a  passing  sentiment,  he  puts  before 
what  he  has  to  say  a  solemn  asseveration.  "  God  is  my  witness."  Such  a  form  of 
expression  would  hardly  be  regarded  in  these  days  as  meeting  the  laws  of  taste  and 
propriety,  and  some  object  to  it  on  the  ground  that  God  cannot  be  called  into 
court  to  witness  to  a  thing,  and  that  after  all  it  is  only  the  testimony  of  a  man. 
Granted  :  Yet  it  is  the  highest  form  in  which  testimony  can  be  given.  And  apart 
from  the  apostle's  anxiety  to  be  believed,  there  was  a  naturalness  in  his  using  it 
which  would  not  belong  to  any  other.  He  was  often  alone,  separated  from  his 
converts,  but  he  carried  them  about  with  him  in  his  heart.  He  often  spoke  to  God 
about  them,  so  that  God  knew  of  his  love  to  them.  And  not  only  so ;  it  is  as 
though  he  said,  "  Did  I  say  I  had  you  in  my  heart  ?  I  should  rather  have  said, 
'  I  long  after  you  in  the  heart  of  Jesus  Christ.'  '  I  love,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ 
loveth  in  me.'  His  heart  and  mine  meet  in  unison  here."  II.  Loving  thus  how 
NATDBAL  THAT  HE  SHOULD  PRAY  ABOUT  THEIR  LOVE.  He  asks  that  the  great  love 
faculty  should  fill  their  souls.  "  In  all  knowledge."  There  is  the  knowledge  of 
the  schoolboy,  of  the  well-informed  man,  of  the  philosopher.  Here  it  is  the  latter, 
the  higher  knowledge,  such  as  is  strong  meat  to  the  strong  man.  "In  all  percep- 
tion." Tbe  first  term  deals  with  the  general  knowledge  of  the  gospel ;  this  comes 
down  to  particulars  of  Christian  apprehension,  "That  ye  may  approve  things  that 
are  excellent"  or  "try  things  that  differ."  It  is  good  to  have  the  faculty  for  so 
discerning,  that  we  may  never  call  darkness  Ught ;  but  the  apostle  prays  for  more, 
even  that  in  the  region  of  things,  all  of  which  are  good  and  true,  they  may  discern 
the  most  excellent,  always  seeing  and  choosing  the  best,  iigain,  there  are  different 
ways  of  doing  good  things.     So  that  the  apostle  goes  on  to  pray  that  they  may  be 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  l 

"  sincere  and  without  offence"  or  "  stnmbling  " — anything  that  prevents  advacee. 
III.  The  pbateb  is  sdmmed  up  in  the  words:  "that  ye  may  be  filled  with  the 
fruits  of  righteousnesB."  In  so  doing  they  would  have  the  sublime  glory  of  living 
to  the  praise  of  God — the  highest  end  and  aim  of  being.  Men  living  the  Christian 
life  by  distinst  intent  and  aim  achieve  the  noblest  thing  in  actual  result.  But  a 
little  thing  does  it  seem  ?  Every  little  stream  contributes  to  the  majestic  swell  of 
the  ocean,  so  every  fruitful  life  is  sending  its  little  to  contribute  to  the  fulness  of 
the  Divine  glory.  IV.  The  relation  between  the  phbase,  "  that  youb  love  may 
ABOUND,"  AND  ALL  THAT  COMES  AFTEB.  That  is  the  root-phrasc,  the  key  to  the 
position,  mother  to  all  the  virtues.  Love  will  produce  all  these,  and  make  a 
beautiful  character.  The  soul  is  a  living  house  having  many  doors.  Some,  the 
greatest  number,  stand  by  the  door  of  reason,  and  strive  to  enter,  and  many  go  in. 
But  when  they  get  in  they  find  the  house  full  of  company.  How  did  they  get  in  ? 
By  other  doors,  or  by  the  windows.  From  deep  convictions,  blossoming  hopes, 
and  heavenly  aspirings,  but  most  got  in  by  the  door  of  love.  This  is  not  so 
imposing  a  way  of  entrance.  There  is  no  great  knocker  to  this  door  called  logic. 
You  come  in  by  it  softly,  you  do  but  whisper,  and  are  admitted.  "V.  The  practical 
DBB  of  all  this  is  that  we  should  take  the  best  things  we  can  think  of  to 
promote  the  aboundings  of  love.  {A,  Raleigh,  D.D.)  The  sixth  verse  was  like 
the  peal  of  a  trumpet ;  the  seventh  is  the  low  sweet  murmur  of  the  summer 
morning.  The  expression  of  the  text  is  of  singular  beauty.  Who  can 
measure  the  circumference  of  a  truly  philanthropic  heart  ?  Has  arithmetic  any 
cunning  art  by  which  to  calculate  the  girth  of  that  organ  of  affection  ?  A  man  in 
Rome  carrying  the  Philippian  Church  in  his  heart  1     I.  He  who  cabbies  the 

WORLD   ELSEWHEBB    THAN   IN    HIS   HEABT   WILL  SOON   WISH   TO    OAST    OFF    HIS    BURDEN. 

II.  He  who  carries  the  good  in  his  heart  can  never  BE  DESOLATE.  Loueliness 
is  an  impossibility  to  the  well-stored  heart.     III.  He  whose  heart  is  engaged 

with  the  TENDEB  offices  of  affection  18  THE  PBOFOUNDEST  INTEBPBETEB  AND 
THE  MOST  EFFICIENT  SEBVANT  OF  MANKIND.  IV.  He  WHO  ENSHRINB8  HI8  BENB- 
FAOTOBS   IN   HIS   HEABT    HAS    BEOKEN    THE    DOMINION     OP    SELFISHNESS.       {J.    Parker^ 

D.D.)  Reasons  for  PauVs  confidence : — I.  The  common  intebest — "  defence  and 
confirmation."  1.  They  sympathized  with  the  apostle  in  his  trials.  These  trials 
arose  not  oat  of  political  or  moral  offences,  but  out  of  his  defence  and  propagation 
of  the  gospel.  The  Phihppians  made  common  cause  with  him,  supporting  him 
by  gifts  and  prayer.  The  true  character  of  Christianity  is  seen  here.  When  the 
Jews  are  in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  Esther  is  pleading  their  cause  ;  when  Peter  is  in 
prison,  the  disciples  are  praying  for  his  release.  The  Church  is  one  in  adversity  aa 
well  as  prosperity ;  one  in  prison  as  well  as  in  heaven.  Remember  that  as  you 
think  of  missionaries,  and  your  persecuted  brethren  in  the  home,  workshop,  &e. 
(Heb.  xiii.  3).  3.  They  seconded  the  apostle's  efforts  by  their  lives  and  labours. 
They  lived  the  gospel  he  preached.  Their  sympathy  was  deeper  than  attach- 
ment  to  his  person,  or  admiration  of  his  character.  "If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My 
commandments."  "  See  how  these  Christians  love  one  another,"  was  the  evidence 
wrung  from  minds  full  of  animus.  No  power  can  shake  the  gospel  when  firmly 
rooted  in  the  life  of  the  Church.  Sceptics  may  as  well  scoff  at  the  light  of  the  sun 
as  ignore  the  gospel  of  the  life  and  character.  II.  The  mutual  love  aud  esteeu 
WHICH  THIS  SEBvicE  PBODUCES — "  I  have  you  in  my  heart ; "  as  we  say  of  a  friend, 
"  He  has  a  warm  place  in  my  heart."  1.  It  was  a  great  love.  2.  Constant  love. 
The  old  adage  "  out  of  sight,  out  of  mind,"  was  not  true  here.  8,  Increasing  love. 
Many  streams  dry  up,  but  "let  brotherly  love  continue."  III.  The  common 
BouBGE  OF  BLESSEDNESS — "  partakers  with  me,"  &c.  1.  By  the  one  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
they  were  saved  from  sin.  There  is  but  one  fountain  opened  for  sin.  2.  The 
example  of  Jesus  led  them  all  in  the  right  way.  With  one  accord  all  believers 
"  show  forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  hath  called  them,"  &o.  3.  His  presence  was 
their  one  source  of  inspiration.  Daily  communion  with  Jesus  kept  their  zeal 
burning,  and  their  work  advancing.  4.  His  coming  was  their  only  hope.  {Weekly 
Pulpit.)  Observe — I.  What  a  faithful  ministeb  deliohts  to  think  of  in 
HIS  flock  :  That  they  will  be — 1.  Steadfast.  2.  Progressive.  3.  Triumphant.  IL 
Why  he  delights  to  think  so.  Because — 1.  He  loves  them.  2.  Labours  for 
them.  3.  Suffers  for  them.  (J.Lyth,  D.D.)  The  fellowship  of  the  gospel: — 
We  have  here  a  wider  idea  of  that  than  in  verse  5.  The  apostle  and  the  Philippians 
being  one  in  their  faith  in  Christ,  were  one  also  in  their  love  of  each  other.  Being 
one  with  the  apostle  in  Christ,  they  were  one  with  him  in  all  the  vicissitudes  of  his 
experience.    He  refers  to  himself  as  in  two  different  situations :  in  the  one  he  was 


CBAP.  I.J  PHILIPPIANS.  U 

bound  as  a  prisoner,  in  the  other  be  was  defending  and  confirming  the  gospel. 
In  each  case  the  Philippians  were  partakers  of  his  grace.     I.  The  idvocacy  op  the 

BEST  or  CAUSES  MAY  BRING  A  MAN  INTO  SOCIAL  HUMILIATION.  II.  SOCIAL  HUMILIA- 
TION DOES  NOT  NECESSAKILY  INVOLVE  MORAL  DISHONOUR.  III.  WhILE  THE  MORALLY 
HONOURABLE    ARE    8UFFERIN0    FROM  SOCIAL  HUMILIATION  THEY  WILL  NOT   BE   ABANDONED 

BY  THE  PARTAKERS  OF  THE  SAME  GRACE.  Another  proof  of  the  Uniting  and  con- 
solidating force  of  Christianity.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  unifying  influence  of 
Christian  love : — There  are  instincts  in  human  nature  by  which  we  love  the 
beautiful,  the  useful,  the  tender,  and  the  loving;  bnt  this  love  drew  its  inspiration 
from  character  and  from  life.  This  is  the  result  of  the  love  of  Christ  in  us.  Two 
drops  of  rain  fall  on  the  same  stone,  and  near  each  other.  By  the  force  of  the 
affinity  they  will  travel  the  short  distance,  and  unite.  Divine  love  comes  down  in 
drops,  which  attract  each  other  to  form  the  Christian  Church.  In  the  concerted 
action  of  that  society,  all  intellects  are  fused  into  one  wisdom ;  all  consciences  unite 
to  make  one  great  moral  force :  all  hearts  are  joined,  as  so  many  embers  gathered 
together  to  make  a  large  fire;  all  wills  are  blended  to  create  a  power  before  which 
opposition  must  cease.  As  water  will  find  its  level,  so  the  love  of  Christians  will  rise  as 
high  as  its  source.  The  Saviour  loved  the  world,  and  died  for  it;  so  St.  John  says 
that  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren.  {The  Study.)  The  heart  of 
Paul  and  the  heart  of  Christ : — As  Bengal  says,  "  Christ,  not  Paul,  lived  in  Paul ; 
wherefore  Paul  is  moved  not  in  the  heart  of  Paul,  but  in  the  heart  of  Jesus  Christ." 
Springing  from  such  a  depth,  Paul's  love  could  not  but  rise  to  vast  proportions. 
The  heart  of  Jesus,  infinitely  tender,  thrown  open  to  men,  was  the  home  of  the 
captive  apostle — the  well-spring  of  sacrificing  love  ;  where  man  is  brought  nearest 
to  God.  (G.  G.  Ballard.)  The  apologetic  value  of  Paul's  bonds : — So  then  Paul's 
bonds  were  a  confirmation  of  the  gospel,  and  a  defence.  And  most  truly  so.  For 
if  he  had  shunned  bonds,  he  might  have  been  thought  a  deceiver  ;  but  now  by 
enduring  everything,  both  bonds  and  affliction,  he  shows  that  he  suffers  this  for  no 
human  reason,  but  for  God,  who  rewards.  For  no  one  would  have  been  willing  to 
die,  or  to  incur  such  great  risks ;  no  one  would  have  chosen  to  come  into  collision 
with  such  an  emperor,  I  mean,  as  Nero,  unless  he  had  looked  to  another  far  greater 
King.  Truly  a  confirmation  of  the  gospel  were  his  bonds.  See  how  he  more  than 
succeeded  in  turning  all  things  to  their  opposite.  For  what  they  supposed  to  be  a 
weakness  and  a  detraction,  that  he  calls  a  confirmation ;  and  had  not  this  taken 
place,  there  had  been  a  weakness.  {Chryaottom.)  Ministers  carry  the  images  of 
their  people  in  their  hearts  : — After  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  a  soldier  was  found 
dead  upon  the  field,  holding  in  his  hand  the  picture  of  three  small  children.  No 
clue  to  his  name  could  be  found.  In  the  terrors  of  battle  he  had  comforted  him- 
self  with  this  picture.  It  was  published,  and  by  this  means  the  children  were 
found  in  a  village  of  Western  New  Tork.  Even  so  do  faithful  ministers  carry  the 
goulfl  of  their  converts  with  them  wherever  they  go. 

Vcr.  8.  God  ia  my  witness  how  greatly  I  long  after  you  all.— Pawl'*  tender 
regard  for  the  Philippians  : — I.  Its  witness — God.  1.  This  appeal  should  not  be 
made  frequently,  or  on  trivial  occasions ;  but  should  be  reserved  for  seasons  of 
peculiar  solemnity,  as  here.  Paul  wanted  to  give  them  an  assurance  of  his  regard 
such  as  would  be  their  consolation  when  he  was  gone.  2.  But  though  the  parade 
of  this  witness  should  be  spared,  the  consciousness  of  it  should  pervade  all  onr  life. 
It  is  easy  to  deceive  our  fellow  man.  It  is  healthful  to  be  constantly  reminded  of 
an  onlooker  who  is  not  mocked.  His  company,  however,  is  shunned  by  many  for 
good  reasons.  No  man  chooses  the  living  God  as  his  habitual  company  who  is 
not  reconciled  to  him  through  Christ.  3.  What  a  blessed  state  to  be  in  ;  to  let  all 
our  affections  towards  our  brethren  flow  and  reflow  in  the  Divine  presence.  II. 
Its  source — "the  bowels," — the  strong  compassion  of  Christ.  From  that 
fountain  his  own  pity  flowed.  1.  He  was  free  to  testify,  "  In  me  dwelleth  no  good 
thing."  True ;  no  pity  flowed  from  his  cruel  heart  or  dimmed  his  cruel  eye  when 
Stephen  died.  He  was  not  at  that  time  in  Christ.  From  the  memory  of  his 
former  self  he  writes  Titus  iii.  3.  2.  Now  the  very  love  that  glowed  in  the  bosom 
of  Jesus  was  communicated  to  His  disciple.  It  was  not  a  love  of  mere  nature  or 
an  affection  of  party.  3.  His  new  position  gave  him  a  new  view  and  new  affections. 
He  had  risen  with  Christ,  and  from  the  heavenly  places  the  old  divisions  between 
Jew  and  Greek,  &o.,  had  disappeared,  and  one  Une  only  divided  the  race  into  two 
compartments,  those  who  were  in  Christ  Jesus  and  those  who  were  not.  He  loved 
th«  whole,  bat  rejoiced  over  the  brethren  with  joy  unspeakable.     HI.  Its  ohabaotxb 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  l. 

AND  STRENGTH — "  How  greatly,"  &c.  1.  Learn  from  the  fact  that  he  called  God  to 
witness  it,  that  in  order  to  get  into  communion  with  God  it  is  not  necessary  to 
banish  your  brother  out  of  sight.  The  law  is  that  "  he  who  loveth  God,  love  his 
brother  also."  2.  The  extent  and  distribution  of  his  affection — '•  all."  Probably 
they  were  not  all  alike  attractive.  The  longing  was  one  as  it  burned  in  Paul's 
heart ;  but  it  was  many  coloured  as  it  streamed  on  a  promiscuous  congregation. 
Light  is  for  all  the  same,  but  it  becomes  various  as  it  falls  on  various  surfaces. 

(1)  Little  children.    •'  Longing  after"  is  more  appropriate  to  infants  than  to  others. 

(2)  The  young  who  are  of  understanding  age.  You  have  need  of  a  compassion 
like  Christ's.  (3)  The  burdened  with  care.  (4)  The  aged.  (W.  Armt,  D.D.) 
Brotherly  love: — I.  Its  soueces — "  the  tender  mercies  of  Jesus  Christ."  Here  the 
hardness  of  our  hearts  is  melted.  Sin  has  dried  up  the  wells  of  sympathy,  broken 
the  family  ties  of  mankind.  Jesus  collects  the  fragments,  places  them  in  the 
fumace  of  his  love,  and  welds  them  together.  1.  The  restoration  of  the  family 
likeness.  When  we  see  God  the  Father  in  each  other,  we  begin  to  love  one  another. 
The  spirit  of  Christ  generates  that  love.  When  we  meet  in  Christ  we  experience 
the  fiiat  touch  of  heart.  The  ministry  of  the  tender  mercies  of  Christ  quickens 
those  who  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  2.  On  the  basis  of  brotherly  love 
human  society  is  reconstructed.  The  branches  touch  each  other  in  the  vine. 
The  whole  fabric  rests  on  the  one  corner  stone,  Christ.  By  the  power  of  the  Cross 
the  clouds  of  selfishness  are  rolled  back.  The  social  instincts  are  sanctified  to 
constitute  universal  society.  II.  Its  attestation — "  God  is  my  witness."  The 
evidence  was  an  inward  consciousness,  and  an  outward  life.  Omniscience  was  the 
final  court  of  appeal.  1.  Love  to  the  Church  is  an  evidence  of  oar  conversion  by 
the  truth  (1  John  iii.  14).  2.  Through  the  Church  we  commune  with  God.  The 
heavens  declare  God's  glory,  the  earth  His  riches,  the  Bible  His  will,  human 
experience  in  the  Church  His  goodness.  The  historical  side  of  religion  administers 
to  the  spiritual.  The  wisdom  of  Paul,  the  zeal  of  Peter,  the  affection  of  John, 
bring  God  nearer  to  the  heart.  Every  believer  is  a  vessel  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and 
to  drink  of  His  experience  is  to  commune  with  the  Divine.  III.  The  functions  of 
SPIRITUAL  LONGINGS.  Paul's  Supreme  desire  was  to  be  near  the  Philippians,  and  to 
be  of  service  to  their  growth.  Thereby  he  would  witness — 1.  To  the  love  of  God. 
2.  Against  the  hatred  of  the  sinful  heart.  3.  To  the  final  society  of  the  blest. 
{Weekly  Pulpit.)  Apostolic  solicitude: — I.  Its  objects.  II.  Occasion.  HI. 
Pbinciple.  IV.  Intensity.  V.  Evidence.  (/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Saints  longing 
for  saints  is  a  prophecy  that  all  saints  are  destined  to  be  brought  into  one  assembly. 
God  will  satisfy  all  the  desires  which  He  creates;  He  will  feed  the  soul  which  He 
has  made  hungry ;  and  as  He  has  given  us  the  spirit  of  true  fellowship,  so  will  He 
supply  the  means  of  its  full  enjoyment.  Out  of  all  this  comes  heaven.  The  good 
longing  for  the  good ;  the  creature  yearning  for  the  Creator ;  the  redeemed  sighing 
for  (he  Bedeemer ;  the  dew  of  the  morning  trembling  with  the  hope  of  being  taken 
up  by  the  infinite  light :  what  is  all  this  but  the  premonition  of  celestial  life. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  consistency  of  love  of  man  with  love  of  God  : — He  is  a* 
jealous  God  to  the  effect  of  commanding,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before 
Me  ;  "  but  even  in  His  own  sight  you  may  cherish  to  the  full  all  your  love  of  the 
brethren.  The  sun,  at  his  rising,  extinguishes  all  the  stars  of  heaven,  but  not  the 
flowers  of  earth  ;  so  when  you  get  into  the  presence  of  God,  none  oiher  is  permitted 
to  stand  on  a  level  with  Himself,  but  into  His  presence  you  may  boldly  bring  all 
your  brethren  of  human  kind.  In  His  presence  you  may  keep  every  affection  that 
is  inherited  by  nature  or  ingrafted  by  grace.  {TV.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Universality  of 
Christian  love : — A  lamp  lighted  on  the  top  of  a  pillar  casts  light  on  some  objects, 
and  a  shadow  on  others  ;  but  the  sun  spreads  day  over  all.  The  love  that  is  grafted 
into  Christ  is  universal;  like  His  own.  There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God;  and 
none  with  the  godly  as  far  as  they  act  in  character.  (Ibid.)  "  The  bowels  of  Jesus 
Christ" : — The  (nrXayxva  are  properly  the  nobler  viscera,  the  heart,  lungs,  liver,  <&c., 
HS  distinguished  from  the  Ivrepa,  the  lower  viscera,  the  intestines.  The  ffirXayxva 
alune  seem  to  be  regarded  by  the  Greeks  as  the  seat  of  affections,  whether  anger, 
love,  pity,  or  jealousy.     {Bishop  Lightfoot.) 

Vers.  9-11.  And  tlila  I  pray. — The  recorded  prayers  of  St.  Paul  are  eight  in  number. 
I.  Fob  the  Ephesians  (i.  17-23 ;  iii.  14-21).  II.  Fob  the  Colossians  (i.  9-14).  IIL 
For  the  Thessalonians  (I.  iii.  10-13  ;  II.  i.  11-12  ;  ii.  16, 17  ;  iii.  16).  IV.  Fob  thb 
Philippians  {in  loco).  {G.  G.  Ballard.)  St.  Paul' t  prayer  for  the  Philippians : — 
These  words  contain  a  petition  for — L  Thb  xnlabqeuent  or  ths  affections  by  thi 


<aup.  L]  PHILIPPIANS.  IT 

lUFBOVE&rSNT  OF  THB  INTELLECTUAL  POWERS.  11.  An  IMCBEASE  OF  LOTS  !■  KNOW- 
LEDOB   AND  JBDQMENT  WITH  BEFEBENOE  TO  THE  IMPROVEMENT   OF   THE    MORAL  OHARAC- 

IBR.  (C.  Lawson.)  The  prayer  tells  us  that  love  should  be— I.  Pboorebsive. 
II.  Intelligent.  III.  Discriminatino.  IV.  Sincere.  V.  Without  offence. 
VL  Constant.  VII.  Fruitful.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I.  Thb  apostle's  action  of 
prating.  The  Philippians  abounded  in  love,  <feo.,  yet  the  apostle  prayed  that  they 
might  abound  yet  more  and  more.  Whence  observe — 1.  The  continual  necessity  of 
prayer.  Whatsoever  graces  the  Lord  hath  bestowed  on  us  yet  we  have  still  need 
to  pray  that  we  may  abound  more  and  more  in  Him  (1  Thess.  v.  17 ;  James  i.  5 ; 
1  I'hess.  iii.  12).  And  the  reason  why  we  are  continually  so  to  pray  is  plain  ;  for — 
(1)  Such  is  our  weakness  through  sin,  that  nnto  whatsoever  measure  of  grace  we 
have  attained,  yet  stand  therein  we  cannot  unless  God  uphold  us  (Matt.  xiv.  31 ; 
Eph.  vi.  20).  (2)  In  whatsoever  grace  we  abound,  yet  therein  we  come  so  short  of 
perfection  that  we  have  need  to  pray  that  we  abound  more  and  more.  (3)  This, 
then,  may  serve  to  condemn  our  great  slackness,  negligence,  coldness,  and  faintness, 
both  in  private  and  public  prayer.  2.  Christians  are  not  to  stand  still,  or  be  con- 
tent with  good  beginnings,  but  to  grow  (Heb.  vi.  1 ;  Phil.  iii.  12).  And  how  should 
any  man  think  otherwise,  considering  what  enemies  hinder  our  perfection.  These 
continually  bid  us  such  battle,  that  if  either  we  stand  or  give  back  we  must  gener- 
ally take  the  foil.  (1)  Many  which  seemed  to  have  begun  in  the  spirit  make  an 
end  in  the  flesh.  (2)  Others  pause,  and,  as  if  they  were  in  danger  in  every  step, 
move  not  a  foot  forward.  Nay,  not  to  go  forward  is  to  go  backward,  and  not  to 
increase  in  the  graces  of  God's  Spirit  is  to  decrease  (Rev.  iii.  16).  (3)  Others 
are  content  to  make  a  show  of  going  forward  for  advantage  and  gain.  II. 
The  thinos  for  which  he  prats.  I.  That  their  love  to  God  and  one  another 
might  abound.  (1)  Touching  the  love  of  God,  how  can  we  love  Him  enough  who 
flo  loved  us.  (2)  Love  one  of  another  (1  Thess.  iii.  12).  (3)  Love  towards  poor 
saints  and  afflicted  members  of  Christ  (2  Cor.  viii;  Deut.  xv.  7-11) ;  which  serveth 
to  condemn  the  cold  love  of  Christians  in  our  days  (1  John  iv.  20).  2.  That  they 
may  abound  more  and  more  in  knowledge,  viz.,  of  God's  will  out  of  His  Word  (1 
Cor.  xiv.  20;  Heb.  vi.  1).  This  then  may  teach  us — (1)  To  beware  of  their  leaven 
who  would  have  shut  us  up  in  ignorance,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  the  mother  of 
devotion,  and  that  the  Scriptures  are  hard  to  be  understood,  and  perilous  to  read. 
Bat  what  saith  the  Holy  Ghost?  (John  v.  29  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  18  ;  Col.  iii.  16.)  (2)  To 
give  diligence  unto  the  reading,  hearing,  and  meditating  upon  the  Scriptures  that 
we  may  abound  in  knowledge  and  understanding.  Very  lamentable  is  it  to  see  so 
many  thousands  who  are  as  ignorant  of  God's  Word  as  when  they  sat  in  the  dark- 
ness of  Egypt.  3.  That  they  may  abound  more  and  more  in  all  judgment,  i.e.,  in 
sound  judgment,  that  having  their  wits  exercised  through  long  custom,  they  may 
discern  both  good  and  evil ;  and  abound  also  in  an  experience  of  spiritual  things  in 
themselves,  that  they  might  spiritually  feel  in  their  hearts  that  which  they  knew 
out  of  the  word  (Psa.  xxxiv.  8).  This  should  teach  us  to  so  observe  the  mercies 
and  judgments  of  the  Lord  that  we  may  have  an  experimental  knowledge  of  them 
(Psa.  xxxiv.  6).  4.  That  their  "love"  might  be  grounded  in  sound  "  knowledge 
and  judgment,"  that  each  having  help  of  other,  and  being  furnished  by  other,  they 
might  the  better  "  discern  things  that  differ."  Tht)ugh  we  have  all  knowledge  and 
not  love  we  are  nothing.  So,  on  the  other  hand,  though  we  have  all  love  and  no 
knowledge,  it  is  nothing.  Which  of  these  soever  grows  up  without  other,  like 
Jonah's  gourd,  will  quickly  wither.  Our  care  then  must  be  that  our  love  abound  in 
knowledge,  that  we  may  know  on  whom  our  love  ought  principally  to  be  set ;  and 
in  all  judgment,  that  knowing  whom  we  ought  to  love  we  may  love  them  as  we 
ought  (Gal.  vi.  10).  Otherwise  our  love  may  do  more  harm  than  good ;  as  zeal 
without  knowledge.  III.  The  ends  wherefore  he  prats.  1.  That  they  might 
discern  things  that  differ  one  from  another,  virtue  and  vice,  false  and  true  prophets, 
corrupt  and  uncorrupt  doctrine,  and  so  might  follow  the  good  and  fly  the  bad 
(Bom.  ii.  18).  Very  justly,  then,  are  they  to  be  reproved  that  in  seeking  after 
knowledge  even  out  of  the  Scriptures  propose  any  other  end.  (1)  Such  are  they 
that,  seeing  the  Church  to  lean  on  the  Scriptures,  do  by  their  corruptions  of  the 
text,  their  false  glosses  and  conclusions,  labour  to  overthrow  the  truth  and  to  build 
their  own  errors.  (2)  Others  there  are  whose  end  is  only  a  vain  ostentation,  that 
men  may  think  and  speak  of  them  as  great  rabbins  (1  Cor.  viii.  1).  The  end  of 
others  is  information,  so  that  they  may  not  appear  ignorant,  but  who  show  no 
fruits  of  their  knowledge  in  a  godly  life.  2.  That  they  might  be  pore  from  any 
leaven  of  oorruption  in  doctrine,  life,  or  manners  as  white  wool  never  dyvd,  flne 

2 


13  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oaA*.  L 

flour  never  leavened.  For  it  is  not  enough  to  know  the  difference  between  purity 
and  impurity  (1  Cor.  v.  6-7;  Matt.  xvL  12;  1  Tim.  v.  22).  3.  That  they  might 
not  stumble,  but  hold  on  a  constant  course  without  falling,  slipping  back,  or  stand- 
ing at  a  stay  (Gal.  iii.  3  ;  Luke  ix.  62).  4.  That  they  might  be  fruitful  in  all  good 
works.  (1)  The  measure  of  good  works — "  filled  ; "  pressed  down,  shaken  together. 
(2)  The  definition  of  good  works — "  fruits  of  righteousness."  (3)  Their  fountain — 
"  Jesus  Christ."  (4)  Their  end — "  the  glory  and  praise  of  God."  IV.  Observations 
FOR  ouB  iNBTBUCTioN.  1.  We  are  not  only  to  do  the  things  that  are  good,  but  to 
abound  in  them  (Col.  i.  9-10;  John  xv.  5-8;  Acts  ix.  86).  Why?  (1)  That  we 
may  please  God  (Col.  i.  10).  (2)  That  we  may  glorify  the  Father  (John  xv.  8).  (3) 
That  we  may  abide  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  us  (John  xv.  5).  2.  Let  this  stir  as  up 
and  forward  to  every  good  work.  (H.  Airay,  D.D.)  I.  Christian  love  in  its 
PROPER  growth  and  MANIFESTATION.  1.  This  lovo  is  Hot  that  Specially  which  was 
cherished  towards  the  apostle.  From  his  point  of  view  that  was  already  much 
more  than  he  had  looked  for.  Nor  is  it  brotherly  love,  or  love  to  all  men,  or  love 
towards  God  and  Christ,  or  loving  activity  in  Christian  service.  It  is  rather  love 
in  the  absolute  sense  of  the  term — the  inward  state  of  the  heart,  which  is  also  the 
motive  power  of  the  life.  2.  It  is  no  mere  rhetorical  accident  which  makes  this 
grace  the  very  essence  of  the  renewed  life.  It  is  the  life  of  the  believer's  soul,  and 
the  soul  of  his  life.  It  is  with  conscious  design,  therefore,  and  perfect  propriety, 
that  he  who  penned  1  Cor.  xiii.  should  here  specify  love  as  the  distinctive  mark  of 
the  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  3.  This  love,  although  the  bond  of  perfectness,  is 
itself  never  perfect  on  earth.  Here  there  must  be  a  persistent  going  on  to  perfec- 
tion. The  manifold  outgoings  of  love  need  direction  and  control.  (1)  It  cannot 
live  for  ever  in  a  cell,  apart  from  thought  (Prov.  i.  4).  We  are  therefore  taught 
that  the  love  of  the  renewed  heart  must  live  in  the  sphere  of  increasing  spiritual 
knowledge,  (a)  Of  Christ — a  clear  perception  of  the  Saviour's  person,  character, 
and  work,  accompanied  by  a  heart  interest  therein,  (b)  Of  the  deep  things  of  God. 
(2)  This  abounding  of  love  in  knowledge  is,  consequently,  also  an  abounding  in  all 
discernment,  in  every  moral  sense  or  feeling  which  almost  intuitively  perceives 
what  is  right,  and  almost  unconsciously  shrinks  from  what  is  wrong.  It  is 
spiritual  discrimination,  moral  tact.  4.  The  function  of  love  thus  regulated  is  to 
approve  the  things  that  are  excellent.  Love  has  to  prove  and  so  approve  things 
that  differ  (marg.)  in  being  better.  What  are  those  excellent  things  ?  See  chap, 
iv.  8-9.  5.  A  practical  and  much  needed  lesson  lies  in  this.  Love  may  set  on 
foot  many  schemes  of  usefulness,  and  yet  the  issue  may  be  failure,  because  the 
abounding  love  has  not  been  in  knowledge  and  discernment.  It  can  never  be  right 
to  cultivate  one  central  grace  to  the  neglect  of  the  others.  II,  The  perfection  or 
THE  Christian  life  thereby  attained.  1.  "  Sincere,"  i.e.,  spotless,  pure,  clear. 
Some  see  here  a  military  figurp,  the  result  of  dividing  an  army  into  several  sections, 
so  as  to  separate  the  more  hardy  and  valiant,  as  Gideon  set  apart  his  three 
hundred.  According  to  this  the  word  means  selected  and  so  excellent.  Others  see 
an  agricultural  figure.  Select,  pure  as  corn  that  is  purged  by  the  winnowing  fan 
or  threshing  roller.  But  the  view  that  it  means  tested  or  judged  by  the  sunbeam 
is  the  most  probable.  Christ's  people  as  here  depicted,  therefore,  are  hke  the  gem 
held  up  to  the  sunlight,  and  found  to  be  without  a  flaw ;  walking  in  the  light  ol 
truth,  and  the  white  radiance  of  eternity.  2.  It  follows  that  they  become  in  rela- 
tion to  others  "  void  of  offence,"  giving  no  occasion  for  stumbling.  A  Christian 
who  is  consistent  in  his  own  character  is  also  inoffensive  in  his  conduct.  His  un- 
conscious example,  as  well  as  words  and  deeds,  is  a  power  only  for  good.  3.  This 
he  does  unto  the  day  of  Christ.  (J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.)  In  one  word  the  apostle 
prayed  that  the  Philippians  might  grow.  Moral  dwarfs  never  pray  that  others  may 
become  moral  giants,  A  man  cannot  transcend  himself.  Only  the  firmament  can 
embrace  the  stars.  The  apostle  prays — I.  That  love  mat  abound  in  moral  tact. 
True  love  is  intelligent.  We  are  to  love  God  with  "  all  our  mind,"  As  knowledge 
is  the  basis  of  faith,  so  is  it  the  first  condition  of  love.  II.  Fob  an  enlargement 
AND  QUICKENING  OP  THE  DI3CRIMINATINO  FACULTY,  that  they  might  distinguish 
between  things  that  differ,  that  so  they  might  elect  the  right.  A  man  is  known  by 
his  verdicts.  The  artist  sees  where  the  clown  but  looks.  The  more  we  love  Christ 
the  more  shall  we  be  qualified  to  perceive  every  charm  in  moral  life.  He  who 
approves  the  excellent  will  defend  it.  III.  Fob  theib  sincerity.  The  word  has  a 
double  meaning.  1.  In  the  Greek  it  signifies  that  which  is  proved  in  the  snnUght. 
Christians  are  to  be  so  true  that  the  solar  light  of  infinite  rectitude  cannot  find  any 
•tain  or  derangement  in  their  charactei.    2.  In  the  Latin  it  means  "  without  wax ; ' 


OHA».  I.J  PHILIPPIANS.  19 

clarified  honey,  free  from  all  admixture.  The  Christian  life  is  to  be  so  refined  as 
to  be  thorouglaly  free  from  foreign  elements.  IV.  "  Being  filled,"  Ac.  (ver.  11). 
Paul,  beginning  at  the  centre,  finds  his  way  to  the  circumference  ;  beginning  with 
the  spiritual,  he  culminates  in  the  practical  (John  xv.  1-5).  See  the  connection 
between  Christ  and  fruit.  This  call  to  practical  life  shows  that  Christianity  is  not 
a  mocking  pretence,  a  theological  dream,  or  a  speculative  science,  but  a  sublime, 
vital,  and  vitalizing  reality.  The  doctrines  acknowledged  in  this  prayer  are — 1. 
That  Christian  life  is  progressive.  2.  That  God  is  ready  to  co-operate  with  His 
people  for  their  moral  enrichment.  3.  That  the  entire  manhood  is  to  bear  fruit. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)         Let  it  be  your  earnest  concern  anl  prayer — I.  That  yodb 

LOTS    MAY   ABOUND    IN     ALL     KNOWLEDQB    AND    JDDOMENT.        1.    The    loVe    yOU    should 

aspire  after  is  Christian  love.     (1)  Such  as  proceeds  from  faith  (Gal.  v.  6).     (2) 
Which  has  for  its  objects  God  and  Christ,  His  cause,  truths,  ordinances,  servants, 
and  your  fellow  creatures.     (3)  This  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  and  inspires  the 
soul  with  a  cheerful  disposition  for  and  activity  in  keeping  God's  commandments 
(Kom.  xiii.  10 ;  1  John  v.  3).     2.  Your  being  Church  members  supposes  that  you 
are  already  partakers  of  this  love  in  some  prevailing  degree,  as  Paul  inferred  in 
this  case.     Persons  lacking  this  ought  not  to  be  Church  members ;  for  love  is  the 
great  band  of  union  and  communion.     3.  The  prayer  intimates  that  it  is  not  per- 
fect, but  that  you  ought  to  seek  further  progress  in  it.     (1)  There  may  be  some- 
thing lacking  with  respect  to  its  disinterestedness,  impartiality,  and  spirituality ; 
or  in  respect  to  some  instances  and  exercises  of  it ;  or  in  respect  of  its  constancy, 
»nd  the  degrees  of  its  fervour  and  activity.    (2)  Keep  before  you  a  humbling  sense 
of  defect,  and  be  earnest  with  God  to  invigorate  and  develope  it.     4.  The  text 
suggests  that  it  should  be  a  judicious  love.     Light  should  kindle  all  your  warmth. 
Without  knowledge  and  judgment  your  love  will  be  like  a  land  flood,  that  over- 
floweth  with  a  rapid  stream,  but  hath  no  springs  to  maintain  it,  or  banks  to  conduct 
it  to  a  regular  course.    Take  heed  of  an  ignorant,  ungoveruable,  and  misjudged 
love  of  you  know  not  what,   or  why.     H.  That  ye  may  .vpprove,  &o.  (ver.  10). 
We  are  to  prove  all  things  by  the  unerring  touchstone  of  God's  Word,  and  by  a 
spiritual  taste  according  to  it.     The  more  acquaintance  we  have  with  the  things  of 
God  the  better  they  recommend  themselves  to  us  (Psa.  xxxiv.  8;  1  Pet.  ii.  2-3). 
m.  That  ye  may   be  sincere,  &o.  (ver.   10).      Some   understand   "sincere"   as 
referring  to  God,  and  "  without  offence"  as  referring  to  man.     But  why  should  not 
each  refer  to  both  ?     1.  Sincerity  is  not  so  much  a  distinct  grace  as  an  essential 
quality  running  through  all  our  graces  and  duties,  distinguishing  them  from  false 
appearances  in  their  exercise  towards   God  and  man.     2.  "  Without  offence  " 
(Acts  xxiv,  16).    IV.  "  That  ye  may  be  filled,"  &c.  (ver.  11).    1.  The  nature  of  a  man 
must  be  changed  in  its  moral  frame  by  regenerating  grace  before  he  can  bear  fruits 
of  righteousness.  2.  They  are  by  Jesus  Christ — (I)  As  all  virtue  for  producing  them 
is  derived  from  Him  (John  xv.  5).     (2)  As  all  their  acceptance  with  God  is  through 
Him  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).    (3)  As  the  revenue  of  glory  which  arises  from  them  passes  to  God 
through  Him  (1  Pet.  iv.  11).     {J.  Gayse,  D.D. )       True  Christian  love : — Our  power  to 
help  and  bless  each  other  is  primarily  the  power  of  prayer.   Prayer  directs  and  impels 
to  services  of  love ;  secures  the  efficiency  and  success  of  all  other  ministrations ; 
appeals  to  the  foundation  of  good,  and  fills  the  channel  of  blessing  sometimes  to 
overflowing.     And  Paul  knowing  all  this  writes  not  merely,  "  I  preach,  teach,  warn, 
labour,"  but  "  I  pray."    He  prays  in  harmony  with  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  that 
they  may  abound  "  more  and  more"  in  love.     Some  people  seem  to  have  enough 
religion,  and  very  little  that  enough  is.     Paul's  cry  was  ever  for  "more" — if  he 
had  light,  if  he  felt  himself  unusually  strong,  if  he  felt  his  inner  life  enriched  from 
God's  fulness,  his  cry  still  was  "  more."     So  he  prayed — not  that  the  Philippians 
were  marrow-minded,  thin-souled,  cold-hearted  people.     I.  There  was  lovb  in  the 
heabtb  of  the  saints  at  Philippi.     This  was  the  chief  evidence  of  their  being 
saints.     The  absence  of  this,  no  matter  what  had  been  present,  would  have  cast  s 
cloud  on  their  Christian  profession.     II.  This  love  was  manifested.     It  was  not 
stagnant  like  the  waters  of  a  tarn,  but  flowed  as  a  stream  which,  descending  from 
the  hills,  runs  through  the  valleys.     Christian  benevolence  must  not  sleep  in  the 
depths  of  your  nature.     What  if  God's  pity  had  slept  in  His  1  If  it  be  there  then 
make  ways  for  it,  so  that  the  living  water  may  reach  a  thirsty  world.    IH.  Thb 
LOVE  OF  OTHKBS  MAY  BE  AFFECTED  BY  ouB  PRAYERS.     Sometimes  HO  Other  ageucy  will 
■ucceed,  as  in  the  case  of  a  crabbed  professing  Christian  who  is  impervioos  to 
speech,  example,  and  other  acts  of  loving-kindness.    We  can  pray  that  God  would 
expand  that  narrow  soul.    lY.  Thx  lovx  or  a  tbus  Chmistian  is  mot  a  stationaby 


aO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap,  i^ 

MiNCiPLE  :  because  life  underlies  it.  (S.  Martin.)  Love — the  hearVs  eye  : — Lot* 
is  a  faculty  of  spiritual  knowledge.  Metaphysicians  think  the  faculty  of  sight  is  to 
be  found  principally  among  the  intellectual  powers.  As  a  power  of  sight  Paul  saya 
five  things  about  love.  I.  It  discerns  bpiritdally,  i.e.,  it  sees  those  objects  which 
belong  to  the  spiritual  sphere.  Love  sees  as  no  other  faculty  can — 1.  The  truths 
of  tb*»  gospel.  2.  God  Himself.  3.  The  precepts  ol  the  Saviour.  4.  The  promises. 
5.  Christian  duty  and  responsibility,  II.  It  discbiminates.  Some  people  say  that 
love  is  blind,  which  is  true  in  a  sense.  But  love  has  also  widely  open  eyes.  It 
separates  right  from  wrong  views  of  God,  of  human  character,  of  Christian  duty. 
Prejudice  never  discriminates,  nor  pride,  vanity,  cowardice,  pugnacity,  ambition. 
III.  It  apprecutes.  Dislike  and  hatred  depreciate  ;  indifference  values  nothing  ; 
love  approves  what  is  excellent.  You  will  see  what  is  excellent  in  others  in  the 
degree  of  your  love.  If  you  have  not  Christian  love  you  will  fail  to  see  much  that 
is  Christian  in  God's  Church.  IV,  It  prevents  mistakes.  It  makes  a  man 
sincere  and  without  offence.  The  sincere  but  unloving  are  sometimes  most 
offensive.  The  deficient  in  love  are  often  most  insincere.  The  two  things  in  social 
and  Church  life  are  often  separated.  You  have  the  sincere  and  the  loving  aa 
separate  classes.  But  why  should  they  not  be  brought  together  ?  The  Christian  is 
not  obtrusive,  obstinate,  exacting,  compromising.  V,  It  remains  unimpaired  to 
THE  END.  The  understanding  may  fail,  and  the  memory,  but  love  never.  A  beau- 
tiful illustration  of  this  we  sometimes  see  in  old  Christians.  Conclusion  :  The  day 
of  Christ  comes  apace.  In  the  tires  of  that  day  love  only  will  survive,  {Ibid. ) 
Perteverance  to  the  day  of  Christ : — The  "  day  "  governs  the  whole  petition.  Let 
us  mark  the  ascending  order  and  cumulative  force  of  the  supplications — 1,  For  the 
steady  increase  of  their  love  in  the  knowledge  of  truth  and  in  the  moral  tact  of  its 
appreciation ;  2.  For  their  perfection  internal  and  external  of  moral  character ;  and 
—3.  For  their  final  acceptance  thus  perfected  in  the  testing  day  of  Christ.  I.  Thk 
REGULATING  PRINCIPLE  OF  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.  1.  The  Philippians  had  been  already 
taught  of  God  to  love  Himself  and  one  another.  The  apostle  now  prays  for  its 
abundant  increase,  not  by  arbitrary  and  absolute  effusion  into  their  hearts,  but  aa 
the  result  of  being  fed  by  Divine  truth  and  diligently  practised.  2.  "  Knowledge  " 
is  the  apprehension  or  arrangement  of  truth  in  the  mind,  but  spiritual  knowledge, 
partly  as  being  bound  up  with  our  spiritual  nature  and  needs,  and  chiefly  as  being 
imparted  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (1)  As  love  enlarges  and  strengthens  the  power  of 
attaining  religious  knowledge,  so  increasing  knowledge  feeds  love  in  return.  (2) 
All  knowledge  is  summed  up  in  knowing  Christ.  All  truth  is  now  "  as  the  truth  is 
in  Jesus."  3.  Judgment  is  the  faculty  of  spiritual  discernment :  that  moral  sensi- 
tiveness of  the  renewed  mind  which  is  quick  to  perceive  the  good  and  evil  in  every 
doctrine,  practice,  and  contingency  of  daily  life  (Heb.  v.  14).  As  knowledge  is 
truth  stored  up  in  the  mind,  so  judgment  is  the  mind  itself  applying  that  know- 
ledge to  the  endless  occasions  which  arise  for  distinguishing  between  what  should 
be  sought  and  what  shunned.  4.  The  approval  of  things  tliat  are  excellent  is  the 
operation  of  this  knowledge  and  discrimination  in  the  mind  itself — the  precious 
insight  of  love  which,  using  its  knowledge  and  its  tact,  distinguishes  in  every  case 
what  is  more  excellent  and  at  once  approves  of  it.  It  is  the  inward  legislator  that 
often  tells  us  what  is  the  commandment  where  outward  legislation  fails.  The 
praise  of  charity  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  is  little  more  than  the  praise  of  its  marvellous  dis- 
crimination. Almost  all  that  can  look  like,  without  being,  religion  is  there 
condemned  by  the  judge  among  the  graces.  II.  From  the  regulating  principle  the 
prayer  now  passes  to  the  perfect  character,  as  established  in  the  world,  under 
the  guidance  and  control  of  enlightened  love.  Paul  exhibits  the  whole  compass  of 
godliness  under  two  aspects,  inward  and  outward — first  in  their  separation  and 
then  in  their  union.  1.  Sincere  signifies  that  flawless  simplicity  of  heart  which  is 
able  to  endure  every  tpst.  The  last  and  most  perfect  test  is  the  eye  of  God.  What 
the  sun  is  in  nature  hi  Great  Detector  is  in  religious  life.  Those  whom  God  sees 
thus  pure  in  heart  have  it  as  the  reward  of  their  purity  that  they  see  God.  This 
sacred  simplicity  is  a  pearl  of  great  price.  Hence  it  is  made  a  matter  of  prayer; 
such  cleanness  is  the  express  creation  of  God  ;  but  not  so  as  to  exclude  the  conse- 
cration of  our  ovm  effort  and  habitual  watchfulness,  2,  *'  Without  offence."  The 
prayer  asks  for  preservation  through  the  blessing  of  God  on  the  wise  solicitude  of 
charity,  from  doing  anything  that  should  hinder  the  salvation  of  any  one.  The 
Christian's  thoughtful  charity  must  show  its  tact  in  this  that  his  conduct  shall  at 
once  rebuke  the  sin  of  others,  and  direct  them  to  the  beauty  of  holiness.  3.  When 
the  prayer  proceeds  to  the  "  fruit  of  righteousness  "  it  completes  the  picture  of  this 


<»A».  I. J  PHILIPPIANS,  n 

perfection,  at  the  same  time  that  it  explaina  more  fully  the  meaning  of  "  sincere 
and  without  offence."  (1)  Righteousness  is  neither  that  imputed  nor  that  im- 
planted  alone,  but  that  which  comes  through  our  union  with  Christ  and  unites  in 
fruit.  (2)  The  fruit  or  produce  of  the  new  method  of  making  ua  right  in  Christ  is  the 
entire  compass  of  godliness  in  all  its  tempers  and  acts.  (3)  "  Filled,"  sounds  out 
clearly  the  note  of  Christian  perfection  attainable  because  prayed  for,  prayed  for 
because  attainable.  It  leaves  no  room  for  the  notion  of  any  necessary  defect  in  the 
religious  life.  III.  We  must  go  back  to  that  central  word,  "thb  day  of  Christ," 
which  COMPLETES  THE  MEANiNQ  OF  THE  PBAYER.  Jesus  tile  Judge  will  in  that  day 
acknowledge  the  purity  which  He  now  approves,  and  confirm  and  reward  the 
righteousness  He  now  creates.  Christian  integrity,  sealed  in  one  sense  by  death,  is 
4o  be  re-examined,  and  finally,  with  the  whole  uai?erse  as  witness,  ratified  in  the 
great  day.  Conclusion :  Those  who  are  tempted  by  their  creed  or  indolence  to 
rely  on  the  supposed  necessity  that  a  salvation  once  begun  must  be  finally  accom- 
plished are  reminded  by  the  tone  and  words  of  the  prayer  that  without  their 
inwaid  and  outward  holiness  that  blessed  issue  shall  not  be  attained.  {W.  B. 
Fope,  D.D.) 

Yer.  9.  That  your  love  abound  yet  more  and  more  In  all  knowledge  and  In  all 
Judgment. — Paul's  prayer: — I.  Its  subject  matter — "Your  love."  II.  Its  bdb- 
DEN — "  May  abound,"  Ac.  III.  Its  aim — "  That  ye  may  approve,"  &o.  (G.  Gf. 
Ballard.)  Dejiniteness  in  prayer: — 1.  Implies  a  deep  consciousness  of  an  in- 
telligently apprehended  need.  2.  Is  becoming  when  an  intelligent  being  addresses 
the  Divine  Intelligence.  .S.  Is  essential,  from  the  very  nature  of  prayer.  4. 
Affords  a  fixed  ground  for  the  exercise  of  faith.  5.  Emboldens  supplication.  6. 
Inspires  hope  of  a  definite  response.  {Ibid.)  Love: — I.  God's  love,  embraced 
by  faith  into  the  inmost  personality  of  man,  is  the  central  force  of  Christian  life. 
II.  Christian  love.  1.  Receives  its  first  impulse  from  God's  love.  2.  Is  sustained 
in  activity  by  its  power.  3.  Moves  in  a  refluent  orbit  of  increasing  circles  which 
continuously  grow  (Rom.  v.  20).  III.  Abounding  love.  As  the  river,  although  per- 
fect, perpetuates  itself  only  by  its  ever-onward  flow,  as  the  full  ocean  at  spring  tide 
*'  aboundeth  yet  more  and  more,"  so  love,  in  abounding,  gathers  that  true  freshness, 
vigour,  and  activity,  whereby  it  has  power  to  abound  yet  more  and  more  (Ibid.) 
Love's  spring  tides  : — 1.  Roll  to  us  immediately  from  tlie  heart  of  God.  2.  Are  in 
harmony  with  His  reign  of  grace.  3.  Bring  to  us  the  fullest  manifestation  of  His 
love.  4.  Thrill  us  with  holy  excitement  though  performing  monotonous  duties, 
and  inspire  a  holy  daring  though  in  view  of  the  fiery  trial  5.  Overleap  in  their  im- 
petuous progress  every  landmark  of  stern  propriety  set  up  by  cold  conventionalism. 
6.  Know   no    limits    save    "knowledge    and   judgment"    (Ibid.)  Love    and 

knowledge: — Such  passages  as  these  have  a  peculiar  value  for  serious  Christians; 
for  one  of  the  great  questions  of  Christian  life  is.  What  is  it  best  to  pray  for  ?  Here 
Paul  gives  us  a  regulating  principle  for  many  of  our  own  most  earnest  prayers.  I. 
We  see  what  St.  Paul  takes  for  granted  as  the  underlyino  substance,  the  raw 
material  of  the  Divine  life  of  the  soul  of  man — ••Love."  1.  He  does  not  pray  that 
their  knowledge  may  abound  more  and  more  in  love.  Whenever  knowledge  and 
love  are  put  in  competition,  the  precedence  is  always  given  to  love.  As  compared 
with  knowledge  love  is  intrinsically  stronger,  and  worth  more  practically.  To  be 
knit  to  God  by  love  is  better  than  to  speculate  about  Him.  To  enwrap  other  men 
in  the  flame  of  a  passionate  enthusiasm  is  better  than  to  analyze  rival  systems  of 
ethical,  social,  or  political  truth.  2.  A  personal  affection  for  Jesus  our  Lord  is  the 
first  step,  the  fundamental  thing  in  real  Christianity.  What  is  it  that  provokes 
love  ?  (1)  Beauty,  and  our  Lord's  moral  beauty  acts  upon  the  affections  of  a  true 
aoal  just  as  the  son  acts  upon  the  petals  of  an  unopened  bud.  (2)  One  specific 
kind  of  moral  beauty — generosity.  The  generosity  of  Jesus  in  giving  Himself  to 
die  for  us  appeals  even  more  powerfully  than  the  faultless  beauty  of  His  character. 
"  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us."  (3)  It  is  a  distinct  endowment,  an  infused 
grace,  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  To  love  Christ  is  to  love 
(1)  God ;  for  God  in  Him  is  made  apprehendible  and  approachable.  (2)  Man,  in 
EQm  the  representative.  (3)  Thus  love  to  the  Saviour  is  the  common  source  of  all 
that  is  not  spiritual  in  religion,  and  most  fruitful  and  creative  in  philanthropy. 
II.  St.  Paul  would  have  this  love  abound  more  and  more  in  knowledge — iTriyvoxnv — 
4be  higher  knowledge.  1.  There  is  a  period  in  the  growth  of  love  when  such 
knowledge  is  imperatively  required.  In  its  earliest  stages  the  loving  soul  lives  only 
in  the  warmth  and  light  of  its  object.    It  asks  no  questions ;  it  only  loves.    But 


91  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnut.  1, 

from  the  nature  of  the  case  this  period  oomea  to  an  end,  not  because  love  grows 
cold  but  because  it  becomes  more  exacting.  It  cannot  live  apart  from  thougiiS, 
and  sooner  or  later  must  come  to  an  understanding  with  it.  It  must  know 
something  accurately  about  its  object,  and  begins  to  ask  questions  which  must  ba 
wisely  and  truly  answered,  or  in  its  deep  disappointment  it  will  sicken  and  die.  2. 
How  repeatedly  this  truth  is  realized  in  the  case  of  the  sons  of  deeply  religious 
people,  and  in  people  who  have  been  deeply  religious  themselves,  but  have  passed 
from  fervent  love  to  deep  despair,  because  its  training  in  knowledge  has  been 
neglected.  3.  This  law  will  explain  what  happened  in  the  Early  Church.  At  first 
love  reigned  alone,  nnenquiring,  ecstatic.  But  when  the  Gentiles  pressed  into  the 
fold  questions  could  not  be  but  asked.  And  bo  in  God's  providence  love  had  to, 
and  did,  grow  more  and  more  in  knowledge.  Each  of  the  four  groups  of  St.  Paul's 
Epistles  marks  a  distinct  stage  in  the  doctrinal  insight  of  the  Church.  Each  of  the 
great  Alexandrian  teachers,  Clement,  Origen,  Dionysius,  Athanasius,  aud  Cyril 
poured  a  flood  of  light  upon  the  Christian  conscience.  The  Church  passed  from 
the  agonies  of  the  Coliseum  and  the  catacombs  to  define,  and  to  recognize  before 
she  defined,  the  unchanging  faith  at  Nicaea,  Constantinople,  Ephesus,  and  Chal- 
eedon.  4.  What  has  been  said  applies  to  education.  This  must  begin  with  the 
heart.  Until  a  pupil's  affections  are  won,  the  true  groundwork  of  the  process  i» 
not  mastered.  The  repression  of  love  will  assuredly,  sooner  or  later,  avenge  itself. 
Witness  the  case  of  J.  S.  Mill.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Love  abounding  through 
knowledge: — This  climax  is  unexpected.  We  should  have  thought  "in  fervour, 
zeal,  self-sacrifice."  Instead  of  that  the  direction  is  upward  from  the  heart  to  the 
head.  I.  Knowledge  reveals  oharacter  and  chakacter  draws  out  love.  We  can 
only  love  a  person  whom  we  know  to  be  lovable.  This  holds  especially  true  of 
our  relations  to  God.  Enmity  comes  of  ignorance  of  Him.  Hence,  in  Jesus  He 
has  given  us  a  revelation  of  His  heart,  and  to  know  Christ  is  to  love  God.  "  My 
people  is  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge,"  is  the  epitaph  written  over  the  graves 
of  scores  of  dead  Christians.  Neglecting  the  diligent  study  of  the  Scriptures  they 
have  no  nutriment  for  their  love,  and  it  starves.  II.  Knowledge  of  God  bbings 
va  INTO  commdnion  with  that  Divine  life  which  is  the  spring  of  all  Divine  lote. 
If  God  is  love,  the  more  we  come  into  fellowship  with  Himself  the  more  we  shall 
eome  into  the  exercise  and  experience  of  His  love.  But  it  is  only  through  know- 
ledge that  we  can  come  into  this  experience.  (A.  J.  Gordon.)  Knowledge  the 
hasig  of  love : — I.  What  are  we  to  understand  bt  Christuns  having  the  teub 
knowledge  of  God.  This  cannot  mean  perfect  knowledge.  None  but  Deity  can 
comprehend  Deity.  But  we  may  have  a  true  knowledge,  and  the  difference  between 
the  two  is  that  the  former  is  a  knowledge  of  all  things  that  are  true  concerning  God, 
and  the  latter  of  some  things  which  are  true.  And  what  Christians  know  is  as  true 
as  if  they  knew  everything  They  know,  e.g.,  God  to  be  self-existent,  omnipotent, 
just,  merciful,  Ac.,  although  they  do  not  know  the  ground  of  His  self -existence, 
&c.  No  man  knows  everything  about  anything,  but  the  little  he  knows  is  as  true 
as  though  he  knew  all.  II.  How  Christians  gain  this  true  though  partial  know- 
ledge OF  God.  1.  By  the  light  of  nature,  *'  The  invisible  things,"  &c.  2.  By 
Divine  revelation.  Though  God  cannot  tell  men  in  any  language  all  things  about 
Himself,  He  can  tell  some  things  in  their  language  which  they  can  understand. 
III.  Theib  true  love  for  God  is  founded  on  their  true  knowledge  of  God. 
They  do  not  love  or  worship  an  unknown  God.  Knowledge  not  ignorance  is  the 
mother  of  their  devotion  :  which  will  appear  if  we  consider — 1.  That  if  Christians 
ehould  love  God  for  what  is  not  true  concerning  Him,  they  would  love  a  false 
character  of  God,  which  would  not  be  true,  but  false  love — the  same  as  loving  a 
false  god,  which  is  the  essence  of  idolatry.  2.  It  is  the  knowledge  which  Christiana 
have  of  the  real  and  supreme  excellency  of  God  that  lays  them  under  moral 
obligation  to  love  Him  supremely.  The  more  they  know  of  God  the  more  they  feel 
themselves  bound  to  love  Him  with  all  their  heart.  Improvement :  If  Chnstiana 
have  some  true  knowledge  of  God  from  His  works  and  Word,  then — 1.  They  may 
have  some  true  knowledge  of  every  doctrine  that  God  has  revealed.  2.  There  is  a 
propriety  in  preaching  upon  any  doctrine  that  God  has  revealed.  3.  Christiana 
have  no  right  to  disbelieve  any  doctrine  because  there  is  something  mysterious  in 
it.  If  we  disbelieve  on  this  ground,  we  must  disbeUeve  everything.  4.  Those  who 
have  gained  this  certain  knowledge  ought  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once 
delivered  to  the  saints.  5.  There  is  no  excuse  for  religions  errors.  (N.  Emmon$, 
D.D.).  The  importance  of  Christian  knowledge  : — I.  The  subjects  which 
Christunitt  presents  abb  the  most  important  and  sublime  in  the  umitsbsb. 


CHIP.  I.]  PHILIPPIAN3, 


II.  JUBT  CONCEPTIONS  OF   THE  TRUTH  OF  GoD  ARE  INDISPENSABLE  TO  THE  POSSESSION  0» 

TRUE  HOLINESS.  What  is  holiness  but  obedience  to  truth  ;  truth  desired,  loved, 
obeyed  ?  But  how  is  truth  to  be  obeyed  unless  it  is  known  ?  It  is  an  unchanging 
law  of  our  being  that  the  heart  is  affected  through  the  medium  of  the  understaud- 
ing.  III.  Without  the  spirit  of  thkolooical  research  it  is  impossible  to  make 
RiPiD  ADVANCES  IN  THE  DiviNE  LIFE.  Christians  have  much  to  learn  of  God  that 
they  may  desire  greater  manifestations  of  His  glory  ;  of  themselves,  that  they  may 
be  stimulated  to  greater  attainments ;  of  their  obligations,  that  they  may  press 
after  perfect  holiness.  There  are,  of  course,  instances  in  which  growth  in  know- 
ledge does  not  secure  growth  in  grace ;  but  that  is  because  truth  does  not  make  its 
appropriate  impression  on  the  mind,  and  is  opposed  by  sin.  But  the  clearer  our 
views  of  God  the  more  fervent  our  love  of  Him ;  of  sin,  the  more  self-abasing  our 
repentance ;  of  Christ,  the  stronger  our  faith  ;  of  duty,  the  stronger  our  desires  to 
perform  it.  IV.  The  attainment  of  religious  knowledge  is  the  source  of  purb 
AND  elevated  ENJOYMENT.  Of  all  the  prospective  emotions  the  desire  of  knowledge 
it  the  most  exalted.  The  pleasures  of  intellect  transcend  those  of  sense.  How 
much  purer  and  higher  the  felicity  consequent  on  advances  in  the  knowledge  of 
God.  The  veriest  infant  in  the  school  of  Christ  finds  his  understanding  satisfied, 
his  heart  filled  with  love  at  the  discovery  of  every  new  principle  in  the  Word  of 

God.       V.    KiLIGIOUS  KNOWLEDGE  WIDENS  THE   SPHERE   OF   CHRISTIAN  USEFULNE.sS.       A 

well-informed  Christian  possesses  a  weiglit  of  character  and  a  power  of  moral 
feeling,  which  exert  the  best  influence.  Such  a  man  is  always  ready  for  action.  If 
the  spirit  of  His  master  rests  upon  him  in  proportion  to  his  intellectual  attainments, 
he  will  instruct  the  ignorant,  &c.  The  Church  has  sustained  no  small  detriment 
from  the  ignorance  of  good  men.     VI.  The  character  of  our  age  furnishes  a 

REASON   FOR   SOLICITUDE    IN    RELATION    TO   THE    DOCTRINES   OF   THE  BiBLE.       There  iS  a 

strange  apathy  to  the  truth.  It  is  an  age  of  business,  and  not  of  investigation. 
Conclusion  :  1.  Ministers  ought  not  to  be  reproached  for  instructive  preaching,  and 
for  not  yielding  to  the  demand  for  sensationalism.  2.  The  love  of  truth  is  the 
conclusive  test  of  Christian  character.  S.  Rest  not  in  intellectual  attainments  in 
religion.  {Gardiner  Spring,  D.D.)  Knowledge  and  judgment : — These  are  the 
limits  which  define  the  course  of  love,  and  thus  deepen  it.  I.  Advanced  know- 
ledge is  derived  from — 1.  Experience.  2.  Attentive  study  of — (1)  The  Divine 
perfections.  (2)  The  gospel  mystery.  (3)  The  Divine  claims.  (4)  The  principles 
of  Christ's  teaching,  which  should  pervade  all  Christian  conduct.  II.  Moral 
PERCEPTION.  1.  Results  from  the  full  exertion  of  every  moral  sense.  (1)  There  are 
many  things  in  Christian  life  which  cannot  be  formulated,  but  must  be  felt  to  be 
known.  (2)  Grace  awakens  the  moral  senses.  Love  makes  them  delicately  sensi- 
tive to  spiritual  things.  Christian  life  appeals  to  them.  Experience  comes  in  the 
exercise  of  them.  (3)  This  experience  produces  a  profounder  knowledge  and  a 
deeper  love  by  intensifying  spiritual  perceptions,  because — 2.  It  is  a  medium  ol 
communication  with  the  unseen  and  eternaL  3.  As  a  medium  of  communication 
with  God  it  makes  the  soul  superior  to,  and  independent  of,  the  senses.  When 
these  close  at  eventide,  the  moral  senses  only  open  wider  for  the  morning  sun.  4, 
It  robes  the  soul  with  a  halo  of  light  more  assuring  and  glorious  than  "  the  glory- 
cloud  "  emitted.  5.  It  imparts  to  the  soul  that  delicate  tact  and  instinct  whicb 
almost  instinctively  perceives  what  is  right,  and  almost  unconsciously  shrinks  from 
what  is  wrong.  6.  It  is  indestructible  by  death,  and  shall  be  an  imperishable 
avenue  for  the  soul's  perpetual  advance  in  knowledge.  (G.  G.  Ballard.)  Love 
inseparable  from  Christian  life : — Goethe  says,  "  We  hear  of  a  particular  regulation 
in  force  in  the  British  naval  service.  The  whole  cordage,  from  the  strongest  to  the 
weakest,  has  a  red  thread  moving  throughout  it,  which  cannot  be  twisted  out  with- 
out undoing  it  all.  In  this  way  even  the  smallest  parts  are  recognized  as  the 
property  of  the  Crown."  Love  in  the  Christian  character,  we  may  say,  is  that 
which  is  woven  into  every  part  of  it,  is  that  which  cannot  be  removed  without 
destroying  the  whole,  and  is  that  which  is  enduring  and  indestructible  evidence 
that  the  character  is  owned  by  Him  who  is  King.  (J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.)  Love :  it* 
critical  function : — Love  abounding  in  all  discernment  distinguishes  the  wrong 
from  the  right,  just  as  a  good  ear  distinguishes  a  false  and  imperfect  note  from  the 
true.  {Webster  and  Wilkinson.)  The  training  of  love: — As  we  train  the  bodily 
senses  of  sight,  and  touch,  and  hearing  to  discriminate  accurately,  and  bring  them 
by  exercise,  voluntary  or  involuntary,  to  exquisite  precision  and  almost  unfailing 
•ccuracy,  so  oar  love  must  be  trained  to  be  itself  a  universal  spiritual  sense,  at  once 
the  eye  and  the  ear  and  the  hand  of  the  heart,  seeing  and  hearing  and  toaohkig  m 


U  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

thingB  Divine,  with  a  sure  and  delicate  feeling  that  seldom  needs  correction. 
(W.  B.  Pope,  D.D,)         Regulated  love: — The  cbariot  in  ancient  warfare  had  its 
two  occupants,  the  warrior  and  the  charioteer:  the  one  could  not  engage  the  enemy 
unless  the  other  held  the  reins  and  guided  the  course.     So  love,  the  true,  the  only 
commissioned  soldier  in  that  warfare  whose  every  triumph  is  peace,  can  fight  to- 
wards victory  only  when  knowledge  directs  and  controls  every  movement  that  is  made. 
(J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.)        Advancement  in  knowledge  must  be  constant: — Spain  once 
held  both  sides  of  the  Mediterranean  at  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,     So  highly  did  she 
Talae  her  possessions,  that  she  stamped  on  her  coin  the  two  Pillars  of  Hercules  (aa 
the  promontories  of  rock  were  called)  ;  and  on  a  scroll  thrown  over  these  were  the 
words,  ne  plus  ultra,  "no  more  beyond."    But  one  day  a  bold  spirit  sailed  far 
beyond  these  pillars,  and  found  a  new  world  of  beauty.     Then  Spain,  wisely  con- 
vinced of  ignorance,  struck  the  word  n€  from  the  coin,  and  left  plus  ultra,  "more 
beyond."    How  many  a  man,  whose  conceit  is  great,  thinks  he  has  reached  the 
limits  of  knowledge,  when  further  investigation  would  open  to  him  a  continent  of 
truth  before  unknown.     (Bp.  Simpson).         The  excellence  of  love  : — We  have  many 
servants  who  regard  their  work  as  drudgery,  and  though  they  do  their  duties,  they 
do  them  with  no  regard  for  our  interests :  but  the  old-fashioned  servants  were  of 
another  kind.     If  you  have  any  such,  you  will  prize  one  of  such  above  a  thousand 
others.     They  love  their  master,  and  they  identify  themselves  with  his  interests. 
Old  John  did  not  want  orders,  he  was  a  law  to  himself,  he  served  from  love.    When 
his  master  one  day  spoke  about  their  parting,  he  wanted  to  know  where  his  master 
was  going,  for  he  had  no  idea  of  going  himself  :  he  was  part  and  parcel  of  the 
household,  and  was  worth  his  weight  in  diamonds.    You  may  well  say,  "  I  would 
give  my  eyes  to  get  such  a  servant  as  that."    I  dare  say  you  would.     Our  Lord 
Jesas  gave  Himself  that  He  might  make  such  servants  out  of  us.     (G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Love  rich  in  purse : — A  poor  widow  contributed  to  the  Dorpatian  Branch  of  the 
Russian  Bible  Society  a   rouble;    and,   to  the  question  whether  that  sum  was 
not  rather  too  much  for  one  in  her  circumstances,  she  answered,  "  Love  is  not 
afraid  of  giving  too  much*"        Intelligent  love  : — Blind  love  fails  in  any  sphere  of 
action.    A  true-hearted  boy,  who  finds  his  mother  suddenly  made  a  widow,  and  hi» 
young  sisters  and  himself  fatherless,  and  sees  want  coming  on  with  fierce  visage 
and  rapid  steps  like  an  armed  man,  is  impelled  by  his  love  to  the  dear  ones  around 
him  to  rush  at  once  into  the  midst  of  the  struggle  of  life ;  and  in  the  place,  and 
with  the  weapons,  of  a  full-grown  man,  give  the  enemy  battle.    The  love  and  the 
zeal  are  most  beautiful  and  admirable,  yet  those  among  the  onlookers  who  have 
experience  of  the  world's  diflSculty  cannot  but  fear  that  the  young  hero  may  soon  be 
brought  home  from  the  battle-field  wounded  and  bleeding  and  despondent.  He  needs 
training.     His  love  must  have  the  knowledge  of  men  and  things  along  with  it, 
before  it  is  likely  to  reach  its  aim.     So  with  Christian  love  generally,  going  forth 
to  do  work  for  God  and  man  in  the  world.     Having  talents  entrusted  to  us  by  God 
to  lay  out  for  Him,  we  muet  strive — by  the  study  of  our  powers  and  opportunities, 
temptations  and  dangers ;  by  the  consideration  of  present  circumstances,  and  by 
cautious  forecast ;  by  carefully  looking  in  and  out,  and  at  all  things  in  the  hght  of 
God's  Word — to  become  wise  and  successful  spiritual  traifiekerB.     (R.  Johnstone, 
LL.B.)         The  love  of  God  without  knowledge  : — The  affections  of  the  human  soul 
are  certainly  not  devoid  of  heavenly  aspirations ;  but  what  if  they  do  not  clearly 
know  God  ?    Then,  like  the  vine  stretching  up  its  tendril  fingers  and  finding  no 
support,  and  so  falling  back  again  to  creep  upon  the  earth  from  which  it  sprung, 
the  heart  that  fails  to  find  God,  only  loves  the  world  the  more  desperately  and 
hopelessly.     Blessed  be  God,  therefore,  for  the  Cross  of  Christ,  that  trellis  for  the 
heart's  affection.     It  is  this  by  which  the  soul  learns  to  know  the  love  of  God ;  and 
upon  it  the  renewed  affections  climb  higher  and  higher ;  beneath  it  they  strike  their 
roots  deeper  and  deeper  ;  upon  its  arms  they  reach  out  farther  and  farther ;  over- 
more  increasing  in  love  by  increasing  in  knowledge.     {A.  J.  Gordon.)        The  know- 
ledge of  Christ  the  mainstay  of  brotherly  love : — Two  burnished  reflectors  can  radiate 
the  brightness  from  one  to  the  other  if  there  be  a  light  between  them.     But,  if  each 
only  reflects  from  the  other,  there  can  be  no  illumination :  because  neither  fur- 
nishes any  supply  of  light.     So  two  Christians,  reciprocating  each  other's  affections, 
will  make  but  a  poor  exhibit  of  brotherly  love,  unless  they  have  Christ  between 
them  as  the  centre  and  source  of  their  life.     And  there  is  just  as  little  to  admire  in 
mutual  fellowship  among  Christians,  unless  Christ  be  in  the  midst  of  them  as  the 
centre  of  that  fellowship.     To  exhort  one  another,  to  comfort  one  another,  and  to 
love  one  another,  are  aU  most  solemn  duties.    But  where  will  be  the  profit  in  them 


our.  1.1  PHILIPPIANS.  15 

unless  Christ  be  the  central  theme,  and  His  grace  and  glory  be  the  central  objects 
of  oar  admiration  and  praise?  The  cherubim  stood  with  •*  their  faces  one  toward 
another ; "  but  the  mercy-seat  was  between.  And  it  was  apon  faces  bending  io 
eager  gaze  upon  those  "  things  which  the  angels  desire  to  look  into,"  that  the  glory 
of  God  was  reflected.  If  we  get  cheer  and  brightness  from  looking  into  each 
other's  faces,  and  communing  with  each  other  in  the  services  of  God's  house,  it 
will  be  because  Christ  stands  in  the  midst  of  us,  the  object  of  all  our  meditations 
and  the  fountain  of  all  our  joys.  "  This  is  eternal  life,  that  they  might  know  Thee, 
tbe  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou  has  sent."  "  I  count  all  things 
but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord."    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  10.  That  ye  may  approve  the  things  that  are  excellent. — True  religion 
i$ — I.  The  highest  intelligence.  II.  The  taikest  accomplishment.  III.  The 
MOST  ENDURING  POSSESSION.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Lifc-work : — I.  Hespects  judg- 
ment— motive — action.  II.  Requires  energy — till  the  day  of  Christ.  (ibid.) 
Spiritual  discrimination : — L  Demands  the  exercise  of  the  most  intelhgent  and 
sensitive  charity.  II.  Commands  a  wide  field  of  effort,  viz.,  the  bad,  the  good,  the 
better,  the  best — in  character,  life,  doctrine,  practice,  enjoyment,  attainment.  III. 
Implies  the  admission  and  use  of  a  noble  liberty  of  thought,  judgment,  and  action. 
IV.  Involves  a  weighty  and  far-reaching  responsibility.  V.  Is  essential  to  a 
pore  and  blameless  Ufe.     (G.  G.  Ballard.)         Discerning  with  a  purpose  : — I.  A 

eCGGESTION  THAT  A  SPIRIT    OF    DISCERNMENT   18    REQUIRED    FROM    RELIEVERS    IN    ChRIST 

Jesds.  The  reference  is  founded  on  the  common  action  of  comparing  one  thing 
with  another,  so  as  to  find  the  best.  A  capability  to  prove  which  is  best  for  us 
bodily  in  food,  e.g.,  would  save  us  from  many  physical  ailments.  Huw  many 
spiritual  troubles  might  be  avoided  if,  in  prayer  and  preaching,  we  always 
fixed  upon  what  best  present^-d  the  glory  and  grace  of  Christ.  Pos-essing 
this  faculty  we  should — 1.  Know  what  course  it  would  be  right  to  take  in 
spiritual  difficulties.  The  banker  draws  his  finger  across  a  bank-note  and  says, 
"  That  is  forged,"  or  "  That  is  genuine."  His  senses  are  exercised  to  prove  them. 
So  we  ought  to  be  able  to  perceive  the  signs  of  evil,  however  covered  up,  and  the 
marks  of  God's  will,  however  faint.  2.  Understand  the  relation  between  duty 
and  comfort.     II.  A  purpose  placed  in  view  of  this  spirit   of   discernment. 

1.  It  has  respect  to  the  day  of  Christ,  when  every  man's  work  will  be  tried.  (1) 
So  we  are  not  to  purpose  our  own  satisfaction.  Many  endeavour  to  attain  certain 
excellencies  so  that  they  may  stand  well  with  themselves.  (2)  We  are  not  to 
purpose  to  be  satisfied  with  the  opinions  of  the  world.  There  are  men  who  think 
that  if  they  secure  the  approbation  of  their  neighbours,  they  are  as  good  as  they 
need  be.  2.  It  has  set  before  it  sincerity  and  blamelessness.  (1)  The  Christian  is 
seen  standing  in  the  light,  and  gives  no  occasion  for  others  to  stumble  against 
him.  Seeing  him  in  family,  business,  party,  or  Church,  they  have  no  cause  to  say, 
"He  acts  so  as  to  stand  between  me  and  Christ."  (2)  To  be  counted  sincere  and 
without  offence  is  the  proof  of  a  high  attainment.  The  Christian  must  not  b« 
behind,  but  before  men  of  the  world  in  good  points  of  character  and  conduct.  (D. 
O.  Watt,  M.A.)  The  things  tliat  are  excellent: — Two  things  are  necessary  for  all 
noble  life.  1.  That  we  have  some  ideal  of  duty.  2.  That  we  are  honest  in  trying 
to  realize  this  ideal.  The  words  before  us  suggest  these  necessities.  I.  As 
Christians  we  ought  to  approve  things  that  are  excellent.  1.  Not  merely 
things  which  are  opposed,  or  differ,  as  good  and  bad.  It  requires  no  gift  of  grace 
to  do  this.  Natural  conscience  tells  us  what  is  right  and  wrong.  AJJ  know  that 
truth  is  better  than  falsehood.  When  men  call  good  evil,  they  are  condemned  as 
much  by  the  world  as  the  Church.  It  is  melancholy  to  think,  however,  that  some 
have  fallen  as  low  as  this  in  Christian  communities,  and  make  a  gain  of  godliness. 

2.  Paul  had  a  higher  level  of  thought  in  view — a  certain  spiritual  sensitiveness 
which  recoils  from  evil,  and  is  drawn  to  good.  3.  We  all  fail  more  or  less  in  the 
cultivation  of  this  higher-mindedness.  The  world  is  too  much  with  us,  weighing 
down  our  desires,  and  whispering  a  religion  of  convenience,  rather  than  of  aspira- 
tion. Our  frequent  failures,  too,  tend  to  keep  us  contented  at  a  low  leveL  4.  The 
fineness  of  spiritual  perception  is  of  value  in  the  world.  It  is  a  key  which  nnloeki 
secrets  of  character.  It  is  not  easily  deceived.  It  knows  what  is  true  and 
excellent  in  art,  literature,  society,  and  pohtics,  more  readily  than  others  who  let 
their  moral  ideals  grow  dim.  II.  The  further  necessity  of  our  being  sincerb 
AND  without  offence.  Out  life  and  thought  must  be  knit  together,  cur  ideaJ 
translated  into  fact     1.  Sincerity  is  the  basis  of  all  good  character.    A  man  vhosa 


21  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  l 

inner  and  outer  life  is  a  contradiction  loses  even  the  respect  of  the  world.  It  woul(3 
be  better  if  all  Christian  Churches  were  more  intent  on  the  realities  of  Christian 
character ;  their  reward  would  be  greater,  and  their  contentions  less.  2.  We  are 
also  to  be  without  offence.  {Principal  Tidloch.)  Sincere  and  without  offence: — I. 
A  FEW  WORDS  AGAINST  INSINCERITY.  1.  Agaiust  all  forms  of  it.  We  are  all  in 
danger  of  it,  and  its  sources  are  numberless,  insidious,  and  within  our  own  breast. 
It  arises  from  the  prevalent  excitement ;  men-pleasing,  fiction,  ritualism.  2. 
Against  religious  insincerity.  Here  the  danger  is  greatest.  Men  don't  counterfeit 
copper,  but  gold.  He  that  takes  a  bad  sovereign  loses  twenty  times  as  much  as  ha 
who  takes  a  bad  shilling.  Hence  the  Word  of  God  is  singularly  full,  and  strong 
against  this  evil,  and  religion  is  described  as  "  wisdom  that  cometh  from 
above  ;  "  without  hypocrisy  ;  faith  unfeigned ;  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren ; 
love  without  dissimulation.  3.  Remember  our  Lord's  conduct  against  it.  Every 
other  form  of  evil  is  condemned,  but  with  pity  and  hope.  Hypocrisy  is  branded 
as  beyond  the  reach  of  mercy.  II.  A  few  words  to  promote  sincerity.  A  life 
sincere  and  without  reproach  is  sure  to  be — 1.  Harmless  and  useful.  No  stumbling- 
block  is  more  fatal  than  insincerity.  We  naturally  trust  the  appearance  of 
goodness;  but  if  it  proves  rottenuesss,  and  gives  way,  we  stumble  and  hurt 
ourselves.  Few  things  stagger  young  Christians  more  than  the  inconsistencies  of 
older  Christians.  Sincerity,  however,  silences  reproach,  inspires  confidence, 
commands  respect,  kindles  affection,  draws  to  fellowship.  2.  Strong.  St.  James 
speaks  of  a  "double-minded  man,"  i.e.,  a  man  with  two  souls — one  his  real  self, 
the  other  what  he  pretends  to  be.  These  are  sure  to  play  at  see-saw.  Such  a  Ufe 
resembles  ploughing  with  an  ox  and  an  ass,  always  ungainly  and  inefficient. 
Such  a  life  is  sure  to  stifle  prayer.  Eeuben  was  unstable  as  water,  and  he  did  not 
excel.  In  opposition  to  this,  the  Bible  commends  the  single  heart  and  the  single 
eye.  What  a  man  sees  clearly  he  can  grip  tghtly  :  when  he  sees  his  course  plainly 
he  goes  on  confidently.  3.  Happy.  When  conscience  smiles  all  is  sunshine; 
when  it  frowns  it  will  be  to  a  man  what  Mordecai  was  to  Haman.  "  Our  rejoicing 
is  this  :  the  testimony  of  our  conscience,"  &c.  4.  Pre-eminently  a  life  with  God. 
6.  Will  find  its  consummation  in  the  coming;  of  the  Lord.  {J.  Aldis.)  Christian 
rectitude: — The  word  "  sincere"  means  a  life  which  has  the  brightest  light  flung 
opon  it,  which  is  tried  in  that  light,  and  approved  as  genuine.  Christian  rectitude 
consists  in — I.  Internal  bincekitt.  This  involves— 1.  A  concentratedness  of 
heart  upon  one  object.  2.  A  thoroughness  of  life's  uniformity  to  that  one  object. 
3.  An  unostentatious  but  manifest  integrity.  4.  The  completeness  of  that  mani- 
festation shall  be  proportionate  to  the  brightness  of  the  testing-Ught.  II.  Ex- 
ternal blamelessness.  1.  Without  being  found  guilty  of  an  offence.  2.  Without 
giving  one.  3.  Without  taking  one.  III.  A  present  btatb  of  life,  with  a 
GLORIOUS  futorb  DESTINATION,  Then — 1.  Life  shall  be  judged.  2.  Life  shall  be 
made  manifest.  8.  Rectitude  of  life  shall  be  approved.  4.  Rectitude  of  life 
shall  be  rewarded.  5.  The  "good-work  "begun  in  grace  shall  be  crowned 
in  glory.  (G,  O.  Ballard.)  The  discernment  of  things  excellent: — A  house- 
keeper very  rarely  buys  a  supply  of  food  without  going  through  the  procesa 
of  noting  different  kinds  so  as  to  get  that  which  is  good.  The  man  who 
works  effectively  on  the  Stock  Exchange  is  the  man  who  discerns  the  little 
differences  which  make  one  stock  preferable  to  another,  and  who  first  observes 
the  indications  that  a  stock  is  about  to  take  a  more  excellent  place  in  the  mart.  I 
believe  it  is  a  habit  of  religious  people,  when  they  come  into  a  new  neighbourhood, 
to  go  from  one  place  of  worship  to  another,  making  comparisons  amongst  them,  so 
•a  to  prove  that  one  which  will  best  suit  their  temperaments — perhaps  they  would 
say,  80  as  to  approve  that  which  is  excellent.  {J.  Aldis.)  Discernment  the  result 
of  experience :—  When  oi^'ered  food,  a  child  takes  palatableness  only  into  account, 
and  will  as  readily  eat,  if  it  be  pleasant  to  the  taste,  what  is  unwholesome  or  even 
poisonous,  as  what  is  most  nourishing.  The  power  of  discriminating,  so  as  "to 
refuse  the  evil  and  cboofce  ihe  good,"  comes  by  experience.  Now  the  skill  which 
experience,  to  a  great  extent  unsought,  thus  gives  in  the  physical  sphere,  must,  in 
the  spiritual,  be  sought  by  definite  pursuit.  Observation  and  reading,  the  reading 
particularly  of  the  biographies  of  eminent  Christians — and  especially  the  Bible 
biographies,  which  have  an  absolute  truthfulness  seldom  even  approached  in 
others — these  will  supply  materials,  the  thoughtful  and  prayerful  consideration  of 
which  will  produce  aciiieuess  of  moral  perception.  There  are  Christians  in  whom 
natural  delicacy  of  feeling  find  accuracy  of  judgment,  fostered  by  various  helpful 
surroundings,  give,  from   the  very  beginning  of  their  religious  life,  a  faculty  ot 


OTir.  1.]  PHILIPPIANS.  J7 

ipiiitual  discrimination  which  acts  almost  with  the  readiness  and  certainty  of 
an  instinct.      {R.  Johmtonc,  LL.B.)  "  Sincere  and  without  offence"  are  words 

closely  connected.  "  Sincere  "  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to  a  practice  conmion  then 
and  now.  In  the  bazaars  in  the  East  goods  are  stored  away  in  very  obscure  places, 
and  persons  go  in  to  make  their  purchases,  and  purchase  them  in  that  dull  light. 
Those  who  wish  to  know  the  matter  thoronglily  take  the  goods  to  the  open  space 
where  the  sunbeam  plays,  and  then,  under  the  full  blaze  of  the  light,  if  no  flaw, 
and  if  no  stain  shall  be  revealed,  the  article  is  pronounced  "  sincere  "  in  the  sense 
of  the  text,  and  consequently  without  offence.  He  that  walks  io  darkness  knows 
not  where  he  is  goii'g.  He  strikes  against  this,  and  he  strikes  against  that,  and  he 
cannot  understand  it.  He  gels  bewildered  and  ultimately  overthrown.^  (J.  Aldis.) 
Sincerity : — Some  of  us  have  seen  the  glorious  blue  of  the  Rlione,  as  it  leaves  the 
Lake  of  Geneva.  A  little  way  down,  we  have  seen  the  Arve,  loaded  with  mud, 
rush  into  the  same  channel.  We  have  watched  the  two  streams  flow  side  by  side, 
each  in  its  own  division  of  the  channel,  as  if  the  pure  could  not  permit  the  impure 
■to  mingle  with  it.  But  the  earthly  insinuates  itself  fully  at  last,  and  the  river 
flows  on,  its  colour  still  blue,  but  sadly  changed  from  the  heaven-like  blue  of  its 
beginnings.  Have  we  not  often  mourned,  brethren,  to  see  something  like  this  in  a 
Christian  life— the  hue  of  earth  spreading  itself  lamentably  over  the  hue  of  heaven? 
Faith  in  Christ  brings  the  water  from  "  the  upper  spriugs,"  to  make  the  stream 
pure  and  swret ;  but  the  muddy  and  bitter  water  from  the  world  ever  presses  in,  to 
mar  and  pollute.  But  "  love,  abounding  in  knowledge  and  in  all  judgment,"  can 
keep  the  stream  clear,  so  that  it  reveals  itself  truly  as  a  branch  of  the  "  pure  river 
of  the  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  which  proceedeth  out  of  the  throne  of  God 
and  of  the  Lamb."     (R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  Sincerity  :— In  the  palmy  days  of 

Koman  prosperity,  when  her  merchants  lived  in  their  marble  palaces  on  the  banks 
of  the  Tiber,  there  was  a  sort  of  emulation  in  the  grandeur  and  artistic  adornment 
of  their  dwellings.  Good  sculptors  were  eagerly  tought  after  and  employed.  But 
tricks  were  sometimes  practised,  then  as  now;  thus,  if  the  sculptor  came  upon  a 
flaw  in  the  marble,  or  chipped  a  piece  out  by  accident,  he  had  a  carefully-prepared 
wax,  with  which  he  filled  in  the  chink,  and  so  carefully  fixed  it  as  to  be  im- 
perceptible. In  process  of  time,  however,  heat  or  damp  would  affect  the  wax,  and  re- 
veal its  presence.  The  consequence  was,  that  when  new  contracts  were  made  for  com- 
missioned works  of  art,  a  clai.se  was  added  to  the  effect  that  they  were  to  be  tine  cerd, 
-or  without  cement.  Heucewehaveaword  picture  of  great  significance.  {J.  Tesseyman.) 
Sincere  Christians  : — A  flying  fish  sometimes  attempts  to  fly,  but  it  is  no  bird  for 
all  that.  It  only  takes  a  little  flight  and  then  it  is  in  the  water  again;  but  a  true 
bird  keeps  on  the  wing,  especially  if  it  is  such  a  bird  as  the  eagle,  whose  untiring 
wing  bears  it  above  the  clouds.  Let  ns  beware  of  prayers  which  leap  up  like  a 
grasshopper  and  are  soon  down  again.  Let  our  prayers  have  the  wings  of  a  dove, 
let  them  fly  away  from  earth  and  rest  in  God.  Hypocrites  pray  by  fits  and  starts ; 
the  genuine  Christian  "  prays  without  ceasing."  One  fault  may  spoil  a  life  :—- 
Did  you  ever  write  a  letter,  and  just  as  you  were  finishing  it  let  your  pen  fall  on  it, 
or  a  drop  of  ink  blot  the  fair  page?  It  was  the  work  of  a  moment,  but  the  evil 
could  not  be  effectually  effaced.  Did  you  never  cut  yourself  unexpectedly  and 
quickly?  It  took  days  or  weeks  to  heal  the  wound,  and  even  then  a  scar  remained. 
It  is  related  of  Lord  Brougham  that  one  day  he  occupied  a  conspicuous  place  in  a 
group  to  have  his  daguerreotype  taken.  But  at  an  unfortunate  moment  he  moved. 
The  picture  was  taken,  but  his  face  was  blurred.  Do  you  ask  what  application  we 
would  make  of  these  facts?  Just  this:  "It  takes  a  lifetime  to  build  a  character;  it 
only  takes  one  moment  to  destroy  it."  Without  offence : — The  word  as  used  in 
the  New  Testament  does  not  mean  what  we  mean  when  we  use  the  word  now.  You 
say  you  gave  So-and-so  "offence."  You  mean  you  made  him  angry.  Well,  if  you 
put  anything  in  a  man's  way  in  the  dark  and  he  strikes  against  it  and  he  falls  over 
it  and  hurts  himself,  most  likely  he  will  be  angry.  But  the  Bible  does  not  concern 
itself  about  feeling.  That  is  of  no  consequence.  The  Bible  concerns  itself  with  a 
man's  being  hurt — the  mischief  done.  Hence  always  in  the  New  Testament  it 
means,  concerning  a  man  himself,  that  in  his  conduct  and  temper  and  speech  he 
should  not  put  anything  in  his  practical  course  of  life  that  may  cause  him  to 
stumble  and  fall,  not  because  he  would  be  irritated  but  because  he  would  be  hurt. 
And  so,  with  regard  to  others,  we  are  to  do  nothing  which  might  prove  as  a  stumbling- 
block  in  a  man's  way  as  he  is  going  on  in  his  life,  lest  he  also  should  strike 
against  it  and  fall  over  it  and  be  hurt,  (J.  Aldis.)  The  day  of  Christ: — It  ia 
striking  to  observe  how  diversified  are  the  appellations  given  to  that  day :  "  Tha 


S8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  % 

day  of  judgtnent,"  "the  day  of  wrath,"  "the  day,"  "that  day,"  "the  great  day," 
"the  last  day,"  "  the  day  of  God,"  "the  day  of  Christ."  Here  it  is,  "the  day  of 
Clirist " — the  day  that  is  coming,  wbeu  He  will  give  the  crown  of  righteousness  to 
all  them  that  love  His  appearing.  The  day  of  His  finished  work,  when  grace 
brightens  into  glory.  The  day  of  Christ,  when  His  doctrines  will  be  made  clear,  no 
longer  veiled  in  mystery,  or  troubled  by  debate;  when  the  merit  of  His  righteous- 
ness and  sacrifice  will  be  shown  forth  in  the  safety  and  honour  of  His  redeemed 
and  justified;  when  the  splendour  of  His  example  will  shine  out  full-orbed  in  the 
millions  of  imitations  of  that  example,  each  one  peculiar,  but  each  one  by  grace 
made  perfect  at  last,  and  all  its  perfection  being  the  harmony  betwixt  itself  and  the 
example  that  had  been  set.  "The  day  of  Christ."  The  day  of  His  triumph,  every 
obstacle  surmounted,  every  foe  vanquished ;  the  day  of  His  recompense  when  He 
shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  shall  receive  the  joy  set  before  Him,  and 
"present  to  Himself  a  glorious  Church  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,"  &o.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  11.  Being  filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteousness. — Divine  culture: — L 
The  field — The  loving  heart.  II.  The  seed — Righteousness.  III.  The  fruit — 
Abundant.  IV.  The  husbandman — Jesus  Christ.  V.  The  end — "  The  glory  and 
praise  of  God."  (G.  G.  Ballard.)  Righteousness : — I.  Its  natube.  II.  Its 
FRUITS.  III.  Its  soubcb.  IV.  Its  end.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I.  The  fruit.  II. 
The  power  by  which  it  is  produced.  III.  The  motive.  IV.  The  measure  of 
righteousness,  (Ibid.)  The  fruits  of  righteousness: — I.  What  thet  are:  good 
works,  so  called  because  they  spring  from  righteousness  as  fruit  from  a  tree.  Vi^e 
must  first  be  righteous,  by  the  righteousness  of  God  in  us  before  we  can  do  the 
works  that  are  good.  What  this  righteousness  is  Paul  explains  in  Rom.  iii.  9.  1. 
Learn  to  beware  of  them  who  tell  you  that  our  good  works  are  that  righteousness 
whereby  we  are  justified  before  God.  As  well  say  that  the  fruit  is  the  tree.  2. 
Beware  of  them  that  tell  you  that  men  not  begotten  in  the  faith  of  Christ  are  able 
to  do  the  things  that  are  good  and  pleasing  to  God.  3.  Let  this  teach  us  how  to 
examine  our  works  whether  they  be  good  or  no.  Do  they  proceed  from  a  lively 
faith  in  Christ  Jesus?  II.  Their  author.  Christ  who  is  the  author  of  every  good 
thing  in  us  by  the  grace  of  His  Holy  Spirit  (2  Cor.  iii.  5 ;  Phil.  ii.  13).  1.  Let  this 
warn  as  against  them  who  would  persuade  us  that  we  are  able  of  ourselves  to  do 
that  which  is  good.  2.  Let  this  teach  us  to  give  all  the  praise  to  Him  to  whom  it 
is  due  (Rev.  v.  13).  III.  Their  end  (1  Cor.  x.  31;  Matt.  v.  16;  1  Peter  ii.  V2f. 
Let  this  try  our  motives.  Do  we  do  good  that  we  may  gain  heaven  or  that  we  may 
glorify  God?  (H.  Air  ay  ^  D.D.)  Gospel  holiness: — I.  The  experience — "Fruits 
of  righteousness."  Righteousness  is  right-mindedness.  1.  Integrity  is  the  fruit 
toward  God  and  man.  2.  Tenderness  of  conscience.  3.  With  these  and  other 
virtues  we  are  to  be  filled.  4.  Although  the  world  may  reproach  us.  II.  Thh 
MEANS — Union  with  Christ.  Granted  this,  good  works  are  inevitable,  as  a  good 
tree  must  produce  good  fruits.  III.  The  end.  God  can  take  delight  in  nothing 
but  holiness.  It  is  His  own  nature.  (J.  Summerfield,  A.M.)  Spiritual  attain- 
ment : — I.  Righteousness  op  heart  precedes  righteousness  of  life.  IL 
Righteousness  of  heart  is  self-disseminating.  Its  fruit  is — 1.  Living.  2.  Of  har- 
monious unity.  3.  Luxuriant.    III.  Righteousness  of  heart,  the  only  thing  that 

CAN    fill   the     capacities   OF     MAN.       IV.    FuLNESS    OF     RIGHTEOUSNESS fruit,    is     all 

Divine.  It  is  Divine — 1.  In  its  source — "  God  giveth  the  increase."  2.  In  its 
medium  of  communication — "  which  is  by  Jesus  Christ."  3.  In  its  end — "  unto 
the  glory  and  praise  of  God."  (1)  To  His  "  glory "  before  men.  (2)  To  His 
"  praise  "  among  men.  (G.  G.Ballard.)  Fruits  of  righteousness  : — Just  as  the 
fruits  which  men,  with  grateful  and  rejoicing  hearts,  gather  in  at  harvest- home  are 
not  only  much  in  quantity,  but  also  many  in  variety,  so  in  the  Church,  the  garden 
of  the  Lord,  His  planting  that  He  may  be  glorified,  there  are  manifold  good 
thoughts  and  deeds  and  impulses,  all  springing  up  from  the  one  seed  of  love,  and 
maturing  to  life  eternal,  to  be  garnered  in  when  "the harvest  of  the  earth  is  ripe." 
(J.  Hutchison,  D.D.)  Abounding  fruitfulness  : — It  is  not  enough  to  give  no 

offence,  you  must  edify ;  .to  abstain  from  evil,  you  must  do  good.  As  the  perfection 
of  a  tree  is  to  bring  forth  good  fruits,  and  not  simply  that  it  should  not  bear  bad. 
For  according  to  that,  those  which  bear  no  fruit  at  all  might  pass  for  good  trees. 
Thus  the  praise  of  a  Christian  is  to  lead  a  life  which  is  not  only  exempt  from  the 
corruption  of  sin,  but  which  abounds  in  all  kinds  of  virtues,  which  is  covered  and 
enriched  by  holy  acts  worthy  of  the  name  by  which  we  are  called.  For  He  has 
•natched  us  from  the  soil  of  the  world,  or  more  properly  of  hell,  where,  like  the 


BKAP.  1.1  PEILIPPIANS.  S9 

plants  of  Sodom,  we  bore  but  empty  and  useless  fruits,  and  those  which  were 
poisonous  and  deadly.  He  has  transplanted  us  into  the  paradise  of  God,  His 
Church  ;  where,  by  the  eflScacy  of  His  blood,  His  Word,  and  His  Spirit,  He  hath 
shed  in  us  thoughts,  hopes,  and  affections  totally  different  from  those  we  had 
formerly,  namely,  hatred  and  contempt  for  the  world  and  sin,  admiration  and  love 
for  heaven  and  holiness.  {J.  Daille.)  Advantages  of  advanced  pi eti/  : — Fighting 
faults  is  the  most  discouraging  thing  in  the  world.  When  cora  reaches  a  certain 
height,  no  more  weeds  can  grow  among  it.  The  corn  overshadows  and  grows 
them  down.  Let  men  fill  themselves  full  of  good  things.  Let  them  make 
their  love,  and  purity,  and  kindness  to  grow  up  like  corn,  that  every  evil  tnd 
noxious  thing  within  them  may  be  overshadowed  and  die.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
The  trees  of  righteousness  blossoming,  and  bringing  forth  fruit : — I.  How  A  Christian 
BRINGS  FORTH  FRDiT.  I  aiiswer :  he  brings  forth  fruit  *'  in  the  vine  "  ;  by  nature  we 
are  barren ;  there  is  not  one  good  blossom  growing  on  us  ;  but  when  by  faith  we 
are  engratted  into  Christ,  then  we  grow  and  fructify ;  "  as  the  branch  cannot  bear 
fruit  of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine,  no  more  can  ye  except  ye  abide  in  Me." 
Jesus  Christ  is  that  blessed  root  which  shoots  up  that  sap  of  grace  into  His 
branches.  II.  What  that  fruit  is  which  a  good  Christian  brings  forth.  1.  A 
Christian  brings  forth  inward  fruit :  "  love,  joy, peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  good- 
ness, faith."  2.  A  Christian  brings  forth  outward  fruit.  (1)  The  fruit  of  good 
discourse;  "a  wholesome  tongue  is  a  tree  of  life."  Gracious  speeches  fall  from 
the  lips  of  a  godly  man,  as  fruit  from  a  tree.  (2)  The  fruit  of  good  works.  God 
will  say  at  the  last  day.  Show  Me  thy  faith  by  thy  works.  3.  A  Christian  brings 
forth  kindly  fruit.  The  godly  man  bringeth  forth  his  fruit ;  that  is,  he  brings  forth 
that  fruit  which  is  proper  for  him  to  bear.  But  what  is  this  kindly  and  proper 
fruit  ?  I  answer,  when  we  are  good  in  our  callings  and  relations ;  in  a  magistrate, 
justice  is  kindly  fruit ;  in  a  minister,  zeal ;  in  a  parent,  instruction ;  in  a  child, 
reverence  ;  in  a  master,  good  example ;  in  a  servant,  obedience ;  in  the  husband, 
love  ;  in  the  wife,  submission ;  in  a  tradesman,  diligence  ;  in  a  soldier,  innocence. 
A  tree  of  God's  planting  brings  forth  His  fruit,  that  which  is  suitable  and  proper. 
I  shall  never  believe  him  to  be  good,  that  doth  not  bear  kindly  fruit ;  a  good  Chris- 
tian, but  a  bad  master ;  a  good  Christian,  but  a  bad  parent,  doth  not  sound  well. 
The  excellency  of  a  Christian  is  to  bring  forth  proper  fruit ;  wherein  lies  the  good- 
ness of  a  member  in  the  body,  but  to  discharge  its  proper  oflice  ?  the  eye  is  to  see, 
the  ear  to  hear,  &c.  So  the  excellency  of  a  Christian  is  to  bring  forth  that  fruit 
which  God  hath  assigned  to  him  :  what  is  a  thing  good  for  which  doth  not  do  its 
proper  work?  what  is  a  clock  good  for  that  will  not  strike?  what  is  a  ship  good  for 
that  will  not  sail  ?  what  is  a  rose  good  for  that  doth  not  smell?  what  is  that  professor 
good  for  that  doth  not  send  forth  a  sweet  perfume  in  his  relation?  the  commenda- 
tion of  a  thing  is  when  it  puts  forth  its  proper  virtue.  Not  to  bring  forth  suitable 
fruit,  spoils  all  the  other  fruit  which  we  bring  forth.  If  a  man  were  to  make  a 
medicine,  and  should  leave  out  the  chief  ingredient,  the  medicine  would  lose  its 
virtue.  Relative  graces  do  much  beautify  and  set  oft  a  Christian  ;  it  is  the  beauty 
of  a  star  to  shine  in  its  proper  orb  ;  relative  grace  doth  bespangle  a  Christian.  4. 
A  good  Christian  brings  forth  seasonable  fruit,  he  that  bringeth  forth  fruit  in  his 
•eason  ;  everything  is  beautiful  in  his  time.  That  may  be  good  at  one  time,  which 
at  another  may  be  out  of  season.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  skill  in  the  right  timing 
of  a  thing ;  duties  of  religion  must  be  performed  in  the  fit  juncture  of  time.  (1) 
Christian  duties  that  relate  to  our  neighbour  must  be  observed  in  their  season. 
Out  reproving  others  must  be  seasonable.  Affliction  opens  the  ear  to  discipline. 
Our  comforting  others  must  be  seasonable ;  "  a  word  spoken  in  due  season,  how 
good  is  it  ?  "  (2)  Duties  of  religion  that  relate  to  God  must  be  performed  in  their 
season.  To  read  at  home,  when  the  word  is  a-preaching,  or  the  sacrament  cele- 
brating, is  unseasonable,  nay,  sinful ;  as  Hushai  said,  "  the  counsel  is  not  good  at 
tkis  time  "  :  one  duty  is  to  prepare  for  another,  but  not  to  jostle  out  another  ;  fruit 
must  put  forth  seasonably.  Let  all  the  trees  of  righteousness  bring  forth  season- 
able fruit ;  in  prosperity  be  thankful,  in  adversity  patient.  I.  It  shows  us  who  is 
a  Christian  in  God's  calendar,  namely,  the  fruit-bearing  Christian.  As  soon  as  the 
sap  of  grace  is  infused,  it  puts  forth  itself  in  evangelical  fruit.  II.  Here  is  an 
indictment  against  three  sorts.  1.  Such  as  bring  forth  no  fruit ;  "  Israel  is  an 
empty  vine. "  O  how  many  unfruitful  hearers  are  there,  who  evaporate  into  nothing 
but  froth  and  fume,  being  like  those  ears  which  run  out  all  into  straw  I  they  give 
God  neither  the  early  fruit  nor  the  latter.  To  the  unfruitful  Christian  let  me  say 
four  things.     (1)  Unfraitfulness  is  a  shame  :  barrenness  of  old  was  counted  a  great 


aO  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  U 

ehame.  (2)  What  acconnt  can  the  nnfruitful  Christiau  give  to  God?  (3)  They 
that  do  not  bring  forth  good  frnit,  shall  never  taste  of  the  fruits  that  grow  in 
heaven,  2.  It  reproves  such  as  bring  forth  evil  frait.  3.  It  reproves  such  as  bring 
forth  good  fruit,  but  to  a  bad  end;  "  Israel  is  an  empty  vine,  he  bringeth  forth 
fruit  unto  himself "  :  a  man  had  as  good  bring  forth  no  fruit,  as  bring  forth  fruit 
unto  himself.  What  is  it  for  one  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  himself  f  Prayer  ia 
good ;  but  when  a  man  prays  only  to  show  his  parts,  this  is  to  bring  forth  fruit 
onto  himself.  Works  of  mercy  are  good,  but  when  a  man  gives  alms,  not  so  much 
to  feed  the  poor,  as  to  feed  his  pride,  now  he  brings  forth  fruit  to  himself,  and  thia 
fruit  is  worm-eaten.  III.  1.  Let  this  exhort  all  to  fruitfulness.  (1)  Fruit  is  that 
which  God  expects  from  us,  we  are  His  plantations  ;  and,"  whoplanteth  a  vineyard, 
aud  eateth  not  of  the  fruit  thereof?  "  (2)  Fruitfulness  is  one  of  the  most  distinctive 
characters  of  a  Chiistian;  "  the  root  of  the  righteous  yieldeth  fruit."  But  may 
not  hypocrites  bring  forth  fruit  ?  (a)  They  do  not  bring  forth  fruit  in  the  Vine  ; 
they  bring  forth  in  the  strength  of  parts,  not  in  the  strength  of  Christ,  (b)  Hypo- 
crites bring  forth  something  like  fruit,  but  it  is  not  the  right  fruit.  The  fruit  thef 
bear  is  not  sweet.  (3)  Fruitfulness  adorns  a  Christian  ;  the  fruit  adorns  the  tree ; 
a  fruit-bearing  Christian  is  an  ornament  to  religion  ;  the  more  fruitful  the  branch 
is,  the  more  fair  to  look  on.  A  dead  tree,  as  it  is  unserviceable,  so  it  is  uncomely. 
A  Christian,  decked  with  the  fruits  of  righteousness,  is  beautiful  and  glorious. 
(4)  Fruitfulness  is  a  good  evidence  to  show  for  heaven  ;  the  fruits  of  love,  humility, 
good  works,  are,  as  St.  Bernard  saith,  seeds  of  hope,  signs  of  predestination,  the 
happy  presages  of  future  glory.  The  righteousness  of  faith  is  always  accompanied 
with  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  He  that  can  show  good  fruit,  goes  full  sail  to 
heaven.  2.  It  exhorts  them  that  do  bear  fruit,  that  they  would  bring  forth  more 
fruit ;  do  not  think  you  have  fruit  enough,  but  bring  forth  further  degrees  of 
sanctity ;  "  every  branch  that  beareth  fruit,  he  pruneth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth 
more  fruit."  (1)  This  is  the  end  why  we  have  new  cost  laid  out  upon  as,  that  we 
should  bring  forth  more  fruit.  (2)  The  fuUer  we  are  of  fruit,  the  more  we  are  like 
Christ,  who  was  "  full  of  grace  and  truth."  He  received  the  Spirit  without  mea- 
sure. (3)  Bearing  much  fruit  will  usher  in  abundance  of  comfort  into  the  soul  in 
these  two  exigencies.  Store  of  fruit  will  give  comfort  in  the  hour  of  death  :  a  little 
grace  will  make  us  above  the  fear  of  death,  0  what  joy  will  it  be  on  the  deathbed, 
when  a  Christian  can  bring  his  sheaves  full  of  corn  1  when  he  can  show  his  five 
talents  that  he  hath  gained  by  trading  1  when  there  is  not  only  a  drop  or  two  of 
oil,  but  his  lamp  full  of  oil  1  what  though  the  devil  show  God  our  debts,  if  we  can 
show  Him  our  fruit?  (4)  The  more  your  fruit  is  increased,  the  more  your  glory  is 
increased;  he  whose  pound  gained  ten,  was  made  ruler  over  ten  cities.  IV. 
The  last  use  is  of  direction.  I  shall  lay  down  some  means  to  fruitfulness.  1.  Be 
sensible  of  unfruitfulness.  2.  If  you  would  be  fruitful,  remove  those  things  which 
will  hinder  fruitfulness.  Cherishing  any  secret  lust  in  the  heart ;  sin  lived  in,  is 
like  vermin  to  the  tree,  which  destroys  the  fruit ;  grace  cannot  thrive  in  a  sinful 
heart.  3.  The  third  means  to  fruitfulness  is  weeping  for  sin.  Moisture  helps 
germination  in  trees  ;  holy  tears  do  water  the  trees  of  God,  and  make  them  more 
fruitful.  4.  If  you  would  be  fruitful  often  apply  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  the 
promises.  (1)  Apply  the  blood  of  Christ.  Naturalists  say,  that  blood  applied  to 
the  root  of  some  trees  makes  them  bear  better.  Sure  I  am,  the  blood  of  Chris* 
applied  to  the  heart,  makes  it  flourish  more  in  holiness.     (2)  Apply  the  promises. 

5.  Another  means  to  fruitfulness  is  humility.  The  low  grounds  are  most  fruitful: 
"the  valleys  are   covered   with  corn";  the  humble  heart  is  the  fruitful  heart. 

6.  If  you  would  be  fruitful  in  grace,  be  much  in  good  conference  ;  "then  they  that 
feared  the  Lord  si)ake  often  one  to  another."  7.  If  you  would  be  fruit-bearing 
trees,  be  near  the  water  of  the  sanctuary ;  "  he  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the 
waters,  and  that  spreadeth  out  the  roots  by  the  river  ;  her  leaf  shall  be  green,  nor 
shall  it  cease  from  yielding  fruit."  8.  And  lastly,  if  you  would  fructify  apace,  go 
to  God  and  desire  Him  to  make  you  fruitful ;  God  is  called  the  Husbandman,  and 
He  hath  an  art  above  all  other  husbandmen  ;  they  can  plant  and  prune  trees,  but 
if  they  be  dead  they  cannot  make  them  bear.    (T.  Watson.) 

Vers.  12-20.  I  would  ye  should  tmderstand,  brethren. — Ministerial  Ufe: — 
Its  aim,  pursuit,  and  success,  ought  to  be — I.  Transparent.  This  a  true 
minister's — 1.  Duty.  2.  Desire.  3.  Privilege.  II.  Familiar  to  the  Church.  This — 
1.  Demanded  by  their  community  of  interest.  2.  Necessary  to  the  growth  of  their 
matual  sympathy.     3.   His  vindication   against   false  rumours   and   slander.    4. 


oup.  1.1  PHILIPPIANS.  31 

Shoald  ever  bring  glory  to  God.  5.  Onght  to  be  oaltivated,  intelligent,  and  loving. 
(O.  G.  Ballard.)  The  gospel  in  Rome: — I.  Thb  spread  of  the  gospel  through 
THE  ii>osTLE's  iMPRisoMMENT.  1.  His  imprisonment  gave  notoriety  to  the  cause  for 
which  he  was  imprisoned.  2.  His  own  soldier  guards  heard  him  talk  to  his 
visitors,  and  themselves  became  the  means  of  extending  the  cause.  As  one  man 
relieved  another  day  after  day,  the  whole  of  the  imperial  guard  was  brought  under 
Christian  teaching.  3.  These  guards  would  make  this  strange  prisoner  the  theme 
ol  many  homes  in  the  city.  4.  The  apostle's  calmness  and  consistency  began  to 
tell  on  the  Christians  themselves.  (1)  The  Gentile  Christians  in  sympathy  with 
the  liberal  views  of  the  apostle  plucked  up  heart  of  grace.  (2)  The  Jewish 
Christians  envious  of  the  apostle's  influence  doubled  their  zeal.    II.  The  tjnveil- 

tNQ  OF  THE    apostle's    HEART  THROUGH  THE  SPREAD  OF  THE  GOSPEL.       We  See — 1.    His 

perfect  self-forgetfulness.  Neither  his  imprisonment  nor  the  preaching  of  envy  and 
strife  could  disturb  his  confidence  in  Christ.  2.  His  large  and  hopeful  charity. 
Even  the  Judaizers  preached  Christ.  8.  His  spirit  of  humble  and  trustful  depen- 
dence— (1)  On  the  prayer  of  the  Philippians.  (2)  On  the  supply  of  the  Spirit 
through  Jesus  Christ.  4.  His  thorough  and  absorbing  devotedness  to  his  work. 
Conclusion  :  Note — 1.  The  power  of  personal  influence.  2.  That  this  influence  can 
only  be  sustained  by  personal  union  with  Christ.  (•/.  J.  Goadby.)  The  gospel  in 
Rome : — The  Philippians  had  expressed  through  Epaphroditus,  no  doubt,  besides 
warm  sympathy  with  Paul,  anxiety  respecting  his  prospects  and  those  of  the 
gospel.  Not  merely  was  there  a  clog  on  the  great  missionary  himself,  but  his 
persecution  was  likely  to  discourage  the  Roman  Christians.  He  hastens  to  re- 
assure them.  I.  The  first  result  of  God's  gracious  intervention  to  make  the  wrath 
of  man  praise  Him  was  that  the  cause  of  Paul's  imprisonment  became  ex- 
tensively KNOWN.  1.  His  bonds  were  **  well  known  as  being  in  connection  with 
Christ."  This  was  no  doubt  the  form  in  which  the  cause  of  his  imprisonment 
would  present  itself;  yet  the  full  and  precious  force  of  the  "in  Christ"  is  to  be  held 
fast  here.  It  was  through  his  union  with  Christ — (1)  That  the  bonds  were  on  his 
limbs — badges,  therefore,  not  of  slavery  but  of  freedom.  (2)  That  he  was  prompted 
by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  to  earnest  effort.  (3)  That  he  was  sustained  by  grace  to 
bear  his  bonds  with  patience  and  make  them  instruments  for  glorifying  God.  2. 
Thif  was  known  among  the  Prsetorian  guards.  He  had  no  privacy  day  or  night, 
and  seeing  his  purity,  patience,  gentleness,  and  kindness,  they  soon  saw  that  he  was 
no  criminal,  and  felt  that  his  bonds  were  in  Christ.  3.  In  all  other  places,  to  all 
who  knew  anything  about  His  imprisonment.  II.  The  second  result  was  that 
Paul's  example  became  stimulating.  1.  We  may  infer  that  in  the  early  Church 
every  member  according  to  his  opportunities  spoke  the  word  of  the  Lord.  "  Most" 
of  the  members  of  the  Roman  Church  were  certainly  evangelists.  The  discoverer 
of  a  remedy  is  bound  by  humanity  to  make  the  remedy  known:  so  surely  should  he 
who  knows  of  the  Divine  physician.  In  heathen  countries  evangelism  is  the 
immediate  fruit  of  conversion  ;  but  also  many  professing  Christians  never  speak  a 
word  for  Christ.  2.  The  observation  of  the  apostle's  endurance  of  suffering 
strengthened  the  faith  of  the  Church,  and  spuiTed  them  to  increased  effort.  Thus 
it  comes  that  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church.  This  was  the 
effect  of  the  death  of  Stephen ;  of  the  persecution  of  the  Waldenses  and  of  the 
Malagasy.  3.  The  secret  of  this  is  told  in  the  little  phrase  "  in  the  Lord."  The 
man  out  of  Christ  can  see  only  the  chains  and  the  possibilities  of  death :  the  man 
who  is  "in  Christ"  sees  also — (1)  The  spiritual  grandeur  of  work  such  as  had 
brought  the  apostle  to  bonds.  (2)  The  grand"ur  of  suffering  for  Christ.  (3)  The 
sympathy  of  Christ  with  the  sufferer.  (4)  The  growth  of  religious  stren^rth  and 
beauty  through  the  affliction.  4.  The  preachers  were  under  the  intlr.ence  of 
strangely  divergent  motives,  but  the  apostle  rejoiced  that,  however,  perfectly  or 
imperfectly,  Christ  was  preached  by  all.  (/?.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  PauVs  sorrows 
and  joi/s  : — I.  Paul's  sorrows.  Persecuted — imprisoned — insulted.  II.  Paul's 
JOTB.  The  progress  of  the  gospel — the  love,  courage,  and  confid<-nce  of  the  brethren 
— the  proclamation  of  Christ.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)         Paul's  captivity  : — I.  The  first 

RESULT  WAS  THAT  IT  HAD  BEEN  SERVICEABLE  FOR  THE  DIFFUSION    OF   THE   TRUTH  AMONG 

THOSE  WHO  OTHERWISE  MIGHT  NOT  HAVE  HEARD  OP  IT.  Man  may  be  bound  but  not 
the  Word  of  God  (2  Tim.  ii.  9).  We  may  almost  trace  his  rejoicing  in  his  chain 
(Acts  xxviii.  20 ;  2  Tim.  i.  16).  They  were  to  him  as  links  of  spiritual  pearls ;  his 
garb  of  affliction  as  a  robe  of  beauty  because  they  were  manifest  in  Christ.  He 
was  soon  seen  not  to  be  a  political  offender  or  a  law  breaker,  but  a  bomble, 
pati«nt,  contented  witness  for  Christ.     II.  The  second  bxsult  wab  thai  it  ums>m 


33  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  || 

THOSE    WHO    WERE   ALREADY   BELIE^TERS   INCREASINGLY    BOLD    OP   BPEBCH.      If    he    COnW 

preach  in  fetters  much  more  should  they  preach  in  freedom.  But  there  is  a  dark 
shadow  on  the  picture,  Christ  was  preached  from  varying  motives.  Yet  the  apostle 
will  rejoice  that  He  is  preached  at  all.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  the 
preachers  of  Christ  of  envy  and  strife  were  unsparingly  denounced  ;  but  here  he  is 
not  comparing  party  with  party,  but  Christianity  with  heathenism.  Even  an  im- 
perfect gospel  was  precious  in  view  of  the  nameless  corruptions  of  Eome.  The 
same  experience  is  seen  still  in  mission  fields,  all  minor  differences  of  Church 
organization  and  creed  dwindle  into  nothingness  in  the  presence  of  the  hideous 
corruption  of  the  pagan  world.  So  ought  it  to  be  in  Christian  lands  in  view  of 
home  heathenism.  {J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.)  The  g»spel  furthered  by  opposition: — 
I.  The  experience  of  Paul.  He  was  brought  into  notoriety — into  contact  with 
persons  of  influence — to  Rome  the  centre  human  power — had  leisure  to  write  hia 
Epistles.  II.  The  experience  of  all  believers.  Nothing  happens  by  chance — all 
things  are  overruled  by  Christ — we  should  therefore  gladly  toil  and  suffer  in  His 
cause.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Things  concerning  himself: — Knowing  the  deep  solicitude 
of  the  Philippians,  but  not  to  what  extent  they  may  have  been  misinformed  as  to 
his  imprisonment,  he  makes  haste  to  set  their  minds  at  rest.  But  if  we  expect  that 
he  will  dilate  upon  the  details  of  his  external  fortunes,  or  open  the  secrets  of  hia 
prison  house,  we  shall  be  disappointed.  Vv'^hat  little  may  he  recovered  of  these 
must  be  gathered  from  other  sources.     I.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  St.  Paul  here 

REFERS  TO  THAT  IMPRISONMENT  WITH  WHICH  THE    BoOK  OF   THE  AcTS  CLOSES.      Regard 

this  event — 1.  Under  the  purely  human  aspect.  Three  times  in  his  life  was  St. 
Paul,  as  he  gloried  in  saying,  "  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ,"  besides  "  bonds  oft." 
The  first  was  at  Csesarea,  when  he  pleaded  his  own  and  his  Master's  cause,  and 
claimed  the  right  of  a  Roman  citizen  to  appeal  unto  Caesar.  In  this  he  gratified  one 
ot  the  deepest  desires  of  his  heart.  ''  I  must  see  Rome."  It  was  his  holy  ambition 
to  carry  the  gospel  to  the  centre  of  the  world.  The  Lord  ratified  the  desire  of  hia 
heart.  "  As  thou  hast  testified  of  Me  in  Jerusalem,  so  shalt  thou  bear  witness  in 
Rome."  But  His  Master  had  not  indicated  that  He  was  to  go  bound.  Apostles, 
like  ourselves,  must  wait  for  the  unfo'.dings  of  providence.  He  reached  Rome  and 
was  subjected  to  mild  restraint.  During  two  years  he  was  kept  in  suspense  :  then 
he  seems  to  have  been  dismissed,  but  returned  again  after  a  few  years'  mission  to 
the  West,  to  the  same  place,  and  was  beheaded.  All  this  is  what  he  meant  by  the 
•'  things  that  concern  me."  As  to  those  details  we  should  have  been  so  glad  to 
receive,  about  himself  and  the  Roman  Church,  he  is  silent,  perhaps  because  hia 
letters  were  closely  watched.  2.  When  he  lays  the  stress  on  "  have  fallen  out 
rather,"  he  gives  us  a  hint  of  another  side  of  the  matter.  The  hand  of  God  had 
been  leading  him  in  a  way  he  knew  not.  It  was  not  Paul  alone  who  had  aj^pealed 
unto  Caesar,  but  Christ  in  him  and  Christ's  cause.  It  was  part  of  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God  that  he  should  consolidate  the  Church  in  Rome.  St.  Paul's  special 
revelation  of  truth — "  my  gospel" — was  necessary  to  the  perfection  of  evangelical 
teaching,  and  therefore  was  he,  not  Peter,  sent  to  Rome.  II.  Rather  unto  tbtb 
FDBTHERENCE  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  The  apostlc's  imprisonment  had  positively  tended 
to  promote  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  1.  Generally  this  had  been  the  case.  Paul 
was  still  the  centre  of  the  European  gospel,  and  had  time  and  opportunity  now 
for  a  calm  survey  of  the  whole  estate  of  Christ's  Church.  His  spirit  was  sur- 
rendered to  the  undisturbed  influence  of  meditation  and  prayer.  What  the  three 
great  Epistles — Ephesians,  Colossians,  and  Philippians — owe  to  this  seclusion,  those 
who  study  them  may  conjecture.  Certain  it  is  they  have  tended  greatly  to  the 
furtherence  of  the  gospel.  2.  More  particularly  his  bonds  have  promoted  the 
gospel — (1)  By  being  made  known  through  Rome  in  their  connection  with  the 
Redeemer.  He  was  known,  marked,  inquired  about  as  the  most  eminent  repre- 
sentative of  Christianity  to  the  army  and  to  great  numbers  who  assembled  in  hia 
own  hired  house.  (2)  By  their  effect  in  stimulating  others  to  preach  Christ,  (a) 
The  first  class  of  these  preachers  are  described  as  feeling  the  good  influence  of  the 
apostle's  bonds  in  two  ways :  first  they  were  inspired  with  boldness  by  hia 
Christian  endurance;  secondly,  their  love  to  the  cause  of  Christ  was  increased  by 
their  sympathy  with  his  devotion  as  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel,  (b)  But 
these  bonds  stirred  up  a  different  class  of  preachers  ;  the  weak  brethren  of  whom 
he  speaks  as  exerting  so  much  influence  in  Rome  (Rom.  xiv.).  Weak  in  faith  and 
scrupulosity,  but  strong  in  prejudice  and  bitterness,  who  thought  that  by  preaching 
a  more  contracted  gospel,  they  would  add  bitterness  to  his  bonds.  As  a  con 
tederftte  company  they  were  actuated  by  "  strife  "  and  "  faction  "  ;  being  only  in  ■ 


CHAP,  t]  PHILIPPIANS.  Si 

minority,  they  Bonght  to  increase  their  numbers  and  raise  a  party  that  would 
neutralize  this  Gentile  gospel.  8.  By  a  remarkable  expression  St.  Paul  declarea 
his  Bclf-forgeiting  concentration  of  heart  on  the  furtherance  of  Christ's  gospel 
(ver.  18).  (1)  The  exclamation,  "  What  then,"  shows  that  he  has  something  to 
Bay  which  demands,  as  it  were,  an  apology  to  himself  and  others ;  but  he  boldly 
goes  on  to  give  the  ground  of  his  rejoicing  and  his  condemnation  of  every  impure 
motive  in  the  preaching  of  Christ.  (2)  This  rejoicing  is — (a)  His  pure  and  loyal 
exultation  that  by  all  means  the  name  of  Christ  was  more  widely  proclaimed,  (b) 
His  gladness  that  what  was  mingled  with  bo  much  private  disquietude  would  issue 
in  the  furtherance  of  his  own  salvation.  Fidelity  to  public  duty  must  go  hand  in 
band  with  trembling  sohcity  for  individual  fidelity,  (c)  To  what  did  he  look  for 
personal  assurance  and  establishment  in  grace  ?  Not  to  any  guaranteed  apostohcal 
prerogative ;  not  to  the  long-discipUned  strength  of  his  moral  nature ;  but  to  the 
common  heritage  of  all  Christians — "  the  supply  of  Christ's  Spirit "  through  the 
players  of  his  fellow  saints  united  with  his  own.  (IF.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  The 
triumphs  of  the  gospel: — I.  Continue  in  spite  of  oppression.  II.  Abe  secured 
by  opposite  agencies.  III.  Abe  a  source  of  joy  to  its  adherents.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  The  things  that  have  happened  unto  me  have  fallen  out  rather 
unto  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel. — The  Philippians  looked  upon  the  imprison- 
ment as  a  calamity ;  Paul  assures  them  that  it  was  an  element  of  prosperity. 
This  shows  how  much  our  estimate  of  men  and  things  depends  upon  the  angle 
from  which  we  conduct  the  examination.  Circumstances  are  often  the  only 
lexicons  which  can  determine  the  meaning  of  words.  *'  Euin"  at  Philippi  meant 
"  coronation  "  at  Rome.  Much  depends  on  the  plane  of  vision  as  well  as  upon 
optical  power.  There  is  a  germ  of  prophecy  here.  By  and  by  we  shall  see  life 
from  higher  standpoints.  It  is  better  for  the  student  to  study  his  dark  problems 
at  Rome  than  at  PhilippL  Circumstances  the  most  untoward  may  in  reality  be 
advancing  the  Divine  kingdom.  Every  purpose  of  God  may  be  thwarted,  but  the 
outcome  of  the  ages  will  show  that  Gods  great  plan  has  been  realized.     I.   Gron's 

PBOVIDENCE    IS   NOT   TO   BE    INTERPRETED    IN    FRAGMENTS.       II.    TBE    MORAIi   IS  HIOHBB 

THAN  THE  PERSONAL.     Paul  is  iu  prisoH ;  the  gospel  is  free.     III.  The  bonds  of 

ONE  MAN  MAY  GIVE  INSPIRATION  TO  THE  LIBERTY  OF  ANOTHER  (VCT.  14).  IV.  ThB 
SPREAD   OF    THE    GOSPEL    DEPENDS    UPON    NO    ONE    MAN.       V.    EvEN  THE  AFFLICTED  HATB 

A  MISSION.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Bonds  in  Christ  : — I.  Cannot  arrest  the  spread 

OF     THE     gospel.       II.      ArE     THE      PBllMISE      OF      FUTURE     GLORY.        III.     ArE     MORH 

HONOURABLE  THAN  AN  IMPERIAL  CROWN,  for — 1.  They  are  worn  in  the  service  of  the 
King  of  kings.  2.  Worn  in  royal  spirit.  3.  Made  the  means  of  confirming 
others.  4.  Overruled  for  the  extension  of  the  kingdom.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  PauVt 
bonds  in  Christ  exhibited: — I.  His  own  mobal  blamelessness.  II.  Hia  seli- 
OBTOTioN  to  Cheist.  III.  His  REAL  DIGNITY.  The  omeu  of  civil  degradation  was 
the  sign  of  his  relationship  with  the  Lord  of  the  universe.  IV.  His  moral  free- 
dom. (G.  O.  Ballard.)  Ilie  ministry  of  Paul  the  prisoner  : — I.  The  things  that 
■ATX  happened  unto  ME  (see  history  of  Paul  as  the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ,  Acta 
xxi.,  xxviii.)  1.  Popular  tumult  in  Jerusalem.  2.  Apprehension  by  Lysias,  bound 
and  ordered  to  be  examined  by  scourging.  3.  Placed  at  the  bar  of  the  Sanhedrim 
and  ordered  to  be  smitten  on  the  mouth  by  the  High  Priest.  4.  Conspiracy  against 
bis  life,  exposed,  defeated.  6.  Taken  prisoner  to  Csesarea.  Tried  before  Felix. 
Then  before  Festus,  afterwards  before  Agrippa  and  Berenice.  6.  Appeals  to  Caesar, 
shipwrecked,  arrives  at  Rome.  7.  In  Rome  delivered  to  the  captain  of  the  guard, 
permitted  to  dwell  by  himself  with  a  soldier  that  kept  him  (Acts  xxviii.  30-31)  for 
two  years.  II.  Have  fallen  out  bather  unto  the  furtherance  of  the  gospei.. 
The  development  of  events  in  a  consecrated  life — 1.  Is  the  work  of  an  overruling 
Providence.  2.  Produces  startling  results,  disappointing  alike  to  the  hopes  of 
enemies  and  the  fears  of  friends.  3.  Whatever  may  be  its  starting  point,  attains 
its  end  in  the  advancement  of  the  gospel.  4.  Illustrates  how  moral  principles 
when  tried  in  Buffering  become  mighty  forces  in  the  world's  evangelization.  6. 
A  pledge  that  suffering  with  Christ  shall  be  followed  by  a  fellowship  of  glory. 
(Ibid.)  The  powerlessness  of  persecution: — I.  Persecutions  further  eatheb 
than  HiNrEB  the  GOSPEL.  In  all  ages  the  Church  has  been  increased  rather  than 
diminished  by  them  (Exod.  i ;  Dan.  iii.).  When  Christ  was  crucified  they  thought 
they  had  rooted  out  His  name  and  doctrine  for  ever ;  but  by  the  Cross  the  kingdom 
was  established.  II.  How  comes  this  to  pass?  Not  by  the  intentions  of  enemies, 
Bor  the  virtue  of  the  saints'  sufferings.  1.  By  the  power  of  Christ  (Psa.  ii.  1).  2. 
When  men  eee  the  saints'  undauntedness,  their  patience,  the  power  of   Goi 

ft 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chip.  I> 

Btrengthening  them,  and  their  triumph  over  death,  their  very  example  brings 
many  into  the  Church.  3.  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound,  though  the  preacher 
may  be  (2  Tim.  ii.  9).  III.  The  use.  1.  To  be  comforted  in  all  our  troubles 
which  the  wicked  raise  up  against  us,  if  the  gospel  is  advanced  thereby.  2.  To 
condemn  the  faintness  and  backsliding  of  many  in  troubles  (Luke  xiv.  26-27).  3. 
Not  to  doubt  of  the  truth  or  dislike  professors  when  they  are  persecuted.  (H. 
Airay,  D.D.)  Christian  boldness : — I.  The  result  of  a  firm  confidence  in  the 
Lord.  II.  Increases  upon  the  approach  of  pf>rsecution.  HI.  Necessary  to  true 
witness  bearing.  (G.  G.  Ballard.)  Expectations  unexpectedly  fuljilled : — Paulwa* 
in  Bome.  His  earnest  wish  was  gratified,  but  how  differently  from  what  he  had 
expected.  But  he  did  not  murmur.  All  had  happened  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
gospel.  Let  us  look  at  the  circumstances  by  which,  notwithstanding  his  imprison- 
ment, his  original  expectations  were  now  unexpectedly  realized.  Consider — I.  Thb 
AMOUNT  OF  LIBERTY  GRANTED  HIM.  For  somc  uukuown  reason,  instead  of  being 
shut  up  within  the  Prffitorian  barracks,  he  was  permitted  to  dwell  in  a  hired 
lodging  of  his  own,  and  "receive  all  who  might  come  to  him."  He  was  not 
forbidden  to  preach  to  his  visitors,  and  many  would  go  away  deeply  impressed. 
II.  The  additional  efficact  given  to  his  preaching  by  his  bonds.  He  was  kept 
under  strict  guard,  being  chained  to  a  Roman  solJier.  It  might  have  been  thought 
that  had  he  been  allowed  to  go  unfettered  he  might  have  accomplished  more.  But 
the  fact  of  his  bondage  drew  multitudes  who  might  otherwise  not  have  heard  him, 
and  his  chains  were  a  token  of  his  sincerity.  It  became  manifest  that  his  bonds 
were  in  Christ  and  that  he  was  not  afraid  of  imprisonment  or  death.  Onesimus 
was  but  one  of  many  begotten  by  his  bonds.  III.  Into  what  unexpected  quarters 
his  influence  penetrated.  Had  a  Roman  Christian  previous  to  Paul's  coming 
been  asked  what  section  of  the  population  would  be  the  last  to  feel  the  power  of 
the  gospel  he  would  probably  have  pointed  to  the  rude,  hardened  soldiers  who  were 
in  attendance  on  Nero.  But  Paul  comes  and  lo !  the  praetorium  is  one  of  the  first 
places  to  feel  his  influence.  IV.  How  his  imprisonment  influenced  many  of 
THOSE  who  were  ALREADY  PREACHING  THE  GOSPEL.  We  might  have  thought  that  the 
sight  of  Paul's  chains  would  depress.  Instead  of  this  it  quickened  their  zeal.  Let 
us  learn  a  lesson  of  hope  in  God.  1.  For  the  progress  of  His  kingdom.  2.  For 
our  own  welfare.  {T.  C.  Finlayson.)  Irresistible  moral  influence: — Moral 
influence  springing  from  and  devoted  to  Christ  resists  all  mere  physical  and  local 
restrictions.      Paul's  moral  influence  exerted  a  mighty  power.     I.    Under   the 

MOST      DISADVANTAGEOUS      CIRCUMSTANCES — in      bouds.        II.     WiTH     A    VERY     LIMITED 

OPPORTUNITY — one  soldier  daily.  III.  Upon  a  class  op  mind  and  heart  not 
EASILY  IMPRESSED,  viz.,  the  guard  which  had  charge  of  him,  a  prisoner.  IV. 
Throughout  the  city  —  notwithstanding  the  restraints  of  "  his  own  hired 
house."  V.  Reaching  the  further  field,  by  first  fully  cultivating  the  one  at 
hand.  (G.  G.  Ballard.)  The  furtherance  of  the  gospel: — Progress  —  the 
figure  is  perhaps  military.  As  the  progress  of  armies  is  facilitated  by  the 
cutting  down  of  obstructing  trees,  so  trials  were  but  the  means  of  cutting  down 
all  hindrances  to  the  onward  march  of  the  truth.  {J.  Hutchinnoii,  D.D.) 
Hindrances  as  hflps : — The  Boers'  determined  opposition  to  Livingstone's  purpose 
to  evangelize  by  native  teachers  occasioned  his  continued  efforts  to  penetrate 
westward  until  he  crossed  the  continent,  and  committed  himself  fully  to  his  great 
life-work  as  a  missionary  explorer.  (J.  F.  B.  Tinlmg,  B.A.)  Unfavourable 
circumstances  may  he  turned  to  advantage: — In  one  place  near  the  Hospice  of  St. 
Bernard,  I  met  with  a  curious  natural  conservatory.  The  under  surface  of  the 
snow  having  been  melted  by  the  warmth  of  the  soil,  which  in  Alpine  regions  is 
always  markedly  higher  than  that  of  the  air,  was  not  in  contact  with  it.  A  snowy 
vault  was  thus  formed,  glazed  on  the  top  with  thin  plates  of  transparent  ice ;  and 
here  grew  a  most  lovely  cushion  of  the  Aretia  Helvetica,  covered  with  hundreds  of 
its  delicate  rosy  flowers,  like  a  miniature  hydrangea  blossom.  The  dark  colour  of 
the  soil  favoured  the  absorption  of  heat ;  and,  prisoned  in  its  crystal  cave,  this  little 
fairy  grew  and  blossomed  securely  from  the  very  heart  of  winter,  the  unfavourable 
circumstances  around  all  seeming  so  many  ministers  of  good,  increasing  its 
strength,  and  enhancing  its  loveliness.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  TJie  advantage  of 
disadvantage : — I  never  had  in  all  my  life  so  great  an  inlet  into  the  Word  of  God  a3 
now.  Those  Scriptures  that  I  saw  nothing  in  before  are  made  in  this  place  and 
state  to  shine  npon  me.  I  have  seen  that  here  which  I  am  persuaded  I  shall  never 
in  this  world  be  able  to  express.  (John  Bunyan,  in  Bedford  Jail.)  Character  of 
St.  PauVi  captivity : — The  degree  of  restraint  put  upon  a  person  labouring  onder  a 


emiv.  I.]  PHILIPPIJNS.  M 

oriminal  charge  wa8  determined  by  various  circumstances  :  by  the  nature  of  the 
charge  itself,  by  the  rank  and  reputation  of  the  accused,  by  the  degree  of  guilt 
presumed  to  attach  to  him.  Those  most  leniently  dealt  with  were  handed  over  to 
their  friends,  who  thus  became  sureties  for  tlieir  appearance  ;  the  worst  offenderi 
were  thrown  into  prison  and  loaded  with  chains.  The  captivity  of  St.  Paul  was 
neither  the  severest  nor  the  lightest  possible.  By  his  appeal  to  Cresar  he  had 
placed  himself  at  the  emperor's  disposal.  Accordingly  on  his  arrival  at  Rome  he 
is  delivered  over  to  the  prefect  of  the  prsetorians  under  \\hi>?e  charge  he  remained 
throughout  his  captivity.  He  represents  himself  as  strictly  a  prisoner  ;  he  speaks 
again  and  again  of  his  bonds.  At  times  he  mentions  his  coupling  chain.  Accord- 
ing to  Eoman  custom  he  was  bound  by  the  hand  to  the  soldier  who  guarded  him, 
and  was  never  left  alone  day  or  night.  As  the  soldiers  would  relieve  guard  in 
constant  succession,  the  prtetorians  one  by  one  were  brought  into  communication 
with  the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  thus  he  was  able  to  atlirm  that  his  bomls  had 
borne  witness  to  the  gospel  "  throughout  the  imperial  regiment."  On  the  other  hand 
his  confinement  was  not  so  severe  as  this,  standing  alone,  might  seem  to  imply. 
It  is  certain  that  all  had  free  access  to  him,  and  that  he  was  allowed  to  converse 
and  write  without  restraint.  He  was  not  thrown  into  prison,  but  lived  in  rooms  of 
his  own.  When  he  first  arrived  he  was  taken  to  temporary  lodgings  :  either  to  a 
house  of  public  entertainment,  or  to  the  abode  of  some  friend.  But  afterwards  he 
rented  a  dwelling  of  his  own,  and  there  he  remained  apparently  till  his  release. 
{Bp.  Lighti'oot.)  Who  could  see  without  emotion  that  venerable  form  subjected 
by  iron  links  to  the  coarse  control  of  the  soldier  who  stood  beside  him  7  How  often 
must  the  tears  of  the  assembly  have  been  called  forth  by  the  upraising  of  that 
fettered  hand,  and  the  clanking  of  the  chain  which  checked  ite  energetic  action  I 
{Conybeare  and  Hoicson.)  Good  out  of  evil: — The  cloud,  while  it  obscures  the 
Bun,  sends  down  the  fertilizing  shower.  This  theatre  was  prepared  for  his  punish- 
ment, and  it  became  the  scene  of  his  triumph.  This  persecution,  which  was 
intended  to  cover  him  with  shame,  overwhelmed  him  with  honour ;  it  was  to 
blacken  and  wither  his  name,  and  it  rendered  it  illustrious  in  the  first  city  and  in 
the  most  superb  court  in  the  universe.  Oh  the  vanity  of  the  thoughts  of  the  wicked  I 
Oh  the  admirable  wisdom  of  the  providence  of  God !  He  causes  the  Jew  to  open 
the  apostle's  mouth,  when  he  thinks  that  he  is  closing  it,  and  makes  him  spread 
his  voice  throughout  the  world,  in  desiring  to  banish  him  from  Judea.  He  had 
formerly  conducted  Joseph  to  the  highest  pitch  of  glory  in  the  same  way,  through 
the  fury  of  his  unnatural  brethren.  Persecution,  slavery,  and  imprisonment  had 
also  been  as  it  were  the  ladders  to  his  prosperity.  Since  then  He  has  always  in 
the  same  way  used  them  in  the  conduct  of  His  people,  overthrowing  the  designs  of 
His  enemies,  and  turning  the  artifices  of  their  malice,  and  the  excess  of  their  fury, 
directly  contrary  to  their  intentions ;  multiplying  His  Church  by  the  deaths  and 
massacres  which  seemed  likely  to  destroy  it ;  lighting  His  gospel  by  those  very 
means  which  appeared  likely  to  extinguish  it ;  and  drawing  the  brightest  glory  o£ 
His  servants  from  their  deepest  disgrace.     (J.  Daille.) 

Ver.  15.     Some  Indeed  preach  Christ  even  of  envy  and  strife. — Observe — I.  A 

GOOD  ACT  MAY  BE   PBOMPTED   BY  A  BAD   MOTIVE.       II.    ThE    GOOD    REMAIN'S    THOUGH    THS 

OBJECT  FAILS.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)         Motives — I.  Vaky  widely.    II.  Do  not  affect  thb 

NATURE    but    THE    MORAL   QUALITY    OF   AN    ACTION.       III.    DETERMINE   NOT   THE    RESULT 

BUT  THE  REWARD.     {IMd.)  The  text   suggests — I.  Diverse   developement  of 

HUMAN   DISPOSITION.       II.    ThB    POSSIBILITY    OF    DOING    A    GOOD    DEED    THROUGH    A    BAD 

MOTIVE.      III.    The  impossibility  of  entirely  CONCEALING  MOTIVES.      IV.  The 

ACTION  OF  SELF-SEEKERS  TURNED  INTO  THE  GOOD  MAN'S  SOURCE  OF  JOY.  V.  MaN  IS 
NEVER  80  DIABOLIZED  AS  WHEN  MAKING  A  GOOD  CAUSE  THE  MEANS  OF  GRIEVING  AND 
TORMENTING  THE  ChURCH.       VI.    ThE  MERE  FACT  THAT  A  MAN  PREACHES  ChRIST  IS  NOT 

A  PROOF  OF  HIS  PERSONAL  SALVATION  :  and  if  this  can  be  afiirmed  of  preaching,  how 
much  more  may  it  be  afiirmed  of  learning.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Two  voices  on 
the  same  subject : — I.  The  voice  of  selfishness.  II.  The  voice  of  love.  {Ibid.) 
The  real  and  counterfeit  in  the  Christian  ministry: — I.  Where  they  correspond. 
1.  Both  adopt  the  Christian  name.  2.  Both  utter  the  same  shibboleth.  3.  Both  are 
active  in  preaching  Christ.  II.  Where  they  differ.  1.  In  heart.  "Contention" 
moves  the  one ;  "  love  "  reigns  in  the  other.  2.  In  spirit.  "  Envy  and  strife  "  move 
the  one  ;  "  good  will "  actuates  the  other.  3.  In  source  of  strength.  Love  of  party 
•nimatea  the  one  ;  confidence  in  the  Lord  emboldens  the  other.  4.  In  aim.  That  of 
the  one  is  to  advance,  it  may  be,  a  lifeless  Charch ;  that  of  the  other  to  propel  the 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  l 

gospel  of  Christ.  8.  The  depth  and  accuracy  of  conviction.  The  one  *•  supposing  to 
dd,"  &c.  (ver.  16);  the  other  "  knowiug  that,"  &o.  (ver.  17).  {O.  G.  BaVMrd.) 
spurious  ministry: — I.  The  elements  formative  of  it.  1.  An  imperfect  appre- 
hension of  Christ's  mission.  2.  A  total  absence  of  Christ's  Spirit.  3.  Thought 
and  sympathy,  narrowed  by  early  prejudice  and  preconceived  ideas.  4.  Christ 
made  subservient  to  the  doctrines,  ritual,  and  history  of  a  system.  II.  Tkb 
BESULTS  iNSEPABABLE  FBOM  IT.  1.  The  cross  degraded  into  a  rallying-point  for 
party  strife.  2.  The  basest  spirit  indulged  under  the  pretence  of  fulfilling  a 
sacred  ofiice,  (1)  "Envy" — displeasure  at  another's  good.  (2)  "Strife" — selfi&h 
rivalry  which  seeks  to  gain  the  good  belonging  to  another.  3.  Christ  preached 
merely  to  advance  a  party.  4.  Zeal  for  propagating  a  creed,  greater  than  to  save  a 
lest  world.  III.  The  geem  of  it.  1.  May  exist  in  those  who  zealously  preach 
Christ.  2.  Consists  iu  a  moral  contradiction  between  the  heart  of  the  preacher  and 
the  theme  of  his  discourse — contentiousness  and  Christ.  3.  Produces  impurity  of 
motive  in  Christian  work — "  not  sincerely."  4.  Biases  the  judgment  to  expect 
results  which  are  never  realized — "  supposing."  5.  Inspires  alma  which  are 
unchristian — "to  add  affliction."  {Ibid.)  The  preaching  of  Christ: — I.  The 
THEME.  His  person  and  work — His  grace  and  power — His  gifts  and  promises — 
His  example  and  requirements.  II.  The  motive.  Sometimes  impure  ;  as  sectarian, 
mercenary,  ambitious — sometimes  sincere  ;  from  love  to  God  and  man.  III.  The 
BEBULT.  Some  good  every  way — Christ  is  exalted — the  faithful  rejoice»  {J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  I.  The  pheachinq  of  Chbist.  No  preaching  can  bear  this  designation 
which  does  not  constitute  Him  the  grand  object  of  it.  From  the  first  the  holy 
men  who  spoke  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit  pointed  to  Him.  All  the 
Scriptures  lead,  remotely,  perhaps,  but  certainly,  to  the  Cross  of  Christ.  He  is  to 
be  preached  as  the  only  object  of  faith,  and  the  sole  source  of  salvation.  Opposi- 
tion must  not  hinder,  nor  heresy  divert  this.  II.  The  scale  on  which  Chbist  is  to 
BE  PREACHED.  1.  To  all  pcoplcs — Philippiaus  and  Romans,  Europeans  and 
Africans.  2.  By  men  of  all  views  and  denominations,  Jewish  and  Gentile 
Christians ;  Roman  Catholics  and  Protestants ;  Anglicans  and  Dissenters,  &c. 
Ill,  The  Spirit  in  which  this  should  be  eeceivkd.  There  are  two  classes 
interested.  1.  Ministers  should  rejoice  when  they  see  the  gospel  spreading  on  all 
sides  and  among  all  denominations.  Let  it  not  be  said  of  them,  "  Ye  know  not  what 
spirit  ye  are  oli."  No  jealous  or  envious  feeling  at  others'  successes  should  be 
cherished  by  them.  2.  Congregations  while  loyal  to  their  own  Church  should  put 
a  generous  construction  on  the  work  of  others.  IV.  The  glorious  besults  arisk^o 
out  OF  THIS.  1,  In  time.  2.  In  eternity.  (W.  B.  Colly ir,  D.D.)  Toleration: — 
I.  We  see  here  the  true  ground  of  christian  toleration.  1.  Negatively.  (1) 
Toleration  is  not  an  enforced  forbearance  with  men  who  teach  error.  Some  keep 
their  hands  off  errorists  because  they  cannot  touch  them  ;  like  boys  who  will  not 
pluck  ripe  fruit  because  there  is  a  high  wall  in  the  way.  (2)  Nor  is  it  a  recognition 
of  the  right  of  men  to  freedom  of  thought  and  experience,  which  is  only  part  of  it. 
(8)  Still  less  is  it  indifference  to  error.  There  are  men  who  do  not  care  whether 
you  teach  God  or  Jupiter,  heathen  mythology  or  Christian  theology.  2.  Positively. 
It  is  a  generous  confidence  in  the  vitality  of  truth  and  its  ultimate  victory,  born  of 
hope,  nursed  by  courage,  adopted  by  love.  II.  If  Paul's  spirit  be  bight  then  we 
keed  to  amend  our  view  of  social  and  moral  besponsibelitt.  He  saw  bad  men 
taking  his  place  yet  he  let  them  go  on,  rejoiced  in  their  work,  though  not  in  the 
motive  of  it.  Had  he  lived  in  our  day  he  would  have  been  told,  "  You  cannot  afford 
to  sit  in  a  Church  where  these  men  teach  or  you  will  be  responsible  for  their 
teaching."  He  would  have  replied,  "  Who  made  you  a  judge ;  to  their  own  master 
they  stand  or  fall."  Every  man  is  responsible  for  his  own  conduct  and  belief  to 
God.  If  I  please  to  work  with  men  who  are  heretical  on  some  points  of  theology, 
but  who  are  right  in  the  point  in  which  I  work  with  them  (Unitarian  temperance 
reformers,  e.g.),  I  am  not  responsible  for  their  wrong  beliefs,  but  only  for  that  part 
which  I  take.  Paul  was  grieved  at  the  amount  of  error  that  was  in  these  men,  but 
the  small   amount  of  truth  he   saw  pleased  him   more.     III.  This  Christian 

TOLERATION  FOUNDED    IN   FAITH   AND   LOVE,   LEADS   TO    THE    BEAL  AND    ONLY  BEAL  UNION 

possible  to  the  Christian  Chubch.  External  formulas  are  not  unimportant,  but 
there  never  wiU  be  Christian  union  in  this  world  until  men  feel  that  the  invisible, 
spiritual  elements  of  truth,  the  interior  experience  of  soul,  are  transcendently 
more  important  than  the  idea  forms,  or  the  government  forms,  or  the 
worship  forms  of  the  Church.  Humanity  is  our  common  bond  outside;  why 
should  not  Christianity  be  within?     "Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  ia 


CHAP.  1.]  PHILIPPIANS.  87 

his  own  mind.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Love  of  Christ  and  the  brethren  the  essential 
qualification  for  preaching  Christ : — I.  It  oiveb  impulse  to  all  true  motive 
POWER.  From  this  sprung  their  "  good  will."  II.  It  la  keen  in  perceiving,  even 
IN  CHAINS,  the  will  OF  GoD.     "  Knowiug  that  I  am  set."    III.  It  is  quick  in  co- 

OPERAXINQ  to  accomplish  THE  WILL  OF  GOD  WHEN  KNOWN.  IV.  It  BINDS  THB 
HEART  IS  SYMPATHY  TO  ALL  WHO  SUFFER  IN  THE  DEFENCE  OP  THB  GOSPEL.  V.  It 
IS   THE    MIGHTIEST  FORCE    THAT    MEN    CAN    WIELD    FOR  THB    GOSPEL's  TRIUMPH.       {G.  G. 

Ballard.)  The  preaching  of  Christ  a  rea.io7>  for  joy  and  holy  exultation : — I.  Let 

us  inquire  what  the  apostle  intended  bv  the  preaching  of  Christ.  1.  The 
exhibition  of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  sent  to  save  a  guilty  world.  (1)  Such  a 
messenger  had  been  set  forth  by  prophecy  and  types  from  the  beginning.  (2)  He 
was  exhibited  as  truly  human,  sinless,  Divine.  2.  The  publication  of  His  great 
work,  and  ultimate  design  in  visiting  this  world.  (1)  To  atone  for  sin.  (2)  To 
confer  eternal  life.  3.  Tho  assertion  of  His  claims  on  all  mankind.  (1)  To  their 
love.  (2)  To  their  obedience.  II.  Glorious  as  this  theme  is,  yet  many  preach 
it  from  corrupt  motives.  1.  Some  for  gain — money,  position,  influence.  2. 
Some  for  victory  in  a  controversial  battle.  3.  Yet  if  Christ  is  really  preached, 
whatever  may  be  the  condemnation  of  the  preacher,  Christ's  end  will  be  secured. 
III.  The  reasons  why  the  preaching  of  Christ,  under  any  circumstances,  is  a 
jobt  occasion  for  holy  joy.  1.  By  this  means  the  enemies  of  Christ  are  made  to 
bear  unequivocal  testimony  to  His  dignity  and  glory,  and  to  promote  the  interests 
of  truth  without  intending  it :  as  the  heathen  writers  quoted  by  Paul,  and  the  devils' 
confession  of  Christ.  2,  As  the  world  can  only  be  renovated  by  the  preaching  of 
Christ,  80  even  His  enemies  who  preach  Him  contribute  to  this  event.  Think  of  the 
heathen  world ;  the  acceptance  of  Christ  in  any  sense  and  from  any  hands  cannot 
but  better  it.  3.  We  may  be  assured  that  God  will  ■  ertainly  overrule  the  preaching 
of  Christ,  even  by  wicked  men,  to  accomplish  His  purpose  of  mercy.  In  much 
inferior  matters  God  controls  the  movements  of  bad  men  for  His  own  glory.  He 
did  80  in  the  case  of  Judas.  Is  it  not  then  correct  to  argue  that  if  God  sub- 
ordinates the  ma'ignity,  ambition,  and  haughtiness  of  men  to  the  accomplishment 
of  His  providential  purposes,  He  will  also  overrule  them  to  serve  His  designs 
of  mercy  1  Witness  the  Reformation  under  Henry  VIII.  Application :  1.  Our 
cause  for  rejoicing  is  exceedingly  great.  Notwithstanding  there  are  many  parts 
where  the  gospel  is  imperfectly  preached,  yet  there  are  thousands  of  holy  men 
who  preach  Christ  from  the  purest  motives.  2.  Let  us  manifest  our  gratitude 
to  Hiia  who  is  preached  by  a  more  lively  zeal  in  His  cause.  3.  Let  us  who 
love  Christ  draw  into  closer  union  with  one  another.  If  we  allow  bickering  and 
strife  while  Christ's  cause  may  prosper  we  shall  be  ruined.  4.  Let  the  despondent 
be  encouraged — anyhow  Christ  is  preached.  The  gospel  is  advancing  in  spite  of 
our  fears.  (Isaac  Mann,  M.A.)  Allowable  contention : — God  grant  that  we  may 
contend  with  other  Churches  as  the  vine  with  the  olive — which  of  us  shall  bear  the 
best  fruit ;  but  not  as  the  briar  with  the  thistle,  which  of  us  will  be  the  most 
unprofitable.  (Lord  Bacon.)  An  imprisoned  preacher's  thoughts  : — Paul  was 
imprisoned  for  preaching  the  gospel,  and  was  persecuted  by  them  who  but  for  him 
would  not  have  had  a  gospel  to  preach,  1.  The  apostle  had,  by  nature,  a  temper 
that  could  not  bear  very  much  being  abused.  He  was  naturally  sensitive  and 
aggressive.  In  prison  and  helpless  no  doubt  there  were  slight  heavings  of  the  old 
volcano  at  the  conduct  of  his  opponents.  Moreover  his  conscience  was  an  inspired 
one,  and  he  must  have  felt,  "Who  is  a  judge  of  orthodoxy  if  I  am  not?  "  Did  he 
then  rouse  the  alaiTU  and  denounce  these  preachers  of  envy  and  strife  f  No,  he 
rf'joiced- where  few  could  have  rejoiced,  viz.,  in  prison,  and  at  what  few  could  have 
rejoiced,  viz.,  that  his  enemies  were  doing  good.  2.  Paul  might  have  felt  that  his 
l\fe  was  thrown  away,  that  God  had  need  of  him.  Many  feel  that  everything  must 
be  done,  and  that  there  is  none  to  do  it  but  themselves.  Paul  had  a  right  to  feel 
so  if  any  man  tiad.  But  the  thought  never  eeeras  to  have  occurred  to  him.  No 
doubt  be  felt  the  cowardliness  and  the  cruelty  of  these  men,  but  the  feeling  was 
swallowed  up  in  the  reliection  that  they  were  doing  his  work  when  he  could  not  do 
it  himself.  3.  Paul  held  that  so  precious  is  this  truth  of  Jesus  that  no  man  can 
present  even  a  particle  of  it  that  is  not  worth  presenting.  You  cannot  preach 
Christ  so  that  it  is  not  worth  while  to  have  preached  Him  thus.  It  is  better  that 
He  should  be  preached  by  bad  men  for  bad  purposes  than  not  preached  at  all.  4. 
It  would  have  been  enough  in  Paul  to  have  said  less  than  he  did,  such  as  '*  I  trust 
all  will  be  for  the  best.  I  hope  it  will  do  some  good,  but  I  fear  it  will  do  maoh 
harm.    Of  course  I  cannot  associate  with  them."     On  the  ooutrary  he  exalts  over 


38  THE  r.lBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  r. 


the  certain  good  of  the  issue.  The  houuds  of  love  are  better  than  the  hounds  ot 
theology  to  hunt  heretics  with.  How  painful  not  to  know  the  diSerence  between 
conscience  and  combativeness.  5.  Consider  in  a  few  deductions  the  temptations 
to  which  men  who  are  working  for  religious  ends  are  liable.  I.  The  danger  of 
60B8TIT0TING  ACTIVITY  FOB  THE  LOVING  GRACES.  The  bee  that  goGS  buzzing  about 
the  flowers  in  the  spring  is  very  useful ;  but,  after  all,  I  think  the  flowers,  that 
never  stir  or  buzz,  are  full  as  interesting  and  far  more  important.  The  buzzing  bee 
gets  a  good  deal  of  honey,  but  he  would  not  get  a  particle  if  it  were  not  for  the  silent 
flowers  which  contain  it  all.  There  is  a  great  peril  of  an  external  rattling  activity 
leaving  the  heart  cold,  mechanical,  and  even  malevolent.  II.  The  danger  op 
ARROGANCE.  1.  There  are  a  great  many  people  who  say  that  all  Churches  must  be 
constituted,  work,  and  believe  as  their  own.  2.  Many  of  us  have  got  beyond  that, 
but  how  many  of  us  can  rejoice  in  the  Church  whose  services  has  swallowed  up 
ours.  But  all  that  Paul  wanted  was  that  work  should  be  done,  whoever  did  it ;  and 
even  rejoiced  that  others  would  have  the  credit  for  the  work  he  did.  Conclusion  : 
From  the  beginning  until  to-day  the  power  of  preaching  has  been  and  henceforth 
will  be,  not  in  ideas  but  in  disposition.     [H.  W.  Beecher.)        The  motives  of  PauVt 

eneviies : I.  It  may  be  that  the   enemies  of  the   apostle  hoped   that  theib 

preaching  would  irritate  Nero  and  his  officers  against  Christianity,  and  that, 
offended  at  this  new  increase  which  this  doctrine  had  received,  they  would  quickly 
discharge  their  anger  upon  a  prisoner,  who  was  the  principal  support  of  this 
growing  religion,  either  by  putting  him  to  death  suddenly  or  by  condemning  hiia 
to  some  more  grievous  trouble  than  his  present  prison.  II.  It  may  be  that 
envy  had  inspired  them  with  the  thought,  that  by  labouring  in  preaching  tmb 
GOSPEL  THEY  SHOULD  OBTAIN  A  PART  OP  THE  aiostle's  GLORY,  and  that  by  making 
good  use  of  the  time  of  his  imprisonment,  to  establish  themselves  in  the  minds 
of  the  disciples,  they  should  by  degrees  take  away  the  credit  and  authority 
which  he  possessed  ;  and  judging  of  him  by  themselves,  they  imagined  that  it 
would  be  an  immense  increase  to  his  affliction  to  see  them  thus  enriched  and 
decorated  with  his  spoils.  Such  or  such  like  were  the  thoughts  of  these  wretched 
men.  Judge  by  this  what  is  the  nature  of  vice,  and  how  horrible  its  impudence 
in  daring  thus  to  profane  the  most  sacred  things,  and  to  abuse  them  so  vilely 
for  its  own  ungodly  purpose.  Thus  Satan  sometimes  clothes  himself  as  an  angel  of 
light  to  further  the  works  of  darkness.  From  which  you  see  that  it  is  not  enough 
that  our  actions  be  good  and  praiseworthy,  if  our  intentions  are  not  pure  and 
upright.  It  is  to  profane  the  good  to  do  it  with  a  bad  end  in  view.  2.  See 
how  the  thoughts  of  vice  are  not  only  impudent,  but  even  foolish  and  vain. 
These  deceivers,  judging  of  St.  Paul  by  themselves,  believed  that  their  preaching 
would  vex  him.  Poor  creatures  !  how  little  you  knew  of  this  high-minded  man,  to 
imagine  that  so  small  a  thing  could  trouble  him  1  (J.  Daille.)  Christ  preached 
hy  love  : — I  once  asked  a  distinguished  artist  what  place  he  gave  to  labour  in  art. 
"Labour,"  he  said,  in  effect,  "is  the  beginning,  the  middle,  and  the  end  of  art." 
Turning  then  to  another — "  And  you,"  I  inquired,  "  what  do  you  consider  the  great 
force  in  artT  "  "  Love,"  he  replied.  In  their  two  answers  I  found  but  one  truth. 
{Boree.)  Evangelical  congratulation  :—'Rovr  Paul  would  have  rejoiced  had  he 
been  living  now.  The  ministry  at  Eome  must  have  been  on  a  comparatively 
insignificant  scale.  But  for  every  man  who  preached  the  gospel  then  thousands  are 
preaching  it  now.  Why  should  there  have  been  such  rejoicing  in  connection  with  the 
preaching  of  Christ  crucified.  I.  Because  thereby  the  renovation  of  fallen  mak 
IS  intelligently  proposed.  1.  High  time,  by  common  consent,  something  was 
done  in  that  direction,  and  many  are  the  projects  suggested  for  it.  (1)  Give  the 
people  a  sound  secular  education.  (2)  Give  them  remunerative  employment.  (3) 
Confer  upon  them  honourable  enfranchisement.  (4)  Take  care  to  raise  them  into 
better  and  more  civilized  habits  by  bettier  dwellings,  food,  &c.  (5)  Educate  their 
tastes,  open  museums  and  art  galleries.  2.  Can  you  look  at  these  laudable  secondary 
considerations  without  marking  their  fatal  defect  7  They  deal  with  man  externally 
and  say  not  a  word  about  his  internal  renovation.  If  you  leave  a  man's  heart 
nntouched  there  is  that  there  which  will  laugh  all  your  culture  to  scorn.  If  hia 
heart  be  right  all  will  be  right,  but  not  otherwise.  3.  The  gospel  aims  at  making 
the  heart  right,  and  succeeds  wherever  it  is  accepted.  II.  Because  thereby  thb 
BBNOTATios  18  OBA0I0U8LY  GUARANTEED.  1.  With  the  preachiug  of  Christ  God  ha0 
formally  connected  the  exertion  of  His  power.  "With  God  all  things  are 
possible."  The  preacher  is  a  fellow- worker  with  God.  2.  With  this  preaching. 
€k>d   baa    b«en    pleased    to    associate    the    accomplishment    of    His    purposes. 


CHAP.  I.]  PHILIPPIANS.  89 

8.  He  has  identified  with  preaching  the  manifestation  of  His  sympathiesL 
(W.  Brock,  D.D.)  Good-will. — Good-will  the  spirit  common  to  the  brother- 
hood  of  tiu  Christian  ministry  : — I.  It  is  God-like.  1.  The  spirit  charac- 
teristic cf  all  God's  will  towards  men.  2.  The  spirit  manifested  by  His  Son.  3. 
The  spirit  of  the  gospel  message.  II.  It  is  yielded  to  an  honoured  bkother. 
1.  To  him  as  a  man — his  character,  aims,  and  life.  2.  To  his  labours  in  the 
cause  of  Christ.  3.  To  his  future  success.  (G.  G.  Ballard.)  The  defence  of  the 
gotpel : — I.  Is  necessary.  It  has  many  powerful,  malignant  enemies.  II.  Is  im- 
piRATivE  upon  its  professors,  whether  ministers  or  people.  III.  Must  be  main- 
TAiNED  IN  LOVE  to  the  truth,  its  advocates,  and  even  its  opponents.  {J.Lyth,  D.D.) 
Observe — I.  The  cause  to  be  defended.  II.  The  opposition  to  which  it  is 
EXPOSED.  III.  The  means  of  its  defence.  IV.  The  persons  who  odght  to 
DEFEND  IT.  (Ibid.)  The  opponents  of  St.  Paul : — In  the  Corinthian  Church 
there  was  a  party  that  said,  "  I  am  of  Cephas  " — followers  of  the  apostle  of  the 
circumcision,  and  hostile  to  those  who  named  themselves  from  Paul.  It  is  very 
probable  that  this  Petrine  party  held  high  views  about  the  law ;  but  there  is  na 
hint  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  that  they  either  held  or  taught  such  mis- 
chievous errors  as  were  propagated  in  Galatia.  Minor  matters  of  ceremoniHl  seem 
rather  to  have  occupied  them  (chap.  viii.  10).  But  there  is  no  question  that  the 
apostle's  authority  was  impugned  in  Corinth,  and  in  all  likelihood  by  the  Petrine 
party,  because  he  had  not  been  personally  called  by  Jesus  as  Simon  had  been  ;  and 
by  the  same  party  his  right  to  pecuniary  support  from  the  Churches  seems  to  have 
been  denied  or  disputed.  While  therefore  there  was  comparative  purity  in  the 
section  that  took  Peter  for  its  head  and  watchword  ;  there  was  also  keen  and  reso- 
lute opposition  to  the  person  and  prerogative  of  tlie  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles.  To 
meet  all  the  requirements  of  the  case  before  us  we  have  only  to  suppose  that  such 
a  party  was  formed  at  Kome,  and  Eom.  xiv.  seems  to  indicate  their  existence.  If 
there  was  a  company  of  believing  Jews,  who  held  the  essential  doctrines  of  the 
gospel,  but  was  combative  on  points  of  inferior  value,  and  in  connection  with  the 
social  institutions  of  their  people,  and  who  at  the  same  time  were  bitter  and  nn- 
Bcrupulous  antagonists  of  the  apostle,  from  such  an  impression  of  his  opinions  as 
is  indicated  by  James  in  Acts  xxi.  20-21,  then  such  a  party  might  preach  Christ, 
and  yet  cherish  towards  St.  Paul  all  those  feelings  of  envy  and  ill-will  he  asoribeB 
to  them.  Chrysostom  touches  the  truth  when  he  says  they  were  jealous  of  the 
apostle.  Calvin  writes  feelingly,  "  Paul  says  nothing  here  which  I  myself  have  not 
experienced.  For  there  are  men  living  now  who  Lave  preached  the  gospel  with  no 
other  design  than  to  gratify  the  rage  of  the  wicked  b;.  persecuting  pious  pastors." 
{Prof.  Eadie.)  Paul's  joy  in  the  preaching  of  hit  enemies: — Paul's  example  is  a 
rebuke  to  the  excessive  ecclesiastical  spirit.  He  saw  something  good  in  the  worst 
men  who  preached.  Modern  precisionists  see  the  worst  in  the  best  men.  Paul 
looked  on  the  good  side.  Modern  orthodoxy  is  disposed  always  to  look  on  the  bad 
side.  If  a  vase  was  cracked,  Paul  turned  it  round  and  looked  upon  the  side  where 
it  was  not  cracked.  If  a  vase  is  cracked,  we  are  disposed  to  turn  it  round  and  look 
on  the  side  where  the  crack  comes.  Paul  would  certainly  rather  have  men  preach 
Christ  that  loved  Christ ;  but  rather  than  that  Christ  should  not  be  preached  he 
was  willing  that  those  who  did  not  love  Him  should  preach.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Christ  really  though  inadequately  preached : — The  rising  sun  in  the  morning  brings 
ten  thousand  noxious  insects  to  life,  brings  miasma  from  the  morass,  and  sets 
disease  flying  through  the  land ;  nevertheless,  in  spite  of  malaria,  and  in  spite  of 
all  venemous  insects  that  then  begin  to  move,  and  in  spite  of  all  mischiefs  which 
waking  men  begin  to  perform,  it  is  infinitely  better  that  the  sun  should  rise,  and 
that  these  evils  should  take  place,  than  that  it  shoald  be  everlastingly  dark.  It 
was  better  to  have  Christ  preached  by  bad  men  than  not  at  all.  It  was  better  to  have 
the  gospel  imperfectly  delivered  than  not  to  have  it  made  known  in  any  way,  or 
only  to  a  limited  extent.  The  truth  preached  with  manifold  and  manifest  error  is 
a  thousand  times  better  than  none  at  alL  While  the  full  and  symmetrical  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus  will  do  far  more  good,  and  good  of  a  far  higher  type,  than  any 
fragmentary  views,  yet  such  is  the  vitality  and  power  of  Christian  truth,  that  its 
very  fragments  are  potent  for  good.  One  may  stand  before  an  ample  glass,  long 
and  broad,  which  reflects  the  whole  figure,  and  the  whole  room,  giving  every  part 
in  proportion  and  in  relation.  Break  that  mirror  into  a  thousand  fragments,  and 
each  one  of  these  pieces  will  give  back  to  you  your  face  ;  and  though  the  amplitude 
of  view  and  the  relations  of  objects  are  gone,  yet  the  smallest  fragment,  in  its 
nature  and  ases,  is  a  mirror  still,  and  you  can  see  your  face  withal.     A  full  Chriat 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i. 

reflects  men,  time,  and  immortality  ;  but  let  error  shatter  the  celestial  glass,  and 
its  fragments,  reduced  in  value,  do  in  part  some  of  that  work  which  the  whole  did ; 
and  they  are  precious.  (Ibid.)  The  preaching  of  Christ  bywhatever  lips  a  source 
of  satisfaction  to  Christians : — "  You  (Scotch  commissioners  and  Presbyleiian 
clergy  after  Dunbar)  say  that  you  have  just  cause  to  regret  that  men  of  civil 
employments  should  usurp  the  calling  of  the  ministry  to  the  scandal  of  the 
Bef ormed  Kirks.  Are  you  troubled  that  Christ  is  preached  ?  Is  preaching  so 
exclusively  your  functiou?  I  thought  the  covenant  and  those  professors  of  it  could 
have  been  willing  that  any  should  speak  good  of  the  name  of  Christ  ;  if  not  h  is  no 
covenant  of  God's  approving."  (Oliver  Cromwell.)  Power  of  the  Bible  even  in 
faulty  versions : — A  railway  man  asked  for  a  genuine  Catholic  Bible,  as  he  w»s  not 
allowed  to  read  a  heretical  version  like  Luther's.  "  Here  is  the  book  you  want," 
said  the  colporteur,  handing  him  a  Van  Ess  copy.  "  Yes  ;  that  is  the  book,"  said 
the  man,  after  looking  at  it  well.  That  happened  a  few  weeks  ago,  and  now  Jesua 
is  his  All,  and  he  finds  the  same  grand  truths  about  Him,  whether  he  takes 
Luther's  translation  or  Van  Ess's.  God's  Word  shall  not  return  void  to  Him. 
{Anstera.)  Power  of  Christ  preached  : — The  surest  way  of  turning  a  person  from 
one  pleasure  is  to  give  him  a  greater  pleasure  on  the  opposite  side.  A  weeping 
willow  planted  by  a  pond  in  a  pleasure-garden  turns  all  to  one  side  in  its  growth, 
and  that  the  side  on  which  the  water  lies.  •  No  dealing  with  its  roots  or  with  its 
branches  will  avail  to  change  its  attitude  ;  but  place  a  larger  expanse  of  water  on 
the  opposite  side,  and  the  tree  .will  turn  spontaneously  and  hang  the  other  way.  So 
must  man's  heart  be  won.  (William  Arnot.)  The  influence  of  the  gospel: — This 
is  the  weapon  that  has  won  victories  over  hearts  of  every  kind,  in  every  quarter  of 
the  globe.  Greenlanders,  Africans,  South  Sea  Islanders,  Hindoos,  and  Chinese, 
have  all  alike  felt  its  power.  Just  as  that  huge  iron  tube,  which  crosses  the  Menai 
Straits,  is  more  affected  and  bent  by  half  an  hour's  sunshine  than  by  all  the  dead 
weight  that  can  be  placed  in  it,  so  in  like  manner  the  hearts  of  savages  have  melted 
before  the  Cross  when  every  other  argument  seemed  to  move  them  no  more  than  ii 
they  had  been  stones.     (Up.  liyle.) 

Ver.  19.  For  I  know  that  this  shall  turn  to  my  salvation. — Mark— I.  The  confi 
DENCK  OF  THE  DECLARATION — "  1  kuow. "  Not  an  augcl  could  uttcr  a  truer  note  of 
triumph.  Eighteousness  is  a  prophetic  power.  The  good  man  can  infallibly  pre- 
dict the  issue  of  moral  operation.  II.  The  geounij  of  this  confidence.  "  This 
shall  turn,"  viz.,  the  preaching  of  Christ.  His  joy  does  not  arise  from  the  fact 
that  certain  persons  preached,  but  from  the  higher  fact  that  Christ  was  preached  ; 
not  that  bad  men  were  working,  but  that  a  good  work  was  being  done.  III.  The 
extension  of  the  truth  is  the  best  guarantee  of  personal  happiness,  A  man 
of  less  moral  grandeur  would  have  started  the  argument  from  himself.  Let  me  be 
free  and  then  the  gospel  shall  triumph  ;  but  he  knew  nothing  of  such  self-idolatry. 
He  said  Christ  shall  be  preached,  and  Christ's  servants  in  due  time  shall  be  free. 
When  it  goes  well  with  the  Master  it  goes  well  with  the  servant.     IV.  The  gospel 

HAS    EVERYTHING    TO    HOPE    FROM     BEING     ALLOWED   TO    REVEAL    ITS     OWN     CREDENTIALS. 

Proclaim  it — ministers,  teachers ;  it  sounds  well  from  any  lips — philosophers, 
babes  and  sucklings,  unlearned.  By  whomsoever  pronounced,  the  celestial  fire  will 
strike  through  every  syllable.  V.  The  greatest  man  in  the  Chdbch  may  be 
SERVED  BY  THE  SUPPLICATION  OF  THE  GOOD.  The  apostlc  associatcs  his  salvation 
with  the  prayer  of  the  Philippians.  No  man  is  so  far  advanced  as  to  be  beyond  the 
jange  of  prayer.  Here  a  child  is  of  value.  (•/.  Parker,  D.D.)  Salvation  and  its 
meant: — I.  The  salvation  provided  by  Christ  is  radically  a  spiritual  salva- 
tion. It  extends  indeed  to  all  the  elements  of  our  nature,  being  an  emancipation 
of  the  whole  man  from  the  bondage  of  death ;  but  the  condition  of  the  body  follows 
that  of  the  soul.  In  a  sense  we  enter  into  spiritual  salvation  at  conversion,  for 
••  he  that  believeth  hath  everlasting  life."  But  the  word  is  generally  applied  to  the 
state  of  perfect  purity  and  beauty  and  blessedness  for  the  whole  nature  which  the 
day  of  Christ  will  bring  in,  II,  All  God's  providential  dealings  with  Hia 
PEOPLE  ABE  intended  TO  BE  A  TRAINING  FOR  SALVATION,  whether  pleasant  or  like 
Paul's  at  Eome,  "  not  joyous  but  grievous,"  a  discipline  fitted  to  ripen  the  flower 
of  holy  character,  which  will  be  fully  opened  in  its  glorious  beauty  in  heaven.  III. 
By  the  measure  in  which  we  avail  ourselves  of  this  training  our  salvation 
WILL  DB  AFFECTED.  1.  All  who  leach  hcaveu  will  be  perfectly  happy  up  to  the  full 
measure  of  their  capacities,  because  being  "  pure  in  heart,"  they  will  "  see  God  " 
%B  folly  M  their  natures  can  see  Him.     2.  But  the  eyes  of  those  who  availed  them* 


CHAP,  t]  PHILIPPIAN8.  41 

selves  bat  little  of  the  light  of  truth,  who  looked  at  God  bat  seldom,  will  be  able  to 
look  at  Himonly  from  far;  whilst  those  whose  e.yes  have  beenmuchaccastomed  to  the 
light  here,  will  stand  in  the  foremost  circles,  and  there  with  ravished  hearts  gaze 
on  the  infinite  glory.  Some  will  have  an  abundant  entrance,  while  others  will  be 
saved  only  as  "  through  fire."  IV.  Kemembering  these  things,  what  manneb  op 
PERSONS  ought  WE  TO  BE.  1.  In  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness.  2.  In  prayer 
and  effort.  3.  So  that  the  Divine  training  may  "  turn  to  our  salvation."  V.  How 
THEN  SHALL  WE  OBTAIN  THIS  SPIRITUAL  PROFIT?  1.  Through  the  Supply  of  the 
Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.  (1)  He  originates  and  supports  spirituallife  ;  clears  away 
the  mists  of  prejudice  ;  opens  the  eyes  to  guilty  self  and  merciful  God  ;  dwells  in 
the  regenerate.  (2)  The  figures  under  which  His  influence  is  set  forth  describe  His 
action ;  "  fire"  to  burn  up  the  cbaii  within  us,  and  to  light  up  in  our  souls  the 
genial  flame  of  love ;  water  to  cleanse  pollution  and  to  quench  thirst ;  unction  to 
consecrate.  2.  This  supply  is  obtained  largely  through  the  Church's  prayer.  {R. 
Johnstone,  LL.B.)  The  supply  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ : — I.  The  supply. 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  sole  agenc  of  the  Saviour's  will  in  the  inward  work  of  grace  ; 
nor  is  the  indwelling  and  operation  of  Christ  ever  mentioned  without  the  accom- 
paniment of  this  truth.  Not  that  the  Spirit  is  supplied  merely  as  an  influence ; 
He  is  both  the  Giver  and  the  Gift ;  just  as  the  Saviour  is  the  Victim  and  Priest. 
The  gospel  is  a  ministration  of  the  Spirit  by  the  Spirit,  and  the  apostle  hopes  for 
the  supply  to  his  soul  of  all  that  grace  which  the  Spirit,  the  Keeper  of  Christ's 
treasury,  has  to  bestow.  II.  The  Prayer.  He  relies  on  the  Philippians'  interces- 
sions,  answering  to  those  he  always  offered  for  them  (ver.  4).  It  is  simply  His 
most  graceful  way  of  asking  thera  to  pray  for  him — not  simply  with  reference  to 
the  official  work  of  the  gospel,  but  to  the  good  of  his  own  soul.  Mutual  prayer  is 
bound  up  with  the  very  essence  of  the  Christian  system.  III.  The  conxkction 
between  the  two.  He  seems  to  place  himself  between  them  and  hia  Lord.  The 
Spirit  of  Jesus  flows  unto  him  in  proportion  as  the  prayers  of  his  fellow  Christiana 
and  his  own  flow  out  towards  Him  in  supplication.  We  are  what  the  supply  of 
the  Saviour's  Spirit  makes  us  ;  that  is  the  measure  of  our  life,  strength,  perception 
of  truth,  performance  of  duty,  £ind  attainment  in  grace.  But  that  is  dependent  on 
individual  and  common  prayer  ;  and  the  prayer  for  the  Spirit  is  offered  through  the 
same  Spirit  in  whom  as  well  as  for  whom  we  pray.  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  The 
ministers'  plea : — I.  The  prayer  of  the  Church.  1.  In  reference  to  Paul.  (1) 
He  expected  to  be  prayed  for.  He  dees  not  ask  for,  but  assumes  that  he  has  their 
prayers.  Would  that  all  pastors  could  assume  as  much.  Some  are  rich  in  this,  but 
some  terribly  poor.  (2)  He  valued  the  prayers  of  the  saints.  He  was  an  apostle, 
but  could  not  do  without  them ;  how  much  more  we.  (3)  He  looked  for  great 
results  from  them.  He  wanted  them  all  the  more  because  his  troubles  were  heavier 
than  usual ;  so  do  ministers  in  these  evil  days.  2.  In  reference  particularly  to 
ministers.  (1)  They  may  justly  claim  the  prayers  of  their  brethren.  (a)  To 
help  them  in  their  duties,  so  that  they  may  be  made  effectual,  (b)  They  are 
burdened  with  remarkable  responsibilities,  (c)  They  have  an  experience  singular 
to  themselves,  (d)  They  have  subtle,  numerous,  and  peculiar  temptations — pride; 
despondency,  (e)  They  have  many  discouragements.  (2)  The  prayers  which  are 
wanted  are  those  of  the  entire  Church.  From  some  other  labour  some  of  you 
might  be  exempted,  but  not  from  this,  (a)  Of  all  who  profit  by  our  ministry.  If 
you  feed  upon  the  Word  pray  that  others  may  do  so  ;  if  you  don't,  do  not  unkindly 
speak  of  it  everywhere,  but  tell  the  Lord  about  it.  (b)  Of  converts,  (c)  Of  the 
aged  with  their  experience,  and  the  young  with  their  freshness,  (d)  Of  the  absent 
through  sickness,  &c.  How  effective  the  ministry  of  the  helpless  who  can  yet  pray. 
(3)  The  prayers  of  God's  people  ought  to  go  up  for  their  minister  in  many  forms, 
(a)  It  should  be  daily  work,  (b)  If  we  expect  a  blessing  on  our  families  through 
the  ministry,  we  should  as  families  ask  God  to  bless  it.  (c)  Then  there  are  our 
prayer-meetings,  <fec.  (d)  There  should  be  especial  prayer  by  each  Christian  at 
home  before  every  service.  (4)  These  prayers,  to  be  good  for  anything,  will  be 
attended  with  consistent  lives,  II.  The  supply  of  the  Spirit.  1.  The  Spirit  we 
want  is — (1)  The  Spirit  who  rested  on  Christ.  (2)  The  Spirit,  the  Comforter, 
who  represents  Christ.  2.  This  Spirit  is  essential  to  every  true  minister.  All  other 
gifts,  however  desirable,  may  be  dispensed  with,  but  for  the  conversion  of  souls  this 
is  the  one  eaaentiaL  (1)  The  preacher  must  be  taught  of  the  Spirit,  else  how  shall 
be  apeak?  (2)  He  must  be  inflamed  by  the  Spirit.  (3)  He  must  have  the  unction 
of  the  Spirit.  3.  The  supply  of  the  Spirit  is  essential  to  the  edification  of  tha 
Choroh  of  Ood.    To  build  up  a  church.    (1)  Light  is  needed.    (2)  Love.    (3)  HoU> 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

aess.  (4)  Zeal.  4.  For  the  conversion  of  sinners.  Who  can  enlighten  the  blind 
«ye,  quicken  the  dead  soul,  but  the  Spirit  ?  5.  For  the  progress  of  the  gospel  and 
the  victory  of  truth.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  relation  between  prayer  and  the 
supply  of  the  Spirit : — I  believe  in  the  efficacy  of  united  prayer,  but  each  one  must 
pray.  There  would  be  no  clouds  unless  the  drop  of  dew  from  each  blade  of  grass 
were  exhaled  by  the  sun.  Each  drop  ascending  in  vapour  falls  again  in  the  blessed 
ehower  which  removes  the  drought.  So  the  grace  that  trembles  upon  each  one  of 
you  must  exhale  in  prayer,  and  a  blessing  will  come  down  upon  the  Church  of  God. 
(Ibid.)  The  necessity  of  the  Spirit  in  spiritual  work  : — There  is  an  old  Eomish 
story,  that  a  certain  famous  preacher  was  to  preach  on  a  certain  occasion,  but  he 
missed  his  way  and  was  too  late,  and  the  devil  knowing  of  it  put  on  the  appearance 
of  the  minister,  took  his  place,  and  preached  a  sermon  to  the  people,  who  supposed 
they  were  listening  to  the  famous  divine  whom  they  had  expected.  The  devil 
preached  upon  hell,  and  was  very  much  at  home,  so  that  he  delivered  a  marvellous 
sermon,  in  which  he  exhorted  persons  to  escape  from  the  wrath  to  come.  As  he 
was  finishing  his  sermon,  in  came  the  preacher  himself,  and  the  devil  was  obliged 
to  resume  his  own  form.  The  holy  man  then  questioned  him,  "How  dare  you 
preach  as  you  have  done,  warning  men  to  escape  from  hell?"  ♦' Oh,"  said  the 
devil,  "  it  will  do  no  hurt  to  my  kingdom,  for  I  have  no  unction."  The  story  is 
grotesque,  but  the  truth  is  in  it.  The  same  sermon  may  be  preached  and  the  same 
words  uttered,  but  without  unction  there  is  nothing  in  it.  The  unction  of  the  Holy 
One  is  true  power ;  therefore,  brethren,  we  need  your  prayers  that  we  may  obtain 
the  supply  of  the  Spirit  upon  our  ministry ;  for  otherwise  it  will  lack  unction, 
which  will  amount  to  lacking  heart  and  soul.  It  will  be  a  dead  ministry,  and  how 
can  a  dead  ministry  be  of  any  service  to  the  people  of  God  ?  (Ibid, )  Prayer 
for  ministers ; — John  Livingston  of  Scotland  once  spent  a  whole  night  with  a  com- 
pany of  his  brethren  in  prayer  for  God's  blessing,  all  of  them  together  besieging 
the  thron*  ;  and  the  next  day,  under  his  sermon,  five  hundred  souls  were  converted. 
All  the  world  has  heard  how  the  audience  of  the  elder  Pres.  Edwards  was  moved  by 
his  terrible  sermon  on  "  Sinners  in  the  hands  of  an  Angry  God ;  "  some  of  them 
«ven  grasping  hold  of  the  pillars  of  the  sanctuary,  from  feeling  that  their  feet  were 
actually  sUding  into  the  pit.  But  the  secret  of  that  sermon's  power  is  known  to 
but  very  few.  Some  Christians  in  that  vicinity  (Enfield,  Mass.)  had  become 
alarmed,  lest,  while  God  was  blessing  other  places,  He  should  in  anger  pass  them 
by ;  and  so  they  met  on  the  evening  preceding  the  preaching  of  that  sermon,  and 
spent  the  whole  of  the  night  in  agonizing  prayer.  (Dr.  H.  C.  Fish.)  Cheerful- 
ness in  trial : — At  a  certain  period  the  Methodist  Society  in  Dublin  was  greatly 
agitated  by  divisions.  A  good  but  very  anxious  brother  wrote  to  Mr.  Wesley  on 
the  subject,  told  him  the  real  state  of  things,  deplored  it  exceedingly,  and  concluded 
his  communication  by  inquiring,  *'  Where,  sir,  are  all  these  things  to  end  t  "  The 
venerable  Wealey  replied :  •'  Dear  brother,  you  ask  where  are  all  tuese  things  toend  ?  " 
*•  Why,  in  glory  to  God  in  the  highest,"  to  be  sure ;  "  and  on  earth  peace,  and  good 
will  among  men.* "  (Anecdotes  of  the  Wesleyg.)  Benefit  of  trial : — It  is  rough 
work  that  polishes.  Look  at  the  pebbles  on  the  shore  1  Far  inland,  where  some 
arm  of  the  sea  thrusts  itself  deep  into  the  bosom  of  the  land,  and  expanding  into  a 
salt  loch,  lies  girdled  by  the  mountains,  sheltered  from  the  storms  that  agitate  the 
deep,  the  pebbles  on  the  beaeh  are  rough,  not  beautiful ;  angular,  not  rounded.  It 
IB  where  long  white  Unes  of  breakers  roar,  and  the  rattling  shingle  is  rolled  about 
on  the  strand,  that  its  pebbles  are  rounded  and  polished.  As  in  nature,  as  in  the 
arts,  80  in  grace;  it  is  rough  treatment  that  gives  souls  as  well  as  stones  their 
lostre ;  the  more  the  diamond  is  out  the  brighter  it  sparkles ;  and  in  what  seems 
hard  dealing,  tiiere  God  hai  no  end  in  view  but  to  perfect  His  people's  graces. 
(T.  Outhriet  DJ>.) 

Yer.  20.  According  to  my  earnest  expectation  and  my  hope. — PauFi  expeeta- 
tion: — I.  Paul  had  as  expectation.  1.  This  seems  natural  if  we  regard  his 
character  and  temper.  (1)  He  was  a  warm-hearted  man,  an  intellectual  man,  a 
man,  moreover,  whose  natural  gifts  had  not  been  cramped  but  had  a  healthy 
development,  and  who  had  healthy  cravings.  While  he  did  not  think  more  highly 
of  himself  than  he  ought,  neither  did  he  think  more  meanly.  (2)  He  was  a  born 
leader,  not  fitted  for  service  so  much  as  for  rule :  finding  few  or  none  with  dignity 
enough  to  compel  his  homage.  A  man  of  ambition,  witii  a  splendid  seoolar  career 
■before  him.  2.  When  Jesus  spoke  to  him  Paul  found  a  Master,  and  at  once  a  new 
object  of  expectation  and  hope  was  found.    II.  The  bxpbotation  was  that  Chbisx 


^HAP  I.]  PHILIPPIANS,  43 

WOULD  BE  MAGNIFIED  IN  HIM.     1.  Notice  the  change  of  self-estimatft.    Had  Paul 

t'oined  some  secular  cause  he  would  have  regarded  himself  as  conferring  a  favoar : 
tot  when  he  joined  the  Church  he  only  congratulated  himself  on  finding  mercy. 
This  self-abnegation  was  because  he  found  Christ  all  in  all.  2.  He  expected  that 
Christ  would  be  magnified  in  his  body :  it  seems  more  natural  for  us  to  think  hi8 
spirit.  But  the  body  is  the  manifestation  of  the  spirit.  In  the  spirit  Christ  ia 
felt,  in  the  body  He  is  seen.  If  the  life  is  degraded  Christ  is  not  in  the  spirit.  3. 
He  expected  that  Christ  would  be  magnified  in  his  body  irrespective  of  time  or  circum- 
stance, life  or  death.  Christ's  grace  is  sufficient  for  this.  III.  Of  this  expectation 
HE  WAS  NOT  ASHAMED  BUT  ENTERTAINED  IT  BOLDLY.  1.  Somo  Christians  feel  ashamed  of 
a  bold,  vigorous  magnification  of  Christ.  "  What  will  the  world  say  1  "  2.  Some 
Christians  feel  afraid  to  magnify  Christ.  "  What  will  the  world  do  ?"  (A.  J.  Baviford, 
B.A.)        PauVs  Expectation  : — I.  "  Expectation  "  and  "  hope  "  abe  words  which 

OONNECT  THE  HEART  WITH  THE  FUTURE.  II.  No  POWER  CAN  80  LIOHT  DP  THE  FUTURE. 
AND    THROW    OVER    IT    THE    HUES   OF   IMMORTAL   BEAUTY   AS    OHILDLIKB    TRUST    IN     GOD. 

ni.  The  unexpectant  and  hopeless  man  is  living  only  half  a  life  ;  but  he 
who  is  living  on  false  hopes  and  expectations  is  wasting  life.  IV,  It  is  right  thai 
THE  BODY  should  BE  1UENED  TO  MORAL  ACCOUNT.  Christ  purchased  the  whole  man. 
The  passions  are  not  to  have  their  own  wild  way.  The  blood  is  not  to  be  the 
master  of  the  man.  V.  The  possibility  of  being  ready  fob  life  or  death. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Christ  magnified  : — 1.  Every  bad  man  is  an  injury  to  creation. 
Ood  may,  it  is  true,  overrule  this  for  the  general  good.  If  an  unholy  man  has  been 
of  any  service  he  has  been  made  so  in  spite  of  himself ;  he  never  designed  it  or 
desired  it.  If  he  has,  like  a  lighthouse,  served  as  a  warning  to  others,  that  is  God'a 
work.  Every  good  man  is  useful  and  aims  to  be.  But  how  is  a  good  man  to  be 
oseful.  I.  By  magniftino  Christ.  1.  Christ  is  the  most  splendid  object  in 
existence.  (1)  He  is  highly  thought  of  in  heaven.  There  He  is  seen  as  He  is. 
(2)  He  is  highly  thought  of  in  hell.  The  destruction  of  the  lost  comes  from  His 
presence  and  glory.  (2)  But  while  heaven  and  hell  in  different  ways  acknowledge 
the  greatness  of  Christ  there  are  men  on  earth  who  entertain  the  lowest  thoughts 
of  Him,  although  it  was  on  earth  that  He  displayed  His  love.  But  there  is  a 
rapidly  increasing  number  who  count  all  things  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Him.  2.  While  speaking  of  magnifying  Christ  it  is  proper  to  be  reminded 
that  there  are  some  who  do  all  they  can  to  diminish  Him.  (1)  Such  are  they  who 
-deny  him.  (2)  But  there  are  some  who  injure  Christ  though  they  deny  Him  not. 
They  lessen  Him  as  to  the  Divine  dignity  of  His  person,  the  magnitude  of  His 
work,  the  merits  of  His  sacrifice.  (3)  There  are  those  who  magnify  themselves 
ander  the  pretence  of  magnifying  Christ.  3.  But  while  some  dishonour  Christ 
there  are  oJhers  who  magnify  Him.  How?  (1)  Not  by  making  Christ  appear 
greater  than  He  is — that  is  impossible.  The  highest  created  mind  has  never  yet 
conceived  that  He  is  so  great  as  He  is.  (2)  Not  by  a  thoughtless  chiming  upon  His 
name  or  by  the  use  of  a  few  phraseologies;  but — (B)  By  receiving  in  the  letter  the 
truths  respecting  His  incarnation,  teaching,  death,  &c.,  and  the  spirit  of  those 
truths  which  give  brightness  to  the  intellect,  love  of  righteousness  to  the  heart, 
vigour  and  grace  to  the  character,  and  bind  the  soul  to  the  Infinite.  4.  It  was 
thus  that  Paul  magnified  Christ.  Not  only  was  the  Christian  system  &8  a  whole 
confirmed  in  Him,  but  its  distinguishing  doctrines.  (1)  That  God  is  willing  to 
pardon  the  chief  of  sinners.  (2)  That  the  power  of  God  can  make  the  greatest 
sinner  ask  for  mercy.  (3)  That  by  the  grace  of  God  the  greatest  sinner  may  find 
mercy  and  be  transformed  into  the  greatest  saint,  apostle,  missionary.    II.  In  obdsb 

TO  MAGNIFY    ChRIST   ALL   THE    CIRCUMSTANCES    OF    OUR   LIFE    MUST    BE    SUBSERVIENT   TO 

THAT  END.  1.  OuT  active  services.  2.  Our  afilictions.  3.  Our  life  and  conduct, 
4.  Our  death.  {Caleb  iJ orris.)  The  Saviour  viagnified  in  His -people  : — I.  How 
<3hei8t  is  magnified  in  the  Christian's  life.  To  magnify  is  to  make  great,  or  to 
celebrate  existing  greatness.  In  the  second  sense  only  can  Christ  be  magnified. 
Christ  is  magnified — 1.  In  the  conversion  of  His  people.  2.  In  their  sanctifica- 
tion.  3.  In  their  devoted  labours  in  His  cause.  4.  In  their  trials  and  sufferings. 
6.  In  the  abiding  results  which  their  services  secure.  II.  How  Christ  is  magnified 
IN  THE  Christian's  death.  1.  By  raising  his  soul  above  the  dread  which  it 
naturally  inspires.  2.  By  abiding  hopes  and  consolations  in  his  death.  3.  Through 
the  infiuence  which  his  death  exerts  on  those  who  survive.  Conclusion :  Our 
theme  ought  to  lead  as — 1.  To  see  the  power  and  glory  of  the  Savioor.  8.  The 
flharsoters  to  whom  only  the  text  applies.  3.  The  grand  aim  of  the  Ohristian 
ministry.     4.  That  the  Christian  need  not  be  painfully  anxious  about  the  eventi 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  » 

of  life.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Christ  made  great : — I.  How  is  this  principle  mani- 
fested. As  God  of  course  He  cannot  be  made  great ;  only  in  His  mediatorial 
character.  In  this  He  is  made  great.  1.  By  (iod  the  Father  (chap.  ii.  10).  2.  By 
the  angels.  They  did  so  when  He  was  on  earth.  They  do  so  in  heaven.  3.  By 
every  individual  partaker  of  His  great  salvation  ;  by  Paul  and  us.  (1)  In  our  firm 
belief  of  His  vicarious  sacrifice.  (2)  In  our  self  humility.  (3)  In  unshaken 
confidence.  4.  In  earnest  evangelism.  5.  In  hopeful  death.  II,  In  what  does 
ITS  EXCELLENCY  APPEAB.  1.  This  is  all  men's  moral  obligation.  2.  The  greatest 
moral  excellence.  3.  The  only  right  principle  of  action.  4.  B-ecause  God  always 
honours  it.  {N.  M.  Harry.)  Earliest  expectation: — Found  only  here  and  in 
Rom.  viii.  19.  It  means  the  waiting  with  the  head  raised,  and  the  eye  fixed  on  that 
point  of  the  horizon  from  which  the  expected  object  is  to  come.  What  a  plastio 
representation  I  An  artist  might  make  a  statue  of  hope  out  of  this  Greek  term. 
{J.  Hutchison,  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  For  me  to  live  Is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain. — The  apostle's  altema 
live : — The  language  is  like  a  great  river  which,  flowing  through  some  country, 
bends  first  from  the  one  side  and  then  from  the  other,  and  then  comes  back  into 
its  straight  course.  There  is  a  triple  movement  of  thought  and  feeling .  1.  There 
is  the  absorbing  devotion  which  this  man  has  to  Christ.  2.  Then  comes  in  the 
bend  of  the  stream ;  a  rock  on  the  margin  sends  the  waters  away  in  another  direc- 
tion. He  thinks  about  others.  3.  Then  comes  the  third  feeling  when  he  appre- 
hends it  to  be  his  duty  to  stop  and  work.  I.  The  first  attitude  of  the  apostle's 
mind.  Here  we  get  the  grand,  noble  simplicity  and  unity  ob  continuity  op 
LIFE  AND  DEATH  to  a  devout  man  thinking  about  himself.  1.  Look  at  the  noble 
theory  of  life.  In  all  senses  in  which  you  can  use  the  words,  Christ  is  this 
man's  hfe.  (1)  The  secret  of  its  origin,  its  source,  and  basis.  (2)  Its  goal  and 
aim.  (3)  Its  law  and  pattern.  My  life,  if  it  be  in  Christ,  may  become  a  chain  of 
golden  deeds ;  if  I  be  out  of  Christ,  it  is  but  a  heap  of  unconnected  links.  2. 
Wheresoever  life  is  thus  simple  and  of  a  piece,  death  will  be  gain,  continuous  and 
increasing.  (1)  Tbe  direction  is  the  same ;  he  passes  the  points  and  gets  on  t6 
the  other  line  without  a  shock.  (2)  The  life  is  simply  lifted  out  of  the  common 
atmosphere  and  plunged,  as  it  were,  into  an  oxygen  jar,  and  it  blazes  out  the  more 
brightly  for  the  change.     II.  The  second  bend  or  reach.     The  hesitation  which 

ARISES     FROM     THE     CONTEMPLATION     OF     LIFE     AS     A     FIELD   FOB   WORK.       The    brokeU 

language  of  the  original  expresses  the  broken  waters  of  the  river  as  it  takes  the 
turn.  "  I  am  in  a  strait,"  like  a  man  hedged  up  between  two  walls,  not  knowing 
how  to  turn.  Paul  was  the  subject  of  two  counter-attractions,  that  of  death  and 
that  of  life.  1.  Notice  how  he  talks  about  the  former.  "I  desire  to  depart," 
weigh  an  anchor  or  lift  the  pegs  of  a  tent.  To  be  with  Christ — that  is  the 
attraction.  He  draws  us,  and  we  run  after  Him.  This  is  no  morbid,  sentimental 
desire  for  death  arising  out  of  hatred  with  life.  2.  Then  think  of  that  reason  for 
living  which  overbears  the  wish  for  death.  "  There  is  work  to  be  done,  and  so  I 
feel  that  life  tugs  at  me."  How  different  to  many  men's  clinging  to  life,  because 
of  tbe  judgment  after  death.  III.  Notice  the  beautiful  calm  solution  of  thb 
QUESTION — not  an  equipoise  of  hesitation,  something  pulling  two  different  ways,  and 
BO  the  rest  of  equal  forces  acting.  "  I  know  that  I  shall  abide  and  continue 
with  yod  all  " — a  calm  taking  what  God  wills  about  the  matter.  Stick  to  your 
tasks,  and  in  God's  time  you  will  have  rest  and  reward.  Conclusion :  Here  are 
two  theories  of  hfe  for  you.  "  To  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain."  "  To  live  is 
self,  and  to  die  is  loss  and  despair."  Which?  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christian 
life  and  death: — I.  The  proper  scope  and  character  of  all  truly  Christian  LnrK. 
1.  Such  Ufe  is  never  aimless ;  but  how  many  people  could  give  no  rational  answer 
to  the  question,  What  are  you  living  for?  2.  Its  aim,  however,  does  not  lie  within 
the  circle  of  the  seen  and  temporary.  While  not  indifferent  to  the  claims  of  the 
present  world,  its  ambition  pitches  higher.  3.  Its  end  and  substanceis  Christ. 
4.  A  life  is  possible  which,  while  in  a  sense  Christ,  shall  not  be  such  in  the  full 
and  proper  sense  of  the  term.  St.  Paul  has  just  spoken  of  Christians  who  were 
insincere  and  contentious.  So  now  there  are  men  whose  life  is  Christ,  pre- 
dominately, it  may  be,  but  not  wholly.  II.  What  Christian  death  is,  and  how 
IX  ought  to  be  regarded.  1.  It  is  Christian  death  of  which  he  speaks,  yet  we 
cannot  but  be  struck  with  an  assumption  he  makes  concerning  death  in  general — 
living,  only  not  in  the  flesh.  "  All  Uve  unto  God."  2.  The  life  out  of  the  flesh 
which  Christians  live  is  a  higher  and  more  advanced  life  than  that  of  the  present. 


I.]  PHILIPPIANS.  46 

Not  that  there  is  anything  essentially  evil  or  degrading  in  the  flesh ;  but  death 
will,  to  those  who  love  Christ,  obviously  be  so  far  gain  that  it  will  clear  away  a 
throng  of  hindrances  to  the  free  consecration  of  the  soul  to  God.  3.  The  pre- 
eminence is  deined  as  being  with  Christ.  (1)  Believers  are  aheady  with  Him, 
"joined  to  Him,"  &c.,  but  in  important  respects  we  are  at  present  not  with  Him. 
He  is  beyond  the  reach  of  our  sense.  (2)  Death  raises  the  saint  to  be  with  Him 
immediately,  although  we  shall  be  nearer  after  the  resurrection.  4.  St.  Paul  does 
not  measure  this  pre-eminence  of  Christian  death  over  Christian  life.  He  is  con- 
tent with  a  general  statement  of  its  exceeding  superiority ;  it  is  "  much  more 
than  much  better."  III.  Christian  litb  and  death  regarded  as  an  alteknatite. 
1.  Ordinarily,  even  Christians  recoil  from  death,  partly  for  want  of  an  adequate 
faith,  partly  from  physical  shrinking.  2.  Within  limits  this  desire  for  life  is  not 
blameworthy.  Such  a  sense  of  future  blessedness  as  should  spoil  earth  for  us  is 
nowhere  encouraged  in  Scripture ;  it  would  be  incompatible  with  our  duty  to  God 
and  man,  and  in  many  cases  it  is  desirable  for  others  that  we  should  stay.  3.  But 
whether  life  be  more  or  less  desirable,  it  should  be  spent  under  the  assurance  that 
death  is  gain,  i.e.,  if  life  be  Christ,  otherwise  we  have  no  reason  to  expect  that 
death  would  bring  any  advantage.  4.  Granting  this,  however,  if  the  will  of 
God  ordains  life,  it  is  an  unspeakable  grace  to  live  and  not  die.  It  is  service  for 
the  blessed  Master,  the  fruit  of  which  is  so  ample  that  we  can  afford  to  wait  for 
everlasting  Ufe.  Be  death  ever  so  desirable,  it  is  our  own  fault  if  the  happiness 
of  life  does  not  more  than  counterbalance  the  trial  of  it.  Other  things  being 
equal,  the  more  life,  the  more  heaven.  Conclusion :  1.  How  startling  a  contrast 
the  current  life  of  man  forms  with  this  lofty  ideal.  2.  When  this  august  profes- 
sion is  more  than  a  profession,  how  rare  is  the  type  of  character  which  answers 
to  the  apostolic  model.  3.  Yet  this  same  life  is  the  only  secure,  rational,  and 
happy  life  to  live.  {J.  D.  Geden,  D.D.)  The  Christian's  estimate  of  life  and 
death: — I.  The  Christian's  life  a  description  of  it.  The  Christian  lives — 1. 
From  Christ.  Christ  is  the  source  of  his  existence.  2.  On  Christ.  Christ  is  the 
support  of  the  Ufe  He  has  given,  nourishing  it  with  communications  from  Him- 
self. 3.  To  Christ.  Coming  from  Him,  He  is  its  aim  and  end.  II.  The  desibb 
HE  HAS  while  livino  THIS  LIFE  (ver.  23).  1.  "  To  set  loose  a  second  time,"  as 
vessels,  not  outward  bound,  but  from  a  foreign  port  on  a  return  voyage.  He  is 
not  looking  back  on  the  country  behind  him,  he  is  looking  on  the  sea  which  he 
has  to  cross  before  he  can  get  home.  2.  Why  ?  Because  Christ  is  there.  "  Whom 
have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee?"  3.  This  is  the  result  of  the  new  life  which  tends 
towards  Christ,  its  source.  4.  Thus  to  be  with  Christ  is  "  beyond  all  comparison 
better."  There  is  a  fruition  of  Christ  above,  compared  with  which  the  highest 
enjoyment  we  can  get  out  of  Him  here  is  as  nothing.  III.  A  feeling  in  tke 
Christian's  mind  counteracting  this  dksibe,  viz.,  a  desire  to  remain,  springing 
from — 1,  Love  to  Christ.  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ " — it  is  for  Christ's  honour 
and  glory  to  live  a  fruitful  life.  2.  Love  for  his  fellow-men.  Love  for  self  would 
say  "Go";  love  for  perishing  sinners  is  stronger,  and  says  "Stay."  The  hesita- 
tion only  lasted  as  long  as  he  was  speaking  of  it.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  A  com- 
parative view  of  life  and  death : — I.  By  those  who  look  at  life  on  its  bright 
SIDE.  1.  To  me  to  live  is  gaiety,  delightful  society ;  and  to  die  is  the  quenching  of 
all  joy,  to  plunge  into  I  know  not  what,  and  to  go  where  I  do  not  wish  to  go.  2. 
To  me  to  Uve  is  the  indulgence  of  the  luxury  of  my  sen^^es  ;  to  die  is  the  destruc- 
tion of  all  that  gratifies  them.  3.  To  me  to  live  is  aiHueuce  in  what  all  are 
coveting ;  to  die  would  be  to  have  all  this  seized  by  others.  4.  To  me  to  live  is 
successful  enterprise,  competition  overcome,  prosperity,  power,  fame  ;  to  die  that 
would  be  to  lose  the  field  of  my  career.  II.  By  those  who  look  on  the  dark 
SIDE.  To  me  to  live  is  a  hard  thing ;  it  is  to  endure  privation,  poverty,  pain. 
Well  then,  would  you  die  in  preference  ?  Oh,  no,  that  would  be  worse.  Why  so  ? 
Sometimes  the  person  can  hardly  tell — there  is  an  undefined  horror  of  death,  but 
sometimes  there  is  the  power  of  conscience  in  the  case.  III.  By  those  who  look 
ON  LiFB  iRRELiGiotrsLY.  1.  To  me  to  hve  is  a  course  in  which  my  pleasures  are 
poisoned  with  vexation  ;  but  at  any  rate  it  is  for  so  long  an  exemption  from  what 
I  have  to  expect  hereafter.  Besides,  while  I  hve  I  may  repent  and  reform  ;  but  to 
me  to  die  is  perdition.  2.  To  me  to  live,  says  the  atheist,  is  to  have  the  play  of 
all  my  senses,  to  take  all  I  dare  or  can  of  immediate  good,  to  exult  in  defiance  of 
what  superstition  has  feigned  an  almighty  power,  perhaps  to  command  great 
attention  by  my  genius.  On  the  contrary,  to  die  is  to  have  all  this  broken  np,  and 
to  become  a  clod  of  earth.    lY.  By  the  Christlan.     To  live  is  Christ  and  to  die 


4S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

is  to  be  with  Him,  therefore  gain — far  better.  {John  Foster.)  To  live  it  Christ 
and  to  die  is  gain: — That  which  a  man  loves  supremely  is  that  for  which 
he  lives  —  money,  fame,  pleasure,  &c.  The  lofty  altitude  of  moral  nature 
to  which  we  have  to  aspire  is  to  find  in  Christ  our  only  reason  for  living. 
Apart  from  this,  the  yearning  aspirations  and  voids  of  humanity  can 
never  be  satisfied.  L  Life  in  Christ  comprehends  *t.t.  truk  life — science, 
art,  beauty,  music,  all  that  adorns  the  saint,  strengthens  the  worker,  sustains  the 
sufferer.  All  life  rooted  in  Christ  will  bear  all  manner  of  fruits  and  be  beautiful 
with  all  the  hues  of  heaven.  Into  what  base  are  our  life-roots  struck  ?  II.  Lifb 
IR  Christ  can  bee  the  ulterior  phase  of  what  men  caix  death.  The  eye  of 
true  life  can  see  clear  through  the  dispensation  of  dying,  and  behold  the  "gain  ;  " 
can  see  straight  through  the  troubled  night  of  the  final  act  of  man  upon  earth,  and 
gladden  itself  with  the  sight  of  the  morning  glory  that  falls  for  ever  on  the  hills  of 
heaven.  To  die  is  mystery  ;  speculation  ;  life's  most  desperate  venture  ;  annihila- 
tion— this  is  the  creed  of  those  whose  Hfe  is  not  centred  in  Christ.  Compare  this 
creed  with  the  gain  which  Christianity  discloses.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Christian  life 
<  and  death : — There  are  only  two  questions  that  a  truly  wise  man  would  think  it  of  any 
essential  consequence  to  ask  in  regard  to  himself,  "What  is  the  proper  object  of  life?  " 
"  What  is  beyond  life  ?  "  Here,  then,  only  they  are  completely  answered.  Let  us — 
I.  Inquire  into  the  meaning  of  the  words,  "Tomb  to  live  is  Christ."  True 
experimental  Christianity  is — 1.  A  life  of  dependence  on  Christ,  as  of  children  on 
the  head  of  a  family.  This  dependence  is  (1)  constant ;  (2)  humble  ;  (3)  trustful ; 
(4)  invisible,  but  real.  2.  A  life  of  communion  with  Christ;  as  between  two 
dearest  friends.  This  is  (1)  habitual;  (2)  cordial;  (3)  private  and  public.  3.  A  life 
of  conformity  and  devotedness  to  Christ,  as  servants  to  an  illustrious  and  beloved 
master.  This  is  entire,  and  embraces  (1)  all  the  occupations  of  life  whatever  they 
may  be,  secular  or  sacred ;  (2)  all  the  thoughts  and  affections.    II.  The  ground 

WE   HAVE   TO   INFER  THAT  WHEN  "  TO  LIVE  IS  ChRIST,"  TO   DIE  WtLL  BE  GAIN.      BeoaUSe 

— 1.  To  whatever  world  death  shall  introduce  us,  Christ  will  be  Lord  of  it.  "  I 
have  the  keys  of  Hades,"  &a.  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  yon."  2.  The  graces 
and  tempers  of  such  a  life  as  the  Christian's  must  be  the  root  and  commencement 
of  the  happiness  of  that  world,  whatever  it  be  as  to  particulars.  "  Whatsoever  a 
man  soweth."  "Blessed  are  the  poor  in  Spirit,"  Ac.  3.  We  are  assured  that 
there  will  be  an  illustrious  manifestation  of  Christ  for  the  very  purpose  of  making 
death  gain.     "  Our  conversation  is  in  heaven,"  Ac.  (1  Cor.  xv.  42).     Improvement : 

1.  What  an  unspeakable  advantage  has  the  Christian  over  every  other  character. 

2.  Let  the  Christian  be  satisfied  that  death  is  gain,  without  prying  into  particulars. 

3.  Learn  the  importance  of  keeping  together  what  God  has  made  inseparable. 
Life  Christ,  and  death  gain.  (T.  N.  Toller.)  Christian  life  and  death: — L 
Christian  life.  1.  Separation  for  Christ,  from  the  world,  self,  sin.  2.  Dedica- 
tion to  Christ.  All  are  dedicating  their  life  to  something — fashion,  money, 
pleasure,  science,  fame.  3.  Use  by  Christ.  Behgion  is  not  a  man's  transformation 
into  something  different,  but  his  acceptance  by  Christ  for  the  accomplishment  of 
his  purpose.  4.  Likeness  to  Christ,  in  love  and  knowledge.  6.  Concealment  in 
Christ.  II.  Christian  death.  "  Gain,"  because  heaven.  1.  No  more  trial  and 
sickness,  but  eternal  health  and  peace.  2.  No  more  bereavement,  but  eternal 
union.  3.  No  more  superstition,  but  eternal  light.  4.  No  more  sorrow  over  the 
dissensions  of  Christ's  Church,  but  eternal  harmony.  5.  No  more  spiritual 
ignorance,  but  perfect  knowledge.  6.  No  more  temptation  and  sin,  but  perfect 
safety  and  holiness.  7.  No  more  death,  but  the  fadeless  life.  {H.  O.  Guinness.) 
Ghristly  life  and  gainful  death ;— I.  The  Christian's  lite  is  Christ.  1.  Obedience 
to  Christ's  precepts.  These  preferred  (1)  to  the  dictates  of  man,  (2)  and  to 
personal  inclinations.  2.  Admiration  of  Christ's  character.  Jesus  is  regarded  as 
— (1)  The  ideal  of  perfection.  (2)  The  model  of  imitation.  8.  Devotion  to 
Christ's  interests.  True  Christians  seek— (1)  The  extension  of  Christ's  dominion. 
(2)  The  exaltation  of  Christ's  name.  4.  Inspiration  by  Christ's  Spirit.  (1)  In  ua 
there  is  no  inherent  holiness.  (2)  Our  good  desires  are  derived  from  Christ  5. 
Sustentation  by  Christ's  power.  (1)  We  are  naturally  impotent.  (2)  Christ  works  in 
His  people,  and  they  can  do  all  things  through  Him  strengthening  them.  II.  The 
Christian's  death  is  gain.  1.  Physically.  The  resurrection  body  will  be 
characterized  by— (1)  Perfect  health.  (2)  Perfect  beauty.  (3)  Capability  of  increased 
power  and  activity.  2.  Mentally.  (1)  All  hindrances  to  inteUectnal  pursuits  will 
be  removed.  (2)  Mental  facilities  will  be  increased.  3.  Socially.  Death  introduces 
the  Christian  to — (1)  A  more  respectable  circle  of  acquaintance,     (a)  The  great  and 


flHA*.  I.  J  PHILIPPIANS.  41 

good  of  all  ages.  (6)  The  holy  angels,  (c)  Christ  Himself.  (2)  A  better  plac«  of 
residence.  (3)  Unprecedented  possessions.  4.  Spiritually.  After  his  decease  the 
Christian  has — (1)  A  freedom  from  external  temptations.  (2)  A  deliverance  from 
inherent  depravity.  (3)  A  constant  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God.  {W, 
Sidebottom.)  The  good  man'$  life  and  death  : — 1.  How  oiuinously  the  words 
"  live  "  and  "  die  "  follow  each  other.  There  is  but  a  comma  between  them.  Life 
is  but  death's  vestibule.  2.  If  yoa  would  get  a  fair  estimate  of  the  happiness  of  a 
man,  you  must  judge  him  in  these  two  closely  connected  things,  his  life  and  his 
death.  Solon  said,  "  Call  no  man  happy  till  he  is  dead  ;  for  yon  know  not  what 
changes  may  pass  upon  him  in  life."  We  add,  "because  if  the  life  to  come  be 
miserable  that  shall  far  outweigh  the  highest  happiness  he  has  enjoyed  in  this." 
L  The  good  man's  life.  1.  It  derives  its  parentage  from  Christ.  The  righteous 
man  has  two  lives,  that  which  he  has  inherited  from  his  parents,  and  a  spiritual 
life,  which  is  as  much  above  mental  life  as  that  is  above  the  animal  or  the  plant. 
2.  Christ  is  its  sustenance.  Without  Christ  the  new-born  spirit  must  become 
vague  emptiness.  3.  The  fashion  of  his  life  is  Christ.  Every  man  has  a  model 
by  which  he  endeavours  to  shape  his  life.  Men  do  not  always  do  a  thing  because 
it  is  right,  but  because  some  one  does  it  whom  we  take  as  a  standard  of  propriety. 
What  an  outcry  there  is  against  a  man  who  dares  to  be  singular,  and  says,  "  I  will 
not  follow  your  model,  I  will  follow  Christ."  4.  The  end  of  his  life  is  Christ ;  not 
wealth,  respectability.  5.  Its  happiness  and  glory  is  all  in  Christ.  IL  The  good 
man's  death.  Why  does  not  death  spare  the  good  and  take  the  bad.  Gain  1  is  it 
not  loss  in  every  sense  ?  No  ;  in  every  sense  in  which  it  is  loss  it  is  immeasurable 
gain.  1.  He  loses  friends,  wife,  children ;  but  only  for  a  time ;  he  gains  them  for 
ever.  2.  He  loses  his  wealth  ;  but  he  gains  eternal  riches,  and  those  who  have  no 
money  to  lose  are  made  rich  for  evermore.  8.  He  loses  the  means  of  grace,  but 
gains  heaven.  4.  He  loses  his  partial  knowledge ;  but  sees  face  to  face.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Life  and  death  in  Christ : — I.  Life  in  Christ.  Life  for  this  man 
is — 1.  Negatively.  Not  (1)  the  life  of  the  beasts  that  perish.  Meat,  drink,  clothing, 
are  the  means  of  preserving  life  ;  bat  not  the  objects  for  which  we  live.  A  disciple 
of  Christ  lives  on  them,  but  not  for  them.  (2)  To  acquire  a  great  property. 
Property  is  useful  in  fulfilling  some  of  the  ends  of  life,  but  when  it  comes  to  be  an 
end  in  itself  it  is  no  longer  a  blessing.  (3)  Pleasure.  He  will  not  occupy  the  day 
in  chasing  thistle-down.  (4)  Honoar.  He  has  gotten  the  favour  of  God.  (5)  In 
refusing  and  avoiding  these  things.  Strip  them  all  off,  and  yon  are  no  nearer  a 
true  hfe  in  the  Lord.  Life  consists  neither  in  having  them  nor  wanting  them.  2. 
Positively.  His  life  is  not  a  life  with  Christ,  nor  even  in  Christ.  His  very  life  was 
Christ.  His  former  self  was  lost.  Henceforth  he  lives  Christ.  His  common  life, 
when  he  hes  down  and  rises  up,  when  he  labours  and  rests,  in  private  and  public. 
II.  Death  in  Christ.  The  substance  of  the  inheritance  beyond  we  know  from 
verse  23  is  the  same  Christ.  What  are  the  gains?  1.  Peace  instead  of  war. 
Here  Christ  and  conflict ;  there  Christ  and  peace.  2.  Here  Christ  and  ignorance  ; 
seeing  in  part,  through  a  glass  darkly;  there  Christ  and  light.  3.  Here  Christ  and  sins; 
there  Christ  and  purity.  4.  Here  Christ  and  pain ;  there  Christ  and  perfect  joy.  (W. 
Amot,  D.D.)  The  significance  of  the  apostle's  sentiment : — When  did  he  utter  this  ? 
It  was  not  as  he  rose  from  earth  dazzled  into  blindness  by  the  Redeemer's  glory,  and 
the  words  of  the  first  commission  were  ringing  in  his  ears.  It  was  not  in  Damascus, 
while  as  the  scales  fell  from  his  eyes  he  recognized  the  Lord's  goodness  and 
power.  Nor  was  it  in  Arabia  where  supernatural  wisdom  so  fully  unfolded  to  him 
the  facts  and  truths  which  he  was  so  uniformly  to  proclaim.  It  sprang  not  from 
some  momentary  elation  as  at  Cyprus  where  he  confounded  the  sorcerer  and 
converted  the  Roman  pro-consul.  No,  it  was  written  at  Rome,  in  bonds,  and  after 
years  of  unparalleled  toil  and  suffering.  His  past  career  had  been  signalized 
by  stripes,  imprisonment,  shipwrecks,  and  unnumbered  perils,  but  he  did  not 
regret  them.  He  had  been  "in  weariness  and  painfulness,"  &c.,  but  his  ardour 
was  unchilled ;  and  let  him  only  be  freed,  and  his  life  prolonged,  and  his  motto 
would  still  be,  "  For  me  to  live  is  Christ. "  It  did  not  repent  the  venerable  con- 
fessor now,  when  he  was  old,  infirm,  and  a  prisoner,  with  a  terrible  doom  suspended 
over  him,  that  he  had  done,  travelled,  spoken,  and  suffered  so  much  for  Christ. 
Nor  was  the  statement  like  a  suspicious  vow  in  a  scene  of  danger,  which  is  too 
often  wrung  from  cowardice,  and  held  up  as  a  bribe  to  the  Great  Preserver,  but 
forgotten  when  the  crisis  passes,  and  he  who  made  it  laughs  at  his  own  timidity. 
Mo.  It  was  no  new  course  that  the  apostle  proposed,  it  was  only  a  continuation 
of  those  previoas  habits  which  his  bondage  had  for  a  season  intermpted.     Could 


48  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

there  be  increase  to  a  zeal  that  had  never  flagged,  or  could  those  labours  be 
multiplied  which  had  filled  every  moment  and  called  out  every  energy  ?  In  fine, 
the  saying  was  no  idle  boast,  like  that  of  Peter  at  the  last  supper — the  flash  of 
a  sudden  enthusiasm  so  soon  to  be  drowned  in  tears.  For  the  apostle  had  the 
warrant  of  a  long  career  to  justify  his  assertion,  and  who  can  doubt  that  he  would 
have  verified  it,  and  nobly  shown,  as  hitherto,  for  him  to  live  was  Christ  ?  He 
sighed  not  under  the  burden,  as  if  age  needed  repose ;  or  sank  into  self- 
complacency,  as  if  he  had  done  enough,  for  the  Lord's  commission  was  still  upon 
him,  and  the  wants  of  the  world  were  as  numerous  and  pressing  as  to  claim  his 
last  word  and  urge  his  last  step.  {Professor  Eadie.)  The  reason  why  some  men 
cling  to  life : — I  remember  when  I  used  to  live  in  the  south  of  England,  there  was 
a  story  abroad  about  some  man  that  was  thrown  over  the  face  of  the  Isle  of  Wight 
chalk  cliffs.  They  found  bim  in  the  morning  lying  down  there  among  the  white 
boulders  and  bla  'k  sea- weed,  and  below  the  finger  nails  there  was  powdered  chalk 
that  he  had  scraped  in  his  desperate  clutch  as  he  fell  to  save  himself.  My  friends, 
there  are  some  of  you  tbat  grasp  at  life  Uke  that,  and  for  something  of  the  same 
reason,  because  you  are  afraid  of  the  smash  when  you  get  down  to  the  bottom.  {A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  To  me  to  live  is  Christ. — 1.  The  rendering  is  literally,  "  To  me 
life  is  Christ,"  life  altogether,  everywhere,  always  is  neither  more  nor  less  than 
this.  2.  The  word  has  wide  application.  The  blade  of  grass,  the  tree,  the  worm, 
bird,  beast,  man,  God,  live.  But  there  is  life  proper  to  each.  In  the  lower  forms 
it  is  simple,  but  as  we  ascend  life  becomes  more  complex,  difficult,  and,  therefore, 
more  noble.  That  is  the  noblest  thing  which  surmounts  disaster  or  suffering 
which  retrieves  itself  or  is  retrieved.  The  life  of  man  has  so  suffered,  and  has 
been  so  retrieved.  3.  The  text  expresses  an  infinite  indebtedness.  No  man  could 
confer  a  benefit  on  fellow-man  so  great  as  to  put  him  under  this  law.  Not  to 
benefactor,  defender,  deliverer,  could  you  say  this.  I.  This  canon  eules  the 
THOUGHT.  The  intellectual  life  is  Christ's.  This  is  not,  however,  to  impair 
mental  freedom.  Man  may  expatiate  on  any  field,  making  fresh  discoveries  at 
every  step.  But  from  the  vantage  ground  of  the  Christ  life  all  acquired  knowledge 
can  he  put  in  right  relations  and  error  detected.  Christ  does  not  reveal  all 
truth,  but  places  man  on  the  mountain-top  of  truth,  where  he  is  never  out  of  the 
view  of  some  truths.  II.  Take  life  as  sentiment — thought  with  aroma  in  it, 
and  beauty  in  it,  without  which  no  life  is  complete;  How  shall  we  keep  the 
poetry  in  our  life?  Only  by  having  the  beauty  of  Christ's  life.  III.  Take  life 
as  foece — active  moral  force.  A  life  without  much  force  may  be  pure  and 
good,  but  it  can  never  be  beneficent.  A  life  with  force  may  be  destructive.  To 
constitute  good  human  force  we  need  more  than  energy  and  self-will.  We  need 
right  motives  and  wise  means.  If  you  leave  Jesus  Christ  out  of  your  life  you 
cannot  have  any  of  them  perfectly,  "  Be  strong  in  the  Lord,"  &o.  IV.  Take 
LIFE  A3  HOPE,  ASPIRATION,  DESTiNT.  What  is  life  if  it  be  not  this  much.  Without 
an  assured  future,  no  present  of  any  kind  can  be  worth  a  hearty  interest.  Have 
we  an  assured  future  without  Jesus  Christ  ?  "  Because  He  Uves  we  shall  live  also." 
Conclusion :  Is  it  Christ  for  you  to  live,  or  money,  sentient  pleasure,  ambition, 
indifference,   emptiness?      {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Christ  our  life: — We  can  see 

what  this  did  for  Paul.  1.  It  gave  steady  perseverance  to  his  endeavours.  2.  It 
put  a  tone  of  charity  on  all  his  intercourse.  3.  It  gave  him  calmness  under  trial 
and  persecution.  I.  So  fab  as  our  life  is  feeling  we  may  say  the  text. 
Take — 1.  Our  thinking.  The  unity,  ppace,  freedom,  safe  guidance  of  our  thoughts, 
follow  and  are  assured  if  to  us  to  think  is  Christ.  2.  Our  trusting.  No  fear 
comes  to  us  out  of  the  uncertainty  and  insecurity  of  our  earthly  trusts  if  our 
great  trust  rests  on  Christ.  3.  Our  loving.  There  will  be  an  ever-enlarging 
love  to  men  if  our  first  love  be  set  on  Christ.  4.  Our  hoping — that  hope  is  full 
of  immortality  which  can  build  on  this  sure  foundation,  ♦'  Jesus  is  mine."  II.  So 
FAR  A3  CUB  LIFE  IS  ASSOCIATION,  we  may  Say  the  text.  1.  In  friendship  His 
presence  can  make  our  hearts  burn  within  us.  2.  In  the  family  He  can  be  the 
all-hallowing  thought  sanctifying  the  home  life.  3.  In  society  He  can  make  by 
His  unseen  presence  our  social  fellowships  purer  and  more  truly  happy.  If  this 
is  not  so  it  is  because  we  have  permitted  the  un-Christly  stamp  to  get  printed 
on  our  associations.  III.  So  fab  as  life  is  activity  we  may  say  the  text.  1.  In 
business,  "Let  every  man  wherein  he  is  called,"  &c.  2.  In  the  Church.  3.  In 
the  world  of  morals,  politics,  science  :  all  these  are  spheres  of  Christ's  rule. 
{R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  Christ  tht  saints'  life  ;— 1.  There  is  no  other  name  but  Christ's 
which  has  life  in  it.     There  is  no  life  in  the  world's  wealth,  learning,  honour,  love. 


CHAP.  L]  PHILIPPIANS.  49 

If  they  do  not  destroy,  they  afford  no  protection  or  sustenance.  To  be  Christlesa  \ 
is  to  be  lifeless.  2.  Is  it  possible  that  St.  Paal  can  be  speaking  of  a  mere  man  7 
This  is  not  an  accidental  expression  of  temporary  excitement.  It  is  a  sentiment 
that  pervades  his  writings  (chap.  iii.  7-9  ;  Gal.  ii.  20,  vi.  14).  On  the  Socinian 
hjrpothesis  all  this  is  extravagant  and  idolatrous.  Where  do  we  find  succeeding 
prophets  speaking  thus  of  Moses  J  3.  Paul  means  that  Christ  constituted  his  life. 
In  what  sense  ?  I.  Christ  was  tee  bestower  and  sdstaineb  of  it.  He  was 
this  naturally  (Heb.  i.  2 ;  John  i.  3 ;  Heb.  i.  3).  On  this  ground  Adam  in  his 
state  of  innocence  would  have  said  that  the  Son  of  God  was  his  life.  But  Paul 
was  thinking  of  Christ  as — 1.  The  life  of  pardon.  Distinguish  the  gaining  of 
pardon  and  the  persuasion  that  it  has  been  gained.  A  rebel  may  be  pardoned 
without  knowing  it,  but  before  he  can  be  hai)py  he  must  know  it.  Paul  knew 
fully  that  Christ  had  forgiven  him.  2.  The  life  of  love.  Pardon  properly  is  only 
the  capacity  for  living  ;  but  love  is  the  soul's  life.  How  this  love  burned  in  Paul 
towards  God  and  towards  man,  3.  The  life  of  hope.  Hope  is  life ;  despair  is 
death.  The  unbeliever  is  hopeless  and  therefore  lifeless.  IL  Cheist  was  thb 
object  or  the  energies  op  that  life  He  had  bestowed.  Paul  had  three 
reasons  for  his  enc^rossing  consecration  to  Christ.  1.  A  reason  of  justice.  Christ 
had  surrendered  His  life  for  him,  and  equity  demanded  that  he  should  consecrate 
his  life  to  Christ  (2  Cor.  v.  14-15).  Life  for  life  :  Christ  gave  all  He  could  give  : 
Paul  returns  all  he  can.  Gratitude  facilitates  the  justice,  and  makes  the  duty 
a  delight.  2.  A  reason  of  self-interest.  (1)  Unless  he  rendered  the  service,  he 
would  renounce  the  discipleship  and  be  a  castaway  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  (2)  He  had 
respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward  of  all  duty  well  discharged  (Luke  xix. 
17-19).  3,  A  reason  of  taste.  He  liked  the  work  for  its  own  sake.  (IF.  Anderson, 
LL.D.)  To  serve  Christ  must  be  our  one  aim: — It  is  said  of  Thomas  Pett,  the 
miser,  that  his  pulse  rose  and  fell  with  the  funds.  He  never  lay  down  or  rose 
that  he  did  not  bless  the  inventor  of  compound  interest.  His  one  gloomy  apart- 
ment was  never  brightened  with  coal,  caudle,  or  the  countenance  of  a  visitor,  and 
he  never  ate  a  morsel  at  his  own  expense.  Of  course  he  made  money,  for  he  gave 
himself  wholly  to  it ;  and  we  ought  not  to  forget  that  the  same  single-minded- 
ness  and  self-denial  would  make  Christians  rich  towards  God.  What  is  wanted 
in  the  service  of  Christ  is  the  same  unity  of  pni-pose  which  has  ruled  all 
men  who  have  won  the  object  for  which  they  lived.  He  who  makes  God's 
glory  the  one  only  aim  before  which  all  otber  things  bow  themselves,  is  the 
man  to  bring  honour  to  his  Lord.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  ideal  of  Christian  , 
life: — For  me  to  live  is — I.  Faith  in  Chiust.  1.  Without  faith  life  is  dwarfed  ^  . 
and  desolate.  2.  The  grander  faith's  object,  and  the  firmer  faith's  trust,  the  » 
nobler  the  life.  3.  Christ  is  the  grandest  object,  and  faith  in  Him  the  strongest 
trust.  II.  Meditation  on  Christ.  1.  We  can  come  very  near  Him.  2.  This 
meditation  is  sweet.  The  thought  of  Christ  the  antidote  to  life's  sorrows. 
III.  Action  fob  Christ.  1.  Inspired  by  the  loftiest  motive :  Christ.  2.  Of  the 
most  diverse  character.  3.  With  the  best  result.  IV.  Hope  in  Christ.  1.  He 
is  the  hope  of  this  life  and  consequently  glorifies  it.  2.  He  is  our  hope  for 
eternity — "  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also."  {Paxton  Hood.)  The  great  end  and 
bufiness  of  a  Christianas  life  is  to  glorify  Christ ; — I.  I  abode  it  thus  : — 1.  We 
have  life  from  Him;  life,  therefore,  should  be  to  Him.  A  supernatural  influence 
causeth  a  supernatural  tendency.  As  rivers  run  into  the  sea  from  whence  their 
channels  are  filled,  so  doth  grace  cause  all  the  issues  and  outgoings  of  the 
spirituiil  life  to  return  to  Christ  from  whence  they  came.  2.  The  right  Christ  has 
to  our  service.     We  are  His  by  every  right  and  title  (Kom.   xiv.  7-9).      II.  To 

MAKE     this     CLEAB    LET     D8      EXAMINE      THE     SEVERAL     TITLES     ChBIST      HATH       TO     A 

BELiEVEB.  1.  By  creation  (Heb.  i,  2).  Note — (1)  The  absolute  right  that 
accrueth  to  Him  from  hence.  We  were  made  out  of  nothing  by  Him ;  all  we 
have,  therefore,  is  His — mind,  eyes,  tongue,  hands,  &o.  His  is  a  right  both 
of  jurisdiction  as  a  king,  and  of  propriety  as  a  creator.  (2)  The  intention  of 
the  Creator  (Prov.  xvi.  4;  Rom.  xi.  36).  All  things  were  made  tor  man,  ^ 
but  man  himself  for  God.  Our  end  was  not  to  eat,  drink,  sleep,  &o.,  but 
to  live  and  use  all  things  for  God.  (3)  The  obUgation  left  upon  the 
creature  to  love  and  serve  Him  that  created  us.  2.  Preservation,  by  which 
the  title  of  creation  is  daily  renewed  and  reinforced  (Acts  xvii.  28 ;  Heb.  i.  3). 
8.  Eedemption  (1  Cor.  vL  20).  Consider— (1)  The  right.  (2)  The  price  (Pet.  i.  1&- 
19).  4.  Conquest  (Col.  i.  13).  5.  Actual  possession  (1  Cor.  vi.  15).  6.  Resignation 
and  Tolantary  consent  (S.  Song.  ii.  16 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  6  ;  2  Chron.  zxz.  8).     IIL  Tna 

4 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  (chap,  t 

OSE.  To  persaade  ns  to  make  it  oar  businesB  to  honour  Christ  And  advance  Him. 
1.  Directions.  (1)  Yon  must  close  with  Him  by  faith,  and  use  Him  to  the  end 
which  God  hath  appointed  Him  (2  Thess.  i.  11-12).  (2)  Consecrate  and  dedicate 
yourselves  to  Christ's  use  (Rom.  xii.  1).  (3)  Use  yourselves  as  those  that  are 
Christ's,  improving  your  time,  estates,  strength,  relations,  talents,  for  His  glory 
(Zech.  xiv.  20).  (4)  Honour  Him  by  the  holiness  of  your  conversation  (1  Pet. 
ii.  12).  (5)  Let  Christ  be  endeared  to  you  by  all  your  enjoyments.  Temporal 
and  spiritual  (1  Cor.  iii.  21).  (6)  Count  it  an  honour  to  suffer  for  Christ's 
Bake  (Acts  v.  41 ;  Phil.  i.  29).  2.  Motives.  (1)  You  are  not  your  own,  but  are 
under  another  Lord.  (2)  We  have  owned  Christ's  right  in  baptism  (1  Pet.  iii.  21). 
(3)  There  will  be  a  day  of  accounts  when  the  great  God  of  recompenses  will 
reckon  with  you.  (4)  The  utility  and  profit  of  it.  (a)  For  the  present  an 
interest  in  Christ's  intercession  (John  xvii.  9-10).  (5)  Heaven  in  the  eternity  to 
come.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Diverse  views  and  aimt  of  life: — To  some  men  to 
live  is  a  man,  for  a  man ;  they  are  content  to  merge  their  individuality  in  his ;  they 
do  not  care  to  be  known  if  he  is  known ;  they  always  wish  to  be  regarded  as  bis 
friends  ;  they  live  on  his  words  ;  they  immortalize  themselves  by  recording  them ; 
to  please  him  is  their  highest  honour  and  felicity,  and  they  leave  a  beautiful 
biography  behind  them  in  which  they  entomb  and  lose  themselves,  and  rear  a 
monument  to  the  memory  of  their  idol.  Such  was  Boswell's  "  Life  of  Johnson  " 
— *'  To  me  to  live  is  Johnson  1  "  Such  was  Lockhart's  "  Life  of  Scott " — "  To  me 
to  live  is  Scott  I "  Such  is  the  elegant  tribute  of  Tacitus  to  Julius  Agricola — 
••  To  me  to  live  is  Agricola  !  "  Such  is  the,  to  me,  sad  and  shocking  life  of  Cicero, 
by  Dr.  Middleton — "  To  me  to  live  is  Cicero  1 "  But  Paul  said,  "  To  me  to  live  is 
Christ  1 "  To  some  men  to  live  is  a  science.  They  are  absorbed  by  it ;  the  pursuit 
of  it  is  the  unconscious  charm  of  their  existence.  All  things  and  all  bodies  are 
regarded  as  through  the  lens  supplied  by  it.  To  Lyell  and  Murchison — "  To  me 
to  live  is  Geology  I  "  To  Rosse  or  Nicholl — "  To  me  to  live  is  Astronomy !  "  To 
Liebig  or  Davy,  to  Faraday  or  Matueccei — •'  To  me  to  live  is  Chemistry  or  Elec- 
tricity?" To  Owen  or  Cuvier — "  To  me  to  live  is  Comparative  Anatomy  1 "  To 
Young — "  To  me  to  live  is  a  Rosetta-stone  I  "  But  Paul  said,  "  To  me  to  live  ia 
Christ !  "  And  some  men  live  for  an  idea.  They  live  for  it ;  in  it ;  become  martyrs 
to  it.  Bravely,  but  sometimes  very  foolishly,  they  identify  the  whole  world  with 
their  one  idea.  If  it  expires  all  perishes.  Hence  Vane  and  Sidney  would  say, 
"  To  me  to  live  is  a  Republic  I  "  Hence  Leibnitz  and  Kant  and  Descartes  con- 
centrated their  life  on  an  idea.  But  Paul  said,  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ  1  "  And 
to  some  men  to  live  is  self.  "What  shall  I  eat,  and  what  shall  I  drink,  and 
wherewithal  shall  I  be  clothed?"  (Paxton  Hood.)  Life  in  Christ: — Behold 
yonder  flower ;  it  lives  by  means  of  the  plant  on  which  it  grows ;  does  it  not  ? 
Did  not  the  plant  give  it  birth?  and  does  not  the  plant  supply  it  nourishment? 
and  if  you  separate  it  from  the  plant  will  it  not  die  1  Now,  consider  it  once  more 
— it  lives  for  the  plant  on  which  it  grows  ;  does  it  not  ?  Does  it  not  blossom  into 
beauty  that  it  may  adorn  it  as  a  lovely  ornament,  and  ripen  into  maturity  that  it 
may  serve  it  by  forming  precious  seed  ?  Just  so  Paul  grew  as  a  flower  upon  Christ. 
He  felt  that  he  lived  by  Christ ;  and  so  he  determined  to  live  for  Christ ;  and  the 
sweet  meaning  contained  in  this  fragrant  saying  that  he  breathes  out  an  offering  to 
Jesus  in  the  thought  of  Uf e  for  Christ.  {U.  O.  Guinness. )  Christ  the  grandest 
life  : — If  life  is  to  be  measured  by  the  dignity  of  its  affections,  by  their  purity  and 
power,  then  what  affection  is  so  lofty,  so  inspiring,  so  ennobling,  as  the  love  of 
Christ?  If  life  is  to  be  estimated  by  its  raptures  of  exalted  hope,  its  frequent 
glimpses  of  unfathomed  being,  its  cadencies  of  harmony  borne  upon  the  ear  from 
distant  spheres  of  praise,  then  what  raptures  are  so  glowing  as  those  kindled  by 
the  life  of  Christ?  If  life  is  to  be  estimated  by  what  it  performs,  and  by  its 
motives  to  performance,  then  what  life  can  hold  so  lengthened  a  series  of  unselfisb 
exploits,  as  his  who  lives  for  Christ  ?  What  motive  can  occupy  so  high  a  ground 
or  purpose,  so  glorious  an  aim  ?  "  For  me  to  live  is  Christ."  (Paxton  Hood.) 
Love  the  true  life  : — Our  love  is  our  life.  What  is  your  life  ?  It  is  even  that  which 
ia  your  strongest  love.  We  do  not  live  indeed  until  we  love  in  real  earnest ;  and 
the  greater,  the  nobler  our  love,  the  greater  and  the  nobler  will  be  the  life  bom 
from  it.  And  hence  there  are  many  persons  who  have  lived  long  in  the  world,  but 
they  have  never  begun  to  hve  indeed.  No  one  has  begun  to  live  whose  whole 
existence  has  been  consumed  upon  the  life  of  self.  We  do  not  know  what  we  are 
capable  of  till  something  crosses  our  path,  and  says,  "  Live  for  me."  Look  at  that 
C*y  girl,  merry  aud  thoughtless,  careless  and  quiie  unprophetic  of   the  future, 


oiup.  1.]  PHILIPPIANS.  n 

simply  living  on  from  day  to  day,  from  wave  to  wave  of  laughter  and  pleasure — 
the  privileged  and  licensed  plague  of  the  family.  Let  a  year  or  two  roll  round, 
and  look  at  her  again.  She  is  not  less  interesting — nay,  but  how  much  more 
interesting  ?  Young  as  she  is — almost  venerable — the  merry  gaiety  is  gone,  and  in 
its  place  the  sweet  seriousness  of  wifehood  ;  and  all  the  powers  of  her  being  have 
been  aroused,  for  a  little  helpless  being  has  fallen  at  her  feet,  and  said  to  her, 
through  its  blue  eyes,  "Take  care  of  me."  If  she  could  put  her  thou^'hts  into 
speech  she  would  say,  "  For  me  to  live  is  my  darling."  It  has  revolutionized  her — 
it  has  robbed  her  of  her  selfish  coquetry,  and  given  to  her  a  selfishness  almost 
£vine.  It  is  so  with  the  husband  and  the  father.  He  is  most  capable  of  noble 
exertions  as  the  love  of  his  life  takes  noble  shapes  to  him,  and  rouses  to  noble 
energies.  Nor  can  I  conceive  how  the  heavy  and  monotonous  wheels  of  business 
eonld  roll  on  at  all,  if  God  had  not  made  our  nature  so,  that  the  social  love  becomes 
a  sacred  incentive  to  action,  and  in  spite  of  himself  man  is  made  to  live  for  beings 
outside  of  himself — to  find  his  happiness  in  th>^ir  happiness — and  thus  to  find  that 
"  Life  is  indeed  more  than  meat,  and  the  body  than  raiment,"  But  this  principle 
of  our  existence  is  intensified  when  we  become  the  subjects  of  a  holy,  divine 
affection — when  we  become  so  related  to  divine  persons  and  realities  as  to  say,  "  To 
me  to  live  is  Christ."  Then  a  great  affection  enthrones  itself,  so  that  it  takes 
possession  of  all  our  powers,  "  body,  soul,  and  spirit ;  "  it  sways  a  sceptre  over  all, 
and  unites  all  to  itself;  it  commands  the  resources  of  the  mind  and  the  heart,  and 
makes  them  all  its  own.  (Ibid.)  Christ  the  end  of  life: — As  the  river's  flowing, 
even  away  amid  inland  bills,  is  all  advance  towards  the  distant  sea:  as  the 
blossom's  beauty,  even  in  early  April  days,  is  all  progress  towards  the  autumn 
fruit ;  so  all  St.  Paul's  life,  even  those  acts  and  thoughts  that  seemed  remotest,  was 
a  means  to  an  end — Christ.  {A.  K,  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  Various  degrees  in  living 
Christ : — Suppose  you  have  three  students  sitting  with  their  canvas  on  easels 
before  the  work  of  some  great  painter.  They  have  looked  on  that  work  until  all 
have  caught  inspiration  from  it,  and,  with  painstaking  earnestness,  tliey  all  try  to 
reproduce  what  they  see  in  the  picture  before  them.  Each  will  do  his  very  best ; 
each  will  have  some  palpable  resemblance  to  the  work,  but  each  will  differ  from 
the  others  according  to  his  ability.  And  with  ourselves  there  is  not  the  slightest 
reason  for  discouragement,  though  we  are  not  able  to  reach  the  same  degree  of 
excellence  that  is  obtained  by  some  fellow-disciple.  Let  every  one  try,  as  near  as 
possible,  to   reproduce  the   original.      (W.  G.   Pascoe.)  The   means   of  living 

Christ: — A  vine  is  growing;  it  grows  in  good  ground  ;  it  grows  strong.  It  draws 
the  sap  of  the  ground,  and  bears  much  fruit ;  but  the  fruit  is  bad.  It  is  bitter  to 
the  taste,  and  poisonous.  Another  vine  grows  near  it — a  good  vine — all  good. 
They  take  a  branch  of  the  good  vine,  and  bend  it  gently  towards  the  wild 
vine,  and  they  lay  a  strong  hand  on  the  wild  vine,  and  bend  it  towards  the 
good  vine.  They  touch.  They  are  fastened — the  branch  of  the  good  vine 
to  the  stem  of  the  evil.  As  yet  this  produces  no  change  on  the  wild  vine; 
but  it  is  some  needful  preparatory  work.  They  now  make  an  opening  in 
the  stem  of  the  wild  vine,  and  another  in  the  branch  of  the  good  vine.  They 
place  them  into  each  other  at  the  wound,  and  bind  them  up.  The  wounds  heal, 
and  the  two  have  grown  into  each  other.  The  next  step  in  the  process  is  to  oat 
off  the  head  of  the  wild  vine,  and  leave  instead  the  now  engrafted  branch  of  the 
good.  Then  the  branch  of  the  good  is  severed  from  its  parent  stem.  The  root  of 
the  evil  tree  remains  ;  but  its  head  now  is  the  new  and  the  good  tree.  "  I  live," 
murmurs  the  root  and  stem  of  the  old  evil  tree  far  below."  I  live — you  live ;  yon 
have  no  leaf,  no  flower,  no  fruit :  all  the  life  is  in  the  new  tree.  "  I  live,"  still 
humbly  murmurs  the  old  root  out  of  the  ground ;  "  nevertheless  not  I,  but  the  new 
good  tree  liveth  in  me ;  and  the  life  that  I  now  live  in  the  ground,  I  live  through 
the  new  and  good  tree,  which  loved  me,  and  gave  itself  for  me."  This  cutting,  and 
bleeding,  and  binding,  and  grafting  process  took  place  while  the  patient  was  pros- 
trate and  blind  outside  the  gate  of  Damascus.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  constancy 
of  Paul's  purpose  to  live  Christ : — Changed  and  varied  the  scenes  around  might  be, 
but  the  heart  was  always  the  same  :  true  to  its  one  grand  object  far  more  steadily 
than  the  magnetic  needle  which  does  not  always  point  to  the  north.  The  pinched 
miser  might  for  a  minute  forget  his  wealth:  a  spring  of  something  better  might  gush 
unawares  in  the  ambitious  man's  heart,  and  make  him  forget  the  aim  of  his  ambi- 
tion :  the  watching  mother  might  for  a  brief  instant  be  startled  into  a  forgetfuinesa 
that  would  take  away  the  heavy  burden  of  the  seldom -ceasing  remembrance  of  het 
little  dying  babe  :  but  the  moment  never  came  and  the  place  never  was,  in  which 


61  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  l 

the  great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  forgot  hia  Saviour.  Was  it  too  much,  then, 
when  looking  over  a  life  thus  leavened  and  pervaded,  he  said,  with  a  truthfulness 
of  which  words  were  but  poor  expression,  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ  I "  (A.  K. 
H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  Why  Christianity  does  not  prevail: — The  chief  reason  why 
Christianity  does  not  yet  pervade  the  world,  is  that  Christ  does  not  pervade  the 
life  of  Christians.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  To  die  Is  gain. — L  What  kind  of  an 
EVENT  DEATH  i8>  1.  It  is  the  most  dreadful  of  events.  (1)  Its  personifications 
show  this  :  "  Tyrant,"  "  monster,"  "  usurper,"  "  king  of  terrors,"  *'  last  enemy." 
(2)  Every  circumstance  connected  with  it  is  appalling,  (a)  Its  cause  and  sin. 
(fc)  Its  forerunners — spiritual  and  bodily,  (c)  Its  accompaniments,  forced  separa- 
tion, burial,  (d)  "After  death  the  judgment."  2.  It  is  the  most  decisive  event. 
It  places  the  righteous  beyond  the  possibility  of  fear,  and  the  ungodly  beyond  the 
possibility  of  hope.  .S.  It  is  that  event  in  which  the  excellency  of  religion  pre- 
eminently appears.  Religion  does  not  prevent  the  hissing  of  the  serpent,  but  it 
extracts  his  sting;  it  does  not  show  another  entrance  into  Canaan  than  through 
the  Jordan,  but  it  divides  the  flood.  II,  In  what  sense  dying  is  a  gain.  It 
exchanges  earth  for  heaven.  Think  of — 1.  Its  beauty.  2.  Its  purity.  8.  Its 
pleasures.  4.  Its  friendship.  {A.  Pope.)  Death  a  gain: — I.  Physically: 
freedom  from  bodily  restrictions,  pain,  and  temptation.  II.  Mentally.  The 
liberation  of  the  mind;  multiplication  of  subject  of  thought;  heavenly  inspiration. 

III.  Socially.  Re-union  of  friends ;  indefinite  enlargement  of  the  circle  of 
acquaintance ;  society  under  the  happiest,  healthiest,  and  permanent  conditions. 

IV.  Spiritually.  "  For  ever  with  the  Lord."  {W.  H.  H.  Murray.)  The  gain  of 
dying  : — I.  In  begabd  to  death  itself  it  is  not  a  OArs.  It  is  part  of  the  curse, 
the  effect  of  sin.  We  may  look  further  and  consider  these  things  as  they  bear 
upon  eternity.  The  irrevocable  step  is  taken.  Every  other  step  may  be  recovered, 
but  not  this.  If  death  be  not  gain,  what  is  it?  Infinite,  eternal  loss.  It  is  no 
small  thing — (1)  To  lose  one's  lamp  of  profession;  it  has  cost  years  of  hypocrisy  to 
keep  it ;  (2)  to  lose  one's  hope  ;  (3)  to  lose  one's  body  ;  (4)  but  to  lose  one's  soul, 
what  is  there  not  in  that  loss.  He  that  hath  not  death  for  his  gain,  what  has 
he  for  his  gain  J  (!)  Is  his  money  his  gain  ?  he  had  better  not  have  acquired  it. 
(2)  His  talent?  he  had  better  not  have  used  it?  (3)  His  soul  ?  he  had  better  not 
have  had  it.     (4)  The  gospel  ?  he  had  better  never  have  heard  it.     II.  In  what 

BENBE    CAN    THE    CHILD    OF    GoD    SAY    THAT    DEATH    IS    GAIN.       1.    Negatively.       (1)    Not 

because  he  has  more  pardon.  He  is  as  much  forgiven  on  earth  as  in  heaven.  (2) 
Not  because  he  is  more  a  child  of  God.  (3)  Not  because  he  is  more  the  object  of 
God's  sovereign  love.  2.  Positively.  Because — (1)  He  enjoys  perfect  freedom 
from  sin  and  temptation.  (2)  He  enters  the  land  of  perfect  rest,  full  enjoyment, 
and  unbroken  peace.  (3)  He  mingles  with  the  society  of  perfected  beings. 
(4)  He  is  for  ever  with  Christ.  (J.  U.  Evans,  M.A.)  The  saints^  death 
gain : — I.  The  conviction  of  the  apostle.  1.  It  did  not  rest  on  observation 
or  speculation.  These  would  lead  a  man  to  regard  death  as  the  very  re- 
verse. We  naturally  shrink  from  death,  and  that  because  death  it  unnatural, 
yet  we  know  it  to  be  the  destiny  of  every  one  of  us.  An  element  of  uncertainty 
mingles  with  every  other  exp«^ctation,  but  with  this  none.  Think,  too,  of  its  irre- 
Tocableness.  Many  of  our  efforts  may  be  repeated,  but  there  is  no  repetition  of 
death.  Mere  human  speculation,  even  in  the  wisest,  never  approached  a  conviction 
that  death  could  bring  gain.  Strong  desire  and  sublime  guessing,  this  is  all  we 
find  in  Socrates  or  Cicero.  2.  Paul's  conviction  rested  on  faith  in  Christ  as  the 
conqueror  of  death.  The  causes  of  aversion  to  death  include  the  *  *  dread  of  some- 
thing after  death."  The  only  adequate  explanation  of  death  is  that  it  is  the  wages 
of  sin.  The  glorious  tidings  of  the  gospel  are  that  Christ  hath  borne  the  curse  and 
overthrown  the  power  of  death.  Death  is  abolished,  only  the  form  remains.  The 
saint  shrinks  from  dying  but  has  no  fear  of  death.  3.  The  conviction  stood  in  the 
very  closest  relation  with  the  clause,  *'  To  live  is  Christ."  Only  those  who  are  alive 
unto  God  will  find  death  to  be  gain.  II.  The  fact  that  to  the  Christian  tbath 
IB  GAIN.  1.  It  is  wider,  deeper,  clearer,  more  accurate  knowledge  of  God  and  truth. 
2.  It  is  perfect  holiness.  ♦'  We  shall  be  like  Him."  3.  We  shall  enter  a  glorious 
society.  4.  We  shall  engage  in  joyful  tireless  work.  {R.Johnstone,  LL.B.)  Tlie 
benefit  of  death: — I.  Immediately  on  death  man  is  capable  of  gain.  The 
text  is  altogether  against  the  notion  of  the  soul's  sleep  between  death  and  the 
resurrection.  1.  The  soul  is  distinct  from  the  body  and  is  not  merely  the  vigour 
of  the  blood  (Gen.  ii.  7  ;  Eccles.  xi.  7).  It  is  distinct  (1)  in  its  supports  ;  (2)  in  its 
operations ;  (3)  as  to  weakness  and  perfection ;  (4)  as  to  pleasure  and  pain  ;  (5)  in 


CHAP.  I.]  PHILIPPIANS.  U 

the  oommands  Qod  hath  given  aboat   it   (Matt.    vi.  25 ;   ef.,  Dent.    iv.  9).      9. 
The  soul  can  exercise  its  operations  apart  from  the  body  (2  Cor.  xii.  2).     3.  That 
the  souls  of  the  saints  do  exist  apart  from  the  body  appeareth  from  Scripture 
<Phil.  i.  3  ;  2  Cor.  v.  1-2  ;  Luke  xxiii.  43).     II.  What  this  oajm  is.     1.  Its  nature. 
^1)  Privatively.     (o)  A  freedom  from  all  misery  (Rev.  xiv.  13,  xxi.  21  ;  Matt.  xxv. 
21).     There  is  to  be  no  serpent  in  the  upper  Paradise,     {b)  Freedom  from  sin 
{1  Cor.   XV,  26  ;  Eph.  v.  27 ;  Jude  24).     (2)  Positively,     (a)  The  vision  of  God 
(1  Cor.  xxii.  12) ;  1  John  iii.  2).     (b)  The  full  fruition  of  God  (2  Cor.  iii.   18 ; 
1  John  iii.  2)  in  holiness  and  happiness.     2.  Its  comfortable  adjuncts.     (1)  The 
place  which  is  very  glorious.     (2)  The  company  (Heb.  xii.  22-23  ;  Matt.  viii.  11). 
As  the  loops  of  the  tabernacle  did  couple  the  curtains,  so  dear  love  nuites  the  glori- 
fied saints.     III.  We  shall  lose  nothing  that  shall  not  be  made  op.     1.  Do 
we  lose  friends  ?     They  are  better  in  heaven,  and  we  shall  rejoin  them,     2.  Is  it 
ordinances  that  we  lose  ?     There  the  Lamb  shall  be  the  li^ht  of  the  New  Temple. 
We  shall  stuily  Divinity  in  the  light  of  Christ's  face;  and  drink  of  the  fruit  of  the 
vine  new  with  Christ  (Matt.  xxvi.  29).      3.  Communion  with  God  (1  Thess.  iv.  17). 
There  will  be  no  cloud  on  that  day.     4.  Service  and  opportunities  for  glorifying 
God.    We  shall  be  more  active  in  his  praise.     The  instrument  will  be  perfectly  in 
tune.   Here  we  often  jar.     There  will  be  no  spot  or  blemish  (Eph.  v.  27).     5.  Com- 
forts of  this  world.     They  are  of  use  in  our  passage,  and  we  must  possess  as  if  we 
possessed  not  (1  Cor.  vii,  81) ;  but  there  we  are  free  from  all  needs.      No  man 
complains  when  he  is  recovered  out  of  a  disease,  that  he  needs  no  more  physic, 
.IV,  Use.     1,  To  commend  Christ's  service  to  you.     If  you  have  dedicated  your  life 
to  Him,  then  death  will  be  better  (Gal,  vi,  8).     2.  A  meditation  for  the  dying.     {T. 
Manton,  D.D.)        The  benefits  which  believers  receive  at  death  : — In  what  respect 
death  is  gain  to  believers.     I.   In  respect  or  theib  souls.     It  separates  soola 
from  bodies,  not  to  their  loss  but  to  their  gain.     It  is  with  the  souls  of  believers  as 
with  Paul  and  his  company  in  Acts  xxvii.     The  ship  broke  in  pieces,  bat  the 
passengers  came  all  safe  to  land.    The  benefit  is  twofold.    1.  Perfection  in  holiness 
(Heb.  xii.  23),  which  up  to  this  consisted  only  in  gradual  advances.    This  perfection 
consists  in — (1)  Complete  freedom  from  sin  (Eph.  v.  27) ;  from  its  commission  (Rev 
xxi.  27);  its  veryinbeing,  the  possibility  of  sinning  (Rev,  iii.  12).     (2)  The  arrival 
of  their  holiness  at  the  highest  pitch  they  are  capable  of  (Eph.  iv.  13),     (a)  Their 
onderstandings  shall  be  perfectly  illuminated  (1  Cor.    xiii.  12).     (6)  Their  wills 
shall  be  perfectly  upright,  so  that  they  shall  will  nothing  but  good,  without  the 
least  bias  to  the  other  side  (Rev.  xxi.  27).     A  perfect  conformity  betwixt  God's  will 
and  theirs,  without  the  least  possible  jarring  (1  John  iii.  2).     (c)  The  executive 
faculty  shall  then  perfectly  answer  the  will  with  ease  and  delight  (Matt  vi.  10). 
2.  Immediate  entering  into  glory  (Luke  xxiii.  43).     Here  consider — (1)  The  glory 
they  enter  into,     (a)  A  glorious  place  (2  Cor.  v.  1 ;  John  xiv.  2 ;  Rev.  xxi.  23). 
(6)  A  glorious  society  (Heb.  xii.  23-4  ;  John  xvii.  24),     (c)  A  glorious  state.     What 
eye  hath  not  seen.      Rest  and  perfect  blessedness.     II.  In   respect   ot   theib 
BODIES.     Death  cannot  harm   them.     1,  It  cannot  separate  them  from  Christ 
(1  Thess,  iv.  14).     2.  It  is  a  stage  in  their  progress  towards  the  resurrection.     The 
saint's  dust  is  precious,  locked  up  in  the  grave  as  in  a  cabinet,  till  the  Lord  have 
farther  use  for  it.     (T.  Boston,  D.D.)         The  antidote  of  death : — I.  To  whom  thb 
btabtlino  expression  APPLIES.    To  Christians  and  no  others.     The  text  is  limited 
in  its  app  ication  by  the  previous  clause.     Character  and  privilege  are  nnseparably 
oonnecte'l.     To  all  but  Christians  death  is  everlasting  ruin.     II.  The  steanino  of 
THE  EXPRESSION.     1.  There  are  few  words  that  have  a  more  powerful  influence  over 
human  affairs  than  gain.    It  is  the  folly  and  the  sin  of  men  that  they  do  not  extend 
the  application  of  it  to  moral  subjects.     Blessed  the  man  who  in  reckoning  up  his 
gains  can  enter  death  as  one  of  the  items.    2.  How  wonderful  does  this  appear 
when  we  consider  what  death  is — the  most  fearful  thing  in  the  universe  next  to 
hell  and  sin.     Yet  it  is  gain  to  the  believer.    True,  he  loses  all  that  is  most  precious 
to  him  in  life  upon  earth  ;  but  all  that  he  loses  here  compared  with  what  he  gains 
in  heaven  is  as  the  surrender  of  a  little  homestead  and  a  contracted  farm  to  gain 
a  kingdom  and  a  crown,  or  parting  with  a  single  farthing  for  the  acquisition  of  a 
princely  revenue.    Death  is  gain.    (1)  Bydeliveting  the  Christian  from  all  evils; 
labour  and  weariness,  pain  and  weakness,  care  and  fear,  danger  and  disappoint- 
ment.   There  will  be  no  mortification  of  sin,  for  there  will  be  no  sin  to  mortify. 
No  ignorance  will  becloud  the  judgment;  no  rebellion  enslave  the  will,  no  depra- 
vity taint  the  heart,  no  disorder  misguide  the  passions.     And  as  there  will  be  no 
evil  in  ourselves  bo  there  will  be  none  in  our  companions.    Hence  there  wiU  be  no 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  I» 

envies  nor  strifes.  (2)  Because  it  brings  us  to  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  all 
desirable,  great,  and  glorious  things,  (a)  In  heaven  there  •will  be  all  things  really 
desirable.  Here  many  of  our  desires  are  unreasonable  and  their  objects  unattain- 
able, or  if  attained  injurious,  but  in  heaven  there  is  no  improper  desire.  We  shall 
wish  only  for  what  is  right  and  shall  never  be  disappointed.  (6)  All  things  great 
and  glorious.  Here  the  things  we  desire  are  not  great,  and  there  is  a  disproportioa 
between  the  object  we  covet  and  the  intensity  of  our  longings.  There  we  shall 
have  put  away  childish  things.  Two  words  are  descriptive  of  the  heavenly  state. 
(o)  Life — Eterual  life.  We  know  now  only  imperfectly  what  it  is  to  live.  There 
our  intellectual,  spiritual,  and  social  beiug  will  be  in  full  and  everlastiug  develop- 
ment. (6)  Glory.  We  shall  not  merely  behold  its  infinite  glories,  but  shall  say, 
"  All  these  are  mine."  Here  possession  and  enjoyment  are  often  separated ;  but  in 
heaven  the  objective  source  of  happiness  and  the  subjective  condition  of  the  soul 
will  be  in  harmony.  HI.  Leaving  these  general  remarks  we  may  notice  thb 
BESiDENCE  OF  THE  BiGHTEOHS.  Consider — 1.  The  agreeable  and  happy  associatea 
of  all  who  reach  that  blessed  world.  2.  Their  employments.  True,  we  shall_  rest 
from  our  labours,  but  activity  and  glory  will  not  be  labour.  3.  Their  condition. 
They  have  the  light  of  perfect  knowledge  irradiating  their  understanding,  the  glow 
of  perfect  love  warming  their  hearts,  the  purity  of  perfect  holiness  diffused  through 
their  character  for  ever.  This  gain  accrues  to  all  who  live  to  Christ.  We  may 
advance  a  step  further,  and  say  that  the  death  of  a  believer  is,  in  a  sense,  gain  to 
Christ.  He  is  magnified  by  the  death  of  His  saints,  in  the  support  He  administers, 
the  consolation  He  imparts,  the  triumphant  joys  He  inspires.  Conclusion :  1. 
What  a  proof  we  have  in  this  subject  of  the  truth,  excellence,  and  sustaining  power 
of  Christianity.  2.  What  a  powerful  means  to  overcome  the  undue  love  of  life  and 
fear  of  death.  3.  How  this  subject  should  reconcile  us  to  the  death  of  our  pious 
friends.  (J.  A.  James).  Socrates  and  Paul  on  death  : — Socrates  in  prison  in 
Athens,  as  Paul  was  in  Rome,  unjustly  accused,  too,  as  he  was,  a  good  teacher 
further,  according  to  his  light,  though  a  despised  and  rejected  one,  was  sustained 
by  the  consciousness  that  no  crime  had  been  his,  by  the  thought,  also,  that  hi» 
suffering  and  death  were  of  God's  will.  But  among  his  last  words,  before  the 
hemlock  bowl  had  done  its  work,  was  this  saddest  saying  to  his  friends  :  "  It  is  now 
time  to  depart : — for  me  to  die — for  you  to  live—  but  which  of  us  is  going  to  a  better 
thing,  is  uncertain  to  every  one  except  only  to  the  Deity."  These  words  are  not 
unlike  those  of  Paul,  but  nothing  of  Paul's  hope  and  assurance  glows  within  them. 
All  is  gloomy  uncertainty,  if  not  even  despair.  There  is  nothing  said  of  gain,  and 
where  it  is  to  be  found.  (J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.)  The  testimony  of  nature  and  of 
Christ  concerning  death : — This  is  indeed  a  strange  sound  in  the  ears  of  nature,  a 
sound  of  which  nature  knows  nothing,  and  which  sorely  puzzles  her.  Death  gain  I 
Why,  in  nature's  account-book  death  is  sheer  loss,  the  loss  of  everything,  the  loss 
of  life,  and  of  all  that  makes  life  pleasant  and  happy,  the  loss  of  the  green  fields 
and  of  the  blue  sky,  of  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  stars,  of  the  fresh  air,  of  our 
homes  and  our  gardens,  of  health,  and  strength,  and  mirth,  and  thought,  and 
friendship,  and  love.  It  is  the  loss  of  all  these  bright  and  precious  joys  :  and  what 
does  it  give  us  in  exchange  ?  Darkness,  and  colduess,  and  numbness — a  house  of 
clay,  with  worms  for  our  bedfellows — rottenness  and  nothingness.  And  can  this^ 
be  gain  ?  Yes,  brethren,  if  you  are  in  Christ,  as  sure  as  Christ  liveth,  as  sure  as 
God  liveth,  it  is  gain.  It  is  the  passing  from  impurity  to  purity,  from  imperfection 
to  perfection,  from  corruption  to  incorruption,  from  mortality  to  immortality,  from 
broken  glimpses  of  joy  glancing  through  clouds  of  sorrow,  to  the  full  ever-beaming 
sunshine  of  the  presence  of  God.  (Archdeacon  Hare.)  Christ  and  death : — As  a 
father  wades  out  into  a  stream  to  encourage  his  timid  child  to  cross,  so  Christ  went 
down  into  the  river  men  had  dreaded,  but  whose  waters  are  full  of  cleaosing,  and 
whose  farther  waves  beat  on  a  golden  shore.  I  regret  to  say  that  Christians  are 
slow  to  improve  the  privilege  of  knowledge  and  faith.  (IF.  H.  H.  Murray.) 
What  makes  death  gain : — A  leafless  wood  may  preach  you  an  awful  sermon.  Not 
only  may  you  look  upon  it  as  a  host  of  skeletons ;  it  may  also  cry  to  you  to  be- 
think yourselves  that  even  as  these  trees  stand  naked  from  bead  to  foot  before  the 
eye  of  heaven,  so  will  your  souls  ere  long  stand  utterly  bare  and  naked  before  the 
eye  of  God.  Every  cloak  and  mask  you  may  have  clad  them  in  will  be  torn  ofit. 
Every  fading  leaf  and  perishing  flower — whatever  is  bred  by  the  sun  of  this  world, 
or  pat  forth  to  win  the  eyes  of  this  world — all  the  dress  and  drapery  of  our  minds 
and  hearts — oar  cleverness,  our  skill,  our  learning,  our  knowledge,  oar  prudenee, 
our  indoitrj,  our  gaiety,  oar  good-fellowship — all  those  qaalities  of  fair  seeming 


«HA».  I.]  PHILIPPIANS.  M 

\rhiob  have  no  higher  aim  than  to  look  well  in  the  sight  of  oar  neighbours — will 
be  swept  away ;  and  nothing  will  remain  but  the  skeletons  of  our  souls,  shivering 
in  the  sight  of  men  and  of  angels,  in  the  day  of  that  last  and  terrible  winter,  when 
the  glory  of  this  world  will  have  waned,  and  death  will  have  spread  out  his  hand 
over  all  the  generations  of  mankind.  Nothing  will  remain  but  tbe  naked  trunk 
and  leafless  branches  of  our  souls,  except  those  seeds  of  Christian  faith  and  love, 
which  may  have  remained  secretly  wrapt  up  in  the  bosom  of  the  flowers.  The  leaf 
dies ;  for  the  leaf  has  no  life  in  it.  The  flower  dies ;  for  the  flower  has  no  life  in 
it.  Bat  the  seed,  if  it  be  the  seed  of  Christian  faith  and  love,  has  life  in  it,  and 
eannot  die.  When  it  falls  to  the  ground,  Christ  sends  His  angels  to  gather  it  up, 
and  bids  them  lay  it  by  in  the  storehouses  of  heaven.  By  the  world,  indeed,  it  ia 
unseen.  The  world  perceives  no  difference  between  the  flower  that  has  seed  in  it, 
and  the  flower  that  has  no  seed.  To  the  outward  eye  they  look  the  same;  for  the 
outward  eye  sees  only  what  is  outward.  But  Christ  knows  His  own :  He  bebolda 
the  seed  within  the  heart  of  the  flower:  and  He  will  not  suffer  it  to  die  or  to  be 
lost.  In  the  last  day  He  will  bring  it  forth,  and  will  crown  the  branches  again 
with  the  undying  flowers  of  heaven.  (Archdeacon  Hare.)  The  death  of  taint* 
magnifiei  Christ : — Kev.  J.  Hervey :  Oh,  welcome  death !  thou  mayst  well  be 
reckoned  among  the  treasures  of  the  Christian.  The  great  conflict  is  over  ;  all  is 
done.  To  live  is  Christ,  but  to  die  is  gain. — Dr.  Payson  :  The  battle's  fought — the 
battle's  fought ;  and  the  victory  is  won  ;  the  victory  is  won  for  ever  I  I  am  going 
to  bathe  in  an  ocean  of  purity,  and  benevolence,  and  happiness  to  all  eternity. 
Faith  and  patience,  hold  out. — Rev.  G.  Boberts  :  Be  quiet,  my  son  ?  Be  quiet,  my 
Bon  ?  No,  no  1  If  I  had  the  voice  of  an  angel  I  would  rouse  the  inhabitants  of 
Baltimore,  for  tbe  purpose  of  telling  them  of  the  joys  of  redeeming  love.  Victory  I 
Victory  I  Victory  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  1 — Rev.  P.  Hardcastle :  On  the 
Becond  day  before  his  death  his  pulse  was  feeble,  and  be  was  evidently  sinking. 
When  asked,  "  Can  you  say  that  the  precious  Word  which  you  have  been  preaching 
is  now  yonr  individual  salvation  ?  "  "  Yes,"  said  he,  "  and  my  strength."  "  And 
your  comfort  ?  "  *'  Yes,  and  my  peace."  "  And  yoar  refuge  ?  "  "  Yes,"  said  tbe 
dying  man,  "  and  my  life,  my  life,  my  life  ! '  He  passed  away  in  the  sixtieth  year 
of  his  age,  and  the  thirty-fifth  of  his  ministry. — Rev.  J.  Dickens:  "My  dear 
brother,  do  you  not  already  see  the  towers  of  the  New  Jerusalem  ?  "  said  a  Christian 
brother.  "  I  do,"  was  his  reply.  When  asked  by  the  same  person  if  they  should 
engage  in  prayer,  he  said — "  I  would  rather  engage  in  praise."  In  that  exercise  be 
spent  bis  last  breath.  The  last  words  uttered  were — "  Glory  I  Glory  1  Come,  Lord 
Jesus  1"  (J.  Bate.)  Two  prospects  in  death: — Before  some  of  us  there  rise 
tbe  high,  cold,  great  snow  mountains,  on  the  summits  of  which  nothing  can  live, 
and  when  we  come  to  the  base  of  them  we  look  up  and  feel  the  trackless  impassable 
wastes,  and  know  not  what  lies  beyond ;  but  before  others  of  us  this  man  and  those 
who  hold  with  him,  there  has  been  a  tunnel  cut  through  the  Alps,  and  it  goes 
straight  on,  and  comes  out,  keeping  on  in  the  same  direction,  beneath  a  bluer  sky, 
and  with  a  brighter  land,  with  summer  plains  and  a  happier  life  spread  before  as 
in  the  warm  south.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Contrasted  views  of  death: — "To  die 
is  ^iain,"  said  Paul.  "  Out  upon  thee,  thoa  ugly,  foul  phantom,"  said  Charles 
Lambj  the  mere  man  of  letters,  "  I  detest,  abhor,  and  execrate  thee,  to  be  shunned 
as  a  universal  viper,  to  be  branded,  proscribed,  and  evil  spoken  of.  I  care  not  to 
be  carried  with  the  tide  that  smoothly  bears  human  life  to  eternity.  I  am  in  love 
with  this  green  earth,  the  face  of  town  and  country,  the  unspeakable  rural  solitudes 
and  the  sweet  security  of  streets.  I  would  set  up  my  tabernacle  here — a  new  state 
of  being  staggers  me."  (J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  Death  differently  viewed  by 
different  characters : — You  have  been  in  a  ship  when  it  entered  the  harbour,  ana 
you  have  noticed  tbe  different  looks  of  the  passengers  as  they  turned  their  eyes 
ashore.  There  was  one  who,  that  he  might  not  lose  a  moment's  time,  had  got 
everything  ready  for  landing  long  ago  ;  and  now  he  smiles  and  beckons  to  yonder 
party  on  the  pier,  who  in  their  turn,  are  so  eager  to  meet  him,  that  they  almost 
press  over  the  margin  of  the  quay ;  and  no  sooner  is  the  gangway  thrown  across, 
than  he  has  bold  of  the  arm  of  one,  and  another  is  triumphant  on  his  shoulder, 
and  all  tbe  rest  are  leaping  before  and  after  him  on  their  homeward  way.  But 
there  is  another,  who  showed  no  alacrity.  He  gazed  with  pensive  eye  on  the 
nearer  coast  and  seemed  to  grudge  that  the  trip  was  over.  He  was  a  stranger 
going  amongst  strangers,  and  though  sometimes  during  tbe  voyage  be  bad  a 
momentary  hope  that  something  unexpected  might  occur,  and  that  some  friendly 
iaoe  might  recognize  him  in  regions  where  be  was  going  an  alien  and  an  adTcntorar 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  i. 

— no  such  welcoming  tace  is  there,  and  with  reluctant  steps  he  quits  the  vessel, 
and  commits  himself  to  the  unknown  country.  And  now  that  every  one  else  has 
disembarked,  who  is  this  unhappy  man  whom  they  have  brought  on  deck,  and 
whom,  groaning  in  his  heavy  chains,  they  are  conducting  to  the  dreaded  shore? 
Alas!  he  is  a  felon  and  a  runaway,  whom  they  are  bringing  back  to  take  his  trial 
there ;  and  no  wonder  he  is  loath  to  land.  Now,  dear  brethren,  our  ship  is  sailing 
fast.  We  shall  soon  hear  the  rasping  of  the  shallows,  and  the  commotion  overhead, 
which  bespeak  the  port  in  view.  Wien  it  comes  to  that,  how  shall  you  feel  ?  Are 
you  a  stranger,  or  a  convict,  or  are  you  going  home?  Can  you  say,  •*  I  know  whom 
I  have  believed  "  T  Have  you  a  Friend  within  the  veil  ?  And  however  much  yoa 
may  enjoy  the  voyage,  and  however  much  you  may  like  your  fellow  passengers, 
does  your  heart  sometimes  leap  up  at  the  prospect  of  seeing  Jesus  as  he  is,  and  so 
bein^  ever  with  the  Lord  1  {James  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Happy  to  live  or  die  in 
Christ : — Just  before  Calvin  died  he  wrote  to  a  friend  these  words  :  "My  respira- 
tion is  difficult,  and  I  am  about  to  breathe  the  last  gasp,  happy  to  live  and  die  in 
Jesus  Christ,  who  is  gain  to  all  His  children  in  life  and  death."  He  felt  what  Paul 
felt.  Ready  for  life  or  death  : — A  lady  once  said  to  John  Wesley,  "  Suppose  you 
knew  you  were  to  die  at  12  o'clock  to-morrow  night,  how  would  you  employ  the 
intervening  time  ?  "  "  Why,  just  as  I  intend  to  spend  it  now.  I  would  preach  this 
evening  at  Gloucester,  and  again  at  5  o'clock  to-morrow  morning.  After  that  I 
should  ride  to  Tewkesbury,  preach  in  the  afternoon,  meet  the  Societies  in  the 
evening.  Then  repair  to  friend  Martin's,  who  expects  to  entertain  me,  converse 
and  pray  with  the  family  as  usual,  retire  to  my  room  at  10  o'clock,  commend 
myself  to  my  heavenly  Father,  lie  down  to  rest,  and  wake  up  in  glory  I "  A 
believer's  privilege  at  death: — 1,  Believers  at  death  shall  gain  the  glorious  sight 
of  God.  They  shall  see  Him  intellectually  with  the  eyes  of  their  mind,  which 
divines  call  the  beatifical  vision ;  if  there  were  not  such  an  intellectual  sight  of 
God,  how  do  the  spirits  of  just  men,  made  perfect,  see  Him  ?  They  shall  behold 
the  glorified  body  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and  if  it  be  pleasant  to  behold  the  sun,  then 
how  blessed  a  sight  will  it  be  to  see  Christ  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness  clothed  with 
our  human  nature,  shining  in  glory  above  the  angels  ?  Through  Christ's  flesh, 
as  through  a  transparent  glass,  some  bright  rays  and  beams  of  the  Godhead  shall 
display  themselves  to  glorified  eyes ;  the  sight  of  God  through  Christ  will  be  very 
complacential  and  delightful;  the  terror  of  God's  essence  will  be  taken  away; 
God's  majesty  will  be  mixed  with  beauty,  and  sweetened  with  clemency ;  it  will 
be  infinitely  delightful  to  the  saints  to  see  the  amiable  aspects  and  smiles  of  God's 
face.  2.  The  saints  at  death  shall  not  only  have  a  sight  of  God,  but  shall  enjoy 
the  love  of  God ;  there  shall  be  no  more  a  vail  on  God's  face,  nor  His  smiles 
chequered  with  frowns,  but  His  love  shall  discover  itself  in  all  its  orient  beauty 
and  fragrant  sweetness.  Here  the  saints  pray  for  God's  love,  and  they  have  a  few 
drops,  but  there  they  shall  have  as  much  as  their  vessel  can  receive.  To  know 
this  love  that  passeth  knowledge,  this  will  cause  jubilation  of  spirit,  and  create 
such  holy  raptures  of  joy  in  the  saints  as  are  superlative,  and  would  soon  over- 
whelm them  if  God  did  not  make  them  able  to  bear  it.  3.  Believers  at  death  shall 
gain  a  celestial  palace,  an  house  not  made  with  hands.  Here  the  saints  are 
straitened  for  room,  they  have  but  mean  cottages  to  live  in,  but  they  shall  have 
a  royal  palace  to  live  in  ;  here  is  but  their  sojourning-house,  there  in  heaven  is 
their  mansion-house,  an  house  built  high  above  all  the  visible  orbs,  an  house 
bespangled  with  light,  enriched  with  pearls  and  precious  stones.  And  this  is  not 
their  landlord's  house,  but  their  Father's  house ;  and  this  house  stands  all  upon 
consecrated  ground ;  it  is  set  out  by  transparent  glass  to  show  tht  holiness  of  it. 
4.  Believers  at  death  shall  gain  perfection  of  holiness.  Here  grace  was  but  in  its 
cradle,  very  imperfect ;  we  cannot  write  a  copy  of  holiness  without  blotting  ; 
believers  are  said  to  receive  but  *'  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit."  But  at  death  the 
saints  shall  arrive  at  perfection,  their  knowledge  clear,  their  sanctity  perfect,  their 
■on  shall  be  in  its  full  meridian  splendour.  How  come  the  saints  to  have  all 
this  gain  ?  Believers  have  a  right  to  all  this  gain  at  death  upon  divers  accounts  : 
by  virtue  of  the  Father's  donation,  the  Son's  purchase,  the  Holy  Ghost's  earnest — 
and  faith's  acceptance.  Therefore  the  state  of  future  glory  is  called  the  saints' 
proper  inheritance.  They  are  heirs  of  God,  and  have  a  right  to  inherit.  See  the 
great  difference  between  the  death  of  the  godly  and  the  wicked ;  the  godly  are 
gainers  at  death,  the  wicked  are  great  losers  at  death.  They  lose  fonr  things : 
L  They  lose  the  world.  2.  They  lose  their  soula.  3.  They  lose  heaven.  4.  They 
iMe  their  hopes;  foi  though  they  lived  wickedly,  yet  they  hoped  God  wm  meroifcl. 


CHAP,  t]  PEILIPPIANS. 


ftnd  they  hoped  that  they  should  go  to  heaven.  Some  plants  thrive  best  when 
they  are  transplanted :  believers,  when  they  are  by  death  transplanted,  cannot 
choose  but  thrive,  because  they  have  Christ's  sweet  sunbeams  shining  upon  them. 
And  what  though  the  passage  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  be  trouble- 
some? who  would  not  be  willing  to  pass  a  tempestuous  sea  if  he  were  sure  to  be 
crowned  so  soon  as  he  came  to  shore?  What  benefits  do  believers  receive  at 
death  ?  I.  The  saints  at  death  have  great  immunities  and  freedoms.  An  appren- 
tice when  out  of  his  time  is  made  free :  when  the  saints  are  out  of  their  time 
of  living,  then  they  are  made  free,  not  made  free  till  death.  1.  At  death  they  are 
freed  from  a  body  of  sin.  (1)  It  weighs  us  down ;  sin  hinders  us  from  doing  good. 
A  Christian  is  like  a  bird  that  would  be  flying  up,  but  hath  a  string  tied  to  its  legs 
to  hinder  it :  so  he  would  be  flying  up  to  he&ven  with  the  wings  of  desire,  but  sin 
hinders  him  :  "  for  what  I  would,  that  I  do  not."  A  Christian  is  like  a  ship  that 
is  under  sail,  and  at  anchor ;  grace  would  sail  forward,  but  sin  is  the  anchor  that 
holds  it  back.  (2)  Sin  is  more  active  in  its  sphere  than  grace.  How  stirring  was 
lust  in  David  when  his  grace  lay  dormant  1  (3)  Sin  deliles  the  soul,  it  is  like 
a  stain  to  beauty,  it  turns  the  soul's  azure  brightness  into  sable.  (4)  Sin  debilitates 
us,  it  disarms  ua  of  our  strength  :  "  I  am  this  day  weak,  though  anointed  king  :  " 
so,  though  a  saint  be  crowned  with  grace,  yet  he  is  weak,  though  anointed  a 
spiritual  king.  (5)  Sin  is  ever  restless  :  "  the  flesh  lusts  against  the  Spirit."  (6) 
Sin  adheres  to  us,  we  cannot  get  rid  of  it.  (7)  Sin  mingles  with  our  duties  and 
graces;  we  cannot  write  a  copy  of  holiness  without  blotting.  Death  smites  a 
believer  as  the  angel  did  Peter,  he  made  his  chains  fall  off,  so  death  makes  all  the 
chains  of  sin  fall  off.  This  makes  a  believer  so  desirous  to  have  his  pass  to  be 
gone;  he  would  fain  live  in  that  pure  air  where  no  black  vapours  of  sin  arise. 
II.  At  death  the  saints  shall  be  freed  from  all  the  troubles  and  incumbrances  to 
which  this  life  is  subject.  There  are  many  things  to  embitter  life  and  cause 
trouble,  and  death  frees  us  from  all.  1.  Care.  Care  is  a  spiritual  canker  which 
eats  out  the  comfort  of  life  ;  death  is  the  cure  of  care,  2.  Fear.  Fear  is  the  ague 
of  the  soul  which  sets  it  a  shaking;  "there  is  torment  in  fear."  Fear  is  like  Pro- 
metheus's  vulture,  it  gnaws  upon  the  heart.  3.  Labour.  "All  things  are  "full  of 
labour."  Tbey  rest  from  their  labours.  4.  Suffering.  Believers  are  as  a  hly 
among  thorns ;  as  the  dove  among  the  birds  of  prey.  5.  Temptation.  Though 
Satan  be  a  conquered  enemy,  yet  he  is  a  restless  enemy.  After  death  hath  shot 
its  darts  at  us,  the  devil  shtll  have  done  shooting  hi> ;  though  grace  puts  a  believer 
out  of  the  devil's  possession,  only  death  frees  Lim  from  the  devil's  temptation. 
6.  Sorrow.  Believers  are  here  in  a  strange  country,  why  then  should  they  not  be 
willing  to  go  out  of  it?  Death  beats  off  their  fetters  of  sin,  and  sets  them  free. 
Who  goes  weeping  from  a  jail?  Besides  our  own  sins,  the  sins  of  others.  0  then 
be  willing  to  depart  out  of  the  tents  of  Kedar  1  (T,  Watson.)  Victory  after 
death : — Cassar,  after  his  victories,  in  token  of  houour,  had  a  chair  of  ivory  set  for 
him  in  the  senate,  and  a  throne  in  the  tht^atre;  the  saints,  having  obtained  their 
victories  over  sin  and  Satan,  shall  be  enthroned  with  Christ  iu  the  empyrean 
heaven.  To  sit  with  Christ  denotes  safety  :  to  sit  on  the  throne,  dignity :  "  this 
honour  have  all  the  saints."  In  glory  is  a  blessed  rest — "  there  remaineth  there- 
fore a  rest."  A  happy  transit  from  labour  to  rest.  Here  we  can  have  no  rest, 
tossed  and  turned  as  a  ball  on  a  racket,  "  we  are  troubled  on  every  side."  How 
can  a  ship  rest  in  a  storm  ?  But  after  death  the  saints  get  into  their  haven. 
Everything  is  quiet  in  the  centre ;  God  is  "  the  centre  where  the  soul  doth  sweetly 
acquiesce."  A  Christian,  after  his  weary  marches  and  battles,  shall  put  off  his 
bloody  armour,  and  rest  himself  upon  the  bosom  of  Jesus,  that  bed  of  perfume ; 
when  death  hath  given  the  saints  the  wings  of  a  dove,  then  they  shall  fly  away 
to  paradise  and  be  at  rest.     (Ibid. ) 

Vers.  22-26.  But  If  I  Uve  In  the  flesh  this  Is  the  fruit  of  my  labour.— L  Thb 
PEBSONAi.  WEioHEDwiTH  THE  PUBLIC,  or  the  difficulties  of  the  veteran  philanthropist. 
II.  Man's  sublimest  reason  for  not  wishing  immediate  translation  is  that  hb 

MAT  BE  OF  SPIRITDAL  SERVICE  TO  THE  WORLD.  III.  The  NEXT  BEST  CONDITION  TO  THAI 
OF  BEING  WITH  ChRIST  IS  TO  BE  WORKING  FOR  HiS  PEOPLE.       "  To  be  with  Chrfst    .    .    , 

to  abide  with  you."  How  could  there  be  hesitation  in  deciding  the  choice  ?  Selfish- 
ness could  not  have  hesitated.  True,  but  selfishness  would  never  have  been  called 
upon  to  make  the  election.  Benevolence  has  its  difficulties  as  well  as  selfishness. 
Love  lifts  a  finger  to  the  heavens  and  points  another  to  the  earth.  The  choice  ia 
betwe3n  gain  and  service,  and  rightly  estimated  service  is  gain.  It  is  worth  all  pain 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

and  inconvenience  to  remain  out  of  heaven  so  long  as  you  can  prepare  your  con- 
temporaries for  it.  You  are  with  Christ  as  long  as  you  are  with  His  work.  The 
apostle  is  not  a  dreamy  contemplatist  always  wishing  for  some  more  pleasant  con- 
ditions of  existence.  He  is  a  worker  who  finds  satisfaction  in  labour.  There  is  a 
disease  in  the  Church  which  corifounds  religion  with  wishing  for  heaven.  Persona 
afflicted  with  it  hold  their  heads  so  erectly  as  not  to  see  the  spiritual  darkness 
around  them.  They  are  dreamers,  transceriJentalists,  but  are  they  Christians  ? 
They  ave  fond  of  hymns  that  warble  the  blessedness  of  heaven ;  they  revel  in  texts 
that  describe  the  rest,  the  power,  the  fascinations  of  the  heavenly  state.  Let  such 
diseased  ones  mark  how  the  apostle  conjoins  "  labour  "  and  "  gain,"  and  how  he 
balances  what  is  "  needful  "  for  man  with  what  would  be  pleasant  to  himself ;  and 
let  them  be  rebuked  and  stimulated  by  the  joy  with  which  he  anticipated  restora 
tion  to  his  laborious  life.  IV.  There  is  only  one  world  in  which  you  can  serve 
KEN  evangelically  ;  do  not  be  in  indecent  haste  to  escape  the  opportunity.  When 
you  wish  tu  enter  heaven  may  you  have  a  strong  drawing  to  the  service  still  to  be 
done  on  earth.  V.  God  never  leaves  the  earth  entirely  destitute  of  great 
MEN.  Elijah  may  deem  himself  alone,  but  God  knows  that  there  are  seven  thousand 
who  have  never  kissed  the  world's  dumb  god.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  St.  Paul's 
choice: — As  an  overfondness  for  life  is  a  mean,  effeminate  passion  that  exposes  ua 
to  the  basest  impressions,  and  renders  us  insensible  to  every  honourable  purpose, 
BO  a  contempt  of  death  has  been  esteemed  one  of  the  principal  ingredients  in  a 
great  character.  From  the  views  of  heathen  morality  it  is  difficult  to  understand 
why  he  who  had  no  sure  prospect  of  another  life  should  be  over  prodigal  of  this  ; 
but  when  we  behold  a  man  raised  above  the  world  by  a  just  sense  of  immortality 
we  cannot  but  applaud  the  example  as  an  honour  to  human  nature,  and  a  glorious 
instance  of  the  power  of  the  gospel.  Notice — I.  The  reasons  that  inclined  Paul 
to  desire  to  dupart — "To  be  with  Christ."  1.  This  signifies  that  state  of 
happiness  revealed  by  our  Lord  in  His  promise  to  His  disciples  that  where  He  waa 
they  should  be  also.  2.  What  the  nature  and  degree  of  it  is  the  Scripture  has 
nowhere  informed  us ;  and,  indeed,  in  our  present  state  exact  notions  of  it  are  im- 
possible. 3.  It  is  enough  to  know  that  to  be  with  Christ  is  to  be  partakers  of  His 
glory.  This  is  twofold.  (1)  Eeal  but  imperfect  immediately  upon  death.  (2)  Com- 
plete after  the  resurrection.  II,  The  motives  that  reconciled  him  to  a  longer 
BTAY,  1.  He  had  not  only  a  certain  prot,pect  of  happiness  in  another  life,  but  un- 
common  reasons  to  be  weary  of  this.  2.  But  persecuted  and  discouraged  as  he  was 
and  would  still  be,  his  charity  for  the  souls  of  men,  and  his  zeal  for  his  Master, 
prevailed  with  him  to  defer  his  own  felicity.  He  was  moved  with  compassion  to 
the  errors  of  a  deluded  world,  and  affected  with  the  concern  of  a  father  for  the 
happiness  of  his  converts.  III.  The  submission  he  expresses  to  the  wisdom 
AND  appointment  OF  GoD.  He  did  not  presume  to  make  bis  own  choice.  He  knew 
(ver.  25)  that  God  had  determined  he  should  abifle,  and  therefore  he  cheerfully 
acquiesces  in  the  Divine  will,  and  is  as  easer  to  promote  the  glory  of  God  in  one 
world  as  to  partake  of  it  in  another.  Application  :  1.  The  prospect  of  being  with 
Christ  is  as  much  ours  as  it  was  his.  2.  This  prospect  is  a  powerful  support 
against  death,  and  a  great  encouragement  to  duty.  3.  The  prospect,  however,  of 
being  of  use  to  Christ  here  should  beget  a  willingness  to  postpone  our  departure 
that  Christ's  will  may  be  done.  {J.  Rogers,  D.D.)  A  strait  betwixt  two : — I. 
Continuance.  Continued  life  meant — 1.  Continued  labour.  Nothing  which  God 
makes  is  without  a  work  to  do.  "All  things  are  full  of  labour."  To  God's  moral 
creatures  is  given  the  sublime  privilege  that  not  blindly  through  the  action  of 
material  laws,  i)Ut  consciously  and  by  resolutions  of  their  own,  they  may  fulfil  the 
end  of  their  existence.  (1)  To  work,  then,  according  to  the  faculties  and  opportuni- 
ties which  God  has  given  us  is  our  duty.  (2)  Work  is  the  law  of  the  new  life  in 
Christ  Jesus.  "  Son,  go  work."  (3)  The  manifestation  of  God's  life  is  holy, 
beneficent  activity.  Here  is  our  example.  (4)  The  highest  conceivable  honour  for 
God's  creatures  is  to  be  "  labourers  together  with  Him."  (5)  As  this  is  duty,  so  is 
it  the  direction  in  which  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us  to  turn  our  energies. 
(6)  But  what  if  through  illness,  &c.,  a  Christian  cannot  work?  Then  he  works  by 
the  influence  of  his  resignation  and  his  prayers.  2.  "  Fruit  of  labour  " — success  in 
the  work  to  which  God  calls  him.  (1)  As  a  rule  honest,  hearty  labour  of  every  kind 
succeeds  more  or  less.  Yet  there  are  often  fitilures.  Shipwreck  overwhelms  the 
vessel,  or  fire  consumes  the  factory,  or  disease  enfeebles.  The  Christian,  when 
calamities  of  this  kind  overtake  him,  recognizes  in  them  a  reminder  that  there  it 
higher  wealth  and  nobler  work  than  that  which  has  to  do  with  this  world.     (2)  la 


«up.  i-l  PHIUPPIANS.  6f 

the  spiritnal  sphere  there  U  always  "  fruit  of  laboar,*'  thongh  very  often  neither  aa, 
nor  when,  nor  where  we  look  for  it.  All  earnest  effort  for  personal  Bpiritual 
advancement  succeeds,  for  *'  this  is  the  will  of  God."  Fruit  of  this  kind  is  yielded, 
too,  by  every  Christian  effort  to  benefit  others.  With  regard  to  the  direct  effort  of 
Christian  labour  for  the  good  of  others,  even  where  there  is  little  or  no  visible  fruit, 
■till  the  conscientious  worker  has  abundant  ground  of  encouragement.  Christian 
labourers  casually  learn,  long  after,  of  spiritual  good  done  when  they  complained 
of  labouring  in  vain.  The  seed  may  long  lie  inactive.  3.  This,  then,  is  what  Paul 
sees  to  counterbalance  the  influence  of  the  reflection  "  to  die  is  gain."  II.  De. 
PABTURE.  1.  One  grand  thought.  Paul's  wish  was  that  by  departure  he  should  be 
with  Christ  2.  Some  Christians  have  held  that  the  intermediate  state  is  one  of 
sleep.  But  our  Lord's  declaration  to  the  dying  thief  disposes  of  that;  and  had  it 
been  Paul's  view  he  would  have  counted  it  better  to  remain  with  Christ  here.  3.  To 
depart  and  be  with  Christ  was  "  better  by  very  far  "  than  remaining  in  a  world  of 
ignorance,  and  sin,  and  trouble.  IIL  The  strait  between  the  two.  1.  Of  struggle 
between  liking  and  a  sense  of  duty  every  soul  of  any  strength  and  nobleness  has 
experience  every  day.  2.  Paul  was  led  to  choose  the  less  desirable  personally  out  of 
love  to  Christ  and  His  cause.  3.  The  principle  on  which  this  choice  was  based  is 
that  God,  having  a  plan  of  life  for  each  of  His  people,  no  one  of  them  will  pass 
away  so  long  as  any  work  remains  for  them  to  do.  No  Christian  dies  prematurely. 
(B.  Johmon,  LL.  B.) 

Vers.  23-24.  I  am  In  a  etralt  betwixt  two.— Christ  i$  hett:  or,  St.  Paul's 
ttrait: — I.  St.  Paul's  BTRArr.  His  soul  was  as  a  ship  between  two  winds,  tossed 
up  and  down ;  as  iron  between  two  loadstones,  drawn  first  one  way  and  then 
another.  The  people  of  God  are  often  in  great  straits.  Some  things  are  so  exceed- 
ingly bad  that  without  deliberation  we  ought  to  abominate  them ;  some  things  so 
good  that  we  should  immediately  cling  to  them  ;  others  again  are  of  a  doubtful 
nature,  requiring  our  best  consideration,  as  Paul's  here.  II.  One  qbodnd  of  this 
STRAIT  WAS  HIS  PRESENT  OESiBE.  1.  I  have  a  desire.  When  there  is  anything  Bet 
before  the  soul  having  a  magnetical  force  to  draw  out  the  motives  thereof  we  call 
that  a  desire,  even  though  for  the  present  the  soul  desires  it  not.  This  desire  was — 
{!)  Spiritual.  (2)  It  came  from  a  taste  of  sweetness  in  communion  with  Christ. 
(3)  Constant.  •'  I  have,"  I  carry  it  about  with  me.  (4)  EfiBcacious,  not  the  will  of 
a  sluggard,  but  one  which  carried  him  through  death  itself.     2.  I  desire  to  depart. 

(1)  There  must  be  a  parting  from  the  enjoyment  of  the  creature,  from  the  body, 
from  friends.  (2)  There  was  to  be  a  departing  also.  Here  we  cannot  stay  long  ; 
away  we  must ;  we  are  for  another  place  (Psa.  xc.  2).  Paul  labours  to  sweeten  so 
harsh  a  thing  by  comfortable  expressions  of  it — sleep,  going  home,  Ac.  3.  I  desire 
to  be  with  Christ.  (1)  Why  doth  he  not  say  heaven  7  Because  heaven  is  not 
heaven  without  Christ,  but  He  is  the  heaven  of  heaven.  Every  creature  is  best  in 
its  own  element ;  Christ  is  the  element  of  the  Christian.  If,  therefore,  death  is  a 
passage  to  Him,  what  is  there  in  it  to  be  feared?  (1  Cor.  iii.  22).  (2)  There  is  none 
but  a  Christiau  who  can  desire  death,  for  to  be  with  Christ  is  perfect  holiness. 
4.  The  consummation  of  this  desire  would  be  far  better  than  anything  or  every- 
thing else.  God  reserves  the  best  for  the  last.  The  Christiau  is  happy  in  life, 
happier  in  death,  happiest  in  heaven.  5.  How  shall  we  attain  this  desire  ?  Let  us 
carry  ourselves  as  Paul  did  (chap.  iii.  20).     (1)  He  had  Ins  conversation  in  heaven. 

(2)  He  loosed  his  affection  from  all  earthly  things  (Gal.  vi.  14).  (3)  He  laboured 
to  keep  a  good  conscience  in  all  things  (Acts  xxiv.  16 ;  Heb.  x.  22).  (4)  He  had 
the  assurance  that  he  was  in  Christ  by  his  union  with  Him  (Gal.  ii.  19).  (5)  He 
had  an  art  of  sweetening  the  thoughts  of  death,  by  regarding  it  as  the  passage  to 
Christ  and  life.  III.  The  other  qbocnd  of  his  strait  was  hib  present  conviction 
that  to  stay  was  better  for  them.  1.  The  lives  of  worthy  men  are  very  needful  for 
the  Church  of  God,  because  God's  method  is  to  bless  man  bv  man.  (1)  By  their 
counsel  and  direction  (Prov.  vii.  21).  (2)  By  their  reformation  of  abuses.  (3)  By 
their  good  example  (chap.  ii.  15).  (4)  By  their  prayers.  2.  Holy  men  can  deny 
themselves  and  their  own  best  good  for  the  Church's  benefit.  Because — (1)  They 
have  the  spirit  of  love,  and  love  seeketh  not  her  own.  (2)  The  Spirit  of  Christ  who 
minded  not  His  own  things  (1  Cor.  x.  24).  3.  Use.  (1)  Oh  that  we  may  have  this 
Spirit  to  set  us  a  work  to  do  good  while  we  are  here.  (2)  Set  loving  hearts  full  of 
inventions  how  to  glorify  God  and  do  good  to  man.  (3)  Labour  to  have  suf&oiency 
that  you  may  have  ability  to  do  good.  (R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  Willing  to  wait,  but 
ready  to  go : — I.   The  two  desires.     1.  To  depart  and  be  with  ChriBt.     Thia 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

desire  is  composed  of  two  parts — a  vestibule  somewhat  dark  and  forbidding,  throagh 
which  the  pilgrim  must  pass,  and  a  temple  unspeakably  glorious,  which  is  to  be  his 
home.  (1)  The  exodus  from  this  life  by  dissolution  of  the  body.  The  band  that 
knits  body  to  soul  is  broken  at  death,  and  the  soul  escapes.  (2)  The  company  to 
which  the  exodus  more  directly  leads  is  Christ.  Paul  knew  of  no  place  of  purgation. 
Wherever  and  whatever  the  place  of  saved  spirits,  one  thing  is  certain — Christ  is 
there.  Christians  need  not  care  for  more.  Christ's  presence  is  needed  for  human 
happiness.  Heaven  would  not  be  heaven,  however  otherwise  glorious,  without  a 
human  Christ  to  fasten  the  affections  upon.  2.  To  abide  in  the  flesh.  (1)  It  is  ft 
natural  and  lawful  desire.  God  has  placed  and  visited  us  here,  and  given  us  some- 
thing  to  do.  This  is  a  point  of  great  imp(jrtance.  Some  rebelliously  cling  to  life 
without  respect  to  God's  will ;  others  are  troubled  because  in  illness  they  discover 
a  desire  for  longer  days.  Let  the  love  of  life  remain,  only  get  it  so  sanctified  that 
at  the  appointed  time  it  may  cease.  II.  The  Christian  balanced  evenly  between 
THE  TWO  DESIRES.  1.  To  depart  was  far  beiter.  2.  To  stay  was  more  needful.  3.  The 
desire  to  be  with  Christ  does  not  make  life  unhappy,  because  it  is  balanced  by  the 
pleasure  of  working  for  Christ ;  the  desire  to  work  for  Christ  does  not  make  the 
approach  of  dissolution  painful,  because  itis  balanced  by  the  expectation  of  being 
soon  ever  with  the  Lord.  4.  These  two  constitute  the  spiritual  man.  They  are  the 
right  and  left  sides  of  the  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.  Where  both  grow  equally, 
there  is  no  halting;  where  both  have  grown  well,  the  step  is  steady  and  the  progress 
great.  III.  Practical  lessons.  1.  This  text  is  sufficient  to  destroy  the  whole 
fabric  of  Romish  prayer  to  departed  saints.  2.  The  chief  use  of  a  Cliristian  in  the 
world  is  to  do  good.  3.  You  cannot  be  effectively  useful  to  those  who  are  in  need 
on  earth  unless  you  hold  by  faith  and  hope  to  Christ  on  high.  4.  Living  hope  of 
going  to  be  with  Christ  is  the  only  anodyne  which  can  neutralize  the  pain  of  part- 
ing with  those  who  are  dear  to  us  in  the  body.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  attractions 
of  heaven  checked  by  the  claims  of  earth : — I.  Having  a  desire  to  depart.  A 
disciple  of  Christ  may  have  a  desire  to  depart.  1.  For  the  sake  of  having  the  de- 
parting over.  This  is  more  terrible  in  prospect  than  in  realization  or  in  retrospect. 
We  shrink  from  the  strangeness  of  a  new  habitation  however  glorious;  from  the 
dark  valley,  however  bright  the  yonder  light.  2.  For  the  sake  of  heaven's  attrac- 
tions as — (1)  A  place.  It  is  Paradise  regained.  Beauty  smiles  there,  life  reigns 
there,  the  blessing  of  God  is  enshrined  tliere.  There  is  no  night,  no  withering  cold 
or  scorching  heat.  (2)  A  state,  sorrowless,  deathless,  curseltss,  sinless.  8.  For 
the  sake  of  the  objects  of  our  holiest  affections — our  Father,  our  glorified  Saviour, 
unfallen  spirits,  redeemed  souls.  4.  For  the  sake  of  the  realization  of  our  highest 
hopes.  The  weary  look  for  rest,  the  hindered  worker  for  unfettered  action,  the  sad 
for  gladness,  the  solitary  for  congenial  society,  the  fearful  for  safety,  the  doubtful 
for  certainty.  II.  There  were  claims  which  held  Padl  to  earth.  1.  Had  Paul 
been  a  husband  and  a  father  he  could  have  turned  to  his  household  and  said,  "for 
you."  But  his  only  tie  to  earth  was  God's  Church.  There  is  a  peculiar  connection 
between  the  man  who  has  been  the  means  of  another's  conversion  or  spiritual  pro- 
gress which  can  never  be  dissolved  and  which  no  other  can  take  up.  Paul,  therefore, 
desired  to  live  to  instruct  and  comfort  his  converts,  guide  the  whole  Church,  and 
win  souls  for  Christ.  2.  This  doable  attraction  perplexed,  him  and  it  was  a  good 
sign,  a  sign  of  life  and  high  sensibility.  Those  whose  religious  life  is  monotonous 
have  not  much  life  in  them.  (1)  A  man  of  the  world  is  in  no  such  strait.  He  is 
drawn  but  in  one  direction  ;  by  many  things  it  may  be,  gold,  honour,  treasures,  but 
only  earthward.  (2)  The  hypocrite  is  in  no  such  strait.  His  straits  are  connected 
with  keeping  on  his  mask  and  his  cloak.  (3)  The  lukewarm  and  declining  Christian 
has  no  such  straits.  3.  This  perplexity  only  existed  until  the  will  of  God  was  ex- 
pressed to  him.  As  soon  as  he  knew  that  he  said,  "  I  am  ready  ;  the  time  of  my 
departure  is  at  hand."  Conclusion  :  The  right  state  is  to  be  attracted  by  Christ, 
wherever  Christ  is,  in  His  Church  on  earth  or  His  Church  in  heaven ;  and  to  the 
place  in  which  we  can  most  glorify  Him.  (S.  Martin.)  The  desire  of  the  apostle ; 
yet  hit  perplexity : — Nothing  is  more  unpleasant  than  uncertainty  and  indecision. 
Shall  I  take  a  journey  or  not?  Sometimes  the  case  is  very  important;  marriage, 
e.g.  What  a  strait  was  Jacob  in  between  starvation  and  letting  Benjamin  go  to 
Egypt,  and  David  with  his  three  things  to  choose.  Paul  was  now  in  a  strait  not 
between  two  evil  but  between  two  good  things.  It  was  the  strait  of  a  man  in  a 
garden  between  a  peach  and  a  nectarine;  a  rose  and  a  lily.  He  was  between  living 
and  dying  ;  but  Christ  was  connected  with  both  ;  whether  he  should  enjoy  Christ 
in  heaven  or  serve  Him  on  earth.    I.  His  bbfbesentation  or  dkath.    Consider — 1. 


CBA».  I.]  PHILIPPIANS.  61 

Its  nature — departure.  (1)  The  idea  may  be  exemplified  by  the  traveller's  departure 
from  the  inn,  a  prisoner's  fiom  his  dunp;eon.  (2)  By  so  calling  it  Paul  showed  that 
man  is  a  compound  being.  Cowper  does  not  iiiscnbe  on  the  tomb  of  his  dog, 
"  Here  lies  the  body,"  but  "  Here  lies  poor  Dansy."  There  is  a  spirit  in  man.  (3) 
This  defarlure  was  the  inlet  to  future  blessedness.  "To  be  with  Christ."  So 
heaven  will  be  a  social  state.  If  Socrates  could  f<-el  pleasure  at  the  thought  of  being 
with  MusaeuB,  and  other  worthies  who  had  lived  before  him,  what  must  be  the 
attraction  of  the  believer  in  Jesus.  2.  The  preference  he  gives  it.  "Far  better" 
than  what?  (1)  Than  to  be  stoneil  in  the  streets  of  Corinth;  to  fight  with  the 
beasts  of  Ephesus,  &c.  ?  That  would  be  saying  \ei-y  little.  (2)  It  would  also  be  say- 
ing very  little  if  far  better  than  his  temporal  mercies.  There  are  things  now  that 
th«  believer  deems  far  better.  (3)  It  would  be  far  better  than  the  enjoyment  of  the 
best  and  most  spiritual  things  below.  II.  His  desire  after  it.  1.  The  desire  of 
death  can  never  be  natural.  2.  The  fear  of  death  is  as  natural  as  hunger  and  sleep; 
and  there  is  no  evil  in  it.  If  anything  can  raise  us  above  it  it  must  be  supernatural. 
8.  There  may  be  more  who  feel  this  desire  than  you  are  aware  of.  4.  Christians 
have  more  of  this  readiness  to  die  as  they  approach  death.  Ill,  The  oounter- 
BALANCB  BY  WHICH  HE  WAS  WILLING  TO  REMAIN.  The  apostls  shows  the  scuse  he  had 
of  his  own  importance,  and  the  self-denial  he  was  willing  to  exercise  in  order  to  be 
useful.  Humility  does  not  consist  in  ignorance.  {W.  Jay.)  Life  more  our 
business  than  death : — At  a  private  meeting  of  friends  George  Whitefield,  after  ad- 
verting to  the  difficulties  attending  the  gospel  ministry,  said  that  he  was  weary  with 
the  burdens  of  the  day,  and  declared  it  to  be  his  great  consolation  that  in  a  short 
time  his  work  would  be  done,  and  he  should  depart  and  be  with  Christ.  He  then 
appealed  to  the  ministers  present,  and  asked  if  they  had  not  entirely  similar  feel- 
ings. They  generally  assented,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Tennent.  On  seeing 
this,  Mr.  Whitefield,  tapping  him  on  the  knee,  said:  "  Well,  Brother  Tennent,  yon 
are  the  oldest  man  among  us;  do  you  not  rejoice  to  think  that  your  time  is  so  near 
at  hand  when  you  will  be  called  home  ?  "  Mr.  Tennent  bluntly  answered  that  be 
had  no  wish  about  it.  Being  pressed  for  some  opinion  more  definite  and  decided, 
he  then  added  :  "  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  death.  My  business  is  to  live  as  long 
as  I  can,  and  as  well  as  I  can,  and  serve  my  Master  as  faithfully  as  I  can  until  He 
shall  think  proper  to  call  me  home."  It  proved  a  word  in  season  to  the  great 
evangelist,  helping  him  more  calmly  and  patiently  to  hold  on  his  way.  {J.  L.  Nye.) 
I.  The  saints  ake  sometimes  in  straits  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  14).  II.  Thet  mind  not 
their  own  but  the  glort  op  God  and  good  op  others  (chap.  ii.  21).  III.  The 
TRULY  pious  desire  TO  DEPART  AND  BE  WITH  Christ.  1.  What  is  it  to  depart  ?  (2 
Pet.  L  14  ;  2  Cor.  v.  1).     To  go  into  the  other  world.     2.  WTiat  to  be  with  Christ  ? 

(1)  To  enjoy  His  presence  (John  xii.  26 ;  xvii.  24).  (2)  To  behold  His  glory  (John 
xvii.  24 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  (3)  To  have  communion  with  Him.  3.  Why  do  they 
desire  to  be  with  Christ  f    Because — (1)  They  believe  His  promises  (John  xiv.  1-2). 

(2)  Are  convinced  of  the  creature's  vanity  and  Christ's  excellency.  (3)  Love  Christ 
above  all  things  (Phil.  iii.  8-9  ;  Psa.  xlii.  1-2).  (4)  Long  to  be  eased  of  their  sins 
(Rom.  vii.  24).  (5)  To  be  out  of  the  devil's  reach  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  (6)  They  have  fore- 
tastes  of  heaven  already  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  (7)  This  is  the  end  of  all  their  labours  (1  Pet. 
L  9).  4.  It  is  better  to  be  with  Christ  than  here  (Matt.  xvii.  4).  We  shall  have  better 
—(1)  Souls  (Heb.  xii.  23).  (2)  Bodies  (Phil,  iii.  21).  (3)  Company  (Heb.  xii.  22-23 ; 
John  xvii.  24).  (4)  Employments  (Eev.  vii.  11-12).  (6)  Honours  (John  xii.  26).  (6) 
Riches  (Matt,  vi,  19-20).  (7)  Pleasures.  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  St.  Paul's  donht  and 
desire : — I.  Paul  in  his  strait.  He  would  be  with  Christ  and  yet  with  the  Philip, 
pians ;  he  would  be  dissolved  and  yet  live.  He  resolved,  however,  at  last  against  him- 
self. 1.  For  the  glory  of  God  ;  the  prime  motive  of  our  Christian  obedience.  We 
must  neither  live  nor  die  but  to  God's  glory.  2.  For  the  good  of  the  brethren,  wherein 
God's  glory  is  greatly  manifested  (2  Cor.  xii.  15).  3.  This  was  only  possible  to  a  man 
already  in  Christ,  and  imbued  by  His  Spirit.  4.  If  the  same  mind  be  in  us  which 
was  in  Paul  we  should  look  upon  our  calling  as  Christians  as  the  most  delightful 
yet  most  troublesome  calling.  II.  Paul's  desire.  1.  The  desire  carries  nothing  in 
it  that  hath  any  opposition  to  the  will  of  God.  It  is  not  wrought  in  us  by  im- 
patience  or  sense  of  injuries  as  is  the  case  of  Stoics.  2.  This  desire  is  from  heaven, 
heavenly  (Heb.  iv.  9  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  8).  We  love  Christ  and  would  be  where  Hie 
honour  dwelleth.  3.  This  desire— (1)  is  but  for  a  dissolving  of  the  whole  into  its 
parts,  that  the  better  part  may  have  the  better  portion  at  once  and  the  whole  by 
and  by.  (2)  Brings  us  to  Christ,  and  is  therefore  (3)  the  fittest  object  for  our 
desire  to  fasten  upon,     (A.  Farindon,  B.D.)        PauVs  dexire  to  depart : — I.  The 


eS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

apostle's  description  of  death.  1  Negatively.  He  does  not  call  it — (1)  An  arrest. 
In  the  death  of  the  wicked  the  sheriff's  oifieer  of  justice  lays  his  clay-cold  hand 
upon  the  man's  shoulder  and  he  i8  a  prisoner  for  ever  :  "  but  who  shall  lay  any- 
thing to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  "  (2)  A  plunge.  The  wicked  stand  upon  the 
precipice  of  a  yawning  and  bottomless  gulf  and  their  unwilling  spirits  must  take  a 
desperate  leap.  The  believer  climbs  upwards.  2.  Positively.  He  calls  it — (1)  A 
departure,  like  a  vessel  homeward  bound.  (2)  Departure  to  Christ,  (a)  We  shall 
see  Him  as  He  is.  (&)  We  shall  commune  with  Him.  (c)  We  shall  enjoy  full 
fruition  of  Him.  IL  The  apostle's  desire.  1.  Some  men  are  scared  by  it.  2. 
Others  with  a  seared  conscience  meet  it  with  an  idiot  resignation.  3.  The  apostle 
panted  to  be  gone  :  as  the  captain  with  his  rich  freight  longs  for  the  harbour,  as 
the  conqueror  longs  for  his  crown.  IH.  The  apostle's  reasons.  1.  Others  besides 
he  have  longed  to  die.  (1)  The  suicide  mad  from  life's  misery  leaps  from  one 
evil  to  a  myriad.  (2)  The  so-called  philosopher,  sick  of  mankind.  Not  so  Paul, 
he  was  neither  coward  nor  man-hater.  (3)  Those  who  think  that  by  getting 
out  of  the  world  they  will  escape  their  disappointments  and  suffering.  2.  Paul 
felt  this  desire  because  he  knew  that  being  with  Christ — (1)  He  would  be  clean 
rid  of  sin.  (2)  That  he  would  meet  his  brethren  in  the  faith  who  had  gone  before  ; 
(3)  That  he  would  be  with  Christ,  and  these  words  have  all  heaven  condensed  in 
them.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  For  ever  with  the  Lord : — I.  The  apostle's  certaintt 
BESPECTiNO  THE  DISEMBODIED  STATE.  1.  Paul  was  an  eminently  conscientious  man 
who  would  not  say  what  he  did  not  believe  to  be  true,  and  a  man  of  well-balanced 
reason,  logic  preponderating  among  his  faculties.  2,  Now  this  Paul  was  convinced 
of  a  future  state.  He  did  not  believe  in  purgatory,  much  less  that  the  soul  sleeps 
until  the  resurrection.  3.  What  made  this  conscientious  and  collected  man  come 
to  this  conclusion  ?  I  suppose  he  would  have  replied  first  that  he  had  been  converted 
by  a  sight  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  was  sure  he  had  seen  Him,  and  that  He  had  come 
from  somewhere  and  gone  somewhere ;  and  recollecting  the  prayer,  "  I  will  that 
they  be  with  me  where  I  am,"  he  was  quite  certain  that  as  soon  as  saints  died  they 
were  with  Christ.  4.  Bemember  this  judicious  and  truthful  witness  had  other 
distinct  evidence  of  the  disembodied  state.  He  had  been  caught  up  into  Paradise. 
It  was,  therefore,  not  merely  matter  of  belief  but  of  observation.  5.  Paul  had  no 
doubt  then,  nor  need  you.  If  you  believe  in  Him  there  is  no  condemnation,  and 
if  80,  no  separation  (Eom.  viii.)  either  in  this  life  or  that  which  is  to  come.  II. 
The  apostle's  idea  of  that  state.  1.  It  is  a  one-sided  idea  and  almost  a  one- 
worded  description :  an  inclusive  idea,  for  it  takes  in  all  the  heaven  which  the 
largest  mind  can  conceive.  2.  Being  with  Christ  is  so  great  a  thing  that  he 
mentioned  it  alone.  (1)  Because  his  love  was  so  concentrated  on  Christ  that  he 
could  think  of  nothing  else  in  this  connection.  (2)  He  was  persuaded  that  heaven 
could  not  be  heaven  if  Christ  was  not  there.  It  would  be  day  without  the  sun, 
existence  without  life,  seeing  without  light,  the  heavens  without  their  stars.  Christ 
is  heaven  and  heaven  is  Christ.  3.  What  is  it  to  be  with  Christ  ?  (1)  It  is  to  be 
with  Him — heaven  is  not  merely  what  comes  out  of  being  with  Him,  His  company 
itself  is  heaven.  (2)  It  is  to  have  a  clearer  vision  of  Him  than  is  possible  now,  and 
this  vision  will  be  ravishing.  (3)  Brighter  knowledge.  Here  we  only  know  in 
part.  (4)  More  intimate  intercourse.  (5)  Unbroken  fellowship.  (6)  A  share  of 
His  glory.  III.  The  apostle's  estimate  of  this  disembodied  state.  "  Very  far 
better."  1.  St.  Paul  does  not  claim  for  this  state  that  it  is  the  believer's  highest 
condition,  because  one-half  of  him  is  left  behind.  The  fulness  of  our  glory  is  the 
resurrection.  Yet  for  one-half  of  his  manhood  to  be  with  Christ  is  far  better  than 
for  the  whole  of  his  being  to  be  here  under  the  best  possible  conditions,  not  merely 
of  worldly  wealth,  &c. — he  had  got  above  all  that — but  of  spiritual  excellence  and 
blessing.  2.  Concerning  our  departed  friends,  then,  how  can  we  sorrow  ?  3.  With 
regard  to  ourselves  what  is  there  to  fear  ?  4.  All  this  points  to  the  fountain  of 
bliss  while  we  are  here.  The  nearer  we  get  to  Christ  the  more  we  shall  participate 
in  what  makes  the  joy  of  heaven.  {liid.j  Better  to  be  with  Christ  than  here: — 
L  What  ib  it  to  be  with  Christ  ?  It  implies — 1.  Our  being  where  He  is  (John 
xiv.  2-4).  2.  Our  enjoying  what  He  enjoys.  (1)  Clear  knowledge  of  God  (John 
xvii.  3;  1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  (2)  Perfect  love.  (3)  Eternal  joy  (chap.  iv.  1).  H.  How 
13  it  better?  1.  In  its  immunities.  (1)  From  sin  (1  Cor.  xv.  30).  (a)  Errors  in 
judgment  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  {b)  Disorder  in  affections,  (c)  Infirmity  m  actions. 
(2)  From  misery  (Eev.  xxi.  4).  2.  In  its  enjoyments,  which  are  better;  because — 
(1)  More  real  (Prov.  xxiii.  5),  (2)  More  spiritual  (Matt.  xi.  28-29).  (3)  More 
Batisfying  (Psa.  xvi.  11 ;  xviL  15).     (4)  More  certain  (Isa.  Iv.  3).     (6)  Moie  lasting 


OHA».  I.]  PUILIPPIANS. 


{2  Cot.  v.  1).  III.  Uses.  Labour  to  get  to  Christ.  1.  Means.  (1)  Repent  (Luke 
xiii.  3).  (2)  Believe  on  Christ  (Acts  xvi.  31).  (3)  Labour  after  true  grace,  without 
which  you  shall  not  (Heb.  xii.  14),  and  you  cannot  enjoy  God.  (4)  Use  the  means 
appointed  (Rom.  x.  17).  2.  Motives.  (1)  Labour  after  it.  Consider — (a)  It  is 
possible.  (6)  It  is  desired  by  God  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  (c)  You  will  repent  ere  long 
unless  you  do.  (2)  Seek  it  first.  (a)  It  is  a  thing  of  the  greatest  concern  (Luke 
X.  42),  (6)  It  is  the  only  thing  needful  (Luke  x.  42).  (3)  Labour  after  it  now 
^sa.  xcy.  8-9).  Consider — (a)  Your  time  is  short.  (6)  The  work  is  great  (c) 
lou  know  not  when  you  will  be  called  to  account.  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  Paul  and 
Voltaire : — I  was  lately  looking  over  Voltaire's  correspondence  with  one  of  his 
literary  female  acquaintances,  and  no  less  than  three  times  in  his  letters  does  he 
say,  "  I  dread  death  and  hate  life."  Was  it  so  with  the  Apostle  Paul?  Did  he 
dread  death?  What  is  his  language — "I  have  a  desire  to  depart  and  to  be  with 
Christ,  which  is  far  better."  Did  he  hate  life?  "  Nevertheless  to  abide  in  the 
flesh  is  more  needful  for  you,  and,  having  this  confidence,"  &o.  (W.  Jay.) 
Strait : — From  the  word  strait  employed  in  our  translation  we  are  apt  to  take  up 
the  notion  of  pain  and  difficulty.  This  is  not  the  idea  which  the  apostle  intended 
to  express.  Literally  the  word  signifies  to  be  between  two,  and  held  by  both  at  the 
same  time.  In  ordinary  circumstances,  and  in  the  present  case  especially,  this  is 
pleasanter  and  safer  than  to  be  held  by  only  one.  This  strait  is  the  happiest 
condition  in  which  a  living  man  can  be.  It  is  not  a  position  of  distraction  from 
which  he  would  fain  escape,  but  a  position  of  solid  repose.  To  be  grasped  aud  drawn 
by  either  of  these  emotions  alone  would  bend  and  break  a  man ;  to  be  attracted 
equally  by  both  produces  a  delicious  equilibrium.  The  spiritual  fact  may  be 
explained  by  a  material  example.  Suppose  a  man  is  standing  aloft  upon  a  pedestal 
where  he  finds  room  to  plant  his  feet  and  no  more.  Suppose  that  one  neighbour 
stands  near  him  on  the  right  hand,  and  another  near  him  on  the  left.  If  one  of 
these  grasp  and  draw  him,  his  posture  immediately  becomes  uneasy  and  dangerous. 
Under  the  strain  he  does  not  keep  his  footing  easily,  and  will  not  keep  it  long. 
But  if  both  should  grasp  him,  either  seizing  a  hand,  and  draw  with  equal  force  in 
opposite  directions,  the  result  would  be  an  erect  attitude  and  an  easy  position. 
Such  precisely  in  the  spiritual  department  is  the  equilibrium  of  a  believer  who  is 
held  and  drawn  by  both  these  desires  at  once.  It  is  the  strait  betwixt  two  that 
makes  him  easy.  Either  of  these  desires  wanting  the  other  would  distress  him  in 
proportion  to  its  strength.  On  the  one  hand,  a  desire  to  abide  in  the  flesh  without 
a  balancing  desire  to  depart  and  to  be  with  Christ,  is  a  painful  condition.  The 
weight  hanging  on  one  side  racks  the  person  all  over.  Most  men  are  crushed  in 
this  manner  all  their  days.  The  Redeemer  knows  this  sorrow  and  provides  relief. 
One  specific  design  of  His  coming  was  "  to  deliver  them  who  through  fear  of  death 
were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage."  As  soon  as  one  of  these  tremblers  is 
begotten  again  into  a  living  hope,  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead, 
the  balance  is  restored  and  deliverance  effected.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ccnverse 
is  equally  true,  although  not  equally  common.  To  experience  a  desire  to  depart, 
unbalanced  by  a  desire  to  abide  in  the  flesh,  is  also  a  painful  experience.  Muiy 
Christians  pass  through  at  least  a  short  period  of  this  unevenness  and  uneasiness 
before  they  are  set  free.  Whatever  may  be  the  immediate  causes  which  have  made 
lif«  wearisome  to  a  Christian,  whenever  the  desire  to  abide  dies  out,  the  desire  to 
depart  distracts  him.  It  may  be  that  most  of  us  at  present  would  gladly  bargain 
for  such  a  state  of  mind  at  the  close  of  life,  as  being  the  safest ;  but  it  is,  notwith- 
standing, and  not  the  less  a  painful  state  of  mind.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Death,  a 
departure  : — I  shall  never  forget  the  cry  of  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  De  Witt,  of  New  York, 
as  he  stood  at  the  grave  of  his  wife.  After  the  body  had  been  lowered  to  its  resting- 
place,  that  venerable  man  of  God  leaned  over  the  open  space  and  said  :  "Farewell, 
my  honoured,  faithful,  beloved  wife.  The  bond  that  bound  us  is  severed,  thou  art  in 
glory,  I  am  still  on  earth,  but  we  shall  meet  again.  Farewell,  farewell  1 "  (T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.)  Heaven  our  home  : — As  a  home  the  believer  delights  to  think  of  it. 

Thus  when,  lately  bending  over  a  dying  saint,  an  1  expressing  our  sorrow  to  sea 
him  laid  so  low,  with  the  radiant  countenance  rather  of  one  who  had  just  left 
heaven,  than  of  one  about  to  enter  it,  he  raised  and  clasped  his  hands,  and 
exclaimed  in  ecstasy,  "I  am  going  home."  Happy  the  family  of  which  God  is 
the  Father,  Jesus  the  elder  Brother,  and  all  the  "  saints  in  light "  are  brethren. 
(T.  Giithrie.)  Longing  for  home: — I  have  heard  a  story  of  the  celebrated  Mr. 
WilHam  Dawson,  who  used  to  call  himself  "  Billy  "  Dawson,  much  to  the  point. 
On  one  occasion,  when  he  and  some  other  Methodist  friends  were  spending  the 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  I. 

evening  together,  a  dear  friend  of  mine  happened  to  be  present,  and  heard 
wbat  passed.  They  were  praying  that  Mr.  Dawson's  life  might  be  spared  for 
many  years  to  come,  that  such  an  earnest  man  might  be  kept  in  the  Church 
for  the  next  twenty  or  thirty  years.  At  last,  as  they  were  just  in  the  middle  of 
prayer,  William  Dawson  said,  "  Lord,  don't  hear  'em :  I  want  to  get  my  work  done, 
and  go  home  ;  I  don't  want  to  be  here  any  longer  than  there  is  needs  be ;  " 
and  the  brethren  stopped  their  prayers,  thunderstruck  as  they  witnessed  hia 
emotion.  Now  I  believe  that  feeling  will  often  pass  over  the  earnest  working 
Christian.  "Oh,"  saith  he,  "I  am  not  lazy;  I  am  not  idle;  but  still,  I  would 
like  to  get  my  work  done."  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Death  a  gain: — The  most  you 
can  do  to  a  good  man  is  to  persecute  him  ;  and  the  worst  that  persecution  can 
do  is  to  kill  him.  And  killing  a  good  man  is  as  bad  as  it  would  be  to  spite  a 
ship  by  launching  it.  The  soul  is  built  for  heaven,  and  the  ship  for  the  ocean, 
and  blessed  be  the  hour  that  gives  both  to  the  true  element.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
The  desire  to  depart : — As  birds  in  the  hour  of  tranamigiation  feel  the  impulse  of 
southern  lands,  and  gladly  spread  their  wings  for  the  realm  of  light  and  bloom, 
80  may  we,  in  the  death  hour,  feel  the  sweet  solicitations  of  the  life  beyond,  and 
joyfully  soar  from  the  chill  and  shadow  of  earth  to  fold  our  wings  and  sing  in 
the  summer  of  an  eternal  heaven  1      {Ihid.)  To  depart  is  to  be  with  Christ : — 

The  Rev.  Alexander  Fisher,  of  Dunfermline,  an  excellent  young  minister,  in  the 
afternoon  of  the  day  on  which  he  died,  inquired  what  the  hour  was,  and  on 
being  informed,  said,  "What  would  you  think  if  I  -were  in  heaven  to-night?" 
It  was  answered,  "  Then  you  will  be  with  your  Saviour,  and  see  Him  face  to 
lace."  His  pale  emaciated  countenance  seemed  to  beam  with  delight,  and  his 
faltering  lips  uttered,  "  Glory,  glory,  glory  1  "  Ready  for  heaven : — A  little 
child  was  playing  with  her  mother,  and  they  were  talking  about  heaven.  The 
mother  had  been  telling  of  the  joy  and  glories  of  that  happy  world.  The  match- 
less beauty  of  the  angels,  the  golden  streets  and  pearly  gates,  and  the  exultant 
song  of  redemption.  "  There  is  no  sickness  in  those  bright  realms,  no  pain,  no 
death,  no  sorrow,  nor  sighing,  nor  tears,  no  sin ;  for  all  will  be  pure  and  holy." 
"Oh,  dcHr  mother  I"  exclaimed  the  little  child,  in  her  amazement  and  delight, 
"let  us  all  go  now!"  "We  must  wait  a  little,"  said  the  mother,  "wait  until 
God  shall  send  for  us."  "Well,  dear  mother,"  responded  the  child,  in  a  tone  of 
disappointment,  "  if  we  can't  start  now,  at  any  rate,  let  us  pack  up  and  be 
ready  1 "  There  is  a  whole  sermon  in  that  one  sentence  :  "  Let  us  pack  up  and 
be  ready  1 "  Oh,  what  a  world  of  difference  between  being  ready  and  unready  1 
(J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  Christ,  heaven's  supreme  attraction  : — Being  \rith  Christ  is 
BO  great  a  thing  that  he  mentioned  it  alone,  because  his  love  was  so  concentrated 
upon  Christ  that  he  could  think  of  nothing  else  in  connection  with  heaven.  There 
is  a  wife  here,  perhaps,  and  her  husband  is  in  India.  He  has  been  long  away,  and 
the  years  of  his  forced  absence  have  been  weary  to  her.  She  has  had  loving 
messages  from  him  and  kind  letters,  but  often  has  she  sighed,  and  her  heart  has 
looked  out  of  the  windows  towards  the  east,  yearning  for  his  return  ;  but  now  she 
baa  received  a  letter  entreating  her  to  go  out  to  her  husband,  and  without  hesitation 
she  has  resolved  to  go.  Now,  if  you  ask  her  what  she  is  going  to  India  for,  the 
reply  will  be,  "  I  am  going  to  my  husband."  But  she  has  a  brother  there,  she  haa 
many  old  friends  there,  her  husband  has  a  handsome  estate  there.  Yes,  there 
may  be  other  inducements  to  make  the  voyage,  but  to  be  with  her  beloved  is  the 
master  object  of  her  journey.  She  is  going  to  the  man  she  loves  with  all  her  aoul, 
and  she  is  longing  for  the  country,  whatever  that  country  may  be,  because  he  ia 
there.  It  is  so  with  the  Christian,  only  enhanced  in  a  tenfold  degree.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Depart : — The  word  "  depart "  means  strictly  to  take  to  pieces. 
The  living  man  is  contemplated  as  a  complex  machine,  and  it  is  intimated  that  at 
death  its  joints  are  loosed,  and  the  whole  is  broken  up  into  its  constituent  elements. 
This  life  in  the  body  is  like  a  watch.  By  food,  and  drink,  and  air,  it  is  wound  up 
daily,  and  so  kept  going.  At  last  the  machinery,  by  gradual  wear  and  tear,  or  by 
some  sudden  accident,  is  brought  to  a  stand.  Then  it  is  taken  down— taken  to 
pieces — in  order  that  it  may  be  purified  and  perfected,  and  set  agoing  again,  not  to 
measure  then  the  changing  seasons  of  time,  but  to  move  on,  without  waste  or 
weariness,  in  a  limitless  eternity.  More  immediately,  the  dissolution  or  untying 
probably  refers  to  the  separation  of  soul  and  body.  The  band  that  knit  them 
together  is  broken  at  death.  The  soul  escapes,  and  the  body,  meantime,  returns  to 
dust.  In  this  view  the  works  of  the  watch  never  stand  stiU.  When  life  from  God 
was  first  breathed  into  that  immortal  being,  it  was  wound  up,  once  for  all,  to  go  for 


CBir.  Lj  PHILIPPIANS,  65 

ever.  At  the  shock  of  death  it  is  severed  from  its  case  of  flesh.  Outer  casement, 
and  figured  dial,  and  poiuted  hands,  all  remain  with  us,  and  all  stand  still.  But 
these  never  were  the  moving  springs.  These  were  shells  to  protect  the  tender  from 
injury  where  the  road  was  rouj^h,  and  indices  to  make  the  movements  palpable  to 
bodily  sense  ;  but  the  vital  motion  of  the  departed  spirit  continuos  uninterrupted, 
nnimpeled,  in  a  region  where  no  violence  is  dreaded,  and  no  sign  to  the  senses  i» 
required.     (W.  Amot,  DJ).) 

Ver.  25.  Having  this  confidence. — This  "  I  know  "  of  the  apostle  has  something 
like  its  parallel  in  that  of  Luther,  when  his  friend  and  true  yoke-fellow,  Melancthon, 
lay  at  the  point  of  death.  The  reformer,  it  is  said,  after  earnest  prayer  approached 
the  sick-bed,  and  uttered  these  prophetic  words,  "  Cheer  up,  PhiUp ;  you  are  not 
going  to  die."  Luther  was  in  no  sense  prophesying,  but  he  had  been  praying; 
and  in  answer  to  his  prayer  the  conviction  was  irresistibly  borne  in  upon  his  mind 
and  heart,  that  his  colleague,  for  whom  so  much  work  was  waiting,  would  yet  live  to 
do  it.  What,  then,  of  personal  conviction  Luther  asserted  about  another,  Paul  here 
asserts  about  himself.  We  thus  see  that  blended  humility  and  trustfulness,  more 
especially  in  strongly  emotional  natures,  can  dare  sometimes  to  use  the  bold  language 
of  assured  conviction  even  in  regard  to  issues  which  are  to  us  uncertain,  for  they 
are  with  God  alone.  But  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  this  language  never  can  be  used 
when  merely  personal  or  private  ends  are  in  view.  When  Paul  said  "  I  know  "  in 
this  case,  he  was  indeed  alluding  to  his  own  future,  but  he  was  contemplating  it  in 
relation  not  to  his  own  individual  interests,  but  solely  to  his  friends'  "  progress  uid 
joy  in  the  faith," — their  advancement  in  the  inner  life  through  strengthening  faith, 
and  their  joy,  as  overflowing  out  of  that  faith,  in  their  outward  life  of  Christian 
service.  All  this  would  be  theirs  by  his  presence  restored  to  them  for  a  time,  more 
thftn  by  any  letter,  however  tender,  he  could  write  to  them.     (J.  Hutchiion,  D.D,) 

Vers.  27-30.  Only  let  yonr  conversation  be  as  It  becometb  the  gospel  of 
Christ. — A  call  to  a  fourfold  manifestation  of  spiritual  life  : — I.  To  HoLiNEsa 
(ver.  27).  As  if  he  had  said,  I  have  one  dominating  wish  in  reference  to 
you.  1.  It  is  well  to  know  what  God's  princes  wish  for  us.  The  noblest  desire  one 
man  can  cherish  for  another  is  that  he  may  be  like  Jesus.  2.  There  is  but  one 
ideal  life  in  the  Church.  But  here  is  a  difficulty :  how  can  the  lowest  copy  the 
highest?  Would  it  not  have  been  wiser  to  have  set  forth  a  man  wlio  excelled 
in  one  moral  feature,  and  to  have  said,  "  Transcribe  that,"  and  so  on  until  all  the 
graces  had  been  gradually  acquired  ?  Is  not  the  setting  forth  of  absolute  perfec- 
tion exorbitant  and  demanding  too  much  from  the  helpless  sinner?  Let  us  see. 
What  does  moral  perfection  begin  in?  It  begins  in  the  disposition,  the  will,  the 
heart.  If  you  are  urged  to  escape  from  polar  winter  to  tropical  summer,  it  is  not 
meant  that  the  journey  is  to  be  accomplished  at  a  stride,  but  step  by  step.  When 
a  child  is  required  to  be  perfect  as  a  musician  it  is  not  intended  that  in  one  day  his 
uncrafty  fingers  should  liberate  the  angel  strains.  So  with  the  growth  of  the  acorn 
into  the  oak.  And  so  when  our  Saviour  tells  us  to  be  perfect  as  our  Father  in 
heaven  is  perfect  He  means  that  we  are  to  grow  in  grace.  In  all  our  growing  and 
striving  Christ  Himself  is  with  us,  and  His  grace  is  all-suflicient.  II.  To 
DNANiiiiTY  (ver.  27).  This  is  not  monotony.  The  root  of  true  unity  is  oneness 
in  the  love  and  service  of  Christ.  Christendom  is  in  reality  one,  though  apparently 
many.  The  coat  is  of  many  colours,  the  heart  is  one.  This  is  particularly  seen 
in  the  time  of  threatened  danger.  The  armies  of  defence  have  never  come  from 
•ny  particular  section  of  the  Church.  How  illogical  the  decision  to  have  nothing 
to  do  with  religion  because  the  Church  is  divided.  There  are  so  many  styles  of 
building,  and  so  many  modifications  of  those  styles,  some  Doric,  others  classic — 
are  people  so  perplexed  with  these  varieties  as  to  renounce  architecture  altogether 
and  resolved  to  reside  in  the  open  air  ?  Try  the  same  with  clothing,  patriotism, 
business.  Do  men  give  np  commerce  because  some  tradesmen  are  insolvent  ?  Do 
you  give  up  housekeeping  because  some  chimneys  smoke  ?  III.  To  cotjeaoe  (ver. 
28).  Timidity  is  a  symptom  of  moral  feebleness,  an  impediment  in  the  path  o£ 
moral  progress.  Timidity  on  the  part  of  one  may  dishearten  the  courage  of  a 
multitude.  It  arises  from  distrust  in  God.  How  many  a  man  of  noble  powers 
and  enlarged  culture,  for  want  of  strength  in  a  crisis,  the  courage  to  utter  the 
decisive  word,  fails  and  trembles,  and  becomes  the  prey  of  the  mean.    IV.  Feab- 

I^rjSNESS   IN     THE     STRIFE    IS    TO     BE    ASSOCIATED     WITH     MAGNANIMITJ     IN     ENDURANC* 

(vers.  29-30).    The  strong  in  heart  are  called  to  suffer      Suffering  is  an  edaca- 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».   ft 

tion,  a  means  of  grace.  Think  of  the  hidden  and  silent  heroism  that  is  going  o» 
day  by  day.  How  many  a  man  otherwise  mighty  fails  in  suffering  I  (J.  Parker 
D.D.)  Christian  citizenship : — There  was  one  drawback  to  the  apostle's  delight 
in  thinking  of  the  Philippians.  It  was  not  doctrinal  unsoundness,  or  denial  of  hia 
authority,  but  the  spirit  of  social  rivalry  and  partizanship.  This  he  hints  at  by 
the  recurrence  of  the  word  "  all "  in  the  former  part  of  this  chapter,  and  he  now 
deals  with  it  in  a  most  delicate  but  effective  way.  He  shows.in  a  manner  which 
they  as  Roman  citizens  were  quick  to  understand,  the  leading  duties  of  gospel 
citizenship  and  their  enforcing  motives.  I.  The  duties  of  this  Chbistiam 
CITIZENSHIP.  1.  Stand  firmly  by  the  charter  of  your  citizenship— the  gospel- 
all  of  you,  all  together.  Be  a  compact  body.  The  apostle  puts  stress  upon  th© 
Christian  spirit  as  the  outcome  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  does  not  dream,  like 
some  recent  men,  that  the  one  can  exist  apart  from  the  other.  2.  Be  unitedly 
zealous  for  the  common  faith.  Zeal  for  the  truth  is  not  only  to  impel  them  to 
stand  by  the  truth,  but  to  make  it  known.  There  is  a  zeal  which  begins  and  end* 
with  self,  or  which  will  show  itself  in  its  own  way  only,  and  a  zeal  which  spends 
itself  not  so  much  against  the  common  foe  as  against  those  of  their  own  party  who 
differ  in  minor  things.  What  the  apostle  commends  is  a  right  kind  of  zeal  rightly 
directed.  3.  Be  bold  in  facing  your  foe.  The  opposition  was  formidable — Jews 
and  Gentiles  singly  and  combined ;  the  attack  was  likely  to  be  sudden.  11.  The 
MOTIVES  BY  WHICH  THEY  ARE  ENFORCED.  1.  An  attention  to  theso  duties  attests 
their  true  apprehension  and  enjoyment  of  Christianity  itself  (chap.  ii.  1).  2.  The 
power  of  Divine  love.  3.  Obedience  to  those  duties  will  bear  witness  to  the 
reality  of  their  communion  with  God.  4.  It  is  also  thus  a  true  testimony  to  the 
compassion  and  tenderness  which  Christ  alone  puts  into  men's  hearts.  5.  Doing 
thus  you  will  make  my  cup  of  gladness  run  over.     (J.  J.  Goadhy.)  Citizens  of 

heaven : — The  meaning  is,  Play  the  citizen  in  a  manner  worthy  of  the  gospel. 
Paul  does  not  mean,  of  course,  Discharjre  your  civic  duties  as  Christian  men, 
though  some  Christian  Englishmen  need  that  reminder ;  but  their  city  was  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem.  I.  Keep  fresh  the  sense  of  belonging  to  the  motheb 
CITY.  Paul  was  writing  from  Eome,  where  he  might  see  how  the  consciousness  ot 
being  a  Eoman  gave  dignity  to  a  man.  He  would  kindle  a  similar  feeling  in 
Christians.  1.  We  belong  to  another  polity  than  that  with  which  we  are  connected 
by  the  bonds  of  sense.  2.  Therefore  it  is  a  great  part  of  Christian  discipline  to 
keep  a  vivid  consciousness  that  there  is  an  unseen  order  of  things.  The  future  life 
is  present  to  an  innumerable  company.  3.  There  is  a  present  connection  between 
all  Christians  and  the  heavenly  city.  The  life  of  Christian  men  on  earth  and  in 
heaven  is  fundamentally  the  same;  in  principle,  motive,  taste,  aim,  &o.  As 
Philippi  was  to  Rome,  so  is  earth  to  heaven,  a  colony  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
empire,  ringed  round  by  barbarians,  and  separated  by  seas,  but  keeping  open  its 
communications,  and  one  in  citizenship.  4.  Our  true  habitat  is  elsewhere  ;  so  let 
us  set  our  affections  ou  things  above.  The  descendants  of  the  original  settlers  in 
our  colonies  talk  still  of  coming  to  England  as  going  "  home,"  though  they  were 
bom  in  Australia  and  have  lived  there  all  their  lives.  5.  How  need  that  feeling  of 
detachment  from  the  present  sadden  our  spirits  or  weaken  our  interest  in  things 
around  us  ?  To  recognize  our  separation  from  the  order  of  things  in  which  we 
"move"  because  we  "  have  our  being"  in  that  majestic  unseen  order  makes  life 
great,  not  small.  II.  Live  by  the  laws  of  the  city.  1.  The  Philippian 
colonists  were  governed  by  the  code  of  Eome.  They  owed  no  obedience  to  the 
law  of  the  province  of  Macedonia.  So  Christian  men  are  not  to  be  governed  by 
maxims  and  rules  of  conduct  which  prevail  in  the  province,  but  from  the  capital. 
2.  The  gospel  is  not  merely  to  be  believed,  but  to  be  obeyed.  Like  some  of  the 
ancient  municipal  charters,  the  grant  of  privileges  and  proclamation  of  freedom  is 
also  the  sovereign  code  which  imposes  duties  and  shapes  life.  A  gospel  of  laziness 
and  mere  exemption  from  hell  is  not  Paul's  gospel.  3.  That  law  is  all-sufficient. 
In  Christ  we  have  the  realized  ideal,  the  flawless  example,  and  instead  of  a 
thousand  precepts,  all  duty  is  resolved  into  one — be  like  Christ.  4.  Live  worthy  of 
the  gospel,  then.  How  grand  the  unity  and  simplicity  thus  breathed  into  our 
duties.  6.  Such  an  all-comprehensive  precept  is  not  a  mere  toothless  generality. 
Let  a  man  try  honestly  to  shape  his  life  by  it,  and  he  will  find  soon  enough  how 
close  it  grips  him.  The  tiny  round  of  the  dewdrop  is  shaped  by  the  saine  laws 
which  mould  the  giant  planet.  6.  It  is  an  exclusive  commandment,  shutting  out 
obedience  to  other  codes,  however  common  or  fashionable.  We  are  governed  from 
home,  and  giTe  no  submission  to  provincial  authorities.     Never  mind  what  people 


1.]  PHILIPPIANS.  69 

My  about  you,  or  what  may  be  their  maxims  or  ways.  The  censures  or  praises  o{ 
men  need  not  move  us.  We  report  to  headquarters,  and  subordinate  esiiiuates 
need  be  nothing  to  us.  We  appeal  unto  Caesar.  III.  Fioht  for  thb  advance  of 
THE  DOMINIONS  OP  THE  CITY.  1.  Like  the  armed  colonies  which  Rome  had  on  her 
frontier,  who  received  their  bits  of  land  on  condition  of  holding  the  border  against 
the  enemy,  and  pushing  it  forward  a  league  or  two,  so  Christian  soldiers  are  set 
down  to  be  "  wardens  of  the  marches,"  and  to  (1)  stand  fast — maintaining  our 
ground  and  repelling  all  assaults.  (2)  This  successful  resistance  is  to  be  in  one 
apirit,  inasmuch  as  all  resistance  depends  on  our  spirits  being  rooted  in  Ood's 
Spirit,  in  vital  union  with  whom  we  may  be  knit  together  in  a  unity  which  shall 
oppose  a  granite  breakwater  to  the  inrushiug  tide  of  opposition,  (3)  We  are  to 
carry  the  war  onwards,  striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the  gospel.  (4)  There  is 
to  be  discipline  and  compact  organization  like  that  of  the  PraBtorian  guards.  (5) 
The  cause  for  which  we  are  to  fight  is  the  faith  of  the  gospel — either  its  sum  and 
substance  or  the  subjective  act  of  trust  in  it — to  unitedly  contend  for  its  growing 
power  in  our  own  heart  and  the  hearts  of  others.  2.  Such  work  is  ever  needed, 
and  never  more  than  now,  when  a  wave  of  unbelief  seems  passing  over  us,  and 
when  material  comfort  is  so  attractive.  Close  your  ranks  for  the  fight.  IV.  Be  sukb 
OF  VICTORY.  1.  "  Terrified  "  refers  to  a  horse  shying  or  plunging  at  some  object. 
It  is  generally  things  half-seen,  and  mistaken  for  something  dreadful,  that  makes 
horses  shy  ;  it  is  usually  a  half-look  at  adversaries  and  a  mistaken  estimate 
of  their  strength  that  makes  Christians  afraid.  Go  up  to  your  fears  and 
speak  to  them,  and,  as  ghosts  are  said  to  do,  they  will  generally  fade  away.  2. 
Such  courage  is  based  on  a  sure  hope.  "  Our  citizenship  is  in  heaven."  The 
outlying  colony  knows  that  the  Emperor  is  marching  to  its  relief.  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  Ministerial  tolicitude  : — I.  The  approprute  metaphor.  The  Church  is 
A  city,  set  on  a  hill.  The  Divine  mind  has  expended  infinite  treasures  on  it.  It 
is  a  masterpiece  of  perfection.  Its  foundation  is  Christ.  1.  We  expect  to  see 
order  in  a  city :  so  there  must  be  laws  and  government  in  the  Church.  2.  There 
is  to  be  beauty  in  a  city  :  so  all  excellence  should  be  in  the  Church.  3.  In  a  citj 
we  expect  commerce  ;  so  the  Church  is  to  send  her  merchandise  to  all  parts. 
4.  In  an  imperial  city  we  look  for  the  residence  of  the  sovereign,  and  this  is  the 
comfort  of  the  Church — "The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us."  5.  As  it  is  a  city,  it  is  a 
place  of  chartered  privileges — the  free  gifts  of  the  reigning  monarch.  II.  The 
general  direction.  What  does  this  venerable  citizen  say  to  bis  fellow-citizens  ? 
It  is  not  the  profession  of  citizenship  that  will  avail.  1.  With  regard  to  your 
principles  :  God  gave  His  Son  to  die  for  you  rebels ;  therefore  you  owe  your  lives 
to  Him.  2.  Let  your  conversation  be  as  becometh  the  privileges  of  the  gospel — 
how  varied  and  rich  they  are.  3.  Let  it  be  as  becometh  the  holy  practice  required 
by  the  gospeL  "  Let  your  light  so  shine,"  &o.  III.  The  particular  enumeration. 
1,  Steadfastness.  I  never  knew  a  man  who  was  always  changing  whose  piety  was 
deep  and  sincere.  Be  steadfast  in  your  attachment  to  (1)  your  own  Church  ;  (2)  its 
doctrines  ;  (3)  its  discipline.  2.  Unity  (1)  of  judgment ;  (2)  of  affection.  3.  Energy 
and  activity.  (T.  Mortimer,  M.A.)  A  minister's  desire  on  behalf  of  his  people  : — 
1.  Wb  have  a  duty.  We  are  citizens  of  no  mean  city  (chap.  iii.  20  ;  Heb.  xii.  23). 
What  an  unspeakable  privilege ;  our  duty  is  to  act  up  to  it  (Eph,  iv.  1 ;  1  Thess. 
ii.  12).  1.  Let  it  be  seen  in  your  life  that  you  are  men  of  other  principles  than 
those  of  the  world.  (1)  By  acting  on  other  principles  than  those  of  ambition,  ease, 
■olfishnesB.  (3)  By  being  men  of  other  habits  (chap.  iii.  1&-19) — unworldly, 
■piritual :  in  the  home,  in  business,  &c.  2.  Remember  that  the  glory  of  the  gospel 
is  connected  with  the  conversation  of  its  professors.  A  treasure  is  entrusted  to 
you  ;  do  not  tarnish  it,  lose  it,  barter  it.  II.  Some  particulars  of  our  duty 
SPECIFIED.  "  That  ye  stand  fast."  It  is  easy  for  a  man  to  be  obstinate  aud  head- 
strong in  maintaining  his  own  opinions ;  but  the  difficulty  is  for  a  man  to  stand 
fast  in  the  gospel,  viz. — 1.  In  one  spirit — a  steady  union  of  affection  (Acts  i.  14  ; 
iL  46),  without  jarring  or  discord.  2.  In  one  spirit  for  the  common  faith.  When 
a  man's  opinion  about  the  things  of  the  world  is  attacked,  how  ready  he  is  to 
defend  it,  but  what  a  cold  indifference  there  is  about  Christian  principles.  III. 
Thb  desire  eipbessed  fob  this  gospel  conversation.  "Only."  Paul  seems  to 
have  lost  sight  of  other  themes — only  let  me  see  this,  and  I  shall  be  happy. 
This  was  comprehensive  of  everything  else.  (T.  Woodroffe.)  Citizenship:— 
(Text  in  conjunction  with  chap.  iii.  20.)  Paul  was  a  Roman  citizen.  By  virtue  of 
this,  be  possessed  rights,  privileges,  and  immunities  denied  to  strangers.  He  now 
tunu  it  to  spiritual  account.    I.  Tbue  belibvxbs  abb  citizens  of  hbatbn.    Here 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

they  are  strangers  and  pilgrims.  Their  thoughts  and  affections  point  to  th« 
heavenly  Jerusalem.  But  they  cannot  say  with  Paul,  "  I  was  free  bom."  Like 
the  captain,  *•  With  a  great  sum  they  obtained  this  fteedom  "  (1  Pet.  i.  18-19).  It 
is  the  believer's  interest  in  Christ,  the  purchaser  of  his  freedom,  which  constitutes 
him  a  citizen  of  heaven.  II.  Citizens  of  heaven  should  REFiiEOT  in  theib  lives 
THE  DiQNiTT  AND  HOLINESS  OF  THEIR  ciTT.  As  royal  children  they  must  behave 
royally.  We  do  not  expect  princely  bearing  in  the  pauper,  and  we  look  only  for 
earthly  mindedness  in  the  citizens  of  earth.  When  Alexander  was  asked  to  run  in 
the  Olympic  games,  he  replied,  "I  will  if  kings  are  to  be  my  antagonists."  IIL 
Heaven's  laws  for  the  life  op  its  citizens  upon  earth  are  contained  in  the 
GOSPEL  OF  THEIR  KiNO.  The  oHc  great  law  of  which  all  the  rest  are  only  particular 
applications  is  "Christ  our  life."    "He  left  us  an  example."     IV.  Lives  which 

HARMONIZE    AND   ILLUSTRATB    THESE    LAWS    ARE  WORTHY  OF  THE  HEAVEN  TO  WHICH  THE! 

BXLONO.  Lessons:  1.  Prize  the  privilege.  2.  Study  the  laws.  3.  Live  the  life. 
{J.  B.  Norton.)  Conversation  becoming  the  gospel  .'—Consider — I.  The  gospel 
in — 1.  The  dignity  which  it  confers.  (1)  What  we  are  by  nature — children  of 
wrath,  aliens,  slaves  of  sin.  (2)  What  we  are  by  grace — children  of  God,  citizens 
of  heaven,  kings  and  priests  unto  God.  2.  The  knowledge  it  communicates.  (1) 
The  mystery  of  godliness — God  manifest  in  the  iiesh.  (2)  The  "mystery  of  the 
gospel" — the  union  between  Christ  and  His  people.  (3)  The  mystery  connected 
with  the  resurrection.  (4)  The  "mystery  of  iniquity."  (5)  The  mystery  of  providence 
— "  AU  things  work  together  for  good,"  Ac.  (6)  The  *'  mysteries  of  the  kingdom." 
3.  The  spirit  it  enjoins.  Peace  with  God,  joy,  God's  love,  the  manifestation  of  the 
mercy  we  enjoy,  walking  in  love,  blamelessly.  II.  The  attendant  advantages.  1. 
Stedfastness.  Changing  circumstances,  heresies,  worldliness,  try  this  stability. 
2.  Unity.  (1)  Every  individual  soldier  must  remember  that  he  belongs  to  the 
Hrmy.  (2)  In  order  to  this  unity  there  must  be  personal  consistency  and  indi- 
vidual value  of  the  truth.     "One  mind,"  viz.,  that  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus, 

(3)  Mutual  effort.  3.  Zeal  for  the  success  of  the  truth.  (1)  Defending  its  purity. 
(2)  Extending  its  blessings.  (W.  Cadman,  M.A.)  Conversation  becoming  tJie 
gospel : — I,  What  n?  the  gospel  must  our  conversation  become  f  1.  The 
doctrine  of  the  gospel.  Living  as  those  who  believe — (1)  That  Christ  is  the  Son 
of  God  and  man  (John  i.  14).  (2)  That  He  died  for  sin,  even  for  ours  ;  that  He 
rose  again,  ascended,  and  will  come  again  to  judge  the  world.  2.  The  discipline 
of  the  gospel.  That  all  things  be  done — (1)  Decently  and  in  order  (1  Cor.  xiv.  40). 
(2)  In  faith  (Bom.  xiv.  23).  (3)  In  love  (Eph.  v.  2).  (4)  In  humility  (chap, 
iv.  1-2  ;  Luke  xvii.  10).  (5)  To  the  glory  of  God  (1  Cor.  x,  31 ;  Matt.  v.  16).  3. 
Our  expectations  from  the  gospel.  Live  as  tbose  who  expect  (1  John  iii.  4) — (1) 
Pardon  (Eph.  i.  7).     (2)  Acceptance  (Gal.  ii.  16).     (8)  Peace  with  God  (Bom.  v.  1). 

(4)  Joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  (Bom.  xiv.  16-17  ;  1  Pet.  i.  8).  (6)  All  the  graces  of 
the  Spirit  (1  Pet,  ii,  9).  (6)  A  joyful  resurrection  (1  Cor,  xv,  52-53).  (7)  Eternal 
happiness.  4.  Our  profession  of  the  gospel,  for  which  we  have  these  rules.  (1) 
In  departing  from  iniquity  (2  Tim.  ii  19).  (2)  In  being  new  creatures  (2  Cor,  v. 
17).  (3)  In  loving  Christ  above  all  things  (Luke  xiv,  26).  (4)  In  denying  our- 
selves, taking  up  our  cross  and  following  Christ  (Matt.  xiv.  24).  (5)  In  bearing 
much  fruit  (John  xv.  8).  (6)  In  being  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation  (1  Pet.  i. 
15) ;  in  thought  (Prov.  xii,  5 ;  PhU.  iv.  8) ;  in  affections  (Col.  iii.  2) ;  in  words 
(James  i.  26 ;  Eph.  iv.  29) ;  in  actions  (Tit.  ii.  11-12).  (7)  In  loving  one  another 
(John  xiii.  35).  (8)  In  continuing  to  the  end  (John  viii.  31).  II.  Whv  walk  as 
becometh  the  gospel  ?  1.  Otherwise  we  are  a  shame  to  the  gospel  (Heb.  vi.  6). 
2.  Enemies  to  Christ  (Phil.  iii.  18-19).  3.  You  will  receive  no  benefit  from  the 
gospel  (Heb.  iv.  1-2).  4.  The  gospel  will  rise  in  judgment  against  you  (John  iii. 
19).  6.  But  if  you  walk  as  becometh  the  gospel,  all  its  promises  shall  be  made 
good  unto  you  (John  i.  29,  xiv.  2 ;  Matt.  xxv.  34).  III.  What  conversation  is 
that  which  becometh  the  gospel  ?  1.  Towards  God.  (1)  A  humble  conversation 
(Eph.  iv.  1-2;  Matt,  xi,  29).  (2)  Trustful.  (3)  Cheerful  (chap  iv,  4).  (4) 
Obedient.  (5)  Heavenly  (chap.  iii.  20).  2.  Towards  man.  (1)  Meek  and  lowly 
(Matt,  xi,  29).  (2)  Loving  (John  xiii.  34-35).  (3)  Just  (Matt,  vii.  12).  (4) 
Charitable  (1  Tim,  vi.  17-18).  IV.  Cbe.  Walk  thus  according  to  the  gospel. 
1.  Motives.  (1)  This  is  most  safe  (Prov.  x.  9).  (2)  Most  profitable  (1  Tim.  vi.  18; 
James  ii,  6),   (3)  Most  honourable  (1  Sam.  ii.  30).   (4)  Most  pleasant  (Prov.  iii.  17). 

(5)  Most  necessary  (Luke  x.  42)  to  happiness  (Heb.  xii.  14).  2.  Means.  (1)  Search 
the  Scriptures.  (2)  Frequent  ordinances  (Bom.  x.  17).  (3)  Be  much  in  prayer 
(James  i.  6),     (4)  Meditate  often  (chap,  iv,  8).     (5)  Live  above  your  bodies  (1  Cor, 


OHAP.  I.]  rUlLIPPIdNS.  69 


ix.  27).    {Bithop  Beveridge.)       Conversation  becoming  the  gt  /pel : — I.  A  conversation 

BKCOMINO   THE  GOBPEh   MUST    BE    WISE,    FOR    THE    GOSPEL,    IS    A    SYSTEM  OF    KNOWLEDGE. 

Hence  it  is  called  light.     There  are  three  states  with  regard  to  gospel  knowledge. 

I.  The  heathen  are  children  of  night.  2.  The  Jews  had  some  light.  3.  Christiana 
are  children  of  the  light  and  of  tlie  day.     Christians  ought  to  excel  in  this  light. 

II.  A  COKVERSATION  BECOMING  THE  GOSPEL  SHOULD    BE    CHEERFDL,  FOR    THE    GOSPEL   IS 

A  BYSTEM  OF  JOY.  1.  As  such  it  was  prudicted.  2.  Joyful  results  universally 
followed  its  establishment.     3.  It  has  lost  none  of  its  power  to  bless.    (1)  In  duty. 

(2)  In  trials.  (3)  Death.  III.  A  conversation  iiecomjng  the  gospel  must  bb 
HOLY,  FOB  the  GOSPEL  IS  A  SYSTEM  OF  8ANCTITT.  1.  There  is  no  holiness  in 
theory  or  practice  outside.     But— 2.  The  gospel  (1)  teaches  it;  (2)  requires  it; 

(3)  produces  it.  IV.  A  conversation  worthy  the  gospel  should  be  charitable, 
FOB  the  gospel  IB  A  BYSTEM  OF  BENEVOLENCE.  Nothing  is  moro  unbecoming  to 
it  than  a  selfish,  grasping  temper.  {IV.  Jay.)  Christian  consistency: — 1.  Paul 
PLEADED  FOB  A  CONSISTENT  CHRISTIAN  Church.  The  Christian's  life  is  to  harmonize 
with  his  creed.  His  life  must  be  characterized  by — 1.  Truthfulness.  God  is  the 
author  of  truth  ;  the  Holy  Spirit  the  spirit  of  truth ;  the  gospel  the  word  of  truth  ; 
and  the  Christian  must  be  a  man  of  truth.  2.  Love.  This  is  the  first  and  great 
commandment  in  the  evidence  of  discipleship,  the  inspiration  of  duty,  and  is  due 
to  foes  as  well  as  friends.  3.  Holiness  in  thought,  desire,  and  action.  II.  Fob  a 
UNITED  Church.  The  early  Christians  were  frequently  exhorted  to  be  one  in 
faith,  feeling,  spirit,  antl  action;  the  bond  was  to  be  love,  and  the  end  the  establish- 
ment  of  the  gospel.  This  union  was  necessary — 1.  To  resist  their  common 
adversaries,  who  were  and  are  combined,  persistent,  powerful.  2.  To  develop  their 
Christian  graces.  Our  minds  and  hearts  are  enlarged  by  the  intercourse  of  good 
men.  The  bold  encourage  the  timid,  the  wise  instruct  the  ignorant,  the  strong 
shelter  the  weak.  The  manifold  diversities  of  our  nature  and  condition  constitute 
the  perfection  of  the  Church,  as  the  members  of  the  body.  3.  To  establish  the 
true  faith.  The  success  of  the  whole  depends  on  the  agreement  of  the  parts.  III. 
Fob  a  zealous  Church.  Christians  are  to  stand  by,  struggle  for,  suffer,  and  even 
die  with  one  another.  1.  This  zeal  is  demanded  for  a  noble  object.  (1)  We  are  to 
strive,  not  for  place,  power,  or  popularity,  but — (2)  For  the  faith  :  to  maintain  its 
purity  in  our  own  hearts,  and  to  diSase  its  gracious  influence  through  the  world. 
(3)  The  tradesman  is  zealous  in  business,  the  statesman  in  politics,  the  Christian 
for  the  faith.  (4)  This  was  never  needed  more  than  now.  2.  The  object  inspires 
the  zeal.  It  calls  into  exercise  our  highest  faculties ;  it  informs  the  judgment, 
subdues  the  will,  sanctifies  the  affections,  and  ennobles  the  soul.  It  has  done  more 
for  the  race  than  all  the  moralists  or  philanthropists  who  have  ever  Uved.  3,  This 
seal  ia  to  be  exercised  in  a  commendable  spirit,  "  together."  Christians  are  not 
to  strive  against  one  another.  The  earnest  Christian  has  no  time  for  useless  debate. 
Cultivate  the  spirit  of  brotherly  sympathy.  ((?.  J.  Procter.)  Christian  consiS' 
tency  : — I.  What  is  that  depohtment  which  becometh  a  professor  of  the  oospei. 
OF  Christ?  1.  With  respect  to  the  world.  (1)  He  must  not  worship  its  god — 
mammon  (Matt.  vi.  24 ;  1  John  ii.  16 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  9-11).  (2)  He  must  shun  its 
company  (Psa.  i.  1 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  14-18).  (3)  He  must  avoid  its  pleasures  and 
fashions  (Rom.  xii,  2).  True,  Christ  attended  the  wedding  at  Cana,  &e.,  but  good 
people  were  there,  and  it  was  to  manifest  His  glory ;  but  whoever  beard  of  God's 
glory  being  promoted  at  card  parties,  &o.  2.  With  respect  to  his  prevailing  senti- 
ments. (1)  Peace.  (2)  Faith.  (8)  Joyful  hope.  (4)  Patience  and  cheerful 
acquiescence.  (5)  Courage.  3.  With  respect  to  sin.  (1)  He  must  not  commit  it. 
(2)  He  must  hate  it.  (3)  He  must  struggle  against  it  in  every  form  and  every- 
where. 4,  With  respect  to  the  aim  and  business  of  his  life.  To  promote  the 
glory  of  God  (Matt.  v.  14-16 ;  1  Cor.  x.  31-32).  II.  Why  such  a  deportment 
should  be  maintained.  1.  Because  it  would  bring  joy  to  those  who  watch  for 
your  souls  (chap.  ii.  1,  iv.  1),  2.  Because  of  the  advantage — "  the  witness  in 
yourself  "  of  your  conversion.  3.  Because  it  prepares  the  mind  for  the  sea«on  of 
affliction  and  the  solemnities  of  death.  4,  Because  it  is  the  will  and  commandment 
of  Christ.  Conclusion  :  1.  The  world  vigilantly  watches  and  judges  the  character 
and  conduct  of  professors.  The  want  of  consistency  in  Christians  ha,s  done  more 
harm  to  Christianity  than  all  the  ravings  of  infidels.  2.  God's  eye  is  constantly  upon 
us.  3.  The  plea  of  not  being  a  professor  will  be  no  plea  in  the  hour  of  death  for  a 
sinful  life.  (I.  Sp>'nrer,  D.D.)  Christian  consistency  : — I.  The  general  characteb 
of  Christian  consistency.  II.  Its  special  requirements.  III.  Paramount  importancb. 
IV.  Gratifying  results.    [J.  Lyth,  D.D.)      I.  What  the(  onduct  is  which  becohe4 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i. 


THK  oosrsZto  1.  It  most  be  the  genaine  result  of  gospel  dispositions.  Conduct  it 
the  birth  of  principle ;  what  is  seen  in  the  life  is  the  development  of  what  exists  in 
the  heart.  The  tree  must  be  good  before  the  fruit  can  be  good.  But  we  must  not 
judge  altogether  by  outward  appearance.  All  is  not  gold  that  glitters.  A  fair 
show  in  the  flesh  is  naught  unless  the  heart  be  right  with  God.  The  gospel  makes 
the  heart  right.  2.  Must  be  maintained  under  the  influence  of  gospel  principles 
and  in  the  use  of  gospel  ordinances.  Everything  is  liable  to  deterioration  ;  institu- 
tions,  buildings,  metals  of  the  finest  polish,  Christians  of  the  most  exalted  piety. 
We  must  live  by  faith,  by  the  love  of  God  in  the  keeping  of  His  commandments,  by 
an  attention  to  the  means  of  grace.  3.  Must  resemble  gospel  patterns.  The 
gospel  is  not  a  collection  of  maxims  and  doctrines  so  much  as  an  exhibition  of 
examples.  •' Follow  me  as  I  follow  Christ. "  4.  Must  be  conformable  to  gospel 
precepts.  The  gospel  is  not  merely  an  offer  of  mercy  and  a  promise  of  blessing. 
The  law  is  not  made  void  through  faith.  Where  much  is  given,  much  is  required. 
The  epitome  of  these  precepts  is  "live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  the 
present  world."  II.  What  obligations  abb  wk  dndeb  to  maintain  this  conduct f 
1.  God  requires  it.  For  this  end  He  has  given  His  revelation.  "  Not  every  one 
that  saith.  Lord,  Lord,"  &c.  The  will  of  God  is  righteous,  and  no  creature  can 
resist  it  with  impunity.  2.  Consistency  requires  it.  Profession  without  practice 
is  hypocrisy.  Actions  speak  louder  than  words.  "  Let  every  one  that  uameth  the 
name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  3.  Our  personal  comfort  requires  it.  *'  Our 
rejoicing  is  the  testimony  of  our  conscience."  Without  this  peace  is  a  delusion. 
4.  Our  connection  with  society  requires  it.  We  owe  to  society  what  we  cannot 
adequately  repay  but  by  the  blessings  of  the  life  of  the  gospel.  5.  Our  final  salva- 
tion requires  it.  We  shall  be  judged  according  to  our  works.  Conclusion  :  1.  How 
excellent  is  the  Christian  religion.  2.  How  illiberal  and  unreasonable  to  censure 
it  on  account  of  its  inconsistent  professors.  (JR.  Treffry.)  The  gospel's  power  in 
a  Christian't  life  .—I.  What  thb  gospel  is.     1.  It  is  the  gospel  of  Christ  because 

M)  He  is  the  author  of  it.     (2)  The  pith  and  marrow  of  it.     (3)  The  fiaiisher  of 

it.  It  is  His  property,  it  glorifies  His  person,  it  is  sweet  with  the  savour  of  His 
name.  2.  It  is  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Good  news.  (1)  It  removes  the  worst  iUs — 
sin,  death,  hell.  (2)  It  brings  the  best  blessings — reconciliation  with  God,  good- 
will on  earth,  eternal  happiness  in  heaven.  II.  Odb  conversation  must  be  such 
AS  BBCOMETH  THE  GOSPEL.  The  gospcl  is — 1.  Simple.  So  should  we  be  in  our 
dress,  our  speech,  our  behaviour.  Wherever  you  find  the  Christian  you  ought  not 
to  want  a  key  to  him.  He  should  be  a  transparent  man  like  Nathaniel  and  "  as 
little  children."  2.  True.  Gold  without  dross.  So  should  the  Christian  be  in 
his  talk.  There  should  be  no  scandal,  oath-taking,  equivocation,  still  less  lying. 
8.  Fearless.  It  calls  things  by  their  right  names,  and  is  the  very  reverse  of  what 
is  now  called  charity.  Be  honest  and  brave  in  your  profession  and  action.  4.  Gentle. 
Bad  temper  is  quite  contrary  to  the  gospel.  Have  a  lion's  heart,  but  a  lady's  hand. 
6.  Loving.  Without  love  the  Christian  is  as  sounding  brass.  6.  Merciful.  Harsh 
or  miserly  people  do  not  become  the  gospel.  7.  Holy.  The  Christian  must  b* 
holy  as  Christ  is  holy.  III.  The  stebn  necessitt  of  a  convebsation  that  becouetb 
THB  gospel.  1.  If  you  do  not  live  like  this  you  will  make  your  innocent  fellow- 
members  suffer.  Ton  tempt  others,  and  bring  discredit  on  the  whole  Church.  2. 
You  make  your  Lord  suffer.  The  world  lays  your  sin  at  the  door  of  your  religion. 
8.  You  will  pull  down  all  the  witness  you  have  ever  borne  for  Christ.  How  can 
your  children,  neighbours.&c,  believe  you  if  you  act  inconsistently.  {C.H.  Spurgeon.) 
ChrUtian  coriduct  is  made  up  of  little  things  : — See  to  it  that  each  hour's  feelings, 
and  thoughts,  and  actions  are  pure  and  true  ;  then  will  your  life  be  such.  The 
mightiest  maze  of  magnificent  harmonies  that  ever  a  Beethoven  gave  to  the  world, 
is  but  single  notes,  and  all  its  complicated  and  interlacing  strains  are  resolvable 
into  individualities.  The  wide  pasture  is  but  separate  spears  of  grass  ;  the  sheeted 
bloom  of  the  prairies  but  isolated  flowers.         Striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the- 

gospel. 1.  The  phrase,  "  faith  of  the  gospel,"  has  a  distinct  significance  in  the 

New  Testament.  It  refers  to  the  Divine  revelation  of  mercy  and  love  in  the  Son 
of  God,  and  its  acceptance  by  earnest  and  penitent  trust.  It  is  connected  with 
long  lives  of  antecedent  prophecy,  symbolical  services,  the  constant  yearning  of  th& 
world  for  a  Redeemer,  and  the  Messianic  hope  of  the  Jews.  2.  This  message  of 
redemption  meets  with  endless  forms  of  acceptance  and  rejection.  (1)  At  first  its 
promulgation  came  iu  contact  with  heathenism  as  a  religion,  and  naturally  accused 
the  opposition  of  the  proud  systems  of  error.  (2)  Next  it  came  in  contact  with 
Heathenism  as  a  philosophy,  and  the  proud  reason  of  the  classic  world  sought  to 


CHAP,  tj  PHILIPPIANS.  71 

analyze  its  mysteries.  (3)  To  every  form  of  religious  thought  and  every  phase  o5 
intellectual  life  it  has  come  for  eighteen  centuries  to  be  rejected  by  the  proud,  but 
to  be  accepted  by  the  meek.  3.  It  is  one  of  the  vital  questions  of  the  day  how  to 
meet  and  overcome  this  opposition.  I.  The  Pulpit  is  naturally  called  into  reqai- 
eition.  1,  But  is  it  to  be  the  teacher  of  philosophy?  Then  its  function  is  to 
wrestle  with  the  doubts,  to  antagonize  the  unbelief  of  the  day.  But  this  attitude 
is  only  a  negative  one,  and  to  tuke  up  in  detail  the  varied  assaults  would  only  be 
to  advertize  and  disseminate  them.  2.  The  real  business  of  the  pulpit,  as  de- 
fined by  Scripture,  is  to  preach  Christ  and  Him  crucified,  and  by  the  proclamation 
of  positive  truth  there  the  unbelief  of  the  day  will  best  be  met.  II.  The  press 
competes  with  the  pulpit  in  the  education  of  the  multitude.  Here  unbelief  tinds 
full  and  systematized  expression,  but  so  may  and  so  does  Christianity.  The  bane 
and  the  antidote  exist  side  by  side,  and  sceptical  assaults  aUmg  the  whole  line  of 
the  faith  have  been  repelled  in  current  liteiature.  Here  scientific  objections  can 
be  and  are  met  by  scientific  men.  III.  But  the  individual  Chuistian  lifb  is  the 
best  defender  of  the  faith.  The  union  of  Christians  in  the  conversation  which 
becometh  the  gospel  will  render  the  faith  invincible.  (W.  A.  Snively,  D.D.) 
Means  in  aid  of  the  propagation  of  the  gospel : — I.  The  faith  of  the  gospel. 
"  The  faith  which  was  once  delivered  to  the  saints,"  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  " : 
viz. — 1.  The  truth  about  God.  His  unity  and  threefold  Personality.  2.  About 
man — his  fall  and  ruin.  3.  About  redemption — the  Incarnation  and  Atonement  of 
Christ;  the  acceptance  of  salvation  by  faith;  regeneration  and  sanctification  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  About  immortality.  II.  The  import  of  the  apostle's 
LiNQUAGE  concermno  IT.  The  Philippians  are  to  strive  together  for  it.  The 
gospel  was  a  precious  deposit ;  they  were  to  hold  it  fast  in  opposition  to  all  who 
would  rob  them  of  it ;  they  were  to  preserve  it  in  its  original  purity,  in  opposition 
to  those  who  sought  to  adulterate  it.  But  it  was  not  to  be  a  concealed  treasure,  or 
appropriated  exclusively  by  themselves,  but  was  to  be  communicated  to  their  fellow 
men.  1.  All  Christians  may  and  must  aid  in  disseminating  the  faith  of  the  gospel. 
Some  think  this  the  business  of  ministers.  Paul  told  the  "  saints  "  as  well  as  tl\e 
bishops  and  deacons  to  do  it.  Christians  may  do  this.  (1)  By  cultivating  purity 
of  heart  and  life  and  maintaining  an  exemplary  deportment.  This  method  is- 
sanctioned  by  Christ  Himself — "  Let  your  light  eo  shine."  Its  efiBcacy  may  be 
illustrated  by  numerous  facts.  This  was  the  main  method  of  gospel  propagation 
in  Apostoho  and  early  Christian  times.  Gibbon  puts  the  vii  tues  of  Christians 
among  his  "  secondary  causes."  So  to-day.  The  greatest  enemies  of  the  Cross  are 
inconsistent  Christians.  (2)  By  pecuniary  contributions.  Many  overvalue  money ; 
Bome  undervalue  it :  the  truth  is,  it  is  a  talent  to  be  employed  for  God.  God  has 
given  you  the  power  and  opportunity  to  get  it.  Consecrate  it  therefore  to  Him. 
The  proportion  must  be  left  to  conscience.  The  poorest  should  not  be  discouraged, 
for  God  values  the  widow's  mite,  when  the  offering  of  a  willing  mind.  Let  modem 
Churches  take  example  by  the  Church  at  Philippi.  (3)  By  union  and  co-operation. 
The  advantages  of  this  are  obvious.  We  see  this  in  business  and  politics,  and  in 
philanthropic  and  religious  societies.  Why  then  should  minor  differences  separate 
Christians  T  Divisions  are  a  source  of  weakness ;  union  is  strength.  (4)  By 
humble,  importunate,  and  believing  prayer.  Old  Testament  and  New  alike  enjoin 
this  as  a  means  of  advancing  the  faith.  Let  this  be  remembered  in  public,  private, 
and  family  prayer.  It  is  a  means  which  God  delights  to  honour.  2.  In  this  good 
work  Christians  should  be  zealous.  "Striving"  as  the  competitors  in  the  games. 
Nothing  is  more  offensive  to  Christ  than  lukewarmness.  (1)  The  work  needs  the 
most  strenuous  effort.  It  has  to  struggle  with  the  most  inveterate  and  formidable 
opposition,  from  the  evil  heart  and  from  evil  systems.  (2)  It  is  worthy  of  them. 
It  brings  glory  to  God,  the  highest  good  to  man,  and  honour  to  the  Eedeemer. 
(J.  Thomson,  D.D.)  Unity  and  action: — I.  The  object  fob  whose  pebpetuitt 
TOO  ABB  to  co-operate.  The  whole  gospel,  not  its  promises,  or  precepts,  or 
doctrines  alone,  still  less  any  particular  views  relating  to  them,  such  as  Calvinism 
or  Arminianism.  We  have  to  contend  for  the  faith,  not  a  fragment  of  it.  Why 
are  Christians  to  strive  together  for  this?  1.  Because  they  alone  understand  and 
prize  it.  By  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  they  see  its  value.  To  them  Christ  is  all.  Hia 
gospel  is  the  book  of  their  hearts.  They  cannot  but  love  what  is  precious.  To 
others  it  may  be  dull.  2.  Because  to  them  its  honourable  privileges  are  granted. 
Their  religious  privileges  become  duties  in  consequence  of  their  obligations  to  Him 
■who  had  saved  them.  Their  duties  become  privileges  in  consequence  of  tbeir  1ot« 
to  Him  who  first  loved  them.     3.  Because  the  enemies  of  the  Master  are  watchful 


79  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  t. 

and  active.  II.  The  position  you  aee  to  maintain.  It  was  not  required  cf  them 
to  assume  the  position  of  an  united  phalanx.  God  had  assigned  that  as  He  has  to 
us.  We  are  simply  to  "  stand  fast  in  one  spirit "  in  it.  You  have  the  gospel 
verities — unitedly  maintain  them.  Divide  and  conquer  is  the  policy  of  the  adver- 
sary ;  close  your  ranks  and  win  is  ours.  "  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself 
shall  not  stand."  III.  The  unity  of  purpose  tou  abe  to  cherish.  1.  Be  of  one 
mind  on  the  subject  of  unity  itself.  2,  On  the  subject  of  social  prayer  :  "If  two  of 
you  shall  agree,  tfec."  3.  With  respect  to  the  mutual  ministry:  Support  your  pastors 
and  love  them.  4.  In  doing  good  to  all  men.  (W.Leask,I).D.)  Standfast : — 
The  word  crriKiTt  in  the  original  signifies  to  h'dd  on,  and  to  remain  firm  at  one's 
post,  arid  is  derft'ed  from  the  combats,  in  which  each  endeavour  to  keep  his  place, 
and  to  mainlaiu  himself  in  his  seat,  without  gomg  back,  or  being  shaken  by  all  the 
attacks  of  the  enemy.  The  apostle,  employing  this  image  to  represent  to  us  the 
life  of  the  faithful,  means,  that  in  this  spiritual  warfare  we  should  never  allow  our- 
Belves  to  be  drawn  from  that  position  in  which  God  has  placed  us,  and  that  aU 
together,  like  his  faithful  and  valiant  soldiers,  courageously  repulsing  the  enemy, 
we  should  always  stand  firm,  without  quitting  either  the  faith  or  the  profession 
which  by  His  grace  we  have  made.  (J.  Daille.)  Striving  together; — As  a 
wrestler  grapples  his  antagonist,  and  strains  himself  for  the  mastery,  so  the 
Christian  must  struggle  against  every  enemy  of  the  truth.  (G.  J.  Procter.) 
Concord  in  the  Church : — As  there  is  no  body  or  society  more  noble  than  the 
Church,  so  there  is  none  in  which  union  and  concord  are  more  necessary.  You  are 
begotten  of  the  same  seed,  i.e.,  of  the  gospel,  brought  up  in  the  same  family, 
nourished  with  the  same  food,  animated  by  tlie  same  spirit,  destined  to  the  same 
inheritance.  If  so  many  close  ties  cannot  unite  you,  at  any  rate  let  this  common 
warfare  in  which  you  are  engaged,  this  common  danger  tbat  you  run,  and  these 
common  enemies  with  whom  you  contend,  extinguish  your  differences,  and  make 
you  rally  together  for  your  common  presers-ation  and  defence.  Often  among  the 
kingdoms  of  the  earth,  the  fear  of  an  enemy  without  stays  the  misunderstandings 
and  quarrels  within.  Let  us  imitate  in  this  respect  the  prudence  of  the  children 
of  this  world.  Whatever  you  may  have  of  wisdom  or  courage,  turn  it  against  the 
enemy.  May  he  alone  feel  the  vigour  of  your  arm,  and  the  point  of  your  weapons. 
It  is  not  against  your  brother  that  they  should  be  employed.  They  are  made,  and 
they  hn-ve  been  given  you,  to  defend,  and  not  to  wound  him  ;  to  preserve,  and  not 
to  shei)  his  blood.  I  say  it  with  regret,  it  is  nothing  but  our  division,  my  brethren, 
which  has  prevented  the  defeat  of  the  enemy,  and  the  triumph  of  the  Church.  If 
we  had  all  fought  together,  we  should  long  ago  have  been  conquerors.     {J.  Daille.) 

Ver.  28.  In  nothing  terrified  by  your  adversaries. — Courage: — I.  The  need  of 
it.  II.  The  PROOFS  of  it.  III.  The  advantage  of  it ;  it  is  a  sign  of  perdition 
to  your  foes — of  salvation  to  you.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I.  Your  adversaribs  are 
numerous,  mighty,  terrible,  yet  they  will  certainly  perish.  II.  Your  salvation 
is  near,  sure,  glorious,  and  that  of  God.  (Ibid.)  An  evident  token  of  perdition. 
Tokens  of  perdition  : — Perdition  means  hopeless  ruin.  A  token  is  a  premonition. 
The  natural  world  is  full  of  warnings.  A  change  in  the  atmosphere  or  in  the 
order  of  things,  a  coming  disaster  or  great  event,  is  heralded  by  certain  pheno- 
mena, which  long  experience  and  observation  know  how  to  inteipret.  So  also  in 
the  political,  social,  moral,  and  religious  spheres.  So  evident  are  these  tokens  to 
the  discerning  that  it  is  not  difficult  to  forecast  the  future.  On  this  prim-iple  Paul 
interprets  the  conduct  of  adversaries.  And  every  preacher  of  the  gospel  is 
warranted  in  accepting  certain  traits  of  character  and  developments  of  depravity 
as  "  evident  tokens  of  perdition  "  in  those  in  whom  they  are  found,  and  hold  them 
forth  as  warnings,  "  beacon-lights"  in  the  world.  Let  me  specify  a  few  such  tokens, 
not  from  the  infidel,  or  openly  immoral  classes,  but  from  the  respectable  and 
Church-going  class  of  sinners.  I.  A  state  of  habitual  moral  insensibility  on 
the  momentous  and  infinitely  interesting  matter  of  salvation.  II.  A  quiet, 
bleeping  conscience,  under  the  sunlight  of  the  Bible,  and  the  faithful  and 
searching  appeals  of  God's  ambassadors.  III.  Convictions  of  bin  lost,  and 
BELAPSE  into  greater  caielessness  and  insensibility  than  ever  before,  after  a  period 
of  rehgious  interest.  IV.  Passed  by  and  left  undisturbed  in  their  sins — left, 
it  may  be,  to  scoff  and  oppose — when  God's  Holy  Spirit  has  been  sent  down  in 
mighty  power  to  awaken  and  convert  souls  and  gather  in  the  harvest.  V.  Whem 
PBOviDENTiAL  CHASTISEMENTS  FAIL  OF  THEiB  END,  and,  instead  of  humble,  penitent 
labmisBion  and  teai-ful  recognition  of  God's  hand  in   them,  there  is  a  proud. 


ciu».  I.]  PEILIPPIANS. 


unyielding  spirit  of  bitternesf.  Now  where  such  things  appear,  "  perdition  "  is 
nigh ;  the  final  wrath  is  imminent ;  the  last  Bands  of  hope  are  falling ;  the  knell 
of  despair  is  ready  to  sound  I  (Uomiletic  Monthly.)  Tokens  of  perdition  : — 
I.  A  FALSE  HOPE  OF  piETT.  There  are  many  who  deceive  themselves  with  a  spurious 
religion,  and  while  they  have  a  name  to  live,  are  dead.  II.  Premature  depravitt. 
Though  tha  principle  of  sin  is  inherent  in  every  human  bosom,  it  attains  a  more 
early  and  rank  luxuriance  in  some  cases  than  in  others.  III.  Inveteracy  in  trans- 
6RESSI0N.  The  almost  invincible  force  of  habit  is  a  subject  of  universal  remark. 
IV.  Confirmed  belief  of  destructive  error.  The  confidence  which  the  votaries 
of  error  repose  in  its  delusions  is  widely  different  in  different  persons.  With 
some  it  is  little  more  than  a  cherished  wish  that  their  system  were  true.  V.  Un- 
banctified  worldly  prosperity.  VI.  Apathy  of  mind  under  Divine  chastisement. 
VII.  Return  to  insensibility  after  serious  impressions.  VIII.  An  impenitent 
old  age.  (Christian  Age.)  Men  not  terrified: — John  Noyes,  kissing  the  stake, 
said,  '•  Blessed  be  the  time  that  ever  I  was  born  for  this  day."  To  his  fellow- 
martyrs  be  said,  "  We  shall  not  lose  our  lives  in  this  fire,  but  change  them  for  a 
better,  and  for  coals  have  pearls."  Hugh  Laverocke,  comforting  John-a-Price,  hia 
fellow-martyr,  said  unto  him,  "  Be  of  good  comfort,  my  brother,  for  my  Lord  of 
London  is  our  good  physician.  He  will  cure  thee  of  all  thy  blindness,  and  me  of 
my  lameness  this  day."  Joyce  Lewis. — "When  I  behold  the  uglisome  face  of 
death,  I  am  afraid;  but  when  I  consider  Christ's  amiable  countenance,  I  take  heart 
again."  John  Huss  said  to  a  countryman  who  threw  a  faggot  at  his  head,  "  Oh, 
holy  simplicity,  God  send  thee  better  light  I  You  roast  the  goose  now,  but  a  swan 
shall  come  after  me,  and  he  shall  escape  your  fire."  Huss,  a  goose  in  the  Bohemian 
language ;  and  Luther,  a  swan.  Castilia  Rupea. — •'  Though  you  throw  my  body 
down  off  this  steep  hill,  yet  will  my  soul  mount  upwards  again.  Your  blasphemies 
more  offend  my  mind  than  your  torments  do  my  body."  Doctor  Taylor,  as  he  was 
going  to  martyrdom  :  "  I  shall  this  day  deceive  the  worms  in  Hadley  churchyard," 
and  fetching  a  leap  or  two  when  he  came  within  two  miles  of  Hadley,  "  Now," 
eaith  he,  "  lack  I  but  two  stiles,  and  I  am  even  at  my  Father's  house."  In 
nothing  affrighted .- — The  rendering  of  the  Revised  Version  is  very  happily  chosen. 
The  word  is  used  of  horses  shying  in  view  of  any  unusual  or  unexpected  object. 
Believers  are  apt  to  be  so  scared  ;  but  thru  it  is  implied  in  the  word  used  that  a 
Budden  fright  or  panic  may  after  all  arise  from  trilling  cause.  It  is  that  which 
need  not  disturb.  Whatevei*  it  is  that  causes  the  alarm  it  is  seen  to  be  powerless, 
even  to  vanish  whenever  it  is  boldly  approached.  All  such  trials  to  God's  people 
are  like  the  lions  in  the  narrow  path  leading  to  the  Palace  Beautiful  of  Bunyan's 
allegory.  They  were  chained  as  the  Pilgrim  espied  them,  but  he  knew  it  not. 
They  have  therefore  only  to  be  courageously  approafhed.  and  then  the  voice  oi 
Watchful  is  heard,  "  Fear  not  the  lions,  for  they  are  chaired,  and  are  placed  there 
for  trial  of  fnith  where  it  is,  and  for  discovery  of  those  that  have  none.  Keep  in 
the  midst  of  the  path,  and  no  hurt  shall  come  unto  thee."     (J.  Hutchison,  D.D.) 

Vers.  29-30.  Unto  you  It  Is  given  In  the  behalf  of  Christ. — Fellowship  with 
the  martyrs  and  confessors : — I.  Like  faith.  II.  Like  conflicts.  III.  Lies 
HONOUR.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  Christian's  life  is — I.  A  life  op  faith.  This 
faith  is — 1.  The  gift  of  God — "is  given  you."  2.  A  particular  gift  bestowed  on  a 
particular  people,  distinguishing  them  from  all  others.  The  Christian  knows  and 
enjoys  what  no  one  else  does.  II.  A  life  of  suffering.  1.  Christ's  life  was  full 
of  it,  and  so,  therefore,  is  the  believer's.  2.  Some  sufferings  he  shares  with  the 
humanity  to  which  he  belongs.  3.  Some  trials  are  peculiar  to  the  Christian 
arising  from  (1)  sin;  (2)  the  inherent  difficulty  of  the  Christian  life;  (3)  profession 
before  the  world ;  (4)  self-denial ;  (5)  consistency  in  business,  &o. ;  (6)  the 
opposition  of  the  enemies  of  the  gospel.  III.  The  life  of  buffering  proves  thb 
life  of  faith.  Others  are  rebellious,  or  stoically  resigned  ;  the  Christian  bows 
out  of  love  to  Christ,  and  is  supported  by  Christ  in  response  to  faith.  (J.  W. 
Reeve,  M.A.)  The  gifts  of  God: — 1.  What  they  are.  The  power  to  believe — 
to  suffer,  n.  Their  inestimable  value.  1.  Faith  brings  peace,  joy,  righteous- 
ness. 2.  Patient  suffering  brings  deliverance,  conquest,  glory.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Unto  you  it  is  given  to  believe : — I.  Faith  is  the  gift  of  God.  He  supplies  the 
ground,  the  means,  the  power.  II.  It  is  given  to  tou.  You  can  accept  the 
ground,  use  the  means,  exercise  the  power.  HI.  How  fab  hatb  tou  improved  it  1 
You  cannot  reach  the  higher  standpoint  before  the  lower;  every  one  has  a  measnre 
of  ability;  therefore  repent,  believe.     (Ibid.)        Unto  fou  it  it  given  to  tufer:— 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  i. 

God  gives  yon — L  The  opportunity.  II.  The  poweb.  III.  The  honour.  IV.  Th€ 
BEWABD  of  suffering  for  Christ.  (Ibid.)  Suffering  for  Christ: — It  is  said  that 
men  learned  to  despise  pain  before  Chi'ist.  This  is  trne.  But  where,  save  in 
Christian  literature  and  history,  do  you  find  suffering  converted  into  joy,  esteemed 
as  an  honour,  and  borne  as  a  badge  of  royalty.  As  a  king  grants  charters  and 
honours,  so  Christ  as  our  Sovereign  gives  His  disciples  the  privilege  of  faith  and 
alliance  to  Him.  And  he  still  farther  honours  them  by  permitting  them  to  suffer 
on  His  behalf.    Let  us  see  what  kind  of  sufferings  are  included  in  this  charter. 

I.   AliL  INTLIOTED   DIBECTLT  FOR  OUB  ADHESION  TO  THE  NAME  AND  W0B8HIF  OF  ChRIST. 

Physical  persecution,  social,  domestic.  11.  All  arisino  frou  the  effectual 
PBEACHiNO  of  TRUTH,  whether  by  ministers  or  private  disciples.  We  are  not  to 
count  the  suffering  which  comes  from  our  own  headstrong  rashness  in  speech  or 
administration,  but  that  which  comes  from  a  calm  inflexible  advocacy  of  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus.  For  this  it  is  an  Lonour  to  suffer.  HI.  All  which  arises  from 
THE  APPLICATION  OF  CHRISTIAN  TRUTH  to  humau  disposition  and  conduct,  to  the 
manners  of  society,  to  the  selfishness  and  injustice  of  men.  Labourers  in  this 
harvest  field  will  have  their  bosom  full  of  sheaves,  and  their  head  crowned  with 
thorns.  Let  a  man  have  a  conscience,  and  he  will  perforce  find  himself  a  warrior. 
What  afiBnity  is  there  between  generosity  and  greed.  IV.  All  suffering  not  of 
^HE  nature  of  obloquy.  All  self-denials,  watchings,  labours,  cares,  weariness, 
incident  to  a  life  devoted  to  the  cause  of  God.  Those  whose  parish  is  the  dungeon, 
the  hospital,  the  purlieus  of  vice.  V.  All  consequent  upon  a  stbifb  with  self 
.AND  circumstances  for  the  purpose  of  augmenting  Christian  dispositions.  Our 
internal  conflicts  are  often  greater  than  our  external.  What  suffering  is  involved 
in  our  strife  with  the  world,  the  fiesh,  and  the  devil ;  in  our  endeavour  to  be  patient 
under  sickness  and  misfortune,  resigned  in  the  midst  of  sorrows  and  bereavement. 
VI.  At.t.  abisimo  from  the  service  wb  perform  on  BEHALF  OF  OTHERS.  Mothers 
with  their  children  in  bearing  and  up-bringing,  friends,  philanthropists.  Con- 
clusion :  I  remark  in  view  of  this  exposition — 1  We  are  not  to  seek  suffering  on 
purpose.  Suffering  without  moral  impulse  is  cf  no  account.  2.  It  is  a  shame 
for  a  man  to  entertain  an  ideal  of  Christian  life  which  is  ease  and  freedom 
from  inconvenience.  3.  All  true  education  consists  in  preparation  for  and  en- 
durance of  suffering,  Let  parents  see  to  this.  4.  We  may  form  a  proper  judg- 
naent  of  those  who  are  called  to  labour  for  God  Those  prepared  to  regard 
suffering  as  an  honour,  and  to  count  the  victory  as  worth  any  price,  (if.  W. 
Beecher.)  The  value  of  suffering: — To  this  refiner's  fire  may  doubtless  be  ascribed 
in  part  the  lustre  and  purity  of  their  faith  as  compared  with  other  Churches. 
iBish(^  Lightfoot.)  Persecutions  only  raked  away  the  ashes,  so  that  the  spiritual 
^ame  was  steady  and  brilliant.  {Prof.  Eadie.)  The  grace  and  honour  of  suffering : — 
The  men  whom  a  general,  at  the  critical  moment  of  a  great  battle,  specially 
appoints  to  hold  the  key  of  his  position,  or  whom,  in  the  assault  of  a  besieged  city, 
lie  sends  on  a  "  forlorn  hope,"  are,  by  his  choice  of  them  for  peril  and  probable 
suffering,  marked  out  as  in  his  judgment  "the  bravest  of  the  brave."  Their 
eomrades,  even  while  rejoicing  in  their  hearts,  it  may  be,  that  the  selection  has  left 
themselves  ont,  feel  that  those  on  whom  the  choice  has  fallen  are  honoured. 
Similarly,  is  there  not  "grace"  shown  in  the  choice  made  by  the  "Captain  of 
salvation,"  when  in  His  providence  He  calls  this  soldier  of  the  cross,  and  that,  to 
■offer  or  die  under  the  standard  ?  In  the  old  persecuting  times  in  our  country, 
men  who  "  bore  in  their  bodies  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  in  limbs  crushed  by 
the  iron  boot  or  torn  by  the  rack — looking  back  in  after  days  upon  the  patience  which 
the  Saviour  had  given  them  amid  their  anguish,  and  the  increase  of  spiritual  wisdom 
and  energy  which  had  come  through  the  trial  to  themselves,  and  to  some  extent 
also  to  others,  could  not  but  esteem  the  suffering  for  Christ  as  a  "  gift  of  grace." 
When  onder  sentence  of  death,  good  Bishop  Kidley  wrote  thus  to  his  relatives : 
"  I  warn  you  all,  my  beloved  kinsfolk,  that  ye  be  not  amazed  or  astonished  at  the 
kind  of  my  departure  or  dissolution;  for  I  assure  yon  I  think  it  the  most  honour 
that  ever  I  was  called  unto  in  all  my  life.  And  therefore  I  thank  God  heartily  for 
it,  that  it  hath  pleased  Him  to  call  me,  of  His  great  mercy,  unto  this  high  hononr, 
to  suffer  death  willingly  for  His  sake  and  in  His  cause ;  unto  the  which  honour  He 
tsalled  the  holy  prophets,  and  His  dearly  beloved  apostles,  and  His  blessed  chosen 
martyrs."  And  when  the  end  came,  and  Latimer  and  he  were  burned  at  the  same 
stake — whilst  the  persecutors  could  see  only  the  fiame  which  consumed  the  fiesh, 
the  faith  of  the  martyrs  could  discern  for  themselves  a  chariot  of  fire  waiting  to 
4[>ear  them  home  to  their  Lord,  and  for  their  country  a  fire  of  pious  zeal  lighted  up. 


OTAP.  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  Tf 

which  all  the  arts  of  the  wicked  one  should  never  be  able  to  put  out.  There  was 
^eat  "grace"  there.  {R.  John$tone,  LL.B.)  The  service  of  suffering  : — Dr. 
Tronchin,  talking  one  day  with  the  son  of  Caesar  Malan  about  his  father,  who  was 
lying  on  his  deathbed,  said,  *'  How  often  have  I  not  heard  even  his  friends  say, 
when  I  spoke  with  admiration  of  the  work  of  your  father,  •  Malan  serves  God  with 
fire,  courage,  and  perseverance,  because  the  service  which  God  requires  of  him  is 
•n  active  service,  and  consists  in  an  activity  which  responds  to  his  tastes  and 
talents.'  But  wait  before  judging  him  definitely  until  God  calls  him  to  a  passive 
service  of  suffering."  God  is  doing  this  under  our  eyes  at  this  hour,  and  under 
our  eyes  also  His  servant  is  found  faithful.  (J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  The  honour 
of  suffering  for  Christ : — One  of  the  witnesses  for  the  truth  when  imprisoned  for 
conscience'  sake  in  the  days  of  Queen  Mary,  is  said  to  have  thus  written  to  a  friend: 
*•  A  prisoner  for  Christ  I  What  is  this  for  a  poor  worm  I  Such  honour  have  not 
all  the  saints.  Both  the  degrees  which  I  took  at  the  University  have  not  set  me  so 
jiigh  as  the  honour  of  becoming  a  prisoner  of  the  Lord."  The  mystery  of 
suffering  : — "  Unaccountable  this  !  "  said  the  Wax,  as  from  the  flame  it  dropped 
melting  upon  the  Paper  beneath.  "  Do  not  grieve,"  said  tlie  Paper ;  "  I  am  sure  it 
is  all  right."  '*  I  was  never  in  such  agony  !  "  exclaimed  the  Wax,  still  dropping. 
"  It  is  not  vrithout  a  good  design,  and  will  end  well,"  replied  the  Paper.  The  Wax 
was  unable  to  reply  at  once,  owing  to  a  strong  pressure  ;  and  when  it  again  looked 
op  it  bore  a  beautiful  impression,  the  counterpart  of  the  seal  which  had  been 
applied  to  it.  "  Ah  1  I  comprehend  now,"  said  the  Wax,  no  longer  in  suffering. 
'■  I  was  softened  in  order  to  receive  this  lovely  durable  impress.  Yes ;  I  see  now  it 
^as  all  right,  because  it  has  given  to  me  the  beautiful  likeness  which  I  ooald  not 
otherwise  have  obtained."     (Mrs.  Prosser.) 


CHAPTER  n. 


Vebs.  1-13.  If  there  be  therefore  any  consolation  In  Christ. — Christian  unity : — 
I,  Ths  doctrine  of  Christian  unity.  1.  This  unity  is  inward  and  consists  of 
harmonious  spiritual  feeling.  (1)  It  can  only  subsist  among  Christians.  (2)  At 
the  same  time  it  is  possible  and  also  common  for  those  who  in  the  main  are 
brethren  to  fail  grievously.  (3)  This  unity  is  specifically — (o)  Agreement  of  view. 
<5)  Accord  in  purpose,  (c)  Mutual  love.  2.  It  is  also  outward  and  visible.  (1) 
WliereVer  there  is  true  inward  feeling  there  is  a  corresponding  outward  manifesta- 
tion. (2)  This  unity  when  seen  cannot  but  impress  the  world  with  a  favourable 
conclusion.  II.  The  causes  or  ditisions.  The  spirit  of  vain-glory,  self-preference, 
«eli-interest.  It  was  from  envy  the  brethren  of  Joseph  hated  him.  The  same  was 
at  the  root  of  Absalom's  and  Adonijah  s  rebellion.  This  was  rebuked  by  Christ 
when  He  set  a  little  child  in  the  midst  of  His  contentious  disciples.  We  are  not 
willing  to  admit  this  as  the  cause  in  our  own  case.  We  persuade  ourselves  that 
real  grievances  are  the  cause,  and  that  conscience  is  prompting  us  to  be  valiant  for 
the  truth.  But  these  considerations,  when  genuine,  would  indeed  lead  to  plainness 
of  speech,  but  would,  in  their  end  and  aim,  promote  rather  than  retard  brotherly 
love  and  union.  Grievances  are  only  occasions  for  forbearance.  III.  The  remedy. 
"  The  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus."  His  humble,  self -emptying  spirit.  The 
spirit,  then,  of  humiliation  which  will  not  stand  upon  claims  and  rights,  but  readily 
concede  them,  is  that  which  will  check  disunion  and  promote  nnity.  Conclusion : 
1 .  Make  this  a  means  of  trying  your  own  spirits.  2.  Do  we  wish  to  learn  this 
necessary  disposition?  3.  Without  this  vain  is  our  profession  of  vital  Christianity. 
{E.  Meade,  M.A.)  The  excellence  of  Christian  unity  : — 1.  Does  Christian  unity 
consist  in  the  union  of  Christians  in  one  corporate,  visible  organization  7  It  should 
do,  and  one  day  will  do.  2.  But  even  this  desirable  object  by  itself  would  not 
secure  true  unity.  It  would  be  but  a  body  without  life — the  nnity  of  the  church- 
yard. 3.  The  only  true  unity  is  that  of  the  text,  one  of  sonl  and  brotherly  affection. 
I.  Look  at  its  excellence.  It  gives  peace;  promotes  strength  and  usefulness; 
commands  attention  and  imitation.  1.  Notice  the  individual  man.  The  sonl  is  a 
little  kingdom.  In  it  there  dwell  a  variety  of  faculties  ;  there  are  fears,  hopes,  likes, 
dislikes ;  appetites  to  urge  and  principles  to  cueck ;  self-will  to  prompt,  self-interest 
io  restrain  ;  passions  to  hurry  away,  conscience  to  control,  &o.    When  these  are  iu 


n  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  a. 

discord  what  a  "  tronbled  sea  "  there  is.  Bat  when  the  Spirit  of  God  is  received 
and  obeyed,  what  a  blessed  harmony  is  the  result — "  a  peace  that  passeth  under- 
Btanding."  2.  Take  the  family.  Let  love  reign  there,  sustained  and  cherished  by 
mutual  forbearance  in  the  fear  of  God,  parents  honoured,  sons  and  daughters  kind 
and  helpful,  and  how  the  power  and  usefulness  of  the  family  are  increased.  It  is 
not  to  have  many  hands  at  a  rope  which  will  pull  the  weight,  but  all  moved  by  the 
same  impulse  and  pulling  together.  3.  Suppose  the  same  to  prevail  in  a  parish. 
Why  should  it  not  1  It  was  so  once  at  Jerusalem,  and  would  now  as  then  (Acts  ii. 
46-47)  result  in  personal  happiness  and  numerous  conversions.  4.  If  the  same 
obtained  throughout  the  world  the  effect  would  be  irresistible.  II.  The  evils  o» 
DISUNION  AND  DIVISION.  1.  It  is  a  proof  of  being  unspiritual  and  carnal,  as  it  was 
in  the  case  of  the  Corinthians,  and  in  some  cases  of  being  unconverted.  How 
dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  the  fomenters  of  strife  and  discord.  2.  It  is  a  hindrance 
to  grace,  comfort,  and  usefulness.  3.  It  is  a  stumbling-block  to  the  world.  (Ibid.) 
Love  promotes  unity: — He  found  an  inexpressibly  sweet  love  to  those  that  he  looked 
upon  as  belonging  to  Christ,  beyond  almost  all  that  he  ever  felt  before,  so  that  (to 
use  his  own  words)  "  it  seemed  like  a  piece  of  heaven  to  have  one  of  them  near 
him."  (Life  of  Brainerd.)  How  unity  is  obtained  : — When  the  tide  is  out  yja 
may  have  noticed,  as  you  rambled  among  the  rocks,  little  pools  with  little  fishes  in 
them.  To  the  shrimp,  in  such  a  pool,  his  foot-depth  of  salt  water  is  all  the  ocean 
for  the  time  being.  He  has  no  dealings  with  his  neighbour  shrimp  in  the  adjacent 
pool,  though  it  may  be  only  a  few  inches  of  sand  that  divide  them  ;  but  when  the 
rising  ocean  begins  to  lip  over  the  margin  of  the  lurking-place,  one  pool  joins 
another,  their  various  tenants  meet,  and  by-and-by,  in  place  of  their  little  patch  of 
standing  water,  they  have  the  ocean's  boundless  fields  to  roam  in.  When  the  tide 
is  out — when  religion  is  low — the  faithful  are  to  be  found  insulated,  here  a  few  and 
there  a  few,  in  the  little  standing  pools  that  stud  the  beach,  having  no  dealings 
with  their  neighbours  of  the  adjoining  pools,  calling  them  Samaritans,  and  fancying 
that  their  own  little  communion  includes  all  that  are  precious  in  God's  sight.  They 
forget,  for  a  time,  that  there  is  a  vast  and  expansive  ocean  rising — every  ripple 
brings  it  nearer — a  mightier  communion,  even  the  communion  of  saints,  which  is 
to  engulf  all  minor  considerations,  and  to  enable  the  fishes  of  all  pools — the  Chris- 
tians— the  Christians  of  all  denominations — to  come  together.  When,  like  a  flood, 
the  Spirit  flows  into  the  Churches,  Church  will  join  to  Church,  and  saint  will  join 
to  saint,  and  all  will  rejoice  to  find  that  if  their  httle  pools  have  perished,  it  is  not 
by  the  scorching  summer's  drought,  nor  the  casting  in  of  earthly  rubbish,  but  by 
the  influx  of  that  boundless  sea  whose  glad  waters  touch  eternity,  and  in  whose 
ample  depths  the  saints  in  heaven,  as  well  as  the  saints  on  earth,  have  room 
enough  to  range.  {Dr.  Hamilton.)  The  Christian  doctrine  of  self: — I.  Thb 
ADJURATION  (ver.  1).  1.  The  strength  of  the  appeal  lies  in  the  completeness  of  its 
expressions.  (1)  "  If  there  be  any  consolation  in  Christ."  I  charge  you  by  every 
holy  argument  which  our  common  union  with  Christ  suggests,  not  such  as  the 
dignity  of  your  position,  the  grandeur  of  union,  the  weakness  and  odiousness  of 
discord,  <feo.  (2)  Paul  passes  from  the  Christ  as  external  from  whom  every  argu- 
ment flows,  to  the  love  which  is  internal.  "Comfort  of  love."  I  charge  you  by 
our  common  possession  of  love,  and  by  the  tender  motive  contained  in  it.  (3)  Thus 
the  exhortation  to  self-renouncing  devotion  is  based  upon  union  with  Christ  and 
enforced  by  the  love  of  the  heart.  Christ  gives  the  strength  of  the  argument :  love 
gives  that  argument  its  tenderness.  2.  Here  follows  another  pair  of  appeals,  but 
now  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  strength  of  the  invocation.  (1)  "  Fellowship  of  the 
Spirit."  I  appeal  to  the  common  inheritance  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  makes 
Christians  one.  That  fellowship  is  the  ground  of  your  self-renouncing  devotion  and 
the  power  which  renders  you  capable  of  it.  (2)  "Bowels  and  mercies."  The  gentle, 
compassionate,  forgiving  spirit  is  most  mighty  in  annihilating  causes  of  dissention 
and  is  the  source  of  all  compassion  in  ua  to  mankind.  Renounce,  therefore,  every 
selfish  impediment  and  devote  yourself  to  the  common  cause  afresh.  3.  Thus  the 
apostle's  joy  would  be  fulfilled.  He  was  already  happy  in  their  devotion  and  in  the 
fruits  of  their  fellowship.  But  he  had  heard  of  the  risings  of  a  fatal  spirit  among 
them.  His  joy  could  not  reach  its  consummation  without  their  united  and  perse- 
vering devotion.  II.  The  exhortation.  1.  In  its  unity.  Here  we  have  self-love 
in  the  great  uniting  object  of  Christ's  kingdom,  subordinate  in  humility  to  the 
honour  of  others,  and  losing  its  essential  selfishness  in  the  perpetual  combination 
of  the  advantage  of  others  with  its  own.  These  three  are  one.  Self-renunciation 
IB  the  secret  of  unity  in  the  Church,  of  humility  in  the  individual,  and  of  charity  ia 


n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  n 

b11  the  relations  of  life.  S.  In  its  divisions.  (1)  The  oneness  of  a  common  interest 
is  enforced.  "  Likeminded,"  regarding  together  one  object  of  pursuit,  viz.,  all  the 
compass  of  that  truth  which  commands  the  Church's  faith,  all  the  variety  of  those 
interests  that  concentrate  the  Church's  desire  and  effort ;  all  that  constitutes  the 
great  business  of  Christ's  servants  in  the  world.  This  unity  of  purpose  is  either 
the  result  of  a  common  love  set  upon  the  same  object — "  having  the  same  love,"  or 
is  shown  by  the  concentration  of  the  faculties  of  the  soul  on  that  object — "  of  one 
accord  in  the  promotion  of  one  thing."  (2)  The  humble  preference  of  others  to 
self  in  all  that  pertains  to  dignity  (ver.  3).  (a)  Negatively.  They  are  to  avoid  the 
conduct  he  condemns  at  Rome — strife  was  to  be  kept  out  of  their  community  and 
vanity  out  of  their  character.  A  mind  clothed  with  humility  cannot  desire  pre- 
emiuence,  and  cannot,  therefore,  contend  against  others  to  bring  them  down,  or 
seek  vain  eelf-e'evation  for  its  own  sake.  (b)  Positively,  In  the  exercise  of 
humility  they  were  to  regard  not  that  every  one's  moral  character  was  better  than 
their  own,  but  that  others  were  more  worthy  of  distinction  in  the  Church.  '*  In 
honour  preferring  one  another."  (3)  The  habitual  consideration  of  others'  well- 
being  in  connection  with  our  own  (ver.  4).  "  Own  things  "  must  be  taken  in  the 
largest  sense,  temporally  and  spiritually.  Notliing  is  our  own  absolutely  and  apart 
from  others.  Our  things  are  ours  only  in  union  with  the  things  of  others.  We  are 
not  forbidden  to  seek  our  own  interests,  but  only  in  common  with  the  good  of  all 
around  us.  "  None  of  us  liveth  to  himself."  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  Cliristian  con- 
cord : — 1.  The  "  therefore  "  connects  the  passage  with  the  "  conversation  worthy 
of  the  gospel."  2.  The  central  precept  is  in  verse  2 — "  That  ye  be  likeminded," 
which  suggests  the  subject  of  the  whole.  I.  The  constituent  eijiment  of  Christian 
CONCORD.  1.  Mutual  and  all-pervading  love — "  Having  the  same  love."  All  true 
Christians  have  this  in  some  measure.  Among  the  members  of  a  congregation  it 
should  be  peculiarly  strong.  To  its  prevalence  will  correspond  congregational  life 
and  health.  Frequent  and  close  intercourse  in  a  large  city  church  is  impossible — 
all  the  more  necessary,  therefore,  to  combine  in  the  various  schemes  of  Christian 
effort.  One  of  the  most  valuable  results  of  Sabbath  Schools,  Dorcas  Societies,  &c.,  is 
the  formation  of  Christian  friendship.  2.  Union  or  accord  of  souls  minding  the  same 
thing — the  basis  of  Christian  concord — oneness  of  view  in  respect  to  all  matters  of 
vital  moment.  Having  this  oneness  of  view  Christians  will  also  in  the  degree  in  which 
they  yield  up  their  hearts  to  the  common  faith  have  a  substantial  oneness  of  dis- 
position and  resolution.  The  "one  thing"  is — (1)  The  advancement  of  the  kingdom 
of  God  in  ourselves  through  advance  in  the  beauty  and  strength  of  godliness.  (2) 
In  the  Church,  through  the  increase  of  wisdom,  purity,  and  zeaL  (3)  In  the 
world,  through  the  universal  and  successful  proclamation  of  the  gospel.  3.  Mutual 
helpfulness.  Christian  love  cannot  flourish  apart  from  Christian  energy.  A 
monastery  is  a  hot-bed  of  jealousy  and  discord,  and  the  more  closely  a  denomina- 
tion or  Church  approaches  this  character  in  inactivity  and  nselessness,  the  more 
open  it  will  be  to  dissensions.  II.  Its  motive.  1.  The  fulfilment  of  the  apostle's 
joy.  Each  reference  to  their  possible  religious  experience  is  like  a  rod  of  Divine 
power  calling  out  a  stream  of  sympathy  and  affection.  2.  If  Paul's  joy  was 
augmented  by  the  union  of  the  Philippians,  much  more  will  Christ's  joy  be  fulfilled 
by  the  answer  to  His  prayer  "  that  they  all  may  be  one."  It  is  only  the  dissentions 
of  the  Church  that  postpones  this  blessed  consummation.  III.  The  sources  of 
DISCORD  AND  THE  MEANS  OF  DRYING  THEM  UP.  1.  The  great  causes  of  disseution  in 
any  society  are  here  indicated.  2.  These  enls  are  only  to  be  removed  by  the 
cvdtivation  of  the  opposite  virtues  of  humility,  which  is  an  exclusively  Christian 
grace.  3.  This  is  not  meanness  of  spirit.  While  it  recognizes  facts  as  they  are  in 
human  nature,  it  involves  a  profound  respect  for  man's  possible  self.  4.  This 
lowliness  of  mind  leads  each  to  esteem  others  better  than  self  (Rom.  xii.  10 ;  Eph. 
V.  21 ;  1  Pet.  V.  5).  This  does  not  imply  blindness  to  one's  own  ability  and  attain- 
ments, or  to  the  deficiencies  of  others  ;  but  a  humble  view  of  self  will  inspire  to 
help  others  to  fill  their  place  of  usefulness — "  to  please  them  for  their  good  to 
edification."  6.  It  will  also  lead  every  man  to  look  not  on  his  own  things,  and  to 
cherish  a  spirit  of  unselfishness  in  regard  to  others.  (R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.) 
Christian  unity  : — I.  Its  spirit — Christian,  kind,  brotherly,  compassionate.  EL 
Its  practice — Peaceable,  humble, unselfish.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  PauVi  appeal: — 
1.  The  "  if "  is  not  here  the  sign  of  doubt  or  hesitation,  but  rather  of  assured 
certainty.  When  persons  wish  to  disclose  the  vastness  of  an  assembly,  they  some- 
times say,  "If  there  was  one  present,  there  were  two  thousand."  As  employed  by 
Paul  it  ia  equivalent  to  '  If  there  is  any  water  in  the  sea,  or  any  light  in  the  sun." 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0HA».  u. 

2.  Consolation,  comfort  of  love,  Ac,  signify  mnch  in  common.  This  appeal  is  a 
burst  of  tenderness.  Affection  delights  in  repetition.  Love  amplifies  its  expres- 
sions to  the  utmost ;  it  is  the  efifort  of  an  eloquent  rhetorician,  artless,  yet  full  of 
art.  There  are  expressions  full  of  summer  light  and  beauty  which  are  only  re- 
vealed to  the  heart.  3.  Paul  having  laid  his  basis  in  the  very  heart  of  Christ, 
makes  an  appeal — "fulfil  ye  my  joy."  It  is  right  to  interject  one's  personality  as 
an  element  in  an  argument  for  brotherhood  and  consolidation  in  the  Church.  It 
appears  an  infinite  descent  from  Christ  to  Paul,  but,  in  reality,  it  is  no  descent ; 
in  this  argument  Christ's  purpose  and  Paul's  desire  are  identical.  The  soul  has 
moods  which  bring  it  close  to  the  heart  of  God.  Paul  appears  before  the  Philippiana 
more  as  saint  than  logician,  and  in  that  capacity  Christ  and  the  "servant"  are  one. 
The  apostle  likens  his  joy  to  a  cup  that  is  nearly  full,  and  intimates  that  unanimity 
in  the  Church  would  fill  it  perfectly — make  it  overflow.  See  the  importance  even  of 
a  single  element.  An  atom  may  be  necessary  to  perfection.  Beauty  may  depend  on 
the  straightness  or  curve  of  a  single  line.  (J.  Parker,  D.D. )  The  apostle's  appeal : — 
I.  The  manner  of  the  apostle's  exhortation.  He  exhorteth  them  to  be  like- 
minded,  having  their  affections  (Bom.  xii.  16),  likings,  and  desires  so  set  on  the 
same  things  as  to  fulfil  his  joy.  "  I  joy  in  your  fellowship  in  the  gospel,"  &c. 
(chap.  i.  5-7),  yet  my  joy  is  not  full  so  long  as  I  hear  of  your  contentions.  1.  "  If 
there  be  any  consolation  in  Christ."  (1)  In  general  the  apostle's  vehement 
obtestation  for  the  embracing  of  concord,  love,  and  humility,  is  to  be  noted. 
Pastors  ought  to  labour  to  repress  such  enormities  among  their  people  as  hinder 
the  course  of  Christian  conversation  by  beseeching  as  though  they  desired  no  other 
recompense  than  that  such  disorders  might  be  reformed.  They  are  fathers  to 
their  flocks  (1  Cor.  iv.  15  ;  1  John  ii.  1).  Sometimes,  however,  sternneBs  must  be 
used.  Paul  did  not  deal  with  the  Galatians  as  with  the  Philippians,  nor  with  some  of 
the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  iv.  21).  (2)  In  particular,  the  ground  of  his  argument  is, 
that  if  they  had  received  comfort  in  Christ  by  him,  then  they  ought  at  his  request 
thus  to  comfort  him,  as  to  be  likeminded,  Ac.  2.  "  If  there  be  any  comfort  of 
love."  The  ground  of  which  argument  is  that  if  they  loved  him  as  he  loved  them, 
and  desired  his  comfort  as  he  did  theirs,  then  they  would  fulfil  his  joy.  To  yield 
to  the  holy  desires  of  one  another  is  an  effectual  token  of  Christian  love  towards 
one  another  (John  xiv.  15 ;  Philemon  17).  Men  are  ready  enough  to  yield  to 
wicked  enticings  (Prov,  i.  10-12).  3.  "  If  there  be  any  fellowship  of  the  Spirit," 
i.e.,  "if  ye  be  knit  together  in  the  bond  of  one  Spirit,  and  have  fellowship  as 
members  of  one  body,  under  one  head,  fulfil  ye  my  joy."  The  ground  of  this 
argument  is,  that  men  knit  together  are  to  give  proof  thereof  by  concord.  What 
proof  of  this  many  give,  let  their  contentions  and  divisions  witness.  4.  "  If  any 
compassion  and  mercy."  The  ground  of  which  argument  is  that  in  mercy  and  com- 
passion to  him,  the  Lord's  prisoner  for  their  sake,  they  should  fulfil  his  joy  in 
being  likeminded.  The  godly  requests  of  God's  saints  afflicted  for  Christ's  sake 
should  move  in  us  such  compassion  as  that  we  should  gladly  hearken  and  yield  to 
them.  II.  The  matter.  Observe — 1.  The  godly  pastor's  joy  is  to  be  in  hia 
people,  whatever  his  own  case  may  be.  2.  That  that  joy  is  not  full  as  long  as 
there  is  anything  amiss  amongst  bis  people.  3.  That  he  should  be  admonished 
to  labour  that  nothing  be  amiss  either  touching  doctrine  or  practice,  so  that  his  joy 
may  be  full.  That  there  was  something  amiss  here  is  proved  by  the  exhortation ; 
whence  learn — (1)  That,  what  the  state  of  the  best  churches,  so  of  the  most  holy 
men  is.  (2)  To  long  to  be  of  that  triumphant  Church,  and  to  enter  the  holiest. 
Here  Abraham,  David,  Job,  Paul,  Peter,  have  their  faults.  There  they  are 
perfected,  1.  He  exhorteth  them  to  be  "likeminded  "  (Rom.  xii.  16),  having  their 
affections,  likings,  desires,  set  on  the  same  things  (1  Cor.  i.  10  ;  Rom.  xv.  5).  Are 
not  Jews,  Turks,  Pharisees,  <fec.,  likeminded  ?  The  necessity  of  this  is  seen — (1) 
From  the  fact  that  we  have  "  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism,"  &c.  (Eph.  iv.  5). 
(2)  Because  there  is  no  better  remedy  against  dissensions  (John  xvii.  21 ;  Phil.  iii. 
16).  Let  us,  therefore,  beware  how  we  dissent  about  matters  of  less  moment  when 
we  are  agreed  in  greater.  2.  "  Having  the  same  love."  This  is  how  we  may  be 
likeminded.  Love — (1)  In  respect  of  the  object.  Love  the  same  Church,  gospel, 
truth.  Where  one  loves  one  thing,  and  another  another,  distractions  and  desolations 
ensue.  (2)  In  respect  of  fervour.  3.  "  One  accord" — agreeing  in  our  wills  that 
onity  and  concord  may  be  maintained  "  (Psa.  vii.  18  ;  cxxxiii.  1 ;  Acts  iv.  32).  4. 
"  One  mind,"  or  judgment.  {H.  Airey,  D.D.)  Mutual  harmony  : — We  hear  a 
great  deal  about  the  harmony  of  the  spheres.  That  ispoetry,  but  let  us  try  and  translate 
that  poetry  into  practice.    It  is  a  painful  thing  to  take  up  a  newspaper  now-a-days  t 


3HA».  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  7S 

Every  one  seems  to  be  fighting,  abroad  and  at  home.  There  is  too  mnch  bitter 
controversy.  We  want  to  realize  that  if  there  is  a  mutual  work  to  be  done  and 
faith  to  do  it,  there  mast  be  mutual  love  to  supply  the  fire.  I.  The  first  way  I 
want  to  approach  this  text  is — along  the  line  of  variety.  "  Being  of  one  accord  " 
does  not  always  mean  being  of  the  same  opinion.  Of  course,  in  the  main  there  can 
be  no  good  work  done  unless  the  great  verities  are  believed  in  by  us  all.  You  have 
to  live  in  harmony ;  your  very  nature  is  to  be  harmonious  within  you.  You  may 
be  a  very  inharmonious  man  in  yourself.  You  may  be  affectionate.  Yes  I  but 
there  is  no  courage  in  yon.  We  have  all  got  to  contribute  something  to  the 
harmony.  I  do  not  want,  in  a  choir  of  musicians,  all  to  play  the  violin  ;  I  should 
not  like  to  listen  to  a  band  of  fintes.  To  be  all  of  one  accord  does  not  mean  all 
doing  the  same  thing  or  playing  the  same  instrument.  One  man  has  his  special 
gift.  But  in  all  this  variety  there  is  harmony ;  and  is  not  that  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  things  in  the  world.  The  worst  of  it  is  that  one  bad  musician  can  spoil  a 
choir.  One  cantankerous  person  in  the  household  can  upset  everything.  One 
may  injure  many !  Now  variety  is  intended  by  God.  There  are  men  emphatically 
endowed  by  special  gifts  for  mission  work ;  some  have  tender  sympathies  and  they 
can  be  friends  to  the  fatherless  and  widow ;  some  have  gifts  for  calling  oat  the 
energies  of  the  young.  But  there  must  be  harmony  in  all  the  variety — *'  being  of 
one  accord.  II.  There  must  be  in  this  one  accord  scbobdinanot  of  onk  to  the 
OTBBB.  Everything  must  be  subservient  to  great  ends.  There  must  always  be  the 
Chorus-Leader.  What  we  want  is  the  harmony  of  true,  beautiful,  religious  charity. 
By  subserviency  I  mean  everything  uniting  for  Christ's  ends.  III.  In  this  harmony 
there  is  health.  If  I  have  no  pain  in  my  hand  or  foot,  but  if  I  have  a  headache — 
what  then  ?  Where  is  the  harmony  within  me  ?  When  the  blood  flows  healthily, 
the  eye  is  clear,  the  step  elastic,  the  brain  vigorous,  the  appetite  sharp  and  good, 
and  the  sleep  is  restful — all  is  well  1  But  if  one  of  the  members  gets  out  of  order, 
it  is  all  misery.  The  head  looks  at  the  foot  and  says,  "  Why  don't  you  get  better?" 
but  by-and-by  the  head  is  all  right,  and  the  foot  suffers  too.  The  members  are  not 
of  one  accord.  You  may  lift  that  thought  up  into  the  highest  regions  of  all,  and 
yon  may  realize  that  if  there  is  to  be  accord  and  harmony  amongst  men  in  the 
Church  we  must  all  take  care  of  one  another,  it  will  not  do  to  neglect  anybody. 
You  must  look  out  and  take  care  of  the  humblest  member  as  well  as  the  highest. 
It  is  60  in  a  nation.  A  nation  is  in  harmony  when  the  rich  sympathize  with  and 
help  the  poor,  and  the  wise  help  the  ignorant,  A  prosperous  Church  or  nation  is 
where  there  is  health  in  the  body  politic.  IV,  We  shall  thus  enjoy  influence. 
The  world  likes  harmony  ;  it  does  not  know  how  it  is  attuned  ;  but  it  likes  it.  I 
have  seen  in  a  picture-gallery  a  poor  fellow  who  comes  in  a  sort  of  semi-fustian ;  he 
is  no  connoisseur,  but  there  was  harmony  he  could  detect,  and  he  liked  it.  V.  It 
means  beaven  1  Best  in  God.  We  have  the  mind  of  Christ.  And  that  is  heaven 
begun  on  earth.  There  is  no  harmony  in  a  piano  of  itself .  The  mind  makes  the 
harmony.  I  cannot  make  harmony  out  of  the  piano  ;  it  is  produced  by  the  spirit 
that  comes  through  the  fingers.  "  Being  of  one  accord."  Yes !  one  mind.  We 
must  be  moulded  after  the  mind  of  Christ,  Yon  may  have  a  violin,  flute,  piano, 
and  harp,  but  you  must  have  one  chord.  "  Being  of  one  accord."  Oh,  what  a 
heaven  it  will  be  where  we  shall  have  our  different  mental  calibre,  for  we  shall  not 
all  be  exactly  alike.  "  One  star  differeth  from  another  in  glory,"  and,  in  propor- 
tion as  you  realize  that  idea,  you  realize  the  harmony  of  heaven.  (W.  M.  Stat- 
ham.)  Christian  union — strength : — The  King  of  the  Lacedaemonians  being  once 
asked  why  it  was  that  Sparta  was  not  surrounded  by  walls,  is  said  to  have  pointed 
to  the  citizens,  all  filled  vnth  one  and  the  same  enthusiasm — one  united  band — and 
to  have  answered,  "  These  are  the  walls  of  the  Spartan  State.  With  these,  thus 
separate  and  yet  one,  all  enemies  can  be  repelled."  So  is  it  with  the  city  of  God, 
Christ's  own  Church.  Its  citizens,  when  they  are  of  one  mind  and  heart,  are  its 
unassailable  bulwarks.  The  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  it.  Thus,  when 
warfare  is  over  and  victory  is  won,  in  the  city  of  Peace,  where  no  bulwarks  can  ever 
be  needed,  those  who  have  overcome  will  join  in — "  The  undisturbed  song  of  pure 
consent.  Aye  sung  before  the  sapphire-coloured  throne."  (J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.) 
Christian  union  how  obtained: — Those  whose  inmost  hearts,  warmed  and  expanded 
by  the  love  of  Christ,  are  welded  together,  as  the  glowing  iron  from  the  furnace, 
being  softened  and  rendered  adhesive  by  the  heat,  and  so  are  joined  in  love 
spiritual,  as  the  different  members  of  the  same  body  are  joined  in  the  union  of 
natore — these  hold  the  same  love,  these  love  as  brethren;  and  there  is  no  tie  so 
close,  BO  firm,  and  so  enduring.    Every  other  onion  is  cemented  by  the  cement  of 


80  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

earth,  but  this  by  the  true  attraction  of  cohesion  which  ia  from  heaven.  (E. 
Meade,  M.A.)  Shoulder  to  shoulder: — "Now  then,  Highlanders,  shoulder  tc 

shoulder  I "  was  the  cheery  and  inspiriting  word  of  command  that  rang  out  above 
the  roar  of  battle,  as  a  gallant  soldier  led  his  Scotchmen  to  the  charge ;  and  every 
man,  not  for  himself,  but  for  England,  rushed  forward  as  with  only  "  one  shoulder  " 
in  the  regiment,  and  with  the  irresistible  might  of  their  courage  and  their  valour, 
swept  the  broken  ranks  of  their  defeated  foes  before  them.  Oh !  let  us  hear 
the  voice  of  our  great  Captain  ringing  across  this  world's  great  battle-field,  and 
summoning  us  to  give  up  our  petty  jealousies  and  our  miserable  little  differ- 
ences. "  Soldiers  of  the  Cross,  shoulder  to  shoulder  I " — against  all  the  evil, 
all  the  falseness,  all  the  baseness,  all  the  meanness,  all  the  impurity,  all  the 
pride,  all  the  folly,  all  the  mighty  army  of  sin  that  the  Prince  of  Darkness 
has  set  in  battle  array  against  us.  (T.  T.  Shore.)  Com^olation  in  Christ : — 1.  The 
language  of  man  has  received  a  new  coinage  of  words  since  his  perfection  in  Eden. 
Adam  could  scarce  have  understood  the  word  consolation,  because  he  did  not 
understand  the  word  sorrow.  He  soon  needed  it,  but  did  not  find  it  hke  the  first 
promise  which  spake  of  Christ.  And  consolation  can  be  found  nowhere  but  in 
Him.  2.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  revealed  to  us  as  the  Comforter,  and  it  is  His  business 
to  console ;  but  Christ  is  the  consolation.     I.  Christ  in  His  vabied  positions  la 

A.   CONSOLATION    FOB   THE    DIVERS    ILLS     OF    THE     PEOPLE     OF     GoD.         "  All    His    paths 

drop  fatness,"  &c.  1.  There  are  times  when  we  look  on  the  past  with  deepest 
grief,  with  fond  regrets  for  the  lost  Paradise.  To  meet  this,  consider  Christ  in 
old  eternity,  as  the  covenant  Head,  stipulating  to  redeem  thee ;  and  think  of  the 
anticipating  mercies  of  God.  2.  If  your  minds  dwell  in  sadness  on  the  fact  that 
you  are  absent  from  the  Lord,  think  of  the  great  truth  that  Christ  of  old  had 
delights  with  the  sons  of  men,  and  delights  to  have  fellowship  with  them  now. 
Eemember  that  he  appeared  to  Abraham  in  the  plains  of  Mamre,  to  Jacob  at  the 
brook  Jabbok,  to  Joshua  as  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  to  the  three  Hebrew 
children,  and  so  to-day.  3.  Pursue  the  Master's  footsteps  as  He  comes  out  of  the 
invisible  glory  and  wears  the  visible  garment  of  humanity.  You  are  tried  and 
troubled,  but  what  better  consolation  can  you  have  than  that  Christ  is  one  with 
you  in  your  nature  and  suffered  all  that  you  are  now  suffering.  (1)  You  are  poor, 
He  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head.  (2)  You  are  in  pain ;  He  agonized  in  Geth- 
semane  and  was  nailed  to  the  cross.  "Was  there  ever  sorrow  like  unto  His?" 
What  consolation  in  the  fact  that  that  sorrow  expiated  sin  1  4.  Follow  Him  to  the 
grave.  You,  through  fear  of  death  are  all  your  lifetime  subject  to  bondage,  but 
surely  you  may  find  an  easy  couch  where  your  master  slept.  But  this  consolation 
is  as  naught  compared  with  that  derived  from  His  resurrection.  Be  not  faithless, 
but  believing.  5.  See  Him  ascending  to  His  glory,  and  anticipate  the  joy  you  vnll 
have  in  His  triumph.  He  went  as  your  representative.  6.  Behold  Him,  the 
great  High  Priest,  the  advocate  with  the  Father ;  and  sending  down  consolations 
upon  His  people.  7.  But  He  shall  come  again  as  King  and  complete  his  ministry 
of  consolation  for  body  as  well  as  for  soul.  H.  Christ  in  Hib  unchangino 
NATURE  A  CONSOLATION  FOR  OUR  CONTINUAL  SORROWS.  1.  He  is  a  Surpassing  con- 
Bolation.  Talk  about  the  consolations  of  philosophy ;  the  charms  of  music ;  the 
comfort  of  friendship ;  tbe  joys  of  hope ;  we  have  all  these  and  others  in  super- 
abundance in  Him.  2.  His  consolations  are  unfailing.  All  other  wells  are  dry; 
but  this  flows  in  an  unceasing  stream.  3.  His  consolations  are  everlasting ;  in 
youth,  manhood,  old  age,  in  the  prospect  of  death  and  eternity.  4.  They  are 
always  within  a  believer's  reach,  "  a  very  present  help  in  time  of  trouble."  You 
may  always  cheer  your  heart  with  Him,  when  all  other  things  are  far  away.  HI. 
Is  Christ  an  available  consolation  for  me  ?  1.  Not  if  you  are  a  self-sufiBcient 
moralist  trusting  in  your  own  righteousness.  You  are  trusting  in  a  lie,  and  Christ 
will  never  be  friends  with  a  lie.  2.  Not  if  you  are  a  backslider,  unless  you  return, 
to  which  Christ  invites  you.  3.  Yes  I  if  you  are  a  penitent,  obedient  believer.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  Consolation  in  Christ : — L  I  ask  the  young  convert  if  there  be  any 
consolation  in  Christ.  "  Why  there  is  no  consolation  without  Him,"  they  reply. 
When  anguish  took  hold  of  us  because  of  God's  judgments  we  knew  not  whither  to 
flee.  We  tried  to  stifle  fear  and  silence  conscience,  but  our  misery  increased.  We  then 
tried  to  soothe  conscience  by  reformation,  but  we  found  no  comfort.  We  resorted 
to  the  means  of  grace  and  called  upon  God,  but  the  answer  was,  •'  Cursed  is  every 
one  that  oontinneth  not,"  Ac.  Then  almost  in  despair  Jesus  appeared  to  us,  the 
burden  was  removed,  andwewere  made  happy.  II.  I  appeal  to  the  active  Christian. 
He  responds,  "  Yes ;  His  yoke  is  easy,"  &c.    All  our  ability  to  perform  duty,  and  all 


•BAT.  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  81 

our  acceptance  of  it,  are  from  Him,  and  we  glory  in  Him  as  our  righteousness  and 
strength. "  III.  The  aftlicted  Christian  responds,  "  the  sufferings  of  this  present 
time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed."  My 
afBictions  have  been  my  greatest  blessings.  I  have  had  the  example  of  Christ  before 
me,  His  patience  with  me,  His  everlasting  arms  underneath  me.  His  word  or  His 
smile  have  eithi-r  removed  my  afflictions  or  inspired  me  with  fortitude  and  joy  to 
bear  them.  IV.  The  dying  Chkistian  will  reply  that  he  has  only  a  desire  to 
depart,  and  that  while  passing  through  the  valley  Christ's  rod  and  staff  are  his 
comfort.  V.  The  glorified  saints  ascribe  everything  to  Him  that  brought  them 
out  of  great  tribulation.  VI,  What  do  tod  say  ?  "  There  may  be  consolation  in 
Christ,  but  I  can  say  nothing  of  it  from  experience.  I  could  never  see  any  such 
excellence  in  Him  as  to  induce  me  to  give  up  my  present  enjoyment."  But  the 
day  will  come  when  you  would  give  all  the  world  for  one  smile  of  the  consolation 
of  Israel.  Inferences  :  From  what  has  been  said — 1.  We  should  thank  God  for 
His  unspeakable  gift.  2.  We  see  what  en<^mies  they  are  to  themselves  who  are 
enemies  to  Christ.  3.  How  greatly  they  mistake  who  represent  religion 
as  gloomy.  4.  Let  your  lives  declare  this  consolation.  5.  If  there  be  such 
consolation  here,  what  must  heaven  be?  {S.  Lavington.)  The  tender  sym- 
pathy of  Christ: — St.  Yoo,  of  Keinartin,  one  morning  went  out  and  saw  a 
beggar  asleep  on  his  doorstep.  The  beggar  had  been  all  night  in  the  cold. 
The  next  night  St.  Yoo  compelled  this  beggar  to  come  into  the  house  and 
sleep  in  the  saint's  bed,  while  St.  Yoo  passed  the  night  on  the  doorstep  in  tlie 
cold.  Somebody  asked  him  why  that  eccentricity?  He  replied,  "It  isn't  an 
eccentricity ;  I  waut  to  know  how  the  poor  suffer,  I  want  to  know  their  agonies, 
that  I  may  sympathize  with  them,  and  therefore  I  slept  on  this  cold  step  last 
night."  That  is  the  way  Christ  knows  so  much  about  our  sorrows.  (Talmayc.) 
Any  comfort  of  love. — A  communion  discourse : — 1.  The  comfort  of  love — when 
love  is  mutual — no  one  questions.  The  dependent  child,  in  the  arms  of  the  lovint; 
mother,  experiences  it.  There  is  no  comfort  in  selfishness,  indifference,  and  hate. 
2.  As  over  against  all  the  reasonings  of  the  enemies  of  Christianity,  there  stands 
out  in  bold  relief  this  unanswerable  fact,  that  Christ  comes  with  comfort — the  com- 
fort of  love — to  a  world  full  of  suffering.  The  mission  of  our  Saviour,  as  put  by 
Isaiah  (Ixi.  2),  is  to  "  comfort  all  that  mourn  "  (Luke  iv.  18).  As  light  to  the  eye, 
as  food  and  water  to  the  body,  more  than  as  medicine  to  the  sick,  is  this  Divine 
comfort  of  love  to  a  world  full  of  broken  hearts.  3,  Stoicism,  born  before  the  story 
of  the  manger  was  told,  teaching  indifference  alike  to  pain  and  pleasure,  illustrates 
the  highest  achievement  of  human  wisdom ;  but  it  offers  no  comfort  to  a  suffering 
world.  4.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  an  object  lesson — the  culminating  expression  of 
God's  comforting  love.  5.  Standing  by  the  cross,  we  grasp  the  full  measure  of 
God's  comforting  love.  6.  It  is  not  strange  that  men  with  honest  love  have 
struggled  to  compass  this  mystery,  but  it  is  strange  that  men  should  have  converted 
that  which  is  the  comfort  of  love  into  a  battle-field.  (J.  G.  Butler,  D.D.)  The 
emotional  in  Christianity  : — Notice — I.  How  emotional  life  has  been  stifled.  At 
one  time  men  have  been  bound  by  monotonous  rituals  and  artificial  formularies, 
and  at  another  period  by  rigid  theological  statements,  tbe  result  of  anatomical 
analysis — a  paring  and  cutting  which  takes  the  life  and  leaves  the  letter.  Heal 
religion  is  full  of  emotion.  Bead  the  Psalms  and  see  bow  they  abound  in  it.  11. 
The  perversion  op  emotion  is  also  destructive  of  the  soul's  true  life.  This  is  seen 
where  self  is  made  the  sole  object  of  thought.  The  bitterest  torment  is  the  torment 
of  self.  Th»?  word  miser,  for  example,  means  "  miserable."  III.  Turn  from  these 
to  the  truk  rcNciioN  OF  EMOTION — "the  comfort  of  love.  1.  Love  is  a  comfort  in 
the  discoveries  it  makes  of  the  new  possibilities  of  the  soul.  Think  of  the  grace  of 
tears  1  I  have  seen  a  man  who  had  been  elbowing  his  way  through  life  amid  its 
rough  and  selfish  oppositions,  hammering  his  heart  hard,  as  it  were,  lest  it  by 
softening  should  become  weak.  Such  a  man,  made  callous  by  contact  with  an  nn- 
sympathetic  world,  I  have  seen  stand  by  the  coffin  of  his  child.  His  stony  heart 
broke,  and  he  was  glad  to  weep.  The  bondage  of  the  hard,  real  world  was 
sundered,  its  barriers  dissolved,  and  he  recognized  that  the  long-hidden  power  to 
feel  was  not  destroyed.  2.  Love  is  a  comfort,  inasmuch  as  it  is  restful  and  quiet. 
Ambition,  anger,  and  jealousy  bring  pain.  These  are  costly  indulgences,  for  they 
cause  sleeplessness  and  rob  one  of  strength.  But  there  is  comfort  in  love.  The 
mother  bears  her  babe  on  her  breast,  and  cradles  it  in  her  soul.  She  pastures  her 
eyes  in  its  face,  and  its  beautiful  smile  is  a  reflection  of  the  serene  and  joyful  sense 
of  po&sesaion  which  she  herself  letls.     O  the  luxury  of  that  love  t    If  in  a  palace, 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

its  gilded  wealth  is  but  tinsel  in  the  atmosphere  of  such  love.  Love  beautifies  tha 
deformed  body  and  withered  features.  More  than  that,  it  trusts  against  hope.  A 
bridge  was  begun  in  California,  over  a  quagmire.  Piles  were  driven  and  earth 
was  brought,  but  every  effort  failed,  till  finally  a  simple  platform  of  boards  was 
constructed,  on  which  yielding  support  people  were  floated  across.  So  love,  with 
its  strong,  instinctive  trust,  floats  across  chasms  that  mere  reason  can  never  bridge. 
3.  There  is  o  )rafort  in  love,  because  it  harmonizes  everything.  What  a  world  this 
would  be  if  love  reigned  1  There  would  be  none  to  chafe  and  crowd  and  irritate. 
What  oil  does  love  pour  on  troubled  waters  I  I  recall  the  bright  tranquillity  of  an 
aged  grandmother,  whose  active  d.iys  were  over  and  who  could  only  sit  in  her  chair 
and  look  her  benedictions  on  us  all.  That  smile  of  hers  lubricated  all  the  wheels 
of  daily  life ;  it  dried  up  all  tears  as  the  sun  dries  up  the  showers,  and  shed  an 
atmosphere  of  peace  and  harmony  through  the  household.  4.  Love  takes  hold  on 
the  infinite.  Ambition  disappoints  and  pleasure  cloys,  but  love  never  dies.  It  has 
its  successive  growths.  The  child's  love  is  fickle  and  selfish ;  that  of  the  youthful 
pair  is  founded  on  mutual  esteem  and  gets  chilled,  but  that  of  a  mother  yeama  to 
give  its  best  treasures  even  to  the  prodigal,  and  to  love  him  back  to  purity.  There 
are  no  mathematics,  no  question  of  "  seventy  times  "  of  forgiveness  in  such  love. 
It  is  a  picture  of  the  love  of  God,  and  lifts  us  towards  the  Infinite.  True  love  in- 
spires the  missionary,  who,  like  Carey  or  Martin,  goes  to  far-off  lands  with  the 
gospel,  or  to  the  loathsomely  sick  in  hospital,  or  to  the  brutal  in  prison.  This  is 
the  secret  of  Paul's  boast  that  he  could  do  all  things,  for,  to  him  who  thus  loveth, 
••  all  things  are  possible."     (J.  B.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3-4.  Let  nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vain  glory. — I.  There  abb 
TWO  WAYS  OF  DOING  EVEN  THE  BEST  WORK.  Through  Strife  and  through  love. 
This  was  seen  in  chap,  i.,  where  two  classes  of  preachers  were  described.  II.  En- 
ure   SYMPATHY   WITH    CHRTST   WILL     ALWAYS     HEIGHTEN    MAN's   APPRECIATION   OF    MAN. 

III.  Christianity  is  thus  the  only  humanizing  and  fraternizing  religion.  IV. 
Self-seeking  is  in  utter  antagonism  to  the  spirit  of  Christianity.  V.  Chris- 
tianity  NEVER     encourages   A   DEGRADING   VIEW   OF   HUMAN  NATURE.        Man    is    tO    be 

"  esteemed  "  by  man.  Christians  are  to  recognize  each  other's  excellencies.  LoveV 
eye  is  quick  to  detect  virtue  in  another,  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Observe — I.  How 
THINGS  ARE  OFTEN  DONE — in  a  Spirit  of  selfish  opposition  ;  of  vain-glorious  assump- 
tion. II.  How  THEY  ought  TO  BE  DONE — in  humility,  giving  the  honour  to  others. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Unanimity: — I.  Up  to  this  point  the  apostle  continues  his 
APPEAL  FOR  UNANIMITY.  The  Spirit  of  this  appeal  is  that  of  profound  and  tender 
sympathy  with  Christ.  When  history  gives  up  her  dead  it  will  be  found  that  where 
the  rod  has  conquered  its  tens,  love  has  won  its  thousands.  The  anxiety  for  entire 
oneness  in  the  Church  is  in  harmony  with  Chi-ist's  prayer.  Paul  was  wont  to  call 
for  this.  Absence  of  union  is  a  reflection  on  the  uniting  force.  II.  The  dnitino 
FORCE  IN  A  Christian  Church  is  the  love  of  Christ.  Where,  then,  thero  ia 
disunion,  it  is  plain  that  there  is  either  not  suflScient  of  this  love,  or  that  it  is 
unequal  to  the  exigencies  of  the  case.  Hence  the  grandeur  and  urgency  of  the 
appeal,  •'  If  there  be  any  consolation  in  Christ;  "  as  though  he  had  said,  "  Bemem- 
ber  that  Christ's  love  is  on  trial."  Men  are  looking  on  you  as  an  experiment,  and 
that  not  only  you  but  Christ  Himself  will  be  deeply  involved  in  the  event  of  failure. 

in.    A   DISCORDANT   ChUBCH    IS  A  REFLECTION  ON  THE    MOBAL   POWER   OF   THE    SaVIOOB, 

because,  WITHOUT  HiM,  THE  Church  WOULD  NOT  BE  IN  EXISTENCE.  The  world  has 
a  right  to  compare  the  deeds  of  the  servant  with  the  spirit  of  the  Master,  because 
the  connection  is  moral  and  involves  responsibility.  A  recently  erected  edifice,  e.g., 
has  fallen.  How  do  men  treat  the  fact?  They  instantly  connect  it  with  the 
architect  or  the  builder.  When  a  chemical  experiment  has  failed  men  blame  the 
manipulator.  So  all  the  practices  of  the  Church  are  carried  back  to  Christ,  ani 
He  is  magnified,  or  put  to  an  open  shame,  according  to  their  nature.    IV.  What 

CONCLUSION  ARE  WE  TO  COME  TO  FROM  ALL  THIS  ON  THE  SUBJECT  OF  MUTUAL  DISCIPLINE  ? 

Are  charity  and  justice  to  be  sundered?  Is  there  not  to  be  a  law  of  right  in  the 
Church  ?  Is  the  garment  of  love  to  be  thrown  over  the  leper  ?  Hear  what  Paul 
says  (2  Thess.  iii.  6  ;  Horn.  xvi.  17).  The  tones  vary  but  the  voice  is  the  same 
Christ  called  Herod  a  fox,  and  said  that  Nathaniel  was  without  guile.  God  can 
be  warm  as  summer  and  chilling  as  winter.  The  apostle  is  perfectly  consistent. 
The  voice  is  as  truly  one  as  is  the  voice  of  a  mother,  when  she  sings  her  child  to 
slumber,  or  shrieks  at  the  approach  of  a  ravenous  beast.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Evilt  to  he  shunned  and  graces  to  be  cultivated : — The  words  depend  upon  the 


W^F.n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  81 

former,  "  Fulfil  my  joy  that  ye  be,"  &o.  Why  ?  "  That  nothing  be  done  through 
strife,"  &c.  As  if  he  should  have  said,  If  there  be  among  you  contention  and  vain- 
glory it  is  not  possible  that  you  should  be  likeminded,  and  so  my  joy  is  unfulfilled. 

I.  He  would  havb  nothing  donb  thbodoh  contention.  1.  Contention  should  be 
abandoned  by  Christians,  i.e.,  they  should  take  no  pleasure  in  dissenting  from 
others  (Gal.  v.  20,  24  ;  Prov.  xxvi.  21).  The  schisms  and  heresies  wherewith  the 
Church  at  all  times  is  troubled,  come  commonly  from  men  who  take  a  pleasure  in 
dissent,  such  as  Arius,  Nestorius,  Macedonius,  &c,  2.  But  may  nothing  be 
done  through  contention  ?  May  not  Micaiah  set  himself  against  four  hundred 
false  prophets  (2  Chron.  xviii.),  and  Jeremiah  strive  with  the  whole 
earth  (Jer.  xv.  10),  and  a  pure  Church  with  error  f  To  know  whether  any- 
thing is  done  through  contention  two  rules  are  necessary.  (1)  Is  it  done  opon  a 
humour  to  contradict  whether  true  or  false  ?  (2)  When  the  truth  is  manifested  is 
the  opposition  still  maintained  ?  II.  The  apostu:  would  repress  the  evil  of 
VAIN-GLORY,  a  vaiu  affection  of  glory,  which  is  when  vain  men,  to  get  themselves 
glory,  single  themselves  in  some  vanity  from  the  rest  (Gal.  v.  26).  1.  The  reason  is 
that  men  desirous  of  this  cannot,  as  they  should,  as  becometh  Christians,  be  of  one 
accord  with  others.  2.  It  is  vain-glory  that  we  are  not  to  affect,  for  this  glory  ia 
allowable  that  men  speak  well  of  us,  and  glorify  God  on  our  behalf.     III.  As  a 

BEMEDT   THE   APOSTLE    PRESCRIBES    UEEENE88    OF    MIND.         1.    Humility    is    OppOSed    tO 

eontentioD  and  vain-glory  as  a  preservative  against  them,  and  a  preserver  of  that 
unity  and  concord  of  which  they  are  the  bane.  2.  Ye  see  how  it  is  defined  to  be  a 
virtue,  whereby  every  man,  in  whatsoever  state  or  place  he  be,  esteemeth  other 
better  than  himself  (Eph.  iv.  2).  In  modesty  we  are  to  yield  in  many  things  of  our 
own  right,  so  that,  though  David  knew  himself  to  be  better  than  Saul,  yet  in 
meekness  cf  mind  he  may  esteem  Saul  better  than  himself.  lY.  Another  reuedy 
(ver.  4)  IS  not  to  look  on  our  own  things  but  on  the  things  of  others.  Self- 
seeking  is  an  enemy  also  to  concord.  If  we  look  on  our  own  graces,  wit,  learning, 
goods,  and  neglect  or  contemn  those  of  other  men,  what  else  will  follow  but  vain- 
glory and  contention  (Luke  xviii.  11).  We  may  look  on  our  own  things  and  glorify 
Ood,  but  not  to  glorify  them  ;  and  on  the  things  of  others,  not  to  envy  them  but  to 
reverence  them.  (H.  Airay,  D.D.)  True  humility: — I.  Its  features.  1.  It 
distrusts  self.  2.  Honours  others.  II.  Its  effect.  It  excludes — 1.  Strife.  2. 
Vain-glory.  III.  Its  obligation.  1.  It  is  conformable  to  the  mind  of  Christ.  2. 
It  contributes  to  social  happiness.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Prohibitions  and  tw- 
junctiont : — I.  What  is  forbidden.  1.  Not  a  proper  care  for  one's  own  health, 
reputation,  interest,  &c.,  but  a  selfish  disregard  of  the  happiness,  claims,  and 
rigbts  of  others.  II.  What  is  enjoined?  not  inquisitiveness,  but  consideration, 
sympathy,  help — because  of  God's  ordination,  our  own  mutual  dependence, 
Christ's  example,  the  pleasure  and  reward.     (Ibid.)        Selfishness  : — I.  Its  nature. 

II.  Operation.  III.  Cure.  (Ibid.)  Vain-glory: — Vain-glorious  men  are  the 
scorn  of  wise  men,  the  admiration  of  fools,  the  idols  of  parasites,  and  the  slaves 
of  their  own  vanity.  (Lord  Bacon.)  Lowliness  of  mind: — If  we  have  any 
graces,  they  are  graces  which  ought  not  to  elate,  but  to  humble  us ;  and  that  the 
more  we  have  received,  the  more  we  ought  to  abase  ourselves,  as  you  see  among 
the  ears  of  corn,  those  bend  their  head  lowest  which  are  the  best  and  the  fullest 
of  grain.  (J.  Dallie.)  Humility: — Of  all  trees,  I  observe,  God  hath  chosen 
the  vine,  a  low  plant  that  creeps  upon  the  helpful  wall;  of  all  beasts,  the 
soft  and  patient  lamb  ;  of  all  fowls,  the  mild  and  guileless  dove.  Christ  is  the  rose 
of  the  field,  and  the  lily  of  the  valley.  When  God  appeared  to  Moses,  it  was  not 
in  the  lofty  cedar,  nor  the  sturdy  oak,  nor  the  spreading  plane ;  but  in  a  bush,  a 
humble,  slender,  abject  shrub;  as  if  He  would,  by  these  elections,  check  the  con- 
ceited arrogance  of  man.  (Owen  Feltham.)  Christian  humility  : — Eowland 
Hill,  during  his  last  illness,  being  asked  by  Mr.  Jay  if  he  felt  his  personal  interest 
in  Christ,  replied,  "  I  can  see  more  of  my  Saviour's  glory  than  of  my  interest  in 
Him.  God  is  letting  me  down  gently  into  the  grave,  and  I  shall  creep  into  heaven 
nnder  some  crevice  of  the  door."  Avoiding  vain-glory  : — When  Lacordaire,  the 
most  renowned  of  Roman  Catholic  orators,  was  complimented  upon  being  the  first 
preacher  in  France,  he  replied,  "No ;  I  am  the  second ;  Adolphe  Monod  is  the  first." 
{J.  A.  James.)  Frederick  the  Great  once  sent  a  sword  to  George  Washington  with 
the  inscription,  *'  From  the  oldest  soldier  to  the  greatest."  (H.  O.  Mackay.)  Truth- 
ful e<itima,tion : — It  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  esteem  another  better  looking  than 
bimnelf ,  when  he  is  only  half  as  good  looking.  There  may  be  a  difference  between 
*xi*rO  in  appearance,  bat  if  a  man  is  six  feet  high  he  cannot  say  of  another  man 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  n. 

who  it  only  three  feet  high,  "I  think  he  is  taller  than  I  am,"  and  be  a  truthful  man. 
If  •  man  is  SiJgacious  and  he  knows  it — as  he  generally  does — he  cannot  eay  that 
a  wool-gatherer  is  smarter  than  he."  If  a  man  is  generous  and  kind,  he  cannot 
make  himself  believe  that  a  stingy  man  is  better  than  he.  But  this  is  not  the 
idea.  Paul  meant  simply  that  a  man  who  is  using  his  whole  self  for  other  men,  and 
is  striving  to  help  others  instead  of  helping  himself,  is  putting  himself  below  others, 
or  esteeming  them  better  than  himself.  The  mother  esteems  the  child  as  better 
than  herself  in  that  sense.  If  either  of  the  two  is  to  lie  awake  she  lies  awake.  She 
lies  awake  that  the  child  may  go  to  sleep.  If  either  she  or  the  babe  is  to  go 
hungry  it  is  not  the  babe.  She  esteems  the  babe  better  than  herself  in  the  sense 
that  she  gives  herself  away  for  it;  that  she  bestows  her  thought  and  feeling  and  care 
on  its  behalf.  Paul  means  that  when  we  love  our  fellow  men,  we  ought  to  be  in 
that  g<^neral  spirit  which  shall  lead  us  to  feel  that  service  rendered  to  others  at 
Bome  inconvenience,  and  it  may  be  suffering,  is  a  great  deal  better  than  rendering 
service  to  ourselves.  And  it  comes  back  again  to  that  other  form,  "Thou  shall 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  (if.  W.  Beecher.)  The  estimation  of  self  and 
others  : — In  the  ancient  fable  a  man  carried  two  bags  slung  over  his  shoulders.  In 
the  one  in  front  he  carried  his  neighbour's  faults  :  in  the  one  behind,  out  of  sight, 
he  carried  his  own — the  exact  reverse  of  the  Christian  way.  {Christian  Age.) 
The  example  of  Christ: — The  primary  object  of  the  apostle  in  the  next  few  verses 
is  not  to  tell  how  great  Christ  was  by  nature,  and  how  low  He  became,  although  in 
his  illustration  he  has  done  so ;  but  to  show  how  He  looked  on  His  own  things  and 
the  things  of  others.  St.  Paul  begins  the  tale  of  Christ's  humiliation  by  referring 
to  the  state  of  mind  which  led  to  it;  and  the  clause  which  has  the  prime  emphasis 
laid  upon  it  is  that  which  virtually  asserts  that  He  did  not  regard  His  own  things. 
Though  the  form  of  God  was  His  He  did  not  regard  it  with  a  selfish  and  exclusive 
attachment,  but  He  laid  it  aside  and  became  man.  He  was  in  the  form  of  God, 
and  did  not  think  it  a  thing  to  be  eagerly  laid  hold  of  to  be  equal  with  God  in 
having  or  exhibiting  this  form.  He  emptied  Himself  of  it.  He  did  not  look 
simply  to  His  own  things — the  glories  of  the  Godhead  ;  but  He  looked  on  the  things 
of  others,  and  therefore  descended  to  humanity  and  death.  His  heart  was  not  so  set 
upon  His  glory,  that  He  would  not  appear  at  any  time  without  it.  There  was 
something  which  He  coveted  more — something  which  He  felt  to  be  truly  a 
&pirayn6i,  and  that  was  the  redemption  of  a  fallen  world  by  His  abasement  and 
death.  Or  to  speak  after  the  manner  of  men,  two  things  were  present  to  His  mind. 
Either  continuance  in  the  form  of  God,  and  being  always  equal  with  God,  but 
allowing  humanity  to  perish  ;  or  vailing  this  form  and  foregoing  this  equality  for  a 
season,  and  delivering  by  His  condescension  and  agony  the  fallen  progeny  of  Adam. 
He  gave  the  latter  the  preference  from  His  possession  of  His  "mind,"  and  in  in- 
discribable  generosity  He  looked  at  the  things  of  others,  and  descended  with  His 
splendour  eclipsed — appeared  not  as  God  in  glory,  but  clothed  in  flesh;  not  in 
royal  robes,  but  in  the  dress  of  a  village  youth  ;  not  as  a  Deity  in  fire,  but  a  man 
in  tears  ;  not  in  a  palace,  but  in  a  manger ;  not  with  a  thunderbolt  in  His  hand, 
but  with  the  hammer  and  hatchet  of  a  Galilean  mechanic,  and  in  this  way  He  gave 
the  Church  an  example  of  that  self-abnegation  and  kindness  which  the  apostle  here 
enforces,  "  Look  not  every  one  on  his  own  thirgs,  but  also  on  the  things  of  others. 
Let  this  mind  be  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus."  (Prof.  E»die.) 
Humility  and  joy  fulness: — Our  humiliations  work  out  our  most  elevated  joys. 
The  way  that  a  drop  of  rain  comes  to  sing  in  the  leaf  that  mstles  in  the  top  of  the 
tre«  all  the  summer  long,  is  by  going  down  to  the  roots  first  and  from  thence 
ascending  to  the  bough,    (if.  W.  Beecher.) 

Yer.  4.  Look  not  eveiy  man  on  his  own  tilings,  but  every  man  also  on  the 

things  of  others. — Our  own  and  others'  things : — This  is  but  a  practical  application 
of  sentiments  and  dispositions  already  enforced.  The  vain-glorious  spirit  is 
fussily  and  uselessly  concerned  with  the  affairs  of  others ;  but  love,  the  faculty  oi 
soul-sight,  looks  at  others'  endowments  and  virtues  and  appreciates  them :  at 
others'  privileges  and  rights,  and  defends  them ;  at  others'  blessings,  and  rejoices 
in  the  possession  of  them ;  at  others'  sorrows,  and  weeps  over  them  ;  at  others' 
wants,  and  would  supply  them.  And  further,  what  Paul  would  have  the  Philippians 
do  Christ  Jesus  had  done  (ver.  5,  &c.).  The  life  of  Jesus  is  a  perfect  exposition  of 
the  text.  I.  What  do  these  words  pkohibit  ?  1.  A  supreme  and  exclusive 
regard  to  our  own  things.  It  forbids — (1)  The  closing  of  the  eye  to  the  things  of 
others.     (2)  The  shutting  of  the  heart.     (3)  The  closing  of  the  hand.    8.  Whj— 


CBAP.  n.1  PHILIPPIANS.  W 

(1)  Because  it  is  not  Godlike.  Religion  is  Godlikeness.  (2)  Beoaase  it  transgresses 
the  laws  which  demand  love.  (3)  Beoaase  it  does  not  become  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
If  God  in  our  salvation  has  looked  on  our  things  so  as  to  provide  for  our  com- 
plete npUfting,  sheer  consistency  demands  compliance  with  the  text.  (4)  Because 
it  is  injurious  to  self  and  to  Christ's  cause.  II.  What  do  these  words  kkqdibe  f 
1.  Not  the  neglect  of  our  own  things — *'  also."  Nor  does  it  sanction  the  conduct 
of  the  busybody  in  other  men's  matters.  But — 2.  Sympathy  with  others  in  what- 
ever state  they  may  be  seen  by  us.  We  are  to  "weep  with  those  who  weep,  and 
rejoice  with  those  who  rejoice."  Competitors  in  any  calling  find  the  latter  very 
dilBcult.  3.  Heart  readiness  to  defend  and  serve  others  according  to  our  oppor- 
tunity and  ability.  4.  The  avoidance  of  all  that  will  damage  the  things  of  others. 
In  a  word,  look  not  as  the  Priest  and  Levite  looked,  but  as  the  good  Samaritan 
looked — so  as  to  enlarge  the  heart  and  open  the  hands.  III.  To  what  extent  are 
THE  PROHIBITION  AND  REQUIREMENT  OBLIGATORY.  1.  They  are  addrcssed  to  "every" 
Christian  man.  Other  men  cannot  translate  them  into  life.  We  do  not  wonder 
that  men  say,  '•  Your  morality  is  too  high  for  us."  Of  course  it  is  for  those  who 
are  in  the  horrible  pit,  but  not  for  those  who  are  walking  on  the  high  table-land 
with  Jehovah.  "  Every  man"  (1)  however  poor.  You  cannot  give  money,  but  yon  can 
give  sympathy  and  prayer.  (2)  However  rich.  Some  men  give  money  to  be  exempt 
from  personal  attention  to  others.  They  think  they  are  not  required  to  work,  only  to 
give.  (3)  Masters  are  to  look  with  careful  and  sympathetic  eyes  on  their  servants* 
things,  and  servants  on  their  masters'.  (4)  Tradesmen  on  the  things  of  their  rivals. 
(5)  Patriots  on  the  things  of  other  lands.  2.  •'  On  the  things."  (1)  Although  in 
competition  with  one's  own.  (2)  Although  not  quite  to  one's  taste.  (3)  Although 
not  always  convenient.  (4)  Including  the  health,  wealth,  honour,  peace,  comfort, 
well-being  and  well-doing  of  others.  (5)  The  others  may  be  strangers,  but  they  are 
men  for  whom  Christ  died ;  rivals,  but  they  are  neighbours  whom  I  am  required 
to  love  ;  employers  or  workpeople,  but  they  may  be  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints 
and  of  the  household  of  God ;  or  they  may  be  enemies,  but  even  them  we  are  to 
love.  Conclusion  :  1.  The  text  is  one  of  the  many  illustrations  of  the  practical 
character  of  New  Testament  teaching.  Christ's  doctrines  are  the  inspiration  of  its 
ethics.  Nearly  every  point  of  Christian  theology  is  raised  in  the  subsequent  para- 
graph to  enforce  the  text.  Beligion  is  a  sham  if  it  be  not  practicaL  2.  The  text 
exhibits  a  high  standard  of  conduct,  but  it  leads  us  in  a  path  in  which  we  may 
hear  the  Good  Shepherd's  voice.  He  speaks  these  words  through  His  apostle ; 
elsewhere  He  spoke  them  through  His  life.  Look  at  him  providing  for  His  mother 
amidst  the  agonies  of  the  cross.  3.  The  text  shows  that  a  selfish  man  cannot  be 
a  Christian.  4.  Such  precepts  as  these  exalt  the  dispensation  to  which  we  belong. 
What  must  Christ's  religion  be  if  this  be  a  precept  in  harmony  with  its  doctrines, 
facts,  ordinances,  and  spirit?  {S.  Martin.)  The  evils  of  teljishness : — 1.  It  is 
true  that  our  own  things  have  the  first  claim  on  our  regard  (Prov.  xxvii.  23;  Bom. 
xii.  17).  Persons  without  wealth  cannot  be  generous  without  first  seeking  their 
own  profit.  Nay,  attention  to  a  lawful  calling  where  nothing  is  given  away  benefits 
the  community.  The  carpenter  and  the  mason  may  have  exclusive  regard  to  their 
earnings,  but  the  house  they  build  is  not  less  valuable.  The  mariner  who  handles 
dexterously  the  tackling  of  a  ship,  may  aim  only  at  promotion,  but  he  is  the 
undesigned  benefactor  of  all  on  board.  So  with  the  vessel  of  state.  2.  On  these 
grounds  some  have  ridiculed  all  philanthropy,  and  have  pronounced  a  vigorous 
selfishness  the  best  disinterestedness.  With  this  the  text  remonstrates.  Let  no  man 
look  on  his  own  thiugs  "  only."  This  exclusive  looking  is — I.  Mean  in  itself.  The 
effect  of  such  action  may  be  magnificent,  but  that  does  not  alter  its  inglorous  cha- 
racter. Each  of  the  lower  animals  in  satisfying  its  immediate  wants  tenders  some 
service  to  the  whole  economy  of  life.  Nay,  insensible  matter  has  comprehensive 
usefulness.  The  eye  is  affected  by  its  colours,  the  ear  by  its  vibrations,  Ac,  and 
each  molecule  has  its  share  in  imparting  the  stability  of  attraction  to  the  stellai 
universe.  For  a  man  to  tell  us,  then,  that  he  is  doing  good  when  it  is  not  his  aim 
is  to  appropriate  a  praise  due  equally  to  brutes  and  vermin.  Ton  must  do  good 
with  an  intent  to  do  it,  and  find  your  motive  and  reward  in  communicating  bliss. 
XL  Rdinous  to  society.  1.  How  far  is  the  adage,  "  Every  man  for  himself,"  to 
be  carried  7  (1)  Is  not  a  man  to  act  for  his  family  ?  Then  the  brutes  he  scorns 
will  be  his  censors.  (2)  But  if  a  wife  or  child  is  to  be  cared  for,  why  not  an  aged 
father,  or  widowed  mother,  or  dependent  sister  ?  (3)  And  if  relation  create  claim 
in  one  case,  why  not  in  all  ?  (4)  And  if  obligation  extend  to  all  the  members  of  a 
family  connection,  how  shall  it  disown  neighbourhood  and  country  ?  for  one  Gh>d 


8t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOH.  [chip.  & 

hath  made  ns,  and  we  are  all  His  offspring.  2.  To  think  or  act  otherwise  will  leave 
countless  evils  without  remedy,  and  create  manifold  disasters.  The  landed  pro- 
prietor will  look  only  to  his  rents,  the  manufacturer  think  only  of  the  number  of 
his  "  hands,"  the  railway  contractor  strive  only  to  make  the  most  of  his  navvies 
without  the  least  oare  for  evils  which  may  entail  ruin  and  death.  The  neglect  oa 
superiors  foments  dislike,  and  induces  all  those  jarrings  which  marked  the  decline 
of  ancient  commonwealths.  3.  The  man  who  cares  for  none  but  himself  does 
harm  by  his  very  presence.  He  is  like  an  iceberg,  which,  straying  into  warmer 
latitudes,  reduces  instantly  their  temperature,  replaces  their  pure  air  by  fogs,  the 
bright  sun  by  gloom,  and  a  luxuriant  vegetation  by  decay.  III.  Opposed  to  the 
WHOLE  SPIBIT  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  Scrlpture  associates  the  conceptions  of  God  and 
goodness.  He  did  not  need  to  give  His  bounties  for  His  own  happiness.  He  does 
not  confine  them  to  friends ;  His  foes  share  them.  But  He  is  more  than  good ; 
He  "  so  loved  the  world,"  &c.,  and  He  who  was  sent  in  love,  came  and  suffered  in  love, 
to  teach  us  not  to  look  on  our  own  things,  but  also  on  the  things  of  others.  (D.  King, 
LL.D.)  Christian  disinterestedness : — I.  What  the  text  fobbids.  1.  Negatively. 
Not  proper  self -attention,  which  reason  and  Scripture  combine  to  enforce.  You 
may,  and  aright,  look  on  your  own  things — (1)  As  to  the  soul.  This  is  the  one  thing 
needful.  (2)  As  to  your  bodily  health,  which  is  to  be  valued  not  only  for  enjoyment, 
but  for  usefulness.  "Life  is  yours";  therefore  take  care  of  it.  (3)  As  to  your 
reputation.  "  A  good  name  is  rather  to  be  chosen  than  great  riches,"  and  a 
Christian  cannot  afford  to  be  indifferent  to  it.  (4)  As  to  the  welfare  of  your 
family,  otherwise  you  are  "worse  than  an  infidel."  (5)  As  to  your  secular  affairs. 
Idleness  is  condemned.  "  If  any  would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat "  ;  "  not 
slothful  in  business."  2.  Positively.  Look  not  exclusively.  "  Also  on  the  things 
of  others  "  ;  "  No  man  liveth  unto  himself  " ;  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as 
thyself."  II.  What  it  enjoins.  1.  How  are  we  to  look  on  the  things  of  others? 
(1)  Not  inquisitively ;  (2)  nor  enviously ;  (3)  nor  unconcernedly ;  (4J  but  so  as  to 
have  an  interest  in  them  by  sympathy.  2.  Why  are  we  to  look  ?  (1)  Because  God 
commands  it ;  (2)  because  of  our  mutual  need ;  (3)  the  pleasures  of  beneficence ;  (4) 
the  reward  of  benevolence ;  (5)  the  example  of  Christ.  {W.  Jay.)  Christian 
obligation : — Man's  first  obligation  is  to  save  his  own  soul ;  his  second  to  save  the 
souls  of  others.  The  first  is  implied,  the  second  taught  in  our  text.  Observe — I. 
The  pebsonal  state  of  evebt  Christian  places  him  undeb  an  obligatios  to 
PROMOTE  the  wobk  OP  GoD.  Being  initiated  into  the  faith  and  privileges  of  the 
Christian  covenant,  he  is  bound  to  hold  it  as  a  whole.  Now,  Christianity  contem- 
plates not  only  his  personal  illumination,  happiness,  and  preparedness  for  heaven, 
but  it  equally  contemplates  the  same  privileges  for  others,  and  constitutes  saved 
men  its  agents.  The  true  Christian,  then,  does  not  meditate  upon  misery  and 
leave  it  in  its  destitution.  II.  The  spiritual  graces  and  gifts  possessed  by  the 
Church  lie  heb  dndeb  an  obligation  of  devoted  zeal  to  God.  1.  Spiritual 
blessings  can  only  be  enjoyed  in  spiritual  channels.  You  cannot  bestow  the 
tenderness  of  Christian  affection  on  gold  and  commerce  and  art.  They  must 
be  employed  religiously.  2.  The  moral  power  of  Christianity  can  only  be  employed 
morally,  and  no  other  form  of  power — that  of  genius,  science,  oratory,  magistracy, 
Ac. ,  can  supply  its  place  in  the  Church.  It  is  of  no  great  consequence  on  what 
nature  this  moral  force  operates.  Take  a  feeble  branch  and  engraft  it  on  a  living 
tree,  and  it  partakes  of  the  beauty  and  vigour  of  the  tree,  and  bears  fruit.  And 
this  moral  power  operates  individually,  as  in  Howard,  Wilberforce,  and  Wesley, 
or  it  may  be  centralized  in  the  Church.  But  we  must  be  careful  not  to  drown  the 
individual  in  the  society.  3.  The  Church  also  possesses  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit, 
which  can  only  be  devoted  to  religious  objects.  On  these  and  on  Him  who  gives 
them  depends  the  life  of  the  Church.  4.  Otlaer  gifts  are  superadded  for  the  purpose 
of  conveying  the  truth  to  the  world.  III.  Feom  the  situation  op  Cheistians  ra 
the  kingdom  of  God  thet  aee  bound  to  promote  its  intebests.  Christian 
patriotism  suggests  that  we  should  defend  the  faith,  and  Christian  philanthropy 
that  we  should  extend  it.     IV.  The  great  alteenativb  befobe  us — whetheb  wb 

AND  THE  WOBLD  WILL  GO  TO  HEAVEN  OB  HELL MAKES  IT  IMPEBATIVB  ON  US  TO  DO 

CUB  UTMOST  TO  PROMOTE  TRUE  EELiGiON.  {J.  Dixon,  D.D.)  Doing  good  : — I. 
The  evil  the  text  guards  us  against — Selfishness.  Self-preservation  is  indeed 
the  first  law  of  nature,  but  we  are  bound  to  observe  the  higher  law  of  grace — 
"  Thou  ehalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  II.  The  dutt  the  text  enjoins — 
To  care  for  and  promote  the  welfare  of  our  fellow-men.  True  benevolence 
demands — 1.  Our  personal  exertion  towards  our  families,  friends,  neighboarhood. 


u.]  PUILIPPIANS.  87 

world.  8.  Our  property.  8.  Our  influence.  4.  Our  prayers.  III.  Some  MorrrEB 
TO  THE  OBSERVANCE  OF  THIS  DUTY.  1.  He  who  carcs  Only  for  self  is  a  useless 
member  of  society.  2.  The  law  of  nature  requires  the  exercise  of  beneficence  (Acta 
z.  26).  3.  The  pleasure  of  doing  good  invites  to  it.  4.  A  regard  for  the  esteem  of 
our  fellow-men.  5.  The  Word  of  God  enforces  it.  6.  The  example  of  Christ  seta 
it  forth.  7.  The  hope  of  standing  without  confusion  before  the  judgment  seat  of 
Christ  is  an  important  consideration,  (Es^ex  Congregational  Remembrancer.) 
Sectarianism  : — ^\  hat  is  it  ?  It  is  the  overweening  zeal  for  a  part  to  the  prejudice 
oi  the  whole,  and  it  has  four  great  spheres.  I.  The  sectarianism  of  the  xNnrviDUAi. 
1.  Our  first  association  with  religion  is  its  bearing  on  our  own  salvation.  All  the 
world  for  us  centres  round  the  question,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  And  so 
far  we  must  for  the  time  look  on  our  own  things,  and  not  on  the  things  of  others. 
And  we  want  to  see  more  of  this  personal  convictiou  and  iijdividual  dealing  of  the 
Boul  with  Christ.  2.  But  twin  monsters  are  begotten  alongside  of  the  genuine 
conviction,  and  begin  at  once  to  make  a  personal  interest  in  religion  a  sectarian 
interest.  (1)  The  limitation  of  the  idea  of  salvation  to  safety  from  misery.  I  do 
not  underrate  the  part  "the  terror  of  the  Lord  "  has  played  in  conversion  ;  but  we 
are  not  for  ever  to  stand  on  the  brink  of  the  pit,  but  to  use  the  vantage  ground 
Christ  has  given  as.  Be  no  longer  anxious  about  your  own  soul.  Leave  that 
to  Christ,  and  be  doing  His  work.  The  man  who  is  ever  thinking  of  personal 
safety  will  endanger  that  safety ;  but  he  that  loses  himself  in  Christ  shall  find 
Him.  (2)  The  continuance  of  mere  personal  considerations  as  the  staple  of 
religion.  There  are  those  who  think  that  Christian  separateness  means  being  very 
anlike  other  men.  II.  The  sectarianism  of  the  conoreoation.  1.  I  would  speak  with 
the  deepest  sympathy  of  congregational  life.  Our  most  blessed  hours  are  connected 
with  it,  and  its  records  are  a  ground  for  thankfulness.  And  it  is  to  be  viewed  in 
relation  to  its  whole  work,  Sunday  school,  tract  society,  &c.  2.  But  it  is  subject  ta 
sectarianism,  and  that  in  a  more  virulent  form,  because  of  the  strength  of  its 
organization.  I  find  it  in  the  pronouns  which  appropriate  religion — "  my," 
"oar."  These  contain — (1)  The  best  of  love.  When  we  mean  by  them,  This  is 
my  Church;  These  are  our  forms  of  doing  good;  May  God  grant  success  to  our 
cause ;  we  give  expression  to  an  appropriation  of  truth  without  which  no  Church 
can  thrive.  (2)  But  they  contain  the  worst  of  sect,  and  mean  "  ours  "  to  the  exclu- 
sion, and  even  prejudice,  of  others.  "  We  express  true  churchmanship,"  i.e., 
others  do  not ;  "  We  are  liberal,  others  are  narrow,"  &c.  And  then  wretched 
pecuniary  interests  intervene,  and  we  are  glad  that  some  wealthy  man  has  left  one 
Church  to  join  ours,  or  that  we  are  successful  where  others  fail.  3.  The  best 
means  to  counteract  this  is  to  take  an  interest  in  another  Church's  work,  or 
at  least  to  join  it  on  a  common  platform.  III.  The  sectarianism  of  the  denomi- 
nation. It  is  this  we  usually  think  of  as  sectarianism.  1.  But  for  two  causes,  their 
historical  greatness  and  the  overweening  claims  of  a  portion  of  the  clergy,  there 
would  be  nothing  to  be  feared  ;  for  the  belief  in  the  Divine  sanction  of  tha 
denominations  has  waned  considerably  in  the  last  two  centuries,  and  each  con* 
tributes  its  quota  to  full  Christian  life ;  and  again  they  have  been  very  useful  as 
checks  and  chasteners  to  each  other.  2.  But  the  advantages  of  amity  among  the 
denominations  are  obvious.  (1)  While  we  maintain  a  separate  and  defiant  atti- 
tode  we  waste  our  energies,  weaken  ourselves  for  all  good  purposes,  and  present  a 
divided  front  towards  sacerdotalism,  infidelity,  and  indifference.  The  result  of 
oar  divisions  is  the  alienation  of  mankind  ;  when  we  shall  be  at  one,  the  world  will 
beheve  in  its  Saviour.  (2)  We  lose  the  advantage  of  effective  mutual  admonition 
and  encovuragement,  by  not  thoroughly  understanding  each  other.  (3)  It  is  pre- 
eminently in  the  interest  of  souls  that  we  should  cease  from  sectarianism.  We  are 
more  anxious  to  make  them  members  of  our  denomination  than  to  make  them 
members  of  Christ.  IV.  The  sectarianism  of  religion.  1.  We  speak  of  that  alone 
as  religion  which  consists  in  prayer,  Bible  reading,  public  worship,  &c. ;  but  surely 
the  administration  of  justice,  the  enactment  of  laws,  education,  &c.,  are  religions. 
The  Bible  knows  nothing  of  the  distinction  between  secular  and  sacred,  but  only  that 
between  good  and  eviL  2.  The  man  who  marks  out  a  particular  sphere  as  religious,. 
and  bans  the  rest  as  worldly,  makes  religion  a  sectarian  thing  which  growa 
narrower  and  pettier  continually.  The  religion  that  has  no  message  for  the 
workman  in  his  shop,  the  artist  in  his  studio,  the  scientist  in  his  laboratory,  is  in 
danger  of  alienating,  not  drawing  mankind.  (The  Hon.  and  Rev.  W.  H.  Fremantle^ 
M.A.)  Regard  for  others: — Two  boats  were  sent  out  from  Dover  to  relieve  a 
Vessel  in  distress.     The  fury  of  the  tempest  overset  one  of  them,  which  contained 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

three  sailors,  one  of  whom  sank.  The  two  remaining  sailors  were  floating  on  the 
deep ;  a  rope  was  thrown  to  one  of  them  from  the  other  boat,  but  he  refused  it, 
crying  out,  "Fling  it  to  Tom ;  he  is  just  ready  to  go  down.  I  can  last  some  time 
lonf?er."  They  did  so.  Tom  was  drawn  into  the  boat.  The  rope  was  then  flung 
to  the  generous  tar,  just  in  time  to  save  him  also  from  drowning.  {W.  Baxendale.) 
Uiiselfish  care  for  others : — A  very  poor  and  aged  man,  busied  in  planting  and 
grafting  apple-trees,  was  interrupted  by  the  question,  "  Why  do  you  plant  trees 
who  cannot  hope  to  eat  the  fruit  of  them?  "  He  raised  himself  up,  and,  leaning 
on  his  spade,  replied,  "  Some  one  planted  trees  before  I  was  born,  and  I  have  eaten 
the  fruit ;  I  now  plant  for  others,  that  the  memorial  of  my  gratitude  may  exist 
when  I  am  dead  and  gone.  {Ibid.)  Disinterested  friendship  : — The  Eev.  Thomas 
Thomason,  while  at  Cambridge,  having  otrce  gained  the  Norissian  prize  for  a 
theological  essay,  tried  a  second  time  for  it,  but  was  surpassed  by  his  friend  Jerram. 
The  latter  thus  describes  the  incident :  "  One  morning  Thomason  hastened  into  my 
room,  followed  by  one  of  the  beadles,  and  with  a  gladness  of  heart  which  I  shall 
never  forget,  told  me  that  the  prize  was  awarded  to  me,  and  that  the  beadle,  not 
knowing  my  room,  had  called  at  his  and  asked  where  he  could  find  me.  I  sincerely 
believe  my  friend  could  scarcely  have  rej  oiced  more  had  he  a  second  time  succeeded." 
Thomason's  account  to  his  mother  was  as  follows  : — "  I  have  lost  the  prize ;  Jerram 
has  got  it.  I  am  not  mortified  ;  it  is  still  in  the  family,  a  young  man  of  the  same 
college,  of  the  same  Church  and  profession.  I  have  had  it  once  ;  it  ill  becomes  me 
to  murmur."  It  is  pleasant  to  learn  that  Thomason  again  gained  the  same  prize 
on  two  successive  occasions.     {J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  Religious  selfishness 

common: — I  have  been  a  member  of  your  Church  for  thirty  years,"  said  an  elderly 
Christian  to  his  pastor,  "  and  when  I  was  laid  by  with  sickness  only  one  or  two 
came  to  see  me.  I  was  shamefully  neglected."  "  My  friend,"  said  the  pastor,  "in 
all  those  thirty  years  how  many  sick  have  you  visited?"  '*  Oh,"  he  replied,  "  it 
never  struck  me  in  that  light.  I  thought  only  of  the  relation  of  others  to  me,  and 
not  of  my  relation  to  them."  Self-sacrifice  for  others  : — An  engineer  in  the 
South-west,  on  a  locomotive,  recently  saw  a  train  coming  with  which  he  must 
collide.  He  resolved  to  stand  at  his  post  and  slow  up  the  train  until  the  last 
minute,  for  there  were  passengers  behind.  The  engineer  said  to  the  fireman, 
"  Jump  !  One  man  is  enough  on  this  engine.  Jump !  "  The  fireman  jumped, 
and  was  saved.  The  crash  came.  The  engineer  died  at  his  post.  (T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.)  Christian  disinterestedness :— It  was  said  of  Wilberforce  that  he  was 
masked  one  day  by  a  pious  lady  how  the  salvation  of  his  own  soul  fared  in  the  midst 
of  business  entailed  on  him  by  his  efforts  for  the  slave,  and  that  he  answered 
(surely  a  noble  answer),  "Madam,  I  forgot  for  the  time  I  had  a  soul."  {W.  H. 
Fremantle,  M.A.)  Others  before  self: — Thomas  Sampson  was  a  working  miner, 
and  worked  hard  for  his  bread.  The  captain  of  the  mine  said  to  him  on  one  occa- 
sion, "  Thomas,  I've  got  an  easier  berth  for  you,  where  there  is  Uttle  comparatively 
to  do,  and  where  you  can  earn  more  money.  Will  you  accept  it  ?  "  What  do  you 
think  he  said?  "  Captain,  there's  our  poor  brother  Tregony.  He  has  a  sick  body, 
and  he  is  not  able  to  work  as  hard  as  I  am.  I  fear  his  toil  will  shorten  his  useful 
life.  Will  you  let  him  have  the  berth  ?  "  The  captain,  pleased  with  his  generosity, 
sent  for  Tregony,  and  gave  him  the  berth.  Thomas  was  gratified,  and  added,  "I 
can  work  a  Httle  longer  yet."  (Sunday  Magazine.)  The  difficulty  of  looking  on 
the  things  of  others : — In  the  journals  of  the  sainted  wife  of  Jonathan  Edwards  it  is 
recorded  how  one  of  her  great  struggles  was  to  acquiesce  in  the  revival  work  in  the 
town  being  done  by  another  minister  than  her  husband.  (W.  H.  Fremantle,  M.A.) 
Considering  others  before  self: — A  German  countryman  went  one  day  with  his  four 
sons  to  the  neighbouring  town  to  transact  some  business.  While  there,  in  the 
market-place,  he  bought  five  peaches.  One  of  these  he  kept  for  his  wife,  who  was 
at  home,  and  the  others  he  gave  to  his  boys.  When  they  were  sitting  round  the 
fire  the  next  evening,  he  thought  he  would  ask  each  of  his  sons  what  he  had  done 
with  his  peach.  The  eldest  said  he  had  eaten  his,  but  had  kept  the  stone  to  plant 
in  the  garden,  in  hopes  that  it  would  grow  up  and  bear  some  peaches  as  good  as  the 
one  he  had  bo  much  enjoyed.  The  youngest  boy  confessed  he  had  eaten  his  own 
peach  and  thrown  the  stone  away,  and  after  his  return  home  had  helped  hia 
mother  to  eat  half  of  her  peach  1  The  second  eldest  boy  told  how  he  had  picked  up 
the  stone  which  his  little  brother  had  thrown  away,  and  cracked  it,  and  eaten  the 
kemeh  "  It  was  nice  and  sweet,"  he  added,  "  and  I  sold  my  own  peach  for  so 
much  money  that  I  have  enough  to  buy  several  peaches  now  with  what  I  got  for 
it."    The  third  son  then  had  to  tell  his  tale.    The  others  had  told  all  theirs  oat  at 


CHAP.  It]  PHILIPPIANS.  M 

once  with  no  hesitation  and  no  shame,  bnt  this  little  lad  blushed  as  he  began  bis 
fitory :  '*  I  took  my  peaoh  to  a  poor  little  friend  who  has  been  in  bed  for  so  long, 
and  suffers  so  much  pain.  He  refused  to  take  it  from  me,  so  I  put  it  on  his  bed 
and  ran  away."  His  mother's  kisses,  as  she  heard  these  words,  were  far  sweeter  on 
his  yoang  lips  than  any  fruit.     (T.  T.  Shore.) 

Vers.  5-11.  Let  this  mind  be  In  yon  which  was  also  In  Christ  Jesns. — 
Observe — I.  The  picture.  Majesty — condescension — suffering.  II,  Thk  lksson. 
Humility — love — self-sacrifice.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Lessons  taught  by  the  humili' 
ation  and  exaltation  of  Christ : — The  apostle  was  exhorting  the  Philppians 
to  imitate  the  humility  and  disinterestedness  of  the  Saviour.  But  there 
could   have  been  no  force  in  the  example  if  Jesus   Christ  had  not  been  God. 

I.    A     BRIEF     ILLUSTRATION      OF    THIS    IMPRE8SIVB     DESCRIPTION     OF     THE     EeDEEMEB. 

1.  Jesus  Christ  is  here  presented  as  subsisting  originally  in  the  splendour 
of  Deity.  "  Form  of  God "  must  not  be  explained  to  mean  any  temporary 
manifestation  such  as  the  Theopbanies  of  the  Old  Testament.  Fire,  e.g.,  is  the 
symbol  of  Deity,  as  was  the  Shechinah,  but  not  the  form.  That  has  an  integral 
meaning.  2.  He  humbled  Himself.  Had  He  not  done  so  God  would  never  have 
been  seen  by  His  creatures.  Notice  the  gradation.  (1)  Subordination.  ••  He  took 
the  form  of  a  servant."  (2)  Human  subordination.  (3)  Obedient  subordination. 
(4)  Self-sacrificing  subordination.  8.  Elevation.  (1)  A  name  above  every  name. 
(2)  A  dignity  recognized  by  all.  IL  The  all  important  lessons.  1,  Dis- 
interestedness. "  Look  not  every  one  on  His  own  tLings,"  <fec.  This  is  just  what 
Christ  did,  and  that,  not  because  there  was  any  worthiness  in  man,  but  out  of  love. 

2.  Self-sacrifice.  There  is  no  religion  without  an  imitation  of  Christ's  self- 
abandonment.  3,  Perseverance.  If  anything  could  have  stopped  Christ  in  his 
work  He  would  have  been  stopped.  Conclusion :  Let,  then,  this  mind  be 
in  you.  I  argue  with  you  on  the  ground — 1.  Of  your  Christianity.  O 
Christian,  from  whence  did  you  derive  your  name.  2.  Of  gratitude.  ^Tiat 
do  you  owe  to  Christ?  3.  Of  the  intercession  of  Christ.  4.  Of  the  greak 
worth  of  the  soul.  6.  Of  the  glories  of  tlje  kingdom  of  Christ.  (T.  Lessey, 
M.A.)  The  humiliation  aiid  glory  of  Christ : — I.  Let  us  track  the  humilia- 
tion AND  QLORT  OF  Christ.  1.  The  poiut  of  departure,  where  is  it?  On  earth 
or  in  heaven?  In  humanity  or  in  Deity?  Those  who  contend  from  the  simply 
human  view  of  the  nature  of  Cbrist  say  that  He  began  to  condescend  some- 
where in  His  earthly  lifetime,  as  if  that  could  be  a  mighty  argument  for  humility. 
No,  we  must  begin  where  Paul  begins.  "  In  the  form  of  God  "  can  only  mean 
possessing  the  attributes  of  God  (2  Cor.  iv.  4  ;  Heb.  I  3 ;  John  i.  1).  2.  Being 
thus  Divine,  He  did  not  deem  His  equality  with  God  a  thing  to  grasp  at  and 
eagerly  retain.  He  emptied  Himself  of  His  heavenly  glory,  and  having  humbled 
Himself  as  a  common  man  He  humbled  himself  yet  more,  becoming  obedient  to  the 
death  which  only  the  lowest  malefactors  could  die.  8.  Of  course  there  could  be  no 
essential  change  in  this  humihation.  Jesus  could  never  be  less  than  Divine.  The 
Divine  glory  dwelt  within  the  human  nature  as  within  a  veil.  It  shone  out  at 
times  and  then  all  was  dark  again.  The  glory  of  His  boyhood  was  seen  in  the 
temple;  of  His  manhood  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration;  He  gave  but  a  look  in 
the  garden  out  of  His  divinity  and  the  soldiers  fell  back.  4.  At  the  lowest  point  of 
the  humiliation  the  ascent  begins  in  the  worship  of  the  penitent  thief,  in  the  words 
of  the  soldier,  in  the  reverence  shown  to  His  body,  in  His  resuiTection  and 
triumphant  ascension.  5.  The  name  is  the  character,  influence;  and  to  that  all 
creation  shall  do  homage,  because  in  some  way  affected  by  it.  II.  The  pbactical 
purpose.  1.  The  inculcation  of  himaility.  You  see  what  Christ  has  done.  Do 
likewise  ;  be  lowly,  go  down.  Ah,  the  contrast  between  Christ  and  many  who  bear 
His  name  !  He  in  greatness  and  glory  coming  down  so  far  1  We  in  our  blindness 
and  littleness,  all  struggling  to  rise.  2.  If  His  life  is  the  model  of  my  own  ;  if  His 
cross  repeats  itself  in  the  cross  I  bear  for  Him ;  then  there  comes  to  me  a  truer 
elevation.  "God  hath  highly  exalted  Him,"  and  that  is  a  pledge  that  those  who 
have  been  with  Christ  in  His  humiliation  shall  together  sit  on  His  throne.  3. 
TSTierefore  work  out  your  own  salvation— by  self-denial,  humility,  and  this  with 
fear  and  trembling,  because  it  is  the  only  thing  you  need  fear  about.  (A.  Raleigh, 
D.D.)  The  supreme  example  of  self-renunciation : — These  words  are  the  grandest 
and  most  profound,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  copious  and  unrestrained  which 
St.  Paul  ever  used  on  this  subject,  his  final  and  finished  formula  of  the  Incarnation. 
It  iR  wonderfol  to  observe  with  what  tranquillity,  ease,  and  unconsciousness  of  e£Eort 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cBUf.  n. 

this  amazing  snbject  ii  introduced.  All  comes  as  a  matter  of  eonrse.  He  does  not 
say  "Behold,  I  show  you  a  mystery."  It  flows  as  naturally  from  His  pen  as  a 
simple  motive  for  Christian  duty,  as  if  it  were  the  commonplace  of  theological 
truth  as  familiar  to  them  as  to  Himself.  So,  doubtless,  it  was.  I.  There  is  onb 
Person  here  and  one  only.  The  name  Jesus  Christ  is  given  to  that  Person,  who, 
before  the  Incarnation,  was  "  in  the  form  of  God,"  and  afterwards,  "  in  the  form  of 
a  servant."  He  may  be  called  by  any  name,  "  Son  of  God  "  or  "  Son  of  man,"  but 
that  name  always  signifies  His  Person  as  possessed  of  two  natures.  Accordingly, 
that  Person  may  be  the  subject  of  two  classes  of  predicates.  The  Divine  nature 
never  has  a  human  attribute,  nor  the  human  a  Divine,  but  the  Divine-human 
Person  may  be  spoken  of  as  having  both.  So  here  St.  Paul  is  referring  to  a 
thought  of  the  Eternal  Son  which  implied  that  He  was  not  yet  man.  The  example 
is  that  of  Christ  Jesus  in  tbe  flesh,  but  its  strength  and  obligation  are  based  upon 
the  fact  that  it  was  the  divinity  in  Christ  that  began  the  mediatorial  humiliation. 
II.  The  pke-existent  nature  and  form  of  being  is  here  strikingly  described.  Paul 
uses  an  expression  which  indicates  the  relation  of  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity 
to  the  First,  that  of  eternal  subordination  without  implying  inferiority.  As  the 
Father  cannot  be  without  the  Son,  as  being  cannot  be  without  its  image,  so  the 
Godhead  in  the  Second  Person  had  its  form — the  essential  attributes  and  glories  of 
Deity  which  He  might  lay  aside  without  losing  the  divinity  of  His  Eternal 
generation.  III.  The  act  of  Incarnation  is  attributed  to  that  pre-existent 
Person.  He  resolved  to  empty  Himself  of  all  the  glories,  prerogatives,  and  mani- 
festations of  tbe  Godhead  and  animate  a  human  nature.  This  was  His  own  act. 
There  was  a  concurrence  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  The  Father  by  an  eternal  necessity 
begetting  His  Son,  begets  Him  again  in  indissoluble  union  with  our  nature.  The 
Holy  Ghost  is  the  Divine  instrument  of  the  Father's  will  in  that  office.  But  it 
was  the  Son's  own  act  to  conjoin  with  Himself  this  new  man.  Now,  though  our 
human  nature  is  not  an  ignoble  thing,  yet  His  coming  in  the  likeness  of  a  nature 
that  evil  had  defiled,  was  a  condescension  which  might  be  termed  a  humiliation. 
His  Divine  repute  was  for  a  season  suspended,  and  He  was  reputed  among  the 
transgressor*.  IV.  The  REAiiiTY  of  His  assumption  of  Human  nature  is  set  forth 
by  three  expressions.  1.  "Form  of  a  servant."  The  entire  history  of  our 
Saviour's  human  existence  was  that  of  the  mediatorial  servant  of  God  (Isa.  xliiA 
As  such  He  proclaimed  Himself,  and  was  proclaimed  (Acts  iii.  26).  The  term  is 
parallel  with  "  form  "  of  God,  and  signifies  that  in  His  human  nature  His  mani- 
festation was  that  of  the  servitude  of  redemption.  Our  human  nature  was  the 
towel  with  which  He  girded  Himself  (John  xiii.).  He  took  our  humanity  only  that 
He  might  serve  in  it.  2.  "  Likeness  of  men  "  limits  itself  to  the  mere  assumption 
of  our  nature,  and  indicates  that  He  became  man  otherwise  than  others  become 
men ;  that  His  human  nature  was  perfect,  but  it  was  representative  human  nature, 
"likeness  of  men."  So  that  the  apostle's  careful  definition  leaves  room  for  all  that 
range  of  difference  between  Him  and  us  that  theology  is  constrained  in  reverence  to 
establish.  3.  "Found  in  fashion  as  a  man"  completes  the  picture  of  the 
Incarnation  bj  realizing  it  and  giving  it  location  among  men.  He  was  all 
by  which  a  man  could  be  observed,  judged,  estimated.  He  was  "found" 
numbered  as  one  of  the  descendents  of  Adam.  V.  The  design  of  the  wonderfitIi 
DESCENT  (ver.  8).  The  emptying  ends  with  the  Incarnation ;  but  the  example  of 
8elf-renunciation  is  further  exhibited.  1.  The  death  of  the  cross  was  imposed  on 
Him  as  a  great  duty.  Much  is  here  omitted  because  of  the  special  purpose  in 
view.  Paul  says  nothing  about  our  Lord's  birth  under  the  Mosaic,  nor  His  obliga- 
tions as  under  the  moral  law,  nor  the  endless  indignities  that  He  accepted.  He 
singles  out  the  one  tremendous  imposition  that  He  should  die  for  sin.  Death  was 
the  goal  of  a  great  obedience.  All  other  duties  tended  to  this,  and  found  in  this 
their  consummation.  2.  This  great  obedience  was  voluntarily  assumed  in  humility. 
It  was  not  merely  death,  but  a  humiliating  and  cursed  death.  Bat  to  this  He 
submitted,  passive  before  men  because  inwardly  passive  before  God.  ¥1.  This 
6PONTANE0US,  PERFECT  BELF-sACRiFicE  18  AM  EXAMPLE,  the  ruling  and  regulative 
principle,  indeed,  of  all  Christian  devotion  and  service.  That  man's  salvation 
required  this  is  taken  for  gr&nted,  but  is  not  dwelt  upon.  As  an  example,  however, 
it  may  be  viewed  under  two  aspects.  1.  As  the  perfect  exliihition  of  self-renun- 
ciation. (1)  It  is  obvious  that  Paul  lays  great  stress  on  the  pre-incarnate  con- 
descension. He  whose  Deity  was  that  of  the  Son's  eternal  exhibition  of  tbe  form 
of  His  Father,  did  not  reckon  the  display  of  His  Divine  glorv,  of  the  perfections 
"  equal  with  God,"  a  thing  to  hold  fast ;  but  let  them  go  for  man's  salvation,  and 


emit,  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  91 

lived  among  the  conflitions  of  human  nature.  This  was  His  self-sacrifice.  We 
dare  not  attempt  to  define  here  :  there  is  a  danger  in  two  directions.  We  may  so 
dwell  upon  the  unchangeableness  of  the  Di\'ine  nature  as  to  reduce  all  the  condes- 
cension to  his  incarnate  estate  ;  or  we  maj  so  exaggerate  the  Divine  self-sacrifice 
as  to  attribute  an  impossible  abnegation  of  His  Divine  attributes.  Enough  that  the 
New  Testament  does  not  reveal  to  us  a  Trinity  inaccessible  to  those  sentiments 
which  we  regard  as  the  higliest  attributes  of  human  virtue.  The  pattern  of  our 
loftiest  human  excellence  is  in  God  Himself.  (2)  But  we  now  descend  to  the 
exhibition  of  self-sacritice  in  the  mediatorial  Man  of  sorrows.  Concerning  this 
the  words  teach  us  to  mark  its  absolute  perfection  in  every  respect  as  an  exhibition 
ol  self-sacrifice,  and  its  absolute  perfection  also  as  a  pattern  to  us.  When  he  has 
brought  the  Eedet-mer  down  from  His  transcendent  height,  he  txhibits  ffim  with 
reverent  joy  and  tenderness  as  the  supreme  pattern  of  sacrificing  love.  But  he 
only  refers  to  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ,  and  that  mind  was  the  surrender  of  all 
and  the  endurance  of  all  for  the  good  of  man.  There  is  no  detail  of  the  Saviour's 
Bufferings.  2.  The  reality  of  the  example  to  us.  Elsewhere  it  is  said  that  Christ 
in  His  meek  endurance  and  self-sacrificing  devotion  left  us  an  exampla  Paul 
shows  that  all  who  are  Christ's  undergo  in  their  degree  His  lot  and  share  His 
destiny.  "If  any  man  will  serve  Me,"  &c.  Those  who  shall  reign  with  Christ 
must  first  suffer  with  Him.  The  spirit  of  union  with  Christ  imparts  this  first 
principle  of  the  Saviour's  consecration ;  it  must  become  the  ruling  principle  in  us  also. 
{W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  The  great  example  : — The  apostle  enforces  the  previous 

counsels  to  the  cultivation  of  self-denying  love  by  the  argument  strongest  of  all  to 
the  Christian  heart,  the  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  I.  God  condescended  to 
BECOME  MAN.  1.  Christ  did  not  change  His  nature,  an  impossibility,  but  His 
"  form,"  and  in  the  surrender  of  this  Divine  dignity  for  us  points  to  the  duty  of  our 
surrender  of  ease,  rank,  repute,  and  even  life,  for  the  good  of  others.  2.  The  work 
of  love  seemed  a  greater  thing  than  His  retention  of  what  was  originally  His  own, 
and  not  an  object  of  mere  ambition.  3.  So  He  emptied  Himself  of  this  "  form," 
the  glory  in  which  He  was  revealed  to  the  angels,  and  to  Moses,  and  Isaiah.  (1)  By 
assuming  the  form  of  a  servant,  its  opposite.  The  King  became  a  subject.  (2) 
How  He  took  that  form  is  explained — "  being  made  in  the  likeness  of  men,"  not  of 
a  man  ;  He  was  the  representative  of  the  race.  Here,  then,  we  have  the  mystery 
ol  mysteries.  Our  Redeemer  is  God,  or  our  hope  in  Him  were  baseless,  but  His 
Deity  was  veiled  in  flesh.  II.  As  a  man  He  went  down  into  the  depths  op 
HDuiLiATioN.  1.  His  obcdience  exhibits — (1)  The  reality  of  His  manhood.  Subjec- 
tion is  conceivable  only  in  a  created  nature.  (2)  His  exemplariness  ;  as  a  servant 
of  God,  he  is  a  member  of  the  class  to  which  all  Christians  belong.  2.  His 
obedience  led  Him  to  the  death  of  the  cross,  a  death — (1)  The  most  cruel.  (2) 
The  most  disgraceful.  3.  All  this  was  voluntary.  III.  In  reward  for  His 
OBEDIENCE  He  wab  ckowned  WITH  OLORT  AND  HONOUR.  1.  This  was  doHC  by  the 
Father  who  in  the  economy  of  Redemption  represents  the  majesty  of  the  God- 
head. 2.  This  was  done  for  the  purpose  of  securing  for  Christ  universal  supremacy 
and  homage.  3.  The  end  of  all  was  the  glory  of  God  the  Father  in  conformity 
with  the  Son's  prayer — "  Glorify  Thy  Son  that  Thy  Son  also  may  glorify  Thee." 
Cionclusion :  The  fitness  of  the  wonderful  paragraph  as  an  argument  to  enforce  the 
exhortation.  All  this  was  out  of  love  for  you.  Imitate  this  love  in  its  devotion, 
Beli-forgetfulnesB,  humility.  {R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  An  appeal  for  the  eultiya- 
lion  of  a  right  spirit : — This  comprehensive  passage  can  be  used  for  theological 
purposes  only  by  accommodation.  It  is  a  practical  exhortation  rather  than  a 
theological  disquisition.  PhuI  is  not  arguing  a  doctrinal  point,  or  rebutting  an 
heresy.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Philippians  were  unsound.  It  is  simply 
the  groundwork  for  a  powerful  appeal  for  the  cultivation  of  a  right  ppirit.  Paul's 
argument,  based  on  the  Messianic  history,  may  be  thrown  into  this  shape.  Yon 
Philippians  hav«  been  a  great  joy  to  me,  but  my  joy  is  not  quite  full.  Tour 
unanimity  is  not  perfect.  '*  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,"  <feo.  That  mind  was  con- 
descending, unselfish,  most  loving.  Some  of  you  imagine  yourselves  too  elevated 
to  mingle  with  others.  But  Christ,  who  was  infinitely  elevated,  stooped  to  servitude 
and  death.  Let  His  mind,  then,  be  in  you,  and  nothing  shall  be  done  through 
strife  and  vain-glory.  The  highest  sliould  prove  his  highness  by  serving  the  lowly. 
I.  Every  feature  in  Christian  character  may  be  carried  back  to  and  examined 
IN  the  light  of  the  whole  history  or  Christ.  The  Christian  is  always  repre- 
senting or  misrepresenting  Christ.  II.  These  delineations  of  Christ  reveal  thh 
TBiE  method  of  rendering  service  to  mas.      Human  deliverance  and  progress 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

will  remain  a  theory  only  until  men  come  to  work  on  the  method  here  stated. 
Great  philanthropic  programmes  must  begin  at  Bethlehem,  and  comprehend  th« 
mysteries  of  Calvary  if  they  would  ascend  from  Bethany  to  the  heavens.  To  serve 
man  Christ  became  man.  So  in  serving  others  we  must  identify  ourselves  with 
them.  This  identification  with  the  race  made  Christ  accessible  to  all  classes.  We 
too  must  go  down.  III.  Cheist's  peety  was  not  a  mere  index  finger.  Instead 
of  sayiug,  "  That  is  the  way,"  He  said,  "  I  am  the  way."  Men  fail  when  they  say 
♦'  that  "  instead  of  "  I,"  when  they  give  a  pronoun  instead  of  the  living  substantive  of 
their  own  sanctified  character.  Instead  of  seeing  bow  the  world's  misery  looks 
after  it  has  flown  from  a  secretarial  pen,  and  taken  form  upon  the  clean  foolscap 
of  a  great  society  we  should  lay  our  own  white  hand  on  the  gashed  and  quaking 
heart  of  humanity.  IV.  Condescension  is  not  degradation.  1.  Was  Christ 
degraded  ?  Go  into  the  territories  of  wretchedness  and  guilt  upon  any  other  busi- 
ness than  that  of  Christ  and  you  will  be  degraded.  Benevolence  will  come  forth 
unpolluted  as  a  sunbeam.  2.  More:  How  do  you  teach  a  child  to  read?  By 
beginning  at  the  rudimentary  line,  and  accompanying  Him  patiently  through  alll 
introductory  processes.  So  Christ  does  in  the  moral  education  of  the  race.  V. 
Are  we  to  come  down  to  men  ob  are  men  to  be  brought  up  to  trs  ?  Both. 
We  have  here  also  a  revelation  of  the  glory  which  is  in  reserve  for  those  who  adopt 
Christ's  method.  Christ  had  that  glory  of  right :  His  followers  have  it  of  grace. 
Christ  promises  exaltation  to  all  who  overcome.  Conclusion :  1.  God  overrules 
the  most  improbable  means  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  greatest  ends.  2.  The 
true  worker  is  never  finally  overlooked.  "  Therefore  I  will  divide  Him  a  portion 
with  the  great. "  Why?  "Because  He  hath  poured  out  His  soul  unto  death."  In 
apparent  weakness  may  be  the  sublimest  mystery  of  power.  A  man  may  be  con- 
quering when  in  a  very  passion  of  suffering.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  mind  of 
Christ : — I.  Its  features.  Humble — obedient — loving — self-sacrificing.  II.  Its 
REWARD.  Exaltation — honour — glory.  IH.  Its  obligation.  We  are  redeemed  by 
Him — must  be  conformed  to  Him.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christ  is  our  pattern: — 
It  is  said  that,  thinking  to  amuse  him,  his  wife  read  to  Dr.  Judson  some 
newspaper  notices,  in  which  he  was  compared  to  one  or  other  of  the  apostles. 
He  was  exceedingly  distressed :  and  then  he  added, "  Nor  do  I  want  to  be  like  them ;  I 
do  not  want  to  be  like  Paul,  nor  Apollos,  nor  Cephas,  nor  any  mere  man.  I  want  to  be 
like  Christ.  We  have  only  one  perfectly  safe  Exemplar. — only  One,  who,  tempted  like 
as  we  are  in  every  point,  is  still  without  sin.  I  want  to  follow  Him  only,  copy  His 
teachings,  drink  in  His  Spirit,  place  my  feet  in  His  footprints,  and  measure  their 
shortcomings  by  these,  and  these  only.  Oh,  to  be  more  like  Christ  1  "  How  to 
obtain  the  mind  of  Christ : — As  certain  silk -worms  have  their  silk  coloured  by  the 
leaves  on  which  they  feed,  so,  if  we  were  to  feed  on  Christ,  and  nothing  else  but 
Christ,  we  should  become  puie,  holy,  lowly,  meek,  gentle,  humble ;  in  a  word,  we 
should  be  perfect  even  as  He  is.  Wiiat  wonderful  meat  this  must  be  I  0  my  brethren, 
if  you  have  ever  tried  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Jesus  as  your  soul's  diet,  you 
will  know  that  I  am  not  speaking  vain  words  1  There  is  no  such  sustenance 
for  faith,  love,  patience,  joy,  as  living  daily  upon  Jesus,  our  Saviour.  You  who 
have  never  tasted  of  this  heavenly  bread,  bad  better  listen  to  the  word,  "0  taste 
and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good  1  "  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  lesson  of  humility  : — 
The  heathen  had  semblances  or  images  of  well-nigh  every  virtue.  He  had  many 
excellences,  here  and  there,  which  put  Christians  to  shame.  Wretchedly  corrupt 
as  life  was  upon  the  whole,  still  not  individuals  only,  but  even  nations,  had  great 
single  virtues.  The  heathen  had  self-devotion,  contentment,  contempt  of  the 
world,  and  of  the  flesh ;  he  bad  fortitude,  endurance,  self-denial,  abstemiousness, 
temperance,  chastity,  even  a  sort  of  reverence  for  God  whom  he  knew  not ;  but  he 
had  not  humility.  The  first  sin,  the  wish  to  be  as  God,  pride,  spoiled  them  all. 
Man,  in  his  natural  state,  cluims,  as  his  own,  what  is  God's ;  and  so  he  displeases 
God,  whom  he  robs  of  His  honour.  And  so  the  first  beginning  of  Christian  virtues 
is  to  lay  aside  pride.  It  is  to  own  that  we  have  nothing,  that  so  we  may  receive 
all  and  hold  all  of  God  ;  and  when,  as  being  in  Christ  and  partaking  of  His  riches, 
we  begin  to  have,  still  to  own  that,  of  our  own,  we  have  nothing.  But  not  only  in 
general  or  towards  God  have  we  need  to  be  humble.  It  enters  in  detail  into  every 
Christian  grace,  so  that  well-nigh  the  whole  substance  of  the  Christian  discipline 
is  humility.  Every  mountain  of  human  pride  must  be  brought  low,  to  prepare  the 
Lord's  way  ;  and  so  shall  the  lowly  valley  be  exalted.  Without  humility,  there  can 
be  no  resignation,  since  humility  alone  knows  its  sufferings  and  sorrows  to  be  lesi 
th«n  it  deserves ;   no  contentment,  for  humility  alone  knows  that  it  has  more 


CHAP.  II.]  PHILIPPIANS.  93 

blessinps  than  it  deserves  ;  no  peace,  for  contention  cometh  of  want  of  humility . 
no  kindness,  for  pride  euvieth  ;  and  this  St.  Paul  assigns  as  the  very  reason  why 
"love  envieth  not,"  that  it  "  is  not  puffed  up," that  is,  is  humble.  How  shall 
there,  without  it,  be  any  Christian  grace,  since  all  are  the  fruits  of  God's  Holy 
Sjiirit,  and  He  "  resisteth  the  proud  and  giveth  grace  unto  the  lowly  ?  "  Ho 
"dwelleth  in  the  humble  and  contrite  heart."  If  love  be  the  summit  of  all  virtue, 
humility  is  the  foundation.  He  humbled  Himself,  because  He  loved  us  :  we  must 
be  humble,  in  order  to  love  Him ;  for  to  such  only  will  He  impart  His  love.  "  The 
publican  would  not  so  much  as  lift  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,"  and  God  was  more 
pleased  with  the  confession  of  sins  in  the  sinner,  than  in  the  recounting  of  the 
virtues  of  the  righteous.  The  Canaanitish  woman  was  content  with  the  portion  of 
the  dogs,  and  she  had  "  the  children's  bread."  The  gate  of  life  is  low  as  well  as 
narrow.  Through  the  lowly  portal  of  repentance,  are  we  brought  into  the  Church ; 
and  humble  as  little  children  must  we  agoin  become,  if  we  would  enter  the  ever- 
lasting gates.  Well  indeed  may  the  Christian  be  ashamed  not  to  be  humble,  for 
whom  God  became  humble.  But  this  humility  must  be  deep  down  in  our  nature, 
and  so  striking  root  downwards  thou  shalt  bear  fruit  upwards ;  so  laying  a  deep 
foundation,  shall  thy  house  remain.  The  tree  falls  with  any  gust  of  vi'ind  when 
the  root  is  near  the  surface ;  the  house  which  has  a  shallow  foundation,  is  soon 
shaken.  High  and  wide  as  the  noblest  trees  spread,  so  deep  and  wide  their  roots 
are  sunk  below ;  the  more  majestic  and  nobler  a  pile  of  building,  the  deeper  its 
foundation ;  their  height  is  but  an  earnest  of  their  lowliness ;  you  see  their  height, 
their  lowliness  is  hidden  ;  the  use  of  sinking  thus  deep  is  not  plain  to  sight,  yet 
were  they  not  thus  lowly,  they  could  not  be  thus  lofty.  Dig  deep  then  the  founda- 
tion of  humility,  so  only  mayest  thou  hope  to  reach  the  height  of  charity ;  for  by 
humility  alone  canst  thou  reach  that  Rock  which  shall  not  be  shaken,  that  is 
Christ.  Founded  by  humility  on  that  Rock,  the  storms  of  the  world  shall  not 
shake  thee,  the  torrent  of  evil  custom  shall  not  bear  thee  away,  the  empty  winds 
of  vanity  shall  not  cast  thee  down.  Founded  deep  on  that  rock,  thou  mayest  build 
day  by  day  that  tower  whose  top  shall  reach  unto  heaven,  to  the  very  presence  of 
God,  the  sight  of  God,  and  shalt  be  able  to  finish  it;  for  He  shall  raise  thee 
thither,  who  for  thy  sake  abased  Himsplf  to  us.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  The 
mind  in  Christ: — The  word  mind  generally  denotes  that  power  in  man  which 
conceives  thought,  weighs  it,  and  forms  conclusions.  We  speak  of  a  "  strong 
mind,"  a  "  disordered  mind."  Again,  the  word  is  used  for  the  will-power,  as  when 
we  say,  "I  have  a  mind  to  do  it."  At  other  times  it  is  used  for  tl;e  heart  or 
affections,  e.g.,  "A  mind  at  rest,"  "  A  joy  of  mind,"  "  A  grief  of  mind."  In  the 
7th  of  Romans  it  is  used  for  the  principle  of  grace  in  the  heart.  "  But  I  see 
another  law  in  my  members  waning  against  the  law  of  my  mind."  Lastly,  it  is 
employed  in  a  more  comprehensive  way,  as  in  the  text,  where  consecration  of 
intellect,  the  aim  of  life,  and  temper  of  spirit  are  included.  Christ  Jesus  is  held 
up  by  the  apostle  as  the  model  after  which  we  should  shape  our  lives.  As  good 
parents  train  their  children  by  example,  so  God  our  Father  trains  His  children. 
Christ  the  Lord  is  at  first  the  pattern  of  heavenly  life  to  us,  but  becomes  more  the 
power  of  heavenly  life  within  us.  Christ  answers  all  the  requirements  of  an 
example  to  us.  We  need  for  such — L  A  bking  of  boundless  capacity.  The  Bible 
represents  Christ  as  God  and  Creator.  Look  to  created  things  and  see  the  power 
of  His  being.  The  drop  of  water  has  all  the  power  and  freshness  which  He  gave  it 
on  the  morning  of  creation.  The  effect  cannot  be  greater  than  the  cause.  The 
sun  shines  with  the  same  fulness  of  warmth  and  light  and  life  as  when  it  waked 
the  first  germ  into  life,  yet  it  is  but  "  the  work  of  His  fingers."  But  what  are  these 
as  witnesses  compared  with  the  experiences  of  pure  hearts  who,  in  all  generations, 
have  been  able  to  sing,  "  The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation  ?  "    II.  One  whobk 

KATDBE  IS  LIKE  ODR8,  AND  IS  AT  THE  SAME  TIME  ABOVE  SIN.       Look  tO  the  glory  and  yet 

the  humanity  of  His  nature.  Earth  did  not,  it  could  not,  lift  itself  toward  heaven. 
He  became  "  Immanuel — God  with  us."  "  He  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a 
servant,"  &o.  The  prostrate  vine  cannot  lift  itself  again  to  clasp  the  tree  and 
climb  among  its  branches ;  but  if  the  tree  bow  itself  and  unloose  the  tendrils  from 
the  roots  and  briers,  the  vine  may  find  its  place  of  rest  and  fruitfulness.  This  the 
tree  cannot  do ;  but  God  in  Christ  has  thus  bowed  Himself  to  fallen  man.  IIL 
One  who  presents  to  ds  freshness  and  variety  of  mind  and  bouij.  We  read, 
"Thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  youth."  "  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever."  Selecting  as  emblems  those  objects  that  are  most  expressive  of  life 
and  beauty  and  blessing,  the  Saviour  takes  their  name  upon  Himself.     He  is  th« 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cha».  n.. 

"Snn  of  Righteousness,"  "The  Star  out  of  Jacob,"  "The  Morning  Star,"  " Th« 
Light  of  tlie  World."  And  then  coming  to  thiugs  of  earth — He  is  the  sheep  that 
is  dnmb  before  her  shearers  and  is  presently  "  the  Good  Shepherd."  He  is  the 
"  Lamb  of  God,"  Ac.  He  is  the  "  Fountain  Opened,"  The  "  Tree  of  Life,"  "  The 
Rose  of  Sharon  and  the  Lily  of  the  Valley."  In  short.  He  is  light  for  the  eye, 
sound  for  the  ear,  bread  for  food,  water  for  thirst,  peace  for  the  troubled,  and  rest 
for  the  weary.  Over  agaiast  every  door  of  the  mind  and  every  window  of  the  soul 
He  stands  laden  with  riches  and  waiting  for  admission.     IV.  We  need  in  thb 

CUIiTTJKE  OF  THE  MIND  AND  SOUL  ONE  WHO  HAS  SURPASSING  WISDOM.      In  Christ  are  hid 

all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  Conclusion :  What  are  we  to  be  like 
Him  in  ?  1.  In  our  aim  in  life.  2.  In  our  spirit  and  temper.  {E.  P.  IngersoU.) 
The  mind  in  Christ : — I.  In  Him.  II.  In  you.  III.  In  tou  by  His  Spirit.  IV, 
In  tod  as  a  means  of  happiness  and  salvation.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  mind  that 
was  in  Christ  Jesus : — Was — I.  Self-abneoating.  If  Christ,  being  God,  for  our 
sakes  became  man,  may  we  not  learn  to  forego,  for  the  sake  of  each  other,  our  own 
private  advantages  ?  1.  The  rich  may  give  to  the  poor,  just  as  Christ  for  our  sakes 
became  poor.  2.  The  poor,  themselves,  should  be  helpful,  just  as  Christ  being  poor 
was  able  to  make  many  rich.  II.  Condescending.  He  stooped  from  highf^st  glory 
to  our  low  estate,  thereby  teaching  those  who  have  the  advantage  of  ability  and 
attainments  to  condescend  to  the  ignorance  and  incapacity  of  their  less  favoured 
brethren.  III.  Non-complaining.  Hence,  the  poor  and  ignorant  should  learn  to 
cease  from  murmuring  against  those  who  have  become  better  oft  by  diligence, 
frugality,  and  sobriety,  and  to  wear  with  cheerfulness  the  garb  of  poverty  He  wore, 
and  receive  with  thankfulness  the  hardships  He  bore  before  them.  IV.  Non- 
coNTENTioos.  All,  whatever  their  condition,  should  learn  to  contend  less  for  their 
ownselves  in  the  pursuit  of  this  world's  advantages,  and  leave  more  room  for  their 
neighbours'  advancement  and  more  cordially  promote  it.  Industry  is  commendable, 
but  grasping  and  jealousy  are  alien  to  the  mind  of  Christ.  We  should  let  live  as 
well  as  live.  V.  Abhorrent  of  sin.  So  much  so  that  He  humbled  Himself  to  the 
death  of  the  cross  to  destroy  it.  The  Christian,  therefore,  should  mortify  the 
affections  of  the  flesh.  VI.  Fearless  of  death.  He  encountered  it  with  joy  that 
He  might  deliver  us  from  bondage  unto  the  fear  of  death.  (C  Girdlestone,  M.A.) 
Christ's  was — I.  A  fearless  mind.  He  braved — 1.  Public  opinion.  2.  Persecution. 
3.  Death.  II.  A  self-denying  mind  :  and  such  in  us  will  enable  us,  like  Him,  to 
forego — 1.  Present  advantage  for  the  good  of  others.  2.  Popularity  for  the  sake 
of  principle.  3.  Personal  claims,  profit  and  pleasure  for  usefulness.  III.  A 
laborious  mind.  Christ  was  ever  thinking,  planning,  devising  for  others.  IV.  A 
bro.vdly  sympathetic  mind.  Helpfulness  should  be  united  with  tenderness.  V. 
A  patient  mind.  How  He  waited  those  thirty  years ;  how  He  bore  with  the 
ignorance  of  His  disciples,  and  the  malignity  of  His  murderers,  VI.  A  hopeful 
mind.  He  saw  beyond  the  cross.  "  He  saw  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and 
was    satisfied."       {H.    B.    Raicmley.)  I.  What   is    meant    by   the    mind    o» 

Christ  ?  His  view  of  things,  and  to  have  that  mind  is  to  think  and  feel  about 
things  as  He  did.  He  came  down  from  heaven  to  study  matters  on  the  spot,  and 
we  can  never  have  right  views  unless  we  take  His  point  of  view.  But  He  came 
down  not  only  to  have  right  views  but  to  rectify  what  was  wrong.  Hence,  His 
standpoint  was  benevolent.  He  came  not  to  judge  but  to  save  the  world.  II. 
What  was  Christ's  mind  when  He  became  incarnate  ?  1.  His  view  of  man.  This 
is  seen  sufficiently  in  the  fact  that  He  took  man's  nature.  Creation  gives  us  a  high 
estimate  of  manhood.  The  Incarnation  one  far  higher.  God  made  it :  God  wore 
it.  2.  His  view  of  the  soul.  He  thought  it  was  worth  shediiing  His  blood  for. 
How  much  are  we  willing  to  give  to  save  a  soul  ?  We  do  so  little  because  our 
estimate  is  so  low.  3.  His  view  of  sin.  He  deemed  it  an  evil  so  terrible  that  He 
must  give  His  life  to  atone  for  it.  Ought  not  this  to  produce  in  us  a  due  sense  of 
its  enormity.  4.  His  view  of  the  woivd  and  its  glory.  He  treated  the  offer  of 
Satan  with  contempt,  and  told  Pilate  that  His  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world. 
How  contrary  our  own  view.  5.  His  view  of  the  use  of  tiaie.  "  I  mast  work  the 
works  of  Him  that  sent  me,"  &c.  What  a  lesson  to  the  indolent  and  procrastina- 
ting. 6.  His  view  of  the  obligations  of  religion.  In  childhood,  while  obedient  to 
His  parents,  He  recognized  a  higher  authority  than  theirs.  "  Wist  ye  not,''  &o. 
Later  on,  "  If  any  man  love  father  and  mother  mere  than  Me."  7.  His  view  of 
wealth  and  poverty — "  The  foxes  have  holes,"  &c.  8.  His  view  of  God's  Word — 
"  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone."  9.  His  view  in  regard  to  His  enemies — 
*•  Father,  forgive  them,"  is  the  practical  commentary  on  •'  Love  your  enemieB." 


nut.  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  95 

III.  How  ARE  WK  TO  ATTAIN  THIS  MIND  ?  1.  Only  by  union  with  Him  throag}| 
faith.  2.  This  mind  is  to  be  cultiviited  by  a  diligent  study  of  His  precepts  and 
example  with  the  help  of  His  Spirit.  (J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A.)  The  imitablenesa  of 
Chri$t'»  character: — 1.  That  character  as  depicted  by  the  evangelists  is  the  perfec- 
tion of  beauty,  and  the  more  we  contemplate  it  the  stronger  must  be  our  convictions 
of  the  divinity  of  His  religion.  (1)  The  evangelists  were  incapable  of  inventing 
it.  Their  history,  character,  training,  prevented  that ;  and  moreover,  they  present 
it  artlessly,  not  as  advocates,  but  as  witnesses.  (2)  Believing,  then,  as  we  must, 
Christ  as  thus  described  by  friends  and  foes  alike,  perfect  and  without  sin,  the 
religion  He  taught  must  be  Divine.  No  bad  man  would  originate  a  good  cause,  and 
no  good  man  a  bad  one.  2.  Christ's  character  is  exhibited  not  for  advocacy  or 
admiration,  but  for  imitation,  and  the  best  evidence  of  our  interest  in  Him  is  our 
likeness  to  Him.  Without  this  our  religion  is  vain.  The  mind  that  was  in  Him, 
and  is  to  be  in  us,  was  one  of — I.  Eminent  humility.  Man  fell  by  pride,  and  must 
be  raised  by  humility.  1.  Upon  this  Christ  insisted.  His  first  beatitude  was  on 
the  poor  in  spirit.  The  condition  of  diseipleship  is  to  learn  of  Him  who  was 
"  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  2.  Christ  combined  the  highest  displays  of  dignity 
with  unaffected  lowliness.  3.  This  humility  was  uniformly  displayed  in  self-denial, 
forbearance,  forgiveness,  gentleness,  patience,  submission.  II.  Sublime  benevo- 
LEMCB.  This  was  exhibited — 1,  In  the  intense  solicitude  with  which  He  regarded 
the  interests  of  others ;  and  if  we  would  be  conformed  to  the  mind  of  Christ  we 
must  extirpate  selfishness  and  live  for  the  welfare  of  men.  2.  In  the  work  He 
undertook  and  the  sacrifice  He  made.  Some  people  manifest  only  feeling,  but  real 
charity  like  Christ's  is  always  practical.  3.  In  the  spirit  and  temper  which  marked 
all  His  procedure.  It  did  not  confine  itself  to  occasional  great  efforts.  III. 
Supreme  devotion.  If  we  want  to  know  what  the  law  of  God  requires  we  see  it  is 
Christ  whose  meat  was  to  do  God's  will  and  to  finish  His  work.  This  principle — 
1.  Had  all  the  constancy  of  influence  on  His  mind  in  every  transaction.  It  did 
not  appear  in  peculiar  forms  or  on  special  occasions.  2.  It  was  manift  sted  in  the 
spirit  of  prayer.  3.  It  was  marked  by  uniformity,  and  not  by  fits  and  starts. 
Conclusion  :  Various  considerations  to  enforce  the  imitation  of  this  bright  example. 
1.  It  was  the  great  design  of  the  Saviour  to  secure  this  conformity  to  the  virtues 
of  His  life,  even  by  His  mediation.  2.  It  was  His  command  to  do  as  He  had 
done.  3.  "There  is  not  a  doctrine  or  principle  of  our  religion  that  does  not  lead  to 
this  and  present  a  motive.  4.  All  the  tendencies  and  affections  of  every  renewei 
mind  are  in  harmony  with  this  important  claim.  5.  Heaven  will  be  the  perfection 
of  this  conformity.  {Joseph  Fletcher,  D.D.)  The  obedience  of  Christ: — By 
having  the  mind  of  Christ  is  not  meant  doing  exactly  as  He  did,  but  having  the 
disposition  so  that  had  we  been  in  His  circumstances  we  should  have  done  what  He 
did,  and  so  acting  in  our  circumstances  as  He  would  act  were  He  in  them.  Here 
His  obedience  is  set  forth  for  our  imitation.  Notice  that  it  was — I.  Voluntary, 
not  forced  or  reluctant.  "  He  made  Himself,"  "He  took,"  "He  humbled  Himself." 
1.  There  was  no  oomjelling  power  in  heaven,  earth,  or  hell.  2.  The  inspiration  of 
this  obedience  was  love  to  God  and  man.  3,  Human  obedience  to  be  of  any  value 
must  be  the  free  and  joyful  outcome  of  love.  II.  Homiliatiso.  1.  Obedience  is 
easy  when  the  path  is  agreeable  and  the  end  profit  or  renown.  In  Christ's  case  the 
pathway  was  the  ujanger  and  the  wilderness,  &c.,  and  the  goal  the  cross.  2. 
There  was  no  species  of  humiliation,  sin  only  excepted,  which  Christ  did  not 
endure.  3.  This  is  the  first  step  in  true  human  obedience,  for  before  that  can  be 
rendered,  pride,  self-seeking,  self-importance,  must  be  subdued.  4.  This  can  only 
be  effected  by  the  religion  of  Jesus.  II.  Pekseveking — "unto death."  1.  The  last 
term  of  our  Lord's  obedience  was  the  hardest  and  worst.  His  other  trials,  heavy 
enough,  were  only  preparatory.  Our  obedience  will  be  worthless  unless  we  endure 
to  the  end.  "  Forasmuch  as  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us,  arm  yourselves  with  the 
same  miiid."  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  Christian  tunper : — I.  Humility.  1. 
This  is  important  because  it  is  the  particular  grace  here  inculcated,  and  is  the  root 
of  all  other  graces.  2.  Pride  is  natural  to  man  and  must  be  repressed  in  the  believer 
by  three  considerations.  (1)  What  he  was — a  sinner,  enemy  of  God,  heir  of  hell,  &c. 
(2)  What  he  is — a  pardoned  sinner,  a  child  of  God,  but  still  imperfect,  and  with 
fiuch  weakness  that  he  may  well  be  humble  (1  Tim.  i.  15).  (8)  What  he  shall  be — 
"like  Christ;"  what  cause  for  humble  gratitude.  II.  Piety.  1.  This  was  emi- 
nently  seen  in  Christ.  2.  The  natural  man  is  ungodly.  3.  The  spirit  of  piety 
will  render  those  acts  of  religion  natural  and  pleasant  which  are  intolerably 
bardensome  to  the  unconverted.     III.  Spirituality  (John  iii.  6).     1.  We  deriv* 


9«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

our  fleshly  nature  from  our  first  parents.  Natural  men  mind  earthly  things,  while 
the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are  foolishness  unto  them.  2.  The  believer,  born 
from  above,  is  spiritual,  and  minds  heavenly  things.  3.  This  constitutes  tht 
difference  between  the  two,  and  determines  the  destiny  of  each  (Rom,  viiL  6).  IV. 
Contentment  (chap.  iv.  11-13).  This  is — 1.  Generated  by  Divine  grace.  2. 
Sustained  by  the  Divine  promises.  V.  Meekness  (Matt.  v.  5  ;  2  Cor.  x.  1).  This 
meekness  is  not  the  effect  of  constitution  or  the  calculation  of  self-interest ;  it  is 
the  gift  of  God  working  on  the  lines  of  Christ's  example.  VI.  Mebct  (Heb.  v.  2  ; 
Matt.  V.  7 ;  Eom.  ix.  23 ;  Col.  iii.  12).  1.  To  the  souls  of  men.  2.  To  their 
bodies.  VII.  Sinoeritt.  This  is  the  soul  of  all  religion  (2  Cor.  i.  12  ;  John  i.  48). 
Conclusion :  1.  See  how  excellent  is  the  religion  of  Jesus.  2.  Learn  the  necessity 
of  something  more  than  morality.  3.  How  vain  the  profession  of  the  gospel  with- 
out its  temper.  4.  How  far  we  come  short  of  this  example.  (G.  Burder.)  The 
problem  of  the  age  (Prov.  xxiii.  17  in  connection  with  text)  : — Now,  while 
Solomon  lays  down  the  broad  general  principles  concerning  the  prime  importance 
of  one's  theory  of  things,  Paul,  in  this  passage,  gives  a  clear  and  terse  expression 
to  the  Christian  theory  of  human  life,  and  urges  its  acceptance  with  the  most 
intense  earnestness — "  Have  this  mind,"  &c.  Christ  Himself  stands  out  as  the 
embodiment  of  the  Christian  theory.  I  propose  to  show  that  this  theory  is 
unique  and  contrary  to  the  popular  view  of  this  age  in — I.  Its  msTHon  op  esti- 
mating THE  VALUE  OF  HAN  IN  TEis  WORLD.  1.  It  estimates  him  not  by  what  is  on 
him  or  around  him  or  in  his  possession,  but  by  what  is  in  him.  Be  such  in  soul  as 
Christ  was.  2.  I  seriously  question  whether  Christ,  where  He  to  appear  as  of  old 
among  men,  would  find  many  who  would  be  willing  to  acknowlei^e  themselves  to 
be  of  His  class  In  society.  Would  He  have  the  shadow  of  a  title  to  respectability 
in  what  the  world  is  pleased  to  call  the  "  best  society."  3.  It  is  hard  to  gain  any 
adequate  conception  of  how  belittling  and  degrading  such  modern  views  are.  But 
whether  we  are  aware  of  it  or  not,  society  is  suffering  the  disastrous  consequences 
of  this  lowering  of  the  estimate  of  character.  We  are  coveting  the  same  things 
that  made  wreck  of  the  old  nations,  and  forgetting  the  thing  that  has  distinguished 
the  Christian  from  them.  The  only  possible  remedy  is  to  be  found  in  making 
Christ's  view  our  own,  and  shaping  social  life  and  intercourse  according  to  that. 
"  Have  this  mind  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus."  II.  The  Christian  theory 
of  life  is  unique,  and  contrary  to  the  popular  theory  of  this  age  in  the  supreme  bnd 
THAT  IT  proposes  FOR  HUMAN  CONDUCT.  That  end  is  absolute  righteousness  in  con- 
formity to  the  will  of  God.  There  is  no  escaping  the  fact  that  Christ  exalted 
righteousness  as  the  governing  principle  of  the  universe.  Now  there  are  two 
radically  variant  views  concerning  the  supreme  end  of  human  conduct — that  which 
finds  it  in  God,  and  that  which  finds  it  in  man.  The  latter  is  the  outcome  of  our 
depraved  nature.  It  may  be  traced  along  the  line  of  heathen  and  materialistio 
thought  from  Epicurus  to  Herbert  Spencer  and  Paul  Janet.  In  its  grosser  form  it 
makes  the  quest  for  happiness  the  supreme  thing  for  man.  Its  positive  rule  is, 
"Enjoy  yourself;"  its  negative,  "Don't  get  hurt."  You  cannot  make  men  of 
breadth  and  stature  on  that  basis.  The  view  dwarfs  and  deadens  humanity.  The 
antagonistic  view  of  Christianity  finds  the  supreme  end  of  human  conduct  and 
activity  in  connection  with  God,  Virtue  is  righteousness,  conformity  to  the  law  of 
the  moral  Governor.  And  yet,  is  it  not  true  that,  as  we  throw  away  Christ's 
standard  of  manhood — character — we  also  cast  aside  His  theory  of  the  supreme 
rule  of  human  conduct  ?  Nay,  does  not  the  fact  that  we  have  repudiated  that  rule 
account  for  our  present  view  of  character  ?  Does  not  the  average  man  oftener  ask 
the  question.  Will  this  make  me  comfortable  ?  Will  this  secure  my  happiness  f  or. 
Will  this  increase  my  fortune?  or.  Will  this  enlarge  my  knowledge  or  culture?  than 
the  question.  Is  this  right  ?  It  is  this  selfish,  so-called  morality  that  has  brought 
the  degradation  of  character,  the  general  corruption.  III.  The  Christian  theory  is 
unique  and  contrary  to  the  popular  theory  in  the  law  which  rr  proposes  fob  tbm 
attainment  of  the  highest  success  in  human  life — the  law  of  self-sacrifice.  Man 
ifl  born  into  the  world  the  most  helpless  of  animals,  and,  what  is  more,  the  most 
selfish  of  all  animals.  The  problem  of  human  life,  for  the  parent,  human  and 
divine,  is  how  to  develop  the  generous  manhood  and  womanhood  out  of  this 
intensest  of  all  animalism.  Just  here  it  is  that  man  is  most  fearfully  made.  He 
can  only  gain  by  renouncing.  He  seeks  for  himself  and  his  own  selfish  aims  only, 
at  the  peril  of  missing  all.  The  law  of  the  gospel  is,  '*  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of 
God  and  His  righteousness,"  &c.  Seek  other  things  first,  and  you  lose  them  all, 
"  He  that  loseth  his  life  shall  find  it,"  &o.     If  the  wretched  and  unsuccessful  man 


CHAP,  u.]  PHIUPPIANS. 


will  look  into  his  heart  ke  will  find  that  he  is  breaking  this  great  law  of  life,  and 
is  suffering  for  his  breach  of  it.  He  is  making  too  much  of  self,  possessions, 
Buccess,  and  is  thereby  forfeiting  the  very  things  he  desires  most.  The  human 
disaj'pointment  and  unrest  will  continue  with  the  resultant  envy  and  strife  until 
Christ's  law  of  self-sacrifice  is  accepted.  With  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus, 
we  shall  find  the  true  solution  of  the  dark  problem  that  has  led  so  many  into 
pessimism.  IV.  The  Christian  theory  is  unique  in  the  kind  of  lifb  that  it  pro- 
poses  TO   MAN   fob   the   SATISFACTION   OF   HIS   ACTIVE   NATURE  I    a  life   deVOted   tO    th« 

glory  of  God  in  redemption.  This  was  the  supreme  thing  in  the  life  of  Christ. 
For  this  He  obeyed,  suffered,  and  died.  On  the  ground  of  this  God  has  highly 
€  salted  Him.  And  so  in  the  gospel  view,  the  work  for  which  man  is  in  the  world. 
We  have  had  our  popular  theories  of  moral  reform  without  Christ ;  but  if  anything 
has  been  demonstrated  by  human  history,  the  only  universal  and  effective  method 
of  such  reform  is  that  which  starts  out  from  Christ  and  His  gospel.  When,  and 
only  when,  you  make  the  drunkard  a  real  Christian,  you  make  sure  that  he  will  be 
a  temperate  man.  We  have  had  our  popular  theories  of  education  without  Christ, 
but  nothing  now  seems  more  certain  than  that  they  practically  end  in  corruption 
and  crime.  We  devote  our  powers  with  tremendous  energy  to  the  production  and 
acquisition  of  wealth  and  the  advancement  of  material  oivilization,  with  the 
inevitable  result  of  overproduction  and  periodical  depression,  in  which  much  of 
the  fancied  gain  disappears.  If  one-half  the  energy  were  expended  in  the  higher 
line  of  gospel  effort  we  might  have  steady  increase  of  solid  wealth  with  permanent 
prosperity,  and  all  this  in  a  world  of  constantly  increasing  purity  and  peace. 
Living  on  such  principles  our  souls  might  grow  as  rapidly  as  our  fortunes,  instead  of 
being  blighted  and  dwarfed  by  covetousness.  (Pre$.  D.  S.  Gregory.)  Pauls  method 
of  exhortation : — Just  as  some  orator,  skilfully  addressing  a  company  of  soldiers  on 
the  eve  of  battle,  begins  with  admonition  and  ends  with  a  picture;  just  aa  he 
would  appeal  to  their  manhood,  their  consistency,  their  hononr,  and  their  ooarage, 
as  he  would  play  upon  their  fear  of  disgrace  and  their  contempt  of  poltroonery ;  just 
as  he  would  follow  up  each  motive  with  another  and  a  more  elevated  one,  until,  at 
the  last,  he  would  invoke  their  patriotism  and  their  love  for  their  leader,  alike  and 
together,  by  unfurling  the  national  ensign  and  showing  them  how  he  had  caused  to 
be  painted  across  the  folds  the  likeness  of  the  face  they  knew;  so  here  the  apostle 
seeks  to  arouse  Christian  enthusiasm  by  quickly  exhibiting  the  very  image  of  the 
Captain  of  our  salvation,  and  bidding  us  follow  Him  alone.  {C.  S.  Eobimon,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-10.  Who  being  In  the  form  of  GoA.— The  three  estates :— The  apostle 
evidently  points  out  the  three  diilerent  conditions  of  Christ.  His  state  of — 
1.  Dignity,  2.  Humility.  3.  Glory.  These  three  are  essential  to  the  argument, 
for  take  away  any  of  them  and  the  example  he  proposes  is  lost.  I.  If  you  remote 
THE  state  of  Christ's  natur-vl  dionitt  the  second  state  will  no  longer  be  that 
OF  humilution,  nor  Christ  any  longer  an  example  of  humility.  II.  It  is  implied 
that  He  was  in  possession  of  whatever  belonged  to  Kis  state  of  dionitt  befobb 
He  underwent  anything  that  belonged  to  His  state  of  humiliation.  He  was 
in  the  form  of  God,  before  He  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men.  III.  It  is  implied 
that  He  underwent  whatever  belonged  to  His  state  of  humiliation  before  He 
ENJOYED  anything  THAT  BELONGED  TO  His  STATE  OF  EXALTATION;  bccanse  His  exal- 
tation was  the  effect  and  reward  of  His  humility,  and  being  purchased  and  obtained 
by  His  humility  could  not  be  antecedent  to  it.  From  whence  it  follows,  that  the 
form  of  God,  being  the  dignity  He  possessed  before  His  humiliation,  does  not 
belong  to  Him  in  virtue  of  anything  He  did  or  suffered,  nor  is  any  part  of  that 
glory  to  which  He  was  exalted  after  or  on  account  of  His  sufferings.  To  maintain 
otherwise  is  to  confound  the  distinct  states  of  glory  which  belong  to  Christ :  the 
glory  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was,  and  the  glory  which  He 
received  from  the  Father  at  the  redemption  :  one  the  glory  of  nature,  the  other  the 
glory  of  office ;  one  the  glory  of  the  eternal  Logos,  the  other  the  glory  of  the  Son 
of  Man.  These  are  carefuUy  distinguished  elsewhere.  1.  We  find  the  original 
glory  founded  upon  creation  (Col.  i.  15-17),  and  in  the  next  verse  the  apostle 
mentions  a  honour  belonging  to  Christ's  exaltation  founded  on  His  repurrection. 
Lb  Lord  of  all,  He  is  styled  the  firstborn  of  every  creature  ;  as  Head  of  the  Church, 
the  firstborn  from  the  dead.  2.  To  raise  the  dead  is  a  power  equivalent  to  creation, 
and  therefore  St.  John  tells  us,  "  The  hour  is  coming,"  &c.  (chap.  v.  25).  In  ver,  27, 
however,  speaking  of  His  being  Judge  of  the  world  which  belongs  to  Him  in  virtaa 
of  Bedemption,  lies  one  of  the  glories  of  His  exaltation.    He  sayi,  "  The  Father," 

7 


9«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

Ao.  3.  In  Heb.  i.  1-2  the  apostle  describes  the  dignity  of  the  Person  sent  for  ouf 
redemption,  and  evidently  describes  Christ's  origiual  glory.  Then  follows,  "  When 
He  had  purged  our  sins,"  &o.,  which  speaks  of  His  state  of  exaltation  which  He 
received  after  His  sufferings.  And  in  chap.  ii.  9,  it  is  said  that  Jesus  was  made  a  little 
lower  than  the  angels,  but  here,  **  better."  If  He  was  made  lower  in  order  to  redeem 
us,  it  seems  to  imply  that  He  was  really,  and  by  nature,  higher.  We  may  expound 
Hebrews  by  Philippians.  For  when  He,  who  was  in  the  form  of  God,  made  Him- 
Belf  of  no  reputation,  He  was  made  lower  than  the  angels ;  but  when,  after  Hia 
suffering  death.  He  was  exalted  by  God  then  He  was  made  so  much  better  than 
the  angels,  as  He  had  by  inheritance  a  more  excellent  name  than  they  (Cf.  ver. 
9-10).  (r.  Sherlock,  D.D.)  The  form  of  God  :— To  be  in  the  form  of  God  signifies 
not  only  to  be  King,  to  possess  majesty  and  power,  but  also  to  have  the  insignia  of 
royalty,  its  courtly  train  and  equipage.  Thus  formerly  among  the  Romans  w© 
might  call  the  form  of  a  consul,  the  eqaipage  and  pomp  with  which  the  laws  and 
customs  of  that  people  invested  those  who  exercised  the  ofiSce ;  the  purple,  the 
ivory  chair,  the  twelve  lictors  with  their  fasces  and  rods,  and  such-like.  When, 
then,  the  apostle  here  says  that  the  Lord,  before  taking  our  nature  upon  Him,  waa 
in  the  form  of  God,  he  does  not  merely  intend  that  He  was  God  in  Himself,  and 
that  He  had  the  true  nature  of  the  divinity ;  but,  further  still,  that  He  possesed  the 
glory  and  enjoyed  all  the  dignity,  majesty,  and  grandeur  due  to  so  high  a  name. 
This  is  precisely  what  our  Lord  means  in  St.  John  by  the  glory  which  He  says  He 
had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was.     (J.  Dailli.) 

Ver.  7.  But  made  Himself  of  no  reputation. — The  humiliation  of  Chritt: — L 
How  FAB  Chbist  was  LESSENED.  1.  His  Godhead  waa  obscured  by  the  interposing 
veil  of  our  flesh.  He  emptied  Himself  of  the  Divine  glory,  not  by  ceasing  to  be 
what  He  was,  but  by  assuming  something  He  was  not  before.  2.  His  dignity  waa 
lessened.  It  was  a  condescension  of  God  to  take  notice  of  man's  misery  (Psa. 
cxiii.  6),  mnch  more  to  take  part  in  it.  Three  steps  in  this  condescension  may  be 
noted.  (1)  He  who  thought  it  no  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God  is  made  less  than 
God  (John  xiv.  28),  as  Mediator.  (2)  He  was  not  only  lesser  than  God,  but  lesser 
than  the  angels  (Heb.  ii.  7).  (3)  In  the  human  nature  He  was  depressed  beyond 
the  ordinary  condition  of  man  (Psa.  xxii.  6 ;  Isa.  liii.  3 ;  Mark  ix.  12).  Born  of  a  poor 
virgin,  Hia  eradle  a  manger,  &c.,  lived  a  life  of  poverty,  &c.  II.  This  was  Hre 
OWN  voLnNTART  ACT.  This  is  in  no  way  inconsistent  with  the  action  of  the  Father 
in  sending  Him.  1.  What  He  was  to  do  and  undergo  was  proposed  to  Him  and 
willingly  accepted  (Heb.  x.  6-7;  Isa.  vii.  5;  Prov.  viii.  31),  2.  The  Scripture 
assigneth  this  work  to  the  love  and  condescension  of  Christ  Himself  as  the  imme- 
diate cause  of  His  performance  of  it  (Gal.  ii.  20  ;  Eph.  v.  25-26 ;  Bev.  i.  5-6 ; 
2  Cor.  viii.  9).  III.  This  wobk  was  fob  oub  bakes.  1.  As  our  Mediator.  (1) 
He  emptied  Himself  that  we  might  be  filled  with  all  grace.  (2)  He  was  bom  of  a 
woman  that  we  might  be  born  of  God  (Gal.  iv.  4-5).  (3)  He  was  made  a  curse  that 
we  might  have  a  blessing  (Gal.  iii.  13-14).  (4)  He  was  made  poor  for  us  that  by  Hia 
poverty  we  might  be  made  rich  (2  Cor.  viii.  9).  (5)  There  are  Bome  things  in  the 
mediation  of  Christ  which  belong  to  ministry  and  others  to  authority.  Those 
which  belong  to  ministry  as  to  be  in  servant's  form,  and  to  die ;  he  must  be  a  man 
for  that.  Those  which  belong  to  authority  as  to  bring  us  to  God  convey  to  us  the 
spirit ;  and  He  mast  be  God  for  that.  2.  As  our  pattern  (ver.  5).  (1)  The  power 
of  Christ's  example  is  general,  (a)  It  ia  perfect,  for  His  life  is  religion  exempUfied, 
a  visible  commentary  on  God's  Word,  (b)  Engaging.  Christ's  submission  to  a 
duty  should  make  it  engaging  to  us  (John  xiii.  14 ;  1  John  ii.  6).  Alexander  the 
Great  achieved  most  of  his  exploits  by  his  example.  When  hard  beset,  he  would 
make  the  first  in  every  action,  (c)  Effectual  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  {d)  Encouraging 
(Heb.  ii.  18;  iv.  15).  (e)  An  armour  of  proof  against  all  temptations  (ver.  5;  1 
Pet.  iv.  i).  (2)  What  He  teacheth  ua  by  making  Himself  of  no  reputation,  (a) 
Patience  under  indignities  undergone  for  God's  sake  (1  Pet.  ii.  21  ;  Heb.  xii.  2). 
Consider  if  Christ  had  been  unwilling  to  suffer  for  us  what  had  been  our  condition 
to  all  eternity  I  We  cannot  lose  so  much  for  Him  as  He  hath  for  us  (2  Cor,  viii.  9). 
We  are  gainers  by  Him  if  we  love  the  world  for  His  sake  (Matt.  x.  29-30.)  (b) 
Humility.  We  are  far  inferior  to  Christ,  and  shall  we  stand  so  much  on  our  repu. 
tation  (Matt.  xi.  29,  xx.  28  ;  John  xiii.  3).  (c)  More  exact  obedience  (ver.  8  ;  Heb. 
V.  8-9).  (d)  Self-denial  (Rom.  xv.  3 ;  John  xii,  27-28;  chap.  i.  20).  (e)  Contempt  of 
the  world  and  the  glory  thereof.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Took  upon  Him  the  form  of 
%  nervant. — The  mystery  of  Chritt  in  the  form  of  a  tervant : — Christ  is  expressly 


n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  99 

called  God's  servant  (Isa.  xlii.  1  ;  cf.  Matt.  xii.  18),  and  ••  bondservant "  (Psa.  il.  6  ; 
cf.  Exod.  xxi,  6).  I.  To  whom  He  became  a  servant.  To  man's  great  Lord  and 
Master  (Isa.  xlix.  3).  It  was  with  His  Father  He  entered  into  the  contract  of 
service  (Psa.  xl.  6).  It  was  Hia  Father's  business  He  was  employed  in  (Luke  ii.  49 ; 
John  ii.  4).  II.  For  whom  He  became  a  servant.  For  and  instead  of  those  who 
were  bound  to  service,  but  utterly  unable  for  it.  III.  Thb  necessity  of  His 
becoming  a  servant  for  us  for  our  salvation.  1.  Mankind  were  constituted  God's 
hired  servants  by  the  first  covenant,  viz.,  of  works,  and  extend  to  that  in  their 
hebd  the  first  Adam.  Their  work  was  perfect  obedience  to  the  holy  law ;  their 
hire  was  life  (Rom.  x.  1).  The  penalty  of  breaking  away  from  their  Master  was 
perpetual  bondage  under  the  curse  (Gal.  iii.  10).  2,  They  never  made  out  their 
service.  Through  the  solicitation  of  the  great  runaway  servant,  the  devil,  they 
violated  the  covenant,  and  broke  away  from  their  Master.  So  they  lost  all  plea  for 
the  hire,  and  justly  became  bondmen  under  the  curse  of  the  broken  covenant  of 
works  (Gal.  iv.  24).  Their  falling  under  thiscnrse  inferred  the  loss  of  their  liberty, 
and  constituted  them  bondmen  (Gen.  ix.  25  ;  Josh.  ix.  23).  3.  By  the  breaking  of 
that  covenant  they  lost  all  their  ability  for  their  service,  and  were  left  without 
strength  (Rom.  v.  6).  They  had  no  suffering  strength  to  bear  their  punishment, 
and  80  must  have  perished  under  it.  They  had  no  working  strength,  for  their 
work-arm,  once  sufficient,  was  broken ;  nay,  they  had  neither  hand  nor  heart  for 
their  work  again  (Rom.  viii.  7  ;  Josh.  xxiv.  19).  4.  Howbeit  the  punishment  due 
to  them  behoved  to  be  borne,  and  the  service  to  be  mailo  out  according  to  the 
original  contract,  the  covenant  of  works  ;  or  else  they  could  never  have  life  and 
salvation  (Gen.  ii.  7  ;  Isa.  xlii.  21 ;  Gen.  xxviii.  15).  5.  Since  all  this  behoved  to 
be  done,  and  they  could  not  do  it,  it  was  necessary  for  their  life  and  salvation  that 
Christ  should  come  under  the  curse  for  them,  accept  their  service,  and  fully  serve 
it  out  for  them  (Gal.  iii.  3-5,  13).  IV.  The  contbact  of  the  service — the  covenant 
of  grace  made  between  the  Father  and  Christ.  Heaven's  device  in  this  case  was 
that  Christ  should  be  the  worker  for  life  and  salvation  to  poor  sinners  ;  and  that 
they  should  get  hfe  and  salvation,  through  Him,  by  His  grace,  and  so  work  from 
life  and  salvation  received,  as  sons  entitled  to  the  inheritance  autecedently  to  all 
their  working  (Rom.  vi.  23;  iv.  4,  5).  Here  consider — (1)  The  contract  was  entered 
into  from  eternity  (Tit.  L  2).  (2)  Its  design  was — (a)  To  illustrate  the  Divine 
glory  much  darkened  by  the  hired  servants  of  God's  own  house  by  sin  (Isa.  xlix.  3). 
(6)  To  save  lost  sinners  (Isa.  xlix.  6).  (3)  The  service  which  in  this  contract  He 
undertook  to  perform  was  to  fulfil  the  whole  law  for  them  (Heb.  x.  9).  (4)  The 
covenanted  reward  of  the  service  was  a  glorious  exaltation  to  Himself,  and  eternal 
life  for  them  (ver.  9 ;  Tit.  i.  2).  V.  The  fulfilunq  of  the  service  according  to 
the  contract.  It  was  a  hard  service,  but  He  went  through  with  it  (ver.  8).  1,  He 
entered  into  this  service  by  His  being  born  holy  for  us,  and  remained  so  to  the  end. 
Thus  He  answered  the  demand  which  the  law  had  upon  them  for  original  holiness 
as  a  condition  of  life  (Isa.  ix.  6  ;  Luke  i.  35).  2.  He  went  on  in  His  service  in  the 
righteousness  of  His  life,  being  obedient  unto  death  (ver.  8 ;  John  xvi.  4).  3. 
Having  suffered  all  His  life  long,  He  completed  and  finished  His  service  in  His  death 
and  burial ;  thus  answering  for  them  the  law's  demand  of  satisfaction  tor  sin  (John 
xix.  30).  The  term  of  His  continuance  in  this  state  of  servitude  was,  according  to 
the  covenant,  till  death,  but  no  longer  (John  ix.  4 ;  Job  iii.  19 ;  Rom.  iv.  9).  VI. 
Whkrefore  He  bnoaqed  in  this  service.  1.  Love  to  God  and  man  (Exod.  xxi.  6). 
i.  He  took  it  on  Him  for  releasing  us  from  that  state  of  bondage  into  which  our 
lather  Adam,  by  his  mismanagement,  had  brought  all  mankind.  What  Judah  offered 
to  do  in  the  case  of  Benjamin  (Gen.  xliv.  33),  Christ  really  performed  in  the  case 
of  His  brethren.  8.  To  bring  them  into  a  state  of  adoption  in  the  family  of  God. 
He  became  a  bondservant  that  they  might  become  sons  and  daughters  (Gal.  iv.  1-5). 
YII.  The  use.  1.  To  all  strangers  to  Jesus  Christ :  ye  are  bondmen  under  the 
law,  and  so — (1)  It  lies  upon  you  to  fulfil  the  service  to  which  man  was  bound  by 
the  covenant  of  works,  viz.,  perfect  obedience  under  the  pain  of  the  curse  (Rom. 
iii.  19).  As  you  are  unable  for  this  you  can  never  be  saved  while  out  of  Christ.  2. 
It  lies  upon  you  to  bear  the  punishment  due  to  you  for  breaking  away  from  youi 
Lord  and  Master  (Gen.  ii.  17).  2.  Let  all  be  exhorted  to  flee  to  Christ,  and  by 
faith  embrace  Him,  and  the  service  performed  by  Him  as  their  only  plea  for  life 
and  salvation.  Surely  it  will  be  glad  tidings  to  the  poor  broken-hearted  sinner, 
who  sees  that  he  cannot  serve  the  Lord  according  to  the  demand  of  the  law,  to 
know  that  there  is  a  service  performed  by  the  Mediator  for  him  which  is  perfect  in 
the  eye  of  the  law,  and  that  a  way  of  reconciliation  is  opened.    VIII.  Improvement. 


100  tBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {cbat.  o, 

1.  II  you  haye  any  part  or  lot  in  this  matter  ol  Christ's  service,  let  it  be  the  busi- 
ness of  your  life  to  serve  the  Lord  Christ.  Consider — (1)  He  was  in  the  form  of 
God  who  served  for  yon,  and  delivered  you  from  the  worst  of  masters.  (2)  He  has 
no  need  of  your  service,  but  ye  were  in  absolute  need  of  His  service  for  you.  (3) 
The  service  He  rendered  you  was  hard  service  ;  the  yoke  He  puts  upon  yon  is  easy, 
and  the  burden  light.  (4)  Christ  fulfilled  all  righteousness  for  you  to  the  end  that 
you  might  serve  Him  in  holiness  and  righteousness.  (5)  Christ  served  you  un- 
grudgingly, do  not  grudge  what  you  give  or  do  for  Him.  (6)  As  Christ  was  highly 
exalted  after  His  service  so  will  you  be  after  yours.  Be  faithful  therefore.  2.  Re- 
deemed by  Christ.  (1)  In  what  spirit  are  we  to  serve  Him.  (a)  Not  as  slaves,  but 
as  children  (Gal.  It.  7).  This  is  the  only  acceptable  service.  (&)  Out  of  love  for 
Him  (Heb.  vi.  10 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14 ;  2  Tim.  i.  7).  (c)  Universally  (Col.  iv.  12).  (d) 
Constantly  (Psa.  cxix.  112).  (2)  How  are  we  to  serve  Him.  (a)  By  being  of  a 
loving  disposition  towards  our  brethren.  (6)  By  doinj^  good  as  we  have  opportunity 
(Gal.  vi.  10).  (c)  Put  on  bowels  of  mercies  towards  those  who  are  in  distress  (Col. 
iii.  12).  (d)  Show  a  strict  regard  for  justice  in  your  dealings  with  men  as  Christ 
did  in  His  deahngs  towards  God  for  you.  (e)  Be  humble  (John  xiii.  14-15).  (T. 
Boston,  D.D.)  Christ  a  slave  : — The  word  "  servant"  does  not  convey  to  us  the 
degree  of  degradation  which  it  meant  centuries  ago.  For  service  has  been  dignified 
since  Christ  was  a  servant.  We  know  nothing  now  more  honourable  than  Christian 
service.  But  He  first  taught  as  to  call  our  servants  "friends."  I.  Look  at  bomb 
or  THE  LAWS  BESPECTiNQ  JEWISH  SLAVES  60  as  to  estimate  the  humiliation  of  Jesus ; 
and  these  were  mild  compared  with  those  that  obtained  among  the  Bomans.  1. 
No  slave  could  have  any  right  as  a  citizen.  If  injured  he  had  no  redress.  As  for 
our  Saviour,  when  subjected  to  the  most  outrageous  wrong,  no  arm  of  the  law  was 
outstretched  for  BUs  defence.  "  His  judgment  was  taken  away."  2.  The  slave 
coold  hold  no  property.  The  Servant  of  servants  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head  ; 
no  money  to  pay  His  taxes ;  no  clothes  but  such  as  privileged  hands  had  made  for 
Him.  S.  The  slave,  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  was  a  mere  chattel,  which  could  be 
bought  and  sold  ;  for  the  base  sum  of  less  than  three  pounds  Judas  sold  his  Lord. 
4.  At  death  the  slave  might  be  scourged  and  tortured  as  none  other  might,  and  the 
bitterest  and  vilest  death  was  assigned  to  Him.  See  Jesus  under  the  lash  and  on 
the  cross  the  slave.  5.  The  law  said  the  slave  was  nothing  less  than  a  dead  man  ; 
Christ  was  "  a  worm  and  no  man."  II.  As  a  slave  Chbist  had  two  duties  to 
EXECDTE.  1.  To  His  Father.  (1)  God  had  made  the  power  of  Jesus  to  do  His 
work  depend  on  His  faithfulnesss.  "  By  His  knowledge  shall  my  righteous  servant 
justify  many."  Had  He  not  been  righteous  as  a  servant,  He  could  not  have  justi- 
fied the  sinner.  (2)  But  how  perfect  was  His  course  of  servitude,  how  continuous, 
laborious,  devoted  (Psa.  xl. ;  cf .  Heb.  x).  The  Jewish  slave  wishing,  for  the  love  he 
bare  his  master,  to  continue  in  his  service,  had  his  ear  fastened  for  a  while  with  an 
awl  to  his  master's  door  in  token  of  his  abiding  always  in  his  service.  So  Christ,  in 
the  language  of  the  slave,  loves  to  say,  "  Mine  ears  hast  Thou  opened,"  and  adds  the 
reason,  "  I  delight,"  &o.  2.  To  His  people.  His  time  while  He  lived  on  earth  was 
not  His  own  but  theirs.  He  was  at  every  one's  calL  His  day  was  all  work  for  the 
creature ;  His  night  communion  with  the  Creator.  The  smallest  things  were  not 
beneath  His  attention  (John  xiii.).  HI.  Infebencbs.  1.  Of  all  the  names  a 
Christian  can  wear  there  is  not  one  which  places  him  so  near  his  Master  as  this — a 
servant  of  God.  St.  Paul  put  it  above  his  apostleship.  2.  To  own  that  title  you 
must  not  regard  it  as  a  figure  of  speech.  (1)  Your  time  is  not  your  own.  (2)  Your 
possessions — money,  talents,  power.  (3)  Be  clothed  therefore  with  humility,  and 
gird  yourself  with  energy.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Made  In  the  likeness  of  men. — 
Christ  a  man : — 1.  As  soon  as  the  Saviour  had  resolved  to  take  upon  Him  the  form 
of  a  servant,  it  followed  that  He  should  be  "  made  in  the  likeness  of  men."  Fallen 
man  is  the  most  servile  thing  in  God's  universe — a  bond-slave  of  Satan,  "  Sold 
under  sin  " — the  servant  of  uncleanness.  His  passions  are  his  masters,  his  fear* 
his  chains,  death  his  cruel  tyrant.  2.  We  must  be  careful  not  to  suffer  our  con- 
viction of  the  Deity  of  Christ  to  weaken  our  apprehension  of  His  perfect  manhood. 
For  if  Christ  be  not  absolutely  a  man,  if  His  divinity  come  in,  in  the  least  degree, 
to  qualify  His  humanity,  then  He  practically  ceases  to  be  an  example,  and,  indeed, 
a  substitute.  L  Ix  was  not  the  bodv  of  Christ  onlt  which  was  human  while 
His  soul  was  Divinb,  but  that  soul  and  body  were  equally  in  the  likeness 
OF  MEN.  1.  His  bodily  presence  stood  forth  always  visibly  and  palpably  a  man. 
In  the  likeness  of  the  infant  He  lay  in  the  mauger,  of  the  boy  He  sat  in  the  temple, 
of  the  man  He  walked  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land.    The  labouring  man  haa 


CHAP.  II.]  PHILIPPIANS.  101 

the  privilege  of  resemblance,  for  it  is  not  aniikely  that  He  worked  at  His  father's 
trade.  Rest  and  clothes  and  food  and  warmth  He  needed  like  us.  2.  Let  us  trace 
on  the  likeness  into  His  spiritual  being.  (1)  It  is  a  law  of  the  mind  that  it  grows. 
Jesus  "  grew  in  wisdom."  (2)  That  we  are  conscious  of  joy  and  sorrow.  Once 
Christ  rejoiced  in  Spirit,  and  twice  shed  tears.  (3)  That  we  must  lean  on  some  one, 
our  God  and  our  friend.  So  did  Jesus.  (4)  That  we  should  be  tempted.  He  imitated 
us  in  His  conflict  with  the  prince  of  darkness.  (5)  In  deep  thoughts  he  had  the  coun- 
terpart of  ours,  the  shrinlang  back  of  the  obedient  and  willing  spirit  as  it  recoils 
from  nature's  throes.  (6)  He  was  utterly  blameless ;  yet  He  knew  sin  by  experience,  for 
He  bore  it.  II.  The  manhood  Christ  assumed  is  full  or  the  deepest  comfort 
TO  His  Church.  1.  All  the  nature  of  our  race  was  gathered  and  concentrated  into 
that  one  human  life.  He  stood  forth  as  the  great  representative  man.  2.  Thus  it 
was  that  Christ  went  down  to  His  grave,  and  when  He  rose  and  was  glorified  the 
great  representative  principle  went  on.  He  is  not  the  solitary  conqueror  entered 
into  His  rest ;  but  the  forerunner  and  earnest  of  His  saints.  He  holds  ground  for 
us  till,  in  due  time,  we  shall  come.  3.  And  so  long  as  the  needful  processes  of  the 
preparation  go  on  He  there  lives,  and  intercedes,  and  rules,  and  wears  the  very 
form  in  which  He  suffered.  How  certain,  then.  His  sympathy.  III.  Theeefobh 
bkvbrekoe  manhood.  Respect  a  body  which  has  such  fellowships  ;  be  tender  to 
the  corporeal  wants  of   the  members  of   the  body  of   Christ.      (Ibid.)  The 

humiliation  of  Christ: — I.  In  His  Incarnation.  The  Euler  of  all  brought  to 
the  state  of  a  oreature.  1.  To  the  state  of  an  inferior  creature,  a  man,  not  ar. 
angel.  2.  At  a  time  when  this  nature  was  stained  by  sin.  3.  To  be  scorned  b/ 
men.  4.  Deprived  of  the  joys  of  heaven.  5.  The  offspring  of  a  poor  woman.  II. 
In  His  Life.  1.  Bom  in  a  stable.  2.  Tempted  of  Satan.  3.  Inured  to  poverty. 
4.  Ungratefully  received  by  His  own  and  by  the  world.  III.  In  His  death — that 
of  a  malefactor.  {J.  Flavel.)  The  possibility  of  Christ's  humiliation : — We  have 
no  difficulty  in  conceiving  how  a  man  of  highest  virtue,  and  noblest  birth,  and 
clearest  intelligence,  could  assume  an  outward  garb  which  would  completely  belie 
or  hide  his  real  character.  A  king  need  not  always  wear  the  royal  robes  and  sit  on 
a  throne.  He  may  become  a  shepherd  on  the  hill,  a  sailor  before  the  mast,  a 
servant  of  his  own  servants.  Missionaries — and  in  this  case  the  moral  analogy  ia 
more  perfect — after  learning  the  language  of  a  barbarous  people,  have  gone  among 
(hem,  conforming  to  all  their  habits  as  far  as  they  could,  living  a  dark,  rude  life, 
submitting  to  every  kind  of  trial  and  privation,  in  order  to  a  great  and  beneficent 
end.  Is  it  then  to  be  said,  in  the  ignorance  of  our  pride,  in  the  supercihous  pre- 
sumption of  our  poor  narrow  thought,  that  the  Infinite  One  must  always  be  in 
Divine  state  and  glory,  in  one  manifestation,  in  one  form  of  His  infinite  life,  that 
whatever  transpires  in  the  history  of  the  world  or  the  universe.  He  can  do  nothing 
axcept  what  He  has  been  for  ever  doing — speak  no  new  word — make  no  new  reve- 
lation of  Himself?  The  assertion  that  God  cannot  lay  aside  some  of  what  we  may 
call  the  accidents  of  His  being,  and  invest  Himself  in  another  way,  is  almost  to 
assert  that  He  is  not  God  at  all.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  "Emptied  Himself": — 
All  His  attributes  He  veiled  and  hid ;  His  infinity,  to  abide,  like  other  unborn 
babes,  within  the  virgin's  womb ;  His  eternity,  to  receive  birth  in  time,  younger 
than  His  creatures ;  His  unchangeableness,  to  grow  in  stature,  and  (as  it  would 
seem)  for  His  earthly  form  to  decay,  and  be  worn  by  His  sufferings ;  His  wisdom, 
"for  our  sake  and  among  us  to  be  ignorant,  as  man,"  "  of  that  which,  as  Lord, 
He  knew  ";  His  self-sutficingness,  that  He,  who  had  all  things,  became  as  though 
He  had  nothing.  He  forewent  not  things  without  Him  only  ;  He  forewent  Himself 
He,  the  Creator,  not  only  made  Himself  to  need  the  creatures  which  He  had 
formed,  and  was  without  them — He  was  hungry  and  thirsty,  and  wearied — but  even 
in  the  things  which  He  wrought.  He  depended  not  alone  on  the  Godhead  within 
Him  but  on  the  Father.  His  works  were  not  His  own  works  but  His  Father's. 
He  came  not  to  do  His  own  will,  but  His  Father's.  He  prayed,  and  praying  was 
heard,  though  He  Himself  was  God.  He  was  strengthened  as  man,  by  the  angel, 
whom,  as  God,  He  created.  Again,  how  must  He  have  "  emptied  Himself  "  of  His 
ijnajesty,  who,  when,  with  a  word,  He  could  have  destroyed  the  ungodly,  and  "  with 
the  breath  of  His  mouth  "  have  "  slain  the  wicked,"  was  Himself  sold  into  their 
hands  for  the  price  of  a  bondslave.  He  "  hid  not  His  face  from  shame  and  spit 
ting,"  before  whom  angels  veil  their  faces.  He  "  emptied  Himself  "  of  His  immor- 
tahty,  and  the  immortal  died.  He  became  subject  to  death,  the  penalty  of  sin. 
But  what  seems  yet  more  amazing,  He  was  content  to  veil  even  that,  in  Himself, 
vherein,  so  to  say,  God  is  most  God,  the  glory  of  the  divinity,  His  holy  being. 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tt, 

whereby  He  hateth  all  iniquity.  He  who  is  "  the  Truth,"  was  contented  to  b« 
called  "  that  deceiver."  He  hid  His  holiness,  so  that  His  apostate  angel  shrank 
not  from  approaching  Him,  to  tempt  Him.  He  veiled  the  very  humility  wherewith 
He  humbled  Himtelf  to  be  obedient,  so  that  Satan  thought  that  He  might  be 
tempted  through  pride.  He  was  content  to  be  thought  able  to  covet  the  creatures 
which  He  had  made,  and,  like  us,  to  prefer  them  to  the  Father  ;  yea,  and  the  very 
lowest  of  the  creatures,  which  even  man  can  despise.  They  called  Him  "  a  glut- 
tonous man,  and  a  wine-bibber."  "We  know,"  say  they,  "that  this  man  is  a 
sinner,"  They  reproached  Him  for  disobedience  to  the  Father,  and  breaking  the 
law  which  He  gave.  So  wholly  was  He  made  like  unto  us  in  all  things,  sin  only 
excepted,  that  man  could  not  discern  that  He,  the  holy  God,  was  not  (shocking  to 
say)  unholy  man,  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Condescension  of  Christ: — During  one 
of  the  campaigns  in  the  American  Civil  "War,  when  the  winter  weather  was  very- 
severe,  some  of  Stonewall  Jackson's  men  having  crawled  out  in  the  morning  from 
their  snow-laden  blankets,  half-frozen,  began  to  curse  him  as  the  cause  of  their 
sufferings.  He  lay  close  by  under  a  tree,  also  snowed  under,  and  heard  all  this : 
but,  without  noticing  it,  presently  crawled  out  too,  and,  shaking  off  the  snow,  made 
some  jocular  remark  to  the  nc \aest  men,  who  had  no  idea  he  had  ridden  up  in  the 
night  and  lain  down  amongst  them  1  The  incident  ran  through  the  army  in  a  few 
hours,  and  reconciled  his  followers  to  all  the  hardships  of  the  expedition,  and  fully 
re-established  his  popularity,  {M,  O.  Mackay.)  The  humanity  of  Christ : — From 
eternity  thei  e  was  the  idea  and  image  of  a  man  in  the  mind  of  God.  That  man 
was  perfect,  Adam  was  created  in  his  innocence  a  type  or  shadow  of  that  man. 
When  Adam  lost  the  likeness,  the  great  design  of  God  was  to  restore  it.  To  this 
end,  Christ,  who  was  always  the  real  original  of  that  man  as  he  lay  in  the  purposes 
of  God,  determined  to  take  our  nature.  From  time  to  time,  in  earnest  of  Hia 
future  purpose.  He  appeared  as  a  man  to  the  Old  Testament  saints.  At  last,  when 
the  appointed  period  arrived,  Christ  "came  after  the  flesh,  born  of  a  woman," 
He  was  not  at  first  that  perfect  man  which  lay  in  the  intention  of  the  Father  before 
all  ages,  but  He  was  like  it,  as  the  shadow  is  to  the  substance  ;  and  He  gradually 
grew  into  it.  By  successive  processes  He  attained  it.  First,  He  was  natural ; 
then,  after  His  resurrection.  He  was  spiritual ;  then,  after  His  ascension.  He  was 
glorious ;  and  now,  still  a  man,  entirely  a  man,  wearing  our  framework,  and  carrying 
our  affections.  He  is  that  very  eternal  man  conceived  in  the  bosom  of  God,  and  of 
which  both  Adam  in  Paradise  and  He  in  Bethlehem  were  made  to  be  the  copy  and 
the  likeness,  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  And  being  found  In  fashion  as  a  man. — 
The  Saviour's  fashion : — I,  The  fashion  in  which  Christ  was  found — that  of  a 
man.  1.  Keal,  not  in  appearance  only.  2,  Perfect,  both  body  and  soul,  with  all 
the  attributes  of  our  humanity.  3.  Sinless.  It  was  needful  for  Him  to  assume 
this  fashion.  (1)  Otherwise  our  sins  could  not  be  atoned  for,  (2)  Nor  could  He 
have  become  the  Head  of  the  Church,  It  is  impossible  to  admire  this  fashion  too 
much.  II.  What  He  endured  in  that  fashion,  1,  He  humbled  Himself  to 
teach  us  the  sin  and  folly  of  pride  and  the  duty  of  humility.  2.  He  became 
obedient  to  teach  us  passive  and  active  obedience  to  God's  will.  (1)  This  obedience 
was  perfect — "to  death."  (2)  Acceptable.  (3)  He  endured  the  cross  to  teach  us 
self-denial.  HI.  The  permanence  of  that  fashion.  Other  fashions  change. 
This  never.  He  wears  the  body  that  will  be  His  through  eternity.  Conclusion  : 
1.  This  is  the  only  fashion  in  which  salvation  can  be  found.  2.  This  is  the  only 
pattern  for  our  holiness.  {J.  Irons.)  Christ  degraded: — 1.  The  expressions 
which  assert  Christ's  incarnation  imply  His  Deity.  Who  would  say  of  any  merely 
human  being  that  he  was  "  found  in  fashion  as  a  man."  2.  Christ  might  have 
been  man  without  humiliation:  e.g.,  had  He  assumed  the  "glorious  body"  He 
now  wears,  3.  The  most  beautiful  feature  about  Christ's  humiliation  was  that  it 
was  never  prominent,  but  always  self-forgetful.  The  grace  of  a  humble  mind  is 
that  it  is  too  humble  to  look  humble.  Our  Lord's  humiliation  may  be  regarded  in 
four  stages.  I.  In  His  incarnation.  How  imperceptible  that  was.  No  parade. 
Never  did  infant  enter  life  with  less  consequence.  II.  In  His  PRE-MiNiSTEBiAi. 
life.  1.  There  was  the  humiliation  of  the  flight  and  exile  into  Egypt.  2.  His 
choice  of  Nazareth  as  a  home,  the  name  of  which  fastened  a  stigma  and  a  prejudice 
upon  Him  all  His  days.  3.  His  life  of  subjection  and  labour.  III.  In  His  pubuo 
MINISTRY.  1.  His  submission  to  baptism.  John  was  struck  with  the  self-abase- 
ment  of  this  act.  Ordinances,  however  precious,  are  humbling  because  the  badge 
of  a  fallen  state.  2.  His  temptation.  There  are  things  we  come  in  contact  with- 
which,  though  not  hurtful,  leave  a  feeling  of  debasement.    3.  His  poverty  and 


CHAP,  a,]  PHILIPPIANS.  108 

privation.  4.  His  intercourse  with  the  coarse  and  the  Binful.  4.  Hia  subjection 
to  the  cavil  of  the  unbeliever,  and  the  jest  of  the  profane.  IV.  In  His  death.  1.  The 
circumstances  of  His  arrest  and  trial.  2.  The  character  of  His  punishment.  3.  His 
dissolution.  It  was  humiliation  indeed  for  God  to  become  man  ;  much  more,  being 
man,  to  die.  {J.  Vaughan,  M^.)  The  humiliation  of  Christ : — In  the  text  we  have — 
1.  The  depth  of  Christ's  humiliation.  (1)  Specified — "  death."  (2)  Aggravated— 
"  death  of  the  cross."  2.  The  manner  thereof,  (1|  Voluntary — '*  humbled  Himself." 
(2)  "  Obedient."  The  Scripture  marks  the  special  stages  of  His  humiliation.  1. 
He  stooped  to  become  a  man.  Had  Christ  been  made  an  angel  it  had  been  infinitely 
below  Himself.  2.  He  condescended  to  put  His  neck  under  the  yoke  of  the  law. 
(Gal.  iv.  4).  A  creature  is  indispensably  subjected  to  the  law  of  its  Maker,  by 
virtue  of  its  creatureship  and  dependence,  and  is  involved  in  no  humiliation.  But 
the  Son  of  God  is  the  Law  Maker.  He  submitted  to  the  ceremonial  law  in  ffis 
circumcision,  and  to  the  moral  law  in  His  life ;  all  which  subjection  was  not  a  debt 
to  God,  but  a  voluntary  subscription.  "  The  law  is  not  made,"  in  some  sense, 
"  for  a  righteous  man  "  (1  Tim.  i.  9),  but  is  not  made  in  any  sense  for  the  glorious 
God.  3.  He  appeared  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  (Bom.  viii.  3).  He  trod  not 
one  step  awry  in  sin,  but  many  of  the  footateps  of  ein  appeared  upon  Him :  e.g. — (1) 
Poverty.  Sin  was  the  great  bankrupt  that  brought  all  to  beggary,  and  so  poverty 
is  the  likeness  of  sin.  (2)  Sorrow  (Isa.  liii.  3).  The  same  Hebrew  word  stands  for 
both.  (3)  Shame  and  reproach.  Sin  was  the  inlet  of  shame  (Gen.  iii,  7),  So 
Christ  (Isa.  liii.  3  ;  Psa.  xxvil  6).  (4)  The  withdrawment  of  the  Father  and  cloud- 
ing the  light  of  His  countenance  (Matt,  xxvii.  46,  cf.  Isa.  lix.  2),  (4)  Death,  In 
amplification  of  this,  the  principal  act  of  Christ's  humiliation,  note — L  What  kind 
OF  DEATH  Chbibt  HUMBLED  HiMBEU  UNTO.  Not  a  natural  death,  nor  a  mere 
violent  death,  but  a  violent  ,death  having  three  embittering  circumstances.  1. 
Pain.  The  easiest  death  is  painful,  however  downy  the  bed.  The  first  mention  of 
Christ's  death  is  that  of  bruising  (Gen.  iii.  15  ;  Isa.  liii.  10).  So  painful  was  it  in 
thought  that  Christ  shrunk  from  it  (Matt.  xxvi.  39).  Three  things  made  the  actual 
death  painful.  (1)  The  piercing  His  hands  and  feet,  those  sinews  and  sensitive 
parts.  (2)  The  extension  and  distortion  of  His  body.  (3)  The  slowness  and 
gradual  approach  of  death.  Six  complete  hours  in  the  heat  of  the  day  was  Christ 
in  dying  (Mark  xv.  25  ;  cf.  ver.  34).  2.  Shame.  There  is  nothing  so  sharp  and  in- 
tolerable, not  even  pain,  to  a  noble  spirit  as  shame  (Heb.  xii.  2).  The  cross  was 
an  ignominious  death,  and  Christ  endured  it  amidst  circumstances  of  aggravated 
ignominy,  nakedness,  and  scorn.  All  his  ofiices  were  derided :  His  Priestly 
(Matt,  xxvii.  42) ;  His  prophetical  (Luke  xxii.  64) ;  His  Kingly  (John  xix. 
2-3).  Notorious  villains  were  crucified  with  Him.  He  suffered  without 
the  gate  (Heb.  xii.  12  ;  Levit.  xxiv.  14).  3.  Curse.  Pain  was  bad,  shame  worse, 
curse  worst  of  all  (Deut.  xxi.  23 ;  Gall  iii.  13  ;  Acts  v.  30).  II.  In  what  manneb 
Christ  underwent  this  death.  1.  Willingly.  His  sacrifice  was  a  free-will 
offering.  Neither  the  Father's  ordination  nor  men's  violence  constituted  the 
sacrifice  (Psa.  xl.  7-8  ;  John  x.  17-18).  He  might  have  avoided  it  (Matt.  xxvi.  53), 
but  so  far  from  that  He  anticipated  His  executioners  (John  xix.  33).  But  He  was 
more  than  willing  (Luke  xii.  50).  2.  Obediently.  It  was  His  will  to  die ;  and  yet 
He  died  not  of  His  own  will,  but  of  His  Father's.  The  two  are  conjoined  in  Heb. 
X.  7,  and  John  x.  18.  This  obedience  was  the  best  part  of  His  sacrifice  (1  Sam. 
XV.  22  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  39).  3.  Humbly  and  meekly. — (Isa.  liii.  7) — from  His  expostu- 
lation with  Judas  (Matt.  xxvi.  50)  to  His  last  prayer  (Luke  xxiii.  34)  all  is  that  of 
One  who,  when  He  suffered  He  threatened  not  (1  Pet.  ii.  23).  III.  Upon  what 
grounds  Christ  thus  humbled  Himself  to  death.  1.  That  Scripture  prophecies 
might  be  accomplished  (Isa.  Ixiii.  1 ;  Gen.  iii.  15  ;  Luke  xxiv.  25,  26).  2.  That 
Scripture  types  might  be  fulfilled — Isaac,  the  offerings,  the  brazen  serpent,  &c.  3. 
lliat  His  will  and  testament  might  be  firm  and  effectual  ^Heb.  ix.  16, 17  ;  Luke 
xxii.  20).  4.  That  justice  might  be  satisfied  (Heb.  ix.  22,  Rom.  iii.  25,26).  5. 
That  He  that  hath  the  power  of  death  might  be  destroyed  (Heb.  ii.  14).  6,  To 
take  away  the  meritorious  cause  of  death,  namely,  sin  (Rom.  viii,  3  ;  vi  10-11 ; 
Dan.  ix.  24-26).  Application  :  Three  uses  may  be  made  of  this  doctrine.  1.  For 
information.  (1)  This  lets  us  see  the  transcendent  and  inexpressible  love  of  Christ 
to  poor  sinners  (Gal.  ii.  20).  (2)  The  horrible  and  cursed  evil  of  sin  to  need  saoh 
a  remedy.  (3)  The  exact  and  impartial  justice  of  God  and  His  most  righteous 
remedy  against  sin.  Rather  than  that  sin  should  go  onpunished  He  spared  not  His 
own  Son  (Bom.  iii.  25).  (4)  This  is  sad  and  dreadful  news  to  all  impenitent  sinners 
(Heb.  X.  29).     2.  For  exhortation.     If  Christ  shed  His  blood  for  sin  (1)  kt  as  shed 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

the  blood  of  Bin  (Bom.  vi.  10, 11 ;  Gal.  v.  24).  (2)  Let  our  lives  run  out  for  Christ 
in  a  vigorous  activity  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15 ;  Titus  ii.  14).  (3)  Let  as  praise  Him 
exceedingly,  and  raise  Him  in  our  esteem  above  everything  and  every  one  else 
(1  Pet.  ii.  7  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  2  ;  Phil,  iii,  8 ;  Matt.  x.  37).  (4)  Let  us  prize  highly  our 
own  souls  that  were  purchased  at  such  a  price  (1  Pet.  L  18).  (5)  Let  us  be  wilUng, 
if  need  be,  to  shed  our  blood  for  Him  (Acts  xx.  24  ;  Rev.  xii.  11 ;  Heb.  xii.  4).  (6) 
By  faith  and  hearty  acceptance  of  Christ,  let  us  put  in  for  a  share  of,  and  get  an 
interest  in  Christ's  blood  (Rom.  iii.  25 ;  Heb.  ix.  14).  3,  For  comfort.  (1)  Your 
enemies  are  foiled.  The  justice  of  God  is  satisfied  ;  the  law  is  fulfilled ;  Satan  is 
subdued  ;  sin  is  abolished  as  it  binds  over  to  punishment,  and  is  reflected  in  the 
conscience  by  way  of  accusation  ;  death  is  slain.  (2)  Your  person  is  accepted.  (3) 
Christ  is  willing  to  do  anything  for  thee.  (4)  Heaven  is  opened  to  thee  (Heb.  x. 
19).  (J.  Meriton,D.D.)  The  obedience  of  Christ : — L  Its  characteristics.  1. 
Produced  by  the  Spirit.  He  was  tempted  and  overcame  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  2. 
Perfectly  human,  or  it  would  be  no  example  to  us.  3.  Progressive.  "  Though  He 
were  a  Son,"  &c.  It  grew  with  the  growth  of  obligations.  4.  Active  and  passive. 
II.  Its  nature.  1.  He  obeyed  the  law.  "  Thy  law  is  within  my  heart  "  was  the 
language  of  His  whole  life.  (1)  As  an  antitype  He  fulfilled  the  whole  law  of 
sacrifice.  (2)  As  a  devout  Jew,  He  fulfilled  the  whole  ceremonial  law.  (3)  As  a 
citizen  of  the  world  He  fulfilled  the  political  law  by  paying  taxes.  (4)  As  a  man 
He  fulfilled  the  whole  moral  law.  ^5)  As  a  child  of  God  He  fulfilled  the  spiritual 
law.  2.  Christ  was  always  obeying  inward  principle.  His  outward  life  was  the 
reflection  of  His  sense  of  duty.  How  often  was  "I  must"  upon  His  lips.  3.  Christ 
always  set  His  life  to  the  meridian  of  Scripture — "It  is  written."  4.  He  was  the 
most  obedient  of  Sons  to  His  heavenly  Father. — "I  can  of  Myself  do  nothing." 
in.  The  harmonious  adjustment  of  its  twofold  obligations.  1.  As  a  child  He 
was  subject  to  His  mother — but  if  interfered  with  in  His  work  there  were  the 
"Woman;  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  "  or  "  Who  is  My  mother?"  2.  As  a 
subject  of  the  state  He  pays  the  tribute  at  the  same  moment  that  He  asserts  His 
claim  and  privilege  as  the  Son  of  God.  "  Render  unto  Caesar,"  &o.  IV.  Its 
development.  1.  As  an  infant  He  was  obedient  to  circumcision.  2.  His  child- 
hood and  early  manhood  were  subject  to  parental  authority.  3.  At  thirty  His 
argument  for  baptism  is  "  Thus  it  becometh  us,"  &o.  4.  In  obedience  to  the  Holy 
Ghost  He  goes  into  the  desert  and  conquers  by  "  It  is  written,"  &c.  6.  The  yoke 
He  imposes  on  His  disciples  is  His  own — obedience.  6.  He  is  Lord  of  the  Sabbath, 
but  obeys  the  Sabbath.  7.  The  Transfiguration  speaks  of  Sonship  and  service.  8. 
His  death  was  the  completion  of  His  life  of  obedience.  (J.  Vaugftan,  M.A.) 
Obedient  unto  death : — The  phrase  states  the  landing-place  of  Christ's  career  of 
humiliation,  the  antipodes  of  the  contrast,  the  nadir  below  which  it  was  impossible 
for  Him  to  go.  I.  What  is  death — especially  as  expressive  of  the  condition  to 
which  Jesua  bumbled  Himself  ?  Our  modern  conception  of  death  has  been  bo 
illumined  by  the  doctrine  of  Christian  immortality  that  we  are  inclined  to  conceive 
of  the  death  of  Christ  simply  as  an  analogue  of  ours.  But  death,  in  the  person  of 
Jesus,  was  the  culminating  catastrophe  in  the  history  of  the  "  Man  of  sorrows.** 
To  us  death  is  the  chalice  whose  poison  has  been  changed  by  the  chemistry  of 
redeeming  love  into  nectar ;  to  Jesus  it  was  a  cup  full  of  the  concentrated  dregs  of 
woe.  To  us  it  is  a  shaft  whose  sting  has  been  removed ;  to  Him  it  was  an  arrow 
envenomed  by  the  wrath  of  God  against  sin.  To  us  it  is  a  victory  over  the  last 
and  mightiest  form  of  evil ;  to  Him  it  was  a  surrender  to  the  masterful  forces  of 
disorganization  and  ruin.  To  us  it  is  an  introduction  into  the  presence  and 
oompanionship  of  God  ;  to  Him  it  was  an  abandonment  into  darkness  unrelieved 
by  a  ray  of  Divine  light,  and  whose  solitude  was  unblessed  by  a  whisper  of  Divine 
love.  The  Atonement  was  no  compromise  between  the  demands  of  justice  and  the 
pleadings  of  mercy.  Justice  was  exacted  of  Jesus,  and  mercy  was  proffered  to 
man.  The  Deity  of  Christ  gave  inconceivable  sensitiveness  to  the  agonized 
consciousness  of  Jesus ;  and  who  shall  say  that,  in  that  brief  hour,  Jesus  did  not 
experience  a  sense  of  the  awful  demerit  of  sin  and  of  the  fierceness  of  God's  wrath 
against  it  transcending  the  anguish  of  a  lost  soul  ?  II.  Jesus  became  obedient 
UNTO  DEATH  in  that — 1.  Death  was  the  objective  end  of  His  mission.  He  came  in 
order  to  do.  It  is  possible  to  conceive  that  Jesus  might  have  assumed  our  nature 
without  submitting  to  the  law  of  death.  In  becoming  a  man  He  did  not  necessarily 
become  mortal,  for  mortality  is  not  an  essential  condition  of  humanity.  Adam 
Was  human,  but  he  was  not  created  mortal.  Mortality,  with  Him,  was  a  con- 
Mquence  of  disobedience :  and  so  Jesus,  in  becoming  human,  had  He  seen  fit, 


CHAP.  n.J  PHILIFPIANS.  105 

might  have  been  exempt  from  the  law  of  denth,  or  might  have  passed  away  by  a 
translation,  such  as  is  recorded  of  Enoch  and  Elijah,  and  such  as  did  transpire  in 
His  own  history  after  He  had  risen,  to  die  no  more.  But  neither  of  these 
possibilities  were  consistent  with  the  mission  of  Jesus.  Without  dying,  His  object 
in  comirg  into  the  world  would  have  failed  of  being  accomplished.  In  this  respect 
His  death  differed  from  ours ;  we  are  not  brought  into  this  world  simply  for  the 
purpose  of  dying  ;  we  die  because  we  cannot  help  dying.  But  it  behoved  Jesus  to 
die.  He  became  obedient  unto  death.  If  His  object  in  coming  into  the  world  was 
to  save  men  by  the  lustre  of  His  living  and  by  the  splendour  of  His  philosophy, 
why  need  He  to  have  died,  and  why,  especially,  need  He  always  have  insisted  upon 
the  necessity  of  His  death,  in  order  that  by  dying  He  might  accomplish  the  object 
which  He  had  undertaken?  2.  By  the  voluntary  surrender  of  His  life.  Death,  to 
us,  is  a  surrender  to  an  inevitable,  from  whi^h  we  wo  ^d  prefer  to  be  exempt,  »nd 
at  the  best  in  most  cases,  it  is  a  passive  submission  to  a  necessity,  but  the  death  of 
Jesus  was  Jesus  in  action.  3.  In  that  His  dying  was  the  supreme  expression  of  His 
submission  to  the  will  of  the  Father.  It  was  the  fitting  crown  of  a  life  whose 
explanntion  was  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will,"  &c.  III.  Why,  in  the  economy  of 
God  was  it  nkedfol  that  Jesus  shocld  submit  to  death  ?  1.  Because  His 
Bobjection  to  the  law  of  death  was  the  highest,  and  an  exhaustive  test  of  the 
absolute  subordination  of  His  will  to  the  will  of  His  Father.  2.  The  obedience  of 
Jesus  unto  death  became  the  exhaustive  ground  on  which  God  could  justly  remit 
the  penalty  pronounced  against  the  sinner.  3.  Aa  the  reward  of  His  obedience 
Jesus  was  empowered  with  the  prero^'ative  of  bestowing  the  gift  of  eternal  life  on 
all  tha*  'lelieve  on  His  name.  {R.  Jefferey,  D.D.)  The  death  of  the  cross  was 
— L  A  voluntary  death.  II.  A  death  of  infinite  love.  III.  A  death  of  kinoly 
POWEB.  IV.  A  death  of  terrible  bodily  pain  and  mysterious  mental  anguish. 
v.  A  death  of  ca  .m  assurance.  (R.  H.  Giles,  B.A.)  The  passion  of  our  blessed 
Saviovr : — 1.  When  in  consequence  of  original  apc^tasy  from  Gfid  man  had 
forfeited  the  Divine  amity,  when  having  deserted  his  natural  Lord,  other  lords  had 
got  dominion  over  him,  when  according  to  an  eternal  rule  of  justice  he  stood 
adjudged  to  def.truction,  when  all  the  world  stood  guilty  before  God  and  no  remedy 
did  appear,  God  out  of  infinite  goodness  designed  onr  redemption.  2.  How  could 
this  happy  design  be  compassed  in  consistence  with  the  glory,  justice,  and  truth  ol 
God?  3.  God  was  pleased  to  prosecute  it,  as  thereby  no-wise  to  impair  but  rather 
to  advance  His  glory.  He  accordingly  would  be  sued  for  mercy,  nor  would  he 
grant  it  without  compensation,  and  so  did  find  us  a  Mediator  and  furnish  as  with 
means  to  satisfy  Him.  4.  But  how?  Where  was  there  a  Mediator  worthy  to 
intercede  on  our  behalf  ?  Where  amongst  men,  one,  however  innocent,  sufficient 
to  do  more  than  satisfy  for  himself  ?  Where  among  angels,  seeing  that  they 
cannot  discharge  more  than  their  own  debts  of  gratitude  and  service  ?  4.  Wherefore 
seeing  that  a  superabundant  dignity  of  person  was  required  God's  arm  brought 
salvation.  5.  But  how  could  God  undertake  the  business  ?  Could  He  become  a 
suitor  to  His  offended  self  ?  No,  man  must  concur  in  the  transaction :  some 
amonds  must  issue  from  him  as  the  offending  party.  So  the  Eternal  Word  assumed 
human  flesh  and  merited  God's  favour  to  us  by  a  perfect  obedience  to  the  law,  and 
satisfying  Divine  justice  by  pouring  forth  His  blood  in  sacrifice  for  our  sins.  In 
this  kind  of  passion  (the  death  of  the  cross)  consider  divers  notable  adjuncts.  L 
Its  being  in  appearance  criminal,  as  in  semblance  being  an  execution  of  justice 
on  Him.  "He  was  numbered  among  the  transgressors."  "Made  sin  for  us." 
He  was  impeached  of  the  highest  crimes,  and,  although  innocent,  for  them  suffered 
death.  But  why  such  a  death,  since  any  would  have  been  sufficient;  and  why  such  ft 
death  odious  alike  to  Jew  and  Gentile  ?  1.  As  our  Saviour  freely  undertook  a  life  of  the 
greatest  meanness  and  hardship,  so  we  might  be  pleased  to  undergo  such  a  death. 
(1)  It  has  been  well  said  that  "  no  man  expresses  such  a  devotion  to  virtue  as  he 
who  forfeits  the  repute  of  being  a  good  man,  that  he  may  not  lose  the  conscience 
of  being  such."  So  our  Lord  was  content  not  only  to  expose  His  life,  but  His  fame, 
for  the  interest  of  goodness.  (2)  Had  He  died  otherwise.  He  might  have  seemed  to 
purchase  our  welfare  at  a  somewhat  easier  rate.  He  industriously  shunned  a  death 
such  as  might  have  brought  Him  honour  when  exposed  to  it  by  the  malignity  oi 
the  Pharisees.  Accordingly  this  death  did  not  fall  on  Him  by  surprise  or  chance. 
He  foresaw  it  from  the  beginning,  and  regarded  it  with  satisfaction.  2.  This  death 
best  suited  the  character  of  His  undertaking.  We  ieserve  open  condemnation  and 
exemplary  ponishment,  wherefore  He  was  pleased  to  undergo  not  only  an  equiva- 
lent pain  for  as,  bat  in  a  sort  equal  blame  before  God  and  man.     3.  Seeing  that. 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  fcHAP.  if. 

our  Lord's  death  was  a  satisfaction  to  Divine  justice,  it  was  most  fit  that  it  shonld 
•be  in  a  way  wherein  God's  right  is  most  nearly  concerned  mnd  plainly  discernible. 
All  judgment,  as  Moses  says,  is  God's,  or  is  administered  by  authority  derived 
from  Him,  magistrates  being  His  officers.  So  our  Lord,  as  His  answer  to  Pilate 
testifies,  received  the  human  judgment  as  God's.  Had  He  suffered  by  private 
malice.  His  obedieuce  had  been  less  remarkable.  4.  Our  Saviour  in  any  other  way 
could  hardly  have  displayed  so  many  virtues  to  such  advantage.  His  constancy, 
meekness,  charity,  &c.,  were  seen  by  vast  multitudes,  and  made  matters  of  the 
greatest  notoriety.  Plato  says  that  to  approve  a  man  righteous,  he  must  be 
scourged,  tortured,  bound,  have  his  eyes  burnt  out,  and,  at  the  close,  having 
suffered  all  evils,  must  be  impaled.  The  Greeks,  then,  in  consistence  with  their 
own  wisdom,  could  not  reasonably  scorn  the  Cross,  which  Christ  freely  chose  to 
recommend  the  most  excellent  virtues  to  imitation.  H.  Its  being  most  paimfcl, 
which  demonstrated — 1.  The  vehemence  of  His  love.  2.  The  heinousness  of  our 
Bins.  3.  The  value  of  the  compensation.  4.  The  exemplification  of  the  hardest 
duties  of  obedience  and  patience,  IH.  Its  being  most  shameful — a  Boman 
punishment  reserved  for  slaves,  answering  to  the  Jewish  punishment  of  hanging 
up  dead  bodies.  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  s  tree."  1.  This, 
ignominious  in  itself,  exposed  the  sufferer  to  the  scorn  of  the  rude  vulgar.  2.  We 
need  not  doubt  that  our  Saviour,  as  a  man,  endowed  with  human  sensibilities,  felt 
these  indignities  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  the  infinite  dignity  of  His  person  and  the 
perfect  innocency  of  His  life  must  have  enhanced  His  sufferings.  And  so  we  read, 
"See  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  my  sorrow."  3.  And  further,  there  was  the 
shameful  burden  of  sin  which  He  bore.  IV.  Its  peculiab  advantageousnebs  to 
THE  designs  or  ouB  LoKD  IN  BUFFEBiNG.  1.  It  was  VBVj  notorious,  and  lasted  a 
competent  time.  Had  He  been  privately  or  suddenly  dispatched,  no  great  notice 
would  have  been  taken  of  it,  nor  would  it  have  beeu  so  fully  proved.  2.  The  nature 
of  His  kingdom  was  thereby  signified.  None  but  a  spiritual  kingdom  could  He 
have  designed  who  submitted  to  this  suffering.  3.  It  was  a  most  convenient  touch- 
stone to  prove  the  genuine  disposition  and  work  of  men,  so  as  to  discriminate  those 
who  can  discern  and  love  true  goodness  though  so  disfigured,  and  not  be 
■scandalized  by  the  Cross.  4.  By  it  God's  special  providence  was  discovered,  and 
His  glory  illustrated  in  the  propagation  of  the  gospel;  for  how  could  such  a  sufferer 
gain  so  general  an  opinion  in  the  world  of  being  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory  without 
God's  miraculous  aid  ?  V.  Its  practical  efficacy.  No  point  is  more  fruitful  in 
-wholesome  instruction,  more  forcible  to  kindle  devout  affections,  more  efficacious 
in  affording  incentives  to  a  pious  life.  1.  We  are  hence  obliged  with  affection  and 
gratitude  to  adore  each  person  in  the  blessed  Trinity.  (1)  The  Father  giving  the 
Son.  (2)  The  Son  giving  Himself.  (8)  The  Spirit  assisting  the  Son  to  offer  Him- 
«elf  without  spot.  2.  What  surer  ground  can  there  be  of  faith  and  hope  in  God — 
♦•  If  God  spared  not  His  own  Son,  &c."  Who  can  doubt  of  God's  goodness,  despair 
of  God's  mercy,  after  this.  3.  It  should  yield  great  joy  to  know  that  Christ  hung 
there  not  only  as  a  resolute  sufferer,  but  as  a  noble  conqueror  over  the  devil,  the 
world,  the  flesh,  death,  wrath,  enmity,  and  strife,  &c.  4.  It  should  give  as  a 
humbling  sense  of  our  weakness  and  vileness  to  know  that  we  needed  such  succoor. 
Pride  is  madness  in  the  presence  of  Him  who  made  Himself  of  no  reputation. 
6.  But  as  this  contemplation  doth  breed  sober  humility,  it  should  also  preserve  us 
from  base  abjectness  of  mind ;  for  had  not  God  esteemed  us.  He  would  not  have 
debased  Himself.  6.  Can  we  reflect  on  this  event  without  detestation  of  sin,  which 
brought  such  a  death  on  the  Eedeemer.  7.  What  in  reason  can  be  more  powerful 
towards  working  penitential  sorrow  and  religious  fear,  and  stimulating  true 
obedience  ?  8.  It  affords  strong  engagements  to  charity,  to  know  that  out  of  com- 
passion for  us  Christ  suffered.  9.  It  should  breed  a  disregard  for  the  world  and  its 
vanities,  and  reconcile  us  to  even  the  worst  condition  ?  For  who  can  suffer  as 
Christ  suffered.  10.  It  will  incline  us  to  submit  cheerfully  to  God's  will  to 
remember  that  Christ  learned  obedience  by  the  things  He  suffered.  (J.  Barrow,  D.D.) 
The  Croti  the  fountain  of  merit : — I.  The  nature  of  Christ's  merit.  1.  Let  as 
gain  a  clear  idea  of  a  meritorious  act.  (1)  It  must  be  good.  Actions  claiming  the 
highest  regards  of  God  are  those  which  have  an  intrinsic  perfectness,  and  wbich, 
when  looked  at  on  all  sides,  are  in  entire  correspondence  with  the  mind  and  will  of 
God.  Christ's  actions  in  perfectness  contrast  vnth  those  of  the  creature.  Their 
peeoliar  goodness  arises  from  the  absence  of  any  staic  of  sin  and  any  material 
defect :  oar  good  actions  have  both  these  drawbacks.  (2)  It  must  be  voluntary. 
Even  an  heroic  action  loses  its  moral  value  if  necessitated.    Personal  effort  freely 


«RAr.  n.l  PHILIPPIANS.  lOT 

made  lies  at  the  root  of  ftll  saorifice.  Christ's  actions  were  of  this  character  (Bom. 
XV.  36;  Luke  xxii.  42).  (3)  Our  Lord's  actions  coald  have  obtained  no  merit, 
whatever  their  perfection,  had  they  resulted  only  from  His  natural  powers. 
Nature,  even  when  pure,  cannot  purchase  a  supernatural  reward.  Grace  must  aid 
and  enrich  the  operation  of  the  human  faculties.  Even  in  Christ  grace  imparted 
worth  to  His  natural  actions  (John  v.  19).  Christ  as  man  had  within  Himself  the 
foundations  of  a  true  merit,  and  by  His  Divine  personality  communicated  to  His 
actions  an  infinite  value.  2.  Yet  after  all,  with  this  combination  of  natural,  super- 
natural, and  Divine  energies  in  the  work  of  Christ,  its  claim  on  Divine  retribution 
must  rest  on  some  covenant  or  promise.  Merit  in  the  sense  of  an  action  to  which 
a  reward  is  due  on  grounds  of  justice  can  only  exist  where  there  is  some  stipulation. 
The  merit  which  appeals  to  goodness  sets  up  no  claim  ;  that  which  rests  on  fidelity 
involves  a  promiRe ;  that  which  trusts  to  the  justice  of  the  rewarder  implies  a 
covenant.  JJot  to  reward  in  the  one  case  may  be  churlishness  ;  in  the  other  it 
would  be  to  break  one's  word ;  whilst  in  the  third  there  would  be  positive  dis- 
honesty. For  Gud  therefore  to  be  liable  to  any  claim.  He  must  have  graciously 
condescended  to  involve  Himself  in  an  obligation.  Such  a  covenant  was  made 
with  Abraham  (Heb.  vi.  17, 18).  The  entering  into  covenant  and  confirming  by  an 
oath  were  human  types  and  shadows  of  the  great  covenant  between  God  and  man 
in  Christ  (Heb.  vii.  21).  God  has  entered  into  covenant  with  man  in  Christ  to 
crown  with  a  reward  those  works  which  Christ  first  wrought  in  Himself,  and  after- 
wards by  His  grace  should  work  through  His  members.  All  is  traceable  to  Divine 
mercy  a?  its  first  source  (Psa.  Ixii.  12),  yet  it  is  the  Divine  justice  which  ia 
represented  as  under  an  obligation  to  repay  the  services  which  are  rendered  (Heb. 
▼i,  10),  There  is  nothing  derogatory  to  the  sacred  manhood  of  Christ  in  this 
oovenant.  If  the  Son  could  address  the  Father,  and  say,  "Lo,  I  come,"  Ac,  we 
can  conceive  the  human  will  of  Christ  in  fulfilling  the  Father's  will  as  resting  on 
the  Divine  promise  (Psa.  xvi  10,  11 ;  Acts  i.  4).  IL  The  Cross  as  its  fountain. 
1.  The  merit  of  the  Cross  rested  on  the  whole  of  His  life :  as  He  foresaw  Hia 
passion,  so  He  accepted  it.  2.  The  Gross  is  the  great  instrument  in  the  acquire- 
ment of  merit  on  two  grounds.  Merit  may  be  calculated  by  the  condition  of  the 
person  who  merits,  or  by  the  difficulty  of  the  action.  Thus  if  Adam  in  Paradise, 
and  some  of  His  fallen  descendants  were  to  perform  the  same  virtuous  action,  the 
act  of  the  former  would  have  more  merit  in  the  one  sense ;  the  act  of  the  latter  in 
the  other.  In  the  latter  sense  the  Cross  outstrips  all  other  portions  of  our  Saviour's 
life  in  its  value.  In  it  the  activities  of  endurance  were  taxed  to  the  utmost  limit. 
To  bear  up  under  fierce  pain  for  a  few  hours  is  a  greater  test  of  moral  strength 
than  the  lifelong  efforts  of  a  healthy  person.  Not,  however,  that  suffering  in  itself 
is  acceptable  to  God  ;  the  thief  suffered  ;  it  was  the  way  in  which  the  purpose  for 
which  it  was  borne  which  made  it  acceptable.  3.  The  Cross  completed  the  treasure 
of  merit.  The  Cross  was  the  ultimate  limit  of  those  labours  which  purchased  a 
reward.  The  resurrection,  ascension,  Ac,  could  add  nothing.  Merit  ceased  vrith 
the  Cross :  what  follows  is  reward  (John  xix.  30).  4.  The  atoning  value  of  the 
Cross  lay  in  the  removal  of  a  hindrance  :  its  meritoriousness  acquired  a  positive 
gain.  The  removal  of  sin  was  the  preliminary  to  Divine  communications.  Human 
nature  was  not  left  in  a  state  of  neutrality,  as  if  God  should  look  upon  it  without 
wrath  or  favour,  but  was  again  to  become  the  subject  of  Divine  complacency. 
III.  Thb  object  fob  whom  this  merit  was  acquired.  1.  For  Himself  (ver.  9; 
Heb.  ii.  9  ;  Luke  xxiv.  26,  46;  Psa.  ex.  7 ;  Heb.  xii.  2).  It  was  not  simply  glory 
for  His  body  that  He  purchased,  but  exaltation  and  kingly  power  ;  a  name  above 
every  name.  2.  For  all.  He  took  the  nature  of  all,  and  thus  merited  for  all 
(Heb.  ii.  14)).  But  Hlthough  He  merited  for  all,  all  do  not  receive  the  grace  He 
purchased.  A  fountain  is  useless  to  the  thirsty  unless  they  drink.  What  is  necessary 
therefore  is  for  us  to  become  the  recipients  of  His  grace  ?  We  must  have  union 
with  Christ  for  pardon  and  life  (John  xv.  16,  i.  16 ;  2  Pet.  i.  4).  Christ  saves  by 
tecoming  a  new  principle  of  life  in  the  soul  through  the  action  of  the  Divine  Spirit. 

iW,  H.HutcMngs,M.A.)  Christ's  humiliation  and  exaltation  (text  and  following) : — 
.  "  For  this  cause."  1.  A  cause  there  is.  God  ever  exalts  for  a  cause.  Here  on  earth 
it  is  otherwise.  Some  men  as  Shebna,  Haman,  Sanballat,  are  exalted  no  man 
knows  wherefor.  2.  For  what  cause  ?  His  humility.  Of  all  causes  not  for  that, 
says  the  world.  The  word  was  not  in  the  list  of  heathen  virtues.  Yet  this  last 
-virtue  is  the  grotmd  of  Christ  exulting.  (1)  "  He  himibled  " — so  great  a  person.  For 
one  of  mean  estate  to  be  humble  is  no  great  praise,  it  were  a  fault  were  be  not ;  bat 
for  a  king,  nay  the  King  of  kings  to  show  this  great  bomility,  is  a  cause  indeed. 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

(2)  "Himself."  Of  His  own  accord.  One  may  be  humbled  and  not  humble. 
Pharoah  was  humbled  by  His  ten  plagues.  Simon  was  compelled  to  humble  hia 
neck  under  the  Cross.  But  here  is  true  humility.  (3)  It  was  not  Absalom's 
humility,  in  show,  his  heart  being  full  of  pride  and  rebellion.  And  yet  it  is  a  glory 
for  humility  that  even  proud  men  take  a  pride  to  shroud  themselves  in  her  mantle. 
But  it  is  not  humble  courtesy,  but  humble  obedience  here.  (4)  But  there  is  an 
obedience  which  cometh  from  natural  reason ;  but  some  other  there  be  wherein 
there  is  no  other  reason  but  the  will  of  a  lawful  superior.  All  look  to  the  former, 
■very  few  to  the  latter  ;  but  even  so  obeyed  Christ.  (5)  The  extent  of  our  obedience 
is  a  matter  considerable.  Obedience  in  some  petty  matter  is  little  worth.  How  far 
obedient?  Until  what?  Unto  humanity  had  been  enough,  to  servitude  were  more. 
But  Christ's  obedience  was  unto — (a)  Death.  That  staggers  the  best  of  us.  We 
love  obedience  in  a  whole  skin.  And  why  should  obedience  come  to  that  ?  Death 
is  the  wages  of  sin.  Obedient  and  y^-t  put  to  death?  Even  so;  rather  than  lose 
His  obedience  He  lost  His  life,  (i)  The  worst  death.  Nay,  if  He  must  die,  let  Him 
die  a  honest  fair  death.  Not  so.  11.  "God  hath  highly  exalted  Him."  Thia 
exaltation  is — 1.  Personal.  (1)  From  whence.  From  death.  His  humiliation  had 
been  to  the  ground,  into  the  lowest  parts  of  it ;  His  exaltation  was  from  thence. 
(2)  Whither.  From  death  to  life,  from  shame  to  glory,  from  the  form  of  a  servant 
to  the  dignity  of  a  sovereign.  Not  to  Lazarus'  life  again,  but  to  life  immortal  j 
from  shame  to  the  glory  of  the  Father  which  shall  never  fade,  as  all  here  shall. 
2.  The  exaltation  of  His  name,  the  amends  for  tbe  Cross.  Without  a  name  what 
is  exalting  ?  Things  that  are  exalted  seem  not  to  be  so  until  their  name  go  abroad 
in  the  world.  And  when  men  are  so  high  that  they  cannot  get  higher  there  is  no 
way  to  exalt  them  but  to  dilate  their  names,  which  every  noble  generous  spirit  had 
rather  have  than  any  dignity.  How  will  they  jeopard  dignity  and  even  life  but  to 
leave  a  glurions  name  behind  them.  But  what  name  was  given  here?  "the  name 
of  Jesus."  (1)  Of  this  giving  three  doubts  arise,  (a)  How  given.  Him  and  others 
had  it  also  (Heb.  iv.  8 ;  Hag.  i.  1).  They  had  it  of  men.  He  of  God.  All  these 
Jesuses  had  need  of  and  were  glad  "to  lay  hold  of  the  skirts  "  of  this  Jesus  to  be  saved 
by  Him.  (b)  He  had  it  before.  True,  but  by  a  kind  of  anticipation,  for  it  never 
had  its  perfect  verification  till  after  the  crucifixion,  (c)  But  if  given  Him  txapiaaro 
"of  grace,"  where  is  the  merit  then?  Answer.  That  which  is  due  may  be 
cheerfully  parted  with  as  though  it  were  a  gift.  But  this  grace  is  not  the  grace  of 
adoption,  but  that  of  union.  (2)  How  is  this  name  above  all  names,  (a)  To  Him. 
It  is  esteemed  more  than  any  other  title  of  Deity  by  Him  ;  because  His  glory  is  in 
it  joined  to  our  safety.  (6)  To  us.  For  it  is  the  only  name  by  which  we  can  be 
saved.  With  this  name  there  is  comfort  in  the  name  of  God  ;  without  it  none  at 
all.  3.  "  That  at  the  name  of  Jesus,"  <feo.  God,  though  He  have  so  exalted  it, 
yet  reckons  it  not  exalted  until  we  exalt  it  too.  So  we  are  to  esteem  it  above  every 
name,  and  to  show  our  esteem  by  bowing  with  the  knee  and  confessing  with  the 
tongue.  (1)  These  are  outward  acts :  so  the  exalting  of  the  soul  is  not  enough. 
Our  body  is  to  afford  her  part,  and  not  the  upper  parts,  the  tongue  in  the  head,  but 
also  the  lower,  theknee  in  the  leg.  (2)  "Every  knee" — (a), "Shall  bow,"  for  what  better 
way  to  exalt  Him  than  by  our  humility,  who  for  His  humility  was  exalted.  Thia 
honour  is  awarded  Christ  for  the  death  of  the  Cross  ;  shall  we,  then,  rob  Him  of  it  ? 
And  He  will  not  have  us  worship  Him  like  elephants,  as  if  we  had  no  joints  in  our 
knees  ;  He  will  have  more  honour  of  men  than  of  pillars  in  the  Church,  (b)  Bow 
to  His  name.  His  person  is  out  of  sight,  but  His  name  is  left  behind  that  we  may 
do  reverence  to  it.  But  why  to  this  name  rather  than  to  that  of  Chiist  ?  Christ 
cannot  be  the  name  of  God,  for  God  cannot  be  anointed.  Christ  was  anointed 
that  He  might  be  Jesus — Saviour.  But  it  is  not  to  the  syllables  of  the  name 
that  we  are  to  bow.  The  name  is  not  the  sound  but  the  sense— Him  who  is  named. 
Of  course  a  superstitious  use  has  been  made  of  this  act ;  so  there  has  of  hearing 
sermons.  Shall  we  therefore  abandon  hearing  as  well  as  kneeling  ?  No  I  Eemova 
the  superstition  and  retain  both.  It  is  well  to  drive  away  superstition,  but  it  will 
be  well  not  to  drive  away  reverence  with  it.  (3)  He  farther  requires  somewhat 
from  the  tongue.  And  reason  :  that  member  of  all  others  is  our  glory  (Psa.  ivii.  8), 
our  peculiarity  above  the  beasts ;  they  will  be  taught  to  bow,  we  have  tongues  to  do 
something  more  than  they.  Besides  the  knee  is  only  dumb  acknowledgment,  but  a 
Tocal  confession  utters  our  mind  plainly,  and  this  He  calls  i^onoXoynms.  Three  things 
are  in  it.  \6yoc  we  must  say  somewhat ;  ofioii,  do  it  together,  not  some  speak  and 
others  keep  mute ;  e^,  speak  out,  not  whisper.  And  it  was  the  praise  of  the  primi- 
tive Charoh  that  they  did  it  jointly  and  aloud ;  that  tiieir  Amen,  aa  Jerome  saith* 


CHAP.  n.J  PHILIPPIANS.  109 

was  like  a  clap  of  thunder,  and  their  Hallelujah  as  the  roaring  of  the  sea.  (6) 
Why  the  knee  first — because  we  thereby  put  ourselves  in  miud  of  due  regard  to 
Him  in  reverence,  and  are  therefore  the  fitter  to  speak  of  and  to  Him  with 
respect,  (c)  Every  knee  and  tongue.  Thpy  in  heaven  "  cast  down  their  crowns 
and  fall  down  "  and  confers  Him  singing  (Kev.  iv.  10) ;  they  under  the  earth  are 
thrown  down  and  made  His  footstool  (Psa.  ex.  1)  ;  they  on  earth,  as  in  the  midst, 
partake  of  both.  The  better  sort  get  to  their  knees  gladly,  and  cheerfully  confess 
Him.  Infidels  and  Christians  little  better  are  forced  to  "  fall  backward,"  and  in  the 
end  to  cry  "  Vicisti  Galilee,"  though  they  guard  their  tongues  when  they  have 
done,  (d)  See  our  lot.  Exalted  He  shall  be  with  our  wills  or  without  them. 
Either  fall  on  our  knees  now,  or  be  cast  on  our  faces  then  ;  either  confess  Him  with 
saints  and  angels,  or  with  devils  and  damned  spirits,  (e)  Every  tongue  shall  do 
this,  i.e.,  every  speech  and  dialect  in  the  world.  Where  are  they,  then,  who  deny 
any  tongue  the  faculty  here  granted,  or  bar  any  of  them  the  duty  here  enjoined, 
that  lock  up  the  public  confession  in  some  one  tongue  or  two  ?  4.  But  though 
thus  many  tongues,  one  confession  that  "Jesus  Christ  is  Lord."  (1)  Lord 
whereof  f  (Matt.  xvi.  19 ;  Kev.  iii.  7  ;  i.  18,  xx.  2-3).  (2)  No  man  can  confess  this 
"  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  (3)  Confess  what  ?  that  Jesus  is  a  Lord  to  save  (Matt. 
xiv.  30),  and  a  Lord  to  serve  (Acts  ix.  6).  The  first  we  like  well,  but  the  latter  not 
so  (Luke  vi.  46).  5.  "  To  the  glory  of  the  Father,"  whose  great  glory  it  is  that 
His  Son  is  Lord  of  such  servants,  that  men  shall  say,  "  see  what  servants  He  hath." 
How  full  of  reverence  to  His  name  1  How  free  ami  forward  to  do  His  will.  (Bishop 
Andreweg.)  Humility  : — The  flower  of  humility  tills  the  air  with  perfume,  but 
its  leaves  lie  hidden  in  the  shade.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Christ's  obedience  unto 
death: — His  was  no  mere  resignation,  for  that  is  the  attitude  of  the  soul  toward 
the  inevitable.  A  creature  may  risk  his  life,  indeed,  provided  the  aim  be  a  true  and 
noble  one  ;  but  no  right  is  his  to  throw  it  away.  He  is,  on  the  contrary,  bound  to 
conserve  it,  if  he  can  do  so  without  the  sacrifice  of  higher  interests.  But  Christ 
Jesus  in  His  perfect  obedience  died,  because  He  so  willed,  and  when  and  as  He 
willed.  There  stands  in  a  Strasburg  church  a  monument  suggestive  in  its  sculp- 
tured group.  It  is  the  figure  of  a  warrior  before  an  open  grave.  Death  at  his  side 
is  touching  him  with  his  inevitable  dart,  and  he  is  represented  as  descending  with 
manly  step,  but  saddened  brow,  into  the  sepulchre  yawning  at  his  feet.  Thus  ia 
depicted  the  lot  of  our  common  humanity.  "  It  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die," 
and  when  death  comes,  he  comes  resistlessly.  Thus  are  depicted,  further,  the  noble 
submission  and  fortitude  with  which  the  brave  man,  brave  because  he  is  good,  meets 
death.  But  with  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  it  was  far  otherwise.  He  had  His 
life  either  to  give  or  to  keep.  He  gave  His  life  with  all  its  preciousness,  a  freewill 
ofifering,  a  priceless  sacrifice  ••  of  a  sweet-smelling  savour  unto  God."  (J.  Hutchinson^ 
D.D.)  Obedient  unto  death: — During  the  wars  of  the  first  Napoleon,  in  a  naval 
engagement,  the  son  of  the  captain  of  a  vessel  was  placed  by  his  father  at  a  certain 
post  and  charged  to  keep  it  till  his  return.  The  captain  was  killed,  and  his  vessel 
given  over  to  the  enemy.  The  boy's  position  became  dangerous,  and  he  was  urged 
to  quit  it.  "No,"  said  he,  "my  father  told  me  to  stay  till  he  came  back."  And  so 
listening  in  vain  for  the  voice  which  alone  he  would  obey,  he  perished  in  the 
explosion  of  the  ship.    (W.  Harris.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Wherefore  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him. — The  exaltation  of 
Christ :  —I.  Its  occasion.  1.  His  voluntary  humiliation.  2.  His  Divine  investi- 
ture. II.  Its  import.  1.  The  glorification  of  humanity.  2.  Investment  with 
supreme  sovereignty.  III.  Its  object.  1.  The  subordination  of  every  creature. 
2.  To  the  human  Mediator.  IV.  Its  dltimatb  issue.  1.  The  subjection  of 
every  foe.  2.  The  universal  acknowledgment  of  Christ.  3.  The  full  reve- 
lation of  the  glory  of  God.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  exaltation  of  Christ : — 
I.  The  exaltation  as  the  rewabd  of  the  obedience.  1.  The  same  Person 
is  exalted  who  humbled  Himself.  We  must  not  say  that  He  was  exalted 
in  His  humanity.  It  was  not  the  man  alone  who  humbled  Himself.  "  la 
Christ  divided  7 "  2.  The  supreme  elevation  could  never  have  been  the 
prerogative  of  any  created  being.  None  but  the  eternal  Son  of  the  Father  coold 
have  received  or  sustained  it.  But  as  the  reward  of  His  redeeming  submission  it 
could  only  be  received  in  the  person  of  Him  who  was  man  as  well  as  God.  3.  The 
redeeming  God-man  merited  well  in  His  obedience  and  death,  and  received  an 
eternal  and  unlimited  acknowledgment  of  His  claim.  The  justice  of  God  waa 
satisfied  by  the  punishment  vicariously  endured ;  and  the  love  of  God  accepted  that 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAF.  n. 

satisfaction  as  an  expiation  cancelling  the  sinner's  obligation  to  suffer.  And  the 
elevation  of  the  safferer  was  the  declaration  that  the  merit  of  His  supreme  obedi- 
ence availed  for  the  whole  world.  4.  The  very  word  here  used  is  that  which  ia 
employed  concerning  those  to  whom  the  benefit  of  Christ's  merit  ia  applied.  We 
are  "accepted"  in  the  Beloved,  or  "graced"  in  Him;  He  was  "accepted''  or 
"graced  "  with  the  high  rewards  of  exaltation.  That,  indeed,  was  His  exaltation  : 
not  to  have  a  name  above  every  name  simply,  but  to  have  in  Himself  a  fulness  of 
merit  that  should  avail  for  all.  XL  The  exaltation  as  the  NECEssiiBT  conditiok 
or  THB  BEDEEHiNO  AND  SATiNQ  woBK.  1.  As  our  representative  Christ  was  exalted, 
i.e.,  as  the  mediatorial  Redeemer.  The  resurrection  and  ascension  are  most  fre- 
quently regarded  as  part  of  the  process  of  His  saving  course.  As  He  fulfilled  that 
course  He  must  needs  pass  into  the  heavens.  In  His  Divine  human  person  He  has 
"  gone  up  higher,"  but  is  still  continuing  His  ministration.  Had  the  merit  of  His 
sacrifice  been  simply  rewarded  as  such,  apart  from  His  redeeming  ministry,  the 
Incarnate  would  have  been  set  down  literally  on  a  throne  to  rest  for  ever.  In  that 
case  the  language  of  the  passage  would  have  been  different.  2.  The  saving  name 
of  Jesus  is  exalted.  The  "  name"  cannot  refer  to  any  particular  designation  con- 
ferred after  the  ascension  ;  we  know  not  what  name  could  have  been  added  to  the 
glorious  catalogue  from  " Emmanuel,"  the  first,  to  "Lord  Jesus,"  the  last.  We 
know  from  the  Apocalypse  that  He  has  a  new  name,  but  we  know  also  that  it  is 
only  the  old  name  more  abundantly  glorified  ;  a  name  which  He  had  from  the  in- 
carnation, but  whose  full  meaning  could  never  be  known  until  His  human  nature 
had  passed  through  all  its  processes  of  discipline  and  become  perfect.  It  is  the 
mediatorial  name,  therefore,  that  is  exalted,  and  that  name  is  Jesus.  Our  Saviour's 
dignity  is  His  power  to  save,  only  now  He  redeems  not  by  price  but  by  power. 
III.  The  exaltation  as  eeceivino  univeesaij  recognition.  1.  The  homage  paid 
to  the  name  of  Jesus  is  not  here  regarded  as  offered  at  once.  It  is  the  gradual  re- 
sult of  His  supremacy  in  heaven  enforced  in  the  promulgation  of  His  claims  on 
earth.  (1)  The  "  beings  in  heaven  "  accepted  the  dignity  of  Jesus  at  once,  and 
are  first  mentioned  because  they  are  the  loftiest  and  most  honourable.  They 
watched  His  career  and  studied  it  intently  ;  for  He  was  seen  of  angels.  A  gradual 
recognition  can  hardly  be  asserted  in  their  case,  and  in  no  sense  can  the  Lord's 
supremacy  be  said  to  have  been  enforced  on  them.  (2)  "  Beings  on  earth  "  repre- 
sent the  whole  race.  The  world  is  His  because  He  has  redeemed  it,  and  every  knee 
shall  bow  and  every  tongue  confess — all  science,  philosophy,  policy,  power,  genius, 
art.  Before  the  scene  of  redemption  ceases  to  be  visited  by  His  gospel  and  grace 
His  Jesus  name  shall  have  been  accepted  by  all  mankind  either  in  loyal  love  or 
despair.  (3)  And  "  under  the  earth  "  also.  Not  a  soul  rebels  there.  He  is  Lord 
of  the  dead,  and  when  the  end  comes  Hades  shall  go  out  of  existence  at  His  word. 
2.  The  confession  is  offered  to  the  Lordship  of  Jesus.  Our  Lord  receives  this 
name  in  various  senses.  (1)  In  one  sense  we  may  regard  it  as  human  purely  as 
often  in  the  gospels  where  the  people  seem  to  regard  Him  as  a  distinguished  servant 
of  God ;  and  yet  the  language  seems  to  waver  between  the  respect  due  to  a  rabbi 
and  the  adoration  due  to  God.  Most  beautifully  does  Thomas  in  the  end  rise  from 
that  human  Lordship  to  the  divinity  of  that  Saviour  whose  dignity  he  felt  at  last. 
(2)  In  another  and  pre-eminent  sense  Jesus  is  Lord  as  representing  the  Jehovah  of 
the  Old  Testament ;  and  in  that  sense  He  shares  the  dignity  with  the  Lord  the 
Spirit.  (3)  But  chiefiy  our  Lord  is  such  as  the  Mediatorial  Person  invested  with 
authority  over  men  and  over  the  universe  in  consequence  of  His  submission  to  the 
death  of  the  Cross,  as  here.  This  dominion  is  given  to  One  who  deserved  it  by 
obedience,  though  He  was  capable  of  it  only  as  God.  FV.  The  exaltation  as  be- 
DOUNDiNO  TO  THB  OLOBT  OF  GoD.  The  wholc  mysteiy  of  the  economical  submis- 
sion, obedience,  exaltation,  and  dominion  of  Christ  tends  to  the  glory  of  the  Father. 
1.  The  Father  is  literally  the  Father  of  the  Eternal  Son  made  fiesh,  and  not  the 
Deity  in  general.  The  Father  is  the  essential  as  well  as  the  redeeming  name  of 
Him  to  whom  all  glory  is  finally  given.  2.  The  success  of  the  mediatorial  govern- 
ment of  our  Lord  redounds  to  the  glory  of  the  Father  inasmuch  as  it  will  justify 
and  exalt  the  supreme  wisdom  of  Him  who  originated  the  plan.  {W.  B.  Pope, 
D.D.)  The  mediatorial  exaltation  involves  the  two  stupendous  facts  which  close 
Christ's  earthly  career.  I.  The  evidence  of  the  fact  of  Chbist's  BEStJEBBCTiON. 
U.  The  EVIDENCE  of  oub  Lord's  ascension  is  also  cleab.  1.  It  is  twice  recorded 
by  St.  Luke.  2.  It  was  pubUc.  3.  It  was  predicted  by  Christ.  4.  The  promise 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  was  to  follow  it  was  fulfilled.  5.  It  formed  a  staple 
doctrine  of  apostolic  teaching.     6.  The  Christian  doctrine  of  heaven  depends  upon 


CHAP,  n.]  PHILIPFIANS.  Ill 

the  fact  that  Christ  ascended  to  the  Father  (John  xiv.  1,  Ac).  III.  What  follows 
FBOM  ouB  Lord's  besurrection  and  ascension.  1.  The  glorified  Christ  has  re- 
ceived a  name  that  is  above  every  name.  (1)  That  name  stands  for  the  reality  it 
implies — Saviour.  (2)  The  name  has  accrued  to  Him  because  in  what  He  is,  haa 
done,  is  doing,  and  will  do,  the  rich  meaning  of  the  name  is  realized.  (3)  The 
name  is  above  because  including  every  other  name.  (4)  In  it  believers  glory,  by  it 
hearts  are  won,  before  it  heaven  bows  in  worship,  at  it  hell  trembles  with  fear.  2. 
To  this  exalted  Saviour  all  dominion  is  entrusted.  (1)  Heaven,  with  its  angels, 
principalities,  and  powers.  (2)  Earth — men,  forces,  empires.  (3)  The  under-world — 
His  widest  human  dominion.  3.  That  dominion  will  be  universally  acknowledged 
(John  vi.  38-40 ;  Kev,  i.  7  ;  2  Cor.  v.  10 ;  2  Thess.  i,  7-10 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  24-28).  IV. 
The  ultimate  end  and  aim  of  the  Saviour's  mediatorial  reign  will  be  the  olory 
OF  God  the  Father.  1.  The  Redeemer  looked  for  this — "Father,  glorify  thy 
Son ! "  <&o.  2.  The  mediatorial  work  was  undertaken  and  discharged  with  reference 
to  this.  {C.  Clemance,  D.D.)  Chrisft  exaltation: — I.  In  the  very  fact  of 
Christ's  exaltation  there  is  to  every  true  Christian  a  very  laboe  degees 
or  COMFORT.  He  has  certain  features  of  character  which  make  it  so.  1.  He  has 
a  relationship  with  Christ,  and  therefore  feels  an  interest  in  the  success  of  His 
kinsman.  2.  He  has  a  feeling  of  unity  in  the  cause.  He  shares  the  exaltation  in 
some  degree,  seeing  that  he  has  sympathy  with  Christ's  desire  of  promoting  God's 
cause  in  the  world.  Every  soldier  feels  honoured  when  his  general  is  applauded 
for  the  victory,  inasmuch  as  he  has  helped  him  to  gain  it.  3.  The  Christian  knows 
that  there  is  a  real  union  between  Christ  and  His  people,  now,  therefore,  that  oar 
Head  is  crowned  he  cannot,  being  so  intimately  interested,  but  rejoice.  Christ  is 
in  heaven  as  our  representative.  The  throne  He  occupies  is  for  the  Church  whom 
He  represents.  In  Him  we,  too,  are  exalted.  4.  The  Christian  has  surrendered 
his  whole  being  to  the  work  of  honouring  Christ,  and  therefore  feels  that  in  his 
Saviour's  exaltation  his  whole  desire  is  consummated.  He  cares  not  what  happens 
to  himself  so  long  as  he  can  say,  "The  Lord  reigneth."  IL  Another  well-spring 
of  joy  is  found  in  the  reason  of  Christ's  exaltation.  Because  of — 1.  His  humili- 
ation. The  Christian  need  feel  no  pain  in  being  humbled :  the  same  joy  is  set 
before  him  as  was  set  before  his  Lord.  2.  His  obedience.  Let  the  Christian  obey 
and  he  will  win  the  same  reward.  IIL  Another  source  of  comfort  is  found  in  thb 
Pebson  who  exalted  Him.  1.  Neither  Christ  nor  the  Christian  are  self-crowned 
autocrats;  andthesamehand  that  crowned  Him  will  crown  us.  He,  "King  of  kings," 
we  "kings  unto  God  and  His  Father."  2.  Man  never  exalted  Christ,  but  dishonoured 
and  rejected  Him — but  God  exalted  Him.  Believer,  if  all  men  speak  ill  of  thee, 
think  "the  servant  is  not  above  his  Lord."  8.  Christ  did  not  exalt  Himself,  nor 
can  yon  in  depression  of  spirits,  humbleness  of  position,  but  God  can  and  will.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  Of  Christ't  exaltation.  I.  The  first  step  was  His  resurrection. 
II.  The  second  His  ascension.  UI.  The  third  His  sittino  on  the  rioht 
HAND  OF  God  (Heb.  i.  3 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  23 ;  Eph.  i.  20).  1.  This  is  to  be  under- 
stood in  a  figurative  sense  as  denoting. — (1)  Majesty  and  honour  (2  Kings  ii.  19 ; 
Psa.  xlv.  9).  (2)  Power  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  10).  2.  Christ  sitting  h«re  denotes— (1)  A 
Btate  of  rest  (Micah  iv.  4 ;  Heb.  x.  12).  (2)  Continuance  in  that  state  (2  Kings 
viL  3).  3.  It  denotes — (1)  The  accomplishment  of  that  work,  and  the  consummation 
of  all  those  offices  which  He  was  to  perform  on  aarth  for  the  redemption  of  sinners 
(Heb.  iv.  10).  (2)  The  delight  and  satisfaction  the  Father  had  in  Christ,  and  in 
that  glorious  work  which  He  had  finished  (Psa.  ex.  1).  (3)  The  great  honour 
and  dignity  to  which  He  is  advanced  in  heaven  (Heb.  i.  13).  (4)  His  being  invested 
with  sovereign  dominion  and  supreme  authority  and  power  (Heb.  ii.  7-8).  4.  The 
ends  for  which  He  sits.  (1)  That  as  a  mighty  King  He  may  protect  and  defend  His 
Church  and  people  against  the  rage  of  their  enemies  (Isa.  xxxii.  1-2;  Deut.  xxxiii. 
26-27).  (2)  That  He  may  subdue  all  the  enemies  of  His  people  (Psa.  ex.  1 ;  Acts  ii. 
36 ;  Heb.  x.  12-13 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  25).  (3)  That  with  royal  munificence  He  may  dispense 
to  His  faithful  subjects  all  these  gifts  and  graces  that  may  qualify  them  for  glory 
(Acts  V.  31).  (4)  That  He  may  act  as  a  powerful  intercessor  for  them  (Rom.  viiL 
84).  (5)  That  all  His  friends  and  followers  may  with  Him  be  translated  into 
heaven  and  be  advanced  into  the  glorious  state  of  kings  and  priests  (Eph.  i.  4-6 ; 
Rev.  iii.  21).  5.  Use.  (1)  Behold  the  great  difference  between  our  Redeemer's 
earthly  and  heavenly  state.  (2)  How  highly  our  nature  is  dignified  and  ennobled 
in  the  person  of  our  Redeemer.  (3)  This  lets  us  see  that  the  redemption  of  lost 
sinners  was  pleasing  unto  the  Father.  (4)  We  should  draw  near  to  Him  in  all  the 
duties  of  worship  with  the  reverence  that  beseems  His  Majesty.      (5)  Let  this 


lis  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Q 

exalted  Eedeemer  have  your  hands  and  your  heart.  (6)  Let  this  settle  and  com- 
pose  the  Lord's  people  with  resppct  to  the  state  and  interests  of  Christ's  kingdom 
(Isa.  lii.  7).  IV.  The  last  step  is  His  coming  to  judge  the  wokld.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.\ 
Christ's  exaltation: — In  the  former  verses  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  is  eclipsed; 
here  He  sbines  forth  in  all  His  strength  and  splendour.  The  doctrine  of  Christ's 
humiliation  leads  you  to  Mount  Calvary;  but  this  doctrine  leads  you  to  Mount 
Olivet.  There  yoa  may  see  Christ  standing  at  the  bar ;  here  you  see  Him  sitting 
on  the  throne.  I.  The  doctrine  of  Christ's  exaltation.  1.  It  pleased  God  that 
He  who  humbled  Himself  should  be  "  made  higher  than  the  heavens,"  that  He 
who  appeared  as  a  servant  should  now  appear  as  the  Lord  of  Glory.  The  word 
"  highly  exalted  "  is  emphatic  and  singular ;  His  exaltation  was  super-superlative. 
Jesus  Christ  in  His  resurrection  was  exalted;  in  His  ascension  "highly  exalted;" 
in  His  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  "  very  highly  exalted  above  all  exaltation." 
In  His  resurrection,  He  was  exalted  above  the  grave;  in  His  ascension,  above  the 
earth  ;  in  His  session,  above  the  highest  heavens.  The  steps  of  Christ's  exaltation 
answered  the  steps  of  His  humiliation.  (1)  His  incarnation  is  answerable  to  His 
resurrection,  for  by  the  first  He  was  "  manifest  in  the  flesh  "  the  Son  of  Man  ;  by 
the  second  "declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power"  (Rom.  i.  3-4).  (2)  His 
poor,  painful,  and  shameful  life,  and  His  painful  and  cursed  death,  is  answerable  to 
His  ascension  and  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  In  the  one  He  was  disparaged, 
in  the  second  honoured.  In  the  disparagement  He  was  lower  than  the  angels ; 
in  the  honour,  far  above  them  (Heb.  i.  5-13 ;  Eph.  i.  20-22).  (3)  His  coming  to 
judge  the  world  answers  His  being  judged  by  the  world.  The  former  is  the 
oompletion  of  His  exaltation  as  the  latter  was  of  His  degradation  (Isa.  Uii ;  John 
V.  22-23).  Jesus  by  His  resurrection  overcame  His  enemies  (Heb.  ii.  14) ;  by  His 
ascensiont  riumphed  over  them  (Cor.  ii.  15) ;  by  His  Judgeship  He  tries  and  con- 
demns them.  For  the  furtlier  demonstration  of  His  exaltation  note — 2.  That  God 
hath  given  Him  a  name  that  is  above  every  name.  (1)  What  is  to  be  understood 
by  this  name — the  power,  dignity,  and  authority  with  which  Ciirist  was  invested, 

(a)  Sometimes  name  is  put  for  glory  and  renown  (Gen.  vi.  4 ;  1  Chron.  v.  24, 
Heb.) ;  thus  Christ  is  invested  with  the  glory  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father 

(b)  for  the  power  and  sovereignty  by  which  Christ  is  King  of  nations  and  of  saints 
(John  X,  25  ;  Acts  iii.  6,  iv.  7).  Of  this  He  spake  at  the  ascension  (Matt,  xxviii. 
18).  And  tbe  glory  of  Christ's  name  is  such  that  shall  be  celebrated  through  all 
ages  (Luke  ii.  10-14 ;  Heb.  i.  6  ;  Rev.  v.  12).  (2)  How  hath  Christ  obtained  a 
name  above  every  name.  This  name  is  a  demonstration  of  Christ's  super-exaltation, 
and  notes  four  things,  (a)  That  Jesus  should  be  the  only  Saviour  of  the  world  (Acts 
iv.  11-12).  (b)  In  that  He  is  exalted  to  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  which  is  a 
name  or  honour  angels  never  had  (Heb.  i.  3,  4,  13).  (c)  Because  it  is  through  this 
name  that  the  name  of  God  becomes  a  comfort  to  us.  The  attributes  of  God  are 
the  "name  of  God."  To  a  Christless  sinner  all  the  attributes  of  God  are  against 
Him:  wisdom  (Jer.  xvii.  10;  1  John  iii.  20);  holiness  (Hab,  i.  13)  ;  justice; 
omnipotence.  But  the  name  of  Christ  maizes  the  name  of  God  a  sanctuary  (Prov. 
xviii.  10),  and  a  comfort :  wisdom  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  24  ;  Matt.  vi.  32) ;  holiness  (1  Cor. 
i.  10) ;  justice  (Rom.  iii.  25-26  ;  viii.  1) ;  omnipotence  (Rom.  viii.  31).  (d)  Because 
His  name  should  be  most  precious  and  powerful  in  His  Church  through  all 
generations  (Matt,  xviii.  20;  John  xiv.  13 ;  1  Cor.  v.  4  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  19).  (3)  How 
are  we  to  understand  that  God  hath  given  Him  a  name  ?  As  Mediator  ;  for  so  only 
was  He  capable  of  exaltation.  Not  as  God,  for  that  cannot  be,  nor  in  the  sense  of 
the  manifestation  of  His  glory,  for  the  sun  is  not  exalted  when  the  cloud  is  removed; 
nor  as  mere  man,  for  humanity  is  incapable  of  such  exaltation  and  worship  ;  but 
as  God-man.  3.  That  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow.  (1)  What 
is  meant  by  bowing  the  knee.  Some  understand  this  literally,  but  if  "  name  " 
stands  for  power  then  kneeling  must  mem  submission  (Gen.  xli.  43  ;  John  v. 
22-23).  (2)  Who  shall  bow  ?  (a)  All  knees  in  heaven  voluntarily,  (i)  The  good 
angels  who  always  obeyed  and  honoured  Christ  (Dan.  ix.  24-25 ;  Luke  i.  30-31, 
ii.  13-14 ;  Matt.  ii.  13,  iv.  11 ;  Luke  xxii.  43  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  6 ;  Acts  i.  11 ;  Heb.  i. 
6 ;  Matt.  xxv.  31).  All  this  service  was  performed  unto  Christ,  not  only  as  Creator 
(Col.  i.  16),  but  as  Governor  (Col.  ii.  10 ;  Eph.  i.  21-22).  (ii)  The  spirits  of  just 
men  made  perfect  (Rev.  v.  9-10;  iv.  8,  10).     (&)  On  earth  (i)  good  men  willingly 

g'sa.  ex.  3).  By  nature  they  are  children  of  disobedience  (Col.  iii.  6-7,  1,  21  ; 
om.  viii.  7).  But  the  grace  of  God  removes  that  "iron  sinew"  (Isa.  xlviii.  4). 
(ii)  Evil  men  nnder  compulsion  ;  because  they  do  not  willingly  bear  Christ's  yok« 
they  shall  beoome  His  footstool  (Psa.  ox.  1).    (c)  In  hell  (Lake  x.  17,  viii.  28-32 ; 


CHAP,  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  113 

James  ii.  19 ;  Col.  ii.  15  ;  Heb.  ii.  14).    4.  That  every  tongue  shall  confess,  Ac. 

(1)  What  is  meant  bj  every  tongue  ?     Not  simply  every  nation  but  every  person. 

(2)  What  is  meant  by  Jesus  is  Lord?  (1  Cor.  ii.  8).  (a)  As  Creator  (1  Cor.  viii. 
6 ;  Rom.  xi.  36).  (6)  As  Son  of  God  (Heb.  i.  2-4).  (c)  As  such  He  is  a  Lord  to 
command  us  and  to  save  us.  (3)  As  every  knee  must  bow  to  Christ's  dominion  bo 
every  tongue  must  confess  EUm  Lord,  (a)  Devils  and  wicked  men  (Rev.  vi.  16). 
(b)  Saints  and  angels  (Rev.  v.  12-1."]).  II.  The  end  of  Christ's  exaltation. 
As  God  had  no  motive  without  Himself,  so  Ho  had  no  end  beyond  Himself  in 
giving  Christ  (Eph.  i.  6).     For  this  Christ  prayed  (John  xii.  28).     III.  Appucation. 

I.  Use  of  infoimation,  as  Christ  first  suiiered  and  entered  into  His  glory  (Luke 
xxiv.  26),  even  so  must  we  (Acts  xiv.  22 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  11).  2.  Use  of  exhortation. 
1b  Christ  exalted  ?  Then  let  us,  our  tongues,  knees,  hearts,  Uves,  acknowledge 
Him  to  be  our  Lord.  (1)  What  Jews,  Pilate,  and  Herod  did  in  scorn,  let  us  do  in 
Bincerity.  (2)  Let  us  take  heed  that  we  do  not  violate  our  allegiance  to  Him 
(Exod.  ▼.  2 ;  Psa.  xii.  4 :  Luke  xix.  27).  (a)  Christ  is  only  a  Saviour  to  those  who 
Bubmit  to  Him  (Heb.  v.  9 ;  Tit.  ii.  11-12.  (b)  Every  knee  must  one  day  bow  to 
Him.  (c)  The  sins  of  Christians  are  far  greater  than  those  of  the  Jews  against 
Christ  who  sinned  against  Him  in  His  state  of  humiliation  (Heb.  vi.  6).  They  did 
it  in  ignorance  (Acts  iii.  17  ;  1  Cor  ii.  1).  {d)  Christ  at  last  will  be  too  hard  for  the 
hardest-hearted  sioner.  3.  Use  of  comfort  to  believers.  (1)  Is  Christ  exalted? 
then  we  may  comfoiiably  believe  that  He  hath  perfectly  satisfied  God's  justice  for 
us.  (2)  Christ  though  exalted  is  still  mindful  of  us  (Heb.  ii.  15-18).  (3)  Christ  is 
exalted  to  heaven,  and  so  shall  all  believers  be  in  due  time  (John  xvii.  24 ;  Cor.  iii. 
4).     (W.  Taylor,  A.B.) 

Ver.  9.  God  hath  .  .  .  given  Him  a  name  which  Is  above  every  name. — The 
name  of  Jesm,  as  it  appears — I.  On  the  page  of  history.  1.  Its  origin.  2. 
Import,  3.  Associations.  4.  Claims.  II.  In  the  estimate  of  man.  1.  Despised 
and  hated.  2.  Admired  and  wondered  at.  3.  Beloved  and  reverenced.  III.  In 
the  purpose  of  God  :  triumphant,  worshipped  by  all  in  heaven,  on  earth,  under 
the  earth.  (-7.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  name  Jesus  means  Saviour  (Matt.  i.  21).  L 
There  is  something  to  be  saved  from:  sin.  1.  From  its  penalty.  2.  From  its 
guilt.  Desert  of  punishment  is  worse  than  punishment  itself.  3.  From  its  power. 
The  sinner  needs  not  only  cleansing  from  the  past,  but  protection  for  the  future. 

II.  There  is  one  who  will  save  (1  Tim.  i.  15).  How?  1.  By  His  incarnation, 
getting  Himself  into  connection  with  man's  nature  and  condition.  2.  By  His  work 
of  reconciliation.  3.  By  winning  man's  attention,  gratitude,  and  trust  through 
His  own  unutterable  condescension.  4.  By  cleansing  him  from  sin.  (G.  D. 
Boardnuin,  D.D.)  The  navie  above  every  navie  : — I.  Its  acquisition.  The  name 
of  Jesus  was — 1.  Chosen  by  God.  2.  Sanctified  and  approved  by  Christ's  suffering. 
3.  Glorified  by  His  exaltation.  II.  Its  glort.  None  other  is — 1.  So  great.  2. 
So  mighty.  3.  So  dear.  4.  So  enduring.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  A  name  is  a  call- 
word  by  which  we  Keparate  objects  and  give  to  each  its  identity.  I.  The  names, 
however,  of  familiar  objects  are  not  mere  arbitrary  signs,  but  symbols  of  quality. 
The  words  eagle,  horse,  bring  a  picture  before  the  imagination.  No  picture  rises 
at  a  foreign  name,  although  it  discriminates  and  separates.  Homo  once  had  a 
picture  in  it,  but  not  now :  although  man  has.  II.  We  see  this  more  strikingly 
illustrated  in  the  names  of  men.  A  village  of  people  have  their  portraits  in  their 
names.  1.  Physically.  As  A.  is  called,  there  is  a  vision  of  a  tall  man;  as  B.,  of 
a  short  man.  2.  Socially  and  economically.  One  man  would  be  generous  and 
another  stingy.  3.  Morally.  Faith,  zeal,  genius,  are  stored  up  in  names.  III. 
We  see  thnt  personal  names  stand  for  abstract  excellences.  Thus  lover,  father, 
chUd,  <S;c.,  go  to  signify  domestic  excellences.  When  the  word  mother  is  spoken, 
not  only  does  your  mother  come  forth  to  your  imagination  in  feature,  but  those 
qualities  which  make  all  mothers  differ  from  other  relations.  IV.  By  the  extension 
of  this  practice  names  come  to  signify  historic  qualities.  Plato  means  thought; 
Demosthenes,  eloquence ;  Nero,  cruelty ;  Napoleon,  military  genius ;  Howard, 
philanthropy.  V.  The  name  of  Jesus  is  above  every  name  ;  not  simply  that 
His  name  is  highest  on  the  list,  although  that  is  the  fact.  We  are  to  give  to  the 
term  "  name  "  as  applied  to  Him  its  full  proportions  and  richness  of  meaning.  1. 
Christ's  name  is  above  that  of  all  historical  personages.  The  sum  of  their  life  is 
small  compared  to  the  magnitude  of  His.  2.  If  you  gather  the  witnesses  and 
martyrs  that  have  lived  in  every  age,  the  great  men  and  nobles  of  whom  the  world 
was  not  worthy,  there  is  not  one  of  them  that  is  not  dwarfed  by  the  side  of  the 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

name  of  Jesus.  3.  If  you  go  from  the  best  specimens  of  men  to  philosophers, 
poets,  scholars,  whatever  admiration  is  bestowed  on  them,  no  one  would  dream 
that  their  name  was  to  be  mentioned  by  the  side  of  His.  4.  There  are  judges' 
names  that  signify  perfect  justice,  kins'  and  princes'  that  signify  authority, 
splendour,  and  jjower.  But  has  the  woud  stored  up  in  any  of  these  names  such 
associations  as  belong  to  Jesus  ?  Is  there  anywhere  such  justice  and  imperialnesa 
as  there  are  in  Him  ?  Already  His  name  stands  higher  for  the  very  qualities  which 
go  to  make  courts  illustrious,  that  make  men  glorious  in  history.  Once  a  culprit 
under  the  hand  of  Rome,  but  now  through  a  wider  world  than  the  Roman,  thos* 
governments  who  do  not  acknowledge  Him  are  feeble  and  barbarous.  5.  But  there 
is  a  more  important  matter  of  comparison — the  names  of  chief  power  on  the  heart— 
heart-names.  In  each  quality  which  makes  the  dearest  names  in  life  Christ  so 
excels  that  He  is  infinitely  above  all  others.  (1)  All  the  love  and  authority  which 
there  is  in  "  father"  is  dark  compared  with  that  special  element  in  Jesus.  Christ 
is  more  in  those  very  qualities  which  make  a  father  dear  to  his  children  than  all 
fathers.  (2)  All  those  indescribable  and  tender  graces  which  make  "  mother  "  the 
queenly  name  Christ  has  in  such  abundance  and  perfectness  that  a  mother's  heart 
by  the  side  of  His  would  be  like  a  taper  at  mid-day.  (3)  He  is  more  tender  in  love 
than  any  lover  ever  knew  how  to  be.  No  love-letter  was  ever  written  which  can 
compare  with  what  may  be  gathered  from  the  Bible  describing  the  inflexions  of 
Divine  love  toward  men.  (4)  The  enduring  intimacy  of  exalted  love  in  true 
wedlock  carries  up  onr  conceptions  of  possible  happiness  to  the  very  gate  of  heaven, 
but  when  we  have  carried  it  to  the  uttermost  there  comes  the  outbursting  light  ol 
that  mystic  love  of  Christ  to  the  Church  which  rides  higher  than  poetry  can  follow 
or  than  experience  ever  went.  (5)  But  this  world  is  but  our  outhouse  of  creation. 
When  we  have  carried  these  suggestions  from  the  realm  of  experience  ap  to  in- 
visible heaven,  we  find  that  the  name  of  Jesus  is  above  all  these.  There  are  beings 
who  rise  not  only  higher  than  men  in  wisdom,  power,  goodness,  <fec. ,  but  there  is  a 
gradation  among  them:  thrones,  dominions,  &c.,  in  long  succession;  and  we  find 
Christ  towering  above  them,  "chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely." 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  name  above  every  name: — The  Saviour's  name  is  above 
every  name  in  respect  of — I.  The  greatness  it  represents.  There  is  in  it — 1.  The 
greatness  of  nature.  That  which  is  not  natively  great  cannot  be  truly  and  pre- 
eminently great.  Can  the  native  greatness  of  Christ  be  less  than  that  of  Deity  if 
He  is  capable  of  receiving  the  glory,  power,  and  dominion  that  are  ascribed  to 
Him  ?  There  are  two  extremes  of  error  :  the  Unitarian,  assimilating  the  Divine  in 
Christ  to  the  human ;  and  the  Roman  Catholic,  ascribing  to  the  human  Virgin  what 
can  only  be  Divine.  2.  Greatness  of  character.  Christ  is  the  greatest  of  characters, 
because  in  Him  meet  all  the  attributes  of  Godhead  and  all  the  perfections  oi 
manhood.  3.  The  greatness  of  mission  and  work.  In  His  mediation  confessedly 
He  stands  alone ;  li  ■  a  race  that  needs  salvation  cannot  raise  up  one  as  a  partaker 
of  the  Saviour  in  His  work.  II.  The  influence  which  it  exerts.  1.  Through 
it  alone  salvation  comes  as  a  personal  possession.  2.  Every  blessing  that  comes 
to  the  soul  comes  in  connection  with  this  name.  3.  The  results  of  experimental 
Christianity  will  not  work  where  His  name  is  denied  or  ignored.  Physical,  and 
even  moral,  truths  may  bless  the  world  when  their  propounders  are  forgotten. 
Not  so  with  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  In  vain  we  are  told  that  religion  is  not  a 
matter  of  history.  Take  away  what  is  Divine  in  Jesus,  and  you  pnt  out  the  sun 
and  endeavour  to  produce  light  by  a  book  on  optics.  III.  The  space  which  » 
FILLS.  Wherever  there  is  intelligence  it  is  understood  ;  wherever  there  is  loyalty  it  is 
adored.  It  is  coincident  with  civilization,  law.  liberty,  social  ties,  and  charities ;  a 
name  of  welcome  and  cheer  to  all  that  is  true,  lovely,  and  of  good  report.  IV.  Thb 
PERIOD  through  WHICH  IT  ENDURES.  There  are  names  chronicled  in  history  which 
we  would  williiigly  let  die;  but  there  is  a  fitness  and  reasonableness  in  the  perpetua- 
tion of  Christ's  name.  At  the  same  time  there  is  something  surprising  in  it. 
Christ  endures  in  an  entirely  different  character  from  great  conquerors  and 
geniuses,  as  the  founder  of  true  religion,  and  the  head  of  the  Church.  The  name 
of  Mohammed  still  endures,  but  is  waning,  whereas  that  of  Jesus  is  going  into  new 
regions.  This,  too,  in  spite  of  opposition  to  His  claims.  (Principal  Cairns.) 
The  music  of  two  syllables : — The  name  of  Jesus  is — I.  An  east  name  1.  Easily 
pronounced.  There  are  names  so  long  and  difficult  that  they  have  to  be  repeated 
before  we  venture  to  speak  them  ;  but  within  the  first  two  years  a  child  clasps  its 
hands  and  says  Jesus.  2.  Easily  remembered.  Sometimes  we  have  to  pause 
before  we  can  recall  the  names  of  our  best  friends,  but  we  cannot  imagine  the 


CHAP,  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  HI 

freak  of  intellect  in  which  we  could  forget  this.  3.  Easily  recognized.  TLe 
dying  have  been  known  to  be  oblivious  to  everything  else.  II.  A  beautitoi.  name. 
It  is  impossible  to  dissociate  a  name  from  the  person  who  bears  it.  Names 
which  are  attractive  to  some  are  repulsive  to  others,  because  the  same  name 
is  borne  by  different  persons,  and  thus  they  convey  pleasant  or  painful  sugges- 
tions to  diffunnit  people.  But  this  name  is  the  same  to  all,  and  stands  for  love, 
patience,  magnanimity,  and  every  beautiful  quality.  To  the  penitent,  afflicted, 
aged,  it  is  alike  beautiful.  III.  A  miohty  name.  Bothschild  is  a  potent  name  iu 
the  financial  world,  Cuvier  in  the  scientific,  Wellington  in  the  military;  but  no 
name  is  so  potent  to  awe,  lift,  thrill,  and  bless  as  that  of  Jesus.  That  one  word 
unhorsed  Saul,  and  flung  Newton  on  his  face.  That  name  in  Euir'and  means 
more  than  the  queen ;  in  Germany  more  than  the  emperor.  At  its  utterance  sin, 
infidelity,  sorrow,  and  death  flee  away.  All  the  millions  of  the  race  are  to  know 
and  honour  it  IV.  An  endorino  name.  You  pull  aside  the  weeds  and  see  the 
faded  inscription  on  the  tombstone.  That  was  the  name  of  a  man  who  once  ruled 
that  town.  The  mightiest  names  in  the  world  are  perishing  or  have  perished. 
Gregory  VI.,  Richard  I.,  Louis  XIV.,  names  that  once  made  the  world  tremble, 
mean  now  to  the  mass  absolutely  nothing.  But  the  name  of  Christ  is  to  live  for 
ever.  It  will  be  perpetuated  in  art,  in  song,  in  architecture,  in  literature,  and 
above  all,  will  be  embalmed  in  the  memory  of  the  good  on  earth  and  all  the  great 
ones  in  heaven.  To  destroy  it  would  require  a  universal  conflagration.  (T.  De 
Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  exalted  name  of  Jesus  : — I.  The  meaning  of  the  name 
(Matt.  i.  18,  &o.) — Saviour,  "  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins."  Who 
shall  save  ?  "  He."  Not  we  or  they.  If  I  could  save  myself,  Christ  would  be  no 
more  Jesus  to  me.  IL  Its  poweb.  1.  It  has  power  as  an  authority  It  gave 
Peter  and  John  authority  to  heal  the  cripple,  Paul  and  Silas  to  dispossess  the 
damsel  of  the  devil,  and  all  to  proclaim  salvation.  2.  As  a  test  (Col  iii.  17)  of 
lawfulness  and  unlawfulness,  &c.  "  Can  I  do  this  or  that  in  this  name  ?  "  3  Aa 
a  plea ;  in  prayer  for  pardon  and  blessing,  "  Whatsoever  ye  ask  the  Father  in  My 
name,"  &c.  III.  Irs  majesty.  There  have  been  great  names  in  the  world — 
Alexander,  Caesar,  Napoleon ;  but  these  have  little  majesty  compared  with  those  of 
Abraham,  David,  and  Paul.  But  there  are  names  higher  than  these — Michael, 
Gabriel.  But  all  these  are  dim  as  faiing  stars  compared  with  His,  whose  glory  is 
as  the  rising  sun,  whose  beams  shall  illumine  a  whole  universe.  At  it  all  shall 
one  day  bend  the  knee.  IV.  Its  preciodsness.  What  makes  the  name  of  home 
precious  J  Its  hallowed  associations  And  round  this  name  do  cluster  the  sweetest 
memories,  endearing  it  to  pardoned  sinners.  Whisper  that  one  word  Jesus,  and  I 
think  of  Bethlehem  and  Calvary,  and  faces  of  the  dear  departed  rise  before  me,  and 
I  hear  once  more  the  old  songs,  and  see  the  light  of  former  Sabbaths.  All  heaven 
is  hidden  in  the  name,  and  all  hopes  hang  upon  it.  (H.  O.  Guinnets.)  The 
importance  of  a  name : — There  are  merely  human  names  that  thrill  you  through 
and  through.  Such  a  name  was  that  of  Henry  Clay  to  the  Kentuckian,  William 
Wirt  to  the  Virginian,  Daniel  Webster  to  the  New  Englander.  By  common 
proverb  we  have  come  to  believe  that  there  is  nothing  in  a  name,  and  so  parents 
sometimes  present  their  children  for  baptism  regardless  of  the  title  given  them, 
and  not  thinking  that  that  particular  title  will  be  either  a  hindrance  or  a  help. 
Strange  mistake.  You  have  no  right  to  give  to  your  child  a  name  that  is  lacking 
either  in  euphony  or  in  moral  meaning.  It  is  a  sin  for  you  to  call  your  child 
Jehoiakim  or  Tiglath-Pileser.  Because  you  yourself  may  have  an  exasperating 
name  is  no  reason  why  you  should  give  it  to  those  who  c  me  after  you.  But  how 
often  we  have  seen  some  name,  filled  with  jargon,  rattling  down  from  generation 
to  generation,  simply  because  some  one  a  long  while  ago  happened  to  be  afflicted 
with  it.  Institutions  and  enterprises  have  sometimes  without  sufficient  delibera- 
tion taken  their  nomenclature.  Mighty  destinies  have  been  decided  by  the 
significance  of  a  name.  There  are  meu  who  all  their  life  long  toil  and  tussle 
to  get  over  the  influence  of  some  unfortunate  name.  While  we  may,  through  right 
behaviour  and  Cliristian  demeanour,  outhve  the  fact  that  we  were  baptized  by  the 
name  of  a  despot,  or  an  infidel,  or  a  cheat,  how  much  better  it  would  have  been  if 
we  all  could  have  started  life  without  any  such  encumbrance.  {T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.)  The  preciousness  of  the  name  of  Jesus: — Years  ago  a  French  soldier 
who  loved  Napoleon  was  undergoing  an  operation,  and  as  the  surgeon  pressed  the 
probe  far  into  bis  lungs  to  feel  for  the  bullet  that  lay  there,  a  ghastly  smile  came 
over  his  face.  "  A  little  deeper,"  said  he,  "  and  you  will  find  the  emperor  1 "  And 
oh  I  I  tall  70a  Christ  has  had  thousands  of  followers,  who  have  had  His  nam* 


11«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  n. 

written  in  their  inmoBt  hearts,  deeper  than  all  other  names,  and  thoughts,  and 
memories — deeper  than  life,  and  death,  and  heaven — deeper  than  all,  for  ever  I 
(Ibid.)  A  Name  above  every  name  : — And  in  now  seeking  to  vindicate  the  applicability 
of  this  remarkable  language  to  our  blessed  Savioar,  I  would  at  once  ask  you  ta 
obsprve  that  in  a  certain  aspect  there  could  scarcely  have  been  a  career  that  seemed 
less  hkelv  to  eecure  future  j)re-eminence  than  just  the  earthly  career  of  Christ 
Jesus.  He  was  cradled  in  a  manger.  He  probably  did  live  a  life  of  toil  as  a 
village  carpenter.  He  certainly  spent  His  youth  in  a  town  whose  special  character- 
istics were  ignorance  and  vice.  And  when  He  became  a  man  and  emerged  from  His 
village  home  into  the  cities  of  Palestine,  Ho  waa  opposed  by  all  the  accredited 
leaders  of  the  people.  I  must  proceed  to  say  that  all  this  pre-eminence  of  Christ 
Jesus  is  most  natural,  and,  indeed,  most  necessary.  Just  as  no  one  marvels  why 
the  nftme  of  Newton  or  Watt  or  Jenner  or  Simpson  is  ever  held  by  us  in  most 
respectful  remembrance,  so  no  one  who  thinks  carefully  needs  wonder  that  count- 
less thousands  hail  with  delight  the  name  Je?us,  and  declare  that  this  name  is  all 
their  boast.  For,  apart  altogether  from  anything  supernatural  about  our  blessed 
Saviour — regarding  Him,  that  is,  simply  in  the  character  of  a  mere  man — what 
elements  of  true  greatness  were  wanting  in  this  Son  of  the  Virgin  Mary  ?  what 
powers  and  characteristics  are  there  which  evoke  men's  love  and  applause,  which 
secure  respect  and  reverence  and  esteem,  which  were  wanting  in  Him  who  is  the 
Captain  of  our  salvation  ?  Nay,  but  what  is  there  which  acts  as  a  magnet  upon 
men  which  was  not  possessed  with  peculiar  intensity  by  Him  of  whom  the  Father 
declared — "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased  "  ?  As  we  all  know, 
wisdom  usually  secures  ascendancy  among  men.  We  regard  Platos  and  Bacons  as 
our  mental  kings — as  real  intellectual  giants  amongst  us.  But  if  so,  how  could 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  occupy  any  other  than  the  front  rank  among  men  ?  bow  could 
He  be  anywhere  else  than  in  "  the  midst "  as  the  centre  of  attraction — the  exemplar 
man  ?  His  is  the  very  wisdom  of  the  Deity,  Most  naturally,  therefore,  does  the 
name  of  Jesus  secure  pre-eminence.  And  while  wisdom  has  ever  been  an  attractive 
power  among  men,  so  also  we  know  that  goodness  invariably  secures  respect  and 
esteem  for  those  who  have  it.  Benevolence,  indeed,  rules  our  hearts  as  if  with  pre- 
scriptive right ;  and  self-sacrifice  for  the  good  of  others  evokes  the  plaudits  of  all 
thoughtful  persons.  No  doubt  there  are  times  at  which  this  is  not  so.  In  days  in 
which  an  all-wise  God  gives  men  over  to  the  open  practice  of  sin,  all  respect  for 
goodness  and  virtue,  for  the  virtuous  and  good,  is  abandoned.  But  if  all  these 
things  are  so,  how  could  the  name  of  Jesus — the  name  of  the  pure,  compassionate, 
self-denying  One — the  name  of  Him  who  literally  died  for  the  sons  of  men — but 
become  a  name  which  is  above  every  name  ?  It  would  have  been  an  insult  to  the 
common-sense  of  maukind  had  the  world  extolled,  as  it  does,  the  virtues  of  an 
Augustine,  a  Pn-.cal,  an  A  Kempis,  or  a  Vicars — had  men  talked  as  they  do  of  the 
comparatively  llickering  torches  of  holiness  which  were  waved  abroad  by  such  pious 
souls — and  yet  left  unnoticed  the  great  Sun  of  righteousness,  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  Unquestionably,  then,  the  pre-eminence  of  Christ's  name  is  a  natural  pre- 
eminence. He  reigns  because  He  has  a  right  to  reign,  because  He  possesses,  as 
none  other  ever  did,  all  those  qualities,  all  those  excellences,  all  tho^e  magnetic  in- 
fluences  by  means  of  which  hearts  are  enthralled  and  minds  made  submissive. 
(W.  L.  Ker,  M.A.) 

Vers.  10-11.  That  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow. — Bowing  at  the 
name  of  Jesus  : — I.  To  what  period  does  the  assertion  befee.  1.  Not  the  present, 
which  would  not  be  the  fact,  and  besides  the  text  is  a  prophecy.  Many  objects  are 
now  worshipped :  riches,  pleasure,  &c.  2,  At  the  judgment,  when  every  usurper 
will  be  dethroned,  and  every  rebel  crushed.  II.  The  persons  alluded  to.  1.  Hia 
willing  and  devoted  servants.  2.  Others  will  bow  unwillingly.  III.  The  conse- 
quences OF  this  event.  Jesus  will  reign  with  undisputed  sway.  1.  Sin  will  be 
banished  from  His  dominions.  2.  There  will  be  no  more  contention.  3.  There 
will  be  no  more  weakness  or  sorrow.  4.  There  will  be  no  more  fear  of  death. 
(W,  H.  Davison.)  The  supremacy  of  Christ : — I.  Is  univesal.  1.  In  heaven  and 
on  earth.  2.  In  the  control  of  providence  and  grace.  3.  In  the  administration 
of  mercy  and  judgment.  II.  Must  be  universally  acknowledged.  1.  By 
His  enemies  as  by  His  friends.  2.  To  this  end  He  is  exalted  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  III.  Secures  the  glory  of  God.  1.  In  the  accomplishment  of 
Hia  purpose.  2.  The  revelation  of  Hia  character.  3.  The  completion  of  His 
kingdom.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        Chritt't  claims: — I.  The  ciaims  of  Chbisi  upon 


CHAP,  n.)  PHILIPPIANS.  117 

our  faith ;  Bubmission ;  obedience ;  love.  II,  His  poweb  to  enforce  them. 
He  is  exalted ;  as  Lord  of  all.  III.  The  certainty  of  their  finai.  acknow- 
ledgment. Every  knee  shall  bow,  rtc. ;  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  (Ihid.) 
The  triumphs  of  Christ : — Before  many  a  Popish  shrine  on  the  continent  one  sees 
exhibited  a  great  variety  of  crutches,  together  with  wax  models  of  arms,  legs,  and 
other  lirabs.  These  are  supposed  to  represent  the  cures  wrought  by  devotion  at 
that  altar ;  the  memorials  of  the  healing  power  of  the  saint.  Poor  miserable 
superstition  all  of  it,  and  yet  what  a  rerniuiler  to  the  believer  in  Jesus  as  to  his 
duty  and  his  privilege  I  Having  pleaiied  at  the  feet  of  Jesas,  we  have  found 
salvation  ;  have  we  remembered  to  record  this  wonder  of  His  liand  ?  If  we  hung 
up  memorials  of  all  His  matchless  grace,  what  crutches,  and  bandages,  and  trophies 
of  every  sort  should  we  pile  together  I  (C  H.  Spuryeon.)  The  Supreme  King  : — 
At  a  missionary  meeting  on  the  Island  of  Earatonga,  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  an  old 
man,  who  wished  to  join  the  Church,  rose  and  said,  "  I  have  lived  during  the  reign 
of  four  kings.  In  the  first  we  were  continually  at  war,  and  a  fearful  season  it  was 
watching  and  hiding  with  fear.  During  the  leign  of  the  second  we  were  overtaken 
with  a  severe  famiue,  and  all  expected  to  perish ;  then  we  ate  rats  and  grass  and 
this  wood  and  that  wood.  During  the  third  we  were  conquered,  and  became  the 
peck  and  prey  of  the  two  other  settlements  of  the  island  ;  then  if  a  man  went  tp 
fish  he  rarely  ever  retun.ed,  or  if  a  woman  went  far  away  to  fetch  food  she  was 
rarely  ever  seen  again.  But  during  the  reign  of  this  third  king  we  were  visited  by 
another  King,  a  great  King,  a  good  King,  a  peaceful  King,  a  King  of  love,  Jesus, 
the  Lord  from  heaven.  He  has  gained  the  victory.  He  has  conquered  our  hearts ; 
therefore  we  now  have  peace  and  plenty  in  this  world,  and  hope  soon  to  dwell  with 
Him  in  heaven."  (R.Brewin.)  Christ  must  be  confessed : — Victorinus,  a  teacher 
of  rhetoric  at  Home,  was  in  his  old  age  converted  to  Christianity,  and  came  to 
Simplicianns,  one  eminent  at  that  time  for  his  piety,  whispering  in  his  ear  softly 
these  words,  "  I  am  a  Christian  ;  "  but  this  holy  man  answered,  "  I  will  not  believe 
it,  nor  count  thee  so,  till  I  see  thee  among  the  Christians  in  the  church,"  at  which 
he  laughed,  saying,  "Do  then  those  walls  make  a  Christian?  cannot  I  be  such 
except  I  openly  profess  it,  and  let  the  world  know  the  same  ? "  This  he  said  for 
fear,  being  yet  but  a  young  convert,  though  an  old  man  ;  but  some  time  after,  when 
he  was  more  confirmed  in  the  faith,  and  had  seriously  considered  that  if  he  should 
continue  thus  ashamed  of  Christ,  He  would  be  ashamed  of  him  at  last,  he  changed 
his  purpose,  and  came  to  Simpliciauus,  saying,  "  Let  us  go  to  the  church,  I  will 
now  in  earnest  be  a  Christian."  And  there  he  made  an  open  confession,  observing 
that  "as  he  had  openly  professed  rhetoric,  which  was  not  essential  to  salvation,  he 
ought  not  to  be  afraid  to  own  the  Word  of  God  in  the  congregation  of  the  faithful." 
CW.  H.  Baxendale.)  We  must  speak  for  Christ: — Of  one  of  the  statues  in  the 
Campanile,  Florence,  it  is  said  that  Donatello,  when  giving  it  the  last  stroke  of  his 
chisel,  exclaimed,  in  enthusiastic  admiration,  "  Speak  1 "  So  Christ,  when  He  calla 
men  from  their  sins  and  re-createa  them  in  His  own  image,  says,  "  Tell  what  things 
Qod  hath  done  for  you."    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  12-18.  Wherefore  my  beloved,  as  ye  have  al\vays  oheyed. — I.  Thk  work. 
1.  Work  out  your  own  salvation.  2.  In  conformity  with  apostolic  teaching.  3. 
Under  all  circumstances.  II.  The  means.  1.  Divine  power.  8.  Personally  and 
Bolicitously  applied,  3.  In  the  spirit  of  contentment  and  peace.  III.  The  end. 
1.  That  ye  may  be  blameless,  sons  of  God.  2.  Shedding  hght  on  a  dark  world.  3. 
Multiplying  the  joy  of  the  Church  both  here  and  hereaft^.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  obedience  of  the  Christian  life : — I.  The  obedience  of  the  Christian  life 
u  THE  WORKING  OUT  OF  SALVATION.  1.  In  relation  to  God.  The  absolute  power  o£ 
God's  vrill,  which  is  the  law  to  every  creature  and  the  accepted  law  to  the  Christian, 
IB  regarded  as  expressing  itself  within  the  heart  of  man.  (1)  "  Worketh  in  you  "  is 
ased  elsewhere  of  that  internal  energy  of  God  which  is  the  spring  of  all  other 
energy  (1  Cor.  xii.  6  ;  Eph.  i.  11).  But  here  it  is  the  spiritual  volition  alone  that 
is  meant,  that  special  influence  of  God  apon  the  will  and  act  of  man  in  the  things 
which  pertain  to  the  Divine  good  pleasure.  (2)  •'  His  good  pleasure  "  imparts  to 
•*  worketh  in  us  "  a  character  of  love  and  perfect  freedom  that  must  never  be  lost 
sight  of  in  our  consideration  of  God's  working  on  the  human  heart.  His  influences 
ere  not  mechanical  and  unbending,  working  out  a  pre-determined  law  of  election, 
but  pre-spontaneous  and  springing  from  the  heart.  God  can  study  and  adapt 
Himself  to  His  creature's  freedom.  In  the  profound  mystery  of  our  co-operation 
with  Divine  grace  it  is  oar  own  will  and  act  while  it  is  God's.     The  obedience  oi 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  Christian  to  the  law  within  Him  is  perfect  freedom.     2.  In  regard  to  the  service 
it  performs.      (1)   The  object  of  this  service  is  personal  salvation.      We  are  to 
imitate  the  obedience  of  Christ  in  the  utmost  possible  care  of  our  own  souls,  as  if 
our  salvation  were  the  very  service  of  our  covenant  with  God.     But  lest  this  should 
be  carried  to  a  morbid  exce&s  the  apostle  adds  the  other  lessons  on  self  in  this 
chapter  and  elsewhere.     (2)  Does  the  apostle  mean  by  the  peculiar  stress  He  lays 
on  "your  own"  that  whatever  God's  inr.ard  working  may  mean,  the  accomplish- 
ment in  result  must  be  the  working  out  on  man's  part  of  an  actual  salvation  ?     Or 
does  He  refer  to  the  Redeemer's  intervention,  and  indirectly  bid  them  remember 
that  His  obedience  has  not  rendered  theirs  superfluous  ?     Or  *'  As  ye  obeyed  in  My 
presence  when    I   could  give  you  My  aid,  &o.,   so   remember   that   neither  My 
presence  nor  My  absence  was  vital  to  your  interests  ?  "    We  may  mingle  all  these 
meanings.     Every  Christian  must  make  His  own  soul's  salvation  His  personal  care, 
and  not  so  to  rely  upon  Divine  grace,  atoning  redemption,  or  human  ministry  as  to 
neglect  his  own  persevering   sedulity.      3.  In  regard  to  its  spirit.      "  Fear  and 
trembling  "  is  divested  of  the  stern  and  depressing  character  it  wears  in  the  Old 
Testament.    In  the  New  it  is  always  used  in  connection  with  obedience,  and  always 
to  signify  vehement  eagerness  to  do  well  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).     There  is  here  no  idea  of 
trembling  apprehension  of  the  future,  nor  anything  but  the  humble  alacrity  that 
vibrates  with  eager  desire  to  obey.    II.  Salvation  most  be  wrought  out  in  thb 
MIDST  or  AN  EViii  WORLD.     In  "  fear  and  trembling  "  before  God,  and  "  without 
murmurings,"  &c.,  and  "  before  men."  They  are  to  yield  obedience  to  three  great  laws. 
1.  The  law  of  dignity.     (1)  They  are  children  of  God ;  (2)  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked 
and  perverse  generation ;  (3)  tlierefore  they  are  to  maintain  their  dignity.     2.  The 
law  of  the  preservation  of  purity.     The  force  of  the  exhortation  arises  from  the 
fact  that  as  "  lights  "  they  are  seen,  and  that  "  in  the  midst  of  the  perverse  nation 
they  are  to  let  their  influences  be  felt."     (1)  As  the  children  of  God  in  their  aspect 
towards  the  world  are  commanded  to  use  their  liberty  of  action  so  as  to  avoid  sin 
in  act,  here  they  are  commanded  to  abstain  from  receiving  the  principle  of  it  again 
in  their  nature.     This  is  the  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  to  keep  themselves 
unspotted  from  the  world.     (2)  But  the  word  "  harmless"  seems  rather  to  mean 
"become"  than  be  pure.      There  is  a  process  of   purification  that  implies  the 
admixture  of  something  of  the  world's  evil  still  remaining.     Surely  this  is  verified 
by  the  experience  of  every  one  of  us.    The  provision,  however,  is  ample  for  the 
entire  cleansing  of  the  soul.     8.  The  law  of  a  pure  exhibition  of  character  for  the 
world's  teaching  and  example.     God  has  placed  His  people  in  the  world  to  be  to  it 
what  the  luminaries  are  in  nature.    And  of  this  the  reason  is  :  because  ye  hold  in 
yourselves  the  Word  which  is  the  light  of  life.    (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)        Divine 
help : — The  method  of  grace  is  the  method  of  nature  likewise.    There  is  a  pro- 
fusion of  plastic  elements  and  forces,  but  man  must  plough  the  soil,  sow,  reap, 
and  prepare  his  food  for  the  table  ;  combine  them,  build  the  house,  capital,  palace, 
cathedral ;  fashion  the  ship,  map  the  seas  and  stars,  use  the  compass,  and  guide 
the  rudder ;  discover  the  laws  of  matter,  invent  the  engine,  and  girdle  the  earth 
with  rail  and  wire.     (A.  H.  Moment,  D.D.)         Working  out  our  own  salvation: — 

1.  The  SPIRIT  IN  WHICH  THIS  GREAT  WORK  IS  TO  BE  PURSUED.  1.  What  will  come  of 
any  work  we  undertake  largely  depends  on  the  "  spirit"  in  which  we  undertake  it. 
We  may  enter  upon  it  half-heartedly,  or  as  something  merely  secondary.  But  our 
salvation  is  to  be  the  principal  thing  to  us;  and  working  it  out  is  to  be  thorough. 

2.  Wise  cautiousness.  "  Fear  and  trembling."  This  is  not  nervous  dread,  nor 
timorous  quaking,  but  a  keen  and  ceaseless  outlook  considering  foes  and  tempta- 
tions ;  a  self-distrust  that  sharpens  vigilance ;  a  recognition  of  danger  and 
preparedness  to  meet  it.  3.  Cheerfulness — "without  murmurings."  The  work  we 
do  cheerfully  brings  its  own  blessing.  Do  not,  then,  do  it  in  a  grudging,  com- 
plaining spirit;  and  this,  not  only  in  doing  but  in  bearing.  4.  Hopefulness — 
'♦  without  disputings,"  not  with  men  but  with  God.  Distrust  of  God  will  sap  our 
sources  of  strength.  Work  out  with  unquestioning  trust  in  God's  wisdom,  goodness, 
and  power.  5.  Becomingness,  in  view  of  their  relationship.  They  are  "  the  sons 
of  God,"  they  must  live  as  God's  sons — holy,  loving,  &o.  Their  lineage  should 
show  itself  in  their  spirit.  II.  The  incentives  to  this  course  or  conduct.  1. 
Consistency.  The  work  is  begun  and  ought  in  consistency  to  be  finished.  Men 
plead  consistency  as  an  argument  for  a  bad  course,  as  Herod  in  the  case  of  John 
the  Baptist ;  much  more  should  Christians  for  a  good  one.  2.  God's  help.  In 
working  out  our  salvation  we  are  not  left  to  our  own  unaided  powers.  Because  we 
have  effectual  help  let  us  be  thorough,  &e.,  in  this.     3.  Besponsibility — "  lights  in 


CHAP,  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  119 

the  world."    Be  then  as  the  lighthouse  and  the  star.     4.  Personal  relations.     They 
»re  the  apostle's  spiritual  children.     (<7.  J.  Goadby.) 

Vers.  12-13.  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling. — Here 
is — L  HoPB  for  all.  II.  Help  for  alL  III.  Work  for  all.  IV.  A  kind  wobd  for 
all.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Salvation: — I.  Is  youb  own  concern.  L  Others  may 
be  solicitous  about  you.  2.  You  must  bear  the  responsibility.  II.  Demands 
effort.  1.  It  is  not  of  works.  2.  Yet  it  must  be  worked  out.  HI.  Must  be 
ANXIOUSLY  PROSECUTED.  1.  With  peaceful  confidence  in  God.  2.  Yet  with  fear 
and  trembling.  (Ibid.)  The  way  of  salvation: — I.  The  invaluable  BLEssiNa 
SET  BEFORE  US.  1.  The  blessing  itself — Salvation.  What  is  that  ?  Deliverance 
from  sin.  Had  there  been  no  sin  there  would  have  needed  no  salvation.  But 
having  sinned  man  has  lost  likeness  to  God,  love  for  God,  life  with  God,  and  he 
wants  these  restored.  But  he  cannot  get  them  back  of  himself.  Christ,  however, 
has  secured  them  for  him ;  deliverance  (1)  from  the  cur.^e  of  sin.  Christ  has 
taken  this  upon  Himself  (Horn,  viii,  1).  (2)  From  the  dominion  of  sin.  That  is 
made  the  slave  which  all  along  has  been  the  master.  (3)  From  all  the  consequences 
of  sin.  (a)  Separation  from  God.  Being  saved  from  sin  man  has  access  to  God. 
(b)  Eternal  punishment.  2.  Your  interest  in  this  salvation.  You  hear  people  say, 
"  That  is  my  own  house,  my  own  business,"  and  lay  great  emphasis  on  the  "own," 
And  your  own  salvation  has  a  peculiar  emphasis  connected  with  it.  Christ's 
salvation  is  a  common  salvation,  and  you  do  well  to  publish  it ;  but  what  if 
heathens  should  possess  it,  and  you  through  the  want  of  it  be  lost.  II.  Thb 
MEANS  OF  ITS  ATTAINMENT.  "  Work  out,"  ctc.  1.  Negatively :  this  does  not  mean 
— (1)  To  make  an  atonement  for  sin.  Salvation  in  that  respect  is  finished.  (2) 
That  you  are  saved  through  your  work.  There  is  no  more  merit  in  it  than  there  is 
in  receiving  alms  from  a  benefactor.  2.  Positively;  it  is — (1)  To  labour  to  believe, 
and  receive  salvation — by  reading,  hearing,  meditation,  &o.  (2)  To  labour  to  secure 
the  enjoyment  of  salvation.  Many  have  it,  but  not  the  joy  of  it.  This  is  secured 
by  prayer  and  Christian  work.  (3)  Labour  to  exhibit  and  practise  salvation.  You 
cannot  hold  the  world  and  sin  in  one  hand,  and  salvation  in  the  other.      III.  The 

ENCOURAGEMENT   TO    USE    THE    MEANS    PRESCRIBED.        Do  UOt  Say,  trembling  SOul,  thoU 

hast  no  strength,  "I  would  work,  dut  am  so  feeble."  Thy  helper  is  God.  1.  He 
works  "to  will."  He  does  not  re-form  tlie  natural  faculty  of  the  will;  but  sweetly 
and  powerfully  constrains  that  will  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  2.  He  works  "  to  do." 
Sometimes  you  have  the  will  but  not  the  strength.  But  as  God  works  in  us 
principles  of  action — faith,  love,  and  regard  for  His  glory — so  when  these  principles 
are  quickened  and  brought  into  practice,  what  cannot  a  man  do?  {J.  Sherman.) 
Your  own  salvation : — Hearers  often  allege  that  preachers  deal  with  subjects  in 
which  they  have  no  interest,  or  with  unpractical  themes  or  with  myfterious 
dogmas.  No  such  charge  can  be  preferred  against  this.  I.  The  matter  under 
CONSIDERATION.  Salvatiou ;  which  contains  within  it  deliverance — 1.  From  the 
guilt  of  our  past  sins.  This  is  a  matter  of  grave  consideration.  (1)  God  thinks  so, 
or  He  would  not  have  sent  His  Son  and  His  Spirit.  (2)  The  Church  thinks  so,  or 
earnest  men  and  women  would  not  make  such  sacrifices  to  bring  men  to  this 
salvation.  (3)  The  angels  think  so,  or  there  would  not  be  joy  in  their  presence  at 
sinners  repentmg.  (4)  The  devils  and  lost  spirits  think  so,  or  the  one  would  not 
endeavour  to  thwart  salvation,  nor  the  others  (as  Dives)  long  so  ardently  for  the 
salvation  of  their  living  brethren.  Nothing  so  much  concerns  any  one  as  this.  (1) 
What  is  it  to  have  a  healthy  body  if  you  have  a  perishing  soul  1  (2)  What  is 
wealth  if  that  which  is  more  precious  than  the  whole  world  be  lost  ?  (3)  What  are 
honour  and  reputation  if  we  have  to  hear,  "  Depart  from  Me."  II.  Whose  jiatteb 
is  IT?  "Your  own."  1.  The  sin  you  commit  is  your  own  and  its  condemnation. 
You  may  share  in  other  men's  sins  and  they  in  yours;  but  a  burden  lies  on  you  which 
no  one  can  touch.  You  mnst  obtain  it,  for  this  a  personal  pardon,  or  you  are  undone 
for  ever.  You  must  yourself  repent,  believe,  Ac.  2.  You  must  personally  die,  and  in 
that  dying  we  shall  haveeither  personal  comfort  or  personal  dismay.  When  death  is 
past,  salvation  is  still  "  our  own. "  There  is  a  personal  heaven  for  a  personal  believer. 
But  if  you  have  it  not,  it  will  be  your  own  damnation.  No  one  will  be  condemned 
for  vou.  A  substitute  there  is  now,  but  not  then.  3.  You  may  be  tempted  to 
forget  your  own  salvation  by  thoughts  of  other  people.  Eeverse  the  process.  (1) 
Members  of  the  Church.  (2)  Ofiicial  Christians.  3.  Unpractical  doctrinists.  (4) 
Speculatists.  (5)  Critics.  (6)  Those  who  have  espoused  great  public  designs. 
Protestant  controversialists,  reformers,  <feo.     III.  Answebs  to  objections.     1.  "la 


MO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  u. 

it  not  all  fixed  ?  Don't  you  believe  in  predestination  ?  What  have  we  then  to  do 
with  our  own  salvation  ?  "  Is  it  not  fixed  whether  you  shall  be  nourished  with  food 
to-day  or  shall  go  hungry  ?  Why  then  will  you  go  home  and  eat  your  dinner  ? 
You  do  not  reason  so  wickedly  and  foolishly  about  any  other  subject  but  this.  2. 
Do  you  not  believe  in  full  assurance  ?  Yes,  but  presumption  is  not  assurance,  and 
the  most  fully  assured  are  those  who  are  most  careful  about  their  own  salvation. 
3.  ••  This  is  very  selfish."  Yes,  but  it  is  a  selfishness  that  is  needful  before  you 
can  be  unselfish.  How  can  you  be  of  any  service  to  others  if  you  are  not 
saved  yourself.  IV.  IIender  some  assistance.  Ask  yourself,  "Am  I  saved?" 
1.  Does  God  work  in  you  ?  Eave  you  a  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  your 
soul  ?  If  BO,  you  are  saved.  2.  Does  your  salvation  rest  wholly  on  Christ  ? 
If  you  are  hanging  on  anything  but  the  Cross  you  are  deceived.  3.  Have 
you  turned  your  back  on  sin  ?  4.  If  not,  "  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
&c.         (C    H.    Spxirgeon.)  The    working    out    of    salvation : — Salvation    is 

founded  on  the  mediation  of  Christ,  but  it  is  perfected  by  personal  co-operation. 
This  is  your  own  salvation,  because — I.  It  must  be  wkocght  out  in  yourself. 
It  must  have  all  the  distinctiveness  which  pertains  to  individuality  of  character. 
1.  Its  sphere  is  in  the  man.     Christianity  Is  not  an  outward  application,  but  an 
inward  work;  not  rites,  &c.,  but  life.     2.  It  is  marked  by  attributes  so  distinct  as 
to  isolate  it  and  make  it  our  own.     Every  man  has  his  own  infirmities,  and  hence 
the  work  of  grace  differs  in  individuals.     II.  It  must  be  bkought  out  by  your- 
self.   The  necessity  of  Divine  iufluence  is  assumed — "  It  is  God  that  worketh  in 
you."     We  cannot  be   too  deeply   conscious  of  our  entire  dependence;  but  we 
cannot  be  too  much  alive  to  our  personal  obligations.     The  latter  will  be  the  basis 
of  the  judgment.      The  ministry  of  the  Word,  &c.,  are  highly  important ;  but  they 
must  not  be  substitutes  for  personal  Christianity.      III.  It  must  be  wrought  out 
FOB  yourself.    Every  Christian  is  now  shaping  the  character  of  his  salvation  in 
the  world  to  come  where  "  every  one  will  receive,"  &c.  (J.  E.  M.  A.)     The  working 
out  of  salvation : — I.  The  salvation  which  is  to  be  wrought  out.    "  Salvation  " 
has  two  senses — deliverance,   and  a  being  raised  to  that  state  of  holiness  and 
happiness  which  God  designs.      In  the  text  it  includes  both.      Salvation  was  not 
finished  on  the  cross.     It  was  not  even  secured ;  since  something  depends  upon  our 
own  act.     Salvation  is  a  process.     The  first  step  is  deliverance  from  blindness  and 
insensibility;  the  second,  from  condemnation.    Our  salvation, then, proceeds  into  a 
state  of  entire  conformity  to  the  mind  of  Christ.     Yet  it  supposes  growth,  even 
then.      It  is  also  preservation,  every  moment,  from  temptation,  sloth,  neglect,  im- 
patience, until  at  death  the  pure  spirit  is  committed  into  the  hands  of  the  Father, 
and  enters  upon  the  perfect  happiness  of  heaven.    II.  The  manner  in  which  it 
18  TO  BE  wrought  OUT.     1.  "  Work  "  denotes  a  vigorous  application  of  the  mind 
to — (1)  Serious  thoughts.     (2)  Prayerful  exercises  of  faith.     (3)  The  government 
of  the  heart.     (4)  The  resistance  of  temptation.     (5)  The  means  of  grace.     (6) 
Practical  religion.    2.  Salvation  is  to  be  worked  out.      By  repentance  and  faith  till 
Justification  and  sanctification  are  secured.     Our  daily  contests  and  attainments 
most  be  prosecuted  till  the  conqueror  be  crowned.     3.  With  fear  and  trembling. 
Beware  of  the  treachery  of  the  heart.     The  number  who  have  fallen  ;  the  immense 
stake  at  issue ;  the  frown  of  God.    III.  The  encouragement.     1.  This  settles  the 
disputed  point  of  Divine    help   and    human    agency ;    not  philosophically  but 
practically.     God  does  not  so  work  in   man  as  to  render  him  a  mechanical 
instrument ;  nor  does  man  so  work  as  that  the  work  is  attributed  to  his  own 
powers.      1.  A  great  part  of  the  controversy  respecting  free-will  arises  from  not 
distinguishing  between  a  power  to  will  and  the  act   of  willing.     That  such  a 
distinction  is  just,  appears  most  clearly  from  God's  working  in  us  "  to  do."      Now, 
it  were  absurd  to  say,  God  "  does,"  that  is,  prays,  watches,  and  believes,  for  us ; 
but  He  gives  the  power.     It  were  equally  absurd  to  say,  God  "  wills  "  for  us;  but 
He  gives  the  power  to  will;  for  He  restores  free-agency.    Again:  If  God  necessitated 
our  doing.  He  would  not  "  work  in  us  to  do,"'  but  by  us  to  do ;  so,  if  He  necessitated 
our  will,  he  would  work,  not  "  in  us  to  will,"  but  by  ua  to  will.      The  sense  is,  that 
He  works  in  us  that  we  may  ourselves  will  and  do.      2.  God  works  in  us  to  will. 
Several  operations  are  necessary  here.    He  enlightens  the  mind ;  impresses  upon 
as  the  things  that  belong  to  our  peace ;  and  sets  before  us  the  motives  which 
persuade  the  will.      This,  however,  is  not  power  to  do.     "  To  will  is  present  with 
me;  but  how  to  perform  that  which  is  good  I  find  not."      God  strengthens  as  by 
the  rich  effusions  of  His  blessed  Spirit.     He  does  not  convey  all  power  at  once. 
Some  degree  of  it  is  given,  independently  of  ourselves.    Afterwards,  the  power  i* 


OHAT.  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  Ut 

increased  according  to  onr  diligence,  and  faith,  and  improvement.  What,  then,  is 
there  that  you  cannot  attain  ?  "  God  worketh  in  you."  3.  Do  you  doubt  of  (1) 
Your  attaining  to  saving  faith  ?  ••  God  worketh  in  you;"  and  His  grace  is  sufficient. 
(2)  Your  attaining  power  over  sin  ?  "  God  worketh  in  you  ;  "  and  is  anything  too 
hard  for  BQm?  (3)  Your  gaining  complete  salvation  ?  "God  worketh  in  you  ;  " 
and  His  almighty  Spirit  can  sanctify  the  most  corrupt  and  depraved  nature.  (4) 
Your  victory  over  trouble  and  conflict  ?  Fear  not :  "  God  worketh  in  you  ;  "  and 
His  strength  shall  be  so  made  perfect  in  your  weakness,  that  you  shall  be  even 
•'more  than  conquerors."  Conclusion:  1.  If  you  neglect  jour  proper  work, 
think  not  to  blame  God.  He  has  both  given  and  offered  power.  2.  If  you 
have  it  not,  you  have  not  asked,  or  have  not  employed  it.  3.  In  proportion 
as  you  are  strengthened,  you  act.  Live,  then,  near  to  God.  4.  The  glory  of 
salvation  is  the  Lord's.  You  do  nothing  but  in  His  power,  (R.  WaUon.) 
The  working  out  of  salvation : — "  Wherefore  "  links  this  passage  to  the  whole 
picture  from  ver.  6  to  ver.  11.  Since  the  mind  of  Christ  is  revealed  in 
His  incarnation  and  death  and  is  set  before  you  as  an  example,  work  out,  &c. 
Every  Christian  duty  finds  its  motive  and  model  in  Christ.  This  counsel — 
I.  Implies — 1.  That  something  has  been  already  done.  The  very  phrase 
'work  out"  implies  this.  Salvation  has  been  begun,  and  is  in  one  sense,  a 
complete  thing.  We  have  not  to  work  for  salvation,  but  to  accept  it.  2.  That 
something  more  has  to  be  done.  The  new  life  has  been  created,  but  it  must  grow 
or  it  will  die.  What  is  more  beautiful  than  the  fervour  and  rapture  of  the  first 
'ove,  when  young  hearts  turn  to  the  Saviour  as  flowers  to  the  light  and  find  in  Him 
their  rest  and  their  joy  ?  But  this  first  love  may  be  forsaken.  Character  having 
greatly  improved  may  deteriorate,  and  spiritual  health  may  suffer  a  relapse.  So 
we  are  reminded  that  we  must  not  be  merely  passive  in  religion,  receiving  im- 
pressions, drinking  in  comfort,  stimulated  from  without,  bui  also  to  be  active, 
cultivating  our  own  powers.  II.  Tuis  salvation  is  our  own.  Something 
essentially  individual  between  each  man  and  his  God.  In  a  sense  it  is  the  same 
in  all,  and  yet  it  is  diUerent.  God  does  not  mean  your  nature  to  be  a  copy  of 
any  other.  One  man  is  impulsive,  another  is  calm ;  one  is  bright,  another 
gloomy;  one  is  brave,  another  like  a  sensitive  plant  shrinking  from  even  the 
breath  of  opposition.  The  experience  of  the  gaoler  was  different  from  that  of 
Lydia.  So  it  is  your  own  salvation  and  no  one  can  work  it  out  for  you.  Tha 
battlefield  is  your  own  soul,  you  have  to  pass  through  the  great  crisis  of  life  alone, 
and  you  have  to  die  alone.  III.  How  are  wa  to  work  it  out?  1.  By  the 
acquisition  of  spiritual  truth.  It  is  possible  to  have  our  Father's  phrases  on  our 
lips  when  we  have  not  the  power  which  lay  behind  them  in  our  hearts.  We  are 
thankful  for  the  wisdom  and  piety  of  the  past,  but  a  traditional  faith  will  not  save  us  ; 
and  while  it  is  unwise  to  break  away  from  the  past,  it  is  unequally  unwise  to  reject  the 
new  trui  h  that  may  be  revealed  to  us.  There  will  then  be  progress  in  character.  The 
spiritual  truth  thus  acquired  will  be  the  food  of  the  soul.  2.  By  resolute  effort.  A  man 
can  never  become  wise  or  good  wit'aout  trouble.  Jesus  bids  us  "strive,"  and  Paul  to 
"  fight  the  good  fight,"  &q.  It  is  not  an  easy  thing  to  live  the  Christian  life. 
The  religion  of  sentimentalism,  emotion,  ritual,  may  be  easy,  but  the  religion  of 
principle  means  cross-bearing  and  earnest  conflict  with  sin.  3.  Even  in  tha 
absence  of  means  which  are  important.  The  presence  of  the  apostle  was  a  help. 
There  is  something  in  the  presence  of  a  friend  which  cannot  be  written  with  ink. 
The  Philippians  had  done  well  in  the  apostle's  presence ;  they  were  to  do  much 
more  in  his  absence.  Why  1  To  comfort  him.  As  children  when  their  father 
is  from  home  are  taking  more  care  than  usual  that  the  windows  and  doors  are 
properly  fastened,  so  the  Christians  of  Philippi  were  to  be  doubly  vigilant  when 
Paul  was  away.  External  aids  are  precious,  but  we  must  learn  to  be  independent 
of  them  when  necessary.  IV.  The  spirit  in  which  we  abb  to  do  the  work — 
"with  fear  and  trembliiig."  This  Epistle  is  full  of  joy;  but  it  is  the  joy  of 
a  reverent  and  earnest  soul.  There  is  abundant  reason  for  caution,  self- 
distrust,  modesty,  and  huujility,  since  so  many  have  fallen,  so  many  Peters 
denied  their  Lord,  so  many  Demases  forsaken  Him.  "Be  not  high-minded, 
but  fear."      (James  Owen.)  The   working   out  of  salvation: — I.  A  Christian 

MAN      HAS      HIS      WHOLE     SALVATION      ALREADY      ACCOMPLISHED     FOE     HiM     IN     ChRIST, 

AND  YET  HE  HAS  TO  WORK  IT  OCT.  Notice — 1.  The  persons  to  whom  these 
words  are  addressed.  Through  applying  them  to  non-Christians  they  have 
been  perverted  to  mean :  "  You  co-operate  with  Christ  in  the  great  work  ol 
salvation,  and  yoa  will  get  grace  and  pardon."    But  none  save  Christians  hava 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

anything  to  do  with  them.  They  are  addressed  to  those  who  are  already  resting 
on  the  finished  salvation  of  Jesus  Christ.  If  you  have  not  done  so,  and  are  apply- 
ing them  to  yonrselves,  remember  that  when  the  Jews  came  to  Christ  in  a  similar 
spirit,  asking  Him,  "  What  shall  we  do  ?  "  &c.  He  said,  "  This  is  the  work  of 
God  that  ye  believe  on  Him  whom  He  hath  sent."  The  first  lesson  is  not  work 
but  faith,  and  unless  there  be  faith  no  work.  2.  But  if  salvation  be  this,  How  can 
we  work  it  out?  Salvation  has  four  aspects.  It  means — (1)  The  whole  process  by 
which  we  are  delivered  from  sin,  and  set  safe  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  (2) 
Deliverance  from  the  guilt,  punishment,  and  condemnation  of  sin,  in  which  it  is  a 
thing  past.  (3)  The  gradual  process  of  deliverance  from  its  power  in  our  own 
hearts,  in  which  it  is  a  thinpr  present.  (4)  The  final  and  perfect  deliverance,  in 
which  it  is  s  thing  future.  These  all  come  equally  from  Christ,  and  depend  upon 
His  work  and  power,  and  are  all  given  in  the  first  act  of  faith.  But  the  attitude 
in  which  the  Christian  stands  to  the  accomplished  salvation,  and  that  in  which 
He  stands  to  the  progressive  salvation  are  different.  He  has  to  take  the  finished 
blessing.  Yet  the  salvation  which  means  our  being  delivered  from  the  evil  in  our 
hearts  is  ours  on  the  condition  of  continuous  faithful  reception  and  daily  effort. 
3.  The  two  things,  then,  are  not  inconsistent.  Work  as  well  as  believe,  and  in  the 
daily  subjugation  of  your  spirits  to  His  Divine  power ;  in  the  daily  crucifixion  of 
your  flesh;  in  the  daily  straining  after  loftier  heights  of  godliness  and  purer  atmo- 
spheres of  devotion  and  love,  make  more  thoroughly  your  own  what  you  possess, 
work  into  the  substance  of  your  souls  what  you  have.  II.  God  works  all  in  us, 
AKD  YET  WE  HAVE  TO  WORK.  Commaud  implies  power  ;  command  and  power  imply 
duty.  1.  Is  there  any  cautious  guarding  of  the  words  that  they  may  not  seem  to 
clash  with  the  other  side  of  truth  ?  No.  Paul  does  not  say,  "  Yet "  God  worketh 
in  you,  or  "  although,"  or  "  remember  as  a  caution."  He  blends  the  two  together 
in  an  altogether  different  connection,  and  sees  no  contradiction  or  puzzle,  but  a 
ground  of  encouragement — "  for  "  God  worketh  in  you.  That  expresses  more  than 
bringing  outward  means  to  bear.  It  speaks  of  an  inward,  real,  and  efficacious 
operation.  God  puts  in  you  the  first  faint  motions  of  a  better  will.  It  is  not  that 
God  gives  men  the  power  and  leaves  th>m  to  use  it;  that  the  desire  and  purpose 
come  from  Him,  and  are  left  with  us  as  faithful  or  unfaithful  stewards.  The  whole 
process,  from  the  first  sowing  of  the  seed  until  its  last  fruiting  in  action,  is  God's 
altogether.  2.  And  none  the  less  strongly  does  He  teach  by  His  earnest  injunction 
that  human  control  over  the  human  will  and  that  reality  of  human  agency,  which 
are  often  thought  to  be  annihilated  by  the  view  of  God  as  originating  all  good. 
The  apostle  thought  this  doctrine  did  not  absorb  all  our  individuality  in  one  great 
cause,  which  made  men  mere  tools  and  puppets.  His  conclusion  is  God  does  all, 
therefore  you  work.  3.  Each  of  these  truths  rests  on  its  own  appropriate  evidence. 
My  own  consciousness  tells  me  that  I  am  free,  that  I  have  power,  that  I  am  therefore 
responsible.  I  know  what  I  mean  by  the  will  of  God,  because  I  am  myself  conscious 
of  a  will.  The  power  of  God  is  an  object  of  intelligent  thought  to  me  because  I  am 
conscious  of  power.  On  the  other  hand,  that  belief  in  God,  which  is  one  of  the 
deep  and  universal  beliefs  of  men,  contains  in  it  the  belief  in  Him  as  the  source  of 
all  power,  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will.  These  two 
convictions  are  both  given  us  in  the  primitive  beliefs  which  belong  to  us  all.  These 
two  mighty  pillars,  on  which  all  morality  and  all  religion  repose,  have  their 
foundations  deep  down  in  our  nature,  and  tower  up  beyond  our  sight.  They 
seem  to  stand  opposite  each  other,  but  it  is  only  as  the  piers  of  some  tall  arch  are 
opposed.  Beneath  they  repose  on  one  foundation,  above  they  spring  together  in 
the  completing  keystone,  and  bear  the  whole  steady  structure.  Wise  and  good  men 
have  toiled  to  harmonize  them  in  vain.  Perhaps  the  time  may  come  when  we 
shall  be  lifted  high  enough  to  sep  the  binding  arch,  but  here  on  earth  we  can  only 
behold  the  shafts  on  either  side.  Any  fancied  reconciliation  only  consists  in 
paring  down  one-half  of  the  full-orbed  truth  to  nothing,  or  admitting  it  in  words, 
while  every  principle  of  the  reconciler's  system  demands  its  denial.  Each  antago- 
nist is  strong  in  his  assertions,  and  weak  in  his  denials.  4.  This  apparent  in- 
compatibility is  no  reason  for  rejecting  truths,  each  commended  to  our  acceptancfl 
on  their  own  proper  grounds.  The  Bible  admits  and  enforces  both.  God  is  all, 
but  thou  canst  work.  Take  this  belief  that  God  worketh  all  in  you  as  the  ground 
of  your  confidence.  Take  this  conviction  that  thou  canst  work  for  the  spur  and 
•timulus  of  your  life.  III.  The  Christian  has  nis  salvation  secured,  and  yet  hb 
n  TO  RIB  AND  TBEMBLE.  You  may  say,  "Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear."  So  it 
does:  the  tear  that  hath   torment.     But  there   is  another  fear  and   trembling 


<jHA».  n.]  PHILIPPTANS.  ISf 

whiVh  is  but  another  shape  of  confirlence  and  calm  hope.  Scripture  does  tell 
us  that  the  believing  man's  salvation  is  certain  since  he  believes.  And  your 
faith  can  he  worth  nothing  unless  it  have  trembling  distrust  of  your  own 
power,  which  is  the  companion  of  all  thankful  and  faithful  reception  of  God's 
mercy.  Let,  then,  all  fear  and  trembling  be  yours  as  a  man ;  let  all  con- 
fidence and  calm  trust  be  yours  as  a  child  of  God.  Turn  your  confidence 
and  your  fears  alike  into  prayer.      {A.   Ulaclaren,   D.D.)  The    working    out 

of  salvation : — This  work  is  a  work — I.  In  tour  own  heabt.  To  obey  in- 
wardly ;  to  cherish  and  cultivate  the  good  feelings  which  are  now  in  you ;  to 
discipline  yonr  thoughts,  rule  your  temper,  keep  your  heart  in  order ;  to  form 
right  habits  of  daily  life ;  to  struggle  against  your  besetting  sin  ;  to  maintain  a 
Christian  spirit.  II.  In  thk  closet.  Every  one  knows  how  diflicnlt  it  is  to  fulfil 
faithfully  the  duties  of  private  prayer,  self-examination,  and  meditation;  and  to 
maintain  the  habit  regularly,  aud  to  do  it  spiritually.  To  get  rid  of  wandering 
thoughts  ;  not  to  slide  into  reverie.  To  use  form  without  formality.  To  make  his 
own  room  a  sanctuary,  which  he  never  leaves  without  carrying  from  it  a  holier 
frame  and  a  higher  aim.  III.  In  yodr  own  sphere.  In  the  family  and  in  business. 
IV.  In  the  work  outside.  No  Christian  should  be  wi'hout  some  definite  form  of 
Christian  work.  It  may  be  among  tlie  poor,  with  the  sick,  or  in  the  Smday 
school,  (fto.  In  so  doing  you  are  working  out  the  salvation  you  have  received. 
Conclusion :  Have  you  been  saved  ?  Then  save  1  Are  you  loved  ?  Then 
love  I  Are  you  happy?  Then  make  others  happy!  \j.  Vavglmn,  M.A.) 
The    vorking    out    of  salvation : — Note — I.  That   great   and    important    truth 

WHICH    OUGHT    NEVER    TO   BE    OUT   OF   OUR    REMEMBRANCE.       "  It    is    God    that    WOrketh 

in  us,"  (Src,  i.e.,  "It  is  of  His  good  pleasure,"  &o.  This  removes  all  imagi- 
nation of  merit  from  man,  and  gives  God  the  whole  glory  of  His  work.  The 
expression  means  either — 1.  "  To  will,"  including  the  whole  of  inward;  "  to  do," 
the  whole  of  outward  religion.  2.  "  To  will,"  implying  every  good  desire ;  "  to  do," 
whatever  results  therefrom,  i.e.,  God  worketh  all  inward  and  outward  holiness,  or 
God  breathes  every  good  desire  and  brings  it  to  good  effect.  The  original  seems 
to  favour  the  latter ;  but  either  is  destructive  of  pride.  II.  If  God  worketh  in  you 
THEN  WORK  OUT  YODR  OWN  SALVATION.  '*  Woik  out "  implies  the  doing  of  a  thing 
thoroughly  ;  "  your  own,"  you  must  do  it  or  it  will  be  h  ft  undone  for  ever.  1. 
Salvation  (1)  begins  with  preventing  grace,  including  the  first  wish  to  please  God, 
the  first  dawn  of  light  concerning  His  will.  (2)  Is  carried  on  by  convincing  grace 
or  repentance,  which  brings  a  larger  amount  of  self-knowledge,  &o.  (3)  Afterwards 
we  experience  the  proper  Christian  salvation,  whereby  through  grace  we  are  saved 
by  faith,  consisting  of  two  branches,  [a)  Justification,  by  which  we  are  saved  from 
the  guilt  of  sin  aud  restored  to  God's  favour,  which  is  instantaneous.  (6)  Sanctifi- 
cation,  by  which  we  are  saved  from  the  power  and  root  of  sin  and  restored  to  the 
Divine  image,  and  which  begins  the  moment  we  are  justified,  and  gradually  in- 
creases till  the  heart  is  cleansed  from  all  sin,  and  Ulied  with  pure  love  to  God  and 
man.  2.  How  are  we  to  work  out  this  salvation  T  This  is  explained  by  that  other 
passage  in  which  Paul  exhorts  servants  to  obey  their  masters  according  to  the 
flesh,  "  with  fear  and  trembling,"  a  proverbial  expression  which  cannot  be  under- 
stood literally.  For  what  master  could  bear,  much  less  require,  his  servant  to 
stand  quaking  before  him  ?  And  the  words  following  utterly  exclude  this  meaning 
(Eph.  vi.  6,  Ac).  They  imply — (1)  That  everything  be  done  with  the  utmost 
earnestness  of  spirit,  and  with  all  care  and  diligence,  perhaps  in  reference  to  the 
former  word  •'  fear."  (2)  With  the  utmost  speed,  punctuality,  exactness,  referring 
to  "trembling."  Transfer  this  to  the  working  out  of  our  salvation.  With  the 
same  temper  and  manner  that  Christians  serve  their  earil'y  masters,  bo  let 
Christians  serve  their  heavenly  master.  8.  What  are  the  steps  in  this  working  ? 
(1)  Cease  to  do  evil — fly  from  all  sin,  abstain  from  every  appearance  of  evil.  (2) 
Learn  to  do  well — use  family  and  private  prayer,  search  the  Scriptures,  do  good 
unto  all  men;  and  herein  "be  ye  steadfast,  unmoveable,"  &c.,  and  so  go  on  to 
perfection.  III.  What  connection  is  thbbk  between  the  roBMEB  and  latteb  pabt 
or  THIS  sentence  ?  Is  there  not  a  flat  opposition  ?  If  God  worketh  in  us,  is  not 
our  working  impracticable  and  unnecessary  ?  No.  1.  God  worketh  in  you,  there- 
fiire  yoQ  can  work :  otherwise  it  would  be  impossible.  We  know  that  the  word  is 
absolutely  true,  "Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing;"  but  it  is  equally  true  that 
"  1  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  me."  2.  God  worketh  in  you, 
therefore  you  must  work.  You  must  be  workers  together  in  Him,  or  He  will  ceas« 
working.     "  Unto  him  that  hath  shall  be  given ;  but  from  him  that  hath  not " — that 


124  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ii, 

doth  not  improve  the  grace  already  given — "  shall  be  taken  away  what  he  assuredlj 
hath."  He  will  not  save  us  unless  we  "save  ourselves  from  this  untoward  gene- 
ration," unless  we  labour  to  ♦'  make  our  calling  and  election  sure."  (J.  Wesley,  M.A.) 
The  working  out  of  salvation : — I.  The  end  to  be  attained.  Salvation.  1.  Pardon, 
2.  Sanctification.  3.  Eternal  life:  the  whole  benefits  of  redemption.  II.  This  end 
18  ONLY  TO  BE  ATTAINED  BY  woEKiNa.  This  teaches — 1.  Negatively  (1)  That  it  is  not 
a  matter  of  course  that  men  are  saved,  because  Christ  has  purchased  redemption 
for  them.  (2)  That  salvation  is  not  a  benefit  which  others  can  confer  upon  us. 
Each  one  must  work  out  his  own.  No  priest  can  save  us.  (3)  This  is  not  an  easy 
work.  KarspyciS^effdt  is  a  strong  word,  and  this  working  is  to  be  with  fear  and 
trembling,  i.e.,  with  soUcitude,  lest  after  all  we  should  fail.  Our  utmost  exertion 
therefore  is  required.  "  Strive  to  enter,"  &c.  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  sufferefh 
yiolence."  Israel,  to  gain  possession  of  Canaan,  had  to  fight  long  and  hard.  No 
cross,  no  crown.  2.  Positirely.  (1)  Our  working  must  be  directed  to  a  right  end, 
not  to  make  atonement  or  merit  salvation  by  our  good  works.  These  are  the  two 
errors  of  all  false  religions,  and  men  who  labour  in  this  direction  make  no  progress. 
The  proper  course  is  to  obtain  an  interest  in  Christ,  and  to  bring  our  hearts  and 
lives  into  conformity  with  the  will  of  God.  If  a  man  thinks  it  enough  to  believe 
in  Christ  and  then  live  as  he  pleases,  he  turns  the  grace  of  God  into  licentiousness. 
We  have  to  subdue  the  world,  the  flesb,  and  the  devil.  (2)  We  must  work  in 
accordance  with  the  gospel.  Therefore  our  work  must  recognize — (a)  The  work  of 
Christ  as  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  (6)  The  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  (c)  The 
efl&cacy  of  the  means  of  grace,  none  of  which  are  to  be  neglected.  (3)  It 
must  be  assiduous  and  laborious.  III.  The  ENcoURAaEMENxa.  1.  That  God 
can,  does,  and  will  aid  us.  2.  That  this  aid  is  not  merely  outward,  giving 
us  the  means  and  opportunity,  but  inward  and  efficacious,  giving  us  strength 
and  will.  3.  There  is,  therefore,  a  divine  consensus,  a  co-operation  promised, 
analogous  to  the  working  of  God  in  nature,  and  in  those  cases  in  which  He 
gave  strength  to  the  palsied  or  the  lame.  4.  This  Divine  co-operation  is  con- 
gruous to  the  nature  of  the  soul.  5.  As  it  is  absolutely  necessary  it  should  be 
Bought  and  relied  on.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  working  out  of  salvation: — L 
Man's  pabt  in  salvation — i.e.,  the  Christian  man's,  for  the  unregenerate  have  no 
spiritual  germ  to  work  out.  We  must  work  energetically — "energize,  for  it  is  God 
who  energizes  in  you."  We  must  act  as  though  everything  depended  on  our  own 
personal  efforts.  This  includes — 1.  Untiring  dilif^ence,  improving  every  moment ; 
making  the  best  use  of  every  opportunity.  2.  Thoroughness,  wholeness.  Half 
work  will  not  do  (1  Thess.  v.  23).  Mind,  heart,  body.  3.  Fortitude.  We  must  work 
undaunted  by  difficulty  (Acts  xx.  23-24).  4.  With  fear  and  trembling  (Eph.  vi.  5). 
The  fear  that  is  begotten  by  the  anxiety  to  please.  IL  God's  part.  1.  "  God 
worketh,"  which  supplies — (1)  The  motive.  The  good  we  do  is  not  our  own  but 
God's.  The  light  is  not  in  the  window;  that  is  simply  the  medium  through  which 
light  passes.  The  coal  burns  and  throws  off  light  and  heat  because  the  sun  worked 
its  light  and  warmth  into  it  thousands  of  years  ago.  (2)  The  power.  He  who 
created  the  heavens,  established  the  rocks,  painted  the  landscape  with  beauty, 
works  in  as  ;  let  us,  therefore,  though  Paul  and  the  whole  brotherhood  of 
ministers  be  absent,  fail  not.  (3)  The  reason.  God  works  in,  therefore  we 
should  work  out.  2.  How  does  God  work  ?  (1)  In  the  tree  by  air,  light,  heat, 
rain,  and  dew,  and  the  tree  works  out  in  wood,  leaves,  and  fragrant  blossoms. 
(2)  In  man  by  means  of  His  truth,  Spirit,  and  grace,  and  we  work  them  out 
in  love,  joy,  &o.  (GaL  v.  22-23).  3.  God  works  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  His 
good  pleasure.  He  does  this  that  He  may  accomplish  His  gracious  purpose 
in  the  salvation  of  mankind — "for  God  willeth  all  men  to  be  saved."  (D.  R, 
Jenkins.)  Salvation  worked  out: — I.  What    is    supposed  in   the    command, 

1.  That  we,  while  in  our  natural  state,  are  lost  creatures,  liable  to  perish 
for  ever.  Our  being  bid  to  work  out  our  salvation,  supposing  this  to  be  out 
antecedent  condition,  may  well  keep  us  humble  as  long  aa  we  live.  2.  That  there 
is  a  way  open  by  which  we  may  be  delivered  from  that  condition,  for  we  had  never 
been  enjoined  thus  had  we  been  doomed  to  perish  (vers.  6-8  ;  John  iii.  16).  3. 
That  God  is  very  desirous  of  their  sal va;  ion  to  whom  this  command  is  sent  (2  Pet. 
iii.  9;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  II.  What  is  included  in  the  salvation  we  are  to 
WORK  OUT.  Considering  ourselves — 1.  As  fallen  creatures,  our  first  work  is  to  get 
our  state  changed,  and  not  to  rest  satisfied  till  we  are  restored  to  the  favour  and 
image  of  God.  Here  our  salvation  in  the  application  of  it  begins.  And  with  what 
earnestness  should  it  be  lab  -lued  after  by  every  one  who  loves  his  safety.     2.  In  • 


Clip,  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  181 

Btate  of  grace,  but  as  yet  imperfect  in  attainments.  The  work  of  our  salvation  in- 
cludes the  mortifying  of  the  remains  of  our  corruption  in  us,  the  roNisting  of 
temptations,  the  making  additions  to  grace  received,  and  our  pressing  on  to  glory. 
And  how  much  has  a  Christian  to  do,  as  to  all  these  ?  (2  Pet.  i.  10 ;  Phil.  iii.  12- 
14).  3.  As  mortal  and  dying  out  of  the  world,  the  work  of  salvation  includes  our 
preparing  for  a  removal  from  it,  and  laying  up  treasure  in  another.     III.  What  is 

IMPLIED    IN    BEING    BID    TO   WOBK   THIS    OUT,    AND    THE     MANNER    IN    WHICH    IT    18    TO    BE 

DONE.  That  it  is  a  work — 1.  In  which  the  soul  is  to  be  engaged.  Bodily  service 
profiteth  nothing  alone.  2.  In  which  we  are  to  engage  with  the  greatest  intent- 
ness.  3.  In  which  the  utmost  watchfulness  is  necessary,  considering  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  the  heart,  the  temptations  of  Satan,  the  instances  of  many  who  have 
miscarried.  4.  In  which  the  appointed  means  are  to  be  employed.  5.  In  which 
we  are  to  persevere,  as  he  only  who  endures  to  the  end  will  be  saved.  IV.  Goo 
WOBES  IN  us,  1.  It  is  God  who  works  in  us  to  will  and  to  do.  (1)  Man  is  naturally 
averse  to  the  business  of  his  salvation.  How  plain  is  this  command  and  how 
strongly  urged,  but  how  few  can  be  prevailed  upon  to  set  about  it  1  (2)  When  this 
aversion  is  overcome  it  is  God  that  does  it.  (a)  He  touches  and  turns  the  will, 
and  by  His  renewing  grace  brings  His  people  to  love  and  choose  what  they  pre- 
viously disliked,  and  thus  He  of  unwilling  makes  them  willing  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26). 
{b)  He  excites  that  grace  which  He  implants,  and  thus  both  the  disposition  and 
the  act  is  owing  to  influence  from  heaven  (Cant.  i.  4).  As  to  His  method,  usually 
God — (i.)  Opens  their  souls  to  their  lost  and  miserable  state  (John  xvi.  8).  (ii.)  He 
holds  their  thoughts  close  to  what  is  thus  discovered  as  matter  of  the  highest 
moment,  not  to  be  made  light  of  as  heretofore,  (iii. )  By  such  discovery  and  view 
our  impression  is  made  upon  the  conscience,  so  that  the  sinner  can  no  longar  rest 
in  his  present  state,  (iv.)  The  awakened  sinner  is  led  to  importunately  inquire 
what  he  must  do  to  be  saved  (Acts  ii.  30  ;  xvi.  36).  6.  The  inquirer  is  reasonably 
instructed  in  the  go?pel  method  of  salvation  (John  iii.  16).  6.  Salvation  being 
represented  as  attainable  the  sinner  under  Divine  influence  is  led  to  de-ire,  hope, 
choose,  believe.  2.  God  works  of  His  good  pleasure.  (1)  'Tis  of  His  sovereign 
grace  that  He  works  in  any  ;  without  any  constraint  or  need  on  His  part ;  without, 
nay  contrary  to  any  merit  in  ours.  (2)  In  whomsoever  God  works  they  are  to  own 
it  a  gracious  vouchsafement,  one  to  bo  highly  prized  and  improved.     V.  The  fobcb 

OF  the  reason,  from  such  a  REPRESENTATION  OF  THE  DiVINE  INFLUENCE,  TO  QUICKEN 
AND   ENGAGE    US   TO   SET   ABOUT   OUR    PART   WITH    THE    UTMOST    DILIGENCE.         1.     What 

reason  have  we  from  God's  working  in  us  to  excite  ourselves  to  work  out  our  salva- 
tion. It  makes  it — (1)  Reasonable.  His  hand  is  stretched  out  to  pluck  ^ou  as  brands 
from  the  burning,  let  it  not  be  overlooked  ;  His  presence  is  vouchsafed  to  help  tlie 
soul  to  heaven,  let  it  not  be  slighted.  (2)  Possible.  However  difficult  the  work,  the 
Divine  worker  is  working  within,  (3)  Hopeful,  What  room  is  there  for  despond- 
ency  when  God  undertakes  the  design,  begins  the  work,  and  works  on  if  you  do  not 
break  oft?  (4)  Delij;htful.  When  God  draws  the  believer  runs,  2.  We  are  to 
work  because  of  the  manner  of  God's  working,  viz.,  His  guod  pleasure.  (1)  It  is 
certain  that  without  God's  working  we  can  do  nothing.  (2)  Perhaps  we  long 
neglected  the  work,  and  therefore  how  justly  might  the  Divine  favour  have  been  with- 
drawn. (3)  How  much  yet  remains  to  be  done,  and  the  time  allotted  is  uncertain  and 
short.  Application:  1.  Behold  the  folly  of  sin,  2.  See  the  mercy  of  God.  3.  How 
unreasonable  despair,  4,  How  inexcusable  the  finally  lost,  (D.  Wilcox.)  Salvation 
worked  out: — I,  What  are  we  to  understand  here  bt  saltation?  1.  Freedom 
from  our  misery.  (1)  Guilt  of  sin  (Gal.  iii.  22 ;  Matt.  i.  20).  (2)  Strength  of  cor- 
ruption (Rom.  vii.  24 ;  Acts  iii.  26).  (3)  Power  of  Satan  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  (4)  Wrath 
of  God  (Psa,  viii.  11).  (5)  Eternal  punishment  (Matt.  xxv.  46  ;  2  Thess.  i.  9),  2. 
Advancement  to  happiness:  (1)  In  this  life,  consisting  in  God's  love  to  us  (Psa. 
XXX.  5)  and  our  love  to  Him.  (2)  In  the  life  to  come — consisting  in  the  perfection 
of  our  souls  (Heb.  xii.  23)  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  God  (John  xvii.  5,  24).  II. 
What  by  working  out  ?  1.  Our  making  use  of  all  the  means  appointed  by  God  for 
this  end  (Matt.  vi.  33).  2.  Continuing  the  use  of  them  until  we  have  attained  the  end 
(Acts  xiii.  43 ;  Rom.  xii.  12).  III.  What  bt  feab  and  trembling  ?  1.  Not  with  pride 
(1  John  1-8).  2.  Nor  presumption  (Psa.  xix.  13).  3.  Nor  carnal  security  (1  Pet.  v.  8). 
4.  But  with  a  holy  fear.  (1)  Lest  we  should  go  the  wrong  way,  or  make  use  of  the 
wrong  means  (Bom.  x.  2).  (2)  Lest  we  should  fail  in  the  use  of  the  right  means 
(Heb.  iv.   1).     {Bishop  Beveridge.)        Salvation  worked  out: — I.  The  one  gbsax 

THING   WHICH   A   MAN   HATH   TO   DO   13  TO   WORK  OUT   HIS   OWN  SALVATION.      To  ClcaT  Up 

the  nature  of  this  work,  consider — 1.  It  is  not  to  be  done  by  the  way,  bat  with  aU 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  n, 

our  might  (Ecel.  ix.  10  ;  2  Pet.  i,  10).  2,  All  our  other  works  are  to  be  referred  to 
this  (1  Cor.  X.  3J).  3.  We  oannot  do  it  by  our  own  strength  (Jer.  x.  23;  2  Cor. 
iii.  5).  Why,  then,  dolh  God  command  us  to  do  it?  (1)  God's  commands  show 
not  our  ability  but  duty.  (2)  God,  by  His  commands,  puts  us  upon  doing  what  we 
can,  depending  on  Him  for  the  rest.  (3)  God  by  His  commands  enables  us  to  do 
it  (Gen.  i.  3  ;  John  v.  6,  xi.  43  ;  Acts  iii.  6).  (4)  None  can  enable  us  to  do  it  but 
God  (ver.  13  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  5).  (5)  We  have  no  ground  to  expect  strength  from  God 
to  do  it,  but  through  Christ  (John  xv.  5).  (6)  We  must  not  do  in  our  own  way  but 
God's  (Isa.  viii.  20).  (7)  This  is  the  one  thing  needful  (Luke  x.  42).  (8)  It  is  the 
most  honourable  work  we  can  be  employed  in  (Prov.  xii.  26).  (9)  It  is  not  to  be 
begun  only  but  finished  (John  xvii.  4).  II.  How  doth  it  appear  that  this  is  thb 
WORK  WE  OUGHT  TO  DO  ?  1.  This  is  the  end  of  our  continuance  on  the  earth.  2, 
God  calls  on  us  to  do  it  (Exek.  xxxiii.  11),  and  commands  (Acts  xvii.  30).  3.  He 
hath  shown  iis  how  to  do  it  (Micah  vi.  8).  4.  He  hath  offered  us  the  means  (Jer. 
vii.  25).  5.  He  hath  promised  to  enable  us  in  the  use  of  those  means  to  do  it 
(Matt,  xviii.  20).  6.  All  His  providences  tend  to  it  (Job  xxxvi.  8-10).  7.  And  so 
do  His  ordinances.  III.  How  must  we  do  this  work  ?  1.  Begin  it  (1)  with 
knowledge  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9;  Isa.  i.  7).  2.  Eepentance;  consisting  in  (1)  a  sense 
of  sin  (John  xvi.  8).  (a)  Original  (Psa.  li.  5) ;  (h)  actual  (Psa.  11.  3-4) ;  in  our  thoughts 
(Gen.  vi.  5) ;  affections  (2  Tim.  iii.  3-4) ;  words  (Matt.  xii.  36) ;  actions,  (c) 
Habitual  (Jer.  xiii.  23).  (2)  A  sorrow  for  sin.  (a)  Cordial  (Joel  ii.  13).  (b)  Uni- 
versal (Ezek.  ix.  4).  (c)  Exceeding  all  other  sorrow  (Zech.  xii.  10-11).  (3)  A 
hating  of  sin  (Psa.  cxxxix.  21-22.  (4)  A  firm  resolution  against  sin  (Psa  xvii.  3, 
cxix.  106).  (5)  A  constant  endeavour  to  perform  those  resolutions  with  faith  (Acts 
xvi.  31).  (a)  Assenting  to  the  Scripture  m  general  (Acts  xxiv.  14  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  26), 
viz.,  that  the  assertions  are  all  truths  (Heb,  vi.  18) ;  that  the  history  is  certain  ;  the 
commands  Divine  (Rom.  vii.  12-14) ;  the  promises  performed ;  the  threatenings 
executed,  (h)  Asseniing  to  the  gospel  in  particular,  viz.,  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of 
God;  truly  man ;  the  promised  Messiah ;  the  only  Saviour;  our  meritorious  sub- 
stitute ;  our  prevailing  intercessor,  (c)  Applying  these  truths  to  ourselves  (Jamea 
ii.  29) ;  that  He  is  our  Lord  and  God  (John  xx.  28) ;  our  Saviour  and  Redeemer ; 
our  Advocate  (Heb.  vii.  25  ;  1  John  ii.  1).  2.  We  must  carry  on  this  work — (1)  By 
increasing  in  knowledge  (2  Pet.  iii.  18).  (2)  By  renewing  our  repentance  (Psa.  xxv. 
7  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  9).  (3)  Renewing  acts  of  faith.  (4)  Watchfulness  over  our  hearts 
(Prov.  iv.  23).  (5)  Frequent  exercise  of  our  graces.  3.  We  must  finish  this  work 
(John  xvii.  4).  (1)  By  mortifying  all  our  sins  (2  Tim,  iv.  7  ;  Rev.  iv.  12,  21).  (2) 
Continuing  in  the  performance  of  all  duties  (1  Cor.  xv.  58  ;  Rev.  iii.  11).  (3)  Per- 
severing in  all  places  (2  Tim.  iv.  7).  IV.  Set  upon  this  work.  Consider — 1. 
This  is  the  work  you  came  about.  2.  You  have  comfort  of  no  other  works  (Rom. 
vL  21).  8.  All  otlier  works  are  sin  till  this  be  set  about  (Prov.  xv.  8,  xxi.  4,  27  ; 
Isa.  Ixvi.  3).  4.  Till  this  be  done,  ye  are  incapable  of  any  mercy  (Matt.  ii.  2).  5. 
Subject  to  all  misery — (1)  The  curse  of  the  law  (Gal.  iii.  10  ;  Deut.  xxviii.  15-16). 
(2)  The  wrath  of  God  (Psa.  vi.  11).  6.  Even  in  this  life  this  is  the  best  work — (1) 
Most  pleasant  (Prov.  iii.  17).  (a)  Here  we  exercise  our  best  parts  (Matt.  ix.  29). 
(6)  Set  them   on   their  proper  objects,      (c)  Employ  them  to  their  proper  end. 

(2)  Most  honourable  (Prov.  xii.  26).  (a)  As  the  persons  we  converse  with, 
(h)  As  to  the  employment  itself.  (3)  Most  profitable.  Hereby  we  attain 
(a)  the  most  real  riches  (Prov.  xxiii.  5 ;  Luke  viii.  18).  (b)  Most  satisfying 
(Isa.  Iv.  1-2).  (c)  Most  lasting  (1  Tim.  vi.  17).  7.  All  the  power 
we  have  of  doing  anything  was  given  ns  to  do  this.  8.  Unless  this 
work  is  done  we  are  undone  for  ever  (Luke  xiii.  3).  9.  If  this  be  done,  we  shall 
be  happy.  (1)  In  our  freedom  from  evil  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  (2)  In  our  enjoy- 
ment of  all  good.  V.  Objections,  1.  I  have  no  time.  (1)  What  hast  thou  any 
time  for  but  for  this  ?  (2)  Thou  hast  time  for  other  things  (Eccles.  iii.  1,  2). 
2.  We  know  not  how  to  do  this  work.  I  have  told  you.  3.  It  is  hard  work.  (1)  It 
is  feasible.     (2)  It  is  not  hard  in  itself,  but  our  sins  make  it  60  (Matt.  xi.  30). 

(3)  Do  what  you  can,  and  God  will  ennble  you  to  do  the  rest.  (4)  Be  but  willing, 
and  the  work  is  easy  (1  John  v.  3).  (5)  Whatsoever  pains  you  take  will  not  be  in 
vain  (1  Cor.  xv.  58).  (6)  Heaven  will  make  amends  for  alL  4.  I  have  done  it 
already.  (1)  You  may  be  mistaken  (Matt.  vii.  23;  xxv.  11).  (2)  Howsoever,  you 
cannot  do  it  too  well.  (3)  None  have  done  so  much  but  there  is  more  to  do, 
(a)  Hast  thou  no  sin  to  be  repented  of  (Eccles.  vii.  20) ;  (fc)  no  lust  to  subdue 
(Bom.  vii.  24) ;  (c)  no  grace  to  get  quickened  (Phil.  iii.  11,  12).  (4)  None's  work 
is  finished  till  they  die  ;  were  it  otherwise,  God  would  give  you  your  reward  (Johu 


«BAP.  II.]  PHILIPPIANS,  127 

xvii.  4).  5.  Time  enough  hereafter.  No,  the  best  time  is  now  (John  ix.  4). 
(Ihid)  Working   out   ichat    ts  worked    in: — I.    The   matter    to    be    worked 

OCT.  1.  Your  own  salvation.  Charity  must  begin  at  home.  You  ought  to  spread 
the  truth,  but  you  must  first  understand  it.  Ploughing  another  man's  field,  don't 
neglect  your  own ;  indicating  to  another  the  mote  in  his  eye,  do  not  permit  a  beam 
to  blind  your  own.  2.  What  is  to  be  worked  out  must  first  be  worked  in.  An 
unconverted  man  can  work  nothing  out,  for  there  is  nothing  in.  You  have  faith  ; 
work  it  out  then  ;  act  like  a  believer  ;  trust  God  in  daily  life.  Be  you  Christlike, 
inasmuch  as  the  Spirit  of  Christ  dwells  in  yon.  8.  Salvation  is  to  be  worked  out. 
Holiness  is  salvation.  We  are  not  to  work  out  our  salvation  from  the  guilt  of  sin  ; 
Christ  has  done  that,  but  from  the  power  of  sin.  God  has  in  effect  worked  that 
in  ;  He  has  broken  the  yoke  of  sin  ;  it  lives  and  struggles,  but  it  is  dethroned,  and 
our  life  is  to  keep  it  down.  A  man  may  be  saved  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  yet  not 
saved  from  the  power  of  pride  or  bad  temper.  Your  salvation  is  not  complete  till 
you  are  saved  from  these.  You  must  fight  them  till  you  conquer.  II.  The  model 
TO  BE  WORKED  TO.  1.  Every  artist  requires  some  idea  in  his  mind  to  which  he  is  to 
work.  The  apostle's  model  is  exhibited  in  the  context.  (1)  Unanimity  (ver.  2) ; 
(2)  humiliation  (ver.  3) ;  (3)  mutual  love  ;  (4)  in  a  word,  the  mind  of  Christ  (ver.  6). 
III.  The  spirit  in  which  this  is  to  be  worked  got,  1.  An  energetic  spirit. 
From  the  Greek  word  "  work "  we  get  our  word  energy.  The  bringing  out  of 
the  new  nature  requires  this,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  mark  of  superlative  difficulty. 
God  works  in,  therefore  we  must  work  out.  The  assistance  of  Divine  grace  is  not 
given  to  put  aside  our  own  efforts,  but  to  assist  them.  2.  With  fear  to  offend  so 
good  a  God  of  which  we  read.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  feareth  always.  8.  With 
trembling.  Before  tlie  Lord  we  do  not  tremble  with  affright,  but  with  holy  awe, 
lest  we  should  sin  and  grieve  the  Spirit.  IV.  The  sweet  encouragement  the 
TEXT  AFFORDS.  Here  is — 1.  Help  (1)  in  an  exercise  beyond  your  power.  (2)  All 
sufficient  for  every  emergency.  (3)  Which  enables  yon  to  receive  Divine  help. 
(4)  Which  shall  be  more  than  equal  to  the  power  of  Satan  and  all  your  corruptions. 
2.  God  works  in  ns  to  will — gives  us  the  desire  for  holiness,  the  resolutinn  to  put 
down  sin,  the  stern  resolve  not  to  fall  into  sin  again,  and  He  who  gave  tlie  desire 
will  surely  finish  it.  3.  God  does  not  leave  yon  then ;  He  gives  you  the  power  to  do, 
to  achieve  the  victory ;  therefore  fear  not.  4.  That  which  He  works  in  you  is 
pleasing  in  His  sight.  (C  H.  Spnrgeon.)  Man  working  and  God  working  : — 
I.  We  must  work  out  odr  own  salvation.  1.  We  must  be  personally  active. 
Salvation  cannot  be  wrought  otherwise.  2.  This  activity  must  amount  to  vigorous, 
sustained  working.  No  excellence  anywhere  without  it.  3.  This  activity  is  to  be 
centred  on  our  own  salvation.  II.  God  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do  of 
His  good  pleasure.  1.  As  the  first  clause  seems  to  throw  the  work  wholly  on  man, 
this  seems  to  throw  it  entirely  on  God  2.  He  regulates  inclination  and  action — 
the  motive  and  the  deed.  3.  This  He  does  benevolently.  III.  The  consistency 
OF  THESE  PROPOSITIONS.  Salvation  is  of  God  as  respects  supreme  agency,  while 
our  part  in  it  is  merely  instrumental  and  subordinate  The  atonement  is  the  whole 
ground  of  our  acceptance.  God  the  Holy  Spirit  works  in  us,  enabling  U3  to  believe 
the  gospel,  and  purifying  our  heart  by  faith.  He,  however,  does  not  work  separately 
from  us,  nor  control  and  compel.  We,  too,  are  occupied.  He  works  by  us  as  well 
%B  in  us.      IV.  The  obligation  resulting  from  a  collective  view  of  the  case 

»0    FBOSBCUTE    THE    UNDERTAKING    WITH    FEAR     AND    TREMBLING.  The    propriety    of 

doing  so  appears — 1.  From  the  importance  of  the  work.  In  small  matters  men 
are  at  ease.  There  is  not  enough  to  engage  fully  the  mind.  But  no  work  in  its 
character  and  issues  can  compare  with  this.  2.  From  the  character  of  the  Agent 
working  in  us.  In  conclusion  :  this  subject  is  (1)  encouraging  to  the  timid, 
(2)  stimulating  to  the  torpid.  (D.  King,  LL.D.)  Divine  injliienee  and  mans' 
duty  : — I.  The  doctrine  of  Divine  influence  in  the  application  of  redemption. 
The  exercise  of  this  influence  is — 1.  Sovereign  and  free.  God's  self-existence  and 
independence  render  it  impossible  that  He  should  be  subject  to  foreign  control,  or 
to  any  considerations  but  those  that  are  s-uggested  by  His  own  mind.  But  His 
proceedings  are  not  arbitrary  or  capricious.  His  reasons  are  always  the  wisest, 
b«st,  and  most  benevolent.  2.  Secret,  imperceptible,  and  only  to  be  discovered  by 
its  effect.  With  what  rapidity  does  He  wheel  the  earth  round  its  axis,  and  carry  it 
in  its  annual  revolution  ;  and  these  movements  could  never  have  been  discovered 
but  by  careful  observation.  When  at  the  approach  of  spring  the  fields  are  arrayed 
in  their  beautiful  vesture,  you  c«nnot  see  God  raising  the  sap  through  root  and 
fibre,  along  stem  and  branch,  and  unfolding  each  bud  and  blossom.  So  in  salvatioiu 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

No  shout  of  angelic  hosts  announces  that  God  has  commenced  operations ;  and 
though  we  know  there  is  joy  in  their  presence,  we  can  only  see  the  ground  of  their 
joy  in  individual  repentance.  While  the  world  is  stunning  us  with  its  noise,  and 
the  Christian  labourer  may  be  complaining,  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  "  God 
may  be  quietly  inspiring  multitudes  to  ask,  •'  What  must  I  do  ?  "  <fec.  3.  Mighty. 
God's  system  of  operations  is  no  languid  series  of  efforts.  The  same  expression  is 
used  with  reference  to  the  Divine  power  which  raibed  Christ  from  the  dead,  and 
which  binds  all  things  in  the  universe  to  work  according  to  the  purpose  of  His  own 
will.  This  same  power  is  exerted  in  our  recovery.  (1)  The  obstacles  to  be  sur- 
mounted  demonstrate  this :  the  mountain  of  pride  and  self-righteousness  to  be 
laid  low  ;  the  prejudices  to  be  swept  away ;  the  enmity  and  resistance  to  be  over- 
come. (2)  So  do  the  changes  to  be  effected ;  the  careless  are  to  be  made  careful ; 
slaves  of  sin  are  to  be  transformed  into  children  of  God.  Who,  then,  can  hesitate 
to  apply  for  this  succour,  and  who  can  despond  who  has  it  ?  4.  In  conformity 
with  the  principles  of  our  nature.  God  always  adapts  His  procedure  to  the  nature 
of  the  objects  on  which  He  works.  You  may  produce  considerable  alteration  hj 
culture,  soil,  and  climate,  but  you  can  never  change  the  distinctive  properties  of 
one  animal  or  plant  for  those  of  another.  So  in  salvation  our  faculties  remain  as 
they  were  ;  but  we  have  new  aims,  in<!linations,  purposes,  and  pursuits.  (1)  God 
does  not  alter  our  absolute  dependence  upon  Him  as  the  creatures  of  His  hand. 
He  may  increase  our  obligations  ;  but  from  the  first  step  in  the  narrow  way  to  the 
last  it  is,  "  Not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God."  (2)  God  does  not  interfere  with  the 
freedom  He  has  bestowed,  and  the  consequent  responsibiUty  under  which  we  are 
placed.  We  find  that  men  exercise  great  influence  over  our  minds  not  only  by 
mighty  considerations  and  powerful  arguments,  but  by  enlisting  our  sympathies, 
and  enkindling  within  us  their  own  ardour.  Our  minds  thereby  are  strengthened, 
not  enfeebled  by  the  impulse  thus  given  to  us.  And  so  God  operates  with  like 
results.  (3)  God  does  not  supersede  the  use  of  the  powers  and  faculties  He  has 
conferred.  He  does  not  take  our  places  or  woik  in  our  stead.  There  is  no  promise 
that  He  will  pray,  repent,  <fec. ,  for  us.  He  worketh  in  us,  affords  His  gracious 
protection  and  omnipotent  aid,  not  to  lull  our  powers  into  lethargy,  but  to  stir  them 
up  to  persevering  efforts.  5.  The  tendency  and  aim  of  the  Divine  influence.  (1)  To 
will  refers  to  those  determinations  to  which  the  mind  cordially  comes  after  a  full 
consideration  of  its  state  in  the  sight  of  God  and  of  the  overtures  of  mercy  made 
to  it.  It  is  implied  that  these  are  full  and  unwavering;  for  to  will  is  more  than  to 
wish.  Many  good  wishes  never  proceed  further ;  the  will  contradicts  them  all. 
(2)  To  do  which  enables  as  to  reduce  determinations  to  practice.  They  may  be 
strong  and  firm,  and  yet  delayed  and  laid  aside  and  forgotten.  It  is  not  enough  to 
be  convinced  of  sin ;  we  must  make  application  for  pardon,  and  trust  in  Christ's 
merits.  We  must  not  satisfy  our  minds  that  Christ's  precepts  are  good  ;  we  must 
run  in  the  path  of  His  commandments.  II.  The  duix  imposed  bt  this  dootbine. 
"  Work  out  your,"  &a.  We  have  here  a  summons.  1.  To  begin  in  the  work. 
Men  say,  •'  Why  trouble  ourselves  ;  until  God  stretch  forth  His  hand  and  break  the 
chain  of  our  sins,  it  would  be  useless  for  us  to  make  the  attempt."  This  is  to 
pervert  the  grace  of  God  to  our  sure  destruction,  and  to  turn  into  an  argument  for 
indolent  indifference  the  most  powerful  incentive  to  exertion.  The  Bible  brings 
Christ's  message  to  men.  It  beseeches  universal  acceptance.  With  the  external 
message  the  dispensations  of  providence  have  concurred  to  warn  off  the  folly  and 
peril  of  delay,  and  to  arge  instant  acceptance.  2.  To  carry  on  the  work.  It  is  not 
enough  to  begin  the  course ;  we  must  persevere.  And  there  is  much  to  be  worked 
out :  love  of  sin,  evil  habits  have  to  be  extirpated,  the  love  of  God  to  be  intensified, 
closer  conformity  to  onr  great  Pattern  to  be  attained.  The  consideration  that  God 
worketh  in  you  leaves  yon  without  excuse  for  negligence  and  vrithout  ground  for 
despondency.  3.  The  work  is  to  be  carried  out  with  fear  and  trembling ;  with  the 
reverence  and  godly  fear  which  love  inspires — *'  With  that  man  will  I  dwell  who  is 
of  a  humble  and  contrite  spirit,"  &e.  {R.  Redpath,  M.A,)  Divine  grace  and 
human  endeavours: — I.  Human  agency  in  things  which  concern  salvation.  IL 
Divine  agency.  1.  Its  reality.  (1)  Christian  character  begins  by  Divine  agency ; 
for  it  begins  in  regeneration,  which  is  unquestionably  the  work  of  God.  (2) 
It  is  maintained  by  the  same,  for  God  works  in  His  people  to  will  and  to  do. 
2.  Its  necessity.  (1)  From  the  corruption  of  human  nature.  Were  man  naturally 
inclined  to  what  is  good,  a  counteracting  influence  would  be  superfluous.  (2)  From 
the  temptations  to  evil,  which  necessitate  Divine  protection.  3.  Its  source — th« 
Divine  will.     God  works  because  "of  His  good  pleasme."     He  chooses  to  work. 


8HA».  n.]  PHILIPPIAN8.  189 

(1)  Not  arbitrarily  in  the  sense  of  capriciously.  We  are  assured  from  a  considera- 
tion of  the  wisdom,  rectitude,  love,  and  unchangeableness  of  God  that  for  all  His 
doings  there  are  adequate  reasons.  (2)  Not  arbitrary  in  the  sense  of  having  no 
law.  His  own  perfection  supplies  laws,  which,  like  their  sources,  are  perfect,  and 
in  conformity  with  them  He  uniformly  acts.  4.  Its  effect.  God  works  in  His 
people.  (1)  To  will,  under  which  term  we  understand  desires,  intentions,  resolu- 
tions, and  affections.  This  Divine  energy  does  not  impair  our  will.  We  are 
conscious  of  acting  at  all  times  as  we  will,  and  never  more  so  than  when  we  seek 
the  things  of  God.     "  I  have  chosen  the  way  of  truth,  incline  my  heart,"  &c. 

(2)  To  do.  The  effect  should  never  be  disjoined  from  the  cause,  nor  the  cause  from 
the  effect.  It  is  not  God  works  in  as,  therefore  we  need  not  work  ;  but  therefore  we 
work.  in.  The  connectiom  between  the  two.  Both  are  matter  of  fact,  and  must 
be  believed  as  facts  whatever  may  be  our  opinion  of  their  relation.  (1)  A  theory 
which  should  harmonize  them  would  supply  no  additional  reason  for  believing  the 
facts.  (2)  The  absence  of  such  theory  affords  no  warrant  for  disbelieving  them. 
2.  A  knowledge  of  the  point  is  unattainable,  since  it  is  none  other  than  the  manner 
in  which  the  Infinite  mind  acts  on  created  minds.  We  have  three  sources  of 
knowledge.  (1)  Consciousness ;  the  knowledge  of  what  passes  in  our  own  minds 
affords  no  assistance.  (2)  Observation ;  the  cognizance  of  what  comes  before  the 
senses  avails  u?  nothing.  (3)  No  testimony  but  what  is  Divine  could  make  us 
acquainted  with  the  subject,  and  none  has  been  given.  3.  But  while  we  know 
nothing  of  the  internal  working  of  the  Infinite  mind,  we  know  something  of  the 
methods.  God's  gracious  influence  on  the  soul  very  much  consists  in  His  causing 
clear  and  realizing  apprehensions  of  things  as  they  are  to  abide  in  the  mind.  For 
this  purpose  He  removes  hindrances  which  prevent  Divine  truth  from  being  known 
and  considered,  and  consequently  from  yielding  its  appropriate  fruit.  (1)  Inatten- 
tion. The  person  whose  heart  the  Lord  opens  attends  to  the  things  that  are 
spoken.  (2)  Pride.  God  shows  man  things  as  they  are,  himself  abominable,  God 
excellent.  (3)  Love  of  the  world.  "Things  which  are  seen,"  being  "  temporal," 
appear,  as  they  actually  are,  next  to  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  "  things  which 
ore  not  seen  and  eternal."  Thus  trust  in  God,  love  to  God,  hope  of  heaven,  Ac, 
are  called  into  habitual  exercise,  the  will  directed  to  God  and  goodness,  and  the 
conduct  proportionably  changed  for  the  better.  Conclusion :  The  subject  affords 
materials  for — 1.  Examination.  We  may  learn  from  it  whether  our  creed  and  our 
practice  in  relation  to  the  topics  discussed  are  scriptural  or  erroneous.  (1)  Are  you 
rendered  careless  respectiag  your  affections  and  conduct  by  the  consideration  that 
God  worketh  in  you  ?  (2)  Are  you  disposed  on  the  other  hand  to  think  lightly  of 
the  Divine  influence  ?  2.  Encouragement  to  those  who  hunger  and  thirst  after 
righteousness,  but  are  conscious  of  their  moral  weakness.  The  very  desire  is  a 
proof  that  God  has  dune  much  for  you,  and  a  pledge  that  He  will  do  more.  (G. 
Burder,  M.A.)  The  law  of  spiritual  interact ian : — I.  The  nature  of  salvation. 
It  is  something  to  be  worked  out,  a  moral  process  in  man  himself.  On  the  one 
hand  it  is  the  overcoming  and  casting  out  of  evil,  and  on  the  other  the  assimilation 
and  development  of  good.  It  is  restoration  from  disease  to  health.  The  man  who 
is  undergoing  salvation  is  both  cured  and  nourished.  This  is  the  result  of  the  joint 
work  of  God  and  man — man  being  able  to  do  his  part  because  God  works,  and  God's 
working  requiring  man's  work.  II.  Paul's  putting  of  the  matter  is  in  perfect 
agreement  with  the  scientific  law  that  growth  and  development  are  dependent 
ON  the  due  interaction  between  the  thing  that  has  to  grow  and  a  tittino 
ENTiRON'MENT.  To  this  biological  law  all  living  things  are  subject  Take,  «.^.,  a 
corn  of  wheat :  until  it  is  acted  on  by  a  fitting  environment  it  can  neither  grow  nor 
produce  fruit.  The  grains  of  wheat  found  in  Egyptian  mummies  might  have  been 
thought  dead.  Yet  no  sooner  were  they  sown  in  appropriate  soil  than  they  began 
to  grow,  simply  because  they  were  duly  acted  on  by  a  fitting  environment.  Some 
of  them,  while  the  same  in  appearance  with  the  rest,  were  dead ;  they  rotted  and 
disappeared  because  they  were  incapable  of  reacting  in  response  to  their  environ- 
ment. The  fijst  movement  proceeds  from  the  surroundings ;  then  follows  the 
response  of  the  germ.  Or  take  our  body.  Unless  we  are  blessed  with  sunshine, 
bi«athe  pure  air,  eat  nourishing  food,  &c.,  we  can  neither  develope,  nor  retain  our 
health.  The  same  principle  holds  good  in  disease.  A  cure  depends  on  proper 
action  from  without  by  medicine  or  diet.  If  there  is  nothing  in  them  to  affect  our 
condition,  we  go  from  bad  to  worse,  and  if  our  condition  is  so  bad  that  the  medi- 
cine works  no  responsive  action,  our  case  is  equally  hopeless.  III.  What  is  the 
KBAii  aioNiEiCANOB  OF  THIS  INTERACTION  ?    Is  the  Organism  pushed  like  a  ball  set  in 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

motion  ?  No.  Our  environment  acts  on  us  by  becoming  food  to  us,  and  light,  air, 
heat,  as  well  as  bread  and  water,  are  food.  And  food  feeds  us  by  becoming  one 
with  us,  and  energizing  in  us.  "  They  work  in  you  to  will  and  to  do."  But  the 
power  in  the  food  cannot  become  ours  without  our  effort.  We  must  at  least  be  able 
to  digest.  If  we  cannot  do  that  the  most  nutritious  food  will  not  save  us  from 
death.  Here  again  we  may  say,  "  Work  physically,  for  it  is  food  that  worketh," 
&c.  The  same  with  medicine.  Our  phrase  is,  "  Has  it  begun  to  work  ?  "  But  the 
entire  man  is  subject  to  this  great  law,  man  not  only  as  a  physical  but  as  a  spiritual 
being.  IV.  God  is  the  ultimate  environment  of  oub  spikitual  nature,  as  light 
and  air  and  food  to  our  body.  Therefore,  unless  He  act  upon  us  it  is  impossible  that 
we  should  act,  nor  can  His  action  have  any  result  unless  we  respond  and  co-operate. 
And  He  doeg  not  merely  influence  us  from  without,  give  us  commands  or  present 
motives ;  He  enters  and  His  eneigy  becomes  ours,  in  virtue  whereof  we  can  will  or 
do.  But  we  must  lay  hold  of  Him  and  assimilate  His  energy.  God  can  no  more 
become  our  spiritual  light,  life,  and  strength  without  receptive  action  than  undi- 
gested bread  can  be  the  staff  of  life.     V.  That  which  is  true  of  the  spirituaii 

LIFE    IN    GENERAL   18     EMPHATICALLY     TRUE    OF     IT   AS    ENFEEBLED     AND     DARKENED    BY 

SIN.  Unless  God  come  to  our  help  the  weakness  and  darkness  cannot  be  overcome  ; 
but  equally  hopeless  is  our  case  unless  we  receive  His  help.  If  we  are  so  far  gone 
in  moral  corruption  that  no  function  of  our  spiritual  being  can  come  into  action, 
anything  that  God  does  will  no  more  avail  us  than  light  and  water  a  plant  that  has 
withered.  God  must  interfere,  and  we  must  open  our  nature  to  His  influences.  He 
moves  first,  but  there  must  be  a  corresponding  movement  on  our  side.  What  is 
this  but  what  Paul  says  in  the  text.  VI.  We  are  so  constituted  by  God  that  wb 
CANNOT  BE  SPIRITUALLY  HEALTHY  WITHOUT  HiM.  Tbis  always  was,  is,  and  will  be  the 
case.  Man's  moral  weakness  and  corruption  are  rooted  in  the  refusal  to  let  God 
work  in  him,  in  the  resolve  to  be  self-sufScient.  Man  without  God  is  like  an 
organism  without  nourishment.  What  a  starving  man  is  such  is  the  spiritual  man 
without  God.  Now  suppose  you  went  to  relieve  such  a  starving  man,  and  he  were 
to  say,  "I  cannot  accept  your  food  till  I  am  stronger,"  you  would  exclaim,  "  How 
can  you  expect  to  be  strong  without  food?  Can  you  feed  on  yourself?  "  No  less 
absurd  is  our  behaviour  in  regard  to  salvation.  God  is  waiting  to  do  His  part. 
You,  also,  in  secret,  want  to  do  yours  ;  but  you  cannot  without  Him.     VIL  Thosb 

WHO    HAVE   BEGUN    TO   WORK  OUT   THEIR  SALVATION  FIND    THAT  THEIR  ONLY  SALVATION  IS 

IN  God.  It  is  not  merely  that  He  must  help  you  now  and  then.  Continuous  trust 
and  fellowship  are  the  only  safety.  {Principal  Sivion.)  The  Christian  work. — 
Firtt  part: — I.  The  duty — "  Work."  The  estate  of  a  Christian  is  a  working  not 
idle  estate.  Christianity  is  not  verbal  profession  nor  speculative  (John  xiii.  17). 
1.  Works  of  preparation  are  those  that  prepare  men  to  believe,  as  hearing,  reading, 
meditating.  2.  From  these  a  Christian  ought  to  proceed  to — (1)  Works  of  piety, 
faith,  hope,  prayer,  and — (2)  works  of  charity.  3.  The  use  of  all  this  is  to  give  us 
a  right  conceit  of  religion.  Many  are  good  talkers,  and  yet  never  come  one  step 
towards  salvation.  II.  The  right  manner  of  performing  the  duty.  1.  Obediently. 
"As  ye  have  obeyed."  Whatever  we  do  it  must  be  in  obedience  to  God.  Then — 
(1)  We  must  know  what  God's  will  is  (Eom.  xii.  2  ;  Eph.  v.  10).  (2)  This  must  be 
to  all  God's  laws.  Partial  obedience  is  no  obedience  (Psa.  cxix.  10).  2.  Sincerely. 
"  Whether  I  am  present  or  not."  God  sees  you.  The  Pharisees  obeyed  to  be  seen 
of  men  (Matt.  vi.  2,  6).  Joash  was  a  good  king  as  long  as  Jehoida  lived ;  but  a 
good  Christian  is  ever  good,  in  all  places,  occasions,  companies.  3.  Laboriously. 
"  Work  out."  No  perfunctory  thing  can  please  God.  4.  Constantly — not  like 
morning  dew,  or  Lot's  wife  who  turned  back  (Luke  i.  75  ;  John  xvii.  4  ;  2  Tim.  iv. 
7-8).  To  this  end — (1)  We  must  come  with  a  resolution  not  to  be  scared  from  the 
performance  of  duties,  and  therefore  to  be  furnished  with  patience  (Heb.  x.  36 ; 
Gal.  Ti.  9).  (2)  We  must  consider  the  promises  (Kev.  iii.  21 ;  Matt.  x.  22).  5. 
It  must  tend  to  salvation.  We  must  go  on  in  a  constant  course  of  goodness  that 
we  may  come  to  the  end  of  our  faith.  For  salvation  is  begun  here,  and  the  state 
of  grace  here  is  called  salvation,  even  as  well  as  the  state  hereafter.  All  conclu- 
sions are  to  be  reduced  to  their  principles,  and  so  all  is  to  be  reduced  to  salvation 
as  the  mam  principle.  Do  we  sanctify  all  things  by  prayer  (Col. iii.  24).  III.  The 
MOTIVES  TO  THIS  DUTY.  1.  The  example  of  Christ.  "Wherefore."  Christ  did  all 
in  obedience  to  God,  &c.  2.  The  apostle's  love.  Christians  should  take  good 
courses,  that  they  may  comfort  those  that  are  good.  3.  The  possibility  of  it.  You 
have  gone  so  far ;  keep  on.  4.  The  end.  Salvation.  Considering  we  are  not  yet 
perfect,  we  are  encouraged  to  go  on  to  perfection  (Tit.  ii.  11  ;  Heb.  zi.  26).    lY. 


CHAP.  n-J  PHILIPPIANS.  131 

Thb  bpirit  in  which  it  is  to  be  done.  1.  Fear  is  an  affection  planted  by  God 
in  our  natures,  whereby  we,  foreseeing  dangers  which  may  hinder  our  being  or  well- 
being,  are  afraid  of  them.  This  is  a  spiritual  fear.  (1)  A  fear  of  reverence,  which 
is  a  fear  mixed  with  love,  wherein  we  stand  in  awe  of  God's  greatness  but  love  Him 
for  His  goodness.  (2)  A  fear  of  watchfulness.  (3)  Of  jealousy,  lest  we  should 
offend  God.  2.  God  loves  not  the  careless  Christian.  3.  All  things  must  be  done 
in  this  fear,  or  we  shall  come  short  of  our  salvation.  Second  part  : — I.  Thb 
Chbistian  hath  a  will  and  a  power  to  do  good.  II.  This  power  we  have  not  from 
OURSELVES  BUT  FROM  GoD.  Some  things  are  done  for  us  which  were  neither  wrought 
by  us  nor  in  us,  e.g.,  Christ's  death.  Some  things  are  wrought  in  us  not  by  us,  as 
our  first  work  of  conversion.  Other  things  are  wrought  in  us,  and  by  us,  such  aa 
all  good  works  after  conversion.  The  will  is  wrought  in  us  by  God  as  we  be  Hia 
temples,  and  the  deed  is  wrought  by  us  as  instruments  of  God's  inward  working. 
III.  This  work  of  God  in  vb  is  a  powerful  work.  He  gives  to  ua  to  will  that  which 
He  wills.  IV.  This  WORK  IB  INWARD,  NOT  WITHOUT.  He  uses  exhortations,  Ac,  but 
He  puts  power  to  these  to  prevail.  V.  The  perfection  of  this  work  (Heb.  xii.  2  ; 
Phil.  i.  6),     (R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  Practical  religion  : — 1.  The  practical  element 

IN  religion.  II.  The  emotional  element — "  With  fear  and  trembUng.  1.  This 
is  not  slavish,  but  reverential  fear.  2.  We  should  have  "  fear  and  trembling.  (1) 
Because  of  our  accountability.  Soon  we  may  hear  it  said,  "  Give  an  account  of  thy 
stewardship."  (2)  Because  of  the  danger  of  losing  souls.  (3)  Because  of  our 
fallibility,  we  may  teach  error,  and  thus  be"  blind  guides."  III.  The  bupernaural 
ELEMENT  :  "  It  is  God  that  worketh,"  &a.  {A.  J.  Furman.)  The  two/old  force  in 
salvation  : — This  sentence  falls  from  Paul  as  easy  and  natural  as  his  breath.  It  is 
a  casual  remark,  true,  but  not  combating  any  specific  error ;  a  simple  exhortation 
to  earnestness,  with  the  assurance  of  Divine  co-operation.  But  what  Paul  said  in 
this  casual  way  has  been  caught  up  by  opposing  schools,  turned  to  a  use  he  never 
dreamed  of,  crowded  with  a  meaniug  he  did  not  intend,  made  the  rallying  cry  of 
theological  champions,  and  a  very  body  of  divinity.  Arminian  and  Calvinist  have 
seized  it,  cut  it  in  two,  emphasized  each  his  own  word  in  it  according  to  his 
philosophy,  and  thus  equipped  fought  each  other  for  two  hundred  years  over  a 
doctrine  of  faith  and  works.  The  text  teaches — I.  That  salvation  is  an  achieve- 
ment. What  is  here  meant  by  salvation.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  anything  done  by 
Christ  in  the  way  of  expiation.  (2)  Not  getting  to  heaven.  A  man  does  not  enter 
heaven  to  find  salvation,  but  because  he  has  it.  (3)  Not  an  immediate  work  wrought 
in  some  hour  of  deep  feeling.  What  is  then  done  is  an  important  but  small  part  of 
salvation.  2.  Positively.  It  is  a  moral  process  in  which  time  and  effort  are  chief 
factors.  (1)  If  a  man  has  any  sinful  habits,  he  must  overcome  them ;  or  lacks  and 
weaknesses,  he  must  supply  the  deficiency.  (2)  And  then  there  is  the  great  reality 
of  character — a  needed  group  of  qualities  that  only  comes  about  by  elaboration. 
II.  This  achievement  is  the  result  of  sharp  and  definite  strife.  1.  Every 
man  is  bound  by  every  consideration  to  undertake  this  work.  He  is  here  to  do  this 
very  thing.  2.  When  he  comes  upon  the  stage  he  finds  evil,  aud  his  work  is  to  cast 
it  out  and  bring  in  good.  No  evil  goes  out  of  itself.  No  nation  and  no  man  ever 
grew  into  virtue  or  dropped  evil  as  a  tree  drops  dead  leaves.  3.  Look  at  the  world 
and  its  history — tell  me  if  a  single  gaiu  has  been  made  that  did  not  turn  on  the 
overthrow  of  some  positive  evil  with  pain  and  effort.  4.  Let  every  man  ask  himself. 
Am  I  saving  myself  ?  I  am  ignorant,  &c.  I  find  in  myself  hereditary  evil.  I  have 
contracted  evil  habits.  I  am  passing  on  from  day  to  day  without  communion  with 
God,  doing  nothing  for  humanity.  Am  I  striving  to  escape  from  that  broad  road 
to  destruction  ?  III.  The  twofold  process.  Work  it  out,  for  God  works  it  in.  l.No 
other  influence  can  touch  a  man  like  God's.  When  I  give  you  my  hand  it  is  in  part 
my  strengtb  that  upholds  you.  When  you  cheer  me  I  am  leaning  on  your  inspira- 
tion. But  when  God  works  in  a  man  to  will  and  to  work,  the  union  of  wills  is  so 
close,  that  separate  threads  of  influence  cannot  be  detected.  It  often  hurts 
a  man  to  be  helped  by  others ;  it  never  hurts  him  to  be  helped  by  God. 
2.  The  importance  of  this  twofold  process.  (1)  Suppose  God  were  left  out 
and  man  saved  himself,  overcame  his  weakness  and  faults,  and  so  trained  his 
faculties  as  to  become  a  wise  and  good  man.  What  sort  of  a  man  would  you  have  ? 
assuredly  a  conceited  one  who  will  at  last  become  a  selflsh  one.  A  man  cannot 
isolate  himself  in  sharp  individuality  from  God  and  live.  (2)  Suppose  that  God 
saved  a  man  without  any  effort  of  his  own  :  that  He  shut  up  the  path  of  evil,  and 
by  some  Divine  alchemy  whitened  the  passive  soul,  the  result  would  be  worse  than 
in  the  previous  case.    3.  Now  suppose  again  the  reunion  of  God  and  man  in  the 


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

yrotk  of  SAlvation.  When  a  man  recognizes  that  God  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  his  work, 
he  is  led  straight  op  to  the  exercise  of  every  element  of  His  character.  Then  he 
becomea  reverent,  and  reverence  is  one-half  of  character.  Along  with  this  comes 
humility — the  soil  of  all  the  virtues.  And  as  the  man  comes  more  and  more  to 
feel  that  God  is  in  him  he  is  swept  into  the  current  of  God's  own  thought  and 
feelings,  and  so  he  loves  as  God  loves  ;  and  all  the  patience,  tenderness,  truth,  and 
majesty  of  God  work  in  him,  subduing  him  into  their  quality.  {T.  T.  Munger.) 
God  works  : — I.  Secretly — "in  yon."  II.  Mediately — by  His  Word.  HI.  Mightily 
— by  His  Spirit.  IV.  Graciodsly — of  His  good  pleasure.  V.  Effectually — to  will 
and  to  do.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Salvation  a  work: — The  word  KartpyaZeaQat,  "to 
apply  oneself  to,"  properly  signifies  to  do,  to  work,  to  labour,  and  is  taken  in  two 
ways  in  the  Scripture ;  sometimes  to  express  to  polish,  form,  and  fashion  a  rough 
and  raw  thing,  as  when  a  carpenter  cuts  and  polishes  wood,  and  a  mason  stones, 
which  they  desire  to  employ  in  their  work ;  and  in  this  sense  we  may  say  that  God 
makes  us  when  He  creates  us  in  His  Son,  stripping  us  of  this  vile  and  miserable 
form  of  sinners  and  slaves  of  Satan,  in  which  we  are  bora,  and  giving  us  another, 
holy  and  glorious,  by  which  we  become  His  children,  precious  and  lively  stones, 
and  fit  to  enter  into  the  building  of  His  temple,  from  vile  and  dead  stones,  which 
we  were  by  nature.  The  other,  more  common,  signification  of  this  word  is,  to 
accomplish,  perfect,  and  finish  a  thing  already  commenced,  to  execute  it  and  guide 
it  to  its  end ;  as  when  the  apostle  says,  in  Bom.  vii.  18,  that  "  to  will  is  present 
with  me,  but  how  to  perform  that  which  is  good  I  find  not ; "  and  when  he  says 
besides,  in  Bom.  iv.,  it  "  worketh  wrath,"  because  it  completes  in  us  the  feeling  of 
the  wrath  of  God  against  sin,  which  without  is  weak  and  languid,  the  light  of 
nature  alone  without  the  law  only  exciting  and  beginning  it  in  as.  (J.  Daily.) 
Salvation  worked  in  arid  out: — A  clock  presents  a  beautiful  emblem  of  Chris- 
tianity. When  in  good  order  it  is  always  going,  and  one  wheel  propels  another ; 
and  even  so  must  true  Christianity  be  in  continual  exercise,  and  every  act  of 
godliness  make  way  for  the  next.  As  a  clock,  however,  needs  to  be  constantly 
inspected,  and  frequently  set  and  cleaned,  so  God,  in  His  faithfulness  and  long- 
suffering,  has  continual  work  to  do,  amending,  purifying,  and  regulating  our 
Christianity.  {T.  H.  Leary,D.C.L.)  The  working  out  of  salvation  gradual: — 
A  man's  salvation  is  to  be  wrought  out  as  an  artist  works  oat  a  picture.  It 
is  a  good  thing  for  a  man  to  make  a  charcoal  sketch  ;  but  it  will  not  do  to 
stop  at  that.  It  is  a  good  thing  that  refers  to  something  better  that  is  coming 
on.  He  may  pat  in  the  dead  colours,  and  so  make  an  advance,  but  it  is  not 
an  advance  which  fits  the  picture  to  be  put  up  in  a  gallery  for  admiration.  He 
may  add  particular  features,  and  thus  make  a  further  advance ;  but  suppose  a  man 
were  painted  perfectly  up  to  his  nose,  and  all  the  rest  were  left  blank,  what  sort  of 
a  picture  would  he  make  f  Suppose  one  of  a  man's  eyes  were  accurately  painted, 
and  the  other  were  all  blurred,  what  would  be  the  effect?  Things  are  good 
according  as  they  conform  to  an  ideal  in  the  line  of  progress  or  development.  So 
whatever  tends  to  educate  a  man's  conscience,  to  unfold  his  reason,  to  enlarge  his 
moral  sensibilities,  to  fill  him  with  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  is  beneficial ;  a  benefit 
in  that  direction  may  be  called  works — not  condemned  works,  but  works  that  are 
efl&cacious.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  publicity  of  a  worked-out  salvation.  You  are 
to  work  it  out.  It  must  be  presented  to  the  eye  ;  it  is  not  to  be  like  the  works  of  a 
watch  that  are  elaborately  finished  and  then  concealed  in  a  case.  The  words 
imply  that  there  is  something  in  the  Christian's  heart  has  to  be  brought  out,  and 
that  only  work  can  develope  it.  A  mechanic  takes  a  bar  of  iron.  He  knows  there 
is  brightness  in  its  nature,  so  he  places  it  in  his  lathe,  and  by  means  of  cutters, 
files,  and  other  instruments  the  black  or  rusty  bar  is  made  so  bright  that 
it  dazzles  the  eye  with  its  shining  surface.  And  there  is  that  in  the  heart  of  every 
Christian  which  worked  out  would  delight  all  that  knew  him.  "  Let  your  light  so 
shine,"  Ac.  {D.  E.  Jenkins.)  Man's  work  an  evidence  of  his  salvation : — William 
Wickham  being  appointed  by  King  Edward  to  build  a  stately  church,  wrote  in  the 
windows,  "  This  work  made  William  Wickham."  When  charged  by  the  king  for 
assuming  the  honour  of  that  work  to  himself  as  the  author,  whereas  he  was  only 
the  overseer,  he  answered  that  he  meant  not  that  he  made  the  work,  but  that  the 
work  made  him,  having  before  been  very  poor,  and  then  in  great  credit.  Lord, 
when  we  read  in  thy  Word  that  we  must  work  out  our  own  salvation,  thy  meaning 
is  not  that  our  salvation  should  be  the  effect  of  our  work,  bat  our  work  the  evidence 
of  our  salvation.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  difficulty  of  working  out  our  salvation : — 
Like  the  man  in  the  old  heathen  fable,  condemned  to  roll  a  ball  ap  a  steep  hill,  no 


CHAP,  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  133 

sooner  do  we  gain  a  step,  than  sin  tries  by  its  own  weight  to  roll  down  again  and 
drag  as  with  it.  Like  our  countrymen  at  the  heights  of  the  Ahna,  the  repentant 
Christian  has  to  force  his  way  upwards  to  the  skies  in  the  face  of  enemies  already 
entrenched  in  strong  position  in  his  heart,  and  like  them  he  can  only  ensure  success 
by  the  exercise  of  a  vigorous  will,  assisted  in  the  spiritual  warfare  by  Him  who  is 
"mighty  to  save."  (G,  Huntington,  M.A.)  Work  out  your  own  lalvation: — 
Cast  a  sponge  into  water,  and,  the  fluid  filling  its  empty  cells,  it  swells  out  before 
our  eyes  ;  increases  more  and  more.  There  ia  no  effort  here,  and  could  be  none  ; 
for  though  once  a  living  animal,  the  sponge  is  now  dead  and  dry.  But  it  is  not  as 
sponges  fill  with  water,  nor,  to  use  a  Scripture  figure  often  employed,  and  sometimes 
misapplied,  as  Gideon's  fleece  was  filled  with  dews,  that  Ood's  people  are 
replenished  with  His  grace.  More  is  needed  than  simply  to  bring  ourselves  in 
contact  with  ordinances  ;  to  read  the  Bible  ;  to  repair  on  Sabbath  to  the  Church  ; 
to  sit  down  in  communion  seasons  at  the  Lord's  table.  The  babe,  for  example,  is 
laid  in  a  mother's  arms,  and  in  contact  with  her  breast;  but  is  laid  there  only  to 
die,  unless,  with  slumbering  instincts  awakened,  it  fastened  and  suck  by  its  own 
efforts  the  nourishment  provided  for  it,  independent  of  itself ;  and  there,  drawing 
life  from  a  mother's  bosom,  it  lies  in  her  loving  arms,  the  symbol  of  him  who 
hangs  by  faith  in  Christ,  and,  fed  on  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  is  nourished  up 
into  the  likeness  and  image  of  God.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  motive  for  this 
v)ork  : — Just  as  the  same  electricity  that  flashes  like  an  avenging  sword  from  the 
eloud,  and  that  lightens  from  one  side  of  heaven  to  the  other,  also  trembles  in  the 
dew-drop,  and  flies  along  the  wire,  carrying  news  from  one  continent  to  another  : 
so  the  Divine  Power  that  binds  all  holy  beings  in  chains  of  loyalty  and  love  to  the 
throne  of  the  eternal,  and  that  breaks  the  bond  of  our  captivity,  and  raises  as  to  a 
state  of  spiritual  enlargement  and  fellowship,  also  enables  us  to  discharge  the 
smallest  duties  and  the  common  daily  responsibilities  of  the  Christian  life.  "  Christ 
is  all,  and  in  all,"  in  every  duty,  in  every  service.  (James  Owen.)  Salvatum  to 
be  worked  out  with  fear  and  trembling  : — The  face  of  the  helmsman  in  coming  down 
the  rapids  of  the  St.  Lawrence  in  the  great  vessel  is  a  sight  to  see.  He  takes  in, 
as  it  were,  all  the  conditions  of  the  case,  in  one  inevitable  glance — the  bank  ;  the 
bend  ;  the  shallowing  or  deepening  bed  ;  the  amount  of  way  on  the  vessel ;  the 
harry  of  the  waters  ;  the  calm  spread  of  the  deep  river  lying  like  a  peaceful  haven 
yonder  in  the  distance  1  There  he  stands — fearful,  yet  firm — distrustful,  yet 
confident — until  the  danger  is  past.  With  a  similar  feeling — not  slavishly  afraid — 
bat  intent,  earnest,  bending  all  the  powers  in  concentrated  effort  towards  the 
ultimate  object — so  '*  work  out  your  salvation."  (A,  Raleigh,  D.D.)  We  mutt 
fear  and  tremble  because  of  the  preciousness  of  salvation,  and  becaiue  of  the  co- 
operation of  omnipotence  : — Did  you  ever  have  committed  to  your  care  something 
exceedingly  rare  and  precious  ;  something  of  singular  beauty  or  untold  value  ?  Did 
yoa  ever  come  into  the  possession  of  something  long  and  ardently  desired,  which 
you  had  thought  to  be  too  good,  too  sweet,  too  lovable  ever  to  be  really  yours, 
your  very  own  ?  Was  not  there  an  awe,  almost  a  terror  in  the  sense  of  that 
possession?  Did  you  not  say  to  yourself,  "Who  am  I  that  I  should  have  this? 
What  if  I  should  let  it  drop?  What  if  I  should  lose  it?  "  Did  not  the  very  joy 
make  yoa  "  afraid  "  and  your  happiness  make  you  "  tremble  "  t  There  is  another 
cause  of  "  fear"  and  "  trembling  I  "  You  are  working  with  Omnipotence,  it  is  an 
awful  thing  working  with  God  I  What  a  responsibility  1  What  a  position  for  a 
man,  a  poor  sinner,  to  be  in  I  "  What  if  my  shortcomings  and  sins  should  deprive 
me  at  last  of  that  friendship,  and  lurn  His  very  kindness  into  a  curse  I  The  thought 
may  well  make  me  '  fear  and  tremble  I ' "  And  how  tremendous  is  the  issue  at 
stake  t  To  have  been  once  saved  ;  to  have  stood  on  that  high  and  blessed 
position ;  to  have  tasted  that  peace,  and  then  to  lose  it  all !  Oh  1  what 
bitter  self-reproach  for  ever  1  What  a  wrong  done  to  my  own  dear  kind 
Saviour  I  What  an  aggravation  to  my  time  of  misery  I  {J  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
God  working  in  xu  : — Sunhght  is  universal ;  it  shines  everywhere ;  but  when  you 
bring  it  to  bear  upon  your  plants  in  greenhouses  you  specialize  it.  The  black 
Hamburg  grape  you  cannot  raise  out  of  doors,  although  there  is  sunlight  there. 
You  build  glass  houses ;  you  so  arrange  them  that  the  sun's  rays  fall  npon  the 
vines ;  you  secure  the  conditions  required  for  their  growth,  and  the  consequence  is 
that  you  have  fruit.  You  specialize  the  sunlight  by  the  skill  of  the  gardener. 
There  are  certain  latitudes  in  which  given  results  cannot  be  obtained  by  sunlight 
without  speciahzing  it.  The  Divine  influence  is  diffused  npon  the  good  and  the 
bad  alike,  just  as  sunlight  is  ;  but  when  men  understand  it  and  accept  it  by  the 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chas.  ta 

force  of  their  own  will,  putting  themselves  in  the  line  of  God's  nature,  it  becomes' 
special  to  them,  and  works  in  them  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  God's  good  pleasure. 
The  Divine  influence  is  to  the  human  will  what  the  atmosphere  is  to  the  eye  and  to 
the  ear,  and  what  that  which  is  taken  into  the  mouth  is  to  the  tongue.    If  it  were 
not  for  the  atmosphere  and  its  vibrations  the  eye  would  perish  ;   it  would  have 
nothing  to  do ;  for  although  it  is  an  organ  for  seeing,  it  cannot  see  in  and  of  itself. 
The  ear  is  an  organ  for  hearing,  but  the  ear  cannot  hear  of  itself.     It  must  have 
outside  pulsations  beating  upon  it.     The  tongue  cannot  taste  unless  it  has  some- 
thing of  which  to  taste.    "When  a  seed  is  planted  in  good  soil  it  is  given  over  to  the 
Bun ;  and  when  the  sun  undertakes  to  care  for  a  plant  it  always  keeps  its  eye  on 
the  blossom  and  the  fruit  which  it  is  to  unfold.     It  is  not  enough  that  it  develops 
stem,  branches,  and  flowers.      The  tendency  of  the  sun  is  to  bring  everything  up 
to  its  ultimate  consummation.     So  the  tendency  of  the  Divine  Spirit  is  to  draw 
men  up  steadily  through  the  whole  range  of  their  faculties  till  they  blossom.     {H. 
W.  Beecher.)        Divine  energy  an  incentive  to  human: — Suppose  that  you  were 
involved  in  temporal  difficulties,  that  a  benevolent  friend  came  forward  to  pay 
your  debts,  and  place  you  in  a  better  position  than  you  had  ever  occupied,  would 
you  argue,  "  Well,  I  need  not  care  how  wasteful  I  become,  or  how  heavy  the 
demands  which  he  may  meet ;  he  has  enough  and  to  spare.    As  his  heart  overflow* 
with  benevolence,  I  will  leave  him  to  settle  all  matters  without  my  aid,  and  when 
everything  has  been  done,  I  may  be  prevailed  on  to  take  advantage  of  his  goodness ; 
but,  in  the  meantime,  I  will  be  as  reckless  as  I  may "  ?    The  question  instantly 
occurs.  How  it  is  either  possible  or  right,  consistent  with  benevolence,  to  assist 
such  a  character?     Suppose  that  your  house  were  on  fire,  and  a  well-appointed 
train  of  firemen,  with  their  engines,  were  at  hand,  to  assist  in  quenching  the 
flames,  would  you  retreat  from  a  scene  where  perhaps  your  most  important  worldly 
interests  were  at  stake,  and  where  lives  dearer  to   you  than  your  own  were  is 
danger,  and  betake  yourself  to  dissipation  or  amusement,  saying  there  were  persons 
paid  for  the  work,  and  whose  office  and  duty  it  was  to  attend  to  it,  and  that  you 
would  devolve  all  the  trouble  on  them?    You  could  not  be  so  unnatural;  you 
would  do  everything  to  rouse  the  sleeping  inmates,  to  secure  your  most  important 
papers ;  and  whatever  energy,  daring,  and  skill  and  diligence  could  accomplish, 
you  would  do.     Or  suppose,  again,  that  you  were  placed  in  a  garrison  which  was 
beleaguered  by  fierce  and  formidable  foes,  that  the  attacks  upon  the  fortifications 
were  pushed  most  vigorously  on  all  sides,  and  it  required  all  your  skill  and  labour 
night  and  day  to  defend  yourselves  ;  but  in  the  meantime  a  numerous  and  well- 
appointed  army  had  been  sent  by  your  sovereign  to  your  relief,  well  able  to  raise 
the  siege  and  effect  your  liberation ;  when  you  heard  the  news,  would  yon  remit 
your  ardour  and  watchfulness  ?    When  you  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpets,  and 
the  roar  of  the  artillery  as  they  marched  to  the  conflict,  and  when  you  knew  that 
the  moment  of  your  rescue  was  at  hand,  is  there  a  man  who  would  fold  his  arms, 
and  refuse  to  mount  the  ramparts,  to  sally  out  and  make  a  diversion  on  his  own 
side  of  the  camp  f  who  would  not  dare  and  do  everything  to  make  the  defeat  of  the 
enemy  as  complete  as  possible  J    If  the  men  refused,  the  very  women  would  cry 
shame  upon  them,  take  up  the  arms  which  the  dastards  had  thrown  away,  and 
help  to  achieve  the  victory.    But,  my  friends,  you  have  auxiliaries  far  mightier 
and  stronger  than  the  best  disciplined  and  most  enthusiastic  troops  that  ever 
general  brought  into  the  field  of  battle.     You  have  the  army  of  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
and  at  its  head  the  Captain  of  your  salvation  ;  you  have  all  the  resources  of 
Omnipotence  collected  and  concentrated  for  your  deliverance.     If  ever  impulse 
or  energy  was  communicated  to  the  human  mind,  it  must  be  by  such  considera- 
tions as  these ;  and  with  all  these  mercies,  boundless  and  glorious,  around  you  and 
before,  is  it  not  high  time  to  shake  off  your  slumber,  to  commence  yonr  work,  and 
to  ask  with  eagerness,  "  What  shall  we  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  "  What  shall  we  do  that 
we  may  do  the  works  of  God  ?"     (R.  Redpath,  M.A.)         God's  grace  and  man's 
free  agency : — You  might  as  well  expect  the  steam  which  gives  its  mighty  energy 
to  the  engine  to  perform  all  the  delicate  workmanship  of  some  textile  manufacture 
without  the  directing  brain  and  controlling  hand,  as  to  hope  for  grace  to  work  apart 
from  the  co-operation  of  the  human  will;  and  again,  you  might  as  soon  expect 
these  mechanical  results  without   the  motive   power,  as  that  man    shouIJ    save 
himself  without  God's  grace.    The  body  is  supplied  with  an  organization  admirably 
adapted  to  our  wants,  but  it  is  the  mind  which  directs  every  action,  and  it  is  the 
principle  of  life  which  renders  action  possible.   Deprive  it  of  intelligence,  and  what 
one  action  would  be  rightly  performed  ?    And  yet  we  feel  that  there  is  a  mutaa]> 


«HA».  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  135 


concurrence  of  mind  and  body  when  we  do  perform  anything.  (G,  Huntington,  M.  A.) 
Grace  is  God's  work  : — Before  any  daisy  or  violet,  before  any  blossom  is  seen  in  the 
field,  the  sun  lies  with  its  bosom  to  the  ground,  crying  to  the  flower,  and  saying,  "Why 
tarriest  thou  so  long?"  and  day  after  day  the  sun  comes,  and  pours  its  maternal 
warmth  upon  the  earth,  and  coaxes  the  plant  to  grow  and  bloom.  And  when  days 
and  weeks  have  passed  the  root  obeys  the  call  and  sends  out  its  germ,  from  which 
comes  the  flower.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  sun's  warmth  and  light,  the  flower 
could  never  have  come  to  itself.  So  the  Eternal  Spirit  of  God  rests  on  the  human 
soul,  warming  it,  quickening  it,  calling  it,  and  saying,  •*  0,  my  son  I  where  art 
thou  ?  "  And  at  last  it  is  this  Divine  sympathy  and  brooding  influence  that  brings 
men  to  God,  and  leads  them  to  say,  "  Am  I  not  sinful  T  "  and  to  yearn  for  some- 
thing higher  and  purer  and  holier.  It  vas  God's  work.  He  Kmg  ago  was 
••  working  in  you,  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  own  good  pleassure."  (//.  If.  Beecher.) 
God  is  a  silent  worker: — The  grandest  operatiims  both  in  nature  aud  in  grace  are 
the  most  silent  and  imperceptible.  The  shallow  brook  babbles  in  its  passnge,  and 
is  heard  by  every  one  ;  but  the  coming  on  of  the  seasons  is  silent  and  unseen.  The 
Btorm  rages  and  alarms ;  but  its  fury  is  soon  exhausted,  and  its  effects  are  partial 
and  soon  remedied ;  but  the  dew,  though  gentle  and  unheard,  is  immense  in 
quantity,  and  the  very  life  of  large  portions  of  the  earth.  And  these  are  pictures 
of  the  operations  of  grace,  in  the  Church  and  in  the  soul.  (R.  Cecil.)  God's 
agency  effective  when  man's  is  impotent : — See  Israel  at  the  Red  Sea.  By  the 
wilderness,  and  the  mountains,  and  the  sea,  the  people  are  shut  in;  and  behind 
them  is  Pharaoh  in  close  pursuit,  with  his  great  and  well-equi[iped  army. 
If  we  look  simply  at  man's  valour  or  wisdom,  resistance  and  escnpe  are  equally 
and  utterly  hopeless.  The  cry  of  Israel  to  Moses  is,  "Because  there  were  no 
graves  in  Egypt,  hast  thou  taken  us  away  to  die  in  the  wilderness  ? "  But 
Moses  said  to  them,  "Fear  ye  not:  stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord, 
which  He  will  show  you  to-day.  The  Lord  shall  fight  for  you,  and  ye  shall  hold 
your  peace."  At  this  point,  you  observe,  they  are  called  to  be  siuiple  spi  ctators 
of  "  the  salvation  of  the  Lord,"  looking  on  with  adoring  wonder  at  the  mighty  work 
which  only  the  Divine  hand  could  accomplish — the  opening  of  a  pathway  for  them 
through  the  midst  of  the  great  waters.  But  afterward?,  for  the  "  Stand  still  and  see," 
comes  a  command  to  display  energetic  activity.  "  The  Lord  said  unto  Mo?es,  Speak 
unto  the  children  of  Israel,  that  they  go  forward.  And  the  children  of  Israel  went 
into  the  midst  of  the  sea."  So  with  yon  and  me,  dear  brethren.  The  expiation  of 
guilt,  the  "  working  out  of  our  salvation  "  meritoriously,  could  be  achieved  only  by 
the  God-man ;  and  our  part  is  to  "  stand  still,"  and  "  behold  the  Lamb  of  God, 
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  But  now,  when,  by  the  Lord's  pro- 
pitiatory sufferings  and  death,  a  way,  broad  and  clear,  has  been  opened  for  na 
through  the  midst  of  the  waters  of  avenging  judgment.  His  command,  loud  and 
explicit,  to  every  one  of  os  ia  that,  by  persistent,  growing  faith  and  holiness,  we 
"go  forward."  {R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  Man  to  work  in  hi^  salvation: — Though 
salvation  remains  wholly  of  grace,  it  may  be  described  as  worked  out  by  ourselves. 
God  does  not  reduce  man  into  a  machine ;  He  rather  puts  a  machine  at  man's 
disposal,  and  having  imparted  the  strength  to  turn  the  wheel,  requires  of  man  that 
he  labour,  in  order  to  the  evolving  the  web  from  the  loom.  {H.  ]\lelvill,  B.D.) 
Man  permeable  by  God : — Just  as  it  is  the  distinction  of  a  crystal,  that  it  is 
transparent,  able  to  let  the  light  into  and  through  its  close  flinty  body,  and  be 
irradiated  by  it  in  the  whole  mass  of  its  substance,  without  being  at  all  more  or 
less  a  crystal,  so  it  is  the  grand  distinction  of  humanity,  that  it  is  made  permeable 
by  the  Divine  nature,  prepared  in  that  manner  to  receive  and  entemple  the 
Infinite  Spirit,  to  be  energized  by  Him,  and  filled  with  His  glory  in  every  faculty, 
feeling,  and  power.  {H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)  Salvation  possible,  but  not  easy: — 
Christ  has  made  salvation  possible  for  us,  but  He  has  not  made  it  easy  ;  He  has 
brought  it  near  to  each  of  ns,  but  we  have  still  to  be  working  it  out.  He  has 
cast,  as  it  were,  the  rope  to  shipwrecked  souls,  vainly  buffeting  with  the  breakers, 
and  bhnded  with  the  spray.  We  could  never  have  made  our  way  without 
this  help,  bruised  and  battered,  benumbed  as  we  were.  We  could  never  have 
saved  ourselves  without  His  help,  but  now  all  may  be  well,  through  Him,  only 
there  still  needs  effort  on  our  part  as  well  as  on  BUs,  if  only  to  hold  fast  by 
the  cord  of  life  and  watch  against  the  perils  that  still  lie  in  our  way.  That 
effort  is  needed  as  really  as  is  His  help.  The  door  of  life  is  still  open,  but  it  ia 
still  a  strait  gate,  and  we  must  strive  to  enter  in.  Eternal  life  may  be  laid  hold 
oL  but  we  must  fight  the  good  fight  in  order  to  lay  hold  on  it.    {W.  G.  Smith,  D.D.) 


IM  fHE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Working  out  salvation : — Much  more  in  my  absence  prove  to  yourselves,  prove  to 
all  who  care  to  look  at  you,  that  you  do  not  depend  on  me,  that  you  do  not  hang 
upon  man  or  angel ;  but  that  you  hang  on  God,  who  brought  the  Gospel  to  you, 
although  He  brought  it  on  my  lips.  It  was  He  who  brought  it,  and  He  has  not 
gone ;  He  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure.  "  Oh,  ye 
Philippians,"  he  says,  "  you  are  at  no  loss,  you  are  at  no  disadvantage;  true  I  ain 
not  with  you,  though  I  fain  would  be  ;  but  God  is  with  you,  and  He  is  now  working 
in  you."  I  sometimes  think  that  this  verse  receives  its  fullest  emphasis  by  taking 
it  from  Paul's  mouth  and  putting  it  into  Christ's.  We  hear  it  as  coming  not  from 
Paul  the  servant,  but  from  Christ  the  great  Master  within  the  veil  as  He  looks  down 
on  us.  Oh,  how  it  fits  us !  We  are  so  apt  to  say — if  He  were  here,  then  how  our 
sanotification  and  our  Christian  work  would  get  on.  If  He  were  here  with  us ! 
And  Christ  savs  to  us,  to  us  His  Philippians  here  in  London,  speaking  down  from 
the  eternal  glory,  "  Wherefore,  My  beloved,  as  ye  have  always  obeyed  not  as  in  My 
presence  only,  but  now  much  more  in  My  absence,  work  out  your  own  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling,  for  I  am  working  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  My  good 
pleasure."  Christians,  we  are  walking  not  by  sight,  but  by  a  spiritual  vision  of  Him 
who  has  gone  before  us,  and  is  drawing  us  surely  and  certainly  into  His  own 
presence.  "  Not  as  in  My  presence  only,  but  now  much  more  in  My  absence,  let 
there  be  intensity,  let  there  be  individualism  ;  let  every  man  feel  that  this  is  his 
own  affair  ;  and  while  you  receive  all  ministries  and  all  gifts  of  that  kind  helpfully 
and  thankfully,  rise  superior  to  them  all ;  reach  out  and  forth  to  Me  Myself,  your 
Saviour,  your  Sanctifier,  your  All  in  all."  "  Your  own  salvation ; "  what  does  that 
mean  ?  That  is  a  rare  word  in  the  Bible ;  the  Bible  is  not  fond  of  calling  anything 
our  own,  I  must  realize  that  I  have  in  my  heart  the  salvation  I  am  to  work  out. 
Let  me  enhance  this  thought  in  your  mind,  the  thought  that  salvation  is  made 
over  to  us  as  our  own,  in  a  Book  which  from  beginning  to  end  strips  us  of  all  real 
ownership.  "  This  is  mine,"  says  a  man  here,  or  a  man  not  here,  "  this  is  my  pile, 
I  scraped  it  together;  I  rose  early,  I  sat  up  late,"  and  as  he  says  it  he  jerks  his 
money-bags  or  turns  over  his  bank-book  to  the  balance.  And  as  we  have  seen  in 
Glasgow  some  years  ago,  in  the  ease  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  the  bfnk  breaks 
and  he  is  a  beggar — he  is  a  beggar  I  This  that  he  was  calling  his,  even  while  he 
clutched  it,  it  left  him  ;  for  riches  take  unto  themselves  wings,  and  prove  to  us 
that  that  possessive  word  was  foolish ;  it  is  disproved  by  bitter  fact.  If  your  wealth 
was  really  yours,  why  did  you  let  it  go  ?  "  My  property,"  says  a  man.  "  See 
that  ?  See  that  fine  row  of  buildings  ?  that  is  mine.  These  title-deeds  mine, 
Becurely  mine,"  and  the  next  morning  he  is  poking  among  the  black  ashes  with  hia 
stick  ;  his  property  has  gone  up  in  a  chariot  of  fire,  and  come  down  in  a  shower  of 
soot  I  Oh,  how  sarcastically  the  chapter  of  accidents  disputes  with  ns  this  ex- 
pression :  "  My  own."  How  did  that  happen  if  it  was  really  yours  ?  •'  My  child," 
Bays  a  mother,  •'  my  own,  my  firstborn,  the  latest  thing  in  babies,  did  you  ever  see 
his  hke?  My  own,"  and  she  draws  him  to  her  bosom.  I  can  imagine  some  mother 
Baying,  "  Now,  preacher,  you  can  surely  allow  the  expression  here — My  own  baby  ; " 
No,  I  dare  not ;  I  must  be  true  to  God's  Word,  and  true  to  the  facts  of  life.  Thert 
is  a  Power  that  dares  to  come  in  between  the  babe  and  the  bosom  ;  and  that  is  close 
work,  is  it  not  t  "  Your  own  salvation."  That  thing,  if  I  may  so  say,  for  which 
you  had  neither  right  nor  claim  nor  title,  handed  over  to  you,  and  as  it  is  handed 
over,  this  word  along  with  it — "  Now  that  is  yours."  "  The  gift  of  God  is  eternal 
life,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord;  "  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death,  but  the  gift  of 
God  is  eternal  life  ;  "  "  He  that  believeth  hath" — open  your  arms,  man  1 — "ever- 
lasting life."  Now,  thou  black,  grim,  doubting  devil  that  dost  for  ever  whisper  thy 
words  in  my  ear,  I  will  fight  thee  here.  "  My  own  salvation  " — mine  because  it  is 
a  gift.  Salvation  is  ours  because  it  is  a  gift,  and  from  One  who  will  never  with- 
draw it.  "  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance."  Now  let  us  get 
on  to  the  command,  "Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling." 
That  is  what  I  wanted  to  get  at.  You  have  to  be  active.  God's  sovereignty  and 
power  evoke  human  responsibility  and  activity.  You  have  it,  therefore  work  it  out. 
To  use  a  common  illustration  :  there  is  a  load  of  bricks  here,  a  load  of  timber  and 
some  slates.  That  is  not  a  house.  No ;  but  there  is  the  making  of  one,  and  yoa 
can  make  the  house  out  of  it.  Now  the  Lord  lays  all  down  at  our  door;  He 
puts  it  into  our  hearts ;  Lie  comes  with  the  plan  and  the  specification  and  the 
material,  and  says,  "  Now  work  them  out."  The  Greek  has  at  its  root  the  idea  of 
"energy."  Oh!  what  a  pulsing  word — energize  your  own  salvation.  Now  there 
vre  just  a  numbei   of   people  needing  the  word  "energize."    The  doctrines  are 


CHAP,  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  187 

lying  on  your  souls  like  great  un'WTOught  lumps  of  dough  that  you  have  not  worked 
out — 1  speak  to  house-wives — and  no  man  can  feed  on  dough;  it  will  kill  himl 
Many  of  you  are  dyspeptics,  feeding  on  Gospel  doctrine  that  you  have  not  kneaded 
and  fired — and  I  don't  know  what — but  you  understand  what  I  mean  !  ••  Work  out 
your  own  salvation."  Get  up  now,  put  your  feet  below  you,  fling  o5  your  coat, 
turn  up  your  sleeves,  and  go  at  this  business  like  the  work  of  a  lifetime,  and  never 
stop  it,  this  work  of  saving  yourself,  if  I  may  be  as  contiadidory  as  the  Bible  is. 
When  the  Lord  comes  to  me  in  all  the  light  of  His  saving  grace,  He  shows  me  what 
to  do.  He  brings  all  with  Him  that  is  needed;  but  I  am  not  to  be  lazy  ;  I  am  not 
to  lie  back  and  do  nothing.  Now  you  know  what  to  do.  You  have  a  bad  temper 
— work  out  your  salvation.  You  are  getting  to  be  a  fair  pest  in  the  house  because 
of  this  temper.  You  are  not  to  go  and  cuddle  up  this  temper  and  say,  "  I  am  a 
child  of  God,  though  I  have  a  little  infirmity."  Be  saved  from  your  infirmity, 
oh  sweet  child  of  God  !  Another  says,  "  I  do  believe  that  I  am  saved,  but  I  am 
inconsistent."  Well,  save  yourself  from  this  inconsistency — work  out  your  own 
salvation.  What  would  you  think  of  the  man  who  went  about  with  his  hands  in  hia 
pockets  whistling  and  joking,  because  he  had  a  load  of  bricks  and  stones  and 
timber  lying  all  around  there ;  and  wanting  shelter  on  a  wintry  day,  he  creeps 
under  the  bricks  and  says,  "  This  is  my  house  :  here  will  I  dwell."  Are  not  some 
of  ns  doing  so  ?  Why,  if  you  could  see  your  spiritual  house  as  the  Lord  sees  it, 
you  would  get  in  an  awful  fright.  Oh  man,  work  out  your  own  salvation  I  Now, 
blessed  be  God,  His  great  gift  will  work  out.  There  is  a  grand  "  furthiness  " — if 
you  don't  know  tliat  word,  so  much  the  worse  for  you — in  the  grace  which  comes 
from  Jesus  Christ,  which  will  expand  and  extend  and  yield  as  long  as  you  make 
demands  upon  it.  There  are  many  L^i'ts  we  get  that  have  none  of  this  furthiness 
in  them.  You  have  them  in  your  house.  The  first  day  that  gift  came  to  you — 
Borne  ornament,  it  is  on  the  mantelpiece — when  it  came  first  it  told  on  you,  it  told 
of  your  friend's  kindness,  and  for  a  little  time  there  was  much  in  it.  But  as  time 
went  on  it  did  not  expand,  its  g  ild  became  dim,  and  theit^  came  some  day,  some 
dull,  dark  day,  that  you  were  doleiul  and  needed  help,  and  you  stood  and  looked  at 
that  gift,  and  it  utterly  failed  to  do  you  good.  It  came  to  an  end.  The  next 
que'^tion  is,  How?  Here  is  the  modus  operandi — "With  fear  and  trembling." 
"  With  fear  and  trembling " — what  does  it  mean  ?  I  does  not  mean  that  we 
are  to  go  through  life  with  our  knees  for  ever  smiting  each  other  because  "ia 
Buch  an  hour  as  we  think  not  "  we  will  drop  into  the  pit  again.  Many  take 
that  meaning  out  of  it,  and  that  paralyzes  work.  "Work  out  your  own 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  The  cup  of  salvation  is  so  full,  it  is 
BO  brimming,  it  is  so  sweet,  tbat  it  would  be  "too  sweet  to  be  whole-.ome ;  ** 
it  would  go  to  the  head  and  make  us  reel  and  stagger,  and  become  on* 
vatchful  and  hilarious,  and  defeat  its  own  purpose.  But,  wherever  Christ 
gives  the  cup  of  salvation.  He  puts  in  an  infusion  of  these  tonic  bitters,  "  fear 
and  trembUng,"  so  that  Grace  may  not  cloy  and  clog.  These  are  the  bitter 
herbs  with  which  we  eat  our  Passover.  The  more  freely  you  take  of  Christ,  the 
more  careiiul  you  become  in  life  and  conduct.  It  is  like  the  ballast  to  the  ship. 
You  have  seen  those  yacht?  of  ours,  designed  by  Watson  and  built  by  Fyfe — things 
of  beauty,  and  almost  instinct  with  life.  There  it  is  ;  the  sea  is  sparkling  in  the 
Bun ;  there  is  a  splendid,  crisp  breeze  blowing.  Watch  that  squall  of  wind  as  it 
strikes  the  yacht  with  its  great  mass  and  breadth  of  canvas  that  would  do  for  th« 
mainsail  of  a  man-of-war.  See  what  happens  !  You  would  expect  the  very  breadth 
of  the  sheet  is  going  to  spoil  all.  That  squall  will  strike  the  sail  and  the  vessel 
will  careen  and  go  the  bottom.  Not  at  all :  that  squall  strikes  her,  and  most  grace- 
fully she  yields  to  it  and  heels  over  on  to  her  very  beam  end  ;  but  look  at  the  out- 
water.  See  how  she  is  tearing  through  1  For  deep  down  there  is  the  keel,  and  • 
great  weight  upon  it;  in  these  modern  days  tons  of  lead  aie  run  along  the  keel;  or, 
as  in  America,  there  is  a  great  centre-board  sent  away  down  into  the  water,  which 
gives  tremendous  leverage  ;  and  no  matter  how  the  yacht  heels  over,  it  holds  her 
steady  and  prevents  disaster.  So  with  religion :  spread  your  sails  to  the  gales  of 
Gospel  grace ;  take  Christ  in  all  the  fulness  of  the  Father's  gift  as  He  is,  and  the 
Gospel  doctrines  will  not  sink  you  ;  you  will  not  grow  giddy  and  light-hcHded,  but 
this  fear  and  trembling  will  give  you  rest,  weight,  grip,  ballast,  solidity,  and  yoa 
will  urge  your  course  forward  across  these  seas  of  time  and  sin  with  splendid  speed. 
It  is  just  like  what  you  have  when  a  man  has  been  saved  who  was  drowning,  and 
all  his  kicking  and  struggling  were  only  hastenmg  it.  And  when  this  kicking  and 
■tniggling  were  over,  some  one  has  reached  from  above  and  drawn  him  ijut,  and 


138  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

there  he  stAnds  on  the  Bolid  land,  saved.  Ah  !  bat  it  was  •  narrow  shave.  Ee- 
joicing,  but  it  is  not  a  hilarious  rejoicing,  is  it  ?  He  is  not  cracking  his  thumbs 
and  jigging,  but  he  is  rejoicing  "  with  trembling."  He  is  altogether  saved,  and  he 
was  so  nearly  altogether  lost.  •'  With  fear  and  trembling."  Take  another  illustra- 
tion. An  eminent  French  surgeon  used  to  say  to  his  students  when  they  were 
engaged  in  difficult  and  delicate  operations,  in  which  coolness  and  firmness  were 
needed,  "Gentlemen,  don't  be  in  a  hurry,  for  there's  no  time  to  lose."  Time  to 
make  that  incision  once  and  well  in  the  vital  place,  not  time  to  dash  at  it  with 
over-confidence.  Before  yon  have  recovered  3  ourself  a  precious  life  will  have  been 
spilled.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling  " — no  swagger, 
no  bounce,  no  bravado,  no  oocksureness,  yet  every  confidence  that  He  who  hath 
begun  this  good  work  will  carry  it  on  to  the  perfect  day.  All  confidence  in  Thee, 
my  God,  and  none  in  myself ;  that  is  the  way  in  which  I  do  the  best  work  towards 
God,  or  my  brother  man.  Only  one  life,  no  second  chance  for  evermore ;  and  into 
this  one  life,  into  this  one  day,  we  are  to  crowd,  to  pack  the  utmost  of  holy  living 
in  every  direction  that  we  possibly  can,  "with  fear  and  trembling."  "For  it  is 
God  that  worketh  in  you ;  "  but  I  just  wish  to  recite  it  before  I  let  you  go.  You 
work  out,  as  one  has  said  ;  for  God  works  in.  There  is  the  mainspring,  there  is 
the  unfailing  Source,  of  all  the  believer's  energy  for  sanctification,  and  for  personal 
effort  in  the  Church  of  Christ  to  promote  His  cause.  It  is  God  who  worketh  in  us 
both  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure.  Thau  let  me  say  at  once,  we  can  be 
holy,  we  shall  be  holy,  for  it  is  God  who  worketh  in  ns.  Poor  druukard,  thou 
canst  give  up  drink ;  lustful  man,  thou  canst  be  clean  ;  for  it  is  God,  it  is  God  that 
worketh  in  you.  Do  not  be  a  football  of  the  world,  of  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  for 
it  is  God  that  worketh  in  you.  "  Ah  I  it  is  true,  it  is  all  true  ;  but  what  can  I  do  ?  " 
Now  we  come  back  to  the  Power :  "It  is  God  ;  "  and  what  can  He  not  do  if  you 
will  only  let  Him?  God  is  the  Source.  See  how  He  puts  it.  It  is  God  that 
worketh  in  you.  How  ?  Listen :  "  both  to  will  and  to  do."  The  first  thing  is  to 
get  the  will  right,  and  then  the  deed,  don't  you  see,  will  follow.  Is  it  not  your  com- 
plaint and  mine,  that  the  will  is  wrong,  the  will  is  twisted,  the  will  has  been  led 
captive  by  the  devil?  Well,  there  is  an  engine — that  splendid  creation  of  the 
engineering  faculty  of  the  nineteenth  century  1  But  did  you  ever  see  an  engine 
which  was  allowed  to  drive  itself  ?  Tiiere  is  a  splendid  horse,  but  did  you  ever  see 
a  blood  horse  that  was  allowed  to  drive  itself  ?  Your  engine  needs  a  driver,  and 
your  horse  needs  a  rider ;  and  your  converted  man  has  a  God  in  him,  managing 
him  in  every  direction.  There  is  the  engineer ;  he  steps  on  the  foot-plat« :  with 
one  hand  he  holds  the  reversing-rod,  that  sends  the  engine  backwards  or  forwards ; 
with  the  other  hand,  he  holds  the  throttle-valve,  the  opening  of  which  lets  the 
steam  into  the  cylinders.  So  with  God :  He  holds  the  will  and  the  doing.  Thou 
art  managed,  splendidly  managed.  God  will  drive  thee.  God  will  see  to  thy 
supplies,  and  wUl  keep  up  the  Divine  pressure.  Thoa  shalt  be  filled  onto  all  the 
fulness  of  God.    {J.  McNeill.) 

Vers.  14-16.  Do  all  things  without  mnmiiirings  and  dlspnttngs.— Here  Is — L 
An  impobtant  admonition.  II.  A  potent  aboument — for  the  sake  of  your  own 
character,  position,  comfort — for  the  sake  of  the  world  which  must  be  reproved, 
enhghtened,  saved.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I.  Ths  bxhobtation.  1.  The  apostle 
dissuadeth  against  murmuring,  of  which  there  are  two  sorts.  (1)  Against  God 
(Num.  zi.  6).  The  successors  of  these  complaining  Israelites  are  those  who  in  time 
of  scarcity  either  (a)  break  out  into  impatient  speeches,  such  as  "  What  means  the 
Lord  to  kill  us  with  famine  ?  What  greater  sinners  are  we  than  such  and  such  7 
Would  God  He  would  either  mend  these  things  or  make  an  end  of  us."  Or  (ft) 
through  malcontent  seek  to  raise  up  seditions  and  rebellions  in  the  commonwealth, 
so  to  procure  a  remedy  by  a  worse  mischief.  But  what  was  the  end  of  the  ancient 
murmurers  t  Let  the  modern  ones  read  for  their  warning  1  Cor.  x.  (2)  Those  who 
murmur  at  their  brethren :  grudging  their  wealth,  popularity,  or  preferment,  and 
seeking  their  discredit  and  downfall.  So  the  Pharisees,  &c.,  against  Christ,  and 
the  Grecians  against  the  disciples  (Acts  vi.  1).  And  this  is  what  the  apostle  here 
condemns.  To  murmur  against  our  neighbour  is  (a)  a  common  fault.  If  he  be 
our  superior  we  murmur  agamst  him  as  too  great  to  dwell  so  near  us,  be  he  never 
so  kind  to  us  ;  if  he  be  our  equal  we  grudge  that  he  should  come  forward  as  well  as 
ourselves,  or  be  equally  honoured  with  ourselves ;  if  he  be  our  inferior  we  disdain 
him,  and  his  livelihood  we  wish  for  ourselves.  (6)  The  vile  malice  of  this  disease 
is  that  if  there  be  some  cause  for  ouz  mormuring  we  make  it  not  a  matter  of  friendly 


CHAP.  n.J  PHILIPPIANS.  189 

expostulation,  but  of  heart  rankling  and  backbiting,  (c)  The  root  from  whenc« 
this  springs  is  an  evil  and  jealous  mind,  which  it  behoves  us  to  weed  out,  and  to 
cultivate  an  opposite  temper,  candid,  open,  generous.  2.  Against  disputings. 
That  we  should  not  fall  into  open  brawlings  or  quarrellings  (Gen.  xiii.  7-B).  (1) 
Imitate  Abraham's  example.  He  was  Lot's  elder  and  uncle,  but  he  did  not  stand 
on  that,  but  goes  to  Lot  kindly  and  yields  his  right  rather  than  contend  with  him. 
(2)  See  whence  these  rise  and  what  are  their  companions  (Gal.  v.  20  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  20]. 
^3)  Note  again  the  counsel  of  the  wise  man  (Prov.  xxv.  8 ;  xvii.  14).  (4)  Thi^i 
becomes  not  them  who  have  given  their  names  to  Christ  (ver.  5),  but  rather  love, 
peace,  courtesy,  gentleness.  IL  The  reason  of  this  exhortation.  1.  That  ye 
may  be  blameless.  Is  this  possible  ?  (1)  We  cannot  escape  blame  even  as  Christ 
could  not.  (2)  But  we  can  avoid  occasions  of  blame  as  Christ  (John  xv.  25),  and 
Zacharias  and  Elisabeth  (Luke  i.  6).  (3)  And  then  when  it  comes  causeless  through 
our  reproof  of  the  blameworthy,  who  will  turn  upon  ub,  we  need  not  be  afraid  of  it. 
2.  Pure.  If  we  hit  this  mark  we  shall  not  miss  the  other.  If  pure,  then  blameless. 
So  wd  should  study  to  avoid  the  conlugiou  of  sin  (Matt.  x.  16;  Eph.  vi.  5;  James 
L  8).  3.  The  sons  of  God  in  the  midst,  &c.,  i.e.,  that  it  may  be  known  that  we 
are  such  (2  Pet.  i.  10,  etc.).  (1)  Huw  shall  this  ai>pear  ?  By  walking  without 
rebuke  (Bom.  %'iii.  14).  This  is  the  undoubted  stamp  of  our  adoption  being  the 
fruit  of  the  spirit.  (2)  How  can  we  thus  live  ?  Is  it  not  a  crooked  and  perverse 
nation  ?  True,  there  is  danger  that  if  we  touch  pitch  we  shall  be  defiled,  and  if  we 
walk  amongst  thorns  be  pricked  by  them.  Whereupon  there  are  many  warnings 
against  the  company  and  enticements  of  the  world  (Prov.  i.  10-14,  iv.  14-15;  Psa. 
xxvi.  4-6,  i.  1).  What  then?  must  we  adopt  monasticism?  No  (Gen.  xix.  1; 
2  Pet.  ii.  8)  I  but  rather  think  of  these  precepts,  (a)  That  we  fashion  not  ourselves 
like  unto  the  world  (Bom.  xii.  2;  1  John  ii.  16).  (6)  That  we,  Hke  just  Lot,  be 
vexed  in  our  souls  when  we  see  and  hear  the  words  and  deeds  of  the  wicked 
{2  Pet.  ii.  8  ;  Psa.  cxix.  158,  136,  53,  139).  (c)  That  we,  like  Noah,  admonish  the 
wicked,  {d)  That  we  try  to  win  them  to  the  ways  of  Christ.  {H.  Airay,  D.D.) 
The  cultivation  of  a  Christian  deportment : — Conversion  is  a  great  change ;  but  the 
converted  need  frequent  caution  lest  they  should  return  to  pollution  in  consequence 
of  their  surroundings  and  temptations,  and  constant  exhortations  to  follow  holiness. 
Hence  the  rules  before  us.  I.  The  Christian  deportment,  the  cultivation  of  which 
is  commanded.  1.  The  spirit  which  Christians  are  to  cherish  towards  God — "  with- 
out murmuring,"  i.e.,  impatient  discontent  with  God  as  have  imposed  harsh  laws, 
and  required  diflScult  obedience.  This  is  the  temper  of  unconverted  men,  but  many 
professors  are  in  danger  of  cherishing  it.  Eeflect  then— (1)  That  Chriit's  burden 
is  easy,  and  that  His  commandments  are  not  grievous.  (2)  That  they  are  given  to 
prevent  injury  to  the  soul.  (3)  That  obedience  is  claimed  as  a  testimony  of 
gratitude.  (4)  That  there  is  a  heavenly  recompense.  If  these  weigh  with  yoa,  so 
far  from  murmuring  you  will  love  the  law  of  your  God  and  rejoice  in  His  testimonies. 
2.  The  spirit  which  Christians  are  to  cherisb  towards  men — "  without  disputings." 
(1)  The  spirit  of  contention  is  most  injurious  to  the  individual  and  the  Church, 
and  is  everywhere  condemned.  (2)  It  is  to  be  feared  that  this  consideration  is 
largely  disregarded,  witness  our  internal  disputes  and  the  strife  of  sects.  (3)  As 
the  reaBone  for  unity  are  most  cogent,  Christians  and  Churches  should  love  one 
another.  3.  The  spirit  Christians  are  to  cherish  in  relation  to  the  public  interests 
and  extension  of  the  truth.  "  Shine  .  .  .  word  of  life."  (1)  The  advocacy  of  the 
trath  is  not  to  be  confined  to  the  ministry ;  these  words  were  addressed  to  saints  as 
well  as  bishops.  How  can  Christians  better  shine  as  lights  than  by  exhibiting  the 
lamp  of  truth  either  by  preaching,  Sunday-school  teaching,  Bible  or  tract  circula- 
tion, family  instruction,  &c.  To  this  end  we  need  the  Pentecostal  fire.  II.  The 
motives  by  which  the  cultivation  of  this  deportment  is  commanded.  1.  The  just 
vindication  of  the  Christian  character  in  the  presence  of  the  ungodly  world.  As 
they  exhibited  the  elements  of  the  Christian  character  indicated  they  would  be 
"  blameless,"  &c.,  and  compel  adversaries  to  render  the  gospel  the  tribute  of  their 
homage.  The  importance  of  this  motive  is  seen — (1)  In  the  constancy  and  energy 
with  which  it  is  urged.  (2)  The  damage  inflicted  on  Christianity  by  inconsistent 
Christians.  2.  The  joy  which  this  exhibition  will  produce  to  the  minister  of  the 
gospel  in  the  day  of  Christ.  Then — (1)  The  holy  deportment  of  believers  will  be 
made  the  subject  of  public  acknowledgment  at  the  last  day  (Matt.  xxv.).  What  an 
inspiring  thought !  (2)  It  will  then  be  the  cause  of  ministerial  joy.  There  is  joy 
in  conversion,  progress,  usefulness,  triumphant  death,  but  no  joy  can  equal  the  last 
«f  iJi.     (3)  Thifi,  then,  should  prove  a  powerful  argument  for  the  cultivation  of- 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

this  deportment.  The  benefits  received  from  the  ministry  demand  this  gratefuJ 
return.  Conclusion  :  A  revival  of  religion,  in  the  way  indicated  by  the  text,  would 
speedily  inaugurate  the  triumph  of  Christianity,  (j.  Partons.)  The  duties  oj 
Church  members  : — As  a  Christian  Church  you  profess  to  be  a  society  of  believing 
and  faithful  men.  Without  piety  you  have  no  place  in  the  Church.  Your  dis- 
qualifications may  not  appear  to  men,  but  they  are  marked  by  God.  QjYour  duty 
to  YOUB  MiNisTEK,  Or  rathf  r  to  God  in  relation  to  Him,  "  Do  all  thmgs  without 
murmurings,"  &c.,  readily,  cheerfully,  consistently.  1.  Love  him,  as  the  man  who 
devotes  himself  to  your  welfare,  as  the  man  who  loves  you.  Where  this  is  wanting 
outward  attention  is  a  worthless  form ;  when  this  is  cultivated  all  necessary  for  his 
happiness  will  follow.  2.  Hear  him — (1)  Caiididly.  His  office  is  no  easy  one. 
Make  allowances  for  ill-health  and  a  jaded  mind.  (2)  Regularly,  or  his  instructions 
will  be  impaired  and  he  discouraged.  (3)  Prayerfully,  before  you  come ;  as  yon 
hear.  His  comfort  and  usefulness  depend  largely  upon  this.  3.  Respect  his 
official  authority.  Some  exaggerate  this  by  sacerdotal  superstitions  ;  others  unduly 
and  un script urally  depreciate  it.  4.  Supply  his  temporal  wants.  This  is  a  matter 
of  right,  not  charity.  It  is  not  to  be  doled  out  "  murmuringly,"  but  given  gener- 
ously, so  that  he  may  be  honest  and  given  to  hospitality.  aD  Your  duty  to  thb 
Church.  1.  Unity :  the  negative  "  without  murmurings  'implies  the  positive. 
There  may  be  no  murmurings  because  no  life — a  calmness  of  death.  The  only 
union  of  wtirth  is  that  which  is  quickened  by  the  Spirit.  This  does  not  exclude 
variety.  There  is  beauty,  strength,  perfection,  in  harmonious  diversity:  John's, 
Peter's,  Thomas's.  2.  Consistency — "  blameless,"  &c.  Not  giving  the  lie  to  pro- 
fession by  unchristian  tempers,  and  affording  the  e;  mies  of  the  Cross  occasion 
for  rebuke.  I\reiiibers  of  the  Church  may  be  divided  i  to — (1)  Those  who  do  good. 
(2)  Those  who  do  harm.  (3)  Those  who  do  both.  (4)  Tuose  who  do  neither. 
Now  at  least  belong  to  the  last.  It  will  be  but  a  poor  consistency,  but  it  wiU  be 
harmless,  while  the  positive  in  consistency,  seen  in  outbreaks  of  wicked  temper,  in 
the  violation  of  truth  and  justice,  in  malicious  speaking  and  cruel  slander,  such 
brings  a  stigma  on  the  member  and  the  Church.  Consistency,  however,  requires — 
(ii  That  you  take  an  interest  in  the  affairs  of  the  Church ;  (2)  .that  you  attend  ita 
meetings ;  (3)  that  you  maintain  its  iJiscipline  ;  (4)  that  you  are  jealous  for  its 
reputaHpn ;  (5)  that  you  tell  your  brother  of  his  fault  before  you  tell  it  to  the 
Church  rt6)  that  you  contribute  to  its  support.  And  all  this  you  have  to  exhibit 
before  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation,  and  there  is  a  good  deal  of  crookedness  in  oui 
times,  in  legislation,  trade  and  commerce,  habits  of  society.  You  are  by  your 
consistencYJp  draw  out  the  straight  lines  of  Christianity  and  make  the  crooked 
straight.  TOI^  Your  duty  to  the  world.  "  Shine  as  lights. "  Divine  light  is  to 
be  conveye3*lrnrough  your  medium.  This  position  is  most  honourable.  It  makes 
you  God's  agents.  It  is  not  entrusted  to  philosophers,  statesmen,  or  official  people, 
but  to  believeis  as  such.  Around  us  is  darkness  ;  but  in  the  Church  there  should 
be  light — the  contrast  should  be  visible — in  the  family,  social  circle,  market,  every- 
where. 1.  Let  your  characters  shine;  individually  like  stars;  collectively  like 
constellations.  2.  Shine  by  your  voluntary,  combined,  and  well-organized  efforts. 
You  are  to  hold  up  the  Word  of  life  through  home  and  foreign  missions,  thus 
resembling  Eddystone:  "To  give  light  and  to  save  life."  Through  your  neglect  to 
do  this  souls  may  be  wrecked.  3.  Ail  mubt  join  in  this  dispensation  of  light,  and 
blend  together  in  one  radiance.  Unfortunately  some  never  find  this  out,  and  others 
neglect  it.  iTVTXTHE  motive  constraining  to  these  various  duties.  "  That  I  may 
rejoice,"  &Jsr— K  At  that  day  the  relation  between  pastor  and  people  will  be 
recognized.  Nothing  is  said  about  other  meetings.  2.  You  can  contribute  to  your 
pastor's  joy.  If  you  are  consistent  it  will  be  reckoned  to  his  honour  then.  (J. 
Stoughton,  D.D.)  Tlie  duties   of  a  Church  towards  its  neighbourhood: — The 

relation  of  a  Church  to  its  vicinity  is  that  of-^JSALT  to  the  land.  A  Church 
owes  it  to  the  peoples  around  to  destroy  prejudice~^nd  to  dispose  men's  minds  to 
the  reception  of  the  truth.  You  live  in  an  age  hard  to  please,  &c.  ;  then,  be 
blameless  and  harmless.  The  Saviour  urged  the  same  duty  (Matt.  v.  13).  Salt 
was  used  for  manure,  to  destroy  weeds  and  insects,  and  to  moisten  and  nourish  the 
eoiL  Christian  characters  must  remove  erroneous  notions  respecting  Christ  and 
His  kingdom,  awaken  attention,  and  keep  from  barrenness  the  field  of  Christian 
effort.  How  '  1.  By  the  irreproachable  character  of  the  individual  members  of  a 
Church.  Every  true  Christian  professes  to  be  in  training  for  perfect  holiness. 
Consistency,  therefore,  requires  that  he  should  not  allow  sin.  And  men  may  claim 
thas  maeh  from  professors.     Now,  if  any  professor  have  the  reputation  of  being 


CHAP,  n.)  PHILIPPIANS.  141 

an  unkind  husband,  a  disobedient  child,  a  tyi-annical  master,  or  a  slothful  servant, 
a  busybody,  a  cheat,  he  creates  prejudices  and  closes  men's  hearts  against  the 
gospel.  Call  not  these  little  things.  Dead  flies  canse  the  ointment  to  stink, 
especially  to  those  who  want  to  condemn  the  ointment.  A  mote  in  the  Christian's 
eye  attracts  more  attention  than  a  beam  in  the  worldling's.  2.  By  the  peace, 
harmony,  and  brotherly  love  of  a  Church.  Diversities  will  be  found,  but  as  in 
music,  distinct  melodies  breathed  by  different  voices  constitute  full  harmony.  And  a 
neighbourhood  knows  whether  a  Church  meets  in  bitterness  or  in  love  (Eccles,  x.  20). 
The  stormy  wind  of  strife  cannot  be  confined,  nor  the  balmy  breeze  of  charity. 
3.  By  the  inviting  aspect  of  the  public  worship  of  a  Church.  (1)  The  building 
should  accord  in  style  and  dimensions  with  the  character  and  population  of  a 
neighbourhood.  It  should  say,  "Come  in:  there  is  room."  (2)  Sufficient  light 
and  air,  and  all  that  can  make  them  attractive  should  be  provided.  The  theatre  and 
gin  shop  are  attractive.  (3)  The  mode  of  worship,  too,  is  of  iuiportauce— the  best 
music,  reading,  preaching.  4.  By  Churches  forming  benevolent  iu.-titutions  in  their 
neighbourhood,  and  having  their  representatives  in  institutions  of  a  more  general 
character :  such  as  hospitals,  societies  for  the  relief  of  the  poor,  day  schools,  &o. 
The  multitude  cannot  appreciate  the  maa.who  is  a  martyr  to  religious  opinions, 
but  they  can  self-denial  and  kindness.  (^0  Light  to  the  world.  1.  By  provid- 
ing and  sustaining  an  efficient  ministry,  aaapted  to  the  people,  and  receiving  the 
Churches'  sympathy,  support,  and  co-operation.  By  this  means  a  minister  is 
advertised.  Let  a  Church  give  its  ministry  a  good  character,  and  let  it  be  really 
good,  and  hearers  will  be  gathered  and  souls  saved.  2.  By  every  member 
ministering  as  he  hath  received  the  gift.  Is  one  member  qualified  f»r  business? 
Let  him  serve  tables.  Is  another  capable  of  instructing  children  ?  Let  liim  teach 
the  young.  Is  another  gifted  with  conversational  powers?  Let  him  visit,  &c.  Let 
every  one  do  something.  Ttie  deficiency  of  power  in  our  Churches  is  the  loss  of 
single  talents.  3.  By  cherishing  and  exercising  in  all  things  a  spirit  worthy  of  its 
vocation. .^^ppear  as  God's  children,  separate  in  character  and  conduct  from  the 
world.  vJip  As  SEPARATE  stars  in  a  constellation,  many  golden  candlesticks 
IN  ONB  HOLT  PLACE,  exhibiting  real  and  essential  unity.  How  is  this  to  be 
developed?  L  By  ministers  and  Churches  guarding  most  carefully  each  other's 
reputation.  Let  not  the  unsuccessful  be  jealous  of  the  prosperous,  or  the  pros- 
perous be  cold  towards  the  less  favoured.  Let  none  be  ready  to  take  up  an  evil 
report  against  his  neighbour.  2.  By  co-operation  for  common  ends.  Some 
objects  are  pursued  most  successfully  alone ;  but  in  circulation  of  the  Scriptures, 
educational  movements,  <fec.,  there  should  be  association.  To  the  tents  of  yonr 
tribe  for  fellowship,  Ac,  but  to  the  open  camp  for  home  and  foreign  missions. 
This  will  make  our  tents  as  separate  dwelling-places  of  one  spiritual  army.  3.  By 
the  universal  expression  of  pleasure  in  the  prosperity  of  the  successful,  and  of 
regret  in  the  adversity  of  the  unprosperous  (1  Cor.  xii.  14-27).  4.  By  the  contribu- 
tion of  assistance  to  all  that  need  it  (Eph.  iv.  4-16).    (S.  Martin.)        Be^' 


lights  in  the  wqrl^ : — 1.  Christian  precepts  have  not  suffered  any  degeneration  of 
'ttruauiug.  TEey  would  naturally  be  of  the  gentlest  to  those  emerging  from 
heathenism.  If,  then,  such  exhortations  were  delivered  to  the  newly-converted 
Philippians,  we  ought  to  arrive  at  a  high  stage  of  Christian  perfection.  2.  The 
apostie  says — (1)  "  Do  all  things."  Christianity  is  not  mere  thinking  or  feeling, 
but  working.  (2)  Without  murmurings — (a)  Against  God's  providence,  (b) 
Against  one  anotner.  Let  there  be  no  whisperings  against  those  who  ought  to  be 
esteemed  among  yon.  (c)  Against  the  ungodly  world ;  rather  suffer  in  silence. 
(3)  Without  disputings.  Raise  not  knotty  points  of  controversy.  Turn  your 
Bwords  against  your  adversaries,  not  against  yourselves.  (4)  That  ye  may  be 
blameless.  There  will  be  those  who  will  blame  you,  but  don't  give  them  occas-ion  to. 
(5)  Harmless,  or  hornless,  creatures  that  not  only  do  no  harm,  but  are  incapable  of 
any.  (6)  As  sons  of  God.  Dignity  of  relationship  should  beget  dignity  of  deport- 
ment. (7)  Without  rebuke,  whom  men  cannot  rebuke.  3.  All  this  is  as  means  to 
an  end — "  that  ye  may  shine,"  &o.  I.  Publicity  eequired.  Christians  are  to  be 
••  lights  "  and  to  "  shine,"  and  that  not  in  the  house,  but  in  the  "  world  "  ;  hence 
secrecy  is  impossible.  Beware,  however,  of  ostentatious  Phariseeism,  but  do  not 
make  it  an  excuse  for  cowardice.  The  Christian — 1.  Should  make  a  public  avowal 
of  his  faith,  by  coming  out  from  among  the  world  and  declaring  himself  on  the 
Lord's  side.  2.  Should  be  associated  constantly  with  Christian  people.  One  act 
of  profession  is  not  enough ;  it  should  be  continued  by  union  with  the  visible 
Choroh.    The  man  that  was  helped  stood  with  Peter  and  John.     3.  Should  dailj 


141  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {oBMr.  n. 

carry  ont  their  Christianity  in  their  life.  Do  not  be  a  display  of  fireworks.  Let 
the  servant  ontshine  others  by  being  more  attentive,  and  the  master  by  being  more 
generous.  4.  Should  add  the  open  testimony  of  words.  5.  There  are  times  when 
there  must  be  a  very  bold  and  stern  decision  for  Christ.  When  the  old  Roman 
senator  was  told  by  Vespasian  that  he  might  go  to  the  senate  house,  but  he  must 
hold  his  tongue,  he  answered,  "  I,  being  a  senator,  feel  impelled  to  go  into  the 
Senate  house,  and  being  in  the  Senate,  it  is  the  part  of  a  senator  to  speak  what 
his  conscience  dictates."  "Then,"  said  the  Emperor,  "if  you  speak  you  will 
die."  "Be  it  known  unto  thee,  0  Emperor,"  said  he,  "that  I  never  hoped  to  be 
immortal,  nor  did  I  ever  wish  to  live  when  I  might  not  speak  my  mind."  This 
publicity  may  be  further  urged  from  the  fact  that  Christians  are  runners  and 
soldiers ;  but  who  runs  or  fights  in  secret  ?  II.  Usefulness  intended.  We  are 
lights — 1,  To  make  manifest.  A  Christian  should  so  shine  that  those  who  come 
near  him  are  able  to  see  their  own  character  in  his  life,  and   to  know  the  gospel. 

2.  To  guide.  The  mariner  understands  this.  Every  Christian  should  light  some 
part  of  the  voyage  of  life,  and  there  should  not  be  a  channel  without  its  light. 

3.  For  warning.  On  our  rocks  and  shoals  a  lighthouse  is  erected.  There  are  plenty 
of  false  lights.  Satan's  wreckers  are  always  abroad  tempting  under  the  name  of 
pleasure.  Let  us  put  up  the  true  light  on  every  dangerous  rock,  and  so  be  clear  of 
the  blood  of  all  men.  4.  For  comfort.  5.  For  rebuking  sin.  The  gas  lamps  are 
the  best  police  we  have.  Thieves  do  not  like  the  light.  So  Christians,  when  they 
are  in  sufficient  numbers  to  act  on  the  commonwealth,  make  crime  less  common. 
6.  The  Christian's  light,  unlike  the  others,  gives  light.  III.  Position  indicated. 
"  Crooked,"  &o.  This  should — 1.  Be  an  incentive.  The  worse  people  are,  the 
more  need  they  have  of  your  exertions.  If  crooked,  then  make  them  straight. 
2.  Administer  a  caution.  Do  not  wonder  if  they  hate  your  light,  and  try  to  blow 
it  out.  Be  the  more  anxious  not  to  give  unnecessary  offence.  Ask  Christ  to  keep 
you  straight  and  your  ligbt  burning.  3.  Console  you.  Are  jou  in  the  midst  of  a 
crooked  people  ?  So  were  Paul  and  the  Philippians.  IV.  Argument  suggested. 
"That  I  may  not  run,"  <feo.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christianity : — 1.  Is  not  a  mere 
set  of  opinions  which  may  lie  dormant  in  the  mind ;  but  (2)  a  system  of  principles 
which,  taking  hold  of  the  innermost  springs  of  feeling  and  action,  gives  its  own 
colour  and  character  to  all  that  proceeds  therefrom.  The  apostle  enjoins— L 
Negativblt,  abstinence  from  those  tempers  by  which  Christian  graces  must  be 
withered  and  the  Christian  profession  dishonoured.  1.  Two  blades  of  grass  cannot 
be  found  in  all  respects  alike,  so  we  cannot  find  two  men  alike  in  character  and 
temperament.  So  there  must  be  about  the  Christian  that  which  distinguishes  him 
not  only  from  the  worst,  but  the  best,  samples  of  unrenewed  humanity.  (2)  With 
worldly  persons  it  is  enough  to  be  irreproachable  in  those  habits  aud  duties  which 
regard  their  fellow-men.  The  Christian's  aim  is  to  conform  to  the  will  of  God. 
The  Christian  is  anxious  not  only  to  act  well,  but  to  act  on  Christian  principles 
and  from  Christian  motives.  (1)  A  worldly  person  may  discover  many  reasons 
for  checking  a  murmuring  habit  of  mind ;  he  may  see  its  inutility  and  folly,  and  so 
determine  to  play  the  philosopher  and  endure  what  he  cannoi  avoid.  The 
Christian  stifles  every  rising  murmur,  because  he  recognizes  the  goodness  of  God 
in  all  His  appointments,  and  fulfils  the  hardest  duties  and  bears  the  heaviest 
burdens,  not  because  they  are  not  grievous,  but  because  he  has  that  heaven-born 
faith  which  these  trials  call  into  exercise,  and  which  bluuts  their  edge  and 
sweetens  their  bitterness.  (2)  A  merely  moral  person  may  see  the  expediency  of 
setting  aside  a  spirit  of  contention,  viz.,  that  it  disturbs  social  enjoyment  and 
deadens  the  sympathies  of  friendship.  Nor  is  a  Christian  wholly  unbiassed  by 
such  considerations,  but  he  cultivates  a  pacific  spirit,  because  he  is  a  follower  of 
the  Prince  of  Peace,  and  because  contention  cannot  consist  with  a  healthy  Christian 
experience,  and  mars  usefulness.  II.  Positively.  The  exhibition  of  Christian 
light.  1.  Where?  (1)  In  the  sphere  in  which  he  personally  moves.  (2)  In  the 
sphere  over  which  his  influence  extends,  (a)  How  wide  these  are  in  the  narrowest 
life.  (6)  How  dark  and  needing  illumination.  2.  How  ?  (1)  By  his  good  works. 
(2)  By  holding  forth  the  word  of  life.  8.  Let  the  millions  perishing  at  home  and 
abroad  for  lack  of  Christian  light  and  influence  stimulate  the  Christian.  (T.  Page, 
M.A.)  The  inward  principle  and  outward  form  of  Christianity  : — Its  spirit  takes 
up  and  incorporates  surrounding  materials  as  a  plant  clothes  itself  with  soil  and 
climate,  whilst  it  exhibits  the  workings  of  a  vital  principle  within,  independent 
of  all  accidental  circumstances.  {S.  T.  Coleridge.)  Negative  and  positive 
Ckrietianity  ; — He  must  be  not  only  blameless,  but  didactic  in  his  life ;  he  must 


CHAF.  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  148 

not  only  be  innooect,  but  "  seftloas  of  good  works  "  ;  he  must  not  only  be  pure, 
but  shining,     {Jeremy  Taylor.)         Inquire — I.  How  thinob  abb  commonly  done? 

II.    How    THET   OCQHT   TO    BE    DONE?       III.    HoW    THEY    CAN    BE    BO    DONE?       (J.  Lljth 

D.D.)  1.  The  codbsk  condemned  is  common,  humiliating,  unsatisfactory.  II. 
The  corrnsE  commended  is  possible,  wise,  pleasant.  Christian.  (Ibid.)  Mur- 
murings  and  d'nputingt : — I.  Mdemubinqs.  1.  The  kinds  of  murmuring.  (1) 
Against  God  (Rom.  ix.  20).  (2)  Against  God's  providence  in  doing  better  to  some 
than  to  others.  This  sin  is  many  times  found  in  David,  Job,  Habakkuk — "  Why 
doth  the  wicked  prosper  ?  " — until  they  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God  and  under 
stood  their  end  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  17).  (3^  Against  God's  ordinance  in  magistracy  and 
ministry  (1  Sam.  viii.  7;  Titus  ii.  6,  9).  2.  Causes.  (1)  Ignorance  of  God's 
particular  providence  (Job  xlii.  6).  (2)  Self-love  (Numb.  xvi.  3).  3.  Cures.  (1) 
Labour  to  have  a  right  understanding  of  God's  justice  without  all  exception. 
(2)  Of  His  infinite  goodness  to  all,  and  particularly  to  His  own  children  (Matt.  x. 
29).  This  will  lead  us  to— (o)  Justify  God  (Psa.  cxix.  137  ;  1  Sam.  iii.  18 ;  2  Cor. 
XX.  19  ;  Psa.  xxxix.  1).  (6)  Learn  a  holy  silence  (Psa.  Ixii.  1 ;  Lev.  x.  3).  (c) 
Practice  resignation  (Luke  xxii.  42).  (d)  Exercise  gratitude.  II.  Dispdtings — 1. 
Issue  from  murmurings.  Murmuring  requires  vindication  ;  and  men  are  never  at 
a  loss  for  reasons  in  favour  uf  the  worst  cause.  This  extends  to  duties.  2.  Is  a 
great  sin.  Where  theologjr  is  disputed  it  is  least  practised.  (B.  Sibbes,  D.D.) 
Things  best  dropped: — (Children's  sermon.)  Did  you  ever  get  nervous  before  a 
painted  portrait  ?  When  I  was  a  boy,  there  was  a  great  oil  painting  hung  over 
the  fireplace  of  an  old  gentleman,  with  a  little,  sharp,  cold,  cruel  face.  But  what  used 
to  frighten  me  most  were  the  cold,  cruel  eyes.  They  seemed  to  be  everywhere.  If 
I  went  to  the  one  end  of  the  room,  they  followed  me  there  ;  if  I  went  to  the  other, 
they  followed  me.  If  I  did  anything  that  was  wrong,  they  seemed  to  be  sneering, 
"  That  is  just  what  I  expected  from  a  boy  like  you  1  "  and  if  I  did  anything  right, 
they  seemed  to  sneer  still  more,  "  Pah,  you  will  very  soon  be  doing  something 
wrong  again !  "  I  was  glad  when  it  became  too  dark  to  see  these  eyes,  but  when 
the  morning  came,  there  were  those  eyes  as  unpleasant  as  ever  I  I  would  have  been 
very  glad  to  have  turned  that  picture  with  its  face  to  the  wall  1  And  would  you 
not  sometimes  like  to  do  that  with  this  text,  if  it  was  hung  up  opposite  you  ?  When 
you  are  grumbling  because  your  brother  or  sister  got  a  larger  piece  of  cake  than 
you,  or  a  toy  bigger  than  yours,  or  when  it  is  not  your  turn  to  be  taken  out,  you 
would  not  like  to  see  what  God  is  saying  to  you  when  you  are  murmuring  and 
grisling  and  grudging  and  disputing.  Yet  that  is  what  God  is  saying  to  you  when 
yon  are  peevish  and  discontented.  He  is  saying  it  to  make  you  happy.  There 
was  once  a  little  lady  who  was  very  unhappy.  She  lived  in  a  fine  house,  and  had 
lots  of  toys  and  a  watch,  yet  nothing  could  please  her.  Even  the  weather  was 
never  just  what  she  wanted.  It  was  sure  to  rain  when  she  wanted  it  to  be  fine,  or 
fine  when  she  took  out  her  new  umbrella.  From  morning  to  night  she  murmured  and 
grumbled,  and  was  very  unhappy.  One  day  she  came  upon  two  poor  children  playing 
and  having  such  a  hearty  game.  "  These  children,"  she  said,  ••  are  very  happy. 
I  will  ask  them  what  makes  them  so."  So  she  asked  the  eldest  boy.  "  I  don't 
know,  miss,  what  you  mean,"  said  the  boy;  "what's  happy?"  "Why,"  she 
replied,  "  it  means  bright,  glad,  fond  of  things."  "  Oh  I  "  said  the  boy,  "  Jim  and 
I  are  always  glad  ;  ain't  we,  Jim  ?  "  And  the  eyes  of  the  little  brother  danced 
like  sunshine  upon  ripples  as  he  said,  "  Yes,  always  glad."  "  But  what  makes  you 
BO  glad ? "  "I  don't  know,  I'm  sure,  miss,  except  that  when  I  try  to  make  Jim 
glad  I  get  glad  myself."  And  that  was  all  that  he  knew  about  the  matter.  But  as 
the  little  lady  went  home  she  thought  about  it,  and  said  to  herself,  "  What  the 
little  boy  means  is  this — the  way  to  be  happy  is  by  trying  to  make  other  people 
happy."  So  she  thought  she  would  try,  and  all  that  day,  instead  of  grumbling 
and  murmuring  and  finding  fault,  she  said,  "  Thank  yon  I  "  with  a  pleasant  smile  ; 
and  "  Don't  you  trouble,  let  me  do  it  1  "  in  a  nice  spirit ;  and,  "  Well,  this  task  is  a 
little  difficult,  but  I  shall  manage  it  I "  And  she  found  that  everybody  got 
pleasanter  to  her,  and  instead  of  always  scolding  her,  everybody  had  a  Idud  word 
for  her,  and  people  who  used  to  dislike  her  came  to  love  her.  So  she  learnt  the 
secret  of  happiness.  And  now  she  has  grown  into  a  great  woman,  people  feel  better 
for  looking  at  her.  She  has  such  a  happy,  kindly  face.  Try  to  be  the  same ;  and 
instead  of  grumbling  try  to  make  people  happy.  {J.  R.  Howat.)  Don't  spoil  your 
portrait.  How  do  you  suppose  that  old  gentleman  in  the  picture  came  to  have 
such  an  impleasant  look  ?  Because  all  his  life  he  mast  have  been  a  grombling 
man.      Remember  that   you    are   now   making   the   features  you  will   have  in 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

twenty  years'  time.  There  is  nothing  that  tells  on  the  features  so  much  u 
grumbling  and  discontent  and  fault-finding.  Why,  the  moment  you  look  upon 
some  people  you  say,  "  What  a  discontented  person  that  is !  "  The  way  to  grow 
bfautil'ul  is  by  trj'ing,  in  a  loving,  gentle  spirit,  to  make  others  happy.  That  was 
the  way  with  Jesus.  He  never  murmured.  Sometimes  He  had  to  go  without 
food,  but  He  knew  that  His  Father  would  not  forget  Him.  Sometimes  people  said 
very  hard  things  of  Him,  but  He  never  murmured.  He  just  thought,  "  They  don't 
know  better,  poor  things !  if  they  did,  they  would  not  say  such  things."  He  waa 
always  happy,  because  He  was  always  trying  to  make  other  people  happy.  And 
once  you  become  busy  in  that  way  you  won't  have  any  time  to  be  unhappy  your- 
self. Pray  to  the  dear  Lord  Jesus  to  give  you  His  Spirit,  to  help  you  to  do  all 
things  without  murmurings  and  disputings;  and  the  way  to  keep  that  spirit  when 
yon  have  got  it  is — try  to  be  glad  when  others  are  glad.  {Ibid.)  Evil  oj 
disputings  : — Do  all  things  without  "  disputings."  Dispute  not  with  God ;  let  Him 
do  what  seemeth  Him  good.  Dispute  not  with  your  fellow-Christians,  raise  not 
railing  accusations  against  them.  When  Calvin  was  told  that  Luther  had  spoken 
ill  of  him,  he  said,  "  Let  Luther  call  me  a  devil  if  he  please,  I  will  never  say  of  him 
but  that  he  is  a  most  dear  and  valiant  servant  of  the  Lord."  Eaise  not  intricate 
and  knotty  points  by  way  of  controversy.  Kemember  you  have  adversaries  upon 
whom  to  use  your  swords,  and  therefore  there  is  little  need  that  you  should  turn 
their  edges  by  dashing  at  the  armour  of  your  fellows.  Dispute  not  even  with  the 
world.  The  heathen  philosophers  always  sought  occasions  for  debate  ;  be  it  yours 
to  testify  what  God  has  told  you,  but  court  not  controversy.  Be  not  ashamed  to 
contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  but  never  do  it  in  a  spirit 
of  mere  debatmg,  never  because  you  wish  to  gain  a  victory,  but  only  because  you  would 
tell  out  what  God  hath  bidden  you  reveal.  (C7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Murmuring  the 
cause  of  disputings : — As  fuel  is  to  the  fire,  so  are  murmurings  to  contentions, 
even  as  the  ground  and  matter  whereout  they  do  spring  ;  and  as  the  fire  long 
covered  and  smothered  is  not  always  kept  under,  but  at  length  bursteth  forth  into 
flame,  so  those  concealed  hatreds,  howsoever  for  a  time  they  lie  boiling  within  the 
heart  of  him  who  fostereth  them,  yet  do  tbey  at  length  show  themselves  in  their 
colours,  even  breaking  out  into  open  strifes.  It  standeth  upon  us  to  strangle  both 
mother  and  daughter,  lest,  yielding  possession  in  our  hearts  to  the  one,  we  be 
strangled  with  the  other.  (H.  Airay,  D.D.)  The  folly  of  contentions  on  the 
mission  field : — Captain  Stephens  relates  this  incident  illustrative  of  the  unwisdom 
of  different  denominations  competing  in  the  same  community  for  converts.  Of 
course  success  among  the  inhabitants  of  Hawaii  brought  other  labourers  into  the 
field,  and  this  led  to  the  following  dialogue,  which  is  not  without  its  instruction 
and  warning  : — "  Have  you  dilferent  gods  ? "  "  Different  gods  ?  No,  we  all  worship 
the  same  living  and  true  God."  "  Do  you  have  different  Bibles  ?  "  "  Certainly 
not.  There  is  but  one  Bible,  written  hymen  divinely  inspired."  "Have  you  all 
the  same  Saviour?"  "Yes,  the  same."  "  Well,  then,  with  the  same  God,  the 
same  Saviour,  and  the  same  Bible,  we  cannot  understand  why  you  differ."  Why 
slioiiM  differing  Christians  put  this  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  recently  con- 
verted heathens.  The  world  is  large,  and  the  idolatrous  are  yet  a  great  multitude. 
(J.  L.  Nye.)  Controversy  hushed  in  the  presence  of  heathenism  : — What  a  cause 
of  thankfulness  it  is  to  be  out  of  the  din  of  controversy,  and  to  find  hundreds  of 
thousands  longing  for  crumbs  which  are  shaken  about  so  roughly  in  these  angry 
disputes.  It  isn't  High  Church,  or  Low,  or  Broad  Church,  or  any  other  special 
name,  but  the  longing  desire  to  forget  all  distinctions,  and  to  return  to  a  simpler 
state  of  things,  that  seems  naturally  to  result  from  the  very  sight  of  heathen 
people.     (Bi$hop  Patteson.) 

Ver.  15,  That  ye  may  be  blameless  and  harmless. — God's  people : — L  Theib 
TRUE    CHAKAOTEB.       II.   POSITION,       III.    Office.       (J.   Lyth,  D.D.)  I.  The 

believp.r's  sphere — in  a  dark  world,  a  perverse  age,  II.  His  office — to  dis- 
pense knowledge,  grace,  life.  III.  His  dutt — to  hold  forth,  &c.,  by  precept — 
example.      {Ibid.)  The   Christian  in  the   world: — WTiy  is  not  the  Christian, 

as  soon  as  converted,  taken  to  heaven  ?  Enoch  walked  three  hundred  years 
with  God  before  he  was  translated ;  Moses  for  forty  years  led  Israel  ere  God 
took  him  to  be  with  Himself.  Our  remaining  in  the  world  gives  rise  to  the  scheme 
of  Christian  duties.  1,  In  speaking  of  duties,  we  must  remember  that  there  is  no 
conflict  between  them.  They  all  harmonize.  They  are  so  related  that  we  cannot 
folly  perform  any  one  of  them  without  being  led  on  to  the  performance  of  others. 


OHA*.  n.]  PHILIPPIANa.  UBt 

8.  All  our  duties  may  be  classified  around  three  centres.  (1)  Our  duties  to  God. 
These  relate  (a)  to  worship  and  (b)  to  service.  They  are  contained  in  the  first 
table  of  the  law.  (2)  Duties  to  our  fellow-beings.  These  are  contained  in  the 
second  table  of  the  law.  (3)  Duties  to  ourselves.  These  relate  to  securing  a  title 
to  heaven  and  a  fitness  for  heaven.  They  are  practically  secured  when  we  bind  the 
two  tables  of  the  law  together.  3.  Are  we  as  Christians  in  the  world  fulfilling  the 
plan  and  purpose  of  God  ?  Are  we  blameless  and  harmless  ?  Are  we  the  sons  of 
God  ?  Do  we  shine  as  lights  ?  Are  we  consumed  with  zeal  for  our  Father's  house, 
and  are  we  constantly  about  our  Father's  business?  {A.  H.  Moment.)  All  Christians 
mutt  shine : — If  I  had  been  made  a  firefly,  it  would  not  become  me  to  say,  "  If  God 
bad  only  made  me  a  star,  to  shine  always,  then  I  would  shine."  It  is  my  duty,  if  I 
am  a  firefly,  to  fly  and  sparkle,  and  fly  and  sparkle ;  not  to  shut  my  wings  down 
over  my  phosphorescent  self,  because  God  did  not  make  me  a  sun  or  a  star.  [H. 
W,  Beerher.)  Uiding  his  lamp  : — A  labouring  man,  soon  after  confessing  Christ 
and  joining  a  Church  in  a  rural  di^tlict,  bad  occasion  to  leave  his  home  for  a  few 
weeks,  to  obtain  work  during  harvest  in  an  adjoining  county.  On  returning  home, 
he  was  cougratulated  by  his  fellow  Christians,  who  expressed  their  hope  that  he  had 
been  able  to  stand  firm  to  his  profession  of  Christ,  and  the  opposition  and  perse- 
cution to  which  they  justly  concluded  he  must  have  been  subjected  by  the  ungodly 
workmen  with  whom  he  had  been  compelled  to  labour.  "  Oh,  no,"  he  replied,  "  I 
had  no  persecution  at  all,  for  though  I  was  working  with  them  for  five  weeks,  they 
never  found  me  out."  "  So  much  the  worse  for  you,"  they  replied,  "  for  if  your 
light  had  shone  before  them,  and  you  had  borne  a  witness  for  Christ,  they  cer- 
tainly would  liave  found  you  out."  Christians  are  lights  : — Lights  have  a  very 
cheering  influence,  and  so  have  Christians.  Late  one  niglit  we  had  lost  our  way  in 
a  park  not  far  from  the  suburbs  of  London,  and  we  were  walking  along  and 
wondering  where  we  were.  We  said,  "  There  is  a  light  over  there,"  and  you  cannot 
tell  what  a  source  of  comfort  that  candle  in  a  cottage  window  proved  to  us.  I 
remember  riding  in  a  third-class  carria^ye,  crowded  full  of  people,  on  a  dark  night, 
when  a  woman  at  the  end  of  the  carriage  struck  a  match  and  lit  a  candle ;  with 
what  satisfaction  everybody's  face  was  lit  up,  as  all  turned  to  see  it.  A  light  really 
does  give  great  comfort ;  if  you  think  it  does  not  sit  in  the  dark  an  hour  or  two. 
A  Christian  ought  to  be  a  comforter ;  with  kind  words  on  his  lips,  and  sympathy 
in  his  heart,  he  should  have  a  cheering  word  for  the  sons  of  sorrow.  (C\  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Tlie  Christian's  carriage  in  the  world : — I.  Blameless.  1.  This  if  taken 
generally  is  impossible.  Even  Christ  did  not  live  without  blame  (Heb.  xii.  3). 
The  best  people  are  subject  to  most  blame,  for  wicked  people  will  quarrel  with 
them.  2.  But  the  meaning  is  so  behave  yourselves  tbat  you  give  no  occasion  of 
offence  to  your  own  conscience,  or  that  of  others.  II.  Hahmless.  The  property  of 
Christians  is  to  do  no  harm,  because  our  nature  is  changed.  The  gospel  makes  as 
tame.  Among  birds,  the  wicked  are  likened  to  ravenous  eacles,  the  Christians  to 
harmless  doves  ;  among  beasts,  the  one  are  like  lions,  the  other  like  lambs  ;  among 
plants,  briars— lilies.  III.  Christians  that  are  blameless  and  harmless  are  thb 
BONS  OF  God,  1.  The  ground  of  this  is  the  love  of  God  (John  i,  12  ;  1  John  iiL  1). 
2.  Those  who  are  His  sons — (1)  He  renews  to  do  His  will  and  commandments 
(1  Pet.  i.  16).  (2)  He  gives  them  the  spirit  of  prayer  (Acts  ix.  11),  by  which  we 
have  constant  access  to  Him  (Eph,  ii.  18;  iii.  8).  (3)  He  affords  them  sweet  conso- 
lation (Eom.  V.  1).  (4)  He  saves  from  overmuch  carefulness.  3.  God's  sons  live 
without  rebuke.  IV.  The  blameless  and  sons  of  God  live  in  the  midst  of  a. 
CBOOKED  AND  PERVERSE  NATION.  1.  The  nature  of  this  crookedness.  (1)  It  is  in  the 
will  (Jer.  xxvii.  13;  Matt,  xxiii.  37).  (2)  In  the  affections.  Men  love  their  bane. 
(3)  In  the  life,  (4)  As  regards  religion.  2.  The  signs.  (1)  Bring  thyself  to  the 
rules  of  God's  truth ;  if  thou  do  it  unwillingly  and  shun  the  means  of  salvation, 
it  is  a  sign  thou  art  crooked.  (2)  Do  you  tremble  when  the  rules  are  applied 
to  your  lusts  and  corruptions.     3.  The  cure.    (1)  Obedience  to  God's  ordinance. 

(2)  Especially  when  young.  (3)  Keep  good  company.  (4)  Pray  with  the  Psalmist 
jPsa.  cxix.  6).  4.  Why  are  Christians  so  placed?  (1)  God  hereby  shows  His 
power  in  that  He  can  and  doth  preserve  His  children  among  lions.  (2)  That  con- 
demnation of  the  wicked  is  hereby  justified.  They  cannot  say  they  were  without 
good  examples.  (3)  That  ungodly  men  may  be  won.  (4)  That  Christians  may  b« 
refined.  5.  Directions  for  Christians  so  placed.  (1)  Remember  your  calling  as 
sons  of  God :  don't  disgrace  it.     (2)  Observe  the  people  with  whom  yon  converse. 

(3)  Beware  how  you  give  them  offence.  (4)  Be  warned  by  the  example  of  David.  f5) 
Look  to  the  duties  of  the  second  table.     (6)  Use  a  loving  carriage  towards  all.     V. 

10 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [CH1».  a. 

In  the  midst  of  this  nation  tee  sons  of  God  are  to  shine  as  lights.  1.  Light  is — 
(1)  Excellent,  showing  the  excellences  of  all  creatures.  (2)  Pure.  (3)  A  most 
comfortable  thing  in  darkness.  (4)  A  quality  of  the  surest  motion.  (5)  Hath 
a  secret  influence  wherever  it  is.  Herein  Christians  resemble  light.  2.  How  to  be 
a  light.  (1)  Communicate  with  the  chiefest  light.  (2)  Use  the  means.  (3)  Have 
no  connection  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness.  (4)  Follow  the  example  of 
those  that  He  lights.  (5)  Pray  that  thy  light  may  grow  more  and  more  unto  the 
perfect  day.  (6)  Enlighten  thy  brethren.  {R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  Harmless. — 
This  word  probably  means  sincere,  that  is  to  say,  pure,  not  mixed,  not  sophisti- 
cated, that  is  entirely  of  one  kind,  without  the  true  and  natural  constitution  having 
been  altered  by  anything  foreign.  And  it  appears  that,  to  set  foith  this  simplicity 
and  sincerity,  God  formerly  forbade  His  ancient  people  to  plant  a  vineyard  with 
different  kinds  of  plants,  and  to  unite  under  the  same  yoke  animals  of  different 
species,  and  to  clothe  themselves  with  a  cloth  of  linen  and  woollen  mixed  together, 
to  teach  us  by  the  enigma  of  these  figures  that  He  hates  a  mind  and  life  double  and 
variegated,  in  the  composition  of  which  enters  vice  and  virtue,  good  and  evil,  piety 
and  superstition.  He  wishes  us  to  be  entirely  Christians,  and  that  there  should  be 
nothing  strange  in  the  whole  range  of  our  conversation  ;  that  the  outside  and  the 
inside  should  be  of  the  same  nature,  the  one  exactly  corresponding  to  the  other ; 
that  the  form,  colour,  and  substance  of  our  lives  should  be  simple,  and  not  mixed. 
And  although  this  virtue  is  very  extended,  it  may,  nevertheless,  be  referred  to  four 
principal  heads.  I.  Without  htpockisy  before  God,  acknowledging  and  confessing 
ourselves  such  in  His  presence  as  we  are  in  truth,  without  lessening  the  good  which 
there  is,  without  also  hiding  interior  defects  with  the  paint  and  false  colouring  of 
our  artifices,  imitating  the  coarse  fraud  of  our  first  father,  who,  having  renounced 
the  naked  simplicity  in  which  he  had  been  formed,  wished  to  disguise  himself 
before  that  sovereign  Majesty  by  covering  himself  with  fig-leaves.  H  Not  to 
COUNTERFEIT  BEFOKE  MEN,  giving  up  fiauds,  pretences,  and  dissimulations,  crooked 
and  equivocal  ways,  which  the  people  of  the  world  use,  to  make  their  neighbours 
believe  of  them  the  contrary  of  what  they  really  are.  HI.  Gentleness  and  meek- 
ness OF  MIND ;  it  is  not  easily  irritat  d,  or  if  iriitation  should  sometimes  arise,  it  is 
soon  appeased,  and  in  reality  loses  the  remembrance  of  the  offences  that  havt  been 
committed  against  it.  IV.  Freedom  from  curiosity  ;  it  only  employs  itself  on  its 
own  business ;  and,  entirely  turned  within,  does  not  observe  very  carefully  what 
passes  without,  from  whence  it  is  neither  suspicious  nor  distrustful.  (J.  Daille.) 
The  sons  of  God. — 1.  There  was  nothing  strange  to  the  ear  of  a  heathen  in  this 
title.  The  gods  of  the  Gentiles  were  fabled  to  be  the  parents  of  earthy  heroes,  the 
fathers  of  races.  One  belief  of  man  stands  out  in  all  ages,  that  man  and  God  are 
related  as  no  creature  is  related  to  either  God  or  man.  2.  Communion  on  some 
level  man  would  have,  and  so  the  gods  of  the  Gentiles  played  the  part  of  the 
murderer,  the  adulterer,  &c.  "  Sons  of  God  blameless  and  harmless  "  was  quite 
a  new  collocation  of  ideas.  The  sons  of  God  up  to  that  time  had  been  too  largely 
the  tyrants,  deceivers,  roysterers  of  the  world.  3.  The  atheism  of  the  times  was 
largely  a  reaction  against  these  degrading  conceptions.  The  mind  of  all  thoughtful 
men  was  thoroughly  unsettled  when  Christ  appeared,  and  by  living  as  the  Son  ol 
God  effected  a  revolution.  The  seed  of  this  revolution  is  in  vers.  5-11.  God  dwelt 
among  men  at  last  not  corrupting,  thieving,  or  destroying,  but  healing,  purifying, 
blessing.  The  end  of  God  is  to  surround  Himself  with  sons  after  this  pattern,  L 
Sons  of  God  :  the  nature  of  this  RELATioNSfiip.  1.  The  sons  of  God  are  clearly 
distioguisi  ed  from  the  world.  It  is  a  title  which  man  as  man  has  no  right  to  share. 
2.  But  how  does  this  square  with  the  doctrine  of  universal  Fatherhood  taught,  e.g., 
in  Heb.  ii?  Children  and  sons  are  not  co-ordinate  there.  The  latter  is  higher 
than  the  former,  although  the  former  is  the  base  out  of  which  the  latter  is  evolved. 
In  the  home  the  natural  relation  is  one  thing,  and  confers  certain  rights  and 
claims.  The  spiritual  relationship  is  another,  that  is  the  condition  of  the  child  as 
a  being  of  will,  thought,  and  affection  with  regard  to  the  parent.  And  so  man  may 
be  a  child  of  the  Great  Parent,  but  sensual,  rebellious.  To  such  God  fulfils  a 
Father's  duties  and  feels  a  Father's  sorrows  ;  but  sons  they  are  not  until  the  spirit 
of  sonship  be  in  them.  3.  This  is  what  regeneration  means.  It  is  the  carrying 
np  the  child's  relation  through  all  the  higher  powers  and  faculties,  and  yielding 
to  God  the  child  complete  (Pet.  ii.  1-11 ;  1  John  iiL  1-4).  It  is  in  view 
of  this  that  our  Saviour  delivers  to  Nicodemus  the  deepest  doctrine  of  His 
kingdom.  The  new  birth  is  the  only  way  by  which  the  unfilial  child  can  pass  into 
the  freedom,  joy,  and  spiritual  life  of  the  son.     XL  The  manifestation  of  bonbhbp 


CHA?,  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  147 

AND  ITS  FRUITS.  1.  Blameless  and  harmless  (1  Pet.  ii.  18-25;  iii.  &-18;  iv.  12-19). 
Goodness  is  the  most  powerful  appeal  to  man.  Eevenge  may  terrify,  but  forgiveness 
will  awe  and  controL  In  the  multitude  there  is  a  hidden  sense  of  the  beauty  of 
goodness  ihat  only  wants  appealing  to  by  some  act  of  goodness.  Bold  men  stood 
and  trembled  before  an  agonized  child  as  they  never  trembled  before  the  foe.  Why? 
Because  goodness,  patience,  faith,  are  heavenly.  2.  There  is  nothing  exclusive  in 
this  sonship — "  Holding  forth  the  word  of  life,"  that  men  may  live  also.  The  sons 
are  to  be  magnets  to  draw  the  children  to  the  Father,  that  they  may  be  received  as 
sons.  (Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.)  Insincere  prof f'ssors: — As  you  see  that  in  the  world 
art  counterfeits  precious  stones  and  drugs,  exchanging  them  for  others  of  little  value, 
which  they  pass  off  for  good  by  favour  of  some  apparent  resemblance  which  they 
have  to  the  true  ;  so  also  in  the  Church  there  has  always  been  found  a  number  of 
cheats,  who,  deceiving  themselves  and  others,  take  the  colour  and  form  of  the  children 
of  God,  although  in  reality  they  are  not  so.  And  as  there  are  certain  means  by 
which  adulterated  goods,  such  as  the  gold  and  stones  of  alchemy,  are  discerned 
from  the  true  ;  so  also  in  religion  there  are  marks  and  certain  proofs  whereby  those 
may  be  known  who  have  only  the  name  of  the  children  of  God  from  those  who  are 
so  in  reality.  Those  who  sustain  these  trials,  and  in  whom  are  really  found  all 
these  marks,  are  they  whom  the  apostle  here  very  elegantly  calls  '•  children  of  God, 
without  rebuke  ;  "  those  whom  the  crucible  cannot  make  to  blush  ;  those  in  whom 
neither  the  calumny  nor  the  cunning  of  the  enemy  can  find  anything  to  lay  hold 
of;  such  as  the  Scripture  sets  forth  in  a  Job,  who  confounded  all  the  artifices  of 
Satan,  and  justified  most  fully  by  h  s  trials  the  glorious  testimony  which  God  had 
condescended  to  bear  to  him  with  His  own  mouth.  (J.  Daille.)  In  the  midst 
Of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation. — As  naturalists  say  that  there  are  rivers  which 
run  through  lakes  without  mingling;  their  waters  with  them,  may  we  flow  together 
in  this  world  without  uniting  in  its  ways,  preserving  all  the  colour,  strength,  and 
substance  of  our  Divine  source ;  may  we  be  truly  that  people  of  God,  of  which 
Balaam  formerly  said,  "  They  shall  dwell  alone,  and  shall  not  be  reckoned  among 
the  nations;"  always  strangers  in  the  world,  although  living  on  the  earth,  and 
breathing  its  air ;  floating  in  the  midst  of  its  waters  without  being  confounded 
with  them  ;  walking  in  its  fires  without  being  burnt ;  constantly  remaining  upright, 
perfect,  sincere,  and  unrebukable  in  the  midst  of  all  its  obliquities  and  perversities. 
(Ibid.)  Children  of  God  without  rebuke  Moral  courage: — When  the  late 
Commodore  Foote  was  in  Siam  he  had,  upon  one  occasion,  the  king  on  board  his 
vessel  as  a  guest.  Like  a  Christian  man  as  he  was,  he  did  not  hesitate  in  the  royal 
presence  to  ask  a  blessing  as  the  guests  took  their  places  at  the  table.  "Why,  that 
is  just  as  the  missionaries  do,"  remarked  the  king,  with  some  surprise.  "  Yes," 
answered  the  heroic  sailor,  "  and  I  am  a  missionary  too."  (Homiletic  Monthly.) 
Shining  Christians : — A  friend  told  me  that  he  was  visiting  a  lighthouse  lately, 
and  said  to  the  keeper,  "  Are  you  not  afraid  to  live  here  ?  It  is  a  dreadful  place  to 
be  constantly  in."  "  No,"  replied  the  man;  "  I  am  not  afraid.  We  never  think  of 
ourselves  here."  "  Never  think  of  yourselves  1  How  is  that  ?  "  The  reply  was  a 
good  one.  *'  We  know  that  we  are  perfectly  safe,  and  only  think  of  having  our 
lamps  burning  brightly,  and  keeping  the  reflectors  clear,  that  those  in  danger  may 
be  saved."  Christians  are  safe  in  a  house  built  on  a  Eock,  which  cannot  be  moved 
by  the  wildest  storm,  and  in  a  spirit  of  holy  unselfishness  they  should  let  their 
light  gleam  across  the  dark  waves  of  sin,  that  imperilled  ones  may  be  guided  into 
the  harbour  of  heaven.  (Ibid.)  Shine  for  others  : — Unless  we  let  our  light  shine 
we  are  hidden  from  recognition,  and  may  be  only  stumbling-blocks.  A  blind  beggar, 
sitting  on  a  side-walk  one  dark  night,  had  a  bright  lantern  by  his  side.  Wliereat  a 
passer-by  was  so  puzzled  that  he  had  to  turn  back  with,  "What  do  you  keep  a 
lantern  burning  for?  You  can't  see."  "So  that  folks  may  not  stumble  over 
me,"  was  the  reply.  We  should  keep  our  light  burning  for  the  sake  of  others  as 
well  as  for  the  good  of  being  in  the  light  ourselves.  (J.  L.  Nye.)  Chrittian 
influence  : — When  Lord  Peterborough  lodged  for  a  season  with  Fenelon,  Archbishop 
of  Cambray,  he  was  so  delighted  with  his  piety  and  virtue  that  he  exclaimed  at 
parting,  "  If  I  stayed  here  any  longer,  I  should  become  a  Christian  in  spite 
of  myself." 

Ver.  16.  Holding  forth  the  word  of  life. — Here  is — I.  A  trust.  The  Word  of  God 
— which  gives  life.  II.  A  duty.  To  hold  it  forth  in  the  conversation,  spirit,  prac- 
tice. III.  A  MOTIVB.  Your  salvation  and  our  joy — in  the  day  of  Christ.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)        The  toord  of  life : — The  gospel  is  here  thus  called  (John  vi.  68;  Acts  v. 


14a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

20),  because — I.  By  it  we  are  born  into  a  new  life  (1  Pet.  i.  23).  II.  It  ia  thb 
POWER  OF  God  unto  salvation  (2  Cor.  ii.  16).     III.  Therein  Christ,  who  is  ooh 

LIFE,    13    OFFERED   TO    US.       IV.    It    IS  A  LANTERN  TO  OOR  FEET  TO  LEAD  US   TO   ETERNAL 

LIFE.     (H.  Airay,   D.D.)  The   Bible: — I.  Is   the    word   of   life;  it   reveals, 

promises,  communicates  life.  II.  Must  be  held  forth  by  every  believer,  by 
word  and  example,  for  his  own  credit,  the  world's  benefit,  God's  glory.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Holding  forth  the  word  of  life: — I.  The  character  of  the  gospel.  It 
is  the  word  of  life,  because — 1.  It  unfolds  tlie  certainty  of  a  blessed  immortality. 
Reason  has  nothing  to  report  except  speculations  and  probabilities  ;  as  witness  the 
conclusions  of  Socrates  and  Cicero.  The  gospel  brings  life  and  immortality  to 
light.  2.  It  exhibits  Christ  who  is  essential  life  Himself,  the  Author  of  life  natural, 
spiritual,  and  eternal.  Hence  He  is  called  "  The  Life;  "  and  "He  that  hath  the 
Son  hath  life,"  implying  previous  "  death  in  trespasses  and  sins."  By  faith  the 
believer  "  passes  from  death  unto  life."  3.  It  is  the  instrument  of  the  Spirit  in 
communicating  life.  "Of  His  own  will  begat  He  us,"  &c.,  "bom  not  of  cor- 
ruptible seed,"  &c.  It  is  also  the  means  of  sustaining  life  and  maturing  it.  II. 
The  MANNER  of  ITS  EXHIBITION.  Holding  it  forth.  What  the  lighthouse  is  to  the 
mariner  the  gospel  is  to  a  dark  world.  1.  Ministers  are  bound  to  hold  it  forth 
to  their  congregations  as  the  only  sure  ground  of  hope,  and  adequate  means 
of  salvation.  Can  they  with  this  in  their  hands  amuse  them  with  other 
topics,  or  inculcate  a  lifeless  morality  ?  2.  Christians  are  individually  and 
collectively  to  hold  it  forth  in  their  lives  for  the  instruction  of  mankind. 
Men  are  unable  to  judge  of  any  system  save  by  its  practical  effects,  and 
few  will  fail  to  appreciate  a  holy  life.  3.  Our  country  is  bound  to  hold  it 
forth  to  heathen  nations.  (D.  Ruell.)  Holding  forth  the  word  of  life: — I.  Bb 
SURE  THAT  YOU  HAVE  THE  TRUTH.  You  caunot  hold  forth  what  you  do  not  possess. 
Business  to  be  honest  must  have  actual  stock  or  capital.  Our  commercial  and 
agricultural  circles  have  been  and  are  now  disturbed  by  gambling  in  "  deals  "  and 
"  futures."  Thousands  of  barrels  of  oil  that  never  existed,  and  millions  of  bushels 
of  grain  that  never  were  harvested,  have  been  made  the  basis  of  mere  speculation. 
Mortgage  and  ruin  have  overtaken  multitudes  in  this  illegitimate  traffic.  There  ia 
a  godless  spiritualism,  a  Christless  Unitarianism,  and  a  Scriptureless  "  new 
theology,"  which,  however  curious  they  may  be,  have  no  breath  or  life  in  them  for 
a  hungry  soul.  You  might  as  well  send  a  starving  man  to  a  bucket-shop  for  bread 
as  to  satisfy  your  soul  with  such  speculations.  The  wife  of  Abraham  made  cakes 
for  the  angels.  There  have  been  improvements  in  bread-making  since  Sarah's  day, 
but  nobody  yet  has  been  able  to  make  bread  without  flour.  You  must  have  the 
grain  to  begin  with,  and  so  you  must  have  the  truth,  the  bread  of  life,  before  you 
attempt  to  feed  the  famine  of  the  soul.  II.  Be  sure  that  you  have  it  unadul- 
terated. Commissions  have  discovered  food  adulterations.  Innutritions  if  not 
poisonous  matter  has  been  mixed  with  wholesome  tlour,  cheapening  and  degrading 
it.  So  the  truth  has  been  vitiated  by  a  mixture  of  philosophy,  tradition,  &c.  It 
fails  to  nourish  starving  souls.  The  best  test  of  purity  is  its  effect  on  your  own  life. 
Daniel  tested  the  wholsomeness  of  his  coarse  pulse,  and  showed  a  fairer  hue  than 
those  who  fed  on  royal  dainties.  III.  Be  sure  that  you  yourselves  are  lxvino 
epistles  of  what  you  intellectually  HOLD.  It  is  not  the  printed  book  that  does 
the  work,  but  the  truth  which  has  become  the  vital  texture  of  your  soul.  We  have 
a  revised  version  of  the  Bible  for  which  we  are  thankful,  but  every  Christian  should 
be  a  new  transcript,  a  walking  word  of  God.  A  military  man  sees  at  a  glance 
whether  a  soldier  has  been  trained  under  old  or  new  schools.  Mf^n  are  not  slow  to 
detect  whether  or  not  you  have  been  trained  by  Christ.  IV.  How  to  hold  thb 
truth.  1.  Not  as  the  miser  holds  his  gold,  but  hold  to  give.  The  merchant  gets 
to  give.  He  is  ruined  if  he  cannot  sell,  and  his  goods  are  left  to  spoil.  We  ought 
to  be  as  anxious  to  disperse  as  to  acquire.  2.  Lovingly.  Tact  is  needed  in  busi- 
ness. Anybody  can  buy,  but  to  sell  is  another  thing.  I  once  asked  a  salesman  why 
he  was  so  ta'kative  to  one  customer  and  so  taciturn  to  another,  and  he  said  that 
he  had  always  studied  character,  and  knew  very  quickly  how  to  handle  men.  3. 
Constantly.  Notice  the  present  participle  in  the  text,  and  the  continuous  action 
implied.  You  cannot  cover  up  the  Christian  character  and  live.  It  must  have 
breath.  In  descending  into  deep  wells,  men  first  lower  a  candle.  If  it  goes  out, 
they  know  tliat  death  damps  are  there.  No  sane  person  would  risk  asphyrfa. 
There  are  places  in  which  no  Christian  ought  to  risk  himself,  because  death  is  there. 
He  wiU  not  go  to  drinking-saloous,  and  other  places  I  need  not  mention.  It  is  not 
(he  darkness  there  that  harms,  any  more  than  in  the  deep  well,  but  it  is  the  death- 


oup.  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  149 

dampg  I  4.  Have  confidence  in  the  Word  as  God's  own  message.  It  is  His  Word, 
He  will  give  it  success.  He  ordered  the  serpent  of  brass.  It  mattered  not  about 
the  pole,  whether  it  were  rough  or  smooth,  crooked  or  straight,  large  or  small,  low 
or  high,  Bo  that  the  people  could  see  it.  All  men  had  to  do  was  just  to  look  and 
live.  A  man  once  kept  on  his  parlour  mantel  an  ugly  oyster-shell.  When  asked 
why  that  incongruous  thing  was  there,  he  told  the  story  of  his  earlier  years.  He 
was  a  diver.  Once  he  saw  a  shell  in  which  was  held  a  bit  of  paper.  He  took 
it  to  the  surface,  carried  it  home,  deciphered  it,  and  found  it  a  part  of  a  gospel 
tract.  It  was  blessed  to  his  salvation.  The  shell  was  reverently  preserved, 
because  it  had  silently  "held  forth  the  word  of  life"  to  him  who  had  long 
neglected   the  appeals    from  human   lips.      {A.   Blackburn,   D.D.)  Holding 

forth  the  word  of  life : — I.  It  is  your  BnsiNESs  to  hold  forth  the  word 
or  LITE.  Your  work  on  earth  is  not  done  when  you  have  saved  yourself  fiom 
an  untoward  generation.  You  have  to  hold  your  lamps  as  far  in  as  you  can 
into  the  dark  mass  around.  God  does  not  call  you  to  a  timid,  fugitive,  skulking 
piety;  a  religion  which  has  to  lock  its  doors  and  bar  its  windows.  There  is  a  part 
of  it  which  has  to  do  with  this.  Our  lamp  must  be  kindled,  trimmed,  and  fed,  in 
secret.  But  the  office  of  the  lamp  is  to  shine.  II.  By  what  meanb  ?  1,  By 
example.  Let  men  see  how  yon  live.  No  one  can  sot  limits  to  the  operation  of  a 
consistent  example.  Men  are  never  too  old  or  too  young  to  be  struck  by  it.  2.  By 
sympathy.  There  is  a  dry,  cold,  harsh,  stern,  mode  of  expressing  the  truth;  and 
tnere  is  a  repulsive,  ungenial,  precise,  stiff,  sort  of  example  which  never  leads  men, 
seeing  its  good  works,  to  glorify  God.  Let  a  man,  a  child,  see  that  you  feel  for  him 
and  with  him  in  his  poverty  or  sorrow,  and  not  as  a  superior  might  do,  but  as  one 
compared  with  infirmity.  III.  Practical  counsels.  Much  is  lost  in  spiritual  as 
well  as  in  worldly  things,  by  too  vague  and  discursive  an  aim.  As  long  as  we  think 
generally  of  shining  as  lights  in  the  world  there  will  be  something  of  unreality  in 
the  conception.  Let  us  make  the  matter  more  practical  by  narrowing  the  bounds. 
1.  Begin  with  the  home.  Is  all  right  there  7  Remember  that  those  within  your 
own  doors  see  you  as  none  ehe  can.  2.  Let  each  one  have  a  few  poor  persons  to 
whom  he  will  steadily  set  himself  to  carry  the  word  of  life.  (Dean  Vaughan.) 
Christian  influence : — I.  What  is  meant  by  holding  forth  the  word  of  life. 
As  a  standard  bearer  holds  out  an  ensign  to  direct  the  march  or  animate  the 
attack ;  as  a  man  who  holds  forth  a  clear  light  in  the  midst  of  darkness  to  illumi- 
nate the  path  and  direct  the  steps  of  travellers ;  as  the  fires  which  were  kept 
bnrning  at  the  entrance  of  harbours  to  direct  ships  into  port,  so  are  Christians  to 
hold  forth  the  light  of  life.  It  is  to  be  held  forth  in — 1.  Its  great  and  distinguish- 
ing doctrines.  These  are  the  nerves  and  sinews  of  the  Word.  They  must  be 
onderstood  intelligently,  and  defended  valiantly.  •'  Be  always  ready  to  give  an 
answer  for  the  hope  that  is  in  you."  2.  In  its  peculiar  spirit.  This  distinguishes 
the  gospel  from  every  other  religions  system.  It  is  a  spirit  of  love  to  God  and  man 
(ver.  5).  3.  In  its  practice.  The  imitation  of  Christ,  obedience,  self-denial.  4. 
Eminently,  conspicuously.  XL  Motives  to  enforce  this  duty.  1.  The  nature 
and  design  of  the  gospel  demand  this.  2.  This  is  the  best  means  of  high  Christian 
attainment.  3.  This  is  the  most  effective  means  of  usefulness.  (J,  Hanea,  D.D.) 
Holding  forth  the  light . — When  I  was  a  young  student,  I  breakfasted  with  Cassar 
Malan  at  Dr.  John  Brown's.  When  the  doctor  told  him  that  I  was  a  yonng  student 
of  divinity,  he  said  to  me,  "  Well,  my  young  friend,  see  that  you  hold  up  the  lamp 
of  truth  to  let  the  people  see.  Hold  it  up  and  trim  it  well.  But  remember  this  : 
You  must  not  dash  the  lamp  in  people's  faces,  that  would  not  help  them  to  see." 
How  often  have  I  remembered  these  words  I  They  have  often  been  of  use  to  me. 
(Dr.  Morison.)  Christians  are  light-holdert : — At  the  head  of  New  York  Harbour 
stands  a  colossal  statue  of  Liberty,  a  gift  from  France  to  America.  At  night  the 
outstretched  hand  of  the  figure  holds  forth  a  magnificent  display  of  the  electric  light, 
which  guides  the  ships  to  a  safe  anchorage.  What  that  statue  is  to  New  York 
Harbour  Christians  are  to  the  world.  They  mast  hold  forth  the  word  of  life.  (R. 
Brewin.)  Exposure  of  light-bearers  : — Some  years  ago  I  went  to  see  the  light- 
house, which,  standing  on  Dunnet  Head — the  Cape  Orcus  of  the  Romans — guards 
the  mouth  of  Pentland  Firth.  On  ascending  the  tower,  I  observed  the  thick  plate- 
glass  windows  of  the  lanthom  cracked — starred  in  a  number  of  places.  I  turned  to 
the  keeper  for  an  explanation.  It  appears  that  it  is  done  by  stones  flung  up  by 
the  sea.  The  wave,  on  being  thrown  forward  against  the  cliff,  strikes  it  with  such 
tremendous  force  as  to  hurl  the  loose  stones  at  its  base  right  up  to  the  height  of 
three  hundred  feet.     So  are  the  great  light-bearers,  by  the  exposure  of  their  posi- 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  tt, 

tion,  and,  in  spite  of  the  elevation  of  their  characters,  liable  to  be  cracked  and 
starred  by  the  violence  of  the  world.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  prosperity  of  the 
pastor,  the  prosperity  of  his  flock  : — As  in  the  world  a  fine  and  fruitful  flock  is  the 
riches  of  the  shepherd,  an  honest  and  well  conducted  family  the  joy  and  honour  of 
the  father,  a  happy  and  flourishing  state  the  strength  and  glory  of  the  prince ;  so 
also  in  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,  a  holy  and  blessed  Church,  abounding  in  the 
fruits  of  righteousness,  is  the  crown,  the  joy,  and  the  triumph  of  its  pastors.  {J. 
Daille.) 

Vers.  17-18.  If  I  be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  your  faith. — 
Observe — I.  The  sacrifice  of  faith.  Christ  is  the  only  true  sacrifice,  faith  offers 
it— every  one  must  ofier  it  for  himself.  II.  The  libation.  The  blood  of  the 
martyrs — joyfully  offered — in  defence  of  the  truth,  and  for  the  confirmation  of  our 
faith.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  law  of  the  Christian  life : — The  sacrifices  of  the  Jews 
were  not  all  sombre  ceremonials.  A  solemn  oppression  rested  on  the  people  on  the 
great  day  of  Atonement ;  and  it  was  not  until  the  High  Priest  returned  from  the 
Most  Holy  Place,  and  proclaimed  by  His  presence  that  the  ceremonial  was  ended, 
that  the  people  were  able  to  breathe  in  gladness  again.  But  there  was  one  special 
festival  which  was  of  a  joyous  character — the  whole  burnt  offering,  or  "  splendour" 
offering,  which  was  an  expression  of  gratitude  to  God  for  His  goodness.  This  wa» 
the  service  in  which  beasts  in  multitude  smoked  upon  the  altar,  and  wine  was 
poured  out  in  libation.  It  was  to  this  that  the  apostle  here  refers.  He  delighted 
to  think  of  humanity  as  presented  in  offering  to  the  most  Holy  One — all  presenting  to 
God  their  faith  and  sacrifice,  and  to  have  part  in  such  service  was  his  highest  joy. 
Life  itself  miglit  be  freely  poured  out  upon  it  in  libation.  Christian  history 
furnishes  us  with  the  reality  of  these  two  types.  When  the  Saviour  hung  on 
Calvary,  the  sin-offering,  there  was  no  room  for  any  but  solemn  accessories. 
"  There  was  darkness,"  &g.  ;  but  when  He  returned  the  whole  spirit  of  piety  was 
altered  and  enlarged.  Sadness  gave  way  to  joy ;  death,  suffering,  endurance, 
became  charj^'ed  with  joyous  inspiration  ;  so  that  the  verj- word  "  sacrifice  "  took 
on  a  new  significance.  I.  In  Christian  service  there  must  be  sacrifice.  1. 
This  is  the  law  of  Christian  life.  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,"  &c.  2.  It  is 
the  impulse  of  Christian  affection.  "Enough  for  the  disciple  to  be  as  his  Lord." 
3.  It  is  the  revelation  of  a  higher  righteousness.  "  It  is  better  to  suffer,"  <fec., 
because  "  Christ  also  suffered  the  just,"  &c.  4.  It  is  the  assurance  of  triumph  and 
the  way  to  spiritual  influence.  "  If  we  suffer  with  Him  we  shall  also  reign  with 
Him."  (1)  The  spirit  of  sacrifice  is  the  possession  of  all  Christians.  (2)  But 
there  are  those  whose  suffering  is  more  conspicuous  than  that  of  others.  Men 
foremost  in  office.  "The  Shepherd  giveth  His  life  for  the  sbeep."  These  draw 
most  opposition.  The  qualities  which  make  them  wortby  of  confidence  mark  them 
out.  Duty  demands  that  they  sliou'd  be  faithful  in  times  of  danger  ;  and  in  times 
of  peace  they  find  room  to  offer  themselves.  A  long  life  spent  in  Christ's  cause  is 
as  truly  poured  out  as  that  which  is  cut  short  by  the  axe.  (3)  There  are  others 
who,  by  a  necessity  of  their  being,  cannot  serve  without  sacrificing  themselves. 
There  is  feeling  in  all  their  labour,  and  feeling  wears  out  more  than  toil.    II.  Faith 

KNOWS    HOW   TO    VINDICATE   AND    APPROVE     THE    LAW     OF    SACRIFICE.       1.    The    CaUSe    of 

humanity  is  justly  held  to  vindicate  all  the  sacrifices  that  individual  men  can  make 
to  it.  That  story  of  Marcus  Curtius,  who  threw  himself  into  the  gulf  opened  in  the 
forum  at  Kome,  is  one  of  the  noblest  legeuds  of  history.  Now  and  then  we  are 
thrilled  by  records  of  shipwreck,  how  that  officers  stand  on  the  quarter-deck  and 
go  down  with  the  ship.  To  what  purpose  is  this  waste  ?  The  cause  of  humanity 
demands  it,  and  he  would  be  a  dastard  who  would  count  his  own  life  dearer  than 
that  of  the  tiniest  child.  The  gifttd  mnst  not  alone  enjoy  their  gifts,  but  lay  them 
out  in  the  service  of  the  undistmguished.  2.  The  Christian  cause  is  the  cause  of 
man.  Philanthropy  has  drawn  its  inspiration  from  the  life  of  Christ.  What  was 
the  sacrifice  of  which  the  apostle  speaks,  and  which  missionaries  offer  ?  To  free  the 
heathen  from  their  licentiousness,  to  throw  a  new  glory  on  the  lot  of  the  slave,  to 
liijht  the  pathway  of  the  dying,  to  raise  woman  from  her  degradation,  &c.,  &c. 
Whatever  be  the  talk  about  humanity,  the  opportunity  for  serving  it  must  be 
sought  in  the  fellowship  of  Christ.  8.  The  service  of  Christian  faith  contemplates 
not  only  humanity  but  also  God.  III.  The  sacrifice  of  faith  is  a  common 
SACRIFICE.  Paul  aims  to  draw  the  Philippians  into  the  fellowship  of  his  own  sacri- 
ficial ecstasy,  and  assumes  that  they  are  already  in  sympathy  with  him.  He 
•peaks  of  himself  as  the  libation  only,  and  of  them  as  the  sacrifice.    He  calls  it 


3HAP.  n.]  PHILIPFIANS.  161 

the  sacrifice  and  liturgy  of  their  faith.  1.  It  is  to  their  service  that  he  is  devoted  ; 
how,  then,  could  they  do  other  than  join  with  him  in  the  sacrificial  spirit  wliich 
possesses  him.  They  cannot  blame  the  enthusiasm  which  carried  him  into  danger 
at  Kome  when  they  remembered  the  vision  of  the  man  of  Macedonia.  2.  It  was 
their  cause  because  it  was  the  cause  of  Christ,  and  they  were  Christians.  The 
same  law  and  sacrifice  was  binding  on  them  and  on  him ;  they  would  be  as  ready 
as  he  to  be  offered  if  the  same  call  should  come.  Here  are  two  thoughts  which 
should  reconcile  us  to  sacrifice,  particularly  when  witnessed  in  others.  (1)  We  are 
debtors  for  all  we  have  to  others.  The  woman  experiencing  the  pangs  of  mother- 
hood and  the  anxiety  of  a  family  is  paying  her  debt  to  humanity,  for  she,  too,  once 
rested  beneath  a  mother's  heart.  The  man  toiling  for  his  fellows  is  the  son  of  a 
toil-worn  generation.  (2)  It  is  in  us  to  offer  ourselves  when  callod  upon.  There 
is  no  tale  of  manful  endurance  or  womanly  self-devotion  that  does  not  thrill  us. 
Why  ?  Because  of  sympathy.  It  is  only  the  expression  of  a  common  passion. 
There  are  differences  of  gifts,  but  it  is  the  same  spirit.  TLe  sacrifice  of  the  mis- 
sionary warrants  and  inspires  our  sacrifice.  (A.  Mackennal,  D.D.)  The  spirit 
of  the  martyrs : — I.  Faith.  They  died  in  faith  for  the  faith.  II.  Love — to  Christ 
and  His  cause — to  the  brethren.  III.  Jot,  in  the  prospect  of  glory,  of  the  benefit 
derived  by  the  Church.  IV.  Triumph  over  persecution  and  death.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  Christian  service : — I.  The  Sacrifice.  The  Jewish  sacriiices  were  prointiatory 
and  eucharistic.  Our  Lord  by  the  offering  of  Himself  once  for  all  has  fulfilled  the 
former,  but  Christians  are  "  to  offer  the  SHcrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually,"  "  to 
present  their  bodies  living  sacrifices,"  and  "  with  such  God  is  well  pleased."  1. 
All  sacrifices  involve  something  given  up.  Thus  we  say  a  man  "  sacrificed  half  hia 
fortune ;  "  a  father  "  sacrificed  his  time  for  his  son."  2.  Faith  is  here  represented 
as  a  sacrifice,  because  out  of  it  all  other  sacrifices  spring — love,  zeal,  liberality. 
Is  our  faith  such  ?  Do  we  in  it  surrender  anything  really  valued  ?  Does  it  cost  ofl 
a  struggle  ?  If  not,  may  we  not  suspect  that  it  is  a  moie  assent  to  doctrine.  3. 
Real  faith  is  sacrifice,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  renunciation  of  pride.  (1)  The  pride  of 
reason.  Reason  loves  to  elaborate  for  itself,  but  the  gospel  claims  to  be  believed. 
Its  absolute  authority,  its  simplicity,  its  mysteries,  are  all  hateful  to  intellectual 
arrogance.  (2)  The  pride  of  self-righteousness.  There  is  a  great  proneness  to 
dream  that  eternal  life  may  be  earned.  With  this  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  will  not 
suit ;  for  the  reality  and  universality  of  sinfulness,  and  our  utter  inability  to  satisfy 
the  claims  of  the  Divine  law,  and  the  absolute  gratuitousness  of  salvation  are  ita 
very  essence.  (3)  The  pride  of  self-will  (ver.  5,  Ac).  II.  The  priestly  seevicb 
CONNECTED  WITH  THE  SACRIFICE.  1.  The  Ncw  Testament  recognizes  but  one  priest 
111  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  but  by  a  figurative  application  of  the  name,  Chris- 
tians are  priests  as  by  "the  unction  of  the  Holy  One.  Set  apart  from  the  world 
for  the  service  of  God,  "a  holy  priesthood  to  offer  spiritual  sacrifices."  Such  a 
spiritual  sacrifice  was  the  Philippians'  faith.  2.  In  speaking  of  this  faith  St.  Paul 
introduces  a  variation  of  the  ordinary  figure,  to  bring  out  the  relation  between  him 
and  them.  His  labours  had  been  blessed  to  their  conversion  and  advancement,  and 
thus  had  been  a  kind  of  priestly  service.  Through  the  spiritual  energy  given  them 
from  heaven,  they  brought  faith  and  love  as  a  free-will  offering  to  God ;  and  the 
apostle's  part  in  the  work,  his  tea^^hings,  and  prayers,  corresponded  with  the 
priestly  act  of  laying  the  offering  on  the  altar  (Rom.  xv.  15-16).  3.  See,  then,  the 
comprehensive  work  of  the  Christian  priest.  He  is  called  on  to  present  his  whole 
life  by  personal  holiness,  and  also  to  bring  other  men  to  God  and  help  them  on- 
ward. This  work  belongs  to  all  Christians.  4.  The  apostle  thought  it  not  unlikely 
that  he  should  close  his  relations  with  his  converts  by  a  violent  death.  This  would 
be  his  "  being  offered  "  (lit.,  poured  forth)  the  libation  or  drink-offering  by  which 
his  priestly  service  connected  with  their  sacrifice  of  faith  should  be  completed. 
The  apostle's  joy  in  this  prospect  is  very  sublime,  and  is  a  magnificent  proof  of  the 
Bustaining  power  of  the  Christian  faith.  The  sources  of  Christian  joy  in  prospect 
of  martyrdom  are  two-fold.  (1)  The  confident  hope  of  glory.  (2)  The  knowledge 
that  glory  will  accrue  to  God.  5.  In  this  the  joy  was  mutual.  {R.  Johnstone,. 
LL.B.)  The  joy  of  the  Church  in  her  martyrs  and  confessors : — I.  In  their  faith- 
ful TESTIMONT  AND  NOBLE  TRIUMPH.  II.  In  THE  CONFIRMATION  OF  THE  FAITH  AN© 
ITS  CONSEQUENT  DIFFUSION.      III.  In  the  ENCOURAGEMENT  AFFORDED  BT  THEIB  EXAMPLE. 

{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Priest  and  sacrifice  : — In  the  first  place,  he  compares  himself  to 
a  priest,  and  sets  before  us  the  conversion  of  the  Philippians  to  the  faith  of  the 
gospel,  brought  about  by  his  preaching,  and  their  piety  as  its  consequence,  under 
the  image  of  ft  sacrifice.     He  speaks  in  the  same  way  in  Rom.  xv.  16.    In  this 


151  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

mystical  Bacrifice  the  apostle  was  the  high  priest ;  the  gospel  was,  as  it  were,  th« 
knife  with  which  he  spiritually  immolated  his  victims.  The  Philippians  converted 
to  Jesus  Christ  were  his  victims  ;  for  as  also  the  ancient  priests  consecrated  to  God 
the  victims  that  they  offered,  so  also  the  apostle,  and  all  the  faithful  preachers  ol 
the  gospel,  lead  and  offer  to  the  Lord  those  to  whom  they  preach  the  word  with 
©fleet.  Besides,  as  the  priests  of  old  put  their  victims  to  death,  so  now  do  the 
ministers  of  the  gospel  in  some  manner  immolate  men  who  receive  their  preaching, 
making  them  die  to  the  world  and  the  flesh,  drawing  out  of  their  hearts  vain  affec- 
tions and  lusts,  in  which  their  life  consisted.  And  as  for  the  ancient  victims,  they 
remained  purely  and  simply  dead,  without  receiving  from  the  hand  of  the  priest 
any  kind  of  life  instead  of  that  of  which  he  had  deprived  them.  But  it  is  not  so 
with  the  men  whom  the  ministers  of  the  Lord  immolate  with  the  sword  of  His 
gospel.  For  instead  of  this  miserable,  earthly,  and  carnal  life  which  they  take 
from  them,  they  clothe  them  with  another  that  is  holy  and  Divine,  changing  them 
by  this  mystical  sacrifice  from  children  of  Adam  into  children  of  God,  from  old  and 
perishing  creatures  into  new  and  heavenly  men.  Besides  this  difference,  there  is 
still  another.  For  whereas  those  poor  animals,  destitute  as  they  were  of  reason 
and  intellect,  suffered  death  simply,  without  any  act  on  their  part ;  now  the  victims 
of  Jesus  Christ  are  only  immolated  when  they  knovriugly  and  willingly  receive  the 
stroke  of  the  gospel.  Thus  you  see  that  the  apostle  here  expressly  mentions  the 
faith  of  the  Philippians,  as  it  was  through  that  they  had  been  offered  to  God. 
From  whence  again  a  third  difference  arises  between  these  two  kinds  of  victims. 
For  whereas  the  ancient  victims  remained  entirely  deprived  of  their  being,  without 
obtaining  any  new  one  ;  men  now  offered  to  God  by  the  gospel,  besides  being  made 
by  it  new  creatures,  become  also  themselves  priests,  to  offer  themselves  henceforth 
to  God,  by  a  true  faith,  presenting  their  bodies  to  him  in  sacrifice  (Bom.  xii.  1 ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  5),  And  this  is  the  reason  that  the  Scripture  honours  with  the  name  of 
sacrifices  all  those  actions  of  their  spiritual  life  which  they  practise  in  faith,  as: 
their  alms-giving,  their  repentance,  their  patience,  their  hymns,  their  prayers,  and 
Buch  like.  St.  Paul  comprehends  here  all  those  spiritual  oblations  under  the  name 
of  sacrifice  and  service  of  faith  of  the  Philippians.  (J.  Daille.)  The  joy  oj 
martyrdom : — The  Greeks  of  old  delighted  to  tell  how  Phidippides — fleetest  of  foot 
among  his  countrymen — having  borne  himself  gallantly  in  the  great  fight  at 
Marathon,  darted  from  the  field  immediately  after  vict:jry  was  secure,  ran  to 
Athens,  related  his  tidings  to  the  fathers  of  the  city,  closing  with  the  words, 
•*  Rejoice  ye,  as  we  rejoice,"  and  then,  utterly  exhausted  by  wounds  and  toil,  fell 
down  dead  before  them.  The  entire  sinking  of  the  thought  or  care  of  self  in  joy 
over  the  safety  and  glory  of  his  native  land  was  very  beautiful.  Yet  the  noblest 
feelings  which  arise  out  of  any  of  the  relations  of  man  to  what  is  earthly  and 
Tisible,  make  but  a  feeble  approach  to  the  grandeur  of  spirit  of  him  who  "  joys  "  to 
think  of  dying  a  cruel  death,  that  the  unseen  God,  the  God  whom  he  ^ows  by 
faith  only,  may  thereby  be  glorified.  Paul  believed  that  "  out  of  the  eater  would 
come  forth  meat ;  and  out  of  the  strong,  sweetness," — that  from  the  place  of  his 
martyrdom  there  would  exhale  a  rich  fragrance  of  Christ,  which  would  bring 
spiritual  joy  to  many  souls ; — and  therefore  he  would  gladly  *'  endure  all  things  for 
the  elect's  sake,  that  they  also  might  obtain  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus, 
with  eternal  glory."  (R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  The  kindled  torch : — Perhaps  one  of 
the  closest  parallels  with  the  apostle's  spirit  and  word  is  that  of  the  venerable 
Latimer,  as  at  the  stake  in  front  of  Balliol  College  at  Oxford  he  encouraged  hia 
younger  companion  in  tribulation,  Eidley  :  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  brother  1  We  shall 
this  day  kindle  such  a  torch  in  England  as  by  the  blessing  of  God  shall  never  "be 
extinguished."  {J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.)  William  Tyndale,  the  grandest  figure, 
perhaps,  take  him  all  in  all,  of  the  English  Reformation — a  man  of  Pauline 
strength  of  character  and  singleness  of  devotion  to  the  work  which  God  had  given 
him  to  do — suffered  martyrdom  in  circumstances  of  such  seclusion  that  we  know 
scarcely  anything  more  than  the  mere  fact.  But  no  information  of  his  demeanour 
in  the  dungeon  of  Vilvorde  could  possibly  either  tell  us  more  of  his  character,  or 
speak  more  weightily  for  Christ  to  any  one  who  has  ears  to  hear,  than  these  words, 
written  years  before,  in  his  preface  to  •*  The  Parable  of  the  Wicked  Mammon," — 
•*  Some  man  will  ask,  peradventure,  why  I  take  the  labour  to  make  this  work,  inas- 
much as  they  will  burn  it,  seeing  they  burned  the  gospel.  I  answer,  In  burning 
the  New  Testament  they  did  none  other  thing  than  that  Hooked  for;  no  more  shall 
they  do  il  they  bum  me  also,  if  it  be  God's  will  it  shall  so  be.  Nevertheless,  in 
translating  the  New  Testament  I  did  my  duty,  and  bo  do  I  now,  and  will  do  aa 


CHA».  n.)  PHILIPPIANS.  153 

much  more  as  God  hath  ordained  me  to  do."  {R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  Lnigi 
Pascali,  pastor  of  the  Waldenses  in  Calabria,  being  condemned  to  death  after  the 
horrors  of  a  long  captivity,  and  but  a  little  while  before  his  death  by  fire,  was 
visited  by  his  brother.  The  spectacle  he  presented  in  consequence  of  bis  saffer- 
ings  caused  his  brother  to  fall  powerless  when  he  attempted  to  embrace  him.  But 
as  the  visitor  has  himself  told  us,  the  martyr  exclaimed,  "  My  brother,  if  jou  are  a 
Christian,  why  do  you  allow  yourself  to  be  thus  cast  down  ?  Do  you  not  know  that 
not  a  single  hair  can  fall  from  our  heads  without  the  will  of  God  f  Trust  in  Jesua 
and  take  courage.  The  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  com- 
pared with  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  in  us."  "  These  are  the  feelings  of  my 
heart,"  wrote  the  martyr ;  "  My  faith  becomes  stronger  as  the  hour  approaches, 
when  I  am  to  be  offered  as  a  sweet-smelling  sacrifice  unto  Christ.  Yes,  my  joy  is 
so  live'y  that  I  can  fancy  I  see  my  fetters  broken,  and  I  would  be  ready  to  brave  a 
thousand  deaths,  were  that  necessary  for  the  cause  of  truth."  To  his  betrothed 
wife,  Camilla  Guarina,  whom  he  was  to  see  no  more,  he  wrote,  "  My  love  to  you 
increases  with  my  love  to  God.  The  more  I  have  suffered  the  more  progress  I  havg 
made  in  the  Christian  religion,  and  the  more  also  have  I  loved  you.  Console  your- 
eell  in  Jesus  Christ.     May  your  life  be  a  copy  of  His."     (M.  Bounet.) 

Vers.  19-30.  I  trust  In  the  Lord  Jesus  to  send  Tlmotheus  Bhortly. — Chriitian 
friendship — I.  Is  founded  in  the  faith  of  Christ.     II.  Concerns  itself  fob  thb 

STATE    of   others.       III.    Is    UNSELFISH.        IV.    Is   PROVED    BY   FAITHFUL    SERVICE.         V. 

Survives  difficulties.  VI.  Abounds  in  want,  sickness,  sorrow.  VII.  Foroetb 
its  sorrow  in  the  joy  of  others.  VIII.  Can  sacrifice  life  itsflf.  (./.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Christian  mutual  happiness  : — The  solicitude  of  the  apostle  was  evinced — 
I.  By  what  hb  hopes  to  do.  1.  To  send  Timothy.  (1)  That  he  may  carry  good 
news  to  them.  (2)  That  he  may  be  of  spiritual  profit  to  them.  (3)  That  he  may 
bring  back  tidings  from  them.  2.  To  visit  them  himself.  This  is  contingent  (1) 
upon  the  Lord's  will ;  (2)  upon  his  release  from  imprisonment.  II.  By  what  hi 
has  already  done  in  seudiug  Epaphroditus  to  them.  Paul  sent  them  their  own 
messenger.  1.  A  man  of  the  highest  woi  th.  2.  For  his  (Epaphroditus')  improve- 
ment :  he  had  been  sick,  and  greatly  longed  to  see  them.  3.  For  their  joy  at  his 
return  with  tidings  of  a  mission  successfully  accomplished  (and  as  the  bearer  of 
this  Epistle).  4.  For  his  (Paul's)  own  comfort  therein.  III.  And  by  what  he  hopes 
WILL  BE  their  CONDUCT  toward  Epaphroditus.  1.  To  receive  him  in  the  Lord  with 
all  gladness.  2.  To  hold  him  in  reputation,  i.e.,  honour  him.  3.  Because  his 
accomplished  mission  showed  him  to  be  worthy  of  all.  IV.  Five  reflections.  1. 
Well-wishers  are  to  be  determined  and  judged  by  their  ability  to  perform.  2.  We 
ought  to  think  of  the  comfort  of  others  as  well  as  of  our  own.  3.  Faithful 
ministers  are  worthy  of  esteem  and  honour,  and  especially  missionaries.  4.  A 
self-sacrificing  spirit  is  the  highest  and  loveliest  trait  of  character  that  man  can 
reach  and  possess.  5.  Epaphroditus,  through  the  loveliness  of  his  character  (he 
had  not  been  misnamed),  his  courage,  consistency,  zeal,  and  unselfishness,  in  six 
verses  of  an  epistle  (his  only  mention)  acquires  an  immortality  of  fame  that  a  Caesar 
might  covet.  Goodness  is  true  greatness,  and  exalts  its  possessor  to  the  st'trs.  (L. 
0.  Tlwmpson.)  Paul,  Timothy,  and  Epaphroditus  : — I.  Paul  is  the  chief  figure  in 
the  group.  1.  He  is  a  prisoner,  hoping  and  strongly  expecting  to  be  free,  but  not 
so  sure  whether  his  liberty  will  lead  him  out  again  on  eartii  or  usher  him  into 
heaven.  Still  his  hope  is  that  before  long  he  will  be  with  his  friends.  Meantime 
has  come  a  messenger  from  Philippi  with  help  and  messages  of  affection.  He 
desires  not  simply  to  send  an  acknowledgment — any  messenger  could  take  that — 
but  to  send  some  one  who  would  help  them  in  the  highest  sense.  2.  Here  in  Rome 
are  a  number  of  persons  who  in  general  capability  are  quite  equal  to  the  service, 
and  we  can  imagine  the  question  put  to  them  as  they  came  to  Saul's  lodging — "  Will 
you  go  to  Philippi  ?  It  is  of  great  consequence  that  evils  should  be  checked  and 
that  spiritual  knowledge  and  strength  should  be  increased.  Will  you  go  ?  "  "  No," 
says  one.  "  The  journey  is  hard  and  perilous,  and  success  uncertain."  "  No," 
says  another.  "  Not  that  I  have  any  fear,  but  I  prefer  Rome.  I  can  be  as  useful 
here  as  at  Philippi."  "  No,"  says  a  third.  "  I  prefer  home."  And  so  the  chain  is 
heavier  on  Paul's  wrist,  as  he  writes,  "  All  seek  their  own,"  <feo.  3.  This,  then,  is 
the  dark  group  we  have  to  look  at  first.  They  are  unnamed,  happily.  "The  term 
"  all,"  is  hmited  to  those  who  were  asked,  and  it  is  a  verdict  not  on  character  but 
in  relation  to  one  point  of  duty.  But  the  failure  was  a  great  one.  It  cannot  be  a 
light  thing  for  a  Christian  to  thus  shrink  from  duty,  and  to  fall  by  our  own  ohoiot 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

from  the  highest  and  best  service.  Each  of  ns  has  some  Philippi.  It  may  be 
some  ordinary  place  or  plain  service,  but  whatever  tests  purity  of  motive  and 
strength  of  principle  is  as  great  as  an  apostolic  mission.  The  essence  of  New 
Testament  teaching  is  life  in  Christ  and  for  men.  To  the  uttermost  He  saves ;  to 
the  uttermost  we  are  to  serve.  II.  Here  is  Timothy  ;  he  will  go.  There  is  no  man 
minded  like  him.  He  is  Paul's  other  self.  You  go  into  a  gallery  of  pictures,  and 
they  are  all  good  in  some  way ;  but  perhaps  out  of  many  hundreds  only  two  or 
tkree  approach  the  highest  mark.  So  every  Christian  has  the  light  of  God  on  him, 
but  how  few  shine  with  unwavering  lustre :  ready  for  every  call  of  duty.  Some 
lines  in  this  picture  are  worthy  of  note.  1.  Timothy  has  grown  into  this  perfect- 
ness  from  his  youth.  No  moral  excellence  is  achieved  suddenly.  If  you  want  to 
be  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  you  must  enter  the  service  early.  If  you  want  to 
be  fit  for  anything  to  which  God  may  call  you,  begin  at  once  and  work  your  way  up. 
When  you  are  ready  the  call  will  come.  2.  Au  other  line  is  obedience.  A  good 
many  years  have  passed  since  Paul  found  him  at  Derbe,  but  he  has  been  "  serving  " 
all  the  time.  No  doubt  before  now  he  has  been  master  to  many,  but  he  has  never 
ceased  to  be  a  servant.  Leave  it  to  others  to  command,  speculate,  dispute  in  the 
gospel,  or  even  to  rest  in  it  and  enjoy  it.  A  nobler  and  more  fruitful  use  is  to  serve 
in  it.  3.  Another  line  is  sonship.  This  relation  is  more  than  once  referred  to. 
"  I  have  no  man  who  will  naturally,"  i.e.,  as  a  birthright.  HI.  The  third  figure  is 
Epaphroditus,  pastor  of  the  Philippiau  Church,  bearer  of  a  precious  gift,  brother, 
companion,  fellow-soldier.  1.  He  gave  himself  to  the  work  in  Rome  with  such 
eagerness  that  his  health  was  undermined.  The  apostle  could  smite  a  sorcerer  and 
heal  the  father  of  Publius,  but  he  could  not  raise  up  a  dear  fellow-labourer. 
Miracle  power  was  for  public  uses,  not  private  satisfactions.  Those  who  preach  the 
cross  must  bear  it.  2.  At  length,  after  many  fears  and  prayers,  danger  passes 
away.  With  convalescence  came  home-sickness  and  a  desire  to  relieve  the  anxiety 
of  friends.  Conclusion :  We  have  been  in  good  company.  Imagination  may 
depict  the  scene  in  Paul's  chamber;  but  revelation  has  given  us  the  moral  portrai- 
ture. The  lessons  we  may  learn  in  such  society  are — 1.  The  importance  of  » 
sincere  and  thorough  self-denial  in  the  Christian  character.  2.  The  exceeding 
beauty  of  a  consecrated  life.  3.  The  use  and  value  of  suffering.  (A.Raleigh,  D.D.) 
The  mission  of  Timothy  exhibits — I.  The  missionaby  principle.  1.  Trust  in  Christ. 
2.  A  concern  for  the  condition  of  others.  U.  The  kind  of  agency  to  be  employed. 
1.  Earnest.  2.  Unselfish.  3.  Tried.  III.  The  coukse  op  action  to  be  pursued. 
1.  Prompt.  2.  Wise.  3.  Believing.  4.  Persevering.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christian 
intercourse.  L  Is  sanctified  by  faith.  II.  Sweetened  by  faith.  IH.  Replete 
WITH  comfort.  (Ibid. )  The  value  of  a  true  comforter : — Happy  is  the  man  who 
has  that  in  his  soul  which  acts  upon  the  dejected  as  April  airs  upon  violet  roots. 
Gifts  from  the  hand  are  silver  and  gold,  but  the  heart  gives  tliat  which  neither 
silver  nor  gold  can  buy.  To  be  full  of  goodness,  full  of  cheerfulness,  full  of  sym- 
pathy, full  of  helpful  hope,  causes  a  man  to  carry  blessings  of  wiiich  he  is  himself 
as  unconscious  as  a  lamp  is  of  its  own  shining.  Such  a  one  moves  on  human  life 
as  stars  move  on  dark  seas  to  bewildered  mariners  ;  as  the  sun  wheels,  bringing  all 
tbe  seasons  with  him  from  the  south.     (H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  20-21.  For  I  have  no  man  llkemlnded. — The  eare  of  a  good  pastor  for  hit 
people  : — I.  Every  good  minister  feels  a  tender  concern  for  the  good  of  hm 
people.  Every  good  minister  is — 1.  A  good  man ;  and  therefore  has  a  spirit  of 
benevolence.  2.  Has  experienced  a  saving  change,  and  is  therefore  anxious  for  the 
salvation  of  others.  3.  Has  grown  in  grace  himself,  and  is  consequently  desirous 
to  promote  the  spiritual  good  of  others.  II.  Why  this  is  true  op  every  good 
minister.  Because — 1.  He  realizes  that  God  has  committed  the  flock  into  hia 
hands,  and,  for  a  time,  suspended  their  present  and  future  good  upon  hia  care  and 
fidelity.  2.  Because  his  people  have  committed  themselves  to  his  pastoral  watch 
and  care.  3.  Because  he  freely  and  solemnly  engages  to  be  their  spiritual  guide 
and  watchman.  4.  Because  he  knows  that  his  interest  is  inseparably  connected 
with  theirs.  5.  Because  he  views  their  eternal  interests  as  inseparably  connected 
with  the  eternal  interests  of  Christ.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Missionary  agency : — 
I.  The  men  wanted.  Those  likeminded  with  the  apostle,  men  of  earnest,  spon- 
taneous, self-denying  zeal.  II.  The  scarcity  of  them.  1.  Manifest.  2.  Humili- 
ating. 3.  Admonitory.  III.  The  reason  op  it.  1.  Selfish  aims.  2.  Want  of 
love  to  Christ.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Concern  for  the  spiritual  tcnnts  of  men  : — L 
Thx  sitcation  of  mankind.     From  a  spiritual  point  of  view  this  is  Kuch  as  to 


<3HAP.  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  165 

Awaken  the  anaffeoted  concern  of  good  men.  II.  Thb  bakitt  or  thosb  who  oabb 
roB  THE  BPiEiTDAL  8TATB  OF  OTHERS.  1.  They  Were  rare  in  Paul's  time.  2.  They 
are  rare  now  in  proportion  to  the  number  who  require  their  efforts,  although  in  a 
less  degree  than  formerly.  III.  The  principaij  causes  of  this  unconcern.  1.  An 
inordinate  and  criminal  seU-love.  2.  The  prevalence  of  unbelief.  3.  Despondency. 
{E.  Payson,  D.D.)  Failures  : — In  this  and  like  passages  we  may  trace  signs  of 
one  of  the  apostle's  trials,  which  we  hardly  estimate  at  its  real  measure.  His 
forced  inactivity  opened  to  him  a  new  experience.  He  had  to  sit  still  and  see  what 
became  of  his  work,  with  the  sense  that  the  world  thought  him  a  defeated  man. 
Judged  by  our  rule  such  a  result  would  appear  to  be  failure  in  life ;  and  we  should 
expect  the  attendant  feelings  to  be  those  of  depression  and  disappointment.  We 
know  that  it  was  not  so  with  St.  Paul  ;  but  moods  of  feeling  come  and  go  even  in 
the  strongest,  and  we  may  see  signs  that  he  was  not  unmoved.  There  is  an  under- 
tone of  deep  sadness  in  this  Epistle,  full  as  it  is  of  firm  confidence  and  rejoicing. 
He  was  at  Rome.  What  had  become  of  his  great  Epistle?  Do  we  not  read  between 
the  lines  here  that  the  reality  was  not  all  he  had  hoped  for?  There  was  energy, 
zeal,  progress  ;  Christ  and  His  servant  were  spoken  of  in  the  household  of  Nero  : 
Rome  was  hearing  more  than  ever  of  the  name  of  Christ.  But  there  was  another 
side  to  this.  How  was  the  solemn  adjuration  of  Horn.  xii.  1  realized.  What  fruit 
had  come  from  his  lessons  of  forbearance  and  co-operation  ?  What  a  tale  does  it 
tell  when  there  in  the  midst  of  that  great  active  Church,  there  was  no  man  like- 
minded,  Ac.  To  a  faith  like  St.  Paul's  these  adverse  appearances,  though  they 
might  bring  for  him  as  they  passed  a  cry  of  distress,  wore  a  very  diffeient  aspect 
to  what  they  did  to  the  world.  They  were  but  parts  of  his  Master's  use  of  him, 
and  if  the  moment's  disloyalty  or  littleness  Btung  him,  the  next  moment  brought 
back  the  unfailing  joy.  I.  The  failure  of  life.  The  contrast  between  its  opening 
and  its  elosa  is  what  mankind  has  been  accustomed  to  see  from  the  beginning. 
Examples  of  it  are  familiar  to  us  now.  1.  In  their  coarser  forms  we  have  evidence 
of  them  in  the  old  cries  about  the  cheats  and  broken  promises  of  life,  in  the 
discontent  of  the  successful,  and  in  the  falls  from  goodness  to  evil.  2.  All  our 
lives  have  failure  in  them.  Every  action  is  an  instance  how  we  have  come  short. 
3.  We  see  the  failures  of  life  in  the  ordinary  incidents  of  our  experience  ;  when  the 
good  die  young ;  when  the  bright  promise  is  cut  short ;  when  men  miss  their  true 
calling  or  ignobly  shrink  from  it ;  where  a  life  of  noble  labour  is  wrecked  as  a  ship 
sinks  within  sight  of  port.  4.  But  the  failures  which  specially  touch  us  are  when 
a  man  has  aimed  higli,  and  has  shot  wide  of  his  mark  or  short  of  it;  when  care, 
love,  a&d  toil  have  been  lavished  on  an  idea  or  a  cause,  and  the  idea  will  not  stand 
the  test,  or  the  cause  d\vindles  into  rivalry  or  strife  ;  when  the  successful  statesman 
flees  his  policy  bringing  forth  fruit  which  he  did  not  plant  or  look  for;  when  the 
reformer  sees  his  work  taken  out  of  his  hand  by  disciples  of  meaner  and  narrower 
thoughts ;  still  worse  when  he  becomes  their  dupe  and  leaves  the  evils  of  the  world 
greater  than  when  he  assailed  them.  6.  So  it  has  been  with  those  heroic  institu- 
tions which  have  one  after  another  tried  some  great  effort  for  God's  glory.  The 
flock  of  Francis,  the  royal-hearted  bridegroom  of  the  forgotten  poverty  of  Christ 
sank  down  too  often  into  idle  mendicants;  the  flock  of  Dominic  became  the 
ministers  of  the  inquisition  ;  the  little  company  who  devoted  themselves  to  the 
service  of  Jesus  swelled  into  that  mighty  order  which  has  furnished  the  bravest  of 
missionaries,  but  also  the  most  daring  and  ambitious  of  political  intriguers.  6. 
What  right  have  we  to  wonder  when  the  greatest  of  God's  instruments.  His  Church, 
presents  in  its  reahty  such  a  contrast  to  its  ideal,  wLen,  in  spite  of  all  the  wonders 
it  has  done,  it  has  failed  to  do  all  that  was  expected  of  it.  But  what  is  it  but  the 
inevitable  incident  in  the  mingled  greatness  and  littleness  of  human  life.  II. 
Failure  means  humiliation  to  ourselves,  but  we  know  not  what  it  means  in  thb 
counsels  of  God.  There  is  something  wiser  even  than  the  world,  and  that  is  the 
counsel  of  Him  who  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness  Paul  in  prison  could 
not  refute  the  world's  accusation  of  failure  nor  convince  it  of  the  meaning  of  what 
he  had  done,  and  of  what  was  to  follow  it.  His  justification  belonged  to  God  hia 
Master,  and  God  kept  it  in  His  own  hands  for  this  world  and  the  next.  III.  How 
BHAiJi  WE  think  THEN  ABOUT  WHAT  WK  CALL  FAILURE.  1.  We  canuot  take  it  In  at  all 
adequately  without  being  led  to  think,  not  hopelessly,  scornfully,  or  indifferently, 
but  humbly  of  this  human  life  in  which  it  is  so  severe  a  part  of  our  discipline. 
And  these  lowly  thoughts  are  enforced  by  the  contrast  between  what  we  do  aa 
moral  agents,  and  what  we  achieve  within  the  range  where  simple  intelligence 
works,  in  mathematics,  physics,  mechanics,  Ac.      Within  that  range  men  ean 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

predict  without  mistake,  secure  perfection  in  their  skill,  and  move  from  on« 
stupendous  discovery  to  another  ;  but  all  is  changed  when  we  pass  into  that  other 
world  whose  ruling  powers  are  love,  duty,  pain,  and  death.  Compare  what  we 
achieve  in  mathematical  and  physical  science  with  our  success  in  the  problems  of 
government.  Does  not  this  read  the  Bible  lesson  of  lowly  thinking  in  the  rebuke 
which  it  gives  to  ambition  and  pride.  2.  Shall  we  then  sit  with  folded  hands,  idle 
and  hopeless  because  the  chances  of  failure  are  so  formidable,  and  like  the  servant 
in  the  parable  bury  our  talent.  There  can  be  no  failure  worse  than  that.  God  our 
Master  sends  us  forth  not  to  make  our  mark  but  to  work,  God  accomplishes  His 
purposes  in  many  ways ;  one  of  them  we  know,  by  the  highest  of  all  examples,  the 
way  that  seems  irretrievable  disaster.  The  followers  of  the  Cross  have  no  right  to 
look,  in  their  own  day,  for  the  recognition  of  success  ;  and,  besides,  we  are  bad 
judges  of  success  and  failure.  Only  in  after  years  does  the  work  draw  itself  up  to 
its  true  grandeur ;  only  then  do  we  lose  sight  of  partial  failures  and  see  it  at  last 
for  what  it  is.  3.  Don't  let  us  be  afraid,  in  a  good  cause,  of  the  chances  of  failurSc 
•'  Heaven  is  for  those  who  have  failed  on  earth,"  says  the  mocking  proverb  :  and 
since  Calvary  no  Christian  need  be  ashamed  to  accept  it.  But  even  here,  men 
have  that  within  them  which  recognizes  the  heroic  aspect  of  a  noble  failure.  Even 
here  it  is  better  to  have  failed  than  not  to  have  tried ;  to  make  the  mistakes 
of  the  good  than  never  to  have  struck  one  blow  for  Christ  because  so  many 
have  struck  to  little  purpose.  If  the  great  and  saintly  life  be  incomplete, 
at  least  there  is  the  great  and  saintly  life.  If  the  great  effort  has  waxed 
feeble,  at  least  there  has  been  a  new  beacon  of  warning.  The  world  would 
have  missed  its  highest  examples,  if  men  had  always  waited  till  they  could  make  a 
covenant  with  success.     (Dean  Church.)        The  experience  of  isolation: — I.  It  is 

A   COMMON   COMPLAINT   AMONGST   D8   THAT   WE   WANT   SYMPATHY.      1.   We  are  louely,  We 

say ;  and  if  not  actually  solitary,  are  solitary  in  heart.  The  young  are  too 
impatient,  too  imperious  in  their  demand  for  sympathy;  the  old  are  sometimes 
too  tolerant,  at  least  too  fond,  of  isolation.  2.  There  is  much  that  is  fanciful  and 
morbid  in  the  complaint  of  the  young  that  they  have  no  one  likeminded.  Why 
cannot  that  sister  make  one  of  her  own  household  the  sharer  of  her  troubles  and 
joys  ?  No,  that  is  too  tame  and  commonplace  a  friendship :  nothing  but  that  which 
is  self-made  and  self-sought  has  any  charms  for  one  who  is  as  yet  trying  new 
sources  of  happicess  instead  of  drinking  thankfully  of  those  which  God  has  opened. 
II.  St.  Paul  gives  no  encouragement  to  this  dngratefdl  pdrsoit.  1.  True,  he 
was  a  man  to  whom  life  without  love  would  have  been  a  daily  torture  and  death. 
Nor  was  his  a  promiscuous  love  only.  Within  the  universal  brotherhood  he  had 
his  special  preferences  and  close  attachments.  2.  But  his  thirst  for  human  love 
was  not  the  sentimental,  purposeless  thing  it  is  with  many.  His  best  affections 
were  engaged  and  fixed  unalterably.  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ."  What  he  sought 
in  human  friendship  was  not  a  supreme,  nor  even  subordinate  object  of  affection. 
He  sought  sympathy  in  his  work  for  Christ :  the  loneliness  he  bewailed  was  a 
loneliness  in  his  care  for  Christ's  people.  How  this  says  to  us.  Away  with  your 
little,  selfish,  earth-born  murmurings  1  So  long  as  your  troubles  are  all  selfish  they 
cannot  be  borne  too  lonelily.  3.  And  if  sympathy  like  this  be  denied  you,  learn 
like  Paul  to  be  content  (chap.  iv.  11  •  Rom.  viii.  31,  &c.).  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
Care  for  souls  : — Some  preachers  think  only  of  their  sermon  ;  others  think  only  of 
themselves :  the  man  who  wins  the  soul  is  the  man  who  aims  at  it.  {Dean  Hook.) 
Natural  care  for  others: — The  following  account  of  a  piece  of  heroism  on  the  part 
of  a  young  Englishwoman,  by  which  she  lost  her  Ufe,  has  just  reached  us  from  the 
Ca|ie.  On  September  2.S  last,  Miss  Burton,  a  governess  in  the  family  of  Mr.  Saul 
Solomon,  resident  at  Capetown,  was  out  with  her  little  pupils,  when  the  youngest, 
a  girl  of  five,  fell  into  a  reservoir  of  water.  Miss  Burton  endeavoured  vainly  to 
rescue  her  little  charge  by  means  of  her  parasol,  and  then  jumped  in  after  her.  The 
elder  children  ran  home  to  raise  the  alarm,  but  when  help  was  obtained  both  the 
governeBS  and  child  had  disappeared,  and  it  was  necessary  to  use  drags  for  the 
bodies.  Great  sympathy  was  expressed  throughout  the  town  for  the  bereaved 
parents,  and  also  much  admiration  for  the  brave  girl  who  lost  her  life  in  attempting 
to  save  that  of  the  child  entrusted  to  her. 

Ver.  21.  For  all  seek  their  ovni. — Self-set-king  .-—h  Its  signs.      II.  Its  causes. 
in.  Its  EVILS.     IV.  Its  cure.     (J.  Lyih,  D.D.)  The  evil  of  self-seeking  : — I. 

Things  op  a  different  sort  spoken  of.  1.  Their  own  thinj^s — the  things  of  this 
life  ;  BO  called — (1)  Because  they  belonged  to  them  by  providential  disposal  and 


CHAT    n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  167 

civil  right.  (2)  Some  might  call  them  so  by  a  new  covenant  tenure  so  far  as  they 
used  them  to  just  and  laudable  purposes,  (3)  'Twas  well  if  others  did  not  make 
them  their  own  in  a  criminal  sense,  using  them  only  for  themselves,  for  self-indul- 
gence. 2,  The  things  of  Jesus  Christ:  things  of  His  kingdom.  (1)  The  things  of 
His  glory,  of  which  He  is  thi  object.  (2)  The  things  of  our  salvation,  of  which 
He  is  the  author.  11.  A  sinful  disposition  with  reoabd  to  tuesb  things. 
"Seek"'  indicates  the  temper  of  the  soul  in  contrivances  and  desires,  and  the 
actings  of  the  life  in  its  endeavours.  1.  Some  sought  their  own  things,  and  not  at 
all  the  things  of  Christ.  2.  Others  sought  their  own  more  than  His.  IIL  The 
BOBJKCT  OF  this  DISPOSITION.  "All"  has  Special  but  not  exclusive  reference  to 
ministers  :  for  carnality  in  ministers  usually  spreads  its  contagion  among  the 
people ;  and  the  apostle  afterwards  speaks  of  both  ministers  and  people  as  deeply 
infected  with  it  when  at  the  first  summons  of  his  second  imprisonment  they 
were  bo  fearful  of  their  secular  interests  that  none  dared  publicly  to  own 
him  (2  Tim.  iv.    16).     (J.  Guyse,  D.D.)         Seeking  our  own  things: — I.  When 

MAT    WE    BE    SAID    TO    SEEK    OUR    OWN    THINGS   AND    NOT    THOSE    OF   ChRIST.       1.    WhcU 

we  seek  them  in  opposition  or  disservice  to  the  things  of  Christ  (John  xi. 
47-63  ;  Acts  xix.  27-29).  (1)  This  spirit  has  acted  under  the  Christian  name ; 
it  still  works  in  the  Papal  tyranny,  and  in  those  Protestants  whose  persecuting 
spirit  substitutes  a  kingdom  of  this  world  in  the  room  of  Christ's.  (2)  Where- 
ever  this  spirit  prevails  it  eats  out  the  power  of  godliness  or  suppresses  it  in 
others  (Luke  xxii.  24-26).  2.  When  we  seek  our  own  to  the  neglect  of  Christ's 
(Acts  xviii.  17;  Matt.  xxii.  5;  John  v.  44).  3.  When  we  seek  our  own  more  than 
Christ's  (Matt.  xiii.  20-22).  Some  seek  them  only  in  such  ways  and  at  such  times 
as  will  cost  them  little  expense  or  trouble.  4.  When  we  seek  our  own  so  as  to 
hinder  our  seeking  Christ's.  (1)  We  sometimes  seek  our  own  with  such  eagerness 
of  spirit  as  puts  us  out  of  tune  for  spiritual  things,  and  when  we  have  been  em- 
ployed in  spiritual  work,  a  too  hasty  return  to  the  world,  and  a  too  eager  application 
to  the  things  of  it  defaces  promising  impro'ssions  (Matt.  xiii.  22).  (2)  At  other 
times  we  are  unreasonably  employed  in  our  own  things  where  we  ought  to  be 
engaged  in  the  worship  of  God  (Luke  x.  40-42).  5.  When  there  is  too  much  of 
self  secretly  twisting  itself  into  what  we  do  for  Christ  (Zech.  vii.  5-6;  Philip,  i.  15-16). 
(1)  Some  seek  the  things  of  Christ  onlv  for  their  own  wordly  interests,  from  secular 
views,  to  make  a  livelihood  or  to  conciliate  favour  (Exek.  xxxiii.  31).  (2)  Others 
seek  their  own  honour,  and  the  gratification  of  their  own  pride,  to  recommend  their 
learning,  piety,  or  zeal  (2  Kings  x.  16  ;  Matt,  xxiii.  5-7).  (3)  The  like  sin  we  are 
guilty  of  when  we  are  zealous  for  notions  of  our  own,  because  they  are  our  own  and 
exalt  our  reason,  or  because  they  suit  the  general  taste  (Gal.  i.  9-10 ;  vi.  12-14). 
(4)  When  we  set  up  our  own  righteousness  instead  of  Christ's  to  recommend  us  to 
God's  acceptance  (Rom.  ix.  30-32),  or  lean  on  our  own  strength  and  not  on  Christ's 
for  spiritual  performances  (1  Cor.  i.  29-31 ;  Isa.  xlv.  24-25).  (5)  Others  seek  an 
indulgence  in  their  own  passions  and  pleasures,  seeking  the  things  of  Christ  as  a 
cloak  for  them,  or  as  a  salve  to  conscience.  6.  ^Vhen  we  put  no  respect  to  Christ 
on  our  own  things  (Col.  iii.  23-24).  (1)  All  our  abilities  should  have  a  reference  to 
Him  that  He  may  be  glorided  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  (2)  We  should  seek  His  love  and 
favour  that  we  may  taste  them  with  a  sweeter  relish  as  the  purchase  of  His  blood 
and  branches  of  new  covenant  mercies.  II.  The  great  evil  of  this.  1.  Consider 
the  excellence  of  Christ's  things  above  all  our  own.  (1)  They  have  a  substantial 
worth  and  real  goodness  in  them  as  derived  from  His  glorious  Person  (Heb.  i.  3 ; 
2  Cor.  iii.  18).  (2)  There  is  all-comprehensive  goodness  to  fill  up  our  vastest 
capacities  with  complete  satisfaction  (Prov.  viii.  20-21),  and  to  ennoble  them.  (3) 
What  are  our  own  in  comparison?  They  are  empty,  perishing,  some  debasing,  will 
not  profit  in  the  day  of  wrath.  (4)  What  folly  then  to  prefer  broken  cisterns 
(Jer.  ii.  13).  2.  Consider  how  unsuitable  this  is  to  our  character  as  Christians. 
(1)  We  are  disciples  of  Christ,  and  profess  to  make  of  Him  our  all.  (2)  We  are 
strangers  and  i)ilgrims,  and  profess  to  have  our  portion  above.  3.  Consider  the 
abundant  care  and  grace  with  which  Christ  has  sought  our  things — our  everlasting 
peace  and  salvation  (2  Cor.  viii.  9  ;  Phil.  ii.  6-8,  iv.  5 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14-15 ;  1  John 
iv.  19).  4.  Consider  the  danger  of  seeking  our  own  in  preference  to  Christ's.  (1) 
The  more  distance  there  will  be  between  Christ  and  us.  (2)  The  more  open  we 
shall  be  to  temptation.  (3)  The  less  fitness  we  shall  have  for  heaven.  (4)  The 
more  sure  will  be  our  rejection  by  God  and  the  loss  of  the  soul  (Matt.  xvi.  26). 

ilbid.)         Giant  "  Self "  : — (Text  in  conjunction  with  1  Cor.  liii.  5;  PhiL  ii.  4). 
.  A  COMMON  BUT  SEBiouB  TkviiT.     In  ons  sense  it  is  right  to  seek  our  own.     To  get 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  a, 

on  with  your  learning,  to  prosper  in  your  business,  &c.,  is  right  and  dutiful :  bat 
when  you  are  wholly  taken  up  with  self,  that  is  seeking  your  own  in  a  bad  sense. 
Selfishness  appears  in — 1.  Seeking  our  own  pleasure  and  comfort  to  the  neglect  of 
that  of  others.  Yon  see  it  in  taking  the  best  seats,  and  trying  to  get  the  daintiest 
morsels  at  meal  times ;  in  the  endeavour  to  get  the  best  of  everything  for  ourselves, 
and  to  leave  what  is  inferior  for  others ;  in  trying  to  secure  a  whole  railway  carriage 
to  oneself,  not  caring  how  crowded  the  others  may  be.  There  is  something  of  the 
kind  in  churches  :  and  in  families  where  children  disregard  each  other  or  their 
parents,  and  grudging  to  others  what  we  do  not  get  ourselves.  2.  Seeking  our  own 
honour  and  credit.  What  a  danger  there  is  of  wishing  ill  to  one's  rival  in  school, 
play,  or  business,  so  that  we  may  reap  the  advantage.  Under  this  head  may  be 
included  the  tendency  to  allow  others  to  fall  under  suspicion  where  we  were  the 
wrong-doers.  3.  Seeking  to  overbear  others  with  our  opinion.  Most  of  us  like  to 
get  our  own  way  and  carry  our  point.  Even  when  convinced  many  will  not  give  in. 
4.  Seeking  to  gratify  our  own  temper  irrespective  of  the  pain  it  may  give  others. 
In  holding  out  sulkily,  or  saying  cutting  things.  5.  Seeking  our  own  salvation  all 
unconcerned  about  the  salvation  of  others.  How  unlike  the  sailor  saved  from  the 
wreck,  whose  first  word  when  he  returned  to  consciousness  was,  "  Another  man  over- 
board !  "  as  if  that  were  uppermost  with  him,  so  that  there  might  be  two  salvations 
to  him.  II.  A  BARE  BUT  BEAUTIFUL  GRACE.  Love  Seeking  not  her  own  :  beautiful, 
for  it  is  being  like  Jesus  ;  it  is  an  element  of  heaven,  but  rare.  It  is  the  opposite 
of  what  has  been  described.  Jesus  pleased  not  Himself ;  nor  did  Abraham  in  his 
dispute  with  Lot.  III.  A  VALUABiiE  counsel.  •'  Look  not  on  his  own  things,"  &c. 
1.  In  small  matters.  It  is  comparatively  easy  to  be  heroic  on  great  occasions.  2. 
To  the  widest  extent.  (J.H.  Wilson,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  unselfishness : — If  a  vessel 
were  on  the  eve  of  going  down,  what  would  you  think  if  a  few  men  were  to  get  the 
boats  launched,  and  before  they  were  half  filled,  were  to  cut  the  ropes  that  bound 
them  to  the  ship,  and  pull  off  ?  What  would  you  think  of  such,  congratulating 
themselves  on  their  own  escape,  while  leaving  hundreds  on  board  who  were  not 
aware  of  their  danger,  some  of  them,  perhaps,  sound  asleep  ?  I  have  heard  of  a 
man  who  had  set  fire  to  a  mill,  finding  he  had  cut  off  his  own  retreat,  and  appearing 
at  a  window  several  stories  up,  appealing  for  help.  The  ladder  was  raised  in  the 
hope  of  saving  him,  but  the  danger  was  extreme,  and  neither  fireman  nor  policeman 
would  venture.  A  boy  was  seen  forcing  his  way  to  the  foot  of  the  ladder,  saying, 
"Let  me  go  !  I'm  his  son,  and  he  is  my  father."  And  when  the  fireman  would 
have  pushed  him  back,  the  boy  earnestly  repeated,  "  He  is  my  father,  I  tell  thee, 
and  he  does  not  love  God  1  "  and  the  next  minute  saw  him  climbing  aloft,  making 
every  effort  to  save  his  father,  and  perishing  in  the  attempt.  (Ibid.)  The  beauty 
of  unselfishness  : — A  young  woman  was  dying  in  a  lodging  in  London,  of  a  loath- 
some disease.  Who  was  her  attendant,  tenderly  nursing  her  day  and  night  ?  Yoa 
might  have  taken  her  for  a  sister.  And  yet  the  two  had  only  been  fellow-servanta 
in  the  same  house,  and  when  the  one  fell  ill  and  had  to  go  into  lodgings,  the  other 
gave  up  her  situation  to  go  to  nurse  her  friend,  spending  her  own  strength  and  all 
her  hard-earned  savings  in  supporting  her  fellow-servant,  and  never  leaving  her  till 
she  died.  A  friend  in  Australia  has  sent  me  the  following  touching  narrative : — 
"  Some  days  since,  a  little  girl,  called  Jane  Buchanan,  was  carrying  ber  brother,  a 
child,  in  her  arms,  through  the  holes  not  far  from  Golden  Point,  on  the  White  Flat, 
when  the  httle  fellow,  from  joyousness  or  some  other  cause,  made  a  sudden  spring 
from  his  sister's  arms,  and  plumped  into  an  abandoned  shaft  about  ten  feet  deep. 
Without  a  moment's  deliberation,  our  little  heroine  jumped  in  to  save  the  life  of  her 
brother,  and,  what  is  equally  gratifying,  succeeded.  A  man  who  witnessed  the 
accident  hurried  ts  the  spot,  found  the  girl  up  to  her  neck  in  water  and  holding 
the  boy  above  her  head,  and  was  hailed  with  the  girl's  imploring  entreaty — *  Here, 
you  save  my  little  brother,  and  don't  mind  me.'  Both  were  drawn  up  without 
delay,  and  both  were  uninjured  save  from  the  cold  bath  and  wet  clothes."  (Ibid.) 
Disinterested  service  : — San  Quala,  the  native  apostle  of  Central  Burmah,  was,  in 
consequence  of  his  abilities  and  influences,  offered  a  lucrative  appointment  by  the 
British  Commissioner  at  Pegu.  Without  hesitation  he  declined  the  offer,  though 
having  no  salary,  and  depending  for  food  and  clothing  on  the  people  to  whom  he 
preached.  He  replied,  "  I  cannot  do  it.  I  will  not  have  the  money.  I  will  not 
mix  up  God's  work  with  Government  work.  There  are  others  to  do  this  thing ; 
employ  them."  And  being  further  pressed  with  the  suggestion  that  he  might  con- 
tinue his  work  as  missionary,  which  would  thus  be  renuered  easier,  he  said,  "  No, 
sir.     When  I  eat  with  the  children  of  poverty  I  am  content.     I  did  not  leave  my 


CHAP,  n.]  PHILIPPIANS.  16f 

deajr  wife  and  oome  ap  hither  in  Bsarch  of  silver  or  agreeable  food.  I  came  to 
this  land  that  its  poor  benighted  inhabitants  might  be  saved."  In  two  and  a  hall 
years  this  man  had  gathered  thirty  churches  and  baptized  more  than  two  thousand 
adult  believers  with  his  own  hands.  (J.  B.  J.  Tinling,  B.A.)  Disinterestedness  : — 
In  return  for  his  splendid  services  to  China,  Gordon  would  accept  only  the  distinc- 
tions of  the  "Yellow  Jacket  "  and  the  *'  Peacock's  Feather,"  which  correspond  to  our 
own  orders  of  the  Garter  and  the  Bath,  Of  these  rewards  he  wrote  to  his  mother:  "I 
do  not  care  twopence  about  these  things,  but  know  that  you  and  father  like  them." 
The  Chinese  Government  twice  offered  him  a  fortune.  On  the  first  occasion  lO.OuO 
taels  were  actually  brought  into  his  room,  but  he  drove  out  the  bearers  of  the  trea- 
sure and  would  not  even  look  at  it.  On  the  second  occasion  the  sum  was  still 
larger,  but  this  also  he  declined,  and  afterwards  he  wrote  home  : — "  I  do  not  want 
anything,  either  money  or  honours,  from  either  the  Chinese  Government  or  our 
own.  As  for  the  honours,  I  do  not  value  them  at  all.  I  know  that  I  am  doing  a 
great  deal  of  good,  and,  liking  my  profession,  do  not  mind  going  on  with  my  work. 
Do  not  1  hink  I  am  ill-tempered,  but  I  do  not  care  one  jot  about  my  promotion,  or 
what  people  may  say.  I  know  I  shall  leave  China  as  poor  as  I  entered  it,  but  with 
the  knowledge  that  through  my  weak  instrumentality  upwards  of  eighty  to  one 
hundred  thousand  lives  have  been  spared."  Selfishness  common: — When  they 

(the  Athenians,  after  a  battle  with  Xerxes)  came  to  the  Isthmus,  and  every  officer 
took  a  bullet  from  the  altar  to  inscribe  upon  it  the  names  of  those  who  had  done 
the  best  service,  every  one  put  himself  in  the  first  place,  and  Themistocles  in  the 
second.  (Plutarch.)  Beauty  of  uiuelfishness  : — Airs.  Appleton,  of  Boston,  the 
daughter  of  Daniel  Webster,  was  dying,  after  a  long  illness.  The  great  lawyer, 
after  plea.ding  an  important  cause  in  the  court-room,  on  his  way  home  stopped  at 
the  house  of  his  daughter  and  went  into  her  sick-room.  She  said  to  him,  "  Father, 
why  are  you  out  to-day  in  this  cold  weather  without  an  overcoat  ?  "  The  great 
lawyer  went  into  the  next  room,  and  svas  in  a  flood  of  tears,  saying,  •'  Dying  herself, 
yet  thinking  only  of  me."  Oh  1  how  much  more  beautiful  is  care  for  others  than 
this  everlasting  taking  care  of  ourselves  1     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Ver.  22.  But  ye  know  the  proof  of  him. — Timothy  : — I.  His  filial  attachment 
10  Paul.  II.  His  co-opebaiion  in  the  service  ov  the  gospel.  III.  His  tried 
AND    faithful    CHARACTER.       (J.    Lyth,    D.D.)  Pfoof   of   character: — I.    Is 

REQUIRED — 1.  In  every  station.  2.  Particularly  in  a  minister.  II.  Is  given — 1. 
By  faithful  service.  2.  Willing  aud  childlike  submission  to  superiors.  III. 
Brings  honour.  1.  It  commands  observation.  2.  Wins  confidence.  3.  Ensures 
success.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  As  a  son  with  the  father. — A  lesson — I.  To  younger 
MINISTERS  to  honour  and  reverence  their  ancients,  and  have  them  for  an  example. 
II.  To  YOUTHS  to  have  proper  regard  to  their  elders  (1  Tim.  v.  1-2;  Levit.  xix. 
32).  III.  To  CHCLDREN  to  obey  thtir  parents.  IV.  To  spiritual  children  in 
regard  to  those  who  have  begotten  them  in  the  faith  of  Christ  Jesus  (Philemon  10  ; 
1  Cor.  iv.  15  ;  Gal.  iv.  19).     {H.  Airay,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23-24.  Him,  therefore,  I  hope  to  send. — Th€  servant  of  God  in  affliction  : — 
I.  Cares  for  the  Church.      II.    Waits  patiently  the  end.     III.  Commits  the 

FUTURE    into   THE    HANDS    OF   THE   LORD.       IV.    ANTICIPATES    DELIVERANCE    IN    HOPE  OF 

FURTHER  SERVICE.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  So  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it  will  go  with 
me. — A^cw  year's  aerinon: — The  first  day  of  the  new  year  is  often  a  season  of — 
1.  Peculiar  transactions :  balancing  of  accounts  and  commencing  business.  2. 
Humanity  and  beaevolence,  family  gatherings,  gifts  to  the  poor.  3.  Thankfulness 
and  joy  for  pre-ervation  of  life,  &a.  4.  Seriousness  and  recollection.  5.  Fore 
cast.  Let  us  confiue  ourselves  to  the  latter  view,  and  consider— I.  Our  inability 
TO  determine  our  FUTURE  CIRCUMSTANCES.  The  endowments  of  the  apostles  were 
not  absolute.  In  some  cases  Paul  could  foretell  things  to  come,  but  in  others  he 
was  left  in  ignorance,  and  could  only  reason  from  probabilities  (Acts  xx.  22).  And 
when  we  look  into  futurity,  all  that  meets  the  eye  is  a  dark  unknown.  1.  Even 
prophecy  is  wrapped  up  in  so  much  obscurity  that  the  fulfilment  and  the  explana- 
tion generally  arrive  together.  How  often  has  this  been  exemplified  in  the  calcu- 
lations of  not  very  wise  men,  who,  in  addition  to  being  drawn  off  from  more  useful 
duties,  have  frequently  survived  their  laborious  schemes.  2.  Your  own  history 
testifies  that  God  has  led  you  by  a  way  which  you  knew  not,  and  you  hardly  know 
it  now.  Had  all  your  changes  been  foretold,  they  would  have  appeared  incredible? 
fti  Nor  have  you  any  information  that  can  enable  you  to  foresee  things  for  a  sin^* 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  H 

year — how  it  will  go  with  your  health,  circumstances,  relations.  II.  What  use  wh 
BuoniiD  MAKE  OF  THIS  IGNORANCE.  Let  US — 1.  Leam  our  littleness,  and  that  God 
is  all  in  all.  "Trust  in  the  Lord  with  all  thy  heart."  2.  Beware  of  presumption. 
The  future  is  God's,  not  thine.  Never  say  "  I  will"  without  '*  If  the  Lord  will." 
3.  Never  despair.  Seeing  we  know  not  how  it  will  go  with  us,  why  should  we  look 
only  for  evil  ?  4.  Draw  off  our  attention  from  future  events  to  present  duties.  We 
are  to  cast,  not  our  work,  but  our  care,  upon  the  Lord.  Duty  and  means  belong 
to  us,  but  events  are  entirely  His.  5.  Seek  after  a  preparation  for  all  events.  We 
shall  find  this  in  Divine  grace.  This  drew  prayer  from  Jacob  when  he  went  forth 
with  a  staff ;  this  preserved  Daniel  in  the  court  of  Darius  and  in  the  lion's  den ; 
this  enabled  Paul  to  say,  "I  can  do  all  things,"  <&c.  And  seeing  that  we  have 
neither  the  ordering  of  the  weather,  nor  the  choice  of  food,  happy  is  the  man  whose 
constitution  enables  him  to  bear  any  weather,  and  whose  appetite  enables  him  to 
relish  any  food.  III.  What  thebe  is  to  encoceaoe  us  under  all  this  darkness 
AND  UNCEKTAESTT.  You  Say,  "  I  866  not  how  it  wiU  go  with  me,"  and — 1.  It  is 
well  you  do  not.  You  know  as  much  as  is  good  for  you.  It  is  with  the  mind  as 
with  the  senses.  A  greater  degree  of  hearing  would  incommode  us.  If  our  eyes 
could  see  things  microscopically  we  should  be  afraid  to  move.  Were  we  informed 
of  the  blessings  of  providence  beforehand,  we  should  cease  to  enjoy  those  we 
have  ;  or  of  adversities,  what  dismay  would  ensue.  2.  God  does  ;  and  He  is  your 
friend,  and  far  more  concerned  for  your  happiness  than  you  can  be.  3.  You 
know  that  it  shall  be  well  with  them  that  fear  God.  4.  Your  ignorance  only 
regards  time;  all  in  eternity  is  sure.  (TF.  Jay.)  Tlie  Providence  of  God: — We 
should — I.  Express  future  purposes  with  a  resignation  to  Gon's  will  and 
GUIDANCE  (Psa.  ixi.  1).  II.  OBSERVE  THAT  God's  PROVIDENCE  exteuds  to  every 
particular  thing — our  incomings,  outgoings,  journeys,  the  very  hairs  of  our  head. 
This  should  teach  us — 1.  To  set  on  our  affairs  with  looking  up  to  heaven  for  per- 
mission (James  iv.  13).  Let  us  in  all  our  affairs  be  holy,  and  not  limit  our  holiness 
to  coming  to  church.  2.  That  we  ought  not  to  set  on  anything  wherein  we  cannot 
expect  God's  guidance,  and  so  consequently  cannot  trust  in  Him  for  a  blessing, 
a.  To  take  nothing  but  that  for  which  we  can  give  God  thanks.  {R.  Sibbes,  D.D.) 
Trust  in  the  Lord  : — I.  Implies — 1.  Keliance  on  His  providential  care.  2.  Because 
of  His  mercy  and  love.  II.  Is  necessary  under  all  circumstances.  1.  In  joy 
and  sorrow.  2.  In  all  our  plans  and  purposes.  3.  In  small  matters  as  in  great. 
III.  Is  A  SOURCE  OF  UNSPEAKABLE  COMFORT.  1.  It  biings  pcace,  2.  It  assures 
that  all  will  be  well.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Trust  in  God  .-—The  child  at  school  is 
not  to  lean  his  elbow  on  the  table,  and  vex  himself  by  thinking  how  he  shall  find 
raiment,  how  he  shall  get  home,  how  the  expense  of  his  education  is  to  be 
defrayed.  He  is  a  learner  ;  he  is  to  mind  his  book — the  father  requires  no  more 
of  him — he  will  provide.  The  farmer  is  not  to  muse  from  day  to  day  about  the 
weather:  "Perhaps  it  may  not  be  a  tine  season — there  may  be  a  blight — and  all 
my  labour  may  be  lost."  No :  but  he  is  to  act ;  he  goes  forth  bearing  precious 
seed,  commits  it  to  the  ground,  and  then  pursues  his  other  business — and  what  can 
his  anxiety  do  afterwards  ?  The  soldier  is  to  learn  his  exercise,  to  obey  the  word 
of  command,  to  keep  his  arms  bright,  to  be  always  at  the  post  assigned  him ;  bat 
he  is  not  to  neglect  all  this,  by  busying  himself  in  drawing  plans  of  the  campaign, 
and  describing  the  duties  of  the  geneial.    (W,  Jay.) 

Ter.  25-80.  I  mpposed  It  necessary  to  send  to  yon  Epaphrodltos. — Epaphro' 
ditus: — I.  His  titles.  1.  The  first  of  these  shows  his  religion,  and  his  holy 
union  with  the  apostle  and  other  believers.  For  the  Christians  in  those  early  agea 
called  each  other  "  brother,"  a  name  full  of  sweetness  and  friendUness  derived 
from  the  custom  of  the  Jewish  Church,  and  suitable,  inasmuch  as  they  all  have  one 
Father,  and  are  all  begotten  by  one  Spirit,  uniting  them  in  one  family.  They  are 
nourished  by  the  same  food,  consecrated  by  the  same  sacraments,  and  called  to  the 
same  inheritance.  Every  time  you  see  a  Christian,  whatever  his  condition,  he  is 
your  brother.  Paul  did  not  disdain  to  acknowledge  Epaphroditus.  2.  "  Com- 
panion in  labour"  relates  to  office,  viz.,  the  ministry ;  and  how  excellent  the  office 
which  renders  men  companions  of  Paul  and  the  apostles.  8.  "  Fellow  soldier " 
expresses  the  part  he  had  taken  in  his  battles  against  the  devil,  the  world,  false 
brethren,  &o.,  for  the  glory  of  his  Master  and  the  salvation  of  the  flock.  This  titl« 
is  peculiarly  suitable  to  believers  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  are  called  to  suffer  perse- 
cution, carry  the  cross,  and  "  vrrestle  not  with  flesh  and  blood,"  &c.  (2  Tiro.  ii. 
ft-6).    i.  '*  Your  messenger,"  in  relation  to  his  special  mission  to  the  apostle,    &. 


OKiP.  II.]  PHILIPIIANS.  161 

"  My  miuistor,"  in  reference  to  the  service  rendered  St.  Paul :  not  the  least  of  the 
glories  of  Epaphroditus.  II.  His  sickness.  How  strange  it  seems  that  so  good 
and  u.'^eful  a  man  should  be  disabled,  and  that  Paul,  who  could  cure  diseases,  could 
not  cure  his  I  Learn,  however— 1,  That  the  Lord  wishes  that  His  servants  should 
be  subject  to  these  afflictions  and  infirmities  lest  the  excellence  of  their  piety  and 
graces  should  raise  their  vanity.  Thus  they  are  kept  modest  (2  Cor.  xii.  6).  2. 
That  the  wonders  of  His  power  may  shine  gloriously  when,  with  such  weak  instru- 
ments, He  does  not  fail  to  perform  His  work  (2  Cor.  iv.  7 ;  xii.  9 ;  2  Pet.  i.  7 ;  2 
ThssB.  v.  6-7).  III.  His  cure.  1.  God  often  allows  His  own  to  descend  to  the 
last  degree  of  sorrow  to  relieve  them  afterwards  from  it  with  greater  eclat :  as  we 
see  in  the  cases  of  Hezekiah  and  David.  This  proceeding  is  very  suitable.  (1)  For 
p*"  that  our  faith  may  be  better  exercised,  the  extremity  of  our  danger  firing  our 
neai  and  warming  our  desires  in  vows  and  prayers.  (2)  For  God ;  the  greater  our 
uanger  the  more  glorious  His  power.  2.  This  was  not  merely  an  exercise  of  God's 
power,  but  of  (1)  His  mercy  towards  Epaphroditus.  (2)  His  goodness  towards 
Paul.  Christianity  does  not  dehumanize  us.  Paul's  sorrow  was  deep  because 
natural.  IV.  His  return.  This  good  servant  of  God,  knowing  that  the  news  of 
his  malady  had  much  grieved  his  friends,  touched  with  reciprocal  love,  desired, 
as  soon  as  he  was  in  health,  to  see  them  again  that  he  might  change  their  sorrow 
into  joy.  Which  shall  we  most  admire,  the  affection  of  the  flock  towards  the 
shepherd  or  that  of  the  shepherd  towards  the  flock.  It  is  one  of  the  miracles  of 
love  which  unites  and  blends  what  distance  in  vain  separates.  V.  His  beooh- 
MENDATioN  (ver.  29).  For  the  love  of  the  Lord  as  His  faithful  servant  whom  He 
has  given  you,  receive  him.  This  is  what  Christ  calls  receiving  one  in  His  name 
(Mark  ix.  37).  Learn — 1.  Not  to  judge  of  men  by  the  accidents  which  befall  them. 
Innocence  is  not  always  prosperous,  and  piety  often  falls  into  great  calamities.  2. 
That  it  is  one  thing  to  meet  with  affliction  in  the  work  of  tbe  Lord,  and  another  to 
meet  with  it  as  an  effect  of  our  vice,  avarice,  or  vanity.  3.  That  the  closest  and 
tenderest  relations  should  subsist  between  pastor  and  flock.  4.  That  personal 
considerations  should  yield  to  the  advantage  of  the  Church.  (J.  Bailie).  Epa- 
phroditu$ : — I.  His  Christian  btatcs — a  brother,  &c.  II.  His  sickness.  1. 
Incurred  in  the  service  of  Christ.  2.  A  source  of  solicitude  to  the  apostle  and 
the  Church.  III.  His  recovery  through  Divine  mercy.  IV.  His  retuen  to 
Philippi.       1.  Welcome.       2.  Honourable,      (/.  Lyth,   D.D.)  The    titles   of 

Epaphroditus : — 1.  Brother.  A  name  significant — 1.  Of  office.  As  judges  call  one 
another  brother,  so  does  Paul  Epaphroditus,  because  they  discharged  the  same 
spiritual  functions.  2.  Of  love  and  friendships  It  shows  the  care  which  one 
Christian  man  should  have  of  another.  3.  Of  equality.  Hereby  St.  Paul  sbows — 
(1)  His  humility,  who,  being  an  apostle,  called  one  of  inferior  rank  brother.  (2) 
His  magnanimity.  II.  Fellow  labourer.  Unless  ministers  are  this  they  are 
fellow  loiterers.  This  must  not  be,  because  the  Scriptures  compares  their  office 
with  the  most  laborious  of  occupations.  If  ministers  are  fellow-labourers,  then — 1. 
Their  people  must  submit  to  be  wrought  upon.  If  they  are  builders  you  must  be 
lively  stones,  and  suffer  yourselves  to  be  squared  and  made  fit  for  the  building.  If 
they  are  husbandmen  you  must  be  the  ground,  and  such  as  may  bring  forth  fruit 
to  perfection,  else  all  their  labour  upon  you  will  be  vain.  2.  God  suffers  them 
not  to  be  alone  (Mark  vi.  7)  so  that  they  may  render  mutual  aid.  Thus  He  sent 
Jerome  and  Augustine,  the  one  severe  and  powerful,  the  other  meek  and  gentle ; 
Luther  hot  and  fiery,  and  Melanchthon  soft  and  mild,  each  to  temper  the  other. 
III.  Fellow-soldier.  1.  Every  man's  life  is  a  warfare.  2.  In  this  warfare 
ministers  are  captains,  who  fight  against  the  enemies  within  us,  and  lead  us  against 
the  enemies  without  us.  Then — (1)  Hold  not  forth  against  the  ministry.  (2)  Help 
it  (Judges  V.  23).  (3)  Look  for  recompense  in  the  triumphant  kingdom.  IV. 
Messenger  of  the  Churches  and  minister  to  Paul's  wants.  1.  The  child  of 
God  is  subject  to  wants.  2.  They  shall  be  satisfied.  Bather  than  Elias  shall 
perish  for  hunger  the  ravens  shall  feed  him  (1  Kings  ivii.  4).  If  Dives  will  not 
have  mercy  on  Lazarus,  dogs  shall.  For  Paul  God  provides  an  Epaphroditus  or 
an  Onesiphoms.  {R.  Sibbet,  D.D.)  The  relations  of  believers : — I.  Theeb 
fellowship.  1.  Brethren.  2.  Companions  in  toil  and  conflict.  IL  Their  con- 
sequent stmpatht  with  bach  other.  1.  They  respect  each  other's  wishes.  2. 
Help  each  other's  joys,  3,  Minister  to  each  other's  wants.  {J.^  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Epaphroditus  is  known  to  as  only  from  the  notices  in  this  Epistle.  He  is, 
doubtless,  to  be  distinguished  from  Epaphras  (CoL  L  7 ;  ir.  12 ;  Philemon  23) ; 
for  though  the  names  are  the  same  the  identity  seems  improbable.     1.  The  on« 

11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

appears  to  have  been  a  native  of  Philippi  (ver.  25) ;  the  other  of  Colossse  (Col,  iv. 
12).  The  longer  form  is  always  used  of  the  Philippian  delegate ;  the  shorter,  of 
the  Colossian  teacher.  The  name,  in  fact,  is  so  extremely  common  in  both  forms 
that  the  coincidence  affords  no  presumption  of  the  identity  of  persons.  The  name 
is  not  specially  characteristic  of  Macedonia,  but  occurs  abundantly  everywhere. 
On  a  Thessalonian  inscription  we  meet  with  one  Gaius  Clodius  Epaphroditus. 
This  concurrence  of  names  is  suggestive.  The  combination  which  occurs  once 
might  well  occur  again;  and  it  is  possible,  though  in  the  absence  f^  evidence 
hardly  probable,  that  Gaius  the  Macedonia  (Acts  xix.  29)  is  the  same  as  Epaphro- 
ditus the  Philippian.  (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  The  attachment  of  jellow-soldiers : — An 
American  officer  who  had  fought  in  the  late  wars  was  seated  in  his  pleasant  parlour, 
musing  on  the  turbulent  scenes  through  which  he  had  passed.  Suddenly  the  door- 
bell rang.  The  officer  rose  to  open,  the  new-comer,  and  a  lame  and  weather-beaten 
soldier  stood  before  him.  "Will  you  buy  my  books,  sir?"  he  said.  "I  do  not 
wish  them,"  was  the  quick  reply,  and  the  door  was  closed.  The  ofHcer  resumed 
his  seat,  but  strange  questionings  arose  in  his  mind.  Vv'as  not  that  the  face  of  one 
he  knew  ?  Had  he  not  heard  that  voice  before  ?  Impi  essed  as  with  the  fear  of 
some  ill  act,  he  quickly  advanced  to  the  door,  and  on  opening  it  again,  there  stood 
the  brave  hero  of  many  battles  with  the  big  tears  starting  from  his  eyes.  He  spoke 
again — "  Don't  you  know  me,  colonel?  "  The  voice  had  a  well-remembered  sound. 
And  this  time  it  fell  not  on  dead  ears  nor  a  stony  heart.  The  maimed  soldier  was 
recognized  as  one  who  had  fought  on  many  a  field  of  daring  und  carnage  by  the 
officer's  side,  and  who  was  covered  all  over  with  glorious  scars,  the  tokens  of  hie 
patriotism  and  bravery.  Instantly  the  door  was  flung  wide  open,  and  the  veteran 
was  welcomed  into  the  mansion  of  the  opulent  officer,  who,  with  tears  in  his  eyes, 
fell  on  the  hero's  neck  and  embraced  him.  The  scene  that  followed  the  recognition 
was  one  never  to  be  forgotten,  and  the  colonel  afterwards,  relating  the  incident 
of  the  meeting,  said  he  felt  at  that  greeting  a  veneration  for  his  old  comrade  almost 
amounting  to  a  feeling  of  worship. 

Vers,  26-28.  For  He  longed  after  you  all — The  sickness  of  Epaphroditu* : — 
I.  The  sickness  and  its  lessons.  1,  God's  children  are  subject  to  sickness  as  long 
as  they  live,  (1)  This  arises  from  the  nature  of  the  body  and  the  character  of  its 
surroundings.  (2)  Thus  grace  is  strengthened  in  the  soul  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  2.  God 
suffers  His  children  to  come  to  extremities,  yea,  even  to  death  itself,  as  Hezekiah, 
Job,  Jonah,  David,  Daniel,  the  three  children,  the  disciples,  our  Lord  Himself,  and 
by  this  means  it  comes  to  pass  that  when  all  ordinary  means  fail  their  trust  is  not 
placed  on  the  means  but  on  God's  own  good  will  and  power.  3.  God  suffers  us  to 
fall  into  extremities  that  He  might  try  what  is  in  us,  and  that  He  might  exercise 
our  graces.  H.  His  feeling.  "  FuU  of  heaviness,"  not  for  himself  but  for  them, 
"  He  longed  after  you  all,"  A  great  triumph  of  grace  when  we  can  refrain  from 
murmuring  about  ourselves,  and  feel  only  for  the  effect  of  our  affliction  on  others. 
III.  God's  interposition,  1,  Had  mercy  on  him.  (1)  God's  mercy  is  the  spring 
of  all  God's  dealings  with  us.  (2)  Let  us  look  to  it  that  we  wilfully  neglect  not  or 
cast  not  away  mercy,  nor  rest  in  our  own  merit.  2.  Had  mercy  on  me,  IV. 
Paul's  conduct.  1.  Although  he  regarded  the  restoration  of  his  friend  as  a 
special  mercy  to  himself,  he  was  more  anxious  about  the  comfort  of  the  Philippians 
than  for  his  own.  2.  This  self-denial,  however,  augmented  the  apostle's  joy,  "  It 
is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  (R.  Sibbei,  D.D.)  Sickness  affords 
room  for  the  display  of — I.  Beotheelt  bimpathy,  II.  Divine  mercy.  (J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  The  sickness  of  Epaphroditus: — I.  He  was  sick.  1.  It  is  a 
salutary  thing  for  the  healthy  to  remember  the  sick.  What  a  change  does 
even  a  slight  sickness  make  in  our  thoughts  and  feelings !  What  an  import- 
ance does  it  give  to  things  at  other  times  trivial,  and  what  an  insignificance 
to  things  at  other  times  engrossing !  The  strong  man  is  then  in  the  grasp  of 
a  stronger.  The  worldly  man  finds  then  that  there  is  something  unseen  as 
true  as  things  that  are  seen ;  the  busy  man  is  reminded  that  there  will  be  an 
end  of  work,  and  the  frivolous  that  there  will  be  an  end  of  pleasure.  2  What  a 
natural  incongruity  there  is  between  health  and  sickness !  How  does  the  very 
presence  of  a  person  in  robust  health  jar  upon  the  sensitiveness  of  a  frame  diseased? 
How  few  there  are  whose  visit  to  a  chamber  of  sickness  carries  with  it  repose  and 
soothing  I  What  a  tenderness  should  we  cherish  towards  the  peculiarities, 
frailities,  irritabilities  of  sickness.  What  care  there  should  be  in  the  choice  of 
times,  the  control  of  speech,  the  selection  of  topics,  and  in  the  regard  to  brevity  \ 


CHAP.  n.J  PHILIPPIANS.  168 

And  yet  in  all  these  things,  how  should  art  conceal  art?  and  a  delicate  consideration 
prompt  everything.  3.  God  gives  these  gifts  naturally  to  some :  and  some  learn 
it  in  the  school  of  Jesus.  II.  Nioh  dnto  dkath.  1.  Happy  are  they  who  well  use 
those  seasons  of  passing  indisposition,  which  interrupt  from  time  to  time  a  life  of 
average  vigour.  They  will  find  themselves  the  less  surprised  and  overwhelmed  by 
the  arrival  of  that  time  when  a  mortal  sickness  shall  darken  the  windows  for  ever.  3. 
This  sort  of  visit  to  the  gates  of  the  grave,  and  acquaintance  with  the  preliminaries  of 
dying,  is  an  occurrence  by  no  means  infrequent.  We  are  all  familiar  with  records 
of  perils  by  water,  in  which  every  stage  of  the  process  of  dying  has  been  travelled 
through.  How  remarkable  are  the  details  of  those  records.  Words  and  acts  long 
forgotten  flash  again  upon  the  mind,  and  they  have  made  the  person  able  to  tell 
from  experience  how  it  may  be  in  the  judgment,  how  conscience  may  arraign  the 
sinner  at  the  bar  of  God,  and  do  the  office  of  the  undying  worm  and  the  unquench- 
able fire.  3.  But  sickness,  too,  as  well  as  accident,  may  give  something  of  th« 
same  experience.  There  may  have  been  a  long  suspense  between  life  and 
death.  The  physician  may  have  destroyed  hope.  At  last  a  turn  has  come ; 
the  sickness  was  close  upon  death,  but  it  was  not  death,  and  all  this  mortal  strife 
must  be  endured  again.  Has  that  person  nothing  to  tell  of  those  days  of  expected 
dissolution  ?  Can  he  lose  again  the  experience  then  acquired.  We  know  that  no 
such  experience  can,  of  itself,  convert  a  soul  (Luke  xvi.  31)  ;  but  it  will,  at  least, 
tell  how  small  and  poor  the  world  looked,  how  true  God's  truth  appeared ;  and  well 
may  such  be  asked  whether  they  have  duly  cherished  the  impression  made  upon 
them  in  those  days  of  suspen-e.  III.  God  had  mercy  on  him.  Is  this  the  same 
apostle  who  wrote  Phil.  i.  23  ?  Does  he  account  it  a  mercy  which  with  Iraws  a  man 
from  immediate  fruition  ?  We  may  draw  from  this  an  illustration  of  the  natural- 
ness of  the  Word  of  God.  However  bright  the  light  the  gospel  throws  upon  the 
world  beyond  still  life  is  a  blessing  (Eccles.  xi.  7),  and  still  death  is  an  enemy.  To 
speak  of  a  recovery  from  sickness  as  a  misfortune  is  as  contradictory  to  the 
language  of  the  Bible  as  it  is  to  the  voice  of  nature  within.  1.  No  one  will  doubt 
this  in  the  case  of  one  whose  salvation  is  less  than  secure.  That  such  a  man  is 
not  cut  off  in  his  sins,  that  a  new  opportunity  is  given  him  for  amendment,  is  in- 
deed a  mercy.  2.  But  Epaphroditus  was  a  Christian  man.  To  him  death  would 
have  been  gain,  and  had  providence  so  ordered  it  Paul  would  have  bidden  his 
Philippian  friends  to  give  thanks  over  him  as  one  who  slept  in  Jesus.  If  God  wills 
thus  it  is  well  for  the  Christian  ;  if  God  wills  the  opposite  it  is  well  still.  If  he 
lives  He  can  still  work  and  gather  in  more  souls  for  Christ.  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
Recovery  from  sickness : — I.  The  sickness  which  you  have  endured.  1.  You  have, 
perhaps,  been  suddenly  smitten  after  a  long  and  uninterrupted  course  of  health. 
2.  Or  your  sickness  has  been  preceded  by  protracted  feebleness  and  delicacy.  3. 
But  whichever  way  it  has  come  the  affliction  has  secluded  you,  discontinued  your 
active  pursuits,  oppressed  you  with  pain,  and,  it  may  be,  destroyed  all  hope  for  the 
time  of  recovery.  4.  How  solemn  and  affecting  was  your  condition  when  the  crisis 
arrived.  Death,  "the  king  of  terrors,"  had  knocked  and  was  standing  in  your 
presence.  6,  What  were  your  thoughts  as  you  thus  trembled  on  the  brink  of  eter- 
nity ?  Did  you  see  heayen,  or  was  there  nothing  before  yoa  but  "a  fearful  looking 
for  of  judgment."  ll.  The  recovery  which  the  God  of  mercy  permitted 
Tou  to  enjoy.  1.  Tha  source  of  this  mercy  is  Divine.  No  doubt  all  the  means 
which  skill  and  kindness  could  suggest  had  been  employed  in  the  case  of  Epaphro- 
ditus, but  wb^n  his  recovery  was  effected  the  apostle  ascribed  it  entirely  to  the 
hand  of  God.  And  so  must  you.  He  gave  the  skill  which  selected  the  suitable 
means  and  gave  His  blessing  so  that  the  means  were  rendered  effectual.  Have  you 
thanked  Him  for  His  mercy.  2.  Your  recovery  manifests  the  power  of  Divine 
mercy.  Next  to  resurrection,  recovery  is  the  most  astonishing  and  merciful  dis- 
play of  Divine  power.  3.  Your  recovery  manifests  the  sovereignty  of  this  mercy. 
Others  have  died.  Had  you  died  none  could  have  charged  God  with  injustice  or 
unkindness.  He  was  under  no  obligation  to  heal  you.  4.  The  value  and  import- 
ance of  this  mercy.  A  state  of  sickness,  however  painful  to  the  flesh,  has  often 
proved  exceedingly  profitable  to  the  spirit,  and  recovery  has  given  you  a  fresh 
opportunity  for  salvation  and  usefulness.  Some  are  hardened  by  the  dispensation, 
but  in  your  case  it  is  to  be  hoped  it  has  been  sanctified  and  blessed.     III.  The 

MERCY    which    YOUB   RECOVERY    HAS  CONFERRED  ON  OTHERS  AS  WELL  AS  ON  YOURSELVES. 

There  are  no  earthly  sorrows  more  deep  or  distressing  than  those  which  death 
occasions  to  the  survivors.  In  the  case  of  Christians  the  Borrow  is  alleviated  by 
hope,  but  in  the  case  of  unbelievers  it  is  hardened  by  despair.    Whatever  may  haye 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  U. 

been  yoar  case,  every  child,  brother,  sister,  relative,  friend,  has  echoed  on  yonr  re- 
coYcry  the  joyful  exclamation,  "  and  on  me  also."  In  restoring  your  friend  God 
has  mercifully — 1.  Answered  your  prayers.  2.  Regarded  your  afflictions.  (1) 
Your  poverty.  (2)  Your  own  sickness.  (3)  Your  sorrow  in  anticipating  other 
troubles.  (4)  Your  grief  lest  your  friend  should  die  in  impenitence.  3.  Regarded 
your  souls  by  sparing  a  fellow  labourer.  (J.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Syvipathy  : — 
The  apostle — I.  Shakes  in  the  sorbow  of  the  Philippians.    11.  Hastes  to  wipe 

AWAY    THEIE    TEARS.       III.   ReJOICES    IN    THEIR    JOY.      (J.    Lyth,    D.D.)  Why  God's 

tervants  are  afflicted: — As  the  skill  of  a  pilot  is  more  clearly  seen  m  the  guidance 
of  a  bad  vessel  among  banks  and  breakers,  than  if  he  piloted  some  good  ship,  well 
equipped  in  a  safe  sea  without  danger ;  so  is  it  evident  that  the  power  and  wisdom 
of  God  are  more  clearly  and  wonderfully  shown,  when  He  preserves  and  guides  to 
the  completion  of  His  plans  His  poor  believers,  weak  and  subject  as  they  are  to  the 
Bufferings  and  miseries  of  other  men,  than  if,  stripping  them  of  their  vileness,  and 
clothiug  them  from  thence  with  an  immortal  nature,  incapable  of  suffering.  He  em- 
ployed them  thus  fitted  in  His  work.  Besides,  He  acts  thus  for  the  praise  of 
believers  themselves,  afflictions  justifying  their  piety,  and  making  its  lustre  appear 
as  well  as  its  firmness  in  the  eyes  of  men  and  angels.  It  remains  subject  to 
calumny  whilst  in  prosperity.  Satan  desires  to  make  it  pass  for  hypocrisy,  and  for  a 
mercenary  service,  as  if  they  only  loved  God  because  He  spared  them.  It  is  what 
he  formerly  said  of  Job,  that  he  only  feared  the  Lord  because  He  had  everywhere 
encompassed  him  with  a  hedge  of  providence  and  blessing,  and  that  he  would 
doubtless  change  his  piety  into  blasphemy  if  God  were  to  strike  him.  To  confound 
this  malace,  the  Lord  gave  up  to  him  the  property  and  health  of  His  servant,  and 
caused  his  faith  and  his  love  to  be  seen  by  his  constancy  in  the  midst  of  these 
severe  trials.  Sickness,  poverty,  persecution,  and  other  sufferings,  are  as  it  were 
the  crucible  of  God.  He  makes  believers  pass  through  this  fire,  that  their  piety 
being  preserved,  and  that  coming  out  of  it  more  pure  and  brilliant,  every  one  may 
be  forced  to  acknowledge  their  value ;  and  this  is  what  we  are  taught  by  the  apostle 
St.  Peter,  saying  that  the  trial  of  our  faith  in  the  midst  of  temptations  is  much 
more  precious  than  gold  which  perishes,  and  though  it  be  tried  with  fire  shall  turn 
"  to  praise,  and  honour,  and  glory,  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ."  {J.  Daille.) 
Providential  care : — All  the  events  of  life  are  precious  to  one  that  has  this  simple 
connection  with  Christ  of  faith  and  love.  No  wind  can  blow  wrong,  no  event  be 
mistimed,  no  result  disastrous.  If  God  but  cares  for  onr  inward  and  eternal  life,  if 
by  all  the  experiences  of  this  life.  He  is  reducing  it  and  preparing  for  its  disclosure, 
nothing  can  befall  us  but  prosperity.  Every  sorrow  shall  be  but  the  setting  of  soma 
luminous  jewel  of  joy.  Our  very  mourning  shall  be  but  the  enamel  around  the 
diamond ;  our  very  hardships  but  the  metallic  rim  that  holds  the  opal,  glancing 
with  strange  interior  fires.  (H.  W.  Btecher.)  Timely  providences  : — We  find  a 
multitude  of  Providences  so  timed  to  a  minnte,  that,  had  they  fallen  out  ever  so 
little  sooner  or  later,  they  had  signified  but  little  in  comparison  of  what  they  now 
do.  Certainly,  it  cannot  be  casualty,  but  counsel,  that  so  exactly  nicks  the  oppor- 
tunity. Contingencies  keep  no  rules.  How  remarkable  was  the  relief  of  Rochelle, 
by  a  shoal  of  fish  that  came  into  the  harbour  when  they  were  ready  to  perish  with 
hunger,  such  as  they  never  obseKced  either  before  or  after  that  time.  Mr.  Dodd 
could  not  go  to  bed  one  night,  but  feels  a  strong  impulse  to  visit  (though  unseason- 
ably) a  neighbouring  gentleman,  and  just  as  he  came  he  meets  him  at  his  doer, 
with  a  halter  in  his  pocket,  just  going  to  hang  himself.  Dr.  Tate  and  his  wife,  in 
the  Irish  rebellion,  flying  through  the  woods  with  a  sucking  child,  which  was  just 
ready  to  expire,  the  mother,  going  to  rest  it  upon  a  rock,  puts  her  hand  upon  a 
bottle  of  warm  milk,  by  which  it  was  preserved.  A  good  woman,  fi'om  whose  mouth 
I  received  it,  being  driven  to  a  great  extremity,  all  supplies  failing,  was  exceedingly 
plunged  into  unbelieving  doubts  and  fears,  not  seeing  whence  supplies  should 
come ;  when  lo  1  in  the  nick  of  time,  turning  some  things  in  a  chest,  she  unex- 
pectedly lights  npon  a  piece  of  gold,  which  supplied  her  present  wants,  till  God 
opened  another  door  of  supply.  If  these  things  fall  out  easually,  how  is  it  that 
they  observe  the  very  juncture  of  time  so  exactly  ?  This  is  become  proverbial  in 
Scripture.  "  In  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  seen  "  (Gen.  xxii.  14).  (•/. 
Flavel.)  Receive  Him  therefore  In  the  Lord  with  all  gladness. — The  succour  of  tht 
taints  is — I.  A  work  of  Christ.  1.  Enjoined.  2.  Exemplified.  3.  Commended 
by  Him.  U.  A  work  of  sacriticb.  Requiring — 1.  The  renunciation  of  ease  and 
comfort.  2.  Often  of  health  and  life.  IIL  A  work  of  honodb.  1.  Those  who 
undertake  it  are  justly  esteemed.    2.  Their  preservation  is  a  sooroe  of  joy  to  thu 


SRAp.  n.]  PIIILJPPIANS.  165 

Cbnrch.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  Christian'g  duty  : — I.  To  do  all  thinqs  "  in 
naa  Lord."  1.  Marry.  2.  Love.  3.  Salute.  4.  Receive  ministers.  5.  Live. 
6.  Die.  II.  The  reason  for  this.  A  Christian  in  all  looks  to  the  Lord,  and  de- 
pends upon  Him.  Carnal  men  do  contrarily.  They  marry,  love,  &c.,  carnally. 
(R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  The  Christian's  duty  to  his  ministers: — I.  The  duty.  1.  To 
receive  them  joyfully — whatever  their  miuistrations  may  be,  rebuke  or  encourage- 
ment, admonition  or  comfort.  It  is  for  your  good;  rebel  not  against  them.  2.  To 
hold  such  in  reputation,  personally  and  ofHcially.  (1)  By  speaking  well  of  them 
and  not  suffering  detraction.  (2)  By  co-operating  with  them.  (3)  By  supporting 
them.  II.  The  motives.  1.  It  is  an  evidence  that  we  are  the  children  of  God, 
and  have  passed  from  death  to  life,  if  we  love  and  reverence  the  brethren.  2. 
Those  whcim  God  esteems  we  ought  to  make  the  most  account  of.  3.  Consider 
their  gifts  and  graces.  4.  Remember  the  good  you  reap  by  them.  (Ibid.)  The 
work  of  Christ : — I.  Is  esskntially  benmvvolent  in  its  objects.  1.  To  feed  the 
hungry.  2.  Clothe  the  naked.  3.  Visit  the  sick  and  the  prisoner.  II.  Deserves 
EVERY  sacrifice.  1.  Of  time.  2.  Money.  3.  Life.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Returning 
labourers  to  be  welcomed  with  joy  : — You  remember  the  enthusiastic  welcome  which 
was  accorded  among  us  to  the  brave  young  American,  Stanley,  who  had  encountered 
innumerable  perils  to  carry  aid  to  the  illustrious  missionary  pioneer  of  Central 
Africa,  David  Livingstone.  We  felt  as  if  in  helping  the  noble  old  man,  whom  all 
of  us  had  come  to  think  of  as  a  personal  friend,  he  had  helped  ourselves.  We 
know  what  pleasure  and  sense  of  honour  would  be  felt  if  Florence  Nightingale  pre- 
sented herself  under  our  roof,  or  under  the  roof  of  any  true-hearted  countryman  of 
those  wounded  soldiers  of  the  Crimea,  for  whom  she  cared  so  wisely  and  lovingly, 
and  who  kissed  her  very  shadow  on  the  wall,  as  she  passed  through  the  wards  of 
the  hospital.  Somewhat  like  this  would  be  the  position  of  Epaphroditns  on  his 
return  to  Philippi.  The  knowledge  of  his  heroism  and  self-devotion  in  the  cause 
of  the  Saviour  they  loved,  and  this  in  discharging  the  duties  of  a  ministry  for  the 
relief  and  comfort  of  their  dear  friend  and  spiritual  father  the  apostle,  could  not 
but  lead  them  to  feel  it  a  peculiar  privilege  and  honour  to  be  permitted  to  welcome 
him  once  more  among  them.  (R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  The  risk  of  Christian 
work : — The  word  "  not  regarding  "  means  Epaphroditns  had  risked  his  life  as 
the  gambler  does  his  stake.  He  had  played  with  it  as  in  a  game  of  chance.  The 
same  word  in  later  days,  and  possibly  with  a  direct  reference  to  this  passage,  has 
given  a  name  to  an  inferior,  and  though  sometimes  a  disorderly,  yet  a  self-forgetful 
class  of  church -officers,  who  from  Constantino's  time  onwards  were  set  apart  as 
attendants  on  the  sick  and  dying.  They  were  men  who  hazarded  their  lives  in 
times  of  plapue  and  contagious  sickness,  like  the  -rrapa^oXoi,  or  bestiarii,  who  ex- 
posed themselves  to  the  risk  of  death  in  conflict  with  the  wild  beasts  of  the  amphi- 
theatre. It  was  in  some  such  way  as  this  that  Epaphroditns  staked  his  life  in 
faithfully  representing  the  Philippian  Church  in  carrying  out  the  mission  with  which 
he  had  been  entrusted.  (J.  Hutchinson,  D.D.)  Life  preferred  to  service  : — In  the 
early  part  of  the  American  campaign  some  of  the  officers  displayed  great  lack  of 
bravery.  This  fact  soon  became  known  amongst  the  men,  and  caused  great 
contempt.  Once  in  an  engagement  a  soldier  said  to  his  comrade,  "  Why  don't 
yon  get  behind  a  tree  ?  "  The  reply  came  instantly,  "  Oh  I  there's  not  enough 
of  them  for  the  officers."  (U.  O.  Mackay.)  Life  7wt  regarded : — Father  Peto  and 
Elstowe,  two  men  who  had  dared  to  speak  out  bravely  as  to  Henry  the  Eighth's 
misdeeds,  were  summoned  before  the  king's  council  to  receive  a  reprimand.  Lord 
Essex  told  them  they  deserved  to  be  sewn  into  a  sack  and  thrown  into  the  Thames. 
"  Threaten  such  things  to  rich  and  dainty  folk,  who  have  their  hope  in  this  world," 
answered  Elstowe,  gallantly,  *'  we  fear  them  not ;  with  thanks  to  God,  we  know 
the  way  to  heaven  to  be  as  ready  by  water  as  by  land."  Men  of  such  metal  might 
be  broken,  but  they  could  not  be  bent.  The  two  offenders  were  hopelessly  un- 
repentant and  impracticable,  and  it  wa«  found  necessary  to  baniah  them.    (Ibid.) 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  nu 


CHAPTER  III. 

Vers.  1-11.  Finally,  my  trethren. — Prideless  pride : — 1.  What  were  the  thing* 
not  irksome  and  safe  ?  (1)  Counsels  in  some  lost  Epistles.  (2)  Messages  delivered  by 
word  of  mouth  through  his  delegates.  (3)  Earlier  verbal  communications.  (4) 
Something  in  the  Epistle.  The  latter  probably  referring — (a)  to  the  main  topic  of 
the  letter — rejoicing,  or  making  their  boast  in  Christ;  or  (b)  to  their  dissentions,  a 
reference  in  the  making  of  which  he  was  interrupted.  Each  supplies  a  good  sense. 
In  the  first  case  he  proposes  to  dwell  once  more  on  that  which  will  be  the  sure 
antidote  to  false  pride,  in  the  other  he  will  add  some  further  counsels  respecting 
their  dissensions.  2.  Since  the  apostle  seems  to  be  about  to  conclude,  what 
occasioned  the  interruption  ?  Probably  some  outbreak  of  Jewish  proselytism  re- 
specting which  he  warns  the  Philippians  in  plain  language.  At  the  word  "  con- 
cision "  he  enters  on  a  fresh  line  of  thought  which  occupies  the  rest  of  the  chapter. 
I.  He  atfibms  that  he  and  his  Gentile  brethren  have  the  most  valid  claim  to 
WHAT  THE  Jews  bo  dearly  prized.  "  We  are  the  circumcision."  He  justifies  his 
assertion  by  describing — 1.  The  nature  of  their  worship.  The  one  essential  thing 
in  worship  is  its  spirit.  The  kind  of  worship  the  proselytizers  offered  rested  largely 
on  forms.  If  the  form  were  only  according  to  their  pattern  it  was  enough.  The 
apostle,  on  the  contrary,  takes  his  stand  on  the  requirement  of  our  Lord  :  •'  God 
is  a  spirit,"  &c.  Heart,  not  hand,  lip,  knee  worship  was  the  main  thing,  and  in 
this  respect  they  and  he  were  more  in  harmony  with  the  purpose  of  circumcision 
than  those  who  submitted  to  the  rite.  2.  The  ground  of  their  trust.  They  rested 
in  position  rather  than  privilege.  Circumcision  was  the  sum  of  Jewish  privilege. 
It  was  the  main  thing  about  which  the  Jews  boasted.  Bat  their  high  privilege  had 
not  led  them  to  a  hi^h  morality,  but  had  been  made  a  cloak  for  sin.  In  contrast 
with  this  Paul  puts  Christian  conduct.  Christians  rejoiced,  or  made  their  boast,  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  had  no  confidence  in  the  flesh.  They  looked  to  Him  as  the  ful- 
filler  of  all  righteousness  for  us  and  the  example  of  all  righteousness  in  us.  Theirs 
was  a  pridelcf^s  pride.  II.  He  argues  with  the  Jew  on  his  own  ground.  The 
ground  of  their  boasting  might  well  be  his  as  regards — 1.  Inherited  privileges.  (1) 
The  Jews  make  much  of  circumcision  and  the  time  of  its  performance.  If  before 
the  eighth  day  it  is  nothing ;  if  after,  of  less  value.  That,  then,  which  the  strictest 
Jews  demand  is  true  of  me.  (2)  They  also  talk  of  the  old  stock.  I  belong  to  it. 
(3)  They  pride  themselves  on  their  tribe.  What  will  compare  with  mine  ?  (4) 
Nay,  more ;  scattered  among  the  Gentiles,  exposed  to  taint,  to  loss  of  language  and 
custom,  yet  my  ancestors  remained  pure  in  every  sense.  I  am  a  Hebrew  of  the 
Hebrews.  2.  Personal  acts.  (1)  What  of  the  law  ?  I  belonged  by  choice  to  the  sepa- 
rated sect.  (2)  What  of  zeal ?  These  men  are  making  much  of  that;  but  did  not  I 
persecute  the  Church  ?  (3)  And  as  for  righteousness,  when  was  I  a  defaulter  ?  S. 
Here  surely  was  ground  for  boasting  had  he  been  so  disposed.  But — III.  The  whole 
OF  THESE  most  COVETED  THINGS  HE  NOW  COUNTS  LOSS.  He  relinquished  them  all  to 
win  Christ.  He  changes  the  figure.  He  had  been  speaking  of  gain  and  loss ;  he 
now  speaks  of  entering  on  a  race.  1.  He  divests  himself  of  all  self-righteous  robes. 
He  felt  himself  disqualified  for  the  contest  in  any  such  dress.  2.  He  desires  to  lay 
firmest  hold  of  Christ.  3.  He  seeks  to  feel  the  full  meaning  of  the  resurrection 
power,  the  propulsion  to  a  higher  and  nobler  purpose.  4.  He  asks  to  share  the  suf- 
ferings of  Christ.  Note  this,  inasmuch  as  many  talk  as  though  the  sufferings  of 
Christ  had  dispensed  with  their  own.  5.  He  would  be  fashioned  to  the  likeness  of 
His  death.  6.  And  so  he  would  reach  the  goal — resurrection,  i.e.,  complete  newness 
of  life  through  Christ  Jesus.  Conclusion  :  This  delineation  has  its  practical  bearing 
on  ourselves.  1.  It  puts  privileges  in  their  true  place.  They  increase  our  obliga- 
tion to  serve  God.  2.  External  religiousness  is  put  in  its  right  place.  3.  We  are 
shown  where  we  shall  only  find  the  true  safeguard  against  modern  delusions  on 
religious  questions — in  Christ.  (J.  J.  Goadby.)  Rejoice  In  the  Lord. — Grounds 
of  Christian  rejoicing : — He  who  would  rejoice  in  the  Lord  must — L  Bewabb  or 
EREOB  (vers.  1-3).  II.  Eenouxce  all  and  trust  in  Christ  only  (vers.  4-S).  III. 
Embrace  the  fulness  of  Christ  (vers.  9-11).  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I.  Rejoice  m 
THE  Lord  is  the  text  of  the  whole  chapter.  After  a  long  chapter  on  the  suppression 
of  self  and  the  absorption  of  every  faculty  in  the  service  of  Christ,  here  seems  to  be 
the  reward.  Observe — 1.  It  is  "  in  the  Lord."  There  are  two  estates  of  men,  "  in 
the  flegh,"  and  "in  the  Lord."  To  be  in  the  latter  estate  is  to  possess  all  that 
can  minister  to  happiness.     So  we  are  here  reminded  that  we  can  command  oxut 


CHAf.  in.]  PHILIPPIANS.  167 

own  bappineFS.  It  is  enforced  as  a  duty.  Joy  is  a  feeling  that  ranges  over 
all  life  and  time.  It  remembers  from  wbat  it  bas  been  rescued  ;  it  rejoices  in  pre- 
sent security  ;  it  hopes  for  more  tban  it  can  conceive  in  the  future.  2,  But  if  the 
Christian  is  seduced  from  Christ  the  joy  departs,  and  gives  place  to  a  deeper  deso- 
lation than  the  soul  has  ever  known.  It  was  this  danger  that  the  apostle  dreaded, 
arising  from  two  errors  ;  one  doctrinal,  which  would  teach  them  to  cease  to  trust  in 
Christ  alone ;  another  practical,  which  would  make  them  selfish  and  carnal,  and  so 
enemies  of  the  Cross.  II.  Cukistian  rejoicing  defended  against  its  judaizino 
ENEMIES.  The  apostle  bids  the  Philippians  beware  of  the  dogs,  evil-workers,  con- 
cision, suggestive  phrases,  the  last  implying  that  circumcision  having  served  its 
purpose  had  become  dishonoured  as  well  as  disused ;  the  word  was  now  but  a 
synonym  of  a  Christian  profession  (Col.  ii.  11 ;  Rom.  ii.  20).  Those  were  the 
true  circumcision  who — 1.  Worship  God  in  the  spirit,  i.e.,  they  offer  a  worship 
which  is  ordered,  prompted,  released  from  ceremony  and  made  acceptable  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  (1)  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  Master  of  all  Christian  worship.  (2) 
The  object  of  that  worship  or  service  is  included  in  the  term  and  not  expressed 
(Eom.  ix.  4 ;  Acts  xxvi.  7  ;  Rom.  xii.  1).  (3)  The  worship  presented  is  "  in  spirit 
and  in  truth,"  because  the  communism  of  man's  spirit  with  God  through  the  in- 
dwelling spirit  (Rom.  viii.  26 ;  Jude  20)  is  His  own  temple.  But  this  must  be 
external  also.  The  word  "circumcision"  iudicates  the  fellowship  of  those  who, 
by  this  symbolic  rite,  were  dedicated  to  God.  And  Christian  public  worship  is  the 
common  spiritual  homage  of  men  who  are  serving  God  in  their  spirits  while  they 
are  serving  Him  in  His  house.  (4)  But  the  Spirit  unites  no  humau  spirit  to  God 
which  is  not  holy ;  and  so  the  cutting  off  of  sin  was  what  circumcision  always 
signified  (Rom.  ii.  29).  2.  Rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  i.e.,  confide  or  glory.  They  have 
learned  that  circumcision  has  given  place  to  baptism  ;  buttlieyput  trust  in  neither. 
They  trust  only  in  Cbrist,  and  as  they  trust  they  glory.  3.  Have  no  confidence  in 
the  flesh.  (1)  In  the  fleshly  ordinance  which  cannot  be  retained  without  dishonour- 
ing Christ.  (2)  In  the  "  fleshly,"  i.e.,  personal  and  national  prerogatives  of  the 
circumcised  members  of  the  old  covenant.  They  renounced  Judaism  with  all  its 
advantages.  (3)  In  anything  that  human  nature  can  do  to  win  the  Divine  favour. 
(W.  B.  I'ope,  D.D.)  It  is  God's  will  that  we  should  rejoice  in  Him: — I.  What  is 
rr  TO  REJOICE  ?  Delight  is  the  soul's  acquiescence,  or  resting  itself,  in  what  it  appre- 
hends to  be  good.  There  is  a  two-fold  delight.  1.  Bodily  or  sensitive  called 
pleasure,  which  proceeds  from  some  impression  made  by  a  suitable  object  upon  the 
senses.  Of  which  note — (1)  This  in  itself  is  not  sinful,  because  both  the  sense  and 
the  object  and  the  suitableness  of  them  were  all  made  by  God.  (2)  Hence  it  is 
permitted  by  God  (Eccles.  iii.  22  ;  v.  19).  (3)  But  corrupt  man  is  too  apt  to  sin  in 
these  sensitive  pleasures,  either — (a)  in  the  unlawful  object  (Psa.  Ixii.  4),  (b)  or 
in  the  manner  by  excessiveness  (Jude  12).  2.  Rational  or  spiritual  joy,  seated  in  the 
soul  itself.  II.  What  is  it  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord.  1.  God  was  pleased  at  first 
to  order  the  soul  of  man  so  that  it  had  a  natural  tendency  and  suitableness  to  the 
nature  of  God.  2.  But  the  soul  being  disordered  by  sin  is  apt  to  rejoice  in  nothing 
but  externals.  3.  It  is  therefore  God's  will  that  we  labour  after  our  primitive  per- 
fections and  joys,  so  as  to  delight  ourselves — (1)  In  Him  as  God  and  our  God  (Psa. 
xxviii.  7  ;  Deut.  xii.  12,  18).  (2)  In  His— (a)  works  (Psa.  civ.  31) ;  (b)  Word  (Psa.  i.  2, 
oxix.  103);  (c)  properties ;  goodness  (Luke  xviii.  19);  mercy;  justice ;  power  (Psa. 
Ixiii.  5-7) ;  wisdom  ;  truth  ;  omnipresence.  III.  How  doth  it  appear  that  we  ought 
AND  MAY  THUS  REJOICE  7  1,  From  Scripture.  (1)  God  commands  it  (Psa.  xxxii. 
11  ;  PhiL  iv.  4).  (2)  Christ  prays  for  it  (John  xvii.  13).  (3)  This  is  one  great  end 
of  His  promises  (Rom.  xv.  4).  (4)  It  is  one  great  end  of  the  ministry  (lea.  liL  7 ; 
Bom.  z.  15 ;  2  Cor.  i.  24).  (5)  It  is  the  end  of  Christ's  sending  the  Spirit  (Johu 
xvi.  7).  The  Spirit  comforts  us  by — (a)  Renewing  us.  (6)  Convincing  us  it  is  our 
duty  (John  xvi.  9).  (c)  Witnessing  our  adoption  (Gal.  iv.  6).  (d)  Blessing  His 
ordinances  to  us.  («)  Bringing  and  directing  us  to  Christ  for  it  (John  xiv.  26).  (/) 
Weaning  us  from  fleshly  delights,  {g)  Power-fully  working  comfort  in  ns  (Gal.  v. 
22).  2.  From  reason.  We  should  rejoice  because — (1)  God  hath  given  us  that 
power.  (2)  Tbere  is  nothing  in  this  world  that  we  can  have  any  solid  joy  in,  be- 
cause not  suitable  to  the  soul.  (3)  There  is  none  but  God  we  can  rationally  rejoice 
in.  3.  But  doth  not  God  sometimes  command  ns  to  mourn?  (Eccles.  iii.  4  ;  Isa. 
xxii.  12  ;  Joel  ii.  12-13).  (1)  This  sorrow  consists  not  in  abstaining  from  spiritual 
but  natural  joy.  (2)  It  maketh  way  for  spiritual  joy.  (3)  It  should  be  accompanied 
with  it  (Psa.  ii.  11).  IV  Uses.  1.  InforruaKon.  (1)  Observe  God's  goodness  to 
His  creatures  in  making  it  their  du^  to  rejoice.     (2)  The  privilef,'e  of  Christiana 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

above  all  others  (John  xvi.  22).  (3)  The  false  calumny  that  is  laid  on  holiness  aa 
depriving  us  of  joy  (John  xiv.  1).  (4)  Our  misery  is  all  from  ourselves  (Hosea  xiiL 
9).  (5)  In  the  excellency  of  Christian  joy  above  all  others ;  it  is  in  the  Lord.  2. 
Exhortation  :  Bejoice.  (1)  Consider  the  necessity.  God  commands  it  for  His  glory 
and  the  credit  of  religion.  (2)  Consider  the  excellency,  above  all  other  joy.  (a)  It 
is  spiritual,  the  joy  of  the  soul  (Psa.  xxxiii.  21).  (b)  Pure  and  unmixed  (Prov.  xiv. 
13).  (c)  Easy  and  cheap,  (d)  Eeal  and  true,  (e)  Universal  in  respe^it  of  time, 
place,  and  condition.  (/)  Surpassing  (Hab.  iii.  17-18).  (g)  Well  grounded;  on 
God's  mercy  and  Christ's  merits  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  (7()  Full  and  satisfying  (John  xvii. 
13 ;  Psa.  xvi.  11,  xvii.  15).  (3)  Consider  this  excellency  in  its  nature,  (a)  In  the 
cause :  God  ;  the  Father,  the  Son  (John  xvii.  13),  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22).  (&)  In  the 
subject ;  the  soul  (Luke  i.  46-47).  (c)  The  object ;  the  chiefest  good,  {d)  The  end : 
the  glory  of  God  as  the  ultimate,  the  good  of  man  the  subordinate.  (<)  The  effects. 
It  will  destroy  our  sinful  joy  (Psa.  xvi.  11) ;  lessen  our  esteem  of  the  world  (Psa. 
iv.  7) ;  enlarge  our  hearts  and  make  them  more  capacious  of  heavenly  things ; 
faciUtate  all  duties  (Neh.  viii.  10 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  47) ;  make  us  long  more  after 
heaven  (Psa.  cxix.  20) ;  support  us  in  our  afflictions  (1  Pet.  i.  6-8) ;  defend  us 
against  temptations.  V.  Means  and  dieections.  1.  Labour  after  a  right  know- 
ledge of  God  (Psa.  ix.  10).  2.  Endeavour  to  get  an  interest  in  Him.  3.  Get  thy 
evidences  clear  and  keep  them  so  (Job  xix.  25 ;  Psa.  xxvii.  1).  4.  Convince  thyself 
it  is  thy  duty  to  rejoice.  5.  Live  above  the  temperature  of  the  body.  6.  Study  well 
the  nature  of  justification  (Rom.  iv.  5  ;  v.  1).  (1)  Christ  was  made  sin  for  us  ;  (2) 
and  we  righteous  in  Him.  7.  Have  frequent  recourse  to  the  promises  (Heb.  xiii. 
6-6).  8.  Let  the  eye  of  faith  be  constantly  fixed  on  the  attributes  of  God  (Isa.  xiv. 
24  ;  Psa.  Ivii.  1,  7).  9.  Have  a  care  of  what  will  damp  thy  joys.  (1)  Wilful  sins. 
(2)  Nice  questions  about  election.  (3)  Dark  providences  (Eccles.  ix.  1).  10.  Often 
meditate  on  a  Christian's  privileges.  (1)  That  He  hath  God  for  His  Father  and 
portion.  (2)  Christ  for  his  Advocate  (1  John  ii.  1).  (3)  All  things  working  for  His 
good  (Rom.  viii.  2§).  (4)  A  kingdom  provided  for  him  (John  xiv.  1-2).  VL 
Objections.  1.  My  sins  are  many  and  great.  Answer:  (1)  God's  mercies  are  more 
and  greater  (Isa.  Iv.  7).  (2)  So  are  Christ's  merits  (Heb.  vii.  25).  (3)  So  are  the 
promises  (Ezek.  xviii.  21-22).  2.  My  corruptions  are  strong.  Answer:  (1)  They 
are  not  too  strong  for  God.  (2)  Christ  came  to  subdue  them.  (3)  God  has  pro- 
mised to  subdue  them  (Heb.  x.  16 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-27).  3.  The  devil  oft  tempta 
me.  Answer :  (1)  So  he  did  Christ.  (2)  He  can  tempt  thee  no  farther  than  God 
sees  good.  (3)  God's  grace  shall  be  sufficient  for  thee.  4.  God  hath  forsaken  me. 
Answer :  (1)  It  is  ouly  for  a  while.  (2)  Be  will  again  receive  thee  (Isa.  xlix.  13-16  ; 
Psa.  xlii.  11).  5.  I  have  many  losses  and  crosses.  Answer:  (1)  That  is  no  new 
thing  to  saints  (1  Pet.  iv.  12,  13).  (2)  It  is  often  a  sign  of  God's  love  (Heb.  xii. 
6-7 ;  Amos  iii.  2).  (3)  Their  end  is  good  (Heb.  xii.  10).  (4)  And  their  effect  (2 
Cor.  iv.  17;  Psa.  xlii.  11).  {Bp.  Bereridge.)  I.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  as  toub 
Saviour.  When  Candace's  treasurer  found  that  Jesus  had  suffered  for  him  on  the 
cross,  "  he  went  on  his  way  rejoicing."  Our  acceptance  with  God  makes  heaven 
rejoice — the  return  of  the  prodigal  affords  the  greatest  happiness  to  himstlf  and  all 
others.  II.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  as  tour  Guide.  They  were  journeying  on  in  com- 
parative fear.  In  tribulation  even  the  saints  rejoice  because  their  Saviour  will 
deliver  them.  III.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  as  tour  reward.  (Weekly  Pulpit.) 
Christian  joy  : — I.  Its  nature.  The  joy  of  faith — felt  not  seen — yet  real  and  solid. 
II.  Its  SOURCE  AND  8ECURITT.  Christ  supplies — sustains  it.  III.  Its  perpetuity. 
it  is  an  apostle's  last  injunction — must  endure  for  ever.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
joy  of  Christian  brethren: — The  chapter  contains  a  general  exhortation  to  several 
duties.  This  verse  tells  you  how  to  do  them — "rejoicing."  I.  The  appelation — 
••Brethren."  By  loving  compellation  he  labours  to  enter  into  their  hearts.  If 
exhortation  comes  from  the  pride  of  man,  the  pride  of  man  will  beat  it  back.  Why 
are  Christians  brethren  f  1.  They  have  the  same  beginning  of  life  from  the  same 
Father ;  the  same  common  brother  Christ ;  the  same  food,  the  Word  of  God ;  the 
same  promises  and  inheritance.  2.  The  word  is  indicative  of  equality.  This 
ghould  fill  up  the  valleys  of  hearts  dejected  here  in  regard  to  mean  estates  ;  as  also 
pull  down  the  mountains  of  proud  hearts.  3.  It  is  a  name  of  dignity  belonging 
to  the  heirs  of  heaveru  4.  It  is  a  word  of  love.  II.  The  exhortation. 
1.  It  is  the  Christian's  duty  to  rejoice.  It  is  commanded  here.  2.  It 
is  reasonable  that  they  should  rejoice.  They  are  free  from  the  spiritual 
.^gypt ;  why  should  they  not  sing  as  the  delivered  Israelites.  They  have 
with  God  and  an  assured  hope.     8.  It  belongs  only  to  Chiistians  to  rejoice. 


CHA*.  m.)  PHILIPPIANS,  169 

Others  have  neither  cause  nor  commandment  to  do  so.  III.  The  limitation — "In 
the  Lord."  1.  In  whom  7  Christ  is  our  Lord — (1)  By  gift.  God  has  given  ns  all 
to  Him.  (2)  By  conquest.  He  hath  gotten  the  victory  over  Satan  for  us.  (3)  By 
marriage.  2.  How  ?  (1)  By  adherence  to  Him.  We  must  rest  contented  with  Him 
aa  our  only  and  BufBcient  joy.  (2)  Obedience  to  His  laws;  delighting  in  them. 
rV.  The  means.  1.  Faith.  It  is  the  sense  of  our  reconciliation  that  makes  ns 
rejoice  (Bom.  v.  2;  1  Peter  i,  6).  Wliatever  strengthens  or  weakens  faith, 
Btrengthens  or  weakens  joy.  2.  Peace.  Whatever  disturbs  our  peace  disturbs  our 
joy.  3.  Prayer.  Pray  that  your  joy  may  be  full.  4.  Christian  communion.  Aa 
the  two  disciples'  hearts  did  burn  within  them  when  they  talked  with  Christ.  V. 
Questions.  1.  Why,  then,  are  God's  children  sorrowful?  (1)  Their  sorrow  proceeds 
from  the  want  of  the  perfections  necessary  to  make  them  absolute  Christians  indeed. 

(2)  They  do  not  adorn  their  profession,  and  so  God  hides  the  comfortable  presence 
of  His  Spirit.  (3)  The  sorrow  may  only  be  apparent,  for  their  joy  is  a  bidden  joy. 
The  feast  is  kept  in  the  conscience  and  not  always  manifest.  (4)  While  they  live 
here  they  have  ever  a  mixture  of  joy  and  grief  to  temper  one  another.  2.  Is  not 
the  Christian  fuller  of  sorrow  than  of  joy  ?  If  so,  it  arises  from  ignorance  of  the 
grounds  of  comfort  or  from  want  of  application  of  them.  Let  him  then — (1) 
Compare  all  discomforts  with  the  joy  he  may  have,  and  he  will  find  that  it  counter- 
vails a  world  of  sorrow,  for  it  is  endless,  and  one  day  will  be  full.  (2)  Take  heed 
of  the  hindrances  of  this  joy.     Sins  committed  and  not  repented  (1  Chron.  ii.  7). 

(3)  Take  heed  of  negligence  in  good  duties  and  to  do  them  thoroughly.  (R.  Sibbes, 
D.D.)  Joy  in  the  Lord: — Evangelical  religion  is  often  charged  with  making 
men  gloomy,  averse  to  sharing  the  innocent  pleasures  of  life,  and  thus  has  been 
made  repulsive  to  the  young  especially.  The  charge  finds  some  support  in  the 
demeanour  of  many  Christians  in  whom,  from  defective  views  of  duty,  the  gospel  is 
not  permitted  to  exert  its  sweetening  power.  By  such  religion  is  grievously  mis- 
represented. Jesus  was  "  the  man  of  sorrows  "  because  He  bore  the  world's  guilt ; 
but  when  the  bitter  work  was  over  He  was  "  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness." 
Christians  ought  to  share  this.  Being  "in  the  Lord "  they  should  be  full  of  glad- 
ness.     I.    To  THE    UXREGENERATE  MAN   CHRISTIAN  JOY  IS  UNINTELLIGIBLE,       It  beloUgS 

to  a  sphere  with  which  he  has  no  acquaintance.  He  sees  the  restraints  which 
religion  imposes,  but  of  its  blessed  communion  with  God  he  sees  nothing.  Its 
hopes  to  him  are  visionary.  He  cannot  think  the  yoke  of  Jesus  to  be  easy.  II.  To 
THE  true  Christian  this  joy  is  reasonable,  and  even  when  he  is  not  happy  he  feels 
he  ought  to  be.  1.  It  springs  fr^m  love  to  Christ.  Out  in  the  world  we  find 
Marahs;  its  springs  are  full  of  bitterness.  In  Christ,  "with  joy  we  draw  water 
from  the  wells  of  salvation."  2.  The  citizens  of  the  spiritual  Zion  may  well  be  joy- 
ful in  their  King.  What  city  is  like  ours?  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the 
whole  earth.  God  hath  called  her  walls  Salvation  and  her  gates  Praise.  Prosperity 
is  within  her  palaces.  Through  her  midst  flows  the  river  of  life,  and  there  is  the 
tree  of  Ufe  whose  leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  The  King  abides 
amongst  us.  To  all  our  petitions  His  ear  is  open;  to  all  our  wants  His  boanteoua 
hand.  His  service  is  glorious  liberty.  3.  We  have  perfect  security.  No  power  can 
pluck  UB  out  of  our  Saviour's  hand;  for  with  His  infinite  goodness  is  conjoined  an 
infinite  greatness.  4.  In  the  contemplation  of  providence  there  is  an  unfailing 
source  of  joy.  The  natural  satisfaction  which  outward  comforts  bring  ie  pervaded 
and  glorified  by  the  thankfulness  of  hearts  rejoicing  in  their  Father's  goodness. 
Anxiety,  pain,  and  bereavement  may  be  appointed  to  ns,  but  that  they  are  a 
Father's  appointment  will  prevent  despondency  and  maintain  peace.  5.  Innocent 
enjoyments  have  a  new  charm  '*  in  the  Lord."  He  who  began  His  miracles  by 
contributing  to  social  pleasure,  changes  the  common  into  the  noble  and  refreshing. 
Friendship  has  one  added  sweetness,  nature  a  new  and  glorious  beauty,  and  study  a 
satisfaction  altogether  peculiar,  now  that  intellectual  improvement  is  felt  to  be 
polishing  a  shaft  for  the  Master's  quiver.  6.  Next  to  the  ineffable  delight  of  seeing 
Jesus  as  His  Saviour  is  the  delight  which  fills  the  believer's  heart  in  helping  others 
to  see  Him  as  theirs.  III.  The  reasons  why  many  Christunb  have  littlb  o»  this 
JOY  are  various.  In  some  it  is  due — 1.  To  temperament.  Of  this  class  the 
Apostle  Thomas  may  be  taken  as  a  type.  In  many,  the  nervous  tendency  to 
religious  melancholy  developes  insanity,  as  in  the  case  of  Cowper.  The  care  of  a 
physician  and  the  watchful  love  of  friends  may  be  of  service  to  joyless  Christians. 
2.  To  defective  apprehension  of  the  fulness  and  freeness  of  the  gospel.  Ths 
glorious  liberty  has  been  so  little  understood  that  while  living  in  the  air  of  freedom 
manj  have  fallen  back  into  "the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear."    S.  To  feeble 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  ns. 

•piritnality  and  indulgence  in  sin.  Worldliness,  like  a  killing  parasite,  hag 
wreathed  itself  round  the  energies  of  the  soul.  The  pleasures  of  life  have  stolen 
away  the  time  from  duty.  Mists  rise  from  a  mind  cherishing  sinful  desire  and  hide 
the  face  of  God.  We  know  why  David  had  to  pray,  "  Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of 
Thy  salvation."  And  all  that  is  well,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  this  gloom  is  the 
harbinger  of  repentance,  and  the  opening  of  his  heart  to  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness. 
(R.  Johmtone,  LL.B.)  Joy  in  the  Lord: — The  greatest  painter — atleastone  of  the 
greatest  painters — of  the  devoutest  period  of  the  Middle  Age,  a  man  who,  as  men  said, 
nsed  to  kneel  and  pray  till  the  angels  came  to  him  to  be  painted,  whose  works,  as  they 
adorn  the  walls  of  Florence,  open  up  to  us  a  world  we  had  hardly  dreamt  of  before, 
— that  greatest  of  painters — Fra  Angelico  da  Fiesole — in  some  of  his  most  beautiful 
pictures,  has,  amidst  a  multitude  of  exquisitely-pencilled  faces  combined  in  groups, 
made  each  face  of  varying  expression,  but  each  expressive  gaze  of  joy  and  thankful- 
ness steadily  fixed  upon  one  central  figure — the  figure  of  the  Eedeemer.  (Knox 
Little. )  The  elevating  power  of  joy  : — You  go  out  on  a  bright  spring  morning 
into  the  green  fields,  you  hear  above  you  a  voice  that  thrills  you  through  with 
pleasure ;  you  don't  see  anything  distinctly ;  but  from  the  clouds  there  comes  a 
warbling  note,  a  rising  splendour  of  music,  as  the  lark  ascends  towards  heaven. 
There  is  in  every  cadence  the  outwelling  of  an  unconscious,  yet  real,  joy.  It  is  a 
parable  of  God's  working.  The  little  creature,  as  she  ascends  and  sings,  sings  and 
ascends,  is  simply  proclaiming  the  truth  that  was  seen  in  the  life  of  Jesus :  joy  is  a 
power  to  exalt.  (Ibid.)  Joy  is  not  always  ecstasy: — We  ought  not  to 
seek  too  high  joys.  We  may  be  bright  without  transfiguration.  The  even  flow  of 
constant  cheerfulness  strengthens  ;  while  great  excitements,  driving  us  with  fierce 
epeed,  both  rack  the  ship,  and  end  often  in  explosions.  If  we  were  just  ready  to 
break  out  of  the  body  with  delight,  I  know  not  but  we  should  disdain  many  things 
important  to  be  done.  Low  measures  of  feeling  are  better  than  ecstasies  for  ordinary 
life.  God  sends  his  rain  in  gentle  drops,  else  flowers  would  be  beaten  to  pieces.  (H. 
W.  Beecher.)  The  importance  of  Christian  joy : — The  duty  is  an  important  one.  The 
tone  of  the  apostle  here  and  elsewhere  brings  this  out  very  clearly.  Nothing  is  more 
calculated  to  commend  the  gospel  to  those  around  us,  than  proof  that  its  influence 
on  the  hearts  which  receive  it  is  to  make  them  bright  and  happy.  This  commenda- 
tion is,  of  course,  specially  impressive  where  outward  circumstances  are  of  a  kind 
naturally  tending  to  sadden.  When,  in  deep  poverty,  or  on  a  bed  of  pain,  a 
Christian  is  contented,  calm,  joyous,  there  is  here  "an  epistle  of  Christ"  written 
in  letters  so  large  and  fair,  that  even  careless  observers  can  hardly  help  reading 
its  testimony  to  the  reality  and  potency  of  Divine  grace.  Where  the  lights  of  thia 
world  have  been  in  so  large  a  measure  withdrawn,  it  must  be  plain  that  such 
brightness  of  heart  can  come  only  through  a  beam  of  sunshine  straight  from 
heaven  to  that  heart.  For  the  spiritual  progress  of  the  believer  himself,  too,  it  ia 
of  very  much  moment  that  he  "  rejoice  in  the  Lord."  Nehemiah's  statement  holds 
true  for  all  time :  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  We  know  the  power  of 
happiness,  of  a  genial,  buoyant  spirit,  in  carrying  forward  the  ordinary  work  of 
life.  In  the  work  of  the  spiritual  life — resistance  to  temptation,  and  earnest  labour 
for  the  Maater — there  is  no  sustaining  power  to  be  compared  with  joy.  Walking  in 
darkness,  enveloped  in  spiritual  gloom,  we  move  slowly,  stumble,  fall.  In  the  sun- 
shine, we  press  forward  with  bounding  step  in  the  way  of  God's  commandments, 
"  running,  and  not  weary  "  ;  wherefore,  **  0  house  of  Jacob,  come  ye  and  let  ua 
walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord."  (R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  To  write  the  same  things 
to  yo«. — Repetition : — That  can  never  be  too  much  taught  which  cannot  be  too  well 
learned.     By  learning  the  same  things  often — I.  Dull  and  unexpeet  understandings 

ABE  MTTCB  HELPED.      II.  YoU  ABE  8TIKBED  UP  INTO  OEEATEK  WARINESS  THAN  OTHERWI8B 

VE  WOULD.  (H.  Airay,  D.D.)  Dwelling  on  the  same  things  is  necessary  even  for 
the  best  Christians,  because — I.  Tbuth  is  supernatural,  and  our  minds  are  carnal. 
Th(.t  therefore  which  is  to  keep  our  changeful  minds  must  be  assiduous,  or  else  our 
minds  will  sink  into  their  first  estate.    II.  We  often  disregard  the  truth  at  the 

yiBST,  SECOND,  OB  THIRD  PRESENTATION  (Job  XXxiii.  14).  III.  ThERE  IS  SUCH  A  BREADTH 
AND    DEPTH  IN  THE  WoRD  OF  GOU,  THAT  ALTHOUGH  WE  OFTEN  HEAE  THE  SAME  THING  W« 

NEVEB  COME  TO  UNDERSTAND  THE  FULL  EXTENT.  OuT  souls  are  narrow.  Spiritual 
meat  requires  digestion,  and  therefore  repetition.     IV.  Corruptions  and  worldli 

BUSINESS  tend  to  THRUST  OUT   THE  CONSIDERATION  OF   THE   TRUTH.       We  CaUnot  haVd 

two  things  in  our  mind  at  the  same  time  in  strength  Whence  it  comes  to  pass 
that  the  better  being  ever  subject  to  be  thrust  out  needs  to  be  hammered  in  with 
often  repetition.     V.  Oub  memories  abe  vbrt  weak  to  retain  anything  that  u 


OTA».  iiLj  PHILIPPIANS.  171 

«ooD.  Good  things  eink  through  them  as  water  through  a  sieve ;  tbere  is  need 
therefore  of  remembrances.  After  this  manner  God  hath  dealt  with  man  in 
renewing  the  promises,  and  Christ  in  His  parables  (Matt,  xiii.),  although  with 
variety,  teaching  ministers  to  avoid  tediousness.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  it  not  be 
grievous  to  ministers  to  do  what  is  for  the  safety  of  God's  children.  Peter  cast 
often  and  got  nothing,  yet  at  Christ's  word  he  cast  again.  God,  that  blesseth  not 
€very  cast,  may  bless  the  cast  to  the  catching  of  many.  2.  If  we  hear  tLe  same 
things  often,  let  us  henr  tbem  as  an  impression  which  may  carry  force  and  work 
upon  our  hearts  more  strongly  than  before.  (R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  The  usefulneiis  of 
repetition: — 1.  A  story  we  have  often  heard  or  read,  however  fascinating  at  first, 
will  gradually  lose  much  of  its  interest.  If  read  for  amusement  it  would  be  quite 
out  of  the  rature  oi  things  that  a  book  should  please  us  so  much  on  the  second  or 
third  peiu=al  as  on  the  first:  but  if  read  for  instruction  the  case  is  somewhat 
altered.  We  are  conscious  that  many  parts  are  impei  fectly  mastered,  and  we  do 
not  hesitate  to  apply  ourselves  again  and  again  to  the  study.  But  even  when 
instruction  is  the  object,  a  truth  which  has  once  settled  in  our  minds  will  lose  its 
power  of  gaining  our  attention.  2.  When  we  pass  from  human  literaiure  to 
Divine,  we  carry  our  dispositions  and  habits  with  us,  and  we  shall  be  tempted  to 
reckon  ourselves  so  well  acquainted  with  certain  portions  of  the  Bible  as  to  reckon 
further  study  of  them  superfluous.  Now  there  is  no  truth  of  Christianity  that  will 
not  repay  further  outlay  of  time  and  attention.  Whatever  our  progress,  we  are 
only  beginners.  Yet  while  the  text  sets  itself  against  that  craving  for  novelties  in 
religion  which  is  the  mark  of  a  mind  diseased,  it  does  not  circumscribe  the  range 
of    inquiry.    *'  The  si;me   things "   were    confined  to  no  narrow  groove.     I.  The 

NATURE  OF  SCRIPTURAL  TRUTH  DEMONSTRATES  THAT  REPETITION  CAN    NEVER  BE  USELESS. 

It  is  a  property  of  the  truths  of  the  Bible  that  the  simplest  involve  the  most 
diflicult,  while  the  more  sublime  and  mysterious  prove,  under  some  s'uupe  or  another, 
the  plain  and  the  elementary.  It  is  a  simple  truth,  e.g.,  that  the  Eternal  Son  of 
God  died  as  the  Surety  of  the  lost  human  race,  but  you  introduce  with  it  a  whole 
library  of  divinity,  for  there  is  not  one  truth  of  our  religion  that  is  not  contained  in 
it— the  guilt  of  sin,  the  love  of  God,  the  Trinity,  &c.  And  if  the  most  elementary 
doctrine  is  virtually  a  summary  of  the  Bible,  then  to  ply  men  with  it  is  virtually  to 
ply  men  with  the  whole  system  of  Christianity.  And  then  if  I  have  the  fact  that 
Christ  died  for  sin  put  continually  before  me,  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  it  will 
always  call  up  the  selfsame  idea.  I  shall  sometimes  view  the  atonement  as 
demonstrative  of  Christ's  love  ;  sometimes  of  the  greatness  of  man's  sin,  &o.,  &c. 
And  these  doctrines  derived  from  the  atonement  will  gain  power  and  clearness  from 
their  association  with  it.     And  so  with  the  rest.    II.  The  agency  by  which  scrip- 

TDBAIi  TRUTH  IS  EXPOUNDED  PROVES  THE  USEFULNESS    OF  REPETITION.      That  ageUCy  is 

the  Spirit  of  God.  Hence  it  comes  to  pass  that  a  text  may  have  been  read  or  heard 
a  hundred  times  without  making  any  impression,  and  yet  on  the  next  occasion  it 
may  seem  charged  with  electric  light  and  the  whole  mind  within  disturbed.  And 
what  holds  good  in  conversion  holds  good  for  the  whole  coarse  of  Christian 
experience,  and  thus  the  Bible,  however  diligently  studied,  is  always  a  new  book, 
and  its  best-known  portions  instead  of  being  exhausted  will  often  seem  to  have  been 
indited  again.  We  have,  therefore,  an  incontrovertible  reason  why  "the  same 
things  "  should  be  always  useful.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  repetition  of  old  truth 
it : — I.  Often  necessary.  Men  let  it  slip — fail  to  improve  it.  II.  Never  wearisome. 
It  is  precious  to  those  who  believe  it — who  deliver  it.  III.  Always  safe.  It 
quickens  memory — stirs  the  heart — provokes  effort — and  helps  to  secure  salvation. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Repeating  the  $ame  teaching  : — It  was  the  Sophists  who  scoffed 
at  Socrates  because  he  was  always  teaching  "  the  same  things,"  and  in  this  their 
mockery  of  the  great  heathen  teacher  they  but  disclosed  their  own  folly.  It  waa 
the  Bomanists  in  Beformation  times  who  frequently  laid  to  the  charge  of  the 
Reformers  that  they  were  always  harping  upon  the  same  string.  It  is  a  mark  of 
the  present  day  still  to  show  a  craving  for  what  is  new,  and  to  find  that  craving  too 
eagerly  met  and  administered  to  ;  but  as  Paul  knew,  so  do  all  preachers  of  the 
dcctrines  of  grace  know,  that  if  the  Divine  Word  Himself  chose  to  utter  the  same 
truths  ofttimes  in  the  same  form,  they  have  their  ample  justification  in  that 
example  of  His  which  to  them  is  also  of  necessity  precept.  {J,  Hutchison, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Beware  of  dogs. — The  enemiet  of  tlie    Church : — I.   Theib  oharactbb 
U.  Their  conduct — "Evil  work."    III.  Theib  debtbdotive  cbska 


17a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

«<  Con^sion."      [Prof.    Eadie.)  The  apostolic    warning  : — L   The    pekbons 

WARNED.  1.  All  the  Philippians,  and  not  merely  the  pastors.  They  must 
beware  of  false  teachers.  Christ's  sheep  can  discern  between  a  wolf  and  a 
shepherd  (John  x.  4-5),  and  therefore  they  are  bidden  to  "  try  the  spirits," 
and  "prove  all  things."  But  how,  say  the  Papists,  should  common  people  know 
the  Word  to  be  the  Word  of  God  ?  For  answer  I  would  ask  such  how  they  know  the 
pope's  canons  to  be  the  pope's  ?  They  wiU  say  their  teachers  bring  them  in  the 
pope's  name,  and  they  believe  their  teachers.  So  we  believe  our  teachers,  who  tell 
us  this  is  and  that  is  not  the  Word  of  God.  But  they  object  that  this  makes  every 
man  a  judge.  I  answer,  there  is  a  manner  of  judging,  viz.,  that  by  which  we 
discern  of  anything,  which  every  Christian  must  have,  so  that  it  cannot  be  a  plea 
to  him  at  the  day  of  judgment  to  say,  "My  teacher  did  mislead  me."  Every 
one  must  discern  between  good  and  bad.  For  he  that  knows  not  his  Master's  wiU 
shall  be  beaten.  2.  Not  only  young  and  ordinary  Christians  are  to  beware,  but  also 
the  best  settled.  The  Philippians  were  a  Church  established  in  the  truth.  II.  Thb 
WARNING  GIVEN — "  Beware,"  which  signifies  to  discern,  and  then  to  avoid.  Those 
who  are  aware  of  evil  will  beware  of  it.  The  Church  is  even  subject  to  danger ; 
and  God  suffers  it  to  be  so.  1.  To  try  those  who  are  true  and  who  false.  2.  To 
try  the  good  so  as  to  make  them  better.  III.  The  persons  warned  against,  1. 
Wicked  men  and  dogs.  (1)  Without  the  Church  all  are  dogs.  (2)  The  dogs  within 
the  Church  first  fawn  upon  their  intended  victims  (Eom.  xvi.  18),  and  when  they 
cannot  prevail  by  flattery  they  snarl  and  bark  against  them,  by  slanders  and  open 
scoffs,  when  they  cannot  bite.  When  they  can  they  persecute  with  fire  and  sword. 
2.  Evil  workers.  (1)  Seducing  men  from  Christ.  (2)  Wicked  livers.  3.  The 
concision.     They  make  divisions  in  the  Church.     IV.  How  to  take  the  warning. 

I.  Get  fundamental  truths  into  the  heart  and  love  them  (2  Thess.  ii.  10).  None 
are  seduced  but  such  as  are  cold  in  love.  2.  Practice  that  we  know,  and  God  will 
give  us  a  fuller  measure  of  knowledge,  whereby  we  shall  know  seducers.  (John 
vii.  17).  3.  Pray  to  God  for  wisdom  to  discern  of  schisms  and  ill-disposed  persons. 
4.  Let  US  look  that  we  keep  in  us  a  holy  fear  and  reverence  of  God  (Psa.  xxv.  12). 
{R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  Dogs: — Paul  calls  the  false  teachers  such  in  respect  of — I. 
Their  snarling  and  barking,  because  as  dogs  they  barked  at  him  and  snarled  at 
his  doctrine,  and  that,  as  dogs  again,  not  upon  reason  but  custom.  Abishai  called 
Shimei  a  dog  in  respect  of  his  causeless  barking    against  David  (2  Sam.  xvi.  9). 

II.  Their  greedinkss,  making,  as  he  afterwards  said,  "  their  belly  their  god  " 
(Isa.  Ivi.  11).  III.  Their  abscrdness,  because  as  the  dog  returneth  to  his  vomit, 
so  they  made  the  converted  Jews  return  to  their  old  Judaism.  (H.  Airay,  D.D.) 
Dogs : — St.  Paul  retorts  upon  the  Judaizers  the  term  of  reproach  by  which  they 
stigmatized  the  Gentiles  as  impure.  In  the  Mosaic  law  the  word  is  used  to  denounce 
the  foul  profligacies  of  heathen  worship  (Deut.  xxiii.  19).  Among  the  Jews  of  the 
Christian  era,  it  was  a  common  designation  of  the  Gentiles  involving  the  idea  of 
ceremonial  impurity.  St.  John  apijli^s  the  term  to  those  whose  moral  impurity 
excludes  them  from  the  new  Jerusalem,  the  spiritual  Israel  (Rev.  xiii.  15).  As 
a  term  of  reproach,  the  word  on  the  lips  of  a  Jew  signified  chiefly  "  impurity ;  " 
of  a  Greek,  "  impudence."  The  herds  of  dogs  which  prowl  about  Eastern  cities, 
without  a  home  or  owner,  feeding  on  the  refuse  of  the  streets,  quarrelhng  among 
themselves,  and  attacking  the  passer  by,  explain  both  applications  of  the  image. 
Thus  St.  Paul's  language  is  strikingly  significant.  They  speak  of  themselves  as 
God's  children  ;  they  boast  of  eating  at  God's  table ;  they  reproach  us  as  dogs, 
as  foul  and  unclean,  as  outcasts  from  the  covenant  because,  forsooth,  we  eat  meat 
bought  at  the  shambles,  and  do  not  observe  the  washing  of  cups  and  platters. 
I  reverse  the  image.  We  are  the  children  of  God,  for  we  banquet  on  the  spiritual 
feast  which  God  has  spread  before  us  :  they  are  the  dogs,  for  they  greedily  devour 
the  garbage  of  carnal  ordinances,  the  very  refuse  of  God'stable  (ver.  8).  (Bp. 
Lightfoot.)  Evil  workers. — Paul  calls  them  so  in  respect — I.  Of  the  works  they 
URGED ;  because  by  preaching  the  necessity  of  works  unto  salvation,  and  joining 
them  with  Christ  as  workers  together  with  Him  of  our  salvation,  they  made  those 
works  which  in  themselves  were  not  evil,  evil  works.  II.  Of  the  evil  mind 
wherein  they  urged  those  works,  in  hatred  of  him,  and  to  cross  that  which  he  had 
taught  touching  the  sole  sufficiency  of  Christ's  righteousness  unto  salvation.  III. 
Of  their  unfaithful  working  in  the  Lord's  vineyard,  because  together  with  good 
seed  they  did  sow  tares,  joining  wit!  Christ  the  works  of  the  law  in  the  work 
of  our  salvation.  {H.  Airay,  D.D.)  Beware  of  the  concision. — These  Philippians 
had  admitted  certain  new  men  that  preached  traditional  and  additional  doctrines, 


CHAi-.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  171 

the  law  with  the  gospel,  Moses  with  Christ,  circumcision  with  baptism.  To  these 
new  converts  these  new  doctors  inculcated  often  that  charm,  "Ye  are  the  circum- 
cision" whom  God  hath  sealed  to  Himself ; -will  you  break  this  seal  ?  Now  St.  Paul 
meets  with  these  men  in  their  own  haunt,  and  eveu  in  the  sound  of  the  word  they 
BO  often  pressed.  '*  They  press  upon  you  circumcision,  but  beware  of  concision,  of 
tearing  the  Church  of  God ;  for  we  are  the  circumcision.  If,  therefore,  they  set  up 
another,  and  continue  a  figure  after  the  substance  Christ  Jesus  is  manifested,  a 
legal  circumcision  in  the  flesh  after  the  spiritual  circumcision  of  the  heart,  their 
end  is  not  circumcision  but  concision."  1.  Bewake.  This  caveat  shows  us — 1. 
God's  loathness  to  lose  us.  That  we  are  here  now  is  sufficient  argument  for  this. 
Who  of  us  has  not  done  something  since  yesterday  that  has  made  him  unworthy 
to  be  here  to-day  ?  If  God  were  weary  of  me,  and  would  fain  be  rid  of  me,  He 
could  find  enough  in  me  now  and  here  to  let  me  perish.  Is  not  the  spirit  of 
slumber  in  me,  the  spirit  of  detraction  in  another,  of  impenitence  and  facility  to 
admit  temptations  in  others,  enough  to  justify  Him  ?  But  He  would  not  have  the 
death  df  any,  but  would  have  all  men  be  saved,  and  so  says,  "  beware."  2.  Con- 
sider the  way  by  which  He  leads  us  to  Him.  He  declares  His  will  towards  ns  in 
a  law.  He  bids  and  forbids.  There  had  passed  a  contract  between  us  and  Him — 
Beheve,  do,  and  thou  shalt  live.  We  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done."  which  supposes 
that  that  will  is  made  known.  And  that  will  has  been  manifested  in  the  law 
within,  the  Mosaic  law,  and  the  gospel,  and  not  only  does  God  thus  speak  to  us, 
but  He  calls  upon  us ;  gives  us  a  law  and  bids  us  "  beware  "  of  breaking  it.  3. 
Nothing  exalts  God's  goodness  more  than  this,  that  He  multiphes  the  means  of 
mercy,  so  that  no  man  can  say.  Once  I  might  have  been  saved,  once  God  opened 
to  me  a  door,  but  I  neglected  that,  and  God  never  came  more.  (L)  God  hath  spoken 
once  in  His  Scriptures,  and  we  have  heard  Him  twice  (Psa.  Ixii.  11)  at  home  in  our 
own  reading,  and  again  and  again  in  His  ordinances.  (2)  There  is  a  language  in 
the  heavens  (Psa.  xix.  2).  This  is  the  true  harmony  of  the  spheres  which  every 
man  may  hear.  Though  he  understand  no  tongue  but  his  own,  he  may  hear 
God  in  the  seasons,  in  the  vicissitudes  of  Church  and  State,  &c.  This  is  God's 
English  to  thee,  and  His  French,  Latin,  Greek,  to  otbers.  (3)  But  then  God  trans- 
lates Himself  in  particular  works.  Nationally  :  He  speaks  in  particular  judgments 
or  deUverances  to  one  nation.  Domestically :  He  speaks  that  language  to  a 
particular  family ;  and  so  personally.  God  will  make  a  fever  speak  to  me  that 
there  is  no  health  in  me ;  my  adversity  that  there  is  no  safe  depeudence  but  in 
Him ;  even  my  sin  shall  be  a  sermon  to  me.  (4)  God  hath  spoken  to  us  in  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  His  Son.  II.  Bewabe  of  the  concision.  There  is  s 
certain  elegant  and  holy  delicacy  and  juveuility  in  St.  Paul's  choosing  the  words  of 
musical  cadence — circumcision,  concision  ;  but  then  this  presents  matter  of  gravity. 
Language  must  wait  upon  matter,  and  words  upon  things.  Concision  is  the 
severing  of  that  which  should  be  entire — in  the  state,  the  aliening  of  the  head  from 
the  body;  in  the  Church  to  constitute  a  monarchy,  an  universal  head;  in  the 
family,  to  divide  man  and  wife.  But  more  particularly  consider— 1.  The  concision 
of  the  body  ;  disunion  in  doctrinal  things.  (1)  This  that  should  be  kept  entire  is 
Jesus.  (2)  "Every  spirit  which  dissolveth  Jesus"  (1  John  iv.  3),  that  makes 
religion  serve  turns,  that  admits  so  much  gospel  as  may  advance  present  businesses, 
every  such  spirit  is  not  of  God.  (3)  Not  to  profess  the  whole  gospel,  not  to  believe 
all  the  articles  of  faith,  this  is  a  breaking  of  what  should  be  entire.  (4)  The 
advancement  of  a  private  interpretation  to  an  article  of  faith  mars  the  peace  and 
rends  the  unity  of  the  Church.  Let  ns  therefore  (Psa.  cxxxvii.  6)  prefer  Jerusalem 
before  our  chief  joy,  love  of  peace  by  or  forbearance  on  all  sides,  rather  than 
victory  by  wrangling  and  uncharitableness.  2.  The  concision  of  the  garment ; 
disunion  in  ceremonial  things.  To  a  circumcision  of  the  garment,  to  a  paring  away 
such  ceremonies  us  were  superstitious  and  superfluous,  we  came  at  the  beginning  of 
the  Beformation.  But  those  churches  that  came  to  a  concision  of  the  garment,  an 
absolute  taking  away  of  all  ceremonies,  neither  provided  so  safely  for  the  Church 
itself  nor  for  her  devotion.  Ceremonies  are  nothing,  but  where  there  are  none 
order  and  obedience,  and,  presently,  religion,  will  vanish.  3.  And  therefore  beware 
of  tearing  the  body  or  the  garment,  lest  the  third  be  induced,  the  tearing  of  thine 
own  spirit  from  that  rest  it  should  receive  in  God;  for  when  thou  has  lost  thy 
hold  of  those  handles  which  God  reaches  out  to  thee  in  the  ministry  of  His  Charch, 
and  hast  no  means  to  apply  the  promises  of  God  to  thy  soul,  when  anything  falls 
npon  thee  to  overcome  thy  moral  constancy,  thon  wilt  soon  sink  into  desperation, 
which  is  the  fearfollest  concision  of  alL     When  God  hath  made  me  a  partaker  of 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [c«A».  irr 

the  Divine  nature,  so  that  now  in  Christ  Jesus  He  and  I  are  one,  this  were  a  dis- 
solving  of  Jesus  of  the  worst  kind  imaginable  to  tear  myself  from  Jesus,  or  by  any 
suspicion  of  His  mercy,  or  any  horror  of  my  own  sins,  to  come  to  think  myself  to 
be  none  of  His.  1.  This  is  treason  against  the  Father ;  a  cutting  off  of  the  power 
of  God.  2,  Treason  against  the  Son  ;  a  cutting  off  of  the  wisdom  of  God.  S. 
Treason  against  the  Holy  Ghost ;  the  cutting  off  of  comfort.     (John  Donne,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Tor  we  are  the  circumcision. — In  all  ages  and  under  all  dispensations 
there  have  been  two  antagonistic  principles  at  work,  two  classes  among  the  pro- 
fessed people  of  God  ;  the  carnal  and  the  spiritual ;  those  who  relied  on  externals 
and  those  who  rehed  on  what  is  internal,  an  Israel  according  to  the  flesh,  and  an 
Israel  according  to  the  spirit.  The  great  question  between  the  two  has  ever  been 
and  is,  Who  are  the  circumcision  ?  the  true  people  of  God  ?  I.  What  is  meant  by 
"  We  ARE  THE  CIRCUMCISION  ?  "  Circumcision  in  the  Old  Testament  was — 1.  The 
symbol  of  regeneration.  2.  The  sign  and  seal  of  a  covenant.  It  distinguished  the 
people  of  God  from  other  men,  and  assured  them  of  their  interest  in  the 
blessings  of  the  covenant.  The  question  therefore  is  tantamount  to  this :  Who 
are  the  people  of  God  in  such  a  sense  as  to  be  His  spiritual  children  and  heirs  of 
His  kingdom  ?  The  Judaizers  said  they  were — Paul  said  Christians  were.  II. 
The  CHARACTERISTICS  of  thosc  who  are  the  true  people  of  God  or  the  true  circum- 
cision. 1.  They  worship  God  in  the  Spirit,  i.e.,  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  (1)  This  includes  (a)  that  the  inward  principle  of  worship  is  no  mere 
principle  of  nature,  whether  fear,  natural  reverence,  or  sentiment,  but  that  love 
and  devotion  of  which  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  author,  {b)  That  the  mode  of  wor- 
ship is  that  which  the  Holy  Spirit  has  enjoined.  It  is  not  a  will  worship,  not  the 
assiduous  performance  of  things  uncommanded  of  God,  whether  in  matters  of 
worship  or  life.  (2)  It  therefore  stands  opposed  to  {a)  insincere,  hypocritical 
service;  (6)  mere  external  and  ceremonial  service  ;  (c)  all  such  service  as  the  unre- 
newed and  unspiritual  do  or  can  render.  Such  was  Jewish  and  Judaizing  worship  ; 
and  all  formalism,  whether  Papal  or  Protestant.  2.  They  rejoice  or  glory  in  Christ 
Jesus.  This  includes  the  recognition  of  Him  (1)  as  the  ground  of  our  confidence  ; 
(2)  as  the  source  of  honour ;  (3)  as  the  object  of  delight.  How  opposite  is  this 
spirit  to  that  of  the  Judaizers,  who  gloried  in  the  law,  the  theocracy,  and  their  descent 
from  Abraham.  3.  They  do  not  confide  in  the  flesh.  "  Flesh  "  includes  (a)  what 
is  external,  whether  Abraham's  descent  or  circumcision;  external  obedience  to  the 
law,  or  religious  ceremonies ;  baptism  or  membership  in  the  true  Church.  This  is 
haul's  interpretation  as  given  in  the  immediate  context.  (5)  What  is  opposed  to 
spirit,  i.e.,  nature.  (2)  To  have  no  confidence  in  it,  therefore,  means  to  have  no 
confidence  in  ourselves,  our  own  righteousness  or  strength.  This  also  is  included 
in  Paul's  amplification.  Those  who  do  not  trust  in  the  flesh  are  those  who 
renounce  their  own  righteousness  and  embrace  that  of  God,  which  is  by  the  faith  of 
Christ.  Conclusion :  It  is  by  these  criteria  that  we  are  to  judge  ourselves,  and  to 
determine  the  true  fomi  of  religion,  and  of  the  Church.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  The 
true  circumcision : — I.  Spiritual  worship.  1.  There  must  be  present  worship. 
The  rite  of  circumcision  was  administered  once  for  all,  and  as  an  external  badge  this 
was  suflicient.  But  true  religion  is  a  matter  of  daily  hfe.  A  circumcised  Jew  who 
lived  in  sin  was  no  true  Jew  ;  a  baptized  Christian  may  behave  like  a  man  of  the 
world,  in  which  case  his  baptism  counts  for  nothing.  The  heart  and  soul  of  religion 
is  personal  devotion,  daily  worship.  2.  This  worship  must  be  an  inspiration  of 
the  Spirit  of  God.  All  worship  requires  some  support.  The  formal  worship  of  the 
Jew  rested  on  ceremonies.  When  these  were  absent  the  worship  perished.  The 
Christian  rests  upon  the  influences  of  the  Spirit,  and  where  this  is  there  is  Divine 
life.  II.  Christian  ENTHrsiASM.  The  expression '♦  glory  in  Christ  Jesus,"  points 
to  this.  1.  The  secret  of  the  deepest  religious  life  is  personal  devotion  to  Christ. 
Jesus  at  once  demands  adoration  by  His  Spiritual  greatness,  and  wins  affection  by 
His  human  sympathy.  2.  This  devotion  is  inspired  by  joyous  enthusiasm.  The 
Jew  gloried  in  Aoraham,  but  a  greater  than  Abraham  is  here.  IIL  Freedom  from 
BUPERflTiTiON.  For  US,  HkePaul  (see  sequel), tocast  off  all  confidence  in  privileged  birth 
in  a  Christian  home,  membership  in  a  historic  Church,  observance  of  venerable  rites, 
and  to  trust  wholly  in  spiritual  religion,  is  a  confirming  sign  of  Divine  sonship  better 
than  any  rite  such  as  circumcision.  (W.  F.  Adenerj,  M.A.)  The  true  circumcision 
— I.  The  sacraments  of  OiiD  and  New  Testaments  are  in  substance  the  same.  The 
Phihppians  who  were  baptized  with  water  ancf  the  Holy  Ghost  are  said  to  be  cir- 
Bumoiaed.    An^  so  the  apostle  attributes  our  baptism  and  Lord's  sapper  after  & 


'.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  175 

sort  to  the  Church  of  the  Jews  (1  Cor.  x.  1-2).  As  the  covenant  was  always  the 
same  in  substance,  so  the  seals  of  it  were  the  same  too.     II.  The  beauty  of  that 

WEIGH  SEDUCERS  PRETEND    TO,  WILL   HOBE    BEADILY    BB    FOUND    IN  THOSB  THAT  CONSCI- 

ENTI0U8LT  OPPOSE  THEM.  Theso  men  ran  down  the  apostle  and  others,  giving  out 
themselves  only  for  the  circumcised  ones.  But  the  apostle  proves  he  had  the  better 
claim.  Thus  the  works  of  holiness  are  to  be  found  more  with  those  that  press 
justification  by  faith,  than  with  others  who  would  be  looked  on  as  great  patrons  of 
good  works.  Be  not,  then,  deceived  with  fair  speeches  ;  examine  matters  to  the 
bottom.  Often  those  who  have  the  highest  pretences  to  right  on  their  side  go 
furthest  from  it.  III.  The  sion  in  beligion  without  the  thing  signified  is 
LITTLE  woBTH.  1.  All  it  caD  do  is  to  give  a  name  before  men  which  they  lose 
before  God  (Rom.  ii.  28-29).  Christian  may  be  an  honourable  title  before  men, 
end  an  empty  title  before  God.  2.  The  sign  is  a  mere  external  thing  on  which 
nothing  of  weight  for  salvation  can  hang,  and  therefore  when  the  Lord  comes  to 
judgment.  He  throws  down  aU  together  (Jer.  ix.  25-26).  For  He  looks  not  to  the 
outward  appearance  but  to  the  heart.  3.  It  is  an  inefficacious  thing  ;  as  a  body 
without  a  spirit.  He  who  has  got  the  sign  only,  has  only  the  meanest  half  of  the 
sacrament.  Sacraments  are  seals  of  the  covenant ;  but  where  there  is  no  covenant 
there  can  be  no  seal ;  and  what  avails  a  seal  at  a  blank.  4.  Men  in  Christ's  livery 
may  abi<3e  in  the  devil's  service  and  meet  with  his  doom  (Luke  xiii.  26-27).  6.  To 
apply  all  this.  (1)  Baptism  with  water  without  the  Holy  Spirit  is  little  worth. 
Many  never  reflect  seriously  on  their  baptism.  Hence  they  live  as  though  they 
had  never  sworn  allegiance  to  the  King  of  heaven,  aud  were  entirely  their  own,  and 
will  never  renew  it.  Let  me  ask  as  touching  this  baptism :  (a)  Baptized  ye  were 
with  water,  but  were  ye  ever  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  fire — the  thing  sig- 
nified ?  Alas,  in  consequence  of  the  want  of  this,  the  uuiversal  coldness  in  the 
things  of  God.  (b)  Hast  thou  realized  that  only  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  can 
cleanse  thee  ?  In  baptism  is  a  profession  of  this.  If  not  what  avails  thy  baptism, 
(c)  Wast  thou  ever  made  partaker  of  the  washing  of  regeneration  ?  (Tit.  iii.  5-6). 
Unto  what  then  were  ye  baptized  7  (Acts  xix.  2).  (d)  Where  ye  ever  cut  off  from 
the  old  stock  of  Adam  and  ingrafted  into  Christ?  (1  Cor.  xii.  13).  Baptised  into  the 
name  of  Christ,  and  yet  not  in  Christ,  but  without  Him  makes  sad  work,  (e)  Are 
lusts  reigning :  or  are  they  dying,  and  your  souls  living  a  new  life  ?  (Bom.  vi.  5-6). 
Has  the  water  been  but  as  that  thrown  upon  a  corpse?  (2)  The  Lord's  supper 
without  the  thing  signified  is  little  worth.  To  be  partakers  of  the  bread  of  the 
Lord  without  the  bread  which  is  the  Lord  will  go  but  small  length  (John  vi.  57). 
IV.  Believers  in  Christ  abe  the  tbue  circumcision.  They  have  in  spirit  which 
the  Jews,  by  this  ordinance,  only  had  in  the  letter.  Circumcision  was — 1.  A  token 
of  God's  covenant  (Gen.  ivii.  7-11).  This  honour  have  all  God's  saints  to  have 
God  Himself  to  be  ours.  2.  A  distinction  between  Jews  and  others,  as  God's 
people  (Gen.  xvii.  4).  So  believers  are  God's  people,  His  garden,  while  others 
are  but  His  out  field.  3.  A  cutting  oft  of  part  of  the  flesh,  signifying  the  believer's 
privilege  and  duty  (Col.  ii.  11).  Their  hearts  are  circumcised  to  love  the  Lord  ; 
their  ears  to  hear  Him ;  their  lips  to  speak  for  Him,  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The  mark$ 
of  a  true  Christian: — There  are  many  things  that  have  a  name  to  live  and  are  dead  : 
faith  without  works  ;  the  form  of  godliness  without  the  power ;  sacraments  without 
holy  desires ;  Christians  without  union  with  Christ,  In  exposing  this  the  apostle's 
intention  was  not  to  disparage  the  Old  Testament  sacraments,  but  to  show  that  in 
common  with  the  New  their  value  consisted  in  their  spiritual  use  and  significance,  in 
their  connection  with  the  moral  affections,  in  their  leading  to  Him  who  is  the  end 
of  all  sacraments.  Consider — I,  The  nature  of  a  believer's  worship.  1,  The 
word  worship  may  be  taken  in  the  larger  sense  which  includes  all  religious  service. 
From  which  we  learn  that  the  believer's  hfe  is  to  be  one  continued  act  of  worship  ; 
his  body  is  a  living  temple  ;  his  heart  an  altar  for  daily  sacrifice  ;  his  calhng  that 
of  "  a  priest  unto  God  ;  "  his  whole  conversation  one  hymn  of  praise.  To  worship 
God  in  the  spirit,  then,  is  to  worship  Him  in  the  life.  The  fire  of  sacrifice  is  to 
eome  down  on  the  domestic  hearth,  and  "  holiness  unto  the  Lord  "  is  to  be  written 
"  on  the  bells  of  the  horses. "  2.  Still  the  reference  to  the  Old  Testament  ritual 
would  suggest  that  "  worship  "  points  to  certain  religious  actions.  To  worship  God 
in  the  spirit,  then,  is  to  worship  Him — (1)  In  simplicity  as  distinguished  from 
hypocrisy.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  when  a  miser  prays  to  be  delivered  from  covetous- 
ness,  a  vindictive  man  from  "  malice,  hatred,"  <»c.  (2)  With  reverence,  as  distin- 
gashed  from  all  permitted  indifference,  deadness,  reluctance,  clock-work  piety. 
Our  heart  and  tongae  should  go  together.     Moses  left  his  sandals  at  the  foot  ol  iim 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nx. 

mount,  too  many  take  their  sandals  and  leave  their  hearts  behind.  (3)  In  earnest- 
ness, as  if  we  felt  that  important  interests  were  suspended.  The  two  worships  are 
distinguished  in  that  in  one  case  an  end  is  looked  for,  in  the  other  the  only  care  is 
to  get  the  work  done.  II.  The  object  op  the  believbb's  jot.  We  rejoice  in  Christ 
Jesus,  1.  For  the  glory  of  His  character.  2.  For  the  dignity  of  His  offices.  3. 
The  blessedness  of  His  work.  4.  The  completeness  of  His  salvation.  5.  The 
freedom  of  His  service.  6.  The  reasonableness  of  His  commands.  7.  The  unutter- 
able recompences  of  His  rewards.  III.  The  gboond  of  a  bbleevbr's  trust.  1.  By 
"  the  flesh  "  St.  Paul  means  anything  that  we  are  or  have.  The  flesh  in  its  best 
estate  is  a  corrupt  thing,  and  can  therefore  be  no  proper  ground  for  confidence. 
2.  The  apostle  would  take  away  our  confidence  from  everything  that  is  not  Christ. 
He  not  only  excludes  all  outward  distinctions,  national  privileges,  moral  excellen- 
cies and  attainments,  but  he  strikes  at  that  refined  and  subtle  fallacy  of  Romanism 
which  would  lead  us  to  have  confidence  in  some  indwelling  grace,  which  would  give 
efficacy  to  tears  and  perfection  to  human  sanctity.  St.  Paul  knew  that  it  was  not 
grace  in  the  saints,  but  grace  in  Christ,  that  was  to  save  him,  and  in  that  he  could 
feel  unbounded  confidence.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The  inheritors  of  the  promises : — 
I.  The  ground  of  the  apostle's  claim.  1.  To  worship  God  in  the  spirit  is — (1)  To 
worship  God  as  a  spirit.  (2)  With  our  own  spirit.  (3)  By  the  help  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  To  worship  God  in  the  flesh  would  be  to  worship  God  as  though  He  were 
flesh,  with  the  powers  of  the  body  alone,  and  by  the  influences  and  aids  which 
work  on  the  body  (John  iv.  23 ;  Mai.  i.  11).  2.  To  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus  is  not 
only  to  believe  in  Him  and  receive  Him,  but  gladly  and  gratefully  to  accept  aU  His 
work  and  gifts  and  services,  being  cleansed  by  His  blood,  made  righteous  by  His 
obedience,  and  being  reconciled  by  His  mediation  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  And  if  we  connect 
this  with  the  former,  then  it  means  to  worship,  pleading  Christ'i  sacrifice,  trusting 
in  His  advocacy,  and  making  Him  in  all  respects  our  way  to  God.  3.  Having  no 
confidence,  &c.  What  he  means  by  flesh  is  evident  from  the  words  following — the 
administration  of  ordinances,  birth  of  high  noble  blood,  earnest  external  obedience. 
The  flesh  is  the  outward  and  material,  not  the  inward  and  spiritual.  Now,  if  we 
connect  this  third  qualification  with  the  first,  to  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh  is 
to  use  the  material  without  abusing  it,  making  it  secondary  and  subservient,  to 
employ  as  much  of  the  outward  form  in  worship  as  is  essential  to  spirit  and  life, 
but  never  as  a  substitute.  II.  The  lofty  position  Paul  claims.  The  practice  of 
circumcision  existed,  it  may  be,  before  it  was  imposed  on  Abraham,  but  it  was  or- 
dained by  God  mainly  with  a  spiritual  object  (Gen.  xvii.  10,  &c.),  as  the  sign  and 
seal  of  the  Divine  covenant ;  it  testified  to  God's  faithfulness.  What  advantage, 
then,  hath  the  Jew  ?  or  what  profit  is  there  of  circumcision  ?  (Rom.  ix.  4-5).  Like 
privileges  are  possessed  by  such  as  worship  God  in  the  spirit,  &c.  1.  They 
are  the  sons  and  daughters  of  the  Lord  Almighty.  2.  They  behold  the  bright- 
ness of  the  Father's  glory  (John  i.  14,  18).  3.  They  are  the  inheritors  of  great 
and  precious  promises.  Even  the  promises  made  to  Abraham  are  theirs  (Rom. 
iv.  11-13,  16 ;  Gal.  iii.  7-9).  But  the  believer  is  interested  in  a  better  covenant, 
established  in  better  promises.  (1)  A  country  was  promised  to  Abraham — a  good 
land ;  but  Canaan  shared  in  the  universal  curse.  But  the  land  promised  to  the 
Christian  is  a  better  country.  (2)  It  was  promised  to  Abraham  that  his  seed 
Bhould  become  a  great  nation — those  who  rejoice  in  Christ  are  a  holy  nation,  a 
peculiar  people.  (3)  God  promised  to  Abraham  to  be  his  God,  etc.,  and  so  (2  Cor. 
vi.  18) — 4.  They  are  favoured  with  special  Divine  revelations  (Heb,  viii.  10-11 ; 
2  Cor.  iii.  18).  5.  They  are  a  royal  priesthood.  6.  They  are  connected  with  an 
ancient  and  sacred  lineage.  The  Jew  claimed  Abraham  as  his  father,  and  all  the 
illustrious  patriarchs  and  prophets  as  ancestors ;  but  they  whom  Paul  describes 
may  claim  as  ancestors  all  who  have  like  precious  faith  in  every  age.  7.  While  of 
the  Israelites  as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ  came ;  of  those,  whom  Paul  describes, 
Christ  comes  as  a  gospel  and  a  revelation  to  the  world  (2  Cor.  ii.  14-15 ;  iii.  2-3). 
Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  claim  to  be  the  circumcision  in  the  presence  of  the  Jew. 
To  him,  if  he  rejoice  not  in  Christ  Jesus  we  say,  Your  circumcision  is  counted  un- 
circamcision :  We  are  Abraham's  seed,  and  he  is  an  alien.  We  envy  not  his 
connection  by  blood  ;  we  have  a  tie  less  corruptible.  2.  We  claim  this  position  as 
Christians  of  simple  customs,  in  spite  of  some  who  would  withhold  it  because  we 
follow  not  with  them.  We  notice  the  stress  which  such  lay  upon  consecrated 
edifices,  sacramental  efficacy,  an  authorized  ministry,  uniformity.  We  affirm  that 
spiritual  worship  consecrates  any  structure,  constitutes  the  worshipper  a  priest,  and 
renders  the  simplest  forms  full  of  power  and  life.    3.  We  claim  this  in  the  face  (A 


in.]  PHILIPPIANS.  177 

the  world  ;  and  if  men  demand  of  as  a  style  and  order  of  worship  which  would 
undermine  spirituality,  divert  our  complacency  from  Christ,  and  foster  confidence 
in  the  flesh,  let  us  not  only  not  conform  to  tlieir  requirements,  but  let  us  deny  that 
conformity  would  secure  any  increase  of  acceptableness  or  power.  (1)  Of  power  1 
What  is  mightier  than  spiritual  worship?  What  show  of  strength  exceeds  that 
manifest  by  rejoicing  in  Jesus  7  And  is  "  no  confidence  in  the  flesh  "  loss  of  power 
(Jer.  xvii.  5-8).  (2)  And  is  there  no  beauty  in  simplicity  ?  The  utmost  and  highest 
is  to  be  found  in  an  assembly  which  worships  God,  &c.  4.  Let  us  in  godly  fellow- 
ship with  all  true  churches  maintain  this  position.  (S.  Martin.)  Spiritual 
heirship : — 1.  A  scholar  trained  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel  kneels  before  the  Father 
*'  in  spirit  "  ;  a  Pharisee  of  the  strictest  sect  has  his  shrunk  heart  expanded  into 
'•  joy  in  Christ  Jesus  "  ;  a  proud  professor  feels  '•  no  confidence  in  the  flesh."  "  We 
are  the  circumcision,"  he  says,  after  this  thorough  reailjusting  of  His  religious 
relations.  He  thought  so,  as  a  Jew,  when  there  was  none  to  dispute  the  claim.  As 
a  Christian,  with  all  Jewry  despising  that  claim,  he  is  sure  of  it.  2.  Now  to  be 
able  to  say,  "  We  are  the  circumcision,"  to  be  clearly  conscious  of  standing  in  the 
right  line  of  spiritual  descent  is  no  mean  distinction,  no  unproductive  element  in 
our  expectations,  that  we  should  alienate  it  without  cause.  I.  Thodqhtfdl  students 

CAN    HARDLY    DOUBT    THAT     GOD     HAS     MEANT     HiS     ChURCH    TO    MAINTAIN   AN    HISTORJO 

UNITY.  No  bend  in  its  growth  has  ever  been  so  abrupt  as  to  choke  the  sap  or  sever 
the  commerce  of  any  branch  with  the  root.  Each  moral  revolution  no  less  than 
each  theological  variation  proves  that  the  essence  of  faith  is  not  perishable. 
Something  of  primitive  power  goes  into  the  least  oft'shoot.  The  three  dispensations 
lay  their  ordaining  hands  on  its  head,  with  patriarchal  blessings,  Levitical  unction, 
and  gospel  baptism.  Let  any  holy  family  pilch  its  tent  where  it  will,  it  shall  not 
be  out  of  that  Divine  order;  reaching  backwaid  and  forward — Calvary,  Sinai, 
Mamre.  II.  But  blended  with  this  law  of  its  history,  the  Church  has  to 
RECOGNIZE  ANOTHER,  Constantly  counterbalancing  the  gravitation  towards  indolence 
which  might  accrue  from  the  former  alone,  and  checking  its  complacency.  For  as 
it  advances,  some  unexpected  crisis  is  always  breaking  up  the  old  distribution  of 
forces ;  the  original  Providence  readjusts  the  lines.  Dismissing  former  tests  of 
legitimacy,  it  brings  fresh  affiliations  into  the  family,  showing  those  often  to  be 
of  "  the  circumcision  "  that  had  before  been  reckoned  of  the  alienacre ;  and  dis- 
owning sons  who  forfeit  favour  by  sinning  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  Men  claim  to 
be  Christians  by  birth;  offer  as  a  spiritual  qualification,  not  a  confession  of  faith, 
bat  a  pedigree.  Something  like  this  Las  always  been  a  presumption  of  religious 
majorities.  And,  as  if  to  rebuff  it,  the  propensity  to  proscription  is  no  sooner 
settled,  than  a  reformation  is  sent  to  disturb  it.  Some  Paul  of  Samosata,  some 
Constantine,  or  some  Popish  lineage  is  always  secularizing  the  Churcb,  and  then 
some  impracticable  Wyclifte,  dissenting  Baxter,  or  erratic  Huss,  sloughs  the  form 
to  act  out  the  substance.  Hypociites  vitiate  the  succession,  and  heretics  ennoble 
the  new  blood.  When  the  Jews  refuse  the  aj^ostle  of  their  salvation,  lo  1  he  turns 
to  the  Gentiles.  As  if  purposely  to  break  up  confidence  in  mere  ecclesiasticism  and 
clear  the  gospel  of  bondage,  the  visible  Church  is  scarcely  at  any  epoch  suffered  to 
enfold  the  Church  spiritual  with  a  clear  circumference.  And  the  instant  any 
majority  begins  to  be  at  ease  in  Zion,  some  terrible  prophet  comes  crying  out  of 
the  wilderness,  "  Bepent  I  "  shows  what  circumcision  is,  and  turns  the  world  of 
the  Rabbis  upside  down.  But  always,  observe,  the  old  faith  goes  into  the  living 
body.  {Bishop  Huntington.)  Worship  God  In  the  Spirit. — Spiritual  worship: — 
L  What  it  is  to  wi-kship  God  in  the  spirit.  1.  Christ  has  respect  to  the  whole 
of  our  service  and  obeiiience  to  God.  The  parts  of  it  are  two:  holiness,  or  oar 
daty  to  God ;  righteousness,  or  our  duty  to  man  (Luke  i.  74-75).  The  Christian 
life  is,  as  it  were,  one  continued  act  of  worship,  where  all  our  actions,  natural,  civil, 
and  religious,  meet  in  God  (Acts  zxvi.  7  ;  Bev.  vii  15).  2.  It  has  respect  to  those 
duties  which  are  properly  parts  of  worship.  The  Christian  (1)  worships  God  with 
his  heart,  soul,  and  spirit,  and  not  with  his  body  only  (Bom.  i.  9 ;  John  iv.  24). 
This  implies  (a)  internal  worship,  called  for  by  the  first  commandment.  The  true 
Christian's  soul  is  a  temple  of  God.  (b)  Outward  joined  to  inward  (1  Cor.  vi.  20). 
(c)  Spirituality — faith ;  love ;  goodwill ;  sincerity.  (2)  By  assistance  from  and 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Eph.  vi.  18 ;  Jude  20).  (a)  The  Spirit  gives  habitual 
grace  to  make  men  capable  of  spiritual  worship  (John  iii.  6).  (b)  He  gives  actual 
grac«.  influences  to  stir  up  grace  (Bom.  vii.  26).  II.  This  worship  la  a  distinguish- 
cio  KARK  of  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN.  1.  All  truo  Christians  have  it,  for — (1)  All  of 
them  are  spiritual  (John  iii.  6).     Everything  that  brings  forth,  brings  forth  its  like. 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

(2)  All  of  them  have  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  them  (Bom.  viii.  9).     (3)  That 
■worship  which  is  merely  outward  is  but  the  carcase  of  duties,  unacceptable  to  God; 
and  they  who  never  perform  more  are  hypocrites  (Matt.  xv.  7-8).     (4)  External 
worship  is  properly  but  the  means  of  worship.     Prayer,  hearing,  &o.,  tend  to  the 
promotii)n  of  love,  trust,  &c.,  and  the  enjoyment  of  God  can  never  be  found  but  in 
worshipping  Him  in  the  Spirit.      2.  That  none  but  true  Christiana  have   this 
privilege  is  plain  from  this,  that  all  others  are  in  the  flesh  (Jude  19).     (T.  Boston, 
D.D.)        God  should  be  worshipped : — I.  With  a  knowledge  of  His  true  chabacteb. 
Otherwise  it  is  mere  Athenian  worship.     This  is  the  great  fault  of  the  heathen. 
Hence  the  great  importance  of  religious  knowledge.     This  may  be  obtained  from 
nature,  and  our  own  persons.     And  yet  with  all  the  perfections  of  deity  before 
their  eyes  men  do  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge.     But  as  man  is  a 
fallen  creature,  the  knowledge  which  reason  can  furnish  is  not  suflQcient.     Christ 
does  not  reveal  His  mercy,  and  show  how  sinneis  can  be  pardoned  and  restored. 
So  God  has  revealed  Himself  in  His  Word,  and  now  man  is  utterly  without  excuse 
if  he  do  not  know  God  and  worship  Him.     II.  With  reverence.     This  sentiment 
is  natural  when  we  come  before  any  superior,  how  much  more  when  we  come  before 
God.     This  is  no  slavish  or  superstitious  diead,  but  that  by  virtue  of  which  God'a 
children  are  distinguished  from  the  wicked  who  have  no  fear  of  God  before  their 
eyea.      God   is  a  jealous  God,  and  abominates  levity.      Reverence  is  the  most 
prominent  feature  of  angelic  worship.     How  shocking  then  is  familiarity  in  the 
worship  of  man.    III.  Humility.     Nothing  is  more  odious  to  God  than  pride,  and 
nothing  more  acceptable  than  the  contrite  spirit.     He  dwells  with  such.     It  is 
most  proper  in  regard  to  man's  moral  and  God's  exalted  state,  and  upon  it  Christ 
pronounced  his  beatitudes.     IV.  Faith.     Without  this  it  is  impossible  to  please 
God,  and  all  worship  must  become  an  empty  form.     Its  principal  exercise  has 
respect  to  Christ  as  the  Mediator.      V.  Concentration.      Spiritual  worship  is 
interrupted  by  nothing  so  much  as  the  wandering  of  our  thoughts,  and  is  one  of 
the  accusations  brought  against  God's  ancient  people.     "VI.  Fervency.    The  crying 
defect  of  our  worship  is  want  of  heart.    VII.  Scriptural,  with  such  rites  as  God 
has  appointed,  and  those  only.  As  to  external  circumstances,  time,  place,  atiitude, 
these  should  be  regulated  by  the  apostle's  rule,  "Let  all  things  be  done  decently 
and  in  order;"  but  as  it  relates  to  the  worship  itself,  nothing  should  be  introduced 
but  what   is  authorized  by  the  Scriptures,  such  as  prayer,  singing,  reading,  ad- 
ministering the  sacraments.     "In  vain  do  they  worship  Me,"  &c.     "Who  hath 
required  this  at  your  hands."     VIII.  Frequency.     Men  are  not  required  to  spend 
their  whole  time  at  it.     But  God  should  be  worshipped  morning  and  evening ;  and 
the  Lord's  day  should  be  entirely  devoted  to  the  Lord's  service.     We  cannot  go  to 
an  excess  here  unless  we  make  this  duty  exclude  others  which  are  equally  incumbent. 
"  Pray  without  ceasing."     (A.  Alexander,  D.D.)         Rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus. — 
Rejoicing  in  Christ  Jesus  : — I.  Its  nature.     1.  It  is  an  act  of  love.     The  acts  ol 
love  are  desire  and  delight,  and  they  both  agree  in  this  that  they  are  conversant 
about  good,   and  are  founded  in  esteem.     But  they  differ  because  desire  is  the 
motion  and  exercise  of  love,  and  delight  the  quiet  and  repose  of  it.    All,  however, 
meet  in  Christ.     2.  It  is  an  act  of  love  begotten  in  us  by  the  sense  of  the  love  of 
Christ  (1  John  iv.  19).     The  object  of  love  is  goodness.     (1)  The  goodness  that  ia 
In  Christ,  moral  and  beneficial  (P.- a.  cxix.  140  ;  c.  5  ;  cxix.  68).     (2)  The  goodness 
that  floweth  from  Him  (Titus  iii.  4).     (3)  The  goodness  we  expect  from  Him  in 
this  world  and  the  next  (Luke  vii.  47  ;  Matt.  v.  12).     3.  This  love  of  Christ— (1)  la 
revealed  in  the  gospel  (Acts  xiii.  48).     (2)  Is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  (Eom.  v.  5).     (3)  Is  received  by  faith  (1  Pet.  i.  18 ;  Kom.  xv.  13),  which 
faith  is  (a)  assent,  a  certain  belief  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  concerning  Christ  as 
the  only  sufficient  Saviour  (John  iv.  42 ;  vi.  69).     (b)  Consent,  a  readiness  to  obey 
the  gospel,     (c)  AfEance,  a  reposing  of  our  hearts  on  God's  promise  of  pardon  and 
eternal  hfe  (Heb.  iii.  6).     (4)  Is  improved  by  meditation  (Psa.  civ.  34).     (5)  Is 
enjoyed  more  than  all  other  things  whatsoever  (Psa.  xxxv.  9  ;  Ixiii.  5 ;  Ixxiii.  25). 
IL  The  spiritual  profit  of  it.     1.  It  is  such  a  joy  as  doth  enlarge  the  heart  in 
duty  and  strengthens  us  in  the  way  of  God  (Neh.  viii.  10 ;  Psa.  cxix.  14 ;  xl.  8). 
The  hardest  .•-ervices  are  sweetened  by  the  love  of  Christ.     2.  It  ia  a  cordial  to 
fortify  us  against  and  to  sweeten — (1)  Common  afflictions  (Hab.  iii.  17-18;  Rom. 
xii.   12 ;  Heb.   xii.  2).     (2)  Persecutions  (Acts  v.  41 ;  Heb.  x.  34 ;  Matt.  v.  12  j 
1  Pet.  iv.  13  ;  James  i.  2).     3.  It  draws  oS  the  heart  from  the  delights  of  the  flesh. 
IIL  Thb  helps  by  which  it  is  raised  in  vb.      1.  A  sense  of   sin   and  misery. 
The  grievousnesa  of  the  disease  makes  recovery  the  more  delightful     2.  An  entixt 


OTAP.  ni.]  PHILIPPIANS.  17» 

confidence  in  Christ  (1  Pet.  ii.  7;  Phil,  iii  8).  3.  A  constant  use  of  the  means. 
(1)  The  Word;  (2)  prayer  (John  ivi.  2-i).  (3)  The  sacraments.  4.  Sincerity  of 
obedience  (1  Cor.  v.  8).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Rejoicing  in  Christ  is — I.  A  holy 
COMPLACENCY  IN  HiM.  We  CEnnot  be  well  pleased  with  anything  unless  we  see  a 
suitableness  in  it  to  ns.  There  is  a  threefold  suitableness  of  Christ.  1.  A  suitable- 
ness to  the  Divine  perfections  concerned  in  the  salvation  of  sinners  that  is  sweetly 
discerned  by  the  believer  and  acquiesced  in  (1  Cor,  i.  23-24).  2.  A  suitableness  of 
Christ  to  the  case  of  the  soul  which  the  believer  sees  and  is  pleased  with.  If  you 
lodge  a  starving  man  in  a  palace,  clothe  him  with  costly  attiie,  and  fill  his  pockets 
with  gold,  what  good  can  these  do  him?  They  are  not  meat,  and  so  are  not  suitable 
to  his  case.  But  Christ  is  to  ours  every  way  (1  Cor,  i.  80-31),  and  no  one  else  is. 
(1)  As  He  is  God-man  ;  the  Mediator  answering  at  once  the  honour  of  God  and  the 
sinner's  necessities,  (2)  In  His  ofiBces.  As  Prophet,  the  Interpreter  of  the  Father's 
mind  ;  as  Priest,  the  Atonement  and  Intercessor  ;  as  King,  the  Conqueror  and  Ruler. 
8.  A  suitableness  to  the  mind,  or  we  could  not  rejoice  in  Him,  He  is  suited  to  every 
nnbeliever'a  case,  but  alas  1  not  to  their  minds.  Give  a  natural  man  his  idols, 
the  drunkard  his  cups,  the  miser  his  gold,  these  are  suitable  to  their  mind, 
but  as  unsuitable  to  their  case  as  a  sword  for  a  madman  or  poison  for  the 
sick.  But  the  believer  is  made  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  Christ  is, 
therefore,  suitable  not  only  to  bis  case  but  to  his  mind  (1  Pet.  ii.  4  ;  Psa.  Ixxiii.  25), 
There  is  none  beside  Him,  none  like  Him,  none  after  Him — the  altogether  lovely, 
BeUevers  are  pleased  at  heart — (1)  That  He  should  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and 
have  the  glory  of  it  (Zech,  vi.  12-13)  as  is  appointed  of  God.  But  this  suits  not  the 
minds  of  natural  men  (1  Pet,  ii,  7-8),  (2)  With  His  laws  (Isa.  xxxiii.  22),  Christ's 
yoke  is  welcome  to  them  because  His  law  is  suitable  to  them,  and  they  to  it 
(Psa,  cxix.  128),  for  it  is  written  on  their  hearts.  (3)  With  the  fulness  of  the  spirit 
of  sanctiti cation  which  He  communicates  (1  Cor.  i.  30-31).  There  is  nothing  the 
true  believer  rejoices  in  more  than  the  Christ-given  spirit  of  holiness  imparted, 
enjoyed,  and  acted  out,  II,  A  rolling  of  the  soul  over  on  Him  fob  all,  1,  Their 
weight  of  guilt — "  through  faith  in  His  blood  "  (Rom.  iii,  25),  Christ  is  the  city  of 
refuge  from  the  law.  2.  Their  weight  of  duties,  (1)  For  performance,  Christ 
lays  His  yoke  upon  tlie  beUever,  and  he  receives  it  and  lays  himself  and  it  again  on 
Christ  the  fountain  of  strength.  Hence  it  becomes  an  easy  yoke,  which  before  was 
insupportable.  For  duties  are  a  dead  weight  while  laid  on  by  the  hand  of  the  law 
(John  XV,  5),  but  from  Christ  the  believer  receives  a  kind  of  derived  oranipotency 
(Phil,  iv,  13 ;  ii,  13),  He  makes  the  will  for  the  work,  and  the  work  for  us  when 
He  has  wrought  the  will  for  it.  (2)  For  acceptance  (Heb,  xi.  4).  Duties  rightly 
done  are  the  returas  of  influences  from  heaven  which  are  communicated  from 
Christ,  and  so  go  back  through  Him.  III.  A  best  of  the  heart  in  Christ  as  a  fit 
MATCH  FOR  THE  RODL.  For  as  in  marriage  there  is  first  a  view  of  such  a  person  aa 
a  fit  match,  whereupon  follows  choice  and  acceptance ;  and  in  case  the  person  chosen 
answer  the  expectation,  there  ariseth  a  rest  which  is  solid  joy,  so  it  is  when  the 
soul  is  pleased  with  Christ.  There  is  found  in  Him — 1.  Rest  for  the  conscience : 
otherwise  there  is  none  except  where  it  be  lulled  to  sleep.  Now  Christ  finds  His 
elect  seeking  rest  and  finding  none  in  the  law ;  He  gives  it  them  through  His 
blood  (Heb.  ix.  14 ;  1  John  i,  7).  2.  Rest  for  the  heart.  (1)  Our  hearts  are  full 
of  desires  of  happiness  which  crave  for  satisfaction.  Hence  universal  human 
restlessness.  (2)  The  natural  man  goeth  through  the  dry  places  of  the  creature 
seeking  rest  and  finding  none  (Jer.  ii.  3  ;  Eccles.  x.  15 ;  Isa.  Iv.  2).  Christ  finds 
His  elect  thus  wandering,  and  discovers  Himself  as  the  fountain  of  satisfaction, 
and  the  desires  of  the  soul  centreing  and  meeting  in  Christ  abide  in  Him  and  are 
satisfied  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  25  ;  Phil.  iv.  18 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  5).  IV.  A  confession  of 
Christ  unto  salvation.  This  is  plainly  intimated  in  the  original  "  glorying  in 
Christ."  As  the  image  of  God  impressed  on  man's  soul  at  creation  shone  through 
his  body,  as  a  candle  through  a  lantern,  so  that  complacency,  confidence,  and  rest 
of  the  heart  in  Christ  will  shine  forth  in  the  life.  1.  With  respect  to  the  believer's 
ordinary  conversation.  (1)  This  inward  rejoicing  wears  off  the  air  of  pride 
(1  Pet.  V.  6).  (2)  Grace  will  circumcise  the  self-commending  lips,  (3')  Gracious 
eouls  will  readily  discover  in  their  serious  converse  a  tendency  towards  tne  grace  of 
Christ,  (4)  Rejoicing  in  Christ  will  make  men  tender  in  their  judgment  of  others 
(Gal.  vi.  1),  (5)  Such  as  rejoice  in  Christ  will  have  familiar  converse  with  the 
Word,  and  relish  of  it  (Isa.  lix.  21).  (6)  They  will  have  a  respect  to  the  place 
where  Christ's  honour  dwells,  and  to  ordinances  (Psa.  Ixiii,  1-2),  2,  With  respect 
to  Bofiering.     (1>  The  saints  will  keep  on  Chmt's  side  though  it  be  lowest.     (i| 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

They  will  be  resigned  and  contented.  (3)  They  will  glory  in  any  cross  Christ  puti 
npon  tlieiri.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Glorying  in  Christ ; — I.  Negatively.  The  true 
circumcision  gloried  not — 1.  In  themselves.  2.  In  anything  about  themselves — 
circumcision  or  Abrahamic  descent.  3.  In  Christ  and  something  else — in  Him 
and  Moses.  II.  Positively.  They  gloried  in  Christ.  1.  In  His  great  con- 
descension. 2.  In  His  birth  and  its  wonders.  3.  In  His  life  and  its  blessings. 
4.  In  His  death  and  its  benefits.  6.  In  His  resurrection  and  ascension,  and 
their  pledges.  6.  In  His  return,  and  its  stupendous  and  permanent  results. 
{Prof.  Kadie.)  Have  no  confidence  In  the  flesh. — This  is  an  inference  from 
the  last,  and  means  that  the  Christian  who  rejoices  in  Christ  hath  no  con- 
fidence  in  anything  that  is  not  Christ  or  in  Christ.  I.  In  point  of  jcstifi- 
CATioN.  1.  The  saints  have  no  confidence  in  external  things.  (1)  Man's 
externals — things  which  God  never  made  duty,  but  are  made  so  by  man  (Matt. 
XV.  9).  All  unscriptural  institutions,  opinions,  and  practices,  under  whatever 
pretensions  of  holiness,  carry  off  men  from  Cijrist  and  are  subservient  to  self 
(Matt.  XV.  4-6 ;  Col.  18-21).  (2)  Nor  even  in  God's  externals.  E.g.  (a)  In  their 
external  condition  in  the  world  which  we  receive  by  God's  providence.  The  carnal 
poor  think  that  thereby  they  will  be  relieved  of  eternal  poverty,  and  the  carnal  rich 
in  this  world,  that  they  will  be  before  others  in  the  world  to  come  (Hos.  xii.  8; 
Horn.  xiv.  17).  You  may  be  miserable  here  and  through  eternity  (Job.  xv.  23-24)  ; 
or  fare  sumptuously  here  and  be  in  torment  by  and  by  (Luke  xvi.).  (h)  In  their 
external  privileges  (vers.  5,  7 ;  2  Cor.  v.  16  ;  Luke  xiii.  26-27).  (c)  In  their 
external  attainments  (vers.  6-7).  Great  confidence  have  some  in  their  negative 
holiness  (Luke  xviii.  11 ;  Matt.  v.  20).  (d)  In  their  external  duties  (ver.  8).  There 
are  two  classes  opposite  to  the  Christian  in  this — the  ignorant,  who  do  little  or 
nothing,  and  yet  say  they  serve  God  as  well  as  they  can  ;  and  those  who  have  the 
full  form  of  godliness  and  rest  in  that.  But  as  they  are  mere  external  duties  they 
are  abominable  to  God  (Isa.  i.  11,  &c.  ;  Mark  x.  20-21).  (e)  In  their  external 
sufferings.  The  glorified  put  nothing  down  to  their  tribulation,  but  all  to  Christ's 
blood.  "  Therefore  are  they  before  the  throne."  2.  The  saints  have  no  con- 
fidence for  the  favour  of  God  in  internals.  There  is  no  exception  but  one  (Col. 
i.  27).  They  have  no  confidence  in  internal — (1)  dispositions  (Prov.  xxviii.  26). 
Many  have  a  confidence  in  what  they  call  their  good  hearts;  but  if  God's  testimony 
is  to  be  believed,  it  is  a  false  confidence  (Jer.  xvii.  9).  (2)  Exercises  on  their  own 
spirits.  (3)  Attainments  (Gal.  vi.  14 ;  Phil.  iii.  8).  (4)  Graces.  II.  In  point  of 
SANCTiFicATioN.  As  they  have  taken  Him  alone  for  justification,  so  for  this  (1  Cor. 
i.  30).  The  saints  have  no  confidence  for  this.-  1.  In  their  stock  of  natural  and 
acquired  abilities  (2  Cor.  iii.  51),  knowledge,  utterance,  good  temper,  &c.  2.  In 
the  means,  such  as  the  Word,  sacraments,  prayer,  A'c.  Knowing  that  it  is  the 
Spirit  that  quickeneth  (John  vi.  63).  3.  In  their  purposes  and  resolutions  for 
holinsss  (2  Tim.  i.  12).  4.  In  their  vows  and  engagements  to  holiness  (Isa.  xlv. 
23-2i).  5.  In  their  own  endeavours  after  holiness  (Psa.  cxxvii.  1).  6.  In  the  good 
frame  and  disposition  of  their  hearts,  i.e.,  in  actual  grace,  a  most  desirable  thing, 
bat  no  staff  to  lean  upon  (1  Chron.  xxix.  17-18).  7.  In  habitual  grace.  Paul  had 
a  good  stock  of  it,  but  he  did  not  venture  to  live  on  it  (Gal.  ii.  20).  Grace  within 
the  saints  is  a  well  whose  springs  are  often  dry ;  but  the  grace  without  them  in 
Christ  is  an  ever-flowmg  fountain  (John  vi.  57).     (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-10.  Though  I  might  also  have  confidence  In  the  flesh. — Observe — I.  Pattl's 
ADVANTAGES — Superior  to  those  which  men  generally  put  confidence  in — respecting 
his  birth  and  religious  training,  his  rigid  profession  and  orthodoxy,  his  zeal  and 
biameless  conduct.  II.  The  insufeiciency  of  theh  ab  a  ground  of  confidence — 
they  could  not  confer  peace,  secure  the  favour  of  God — supersede  the  necessity  of 
an  inward  change.  III.  His  benonciation  of  them  was  necessary,  complete, 
wise,  ai^  intelii^^ent.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  faith  of  St.  Paul: — St.  Paul  is  here 
speaking  of  himself.  Generally  this  is  not  wise,  but  circumstances  may  sometimes 
justify  it,  1.  The  man  who  has  been  healed  has  a  right  to  speak  of  the  remedy, 
and  ought  to  do  so.  St.  Paul  had  been  changed  ;  the  selfish  man  had  become 
unselfish ;  the  wild  persecutor  had  been  tamed.  2.  The  experience  of  St.  Paul  wai 
very  profitable.  If  you  can  do  good  by  telling  your  experience,  tell  it.  It  is  a 
delicate  thing  to  speak  of  one's  self ;  people  who  have  little  experience  are  often 
the  greatest  speakers ;  but  there  is  a  false  delicacy  which  must  be  overcome.  3. 
Paul's  purpose  was  also  to  glorify  his  Master.  These  verses  resemble  a  tree  with 
many  branches,  bat  they  have  bat  one  root.    The  central  thought  is — L  Faisu. 


CBAP.  ni.]  PHILIPPIANS.  181 

1.  It  was  of  the  right  nature.  There  is  a  faith  which  never  goes  deeper  than  the 
intellect.  It  ia  like  the  smile  of  some  people  who  do  not  know  how  to  smile,  and 
•wLich  only  touches  certain  places  on  the  face.  There  is  another  faith  that  breaks 
right  through  the  soul,  and  moves  the  man  to  his  very  centre.  Such  was  Paul's ; 
it  took  possession  of  heart,  soul,  and  mind.  2.  It  was  a  mighty  faith.  There  is  a 
faith  right  enough  in  its  way,  but  very  feeble.  It  resembles  a  man  who  is  walking 
in  a  path  about  which  he  has  some  doubt.  He  looks  to  the  ri^ht,  to  the  left; 
behind  and  before;  he  proceeds  slowly,  hesitatingly,  but  he  does  proceed.  But 
Paul  received  Christ  with  open  arms,  without  caution  or  reserve.  II.  The  working' 
OF  THIS  FAITH  and  what  it  did  in  Paul.  On  faith  taking  po8ses.>iou  of  the  heaittwo 
things  are  sure  to  follow.  1.  Self-renunciation.  If  yuur  faith  has  not  made  you 
cast  anything  away,  you  out^ht  to  look  into  it.  Now  Paal  had  three  things  of  which 
he  was  very  proud.  (1)  Jewish  extraction.  Men  in  all  ages  have  been  proud  of 
their  ancestors.  The  Jews  had  many  things  of  which  they  could  boa;<t.  They 
were  the  chosen  people.  They  had  Divine  revelation.  The  worship  of  the  true 
God  was  established  among  them.  They  had  a  grtat  history.  Angels  walked  their 
▼alleys;  wondrous  things  were  done  on  their  mountain-tops.  They  have  had 
greater  influence  over  the  world  than  any  other  nation.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  belong 
to  such  a  Slock,  and  to  belong  to  it  was  regarded  as  being  safe  for  ever.  St.  Paul, 
however,  cast  it  aside  as  loss  for  Chiisi.  (2)  Legal  riguteousness.  Paul  was  a 
Pharisee,  and  as  such — (a)  He  knew  the  laws  of  Moses  well.  He  had  a  most 
correct  creed,  (b)  He  praciised  the  religion  of  the  Pharisees.  There  was  a  twofold 
righteousness  ;  real  as  before  God,  love  to  God  and  man  ;  apparent  as  before  man, 
the  observance  of  rites  and  public  duties.  Paul  had  little  of  the  former  ;  he  had  the 
latter  to  perfection,  but  he  cast  it  out.  (3)  Religious  zeal.  Zeal  is  about  the  strongest 
word  you  can  use  to  express  a  warm  state  of  mind,  and  if  there  is  anything  of  which 
a  man  is  proud  it  is  this.  It  is  one  of  the  noblest  of  virtues,  but  do  not  seek  to  display 
it  as  Jehu — it  will  come  out  of  itself.  Better  do  with  your  zeal  what  Paul  did. 
*'  I  count  it  loss  for  Christ ;  I  will  not  hope  for  salvation  from  it."  2.  Reception  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Observe — (1)  His  estimate  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  There  are 
three  things  in  this  which  make  all  other  knowledge  dim,  aud  aU  other  possessions 
worthless  ;  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  the  mediation  of  Christ,  and  immortality  with 
Christ  in  heaven.  These  destroy  man's  three  great  enemies,  (a)  The  mediation 
of  Christ — sin  ;  (b)  immortality — death;  (c)  the  Fatheihood  of  God — fear.  (2)  He 
desired  to  be  united  to  Christ.  How  can  a  person  be  united  to  another?  Ton  have 
friends  in  Australia,  but  you  are  as  near  them  as  ever,  by  confidence,  sympathy, 
aud  the  deepest  feelings  of  your  nature.  To  be  united  to  Christ  is  for  you  to  love 
Him,  and  for  Him  to  send  forth  His  sympathy  towards  you.  In  the  one  case  you 
•re  "  found  in  Him,"  in  the  other  He  is  *'  in  you."  (3)  He  believed  that  there  was 
an  infinite  fulness  of  blessing  in  Christ,  and  that  by  union  with  Christ  this  would 
become  His.  The  soul  that  is  united  to  Christ  shall  not  want,  (a)  It  shall  have 
a  full  and  free  pardon,  (b)  It  shall  be  justified  before  God  through  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ,  (j)  Be  quickened  with  the  life  that  is  in  Christ  (J)  Have  a  true  Tightness 
which  is  produced  by  God  in  and  on  the  soul,  that  will  bear  the  test  of  judgment, 
and  be  beautiful  in  the  light  of  heaven,  (e)  End  its  journey  by  sitting  with  Christ, 
and  enjoying  His  glory.  [T.  Jones,  D.D.)  Privileges  no  ground  of  trust: — The 
list  sounds  much  as  if  you  or  I  were  to  say  something  of  this  kind :  "  I  am  of  a 
good  Presbyterian  stock.  One  of  my  ancestors  fought  at  Bothwell  Bridge  for 
•  Christ's  crown  and  covenant,'  and  another  died  as  a  martyr  in  the  same  cause  in 
the  Grassmarket  of  Edinburgh.  There  have  been  several  ministers  in  my  line,  and 
many  elders.  I  was  baptized  in  a  Presbyterian  church,  attended  the  Sabbath 
school,  and  became  a  communicaut  when  I  was  eighteen.  I  have  always  attended 
the  church  regularly,  kept  up  family  worship,  and  Uved  a  decorous  life.  I  am  well 
read  in  sound  theology;  hold  rigidly  in  my  opinions  by  the  'Westminister  Con- 
fession ;  and  have  now  and  again  taken  a  part  in  controversies  about  election,  or 
the  extent  of  the  atonement."  This  is  all  well,  very  well,  so  far  as  it  goes.  But  if 
you  or  I  be  in  any  degree  looking  to  these  things — to  any  of  them,  or  to  all  of  tnem 
taken  together — as  a  ground  of  hope  for  eternity,  we  are,  in  so  far,  occupying  a 
religious  position  corresponding  very  exactly  with  that  of  Paul  before  his  conversion 
to  Christ.     (R.  Johnstone,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  7-9.  'What  things  were  gain  to  me  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ. — The 
Christian's  accounts  : — The  Christian  keeps  an  accurate  account  uook.  He  reckons 
vp  with  an  enlightened  judgment  his  gains  and  losses.     And  most  important  is  it 


189  SHE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOS.  [chap,  nfc 


that  he  should :  for  the  question  of  questions  is,  What  is  gain  to  me  and  what  i* 
loss  ?     I.  The  ANSWEK  GIVEN  BY  THE  woBLD.    Examine  the  accounts  of  nine-tenths 
and  you  will  find — 1.  Health  and  money  entered  as  clear  gains,  comfort,  ease,  tran- 
quillity, prosperity,  carried  to  the  side  of  profit.    2.  Sickness,  disappointment,  con- 
tiaction  of  the  means  of  pleasure,  decay  of  trade,  sorrow,  bereavement,  entered  as 
unmixed  loss.    3.  And  when  we  come  to  matters  bearing  on  the  interest  of  the 
Boul  we  find  that  the  natural  heart  has  entered  on  the  side  of  eternal  gain,  good 
character,  punctuality  of  attendance  at  Christian  ordinances,  a  conscience  silent  aft 
t6  definite  injuries  against  neighbours.     And  gain  it  is  in  a  sense,  for  it  is  better  to 
have  a  good  conscience  than  a  bad  one,  to  be  moral  than  immoral.     St.  Paul  says 
no  word  about  morality  being  a  loss,  or  that  he  would  have  valued  Christ  more  had 
he  been  a  greater  sinner.  II.  The  Christian's  answkb.   For  Christ's  sake  Paul  now 
accounts  as  loss  all  that  he  had  once  accounted  gain.    He  was  an  Israehte  of  direct 
descent.     Would  he  have  been  a  better  man  had  he  been  bom  a  Gentile  and  an 
idc.later  ?    He  had  been  blameless  in  his  observance  of  the  ceremonial,  and,  as  he 
understood  it,  of  the  moral  law — does  he  regret  that  he  had  not  habitually  broken 
it  ?     None  of  these  things.     The  loss  was  that  he  had  trusted  in  these  things,  and 
looked  to  them  for  salvation.    He  thought  that  God  must  be  satisfied  with  so  un- 
exceptionable  a  genealogy,  so  diligent  a  worshipper.    2.  In  this  point  of  view  many 
of  us  need  instruction  and  warning.    What  ate  we  trusting  inf     (1)  Some  of  us  are 
putting  off  the  question  altogether  and  saying,  "  1  will  live  while  I  can  and  die 
when  I  must;  I  will  not  torment  myself  before  the  time— many  years  hence  I 
hope."     (2)  But  this  childish  and  suicidal  infatuation  is  not  in  all  of  us.     There 
are  those  who  have  religion.     What  is  it  ?     Is  it  more  than  a  moral  Ufe,  a  Sunday 
woisbip,  a  trusting  in  God's  mercy  ?    But  where  is  Christ  in  all  this?    What  know 
you  of  the  thought,  "  What  things  were  gain  to  me,"  &o  ?     What  of  your  own  are 
you  discarding  in  order  to  rest  in  Christ  alone  J    Where  are  your  transfers  from 
one  side  of  your  reckoning  to  the  other  because  of  Christ  ?    And  many  of  us  die  in 
the  strength  of  a  gospel  which  has  no  Christ  in  it ;  no  demolition  of  self,  either  of 
self-confidenoe  or  seeking,  and  no  exaltation  of  Christ  on  the  ruins  of  self,  either 
as  Saviour  or  Lord.   We  are  at  best  what  St.  Paul  was  before  his  conversion — alas, 
without  his  good  conscience  or  scrupulous  obedience.    {Dean  Vaughan.)        A  6u«i- 
ness-like  account : — Our  Saviour's  advice  to  those  who  wished  to  be  His  servants 
was  to  count  the  cost.    He  did  not  wish  to  enlist  any  one  by  keeping  him  in 
ignorance  of  the  requirements  of  His  service.    The  exercise  of  our  judgments  in  the 
gospel  is  required.     Do  not  imagine  that  religion  consists  in  wild  fanaticism  which 
never  considers.    The  apostle  here  gives  us  the  word  "  count "  three  times  over. 
He  was  skilled  in  spiritual  arithmetic  and  very  careful  in  his  reckoning.   He  seema 
here  to  be  in  a  mercantile  frame  of  mind,  adding  and  subtracting  and  balancing. 
I.  The  apostle's  calculations.  1.  His  counting  at  the  outset  of  his  Christian  life — 
"  What  things  were  gain,"  &c.  (1)  He  dwelt  on  the  several  items,  noting  each  with 
great  distinctness.     The  list  reads  like  a  catalogue.     His  Jewish  advantages  had 
been  as  precious  pearls  to  him  once.     (2)  What  is  there  per  contra.    Nothing  on 
the  other  side  but  one  item  ;  but  that  one  outweighed  the  many.  That  one  was  not 
Christianity,  the  Church,  or  the  orthodox  faith,  but  Christ.     (3)  Not  only  after 
putting  the  one  under  the  other  and  making  a  subtraction  did  he  find  that  hia 
earthly  advantages    were   less  than  Christ ;   he  found  these  gains  transformed 
into  a  loss.     There  was  not  a  plus  on  that  side  to  stand  in  proportion  to  a  plus  on 
this  ;  they  were  turned  into  a  minus  of  actual  deficit.     Not  that  he  meant  that  to 
be  a  "  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,"  &c.,  was  in  itself  a  loss — the  advantage  was  "much 
every  way ;  "  but  he  meant  that  with  respect  to  Christ  those  things  became  a  dis- 
advantage, because  their  tendency  bad  been  to  keep  him  from  trusting  Christ.     It 
is  a  grand  thing  to  have  led  a  virtuous  hfe ;  but  this  blessing  may,  by  onr  own  folly, 
become  a  curse,  if  we  place  it  in  opposition  to  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  and  dream 
that  we  have  no  need  of  a  Saviour.    2.  His  estimate  for  the  time  then  present.  We 
are  always  anxious  to  hear  what  a  man  Las  to  say  about  a  thing  after  he  has  tried 
it.    After  twenty  years  of  experience  Paul  had  an  opportunity  of  revising  hia 
balance  sheet ;  and  makes  the  strong  affirmation — "  Yea,  doubtless  I  count,"  &o. 
He  has  made  the  original  summary  even  more  comprehensive,  but  he  stands  to  the 
same  estimate  and  uses  not  barely  the  word  "  Christ,"  but  the  fuller  expression, 
'•  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge,"  Ac.     Now  he  has  come  to  know  the  Christ  in 
whom  before  he  had  trusted.     Christ  is  better  loved  as  he  is  better  known.     (1) 
The  words  show  the  points  upon  which  he  had  fullest  knowledge.     He  knew  the 
Lord  as — (a)  Christ,  the  Messiah  anoi   terl  anrl  sent  of  the  Father,     (b)  Jesuf,  tha 


OEAr  m.]  PHILIPPIANS,  183 

•nointed  and  actual  Saviour,  (c)  My  Lord.  His  was  an  appropriating  knowledge.  (2) 
The  text  implies  that  he  knew  Christ  by  faith.  He  believed,  and  hence  he  knew.  (3) 
He  knew  Him  by  experience, "  and  the  power  of  His  resurrection."  This  is  excellent 
knowledge  when  the  power  of  a  fact  is  realized  within  and  shown  in  the  life.  (4^ 
More  than  that  Paul  aimed  to  know  more  by  a  growing  Ukeness  to  Him.  (5)  There 
is  no  knowledge  in  this  world  comparable  to  this,  for  it  concerns  the  highest  con- 
ceivable object,  and  no  man  hath  it  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (6)  If  you  would  see 
its  excellency  look  at  its  effects  —it  makes  us  humble,  delivers  us  from  the  power 
cf  sin,  elevates  the  motives,  sweetens  the  feelings,  gives  nobility  to  the  life,  and  will 
continue  to  progress  when  every  other  knowledge  is  laid  aside.  3.  His  third 
counting  may  be  regarded  as  his  life  estimate.  "  For  whom  I  have,"  &c  Here 
his  estimate  sets  out  witli  actual  test  and  practical  proof.  He  is  a  prisoner,  with 
nothing  in  the  world;  he  has  lost  caste,  has  no  longer  his  own  righteousness: 
Christ  is  his  all  and  nothing  else.  Does  he  regret  the  loss  of  all  things  ?  No,  he 
counts  it  an  actual  deliverance  to  have  lost  them.  (1)  In  his  first  and  second  count- 
ings these  things  were  "lo.-s,"  now  they  are  "dung."  (2)  In  his  second  estimate 
he  spoke  of  "  knowing"  Christ,  but  now  he  speaks  of  "  winning"  Him,  or  rather 
"  gaining,"  for  he  keeps  to  the  mercantile  figure  all  through.  (3)  Further,  his  aim 
is  to  be  "found  in  Him,"  as  a  bird  in  the  air,  a  fish  in  the  sea,  a  member  in  the 
body — as  a  fugitive  shelters  himself  in  his  hiding-place,  so  in  Christ  as  never  to 
come  out  of  Him,  so  that  whenever  any  one  looks  for  him  he  may  find  him  in  Jesus. 
(4)  Notice  how  Paul  keeps  to  what  he  began  with,  viz.,  his  unrobing  himself  of  his 
boastings  in  the  flesh,  and  his  arraying  himself  with  Christ—*'  not  having  mine  own 
righteousness,"  &c.  II.  Ocr  own  calculations.  1.  Do  we  join  in  Paul's  earlier  esti- 
mate. You  will  never  be  saved  till  you  lose  all  your  legal  hopes.  2.  After  many 
years  of  profession  do  you  still  continue  in  the  same  mind  and  make  tlie  same 
estimate  ?  Not  if  you  have  settled  down  on  something  other  than  Christ.  3.  You 
cannot  join  Paul  in  the  last  calculation — "I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things," 
but  do  you  think  you  could  have  done  so  if  required  for  Christ's  sake  ?  Your  fore- 
fathers  did  so.  4.  Seeing  God  has  left  you  your  worldly  comforts  have  you  used 
all  things  for  His  sake.  5.  If  Christ  be  to  you  so  that  all  things  are  dung  and 
dross  in  comparison,  do  you  not  want  Him  for  your  children,  your  friends,  &c. 
What  a  man  values  for  himself  he  values  fur  others.  (C.  H.  Spurpeon.)  Christ 
is  true  gain : — Earthly  good — I.  Brings  no  peace,  Christ  does.  IL  Can  givb  no 
SATISFACTION,  Christ  can.     III.  Loses  its  poweb  to  oratift,  Christ  never.     IV.  la 

ATTENDED     WITH      CARE     AND     TROUBLE.         Christ    iS     fuU      Of     COUSOlatioU.         V.     At 

BEST  OF  THE  EARTH  EARTHLY.  Christ  opons  heaveu.  VI,  Has  ITS  LIMIT.  In  Christ 
all  fulness  dwells.  VII.  Must  have  rrs  period.  Christ  lives  for  ever.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Life  for  Christ  .-—The  life  which  we  owe  to  Christ  and  hold  in  Christ 
we  are  bound  by  the  strongest  claims  to  use  for  Christ.  Life  is  a  thing  to  be  used. 
And  if  you  admit  that  it  was  once  forfeited,  but  that  Christ  has  bought  it  back  for 
JOU  by  His  death,  and  that  you  keep  it  only  by  your  connection  with  Him,  then  yoa 
cold  it  on  false  pretences  if  you  use  it  in  any  other  way  but  for  Him.  There  are 
two  ways  in  which  "  life  for  Christ "  may  be  understood.  (1)  In  order  to  obtain 
Him— "that  I  may  win  Christ,"  i.e.,  finally  enjoy  Him  ;  or  (2)  as  the  Master  puts 
it,  "for  My  sake."  We  take  it  in  the  latter  sense.  A  man  may  live  a  very  good 
life — he  may  have  a  natural  tendency  towards  it,  or  a  conscientious  feeling  may 
lead  him  to  it ;  but  all  the  while  he  may  fall  short  of  this— that  it  is  not  for  Christ. 
The  motive  is  diluted  by  worldly  motives  and  is  very  feeble,  while  God  measures 
everything  by  the  loving  standard  of  the  one  motive — was  it  for  Christ?  This  life 
for  Christ — I,  Musr  not  be  an  uncertain  thino.  Taken  up  and  laid  down  at 
pleasure,  by  fits  and  starts,  remembered  and  forgotten,  but  must  be  the  result  of 
deep  conviction.  To  this  end — 1.  Consecrate  your  life  to  Christ  in  the  most  express 
and  solemn  way  you  can,  on  your  knees.  Lay  the  sacrifice  upon  the  altar.  Invest 
it  with  the  sacredness  of  an  irrevocable  pledge.  2.  Renew  that  act  of  self-dedica- 
tion at  not  very  long  intervals.  3.  Write  it  on  everything  you  have  and  are,  body, 
Boul,  time,  talents,  business,  family,  <fec.  II.  Must  enter  into  tour  trials.  When 
you  are  in  bodily  or  mental  distress,  and  when  you  are  going  through  the  disciplin© 
of  bitter  daily  friction,  think  thus — "  I  will  sanctify  and  ennoble  this  suffering  by 
bearing  it  for  Christ."  He  bore  much  more  for  me,  and  these  are  the  "  marks  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  "  now  laid  upon  me.  III.  Must  enter  into  youb  happiness.  Christ  ia 
happy  in  your  happiness  and  for  His  sake  you  must  be  happy  :  and  your  happiness 
must  not  fail  to  make  others  happy.  IV.  Must  be  a  life  or  ministbt.  1.  In  defence 
4d  Christ.     2.  In  the  extension  of  Piff  cause.     3.  In  having  some  positive  work  to 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  la. 

do  for  Him.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  importance  of  spiritu.al  accounts : — Tam- 
ing to  the  mercantile  figure  we  are  reminded  of  the  paramount  importance  of  having 
the  record-books  of  our  inner  life  rightly  kept.  The  preat  German  Fatirist,  Heinrich 
Heine,  has  scornfully  depicted  the  mere  worldling  thus ;  "  Business  men  have  the 
game  religion  throughout  the  whole  world.  They  find  in  their  office  their  church, 
in  their  desk  their  prayer-cushion,  in  their  ledger  their  Bible.  The  warehouse  is 
their  inner  sanctuary ;  the  exchange  bell  is  their  summons  to  prayer ;  their  God  is 
their  gold ;  their  faith  is  their  credit."  The  apostle  was  never  so  low  in  the  scale 
as  these  words  represent  justly  the  mere  worldling  to  be.  He  was,  even  as  Saul  the 
persecutor,  of  a  very  different  and  a  far  higher  type.  None  the  less  these  scathing 
words  describe  too  closely  the  character  and  conduct  of  countless  thousands,  who 
all  the  time  are  not  ashamed  and  not  afraid  to  bear  the  name  of  Christian.  But  in 
contrast  to  such  a  picture  we  have  the  new  man,  renewed  in  heart  and  life;  he,  too, 
has  his  all-engrossing  concerns.  He,  too,  has  his  books,  recording  the  transactions 
which  take  place  in  his  inmost  soul.  He  keeps  them  rightly.  No  false  entries  are 
Been  there.  The  things  of  the  world,  whatever  their  value  in  themselves  may  be, 
are,  as  related  to  the  soul's  interests,  entered  as  loss.  The  things  of  the  kingdom 
alone  appear  as  gain.  True  wealth — that  which  alone  can  claim  the  name  of  sub- 
stance— is  summed  up  in  righteousness  :  life  in  Christ  Jesus — life  which  in  Him  is 
everlasting.  (J.  Hutchison,  D.D.)  The  gain  of  loss: — He  who  loses  anything 
and  gets  wisdom  by  it  is  a  gainer  by  the  loss.  {L' Estrange.)  Loss  for  gain: — 
When  the  captain  leaves  the  harbour  he  has  a  cargo  on  board  of  which  he  takes 
great  care,  but  when  a  tremendous  wind  is  blowing  and  the  ship  labours,  being  too 
heavily  laden,  and  there  is  great  fear  that  she  will  not  outride  the  storm,  see  how 
eagerly  the  sailors  lighten  the  ship.  They  bring  up  from  the  hold  with  all  diligence 
the  very  things  which  before  they  prized,and  they  seem  rejoiced  to  heave  them  into 
the  sea.  Never  men  more  eager  to  get  than  these  are  to  throw  away.  There  go  the 
easks  of  flour,  the  bars  of  iron,  the  manufactured  goods :  overboard  go  valuable 
bales  of  merchandise  ;  nothing  seems  to  be  worth  keeping.  How  is  this  ?  Are  not 
these  things  good  7  Yes,  but  not  good  to  a  sinking  ship.  Anything  must  go  to 
save  life,  anything  to  outride  the  storm.  And  so  the  apostle  says  that  in  order  to 
win  Christ  and  to  be  found  in  Him  he  flung  the  whole  cargo  of  his  beloved  con- 
fidences over,  and  was  as  glad  to  get  rid  of  them  as  if  they  were  only  dung.  This 
he  did  to  win  Christ,  and  that  fact  suggests  another  picture  :  an  English  war  ship 
of  the  olden. times  is  cruising  the  ocean,  and  she  spies  a  Spanish  galleon  in  the 
distance  laden  with  gold  from  the  Indies.  Captain  and  men  are  determined  to 
overtake  and  capture  her,  for  they  have  a  relish  for  prize-money ;  but  their  vessel 
sails  heavily.  What  then  ?  If  she  will  not  move  because  of  her  load  they  fling 
into  the  sea  everything  they  can  lay  their  bands  on,  knowing  that  if  they  can  cap- 
ture the  Spanish  vessel  the  booty  will  make  amends  for  all  they  lose  and  vastly 
more.  Do  you  wonder  at  their  eager u ess  to  lose  the  little  to  gain  the  great? 
Sailor,  why  cast  overboard  those  useful  things?  '•  Oh,"  says  he,  "  they  are  nothing 
compared  with  that  prize  over  yonder.  If  we  can  but  get  side  by  side  and  board  her 
we  will  soon  make  up  for  all  that  we  now  throw  into  the  sea."  And  so  it  is  with 
the  man  who  is  in  earnest  to  win  Christ  and  to  be  found  in  Him.  Overboard  go 
circumcision  and  Phariseeism,  and  the  blamelessness  touching  the  law,  and  all  that, 
for  he  knows  that  he  will  find  a  better  righteousness  in  Christ  than  any  which  he 
foregoes,  yea,  find  everything  in  Christ  which  he  now,  for  his  Lord's  sake,  counts 
but  as  the  slag  of  the  furnace.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Self-renunciation  for  Christ 
not  to  be  regretted: — The  poet  George  Herbert  was  so  highly  connected,  and  in 
iuch  favour  at  court,  that  at  one  time  a  secretaryship  of  state  seemed  to  him  not 
unattainable.  But  he  gave  up  all  such  prospects  for  the  work  of  a  humble  clergy- 
man, and  in  looking  back  upon  the  time  he  made  his  choice,  he  could  say,  '•  I 
think  myself  more  happy  than  if  1  had  attained  what  then  I  had  so  ambitiously 
thirsted  for.  And  I  can  now  behold  the  court  with  an  impartial  eye,  and  see  plainly 
that  it  is  made  up  of  frauds  and  bitters,  and  flattery,  and  many  other  such  empty 
imaginary  and  painted  pleasures — pleasures  which  are  so  empty  as  not  to  satisfy 
when  they  are  enjoyed.  But  in  God  and  His  service  is  a  fulness  of  all  joy  and 
pleasure  and  no  satiety."  (J.  F.  B.  Tinling.)  Raymond  Lully,  or  LuUius,  to  whom 
the  Arabic  professorship  at  Oxford  owes  its  origin,  was  the  first  Christian  missionary 
to  the  Moslems.  When  shipwrecked  near  Pisa,  after  many  years  of  missionary 
labour,  though  upwards  of  seventy,  his  ardour  was  unabated.  "  Once,"  he  wrote, 
**  I  was  fairly  rich ;  onoe  I  had  a  wife  and  children ;  once  I  tasted  freely  of  th« 
jpleMures  of  thia  life.    But  all  these  things  I  gladly  resigned  that  I  might  spread 


•HA*,  ni.]  PHILIPPIANS.  18S 

abroad  a  knowledge  of  the  tmth.  I  studied  Arabic,  and  several  times  went  forth  to 
preach  the  gospel  to  the  Saracens.  I  have  been  in  prison,  I  have  been  scourged, 
for  years  I  have  striven  to  persuade  the  princes  of  Christendom  to  befrif^nd  the 
common  cause  of  converting  the  Mohammedans.  Now,  though  old  and  poor,  I  do  not 
dtspair ;  I  am  ready,  if  it  be  God's  will,  to  persevere  unto  death."  And  he  did  so, 
being  stoned  to  death  at  Bergia,  in  Africa,  in  1314,  after  gathering  a  little  flock  of 
converts.     (Sunday  at  Home.)  Worldly  honour  consecrated  to  Christ: — T.  A. 

RaglanJ,  an  eminent  mathematician,  and  a  devoted  Christian,  gaiued  the  silver 
cup  at  Coi-pus  Cbristi  College,  Cambridge,  four  years  in  succession.  One  of  these 
was  dedicated  to  God  for  the  communion  service  of  a  small  native  Church,  mainly 
gathered  by  him  in  Southern  India,  and  all  were  set  apart  for  the  same  purpose  in 
counection  with  his  itenerating  missionary  service.  (J.  F.  B.  Tiyiling.)  Diverge 
estimates  of  Paul's  sacrifices: — Poi-ph}ry,  the  philosopher,  said  that  it  was  a  pity 
that  such  a  man  as  Paul  was  thrown  awaj'  upon  our  religion.  And  the  monarch  of 
Morocco  told  the  English  ambassador  in  King  John's  time  that  he  had  lately  read 
Piul's  Epistles,  which  he  liked  so  well  that  were  he  now  to  choose  his  religion,  he 
would  before  any.  other  embrace  Christianity.  "But  everyone  ought,"  said  he, 
"to  die  in  his  own  religion  "  ;  and  the  leaving  of  the  faith  in  which  he  was  born 
was  the  only  thing  be  disliked  in  that  apostle.     {J,  Trapp.) 

Yer.  8.  Tea,  doubtless,  and  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord. — These  words  are  added  by  way  of 
amplification.  1.  To  ehow  his  perseverance  in  the  contempt  of  all  outward 
advantages.  "I  have  counted,"  and  "do  still  count."  He  had  not  repented 
of  his  choice.  2.  To  comprehend  all  other  things  besides  Jewish  privileges.  A 
Christian  can  deny  anything  for  Christ's  sake.  3.  To  show  the  reality  of  his 
assertion — "  Yea,  doubtless."  It  was  not  pretension,  or  naked  approbation,  or 
speculation,  but  practical  esteem.  (1)  This  contempt  is  set  forth  (a)  in  its 
vehemence  and  greatness,  "loss,"  "dung;  "  (b)  in  its  reality  and  sincerity.  Men 
approve  things  that  are  excellent  (Pom.  ii.  18),  yet  have  no  mind  to  embrace  them, 
because  they  cannot  deny  temptations — but  St.  Paul  says,  "  I  have  suffered,"  Ac. 
(2)  Tbe  causes  of  this  contempt  were — (a)  The  excellency  of  Christ's  knowledge. 
(b)  To  gain  Christ.  Let  us  now  consider — I.  Padl's  self-denial.  1.  The 
universality  of  its  extent — "  All  things."  This  is  to  be  observed — (1)  Partly  because 
some  can  deny  a  few  things  for  Christ,  but  not  all.  But  if  we  keep  back  anything 
the  price  is  too  short  (Mark  x.  21).  If  a  woman  love  but  one  man  more  than  her 
husband,  though  she  love  him  better  than  millions,  it  is  a  breach  of  the  marriage 
covenant.  When  men  come  into  possession  of  a  house  all  persons  must  be  outed, 
or  possession  is  not  valid ;  you  must  deliver  up  all  to  Christ,  or  He  will  accept  of 
none.  (2)  Partly  to  sbow  that  not  only  things  unlawful  must  be  denied,  but  even 
things  lawful  must  be  rejected  or  disesteemed  for  His  sake,  (a)  That  our  sins  must 
be  renounced  is  oui  of  question  (Eph.  iv.  22).  These  were  never  worth  keeping. 
It  is  no  strange  notion  of  the  physician  if  he  require  the  patient  to  part  with  the 
disease,  or  he  who  gives  us  new  apparel  to  bid  us  part  with  our  rags.  (6)  Lawful 
things  when  they  come  into  competition  with  Christ,  such  as  the  comfort  of  our 
relations,  honour,  natural  supports,  and  even  life  (Luke  xiv.  26).  2.  The  degree — 
with  loathing  and  indignation.  Whilst  we  stand  peddling  and  hanker  after  these 
things,  the  temptation  is  not  fully  off ;  but  we  are  like  crows,  though  driven  from 
carrion,  keep  within  scent  of  it.  3.  Here  is  his  resolution  actually  verified.  He 
had  "  sufi'ered  the  loss  of  all  things."  We  have  not  realized  this,  not  being  called 
upon,  but  the  same  spirit  must  be  in  us.  All  things  that  draw  na  off  from  Christ 
must   be  actually  contemned.      II.  The   seasons  why  it  binds  all  Chkistunb. 

1.  This  is  plainly  inferred  out  of — (1)  The  faith  of  the  gospel,  (a)  As  that  faith 
is  sound  belief  of  the  veracity  of  God  we  are  pledged  to  crucify  the  flesh,  and  wait 
with  confidence  on  God  in  the  midst  of  afflictions,  (b)  As  it  is  acceptance  of  good 
so  we  refuse  worldly  things  as  our  felicity  and  portion.  (2)  The  love  of  the  gospel ; 
for  we  are  to  love  Christ  superlatively  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  25 ;  Matt.  vi.  24) ;  therefore 
(Matt.  X.  37).  (3)  The  hope  of  the  gospel  which  is  everlasting  life  (Rom.  viii.  18; 
2  Cor.  iv.  17 ;  Mark  x.  29-30).     (4)  The  obedience  of  the  gospel  (Matt.  xvi.  24). 

2.  Because  Christ  hath  deserved  this  esteem.  (1)  By  what  He  is  to  us.  (a)  More 
excellent  than  all  things  else.  The  world's  good  is  uncertain  and  empty,  {b)  More 
necessary — we  can  dispense  with  everything  else,  (c)  More  beneficial;  m  Him 
alone  is  salvation  and  happiness  to  be  found.  (2)  By  what  He  hath  done  for  as 
(a  Cor.  viii.  9 ;  PhiL  ii.  7 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21).    3.  This  esteem  will  show  itsell     (1)  Jm 


18«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  m. 

labouring  to  get  Christ  above  all,  and  with  the  hazard  of  all  ^Matt.  vi.  33; 
xiii.  45-46).  (2)  In  a  care  to  keep  Christ  above  alL  He  is  your  lite  (Gal.  ii.  20), 
your  strength  (1  John  iv.  4),  your  blessedness  (Col.  i.  27).  (3)  In  grief  for  losing 
Christ  above  all  (Matt.  ix.  15  ;  Psa.  li.  10-12).  (4)  By  delighting  in  Him,  and  in 
the  testimonies  of  His  love  above  all  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  (5)  By  loving  all  other  things 
for  Christ's  sake.  (T.  Manton,  D.l).)  The  knowledge  of  Christ: — 1.  The 
analysis  of  our  faculties  into — thought,  feeling,  and  volition,  may  be  im- 
portant to  the  understanding  and  classification  of  the  phenomena  of  our 
nature ;  but  these  faculties  are  neither  independent  nor  distinct.  The  exercise 
of  one  includes  that  of  the  other.  There  is  always  an  exercise  of  will  in  thought, 
of  feeling  in  cognition.  In  the  Scriptures  knowledge  is  not  mere  intellectual 
apprehension ;  it  includes  the  proper  apprehension  not  only  of  the  object,  but 
of  its  qualities ;  and  if  those  qualities  be  aesthetic  or  moral,  it  includes  the  due 
apprehension  of  them,  and  the  state  of  feelings  which  answers  to  them.  2.  The 
knowledge  of  Christ,  therefore,  is  not  the  apprehension  of  what  He  is,  simply  by 
the  intellect,  but  also  a  due  apprehension  of  His  glory,  and  involves  not  as  a 
consequence  merely,  but  as  one  of  its  elements,  tiie  corresponding  feeling  of 
adoration,  delight,  desire,  and  complacency.  This  knowledge — I.  Includes — 1.  A 
knowledge  of  Christ's  person  as  God  and  man.  2.  The  knowledge  of  this  work  in 
the  redemption  of  man.  3.  Of  His  relation  to  us,  and  of  the  benefits  we  derive 
from  Him,  justification,  adoption,  sanctification,  eternal  life.  II.  Is  superlatively 
EXCELLENT :  because — 1.  He  is  Himself  the  perfect  object  of  knowledge.  2. 
Because  eternal  life,  the  hope  of  the  soul,  consists  in  that  knowledge.  The 
possession  of  it  enlightens  and  enlarges  the  intellect,  purifies  the  heart,  and  renders 
perfectly  blessed.  3.  Without  this  knowledge  we  are  not  only  ignorant  of  God, 
out  of  the  way  of  salvation.  We  know  not  how  to  be  justified  or  sanctified.  We 
of  necessity,  therefore,  are  left  to  seek  and  trust  in  other  ineSectual  methods  of 
obtaining  these  blessings.  Conclusion :  1.  All  religion  is  included  in  this — to 
know  CLrist.  To  this  we  should  concentrate  all  our  attention  and  efforts.  It  is 
vain  to  seek  the  knowledge  of  God  or  His  favour,  to  strive  after  holiness  and  peace 
in  any  other  way.  2.  The  only  test  of  Christian  character  is  found  here.  Men 
may  be  benevolent,  in  a  certain  sense  pious,  but  they  cannot  be  Christians  unless 
they  know  Christ,  and  find  in  that  their  spiritual  life.  3.  The  only  way  to  save 
men  is  not  by  preaching  the  doctrines  of  natural  religion,  nor  by  holding  up  the 
law,  nor  by  expounding  the  anthropological  doctrines  of  the  Bible.  These  things 
are  important  in  their  place,  but  they  are  subordinate  to  preaching  Christ,  i.e., 
holding  Him  up  in  His  person.  His  work,  &o.,  as  the  great  object  of  knowledge, 
and,  as  such,  the  great  object  of  love,  the  only  ground  of  confidence,  and  oar  only 
and  all-suflicient  portion.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  knowledge  of  Christ: — I.  Its 
NATtJBB.  1.  Speculative,  2.  Experimental.  8.  Practical.  II.  Its  excellency 
in — 1.  Itself.  2.  Its  ase.  3.  Its  effect.  III.  Its  value.  Incomparable  ;  all 
else  but  dung  and  dross.  IV.  Its  poweb.  1.  To  sway  the  judgment.  2.  Induce 
sacrifice.  3.  Excite  effort.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  more  we  know  of  some 
things,  the  less  we  admire  them  ;  a  minute  inspection  reveals  deficiencies ;  but  the 
reverse  is  true  about  Jesus  Christ.  So  St.  Paul  felt,  and  so  feels  every  genuine 
Christian.  I.  The  value  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus.  This  knowledge — 
1.  Contains  all  that  can  satisfy  the  understanding.  If  we  derive  pleasure  from 
the  knowledge  of  art,  science,  Uterature,  history,  how  much  more  may  we  derive 
from  the  discoveries  of  Divine  truth  ?  This  leaves  all  the  discoveries  of  scholars 
at  an  immense  distance.  If  men  were  to  propound  to  the  wisest,  "  How  shall  man 
be  just  with  God  ?  "  it  would  baffle  them.  But  the  knowledge  of  Christ  solves 
this.  The  truths  of  the  incarnation,  death,  &c.,  of  Christ,  while  the  profoundest 
are  yet  the  most  simple.  To  regard  this  knowledge,  therefore,  with  indifference  is 
a  mark  of  a  weak  mind.  And,  besides,  it  is  the  constant  study  of  the  angels  of 
heaven  who  behold  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  2.  Pacifies  the 
conscience.  Some  men  would  give  all  the  world  for  a  peaceful  conscience.  Think 
of  what  they  do  to  procure  it — amusement,  repentance,  business,  &c,,  alas,  are  only 
opiates.  But  let  a  man  he  alive  to  the  discoveries  of  the  gospel,  see  justice  satisfied 
in  the  death  of  Christ,  and  know  that  God  is  reconciled  through  His  Son,  and  the 
storm  will  be  stilled.  3.  Purifies  the  heart.  In  all  the  lessons  of  human  wisdom 
there  are  two  incurable  dirfects.  (1)  They  are  often  only  conjectures.  (2)  They 
propose  no  motives  of  sufficient  weight.  Now  this  knowledge  has  been  tried,  and 
ha?  been  found  to  be  saving,  and  no  imaginable  motives  could  be  stronger  than 
«*  for  the  sake  of  Christ,"  and  *'  to  win  Christ."    4.  Saves  the  souh     "  This  ia  Ufa 


^HAP.  in.]  PHILIPPIANS.  187 

•teroal,"  <&o.  II.  The  distingdishing  characters  of  the  Christian's  regard  fob 
THAT  KNOWLEDGK.  1.  It  is  personal — "I  count."  The  error  of  the  Jews  was  that 
they  substituted  relative  for  persoual  piety.  They  gloried  in  their  relation  tc 
Abraham,  &c.  So  now  a  great  mauy  depend  upon  the  merits  of  others.  The 
religion  of  some  is  hereditary,  or  by  prosy.  But  neither  the  devil  nor  Christ  will 
be  served  in  this  way.  2.  Decided  aud  unequivocal.  "Yea,  doubtless."  The 
Christianity  of  many  is  very  vacillating ;  but  this  Clirist  rejects,  and  even  mau 
contemns.  3.  Rational — "  I  count."  Men  sometimes  set  up  a  blazing  profession 
because  their  feelings  have  been  wrought  upon,  and  without  any  idea  of  what  the 
profession  involves.  But  the  cost  ought  to  be  counted,  and  must  be  if  there  is  to 
be  any  stability.  4.  Supreme — "  All  things."  (1)  We  are  to  count  all  things  sinful 
as  loss  for  this  knowledge.  (2)  Things  that  are  lawful.  All  that  is  valued  on 
earth  must  be  subordinated  to  this.  (W.  Henry.)  The  excellency  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  appears — I.  In  the  sacrifices  the  apostle  made  to  secure  it.  II.  In 
THE  benefits  IT  SECURES.  1.  Rightcousness.  2.  Resurrection  power.  3.  A 
gloriuuB  hope.  III.  In  the  disposition  it  creates.  1.  A  correct  estimate  of 
ourselves.  2.  Earnest  purpose.  3.  Persevering  effort.  4.  Love  and  unity. 
{J.  l.yth,  D.D.)        I.  The  knowledge  or  Cueist  is  so  excellent,  that  a  qeacious 

HEART    COUNTETH     ALL     THINGS     DUNG     AND     DROSS     RATHER     THAN      MISS     IT.        1.    The 

knowledge  here  spoken  of.  Knowledge  is  twofold.  (1)  A  bare  speculative  know- 
ledge.  Even  this  is  a  great  privilege  (1  Pet.  i.  12 ;  Eph.  iii.  10) ;  but  if  we  are 
content  with  it  we  shall  periiih.  It  was  not  those  who  saw  the  ark,  but  those  who 
entered  it  who  were  saved.  (2)  A  saving  knowledge  such  as  is  accompanied  by — 
{a)  Faith,  i.e.,  a  certain  persuasion  of  the  truth  of  our  redemption  by  Chi'ist  upon 
evidence  so  as  we  may  venture  our  souls  aud  all  our  interest  in  His  hands  (John 
tI.  69  ;  Acts  ii.  36  ;  John  xvii.  8).  (b)  Love,  (c)  Obedience  (1  John  ii.  4).  2.  Why 
is  this  kno'.vledge  so  prized  ?  (1)  It  is  valuable  in  itself ;  better  than  all  other, 
(a)  From  the  Author  (Matt.  xvi.  16 ;  John  vi.  45  ;  1  John  ii.  20),  (b)  The  matter 
to  be  known,  Christ  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  This  is  comfortable  knowledge  if 
we  consider  our  deep  necessity  (Col.  L  21;  Job  xiv.  4;  2  Tim.  ii.  26;  1  Thess.  i.  10), 
and  His  sufficiency  to  do  us  good  (Acts  xx.  28 ;  Col.  i.  20,  27).  (c)  The  effect.  It 
is  a  renewing  and  transforming  knowledge  (Col.  iii.  10 ;  1  John  iL  2).  (2^  The 
subjects  who  thus  esteem  Christ,  (a)  Their  minds  are  changed  (Jer.  xxxu  84). 
By  this  they  have  a  spirit  of  discerning,  {b)  Their  hearts  (2  Cor.  v.  9-10).  3,  Uses. 

(1)  Of  reproof,  (a)  To  those  who  study  all  things  but  Christ.  If  God  hath  laid 
out  the  riches  of  His  grace  and  wisdom  to  do  us  good,  surely  it  deserveth  our  best 
thoughts,  {b)  To  those  who  content  themselves  with  the  form  of  knowledge  (Rom. 
ii.  20).  Christianity  is  not  only  to  be  believed,  but  felt  (1  Pet,  ii.  3).  Experience 
is  the  best  seal  and  confirmation  (2  Pet.  i.  8).  (2)  Of  exhortation.  Consider 
— (a)  The  necessity.  You  must  know  Christ  before  you  can  believe  and  love  Him 
(2  Tim.  i.  12).  (b)  The  pleasantness,  (c)  The  profit  (John  xvii.  3).  (3)  Bless 
God  that  He  hath  given  thee  this  knowledge,  and  do  not  murmar  if  He  hath 
denied  tbee  other  things.  Remember  (a)  how  it  excelleth  all  other  gifts.  (6)  How 
a  true  value  and  esteem  of  Christ  lesseneth  all  other  things.  II.  Jesus  Christ  must 
BE  KNOWN  AS  LoRD.  1.  What  this  Lordship  of  Christ  is — the  new  light  of  propriety 
and  government  over  all  men  which  Christ  now  hath  as  being  the  Sovereign  of  the 
world,  (1)  It  is  superadded  to  the  former  sovereignty  and  dominion  which  the 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  had  as  Creator  (Rev,  v.  12),  2.  It  is  derivative,  and 
cannot  be  supreme,  but  subordinate  (Matt,  xxviii.  18 ;  John  xvii.  2 ;  Phil.  ii.  11). 
(3)  It  is  beneficial  to  us.  Its  end  is  to  effect  man's  recovery  to  peace  with  and 
loyalty  to  God.  2.  How  this  right  accrueth  to  Christ.  (1)  By  purchase  (Bom.  liv.  9), 

(2)  By  grant  (Acts  ii.  26),  3.  How  we  come  to  be  concerned  in  it.  ( 1 )  By  our  passive 
subjection,  and  (2)  voluntary  submission  (2  Cor.  viii.  6).  4.  What  our  concern 
is.  (1)  Our  privileges  and  immunities,  (a)  Freedom  from  the  curse  and  rigour  of  the 
law  (Gal.  V.  18) ;  {b)  from  the  guilt  of  sin  (Col.  i.  13-14) ;  (c)  the  wrath  to  come 
(1  Thess.  L  10) ;  and  deliverence  to  grace  and  glory,  (2)  Our  duties  (Heb.  v.  9). 
Privilege  and  duty  must  not  be  separated  (Luke  vi.  46  ;  Matt.  vii.  21),  6,  Use, 
to  persuade  ns  to  own  Christ  as  a  Lord,  (1)  Let  us  enter  into  the  state  of  servants 
and  vassals  to  Him  by  renouncing  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  who  were 
once  onr  lords,  but  were,  indeed,  our  enemies  (Isa.  xxvi.  13).  (2)  Be  not  subjects 
in  name  and  by  profession  only  (Col.  i.  10).  HI.  There  should  bb  some  applica- 
tion WHEN  WE  CONSIDER  ChRIST  AND    ADDRKSS   OURSELVES  TO  KNOW  HiM,       1.    What  iS 

this  application?  (1)  Some  distinctions,  (a)  The  application  of  comfort  is  when 
I  respect  Christ  under  such  a  term  as  implies  some  privilege  to  me,  that  He  is  m^ 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiP.  m, 

Saviour,  &o.  (Gal.  ii.  20) ;  but  the  application  that  respects  duty  is  when  I  appre- 
hend Him  under  a  term  which  inferreth  my  obligation  to  obedience — "  my  Lord." 
(6)  The  application  of  faith  is  a  particular  application  of  Christ  and  the  promise  to 
ourselves,  so  as  to  excite  us  to  look  after  the  benefits  for  which  Christ  is  appointed  : 
the  application  of  assurance  is  when  I  actually  determine  that  my  own  sins  are 
pardoned  and  I  adopted  into  God's  family  (1  John  iii.  19).  (c)  The  application 
may  be  implicit,  dark,  and  reserved,  when  we  have  not  so  full  a  persuasion  of  our 
good  estate,  but  comfortable  encouragement  to  wait  upon  God  in  the  way  of  duty ; 
it  may  also  be  explicit,  clear,  and  open  (Eph.  i.  6  ;  2  Cor.  v.  1 :  2  Tim.  v.  8).  (2) 
Some  observations,  (a)  The  application  of  faith  may  be  without  the  application 
of  assurance;  sometimes  they  go  together,  (b)  The  one  is  necessary,  the  other 
comfortable,  (c)  It  is  a  support  to  have  the  darker  way  of  applying  Christ  and  His 
benefits,  when'we  have  not  the  full  certainty  that  they  belong  to  us,  2.  Why  there 
should  be  such  an  application  of  Christ.  (1)  Because  things  that  nearly  concern  us 
do  most  affect  us.  The  love  of  God  in  general  doth  not  so  affect  me  as  when  I  know 
"  He  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  (2)  Without  some  application  there  can 
be  no  interest  and  benefit  to  us.  General  grace  must  be  made  particular.  Christ's 
blood  will  not  avail  unless  it  be  sprinkled.  (3)  The  Scripture  insisteth  mach  on  a 
personal  entering  into  covenant  with  God  (2  Chron.  xxx.  8).  (4)  Our  personal 
interest  in  Christ  is  the  ground  of  our  comfort  and  confidence  (Hab.  iii.  18  ;  Luke 
i.  17).  Application :  1.  Kesolvo  to  give  yourself  up  to  Him  to  serve  Him.  A 
believer  cannot  always  say,  "  Christ  is  mine  "  ;  but  he  can  say  "  I  am  His  "  (Psa. 
cxix.  94).  2.  In  applying  Christ  seek  necessary  grace  rather  than  comfort.  3. 
When  God  draweth — run  (Cant.  i.  4).  When  He  knocketh,  open  (Rev.  iii.  10). 
{T.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ: — Its  notes 
are — I.  Certainty.  Concerning  moral  and  religious  truth  men  have  been  most  un- 
certain, and  have  bewildered  themselves  in  endless  speculations.  And  yet,  on  such 
subjects,  certainty  is  of  the  utmost  importance.  The  knowledge  of  Christ  is 
certain.  What  God  teaches  must  be  absolute  truth.  He  can  neither  deceive,  nor 
be  deceived.  That  Christianity  is  a  system  of  Divine  knowledge  from  God  ia 
proved. — 1.  By  prophecy.  2.  Miracles.  3.  Experience  (John  vii.  17).  II, 
Majesty  and  gbandedb.  Great  thoughts  in  religion  are  necessary  for  man ;  and 
true  religion  must  in  its  own  nature  have  them.  It  is  one  of  the  characteristics  oi 
false  religion  to  inculcate  low  thoughts  of  God  and  Divine  things.  Take  the  Chris- 
tian conception  of  God — eternal,  just,  merciful,  redeeming.  III.  Suitableness  and 
adaptation.  It  is  in  all  its  parts  knowledge  for  us.  No  kind  of  useful  knowledge 
is  to  be  undervalued.  Many  branches  are  of  great  importance.  But  all  such  is — 1. 
Partial.  A  king  may  be  a  criminal  before  God.  2.  Temporary.  But  look  at  the 
knowledge  of  Christ.  (1)  It  is  salvation  for  sinners.  (2)  Communion  with  God 
for  them  who  have  been  afar  off.  (3)  Comfort  in  affliction.  (4)  Life  in  death,  and 
all  this  for  us,  not  for  devils  or  angels.  IV.  Comprishensivenehs.  It  is  not  only 
light  itself,  it  gives  light  to  everything  beside,  not  a  star,  but  a  sun.  He  who 
knows  Christ  knows — 1.  Creation  (CoL  i.  16).  2.  History.  Human  writers  narrate 
the  events,  in  Christ  their  purpose  is  discovered.  The  call  of  Abraham,  &c. ,  all 
stand  connected  with  the  designs  of  providence  in  regard  to  the  spiritual  interests  of 
mankind.  The  Eoman  Empire  was  designed  to  be  the  wide  field  for.the  triumphs  of 
Christ.  The  voyage  of  Columbus  was  intended  to  bring  America  into  the  Christian 
fold.  3.  Daily  providence.  4.  The  sepu'«hre.  V.  Holiness.  Human  knowledge 
does  not  sanctify,  it  often  pollutes,  and  there  is  also  a  knowledge  of  Christ  which 
leaves  us  in  sin  and  under  condemnation.  But  this  knowledge  leads  to  holiness. 
Conclusion  :  1.  Would  you  possess  this  knowledge  ?  You  must  count  all  this  but 
loss  for  it.  2.  If  this  knowledge  is  incalculably  excellent,  then  it  is  our  duty  to 
diffuseit.  {R.Watson.)  The  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ: — I.  It  subpassks 
all  other.  II.  Is  only  communicated  by  the  Spibit  of  God.  III.  Exalts  the  natu'  a 
or  MAN.   IV.  Brings  peace,  holiness,  salvation.    V.  Is  pebmanently  valuable.    VL 

Is  WORTH  4NY  SACRIFICE.      VII.  SECURES  ETERNAL  GAIN.      (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I,  WhaI 

THIS  KNOWLEDGE  IS.  1.  Comparatively — (1)  It  stands  opposed  to  the  ignorance  of  the 
heathen  (1  Cor.  i.  21 ;  Rom.  i.  21 ;  Acts  xvii.  23).  (2)  It  ia  distinguished  from 
the  knowledge  of  the  law  of  Moses  (John  i.  17 ;  Heb.  x.  1).  (3)  It  is  superior  tc 
the  speculative  unsanctified  notions  of  nominal  Christians  (Tit.  i.  16  ;  2  Tim.  iii. 
5,  ii.  19;  Luke  xiii.  27).  2.  Positively.  It  is— (1)  Spiritual  (Eph.  i,  17;  John  vL 
63).  (2)  Supernatural  (1  Cor.  ii.  14)  ;  the  sole  prerogative  of  the  supernatarally 
renewed  man.  (3)  Experimental  (2  Thess.  ii.  10;  1  Pet.  ii.  2-3).  (4)  Practical 
It  is  sometimes  put  for  the  whole  of  religion  (1  John  iL  3-4).     3.  Specifically.   It  it 


CRKV.  III.]  PUILIPPIANS.  18« 

the  knowledge  of  ChriMt     (1)  Christ  Himself  is  the  object  of  it.     (2)  His  character, 
also,  and  office  and  work  (1  Cor.  ii.  2 ;  John  i.  14).     (3)  Faith  is  included  (Isa.  liii. 
11;  Psa.  ix.  10).     II.   Its  excellency.    1.  It  is  most  necessary.    Of  many  things  we 
may  be  ignorant,  because  we  cannot  attain  the  kuowledjre  of  then? ;    and  of  many 
others  we  may  safely  be  ignorant ;  but  this  knowledge  is  necessary  to  salvation 
(Prov.  xix.  2).     There  can  be  no  faith  in  or  love  to  Jesus  without  it.     Satan  takes 
the  greatest  pains  to  prevent  its  attainment,  and  God  to  communicate  it  (1  Tim.  ii. 
4),    2.  Most  heavenly.     Every  good  gift  comes  from  God,  but  this  especially  (2  Cor. 
iv.  6  ;  Isa.  liv.  13).    3.  Most  uscfuL    4.  Every  kind  of  knowledge  is  useful  in  its  place ; 
for  it  is  to  the  mind  what  light  is  to  the  eyes  ;  but  this  exceeds  all  other.     (1)  It 
converts  the  soul  (Acts xxvi.  18) ;  (2)  regenerates  (Col.  iii.  10);  (3)  humbles;  other 
puffs  up  (Isa.  vi,  5  ;  Job  xL  4 ;  Rev,  1. 17) ;  (4)  encourages  (Psa.  ix.  10 ;  Eph.  i.  13 ;  2 
Tim.  i.  12).     4.  Is  most  pleasant.    Knowledge  in  general  is  grateful  to  the  mind, 
yet  some  kinds  are  painful  (Eccles.  i.  18).     There  must  be  a  good  deal  of  pains  to 
get  it,  a  good  deal  of  care  to  keep  it ;  the  more  we  know  the  more  it  seems  to  U8 
remains  to  be  known,  and  the  folly  and  misery  of  man  the  more  apparent.     But 
this  knowledge  is  easily  attained,  imd  he  w^ho  increaseth  it  increasetli  joy  (Psa.  cxix. 
72,  162  ;  Jer.  xv.  16).     Conclusion  :  Is  this  knowledge  so  excellent,  then  ?   L  Do 
we  possess  it  ?  (1.  Cor.  xv.  34 ;  John  iii.  19).     If  not,  seek  it  at  once  (James  L  5 ; 
Prov.  ii.   3-7).     2.  If  so,  be  thankful  (  Matt.  xiii.  16  ;  Luke  x.  21 ;  Jer.  ix.  23-24). 
3.  But  do  not  be  proud.     The  wisest  know  but  little  of  what  is  to  be  known  (Ilosea 
vi.  3  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  18).     (O.  Burder.)         The  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ : — 
If  the  soul  be  without  knowledge  it  is  not  good.     This  is  true  in  regard  to  worldly 
knowledge ;  much  more  to  heavenly.    I.  Its  object — Christ  Jesus.     It — 1.  Compre- 
hends adoring  views  of  the  Divinity  of  His  Person.  Do  away  with  these,  and  scriptural 
revelation  becomes  chaos.     2.  Involves  intelligent  apprehensions  of  the  mediatorial 
and  vicarious  character  of  His  work  (Rom.  iii.  25).    3.  Includes  a  believing  and 
experimental  acquaintance  with  the  way  in  which  sinners  become  interested  in  the 
blessings  of  redemption  by  being  reconciled  to  God  through  faith  in  Christ.     4. 
Implies  an  obedient  regard  and  solemn  recognition  of  the  high  authority  of  Christ 
as  King  and  Lawgiver.    II.  Its  nature.     1.  It  is  not  visual  and  corporeal,  but 
intellectual  and  theoreticah    The  former  was  the  case  in  the  days  of  our  Saviour's 
flesh,  and  yet  to  many  it  was  of  no  avail.     While  something  more  than  head  know- 
ledge is  required,  yet  that  is  essential.    Ignorance  is  not  the  mother  of  devotion. 
2.  Experimental  and  appropriating  ;  this  is  unintelligible  to  carnal  men.    Who  can 
make  a  blind  man  understand  colours,  or  a  deaf  man  sounds.     Sin  has  got  into  the 
heart,  Christ  also  must  Ket  there.    3.  Practical  and  constraining.    Mereuninfluential 
knowledge  of  Christ  N..11  only  aggravate  the  sinner's  doom.    Hell  is  full  of  it.    Does 
your  knowledge,  then,  lead  you  to  love  good  works,  to  hate  sin,  to  be  hnmble 
and  obedient  ?    III.  Its  excellency.     1.  It  is  the  essence  of  all  gospel  truth.    2. 
By  it  alone  we  obtain  a  comprehensive  and  accurate  knowledge  of   the  Divine 
character.    "The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,"  but  he  that  hath  seen  Christ, 
hath  seen  the  Father.    3.  It  may  be  seen  in  the  excellency  of  those  who  have  made 
and  still  make  it  their  chief  study.     Angels,  Prophets,  Apostles,  and  the  greatest  of 
uninspired  geniuses — Bacon,  Newton,  Milton,  Locke.     4.  In  the  excellent  effects  it 
produces    on    individual   character.     There  is  no  necessary  connection  between 
science  and  sanctity,  but  that  between  the  knowledge  of  Christ  and  purity  and 
charity  is  inevitable.     5.  In  its  improving  influence  on  society  at  large.     Compare 
heathen  nations  with  Christian.     6.  The  possession  of  it  stands  iu  inseparable 
connection  with  the  salvation  of  the  souL     What  is  civilization  compared  with 
this?     7.    It  shall  outlive  and  eclipse  all  other    knowledge.     {Josiah    Red/ord.) 
The  excellency  of  this  knowledge  arises  from  the  fact — I.  That  in  Christ  all  Ditinb 
AND  HUMAN  EXCELLENCIES  ARE  COMBINED.     Whatever  bcauty  resides  in  the  Divine 
attributes,  for  "in  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,"  and  whatever 
perfection  of  human  virtues,  because  He  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,"  &c. 
II.  That  it  has  a  tbansfokminq  and   assimilating   effect  on   all   who  believ- 
iNOLY  contemplate  IT.     "  God  is  love,  and  he  that  dwelleth  in  love,"  &o.    "  Be- 
holding His  glory,  we  are  transformed,"  (fee.     III.  It   is   intimately  connected 
WITH  OUR  JUSTIFICATION.    As  faith  is  belief  at  the  truth,  this  knowledge  includes  it. 
IV.  Its  tendency  is  to  generate  lively  hope,  and   fill  thb   soul  with  peacb 
AND  JOY.     V.  It  FITS  the  SOUL  FOR  HEAVEN.     "  This  is  life  eternal,"  &c.    VI.  It  will 
BE  FOR  EVER  INCREASING.     Howcvcr  high  the  saints  may  rise,  still  Christ  will  be  the 
inexhaustible  source  of  their  increase  of  knowledge.    Conclusion  :  If  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  be  so  excellent — 1.  It  should  be  oar  constant  and  vigorous  effort  to  increaet 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [csKf.  nit 

in  it  daily.  2.  We  should  endeavour  to  extend  it  to  as  many  of  our  fellow  creatures  ai 
we  cau  reach.  {A.  Alexander,  D.D. )  I.  What  knowledge  of  Christ  is  that  which  m 
so  EXCELLENT?  It  is — 1.  ExtcDsive.  Apprehending  Him  as — (1)  Christ,i.«.,Hifi  nature 
acd  offices — the  anointed  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  (2)  Jesus,  i.e..  His  intention 
and  execution  of  those  offices — viz.,  salvation.  (3)  Lord,  i.e.,  the  consequents  of 
those  offices — dominion  in  Christ,  subjection  in  us  (Rom,  xiv.  9).  Many  will  take 
Christ  as  Saviour  who  will  not  own  Him  as  Lord,  but  this  is  to  apprehend  Christ 
without  His  crown,  and  so  not  an  excellent  knowledge.  2.  Appropriating.  The 
marrow  of  the  gospel  lies  in  the  pronouns  "my"  and  "ours,"  To  apprehend 
Christ  yours  on  good  grounds  is  the  excellency  of  this  knowledge.  3.  Effectual. 
It  has  a  powerful  efficacy  on  the  heart  and  life,  (1)  On  the  judgment ;  when  this 
knowledge  in  Christ  is  exalted  as  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand,  and  the  richest 
treasure  esteemed  dross  in  comparison  with  His  riches,  (2)  On  the  affections.  To 
kindle  desire  and  raise  joy  in  Christ.  (3)  On  the  practice.  The  profits  of  sin  and 
its  pleasures  are  renounced  as  well  as  self-righteousness.  4.  Fiducial,  It  brings 
the  soul  to  rest  in  Christ  and  His  rij^hteousness  alone  for  pardon  and  acceptance, 
and  to  cast  away  all  those  rotten  proofs  of  good-nature,  harmlessness,  accomplish- 
ments, &c.  6,  Useful,  He  that  has  it  studies  to  improve  Christ,  and  to  nse  Him 
for  those  blessed  purposes  for  which  He  is  given  (vers.  9-10).  II,  Why  this  know- 
ledge IS  EXCELLENT.  Becausc — 1.  It  is  that  knowledge  which  the  most  excellent 
creatures  on  earth  and  the  most  exalted  in  heaven  desired,  obtained,  and  gloried  in. 
Abraham  (John  viii.  56);  Moses  (Heb,  xi,  26);  the  Prophets  (1  Peter  i.  10-11); 
and  Kings  (Luke  x,  23-24) ;  Paul  (1  Cor,  ii.  1-2) ;  angels  (1  Peter  i,  12  ;  Exodus 
xxxvii.  9).  2,  In  knowing  Christ  we  know  the  glorious  excellencies  of  God  (John 
xiv.  7 ;  Col.  i,  15 ;  Heb,  i,  3 ;  2  Cor,  iv,  6).  3.  It  makes  those  who  have  it 
excellent  (2  Cor,  iii,  16,  18 ;  1  John  ill.  2 ;  Philip,  iii.  21).  Note  the  degrees  by 
which  fallen  man  is  raised  by  this  knowledge,  (1)  The  removal  of  that  which 
makes  him  vile  (2  Peter  ii,  20).  (2)  Partaking  of  the  Divine  nature,  i.e.,  of  Hia 
holiness,  the  image  of  God  (Col.  iii.  10) .  All  things  pertaining  to  life  and  godliness 
are  given  through  this  knowledge  (2  Peter  i,  3-4).  (3)  Investing  us  with  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  (Isa.  liii.  11),  (4)  Eternal  glory  (John  xvii.  3).  IIL 
Chbist  Himself  is  most  excellent,  therefore  this  knowledge  is  excellent 
KNOWLEDGE,  1,  There  is  nothing  in  Him  but  is  excellent.  There  is  a  mixture  in 
all  created  beings — the  heavens  (Job  xv,  16) ;  angels  (Job  iv,  18) ;  but  Christ  ia 
altogether  lovely  and  higher  than  the  heavens,  2.  All  the  excellencies  that  are  in 
the  creatures  are  eminently  m  Christ.  3.  All  these  excellencies  are  in  Him  in  a 
more  excellent  manner.  (1)  Perfectly,  without  a  shadow  of  imperfection.  (2) 
Infinitely,  without  limit.  (3)  Unchangeably  and  eternally.  4.  Innumerably  more 
excellencies  than  are  in  all  creatures  together  are  in  Christ  alone,  for  in  Him 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  IV,  Uses.  1.  Reproof  to  those 
who  neglect  or  despise  this  knowledge.  (1)  Those  who  are  not  diligent  to  get  and 
increase  it.  No  knowledge  worth  having  is  to  be  had  without  diligence,  and  how 
ead  that  many  are  so  busy  about  lower  knowledge  that  they  say  they  have  no  time 
for  this.  (2)  Those  who  strive  not  to  communicate  this  knowledge.  To  this  may 
be  attributed  the  ruin  of  families  and  commonwealths,  and  lays  you  under  dreadful 
threatenings.  2,  Exhortation,  (1)  To  those  that  want  it — be  you  persuaded  to  get 
it.  (2)  To  those  of  you  who  have  some  of  it — grow  in  it.  (3)  To  attain  it,  (a) 
Be  convinced  of  and  humbled  for  your  waut  of  it.  (6)  Lay  a  good  groundwork  in 
the  principles  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  otherwise  you  will  but  build  in  the  air 
(Heb,  vi.  1),  (c)  Let  the  Word  of  God  be  familiar  to  you  (Col.  iii,  16  ;  John  v.  39; 
Deut.  vi,  6-9).  (d)  Make  use  of  those  who  are  already  acquainted  with  Christ 
/Heb.  X.  25 ;  Prov.  xiii.  20,  xv.  7).  («)  Be  much  in  seeking  God  (James  i,  5). 
(4)  To  grow  in  it,  [a)  Make  all  your  other  knowledge  subservient  to  this.  See 
Christ  in  ever\  thing  that  is  good,  make  your  knowledge  of  what  is  evil  heighten 
your  desire  of  Christ.  (6)  Get  nearer  Him  and  keep  near,  (c)  Fix  the  eye  of  your 
souls  upon  Him  (Exod.  xxxvii.  9).  Study  the  excellences  of  His  person,  the 
advantages  of  His  offices,  the  riches  of  His  grace,  (d)  Seek  it  not  for  curiosity,  but 
that  you  may  enjoy  Christ  more,  (e)  Content  not  yourselves  with  light  without 
heat.  Let  every  spark  of  knowledge  kiudle  zeal  and  love.  (/)  Live  up  to  the 
knowledge  you  have ;  that  is  the  way  to  attain  more.  Let  the  light  that  shines  in 
your  minds  shine  in  your  lives  (John  \ii.  17).  {g)  Let  humility  keep  pace  with 
knowledge,  (h)  Make  use  of  Christ's  prophetical  office.  (D.  Clarkson,  B.D.) 
The  Tiwre  excellent  kiwwledge  : — I.  The  object  of  this  knowledge.  Unlike  all  other 
objects  of  human  study  it  is  single.    Human  science  diverges  into  several  branches. 


•HAP.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  191 

And  then  it  is  not  a  thing  or  a  system,  but  an  individual.  It  is  a  knowledge  of 
Christ  Jesus  as — 1.  God.  To  take  a  lower  view  of  Him  is  to  degrade  His  dignity 
and  destroy  His  atonement.  He  is  the  Creator,  and  as  the  creator  of  a  thing  must 
be  greater  than  the  thing  created,  so  the  knowledge  of  Christ  must  be  superior  to 
that  of  nature.  2.  The  only  revealer  of  God.  You  may  study  science  in  all  its 
branches  and  be  totally  ignorant  of  God.  The  heathen  world  is  an  evidence  jf  this. 
But  Christ  is  the  revealer  of  the  Father's  mind  and  heart.  3.  The  Redeemer.  As 
guilty  sinners,  under  the  curse  and  condemnation  of  the  law,  we  wanted  a  Saviour 
who  should  bear  our  sins  and  provide  such  a  salvation  as  would  harmonize  the 
moiul  attributes  of  God,  and  make  it  honourable  in  God  to  pardon.  Jesus  Christ 
is  such  a  Saviour.  4,  The  Provider  and  the  channel  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  whose 
power  alone  we  become  living  souls.  Unspeakable  as  is  God's  precious  gift  to  us, 
without  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  it  had  been  of  no  avail.  Take  out  the  science  of 
dynamics  from  the  other  sciences  and  you  reduce  them  to  a  shadow.  The  Spirit 
provides  the  spiritual  dynamics  of  Christianity  and  makes  redemption  effective. 
II.  Its  transcendent  excellency.  1.  Its  majesty  and  grandeur.  Wliat  is  there 
that  can  be  compared  to  it.  The  time  will  come  when  those  around  whose  name 
an  halo  of  scientific  glory  exists  will  stand  upon  the  confines  of  eternity.  Where 
will  the  splendour  of  human  science  be  then?  2.  Its  certainty.  There  is  a  degree 
of  uncertainty  attaching  to  all  science.  You  will  rarely  find  two  scientists  perfectly 
to  coincide.  But  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  Christ's  personality,  the  lustre  of  His 
Deity,  the  efiQcacy  of  His  atonement,  <fec.  The  only  uncertainty  is  that  which 
man's  depraved  nature  invents.  3.  Its  adaptation  to  the  highest  interests  of  our 
nature,  and  its  supply  for  all  our  yearnings  after  happiness,  knowledge,  and  a  nobler 
state  of  being.  4.  The  only  knowledge  that  meets  the  solemnity  of  a  dying  bed  is 
this.  Here  Bacon  and  Butler  had  to  lie  their  dying  heads.  (O.  Winslotu,  D.D.) 
The  excellency  of  Christian  knowledge  : — Knowledge  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  of 
all  attainments.  Happiness  and  usefulness  depend  upon  it.  The  image  of  God 
consists  in  "  knowledge  "  as  well  as  righteousness,  &c.  It  is  indispensable  for  the 
formation  of  character  and  the  regulation  of  conduct.  All  knowledge  is  good,  but 
its  higbest  subject  is  the  greatest  Being.  Hence  it  follows  that  religion  must  of 
necessity  embrace  the  highest  kind  of  knowledge,  and  the  knowledge  of  Christ  is 
that  of  "God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  exemplifying  the  perfections  of  the  Divine 
character,  fulfilling  the  puqioses  of  the  Divine  mind.  Tijis  is  the  theme  to  which 
the  apostle  deliberately  bent  his  unequalled  powers,  and  the  more  we  kno^vof  it  the 
less  shall  we  wonder  that  he  determined  to  know  nothing  else.  This  is  the  theme 
in  which  he  prays  that  believers  may  be  well  instructed  (Rph.  i.  16-19 ;  iii.  14-19.) 
I.  What  is  implied  in  this  knowledge  of  Christ.  The  whole  substance  of  gospel 
truth,  because  every  truth  in  Scripture  relates  to  Him,  and  derives  its  value  and 
use  from  this  connection.  In  this  view  the  knowledge  of  Christ  is  not  limited  to  the 
facts  of  His  personal  history,  but  represents  the  sum  and  substance  of  saving  know- 
ledge. It  is  remarkable  how  Paul  makes  every  other  topic  tributary  to  this. 
When  he  refers  to  the  principles  of  natural  religion  it  is  to  awaken  sinners  to  their 
need  of  Christ.  WTien  be  speaks  of  the  past  history  of  the  world  it  is  to  show  how 
it  was  a  preparation  for  Him.  He  expounds  the  prophets,  tbe  types,  the  obligations 
of  the  moral  law,  all  with  reference  to  Him.  He  cannot  recommend  charity 
without  speaking  of  Christ,  nor  express  gratitude  for  temporal  mercies  without 
thanking  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift  (Col.  iii.  11).  Christ,  then,  is  the  one  grand 
subject  of  the  gospel,  and  everything,  whether  in  nature,  providence,  or  Scripture,  is 
to  be  viewed  in  its  relation  to  Him.  II.  Its  peccliar  excellency  and  transcendent 
VALUE.  Knowledge  is  excellent  in  proportion  to — 1.  The  greatner^s  and  dignity  of 
its  subject.  Some  subjects  are  so  inconsiderable  that  the  knowledge  of  them  is  of 
little  value,  and  a  mind  may  be  full  of  them  without  being  enlarged,  because  the 
subject  of  its  thought  is  insignificant.  There  is  a  distinction  bdtweejn  the  subject 
of  our  thoughts  and  the  mere  fact  which  may  give  rise  to  them  ;  e.g.,  in  examining 
a  flower  a  peasant  may  be  studying  the  Divine  perfections ;  in  examining  a  world  a 
philosopher  may  be  studying  the  mere  laws  of  matter  ;  and  hence  the  grandeur  of 
a  subject  is  not  to  be  estiiuated  by  the  magnitude  of  the  object,  but  by  the  quality 
or  relation  which  occupies  the  mind.  On  this  princip'e  the  humblest  disciple  may 
be  occupied  with  loftier  contemplations  than  ever  occur  to  an  irreligious 
philosopher.  2.  Its  certainty.  The  mind  may  be  dazzled  by  a  splendid  conjecture, 
and  astonished  by  a  wonderful  narrative,  but  it  can  rest  in  neither  until  verified. 
The  knowledge  of  Christ  excels  all  other,  inasmuch  as  it  rests  on  the  infallible 
testimony  of   God.     3.  Its  necessity.    There  are  many  interesting  eabjeots  of 


199  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  m. 

ourioas  research,  but  they  are  not  of  argent  concern.  There  ar«  others  necessary 
for  some,  L>ut  not  for  all.  But  iu  the  knowledge  of  Christ  all  men  are  deeply 
interested,  inasmuch  as  their  safety  and  happiness  depend  upon  it.  4.  The 
magnitude  of  the  evils  it  averts  and  the  value  of  the  benefits  it  secures.  Secular 
knowledge  is  valuable  because  it  averts  temporal  calamities  and  promotes  temporal 
comfort,  but  the  knowledge  of  Christ  has  reference  to  the  interests  of  the  immortal 
Boul.  5.  The  moral  influence  it  exerts.  Many  kinds  of  knowledge  have  no  direct 
influence  on  character  or  conduct,  but  in  this  knowledge,  all  that  is  useful  in  truth 
is  blended  with  whatever  is  beautiful  in  morals,  and  both  are  so  represented  that  no 
man  can  be  familiarized  witii  the  Bible  without  being  elevated.  Take,  t.g.,  the 
character  of  Christ.  6.  The  stability  of  its  objects  and  the  permanence  of  its  use. 
"  The  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal,"  &c.  Religion  only,  of  all  the  forms  of 
human  knowledge,  is  immortal ;  the  usefulness  of  every  other  is  only  temporary. 
{J.  Buchanan,  D.D.)        Christ  Jesus  duly  prized: — L  The  uamneb  in  which  thh 

APOSTIiE    DELrVERS    HIMSELF    ON    THIS   GREAT    SUBJECT.       1.    He    OpCUly   piofeSSCth   hiS 

esteem  of  Christ  above  all,  and  that  not  in  general,  but  from',  his  own  experience, 
which  teacheth  us  that  the  saints  should  avowedly  profess  their  superlative  esteem 
of  Christ,  Christ  is  not  only  to  be  enjoyed  but  to  be  confessed.  This  is  for  His  glory, 
and  that  others  may  fall  in  love  with  Him.  2.  With  the  utmost  certainty — "  yea, 
doubtless."  He  was  not  halting  between  two  opinions.  This  is  necessary  for  us  with 
respect — (1)  To  the  outward  truths  of  religion,  because — (a)  Doubts  are  both  aiflictiva 
and  sinful,  (b)  They  are  enemies  to  our  faith,  (c)  They  are  the  spring  of  apostasy. 
(d)  They  are  prejudicial  to  the  growth  of  religion.  So,  then,  for  confirmation,  study 
the  word  of  truth ;  give  yourselves  up  to  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  truth,  and 
walk  in  the  truth.  (2)  To  the  inward  truth  of  religion.  We  should  seek  this 
certaiuty.  (a)  Because  the  saints  may  attain  to  it.  "  He  that  hath  my  com- 
mandments "  &o,  "  Give  dihgence  to  make  your  calling,"  &c.  sure.  (6)  Because 
doubts  are  hurtful,  (c)  The  case  of  our  day  calls  for  it.  A  doubting  Christian  is 
unfit  to  act  for  Christ  in  »  difficult  time.  Therefore  awake  from  sleep ;  walk  closely 
with  God  ;  examine  yourselves ;  receive  the  Spirit  so  freely  given  of  God  to  bear 
witness  with  yours.  3.  With  affection,  counting  all  things  loss  and  dung.  The 
excellency  of  Christ  naturally  fires  gracious  hearts,  because — (1)  All  their  hopes  are 
in  Him,  and  (2)  all  their  desires.  II.  The  grand  scope  of  the  apostlb.  Jesus  ia 
absolutely  matchless.  All  sheaves  bow  to  Him.  The  transcendent  excellency  ol 
Christ  is  proved.    1.  By  testimony  on  the  part  of — (1)  God  (Isa.  xiii.  1 ;  John  iii.  16). 

(2)  Angels  (Luke  ii.  10-14).  (3)  Saints  in  heaven.  (4)  Saints  on  earth.  (5)  His 
enemies.  2.  By  evidence.  (1)  He  is  God,  •'  the  true  God  and  eternal  life ;  "  there- 
fore His  excellence  is  infinite.  (2)  He  is  commensurate  to  the  desires  of  the  soul, 
which  all  the  creatures  combined  are  not.  But  "  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him 
should  all  fulness  dwell."  (3)  Whatever  excellence  is  in  anything  else,  it  ia 
derived  from  Him,  (4)  All  things  besides  Christ  cannot  make  a  man  happy,  but 
Christ  can.  (a)  The  creatures  want  sufficiency ;  but  Christ  is  completely  satis- 
factory (Psa.  Ixxiii.  25).  (b)  Certainty ;  but  Christ  is  unchanf;eable.  (5)  He  can 
do  for  us  what  no  other  can,  procure  pardon  for  sin,  peace  with  God,  a  right  to 
heaven.  3.  By  comparison.  No  person  or  thing  is  to  be  compared  with  Him.  (1) 
Men  on  earth  ;  the  greatest  one  His  vassals,  the  best  only  good  through  Him.  (2) 
Saints  in  heaven  are  only  like  the  lilies  wearing  a  glory  for  which  they  never  toiled. 

(3)  Angels  are  all  servants.  (4)  The  highest  earthly  good  is  a  broken  cistern,  and 
even  grace  and  glory  are  but  His  gifts.  III.  Uses.  1.  They  have  a  poor  portion 
who  are  without  Christ.  2.  They  have  made  a  good  choice  that  have  received 
Christ.    3.  We  are  to  stand  on  notLing  so  as  we  may  gain  Christ.    {T.  Boston,  D.D.) 

1.  That  only  is  th«  teuk  knowledge  of  chbist  which  terminates  in  ah  interest 
IN  AND  ENJOTMENT  OF  HiM.  To  coufirm  this  coHsidcr — 1.  That  all  the  knowledge  of 
Christ  that  brings  not  to  Him  is  but  splendid  ignorance  according  to  the  Word. 

2.  That  knowledge  of  Christ  which  is  not  an  interest  in  Him  is  mere  opinion  which 
is  dubious  and  uncertain.  It  may  be  a  good  opinion,  but  it  is  not  certainty.  You 
will  not  commit  your  m':ney  to  a  stranger  of  whom  you  have  only  a  good  opinion. 
So  it  is  with  those  who  have  only  a  speculative  knowledge  of  Christ.  Two  points 
of  saving  knowledge  exemplify  this.  Do  you  take  Him  for  and  instead  of  aU  T 
(Matt.  xiii.  45-46).  Have  you  committed  your  soul  unto  Him?  3.  The  true 
knowledge  of  Christ  engages  the  heart  and  captivates  the  soul — "  They  that  know 
Thy  name  will  put  their  trust  in  Thee."  As  the  loadstone  draws  iron,  so  does  Christ 
the  sinner.  4.  The  saving  knowledge  of  Christ  differs  not  in  kind,  but  degree,  from 
heaven'b  happiness  (John  xvii.  3).     II.  All  thikqs  abe  »dt  loss  in  comparison  wit« 


OHAP.  m.)  PHILIPPIANS.  19» 

THIS  KNOWLEDGE.  1.  In  what  respect  7  (1)  Singly.  (2)  All  together.  What  are 
the  stars  without  the  sun?  2.  Proofs  and  illustrations.  (1)  An  interest  in  Christ 
makes  God  ours,  for  He  ia  God.  (2)  This  interest  is  the  one  thing  necessary.  All 
things  must  go  for  necessaries  (Matt.  ri.  25).  Oiher  things  are  mere  conveniences. 
Man's  desire  is  to  be  happy,  and  nothing  outside  of  Christ  is  necessary  to  this  end, 
for  with  Christ  man  may  be  happy  and  lack  every  earthly  blessing  (Phil.  iv.  13). 
Everything  that  one  really  needs  ia  comprehended  in  this  :  "  He  that  spared  not  His 
own  Son  "  &c.  (3)  This  interest  is  satisfying  to  the  soul,  while  nothing  else  can  give 
satisfaction.  He  is  substance,  all  else  is  shadow  and  dream.  In  Him  are  both 
■uitability  and  fulness.  (4)  This  interest  is  a  most  enriching  interest — "  All  things 
are  yoars."  (a)  The  Christian  hath  more  in  possession  than  the  greatest  on  earth 
What  so  great  as  a  kingdom  J  The  Christian  hath  the  kingdom  of  God  within  him. 
Monarchs  lose  their  kingdoms  because  they  are  outside  them.  Christ  is  in  us  the 
hope  of  glory,  {b)  The  little  that  a  Christian  hath,  having  Christ,  is  more  valuable 
than  the  abundance  of  a  Christless  man.  (c)  The  Christian  makes  a  sanctified  use 
of  what  he  possesses,  and  so  "  all  things  work  together  for  good."  The  abundance 
of  the  ungodly  is  their  curse,  (d)  What  the  Christian  hath  he  hath  for  nothing, 
but  others  will  have  to  pay  a  dear  reckoning  for  what  they  have — "What  is  a  man 
profited,"  Ac.  (e)  The  Christian  hath  a  far  better  right  to  his  little,  for  it  comes 
by  covenant  and  not  simply  by  common  providence.  (/)  The  Christian's  portion 
is  but  an  earnest.  (5)  This  interest  is  the  only  lasting  interest.  It  will  abide 
when  we  have  lost  all  other  things  (Matt.  vi.  19-20).    3.  An  induction  of  particulars. 

(1)  ElnowleJge  of  other  things  is  no  way  comparable  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
either  for  pleasure  or  profit.  Grotius  said, ' '  I  have  destroyed  life,  laboriously  doing 
nothing."  (2)  Compared  with  Christ  riches  are  lighter  than  vanity  (Prov. 
xxiii.  5).  (3)  Worldly  reputation  depend,  upon  the  uncertain  thoughts  of  others 
and  may  be  easily  stained ;  but  the  Christian  shall  shine  with  eternal  honour. 
(4)  There  is  no  ease  that  is  permanently  pleasant  but  in  Christ.  (5)  Friends  are 
much  valued,  but  how  often  do  they  prove  themselves  like  brooks  dried  up  (Job 
vi.  15).  Christ  is  a  friend  that  will  help  in  all  cases.  (6)  Domestic  and  social 
relations  are  grtat  mercies,  but  we  must  part  from  them.  (7)  Liberty  is  but  a 
devil's  chain  without  Christ.     (8)  Life  and  self  are  loss  without  Christ.     III.  Uses. 

I.  Of  Information.  (1)  How  foolish  are  men  who,  like  Martha,  are  diligent  to  get 
other  things,  but  who  neglect  the  one  thing  needful.  (2)  Men  are  gainers,  lose  what 
they  will  for  Christ.     2.  Of  exhortation.     (1)  Christ  is  willing   to  receive  you. 

(2)  Consider  what  you  are  without  Him.  (.3)  An  interest  in  Christ  is  the  best  interest 
you  can  have  in  the  world,  {ibid.)  That  I  may  win  Christ.  1,  Christ  is  gained 
when  we  get  an  interest  in  Him  and  in  His  benefits  (1  Cor.  i.  9 ;  Heb.  iii.  14). 
The  ungodly  have  no  part  in  Him.  The  apostle  had  won  Christ  already,  but  he 
would  win  a  full  enjoyment  of  Him.  (2)  The  word  ct/j^jjiw  is  put  in  opposition  to 
the  loss  he  had  incurred,  and  means  that  there  was  enough  in  Christ  to  compensate 
him.  I.  What  gain  wb  have  in  having  Christ.  1,  He  is  our  ransom  from  the 
wrath  of  God,  and  so  you  have  somewhat  whereby  to  appease  yoiu:  guilty  fears 
(Col.  i.  14).  2.  He  hath  purchased  God's  favour  that  we  may  have  comfortable 
access  to  Him  (Heb.  x.  19).  3.  Our  natures  are  renewed,  and  not  only  the  favour 
and  fellowship  of  God  restored,  but  His  image  also  (Titus  iii.  5-6;  2  Pet.  i.  4; 
Heb.  xii.  10).  4.  Christ  is  our  treasury  and  storehouse,  from  whence  we  fetch  all  ova 
supplies  (1  Cor,  i.  30).     5.  By  Him  we  are  made  heirs  of  eternal  Ufe  (Rom.  viii,  17). 

II.  How  much  this  gain  excels  all  oxuee.  1.  It  is  most  comfortable,  for  here  ia 
comfort  at  all  times  and  in  all  cases  (Phil.  i.  21).  2.  Most  universal  (1  Cor.  ii,  22-23 ; 
1  Tim.  iv.  8).  3.  Everlasting  (Luke  x.  42).  4.  Sanctifying.  III.  Uses.  1.  For 
reproof  of — (1)  Those  who  take  no  pains  to  get  it  (Matt.  xvi.  26 ;  Luke  xvi.  25). 
(2)  Those  who  part  with  Ciirist  for  temporal  profit  (Heb.  xii.  16).  2.  For  in- 
straotion.  (1)  If  Christ  be  gain  then  we  may  make  some  losses  for  Christ 
if  we  may  not  have  them  and  Him  too  (Heb.  xi.  26;  Mark  x.  29-30).  (2)  We 
should  not  murmur  when  others  go  away  with  other  things,  if  we  have  Christ 
(Psa.  xvii.  14-15),  8.  To  persuade  you  to  get  Christ.  (1)  He  is  the  best 
gain  if  God  be  preferred  before  the  creature,  eternal  glory  before  finding  riches, 
the  soul  before  the  body.  (2)  This  gain  may  be  gotten  at  a  cheap  rate 
(Isa.   Iv.   1;    Rev.   iii.   18).      {T.  Manton,  D.D.)        Winning   Christ:— I.  Ix    is 

THE    ChBISTLAN's    GBAND    OBJECT,    AND    SHOULD    BE    THE    DESIGN     07    BVEBT    ONE    TO 

vm  SB  GAIN  CHBisT.  1.  What  it  is  to  win  Him  and  bow.  It  is  to  get  Him  to  h* 
ours  and  enjoy  Him.  It  imports  that  we  are  naturally  without  Him  (Eph.  ii.  12). 
(1)  We  must  work  and  win  as  labourers  do  (chap.  ii.  12).    (2)  We  must  fight  and 

13 


194  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

win  aa  soldiers — "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,"  <fec.  Whenever  a  soul 
is  on  its  way  to  Christ,  the  alarm  is  sounded  in  hell,  and  ii  the  soul  would  have 
Him  it  must  be  in  opposition  to  flesh  and  blood,  and  principalities  and  powers. 

(3)  We  must  wrestle  and  win  as  those  do  who  strive  for  the  mastery  (Eph.  vi.  12-14). 

(4)  We  must  run  and  win  as  racers  do.  (5)  We  must  trade  and  win  as  merchants 
do  (Mark  x.  22).  2.  Some  reasons.  (1)  If  we  win  Christ  we  gain  all  (Matt.  xiii. 
45-46).  (2)  It  we  win  not  Christ  we  gain  nothing  and  lose  all  (Matt.  xvi.  26). 
II.  Thosb  whose  grand  object  is  to  win  Christ,  will  count  all  but  dung  that 
COMES  IN  competition  WITH  THIS  BABGAiN.  They  will  count — 1.  Nothing  too  much  for 
Him,  but  be  content  to  have  Him  on  any  terms.  2.  Cost  what  it  will  they  will  not 
think  they  are  even  hands  but  gainers .  3.  Have  what  they  will  they  will  count  they 
have  nothing  while  they  have  not  Christ.  4,  Be  about  them  what  they  will,  if 
Christ  be  not  in  them  they  will  count  them  loathsome.  5.  Be  in  their  way  what 
will,  to  hinder  them  from  Christ,  they  will  shovel  it  out  of  the  way  rather  than  be 
kept  back  from  Christ.  III.  They  are  truly  winners,  lose  what  they  will,  who 
GAIN  Christ.  Winning  Christ — 1.  We  gain  a  ransom  for  our  souls.  2.  A  treasure. 
Solomon  counted  all  that  was  in  the  world  as  two  great  cyphers — "  vanity  and  vexa- 
tion." But  in  Christ  all  is  precious  ;  grace,  pardon,  peace.  They  were  purchased 
with  precious  blood  (1  Pet.  i.  19) ;  they  are  wrapped  up  in  precious  promises 
(2  Pet.  i.  4).  3.  That  which  will  turn  everything  to  our  advantage — '•  All  things 
work  together  for  good."  This  is  the  stone  that  turns  all  to  gold.  4.  A  heirship. 
(T.  Botton,  D.D.)        To  win  Christ : — I.  Is  great  gain.    II.  Is  the  noblest  object 

OP  AMBITION.  III.  Is  worthy  OF  EVERY  SACRIFICE.  IV.  REQUIRES  SELF-RENUNCIA- 
TION AND  FAITH  (ver.  9).  Wirming  Christ: — To  the  apostle  Christ  was — I.  So  identified 
with  the  TRUTH,  that  when  he  gained  Him  he  gained  the  highest  knowledge.  II. 
So  identified  with  the  life  that  when  he  gained  Him  he  was  endowed  with  the  noblest 
form  of  it.  HI.  So  identified  with  spiritual  influence,  that  when  he  gained  Him 
his  whole  nature  was  filled  with  power  and  gladness.  {Professor  Eadie.)  Winning 
Christ : — The  world  has  ever  shown  curiosity  with  regard  to  the  inner  lives  of  its 
great  men.  Hence  it  is  that  few  branches  of  literature  are  more  popular  than 
autobiographies.  The  Church  shares  this  curiosity  with  regard  to  the  eminent 
servants  of  Christ ;  and  it  has  pleased  God  with  regard  to  two  of  them  to  gratify 
this  feeling,  David  and  St.  Paul  are  to  us  more  than  historic  characters;  we  are 
admitted  into  the  inner  workings  of  their  hearts.  In  the  text  we  have  the  key  and 
masterspring  of  all  the  apostle's  actions  and  motives.  I.  What  is  meant  by  winning 
Christ.  1.  Remember  that  St.  Paul  did  not  write  these  words  in  the  first  fervour 
and  flush  of  a  new  conversion.  It  often  happens  with  new  converts  that  their 
impressions  and  resolutions  are  like  the  early  blossoms  of  spring,  which  perish  in 
the  bitter  winds.  When  the  apostle  wrote  these  words  he  had  been  serving  Christ 
for  thirty  years,  and  had  derived  no  earthly  advantage,  but  had  suffered  every 
earthly  loss  for  Him,  Can  any  votary  of  pleasure  after  thirty  years'  service  of  self, 
Bin,  and  Satan  say  that  there  is  nothing  more  he  desires  so  much  as  a  few  more  of 
those  sinful  gratifications  ?  2.  That  which  was  before  St.  Paul  was  not  Chris- 
tianity but  Christ.  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  a  system  and  a  Saviour, 
between  abstract  truth  and  a  living,  loving  person.  This  is  always  the  object 
which  St.  Paul  sets  before  himself  and  his  readers ;  hence  the  vital  interest  of  his 
life  and  writings.  8.  The  apostle  desires  to  win  Christ  and  be  found  in  Him. 
Here  we  have  the  key-phrase  of  St.  Paul's  writings  ;  but  it  is  only  a  continuation  of 
the  Master's  teaching  (John  xv.)  (1)  This  has  reference  to  the  believer's  legal  con- 
dition before  God.  By  faith  man  becomes  one  in  Christ,  and  when  God  looks 
npon  him.  He  looks  upon  him  as  being  "  a  man  in  Christ."  (2)  But  this  has  also 
a  moral  reference,  being  quickened  in  Christ  from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of 
righteousness.  There  is  a  great  distinction  between  all  human  morality  and  the 
morality  of  the  gospel.  Heathen  morals  are  many  of  them  very  beautiful,  but  they 
lack  the  grand  disideratum — the  motive  power.  In  the  gospel  we  get  not  only 
perfect  precepts,  but  the  motive-union  with  ^hrist.  And  there  is  this  distinction. 
In  ancient  times  there  were  thousands  of  followers  of  the  systems  of  Aristotle  or  of 
Plato,  but  whoever  heard  of  such  an  expression  aa  "  in  Aristotle."  Christ,  however, 
is  not  an  external  teacher,  but  He  is  in  me  and  I  in  Him,  and  so  I  have  power  to 
obey  His  law.  IL  What  is  involved  in  this.  1.  The  loss  of  all  that  St.  Paul 
counted  gain.  If  ever  a  man  conld  have  gone  to  heaven  withont  Christ  it  was  he. 
He  was  conscientioas,  earnest,  and  ecclesiastically  all  that  could  be  required.  He 
Ibad  a  high  position  and  brilliant  prospects.  Bat  he  gave  np  everything  to  come  as 
yoa  mast  come,  an  empty-handed,  empty-hearted  sinner  to  Christ.     But  besides 


«BAP.  in.]  PHILIPPIANS.  196 

•elf-righteonsness  and  worldly  advantages  to  be  given  np,  a  Christian  mnst  expect 
to  bear  ridicule  and  persecution.  2.  But  for  all  this  loss  he  was  amply  compensated 
by  the  gaining  of  Christ.  What  will  be  the  wealth  of  all  the  Indies  to  ua  when  we 
come  to  die.  (Canon Miller.)  Winning  Christ: — I.  The  person  who  wishes  to  win 
CnnisT.  This  coming  from  Paul  awakens — 1.  Admiration.  What  an  instance  of  the 
iiiduence  of  Divine  grace  I  He  had  been  Christ's  bitterest  foe.  Here  we  see  the 
prophecy  fulfilled,  "Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir-tree,"  &c.  2.  Inquiry. 
Had  not  Paul  won  Him  already  ?  Yes,  but  his  experience  was  the  same  as  that  of 
all  other  Christians  in  whom  we  find  the  good  work  begun  but  not  completed.  The 
Christian  finds  the  war  still  going  on  in  his  members,  desires  a  livelier  assurance, 
wishes  to  grow  in  grace  and  to  know  more  and  more  of  Christ.  It  was  exactly  so 
with  St.  Paul.  II.  The  value  of  the  prize.  Saints  are  said  to  be  the  excellent  of 
the  earth  ;  but  He  is  fairer  than  the  children  of  men — "  altogether  lovely."  They 
have  some  excellencies,  He  has  all;  theirs  are  derived,  His  original ;  theirs  imperfect, 
His  complete ;  theirs  finite,  His  infinite.  He  is  the  fountain  of  life.  1.  Are 
wisdom  and  knowledge  valuable  ?  In  Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  them.  2. 
Are  power  and  strength  ?  " He  giveth  power  to  the  weak. "  3.  Wealth?  His  are 
unsearchable  riches.  4.  Life  ?  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life.  5.  Peace  ?  "  In 
Me  ye  shall  have  peace."  6.  Security  t  "  The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation, 
whom  shall  I  fear  ?  "  All  this  gain  is  to  be  reaped  in  life  ;  but  the  believer  gains 
much  more  by  death  :  for  then  we  shall  awake  in  His  likeness.  III.  The  possi- 
bility OF  WINNING  THIS  PRIZE.  To  what  purpose  otherwise  is  its  display  ?  Two 
questions  arise.  1.  Am  I  now  a  partaker  of  Christ?  Have  you  ever  felt  your  need 
of  Him,  sought  Him,  received  Him?  Do  you  believe  in  His  name,  renounce  every 
other  foundation,  build  upon  Him,  place  all  your  dependence  in  Him?  Then  you 
may  claim  all  the  benefits  of  His  salvation  as  your  own.  2.  May  I  become  a  par- 
taker of  Him  ?  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  That  you 
may  win  Him  He  sends  forth  His  servants  with  invitations ;  He  offers  His  blessings 
gratuitously;  He  throws  a  thousand  impediments  in  your  downward  course,  so  that 
you  may  go  to  Him.  IV.  The  dp.eadfulness  of  losing  this  prize.  What  would 
you  do  without  Christ  if  you  were  to  meet  with — 1.  Prosperity.  If  a  Christian  met 
with  it,  he  would  possess  it  with  safeguards,  receive  it  with  thankfulness,  use  it  vrith 
diligence,  as  a  good  steward.  In  a  worldly  man's  hands  it  is  as  a  razor  in  tlie  hands 
of  a  child — "  The  prosperity  of  fools  destroys  them."  2.  Adversity.  The  Christian 
in  this  has  "  the  consolation  of  Israel,"  and  has  more  left  in  Chri^'t  tban  be  has 
lost;  but  the  worldling  loses  all  without  compensation.  3.  Death.  Only  the 
Christian  can  meet  that  with  equanimity,  for  Christ  has  robbed  it  of  its  terrors.  4. 
The  day  of  judgment.      {IV.  Jay.)  The  great  prize: — To  win  Christ  is  the 

supreme  achievement  of  tnis  life.  I.  Substitutes  for  Christ.  Some  have  one 
thing,  and  others  another  in  His  place.  Paul  had  just  enumerated  several  things, 
whose  possession,  while  he  was  without  Christ,  gave  him  a  certain  sort  of  pleasure. 

II.    But  dEOUMSlANCES  CHANGE  THE  VALUE  OF  THINGS.       III.    ThINOS    HE    HAD    GAINED 

BY  THE  EXCHANGE.  IV.  QuERiES  OF  PROFIT  AND  LOSS.  1.  What  is  our  gain  without 
Christ?  2.  What  is  our  loss  without  Christ?  3.  What  must  we  lose  to  gain 
Christ?  4.  What  do  we  gain  with  Christ?  5.  What  must  we  do  to  win  Christ? 
6.  What  is  the  danger  of  losing  Christ  ?  7.  To  what  extent  have  we  given  up  all 
things  for  Christ  and  the  excellency  of  His  knowledge  ?  {L.  0.  Thompson.)  To 
win  Christ  and  be  found  in  Him  is  perfect  security  and  consummate  blessedness. 
The  language  suggests  a  goal  and  &  starting  post ;  that  "  I  may  win  Christ,"  the 
goal  or  end  I  have  been  seeking  to  reach  ;  that  "  I  may  be  found  in  Him,"  ready 
not  only  for  resistance  to  old  adversaries,  but  for  a  new  start  and  onward  move- 
ment  towards  Divine  perfection.  Consider — I.  What  it  is  to  win  Christ.  1.  To 
count  Him  gain  in  opposition  to  what  Paul  once  counted  gain.  There  is  an  entirely 
new  estimate  of  gain  and  loss.  What  is  gain  to  me  is  what  puts  me  on  a  right  foot- 
ing with  God.  Thus  I  once  thought  that  my  personal  qualifications  of  birth, 
privilege,  attainment  might  do.  Now  I  see  that  for  any  such  purpose  they  are 
worthless.  In  view  of  the  end  for  which  I  once  pressed  then  I  now  perceive  Christ 
to  be  gain.  There  is  much  implied  in  your  perceiving  this.  (1)  You  are  in  earnest 
as  regards  the  end  with  reference  to  which  you  estimate  what  is  gain  (ver.  2).  Is 
this  BO?  Naturally  it  is  not  so.  You  care  little  about  righting  your  position 
towards  God  ;  or  is  it  your  anxiety  to  stand  well  with  Him  ?  (2)  If  the  latter,  it  is 
DO  wonder  that  what  things  were  gain  to  you  are  now  counted  loss,  for  they  seem 
but  to  aggravate  your  condition  of  wrong  standing,  however  good  they  may  be  in  a 
sense,  and  however  yon  may  multiply  them.  (3)  But  jast  as  all  else  is  thus  felt  to  be 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m. 

worthless  Christ  is  seen  to  be  gain.  What  a  relief  to  find  in  Christ  the  reconciler 
and  the  peacemaker ;  the  justifier  of  the  ungodly  and  the  revealer  of  God.  How 
thoroughly  He  meets  oar  case.  I  see  an  instant  end  of  the  weary  attempt  to  amend 
the  old  position,  and  a  way  wonderfully  open  for  the  immediate  occupying  of  a  new 
one.  2.  Christ  is  coveted  and  sought  as  gain.  It  is  not  enough  to  count  Christ  as 
gain.  This  is  often  done  by  those  who  evince  an  unconquerable  repugnance  to  ac- 
cept the  gospel.  But  Christ  must  be  really  and  earnestly  sought  as  well  as  desired. 
8.  Christ  is  appropriated  as  gain.  It  is  for  nothing  short  of  this  that  you  are  called 
upon  to  count  all  things  but  loss.  This  is  to  be  done  by  faith  alone.  4.  Christ  is 
won  so  as  to  be  enjoyed  as  gain  ;  and  yet  not  as  the  miser  wins  wealth  to  hoard  it, 
or  the  fjpendthrift  to  waste  it,  but  for  profitable  use.  II.  To  be  found  en  Christ 
is  it  the  fitting  sequel  of  winning  Christ.  1.  For  defence,  that  I  may  meet  every 
adversary.  2.  To  meet  and  obey  the  high  calling  of  God,  that  I  may  press  on.  As 
cne  with  Him  I  would  know  more  of  Him.  {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  The  believer's 
refuge: — Paul  had  previously  sheltered  himself  in  fleshly  confidence.  I.  The  ee- 
STOE.  1,  There  are  many  refuges  of  lies.  (1)  The  refuge  of  wilful  ignorance.  *'We 
are  no  scholars  "  is  often  only  an  excuse  for  negligence  and  indifference.  Do  they 
wish  to  know  better  ?  if  not  the  excuse  will  not  screen  the  sinner  in  the  day  of 
God's  visitation.  (2)  The  refuge  of  carnal  ease.  Many  live  as  though  there  were 
only  the  body  to  care  for,  and  cry,  "  Peace,  when  there  is  no  peace."  Remember 
the  rich  fool  I  (3)  Worldly  pleasure.  This  is  the  refuge  of  many  of  our  youth  par- 
ticularly. But  unblessed  of  God  it  is  delusive  and  borders  close  on  misery.  (4) 
Self-righteousness,  a  house  built  on  sand  as  Paul  found  it.  (2)  A  hasty  inconside- 
rate profession  of  religion  from  whatever  motive.  2.  Opposed  to  all  this  is  Christ. 
(1)  In  His  person.  (2)  In  His  love.  (3)  In  His  ofQces  and  work.  II.  The  BELtEVEB's 
SAFETY  in  it  against — 1.  The  world.  2.  The  flesh.  3.  The  devil.  Conclusion  :  1. 
Abide  in  your  refuge.  2.  Welcome  other •  to  it.  {W.  Mudge,  B.A.)  The  super- 
flvxmanest  of  the  law : — According  to  tLe  design  of  God  the  advantages  and  sacra- 
ments of  the  law  are  of  no  avail  since  the  manifestation  of  His  Son,  and  that  those 
who  now  beguile  themselves  with  them  lose  their  time  and  their  trouble,  as  com- 
pletely as  though,  after  the  rising  of  the  sun,  they  still  used  the  light  of  a  lamp ; 
or  as  if,  in  the  strength  of  manhood,  a  person  were  retained  in  all  the  exercises  and 
sports  of  childhood.  {J.  Daille.)  Loss  for  gain: — Even  as  a  poor  beggar  dis- 
covering a  rich  mine  or  some  vast  treasures,  is  ready  to  leap  for  joy  that  he  has 
found  that  which  will  make  him  rich  for  ever ;  he  casts  away  his  former  rags,  he 
despises  his  former  poor  and  wooden  furniture,  for  he  has  discovered  that  which 
will  enrich  him  and  make  his  condition  plentiful ;  so  the  soul  to  whom  the  Lord 
has  made  this  rich,  this  excellent  discovery  of  Christ,  he  has  found  a  mine  more 
precious  than  gold,  and  larger  than  all  the  face  of  the  earth ;  he  casts  off  the  rags 
of  his  own  righteousness ;  his  former  accomplishments  are  now  but  as  a  beggar's 
furniture ;  his  heart  is  full  of  joy  ;  he  says,  Eejoice,  0,  my  soul ;  rejoice  with  me, 
my  friends,  for  I  have  discovered  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  (D,  Clarksorif 
B.D.)  The  excellenqf  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  in  the  excellence  of  its  subject : — 
If  the  real  worth  and  dignity  of  our  knowledge  in  any  department  depend  on  the 
subject  to  which  our  thoughts  are  directed,  it  were  easy  to  show  that  the  religious 
peasant  may  find  a  nobler  subject  of  thought  in  the  structure  of  a  flower,  than  the 
irreligious  philosopher  finds  in  the  structure  of  a  world  I  (J.  Buchanan,  D.D.) 
The  relation  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  to  the  gospel  scheme : — It  is  said  of  Phidias, 
the  celebrated  sculptor,  that  in  preparing  the  design,  and  in  executing  tbe  elaborate 
carving  of  the  shield  of  Minerva,  over  the  portico  of  the  Acropolis  of  Athens,  he  so 
curiously  wrought  and  intertwined  his  own  name  with  the  work,  that  it  could  not 
be  obUterated  or  taken  out  anywhere  without  injuring  the  whole.  So  Jesus  Chiist 
cannot  be  taken  away  from  any  part  of  the  system  of  Divine  truth,  without  doing 
irreparable  injury  to  the  beauty  and  perfection  of  the  whole  Christian  system — *'  for 
to  Him  gave  all  the  prophets  witness."  Christ  was  typically  seen  in  Melchesideo, 
King  of  Salem  ;  in  the  binding  of  Isaac  as  a  sacrifice ;  in  the  persecution  of  Joseph, 
There  was  a  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  set  forth  in  the  paschal  Iamb,  as  eaten  by 
the  Israelites,  and  in  the  hfting  up  of  the  brazen  serpent.  Christ  was  painted  in 
hieroglypbics  and  read  by  the  Jews  in  all  their  ceremonial  observances.  Look  in 
what  varied  views  and  degrees  the  ancient  seers  had  an  apprehension  of  the  ex- 
cellency of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus,  for  he  was  the  Shiloh  of  departing  Jacob ; 
Isaiah's  " Root  of  Jesse;"  Jeremiah's  "Branch;"  Ezekiel's  "Ruler  among  the 
people  ;  "  Haggai's  "  Desire  of  all  nations ;  "  Daniel's  "  Ancient  of  Days  ;  " 
Zechariah's  "Fountain;"   and  Malachi's  "Sun  of  Righteousness."     AH.  these 


«HA».  ni.]  PHILIPPIANS  197 

figures  had  their  substanM  in  their  great  Antitype.  All  their  predictions  had  their 
measure  of  accomplishment  in  Jesus  Christ.  The  writers  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments  are  like  the  cherabim  overshadowing  the  ark — face  to  face,  and  look- 
ing down  at  the  propitiatory,  which  is  Christ.  (J.  Bedford.)  The  ttiperiority  of 
the  knowledge  of  Christ : — \\Tien  we  are  in  the  dark  we  are  glad  of  candle-light,  and 
glow-worms  will  make  a  fair  show  in  onr  eyes ;  but  when  the  sun  is  risen  and 
Bbines  in  his  full  strength,  then  candle-light  seems  needless  or  offensive,  and  the 
worms  that  glittered  in  the  dark,  made  no  better  show  than  other  vermin.  So  when 
men  are  in  the  state  of  nature  and  darkness,  then  their  Church  privileges  and  carnal 
prerogatives,  then  their  outward  performances  and  self-righteousness,  make  a  fine 
show  in  their  eyes.  They  are  apt  to  glory  in  them,  and  rely  on  them,  as  that  by  which 
they  may  gain  the  favour  of  God  and  eteraal  life.  Ay,  but  when  Christ  appears,  when 
the  Sua  of  Righteousness  arises  in  the  heart  and  discovers  His  excellency.  His 
all-sufficiency,  then  a  man's  own  sparks  vanish ;  then  all  his  formerly  beloved  and 
rich  esteemed  ornaments  are  cast  off ;  then  all  he  has,  and  all  he  has  done,  privileges 
and  outward  services,  are  loss  and  dung.  None  but  Christ  for  pardon,  acceptance, 
life.  This  is  the  excellent  effect  of  this  excellent  knowledge.  (D.  Clarkson,  B.D.) 
The  excellent  effect  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ: — The  practical  applications  and  uses 
of  this  knowledge  are  as  important  as  its  direct  and  immediate  influence  on  the 
mind.  The  least  practical  kind  of  knowledge  is  useful,  if  it  raise  the  mind  above 
those  sordid  tendencies  to  which  ignorance  is  allied;  but  the  knowledge  of  geometry 
is  the  more  valuable  by  reason  of  its  many  useful  applications  to  mechanical  arts  ; 
and  astronomy  itself,  the  snblimest  of  all  the  sciences,  by  reason  of  the  aids  which 
it  affords  to  the  practical  art  of  navigation.  The  spiritual  astronomy,  which  points 
to  Christ  as  the  Morning  Star,  gives  a  directory  also  to  guide  our  course  amidst  the 
Btorms  and  tempests  of  that  voyage  in  which  we  are  all  embarked.  It  lays  down  for 
our  guidance  a  clear,  simple,  and  comprehensive  rule  for  the  whole  conduct  of  life, 
marking  oat  the  end  at  which  we  should  steadfastly  aim,  and  the  means  by  which 
we  should  seek  to  attain  it:  and  it  affords  us  the  blessed  assurance  that  Christ  Him- 
self will  be  our  leader,  and  His  Spirit  our  guide.  It  is  applicable,  not  only  for  our 
direction  in  every  condition  of  life,  but  also  for  onr  comfort  and  support  in  the 
hour  of  trial :  imparting  those  blessed  consolations  which  the  world  can  neither  give 
nor  take  away  ;  and  even,  in  the  hour  of  death,  when  all  other  knowledge  fails,  and 
leaves  the  soul  to  sink  alone  and  unbefriended  into  eternity,  this  knowledge  gives 
ns  that  hope  which  is  an  anchor,  sure  and  stedfast,  entering  into  that  which  is 
within  the  veil.  {J.  Bxtchanan,  B.D.)  The  necessity  of  letting  go  every  false  con- 
fidence : — One  night  an  inquirer,  long  under  deep  conviction,  but  still  ansaved, 
dreamt  that  he  was  walking  along  the  edge  of  a  terrible  precipice,  and  fell  over  it 
into  a  terrible  abyss.  As  he  was  falhng  he  grasped  a  little  branch  of  some  bush 
that  was  growing  half-way  down.  There  he  hung  and  cried  for  help.  He  could 
feel  the  branch  giving  way.  He  looked  mto  the  black  yawning  gulf  beneath,  and 
again  cried  out  for  help.  Looking  up  he  saw,  in  his  dream,  Christ  standing  on  the 
edge,  and  saying,  "  Let  go  the  twig  and  I  will  save  you."  Looking  at  the  terrible 
abyss  below,  he  could  not.  He  cried  again  ;  and  again  came  the  same  answer.  At 
length  he  felt  the  branch  slipping,  and,  in  the  utter  desperateness  of  his  despair,  he 
let  go  the  branch — when,  lo  1  in  an  instant,  the  arms  of  Jesus  were  about  him,  and 
he  was  safe.  He  awoke.  It  was  but  a  dream  of  the  night.  Tet  from  the  vividness 
and  instructivenesB  of  its  imagery,  he  was  enabled  to  let  go  every  false  confidence 
and  rely  only  on  the  true.  Would  that  every  anxious  soul  would  go  and  do  like- 
wise! (/.  L.  Nye.)  The  true  method  of  reflection : — If  we  rightly  reject  the  world 
it  is  because,  in  the  pure  processes  of  our  spirit,  we  have  taken  from  it  its  notriment. 
And,  therefore,  viewing  what  was  in  Christ  as  in  comparison  with  Judaism,  Paul 
felt  that  the  old  forms  and  tj'pes  and  usages  were  now  as  the  refuse  which  the  spirit 
had  put  away  on  receiving  for  itself,  and  appropriating  for  its  full  Lealt  h  and  growth 
and  nutriment,  Christ's  revelation.      (T.   T.  Lynch.)  WilUnghood   lightening 

sacrifice : — Men  who  have  made  the  greatest  sacrifices  for  the  cause  of  Christ  have 
hardly  been  conscioas  of  them.  So  Livingstone,  as  late  as  1857,  said,  "  I  never 
made  a  sacrifice ; "  and  Hudson  Taylor,  the  leader  of  the  China  Inland  Mission* 
has  publicly  made  the  same  statement  of  himself.  It  was  in  this  spirit  that  Samuel 
Butherford  said,  "  The  Cross  of  Christ  is  the  sweetest  burden  I  ever  bore  ;  it  is 
such  a  burden  as  wings  are  to  a  bird,  or  u  sails  are  to  a  ship."  (/.  F.  B.  Tinlingt 
B.A.) 

Tc  9.  And  be  found  In  Him. — I.  TansTiRa.  n.  JvnxnsD.  IIL  Ookobaud.  IT. 


l»8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

CoMPLETK.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Found  in  Christ : — I.  Show  how  or  when  God  come* 
TO  BEABCH,  AND  THE  SAINTS  AEK  FOUND  IN  Chkist.  The  world  is  a  oonf used  heap,  and 
many  times  the  counterfeits  are  found  among  the  jewels,  but  God  hath  searching 
times  and  will  find  them  out.  1.  The  preaching  of  the  Word  is  a  time  of  plain 
searching  in  Christ.  2.  A  time  of  temptation.  3.  A  season  of  the  Church's  trouble 
and  persecution.  A  true  friend  is  known  in  adversity,  so  is  Christ  to  the  believer, 
and  he  to  Christ.  4.  The  time  of  death  and  judgment.  II.  How  and  when  they 
shall  be  found  who  are  found  in  Chkist.  1.  As  branches  in  the  true  vine 
(John  XV.  1-6).  So  are  they  safe,  for  barren  trees  shall  be  cut  down  for  the  fire, 
but  Christ  mystical  is  a  tree  the  axe  cannot  approach.  2.  In  a  place  of  refuge, 
"  The  Lord  shall  be  as  a  sanctuary  to  them."  They  are  in  the  city  of  refuge 
where  one  drop  of  wrath  cannot  fall.  3.  Under  a  covert,  in  a  hiding-place — even 
the  Mediator's  covenant  blood.  4.  In  the  covenant,  in  Christ's  chariot  (Cant.  iii.  9, 
10;  Isa.  xxvii.  4-6).  in.  The  reasons.  1.  God  will  search  and  find  out  every  one  of 
us,  be  where  we  wilL  We  may  deceive  ourselves  and  others,  but  God  is  not  mocked 
who  searchest  the  reins.  2.  If  God  find  us  out  of  Christ  we  are  undone.  We 
shall  have  nothing  to  shelter  us  when  He  draws  us  out  of  our  lurking  holes.  ^  If 
we  are  found  in  Christ  we  shall  be  safe  in  time  and  eternity,  blow  the  storm  as  it 
may.  Over  trouble  He  will  lift  up  our  head ;  and  when  death  comes  it  shall  be 
without  its  sting.  IV.  The  uses.  Let  it  be  your  great  care  to  be  found  in  Christ 
as  Noah  in  the  ark,  and  Lot  in  Zoar.  1.  Let  not  the  searching  time  find  you  at  a 
disadvantage.  (1)  In  an  unregenerate  state — "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  This 
is  a  soul-ruining  state,  fire  meeting  stubble;  the  judge  the  criminal.  2.  Be  found 
in  Christ.  (1)  United  to  Him  by  His  Spirit  through  faith.  (2)  Walking  in  Him. 
(3)  Living  in  Him  and  upon  Him  (Gal.  ii.  20).  V,  The  motives.  1.  If  you  b© 
found  in  Christ,  He  will  be  found  in  you,  so  shall  you  have  a  double  security  in 
time  of  trial  (John  xvii.  21-23).  Christ  is  found  in  believers  as  in  His  own  house. 
(1)  His  dwelling,  and  who  will  not  defend  that.  (2)  His  banquetting  house.  What 
provisions  He  brings  with  Him  for  storm  and  seige.  (3)  His  fortified  house.  "  None 
shall  pluck  them  out  of  My  band."  (4)  His  temple,  which  He  will  not  allow  to  be 
profaned.  (5)  His  garden.  He  "  will  water  it  every  moment,"  hedge  it  about  and 
preserve  it.  (6)  As  the  soul  in  the  body  (Col.  iii.  4 ;  Gal.  ii.  20 ;  Acts  ii.  25-27/, 
2.  If  you  be  not  found  in  Christ  you  will  be  found  in  a  bad  case  in  time  and  in 
•ternity.  {T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Found  in  Christ: — The  phrase  implies — 1.  That  there 
is  an  estate  in  Christ.  2.  An  abiding  in  it.  I.  Let  us  explain  the  phrase.  It  is 
taken  from  plants  which  are  grafted  into  stocks,  or  from  the  branches  which  are 
in  the  tree.  Of  this  union  there  are  three  degrees.  1.  We  are  in  Christ  in  the 
eternal  love  and  purpose  of  God.  2.  When  Christ  died  we  were  in  Him  as  a  public 
person.  3.  More  properly  now  by  faith,  as  friends  are  in  one  another  by  love.  But 
as  Christ  is  in  heaven,  how  can  we  be  united  to  Him  ?  I  answer.  If  a  tree  did 
reach  to  heaven  and  have  its  root  in  the  earth,  doth  this  hinder  the  union  of  root 
and  branches.  And  although  Christ  be  in  heaven,  yet  are  we  united  to  Him  by 
His  Spirit,  and  receive  influence  from  Him  of  all  grace  and  goodness.  II.  Thb 
doctrines  that  ABE  CLEARED  HEREBY.  1.  Justification  by  faith.  For  if  the 
question  is.  How  are  we  saved  by  Christ's  righteousness  ?  I  answer,  Christ  and  we 
are  one,  and  whatsoever  He  hath  is  ours.  2.  The  sacrament.  The  Papists  would 
have  the  bread  transubstantiated,  that  the  body  of  Christ  may  be  united  to  us. 
But  I  ask,  How  is  the  foot  united  to  head  ?  By  spiritual  vigour  passing  to  and  fro 
through  the  body.  It  is  not,  therefore,  necessary  that  there  should  be  corporal 
nnion.  Christ  comforted  His  disciples  more  by  His  Spirit  when  He  departed,  than 
He  did  by  His  corporal  presence.  III.  The  comfort  of  this.  Before  we  were  in 
Christ  we  were  in  a  state  of  horror  and  condemnation.  But  now  we  are  in  Him — 
1.  Our  nature  is  exalted  to  the  Godhead.  2.  Whatever  we  may  lose  in  other  states 
here  is  a  state  that  cannot  be  shaken.  3.  Blessed  are  those  who  die  in  the  Lord. 
4.  After  death  we  shall  be  with  Him  in  our  Father's  house.  5,  All  who  touch  us 
touch  Him  (Acts  ix.  4).  IV.  The  duties  which  spbino  out  of  this.  1.  In 
duties  towards  God  how  thankful  we  ought  to  be  to  Him.  2.  It  ought  to  stir  ng 
up  to  duties  in  respect  to  our  fellow-members,  particularly  :n  charity  to  Christ's 
poor.  8.  Towards  ourselves.  We  are  to  carry  ourselves  with  dignity,  and  to  grow  rn 
into  our  living  head.  V.  How  shall  we  oome  to  be  found  in  Christ.  1.  We 
must  come  where  He  is.  2.  We  must  separate  ourselves  fi  om  what  is  contrary  to 
Christ.  Learn — 1.  That  a  Christian  is  continually  under  Christ's  wing  till  he  be 
in  heaven.  2.  There  is  such  a  time  when  God  will  search  men  out  and  lay  them 
open  as  they  are.     3.  The  foundation  of   future  happiness  must  be  laid  now. 


CHAJ.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  199 

{R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  Not  having  mine  own  righteousness. — The  two  righuous- 
netesi: — I.  The  distinction  between  two  sorts  of  riohtkoubnebs.  1.  His 
own  is  either.  (1)  The  false,  superficial  rigbteousnesB  which  He  had  as  a 
Pharisee  (ver.  6),  or  (2)  any  that  might  stand  in  competition  with  Christ.  2. 
The  righteousness  of  God  is  His  gracious  method  of  pardoning  penitent 
believers  in  the  gospel,  and  accepting  them  to  life  in  Christ.  This  is  so 
called  because — (1)  It  is  found  out  by  God  (Job  xxxiii.  24).  (2)  Given  by 
God  (1  Cor.  i.  30 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21).     (3)  Accepted  by  God  (Matt.  iii.  17).     II.  Tub 

DBBCRIPTION    OF   THESE    OPPOSITE    EIGHTEOCSNESSES.       1.    His    OWU    is    by   "  the  law,'* 

the  other  that  which  is  "  by  the  faith  of  Christ,"  i.e.,  appointed  by  God,  merited  by 
Chri:  t,  and  received  by  faith.  2.  These  are  often  opposed  (Rom.  iii.  21-22 ;  x.  3). 
3.  The  law  may  be  taken  in  two  ways,  either  for — (1)  The  law  of  works,  which 
required  a  man  to  be  justifitd  by  a  perfect,  sinless  obedience  of  his  own.  This  is 
opposed  to  the  righteousness  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  (Eom.  i.  17-18;  iii.  20),  and 
by  justification  is  impossible,  for  none  of  us  have  it.  If  we  had,  there  were  no  sin, 
and  no  place  for  Christ ;  but  we  have  all  broken  with  God,  and  can  show  no  work 
justifiable  by  the  law  (Rom.  iii.  12),  (2)  Or  the  ceremonial  law.  By  this  Paul  proves 
that  no  man  can  be  justified,  and  therefore  the  Jews  sought  righteousness  where  it 
was  not  to  be  found,  and  were  guilty  of  a  threefold  error,  (a)  They  thought  that 
pardon  and  acceptance  were  to  be  secured  by  the  bare  works  of  that  law.  {b)  They 
overlooked  and  rejected  Christ,  who  is  the  end  of  righteousness  to  every  believer. 
(c)  They  would  keep  up  this  law  when  it  was  to  be  abrogated.  III.  His  pifterent 
RESPECT  TO  EITHER.  1.  That  which  he  renounced  was  (1)  partly  the  superficial 
righteousness  of  conformity  to  the  external  law,  a  mere  speculative  righteousness, 
and  (2)  partly  the  righteousness  of  the  law  covenant  which  some  falsely  fancied 
they  might  fulfil.  2.  That  which  he  affected  was  '*  to  be  found  in  Christ,"  <fec. 
(1)  The  state  of  His  p  rson,  or  the  way  this  is  applied,  (a)  The  word  "  found  "  is 
emphatic,  and  often  used  with  respect  to  the  day  of  judgment  (2  Cor.  v.  8 ;  2  Pet. 
iii.  14;  Matt.  xxiv.  40).  It  implies  that  the  last  day  is  oue  of  exact  search  and 
trial,  (b)  "  In  Christ,"  i.e.,  incorporated  into  His  mystical  body,  or  united  to  Hirn 
by  the  Spirit  (John  xv.  2;  Rom.  viii.  1).  Being  uuited  to  Him  by  faith,  love,  and 
holiness,  we  are  made  partakers  of  His  righteousness.  (2)  The  righteousness  with 
which  He  would  appear  before  God.  The  righteousness  of  the  new  covenant  is 
twofold,  (a)  The  supreme  righteousness  is  Christ's  obedience  unto  death  (Rom. 
V.  18-19),  i.e.,  our  great  righte<jusness  before  God  by  which  His  justice  is  satisfied, 
and  by  the  merit  of  which  all  the  blessings  of  the  new  covenant  are  procured  for 
us.  (&)  The  subordinate  righteousness,  or  the  way  and  means  and  conditions  by 
which  we  get  an  interest  in  and  a  right  to  this  supreme  righteousness  is  faith 
(Bom.  iv.  3),  and  our  continuance  in  it  is  conditional  on  a  new  obedience  (  1  John 
iii.  7  ;  ii.  29).  This  has  respect  to  the  final  judgment  (Matt.  xxv.  46),  where  the 
righteous  are  those  who  are  fruitful  in  good  works.  Conclusion  :  We  are  justified 
by  faith  only,  without  works,  as  Paul  asserted  ;  and  by  works  and  not  by  faith  only, 
which  is  the  assertion  of  James.  Justification  hath  respect  to  some  accusation, 
and  as  there  is  a  twofold  law  of  works  and  grace,  there  is  a  twofold  accusation  and 
justification.  Now  when  we  are  accused  as  breakers  of  the  law  of  works  we  plead 
Christ's  satisfaction  as  our  righteousness,  no  works  of  our  own.  But  when  we  are 
accused  as  non-performers  of  the  conditions  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  as  being 
neglectors  of  Christ  the  Mediator,  we  are  justified  by  producing  our  faith  or 
sincere  obedience.  Whence  learn — 1.  That  the  day  of  judgment  will  be  a  day  of 
exact  search  and  trial  (Rom.  xiv.  12).  2.  That  in  this  day  there  is  no  appearing 
before  God  with  safety  and  comfort  without  righteousness  of  some  sort  or  another 
(1  Sam.  vi.  20).  3.  The  righteousness  of  the  law  of  works  we  cannot  have  (Gal. 
iii.  10 ;  Rom.  iii.  23 ;  Psa.  cxliii.  3).  4.  Man  having  broken  this  law,  is  lost  or 
disabled  to  his  own  recovery,  or  to  do  anything  whereby  to  satisfy  God  (Rom.  v.  6). 

6.  Because  man  was  under  such  an  impotency,  Christ  became  the  Mediator,  and 
(1)  Became  a  sacrifice  to  offended  justice  (Eph.  v.  2).  (2)  A  ransom  for  sinners 
(1  Tim.  ii.  6).  6.  Upon  His  death  Christ  acquired  a  new  right  of  dominion  over 
the  world,  to  save  on  His  own  terms  (Rom.  xiv.  9 :  Acts  ii.  36 ;  Phil.  ii.  7-11). 

7.  Being  possessed  of  this  Lordship,  He  has  made  a  new  law  of  grace  for  our 
recovery  (Mark  xvi.  16 ;  John  iii.  16-18).  (1)  He  hath  set  down  the  terms  of  life 
and  death.  (2)  The  privileges  of  the  new  grant  are  exceeding  great — pardon, 
peace,  adoption,  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  right  to  glory.  (3)  The  danger  ol 
final  impenitency  and  refusing  these  things,  and  not  submitting  to  this  righteous- 
neas  is  very  grievous  (Heb.  x.  39).    8.  The  terms  of  the  new  law  are  repentance,  faith. 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  new  obedience.  (T. 3Ianton,  D.D.)  Righteousness: — L  The  righteousness ol 
the  liAW — 1.  Consists  in  works.  2.  Is  our  own.  3.  Is  defective  and  useless.  II.  The 
righteousness  of  faith — 1.  Is  through  Christ.  2.  Perfect.  3.  Acceptable  to  God. 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I.  What  is  meamt  bt  Christ's  righteousness.  Bighteousness 
is  the  result  of  obedience  to  the  law.  Christ  fulfilled  the  law  in  our  room.  1.  By 
His  active  obedience  to  its  commands.  Now  the  law  demands  of  the  sinner  wer« 
very  high.  (1)  Spotlessness  of  nature,  for  if  the  fountain  be  poisoned,  how  can 
the  streams  be  wholesome.  The  Son  of  God  satisfied  this  demand  by  taking  on 
Himself  a  sinless  body  and  soul.  (2)  An  obedience  as  broad  as  the  law — "  Cursed 
is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things."  Clirist  fulfilled  all  righteousness  and 
did  no  sin.  (3)  An  obedience  raised  to  the  highest  degree  the  law  requires.  It  is 
not  enough  to  be  sincere  or  do  one's  best.  Christ  answered  this  by  His  perfect  love 
to  God  and  man.  (4)  Continuance  to  the  end  without  the  least  failure  (Gal.  iii.  10). 
Christ  became  obedient  unto  death.  2.  By  his  passive  obedience.  Failing  in 
active  righteousness  the  law  takes  hold  of  the  sinner  and  says,  "  Pay  what  thou 
owest."  (1)  The  law  required  life  as  the  penalty  of  transgression — '*  In  the  day 
that  thou  eatest,"  &c.  Christ  satisfied  this  demand  by  dying  "  the  just  for  the 
unjust."  (2)  The  sufferings  must  be  voluntary,  for  God  hates  robbery  for 
burnt-offering.  Christ  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him  endured  the  cross. 
II,  This  righteousness  is  received  by  faith.  It  is  received  and  becomes  ours 
by  faith,  as  faith  unites  us  to  Christ.  Upon  this  union  follows  a  communion  with 
Christ  in  His  righteousness.  The  soul  by  faith  marries  with  Christ  and  the 
righteousness  is  its  dowry.  The  soul  flies  to  Christ  for  refuge,  and  that  righteous- 
ness is  its  cover.  III.  Confirm  the  doctrine.  1.  That  only  can  shelter  us  from 
the  wrath  of  God  which  satisfies  His  law,  and  this  righteousness  alone  satisfies 
His  law.  2.  It  is  the  rigbteousness  of  God,  so  called  because — (1)  It  is  of  Him 
who  is  God  (Jer.  xxiii.  6).  (2)  Accepted  of  God.  3.  It  is  the  righteousness  of 
the  only  wise  God  to  save  sinners,  when  nothing  else  could  do  it  (Psa.  xL  &-7). 
Conclusion.  1.  Never  entertain  low  thoughts  of  sin.  It  is  the  worst  of  evils, 
which  could  not  be  remedied  but  by  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  2.  Never  entertain  low 
thoughts  of  forgiveness.  Every  pardon  is  the  price  of  blood  more  precious  than 
a  thousand  worlds.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The  believer's  righteousness: — I.  Iig 
NATURE.  1.  Not  personal,  but  through  Christ.  2.  Not  of  the  law  but  by  faith. 
II.  Its  ENJOYMENT.  1.  In  Christ  in  whom  the  believer  dwells.  2.  Is  found  hei« 
and  hereafter.  III.  las  sufficiency,  1.  It  is  purposed.  2.  Originated.  3. 
Effected.  4.  Approved  by  God.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christ  and  faith  :—H.iatory 
and  our  own  personal  life  has  no  more  strange  and  pathetic  page  than  is  suggested 
by  the  words,  "I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things."  1.  We  are  started  on  an 
infinite  journey ;  and  no  surer  witness  to  this  exists  than  in  the  easy  and  familiar  way 
in  which  we  let  object  after  object  fall  from  our  lives  in  our  pursuit  of  what 
seems  to  be  greater.  Or  like  a  general  who  leaves  the  stronghold  he 
is  defending,  deserting  cannon  and  baggage  and  the  unfinished  toil  of  months 
because  the  tide  of  battle  has  set  elsewhere  and  all  his  force  must  be  concentrated 
there,  so  are  we  in  the  great  battle  of  life.  2.  The  same  thing  is  true  in  higher 
regions.  We  cannot  rest  in  intellectual  attainment  We  climb  where  thought  ia 
giddy;  and  at  last,  here  is  law.  Where  is  God?  Without  that  discovery  know- 
ledge is  dross,  and  we  can  suffer  the  loss  of  it  if  we  can  but  reach  Him  and  be  right 
with  Him.  I.  The  failure  of  legal  righteousness  to  bring  us  peace.  Through 
such  a  process  as  that  to  which  we  have  referred  the  apostle  had  passed  in  the 
urgent  march  of  his  spirit  to  its  home  in  the  heart  of  Christ.  There  is  a  tone 
almost  of  solemn  mocking  in  the  appeal  he  makes  to  the  past.  "  My  Saviour  did 
not  find  me  among  the  offscourings  of  the  world.  He  did  not  pick  me  from  the 
mire.  If  any  man  had  a  light  to  boaNt  I  had."  But  it  all  led  him  to  the  "  0 
wretched  man  that  I  am,"  &c.  This  law,  under  the  mountain-shadow  of  which  we 
have  been  standing,  brought  him,  brings  us,  no  peace.  All  that  it  can  do  is  to 
open  the  doors  of  the  temple,  which  by  faith  we  must  enter  if  we  would  behold 
God.  II.  The  heabt's  cry  for  a  righteousness  of  God.  1.  There  is  a  condition 
where  no  such  cry  is  heard — the  Pharisaical.  A  man  may  go  on  looking  at  the 
outward  so  long,  and  so  succeed  in  stifling  his  spiritual  asi'irations  as  to  arrive  at 
the  conclusion  that  all  he  can  do  is  to  obey  the  letter  of  the  law.  2.  But  a  man 
who  has  found  out  that  even  strict  obedience  to  the  moral  law  cannot  reveal  God 
will  understand  this  cry.  The  highest  commands  that  law  ever  laid,  and  the 
lowliest  obedience  ever  rendered,  have  no  Divine  significance  but  in  the  revelation 
of  an  Infinite  Person,  to  whom  we  stand  personally  related.    We  ask  to  be  clothed 


«aup.  in.1  PHILIPPIANS.  SOI 

with  Himself.  III.  Thk  righteousness  that  is  betealbd  to  fatth.  To  the 
apostle  the  voice  of  faith  that  is  in  Christ  was  a  suflicient  answer  to  this  cry. 
"  Not  having  mine  own  righteousness."  The  Incarnation  was  the  only  possible 
answer  for  God  to  give  and  for  us  to  receive.  The  law  was  a  schoolmaster  to  bring 
ns  to  Christ  that  we  might  receive  Himself.  This  is  enough,  and  in  Christ  we  have 
the  righteousness  of  God.  (L.  Mann.)  The  righteousness  of  God  by  faith : — 
This  righteousness  is  the  only  ground  of  acceptance  with  God.  It  is  not  of  mine, 
bat  of  God,  as  in  His  grace  He  has  provided  it,  so  that  it  is  said  of  ns  we  are 
"  justified  freely  by  His  grace."  It  is  wrought  out  by  Christ  and  in  His  blood 
(Bom.  v.  9) ;  or  it  is  *'  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  It  becomes 
ours  through  faith.  This  faith  is  "  counted  for  righteousness,"  or  subjectively 
*•  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness."  Of  the  possessor  of  such 
righteousness  it  may  be  said  that  "  a  man  is  justified  in  the  sight  of  God."  Christ 
obeyed  the  law  for  us  and  suffered  its  penalty,  and  the  merit  of  this  obedience  unto 
death  becomes  ours  as  soon  as  we  can  say,  "  We  have  believed  in  Jesus."  He  that 
was  unrighteous  becomes  righteous,  and  escapes  the  condemnation  which  sin  merits 
(Bom.  viii.  1,  i.  18) ;  nay,  enjoys  the  benefit  of  redemption  (Eph.  i.  7).  When 
works  of  law  are  disclaimed,  and  faith  is  simply  reposed  on  God,  guilt  is  cancelled, 
acceptance  enjoyed,  and  such  a  change  of  state  involves  a  change  of  character 
(Bom.  viii.  4).  The  sinner  is  not  indeed  held  by  any  legal  fiction  to  be  innocent. 
The  entire  process  implies  his  guilt,  but  he  is  no  longer  exposed  to  its  penalty  ;  he 
is  held,  or  dealt  with,  as  a  righteous  person,  "  the  external  justice  of  Christ  Jesua 
being  imputed  to  Him  "  (Hooker).  And  the  result  is  (Bom.  viii.  30).  This 
righteousness.  Divine  in  its  origin,  awful  in  its  medium,  and  fraught  with  such 
results,  was  the  essential  element  of  Paul's  religion  and  the  distinctive  tenets  of 
His  theology.  {Prof.  Eadie.)  Imputed  righteousnees  : — The  grand  truth  of  this 
doctrine  lies  just  here — when  a  sinner  casts  himself  in  penitence  on  the  mercy  of 
his  Saviour,  God  estimates  him  not  according  to  what  he  has  been,  or  is  in  himself, 
but  according  to  what  he  is  in  relation  to  Christ.  We  ourselves  are  constantly 
estimating  things  and  persons  as  they  stand  related  to  other  things  and  persons. 
The  geolofiist  estimates  the  significance  of  certain  remains  according  to  the  strata 
in  which  they  are  "  found."  The  chemist  estimates  the  action  of  certain  elements 
according  as  they  are  "  found  in  "  this  or  that  combination.  The  merchant  esti- 
mates goods  according  as  they  stand  related  to  the  needs  of  this  or  that  market. 
You  present  your  sample  ;  he  refuses.  "  These  things  won't  sell  now  out  yonder 
in  Brazil."  You  say,  "Oh  1  but  judge  them  on  their  own  merits  ;  see  what  excellent 
cloth,  what  beautiful  patterns."  But  it  is  of  no  use.  You  go  into  a  garden  in  the 
early  spring  when  the  leaves  are  just  beginning  to  appear.  Two  branches  are 
touching  each  other.  The  gardener  says,  "  This  branch  will  be  laden  with  fruit, 
bnt  that  will  have  little  or  none  upon  it."  You  see  no  difference.  The  leaves  are 
as  fresh  and  green  on  the  one  as  on  the  other.  But  the  gardener  judges  them 
according  to  their  relations.  The  one  branch  is  "  found  in  "  a  tree  which  he  knows 
to  be  fruitful,  the  other  in  one  he  knows  to  be  almost  barren.  Is  it  a  fiction  when 
he  imputes  the  qualities  of  the  stock  to  the  branch  ?  Or  he  comes  into  your 
garden  and  sees  in  one  of  your  borders  a  plant  which  is  not  thriving.  "  That  plant," 
he  says,  "  will  die  here,  put  it  in  the  hothouse."  He  comes  back  in  a  few  weeks, 
and  the  san>e  plant  is  ••  found  in  "  the  hothouse,  "  It  is  all  right  now,"  he  says. 
He  does  not  mean  that  it  has  recovered  vitality  or  beauty,  but  it  is  in  the  fair  way 
to  health.  Its  change  of  relation  has  "  saved  "  it.  Or,  say  that  yon  go  into  the 
studio  of  a  famous  artist,  and  you  see  him  sketching  a  picture  on  the  canvas.  It 
is  bnt  little — only  a  faint  outline ;  but  he  tells  you  his  idea,  and  you  know  how  he 
has  worked  out  other  ideas.  It  is  only  a  beginning  as  yet ;  but  it  stands  related  to 
a  master  hand,  and  you  can  imagine  what  it  will  be  when  finished.  Your  estimate 
of  the  s  me  picture  would  be  very  different  if  you  "  found  "  it  in  the  studio,  and 
under  the  hand  of  an  inferior  artist.  Or  again,  you  may  be  told  that  a  newborn 
babe  and  a  newborn  ape  are  each  a  mere  piece  of  flesh  and  blood,  and  that  under 
the  dissecting  knife  little  difference  could  be  detected  between  them.  But  the  babe 
is  "  (ouud  in  ''  humanity.  It  stands  related  to  the  human  race,  and  you  estimate 
it  according  to  its  latent  capacities,  although  at  present  there  may  be  no  sign  of 
distinctive  intelUgence.  Or,  you  may  apply  to  have  your  life  insured,  and  you  go 
to  a  physician  to  be  examined.  He  inquires  as  to  any  illness  you  may  have  had, 
and  into  your  present  state.  But  he  also  asks  about  your  parents ;  when,  and  oi 
what  they  died,  and  also  about  your  brothers  and  sisters.  You  might  say,  "  Why 
Bot  judge  of  my  case  purely  upon  its  own  merits  7  "    No;  his  judgment  wul  depend 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ns, 

partly  on  the  family  stock  in  which  yon  are  found,  and  he  will  "impute"  to  yon 
the  healthy  or  unhealthy  qualities  of  the  family  stock.  And  is  God  not  to  estimate 
men  according  to  their  relation  to  Himself,  and  to  His  Son  ?  No  man  is  "justified  " 
in  living  a  life  of  sin,  nor  in  living  a  life  of  self-confident  Pharisiasm  ;  but  when  a 
man  comes  in  a  humble  and  contrite  heatt  and  throws  himself  on  the  mercy  of  the 
righteous  One,  praying  for  pardon,  and  cleansing,  and  strength  to  live  a  better  life, 
his  relation  is  changed  and  he  is  justified.  {T.  C,  Finlayson.)  Salvation  in 
Christ : — A  man  had  been  condemned  in  a  Spanish  court  to  be  shot,  but  being  an 
American  citizen,  and  also  of  English  birth,  the  consuls  of  the  two  countries 
interposed,  and  declared  that  the  Spanish  authorities  had  no  power  to  put  him  to 
death.  V/hat  did  they  do  to  secure  his  life  when  their  protest  was  not  sufficient  ? 
They  wrapped  him  up  in  their  flags,  they  covered  him  with  the  Stars  and  Stripes 
and  the  Union  Jack,  and  defied  the  executioners.  "  Now  fire  a  shot  if  you  dare, 
for  if  you  do  so,  you  defy  the  nations  represented  by  those  flags,  and  you  will  bring 
the  powers  of  those  two  great  empires  upon  you."  There  stood  the  man,  and 
before  him  the  soldiery,  and  thoug'i  a  single  shot  might  have  ended  his  life,  yet  he 
was  as  invulnei  able  as  though  encased  in  triple  steel.  Even  so  Jesus  Christ  has 
taken  my  poor  guilty  soul  ever  since  I  believed  in  Him,  and  has  wrapped  around 
me  the  blood-red  flag  of  His  atoning  sacrifice  ;  and  before  God  can  destroy  me  or 
any  other  soul  that  is  wrapped  in  the  atonement.  He  must  insult  His  Son  and  dis- 
honour His  sacrifice,  and  that  He  will  never  do,  blessed  be  His  name.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon. ) 

Ver.  10.  That  I  may  know  Him. — The  path  of  life  : — I.  Knowledge.  II. 
PowEB.  III.  Fellowship  with  Christ.  IV,  Conformity  to  His  death.  (J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  The    bfliever^s    aspirations  :  —  It    is    said    that    St.    Augustine 

wished  to  have  seen  three  things  before  he  died ;  Home  in  its  glory,  Christ 
in  the  flesh,  and  Paul  in  his  preaching.  But  many  have  seen  the  first  without 
being  the  holier,  the  second  without  being  happier,  and  heard  the  third  and 
yet  went  to  perdition.  Bat  Paul,  in  this  and  the  previous  chapters,  expresses 
seven  wishes  which  centre  in  Christ — that  he  might  know  Christ,  win  Christ, 
magnify  Christ,  be  conformed  to  Christ,  be  found  in  Christ,  rejoice  in  the 
day  of  Christ,  and  be  for  ever  with  Christ.  Now  these  correspond  perfectly 
with  the  desires  of  every  child  of  God.  Here  Paul  desires — I.  To  know  Christ. 
St.  Paul  appreciated  the  value  of  other  departments  of  knowledge.  He  was 
a  scholar  and  a  theologian ;  but  after  he  had  learned  Christ  they  seemed  to 
fade  in  interest.  This  knowledge  was  the  subject  of  his  preaching  everywhere, 
as  he  told  the  Corinthians  and  the  Galatians.  He  wished  to  know  Christ.  1. 
Increasingly.  The  more  he  knew  Him  the  more  he  wanted  to  know,  and  no  wonder, 
for  (1)  in  Him  is  everything  worthy  to  be  known.  (2)  This  knowledge  never  cloys. 
2.  Experimentally.  To  know  in  Scripture  is  to  see  and  to  taste.  It  is  not  the 
speculative  knowledge  that  devils  have,  nor  mere  historical  knowledge,  but  such  as 
a  hungry  man  has  when  he  eats,  and  a  thirsty  man  when  he  drinks.  It  is  appro- 
priative  of  Christ — "  My  Lord,"  "  My  Saviour."  3.  Superlatively  (ver.  8).  For 
what  is  the  widest  and  most  delightful  knowledge  in  the  presence  of  this  7  but  aa 
sounding  brass,  vanity.  11.  The  power  of  His  resurrection.  The  word  "power" 
makes  all  the  difference  between  religion  in  the  head  and  in  the  heart,  between 
possession  and  profession.  It  is  one  thing  to  have  knowledge,  and  another  to  have 
it  vitally  and  brought  into  action.  Christ's  resurrection  has  a  vast  power.  1.  In 
our  justification.  His  ransom  could  avail  nothing  without  His  resurrection.  •*  If 
Christ  be  not  raised  your  faith  is  vain."  But  by  it  the  Father  publicly  testified 
His  approval.  2.  In  our  sanctification,  which  is  the  renewing  of  our  nature  and 
the  strengthening  of  our  graces  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  the  fruit  of  the  resur- 
rection. 3.  In  our  edification.  Every  sermon,  &o.,  is  vain  if  Christ  be  not  risen. 
All  the  means  of  Christian  growth  are  dependent  upon  it  (Eph.  iv.  7-14).  What 
power  it  gave  to  apostolic  preaching.  4.  In  our  glorification.  There  had  been  no 
resurrection  for  us  without  Christ's.  As  in  Adam,  the  covenant  head,  all  died ;  so  in 
Christ,  the  covenant  head  of  Adam's  posterity,  all  shall  be  made  alive.  III.  Thb 
FBLL0W8HIP  OF  Hi8  SUFFERINGS.  Not  in  His  merits :  the  crovsm  must  be  for  ever  on 
His  head.  We  know  this.  1.  By  partaking  of  the  benefit  of  His  sufferings, 
pardon,  &c.  2.  By  communion  with  Him  through  the  channel  of  His  sufferings — 
His  Divine  humanity,  hanging  on  the  Cross,  and  commemorated  in  the  sacrament 
8.  By  enduring  for  His  sake  fiie  same  sufferings  which  He  endured — the  world's 
frowns,  Satan's  temptations.    "  Is  the  servant  above  his  master."    IV.  CoNPORMrrr 


OTA».  ni.]  PHILIPPIANS.  803 

tTNTo  His  death.  Why  not  His  life  ?  That  is  not  excluded.  But  His  death  pre- 
sents in  a  condensed  form  all  that  we  could  desire  to  be  on  earth.  We  see  in  Him — 
1.  Great  patienc"  under  suffering.  2.  Great  faith.  3.  Great  compassion  for  dying 
men.  4.  Great  filial  tenderness.  5.  Great  love  for  repenting  sinners.  (J.  SheT^ini.) 
Knoicing  Christ : — He  who  of  mortal  men  knew  Christ  best  confesses  that  he  knew 
Him  but  imperfectly.  1.  How  much,  then,  must  there  be  in  Him  to  know.  Do  we 
lose  a  sense  of  the  Redeemer's  majesty  by  famiharity  with  His  name?  See,  then, 
His  chief  disciple,  after  years  of  contemplation,  imitation,  and  adoration,  confessing 
that  the  great  object  of  God,  manifest  in  the  flesh,  seems  greater  than  ever,  so  that 
at  the  last  he  offers  the  prayer  suitable  to  a  novice.  2.  This  is  true  of  all  the 
works  of  God,  whether  in  the  material  «t  the  spiritual  world,  and  is  illustrated  by 
what  a  climber  sees  of  the  starry  firmament :  from  the  bottom  the  mou'.tain-tops 
seem  among  tbe  stars,  but  as  he  ascends  they  seem  to  recede,  and  their  vastness 
and  distance  are  best  seen  from  the  summit.  3.  What  Paul  meant  is  clearer  from 
■the  following  explanations.  I.  Knowing  the  power  of  His  kesurrection.  Paul 
laboured  and  suffered  much,  and  \va«  pursued  by  great  infirmity  and  frequent 
depression ;  but  be  saw  above  him  the  figure  of  the  once  suffering  but  now  risen 
Christ — his  brother  throned  and  crowned.  Looking  up  it  seems  as  if  he  were 
moved  to  say,  "  Would  that  I  could  be  raised  out  of  \^hat  I  am,  and  become  as  He 
i8 — vie  or  over  sin,  sorrow,  and  death."  In  this  sense  we  may  feel  the  power  of 
Christ's  resurrection.  In  Christ,  risen  and  glorified,  is  the  image  in  which  we  may 
behold  what  we  may  become.  II.  A  share  of  Christ's  sufferings  the  condition 
OF  A  SHARE  IN  His  RESURRECTION.  He  has  just  exprcsscd  a  desire  to  resemble 
Christ  glorified,  but  he  here  checks  himself  in  order  to  show  that  what  he  desires 
is  not  an  easy  and  instantaneous  change.  What  he  seeks  is  not  simply  repose  and 
relief.  He  is  perfectly  willing  to  resemble  Christ  glorified  by  passing  through  the 
intermediate  stages.  He,  too,  would  reach  the  crown  through  the  Cross,  remem- 
bering that  "  it  is  enough  for  the  disciple  to  be  as  his  Master."  Whoever  then 
would  know  Christ  must  face — 1.  Suffering — the  suffering  of  arduous  effort, 
patient  resignation,  and  trust  when  faith  is  tempted  to  fail,  2.  Death — the 
death  to  much  that  is  attractive  here,  and  especially  to  sin,  as  well  as  to  the 
death  of    the  body.      (T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.)  The  experimental  knowledge  of 

Christ : — I.  An  experimental  knowledge  of  Christ  is  so  great  a  blessing 
THAT  WE  SHOULD  COUNT  ALL  THINGS  BUT  LOSS  TO  GET  IT.  It  is  Bometimes  ex- 
pressed by  taste.  Sight  is  the  knowledge  of  faith,  taste  that  of  experience  (1  Pet. 
iL  3 ;  Psa.  xxxiv.  8).  When  we  taste  His  goodness  or  feel  His  power  we  have  an 
experimental  knowledge  of  Christ.  Many  know  how  to  talk  about  Him  but  feel 
nothing.  Men  speak  of  His  salvation  from  day  to  day,  but  have  not  the  effects  of 
it.  When  we  find  within  ourselves  the  fruits  of  His  sufferings,  the  comfort  of  His 
promises,  the  likeness  of  His  death,  the  power  of  His  resurrection,  then  we  know 
Christ  experimentally.    The  benefits  it  confers   show  its   value.     Experience — 

1.  Gives  us  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  things.  While  we  know  them  by  hearsay 
we  know  them  only  by  guess  and  imagination,  but  when  we  know  them  by  experi- 
ence we  know  them  in  truth.  He  that  reads  abont  the  sweetness  of  honey  may 
guess  at  it,  but  he  that  tastes  it  knows  what  it  is  (Col.  i.  6).  A  man  who  has 
travelled  through  a  country  knows  it  better  than  he  who  knows  it  only  by  a  map. 

2.  Gives  greater  confirmation  of  the  troth.  A  man  needs  no  reason  to  convince 
him  that  fire  is  hot  who  has  been  scorched,  or  that  weather  is  cold  who  feels  it  in 
his  fingers.  So  when  the  promises  of  God  are  verified  we  see  that  there  is  more 
than  letters  and  syllables  (Psa.  xviii.  30 ;  1  Cor.  i,  6 ;  1  Thess.  i.  5).  3.  Gives 
greater  excitement  to  the  love  of  Christ  and  His  ways.  The  more  we  feel  the 
necessity  of  Christ  and  know  His  usefulness  in  binding  up  our  broken  hearts,  the 
more  we  shall  love  Him  as  our  Saviour  (1  John  iv.  19).  We  may  know  the  truth  of 
the  gospel  by  other  means,  but  we  cannot  know  that  it  belongs  to  us  by  any  other 
means.  4.  Engages  us  more  to  zeal  and  diligence  in  the  heavenly  hfe,  which 
reports  and  exhortations  often  fail  to  do.  (1)  Because  when,  e.g.,  we  have  experience 
of  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection  it  begets  a  new  Ufa  within  which  inclines  us  to 
heavenly  things — there  is  a  principle  to  work  with  (Gal.  v.  25).  (2)  When  this 
life  is  gratified  with  the  rewards  of  obedience,  such  as  peace  and  comfort,  it  is  an 
argument  above  all  others  to  press  for  more.  The  Gauls  when  they  had  once 
tasted  the  Italian  grape  must  get  into  the  country  where  it  grew.  The  spies  were 
sent  to  bring  the  clusters  of  Canaan  into  the  wilderness  to  animate  the  Israelites  to 
put  in  for  the  good  land.  So  God  gives  us  the  Spirit  not  only  as  an  earnest  (1  Cor. 
i.  22)  to  show  ns  how  sure,  but  as  first  fruits  to  show  us  how  good  (Bom.  viii.  23). 


2M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

(3)  When  this  life  is  obstructed  by  folly  and  sin,  you  find  more  of  Christ's  dis- 
pleasure in  your  inward  man  (Eph.  iv.  30)  than  can  possibly  be  represented  to 
your  outward  condition.  II.  Motives.  1.  It  is  a  dangerous  temptation  when  the 
gospel  comes  in  word  only  (1  Cor.  iv.  20).  It  must  follow  either  that  you  settle  in 
a  cold  form  (2  Tim.  iii.  5)  or  into  an  open  denying  of  Christ  and  the  excellency  oi 
His  religion.  2.  If  you  have  not  this  knowledge  how  will,  you  be  able  to  carry  on 
this  spiritual  life  with  any  delight,  seriousness,  or  success  ?  (1  John  v.  8-10). 
3.  Without  it  you  can  have  no  assurance  of  your  own  interest  (Rom.  iv.  4-6; 
1  John  iv.  17).  4.  Without  it  you  will  neither  honour  Christianity  nor  propa- 
gate it.  (1)  By  word  (Psa.  xxxiv.  8).  A  report  of  a  report  at  second  or  third 
haad  is  no  valid  testimony.  None  can  epeak  with  such  confidence  as  those  who 
feel  what  they  speak  (2  Cor.  i.  4).  (2)  By  work  (2  Thess.  i.  11-12 ;  1  Thess.  I 
4-7).  III.  Means.  1.  A  sound  belief  of  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  (1  John  v.  10; 
1  Thess.    ii.   13).     We  cannot   feel   the  power  of  the   truth  till   we   receive  it. 

2.  Serious  meditation  and  consideration  {Psa.  xlv.  1 ;  Acts  xvi.  14).  3.  Close 
application.  Things  work  not  upon  us  at  a  distance  (Job  v.  27).  Conclusion : 
1.  Look  for  experience  rather  in  the  way  of  sanctification  than  of  comfort.  The 
one  iB  not  so  necessary  as  the  other,  and  the  Spirit  may  cease  to  comfort  that  He 
may  sanctify.  2.  Look  to  the  thing  and  not  to  the  measure  or  degree  (2*. 
Manton,  D.D.)  Experimental  knowledge  of  Christ : — 1.  A  man  may  have 
a  competent  and  very  extensive  acquaintance  with  the  whole  doctrine  of  the 
Christian  religion,  and  yet  if  he  has  not  an  experimental  knowledge  of  Christ 
it  is  nil  vain  as  to  salvation.  2.  In  the  previous  verse  the  apostle  deals  with 
his  gain  in  point  of  justification,  here  in  point  of  sanctification.  I.  What 
THIS  EXPERIMENTAL  KNOWLEDGE  IS.  Au  iuwaid  and  Spiritual  feeling  of  what 
we  hear  and  believe,  concerning  Christ  and  His  truths,  whereby  answerable 
impressions  are  made  on  our  souls  (Psa.  xxxiv.  8 ;  John  iv.  42).  1.  The  Scripture 
says  of  Christ  tbat  He  is  the  way  to  the  Father  (John  xiv.  6).  Now  the  man  who 
has  tried  many  other  ways  and  finds  no  access,  at  length  comes  by  Christ  and  finds 
communion  with  God.  This  is  experimental  knowledge  (Rom.  v.  1-2).  2.  Christ's 
blood  purges  the  conscience,  <fec.  (Heb.  ix. ).  The  experimental  Christian  knows 
that  sin  defiles  the  conscience  and  unfits  him  to  serve  God.  At  length  he  looks  to 
God  in  Christ  and  throws  his  guilt  into  the  sea  of  Christ's  blood  ;  then  the  sting  is 
taken  from  the  conscience  and  the  soul  is  enabled  to  serve  God  as  a  son  with  a 
father.  3.  Christ  is  fully  satisfying  to  the  soul  (Psa.  Ixxxiii.  25  ;  Hab.  iii.  17-18). 
We  all  know  this  by  report,  the  Christian  knows  it  by  experience.  Sometimes  in 
the  midst  of  all  his  enjoyment  he  says,  "  These  are  not  my  portion,"  and  when 
deprived  of  these  he  can  encourage  himself  in  God  (1  Sam.  xxx.  6,  i.  18).  4.  Christ 
helps  His  people  to  bear  afflictions  and  keeps  them  from  sinking  under  them. 
The  Christian  sometimes  tries  to  bear  his  burden  alone  and  finds  it  too  heavy  for 
him.  Then  he  goes  to  Christ  and  lays  it  on  the  great  burden-bearer  and  is 
helped  (Psa.  xxviii.  7 ;  Isa.  xliii.  2 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  9-10).  5.  Christ  is  made  unto  us 
wisdom  (1  Cor.  i.  20).  When  the  Christian  leans  to  his  own  understanding  he 
mistakes  his  way  at  noonday,  but  when  he  gives  himself  up  to  be  led  by  Christ  as 
a  blind  man,  he  is  conducted  in  a  way  he  knew  not,  and  blesses  the  Lord  who  has 
given  him  counsel.  6.  Christ  is  made  unto  us  sanctification  (1  Cor.  i.  30)  Apart 
from  Christ  tlie  Christian  wrestles  in  vain  and  his  graces  lie  dead ;  but  when  he 
renews  the  actings  of  faith  in  Christ,  and  flings  down  self-confidence,  he  become« 
more  than  conqueror.  II.  Confirmation  of  the  point.  Consider — 1.  The  Scripture 
testimonies  concerning  this.  (1)  To  learn  religion  in  all  the  power  and  parts  of  it  is 
to  learn  Christ  (Eph.  iv.  20-2i).  (2)  There  needs  no  more  to  be  known,  for  this 
comprehends  all  (1  Cor.  ii.  2).  (3)  It  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  a  believer's  life 
(PhiL  i.  21),  Yea,  eternal  life  itself  (John  xvii.  3).  2.  All  true  religion  is  our 
likeness  to  God.  This  is  impossible  without  Christ,  for  He  is  the  only  channel  at 
those  influences  which  makes  us  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  (2  Cor.  iv.  6). 

3.  WhateTer  religion  a  man  seems  to  have  that  does  not  come  and  is  maintained 
in  this  way,  is  but  nature  varnished  over:  for  "  he  that  honoureth  not  the  Son," 
&c.  III.  The  means.  Faith  closing  with  Christ.  1.  Belief  that  Christ  is  such  a 
one  as  He  is  held  out  in  the  gospel  to  be.  It  is  the  want  of  this  that  mars  this 
knowledge  (Isa.  liii.  1).  2.  Closure  with  Christ,  to  the  very  end  that  the  soul  may 
so  know  Him.  3.  Union  with  Christ,  so  making  way  for  this  knowledge  which  is 
the  happy  result  of  union.  IV.  Impbovement.  1.  Religion  is  not  a  matter  of 
mere  speculation  to  satisfy  cariosity,  but  a  matter  of  practice.  An  onexperimental 
professor  is  like  a  foolish  sick  man  who  entertains  those  aboat  him  with  fizM 


OBAF.  m.]  PUILIPPIANS.  205 

diseoarsea  of  the  natnre  of  medicines,  but  in  the  meantime  is  dying  for  the  want  of 
application  of  them.  2.  The  sweet  of  religion  lies  in  the  experience  of  it  (Psa.  Ijuii. 
6 ;  xix.  11).  Religion  would  not  be  the  burden  it  is  if  we  would  by  experience  carry 
it  beyond  dry,  sapless  notions.  3.  All  the  profit  of  religion  lies  in  the  experience 
of  it  {Matt.  vii.  22).  Painted  fire  will  never  burn,  and  the  sight  of  water  will  never 
wash.  4.  The  experimental  Christian  is  the  only  one  whose  religion  will  bring 
him  to  heaven,  which  is  experimental  religion  perfected.  {T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
Do  you  know  Him  f — I.  Let  os  pass  by  that  crowd  of  octeb-codrt  woRsnippERS 
WHO  ABE  CONTENT  TO  LivK  wiTHOOT  KNOWING  Christ.  I  do  not  mean  the  ungodly 
and  profane,  these  are  altogether  strangers  and  foreigners,  but — 1.  Those  who  are 
content  to  know  Christ's  historic  life.  These  know  the  life  of  Christ,  but  not 
Christ  the  life.  2.  Those  who  know  and  prize  Christ's  doctrine,  but  do  iiot  know 
Hm.  Addison  tells  us  that  the  reason  why  so  many  books  are  printed  with  the 
portraits  of  their  authors  is  that  the  interested  readers  want  to  know  wliat  appear- 
ance the  author  had.  This  is  very  natural.  Why  then  do  you  rest  satisfied  with 
Christ's  words  without  desiring  to  know  Him  who  is  the  "  Word  "  ?  3.  Those  who 
are  dehghted  with  Christ's  example.  That  is  well  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  it  does  not 
go  far  enough.  His  extimple  will  be  better  understood  as  we  know  Himself. 
4.  Those  who  are  perfectly  at  ease  with  knowing  Christ's  sacrifice.  This  is  a 
blessed  attainment,  but  we  should  not  forget  that  He  was  the  sacrifice  and  is  greater 
than  it.  6.  Those  who  look  for  His  coming  and  forget  His  presence.  6.  Those 
who  are  satisfied  with  hearing  or  reading  about  Christ :  but  Paul  did  not  say, 
•*  I  have  heard  of  Him  whom  I  believe,"  but  "  I  know."  7.  Those  who  are 
persuaded  to  tbeir  ruin  that  they  know  Him  but  do  not.    II.  Let  us  draw  ccetain 

AFTEB   curtain,  WHICH  SHALL   ADMIT    US    TO    KNOW    SUBE    OF   ChKIST.       1,    We   knOW    a 

person  when  we  recognize  him  :  and  to  this  extent  we  know  the  qnepn,  because  we 
have  seen  her,  and  so  by  a  Divine  illumination  we  must  know  Christ  who  He  ia 
and  what  He  was.  2.  By  a  practical  acquaintance  with  what  He  does.  They  tell 
me  Christ  is  a  clemser,  I  know  Him  because  He  has  washed  me  in  His  blood ;  that 
He  is  a  deliverer,  I  know  Him  because  He  has  set  rne  free  ;  that  He  is  a  sovereign, 
I  know  Him  because  He  has  subdued  my  enemies  ;  that  He  is  food,  my  spirit  feeds 
on  Him.  3.  We  know  a  man  in  a  better  sense  when  we  are  on  speaking  terms 
with  him.  I  know  a  man  not  only  so  as  to  recognize  him,  and  because  I  have 
dealt  with  him,  but  because  we  are  speaking  acquaintances.  So  we  know  Christ  if 
we  pray  to  Him.  4.  But  we  know  a  person  better  when  he  invites  us  to  his  house ; 
we  go  and  go  again,  and  the  oftener  we  go  the  better  we  know  him.  Do  you  visit 
Christ's  banquetting  house,  and  has  He  permitted  you  to  enjoy  the  sweets  of  being 
one  of  His  family  ?  5.  And  yet  after  frequent  visits  you  may  not  know  a  man 
in  the  highest  sense :  yoa  say  to  his  wife,  "  Your  hus'oand  never  seems  to  suffer 
from  depression,  or  to  change."  "  Ah,"  she  says,  '•  you  do  not  know  him  as  I  do." 
That  man  has  grown  much  in  grace  who  has  come  to  recognize  his  marriage  union 
with  his  Lord.  Now  we  have  the  intimacy  of  love  and  delight.  6.  But  a  Christian 
may  get  nearer  than  this.  The  most  loving  wife  may  not  perfectly  know  her 
hasband,  yet  a  Christian  may  grow  to  be  perfectly  identified  with  Christ.  Looking 
at  all  tliis  might  not  Christ  veil  say  now,  "  Have  I  been  so  long  time  with  you,  and 
yet  hast  thou  not  known  Me."  III.  Consideb  what  sort  of  knowledge  this  is. 
1.  If  I  know  Him  I  shall  have  a  very  vivid  sense  of  His  peisonality.  He  will  not 
be  to  me  a  myth,  a  vision,  a  spirit,  but  a  real  person.  Then  there  most  be  a 
personal  knowleclge  on  my  part,  not  a  hearsay,  second-hand  knowledge.  2.  It 
must  be  intelligent.  I  must  know  His  nature,  offices,  works,  and  glory.  8. 
Afifectionate.  It  was  said  of  Garibaldi  that  he  charmed  all  who  got  into  his  society. 
Being  near  Christ  His  love  warms  our  hearts.  4.  Satisfying.  6.  Exciting.  The 
more  we  know  the  more  we  want  to  know.  6.  Happy.  7.  Eefreshing.  8. 
Sanctifying.  IV.  Seek,  then,  this  knowledge.  1.  It  is  worth  having.  Paul  gave 
np  everything  for  it.  2.  There  is  nothing  like  this  to  fill  you  with  courage.  When 
Dr.  Andrew  Eeed  found  some  difficulty  in  founding  one  of  his  orphan  asylums,  he 
drew  npo**  a  piece  of  paper  the  cross,  and  then  he  said  to  himself,  "  What,  despair 
in  the  face  of  the  Cross ; "  and  then  he  drew  a  ring  round  it  and  wrote,  nil 
ditperandum  I  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Utc»  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ: — Paul's 
acquaintance  with  Christ — I.  Reconciled  him  to  the  painful  vicissitudes  of 
outward  crBcuMSTANCEs  (Phil.  iv.  11-13).  II.  Brought  him  help  under  the 
emergencies  of  SPECIAL  DANGER  (2  Tim.  iv.  16-18).  III.  Secured  him  support 
amidst  the  special  inwabd  TBiAiiS  OP  HIS  PERSONAL  LIFE  (2  Cor.  xii.  7-10).  {Dean 
Vaughan.)      Chartuterittics  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ : — The  apostle  aimed  t« 


20«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  um, 

know  Him  as  being  in  Him.  Such  knowledge  is  inspired  by  the  conscionsnesa — 
not  elaborated  by  the  intellect.  It  rises  up  from  within  ;  is  not  gathered  from  with- 
out. It  does  not  accumulate  evidence  to  test  the  truth — it  '*  has  the  witness  " 
in  itself.  It  needs  not  to  repair  to  the  cistern  and  draw — it  has  in  itself  "  a  well  of 
water  springing,"  <$rc.  It  knows,  because  it  feels ;  it  ascertains,  not  because  it 
studies,  but  because  it  enjoys  uniou,  and  possesses  the  righteousness  of  God 
through  faith.  She  that  touched  the  tassel  of  His  robe  had  a  knowledge  of  Christ 
deeper  and  truer  by  far  than  the  crowds  tbat  thronged  about  Him  :  for  "  virtue  " 
had  come  out  of  Him,  and  she  felt  it  in  herself.  Only  this  kind  of  knowledge 
possesses  "  the  excellency,"  for  it  is  connected  with  justification,  as  was  intimated 
by  Isaiah  ;  and  it  is  "  eternal  life,"  as  declared  by  Jesus  (Isa.  liii.  11 ;  John  xvii.  3). 
The  apostle  could  not  set  so  high  a  value  on  mere  external  knowledge,  or  a  mere 
acquaintance  with  the  fact  and  dates  of  Christ's  career.  For  it  is  quite  possible  for 
a  man  to  want  the  element  of  living  experience,  and  yet  be  able  to  argue 
himself  into  the  Messiahship  of  the  Son  of  Mary;  to  gaze  on  His  miracles 
and  deduce  from  them  a  Divine  commission  without  bowing  to  its  authority ; 
aye,  and  to  linger  by  the  Cross,  and  see  in  it  a  mysterious  and  complete  expia- 
tion, without  accepting  the  pardon  and  peace  which  the  blood  of  the  atone- 
ment secures.  {Prof.  Eadie.)  The  knowledge  of  Christ  a 'pemonal  knowledge: — 
The  knowledge  about  which  the  apostle  speaks  is  a  personal  knowledge.  It  pre- 
supposes intellectual  knowledge,  but  is  something  else.  It  is  the  knowledge  of 
which  we  speak  when  we  say  of  a  man  "  I  know  him."  What  do  we  mean  when  we 
say  this  ?  Do  we  not  mean,  I  have  seen  him,  observed  him,  conversed  with  him, 
interchanged  thoughts  with  him,  spent  time  with  him,  done  things  with  him,  have 
been  admitted  into  his  confidence,  written  to  him,  and  heard  from  him  ?  These 
things  and  such  as  these  are  what  make  up  personal  knowledge  between  man  and 
man.  We  should  never  say,  "  I  know  such  or  such  a  great  man  of  history — I  know 
Alexander,  Cresar,  Napoleon  " — merely  because  we  have  read  of  them,  and  could 
give  an  account  of  their  exploits.  We  should  not  say  this  even  of  the  great  men 
of  our  own  time,  its  statesmen,  generals,  or  philosophers — no,  not  even  if  we  had 
seen  them  in  public,  or  heard  them  speak,  or  read  their  writings — unless  also  we 
had  been  admitted  to  tbeir  society,  and  had  exchanged  with  them  the  confidences 
which  a  man  gives  his  friend.  Even  thus  is  it  with  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  We 
have  no  right  to  say,  "  I  know  Christ,"  merely  because  we  have  read  of  Him  in  Scrip- 
ture, or  because  He  has  taught  in  our  streets.  We  have  no  right  to  say  so  unless 
He  has  spoken  to  us,  and  we  to  Him.  Unless  we  have  access  to  His  privacy,  and 
can  tell  Him  our  secrets.  Unless  we  can  go  in  and  out  where  He  dwells,  and  talk 
with  Him  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  friend.  Unless  we  have  not  only  read  in  Scrip- 
ture that  He  is  wise  and  merciful,  &c.,  but  have  also  acted  on  that  information, 
and  found  Him  so  for  ourselves.  Unless  in  temptation  we  have  cried  unto  Him, 
and  received  strength  ;  unless  in  trouble  we  have  applied  to  Him  and  experienced 
a  very  present  help.  {Dean  Vauglian.)  The  natural  desire  of  a  Christian  for  tht 
knowledge  of  his  Saviour  : — Suppose  yourself  a  man  condemned  to  the  hone  in  the 
Roman  amphitheatre.  A  ponderous  door  is  drawn  up,  and  forth  there  rushes  the 
monarch  of  the  forest.  You  must  slay  him  or  be  torn  to  pieces.  You  tremble ; 
your  joints  are  loosed ;  you  are  paralyzed  with  fear.  But  what  is  this  ?  A  great 
unknown  leaps  from  the  gazing  multitude  and  confronts  the  monster.  He  quails 
not  at  the  roaring  of  the  devourer,  but  dashes  on  him  till  the  lion  slinks  towards 
his  den,  dragging  himself  along  in  pain  and  fear.  The  hero  lifts  you  up,  smiles 
into  your  bloodless  face,  whispers  comfort  in  your  ear,  and  bids  you  be  of  good 
courage,  for  you  are  free.  Do  you  not  think  that  there  would  arise  at  once  in  your 
heart  a  desire  to  know  your  deliverer?  As  the  guards  conducted  you  into  the  open 
street,  and  you  breathed  the  cool,  fresh  air,  would  not  the  first  question  be,  "  Who 
was  my  deliverer,  that  I  may  fall  at  his  feet  and  bless  him  ?  "  You  are  not,  how- 
ever, informed,  but  instead  of  it  you  are  led  away  to  a  noble  mansion,  where  your 
wounds  are  healed  with  salve  of  rarest  power.  You  are  clothed  in  sumptuous 
apparel ;  you  are  made  to  sit  down  at  a  feast ;  you  rest  upon  the  softest  down. 
The  next  morning  you  are  attended  by  servants  who  guard  you  from  evil  and 
minister  to  your  good.  Day  after  day,  week  after  week,  your  wants  are  supplied. 
I  am  sure  that  your  curiosity  would  grow  more  and  more  intense.  You  would 
scarcely  neglect  an  opportunity  of  asking  the  servants,  "  Tell  me,  who  is  my  noble 
benefactor,  for  I  must  know  him  ?  "  "  Well,  but "  they  would  say,  "  is  it  not 
enough  for  you  that  you  are  delivered  from  the  lion  f  "  "  Nay,"  say  you, «'  it  is  foi 
that  very  reason  that  I  pant  to  know  him."     "  Your  wants  are  richly  supplied — 


CHAP,  ni.]  PHILIPPIANS.  20: 

why  are  you  vexed  by  curiosity  as  to  the  hand  which  reaches  yon  the  boon  ?  If 
your  garment  is  worn  out.  there  is  another.  Long  before  hunger  oppresses  you, 
the  table  is  well  loaded.  What  more  do  you  want?  "  But  your  reply  is,  ''It  is 
because  I  have  no  wants,  that,  therefore,  my  soul  longs  to  kn'iw  my  generous 
friend."  Suppose  that  as  you  wake  up  one  morning,  you  find  lying  upon  your 
pillow  a  precious  love-token  from  your  unknown  friend,  and  engraved  with  a  tender 
inscription.  Your  curiosity  now  knows  no  bounds.  But  you  are  informed  that 
this  wondrous  being  has  not  only  done  for  you  what  you  have  seen,  but  that  he  was 
imprisoned  and  scourged  for  your  sake,  for  he  had  a  love  to  you  so  great,  that  death 
itself  could  not  overcome  it :  you  are  informed  that  he  is  every  moment  occupied  in 
your  interests,  because  he  has  sworn  by  himself  that  where  he  is  there  you  shall 
be;  his  honours  you  shall  share,  and  of  his  happiness  you  shall  be  the  crown. 
Why,  methinks  yon  would  say,  "  Tell  me,  men  and  women,  any  of  you  who  know 
him,  who  and  what  he  is  ;  "  and  if  they  said,  "  But  it  is  enough  for  you  to  know 
that  he  loves  you,  and  to  have  daily  proofs  of  his  goodness,"  you  would  say,  *'  No, 
these  love-tokens  increase  my  thirst.  If  ye  see  him,  tell  him  I  am  sick  of  love. 
The  flagons  which  he  sends  me,  and  the  love-tokens  which  he  gives  me,  they  stay 
me  for  awhile  with  the  assurance  of  his  affection,  but  they  only  impel  me  onward 
with  the  more  unconquerable  desire  that  I  may  know  him.  I  must  know  him ;  I 
cannot  live  without  knowing  him.  His  goodness  makes  me  thirst,  and  pant,  and 
faint,  and  even  die,  that  I  may  know  him,"  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  progressive 
knoxcledge  of  Christ : — Did  yon  ever  visit  the  manufactory  of  splendid  porcelain  at 
Sevres  ?  I  have  done  so.  If  anybody  should  say  to  me,  "  Do  you  know  the 
manufactory  at  Sevrc-s  ?  "  I  should  say,  "  Yes,  I  do,  and  no,  I  do  not.  I  know  it, 
for  I  have  seen  the  building ;  I  have  seen  the  rooms  in  which  the  articles  are 
exhibited  for  sale,  and  I  have  seen  the  museum  and  model-room ;  but  I  do  not 
know  the  factory  as  I  would  like  to  know  it,  for  I  have  not  seen  the  process  of 
manufacture,  and  have  not  been  admitted  into  the  workshops,  as  some  are. 
**  Suppose  I  had  seen,  however,  the  process  of  the  moulding  of  the  clay,  and  the 
laying  on  of  the  rich  designs,  if  anybody  should  still  say  to  me,  "  Do  you  know 
how  they  manufacture  those  wonderful  articles  ? "  I  should  very  likely  still  be 
compelled  to  say,  "  No,  I  do  not,  because  there  are  certain  secrets,  certain  private 
rooms  into  which  neither  friend  nor  foe  can  be  admitted,  lest  the  process  should  be 
open  to  the  world."  So,  you  see,  I  might  say  I  knew,  and  yet  might  not  half 
know ;  and  when  I  half  knew,  still  there  would  be  so  much  left,  that  I  might  be 
compelled  to  say,  "  I  do  not  know."  How  many  different  ways  there  are  of  know- 
ing a  person — and  even  so  there  are  all  these  different  ways  of  knowing  Christ ;  so 
that  you  may  keep  on  all  your  lifetime,  still  wishing  to  get  into  another  room,  and 
another  room,  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  great  secret,  still  panting  to  "  know  Him." 
Good  Rutherford  says,  "I  urge  upon  you  a  nearer  communion  with  Christ,  and  a 
growing  communion.  There  are  curtains  to  be  drawn  by,  in  Christ,  that  we  never 
shut,  and  new  foldings  in  love  with  Him.  I  despair  that  ever  I  shall  win  to  the  far 
end  of  that  love  ;  there  are  so  many  plies  in  it.  Therefore,  dig  deep,  and  set  by  as 
much  time  in  the  day  for  Him  as  yon  can,  He  will  be  won  by  labour."  (Ibid.) 
And  the  power  of  His  resurrection.  The  power  of  Christ's  resurrection : — There 
are  those  who  think  it  indicative  of  an  unspiritual  state  of  mind  to  lay  stress  on 
the  physical  resurrection  of  Christ.  They  tell  us  that  the  all-important  matter  is 
His  resurrection  in  the  hearts  of  His  disciples.  But  Paul  regarded  it  as  a  fact  o^ 
transcendent  importance.  He  and  the  other  apostles  regarded  it  as  a  power.  I. 
Fob  inspirino  faith  ts  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God.  II.  For  odb  justification 
(Bom.  iv.  25).  The  resurrection  was  a  pledge  that  God  ha4  accepted  the  sacrifice. 
III.  Fob  inspiring  within  ds  the  hope  of  olobt.  Death  is  to  the  eye  of  sense 
a  mystery,  and  the  materialistic  doctrine  darkens  what  faint  hope  of  immortality 
may  be  within  us.  But  Christ's  resurrection  '*  brought  life  and  immortality  to 
light."  He  conquered  death,  and  to  believe  that  He  is  "the  first-fruits  of  them 
that  slept,"  is  to  receive  power  to  break  the  tyranny  of  death  (ver.  21).  IV.  To 
sancttfy  cub  nature.  This  is  perhaps  Paul's  leading  idea.  To  identify  ourselves 
with  a  risen  Eedeemer  must  exert  a  purifying  effect  on  our  souls  (Col.  iii.  1).  (T. 
C.  Finlayson).  The  power  of  Christ's  resurrection  : — I.  As  seen   in   Christ 

Himself  (Eph.  i.  17-21).  1.  In  it  Christ  as  man  was  invested  with  all  the  power 
and  glory  of  the  Godhead.  "All  power  is  given  unto  Me."  2.  When  He  returns 
it  will  be  in  the  fulness  of  the  resurrection  glory.  II.  In  the  justification  o» 
THE  BELIEVER.  1.  Eesurrectiou  implies  death,  and  to  know  Christ  in  His  resurrec- 
tion is  to  know  that  we  died  in  His  death  as  our  surety  (Rom.  vi.  7).    2.  Al 


808  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

Jodicially  one  with  Christ  in  His  death,  the  believer  is  one  with  Him  in  Hii 
resarrection.  III.  In  the  life  of  the  believer.  1.  We  who  were  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins  are  quickened  by  it  into  life.  2.  This  life  is  sustained  by  a 
constant  supply  from  the  fountain  head.  3.  By  this  power  we  rise  above  the  world 
and  sit  in  heavenly  places  with  Christ.  IV.  In  the  believer's  service.  1. 
Observe  its  acting  in  the  earliest  possessors  of  it.  2.  Employ  it  in  testifying  to  its 
power.  V.  In  the  believer's  eesdbrection.  1.  Christ's  resurrection  is  the 
pledge  of  ours.  2.  Ensures  the  triumph  and  glorification  of  the  Church.  {G. 
Graham.)  The  power  of  Christ's  resurrection: — I.  In  relation  to  sin.  1. 
The  death  of  Christ,  had  the  redemptive  effort  ended  there,  had  sealed  man's 
doom  for  ever;  the  resurrection  made  it  vital,  the  spring  of  purifying  and 
renewing  for  the  world.  From  the  ground  the  blood  of  Christ,  like  that  of 
Abel,  cries  out  against  humanity.  It  is  from  heaven  that  Jesus  preaches 
peace  through  His  blood,  and  makes  it  a  power  to  save.  2.  The  resurrection 
brought  to  man  precisely  the  power  he  needed  for  victorious  resistance  to  that 
by  which  his  higher  life  was  in  process  of  being  destroyed.  The  risen  form 
threw  glorious  light  on  the  flesh,  as  completing  the  incarnation.  The  body  was 
redeemed  by  it  from  degradation,  and  consecrated  as  the  Spirit's  organ  and  shrine 
for  ever.  8.  When  Christ  had  risen,  men  saw  that  the  vileness,  the  curse,  the 
stain,  was  the  work  of  an  alien  and  intrusive  force  which  might  be  expelled,  and 
in  the  might  of  that  belief  men  for  the  first  time  roue  in  victory  over  those  passions 
which  had  defiled  the  body.  II.  In  relation  to  sorrow.  1.  The  mountains  of  the 
world  are  great  or  as  nothing  according  as  we  view  them  from  a  valley  or  from  a 
star,  so  all  the  storms  and  crosses  of  life  dwindle  looked  at  from  the  height  of 
"  Jesus  and  the  resurrection."  2.  The  resurrection  maintains  the  continuity  of 
the  life  of  the  man  of  sorrows  and  the  reigning  king.  So  we  aeed  not  shrink  from 
our  sorrows  if  we  but  bear  in  mind  the  glory  that  shall  follow.  3.  Nay,  the  men 
who  first  realized  the  power  of  the  resurrection,  "  gloried  in  tribulations."  It  made 
them  one  with  Christ,  which  guaranteed  the  ultimate  victory.  III.  In  relation 
TO  death.  1.  We  have  little  power  of  realizing  the  anguish  with  which  the  men 
of  old  peered  into  the  uns-een.  This  was  the  world  of  light,  of  life — that  of 
shadows  and  ghosts.  To  the  children  of  the  resurrection  it  is  exactly  the  reverse. 
The  sorrow  and  gloom  is  of  time,  the  light  and  joy  are  everlasting.  2.  The 
resurrection  wedded  the  two  worlds.  Who  now  dreads  to  live  or  to  die  ?  Because 
"living  or  dying  we  are  the  Lord's."  (Baldwin  Brown,  B. A.).  The  power  of 
Christ's  resurrection  : — I.  As  a  fact.  That  is  our  faitb.  Your  philosophers  who 
do  not  believe  in  miracle  do  not  believe  it  possible,  because  they  do  not  allow  that 
God  can  interfere  with,  and  is  above  the  system  He  arranged.  But  we  believe  that 
God  who  made  the  world  administers  His  own  laws  and  interposes  if  He  thinks 
fit.  The  power  of  the  resurrection,  proving  the  truth  of  Christianity  as  a  whole, 
proves  its  exclusiveness  as  a  system  of  Divine  thought  which  is  to  constitute  the 
religion  of  man.  II.  As  a  doctrine.  The  fact  enshrines  a  thought.  Simply  con- 
sidered as  a  fact,  having  power  over  the  reason,  as  a  part  of  the  evidence  of 
Christianity,  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  is  the  same  as  that  of  Lazarus.  But  as  a 
doctrine  it  is  very  different.  "Jesus  died,"  according  to  the  Scriptures,  and 
according  to  the  Scriptures  •'  He  rose  again."  It  is  the  fulfilment  of  a  Divine 
purpose  ;  and  its  power  is  an  appeal  to  our  spiritual  nature,  our  conscience,  and  sense 
of  guilt.  III.  As  A  TYPE.  As  Christ  died  and  rose,  we  are  to  die  to  sin  and  live 
to  God,  "  as  those  who  are  alive  from  the  dead."  IV.  As  a  motive.  Observe  how 
these  thoughts  interweave.  The  resurrection  as  a  fact  operates  upon  the  intellect 
and  gives  assurance  of  truth  ;  as  a  doctrine  it  deepens  the  truth  and  touches 
consciences  and  expresses  reconciliation  with  God ;  as  a  type,  we  rising  from  the 
dead  and  walking  with  Christ — that  is  the  developed  experience  of  the  Christian 
man  in  the  life  of  God.  Christ  was  not  glorified  immediately.  He  lived  for  forty 
days  a  different  life  from  His  former  one.  So  must  we  under  the  power  of  the 
resurrection.  Christ  is  risen,  therefore  "  Seek  those  things  that  are  above."  V. 
As  A  MODEL  (ver.  21).  Conclusion  :  These  transcendental  thoughts,  so  far  from 
unfitting  us  for  the  sober  duties  of  life,  ennoble  and  beautify  life.  A  servant-girl 
may  act  on  a  principle  which  may  bring  her  into  harmony  with  the  angels.  You 
need  not  wait  for  Sunday  to  engage  in  Divine  service.  You  have  but  to  realize  in 
the  shop  or  the  market  the  power  of  the  resurrection.  (T.  Binney,  D.D.) 
The  power  of  Christ's  resurrection : — 1.  We  need  more  and  more  to  look  at 
the  facts  of  the  Christian  dispensation ;  the  doctrines  we  are  required  to  be- 
lieve have  their  foundations  in  these  facts.     Our  tendency  is  to  treat  Christian 


OUT.  m.]  PHILIPPIAN3.  «09 

doctrines  as  if  they  were  speculations.  2.  The  resurrection  is  an  accomplished 
fact.  It  is  sometimes  attributed  to  Christ  alone ;  sometimes  to  the  Father ; 
sometimes  to  the  Spirit ;  bo  that  it  is  brought  before  us  as  a  blessed  mani- 
festation of  the  power  of  the  redeeming  God.  3.  The  power  of  the  resurreo- 
tion  may  signify — (1)  The  power  which  effected  it;  (2)  the  power  of  the  fact 
itself,  or — (3)  the  power  with  which  Christ  was  endowed  at  it,  and  these  words 
may  include  all.  4.  To  know  the  power,  Ac,  is — (1)  To  recognize  it  as  a 
reality.  (2)  To  comprehend  and  appreciate  it  in  its  relation  with  man's  re- 
demption. (3)  To  feel  its  force  upon  the  life.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is — I. 
An  examplk  of  the  Almighty  life-qivino  power  of  God.  To  know  its  power 
IB  to  be  conscious  of  the  working  of  the  same  upon  ourselves,  quickening,  renewing, 
enlightening,  invigorating.  II.  A  confirmation  for  ever  of  the  claims  of 
Jesus  of  Nazareth.  To  know  its  power  is  to  feel  assured  that  the  son  of  Mary 
is  the  Son  of  God.  This  is  essential  to  oar  taking  full  advantage  of  His  riches  and 
resources.  III.  The  sign  and  seal  of  the  truth  of  thb  gospel.  To  know 
its  power  is  to  see  that  truth  sealed  not  by  His  blood  simply,  but  by  His  hand  in 
the  newness  of  His  glorified  life.  Why  is  it  we  do  not  declare  that  truth  more 
constantly  and  zealously  ?  Bdcanse  of  our  unbelief.  Those  who  cordially  believe 
it  are  constantly  repeating  it.  IV.  Adapted  to  strengthen  oub  trust  in  Him. 
To  know  its  power  is  to  feel  our  confidence  strengthened  in  sorrow  and  death. 
v.  Calculated  to  awake  within  us  thb  most  glorious  hopes.  To  know  its 
power  is  to  become  the  subjects  by  its  influence  of  new  and  enlarged  expectations, 
desires,  aspirations  and  affections.  VI.  Fitted  to  raise  us  into  newness  of 
life.  To  feel  its  power  is  to  rise  with  Him  and  set  our  atiections  on  things  above. 
VII.  Able  to  oivb  courage  in  approaching  suffering.  To  know  its  power 
is  to  feel  strengthened  to  endure  all  the  will  of  God.  VHI.  Suited  to  raise  the 
believer  above  the  feab  of  death.  To  know  its  power  is  to  feel  that  it  is  a 
pledge  of  immortality.  (S.  Martin.)  The  power  of  the  resurrection: — I.  As 
THE  ASSUBANCB  OF  iMiioRT.u,iTY  (Rom.  viii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  XV.  14,  &o.).  II.  As  the 
triumph  over  sin  and  the  pledge  of  justification  (Rom.  iv.  24-25).      III.   As 

ASSERTING    THE    DIGNITY    AND    ENFORCING     THE     CLAIMS   OF   THE     HUMAN     DODY    (1    CoT. 

▼L  13-15  ;  Phil.  iii.  21).  IV.  Thus  stimulating  the  whole  moral  and  spibitcal 
BEING  (Rom.  vi.  4,  &o. ;  Gal.  ii.  20;  Eph.  ii.  6;  Col.  ii.   12).     {Bishop  Li ghtfoot.) 

I.  What  is  intended  by  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection.  The  influence 
which  that  great  event  has  upon  the  other  parts  of  His  mediatorial  character  and 
offices,  connected  with  the  safety  and  happiness  of  His  people.  This  may  be 
traced — 1.  In  the  open  and  uncontroverted  declaration  of  His  Divine  Sonship 
(Bom.  i.  4  ;  Psa.  ii.  ;  cf.  Acts  xiii.  32  ;  Heb.  i.  3-5).  2.  In  its  influence  upon  our 
justification  (Rom.  iv.  25).  3.  In  its  effect  on  our  sanctifi cation  (John  vii.  39; 
xvi.  7-6).  4.  In  the  exaltation  of  the  saints  to  glory  of  which  it  is  the  procuring 
cause — "  Because  I  live,"  Ac.  (1  Cor.  xv.  21-22).  II.  What  is  it  to  know  that 
POWER  ?  1.  Not  merely  the  illumination  of  the  understanding  but — 2.  The  heart- 
felt experience  of  what  is  said  to  be  known  (CoL  ii  12-13 ;  iii.  1  ;  Eph.  ii.  4-6), 
corresponding  to  what  the  resurrection  meant  for  Christ.  (1)  Our  Sonahip — 
"begotten  again  to  a  lively  hope."  (2)  Our  freedom  from  the  law's  penalties, 
which  He  has  satisfied.  (3)  Our  entrance  into  the  glory  whither  He  as  oar  fore- 
runner has  gone.  IIL  Why,  as  believers,  wb  shobld  desire  that  knowledge 
MOBS  AND  MORE.  BccausG — 1.  It  is  essential  to  the  Christian  character.  2. 
It  tends  to  strengthen  faith.  8.  It  teaches  the  true  estimate  of  life  with  all 
its  cares,  and  death  with  all  its  terrors.  Inferences  :  1.  The  religion  of  Christ 
in  all  its  parts  is  intended  to  be  practical  and  experimental.  2.  The  Christian 
should  be  always  pressing  onwards  to  higher  attainments  of  knowledge,  faith,  and 
holiness.     (C.Neat.)        The  power  of  tlie  resurrection: — I.  In  our  justification. 

II.  In  oub  begenebation.  The  Divine  Agent  in  this  is  He  of  whom  Christ  said, 
"  If  I  go  not  away  the  Comforter  will  not  come."  So  that  the  resurrection  was 
essential  to  our  being  raised  morally  "from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of 
righteousness."  III.  In  our  sanctification.  Our  continuance  and  progressive 
growth  in  grace  begun  at  regeneration  is  the  work  of  the  same  Spirit.  IV.  In 
oub  consolation  and  hope  (1  Thess.  iv.  ;  1  Cor.  xv.).  V.  In  our  anticipation. 
The  moral  magnet  that  draws  up  the  grovelling  affections  and  hopes  of  a  man 
from  earth  to  heaven  is  the  risen  Christ.  Conclusion  :  We  must  know  this 
power,  by  being  justified,  &o.,  which  is  the  moral  proof  of  Christ's  resurrection. 
(Jff.  Stowell,  M.A.)  (Text  in  conjunction  with  Mark  xvi.  3-4.)  The  resurrection 
t$  a  power  : — L  To  beal  conscience.     No  system  of  thought  that  does  not  admit 

14 


«10  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHA».  m. 

the  fact  of  sin,  or  attempt  to  explain  its  meaning,  or  assist  ns  in  becoming 
delivered  from  its  dominion,  can  hope  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  mankind.  In  all 
ages  and  countries  the  human  heart  has  had  two  questions  to  ask  about  it,  which 
nothing  but  the  resurrection  can  completely  answer.  One  is  about  pardon,  and 
the  other  about  righteousness.  The  one  seeks  peace  with  God,  the  other  His 
image.  And  the  resurrection  is  the  power  for  both.  It  looks  back  and  it  points 
forward.  It  implies  the  Cross,  and  it  presumes  the  Ascension.  Why  did  He  die  ? 
Not  only  as  a  Martyr,  but  as  a  Sin-bearer  (Isa.  liii.  5 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24).  But  if  He 
had  only  died,  while  we  should  have  admired  the  unparalleled  sacrifice,  we  should 
have  mourned  its  nselessness.  But  in  the  resurrection  we  see  the  sacrifice 
accepted,  peace  ensured,  and  eternal  life  given.  Sin  on  the  conscience  is  one 
stone  rolled  away,  and  sin  in  the  will  another.  His  grace  helps  us  to  die  to  sin, 
and  live  to  God  through  union  with  Him  who,  as  He  bore  our  sins,  and  identified 
Himself  with  our  misery,  is  also  made  righteousness  unto  us,  whereby  we  through 
our  regeneration  grafted  into  Him,  are  before  God  righteous  in  His  righteousness. 
II.  To  ENNOBLE  DUTY.  What  is  life  ?  Is  it  but  as  the  dipping  of  an  insect's  wing 
into  the  brimming  flood  of  some  tropical  river — the  quick  submerging  into  a 
devouring  sea  of  one  after  another  of  the  myriad  barks  that  are  ever  being 
launched  on  it,  each  with  its  solitary  voyager — a  journey  between  two  nights. 
Then  assuredly  the  saddest  mystery  about  it  is  that  it  should  ever  have  been  given 
us  at  all.  But  in  the  light  of  the  resurrection  life  is  seen  to  be  worth  living,  for 
the  stone  of  a  purposeless  existence  is  rolled  away  (1  Cor,  iv.  22) ;  and  with  its 
new  aims  and  responsibilities  and  functions  and  motives  this  life  has  a  new 
meaning  and  force.  There  is — 1.  Its  stupendous  responsibility,  for  some  day  we 
shall  rise  to  receive  the  things  done  in  our  body — that  is,  their  results,  whether  they 
be  good  or  bad.  2.  Its  potential  grace  (Col.  iii.  1).  3.  Its  majestic  consecration 
(Rom.  xii.  1).    (Bishop  Thor old.)    The  power  of  ChrisVa  resurrection.    In  it — I.  Thb 

UNITY  OF  DOCTeInK  IN  THE  OlD  AND  NeW  TESTAMENTS  IS  ILLUSTRATED  AND  CONFIRMED. 

II.  Man's  natural  yearnings  after  immortality  are  met  and  satisfied.     III.  A 

POWERFUL  STIMULUS  IS  GIVEN  TO  CHRISTIAN  CHARACTER.  IV.  We  HAVE  A  PLEDGE  OF 
THE    TRIUMPH  OF  THE  ChUBCH,  AND  THE  COMING  OF  THE  LoRD.       (HomUitiC  Monthly.) 

The  power  of  Christ'g  resurrection : — In  every  occurrence  there  are  to  be  considered 
the  fact — that  which  actually  occurs — and  the  consequences,  actual  or  possible — 
what  St.  Paul  calls  "  its  power."  We  know  the  fact  of  an  occurrence  when  we  have 
handled  the  proofs  which  show  that  it  really  took  place ;  when  we  know  how  it 
has  been  described,  what  were  its  several  aspects ;  but  we  know  of  the  "  power  " 
of  the  fact  when  we  can  trace  what  its  effects  have  been,  or  what  they  might 
have  been  or  might  be.  It  is  easier  to  apprehend  a  fact  than  to  take  the  measure 
of  its  consequences,  its  practical  meaning,  its  power.  If  I  throw  a  stone,  I  can 
ascertain  the  weight  of  the  stone,  the  moment  at  which  it  leaves  my  hand,  the 
distance  of  the  spot  at  which  it  touches  the  ground.  But  what  is  hard  to  ascertain 
is  the  effect  of  the  stone's  passage  through  the  air ;  the  thousands  of  insects 
instantaneously  disabled  or  destroyed  by  it ;  the  radiation  of  disturbance  caused 
by  the  displacement  of  the  atmosphere,  and  extending,  it  may  be,  into  regions 
which  defy  calculation.  All  of  us  understand  more  or  less,  at  least,  the  general 
outline  of  the  succession  of  recent  events  in  Egypt ;  but  what  will  be,  in  the  course  of 
time,  their  import  and  influence  upon  the  condition  and  history  of  our  own  country 
and  of  the  world,  who  shall  say  ?  So  to  apprehend  a  fact  is  one  thing ;  it  is 
quite  another  to  feel  its  power.  When  then  St.  Paul  utters  his  prayer  he  implies 
that  already  he  has  knowledge  of  the  fact.  St.  Paul,  being  thus  sure  of  the 
resurrection  as  a  fact,  was  not  embarrassed  by  an  a  priori  doctrine  forbidding  him 
to  ignore  it.  He  was  not  like  those  old  schoolmen  whom  Lord  Bacon  condemned, 
and  who,  instead  of  learning  what  to  think  about  nature  from  the  facts  of  nature, 
endeavoured  to  persuade  themselves  that  the  facts  of  nature  corresponded 
somehow  with  what  they  already  thought  about  it.  St.  Paul,  then,  had  no  need 
to  pray,  as  have  many  in  our  time,  that  he  might  be  assured  of  the  fact  of  Christ's 
resurrection ;  what  he  did  pray  for  was  that  he  might  increasingly  understand 
its  power.  This  power  may  be  observed — I.  In  the  way  in  which  a  true  believ 
IN  it  enables  a  man  to  realize  habitually  the  moral  government  of  thb 
WORLD  BY  God.  Our  age  is  not  one  in  which  men  believe,  that  whatever  happens, 
all  is  overruled  by  a  Being  who  is  perfectly  good  and  wise.  There  are  circum- 
stances in  the  modern  world  which  make  belief  in  the  Divine  government  harder 
than  it  was  for  our  ancestors.  One  is  our  wider  outlook.  Thanks  to  the  Press, 
to  the  railway,  to  the  telegraph,  we  know  a  great  deal  more  of  wha*  is  going  on 


CHAP,  ni.J  PHILIPPIANS.  813 

all  over  the  world  than  did  any  preyions  generation  of  men  ;  and  one  consequence 
is  this — that  human  lite  preseuts  itself  to  many  minds  as  a  much  more  tangled 
and  inexplicable  thing  than  it  ever  did  before.  The  disappointments  in  store 
for  the  conscience  which  is  eagerly  searching  for  clear  traces  of  a  law  of  right 
vigorously  asserting  itself  are  so  frequent  and  so  great,  that  men  lose  heart  where 
heart  and  purpose  are  specially  needful.  Now,  here  the  certainty  that  Jesus 
Christ  arose  from  the  dead  asserts  what  St.  Paul  en  Us  its  "power,"  for  when 
Jesus  Christ  was  crucified  it  might  have  seemed — it  did  seem — that  the  sun  of 
God's  justice  had  gone  down,  that  while  all  the  Vices  were  being  feasted  and 
crowned  in  Rome,  all  the  Virtues  could  be  crucified  with  impunity  in  Jerusalem. 
But  when  He  burst  forth  from  the  grave  He  proclaimed  to  men's  senses  as  well 
SB  to  their  consciences  that  the  real  law  which  rules  the  world  is  moral  and 
not  material,  and  that  the  sun  of  God's  righteousness,  if  it  is  at  times  over- 
clouded in  human  history,  is  sure  to  reappear.     II,   In   the   firm    persuasion 

IT     SHOULD     CREATE     THAT     THE     CHRISTIAN    CREED   IS     TRUE   AS   A   WHOLE    AND   IN    ITS 

BEVEBAi.  PARTS.  1.  It  18  a  proof  that  the  Christian  creed  is  true.  There 
are  many  truths  of  Christianity  which  do  not  contribute  anything  to  prove  its 
general  truth,  although  they  could  not  be  denied  or  lost  sight  of  without  fatally 
impairing  its  integrity.  Take,  for  example,  our  Lord's  perpetual  intercession  in 
heaven.  We  believe  in  this  because  the  apostles  have  so  taught  us.  We  do  not 
believe  in  the  creed  as  a  whole,  because  we  believe  in  Christ's  intercession. 
It  is  otherwise  with  the  resurrection,  which  is  a  proof  that  the  Christian  faith 
is  true  because  it  is  the  certificate  of  our  Lord's  mission  from  heaven,  to  which 
He  Himself  pointed  as  the  warrant  of  His  claims  (John  ii.  19;  Matt.  xii. 
39-40 ;  John  vi.  62 ;  Matt.  xvii.  9 ;  Mark  ii.  9-10 ;  Matt.  xvii.  21,  xvii. 
23;  John  x.  18;  Matt.  xxx.  17-19;  Mark  x.  32-34;  Luke  xviii.  31-33. 
John  ivi.  16 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  31-33).  The  resurrection  was  thus  constantly  before 
Christ's  mind,  because  it  was  to  be  the  warrant  of  His  mission.  And  when  He  did 
rise.  He  redeemed  the  pleflge  which  He  had  given  to  His  disciples  and  to  the  world. 
The  first  preachers  of  Christianity  understood  this.  The  resurrection  was  the 
proof  to  which  they  constantly  pointed  that  our  Lord  was  really  what  He  claimed 
to  be  (Acts  xvii.  18  ;  ii.  22-24,  32).  2.  What  is  the  true  value  of  this  fact  amonK 
the  credentials  of  Christianity  ?  (1)  Paley  makes  a  great  mistake  when  he  rests  the 
whole  case  of  Christianity  upon  the  fact  that  the  resurrection  was  so  certain  to  its 
first  preachers,  that  they  willingly  gave  their  lives  to  attest  it.  This  mistake  lay 
not  in  insisting  on  this  fact — which  is,  indeed,  of  the  very  first  importance  as  an 
evidence  of  Christianity — but  in  insisting  on  it  as  if  it  stood  alone,  and  would  of 
itself  and  unsupported  prove  to  all  minds  the  truth  of  the  Christian  creed ;  the  truth 
being  that  the  evidences  of  Christianity  are  not  one  and  simple,  but  many  and 
complex.  Their  strength  lies  in  their  convergence.  The  fabric  which  its  Divine 
Architect  meant  to  rest  upon  a  group  of  pillars  cannot  be  safely  rested,  even  by  a 
man  of  genius,  upon  one.  (2)  Another  mistake  is,  that  it  is  of  no  value  whatever 
as  an  evidence  of  Cliristianity — Christianity  is  said  to  be  recommended  solely  by 
the  moral  character  of  Christ ;  the  supernatural  incidents  of  His  earthly  life,  and 
notably  His  resurrection,  are  treated  as  an  embarrassing  addition.  This  estimate 
of  the  evidential  value  of  the  resurrection  is  altogether  opposed  to  the  mind  of  our 
Lord  and  His  apoi-tles.  They  did  not  mean  the  resurrection  to  stand  alone ;  but 
they  assigned  to  it  the  highett  place  among  the  facts  and  considerations  which  go 
to  show  that  Christianity  is  true :  a  countersign  in  the  world  of  Nature  to  the 
teaching  of  our  Lord  in  the  court  of  conscience — the  outward  miracle  assures  u 
through  the  senses  that  the  Being  who  is  the  Author  of  Nature  is  the  same  Being  a- 
He  who  speaks  to  conscience  in  the  moral  law,  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  in  the 
whole  character  and  teaching  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  If  we  heaid  the  inward 
voice  of  conscience  alone  we  might  doubt  whether  there  was  really  anything  ex- 
ternal which  warranted  it ;  if  we  witnessed  the  outward  miracle  alone  we  might  see 
in  it  a  mere  wonder  with  no  moral  consequence.  But  when  the  Teacher  whose 
voice  pierces,  rouses,  quickens  the  conscience  is  accredited  by  an  interference  with 
the  observed  course  of  Nature,  the  combined  evidence  is  in  reason  overwhelming. 
Ill,  Iw  THE  SPIRITUAL  LITE  OF  CHRISTIANS.  Our  Lord  is  not  merely  our  authoritative 
Teacher,  or  Redeemer,  but  also,  through  real  union  with  us,  the  Author  of  a  new 
life  within  us.  St.  Paul  teaches  us  this  again  and  again.  Sometimes  he  sp«aks  of 
our  Lord  as  though  He  were  a  sphere  of  being  within  which  the  Christian  lives  : 
(2  Cor.  V.  17) ;  sometimes  as  the  inhabitant  of  the  Christian  soul  (Col.  i.  27).  This 
onion  is  not  metaphor,  it  is  a  certain  experience.    Our  Lord,  khea,  dwells  in 


213  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  in. 

Christians,  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  New  Testament  teaches  us  that  the  mysteriea 
of  His  earthly  life  are  reproduced,  after  a  manner,  in  the  Christian  soul.  If  Christ 
is  born  supernaturally  of  a  virgin  mother,  the  Christian  is  made  God's  child  by 
idoption  and  grace ;  apostles  are  in  travail  until  Christ  be  formed  in  their  converts. 
If  Christ  is  crucified  on  Mount  Calvary,  the  Christian,  too,  has  a  Calvary  where  he, 
crucified  with  Christ,  crucifies  "  the  flesh,  with  the  affections  and  lusts."  If 
Christ,  while  apostles  behold,  is  taken  up  into  heaven  and  sits  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  the  Christian  in  heart  and  mind  with  Him  ascends,  with  Him  continually 
dwells,  is  made  to  sit  together  with  Him  in  heavenly  places.  And,  in  like  manner, 
if  Christ  rose  from  the  dead  the  third  day,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  the  Christian 
also  has  experience  of  an  inward  resurrection.  Conclusion  :  Of  this  power  lodged 
in  the  Christian  soul  there  are  three  characteristics.  1.  Christ  rose  really.  It  waa 
not  a  phantom  that  haunted  the  upper  chamber,  &c.  And  our  Easter  resurrection 
from  sin  will  be  no  less  real  if  it  is  His  power  by  which  we  are  rising  (Rev.  iii.  1). 
2.  Our  Lord  rose  to  lead,  for  the  most  part,  a  hidden  life.  On  the  day  of  His 
resurrection  He  appeared  five  times,  but  rarely  afterwards  during  the  forty  days. 
So  it  is  with  the  risen  life  of  the  souL  It  is  not  constantly  flaunted  before  the  eyes 
of  men ;  it  seeks  retirement,  solitude,  and  the  sincerities  which  these  ensure 
(Col.  iii.  1-4).  3.  Our  Lord  being  raised,  "  dieth  no  more;  death  hath  no  more 
dominion  over  Him,"  &c.  So  with  him  who  shares  that  risen  life.  (Canon  Liddon.) 
Tht  power  of  the  resurrection  in  sorrow  : — The  letter  of  condolence  written  by 
Sulpicius  to  his  friend  Cicero  who  was  mourning  the  loss  of  his  beloved  daughter, 
beautiful  as  it  is,  shows  us  that  the  best  comfort  which  sentiment  and  philosophy 
can  offer,  is  utterly  powerless  to  bind  up  the  broken  heart.  "  Why  grieve?"  asks 
the  sympathizing  Roman,  doing  all  that  kindness  and  ingenuity  could  suggest  to 
comfort  his  afflicted  friend.  "  Surely  after  seeing  your  country  enslaved,  your 
heart  should  be  indifferent  to  so  small  a  matter  as  the  loss  of  a  poor,  weak,  tender 
woman."  And  then  Sulpicius  gravely  adds,  as  if  such  considerations  could  console 
the  afflicted,  "  Do  not  forget  that  you  are  Cicero — the  wise,  the  philosophical 
Cicero,  who  was  wont  to  give  advice  toothers.  Remember  those  judicious  counsels 
now,  and  let  it  not  be  said  that  fortitude  is  the  single  virtue  to  which  my  friend  is 
a  stranger."  Philosophy  had  not  quite  expended  itself  in  these  vapid  platitudes, 
but  the  chief  ground  of  comfort  was  reserved  for  the  last.  "  In  my  return  out  of 
Asia,"  the  well-meaning  Sulpicius  goes  on  to  say,  "as  I  was  sailing  from  Jilgina 
towards  Megara,  I  amused  myself  with  contemplating  the  circumjacent  countries. 
Behind  me  lay  ^gina,  before  me  Megara ;  on  my  right  I  saw  Pirasus,  and  on  my 
left  Corinth.  These  cities,  once  so  flourishing  and  magnificent,  now  presented 
nothing  to  my  view  but  a  sad  spectacle  of  desolation.  Alas,  I  said  to  myself,  shall 
such  a  short-lived  creature  as  man  complain,  when  one  of  his  race  falls  either  by 
the  hand  of  violence,  or  by  the  common  cause  of  nature,  while  in  this  narrow 
compass  so  many  great  and  glorious  cities,  formed  for  a  much  longer  duration,  thus 
lie  extended  in  ruins?"  Cold  comfort,  this  1  Would  such  reasoning  help  you  to 
dry  your  scalding  tears  ?  Does  it  not  seem  like  a  hollow  mockery  of  the  heart's 
great  grief?  When,  however,  "the  power  of  Curist's  resurrection"  is  known  and 
felt,  with  wbat  different  eyes  we  look  upon  the  grassy  mounds  which  cover  the 
remains  of  thr^  departed  1  The  dismal  spot  is  changed  at  once  into  a  field  sown 
with  the  seeds  of  immortality.  The  Saviour's  blood-stained  banner,  emblazoned 
with  the  cross,  which  is  carried  before  His  people,  in  their  triumphal  march,  bears 
the  cheering  inscription,  "  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life  !  "  (J.  N.  Norton.) 
The  fellowship  of  His  sufferings. — The  fellowship  of  ChrisVs  s'afferings : — I.  What 
rr  IMPLIES — a  believing  appreciation  of  them — evidenced  by  suffering  in  Christ's 
service,  for  His  sike,  with  and  for  the  benefit  of  His  people.  II.  Why  an  object 
OF  ambition.  It  implies  gratitude,  honour,  hope,  union  with  Christ.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)        These  sufferings  may  be  considered  in  two  ways.   I.  As  expiatory  of  oob 

SINS,  BORNE  BY  JeSDS  ChRIST  IK  OtJB  STEAD  IN  HiS  QUALITY  OF  SuBETY.      And  of  theSe 

we  are  partakers,  inasmuch  as,  embracing  them  by  faith,  God  imputes  them  to  us, 
and  comtnunicates  to  us  the  fruit  theieof,  namely,  Divine  and  perfect  righteousness, 
by  which,  absolved  from  all  our  sins,  we  become  acceptable  to  God  as  His  dear 
children,  and  can  never  more  be  called  to  endure  any  meritorious  or  expiatory 
sufferings  as  were  those  of  the  Saviour.  11.  As  models,  patterns  which  Jesus  has 
left  us  to  follow,  shovring  us  the  path  by  which  it  is  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father 
to  conduct  us  to  salvation.  And  thns  we  are  partakers  with  Him,  being  called  to 
'uffer  after  His  example.  And  this  fellowship  may  also  be  considered — 1.  Al 
interiot,  the  mortification  of  sin  within  us,  the  cmcifixion  of  the  old  nature,  trans 


CTU».  III.]  PHILIPPIANS.  113 

piercing  it  with  His  thorns  and  nails,  drinking  of  His  vinegar,  and  thus  putting  it 
to  death  by  degrees  ;  in  which  the  passion  of  the  Saviour  is  represented  within  our 
hearts  (Eom.  vi.  5-6  ;  Gal.  ii.  20  ;  v.  24).  2.  Exterior ;  the  part  we  have  in  the 
alBictions  and  persecutions  of  the  Church,  for  the  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  God, 
for  the  glory  of  Jesus,  for  the  edification  of  men  (Eom,  viii.  29  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  12.)  (J. 
Daille.)  The  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings : — I.  Fellowship  with  Christ  qene- 
BAi<LT.  1.  In  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour — "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,"  **  We 
are  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  "  Behold  what  manner  of  love," 
&o.  What  a  word  for  (1)  Aliensand  outcasts.  (2)  Timorous  disciples.  (3)  Happy 
believers.  (4)  Dying  saints.  2.  In  the  possession  of  the  Spirit.  To  Him  the 
Spirit  was  given  without  measure  for  the  perfect  fulfilmont  of  all  His  offices  ;  and 
because  we  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  our  hearts.  (1) 
For  conversion.  (2)  Sanctitication.  (3)  Enjoyment.  (4)  As  an  earnest  of  heaven. 
3.  In  His  merits.  (1)  The  righteousness  of  Christ  was  perfect  in  its  universality, 
motive,  duration,  spirituality.  (2)  We  may  have  feilo-vship  in  these  merits,  for 
Christ  is  "  the  Lord  our  righteousness."  4.  In  His  resurrection.  5.  In  His  glory. 
II.  Fellowship  with  Christ  in  His  sufferin'gs.  This  is  explained  by  the  following 
clause.  1.  What  is  there  in  the  saints  which  should  die  ?  Sin.  How  does  this 
principle  of  sin  manifest  itself?  In — (1)  Unbelief.  (2)  Hardness  of  heart.  (3) 
Impenitence.  (4)  Alienation  from  God.  (5)  Pride.  (6)  Envy,  (7)  Earthly- 
mindedness.  2.  How  does  this  principle  die,  so  that  we  may  be  conformed  to  the 
death  of  Christ  7  (1)  Not  by  a  natural  death,  but  a  violent  one  inflicted  by  an  out- 
side hand.  It  will  never  die  of  its  own  accord,  or  of  disease.  It  must  be  mortified, 
crucified.  (2)  Crucifixion  was  an  ignominious  death  reserved  for  slaves  and  rebels, 
and  does  not  sin  merit  such  a  death?  (3)  A  lingering  death.  And  so  sin  does  not 
die  all  at  once.  This  should  teach  us  patience,  watchfulness,  continued  looking 
unto  Jesus.  8.  How  may  we  know  that  we  have  His  fellowship  ?  By  (1)  our  hatred 
of  sin;  (2)  our  fervent  prayer  against  it ;  (3)  our  desire  for  sanctification ;  (4)  our 
joyful  anticipation  of  a  sinless  world.  {A,  Pope.)  By  the  fellowship  of  Hit 
sufferings  : — 1.  We  are  not  hire  to  understand  a  participation  in  those  He  endured 
as  the  substitute  for  sinners,  although  in  a  certain  sense  we  do  share  them,  and 
that  not  only  in  the  sense  of  enjoying  their  advantages.  They  are  ours  because 
Christ  suffered  in  our  room  and  stead.  But  here  Paul  refers  to  Christ's  sufferings 
in  general.  2.  Nor  are  we  to  understand  them  as  metaphorical ;  that  as  Christ 
died,  so  are  we  to  die  to  sin  ;  as  Christ  was  nailed  to  the  cross,  so  are  we  to  crucify 
our  corrupt  passions.  This  is  an  important  truth,  and  Paul  emphasizes  it  else- 
where. But  here  it  is  a  real  fellowship  in  positive  pain  to  which  he  adverts.  3. 
This  was  a  strange  desire,  one  which  few  of  us  would  entertain.  We  wish  to  have 
fellowship  in  joy,  and  seek  how  we  can  pass  through  life  with  the  least  incon- 
venience. It  would  not  have  been  surprising  had  the  apostle  denied  fellowship 
with  Christ  in  His  glory.  Yet  he  did  not  desire  suffering  for  its  own  sake, 
but  for  its  benefit.  He  knew  well  that  God's  order  was  first  the  cross,  then  the 
crown  ;  fellowship  with  Christ,  first  in  suffering,  then  in  glory.  I,  In  what 
B01TEBINO8  CAN  WE  HAVE  FELLOWSHIP  WITH  Chhist  ?  1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  in  His 
atoning  sufferings.  These  He  bore  alone,  and  we  onnnot  partake  in  them.  No 
man  can  make  atonement  for  his  own  or  others'  sins.  (2)  Not  in  sufferings  which 
arise  out  of  guilt.  As  we  cannot  be  partakers  in  Christ's  atoning.  He  cannot 
partake  of  our  sinful  sufferings.  In  the  accusation  of  conscience,  sense  of  guilt, 
fear  of  wrath,  loss  of  character,  evil  elTects  in  self  and  others,  He  can  have  no 
share.  He  "  was  holy,  harmless,"  <Vo.  (3)  Not  in  certain  forms  of  bodily  affliction. 
Christ  never  was  sick  or  unwell.  Of  course  there  is  an  important  sense  in  which 
He  was  a  partaker  of  this  class  of  sufferings.  His  deep  sympathy,  sensitive  ten- 
derness, made  Him  feel  the  afliictious  of  others  keenly.  2.  Positively.  We  are 
partakers  iu  those  which  arise — (1)  From  persecution  for  righteousness'  sake.  Such 
constituted  a  large  portion  of  our  Lord's.  His  whole  life  was  one  of  pereecution, 
beginning  with  His  birth,  olosipg  only  with  His  death.  In  this  respect  the  apostles 
were  conformed  to  their  Iklaster.  It  is  true,  thank  God,  that  we  are  not  now  liable 
to  sufferings  of  the  same  nature ;  but  a  man  who  maintains  a  high  standard  of 
religion,  and  condemns  the  world  by  his  conduct,  will  meet  with  persecution  in  the 
way  of  petty  annoyances,  designed  misconceptions,  and  coldness.  (2)  From  sym- 
pathy with  the  distressed.  Every  distress  Christ  witnessed  was  photographed  on 
His  soul.  "We  have  not  a  High  Priest  who  cannot  be  touched,"  &o.  In  this 
sense  believers  must  be  conformed  to  Christ.  The  same  loving,  sympathizing  spirit 
th*t  was  in  Him  must  be  in  them.     (3)  From  grief  for  sin.     Much  of  Ghnst's 


814  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  ,6a a>.  itt. 

Borrow  arose  from  nnavoidable  intercourse  with  the  wicked.  When  infinite  parity 
comes  in  contact  with  impurity,  sorrow  and  moral  indignation  must  be  the  result. 
And  so  it  is  with  true  believers.  The  state  of  the  world  around  them,  drunkenness, 
sabbath  profanation,  &c. ,  must  be  peculiarly  afflictive.  (4)  From  spiritual  distress. 
This  Christ  knew  well  in  Gethsemane  and  on  the  cross,  when  He  complained  of 
spiritual  desertion,  and  similar  sufieriugs  are  experienced  by  believers  when  the 
light  of  God's  countenance  is  obscured.  II.  The  benefits  arising  from  this 
FELLOWSHIP.  "  Sorrow  is  better  than  laughter."  Uninterrupted  prosperity  has  a 
prejudicial  influence  over  our  spiritual  nature,  and  tempts  us  to  forget  God. 
Suffering — 1.  Purifies  the  soul.  In  the  furnace  of  affliction  the  dross  of  earth  is 
removed,  passions  are  mortified ;  pride  is  humbled,  and  so  our  graces  are  confirmed 
and  strengthened.  2.  Draws  forth  the  better  qualities  of  a  man.  The  seeds  of 
virtue  germinate  in  the  hotbed  of  affliction.  3.  Enables  ns  to  comfort  others 
(2Cor.  i.  4,  (frc).  4.  Prepares  for  heaven.  ••  Our  light  afflictions,"  Ac.  Conclusion: 
Suffering  by  itself  will  not  produce  these  benefits ;  only  when  accompanied  by  the 
operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  fire  which  melts  some  substances  hardens 
others :  so  some  are  improved  by  affliction,  while  others  by  reason  of  their  own 
perverseness  are  made  worse.  (P.  J.  Gloag,  D.D.)  The  fellowship  of  Christ's 
sufferings : — I.  This  k.sowledge  of  Christ  and  His  sufferings  here  so  ardentlt 
DESIRED.  We  may  have  it — 1.  By  an  actual  participation  in  suffering  for  His 
sake.  Many  persons  of  affected  sensibility  feel  a  sort  of  delight  in  following  Christ 
into  the  judgment  hall  and  to  Calvary  who  have  no  heart  to  make  sacrifice  for 
His  service.  Their  hearts  seem  moved,  but  when  persecution  arises  they  walk 
no  more  with  Him.  2.  By  the  cordial  reception  of  the  benefits  secured  to  as 
by  His  sufferings  in  the  exercise  of  a  lively  faith.  (1)  Pardon.  (2)  Purity.  (3) 
Beconciliation  and  peace.  (4)  Life  spiritual  and  eternal.  3.  By  a  tender  sympathy 
with  all  His  followers  in  the  sufferings  they  endure.  All  the  members  of  the  body 
feel  if  one  be  afflicted,  so  do  all  the  members  of  the  body  of  Christ.  II.  The 
GROUNDS  OF  THIS  PREFERENCE.  1.  The  knowledge  transcends  all  other  as  to  its 
importance.  All  else  is  earthly  and  therefore  transient ;  this  affects  the  dearest  and 
eternal  interests  of  men.  2.  It  is  infinitely  more  valuable  than  testimony  or  theory. 
(T  Raffles,  D.D.)  The  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings: — Historically  the  disciplef 
found  themselves  incapable  of  entering  into  the  fellowship  and  sufferings  of  Jesus 
till  touched  by  the  power  of  His  resurrection.  They  gathered  with  Him  round  tha 
supper  table,  and  gazed  into  His  sorrowful  countenance,  but  could  not  understand 
the  mystery  of  His  sufferings.  There  was  a  veil  upon  their  heart,  and  a  strange 
indescribable  barrier  between  them  and  Him.  "  They  were  amazed  "  as  Jesus  went 
before  them  to  Jerusalem,  "  and  as  they  followed  they  were  afraid."  They  stood 
beside  Him  bravely  for  a  moment  in  the  garden,  but  when  they  saw  Him  bound  and 
helpless  when  they  expected  miraculous  power,  they  all  forsook  Him  and  fled.  How 
different  it  was  when  these  very  men  saw  things  as  in  the  light  of  the  glory  that 
burst  from  that  broken  tomb ;  then  they  began  to  understand  all  that  Moses  and 
the  prophets  had  spoken,  and  their  hearts  burned  within  them  as  they  began  for 
the  first  time  to  enter  into  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings.  A  little  further  on  in 
their  history,  and  the  power  of  the  risen  Christ  has  come  down  in  the  flood-tide  of 
Pentecost,  and  what  a  change  is  wroupht.  They  who  shrank  back  from  suffering — 
that  Peter  who  was  ready  to  say,  "  That  be  far  from  Thee,  Lord,"  and  denied  his 
Master — that  man  gathers  his  fellows  round  him,  and  they  lift  up  the  voice  of 
praise,  rejoicing  that  they  are  counted  worthy  to  suffer  persecution  for  the  sake 
of  Christ.  And  as  it  was  with  them  historically,  so  it  seems  to  be  doctrinally  here. 
Do  we  desire  that  the  Lord  may  nerve  us  to  participate  in  His  sufferings  ?  In  pro- 
portion to  the  tide  of  new  resurrection,  life  is  strong  in  as.  Shall  we  dare  to  stretch 
out  our  trembling  hand  to  grasp  His  cup  ?  I.  The  fellowship  of  His  sufferings. 
The  word  "  fellowship  "  occurs  in  the  case  of  the  partnership  which  existed  between 
the  fishermen  of  Galilee,  and  in  the  case  of  the  early  Christians,  who  "  had  all 
things  common."  So  we  are  not  only  permitted  to  sympathize  with  Christ  as  the 
Man  of  sorrows,  but  that,  just  as  two  partners  in  a  firm  are  both  joint  possessors  of 
the  capital  which  belongs  to  the  firm,  so  that  wondrous  wealth  of  sorrow  which 
belonged  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  so  far  as  it  is  a  source  of  wealth,  belongs  m  a 
measure  to  as,  who  are  partners  with  Him.  As  the  wealth  of  the  disciples  was 
thrown  into  one  fund,  and  distributed  amongst  all,  so  the  wealth  of  sorrow  which 
belonged  to  our  great  Head  is  thrown  into  one  fund  with  all  the  sorrows  of  those 
who  are  His  members,  and  we  are  partakers  with  Him  of  that  which  is  no  longer  to 
Df  a  source  of  loss,  but,  on  the  contrary,  a  perennial  source  of  gain.     And  to  thic 


CHAJ.  nt]  PHILIPPIANS,  Sll 

common  fund  we  are  each  of  as  permitted  in  our  measnre  to  oontribnte  (Col.  i.  24). 
II.  The  fellowship  or  His  buffeeings.  1.  Fellowship  with  the  sufferer.  Mer» 
Buffering  will  do  nothing  for  us.  We  may  torture  ourselves  if  we  will,  but  shall 
continue  as  ungodlike  as  before.  What  we  want  is  to  suffer  in  the  right  way,  and 
that  is  in  fellowship  with  Christ.  How  did  He  suffer?  Not  by  entailing  suffering 
on  Himself,  or  courting  it  for  its  own  sake.  He  was  the  Man  of  sorrows  because  it 
was  His  meat  to  do  His  Father's  will.  Considerations  of  pleasure  and  pain  were 
subordinate.  Psalm  cxviii.  27,  is  prophetic  of  the  passion.  (1)  God's  light — the 
light  of  the  Divine  purpose  resting  upon  the  problem  of  human  life — indicated  the 
way  that  led  to  Calvary.  It  led  the  Son  into  the  darkness ;  yet  it  was  not  the  lesa 
precious  to  the  heart  of  the  Son  for  that.  And  we,  too,  if  we  would  have  real 
fellowship  with  Jesus,  must  see  to  it  that  our  fellowship  is  intelligent  fellowship. 
Some  of  the  broken-hearted  followers  of  Christ  gathered  round  His  cross,  and 
certainly  suffered  while  He  suffered.  Yet  had  they  no  real  fellowship  in  His 
iufferings,  because  they  had  not  risen  to  the  discovery  of  His  design.  Is  it  not  too 
often  so  even  with  us  ?  We  have  our  sorrows  ;  but  the  ray  of  light  has  not  yet 
entered  oar  souls,  and  the  result  is  that  we  have  no  fellowship  with  Christ  in  onr 
Bufferings ;  and  this,  not  so  much  because  God  is  unwilling  to  give  us  the  light,  as 
because  we  shrink,  like  Peter,  from  the  illumination  which  reveals  the  cross,  and 
thus  His  light  becomes  obscured,  and  we  lose  the  moral  power  which  should  have 
raised  us  into  fellowship  with  His  sufferings.  (2)  How  strong  were  the  cords  with 
which  Christ  was  bound  I  It  was  not  the  brute  force  of  the  soldiers,  nor  the  man- 
date of  the  governor,  nor  even  the  cruel  nails  that  fastened  Him  to  the  tree.  These 
He  could  have  broken,  but  there  were  other  cords,  and  oh  how  strong,  that  bound 
Him  there.  There  was  the  cord  of — (a)  Obedience.  The  Father's  will  had  revealed 
itself,  and  that  was  law  to  Him.  {b)  Love,  and  that  glowed  with  furnace  heat 
towards  God  and  man  that  proved  itself  stronger  than  death.  Blpssed  are  they 
whose  love  grows  with  sorrow.  It  is  only  thus  that  we  rise  to  true  fellowship  with 
the  Bufferings  of  Christ,  (c)  Faith.  His  very  enemies  bore  witness  that  He  trusted 
in  God.  His  last  words  upon  the  cross  testified  that  His  trust  remained  unshaken. 
If  we  would  rise  into  fellowship  with  His  sufferings,  it  must  be  by  stepping 
forward  in  the  spirit  of  faith,  even  though  it  should  be  into  a  burn- 
ing, fiery  furnace.  Suffering  erases  to  be  sanctified  when  it  is  infected  with 
mistrust.  2.  Our  privilege  of  fellowship  in  the  sufferings.  Much  was  borne 
that  we  might  not  have  to  bear  ;  but  as  I  gaze  at  yonder  cross  I 
interpret  the  nature  of  our  fellowship  in  the  light  of  the  next  clause. 
Take  the  voices  which  sound  from  the  dying  Son  of  Man,  (1)  "  Father,  forgive 
them  ;  they  know  not  what  they  do  I  "  Can  I  have  fellowship  in  that  J  I  believe 
there  is  not  one  of  us  that  follows  our  Lord  fully,  but  we  shall  be  more  or  less 
misunderstood,  misinterpreted,  but  let  us  endeavour  to  enter  into  sympathy  with 
the  heart  and  mind  of  Jesus ;  and  then,  if  a  rough  word  is  spoken,  or  a  brother 
does  not  seem  to  understai)d  us,  Christ's  prayer  will  rise  to  our  lips.  (2)  "  I 
thirst."  Thank  God  our  thirst  shall  never  be  what  His  was.  Yet  I  am  reminded, 
«'  Blessed  are  they  that  thirst,"  &c.  And  do  not  be  cast  down  that  you  have  not 
received  the  fulness  of  blessing.  Is  it  not  something  that  your  thirst  for  God  and 
rig'nteousness  makes  you  in  a  sense  partaker  of  the  sufferings  of  Jesus.  (3^ 
•'  Woman,  behold  thy  son  1  Son,  behold  thy  mother."  In  that  I  see  something 
that  I  may  have  fellowship  with.  In  the  midst  of  all  His  agony  He  found  time  to 
think  upon  the  sorrows  of  His  broken-hearted  mother  and  His  lonely  disciple,  and 
to  mingle  their  griefs  with  His  own.  How  is  human  sorrow  sanctified  by  such  a 
revelation  as  this  ?  Does  bereavement  come  ?  The  same  pangs  that  shot  through 
my  Saviour's  heart  are  become  mine,  and  I  am  a  partaker  with  Him.  (4)  "  My 
God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  T  "  He  was  forsaken  in  order  that  you  and  I 
might  not  be  forsaken.  And  yet,  let  us  consider  what  it  was  that  caused  that  cry  : 
it  was  the  dark  shadow  of  imputed  sin  coming  between  His  soul  and  God.  And  as 
we  enter  into  the  fellowship  of  the  sufferings  of  Jesus,  our  views  of  sin  will  become 
more  keen  and  clear,  and  also  bring  along  with  them  a  more  painful  emotion  than 
could  otherwise  be  ours.  Let  me  enter  into  the  fellowship  of  the  sufferings  of 
Jesus,  that  will  make  me  hate  sin.  (5)  "  This  day  shalt  Thou  be  with  Me  in 
Paradise."  Parched  are  Hi.s  lips,  and  His  heart  breaking;  yet  when  that  dying 
malefactor's  cry  reaches  His  ear,  His  eye  is  turned  upon  that  poor  dying  man,  and 
the  word  of  peace  and  pardon  is  spoken ;  and  the  suffering  Son  of  Man  takes  on 
Himself  the  burden  of  the  dying  sufferer  at  His  side.  Oh  for  a  heart  to  sorrow  in 
»U  the  sorrows  of  humanity!     (6)  "It  is  finished."    Oh  to  be  partakers  with 


21f  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  m. 

Christ  in  the  glory  of  that  last  cry,  which  is  the  triumphant  issne  of  suffering. 
When  the  will  has  been  so  fully  yielded  that  God  has  been  able  to  work  out  Hia 
own  purpose  in  us,  and  to  reveal  His  Son  in  us,  then  may  it  one  day  come  to  our 
turn  to  exclaim  with  St.  Paul,  "  I  have  finished  my  course."  3.  Fellowship  in  the 
result  of  His  sufierings.  He,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  was  made  "perfect 
through  suffering."  Even  so,  while  there  never  was  a  time  that  the  will  of  the  Man 
Christ  Jesus  was  oj^posed  to  the  will  of  the  Father,  yet  there  was  a  time  when  ita 
obedience  was  not  completed,  and  thus  He  learnt  obedience  by  the  things  which  He 
suffered.  If  we  learn  what  it  is  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  death,  as  our 
wilfulness  and  waywardness  learn  to  submit  themselves  to  the  gentle  discipline  of 
suffering,  and  if  in  each  fresh  cross  we  find  a  fresh  revelation  of  the  loving  will  of  the 
Father,  how  calm,  how  resurrection-like  our  lives  must  needs  become  !  {W.M,  H.  H, 
Aitken,  M.A.)         The  fellowship  of  Christ's  siij'eri7}gs  : — I.  There  aee  senses  in 

WHICH  WE    CAN  HAVB    NO  COMMUNITY    WITH    OUB   LoED    IN    HiS   SCFFEBINGS.         1.    They 

were  distinct  in  kind  from  ours.  (1)  They  were  meritorious,  whereas  we  can 
never  have  any  merit  in  God's  sight.  (2)  Voluntary,  whereas  all  ours  are 
deserved  being  entailed  by  sin.  2.  They  were  distinct  in  degree.  (1)  In  all 
their  bitterness  they  were  foreseen,  whereas  oura  are  hidden,  and  come  in  drops 
only.  (2)  In  absolute  magnitude.  He  bore  the  whole  burden  of  human  suffer- 
ing. Our  sympathies  are  mighty,  but  the  facts  on  which  they  are  founded,  and 
the  persons  they  concern,  are  limited.  (3)  In  capacity  for  suffering  He  surpassed 
us.  It  is  a  token  of  God's  mercy  aa  well  as  our  iufirmity  that  we  are  benumbed 
by  pain.  The  crash  which  lights  on  a  man  and  maims  him,  leaves  him  feeling 
for  a  moment  unhurt.  And  so  with  great  mental  suffering.  Often  in  the 
course  of  mighty  calamities  the  chief  sufferer  endures  less  than  those  who  pity 
him.  But  when  in  the  depth  of  the  valley  of  humiliation  Christ  was  ever 
awake  to  each  particular  of  His  great  load  of  woe,  and  when  they  offered  Him 
the  stupefying  potion  He  put  it  from  Him.  (4)  In  the  matter  and  form  and  nature 
of  His  suffering  He  surpassed  us.  What  was  it  that  wrung  that  "  My  soul  is 
exceeding  sorrowful."  Was  it  the  mere  prospect  of  pain  and  shame  ?  Can  we 
suppose  that  that  courage  which  has  often  borne  on  the  sons  of  men  to  torture  and 
ignominy,  foreseen  and  chosen,  was  not  present  in  Him  ?  No.  Death  had  a  sting, 
but  it  was  not  pain,  nor  shame;  it  was  sin.     II.  But  heke  we  touch  a  point 

WHEEE  WE  MAY  ENTER  INTO  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  HiS  SUFFERINGS.       If    He    becams  siu 

for  us  we  are  the  sinners.  Imputed  guilt  crushed  Him  ;  shall  actual  guilt  bring  to  ua 
no  similar  suffering  ?  Of  this  the  natural  man  knows  nothing.  Terror  on  account 
of  sin  may  throw  over  his  soul  its  dark  shadow,  but  this  is  not  fellowship  with 
Christ's  sufferings.  1.  Whence,  then,  does  this  fellowship  date  ?  When  first  the 
Holy  Spirit  convinces  of  the  hatefulness  of  sin.  2.  This  fellowship  is  an  acquire- 
ment worthy  of  our  highest  ambition.  We  may  avoid  it,  and  live  as  we  think  • 
far  more  comfortable  life.  Shall  we  with  the  dread  of  death  ever  before  us  ?  Is  it 
not  worth  while  to  get  rid  of  this  with  all  its  grievous  bondage  ?  3.  The  Christian 
shculd  need  no  such  argument,  for  the  very  purpose  of  his  existence  is  to  be 
conformed  to  Christ,  but  this  he  cannot  be  without  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings. 
The  Captain  of  our  salvation  was  made  perfect  through  them ;  so  must  we  be. 
(Dean  Alford.)  The  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings: — It  seems  an  awful  wish 
that  any  mortal  should  dare  to  aspire  to  share  the  sufferings  of  the  Man  of 
sorrows ;  stranger  still  when  we  remember  the  actual  sufferings  of  that  mortal ; 
stranger  still  that  He  should  tell  us  to  wish  it  for  ourselves.  I.  The  nature 
OP  THIS  FELLOWSHIP.  1.  It  is  uot  any  imitation  of  Christ's  sufferings.  Paul 
might  have  had  them  as  had  the  impenitent  thief,  without  any  fellowship  with 
Christ.  We,  too,  may  suffer  beside  Christ  without  suffering  with  Him.  2.  The 
sufferings  of  Christ  were  peculiarly  His  own.  Every  heart  knows  its  own 
bitterness.  (1)  We  shall  not  find  them  in  the  outward  circumstances  of  Hia 
life.  There  have  been  more  painful  lives  and  agonizing  deaths  than  His.  (2) 
We  see  their  intensity  in  the  fact  that  Christ's  life  was  perfectly  holy.  He 
loved  God  perfectly  in  a  world  where  God  was  not  loved,  where  His  law  was  broken, 
and  His  name  defamed.  And  remember  He  saw  iniquity  as  none  else  could  see  it ; 
and  yet  He  loved  the  men  whose  sin  He  loathed,  and  because  He  loved  them  He 
bore  the  awful  burden  of  their  sin.  (3)  In  this  our  Lord's  life  followed  a  universal 
law.  It  is  a  law  of  organic  life,  that  the  lowest  form  of  it  has  least  power  of  suffer- 
ing ;  the  highest  form  of  it  most.  The  eye  that  is  the  quickest  to  see  beauty  ia 
inost  pained  by  deformity ;  the  ear  that  most  loves  harmony  is  most  pained  by 
diKottL    Bat  give  a  spiritual  eje  that  loves  the  beauty  oi  hoUuess ;  a  spiritual  ^r 


CHAP,  ra.]  PHILIPPIAN8.  117 

that  loves  the  hainnony  of  rigbteonsness,  and  place  them  in  the  midst  of  disorder 
and  evil,  and  you  have  a  nature  that,  just  because  it  is  perfect,  must  be  sorrowfuL 
8.  Now  we  see  what  is  meant  by  this  fellowship.  Paul  wished  to  be  raised  in  the 
scale  of  being,  and  he  knew  that  he  could  not  have  Christ's  holiness  without  Christ's 
Badness,  His  grace  without  His  grief.  Such  must  be  the  law  of  our  life.  If  we 
would  come  nearer  Christ  we  must  have  His  sufferings.  You  may  escape  them,  but 
only  by  descending  in  the  scale  of  being,  just  as  a  deaf  man  escapes  the  pain  of 
discord,  the  palsied  the  pain  of  touch.  4.  Is  this  a  gloomy  view  of  religion? 
Tea,  to  those  who  have  mistaken  what  religion  is,  to  the  selfish,  the  cowardly, 
and  the  slothful,  whose  religion  is  only  a  device  for  getting  to  heaven  as  com- 
fortably as  they  can.  II.  Its  eeward.  1.  Those  who  share  the  pains  of  Christ 
are  entitled  to  His  joys.  The  same  capacity  for  pain  that  marks  the  highest 
nature  also  shows  its  capacity  for  pleasure.  The  joy  of  Christ  was  in  the  love  He 
bore  His  Father,  although  that  also  made  His  grief.  If  He  grieved  that  the  world 
had  not  known  His  Father,  it  was  joy  to  Him  to  gather  those  to  whom  He  tanght 
the  Father's  love.  If  it  was  grief  to  the  Good  Shepherd  to  see  the  sheep  wa>idering, 
it  was  joy  to  bring  it  back  to  the  fold.  And  for  this  joy  He  endured  the  cross. 
And  it  may  be  our  joy  to  do  likewise,  and  to  have  the  brighter  fellowship  even  in 
the  meanness  of  your  toil.  2.  In  every  pain  yon  endure  for  Christ  there  is  a 
prophecy  of  the  glory  that  you  shall  yet  share  with  Christ.  God  has  made  nothing 
for  pain.  For  every  creature  God  has  provided  its  proper  element,  and  for  every 
desire  its  lawful  gratification.  If,  then,  God  has  made  a  new  creature  in  Christ 
Jesus,  He  has  provided  for  it  an  element  and  gratification  for  its  spiritual  desires. 
The  plant  that  struggles  toward  the  light  testifies  that  light  is  its  proper  element; 
the  captive  eagle  that  spreads  its  wings  in  vain  testifies  that  its  proper  home  is  in 
the  broad  fields  of  air.  And  when  the  soul  of  the  Christian  pines  for  the  light, 
and  its  wiugs  of  faith  and  hope  spread  themselves,  unable  to  bear  him  to 
the  home  he  loves,  it  is  a  certain  proof  thnt  there  is  a  light,  a  freedom,  and  a 
blessedness  in  the  place  onr  Lord  has  gone  to  prepare,  and  he  welcomes  the 
pain  as  preparing  him  for   the  place.       (Bishop  Magee.)  The  fellowship  of 

ChrisVt  sufferings : — L  In  what  respects  a  Christian  mat  have  fellowship 
WITH  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  HIS  Master.  1.  By  Comprehending  their  character, 
objects,  and  results.  (1)  Those  who  think  of  them  as  chiefly  corporeal,  or 
proceeding  from  the  treatment  of  men,  or  from  natural  causes,  cannot  share  this 
fellowship.  The  body  was  tortured,  but  "my  soul  is  troubled."  There  was  no 
cross  in  the  garden;  nor  does  the  prospect  of  suffering  explain  the  agony  there; 
nor  the  endurance  His  cry.  *'  God  hath  put  Him  to  grief,"  and  those  who  regard 
His  sorrows  as  tho.se  of  a  martyr  can  have  no  fellowship  with  Him  who  was 
*'  wounded  for  our  transgressions."  (2)  They  who  limit  the  effect  of  these  suffer- 
ings to  their  moral  influence  can  have  no  fellowship  with  Him.  It  is  true  that 
Christ  has  set  all  mourners  an  example;  but  "He  also  offered  Himself  without 
spot."  G"d  setting  him  forth  as  a  propitiation  is  something  distinct  from  setting 
us  an  example.  (3)  But  the  belief  of  this  is  not  everything,  notwithstanding  what 
doctrinal  Pharispes  may  say.  The  devils  have  it  but  are  not  better  for  it,  and  a 
man  may  be  sound  in  his  ideas  about  these  things  without  caring  an  atom  for 
them.  2.  By  faith  in  them  as  real  and  efficacious,  and  by  appropriating  their 
fruits  to  ourselves.  When  I  feel  and  know  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth 
me  from  sin  I  have  the  highest  kind  of  this  fellowship.  I  may  not  know  all  that 
God  has  revealed  about  the  blood  of  Jesus,  nor  be  able  to  satisfy  a  theologian,  but 
just  as  I  know  that  the  sun  gives  me  light,  and  food  nourishment,  so  I  may  know 
that  Christ's  blood  takes  away  sin,  3.  By  suffering  as  far  as  possible  in  His  Spirit. 
There  were  sorrows  into  which  we  cannot  follow  Him,  and  His  Spirit  was  so  perfect 
that  our  imitation  must  be  very  imperfect.  But  we  have  fellowship  thus  :  (1)  The 
lowly  born  and  despised  disciple  may  have  fellowship  with  the  sufferings  of  Him 
whom  sinners  contemned  because  He  was  the  carpenter's  son.  (2)  The  poor  may 
have  fellowship  with  Him  who  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head.  (3)  The  hidden 
disciple,  called  to  stand  and  wait,  may  have  fellowship  with  Him  who  lived,  with 
but  one  exception,  in  the  seclusion  of  Nazareth  for  thirty  years.  (4)  The  tempted 
likewise.  (5)  The  despised.  (6)  The  forsaken.  (7)  The  agonized ;  and  (8)  The 
dying.  II.  Wherefore  is  this  fellowship  pesirable  ?  1.  Our  enjoyment  of 
the  everlasting  benefits  of  Christ's  sufferings  is  dependent  on  this  fellowship.  2. 
It  assists  our  comprehension  of  Christ's  love.  8.  We  learn  to  value  more  highly 
what  has  been  secured  by  Christ's  suffering.  4.  It  tends  to  relieve  the  harden  of 
cur  aorrowib    6.  It  extinguishes  our  love  for  the  world.    III.  How  hat  1  axtah 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  to. 

rr?  Lite  Paul,  you  must  count  all  things  lo^s.  Such  knowledge  requires  much 
Bacrifice.  1.  If  you  pride  yourself  on  your  family  you  oan  have  no  fellowship  with 
Him  who  endured  contempt  as  the  carpenter's  son.  2.  If  your  great  aim  is  to  be 
wealthy  you  can  have  no  fellowship  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ  in  His  poverty,  3, 
If  your  object  is  applause,  what  communion  can  there  be  between  you  and  "  the 
despised  and  rejected  of  men  "?  (S.  Martin.)  The  fellowship  of  Christ's  suffer- 
ings : — I.  In  relation  to  pain.  1.  The  pains  of  life  are  as  various  as  bodies  and 
souls.  Our  sensibilities  are  very  various ;  one  thing  hurta  one  person  and  another 
another ;  what  is  agony  to  me  my  neighbour  scarcely  feels.  This  is  true  of  the 
roughnesses  of  life,  its  calumnies,  its  disappointments ;  of  those  trials  which  come 
through  the  affections,  and  those  which  come  through  the  ambitions  of  our  nature. 
And  tliose  to  whom  sorrow  does  not  come  go  in  quest  of  it;  they  have  self-made 
troubles  as  hard  to  endure  as  those  God  sends.  Nay,  there  is  this  compensation, 
that  real  suffering  drives  out  imaginary,  and  where  the  lot  is  that  of  want  or 
anguish  the  distresses  of  mere  sentiment  are  excluded.  But  no  Christian  escapes 
distress  of  some  kind.  2.  But  in  all  this  there  is  lacking  as  yet  the  essential 
feature  of  a  fellowship  in  Christ's  sufferings.  For  this  faith  is  needful,  and  devo- 
tion, snbmission,  the  support  of  a  heavenly  arm,  and  the  expectation  of  a  heavenly 
home.  St.  Paul's  life  was  Christ.  AU  his  desires,  interests,  objects,  were  swallowed 
up  in  the  hving  to  Christ's  glory.  It  was  in  this  sort  of  life  that  trouble  met  Him 
(2  Cor.  vi.  5).  What  becomes  of  as  when  we  drag  ourselves  into  this  comparison. 
But  if  we  suffer  no  great  things  on  Christ's  behalf,  let  us  see  at  least  that  common 
life  is  lived  in  remembrance  of  Him,  life's  pleasures  subordinated  to  His  will,  life's 
anxieties,  sorrows,  sicknesses,  endured  patiently  in  His  strength.  II.  In  bela- 
TioN  TO  SIN.  In  the  highest  sense  we  cannot  share  Christ's  sufferings,  and, 
thank  God,  need  not.  He  has  done  alL  We  can  add  nothing.  But  that 
conflict  with  sin,  with  its  assaults,  wiles,  contradictions,  and  perversenesses, 
temptations  which  He  waged,  every  one  of  His  servants  must  have  his  share,  and 
that  conflict  means  suffering,  as  every  man  who  has  had  to  do  battle  with  a 
besetting  sin  will  bear  witness.  He  carries  its  scars  yet,  and  will  carry  them  to  hia 
grave.  As  Christ,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  resisted  unto  blood,  striving 
against  sin,  so  must  we,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  conflict  remember  that  He  is  with 
you  (1  John  iv.  4 ;  2  Kings  vi.  15-17).  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Christ  suffering  in  Hit 
members : — Some  two  hundred  years  ago,  there  was  a  dark  period  of  suffering  in 
Scotland,  when  deeds  of  bloody  cruelty  were  committed  on  God's  peopl«,  not  out- 
done by  Indian  butcheries.  One  day  the  tide  is  flowing  in  Solway  Firth,  rushing 
like  a  race  horse  with  snowy  mane  to  the  shore.  It  is  occupied  by  groups  of  weep- 
ing spectators.  They  keep  their  eyes  fixed  on  two  objects  out  upon  the  wet  sands. 
There,  two  women,  each  tied  fast  by  tiieir  arms  and  limbs  to  a  stake,  stand  within 
the  sea  mark ;  and  many  an  earnest  prayer  is  going  up  to  heaven  that  Christ  who 
bends  from  His  throne  to  the  sight  would  help  them  now  in  their  dreadful  hour  of 
need.  The  elder  of  the  two  is  staked  furthest  out.  Margaret,  the  younger  martyr, 
stands  bound,  a  fair  sacrifice,  near  by  the  shore.  Well,  on  the  big  billows  come, 
hissing  to  their  naked  feet ;  on,  and  further  on  they  come,  death  riding  on  the  top 
of  the  waves,  and  eyed  by  these  tender  women  with  unflinching  courage.  The 
waters  rise  and  rise,  till,  amid  a  scream  and  cry  of  horror  from  the  shore,  the 
lessening  form  of  her  that  had  death  first  to  face,  is  lost  in  the  foam  of  the  surging 
wave.  It  recedes,  but  only  to  return,  and  now,  the  sufferer  gasping  for  breath, 
her  death  struggle  is  begun;  and  now  for  Margaret's  trial,  and  her  noble  answer. 
"What  see  you  yonder?"  said  their  murderers  as  they  pointed  to  her  fellow  con- 
fessor in  the  suffocating  agonies  of  a  protracted  death.  Kesponse  full  of  the  boldest 
faith,  and  brightest  hope ;  she  finnly  answered,  "  I  see  Christ  suffering  in  one  of  His 
own  members."  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Tlie  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings  : — A 
dear  suffering  Christian  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  which  has  now  proved  the  portal  of 
heaven,  shrank  for  a  while  from  the  prospect  of  prolonged  anguish  which  opened 
before  her.  In  the  vision  of  the  morning  there  appeared  to  her  a  minute  crown 
twined  here  and  there  with  thorns,  and  by  the  side  of  this  tiny  ensign  of  the 
Saviour's  deep,  abounding  love,  lay  another  crown,  composed  wholly  of  thorns, 
large  murderous  spines,  such  as  doubtless  composed  the  wreath  of  painful  mockery 
that  bound  the  brow  of  the  Son  of  God,  "I  thought,"  said  she,  "the  angels  might 
have  brought  it ;  for  some  one  seemed  to  say,  pointing  to  the  large  heavy  crown,  *  I 
wore  this  for  thee ;  wear  thine  for  Me,'  "  and  meekly  she  bent  her  head,  and  wore 
the  wreath,  and  now  she  has  laid  it  by  for  the  crown  which  she  wears,  {Anna 
Shipton.)        Sweetness  of  fellowship  with  Christ : — Oh  I  how  sweet  a  cross  it  is  t« 


-OTAF,  m.]  PTIILIPPIANS.  «19 

«ee  a  cross  betwixt  Clirist  and  ns ;  to  hear  our  Redeemer  say,  at  every  sigb,  and 
every  blow,  and  every  loss  of  a  believer,  "  Half  mine ! "  (S.  Rutherford.)  Fellow- 
ship with  Christ'g  suffering : — An  intimate  friend  of  Handel's  called  upon  him  just  as 
he  was  in  the  middle  of  setting  the  words  of  "  He  was  despised  "  to  music,  and 
found  the  great  composer  sobbing  with  tears,  so  greatly  had  this  passage  and  the 
rest  of  his  morning's  woik  affectt d  the  master.  {J\htsical  Anecdotes.)  Vicarious 
suffering  common : — Suffering  in  human  life  is  very  widely  vicarious.  Everyman 
feels  this  in  himself ;  one  part  of  his  bei:  g  paj'ing  another's  penalty.  If  he  loves 
overmuch,  it  is  not  love  that  suffers,  but  conscientiousness.  If  his  passions  are 
unduly  excited,  it  is  his  moral  nature  that  feels  the  transgression.  If  the  brain  be 
overwrought,  the  body  feels  it.  The  first  lesson  of  life  is  one  of  vicarious  suffering. 
As  we  go  to  the  ship  to  see  friends  depart,  and  leave  them  with  cheers  and  benedic- 
tions, and  wafted  kisses  ;  so,  when  a  young  spirit  is  about  to  be  launched  into  this 
earthly  life,  one  would  think  that  troops  of  angels  would  attend  it,  and  with  hope 
and  gladness  see  it  on  its  way.  But  no.  Silently  it  passes  the  bounds  of  the  un- 
seen land ;  and  the  gate  which  opens  to  admit  it  to  this  is  a  gate  of  tears  and 
moans.  Through  the  sorrow  of  another  is  it  ushered  into  existence.  Love  cannot 
clasp  all  it  yearns  for  in  its  bosom,  without  first  suffering  for  it.  The  child  lives 
upon  its  patent's  life.  The  child  which  has  no  one  to  suffer  for  it  is  a  miserable 
wretch.  And  from  this  point  onward,  in  every  relation  of  life,  one  man  suffers  for 
another's  ben«^it.  It  is  the  law  of  social  life ;  and  I  do  not  see  why  we  should 
think  it  strange  that  Christ  obeyed  the  same  law,  only  in  a  grander  way.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Fellowship  with  svffering  longed  for  : — Thuanus  tells,  that  a  Gallic 
lovi  being  led  forth  to  martyrdom  in  company  with  some  equally  faithful,  though 
plebeian  professors,  saw  that  out  of  regard  to  his  rank  the  officers  put  on  him  no 
chains,  while  each  of  his  brethren  bore  them ;  upon  which  he  cried,  "  Let  me,  I 
pray  yon,  be  clipped  of  none  of  my  honours  ;  I,  too,  for  love  of  Jesus,  would  wear  a 
chain!"  {S.  Coley.)  Being  made  conformable  unto  His  death. — The  death  of 
Christ  is  presented  to  us  in  three  different  lights.  1.  As  the  noblest  expression  of 
Divine  love  for  man;  as  the  infinitely  meritorious  price  of  our  redemption;  as  the 
only  safe  ground  of  a  trembling  sinner's  hope.  2.  As  the  strongest  and  most  en- 
dearing motive  to  holiness  of  life — "  constraining  us."  3.  As  a  suitable  pattern  for 
imitation,  which  is  the  meaning  here.  I.  Let  ds  analyse  this  eminently  dis- 
TiNouisHiNQ  FEATUKE  OF  CHRISTIAN  ATTAINMENT.  There  is  Conformity — 1.  To  the 
principles  involved  in  the  Saviour's  death.  It  was  not  merely  an  affecting  and 
mysterious  historical  event.  It  represents  the  principles  which  lie  at  the  foundation 
of  God's  moral  character  and  government,  and  are  most  vitally  connected  with 
man's  hopes  as  a  guilty  and  helpless  being.  (1)  These  principles  are — (a)  That 
Jehovah  is  a  just  and  holy  Being,  and  that  evil  cannot  dwell  with  Him.  (6)  That 
the  Divine  administration  implies  the  punishment  of  sin  as  well  as  the  reward  of 
righteousness,  (c)  That  the  moral  law  of  God  is  a  transcript  of  His  own  character, 
and  as  such,  must  be  vindicated  in  all  its  honours  and  claims,  (d)  That  God  has 
an  unalterable  right  to  the  obedience  of  His  creatures,  (e)  That  satisfaction  must 
be  given  to  the  demands  of  the  perfect  law  before  transgressors  can  be  admitted  to 
mercy.  (/)  That  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission  of  sins.  (2)  To  these 
principles  the  mind  of  the  believer  must  and  will  be  conformed,  (a)  He  acquiesces 
in  them  as  essential  and  worthy  of  God.  (b)  He  looks  on  man  as  a  guilty  being 
and  on  God  as  a  righteous  judge,  (c)  He  adores  and  admires  the  holiness  as  well 
as  the  love  of  Jehovah,  (d)  He  contempla*es  with  delight  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross 
the  harmony  of  the  Divine  attributes,  (e)  And  in  opposition  to  the  infidel  who 
derides  the  scheme,  the  Socinian  who  extracts  from  it  all  its  value,  the  Pharisee 
who  seeks  to  achieve  a  salvation  for  himself,  he  exclaims,  "God  forbid"  (Gal.  vi. 
16;  1  Cor.  ii.  2).  2.  In  the  motives  which  prompted  to  it.  (1)  Love  to  God  and 
man;  the  former  because  God's  honour  required  vindication;  the  latter  because 
man  needed  mercy.  This  love,  of  course,  passeth  knowledge,  and  in  a  sense  cannot 
be  imitated;  but  still  in  the  experience  of  its  lenefits  we  may  be  conformed  to  it 
and  cherish  a  corresponding  feeling  towards  God  aud  man,  by  giving  to  our  Creator 
and  Redeemer  the  highest  place  in  our  affections  and  service,  and  by  devoting  our- 
selves  to  the  welfare  of  mankind.  (2)  A  holy  desire  to  glorify  God  in  the  destruc- 
tion of  sin  and  the  advancement  of  universal  holiness.  We  are  conformed  to  this 
wnen  the  Divine  glory  is  the  end  of  all  our  actions,  and  when  we  wage  war  against 
sin.  3.  In  the  ends  for  which  He  died.  (1)  As  a  witness  for  truth;  and  we  must 
conform  ourselves  to  this  by  acknowledging  the  reality  and  Divine  original  of  truth 
thus  attested.    (2)  To  expiate  the  guilt  of  sin :  to  conform  to  this  we  must  repent 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

believe,  and  accept  His  salvation  fully,  and  seek  the  salvation  of  others.  4.  In  th© 
temper  and  spirit  of  His  death.  He  suffered — (1)  Voluntarily  and  cheerfully — da 
we  suffer  willingly?  (2)  With  patience  and  resignation — are  we  stubborn?  (3) 
With  meek  benevolence — are  we  revengeful?  (4)  In  the  exercise  of  lively  faith — 
do  VB  giv«  way  to  despair?  II,  We  shall  deduce  from  the  subject  those  illus- 
trations  OF  THE   SCHEME   OF   PRACTICAL  CHRISTIANITY  IT   IS   FITTED   TO  UNFOLD.      We 

have  an  illustration  of — 1.  The  practical  character  of  the  doctrine  of  the  atone- 
ment. Having  for  one  of  its  main  objects  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin  and 
the  promotion  of  universal  holiness,  it  is  fitted  to  cherish  a  love  of  practical 
godliness.  2.  The  inseparable  connection  between  faith  and  holiness.  Without 
faith,  the  principles  and  motives  which  most  powerfully  prompt  to  holiness  could 
not  gain  access  to  the  mind:  without  holiness,  there  can  be  nc  genuine  faith,  for 
the  graces  of  holiness  are  its  effects  and  fruits.  3.  The  subject  enters  deeply  into 
the  essentials  of  Christian  experience  and  life.  Eeligion  does  not  consist  in 
the  use  of  means ;  the  ordinances  of  religion  are  only  the  means  of  leading 
the  soul  to  God  and  holiness,  of  being  conformable  to  Christ's  death.  (R. 
Bums,  D.D.)  Conformity  to  Christ's  death: — The  participle  "being  made" 
is  present,  and  implies  a  process  that  is  going  on  and  will  continue  through 
life — not  an  act  like  justification,  simultaneous  with  the  exercise  of  faith. 
"Made  conformable"  means  being  cast  in  the  same  form,  being  brought  into 
such  a  community  and  likeness  that  one  sketch,  outline,  shape,  will  represent 
both.  I.  This  shapino  in  the  form  of  Christ's  death  is  one  of  the  Chbistian's 
EARNEST  endeavours  AND  MOST  CHERISHED  OBJECTS.  No  advantage  in  life,  nothing 
that  tempts  ordinary  men  can  attract  Him  in  comparison  of  this.  Here  is  a  text 
for  us  to  try  ourselves  by.  What  is  the  sliape  that  we  must  be  like.  Christ's  death 
was  a  death  unto  sin.  "In  that  He  died  He  died  unto  sin."  The  suffering  of  the 
previous  verse  is  a  different  thing  from  this,  yet  it  co-exists  with  this  in  the 
sjdritual  life.  Fellowship  with  Christ's  sufferings  is  the  endless  conflict  of  the 
believer's  course,  ever  wearing  and  wearying  Him.  Conformity  to  Christ's  death  is 
the  deep  calm  of  indifference  to  sin  with  all  its  allurements,  ever  setting  in  together 
with  and  over  against  the  conflict.  The  two  are  in  different  portions  of  His  being. 
The  conflict  with  sin  is  carried  on  at  the  surface,  and  also  very  much  beneath  the 
surface — even  in  the  region  where  the  two  wills,  the  old  and  the  new,  are  ever 
struggling  and  wrestling  for  the  mastery ;  and  sometimes  its  more  terrible 
paroxysms  seem  to  penetrate,  and  shake,  and  threaten  to  carry  away  the  whole 
man  :  but  there  is  an  inner  depth,  in  which  the  peace  which  passeth  understanding 
has  its  hold  and  reign  :  and  there,  in  that  centre  of  his  being,  is  this  death  to  sin 
going  on.  As  Christ  died  to  sin,  passed  out  from  the  penalty  and  imputation  of 
sin,  He  had  no  more  to  do  with  it.  So  each  of  the  brethren  who  are  being  made 
like  Him  are  losing  part  and  interest  in  sin,  weaned  from  its  power,  alienated  from 
its  motives  and  objects ;  the  distance  ever  widening  between  it  and  them ;  the 
breach  becoming  ever  more  and  more  irreconcilable.  II.  The  method  by  which 
THIS  IS  brought  about.  1.  Not  by  any  mere  strong  action  of  the  will — any 
acquired  philosophical  indifference  to  sin  and  temptation.  Sin  is  too  strong  for  any 
resolve.  2.  No ;  in  our  Christian  life,  Christ  is  first  and  midst  and  last :  and  no 
mere  moral  strength  or  determination  can  be  reckoned  on  as  accessory  to  Him  in 
his  great  work.  "This  being  conformed  to  Christ's  death  is  brought  in,  is  carried 
on,  is  completed,  by  faith.  When  I  first  see  Christ  linked  to  me  by  the  bonds  of 
God's  everlasting  covenant,  then  faith  begins  its  work  within  me ;  then,  the  first 
utter  dislike  to  sin,  as  sin,  is  bred  in  my  heart.  3.  But  faith  in  what  ?  In 
Christ's  death,  in  its  atoning  efKcacy  and  its  necessity.  Then  alone  does  sin 
appear  in  its  proper  hatefulness  when  I  see  that  this  was  what  helped  to  nail  Him 
there;  when  I  enter  into  my  Kedeemer's  woe  and  understand  what  it  was  that 
caused  it.  I  become  knit  to  Him  and  weaned  from  it — crucified  with  Him,  so  that 
though  the  motions  towards  it  are  yet  felt  in  my  body,  yet  I  have  no  disposition  in 
its  favour.  III.  Let  us  follow  out  this  conformity  into  some  of  its  attendant 
circumstances.  1,  We  have  seen  it  in  its  total  severance  from  sin  and  sinners. 
But  where  were  they  meantime?  Did  they  rest  quiet?  Did  they  allow  this  ever- 
lasting protest  against  the  pollution,  the  selfishness,  the  hatefulness  of  sin  before 
God,  to  be  lifted  up  in  peace  ?  Ah  no  :  tliere  they  were  beneath  His  cross,  scoffing 
at  Him  and  aggravating  His  death-pangs.  And  so  it  will  be  with  us.  Sin  aud  the 
devil  will  not  let  us  alone  in  its  various  stages.  The  nearer  we  approach  in  like 
ness  to  Him,  the  more  will  His  enemies  treat  as  as  they  treated  Him.  No  longei 
by  the  scourge,  and  the  crown  of  thorns,  and  the  cross — but  by  mockery  and  soom 


CHAP.  m.J  PEILIPPIANS.  t21 

by  coldness  and  alienation,  which  in  our  present  state  of  ripened  social  order  are 
weapons  sa  powerful  as  any  outward  persecution  was  then,  2.  He  diod  to  all 
human  ambition.  Whatever  projects  His  followers  may  have  formed  for  Him  were 
defeated  by  it.  Just  so  thy  fondly  cherished  hopes  of  earthly  distinction  must  be 
laid  down  at  the  foot  of  His  cross;  thou  must  be  content,  so  far  as  they  are 
conoerned,  to  be  stripped  and  nailed  to  the  cross  of  shame,  and  made  a  spectacle  to 
men.  3.  All  self-righteousness  is  nailed  to  the  cross,  His  was  the  only  meritorious 
death.  If  I  am  being  conformed  to  it  I  am  nothing;  nothing  as  ground  of  hope,  or 
as  cause  of  fear.  4.  Nor  should  we  entirely  dismiss  such  a  theme  without  one  look 
onwards.  "  If  we  be  dead  with  Christ,  we  shall  also  live  with  Him."  The 
Christian  should  never  end  with  Calvary,  nor  with  the  mortification  of  the  body, 
nor  with  deadness  to  sin ;  but  ever  carry  his  thoughts  onward  to  that  blessed 
consummation,  to  which  these  are  the  entrance  and  necessary  conditions.  {Dean 
Alford.)  The  martyr  spirit: — A  Chinese  convert,  when  trying  to  persuade  his 
countrymen  to  give  up  their  idols  and  believe  in  Christ,  was  ridiculed  and  scorned, 
and  at  last  pelted  with  mud  and  stones  till  his  face  was  red  with  the  blood  that 
flowed  from  the  cuts  in  his  temples.  Mr.  Johnson,  the  missionary,  meeting  him, 
Baid,  "Touhave  had  bad  treatment  to-day."  He  smilingly  replied,  "They  may 
kill  me  if  they  will  love  Jesus." 

Ver.  11,  If  by  any  means  I  might  attain  unto  the  resorrectlon  of  the  dead. 

St.  Paul  in  the  context  reckoneth  up  his  gain  by  Christ — viz.,  his  justification  and 
Banctitication  ;  but  his  gain  reacheth  further,  even  to  glorious  resurrection.  L  Thb 
BENEFIT  TO  BE  OBTAINED  BY  Christ.  How  is  this  a  privilege  since  there  ia  a  resur- 
rection of  the  wicked?  (Acts  xxiv.  15).  But  theirs  is  one  to  condemnation  (John 
V.  29),  and  so  a  fall  rather  than  a  rising.  Therefore  the  faithful  are  only  called  the 
Children  of  the  Resurrection  (Luke  xx.  36).  The  word  here  is  not  dvatrTams,  but 
eSavdffraffif,  to  express  the  full  and  blessed  resurrection  that  no  evil  shall  follow 
(Luke  xiv,  14).  II.  The  submission  of  a  self-denyino  believer  to  use  any  means  to 
OBTAIN  IT.  The  words  seem  to  express  a  doubtfulness,  but  indeed  they  do  not 
(2  Cor,  V.  1),  for  there  is  no  uncertainty  in  God's  promise.  Why  doth  he  then  thns 
express  himself?  1.  To  intimate  the  difl3culty,  thereby  to  quicken  his  desire  and 
diligence.  2.  To  express  the  variety  of  the  means  by  which  God  bringeth  Hia 
people  to  glory  (ver.  10).  3.  To  set  forth  his  full  submission  (Luke  xiv.  26).  4. 
His  unwearied  diligence  and  earnest  endeavour  to  obtain  this  happiness,  whatever 
it  cost  him.  5.  The  value  of  this  benefit,  and  his  vehement  desire  to  attain  it. 
(T.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  doctrine  here  taught  is  that  the  blessedness  of  the  saints 
•t  the  resurrection  is  so  great  that  we  should  be  content  to  use  any  means  and  run 
any  hazards  to  attain  it.  I.  What  is  the  happiness  of  the  saints  in  that  day. 
1.  Our  personal  inherent  blessedness  is  gloiy  revealed  in  ns  (Eom.  viii.  18).  (1)  The 
body  hath  its  felicity,  (a)  Because  the  man  cannot  be  happy  till  the  body  be  raised 
again.  The  soul  alone  doth  not  constitute  human  nature.  (6)  It  is  agreeable  to 
the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  that  the  body  which  had  its  share  in  the  work 
should  share  the  reward,  (c)  The  estate  of  those  who  die  will  not  be  worse  than 
that  of  those  who  are  only  changed  at  Christ's  comin?,  or  there  would  be  a  dis- 
parity, (d)  In  the  heavenly  state  there  are  objects  which  can  only  be  discerned  by 
the  bodily  senses — the  human  nature  of  CLrist,  e.g.  (e)  As  Christ  was  taken  to 
heaven  bodily,  so  shall  we,  for  we  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly  one  (ver.  21 ; 

1  Cor.  XV.  42-44).  (2)  For  the  happiness  of  the  soul.  We  shall  be  satisfied  with  the 
vision  of  God  and  transformed  into  His  Ukeness  (1  Cor,  xiii,  12;  1  John  iii,  2; 

2  Cor,  iii,  18),  2.  Adherent  privileges.  (1)  Justification,  We  have  that  now  by 
faith  ;  then  we  shall  have  our  absolution  from  the  Judge's  mouth,  (2)  Adoption. 
We  have  that  light  now  (Johni,  12) — then  the  full  fruition  thereof  (Eom,  viii,  23), 
(3)  Redemption.  That  day  is  called  "the  day  of  redemption  "  (Eph.  iv.  30), 
because  then  we  are  complet3ly  delivered  from  all  misery,  both  of  soul  and  body 
(Eph.  i.  14).  II.  The  means  whereby  God  bringeth  us  thitheb.  1.  The  way  of 
our  holiness  and  the  active  part  of  our  obedit^nce.  (1)  Dying  to  sin  (Eom.  viii. 
13  ;  Gal.  vi.  8).  (2)  Living  to  God.  The  spiritual  life  is  heaven  begun 
(2  Pet.  iii.  14  ;  Luke  xxi.  36  ;  Acts  xxiv.  15-16).  2.  As  to  passive  obedience  observe 
— (1)  That  no  suffering  must  be  excepted  out  of  our  resignation  (Matt.  xvi.  25 ; 
Luke  xiv.  26).  (2)  This  must  be  endured  cheerfully.  III.  Thb  season  why, 
bather  then  fail,  wh  must  submit  to  any  means  which  God  hath  appointed. 
1.  From  the  absolute  dominion  and  prerogative  of  God,  both  to  make  laws  and  to 
pat  us  on  what  trials  He  pleaseth  to  appoint,    2,  From  the  goodness  and  suitable- 


221  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  m, 

ness  of  His  laws.  (1)  There  is  wisdom  in  them.  (2)  We  have  no  reason  to  ba 
discouraged,  for  Divine  help  is  assured  (2  Tim.  iv.  17-18).  (3)  The  Divine  comfort 
is  to  be  had  (1  Pet.  iv.  14 ;  itom.  v.  5).  3.  The  great  difficulty  lieth  not  in  a  respect 
of  the  end,  but  the  means  ;  and  so  the  trial  of  our  sincerity  must  be  rather  looked 
for  there.  4.  The  hope  propounded  will  bear  this  submission.  Immortal  happiness 
i;s  most  durable,  and  endless  misery  most  terrible ;  the  world  is  vanity,  heaven  real. 
(Ibid. )  The  resurrection : — I.  There  is  a  happy  estate  hekeafteb  which  begins 
»nTH  THE  EESCRBECTi'"'N.  More  happy  than  that  which  Adam  lost  or  from  which 
the  angela  fell.  IL  The  beginnins  op  this  happy  estate  is  at  the  resurrection. 
1.  All  good  shall  be  perfected.  2.  All  evil  cease.  3.  Body  as  well  as  soul,  per- 
fected being,  shall  enjoy  the  fulness  of  the  one  and  immunity  from  the  other. 
III.  The  apostle  makes  the  resurrection  the  last  thino,  thekery  establishing 
AN  ORDER  (Luke  xxiv.  26 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  12).  Calvary  comes  before  Olivet  in  the  ex- 
perience of  both  Christ  and  His  people.  IV.  It  is  hard  to  come  to  heaven  because 
OF  this  Divine  order.  1.  Away  then  with  all  idle  and  secure  thoughts  of  sparing 
ourselves.  We  must  come  to  health  by  physic.  2.  In  all  crosses  let  us  not  look 
into  the  state  we  are  in  so  much  as  that  we  are  going  to.  We  are  going  to  a  palace 
and  should  not  be  dejected  because  of  the  narrowness  of  the  way  (Heb.  xii.  21). 
3.  Labour  for  a  right  esteem  of  the  things  of  this  world.  They  are  momentary  and 
fading.  4.  Labour  to  strengthen  our  graces.  (1)  Faith  to  assure  us  that  we  are 
God's  children,  and  have  heaven  laid  up  for  us.  (2)  Hope  which  makes  us  cheer- 
fully endure  in  expectation  of  what  faith  believes.  (3)  Love  to  Christ  which  made 
Paul  desire  to  be  with  Him  which  was  best  of  all  (chap.  i.  23).  {R.  Sibbes,  D.D.) 
The  resurrection  (ilavdaraaig)  of  the  saints: — I.  Is  distinguished  from  that  of  the 
WICKED — by  its  glory  (ver.  21).  Dan.  xii.  2. — By  its  precedence  (1  Thess.  iv.  16  ; 
1  Cor.  XV.  23).  Fiev.  xx.  5. — By  its  results  (John  v.  29).  II.  Is  an  object  of  Chris- 
tian ambition — requiring  faith — consecration — effort.  III.  Will  amply  repay 
EVERY  SACP.IFICE — of  self-gratification — earthly  advantage — life.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  resurrection  of  the  just : — No  one  could  be  more  convinced  than  Paul  of  the 
blessedness  in  which  the  saint  enters  at  death,  and  he  was  wonderfully  qualified  by 
visions  and  revelations  to  entertain  this  conviction.  Yet  he  sets  his  heart  upon 
that  which  could  only  be  remote.  What,  then,  must  be  that  sequel  which  can  fix 
and  overwhelm  such  a  mind,  that  while  an  instantaneous  heaven  lies  before  it,  ia 
transported  beyond  it  to  splendours  which  it  agonizes  to  "  attain  "?    I.  What  is 

that  entire  SATISFACTION    AND  CLIMAX   FOR  WHICH   THE  TEXT  TEACHES  US  TO   LONG  AND 

LABOUR.  Immortality  as  an  idea  was  not  unknown  to  the  pagans,  but  the  resurrec- 
tion is  the  almost  exclusive  doctrine  of  Scripture.  1.  That  resurrection  will  be 
simultaneous,  and  the  judgment  of  all  will  immediately  succeed  it.  2.  Yet  it  is 
not  unnatural  that  this  common  event  should  sometimes  be  specially  regarded  and 
personally  applied.  In  the  language  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians  it  is  argued  in  the 
case  of  believers  from  their  union  with  Christ.  He  mentions  not  the  wicked  who 
shall  rise  for  different  reasons.  They  could  never  wish  to  attain  the  resurrection. 
The  first  resurrection  (1  Thess.  iv.  15)  is  shared  by  the  dead  over  those  who  have 
never  died,  and  that  of  Eev.  xx.  6,  is  of  souls.  3.  St.  Paul  desired  but  a  share  in 
the  general  resurrection,  attended  as  that  event  would  be  to  him  and  all  the  people 
of  God  with  consequences  of  surpassing  happiness  and  glory.  4.  Yet  searching  the 
experience  of  present  Christians  we  do  not  lind  this  hope  ardently  cherished. 
Thousands  are  contented  with  the  salvation  and  glorification  of  the  soul ;  this  is  to 
be  deplored  as  the  slight  of  a  matchless  good.  Apart  from  the  resurrection  man  is 
incomplete.  II.  What  are  the  Scriptural  representations  of  its  accompaniments 
AND  consequences.  1.  The  mutual  recognition  of  saints  in  heaven.  Is  violence 
to  be  done  to  memory,  and  can  love  be  changed  ?  Can  a  spirit  made  perfect  be 
wanting  in  sympathies  which  so  much  purified  it  from  imperfection?  2.  The 
happiness  of  our  future  condition  is  made  chiefly  to  depend  on  our  resemblance  to 
Christ.  3.  There  the  saints  shall  be  fully  acknowledged.  They  who  here  were 
unknown  and  hated  shall  there  shine  forth  as  the  sun.  4.  Christians  shall  be 
glorified  with  their  Master.  5.  We  therefore  find  the  righteous  in  Scripture 
earnestly  seeking  and  exultantly  hailing  this  resurrection.  Why?  Because — (1) 
It  is  the  triumph  of  Christ.  (2)  The  full  redemption  of  the  believer.  (3)  The 
restitution  of  our  entire  nature.  (4)  Purposes  will  then  be  indicated  which  our 
present  mixed  being  has  not  hitherto  revealed,  for  both  mind  and  body ;  the  latter 
will  then  be  a  perfect  instrument  for  the  soul.  (5)  A  congeniality  will  be  estab- 
lished between  the  risen  saints  and  the  materialism  of  their  glorious  abode.  (6)  In 
the  reintegration  of  our  manhood  shall  be  displayed  the  most  perfect  spectacle  ol 


CHAP,  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  228 

the  beauty  of  holiness.  (7)  There  will  be  endless  progression.  III.  What  are  thh 
DETEBMiNATioNS  BY  wuicH  IT  18  TO  BE  WON.  The  manner  or  method  supposes  far 
higher  means  than  those  we  can  command.  The  "  power  of  the  resurrection  " 
alone  secures  our  confidence.  'J  he  "means,"  however,  in  this  connection,  refer 
not  to  the  causative  but  the  moral ;  to  the  influence  of  pret^ent  character  and  con- 
duct on  this  event.  We  often  mark  the  influence  of  former  conduct  on  our  present 
condition  ;  and  so  we  exist  and  act  for  all  the  future  of  our  immortality.  1.  What 
prayer,  then,  should  we  devote  to  this  attainment?  2.  What  anticipation  should 
familiarize  it?  3.  What  preparation  should  facilitate  it ?  "Mortify  therefore 
your  members."  4.  What  counteipart  should  we  exhibit  of  it.  {R.  W.Hamilton, 
D.D.)  The  attainment  of  the  resurrection : — I.  Paul's  aim.  How  can  that  future 
rising  be  attaiued  at  all  by  man's  effort  in  time?  1.  Paul  has  been  speaking  of  a 
spiritual  fellowship  with  Christ's  sufferings  and  death  and  rising,  and  then  as  a 
direct  result  he  passes  to  this,  from  which  we  infer  that  the  resurrection  in  the 
future  is  the  result  of  man's  spiritual  life  in  the  present.  Men  fancy  that  the  future 
glory  of  the  risen  Christian  is  by  a  kind  of  miracle  suddenly  added  beyond  the 
grave.  Paul  regards  it  as  a  glory  daily  growing  now,  to  be  manifested  then.  It  ia 
an  outgrowth  of  fellowship  with  Christ,  and  its  blessedness  will  be  greater  or  less 
according  to  the  perfection  of  that  fellowship.  2.  In  what  manner  was  this  Chris- 
tian life  a  constant  attninment  of  the  resurrection?  The  "power  of  Christ's 
resurrection  "  is  the  influence  in  the  soul  which  renders  its  life  a  gradual  growth  to- 
wards the  rising  glory  of  man.  (1)  The  risen  Christ  is  the  pledge  of  a  risen  Ufe. 
Christ  did  not  rise  merely  to  prove  our  immortality ;  if  that  were  all  its  meaning 
it  would  only  deepen  man's  fear.  We  do  not  want  immortality  unless  we  know 
that  our  life,  throwing  off  its  sins,  shall  rise  upwards  to  God.  Kising  to  God  Christ 
showed  that  man  is  accepted  by  the  Father,  rising  in  the  human.  He  showed  how, 
through  Him,  human  life  should  rise  iuto  Ufe  Divine.  (2)  The  rising  of  Christ  is 
a  power  to  elevate  life.  We  have  fellowship  not  with  the  past,  but  with  the  living 
Jesus  :  we  are  moulded  by  the  power  not  only  of  a  dying  Saviour,  but  of  the  living 
friend.  He  carries  our  sympathies  upwards  with  Himself  to  God  and  the  spiritual 
world.  (3)  Hence  arises  the  gradual  attainment  of  the  resurrection,  every  ex- 
perience of  our  risen  life  makes  us  feel  the  necessity  of  the  future ;  yet  every 
experience  is  an  actual  attaining  of  that  future.  II.  Paul's  endeavour.  The 
necessity  of  this  agonizing  endeavour  arises  from  two  facts.  1,  The  difficulty  of 
accomplishing  it.  This  is  so — (1)  Because  our  souls  are  subject  to  the  influences 
of  three  great  worlds,  (a)  By  its  fascinations  this  old  earth  appeals  to  our  hearts, 
ftnd  seems  by  many  arms  to  bind  us  to  itself  as  our  home,  (b)  The  dark  world  of 
nnbelief  and  indifference  awakening  the  carnal  nature  renders  the  Christian  life 
an  inevitable  struggle,  (c)  At  the  same  time  through  the  love  of  God  and  the  Cross 
of  Christ  heaven  is  attracting  the  soul.  (2)  Because  of  the  incessant  and  dominant 
power  of  our  easily  besetting  sin.  This  power  arises  largely  in  that  every  man 
thinks  his  own  weakness  small  and  insignificant.  (3)  And  then  listen  to  Paul  after 
his  high  attainments  telling  us  that  he  has  to  keep  his  body  under  lest  he  should 
be  a  castaway.  2.  The  glory  of  its  attainment.  You  know  how  this  raised  Paul 
to  exertion.  He  moved  onwards  to  eternity  under  the  constant  influence  of  its 
attraction.  Alas !  how  feebly  we  feel  this  as  a  motive  for  endeavour.  We  lash 
ourselves  into  exertion  by  fear,  when  we  might  be  so  cheered  into  it  by  sweet  hope 
as  to  become  unconscious  of  toil.  {E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  The  attainment  of  the 
regurrection  dependent  on  fellowship  with  Christ  .•--Just  as  the  perfect  beauty  of  the 
flower  lies  dormant  in  the  seed,  and  through  its  burial  in  the  cold  earth  is  invisibly 
developing  itself,  to  bloom  forth  at  the  voice  of  spring,  so  the  perfect  beauty  of  the 
resurrection  is  hii^dcn  in  the  Christian  now  ;  and,  by  all  his  toil  and  struggle,  that 
germ  of  glory  is  growing.  Just  as  the  mental  power  and  strong  determined  will  of 
the  man  are  hidden  in  the  child,  and  are  maturing  unconsciously  through  all  the 
wonder  of  its  infancy,  so  the  resurrection  manhood  of  the  soul  is  lying  in  it  during 
this  childhood  of  Time  ;  and  by  the  education  of  fellowship  with  Christ,  and 
struggle  to  be  Christ-like,  is  advancing  to  its  final  splendour.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  12-14.  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained. — I.  The  imperfection  of 

OCB  ATTAINMENTS.        II.    ThE   GBANDEUB   OF   OUE    CALLING.         Ill,    ThE    NECESSITY   OF 

KFFOBT.      IV.  The  peospect  OF  EEWABD.      (J.   Lyth,  D.D.)  Failure  and  pro- 

grets : — 1.  It  is  a  painful  feeling  to  look  back  on  life  and  feel  that  a  great  object  ia 
unaccomplished.  The  philosopher  has  this,  who  in  spite  of  brilliant  prospects 
finds  after  hard  effort  the  problems  of  life  to  be  insoluble.     The  would-be  liberator 


824  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  in. 

of  an  oppressed  nation  feels  the  same  when,  after  vast  expenditure  of  time  and 
money  and  suffering,  he  dies  with  a  tyrant  on  the  throne  and  the  people  no  better 
for  freedom  than  when  ho  began.  The  Christian's  feeling  is  even  more  painful, 
when  he  measures  what  he  has  done  witli  what  he  might  or  ought  to  have  done. 
2.  This,  too,  has  to  be  observed  of  the  Christian  that,  as  he  advances  in  the 
Christian  course,  his  standard  of  perfection  rises,  and  what  once  satisfied  him  now 
fails  to  do  80.  3.  The  feeling  of  not  having  attained  is  also  disheartening.  Is  the 
past  to  be  the  criterion  of  the  future?  4.  The  feeling  is  deepened  by  the  thought 
of  all  the  struggle  and  strife  to  attain  perfection,  and  all  seemingly  to  little  purpose. 
And  soon  he  must  meet  the  Great  Judge  who,  however  merciful,  commands  him  to 
be  perfect.  6.  The  apostle  withdraws  our  attention  from  this  feeling  about  the 
past  to  the  future.  I.  It  is  not  a  healthy  thing  to  bkood  oveb  past  sin.  1. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  disturbing  the  balance  between  the  two  parts  of  repentance, 
sorrow  for  sin  and  active  obedience.  (1)  Sorrow  for  sin  is  foundation  work. 
Should  a  man  be  employed  all  his  life  in  laying  foundations  7  (2)  It  is  subordinate 
work,  for  it  has  no  value  apart  from  its  action  on  character.  2.  Brooding  over  the 
past  has  a  dangerous  influence  on  character,  and  has  a  tendency  to  remorse  or 
despair.  3.  The  natural  course  is  from  sorrow  to  pass  to  obedience,  remembering 
gospel  provisions  and  motives.  II.  I  must  not  infer  what  my  religious  futobb 
WILL  EE  from  the  PAST.  The  doctrine  of  probabihties  is  a  very  good  one  to  go 
upon  in  worldly  matters,  wherever  a  permanent  law  prevails.  Here  the  rule  would 
be  "  remembering  "  the  things  behind,  &o.  But  there  are  factors  in  the  spiritual 
life  whi<;h  can  change  the  face  of  things.  To  say  that  it  is  improbable  that  the 
Spirit  will  give  you  more  strength  hereafter  than  now  would  be  an  impious  restraint 
on  the  action  of  the  freest  of  Beings.  Such  a  habit,  moreover,  is  destructive  of 
faith  and  hope.  Forget  the  past  and  believe  that  it  is  possible  for  you  to  grow 
faster  in  goodness  in  one  year  than  you  have  grown  in  ten  ;  and  that  there  are 
resources  inconceivably  great  within  your  reach.  III.  We  must  not  bemkmbeb 
the  past  as  our  standard  of  action  OB  character.  Here  we  must  draw  a  dis- 
tinction. The  man  who  is  conscious  of  high  purposes  running  through  the  web  of 
life  may  be  glad,  as  he  takes  his  roviews  of  by-gone  days,  that  the  grace  of  God  has 
enabled  him  to  live  on  the  whole  near  to  the  level  of  Christian  principles — but  there 
must  ever  be  a  discontent  with  themselves  in  the  minds  of  Christians.  And  he 
may  well  suspect  himself  of  declension  or  something  more  who  is  content  to  live  aa 
he  has  lived.  Hence  to  forget  the  past  and  to  remember  it  in  order  to  avoid  its 
evils  are  the  same  thing.  IV.  The  soul  must  be  so  occupied  with  the  futubk 
that  the  past  shall  only  be  subordinate  and  subsidiary.  If  I  have  been  in 
wretchedness  the  remembrance  is  of  no  account  except  to  help  me  to  escape  from 
it.  If  I  have  been  poor  exertion  to  gain  is  the  main  thing.  Whatever  the  past,  the 
Christian's  future  has  in  it  possibilities  almost  infinite.  {Fret.  Woolsey.)  Aspira- 
tion:— I.  The  goal  at  which  the  apostle  aimed  was  moral  pekfection.  No 
man  can  define  this  moral  perfection ;  but  let  no  man  object  on  that  account.  All 
the  grandest  things  defy  definition.  Music,  the  perfection  of  sound ;  beauty,  the 
perfection  of  form  and  colour ;  poetry,  the  perfection  of  thought — no  one  can  define 
these,  nor  can  any  one  the  music,  beauty,  and  poetry  of  our  highest  nature  and  life. 
II.  The  apostle  acknowledges  that  he  has  not  reached  this  perfection.  1. 
Are  we  to  understand  that  Paul  felt  unsubdued  pride,  selfishness,  <&c.  No.  That 
which  is  not  perfect  is  imperfect ;  but  sin  is  not  imperfection  ;  it  is  contradiction. 
The  contradictory  element  was  destroyed,  but  imperfection  remained,  the  normal 
elements  of  his  nature  had  not  attained  their  fulness  and  strength  and  beauty.  2. 
Who  of  us  has  attained?  We  are  told  of  young  people  who  have  "  finished  theil 
education."  Think  of  having  finished  ones  education  with  a  world  like  this  about 
us  I    Much  more  in  the  things  of  Christ     III.  The  apostle  tells  cs  what  mi 

DOES  TO  attain  THAT   MORAL  PERFECTION    WHICH   IS   THB    PRIZE  OF   VICTORY,         "One 

thing  I  do,"  &c.  Scientists  tell  us  of  arrested  developements  in  nature,  but  instances 
of  that  in  spiritual  life  are  more  numerous.  This  is  to  a  large  extent  because  men 
are  trammelled  by  the  things  behind.  1.  There  are  the  restrictions  of  habit. 
Terrible  is  the  peril  of  routine,  the  benumbing  influence  of  familiarity  and  oommcn- 
place.  We  must  break  away  from  this.  2.  The  discouragements  of  failure.  Here 
the  waters  of  forgeifulness  are  the  waters  of  life.  We  are  saved  by  hope,  not  by 
memory.  3.  The  tyrrany  of  success.  The  success  of  many  musicians,  artists, 
preachers,  masters,  Ac,,  contents  them,  and  instead  of  being  an  inspiration  is  a 
stultification.  {W.  L.  Watkinson.)  PauVs  ideal  of  life : — The  whole  doctrine  of 
tbe  Christian  ideal  is  contained  in  this  section  of  apostolic  experience.     An  ideal  ifl 


.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  225 

■ometimes  called  a  standard,  and  so,  in  some  sense,  it  is ;  but  a  standard  is  some- 
thing measured,  whereas  an  ideal  is  changeable,  ever  mounting  higher  and  higher. 
Men  do  not  go  on  a  journey  or  boild  a  house  aimlessly,  much  less  should  they  live 
aimlessly.  They  should  set  before  them  a  distinct  idea  of  character.  We  call  it 
an  ideal  because  it  proceeds  from  the  faculty  of  ideality  or  imagination,  and  presents 
all  subjects  in  their  perfeotness.  It  is  a  glorious  element  in  the  human  mind,  for 
there  is  so  much  to  draw  men  down  from  what  is  noble.  And  an  ideal  should 
always  run  far  beyond  realization.  The  man  whose  standard  is  far  beneath  his 
power  must  inevitably  go  down.  I.  Thebb  are  three  classes  of  men.  1.  Those 
who  have  no  ideal  whatever.  They  are  bom  Hottentots  and  they  remain  so.  If 
they  are  born  into  mechanical  life  mechanics  they  remain.  These  have  food  and 
raiment,  aud,  being  fired  with  no  inspiration,  they  are  contented.  2.  There  are 
those  who  have  an  ideal  which  is  pure  romancing.  They  are  simple  dreamers. 
They  imagine  themselves  to  be  now  a  warrior,  now  an  artist,  now  an  orator,  and 
fill  up  the  hour  of  their  dream  with  the  fancied  dignity.  These  things  have  no  rela- 
tion to  practical  Ufe ;  on  the  contrary  they  come  back  with  less  nerve  and  a 
greater  inclination  to  avoid  the  burdens  of  life.  3.  There  are  those  who  have  a 
clear  conception  of  the  possibilities  of  human  development,  and  who  bring  enough 
of  reason  with  their  imagination  to  give  definiteness  and  purpose  to  their  ideals. 
In  this  class  we  should  seek  to  be  found.  II.  There  are  many  kinds  of  ideals. 
1.  Those  which  respect  the  external,  secular  condition  of  men.  There  are  those  who 
say,  "  I  will  not  be  a  second  workman  to  any  man."  Their  ideal  lies  in  their  trade. 
The  ideal  of  others  consists  in  being  rich,  or  high  up  in  society.  These  things  are 
not  wrong,  if  they  are  parts  of  a  comprehensive  scheme  that  includes  everything — 
body  and  soul.  It  is  better  to  have  these  as  ideals  than  to  be  aimless.  But  it  ia 
imperfect  and  may  be  ruinous.  A  man  may  sacrifice  his  own  life  and  moral  well- 
being  for  the  purpose  of  pouring  molten  gold  into  his  children's  throats  that  destroys 
him  in  making  and  them  in  taking.  2.  There  are  those  who  rise  higher  and  take 
in  an  ideal  which  includes  secular  character  as  well  as  secular  condition ;  who  pro- 
pose to  be  honoured  among  men ;  some  by  art,  some  by  literature,  some  by  states- 
manship, &c.  They  intend  to  be  respected  for  integrity  and  known  for  power.  But 
these  aim  at  character  only  as  a  thing  within  the  bounds  of  time,  and  necessarily 
dwarf  themselves.  For  man  is  a  creature  of  two  worlds,  and  in  this  he  is  at  his 
least  estate.  3.  Others  include  the  whole  manhood  for  both  worlds — the  apostle's 
ideal.  He  substantially  declared,  "  Nothing  is  done  while  anything  remains  un- 
done." "  Not  as  though  I  had  attained."  HI.  This  delineates  the  noblest 
FORu  OF  ambition  AND  THE  NOBLEST  IDEAL  OF  LIFE.  Life  is  transformed  by  it. 
1.  Such  an  ideal  unites  and  harmonizes  life  and  redeems  it  from  being  a  mere 
series  of  disconnected  experiences  and  passages.  2.  It  stimulates  and  inspires  the 
soul.  A  man  may  have  no  motive  to  life  who  merely  has  an  ideal  of  wealth  or 
ambition  when  these  become  impossible  to  him.  You  cannot  make  a  man  like 
Paul  bankrupt.  He  has  still,  when  all  is  gone,  a  house  not  made  with  hands.  3. 
It  redeems  men  from  indolence.  4.  It  is  the  cure  for  conceit.  6.  It  maintains 
spring  and  enterprise  to  the  end  of  life,  aud  fires  men  up  at  the  very  last  with 
solemn  purposes  and  noble  resolves.  Conclusion  :  Avoid  one  rock  which  is  fatal  to 
nobility.  Because  you  have  broken  your  purpose  don't  let  it  go  unmended :  when 
you  have  failed  to  reach  your  ideal  don't  despair  but  try  a^aln.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
The  ideal  and  the  actual : — I.  The  ideal  of  Christian  life  and  character.  St. 
Paul  was  a  most  ambitious  man,  but  his  aim  was  to  be  something.  So  his  ideal  was 
personal,  not  something  wrought  out  or  imagined  or  embodied  in  a  system  or  a 
ereed.  He  wanted  to  be  like  Christ.  That  for  him  was  perfection.  H.  The 
APOSTLE  had  not  BEACHED  HIS  MARK.  1.  He  had  a  consciousness  of  incompletion 
which  was  forced  upon  him  by  a  variety  of  expei'iences.  (1)  His  particular  form  of 
ambition — being  as  distinct  from  having — which,  connected  with  Christ,  was  an 
egoism  which  promoted  true  humility.  Hence  he  was  keenly  alive  to  his  imper- 
fections. (2)  His  sen-^e  of  limitations.  The  feeling  would  be  forced  upon  him  that 
he  was  capable  of  better  things.  2.  All  this  has  its  lessons.  (1)  It  gives  as  heart 
for  ourselves  and  courage  in  our  work  for  others.  (2)  It  rebakes  self-satisfaction  and 
complacency.  (8)  It  teaches  us  to  recognize  Christian  character  below  perfection, 
and  to  cultivate  charity  for  the  imperfect.  III.  But  it  was  the  fixed  practicaii 
PURPOSE  OF  his  life  TO  BEACH  IT.  Did  he  do  nothing  beside  ?  Nothing.  Ha  did 
indeed  many  things,  but  the  many  made  one.  And  had  he  been  a  Manchester  man 
he  would  so  have  bought  and  sold,  &o.,  that  in  doing  it  he  would  have  been  doiug 
the  one  thing,    IV.  His  method  of  progress.      1.  Forgetfulness  of  things  which 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n%. 

belong  to  immature  and  unripened  states.  2.  A  gathering  up  of  the  totality  of 
nature  into  purpose  and  effort.  (IF.  Hubbard.)  Few  believers  perfect  here: — 
When  Allston  died  he  left  many  pictures  which  were  mostly  sketches,  yet  with  here 
and  there  a  part  fini.-hed  up  with  wonderful  beauty.  So  I  think  Christians  go  to 
heaven  with  their  virtues  mostly  in  outline,  only  here  and  there  a  part  completed. 
But  "  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away,"  and  God  shall  finish  the  pictures 
in  His  own  forms  and  colours.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Aim  at  perfection: — I.  TdB 
NEED  OF  IT.  Our  actual  attainments  are  small — we  have  much  to  learn  and  ex- 
perience. II.  The  means.  A  humble  estimate  of  ourselves — leaving  the  things 
behind  and  reaching  to  those  that  are  before — pressing  to  the  goal.  III.  The  in- 
centive. We  would  be  peifect  (see  Barnes).  In  non-essentials  we  may  differ,  and 
God  will  in  due  time  set  us  right — but  in  this  we  must  have  one  rule  and  oue  mind. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christian  progress: — I.  Wherein  wb  may  make  progress.  1. 
In  our  views  of  the  excellence  of  religion,  2.  In  our  love  to  God  and  Christ. 
3.  In  holiness.  4.  In  heavenly-mindedness.  II.  The  necessity  of  this  pbo- 
GRESS.  This  is  seen — 1.  In  the  frequency  with  which  the  Christian  life  is  compared 
to  a  warfare  and  a  race.  2.  In  the  urgent  commands  of  God.  3.  In  the  nature  of 
religion  to  which  progress  is  indispensable.  III.  The  means.  1.  A  firm  belief  that 
Divine  influences  may  be  obtained  at  all  times,  and  to  the  full  extent  of  our  wants, 
by  humble,  earnest  prayer.  2.  Constant  application  to  Divine  ordinances.  3.  A 
continual  view  of  the  Cross.  4.  A  constant  vision  of  the  prize.  6.  A  study  of 
eminent  examples.  (T.  Craig.)  The  struggle  for  perfection: — We  go  into  a 
sculptor's  studio,  and  there  stands  a  block  of  marble  on  which  the  sculptor  is 
working ;  the  marble  is  all  white  and  pure,  yet  the  image  is  imperfect ;  the  hand  is 
beginning  to  beckon,  the  foot  to  move,  thought  is  gathering  on  the  brow,  the  lips 
seem  as  if  they  would  soon  speak,  yet  the  statue  is  still  imperfect ;  nothing  faulty 
in  the  material,  but  it  is  not  yet  wrought  into  the  fulness  of  the  sculptor's  ideal. 
So  it  was  with  the  apostle  ;  the  vicious  element  was  purged,  but  his  deep  soul  had 
not  yet  been  wrought  into  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  ideal.  He  went  out  after  larger 
measures,  intenser  experiences  of  love,  power,  light,  fellowship,  and  blessedness, 
beyond  all  his  past  or  piesent  enjoyments.  (W.  L.  Watkiiison.)  Unrealized 
possibilities : — You  remember  how  the  mightiest  discoverer  in  natural  science  of 
modem  times,  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  said,  towards  the  close  of  his  career,  that  he  was 
but  as  a  child  who  haci  gathered  a  few  shells  on  the  shores  of  an  illimitable  sea. 
He  saw  stretching  before  him  a  vast  ocean  of  knowledge,  which  his  life  had  been 
too  short,  which  even  his  powers  had  been  too  weak,  to  explore.  What  he  felt  in 
things  natural,  St.  Paul  felt  in  things  spiritual — that  there  were  heights  above  him 
which  he  had  never  scaled,  depths  beneath  him  which  he  had  never  fathomed ; 
that,  rich  as  he  was  in  Christ,  there  were  yet  hidden  in  that  Lord  tre^^sures  of 
wisdom  and  knowledge  which  would  make  him  far  richer  still ;  that  God  was  un- 
searchable, unfathomable,  a  shoreless  sea,  an  ocean  of  perfections ;  of  which  he 
understood  a  Uttle,  of  which  he  was  understanding  ever  something  more ;  but  which 
man  could  no  more  take  in  than  he  could  h^  ^Id  the  sea  and  all  its  multitudinous 
waves  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.  Skirts  of  His  glory  St.  Paul  had  seen,  but  not 
His  train  which  filled  the  temple  of  the  universe.  Secrets  of  Christ's  power  he  had 
known,  who  in  this  v«iv  Epistle  declared,  "I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ 
which  strengtheneth  me  ; "  and  yet  he  felt  that  there  was  a  power  of  Christ,  tran- 
scending all  which  even  he  had  known  ;  and  like  some  great  earthly  conqueror, 
who  should  esteem  nothing  won  while  anything  remained  to  win,  nothing  accom- 
plished while  anything  was  yet  possible  to  accomplish ;  who  slighted,  despised, 
trampled  under  foot  all  his  old  successes  in  the  eager  pursuit  of  new;  even  so  this 
mighty  spiritual  athlete,  this  captain,  commander,  conqueror,  leader  of  the  hosts  of 
the  Lord,  could  not  stay  his  steps,  could  not  arrest  his  course.  (Abp.  Trench.) 
More  and  yet  more : — You  know  what  the  general  said  when  one  of  his  ofiicers  rode 
np  and  cried,  '♦  Sir,  we  have  taken  a  standard."  "  Take  another,"  cried  he. 
Another  officer  salutes  him,  and  exclaims,  "  Sir,  we  have  taken  two  guns."  "  Take 
two  more,"  was  the  sole  reply.  This  way  lies  the  reward  of  holy  service :  you 
have  done  much  ;  you  shall  do  more.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  No  retreat: — It  is  said 
that  at  the  battle  of  Alma,  when  one  of  the  regiments  was  being  beaten  back  by  the 
Bussians,  the  ensign  in  front  stood  his  ground  as  the  troops  retreated.  The  captain 
ehonted  to  him  to  bring  back  the  colours.  But  the  reply  of  the  ensign  was,  "  Bring 
up  the  men  to  the  colours."  The  dignity  of  Immanuel's  ministry  can  never  be 
lowered  to  meet  cor  littleness.  The  men  must  come  up  to  the  coloora.  {Neu- 
Testament  AnecdoUs.) 


ni.]  PHILIPPIANS.  827 

Ver.  12.  Not  aa  though  I  had  attained,  either  were  already  perfect. — In  these 
words  we  have — I.  A  disclaiming  of  present  pebfection  in  two  expressions. 
1.  "  Not  as  though  I  bad  already  attained."  This  is  an  agonistical  word  for  receiv. 
ing  the  reward  due  to  the  conqueror.  In  the  races  there  was  a  crown  of  leaves 
generally  set  over  the  goal,  that  the  foremost  might  catch  it,  and  carry  it  away  with 
him  (1  Cor.  ix.  24;  1  Tim.  vi.  12).  2.  "Or  were  already  perfect" — another 
agonistical  word.  Though  the  runner  was  to  seize  the  crown  as  his  right,  yet  the 
judges  interposed  before  he  could  put  it  on  his  head,  and  when  he  received  it  from 
them  he  was  adjudged  a  perfect  racer  or  wrestler  as  the  case  might  be.  The  word 
"perfect"  was  used — (1)  Of  their  strength  aud  agility,  having  passed  the 
agonistical  exercises  (2  Cor.  xiii.  9).  (2)  Of  their  reward.  When  the  crown  was 
adjudged  them,  or  when  they  had  done  worthily,  the  more  excellent  had  the 
more  excellent  rewards,  which  were  called  perfect  crowns.  II.  An  earnest  endeavooe 
FOR  THE  FUTURE.  III.  Thb  REASON  OF  HIS  DILIGENCE.  Christ's  apprehending  is — 1. 
In  effectual  calling,  as  He  puts  us  upon  this  race,  or  inclineth  us  to  it.  2.  By 
constant  support,  for  Laving  apprehended  us  He  still  upholds  us.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
I.  None  of  God's  childrbn,  however  assured,  can  look  upon  themselves  as  out 
OF  DANGER  TILL  THEIR  RACE  BE  ENDED.  1.  God's  children  may  have  assurance, 
as  Paul  had.  This  is  the  case — (1)  When  grace  discovei's  itself  in  eminent  self- 
denying  acts,  and  is  not  a  sleepy  habit  or  a  buried  seed  (1  Thess.  i.  3).  (2)  When 
evidence  is  not  blotted  by  frequent  interruptions  of  the  spiritual  life  by  sin  (2  Cor. 
i.  12).  (3)  Because  they  have  the  Spirit  of  adoption  (Gal.  iv.  6  ;  Eph.  i.  13-14). 
(4)  They  have  a  sense  of  the  love  of  God  and  His  rich  mercies  in  Christ,  (a)  By 
acquaintance  with  Him  (John  xxii.  21).  (6)  By  intercourse  with  Him  (1  Peter  li.  3  ; 
Eph.  iii.  12).  (c)  By  the  experiences  of  their  afflictions  (Rom.  v.  3-5).  (d)  By 
present  rewards  of  obedience  (John  xiv.  21,  23).  (5)  The  change  wrought  is  a 
sensible  one  and  may  be  plainly  discovered  (Eph.  v.  8).  2.  God's  children  cannot 
look  upon  themselves  as  past  all  care  and  holy  eoliuitude.  Beasons.  (1)  Because 
there  is  no  period  put  to  our  duty  but  life.  It  is  not  enough  to  begin  with  God  ; 
we  must  go  on  in  His  way  till  we  come  home  to  Him  (Heb.  iii.  6,  14  ;  vi.  11 ; 
Phil.  ii.  12).  (2)  During  our  lives  there  is  something  more  to  suffer,  some  lust  to 
conquer,  some  grace  to  strengthen.  (3)  Some  have  left  their  first  love  (Rev.  ii.  4) ; 
have  fainted  in  the  race  (Gal.  v.  7).  (4)  The  nature  of  i.iilB  assurance  is  to  exclude 
fear,  which  hath  torment ;  but  not  the  fear  of  caution  and  diligence  (Prov.  xxviii. 
14;  1  Peter  i.  17).  3.  Uses.  (1)  To  show  us  the  difference  between  carnal  security 
and  solid  assurance,  (a)  There  is  a  difference  in  the  grounds ;  the  one  is  a  slight 
presumption  of  the  end  without  the  means,  and  the  other  goeth  on  solid  evidences 
(1  John  iii.  19).  The  one  is  sand,  the  other  is  rock,  (b)  They  differ  in  effects; 
the  one  benumbeth  the  conscience  into  stupid  peace;  the  other  revives  the 
conscience  and  fills  it  with  joy  and  peace  through  believing  (Rom.  xv.  13 ;  2  Cor. 
i.  12  ;  1  Peter  i.  8).  (c)  They  differ  in  the  way  they  are  procured  or  maintained. 
Foolish  presumption  costs  a  man  nothing,  but  true  assurance  is  gotten  with 
diligence  (2  Peter  i.  10 ;  2  Peter  iii.  14),  and  is  kept  with  watchfulness 
(Heb.  iv.  1,  xii.  28,  29;  1  Cor.  x.  1,  2).  (2)  To  teach  us  the  necessity  of  (a) 
diligence ;  (6)  watchfulness ;  (c)  self-denial.     II.  Whatsoever  degreks  we  hatb 

ATTAINED  WE  MUST    PRESS   FORWABD    TO    PERFECTION.       1.    RcaSOUS.       (1)    By    this    OUr 

title  is  assured.  (2)  By  this  our  hearts  are  more  prepared  in  this  life  for  our 
happiness  (CoL  i.  12 ;  1  John  iii.  3).  (3)  By  this  our  glory  and  blessedness  are 
increased.  2.  Use  :  to  persuade  us  to  get  ground  in  our  race,  which  we  do  aa  our 
title  is  more  assured  by  self-denying  obedience.  (1)  Our  end  will  bear  it,  to  see 
God  and  enjoy  Him  (1  Thess.  ii.  12).  How  much  better  than  all  those  worldly 
things  upon  which  we  lay  out  so  much.  (2)  The  glory  of  God  requires  it.  Less 
grace  may  serve  for  our  safety  and  comfort  (John  xv.  8;  Matt.  v.  16).  (3)  The 
notion  of  grace  implies  it,  which  is  continuous  (Prov.  iv.  18 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  16).  There 
is  requisite  to  this — (a)  A  strong  faith  in  the  world  to  come  (Heb.  x.  39).  (6)  A 
fervent  love,  levelling  and  directing  all  our  actions  to  God's  glory  (2  Cor.  v.  14-15). 
(c)  A  lively  hope  quickening  and  strengthening  our  resolutious  for  God  and  heaven 
(1  Peter  i.  13).  III.  It  is  a  great  encouragement  in  the  spiritual  race  that 
Christ  apprehended  ds  for  this  end  that  we  may  apprehend  the  crown  of  life. 
Christ's  apprehension  implies — 1.  That  any  motion  towards  that  which  is  spiritually 
good  proceeds  first  and  wholly  from  Christ.  He  is  author  and  finisher  (Acts  ivi.  14, 
xxvi.  18 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  14).  2.  A  motion  and  subordinate  operation  on  our  part.  He 
infuses  a  new  life,  which  we  receive  from  Christ  to  use  it  and  live  by  it  (Cant,  i.  4  ; 
Bom.  xii.  2).    3.  The  tendency  of  this  life  is  to  God  and  heaven  (2  Peter  i.  4 ;  CoL 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

iii.  1-3).  4.  Christ  having  apprehended  us  still  keeps  us  in  His  own  hands.  6. 
Use:  to  press  us" to  answer  Christ's  apprehension  by  our  exact,  resolved,  diligent 
pursuit  of  eternal  life,  that  will  declare  that  we  are  apprehended  and  will  be  guided 
by  Christ  to  the  land  of  promise.  Two  motives.  (1)  Our  obligation  to  Christ. 
(2)  Christ's  interest  in  us.  {Ibid.)  Conversion  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Paul : — L 
How  IS  THE  WORK  OF  CONVERSION  EFFECTED.  Paul  says,  "  I  am  apprehended  of  Christ 
Jesus."  How  this  was  done  may  be  seen  from  Acts  ix.  16.  1.  Christ  got  possession 
of  Paul's  understanding  by  appearing  to  Him  in  glory.  Having  once  seen  the 
Saviour's  glory  Paul  could  not  resist  His  claims.  2.  Christ  got  possession  of  Paul's 
heart  by  assuring  him  of  His  grace.  3.  Christ  got  possession  of  Paul's  life.  Hav- 
ing surrendered  mind  and  affections  he  would  not  be  likely  to  make  any  reserve. 
Nor  did  he  ;  and  ever  after  he  said,  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ."  II.  To  what  is  the 
WORK  or  conversion  expected  to  lead  ?  To  perfection.  Paul  expected  to  be 
perfect — 1.  In  character.  2.  In  his  whole  nature — physically  (ver.  21) ;  morally, 
by  being  sanctified  wholly;  intellectually,  by  having  hU  the  powers  of  the  mind  so 
fitly  harmonized  that  there  should  be  no  undue  preponderance,  but  that  each  should 
lend  its  own  proper  aid  in  working  out  for  the  renewed  man  chat  eternal  progi'ession 
in  knowledge  to  which  he  is  destined.  3.  In  all  his  external  circumstances.  The 
society,  employments,  joys  of  heaven,  will  make  us  fully  and  for  ever  blest.  III. 
Who  are  the  subjects  of  this  change?  How  are  we  to  know  them?  What 
proof  did  Paul  give  of  it?  The  text  shows  us — 1.  That  he  highly  appreciated  his 
future  destiny  (vers.  20-21 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  18,  v.  1-9).  2.  That  he  cherished  a  hvely 
sense  of  his  present  deficiencies — "  Not  as  though,"  &o.  3.  That  he  made  it  the  one 
great  business  of  his  life  to  realize  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  both  in  this  life  and 
the  next  (vers.  12-14  and  7-9).  Compare  yourselves  with  Paul.  (J.  Jordan.)  A 
call  to  perseverance : — I.  Our  attainments  vary,  but  none  is  actually  secure  or 
absolutely  perfect,  II.  Odr  ddty,  to  continue  in  the  exercise  of  faith,  self-denial 
effort.  III.  Our  hope.  To  gain  the  full  reward,  to  which  Christ  has  designed 
us.  (/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christian  perfection : — I.  The  sense  in  which  Christians 
ABE  NOT  PERuxcT.  They  are  not  so  perfect  as  to  be  free — 1.  From  ignorance :  they 
may  know  manj  things  material  and  spiritual,  but  they  do  not  know  the  Almighty 
unto  perfection  nor  many  of  His  ways.  2.  From  mistake.  They  do  not  mistake 
things  essential  to  salvation  ;  but  in  non-essentials  they  err  and  frequently  :  in 
regard,  e.g.,  to  facts  and  their  circumstances,  and  the  character  of  men,  and  the 
interpretation  of  Scripture.  8.  From  infirmities.  They  are  free  indeed  from  what 
the  worldly  calls  hisinfirmity — drunkenness,  &g. — but  not  from  weakness  or  slowness 
of  understanding,  and  the  infirmities  of  speech  and  behaviour  which  spring  there- 
from. 4.  From  temptation,  since  Christ  was  tempted.  5.  Now  are  they  absolutely 
perfect.  How  much  soever  a  man  has  attained  he  must  yet  "  grow  in  grace."  IL 
The  SENSE  in  which  Christians  are  perfect.  1.  They  are  free  from  outward  sin. 
(1  John  iii.  8-9,  18 ;  Rom.  vi.  1-2,  5-7,  11,  14-18  ;  1  Peter  iv.  1-2).  It  is  not  said, 
"  He  sinneth  not  wilfully,  habitually,  as  other  men,  or  as  he  did  before."  Objection 
(1)  But  did  not  Abraham,  Moses,  and  David  commit  sin.  Yes,  but  it  does  not 
follow  .that  Christians  must.  Those  who  argue  so  seem  never  to  have  considered 
Matt.  xi.  11.  We  cannot  measure  the  privileges  of  Christians  by  those  formerly  given 
to  the  Jews.  Objection  (2)  But  are  there  not  assertions  which  prove  the  same  thing  ? 
(1  Kings  viii.  46  ;  2  Chron.  vi.  36  ;  Eccles.  vii.  20).  Answer:  From  the  day  that 
sin  entered  the  world  there  was  not  a  just  man  that  sinned  not  until  the  Son  of  God 
was  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins.  "  The  heir  as  long  as  he  is  a  child  differeth 
nothing  from  a  servant."  Holy  men  of  old  were,  during  the  infant  state  of  the 
Church,  in  bondage  nnder  the  elements  of  the  world.  But  when  the  fulness  of  the 
times  was  come,  &o.  Now  therefore  we  are  no  more  servants  but  sons.  So  that 
whatsoever  was  the  case  of  those  under  the  law,  since  the  gospel  was  given  "  he 
that  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not."  It  is  of  great  importance  to  observe  the  difference 
between  the  two  dispensations  (John  vii.  28).  That  this  great  salvation  from  sin 
was  not  given  till  Jesus  was  glorified,  St-  Peter  plainly  testifies  (1  Peter  i.  9-10). 
Objection  (3)  But  did  not  the  apostles  sin — St.  Paul  by  his  contention,  St.  Peter  by 
his  dissimulation  ?  Yes,  but  how  does  that  prove  that  Christians  must  commit  sin. 
No  necessity  of  sinning  was  laid  upon  them.  The  grace  of  God  was  suificient  for 
them,  and  it  is  surely  sufiQcient  for  us.  No  man  is  tempted  above  that  he  is  able  to 
bear,  and  with  the  temptation  there  is  a  way  of  escape.  Objection  (4)  But  does  not 
James  contradict  this  (ver.  2).  No ;  he  does  not  refer  to  himself  or  Christians  (see 
vers.  9  and  1),  where  "  we  "  is  general  or  exclusive  of  Christians.  Objection  (5)  How 
■hAll  we  reconcile  Si  John  with  himself?  (1  John  i.  8,  10).    Observe  (a)  verse  10 


«nw.  nLj  PHILIPPIANS.  229 

fixes  the  sense  of  verse  8.  (6)  The  point  under  consideration  is  not  whether  we  have 
or  have  not  sinned  heretofore  ;  and  neither  of  these  verses  asserts  that  we  do  sin, 
or  commit  it  now.  (c)  Verse  9  explains  both  verses  10  and  8.  We  are  cleansed  from 
all  unrighteousuess  that  we  may  go  and  sin  no  more.  St.  John  is  well  consistent  with 
himself  as  well  as  with  the  other  holy  writers.  He  declares — (a)  "  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  (b)  No  man  can  say  I  have  not  sinned,  have  no  sin 
to  be  cleansed  from,  (c)  But  God  is  lealy  to  save  us  from  past  and  future  sins. 
(d)  "These  things  write,"  &c.  (1  John  ii.  1-2).  (e)  But  lest  there  should  be  any 
doubt  on  a  subject  of  such  vast  importance  the  apostle  resumes  the  subject  in 
Chap,  iii.,  where  be  carefully  explains  his  own  meaning  (vers.  7-10).  2.  They  are 
tree  from  evil  thoughts.  But  thoughts  concernmg  evil  are  not  always  evil  thoughts. 
Our  Lord  doubtless  thought  of  the  things  spoken  by  the  devil  yet  He  had  no  sinful 
thought.  And  even  thence  it  follows,  neither  have  Christians  (Luke  vi.  40).  And 
indeed  whence  should  evil  thoughts  proceed  in  the  servant  who  is  as  His  Master 
(Mark  vii.  21,  cf.  Matt.  xii.  33,  vii.  17-18).  The  same  happy  privilege  St.  Paul 
asserts  from  his  own  experience  (2  Cor.  x.  4,  &c).  3.  From  evil  tesupers.  This  is 
evident  again  from  the  declaration,  "  Every  one  that  is  perfect  shall  be  as  His 
Master."  Christ  had  just  been  delivering  some  of  the  sublimest  doctrines  of 
Christianity,  and  some  most  grievous  to  fiesh  and  blood — "  Love  your  enemies," 
«feo.  What  other  than  this  can  St.  Paul  mean  by  *'  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,"  &c. 
If  IJohn  iii.  3  be  true,  then  the  Cliristian — (1)  Is  purified  from  pride,  for  Christ  was 
lowly  of  heart ;  (2)  from  self-will  or  desire,  for  Christ  desired  to  do  only  the  will  of 
the  Father  ;  (3)  from  anger  in  the  common  sense  of  the  word,  for  Christ  was  gentle 
and  long-suffering.  Conclusion :  Thus  doth  Christ  save  His  people  from  their 
Bins.  "  We  shall  be  saved"  say  some,  "  but  not  till  death."  How  is  this  to  be 
reconciled  with  1  John  i.  5;  iv.  17?  See  2  Cor.  vii.  1.  {John  Wesley,  M.A.) 
Apprehended  that  I  may  apprehend: — I.  Paul  was  apprehended  by  Christ  or  laid 
hold  of.  The  reference  is  to  the  circumstances  of  His  conversion.  I.  What  was  it 
that  arrested  Paul  ?  The  perception  of  a  perfection  of  moral  character  actualized 
before  him  in  Christ  and  made  possible  for  him  through  faith.  Up  to  this  time  he 
had  been  seeking  external  things,  but  now  with  the  vision  of  Christ  there  came 
npon  him  the  conviction  that  even  if  he  gained  all  these  things  he  would  still  be 
fatally  defective  in  the  highest  elements  of  his  being.  Thus,  therefore,  he  was  con- 
fronted with  the  great  question  :  "  Shall  I  go  on  and  be  content  with  the  hollowness 
of  Phariseeism  and  its  inevitable  issue  ?  or  shall  I  go  back  and  build  my  life  anew 
after  the  matchless  pattern  which  has  been  set  before  me  ?  "  He  could  not  get  away 
till  he  had  given  it  an  answer.  2.  There  is  not  one  who  has  ever  come  in  contact 
with  the  gospel  of  Christ,  who  has  not  been  laid  hold  of  thus.  (1)  Young  man,  as 
you  have  been  devoting  yourself  to  the  idolatry  of  wealth,  or  to  the  pursuit  of 
pleasure  or  ambition,  you  have  been  laid  hold  of.  Christ  has  come  to  you  through 
the  faithful  preacher,  and  brought  you  to  a  standstill  by  the  death  of  some 
companion,  or  laid  His  hand  upon  yon  in  sickness,  and  held  you  to  your  couch  face 
to  face  with  the  question  :  "  Have  I  been  living  a  life  such  as  an  immortal  man 
should  live?  (2)  My  middled-aged  friend,  you  know  about  this  too.  Christ 
apprehended  you  and  asked  you  to  revise  all  your  theories  of  life  when  you  buried 
yoor  darling  out  of  your  sight ;  when  your  business  went  all  wrong,  <feo.  II.  Paul 
Dm  MOT  befuse  to  lay  hold  of  that  which  Jesus  bet  befobe  him.  1.  There  is 
here,  therefore,  a  human  agency  as  well  as  a  Divine.  The  stopping  of  St.  Paul  in 
his  career,  the  setting  of  the  truth  before  him — all  that  was  done  for  him.  He  had 
to  choose  for  himself  whether  or  no  he  would  transfer  himself  from  the  service  of 
the  world  to  the  service  of  Christ.  2.  But  not  every  one  who  has  been  laid  hold  of 
has  thus  responded  to  the  Lord's  appeal — the  young  ruler  who  went  away  sorrowful ; 
Herod,  Felix,  Agrippa.  3.  So  with  some  here.  They  have  seen  the  wrongnesa 
of  their  present  career,  but  they  have  not  chosen  to  give  it  up  for  the  way  of  Christ ; 
because  to  do  so  would  have  involved  the  sacrifice  of  all  that  hitherto  they  have 
cherished.  But  what  can  the  world  do  for  you,  that  for  its  sake  yon  should  put 
away  from  you  the  glorious  heritage  which  Jesus  promises  t  III.  Paul  was  not 
content  with  a  mere  paktial  attainment  of  that  which  Christ  had  set  before  him. 
1.  If  any  man  might  have  been  excused  for  cherishing  feelings  of  complacency  it  was 
PaoL  Yet  he  did  not  go  to  sleep  over  the  singularity  of  his  conversion ;  nor  rock 
himself  in  the  cradle  of  his  apostolic  success,  nor  soothe  himself  with  the  opiate  of 
his  official  position.  No,  ever  his  eye  was  fixed  on  Christ.  The  more  elevated  he 
became  in  character,  the  more  elevated  Christ  became  to  him.  2.  Let  the  distance 
between  you  and  Christ  shake  you  out  of  your  complacency.     Tell  us  less  of  what 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

is  behind.  Don't  be  always  recounting  the  story  of  your  conversion.  Forget  even 
your  joining  the  Church.  Look  forward.  FV.  Paul  was  not  discooraged  becadsb 
HE  HAD  not  yet  FULLY  APPREHENDED.  There  is  HO  Hote  of  dcspondency.  His  words  are 
full  of  joyful  exhilaration.  There  are  three  elements  in  this  aspiration  which  should 
encourage  those  who  grieve  because  they  cannot  realize  perfection.  1.  The  joy  ol 
the  soul  is  inseparably  connected  with  the  effort  to  reach  that  which  is  above  it. 
2.  In  this  aspiration  there  was  the  evidence  that  he  had  made  some  progress.  3. 
The  consciousness  that  he  was  not  striving  in  his  own  might.  He  who  helped  Paul 
will  help  us.  Even  if  we  fail  occasionally  let  us  not  be  discouraged,  for  he  who  slips 
on  the  steep  mountain  is  still  higher  up  than  he  who  is  sleeping  in  the  valley. 
(W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Apprehended  but  not  apprehending  : — Who  that  has  read 
that  melancholy  autobiography  left  behind  him  by  John  Stuart  Mill  can  help  recall- 
ing here  the  description  which  he  has  given  of  that  which  might  have  been  the 
religious  crisis  of  his  life?  These  are  his  words  :  " I  was  in  a  dull  state  of  nerves, 
such  as  everybody  is  occasionally  liable  to,  unsusceptible  to  enjoyment  or  pleasurable 
excitement — one  of  those  moods  when  what  is  pleasure  at  other  times  becomes 
insipid  or  indififerent — the  state,  I  should  think,  in  which  converts  to  Methodism 
usually  are  when  smitten  by  their  first  '  conviction  of  sin.'  In  this  frame  of  mind 
It  occurred  to  me  to  put  the  question  directly  to  myself :  •  Suppose  that  all  your 
objects  in  life  were  realized  ;  that  all  the  changes  in  institutions  and  opinions  which 
you  are  looking  forward  to  could  be  completely  effectedatthis  very  instant;  would  this 
be  a  great  joy  and  happiness  to  you  ?  '  And  an  irrepressible  self-consciousness 
distinctly  answered,  '  No.'  At  this  my  heart  sank  within  me  ;  the  whole  founda- 
tion on  which  my  life  was  constructed  fell  down.  All  my  happiness  was  to  have 
been  found  in  the  continual  pursuit  of  this  end.  The  end  had  ceased  to  charm,  and 
how  could  there  ever  again  be  any  interest  in  the  means  ?  I  seemed  to  have  nothing 
left  to  live  for."  Thus  even  to  him,  nurtured  though  he  had  been  in  atheism,  and 
educated  without  a  religion,  the  Saviour  came,  laying  on  him  His  arresting  hand, 
and  beseeching  him  to  adopt  a  more  stable  foundation  for  his  life.  But  alas  !  he, 
too,  made  "  the  great  refusal,  "and  deliberately  put  away  from  him  that  which  would 
have  furnished  him  with  a  model  that  can  never  lose  its  relative  superiority,  no 
matter  how  we  onrselves  may  grow,  and  with  a  motive  that  can  never  lose  its 
power.  (Ibid.)  The  misfortune  of  a  realized  ideal: — I  recall  the  story  of  the 
artist,  who,  standing  before  the  latest  production  of  his  hands,  burst  into  tears,  and 
on  being  asked  for  the  reason  of  his  emotion,  replied,  "  Because  I  am  satisfied  with 
my  work."  He  felt  he  had  done  all  that  was  in  him  ;  that,  in  a  word,  he  had  over- 
taken his  ideal,  and  so  henceforward  the  joy  of  his  art  for  him  was  gone.  Perhaps, 
too,  it  was  something  of  the  same  sort  that  made  Alexander  weep  when  he  had  con- 
quered India.  He  had  filled  in  the  outline  of  his  life  which  he  had  made  for  him- 
self, and  thought  not  that  there  was  yet  another  world  left  him  where  conquest 
would  be  far  more  honourable,  even  the  world  within  himself.  But  the  Christian  is 
delivered  from  this  danger.  He  has  always  the  joy  of  advancement,  while  yet 
there  is  ever  Bomething  more  in  Christ  beckoning  him  forward.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  lS-14.  Brethren,  I  connt  not  myself  to  have  apprehended. — I.  Ihpebfbc- 
TiON  AOKHOWLEDGED.  Those  that  have  made  greatest  progress  are  usually  moat 
(sensible  of  imperfections.     1.  The  reasons  of  this  point.     (1)  In  respect  of  grace. 

(a)  As  grace  increases  light  increases,  and  so  they  are  most  sensible  of  defects. 
Novices  who  know  little  are  most  apt  to  be  puffed  up  (1  Tim.  iii.  6).  Plutarch  tells 
us  that  when  young  men  came  to  study  at  Athens  they  were  wise  men  ;  after  they 
had  studied  a  little  only  lovers  of  wisdom,  but  afterwards  found  themselves  fools. 

(b)  As  grace  increases  love  to  God  is  increased,  and  so  sin  is  more  hated,  (c)  They 
have  more  experience  of  the  craft  of  Satan  (2  Cor.  ii.  11),  and  the  rocks  on  which 
they  may  split.  (2)  Because  of  the  world,  which  they  have  proved  to  be  vanity 
and  vexation  of  spirit.  (3)  Because  of  themselves.  The  longer  they  live  the 
more  they  are  acquainted  with  themselves,  both  by  meditation  and  commerce  with 
God,  whose  perfections  should  beget  humility  (Job  ilii.  5,  6).  (4)  Their  estate 
being  changed  they  have  now  to  look  to  progress  in  it  ;  and  good  men  cannot  run 
Jaot  enough  in  the  heavenly  race.  2.  The  uses.  (1)  To  teach  us  that  growth  in 
grace  and  humility  usually  go  together.  The  laden  boughs  do  most  hang  their 
beads.  (2)  Let  us  be  sensible  of  our  imperfections,  (a)  In  point  of  knowledge 
(Prov.  xxvi.  12).  (b)  In  point  of  daily  practice  (Mark  iii.  37).  (c)  In  point  of  per- 
severance (Ezek.  xxxiii.  13).  II.  Perfection  desired.  1.  The  thing  pursued  after 
yf&ti  "  the  prize,"  &c.  The  prize  of  eternal  glory  is  set  before  those  whom  God  hatb 


CHAP,  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  231 

"called"  in  Christ.  (1)  The  calling  is  (a)  outward  (Matt.  xxii.  14)  ;  (&)  inward 
by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  i.  9).  (2)  lu  this  calling  God  in  Christ 
hath  the  greatest  hand.  (3)  The  nature  of  this  calling,  (a)  The  work  of  God  is  to 
give  grace  whereby  the  heart  of  man  is  changed  and  sanctified  (2  Cor.  iv.  6). 
(b)  The  duty  of  man  is  to  be  obedient  to  the  heavenly  call  (John  i.  12 ;  Jer.  iii.  22 ; 
Psa.  xl  8,  xxviL  8  ;  Acts  ix.  6).  (c)  The  benefits  flowing  from  both.  There  is  a 
change  in  disposition,  from  sin  to  holiness  ;  in  condition,  from  misery  to  happi- 
ness. 2.  The  manner  of  the  prosecution.  Those  that  would  be  Christians  indeed 
must  make  heavenly  things  their  scope.  (1)  The  ways  in  which  this  is  done, 
(a.)  Habitually,  when  you  have  first  fixed  your  end  and  renounced  the  devil,  the 
world,  &o.,  and  chosen  the  better  part  (2  Cor.  iv.  18;  v.  9).  (b)  Actually.  It  is  not 
enough  to  choose  this  part,  we  luust  often  actually  think  of  it  to  renew  lively 
affections  (Prov.  iv.  25).  (2)  The  intention  of  the  end  is  either  (a)  formal  and  ex- 
plicit, by  express  thoughts  of  the  v\orld  to  come  when  the  mind  and  heart  are  in 
heaven  (Matt.  vi.  21)  ;  or  (b)  implicit  and  virtual,  by  the  ready,  unobserved  act  of 
a  potent  habit  (ver.  20).  This  is  necessary  that  we  may  be  sincere  (2  Cor.  i.  12). 
To  direct  our  way ;  when  the  eye  is  on  the  mark  you  may  the  better  steer  your 
course  towards  it.  To  quicken  old  endt^avours  (1  Cor.  ix.  24).  For  joy  and  solace 
(Rom.  v.  2-3).  To  make  us  constant  (Heb.  x.  39).  3.  The  earnestness  of  the 
pursuit.  (1)  His  diligence.  (2)  His  perseverance,  (a)  Forgetting  the  past. 
{b)  Pressing  onward.  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Christian  progress : — I.  The  THiNoa 
BEHIND  WHICH  ARE  TO  BE  FORGOTTEN.  1.  Past  siuful  plcasures.  2.  Past  evil 
acquaintances.  3.  Past  good  works.  II.  The  things  befori.  1.  Increased  holi- 
ness. 2,  The  prize  of  eternal  glory.  (W.  P.  Insley,  M.A.)  Religion  is  a  pro- 
gressive principle,  and  that  not  merely  by  Divine  appointment,  but  from  its  very 
nature.  This  is  the  only  satisfactory  evidence  that  religion  exists  at  all.  It  is  also 
the  chief  source  of  hapj)iiiess  here,  and  a  large  ingi-edient  in  it  hereafter.  It  is 
not,  howevt-r,  always  equally  marked  aud  m-asurable.  The  incoming  tide  baa 
receding  waves ;  so  let  no  man  judge  his  neighbour  a  hypocrite  because  he  thinks 
he  sees  a  retn  grade  movement.  This  progressive  character  may  be  argued — I. 
From  the  nature  of  the  subject  in  which  the  change  is  wbooqht,  Man,  an 
essentially  active  being.  As  previous  to  conversion  the  soul  was  in  progress,  going 
from  one  degree  of  evil  to  another,  so  it  may  be  expected  to  make  progress  in  the 
new  direction  given  it.  II.  From  the  nature  of  the  power  which  effects  xhb 
change.  If  the  effect  could  be  ascribed  to  chance,  or  to  momentary  impulse,  it 
might  be  expected  to  be  stationary,  or  even  to  cease  or  disappear,  but  when  the 
power  of  God,  almighty  and  unceasing,  is  the  sole  efiicieut  cause  of  conversion,  it 
is  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  life  created  can  be  at  a  standstill.  III.  From 
the  means  employed  to  effect  the  change.  Had  these  been  of  a  natural  or 
ordinary  character,  such  as  human  wisdom  might  devise  and  human  power  set  in 
motion,  then  we  might  infer  that  God  intended  us  to  rest  contented  with  actual 
attainments.  But  could  it  be  to  keep  piety  alive  without  improvement  or  increase 
that  God  gave  His  Son,  that  that  Son  came  to  die,  that  the  Spirit  was  given  7 
From  the  prodigality  and  divinity  of  the  agents  and  instrumentalities  religion  can- 
not be  a  stationary  thing.  The  purpose  must  be  adequate  to  the  means.  IV.  Fbou 
THE  ENE  FOR  WHICH  THE  CHANGE  18  PRODUCED.  That  end  is — 1.  Not  deliverance 
from  present  pain.  2.  Not  mere  deliverance  from  future  misery.  8.  Nor,  indeed, 
man's  restoration  by  itself.  If  the  end  were  in  man  be  would  usurp  God's  place. 
4.  The  end  is  for  God's  glory.  This  cannot  be  adequately  promoted  by  stationary 
rehgion.  V.  From  the  nature  of  the  change  itself.  As  far  as  Scripture  and 
experience  reveal  it,  it  is  but  an  incipient  change,  and  must  be  carried  on  for  ever. 
This  change  does  not  consist  in  anything  corporeal,  but  in  the  mind,  and  not  in  the 
structure  of  the  mind,  in  the  creation  of  new  faculties  or  the  destruction  of  old 
ones,  but  in  new  desires,  dispositions,  and  affections.  These  must  have  their 
objects,  and  their  actings  on  those  objects  must  increase  their  strength,  enlarge 
their  scope,  and  stimulate  their  energies.     VI.  From  thb  hanneb  in  which  God 

HAS  BEEN  PLEASED  TO    ENFORCE    THE  OBLIGATION  TO  PROGRESS.       1.    The    CmptinCSS    Of 

past  achievements.  2.  The  weight  of  future  glory.  {J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.) 
Christian  progress  by  oblivion  of  the  past: — There  are  some  views  of  the  apostle 
which  are  discouraging.  His  almost  superhuman  career,  and  his  calm  superiority 
to  temptation  seem  to  place  him  far  beyond  the  reach  of  imitation.  But  here  we 
see  him  frail  and  struggling  like  the  rest  of  us,  a  sight  precious — (1)  To  the  man, 
because  it  tells  him  that  what  he  feela  Paul  felt,  imperfect,  feeble,  far  fr^m  what 
Jm  would  wish   to  bat  yet  with  sanguine  hope  expecting  progress  in  the  saint! j 


»t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

life.    (2)  To  the  minister,  because  it  tells  him  that  his  very  weakness  may  be  hia 

SBople'a  strength.  I.  The  apostle's  aim — Perfection.  1.  Less  than  this  no 
hrietian  can  aim  at.  There  are  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises  that  by  these  we  might  be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  Not  merely 
to  be  equal  to  the  standard  of  our  day  or  even  to  surpass  it :  but  to  be  pure 
as  Christ  is  pure,  "  perfect  as  our  Father  in  heaven."  2.  It  is  easily  conceivable 
why  this  perfection  is  unattainable  here.  Faultlessness  is  conceivable,  being  merely 
the  negation  of  evil ;  but  perfection  is  positive,  the  attainment  of  ail  conceivable 
excellence.  Like  truth,  you  may  labour  on  for  years  and  never  reach  it,  yet  your 
labour  is  not  in  vain.  Every  figure  you  add  makes  the  fraction  nearer  than  the 
last  to  the  million  millionth.  3.  To  this  object  the  apostle  gave  himself  with 
singleness  of  aim — "  this  one  thing."  4.  In  pressing  towards  this  mark  St.  Paul 
attained  a  prize.  The  mark  was  perfection  of  character — the  prize  was  blessed- 
ness. But  he  did  not  aim  at  the  prize,  but  at  the  mark.  In  becoming  perfect  be 
attained  happiness,  but  that  was  not  his  primary  aim.  In  student  life  there  are 
those  who  seek  knowledge  for  its  own  sake,  and  those  who  seek  it  for  the  prize. 
To  the  first  knowledge  is  its  own  reward,  the  second  are  not  genuine  lovers  of 
knowledge.  That  is  a  spurious  goodness  which  is  good  for  the  sake  of  reward. 
The  child  who  speaks  truth  for  the  sake  of  the  praise  of  truth  is  not  truthful. 
The  man  who  is  honest  because  honesty  is  the  best  policy,  has  not  integrity 
in  his  heart.  He  who  endeavours  to  be  holy,  <fec.,  to  win  heaven  has  only  a 
counterfeit  rehgion.  God  for  His  own  sake.  Goodness  because  it  is  good. 
Truth  because  it  is  lovely — are  the  Christian's  aim.  The  prize  is  only  an  incen- 
tive, inseparable  from  success,  but  is  not  the  aim  itself.  With  this  limitation, 
however,  it  is  a  Christian  duty  to  dwell  much  more  on  the  thought  of  future 
blessedness  than  most  men  do.  If  ever  the  apostle's  step  began  to  flag,  the  radiant 
diadem  before  him  gave  new  vigour  to  his  heart.  It  is  our  privilege,  if  we  are  on 
our  way  to  God,  to  keep  steadily  before  us  the  thought  of  home.  It  was  so  with 
Moses  and  with  our  Lord.  II.  The  means  which  St.  Paul  todnd  available  for  the 
attainment  of  Divine  and  perfect  character.  1.  What  are  the  things  behind  which 
are  to  be  forgotten  ?  (1)  The  days  of  innocence.  We  come  into  the  world  with 
tendencies  to  evil ;  but  there  was  a  time  when  there  were  only  tendencies.  We 
call  that  innocence.  And  when  men  come  bitterly  to  feel  that  it  is  gone  they  look 
back  upon  it  with  regret.  In  this  there  is  much  that  is  feeble  and  sentimental 
Our  early  innocence  is  nothing  more  than  ignorance  of  evil.  Christian  life  is  not  a 
retaining  of  that  or  a  returning  to  it.  We  lose  our  negative  sinlessness  and  pat  on 
a  firm,  manly  holiness.  (2)  The  days  of  youth.  Up  to  a  certain  period  it  is  our 
tendency  to  look  forwards ;  but  as  we  arrive  at  middle  age  it  is  the  tendency  to  look 
back  with  the  remorseful  feeling  that  the  days  of  youth  are  gone  by  half  enjoyed. 
This  is  a  natural  feeling,  but  not  the  high  Christian  tone  of  feeling.  We  have  an 
inheritance  incorruptable,  &o.  What  have  we  to  do  with  things  past  ?  And  so 
manhood  in  the  Christian  life  is  a  better  thing  than  boyhood,  because  riper;  and 
old  age  ought  to  be  brighter,  calmer,  and  more  serene  than  manhood.  There  is 
a  second  youth  for  man  better  and  holier  than  the  first,  if  he  will  look  on  and  not 
back,  (3)  Past  errors.  There  is  that  rueful,  self-accusing  temper,  which  is  always 
looking  back.  Something  of  this  we  ought  to  have,  but  not  that  only.  Faith  is 
having  the  heart  to  try  again.  "Forget  the  things  that  are  behind."  We  shall  do 
better  next  time.  Under  this  head  we  include  all  those  mistakes  which  belong  to 
circumstances.  Some  of  these  are  irreparable.  A  wrong  profession,  e.g.,  has  been 
chosen.  It  is  wise  to  forget  all  that.  It  is  not  by  regretting  what  is  irreparable 
that  true  work  is  done,  but  by  making  the  best  of  what  we  are.  Poor  mediocrity 
may  secure  the  fewest  false  steps,  but  he  is  the  best  who  wins  victory  by  the 
retrieval  of  mistakes.  (4)  Past  guilt.  Bad  as  the  results  have  been  of  making 
light  of  sin,  those  of  brooding  over  it  have  been  worse.  Kemorse  has  done  more 
evil  than  even  hardihood.  We  want  everything  that  is  hopeful  for  our  task,  for  it 
is  not  an  easy  one.  And  therefore  it  is  that  the  gospel  comes  to  the  guiltiest  with 
the  inspiring  news  of  pardon.  Do  not  stop  too  long  to  weep  over  spilt  water. 
Conclusion  :  1.  Christian  progress  is  only  possible  in  Christ.  It  is  a  high  calling, 
and  therefore  seems  impossible ;  but  it  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  therefore  to  Lnb 
achieved.  2.  Out  of  Christ  it  is  madness  to  look  on.  {F,  W.  Robertson,  MJL.) 
The  law  of  progrett : — 1.  The  apostle  here  corrects  a  misapprehension,  which  might 
have  been  occasioned  by  his  previous  language.  The  mighty  moral  act  which 
changed  the  whole  tenor  of  his  life  did  not  so  contain  in  itself  his  spiritual  history 
as  to  make  ail  further  aspirations  and  eilorta  superfiuoua.     Unspiritual  men  have 


«HAP.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  233 

thought  to  compound  with  heaven  by  one  supreme  sacrifice,  and  so  to  escape 
from  the  wearing  trials  of  the  daily  struggle.  St.  Paul  maintains  that  at  hia 
conversion  he  was  laid  hold  of  so  that  he  might  attain  that  for  which  he  waa 
still  striving,  and  now  with  the  whole  history  of  the  Acts  behiud  him,  and  having 
written  his  greatest  Epistles  and  founded  his  noblest  Churches,  and  having  been 
caught  op  into  Paradise  and  heard  unspeakable  words,  he  yet  forgets  those 
things  that  are  behind,  &c.  2.  In  these  words  we  catch  the  echo  of  the  most 
familiar  and  potent  watchword  of  modern  times.  The  most  opposite  aspiratiuua 
and  determined  antagonists  ;  govt  rnment,  society,  art,  science,  even  religion,  are 
ranged  under  the  banner  of  pri  gress.  (1)  The  source  and  motive  of  progress  is  a 
sense  of  want.  (2)  This  is  kept  alive  by  an  ideal  of  possible  peifection  which 
haunts  the  soul,  and  is  a  relic  of  Eden.  This  is  largely  the  distinction  of  man 
from  the  beast.  It  is  the  effort  to  satisfy  an  unquenchable  thii  st  for  the  infinite. 
(3)  Allied  to  this  is  the  mighty  power  of  hope.  It  may  fail,  and  be  seduced  and 
degraded,  yet  its  very  errors  bear  witness  to  its  strength  and  the  greatness  of  its 
origin.  (4)  But  is  not  this  yearning  joined  to  this  hope  of  realization  among  the 
dispositions  which  welcome  revelation  to  the  soul  ?  Was  not  revelation  for  ages  a 
progress  from  Eden  to  Moriah,  to  Sinai,  to  Calvary?  and  although  it  is  now  com- 
plete (Jude  3),  yet  it  has  become  the  principle  of  progress.  On  the  one  hand, 
through  the  Church  itjleavens  the  world  gradually  ;  and,  on  the  other,  the  apoitle 
bere  is  a  sample  of  its  progressive  power  within  the  soul,  and  that  it  has  enriched 
and  is  still  euriching  human  thought,  ennobled  character,  and  given  an  original 
impulse  to  entire  sciences,  and  created  virtues  that  are  impossible  without  it,  are 
simpla  matters  of  fact.  I.  True  progress  must  be  the  progrfss  of  man  as  distinct 
from  anything  which  is  properly  outside  him,  1.  Contrast  this  with  one  of  the 
most  general  conceptions  of  progress  at  the  present  day — that  which  ministers 
dignity  and  well-being  to  man's  outward  life.  Political  reforms,  great  constructive 
efforts,  rapid  locomotion,  sanitary  improvements,  vast  accumulations  of  capital 
seconded  by  vast  outlays,  inventions  which  economize  labour  or  relieve  pain — these 
are  progress.  It  is  almost  a  marketable  commodity ;  it  can  be  measured,  weighed, 
▼•lued.  Mental  speculation  tliat  ^oes  not  invent  or  cannot  be  utilized,  morals 
which  do  not  sanction  economical  theories  or  subserve  epicureanism — these  are  the 
enemies  of  progress.  We  are  bidden  compare  English  life  to-day  with  that  of  the 
time  of  our  grandfathers.  But  forgetting  the  vast  achievements  of  the  past  and 
present,  we  are  bidden  to  look  forward  to  the  new  triumphs  which  await  us  or  our 
children.  As  contrasted  with  our  grandfathers  we  are  great  and  powerful ;  yet  for 
our  descendents  there  is  reserved  a  land  of  promise,  compared  with  which  our 
modern  civilization  is  but  as  the  desert.  To  the&e  enthusiasms  the  Church  of  God 
replies  in  no  unfriendly  spu't.  She  has  not  forgotten  the  blessing  of  Eden  (Gen. 
i.  28).  Nay,  material  progress  contributes  real,  if  indirect  service  to  the  higher 
interests  of  man.  2.  But  at  the  same  time  society  may  be  well  organized,  while 
man  himself  is  barbarous  and  selfish.  Man's  conquests  over  matter  are  no 
adequate  measure  of  the  true  progress  of  man.  For  he  is  a  spiritual  being, 
linked  by  his  higher  nature  to  an  immaterial  world.  Man  can  rule  matter  because 
he  is  superior  to  it.  Comprehend  your  matchless  dignity  in  your  Creator's  world. 
Each  of  you  has,  or  rather  is,  that  with  which  nothing  material,  atom  or  planet,  can 
rightly  challenge  comparison.  Each  is  in  the  depth  of  his  personality  a  spiritual  sub- 
stance. 3.  Let  it  be  thankfully  granted  that  as  a  means  to  a  higher  end,  material 
improvement  is  a  healthful  condition  of  human  life  and  a  blessing  from  God. 
But  its  exaggeration  at  the  expense  of  what  it  should  subserre  is  fatal  to  the 
progress  of  man.  When  the  sense  of  the  eternal,  and  all  the  finer  sensibilities  have 
been  crushed  out  by  the  worship  of  matter,  man  sinks  in  the  creation  of  God, 
even  though  he  should  learn  year  by  year  to  wield  more  and  more  power  over  the 
dead  atoms  around  him,  A  high  material  civilization  does  but  arm  the  human 
brute  with  new  instruments  of  his  lust  or  his  ferocity,  unless  it  go  hand  in  hand 
with  a  power  that  can  penetrate  his  heart  and  mould  his  will.  II.  Must  eubbaob 
IHB  WHOLE  OF  HUMAN  NATURE.  It  must  uot  cousist  in  the  undue  development  of  a 
single  power  or  faculty.  1.  To  some  progress  is  co-extensive  with  the  growth  of 
the  miud.  And  it  is  our  sacred  duty  to  cultivate  intellect  long  and  well ;  not 
indeed  that  it  may  be  a  pledge  of  selfish  temporal  advancement,  but  as  an  instro- 
ment  of  religious  work.  And  the  religious  development  of  intellect  is  unquea- 
tionably  a  prominent  feature  of  true  human  progress.  But  it  is  only  one  feature. 
2.  When  intellectual  energy  is  substituted  for  moral  and  spiritual  energy ;  when  a 
man's  mind  ia  developed  at  the  expense  of  his  heart  and  will,  he  deserves  coou^ 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap    in. 

passion.  Pure  intellectualism  is  apt  to  fall  short  even  of  the  lower  measures  of 
duty,  and  when  unbalanced  by  a  warm  heart  and  a  vigorous  will,  the  mere  cultiva- 
tion of  mind  makes  a  man  alternately  selfish  and  weak.      III.  Must  include  ob  at 

LEAST    RECOGNIZE     THE    ATTENDANT    FACTS    AND    OUTLYINQ    CONDITIONS    OF   HUMAN  LIFE. 

1.  The  Fall.  How  rarely  do  secular  theories  of  human  progress  condescend  to 
recognize  this  solemn  fact,  even  when  they  do  not  in  terms  reject  it.  Yet  there 
are  witnesses  to  it  beyond  the  precincts  of  theology.  There  is  the  pagan  doctrine 
of  the  difficulty  of  virtue  ;  there  is  the  spontaneous  tendency  to  evil  profoundly 
imbedded  in  humankind,  and  admitted  by  un-Christian  writers ;  and  there  is  man's 
undeniable  aversion  for  his  brother  man  when  in  a  state  of  nature.  So  that  when 
man's  life  is  organized  into  human  society,  and  society  is  furnishing  itself  into 
goverimient,  it  can  only  secure  itself  against  tyrrany  and  corruption  by  a  mechanical 
system  of  checks  and  counterchecks.  2.  The  wonderful  phenomenon  of  grace. 
Grace  is  not  that  mere  barren  inoperative  sentiment  of  good  will  or  favour  on  the 
part  of  God.  In  God  to  will  is  to  act,  to  favour  is  to  ble^s ;  and  thus  grace  is  a 
positive  boon  conferred  on  man  (Rph.  iii.  20) ;  the  might  of  the  everlasting 
Spirit  renovating  man  by  uniting  him  to  Christ.  3.  Immortality.  Can  any  theory 
of  progress  dare  to  claim  our  attention  which,  while  not  venturing  to  reject  this,  in 
practice  proceeds  as  if  they  were  uncertain  or  improbable  ?  What  a  poor,  narrow 
conception  of  man's  capacity  for  progress  is  that  which  sees  no  horizon  beyond  the 
tomb.  This  is  worse  than  educating  a  child  without  training  him  for  the  duties  or 
guarding  him  against  the  dangers  of  coming  manhood.  (Carum  Liddon.)  The 
Christian  race :— Behold  an  ezcellent  description  of  a  Christian  course,  borrowed 
from  the  exercise  of  running  a  race,  being  a  manlike  and  commendable  exercise, 
fitting  men  and  enabling  them  for  war.  The  very  heathen  herein  condemns  us, 
whose  ordinary  chief  exercises  are  but  good  company  as  we  call  them,  continual 
lying  at  taverns,  to  the  impoverishing  of  our  estates  and  weakening  our  bodies? 
"The  kind  I  condemn  not,  but  the  excess  is  such  as  the  heathen  would  be  ashamed 
of;  for  which  they  shall  even  rise  up  in  judgment  against  us,  and  condemn  us. 
But  from  the  simile,  we  may  gather  thus  much,  that  Christianity  is  a  race.  The 
beginning  of  this  race  is  at  the  beginning  of  our  conversion.  It  should  begin  at 
our  baptism.  The  first  thing  we  should  know  ought  to  be  God.  The  race  is  the 
performance  of  good  duties,  concerning  our  general  calling,  and  concerning  our 
particular.  For  the  length  of  our  races,  some  are  longer,  some  shorter,  but  the  end 
of  every  man's  race  is  the  end  of  his  life.  Some  men's  ways  are  plainer,  some 
rougher.  The  prize  is  fulness  of  joy.  The  lookers  on  are  heaven,  earth,  and  hell. 
God  is  the  institutor  of  this  race,  and  the  rewarder.  The  helpers  are  Christ,  good 
•ngels,  and  the  Church,  which  helps  by  prayer.  The  hinderers  are  the  devil  and 
his  instruments,  who  hiiider  us  by  slanders,  persecutions,  and  the  like.  For  ground 
of  this  race  in  us,  we  are  to  know  that  man  is  created  with  understanding,  directing 
him  to  do  things  to  a  good  end  and  scope.  Other  creatures  are  carried  to  their  end, 
as  the  shaft  out  of  a  bow,  only  man  foreseeing  his  end,  apprehends  means  thereto. 
Eis  end  is  to  receive  reconcihation  and  union  with  God,  to  which  he  aims  by  doing 
come  things,  suffering  others,  and  resisting  others.  (R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)  -  The  law$ 
and  hindrances  of  the  Christian  race : — I.  Fob  prepabation.  1.  The  laws.  (1)  As 
those  who  ran  had  to  use  such  diet  as  did  strengthen,  not  cloy,  and  such  apparel  as 
might  cover,  not  clog  them,  so  the  Christian  (Heb.  xii.  1).  (2)  We  must  consider 
the  ways  we  are  to  run  in,  and  what  dangers  we  are  like  to  meet  with.  The  want 
of  this  is  the  ground  of  apostasy.  (3)  We  must  enter  the  race  betimes.  The  devil's 
trick  is  to  tell  us  we  have  plenty  of  time ;  but  life  is  uncertain,  and  youth  is  the  best 
time  to  get  into  training.  2.  Hindrances.  (1)  Hope  of  long  life.  (2)  A  conceit 
that  when  we  have  given  oar  names  to  Christ  we  must  bid  adieu  to  all  delight. 
(3)  A  despair  of  getting  through.  11.  Fob  continuance.  1.  Laws.  (1)  You  must 
resolve  to  hold  on  without  failing  in  good  duties.  (2)  You  must  look  to  gain 
ground,  and  grow  from  grace  to  grace.  (3)  Yon  must  do  all  things  with  all  your 
might.  (4)  You  must  run  cheerfully  and  speedily.  2.  Hindrances.  (1)  Idle 
scruples  which  are  as  dust  thrown  in  the  eyes  of  runners,  and  temptations  which 
are  as  stones  to  their  feet.  (2)  Sins  against  conscience.  (3)  111  and  dull  company, 
0)  Wandering  minds.  (Ibid.)  Onward! — So  far  as  acceptance  with  God  ia 
«oncemed  a  Christian  is  complete  in  Christ  as  soon  as  he  believes.  But  while  the 
work  of  Christ  for  us  is  complete,  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  us  is  not  complete, 
but  is  continually  carried  on  from  day  to  day.  The  condition  in  which  every 
heliever  should  be  found  is  that  of  progress.  Nearly  every  figure  by  which 
'Christians  are  described  implies  this.     We  are  plants  in  the  Lord's  field,  but  we  ar« 


mar.  uv]  PHILIPPIANS.  235 

•own  that  ^e  mav  frcovr.  "  First  the  blade,"  &c.  We  are  born  into  the  family  of 
God;  but  there  are  babes,  little  children,  &c.  Is  the  Christian  a  pilgrim?  Then 
he  must  not  sit  down  as  if  rooted  to  a  place.  Is  he  a  warrior,  wrestler.  *c.  ? 
These  figures  are  the  very  opposite  of  idleness.  Admire  our  apostle  as — I.  Forming 
A  JUST  ESTIMATE  cpoN  HIS  PRESENT  CONDITION.  "  I  count,"  83  if  he  hal  taken  stock, 
made  a  careful  estimate,  and  had  come  to  a  conclusion.  The  conclusion  was  dis- 
satisfaction ;  nor  was  this  to  be  regretted  :  it  was  a  sign  of  true  grace.  And  yet  he 
was  vastly  superior  to  any  of  us.  Shame  then  on  us  poor  dwarfs  if  we  are  so  vain 
as  to  account  ourselves  as  having  apprehended.  Yet  there  are  those  who  prate  of 
having  reached  a  higher  life  than  this.  But  self-complacency  is  the  mother  of 
spiritual  declension.  We  have  observed — 1.  That  the  best  of  men  do  not  talk  of 
their  attainments.  Their  tone  is  self-depreciation,  not  self-content.  Everybody 
could  see  their  beauty  of  character  but  themselves.  Shallow  streams  brawl  and 
hubble,  but  deep  waters  flow  on  in  silence.  2.  That  we,  in  our  holiest  moments, 
-do  not  feel  self-complacent.  Job  spoke  up  for  his  innocence  till  the  Lord  revealed 
Himself.  We  sliall  never  see  the  beauty  of  Christ  without  perceiving  our  own 
deformity.  3.  That  whatever  shape  self-satisfaction  may  assume  it  is  a  shirking  of 
the  hardships  of  Christian  soldierhood.  Some  shirk  watchfulness  and  repentance 
by  believing  that  the  only  sanctilicution  they  need  is  already  theirs  by  imputation. 
Personal  holiness,  they  say,  is  legal.  Others  believe  they  have  perfection  in  the 
flesh,  and  others  yet  attain  complacency  by  the  notion  that  they  have  overcome  all 
their  sins  by  believing  they  have  done  so,  as  if  believing  a  battle  won  could  win  it. 
4.  That  complacency  can  be  reached  by  many  roads.  (1)  Enthusiasts  reach  it  by 
sheer  intoxication  of  excitement.  (2)  Antinomians  by  imagining  that  the  law  is 
abolished,  and  that  sin  is  not  sin  in  the  saints.  (3)  Cowards,  who  say  we  cannot 
conquer  all  sin,  and,  therefore,  we  need  not  aim  at  it.  5.  That  complacency  has 
its  root  in  forgetfulness  of  the  awful  holiness  of  God's  law,  and  the  heinousness  of 
ein.  II.  Placing  the  past  in  its  true  light.  '*  Forgetting,"  &o.  1.  He  does 
not  mean— (1)  That  He  forgot  the  mercy  of  God  he  had  enjoyed.  (2)  That  he 
forgot  the  sins  he  had  committed.  2.  We  must  follow  out  his  figure.  If  a  racer 
were  to  pass  most  of  his  fellows,  and  then  look  round  and  rejoice  over  the  distance 
covered  he  must  lose  the  race.  His  only  hope  is  to  forget  all  behind.  (1)  So  must 
it  be  with  past  sins  overcome.  Perhaps  at  this  moment  you  can  honestly  say,  "  I 
have  overcome  a  fierce  temper,"  "I  have  bestirred  a  naturally  indolent  spirit." 
Stop  long  enough  to  say,  "  Thank  God  for  that " ;  but  do  not  pause  to  congratulate 
yourselves,  or  it  may  be  soon  undone.  The  easiest  way  to  give  resurrection  to  old 
corruptions  is  to  erect  a  trophy  over  their  graves.  Yonder  friend  is  very  humble, 
but  if  he  were  to  boast  of  it  there  would  be  an  end  of  it.  (2)  So  with  all  the  work 
we  have  done.  Some  people  have  good  memories  as  to  their  performances,  The^ 
used  to  serve  God  wonderfully  when  they  were  young.  In  middle  life  they  wrought 
marvels,  but  now  they  rest  on  their  oars.  As  long  as  you  are  in  the  world  forget 
what  you  have  done,  and  go  forward — individuals,  churches,  denominations. 
III.  Paul  having  put  the  past  and  present  in  their  proper  places  goes  on  to  the 
yoTDRE,  ASPIRING  EAGERLY  TO  MAKE  IT  GLORIO0S.  We  ought  to  be  reaching  forward, 
to  be  like  Jesus.  He  who  would  be  a  great  artist  must  not  follow  low  models. 
"  Be  ye  perfect."  Shall  we  ever  reach  it.  Millions  have  who  are  before  the  throne, 
and  we  shall  too  by  God's  good  help.  IV.  Putting  forth  all  his  exertions  to 
REACH  THAT  WHICH  HE  DESIRES.  1.  "  This  oue  thing  I  do."  He  might  have 
attempted  other  things,  and  did,  but  all  with  reference  to  this  one  purpose. 
2.  Why  r  Because  he  felt  God  had  called  him  to  it.  3.  Moreover  he  saw  the 
orown.  (C.  H.  Sp^irgeon.)  The  great  prize:—!.  The  pdrpose  or  Pattl:  What 
is  involved  in  it  ?  1.  Supreme  love  to  Christ  and  consecration  to  His  service. 
2.  Deadness  to  all  human  ambitions  and  merely  earthly  good.  So  absorbed  is  the 
soul  in  this  one  idea  that  it  becomes  the  master-passion  of  life ;  and  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  all  things  else  cease  to  have  any  attraction.  8,  Not  satisfied  with  any 
measure  of  past  attainment,  or  service,  or  consecration,  but  continually  reaching 
forth  with  ever-growing  ardour.  There,  in  full  view,  is  the  "goal,"  and  the  racer's 
eye  is  fixed  on  it.  II.  Paul's  meaning  as  to  the  prize  was  a  personal  resemblancb 
TO  Christ,  and  a  desire  to  be  near  Him.  His  vision  of  Christ  in  the  infinite  attrac- 
tiveness of  His  character,  and  in  the  glory  and  blessedness  of  His  presence  and 
reign  in  heaven,  made  him  long  to  be  like  Him,  and  to  have,  not  only  a  place  in 
His  kingdom,  but  a  place  hard  by  the  throne  of  the  Lamb.  Multitudes  of 
Christians  are  content  just  to  be  saved — to  get  inside  the  heavenly  gate.  But  Paul 
rebukes  this  spirit.     He  had  a  higher  and  truer  ambition.      III.  How  the  gbeai 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

FBizs  IB  TO  BE  WON.  In  DO  Other  way  than  Paul  won  it  1.  The  mind  must  con 
template  it,  the  heart  be  fixed  upon  it,  until  the  power  of  it  shall  overmaster  aU 
other  objects  and  passions.  2.  The  purpose  to  gain  it  must  be  single  as  well  as 
supreme.  Divided  affection,  and  allegiance,  half-hearted  strivings,  will  end  in  dis- 
appointment  and  disaster.  The  whole  soul,  purpose,  aud  trend  of  life  must  be  in 
the  direct  line  of  daily  striving.  3.  To  insure  success,  all  dead  weights  must  be 
thrown  off,  all  unnecessary  hindrances  avoided,  all  entangling  alliances  sacrificed, 
and  "  the  sins  which  do  so  easily  beset  "  or  hinder  us,  put  away.  (G.  F.  Pent 'cost, 
D.D.)  Life'i  contests  and  prizes : — Such  was  the  language  of  the  most  masterful 
man  that  ever  trod  the  earth,  and  this  utterance  is  the  key-note  of  his  marvellously 
Buccessful  life.  L  Singleness  of  eye,  unity  of  purpose,  concentbation  op  powek. 
This  one  thing  I  do,  he  cries,  and  he  does  it.  II.  His  was  a  sanctified,  but 
BOUNDLESS  AMBITION,  for  evcr  reaching  forth  in  the  direction  of  higher  acquisitions 
of  spiritual  truth  and  nobler  results  of  Christian  work.  III.  Paul  pressed  kveb 
TOWARD  A  DEFINITE  WORK.  Paul's  mark  was  the  highest  that  ever  loomed  up  before 
a  human  soul.  IV.  This  was  also  the  prize  he  sought.  Earth  has  its  prizes,  its 
crowns,  its  plaudits,  its  splendid  fortunes.  Heaven's  real  prize  is  Christ  Himself, 
and  so  Paul's  aspiration  was,  "  That  I  may  win  Christ  and  be  found  in 
Him."  (P.  S.  Henson,  D.D.)  Paul's  view  of  life  was  what  it  should  be. 
— I.  Forgetful  or  oblivious  towards  the  past.  1.  Of  course  the  figure 
is  not  strictly  applicable  to  the  reality.  Life  cannot  break  itself  from  the 
past.  The  continuity  of  life  cannot  be  divided  at  any  point.  Nor 
would  it  be  well  if  it  could.  Up  to  whatever  point  we  have  run  our 
race  we  have  accumulated  experience  which  has  entered  into  life's  texture  and 
given  it  direction  and  colour  which  it  will  more  or  less  always  keep.  And  Paul 
did  not  mean  it  in  this  sense.  There  are  dark  days  and  bright  faces  that  will 
never  die  away.  8.  What  the  apostle  means  is  that  we  are  to  forget  the  things 
which  are  behind  as  no  longer  practically  concerning  us.  Nothing  can  now  be 
altered.  (1)  Did  we  stand  well  in  the  past  ?  Then  let  us  not  take  credit  for  it. 
There  is  no  time  for  self-elation  or  self-sufficiency.  As  soon  as  you  begin  to  dwell 
with  self-complacency  on  the  past  you  lose  your  ideal  of  duty,  and  your  right  sense 
of  the  claims  of  the  future  and  the  present.  This  is  the  mark  of  a  small  and 
never  of  a  great  Ufe,  (2)  Have  we  done  imperfectly  or  ill  in  the  past  ?  Let  us  not 
brood  or  despair.  The  past  is  done  with  us,  let  us  have  done  with  it,  and  in  putting 
off  the  old  let  us  put  on  the  new.  The  future  is  before  you  ;  the  present  is  still 
yours.  II.  Eager  aud  full  of  aspiration  towards  the  future.  1.  Life  by  itself 
has  a  tendency  to  stagnate,  to  grow  commonplace,  bounded  in  desire  and  aim.  The 
young  live  mainly  in  the  future;  but  by  aud  by  the  vision  fades  away  or  becomes 
limited.  A  definite  prospect  of  duty  opens  up  within  which  the  man  must  work, 
and  find  his  happiness  in  working.  Many  lives  are  wrecked  at  this  point,  jnst 
because  they  will  not  settle  and  go  to  some  definite  work.  The  world  neglected, 
neglects  them.  The  very  dream  of  hope  to  do  something  better  has  been  their 
ruin.  2.  But  this  is  no  reason  why  a  hopeful  eagerness  towards  the  future  should 
die  out  of  life.  All  right-minded  men  should  have  their  gaze  so  far  on  the  future 
that  they  may  hope  to  become  better  and  have  more  enthusiasm  and  patient  con- 
t'nuance  in  well  doing.  This  is  to  stretch  forth  unto  the  things  before  ;  to  have  not 
merely  an  ideal,  but  to  work  out  our  character,  by  God's  help,  more  and  more  into 
the  forms  of  that  ideal.  8.  In  whatever  respect  we  feel  that  we  are  offenders 
•gainst  the  law  of  Divine  perfection  revealed  in  Christ  lei  us  be  more  active.  It  is 
too  often  the  case  as  life  goes  on  to  get  contented  with  our  characters  such  as  they 
are.  IIL  Energetic  in  the  present.  1.  Paul  did  not  perplex  himself  with 
questions  as  to  the  meaning  of  life,  or  use  of  it.  He  was  not  found  asking,  as 
clever  writers  now  are,  Is  life  worth  living  f  Such  is  only  the  case  when  a  kind  of 
sickness  has  come  over  human  speculation.  Paul  bad  too  much  common  sense 
and  manliness,  and  moreover  had  a  real  work  to  do,  2.  His  example  may  be  be- 
yond us,  but  the  spirit  that  moved  him  to  work  may  be  ours.  It  is  not  necessary 
that  we  should  have  any  great  work  to  do,  although  we  have  all  such  work  in  the 
improvement  of  our  own  characters,  and  in  making  life  sweet  around  as.  8.  Un- 
like many  in  our  day,  who  have  cast  the  hope  of  the  future  away  from  them,  we 
have  something  for  which  to  work — the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling. 
(Principal  Tullock.)  Memory,  hope,  and  work  : — The  future  for  the  young,  we  say, 
the  present  for  the  middle-aged,  the  past  for  the  old.  But  these  words  of  sobllme 
hopefulness  are  from  "  Paul  the  Aged. "  I.  Live  is  the  future.  1.  The  two  objeoti 
of  hope  and  effort  are  distinct  though  connected.  The  mark  is  reached  by  the  runner's 


CHAP,  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  287 

effort,  the  prize  is  the  reward  given  for  victory.  The  former  stands  for  "  being  made 
oonforcuable  unto  Christ's  death,"  the  latter  for  "attaining  the  resurrection ;  "  or  the 
mark  is  likeness  to  Christ,  and  the  prize  whatsoever  glory  and  felicity  God  shall 
give  besides.  2.  Then  there  is  to  be  a  distinct  recognition  of  moral  perfection  as 
our  conscious  aim,  and  our  efforts  are  allowably  stimulated  by  the  hope  of  the  fair 
reward  it  ensures.  If  you  want  to  be  blessed  you  must  be  good  ;  if  you  want  to 
get  to  heaven  you  must  be  like  Christ.  3.  Our  highest  condition  is  not  the  attain- 
ment of  perfection,  but  the  recognition  of  heights  above  us  as  yet  unreached. 
(1)  Such  recognition  is  the  condition  of  all  progress.  The  artist  who  is  satisfied 
with  his  transcript  of  his  ideal  will  never  grow  any  more.  Unless  we  saw  an  ideal 
far  above  us,  the  actual  would  never  approximate  toward  it.  The  unrest  born  of  the 
contrast  between  these  two  marks  man  off  from  the  happy  contentment  of  the 
brutes  beneath  him,  and  the  happy  peacefulness  of  the  angels  of  God.  (2)  That 
it  eminently  true  of  "  growth  in  grace."  The  type  for  us  is  the  express  image  of 
God  in  Christ.  To  that  supreme  beauty  our  nature  is  capable  of  unlimited  approach. 
No  bounds  can  be  set  to  it.  (3)  There  are  two  ideas  in  that  notion  of  pertection. 
(a)  Extirpation  of  sin  ;  (6)  Attainment  of  the  Divine  likeness.  Sin  may  be  extir- 
pated, and  yet  the  second  process  may  be  in  its  infancy.  And  we  shall  not  stop 
growing  in  heaven,  but  through  the  eternities  we  shall  be  growing  wiser,  nobler, 
stronger,  greater,  and  more  filled  with  God.  (4)  This  grand  future  should  draw 
oar  thoughts  all  the  more  to  itself,  because  it  is  not  only  grand,  but  certain.  •'  We 
know  that  ...  we  shall  be  like  Him."  (5)  And  therefore  that  habit  of  living  in 
the  future  should  make  us  glad  and  confiilent.  And  that  is  the  true  temper  for  wider 
interests  than  our  own.  Live  in  the  future  for  yourselves,  and  for  the  world. 
Believe  in  a  millenium  of  some  sort  or  other,  because  that  faith  is  wrapped  up  in 
the  confidence  that  God  loves  us  all,  and  is  shaping  this  earth's  history  to  His  own 
perfect  aim,  and  instead  of  lamenting  "  the  former  days  were  better,"  let  us  believe 
that  the  time  will  come  when  our  brethren  with  us  will  have  reached  the  mark,  and 
the  purposes  of  God  finished  in  a  redeemed  humanity  and  s  perfected  world. 
II.  Lbt  that  brioht,  certain,  infinite  future  dwabf  fob  d8  tue  narrow  and 
STAINED  PAST.  1.  This  advico  goes  dead  against  much  "experimental"  Christianity; 
but  it  is  wise  for  all  that.  All  sorts  of  backward-looking  are  a  positive  weakness 
and  impediment  to  a  man  in  running  a  race.  Time  given  to  such  occupation  is 
withdrawn  from  the  actual  work  of  life.  A  man  cannot  run  with  his  eyes  over  his 
shoulder ;  he  is  sure  to  knock  against  somebody,  and  so  be  delayed  and  hindered. 
And  if  you  stand  there  looking  backwards  instead  of  making  the  best  of  your  way 
out  of  evil,  the  evil  will  catch  you  up.  Remembering  always  tends  to  become  a 
substitute  for  doing.  But  take  the  injunction  more  specifically.  1.  Forf;et  past 
failures.  They  are  apt  to  weaken  yon.  You  say,  "  I  shall  never  be  any  better. 
Experience  teaches  me  my  limits."  So  it  does.  There  are  certain  things  we  shall 
never  be  able  to  do,  but  it  says  nothing  about  the  limits  in  our  line  of  things. 
There  is  no  limit  in  that  respect,  aud  to  take  the  past  as  proving  it  is  to  deny  the 
power  of  God's  gospel,  the  expansibility  of  the  soul,  and  the  promise  of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  2.  Forget  past  attainments.  (1)  They  are  apt  to  become  food  for  com- 
placency and  every  vain  confidence.  We  are  apt  to  say,  "  At  such  and  such  a  time 
I  was  converted  and  growing  in  Christian  attainments.  Then  my  heart  was  cleav- 
ing to  the  Lord,  and  filled  with  His  fulness."  Yes,  and  you  ate  your  dinner  twenty 
years  ago ;  will  that  serve  to  strengthen  you  for  to-day  ?  The  rain  fell  on  the 
young  spring  wheat  when  yon  and  I  were  boys  ;  will  that  do  anything  towards  this 
year's  harvest  ?  (2)  These  attainments,  like  failures,  do  very  often  become  the 
measure  of  our  notion  as  to  what  we  shall  be  able  to  do  in  the  future,  and  so  cripple 
us.  2.  Forget  past  circumstances,  whether  sorrows  or  joys.  The  one  are  not 
without  remedy,  the  other  not  perfect.  Both  are  past ;  why  remember  them  ? 
Why  should  you  carry  about  parched  corn  when  you  dwell  among  fields  white  unto 
harvest?  Why  clasp  a  handful  of  poor  withered  flowers  when  the  grass  is  sown 
with  their  bright  eyes  opening  to  the  sunshine  ?    III.  Let  hopes  fob  thb  futubb 

AND    LESSOHS    FROM    THE    PAST   LEAD    TO    STRENUOUS   WORK   FOB   THE    PRESENT.       "  ThlS 

one  thing  I  do."  1.  Be  the  past  and  future  what  they  may,  I  cannot  reach  the  one 
nor  forget  the  other  except  by  setting  myself  with  all  my  might  to  present  duties 
and  by  reducing  all  duties  to  various  forms  of  one  life  purpose.  2.  How  ia  that 
noble  ideal  reached  ?  It  is  the  spirit  in  which,  not  the  work  at  which,  we  work 
that  makes  life  one.  A  hundred  processes  may  go  to  the  manufacture  of  a  pin. 
We  may  all  be  trying  to  be  like  Jesus  Christ,  whatever  may  be  the  material  at  which 
we  toiL    {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        Behind  and  be/ore : — 1.  ThiB  ia  the  language  of 


238  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

men  who  subdue  the  world,  the  motto  of  all  heroes,  the  secret  of  all  triumph. 

2.  We  here  observe  one  of  those  laws  of  compensation  by  which  nature  would 
atone  for  the  inequality  of  her  gifts.  All  men  have  not  great  talents  :  but  all  men 
may  have  great  industry,  and  as  talents  are  useless  without  diligence,  one  talent 
improved  by  honest  labour  will  make  a  greater  man  than  ten  that  rust  unused. 

3.  Paul's  entire  life  was  an  illustration  of  the  text.  As  a  lad  he  was  bent  on 
scholarship,  and  won  honours  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel ;  as  a  member  of  the  Jewish 
Church  by  his  prodigal  ability  he  soon  placed  himself  beyond  parallel.  As  a  con- 
vert to  Christianity  he  was  the  same  man  in  singleness  and  intensity  of  purpose. 

4.  Another  feature  in  Paul's  character.  He  arrogates  no  particular  saintship.  His 
fellow  disciples  are  not  left  to  infer  that  his  path  is  accessible  to  no  traveller  but 
himself.  He  preaches  to  sinners  as  the  chief  of  sinners,  to  Christians  as  a  fellow 
citizen ;  the  race  and  fight  were  his  no  less  than  theirs.  I.  What  abb  those 
THINGS  WHICH  Paul  LEFT  BEHIND  AND  FORGOT.  1.  Whatever  he  had  given  up  for 
Christ  (ver.  7).  He  forgot  them  in  the  sense  of  neglecting  them.  He  not  only  never 
repented  these  sacrifices,  he  forgot  them.  The  Israelites  fondly  recollected  the  flesh- 
pots  of  Egypt,  and  there  are  Christians  who  dispute  with  themselves  whether  in 
the  sensitive  jealousy  of  their  first  love  they  did  not  make  too  many  sacrifices  for 
their  Master.  The  man  who  calculates  with  even  a  tincture  of  discontent  what  he 
has  Buffered  for  Jesus,  has  never  seen  the  Cross.  2.  The  errors  and  doubts  that 
marked  his  first  approach  to  Christ.  (1)  He  never  said  but  once,  "  Who  art  thou, 
Lord  f  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  do?  "  As  soon  as  it  pleased  God  to  reveal  His 
Son  to  Paul,  he  disentangled  his  mind  for  ever  from  the  elements  or  rudiments 
that  typified  and  foreshadowed  Christ,  and  never  returned  to  those  beggarly 
elements.  Mark  the  confidence  of  his  personal  feelings  when  he  finds  occasion  to 
impart  them — "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  This  is  the  language  of  a  man 
who  has  laid  aside  for  ever  the  doubt  of  his  acceptance  with  God,  of  Christ's  ability 
to  save,  of  his  Master's  constant  presence  and  guiding  spirit.  Doubts  on  other 
matters  arising  in  the  progress  of  his  ministry  he  would  discuss  in  their  proper 
time,  but  those  which  had  been  once  disposed  of  were  forgotten  for  ever.  (2)  What 
a  melancholy  religion  is  theirs  who  are  ever  contending  with  old  doubts.  After  the 
Lord  has  shown  Himself  to  the  eye  of  faith,  they  seem  unable  to  let  this  matter 
rest.  A  conversation  with  an  unbeliever,  the  perusal  of  a  book,  the  pressure  of  a 
besetting  sin,  disturbs  their  assurance,  and  they  go  over  the  old  ground.  (3)  Having 
obtained  faith  in  Jesus  and  adoption  into  God's  family,  they  ought  to  give  all  dili- 
gence to  add  to  their  faith  courage  to  confess  it.  A  bold  utterance  of  our  trust  in 
Jesus  is  an  excellent  remedy  for  unbelieving  fears.  To  this  boldness  of  confession 
they  should  add  knowledge,  and  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.  This  will  multiply 
instances  of  His  faithfulness.  And  then,  lest  knowledge  should  puff  up,  there 
should  follow  self-discipline,  meek  endurance,  fervent  piety  towards  God,  and 
charity  to  men.     IL    We  have  seen  what  Paul  left  behind  :   let  vb  now  comb 

UP    TO    THE   FRONT    AND   LOOK   INTO   THE    DISTANCE   FOB  THE   THINGS   TOWARDS    WHICH 

PAUL  IS  RUNNING,  AND  REACHING  AS  HE  RUNS.  Thcso  are  eU  embraced  in 
fellowship  with  Christ.  1.  Few  knew  more  of  Christ  than  Paul,  yet  he 
considered  his  attainments  but  as  the  first  steps  in  a  path  of  ever-unfolding 
discovery.  Jesus  was  a  mine  just  opened  ;  and  he  describes  his  prospects 
like  a  man  almost  bewildered  by  the  sudden  inheritance  of  wealth  untold. 
2.  To  win  Christ  was  not  to  gain  His  favour  simply,  but  to  be  conformed  to  His 
image.  {E.  E.  Jenkins,  LL.D.)  Spiritual  barbarism: — I.  Two  thoughts  are 
HERE  SUGGESTED.  1.  The  apostlc's  principle  is  the  very  one  which  makes  the 
civilized  man  distinct  from  the  barbarian.  The  characteristic  of  the  former  is  restless 
progressiveness ;  of  the  latter,  supineness  and  stagnation.  (1)  The  civilizing  man 
has  his  caravan  track,  but  he  will  have  one  directer  and  easier.  He  has  turn- 
pikes and  stage  coaches,  but  he  must  level  or  tunnel  the  mountain,  and  lay  a  pave- 
ment of  iron,  and  chain  his  car  to  a  horse  of  fire.  The  earth  yields  him  enough  to 
eat,  but  he  will  not  live  by  bread  alone  ;  he  must  eat  bread  enough  to  bring  with 
it  a  better  provided  life  ;  so  he  contrives  steam  ploughs  and  threshers  to  make  the 
arm  of  the  farmer  equal  to  the  productive  power  of  the  sun  and  field.  He  finds 
the  pen  too  slow,  hence  his  types  and  cylinders  scatter  libraries.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  barbarian  is  content  to  Uve  in  a  hut,  to  scratch  the  ground  with  a  stick, 
to  trudge  on  foot  with  a  trail  for  a  road.  He  takes  the  world  as  he  finds  it,  and 
leaves  it  as  he  found  it.  (2)  But  the  one  sort  do  not  all  live  where  civilization  pre- 
vails, nor  do  the  others  in  lands  where  barbarism  is  dominant.  Every  civilized 
region  has  risen  out  of  barbarism,  and  we  see  the  barbarian  spirit  in  stagnant 


OHAP.  ni.]  PIIILIPPIANS.  239 

conservatism  resisting  improvement.  (3)  None  the  less  does  the  old  barbarian 
strain  come  to  the  surface.  When  a  man  thinks  of  his  moral  condition,  he  says,  "  I 
•m  as  good  as  the  average  of  my  neighbours."  It  is  this  from  which  man  has  to 
be  saved.  2.  A  rule  which  God  has  made  fundamental  in  the  world,  we  must  make 
BO  in  individual  life.  (1)  Since  the  day  when  man  first  lighted  a  fire  to  boil  his  pot, 
and  hollowed  out  his  first  canoe,  up  to  the  day  when  the  latest  development  of 
these  contrivances  appears  in  the  steamship  which  can  sail  three  thousand  miles 
a  week,  the  world  has  never  rested  in  its  advance.  What  achievements  has  the 
world  made  and  forgotten  in  achieving  better.  Again  and  again  it  would  seem  as 
if  the  men  of  Babylon,  of  Memphis,  of  Athens,  and  Bome  must  have  said  to  them- 
selves, "  No  more  beyond."  Modern  men  have  said  this,  and  prophesied  dire 
results  from  setting  up  of  power  instead  of  hand  looms,  sewing  machines  instead 
of  needles,  locomotives  instead  of  coach  horses.  But  the  world  moved  on  to  "  forget 
the  things  behind,"  &a.  (2)  Said  the  popes  to  those  who  saw  a  purer  Church  and 
truth  attainable,  "  No  more  beyond,  except  the  fire  for  those  who  would  disturb 
our  established  order."  So  said  the  English  kings  of  the  seventeenth  century  to  the 
uprising  spirit  of  liberty.  So  say  the  theologians  to-day ;  but  the  world  and  the 
Church  move  on.  There  are  branches  to  spring  from  the  ever-growing  trees  that 
have  not  yet  even  budded.  (3)  What  God  works  in  the  great  whole,  we  are  to 
work  in  our  part.  He  in  the  man,  we  as  the  molecules  of  the  man  are  to  be  of 
one  mind — "  forgetting,"  Ac.  II.  From  these  thoughts  we  mat  draw  fresh  con- 
victions FOR  THE   realizations   OF   THE   SPIRITUAL   CAPABILITIES   OF  OOB   NATURE.      1. 

While  we  derive  inspirations  of  confidence  from  contemplating  the  grand  law  of  the 
world's  increasing  progress,  must  we  not  see  a  stem  rebuke  upon  every  life  not  in 
harmony  with  this  law  t  2.  On  what  principle  is  our  personal  life  and  thought 
conducted  ?  So  far  as  relates  to  our  worldly  condition,  our  constant  endeavour  for 
betterment  as  the  necessity  of  an  undecaying  life.  How  then  about  the  far  more 
Important  thing  ?  All  unimproveable  life  must  sooner  or  later  run  out.  When 
the  law  of  development  will  not  work,  the  law  of  decay  and  dissolution  is  the  only 
one  that  will.  Work,  then,  with  the  better  law  intelligently,  consistently,  persever- 
ingly.  8.  The  great  reproach  of  Christianity  is  its  passive  content  with  an  average 
morality,  and  a  life  devoid  of  aspiration  to  higher  levels — in  a  word,  its  spiritual 
barbarism,  stagnant,  supine,  and  poor  in  power.  {J.  M.  Whiton,  Ph.  D.)  Winter 
leaves : — Trees  have  their  winter  as  well  as  their  summer  foliage.  Every  one  is 
familiar  with  the  buds  which  tip  the  extremities  of  every  branch  iu  spring.  On  the 
outside  they  are  covered  with  dry,  glossy  scales,  which  are  true  leaves  of  the  lowest 
type.  They  are  formed  in  spring,  and  grow  during  the  whole  summer,  though  very 
slowly,  owing  to  the  diversion  of  the  sap  from  them  to  the  foliage,  behind  which 
they  are  bid.  As  the  season  advances,  the  sap  gradually  ceases  to  flow  to  the 
summer  leaves,  which  therefore  ultimately  fade  and  fall  from  the  tree ;  and  the 
last  movements  of  it,  at  the  end  of  autumn,  are  directed  towards  the  buds,  in  order 
to  prepare  them  for  taking  at  the  proper  time  the  place  of  the  generation  of  leaves 
that  has  just  perished.  But  in  spring,  the  buds,  stimulated  by  the  unwonted  sun- 
shine, begin  to  open  at  their  sharp  extremities.  And  as  the  young  green  leaves 
within  expand  in  the  genial  atmosphere,  the  ser%'ices  of  the  bud-scales,  or  covering- 
leaves,  are  no  longer  needed,  and  by  and  by  they  roll  away,  and  fall  one  by  one 
from  the  tree,  strewing  the  ground  beneath  till  it  looks  like  a  threshing-floor. 
Thus  every  tree  has  a  double  leaf  fall  every  year.  The  winter  leaves,  which  are 
designed  for  the  protection  of  the  bud  during  winter,  are  pushed  off  by  the  growth 
of  the  summer  leaves  from  the  bud  in  spring  ;  and  the  summer  leaves,  which  are 
designed  for  the  nourishment  and  growth  of  the  tree  in  summer,  wither  and  fall  off 
in  autumn.  Cold  is  fatal  to  the  summer  leaves ;  warmth  is  fatal  to  the  winter 
leaves.  Inactivity  renders  useless  the  summer  leaves  ;  and  growth  supersedes  the 
winter  leaves.  I.  The  apostle's  life  affords  many  sieiking  illustrations  of 
THIS.  1.  In  his  unconverted  state,  there  were  many  things  on  which  he  prided 
himself — the  scenes  and  associations  of  his  youth,  the  eager  sympathies  of  his 
opening  intellect,  and  his  ardent  affection  for  the  polity  and  religion  of  his  fathers. 
Bnt  all  these  natural  qualifications  of  the  man  belonged  to  the  winter  or  unregene- 
rate  state  of  his  soul ;  Were  winter  leaves  that  hid  and  confined  the  germ  of  spiritual 
life.  2.  But  although  worthless  as  grounds  of  justification,  they  had  their  own 
value  in  training  and  fitting  him  for  his  work.  Like  the  bud  scales,  they  afforded 
protection  and  nourishment.  All  that  he  had  acquired,  he  laid  on  the  altar.  3. 
And  when  the  great  crisis  of  his  life  came — the  spring-time  of  his  conversion,  & 
light  exceeding  the  brightness  of  the  noonday  son  shone  upon  him ;  and  in  this 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m  ^ 

warm  genial  atmosphere  of  grace,  the  germ  of  spiritual  lite  unfolded  itself  within, 
and  burst  its  wrappings.  Old  forms  ceased  to  have  any  hold  upon  his  affections 
and  homage.  He  died  to  his  former  self  and  all  its  experiences,  and  lived  a  new 
life  in  Jesus.  The  winter-leaves  having  served  their  purpose,  now  dropped  off,  and 
the  summer  leaves  of  grace — the  blossoms  of  holiness,  the  fruits  of  righteousness — • 
had  full  liberty  to  grow  and  develop  themselves.  4.  But  we  must  not  suppose  that 
the  dropping  was  without  effort  or  pain.  It  sometimes  needs  a  severe  gust  of  wind 
to  shake  off  the  scales  that  still  linger  around  tlie  bud.  And  it  was  with  a  sore 
wrench  that  St.  Paul  tore  himself  away  from  all  his  former  cherished  associations. 
5.  But  even  in  his  converted  state  there  were  many  things  which  Paul  required  to 
forget.  The  branch  of  a  tree  puts  forth  bud  after  bud  in  its  gradual  growth  and 
enlargement.  These  summer  leaves,  having  added  a  cubit  to  the  stature  of  the 
branch,  pass  away ;  and  the  added  growth  in  its  turn  puts  forth  a  new  bud  covered 
with  its  scales  or  winter  leaves,  which  drop  off  the  following  spring,  and  allow  the 
imprisoned  summer  leaves  once  more  to  unfold  themselves  in  the  sunny  air.  And 
so  was  it  with  St.  Paul.  His  spiritual  life  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  was  a 
series  of  fresh  beginnings.  Not  once  merely  at  conversion,  but  often  in  hia  con- 
verted state,  had  he  to  form  and  to  drop  the  winter  leaves  in  the  process  of  spiritual 
growth.  There  were  many  things  by  which  his  spiritual  life  was  nourished  and 
guarded — which  had  to  be  blotted  out  if  he  would  go  on  to  perfection.  And  so  be 
reached  forth  unto  those  things  which  were  before.  II.  Are  not  the  lessons  o» 
BUCH  A  LIFE  VERY  BEOAD  AND  INTELLIGIBLE.  1.  Forgetfuluess  of  what  is  behind  is 
an  essential  element  in  the  progress  of  every  believer.  In  our  conversion  we  mast 
separate  ourselves  from  the  associations  of  our  unregenerate  state,  and  count  those 
things  that  were  gain  to  us,  loss,  so  that  we  may  be  found  in  Christ.  These  winter 
leaves  must  fall  off,  when  the  vernal  season  of  grace  has  come,  and  we  who  were 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  are  made  alive  unto  God.  2.  But  not  at  this  initiatory 
stage  merely  is  there  to  be  a  discarding  of  the  things  that  are  behind.  At  every  sub- 
sequent stage  of  our  growth  there  must  be  the  same  process.  By  a  course  ol 
prosperity  our  souls  are  made  to  unfold  in  gratitude  to  God  and  beneficence  to  men. 
In  a  season  of  sorrow  we  are  made  more  heavenly  reminded.  But  these  means  are 
not  to  be  cherished  as  if  they  were  the  end.  We  are  to  keep  them  in  the  background, 
and  prize  the  cliaracter  they  have  formed  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  not  for  self- 
complacency.  These  winter  leaves  that  cherished  and  nourished  our  growth  in 
grace  must  drop  off  from  time  to  time,  with  each  new  attainment  that  we  "  may 
rise  on  stepping-stones  of  our  dead  selves  to  nobler  things."  3.  But  not  the  means 
of  growth  and  formative  processes  of  the  Christian  character  only,  must  be  left 
behind  and  forgotten  ;  the  very  ends,  the  growths  themselves,  must  also  be  super- 
seded. In  a  certain  sense  each  attainment  must  be  the  bud-covering  of  a  succeeding 
attainment,  and  fall  away  when  it  is  matured.  There  must  be  a  double  leaf-fall 
from  the  soul  as  well  as  from  the  tree.  The  summer  leaves  that  are  cherished  must 
drop  off  as  well  as  the  winter  leaves  that  cherished  them.  And  so  the  beautiful 
blossoms  of  grace  must  be  left  behind.  To  rest  satisfied  with  attainment  ia  to 
check  development.  It  is  amazing  how  soon  when  we  cf  ase  to  forget  the  things 
that  are  belimd,  and  remain  stationary  we  degenerate.  When  means  become  ends, 
they  encase  us  with  a  hard  covering  impervious  to  the  tender  influences  of  heaven. 
III.  St.  Paul  exhorted  the  Hebrew  Christians  to  leave  thb  principles  of  thb 
DOCTRINE  OF  Christ,  AND  TO  GO  ON  TO  PERFECTION.  And  such  an  exhortatiou  is  still 
greatly  needed.  1.  Very  many  believers  stop  short  at  the  very  initial  processes  of 
grace,  and  imagine  that  tliese  are  the  final  ends — that  nothing  more  can  be  desired 
or  attained.  It  is  as  if  the  life  of  the  tree  always  remained  in  the  bud,  instead  ol 
casting  off  its  wrappings  and  expanding  into  summer  foliage  and  fruit.  Conversion 
is  ind»-ed  all -essential,  for  while  the  heart  is  unchanged  there  can  be  neither  life  nor 
growth  ;  but  it  is  merely  the  commencement  of  a  course.  Conversion,  justification, 
and  peace  are  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  They  are  not,  indeed, 
to  be  dropped  as  mere  bud-scales,  as  mere  means  to  an  end — for  they  are  the  basis 
upon  which  all  the  subsequent  efforts  of  the  spiritual  life  are  to  be  made.  But  just 
as  in  the  unfolding  buds  of  the  lilac  and  horse-chestnut  tree,  the  covering  leaves  of 
winter,  pass  through  intermediate  changes — in  the  one  into  the  blades  of  the  leaf, 
and  in  the  other  into  the  leaf  stalks — so  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  are 
to  be  carried  on  in  the  growth,  and  their  substance  is  to  be  used  up  and  modified,  as 
it  were,  in  the  expansion  of  the  soul.  In  this  sense  the  things  that  are  behind  are 
to  be  forgotten.  2.  It  is  vain  to  tell  the  believer  to  forget  the  things  that  are 
behind,  to  discard  tbe  preparatory  means  by  which  he  advances  in  piety  by  a  men 


flBAP.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  841 

temporary  effort  of  will.  He  cannot  do  bo.  It  is  only  by  growing  that  he  can  get 
rid  of  the  things  no  longer  essential ;  and  what  he  cannot  remove,  except  by  a 
violent  destructive  wrench,  will  fall  off  easily,  and  of  its  own  accord,  when  anper- 
eeded  and  rendered  effete  by  growth.  8.  To  this  development  we  should  be  further 
stimulated  by  the  consideration  that  the  bud  whose  growth  is  arrested  becomes 
transformed  into  a  thorn.  If  our  winter  leaves — the  experiences  that  contribute  to 
form  our  character,  and  which  are  appropriate  to  the  various  stages  of  our  growth 
—be  allowed  to  remain  unchanged  and  unforgotten,  and  to  choke  up  our  spiritual 
life  so  as  to  arrest  its  advancement,  they  will  be  changed  into  thorns.  The  peace 
that  we  trust  in  will  vanish  in  sorrow.  The  attainment  with  which  we  are  satisfied 
becomes  a  thorn  in  the  fiesh,  the  messenger  of  Satan  to  buSet  us  l^st  we  be  exalted 
above  measure.  It  is  no  unusual  thing  to  see  a  branch  of  a  tree  whose  vital  activity 
is  80  enfeebled  that  its  growth  is  arrested.  Its  terminal  bud  loses  the  power  of 
throwing  off  its  winter  leaves,  because  no  summer  leaves  form  in  its  interior.  The 
bud  then  dies,  and  the  branch  withers  and  becomes  fit  for  the  burning.  And  so  it 
is,  alas  I  no  unusual  thing  to  see  branches  in  Christ  whose  spiritual  life  is  so  weak 
that  their  growth  is  at  a  standstill.  They  lose  the  power  of  forgetting  the  things 
that  are  behind,  because  they  are  not  reaching  forth  unto  those  things  which  are 
before.  They  are  therefore  in  danger  of  perishing.  There  is  a  sense,  indeed,  in 
which  we  cannot  forget  the  things  that  are  behind,  strive  as  we  may.  The  winter 
leaves  or  bud-scales  of  a  tree  leave  behind  them  when  they  drop  off  a  peculiar 
mark  or  scar  on  the  bark,  just  as  the  summer  leaves  do  when  they  fall.  On  every 
branch  a  series  of  these  scars,  in  the  shape  of  rings  closely  set  together,  may  be 
seen,  indicating  the  points  where  each  growing  shoot  entered  on  the  stage  of  rest. 
And  so  every  experience  through  which  we  pass,  every  act  we  perform,  goes  into 
the  very  substance  of  our  being,  and  we  can  never  be  after  it  what  we  were  before 
it.  But  though  these  things  cannot  in  this  sense  be  forgotten,  they  should  not  be 
allowed  to  hang  around  us  to  impede  our  efforts  at  improvement,  any  more  than 
the  development  of  the  tree  is  impeded  by  its  scars.  We  must  remember  the 
failures  and  sins  of  the  past  in  order  to  magnify  the  mercy  that  forgave.  Oon- 
clusion :  1.  Taking  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  universe,  we  find  that  everything 
has  a  special  object  to  perfonn,  and  when  that  object  is  accomplished,  the  agency 
perishes.  The  material  system  of  nature  will  some  day  be  dissolved.  Life  on  earth 
is  not  an  end,  but  a  means — a  state  of  discipline  and  preparation  for  something 
higher  and  nobler  beyond,  and  is  therefore  transitory  in  its  duration.  So,  too,  the 
means  of  grace  are  the  scaffolding  by  the  aid  of  which  the  spiritual  life  is  built  up, 
and  will  be  removed  as  a  deformity  when  the  building  is  completed.  Everything 
that  is  purely  subordinate  and  distinctive  in  religion — that  is  extraneous  to  the 
epiritual  nature,  however  necessary  to  educate  it — will  vanish  as  the  winter  leaves 
of  time  from  the  expanding  bud  of  everlasting  life.  "  And  now  abideth  faith, 
hope,  charity,  these  three."  2.  It  is  through  loss  that  all  gain  in  this  world  is 
made.  But  in  heaven  a  different  law  of  development  will  prevail.  In  the  trees  of 
warm  climates  the  buds  have  no  winter  leaves  or  protective  scales,  being  simply 
formed  of  the  ordinary  leaves  rolled  up ;  consequently  they  expand  in  growth  with- 
out losing  anything.  And  so  it  will  be  in  the  eternal  summer  above.  There  will 
be  a  constant  unfolding  of  the  fulness  of  immortal  life  from  glory  to  glory ;  but 
there  will  be  no  loss  of  the  processes  and  experiences  through  which  the  unfold- 
ing will  take  place.  The  means  and  the  end  will  be  one  and  the  same.  There 
will  be  a  constant  reaching  forth  unto  those  things  which  are  before,  but  there 
will  be  no  forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind.  {H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.) 
This  one  thing  I  do. — Concentration  : — The  secret  of  all  moral  force,  of  all 
B^jiritual  success,  of  all  reality,  is  concentration.  And  what  is  concentration? 
The  whole  man  gathering  himself  up  to  a  point — oneness  of  being,  body, 
soul,  spirit — the  will,  judgment,  energy  in  unity.  And  what  is  unity  7  The 
reflection  of  the  one  great  God.  What  a  beautiful  thing  is  unity,  where  all  the 
attributes  of  God  meet  together  in  love  ;  beautiful  is  the  world  of  harmonies  in  the 
home  where  there  is  no  jarring  element,  in  the  knit  Church,  in  the  man  who,  having 
learned  the  pervading  power  of  the  love  of  Jesus,  says  henceforth,  '*  This  one  thing 

I  do."      I.    ThEEE  ABE  TWO  WAYS  IN  WHICH  WE  MAY  MAKE  RELIGION  ONE  THING.     1.    The 

exclusive  way.  A  man  may  determine  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  anything  not  essen- 
tially rehgious.  2.  The  inclusive  way,  when  a  man  makes  a  wide  circle  of  engage- 
ments converge  towards  rehgion.  II.  To  make  life,  as  it  ought  to  be,  on«,  the 
•BKAT  REQcisiTE  IS  TO  HAVE  ONE  FIXED  AIM.  It  is  the  waut  of  this  that  makcs 
(he  Ufa  of  ao  many  weak,  uncertain,  oapricioos.    The  far,  high,  gathering  point, 

16 


249  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap,  m, 

high  enough  to  sustain  life,  is  only  one— the  glory  of  God.  Some  of  you  did  once 
live  for  another  object — pleasure,  self,  sin.  You  served  your  master  with  good 
service.  What  you  have  to  do  now  is  to  throw  as  much  heart  into  the  new  purpose 
as  you  did  once  into  the  old.  III.  The  glokx  of  God  is  the  right  end  of  man, 
because — 1.  All  the  lines  of  life  go  up  to  it.  You  can  eat  and  drink  to  it,  and  do 
whatever  you  do  to  it.  2.  It  is  God's  end  :  the  end  for  which  God  is,  for  which  He 
gave  Christ,  for  which  He  does  everything.     IV.  Under  this  end  of  emds  and 

SUBSERVIENT    TO    IT   IT    IS    THE    DUTY  OF  EVEiY  CNE  TO  HAVE  SOME  DISTINCT  ChBISTIAN 

PURPOSE  ALWAYS  BEFORE  HIM.  It  is  marvellcus  how,  when  you  have  a  work  in 
hand  for  God,  it  will  brace  up  your  whole  being.  If  you  are  troubled  with  wander- 
ing thoughts  in  prayer  or  in  Church,  it  is  bec;;U.se  your  outer  life  is  not  concentrated. 
If  you  would  live  a  braced  life  everywhere  you  would  find  fixedness  of  thought  in 
your  devotions.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Concentration  the  secret  of  dispatch  : — The 
famous  De  Witt,  one  of  the  greatest  statesmen  of  his  age,  being  asked  how  he  was 
able  to  dispatch  the  multitude  of  affairs  in  which  he  was  engaged,  replied  that  his 
"  whole  art  consisted  in  doing  one  thing  at  a  time.  (S.  Budgett.)  Devotion  to  a 
single  purpose  essential  to  success  : — That  was  a  giand  action  of  old  Jerome  when 
he  laid  aU  his  pressing  engagements  aside  to  achieve  a  purpose  to  which  he  felt  a  call 
from  heaven.  He  had  a  large  congregation — as  large  a  one  as  any  of  us  need 
want ;  but  he  said  to  his  people,  "  Now.  it  's  if  necessity  that  the  New  Testament 
should  be  translated  ;  you  must  find  another  preacher.  The  translation  must  be 
made  ;  I  am  bound  for  the  wilderness,  and  shall  not  return  till  my  task  is  finished. " 
Away  he  went  with  his  manuscripts,  and  prayed  and  laboured,  and  produced  a 
work — the  Latin  Vulgate — which  will  last  as  long  as  the  world  stands  ;  on  the 
whole,  a  most  wonderful  translation  of  Holy  Scripture.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  One 
point  best : — I  asked  Sir  James  Scarlett  what  was  the  secret  of  his  pre-eminent 
success  as  an  advocate.  He  replied  that  he  took  care  to  press  home  the  one 
principal  point  of  the  case  without  paying  much  regard  to  the  others.  He  also 
said  that  he  know  the  secret  of  being  short.  "  I  find,"  said  he,  "  that  when  I  ex- 
ceed half  an  hour  I  am  always  doing  mischief  to  my  client ;  if  I  drive  into  the 
heads  of  the  jury  unimportant  matter,  I  drive  out  matter  more  important  which  I 
had  previously  lodged  there.  {Sir  T.  F.  Buxton. )  Want  of  application  : — A. 
Frenchman  hit  off  in  a  single  phrase  the  cbaracteristic  quality  of  the  inhabitants 
of  a  particular  district,  in  which  a  friend  of  his  proposed  to  settle  and  buy  land. 
"  Beware,"  said  he,  *'  of  working  a  purchase  there  ;  I  know  the  men  of  that  depart- 
ment ;  the  students  who  come  from  it  to  our  veterinary  school  in  Paris  do  not  strike 
hard  upon  this  anvil ;  they  want  energy,  and  you  will  not  get  any  satisfactory 
return  on  the  capital  you  may  invest  there."  (S.  Smiles,  LL.D.)  A  life's  pur- 
pose : — He  has  a  purpose  that  miner's  son.  That  purpose  is  the  acquisition  of 
knowledge.  He  speedily  exhausts  the  resources  of  Mansfeld,  reads  hard,  devours 
lectures  at  Magdeburg,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen  has  outstripped  his  fellows,  has 
a  university  for  his  admirer,  and  professors  predicting  for  hiui  the  nost  successful 
career  of  the  age.  He  has  a  purpose  that  scholar  of  Erfurt.  Thai  purpose  is  the 
discovery  of  truth,  for  in  an  old  library  he  hts  stumbled  on  a  Bible.  Follow  him 
out  into  the  new  world  which  that  volume  has  flashed  upon  his  soul.  With  Pilate's 
question  on  his  lip  and  in  his  heart,  he  foregoes  his  brilliant  prospects — parts  with- 
out a  sigh  with  academical  distinctions — takes  monastic  vows  in  an  Augustine  con- 
vent ;  until  at  last  Pilate's  question  answered  on  Pilate's  stairs — then  comes  the  thric© 
repeated  gospel  whisper,  "The  just  shall  live  tyfaith,"  and  the  glad  evanf^'el  scatters 
the  darkening  and  shreds  off  the  paralysis,  and  he  rises  into  moral  freedom,  a  new 
man  in  the  Lord  !  He  has  a  purpose  that  Augustine  monk.  That  purpose  is  the 
Eeformation.  Waiting  with  the  modesty  of  the  hero  until  he  is  forced  into  the 
strife,  with  the  courage  of  the  hero  he  steps  into  the  breach  to  do  battle  for  the 
living  truth.  (TF.  M.  Punshon,  LL.D. )  An  indomitable  purpose  : — On  one  bright 
summer  day  the  boy,  then  just  seven  years  old,  lay  on  the  bank  of  the  rivulet 
which  flows  through  the  old  domain  of  his  house  to  join  the  Isis.  Then,  as  three- 
score and  ten  years  later  he  told  the  ta'e,  rose  in  his  mind  a  scheme  which 
through  all  the  turns  of  his  eventful  career,  was  never  abandoned.  He  would 
recover  the  estate  which  belonged  to  his  fathers.  He  would  be  Hastings  of  Dayles- 
ford.  This  purpose  formed  in  infancy  and  poverty,  grew  stronger  as  his  intellect 
expanded  and  his  fortunes  rose.  He  persued  his  plan  with  that  calm  but  indomi* 
table  force  of  will  which  was  the  most  striking  peculiarity  of  his  character.  When, 
under  a  tropical  son,  he  ruled  50,000,000  of  Asiatics,  his  hopes,  amidst  all  the  carei 
of  war,  finance,  and  legislation,  still  pointed  to  Daylesford,   the  pos^ssion  of  it 


CHAP,  in.]  PHILIPPIANS.  iU 

being  the  t>ummit  of  his  ambition.  At  length  the  wish  wai  accomplished ;  and 
the  domain,  alienated  more  tban  seventy  years  before,  returned  to  the  descendants 
of  its  old  lords,  and  when  his  public  life  was  closed  for  ever,  it  was  to  Daylesf ord  that 

he  retired  to  die.    (Lord  Macaulay.)       Forgetting  the  things  that  axe  behind. 

Things  pa^t : — I.  Victories.  II.  Errors.  III.  Sins.  IV.  Joys.  V.  Gkikf8. 
(Prof.  Hollard.)  Things  behind  : — The  things  behind  and  the  memory  of  them 
may  be  helpful  or  hurtful.  We  often  find  tlie  former,  e.g.,  God's  mercies  are  to  be 
remembered  as  a  theme  of  gratitude  ;  past  sins  to  produce  penitence ;  former  history 
as  ground  of  warning  and  hope  (Deut.  iv.  9,  viii.  2,  ix.  7  ;  Psa.  Ixxvii.  6,  ciii.  2  ; 
Ezek.  xvi.  63).  Paul  speaks  of  the  past  as  hurtful,  a  hindrance.  He  speaks  as  a 
runner;  perfect  as  regards  equipment,  consecration,  aim;  but  not  perfected  as 
having  attained  the  goal ;  he  looks  not  behind  him  but  hurries  on.  The  memory 
of  things  behind — I.  May  cause  declension.  Israel  remembered  the  fleshpots  of 
Egypt  and  turned  back  and  tempted  God.     Lot's  wife  looked  back  and   perished. 

Many  in  answer  to  Christ's  call  say,  "  Suffer  me  first  to ."     Rich  young  ruler. 

1.  Former  character  and  prospects  have  to  be  forgotten.  2.  Former  sins. 
8.  Former  companionships,  or  they  may  draw  the  soul  back  to  perdition.  II.  May 
FOSTER  SELF-SATISFACTION  AND  PRIDE.  1.  Victories  achieved ;  temptations  resisted 
elated  Samson  to  his  hurt.  Even  when  the  glory  is  given  to  God  there  is  apt  to  be  a 
ring  of  self-satisfaction,  "  I  am  not  as  other  men."  If  we  have  taken  a  gun  from 
the  enemy,  let  us  go  and  take  another,  and  not  sit  idly  down.  2.  Sacrifices  may 
become  a  cause  of  pride — "Lord,  we  have  left  all  and  followed  Thee."  Yet  what 
does  the  "  all  "  amuunt  to.  3.  So  of  trials.  4.  Of  attainments.  We  may  say  of 
ourselves,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant."  But  whatever  they  are,  they 
are  as  nothing  compared  with  what  is  before  ;  and  inasmuch  as  they  are  all  of  grace, 
we  have  nothing  to  glory  of.  5.  Past  enjoyments.  6.  The  people  we  have  left. 
"  If  any  man  love  father  or  mother  more  than  Me,"<fcc.  III.  May  lead  to  discoub- 
AOEiiENT.  1.  Falls  and  failures :  no  use  trying  any  more.  2.  DiiTiculties  and 
dangers  :  David  thought  he  would  one  day  fall  by  the  hand  of  Saul.  3.  Guilt 
contracted;  time  lost;  work  undone;  salvation  neglected;  resolutions  broken; 
convictions  stifled — all  this  and  much  more  may  be  behind.  But  brooding  is  no  more 
to  be  encouraged  than  boasting.  Start  afresh.  [J.  Smith,  M. A.)  Forgftting  the 
things  that  are  behind : — We  are  as  children  taught  as  in  a  play  ;  instructed  by  toys 
and  pictures.  But  the  day  does  come  when  the  form  should  be  lost  to  us  in  the 
reality,  the  letter  lost  in  the  spirit.  The  bird  must  forget  its  nest,  the  seed  its 
husk,  the  flower  its  bud.  The  tree  may  be  full  of  bloom,  and  an  orchard  is  a 
beauteous  sight,  but  the  blossom  must  wither  away  and  be  forgotten  iu  the  fruit. 
These  things  get  behind,  they  pertain  to  the  past,  and  are  of  it.  The  bud  must 
burst, the  flower  blow, thenestfoul.  Thatin  which  the  seedsof  thin;;;s  were  boundand 
nourished  must  become  a  dried  and  worthless  skin  ;  and  the  finest  foliage  must 
fade  ;  and  to  such  things  it  is  unwise  to  hold.  They  should  be  forgotten,  and, 
whether  you  forget  them  or  not  (and  some  men  never  do),  they  are  sure  to  get 
behind ;  and  if  you  do  not  forget  them  you  are  behind  also,  and  can  never  reach 
the  goal.  (W.  Hub  hard.)  Look  not  at  the  past: — We  are  like  one  sailing  down 
a  rapid  stream,  intensely  anxious  as  to  the  issue  of  our  voyage,  and  fearful  of  the 
dangers  which  await  us,  and  yet  turning  our  backs  on  both,  and  trying  to  derive 
encouragement  from  gazing  at  that  portion  of  our  course  already  past,  and  every 
moment  growing  less  and  less  visible.  Of  what  avail,  to  such  a  mariner,  is  even  a 
distinct  view  of  some  distant  point  long  since  swept  by,  when  his  vessel  is  approach- 
ing some  perilous  pass,  or  passing  through  some  vast  and  foaming  estuary  into  the 
deep  sea.  Oh,  surely  it  is  then  time  to  forget  what  is  past,  and  to  bend  forward  to 
reach  forth   to  that  which  is  before.     {J.    W.    Alexander,  D.D.)  Forget  pott 

sorrows  ; — A  writer  tells  how  years,  long  years  before,  he  cut  the  initials  of  his  name 
in  the  bark  of  a  tree,  and  after  many  years  he  came  and  trod  through  the  tasseUed 
grass  to  the  grey  old  beech-tree  where  be  had  whittled  bis  boyish  name.  The 
blackbirds  were  singiug  among  the  alders,  the  green  foliage  of  the  branches  spread 
above,  the  green  carpet  spread  a  sward  below,  and  through  the  interlacing  boughs 
were  glimpses  of  the  ancient  blue  of  the  firmament ;  but  when  he  found  the  tree  he 
could  not  discover  the  letters  of  his  name,  only  a  curious  scar  in  the  bark.  So 
the  scars  of  the  heart  heal  over  ;  and,  indeed,  however  sorrowful  and  bitter  a 
man's  experiences,  he  must  be  a  woful  and  a  miserable  man  who,  in  this  world  oi 
great  interests,  can  find  nothing  to  talk  of  but  his  own  griefs,  the  neglect  he  has 
♦eoeived,  the  extortions  and  vexations  by  which  he  has  suffered.  What  a  petty  world 
such  a  man  must  live  in ;  under  what  a  low  sky  he  must  walk ;  in  what  a  muggj 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

atmosphere  he  must  breathe.  Oh,  let  us  remember  that  hate  is  transitory,  is  tem- 
poral, like  the  scar  on  the  bark  of  a  tree ;  but  love,  goodwill,  ia  eternal,  like  tht 
grey  old  firmament,  which,  old  as  it  is,  was  never  younger  than  it  is  to-day.  "  For- 
get the  tbings  which  are  behind."  There  is  strength  in  forgetting  ;  •'  let  the  dead 
bury  their  dead."  We  can  only  be  cheerful  while  we  forget.  (Paxton  Hood.) 
The  memory  of  past  sorrows  not  to  obliterate  the  appreciation  of  present  mercies  : — I 
once  crossed  the  "  Warm  Spring  Mountain  "  in  the  early  morning.  The  snn  was  just 
rising.  All  the  valley  between  the  Blue  Ridge  and  the  Alleghanies  was  filled  with  a 
silvery  mist,  level  at  the  surface  as  a  sea-line.  But  above  the  horizontal  sea,  three 
or  four  mountain  peaks  projected  themselves  like  islands  dotting  the  expanse. 
Thus  it  is  with  the  memories  of  past  sorrows.  They  emerge  from  the  sea  which 
has  swallowed  up  so  much  else.  We  cannot  forget  our  early  griefs  and  bereave- 
ments. But  we  must  not  permit  them  to  obliterate  the  appreciation  of  present 
mercies.  We  must  hear  the  voice  of  the  Master,  saying.  Thy  brother,  thy  sister, 
thy  child  shall  rise  again.  Remembered  griefs  are  prophetic  of  coming  joys. 
Forgetting  the  things  which  are  behind  we  press  forward  to  the  time  when  "  we 
shall  be  ever  with  one  another  and  with  the  Lord."  (M,  D.  Hoge,  D.D.)  The 
seme  in  which  the  past  cannot  be  Jorgotten  : — Paul  could  not  have  meant  that  he 
literally  forgot  the  past,  for  had  he  done  so,  both  present  and  future  would  have 
been  alike  useless  to  him.  The  past  is  the  sculptor,  the  ten  thousand  touches  of 
whose  chisel  have  given  to  our  present  lives  the  shapes  they  wear ;  it  is  the  painter 
too  that  has  coloured  these  forms  with  every  tint  and  hue  they  bear.  All  the  in- 
fluences that  have  made  our  actual  characters  what  they  now  are  came  out  of  the 
past,  just  as  the  seed  sown  in  earlier  seasons,  with  their  sunshine  and  rain,  make 
the  subsequent  harvest.  W^ie  we  to  forget  past  knowledge,  ours  would  be  the 
ignorauce  of  infancy ;  if  past  experiences  were  obliterated,  our  imbecility  would  be 
that  of  idiocy.  If  history  is  philosophy  teaching  by  example,  the  erasure  of  the 
remembrance  of  the  events  of  our  own  history  would  strip  both  philosophy  and 
religion  of  the  power  to  teach  at  all.  {Ibid.)  The  hindering  force  of  past 
habit : — You  find  some  certain  type  of  Christian  character,  or  exercise  of  Chris- 
tian grace,  that  is  easy  and  natural  to  ynu,  and  you  come  to  know  how  to  do  it. 
It  becomes  your  special  habit,  which  is  all  right,  but  it  also  tends  to  become  your 
limit,  which  is  wrong.  Habits  are  like  fences,  very  good  to  guard  the  soul  from 
sudden  incursions  of  trespassers,  but  very  bad  when  the  trunk  has  grown  up  and 
presses  against  their  stubborn  rings.  And  many  of  us  simply  keep  on  doing  the  narrow 
round  of  things  that  we  fancy  we  can  do  well,  or  have  always  been  in  the  way  of 
doing,  like  barrel-organs,  grinding  our  poor  little  set  of  tunes,  without  any  notion 
of  the  great  sea  of  music  that  stretches  all  round  about  us,  and  which  is  not  pegged 
out  upon  our  cjliBders  at  all.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  danger  of  looking 
back : — There maj  have  been  floating  in  the  apostle's  mind,  combined  with  the  image 
of  the  racer,  some  remembrance  of  the  old  story  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  about  Lot's 
wife.  She  looked  back,  and  as  she  stood  there  gazing  behind  her,  precious  time 
was  irrevocably  lost,  the  fugitives  swept  on  in  frout,  and  the  swift-flying  death  that 
struck  her  with  terror,  as  she  saw  it  pressing  close  behind,  caught  her  up.  She 
was  whelmed  in  the  fiery  destruction  that  filled  the  air ;  and  as  the  shower  of 
ashes  at  Pompeii  moulded  themselves  over  the  forms  of  the  poor  wretches  that  were 
smothered  by  them,  and  preserved  till  to-day  the  print  of  the  very  waves  of  their 
hair  and  the  texture  of  their  dress,  "salt  "  was  crusted  round  that  living  core,  and 
she  peiished,  because  she  wasted  in  trembling  retrospect  tl  e  flying  moments  which, 
rightly  used,  would  have  set  her  in  safety,  (Ibid.)  Beaching  forth  to  tlie 
things  which  are  before. — All  things  are  prospective.  The  impulse  of  a  river  is 
ever  onward.  So  of  all  things  physical  and  intellectual.  The  world's  building  was 
prospective.  Animal  organism  reads  onward  toward  the  image  of  God.  Every- 
thing in  earth's  geology,  and  everything  on  earth's  surface,  point  towards  a  future. 
The  little  child  is  telling  what  he  intends  when  he  is  a  man.  Thoughts  fly  on 
wings  toward  the  to-morrow.  The  affections,  the  adhesive  powers  of  the  soul, 
speak  the  same  language.  Now,  why  all  this?  What  does  it  mean?  It  must 
mean  something.  It  means  that  there  is  a  future  and  a  God.  God  has  gone  that 
way.  He  has  passed  through,  and  these  are  His  footprints.  If  there  is  no  God, 
no  future,  let  the  atheist  tell  us  what  the  meaning  is.  (Homiletic  Monthly.)  The 
things  that  are  before : — I.  Thebe  abe  things  befobe  eveby  Cheistian  towards 
which  he  is  proceeding.  There  is  childhood,  youth,  manhood  in  Christian  life. 
Here  you  see  the  diflerence  between  a  self-deceiver  and  a  Christian.  There  ia  no 
growth  before  a  hypocrite  aay  more  than  there  is  in  an  artificial  flower.    He  vas^ 


OBAP.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  146 

change,  but  there  is  no  life  in  him,  and  therefore  he  cannot  advance.  There  are  things 
before  him.  1.  As  one  endowed  with  talenta  which  must  be  ceaselessly  used.  God 
gives  him  opportunities.  He  must  use  them.  Some  do  not  see  their  opportunities 
because  their  eyes  are  shut  :  some  see  their  opportunities  but  do  not  use  them, 
because  they  are  indolent  or  their  talents  rusty  from  long  aisuse.  2.  As  one  ex- 
posed to  fresh  demands  on  principles  and  powers  of  all  kinds.  The  exhibition  of 
new  phases  of  character  is  before  him.  He  may  not  have  known  much  trouble, 
but  he  has  to  undergo  the  discipline  of  suffering.  Then  in  working  there  has  not 
been  much  demand  made  on  patience.  3.  As  one  must  continue  to  the  end. 
4,  Death.  5.  The  everlasting  kingdom.  II.  There  are  certain  things  before 
ETKRT  Church.  The  body  is  not  one  member  but  many.  Before  the  Church, 
therefore,  is— 1  .The  real,  conscious,  manifested  unity  of  all  its  members.  To  join 
the  Church  is  not  sufficient,  you  must  contribute  to  its  hfe.  2.  Continued  and  ever 
improving  mutual  service.  Each  is  to  help  the  others.  3.  The  increase  of  itself. 
4.  An  extending  and  inproving  influence  on  society.  5.  An  increasing  ministration 
to  the  whole  body  of  Christ.  6.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  every  creature. 
III.  While  certain  things  ar^  before  every  Christian  and  every  Chuch,  particdlab 
THINGS  are  before  particci.ah  CHRISTIANS  AND  CnrTRCHES.  Eveij  mineral  is 
not  a  diamond.  Every  star  is  not  a  sun.  (S.  Martin.)  Paul  reached 
forth  to  the  things  before.  I.  As  beoabded  his  own  imi'rovement.  He  sought. — 
1.  Absolute  pardon.  Continued  demerit  calls  for  coutinued  mercy.  2.  Absolute 
assurance  of  forgiveness.  3.  Absolute  conformity  to  the  Divine  character  and  will 
as  immediately  and  specifically  exhibited  in  Christ.  4.  The  fellowship  of  the  Spirit 
in  all  its  perfection.  6.  A  perfect  accordance  in  present  action  with  the  prospect 
of  the  great  day.  IL  As  regarded  a  diffusive  usefulness.  The  same  perfection 
he  aimed  at  for  himself  he  aimed  at  for  "every  man"  (CoL  i.  28).  (D.  King, 
LL.D.)  The  racer  ai  charioteer : — St.  Paul  is  like  one  of  those  eager  cuarioteers 
of  whom  his  guardsmen  so  often  spoke  to  him  when  they  had  returned  from  the 
contests  in  the  Circus  Maximus,  and  joined  their  shouts  to  those  of  the  mynads 
who  cheered  their  favourite  colours — leaning  forward  in  his  flying  car,  bending 
over  the  shaken  rein  and  the  g'^aded  steed,  forgetting  everything— overy  peril,  every 
competitor,  every  circling  of  the  meta  in  the  rear,  as  he  pressed  on  for  the  goal  by 
which  sat  the  judges  with  the  palm  garlands  that  formed  the  prize.  {Arclideacon 
Farrar.)  The  racer  at  runner : — The  picture  is  that  of  a  racer  in  his  agony  of 
struggle  and  hope.  You  see  him  I— every  muscle  strained  and  every  vein  starting — 
the  quick  and  short  heaving  of  his  chest — the  big  drops  gathered  on  his  brow — his 
body  bending  forward,  as  if  with  frantic  gesture  he  already  clutched  the  goal — his 
eye,  now  glancing  aside  with  a  momentary  sparkle  at  objects  so  rapidly  disappear- 
ing behind  him,  and  then  fixing  itself  on  the  garland  in  eager  anticipation.  The 
apostle  is  not  leaving,  he  is  forgetting  the  things  behind ;  he  is  not  merely  looking, 
he  is  reaching  forth  unto  the  things  before ;  not  only  does  he  run,  he  presses 
toward  the  mark ;  nor  was  he  occupied,  weakened,  or  delayed  by  a  variety  of 
pursuits — "  This  one  thinj,'  I  do."  (Prof.  Eadie.)  Pressing  forward: — The  idea 
is  that  of  a  man  stretching  himself  out  towards  something  as  a  runner  does,  with 
his  body  straining  forward,  the  hand  and  the  eye  drawn  onward  towards  the  goal. 
He  does  not  think  of  the  furlongs  that  he  has  passed,  he  heeds  not  the  nature  of 
the  grpund  over  which  he  runs.  The  sharp  stones  in  the  path  do  not  stay  him,  nor 
the  flowerets  in  the  grass  catch  his  glance.  The  white  faces  of  the  crowd  around  the 
course  are  seen  as  in  a  flash  as  he  rushes  past  them  to  the  winning-post,  and  the 
parsley-garland  that  hangs  there  is  all  that  he  is  conscious  of.  '•  They  do  it  to 
obtain  a  corruptible  crown,  but  we  an  incorruptible."  Let  as,  with  eye  and  hand 
flung  forward,  "  stretch  out  towards  the  things  that  are  before,"  and  imitate  that 
example — not  in  the  fierce  whirl  of  excitement,  indeed,  but  in  fixed  regard  to,  and 
concentrated  desire  of,  the  mark  and  the  prize.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christian 
perfection  is  like  those  problems  in  mathematics  where  we  can  never  find  the  true 
answer.  We  may  go  on  working  the  sum  for  years,  and  though  each  succeeding 
figure  brings  us  nearer  to  it,  we  can  never  actually  reach  it.  (H.  Melvil,  B.D.) 
The  varied  means  of  obtaining  perfection  : — Perfection  is  being,  not  doing — it  is  not 
to  effect  an  act  but  to  achieve  a  character.  If  the  aim  of  life  were  to  do  something, 
then,  as  in  an  earthly  business,  except  in  doing  this  one  thing  the  business  would 
be  at  a  standstill.  The  student  is  not  doing  the  one  thing  of  student-life  when  he 
has  ceased  to  think  or  read.  The  labourer  leaves  his  work  undone  when  the  spade 
is  not  in  his  hand,  and  he  sits  beneath  the  hedge  to  rest.  But  in  Christian  lils, 
•Tery  moment  and  every  act  is  an  opportunity  for  doing  the  one  thing  of  becomiug 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m,. 

Christ-like.  Every  day  is  full  of  a  most  impressive  experience.  Every  temptation 
to  evil  temper  which  can  assail  us  to-day  will  be  an  opportunity  to  decide  the 
question  whether  we  shall  gain  the  calmness  and  the  rest  of  Christ,  or  whether  we 
shall  be  tossed  by  the  restlessr.ess  and  agitation  of  the  world.  Nay,  the  very  vicis- 
situdes of  the  seasons,  day  and  night,  heat  and  cold,  afifecting  us  variably,  and  pro* 
ducing  exhilaration  or  depression,  are  so  contrived  as  to  conduce  towards  the  being 
which  we  become,  and  decide  whether  we  shall  be  masters  of  ourselves,  or  whether 
we  shall  be  swept  at  the  mercy  of  accident  and  circumstance,  miserably  susceptible 
of  merely  outward  influences.  Infinite  as  are  the  varieties  of  life,  so  manifold  are 
the  paths  to  saintly  character  ;  and  he  who  has  not  found  out  how  directly  or  in- 
directly to  make  everything  converge  towards  his  soul's  sanctification,  has  as  yet 
missed  the  meaning  of  this  life.  (J^.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Practice  necessary  to 
perfection : — A  neighbour  near  my  study  persists  in  practising  upon  the  flute.  He 
bores  my  ears  as  with  an  augur,  and  renders  it  almost  an  impossibility  to  think. 
Up  and  down  the  scale  he  remorselessly  runs,  until  even  the  calamity  of  temporary 
deafness  would  almost  be  welcome  to  me.  Yet  he  teaches  me  that  I  must  practise 
if  I  would  be  perfect ;  must  exercise  myself  unto  godlmess  if  I  would  be  skilful ; 
must,  in  fact,  make  myself  familiar  with  the  Word  of  God,  with  holy  living,  and 
saintly  dying.  Such  practice,  moreover,  will  be  as  charming  as  my  neighbour's 
flute  is  intolerable.     (C   H.  Spurgeon.)  Singleness  of  aim : — Confucius's  son 

once  said  to  him,  "I apply  myself  with  diligence  to  every  kind  of  study,  and  neglect 
nothing  that  could  render  me  clever  and  ingenious;  but  still  I  do  not  advance." 
"Omit  some  of  your  pursuits,"  replied  Confucius,  "and  you  will  get  on  better. 
Among  those  who  travel  constantly  on  foot,  have  you  ever  observed  any  who  run? 
It  is  essential  to  do  everything  in  order,  and  only  grasp  that  which  is  within  the 
reach  of  your  arm ;  for  otherwise  you  give  yourself  useless  trouble.  Those  who, 
like  yourself,  desire  to  do  everything  in  one  day,  do  nothing  to  the  end  of  their  lives, 
while  others  who  steadily  adhere  to  one  pursuit  find  that  they  have  accomplished  their 
purpose."  Singleness  of  aim : — "  Mr.  A.  often  laughs  at  me,"  said  Professor  Henry 
once,  in  Princeton  College  Laboratory,  ' '  because  I  have  but  one  idea.  He  talka 
about  everything,  aims  to  excel  in  many  things  ;  but  I  have  learned  that  if  I  ever 
make  a  breach,  I  must  play  my  guns  continually  on  one  point."  The  power  of  a 
single  aim : — Paul's  experience  teaches  us  that  one  unmutilated  and  entire  idea  is 
as  much  as  a  man  can  entertain  in  his  soul,  or  actualize  in  his  lifetime.  Nor  herein 
was  Paul's  experience  anomalous.  Such  has  been  the  experience  as  well  of  all  truly 
eflicient  men.  None  of  them  ever  entertained  more  than  one  great  aim  or  purpose 
of  being.  Noah  was  a  man  of  one  idea.  His  idea  was  an  ark  I  And  though  he 
did  other  things,  yet  the  one  great  thought,  moving  as  a  glorious  dream  through 
all  his  chambers  of  imagery,  was  something  that  would  float  upon  stormy  and 
shoreless  seas  I  And  this  one  thing  he  did — he  built.  Abraham  was  of  this  class. 
His  one  idea  was  a  city.  He,  too,  did  other  things  ;  he  trained  his  servants,  com- 
manded his  household  after  him,  &c.  But  amidst  his  fairest  dreams  by  the 
ancestral  waters,  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven  spake  to  him  of  '♦  a  city  which  hath 
foundations,  whose  builder  was  God."  And  evermore  afterwards  he  journeyed 
towards  that  city.  Nor  of  regenerated  men  only  is  the  thought  true — of  all  men 
who  retain  amid  their  moral  ruins  some  lines  of  the  mutilated  Divine  image — is  this 
a  characteristic.  A  singleness  of  aim  and  effort  ever  hath  been — ever  will  be — the 
secret  of  all  noble  human  accomplishment.  Napoleon  was  the  most  efficient  man 
of  his  own  time,  not  because  gifted  above  his  fellows,  either  physically  or  intellectu- 
ally, but  because  universal  empire  was  his  single  aim — he  lived  only  to  conquer  I 
Demosthenes  was  the  prince  of  all  earth's  orators,  not  because  God  gave  him  a 
splendid  voice,  and  exquisite  grace  of  motion,  but  because  eloquence  was  his  one 
idea.  He  lived  only  to  sweep,  as  with  a  roused  tempest,  over  all  the  ^olian 
sympathies  of  the  human  heart.  Newton  was  the  king  of  astronomers,  not 
because  his  eye  was  keener  as  it  scanned  the  heavens,  nor  because  God  gave  him 
mighty  wings  to  sweep  through  the  empyrean,  but  because,  with  the  power  of  an 
omnipresent  dream,  the  constellations  of  heaven  were  flashing  on  his  soul !  The 
stars  were  in  his  heart.  His  life  was  in  the  stars.  So  is  it  ever :  singleness  of  aim, 
oneness  of  effort — the  gathering  of  thought,  feeling,  heart,  soul,  life  into  one 
intense  absorbing  passion — is  the  secret  of  all  greatness.  And  no  wonder  that  Paul 
was  the  very  chief  of  the  apostles,  so  that  the  earth  shook  at  his  tread,  as  when  a 
giant  goes  on  pilgrimage ;  not  because  he  had  read  Grecian  lore  in  Cilician  schools, 
and  mastered  the  Hebrew  law  at  Gamaliel's  feet,  but  because,  with  his  heart  all 
afire  within  him,  and  his  eye,  as  the  eagle's  on  the  sun,  fixed  on  one  sublime  put' 


«HAP.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  847 

pose — in  that  one  thing  he  gloried — to  that  one  thing  he  tended.  (C,  Wadsworth.) 
The  nobility  of  a  single  aim  : — What  a  noble  thing  any  life  becomes  that  has  driven 
through  it  the  strength  of  a  uniting  single  purpose,  like  a  strong  shaft  of  iron 
bolting  together  the  two  tottering  walls  of  some  old  building  \  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  importance  of  a  high  aim : — The  life  of  man  is  a  vagrant,  cnangelul,  desultori- 
ness;  like  that  of  children  sporting  on  an  enamelled  meadow,  chasing  now  a 
painted  butterfly,  which  loses  its  charm  by  being  caught — now  a  wreath  of  mist, 
which  falls  damp  upon  the  hand  with  disappointment — now  a  feather  of  thistle- 
down, which  is  crushed  in  the  grasp.  In  the  midst  of  all  this  fickleness,  St  Paul 
had  found  a  purpose  to  which  he  gave  the  undivided  energy  of  his  soul.  (F.  W. 
Robertson,  M.A.)  Progress: — Look  at  the  machine  stamped  with  the  date  of 
half-a-dozen  different  patents  in  consecutive  years,  and  see  there  the  image  of  the 
diligent  inventor  bent  on  alternate  excellence,  to  whom  each  improvement  makes  a 
Btepping-stone  to  another  improvement,  and  each  ditKculty  mastered  gives  greater 
skill  to  mas'ter  the  remaining  difficulty,  until  the  original  creative  idea  is  rounded 
out  in  a  consummate  instrument.  Such  is  the  true  life  of  the  spirit  conformed  to 
the  Divine  law  of  progress — not  a  drift,  but  a  race ;  not  a  dream,  but  a  study  ;  not 
self-contentment,  but  self-criticism  and  self-improvement,  with  the  eye  on  the 
Divine  model,  and  constantly  saying  to  itself,  "This  one  thing  I  do."  {J.  M. 
Whiton,  Ph.  D.)  Progress  more  tlian  motion  : — Progress  is  the  great  law  of  life, 
but  by  those  even  who  say  so,  its  principle  is  not  al^vays  seen.  Progress — what  do 
you  mean  by  that  ? — is  it  in  the  increase  of  the  quantity  of  material  productions  ? 
is  it  in  the  growth  of  a  nation  in  the  numbers  of  its  population,  or  in  its  territory  ^ 
is  it  in  the  advance  of  agriculture  or  manufactures?  is  it  in  the  increase  of  the 
superior  quality  of  material  appliances  ?  is  it  in  the  increase  of  knowledge,  of 
science,  of  art  ?  is  it  in  the  evolution  of  the  man  from  the  child  ?  the  philosopher 
from  the  savage?  Oh,  there  is  something  mere  and  higher  than  all  this  and  these. 
Men  forget  it  is  with  us  as  it  is  with  our  planet.  There  is  a  circular  movement  in 
which  all  motions  turn  on  themselves,  and  return  to  the  point  from  whence  they  first 
set  out,  and  then  there  is  an  onward  movement,  as  when  the  whole  system  is  borne 
upward  into  infinite  space.  It  is  so  with  man  ;  he  is  the  subject  of  a  succession  of 
events,  that  which  hath  been  is  now  and  shall  be.  How  wonderfully  the  preacher 
in  Ecclesiastes  describes  this  circular  movement  (chap.  i.  5).  (Paxton  Hood.) 
The  onward  movement  of  the  soul : — Man  is  the  creature  of  the  same  senses ;  he 
beholds  the  same  sun,  the  same  streams,  and  flying  clouds ;  youth  succeeds  to  in- 
fancy, and  the  festival  of  nature  is  followed  by  decay.  We  live  on  food,  the  blood  cir- 
culates through  the  frame ;  and  all  these  motions  return  on  themselves ;  but  there  ia 
another  motion  in  man,  there  is  an  onward  movement — he  is  a  being  of  religioua 
instincts ;  and  to  foster  and  fan  their  flames  is  the  end  of  all  religious  services  and 
exercises.  Oh,  is  it  not  sad  when  the  onward  movement  of  the  soul  is  forgotten  I 
The  world  is  good  for  an  inn ;  but  an  inn  is  not  a  home ;  and  it  is  unwise  to  lay 
•ny  plan  of  Ufe  in  which  provision  is  not  made  for  the  infinite  future  of  the  bouL 
Do  you  not  see  how  every  good  thiug  takes  hold  of  and  leans  upon  a  higher  thing  f 
how  civilization  leans  on  morality  ?  As  a  child  leans  on  a  parent,  and  a  wife  on  » 
husband,  and  a  husband  on  a  wife,  and  so  at  last  all  things  lean  on  God ;  and  well 
it  is  that  it  is  so,  for  he  can  at  any  time  take  off  the  wheels  of  the  most  rapid 
chariot,  He  can  break  the  wings  of  the  proudest  ambition,  and  He  is,  in  fact,  con- 
stantly saying,  "Arise,  this  ia  not  your  rest."  (Ibid.)  Christian  progress  as 
it  nearsits  end: — Bivers  do  not  grow  shallower  as  they  roll  away  from  their  sources, 
and  so  it  has  been  well  said,  the  heart's  river  oaght  not  to  be  an  exception. 
It  shoald  flow  on  widening  and  deepening  till  it  meets  the  ocean  and  mingles 
with  it.  {M.  D.  Hoge,  D.D.)  Christian  progress  impelled  by  a  single  purpose  : — 
You  have  stood  upon  our  shores,  and  seen  a  ship  under  full  press  of  sail  making 
for  her  destination.  How  she  throws  aside  the  seaweed  and  the  waves — how  straight 
amidst  the  currents  she  holds  her  bow — how  she  strains  upon  her  way,  and  goes 
resolutely  to  her  point  1  The  winds  are  strong,  but  the  helm  overrules  the  winds, 
and  turns  them  to  account.  Life  is  going  on  on  board  that  vessel  in  many  forms, 
but  they  are  all  moving  on  together  to  the  port — there  is  a  master  principle  which 
everything  obeys,  and  they  all  delight  to  have  it  so.  And  as  that  ship  pursues  her 
bent  and  often  homeward  course,  it  is  an  emblem  to  you  every  day  you  look  at  it^ 
of  the  condition  of  the  life  of  that  man  who  has  had  the  grace  given  him  to  8ay». 
♦'  This  one  thing  I  do."    For  so,  by  just  such  singleness  of  purpose,  such  inde> 

Eendence  of  external  things,  such  a  straight,  nnbendmg  way,  the  great  purpose  oJ 
fe  ia  to  be  gained,  heaven  is  to  be  won,  and  God  glorified.     (J.  Vaughan,  M.A^ 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chip,  m 

The  enemy  icill  advance  if  the  Christian  doei  not : — The  Confederate  General  Long- 
street,  daring  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  had  one  of  his  generals  come  up  to  him  and 
report  that  he  was  unable  to  bring  up  his  men  again  so  as  to  charge  the  enemy. 
•'  Very  well,"  said  the  general,  "  just  let  them  remain  where  they  are  ;  the  enemy's 
going  to  advance,  and  will  spare  you  the  trouble."  (W.  Baxendale.)  Progress 
inevitable  to  the  Christian : — If  the  spark  which  grace  has  kindled  had  been  left  to 
itself,  or  to  the  feeble  breath  of  mortals  to  preserve  it,  we  might  well  suppose  that 
nothing  more  than  its  continued  existence  was  intended ;  but  when  we  find  an 
nnbroken  current  of  life-giving  air  from  the  breath  of  the  Almighty  brought  to  play 
npon  that  spark,  we  may  conclude  with  safety  that  it  was  meant  to  glow  and  kindle 
to  a  flame,  and  that  the  flame  was  meant  to  rise  and  spread,  and  to  become  a  con- 
flagration; 80  that  what  at  first  was  but  a  seed  of  fire,  smothered  in  ashes, 
drenched  in  rain,  or  blown  at  random  by  the  viewless  winds,  shall  yet  light  up  the 
whole  horizon,  and  dye  the  very  heavens  with  its  crimson.  (J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.) 
Progress  unlimited  for  the  Christian: — No  bounds  can  be  set  to  that  progress  of 
growth.  There  is  no  point  on  that  happy  voyage,  beyond  which  icy  cliffs  and  a 
frozen  ocean  forbid  a  passage  ;  but  before  us,  to  the  verge  of  our  horizon  of  to-day, 
stretch  the  open  waters ;  and  when  that  furthest  point  of  vision  lies  as  far  astern  as 
it  now  gleams  ahead,  the  same  boundless  sapphire  sea  will  draw  our  yearning 
desires,  and  bear  onwards  our  advancing  powers.  {A.  Maclaren,D.D.)  Progress 
in  heaven  : — I  believe  that  we  shall  live  through  all  the  eternities  that  are  before  us, 
growing  wiser,  nobler,  stronger,  greater ;  plunging  deeper  into  God,  and  being  more 
and  more  filled  with  more  and  more  of  Him.  So  we  shall  move  for  ever  as  in 
ascending  spirals  that  rise  ever  higher,  and  draw  ever  closer  to  the  throne  we 
compass  and  to  Him  that  dwells  alone;  ever  perfect,  yet  ever  growing,  for  we 
have  an  inexhaustible  Saviour  to  absorb  into  our  hearts,  and  we  have  hearts  that 
never  reach  the  ultimate  term  and  bound  of  their  indefinite  possibility  of  receiving. 
{Ibid.)  Dissatisfaction  the  motive  of  progress  : — Dissatisfaction  is  always  the  first 
step  in  improvement.  Dissatisfied  with  the  pen,  man  invented  the  printing  press. 
Dissatisfied  with  the  chariot,  man  careers  on  the  locomotive.  Dissatisfied  with  the 
velocity  even  of  steam,  man  links  his  thoughts  to  God's  thunderbolts  1  This,  in 
regard  of  all  things,  is  the  true  inspiration.  A  being  fully  contented  with  present 
attainments,  with  no  aspirations  unto  things  above  and  beyond  him,  should  be 
either  a  god  or  an  idiot  I  Heaven's  pity  on  the  poor  soul  on  this  earth  all  restful 
and  satisfied  !  Genius — the  most  Godlike  of  intellectual  gifts,  is  only  this  restless 
creative  agony — an  impulse  driving  the  spirit  to  beat  its  wings  like  an  imprisoned 
eagle,  till  there  be  blood  on  the  plumes  and  the  vrires  of  the  prison-house ;  forcing 
the  yearning  heart  abroad  like  an  unblessed  spirit,  away  from  the  actual  in  search 
of  the  possible ;  to  dig  in  every  desert  for  a  living  spring ;  to  climb  every  mountain- 
top  for  a  farther  look  into  heaven.  Csesar  was  the  very  demi-god  of  his  generation, 
because  a  possessed  world  could  not  satisfy  him.  Paul  was  the  very  chief  of  the 
apostles,  because,  sick  of  all  present  attainments,  he  "counted  himself  not  to  have 
apprehended."  {C.  Wadsworth.)  A  noble  despair : — "  During  the  nine  years  that 
I  was  his  wife,"  says  the  widow  of  the  great  artist  Opie,  "  I  never  saw  him  satisfied 
with  one  of  his  productions,  and  often,  very  often,  have  I  seen  him  enter  my 
Bitting-room,  and  throwing  himself  in  an  agony  of  despondence  on  the  sofa,  exclaim, 
*  I  never,  never  shall  be  a  painter  as  long  as  I  live  1 '  "  It  was  a  noble  despair,  such 
as  is  never  felt  by  the  self-complacent  daubers  of  sign-boards,  and  it  bore  the 
panting  aspirant  up  to  one  of  the  highest  niches  in  the  artistic  annals  of  his 
country.  The  selfsame  dissatisfaction  with  present  attainments  is  a  potent  force 
to  bear  the  Christian  onward  to  the  most  eminent  degree  of  spirituality  and 
holiness.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  passion  for  progress  : — It  has  been  said  that 
*•  no  other  word  turns  up  so  often  in  the  speeches  of  Albert  the  Good  as  that  of 
progress,  no  other  idea  was  so  constantly  in  his  mind ;  and  that  no  sacrifice  of 
time,  thought,  money,  or  responsibility  seemed  to  him  too  great  when  be  could 
make  it  the  cause  of  national  or  individual  progress."  {J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.) 
Forward  the  true  direction: — Livingstone  having  broken  fresh  ground  among  the 
Bakhatlas,  wrote  to  the  London  Missionary  Society  explaining  what  he  had  done, 
and  expressing  the  hope  of  their  approval.  At  the  same  time  he  said  he  was  at 
their  disposal  to  go  anywhere — provided  it  be  forwabd.  (Ibid.)  The  unreason- 
ableness ofnon-progressiveness: — To  stay  complacently  where  we  are  in  the  religiout 
life  is  as  if  a  tree  should  congratulate  itself  on  being  higher  than  the  shrubs,  on 
its  green  leaves,  on  its  glowing  blossoms,  whilst  all  the  time  it  has  not  known  the 
•apreme  coronation  of  the  summer  fruits ;  or  it  is  as  if  a  caterpillar  should  staj 


UHAP.  in.]  PniLirPlANS.  249 

exaltant  with  its  spots  and  stripes,  its  fine  silks,  its  sncculect  cabbage-leaf,  whilst 
all  the  glorious  life  of  the  butterfly  on  the  burning  roses  is  untasted.  The  best  we 
have  known  is  low,  poor,  dim,  narrow,  insipid,  compared  with  the  larger  experiences 
which  await  ns  in  Christ.  Say  not  "  you  will  rest  on  your  laurels."  Your  moral 
laurels  to-day  are  only  bits  of  straw  and  flowers  of  grass.  Keep  putting  those 
laurels  from  you ;  look  up,  toil  on,  press  forward,  until  your  brow  wear  the 
amaranth  of  full  and  immortal  perfection.     (IT.  L.  Watkinxon.) 

Vers.  15-19.  Let  ns  therefore. — The  imitation  of  Paul: — L  Thb  oenerai. 
EXHORTATION  INCLUDES  THEM  ALL  WITH  HIMSELF.  1.  The  fundamental  principle 
of  all  "perfect,"  i.e.,  well-instructed  and  mature  Christians,  must  be  to  count 
the  goal  of  religion  the  attainment  of  Christ,  and  the  blessedness  of  religion  the 
practical  end  of  life.  Those  are  perfect  who  have  already  finished  their  course 
as  far  as  it  leads  through  carnal  ordinances,  and  from  them  to  Clirist  the  end  of 
the  law.  They  have  this  preparatory  or  first  perfection,  in  that  they  have  put 
away  childish  things  (1  Cor.  xiii.  11),  became  spiritual  (1  Cor.  ii.  6),  and  are  so 
far  made  perfect  in  grace.  This  is  one  of  teveral  designations,  such  as  "  adult," 
"strong,"  &o.,  which  mark  those  who  have  entered  in  the  course,  and  has  no 
more  reference  to  moral  perfection  than  "  saints  "  has  to  sanctity.  2.  Thia 
preliminary  perfection  is  quite  consistent  with  much  lingering  imperfection.  It 
was  quite  possible  that  some  of  them  might  give  up  old  depr ndance  on  the  law 
while  retaining  some  of  the  beggarly  elements.  But  the  apostle  expresses  his 
hope  that  in  every  minor  particular,  as  in  the  fundamental  principle,  they  would 
be  brought  to  think  rightly.  But  the  condition  is  that  they  continued  "thus 
minded  "  as  to  the  great  essential.  Those  who  "  will  to  do  His  will  shall  know  of 
the  doctrine,"  was  the  Saviour's  promise,  and  St.  Paul  here  gives  us  only  another 
version  of  the  same  promise.  Those  whose  hearts  are  clear  as  to  the  ruling 
principle  and  aim  of  life  shall,  if  they  seek  the  guidance  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  the 
source  of  the  greater  as  well  as  of  the  lesser  revelations,  shall  never  be  suffered 
to  go  astray.  3.  The  life  must  perseveringly  conform  to  the  great  principle 
if  this  promise  is  to  be  fulfilled  (ver.  16).  Those  who  have  the  right  aim  iu  their 
Christian  life  must  walk  by  it  still,  whatever  the  measure  of  their  progress  be. 
The  plough  must  be  held  to  the  end  of  the  furrow  ;  to  look  back  is  to  be  unfit  for 
the  knif;dom  of  God.  II.  St.  Padl  exhorts  them  to  copy  his  example,  and 
that  of  all  true  Christians  of  whom  he  made  himself  the  representative.  1.  "  Be 
ye  imitators  together."  The  emphasis  of  their  union  in  this  imitation  is  in  danger 
of  being  lost  unless  we  consider  the  deep  purpose  of  it.  Very  much  of  the  blessed- 
ness and  strength  of  religion  is  the  result  of  close  compact  fellowship.  The 
Philippians  must  unite  and  stir  each  other  up  to  emulation  in  this  matter,  in 
ease  of  any  defection  ;  warning  each  other,  and  generally  making  this  imitation 
the  subject  of  common  effort.  The  apostle  knows  how  effectual  a  stimulant  it 
the  holy  example  of  the  saints.  2.  This  emulous  and  united  imitation  of  tha 
apostle  is  enforced  by  a  vivid  and  pathetic  description  of  the  practical  Judaizers 
who  were  otherwise  minded.  They  are  to  be  "  marked  "  in  the  particulars  which 
miserably  distinguished  them  from  the  apostolic  standard.  Their  life  and  walk 
were  to  be  studied  and  compared  with  a  better  model.  Before  St.  Paul  had 
depicted  the  evil  of  their  doctrine ;  now  he  points  to  their  practice.  They  are 
enemies  of  the  Cross  in  their  spirit,  desires,  aims,  conduct,  and  whole  compass  of 
their  being.  They  were  not  referred  to  as  a  distinct  class ;  they  are  diffused 
through  the  churches  as  an  unholy  leaven.  3.  Nothing  so  stirred  the  apostle's 
Boul  as  men's  opposition  to  the  Cross.  He  estimated  all  things  by  their  relation 
to  the  atonement.  4.  It  is  their  end  that  first  fillg  his  thought,  because  he  had 
just  been  paying  tribute  to  the  "  end  of  the  Lord  "  in  the  resurrection  of  the 
saints.  That  end  was  destruction  (1  Cor.  i.  19  ;  PhiL  i.  18;  Bom.  L  22-23). 
6.  Many  of  the  Gentile  moralists  had  used  these  very  words  to  condemn 
Epicureanism.  "  The  worship  of  the  belly  "  had  become  a  current  phrase  (1  Bom. 
xvi.  18 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  22).  While  he  wept  over  their  unspeakable  folly  and  coming 
end,  he  mourned  over  their  degradation — "whose  glory,"  &c.  6,  The  real  secret 
of  the  dissolute  living  of  these  enemies  of  the  Cross  lies  in  the  words  "who  mind 
earthly  things."  Mind  means  intellect  and  heart.  The  contrast  is  presented 
in  Colossians  iii.  2.  (W.B.Pope,  D.D.)  Perfection: — I.  How  far  attainable. 
II.  Cannot  be  absolute.  III.  Consists  with  difference  of  opinion.  IV.  la 
DISTINGUISHED  BY  CHARiTT.  The  apostle  does  not  despise  those  who  differ  from 
him,  bat  is  sure  they  will  receive  clearer  light.    V.  Is  determined  bt  constancy 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

AND  PBB8EVEEAN0E.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Truc  religion  frees  men  from  dangerotu 
errors : — I.  Thebb  is  that  in  beligion  which  is  necessakt,  fixed,  immu- 
table, and  CLEAB,  ABOUT  WHICH  GOOD  MEN  ("perfect")  DO  NOT  DIFFER — the  things 

which  are — 1.  Perfectly  agreeable  to  the  Divine  nature.  2.  Perfectly  agreeable 
to  human  nature.  (1)  The  great  materials  of  natural  light.  (2)  The  great 
articles  of  the  Christian  faith.      II.    There  is  also  in  beligion  that  which  is 

NOT   so    NECESSABT,    IMMUTABLE,  AND    CLEAB,  IN    WHICH    GOOD    MEN    MAY    BE    OTHERWISE 

MINDED.  Here  we  may  note — 1.  The  causes  of  error.  (1)  The  creature's 
fallibility.  (2)  Accidental  prejudices  from  education,  converse,  strong  imagination, 
melancholy,  intellectual  weakuess,  aSectation,  singularity,  worldly  interest. 
(3)  The  darkness  of  things  themselves  :  as  where  there  is  less  of  reason  to  be  said 
for  a  thing,  or  where  the  rule  of  faith  is  short.  Here  the  rule  is  so  far  as  God  has 
not  determined  we  are  referred  to  reason ;  and  where  both  reason  and  revelation 
seem  silent  our  proper  course  is  stay  and  expectance  rather  than  peremptory 
conclusion.  'Tis  hard  to  get  rid  of  an  error,  therefore,  take  heed  of  admitting  one. 
^4)  Non-improvement  of  intellectuals.  Men  are  greatly  encumbered  by  business, 
and  others  do  not  think  and  examine.  (5)  The  want  of  necessary  helps,  as  friends, 
books,  freedom  of  converse,  and  opportunity.  It  betters  men's  health  to  live  and 
breathe  in  a  free  and  open  air.  Had  some  but  once  heard  a  suggestion  to  the 
contrary  they  had  escaped  their  mistakes.  The  greatest  help  is  God's  Spirit,  and 
the  next,  searching  company.  2.  The  preservatives  against  error  are — (1)  Care 
of  right  information.  We  owe  this  to  truth,  and  to  our  own  souls.  (2)  Modesty 
and  humility  (Psa.  xxv.  9;  Prov.  iii.  34  ;  1  Peter  iii.  18).  He  is  not  likely  to  learn 
who  is  not  of  a  teachable  spirit.  (3)  A  general  intention  to  entertain  and 
submit  to  all  truth  whatsoever  and  whensoever  it  shall  appear,  and  an  implicit 
faith  in  God  where  the  sense  of  any  text  is  not  clear.  (4)  An  ingenuous  dealing 
with  truth,  and  love  of  it  for  itself,  both  in  respect  of  the  ground  on  which  you 
receive  it,  and  the  use  which  you  make  of  it.  (5)  A  perception  of  the  fatal  issue 
of  wilfulness  and  wantonness  of  opinion  in  the  shameful  miscarriages  of  such  as 
have  given  themselves  up  to  dreams  and  fancies— as  the  Munster  Anabaptists  and 
the  ancient  Gnostics.  3.  The  uses  to  be  made  of  this.  (1)  Let  ns  live  in  the 
eense  of  our  own  fallibility :  this  will  make  ns  temperate  and  cautious.  In- 
fallibility is  a  crooked  principle.  (2)  Although  error  be  nowhere  to  be  counte- 
nauced,  yet  it  is  not  everywhere  severely  to  be  challenged  (Gal.  vi.  1 ;  John 
viii.  7 ;  Acts  iii.  17).  The  best  are  liable  to  mistakes.  (3)  We  have  not 
done  our  task  in  the  world  till  we  are  well-informed  in  our  judgment  concerning 
right  and  wrong,  till  we  are  refined  in  spirit  to  relish  and  taste ;  and  reformed 
in   life  to   do   and   practise.      III.    There  is   reason  to  think  that   God  will 

BRING   out   of   particular   MISTAKE   HIM   THAT   IS   BIGHT   IN   THE   MAIN.       "  God   shall 

reveal,"  &c.  This  is  spoken  reasonably  and  becomingly  in  respect  to  God,  and 
hopefully  and  charitably  in  regard  to  man ;  not  as  prophetic,  but  as  likely  and 
credible.  1.  On  God's  part :  because — (1)  of  God's  relation  to  us  as  Father  and 
Teacher.  Men  look  up  to  Him  for  bodily  food  ;  why  not  for  intellectual  commu- 
nications.  (2)  God  has  so  declared  and  promised  (Psa.  xxv.  9 ;  Prov.  iii.  33  ;  James 
iv.  6;  1  Peter  v.  6;  John  viii.  17;  xvi  13).  (3)  God  begins  with  us  with 
intention  to  go  on  if  we  be  not  perverse  and  wilful  (John  xvi.  12).  In  the  case 
before  us  God  had  begun,  and  they  were  resolved  to  press  toward  the  mark. 
2.  On  our  part.  By  truth  already  received  we  have  a  double  advantage  for 
receiving  more.  (1)  The  way  to  the  understanding,  which  was  obstructed,  has 
been  opened-  (2)  The  mind  is  brought  into  a  disposition  to  receive  all  Divine 
truth.  3.  On  the  part  of  truth,  because — (1)  Truth  is  connatural  to  our  souls. 
(2)  The  several  truths  mutually  depend  on  each  other;  one  helping  to  the 
discovery  of  another,  and  each  being  declaratory  and  convictive  of  the  same  error. 
4.  Here  it  is  to  be  observed — (1)  That  this  is  more  for  the  certain  guidance  of  any 
honest  man  than  he  can  in  Scripture  show  for  his  infallibility  who  usurps  the 
title  of  head  of  the  Church.  (2)  That  we  have  warrant  to  think  and  speak  things 
worthy  of  God,  and  tending  to  our  encouragement  in  good  behaviour.  5.  Lest 
I  should  give  any  advantage  to  enthusiasm  I  superadd — (1)  Keep  within  the 
compass  of  the  case.  The  condition  here  is  that  we  press  toward  the  mark,  and 
God's  blessings  are  conditional  everywhere.  (2)  Put  »S  pride.  The  fuU  soul 
loathes  the  honeycomb.  Presumption  and  conceit  wholly  indispose  men  for 
learning  (Psa.  xxv.  9;  iii.  7).  (3)  "  God  will  reveal,"  does  not  necessarily  import 
immediate  inspiration.  One  way  or  other  is  the  course  of  His  providence,  and 
by  some  instrument  or  lover  of  truth  we  shall  be  told  what  we  have  to  do  (Acts 


<mir.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  J51 

viii.  35)  (4)  Where  knowledge  is  pursued  by  practice  there  is  other  expectation 
than  from  speculation  alone  (John  vii.  17 ;  Acts  v.  32).  6.  Inferences :  (1)  The 
purity  of  a  man's  mind,  the  sincerity  of  his  intention,  the  honesty  of  hi«  heart, 
are  his  great  security.  (2)  In  ways  of  uprightness  and  integrity  we  may  presume 
upon  God's  leading  ub  into  all  the  truth  we  are  required  to  know.  (3)  Give  a 
fair  amount  of  patience  to  those  who  mean  well.     IV.  Those  who  aorek  in  the 

MAIN,  BUT   DIITEB   IN    OTHER   PARTICDLAKS,    OUGHT    NEVERTHELESS    TO    BOLD    TOQEXHER 

(ver.  16).  There  is  harmony,  notwithstanding  difference  in  some  apprehensions, 
in  all  degrees  of  perfection.  1.  This  is  a  representation  of  the  heavenly  state. 
There  is  no  discord  there,  and,  therefore,  there  sliould  be  accord  in  those  who 
are  citizens  of  heaven  (Phil.  iii.  20).  2.  It  is  the  cause  of  religion  (James  iii.  17; 
Psa.  cxxxi.  1-2).  It  is  a  scandal  to  the  world  when  professors  do  not  agree,  making 
strangers  ask  with  Pilate,  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  Disagreement  has  tired  out  the 
best  of  men.  Good-tempered  Melanchthon's  satisfaction  when  he  came  to  die 
was  that  he  was  free  "  from  temptation  to  sin,  from  the  troubles  of  the  world, 
and  from  the  fury  of  theologies."  It  was  Origen's  argument  against  Celsua  that 
through  the  virtue  and  efficacy  of  religion  the  state  of  the  Church  was  calm  and 
quiet,  whereas  otlier  states  were  turbulent  (2  Cor.  xii.  20).  3.  It  is  the  conver- 
sation of  Christians  with  each  other  for  mutual  gain  and  advantage.  (1)  For 
spiritual  edification,  whereas  if  variance  obtaius  there  will  be  alienation  of  hearts 
and  suspension  of  Christian  acts  (Mai.  iii.  26).  (2)  For  their  better  subsistence 
is  an  evil  world.  Foreign  opposition  and  force  cannot  do  the  mischief  that 
internal  feuds  may.  (3)  There  is  more  hearts-ease  and  quiet  of  mind.  4.  This 
prevents  all  mischiefs  which  infest  humanity,  such  as  factions,  suspicions,  heart- 
burnings, plottings,  competitions,  and  envious  comparisons ;  whereas  there  should 
be  but  one  division — the  Church  and  the  world.  5.  Objections.  (1)  We  do  not 
think  alike.  Nor  do  we  in  other  matters.  There  are  different  opinions  in 
philosophy.  There  are  different  constellations.  We  differ  in  age,  stature,  feature, 
Ac.  These  varieties  display  the  wisdom  of  the  Creator.  Yet  all  agreeing  in 
human  nature  we  are  fit  companions  for  each  other.  Why  then  should  not  they 
who  meet  in  the  regenerate  nature  and  agree  in  the  articles  of  faith  and  principle 
of  good  life,  overlook  subordinate  differences.  (2)  Errors  are  dangerous,  (a) 
That  is  not  thy  charge  but  His.  To  say  what  is  fit  to  persuade  is  all  thou  canst 
do ;  the  rest  must  remain  with  God.  (b)  Since  all  things  that  are  necessary  to 
salvation  are  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  none  but  those  who  are  gross  neglectors  err 
dangerously.  (3)  But  where  is  zeal  for  God  and  truth.  This  has  its  principal 
operation  on  one's  self,  and  shows  itself  on  others  in  the  strength  of  argument, 
seasonable  and  renewed  proposals.  6.  Suggestions.  (1)  All  that  are  right  in  the 
main  are  virtually  informed  by  the  same  spirit,  and  the  things  they  agree  in  are 
far  more  and  weishty  than  those  wherein  they  differ.  (2)  Why  should  men 
differ  in  religion,  which  is  the  greatest  bond  of  union  ?  (3)  Why  should  we  be 
aggrieved,  when  every  one  uses  but  his  own  right, 'and  every  man  has  a  right 
of  judging  if  he  be  capable  ?  (4)  Why  dost  thou  lay  so  much  stress  upon 
difference  in  such  points  wherein  if  thou  art  temperate  and  sober  thou  art 
afraid  peremptorily  to  assert?  (5)  Hast  thou  never  erred?  (6)  Will  difference 
produce  the  harmony  thou  seekest  7  (7)  Is  it  safe  to  reject  a  man  whom  we 
cannot  conclude  God  has  cast  off  f  (8)  Why  should  I  think  that  essential  in 
another  which  I  dare  not  assert  is  necessary  for  my  acceptance  with  God.  (9)  I 
came  leisurely  to  knowledge  myself,  may  not  days  teach  my  neighbour  wisdom  ? 
(10)  What  was  I  taught  of  God  for  but  to  teach  others  ?  (Luke  xxii.  32 ;  Eccles. 
iv.  9-12).  (11)  Shall  we  disown  that  which  is  good  in  them  because  they  are  not 
Buoh  as  we  would  have  them?  (12)  Do  not  many  differences  arise  from 
constitution  and  circumstances  rather  than  from  perversity  ?  (13)  Why  part  from 
them  on  earth  whom  we  may  meet  with  in  heaven?  7.  Cautions.  (1)  Great 
reverence  is  to  be  given  to  superiors.  Government  is  not  to  be  disturbed  upon 
pretence  of  private  judgment.  (2)  No  disturbance  must  thence  arise  to  the  Church 
of  God  (1  Cor.  xi.  16).  (3)  *Tis  safer  to  err  in  an  error  that  is  common  than  in 
one  which  is  personal.  (4)  It  beeomes  the  modesty  of  particular  persons  when 
their  sentiments  are  singular  to  bethink  themselves  better.  {B.  Whichcote,  D.D.) 
The  temper  to  be  cultivated  by  Christians  of  different  derwminations  towards  each 
other  : — 1.  Paul  ever  kept  the  dictates  of  his  elevated  and  inspired  judgment  under 
the  guidance  of  Christian  kindness.  He  permits  no  part  of  the  Christian 
•character  to  be  abridged  by  another.  He  never  allows  his  earnestness  in  main- 
iaining  truth  and  opposing  error  so  betray  him  into  bitterness  ;  nor  does  he  permit 


269  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOB.  [chap,  nt, 

hia  generosity  to  impair  his  faithfulness.  2.  Our  text  is  a  happy  combination  oi 
these  qualities,  and  is  an  enforcement  of  them  on  others.  Were  we  to  imitata 
them  there  would  be  an  end  of  our  unhappy  dissentions  on  religious  matters. 

L    ThEKE     is   a    great    and    QROWINO     NDUBEB    op    THOSK   with     whom    WB     SHODL0 

CONSCIENTIOUSLY  UNITE.  Look  around  and  see  how  many  there  are  who  are 
perfect  and  thus  minded  in  reference  to  the  most  important  matters.  The  rule 
then  should  be  the  rule  now  (vers.  8-14).  1.  We  ought  to  seek  and  cultivate  the 
society  of  such,  by  friendly  association  and  public  communion,  &c.  2.  Let 
us  use  the  means  to  promote  the  mutual  improvement  of  such  and  of  ourselves. 
3.  Let  us  do  all  we  can  to  render  our  reciprocal  union  more  perfect  and  our 
nsefulness  more  extensive.     IL  Thebe  are  some  who  diiteb  from  us  in  matters 

OF   GREAT    importance — HOW    DOES     THE     PRINCIPLE    APPLY     TO     THEM?       To    haVB    UO 

communion  with  them  would  be  to  expel  them  from  the  sacred  ark  into  the  ranks 
of  the  enemy.  Those  to  whom  the  apostle  refers  are  evidently  not  those  who 
renounce  and  revile  evangelical  truth,  but  those  whose  knowledge  or  whose  means 
or  susceptibility  for  instruction  are  deficient.  1.  Let  us  give  a  fair  and  com- 
prehensive consideration  to  the  way  in  which  their  religious  characters  have  been 
formed.  (1)  Education  may  early  have  produced  an  unfavourable  impression,  or 
they  may  have  attended  an  incompetent  ministry.  (2)  We  ought  to  pay  regard 
to  the  difficulties  and  misapprehensions  which  lie  in  the  use  of  words,  which  may 
be  employed  ambiguously  or  ignorantly.  (3)  We  should  reflect  what  would 
probably  have  been  the  effect  upon  our  minds  had  we  been  placed  in  their 
circumstances.  (4)  When  we  see  in  them  the  apparent  evidences  of  real 
holiness  let  us  not  be  backward  to  acknowledge  it.  2.  How  we  ought  to  act 
towards  them.  (1)  With  justice.  Let  us  not  misrepresent  them,  nor  exaggerate 
the  differences  between  us.  (2)  With  kindness.  Let  us  see  that  our  temper  be 
Bweet  and  our  manner  pleasing.  (3)  We  should  take  great  care  to  prevent  them 
imagining  that  we  maintain  salvation  to  be  suspended  on  a  mere  theoretical  belief 
of  some  points  of  doctrine.  IIL  There  ake  Christians  from  whom  we  differ 
ON  MATTERS  OF  SMALLER  MOMENT.  1.  Let  US  show  them  the  most  sincere  and 
honest  respect  and  kindness.  2.  Let  us  cultivate  friendly  intercourse  with  them 
as  far  as  they  are  disposed  to  recipi'ocate  it.  3.  Let  us  hold  with  them  religious 
communion  on  proper  occasions  so  far  as  our  and  their  principles  permit.  4. 
When  we  state  and  argue  for  the  points  in  which  we  differ  from  them  let  us  take 
care  to  Jeal  justly  by  them.  5.  Let  us  take  equal  pains,  without  intrusion,  to 
make  them  correctly  acquainted  with  our  sentiments.  6.  Let  everything  in  our 
speaking  and  writing,  &c.,  be  a  demonstration  that  we  esteem  the  essential 
principle  and  expansive  morality  of  the  gospel  infinitely  above  the  strict  bounds  of 
controversial  preciseness  and  ecclesiastical  form.    {J.  Pye  Smith,  D.D.) 

Ver  16.  Aa  many  as  be  perfect  be  thus  minded. — Christian  maturity : — I.  It» 
SIGNS.  1.  Humility.  2.  Singleness  of  purpose.  3.  Charity.  IL  Its  duties.  1. 
Persevering  effort.  2.  Forbearance  with  others.  3.  The  encouragement  of  the 
weak.  (J,  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  souVs  perfection: — The  word  "perfect"  does  not 
express  the  idea  of  moral  completeness  so  much  as  that  of  physical  maturity.  It 
means  "full-grown,"  as  in  contrast  to  "babes."  And  the  perfect  here  are  exhorted 
to  cultivate  the  sense  of  not  having  "  already  attained,"  and  to  be  constantly 
reaching  forth  to  unattained  heights,  so  that  a  sense  of  imperfection  and  a 
continual  effort  after  higher  life  are  parts  of  Paul's  perfect  man.  And  it  is  to  be 
further  noted  that  "  perfect "  people  may  be  otherwise  minded,  and  so  stand  in 
need  of  the  hope  that  God  would  by  degrees  show  them  their  divergence  from  Hia 
pattern.  I.  There  abe  people  whom  without  exaggeration  the  judgment  of 
tbuth  calls  perfect.  In  the  language  of  the  New  Testament  men  are  "saints" 
who  had  many  sins,  and  "perfect"  who  had  many  imperfections.  1.  The  main 
thing  about  a  character  is  not  the  degree  to  which  it  has  attained  completeness  in 
its  ideal,  but  what  that  ideal  is.  The  distance  a  man  has  walked  is  of  less  conse- 
quence than  the  direction  in  which  his  face  is  turned.  Men  are  to  be  ranged 
according  to  their  aims  rather  than  their  achievements.  The  visionary  who 
attempts  something  high  and  accomplishes  little  is  often  a  nobler  man  than  he 
who  aims  at  marks  on  the  low  levels  and  hits  them.  2.  So  there  is  a  class  of  aims 
BO  absolutely  corresponding  to  man's  nature  and  relations,  that  to  take  them  for 
one's  own  and  to  approximate  to  them  in  some  measure  may  fairly  be  onlled  the 
perfection  of  human  nature.  The  literal  force  of  the  word  "  having  reached  the 
end  "  g^ves  pertinence  to  that  question.    And  there  need  be,  in  that  case,  no  doubt 


CHA».  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  «63 

ftbout  the  answer,  "  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God  and  enjoy  Him  for  eyer." 
fle  who  hves  for  God  is  doing  what  he  was  made  and  meant  to  do,  and  however 
imperfect,  he  is  more  nearly  perfect  than  the  fairest  character  against  which  the 
damning  accusation  may  be  brought,  "  The  God  in  whose  hand  thy  breath  is  .  .  . 
thou  hast  not  glorified."  People  ask  sneeringly  about  David,  "  Is  this  the  man 
after  God's  own  heart."  Yes;  not  because  religion  has  a  different  morality 
from  that  of  the  world  (except  in  being  higher),  nor  because  saints  make  up  for 
adultery  and  murder  by  singing  psalms,  but  because  the  main  set  of  the  life  was 
towards  God.  3.  Such  men  have  in  them  the  germ  of  a  life  which  has  no  natural 
snd  but  absolute  completeness.  The  small  seed  may  grow  very  slowly  here  and  be 
only  a  poor  bit  of  green,  but  it  has  Divine  germinant  virtue  within,  and  waits  but 
being  carried  to  its  own  clime  to  flourish.  II.  Two  of  the  characteristics  of  this 
PERFECTION.  '*  Thus  Jiiiudcd  "  carries  us  back  to  the  preceding  clauses,  Think  as  I 
do  of  yourselves,  and  do  as  I  do.  1.  "  Not  as  though  I  were  already  perfect,"  &c., 
shows  us  that  true  Christian  perfection  has  in  it  a  constant  consciousness  of  im- 
perfection. In  all  fields  of  effort,  as  faculty  grows  consciousness  of  insufficiency 
grows  with  it.  The  more  we  know  the  more  we  know  our  ignc  ranee.  Only  people 
who  never  have  or  will  do  anything,  or  else  raw  apprentices,  with  the  mercifully 
granted  self-confidence  which  gets  beaten  out  soon  enough,  think  that  they  can  do 
everything.  So  in  Christian  life.  Conscience  becomes  more  sensitive  as  we  get 
nearer  right ;  the  worse  a  man  is  the  less  he  hears  it.  One  little  stain  will  be  con- 
spicuous on  a  brightly  polished  blade,  but  if  it  be  all  dirty  a  dozen  more  or  fewer 
will  make  little  difference.  2.  A  constant  striving  after  further  advance.  How 
vigorously  this  temper  is  put  in  the  context.  So  yearning  forward  and  setting  all 
the  current  of  his  being,  both  faculty  and  desire,  to  the  yet  unreached  mark,  the 
Christian  man  is  to  live.  3.  This  buoyant  energy  of  hope  and  effort  is  to  be  the 
result  of  the  consciousness  of  imperfection.  This,  however,  paralyses  many. 
Men  lament  their  evil  and  slow  progress  and  remain  the  same  year  afier  year. 
How  different  this  from  the  grand  wholesome  completeness  of  Paul's  view  here 
which  embraces  both  elements.  III.  The  co-existence  of  these  chakacteribtics 
WITH  THEia  opposiTEs.  "  If  in  anything  ye  be  otherwise  minded "  refers  not  to 
difference  of  opinion  among  themselves,  but  a  divergence  of  character  from  the 
pattern  set  before  them.  If  in  any  sense  ye  are  unconscious  of  your  imperfections, 
or  are  non-progressive,  God  will  show  you  what  you  are.  Plainly  he  supposes  that 
%  good  man  may  pass  for  a  time  under  the  dominion  of  impulses  and  theories  of 
another  kind  from  those  which  rule  his  life.  1.  He  does  not  expect  the  complete 
and  uninterrupted  dominion  of  these  higher  powers.  The  higher  life  is  planted, 
but  its  germination  is  a  work  of  time.  The  conditions  of  our  hfe  are  in  conflict. 
Interruptions  from  external  circumstances,  struggles  of  flesh  with  spirit,  are  the 
lot  even  of  the  most  advanced.  2.  Such  an  admission  does  not  make  such  inter- 
ruptions less  blameworthy.  That  piece  of  sharp  practice,  tiiat  burst  of  bad  temper 
— could  we  have  helped  it  or  not?  3.  The  feelings  with  which  we  should  regard 
sin  and  contradictions  in  ourselves  and  others  should  be  so  far  altered  by  such 
thoughts,  that  we  should  be  slow  to  pronounce  that  a  m;in  cannot  be  a  Christian 
because  he  has  done  so  and  so.  A  single  act,  if  it  be  in  contradiction  to  a  man's 
main  tendency,  is  not  necessarily  an  incompatibility.  IV.  The  crowning  hope  that 
lies  in  these  words  is  the  certainty  of  a  gradual  but  complete  attainment  of  all  the 
Christian's  aspirations  after  God  and  goodness.  1.  The  ground  of  that  confidence 
Ues  in  no  natural  tendency  in  us  or  effort  of  ours,  but  solely  in  God.  Paul  is 
certain  that  "  God  will  reveal,"  &c.,  because  He  is  God.  He  has  learned  that  God 
is  not  in  the  habit  of  leaving  off  His  work  before  He  has  done.  2.  By  the  discipline 
of  daily  life,  merciful  chastisements,  His  Word,  the  secret  influences  of  His  Spirit, 
&o.  He  will  reveal  to  the  lowly  suul  all  that  is  wanting  in  its  knowledge,  and 
communicate  to  it  all  that  is  lacking  in  character.  3.  So  for  us,  then,  the  true 
temper  is  confidence  in  His  power  and  will,  an  earnest  waiting  upon  Him,  a  brave 
forward  yearning  hope,  blended  with  a  lowly  consciousness  of  imperfection. 
Presumption  should  be  as  far  from  us  as  despair.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Wliat 
kind  of  perfection  is  attainable  in  this  life  : — I.  Explain  the  point  by  several  dis- 
tinctions.  1.  There  is  a  perfection  of  the  reward  and  a  perfection  of  grace.  (1) 
Of  the  reward  the  saints  will  have  in  heaven  when  they  are  freed  from  all  sinful 
weakness  (1  Cor.  xiii.  10 ;  Eph.  v.  17 ;  Jude  24).  This  we  have  not  in  this  world, 
but  because  we  expect  it  in  the  next  we  are  to  la\)our  after  the  highest  perfection  in 
holiness  here,  because  allowed  imperfection  is  a  disesteem  of  blessedness  (1  John 
iiL  8).    He  that  looketh  for  a  sinless  state  wiU  get  as  much  as  he  can  of  it  oow. 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  uM. 


(2)  The  perfection  of  grace  and  holiness  is  such  as  the  saints  may  attain  tint*  in 
this  life  (Col.  iv.  12).  2.  Legal  and  evangelical ;  the  one  is  where  there  is  no  sin, 
the  other  no  guile ;  the  one  stands  iu  an  exact  conformity  to  God's  law,  the  other 
in  a  sincere  endeavour  to  fulfil  it ;  the  one  can  endure  the  balance,  the  other  only 
the  touchstone.  (1)  Legal  perfection  is  described  in  Gal.  iii.  10,  and  supposes  a 
man  innocent,  and  requires  that  he  keep  so.  This  is  impossible  through  the  weak- 
ness of  the  flesh  (Rom.  viii.  3).  (2)  Evangelical  (2  Kings  xx.  3)  is  consistent  witti 
weakness  (2  Chron.  xv.  17).  This  all  must  have  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9).  What  is 
done  for  God  must  be  done  willingly  and  with  all  the  exactness  possible.  Some  do 
many  things  that  are  good,  but  their  hearts  are  not  perfect  with  God  (2  Chron.  xxv. 
2);  the  heart  is  divided  between  God  and  other  things  (Hos.  x.  2;  James  i,  8). 

3.  Absolute  and  comparative.  (1)  That  is  absolutely  perfect  to  which  nothing  ia 
wanting.  This  is  in  Christ  only,  not  in  us.  (a)  Where  there  are  so  many  relics  of 
the  flesh  a  man  cannot  be  absolutely  perfect  (Gal.  v.  17 ;  Rom.  vii.  24).  (b)  There 
is  none  but  sometimes  sin  (1  Kings  viii.  46;  Eccles.  vii.  20;  James  iii.  2;  1  John 
i.  8).  (c)  There  is  none  but  need  the  mercy  of  God  and  ought  to  pray  for  this  as 
for  daily  bread  (Matt.  vL  13).  (2)  Comparative  perfection  is  twofold,  (a)  When 
the  professors  of  Christianity  are  compared  with  those  that  live  under  other 
institutions.  They  that  submit  to  Christ's  terms  are  said  to  be  perfect,  because 
Christianity  itself  is  perfection  (Matt.  xix.  21).  (6)  When  compared  with  others  of 
the  same  profession,  believers  are  distinguished  into  perfect  and  imperfect. 
Though  none  can  attain  to  absolute  perfection,  yet  there  are  several  degrees  of 
grace,  and  diversities  of  growth  (Eph.  iv.  13-14 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  6,  iii.  1 ;  xiv.  20 ;  Heb. 
V.  13-14).     It  is  a  monstrous  thing  after  many  years'  growth  to  be  an  infant  still. 

4.  Of  parts  and  of  degrees.  (1)  Of  parts,  when  we  have  all  things  that  belong  to  a 
sincere  Christian — as  living  creatures  are  perfect  as  soon  as  they  are  brought  forth. 
Thus  a  Christian  must  have  grace  to  enlighten  and  govern,  one  grace  added  to 
another  (James  i.  4).  What  is  defective  in  parts  cannot  be  supplied  by  any  after- 
growth. Leave  out  any  necessary  grace  and  the  new  creature  is  maimed;  some 
leave  out  temperance,  or  patience,  or  love  (1  Peter  5-7).  (2)  Of  degrees,  when  a 
thing  has  attained  its  highest  pitch.  So  we  are  only  perfect  in  heaven  (Heb.  xii. 
23).  5.  Of  growth  and  consummation.  (1)  Things  are  said  to  be  done  when  they 
are  begun  to  be  done  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  And  so  they  are  said  to  be  perfect  who  are  in 
the  way  of  perfection  (2  Cor.  iii.  18;  iv.  16).  This  perfection  is  taken — (a)  As  to 
means  (Eph.  iv.  12;  1  Thess.  iii.  10),  (b)  As  to  improvement  of  means  (2  Cor.  vii. 
1 ;  2  Peter  i.  8  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  1).  (2)  Consummate ;  when  after  the  hazards  of  life 
we  are  presented  to  Christ  (Col.  i.  28) ;  and  by  Christ  to  God  (Col  i.  22),  II.  The 
REASONS  WHY  WE  MUST  BE  PEBFBCT.  1,  We  have  a  perfect  God  (Matt.  v.  43)  whom 
we  are  required  to  imitate,  and  therefore  we  must  not  set  bounds  to  our  holiness  (1 
Peter  i.  15-16).  2.  We  have  a  perfect  rule  (Psa.  xix.  7;  2  Tim.  iii.  17).  3.  We 
have  a  perfect  Etdeemer  (Col.  ii.  10).  4.  There  is  a  perfect  reward  (Eph.  iv.  13). 
III.  The  motives  of  this  perfection.  1.  What  you  lost  in  Adam  must  be  re- 
covered in  Christ,  or  else  you  dishonour  your  Redeemer  (Rom.  v.  17).  2.  We  pray 
for  perfection  and  therefore  must  endeavour  after  it,  otherwise  our  prayers  are  a 
mockery  (Matt.  vi.  8 ;  1  Thess.  v.  23).  3.  In  our  making  covenant  we  purpose  to 
do  the  will  of  God,  and  so  must  endeavour  to  carry  it  out,  otherwise  it  is  not  made 
with  a  true  heart  (Heb.  x.  22 ;  Psa.  xviii.  23 ;  Rev.  iii.  2).  4.  Consider  the  comfort 
and  peace  of  the  man  who  presses  toward  perfection  (Psa.  xxxvii.  37).  IV.  The 
MEANS.  1.  See  that  the  work  be  begun,  for  there  must  be  converting  grace  before 
confirming  grace.  What  good  will  it  do  to  blow  a  dead  coal,  or  to  seek  strength 
before  we  have  life.  2.  The  radical  graces  must  be  strengthened — strong  faith, 
fervent  love,  lively  hope.  3.  Use  the  means  with  all  seriousness  and  good 
conscience.  (1)  In  the  Word  you  have  principles  of  faith,  obligations  to  love, 
arguments  of  hope,  and  therefore  are  built  up  (Acts  xx.  32).  (2)  The  sacraments 
strengthen  our  faith  and  hope  as  a  bond  or  vow,  and  excite  and  engage  our  love  and 
obedience.  (3)  Prayer  (1  Peter  v.  10).  4.  Think  much  and  often  of  your  perfect 
blessedness  which  you  expect  according  to  promise,  which  will  quicken  and  excite 
you  to  more  diligence.  There  will  be— (1)  A  complete  vision  of  God  and  Christ  (1 
Cor.  xiii.  12).  (2)  A  complete  possession  and  fruition  of  God  (Eph.  iii.  19  ;  1  Cor. 
i.  30).  (3)  A  complete  transformation  into  the  image  of  Christ  (1  John  iii  2; 
Psa.  xvii.  15).  (4)  A  complete  delectation  arising  from  all  this  (Psa.  xvi.  11.)  V. 
The  notes.  1.  When  there  is  such  a  base  esteem  of  worldly  things  that  our 
affections  are  weakened  to  them  every  day  (Gal.  vi.  14).  2.  When  more  unsatisfied 
with  present  degrees  of  holiness  with  a  constant  desire  to  grow  better.    3.  Whea 


CUP.  m-J  PHILIPPIANS.  261 

we  are  swayed  more  by  love  than  by  fear  (Gal.  iv.  6 ;  1  John  iv.  18).  4.  When  we 
»re  more  humble  and  see  more  of  our  defects  than  others  do.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
Christian  perfection : — I.  Its  sionb.  1,  A  base  esteem  of  worldly  privileges  and 
honours  (ver.  7).  2.  A  forgetting  of  the  past  aud  an  earnest  pressing  towards  the 
prize  (vers.  12-13).  3.  A  desire  for  the  coming  of  Christ,  such  as  banishes  the  fear 
of  death.  4,  Sweet  communion  with  Christ  and  boldness  of  access  without  fear  of 
God's  presence  or  judgment.  4.  Stability  amidst  either  prosperity  or  adversity. 
6.  Experience  in  finding  out  Satan's  devices,  whereas  a  beginner,  for  want  of 
experience  and  practice,  runs,  ere  he  is  aware,  into  many  offences,  and  looks  for  no 
remedy.  7.  Strength  to  stand  against  the  bitter  blasts  and  oppositions  of  the 
world.  Nothing  could  move  Paul  or  separate  him  from  the  love  of  Christ,  but  im- 
mature Christians  are  shaken  or  blown  away.  8.  Endurance  of  the  infirmities  of 
others  (Gal.  vi.  1).  9.  Knowledge  of  particular  wants,  and  hence  a  seeking  after 
farther  supplies  of  grace.  10.  Ability  and  endeavour  to  beget  other  Christians.  It 
is  the  property  of  a  grown  creature  to  beget  its  like.  A  weak  Christian  has  enough 
to  do  to  look  to  himself.  II.  Its  means.  1.  We  must  know  the  order.  We  must 
first  grow  in  fundamental  graces,  for  we  water  not  leaves  but  the  root  of  our  plants. 
When  root  graces  are  diligently  cherished,  works,  like  leaves,  will  soon  put  forth. 
2.  WTiatsoever  we  do  we  must  do  it  with  the  best  advantage,  labouring  to  practise 
as  many  graces  as  we  can.  3.  We  must  not  neglect  little  things,  small  occasions 
of  doing  good,  or  beginnings  of  evil.  4.  We  must  keep  our  affections  to 
holy  exercises  and  means,  and  consider  what  will  fit  our  disposition  when 
indisposed.  Are  we  dull  in  prayer?  Then  read.  If  that  will  not  be  endured, 
use  coMimunion  of  saints.  III.  Its  motives — Consider — 1.  The  privilege  of  a 
perfect  Christian  (Psa.  xlvi.  5).  2.  The  beautiful  example  he  sets,  so  as  to  make 
others  in  love  with  religion.  3.  The  glory  he  secures  for  God.  4.  The  close 
communion  he  has  with  Christ.  5.  His  blessed  reward.  {R.  Sihbes,  D.D.)  If 
In  ansrthlng  ye  be  otherwise  minded. — Differences  of  opinion : — I.  Must  necessabily 
ABiSE  from — 1,  The  diversity  of  the  human  mind ;  2.  Habit ;  3,  Attainment.  II, 
Ought  to  be  begarued  with  fobbearance.  1.  The  perfect  must  not  despise  the 
weak.  2.  The  weak  must  not  judge  the  perfect  (Rom.  xiv.  3).  III.  Ark  best 
BEHOVED  BY  PBATEB.  God  gives  wisdom  to  all  who  seek  it.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  A 
persuasive  to  unity  tw  things  indifferent ;—  When  God's  people  are  divided  in  opinion 
they  should  not  come  to  an  open  rupture.  I.  What  lenity  and  forbearance 
BuooLD  BR  USED.  1.  There  often  are  difieiences  of  opinion  about  lesser  things  in 
the  Church,  partly  because  of  different  degrees  of  light — all  barks  that  sail  to 
heaven  draw  not  a  like  depth  of  water — and  partly  because  of  the  remainders  of 
corruption.  2.  When  differences  arise  we  should  take  care  they  come  not  to  open 
breach.  This  is  the  course  Paul  takes  licre.  So  should  we,  because  the  Church  is 
in  danger  of  being  rent  and  destroyed  (Gal.  v.  15),  because  the  world  is  scandalized 
(John  xvii:  21),  mutual  means  of  edification  hindered  (Gal.  iv.  16),  and  the  power 
of  godliness  lost.     3.  To  prevent  this  all  lenity  must  be  used.    This  I  shall  state 

(1)  as  to  the  matter  of  the  .stiife.  If  we  agree  in  substantials  let  us  go  by  the  same 
rule  and  mind  tbe  same  thing.  (2)  As  to  the  persons  contending  there  is  a  differ- 
ence. Paul  distinguishes  between  erring  Christians  and  their  factious  guides  (Phil, 
iii.  2).  4.  The  forbearance  itself  is  not  out  of  necessity  but  voluntary  choice  and 
Christian  compassion,  knowing  that  we  need  as  much  from  God  and  others.  Nor 
is  it  a  fo!  bearance  of  policy,  till  we  get  opportunity  to  suppress  others  (Eph.  iv.  2-3). 
There  are  four  graces  that  enforce  it.     (1)  Lowliness — a  sense  of  personal  infirmity. 

(2)  Meekness  (James  iii.  17).  (3)  Longsuffering.  (4)  Love  (1  Pet.  iv.  8 ;  1  Cor,  xiii. 
4,  7).  5.  In  this  forbearance,  both  strong  and  weak  have  their  part.  (1)  What 
they  are  not  to  do.  (a)  Not  to  leave  the  truth  or  do  anything  agamst  it.  Strings 
in  tune  must  not  be  brought  down  to  strings  out  of  tune,  but  the  reverse,  {b)  Not 
to  connive  at  sin  or  error  (Lev.  xix.  17 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  15).  (2)  What  they  are  to 
do,  (a)  The  strong  are  not  to  deal  rigorously  with  the  weak,  but  wait  till  God 
declare  the  truth  unto  thom,  and  promote  their  conviction  with  all  gentleness 
(Isa,  xl,  11),  (6)  The  weak  are  not  to  rend  and  cut  themselves  off  from  the  rest  of 
Christians,  or  be  strange  to  them  on  every  lesser  dissent,  but  to  be  teachable  and 
lay  aside  obstinate  prejudices,  and  examine  into  the  cause  of  the  difference;  and 
leave  room  for  the  discovery  of  God's  mind,  II.  The  reasons  for  this  bxeecisk 
OF  this  leniti  and  forbearance.  1.  From  the  necessity,  excellency,  and  utility 
of  union.  What  more  clear  in  the  Scriptures  than  that  Christians  should  endeavour 
to  be  united,  Christ  prayed  for  it  (John  xvii.  21-23) ;  Paul  enforoes  it  (Phil.  ii. 
1-2) ;  those  that  cause  divisions  are  sternly  cautioned  (Bom.  xyi.  17-18) ;  unity  is 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ttU 

pressed  by  the  most  cogent  arguments  (Eph.  iv.  4-6).  2.  From  the  consideratioE 
of  our  mutual  frailties.  Heb.  v.  2  should  be  verified  in  us  (Gal.  vi.  1  ;  Rom.  liv.  1) 
3.  From  the  consideration  of  the  probability  of  Divine  illumination.  (1)  Th;g 
illumination  comes  from  God  only  (Acts  xvi.  4  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  6-7).  Let  us,  then,  iu 
meekness  use  the  means  and  refer  the  issue  to  God  (2  Tim.  ii.  25).  If  we  force 
men  before  they  are  convinced  it  may  only  make  hypocrites.  (2)  This  illumination 
is  given  by  degrees  (Mark  viii.  24-25).  (3)  They  who  are  not  for  the  present  may 
be  afterwards  mstructed  in  the  truth.  The  apostle  proceeded  in  the  hopes  of  that, 
(a)  Upon  the  supi>osition  that  they  were  already  converted  (chap.  i.  6).  (b)  Thait. 
they  were  humble  and  tractable  (Psa.  xxv.  9).  (c)  That  they  will  not  neglect  any 
means  of  study  and  prayer  (Prov,  ii.  4;  Psa.  cxix.  18).  (</)  That  they  continue  in 
the  communion  of  the  Church,  (e)  That  they  walk  according  to  their  light  (John 
vii.  17).  4.  From  the  temper  of  those  who  are  perfect.  A  grounded  Christian 
bears  with  the  infirmity  of  others  and  helps  them.  III.  Considerations  helpfui* 
TO  THIS  FORBEAKANCE.  1.  In  how  many  things  we  agree,  in  how  few  we  differ. 
There  is  a  threefold  unity.  (1)  In  mind  (Rom.  xv.  5-6).  (2)  In  heart  (Acts  iv.  32). 
(3)  In  scope  (Rom.  xv.  5-7 ;  Jer.  xxxii.  39).  2.  Take  more  notice  of  their  graces 
than  of  their  infirmities  (Rev.  ii.  2,  5,  6).  3.  Remember  how  open  the  enforcements 
to  love  and  unity  are,  and  in  how  much  the  grounds  of  separation  lie  in  the  dark 
and  are  doubtful.  4.  Think  of  God's  love  and  forbearance  towards  us.  5.  This 
forbearance  cannot  be  expected  from  others  unless  shown  to  others  (James  iii.  2 ; 
Matt.  vii.  12,  xviii.  28).  6.  How  dangerous  it  is  to  reject  any  whom  Christ  will  own 
for  His,  Will  Christ  admit  him,  and  you  cast  him  out  (Rom.  xiv.  3)  ?  7.  As  we 
must  not  give  offence  so  we  must  not  take  it  (1  Cor.  xiii.  5 ;  Matt.  v.  9).  8.  Our 
endeavour  for  unity  ought  to  be  earnest  and  constant  (Eph.  iv.  3  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  15). 
(T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Perfect  and  imperfect : — The  perfect  ones,  among  whom,  by 
the  idiom  he  employs,  the  apostle  places  himself,  are  those  who  have  burst  the 
fetters  of  intellectual  and  spiritual  bondage  ;  who  have  made  some  advancement  in 
the  Divine  Hfe,  who  are  acquainted  with  the  higher  forms  of  truth,  and  are  no 
strangers  to  the  impulses  and  powers  of  Divine  grace ;  who  are  the  circumcision ; 
who  by  the  spirit  worship  God  ;  who  are  conscious  of  union  with  Christ,  of  possess- 
ing righteousness  through  faith  in  Him,  and  some  measure  of  confurmity  to  Him, 
and  who  cherish  through  Him  the  hope  of  a  happy  resurrection.  And,  perhaps,  if 
we  take  in  the  previous  context  the  imperfect  are  those  who  have  not  been  able  sos 
fully  to  rise  above  all  confidence  in  the  flesh ;  who  still  thought  circumcision  might 
not  be  wholly  without  value  ;  who  would  scruple  to  count  all  such  things  dead  and 
positive  loss,  but  hankered  after  some  of  them ;  and  who,  in  formally  renouncing 
them  secretly  or  unawares,  clung  to  them,  and  might  not  distinctly  comprehend  the 
freeness,  adaptation,  and  perfection  of  that  righteousness  which  is  through  the 
faith  of  Christ.  They  could  not  be  perfect  runners,  for  they  had  not  laid  aside 
every  weight.  (Prof.  Eadie. )  Perfection  evidenced  by  consciousness  of  imperfec- 
tion:— The  thick  skin  of  a  savage  will  not  be  disturbed  by  lying  on  sharp  stones, 
while  a  crumpled  rose-leaf  robs  the  Sybarite  of  his  sleep.  So  the  habit  of  evil 
hardens  the  cuticle  of  conscience,  and  the  practice  of  goodness  restores  tenderness 
and  sensibility ;  and  many  a  man  laden  with  crime  knows  less  of  its  tingling  than 
some  fair  soul  that  looks  almost  spotless  to  all  eyes  but  its  own.  As  men  grow 
better  they  become  like  that  glycerine  barometer  recently  introdnced,  on  which  a 
fall  or  a  rise  that  would  have  been  invisible  with  mercury  to  record  it  takes  up 
inches,  and  is  glaringly  conspicuous.  Good  people  sometimes  wonder,  and  some- 
times are  made  doubtful  and  sad  about  themselves  by  this  abiding  and  even 
increased  consciousness  of  sin.  There  is  no  need  to  be  so.  The  higher  the  tem- 
perature the  more  chilling  would  it  be  to  pass  into  an  ice-house,  and  the  more  our 
lives  are  brought  into  fellowship  with  the  perfect  life  the  more  shall  we  feel  oar  own 
shortcomings.  Let  us  be  thankful  if  our  consciences  speak  to  us  more  loudly  than 
they  used  to  do.  It  is  a  sign  of  growing  holiness,  as  the  tingling  in  a  frost-bitten 
limb  is  of  returning  life.  Let  us  seek  to  cultivate  and  increase  the  sense  of  our  own 
imperfection,  and  be  sure  that  the  diminution  of  a  consciousness  of  sin  means  not 
diminished  power  of  sin,  but  lessened  horror  of  it,  lessened  perception  of  right, 
lessened  love  of  goodness,  and  is  an  omen  of  death,  not  a  symptom  of  life.  Painter, 
scholar,  craftsman  all  know  that  the  condition  of  advance  is  the  recognition  of  an 
ideal  not  attained.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Meaiis  of  progress  : — Let  our  spirits 
stretch  out  all  their  powers  to  the  better  things  beyond,  as  the  plants  grown  in 
darkness  will  send  out  pale  shoots  that  feel  blindly  towards  the  hght,  or  the  seed 
sown  on  the  top  of  a  rock  will  grope  down  the  bare  stone  for  the  earth  by  which  it 


CHAT.  HLj  PHILIP  PI  AN S.  257 

must  be  fed.  {Ihid.)  Practice  the  best  meaiw  of  the  attainment  of  knowledge  : — 
As  Burely  as  we  live,  this  truth  of  truths  can  only  be  so  discerned  ;  to  those  w^o 
Act  on  what  they  know,  more  shall  be  revealed ;  and  thus,  if  any  man  will  do  His 
will,  he  shall  know  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God,  Any  man — not  the  man 
who  has  most  means  of  knowing,  who  has  the  subtlest  brains,  or  sits  under  the 
most  orthodox  preacher,  or  has  his  library  fullest  of  most  orthodox  books — but  the 
man  who  strives  to  know,  who  takes  God  at  His  word,  and  sets  himself  to  dig  up 
the  heavenly  mystery,  roots  and  all,  before  sunset  and  the  night  come,  when  no 
man  can  work.  Beside  such  a  man,  God  stands  in  more  and  more  visible  presence 
as  he  toils,  and  teathes  him  that  which  no  preacher  can  teach,  no  earthly  authority 
gainsay.      (<7.    Ruskin.)  Tlie   illuminating  circle   widening: — The   mists   that 

shrouded  the  earth  before  the  dawn  do  not  take  their  flight  at  the  very  first  touch 
of  the  morning  sun.  But  before  his  waxing  strength  they  disappear.  So  will  it  be, 
the  apostle  says,  with  moral  mists.  God's  dealings  in  this  respect,  in  the  dispen- 
sation of  His  grace,  accord  with  what  we  see  every  day  in  the  physical  sphere. 
Within  certain  limits,  the  exercise  of  power  tends  to  bring  more  power.  "  To  him 
that  hath  is  given."  To  the  "  shatirs  "  who  run  befoje  the  king  of  Persia — as 
"  Elijah  girded  up  his  loins,  and  ran  before  Ahab  to  the  entrance  of  Jezreel " — 
practice  from  childhood  has  given  such  activity  of  limb,  that  they  can  keep  pace 
for  many  hours  with  a  fleet  horse.  The  swing  of  the  heavy  hammer  makes  the 
muscles  of  the  blacksmith's  arms  "  strong  as  iron  bands."  Similarly,  "  if  a  man 
be  willing  to  do  the  will  of  God,"  which  is  the  legitimate  exercise  of  such  religious 
knowledge  as  he  has,  "he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine"  further.  The  believer  who, 
"whereto  he  has  attained,  walks  by  the  same,"  will  find  his  "  attainment  "  in- 
creasing continually.  For  the  man  who  fills  his  sphere  of  light  with  spiritual 
vigilance — strenuous  opposition  to  the  temptations  of  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  and 
the  devil — earnest  effort,  according  to  opportunity,  to  extend  the  kingdom  of  truth 
and  righteousness — the  illuminated  ciicle  will  steadily  widen.  {JR.  Johnstone, 
LL.B.) 

Ver.  16.  Nevertheless  whereto  we  have  already  attained. — The  Divine  rule  of 
faith  and  practice  : — I.  God  has  left  His  Chcech  k  rule  of  faith  and  manners. 
This  is  a  rule  whereby  men  must  walk,  otherwise  we  should  be  in  a  labyrinth  of 
error,  having  no  otiier  light  but  the  torch  of  nature.  II.  The  properties  of  this 
BULE.  1.  Unchangeableuess.  Therefore  we  must  bring  all  to  it ;  not  it  to  all,  2. 
Perspicuous.  "  A  lamp  unto  my  feet,"  &o.  3.  Homogeneal.  All  things  therein 
are  spiritual  and  holy ;  and  therefore,  when  the  question  is  about  religion,  we  must 
have  recourse  thereto  as  the  only  absolute  complete  rule.  III.  A  Chbistiah 
WALKETB  BY  THIS  RULE.  He  thinks  it  not  sufficient  to  take  a  step,  but  keeps  a 
right  course  ptedfastly  onward.  How  may  this  be  done  f  1.  Let  us  treasure  up 
the  word  in  our  consciences.  Let  us  get  the  rule  within  us  ;  get  the  articles  of 
faith  and  assurance  of  the  promises,  and  let  this  be  betimes  while  we  are  yoong. 
It  is  the  ordinary  cry,  "The  Scriptures  are  hard,  they  cannot  understand  them." 
But  the  reason  is  they  are  bred  up  in  earthly  businesses,  and  are  stuffed  with  them 
BO  as  they  find  no  place  for  the  Word ;  and  it  is  a  miracle  to  see  men  thus  brought 
np  to  live  by  this  rule.  2.  When  we  have  once  treasured  up  the  knowledge  of  these 
things,  we  must  learn  to  apply  them  upon  several  occasions ;  for  where  no  practice 
is,  there  knowledge  is  idle,  and  makes  ns  worthy  of  more  stripes.  Many  have 
general  truths  in  their  minds,  but  coming  to  apply  them,  they  find  a  great  want. 
David  knew  adultery  was  a  sin,  and  Peter  knew  it  was  dangerous  for  a  man  to  rely 
on  himself,  yet  how  foully  did  they  fall.  8.  Let  us  compare  our  experience  with 
our  rale.  We  shall  find  there  is  nothing  therein  but  is  fulfilled ;  there  is  no  suffering 
but  for  sin ;  and  that  besides  heaven  hereafter,  God  rewards  particular  obedience 
here  with  particular  rewards ;  and  particular  sin  with  particular  corrections.  We 
shall  know  that  His  judgments  are  not  scarecrows.  4.  Be  inquisitive  and  watchful 
over  our  particular  steps.  Take  and  hear  admonitions  and  instructions.  Those 
that  are  otherwise  minded,  no  marvel  if  they,  like  libertines,  spurn  against  all 
instruction  and  advice,  and  accordingly  feel  the  smart  of  their  ways  before  they  see 
it.  5.  Get  a  wonderful  jealousy  over  our  hearts.  We  often  offend  in  thoughts  and 
desires,  which  God,  the  searcher  of  the  heart,  looks  into;  and  we  must  therefore  be 
jealous  of  idle  thoughts  and  words.    {R.  Sibbes,  D.D,)        Christian  proficiency : — 

I.  In  ITS  HEASUBE8 — various — we  may  have  outstripped  others — are  yet  far  behiad. 

II.  Its  means.  1.  Determined  by  the  will  of  God.  2.  Proved  by  experience.  8. 
Must  be  persevered  in.    {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        The  spirit  of  the  warning  is  that  know< 

17 


z68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

ledge,  already  enjoyed  and  proved  in  a  spiritual  race,  should  not  lie  dormant  because 
it  is  defective.  It  needed  not  so  much  to  be  rectified  as  supplemented.  Therefore, 
as  far  as  you  have  its  guidance  take  it.  Walk  up  to  the  light  yon  have  and  you 
will  get  more.  Walk  with  me  so  far  as  you  discern  the  common  path,  and  at  the 
)oint  of  divergence  God  shall  rightly  direct  you  as  to  the  subsequent  course.  He 
*ho  employs  what  he  has,  prepares  himself  for  further  gifts.  When  the  morning 
bursts  suddenly  on  one  wakened  out  of  sleep,  it  dazzles  and  pains  him  ;  but  to  htm 
who  on  his  journey  has  blessed  the  dawn,  and  walked  by  its  glimmer,  the  solar 
radiance  brings  with  it  a  gradual  and  cheering  influence.  {Prof.  Eadie.)  The 
necessity  affixed  rule* : — I  have  never  noticed  a  single  living  twig  which  nature  had 
not  provided  with  a  covering  of  bark.  A  creedless  Church  is  like  a  barkless  tree. 
The  bark,  it  is  true,  should  grow  with  the  growth  of  the  tree ;  but  some  bark  seems 
a  necessity  of  growth.  I  have  looked  down  the  microscope  into  the  first  beginnings 
of  life,  and  seen  at  the  very  bottom  of  all  existence  a  mass  of  protoplasmic  pulp ; 
but  the  cell,  which  is  the  unit  of  growth,  is  a  nucleus  of  life  protected  by  a  wall  of 
formed  matter.  This  natural  analogy  of  growth  will  hardly  mislead  as  in  the 
higher  spheres  of  mind  and  morals.  Some  formed  matter,  some  fixed  beliefs,  would 
seem  to  be  necessities  of  the  growth  of  religion.  (N.  Smyth,  D.D.)  Walk  in  a 
straight  road  : — "  No  man  was  ever  lost  in  a  straight  road."  This  famous  saying, 
which  is  attributed  to  the  Emperor  Akbar,  is  worthy  of  a  place  among  the  proverbs 
of  Solomon.  It  is  worthy,  too,  of  a  place  in  the  memory  of  every  Christian  who 
would  walk  worthily  of  his  holy  profession,  and  would  keep  off  forbidden  ground. 
Steady  perseverance : — It  is  not  by  fits  and  starts  that  men  become  holy.  It  is  not 
occasional,  but  continuous,  prolonged,  and  lifeloug  efforts  that  are  required ;  to  be 
daily  at  it ;  always  at  it ;  resting  but  to  renew  the  work  ;  falling  but  to  rise  again. 
It  is  not  by  a  few,  rough,  spasmodic  blows  of  the  hammer,  that  a  graceful  statue  is 
brought  out  of  the  marble  block,  but  by  the  labour  of  continuous  days,  and  many 
delicate  touches  of  the  sculptor's  chisel.  It  is  not  a  sudden  gush  of  water,  the  roaring 
torrent  of  a  summer  flood,  but  a  continuous  flow,  that  wears  the  rock,  and  a  constant 
dropping  that  hollows  out  the  stone.  It  is  not  with  a  rush  and  a  spring  that  we  are 
reach  Christ's  character,  attain  to  perfect  saintship  ;  but  step  by  step,  foot  by 

ot,  hand  over  hand,  we  are  slowly  and  often  painfully  to  mount  the  ladder  that 

sts  on  earth,  and  rises  to  heaven.    {T.  Outhrie,  D.D.) 

Ver,  17.  Brethren,  be  followers  together  of  me.  — Incentivet  to  a  Chrittian  walk  :— 
.  Copt  obeat  examples.  II.  Beware  of  false  professors.  1.  They  mind  earthly 
things.  2.  Are  enemies  of  Christ.  3.  Their  end  is  destruction.  III.  Look  to  thb 
END.  1.  Your  home  is  in  heaven.  2.  Christ  comes  to  fetch  yoo.  3.  Will  fashion 
you  for  it.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christian  example: — Together  with  the  rules  of 
religion  we  mast  propound  God's  graces  in  ue  as  examples  for  others  to  imitate.  I. 
Imitation  implies  foub  things.  1.  A  doing  that  which  another  doth.  2.  A  doing 
it  in  the  same  manner.  3.  A  doing  thereof  grounded  on  the  same  affections,  not  as 
in  a  play  where  the  king  is  often  a  varlet ;  but  as  a  child  who  endeavours  to  imi- 
tate the  father  in  mind  as  well  as  body.  4.  A  doing  with  an  earnest  de  r«  to  be 
like  Him:  so  we  should  desire  to  be  like  Christ,  and  only  like  others  as  they  are 
like  Him.  II.  Hence  we  hat  oatheb  the  obound  wht  we  have  mot  onlt  bules  n 
ScRiPTUBE  BUT  EXAMPLES.  1.  They  show  that  the  things  commanded  are  possible. 
2.  They  show  as  the  way  and  the  means  more  plainly.  3.  They  show  how  graceful 
and  acceptable  they  are  when  done.  So  the  Scripture  allures  to  obedience.  IIL 
Uses.  1.  We  ought  to  follow  others,  and  especially  those  who  are  above  others. 
Then — (1)  Reverence  not  only  the  eye  of  God,  but  of  weak  Christians.  We  are  to 
be  careful  not  to  give  them  a  bad  example.  (2)  Deny  yourselves  in  liberties, 
especially  when  we  are  in  the  presence  of  such  as  will  take  scandal.  (3)  Demean 
yourselves  so  as  to  respect  those  with  whom  you  converse.  Grace  will  teach  us  to 
honour  the  meanest.  2.  If  we  are  bound  to  give  good  example  then  woe  to  the 
world  for  offences.  What  shall  become  of  those  who  wound  and  vex  continually  the 
hearts  of  those  with  whom  they  converse.  3.  As  we  must  give  good  example  so  we 
must  endeavour  to  take  good  from  other's  example ;  and  to  this  end — (1)  We  must 
study  them.  (2)  Not  to  uncover  their  shame  or  weakness,  for  this  is  a  poisonous 
disposition ;  but  as  we  use  glasses  to  see  ourselves  by.  (3)  We  are  to  observe  the 
best  and  not  those  who  are  inferior  to  us  (1  Cor.  iv.  1*6 ;  2  Cor.  x.  12).  (4)  We  must 
learn  truth  before  we  practise,  for  the  best  have  their  blemishes.  (5)  We  must  labour 
to  have  hearts  softened  and  sanctified  by  grace,  for  a  stony  heart  will  receive  no  im- 
pression.    (6)  We  are  to  look  to  every  one  that  hath  any  good  thing  worthy  of 


caA*.  III.]  PHILIPPIANS.  259 

imitation,  as  those  who  delight  in  gardens  when  they  hear  of  any  choice  flowers, 
will  have  a  slip  for  their  own  garden.  When  we  see  any  choice  flower  of  grace 
let  us  get  a  slip  of  it  (Rom.  i.  12).  {R.  Sibhes,  D.D.)  Example  is  living  instruc- 
tion. Embodied  virtue  or  vice  cannot  but  be  attended  with  the  consequences  of  a 
wide-spreading  influence.    In  the  example  of  St.  Paul  here  before  us  we  see — I.  An 

UTTER  REJECTION  OP  ANY  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  UI3  OWN  AS  A  PLEA  OF  JUSTIFICATION.  II. 
A  CORDIAL  ACCEPTANCE  OF  TUE  ReDKEMER.     III.   An  UNREMITTING  PURSUIT  AFTER  THAT 

HOLINESS  WITHOUT  WHICH  NO  M-\N  SHALL  SEE  THE  LoRD.  Conclusion  :  The  Hobility  of 
the  Christian  calling.  1.  The  superiority  of  its  enjoyments.  {W.  Higgin,  M.A.) 
A  minister's  example  should — I.  Consist  with  his  teaching.     II.  Be  formed  on 

THE  APOSTOLIC  MODEL.   III.  Be  OBSERVED  AND  IMITATED  AS  FAR  AS  IT  ACCORDS  WITH  THE 

TRUTH.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  imitating  good  examples: — The  apostle  per- 
suades the  Philippians  to  agree  in  the  imitation  of  his  prai:tice  in  forsaking  all  for 
Christ.  There  were  differences  among  them.  He  would  have  them  agree  in  one 
common  rule,  hope,  example,  that  they  mif/ht  avoid  those  whose  walking  was  not  a 
pattern  (ver.  18).  The  lesson  is  also  enforced  in  1  Cor.  iv.  16  ;  1  Thesa.  i.  6,  ii.  14; 
2  Thess.  iii.  7 ;  Heb.  xiii.  7.  I.  There  are  several  sorts  of  examples.  1.  That 
of  saints  living  in  former  ages  and  now.  (1)  Those  in  former  ages  (Heb.  vi.  12, 
xii.  1 ;  James  v.  10).  These  should  be  regarded  by  us  because — (a)  They  are  so 
many  and  various,  suited  to  all,  and  for  all  Christian  ends.  The  prince  in  Josiah 
and  Hezekiah  ;  the  councellor  in  Hushai ;  the  rich  in  Abraham  ;  the  poor  in  the 
Shnnamite ;  the  courtier  in  the  Ethiopian  eunuch  ;  the  captive  in  Daniel ;  the 
afflicted  in  Job ;  the  banished  in  Joseph ;  the  soldier  in  Cornelius  ;  women  in  Sarah 
(1  Pet.  iii.  6) ;  magistrates  in  Moses  and  Nehemiah  ;  ministers  in  the  apostles.  And 
then  of  all  graces:  Abraham  for  faith,  David  for  devotion.  Job  for  pa'ience,  Paul 
for  diligence.  (6)  These  show  that  there  is  nothing  impossible  in  our  duty.  DiflB- 
culties  have  been  overcome  in  Divine  strength  and  can  still  be.  They  were  of  the  same 
nature,  &o.,  with  us  (James  v.  17).  (c)  Their  examples  are  a  standing  testimony  to 
confirm  by  experience  the  truth  and  reality  of  our  blessed  hopes  (Heb.  xii.  1),  and 
thus  serve  to  confinn  our  faith  and  excite  our  hope  and  love.  (2)  Those  now  living; 
for  God  has  left  us  a  continual  succession  of  good  examples,  and  these  add  this 
above  all  that  are  past,  {a)  That  they  are  in  our  eye.  {b)  There  is  greater  provo- 
cation in  the  examples  of  the  living  (2  Cor.  ix.  2  ;  Heb.  x.  24).  (c)  These  are  yet  in 
the  way  and  can  better  help  us  as  being  within  our  reach  (Heb.  xiii.  3  ;  1  Pet.  v.  9). 
2.  That  of  pastors  and  ordinary  Christians  (1  Pet.  v.  3  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  15-16 ;  Heb.  xiii. 
7).  II.  What  is  this  imitation.  1.  There  must  be  an  action.  To  imitate  is  not 
to  commemorate,  or  admire  and  commend,  but  to  do  likewise  (John  viii.  39).  2.  A 
conformity  to  the  example  both  for  matter  and  manner  (Luke  i.  17)  with  the  same 
affection  of  zeal  and  courage  against  sin.  3.  A  purpose  and  endeavour  of  imitating 
and  not  by  accident.  Christ  must  be  imitated  principally,  and  then  His  choice 
servants.  III.  How  far  we  must  imitate.  1.  Not  in  evil  things  ;  for  the  best  have 
their  blemishes.  2.  Not  in  exempted  cases  or  things  done  by  special  command 
(Gen.xxii.  10;  Exod.  xii.  35;  Numb.  xxv.  27;  2  Kings  i.  10)  or  infallible  gifts 
IV.  Wht  we  must  imitate  the  good  examples  set  before  us.  1.  Because  it  is  a 
great  part  of  the  communion  of  saints  to  profit  by  one  another's  graces  (Rom.  i.  12). 
2.  It  is  one  end  of  these  graces;  for  God  hath  bestowed  them,  not  only  for  their 
benefit  who  have  them,  but  also  for  the  sake  of  others  (chap.  i.  11 ;  1  Thess.  i.  7). 
8.  They  show  us  the  way  to  heaven  more  clearly  and  compendiously  (1  Pet.  iii.  1). 
4.  In  the  example  of  others  we  have  encouragement  as  well  as  instruction  (1  Pet. 
T.  9;  1  Cor.  X.  13;  Heb.  vi.  12).  V.  Uses.  1.  To  show  us  that  good  examples— 
(1)  must  be  given,  (a)  Consider  what  regard  we  owe  to  weak  Christians  that  we 
Bet  them  not  an  ill  copy,  {b)  We  shall  have  to  give  an  account  of  those  sins  into 
which  we  draw  others.  Jeroboam's  idolatry  outlived  him,  and  so  a  man  may  sin 
after  he  is  dead  (1  Tim.  v.  22).  (c)  God  is  severe  on  His  scandalous  children  (1 
Sam.  xii.  14 ;  2  Sam.  xii.  10-12).  {d)  God's  people  are  to  show  forth  His  praises 
(1  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  Isa.  xliii.  10).  (e)  It  is  a  greater  honour  to  be  than  to  take  an  example 
(1  Thess.  i.  7  ;  Eph.  i.  12).  (2)  Must  be  taken,  (a)  It  is  a  shame  to  come  short 
of  those  who  are  upon  the  same  level  with  us.  (b)  There  are  none  but  may  1  arn 
something  from  others,  (c)  We  are  accountable  for  good  examples  as  for  other 
helps  and  means  of  grace.  2.  To  show  us  how  cautious  we  should  be  not  to  be  in- 
fected by  bad  examples.  VI.  Helps  to  make  us  exemplary.  1.  Love  to  God  or 
seal  for  His  glory  (Psa.  cxiz.  165).  2.  Love  to  the  brethren's  souls  (1  John  ii.  10). 
8.  A  sincere  seriousness  in  our  profession  (chap.  i.  10).  4.  Watchfulness  (2  Cor. 
▼i. »;  1  Cor.  x.  32;  Lake  xvii.  8).     6.  Mortification  (Matt.  v.  9).     6.  A  heart  in 


S60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  TO, 

heaven.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Example  is  powerful: — Dr.  Percy  called  upon  Jobn- 
Bon  to  take  him  to  Goldsmith's  lodgings ;  he  found  Johnson  arrayed  with  unusual 
1&TQ  in  a  new  suit  of  clothes,  a  new  hat,  and  a  well-powdered  wig,  and  could  not 
but  notice  his  uncommon  epiuceness.  "  Why,  sir,"  replied  Johnson,  "I  hear  that 
Goldsmith,  who  is  a  very  great  sloven,  justifies  his  disregard  of  cleanliness  and 
decency  by  quoting  my  practice,  and  I  am  desirous  this  night  to  show  him  a  better 
example."  (Washington  Irving.)  Whilst  stationed  in  Scotland,  Colonel  Durnford 
happened  to  be  between  Berwick  and  Holy  Island,  where  a  small  craft  had  struck  on 
the  coast  during  a  storm.  Seeing  the  hesitation  of  the  fishermen  to  go  to  the  rescue, 
he  jumped  into  a  boat,  calling  out,  "  Will  none  of  you  come  with  me  ?  If  not,  I 
shall  go  alone ; "  and  a  volunteer  crew  at  once  joined  him,  and  succeeded  in 
rescuing  those  in  peril.  {Literary  World.)  "  Don't  you  ever  take  wine  ?  "  said 
a  hospitable,  easy-souled  bishop  to  a  friend,  before  whom  he  pushed  the  Madeira. 
"  Are  you  afraid  of  it  ? "  "  No,"  replied  his  wiser  friend ;  "  I  am  afraid  of  the 
example." 

Vers.  17-18.  For  many  wall:  of  whom  I  have  told  yon  oftezL — False  professors : — 
I.  Theib  chaeacteb.  1.  Sensual.  2.  Without  shame.  3.  Earthly.  II.  Their 
BPiRiT.  1.  Opposed  to  the  Spirit ;  2.  Doctrine  ;  3,  Cause  of  the  Cross.  III.  Theib 
iiKD.  1.  Certain  destruction.  2.  Aggravated  misei-y.  IV.  The  feelings  with 
WHICH  THE?  ARE  TO  BE  REGARDED.  1.  Sorrow.  2.  Pity.  8.  Fear  (Jude  23).  {J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  False  profesisors  solemnly  warned: — Paul  was  a  model  pastor.  1. 
Watchful :  his  eyes  were  ever  on  the  Churches.  2.  Honest:  he  did  not  flinch  from 
telling  the  whole  truth.  8.  Affectionate — "Tell  jou  even  weeping."  Paul  wept  for 
three  things.  I.  Their  guilt.  1.  They  were  sensual  persons.  There  were  those 
in  the  early  Church  who  would  go  from  the  Lord's  table  to  heathen  feasts,  others 
indulged  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  And  are  not  some  professors  so  fond  of  the  table 
and  dress  as  to  make  a  god  of  their  bady.  2.  They  did  mind  earthly  things,  and 
80  we  have  ambitious,  covetous  Christians.  They  gloried  in  their  shame,  and  a 
professing  sinner  generally  does  so  more  than  any  one  else.  II.  The  mischief  thei 
WERE  DOING.  He  says  emphatically  that  they  are  the  enemies.  The  infidel,  the 
swearer,  the  persecutor  is  an  enemy.  Christ  is  wounded  in  gin  palaces,  Ac,  but 
most  grievously  of  all  in  the  house  of  His  friends,  C*sar  wept  not  till  Brntua 
stabbed  him.  It  is  honourable  to  be  defeated  by  enemies,  but  disgraceful  to  be 
betrayed  by  friends.  The  wicked  professor  is  the  worst  enemy  because — 1.  He 
grieves  the  Church  more  than  any  one  else.  2.  Nothing  divides  the  Church  ao 
much.  3.  Nothing  has  ever  hurt  poor  sinners  more.  Many  seekers  would  find 
sooner  if  it  were  not  for  the  ill  lives  of  professors.  4.  They  give  the  devil  more 
thame  for  laughter,  and  the  enemy  more  cause  for  joy  than  any  other  class.  III. 
Because  he  knew  their  doom — "Destruction."  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  sensual 
and  worldly  exposed : — 1.  The  object  of  the  apostle  in  the  statement  of  his  own 
consecration  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  chapter  was  that  he  might  the  more 
emphatically  express  his  desire  to  others  that  they  would  imitate  his  example  (vers. 
15-16),  and  enjoy  with  him  the  reward  (vers.  20-21).  He  did  not  wish  to  stand  on 
fin  elevation  solitary  and  unapproached.  2.  The  exhortation  is  enforced  by  a  dis- 
tressing contrast — men  who  desired  to  be  considered  the  followers  of  Christ,  but  ovei 
whom  the  obligations  of  religion  had  no  power  and  who  were  proceeding  fast  through 
deep  degradation  to  perdition.  Observe — L  The  guilt  attributed  to  tue  charac 
tebs  described.  They  were  members  and  perhaps  teachers  ;  not  open  blasphemers 
but  pretended  votaries.  They  were — 1.  Sensualists.  (1)  "Whose  God  is  their  belly  " 
denotes  the  gross  and  brutish  indulgences  to  which  they  resorted  tor  pleasure  (Rom. 
xvi.  17-18).  To  pamper  the  appetites  of  the  borJj^  is  a  tendency  the  power  and 
prevalence  of  which  cannot  be  sufficiently  mourned  (Mark  viL  21-23;  Gal.  v.  19-21), 
and  even  where  there  is  the  restraint  which  arises  from  civil  institutions,  care  of 
reputation,  and  other  motives,  there  is  but  a  modification  in  the  development  of  the 
evil,  and  not  the  removal  of  the  evil  itself.  The  purpose  of  the  gospel  is  to  over- 
come the  propensities  of  original  nature  and  turn  men  away  from  what  is  degrading 
to  what  is  sanctifying.  But  there  was  and  is  an  attempt  to  pervert  the  principle  of 
the  gospel,  and,  by  the  most  infamous  of  all  sophisms,  to  show  that  we  are  per- 
mitted to  "  sin  that  grace  may  abound."  Awful  and  abominable  is  that  heresy 
which  would  thus  attempt  to  poison  the  waters  of  purity  at  their  very  fountain, 
(2)  The  strength  of  the  sensuality  thus  deprecated  is  expressed  with  remarkable  force. 
"  Whose  God  is  their  belly  " ;  and  under  the  sovereign  influence  of  that  debasing 
f  assion  they  "  glory  in  their  shame."    They  make  a  virtue  of  their  subjection,  a 


«up.  ra.]  PIIILIPPIANS.  «61 

boast  of  their  idolatry.  They  who  regard  the  gratification  of  their  appetites 
as  tbe  end  of  their  existence  are  wtirshippers  of  their  loathsome  passions. 
Thty  have  as  much  denied  the  God  of  heaven  as  if  they  had  acknowledged 
the  deities  of  Olympug.  2.  Worldliugs.  It  may  seem  strange  that  this  dis 
position  should  be  placed  in  conijeition  with  tho  others  as  of  the  same  kind 
and  degree  of  criminality,  but  the  phrase  used  expresses  absorption  in  the  con- 
cerns of  the  present  world  to  the  exclusion  of  another.  And  this  neglect  of  futurity 
arises  from  the  same  depravity  as  the  other.  Worldliuess,  condemned  as  "idolatry," 
is  only  another  development  of  depravity  ;  for  Christianity  is  designed  to  impress 
onr  race  with  the  high  solemnities  of  a  world  to  come  (Matt.  vi.  19-21 ;  Col.  ii.  2 ; 
1  John  ii.  15),  and  when  you  are  told  of  men  who  **  mind  earthly  things  "  you  are 
told  of  men  who  commit  a  sweeping  act  of  blasphemy  against  the  whole.     II.  Thb 

CONCL0B10N8     DEDUCED    AS    TO    THESE     CHABACTErS    ON    ChKISTIAN    PRINCIPLES.        It    13 

affirmed — 1.  They  are  malignant  adversaries  of  the  mediatorial  character  and 
work  of  the  Son  of  God.  (1)  Wlien  men  are  enemies  of  the  Cross,  they  are  hostile 
to  every  purpose  for  which  Christ  came  into  the  world.  (2)  In  this  manner  a 
charge  is  advanced  of  special  emphasis  and  solemnity.  There  is  not  ascribed  a 
mere  ordinary  failure  to  comply  with  sotue  of  tlie  precepts  of  religion,  but  a  direct 
and  daring  enmity  afrainst  that  without  which  religion  would  be  nothing  (Rom.  vi. 
4-6  ;  2  Cor.  v.  15  ;  Tit.  ii.  14 ;  Col.  iii.  11).  They  are  enemies  because — (a)  They 
refute  the  grand  design  for  which  alone  it  was  ever  regarded-  {b)  They  are  the 
means  of  degrading  it  in  the  world,  and  exposing  it  to  public  reproach.  It  is  not 
the  Jew,  the  heathen,  the  savage  persecutor,  or  the  blaspheming  infidel,  but  the 
man  who  assumes  the  cross  as  his  badge.  2.  Their  career  terminates  in  the  woes 
of  avenging  retribution.  The  Cross  affords  the  only  hope  of  salvation.  The 
Totaries  of  passions  and  habits  so  hostile  to  the  purifying  principles  and  purposes 
of  redeeming  love  are  therefore  necessarily  placed  under  the  awful  anathema  of 
heaven  (2  Pet.  ii.  10  to  end).  III.  The  impulse  which  the  contemplation  o?  scch 
CHARACTERS  INSPIRES.  "Tell  yoD  cvcn  Weeping."  Their  case  dwelt  much  on  his 
mind,  and  occupied  much  of  his  ministry.  To  the  same  anxiety  he  refers  especially 
in  Acts  XX.  18,  19,  29-31.  This  proceeded — 1.  From  a  dread  lest  the  disciples  of  the 
gospel  should  contracttheir  guilt.  Therewas  a  loud  call  for  vigilance  lest  the  infection 
should  spread.  2.  From  a  deep  concern  for  the  peril  of  those  by  whom  the  guilt 
had  been  contracted  already.  Paul  was  not  only  anxious  for  the  Church,  but  for  his 
fellow  immortals  actually  in  a  state  of  condemnation  (Psa.  cxix.  136  ;  Jer.  ix.  1 ; 
Luke  xix.  41-42).  It  is  not  possible  surely  to  contemplate  the  present  debasement 
and  final  ruin  of  the  sinner  without  sincere  and  heart-rending  sorrow.  (J.  Parsons.) 
The  Cross  and  its  enemies  : — I.  Thb  Cross  of  Christ.  To  the  nations  of  antiquity 
tbe  cross  conveyed  the  same  idea  as  the  gibbet  does  to-day.  It  was  a  badge  of 
infamy.  The  Cross  of  Christ,  however,  includes  all  the  truths  involved  in  Hig 
death.  It  was  not  the  crucifixion  these  people  opposed,  but  tne  principles  asso- 
ciated therewith.  Regard  it,  then,  as  the  symbol  of  debasing  truths,  of  notions  most 
offensive  to  pride.  For  in  the  Cross  we  see  the  extreme  evil  of  sin,  the  necessity 
of  a  righteousness  beyond  man's  power,  the  need  of  the  substitution  of  a  perfect 
sacrifice  to  our  salvation.  1.  The  source  of  powerful  motives.  There  is  no  more 
powerful  incentive  to  holiness  than  in  the  Cross.  Its  profession  commits  a  man  to 
deadness  to  the  sin  for  which  Christ  died.  2.  The  signal  of  an  amazing  conflict. 
Christ's  death  resulted  from  the  depravity  of  the  Jews,  and  the  machinations  of  the 
devil. .  By  that  the  arch  enemy  thought  holiness  would  be  overthrown,  and  thus 
he  stirred  all  his  agencies  in  earth  and  hell  to  effect  it.  Bat  God  so  ordered  it  that 
it  led  on  to  a  conflict  with  tbe  principles  of  evil,  which  shall  terminate  in  the  final 
triumph  of  Christ.  Opposed  now,  He  and  we  with  Him  shall  be  ultimately  victorious. 

II.  Thb  enemies  of  the  Cross.  They  are  described  in  ver.  2  as  opposed  to  the 
Christians  in  ver.  S,  &o.  1.  They  were  proud  men  who  valued  their  own  righteous- 
ness. Gross  sensual  evils  are  not  the  only  things  offensive  to  God  ;  all  substitutes 
for  the  Cross  as  the  only  means  of  salvation  are  obnoxious  to  Him.  2.  Sensual 
men  who  lived  for  their  own  pleasure.  The  Cross  means  mortification  of  the  flesh ; 
to  pamper  it,  therefore,  is  to  defeat  the  purpose  of  the  Cross.  3.  Worldly  men  who 
held  to  their  possessions  in  opposition  to  the  desire  for  heavenly  things  (ver.  19). 
The  votaries  of  pleasure,  the  anxious,  the  miser,  do.,  come  under  this  category.  4. 
Timid  men  who  screeneil  their  own  persons,  for  fear  of  worldly  loss  or  persecution. 

III.  Thb  awfdl  condition  of  all  such  persons.  1.  They  glory  in  their  degrada- 
tion ;  in  their  self-righteousnees,  sinful  pleasures,  or  worldliness,  or  cowardice.  2. 
They  pursue  their  own  destruction — "  The  wages  of  sin  is  ueati-i."    (J.  Blackbu.'ii,l 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  ob 

Consistency  and  usefulness: — The  conscience  of  a  backsliding  professor  was  smitten 
by  the  active  and  earnest  efforts  of  a  more  faithful  brother,  whom  he  at  length  offered 
to  assist  in  devotional  services.  To  this  objection  was  made  by  one  who  said,  "  I 
cannot  hear  him  pray  for  me.  His  life  does  not  pray.  Let  him  repent  of  his  nn- 
faithfiilness  and  confess  to  God  and  men,  and  then  we  will  hear  him."  If  we  would 
nave  our  prayers  credited  as  sincere,  our  lives  must  be  in  accordance  with  them. 
(Paxion  Hood.)  Enemies  of  the  Cross  of  Christ :  their  suicidal  policy : — What 
would  you  think  if  there  were  to  be  an  insurrection  in  a  hospital,  and  sick  man 
should  conspire  with  sick  man,  and  on  a  certain  day  should  rise  up  and  reject  the 
doctors  and  nurses  ?  There  they  would  be — sickness  and  disease  within,  and  all  the 
help  without  1  Yet  what  is  a  hospital  compared  with  this  fever-ridden  world,  which 
goes  swinging  in  pain  and  anguish  through  the  centuries,  when  men  say,  "  We 
have  got  rid  of  the  atonement,  and  we  have  got  rid  of  the  Bible  "  ?  Yes,  and  yoa 
have  rid  yourselves  of  salvation.  (If.  W.  Beecher.)  Professed  friends  secret 
foes  : — When  a  small  band  of  Protestants  were  striving  for  their  liberties  in  Switzer- 
land, they  bravely  defended  a  pass  against  an  immense  host.  Though  their  dearest 
friends  were  slain,  and  they  themselves  were  weary  and  ready  to  drop  with  fatigue, 
they  stood  firm  in  the  defence  of  the  cause  they  had  espoused.  On  a  sudden,  how- 
ever, a  cry  was  heard — a  dread  and  terrible  shriek.  The  enemy  was  winding  up  a 
steep  acclivity,  and  when  the  commander  turned  his  eye  thither,  0  how  his  brow 
gathered  with  storm  I  He  ground  his  teeth,  and  stamped  his  foot,  for  he  knew 
that  some  caitiff  Protestant  had  led  the  blood-thirsty  foe  up  the  goat  track  to  slay 
his  friends.  Then  turning  to  his  friends,  he  said,  "  On ;  "  and  like  a  lion  on  his 
prey,  they  rushed  upon  their  enemies,  ready  now  to  die,  for  a  friend  had  betrayed 
them.  So  feels  the  bold-hearted  Christian  when  he  sees  his  fellow-member  betray, 
ing  Christ,  when  he  beholds  the  citadel  of  Christianity  given  up  to  its  foes  by  those 
who  pretend  to  be  its  friends.  Beloved,  I  would  rather  have  a  thousand  devils  out 
of  the  Church  than  have  one  in  it.  I  do  not  care  about  all  the  adversaries  outside; 
our  greatest  cause  of  fear  is  from  the  crafty  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing  that  devour 
the  flock.  It  is  against  such  that  we  would  denounce  in  holy  wrath  the  solemn 
sentence  of  Divine  indignation,  and  for  such  we  would  shed  our  bitterest  tears  of 
sorrow.    They  are  "  the  enemies  of  the  Cross  of  Christ."     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver  18.  And  now  tell  you  even  weeping  that  they  are  enemies  to  the  Cross  of 
Christ. — I.  The  causes  of  Paul's  grief.  1.  Negatively.  It  was  not  hatred  and 
ill-will  to  their  persons,  nor  emulation  of  their  credit,  nor  desire  of  venting  re- 
proaches. Some  men's  zeal  against  error  is  as  much  to  be  feared  as  others  lapsing 
into  it.  Ithacus  had  nothing  good  in  him  but  his  hatred  of  the  Priscillianists,  and 
this  so  far  transported  him  that  every  zealous  man  was  a  Priscillianist.  2.  Positively 
— (1)  Pure  zeal  for  God's  glory  (Psa.  Ixix.  9  ;  Rom.  xv.  3).  (2)  The  Church's  welfare 
(Psa.  cxxii.  9  ;  Isa.  Ixii.  1 ;  Psa.  cxxxvii.  6).  Pity  to  souls,  both  of  the  ringleaders 
and  their  proselytes.  (3)  Clear  apprehensions  of  the  mischievous  effects  of  sin. 
II.  The  brand  He  puts  on  them  over  whom  He  weeps.  "  Enemies  of  the  Cross 
of  Christ."  1.  To  clear  this  observe — (1)  That  those  who  profess  friendship  to 
Christ  may  yet  be  enemies  to  Him.  (2)  That  friendship  and  enmity  to  Christ  is 
not  interpreted  so  much  by  external  profession  as  by  the  constitution  of  our  hearts 
and  the  course  of  our  conversation  (Luke  vi.  46  ;  Matt.  vii.  21 ;  1  Pet.  i.  17).  (3) 
That  the  worldly  spirit  is  that  constitution  of  heart  which  is  blank  opposite  to  the 
Cross,  2.  To  prove  this — (1)  The  Scripture  expressly  asserts  it  (James  .iv.  4; 
Matt.  vi.  24;  1  John  ii.  15).  (2)  Experience  confirms  it.  (a)  It  was  the  worldly 
spirit  that  caused  the  Jews  to  persecute  Christ  and  His  servants  (James  ii.  5-6 ; 
Luke  xvi.  14).  (b)  This  makes  the  nominal  Christian  to  be  such  an  opposer  of 
Christ's  spiritual  kingdom,  and  to  content  himself  with  the  name  of  Christianity, 
(c)  This  distinguishes  the  hypocrites  from  the  sincere,  {d)  This  hinders  the 
sincere  from  doing  all  they  would  for  God.  (3)  Reason  evidences  it.  (a)  From 
the  intent  of  the  Cross,  which  was  to  be  an  expiation  for  sin.  To  cross  this  end  i& 
to  refuse  God's  remedy.  The  Cross  also  purchased  for  us  that  Spirit  of  power  and 
all  those  helps  of  grace  by  which  we  overcome  the  world  (Gal.  i.  4).  Now  those 
who  mind  earthly  things  defeat  the  end  of  the  Spirit.  The  Cross,  too,  purchased 
heaven,  and  those  who  aim  at  earthly  happiness  contradict  this.  The  Cross,  too, 
is  a  pattern  and  example  of  suffering,  patience,  and  a  glorious  issue,  each  of  which 
worldliness  contemns,  (b)  From  the  nature  of  the  religion  founded  on  the  Crcas 
— faith,  hope,  and  love — which  a  worldly  spirit  destroys.  III.  Uses.  1.  To  show 
how  mistaken  they  are  who  reconcile  the  love  of  the  world  with  a  profession  of 


CHA».  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  2Cb 

godliness  {Luke  xviii.  23  ;  1  Pet.  v.  2;  Eom.xvi.  8).  2.  To  press  those  who  would 
be  sincere  Christians  to  mortify  their  afiections  to  earthly  things.  (1)  Christ 
counts  none  friends  of  His  who  love  not  His  Cross.  (2)  The  true  virtue  of  Christ's 
Cross  is  only  found  by  those  who  are  crucified  by  it  to  the  world.  (3)  Till  this  be 
done  your  love  to  God  and  hope  of  heaven  are  questionable.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
The  Cross  of  Christ  and  its  enemies : — L  What  is  the  Cross  ?  Not  simply  the 
instrument  of  torture,  but  the  sufferings  Christ  endured  and  the  blessings  which 
result  from  them.  In  this  enlarged  acceptation  consider  the  Cross  as — 1.  The 
foundation  of  our  hope  as  fallen  sinners.  To  the  sinner  viewing  futurity  apart  from 
the  atonement  the  prospect  is  appalling.  2.  The  sonree  of  our  spiritual  enjoymenf, 
peace,  joy,  access  to  and  fellowship  with  God.  3.  The  main  the  me  of  th«  gospel 
ministry.  It  furnishes  the  preacher  with  a  rich  &ud  endless  variety  of  topics,  of 
which  it  is  the  harmonizing  and  illustrative  principle.  4.  The  most  legitimate 
object  in  which  we  may  triumph,  and  of  which  we  may  make  our  boast.  Some 
boast  of  their  ancestors,  wealth,  honours,* Iparning,  Ac.  5.  The  pledge  of  everlast- 
ing glory.  IL  Who  abe  its  enemies?  1.  Those  who  deprive  it  of  its  saving  virtue. 
2.  Those  who  decline  its  purchased  privileges.  3.  Those  who  preach  another 
gospel  of  which  it  is  not  the  centre.  4.  Those  who  make  their  boast  of  any  other 
object.  6.  Those  who  reject  it  as  the  condition  of  their  heavenly  crown.  (R. 
Cameron.)  Enemies  of  the  Cross  : — I.  St.  Padl  was  in  the  habit  of  bepeatino 
the  same  things  to  his  converts.  We  learn  from  this  not  only  that  he  thought 
the  Philippians  should  be  on  their  guard  aj^ainst  the  enemies  of  the  Cross,  but  that 
he  feared  the  lesson  would  be  forgotten  unless  repeated  time  after  time.  There  is 
an  incessant  craving  for  novelty,  so  that  the  preacher  i«  likely  to  find  himself 
blamed  if  he  dwells  chiefly  on  truths  a  hundred  times  told,  and  yet  these  simple 
truths  are  those  which  most  need  being  pressed  on  men.  II.  St.  Paul's  distress 
at  what  he  had  to  say.  Why  did  the  apostle  weep  ?  What  is  there  in  the  sins  of 
others  to  cause  a  righteous  man  to  weep  ?  Nay,  he  would  not  be  a  righteous  man 
if  they  did  not  move  him  to  tears.  We  do  not  expect  it  of  the  wicked.  They  are 
not  moved  by  their  own  sins,  it  were  strange  indeed  if  they  were  moved  by  those 
of  their  fellows.  But  if  we  Christians  only  think  of  the  wretchedness  of  the  wicked 
in  this  life  and  that  to  come,  there  is  cause  enough  to  fill  the  breast  of  every  one  of 
as  with  grief  too  mighty  for  utterance.  You  who  cannot  see  a  fellow  creature  in 
pain  without  feeling  pain  may  witness  a  scene  of  snch  misery  as  was  never  found 
on  earth,  and  be  indifferent  to  it  if  you  can.  III.  Those  who  oalled  forth  this 
TEARFUL  and  FREQUENT  MENTION.  Not  enemies  of  Christ  but  of  His  Cross,  and 
therefore  those  who  opposed  or  disliked  the  truths  associated  with  the  death  of  our 
Redeemer.  Putting  aside  the  speculative  enmity  of  the  Socinian  and  the  profligate  who 
is  only  the  enemy  of  the  Cross  as  he  is  the  enemy  of  all  religion,  we  notice — 1.  Those 
who  in  any  measure  or  degree  would  set  aside  the  work  of  mediation  and  look  to  their 
own  righteousness  for  salvation.  2.  The  inconsistent  professor,  whose  practice  is 
at  open  variance  with  the  gospel.  The  Cross  is  so  constructed  that  it  inculcates 
holiness  while  it  offers  pardon.  3.  The  covetous,  who  oppose  its  example 
of  self-sacrifice.  {H.  Melvill,  D.D.)  Enemies  of  the  cross  : — The  text  is  a 
parenthesis  enclosing,  like  some  good  garden,  flowers  of  apostolic  virtue  and 
weeds  of  Philippian  wickedness.  I.  The  fidelity  of  the  apostle  is  commended 
by — 1.  His  warning,  "  I  have  told  you."  As  wisdom  hath  eyes  to  note  evils, 
so  faithfulness  hath  a  tongue  to  notify  them.  We  are  seers  of  God  in  respect 
of  our  eyes,  and  prophets  in  respect  of  our  tongues.  We  are  blind  guides 
if  we  see  not,  and  dumb  dogs  if  we  give  not  warning  of  what  we  see.  We 
should  not  be  hke  dials  or  watches  to  teach  the  eye,  but  like  clocks  and 
'larums  to  ring  in  the  ear.  God  will  never  thank  us  for  keeping  His  counsel, 
but  for  divulging  it.  The  prophet  prays,  "  Set  a  door  before  my  lips,"  not  a  wall, 
but  a  door  that  may  be  seasonably  let  loose  and  free  when  convenience  or  necessity 
require  it.  If  I  see  a  blind  man  walking  towards  some  deep  pit  and  do  not  warn 
him,  I  am  not  less  guilty  of  his  death  than  if  I  had  thrust  him  down  (Ezek.  xixiii. 
7).  A  sleeping  sentinel  is  the  loss  of  a  whole  city.  2.  The  frequence  of  the  warn- 
ing — not  once  or  seldom,  but  often.  St.  Paul  feared  not  tautology,  rather  hke  a 
skilful  workman  he  beats  still  on  the  same  anvil.  There  can  never  be  too  much 
warning  where  there  can  never  be  enough  heed.  Nice  ears  are  all  for  variety  of 
doctrines;  as  palates  of  meats.  St.  Paul  hates  to  feed  this  wanton  humoor,  and 
tells  them  this  single  diet  is  safe  for  tliem.  We  tell  over  the  same  coins,  and 
spend  night  after  day  in  the  same  game  without  weariness.  There  is  an  itch  of  the 
ear  which  St.  Paul  foresaw  would  prove  epidemical  in  latter  times.    Too  many 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  m. 

pulpits  are  fall  of  curious  affectations,  new  crochets,  strange  mixtures  of  opinions, 
insomuch  that  old  and  plain  forms  are  grown  stale  and  despicable.  There  cannot 
be  a  more  certain  argument  of  a  decayed  and  sickly  stomach  than  the  loathing 
of  wholesome  and  solid  food,  and  longing  after  new  and  artificial  composition. 
O  foolish  Israelites,  with  whom  too  much  frequence  made  the  food  of  angels  con- 
temptible. "  The  full  despiseth  the  honeycomb,"  and  there  are  many  thus  full  of 
the  world  and  sinful  corruptions.  But  for  us  let  not  these  dainties  of  heaven  lose 
their  worth  for  their  store.  Often  inculcation  of  warnings  necessarily  implie* 
danger,  and  there  is  much  danger  of  the  infection  of  evil.  3.  The  passion — 
"  Weeping."  What  is  it  that  could  wring  tears  from  those  eyes  ?  Even  the  same 
that  fetc]ied  them  from  our  Saviour,  and  from  all  eyes  that  pretend  to  holiness — 
compassion  of  sinners.  What  shall  I  say  to  such  as  make  merry  with  sin  ?  0 
that  we  should  laugh  at  that  for  which  our  Saviour  wept  and  bled.  Tears  do  well 
in  the  pulpit.  As  it  is  in  the  buckets  of  some  pumps,  that  water  must  be  first 
poured  down  into  them  ere  they  cau  fetch  up  water  in  abundance ;  so  must  our 
tears  be  let  down  to  fetch  up  more  from  our  hearers.  Worldly  men  as  they  have 
hard  hearts  have  dry  eyes,  but  the  tender  hearts  of  God's  children  are  ever  lightly 
attended  with  weeping  eyes.  And  if  good  men  spend  tears  on  sinners  how  much 
more  ought  sinners  to  weep  for  themselves.  See  who  it  was  for  whom  Paul  wept: 
dogs  and  the  concision.  So,  then,  Christ's  charitable  children  should  not  desire  or 
rejoice  in  the  destruction  of  those  who  profess  hostility  against  them.  Every  man 
can  mourn  for  the  fall  of  a  friend,  but  to  be  thus  deeply  affected  with  the  sins  or 
judgments  of  wicked  persons  is  incident  to  none  but  a  tender  and  charitable  heart. 
God's  children  are  like  their  Father  (1  Tim.  ii.  4 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  23,  xxxiii.  11). 
II.  The  wickedness  of  the  false  teachers.  1.  Their  number — "many."  Note, 
then,  that  the  rarity  of  conscionable  men  should  make  them  more  observed  and  valued, 
as  grains  of  gold  amidst  the  rubbish  of  the  ore  and  dust.  Paucity  is  wont  to 
carry  contempt  with  it ;  but  with  Christians  one  is  worth  more  than  a  thousand. 
It  is  better  to  follow  one  Noah  into  the  ark  than  to  perish  with  a  world  of  unbe- 
lievers. "  Many"  are  opposed  to  "us."  It  is  not  for  us  to  stand  upon  the  fear 
of  an  imputation  of  singularity :  we  may  not  do  as  the  most,  but  as  the  best 
The  world  is  apt  to  make  an  ill  use  of  multitude :  on  the  one  side  arguing  the 
better  part  by  the  greater,  on  the  other  arguing  mischief  tolerable  because  abetted 
by  many.  If  the  first  should  hold  good  paganism  would  carry  it  from  Chris- 
tianity, and  hell  fiom  heaven.  "  Thou  shalt  not  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil." 
What  abatement  of  torment  will  it  be  to  be  condemned  with  many.  If  the  second, 
that  which  heightens  evils  should  plead  for  their  immunity,  so  none  but  weak 
mischiefs  should  receive  opposition.  Strong  thieves  should  escape  while  petty 
pilferers  should  be  punished.  Away  with  this  base  pusillanimity.  If  the  devils 
can  say  "  my  name  is  legion,"  let  your  powerful  commands  cast  them  out. 
2.  Their  motion — "walk."  (1)  Natural.  Walking  is  living.  Every  minute  is  • 
new  pace.  None  can  stop  our  passage.  Whether  we  do  something  or  nothing  we 
move  on  by  insensible  steps  toward  our  long  home.  (2)  Voluntary.  So  the 
wicked  ones  walk  like  their  setter  (Job  i.  7).  Wickedness  is  seldom  other  than 
active.  (3)  Walking  implies  an  ordinary  mode  of  life.  It  is  not  a  step,  or  a  pace, 
that  can  make  a  walk,  but  a  proceeding  on  with  many  shiftings  of  our  feet.  It  is 
no  judging  of  a  man  by  one  action.  The  best  man  may  step  aside  as  David  and 
Peter — but  their  walk  was  in  the  ways  of  God's  commandments.  What  is  the 
course  of  men's  lives  f  If  drunkenness,  debauchery,  &c.,  their  walk  is  an  ill  way  to 
an  evil  end ;  pity  those  and  labour  to  reclaim  them.  But  if  their  general  course  be 
holy  it  is  not  a  particular  miscarriage  that  can  be  a  just  ground  of  censure. 
8.  Their  quality — "Enemies  of  the  Cross  of  Christ."  But  who  can  but  hate  that 
which  was  the  cause  of  the  death  of  our  best  Friend.  Surely  we  love  not  Christ  if 
we  hate  not  what  was  accessory  to  His  murder.  But  if  we  regard  it  as  improved  by 
Christ  for  man  we  must  love  it.  The  cross  was  the  death  that  gives  us  life ;  so 
that  we  cannot  be  at  once  enemies  of  the  Cross  and  friends  of  the  crucified,  (1)  Am 
Christ,  so  His  Cross  has  many  false  friends  who  are  no  other  than  enemies.  Unjust 
favours  are  as  injurious  as  derogations.  To  deify  a  saint  is  as  bad  as  devilizing 
him.  Romanists  exceed  in  this  way  their  devotions  to  the  Cross  ;  whose  friendship 
to  the  altar  is  a  defiance  to  the  sacrifice.  (2)  The  Philippian  Pseudapostles  wera 
enemies,  (a)  In  doctrine,  who  joined  circumcision  and  other  legalities  with  the  Cross, 
BO  by  a  pretended  parttiership  detracting  from  the  virtue  of  Christ's  death.  And  so 
now  how  palpable  enemies  are  they  who  hold  Christ's  satisfaction  imperfect  with- 
oot  oars,    (b)  In  practice,  riz.,  those  who  shift  off  persecution  by  conformity  to  tht 


CHAP,  ni.]  PHILIPPIANS.  265 

present  world — caring  more  for  a  whole  skin  than  a  sound  soul — and  loose  livers, 
Chribt's  Cross  is  our  redemption  from  sin  ;  and  those  who  wilfully  sin  frustrate  the 
Cross  and  mock  at  redemption  (Gal.  ii.  20).  4.  Their  end.  A  woeful  condition 
beyond  all  thoughts.  Here  is  every  circumstance  that  may  add  horror  to  a  con- 
dition. (1)  Suddenness  (Pea.  xixvii.  2 ;  Isa.  v.  24;  Prov.  x.  25;  Psa.  Ixxiii.  19). 
(2)  Extremity.  The  wrath  of  God  is  as  Himself  infinite.  (3)  Impossibility  of  release. 
If  the  torment  might  have  an  end  there  were  some  comfort.  0  mad  sinners,  that  for 
a  little  momentary  contentment  cast  themselves  into  everlasting  perdition  t  (Bishop 
Hall.)  Enemies  of  the  cross  :  I.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  many  professors 
OF  EELioioN  ABK  ENEMIES  TO  THE  Cboss  OP  Christ  (Matt.  xiii.  24-30,  47-50,  vii. 
21,  23).  But  observe  in  passing — 1.  That  Christianity  is  not  responsible  for 
hypocrites  and  self -deceived  professors.  Religion  does  not  produce  nor  counten- 
ance hypocrisy.  2.  Christianity  does  not  stand  alone.  There  are  many  false 
friends,  patriots,  professors  of  honesty,  temperance,  &o.  3.  We  claim  for  Chris- 
tianity only  the  good  it  has  done,  and  point  to  the  sinners  it  has  reformed.  4.  We 
ask  that  on  this  subject  the  language  of  discrimination  and  justice  .should  be  used. 

i^IL    How  MAY  WE  DETERMINE  WHEN  PROFESSORS  ARE  ENEMIES  TO  THE  CbOSS  OF  ChKIST  7 

1.  When  they  have  not  been  bom  again.     "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  with  God." 

2.  When  they  live  in  the  indulgence  of  any  known  sin.  It  needs  no  argument  to 
show  that  the  man  who  is  seeking  my  hurt  in  any  way  is  my  enemy.  The  man 
who  indulges  in  known  sin  shows  that  he  disregards  God's  authority,  and  despises 
the  work  of  Christ  which  is  to  cleanse  us  from  all  iniquity.  3.  When  they  pursue 
a  doubtful  or  undecided  course  of  conduct  without  any  effort  to  know  what  is  right. 
4.  When  they  manifest  in  their  conduct  none  of  the  peculiarities  of  those  who 
truly  love  Him.  These  are  not  morality,  good  temper,  &o.,  for  worldly  men  have 
these.  Christ  did  not  die  that  His  followers  might  be  like  other  men,  but  that  they 
•hould  be  a  peculiar  people.  5.  When  they  have  a  deeper  interest  in  their  worldly 
affairs  than  in  the  cause  of  their  Bedeemer  (ver.  19,  chap.  ii.  21 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  2). 
The  proof  of  this  proposition  lies  in  a  nutshell.  (1)  Christ  said,  "He  that  is 
not  for  Me  is  against  Me."  (2)  There  is  no  better  way  of  knowing  a  man's 
character  than  observation  of  his  walk  and  conversation.  (3)  The  interests  of 
Christ's  kingdom  are  intended  to  be  supreme.  He  seeks  no  divided  sway  (Luke 
xiv.  26).  (4)  The  principles  of  Christianity  cannot  lie  dormant  in  the  souL  If 
they  exist  they  will  be  manifested.  6.  When  nothing  can  induce  them  to  give  up 
their  worldly  concerns  for  the  cause  of  religion  upon  God's  demands.  We  make  a 
great  mistake  when  we  speak  of  our  time,  talents,  property.  The  affairs  of  this  life, 
as  well  as  prayer  and  praise,  should  be  pursued  as  part  of  the  service  we  owe  to 
God.  The  gospel  was  designed  to  overcome  the  love  of  the  world,  and  to  induce 
men  to  surrender  all  when  God  urges  His  claims  (Luke  ix.  23,  xiv.  2G).  (1)  If  a  pro- 
fessed follower  of  Christ  will  not  abandon  those  amusements  which  are  obviously 
and  certainly  inconsistent  with  the  gospel,  he  is  the  enemy  of  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
(2)  So  is  he  who  will  not  surrender  his  property  to  God  when  He  demands  it  for 
His  service.  (3)  And  he  who  employs  all  his  time  in  doing  his  own  will.  7.  When 
they  are  opposed  to  all  that  is  peculiar  in  tbe  doctrines  of  Christianity.  (1)  When  the 
doctrines  of  the  Bible  in  general  are  admitted,  but  in  detail  are  denied.  (2)  When 
those  truths  which  are  found  in  natural  religion  are  acknowledged,  but  the  truths 
peculiar  to  the  gospel  are  doubted.  (3)  When  a  man  will  not  examine  those 
doctrines  to  satisfy  his  own  mind  whether  they  are  true  or  false.  (4)  When  a 
man  becomes  angry  when  those  doctrines  are  preached.  (5)  When  in  the  circle  of 
the  worldly  he  is  unwilling  that  it  should  be  known  that  he  holds  them.  8.  When 
they  are  opposed  to  the  peculiar  duties  of  Christianity.  (1)  When  the  obligations 
of  piety  are  admitted  in  general  but  denied  in  particular.  (2)  When  there  is  no 
sympathy  with  the  plans  of  true  Christians  in  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  (3)  When 
all  the  sympathies  are  on  the  side  of  the  enemy  of  Christ.    III.  Why  is  the  fact 

OF    THEIB    BEDja    IN    THE    ChURCH    FITTED   TO    EXCITE    QBIEF.       BeCaUSC — 1.    They  BX9 

cherishing  hopes  that  will  be  disappointed,  and  are  exposed  to  danger  that  is  unfelt 
(2  Cor.  ii.  4).  2.  Their  influence.  (1)  The  loss  of  so  much  positive  strength  to  the 
cause  of  the  Bedeemer.  (2)  It  tends  to  discourage  the  true  friends  of  God.  (3)  It 
is  a  real  hindrance  to  the  cause  of  God,  for  "  he  that  is  not  with  Me  is  against  Me." 
(4)  It  gives  occasion  for  the  reproach  and  opposition  of  a  wicked  world.  (6)  It  is 
the  occasion  of  the  loss  of  the  souls  of  men.  An  ungodly  parent  adds  to  his  own 
destruction  that  of  his  children.  3.  The  slender  probability  that  they  will  ever  be 
saved.  The  apostle  did  not  anticipate  the  conversion  of  those  whose  end  was 
destruction  (Matt   xiiL  30).     There  is  more  hope  for  the  open  sinner  and  the 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n* 

heathen  than  for  the  self -deluded  professor.  (A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  Inconsistency  it — 
I.  Common.  Many  betray  their  profession  by  their — 1.  Spirit.  2.  Temper.  3. 
Conduct.  II.  Enmity  to  tee  Cross.  It — 1.  Contradicts  its  teaching.  2.  Puts 
discredit  on  its  glory.  8.  Hinders  its  success.  III.  Matter  of  regret.  The 
inconsistent — 1.  Dishonour  Christ.  2.  Injure  others.  3.  Euin  themselves.  (<7. 
I.yth,  D.D.)  The  significance  of  mnnly  tears: — It  is  an  unusual  and  a  distressing 
thing  to  see  a  man  weep.  Women  may  not  be  ashamed  of  their  tears,  nor  seek  to 
hide  them  ;  and  when  we  see  them  weep,  we  do  not  turn  away,  but  hasten  to  their 
side,  saying,  "Woman,  why  weepest  thou?"  But  men  are  ashamed  to  weep. 
They  brush  the  falling  tear  from  their  eye  to  hide  it,  or  when  they  cannot  restrain 
their  grief,  like  Peter,  they  go  from  the  presence  of  men  to  wepp  bitterly  in  private. 
There  is  something  so  sacred  and  so  solemn,  or  else  so  ludicrous,  in  the  tears  of 
men,  that  friends  feel  it  kindly  not  to  notice  when  they  fall,  or,  like  the  friends 
of  Job,  to  pause  awhile  in  silence  ere  they  ask,  Man,  why  weepest  thou  ?  As  a  rule, 
man  cannot  bear  to  speak  of,  nor  to  be  spoken  to  about,  their  tears.  How  strange, 
then,  is  the  contrast  in  our  text,  where  Paul  is  not  only  seen  weeping  privately  m 
his  prison  at  Rome,  but  writing  to  the  distant  Church  at  Philippi  to  tell  them  of 
his  tears !  Similar  examples  we  find  among  the  prophets.  There  were  times 
when  they  did  not  try  to  repress  nor  to  hide  their  tears,  but  desired,  and  proclaimed 
aloud  that  they  desired,  to  weep,  saying,  "  Oh  that  my  head  were  waters,  and 
mine  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,  that  I  might  weep  day  and  night  1  "  Now,  why  was 
it  thus  ?  Why  was  it  that  strong  men  desired  to  weep,  and  not  to  hide  their  tears? 
The  answer  is  plain  and  striking.  They  thus  wept,  and  proclaimed  their  weeping, 
not  when  they  wept  for  themselves,  but  over  others.  When  they  wept  for  them- 
selves, like  Peter,  they  went  out  to  a  secret  place  to  weep  alone  before  their  God. 
Bnt  when  they  saw  how  evil  men  ran  on  in  sin,  they  did  not  hide,  bat  showed  the 
rivers  of  tears  that  ran  down  their  cheeks.  There  was  no  shame  nor  weakness  in 
tears  hke  these.  (IF.  Grant.)  Tears  for  sinners  : — It  is  not  so  much  anger  as 
grief  which  should  be  excited  in  us  by  the  prevalence  of  iniquity.  Nature  may 
make  our  eyes  flash  fire,  but  grace  will  make  them  shed  tears,  as  God's  law  is 
broken  and  His  authority  defied.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Saint-like  tears: — Let 
no  man  say  that  tears  argue  weakness ;  even  the  firmest  marble  weeps  in  a  resolu- 
tion of  the  air.  Nay,  such  tears  as  these  argue  strength  of  piety  and  heavenly 
affections.  To  weep  for  fear  is  childish  ;  that  is  unbeseeming  a  man  ;  to  weep  for 
anger  is  womanish  and  weak  ;  to  weep  for  mere  grief  is  human  ;  for  sin,  Christian  ; 
but  for  true  zeal  and  compassion,  is  saint-like  and  Divine :  every  one  of  these 
drops  is  a  pearl.  Behold  the  precious  liquor  which  is  reserved,  as  the  dearest 
relique  of  heaven,  in  the  bottles  of  the  Almighty  ;  every  dram  whereof  is  valued  at 
an  eternal  weight  of  glory.  Even  a  cup  of  cold  water  shall  be  rewarded  ;  and, 
behold,  every  drop  of  this  warm  water  is  more  worth  than  many  cups  of  cold. 
Weep  thus  awhile,  and  laugh  for  ever ;  sow  thus  in  tears,  and  be  sure  to  reap  in 
joy.     {Bishop  Hall.) 

Ver.  19.  Whose  end  is  destruction. — I.  Their  sin.  Earthly  mindedness.  It 
seems  hard  to  say  that  we  should  not  at  all  mind  earthly  things.  These  are 
necessary  to  sweeten  our  pilgrimage,  and  support  as  during  our  service.  We  have 
our  "  earthly  house  "  that  must  be  maintained  (2  Cor.  v.  1).  Therefore  God  does 
allow  us  in  some  sort  to  mind  earthly  things,  but — 1.  Not  only.  Some  mind  ^em 
who  have  no  tincture  of  religion  ^Psa.  x.  4  ;  Rom.  viii.  5  ;  Luke  x.  42,  xii.  21).  2. 
Not  chiefly.  The  gross  worldling  is  discovered  by  his  only  minding,  the  secret  world- 
ling by  his  chiefly  minding.  The  rule  is  that  spiritual  things  must  be  sought  in  the 
first  place  (Matt.  vi.  33),  and  we  must  trust  God  for  other  things  in  the  way  of 
honest  endeavours.  The  minding  of  earthly  things  is  when  religion  is  subordinate 
to  the  world,  when  the  lean  kine  devour  the  fat  (Luke  viii.  14).  This  matter  will 
be  known  by  three  things.  (1)  What  is  your  chief  end  and  scope  ?  It  must  be  God 
and  heaven  (2  Cor.  iv.  18 ;  Phil.  iii.  14).  The  end  cuts  out  the  work  and  forms  the 
thoughts.  (2)  What  is  your  chief  business  ?  X^  it  be  about  earthly  things  you  are 
earthly  minded.  Surely  our  great  business  is  to  obtain  salvation  by  Christ  (chap. 
ii.  12).     It  is  dangerous  to  miscarry  in  so  weighty  a  work.     (3)  What  is  the  great 

«y  and  trouble  of  your  hearts?  Is  it  to  have  and  want  the  world ?  (Luke  xii.  19). 
h6  saints  fetch  their  solace  from  spiritual  things  (Psa.  iv.  6-7,  cxix.  14,  xciv.  19, 
zxx.  7) ;  but  if  disappointment  in  the  world  be  the  cause  of  our  trouble,  and  happi- 
ness in  the  world  feedeth  our  joy,  surely  we  mind  these  things  most.  3.  Alas  1  a  child 
«f  God  i»  often  too  worldly.  In  particular  acts  he  may  carry  himself  too  much  like 


3»LP.  tn.J  PEILIPPIANS.  «67 

an  earthly  minded  man.'bnt  no  prevalpnt  covetousness,  voluptuousneas,  or  ambition 
possessses  bis  heart  instead  of  God.  He  is  growing  out  of  these  distempers  and 
settling  his  soul  to  his  constant  bent,  work,  and  joy.  II.  The  aooratations  of 
XHis  SIN.  1.  "  Whose  God  is  their  belly."  (1)  They  prize  the  belly.  Provision 
for  the  flesh  is  the  sum  of  worldly  happiness.  But  the  world  yields  no  more  than 
bodily  food  and  clothing,  which  the  poorest  may  attain  without  so  mnch  ado.  Are 
they  nearer  to  true  comfort  and  further  from  the  grave?  (Psa.  xvii.  14).  Yon  say 
that  some  rich  men  will  not  afford  themselves  convenienf es,  but  fare  hard.  Answer 
— (a)  Covetousness  is  usually  the  purveyer  of  the  flesh  (Eom.  viii.  5).  Those  who 
seem  to  deal  hardly  with  it,  please  it — by  hoarding  if  not  by  spending,  (b)  They 
are  twice  fools,  for  they  transgress  the  laws  both  of  nature  and  of  grace  (Eccles.  v. 
18-19).  (c)  They  lay  it  up  for  them  who  spend  it  on  the  belly  ;  and  as  one  goes  to 
hell  for  getting,  so  does  the  other  for  spending,  till  it  revolve  into  hands  that  will 
ase  it  better  (Eccles.  ii.  26 ;  Prov.  xiii.  22  ;  Job  ixvii.  17).  Estates  are  ruined  by 
sins  of  omission  as  well  as  commission.  (2)  This  belly  is  made  a  god.  Our  god  is 
that  which  we  value  most,  and  for  whose  sake  we  do  things  (Col.  iii.  6  ;  Epb. 
V.  5).  (3)  How  justly  are  they  deprived  of  eternal  salvation,  (a)  They  put  a  vile 
scorn  on  God  and  Christ  (2  Tim.  iii.  4  ;  1  John  ii.  15).  {b)  They  that  serve  a  base 
god  cannot  but  have  a  base  spirit.  Every  man's  temper  is  as  his  god  is  (Psa.  cxv.  8). 
(c)  They  are  not  only  unfit  for  God,  but  opposite  to  Him  (James  iv.  4).  2.  Their 
glory  is  in  their  shame.  (1)  That  which  a  man  prizes  most  he  will  glory  in,  be  it 
wealth,  honour,  parts,  or  the  Lord  (Jer.  ix.  23-24).  Man  will  glory  in  something. 
True  Christians  renounce  all  carnal  glor\inf?s  (2  Cor.  i.  12;  Gal.  vi,  14;  1  Cor.  xv. 
10).  (2)  The  true  object  of  glorying  is  God  and  Christ  (Jer.  ix.  23-24  ;  Jer.  iv.  2; 
1  Cor.  i.  30-31).  (3)  Not  only  benefits  but  snflerings  for  Christ  should  be  more  to 
OS  than  all  the  world  (Heb.  xi.  26 ;  Acts  v.  41 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  9-10).  (4)  A  mortified 
estate  is  a  greater  cause  for  glory  than  an  exalted,  becanse  it  is  a  far  greater  mercy 
(Gal.  vi.  14  :  James  i.  9-10).  (5)  The  carnal  rejoice  in  earthly  things  as  pleasing 
to  the  flesh  ;  and  so  do  the  godly,  as  far  as  the  flesh  remaineth  in  them  ;  but  this 
is  our  weakness  and  disgrace.  (6)  This  is  to  bid  defiance  to  religion  and  to  glory 
in  your  shame  when  you  bJess  yourselves  more  for  having  an  estate  in  the  world 
than  an  interest  in  the  promises.  This  is  as  if  it  were  a  sign  of  prudence  to 
glory  in  the  finding  of  a  pin.  III.  Their  punishment — "  Their  end,"  &o.  1.  It 
is  good  to  look  to  the  end  of  things  (Deut.  xxxii.  29  ;  Lam.  i.  9 ;  Jer.  xviL  11 ; 
Heb.  xiii.  7).  2.  Worldly  pleasures  will  end  in  everlasting  destruction  (1  Tim.  vi. 
9-10 ;  Rom.  vi,  21,  23 ;'  Gal.  vi.  8 ;  Eom.  viii.  6,  13 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  15).  3.  The 
punishment  is  the  more  dreadful  to  give  us  the  more  help,  and  the  more  powerful 
argument  against  those  pleasing  lusts.  It  is  sweet  to  please  the  flesh,  but  it  will 
cost  us  dear.  IV.  Uses.  1.  Do  we  mind  earthly  things  or  heavenly  ?  (1)  Do  not 
fix  them  as  your  scope  (1  Tim.  vi.  9).  (2)  Let  not  this  be  your  great  work  (Matt. 
▼i.  24).  (3)  Let  not  earthly  things  be  your  great  delight  (1  Cor.  vii.  29-30  ;  Phil. 
iv.  12  ;  Psa.  Ixii.  10).  4.  When  your  estate  is  yet  to  be  made  or  gotten,  let  your 
desires  be  modest  (Isa.  v.  8  ;  Eccles.  v.  10  ;  Heb.  xiii.  6).  (4)  Moderate  your  cares 
about  these  things  (Matt.  vi.  25-32;  Phil.  iv.  6-6;  1  Pet.  v.  7).  (5)  Be  willing  to 
resif-'n  them  to  Christ  when  the  enjoyment  of  them  is  inconsistent  with  your 
fidelity  to  Him  (Luke  xiv,  33).  5,  To  dissuade  ns  from  earthly  mindedness  con- 
sider— (1)  You  must  shortly  die  and  come  to  your  account,  and  according  to  the 
account  you  give  and  the  preparation  you  have  made  you  must  live  in  endless  joy  or 
misery.  (2)  The  danger  of  abundance  (Matt.  xix.  24  ;  Eccles.  v.  11-12  ;  Luke  xii, 
48).  (3)  See  by  faith  those  sure,  great,  and  glorious  things  which  are  infinitely 
more  worthy  your  love  and  labour  (Col.  iii.  2 ;  Heb.  xi.  25).  (4)  Think  often  of 
your  great  necessities  (Luke  x.  42).     (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Earthliness : — I.  Its 

MANIFESTATIONS.  1,  Sensuality.  2.  Pride.  8.  Covetousness.  IL  Its  shame.  It 
degrades — 1.  The  understanding.  2.  The  moral  nature.  3.  The  immortal  spirit. 
III.  Its  END.  1.  Ruin.  2.  Misery.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Materialism: — There  is — 
1.  A  philosophic  materialism  which  reduces  the  soul  to  a  series  of  phenomena  to  be 
accounted  for  by  superiority  of  physical  organization  in  man,  and  makes  God  an 
expression  for  the  sum  of  nature's  workings,  2.  A  practical  materialism  which 
does  not  trouble  itself  to  deny  the  existence  of  the  soul  or  the  claims  of  God,  but 
is  nevertheless  buried  in  matter,  and  swallowed  up  of  earthliness  There  were 
baptized  Christians  in  Philippi  who  were  enemies  of  the  Cross,  because  while  wear- 
ing the  Christian  name  they  were  given  up  to  sensuality.  This,  in  varioas  forms, 
is  a  crying  evil  in  all  prosperous  times.  The  text  is  applicable  to  the  worldling 
now.    L  Who  abb  they  who  imtD  kabthlt  thinob?    1.  Those  whose  sole  care 


Sm  THB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

is  the  increase  of  wealth.  Business  occupies  their  whole  attentions.  Materia! 
interests  absorb  their  whole  soul.  Such  was  the  man  described  by  our  Lord  (Luke 
Tii.  18,  Ac).  These  divorce  what  God  has  joined  together — diligence  in  business 
and  fervency  of  spirit.  2.  Those  whose  sole  enjoyment  is  the  pleasures  of  this  life 
(Luke  xvi.  i9).  "  Whose  god  is  their  belly  "  describes  one  type  of  sensual  enjoy- 
ment. But  a  man  wholly  given  up  to  even  innocent  enjoyment  is,  in  truth,  a  mer* 
sensualist.  He  neglects  and  despises  the  pleasures  of — (1)  devotion ;  (2)  godly 
companionship  ;  (3)  heavenly  anticipation  (ver.  20).  IL  What  is  the  end  of 
THOSE  WHO  MIND  EABTHLT  THINGS  ?  "  Destruction."  "  They  that  sow  to  the  flesh 
shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption"  (Luke  xvi.  24-25).  (Family  Churchman.) 
Illustrationg  of  the  apottWi  sentiment : — Even  heathen  thought  in  its  higher  typea 
could  brand  sensualists  as  KoiXtoSainoveQ,  men  who  worshipped  belly-gods.  The 
striking  words  which  Euripides  puts  into  the  mouth  of  the  Cyclops,  the  type  of 
this  class,  have  often  been  cited  in  this  connection:  •*!  sacrifice  to  no  one  but 
myself ;  not  to  the  gods,  but  to  this  my  belly,  the  greatest  of  the  gods ;  for  to  eat 
and  drink  each  day  is  the  god  for  wise  men."  We  have,  further,  the  greatest  of  the 
German  poets  representing  Mephistopheles  as  contemptuously,  yet  insinuatingly 
saying  to  the  fool  rejoicing  in  his  possessions,  "  Du  hast  dafiir  was  Schlund  und 
Bauch  begehrt."  And  we  have  the  words  of  scathing  denunciation  of  John  Euskin, 
"  The  creation  over  which  God  appointed  us  kings,  and  in  which  we  have  chosen 
to  live  as  swine."  With  such  instances  of  the  contempt  with  which  men  can  justly 
regard  the  lower,  baser  levels  of  life,  we  can  the  better  comprehend  the  indignant 
yet  sorrowing  scorn  with  which  the  apostle  contemplates  the  objects  of  his  denun- 
ciation. In  view,  too,  of  such  grossness  of  nature  as  is  here  depicted,  we  can  listen  to 
the  call  which  Chrysostom  has  addressed  to  every  true  cross-bearer — the  call  to  higher 
things — "  Thou  hast  received  a  belly  that  thou  mayest  feed,  not  distend  it ;  t!;at 
thou  mayest  have  the  mastery  over  it,  not  have  it  as  mistress  over  thee ;  that  it  may 
minister  to  thee  for  the  nourishment  of  the  other  parts,  not  that  thou  mayest 
minister  to  it ;  not  that  thou  mayest  exceed  limits.  The  sea,  when  it  passes  its 
bounds,  doth  not  work  so  many  evils  as  the  belly  doth  to  our  body,  together  with 
our  soul."  They  are  men  who,  in  the  contemptuous  words  of  the  Roman  satirist, 
in  their  all-engrossing  care  for  their  belly  and  their  amusements,  ask  no  other 
favours  of  their  emperor  than  "  bread  and  circus-games."  They  are  those  who,  as 
Cornelius  a  Lapide  puts  it,  are  like  the  moles,  ever  concerned  with  the  earth,  ever 
blindly  digging  in  the  earth,  and  ever  breathing  of  the  earth,  whereas  Christians 
feed  on  heavenly  food  and  and  breathe  the  air  of  heaven.  Or  once  more,  we  can 
recognize  these  men  in  the  picture  in  the  interpreter's  chamber  of  Bunyan's  alle- 
gory, "  The  man  that  could  look  no  way  but  downwards,  with  the  muck-rake  in  hia 
hand,  while  there  stood  over  his  head  one  with  a  celestial  crown  in  his  hand,  and 
proffered  him  that  crown  for  his  muck-rake  ;  but  the  man  did  neither  look  up  nor 
regard,  but  raked  to  himself  the  straws,  the  small  sticks,  and  dust  of  the  floor." 
{J.  Hutchison,  D.D.)  The  curse  of  carnality : — Carnal  men  are  daily  partakers 
of  the  serpent's  curse :  they  go  on  their  belly,  and  eat  dust.  {Archbishop  Leighton.) 
Wliose  god  is  their  belly  : — The  Sicilians  erected  an  altar  and  a  statue  in  the  temple 
of  Ceres  toAdephagia,  the  goddess  of  gluttony,  thus  literally  illustrating  these  words. 
Similar  examples  of  the  personification  and  worship  of  lusts  abound  in  modem 
heathenism.  {J.F.B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  Glory  and  shame  : — Of  Anacreon,  the  famous 
lyric  poet  (520  b.o.),  whose  genius  was  devoted  to  the  praise  of  sensual  pleasures, 
the  people  of  Athens  raised  a  statue  in  the  citadel,  in  which  he  was  represented  as 
an  old  drunken  man  singing.  He  had  lived  to  eighty-five,  and  was  choked  at  last 
by  a  grape  stone.  (Ibid.)  Belly  worship  reproved : — A  gentleman  in  England, 
who  had  a  chapel  attached  to  his  house,  was  visited  by  a  person  from  London,  to 
whom  he  showed  the  chapel.  ••  What  a  glorious  kitchen  this  would  make  1 "  aaid 
the  visitor.  "  When  I  make  a  god  of  my  belly,"  replied  the  gentleman,  "  I  will 
make  a  kitchen  of  my  chapel."  (Biblical  Museum.)  The  love  of  this  world  is  a 
great  hindrance  to  the  gospel : — Dr.  Justus  Jonus  told  Dr.  Martin  Luther  of  a  noble 
and  powerful  Misnian  who  above  all  things  occupied  himself  in  amassing  gold 
and  silver,  and  was  so  buried  in  darkness  that  he  gave  no  heed  to  the  five  booka 
of  Moses,  and  had  even  said  to  Duke  John  Frederick,  who  was  discoursing  with 
him  upon  the  gospel,  "  Sir,  the  gospel  pays  no  interest."  "  Have  you  no  grains  T  " 
interposed  Luther ;  and  then  told  this  fable : — "  A  lion,  making  a  great  feast, 
invited  all  the  beasts,  and  with  them  some  swine.  When  all  manner  of  dainties 
were  set  before  the  guests,  the  swine  asked,  '  Have  you  no  grains  ?'"  "  Even  so," 
continued  the  Doctor,  "even  so,  in  these  days,  is  it  with  oar  epicureans;  w« 


OiUP  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  869 

preachers  set  before  them,  in  our  churches,  the  most  dainty  and  costly  dishes,  at 
everlasting  salvation,  the  remission  of  sins,  and  God's  giace  ;  but  they,  like  swine, 
turn  up  their  snouts,  and  ask  for  guilders :  offer  a  cow  nutmeg,  and  she  will  reject 
it  for  old  hay.  This  reminds  me  of  the  answer  of  certain  parishioners  to  their 
minister,  Ambrose  R.  He  had  been  earnestly  exhorting  them  to  come  and  listen  to  the 
Word  of  God.  •  Well,*  said  they, '  if  you  will  tap  a  good  barrel  of  beer  for  us  we'll 
come  with  all  onr  hearts  and  hear  you.'  The  gospel  at  Wittenberg  is  like  unto  the 
rain  which,  falling  upon  a  river,  produces  little  effect ;  but  descending  upon  a  dry, 
thirsty  soil,  renders  it  fertile."     {Luther's  Table  Talk.) 

Vers.  20-21.  For  our  conversation  Is  In  heaven. — Observe— I.  Heaven  is  described 
AS  A  POLiTT.  n.  Evert  believer  has  an  interest  in  it.  III.  This  interest  influ- 
ences HIS  CONDUCT.  1.  He  confesses  himself  a  stranger  on  earth.  2.  Denies  himself. 
8.  Sets  his  affections  on  things  above.  IV.  The  great  obstacle  to  his  complete  happi- 
ness IS  his  humiliated  body.  V.  He  anticipates  its  glorification.  VI.  Christ  will 

EFFECT    IT   AT   HiS   COMING.         VII.    THEREFORE    WE    LOOK   FOB    HiM.       (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

The  Christiim's  country  : — 1.  "  Conversation  "  has  much  the  same  meaning  as  the 
political  word  "constitution."  ••  Citizenship "  is  a  good  rendering  if  to  the 
ordinary  meaning  of  political  standing  and  privilege  be  added  the  mode  of  a 
nation's  government,  the  character  of  its  laws,  the  tone  and  habits  of  its  citizens. 
2.  The  word  rendered  "  is  "  denotes  that  our  constitution  endures  and  rules.  3. 
States  have  their  heads ;  ours  is  "the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  4,  There  are  here  two 
practical  motives  by  which  St.  Paul  urges  the  Philippians  to  walk  so  that  they  have 
true  Christian  teachers  for  an  ensample.  I.  The  energy  of  loyalty.  1.  Loyalty  is 
reverence  for,  not  mere  submission  to  law.  A  man  may  be  obedient  for  fear  of 
punishment  A  loyal  man  will  not  think  much  of  a  penalty  to  be  escaped.  The 
privilege  of  his  citizenship  was  the  protection  of  every  Roman.  By  pleading  this 
Paul  escaped  the  lash.  But  that  would  be  a  poor  loyalty  which  only  pleaded 
privilege  without  the  homage  of  submission.  The  loyal  Roman  would  behave  him- 
self as  a  freeman.  Regard  for  others  would  be  instilled  into  him  by  reverence  for 
the  law  wLich  protected  all.  They  are  not  loyal  Englishmen  who  by  their  vices 
have  brought  shame  on  the  English  name  in  foreign  lands.  Attachment  to  one's 
country  will  lead  a  man  to  live  worthy  of  it.  2.  You  see  how  loyalty  to  heaven 
affected  Paul.  It  was  a  pain  to  him  that  there  were  Christians  unmindful  of  their 
heavenly  character,  dishonouring  themselves  and  casting  contempt  on  their  citizen- 
ship. The  honour  of  the  heavenly  citizen  is  the  strong  motive  by  which  he  appeals 
to  his  disciples.  Loyalty  to  a  higher  order  is  an  energy  to  resist  temptation.  True 
patriotic  pride  is  an  impulse  to  sons  to  prove  worthy  of  their  sires  ;  a  name  is 
theirs  which  they  must  not  dishonour.  The  higher  law  of  the  household  constrains 
many  to  purity  of  thought  and  manly  struggle.  The  thought  of  home,  wife, 
children,  parents,  deprives  temptation  of  all  its  force.  Loyalty  to  the  sanctities  of 
household  piety  is  the  energy  of  a  pure  and  reverent  life.  In  this  way  Paul  appeals 
to  the  Philippians  when  he  says  '•  we  are  citizens  of  heaven."  He  is  putting  them 
on  their  honour,  while  around  them  are  many  who  have  fallen  from  their  profes- 
sion. 3.  Reflect  on  the  obligations  of  your  heavenly  home.  How  pure,  lowly, 
gentle,  &c.,  yon  expect  to  he  when  there.  But  to  all  this  we  are  actually  called 
now.  Many  a  man  reflecting  on  his  end  hopes  for  a  previous  time  of  amendment. 
In  this  he  shows  his  recognition  of  the  heavenly  character.  And  we  are  now 
citizens  of  heaven,  and  its  life  must  be  our  life  on  earth.  II.  The  inspiration  of 
HOPE.  1.  Note  the  sudden  change  in  Paul's  writing.  Having  introduced  the  fact 
of  the  heavenly  citizenship,  as  an  admonition  he  turns  to  dwell  on  the  hope  it  in- 
spires. The  Philippians  had  seen  Paul's  degradation  change  into  triumph  on  the 
mention  of  the  words,  "  I  am  a  Roman  citizen."  Then  the  imperial  law  of  Rome 
had  been  his  protection  ;  now  he  was  enduring  wrong  at  the  hands  of  the  emperor 
himself.  The  contrast  between  human  statecraft  and  heavenly  rule  comes  up  sharp 
before  him,  and  in  a  burst  of  triumph  he  utters  his  expectation  of  his  King's 
appearance.  2.  Paul  knew  what  was  the  bondage  of  the  body.  How  often  had 
the  zeal  of  his  spirit  worn  out  the  feeble  flesh.  It  is  deeply  pathetic  to  think  of 
this  man  of  inspired  will,  dauntless  courage,  and  deathless  energy,  suffering 
humiliation  because  of  the  tried  and  suffering  frame.  But  the  body  was  not  '•  vile." 
He  is  finding  no  fault  with  it.  It  is  answering  the  purpose  of  humiliation  for 
which  it  was  designed.  Hi?  master  was  keeping  him  down  in  feeble  flesh  that  any 
spiritual  pride  in  him  might  be  checked.  Think  of  it,  yon  of  hasty  spirit ;  this  man, 
noblest  of  all  who  have  borne  Christ's  image,  submitted  meekly  to  this  restriction. 


S70  THE  BIB  lie  AL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ML 

8.  Bnt  it  was  in  hope  of  a  blessed  transformation.  Wisely  ordered  is  the  body  ol 
humiliation,  lest  the  terrible  sin  of  spiritual  arrogance  should  be  ours.  But  wise 
and  kind  as  is  the  discipline,  we  long  for  it  to  be  over.  Our  body  is,  indeed,  a  "  body 
of  humiliation  "  ;  we  must  have  it  changed  ere  we  can  be  free.  But  we  shall  be  free. 
Gnard  we  the  Spirit,  and  He  by  the  energy  with  which  He  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  to 
Himself  will  "change  the  body,"  &o.  {A.  Mackennal,  D.D.)  Thecitizeiiship  and  the 
hope  : — I.  The  citizenship.  The  meaning  of  the  apostle  is  expressed  more  fully  in 
Eph.  ii,  19 ;  Heb.  xii.  22 ;  Gal.  iv.  26.  Believers  are  already  numbered  among  the 
citizens  of  the  eternal  city.  1.  They  are  introduced  among  the  denizens  of  glory 
by  regeneration.  2.  They  Uve  according  to  the  laws  of  their  Divine  sovereign.  3. 
They  enjoy  the  immunities  of  the  celestial  citizenship — freedom  from  the  guilt  and 
power  of  sin,  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding,  complete  safety.  4.  They  are 
engaged  in  the  employments  of  the  city  of  God  ;  for  they  delight  to  do  His  will.  5. 
These  considerations  should  have  a  practical  influence  on  our  heart  and  conduct. 
If  citizens  of  heaven,  we  ought  not  to  degrade  ourselves  by  the  slavery  of  earth. 
II.  The  hope.  1.  The  coming  of  Christ.  The  original  expresses  earnest  expecta- 
tion and  intense  desire.  Paul  was  intent  upon  and  delighted  with  the  animating 
prospect.  (1)  The  foundation  of  the  hope  was  the  sure  Word  of  God.  For  Jesus 
had  repeatedly  declared  that  He  would  come  again  (Matt.  xxiv.  30;  Mark  xiii.  26), 
and  the  angels  at  the  ascension  (Acts  i.  11).  (2)  At  His  second  advent  Jesus  will 
accomplish  all  the  predictions  which  relate  to  His  kingdom  and  glory  (Dan.  vii. 
13-14).  2.  The  resurrection  of  the  saints.  (1)  The  bodies  of  the  faithful  will  be 
transformed  into  the  likeness  of  the  glorious  body  of  Christ  (Rom.  vi.  ;  1  Cor.  xv,). 
Christ's  glorious  body  is — (a)  Immortal.  "  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth 
no  more."  "  Neither  can  they  who  are  counted  worthy  to  attain  that  world  and  the 
resurrection  from  the  dead  die  any  more."  "  Upon  such  the  second  death  hath  no 
power."  (b)  Incorruptible;  and  so  the  bodies  of  God's  people  will  be  free  from  all 
deformity  and  sin.  "  Sown  in  corruption  "  they  shall  be  '*  raised  in  incorruption." 
(c)  Identical.  As  Christ  was  known  after  His  resurrection,  so  every  believer  will 
be  known  to  those  with  whom  he  conversed  here,  (d)  Spiritual  Christ  stood 
before  Hie  disciples  when  the  doors  were  shut.  And  though  we  know  little  of  the 
change  which  will  pass  upon  us,  we  may  safely  believe  that  the  body  will  be  refined 
from  all  that  now  causes  it  to  hang  as  a  clog  upon  the  aspirations  and  operations 
of  the  immaterial  spirit.  The  senses  will  be  wonderfully  improved,  so  that  we  shall 
see  God,  hear  the  harmonies  of  the  celestial  choir,  taste  the  rivers  of  pleasures,  and 
speak  the  language  of  heaven.  (2)  Wondrous  is  this  blessed  hope  ;  but  let  it  not 
be  thought  incredible.  As  if  to  silence  every  objection,  the  text  tells  us  that  the 
transformation  will  be  effected  by  the  almighty  power  of  God.  (G.  Neat.)  Chris- 
tian citizenship: — I.  The  heavenly  citizenship  of  Chbistianb.  1.  Their  city — 
"  heaven."  The  allusion  here  is  to  the  love  of  a  Jew,  Greek,  or  Boman,  for  his 
metropolis.  The  apostle  represents  true  Christians  as  composing  a  commonwealth 
whose  city  is  not  esu:1ihly,  but  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  :  the  metropolis  of  the  great 
empire  of  the  universe  where  God  dwells,  where  angels  do  His  pleasure,  where  the 
spirits  of  good  men  are  gathered,  and  to  which  all  true  Christians  are  continually 
ftscending.  2.  Their  enrollment.  Formerly  they  were  "  aliens,"  but  they  were  in- 
vested with  the  citizenship  by  pardon.  Upon  the  penitent  acceptance  of  reconcilia- 
tion through  Christ  their  name  is  inscribed  in  the  book  of  life.  3.  Their  privileges. 
(1)  Freedom.  That  had  an  importance  when  the  apostle  wrote  which  it  has  not 
now.  It  is  of  little  consequence  to  be  free  of  any  city,  however  distinguished,  whea 
the  great  body  of  the  people  are  free.  But  in  Kome  the  great  body  of  the  people 
were  slaves.  Every  man  who  is  not  liberated  by  the  grace  of  Christ  is  under  the 
power  of  the  god  of  this  world.  We  have  no  proof  of  our  citizenship  unless  we 
have  been  enabled  by  Divine  power  to  break  off  our  sins.  (2)  Admission  to 
honourable  employment  and  ofBce.  There  is  a  diversity  of  offices,  but  every  Chris- 
tian is  an  official  character  and  bears  the  honourable  relation  of  priest  in  God's 
temple.  The  city  is  a  holy  city,  a  temple  itself.  (3)  Fellowship  with  the  whol« 
body,  (a)  Saints  on  earth.  Every  Christian  receives  the  benefit  of  the  prayers  of 
the  millions  of  Christians  who  reside  on  earth.  (6)  Angels,  who  are  ministering 
spirits,  (c)  God.  (4)  Right  to  common  property,  (a)  The  blessings  of  providence. 
(6)  The  benedictions  and  hopes  of  grace,  (c)  Heirship  with  the  humanity  of  Jesus 
Christ,  (d)  Inheritance  in  God.  II.  The  conduct  manifested  by  Christians  and 
ooerespondino  with  their  privtlege.  1.  This  must  be  the  conversation  of  the 
whole  community.  All  collective  bodies  acquire  a  genius,  a  common  character. 
The  Greeks  were  remarkable  for  refinement,  the  Romans  for  a  lofty  ambition,  the 


emAM.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  271 

citizens  of  heaven  for  holinesa.  The  nations  of  them  that  are  saved  walk  in  the 
heavenly  city  clad  in  white  as  an  emblem  of  purity,  bearing  palms  &a  a  symbol  of 
victory.  Unless  our  genius,  our  whole  character,  be  holy,  we  do  not  carry  about 
with  as  the  mark  of  our  city.  If  you  are  living  under  the  influence  of  unsauctifiei 
passions,  your  claim  of  citizenship  is  unfounded.  2.  We  boast  of  the  institutions 
of  our  city — "God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,"  &c.  Wherever  there  is  a  spirit  of 
shame  there  is  treachery,  and  wherever  there  is  treachery  Christ  disowns  us.  3. 
Courage.  When  the  rulers  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  John,  they  took  know- 
ledge of  them  that  they  had  been  with  Him  who  never  knew  how  to  fear  man.  This 
courage  arises  from  the  fact  that  every  Christian  is  under  the  protection  of  his 
Lord.  Wherever  a  Boman  went  his  shield  was  the  magistrate  of  Rome  ;  wherever 
AIL  Englishman  goes  he  feels  himself  under  the  protection  of  his  country.  4.  Our 
citizenship  will  be  seen  in  our  spirit.  We  shall  feel  for  the  common  cause,  endea- 
vour to  spread  the  cause  of  Christ,  and  rejoice  in  seeing  the  heavenly  city  con- 
tinually crowded  with  new  inhabitants.  5.  He  who  converses  as  a  citizen  of  heaven 
has  his  affections  there,  and  does  not  mind  earthly  things.  How  natural  when  at 
a  distance  from  our  native  land  or  home  lo  turn  our  thoughts  towards  it.  What 
shall  we  say  of  citiz^n^  of  heaven  who  never  think  of  it,  or  to  whom  the  thought  is 
dull?  6.  This  heavenly  state  of  mind  can  only  be  preserved  by  looking  for  the  Saviour 
the  Lord  from  heaven.  {R.  Watson. )  Heavenly  Citizenship : — By  a  city  or  state  we 
understand  a  multitude  or  society  of  people,  united  in  one  body,  governed  by  the  same 
laws,  enjoying  the  same  rights,  subject  to  the  same  prince,  and  having  among  them 
the  same  form  of  policy.  From  whence  it  is  evident  that  the  Christian  Church  is 
a  state,  since  all  these  conditions  belong  to  it.  But  this  holy  republic  differs  entirely 
from  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  in  many  respects,  but  more  especially  in  this 
(which  includes  all  the  others,)  that  it  is  in  heaven,  whereas  all  others  are  on  the 
earth  (Dan.  ii.  44).  And  therefore  this  state  is  called  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven," 
"  the  city  of  God,"  "Jerusalem  that  is  above,"  %nd  "the  new  Jerusalem."  And 
herein  it  differs  not  only  from  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  but  from  the  state  of 
Adam  in  Paradise  and  the  Jews  under  the  theocracy.  This  Divine  city  is  really  in 
heaven  because — I.  Jesus  its  Pbince  and  Builder  is  heavenly  (1  Cor.  xv.  47).  < 
Not  formed  of  earth  and  dust  like  Adam,  the  head  of  the  first  republic ;  nor  by 
virtue  of  flesh  and  blood  like  Moses,  the  founder  of  the  Jewish  polity  ;  but  formed 
of  celestial  mould  and  animated  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  As  His  origin  was  heaven,  so 
also  is  His  abode  there ;  there  is  His  court,  and  the  seat  of  His  empire,  whether  yon 
consider  His  Divine  or  human  nature.  For  although  as  God  He  is  everywhere, 
filling  all  space  with  His  essence,  yet  Scripture  particularly  insists  upon  His  pre- 
sence in  the  heavens,  because  there  is  no  place  in  the  universe  where  that  presence 
is  so  gloriously  manifested,  to  the  utter  exclusion  of  sin,  death,  and  sorrow.  The 
palaces  of  princes,  how  magnificent  soever  they  may  be,  are  all  here  below ;  and 
even  the  Paradise  destined  for  the  habitation  of  man,  though  delightful  was  yet 
terrestrial.  II.  As  our  King  is  in  the  heavens,  so  rsoM  thence  is  the  boot  of  oub 
EXTRACTION.  Truc  bclievers  are  not  sprung  from  the  dust  as  Adam,  nor  from  the 
loins  of  Jacob  as  Israelites,  but  from  the  Eternal  Spirit  after  the  pattern  of  Christ 
(John  iii.  3-6).  For  the  Holy  Spirit,  rendering  the  Word  of  Life,  which  is  the  seed 
of  our  regeneration,  fertile  within  us,  forms  us  into  new  creatures,  fit  to  enter  into 
the  heavenly  state.  III.  Q'his  heaven  is  oub  bomb  and  best.  We  live  on  earth 
in  the  character  of  pilgrims  and  strangers  till  the  work  of  onr  trial  be  completed. 
There  already  dwelt  the  firstfruits  of  our  society,  and  there  will  the  remainder  of 
the  happy  citizens  assemble.  Heaven  is  the  eternal  city  to  which  we  aspire.  IV. 
In  heaven  are  also  to  be  found  the  armies  of  oub  state  ;  not  weak  soldiers  armed 
with  wood,  or  even  iron,  whose  fidelity  may  be  corrupted  by  the  artifice  of  the 
enemy,  whose  strength  may  be  weakened  by  a  thousand  casualties,  and  whose  life 
may  be  taken  by  the  sword ;  but  immortal  warriors,  millions  of  angels  clothed  with 
wisdom  and  strength  incorruptible.  They  watch  over  us  night  and  day,  and  are 
sent  here  and  there  upon  errands  of  mercy  to  us  by  our  gracious  Prince.  V.  In 
this  same  place  are  our  dignities  and  honours  preserved  ;  the  thrones  on 
which  we  shall  hereafter  sit ;  the  cities  of  which  our  Master  will  give  us  the 
dominion  in  reward  of  our  faithfulness ;  the  incorruptible  crowns  with  which  He 
wiU  ornament  our  foreheads ;  the  kingdoms  and  priesthoods  with  which  He  will 
invest  us,      (J.  Daille.)  Our  conversation  in  heaven: — I.  A  heavenly  minded- 

NBS8  IS  NECESSARY  FOB  THAT.  1.  A  heavenly  mindedness  must  accompany  a  con- 
versation in  heaven;  i.e.,  our  heart  is  in  heaven,  our  mind  is  directed  thence.  2. 
As  is  the  mind,  so  is  the  conduct.     Worldly  mindedness  is  enmity  against  Christ 


27i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

and  His  Cross-  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  against  Ood.  8.  As  is  the 
conduct,  80  shall  be  the  end.  Contrast  of  the  earthly  and  heavenly  minded  (vers, 
19,  20).  II.  There  most  be  a  change  of  heabt  in  us.  1.  We  must  be  trans- 
lated into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  By  nature  we  are  not  heavenly  minded  ;  selfish- 
ness, sin,  has  made  us  earthly  minded,  estranged  our  heart  from  God,  2,  This  change 
can  be  wrought  only  by  faith  in  Christ,  (J.  Neiling.)  The  Christian's  relation  to  the 
heavenly  world:— I.  Wh^t  that  belation  is.  Citizenship,  1.  It  is  founded  on  the  pro- 
visions of  the  evangelical  economy.  The  object  of  that  economy  is  the  expression 
of  God's  love  for  man — the  Father  seeking  His  child.  The  relation  of  a  believer  to 
God  is  that  of  a  child  to  a  father.  Hence  in  the  gospel  our  privileges  and  prospects 
are  all  ''because  we  are  sons;"  "  if  children,  then  heirs"  (1  John  iii.  1-2), 
2.  This  relation  is  maintained  by  a  corresponding  spirit.  Not  only  is  thy  name 
written  in  heaven,  but  the  name  of  God  is  written  in  thy  heart  and  life.  The  rela- 
tion is  not  hereditary,  but  moral.  It  is  (1)  a  spirit  of  abstraction  from  this  world, 
not  ascetic  indeed,  but  that  spirit  which  walks  in  the  world,  and  displays  its 
spirit  and  example  to  the  world.  They  who  would  live  for  men  must  live  with  men. 
The  Christian  is  here  as  a  foreigner,  but  he  cannot  travel  to  his  Father's  house 
without  being  a  blessing,  (2)  A  spirit  of  devotion  to  that  state  of  society  to  which 
he  belongs,  viz.,  heaven.  (3)  A  spirit  of  solicitude  for  preparation  to  depart  when 
called  upon — "  Looking  for  the  Saviour,"  II.  The  blissful  prospect  of  the 
Christian  in  consequence  of  this  relation.  We  have  here — 1.  A  just  representa- 
tion of  man  at  his  best  estate.  He  possesses  a  "  body  of  humiliation."  The  body 
is  not  abstractedly  vile,  and  therefore  we  should  not  say  that  it  is  vile  because  it 
is  dust,  frail,  &c.  Nothing  is  vile  that  God  has  made;  but  the  body  reminds  as  of 
our  humble  state,  and  bears  a  brand  it  will  never  lose  till  the  morning  of  the  resur- 
rection, 2,  But  it  shall  be  fashioned  like  unto  Christ's  glorious  body,  the 
result  of  which  will  be  the  qualification  of  the  transformed  saints  for  heaven. 
Ill,  The  foundation  on  which  our  confidence  is  reposed  :  the  Saviour,  1.  ffis 
promised  appearance.  2,  His  omnipotent  energy,  (T.  Lessey.)  The  attractions 
of  heaven: — I,  Oub  citizenship  is  there,  1,  We  are  born  from;  2.  Kegistered 
In ;  3.  Made  meet  for  ;  4,  Admitted  to  the  fellowship  of  Leaven.  II.  Our  Lord 
is  there.  1.  We  look  for  His  coming.  2.  According  to  promise.  3.  To  complete 
our  salvation.  III.  Qua  consummated  happiness  is  there.  1,  The  body  will  be 
changed  and  glorified.  The  purpose  of  grace  fulfilled.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
characteristics  of  the  true  Christian: — 1.  The  present  is  not  the  principal  state  of 
man,  and  should  never  be  viewed  separate  from  another  to  which  it  bears  the  same 
relation  as  infancy  to  manhood,  seed-time  to  harvest.  2.  This  consideration 
teaches  us  the  true  importance  of  the  present  period.  The  grand  question  is, 
Where  are  we  to  reside  for  ever?  3,  Some  never  afford  this  subject  a  moment's 
thought,  others  remain  in  a  state  of  uncertainty.  But  Christians,  conscious  of  the 
reality  of  their  religion  and  the  blindness  of  their  condition,  say,  "  Onr  conversation 
is  in  heaven."  I.  The  Christian's  state.  1,  The  original  sometimes  signifies  a 
certain  alliance,  and  means  citizenship  ;  and  sometimes  a  pecuHar  behaviour.  The 
one  infers  and  explains  the  other.  The  believer  stands  in  connection  with  another 
world — "  a  better  country,  even  an  heavenly  "  ;  he  is  a  citizen  of  no  mean  city — 
one  "  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God,"  How  did  a  man  boast  in  being  a  citizen 
of  Rome  I  Think,  then,  what  a  privilege  it  is  to  belong  to  a  state  which  "  Eye  hath 
not  seen,"  &o.  Hence  our  Lord  teaches  His  disciples  to  prefer  their  being  re- 
gistered there  to  the  power  and  fame  of  working  miracles.  2,  As  the  Christian  ii 
allied  to  such  a  country,  a  suitable  mode  of  living  becomes  him,  A  citizen  of  Borne 
could  live  in  the  most  distant  provinces,  A  citizen  of  heaven  resides  on  earth, 
but  he  is  a  stranger  and  a  foreigner.  Though  in  the  world  he  is  not  of  it.  And 
though  certain  purposes  detain  him  here,  his  principles,  habits,  speech,  show  that 
he  belongs  to  "  a  peouhar  people."  He  acts  under  an  impression  of  heaven,  and 
with  reference  to  it.  His  chief  care  is  to  gain  it.  H.  His  expectation.  1.  This 
reminds  as  of  the  present  abode  of  the  Redeemer.  Hence  we  need  not  wonder  that 
Christians  should  have  their  conversation  there.  Where  their  treasure  is  there 
is  their  heart.  The  removal  of  a  dear  friend  will  frequently  render  a  place  indif- 
ferent to  as,  and  we  change  our  neighbourhood  to  be  near  him.  So  rising  with  Christ 
we  seek  those  things  which  are  above,  where  He  sitteth.  2.  Though  our  Redeemer 
Is  now  in  heaven  He  will  come  thence.  He  does  not  forget  His  friends.  He  com- 
municates with  them,  and  supplies  them,  and  has  promised  to  *'  come  again  and 
receive  them  to  Himself."  Aiid  how  wonderful  the  difierence  between  His  former 
and  His  future  coming.    Then  He  was  seen  of  few,  now  "  every  eye  shall  bm 


OHA»    m.J  PHILIPPIANS.  273 

Him."  Then  '•  the  world  knew  Him  not "  ;  now  "  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is." 
Then  *'  He  was  dtspised  and  rejected  of  men  "  ;  now  He  "  shall  come  in  the  clouda 
of  heaven,  with  all  the  holy  angels."  Then  He  was  born  in  a  stable  and  nailed  to 
a  cross  ;  now  "  He  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  His  glory."  3.  The  state  of  the 
Christian's  mind  with  regard  to  this  appearance.  He  looks  for  Him.  (1)  Ha 
believes  His  coming  ;  and  this  distinguisho'?  him  from  infidels.  (2)  He  pays 
attention  to  His  coming ;  and  thus  he  is  distinguished  from  nominal  Christians. 
We  prepare  for  the  reception  of  a  friend,  much  more  for  a  king ;  but  the  Peisunage 
expected  is  the  King  of  kings.  And  the  Christian  waits  with  his  "  loins  girded  and 
hu  lamps  burning,"  and,  "  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  lives  soberly 
.  .  .  looking  for  tliat  blessed  hope  and  the  glorious  appearing."  4.  The  character 
ander  which  the  Christian  waits  for  Him — "  The  Saviour."  This  was  the  name 
given  Him  at  His  birth,  because  He  should  save  His  people  from  their  sins.  This 
work  He  is  coming  to  finish.  III.  His  destiny.  1.  The  subject  changed.  Much 
of  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God  are  displayed  in  the  formation  of  the  human 
frame,  and  therefore  it  cannot  wholly  be  a  "  vile  body."  But  when  we  view  it  aa 
degraded  by  the  Fall,  as  prostituted  to  the  purposes  of  sin ;  when  we  think  of  its 
low  and  sordid  appetites  and  infirmities,  its  diseases,  its  dissolution,  we  acknow- 
ledge  the  propriety  of  calling  it  a  body  of  humiliation.  But  this  body  is  not  to  be 
annihilated,  only  changed.  2.  The  model  to  which  it  will  be  conformed — "  His 
glorious  body."  The  comparison  does  not  regard  His  body  in  the  days  of  His 
flesh ;  but  to  the  post-resurrection  glorified  body  when  it  was  free  from  everything 
animal  and  humiliating.  A  glimpse  of  His  glory  was  given  at  the  Transfiguration, 
to  Saul,  and  to  John.  A  conformity  to  this  glory  is  not  too  great  a  privilege  for  our 
hope.  As  sure  as  we  now  resemble  our  Saviour  in  disposition  shall  we  be  like  Him 
in  person;  and  the  same  mind  will  be  followed  with  the  same  body.  3.  The 
omnipotent  agency  by  which  the  work  is  to  be  accomplished.  Such  a  renovation 
is  nothing  else  than  the  most  stupendous  of  miracles,  and  therefore  it  demands 
more  than  kindness  to  effect  it.  The  re-animation  and  organization  of  millions  of 
dead  bodies  will  not  exhaust  Him  who  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  unto  Himself. 
Learn — 1.  To  be  thankful  for  the  discoveries  of  revelation.  The  wisest  philo- 
Bophers  were  worse  off  than  the  most  illiterate  of  Christians.  2.  The 
importance  the  Scripture  attaches  to  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  The  inter- 
neiliate  state  is  imperfect.  Man  was  embodied  in  his  original,  and  will  be  in  hia 
ultimate  condition.    3.  Let  this  thought  be  combined  with  the  thought  of  death. 

(1)  Remember  it  in  view  of  your  own  dissolution,  and,  as  yon  look  toward  the 
grave,  take  courage  and  drink  in  the  revelation — *'  I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the 
Life."  (2)  Remember  it  when  you  lose  your  pious  friends.  You  have  not  parted 
from  them  for  ever.  4.  Are  you  the  children  of  the  resurrection  1  For  though  the 
resurrection  as  an  event  is  universal,  as  a  privilege  it  is  limited.  Can  that  be  a 
deliverance  which  raises  a  man  from  a  bad  state  and  consigns  him  to  a  worse  t 
{W.  Jay.)  The  heavenly  citzen ship : — I.  Odb  citizenship.  1.  Its  nature.  2.  Ita 
immunities.  3.  Its  responsibilities.  II.  OcR  privileok.  1.  Citizens  of  no  mean 
city.  2.  The  foundation  of  our  right.  3.  Its  advantages.  III.  Odb  duty,  1.  To 
cultivate  heavenly  dispositions,  affections,  habits.  2.  To  glory  in  our  privilegea 
and  prospects.  3.  To  labour  for  the  enlargement  of  heaven.  IV.  Oub  hope — the 
coming  of  Christ.  1.  From  whence?  Heaven.  2.  How?  (1)  Personally.  (2) 
Gloriously.  8.  What  for?  (I)  To  destroy  His  foes.  (2)  To  save  His  people  and 
introduce  them  to  heaven.    4.  Its  certainty  established  by  (1)  His  own  promise. 

(2)  The  general  testimony  of  revelation.  (3)  The  purpose  of  God.  6.  Its  anti- 
cipation. (1)  A  duty.  (2)  Supposes  faith,  fitness,  desire,  research,  active  prepara- 
tion. (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  TJte  perfect  life: — Paul  is  rebuking  the  world-life  of 
his  time.  He  telle  the  Philippians  of  the  call  to  the  higher  life.  Aa  the 
•'mind"  of  Christ  is  different  from  that  of  the  world  so  is  His  "rule."  It  is 
described  as  a  scheme  of  life  introducing  to  the  perfect  condition  of  heaven, 
and  forming  part  of  it.  The  "  perfect "  Christian  looks  steadfastly  up  into 
heaven  as  containing  Christ,  and  representing  the  law,  ideal,  and  aim  of  hia  con- 
duct. I.  Its  obioin.  1.  A  spirit  and  outlook  so  ethereal  must  have  a  correspond- 
ingly lofty  cause.  A  desire  that  reaches  to  heaven  must  have  heaven  for  its  source 
and  attraction.  2.  The  spirit  of  man  can,  and  has,  become  a  partaker  of  the 
heavenly  sphere  while  dwelling  among  earthly  conditions.  3.  What  is  it  that  linka 
ua  with  that  sphere?  Christ.  His  life  imparted  to  us  has  created  this  other 
worldliness  of  thought,  feeling,  purpose.  He  is  to  us  the  embodiment  of  heaven, 
the  centre  of  its  interest  and  Ufe.    4.  The  manner  of  His  continuous  influence  ii 

18 


1S74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  n. 

expressed  in  the  term  "Saviour."     It  is  a  rescue  of  our  spiritual  nature  from 
inertness  and  fatal  debility,  and  through  that  it  works  upon  the  whole  man  towards 
the  attainment  of   a   far-reaching   destiny.      II.    Its   method  of  development. 
1.  The  circumstances  in  which  our  spiritual  life  is  to  be  perfected  are  not  com- 
pletely realized  in  the  present.     2.  But  our  higher  life  has  to  commence  amid 
earthly  conditions.     The  defects  and  sins  of  our  fellows  have  to  be  confronted,  and 
our  own  failings  and  depravities  have  to  be  brought   under.      3.  In  nature  the 
rule  is  that  the  mare  complex  and  highly  organized  a  living  creature  is  the  slower 
is  its  development.     The  young  of  animals  attain  the  full  use  of  their  faculties 
much  sooner  than  the  child.  But  this  life  has  its  seat  in  the  mind,  and,  considering 
this,  we  cannot  wonder  if  it  be  slow.     4.  It  must  also  be  uncertain,     frequent 
lapses,  seasons  of  depression,   periods  of  apparent  standing  still.     Yet,  on  the 
whole,  progress.     Much  of  this  uucertainty  is  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is  a  movement 
from  body  to  spirit.     Not  only  has  it  to  assimilate  truth,  it  has  to  contend  with 
error  and  evil  tendencies.     The  "body  of  humiliation "  is  the  graveyard  of  many  a 
hope,  the  register  of  many  a  sin,  the  condition  of  spiritual  weakness.    5.  A  bodily 
principle  will  ever  cleave  to  us,  but  it  will  be  sublimated  and  made  more  amenable 
to  the  dictates  of  the  Spirit.     The  perfect  life  is  not  realized  in  pure  spirit ;  the 
salvation  of  the  body  is  included.     Laggard  in  the  earthly  development,  it  may  in 
other  realms  be  a  true  helpmeet  and  enricher  of  the  spirit.     6.  Christ  in  us  is  the 
hope  and  effectual  realization  of  future  glory  for  body  and  souL     III.  Its  cui<- 
MiNATiNO  OLOBY.     The  city,  with  its  rights  and  privileges  of  citizenship,  its  order, 
law,  society,  and  civilization  in  ancient  times,  constituted  the  haven  of  liberty  and 
the  sanctuary  of  the  higher  hopes  of  man.     So  Paul  and  John,  when  they  contem- 
plate the  future,  naturally  think  of  it  as  an  etherealized  Borne  or  Jerusalem.     It  ia 
a  common  life.      We  are  to  be  perfected  together.      The  society  and  political 
relationships  of  the  world  will  have  their  correspondences  on  high.     1.  Order  and 
government  will  exist  in  the  noblest  forms.     Bighteousnesa  will  be  the  universal 
law.    2.  Of  this  life  the  centre  and  sustaining  power  will  be  the  Saviour.     (A,  F. 
Muir,  M.A.)        Citixenthip  detected  by  speech : — Our  very  speech  should  be  such 
that  our  citizenship  should  be  detected.     We  should  not  be  able  to  live  long  in  a 
house  without  men  finding  out  what  we  are.     A  friend  of  miue  once  went  across  to 
America,  and  landing  I  think  at  Boston,  he  knew  nobody,  but  hearing  a  man  say, 
when  somebody  had  dropped  a  cask  on  the  quay,  "  Look  out  there,  or  else  you  will 
make  a  Coggeshall  job  of  it,"  he  said,  "  You  are  an  Essex  man,  I  know,  for  that 
is  a  proverb  never  used  anywhere  but  in  Essex  :  give  me  your  hand ;  "  and  they 
were  friends  at  once.     So  there  should  be  a  ring  of  true  metal  about  our  speech  and 
conversation,  so  that  when  a  brother  meets  us,  he  can  say,  "  You  are  a  Christian, 
I  know,  for  none  but  Christians  speak  like  that,  or  act  like  that."  "  Thou  also  wast 
with  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  for  thy  speech  betrayeth  thee."    (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)        Pre- 
paring for  home: — Some  years  ago  a  traveller,  who  hadrecently  returned  from  Jeru- 
salem, discovered,  in  conversation  with  Humboldt,  that  he  was  as  thoroughly  con- 
versant with  the  streets  and  houses  of  Jerusalem  as  he  was  himself  ;  whereupon  he 
asked  the  aged  philosopher  how  long  it  was  since  he  visited  Jerusalem.   He  replied, 
"  I  have  never  been  there,  but  I  expected  to  go  sixty  years  since,  and  I  prepared 
myself."  Should  not  the  heavenly  home  be  as  familiar  to  those  who  expect  to  dweU 
there  eternally  ?  {Ibid.)       Citizenship : — 1.  By  using  this  metaphor  the  apostle  ap- 
pealed to  one  of  the  strongest  and  purest  feelings  in  the  breasts  of  the  men  of  that  day. 
In  modem  times  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  appreciate  the  full  force  of  such  an  appeaJ. 
One  city  will  never  again  exert  the  influence  of  Bome,  nor  kindle  a  similar  enthu- 
siasm.   Citizenship  will  never  again  be  what  it  was  in  Bome.    As  a  mother  beloved 
her  citizens  oared  for  her,  were  proud  of  their  connection  with  her,  would  spill 
their  blood  in  her  defence.     For  services  endured,  to  enter  Bome  in  triumph  was 
the  highest  honour ;  to  be  banished  for  offences  against  her,  the  deepest  disgrace. 
All  that  was  worth  living  and  dying  for  was  implied  in  citizenship.    It  spoke  of 
privileges  to  be  preserved,  traditions  to  be  maintained,  glory  to  be  kept  untarnished. 
2.  Such  an  appeal  was  appropriately  made  to  the  Fhilippians.    Fhilippi  was  a 
mihtary  settlement  (colonia),  and  its  inhabitants  had  the  privileges  of  Boman 
citizens.    Here,  too,  it  was  that  Paul  stood  on  his  dignity  and  right  (Acts  xvi.  17). 
Possibly  the  remembrance  of  these  facts  suggested  the  metaphor,  thoagh  it  would 
come  naturally  from  the  apostle  writing  from  Bome.     I.  The  metaphor  would  sug- 
gest OBBTAIN  TESTS   BY  WHICH  A  CITIZEN  OP  THE  HEAVENLY  CITY  MAY  BE  DISTINGUISHED 

FBOM  A  MERE  CITIZEN  OF  THE  WORLD.    A  good  citizeu — 1.  Will  conform  to  the  lawf 
of  his  city.    Are  we  obeying  the  laws  of  heaven  ?     2.  Will  o]:>pose  the  enemies  of 


CHAP,  ni.]  PHILIPPIANS.  J7I 

his  city.  Are  we  fighting  against  sin,  or  are  we  at  peace  with  evilf  3,  Will  ba 
active  and  zealous  in  all  that  concerns  the  welfare  and  advancement  of  his  city. 
Is  the  petition,  "  Thy  kingdom  come"  an  utterance  of  the  lips  only,  or  the  acted 
prayer  of  our  lives?  4.  Will  subordinate  private  and  personal  interests  to  the 
interests  of  his  city.  Are  our  lives  characterized  by  self-seeking  or  self-surrender  T 
6.  Will  fear  to  disgrace  the  good  name  and  honourable  tradition  of  his  city.  Do 
we  behave  as  citizens  worthy  of  the  gospel  of  Christ?  (Phil.  i.  27).  II.  The 
metaphor  may  remind  us  of  the  nature  of  the  eakthly  life.  It  ia  a  pilgrimage. 
Man  has  not  reached  that  perfect  home  where  bis  full  powers  can  be  developed  and 
exercised,  and  bis  loftiest  expectations  realized.  The  noblest  of  all  ages  have 
felt  this.  The  "  Republic  "  of  Plato  is  an  acknowledgment  of  it,  while  the  testi- 
mony of  patriarchs,  prophets,  apostles,  and  martyrs  is  unamimous  (Heb.  xi.  13-16, 
ef.  Gen.  xliii.  9;  1  Cor.  xxix.  15;  Psa.  xxix.  12,  cxix.  19;  1  Peter  i.  17;  ii.  11). 
Pilgrims  may  admire  the  varied  beauty,  and  enjoy  the  richness  and  fertility  of 
the  lands  through  which  they  pass,  but  their  thoughts  and  deepest  affections  will 
be  homewards.  Tbey  will  live  in  a  condition  of  expectancy,  which  will  determine 
the  character  of  all  their  relations  to  the  land  of  their  sojourn.  So  the  citizens  of 
heaven,  while  thanking  God  for  every  good  and  perfect  gift,  will  nevertheless  regard  all 
earthly  beauty,  richness,  and  joy  but  as  a  type  of  the  spiritual  things  which  God 
has  prepared  for  those  who  love  Him  in  the  perfect  city  which  "  eye  hath  not 
Been,"   Ac.      (L.   Shackleford.)  Our   heavenly   citizenship : — I.  The   means  of 

ENTRANCE.  There  are  only  three  ways  by  which  men  can  become  citizens  ;  by  all 
three  are  we  citizens  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  1.  By  purchase.  He  who  was 
King  of  that  beautiful  city  gave  up  His  kingdom  for  a  season  that  He  might  buy 
for  us  an  admission  to  it.  2.  By  gift.  Thus  God  speaks  to  those  who  "  take  hold 
of  My  covenant,  even  unto  them  will  I  give  in  My  house  ...  a  place  and  a  name." 
"He  that  overcometh  ...  I  will  write  upon  him  the  name  ...  of  the  city  of  my 
God."  3.  By  birth.  Because  birth  is  better  than  purchase  or  gift  we  are 
born  again  that  we  should  have  our  settlement  no  longer  in  a  slavish  world, 
but  be  born  free.  II.  The  time — Now.  It  would  be  much  if  we  could  say, 
*'  Our  citizenship  will  be  in  heaven  "  ;  but  we  can  affirm  that  it  is  so. 
III.  The  rights.  1.  Immunities.  Doubtless  it  is  because  there  are  so 
many  immunities  that  heaven  is  generally  described  by  negatives — no  tears, 
dividings,  si^hs,  temptations,  conflicts,  labour,  sin,  death.  And  if  we 
could  receive  it  all  these  immunities  are  now  for  us.  For  if  Christ  has  borne  onr 
sins,  where  can  there  be  any  condemnation  J  What  labour  can  there  be  that  is  not 
rest?  2.  Privileges.  (1)  It  is  the  privilege  of  every  citizen  to  be  represented. 
Accordingly  Christ  has  gone  into  the  heavens  to  do  and  say  what  we  cannot  do  and 
Bay.  ('()  He  reprefents  us  as  a  substitute,  showing  in  heaven  His  wounds  and 
Buiferings  that  we  may  have  none,  (b)  As  a  forerunner,  that  we  may  ultimately 
Bit  where  He  sits,  and  joy  as  He  joys.  (2)  A  citizen  is  under  the  laws  of  His  own 
state  and  no  other.  He  may  appeal  up  to  this.  We  are  under  the  law  of  liberty, 
and  are  judged  by  no  man.  (3)  A  citizen  may  go  in  and  oat.  Is  he  not  free  of  his 
own  state  ?  But  ours  is  a  holy  liberty.  (4)  A  citizen  has  a  right  to  go  to  the 
presence  of  the  King.  We  have  free  access  to  the  throne  of  grace.  IV.  Thb 
OBLIGATIONS.  1.  Evcry  man's  heart  ought  to  be  at  his  own  home,  and  if  heaven  be 
your  home  your  heart  is  there.  You  may  go  up  and  down  in  the  necessary  things 
of  this  world,  and  be  like  the  traveller  in  a  foreign  country,  always  gathering  some- 
thing you  can  take  home-  There  will  be  nothing  worth  much  to  you  which  has  not 
Bomeihing  of  heaven  in  it.  2.  You  must  be  a  loyal  subject;  and  if  so  you  will 
earry  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  to  which  you  belong  as  a  trust,  and  try  to  extend 
its  influence.  There  will  be  nothing  so  dear  to  you  as  to  make  that  city  and  its 
king  dear  to  somebody.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Citizenship  in  heaven: — There  can 
be  no  conij  arison  between  a  soaring  seraph  and  a  crawling  worm  :  there  ought  to 
be  none  between  Christians  and  men  of  the  world,  only  a  contrast.  If  we  were 
what  we  profess  to  be  we  should  be  as  distinct  a  people  as  a  white  race  in  Ethiopia. 
There  should  be  no  more  diflQculty  in  dislinguishing  the  Christian  from  the  worldly 
than  the  sheep  from  the  goat.  I.  If  our  citizenship  be  in  heaven  then  we  abs 
aliens  here.  "  We  have  no  continuing  city,"  but  "  desire  a  better  country."  Yet, 
though  strangers  and  foreigners  on  earth,  we  share  all  the  inconveniences  of  the 
flesh.  No  exemption  is  granted  us  from  the  common  lot  of  mankind.  In  times  of 
adversity  we  suffer,  and  in  prosperous  times  we  share  the  bounty  of  the  God  of 
providence.  1.  A  good  man  will  not  live  a  week  in  a  foreign  land  without  seeking 
to  do  good.    The  Good  Samaritan  soaght  the  good  not  only  of  the  Samaritans  but 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  flb 

of  the  Jews.  Since  we  are  here  "  to  do  good  and  to  communicate  "  we  must  *•  for- 
get not ;  "  we  must  act  as  recruiters  for  the  better  land.  2.  It  behoves  aliens  to 
keep  themselves  quiet.  What  business  have  foreigners  to  plot  against  a  country  of 
which  they  are  not  citizens.  So  in  the  world  we  must  be  orderly  sojourners, 
submitting  ourselves  constantly  to  those  in  authority,  leading  peaceable  Uves, 
fearing  God,  honouring  the  king,  "  submitting  to  every  ordinance  of  man  for  the 
Lord's  sake."  3.  As  aliens  we  have  privileges  as  well  as  duties.  The  prince  of 
this  world  may  make  his  vassals  serve  him,  but  he  cannot  raise  a  conscription  upon 
aliens.  The  child  of  God  claims  an  immunity  from  the  commands  of  Satan.  4 
As  we  are  free  from  the  conscription  of  the  state  we  are  not  eligible  to  its  honours. 
An  Englishman  at  New  York  is  not  eligible  for  the  Presidency.  It  is  of  ill  omen 
to  hear  the  world  say  "  Well  done  "  to  the  Christian  man.  6.  As  aliens  it  is  not  for 
QS  to  hoard  up  this  world's  treasures.  The  money  of  this  world  is  not  current  in 
Paradise,  and  when  we  reach  it,  if  regret  is  possible,  we  shall  wish  that  we  had  laid 
up  more  treasure  in  our  fatherland.  II.  Thocgh  aliens  on  earth  we  ahe  citizens 
OF  HEAVEN.  1.  We  are  under  heaven's  government.  Christ,  its  King,  reigns  in  us ; 
its  laws  are  the  laws  of  our  consciences  ;  our  daily  prayer  is,  "  Thy  will  be  done  on 
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven."  2.  We  share  heaven's  honours.  The  glory  which  belongs 
to  beatified  saints  is  ours,  for  we  are  already  sons  of  God,  wear  the  robe  of  Christ's 
righteousness,  have  angels  for  our  servitors.  3.  We  have  common  rights  in  the 
property  of  heaven.  "  Things  present  or  things  to  come :  all  are  ours."  4.  We 
enjoy  the  delights  of  heaven.  6.  Our  names  are  written  in  the  roll  of  heaven's 
free  men.  III.  Oub  walk  and  acts  ake  sdch  as  are  consistent  with  oub  dignitt 
AS  HEAVENLY  CITIZENS.  Among  the  old  Komane,  when  a  dastardly  act  was  proposed, 
it  was  thought  a  sufficient  refusal  to  say  Eomamu  sum.  Surely  it  should  be  a 
sufficient  incentive  to  every  good  thing  if  we  can  claim  to  be  freemen  of  the  eternal 
city.  1.  In  heaven  they  are  holy ;  so  must  we  be  if  our  citizenship  is  not  a  mere 
pretence.  2.  They  are  happy ;  so  we  must  rejoice  in  the  Lord  always.  3.  They 
are  obedient ;  so  we  must  follow  the  faintest  monitions  of  the  Divine  will,  4.  They 
are  active ;  so,  day  and  night,  we  should  be  praising  and  serving  God.  5.  They  are 
peaceful ;  so  we  should  find  rest  in  Christ.  IV.  We  might  read  our  text  as  though 
it  said  Our  commerce  is  in  heaven.  We  are  trading  on  earth,  but  the  bulk  of  our 
trade  is  with  heaven.  1.  By  meditation.  2.  By  thought.  3.  In  our  hymns.  There 
is  a  song  which  the  band  is  forbidden  to  play  to  the  Swiss  soldiery  in  foreign  lands, 
because  it  reminds  them  of  the  cowbells  of  their  native  hills.  If  the  men  hear  it 
they  are  sure  to  desert.  So  there  are  some  of  our  hymns  which  make  us  homesick. 
4.  By  hopes  and  loves.  It  is  right  that  the  patriot  should  love  his  country.  5. 
Just  as  people  in  a  foreign  land  are  always  glad  to  have  letters  from  their  country, 
I  hope  we  have  much  communication  with  our  fatherland,  both  from  and  to.  (C. 
n.   Spurgeon.)  The  true   Christian: — I.   The   Christian   is  a  pilgrim  and  a 

BTRANOEB  UPON  EARTH.  1.  This  world  is  uot  destined  to  be  his  home ;  and  in  his 
application  of  the  knowledge  of  this  fact  lies  the  difference  between  him  and  other 
men.  Men  in  general  live  as  if  they  would  hve  for  ever.  But  the  very  nature  of 
the  Christian,  his  knowledge  of  his  situation,  and  the  prospects  he  has  in  view,  all 
conspire  to  banish  from  him  that  delusion.  2.  The  Christian,  being  in  this  situa- 
tion, is  exposed  to  many  hardships.  He  is  far  from  home,  and  is  deprived  of  its 
comforts.  He  cannot  relish  the  pleasures  of  the  world  like  the  votaries  of  mammon. 
He  may  linger  for  a  moment  on  his  journey  in  the  enjoyment  of  those  pleasures 
which,  being  innocent  in  themselves,  he  is  permitted  to  enjoy  ;  but  neither  his  own 
feelings  nor  his  external  situation  will  permit  him  to  continue.  II.  The  Christian 
IS  IN  the  enjoyment  Of  PECULiAB  PRiviiiEGES.  Even  the  boasted  privileges  of  im- 
perial jRome  dwindle  into  nothing  in  comparison.  1.  The  inhabitant  of  any  country 
is  under  the  protection  of  the  government  to  which  he  belongs,  wherever  be  ia 
placed.  So  the  Christian  is  everywhere  under  the  protection  of  the  Almighty. 
Surely,  then,  he  ought  never  to  be  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  calamity.  Should  it 
come  it  will  work  for  good.  2.  The  Christian  is  indebted  to  the  care  and  protection 
of  his  fellow-citizens.  He  is  encompassed  by  an  angelic  host  who  watch  his  steps 
and  shield  him  from  danger.  3.  In  becoming  a  citizen  of  heaven  the  Christian  is 
highly  honoured.  This  honour  arises  out  of  his  own  nature  and  the  nature  of 
heaven.  In  himself  man  is  a  degraded  being;  yet  sanctified  he  becomes  the 
favourite  of  heaven  in  the  present  life,  and  will  be  exalted  at  last  to  God's  right 
hand.  And  what  is  implied  in  this  exahation  who  can  tell.  III.  The  Christian 
IS  distinguished  by  a  peculiar  mode  op  conduct.  1.  Every  true  citizen  is  obvioasly 
ft  patriot,  no  matter  whether  his  country  be  beautiful  or  barren.     There  are  fev 


«■▲».  in.]  PHILIPPIANS.  J77 

pasBJoiis  BO  strong  as  love  of  conntry,  and  none  have  given  birth  to  nobler  actions. 
The  Chri,«tian  is  also  a  patriot,  and  in  disinterested  attachment  to  his  country  and 
readiness  to  die  a  martyr  in  her  canse  is  surpassed  by  none  ;  and,  considering  what 
that  country  is,  no  wonder.  2.  Every  good  citizen  must  observe  the  laws  of  his 
country,  and  for  this  the  Christian  is  distinguished.  God's  laws  are  his  continual 
study,  are  sweeter  than  honey,  their  observance  is  his  delight,  their  transgression 
his  deepest  sorrow.  3.  Every  good  citizen  must  love  his  fellow-citizens,  and  love 
to  the  brethren  is  a  marked  characteristic  of   Christians.      IV.  The  Chbibtian 

CHBBISHES  AN  ACQUAINTANCE    AND    HOLDS   COMMUNION    WITH    HEAVEN.       1.    If    there  be  a 

Christian  with  whom  this  is  not  the  case  the  carnal  policy  of  men  will  furnish  him 
with  an  instructive  lesson.  Men  do  not  emigrate  to  a  land  without  knowing  its 
nature.  The  Christian  must  know  something  of  heaven,  and  be  convinced  that  its 
nature  is  congenial  with  his  own.  2.  The  employments  of  the  celestial  world  are 
in  unison  with  the  feelinj^a  of  its  citizens,  whether  on  earth  or  in  heaven.  The 
Christian's  alTections  are  set  not  on  earth  but  on  things  above.  3.  Intercourse  with 
heaven  is  chiefly  effected  by  prayer,  and  is  with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  This 
intercourse  makes  the  place  of  it,  wherever  it  may  be,  the  house  of  God  and  the 
gate  of  heaven.  4.  The  etTeots  of  this  communion  are  most  valuable,  and  felt  in 
adversity.  If  we  have,  then,  no  friend  to  whom  we  can  unbosom  our  griefs  we  are 
wretched  indeed.  But  the  Christian  has  a  Friend  whose  ear  is  ever  open  and  whose 
hand  is  ever  ready.  V.  Heaven  is  the  Christian's  eternal  home.  (J.  Stark.) 
Heavenly  citizenship  : — I.  Christians  abb  citizens  of  heaven.  1.  By  birth.  Thaa 
was  Paul  a  Koman  citizen.  We  may  well  claim  for  our  country  the  place  from 
which  we  derived  our  life.  2.  By  enrollment.  All  who  are  born  from  above  are 
registered  from  above.  Their  names  are  "  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life."  No 
objection  nrged  against  the  entry  shall  be  deemed  valid.  3.  By  afiQnity.  As 
strangers  yearn  for  the  home  of  their  birth,  so  we  have  instincts  and  desires  which 
point  *o  a  heavenly  origin.  Thus  streams  flow  towards  the  ocean,  and  flames 
ascend  to  the  sun.  4.  Our  education  is  a  further  evidence.  A  child's  future  may 
be  inferred  from  the  instruction  which  fits  him  for  it.  Travellers  preparing  for  a 
foreign  residence  learn  the  language.  Bo  Christians  are  educated  for  heaven. 
This  is  the  object  of  afflictions.  Earthly  trial  is  heavenly  discipline,  and  works 
out  for  us  "a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory."  5.  The  exercise  of 
our  Christian  graces  indicates  where  our  country  is.  (1)  Faith  is  the  substance  of 
the  heaven  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  the  glory  unseen.  (2)  Hope's  object  and 
realization  is  heaven.  (3)  Charity,  while  findmg  scope  for  exercise  here,  has  for 
her  true  home,  and  her  full  and  everlasting  development,  the  New  Jerusalem.  6. 
Our  citizenship  is  in  heaven  because  our  Father's  home  is  there.  Where  He  dwells 
we  cannot  be  strangers,  "  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven."  7.  This,  too,  is  the 
residence  of  the  King,  and  therefore  the  city  of  His  friends  and  subjects.  8.  There 
our  friends  are  gathering.  9.  Heaven  is  our  home,  and  we  are  expected  there. 
II.  Heaven  being  our  city,  our  life  should  be  heavenly.  Admiring  the  beaatiei 
with  which  the  Creator  has  decked  the  earth ;  thankfully  enjoying  the  gifts  of  Hia 
providence ;  humanly  feeling  for  our  own  and  others'  sorrows  ;  diligently  performing 
our  duties,  Ac,  let  us  bear  about  ns  the  inspiring  assurance  that  our  conversation 
is  in  heaven.  1.  Let  us  not,  in  the  pursuit  of  any  earthly  object,  be  so  eager  as  to 
absorb  our  thoughts.  Let  us  not  be  elated  by  prosperity,  nor  depressed  by 
adversity.  2.  Let  us  prize  our  vocation  above  all  our  other  possessions  and 
privileges.  Are  men  zealous  in  attaining  earthly  distinctions f  Let  us  "give  all 
diligence  to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure."  The  holy  alone  are  enrolled  m 
citizens  of  heaven.  3.  The  honour  and  interests  of  our  country  are  committed  to 
U8.  As  an  Englishman  abroad  ought  to  feel  that  the  honour  of  his  conntry  is  com- 
promised by  his  conduct,  and  that  he  must  act  as  a  representative  of  his  nation ;  so 
let  ns  while  strangers  and  sojourners  remember  that  we  are  representatives  of  heaven. 
4.  As  a  loyal  citizen  desires  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  his  country  so  should  we  try 
to  promote  the  best  interests  of  the  Cinrch.  (J.  Vanghan,M.A.)  Heavenly  Citizen' 
ship : — The  proper  country  of  a  real  Christian  is  not  that  in  which  he  first  drew  breath, 
nor  that  in  which  God  has  fixed  the  bounds  of  his  earthly  habitation.     I.  He  is 

CITIZEN   or   A   OITT   OF   WHICH    EXCELLENT    THINGS   ARE    BPOKEN.       1.    It  is  beaOtiful  toT 

situation  (Psa.  xlviii.  2).  In  this  respect  no  other  can  be  compared  to  it,  for  it 
stands  not  on  earth  but  in  heaven.  2.  Its  foundations  are  most  gloriously  laid 
(Eph.  ii.  20).  8.  Its  builder  is  God  (Heb.  xi.  10).  4.  It  will  survive  erery  other 
eity,  being  "  eternal  in  the  heavens."  5.  Its  strength  is  invincible  (Isa.  xxvi-  1). 
^  It  is  distinguished  from  every  other  city  by  its  inhabitants  (Heb.  zii.  88),  wha 


278  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «& 

are  all  holy  (Rev,  xxi.  27),  and  all  happy  (Rev.  xxi.  4 ;  lea.  xxxv.  10).  7.  But  the 
grand  distinction  is  its  King  (Eev.  xxii.  3-5).  II.  How  may  he  be  distinguished 
FEOM  THE  CITIZENS  OF  THE  WORLD  ?  1.  By  the  dicss  he  wsars.  This  is  how  we 
distinguish  inhabitants  of  different  countries.  We  read  that  the  saints  are  clothed 
in  white  robes,  having  been  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  But  they  were 
washed  and  first  worn  here.  2.  By  his  language.  Different  nations  are  distin- 
guished by  different  tongues.  The  language  spoken  in  Jerusalem  above  is  that  of 
love  and  holiness  (Psa.  cxlix.  6),  but  it  was  learned  and  first  used  here  (Eph.  iv.  29  ; 
Psa.  IV.  3),  3.  By  his  works.  The  occupation  of  the  saints  in  light  is  the  'Xn- 
tinual  service  of  God  (Eev.  vii.  15) ;  so  is  that  of  the  saints  below  (Rom.  xii.  1). 
4.  By  his  constant  communications  with  his  city.  {A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  The 
happiness  of  a  heavenly  conversation : — To  have  our  conversation  in  heaven  implies 
— I.  The  seeious  thoughts  and  considerations  of  heaven.  1.  The  happiness  of 
this  state.  (1)  It  is  incomparably  beyond  any  happiness  in  this  world,  (a)  None 
of  the  comforts  of  this  life  are  pure  and  uniuixed.  There  is  something  of  vanity 
end  vexation  of  spirit  in  all  our  enjoyments,  either  in  getting,  having,  or  after 
them.  But  the  happiness  of  the  next  world  is  without  alloy  (Rev.  xxii.  3-5).  (6) 
The  enjoyments  of  this  life  are  uncertain.  When  we  think  we  have  fastest  hold  of 
them  they  often  slip  out  of  our  hands.  The  very  greatness  of  an  estate  has  been 
the  cause  of  the  luss  of  both  it  and  its  owner ;  but  the  happiness  of  heaven  is  as 
unchangeable  as  the  fountain  from  which  it  springs,  (c)  The  enjoyments  of  th# 
world  are  unsatisfying.  Either  we,  or  the  things  of  this  world,  or  both,  are  so 
fantastical  that  we  can  neither  be  well  wiih  them  nor  well  without  them.  If  we  be 
hungry,  we  are  in  pain  ;  if  full,  uneasy ;  if  poor,  we  think  ourselves  miserable ;  if 
rich,  really  so.  Nay,  so  far  from  affording  satisfaction,  the  sweetest  of  them  is 
most  apt  to  satiate  and  cloy  us.  If  they  go  off  quickly  they  signify  nothing,  and 
if  they  stay  long  we  are  sick  of  them.  But  the  delights  of  the  other  world  as  they 
will  give  us  faU  satisfaction,  so  we  shall  never  be  weary  of  them.  (2)  It  is  very 
great  in  itself.  Its  chief  ingredients  are — (a)  Perfection  of  knowledge.  What  can  be 
mct«  dehghtful  than  to  have  our  understanding  entertained  with  a  clear  sight  of 
the  best  and  most  perfect  Being,  with  the  knowledge  of  all  His  works,  and  the  wise 
designs  of  His  providence.  The  Queen  of  Sheba  thought  Solomon's  servants  happy 
in  having  the  opportunity  of  standing  before  him  to  hear  his  wisdom ;  but  in  the 
other  world  it  shall  be  a  happiuess  to  Solomon  himself  to  stand  before  God,  to 
admire  His  wisdom  and  behold  His  glory,  (b)  The  most  delightful  exercise  of  love. 
What  greater  happiness  can  be  imagined  than  to  converse  freely  with  the  most 
excellent,  without  anything  of  folly,  disguise,  jealousy,  or  design  upon  one  another? 
for  then  there  will  be  none  of  those  vices  and  passions  of  covetousness,  hatred, 
envy,  ambition,  wrath,  and  peevishness  which  now  spoil  the  pleasure  and  disturb 
the  quiet  of  mankind.  All  quarrels  and  contentions  will  be  effectually  hindered, 
not  by  force,  but  by  love  ;  and  all  those  controversies  in  religion,  which  are  now 
hotly  agitated,  will  then  be  finally  determined,  not  as  we  endeavour  to  aid  them 
now,  by  canons  and  decrees,  but  by  a  perfect  knowledge  and  convincing  light,  (c) 
And  when  this  blessed  society  is  met  together,  and  thus  united  by  love,  they  shall 
aU  join  in  gratitude  to  Him  who  hath  so  blessed  them.  (3)  This  happiness  shall 
be  eternaL  If  the  happiness  of  heaven  were  such  as  the  joys  of  this  world,  it 
were  fit  they  should  be  as  short ;  but  being  so  excellent  it  would  scarce  be  a  happi- 
ness if  not  eternal,  if  we  could  see  the  end  of  them  at  never  so  great  a  distance 
(4)  It  is  far  above  anything  we  can  now  conceive,  (a)  In  this  imperfect  state  we 
are  not  capable  of  a  full  representation.  That  would  let  in  joys  upon  us  too  big  for 
our  narrow  capacities,  too  strong  for  weak  mortality  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9-11).  (6)  But  no 
sooner  shall  we  enter  npon  the  joys  of  the  other  world  bat  oar  minds  will  be  raised 
to  a  strength  and  activity  as  much  above  that  of  the  most  knowing  persons  in  this 
world  as  the  thoughts  of  the  wisest  philosopher  are  above  those  of  a  child.  2.  Th* 
means  whereby  we  may  come  to  be  partakers  of  this  happiness — holiness  (Heb. 
V.  9 ;  Titus  ii.  11-12 ;  Heb.  xii.  14).  (1)  Holiness  is  not  only  a  condition  hot  a 
necessary  qualification.  This  is  the  force  of  St.  John's  reasoning  (1  John  iii.  1-3). 
"  We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  To  see  God  is  to  be 
happy  ;  but  anless  we  be  like  Him  we  cannot  be  happy.  The  sight  and  presence 
of  God  would  be  no  happiness  to  the  man  who  is  not  like  God  in  disposition.  From 
hence  he  infers,  "  every  man  that  hath  this  hope,"  Ac.  (2)  This  life  is  our  prepar- 
ation for  the  future.  It  is  true  that  heaven  perfects  those  holy  dispositions  which 
ai  e  begun  here,  but  it  alters  no  man  as  to  his  main  state.  "  He  that  is  filthy  let 
him  be  filthy  stilL"    The  happiness  of  heaven  consists  in  such  things  as  a  wicked 


•Ml*,  nt]  FHILIPPIANS.  179 

man  has  no  relish  for.  If  a  eovetous,  ambitious,  voluptnous  man  were  in  heaven 
he  would  be  tormented  with  a  continual  thirst  for  which  there  w&s  no  gratification. 
All  the  joys  of  that  place  are  purely  spiritual  and  can  only  be  relished  by  those  who 
have  purified  themselves  as  God  is  pure.  (3)  From  all  this  it  appears  how  necessary 
it  is  for  us  to  prepare  ourselves  for  this  blessed  state  by  the  constant  endeavours  of 
a  holy  life.     Until  this  be  done  we  are  not  meet  to  be  partakers  of  its  felicities. 

IJ,    The  EFFEOl   WHICH  THESE  C0NSIDEBATI0N8  SHOULD  HAVE  ON  OUE  HEARTS  AND  LIVES. 

1  To  convince  ua  of  the  vanity  of  this  world  God  has  on  purpose  made  it  trouble- 
some that  there  might  be  no  sufficient  temptation  to  reasonable  men  to  take  them 
sff  from  the  thoughts  of  their  future  happiness  ;  that  God  and  heaven  might  have 
no  rival  here.  2.  To  make  us  industrious  to  be  and  do  good  that  we  may  be 
qualified  for  future  happiness.  Men  are  very  industrious  to  be  rich  and  great :  did 
we  value  heaven  half  as  much  as  it  deserves  we  should  take  infinitely  more  pains 
to  secure  it.  And  how  should  the  thought  that  we  are  hasting  towards  another 
world,  and  that  our  eternal  happiness  is  at  stake  quicken  our  endeavours. 
'3.  To  mitigate  the  afflictions  of  this  life.  No  matter  how  rough  the  way 
provided  it  leads  to  happiness  (Bom.  viii.  18).  The  evils  of  this  life  afflict 
men  more  or  less  according  as  the  soul  is  fortified  with  considerations 
proper  to  support  us  under  them.  And  when  we  are  safely  landed,  with  what 
pleasure  shall  we  look  back  upon  those  boisterous  sins  we  have  escaped.  4.  To 
make  us  sincere  in  our  professions  and  actions.  Did  men  firmly  believe  the  reward 
of  another  world,  their  religion  would  not  be  only  in  show  and  pretence,  but  in  Ufe 
and  reality.  For  there  we  shall  be  rewarded  not  for  what  we  seemed  to  be,  bat  for 
what  we  really  were.  5.  To  arm  us  against  the  fear  of  death.  {Archbp.  Tillotson.) 
A  heavenly  mind  here : — 1.  Whatever  incompatibility  there  may  be  between  having 
a  residence  in  one  world  and  a  conversation  in  another,  Christianity  boldly  meets 
it  and  puts  it  out  of  the  v\ay.  In  old  English  a  man's  "  conversation  "  meant  not 
the  mere  act  of  his  tongue,  but  his  conduct,  and  so  revealed  to  what  kingdom  his 
heart  belonged.  An  American  agent  or  ambassador  has  a  temporary  dwelling  in 
Athens.  Living  on  that  foreign  soil,  occupied  daily  with  its  affairs,  its  landscape 
winning  his  admiration,  and  its  faces  and  manners  his  goodwill,  he  remembers 
that  his  stay  is  short;  he  expects  to  be  called  back  where  bis  treasure  is  and  his 
heart  abides.  2.  When  our  faith  commands  us  to  have  our  conversation  in  heaven 
it  does  not  require  us  to  be  bad  citizens  of  the  world  where  we  now  are.  We  are 
not  bidden  to  be  absent  minded.  The  man  may  make  hearty  attachments  where  he 
tarries,  pay  tribute  and  live  cheerfully  and  helpfully.  And  yet  none  the  less  he 
desires  a  better  country,  a  city  first  in  his  love  and  always  in  his  hopes.  So  Christ 
teaches  that  we  can  be  faithful  to  every  present  relationship,  and  yet  never  forget 
our  celestial  patriotism.  We  can  be  in  the  world  without  minding  earthly  things. 
3.  This  glory  is  the  original  glory  of  our  Christian  estate.  Till  Christ  came,  the 
majestic  fact  that  our  little  human  tent  is  overarched  by  an  infinite  heaven  of  light 
scarcely  anywhere  broke  through  the  pagan  shadows.  Men  as  a  rule  looked  down- 
ward at  matter,  and  their  conversation  was  this  world's  wars  and  lusts.  In  Asiatic 
pomp  there  was  not  one  house  of  charity;  in  Alexandrian  science  not  one  school  of 
virtue;  in  Greek  beauty  no  beauty  of  holiness;  in  the  discipline  of  Boman  armies 
no  heavenly  law  of  righteousness.  4.  In  the  midst  of  such  a  society  we  see  Paul 
saying,  "  Our  conversation,"  Ac.  The  earthly  and  the  heavenly  mind,  then.  The 
choice  between  these  is  what  the  gospel  is  prosing  on  our  conscience.  I.  What 
HINDERS.  It  is  said  "We  must  take  the  world  as  it  is.  It  is  no  use  flying  in  the 
face  of  an  immense  majority.  Tour  ideal  is  lovely  and  well  enough  as  a  seventh- 
day  picture  of  impossible  sanctity.  But  while  we  live  in  an  earthly  commonwealth, 
if  we  expect  to  get  on  with  it  we  must  keep  on  pleasant  terms  with  it,  and  not  be 
over  critical  as  to  its  principles."  1.  If  this  answer  were  valid  it  would  settle  the 
whole  question  on  the  anti-Christian  side.  Tlie  Church  would  be  an  organized 
failure.  Instead  of  fearless  witnessing  for  Christ  and  fighting  against  wrong,  we 
should  have  a  cowardly  system  of  mutual  compromises  and  flatteries.  2.  But  then 
even  the  careless  mind  has  a  deeper-toned  conviction  than  this.  Most  people  know 
that  the  principal  glories  of  the  past  have  gathered  round  a  few  brave  and  suffering 
men  who  have  stood  out  against  their  times.  Inward  voices  respond  in  almosfc 
every  breast  to  the  righteousness  of  this  order  of  souls.  3.  Before  they  give  away 
their  manhood  for  the  sake  of  getting  on  with  the  world,  some  citizens  will  inquire 
to  what  end  the  world  is  getting  on.  4.  And  then,  whatever  we  say  or  do,  the  Word 
of  God  refuses  to  be  altered,  and  tells  us  not  only  that  we  can  but  we  mast,  unless 
ve  mean  to  die  eternally,  live  above  the  world  while  we  live  in  it.    5.  Besides, 


no  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ut 

falsehood  and  sensaality  were  never  prevalent  enough  to  incapacitate  a  man  for  a 
elean  and  godly  life,  if  that  sonl  willed  it.  6.  ^;othiQg  in  society  or  cuatom  takes 
off  the  wrong  doer's  sin  or  its  retribution.  There  lives  a  God  with  whom  multitudes, 
usages,  &c.,  are  not  of  the  least  account.  We  cannot  say  at  the  Divine  tribunal, 
"Blame  society;  I  only  went  with  the  rest,  and  was  no  worse  than  they."  You 
may  presume  that  oflFences  will  come,  but  "woe  to  that  man  by  whom  they  come." 

IL  ChRISIIANITY  means  to  reach  SOCrETY  ON  k  BEOAD  SCALE,  BUT  IT  MUST  BEACH  IT 
THROUGH    PERSONS    GATHERED    ONE    BY    ONE    INTO    ITS    OWN     HEAVENLY   CITIZENSHIP.       It 

has  to  do  with  conviction,  affection,  faith  ;  and  these  are  properties  of  individuals 
before  they  can  be  of  communities.  Christ  did  not  publish  a  plan  of  political 
reform,  or  a  schedule  of  social  science.  Meeting  his  countrymen  in  little  groups, 
or  one  by  one,  He  showed  them  the  beauty  of  the  heavenly  conversation  while  they 
were  fishermen  or  publicans.  So  began  the  everlasting  empire  which  soon  lifted 
itself  over  the  palaces  of  Constantinople  and  Rome.  We  all  desire  ours  to  be  a 
Christian  country ;  then  we  must  be  Christian  men.     III.  There  are  those  who 

HAVE  NOT  CONSCIOUSLY  MADE  UP  THEIR  MINDS  TO  KEEP  GoDS  COMMANDMENTS  OCT  AN1> 
OUT,    WHO    YET    WOULD   BE    SHOCKED    AT    THE    IDEA   OF    OUR    SOCIAL    LIFE    RETURNING    TO 

BARBARISM  ;  and  others  nominally  Chrifitian  who  make  no  pretence  to  conform  their 
practice  to  Christ's  law.  But  this  notion  that  we  are  any  safer  and  better  for  living 
in  a  land  of  professed  Christianity  whose  principles  we  daily  ignore  is  a  delusion 
whose  absurdity  is  seen  as  soon  as  stated.  What  we  need  to  realize  is  that  every 
scheme  attempting  to  cure  the  morals  of  the  people  must  fail  unless  it  pats  the  soul 
into  a  direct  conversation  with  Him.  IV.  In  these  times  the  faith  is  put  back 
NOT  so  much  by  persecution  as  corruption.  We  live  in  days  of  indulgence  and 
education.  Ever  since  Eve's  parley  it  has  been  the  strategy  of  evil  to  gain 
admission  without  having  its  character  suspected.  If  the  moral  sense  is  obstinate 
leach  it  to  call  evil  good.  If  conscience  defies  a  sword  drug  it  with  narcotics. 
Once  radically  unsettle  a  man's  mind  as  to  the  obligations  of  duty,  and  you  work  a 
far  more  comprehensive  depravity  in  him  than  by  only  enticing  him  now  and  then 
into  single  bad  actions  against  which  his  conscience  continues  to  cry  out.  V.  So 
THE  true  confessors  of  this  age  are  the  men  and  women  who  exercise  their 

CONSCIENCES  DAY  BY  DAY  TO  DISCERN   BETWEEN   GOOD  AND  EVIL  ;    SOUls   that  keep  SO  far 

back  within  the  entrenchments  of  a  heavenly  citizenship  as  to  be  out  of  all  risk  of 
slipping  over  into  dishonour  ;  men  of  business  who  will  not  take  a  second  look  at 
the  tempter  for  an  additional  thousand  a  year ;  women  who  choose  that  good  part 
with  Mary's  friend,  rather  than  wade  through  ambiguities  neck  deep  to  conquests 
of  social  ambition ;  children  that  would  rather  be  laughed  at  than  disobey.     VI. 

ThBBB  are  two  worlds  within  us,  AS  WELL  AS  EARTH  AND    HEAVEN  WITHOUT  US  ;    Rud 

one  of  them  is  apt  to  get  the  mastery.  Take  as  the  Divine  image  of  the  one,  the 
Saviour's  sacramental  prayer  in  John  xvii.,  or  St.  Paul's  description,  at  the  close  of 
Romans  viii.  of  the  love  of  God.  For  the  other  take  any  unbelieving  sensualist's 
frank  testimony :  Lord  Chesterfield's,  e.g.  "  I  have  run  the  rounds  of  business  and 
pleasure,  and  have  done  with  them  all.  Shall  I  tell  you  that  I  bear  this  melancholy 
situation  with  resignation  ?  No  ;  I  bear  it  because  I  must.  I  think  of  nothing  but 
killing  time,  now  it  has  become  my  enemy,  and  my  resolution  is  to  sleep  in  the 
carriage  to  the  end  of  the  journey."  Now  to  say  nothing  of  what  happens  when 
the  journey  ends,  and  of  the  waking  out  of  sleep,  and  of  the  new  question  that  will 
rise  before  a  man  who  has  so  poorly  succeeded  in  killing  time,  that  time  killed  him 
— viz.,  how  to  kill  eternity — leaving  all  that,  we  see  the  contradiction  between  the 
two  worlds  complete.  The  warfare  between  the  principles  that  lie  at  the  roots  of 
them  is  a  deadly  warfare,  and  still  it  goes  on.  Take  sides  then  at  once  with  Ood 
and  heaven.  (Bp.  Huntington.)  Citizenship  and  conversation: — It  is  not 
difficult  to  see  how  the  "  citizenship"  comes  to  be  called  "  conversation."  "Con- 
versation "  is  "  being  conversant."  When  we  talk  together,  it  is  called 
"conversation."  Because  we  are  "  conversant "  with  the  subject,  therefore  it  is 
called  "conversation."  And  "conversant"  means  "going  np  and  down  in  a 
thing."  That  is  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word.  And  we  "go  up  and  down,"  wo 
move  about  in,  and  therefore  we  are  conversant  with  the  things,  and  the  people, 
and  the  city,  to  which  we  belong.  So  "  citizenship  "  is  called  "  conversation." 
"  Our  conversation  " — our  familiar  habits,  our  daily  life  and  routine,  that  with 
which  we  have  to  do, — "our  conversation,  our  citizenship,  is  in  heaven."  {J. 
Vaughan,  M.A . )  Heavenly  eitizensh  ip : — As  the  conversation  of  the  Israelites  was 
in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  however  distant  they  might  bo  from  it  with  regard  to 
Sb»  body,  because  to  it  their  thoughts  and  affections  turned  ;  towards  that  place 


mkf.  m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  281 

they  lifted  their  eyes  in  prayer  when  absent,  and  from  thence  expected  the  required 
succour,  no  captivity,  no  misfortune  obliterating  the  memory  of  that  holy  sanc- 
tuary, the  Bource  of  all  their  joys :  so  also  the  Christian  beholds  in  heaven  Uie  true 
Ark,  the  Lord  Christ,  where  all  the  fuhiess  of  the  Godhead  dwells,  not  in  types  and 
figures  as  in  the  Mosaic  ark,  but  in  truth  and  reality.  In  heaven  their  faith  dwells, 
their  hope  rests,  elevated  above  all  terrestrial  things,  penetrating  within  the  veil, 
anchoring  upon  the  Bock  of  Ages.  There  dwells  the  soul  in  love  ;  and  beholding 
throughout  the  rest  of  the  universe  nothing  but  vanity  and  sin,  it  retires  continu> 
ally  into  this  heavenly  palace,  where  it  may  worship  the  Lord  in  spirit  and  in 
truth  (Col.  ii.  1-2).  (J.  Bailee).  The  manifestation  of  the  citizenship . — We 
should,  in  fact,  seek  while  we  are  here  to  keep  up  the  manners  and  custums  of  the 
good  old  fatherland,  so  that,  as  in  Paris,  the  Parisian  soon  says,  "  There  goes  John 
Bull,"  so  they  should  be  able  to  say  in  this  land,  "  There  goes  a  heavenly  citizen, 
one  who  is  with  us,  and  among  us,  but  is  not  of  us."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
cititeiiship  maintained  by  communications  with  tlie  mother  country  : — We  send  our 
prayers  there  as  letters  to  our  Father,  and  we  get  His  letters  back  in  this  blessed 
volume  of  His  word.  You  go  into  an  Australian  settler's  hut,  and  you  find  a  news- 
paper. Where  from,  sir?  A  gazette  from  the  south  of  Fiance,  a  journal  from 
America  T  Oh  no,  it  is  a  newspaper  from  England,  addressed  to  him  in  his  old 
mother's  handwriting,  bearing  the  postage  stamp  with  the  good  Queen's  face  in  the 
corner ;  and  he  likes  it,  though  it  be  only  a  newspaper  from  some  little  pottering 
country  town,  with  no  news  in  it ;  yet  he  likes  it  belter,  perhaps,  than  The  Timet 
itself,  because  it  talks  to  him  about  the  village  where  he  lived,  and  consequently 
touches  a  special  string  in  the  harp  of  his  soul.  So  must  it  be  with  heaven.  This 
book,  the  Bible,  is  the  newspaper  of  heaven,  and  therefore  we  must  love  it.  The 
sermons  which  are  preached  are  good  news  from  a  far  country.  The  hymns  we 
sing  are  notes  by  which  we  tell  our  Father  of  our  welfare  here,  and  by  which  He 
whispers  into  our  soul  His  continued  love  to  us.  All  these  are  and  must  be 
pleasant  to  us,  for  our  commerce  is  with  heaven.  I  hope,  too,  we  are  sending  a 
good  deal  home.  I  like  to  see  our  young  fellows  when  they  go  out  to  live  in  the 
bush,  recollect  their  mother  at  home.  They  say  "  She  had  a  hard  struggle  to  bring 
08  up  when  our  father  died,  and  she  scraped  her  little  together  to  help  us  to 
emigrate."  John  and  Tom  mutually  agree,  "  the  first  gold  we  get  at  the  dif/gings 
we  will  send  home  to  mother."  And  it  goes  home.  Well,  I  hope  you  are  sending 
a  great  many  things  home.  I  hope  as  we  are  aliens  here,  we  are  not  laying  up  oar 
treasures  here,  where  we  may  lose  it,  but  packing  it  off  as  quickly  as  we  can  to  our 
own  country.  There  are  many  ways  of  doing  it.  God  has  many  banks  ;  and  they 
are  all  safe  ones.  We  have  but  to  serve  His  Church,  or  serve  the  souls  which 
Christ  has  bought  with  His  blood,  or  help  His  poor,  clothe  His  naked,  and  feed  His 
hungry,  and  we  send  our  treasures  beyond  sea  iu  a  safe  ship,  and  so  we  keep  up  our 
commerce  with  the  skies.  (Ibid).  Tlu  certificate  of  home  : — A  peasant  girl  in- 
tently watching  the  bears  at  Berne,  allowed  her  bag  containing  various  homely 
treasures  to  slip  from  her  arm.  One  of  the  bears  immediately  seized  it  and  began 
in  a  way  that  would  have  been  extremely  comical,  but  for  the  poor  girl's  distress, 
to  pull  out  the  articles,  one  by  one,  before  teaiing  them  to  pieces.  The  keeper  not 
being  within  reach,  no  rescue  was  possible,  and  for  a  few  moments  the  poor 
peasant  wept  as  if  her  heart  would  break.  At  length  a  bright  thought  struck  her, 
and  putting  her  hand  into  the  bosom  of  her  dress  she  drew  from  it  a  paper,  and 
exclaimed  with  joy,  "It  is  my  certificate  of  home;  thank  God  this  bear  has  not  got 
that."  Now  this  Heimath  Schein,  as  it  is  called  in  Switzerland  and  Germany,  is 
necessary  as  a  passport.  Without  it  she  could  not  have  left  her  country,  and  was 
liable  at  any  time  to  be  imprisoned  as  unable  to  prove  herself  a  member  of  the 
canton.  The  Chviirtian,  too,  has  his  "certificate  of  home,"  and  need  never  be  in- 
consolable while  he  can  put  his  hand  upon  that,  whatever  else  may  have  fallen 
under  the  power  of  the  destroyer.  {Sunday  at  Home).  The  influence  of  heavenly 
mindedneft : — As  the  daily  business  of  the  royal  observatory  is  rarely  mentioned  or 
thought  of  in  the  traffic  and  bustle  of  the  world,  though  it  stands  in  intimate  and 
vital  relations  to  navigation  and  commerce,  and  so  to  all  the  interests  of  society; 
BO  the  men  and  women  whose  "conversation  is  in  heaven,"  although  they  may 
appear  unpractical  to  some  thoughtless  persons,  are  able  to  give  the  soundest 
advice,  and  to  exert  the  most  beneficent  influence.  (J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.) 
Citizenship  a  revealer : — As  the  spear  of  Milton's  Ithuriel  had  the  power,  by  its 
touch,  of  making  evil  spirits  stand  forth  in  their  native  blackness  and  oncomeli- 
ness,  however  skilfullj^  they  had  disguised  themselves  as  angels  of  light ;  so  the 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Christian's  sense  of  his  relation  to  heaven  reveals  to  his  heart  the  essential  vanity 
and  desi^icableness  of  any  form  of  life  which  is  alien  from  the  will  of  God.  The 
application  of  the  touchstone  que.'^tion,  "How  would  such  conduct  answer  in 
heaven  ?  How  would  such  conduct  become  one  who  hopes  for  heaven,  and  deems 
himself  a  citizen  of  heaven?" — this  shows  things  as  they  are.  (R.  Johnstone, 
LL.B.)  From  whence  we  look  for  the  Saviour: — Sometimes  I  wait  through  the 
weary  years  with  great  comfort.  There  was  a  ship  some  time  ago  outside  a  certain 
harbour,  A  heavy  sea  made  the  ship  roll  fearfully.  A  dense  fog  blotted  out  all 
buoys  and  lights.  The  captain  never  left  the  wheel.  He  could  not  tell  his  way 
into  the  harbour,  and  no  pilot  could  get  out  to  him  for  a  long  time.  Eager 
passengers  urged  him  to  be  courageous  and  make  a  dash  for  the  harbour.  He 
said  "No  ;  it  is  not  my  duty  to  run  so  great  a  risk.  A  pilot  is  required  here,  and  I 
will  wait  for  one  if  I  wait  a  week."  The  truest  courage  is  that  which  can  bear  to 
be  charged  with  cowardice.  To  wait  is  much  wis^  than  when  you  cannot  hear  the 
fog-horn  and  have  no  pilot  yet  to  steam  on  and  wreck  your  vessel  on  the  rocks. 
Our  prudent  captain  waited  his  time,  and  at  last  he  espied  the  pilot's  boat  coming 
to  him  over  the  boiling  sea.  When  the  pilot  was  at  his  work  the  captain's 
anxious  waiting  was  over.  The  Church  is  like  that  vessel,  she  is  pitched  to  and 
fro  in  the  storm  and  the  dark,  and  the  pilot  has  not  yet  come.  The  weather  is 
very  threatening.  All  around  the  darkuess  hangs  like  a  pall.  But  Jesus  will 
come,  walking  on  the  water,  before  long ;  He  will  bring  us  safe  to  the  desired 
haven.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  21.  Who  shall  change  our  vile  body. — The  humiliation  and  glorification  of 
the  body  : — I.  Oub  presknt  state  of  existence  is  one  of  much  humiliation.  We 
are  in  vile  bodies — 1.  If  you  remember  their  origin.  They  are  formed  from  the 
earth.  We  are  indeed  "curiously  wrought,"  and  exhibit  proofs  of  the  goodness, 
wisdom,  and  power  of  God  .  but  let  the  body  be  analyzed,  and  decomposed,  and 
wherein  does  it  differ  from  the  dust  we  despise?  "  God  knoweth  our  frame  and 
remembereth  that  we  are  dust."  What  a  fine  lesson  of  humility  is  here.  2.  Our 
bodies  are  tainted  with  sin  and  therefore  vile.  Always  connect  with  the  meanness 
of  your  origin  the  idea  that  you  are  infected  with  iniquity.  We  have  unclean  bodies 
which  are  the  prisons  of  our  souls.  You  have  but  to  reflect  on  your  proneness  to 
impurity,  to  forgetfulness  of  God,  and  what  but  for  Adam's  fall  you  might  have 
been,  to  warrant  your  saying  "  behold  I  am  vile."  3.  Our  bodies  are  exposed  to 
sickness,  and  destined  to  death.  "  Thou  shalt  eat  bread  in  sorrow  till  thou  return 
to  the  ground."  All  this  is  true  of  all,  and  yet  how  many  try  to  hide  it  in  the 
elaborate  trickery  of  dress  and  the  disgraceful  vanities  of  the  age.  The  body  is 
only  valuable  as  the  casket  of  an  inestimable  jewel.      II.  The  ennobling  change 

WHICH  SHALL  PASS  ON  THAT  WHICH  IS  NOW  SDBJECT  TO  HUMILIATION.      It  is  nOt  intended 

for  our  state  of  vileness  to  last.  To  shut  out  as  infidels  do  the  prospects  of  futurity 
is  an  act  of  unparalleled  madness.  In  the  gospel  life  and  immortality  are  brought  to 
light.  But  the  specific  hope  of  the  text  is  not  for  those  who  are  "  enemies  of  the 
Cross,"  (Sec,  but  for  those  who  "  count  all  things  loss,"  &c.  1.  The  time  when  this 
great  and  ennobling  change  is  to  occur.  At  the  coming  of  Christ  at  the  general 
resurrection  ;  when  the  universe  shall  sink  in  years,  the  elements  melt  with  fervent 
heat,  when  the  last  moment  of  time  shall  pass,  and  the  whole  of  our  race  be 
assembled.  2.  The  precise  nature  of  this  change — like  unto  the  Saviour's  glorious 
body.  (1)  In  spirituality.  The  earthliness  of  our  bodies  will  be  removed,  and 
made  light  and  buoyant,  no  more  gross  and  material ;  "  Flesh  and  blood  cannot 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  (2)  In  holiness.  On  earth  He  was  "  holy,  harmless, 
undefiled  "  and  is  so  now.  None  can  enter  heaven  without  holiness  :  therefore  our 
bodies  will  be  purged  of  sin.  (3)  In  immortality.  "  Christ  being  raised  from  the 
dead  dieth  no  more."  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  The  immortal  Saviour 
shall  reign  over  an  immortal  peo})le.  3.  The  specific  agency  by  which  this  great 
change  shall  be  effecte  J.  (1)  By  Him  whom  we  call  Lord  and  God.  If  there  be  any 
who  are  ready  to  take  Him  down  from  His  Divine  elevation  let  them  mark  this 
Divine  prerogative.  "  As  the  Father  raiseth  up  the  dead,"  <fec.  (Rom.  xiv,  9). 
(2)  By  His  mighty  power.  What  power  must  he  have  who  raises  the  dead?  (3) 
The  particular  principle  is  that  by  which  He  is  able  to  subdue  all  things.     III.  The 

ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  THIS  CHANGE  OUGHT  TO  BE  MADE  A  MATTER  OF  JOYFUL  EXPECTATION. 

The  great  sin  of  men  is  not  looking  forward.  For  time  they  are  ready  to  give  all ; 
for  eternity  nothing.  But  we  Christians  look  for  the  coming  of  Christ — 1.  As  w« 
hate  sin,  because  we  shall  then  be  perfectly  holy.     2.  As  we  desire  communion  with 


m.]  PHILIPPIANS.  S8» 

God,  because  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is,  and  be  made  lil:e  Him.  3.  As  we  wish  to 
arrive  at  the  true  grandeur  and  perfection  of  our  nature,  because  we  shall  be 
changed  into  the  image  of  moral  beauty.  4.  As  we  desire  the  perfect  triumphs  of 
the  Kedeemer's  kingdom,  because  then  all  things  6))all  be  put  under  His  feet.  5. 
As  we  desire  a  meeting  with  all  the  great  and  good,  because  then  we  shall  rejoic* 
in  an  association  with  the  family  of  God  for  ever.  {J.  Parsons.)  The  vile  body 
made  glorious : — The  word  "  vile,"  in  ordinary  usage,  represents  that  which  is  mean 
and  despicable.  This  is  not  the  thouj;ht  of  the  Apostle  Paul.  The  substance  of 
the  body  is  not  in  itself  vile.  Tliere  is  n(  thing  vile  in  the  elements  of  the  human 
frame  or  in  their  combination.  The  construction  of  the  body  is  not  vile.  There  is 
60  much  of  Divine  design,  wisdom,  and  skill  displayed  in  every  part  of  the  human 
body,  that  the  attributes  of  the  Creator  seem  U>  be  enthroned  or  enshrined  in  it. 
The  uses  of  the  body  are  not  vile,  so  far,  at  least,  as  the  body  is  rif-'htly  used,  and 
the  members  are  instruments  of  right  ousness  unto  God.  It  is  not  Paul's  habit  to 
speak  in  contempt  of  the  human  frame.  The  body  is,  nevertheless,  as  the  subject 
of  disease  and  infirmity,  as  sustained  by  toil  and  by  the  sweat  of  the  brow,  as 
appointed  to  die,  and  as  liable  to  the  motions  of  sin,  in  a  state  of  debasement.  It 
is  in  a  state  of  humiliation.  I.  The  change  here  puedicted.  1.  The  transforma- 
tion in  substance.  This  will  consist  in  the  change  of  the  present  natural  material, 
to  what  the  apostle  calls  "spiritual."  There  is  almost  a  contradiction  involved  in 
speaking  of  any  substance  as  being  spiritual,  but  we  see  very  many  changes  in  the 
substance  of  nature  which  are  very  like  a  change  from  that  which  is  grossly 
mxlerial,  to  that  which  is  refined  and  spiritual.  Take,  say,  a  lump  of  rough  ice. 
Apply  heat  to  it ;  and  the  change  effected  is  to  water.  The  material  is  nearer  the 
spiritual  as  water  than  it  was  as  ice.  Continue  to  apply  heat  to  this  melted  ice, 
and  yon  get  from  it  a  cloud  of  vapour  floating  in  the  air.  Here  is  something 
kindred  to  the  change  of  that  which  is  material  into  that  which  is  spiritual,  and, 
perhaps,  the  change  of  which  the  text  speaks  is  of  this  kind  or  of  this  class.  Or 
take,  say,  a  grain  of  wheat  and  drop  it  into  the  ground;  it  geriuiiates;  and 
presently  it  comes  up  to  a  beauteous  blade.  How  much  more  like  the  spiritual  is 
that  green  spiritual  blade,  than  the  hard,  cold,  apjarently  lifeless  thing  called  a 
eeed  which  you  cast  into  the  ground?  *'  Flesh  and  blood,"  we  are  told,  "  cannot 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorruption."  Of 
these  qualities  we  may  mention  strength.  How  little,  in  certain  aspects,  the  body 
can  bear !  Compared  with  the  spirits  of  some  men  how  weak  is  the  body.  God 
Himself  is  clothed  with  activity,  is  ceaselessly  active.  Those  who  are  redeemed  to 
God  by  Jesus  Christ  are  saved  from  morbid  inactivity.  There  is  as  strong  a  desire 
to  do,  as  there  is  to  be  and  to  enjoy.  Now,  to  have  a  body  that  will  endure  this 
doing,  because  constituted  of  a  material  that  will  never  wear,  and  that  will  never 
waste  !  Oh,  how  glorious  will  this  be  I  (1)  The  transformation,  so  far  as  the 
eubstance  is  concerned,  will  be  from  a  wastii;g  material  to  a  permanent  substance. 
We  all  know  that  our  bodies  are  now  constituted  on  the  principle  of  waste  and 
repair.  The  future  body  will  not  be  based  on  this  arrangement.  (2)  The  trans- 
formation will  be  from  a  corruptible  subsiance  to  an  incorruptible — from  a  substance 
exposed  to  many  ills,  to  a  substance  the  heir  only  to  vigour  and  to  pleasure.  2. 
The  change  in  the  form  may  be  gathered  from  Rev.  i.  13.  The  transformation  will 
be  from  the  mixture  of  comeliness  and  uncc^meliuess  to  perfect  purity — from 
heaviness  to  lightness  and  agility — from  dwarCshness  or  overgrowth  to  perfect 
stature — from  the  expression  which  sin  and  sorrow  give  to  the  human  countenance 
unto  the  expression  of  perfect  righteousness  and  of  fulness  of  joy.  Now  all  this  is 
involved  in  the  words,  "  fashioned  like  unto  His  glorious  body."  The  body  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  a  body  that  His  Father  thinks  worthy  of  Him.  It  is  a  body 
suited  to  His  dignity  as  King  of  kings,  to  the  glorious  city  over  which  He  reij/ns, 
and  which  harmonizes  with  all  that  is  sublime  and  beauteous  there.  And  when 
our  bodies  shall  be  fashioned  like  it  what  a  change  this  will  be  ;  like  that  between 
the  colours  on  a  painter's  palette,  and  the  picture  on  the  canvas,  yet  not  like 
because  infinitely  surpassing  it,  or  as  the  change  which  passes  over  the  earth,  when 
the  winter  is  gone  and  the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come.  II.  Jesub  Chkist 
WILL  BB  THE  Transformeb.  The  Redeemer  has  taken  us  men  entirely  in  hand  to 
do  everything  for  us.  We  want  a  saciitice,  a  righteous  standing  with  God,  regene- 
ration, teaching,  comfort  in  tribulation,  victory  in  battle,  and  Ee  provides  them 
all.  In  the  text  Christ  is  doing  our  part  of  His  work  for  us.  He  has  already 
transformed  our  spirits,  and  will  in  due  time  change  our  bodies.  The  tendency  of 
•this  working  is  to  subdue  everything  to  Kis  purpose,  so  that  all  things  may  hav« 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  m. 

this  one  issue — the  working  oat  of  a  complete  salvation.  The  text  exhibits — 1. 
The  resources  of  Christ.  He  literally  can  do  everything  for  you.  Inwardly  yoo 
are  His  workmanship,  for  you  are  newly-created  in  Him  ;  but  more  still  will  be 
done,  even  the  transformation.  Will  you  not,  then,  look  more  constantly  to 
Christ?  You  cannot  look  to  Him  too  much.  He  delights  in  your  cherishing  large 
expectations.  2.  The  completeness  of  redemption.  Christ  takes  the  body  into 
His  redeeming  hand,  He  changes  that,  and  He  makes  that  perfect.  Why  not  true* 
Him  to  perfect  all  that  concerneth  you  ?  3.  The  future  glory  of  th«  saints.  What 
is  there  involving  dignity,  or  pleasure,  or  joy,  that  is  not  provided  for  in  that 
Father's  house  to  which  the  Saviour  has  gone  that  He  may  prepare  a  place  for  us. 
4.  One  great  object  of  the  Christian's  hope.  The  existence  of  hope  in  our  nature 
is  an  illustration  of  the  goodness  of  God.  We  double  our  sorrows  by  our  fears. 
But  what  shall  we  say  of  the  effect  upon  our  joys  of  hope  ?  We  enjoy  some 
promised  or  coming  blessing,  over,  and  over,  and  over  again,  long  before  it  reaches 
our  hands.  Weary  in  this  pilgrimage  of  life,  whither  are  the  weary  steps  which 
you  are  taking  to-day  carrying  you  ?  Every  step  carries  you  nearer  home.  Every 
pain  tells  that  the  hour  is  near  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  shall  change  the 
body  of  your  humiliation."  Wait  a  little,  and  your  redemption  will  be  consum- 
mated, and  it  will  be  as  though  you  had  never  known  a  fallen  world  like  this,  and 
a  humbled  nature  like  this.  {S.  Martin.)  The  redemption  of  the  hodij  .—I.  The 
SUBJECT  OP  THE  PROCESS.  In  our  present  fallen  state  the  bodies,  even  of  the  saints, 
exhibit  marks  of  degradation,  and  furnish  the  causes  by  which  that  degrndation  ia 
manifested.  1.  Our  bodies,  as  they  were  created,  so  are  they  now  supported,  by 
nutriment  derived  from  the  earth  on  which  we  tread.  2.  They  are  liable  to  be 
painfully  affected  by  various  elements  and  agencies  of  physical  nature.  3.  They 
are  subject  to  manifold  injuries,  and  sufferings,  and  diseases.  4.  They  are  ulti- 
mately destined  to  return  to  the  dust  from  whence  they  were  taken.  5.  On  these 
accounts,  and  with  a  tacit  comparison  of  what  the  body  is  with  what  it  v/as,  with 
what  it  would  have  been,  if  sin  had  not  marred  it — and  with  what  it  shall  be — that 
the  apostle  terms  it  the  body  of  our  humiliation,  but  too  sadly  in  keeping  with  the 
fallen  and  degraded  soul,  till  renewed  by  the  grace  of  the  Almighty  Sidrit.  II.  The 
PROCESS.  1.  Not  an  absolute  change,  but  a  transformation  and  modifi:'ation.  This 
pre-supposes  and  implies  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  2.  The  model,  according 
to  which  this  chMuge  is  accomplished,  is  nothing  less  than  the  glorified  humanity 
of  Christ.  III.  The  agency.  Surely  He  who  made  that  which  whs  not  can  make 
that  which  has  been  to  be  again.  And,  therefore,  the  text  refers  us  to  the 
Omnipotence  of  God.  So  wondrous  a  change  is  only  explicable  on  the  hypothesis 
of  miracle.  IV.  The  lessons.  The  doctrine  is — 1.  Highly  illustrative  of  the  glory 
of  the  Divine  attributes.  (1)  How  glorious  will  be  that  wisdom,  which,  through 
all  the  mutations  of  time  shall  keep  its  eye  upon  those  integral  and  ultimate  parts 
of  the  human  body,  which  are  essential  to  its  identity,  through  all  their  various 
transitions,  and  which  will  collect  those  scattered  paiticles  and  re-combine  them 
into  a  beauteous  frame.  (2)  How  glorious  that  power  which  will  accomplish  that 
purpose.  (3)  How  glorious  that  justice  which  will  sooner  or  later  render  to  every 
man  in  his  body  according  to  what  he  hath  done.  (4)  How  glorious  that  mercy 
which  first  makes  men  saints  and  constitutes  them  citizens  of  heaven,  and  finally 
admits  them  to  the  city  of  which  they  are  made  free  by  grace.  2.  Calls  upon  us  to 
remember  and  recognize  with  devout  gratitude  our  special  obligation  to  the 
Christian  revelation,  which  brings  this  "  Ufe  "  and  this  "  immortality,"  not  only  of 
the  spirit  but  of  the  body,  "  to  light."  3.  Furnishes  a  powerful  motive  to  submiB- 
sion  when  we  are  called  upon  to  suffer  bodily  infirmity.  4.  Affords  ftn  antidote 
against  the  tormenting  fear  of  death  for  ourselves  in  ordinary  life,  and  in  the 
common  piocess  of  hmnan  dpcay  and  mortality,  as  well  as  a  strong  consolation  on 
the  occasion  of  the  removal  of  our  beloved  friends  from  time  to  eternity.  5.  Shows 
us  the  fitness  and  propriety  of  that  decent  and  reverential  respect,  which  in 
Christian  lands  is  ordinarily  paid  to  the  interment  even  of  the  mortal  remains  of 
departed  and  glorified  fiiends?  6.  Ought  to  convince  ns  of  the  necessity  of 
glorifying  God  with  our  bodies  as  well  as  our  spirits,  {Jabez  Bunting,  D.D.) 
The  resurrection  of  the  body  : — I.  Our  sinfol  condition.  Our  body  is  a  humble 
one.  1.  Because  of  its  sin,  which  brought  all  evil  into  the  world.  2.  Because  of 
the  immense  labour  that  is  necessary  to  snpj'ly  its  wants,  abridging  the  time  for 
intellectual  and  religious  pursuits,  and  that  only  to  feed  that  which  will  die.  8. 
As  a  hindrance  to  the  richest  feelings  of  which  the  heart  is  capable.  4.  As  doomed 
to  die,  and  to  inflict  the  keenest  pain  on  beloved  survivors.    II.  The  olobioui 


CHAP.  III.]  PniLIPPIANS.  S86 

BCENB  WHICH  IS  PECULiAB  TO  Christunity,  1.  Tlie  fact.  of  the  resurrection.  This 
identical  body  shall  rise.  We  cannot  say  in  what  that  identity  consists.  The  body 
often  changes  its  substance,  but  its  identity  abides.  If  only  a  similar  body  there 
were  no  resurrection,  only  a  new  creation.  We  depend,  however,  on  scriptural 
proof.  (1)  The  jesurrection  of  Christ.  "Now  is  Cliiist  risen  from  the  dead,  and 
become  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept."  (2)  The  extent  of  redemption,  which 
includes  the  body.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,"  Ac.  "  We  wait  for  the  adoption,  to 
wit  the  redemption  of  the  body."  Christ  cannot  lose  His  own.  (3)  Both  body  and 
eoul  have  sinned  or  wrought  righteousness,  hence  both  body  and  soul  must  be 
rewarded  or  punished.  (4)  The  application  of  the  term  "  sleep  "  to  death — which 
cannot  refer  to  the  soul ;  hence,  death  is  the  body  collecting  new  vigour  for  the 
morning  of  the  resurrection.  (5)  The  great  designation  of  Christ.  "  He  must 
reign  .  .  .  the  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death."  2.  At  the  resurrection 
there  shall  be  a  transformation  of  the  bodies  of  the  saints.  What  does  it  imply. 
(1)  That  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  Christ  dieth  no  more,  nor  His.  (2)  Con- 
formity to  the  body  of  Christ  means  no  more  deformity.  Deformity  in  the 
countenance  is  sonjotimes  the  effect  of  sin,  sometimes  of  accident :  but  there  will 
be  no  more  of  either.  (3)  Excessive  c^re,  necessary  for  the  support  of  the  body, 
shall  then  exist  no  more.  (4)  The  body  will  no  more  be  a  hindrance,  but  an 
assistant  to  the  operations  of  the  spirit.  III.  The  means  by  which  this  is  to  bb 
EFFECTED.  Doubtlcss  the  apostle  introduced  this  to  answer  all  objections.  The 
whole  is  a  miracle,  but  God  makes  miracles  as  great  every  day.  {R.  Watson.) 
The  body  as  it  is  and  as  it  is  to  fee: — I  The  body  as  it  is,  1.  In  regard  to  its 
dignity.  (1)  For  this  we  must  go  back  to  its  creation,  (a)  It  is  represented  as  a 
mass  of  unorganized  matttr.  (b)  Then  it  became  an  organized  body,  (c)  After 
that  breath  is  infused  into  it  and  it  became  an  animated  substance.  The  latter 
element  imparts  to  the  human  system  surpassing  worth.  (2)  Dignity  is  imparted 
to  the  body  in  the  process  of  redemption,  (a)  It  has  become  a  sanctified  thing 
through  the  incarnation.  Christ  could  touch  nothing  that  He  did  not  ennoble. 
(6)  It  has  a  dignity  arising  from  the  indwelhng  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  (c)  There  are 
direct  intimations  that  the  body  stands  in  a  certain  relation  to  mediatorial  designs 
and  purposes,  and  that  Christ  requires  it  for  the  advancement  of  His  kingdom. 
"  Glorify  God  in  your  body  ;  "  "  Present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice  ;  "  "  The  body 
is  for  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  for  the  body,"  For  most  of  its  operations  the  mind 
requires  the  assistance  of  the  body,  and  anatomists  say  that  the  very  structure  of 
our  frames  is  such  as  presupposes  their  being  used  for  the  carrying  out  of  mental 
objects  and  inventions.  But  ths  body  was  intended  of  God  to  be  the  handmaid  in 
higher  departments,  to  be  the  servant  of  the  renewed  will,  and  the  will  of  the  true 
disciple  moves  only  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  his  Master.  So  Christ  speaks 
through  His  servant's  mouth,  works  through  his  hands,  controls  his  eye  and  ear 
lest  they  run  after  vanity,  lifts  up  the  feet  on  their  mission  of  mercy  a»d  love.  (3) 
All  this  shows  why  the  apostle  insists  not  only  that  we  should  have  "  our  hearts 
sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience,"  but  also  that  we  should  have  ' '  our  bodies  washed 
with  pure  water,"  for  in  baptism  the  body  is  made  a  consecrated  thing.  2,  In 
regard  to  its  humiliation.  It  is  humbled — (1)  On  account  of  our  moral  degeneracy 
and  the  curse  entailed  thereby.  Every  pain,  disease,  mark  of  old  age,  grave, 
remind  us  of  this.  (2)  Because  it  is  the  seat  of  sin.  Hence  the  expression  '*  body 
ol  this  death,"  and  the  necessity  of  keeping  the  body  under.  (3)  In  consequence 
of  the  labour  and  pain  required  to  provide  for  its  wants,  (4)  In  that  it  is  a 
hindrance  to  the  soul's  powers.  II.  The  body  ab  it  is  to  be.  The  apostle  uses 
the  word  "  transfigure,"  perhaps,  with  a  designed  reference  to  the  glorious  splendours 
of  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  III.  Pbactical  bescltb.  1.  The  essential, 
inalienable  sanctity  of  the  body  as  a  member  of  Christ  and  a  temple  of  His  spirit. 
2.  The  folly  and  sin  of  undue  carefulness  in  regar.d  to  bodily  necessities.  3.  The 
Heedlessness  of  the  fear  of  death.  {D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The  power  of  Christ 
illustrated  by  the  resurrection: — The  whole  of  our  life  is  interwoven  with  the  life  of 
Christ.  His  first  coming  has  been  to  as  salvation.  We  live  still  because  He  lives. 
The  completion  of  our  salvation  in  the  deliverance  of  our  body  from  the  bondage 
of  corruption  is  wrapped  up  in  His  personal  resurrection  and  quickening  power. 
I.  The  maevel  which  is  to  bb  wbodoht  by  oub  Lobd  at  His  coming.  1.  He 
will  change  the  body  in  which  our  hamiliation  is  manifested  and  enclosed,  and  will 
transform  it  until  it  is  like  the  body  in  which  He  enjoys  and  reveals  His  glory. 
Three  times  human  eyes  have  seen  something  of  the  body  of  glory — in  the  face  of 
Moses,  after  his  forty  days'  communion ;  in  the  transfiguration  of  Christ ;  in  th« 


28«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

angel  face  of  Stephen.  2.  Turning  to  1  Cor.  xv.  we  learn — (1)  That  the  body  is 
corruptible,  subject  to  decay;  but  the  new  body  shall  be  incorruptible.  For  the 
immortal  spirit  it  shall  be  the  immortal  companion.  (2)  It  is  sown  in  'weakaesa- 
weak  to  perform  our  will,  weaker  still  to  perform  God'a,  weak  to  do  and  to  suffer; 
but  it  is  to  be  raised  in  power  and  be  made  like  unto  the  angels  who  excel  in 
strength.  (3)  It  is  a  natural  or  soulish  body — a  body  fit  for  the  soul,  for  the  lowest 
faculties  of  our  mental  nature ;  but  it  will  be  raised  a  spiritual  body,  adapted  to  the 
noblest  portion  of  our  nature,  suitable  for  the  highest  aspirations  of  perfected 
humanity.  (4)  It  is  sinful,  its  members  have  been  instruments  of  unrighteousness. 
It  ii  true  it  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  there  are  traces  about  it  of  the 
time  when  it  was  a  den  of  thieves.  But  it  awaits  the  time  when  it  shall  be  perfectly 
sinless.  (5)  Being  sinless  it  shall  be  painless.  Truly,  we  who  are  in  this  tabernacle 
<io  groan.  Up  yonder  the  rod  shall  no  longer  chasten,  the  faultiness  being  removed. 
(6)  The  spiritual  body  will  not  need  to  sleep,  for  it  will  serve  God  day  and  night  in  His 
temple  without  weariness.  (7)  It  will  be  perfect.  If  the  saints  have  lost  a  sense  or  a 
limb  or  are  halt  or  maimed  they  will  not  be  so  in  heaven,  for  as  to  body  and  soul 
"  they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God."  "We  shall  be  like  Him,"  therefore 
beautiful.  3.  The  miracle  will  be  amazing  if  you  view  it  as  occurring  to  those  who 
shall  be  alive  when  Christ  comes.  Eeflect,  however,  that  most  will  be  in  their 
graves,  and  of  many  all  trace  will  have  disappeared.  4.  By  what  possibility  then 
can  the  self-same  bodies  be  raispd  ?  I  answer,  it  needs  a  miracle  to  make  any  of 
these  dry  bonea  live,  and  a  miracle  being  granted  impossibility  vanishes.  He  who 
formed  each  atom  from  nothing  can  gather  each  particle  from  confusion.     IL  This 

POWER  WHICH  13  TO  RAISE    THE    DEAD    IS    RESIDENT    IN    ChRIST   AT   THIS  MOMENT.       It  is 

not  some  new  power  which  Christ  will  take  in  the  latter  days.  1.  This  power  is 
ascribed  to  Christ  as  the  Saviour,  and  it  is  precisely  in  that  capacity  that  we  need 
the  exercise  of  His  power  at  this  moment.  How  large,  then,  may  be  our  expectations 
for  tl  e  conversion  of  men.  Nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Lord.  If  as  Saviour  He  will 
wake  the  dead,  He  can  now  quicken  the  spiritually  dead.  Your  own  regeneration 
was  as  remarkable  an  instance  of  Divine  power  as  the  resurrection  will  be.  2. 
Opposition  may  be  expected  to  this  power,  but  that  resistance  will  be  overcome. 
There  will  be  no  resistance  to  the  resurrection,  but  to  the  spiritual  there  is  pre- 
jadioe,  hatred  of  Christ,  sinful  preferences,  <fec.  But  "He  is  able  to  subdue  all 
things  unto  Himself."  3.  The  text  includes  all  supposable  cases.  Not  here  and 
there  one,  but  all  things.  No  man  is  so  fallen  but  Jesus  can  save  him.  4.  Nothing 
is  said  concerning  the  unfitness  of  the  means.  The  text  obliterates  man  altogether. 
Jesus  can  and  will  do  it  all.  5.  The  ability  is  present  with  the  Saviour.  He  is  as 
strong  now  as  He  ever  will  be,  for  He  changes  not.  6.  The  text  suggests  a  parallel 
between  the  resurrection  and  the  subduing  of  all  things.  (1)  All  men  are  dead  in 
sin,  but  He  can  raise  them ;  many  corrupt  with  vice,  but  He  can  transform  them ; 
some  lost  to  hope  as  though  their  bodies  were  scattered  to  the  winds — but  He  who 
raises  the  dead  of  all  sorts  can  raise  sinners  of  all  sorts  by  the  self-same  power. 
(2)  As  the  dead  are  to  be  made  like  unto  Christ,  so  the  wicked  when  converted  are 
made  like  Him.  Brilliant  examples  of  virtue  shall  be  found  in  those  who  were 
terrible  instances  of  vice.  III.  The  work  which  we  desire  to  see  accomplished 
The  Saviour  subduing  souls,  not  to  our  way  of  thinking,  to  our  Church,  to  the 
honour  of  our  powers  of  persuasion,  but  "unto  Himself,"  1.  This  subjection  is 
eminently  desirable  since  it  consists  in  transformation.  2.  To  be  subjected  to  Christ 
is  to  be  fitted  for  heaven.  {<7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  raiter  of  the  dead  : — St.  Paul 
had  been  speaking  of  some  whose  interests  were  centred  in  earthly  things.  Of 
them  he  says  that  their  end  is  destruction,  &c.  And  in  contrast  with  this  way  of 
passing  life  he  describes  the  life  of  Christ's  true  servants.  Their  citizenship  is  in 
heaven.  They  are  in  the  position  of  emigrants  for  whom  the  friendly  government  of 
a  colony  should  provide,  before  their  arrival  at  their  destined  country,  a  home  and  a 
rest.  Heaven,  then,  as  being  already  their  country,  naturally  occupies  a  first  place 
in  their  thoughts ;  but  they  cannot  set  foot  in  it  until  a  great  change  has  passed 
over  them.  It  is  upon  this  change,  and  upon  the  person  of  Him  who  is  to  effect  it, 
that  their  eyes  are  naturally  and  constantly  fixed  while  the  present  scene  lasts.  I. 
The  nattjbe  of  the  change  referred  to.  1.  The  human  body  in  its  present  stage  of 
existence.  "  Our  body  of  humiliation."  The  human  frame  appeared  to  the  Greek 
artist  the  most  beautiful  thing  in  nature.  It  was  the  form  which  seemed  to  the 
Greeks  most  nearly  to  unveil  the  Divine  beauty  to  the  eye  of  sense.  How  impossible 
to  imagine  the  phrase  of  the  apostle  upon  the  lips  of  the  men  who  decorated  th« 
PartbenoQ  I    It  implies  that  the  man  who  ases  it  has  seen  deeper  and  higher  than 


CHAP,  ni.]  PHILIPPIANS.  287 

the  realm  of  senee.     The  Greek  knew  only  this  visible  world,  and  he  made  the  most 
of  it.     The  Hebrew  had  had  a  revelation  of  a  higlier  beauty  ;  and  when  men  have 
come  into  contact  with  the  Eternal,  they  sit  lightly  to  the  things  of  time.     The 
Greek  wrts  occupied  with  the  matchless  outline  of  the  human  form.     The  Hebrew 
could  not  forget  that  his  bodily  eye  rested  after  all  on  a  perishable  mass  of  animated 
clay  (Isa.  xl.  6-7 ;  Psa.  xc.  5-6 ;  Job  xiv.  1-2  ;  Jam.s  iv.  14),     2.  Not  that  the 
phrase  implies  any  one-sided  depreciation  of  the  body  such  as  we  meet  with  in 
heathen  ascetics.    Christianity  on  this  subject  keeps  strictly  a  middle  way  between 
two  opposite  errors.     On  the  one  hand,  the  body  has  seemed  to  some  to  be  man's 
all  in  all,  just  as  it  has  to  some  of  our  modern  materialists  ;  and  then  it  has  been 
supposed  that  life  either  ceased  altogether  with  death,  or  was,  after  death,  so 
attenuated  down  into  a  purely  sliad  nvy  existence  as  to  lose  all  the  importance 
which  belongs  to  reality.    And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  body  has  been  treated  as  a 
mere  incumbrance,  having  no  true  inherent  relation  to  the  complete  life  of  man — 
the  soul's  prison-house — the  degrading  fetter  which  binds  noble  spirits  down  to  the 
Boil  of  earth — the  mere  instrument  of  a  being  who  is  complete  without  it,  and  who 
is  never  free,  never  himself,  till  he  is  delivered  from  it.     And  the  effect,  the  moral 
effect,  of  the  first  of  these  opinions  is  certainly,  upon  the  whole,  to  encourage  un- 
bounded  sensual  indulgence,  and,  of  the  second,  to  encourage  suicide,  since,  if  the 
alliance  between  soul  and  body  is  so  disadvanta^reous  and  so  unnatural,  the  sooner 
it  is  put  an  end  to  the  better.    3.  Between  these  opposite  exaggerations  revelation 
holds  on  a  middle  course.     Death  is  the  disturbance  of  tliat  union  of  soul  and  body 
which  constitutes  man ;  and  this  irregular  interruption  of  the  true  life  of  man  ends 
at  the  resurrection,  when  man  re-enters  upon  the  normal  conditions  of  his  complete 
being.    4.  And  yet,  masterful  as  the  body  is,  it  is  not  the  governing  element  in 
human  nature.  Man  is  something  higher,  nobler,  than  the  animal  form  with  which 
he  is  so  intimately  identified.     Man  lives  on  the  frontier  of  two  vast  mysterious 
worlds — the  world  of  pure  spirit  and  the  world  of  animal  existt^nce.     Our  nature 
as  a  whole,  has  been  ennobled  as  well  as  invigorated  by  the  Son  of  God.     He  has 
taken  bodv  and  soul  alike,  and  joined  it  by  an  indissoluble  union  to  His  own  eternal 
person.     His  body  exists  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  thereby  it  confers  a  patent 
of  nobility  of  which  our  race  can  never  be  deprived.    And  yet,  while  this  life  lasts, 
how  great  is  the  interval  between  our  condition  and  His  !     How  unlike  to  ours  is 
the  body  of  glory  which  rose  from  the  tomb  in  its  indescribable  beauty,  in  its  f lee- 
dom  of  movement,  in  its  inaccessibility  to  decay,  in  its  spirituality  of  texture !     5. 
"His  glorious  body  I  "    Christ's  greatest  gift  is  yet  to  come.    We  shall  die  as  do 
the  creatures  around  us  ;  whether  by  violence  or  by  slow  decay.   But  He  will  gather 
ap  what  death  has  left,  and  will  transfigure  it  with  the  splendours  of  a  new  life 
(1  Cor.  XV.  42-44).     II.  The  ground  of  thb  orkat  Christian  expectatioh  or  a 
GLORIFIED  BODY  IN  A  FTiTCRE  I4FE.  How  shall  we  get  it  ?  "  According  to  the  working 
whereby  He  is  able  even  to  subdue  all  things  unto  Himself."  1.  Evervthing  of  course 
depends  on  that.     St.  Paul  had  no  doubt  that  Jesus  Christ,  crucified  some  thirty 
years  before,  was  living  and  reigning  and  had  actual  jurisdiction  over  all  things  in 
heaven  and  earth.     2.  It  seems  very  strange  to  many  that  the  elements  of  the 
human  frame  resolved  into  dust  many  centuries  ago  should  be  re-collected  and  en- 
dowed with  a  new  and  more  glorious  life.     What  has  become  of  the  particles ;  they 
have  passed  through  animals  and  vegetables,  and  by  this  time  are  scattered  in  a 
thousand  directions.     How  are  they  to  be  rescued  from  this  oft-repeated  appropri- 
ation.   It  is  an  astonishing  exertion  of  superhuman  power  which  is  under  oon- 
,  eideration,  but  it  is  not  more  than  any  reasonable  believer  in  God  would  assent  to 
npon  sufficient  evidence  of  His  declared  will.     No  man  can  believe  in  God,  without 
believing  in  an  act  of  power,  compared  with  which  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  a 
trivial  incident.  To  believe  in  God  is  to  believe  in  the  original  creation  of  all  things 
out  of  nothing,  and  creation  is,  after  all,  the  great  miracle.     And  the  man  who 
believes  it  will  not  question  God's  Word  merely  because  the  results  to  which  it  is 
pledged  are  what  we  call  miraculous.  By  the  very  act  of  believing  in  God  he  believes 
in  an  initial  miracle,  compared  with  which  all  that  can  possibly  follow  is  insignifi- 
eant.    HI.  Such  a  faith  as  this  in  the  resurrection  must  have  great  conse- 
QUBNCES.  1.  If  we  parted  company  with  the  body  at  death  for  good  and  all,  it  would 
not  matter  much  what  was  done  with  this  perishing  husk.    But  if  this  body  of 
humiliation  has  before  it  a  splendid  destiny,  then  we  shall  treat  it  in  life  and  in 
death  as  princes  are  treated  who  live  in  expectation  of  a  throne — with  all  the  care 
and  honour  that  its  prospects  demand.     And  hence,  after  death,  respect  for  the 
koman  body  is  a  natural  result  of  Christian  belief  in  the  resurrection.    Just  as  th« 


28S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  oo. 

body  ©f  the  Lord  Jesns  was  carefully  wrapped  in  fine  linen  and  laid  in  a  tomb  until 
the  mom  of  Easter,  bo,  ever  since,  the  bodies  of  departed  Christian  believers  have 
been  looked  upon  with  eyes  conveying  something  of  the  faith,  something  of  the  love, 
of  Nicodemus  and  Jc^epb.  We  know  that  they,  too,  will  rise.  We  know  that  we 
are  not  handling  a  lamp  of  decaying  matter  which  has  lost  its  interest  for  ever,  and 
which  will  presently  be  resolved  into  its  chemical  constituents  to  be  recombined  no 
more.  It  lies  before  us,  there  in  very  truth,  a  bor'y  of  humiliation.  But  one  day— • 
we  are  certain  of  it — it  is  to  be  fashioned  hke  the  glorious  body  of  the  ascended 
Son  of  God,  and  we  treat  it  accordingly.  2.  Much  more  important  is  our  duty  to 
the  body  during  life.  (1)  Guard  it.  You  who  are  well  off  do  what  you  can  for  the 
bo  lies  of  the  poor.  They,  too,  will  rise.  Let  us  all  keep  our  bodies  in  temperance 
and  chastity,  from  all  that  would  bar  entrance  to  the  presence  of  Christ.  Every 
man  that  hath  the  resurrection  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself  as  Christ  is  pure.  Do 
not  forget  how  this  sinful  body  may  even  here  be  made  clean  by  Christ's  body,  just 
as  the  soul  may  be  washed  with  His  most  precious  blood.  (2)  Train  it,  not  as  a 
mere  beautiful  human  frame,  but  as  a  future  partaker  in  those  scenes  of  transcen- 
dent joy  and  worship  which  are  described  in  the  Apocalypse.  "  Present  your  bodies," 
Bays  the  apostle,  "a  living  sacrifice" — in  works  certainly,  and  in  that  best  of  all  kinda 
of  work — in  worship.  Worship,  including  bodily  reverence,  as  well  as  spiritual 
communion,  is  a  direct  preparation  for  heaven.  The  body,  which  never  bends  here 
before  the  Being  of  beings,  is  not  likely  to  be  joined  to  a  spirit  that  has  really  learnt 
to  hold  communion  with  the  Holy  and  the  Infinite.  In  such  matters  as  this 
Christian  instinct  is  far  better  than  argument.  When  eternity  is  once  treated  by  a 
man  as  a  practical  reality,  he  is  likely  very  soon  to  make  up  his  mind  how  to  bear 
himself  among  the  thiugs  of  time.  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  body  of  our  humilia- 
tion : — Clothe  that  body  in  purple  and  fine  linen ;  array  it  in  royal  robes  ;  deck  it 
with  a  kingly  iiadem  ;  place  it  on  a  throne ;  give  it  the  sceptre  of  dominion ;  let 
nations  bow  at  his  feet— it  is  "  a  vile  body  :  "  and  Herod,  while  all  the  crowd  were 
calling  him  a  god,  felt  that  he  was  one  of  the  vilest  of  men.  Animate  that  body 
with  genius;  light  up  that  countenance  with  a  flow  of  lofty  spirit ;  let  an  intellectual 
nature  beam  out  from  those  eyes ;  let  deep  thought  work  beneath  that  brow,  and  a 
towering  spirit  move  those  muscles — still  the  body  is  "  vile;  "  and  in  the  midst  of 
the  astonishing  lucubrations  of  the  in-dwelling  spirit,  it  may  sink  into  the  loathe- 
Bomeness  of  corruption.  Nay,  what  is  better,  adorn  the  in-dwelling  spirit  with 
power ;  let  the  soul  be  redeemed  and  regenerated  and  sanctified  and  impressed  with 
God's  image  ;  let  a  soul  bom  for  glory  look  out  through  that  face  ;  let  that  body  be 
the  charge  of  angelic  guardians ;  let  that  body  be  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
let  that  body  be  sacred ;  let  that  body  be  associated  with  all  that  is  estimable  in  the 
human  character,  with  all  that  is  dear  and  tender  in  social  life ;  let  that  body 
attract  wherever  it  moves  —  it  is  "  a  vile  body,"  liable  to  fall  in  a  moment.  It  may 
be  seized  with  the  pangs  of  anguish,  and  in  an  instant  be  deprived  of  its  indwelling 
spirit  end  left  to  loathesomeness  and  corruption.  "  A  vile  body."  We  have  all  vile 
bodies — bodies  of  humiliation.  Pride  was  not  made  for  man — that  is  clear  :  pride 
will  not  do  for  man :  "  Man  that  is  bom  of  woman  is  of  few  days,  and  full  of 
trouble."  (T.  Lessey.)  God  made  nothing  vile: — When  Archbishop  Whately 
was  dying  his  ehaplain  read  to  him,  among  other  scriptures,  the  words  before  ns, 
but  with  his  wonted  clearness  the  great  man  interrupted  the  reader,  saying,  "  No ; 
the  body  of  our  humiliation,  not  our  vile  body  God  made  nothing  vile."  (Canon 
Miller.)  The  present  glory  and  humiliation  of  the  body  . — I!  you  take  man's  body 
in  some  of  its  aspects  it  is  a  noble  thing.  Sorely  there  are  marks  of  design  upon  it 
which  speak  of  its  Divine  origin.  Consider  the  marvellous  mechanism  of  respira- 
tion and  the  circulation  of  the  blood.  Trace  that  network  of  arteries  and  veins. 
Note  how  the  eye  and  the  hand  have  been  singled  out  as  leading  to  the  conclusion 
of  the  existence  of  a  God.  Mark  every  joint  and  every  limb.  Take  onr  physical 
nature  as  you  see  it  in  its  fair  beauty  in  slumbering  infancy.  Look  at  the  maiden 
in  the  first  blush  of  her  beauty  or  the  matron  in  that  beauty's  maturity,  and  then 
tell  me  if  the  body  is  not  a  beautiful  thing ;  whether  the  contemplation  of  its  oat- 
ward  aspect  or  its  interior  mechanism  be  not  a  study  for  oar  wonder  and  admiration. 
But  we  turn  to  the  other  side  and  hear  Paul  speaking  of  it  as  a  mere  tent,  which  is 
to  be  taken  down,  and  we  turn  to  the  last  passage  of  the  preacher  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, and  there  we  have  a  wondeiful  description  so  exquisite  with  its  imagery  and 
poetry  of  the  day,  "when  the  keepers  of  the  house  shall  tremble,"  <fec.,  which  sets 
forth  the  sinking  and  failing  powers  of  old  age.  But  if  we  want  to  see  the  humbling 
■ide  of  this  body  of  ours  we  must  listen  to  Abraham  whose  wife's  beauty  had  onc« 


OKA*.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  K$ 

been  bo  great.  She  WM  so  fair  a  woman  that  he  was  indnoed  to  lie  for  hor,  and  yet 
a  few  years  later  from  the  same  Abraham  oomes  the  piteoas  appeal,  "  Give  me  a 
burying  place  that  I  may  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight " — the  same  fair,  beloved 
Sarah.  And  in  order,  further,  that  we  may  see  that  this  body  is  indeed  a  body  of 
humiliation,  listen  to  those  words  which  go  home  to  our  hearts  as  we  read  them — 
"Lord,  by  this  time  he  stinketh,  for  he  hath  been  dead  four  days."  (Ibid.)  The 
resurrection  body  changed : — And  so  paper — that  article  bo  useful  in  human  life, 
that  rapository  of  all  the  arts  and  Eciencef?,  that  minister  of  all  governments,  that 
broker  in  all  trade  and  commerce,  that  second  memory  of  the  human  mmd,  that 
stable  pillar  of  an  immortal  name — takes  its  origin  from  vile  rags  I  The  rag-dealer 
trudges  on  foot  or  drives  his  cart  through  the  towns  and  villages,  and  his  arrival  is 
the  signal  for  searching  every  corner  and  gathering  every  old  and  useless  shred. 
These  he  takes  to  the  mill,  and  there  they  are  picked,  washed,  mashed,  shaped,  and 
sized — in  short,  formed  into  a  fabric  beautiful  enough  to  venture  unabashed  even 
into  the  presence  of  monarchs  and  princes.  This  reminds  me  of  the  resurrection  of 
my  mortal  body.  When  deserted  by  the  soul,  I  know  not  what  better  the  body  is 
than  a  worn  and  rejected  rag.  Accordingly,  it  is  buried  in  the  earth,  and  there 
gnawed  by  worms  and  reduced  to  dast  and  ashes.  If,  however,  man's  art  and  device 
can  produce  so  pure  and  white  a  fabric  as  paper  from  filthy  rag:?,  what  should 
hinder  God  by  His  mighty  power  to  raise  this  vile  body  of  mine  from  the  grave, 
and  refine  and  fashioa  it  like  onto  the  glorioas  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ? 
{Qotthold.} 


CHAPTER  IV. 


YnM.  1-8.  Th«refor»— my  brethren— dearly  beloved. — Notfoe — L  Th«  oiwbbai, 
EXHORTATION  (ver.  1).  1.  Bemark  the  kindness  with  which  the  apostle  insinuates 
himself  into  the  hearts  of  the  Philippians ;  addressing  them  as  "  brethren,"  an 
appellation  sacred  in  the  Church  as  signifying  that  holy  and  Divine  union  which 
links  its  members  in  one  common  bond.  And  as  though  the  word  insuiSciently 
expressed  his  affection,  he  adds  "  dearly  beloved,"  and  "longed  for,"  and  "my 
dearly  beloved."  This  was  not  mere  professionalism,  least  of  all  guilefulness. 
There  was  more  love  in  Paul's  heart  than  in  his  mouth,  and  of  this  he  had  given 
the  Philippians  proof.  Herein  is  a  model  for  ministers.  Love  is  the  only  weapon 
by  which  good  pastors  ensure  obedience.  Force  and  threats  will  only  make  hypo- 
crites. 2.  These  words  express  the  affection  of  the  apostle,  but  the  following  the 
piety  of  the  Philippians.  (1)  As  Paul  found  happiness  only  in  the  kingdom  of 
Jesus,  to  say  that  the  Philippians  were  his  joy  was  to  bear  witness  that  Jesus 
reigned  amongst  them.  Their  spiritual  condition  was  Paul's  comfort  in  sorrow. 
(2)  They  were  also  his  crown,  the  subject  of  his  honour  and  ornament,  as  we  say 
of  a  child  or  a  scholar  *'  he  does  honour  "  to  his  father  or  master.  Their  virtue 
proved  how  excellent  must  be  the  ministry  of  which  they  were  the  fruits.  And 
then  there  was  the  prospect  of  the  judgment,  when  the  Lord  would  reward  him 
with  these  Philippians  and  orown  him  therewith  as  with  a  precious  jewel  (chap.  ii. 
18;  2  Cor.  i.  14 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  19-20).  From  which  it  may  be  seen— (a)  That  a 
minister's  ambition  should  be  not  to  rule  and  to  abound  in  riches  and  worldly  pomp, 
but  rather  that  holiness  may  abound  in  their  flocks.  (6)  That  the  first  and  highest 
acknowledgment  that  flocks  owe  to  their  pastors  is  to  hold  them  in  honour.  3. 
Having  won  their  hearts  Paul  exhorts  them  to  steadfastness,  i.e.,  perseverance  in 
the  gospel  (Rom.  v.  2,  xiv.  4 ;  Gal.  v.  1).  •'  So  stand  "  may  be  regarded  as  referring 
— (1)  To  his  teaching  as  to  self-renunciation  and  justification  through  Christ ;  or— ^2) 
to  the  necessity  of  resisting  false  teachers  and  realizing  their  heavenly  citiaenship. 
n.  The  pabticulab  exhortation  to  Eoodias  and  Stnxtche.  These  persons  are 
nowhere  else  mentioned,  but  must  have  been  of  considera))le  influence  in  Philippi. 
They  had,  too,  been  fellow  labourers  with  the  apostle ;  but  most  probably  had  been 
led  astray  by  the  false  teachers  or  were  in  danger  of  it.  Mere  domestic  difference 
would  hardly  have  called  for  such  an  interference.  Note  then — 1.  That  the  most 
•xalted  and  excellent  among  behevers  are  not  always  exempt  from  the  trials  and 
i  nportunities  of  error.  As  snails  will  soil  the  brightest  flowers,  so  Satan  and  his 
ministers  will  endeavour  to  spread  the  filthiness  of  their  errors  and  extravagances 
in  the  purest  and  most  esteemed  minds.     Since  we  are  in  a  common  danger  let  us 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  it, 

be  on  our  guard.     2.  That  Christian  women,  should  apply  this  to  themselves.     14 
was  to  Eve  that  Satan  addressed  himself  in  Paradise  (1  Tim.  ii.  14).     The  success 
of  his  first  stratagem  is  Satan's  subsequent  encouragement  to  attack  the  same  sex 
(2  Tim.  iii.  6-7).     Christian  women,  as  he  has  more  especially  endeavoured  to 
seduce  you,  be  more  resolute  in  your  resistance  of  him.     3.  While  the  example  of 
Euodias  and  Syntyche  may  be  useful  to  women,  that  of  Paul  may  be  profitable  to 
pastors.    Ha  addresses  personally  those  who  have  need  of  reproof  (Acts  xx.  31), 
and  breaks  the  thread  of  a  discourse  addressed  to  the  Church  to  do  so.     But 
observe  his  gentleness.    How  far  beneath  this  model  is  the  pride  of  those  who 
boast  of  being  his  successors,  and  yet  think  it  too  great  a  condescension  to  speak  to 
women,  much  less  entreat  them.     4.  Our  perseverance  and  union  are  to  be  "  in 
the  Lord."     This  is  the  band  of  true  concord.     To  agree  out  of  this  is  conspiracy. 
III.  The  recommendation  of  these  women  to  the  care  of  otheks.     Who   the 
"  yokefellow "  was  it  is  diflacult   to  conjecture.     Some   say  Paul's  wife,  others 
Epaphroditus  (chap.  ii.  25),  or  the  hus'oand  of  Euodias  or  Syntyche.     Most  pro- 
bably he  was  a  person  of  some  merit  and  consideration  in  the  Church.    This  should 
teach  us — 1.  To  distinguish  between  those  who  err  ignorantly  or  negligently  and 
those  who  err  wilfully.     The  former  are  to  be  "  helped."     2.  These  women's  merits 
were  that  they  laboured  with  the  apostle  and  were  worthy  of  h*lp.     3.  This  help 
was  to  be  rendered  not  by  the  "  yokefellow  "  only,  but  by  the  whole  Church,  whose 
names  were  in  "  the  book  of  life  "  (Kev.  iii.  5,  xx.  12 ;  Dan.  xii.  1 ;  Luke  x.  20 ; 
Ezek.  xiii.  9).     {J.  Daille.)         Unity  of  service  at  Philippi : — I.Love.     "Beloved 
and  longed  for  "  is  not  a  mere  hurried  phrase,  or  a  gush  of  exuberant  feeling  that 
quickly  dries  up.     There  are  rivers  which  dip  down  and  flow  underground,  and 
then  come  out  again  into  the  light.     So  Paul's  love,  always  flowing  though  some- 
times unseen  here  sparkles  in  the  sunshine.     This  love  was  grounded — 1.  In  a 
common  discipleship  of  the  same  Master.     To  love  the  same  Saviour  opens  a  new 
fountain  of  love  in  our  hearts.    As  men  are  drawn  to  Christ,  they  are  drawn  closer 
to  each  other.     2.  In  the  fact  that  they  were  the  fruit  of  his  ministry.      They  were 
the  "  joy  "  of  his  soul-travail  and  the  "  crown  "  of  his  labour.     Of  aJl  bonds  this  is 
the  closest.     Are  ye  not  wise  enough  to  win  souls  and  be  a  joy  and  a  crown  to  one 
another  7    II.  Steadfastness.     To  do  the  right  thing  is  go< 'd,  but  to  stand  fast  in 
it  is  better.     1.  Men  get  hindered  and  move  away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel.     2. 
It  is  a  grand  thing  to  stand  fast  to  what  is  good  and  true  in  this  changeful  world 
(John  viii.   31 ;    Matt.   x.    22).      3.  Some  stand  fast  in    their  Churchmanship, 
Presbyterianism,  Methodism,  Independency  ;  but  we  may  stand  fast  in  these  out- 
side things  without  being  "  in  the  Lord."     That  is  the  only  standing  fast  worth 
anything.      Stand  fast  in   Him,  and   He  will  stand  fast  by  you.     IIL   Unity. 
Euodias  and  Syntyche  had  disagreed,  and  were  exhorted  to  be  of  the  same  "  mind." 
1.  Not  of  the  same  opinion,  Paul  knew  too  much  of  human  nature  to  expect 
that.    2.  The  word  has  reference  to  the  disposition  rather  than  to  the  intellect. 
There  is  a  way  of  holding  truth  in  love  to  those  who  differ  from  us,  and  in  the 
midst  of  differing  creeds  to  be  of  the  "  same  mind."     The  apostle  appeals  to  both 
in  the  same  way,  so  as  to  leave  no  suspicion  of  favouritism.     0  that  all  the  wrang- 
ling Euodiases  and  contentious  Syntyches  would  hear  this   admonition.      High 
Church  Euodias  and  Low  Chnrch  Syntyche,  Conforming  Syntyche  and  Noncon- 
forming Euodias  say  to  one  another  as  Abraham  did  to  Lot,  ' '  Let  there  be  no  strife 
between  me  and  thee."    3.  The  centre  and  circumference  of  this  unity  is  "  in  the 
Lord."    There  is  no  real  unity  in  creeds  or  formularies,  in  uniformity  of  discipline 
and  worship.    Every  true  Christian  is  united  to  Christ,  and  through  Him  each  to 
the  other.     The  world  waits  to  believe  until  the  disciples  of  Jesus  are  one.    How 
long  shall  we  keep  them  waiting  7    IV.  Mutual  service.     Ver.  3  is  full  of  work 
and  workers.     1.  There  was  the  "  true  yokefellow."    A  yoke  signifies  hard  work. 
Oxen  are  yoked  together  for  work,  and  this  person  must  have  worked  shoulder  to 
shoulder  with  PauL     2.  There  were  the  women  who  laboured  with  him  in  the 
gospel.    These  women  had  their  "  rights,"  glorious  rights  to  labour  in  the  gospeL 
Would  there  were  more  candidates  for  these  honours.     3.  Clement  was  no  fine 
gentleman  sitting  at  ease  in  Zion,  doing  nothing  himself  and  finding  fault  with 
those  who  did  work.     That  Church  at  Philippi  was  a  hive  of  bees.     No  wonder 
they  were  so  exemplary.     They  were  too  busy  to  be  mischievous.     Depend  upon  it 
God  helped  them  all.   4.  Think  of  the  honour  Paul  assigned  them — "  Whose  names 
are  in  the  book  of  life."     As  the  Jews  of  old  kept  a  register  of  the  living  in  their 
tribes  and  families  from  which  the  dead  were  blotted  out,  so  God  keeps  a  book  of 
Bis  living  ones  who  will  never  die.    Paul  knew  their  names  were  there  because  of 


CHAP.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  991 

their  character.  They  were  living  ones,  and  were  giving  the  best  possible  proof  of 
life,  viz.,  work.  Dead  people  do  not  work.  Love  and  help  one  another.  Are  our 
names  in  the  book  of  life?  If  not  read  Eev.  xx.  15.  5.  It  is  the  Lamb's  book  of 
life.  The  matter  can  only  be  dealt  with  at  the  Cross  of  Jesus.  (U.  Quick.) 
Christian  love : — I.  Its  soubcb.  1.  One  brotherhood.  2.  One  hope.  II.  Its 
INTENSITY — 1.  Of  affection.      2.  Of  desire.      3.  Of  esteem.     III.  Irs  expression. 

1.  Sincere  in  word  and  deed.  2.  It  seeks  to  promote — (1)  Steadfastness.  (2) 
Unity.  (3)  Mutual  consideration.  (4)  Help.  (J.  Lijth,  D.D.)  Deaxly  beloved 
and  longed  for,  my  Joy  and  crown,  so  stand  fast  In  the  Lord.— Observe— I.  How 
Christians  love  one  anotheb.  1.  With  sincere  affection.  2.  They  delight  in  each 
other's  company.  3.  They  rejoice  in  each  other's  happiness.  4.  They  promote 
each  other's  welfare.     II.  Why  they  love  one  anotukr,     1.  They  are  brethren. 

2.  In  the  Lord.  3.  They  anticipate  His  blessing.  (Ibid.)  Paul  an  example  of 
ministerial  solicitude  and  affection : — "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new 
creature."  How  singularly  is  this  illustrated  by  the  writer  of  these  words,  who 
only  a  few  years  before  was  "  breathing  out  threatenings  and  slaughters  against 
the  Christians."  I.  The  pukpobt  of  these  endeabinq  terms.  L  lirethreu,  not 
kinsmen  after  the  flesh,  but  spiritual  relations.     (1)  In  one  sense  he  was  their 

f)arent,  as  having  begotten  them  in  the  gospel ;  but  here  in  the  spirit  of  uuity  and 
ove  he  regards  them  as  brethren.  The  appropriateness  of  the  term  is  seen  in  the 
fact  that  believers  are  children  of  one  heavenly  Father,  born  of  one  Spirit,  are 
made  members  of  Christ  of  whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named, 
»re  heirs  of  the  same  inheritance.  (2)  Among  these  many  brethren  their  Saviour 
is  the  firstborn,  and  while  we  are  brought  together  as  brethren  in  Him  we  are 
amply  provided  for ;  chastisement  for  error,  counsel  for  guidance,  comfort  in 
sorrow,  supply  for  every  need.  (3)  Are  the  children  of  the  Most  High  members  of 
one  another ?  Then  there  ought  to  be  a  symjjathy  for  each  others  concerns,  an 
interest  in  each  other's  welfare,  a  holy  zeal  and  rivalry  in  their  Father's  service. 
2.  Dearly  beloved.  (1)  Love  of  the  brethren  is  a  distinguishing  mark  of  those  who 
have  passed  from  death  unto  life.  (2)  A  renewed  soul  who  loves  a  brother  because 
he  is  a  brother  will  love  all  the  brethren.  (3)  The  more  truly  we  love  the  Saviour 
the  more  truly  shall  we  love  one  another ;  just  as  rays  approach  nearer  themselves 
as  they  draw  near  their  common  centre.  3.  Longed  for.  If  we  love  Jesus  wa 
shall  long  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  His  brethren,  aud  yearn  for  communion  with 
them.  4.  My  joy.  Paul  had  many  sources  of  happiness  within  :  the  Philippians 
were  external  sources  of  gladness.  He  had  been  the  means  of  their  conversion. 
They  were  rejoicing,  and  sliould  he  not  share  their  joy  ?  They  were  trophies  of  a 
Saviour's  love,  and  that  Saviour  was  dear  to  him.  5.  My  crown  ;  and  with  good 
reason — "  Thou  ehalt  be  a  crown  of  glory  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  a  rojal 
diadem  in  the  hand  of  my  God."  He  trusted  that  they  would  own  Him  as  their 
spiritual  father  when  he  and  they  should  have  the  crown  of  righteousness.  Every 
rescued  soul  is  an  ornament  and  honour  to  its  lescuer.     II.  The  advice  was  eqdal 

IN    IMPOBTANCB  TO    THE    TENDERNESS  WITH  WHICH   IT  WAS    OFFERED  — tO  "  Stand    fast." 

1.  It  implies  that  they  had  been  admitted  to  that  faith,  hope,  holiness,  and 
blessedness  in  which  they  were  to  stand  fast.  2.  They  were  to  stnnd  fast  not  by 
thems^  Ives  but  in  His  might  whose  grace  is  made  perfect  in  weakness.  (1)  By  the 
indwelling  of  His  grace.  (2)  By  faith  in  His  perfect  work  (3)  In  love  to  Him 
who  loved  them.  3.  This  steadfastness  is  necessary  to  the  very  existence  of 
ministerial  comfort.  "  Now  we  live  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord.  4.  The  honour 
of  the  Lord  in  a  low  and  latitudinarian  age  demands  it.  5.  It  is  needful  for  the 
encouragement  of  weaker  and  younger  brethren.  {R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)  The 
bright  side  of  a  minister's  life  : — A  minister  has  many  discouragements,  disappoint- 
ments and  pains,  as  had  Paul,  but  taking  his  work  as  a  whole  there  is  no  profession 
that  will  bear  comparison  with  it  in  bringing  peace  and  joy.  There  is — L  The  joy 
OF  INTERESTING  WORK.  1.  His  studics  are  interesting — his  books  and  the  hterature 
of  human  hfe.  2.  So  is  his  practical  work.  His  heart  and  hand  are  ever  appealed 
to  for  sympathy  and  help.  There  are  the  bereaved  to  be  comforted,  fallen  to  be 
uplifted,  young  to  be  counselled,  and  a  thousand  charities  to  be  practised  in  the 
name  of  Christ.  A  man  entering  the  ministry  with  the  right  spirit  will  find  per- 
petual exhilaration  in  the  work.  To  enter  the  harvest-field  where  the  grain  is  ripe, 
and  the  sheaves  are  coming  towards  the  garner — that  is  hfe  for  the  body,  inspira- 
tion for  the  mind,  rapture  for  the  soul ;  and  if  there  is  an  occupation  that  yields 
Bach  mighty  satisfaction  in  all  the  world  I  have  never  heard  of  it.  IL  Thx  joy  or 
SLBVATED  ASSOCIATIONS.    If  a  man  be  tolerably  acceptable  in  his  work,  the  refine- 


9M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOS,  [cHA».  vr. 

ments  of  society  open  before  him.  He  is  invited  into  the  conclave  of  poets  and 
artists ;  he  is  surrounded  by  kindly  influences  ;  society  breathes  upon  him  its  most 
elevating  advantages.  Men  in  other  occupations  must  depend  on  their  wealth  and 
achievements  to  obtain  such  position.  By  reason  of  the  respect  of  men  for  the 
Christian  minister,  all  these  spheres  open  before  him.  In  addition  to  that,  and 
more  than  that,  his  constant  associates  aie  the  princes  of  God  and  the  heirs  of 
heaven.  III.  The  joy  of  seeing  souls  converted.  To  go  from  the  house  of  God 
some  Sabbath  and  feel  that  the  sermon  has  fallen  dead,  and  to  be  told  the  next  day 
by  some  man,  "  That  sermon  was  the  redemption  of  my  soul."  I  went  home  one 
Sabbath  almost  resolved  never  to  preach  again ;  the  gospel  seemed  to  have  no 
effect ;  but  before  one  week  had  passed  I  found  that  five  souls,  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  that  poor  sermon,  had  pressed  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  a  joy 
like  that  of  the  angels  of  God  over  a  repentiint  sinner  to  see  men  turning  their 
backs  on  the  world  to  follow  Christ.  IV.  The  jott  or  comfort  bearing.  To  see 
the  wounds  healing  ;  to  see  Christ  come  to  the  prow  of  the  vessel  and  silence  the 
Euroclydon ;  to  see  a  soul  rise  up  strengthened  and  comforted ;  to  look  over  an 
audience,  one-half  of  them  in  the  habiliments  of  mourning,  and  yet  feel  that  there 
is  power  in  that  gospel  to  silence  every  grief  and  soothe  every  wound  of  the  soul — 
ah  I  to  tell  the  broken-hearted  people  of  the  congregation  that  God  pities,  that 
God  feels,  that  God  loves,  that  God  sympathizes — that  is  the  joy  of  the  Christian 
ministry  I  V.  The  jot  of  the  Church's  sympathy.  If  the  minister  of  Christ  has 
been  at  all  faithful  in  his  work,  he  knows  that  there  are  those  who  are  willing  to 
sympathize  in  his  every  sorrow  and  in  every  success.  He  knows  that  he  has  their 
prayers  and  good  wishes.  If  he  be  sick,  he  knows  they  are  praying  for  his  recovery. 
If  dark  shadows  hover  over  his  household,  he  knows  there  are  those  who  are  pray- 
ing that  those  shadows  may  be  lifted.  {T.de  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  pastors 
joy  and  crown : — I.  The  pastor's  joy.  His  people's  conversion — proficiency — unity 
— zeal.  II.  His  crown.  Because  the  fruit  of  his  labour — the  proof  of  his  ministry 
— the  pledge  of  his  reward.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Standfast: — He  reminds  me 
of  the  death  of  that  British  hero,  Wolfe,  who  on  the  heights  of  Quebec  received 
a  mortal  wound.  It  was  just  at  the  moment  when  the  enemy  fled,  and  when  he 
knew  that  they  were  running,  a  smile  was  on  his  face,  and  he  cried,  "  Hold  me  up. 
Let  not  my  brave  soldiers  see  me  drop.  The  day  is  ours.  Oh,  do  keep  it  I  "  His 
sole  anxiety  was  to  make  the  victory  sure.  Thus  warriors  die,  and  thus  Paul  lived. 
His  very  soul  seems  to  cry,  "We  have  won  the  day.  Oh,  do  keep  it  1 "  O  my 
beloved  hearers,  I  believe  that  many  of  you  are  "  in  the  Lord,"  but  I  entreat  you 
to  "  stand  fast  in  the  Lord."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  secret  of  steadfastness : — 
Readers  of  Darwin  will  recall  the  description  he  gives  of  a  marine  plant  which 
rises  from  a  depth  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  feet,  and  floats 
on  the  surface  of  the  water  in  the  midst  of  the  great  breakers  of  the  Western 
Ocean.  The  stem  of  this  plant  is  less  than  an  inch  through;  yet  it  grows 
and  thrives  and  holds  its  own  against  the  fierce  smitings  and  pressures  of 
breakers  which  no  masses  of  rock,  however  hard,  could  long  withstand.  What 
is  the  secret  of  this  marvellous  resistance  and  endurance  ?  How  can  this  little 
slender  plant  face  the  fuiy  of  the  elements  so  successfully,  and,  in  spite  of 
storms  and  tempests,  keep  its  hold,  and  perpetuate  itself  from  century  to  century  ? 
The  answer  has  leaped  to  every  hp ;  it  reaches  down  into  the  still  depths,  where  it 
fixes  its  grasp,  after  the  fashion  of  the  instinct  that  has  been  put  into  it,  to  the 
naked  rocks  ;  and  no  commotion  of  the  upper  waters  can  shake  it  loose.  (S.  S, 
Chronicle.)  Steadfastness  in  the  Lord  is  enforced  by — I.  The  union  between 
Christ  and  His  people.  1.  Legal.  By  His  Father's  appointment  and  His  own 
love  Jesus  was  so  identified  with  those  He  came  to  save  as  to  be  treated  not  accord- 
ing to  His  own  deserts  but  theirs,  whilst  they  are  so  identified  with  Him  as  to  be 
treated  not  according  to  their  own  deserts  but  His.  This  legal  union  is  the  funda- 
mental blessing  of  the  Christian  salvation,  all  the  others  rest  upon  it,  2,  Spiritual. 
This  is  the  community  of  spiritual  life — of  thought,  feeling,  and  enjoyment— exist- 
ing between  Christ  and  believers.  This  is  produced  by  the  Holy  Spirit  through 
that  faith  by  which  we  enter  the  legal  relation,  or  are  justified — "  He  that  is 
joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  spirit."  3.  Manifest.  The  life  of  Christ  will  reveal 
itself  in  the  graces  which  characterized  Christ.  Stand  fast,  then  "in  the  Lord," 
because  you  are  in  the  Lord.  II.  Christian  steadfastness  is  further  enforced  by 
IHE  Chbistian'b  RESPONSiBiiiiTY.  "Therefore,"  ''so,"  point  back  to  the  previous 
Btatementa.  1.  The  Christian  is  responsible  for  his  privilege.  He  is  a  citizen 
of  heaven  and  must  maintain  the  dignity  of  his  citizenship,  and  stand  fast  in  it 


«ur.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  J93 

against  temptation  and  in  trial.  2.  The  Christian  is  responsible  for  his  hope. 
He  expects  a  Saviour  who  will  change  the  body  of  his  humiliation.  This  ex- 
pectation should  give  a  deep  sense  of  responsibility  for  our  treatment  of  our 
body  as  an  instrument  of  our  moral  nature.  Dare  we  use  the  lips,  which  are 
to  sing  Christ's  praises  day  and  night,  and  the  limbs  which  are  to  render  an* 
ceasing  service,  as  instruments  of  frivolity  or  vice  ?  "  Every  man  that  hath  this 
hope  in  him  purifieth  himself  as  He  is  pure."  Holiness  is  the  proper  fruit  of 
Christian  hope,  therefore  stand  fast.  III.  This  injunction  is  enforced  by  thk 
MOST  ENDEABiNO  EPITHETS.  1.  Brothcrhood  iu  Christ.  2.  Ardent  love.  3.  Joy 
and  glorying  in  previous  steadfastness.  4,  The  hope  of  rejoicing  in  it  in  the  days 
of  Christ.  {R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  Christian  steadfastness : — With  a  heavenly 
birthright  in  possession  and  a  glorious  resurrection  in  prospect,  the  apostle 
naturally  follows  with  this  exhortation.  1.  The  highest  relationship,  "  brethren  "; 
2.  In  the  highest  degree,  "beloved";  3.  Exciting  the  purest  emotion,  "longed 
for  "  ;  4.  Kesulting  in  the  most  glorious  issues,  "  my  joy  and  crowu,"  are  the 
motives  by  which  the  exhortation  is  enforced.  I.  Oub  position  as  Christians  is 
ONB  of  possible  DANGER.  1.  From  the  sceptical  tendeucyof  the  age.  2.  From  the 
habits  of  society.  The  tradesman  thinks  he  must  do  as  others  to  get  a  living. 
The  follies  of  fashion  are  followed  to  avoid  singularity.  3.  From  indifference  to 
the  public  ordinances  of  religion.  The  same  rule  applies  to  the  Christian  profes- 
sion as  to  any  other.  Men  do  not  prosper  who  neglect  their  calling.  4.  From 
want  of  close  attention  to  cultivation  of  personal  piety.  II.  The  only  position  of 
absolcte  safety  is  union  with  Christ.  1.  This  condition  is  one  of  perfect  alliance 
between  the  human  and  the  Divine.  Every  string  of  the  heart  is  in  accord  with 
the  life  of  Jesus.  Whether  we  think  of  the  wisdom  which  is  our  light,  the  comfort 
which  is  our  solace,  the  will  which  is  our  guide,  or  the  purity  which  is  our  sanoti- 
fication,  its  source  is  "  in  the  Lord."  2.  Those  who  stand  on  this  spiritual  eminence 
occupy  an  unshaken  position  among  men.  We  stand  fast  with  His  power  to  defend 
OB,  His  Spirit  to  uphold  us,  His  character  to  guide  us.  UI.  A  state  of  watchfoi.- 
NESS  IS  not  inconsistent  WITH  HAPPINESS.  The  oceau  is  large  enough  for  the 
biggest  ships,  but  it  is  skirted  with  rocks.  The  lighthouse  though  itself  a  warning 
is  the  mariner's  friend.  {Weekly  Pulpit.)  Christian  stability: — The  exhorta- 
tion, *•  stand  fast,"  occurs  six  times ;  and  still  more  frequently  the  duty  is  enjoined 
in  equivalent  terms.  1.  The  duty,  tlierefore,  is  of  primary  importance.  2.  There 
are  two  requisites — a  foundation  and  slrength.  A  man  may  have  his  foot  upon  a 
rock,  yet  if  he  be  weak  he  cannot  stand  ;  and  no  matter  how  strong  he  may  be,  if  bis 
feet  are  on  quicksand  he  cannot  stand.  I.  The  qbodnd  to  stand  dpon.  1,  The  stable 
foundations  are — (1)  Truth.  (2)  Eight  principles.  Truth  is  permanent,  error  is 
changeable,  and  therefore  in  every  department,  unless  a  man's  views  are  correct, 
there  is  no  security  for  his  stability.  But  as  our  subject  is  Christian  stability,  the 
truth  demanded  is  religious  truth,  the  truth  of  the  Bible.  2.  The  unstable  founda- 
tions. (1)  Traditions.  Those  of  the  Pharisees  have  passed  away ;  those  of  the 
Church  change  from  age  to  age.  (2)  Speculation  results  in  philosophy,  than  which 
nothing  is  more  unstable :  e.g.,  the  different  schools  of  Greek  philosophy,  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  of  our  own  day,  as  Bationahsm,  Pantheism,  Materialism,  Atheism,  and  now 
Pessimism.  (3)  Feeling.  Many  believe  in  God  :  they  believe  in  His  mercy,  but 
not  in  His  justice,  not  in  salvation  by  blood,  not  in  depravity,  Ac.  3.  The  only 
Btable  foundation  ia  the  Bible  ;  the  firm  conviction  that  it  is  God's  Word  and  that 
what  it  teaches  is  infallibly  true.  The  only  ground  of  this  faith,  which  is  stable, 
is  the  witness  of  the  Spirit.  True  experimental  religion  is  the  only  security  against 
error,  and  the  only  security  for  stability.  4.  Right  principles  are  necessary ;  not 
expediency,  self-interest,  or  the  interest  of  parties,  but  what  is  right.  II.  The 
6TKENGTH  BY  WHICH  TO  STAND.  There  is  much  difference  naturally  among  men, 
but  the  strength  needed  is  not  our  own.  It  is  of  the  Lord.  It  is  His  and  His  gift. 
If  we  trust  in  ourselves  we  must  fall.      (C  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  watchword  for 

to-day,  "  Stand  fast  "  (Text  in  connection  with  chap.  iii.  20,  81) : — Every  doctrine 
has  its  practical  bearing.  Hence  you  find  Paul  full  of  "  therefores" — conclusions 
drawn  ^m  statements  of  Divine  truth.  The  Lord  is  coming  to  glorify  His  people ; 
let  as  therefore  keep  our  posts  until  the  coming  of  the  great  Captain  shall  release 
the  sentinels.  I.  Paul  joyfully  perceived  that  his  beloved  convsbts  webe  in  THKia 
BIGHT  pulOB.  It  is  important  that  we  should  begin  well.  The  start  is  not  every- 
thing, but  it  is  a  great  deal.  "  Well  begun  is  half  done."  We  must  enter  the  strait 
gate,  and  begin  at  the  right  point.  Many  slips  and  falls  are  due  to  not  being  right 
at  first,  a  flaw  in  the  foundation  will  make  a  crack  in  the  superstractare.      1.  Ih« 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ir, 

only  position  in  which  we  can  begin  aright  is  "  in  the  Lord."  It  is  a  very  good 
thing  to  be  in  the  Church,  but  if  you  are  not  in  the  Lord  first  you  are  out  of  place. 
What  is  it  to  be  "  in  the  Lord  "  ?  (1)  When  we  fly  to  Him  by  repentance  and  faith 
and  make  Him  our  refuge  and  hiding-place.  Are  you  in  Him  ?  You  can  have  no 
better  hiding-place ;  in  fact,  there  is  no  other.  (2)  When  we  are  in  Christ  as  to  our 
daily  life ;  whatever  we  eat  or  drink,  doing  all  in  His  Name.  (3)  By  a  real  vital 
union.  In  Him  and  in  Him  only  is  our  spiritual  life  sustained,  just  as  it  can  only 
be  received  from  Him.  (4)  Christ  has  become  our  element,  vital  and  all-surround- 
ing. We  are  in  Christ  as  birds  are  in  the  air  which  buoys  them  up  and  enables 
them  to  fly ;  as  fish  are  in  the  sea.  2.  Because  they  were  in  Christ,  therefore — (1) 
They  were  Paul's  brethren.  Many  of  them  were  Gentiles  whom  Paul  would  once 
have  regarded  as  dogs.  But  now  as  Christ  was  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren, 
neither  was  Paul.  (2)  They  were  his  dearly  beloved,  the  repitition  of  which  makes 
it  mean  "  My  doubly  dear  ones."  (3)  His  longed-for — his  most  desired  ones.  He 
first  desired  to  see  them  converted,  then  baptized,  then  exhibiting  all  the  graces. 
He  desired  their  company  because  they  were  in  Christ.  (4)  His  joy  and  crown 
Paul  had  been  the  means  of  their  salvation.  The  minister's  highest  joy  is  that 
the  brands  snatched  by  him  from  the  burning  are  now  living  to  the  praise  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  II.  Paul  longed  that  they  shocld  keep  theib  place.  The  begin- 
ning of  religion  is  not  the  whole  of  it.  Precious  are  the  feelings  which  attend 
conversion,  but  dream  not  that  repentance,  faith,  &c.,  are  for  a  season  and  then  all 
is  done  with.  In  conversion  you  have  started  in  the  race,  and  you  must  run  to  the 
end.  In  your  confession  of  Christ  you  have  carried  your  tools  into  the  vineyard, 
but  the  day's  work  now  begins.  "  He  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved." 
The  difference  between  the  spurious  and  the  real  Christian  is  this  staying  power. 
1.  Stand  fast  doctrinally.  In  this  age  all  the  ships  are  pulling  up  their  anchors, 
drifting  with  the  tide,  driven  about  with  every  wind.  It  is  your  wisdom  to  put  down 
these  aachors.  We  will  hearken  to  no  teaching  but  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  2. 
Practically  stand  fast.  The  barriers  are  broken  down ;  they  would  amalgamate 
Church  and  world  :  yes,  even  Church  and  stage,  and  combine  God  and  devil  in  one 
service.  "  Come  out  from  among  them,"  &c.  Strive  together  to  maintain  the 
purity  of  Christ's  disciples.  3.  Stand  fast  experimentally.  Pray  that  your  inward 
experience  may  be  close  adhesion  to  your  Master.  4  Stand  fast  in  the  Lord  without 
wishing  for  another  trust.  What  way  of  salvation  do  we  seek  but  that  of  grace  ? 
what  security  but  the  precious  blood  ?  5.  Stand  fast  without  wavering.  Permit 
no  doubt  to  worry  you.  6.  Stand  fast  without  wandering.  Keep  close  to  the 
example  and  spirit  of  your  Master,  and  having  done  all  to  stand.  7.  Stand  fast 
without  wearying.  You  are  tired ;  take  a  little  rest  and  brush  up  again.  You  cry, 
I  cannot  see  results.  Wait  for  them.  Practice  perseverance.  8.  Stand  fast  with- 
out warping.  Timber,  when  it  is  rather  green,  is  apt  to  go  this  way  or  that.  The 
spiritual  weather  is  very  bad  just  now  for  green  wood :  it  is  one  day  damp  with 
superstition,  and  another  parched  with  scepticism.  III.  Paul  urged  the  best 
MOTIVES  FOB  THEiB  STANDING  FAST.  1.  Becauso  of  youT  citizeuship  (chap.  iii.  20). 
Men  ought  to  behave  themselves  according  to  their  citizenship,  and  not  dishonour 
their  city.  2.  Because  of  their  outlook.  Jesus  is  coming  not  as  judge  or  destroyer, 
but  as  Saviour.  Now  if  we  look  for  Him  we  must  stand  fast.  There  must  be  no 
going  into  sin,  no  forsaking  the  fellowship  of  the  Church,  leaving  the  truth,  playing 
fast  and  loose  with  godliness,  running  with  tbe  hare  and  hunting  with  the  hounds 
Let  us  so  stand  fast  that  when  Jesus  comes  we  may  be  able  to  say  "  Welcome."  3. 
Because  of  their  expectation  of  being  transformed  into  the  likeness  of  Ciirist's 
glorious  body.  4.  Because  of  our  resources.  "  According  to  the  power,"  &o. 
{C.  H.  Spuraeon.)  Christian  love  : — When  a  rosebud  is  formed,  if  the  soil  is  soft, 
and  the  sky  is  genial,  it  is  not  long  before  it  bursts,  for  the  life  within  is  so  abundant 
that  it  can  no  longer  contain  it  all,  but  in  blossomed  brightness  and  swimming 
fragrance  it  must  needs  let  forth  its  joy,  and  gladden  all  the  air.  And  ii,  when  thus 
ripe,  it  refused  to  expand,  it  would  quickly  rot  at  heart  and  die.  And  Christian 
love  is  just  piety  with  its  petals  fully  spread,  developing  itself  and  making  it  a 
happier  world.  The  religion  which  fancies  that  it  loves  God,  when  it  never  evinces 
love  for  its  brother,  is  not  piety,  but  a  poor  mildewed  theology,  a  dogma  with  a 
worm  at  the  heart.  (Jamet  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Love  the  guage  of  manhood : — I  do 
not  distinguish  men  merely  by  the  difference  of  their  thought  power,  still  less  by 
the  difference  of  their  executive  power,  still  less  by  their  external  differences,  as  when 
one  is  high,  another  low  ;  one  rich,  another  poor ;  one  wise,  another  unwise.  The 
point  where  true  manhood  resides  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  love.    In  the  copious- 


CHA».  IV  J  PHIUPPIANS.  K5 

ness,  the  variety,  the  endlessness,  the  sweetness,  and  the  parity  of  the  element  of 
love,  yoa  shall  find  the  measure  that  God  applies,  discriminating  between  one 
another.  (H.  W.  Beeeher.)  The  professional  minister: — The  man  who  has 
adopted  the  Church  as  a  profession  as  oth^ r  men  adopt  the  army,  the  navy,  or  the 
law,  and  goes  through  the  routine  of  its  duties  with  the  coldness  of  a  mere  official 
— filled  by  him  the  pulpit  seems  filled  by  the  ghostly  form  of  a  skeleton,  that  in  its 
cold  and  bony  fingers  holds  an  unlit  lamp.  (T.  Quthrie,  D.D.)  Ministerial 
qualifications  : — The  minister  is  to  be  a  live  man,  a  real  man,  a  true  man,  a  simple 
man,  great  in  his  love,  great  in  his  life,  great  in  his  work,  great  in  his  simplicity, 
great  in  his  gentleness.  (J.  Hall,  D.D.)  Learn  in  Christ  how  possible  it  is  to 
be  strong  and  mild  to  blend  in  fullest  harmony  the  perfection  of  all  that  is  noble, 
lofty,  generous  in  the  soldier's  ardour  of  heroic  devotion ;  and  of  all  that  is  calm, 
etill,  compassionate,  tender  in  the  priest  waiting  before  God  and  mediation  among 
men.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  minister's  joy  and  crotcn  : — The  "crown"  here 
is  not  the  diadem  of  royalty,  but  the  garland  of  victory.  He  has  in  his  mind,  as 
so  often,  the  famous  public  athletic  games  of  the  Greeks — which  the  diligent 
training,  and  the  strenuous  and  persevering  exertion,  needed  to  gain  the  "  corrup- 
tible c'own "  of  laurel,  and  the  intensity  of  joy  felt  by  the  victors,  rendered  an 
admirable  illustration  of  the  Christian  life,  whether  as  regards  the  spiritual  progress 
of  tb )  believer  himself  or  his  work  for  the  salvation  of  others.  The  apostle  believed 
that  he  would  be  enabled  to  "  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  he  had  not  ixm  in 
vain,"  as  a  minister  of  Christ.  In  Nero's  prison,  aged,  worn  with  trouble,  manacled, 
uncertain  whether  he  might  not  soon  be  led  forth  to  death  by  the  executioner,  he  knew 
himself  to  be  yet  in  truth,  as  a  successful  minister  of  Christ,  a  conqueror  wreathed 
•vith  amaranth.  The  emperor  in  his  palace  was,  in  heart,  weary  and  wretched. 
The  prisoner  was  restful  and  happy.  The  glitter  of  the  emperor's  power  and 
grandeur  would  very  soon  pass  away  and  be  as  a  dream.  His  prisoner  was  already 
invested  with  a  glory  which,  recognized  in  this  world  only  by  those  whose  eyes  had 
been  opened  to  discern  spiritual  things,  should  yet  be  manifested  before  the 
universe — for  "  they  that  be  wi?e  shall  shine,"  &<s.  {R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.) 
Stand  fast  : — Stand  fast,  like  the  British  squares  in  the  olden  times.  When  fierce 
assaults  were  made  upon  them  every  man  seemed  transformed  to  rock.  We  might 
have  wandered  from  the  ranks  a  little  in  more  peaceful  times,  to  look  after  the 
fascinating  flowers  which  grow  on  every  side  of  our  march ;  but,  now  we  know  that  the 
enemy  surrounds  us,  we  keep  strictly  to  the  line  of  march,  and  tolerate  no  roaming. 
The  watchword  of  the  host  of  God  just  now  is — "  Stand  fast  I  "  Hold  you  to  the 
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.  I  like  that  spirit  of  Bayard,  that  knight  without 
fear  and  without  reproach.  In  his  last  battle  his  spine  was  broken,  and  be  said  to 
those  around  him,  "  Place  me  up  against  a  tree  so  that  I  may  sit  up  and  die  with 
my  face  to  the  enemy."  Yes,  if  our  backs  were  broken,  if  we  could  no  more  bear 
the  shield  or  use  the  sword,  it  would  be  incumbent  upon  us  as  citizens  of  the  New 
Jesusalem,  to  die  with  our  faces  towards  the  enemy.  I  like  that  speech  of  Welling- 
ton, who  was  so  calm  amid  the  roar  of  Waterloo,  when  an  officer  sent  word,  "  Tell 
the  Commander-in-Chief  that  he  must  move  me ;  I  cannot  hold  my  position  any 
longer,  my  numbers  are  so  thinned."  *'  Tell  him,"  said  the  great  general,  "he 
must  hold  his  place.  Every  Englishman  to-day  must  die  where  he  stands,  or  else 
win  the  victory."  The  officer  read  the  command  to  stand,  and  he  did  stand  till 
the  trumpet  sounded  victory.  And  so  it  is  now.  My  brethren,  we  must  die  where 
we  are  rather  than  yield  to  the  enemy.  If  Jeans  tarries  we  must  not  desert  our 
posts.  Wellington  knew  that  th«  heads  of  the  Prussian  columns  would  soon  be 
visible,  coming  in  to  ensure  the  victory  ;  and  so  by  faith  we  can  perceive  the  legions 
of  our  Lord  approaching :  in  serried  ranks  His  angels  fly  through  the  opening 
heaven.  The  air  is  teeming  with  them.  I  hear  their  silver  trumpets.  Behold, 
He  cometb  with  clouds  1  When  He  eometh  He  will  abundantly  recompense  all  who 
stood  fast  amid  the  rage  of  battle.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  2.  I  beseech  Euodlas  and  I  beseech  Syntyche  that  they  be  of  the  same  mind 
in  the  Lord. — Eitodias  and  Syntyche,  or  the  troublesome  tongue : — 1.  Two  women 
connected  with  the  Church  were  at  enmity.  They  were  estimable  women  and  active 
in  Christian  work ;  but  they  differed  and  scandal  ensued.  2.  The  cause  of  the 
quarrel  may  have  been — (1)  Some  important  point  of  doctrine;  (2)  A  trifling 
difference  of  opinion ;  or  (3)  Some  slight  act  or  careless  word.  The  feminine 
nature  was  sensitive,  offence  was  taken,  disadvantageous  things  were  whispered  of 
each  other  ;  then  it  became  a  topic  of  common  conversation,  and  two  parties  may 


29«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  1.2haj,  it. 

have  been  formed.  3.  The  apostle  in  his  eSorta  to  check  the  evil  wisely  abstained 
from  entering  into  detail.  He  knew  there  were  two  sides  to  the  question.  Henca 
he  entreats  them  to  give  np  their  dissention  of  their  own  accord  from  the  love  of 
Christ.  Eaodias  *•  fragrance"  and  Syntyche  "a  talker,"  may  have  settled  their 
differences ;  but  they  stand  as  permanent  examples  of  the  pettiness  of  mere  bicker- 
ing, and  of  the  danger  that  arises  from  uncontrolled  ase  of  the  tongue.  A  man  or 
woman  can  make  the  whole  of  life  burdensome  to  some  one  else  by  a  malicious 
tongue,  I.  Take  a  few  instances  of  the  habm  done.  1.  Socially.  A  woman 
may  drop  a  word  concerning  a  neighbour,  hinting  that  she  is  extravagant  or  self- 
iudulgent,  and  she  is  noticed,  shunned,  chilled,  embittered.  Or  a  workman  can 
drop  a  hint  concerning  another  whom  he  dislikes,  suggesting  that  he  "  does  not 
know  his  own,"  or  that  he  is  liable  to  get  into  much  company,  or  that  his  work  is 
flimsy,  and  the  man  may  lose  his  place  and  his  family  their  bread.  2.  Domestically. 
Some  little  article  is  misplaced  on  a  Sabbath  morning,  a  sharp  word  is  uttered  and 
the  family  made  miserable  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  3.  Ecclesiastically.  A  trifling 
act  or  word  has  often  split  up  a  Church,  and  a  slanderous  hint  whispered  about 
a  minister's  doctrine  or  practice  which  ruins  him  for  life.  4.  Religiously, 
Perhaps  the  venom  of  slander  is  more  intense  here  than  anywhere.  Under  the 
appearance  of  anxiety  for  truth  and  justice  what  injury  is  often  done  !  5.  Inter- 
nationally. A  little  thing  can  kindle  a  blaze  among  the  nations.  A  few  words  by 
a  wanton  statesman  may  start  it.  Europe  is  full  of  explosive  materials  and  the 
peaceable  ever  live  in  danger  of  having  to  suffer.     II.  Thebb  is  a  period  when  a 

QUAKBEL    CAN    BE    CHECKED,    BOX    WHEN    ONCE    BTABTED   WHO   CAN    SAV     WHERE    IT   WILL 

END?  In  its  earliest  stages  a  fire  can  be  quenched  with  a  pint  of  water,  but  when 
it  begins  to  spread  who  can  set  bounds  to  it  ?  The  sin  of  slander  is  like  a  maddened 
horse  or  a  dry  forest  on  fire.  A  thoughtless  scandalous  word  goes  from  one  to 
another  gathering  as  it  goes.  A  snowball  rolled  in  snow  gathers  garbage  and  what- 
ever may  come  in  its  way,  becoming  solid  by  rolling  and  lasting  long  after  all  other 
snow  has  melted.  So  when  a  gossiping  tongue  drops  a  hint  a  whole  area  of  peace 
may  be  destroyed  for  long.  III.  Those  who  are  so  keen  to  detect  evil  in  othebs 
ARE  often  THEMSELVES  THE  MOST  GUILTY.  The  most  Worthy  are  often  selected  as 
the  objects  of  bitter  attacks,  just  as  we  find  the  best  frnit  is  that  at  which  the  birds 
have  been  pecking.  IV,  Most  blander  wodld  be  starved  if  no  one  fed  it,  but 
BO  many  are  glad  to  hear  of  evil.  There  are  those  who  seem  to  have  no  other 
business  bat  to  pick  up  and  spread  evil  reports.  They  rejoice  in  a  piece  of  scandal 
as  a  raven  does  in  carrion.  V.  The  cabeless  tonoue  often  punishes  the  pos- 
BESBOB.  The  tongue  may  run  away  with  us  like  a  mad  horse,  and  who  shall  drag 
us  from  the  dangerous  precipice  (Prov.  xiii,  13  ;  xxi.  23).  (F.  Hastingt.)  Private 
differenceg: — I.   Often  occur.     II.    Occasion  much  evil.      III.    Eequibe  gentle 

INTEBFEBENCE.      IV.   AbE    BEST    SETTLED   IN    THE   LOBD.       (J.   Lyth,   D.D.)  LoVt 

and  ttrife : — I.  The  transcendent  importance  of  the  grace  of  love.  1.  It  is 
the  evidence  of  our  Btanding  fast  in  the  Lord.  God  is  love,  and  to  be  without  love 
is  to  be  without  God.  Serious  differences  among  Christians  display  the  lack  of  it. 
Where  Christians  are  unanimous  the  Church  is  invincible ;  where  divided  the 
Church  falls  to  pieces.  2.  The  law  of  love  was  laid  down  by  Christ — "  A  new 
commandment  give  I  unto  you,"  <S:c.  Complete  attainment  is  perhaps  scarcely 
attainable  here  ;  but  a  drop  may  be  kindred  to  the  ocean.  3.  To  the  cultivation 
of  this  love  the  greatest  importance  is  attached.  ••  We  know  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,"  &c.  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  My  disciples," 
Ao.  The  observers  of  the  early  disciples  said,  "How  they  love  one  another."  II. 
The  dissention  between  Euodub  and  Syntyche.  1.  Its  ground  is  not  mentioned. 
Perhaps  it  was  something  altogether  frivolous,  for  even  mature  Christians  act 
sometimes  like  silly  children.  Perhaps,  however,  seeing  that  they  were  both  active 
they  differed  about  the  best  modes  of  carrying  on  the  Lord's  work.  When  people 
are  doing  a  great  work  enthusiasm  often  engenders  impatience,  and  words  are 
ottered  that  are  regretted  afterwards.  2.  Whatever  the  ground  of  their  dissention, 
their  wise  friend  Paul  had  only  one  advice  to  give,  •'  Be  of  the  same  mind."  This 
did  not  mean  "  have  the  same  views."  "  In  the  Lord  "  suggests  remembrance  of 
the  important  matters  on  which  they  were  agreed — how  utterly  unsuited  quarrelling 
or  coldness  was  for  those  who  were  united  "  in  the  Lord."  Christians  should  agree 
to  diiler,  and  follow  out  their  separate  views  lovingly  and  with  mutual  helpfulness. 
As  there  were  at  first  Peter,  John,  Thomas,  Martha,  Mary,  so  there  ever  will  be. 
Let  lis  imitate  the  tolerance  and  CHtholicity  of  Christ.  3.  Mark  the  mode  of  Paol'l 
interference.     (1)  He  makes  not  the  slightest  reference  to  the  cause  of  dissention. 


mur.  IV.]  PHILIPPIANS,  W7 

In  inti*k  cases  reconciliation  is  more  likely  to  be  effected  by  letting  the  matter 
Bleep  and  die.  (2)  From  his  apostleship  and  relations  with  the  Philippians  he 
might  have  been  "  much  bold  in  Christ  to  enjoin  them  that  which  was  convenient ; 
yet  for  love's  sake  he  rather  beseeches  them."  (3)  He  beseeches  them  separately, 
and  treats  them  with  exactly  the  same  consideration.  (4)  He  calls  in  a  common 
friend  to  help  them  to  a  reconciliation  (ver.  3),  a  thoroughly  discreet  friend  of 
both  could  do  not  a  little  to  smooth  the  way.  This  is  a  form  of  delicate  work, 
and  is  often  shunned ;  yet  none  more  likely  to  produce  blessed  results.  (R. 
Johnstone,  LL.B.)  Seek  peace: — I.  The  peace-bbeakers — 1.  Have  still   their 

pepresentatives.  2,  Destroy  their  own  happiness.  3.  Disturb  the  Church.  II. 
The  peackmakers.  1.  Christ,  who  gives  us  one  mind  and  heart.  2.  His  servants, 
who  gently  beseech  and  point  to  Him.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Disagreements  of 
Christian-1 : — Johnny  Morton,  a  keen  burgher,  and  Andrew  Gebbie,  a  decided  anti- 
burgher  in  the  great  Presbyterian  controversy,  both  lived  in  the  same  house  at 
opposite  ends ;  and  it  was  the  Itai  gain  that  each  should  keep  his  own  side  of  the  house 
well  thatched.  When  the  dispute  about  the  principle  of  their  kirks  grew  hot,  and 
especially  the  offensive  cLiuse  of  the  oath,  the  two  neighbours  ceased  to  speak 
to  each  other.  But  one  day  they  happened  to  be  on  the  roof  at  the  same  time, 
each  repairing  the  slope  on  his  own  side,  and  when  they  had  worked  up  to  the 
top,  there  they  were  face  to  face.  They  couldn't  flee :  so  at  last  Andrew  took  oil 
his  cap,  and,  scratching  his  head,  said,  "  Johnny,  you  and  me  I  think  ha'e  been 
very  foolish  to  dispute  as  we  ha'e  done,  concerning  Christ's  will  about  our  kirks, 
until  we  had  clean  forgot  His  will  about  ourselves ;  and  so  we  ha'e  fought  sae 
bitterly  for  what  we  ca'  the  truth,  that  it  has  ended  in  spite.  Whatever's  wrang, 
it's  perfectly  certain  that  it  never  can  be  right  to  be  uncivil,  unneighbourly, 
unkind,  and  in  fac'  tae  hate  ano  anither.  Na,  na!  that's  the  deevil's  wark  and  no 
God's.  Noo  it  strikes  me,  that  may  be  it's  wi'  the  kirk  as  wi'  this  house — ye're 
working  on  a'e  side  and  me  on  t'ither ;  but  if  we  only  do  our  work  weel  we  will 
meet  at  the  tap  at  last.  Gie's  your  han',  auld  neighbour  1 "  And  so  they  shook 
hands,  and  were  the  best  of  friends  ever  after.  {E.  Foster.)  What  is  needed  by 
dissentients  : — What  two  men  want  whose  ill-temper  and  mutual  distrust  are  daily 
becoming  worse  is  a  common  friend  whose  hearty  affection  for  both  will  utterly 
drive  away  their  evil  thoughts.  There  are  people  of  that  kind.  Their  face,  their 
tone,  their  gestures,  are  all  "conductors"  of  a  mysterious  but  most  Divine  force 
that  is  not  to  be  resisted.  (R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  The  method  of  peacemaking  : — 
One  8ure  way  of  peacemaking  is  to  let  the  fire  of  contention  alone.  Neither  fan  it, 
nor  stir  it,  nor  add  fuel  to  it,  but  let  it  go  out  of  itself.  (C.  H.  Spnrgeon.) 
Union  in  Christ : — The  union  of  Christians  to  Christ  their  common  Head,  and 
the  means  of  the  influence  which  they  derive  from  Hira,  one  to  another,  may  be 
illustrated  by  the  loadstone  ;  it  not  only  attracts  the  particles  of  iron  to  itseli  by 
the  magnetic  virtue,  it  unites  them  one  among  another.  (iJ.  Cecil,  M.A.)  Strife 
among  Christianx  ruinous  : — Quickly  following  upon  the  battle  of  Chancellorsville, 
a  cry  was  raised  by  the  rearguard  of  Stuart's  cavalry,  "  Tlie  enemy  is  upon  us." 
Shots  began  to  be  fired  in  all  directions,  and  the  whole  army  was  soon  in  a  panio 
of  fright.  The  First  and  Third  Virginia  Regiments,  no  longer  recognizing  each 
other,  charged  upon  each  other  mutually :  while  Stuart's  mounted  men,  generally  so 
brave  and  so  steadfast,  no  longer  obeyed  the  orders  of  their  officers,  and  galloped 
off  in  great  disorder.  When  at  last  quiet  was  restored,  the  number  of  wounded  wai 
seen  to  be  sadly  numerous.  {M.  O.  Mackay.)  Strife  among  Christians  often 
the  result  of  mistake : — During  one  of  the  wars  between  the  English  and  French, 
two  war-vessels  met  in  fearful  encounter.  It  was  too  dark  to  distinguish  friends 
from  foes ;  but  each  supposed  itseli  engaged  with  the  common  enemy.  When 
the  darkness  lifted,  both  ships  were  teen  flying  the  English  flag.  The/  lalated 
each  other,  and  grieved  sadly  over  their  disastrous  mistake. 

Ver.  8.  I  Intreat  thee  also,  true  yokefelloTT. — The  faithful  eolUagne  .'<— I.  Hn 
CHABAOTEB.  II.  HiB  woBE.  III.  His  BEWABO.  (/.  Lyth,  D.D)  Lay  help:— 
We  have  here  a  lively  picture  of  lay  help  as  it  was  in  apostolic  times.  Of  all  tb» 
actors  in  this  busy  scene  there  is  no  proof  that  any  one  was  "  ordained."  Who  St» 
Paul's  "  yokefellow  "  was  we  know  not.  If  Epaphroditus,  there  is  nothing  to  show 
that  he  was  in  the  ministry  as  we  understand  the  term.  As  "  apostle"  (chap.  ii.  25) 
of  the  Philippians  he  was  simply  a  messenger,  and  the  other  expressions  in  the 
same  verse  do  not  imply  office.  There  is  nothing  to  prove  that  Clement  was  the 
illustrious  bishop  of  Borne.    He  is  only  mentioned  as  one  of  Paul's  many  "  fellow 


898  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAf.  n, 

labourers,"  whom  it  is  quite  gratuitous  to  confound  with  the  bishops  and  deacons. 
2.  But  the  clear  words  of  the  text  carry  us  a  step  further.  Women  are  among  the 
fellow  toilers.  And  here,  too,  it  would  be  a  narrowing  idea  to  suppose  that  they 
were  deaconesses.  It  is  simply  as  fellow  Christians  that  they  are  fellow  labourers. 
8.  There  the  particular  help  invited  has  nothing  clerical  in  its  nature.  The 
original  bids  these  friends  join  in  the  reconciliation  of  Euodia  and  Syntyche.  The 
persons  addiessed,  the  persons  described,  and  the  help  asked  for,  enforce  to  one  duty, 
that  of  laymen  consecrating  themselves  to  Divine  service.  The  idea  that  all  the 
oflSces  of  piety  and  charity  are  to  be  heaped  upon  the  clergy;  that  it  is  unnecessary 
and  presumptuous  for  an  unordained  man  to  put  his  hand  to  the  plough  of 
Christian  labour,  is  so  directly  opposed  to  every  principle  of  the  gospel,  that  it 
would  have  received  St.  Paul's  heaviest  condemnation.  Christ  has  called  us  to  a 
coi-porate  life,  a  body  having  many  members,  each  with  its  office,  and  all  equally 
helpful  and  essential  (Eom.  xii.  4-5).  I.  Note  the  advantages  op  association  in 
STIMULATING,  DIRECTING,  AK0  ECONOMIZING  LABOUR.  Multitudes  of  men  and  women 
stand  idle  in  the  Church's  market-place  and  give  as  their  excuse,  "  No  man  hath 
hired  us."  That  excuse  never,  indeed,  had  any  truth  in  it.  Creation,  Eedemption, 
Conscience,  the  Gospel,  the  Spirit,  are  enough  to  silence  the  plea  that  God  hath  no 
call  for  us.  But  how  many  converted  souls  have  asked  themselves,  a  minister,  or  a 
friend,  "What  shall  I  do  ?  "  without  meeting  with  a  response.  The  principle  of 
association  meets  this  want,  giving  assurance  of  sympathy,  direction,  and  help. 
Loneliness  in  feeling  is  melancholy,  in  working  paralysis.  United  effort  prevents 
superfluous  labour  upon  a  spot  already  cultivated,  and  directs  it  on  neglected 
spheres.  II.  The  variety  of  agencies  offered  to  the  Christian  workman.  There 
is  nothing  too  small  to  be  reckoned,  too  eecular  to  be  consecrated  when  it  has  to  do 
with  Christ's  Church,  whether  instruction  of  the  young  in  Sunday  or  night-school, 
visiting  the  sick,  joining  the  choir,  or  placing  the  worshippers  in  order  and  quiet- 
ness, or  bringing  the  Church  by  decorations  into  unison  with  the  joys  of  Christmas, 
Easter,  &c.  All  are  not  bidden  to  rush  into  one  kind  of  service,  but  each  is  asked 
to  do  what  is  most  suitable  to  his  gifts  heartily  as  unto  Christ.  III.  The  reward 
or  THE  WORKER  (Prov.  xi.  25).  There  is  a  reaction  of  good,  not  least,  upon  him.  It 
is  a  great  tLing  to  see  for  ourselves  things  of  which  we  have  idly  read  in  books ; 
want  and  sorrow  so  light  in  the  abstract,  so  heavy  in  the  enduring;  to  be  shamed 
out  of  our  luxury,  loitering,  listless,  dreamy,  self-indulgent  intellectualism ;  to  be 
enabled  to  see  that  in  our  little  part  of  our  day  we  are  decidedly  on  the  side  of 
good,  which  is  the  side  of  Christ.  (Dean  Vavghan.)  Women  in  the  Church: — 
I.  Their  ministers.  1.  Prayer.  2.  Sympathy.  3.  Private  effort.  4.  Words  of 
love.  II.  Theib  claims.  1.  To  encouragement.  2,  To  protection.  3.  To  help. 
(J,  Lyth,  D.D.)  Help  the  women : — The  service  of  women  to  the  cause  of  truth 
has  been  invaluable  in  all  ages.  The  old  Testament  is  full  of  it,  and  the  Christian 
Church  has  always  been  blest  with  it.  Women  ministered  to  the  wants  of  the 
Saviour,  succoured  the  apostles,  and  contributed  to  the  spread  of  the  gospel  in 
many  ways.  I.  Women  nobli  engaged.  By  both  nature  and  position,  woman  has 
facilities  and  opportuuit'es  for  work  that  men  do  not  possess.  1.  In  the  work  of 
teaching.  In  the  home,  in  the  Sunday  School,  and  in  the  mission-hall,  the  services 
of  pious  women  are  coKspicuous.  Timothy  was  instructed  in  the  Scriptures  by 
his  mother  and  his  grandmother.  2.  In  works  of  benevolence.  Charity  is  almost 
natural  to  woman.  We  read  of  Dorcas,  who  made  garments  for  the  poor.  3.  In 
visiting  the  sick.  Woman  is  the  best  visitor  in  the  sick-room.  Her  tenderness, 
and  often  her  helpfulness,  prove  her  fitness  for  the  work.  The  life  of  Elizabeth 
Fry  could  not  be  written  of  any  man.  Nightingale,  the  songstress  of  mercy 
at  the  head  of  the  ambulance  corps,  was  another,  whose  ministry  helped 
forward  the  gospel.  4.  Mission  woik  abroad.  The  missionary's  wife  is  the 
mother  of  the  tribe  among  whom  she  labours.  In  many  parts  of  the  world — for 
example,  in  India— the  seclusion  to  which  all  women  are  banished  precludes  access 
to  them  except  by  woman.  II.  Such  work  must  be  encouraged.  Like  all 
workers,  they  need  the  heart  and  hand  of  the  Church  to  support  them.  1.  Help 
them  by  sympathy  and  tenderness.  Let  them  see  that  they  share  our  full  con- 
fidence. A  word  of  cheer  is  helpful  to  those  toilers.  St.  Paul  was  careful  to 
greet  them,  and  to  acknowledge  their  services.  2.  Supply  them  with  the  means  of 
doing  good.  They  often  want  relief  for  the  poor,  which  they  cannot  supply.  3. 
Pray  for  them.  4.  Bear  your  share  of  their  burden.  Take  upon  you  the  heaviest 
end  of  the  work.  (Weekly  Ftdpit.)  Fellow  labourers: — 1.  Sympathy  was  a 
strong  characteristic  of  St.  Paul,  an  instance  of  which  is  his  fondness  for  the  word 


.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  J99 

"fellowship."  Fellow-heirs,  citizens,  prisoners,  servants,  Boldiers,  workers, 
labourers.  2.  Fellowship  was  the  first  necessity  of  our  creation.  "  It  is  not  good 
for  man  to  be  alone."  It  is  s  high  part  of  our  religion,  a  preparation  for  the 
society,  unity,  and  choruses  of  heaven.  3.  Fellowship  of  labour  stands  in 
immediate  connection  with  •*  the  book  of  life."  Are  we  then  enrolled  together 
as  labourers  ?  Will  none  be  there  who  have  not  laboured  ?  Is  *'  the  communion 
of  saints  "  a  communion  of  workers  for  God  ?  Will  it  be  so  for  ever  in  heaven  ? 
What  an  argument  for  the  united  labours  in  the  Church  ?  L  The  whole  genius 
OF  Christianity  is  work.  "Go  work."  "  Work  while  it  is  day."  "Let  men  see 
your  good  works."  The  end  of  all  work  is  the  extension  of  the  Kingdom  of  God. 
Christianity,  unlike  otlitr  religions,  is  essentially  propagating.  It  is,  therefore, 
compared  to  that  which  emits  and  cannot  but  emit;  leaveu,  light.  The  test  of  all 
at  the  last  day  will  be  what  we  have  done.  II.  This  is  k  du'ferent  conception  of 
BELiQio.N  to  th.\t  WHICH  IS  HELD  BY  MANY  RKLioious  PEOPLE.  There  is  a  Spiritual  as 
well  as  a  natural  selfishness.  It  is  not  seliish  to  pray  the  prayers  which  are  all 
for  ourselves,  to  take  an  interest  only  in  our  own  souls,  to  knuw  the  greatest  of  all 
happiness,  and  not  impart  it  to  others?  III.  In  this  work  ministers  and  people 
MUST  co-operate.  All  the  commands  to  extend  the  kingdom  of  Christ  are  binding 
on  clergy  and  laity  alike.  IV.  Toe  safety  op  any  one  who  is  not  a  labourer  in 
THE  vineyard  is  VERY  DOUBTFUL.  The  Condition  of  going  into  the  vineyard  was  a 
wish  to  work.  None  are  to  simply  go  into  the  grounds,  to  pick  flowers,  to  eat  the 
fruit,  but  all  to  work.     And  the  reckoning  at  the  end  was  of  the  work  done.     V. 

It  18  A   WONDEBtUL   ARRANGEMENT    THAT    GoD  HAS  COMMITTED  THIS  WORK   TO  SINNERS, 

not  to  the  heavenly  hosts.  But  our  weakness  is  our  strength ;  our  sinfulness  is  our 
argument.     For  who  can  sympathize  with  sinners  but  a  sinner  ?     VI.  No  one  can 

UNDERTAKE  THIS  WORK  WHO  HAS  NOT  A  LOVE    FOB  ChRIST   AND  8INNEK3.      {J,    Vaughun, 

M.A.)  The  book  of  life : — I.  Its  author.  II.  Its  publication  :  at  the  last  day. 
III.  Itb  contents:  the  names  of  the  faithful.  IV.  Its  effect:  hfe.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Names  in  the  Book: — There  is  pathos  in  a  human  name,  for  it  always 
represents  a  life,  an  experience,  a  history,  a  destiny.  Sometimes  in  the  Scriptures 
"  names"  mean  souls  (Acts  i.  15).  I.  Some  observations.  1.  It  is  a  great  thing 
to  have  a  name  in  the  New  Testament.  Think  of  the  roll-call  in  the  sixteenth  of 
Romans  and  the  eleventh  of  Hebrews  I  2.  It  is  a  great  thing  now  to  have  a  name 
in  the  family  Bible;  for  that  generally  signifies  Christian  training  and  parental 
prayers.  3.  It  is  a  great  tbing  to  have  a  name  upon  the  pages  of  a  Church 
register.  How  affecting  are  these  old  manuals,  with  their  lists  of  pious  men  and 
women,  many  of  whom  have  passed  into  tbe  skies  I  4.  It  is  the  greatest  thing  of 
all  to  have  a  name  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life.  Beyond  all  fame  (Matt.  xi.  11). 
Beyond  all  power  (Luke  x.  20).  II.  Some  questions.  1.  In  how  many  books  is 
your  name  written  now?  2.  How  can  a  human  name  be  written  securely  in  the 
Lamb's  Book  of  Life?  8.  To  backsliders  :  Are  you  going  to  return  to  your  name, 
or  do  you  want  it  to  come  back  to  you?  4.  To  Christian  workers:  How  many 
names  have  you  helped  to  write  in  the  Book  of  Life  ?  5.  Is  there  any  cheer  in 
thinking  how  our  names  will  sound  when  the  "  books  are  opened  "  in  the  white 
light  of  the  throne?  (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Names: — I.  Whose  names  abb 
WBiTTEN  THESE  t  Those  of — 1.  The  faithful  labourer.  2.  The  patient  sufferer.  3. 
The  victorious  combatant.  4.  The  despised  saint.  II.  How  ibet  came  to  bb 
WBITTEN  thebk?  1.  Through  grace.  2.  By  the  blood  of  Jesus.  8.  The  Spirit 
of  God.  III.  Why  abe  they  written  there?  Because — 1.  Citizens  of  heaven. 
2.  Heirs  of  the  promises.  8.  Precious  in  the  sight  of  God.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Christian  co-operation  : — Union  is  power.  The  most  attenuated  thread  when 
sufficiently  multiplied  will  ft-rm  the  strongest  cable.  A  single  drop  of  water  is  a 
powerless  thing,  but  an  infinite  number  of  drops  united  by  the  force  of  attraction 
will  form  a  stream,  and  many  streams  combined  will  form  a  river,  till  rivers  pour 
their  water  into  the  mighty  ocean,  whose  proud  waves,  defying  the  power  of  man, 
none  can  stay  but  He  who  formed  them.  And  thus  for  as,  which,  acting  singly, 
are  utterly  impotent,  are,  when  acting  in  combination,  resistless.  {O.  H.  Slater.) 
Woman's  work: — A  woman  may  labour  with  an  apostle  in  the  gospel,  without 
departing  one  step  from  the  propriety  of  her  position,  or  the  delicacy  of  her 
character ;  she  can  work  a  good  work  for  Christ,  and  for  the  performance  or  neglect 
of  it  she  must  hereafter  give  account.  By  example,  by  influence,  by  meek  en- 
durance, by  active  sympathy,  she  can  do  aU  that  a  man  cannot  do,  in  the  society 
of  her  equals,  and  in  the  homes  of  the  suffering.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  Wwnan's 
work : — Women,  you  can  give  and  serve  and  pray.    You  can  give  self -denyingly. 


300  THS  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  I9 

serve  lovingly,  pray  conqueringly.  The  best  examples  of  self-denying  liberality, 
of  loving  service,  of  oonquering  prayer  are  recorded  of  woman.  It  was  no  great 
gift,  service,  prayer.  The  gift  was  a  widow's  mite.  The  service  was  the  anointing 
of  Jesus  with  a  box  of  ointment.  The  prayer  was  a  mother's  prayer  for  a  daughter 
possessed  with  a  deviL  But  the  gift  and  service  and  prayer  were  in  self-denial  and 
love  and  faith.  And  so  in  the  sight  of  God  they  were  of  great  price.  {H.  Johnson.) 
Unknown  workers : — Who  has  not  heard  of  John  Wesley?  Yet  how  few  are 
acquainted  with  Peter  Bohler,  who  brought  him  to  Christ.  (J.  F.  B.  Tinling, 
B.A.)  One  woman's  work  : — An  American  paper  tells  the  story  of  a  woman  who, 
because  tired  of  a  Ufe  mainly  employed  in  eating  and  dressing,  resolved  to  devote 
herself  and  her  money  to  a  nobler  purpose.  At  the  close  of  the  war  she  went  to 
a  sandy  island  off  the  Atlantic  coast,  where  about  two  hundred  persons  were  living 
in  poverty  and  ignorance,  and  established  her  home  there,  with  the  intention  of 
benefiting  the  inbabitauts.  She  began  with  teaching,  by  example,  how  to  cultivate 
the  land  lucratively,  and  was  soon  imitated.  Next  she  estabUshed  a  school  for  the 
children,  and  afterwards  a  church.  Now  the  island  is  a  thriving  region,  with  an 
industrious  and  moral  population,  the  change  being  the  work  of  one  woman. 
{Christian  Age.)  The  early  Christian  women  : — '*  What  women  these  Christians 
have  1  "  exclaimed  the  heathen  rhetorician  Libanius,  on  learning  about  Anthusa, 
the  mother  of  John  Chrysostom,  the  famous  "  golden-mouthed  "  preacher  of  the 
gospel  at  Constantinople  in  the  fourth  century.  Anthusa,  at  the  early  age  of 
twenty,  lost  her  husband,  and  thenceforward  devoted  herself  wholly  to  the 
education  of  her  son,  refusing  all  ofiers  of  further  marriage.  Her  intelligence  and 
piety  moulded  the  boy's  character,  and  shaped  the  destiny  of  the  man,  who,  in  hia 
subsequent  position  of  eminence,  never  forgot  what  he  owed  to  maternal  influence. 
Hence,  it  would  be  do  overstrained  assertion  to  say  that  we  owe  those  rich  homiliea 
of  Chrysostom,  of  which  interpreters  of  Scripture  still  make  great  use,  to  the  mind 
and  heart  of  Anthusa.    (W.  Baxendale.) 

Vers.  4-8.  Rejoice  In  the  Lord  alway. — Three  elements  of  Christian  eliaracter  : — 
I.  The  keynote  of  the  Epistle  and  of  Christian  life  is  cheerfulness.  The  repetition 
here,  and  the  enforcement  of  the  same  in  other  Epistles  shows  us  the  importance 
of  this  duty.  1,  If  the  Philippians  neglected  or  undervalued  this  duty  they  have 
many  imitators  to-day.  Some  professing  Christians  set  their  faces  against  it,  and 
make  the  best  of  days  the  saddest,  the  best  of  books  the  most  forbidding,  and  the 
best  of  services  the  least  inviting.  Those  who  take  their  cue  from  these,  come  to 
regard  sourness  and  sanctity  as  synomymous.  This  is  a  gross  and  dishonouring 
perversion  of  that  wbich  was  heralded  with  notes  of  joy.  2.  It  is  "  in  the  Lord" 
that  we  are  to  be  glad.  Christ  has  brought  the  materials  out  of  which  gladness  is 
made — new  and  Lappier  thoughts,  power,  pui-poses,  hoy-es.  3.  The  advantages  are 
manifold.  (1)  To  ourselves,  (a)  Cheerfulness  brings  us  within  the  charmed  circle 
of  the  noblest  and  brightest  spirits.  Without  this  we  can  never  enter  into  the 
rapture  of  psalmists  and  prophets,  (b)  The  perception  of  cheerfulness  nourishes 
the  very  cheerfulness  it  Bees.  The  sun  not  only  reveals  and  makes  the  beauty  and 
fragrance  of  the  flower.  (2)  To  others.  Nothing  breaks  down  the  opposition  of 
men  to  Christianity  like  a  bright  cheering  life.  It  more  faithfully  represents  the 
true  spirit  of  Christianity.  Christ  came  to  make  the  world  glad,  and  only  as  we 
rejoice  in  and  with  Him  are  we  true  to  Him.  4.  We  are  to  rejoice  alway,  which 
teaches  us  to  cultivate  the  habit  of  looking  on  the  bright  side,  of  always  being  on 
the  look  oot  for  compensation,  of  considering  the  purposes  of  diflSculties,  the 
lessons  of  adversity,  the  Sender  of  sorrows.  II.  Foebeabance.  1.  In  what  does 
this  show  itself.  (1)  In  waiving  our  just  rights;  not  pushing  them  always  to  the 
utmost.  (2)  In  checking  ourselves  under  provocation  :  "  not  returning  evil  for 
evi),  but  contrariwise."  This  needs  large  Christian  grace.  2.  The  powerful 
motive :  "  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  (1)  As  seeing  all.  (2)  As  soon  coming  to  end  our 
vexations.  III.  Devoot  trustfulness.  1.  In  arguing  this  (ver.  7),  the  apostle 
does  not  teach  us  to  have  no  care  and  let  everything  drift,  but  not  to  be  full  of  care. 
Whilst  we  are  ordering  our  affairs  with  discretion,  we  must  not  be  over  anxious.  The 
Lord  is  at  hand.  His  Providence  will  be  equal  to  all  emergencies.  Do  your  best, 
and  leave  the  issue  to  Him.  2.  Let  prayer  be  your  antidote  to  worry.  God  knows 
what  is  best.  Submit  to  His  will,  thankful  for  His  many  mercies.  Gratitude  is  a 
condition  of  successful  prayer.  3.  The  grand  issue— the  "  peace  of  God."  (1)  Its 
•harmel — He  in  whom  we  have  to  rejoice.  (2)  Its  character,  (a)  God-like.  (6) 
Transcending  every  effort  of  the  mind  to  grar^p  it.     (3)  Its  effect.    To  stand  sentry 


CMMT.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  501 

and  keep  gnard  over  the  haart  and  mind.  (J.  J.  Goadby.)  Ghriit't  nearness  : — 
I.  A  FACT  STATED.  •*  The  Lord  is  at  hand,"  may  apply  either  to  time  or  place.  He 
is  coming,  and  till  He  comes  to  wipe  away  our  tears,  to  raise  our  dead,  and  fill  us 
with  glory,  He  is,  in  the  meantime,  our  Bolace  in  trials,  conflicts,  diiBculty  and 
danger,  our  light  in  darkness,  and  our  triumph  in  death.  We  greatly  wrong  Him 
to  conceive  of  Him  as  above  the  stars.  He  is  very  nigh  His  people,  the  shade  on 
their  right  hand.  Let  us  therefore  walk  circumspectly,  and  let  nothing  cast  us 
down.  Let  also  our  enemies  beware.  IL  The  command  groonded  on  the  facts. 
1.  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway."  (1)  How  little  there  is  of  this  amongst  us.  Yet 
the  Lord  is  at  hand  that  we  may  rejoice  in  Him  as  a  Refuge,  a  Support,  a  Friend. 
(2)  The  all-sufiScient  ground  of  this  rejoicing.  There  is  nothing  "  in  Him  "  that  is 
not  an  occasion  for  joy,  life,  righteousness,  abounding  grace.  There  is  nothing  our 
souls  can  want,  our  hope  desire,  our  happiness  need,  our  immortality  grasp,  that  is 
not  laid  up  ia  Him.  (3)  There  is  no  true  joy  that  does  not  find  its  spring  iu  Him. 
(4)  This  joy  is  perennial — whatever  be  our  times,  or  circumstances,  it  is  our  privi- 
lege to  rejoice.  2.  "  Let  your  moderation,"  <ftc.  When  the  eye  has  once  seen,  the 
ear  heard,  the  heart  occupied  with  Christ,  all  other  matters  take  a  subonUnate 
position.  The  attractions  of  the  world  are  nothing,  its  anxieties  are  lost  in  the 
comfort  of  His  love,  and  its  entanglements  cannot  keep  us  from  restiug  in  His 
bosom.  Sit,  then,  loosely  to  the  things  around  you.  Let  men  see  that  you  have 
a  better  portion,  and  know  by  your  forbearance,  gentleness,  and  moderation,  that 
the  things  that  once  occupied  you  are  now  quite  secondary.  What  matter  if  other 
things  fade  from  yoar  grasp,  if  the  presence  of  the  Lord  is  realized  in  your  souL 
8.  •*  Be  careful  for  nothing."  (1)  There  is  no  need  for  this  care.  Think  of  the  eye 
ever  watching  you,  the  arm  around  you.  (2)  Be  not  full  of  care ;  it  does  not  mean 
be  indifferent  to  the  concerns  of  life,  but  be  not  anxious.  The  Lord  is  at  hand ; 
He  will  provide.  There  is  nothing  in  God,  in  ourselves,  in  the  world,  or  in  Satan 
that  we  need  be  careful  for.  4.  "  In  everything  by  prayer,"  <tc.  He  is  beside  you, 
and  yon  rob  yourself  of  a  great  privilege  if  you  keep  back  anything.  Pour  out 
your  heart,  only  "  with  thanksgiving."  Don't  murmur.  Thauk  Him  for  what  He 
has  done,  is  doing,  and  will  do.  III.  The  pbecioos  promise,  which  is  conditional 
on  the  keeping  of  the  commands.  "  The  peace  of  God,"  &o.  1.  Christ  has  made 
peace  with  God.  2.  This  peace  must  be  apprehended  and  enjoyed  (Rom.  xv.  13  ; 
1  Pet.  i.  8).  It  can  only  be  enjoyed  by  faith,  and  it  must  be  maintained  by  a  con- 
sistent walk.  8.  This  peace  will  keep  us  from  sinking,  from  sinning,  it  will  keep 
us  calm  amidst  disturbance,  at  rest  amidst  restlessness,  tranquil  in  anticipation  of 
death  and  judgment.  (Marcus  Raimford.)  Spiritual  mindedmss : — There  is  a 
natural  world,  and  there  ia  a  spiritual  world.  It  is  folly  to  i^^nore  either.  True 
wisdom  lies  in  adequately  acknowledging  the  claims  of  each,  and  skilfully  adjusting 
their  relations  to  each  other.  A  man  may  be  so  engrossed  by  the  natural,  as  to 
live  as  if  there  were  no  spiritual  world,  and  vice  versa.  In  the  one  case  he  beoomea 
a  materialist ;  in  the  other,  a  mystic.  We  are  now  in  this  world,  and  have  duties 
here  which  religion  must  help  us  to  discharge.  But  there  is  a  spiritual  world,  and 
nothing  gives  such  elevation  of  character,  and  such  power  and  consistency  of  living, 
as  a  sense  of  its  real  presence.  The  spiritually-minded  have  ever  been  the  pioneers 
of  human  progress.  Paul  did  not  disparage  the  life  that  now  is ;  he  rather  exalted 
it  by  constantly  bringing  upon  it  the  power  of  the  life  to  come.  In  the  text  he 
represents  the  effect  of  a  spiritual  faith  on  this  human  life.  The  key  to  the  whole 
is,  "  The  Lord  is  at  hand."  There  are  four  characteristics  of  spiritual  miadedness 
as  thus  understood.  L  It  will  surprise  materialists  that  the  first  is  joy — the 
deUghtful  enjoyment  of  the  feelings  of  pleasure  at  good  gained  and  actually  en- 
joyed, or  at  the  prospect  of  good  which  one  has  a  reasonable  hope  of  obtaining.  1. 
The  natural  world  can  give  joy.  (1)  There  is  the  joy  of  youth,  when  the  blood  is 
hot,  and  burdens  have  not  bowed,  and  disappointment  have  not  soured  the  man, 
where  there  are  many  beautiful  hopes  and  no  bitter  memories.  (2)  The  joy  of 
health,  when  the  humours  are  wholesome,  the  circulation  unimpeded,  the  nerves 
unjaded,  the  lungs  sound,  and  the  brain  clear  ;  when  food  is  pleasant,  sleep  sweet, 
and  activity  exhilarating.  (3)  The  joy  of  success,  when  the  battle  has  been  won, 
the  oflSce  secured,  the  bride  wedded,  the  fortune  made.  (4)  The  joy  of  the  affections, 
when  the  heart  has  loved  well.  2.  But  the  great  defect  in  all  joy  that  is  not  '*  in 
the  Lord"  is  that  it  \a  transitory.  Youth,  health,  success,  are  good  while  they  last, 
but  they  last  so  short  a  time.  3.  Our  faith  does  not  offer  us  a  choice  as  between 
natural  and  spiritual  joy.  On  the  contrary,  the  sources  of  natural  joy  are  in- 
tensified by  oar  spiritnal  joys,  and  placed  upoc  a  more  endaring  basis.     Would  not 


301  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  w. 

(let  conscience  speak)  yonr  natural  joys  be  trebly  sweet  if  you  did  not  feel  that  if 
these  were  swept  away  there  would  be  nothing  left  7  If  you  did  but  "  rejoice  in 
the  Lord  "  all  of  earth  that  is  sweet  and  beautiful  would  be  more  so.  To  the 
spiritually-minded  "the  Lord  is  at  hand"  to  help  every  human  joy.  II.  To  be 
spiritually-minded  is  to  have  habits  of  honesty  in  business,  of  candour,  good  temper 
and  forgiveness,  for  that  is  the  meaning  of  moderation.  1.  This  is  a  provoking 
world,  full  of  things  which  create  disagreeable  feelings.  The  weariness  and  tricka 
of  others  make  us  shut  up  ourselves  and  become  uncandid,  and  cynical,  and  hard. 
Life  becomes  a  game.  We  must  not  show  our  hands.  The  wicked  will  take 
advantage  of  it,  and  we  shall  lose.  2.  Well,  if  this  natural  life  be  all  there  is,  we 
cannot  afford  to  be  candid  and  good-tempered  toward  all  men.  But  a  spiritually- 
minded  man  can  so  afford,  "  The  Lord  is  at  Land  "  to  help  him.  Put  Him  away, 
saying  that  each  man  must  care  for  himself  only,  and  if  you  fail,  no  matter  the 
failure;  if  you  succeed,  how  barren  the  success.  3.  Whether  yoa  will  or  not 
"  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  He  sees  all  in  the  light  of  the  spiritual  world,  a'jd  judges 
accordingly.  He  is  at  hand  to  help.  The  factory  operative,  the  merchant,  the 
capitalist,  may  all  have  a  sense  of  His  nearness,  and  if  they  have,  then  their 
moderation,  fairness,  self-control,  and  forgiveness  will  be  known  unto  all  men. 

III.  Elevation  of  soul — a  serenity  of  temper  over  which  the  changes  of  life  may 
pass  9s  storms  do  over  a  mountain,  loosing  here  and  there  a  stone,  breaking  here 
and  there  a  tree,  shaking  the  whole  mass  and  drenching  it,  but  leaving  the  mountain 
rooted  in  the  earth.  1.  Much  of  our  life  is  frittered  away  with  carking  cares  and 
anxieties.  These  came  from  too  close  a  look  at  things  which  are  temporal.  This 
nearness  mufct  be  corrected  by  spiritual  mindedness.  To  a  man  who  has  no  feeling 
of  the  Lord's  nearness  every  trouble  exaggerates  itself.  He  cannot  put  his  full 
powers  to  any  one  thing,  because  he  is  troubled  about  many  things.  2.  Eight 
spiritual-mindedness  does  not  unfit  us  for  the  duties  of  life.  Faith  does  not  teach 
carelessness.  It  is  the  care  that  distracts  which  must  be  avoided.  That  is  only 
avoided  as  a  man  comes  to  feel  that  the  Lord  stands  by  Him.  That  realized,  he 
can  attend  to  his  multifarious  duties  without  distraction.  He  has  then  a  powerful 
motive  to  do  his  best,  and  that  being  done,  he  calmly  leaves  what  he  cannot  do. 

IV.  Devoutness — a  sense  of  the  presence  of  One  who  takes  an  interest  in  our 
lives,  and  to  whom  we  can  speak  specifically  about  everything  that  concerns  us, 
and  therefore  concerns  Him,  and  from  whom  we  can  get  direction  and  help.  In 
conclusion,  when  we  are  spiritually-minded  God's  peace — 1.  Keeps  our  hearts 
steady  and  true  when  teraptntions  and  troubles  and  bereavements  seem  bearing 
them  away.  2.  Our  minds.  No  miiid  loses  its  balance  as  long  as  it  perceives  the 
Lord  at  hand  to  help.  3.  Through  Jesus  Christ,  the  connecting  link.  (C.  J. 
Deems,  D.D.)  Joy: — The  gospel  takes  hold  of  every  string  in  human  nature. 
The  beginner  only  pla.y8  on  the  central  octaves  of  the  pianoforte,  while  the  master- 
hand  makes  the  seven  octaves  discourse  music  in  their  turn.  Joy  is  soul-elation, 
or  the  feeling  of  extreme  pleasure.  There  are  certain  conditions  when  that  string 
is  touched  by  the  hand  of  truth.  1.  Thb  joy  ok  convkrsion.  Belief  from  the 
burden  of  sin,  and  finding  the  pearl  of  great  price.  After  Philip  explained  the 
matter,  the  eunuch  went  on  his  way  rejoicing.  No  one  can  contemplate  the  fact 
that  Christ  is  slain  for  His  sins,  and  is  risen  for  His  justification,  without  ex- 
periencing A  sense  of  happiness  (Acts  viii.  27-40).  See  also  the  account  of  the 
conversion  of  the  Philippian  jailer,  and  Lydia.  Joy  from  a  sense  of  safety  is  not 
the  highest  type,  but  very  real.  II.  The  joy  of  Christian  fellowship.  When 
friends  meet,  there  is  a  reciprocal  feeling  of  esteem  (Acts  ii.  40-47).  Two  old 
Peninsula  veterans  accidentally  met  after  a  separation  of  twenty  years.  Words 
could  not  depict  the  beaming  faces.  It  was  the  joy  of  esteem.  Whenever  the 
apostles  met  their  brethren  there  was  joy.  Paul,  the  prisoner,  was  full  of  happiness 
in  anticipating  to  see  the  Philippians  again.  III.  The  .joy  of  service.  God  loves 
a  cheerful  giver.  There  was  great  joy  when  David  collected  the  funds  for  the 
building  of  the  Temple  (1  Chron.  xxix.  9).  Greater  still  was  the  joy  of  the 
redeemed  in  building  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  (Neh.  xii.  43).  God  must  be  served 
with  gladness.  IV.  The  joy  of  pbospebity.  The  Christian  has  no  prosperity  apart 
from  the  kingdom  of  Christ  (Luke  xv.  10).  The  father  made  a  feast  because  the 
lost  had  been  found.  The  visit  of  Philip  to  Samaria  was  blessed  abundantly. 
"  There  was  great  joy  in  that  city  "  (Acts  viii.  8).  The  gospel  is  "  good  tidings  of 
great  joy  to  all  people."  The  more  souls  are  saved  the  more  the  joy  of  the  Church 
(Luke  X.)  5.  The  joy  of  special  revelation.  There  are  moments  of  supreme 
happiness  given  to  all  good  people,  such  as  the  time  of  the  Transfiguration.     The 


OBAT.  IT.]  PRILIPPIANS.  303 

happiest  moment  in  the  life  of  the  Christian  is  the  last,  when  the  servant  is  dis- 
missed his  present  service  in  peace,  and  advancing  towards  the  crown.  One  word 
of  caution — see  that  the  right  motive  produces  joy.  There  are  superficial  influences 
of  a  charming  nature,  but  without  depth  or  worth.  "  Our  rejoicing  is  this,  the 
testimony  of  our  conscience."  When  conscience  says,  rejoice,  we  are  safe.  It  is 
a  joy  that  will  continue  evermore.     {Weekly  Pulpit.)  Christian  joy  : — I.  What 

DOES  THIS  PRECEPT  MEAN  ?  1.  Joy,  like  every  other  simple  emotion,  cannot  be 
defined  ;  it  must  be  felt  to  be  known.  The  text  enforces  that  form  of  joy  which  we 
should  call  habitual  cheerfulness  as — (1)  Opposed  to  gloom  and  dejection.  These 
are  natural  to  some,  fostered  by  the  circumstau'es  of  many,  but  forbidden  to  a 
Christian.  Though  gk>om  be  in  harmony  with  my  constitution  or  temperament, 
that  cannot  justify  me  in  cherishing  it.  I  may  have  a  natural  propensity  to  steal, 
but  I  am  to  fight  against  it ;  and  so  with  a  tendency  to  dejection.  The  Christian  is 
not  like  Cain,  a  fugitive  and  without  a  friend;  but  like  Abraham,  whose  resources 
for  everything  were  in  the  suiSciency  of  God.  What  Habbakuk  did  ("  although 
the  fig-tree,"  Ac.)  St.  Paul  tells  all  Christians  to  do,  "Count  it  all  joy  when  you 
fall  into  divers  trials.  (2)  As  distinguished  from  levity  and  mirth.  Mirth 
is  an  act,  cheerfulness  a  habit.  Mirth  is  like  a  meteor ;  cheerfulness  like  a  star. 
Mirth  is  like  crackling  thorns ;  cheerfulness  like  a  fire.  Mirth  is  like  a  freshet 
formed  by  a  sudden  overflow ;  cheerfulness  like  a  river  fed  by  deep  springs 
and  numerous  brooks.  (3)  As  distinguished  from  indifference  and  insensibility. 
It  is  a  positive  state  ;  a  very  distinct  and  vivid  consciousness.  A  man  may  be  very 
far  from  miserable  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  he  is  cheerful.  He  may  be  stolid  and 
callous  of  soul.  2.  The  text  requires  that  cheerfulness  should  be  habitual.  (1)  It 
is  required  of  us  in  working.  We  are  to  earn  our  bread  by  the  sweat  of  our  brow  or 
brain  joyfully,  not  counting  work  a  hardship.  (2)  There  should  be  cheerfulness  in 
giving,  wtiich  God  loves.  (3)  In  Christian  communion.  (4)  In  general  social  inter- 
course. (5)  In  suffering.  (6)  In  worship.  3.  The  precept  directs  us  to  derive 
our  habitual  cheerfulness  from  the  Lord.  No  creature  was  ever  happy  in  itself 
separated  from  God.  You  must  not,  therefore,  try  to  get  it  from  yourself.  (1)  You 
will  never  get  it  from  increase  of  wealth.  That  brings  increase  of  care.  (2)  Nor 
from  the  Church ;  (3)  but  from  Christ ;  His  character,  advent,  death,  righteous- 
ness, exaltation.  This  is  the  lesson  continually  put  before  as  in  the  Bible.  "  My 
people  have  committed  two  evils."  "I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord."  II.  By 
WHAT  MAY  THIS  PBECKPT  BE  ENFOBCED 1  1.  Habitual  religious  cheerfulness  is  a 
personal  advantage.  (1)  It  benefits  the  body  and  the  spirit.  "  A  merry  heart  doeth 
good  like  medicine."  There  are  many  persons  who  seriously  inpair  their  health  by 
nursing  gloom.  Many  nervous  diseases  may  be  traced  to  a  state  of  mind  cherished. 
f2)  A  man  works  with  great  power  who  cherishes  this  spirit :  "  Neither  be  ye  sorry, 
tor  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  Soldiers  after  a  long  day's  march  would 
hardly  walk  ae  nimbly  as  they  do  if  they  did  not  march  to  music.  Get  a  cheerful 
heart  and  the  yoke  is  easy  and  the  burden  light.  2.  It  is  a  strong  qualification  for 
rendering  service  to  others.  It  is  of  little  ase  trying  to  instruct,  especially  in 
religion,  even  a  child,  unless  yon  are  oheerfoL  And  certainly  a  man  is  no  ase  in 
the  sick  chamber,  or  in  the  house  of  bereavement,  unless  he  has  a  cheerfol  heart. 
3.  If  a  Christian  cannot  rejoice  always  no  man  can.  (1)  The  infidel  cannot.  (2) 
Nor  the  worldly.  4.  For  this  the  Christian  has  the  largest  possible  provision.  Ha 
has  been  born  again,  is  a  son  of  God  and  joint  heir  with  Christ.  It  is  quite  true 
that  Christians  are  soldiers  and  that  the  fight  is  hard,  but  victory  la  Bare ;  they  art 
racers  and  the  running  is  exhausting,  but  the  crown  is  sure ;  they  are  pilgrims  and 
the  journey  is  wearisome,  bot  the  arrival  at  home  is  sure  ;  so  that  the  soldier,  racer, 
pilgrim,  may  rejoice  alway.  6.  The  precept  ii  enforced  by  Divine  authority,  by 
the  example  and  word  of  Christ.  Conclusion :  1.  When  yoa  are  inclined  to 
despondency,  investigate  the  cause.  "  Why  art  thoa  oast  down  ?  "  2.  When  in 
circumstances  that  are  grievous  call  before  you  all  that  is  joyous  and  hopefal.  How 
strange  it  is  that  people  who  have  never  bad  a  real  trouble  are  always  grumbling. 
3.  Never  lose  sight  of  the  fountain  of  gladness.  4.  Avoid  vain  and  foolish  antici- 
pations of  evil.  (S.Martin.)  The  Christian' i  joy : — This  joy  is — I,J[kiiu-uic«cau 
1.  The  reason  has  its  moments  of  inexpressible  delight.  "  Why  do  you  sit  up  so 
latij  at  night?  "was  asked  of  an  eminent  mathematician.  "To  enjoy  myself.'* 
•' How?  I  thought  yoa  spent  your  time  in  working  oat  problems."  "  So  I  do,  and 
there  is  the  enjoyment.  Those  persons  lose  a  form  of  enjoyment  too  keen  to  be 
described  who  do  not  know  what  it  is  to  recognize  after  long  effort  and  various 
failures,  the  true  relation  which  exists  between  two  mathematical  formulas. "    W« 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHi».  IT. 

may  be  strangers  to  this  form  of  enjoyment,  but  we  may  know  enough  of  otbet 
subjects  to  believe  its  reality.  All  knowledge  is  delightful  to  the  human  mind 
because  it  involves  contact  with  fact,  and  this  contact  is  welcome  to  the  mind 
because  the  mind  is  made  for  God  the  Truth  of  truths,  in  whom  as  manifesttd  in 
His  Son  are  "  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  2.  In  our  day  this 
delight  is  especially  observable  in  the  study  of  nature.  The  "  scientific  spirit "  is 
almost  concentrated  upon  this  study,  and  it  deserves  a  warm  welcome  from 
Christians ;  for  if  revelation  is  God's  second  book,  nature  is  His  first.  3.  And  if 
the  contact  of  mind  with  reality  has  thus  a  charm  all  its  own,  what  should  not  be 
the  delight  of  steadily  contemplating  God  as  He  presents  Himself  to  us  in  His 
revelation.  There  the  Being,  the  perfection,  the  life  of  God,  are  spread  out  before 
us  like  a  boundless  ocean,  that  we  may  rejoice  in  Him  always  as  the  only,  the  perfect 
satisfaction  of  our  intellectual  nature.  4.  But  alas  1  while  this  is  the  case,  a  new 
plant  in  your  botanical  gardens,  a  newly  discovered  animal  in  your  menageries,  an 
octopus  in  your  aquariums,  will  send  a  thrill  of  delight  through  those  who  claim  to 
represent  the  most  active  thought  of  the  day,  and  all  the  while  the  Being  of  beings, 
with  all  the  magnificent  array  of  His  attractive  and  awful  attributes  is  around  you. 
How  much  of  the  mental  life  you  bestow  so  ungrudgingly  on  His  creatures  is  given 
to  Him !  0  intelligence  of  man,  that  was  made  for  something  higher  than  any 
created  thing,  understand,  before  it  is  too  late,  thy  magnificent  destiny  and  rejoice 
in  the  Lord.  II.  Moral.  1.  Itis  the  active,  satisfied  experience  of  amoral  nature, 
a  coming  in' contact  with  the  uncreated  and  perfect  moral  Being.  Joy  has  much 
more  to  do  with  the  affections  than  with  the  reason.  It  is  the  play  of  the  affections 
upon  an  object  which  responds  to  them  and  satisfies  them.  To  the  man  of  family, 
his  wife  and  children  call  out  and  sustain  this  delight,  which  the  ordinary  occupa- 
tions of  his  intellect  rarely  stimulate.  And  Uttle  as  he  may  think  it,  on  that  thres- 
hold, beside  that  cradle,  the  man  stands  face  to  face  with  the  attributes  of  the 
everlasting  Being  who  has  infused  His  tenderness  and  His  love  into  the  works  of 
His  hands.  2.  God's  attributes  of  holiness,  justice,  mercy,  may  well  delight  the 
human  mind,  but  they  address  themselves  inevitably  to  our  moral  nature.  As  we 
gaze  on  God  the  holy,  we  turn  our  eyes  on  ourselves,  and  ask  "If  He  is  ol  purer 
eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity  what  does  He  see  in  me?  "  Between  that  uncreated 
beauty  and  our  enfeebled,  broken  nature,  we  know  that  some  dark  shadow  has 
passed,  and  yet  light  enough  is  left  to  enable  us  to  see  how  little  we  are  like  Him. 
Man,  conscioua  of  this  radical  flaw  hides  himself  from  the  Lord  God  and  a  deep 
gloom  takes  possession  of  him.  He  would  fain  bury  himself  in  amusement  of 
work — anyhow — in  self -forgetfulness— anywhere  out  of  the  sight  of  God.  3.  The 
work  of  our  Saviour  has  made  it  again  possible  to  rejoice  in  God.  Christ  has 
destroyed  the  discord  between  our  conscience  and  His  holiness.  His  grace! 
establishes  a  union  between  the  believing  soul  and  its  object.  "  We  are  accepted  in 
the  beloved."  Read  Eom.  v.  1-11  and  see  what  are  the  consequences  of  this  new 
relation  to  God.  (1)  Peace  ;  and  then  as  the  soul  finds  what  it  is  to  have  entered 
into  the  state  of  grace  comes  (2)  Joy  ;  and  joy  as  it  is  one  of  the  first  experiences, 
so  in  its  more  magnificent  forms  it  is  the  crowning  gift  of  the  new  life.  Not  only 
being  reconciled  shall  we  be  saved  by  Christ's  life,  but  we  also  joy  in  God  through 
Christ  from  whom  we  have  received  the  atonement.  The  old  fear  which  skulka 
away  behind  the  trees  of  the  garden  is  gone.  Clinging  to  the  Cross  of  Christ  we 
behold  the  face  of  the  Father,  and  "  with  joy  we  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of 
salvation."  Conclusion  :  1.  Our  power  of  rejoicing  in  the  Lord  is  a  fair  test  of  our 
moral  condition.  The  heart  that  does  not  "  break  forth  into  joy  "  at  the  mention 
of  His  name  is  surely  patalyzed  or  dead.  If  earthly  friends,  pleasures,  &c.,  rouse 
in  us  keen  sensations  of  delight,  and  this  name  which  is  above  every  name,  this  love 
which  transcends  earthly  affections,  finds  and  leaves  us  cold  and  unconcerned,  be 
sure  that  it  cannot  be  well  with  us.  2.  This  power  of  rejoicing  is  the  Christian's 
main  support  under  the  trials  of  life.  St.  Paul  after  saying  that  we  rejoice  in  hope 
of  the  glory  of  God  adds,  "not  only  so  but  we  glory  in  tribulations."  3.  This 
power  is  one  of  the  great  motive  forces  of  the  Christian  life.  Within  the  regenerate 
Bonl  it  is  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life,  fertilizing  everything — 
thought,  feeling,  resolution,  worship :  it  gives  a  new  impulse  to  what  before  waa 
passive  or  dead,  and  makes  outward  efforts  and  inward  graces  possible,  which  else 
bad  been  undreamt  of.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Joy.  a  duty  : — Joy  drives  out  discord. 
Our  text  follows  as  a  remedy  upon  disagreement  (vers.  1-2).  Joy  helps  against  the 
trials  of  life.  Hence  it  is  mentioned  as  a  preparation  for  the  rest  of  faith  (ver.  6). 
L  Tbs  aaioi  comiukdso — "  Bejoioe."    1.  It  is  delightful :  our  booI'b  jabilee  hM 


•HA».  i?.J  PHILIPPIANS.  805 

come  when  joy  enters.  2.  It  is  demonstrative  :  it  is  more  than  peace  :  it  sparkles, 
shines,  sings.  Why  should  it  not  ?  Joy  is  a  bird  ;  let  it  fly  in  the  open  heavens, 
and  its  music  be  heard  of  all  men.  3.  It  is  stimulating,  and  urges  its  possessor  to 
brave  deeds.  4.  It  is  influential  for  good.  Sinners  are  attracted  to  Jesus  by  the 
joy  of  saints.  More  flies  are  caught  by  a  spoonful  of  honey  than  by  a  barrel  of 
vinegar.  5.  It  is  contagious.  Others  are  glsiJdened  by  our  rejoicing.  6.  It  is 
commanded.  It  is  not  leftoptional.  Itiscouimanded  because  (1)  It  makes  us  like 
God.  (2)  It  is  for  our  profit.  (3)  It  is  good  for  others.  II.  The  jot  disckiminated. 
1.  As  to  the  sphere — "In  the  Lord."  That  is  the  sacred  circle  wherein  the 
Christian's  life  should  always  be  .^pent.  2.  As  tc  the  object.  (1)  In  the  Lord, 
Father,  Son,  and  Spirit ;  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  crucified,  risen,  Ac.  (2)  Not  in  (a) 
temporals,  personal,  political,  pecuniary.  (6)  Nor  in  special  privileges,  which 
involve  greater  responsibility,  (c)  Nor  even  in  religious  successes  (Luke  x.  20). 
{d)  Nor  in  self  and  its  doings  (Phil.  iii.  3).  III.  The  time  appointed — "  Always." 
1.  When  you  cannot  rejoice  in  any  other,  rejoice  in  God.  2.  When  you  can  rejoice 
in  other  things,  sanctify  all  with  joy  in  God.  3.  When  you  have  not  before  rejoiced, 
begin  at  once.  4.  Wlien  you  have  long  rejoiced,  do  not  cease  for  a  moment. 
6.  When  others  are  with  you,  le  id  them  in  this  direction.  6.  When  yon  are  alone, 
enjoy  to  the  full  this  rejoicing.  IV.  The  emphasis  laid  on  the  command — 
*' Again  I  say,  Rejoice."  Paul  repeats  his  exhortation.  1.  To  show  his  love  to 
them.  He  is  intensely  anxious  that  they  should  share  his  joy.  2.  To  suggest  the 
difiiculty  of  continual  joy.  He  twice  commands,  because  we  are  slow  to  obey.  3. 
To  assert  the  possibility  of  it.  After  second  thoughts,  he  feels  that  he  may  fitly 
repeat  the  exhortation.  4.  To  impress  the  importance  of  the  duty.  Whatever  else 
you  forget,  remember  this :  Be  sure  to  rejoice.  5.  To  allow  of  special  personal 
testimony.  "Again  I  say,  rejoice."  Paul  rejoiced.  He  was  habitually  a  happy 
man.  This  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  is  peculiarly  joyous.  Let  us  look  it  through. 
(1)  He  sweetens  prayer  with  joy  (i.  4).,  (2)  He  rejoices  that  Christ  is  preached 
(i.  18).  (3)  He  wishes  to  live  to  gladden  the  Church  (i.  25).  (4)  To  see  the  members 
likeminded  was  his  joy  (ii.  2).  (5)  It  was  his  joy  that  he  should  not  run  in  vain 
(ii.  16).  (6)  His  farewell  to  them  was,  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord "  (iii.  1).  (7)  He 
speaks  of  those  who  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus  (iii.  3).  (8)  He  calls  his  converts  his 
joy  and  crown  (iv.  1).  (9)  He  expresses  his  joy  in  their  kindness  (iv  4,  10,  18). 
Conclusion  :  To  all  our  friends  let  us  use  this  as  a  blessing:  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord." 
(C.  H.  Spiirgeon.)  The  duty  of  rejoiciwi : — I.  There  are  some  precepts  of 
Scripture  which  we  may  have  dieficdltt  in  performino,  but  which,  at  least,  we 
HAVE  THE  power  OF  ATTEMPTING.  Such,  e.g.,  8.3  to  forsakc  a  bad  habit  or  to  under- 
take a  certain  course  of  action.  But  there  are  others  which  seem  to  en,ioin 
WHAT  18  beyond  odr  POWER,  e.g.,  those  whicli  demand  a  particular  aspect  of  mind, 
whatever  may  be  our  feelings,  such  as  our  text.  It  seems  strange  that  joy  should 
be  a  duty.  Unless  there  be  cause  for  it,  how  can  we  have  the  power  7  Well,  we 
may  sm  ely  reckon  up  our  occasions  for  sorrow  and  joy,  and  if  the  latter  preponderate 
we  might,  at  least,  be  ashamed  of  being  unhnppy,  and  that  is  a  great  preparation 
for  a  thankful  state  of  mind.  When  a  man  is  downcast,  he  is  often  raised  by  a 
friend  who  points  ont  that  things  are  not  so  bad  as  he  thinks.  And  the  Christian 
lias  reasons  for  joy  which  far  outweigh  reasons  for  sorrow.  Count  up  then  your 
mercies.  Adjust  yourselves  to  the  breathings  of  God's  Spirit.  If  yon  cannot  call 
forth  the  melody  which  slumbers  in  the  heart,  you  can  awaken  the  breeze  of  its 

music.        II.    JOYFDLNKSS    IS  AS    MUCH  WITllIN    OUR    POWER    AS    HONESTY   AJID  INDUSTRY. 

It  is  not  as  though  it  were  only  a  question  of  natural  disposition,  &o.  One  great 
purpose  of  religion  is  to  furnish  us  with  motives  and  aids  to  correct  our  natural 
temperament,  and  to  bring  into  play  moral  forces  to  counteract  those  which  are 
opposite  to  good.  Is  not  the  Christian  entitled  to  discharge  all  his  cares  on  God's 
providence  ;  lay  his  sins  on  God's  Son;  and  his  fears  on  God's  promises  7  Has  he 
an  excuse  then  for  being  disquieted.  III.  Som«  Christians  begart>  joy  ai 
PBBMTTTED  BUT  NOT  AB  COMMANDED,  a  privilege,  uot  a  duty.  Had  this  been  bo 
numbers  would  have  wanted  it ;  but  as  God  has  enjoined  it  all  must  strive  after  it, 
and  that  for  many  reasons.  The  believer  is  asked  to  state  what  is  religion.  If  he 
fails  to  rejoice  he  brings  disgrace  upon  it,  for  he  is  disobedient.  And  here  is  the 
triumph  of  infidelity ;  and  the  inquirer  after  religion  is  deterred  when  he  sees  in  its 
professors,  bow  it  defers  the  happiness  of  which  he  is  in  search.     JfV.  As  joy  is  a 

OOmiAND  which    proceeds    FBOM    God'b    mouth,  so    n    MAY  BE    KEPT  BY  God's  GRACE. 

We  are  bidden  to  rejoice  "  in  the  Lord."  Whatever  be  the  attriliute  contemplnted 
there  ii  reason  for  gladness  even  in  the  holiness  which  condemns  our  sin.     Foi 

20 


S08  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

did  not  that  very  holiness  provide  a  means  whereby  the  sinner  might  be  hononrably 
and  eternally  forgiven.  If  there  be  nothing  in  God  in  which  we  may  not  rejoice,  it 
is  evident  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  universe.  V.  The  Eeoeemek  i8  a  model  fo» 
THE  Christian  in  this  as  in  every  other  virtue.  He  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set 
before  Him  endured  the  Cross  says,  "  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive  that  your  joy  may 
be  full."  VI.  Half  the  depression  of  Cbrtstians  arises  from  looking  at  and 
TNTo  themselves.  Even  when  looking  at  Christ  for  righteousness,  they  look  to 
themselves  for  comfort.  It  is  Christ's  hold  on  the  believer  that  makes  him  safe. 
Bejoice,  then,  in  the  Lord,  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Christians  joyful  in  the  Lord: — 
As  sorrow  is  attendant  on  sin,  so  is  joy  the  companion  of  holiness.  Joy  is  a  feel- 
ing of  pleasure  caused  by  the  remembrance  of  some  past,  the  possession  of  some 
present,  or  tbe  hope  of  some  future  good.  I.  The  Christian  looks  back  on  the  past. 
Then  sin  on  his  own  part  is  seen  side  by  side  with  love  upon  God's.  He  thinks 
with  sorrow  of  his  sinfulness,  but  remembers  the  forbearance  which  withheld  the 
Almighty  hand,  the  goodness  that  led  to  repentance  and  the  grace  that  saved,  and 
80  rejoices  in  the  Lord.  II.  The  present  gives  the  same  cause  for  rejoicing.  There 
is  much  to  abase  and  arouse  painful  feeling'^,  but  in  the  prayer  which  brings  fresh 
supplies  of  strength,  in  the  grace  which  is  all-sufficient,  in  the  promises,  and  in  the 
work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  there  is  abundant  cause  for  joy.  III.  The  future 
presents  a  joyful  outlook.  The  extinction  of  sin,  the  removal  of  all  hindrances  to 
holiness,  the  full  blessedness  of  body  and  soul  in  heaven.  (Canon  Chamneys.) 
Constant  joy  in  God  the  duty  of  Christians : — I.  What  is  implied  in  this  duty. 
1.  That  Christians  are  pleased  that  God  exists.  "  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart. 
There  is  no  God."  Man  in  a  state  of  nature  dreads  God.  Naturally  wishful  of 
independence  he  dislikes  the  idea  of  one  above  him  who  can  dispose  of  him  accord- 
ing to  His  pleasure.  But  in  Christians  this  enmity  has  been  slain.  2,  That  they 
are  please  t  that  He  exists  possessed  of  all  Divine  perfections.  They  could  not 
rejoice  in  Him  were  it  possible  for  Him  to  make  a  mistake  or  use  any  deception. 
3.  That  they  are  pleased  that  He  formed  the  most  wise,  just,  and  benevolent  designs 
from  eternity.  4.  That  they  rejoice  in  His  constant  execution  of  His  original 
designs.  "The  Lord  reigneth;  let  the  earth  rejoice."  II.  The  PROPRrETY  of  this 
duty.  No  one  questions  the  duty  of  rejoicing  sometimes ;  but  how  always  ?  Is 
there  not  a  time  to  weep  ?  Thousands  of  things  are  the  proper  objects  of  mourning. 
Yes ;  but  the  text  says  :  "  Eejoice  in  the  Lord."  In  Him  there  is  no  ground  for 
mourning.  And  even  mourning  over  evil  things  admits  of  an  element  of  joy,  inas- 
much as  they  are  ever  working  out  His  plans.  We  mourn  over  our  afflictions,  yet 
we  may  rejoice  in  God,  inasmuch  as  a  patient  may  rejoice  in  the  skill  of  the 
surgeon  while  he  bewails  the  pain  of  amputation.  III.  The  reasons  fob  this  duty. 
We  are  to  rejoice  because — 1.  God  always  knows  what  is  best  to  do  with  all  His 
creatures.  He  ia  the  only  wise  God.  2.  He  is  always  immntably  disposed  to  do 
what  is  best.  As  a  father  feels  towards  his  children  the  Father  of  mercies  feels 
towards  His  whole  family.  The  fountain  of  all  good  is  in  its  own  nature  a  just 
cause  of  rejoicing  apart  from  the  thousand  streams  of  goodness  which  flow  from  it. 

3.  He  is  absolutely  able  to  do  what  is  best.  If  there  were  a  single  case  of  inability 
it  would  wreck  our  confidence  in  Him,  4.  If,  then.  He  knows  what  is  best,  is 
disposed  to  do  what  is  best,  and  able  to  do  it,  He  certainly  always  will  do  it.  Im- 
provement :  1.  To  rejoice  in  God  always  is  the  most  difficult  duty  Christians  have 
to  perform.  It  is  easy  to  rejoice  in  favours  ;  but  how  about  trials.  2.  To  discharge 
this  duty  is  to  do  what  is  most  pleasing  to  God,  implying  as  it  does  the  purest  faith, 
love,  and  obedience.  3.  To  do  this  is  to  do  peculiafr  honour  to  religion.  Mere 
selfishness  will  dispose  men  to  rejoice  when  they  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God, 

4.  Those  who  obey  this  precept  are  the  happiest  men  in  the  world.  Men  of  the 
world  are  in  some  measure  happy,  but  their  rejoicing  is  often  interrupted.  6.  To 
neglect  tliis  precept  is  unwise,  sinful,  and  injurious,  {N.  Emmont,  D.D.) 
Christian  rejoicing: — I.  What  it  is.  1.  It  is  more  than  contentment.  To  be 
content  is  not  to  murmur,  not  to  wish  for  a  better  lot ;  to  rejoice  is  to  be  right  glad, 
and  to  be  persuaded  that  we  have  got  the  best  we  could  expect.  2.  Can  this  be  the 
duty  of  the  disciples  of  the  "  Man  of  Sorrows  "?  Undoubtedly  a  true  Christian  is 
serious,  and  often  sad  (Psa.  cxix.  136 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  7) ;  and  therefore  has  no  part  in 
such  mirth  and  revelry  as  flows  from  thoughtlessness  and  intemperance.  3,  But  it 
does  not  follow  that  he  may  not  be  truly  happy — only  his  rejoicing  is  in  the 
spirit,  "  in  the  Lord."  And  to  thus  rejoice  must  be  compatable  with  sorrow  for 
sin  and  self-denial  T  yet  for  all  this  it  may  be  a  real,  lively,  and  lasting  satisfaction 
(1  Peter  L  8;  Bom.  viiL  8;  Matt.  zvii.  4).    II.  When  it  uay  bb  vslt.    1.  In 


CHAP,  nr.l  PIIILIPPIANS.  807 

prosperity  ;  especially  if  we  have  set  our  hearts  on  God's  good  gifts  of  grace.  But  it 
consists  not  in  the  goods  we  enjoy,  but  in  those  we  hope  for ;  not  in  the  pleasures 
W9  experience,  but  in  the  promise  of  those  which  seeing  not  we  believe.  Riches 
may  abound,  but  we  know  they  are  of  no  value  compared  to  those  in  heaven  ;  health 
may  flourish,  but  what  is  that  compared  with  life  for  evermore;  friends  and  families 
mav  grow  up  and  multiply  the  joy  of  all  we  have,  but  these  serve  only  the 
more  to  make  us  glad  that  we  have  a  Friend  who  will  never  fail  and  a  home  where 
with  them  we  may  enjoy  His  blessed  company  for  ever.  2.  In  adversity ;  which 
was  the  condition  of  those  here  addressed.  Paul  repeats  his  words  as  though  aware 
that  it  might  seem  a  hard  saying.  But  the  grounds  of  tlieir  rejoicing  are  yours. 
For  you  the  same  Saviour  died  ;  for  you  there  is  the  same  heaven,  the  same  un- 
searchable riches.  Do  you  believe  all  this?  Then  rejoice.  3.  In  temptation. 
Whichever  way  this  comes  we  are  prone  at  first  to  be  sorry,  because  of  our  weak- 
ness and  pronenessto  fall.  Yet  James  (i.  2)  tells  us  to  rejoice.  Why?  Because  one 
thus  feels  sin  to  be  the  heaviest  of  afflictions,  which  is  thus  a  sign  of  grace.  So  St. 
Peter  (1  Pet.  iv.  12-13).  Whatever  then  may  be  the  trials  of  our  faith  now  we  are 
to  rejoice  because  we  shall  be  glad  hereafter  when  Christ's  glory  shall  be  revealed. 
Thus  may  we  pray  not  to  be  led  into  it,  and  yet  when  brought  into  it  rejoice  that  by 
God's  grace  we  may  oome  out  of  it  triumphant.  4.  In  death.  Nowhere  is  Christian 
joy  distinguished  from  worldly  satisfactions  more  than  here.  For  this  is  the 
introduction  to  an  eternal  consummation.  (1)  We  lose  nothing  by  the  change  we 
call  death.  We  cease  to  breathe;  but  we  still  feel,  think,  love,  and  are  beloved.  If 
we  part  with  our  friends  it  ia  only  for  a  brief  season.  (2)  Besides,  losing  nothing 
we  gain  everything  (Matt.  vi.  19).  (C.  GirJleHom,  M.A.)  Rejoicing  in  Christ : — 
I.  In  His  atonement  (Rom.  v.  11).  II.  In  His  biohteodsness  (Rom.  iv).  III.  In 
His  faithfulness  (chap.  i.  6).  IV.  In  His  power.  *•  Kept  by  the  power  of  God." 
1.  In  sorrow.  2.  In  persecution.  3.  In  bereavement.  4.  In  death.  (R.  J. 
McGhee,    A.M.)        Rejoicing  in    God  : — I.  God  who   bequiees    His    people  to 

BEJOICB     AFFORDS    THEM   AHPLB    REASON    FOB    DOING    SO  :    HENCE    THE    BF.QDIREMENT    IB 

REASONABLE  AND  PRACTICABLE.  The  Christian  is  not  required  to  rejoice  in  nothing 
or  in  an  inadequate  cause :  but  in  the  Lord  all-sutScient.    II.  There  exists  equal 

REASON  WHY  THE    CHRISTIAN    SHOULD    REJOICE    IN    GoD   AT   ALL  TIMES   AS   AT    ANT   TIME. 

The  cause  ia  uniform,  so  should  be  the  effect.  If  God  ceased  to  be  his  friend  then 
be  might  cease  to  rejoice,  but  not  otherwise  (Hab.  iii.  17-18).    III.  Joy  and  sorrow 

nr     THB     SAME     HEART     AND   AT   THE    SAJIE    TIME    ARE    PERFECTLY   COMPATIBLE.       There 

may  exist  contemporaneously  reasons  for  both  sorrow  and  joy.  "  Sorrowful,  yet 
always  rejoicing."  When  we  are  commanded  to  rejoice  always  it  is  not  meant  that 
we  should  rejoice  only.  IV.  In  the  case  of  the  Christian  the  causes  of  joy  always 
PREDOMINATE  OVER  THOSE  OF  SORROW.  Not  80  with  the  siuner.  A  saint  may  lose 
a  part  of  his  possessions :  but  the  larger  part  he  cannot  lose.  V.  The  very 
SORROWS  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  ARE  TO  BE  REJOICED  IN.  They  work  fof  him  •  far 
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory.  ••  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been 
afflicted."  Inferences  :  1.  If  it  is  our  duty  to  be  happy  then  it  is  a  sin  to  be 
miserable.  2.  How  grossly  they  misrepresent  religion  who  speak  of  it  as  a  gloomy 
thing.     3.  We  learn  what  it  is  that  makes  the  soul  happy.     Not  the  world;  that  is 

Eassing  away  ;  but  the  Lord  who  abides.  4.  If  God  alone  can  make  His  creatures 
appy  what  madness  it  is  to  live  in  ignorance  of  Him,  or  in  estrangement  from 
Him.  {W.  Nevinn,  D.D.)  Sunshine:  a  talk  for  happy  times: — I.  Rejoice  in 
THE  Lord.  At  the  outset — 1.  Don't  think  this  means — (1)  a  seventh-heaven  rapture. 
Nothing  ia  easier,  more  common,  or  disheartening  than  the  way  we  exaggerate 
religious  joy.  It  is  not  given  to  many  of  us  to  soar  to  great  heights  ;  much  less  to 
live  there.  We  want  a  joy  that  can  walk  al  ng  life's  dusty  roads,  as  a  good  day's 
work,  and  thrive  amidst  bustle  and  home  cares.  (2)  The  short  lived  off- 
spring of  a  passing  excitement ;  an  April  day  of  sunshine,  and  showers  that  end 
in  a  night  of  sharp  frost.  (3)  Nor  is  it  the  childlike  merriment  of  good  spirits. 
(4)  Nor  a  natural  hopefulness  that  forgets  the  past,  and  doesn't  trouble  much  about 
the  future.  2.  But  it  is  a  calm,  deep,  settled  gladness  in  the  Lord.  (1)  It  does  not 
change  life  so  that  there  are  no  difficulties  and  burdens  ;  but  it  edges  the  clouds 
with  brightness,  and  in  the  darkness  it  can  always  see  the  stars.  It  does  not  tnm 
the  desert  into  a  garden,  but  it  is  an  angel  presence  bidding  ua  "fear  not,"  and 
opening  our  eyes,  it  shows  us  "  a  well  of  water."  (2)  It  is  of  much  importance 
that  we  keep  from  exaggerations.  Many  young  people  turn  from  religion  dis- 
appointed because  they  have  been  encouraged  to  look  for  sustained  raptures  and 
have  noi  found  them.     (3)  Depend  upon  it  this  "  oil  of  gladness"  ia  aomething  that 


808  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

commonplace,  everyday  people  can  have  if  they  will.  II.  The  ingredients  o» 
THIS  JOT.  It  is  not  distilled  from  rare  exotics  and  delicate  plants  that  grow  only  in 
hothouses  and  cost  much  to  cultivate.  There  are  three  simples  growing  just  by  the 
gate  of  the  King's  garden,  and  whoever  will  cultivate  and  mix  them  shall  have  this 
balm.  1.  The  sturdy  plant  Confidence — the  superlative  degree  of  hope ;  that  in 
the  dark  to-day  sings  of  a  bright  to-moirow ;  that  does  not  think  or  believe  that  a 
loving  Father  orders  all  things,  but  rests  in  the  as-urance  of  it.  2.  Confidence 
must  be  mixed  equally  with  a  little  lowly  plant  that  grows  on  the  bank  of  the  river — 
Contentment — a  rarer  plant  than  the  other.  Contentment  keeps  its  desires  level 
with  its  condition.  When  much  is  taken  it  counts  up  how  much  is  left,  and  turns 
the  evil  round  to  find  a  better  face  upon  it,  tldnkiiig  of  the  worse  that  might  have 
been.  3.  Put  in  Gratitude,  to  enrich  it  and  make  it  sparkle.  III.  But  if  it  be 
THUS  EASILY  MADE  WHi  IS  IT  SO  UNCOMMON  ?  1.  Thprc  are  timiil  souls  who  have  not 
the  courage  to  forget  themselves.  2.  There  are  the  stern,  the  gloomy,  the  severe, 
possibly  too  selfish  to  forget  themselves,  or  too  exact  to  forget  anything.  Hard- 
natured  men  of  narrow  s\mpathies  to  whom  the  brighter  things  of  the  world 
are  vanities.  Music  and  children  and  flowers  and  holidays  have  no  charms  for 
them.  Business,  duty,  absorbs  them.  0  1  it  is  a  pitiful  thing  when  all  the  child 
is  dead  in  men.  3.  There  are  those  whose  religion  is  mostly  a  regular  ob- 
Bervance  of  servicps,  a  half-hearted  round  of  duty.  The  religion  that  rejoices  in 
the  Lord  must  have  something  intense  about  it.  A  languid,  pale-faced,  sickly  man 
who  gets  up  for  an  hour  or  two  and  sits  by  the  fire  can't  enjoy  anything;  he  hasn't 
vigour  enough.  Type  of  dead-alive  Christians,  whose  religion  is  true  enongh,  but 
they  have  not  enough  of  it.  They  want  more  warmth  and  life  and  heart.  IV. 
Can  Christians  afford  to  live  without  this  joy  in  the  Lord  ?  1.  It  is  repeatedlj 
commanded.      Is  he  guiltless  who  passes  by  the  word  with  light  indifference? 

2 .  It  is  encouraged  by  every  promise  and  precept.  May  not  the  man  suspect  the  reli- 
gion that  is  so  unlike  the  Scripture  sample?  3.  It  is  the  natural  fruit  of  spiritual 
life :  and  if  the  fruit  be  wanting,  the  tree  is  not  worth  having.  4.  Surely  we 
have  no  business  to  keep  twitting  the  world  about  a  peace  it  can  neither  give  nor 
take  away,  if  all  we  can  tell  them  is  a  dismal  tale  of  trials  and  tfmptations,  failure 
and  sin.  This  is  not  what  the  Bible  holds  out  to  as,  what  Christ  purchased  for  as, 
and  is  not  likely  to  fetch  home  the  prodigal  from  the  far  country.  V.  How  mat 
WE  MAKE  this  JOT  OUR  OWN  ?  Confidence,  Contentment,  Gratitude,  where  can  we 
find  them?  only  in  the  King's  garden.  1.  We  must  go  out  of  ourselves  for  everything 
worth  having.  He  who  sees  self  will  never  see  anything  but  what  he  may  weep 
over.  He  who  sees  the  Lord  may  live  always  triumphing.  2.  The  opposite  to  this 
joy  is  not  sorrow.  TLe  Man  of  Sorrows  was  "  anointed  with  the  oil  of  joy  above 
His  fellows."  (1)  The  real  kill-joy  is  worry.  Hundreds  of  religious  people  trust  the 
Lord  to  save  the  ir  souls ;  but  to  feed  and  clothe  the  body,  train  the  children,  &c.,  all 
that  they  must  fret  over  as  if  their  loving  Father  did  not  sit  on  the  throne.  (2)  The 
wasp  nest  ot  ill  temper.  This  too  may  be  conquered.  *'  I  can  do  all  things  through 
Him  that  strengtheneth  me."  {Mark  Guy  Pearse.)  Amusements  in  the  light  of  the 
(jo&pel : — The  text  shows  that  religion  is  no  kill-joy :  and  yet  it  is  frequently  regarded 
as  involving  a  renunciation  of  the  pleasures  of  life.  To  ascertain  the  relation  of 
piety  to  amusements  is  of  great  importance.  Every  man  has  leisure  and  inclina- 
tion for  amusement.  How  far  may  it  be  indulged?  A  man  is  made  or  marred  by 
the  way  in  which  he  spends  his  leisure.  A  certain  amount  of  amusement  is  benefi- 
cial, but  multitudes  are  ruined  by  amusement.  I.  The  extent  to  which  hebb 
AMUSEMENT  IS  NEEDFUL  AND  BENEFICIAL.  1.  The  "  alway  "  of  the  text  covers  th« 
whole  sphere  of  life  but  mere  amusement  can  only  be  an  occasional  thing,  and  there- 
fore not  the  only  form  of  happiness.  That  must  be  found  also  in  those  experiences, 
duties,  toils,  anxieties,  and  sorrows  which  constitute  the  main  stream  of  our  daily 
life.  2.  The  key  to  this  is  "in  the  Lord."  If  God  makes  us  glad  we  may  be 
always  glad.  A  richer  joy  may  be  found  in  discharging  life's  duties  and  btaring 
its  burdens  so  as  to  secure  God's  approval  than  in  any  amount  of  amusement. 

3.  Seeing  that  it  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  seek  happiness  in  amusements 
which  would  imperil  the  proper  conduct  of  life's  more  serious  business.  He  who 
neglpcts  duty  for  amusement  makes  a  great  mistake.     II.  What  teaching  there  la 

IN  THE  TEXT  EBSPECTING  THB  LAWFULNESS  OF  AMUSEMBNTB  AND   THE    MAIN   PRINCIPLES 

TO  GUIDE  US.  1.  Kejoicing  is  a  Christian  duty.  Hence  we  ought  to  cultivate  it  as  much 
as  justice,  &o.  2.  Can  cheerfulness  be  cultivated  without  paying  special  attention 
to  the  matter?  Certainly  not:  hence  the  gospel  sanctions  a  certain  amount  oi 
amusement.    Happiness  is  the  outcome  of  the  healthy  play  of  our  faculties.     Novr 


«HAP.  rv.]  PUILIPPIANS,  S09 

in  the  daily  stress  some  of  them  are  sure  to  be  overstrained.  Our  constitution  is 
like  a  harp  of  many  strings.  To  keep  it  in  tune,  therefore,  we  must  naturally 
give  the  overstrained  strings  periodic  rest,  but  touch  up  the  others  and  play  upon 
them :  this  is  amusement,  and  the  text  implies  its  necessity.  3.  But  what  kind  of 
amusement  does  the  gospel  sanction?  (1)  Our  pleasures  must  be  pure  and  un- 
selfish, to  be  indulged  in  in  the  spirit  of  holiness  and  kindly  consideration  for  others. 
We  are  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord  always;  and  holiness-  and  unselfishness  were  the  most 
conspicuous  features  of  Christ's  character.  4.  God  has  placed  within  the  reach  of 
all  an  infinite  amount  of  ennobling  entertainment.  In  the  world  around  us  there  is 
an  inexhaustible  wealth  of  beauty,  grandeur,  and  skill  whose  observation  and  imita- 
tion supply  us  with  abundant  entertainment.  (1)  We  are  born  into  a  theatre  where 
a  drama  of  the  most  thrilling  interest,  now  comedy,  now  tragedy,  now  both,  is  con- 
stantly going  forward,  and  we  are  taking  our  own  Uttle  part  in  it.  (2)  We  are  bom 
into  a  museum  such  as  monarch  never  erected.  (3)  We  are  born  into  a  palace 
whose  roof  is  the  firmament,  whose  walls  the  horizon,  and  whose  floor  the  earth 
and  sea.  (4)  Besides  this  music,  art,  poetry,  and  literature  are  at  command.  (5) 
And,  yet  more,  God  has  so  made  us  that  tbe  lawful  satisfaction  of  our  appetites  and 
exercise  of  our  bodies  may  be  a  constant  source  of  pleasure.  6.  How  is  it,  then, 
that  we  make  such  a  mess  of  our  amusements.  We  want — (1)  Christ's  training  to 
make  us  Christlike  in  our  tastes  and  habits — eyes  trained  to  appreciate  beauty  in 
form  and  colour ;  ears  trained  to  appreciate  music,  and  a  decided  taste  formed  for 
literature  and  science.  The  lower  appetites  are  alwa%  s  ripe  for  entertainment — the 
higher  want  cultivating,  and  the  lower  will  then  give  way.  (2)  Unselfishness  and 
charity  in  our  pleasures.  The  man  who  can  amuse  himself  at  the  expense  of  wife 
and  children  or  any  of  his  fellows,  cannot  rejoice  in  tbe  Lord,  and  such  amusements 
will  always  be  unhallowed  and  unblessed.  (Dr.  Colbome.)  Christian  rejoicing:  — 
To  rejoice  is  in  one  sense  a  happiness,  in  another  a  duty.  In  one  sense  it  is  an 
art:  there  are  those  who  contrive  to  rejoice,  find  food  for  joy,  where  others  can  see 
nothing  but  gloom  and  grief :  in  another  aspect  it  is  an  attainment ;  a  result  arrived 
at  by  long  experience,  in  the  latter  days  of  a  consistent  Christian  course.  But  in 
every  point  of  view  Christian  joy  can  only  be  found  in  the  Lord ;  by  communion 
with  Him,  by  close  watching,  by  living  much  in  things  above.  Compromises  with 
the  world  drive  it  away.  Sin  destroys  it  in  a  moment.  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
Afraid  of  joy: — Joy  has  been  considered  by  Christian  people  very  largely  as  an 
exceptional  state ;  whereas  sobriety — by  which  is  meant  severity  of  mind  or  a  non- 
enjoying  state  of  mind — is  supposed  to  be  the  normal  condition.  I  knew  a  Roman 
Catholic  priest  that  was  as  upright  and  conscientious  a  man  as  ever  I  met,  who 
said  he  did  not  dare  to  be  happy ;  he  was  afraid  that  he  should  lose  his  soul  il 
he  was  ;  and  he  subjected  himself  to  every  possible  mortification,  saying,  "  It  is  not 
for  me  to  be  happy  here,  I  must  take  it  out  when  I  get  to  heaven.  There  I  expect 
to  be  happy."  That  was  in  accordance  with  his  view  of  Christianity.  (U.  W. 
Beecher.)  The  happiness  of  religion: — An  infidel  was  lecturing  in  a  village  in 
the  North  of  England,  and  at  the  close  he  challenged  discussion.  Who  should  accept 
the  challenge  but  an  old  bent  woman  in  most  antiquated  attire,  who  went  up  to  the 
lecturer  and  said,  "  Sir,  I  have  a  question  to  put  to  you."  **  Well,  my  good  woman, 
what  is  it  ?"  "  Ten  years  ago,"  she  said,  "  I  was  left  a  widow  with  eight  children 
atterly  unprovided  for,  and  nothing  to  call  my  Dwn  but  this  Bible.  By  its  direction, 
and  looking  to  God  for  strength,  I  have  been  enabled  to  feed  myself  and  family. 
I  am  now  tottering  to  the  grave,  but  I  am  perfectly  happy,  because  I  look  forward  to 
a  life  of  immortality  with  Jesus  in  heaven.  That  is  what  my  reUgion  has  done  for 
me.     What  has  your  way  of  thinking  done  for  you?"     "Well,  my  good  lady," 

rejoined  the  lecturer,  "  I  don't  want  to  disturb  your  comfort;  but "  "  Oh,  that's 

not  the  question,"  interposed  the  woman ; ' '  keep  to  the  point,  sir.  What  has  your  way 
of  thinking  done  for  you  ?  "  The  infidel  endeavoured  to  shirk  the  matter  again  ;  the 
feeling  of  tlie  meeting  gave  vent  to  uproarious  applause,  and  he  had  to  go  away 
discomfited  by  an  old  woman.  Christian  cheerfulness: — Of  Major  Vandeleur,  one 
of  the  most  beautiful  characters  found  among  the  Christians  of  the  Crimean  War, 
another  officer  who  knew  him  at  Gibraltar  said  to  his  biographer.  Miss  Marsh: 
♦'  Everybody  on  the  old  rock  liked  Vandeleur,  and  regretted  him  when  he  left  us. 
He  was  *  blue'  you  know  (i.e.,  religious),  but  then  he  was  such  a  bright  blue  I  No 
gay  man,  I  should  think,  was  ever  half  so  cheerful  and  charming  as  a  companion.** 
(J.  F.  B.  Tinting,  B.A.)  The  oil  of  joy  : — Years  ago  a  party  on  board  a  pleasure- 
yacht  in  the  United  States  discovered  to  their  dismay  that  they  were  being  silently 
•nd  slowly  drawn  towards  the  Falls  of  Niagara .  Skill  and  energy  began  at  once  to  oop« 


810  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cii.vp.  w^ 

with  the  horrible  emergency.     The  furnace  was  filled  and  refilled  with  wood  until 
the  fuel  at  command  was  entirely  exhausted.     What  was  to  be  done  ?     Dismay 
Bhowed  itself  on  every  face,  and  despair  was  paralysing  them  when  a  happy  thought 
occun-ed  to  an  officer.     The  oil  used  for  the  machinery  of  the  steam-engine  wa» 
thrown   into  the  fire.      TLis  gave  just  sufficient  impetus  for  the  moving  of   th» 
vessel  out  of  the  strong  current  into  smooth  water,  and  she  was  saved.     "  The  oil 
of  joy  "  keeps  many  a  one  from  being  swept  over  the  rapids  of  temptation.    Let  us, 
then,  "  rejoice  in  the  Lord  " — rejoice  in  His  nearness,  sufficiency,  and  immutability. 
(T.  L.  Nye.)        The  motive  jor  rejoicing: — The  motive  for  a  repetition  of  this 
exhortation  lies  in  the  immediately  foregoing  context.     Those  "whose  names  are  in 
the  book  of  life  "  may  well  have  within  their  breasts,  even  now,  the  svveetntss  and 
the  calm  of  their  promised  bliss.     The  Saviour's  own  express  command  to  His 
disciples    sets    this    directly    before    us    (Luke    x.    20).      (J.    Hutchison,   D.D.) 
Uninterrupted  Christian  joy : — If  the  Christian's  joy  be  interrupted  it  ought  only  to 
be  as  the  sun's  brightness  may  be  dimmed  by  a  passing  cloud,  which  quickly  leaves 
the  firmament  as  radiant  as  before.     (H,  Melvill,  B.D.)         Napoleon  when  sent  to 
Elba,  adopted,  in  proud  defiance  of  his  fate,  the  motto,  *'  Ubicunque  felix."     It 
was  not  true  in  his  case  ;  but  the  Christian  may  be  truly  "  happy  everywhere  "  and 
always.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)         Means  of  Christian  joy  : — If  you  go  into  Stein  way's 
manufactory  and  strike  ceitain  chords  of  the  powerful  instruments,  the  chords  of 
the  other  instruments,  though  they  are  covered  up  and  apparently  mute,  will  sound. 
Such  are  the  correspondences  which  exist  between  them,  such  is  the  sympathy 
which  is  communicated  from  one  to  the  other  by  the  air,  that  when  one  vibrates, 
all  vibrate.     Though  the  sound  be  low  and  almost  i  laudible,  it  is  there.     When  the 
grandeur,  beauty,  and  love  of  the  Divine  nature  are  presented  to  a  man,  they  draw 
some  response  from  every  part  of  his  nature  which  corresponds  to  that  which  is 
presented.      When  the  hearts   of   men   are   drawn  towards   the   heart  of    God 
there  begins  to  be  an  interplay  between   them;   and  thus  Christian  rejoicing, 
while  only  possible,  is  inevitable,  "in  the  Lord."     {H.  W.  Beecher.)        The  sphere 
of  Christian  joy  : — God  has  made  the  human  soul,  and  every  instinct  of  faculty 
that  composes  it  for  Himself.     He  alone  is  the  key  to  unlock  its  varied  and  myste- 
rious powers,  to  discover  their  true  range  and  capacity :  and  as  this  is  the  case  with 
the  other  emotions  so  it  is  with  joy.    Joy,  undoubtedly,  that  active  sense  of  happiness 
which  caresses  the  object  which  provokes  it ;  which  seeks  some  outlet  or  expression  of 
its  buoyancy — joy  has  an  immense  field  of  modified  exercise  in  the  sphere  of  sense 
and  time,  and  Scripture  recognizes  this  in  a  hundred  ways.    "  To  the  counsellors  of 
peace  there  is  joy."    A  man  hath  "  joy  by  the  answer  of  his  mouth."    The  virgin, 
in  Jeremiah,  **  rejoices  in  the  dance,"  and  Isaiah  speaks  of  the  "  joy  of  harvest," 
and  of  the  ••  rejoicing  "  of  men  after  victory  "  who  divide  the  spoil ;  "  and  Solomon 
observes  that  "  folly  is  joy  to  him  who  is  destitute  of  wisdom  ;"  and  James  knows 
of  Christians  who  "rejoice  in  their  boastings,  whose  rejoicing  is  evil."    The  range 
of  joy  is  almost  as  wide  as  that  of  human  thought  and  enterprise.     Its  lomplete 
satisfaction  is  only  to  be  found  in  God.    God  is  the  "  exceeding  joy  "  of  the  Psalmist. 
God  is  the  one  object  who  can  draw  out  and  give  play  to  the  soul's  capacity  for 
active  happiness;  and  therefore  the  Psalmists  heart  "dances  for  joy,"  and  his 
mouth  "praiseth  God  with  joyful  lips,"  and  he  bids  the  children  of  Zion  "be 
joyful  in  their  King ;"  and  he  looks  out  on  heathendom,  and  would  have  all  lands, 
if  it  were  possible,  "  make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the  God  of  Jacob ;  "  and  he  looks  out 
on  nature  and  bids  the  "field  be  joyful  and  all  that  is  in  it,  and  the  trees  of  the 
wood  rejoice  before  the  Lord."     'This  is  the  language  of  exuberant  delight,  and  St. 
Paul  is  only  adopting  the  expression  of  the  Psalmist,  of  Israel,  of  Joel,  of  Habakkuk, 
of   Zechariah,   when  he  bids  the  Philippians   "rejoice  in  the  Lord."    {Canon 
Liddon.)        Why  Christians  are  not  joyful : — Our  florists  make  up  packages  of  seeds 
labelled  " Gorgeous  purple,"  "Exceedingly  beautiful,"  "Remarkably  fine,"  and  so 
on,  referring  to  the  flowers.     Now  let  these  seeds  go  into  the  lands  of  a  clumsy 
person  who  has  perhaps  raised  corn  and  potatoes,  but  who  has  never  raised  flowers ; 
and  let  him  plant  them  in  cold,  wet,  barren  soil,  and  at  an  untimely  season.     A  few  of 
them  will  sprout,  and  will  come  slowly  up,  pale  and  spindling,  and  will  be  neglected, 
and  the  weeds  will  overrun  them :  and  when  the  time  for  blossoming  comes  there 
will  be  found  here  and  there  a  scrawny  plant,  with  one  or  two  stingy  blossoms, 
and  men  will  say.     "  Now  we  see  the  outcome  of  this  pretence.    Look  at  the  labels. 
It  is  all  humbug."    But  do  you  not  perceive  that  the  way  in  which  you  plant  the 
seed,  and  the  preparation  of  the  soil,  and  the  season  have  much  to  do  with  the 
succesiiful  growth?    It  is  true  that  beautiful  plants  might  have  been  produced. 


c«i».  W.J  PHILIPPIANa.  Sll 

They  were  deserving  of  all  the  praise  bestowed  npon  them.  There  was  no  deception. 
They  might  have  been  what  they  were  represented,  but  they  are  not  for  want  of 
knowledge,  skill,  and  adaptation  of  conditions  to  ends.  There  may  be  persons  who 
suppose  because  Christianity  is  joy-producing  that  when  they  become  Christiana 
they  will  be  joyful.  They  suppose  that  they  are  to  take  it  as  they  would  nitrous  oxide 
gas,  a  magniticient  Divine  intoxicant,  and  are  miserably  disappointed  when  ecstatio 
effects  do  nut  take  place.  And  the  reason  why  there  is  not  more  joy  in  the  Church 
is  because  you  do  not  know  how  to  plant  the  seeds  and  cultivate  the  flowers.  They 
are  real  seeds,  and  the  flowers  are  beautiful,  and  the  plant  bears  blessed  fruit  to  those 
who  know  how  to  give  it  proper  culture.  If  you  have  the  faith  o(  Christ  and 
heaven  and  God  near  to  you ;  if  you  so  love  that  all  parts  of  your  being  are  per- 
vaded with  a  sense  of  these  things ;  if  the  affluence  of  God  reaches  down  to  yon  and 
you  open  your  soul  to  let  in  the  consciousness  of  Christ,  you  will  have  joy.  "  Oh  "  saya 
one,  "  I  might  be  joyful  if  I  were  not  so  harassed  with  care. "  "  Casting  all  your  care 
upon  Him;  for  He  careth  for  you."  There  is  provision  made  in  CUrist  for  care. 
"  But  I  have  such  grief ! "  "  Now  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be 
joyous"  &o.  If  the  earth  had  sensilnlity  when  the  spade  opened  it,  it  would  cry, 
"  Oh  I  why  art  thou  wounding  mef  "  But  in  that  open  earth  I  drop  seed,  and 
cover  up  again,  and  by  and  by  the  ground  is  covered  with  beautiful  flowers — does  the 
earth  mourn  now?  God  is  opening  the  furrow  in  you  and  putting  in  seeds.  It  is 
aflaiction  to  you  now,  but  afterward  it  will  produce  in  you  the  peaceable  fruit  of 
righteousuess.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  No  joy  in  heathenism : — The  old  Greeks  and 
Eomans  had  their  pleasures,  their  glories,  tlieir  learning,  their  art,  but  theirs  was 
not  a  happy  life.  There  was  always  a  shadow  across  their  path,  a  skeleton  at  their 
feast.  They  saw  the  roses  which  crowned  their  heads  wither  and  die ;  they  saw 
the  pale  messenger,  death,  knocking  with  impartial  hand  at  the  doors  of  rich  and 
poor  alike.  They  knew  that  they  grew  older,  and  nearer  the  grave,  and  beyond 
that  they  knew  nothing.  There  was  no  hope.  They  grew  weary  of  the  dance  and 
the  wine  cup ;  they  looked  on  their  painted  walls  at  Tlome,  or  Pompeii,  and  felt  that 
they  cared  for  them  no  longer.  They  had  ceased  to  believe  in  their  cold,  passionless 
gods  of  wood  and  stone,  who  could  give  them  no  help,  no  comfort;  they  were 
"  without  God  in  the  world."  Such  was  the  selfish  life  of  the  heathen,  without 
God.  No  wonder  that  one  day  the  Roman,  who  had  nothing  to  live  for,  nothing  to 
hope  for,  entered  his  bath,  and  opened  a  vein,  and  so  bled  quietly  and  painlessly  to 
death.  This  is  what  a  famous  Greek  poet  said  about  life,  that  it  was  best  of  all  not 
to  be  bom,  and  the  next  best  thing  was  to  get  quit  of  life  as  soon  as  possible.  How 
differently  speaks  the  Christian,  "  Eejfice  in  the  Lord  alway,  and  again  I  say 
rejoice."  {U.J.  W.  Buxton,  M.A.)  No  joij  in  infidelity  or  worldlinfss : — The  infidel 
cannot  be  habitually  cheerful.  Hear  Hume  say  in  his  treatise  on  human  nature, 
*'  I  am  affrighted  and  confounded  with  that  forlorn  solitude  in  which  I  am  placed 
by  my  philosophy.  When  I  look  abroad,  I  see  on  every  side  dispute,  contradic- 
tion, distraction.  When  I  turn  my  eyes  inward,  I  find  nothing  but  doubt  and 
ignorance.  Where  am  I  and  what  ?  From  what  causes  do  I  derive  my  existence 
and  to  what  condition  shall  I  return  ?  I  am  confounded  with  this  question,  and 
begin  to  fancy  myself  in  the  most  deplorable  condition  imaginable."  Here  yoo 
have  one  of  the  most  philosophic,  and,  in  many  respects,  one  of  the  best  of  infidels, 
making  this  as  his  confession.  Then,  if  yon  turn  to  the  man  of  poetry  and 
pleasure.  Lord  Byron  says  "  There  is  nothing  but  misery  in  this  world,  I  think." 
This  sentence  was  not  written  for  effect ;  it  was  the  genuine  outpouring  of  that 
man's  heart.  He  had  tried  everything  earthly.  He  certainly  had  been  to  every 
human  and  temporal  fountain  of  enjoyment.  He  had  gone  through  experience 
like  that  through  which  the  wise  man  takes  us  in  the  Book  of  Ecolesiastes,  and 
this  is  hia  conclusion — "  There  is  nothing  but  misery  in  this  world,  at  least,  so  I 
think."     {S  Martin.) 

Vet.  6.  Let  your  moderation  be  known  nnto  all  men. — I.  What  is  modbratiom  ? 
An  equal  temperament  of  mind.  1.  Moderate  in  undergoing  afflictions  (Luke  xxL 
19).  (1)  They  are  less  than  we  deserve  (Lam.  iii.  39;  Ezra  ix.  13).  (2)  They 
are  balanced  by  other  mercies.  (3)  They  produce  spiritual  blessings  (Heb.  xiu 
10).  2.  Moderate  in  our  love  to,  and  desires  of,  all  temporal  enjoyments  (Jer.  xlv. 
5).  (1)  Because  they  are  temporal  (1  John  ii.  16-17).  (2)  The  more  wa  desire- 
tnem,  the  more  we  may  (Eccles.  i.  7-8 ;  iv.  8).  (3)  They  can  never  make  ut 
happy.  3.  Moderate  in  our  enjoyment  of  temporal  mercies.  (1)  We  may  easily 
exceed  (Jade  2 ;  Luke  xzi.  34).     (2)  Excess  changes  their  nature  into  curses.     ^ 


8U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  iV. 

Moderate  in  oar  anger  for  injuries  received.  (1)  So  as  not  to  let  it  boil  up  into 
hatred  (Matt.  v.  22,  44).  (2)  Nor  continue  long  (Eph.  iv.  26).  5.  Moderate  in 
our  cares  about  the  world  (Phil.  iv.  6),  (1)  So  as  to  make  use  of  no  unlawful 
means  to  get  an  estate  (Jer.  xvii.  11 ;  Prov.  xxii.  16).  (2)  So  as  not  to  neglect  our 
sooIb  for  our  bodies  (Matt.  vi.  33).  II.  How  known  unto  all  men.  1.  So  as 
that  it  may  be  real  and  apparent  (Matt.  v.  16).  2.  Universal,  towards  all  (1  Pet. 
i.  15).  III.  The  SEASON.  "  The  Lord  is  at  hand."  How?  1.  So  as  to  be  present 
everywhere  (Psa.  cxxxii.  7  ;  Prov,  xv.  3).  (1)  Otherwise  He  would  not  be  infinite, 
and  so  not  God.  He  is  everywhere.  (1)  In  His  substance  (Jer.  xxiii.  23-24).  (2) 
So  as  to  know  what  is  done  everywhere  (Heb.  iv.  13).  (3)  So  as  to  observe  and 
ponder  every  action  (Prov.  v.  21;  xv.  3).  2.  He  is  ready  to  come  to  judgment 
(Heb.  X.  37).  (1)  To  examine  our  actions  (Eccles.  xii.  14).  (2)  To  give  to  every 
one  according  to  th.ir  deserts  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  (3)  We  know  not  how  soon  (1  Thess. 
▼.  2;  2  Pet.  iii.  10;  Mark  iii.  35,  36).  Uses.  1.  Have  a  care  of  excess,  but  be 
moderate  in  all  things.  Consider — (1)  By  this  means  you  will  always  keep  your- 
self in  an  even  frame  (Luke  xxi.  19).  (2)  You  will  avoid  sorrow  as  well  as  sin. 
2.  Often  consider  the  omnipresence  of  God — in  your  civil  commerces,  in  sohtude, 
in  company,  when  you  pray  and  hear.  3.  Often  consider  that  the  Lord  is  at  hand 
to  judge  either  to  eternal  misery  or  joy  (Matt.  xxv.  46).  {Bishop  Beveridge.) 
Moderation :  a  fable  : — Hamet  and  Raschid,  two  neighbouring  shepherds  of  India, 
in  a  time  of  great  drought,  made  a  request  each  of  the  Genius  of  Distribution : 
Hamet  for  a  little  brook  which  would  never  dry  in  summer,  and  in  winter  never 
overflow.  Immediately  the  genius  caused  the  fountain  to  bubble  at  his  feet,  and 
Bcatter  its  rills  over  the  meadows :  the  flowers  renewed  their  fragrance,  the  trees 
spread  a  greener  foliage,  and  the  flocks  and  herds  quenched  their  thirst.  Baschid, 
not  satisfied  with  Hamet's  moderate  request,  desired  the  genius  to  turn  the  Ganges 
through  his  grounds,  with  all  its  waters  and  all  their  inhabitants.  As  Baschid 
was  looking  with  contempt  upon  Hamet  and  his  small  request,  he  heard,  on  a 
Budden,  the  roar  of  torrents,  and  saw  a  mighty  stream  come  rolling  on,  which  was 
the  Ganges  broken  loose  from  its  bounds.  The  flood  rolled  forward  into  the  lands 
of  Baschid :  his  plantations  were  torn  up,  his  flocks  overwhelmed,  he  was  swept 
away  before  it,  and  a  crocodile  devoured  him.  {Dr.  Johnson.)  Christian  modera- 
tion : — I.  The  fbinciple.  1.  As  to  moderation  in  certain  habits.  (1)  An  ancient 
morahst  tells  us  that  virtue  is  a  medium  between  two  extremes.  The  extreme 
opposite  to  a  vice  is  not  a  virtue,  though  everything  opposite  to  virtue  must  be  vice. 
Virtue  is  a  road  which  has  a  hedge  and  ditch  on  both  sides.  Frugality,  e.g.,  il 
such  a  road.  If  you  break  through  the  hedge  on  one  side,  you  fall  into  wasteful- 
ness ;  if  on  the  other,  into  covetousness.  Humility  is  another :  pride  on  one  side, 
servility  on  the  other.  Magnanimity  is  bordered  by  cowardice  and  rashness.  (2) 
But  while  virtue  is  moderation  between  opposite  vices,  there  is  no  place 
properly  speaking  for  moderation  in  virtue.  No  man  should  think  of  being 
moderately  ni;  jnanimous  or  humble.  Neither  can  there  be  any  moderation  in  vice 
— moderate  avarice  or  extravagance.  (3)  Yet  foolish  as  it  looks,  there  is  a  great 
deal  of  this  sort  of  moderation,  and  much  of  what  the  world  calls  respectability  il 
nothing  else.  Many  a  trademan  would  eschew  a  great  fraud,  and  yet  be  guilty  of 
minor  acts  of  dishonesty.  He  would  not  refuse  to  pay  his  creditors,  but  he  thinka 
nothing  of  wearing  down  the  health  of  his  servants  by  overlabour.  He  would  not 
lie,  but  he  has  no  scruples  in  over  or  understating  the  truth.  (4)  The  proper 
province  of  moderation  is  to  regulate  those  powers,  principles,  and  tendencies  in 
man  which  have  no  evil  in  themselves,  but  which  become  evfl  by  absence  of 
restraint ;  e.g. — (a)  The  desire  of  knowledge ;  the  cause  and  consequences  of  the 
first  offence  should  teach  us  the  need  of  putting  a  check  npon  it.  {b)  So  also  the 
desire  of  power.  Acquisitiveness  is  a  natural  propensity.  If  there  were  no  such 
desire,  what  would  become  of  the  interests  of  society  and  civilization  ?  But  ther* 
is  nothing  that  becomes  more  destructive  when  not  held  in  by  Christian  principles. 
1.  As  to  moderation  in  certain  feelings.  The  other  phase  of  meaning  in  the  word 
is  gentleness.  It  includes  the  control  of  anger.  Indignation  against  evil  is  vir- 
tuous, but  resentment,  even  against  an  evil  doer,  is  the  opposite.  II.  The  mani- 
rESTATioN.  That  our  moderation  may  be  known  unto  all  men — 1.  It  must  be 
decided.  There  must  be  no  pressing  towards  the  borders  of  excess,  even  though 
not  touched.  No  hard  driving  at  a  bargain  which  would  look  like  avarice.  No 
snch  demands  on  servants  as  would  look  like  oppression ;  no  indulgence  which 
would  look  Hke  sensuality.  2.  It  must  spring  from  principle.  A  man  may  b« 
moderate  in  on*  thing,  and  not  in  another.    An  ascetic  in  eating  and  drinking) 


w.]  PHILIPPIANS.  813 

may  be  licentious.  A  man  who  has  no  ambition  may  be  avaricious.  3.  It  must 
be  habitually  exercised.  How  many  in  their  religious  counections  profess  princi- 
ples which  are  outraged  in  the  home  or  in  the  shop.  III.  Thk  Motive.  "  The 
Lord  is  at  hand."  We  tell  men  of  the  injuriousness  of  evil  ways :  as  they  make 
their  bed  they  must  lie  upon  it.  But  while  forceful,  it  is  an  appeal  to  self-love  in 
its  lowest  form,  and  habits  formed  upon  it  do  not  rise  higher  than  mere  prudence. 
Here  is  the  Christian  motive.  1.  The  judgment  of  the  last  day  is  approaching. 
This  anticipation  awakens  an  awful  sense  of  responsibility.  2.  But  the  Lord  is 
an  actual  presence  now.  GUs  judgment  is  passing  on  as  at  this  moment; 
and  we  are  now  responsible.  But  is  He  not  a  Saviour  as  well  as  Judge?  at 
hand  to  forgive  the  penitent  and  help  the  believer.  (J,  Stoughton,  D.D.) 
Christian  moderation : — The  word  here  rendered  moderation  in  our  Bible  Ib  con- 
nected by  derivation  and  usage  with  ideas  not  of  control,  but  of  yielding.  It  is 
rendered  Lindigkeit,  yieldingness,  giving  way,  in  Luther's  German  Bible;  and  I 
fully  believe  the  interpretation  to  be  right.  "  Forb(  arance,"  "  gentleness,"  are  the 
alternative  ren^'erings  of  our  Revised  Version,  and  both  suggest  the  thought  of 
giving  way.  "Let  your  yieldingness  be  known  unto  all  men;  the  Lord  is  near." 
St.  Paul  is  dealing  throughout  this  passage  with  certain  holy  conditions  necessary 
to  an  experience  of  "  the  peace  of  God  keeping  the  heart  and  thoughts  in  Christ 
Jesua."  Standing  fast  in  the  Lord,  harmony  and  mutual  helpfulness  in  the  Lord, 
rejoicing  in  the  Lord,  and  prayerful  and  thankful  communion  with  the  Lord,  ar« 
among  these  conditions.  And  with  them,  in  the  midst  of  them,  appears  this  also: 
"  Let  your  yieldingness  be  known  unto  all  men  ;  the  Lord  is  near."  This  connec- 
tion with  the  deep  peace  of  God  throws  a  glory  over  the  word  and  the  precept  The 
yieldingness  which  is  here  enjoined  is  nothing  akin  to  weakness,  indolence,  or  in- 
difference. It  is  a  positive  grace  of  the  Spirit ;  it  flows  from  the  fulness  of  Jesua 
Christ.  What  is  it?  We  shall  find  the  answer  partly  by  remembering  how,  from 
another  point  of  view,  the  gospel  enjoins,  and  knows  how  to  impart,  the  most  reso- 
lute M/iyieldiugness.  If  anything  can  work  the  great  miracle  of  making  a  weak 
character  strong,  it  is  the  gospel.  It  can  make  the  regenerate  will  say  "  no  "  to 
self  on  a  hundred  points  where  never  anything  but  "  yes "  was  heard  before. 
Nothing  in  the  moral  world  is  so  immovable  as  the  will  of  a  living  Christian,  sus- 
tained by  the  power  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit,  on  some  clear  case  of  principle.  I 
lately  re-'d  of  the  uncompromising  decision  of  a  Christian  man,  in  high  military 
command  in  India,  fifty  years  ago.  He  had  accepted  ofTice,  and  £10,000  a  year, 
being  far  from  rich  meanwhile  in  private  mi  ans,  on  the  condition  that  he  should 
not  be  asked  to  give  official  countenance  to  idolatry.  The  condition  was  not 
observed.  He  was  required  to  sign  a  grant  of  money  to  an  idol  temple.  The  East 
India  Company  would  n^t  give  way,  nor  would  their  distinguished  servant.  He 
resigned  his  command  promptly,  and  came  home  without  a  murmur,  and  without 
•  compensation.  Here,  in  a  conspicuous  ca=^e,  was  the  unyieldingness  of  the  gospel, 
a  mighty  grace  which,  thank  God,  is  being  daily  exemplified  in  His  sight  in  a 
thousand  smaller  instances.  Yet  this  very  case  equally  well  illustrates  from  another 
side  the  yi*^ldingness  of  the  gospel.  From  the  point  of  view  of  principle  this 
admirable  Christian  was  fixed  as  a  rock,  as  a  mountain ;  from  the  point  of  view  of 
self-interest  he  was  movable  as  air.  That  it  was  a  sacrifice  of  self's  gain  and  glory 
to  resign  was  as  nothing  in  his  path.  His  interests  were  his  Master's.  Jesus 
Christ  was  in  him  where  by  nature  self  is.  He  was  jealous  and  sensitive  for  the 
Lord ;  indifferent,  oblivious  for  himself.  Yieldingness,  in  our  passage,  is  in  fact 
SELFLESSNESS.  It  is  mcekness,  not  weakness ;  the  attitude  of  a  man  out  of  whom 
the  Lord  has  cast  the  evil  spirit  of  self.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be  a  "  moderate  " 
in  this  sense.  A  living  calm  pervades  that  soul.  A  thousand  anxieties,  and  a 
thousand  regrets,  incident  to  the  life  of  self,  are  spared  it.  It  is  at  leisure  from 
itself,  and  therefore  free  for  many  a  delightful  energy  and  enterprise  when  God 
calls  it  in  that  direction,  as  well  as  ready  for  imprisonment  and  apparent  inutility 
when  that  is  His  will.  Nothing  does  the  world's  miscroscope  discover  more  keenly 
than  selfle  sness  in  a  Christian  man  or  woman.  Nothing  at  once  baffles  its  expe- 
rience and  explanation,  and  attracts  its  notice  and  respect,  like  the  genuine  selfless- 
ness, the  yieldingness,  of  the  grace  of  God.  Let  ours,  then,  "  be  known  unto  all 
men  "  ;  not  paraded  and  thrown  into  an  attitude,  but  kept  in  practice  and  use  in 
real  life,  where  it  can  be  put  to  real  tests.  And  would  we  read  something,  in  this 
same  verse,  of  its  heavenly  secret?  It  lies  before  ns  :  "the  Lord  is  near."  He  is 
near,  not  here  in  the  sense  of  coming  soon,  but  in  that  of  standing  by  ;  in  the  sense 
of  His  presence,  and  "  the  secret "  of  it,  around  His  servant.    The  very  words  used 


311  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nr, 

here  by  St.  Paul  oocnr  in  this  connection  in  the  Septuagint  (Greek)  translation  ol 
the  Old  Testament,  a  translation  old  even  in  St.  Paul's  time :  "  Thou  art  near 
(syXwc),  0  Lord."  The  thought  is  of  the  calm  and  overshadowing  of  His  recollected 
and  realized  Presence  ;  that  Divine  atmosphere  in  which  bitter  things,  and  thipgs 
narrow  with  the  contractions  and  distortions  of  self,  must  die,  and  in  which  all  that 
is  sweet  and  loving  lives.  "From  the  provoking  of  all  men,  from  the  strife  of 
tongues,"  there  is  Divine  protection  and  concealment  there.  St.  Paul  himself 
beautifully  exemplifies  his  own  words,  in  this  same  Epistle,  in  the  first  chapter. 
The  "  brethren  "  at  Eome  who  "  preached  Christ  of  envy  and  strife,  supposing  to 
add  affliction  to  his  bonds,"  certainly  took  a  very  irritating  line  of  action.  And 
their  action  tried  St.  Paul.  But  it  did  not  irritate  him.  (if.  O.  G.  Moule,  M.A.) 
Christian  Forbearance : — By  "  moderation  "  is  meant,  not  temperance  in  the 
gratification  of  our  desires  generally,  but  specially  temperance  or  self-restraint  in 
our  relations  to  others,  abstinence  from  anger,  harshness,  vengeance.  Elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament,  where  the  original  word  occurs,  the  rendering  is  "sentle- 
ness,"  "  clemency,"  •'  patience,"  any  one  of  which  is  preferable  to  this  ambiguous 
"moderation."  The  exact  idea  is  "a  considerate  and  forbearing  spirit."  The 
apostle  would  have  as  make  allowances  for  the  ignorance  and  weakness  of 
others,  knowing  how  much  and  constant  need  we  stand  in  of  having  allowances 
made  for  ourselves,  both  by  God  and  man.  Taken  generally,  his  precept  here  calls 
npon  as,  for  example,  in  our  business  dealings,  to  remember  that  human  laws, 
however  carefully  devised,  may  ever  and  anon,  if  rigidly  enforced,  act  unjustly  and 
cruelly ;  and  to  guide  ourselves  therefore,  in  every  case,  by  the  broad  principles  of 
equity  in  the  sight  of  God.  Similarly,  in  our  judgment  of  the  conduct  of  men,  it 
enjoins  npon  ns  to  take  a  kindly  view,  wherever  this  is  possible,  never  believing 
evil  of  them  until  we  cannot  help  it.  In  the  case  which  seems  to  be  at  present 
specially  before  Paul's  mind,  that  of  a  person  who  is  "  persecuted  for  righteous- 
ness' sake,"  he  would  have  the  sufferer  to  form  the  mildest  judgment  he  can 
respecting  the  procedure  and  character  of  his  enemy ;  to  remember  and  pity  the 
melancholy  darkness  of  soul  which  prompts  the  persecution  ;  and,  even  if  he  be  in 
a  position  to  avenge  himself,  to  withhold  his  hand,  and  leave  the  matter  with  the 
Lord  Jesus.  When  He  comes,  all  wrongs  will  be  righted  (James  v.  9).  (R.  John- 
stone, LL.B.)  The  Lord  Is  at  hand. — I.  Providentallt  (Psa.  cxxxix).  IL 
SpnoTOALLT.  "Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory."  "Where  two  or  three  are 
gathered  in  My  Name."  III.  Peksonallt.  To  punish  evil  and  to  glorify  His 
own.  {Bishop  Montagu  Villiers.)  The  nearness  of  Christ : — Although  corporeally 
Christ  has  left  this  world  and  is  far  beyond  our  mortal  ken,  yet,  spiritually  and 
essentially,  He  is  near  at  hand  to  every  man.  ••I  am  with  you  always."  I.  In 
ALL  THE  OPERATIONS  OF  NATiTRE.  "In  Him  all  things  consist."  Nature  is  not 
merely  His  creation:  it  is  His  organ,  His  instrument.  He  is  in  it  as  the  soul  is 
in  the  body,  animating  and  directing  every  part.  He  is  in  all  seasons  of  the  year. 
He  flashes  in  the  Ughtning.  He  speaks  in  the  thunder.  He  is  in  every  ray  of 
light  and  every  wave  of  air.  II.  In  all  the  events  of  history.  In  the  creations 
of  hterature,  the  progress  of  science,  in  all  the  advancing  steps  of  civilization. 
Every  event  of  life  is  an  advent  of  Christ.  He  stands  at  the  door  of  our  nature 
and  knocks.  He  originates  the  good  and  controls  the  evil.  III.  In  all  redemp- 
tive INFLUENCES.  lu  the  words  of  the  prophets  and  apostles ;  in  the  ministry  of 
His  gospel ;  in  the  agency  of  His  Spirit.  Conclusion  :  Let  us  realize  this  :  eschew 
evil,  pursue  good  ;  be  heroic  in  duty  and  magnanimous  in  trial.  "  The  Lord  stood 
by  me,"  said  Paul.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Lord  it  near: — Therefore — I.  Bb 
JOYFUL.  II.  Be  oemtlb.  III.  Be  trustful.  IV.  Be  prayerful.  V.  Be  pkacefijl. 
(C.  J.  P.  Eyre,  M.A.)  The  omnipresence  of  God : — I.  Thb  doctrinx.  The 
words  are  not  applicable  merely  to  some  persons,  nations,  occasions,  circumstances^ 
but  to  all.  The  Lord  is  at  hand  to  the  pious  and  the  profane ;  in  places  of  devo- 
tion and  places  of  commerce  and  pleasure.  He  fills  all  time  and  space  (Psa. 
cxxxix.).  II.  The  occasions  which  are  specially  calculated  to  remind  us  of 
this.  1.  God's  visitations  in  the  death  of  those  around  us.  2.  Our  own  advancing 
years.  3.  The  vicissitudes  of  the  seasons.  4.  The  march  of  time  towards  eternity. 
III.  The  ground  and  source  of  the  sinner's  safety.  1.  Redemption  in  Christ. 
2.  Regeneration  and  holiness  by  the  Spirit.  3.  Divine  friendship.  IV.  Prac- 
tical EFFECTS.  1.  In  view  of  Christ's  present  and  future  nearness,  men  should 
be  ready  for  His  manifestation.  2.  Diligent  in  duty.  3.  Dead  to  the  world. 
{W.  Nicholson.)  The  Lord  is  at  hand : — I.  To  inspect  oub  conduct.  "  AU 
things  are  naked  and  open  to  Him,"  and  with  Him  is  no  respect  of  persocs  (Jer. 


OTAP.  IT.I  PHILIPPIANS.  815 

xvii.  10).  II.  Either  to  approve  or  disapprove  our  conduct.  At  this  moment 
God  is  weighing  us  in  the  balance  of  His  sanctuary.  To  be  the  object  of  His 
approbation  is  the  highest  blessing.  We  can  then  be  indifferent  to  the  world's 
censures.     But  to  be  condemned  of  Him  is  our  heaviest  curse.    HI.  To  REonLATB 

THE   AFFAIRS    OF     HiS    ChDRCH     AND    ACCOMPLISH   THE    PREDICTIONS  OF   HiS  WORD.       1. 

To  convict  the  sinner.  2.  Edify  the  believer.  •  3.  Extend  His  gospel.  IV.  To 
SUMMON  UB  TO  Hi8  TRiBDNAi,.  XLis  He  does  practically  at  death.  {Congregational 
Remembrancer.)  Deliverance  at  hand: — I  have  heard  one  say,  as  he  bent  over  a 
friend  who  was  groaning  under  the  surgeon's  knife,  It  will  soon  be  over  1  and  so 
Jesus,  with  tender  fellow-feeling  for  their  infirmities,  consoles  His  suffering  people. 
Amid  your  trials,  think  of  that — they  will  soon  be  over  ;  sooner,  perhaps,  than  you 
fancy.  Your  salvation,  not  only  nearer  than  when  you  believed,  may  be  nearer 
than  you  suppose;  even  now  the  cry  may  be  sounding  in  heaven — Eoom  for 
another  saint  1  a  crown  for  another  head  I  and  the  next  turn  of  the  road  may  bring 
you  in  front  of  the  gates  of  glory.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Near  and  distant  relative 
terms: — "Near"  and  "distant"  are  relative  terms.  For  the  liltle  child,  whose 
limbs  soon  grow  weary,  the  friend's  house  is  far  away,  which  for  his  father  is  but 
a  step  from  home.  So  to  the  child,  reckoning  by  his  life,  an  event  seems  long  past, 
far  away  ijs  a  hoary  antiquity,  which  to  the  man  on  whom  have  come  the  snows  of 
many  winters,  and  who  reckons  by  his  life,  seems  to  have  occurred  but  jesterday. 
Now  faith,  in  the  measure  of  its  vigour,  enables  us  to  see  things  in  the  Ught  of 
God,  giving  as  oneness  of  view  with  Him.  When,  then,  our  apostle  says,  *'  The 
Lord  is  at  hand,"  he  speaks  as  one  who  has  been  taught  to  reckon  according  to  the 
years  of  the  lifetime  of  the  Most  High — unbeginniug,  unending.  On  the  sama 
principle,  you  remember,  in  another  place,  he  estimates  the  Christian's  aflliction— 
affliction  extending  perhaps  over  threescore  years  and  ten — as  "but  for  a  moment," 
because  the  standard  by  which  he  computes  is  the  "eternal"  duration  of  the  weight 
of  glory"  which  is  to  follow.  {R.  Johnstone,  LL.B.)  "  The  Lord  it  at  hand  ".• — . 
As  an  illustration  of  that,  let  the  gay  young  man  think  of  Belshazzar's  feast. 
There  is  the  gorgeous  oriental  palace,  with  its  massive  architecture,  its  huge 
columns,  its  gigantic  figures,  its  pictured  halls  ;  and  there  are  the  thousand  lords 
in  their  rich  robes,  and  the  king,  in  the  pomp  of  an  eastern  despot,  drinking  wine 
before  the  thousand.  And  in  the.'same  hour  there  came  forth  the  fingers  of  a  man's 
hand,  and  they  wrote  over  against  the  candlestick  upon  the  plaister  of  the  wall 
of  the  king's  palace  ;  the  mysterious  hand  moves  and  w^rites — moves  and  writes — 
and  there  are  letters,  words  burnt  into  the  wall,  as  with  a  pen  of  flame.  The  king 
knows  not  what  they  mean  till  the  prophet  comes  to  tell ;  and  then  their  import  is 
found  to  be,  that  the  miserable  man  who  wears  the  crown  is  "  weighed  in  the 
balances  and  found  wanting,"  and  his  kingdom  is  torn  from  him.  So,  though  not 
Tisibly,  yet  really,  there  is  over  against  the  intemperate  young  man,  the  sensual 
yonng  man,  an  omniscient  Eye  beholding  his  deeds,  and  an  unerring  Hand 
recording  his  doom,  opposite  him  in  the  casino,  and  in  other  haunts  of  dissipation 
and  vice.  Here  it  is  :  conscience  at  times  makes  yon  tremble,  and  the  minister  of 
the  gospel  interprets  the  Divine  revelation,  and  tells  you  of  the  wrath  to  come. 
•'The  Lord  is  at  hand  ;  "  and  as  an  illustration  of  that  let  every  man  of  business 
read  the  parable  of  the  rich  fool,  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  St.  Luke,  and  the  six- 
teenth verse.  There  you  have  epitomized  the  history  of  many  a  London  tradesman: 
the  goods  are  laid  up,  not  that  the  soul  may  take  its  ease,  but  that  there  may  b« 
a  grand  funeral,  and  much  excitement  at  the  reading  of  the  will,  and  perhaps 
quarrelling  over  the  property,  and  a  gorgeous  tomb  in  one  of  the  suburban 
eemeteries,  and  a  scattering  of  the  huge  gold-heap  by  some  profligate  son  ;  and 
the  poor,  careful  soul  who  toiled  and  saved,  and  made  others  toil  and  save,  who 
was  at  his  books  till  midnight,  and  grudged  the  hours  of  sleep  and  rest  to  his  poor 
shopman,  where  is  he  f — where  is  he  ?  To  think  that  men  can  go  on  as  they  do, 
digging,  and  delving,  and  scraping  together  money,  money,  money,  while  death  ia 
at  the  door,  and  the  judgment  is  at  hand,  and  hell  is  opening  its  mouth  to  swallow 
np  the  worldly  I  "The  Lord  is  at  hand."  Read  as  an  illustration  of  that  in 
another  way — "  And  being  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper,  as  He  sat  at  meat, 
there  came  a  woman  having  an  alabaster  box  of  ointment  of  spikenard,  very 
precious,  and  she  brake  the  box,  and  poured  it  on  His  head.  And  Jesus  said,  She 
hath  wrought  a  good  work  on  Me ;  she  hath  done  what  she  could."  And  so,  what- 
ever you  do  from  love  to  Jesus  in  the  way  of  helping  men,  in  the  way  of  checking 
sin,  in  the  way  of  saving  souls,  in  the  way  of  lightening  misery.  He  is  at  hand  to 
BOtice,  to  record,  to  approve,  to  bless.    (J.  Stougkton,  DJJ.) 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chkp.  i% 

Vers.  6-7.  Ba  careful  for  nothing. — L  The  evil.  An  incessant  concern  for 
our  temporal  affairs;  that  overthoughtfulness  so  pointedly  condemned  by  Christ  ia 
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Consider — 1.  The  dishonour  it  reflects  on  God  as  the 
moral  Governor  of  the  universe.  It  distrusts  His  care  of  His  own,  and  the  man 
who  cannot  trust  the  God  of  providence  will  not  trust  Him  as  the  God  of  grace. 

2.  Its  effects  on  self.  Though  it  is  certain  that  it  can  produce  no  good  effect, 
yet  it  is  indulged  in,  and  it  corrodes  the  mind,  sours  the  heart,  and  iniluences  the 
whole  system.  Most  maniacs  are  produced  by  this,  not  to  speak  of  thousands  cut 
down  in  the  eagerness  of  their  worldly  pursuits,  destroying  soul  and  body  together. 

3.  Its  effects  on  others.  It  excites  envy.  I  envy  in  others  something  which  my 
covetous  heart  desires.  I  hate  the  person  possessing  it,  and  am  therefore  a 
murderer  in  my  heart.  II.  Tue  cure.  1.  Be  careful  for  nothing.  Eetiie  from 
the  world  into  yourself.  Let  the  matter  lie  between  God  and  you.  Call  not  the 
world  in  as  umpire.  2.  Make  your  requests  known  unto  God.  He  is  your  friend, 
able  and  willing  to  bear  your  burden  and  supply  all  your  need.  (1)  In  prayer : 
there  is  no  other  way  of  approaching  Him,  and  it  is  only  prayer  which  will  throw 
off  the  load.  (2)  Prajer  brings  the  plea,  supplication  urges  it.  God  frequently 
delays  to  try  jour  faith,  and  the  persistence  and  eneigy  of  your  supplication.  But 
His  name  is  yet  Jehovah  Jiieh.  (3)  With  thanksgiving,  which  manifests  the  right 
state  of  heart.  (4)  Without  reserve.  God  cares  for  the  least  of  His  creatures  as 
well  as  for  the  greatest.  What  we  call  little  things  are  often  of  the  greatest  im- 
portance, either  in  themselves  or  their  consequences.  III.  The  effect.  "  The 
peace  of  God."  (J.  Summerfield,  A.M.)  Care: — I.  An  evil.  Anxiety  is  to  be 
avoided.  1.  For  our  own  sakes.  The  exhortation  does  not  discourage  economy 
and  industry,  although  some  fanatics  make  it  do  so.  The  same  religion  which  tella 
us  to  be  careful  for  nothing  tells  us  also  to  be  diligent  in  business,  and  if  any  one 
under  the  cloak  of  the  text  becomes  careless  of  the  duties  of  life  he  denies  "  the 
faith  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel."  Still  there  are  some  virtues  which  become 
vices.  (1)  Here  ia  a  man  who  by  unstinted  economy  heaps  up  riches,  and  knows  not 
who  will  reap  them.  The  world  promised  him  happiness  in  riches,  and  outside 
people  say,  "  What  a  happy  man."  But  look  at  the  wrinkles  on  his  face ;  he  ia 
fearful  of  losing  hie  riches  and  is  apprehensive  of  beggary  and  dies,  sometimes  by 
his  own  hand.  (2)  Here  is  another,  careful  of  his  good  name — a  good  thing  in  it- 
eeif — but  the  least  thing  said  about  him  he  feels  acutely,  and  his  peace  is  destroyed. 
The  Christian's  duty  is  clear.  He  must  not  fritter  away  his  life  in  anxiety  about 
circumstances  or  good  name.  Anxiety  cumbers  people  as  it  did  Martha,  and  is  both 
unwise  and  injurious.  There  are  trials  enough  without  making  them.  The 
anxious  man  is  a  wholesale  trouble  maker.  2.  Because  we  are  not  our  own.  This 
is  a  question  which  affects  both  conscience  and  honesty.  God  made  us.  What  we 
possess  is  not  our  own,  God  has  purchased  us  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  S. 
Because  anxiety  is  distrust  of  God.  The  promises  cannot  be  broken  ;  however  ad- 
verse the  circumstances.  Anxiety  is  thinking  meanly  of  God.  While  religion 
allows  of  grief,  she  forbids  excessive  grief.  It  is  difficult  to  bear  with  affliction,  but 
it  is  cowardly  to  succumb.  II.  A  pkeventative.  Prayer  is  an  appeal  to  Deity, 
which  shows  that  we  are  not  independent  of  Him  ;  but  it  is  an  appeal  to  a  Father. 
To  be  successful  it  must  fulfil  certain  conditions.  1.  It  must  be  thankful — even  in 
time  of  sorrow.  Who  of  us  has  not  something  to  be  thankful  for — food,  raiment, 
«fec.  2.  It  mast  be  particular.  There  are  some  things  which  people  think  too  in- 
aignificant;  but  who  has  sufEcient  knowledge  to  determine  that.  Has  God  ever 
rebuked  you  for  going  to  Him?  God  cares  for  the  sparrows,  much  more  then  for 
you.  3.  Continual.  No  solitary  suppUcation  was  ever  forgotten.  The  answers 
will  surely  come,  although  in  an  unexpected  way.  III.  A  consolation.  1.  The  peace 
of  God.  We  do  not  know  how  it  is  infused  into  the  heart,  "  it  passeth  all  under- 
standing ; "  but  we  may  all  feel  it  if  we  like.  2.  It  is  the  Saviour's  legacy  ;  and 
nobody  should  be  defrauded  of  it — "  My  peace."  3.  Some  people  try  to  keep  the 
peace  of  God  instead  of  letting  the  peace  of  God  keep  them.  4.  Its  medium  is 
•'Christ  Jesus."  (W.  M.  Punslwn,  LL.D.)  Peace  by  power  and  power  by 
prayer: — I.  The  mistake  from  which  wk  abb  dissuaded.  "Be  careful  for  no- 
thing." 1.  This  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to  be  stoically  indifferent,  and  just  to 
take  life  as  it  comes.  Such  a  notion  would  be  the  death  of  all  holy  manly  ambi- 
tion, and  would  mean  "good  for  nothing."  Man  is  not  intended  to  be  the  sport 
of  circumstances.  His  duties  imply  an  earnest  exercise  of  his  powers,  which  is  im- 
possible without  a  measure  of  solicitude.  Note  the  commendation  which  ''care- 
fulueas  "  receives  in  2  Cor.   vii.  11.     Were  a  Christian  to  fall  into  indifference 


CHAP    IV.  1  PHILIPPIANS.  117 

Christianity  would  be  gone.  2.  The  mistake  against  which  we  are  dissuaded  is 
that  of  laying  the  mind  open  to  the  worries  which  are  ready  to  invade  it — the 
disposition  condemned  in  Martha.  St.  Paul  %vould  have  us  rise  into  the  calm  region 
of  faith  above  all  fret  and  paralysing  fear.  3.  Such  an  exhortation  is  not  uncalled 
fcr.  Over  anxiety  is  one  of  the  commonest  of  sins.  Strange  that  it  should  be  so. 
We  profess  to  believe  that  the  Lord  knows  our  sorrows,  that  His  peace  is  sufficient, 
that  He  supplies  all  cur  need,  and  causes  all  things  to  work  together  for  good. 
Surely  such  a  belief  should  make  us  trustful,  fearless,  and  calm.  We  may  well 
cry,  "  Help  our  unbelief."  II.  The  instrumentality  for  the  repression  of  over 
ANXiBTY  (Psa.  Ixii.  8).  J.  *'  Let  your  requests,"  &c.  True,  God  knows  our  needs 
before  we  pray ;  but  we  may,  nevertheless,  find  relief  in  telling  them  out  to  Him 
with  the  confiding  love  of  a  child.  Enlightened  prayer  does  not  ask  for  miracle 
or  any  change  in  the  Divine  will.  It  only  implies  that  asking  is  one  of  the  appointed 
conditions  of  receiving,  that  the  giving  of  the  best  things  that  the  soul  craves  is  the 
sole  prerogative  of  God.  2.  "In  everything."  Prajer  properly  belongs  to  the 
.whole  of  our  condition.  Whatever  touches  our  life  is  important  enough  to  be  taken 
to  the  "  throne  of  grace,"  3.  "By  prayer  and  supplication."  The  language  im- 
plies entreaty.  Not  "  vain  repetitions,"  not  noise  as  if  God  were  afar  off  or  indif- 
ferent, but  the  fresh  warm  cry  of  the  hungry  for  bread,  4.  "  With  thanksgiving." 
Prayer  should  be  animated  with  gratitude.  While  we  are  with  God  let  us  think  of 
His  goodness  in  welcoming  us.  His  former  gracious  answers.  His  countless  unde- 
served and  even  unsought  blessings.  Gratitude  is  one  of  the  sweetest  and  most 
useful  ingredients.  Whilst  it  honours  God  it  disposes  to  that  faith  without  which 
we  cannot  pray  aright.  So  we  come  to  that  trust  which  is  the  antithesis  of  inor- 
dinate anxiety.  In  prayer,  distrust  is  distraction,  and  distraction  weakness.  The 
prayer  of  faith  is  the  natural  and  appointed  instrumentality  for  the  repression  of 
over  anxiety.  111.  The  method  in  which  this  instrumentality  works  for  thb 
PRODUCTION  OF  THE  DESIRED  RESULT,  Psace  comes  by  power  and  power  by  prayer, 
1,  In  prayer  itself  there  is  often  a  priceless  .enjoyment.  2.  We  obtain  specific 
answers  to  prayers ;  not  always,  indeed,  according  to  our  fancies,  but  invariably 
•ccording  to  God's  all-wise  and  perfect  goodness,  which  is  immeasurably  preferable. 
8.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  prayer  to  soothe  away  unnecessary  anxiety,  and  to  sweeten 
such  solicitudes  as  are  wholesome ;  for  prayer  takes  us  into  the  presence  of  God, 
where  all  is  calm.  (/.  P.  Bamett.)  "  Be  careful  for  nothing  " : — Man  is  bom  to 
trouble  as  the  sparks  fly  upward.  He  is  launched  on  the  storm-tossed  sea  of  life. 
He  is  a  reed  which  grows  up  to  be  shaken  of  the  wind.  The  pleasantest  paths  are 
not  without  their  sorrows.  The  rose,  however  sweet  it  is,  has  its  thorns.  What 
then  shall  we  do  with  our  sorrows?  1.  It  is  impossible  to  eradicate  them,  for  in 
the  very  resistance  we  find  a  new  cause  of  suffering.  As  the  fabled  Hydra  of  old, 
with  one  head  severed  from  his  body,  sprang  forward  with  a  hundred  in  its  place, 
so  shall  our  resisted  troubles  be.  2.  It  is  folly  to  resist  them ;  as  idiotic  a  task  as 
Don  Quixote's  against  the  windmills.  3.  Shall  we  suffer,  then  7  We  could  if  we 
were  as  strong  as  Atlas,  who  bore  the  world  on  his  shoulders  ;  but  we  are  not 
Atlases.  4.  Take  them  quickly,  then,  to  the  Divine  Burden-bearer.  This  is  the 
panacea  for  all  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to,  I.  Be  careful  for  nothing.  1.  Be- 
cause there  are  higher  considerations.  Here  we  spend  no  end  of  time  and  thought 
on  things  which  are  not  worth  it,  and  neglect  matters  which  deserve  our  most 
earnest  attention.  "The  life  is  more  than  meat,"  and  the  soul  than  life.  The 
doctor's  bell  and  knocker  never  seem  at  rest ;  nor  are  the  poor  patients  to  be  blamed 
for  their  importunity  ;  but  how  is  it  that  the  body  casket  is  so  cared  for  and  the 
Boul  jewel  so  neglected.  Men  are  careful  even  to  madness  about  their  money,  but 
utterly  careless  about  eternal  riches.  2.  Because  those  necessary  trifles  about 
which  we  are  obliged  to  think  in  some  degree  are  all  seen  to  and  arranged  by  God. 
Cast,  then,  "  all  your  care  upon  Him ;  He  careth  for  you,"  8.  Because  the  smallest 
affairs  of  life  are  entirely  beyond  our  control.  Man  can  do  a  great  deal — he  can 
flash  a  message  round  the  world,  and  through  the  microphone  hear  the  footstep  of 
a  fly,  but  he  cannot  add  one  cubit  to  his  stature,  4.  Because  notliing  is  too  small 
for  God  to  arrange  for.  We  are  ready  to  believe  that  nothing  is  too  great  for  God 
to  care  for,  but  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  confide  in  Him  in  little  things.  But  the  God 
who  made  the  ocean  makes  the  dew  drop,  and  cares  for  both.  II,  Be  prayerful 
FOR  everything.  Some  mercies  will  come  unasked  for ;  but  those  are  sweetest 
which  come  in  answer  to  prayer.  1.  Because  of  the  privilege  of  prayer.  We  have 
not  only  the  care  but  the  heart  of  God.  The  blood  of  God's  dear  Son  has  opened 
the  way  to  the  mercy-seat.     2,  Because  of  the  power  of  prayer.     It  has  a  soothing 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohai.  Hk 

effect,  as  we  know  from  earthly  confidences.  3.  Becaupe  there  is  no  limit  to  prayer. 
There  is  nothing  we  may  noi,  ask  Him  about.  It  is  His  will.  "  1  will  be  enquired 
of."  III.  Be  thankful  fob  anything.  1.  Because  we  do  not  dpserve  anything 
but  wrath.  2.  Because  ingratitude  is  one  of  the  worst  of  sins.  We  are  thankful 
for  the  hospitality  of  earthly  friends,  and  yet  though  we  have  so  much  from  God 
how  thankless  we  are.  Thankless  hearts  are  like  scentless  flowers.  (Thomas 
Spurgeon.)  Carefulness: — I.  Its  nature.  The  root  of  the  original  word  is  a 
verb  which  signifies  "to  divide."  Such  care  as  diverts  and  distracts  the  mind  from 
its  true  and  tranquil  bent  towards  God.  It  is  not  common  forethought  and  pru- 
dence that  is  forbidden.  There  is  no  warrant  for  careless/iess,  supineness,  inac- 
tivity. Neither  the  indiffereuce  of  the  fatalist  or  of  the  sensualist  are  sanctioned 
here.  But  here  is  warrant  for  the  man  who  believes  that  "  all  things  work 
together  for  good  ;"  that  in  things  both  great  and  small  "  the  Lord  will  provide." 

I.  In  disappointment — adversity  where  prosperity  was  expected — the  loss  of  those 
on  whom  our  strongest  trust  was  reposed.  2.  In  the  pressing  claims  of  business 
or  the  family.  3.  Eelax  not  any  reasonable  and  temperate  exertion,  but  listen — 
*'  God  will  provide  "  sing  the  birds  of  the  air,  and  whisper  the  lilies  of  the  field. 

II.  Its  causes.  1.  An  undue  value  of  this  present  world.  We  reverse  the  apostle's 
mle  and  walk  by  sight.  2.  Practical  distrust  of  God,  The  most  orthodox  are  often 
guilty  of  this  heresy.  Faith  in  God  is  useless  in  the  creed  if  it  be  absent  from  the 
heart.  3.  Neglect  of  Christian  privilege.  *'  All  things  are  yours."  The  promises 
are  ours,  but  we  neglect  to  plead  and  to  trust  them.  III.  Its  evils.  1,  Its  essence 
is  worldly  mindedness.  Unseen  and  eternal  things  are  thrown  into  the  background. 
And  the  snare  is  doubly  dangerous  and  successful  from  the  fact  that  it  is  not  viewed 
as  a  sin,  but  cloaked  under  the  specious  names  of  prudence  and  care  for  family.  2. 
It  cramps  our  benevolence.  It  knows  nothing  of  lending  unto  the  Lord  and  giving 
cheerfully.  It  anticipates  the  day  when  what  can  now  be  spent  will  be  wanted. 
It  will  not  trust  God.  3.  It  engenders  a  close  illiberal  spirit  in  all  the  transactioM 
of  life.  It  stands  by  its  rights,  drives  hard  bargains,  exacts  the  uttermost  farthing. 
•'  I  cannot  afford  it."  "  I  must  not  wrong  my  family."  IV.  The  eemkdy.  Prayer, 
including  blessings  sought  and  evils  deprecated  ("  supplication  "),  joined  with  an 
acknowledgment  of  mercies  past.  1.  Be  it  what  it  may  it  is  the  Christians  privilege 
to  spread  it  before  the  Lord,  Uke  Hezekiah.  You  have  kind  friends,  sound  advisers; 
but  go  first  to  God ;  and  when  before  Him  pour  out  your  whole  heart,  and  you  shall 
find  a  calm  and  stillness  in  heart  prayer,  which  shall  soothe  every  grief  and  care  to 
rest.  If  you  do  not  find  it  all  at  once  pray  on.  2.  Be  thankful,  i.e.,  draw  upon 
your  experience  as  well  as  your  faith  ;  and  remember  that  *'  the  Lord's  hand  is  not 
shortened  that  it  cannot  save,"  &o.  (Canon  Miller.)  Anxiety  : — L  Its  roiiT. 
What  good  can  anxiety  do  ?  1.  It  is  an  idle  thing  ;  the  mind  hovers  and  fluttera 
round  the  subject ;  goes  over  the  same  ground  again  and  again,  wearies  itself  in 
vain  repetitions  of  the  same  cares  and  fears;  but  what  has  it  done  t  has  it  advanced 
the  matter  one  real  step?  Has  it  arrived  at  one  good  counsel,  or  set  itself  to  one 
wise  act  ?  2.  It  is  an  enfeebling  thing  ;  it  eats  the  very  life  out  of  the  energies ;  it 
leaves  the  man  not  only  where  he  was,  but  ten  times  less  capable  and  vigorous 
than  at  the  beginning.  3.  It  is  an  irritating  thing ;  it  ruffles  the  temper,  upsets 
the  balance  of  the  spirit ;  is  the  sure  source  of  moodiness,  sharpness,  petulance, 
and  anger  ;  it  sets  a  man  at  war  with  himself,  his  neighbour,  God's  providence,  and 
God's  appointments.  4.  It  is  a  sign  of  mistrust,  of  feeble  faith,  of  flagging  energy, 
and  languid  obedience.  II.  Its  cube.  1.  St.  Paul  knew  better  than  to  attempt  the 
correction  of  anxiety  by  human  arguments.  It  may  be  useless,  wrong,  mischievous, 
but  it  is  in  us  all ;  and  let  a  man  be  sharply  tried,  he  is  anxious  still.  The  conflict 
with  any  one  of  our  evil  tendencies  is  too  strong  for  us  single  handed.  2.  Bring  in 
another  person  ;  introduce  a  new  consideration ;  suggest  a  new  motive.  Tell  ua 
of  One  who  amongst  our  other  griefs  has  borne  this,  amongst  our  other  sorrows  has 
carried  this  (Isa.  liii.  4) ;  of  One  who  in  all  our  afflictions  is  Himseli  afflicted ;  in 
all  our  cares  is  Himself  troubled  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9) ;  above  all,  of  One  who  is  not  in 
some  difl'erent  and  distant  world,  where  the  sound  of  human  groans  scarcely  pene- 
trates, where  the  burden  of  human  distress  is  regarded  as  unreal,  but  who  is  here,  in 
our  world,  at  hand,  present ;  who  both  foresees  and  remembers  with  us,  feels  with  as 
well  as  for  us,  is  *'  touched  with  a  sense  of  our  infirmities,"  yea,  was  Himself 
"  tempted  in  all  points  "  (Heb.  iv.  15).  Then,  in  His  presence,  in  His  human  soul, 
in  His  compassionate  heart,  we  will  lay  aside  our  anxieties,  rest  from  our  burdens, 
take  refuge  from  our  fears  and  from  our  sins.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  The  prayer  of 
faith : — In  everything  make  your  request  known  unto  God,  and  then  be  caref uJ  for 


CHAP.  nr.J  PHILIPPIANS.  819 

nothing.  It  is  committed  into  God's  hands,  rest  and  rejoice.  These  early  converta 
•were  filled  with  an  overwhelming  sense  of  the  blessings  with  which  their  lives  were 
crowned.  They  found  it  easier  to  praise  than  we  do.  I.  The  principle  op 
DELIVERANCE  FROM  CARE  is  placed  bj  our  Lord,  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  in  a  two- 
fold light.  1.  The  things  about  which  we  are  tempted  to  be  careful  are  "  things  that 
perish."  Their  worth  is  but  for  a  little  time,  and  stretches  but  a  little  way.  What 
matters  a  little  more  or  less  of  earthly  treasure.  '  The  soul's  satisfaction  is  inde- 
pendent of  it.  The  true  and  enduring  riches  are  within  reach.  To  men  who 
believed  in  and  pined  for  the  heavenly  treasure,  the  appeal  was  conclusive.  What 
matters  the  earthly  substance  which  moth  and  rust  are  wasting  daily,  when  we 
have  a  glorious  treasure  which  defies  decay  and  violence.  They  believed  this  and 
were  careful  for  nothing.  We  believe  less  and  are  consumed  with  care.  2.  This 
superiority  to  earthly  things  demands  a  keen  discernment,  a  pure  unworldly  heart, 
which  are  rare.  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things.  The  Saviour,  pitying  our  in- 
firmity, has  another  assurance  to  meet  the  needs  of  our  trembling  apprehensive 
natures.  "Your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  these  things." 
We  are  not  alone  in  this  great  universe,  whose  awful  order,  indifferent  to  our  needs, 
strikes  a  shivering  dread  into  our  hearts.  Behind  the  veil  a  Father  is  watching  and 
caring,  and  by  His  vigilant  providence  is  adding,  in  the  measure  in  which  He  sees 
we  need  them,  all  these  things  unto  us.  Be  careful  for  nothing  ;  rest  calmly  in  the 
care  of  God.  3.  But  we  can  not  only  rest  but  pray.  He  is  no  unknown  Friend  to 
whom  we  can  commend  our  cause  and  then  leave  it.  He  is  here  in  the  silent 
sanctuary  of  oar  hearts.  Perhaps  oar  requests  are  shortsighted  and  foolish.  Be 
it  so.  The  best  thing  that  we  can  do  is  to  take  tliem  to  God,  and  lay  them  before 
Him.  His  light  will  reveal,  His  fire  consume  the  sensual,  selfish  element  in  our 
petitions ;  His  burning  presence  will  purify  our  hearts,  and  make  our  prayers 
powerful  with  Him.  Prayer  is  the  channel  of  commnnication  between  the  careworn 
Boul  and  its  helper ;  and  it  fills  its  desolation  with  the  sense  of  a  living,  loving 
presence,  which  charges  the  very  atmosphere  with  benediction ;  it  quickens  a  pulse 
of  joy  and  hope  in  the  numbness  of  its  despair.  He  who  has  never  known  what 
prayer  can  do  to  calm  a  troubled  and  uplift  a  despaiiing  spirit  is  dead  to  the  deepest, 
richest  experience  of  life.  II.  But  it  must  be  the  prayer  of  faith.  1.  Christiana 
complain  bitterly  that  their  prayers  are  not  answered.  But  they  do  not  understand 
the  conditions.  God  nowhere  binds  Himself  to  answer  our  shortsighted  requests. 
Did  we  see  more  clearly  we  should  tremble  lest  He  should.  That  would  prove  His 
heaviest  chastisement.  But  He  binds  Himself  to  answer  our  prayers,  in  His  own 
way.  No  praying  soul  is  sent  empty  away.  2.  The  prayer  of  faith  is  the  prayer 
which  recognizes  God  as  the  supreme  and  perfect  God.  No  man  is  in  the  way  of 
blessing  until  he  understands  that  in  God  alone  can  he  be  supremely  ble.ssed. 
Until  he  has  made  God  his  portion  there  is  the  deepest  want  of  his  being  un- 
satisfied. This  being  recognized  his  wants  fall  into  their  true  proportion.  They 
are  not  extinguished,  but  they  are  no  more  imperative.  It  is  no  longer.  Give  me 
this  or  I  die ;  it  is,  Give  me  Thyself  and  I  live ;  and  this.  Give  or  withhold  at  Thy 
will  I  have  all,  and  abound  in  Thee.  3.  The  prayer  of  faith  seeks  conformity 
with  the  mind  of  God,  without  which  it  is  idle  to  hope  or  pray  for  peace.  Nine- 
tenths  of  our  cares  grow  out  of  our  mad  desires  for  some  unreal  and  delusive  good. 
All  cares  that  eat  into  the  soul  arise  really  from  a  striving  against  God.  The  first 
request  of  prayer  is,  "  Show  me  Thy  will,  and  rule  my  will  by  Thine.  Boot  out 
self-will,  tame  passion,  calm  desire,  bring  me  into  harmony  with  Thy  pare  and  per- 
fect mind,  and  then  bestow  what  Thou  seest  is  for  my  good."  When  a  soul  has 
said  that,  its  brooding  cares  and  wearing  sorrows  have  gone  as  the  mists  of  the 
morning  vanish  in  the  sunlight.  4.  The  prayer  of  faith  never  leaves  out  of  its  account 
the  Hand  that  is  always  working  for  our  deliverance, and  never  so  mightily  aswhen  the 
storm  gathers,  and  the  great  waters  seem  to  overwhelm.  And  the  prayer  of  faith  never 
fails.  (J.  Baldwin  Brrnvn,  B. A.)  Prayer  with  thanksgiving : — The  two  precepts 
balance  each  other.  The  first  especially  would  be  misunderstood  if  it  stood  alone. 
They  are  so  connected  with  "  but "  as  to  exclude  each  other.  You  may  have  either, 
but  you  cannot  have  both.  The  careful  is  not  prayerful ;  the  prayerful  is  not 
careful.  I.  Let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God.  1.  Bequests.  (1)  All 
•reatures  are  dependent.  The  earth  by  dumb  signs  asks  the  rain  from  heaven  to 
refresh  its  dust  and  make  it  fruitful.  The  air  asks  moisture  from  the  ocean  ;  the 
ocean  from  the  rivers.  All  are  needy  and  seek  their  supply  from  Him  in  whom  all 
fulness  dwells.  (2)  Man  with  the  greatest  capacity  is  distinguished  by  the  greatest 
oeed.     The  child  is  much  more  dependent  on  its  parents'  care  than  the  young  of 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  it, 

other  creatureB.  So  the  child  of  God's  family  needs  much  more  from  the  Father's 
hand.  How  many  times  has  a  man  of  sixty  breathed  ?  How  vast  the  supply  ol 
air,  and  how  close  to  his  lips  ?  The  act  of  breathing  seems  an  emblem  at  once 
of  the  creature's  continual  need,  and  of  the  Creator's  abundant  supply.  His  good- 
ness  has  compassed  us  about  like  the  atmosphere ;  and  when  we  open  our  mouth 
it  is  filled  with  good.  2.  Make  them  known  to  God.  (1)  The  lower  part  of  our 
nature  is  supplied  as  God  supplies  that  of  the  beasts.  But  God  desires  company 
among  His  creatures.  He  did  not  find  among  them  any  fit  for  this  until  He  made 
man  in  His  own  image.  Fathers  love  to  supply  their  children's  wants ;  inconceiv- 
ably greater  is  God's  delight.  Human  fathers  have  a  defective  love  in  their  hearts 
and  a  defective  supply  in  their  hands :  they  sometimes  will  not,  and  sometimes 
cannot,  give  what  their  children  require.  But  our  Father  in  heaven  is  not  limited 
on  either  side.  (2)  When  man  fell  the  relation  was  broken  off.  At  a  great  price 
the  channel  was  opened  again.  God  has,  through  Christ,  made  known  His  fulness  : 
we  should,  through  Christ,  make  known  to  Him  our  need.  3.  Tour  requests — your 
own — not  what  other  people  have  asked,  or  what  you  have  learned  to  repeat.  Jesus 
set  a  little  child  in  the  midst  of  His  dii^ciples,  and  said,  "  Give  me  a  child's 
simplicity."  The  wants  it  cries  for  are  its  own,  and  whether  intelligible  or  not  are 
real,  not  feigned.  What  element  in  the  request  of  bis  little  child  goes  home  to  the 
father's  heart,  filling  it  with  delight  and  opening  sluices  for  a  flood  of  gifts?  It  is 
this — they  are  his  own  child's  own  requests.  This  quality,  "yours,"  will  cover  a 
multitude  of  sins  against  grammar  and  other  earthly  laws.  II.  By  prater  and 
SUPPLTCATION  WITH  THANK80IVIN0.  1.  Prayer.  This  is  the  soul's  believing  and 
reverential  approach  unto  God.  It  is  the  prelnde  to  the  request  and  thanksgiving. 
The  pattern  prayer  commences  with  "Our  Father."  The  prater  and  supplication 
foUow.  2.  Supplication — the  specific  request.  The  word  means  asking,  but  its  radical 
signification  is  "  want: "  hence  it  came  to  mean  a  craving  for  supply.  3.  With 
thanksgiving — for  past  favours.  4.  The  relation  of  these  two  elements  of  a  soul's 
communion  with  God.  (1)  Supplication  with  thanksgiving  seems  to  intimate  that 
we  are  apt  to  omit  this  latter  ingredient,  and  to  warn  us  that  the  omission  will 
vitiate  all.  To  ply  the  asking  without  the  song  of  praise  seems  like  taking  some 
ingredients  of  the  physician's  prescription  and  leaving  out  one.  (2)  The  currents 
of  grace  run  in  circles  as  well  as  in  nature — the  believer  draws  from  God  a  stream 
of  benefits  and  returns  the  incense  of  praise.  III.  In  evfrything.  1.  Pray,  At 
all  times,  in  all  places,  about  everything.  Not  on  the  Sabbath,  or  in  church  only. 
Our  Father  takes  it  ill  if  we  send  in  our  request  for  the  pardon  of  sin,  but  ask  not 
His  counsel  about  the  choice  of  a  companion  or  an  investment  in  trade.  He  is  not 
a  man  of  little  faith  who  puts  little  things  into  his  prayers.  2.  Give  thanks. 
There  is  nothing  here  contrary  to  nature.  God's  commandments  are  not  grievous. 
Yon  need  not  give  thanks  for  suffering,  but  even  in  sorrow  there  is  room  for  praise. 
E.g.  (1)  In  the  things  yon  do  not  suffer — when  in  bodily  pain  that  the  mind  is 
clear;  or  when  suffering  from  calumny  that  you  have  a  good  conscience  towards 
God ;  or  when  you  have  lost  your  money  that  your  children  survive.  (2)  For  the 
good  sorrow  brings  in  fruit  unto  holiness.  (3)  But  in  all  cases  there  is  room  for 
thanks  in  the  ••  unspeakable  Gift."  (W.  Amot,  D.D.)  Prayer  perfumed  vith 
praise: — 1.  By  prayer  is  meant  the  general,  and  by  supplication  the  particular  act 
of  devotion.  Do  not  forget  the  second  element.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  generaliz- 
ing in  prayer.  What  we  want  is  more  definite  pleading  with  God.  When 
Abraham  prayed  he  did  not  merely  adore  God  but  offered  specific  petitions,  and 
Elijah  prayed  for  rain  there  and  then.  2.  But  whether  general  or  specific  we  are 
to  offer  thanksgiving.  Hence  it  follows — (1)  That  we  ought  always  to  be  in  a  thankful 
condition  of  heart.  "  Thus  will  I  bless  Thee  while  I  live."  (2)  That  the  blending 
of  thanks  with  devotion  is  always  to  be  maintained.  Though  the  prayer  should 
struggle  upward  out  of  the  depths,  yet  must  its  wings  be  silvered  o'er  with  thanks- 
giving.  These  two  holy  streams  flow  from  a  common  source  and  should  mingU  as 
they  flow;  like  kindred  colours  they  shadfl  off  into  each  other.  (3)  This  com- 
mingling of  precious  things  is  admirable.  Prayer  is  myrrh,  and  praise  is 
frankincense.  The  holy  incense  of  the  sanctuary  yielded  the  smoke  of  prayer 
which  filled  the  holy  place,  but  with  it  was  the  sweet  perfume  of  praise.  Prayer 
and  praise  are  like  the  two  cherubim,  they  must  never  be  separated.  Note  how 
our  Lord  mingles  both  in  the  model  prayer,  and  David  in  the  Psalms  (Psa.  xviii.  3). 
And  BO  St.  Paul  (Eom.  i.  8-9 ;  Col.  i.  3 ;  1  Tbess.  i,  2 ;  2  Tim.  i.  3 ;  Phil.  i.  3-4), 
and  when  he  and  Silas,  when  in  the  Philippian  jail,  they  prayed  and  sang  praises. 
I.  The  seasons  fob  mingling  thanksgiving  with  PEArEB.     In  the  nature  of  things 


CHAP.  !▼.]  PHILIPPIANS.  821 

it  should  be  so.  We  do  uot  come  to  God  as  if  He  had  left  us  penniless.  Thanka- 
giviug  is  our  riglit  attitude  towards  One  who  daily  loadeth  us  with  benefits.  You 
have  cause  for  thanksgiving.  1.  That  such  a  thing  as  prayer  is  possible — that  God 
should  have  cc^mmanded  and  encouraged  it,  and  supplied  all  things  necessary  for 
its  exercise — the  blood-oespriukled  mercy-seat,  the  perpetual  Intercessor,  the  spirit 
of  grace  and  supplication  who  helpeth  our  infirmities.  2.  That  we  are  spared  and 
permitted  to  pray.  It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercy  that  we  are  not  consumed.  Like 
David  we  may  not  be  able  to  go  up  to  the  house  of  prayer,  but  we  can  still  pray. 
The  prodigal  has  lost  his  substance,  but  not  his  power  to  supplicate.  8.  That  we 
have  already  received  great  mercy  at  God's  hands.  If  we  never  received  another 
favour  we  have  had  enough  tor  ceaseless  praise.  Whatever  we  may  ask  for  cannot 
be  one-half  so  great  as  what  has  been  received.  We  have  life  in  Christ ;  and  that 
is  more  than  food  or  raiment.  If  Christ  is  tliiue,  He  who  gave  thee  Him  will  deny 
thee  notliing.  4.  That  prayer  has  been  answered  so  many  times  before.  5.  That 
,we  h.ive  the  mercy  which  we  seek.  We  antedate  our  gratitude  with  men.  Your 
promise  to  pay  a  man's  rent  when  it  has  become  due  is  the  object  of  thanks  before 
a  farthing  has  left  your  pocket.  Shall  we  not  bo  willing  to  trust  God  a  few  months 
or  years  beforehand.  6.  If  the  Lord  does  not  answer  the  prayer  we  are  offering,  yet, 
still,  He  is  so  good,  that  we  will  bless  Him  whether  or  no.  How  devoutly  might 
some  of  us  thank  Him  that  He  did  not  grant  the  evil  things  we  sought  in  the 
ignorance  of  our  childish  minds.  We  asked  for  flesh  and  He  might  have  sent  ua 
quails  in  His  anger.  The  Lord's  roughest  usage  is  only  love  in  disguise.  II.  Thb 
Kviii  OF  THE  ABSENCE  OF  THANKSGiviNQ,  1.  We  should  be  chargeable  with  in- 
gratitude, Aristotle  said,  "  A  return  is  required  to  preserve  friendship  between  two 
persons  ;  "  and  if  we  have  nothing  else  but  gratitude  let  na  abound  therein.  2.  It 
would  argue  great  selfishness.  Can  it  be  right  to  pray  for  benefits  and  never  hononr 
our  Benefactor.  3.  Thanksgiving  prevents  prayer  from  becoming  an  exhibition  of 
want  of  faith.  If  when  I  am  in  trouble  I  still  bless  God  for  all  I  suffer,  therein  my 
faith  is  seen.  Is  our  faith  such  that  it  only  sings  in  the  sunshine  ?  Have  we  no 
nightingale  music  for  our  God  J  Is  our  trust  like  the  swallow,  which  must  leave 
us  in  winter?  Is  our  faith  a  fiower  that  needs  a  conservatory  to  keep  it  active? 
Can  it  not  blossom  like  gentian  at  the  foot  of  the  frozen  glacier.  4.  Not  to  thank 
God  would  argue  wilfulness  and  want  of  submission  to  His  will.  Must  everything 
be  ordered  according  to  our  own  mind  ?  Much  of  the  prayer  of  rebellious  hearts 
is  the  mere  growling  of  an  angry  obstinacy,  the  whine  of  an  angratified  self-conceit. 
in.  The  besdlt  of  thanksgiving  in  connection  with  prayer.  1.  Peace  (vers. 
6,  7).  Some  men  pray,  and  therein  they  do  well ;  but  for  lack  of  mixing  thanks- 
giving with  it  they  come  away  from  the  closet  even  more  anxious  than  when  they 
entered  it.  2.  Thanksgiving  will  warm  the  soul  and  enable  it  to  pray.  Do  not 
pump  up  unwilling  formal  prayer.  Take  the  hymn  book  and  sing.  3.  When  a 
man  begins  to  pray  with  thanksgiving  he  is  on  the  eve  of  receiving  the  blessing. 
God's  time  to  bless  you  has  come  when  you  begin  to  bless  Him  (2  Chron.  xx.  20, 
&o. ).  Our  thanksgiving  will  show  that  the  reason  for  our  waiting  is  now  exhausted ; 
that  the  waiting  has  answered  its  purposes,  and  may  now  come  to  a  joyful  end. 
When  you  put  up  a  thanksgiving  on  the  ground  that  God  has  answered  your  prayer, 
you  have  really  prevailed  with  God.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  ideal  manhood: — 
1.  This  is  a  command  given  by  one  of  the  ablest  professors  in  the  school  of  Christ. 
Different  schools  turn  out  different  sorts  of  scholars.  A  military  school  is  under- 
stood to  torn  out  good  fighting  soldiers ;  a  law  school  good  lawyers ;  a  medical 
school  good  doctors ;  a  classical  school  good  scholars ;  the  school  of  Christ  a 
certain  style  of  manhood  after  the  pattern  of  Christ.  2.  Here  is  a  man  trained 
in  this  school,  and  now  a  teacher.  He  !■  a  prisoner,  advanced  in  life,  most 
sensitive,  one  who  had  been  subjected  to  every  pain  and  indignity,  who  lived  a  life 
enough  to  make  any  one  turn  pale ;  and  yet  after  all  he  had  undergone  he  says, 
"  Let  your  disposition  be  such  that  you  will  see  how  many  things  you  have  to  be 
thankful  for ;  and  when  you  ask  for  anything  do  it  through  the  radiant  atmosphere 
of  gratitude."  When  the  pendulum  swung  up  and  Paul  was  in  the  midst  of 
abundance  he  knew  how  to  be  a  simple  humble  man ;  and  when  it  swung  to  the 
other  extreme  and  he  bore  chains,  he  said,  "  I  have  learned  to  be  content.  My 
manhood  is  more  than  my  condition.  I  am  master  of  circumstances,  they  are  not 
master  of  me."  Such  was  the  style  of  manhood  to  be  turned  out  in  the  school  of 
Christ.  3.  I  am  far  from  saying  that  this  is  easy  or  rapid  of  attainment ;  but  I 
do  say  that  such  is  the  ideal  portraiture  of  Christianity  in  the  school  of  Christ. 
His  school  is  like  every  other  in  that  there  is  a  difference  of  apprehensiveness  in 

21 


329  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

the  scholars ;  but  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  there  is  this  ideal  set  before  them 
which  they  are  to  strive  after — to  give  power  to  the  inward  man,  to  overcomt 
appetites  and  passions,  to  endure  troubles  of  every  kind,  and  not  stoically  but 
rejoicingly,  to  have  a  hope  that  quenches  fear,  faith  that  annihilates  doubt, 
endurance  that  can  bear  as  much  as  God  lays  on.  Not  every  man  that  comes  from 
the  university  is  a  perfect  scholar,  but  there  is  a  bright  ideal  held  up,  and  if  the 
scholar  does  not  approximate  to  it  in  a  measure  it  is  not  the  fault  of  the  university 
but  his  own.  4.  Can  this  ideal  of  Christianity  ever  be  set  aside  ?  We  li  ?e  in  a 
sceptical  age,  but  a  thing  that  has  happened  is  a  fact ;  and  nothing  can  make  it  not 
to  have  happened  ;  and  since  religion  discloses  what  it  is  to  live  in  Christ  Jesus, 
and  lifts  up  the  conception  of  our  higher  being  in  its  developed  state,  we  are  not 
going  to  lose  it  out  of  the  world.  There  is  nothing  so  powerful  as  a  soul  brought 
under  such  inspiration  as  St.  Paul's,  and  no  scepticisms  will  ever  sweep  it  away. 
If  you  can  live  as  Paul  lived,  and  as  thousands  of  Christians  have  lived,  by  other 
than  Christian  instrumentalities,  then  you  are  bound  to  show  what  they  are,  and 
where  they  are  to  be  found.  5.  If  Paul's  conception  of  the  Christian  life  be  true 
then  every  other  is  false — the  ascetic  view,  e.g.,  pain,  selt-denial,  of  course,  comCy 
but  with  them  come  a  spirit  that  welcomes  the  pain  and  turns  the  cross  into  a 
benediction.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Be  careful  for  nothing : — The  Christian  is  not 
half  saved.  God  does  not  pay  half  his  debts  for  him,  and  leave  him  to  work  off 
the  rest.  (Harry  Jones,  M.A.)  Ca«ting  care  on  God: — Bulstrode  Whiteloeke, 
Cromwell's  envoy  to  Sweden,  was  one  night  so  disturbed  in  mind  over  the  state  of 
his  nation  that  he  could  not  sleep.  His  servant  observing  it  said,  "  Pray,  sir,  will 
you  give  me  leave  to  ask  you  a  question?"  "Certainly." — "Do  you  think  that 
God  governed  the  world  very  well  before  you  came  into  it  ?  "  "  Certainly." — "  Then, 
pray,  sir,  excuse  me,  do  j'ou  not  think  that  you  may  trust  Him  to  govern  it  as  long 
as  you  live?  "  No  answer  coixld  be  given,  and  composure  and  sleep  followed.  (J. 
L.  Nye.)  Preaching  and  practice : — Not  many  weeks  before  his  death.  Dr.  William 
Aruot  came  on  this  verse  in  the  course  of  expounding  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians. 
He  gave  a  short  summary  of  it,  which  he  had  found  somewhere,  and  thought  well  worth 
preserving  :  •'  Be  careful  for  nothing.  Be  prayerful  for  every  thing.  Be  thankful  for 
a;!//thing."  A  little  child  some  time  afterwards,  overhearing  his  father  speaking  with 
anxiet}  about  business,  quoted  these  words,  saying:  "  Do  you  remember  whatMr.  Amot 
told  us?"  Trusting  God  in  little  thing » : — He  is  not  a  man  of  little  faith  who 
puts  little  things  into  his  prayer.  That  very  thing  shows  him  to  be  a  man  of  great 
faith.  A  feeble  pulsation  in  the  heart  may  keep  the  life-blood  circulating  for  a 
while  near  the  centre  and  in  the  vitals ;  but  it  requires  a  great  strong  life  in  the 
heait  to  send  the  blood  doi.v"n  into  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  and  make  it  circulate 
through  the  outmost,  smallest  branches  of  the  veins.  In  like  manner,  it  is  the 
strongest  spiritual  life  that  animates  the  whole  course,  even  to  the  minutest 
transactions,  and  brings  to  God  the  smallest  matters  of  our  personal  history  aa 
well  as  the  great  concern  of  pardon  and  eternal  life.  "  Every  thing  : ''  whatever  is 
a  thing  to  you,  whatever  lodges  about  your  heart,  either  as  a  joy  that  you  cherish 
or  a  grief  that  you  are  unable  to  shake  away — in  with  it  into  your  prayer,  up  with 
it  to  the  throne.  It  is  not  right  to  choose,  out  of  the  multitude  of  thoughts  within 
you,  all  the  grave  and  goodly,  and  marshal  them  by  themselves  into  a  prayer. 
This  is  like  one  who  had  wheat  to  sell,  and  sat  down  and  picked  out  all  the  full  and 
plump  seeds  and  brought  them  to  market,  while  the  heap  was  half  made  up  of 
slirivelled,  unripened  grains.  Prayer  in  secret,  is  a  pouring  out  of  the  soul  before 
God ;  and  if  it  is  not  a  pouring,  it  is  not  prayer.  Anything  left  behind,  cherished 
in  you  but  concealed  from  God,  vitiates  all — takes  away  the  comfort  from  you,  and 
hinders  the  answer  from  God.  {IV.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Trust  in  God  the  secret  of 
happiness : — There  was  ouce  a  poor  coloured  woman  who  earned  a  precarious  living 
by  daily  labour,  but  who  was  a  joyous,  triumphant  Christian.  "  Ah,  Nancy,"  said 
a  gloomy  Christian  lady  one  day,  who  almost  disapproved  of  her  constant  cheerful- 
ness, and  yet  envied  it — "Ah,  Nancy,  it  is  well  enough  to  be  happy  now;  but  I 
should  think  that  the  thoughts  of  your  future  would  sober  you.  Only  suppose,  e.g., 
you  should  have  a  spell  of  sickness,  and  be  unable  to  work  ;  or  suppose  your  present 
employers  should  move  away,  and  no  one  else  should  give  you  anything  to  do  ;  or 

suppose  " "  Stop  I  "  cried  Nancy,  "  I  never  supposes.     De  Lord  is  my  Shepherd, 

and  I  know  I  shall  not  want.  And,  honey,"  she  added,  to  her  gloomy 
fritnd,  "  its  all  dem  supposes  as  is  making  you  so  miserable.  You'd  better 
jgive  them  all  up,  and  just  trust  the  Lord."  A  short  line  best : — Walk  through 
to-day  as  well  as  you  can,  and  God  will  undertake  for  your  future.     Whea 


CBAP.  IV.]  PHILIPFIANS.  823 

you  go  forward  out  of  to-day,  to  worry  about  it,  you  are  over  the  feuce,  you  are 
trespassing,  and  God  will  scourge  you  back  into  your  own  lot.  When  I  have  been 
fishing  ill  a  mountain  stream,  I  have  always  found  that  so  long  as  I  kept  a  short 
line  I  could  manage  my  fishing  very  well ;  but  when  I  let  my  line  run  out,  tne 
Btream  took  it  down,  and  there  I  was,  at  the  mercy  of  every  stick  that  stuck  up  in 
the  stream,  and  every  rock  that  jutted  out  from  the  banks.  I  lost  my  fish,  and  I 
tangled  my  line ;  very  likely  I  lost  my  footing  also,  and  got  over  head  and  ears  in 
the  stream.  Now,  most  men  have  cast  out  their  line  into  life  forty  years  long,  when 
it  ought  to  be  but  one  day  long.  In  consequence,  they  are  not  able  to  manage  their 
t4ckle  at  all ;  but  are  pulled  after  it,  stumbling  first  into  this  hole,  and  then  into 
that;  shpping  up  here,  and  slipping  down  there;  struggling  and  splashing 
about  in  far  more  distressed  fashion  than  the  fish  at  the  other  end  of  the 
Lne — and,  as  a  general  thing,  there  is  no  fish  there.  Haul  in  your  line  I 
{H,   W.  Beecher.)  We  may  pray  always  : — In  the    vestibule  of    St.    Peter's, 

at  Bome,  is  a  doorway  which  is  walled  up  and  marked  with  a  cross.  It  ia 
opened  but  four  times  in  a  century ;  on  Christmas-eve,  once  in  twenty-five  years, 
the  Pope  approaches  it  in  princely  state,  with  the  retinue  of  cardinals  in 
attendi»£:ce,  and  begins  the  demolition  of  the  door,  by  striking  it  thrice  with 
a  silver  hammer.  When  the  passage  is  opened  the  multitude  pass  into  the  nave 
of  the  cathedral  and  up  to  the  altar  by  an  avenue  which  the  majority  of  them  never 
entered  thus  before,  and  never  will  enter  thus  again.  Imagine  that  the  way  to  the 
throne  of  grace  were  like  the  Porta  Santa,  inaccessible  save  once  in  a  quarter  of  a 
century,  on  the  25th  of  December  1  With  what  solicitude  we  should  wait  for  the 
coming  of  the  holy  day !  It  would  make  us  fear  we  should  die  before  that  year  of 
jubilee.  How  many  years,  or  montbs,  or  weeks  now  to  the  time  of  prayer  we 
Bhould  be  constantly  asking  ourselves  I  Pray  about  little  thing-i : — Little  cares 
should  be  brought  to  the  Lord.  Some  persons,  however,  will  bring  their  great 
cares  to  Him,  but  not  their  little  cares.  But  this  is  foolish.  It  is  the  little  carea 
of  life  that  wear  the  heart  out.  One  of  the  most  cruel  torments  of  the  Inquisition 
was  to  place  the  poor  victim  beneath  a  trap,  and  let  the  cold  water  fall  upon  the 
head  drop  by  drop.  This  was  not  felt  at  first,  but  at  last  the  monotony  of  the 
water  dropping  always  on  one  spot  became  almost  unendurable  ;  the  agony  was 
too  great  to  be  expressed.  It  is  just  so  with  little  cares.  When  they  keep 
constantly  falling  drop  by  drop  upon  one  individual  they  tend  to  produce  irrita- 
tion, calculated  to  make  life  well-nigh  insupportable.  To  prevent  this,  then,  God 
would  have  us  take  our  little  trials  to  Him  as  well  as  our  great  trials,  and  that,  too, 
because  we  often  bear  up  more  bravely  under  the  great  and  faint  under  the  lesser. 
Universal  prayer: — Do  not  keep  prayer  for  grand  and  difficult  occasions,  and 
think  that  you  can  manage  well  enough  by  yourself  in  little,  trifling  things. 
Without  God  yon  can  do  nothing  well,  not  the  smallest.  Get  into  the  habit  of 
looking  and  referring  everything  to  Him.  Just  as  the  cautious  shopman  rings 
every  coin  upon  his  counter  to  see  if  it  be  true,  the  penny  as  well  as  the  pound,  so 
do  you  try  all  that  you  do  by  the  test  of  God.  Nothing  is  too  common  to  be 
brought  before  Him  who  made  the  earthworm  as  well  as  the  archangel.  Nothing 
is  too  frequent  for  Him  who  regulates  the  pulse  of  the  slave  who  sweats  in  the 
field,  and  the  long-stretched  career  of  the  planets  which  sail  in  space.  You  cannot 
appeal  to  Him  too  often.  He  is  never  tired,  of  whom  it  may  always  be  said,  "  He 
worketh  hitherto."  (Harry  Jonet,  M.A.)  The  caret  of  life  not  to  be  unduly 
anticipated : — A  person  says,  "  I  cannot  understand  how  I  am  to  get  along  when 
I  leave  my  father's  house."  Vfhy  should  you  see  it  till  that  time  comes? 
What  if  a  person  going  on  a  journey  of  five  years  should  undertake  to  carry 
provisions,  and  clothes,  and  gold  enough  to  last  him  during  the  whole  time, 
lugging  them  as  he  travelled,  like  a  veritable  Englishman,  with  all  creation  at 
his  back  1  If  he  is  wise  he  will  supply  himself  at  the  different  points  where 
he  stops.  When  he  gets  to  London,  let  him  buy  what  he  needs  there ;  when 
he  gets  to  Paris,  let  him  buy  what  he  needs  there  ;  when  he  gets  to  Rome, 
let  him  buy  what  he  needs  there  ;  and  when  he  gets  to  Vienna,  Dresden,  Munich, 
8t.  Petersburgh,  and  Canton,  let  him  buy  what  he  needs  at  these  places  I  He  will 
5nd  at  each  of  them,  and  all  the  other  cities  which  he  visits,  whatever  things  he 
requires.  Why,  then,  should  he  undertake  to  carry  them  around  the  globe  with 
him  7  It  would  be  the  greatest  folly  imaginable.  As  to  gold,  why  should  he  load 
his  pockets  with  that  ?  Let  him  take  a  circular  letter  of  credit,  which  is  good,  yet 
not  usable  till  he  arrives  at  the  places  where  he  needs  it.  When  he  gfts  to 
London,  let  him  present  it  to  Baring  Brothers ;  when  he  gets  to  Paris,  let  him 


•24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  it. 

present  it  to  the  Bothschilds.     And  as  be  proceeds,  let  him  place  it  in  the  hand? 
of  the  bankers  of  the  various  places  at  which  he  stops  ;  and  he  will  get  the  meana 
for  prosecuting  his  journey.     Now,  God  gives  every  believer  a  circular  letter  of 
credit  for  life,  and  says,  "  Whenever  you  get  to  a  place  where  you  need  assistance, 
take  your  letter  to  the  Banker,  and  the  needed  assistance  will  be  given  you.     (H. 
W.  Beecher.)        Prayer  with  thanksgiving : — The  currents  of  grace,  like  those  of 
nature,  run  in   circles.     Take  the  case  of  ventilation.     A  tube  dividsd   longi- 
tudinally into  two,  or  two  tubes  joined  together,  stretch  from  the  interior  of  a 
building  through  the  roof  into  the  air.     The  air  flows  up  through  one  lube  of  the 
tube  out  of  the  building,  and  down  through  the  other  lobe  into  the  bull  ling. 
When  the  process  is  set  agoing,  it  continues.     But  if  you  stop  the  ascending 
current,  you  thereby  also  make  the  descending  current  cease ;  and  if  you  stop  the 
descending  current,  tbe  ascending  one  is  arrested,  too.     Ten  lepers  came  to  Christ 
with  prayer  and  supplication.     He  gave  them  their  request.    But  only  one  of  the 
ten   put  in  his  request  with   thanksgiving  ;    only  one  continued  the  circle  and 
answered  the  getting  of  mercy  by  the  giving  of  praise.     The  Lord  marked  and 
mentioned   the  omission.      He  felt  well  pleased  with    the  circle  of  communion 
completed  in  the  one  who  returned  to  give  thanks;  but  He  left  on  record  for  all 
ages  His  disappointment  with  those  who  greedily  snatched  the  gift  and  forgot  the 
Giver :  •'  Were  there  not  ten  cleansed  ?  but  where  are  the  nine  ?  "    When  there  is 
spiritual  life,  the  weight  of  God's  mercies  pressing  down  forces  the  sacrifice  of 
thanksgiving  up.    The  pressure  of  the  air  does  not  make  the  heavy,  sluggish  water 
rise;  whatever  weight  of  air  may  pre^s  upon  it,  the  water  lies  heavy  in  its  bed. 
But  when  water  is  etherealized  into  vapour,  then  the  weight  of  the  air  makes  the 
vapour  rise.    The  load  of  benefits  that  pressed  on  the  nine  lepers,  finding  their 
souls  dull  and  dead,  did  not  move  them   upwards ;  but  the  same  load  on   the 
one  Samaritan,  finding  him  spiritually  quickened,  pressed  his  thanksgiving  up  to 
the  Throne.    The  circulations  of  the  ocean  constitute  a  plain  and  permanent 
picture  of  these  relations  between  a  human  soul  and  a  redeeming  God.     The  sea 
is  always  drawing  what  it  needs  down  to  itself,  and  also  always  sending  up  of  its 
abundance  into  the  heavens.     It  is  always  getting,  and  always  giving.     So,  when 
in  the  covenant  the  true  relation  has  been  constituted,  the  redeemed  one  gets  and 
gives,  gives  and  gets ;  draws  from  God  a  stream  of  benefits,  sends  up  to  God  the 
incense  of  praise.     (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)        Thanksgiving  the  ornament  of  prayer: — 
Let  your  prayers  be  like  those  ancient  missals  which  one  sometimes  sees,  in  which 
the  initial  letters  of  the  prayers  are  gilded  and  adorned  with  a  profusion  of  colours, 
the  work  of  cunning  writers.    Let  even  the  general  confession  of  sin  and  the 
Litany  of  moumfol  petitions  have  at  least  one  illuminated  letter.    Illuminate 
your  prayers  ;  light  them  up  with  rays  of  thanksgiving  all  the  way  through  ;  and 
when  you  come  together  to  pray  forget  not  to  make  melody  unto  the  Lord  with 
psalms,  and  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs.     {C,  H.  Spurgeon.)        Submission  in- 
volved in  prayer  arid  thanksgiving: — To  refuse  to  praise  unless  we  have  our  own  way 
is  great  presumption,  and  shows  that  like  a  naughty  child  we  will  sulk  if  we  cannot 
be  master.     I  might  illustrate  the  wilfulness  of  many  a  supplication  by  that  of  a 
little  boy  who  was  very  dihgent  in  saying  his  prayers,  but  was  at  the  same  time 
disobedient,  ill-tempered,  and  the  pest  of  the  house.    His  mother  told  him  that 
she  thought  it  was  mere  hypocrisy  for  him  to  pretend  to  pray.     He  replied,  "  No, 
mother,  indeed  it  is  not,  for  I  pray  God  to  lead  you  and  father  to  like  my  ways 
better  than  you  do."    Numbers  of  people  want  the  Lord  to  hke  their  ways  better, 
bat  they  do  not  intend  to  follow  the  ways  of  the  Lord.     Their  minds  are  contrary 
to  God  and  wiU  not  submit  to  His  will,  and  therefore  there  is  no  thanksgiving  in 
them.     Praise  in  a  prayer  is  indicative  of  a  humble,  submissive,  obedient  spirit, 
and  when  it  is  absent  we  may  suspect  wilfulness  and  self-seeking.     (Ibid.)        Pre- 
valence of  tMnksgiving : — Suppose  you  had  promised  to  some  poor  woman  thatyoa 
would  give  her  a  meal  to-morrow.     You  might  forget  it,  you  know ;  but  suppose 
when  the  morning  came  she  sent  her  httle  girl  with  a  basket  fur  it,  she  would  b« 
likely  to  get  it,  I  think.     But,  suppose  that  she  sent  in  addition  a  little  note,  in 
which  the  poor  soul  thanked  you  for  your  great  kindness,  could  you  have  the  heart 
to  say,  "  My  dear  girl,  I  cannot  attend  to  you  to-day.     Come  another  time  "  ?   Oh 
dear  no ;  if  the  cupboard  was  bare  you  would  send  out  to  get  something,  because 
the  good  soul  so  believed  in  you  that  she  had  sent  you  thanks  for  it  before  sh«> 
received  your  gift.     Well,  now,  trust  the  Lord  in  the  same  manner.    He  cannot 
run  back  from  His  wr  rl,  my  brethren.     Beheving  prayer  holds  Him,  but  believing 
thanksgiving  binds  Him.    (ibid.)        Day  of  tluinkagiving  : — Dr.  Franklin  says  thai 


CHAP,  rv.]  PHILIPPIANS.  825 

in  a  time  of  great  despondency  among  the  first  settlers  of  New  England,  it  was 
proposed  in  one  of  their  public  assemblies  to  proclaim  a  fast.  An  old  farmer  arose, 
epoke  of  their  provoking  heaven  with  their  complaints,  reviewed  their  mercies, 
showed  that  they  had  much  to  be  thankful  for,  and  moved  that  instead  of  appoint- 
ing a  day  of  fasting,  they  should  appoint  a  day  of  thanksgiving.  This  was  done, 
«nd  the  custom  continued  ever  after.     (J.  L.  Nye.) 

Ver.  7.  The  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  anderstandlng.  Oo<r$  peace : — I. 
The  priceless  leoact — Christ  left  peace  with  His  followers  as  His  last  and  best 
gift.  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,"  &o.  The  apostle  in  speaking  of  it  gives  us  two 
descriptive  particulars.  He  calls  it — 1.  The  peace  of  God.  No  one  else  can  give 
peace.  No  one  else  could  ensure  peace.  No  one  else  could  possess  peace.  2. 
Which  passeth  all  understanding.  The  worldling  cannot  understand  it.  The 
Christian  cannot  understand  it.  Angels  cannot  understand  it.  It  is  so  far 
removed  from  all  that  is  malarial  and  sensible.  II.  The  miohtt  effects — "  Shall 
keep  your  hearts  and  minds."  Here  is  a  power  more  mighty  than  the  universe. 
Silence  is  sometimes  more  powerful  than  speech  ;  love  is  more  mighty  than  rage. 
8o  peace  is  more  powerful  than  storm.  1.  It  keeps  the  heart  from  fear.  There 
can  be  no  fear  of  man,  no  fear  of  the  world,  no  fear  of  death,  no  fear  of  hell  in  the 
heart  where  dwells  the  peace  of  God.  2.  It  keeps  the  heart  from  ambition.  Ambi- 
tion is  the  chief  cause  of  trouble.  He  who  has  the  peace  of  God  has  every  ambition 
satisfied.  He  desires  nothing  else.  8.  It  keeps  the  heart  from  strife.  There  can 
be  no  contention  where  there  is  peace.  4.  It  keeps  the  mind  from  doubt.  Probably 
by  mind  the  apostle  means  the  intellect  as  distinguished  from  the  affections.  The 
man  who  has  no  doubts  is  fixed  on  a  rock.  Even  the  poorest,  the  meanest,  the 
most  illiterate  can  enjoy  the  trust.  HI.  The  blessed  ueans — "  Through  Christ 
JesDs."  Christ  is  the  medium  through  which  the  possibility  of  peace  came  at  first. 
Christ  is  the  channel  through  which  it  fiows  at  present.  He  is  the  propitiation  for 
eins;  therefore  He  brings  peace  to  the  conscience.  He  is  the  power  of  God;  there- 
fore He  brings  peace  to  those  who  are  weak  and  in  fear.  He  is  the  path  to  heaven; 
therefore  He  brings  confidence  to  those  who  are  pilgrims.  He  is  the  Prince  of 
Peace;  therefore  He  is  the  delight  of  all  His  subjects.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird,  M.A.) 
The  feace  of  Qod: — I.  An  tJNsrEAKABLE  privilege.  1.  It  is  peace  with  God. 
Eeconciliation  there  must  be,  and  the  soul  must  be  aware  of  it.  A  man  consciotis 
of  being  guilty  can  never  know  it  till  he  becomes  equally  conscious  of  being  for- 
given. Your  sin  was  the  ground  of  the  quarrel,  but  it  is  cast  into  the  depths  of  the 
sea.  There  is  nothing  now  that  can  cause  the  anger  of  God  towards  us.  We  are 
accepted  in  the  Beloved,  and  thus  have  a  profound  sense  of  peace.  2.  A  conse- 
quent peace  in  the  little  kingdom  within.  By  nature  everything  in  our  inner 
nature  is  at  war  with  itself.  The  passions,  instead  of  being  curbed  by  the  reason, 
often  holds  the  reins ;  and  reason,  instead  of  being  guided  by  Divine  knowledge, 
chooses  to  obey  a  depraved  imagination,  and  demands  to  become  a  separate  power 
and  to  judge  God  Himself.  There  is  no  cure  for  this  but  restoring  grace.  The 
King  must  occupy  the  throne,  and  then  the  state  of  Man^oul  will  be  settled.  8. 
A  peace  in  reference  to  outward  circumstances.  The  man  who  is  reconciled  to  God 
by  Christ  has  nothing  outside  him  that  he  needs  fear.  Is  he  poor?  He  rejoices 
that  Christ  makes  poor  men  rich.  Does  he  prosper  ?  He  rejoices  that  there  is 
grace  which  prevents  his  prosperity  intoxicating  him.  Is  he  in  trouble  7  He  thanks 
God  for  the  promise  that  as  His  day  so  his  strength  shall  be.  In  death  the  hope  of 
the  resurrection  gives  peace  to  his  pillow ;  and  as  for  judgment,  he  knows  whom 
he  has  believed  and  knows  who  will  protect  him  in  that  day.  Whatever  may  be 
suggested  to  distress  him,  deep  down  in  his  soul  he  cannot  be  disturbed,  because 
be  sees  God  at  the  helm  of  the  vessel  holding  the  rudder  with  a  hand  that  defies 
the  storm.  4.  God  gives  peace  in  reference  to  all  His  commands.  The  un- 
regenerate  soul  rebels,  but  when  the  change  takes  place  we  drop  into  the  same  line 
with  God ;  His  will  becomes  our  delight  and  His  statutes  our  songs.  5.  We  feel 
peace  with  regard  to  God's  providential  dealings,  because  we  believe  that  they  are 
helping  us  to  amve  at  conformity  with  Him.  6.  It  is  a  peace  which  "  passeth  all 
nnderstanding. "  Not  only  beyond  common,  or  the  sinners,  but  all — deeper, 
broader,  more  heavenly  than  even  the  joyful  saint  can  tell.  (1)  There  are  kinds  of 
peace  which  we  can  understand,  (a)  The  peace  of  apathy,  to  which  the  Stoics 
schooled  themselves.  Their  secret  is  eat^ily  discovered,  Christianity  is  not  this ; 
tt  cultivates  tenderness,  not  insensibility,  and  gives  us  a  peace  consistent  with  the 
■tmost  delicacy  of  feeling,     {b)  The  peace  of  levity,  which  is  perfectly  ondaratood. 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv» 

(2)  The  Christian  is  often  surprised  at  his  own  peacefulnesa.  There  is  a  possibility 
of  having  the  surface  of  the  mind  lashed  into  storm,  while  yet,  deep  down,  all  is 
BtilL  There  are  earthquakes,  yet  the  earth  pursues  the  even  tenour  of  its  way.  It 
surpasses  understanding,  but  not  experience.  IL  How  this  peaob  is  to  bb 
OBTAINED.  Christians  are  always  at  peace  with  God,  but  are  not  always  sensible  of 
it.  If  you  wish  to  realize  it  hear  Paul.  (1)  Eejoice  in  the  Lord  alway ;  make  God 
your  joy,  and  place  all  your  joy  in  Him.  You  cannot  rejoice  in  yourself,  nor  in 
your  varying  circumstances,  but  God  never  changes.  2.  Let  your  moderation  be 
known  unto  all  men.  Deal  cautiously  with  earthly  things.  If  any  man  praises 
don't  exult;  if  you  are  censured  don't  despond.  Take  matters  quietly.  3.  Be 
careful  for  nothing.  Leave  your  care  with  God.  4.  Pray  about  everything. 
That  which  we  pray  over  will  have  the  sting  taken  out  of  it  if  it  be  evil,  and  the 
nweetness  of  it  will  be  sanctified  if  it  be  good.  6.  Be  thankful  for  anything. 
Thankfulness  is  the  mother  and  nurse  of  restfulness.  Neglected  praises  sour  into 
unquiet  forebodings.  IIL  The  operation  of  this  blessed  privilegb  on  oub 
HEABTs  AND  MINDS.  1,  Our  hearts  want  keeping — (1)  From  sinking,  for  they  are 
very  apt  to  faint  even  under  small  trials.  (2)  From  wandering,  for  how  soon  are 
they  beguiled  ?  A  quiet  spirit  will  neither  sink  nor  wander.  Like  the  life-buoy,  it 
will  rise  above  the  billows  and  keep  its  place.  2.  Our  minds  want  keeping.  In  all 
ages  the  minds  of  Christians  have  been  apt  to  be  disturbed  on  vital  truths.  But 
these  truths  are  known  to  consciousness,  and  having  brought  peace  to  the  mind, 
keep  it  in  perfect  peace.  IV.  The  sphere  of  its  action — "In  Christ  Jesus." 
There  is  no  peace  out  of  Him.  He  is  our  peace.  ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  peace 
of  God : — This  is  not  a  wish  or  prayer,  like  the  benediction  of  2  Thess.  iii.  16  ;  nor 
B  precept  like  CoL  iii.  15  ;  but  is  one  of  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises. 
The  world  is  weary  for  peace  ;  the  army  after  a  long  campaign,  the  country  bearing 
the  burden  of  a  protracted  war,  longs  for  peace ;  but  not  more  earnestly  than  men 
tossed  on  the  waves  of  this  troublesome  world.  This  blessing  is  for  the  spirit 
satiated  with  the  vain  pleasures  of  the  world ;  for  the  spirit  tried  with  sorrow  ;  for 
the  Pharisee  tormented  with  the  incumbrances  of  his  over-righteousness ;  for  the 
publican  standing  on  the  threshold.  I.  Its  source.  1.  It  originates  with  Him. 
Man  by  sin  has  placed  himself  in  antagonism  to  God.  •'  The  carnal  mind  is 
enmity  against  God."  The  transgression  and  enmity  were  ours,  yet  God  devised 
means  whereby  the  banished  might  be  restored,  and  sends  to  rebels  the  ambas- 
sadors of  peace.  It  was  not  from  man  the  sinner  that  the  overtures  were  made. 
2.  It  has  reference  to  Him.  It  is  not  only  peace  from,  but  with,  God.  The 
ambassadors  are  sent  to  proclaim  that  God  has  devised  the  means,  has  made  peace. 
It  is  no  imaginary  reconciliation  ;  it  is  a  peace  wrought  by  real  means,  purchased 
at  a  real  price — the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  (Col.  ii.  14).  And  when  the  sentence 
of  condemnation  is  blotted  out  there  is  no  condemnation  to  those  who  believe 
(Eom.  v.  1 ;  viii.  1).  This  act  is  the  foundation  of  all  peace  in  the  heart.  It  is  ft 
peace  which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  II.  Its  character.  It 
passeth  understanding  because — 1.  Man  unaided  cannot  attain  to  it.  There 
are  many  voices  which  cry  to  man  of  pleasure  and  rest.  But  they  are  delusive. 
"  Peace,"  they  cry,  when  there  is  no  peace.  Wherever  sin  is  there  is  unrest. 
There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked.  They  "  are  like  the  troubled  sea  which  cannot 
rest,"  continually  straining  after  some  haven  of  repose,  but  only  to  be  cast  back  by 
the  waves  of  passion.  And  not  only  cannot  the  sinner,  unaided,  attain  this  peace  ; 
he  cannot,  unaided,  even  receive  it  when  provided  for  him.  The  things  which 
belong  to  his  peace  are  bidden  from  him.  But  this  does  not  make  void  his 
responsibility.  God  hath  revealed  it  by  His  Spirit,  whom  He  gives  to  those  who  ask 
for  Him.  2.  There  are  depths  in  it  which  the  richest  Christian  experience  cannot 
fathom.  There  are  mysteries  in  grace  as  well  as  in  nature  and  providence.  The 
source  of  this  peace  is  God,  and  its  guarantee  the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth 
knowledge.  All  the  gifts  of  God  are  inexhaustible.  III.  Its  effect — "  Shall 
guard."  Our  hearts  and  minds  are  in  need  of  continual  guardianship,  and  where 
shall  we  meet  with  one  more  reliable?  1.  It  can  keep  our  hearts.  We  understana 
by  the  heart  the  source  of  the  affections  and  passions ;  but  not  nnfrequently  the 
inspired  writers  use  the  word  to  signify  the  affections  and  understanding  acting 
together,  "  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  There  is  no  God."  The  affections  are 
apt  to  stray  from  their  centre.  There  is  a  fatal  affinity  between  the  evil  within 
and  the  evil  without.  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence,"  &o.  It  needs  a  strong 
power  to  watch  over  it,  but  the  peace  of  God  is  equal  to  this.  There  is  a 
strength   in  it  to  stay  your    stray  reflections;   for  it  gives   you   in  your  heart 


CHAP.  IV. J  PHILIPPIANS.  827 

Bomething  on  which  your  love  may  centre.     The  lustre  of  the  hall-room  and  the 
gundy  trapiJings  of  the  stage  looks  tawdrv  in  the  daylight ;  and  the  loves  of  the 
earth  look  tinsel  indeed  in  the  light  of  a  Saviour's  love  and  the  brightness  of  the 
peace  of  God.     2.  The  mind.     That  is  prone  to  be  carried  ofif  by  merely  speculative 
problems.     The  peace  of  God  keeps  the  mind  not  by  enslaving  its  faculties  or 
Btiirving  their  energy,  but  by  rightly  balancing  them.  By  giving  us  a  clear  concep- 
don  of  the  relative  values  of  tbings  temporal  and  eternal,  by  revealing  the  due 
order  which  presides  over  all  God's  works,  we  are  taught  to  estimate  aright  the 
true  value  of  gpeculative  nnd  prrictical  problems.    3.  Both  the  heart  and  mind  are 
kept.     In  some  natures  the  thinking  faculty  is  the  most  active  :  such  are  in  danger 
of  neglecting  the  keeping  of  the  heart — the  spirit  of  devotion.     Others  are  exposed 
to  the  reverse  ttmpla'Jon.     To  neglect  either  is  iujurious.     Let  us  give  to  each  ita 
Busieuance;  storing  our  minds  with  Divine  truth  and  yet  increasing  in  love  and 
grace.    IV.  The  channel  throdgh  which  it  comes.  There  is  no  blessing  which  comes 
uot  through  Him — in  nature.  Providence,  salvation.     He  is  our  peace.     (Bp.   W. 
Boyd  Car^ienter.)         The  peace   of  God: — By   this   the   apostle    does  not  mean 
the  blessedness  which  belongs  to  the  Divine  Nature,  nor  the  rest  that  is  laid  up  for 
us  in  heaven  :  but  the  deep  inward  repose  of  the  spiritual  life,  Divine  in  its  origin, 
religious  in  its  nature,  holy  in  its  impulses,  heavenly  in  its  results.     I.   "  Beino 
JUSTIFIED  BY  »AiTU  WE  HAVE  PEACE  WITH  GoD  "  (Rom.  V.  1),     Man  is  Contemplated 
as  a  smner,  conscious  of  guilt,  exposed  to  punishment,  and  who  cannot  be  justified 
by  law,  which  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  condemn  him.     Let  this  idea  be  distmctly 
realized,  and  it  is  seen  at  once  that  it  has  power  to  terribly  agitate  the  soul.     The 
apostle  meets  the  case  by  a  proclamation  of  mercy,  not  indeed  the  tender  and 
benevolent  Divine  alfection  to  which  the  guilty  and  miserable  may  appeal,  but 
something  embodied  in  a  supernatural  fact  to  be  appreliended  and  confided  in : 
"God  Lath  set  forth  Christ  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  His  blood  " — 
that  as  man  could  not  be  justified  by  law  through  obedience,  he  might  be  through 
grace  by  faith.     This  we  have  received  who  have  trusted  in  Christ.     "  There  i3 
now  no  condemnation,"  &c.;  the  terrors  of  conscience  are  stilled;  we  have  "joy 
and  peace  through  believing."     "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked," 
but  there  is  peace  when  he  forsakes  his  evil  way  and  turns  to  the  Lord.     The 
prophet  was  agitated  by  the  revelation  of  the  glory  of  the  Divine  nature  and  the 
corruption  of  his  own  (Isa.  vi.),  but  he  was  tranquilized  when  a  live  coal  from  the 
altar  of  sacriflce  was  laid  upon  his  mouth.     No  angelic  voice  or  vision  is  to  be 
expected  now,  but  there  may  be  such  a  certainty  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  such  a 
perception  of  its  ajjpropriateness,  and  such  a  realization  of  peace,  that  the  penitent 
and  believing  man  may  be  able  neither  to  doubt  the  fact  of  his  forgiveness,  nor  to 
resist  the  feeling  of  deep  calm  blessedness,  which  the  persuasion  of  it  brings. 
IL  "  To  BE  8PIRIT0ALLY  MINDED  18  LIFE  AND  PEACE  "  (Rom.  viii.  6),  a  paspage  taken 
from  Paul's  discourse  on  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  man  as  the  former  was  taken  from 
that  on  the  work  of  Christ  for  man.   By  being  spiritually  minded  the  apostle  means 
that  the  man  who  has  obtained  forgiveness  through  Christ,  in  virtue  of  the  agency 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  has  his  moral  tastes  so  rectified,  his  moral  affections  so 
cleansed  and  elevated,  that  he  loves  all  spiritual  things  and  exercises.     Man  was 
made  for  God.     His  powers  and  affections  were  so  constituted  that  tbey  were  to 
find  their  supreme  enjoyment  in  Him.     Sin  has  disturbed  this  original  law  and 
given  to  the  flesh  an  unnatural  ascendancy,  and  so  is  productive  of  misery  and  mis- 
rule.    The  consequence  is  that  to  the  idea  of  antagonism  between  the  sinner  and 
God,  there  is  the  idea  of  antagonism  to  himself.     Spiritual  renovation  restores  the 
natural  order  of  things,  reason  is  enUghtened,  affections  purified,  passion  restrained, 
the  animal  is  brought  into  subjection  to  the  man,  and  the  man  bound  by  love  and 
loyalty  to  God.     HI.  *'  Great  peace  have  thky  who  love  Tht  law."    "  The  work 
of  righteousness  is  peace."    These  and  other  passa'jes  lead  us  to  the  correspondence 
of  the  Christian's  outward  conduct  with  the  instincts  and  principles  of  his  inward 
life.     That  condition  of  heart  described  as  '*  minding  the  things  of  the  Spirit "  is  to 
find  appropriate  embodiment  in  the  mainlenance  of  a  uniform  and  elevated  morality. 
It  is  only  by  a  course  of  practical  obedience  that  peace  of  conscience  can  be  pre- 
served.    Inconsistency  cannot  but  disturb  inward  peace.     Guilt  is  a  thing  full  of 
fears.     The  secret  of  Paul's  peace  was — •*  herein  do  1  exercise  myself  to  have  a 
conscience  void  of  offence."     IV.  "  Thoo  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whostj 
WIND  IS  STATED  UPON  Theb  "  (Isa.  xxvi.  3).     Filial  trust  in  God  is  everythiii!^  th  it 
belongs  to  the  circumstances  of  Ufe.      T'tiere  is  "a  thought   for  the  D.irirrnw" 
whioh  is  proper  and  becoming,  but  there  is  also  a  care  that  hath  torment,  a  feax 


828  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAr.  nr. 

that  is  sinful.  A  Christian  man  who  realizes  that  all  his  •'  times  are  in  God'i 
hands,"  that  "  He  fixes  the  bounds  of  his  habitation,"  and  "  perfects  that  which 
concerns  him,"  that  his  Heavenly  Father  knoweth  what  he  has  need  of;  that 
"  all  things  work  together  for  good ; "  he  who  thoroughly  believes  all  this,  and 
easts  his  care,  and  stays  his  soul  on  God,  cannot  but  be  saved  from  the  perturbations 
and  anxieties  which  torment  the  worldly  mind.  He  is  kept  from  murmuring  at 
what  God  does,  from  petulance  at  what  He  does  not.  He  can  confide  and  wait, 
and  beUeve  and  be  thankful,  suffer  and  be  salidfied.  (T.  Binney,  LL.D.)  The 
Divine  peace  : — I.  The  peace  of  God.  It  is  so  called — 1.  Because  it  is  that  for  which 
God  made  man  at  first — the  realization  of  His  original  idea  of  the  happiness  of 
humanity.  It  springs  from  intercourse  with  God,  filial  trust,  devjtioual  communion, 
loving  obedience,  apprehension  of  spiritual  truth,  just  and  regulated  affections, 
perfect  repose  in  God's  Fatherhood,  and  conscious  complacency  in  everything  that 
pleases  Him.  These  things  are  such  as  would  have  entered  into  the  happiness  of 
man  had  he  never  sinned ;  many  of  them,  of  course,  enter  into  that  of  the  angels. 

2.  Because  it  is  the  result  of  His  merciful  interposition  for  man  as  well  as  the 
realization  of  His  original  plan.  Something  has  been  done  to  produce  it 
beyond  the  original  constitution  of  things,  and  the  result  of  this  interposition  in 
human  experience  must  be  of  a  nature  different  from  and  additional  to,  the 
blessedness  that  would  have  belonged  to  humanity  had  it  only  realized  that  for 
vhich  it  was  made.  It  is  God's  peace  because  it  is  by  God's  grace  that  it  is 
possible,  by  the  gift  of  His  Son  that  it  is  procured,  by  the  application  of  His  truth 
that  it  is  prtjduced.  It  consists  of  forgiveness  of  sin,  peace  of  conscience,  deUver- 
ance  from  wi-ath,  which  man,  had  he  continued  upright,  would  not  have  needed. 

3.  Because  it  is  that  which  is  immediately  produced  by  God's  Spirit,  and  is  thus  a 
direct  Divine  donation.  When  Christ  was  about  to  leave  His  sorrowing  disciplei 
He  promised  that  He  would  send  them  "  another  comforter,"  and  then  He  adds,  as 
if  interpreting  His  meaning,  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,"  &c.  And  so  •*  the  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  is  .  .  .  peace."  "  May  the  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  joy  and  peace  in 
believing,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  4.  Because  it  is  sustained  and 
nourished  by  those  acts  which  bring  the  soul  in  contact  with  God — meditation  on 
His  truth,  trust  in  His  promises,  prayer  and  praise,  song  and  sacrament.  II.  Ii 
PASSETH  ALL  UNPERSTANDiNO.  There  is  nothing  unphilosophical  in  this.  Mystery 
surrounds  us.  We  are  incessantly  met  with  ultimate  facts  whose  being  and  agency 
we  are  bound  to  admit,  but  which  none  of  us  can  understand.  In  the  natural  laws 
of  the  mind,  in  things  connected  with  our  own  consciousness,  there  are  matters 
about  which  we  can  only  say  that  they  are.  Surely,  then,  it  is  not  wonderful  that 
this  should  be  so  in  religious  life.  His  peace — 1.  Passes  the  understanding  of  the 
man  of  the  world.  The  very  terms  and  phrases  by  which  it  is  expressed  are 
"  foolishness  "  unto  them,  or  repugnant,  or  unintelligible.  In  hstening  to  the  sober 
statements  of  a  Christian  man,  if  restrained  by  courtesy,  they  are  silent,  but 
incredulous  and  perhaps  pitiful :  if  not  restrained  they  reject  the  whole  thing  with 
contempt  as  cant  or  jargon.  Nor  is  this  wonderful.  Many  things  connected  with 
art,  taste,  science,  and  philosophy,  can  be  understood  only  through  the  medium  of 
experience.  And  so  to  him  who  is  destitute  of  religious  experience,  the  very 
language  of  religion  must  be  incomprehensible,  2.  It  passes  the  understanding  of 
the  Christian  himself.  (1)  Light  sometimes  gushes  into  the  intellect,  fiUing  it  with 
clear  apprehensions  of  truth,  and  an  impression  of  its  power  in  a  manner  perfectly 
inexplicible.  The  man,  all  on  a  sudden,  is  filled  with  joy  and  peace  from  seeing 
matters  of  faith  after  he  had  been  toiling  in  doubt  and  darkness,  and  was  just  on 
the  point  of  abandoning  for  ever.  (2)  Ln  the  same  way  the  burden  of  guilt  has 
been  lilted,  the  troubled  conscience  calmed.  The  blessedness  of  the  man  whose 
transgression  is  forgiven  has  come  like  an  angel  of  God.  (3)  It  has  been  thus,  too, 
with  taste  and  affection  ;  by  a  sudden  transition,  the  reckless  and  impure  have 
become  like  unto  a  little  child.  (4)  So,  too,  in  things  of  great  and  terrible  afflictions. 
Christians  have  been  kept  in  such  calm  peace  as  has  been  a  perfect  amazement  to 
themselves.  (5)  And  so,  too,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  the  Christian  life.  8.  It 
passes  the  understanding  of  angels.  The  inward  joys  of  hope  and  faith  are 
associated  with  redemption  and  "  into  these  things  angels  desire  to  look."  III.  It 
KEEPS  THE  HEABT  AM)  MIND.  The  word  is  uscd  ouly  in  three  other  places,  2  Cor. 
zi.  32,  where  the  words  "  with  a  ganison  "  are  included  in  the  word  that  stands 
for  "  kept ; "  Gal.  iii.  23,  where  we  have  the  idea  of  a  sort  of  strong-room,  or 
protected  custody;  1  Pet.  i.  5,  where  it  is  "preserved  as  in  a  fortress."  The 
generaJ  import  of  the  statement  is  that  the  experience  of  religious  life  is  the  most 


CHAP.  !».]  PHILIPPIINS.  829 

powerful  preservative  of  the  happiness  and  virtue  of  man.  Trouble  and  sin  by  the 
peace  of  God  are  cast  out  of  the  soul  and  kept  out.  "  Heart  and  mind,"  however 
discriminated,  include  every  faculty  of  the  inner  man.  1.  Suppose  an  attack  be 
made  on  a  man's  belief,  and  dark  clouds  of  doubt  overspread  the  mind,  I  do  not  say 
that  he  need  not  go  to  bis  books  and  arguments,  but  I  do  say  that  the  portable 
evidence  of  Christianity  in  his  own  experience  of  its  power  will  often  do  more  to 
reveal  the  hoUowness  of  sceptical  suggestions  than  all  the  learning  of  the  schools. 
Nay,  the  peace  of  God  as  a  felt  possession  will  prevent  the  rising  and  entrance  of 
the  doubt  itself,  or  will  instantly  repel  it.  2.  If  the  memory  of  his  old  sins  comes 
to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  his  conscience  he  will,  of  course,  be  humbled  at  the 
thought  of  this ;  but  the  counter  recollection  of  the  peace  and  joy  he  had  in 
believing  will  prove  a  protection  from  what  would  break  his  peace.  And  here  again 
the  possession  of  peace  will  prevent  the  rising  or  entrance  of  that  into  the  soul 
which  would  throw  it  back  again  on  hopelessness  and  despair.  "  I  know  whom  I 
have  believed,"  "  I  will  trust  and  not  be  afraid."  3.  In  like  manner  the  peace  of 
God  will  "  guard  "  the  heart  against  murmuring  and  anxiety,  fear  and  distrust  in 
relation  to  the  affairs  of  life.  "  Thou  hast  been  my  help,  therefore  in  the  shadow 
of  Thy  wings  will  I  rejoice."  4.  It  is  a  preservative,  strong  and  sure,  against  all 
sin.  The  religiously  happy  are  the  morally  strong.  Duty  is  pleasant  because  the 
mind  is  in  joyous  harmony  with  God's  requirements.  (1)  It  keeps  the  heart  by 
keeping  its  volatile  affections,  not  permitting  them  to  go  forth  to  twine  themselves 
round  anything  forbidden.  (2)  Sin  is  resisted  from  the  knowledge  that  it  will 
damage  the  peace  of  the  soul.  (3)  When  this  peace  dilates  the  soul  it  is  not  easy 
for  the  devil  to  put  in  a  temptation.  A  rich  man  cannot  be  tempted  to  steal ;  a 
sober  man  is  not  tempted  by  the  sight  of  a  tavern.  So  with  the  spiritually  happy 
man  ;  what  might  overcome  others  is  nothing  to  him.  He  is  raised  above  them, 
and  the  peace  of  God  shields  him  from  their  influence.  IV.  Through  Chbist 
Jesds.  He  is  the  object  of  faith  and  the  sole  medium  of  spiritual  influence.  In 
virtue  of  His  work  on  earth  we  obtain  peace  at  first;  and  if,  as  justified,  any  man 
Bin,  it  is  by  His  work  in  heaven  that  peace  is  restored.  (T.  Binney,  LL.D.) 
The  peace  of  God  keeping  the  heart: — We  all  need  something  to  keep  our  hearts. 
The  changes  of  the  world  effect  not  only  our  homes  and  outward  comforts,  but  our 
inmost  souls.  And  more,  our  hearts  are  naturally  restless.  The  result  is  that  even 
in  a  calm  our  minds  are  shifting.  It  is  plain  we  need  something  to  steady  us. 
Where  shall  we  find  it  T  Plainly  not  in  this  world  ;  as  well  seek  it  in  the  hurricane. 
Not  in  ourselves,  there  there  is  only  misery.  The  text  shows  us  the  blessing  that 
we  need.  I.  Its  nature.  Not  self-denial,  exertion,  or  watchfulness,  but  peace ; 
enjoyment  and  repose  in  enjoyment.  A  calm  which  not  only  quiets  the  soul  amid 
the  tumult  of  the  storm,  but  keeps  it  quiet.  But "  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked." 
They  are  Uke  *'  a  troubled  sea  when  it  cannot  rest."  This  peace  is  the  result  of  a 
change  in  man's  state  and  character  ;  the  effect  of  a  reconciliation  between  him  and 
heaven.  When  this  transpires  man  can  look  on  God  as  his  Friend,  expect  victory 
in  temptation,  a  refuge  in  perils,  strength  in  weakness,  comfort  in  affliction,  safety 
in  death,  heaven,  and,  in  heaven,  God.  H.  Its  author — God.  1.  The  work  of 
saving  mercy  on  which  it  rests  is  only  His.  He  provides  mercy  and  induces  its 
acceptance.  2.  He  communicates  that  peace  which  flows  from  a  sease  of  pardon. 
This  is  not  the  result  of  reasoning  or  self-examination,  it  is  the  gift  of  that  God 
who  fills  us  "  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing."  III.  Onb  o»  its  peopebties. 
A  peace  thus  Divine  in  its  origin  must  partake  in  some  degree  of  the  lofty  nature 
of  its  Author,  and  in  that  degree  must  be  incomprehensible.  1.  It  passes  the 
understanding  of  those  who  are  strangers  to  it.  They  who  have  not  experienced 
it  can  know  nothing  of  its  character.  Not  that  it  is  visionary  or  enthusiastic — 
nothing  can  be  so  rational  and  real ;  there  is  no  other  that  will  bear  any  serious 
reflection  at  all.  And  this  peculiarity  is  not  confined  to  this  or  any  other  spiritual 
blessing.  The  man  of  intellect  may  talk  of  the  delight  be  experiences  in  the 
acquisition  of  knowledge,  but  his  words  convey  no  distinct  idea  to  his  ignorant 
neighbour.  Tell  a  deaf  man  of  the  harmonies  of  music,  or  a  blind  man  of  tha 
beauty  of  the  world  t  2.  Those  who  enjoy  it  most  cannot  fully  comprehend  it. 
They  are  sensible  of  it,  and  find  their  hearts  quieted  and  purified  by  it ;  but  how 
did  it  come  into  the  heart  ?  Why  is  it  at  times  so  unspeakably  sweet  and  strong  ? 
All  they  can  say  is,  it  "  passeth  understanding,"  and  perhaps  an  inhabitant  of 
heaven  cannot  say  more.  We  may  all,  however,  comprehend  its  effects.  IV.  Osn 
OF  THESE  EFFECTS.  1.  It  kceps  the  heart.  (1)  In  temptation  by  satisfying  it.  It 
triumphs  over  the  pleasures  of  sense  by  communicating  higher  pleasnxei.    (2)  la 


830  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

affliction.  It  is  a  pledge  of  the  special  love  of  God  to  the  soul,  and  as  such  it 
begete  coafidence  in  Him.  Let  a  worluly  man  lose  his  earthly  comforts  and  he  has 
lost  all  ;  but  let  a  man  of  God  lose  what  he  may  his  chief  treasure  is  safe.  2.  It 
keeps  the  mind.  (1)  It  settles  the  judgment,  and  informs  and  elevates  the  under- 
standing by  showing  it,  in  the  light  of  spiiitual  blessedness,  the  measure  and 
poverty  of  all  temporal  good.  (2)  It  keeps  the  mind  from  folly,  new  and  strange 
notions,  sceptical  doubt  and  error.  The  man  who  has  it  has  "the  witness  in 
himself."  Tell  him  that  the  Bible  is  not  true,  his  religion  a  fable  1  You  might  as 
well  tell  him  in  the  broad  light  of  day  that  there  is  no  sun.  V.  Its  soubce  and 
1M8TBC MENTALITY.  The  apostle  had  been  inculcating  freedom  from  anxiety 
and  care ;  but  lest  the  Philippians  should  seek  in  this  the  fountain  of  their  peace 
he  here  adds  "  in  Christ  Jesus."  This  peace  has  God  for  its  author  and  giver, 
but  it  flows,  to  us  through  His  Son.  1.  It  is  one  of  the  blessed  fruits  of  His  obedi- 
ence, sufferings,  and  intercession.  2.  It  dwells  also  in  Him  as  the  head  of  the 
Church,  the  royal  treasury  of  all  precious  gifts.  3.  It  is  dispersed  by  Him  through 
the  agency  of  the  Spirit.      (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  How   to  keep  the  Mart : — Inas- 

much as  the  heart  is  the  most  important  part  of  a  man — for  out  of  it  are  the  issues 
of  life — it  is  natural  that  it  should  be  the  object  of  Satan's  perpetual  attacks.  I. 
That  which  keeps  the  heaet  akd  mind.  1.  The  peace  of  God,  the  peace  existing 
between  the  chUd  of  God  and  his  Judge  through  his  Saviour,  from  whence  flows 
peace  of  conscience.  2.  This  peace  passeth  all  understanding.  (1)  See  how  it 
keeps  those  who  are  in  the  depth  of  poverty  while  many  rich  are  distracted.  (2)  The 
bereaved,  when  those  who  have  not  suffered  are  gnawed  with  fear.  (3)  The  con. 
lessors,  Luther,  Hues,  Bradford — while  popes  and  kings  tremble.  II.  How  i8  this 
PEACE  TO  BE  OBTAINED.  This  promisc  has  precepts  (see  ver.  4).  1.  Rejoice  ever- 
more.  The  man  who  never  rejoices  is  always  murmuring.  Cultivate  a  cheerful 
disposition.  2.  Be  moderate.  Merchant,  you  cannot  push  that  speculation  too 
far,  and  have  peace  of  mind.  Young  man,  you  cannot  be  trying  so  fast  to  rise  in 
the  world,  and  have  the  fear  of  God.  You  must  be  moderate  in  anger,  in  expecta- 
tions, &c.  3.  Be  careful  for  nothing,  &o.  If  you  tell  your  troubles  to  God  you  put 
them  into  the  grave.  If  you  roll  them  anywhere  else  they  will  roll  back  again  like 
the  stone  of  Sisyphns,  Cast  yonr  troubles  where  you  have  cast  your  sins,  into  the 
depths  of  the  sea.  III.  How  this  peace  keeps  tee  heabt.  1.  It  keeps  the  heart 
fuU  of  that  love  which  casteth  out  all  fear.  2.  It  keeps  the  heart  pure,  without  the 
least  relish  for  sin,  which  is  the  soul's  disturbance.  3.  It  keeps  it  undivided,  and 
thus  saves  it  from  distraction.  4.  It  keeps  it  rich,  and  thus  renders  it  secure  from 
anxiety.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Characteristics  of  peace: — It  is — 1.  Heal ;  not  the 
delusive  calm  of  a  hollow  truce,  nor  the  deceitful  tranquillity  of  stolid  indifference 
and  thoughtless  apathy.  An  ice-bound  river  is  at  peace  ;  a  motionless  corpse.  In 
true  peace  there  is  life  and  activity  as  well  as  rest.  2.  Great  (Psa.  cxix.  165  ;  Isa. 
Ut.  13)  in  its  foundation,  author,  effect.  8.  Abundant  (Jer.  xxxiii.  6),  flowing  in 
many  channels,  and  filling  the  heart  (Rom.  xv.  13).  4.  Abiding ;  secure  and 
certain,  a  peace  that  lives  independently  of  circumstances,  "  which  the  world  can 
neither  give  nor  take  away,"  the  unruffled  undercurrent,  beneath  the  groundswell 
of  the  Christian's  sorrows;  a  peace  not  often  disturbed,  and  never  finally  overthrown. 
5.  Incomprehensive,  both  to  the  men  of  this  world  and  saints  of  God  as  well. 
(G.  S.  Bowes,  B.A.)  The  secret  of  peace: — He  who  cUmbs  above  the  cares  of  the 
world  and  turns  his  face  to  his  God,  has  found  the  sunny  side  of  life.  The  world's 
side  of  the  hill  is  chill  and  freezing  to  a  spiritual  mind,  but  the  Lord's  presence 
gives  a  warmth  of  joy  which  turns  winter  into  summer.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  The 
peace  of  elevation : — Dust,  by  its  own  nature,  can  rise  only  so  far  above  the  road; 
and  birds  which  fly  higher  never  have  it  upon  their  wings.  So  the  heart  that  knows 
how  to  fly  high  enough  escapes  those  little  cares  and  vexations  which  brood  upon 
the  earth,  but  cannot  rise  above  it  into  that  purer  air.  {H.  W.  Bucher.)  True 
and  false  peace : — There  are  other  kinds  of  peace  besides  the  peace  of  God.  There 
is  the  peace,  for  example,  of  an  uninformed  conscience ;  of  one  who  thinks  that  an 
amiable  disposition,  and  a  freedom  from  open  or  definite  sin,  is  enough  to  win 
heaven.  There  is  the  peace  of  a  sleeping  conscience  ;  a  conscience  still  lying  dor- 
mant in  the  torpor  of  natural  indifference.  There  is  the  peace  of  a  drugged  con. 
science ;  of  one  who  is  surrendering  himself  to  a  bosom  lust,  and  refusing  to  look 
on  to  its  probable  misery  in  this  life,  to  its  certain  punishment  in  the  next.  Tuera 
is  the  peace  too  of  a  hardened  conscience  ;  of  one  who  has  become  so  used  to  sin 
that  it  has  lost  its  power  to  alarm  ;  of  one  who  can  even  he  down  to  die,  impenitent 
-And  uiuremorgeful,  on  the  strength  of  a  few  vague  hopes,  if  even  these,  in  God's 


CHAP.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  881 

mercy  and  in  Christ's  atonement.  All  sinful  men  are  not  yet  consciously  unhappy, 
though  of  peace,  in  its  true  meaning,  they  can  know  nothing.  There  is  no  peace, 
saith  my  God,  no  true,  permanent  peace  of  God,  to  the  wicked.  God  calls  us  to 
peace.  That  is  what  He  offers  to  us.  Repose  instead  of  restlessness  ;  tranquillity 
instead  of  confusion  ;  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  sure  and  stedfast,  because  entering 
into  that  within  the  veil.  God  grant  that  the  religion  here  known  may  be  all  of 
that  character  ;  a  religion  of  quietness,  a  religion  of  soberness,  a  religion  of  reality, 
•  religion  of  peace.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The  peace  passing  all  understanding : — You 
have  seen  the  sea  when  it  was  perfectly  smooth,  with  hardly  a  ripple  on  the  water; 
and  yon  have  watched  it  when  lashed  into  a  fury  by  the  tempest,  the  waves  run 
mountains«high.  But  all  this  rage  of  the  elements  is  only  ou  the  surface  ;  below 
the  waves  and  foam  and  howling  winds  there  are  depths  which  no  storms  ever 
reach,  where  the  many-branched  coral  and  other  strange  forms  of  growth  and  life 
spread  over  vast  submarine  plains  and  valleys,  throughout  the  whole  extent  of 
which  reigns  the  silence  and  stillness  of  an  unbroken  calm.  Such  is  the  contrast 
between  the  outward  trials  of  life  and  the  deep  inward  peace  which  reigns  in  the 
heart  which  is  stayed  m  God.  We  cannot  escape  the  trials  of  life,  but  if  there  be 
within  us  true  trust  in  God,  then  there  will  be  depths  in  our  inmost  being  where 
no  storms  can  reach,  depths  beyond  the  play  of  the  waves  of  this  troublesome  world, 
where  the  fuiy  of  the  tempest  cannot  come,  where  all  will  be  calm  and  still.  (J.  B. 
Mozley,  D.D. )  The  peace  of  God  a  protection  : — The  peace,  the  harmony  of  soul, 
the  repose  and  concord  of  the  whole  man,  which  is  God's  gift,  the  effect  of  God's 
own  presence  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  shall  keep  you  as  in  a  fortified  place  from  all 
danger,  from  all  the  crafts  and  assaults  of  evil.  What  is  it  which  exposes  ub  to  our 
worst  perils  ?  Is  it  not  a  roving  heart ?  A  heart  seeking  rest  and  finding  none? 
It  16  not  the  unsatisfied  insatiable  thirst  which  is  in  us  ail  by  nature,  for  a  happi- 
uess  which  yet  earth  cannot  give.  That  is  what  makes  a  man  a  pleasure-hunter, 
an  idolater  of  the  world,  the  slave  of  his  evil  passions  and  sinful  lusts.  That  is  the 
bait  which  the  devil  presents  to  the  fallen  Adam  :  and  if  it  succeeded  even  with  the 
unfallen  and  npright,  who  shall  wonder  if  it  succeeds  with  him  T  Let  a  man  have 
found  peace  in  God,  let  him  have  tasted  of  that  water  after  drinking  of  which  none 
thirsts  again  for  any  other,  and  he  has  a  safeguard  against  evil.  Why  should  he  go 
after  that  which  cannot  profit  or  satisfy  when  he  has  within  him  a  spring  of  living 
water.  That  is  the  sense  in  which  Paul  writes  that  the  peace  of  God  shall 
guard  our  hearts  and  our  thoughts,  i.e.,  the  seat  of  thought,  and  the  workings  of 
thought.  There  will  be  no  roving  desires  there  to  go  abroad  from  the  camp  and 
fall  into  the  enemy's  ambush.  And  there  will  be  no  traitor  there  to  open  the  gate 
of  the  citadel  to  some  disguised  foe.  The  heart  that  has  found  peace  in  God,  ia 
kept  as  in  a  sure  fortress  by  that  peace  itself.  It  is  built  as  a  city  that  is  at  unity  in 
itself  (Prov.  xviii.  10  ;  Psa.  cxxii.  3,  Pea.  xiii.  6).  It  is  aU  at  one.  It  is  not  divided 
between  this  and  that ;  it  is  not,  like  the  heart  of  nature,  a  fighting  ground  of  con- 
flicting parties  ;  it  is  in  safe  keeping  under  an  almighty  hand.  {Dean  Vaughan,) 
Peace  protecting  : — The  child  frightened  in  his  play  runs  to  seek  his  mother.  She 
takes  him  upon  her  lap  and  presses  his  head  to  her  bosom ;  and  with  tenderest 
words  of  love,  she  loi  ks  down  upon  him,  and  smoothes  his  hair,  and  kisses  hia 
cheek  and  wipes  away  his  tears,  and  then  in  a  low  and  gentle  voice,  she  sings  some 
sweet  descant,  some  lullaby  of  love  ;  and  the  fear  fades  out  from  his  face,  and  a 
smile  of  satisfaction  plays  over  it,  and  at  length  his  eyes  close,  and  he  sleeps  in  the 
deep  depths  and  delights  of  peace.  God  Almighty  is  the  mother,  and  the  soul  ia 
the  frightened  child ;  and  He  folds  it  in  His  arms,  dispels  its  fear,  and  lulls  it  to 
repose,  saying,  "  Sleep,  my  darling,  sleep !  It  is  I  who  watch  and  protect  thee. 
No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper."  The  mother's  arms  encircle 
but  one ;  but  God  clasps  every  yearning  soul  to  His  bosom  and  gives  it  the  peace 
which  passeth  understandmg,  beyond  the  reach  of  care  or  storm.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Peace  protective : — The  peace  of  God  will  keep  us  from  sinning  onder  our  troubles 
and  from  sinking  under  them.    {Matthev  Henry.) 

Vers.  8-9.  Finally,  brethren,  whatsoever  things.  We  have  here — L  A  dibeotion 
FOB  THOUGHT — "  Think  on  these  things."  II.  A  dikection  for  practice — "  These 
things  do."  III.  A  pkomisk  conditional  on  obedience  to  the  two — "  The  God  of 
peace  shall  be  with  you."  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Christian  life : — I.  Its  featubes. 
1.  Truth  in  word,  &c.  2.  Honour,  integrity  and  purity  in  conduct.  3.  Whatever 
is  beautiful  and  praiseworthy  in  behaviour.  II.  Its  motives.  Apostolical.  1. 
Preoept     2.  Example.    IIL  Its  advamtaoes.    1.  The  preeeaoe  of  the  Qod  of  peMe. 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rr. 

2.  The  peace  He  gives.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)         The  meditation  and  practice  of  holi- 
ness : — A  second  time  we  have  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  maiter.     Before  it  was 
"  finally,  brethren,  rejoice  in  the  Lord."     The  whole  history  of  conversion  with  all 
its  preliminary  struggJes,  the  terrors  and  sorrows  of  repentance,  the  hopes  aud  feara 
of  faith,  finds  its  issue  and  rest  in  this.     But  here  is  a  second  "  finally."     There  is 
something  beyond  the  exultation  of  deliverance  through  Christ ;  and  that  is  tae 
attainment  of  a  perfect  character  in  Him.    We  are  urged — I,  To  fix  ode  full  ani> 
DETEEMiNATE  THOUGHT  UPON  PERFECTION.     The  word  is  ofteu  used  to  siguiiy  due 
appreciation,  and  it  bids  us  here  with  strong  emphasis  estimate  rightly  the  place 
morality  holds  in  the  gospel,     1.  It  was  the  glory  of  the  apostle's  career  to  proclaim 
everywhere  that  for  the  sake  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Cross  the  vilest  transgressors 
repenting   and  beheving   in   Jesus  were  assured  of   forgiveness  and  reputed  as 
righteous.     But  it  became  the  hard  necessity  of  his  life  to  have  to  defend  it  against 
perversion.     The  enemy  everywhere  followed  him,  sowing  tares.     The  abuse  which 
taught  men  to  sin  that  grace  might  abound  was  the  subject  of  his  ceaseless  protest. 
In  the  former  part  of  this  Epistle  he  had  dwelt  on  the  worthlessness  of  all  good 
works  as  the  ground  of  the  sinner's  acceptance  :  and  because  he  had  so  utterly  dis- 
paraged human  goodness  in  the  third  chapter,  he  now  in  the  fourth  vindicates  the 
claims  of  Christian  godliness.     On  the  way  to  the  Cross  think  not  of  any  good  in 
yourself ;  on  the  way  from  the  Cross  think  of  all  the  obligations  of  holiness.     2.  For 
all  the  provisions  of  grace  have  their  issue  in  our  moral  perfection.    Kenouncing 
our  own  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  we  are  to  attain  a  righteousness  of 
faith,  which  in  another  sense  must  be  "  our  own."     Pardon  is  the  removal  of  an 
obstruction  to  holiness.     The  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  teaches  us  to 
aspire  to  all  good  works.     U.  To  ponder  its  unlimited  variety  of  obligations. 
1.  The  apostle  exhorts  us  to  train  our  minds  to  a  high  and  refined  sense  of  this. 
It  is  true  that  the  regenerate  are  taught  of  God,  and  have  the  Spirit  to  guide  them ; 
but  this  is  not  to  supersede  the  use  of  their  own  faculties.     The  Bible  shows  us 
"  what  is  good  "  in  its  great  principles,  but  leaves  us  to  find  out  their  illimitable 
application.     2.  The  object  of  this  study  is  excellence  according  to  all  its  standards, 
"  Whatsoever  things  "  suggests  that  every  Christian  virtue  has  its  own  unlimited 
field  of  study.    What  a  bouudiess  field,  e.g.,  is  truth.    3.  The  result  of  this  constant 
study  is  the  ei^ucatifn  of  the  spiritual  taste  into  a  high  pitch  of  dehcacy.     The 
Christian's  i-tamlard  of  truth,  dignity,  &c.,  becomes  higher  than  that  of  other  men. 
Here  hes  the  secret  of  the  difference  between  Christian  and  Christian,  between 
careless  professors  who  are  always  stumbling  them>-elves,  and  a  cause  of  offence  to 
others,  and  the  educated  disciples  who  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  their  Saviour. 
Receive  this  exhortation  and  you  will  come  by  degrees  so  accurate  in  your  moral 
judgment  as  never  to  fail,  and  be  in  the  best  sense,  "  a  law  unto  yourselves."     IIL 
To  GIVE  IT  THE  FERVENT  DESIRE  OF  OUR  MEDITATION.     The  "  thinking"  signifies  that 
intent  contemplation  of  perfection  which  feeds  the  soul's   regenerate  longing  to 
attain  it.     1.  Mark  with  what  exquisite  skill  the  elements  of  perfection  are  com- 
bined into  one  lovely  whole.     We  must  look  steadily  at  this  assemblage  of  ethical 
graces  untU   we   are  enkindled  with  its  loveliness.     2.  And    as  the    Christian  ia 
exhorted  to  delight  in  the  thought  of  perfection    as  the  aggregate  of    all  excel- 
lencies, so  also  he  must  make  every  individual  principle  the  object  of  affectionate 
contemplation.    How  beautiful  are  truth,  religious  dignity,  &c.     3.  As  the  virtue* 
of  holiness  are  displayed  in  the  Word  of  God,  to  think  of   them  is  to  meditate 
on  it.   "0  how  I   love   Thy  law."     To   the  soul  that  hungers  and  thirsts  after 
righteousness,  the  Bible  is  an  everlasting  delight.     4.  Moreover,  such  an  insatiate 
student  delights  to  consider  the  lives  of  those  who  have  gone  before  him  in  the 
narrow  way — Christ  the  supreme  stai.dard  and  pattern  of  the  result;   Paul  and 
others  as  examples  of  the  process.    Those  who,  like  ourselves,  have  had  to  travel 
through  all  the  stages  of   the  ascent  from   sin  to  holiness   leave   their  example 
for   our  encouragement.     But  while  we   imitate   them  we   must  aspire  to  Him. 
IV,  To  MAKE  IT  OUR  PRACTICAL   CONCERN,      Let  Dot  thinking   end,  but  turn  your 
meditations  to  practice,      1,    Generally  there  is  to  be  nothing  visionary  in    our 
religion.     Hence  the  abrupt  "  do."     There  is  a  sentimental  religion  which  thinka 
loftily  and  talks  magnUoquently  about  virtue,  but  ends  there,     Onr  religion  must 
not  be  a  barren  homage  to  the  saintly  qualities  of  others.     What  man  has  been 
man  may  be,  by  the  grace  of  God,  even  though  the  man  may  have  been  a  Paul. 
2,  Every  scriptural  ideal  of  excellence  may  be  realized  in  practice.     The  pagan 
writers  had  their  noble  ideals,  but  nowhere   outside  the   Bible  is  there   such  • 
conBununate  standard  as  ihia.    And  then,  again,  the  highest  moralists  who  sat* 


OHA».  rr.]  PHILIPPIANS.  833 

not  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  despaired  of  their  own  teaching,  imperfect  as  it  was, 
•'  unless  indeed,"  as  one  said,  '*  God  should  become  incarnate  to  teach  us." 
Christianity  alone  has  the  golden  link  between  thought  and  practice.  3.  As 
thinking  must  not  terminate  in  itself,  so  practice  must  be  the  diligent  regula- 
tion of  our  life  according  to  all  the  principles  of  holiness.  There  is  a  sense, 
indeed,  in  which  our  religion  from  beginning  to  end  is  God's  work ;  but  the  forma- 
tion of  Christian  character  is  our  own  task  under  His  blessing,  and  its  perfection 
is  conferred  upon  us,  not  as  a  gift  simply,  but  as  the  seal  upon  our  efforts,  and  their 
exceeding  great  reward.  4.  Wa  must  work  out  our  own  salvation  by  governing 
our  lives  according  to  these  holy  principles  particularly.  If  we  would  be  perfectly 
true  we  must  act  out  the  truth  in  thought,  word,  and  deed ;  so  with  dignity,  &c. 
V.  To  THINK  OF  IT  WITH  THE  PEACEFUL  coNFiDENCB  OF  HOPE.  There  cau  be  no 
encouragement  more  mighty  than  that  the  God  of  Peace  shall  be  with  us.  1.  God 
will  be  with  us  animating  our  pursuit  by  the  assurance  of  reconciliation.  There  ia 
no  spirit  for  the  pursuit  unless  we  know  that  the  guilty  past  is  pardoned.  The 
heart  must  be  enlarged  if  we  would  run  in  the  way  of  His  commandments ;  and 
don't  narrow  it  and  impede  your  progress  by  permitted  sin.  2.  God  will  be  with  aa 
crowning  our  effort.  Peace  is  the  full  sum  of  His  heavenly  blessing.  "  Great 
peace  have  they  who  love  His  law,"  Others  may  have  a  transient  joy  and  super- 
ficial excitement.  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  Soul  perfection: — The  finest  specimen  of  a 
Christian  is  he  in  whom  all  the  graces,  like  the  strings  of  an  angel's  harp,  are  in 
the  most  perfect  harmony.  Therefore,  we  are  to  beware  of  cultivating  one  grace  or 
attending  to  any  one  duty  at  the  expense  of  others.  That  is  possible  ;  and  never 
more  likely  to  happen  than  in  these  days  of  recoil  from  mere  speculative  theology, 
and  of  busy,  bustling  benevolence.  Treading  in  our  Master's  steps,  we  are  to  go 
about  doing  good  ;  yet  we  may  undertake  so  many  works  of  Christian  philanthropy 
as  to  trench  on  the  hours  that  should  be  sacred  to  devotion.  In  seeking  the  good 
of  others,  we  may  so  neglect  the  cultivation  of  our  own  hearts,  and  the  duties  we 
owe  to  our  own  families,  as  to  have  to  cry  with  the  man  of  old.  They  made  me  keeper 
of  vineyards,  and  mine  own  vineyard  I  have  not  kept.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Avoid 
doubtful  things : — The  atmosphere  is  sometimes  in  such  a  pecuUar  state  that  the 
spectator,  on  coast  or  shore,  looking  abroad  over  the  sea,  cannot  tell  where  the 
water  ends  and  the  sky  begins ;  and  as  if  some  magician  had  raised  them  out  of 
their  proper  element,  and  turned  their  sails  into  wings,  the  ships  seem  floating  in 
mid-air.  But  occasionally  no  line  of  separation  is  more  diflacult  to  draw  than  that 
which  lies  between  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong.  Whether  such  and  such  a 
business  or  amusement,  pursuit  or  pleasure,  is  wrong,  and  one,  therefore,  in  which 
no  Christian  should  engage,  is  a  question  that,  so  far  as  the  thing  itself  is  concerned, 
may  be  difl&cult  to  answer.  But  it  is  not  difficult  to  answer,  so  far  as  you  are  concerned, 
if  you  doubt  whether  it  is  right.  The  apostolic  rule  is,  "Let  every  man  be  fully  per- 
Buadftd  in  his  own  mind ; "  and  unless  you  are  so,  then,  "what  is  not  of  faith  is  sin"— 
sin  at  least  to  you.  {Ibid.)  St.  Paul's  farewell : — The  words  are  the  parting  counsel 
of  the  apostle.  They  come  at  the  most  solemn  period  of  his  hfe,  and  he  was  writing 
to  the  best-loved  of  the  churches.  Will  he  speak  of  the  mysteries  he  saw  and  heard? 
Will  he  expound  some  profound  doctrine  ?  It  is  almost  with  a  feeling  of  dis- 
appointment that  we  find  these  homely  words.  I.  Observe  the  entikeness  of  th« 
apostle's  language.  "Whatsoever  things."  It  has  sometimes  been  supposed 
that  difiFerent  regions  of  goodness  might  be  separated  from  each  other ;  religion 
tiom  moraUty ;  truth  from  beauty.  Paul  recognizes  no  such  distinction.  He  who 
furthers  one  truth  incidentally  furthers  all  others.  II.  Note  how  all  the  EEOioNa 
OF  GOODNESS  FIT  INTO  EACH  OTHER.  Paul,  trained  in  Greek  learning,  would  be 
familiar  with  the  classical  debates  respecting  the  true,  the  beautiful,  and  the  good. 
The  Greek  asserted  that  the  supreme  object  of  pursuit  was  the  beautiful.  His  soul 
was  so  enwrapt  in  sensuous  beauty,  that  he  could  recognize  the  good  only  in  it. 
The  highest  object  of  admiration  to  the  Roman  was  what  was  just.  So  some 
think  now  that  the  highest  good  is  only  to  be  found  in  truth,  scientific  facts;  others 
in  the  noble  and  self-denying ;  in  the  romantic  aspect  of  things.  Paul  discourages 
no  forms  of  goodness,  and  would  welcome  it  whether  in  myth,  legend,  song,  art, 
nature,  domestic  hfe.     III.  The  true  Christian  character  consists  not  in  the 

MERE    ABSENCE    OF   EVIL  BUT    IN   THE    POSSESSION  AND  CULTIVATION    OF   THE    GOOD.       So 

dwell  on  "  these  things  "  as  to  make  them  your  own.  Your  soul  was  made  for 
them,  and  in  nothing  lower  can  it  be  happy.  Only  by  thinking  on  them  can  their 
opposites  be  cast  out.  Darkness  is  only  to  be  expelled  by  light,  impurity  by 
hoUness,  the  love  of  sin  by  the  love  of  God — in  individuals  or  communitiea. 


3S4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

(J?,  M.  Stewart.y  Christian  character : — I.  Should  be  complete  on  evbrt  side. 
IL  Includes  evebythinq  that  is  excellent.  III.  Requires  much  study  and 
PRATEK.      (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christian  rigliteousness : — 1,  The  sanctification  of 

men  is  the  true  object  of  redemption  (Gal.  i.  4  ;  Tit.  ii.  14).  For  this  Christ  took 
our  nature,  was  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  and  died.  And  as  His 
salvation  is  not  a  common  and  earthly  good,  so  the  holiness  to  which  He  moulds 
us  is  not  a  common  and  natural  perfection,  bnt  one  singular  and  supernatural.  2. 
In  these  words  the  apostle  oppose^  his  doctrine  to  that  of  a  false  teacher,  who 
insisted  upon  legal  observances,  which  are  much  more  easy  and  agreeable  than  the 
study  of  real  virtue.  He  enforces  whatsoever  thing*  are — I.  True.  This  comes 
first,  because  before  all  things  we  shall  embrace  the  Truth  as  disciples  of  Him  who 
is  "  the  Truth."  Here  should  be  tbe  foundation  of  afl  our  conduct.  We  must 
consider  "  things  true  " — 1.  Which  are  not  feigned,  or  invented  to  please,  but 
which  really  subsist.  2.  Such  as  are  at  the  foundation  firm  and  solid,  not  shadows 
or  figures.  Falsehoods  of  whatever  kind  are  prohibited.  3.  All  vain  and  deceitful 
appefirances  are  e3?cluded.  Our  manner  of  life  must  be  plain  and  simple,  purged 
froji;  the  love  of  the  world  which,  as  a  shadow,  passes  away.  II.  Vekerable — all 
that  relates  to  the  dignity  of  tbe  hicjh  vocation  to  which  God  has  called  us, 
renouncing  all  frivolity  and  folly.  HI.  Just.  1.  What  God  commands  us  to  render 
unto  men,  whether  honour,  deference,  and  obedience  to  our  superiors  in  the  state 
or  the  family  ;  tb*^  guidance  and  protection  of  inferiors;  friendship  and  assistance 
towards  equals,  or  kindness  towards  all.  2.  The  laws  and  duties  of  the  city  and 
society  in  which  we  live,  save  when  they  conflict  with  conscience.  IV.  Pure. 
We  should  be  careful  not  only  to  preserve  our  bodies  from  pollution,  but  our  hearts, 
tongues,  eyes,  dress,  cultivating  modesty,  and  avoiding  every  species  of  dissolute. 
ness.  V.  Lovely.  Although  all  virtues  are  excellent  in  themselves,  yet  some  are 
more  pleasing  than  others ;  even  as  we  see  amongst  the  stars,  though  all  are 
beautiful,  yet  some  shine  with  a  brighter  lustre.  Among  the  virtues,  sweetness  of 
mind,  courtesy,  clemency,  willingness  to  oblige,  show  with  peculiar  brightness.  VI. 
Good  report.  Among  actions  which  are  good,  some  are  held  more  specially  in 
repute.  St.  Paul  would  have  us  give  ourselves  to  them  with  especial  care,  because 
those  who  hold  them  in  high  esteem  will  love  as  better,  and  yield  more  readily  to 
our  religious  influence.  VII.  That  nothing  may  be  omitted,  the  apostle  adds,  if 
there  be  any  vibtub  ob  praise.  None  of  these  Divine  and  beautiful  flowers  must  be 
wanting.  Indeed,  it  is  not  possible  to  have  one  in  any  degree  of  perfection  without 
the  others.  They  are  sisters  so  firmly  linked  together  that  they  cannot  be  torn 
asunder.        (J.  DaillS.)  The    moralities    of   Christianity  : — I.    What    these 

MORALITIES  ABE.  Whatsoever  things  are — I.  True.  1.  In  speech.  We  must  be  free 
from  lying.  This  is  when  men,  with  a  purpose  to  deceive,  say  what  is  false  either 
by  assertion  (Acts  v.  3)  or  promise  (Prov.  xix.  22).  Lying  is — (1)  Most  contrary  to 
the  nature  of  God,  who  is  truth  itself.  (2)  To  the  new  nature  (Eph.  iv.  25,  26 ; 
Isa.  Ixiii.  8).  (3)  To  society,  for  commerce  is  kept  up  by  truth.  2.  In  actions. 
We  should  keep  the  integrity  of  a  good  conscience  (Psa.  zxzii.  2 ;  2  Cor.  i.  12). 
Sincerity  and  candour  should  be  seen  in  all  we  do.  Satan  assaults  you  with  wiles, 
but  your  strength  lies  in  downright  honesty  (Eph.  vi.  14 ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  2-3).  2. 
Honest — grave  and  venerable,  free  from  scurrility,  lightness  and  vanity  iu  word  or 
deed.  Eeligion  is  a  serious  thing,  so  should  they  be  who  profess  it  (1  Tim.  ii.  9-10 ; 
Tit.  ii.  2).  8.  Just.  We  must  give  every  man  his  due,  and  defraud  none  of  hia 
right;  whether  (1)  superiors  (Matt.  xxii.  21),  (2)  inferiors  (Col.  iv.  1),  (3)  equals 
(Ram.  xiii.  8 ;  Matt.  vii.  12).  4.  Peace.  Nothing  obscene  or  unchaste  should  be 
seen  of  heard  from  a  Christian  (Eph.  iv.  29  ;  v.  12).  6.  Lovely.  There  are  certain 
things  whieh  are  not  only  commanded  by  God,  but  are  grateful  to  men,  such  as 
affability,  peaceableness,  usefulness  (Eom.  xiv.  18  ;  1  Thess.  v.  15  ;  Acts  ii.  46-47). 
6.  Of  good  report.  There  are  some  things  which  have  no  express  evil  in  them, 
bnt  they  are  not  of  good  fame  (1  Thess.  v.  22 ;  1  Peter  ii.  12).  7.  Virtue  and  praise, 
two  things  linked  together.  Many  things  in  the  world  are  praised  which  are  not 
virtnous ;  such  things  are  to  be  abhorred.  But  if  there  be  any  good  thing  even  among 
the  heathen,  religion  should  be  adorned  with  it.  II.  In  what  manner  doth  Chris- 
TiAMiTT  ENFORCE  THEM.  1.  It  derivcs  them  all  from  the  highest  fountain,  the  Spirit 
of  sanctification,  by  whom  we  are  fitted  for  these  duties  (Eph.  v.  9;  Gal.  v.  22). 
2.  It  makes  them  to  grow  out  of  proper  principles.  (1)  Faith  in  Christ  (Heb.  xi.  6 ; 
Bom.  vii.  4).  (2)  Love  to  God  (Gal.  v.  6  ;  Tit.  ii.  11-12).  3.  It  directs  by  the 
highest  rule,  God's  mind  revealed  in  His  Word,  the  absolute  rule  of  right  nnd 
wrong.    4.  It  aims  at  the  highest  end,  the  glory  of  God  (1  Cor.  x.  31 ;  Phil.  i.  Zl ; 


CHAP.  IT.J  PHILIPPIANS.  335 

Acts  xxiv.  14-16).  III.  For  what  reasons.  1.  Because  grace  does  not  abolish 
■o  luin'h  of  nature  as  is  good,  but  refines  and  sublimates  it,  by  causing  us  to  act 
from  higher  principles  and  to  higher  ends.  2.  Because  these  conduce  to  the  honour 
of  religion.  The  creiUt  of  religion  depends  much  on  the  credit  of  its  professors 
(Ezek.  xxxvi.  20-21 ;  2  Sam.  xii.  14  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  2  ;  Tit.  ii.  10).  3.  Our  peace  and  safety 
are  concerned  in  it.  (1)  The  world  is  least  irritated  by  a  good  conversation 
(1  Pet.  iii.  13  ;  1  Sam.  xxiv.  17).  (2)  When  we  do  not  bring  trouble  on  ourselves 
by  our  immoralities,  God  takes  us  under  His  special  protection  (ver.  9).  4.  These 
things  grow  from  that  internal  principle  of  grace  which  is  planted  in  our  hearts  by 
regeneration  (Acts  xxvi.  20 ;  Matt.  iii.  8).  5.  All  the  disorders  contrary  to  these 
limits  and  bounds  by  which  our  conversations  are  regulated,  are  condemned  by  the 
righteous  law  of  God  which  is  the  rule  of  the  new  creature ;  and  therefore  they 
ought  to  be  avoided  by  the  good  Christian  (Matt.  v.  19).  6.  These  moralities  are 
not  small  things ;  the  glory  of  God,  the  safety  of  His  people,  the  good  of  human 
society,  and  the  evidence  of  our  own  sincerity  being  concerned  in  them.  Conclusion : 
1.  If  religion  adopts  moralities  into  its  constitution,  we  must  not  leave  them  out 
of  our  practice  (Tit.  iii.  8).  Here  is  an  answer  to  those  who  ask  wherein  must  we  be 
holy  and  obedient.  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Expansivenfiss  of  Christian  life : — These 
word^  come  at  the  close  of  a  noble  delineation  of  Christian  life.  It  is  as  if  having 
unfolded  tract  after  tract  the  vision  suddenly  expanded,  and  a  sense  of  the  boundless- 
ness of  that  life  came  over  the  apostle,  and  then  under  the  stress  of  that  feeling  he 
pours  the  fulness  of  his  soul  into  one  utterance,  emphasizing  its  breadth  by  the 
six-fold  repetition  of  "  whatsoever  things."  As  much  as  to  say  "  all  things  con- 
ceivable, attainable,  include  them  in  your  view  of  Christian  life."  Christian  life 
is  greater  than  any  description  of  it,  and  no  experience  has  yet  exhausted  it.  I. 
Christ  is  Lord  over  the  kinodon  of  truth;  there  is,  therefore,  nothing  in  that 
KINGDOM  which  A  CHRISTIAN  MAT  NOT  ASPIRE  TO  POSSESS.  Our  enemies  are  surprised 
dt  this  claim.  Because  we  put  the  Cross  in  the  centre  they  fancy  there  is  nothing 
but  the  centre.  1.  Some  deny  the  originality  of  Christian  truth,  and  say  of  some 
fragments  of  it,  "It  is  in  Seneca  or  Confucius."  But  whatever  true  things  are 
in  any  of  the  wise  teachers  of  the  past,  we  shall  not  resent  their  being  found 
anterior  to  Christ.  They  were  in  God  before  they  were  in  them,  and  they  have  their 
place  in  the  kingdom  of  truth  of  which  Christ  is  the  King,  and  of  which  we  are  now 
the  heirs.  2.  Detractors  of  another  sort  have  put  the  stigma  on  the  narrowness  ol 
our  hfe.  The  large,  full,  free  life  is  that  which  philosophy,  art,  science,  literature, 
and  travel  make  possible.  But  all  things  here  are  beforehand  in  Christ.  They  may 
not  be  classed  as  yet,  but  they  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  troth,  and  therefore  to 
ns.  8.  Men  who  say  that  *'  It  is  all  over  with  Christian  life.  It  is  an  old-world 
Btory,  a  thing  past  and  done.  The  real  life — the  life  of  the  future — has  its  roots 
in  material  forces,  and  in  the  views,  hopes,  and  aims  to  which  these  forces  are  giving 
shape."   But  whatever  is  here  is  part  of  the  heritage  of  our  life.    II.  The  earliest 

ACTINGS  OF  ChRISTIAS  LIFE    WERE    ILLUSTRATIONS  OP   THIS  EXPANSIVENESS.       1.  Hardly 

was  its  voice  heard  among  men  than  it  began  to  bring  the  teaching  of  the  lilies 
and  the  birds,  and  the  sunshine  and  rain  into  its  glad  tidings.  It  no  sooner  stepped 
into  heathen  life  than  it  commended  the  faith  of  centurions,  Syro-Phcenician 
women,  the  endurance  of  Roman  soldiers,  and  the  self-denial  of  Grecian  wrestlers 
and  runners.  It  went  after  the  waifs  and  strays  of  Jewish  society.  2.  While 
Christian  life  denounced  the  awful  abysses  that  lay  in  the  moral  life  of  heathenism, 
it  accepted  whatever  was  Divine  in  its  civilization.  It  recognized  in  it  the  working 
of  the  Divine  Spirit,  heard  its  poets  preluding  the  song  of  Christian  brotherhood 
in  the  words,  "Ye  are  Gcd's  offspring";  saw  the  glory  of  Roman  law;  and  in 
Greek  wisdom  questions  which  God  had  helped  to  formulate,  and  God's  Son  had 
come  to  answer.  It  asserted  its  inheritance  in  all  the  virtues  of  Greek  and  Roman 
life,  and  found  an  asylum  for  its  slaves.  III.  Another  illustration  of  the  expan- 
siveness  is  that  rr  is  not  presented  to  us  in  the  New  Testament  in  its  develop- 
ments, BUT  IN  its  germs.  It  is  leaven,  seed,  a  new  spiritual  force,  developing, 
penetrating,  taking  possession  of,  allying  itself  to  all  experiences,  manners,  customs, 
countries,  races.  IV.  Look  at  the  expansive  character  of  the  Book  by  which 
Christian  life  is  fed.  The  Bible  grows  in  the  experience  of  the  individual.  It  is 
a  greater  Book  to  the  man  than  to  the  boy.  It  grows  in  the  experience  of  the 
Chnrch.  It  is  not  the  Bible  that  changes,  but  the  eyes  that  pore  over  it  grow 
wider  as  they  read.  Something  of  this  is  due,  to  the  fact  that  it  is  in  the  main  a 
book  of  principles.  In  their  expansion  the  Bible  expands.  New  circumstances 
demand  new  aspects  of  truth,   new  applications  of  principle.      And  every  new 


836  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  if^ 

application  is  a  discovery  of  the  wealth  that  remains  to  be  dug  out  of  the  Book  ol 
God.  V.  This  has  a  practical  bearing  on  the  atti luke  of  Chdrc  bes  to  each 
OTHEB.  1.  No  one  Church,  however  venerable  in  age,  or  fresh  with  the  dew  of 
youth,  has  a  monopoly  of  the  good  things  of  God.  Let  us  covet  earnestly  each 
other's  gifts — the  fervour  of  the  Wesley  an,  the  self-dependence  of  the  Congre- 
gationalist,  the  ordered  government  of  the  Presbyterian,  the  beautiful  worship  of 
the  Episcopalian.  2.  And  why  should  Church  yearnings  stop  short  here :  think  of 
the  many  things,  great  and  good,  in  the  social  life  of  our  country.  We  want  the 
business  habits,  direct  dealing,  and  honour  among  her  commercial  men ;  the  free 
play  and  force  of  her  public  opinion,  her  respect  for  riglits,  her  forbearance ;  the 
noble  self-renunciation  of  her  soldiers  and  sailors ;  the  enthusiasm  of  her  men 
of  science,  and  the  gravity  of  her  lawyers.  (A.  Macleod,  D.D.)  Faith  in 
action: — I.  The  Christun  life  is  a  building  up  of  character.  1.  It  is  more 
than  belief  of  certain  truths,  the  sustaining  of  certain  religious  emotions ; 
it  is  the  continuous  working  into  the  warp  and  woof  of  our  life  every  good  and 
excellent  quality,  until  we  arrive  at  the  measure  of  and  stature  of  the  fulness  that 
is  in  Christ.  2.  Of  course  there  must  be  a  foundation,  and  a  good  one;  but  it  is 
poor  sort  of  work  to  be  always  laying  foundations  with  so  few  buildings  showing 
signs  of  growth,  much  less  of  completecess.  3.  May  not  this  partly  account  for 
the  slow  spread  ot  the  gospel?  We  can  show  many  wbo  have  begun  to  build,  but 
is  that  an  inducement  for  others  to  begin  also?  II.  It  is  just  bi  these  things 
THAT  WE  ARE  JUDGED  BY  THE  WORLD.  1.  It  is  vcry  true  that  the  world  is  not  dis- 
cerning in  its  judgments.  It  sees  professors  doing  disreputable  things  and  imme- 
diately exclaims,  "  There  is  your  religion  for  you."  With  just  as  much  justice  as  if 
after  Satan  had  transformed  himself  into  an  angel  of  light,  he  again  assumed  his 
demoniacal  form  you  were  to  say,  "  There's  your  angel  for  you."  2.  But  that  is  no 
excuse  for  giving  the  world  occasion  to  speak  slightingly  of  the  gospel.  And  it  is 
just  by  the  neglect  of  things  virtuous  and  praisewortby  that  we  provide  worldlings 
with  arrows  to  shoot  at  Christ's  cause.  What  can  the  world  think  when  men  who 
profess  to  be  sure  of  heaven  grumble  at  everything  that  goes  on  in  earth;  when 
those  who  profess  to  have  received  mercy  are  unforgiving,  close-fisted,  and  hard  to 
deal  with.  3.  It  is  not  by  our  professions  of  faith  that  the  world  judges  ns :  it 
cannot  judge  of  the  new  birth,  faith,  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit ;  but  of  the  outer 
life  it  does  judge,  and  has  to  some  extent  a  right  to  judge.  How  watchful  and 
prayerful  we  should  be  that  it  does  not  misjudge  the  Master  through  us  7  How 
careful  we  should  be  to  be  living  epistles  known  and  read  of  aU  men.     IIL  Wb 

should    learn    of   all  men    WHATEVER  IS  VIRTUOUS   OB  PBAISEWOBTHT    IN    THEIB   LIFB. 

Let  the  Church  learn  punctuality  and  business  habits  from  the  merchant ;  the 
Christian,  courtesy  from  the  outward  politeness  of  the  man  of  the  world ;  the 
Protestant,  that  zeal  which  is  so  self-sacrificing  and  the  devotion  that  is  so  warm 
in  the  Roman  Catholic  or  Mohammedan  ;  the  believer,  patient  and  impartial  study 
of  truth  from  the  man  of  science.  From  any  and  every  quarter  let  whatsoever  is 
of  good  report  be  welcomed.     IV.  Let  nonb  imaginb,  however,  that  ant  excel- 

LENCT    OR    VIRTUE   CAN    BE    A    SUBSTITUTE    FOR   FAITH   IN    ChRIST.       Paul   WaS    a    model 

of  every  natural  virtue  before  his  conversion,  and  yet  none  needed  conversion  more 
than  he.  The  young  man  whom  Jesus  loved  was  the  same.  Paul  counted  his 
virtues  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  nothing  but  that 
knowledge  will  save  your  sooL  {R.  J.  Lynd,  B.A.)  Thought : — In  the  service  ol 
God  there  is  employment  for  every  faculty  and  function  ;  they  each  have  a  mission 
for  the  Master.  The  power  to  think  is  the  prerogative  distinctly  peculiar  to  man.  I. 
Thought  is  a  dutt.  Thoughtlessness,  and  consequently  ignorance,  is  what  the  Lord 
BO  pathetically  lamented  in  His  people  Israel.  "  Israel  doth  not  know ;  My  people 
doth  not  consider."  Thoughtlessness  has  wrought  the  ruin  of  our  race.  Isaac 
•'  meditated  at  eventide."  Joshua  was  commanded  to  "  meditate  day  and  night  in 
the  statutes  of  the  Lord."  David  was  a  diUgent  and  talented  thinker.  "  When  I 
consider  Thy  heavens,"  &o.  IL  Subjects  fob  thought.  "Whatsoever  things 
are  true,"  <feo.  We  are  to  think,  but  not  at  random.  Definite  thought  alone  is  pro- 
fitable. There  are  subjects  worthy  of  winning  the  thoughts  of  thinkers  the  most 
profound.  (J.  W.  Bray.)  Thoughts: — I.  That  we  should  aim  at  perfect 
iNTEOBm  OF  OHABACTEB.  1.  Christian  graces  are  commonly  grouped  together  in 
the  Scriptures.  The  reason  is,  that  they  have  all  one  root  and  originating  source ; 
and  where  one  exists  the  rest  may  be  looked  for.  2.  Some  there  are  who  are  satis- 
fied with  few  excellencies,  forgetting  that,  though  remarkable  for  one  or  two  virtues, 
their  character  may  still  be  egregiously  defective.    It  may  be  distorted  and  dispro* 


CHAP.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  837 

portionate,  like  fruit  that  is  ripe  only  on  one  side,  or  like  trees  with  half  their 
branches  withered.  3.  It  is  easy  to  cultivate  those  virtues  which  are  most  congeuial 
with  our  natural  temperament,  most  opportune  to  our  immediate  circumstances,  or 
most  frequent  in  our  circle  of  friends.  But  of  these  we  may  be  the  least  carejful, 
while  we  should  bestow  all  possible  diligence  to  bring  up  those  graces  to  which  we 
are  least  proue,  or  which  are  least  popular.  4.  This  apostle  would  have  as 
lacking  nothing.     II,  In  the  acquisition  of  a  pekfect  chabacteb,  the  propeb 

DIRECTION  AND   CONTROL  OF  THE  THOUGHTS  IS  OF    PARAMOUNT  IMPORTANCE.        ThoUghtS 

are  either  indicative  of  character,  or  formative  of  it.  Our  thoughts  partly  result 
from  our  disposition,  and  partly  create  it.  In  the  former  light  they  may  serve  as 
A  test  of  our  real  state  to  ourselves.  But  maiuly  we  would  speak  of  the  thoughts 
as  tending  to  form  character.  Such  thoughts  are  those  voluntary  ones  which  we 
choose  to  indulge.  1.  Thoughts  create  images :  images  proJuoa  desires :  desires 
influence  the  temper  and  direct  the  will :  the  will  displays  itself  in  overt  action.  2. 
What  thoughts  should  we  indulge  f  (1)  Things  of  truth  :  of  honesty,  i.e.,  honour- 
ableness,  respect-worthiness:  of  justice:  of  purity:  of  amiahility,  or  such  as  win 
the  esteem  and  love  of  others :  and  of  good  report.  (2)  Meditate  on  truth, 
especially  Christian  truth.  Think  of  everytuing,  in  your  deportment,  which  is 
becoming  to  the  dignity  of  a  Christian  character.  3.  Huw  to  think  of  these  things. 
(1)  In  deliberate  meditation  :  in  the  avoidance  of  whatever  would  awaken  contrary 
thoughts.  (2)  Think  of  these  things  with  ardent  love  of  them,  with  strenuous  and 
prayerful  effort  after  their  attainment,  and  the  exemplification  of  them  in  your  con- 
duct. (3)  By  such  training  and  cultivation  of  the  thoughts  may  we  expect  to  grow 
in  grace ;  by  the  neglect  of  it,  we  shall  decline  in  our  piety  and  perhaps  make 
shipwreck  of  faith.  (T.  O,  Horton,  M.A.)  The  traruforming  power  of  thought : — 
Think  on  these  things  and  you  will  become — I.  Better.  What  a  man  thinks  most 
about  grows  upon  him.  A  youth  may  care  very  little  about  business ;  but  presently  he 
becomes  interested  in  it,  and  it  grows  upon  him  until  before  middle  age  is  reached  he 
can  scarcely  think  of  anything  else.  It  is  so  with  the  artist,  with  the  pleasure-seeker, 
and  with  the  Christian.  Let  him  think  on  "whatsoever  things  are  true,"  &c.,  and 
the  more  attractive  they  will  become  ;  the  larger  place  will  they  occupy  in  his  heart, 
and  the  mightier  will  be  their  influence  on  his  life.  Beholding  these  things  with 
an  open  face,  he  will  be  naturally,  insensibly,  gradually  changed  into  the  same 
image.  U.  More  chabitablb.  One  of  our  most  common  tendencies  is  to  look  at 
the  weaknesses  and  shortcomings  of  our  brethren — to  let  the  thought  of  these 
things  exclude  the  thought  of  their  good  qualities.  Hence  harsh  judgments,  sus- 
picion, distrust.  If,  however,  we  would  lay  aside  this  tendency  and  *'  take  account 
of"  (R.V.  marg.)  whatsoever  things  are  true,  &c.,  in  our  neighbours — look  upon 
their  good  instead  of  on  their  faulty  side,  we  should  think  more  kindly  of  them,  our 
thoughts  would  influence  our  conduct,  and  we  should  be  drawn  towards  them  by  a 
threefold  cord  of  love.  And  this  is  possible.  There  is  much  that  is  praiseworthy 
even  in  brethren  who  have  been  overtaken  in  a  fault.  Much  of  our  unity,  success, 
comfort  as  communities,  depend  on  our  cultivating  this  habit.  IIL  More  helpful. 
A  man's  power  to  help  does  not  so  much  depend  on  his  intentions  as  on  his  character 
and  dispusition.  The  presence  of  a  good  man — a  man  who  has  "  thought  on  these 
things  "  until  they  have  become  part  of  himself,  always  acts  hke  a  tonic  on  weaker 
■ouIb.  It  reproves  their  slowness,  quickens  their  desires,  and  stimulates  their 
efforts.  Such  a  man  is  a  means  of  grace.  (J.  Ogle.)  Christian  tlwught : — Not 
the  common  word  for  *'  think,"  but  the  reckoning,  counting  up,  dwelling  repeatedly 
oti  these  things.  It  is  not  the  bee's  touching  upon  the  flowers  that  gathers  honey, 
but  her  abiding  for  a  time  upon  them  and  drawing  out  tlie  sweet.  It  is  not  he  thai 
reads  most,  but  be  that  meJitates  most  on  Divine  truth  that  will  prove  the  choicest, 
wisest,  stront^est  Christian.     (J.  Ilall.)  The  difficulty  and  importance  of  con- 

tinuous thought : — How  many  persons  are  made  and  kept  frivolous  by  an  inability 
to  prescribe  the  subjects  on  which  their  mind  shall  run  '  They  would  give,  or  fancy 
they  would  give,  all  that  they  possess  for  the  power  to  say  decisively  but  for  one 
short  hour, "  This  and  but  this  shall  be  the  subject  of  my  thoughts."  But  they 
find  that  when  they  open  their  Bible  the  mind  has  flown  away  to  some  meditation 
of  things  present  and  transitory  ;  when  they  kneel  down  to  pray,  even  attention  ia 
absent,  they  cannot  remember  God's  presence,  much  less  can  they  wish  the  thing 
they  profess  to  pray  for.  Such  persons  are  good  judges  of  Paul's  precept,  however 
Uttle  they  may  believe  in  the  possibility  of  obeying  it.  For  indeed  it  is  a  very 
dreadful  thing,  when  we  reflect  upon  it — a  strong  proof,  were  there  no  other,  of  our 
fallen  and  ruined  state — that  a  man  should  thus  sit  at  a  helm  oi  wiiich  he  has  lost 

£2 


S38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cttl*.  Tf. 

the  rudder,  shonld  thus  be  repponsible  for  the  conduct  of  a  mind  over  which 
practically  he  has  no  control.  And  if  that  responsibility  cannot  be  desired  ;  if  "  out 
of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh,"  if  by  the  heart  the  path  of  life  is  chosen  and  the 
course  of  life  shaped  ;  in  short,  if,  in  every  sense  of  the  words,  "  out  of  the  heart 
are  the  issues  of  life,"  and  according  to  the  hfe  must  be  the  eternal  judgment  of 
each  one  of  us  ;  how  terrible  must  it  be  to  be  unable  from  a  moral  impotency  to 
obey  the  charge  "keep  that  heart  with  all  diligence";  to  be  compelled  to  let 
thought  drift  whither  it  will,  and  yet  to  know  that  thought  guides  action,  and  action 
may  destroy  the  soul.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Whatsoever  things  are  true. — Truth 
hath — 1.  God  to  maintain  it.  2.  Defence  in  itself.  3.  Goodness  to  accompany  it, 
4.  Liberty  consequent  upon  it.  5.  It  is  connatural  to  our  principles.  6.  The 
foundation  of  order.  7.  The  ground  of  human  converse.  8.  The  bond  of  union. 
(jB.  Whichcote,B.D.)  False  measures  of  truth: — I.  The  longest  swokd  ;  and  then 
the  Mahometans  must  have  it ;  and  before  them  the  great  disturbers  of  mankind, 
whom  we  call  conquerors,  as  Alexander  and  Casar.  II.  If  the  loudest  lungs 
must  carry  it,  then  the  Baal-worshippers  must  have  it  from  Elijah  ;  for  he  had'but 
one  still  voice ;  but  they  cry  from  morning  to  night.  III.  If  the  most  voices  ;  then 
the  condemners  of  our  Saviour  must  have  it :  for  they  all  cry,  Crucify,  Crucify. 
Therefore  these  are  false  measures.     (Ihid.)  Spheres  of  truth: — I.  Be  time  to 

TOUESELVEs — to  your  better  nature.     As  Shakespeare  says,  "To  thine  own  self  be 
true,  and  it  must  follow,  as  the  night  the  day,  thou  canst  not  tben  be  false  to  any 
man."     II.  To  your  neighbours  in — 1.  Word.     2.  Love.     3,  Act.    4.  Manner. 
III.  To  God.    1.  To  His  claims.    2.  To  your  promises.   3.  In  your  hearts,  for  truth 
is  required  in  the  inward  parts.     4.  In  your  life,  for  there  you  may  best  glorify 
Him.     (W.  Landells,  D.D.)         Universality  of  truth: — Moral  truth  in  its  univer- 
sality is  like  the  pine-tree.     Societies  have  claimed  the  one  for  their  own,  as  some 
naturalists  have  claimed  the  other  for  northern  climes.     But  both  are  wrong.     As 
to  the  pine,  it  is  represented  in  all  zones,  from  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  to  the  fir- 
bushes  of  the  Scandinavian  mountain-tops.     There  are  particular  trees,  as  there 
are  certain  forms  of  speculative  and  political  truth,  which  can  survive  only  in  a 
limited  region ;  the  one  being  fitted  only  for  a  peculiar  atmosphere,  as  the  other  is 
only  adapted  to  circumscribed  types  of  mind.     But  moral  truth  flourishes  amongst 
all  the  mental  productions  of  man,  as  the  pine  amongst  the  vegetation  of  the 
world.     It  must  thrive  everywhere,  because  suited  to  and  intended  for  the  world. 
{Dr.  Herman  Masius.)        New  truth  unwelcome : — Men  who  have  lived  in  tradi> 
tional  knowledge  do  not  thank  you  for  a  new  truth.     It  dazes  and  confounds  their 
dim  vision,  which  is  unsuited  to  its  reception.     Their  bewilderment  at  the  light  is 
similar  to  that  of  the  cricket.     As  that  creature  lives  chiefly  in  the  dark,  so  its 
eyes  seem  formed  for  the  gloominess  of  its  abode ;  and  you  have  only  to  light  a 
candle  unexpectedly,  and  it  becomes  so  dazed  that  it  cannot  find  its  way  back  to 
its  retreat.     (Goldsmith.)        Loyalty  to  truth : — A  father  found  a  favourite  cherry- 
tree  hacked  and  ruined.     He  cried  sternly  to  his  son;  "  George,  who  did  this?" 
He  looked  at  his  father  with  a  quivering  lip,  and  said:  "  Father,  I  cannot  tell  a 
lie :  I  did  it."     "  Alas  1 "  said  the  father,  "  my  beautiful  tree  is  ruined ;  but  I 
would  rather  lose  all  the  trees  I  have  than  have  a  liar  for  my  son,"     The  boy  who 
feared  a  lie  worse  than  punishment  became  the  hero  of   his  country.  General 
Washington.       Whatsoever  thing's  are  honest. — The  word  does  not  exactly  mean 
what  we  call  honest,  but  what  is  worthy  of  honour,  revered,  august,  venerable, 
majestic.    Think  on  whatever  things  you  can  look  up  to  in  persons,  circumstances, 
and  respect.     Especially  in  social  life,  in  the  political  world,  in  literature.     Where 
there  is  no  room  for  reverence  there  is  no  room  for  life.     The  name  of  God,  the 
idea  of  worship,  the  solemnity  of  life,  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  the  fact  of 
death,   the  judgment-seat — "think  on   these  things,"  awful,  venerable  things  I 
Then  government,  law,  the  State,  the  Church,  the  ruling  powers  and  influences  of 
society ;  the  magistrate,  holding  "  not  the  sword  in  vain,  the  minister  of  God  to 
thee  for  good  " — "  think  on  these  things,"  pray  for  them  ;  check  faction,  nphold 
authority.      Nor  are   the  grand  advances  of   science  to   be  omitted  from   this 
catalogue.     For  these,  we  are  to   bless  God.      His  hand  is  in   them  all.    The 
astronomical  accuracy  that  can  calculate  the  moment  of  an  eclipse  a  hundred 
years  hence — the  power  of  expediting  communication,  like  lightning,  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth — the  triumph  over  winds  and  waves — the  mighty  faculty  of  the  poet — 
the  genius  of  history,  the  gift  of  eloquence — the  prevention  of  disease,  the  allevia- 
tion of  pain — the  "  rise  up  and  walk  "  of  medical  skill— thes^e,  too,  together  with 
the  awful  and  majestic  in  nature  and  art,  whatsoever  in  mountain  or  sea  or  sky. 


CHAP.  IV.)  PHILIPPIANS.  839 

whatsoever  in  painting  or  noble  structure  shows  greatness  of  purpose,  nobility  of 
Boul,  and  tends  to  bow  our  souls  in  admiration — "  think  on  tliese  things," 
{B.  Kent.)  Whatsoever  things  are  Just,  observant  of  the  rule  of  right — equal. 
The  original  signification  of  the  term  was  custom — order — social  rule,  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  unmannered  life  of  wild  tribes,  who  are  swayed  by  inclination,  passion, 
caprice.  There  is  a  Divine  order  in  this  world,  ainid  all  our  confusions.  He  who 
walks  in  that  order  walks  in  the  way  of  the  Lord,  That  is  right,  just.  "  There 
is  none  righteous."  Christ  is  the  "Just  One."  There  is  His  righteousness;  we 
must  be  clothed  with  it,  "  Looking  unto  Jesus  "  is  the  loving  study  of  God's  laws 
perfectly  fulfilled  in  Him  for  us.  Thus  we  are  taught  to  repent  of  our  deviations, 
i.e.,  sin,  missing  the  mark,  going  out  of  the  way.  This  leads  us  to  acknowledge  our 
weakness,  and  to  cry  mightily  to  God  to  bring  us  to  Christ,  ••  the  Way."  The  brief 
description  of  Christianity  in  apostolic  times  was  "  that  way,"  or  "the  way  of  the 
Lord,"  "  the  way  of  life."  It  is  God's  way  of  working,  saving,  ruling,  pardoning, 
that  we  want  to  walk  in — the  way  of  righteousness.  Think  on  the  things  in 
society  that  are  conformed  to  this  rule  of  order  and  right,  ihere  is  the  way  of 
the  righteous  King.  He  walks  there.  There  He  takes  delight.  In  tlie  family,  in 
the  Church,  in  the  State ;  whatever  is  upright,  observant  of  right,  and  struggles 
against  wrong-doing,  fraud,  injustice,  is  the  finger  of  God.  Consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously it  is  doing  His  work  ;  the  vindication  of  human  rights  against  oppression, 
ignorance,  superstition,  the  devil,  is  working  for  and  with  Christ.  Take  a  large 
and  ample  range  over  society,  discover  the  right,  the  lawful,  the  just,  making  head 
against  the  wrong,  the  false,  the  licentious;  think  of  these  things;  pray  for  them, 
and  see  God's  hand  and  way  in  them.  Think  on  them  ;  they  are  ;  God  does  not 
leave  Himself  without  a  vntness  ;  there  are  more  signs  of  righteous  government  in 
the  world  than  many  of  us  suspect.  They  are  about  our  path  if  we  will  but  open 
our  eyes,  and  observe,  and  desire  to  see  them.  There  are  flowers,  and  palms,  and 
pools  in  the  desert.  "  Think  on  these  things."  (Ibid.)  Whatsoever  things 
are  pure,  unsullied,  akin  to  holy.  "  Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  hiti 
purifieth  himself,"  &o.  "Ye  have  approved  yourselves  to  be  clear  in  thismattLr." 
"  Some  preach  Christ  .  .  .  not  sincerely."  "Lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man.  .  .  . 
keep  thyself  pure."  Thus  the  word  has  reference  to  what  may  and  does  defile  ; 
influences  in  the  Church  and  the  world  which  tend  to  stain  our  consciences; 
connivance  at  sin,  excusing  evil,  insincere  statements  ;  having  a  bad  motive 
underlying  right  conduct ;  preaching  such  a  gospel  as  Paul  rejoiced  to  know  was 
preached,  and  yet  not  with  cleanness  of  conscience.  Timothy  is  to  let  the 
candidates  for  the  ministry  consider  their  motives ;  he  is  to  study  their  conduct 
for  a  while,  lest  love  of  money,  or  of  applause,  of  vulgar  fame,  or  eccleciastical 
power  and  influence,  should  prove  the  determining  influences,  and  thus  he  would 
be  a  partaker  of  other  men's  sins.  This  suggests  the  need  of  "  the  blood  of 
sprinkling,"  that  oar  actions,  motives,  powers,  prayers,  may  be  cleansed  of  all  vile, 
base  admixtures.  A  true  Christian  will  bemoan  nothing  more  feelingly  than  the 
constant  detection  of  impure,  low  motive  in  his  spiritual  life.  The  apostle  exhorts 
us  to  "  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holi- 
ness in  the  fear  nf  God."  In  the  intercourse  of  the  world  one  is  in  constant 
danger  of  a  certain  miasma,  the  pollution  of  low,  selfish,  interested  motive ;  it  is 
drawn  in  naturally  as  the  pure  air  ;  and  unless  we  think  of  "  whatsoever  things  are 
purfl,"  and  do  like  the  Italian  peasant,  when  the  night  comes  on,  get  out  of  the 
low  ground  on  to  a  hill  above  the  reach  of  the  miasma,  we  are  in  danger  of  losing 
the  freshness  and  vigour  of  our  spiritual  life.  When  the  day  is  over  we  should  get 
us  up  to  the  mountains,  and  converse  with  our  Lord  concerning  the  conduct  of  the 
day,  and  ask  Him  to  see  "  if  there  is  any  wicked  way  in  us,  and  to  wash  us,  not 
our  feet  only,  but  also  our  hands  and  our  head."  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O 
God;  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me."  (Ibid.)  The  power  of  purity  : — It 
is  a  marvellous  thing  to  see  how  a  pure  and  innocent  heart  purifies  all  that  it 
approaches.  The  most  ferocious  natures  are  soothed  and  tamed  by  innocence. 
And  so  with  human  beings  there  is  a  delicacy  so  pure  that  vicious  men  in  its 
presence  become  almost  pure ;  all  of  purity  that  is  in  them  being  brought  out ;  like 
attaches  itself  to  like.  The  pure  heart  becomes  a  centre  of  attraction,  round 
which  similar  atoms  gather,  and  from  which  dissimilar  ones  are  repelled.  A 
corrupt  heart  in  an  hour  elicits  all  that  is  bad  in  us ;  a  spiritual  one  brings  oat 
and  draws  to  itself  all  that  is  best  and  purest.  Such  was  Christ.  He  stood  in  the 
world  the  Light  of  the  world,  to  which  all  sparks  of  light  gradually  gathered.  H« 
stood  in  the  presence  of  impurity,  and  men  and  women  became  pure.     (F.  W 


840  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  it. 

Robertson,  M.A.)  Purity  inculcated  : — Live  in  purity,  my  child,  through  this 
fair  life,  pure  from  every  vice  and  every  evil  knowledge,  as  the  lily  lives  in 
silent  innocence,  as  the  turtle-dove  amid  the  branches,  that  thou,  when  the 
Father  downward  gazes,  mayest  be  His  beloved  object  on  earth,  as  the  uncon 
Bcious  wanderer  gazes  on  the  lovely  star  of  even ;  that  thou,  when  the  sun 
dissolves  thee,  mayest  show  thyself  a  pearl  of  purest  whiteness,  that  thy  thoughts 
may  be  as  the  rose's  perfume,  that  thy  love  may  be  like  a  glowing  sunbeam,  and 
thy  life  like  shepherd's  song  of  evening,  like  the  tones  his  flute  pours  forth  so 
Boftly.  {Schiller.)  Whatsoever  things  are  lovely. — I.  The  union  of  strenoxh 
AND  BEAUTY  IN  CHRISTIAN  CHABACTEK.  1.  The  vii tucs  of  this  vcrse  are  parts  of 
one  organic  whole ;  they  so  hang  together  that  the  absence  of  one  goes  far  to 
destroy  the  value  of  the  other.  This  is  especially  tiue  of  "  things  honest  and 
just."  The  world  is  compelled  to  respect  truth,  however  lacking  iu  grace.  The 
addition  of  "things  lovely  "elevates  the  rigiiteous  into  the  good  man:  but  the 
righteous  man  may  be  honoured  and  trusted  thouyli  he  is  not  admired  or  loved. 
The  want  of  grace  detracts  from  the  syimnetry  of  character;  but  in  the  moral 
world  the  beautiful  has  value  only  as  underneath  the  outward  charm  there  is  the 
Bolid  foundation  of  righteousness.  2.  There  is  a  certain  beauty  even  about  the 
most  rugged  forms  of  moral  strength.  It  is  a  sign  of  incompleteness  of  character 
when  a  man  takes  pleasure  in  putting  the  truth  in  an  offensive  form,  or  in 
enforcing  the  right  with  a  contempt  for  the  feelings  of  others.  There  are  those 
who  have  no  desire  to  conciliate,  and  who  are  too  assertive,,  yet  there  is  in  them  a 
strength  of  principle,  a  manly  resolution,  an  unflinching  devotion  to  the  right 
which  is  far  more  admirable  than  the  amiability  which  is  profuse  in  outward  signs 
of  kindness,  but  shrinlis  from  the  service  which  justice  requires.  3.  Still,  when 
we  think  of  things  lovely,  we  refer  to  qualities  by  which  the  more  severe  attributes 
of  character  are  softened.  Standing  alone  they  are  a  very  poor  possession.  Those 
who  employ  all  their  art  in  order  to  have  the  outward  clothing  of  gentleness, 
elegance,  and  grace  have  their  reward.  They  are  favourites  of  the  social  circle ; 
and  yet  they  may  be  lacking  in  the  first  elements  of  spiritual  nobility.  In 
the  true  Christian  ideal  the  graces  are  only  those  elements  which  add  tenderness 
and  sweetness  to  the  more  masculine  virtues  which  are  essential  to  the  toils  and 
conflicts  of  this  world  of  sin.  II.  Note  the  vabieties  of  spiritual  beauty.  1. 
There  is  a  tendency  to  find  beauty  only  in  the  feminine  virtues — gentleness, 
p,.tience,  compassion,  sympathetic  kindness — and  to  regard  those  of  a  more 
masculine  character  —  courage,  firmness,  resolution — as  bt-longing  to  another 
region.  But  this  is  to  forget  that  God  has  made  everything  beautiful  in  itt 
time  and  place.  There  is  beauty  in  winter  as  well  as  in  spring,  in  the  scarred, 
weather-beaten  rock,  as  well  as  in  the  smiling  landscape.  In  God's  works  there  is 
great  variety,  but  everywhere  beauty.  2.  Can  we  not  apply  the  same  law  to 
character  ?  Would  we  have  all  men  of  the  same  character  ?  Can  we  find  the 
things  that  are  lovely  only  in  peaceful  homes  and  gracious  ministries,  and  not  also 
where  hard  battles  are  fought  and  victories  won  for  Jesus  Christ  J  We  recognize 
the  loveliness  of  simple  trust  and  absolute  devotion  in  Magdalen  in  Gethsemane; 
but  is  there  no  beauty  in  the  lofty  heroism  of  Peter  and  John  declaring  that  they 
would  serve  God  rather  than  men  t  Barnabas  seems  to  gather  up  in  himself  the 
things  that  are  lovely,  but  do  we  find  no  spiritual  beauty  in  the  lion-like  courage  of 
Paul?  So  with  Mblanchthon  and  Luther.  There  is  moral  beauty  in  all — different 
in  type,  but  alike  in  origin  and  end.  III.  Contemplate  the  things  that  abb 
LOVELY  (Col.  lii.  12-15).  Here  is  indeed  a  galaxy  of  virtues,  yet  when  we  come  to 
examine  them  we  find  that  they  all  turn  on  one  point — the  conquest  of  self.  1. 
Selfishness  is  uglii.ess  and  deformity,  because  it  is  a  violation  of  the  Divine  law. 
It  may  disguise  itself,  but  when  detected  it  is  hated  and  despised.  It  is  the  foe  of 
man,  to  be  crushed  by  a  Diviner  force  if  we  are  to  attain  to  spiritual  beauty. 
2.  The  first  lesson  we  have  to  learn  is  humility  and  unselfishness.  So  only  can  we 
follow  Chrisc.  Where  His  Spirit  reigns  the  life  will  have  this  primary  condition  of  true 
beauty ;  although  at  times  it  may  be  lacking  in  features  which  correspond  to  the 
popular  ideas  of  grace.  3.  The  word  chivalry  seems  to  embody  most  of  the  virtues 
included  in  the  phrase  of  the  text :  reverence  for  God  and  for  all  that  is  godlike  in 
man,  sympathy  for  all  goodness,  pity  for  all  weakness,  courage  to  face  all  danger, 
generous  consideration  for  others  dictated  by  true  respect  for  self.  These  are  just 
the  virtues  which  the  Christian  should  strive  by  the  grace  of  God  to  develop.  {J. 
G.  Rogers,  B.A.)  Whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report  (ev^rjixa),  auspicious, 
sounding  well,  of  good  omen ;  silent  deeds  that,  nevertheless,  sound  like  a  trumpet. 


•CHAP,  m]  PniLIPPIANS.  841 

and  awfllcen  our  aiJmiration,  mal<ing  us  think  better  of  human  nature;  things  that 
■come  to  us  like  good  news,  and  "  make  our  bones  fat,"  and  our  eyes  glisten,  and 
our  lips  tremulous — "  things  of  good  report."  Like  the  soldier  at  Balaclava,  who 
diSTuounted  calmly  in  the  hurricane  of  the  fight,  that  his  otlicer  might  ride.  Like 
those  noble  women  who  watched  day  and  night  over  the  sufferers  at  Scutari.  The 
poetry  of  life — he  sijhere  music — audible  amilst  the  groans  of  creation.  Not 
done  to  be  reported  well  of,  but  done  for  love  and  dear  honour's  sake  ;  and  which 
can  no  more  be  hid  than  one  can  "  hide  the  wind."  Such  was  Joseph's  conduct  to 
his  brethren  ;  such  David's  when  he  found  Saul  asleep,  and  took  his  spear  away  only 
and  a  piece  of  his  garment ;  such  Steplien's  dying  prayer,  "  Lay  not  this  sin  to 
their  charge";  such  His  glorious  charge,  "  Begin  at  Jerusalem."  Magnanimity, 
the  Chrisiian  pilgrim,  man  or  woman,  accompanied  by  "  Greatheart  "  ;  the  rising 
above  the  level  and  routine  of  giving,  doing,  loving,  into  the  stature  of  the  man 
in  Christ  Jesus — these  are  things  of  good  report.  Think  of  them — think  that  you 
uever  expeiience  such  a  thrill  of  pleasure  as  when  you  read  of  such  things — then 
•what  must  it  be  to  do  them  I  Thiijk  that  the  capacity  to  enjoy  the  recital  argues 
the  ability  to  do  them.  Think  and  be  thankful  that  you  live  in  a  world  where 
these  noble  things  can  be  done ;  and  you  can  do  them,  if  you  suffer  not  httle 
luercenary  motives  to  blind  your  eyes  and  freeze  your  sensii  ilities.  "  And  when 
they  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  frankly  forgave  them  ;  "  there  is  a  sounding  deed  1 
David  refusing  to  ofl'or  to  the  Lord  "  that  which  cost  Him  nothing  "  ;  the 
centurion's,  "Lord,  I  am  not  worthy  that  Thou  shouldest  come  under  my  roof, 
but  speak  the  word  only  ";  Mary,  with  her  alabaster  box  of  ointment  (and  "this 
that  she  hath  done  shall  be  spoken  of  for  a  memorial  of  her  ") ;  Paul's,  "  though  the 
more  I  love  yoa,  the  less  I  am  beloved" — "take  back  your  runaway  slave, 
Philemon,  as  a  brother,"  and  what  he  owes  thee  put  down  to  me;  that  greatest 
deed  in  the  history  of  the  universe,  how  that  when  we  were  yet  sinners  Christ  died 
for  us.  (B.  Kent.)  If  there  be  any  virtue. — The  clause  is  an  emphatic  and 
earnest  summation.  The  term  aperrj  is  only  here  used  by  St.  Paul,  In  the  philo- 
sophical writings  of  Greece  it  signifies  all  virtue,  and  not  any  special  forms  of  it, 
«.s  it  does  in  Homer  and  others.  The  apostle  nowhere  else  uses  it — it  had  been  too 
much  debased  and  soiled  in  some  of  the  schools,  and  ideas  were  often  attached  to 
it  very  different  from  that  moral  excellence  which  with  him  was  virtue.  It  is 
therefore  here  employed  in  its  widest  and  highest  sense  of  moral  excellence — 
virtus,  that  which  becomes  a  man  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  Christ  and  tenanted  by 
the  Holy  Spirit.  From  its  connection  with  the  Sanscrit  vri — to  be  strong — Latin 
vir'Vires-virtu$ ;  or  with  'Apin-aptarog,  it  seems  to  signify  what  best  becomes  a 
man — manhood,  strength,  or  valour,  in  early  times.  But  the  sigijification  has 
been  modified  by  national  character  and  temperament.  The  warlike  Bomans 
placed  their  virtue  in  military  courage  ;  while  their  saccessors,  the  modem 
degenerate  Italians,  often  apply  it  to  a  knowledge  of  antiquities  or  fine  arts. 
The  remains  of  other  and  nobler  times  are  articles  of  virtu,  and  he  who  has  most 
acquaintance  with  them  is  a  virtuoso,  or  man  of  virtue.  In  common  English,  a 
woman's  virtue  is  simply  and  alone  her  chastity,  as  being  first  and  indispensable  ; 
and  with  the  Scotch  formerly  it  was  thrift  or  industry.  An  old  act  commands 
schools  or  houses  of  "  vertue,"  in  which  might  be  manufactured  "  cloth  and 
sergis,"  to  be  erected  in  every  shire.  Amid  such  national  variations,  and  the 
unsettled  metaphysical  disquisitions  as  to  what  forms  virtue  and  what  is  its  basis, 
it  needed  that  He  who  created  man  for  Himself  should  tell  him  what  best  became 
him — what  he  was  made  for  and  what  he  should  aspire  to.  {Profetsor  Eadie.) 
If  there  be  any  praise. — We  all  consider  what  is  thou;,'ht  of  us  by  those  around  us 
as  a  substantial  good.  Trust  in  our  uprightness  of  character,  belief  in  our  abilities, 
and  the  desire  that  arises  from  this  to  be  more  intimately  connected  with  us,  and 
to  gain  our  good  opinion — everything  of  this  kind  is  often  a  more  valuable  treasure 
than  great  riches.  (Schleierviacher.)  The  esteem  of  others: — While  we  recog- 
nize in  the  desire  of  esteem  an  innocent  and  highly  useful  principle,  we  must 
carefully  guard  against  making  the  opinion  of  others  the  sole  and  ultimate  rule  of 
our  conduct.  Temporary  impulses  and  peculiar  local  circumstances  may  opemte 
to  produce  a  state  of  public  sentiment  to  which  a  good  man  cannot  conscientiously 
conform.  In  all  cases  where  moral  principles  are  involved,  there  is  another  part 
of  our  nature  to  be  consulted.  In  the  dictates  of  an  enlightened  conscience, 
we  find  a  code  to  which  not  only  the  outward  actions,  but  the  appetites,  pro- 
pensities, and  affections,  are  amenable,  and  which  prescribes  the  limits  of  their 
jost  exercise.    To  obey  the  suggestions  of  the  desire  of  esteem,  in  opposition  to  ths 


843  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [onAP.  i7.. 

requisitions  of  conscience,  would  be  to  subvert  the  order  of  our  mental  cousti- 
tution,  and  to  trausfer  the  responsibility  to  the  supreme  command  of  a  mere 
Bentinel  of  the  outposts.  Yet  the  operation  of  this  principle  within  due  limits- 
ie  favourable  to  human  well-being.  It  begins  to  operate  early,  long  before  the 
moral  principles  are  fully  brought  out ;  and  it  essentially  promotes  a  decency  and 
propriety  of  deportment,  and  stimulates  to  exertion.  Whenever  a  young  man  is 
Been  exbibidng  an  utter  disregard  for  the  approbation  of  others,  the  most  unfavour- 
able anticipations  may  be  formed  of  him  ;  he  has  annihilated  one  of  the  greatest 
restraints  on  an  evil  course  which  a  kind  Providence  has  implanted  within  us ;  and 
exposes  himself  to  the  hazard  of  unmistakable  vice  and  misery.  (T.  C.  Upham, 
LiL.D.)  Praise  from  others  : — The  praises  of  others  may  be  of  use  in  teaching 
us,  not  what  we  are,  but  what  we  ought  to  be.  (J.  M.  Hare.)  Commendation : — 
The  tendency  of  the  love  of  commendation  is  to  make  a  man  exert  himself ;  of 
the  love  of  admiration  to  make  bim  puff  himself.  {Archbishop  Whately.)  Praise- 
worthiness  : — When  the  love  of  praise  takes  the  place  of  love  of  praiseworthiness,  the 
defect  is  fatal.  {B.  Grant,  B.A. )  Cominendation  better  than  scolding : — A  word  of 
praise  warms  the  heart  towards  him  who  be.^tows  it,  and  insensibly  trains  him  who 
receives  it  to  strive  after  what  is  praiseworthy  ;  and  as  our  lesser  faults  may  be 
thus  gently  corrected,  by  disciplining  some  counter  merits  to  stronger  and  steadier 
efforts  to  outgrow  them,  so  it  is,  on  the  whole,  not  more  pleasant  than  wise 
to  keep  any  large  expenditure  of  scolding  for  great  occasions.  But  let  me  be 
understood.  By  praise  I  do  not  mean  flattery  ;  I  mean  nothing  insincere. 
Insincerity  alienates  love  and  rots  away  authority.  Praise  is  worth  nothing  if 
it  be  not  founded  on  truth.     (Lord  Lytton.) 

Ver.  9.  Those  things  which  ye  have  both  learned  and  received. — Observe — I. 
The  apostle's  example.  He  preached,  practised,  experienced  the  truth.  XL  It» 
PERMANENT  FORCE.  Still  heard  and  seen  in  the  word  of  inspiration — accompanied 
with  Divine  power  and  blessing.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Observe — I.  The  apostle's 
coNscioos  iNTEGEriT.  II.  His  BRIGHT  EXAMPLE  of  faith,  zeal,  self-consecration, 
purity.  III.  Its  authority  as  a  role.  IV.  The  advantage  of  copying  it.  Peace 
on  earth — in  heaven.  {Ibid.)  The  force  of  example: — During  the  siege  of  Sebas- 
topol,  Gordon  was  one  day  going  the  round  of  the  trenches,  when  he  heard  an  angry 
altercation  between  a  corporal  and  a  sapper.  On  inquiring  the  cause,  he  learnt 
that  the  men  were  instructed  to  place  some  gabions  on  the  battery,  and  that  the 
corporal  had  ordered  the  sapper  to  stand  on  the  parapet,  where  he  would  be  ex- 
posed to  the  enemy's  fire,  and  to  place  the  gabions,  while  he,  perfectly  sheltered, 
handed  them  up  from  below.  Gordon  at  once  jumped  upon  the  parapet,  ordering 
the  corporal  to  join  him,  while  the  sapper  handed  them  the  gabions.  When  the 
work  was  done,  and  done  under  the  fire  of  the  watchful  Bussian  gunners,  Gordon 
turned  to  the  corporal,  and  said,  "  Never  order  a  man  to  do  anything  that  you  are 
afraid  to  do  yourself." 

Vers.  10-20.  But  I  rejoiced  In  the  Lord  greatly. — Paur$  gratitude: — I.  Hb 
ACKNOWLEDGES  THE  GIFT — rcjoicing  in  the  spirit  that  prompted  it ;  expressing  hia 
contentment  and  confidence  in  God ;  confessing  the  seasonable  nature  of  the 
supply.  XL  Hb  commends  the  givers  for  their  special  and  repeated  generosity ; 
exemplification  of  the  spirit  of  Christianity  ;  acceptable  sacrifice  to  God.  XIX.  Hb 
ASSURES  THEM  OF  AN  ABUNDANT  RECOMPENSE.  God  is  Hch ;  wIll  supply  all  their 
need ;  by  Christ  Jesus.      (J,  Lyth,  D.D.)         A  grateful  heart : — I.  Sees  god  in 

EVERT   BENEVOLENT   ACTION.         II.    EeJOICES    IN   THB   SPIRIT   THAT   DICTATES    IT.        IIX. 

Puts  the  highest  value  on  the  gift.  (Ibid.)  Philippian  charity  and  Pauline 
delicacy  : — They  had  revived,  he  says,  or  more  exactly — for  the  figure  is  taken  from 
the  beautiful  burst  of  spring — they  had,  like  a  tree  long  bare  and  frost-bound,  put 
forth  new  sprouts  and  shoots  under  the  genial  influence  of  God's  rain  and  sun- 
shine ;  they  had  thus  sprouted  and  germinated  afresh,  after  a  season  of  apparent 
deadness,  in  their  care  or  thought  for  him.  But  no  sooner  has  he  written  the  word 
than  he  feels,  with  that  quickness  and  delicacy  of  perception  which  is  one  of  the 
great  charms  of  his  character,  that  the  expression  may  seem  to  involve  a  reproach 
for  the  lateness  or  tardiness  of  their  oSering  ;  and  therefore  he  adds  instantly,  that 
he  knows  that  they  had  all  along  been  thinking  and  caring  for  him,  and  had  only 
wanted  the  opportunity  of  actually  showing  and  proving  it.  For  this  he  rejoiced 
in  the  Lord.  Their  kindness  had  given  him  a  pleasure,  not  as  a  man  only,  but  as 
a  Christian.    And  he  goes  on  to  tell  them  why.    {Dean  Vaughan.)        Hearing  and 


CHAi'.  iT.J  PHILIPPIANS.  84» 

doing : — A  brief  and  simple,  but  very  expressive,  eulogy  was  pronounced  by  Martin 
Luther  upon  a  pastor  at  Zwickaw,  in  1522,  named  Nicholas  Hausman.  ••  What 
we  preach,"  said  the  great  reformer,  "  He  lives."  A  good  woman  who  had  been  to 
the  house  of  God  was  met  on  her  way  home  by  a  friend,  who  asked  her  if  the 
Bermon  was  done.  "No,"  she  replied,  "it  is  all  said;  it  has  got  to  be  done." 
{Biblical  Treasury.)  Importance  of  opportunity  • — Opportunity  is  like  a  favouring 
breeze  springing  up  around  a  sailing-vessel.  If  the  sails  be  all  set,  the  ship  i» 
wafted  onward  to  its  port ;  if  the  sailors  are  asleep  or  ashore,  the  breeze  may  die 
again,  and  when  they  would  go  on  they  cannot :  their  vessel  stands  as  idle  as  a 
painted  ship  upon  a  painted  ocean.  Hesitation   destructive  : — The    beautiful 

drosera,  or  sun-dew,  lifts  its  tiny  crimson  head.  The  delicate  buds  are  clustered  in 
a  raceme,  to  the  summit  of  which  they  climb  one  by  one.  The  topmost  bud  waita 
only  through  twelve  hours  of  a  single  day  to  open.  If  the  sun  do  not  shine  it 
withers  and  droops,  and  gives  way  to  the  next  aspirant.  So  it  is  with  the  human 
heart  and  its  purposes.  One  by  one  they  come  to  the  point  of  blossoming.  If  the 
warmth  of  confidence  and  hope  glow  in  the  heart  at  the  right  moment,  all  is  well ; 
but  the  chill  of  hesitation  or  delay  will  wither  them  at  the  core.     {J.  Denton, ) 

Vers.  11-13.  Not  that  I  speak  In  respect  of  want. — Contentment: — I.  Thb 
GREAT  LESSON.  **  I  have  Icamcd,"  &o.  Man  might  very  correctly  be  distinguished 
as  the  discontented  animal.  1.  We  are  not  content  with  life  in  its  severer  aspects. 
(1)  We  do  not  know  how  to  be  abased,  neither  are  we  instructed  to  be  hungry.     In 

the  fields  and  woods  we  find  organic  life  most  responsive  to  changing  environment 

the  spreading  tree  at  the  first,  chill  beginning  to  modify  its  leaf,  to  retrench  its 
branchery,  to  economize  its  flower ;  the  bird  of  the  orient  at  the  first  scent  of  a  less 
genial  air  preparing  to  sacrifice  in  size  or  ornament  to  adjust  itself  to  an  altered 
sphere ;  but  man  rebels  to  accept  a  dress  less  rich  or  resources  less  abundant.  (2) 
The  apostle  had  learned  this  lesson  of  accepting  adversity  with  noble  cheerfulness. 
(2  Cor.  iv.  8-9;  vi.  9-10).  How  immense  the  distance  between  this  and  stoicism. 
That  with  its  insensibility  and  hopelessness  is  the  confession  of  inability  to  deal 
with  the  problem  of  suffering.  Thousands  since  St.  Paul  have  niasteied  the  same 
lesson.  A  lovely  child  of  wealthy  parents  was  brought  to  the  poet-artist  Blake. 
Sitting  in  his  old  worn  clothes,  amidst  poverty,  he  looked  at  her  very  kindly  for  a 
long  while  without  speaking,  and  then  gently  stroking  her  long  bright  curls,  said, 
•'  May  God  make  this  world  to  you,  my  child,  as  beautiful  as  it  has  been  to  me." 
2.  We  are  not  content  with  life  in  its  fairer  aspects.  (1)  We  do  not  know  how  to 
abound,  neither  are  we  instructed  to  be  full.  The  f.aiy  chorus  of  the  bees  in  the 
limes  is  expressive  of  a  sublime  content,  and  the  blackbird  in  the  ripe  cherry  tree 
asks  for  nothing  but  to  be  let  alone,  a  wasp  half  buried  in  a  melting  nectarine  has 
forgotten  its  fretfulness,  the  chirp  of  the  sparrow  looking  at  a  golden  harvest  sheal 
rises  into  something  like  music ;  but  man  at  his  best  estate  is  consumed  with  re- 
grets and  repinings.  (2)  Tiie  apostle  has  learned  this  lesson.  The  problem  o£ 
afifluence  is  one  that  many  deep  thinkers  have  had  to  give  up.  Oriental  asceticisni 
finding  men  full  of  power  and  wealth  and  yet  unhappy  thought  the  remedy  lay  in 
stripping  life  of  its  aiuenities.  The  same  failure  is  confessed  by  Catholic  monasti- 
cism,  and  by  men  like  Thoreau.  But  the  apostle  found  joy  in  all  the  gifts  of  God, 
and  realized  through  them  a  still  higher  capacity  and  power  of  service  and  blessed- 
ness. 3.  We  are  not  content  with  life  under  any  aspect.  (1)  A  lady  was  out  in 
the  fields  when  her  little  daughter  begged  to  gather  wild  flowers.  Having  gathered 
a  nice  few  she  murmured  when  the  mother  wished  to  continue  her  walk.  "Well, 
get  all  in  the  field  if  you  like,"  said  the  mother.  Then  for  a  while  the  eager 
creature  ran  about  plucking  the  coveted  things,  only  at  last  to  burst  into  tears 
because  she  could  not  gather  all.  Thus  is  it  ever  with  poor  human  nature.  (2) 
Now  in  opposition  to  this,  Paul  has  learned  the  difficult  lesson  thoroughly,  and 
intimates  that  not  only  could  he  endure  uniform  prosperity  or  adversity,  but  could 
pass  from  the  one  to  the  other  with  serenity.  It  has  been  thought  that  our  ancestors 
did  not  grumble  so  much  at  the  vicissitudes  of  the  climate  as  we  do — they  had  not 
the  same  opportunity  for  instituting  odious  comparisons.  It  was  not  their  custom 
to  rush  off  to  Cannes  for  a  fortnight,  or  to  contrast  the  ferocious  frosts  of  the  North 
with  the  balmy  atmosphere  of  Palermo.  The  chief  grumblers  at  the  weather,  we- 
are  told,  are  those  who  thus  feel  the  force  of  the  contrast.  And,  really,  the  severest 
trial  of  the  faith  and  temper  of  men  is  in  widely  contrasted  experiences.  Much  of  the' 
bitter  discontent  of  our  age  is  found  in  that  strange  mingling  of  riches  and  poverty,, 
things  grand  and  grievous  in  close  succession.     But  Paul  is  undismayed  by  an^ 


844  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

possible  combination  of  events.  He  is  not  the  victim  of  circumstances,  but  their 
master.  He  could  be  exalted  without  pride  and  aba-ed  without  despair  ;  full  with- 
out presumption,  empty  without  fretfulness.  II.  The  grand  teacher.  "  I  can 
do  aU  things,"  &c.  Let  us  see  how  Christ  teaches  the  supreme  art.  1.  Christ  sets 
man  right  within  himself.  We  think  our  discontents  are  circumstantial,  but 
really  their  origin  is  to  be  sought  in  the  anarchy  of  the  soul.  Many  philosopher* 
have  perceived  this  and  have  sorrowfully  turned  away  from  the  painful  problem,  or 
confessing  that  the  inner  discord  is  incurable.  This  is  Schopenhnuer's  position, 
but  it  is  the  work  of  Christ  to  do  what  he  declares  impossible.  "  Has  there  ever 
been  a  man  in  complete  accord  with  himself  ?  "  asks  the  German.  Yes,  Panl,  here. 
It  is  the  unique  work  of  Jesus  Christ  to  restore  purity,  energy,  harmony  within  our 
hearts.  "  A  human  being  is  the  possibility  of  many  contradictions,"  and  it  is  the 
work  of  Christ  to  attune  the  subtle  chords  of  our  reasonable  and  immortal  nature, 
and  bring  forth  in  our  heart  the  music  of  heaven.  2.  Christ  makes  clear  to  us  the 
whole  sphere  of  hfe.  (1)  Some  modern  sceptics  teach  contentment  by  narrowing 
the  horizon,  by  denying  our  ideals  and  hopes,  and  thus  strive  to  make  life  as  pro- 
saic as  possible.  If  this  could  be  done  it  would  be  a  mighty  misfortune.  All 
civilization  arises  in  the  sense  of  discontent.  As  soon  as  the  savage  feels  a  sense 
of  want,  he  has  been  started  on  the  grand  tour.  The  history  of  constitutional 
government  is  a  noble  discontent.  That  a  man  is  discontented  with  his  caste  and 
seeks  to  improve  himself  raises  the  whole  social  order.  Dissatisfaction  with 
manual  labour  stimulates  invention,  and  art,  and  science.  Christ  never  attempts 
to  contract  our  horizon,  but  mightily  reinforces  the  romantic  element  in  our  nature. 
(2)  But  whilst  Christ  discovers  to  us  the  infinity  of  life,  He  teaches  the  relative 
importance  of  the  sphere  of  the  senses  and  of  the  spirit.  We  soon  get  to  the  end 
of  the  possibilities  of  sensual  and  social  enjoyments.  We  can  enjoy  very  little 
however  vast  our  resources ;  having  just  so  much  nerve  force,  so  much  appetite, 
five  senses,  twenty -four  hours  in  the  day  and  sixty  minutes  to  the  hour.  (3)  But 
Christ  opens  to  us  a  new  world  of  ambition,  and  pleasure,  and  hope,  in  our  moral 
life  and  destiny.  Never  does  the  New  Testament  give  us  any  immoderate  promises 
in  the  carnal  sphere  (1  Tim.  vi.  6-8;  Heb.  xiii.  5).  But  out  and  beyond  Christ 
opens  to  us  boundless  regions  in  which  our  nature  may  find  fulness  of  joy.  To 
destroy  the  larger  thought  and  noble  restlessness  of  the  heart  would  leave  man  » 
maimed  and  wretched  creature,  and  strike  a  blow  at  progress  ;  but  to  leave  man 
his  instinct  for  greatness,  his  dreams  of  glory,  his  aspirations  for  knowledge,  and 
power,  and  felicity,  teaching  him  to  expect  his  full  satisfaction  in  the  regions  of 
his  higher  being  and  destiny  is  to  fill  him  with  sublime  content,  3.  Christ  teaches 
us  that  all  the  events  of  this  present  life  equally  contribute  to  our  personal  and 
everlasting  perfection.  The  apostle  knew  that  the  end  of  life  was  not  more  or 
less  temporal  good,  but  the  hallowing  of  the  spirit  to  God's  love  and  service.  "All 
things  work  together  for  good,"  &c.  It  was  in  that  knowledge  that  Paul  found 
deep  reason  for  resignation.  The  finest  races  have  a  composite  character.  Who 
can  analyse  the  elements  of  our  own.  Now  Paul  has  got  an  insight  into  the  analo- 
gous fact  that  the  widest  ranges  of  circumstance  and  experience  would  create  the 
finest  type  of  moral  life.  (IF.  L.  Watkinson.)  Contentment  in  all  things : — There 
never  was  a  pupil  who  graduated  in  any  university  with  such  a  diploma  as  that. 
There  never  was  penned  such  a  record  of  attainment  as  the  result  of  education.  A 
man  is  educated  just  in  the  proportion  in  which  by  his  soul-power  he  controls  the 
conditions  of  life.  An  uneducated  man  is  controlled  by  his  conditions.  What  did 
Paul  learn  7  I.  To  be  content.  But  it  was  a  very  poor  kind  of  learning  if  by 
content  is  meant  stupidity,  want  of  aspiration  and  enterprise.  If  Paul  meant,  I 
consider  one  thing  or  place  just  as  good  as  another,  poverty  as  good  as  riches, 
slavery  as  good  as  independence,  he  had  learned  nothing  useful.  But  he  did  not 
mean  that.  He  had  learned  to  be  content  because  he  carried  about  with  him  that 
which  made  any  circumstances  blessed.  Englishmen  are  laughed  at  because  they 
travel  on  the  continent  with  their  household  and  all  its  comforts  ;  and  when  they 
camp  down  in  a  poverty-stricken  village  they  feel  better  off  than  if  they  had  nothing 
but  herbs  and  rocks  to  subsist  upon  ;  and  so  are  content.  Now  suppose  we  imitate 
that  inwardly,  and  carry  in  ourselves  such  a  store  of  inspirations,  such  an  ampli- 
tude of  moral  life  as  shall  make  us  superior  to  every  circumstance!  When  a  man 
is  living  so  near  to  God  as  to  have  his  whole  being  pervaded  with  Divine  power, 
\diy  should  he  not  say,  I  am  content  wherever  He  is.  II.  He  was  content  in  AJ^n 
YHiNos.  A  great  many  have  learned  it  in  single  things.  1.  The  mother  says, 
loving  her  child,  I  am  content.     She  will  forsake  exhilarating  pleasures  and  enter. 


CHAP.  nr.J  PIIILIPPIANS,  345 

taining  frienils  for  the  nursery,  and  there  she  is  happy.  2.  There  is  a  gay  giddy 
girl,  for  whom  is  predicted  no  enviable  future ;  but  her  time  comes.  When  love 
finds  her,  and  wakes  her  up  to  her  true  life,  and  she  becomes  a  wife  and  mothej, 
how  all  the  frivolity  is  gone.  She  has  learned  to  be  content.  Take  her  out  of  that 
and  she  has  not  learned  the  lesson.  3.  There  are  others  who  would  be  perfectly 
content  if  they  could  have  fortunes  made  or  their  ambition  gratified.  4.  But  where 
are  thuse  who  can  say,  "  Put  me  where  you  will  and  I  will  make  it  a  paradise. 
Give  me  children  and  I  am  happy ;  take  them  away  and  I  have  still  that  which 
will  make  me  happy.  Give  me  husband,  wealth,  learning,  or  deprive  me  of  them, 
and  I  am  content  "  ?  Here  is  one  at  any  rate.  III.  He  was  content  to  alternate 
BETWEEN  DiFFERKNT  STATES.  Men  get  used  to  things,  so  that  if  you  let  them  have 
one  state  of  things  long  enough  they  will  ad.'ipt  themselves  to  it;  or  give  them,  if 
you  change,  time  enough  to  get  used  to  the  next,  they  will  continue  to  bear  it. 
But  Paul  says,  *'  I  have  learned  both."  It  is  as  if  a  man  were  oscillating  between 
the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold,  and  in  the  sudden  transition  from  one  to  the  other 
should  be  content.  Yet  there  is  a  power  in  the  soul  if  rightly  cultured  that  shall 
enable  a  man  to  pass  from  any  state  to  another  and  say,  "  I  am  content."  Here 
is  a  man  who  is  reduced  by  an  adverse  stroke  of  fortune  from  afiSuence  to  beggary, 
and  if  he  be  a  Christian  what  is  to  prevent  him  saving,  "  I  have  lost  a  little  dust ; 
but  God  is  mine,  Christ  is  mine,  heaven  is  mine.  The  ocean  is  not  spilled  even  if 
my  cup  is.  My  coat  is  very  useful;  but  should  it  be  stolen  it  is  not  I."  Conclu- 
sion  :  1.  This  is  not  a  miraculous  state.  There  are  those  who  think  that  apostles 
do  not  belong  to  the  common  race.  2.  This  is  not  a  superficial  power,  but  one 
which  requires  developement.  "  I  have  learned."  It  took  him  foiiy  years  to  learn 
it,  and  you  must  not  be  discouraged  if  you  cannot  all  at  once  put  on  the  virtues 
which  were  the  result  of  forty  years'  experience.  {H.  W.  Bftcher.)  The  tendency 
of  Chistian  principles  to  produce  true  contentment : — There  have  been  few  persons 
whose  patience  and  temper  have  been  so  severely  tried  as  Paul's  (2  Cor.  xi. 
26,  27),  and  as  he  writes  he  is  a  prisoner.  Do  not  think,  however,  that  he  was  not 
subject  to  the  same  mtirmities  as  other  men.  So  far  was  a  contented  disposition 
from  being  natural  to  him  he  tells  us  that  he  had  acquired  it.  Where  had  he 
learned  this  lesson  ?  At  the  feet  of  Gamaliel  or  from  the  heathen  philosophers? 
These  might  have  commended  tlie  virtue  of  contentment,  and  shown  its  reason- 
ableness, and  its  necessity  to  happiness,  but  to  put  their  followers  in  possession  of 
it  was  not  in  their  power.  Paul  learned  it  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  in  the  school  of 
Christian  experience,  where  we  may  learn  it  too.  I.  Christianity  takes  away  th« 
NATURAL  CAUSES  OF  DISCONTENT.  1.  Pride.  Men  are  naturally  proud.  They  think 
nothing  too  good  for  them,  and  if  anything  be  withheld  it  is  not  according  to  their 
deserts  ;  hence  discontent.  Christianity  removes  this.  Humility  is  its  first  lesson. 
The  Christian  has  been  convinced  that  he  is  a  sinner,  and  his  high  thoughts,  there- 
fore, are  overthrown.  So  far  from  having  been  treated  worse  than  he  deserves,  he 
feels  that  he  has  been  treated  better.  Pride  therefore  yields  to  humble  gratitude. 
2.  Self-preference.  We  naturally  love  ourselves  with  excessive  fondness.  In  com- 
parison with  our  own  affairs  all  others  are  of  no  value.  While  others  possess 
advantages  which  we  do  not,  or  are  free  from  troubles  which  we  experience,  envy 
naturally  arises.  Christianity  regulates  this  self-love  by  commanding  us  to  love 
our  neighbour  as  ourselves.  Those  who  do  this  are  free  from  envy  and  repining 
and  80  are  content.  3.  Covetousneas.  Men  have  naturally  a  strong  desire  for  the 
things  of  this  world,  and  the  more  they  have,  the  more  they  crave.  Ahabwa«  only 
like  many  others.  Here  Christianity  brings  a  cure  (Luke  xii.  16).  It  reveals  far 
more  valuable  riches  than  earth  can  give,  which  are  sure  and  abiding,  and  knowing 
this  he  is  content.  II.  It  furnishes  very  powerful  motives  fob  thb  exercibk 
or  A  contented  mind.  1.  The  disciples  of  Christ  are  under  the  strongest  obliga- 
tions to  walk  in  the  footsteps  of  their  Master.  In  His  life  contentedness  was  very 
conspicuous.  No  one  ever  had  such  provocations  to  discontent  as  He.  Shall  we, 
then,  murmur  at  our  light  afflictions  when  Christ  bore  so  much  for  us.  2.  Tme 
Christians  are  convinced  that  their  lot,  whatever  it  may  be,  has  been  chosen  for 
them  by  their  Lord.  Can  they,  then,  be  dissatisfied  with  the  appointments  ol  their 
Sovereign,  whom  they  are  bound  to  obey  and  serve  ?  3.  Their  lot  has  been  chosen 
in  infinite  love  to  their  souls.  Christ  knows  what  is  best  fo**  His  people,  and  will 
order  all  things  for  their  good.  With  this  conviction  how  can  the  real  Christian  be 
otherwise  than  contented.  lU.  Practical  uses.  1.  For  correcting  the  error  that 
religion  destroys  oheerfnlness .  We  see  that  its  natural  tendency  is  the  very  reverse. 
Look  at  the  proad,  selfish,  or  covetoas  man,  and  see  what  a  miserable  beinj;  he  i& 


ai6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ly. 

Compare  him  with  the  tranquil  apostle.  Surely,  then,  that  which  promotes  con. 
teutment.  cannot  be  destructive  of  happiness.  2.  To  stir  up  Christians  to  their 
duty.  There  are  many  who,  on  the  whole,  live  under  the  influence  of  religion,  who 
nevertheless  when  disappointed  or  afflicted  betray  impatience.  The  fact  is  pride, 
self -preference,  &c.,  are  not  completely  broken.  Then  call  forth  your  principles 
into  more  lively  exercise.  What  grace  could  do  for  Paul  jit  can  do  for  you.  {E. 
Cooper,  M. A.)  The  school  of  Christ: — I.  What  the  believeb  can  learn  when 
Christ  teaches.  1.  To  be  content  amidst  the  world's  cbanges.  What  a  changeful 
life  was  that  of  St.  Paul's  from  the  time  he  left  his  father's  house  for  Gamaliel's 
school  to  his  imprisonment  at  Piotue.  We  are  all  subject  to  disturbing  changes 
from  increase  or  loss  of  wealth,  friends,  position,  &c.,  and  only  in  the  school  of 
Christ  is  theie  rest  for  the  soul.  The  believer  has  "  the  unsearchable  riches,"  so 
nothing  can  impoverish  him  ;  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  nothing  can 
fatally  disturb  him ;  is  "  kept  by  the  power  of  God,"  so  notbing  can  harm  him. 
He  may,  therefore,  well  be  content.  2.  To  be  submissive  amidst  the  world's  trials. 
We  all  encounter  a  good  deal  that  humbles  us,  but  that  is  very  different  from 
learning  how  to  be  abased.  This  knowledge  takes  away  half  its  burden  and  bitter- 
ness. Christ  teaches  this  by  encouraging  us  to  cast  our  burden  on  Him,  and  by 
strengthening  that  faith  which  produces  conformity  to  Him.  3.  To  be  heavenly 
minded  amidst  the  world's  enjoyments.  "  I  know  how  to  abound."  Count  sp 
your  mercies  and  your  trials  and  see  which  abounds.  H.  What  the  believeb 
CAN  DO  WHEN  Cheist  STRENGTHENS.  1.  He  can  suffcr  the  will  of  God.  2.  He  can 
vanguish  his  spiritual  foes.  3.  He  can  fulfll  all  his  duties  to  God  and  man.  {W. 
Cadrnan,  M.A.) 

Ver.  11.  I  tave  learned  In  whatsoever  state  I  am  therewith  to  be  content.— 
Contentment: — I.  Its  natdee.  1.  It  is  opposed  to  dissatisfaction,  and  by  sub- 
Aiission  to  the  hardships  of  life  disarms  them  of  half  their  power.  It  is  too  sensible 
to  aim  after  impossibilities,  or  to  increase  the  infelicities  of  life  by  fretfulness.  A 
just  mind  is  necessary  to  it,  one  who  sees  things  as  they  are  instead  of  through  the 
distorting  medium  of  a  jaundiced  eye.  The  injustice  of  mind  accompanying  pride 
produces  peevishness,  and  that  accompanying  ambition  petulance.  2.  It  is  not, 
however,  indifference  or  stupidity,  although  these  sometimes  pass  for  snch.  Minds 
too  sluggish  to  think,  hearts  too  insensible  to  feel,  souls  too  selfish  to  do  either, 
have  neither  sensibility  nor  sense  to  complain.  But  oontentment  can  feel,  hope, 
sigh  ;  but  its  feelings  are  not  allowed  to  run  into  fretfulness,  and  its  sighs  are  often 
exchanged  for  smiles.  II  it  cannot  have  what  it  would  it  will  not  brood  over  its 
disappointments,  but  brighten  them  by  sweet  submission.  3.  It  has  no  kinship  with 
fatalism.  When  the  calls  of  duty  come  in  conflict  with  the  desires  for  cherished 
sinfulness,  it  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  a  foolish  sinner  to  say  that  his  plans  and 
actions  can  alter  nothing  ;  the  real  meaning  of  which  he  is  too  lazy  to  plan  or  act 
at  all ;  so  he  misnames  his  vice  the  virtue  of  contentment.  Paul's  contentment, 
however,  was  to  work,  plan,  pray.  He  did  not  submit  beforehand,  because  he  did 
not  know  beforehand  ;  but  when  the  event  came  he  said,  "  I  am  content,"  i.e.,  with 
the  ascertained  will  of  his  Master.  II.  The  mode  of  its  acquisition.  **  I  have 
learned,"  i.e.,  as  a  lesson,  and  with  difficulty,  too.  If  we  trace  its  experiences  we 
shall  find — 1.  A  sensibility  to  the  Divine  hand.  He  saw  God  in  his  trials,  and 
said,  ♦'  Thy  will  be  done."  It  is  a  very  different  thing  to  submit  under  the  ills  of 
life  through  a  realization  of  their  Divine  appointment,  and  to  submit  from  sullen- 
ness  or  stupidity.  See,  then,  in  them  the  God  of  all  wisdom  and  goodness.  2.  He 
hoped  in  God.  No  man  can  be  contented  without  hope.  This  leads  to  contented- 
ness  in  certain  expectation  of  deliverance,  if  not  here,  by  and  by.  '•  I  know  whom 
I  have  believed,"  &g.  8.  He  had  his  treasure  in  heaven ;  and  if  we  have  we  can 
say,  "  Our  light  affliction  which  is  but  for  a  moment,"  &o.,  and  so  be  content.  And 
even  in  prosperity  this  consolation  is  required ;  for  amidst  abounding  riches  there 
is  dissatisfaction.  Something  more  is  wanted.  4.  He  had  experiences  which 
tried  him.  His  content  did  not  arise  from  tuition,  faith,  hope,  heavenly  minded- 
ness,  alone  or  together.  His  painful  experiences  gave  strength  to  his  contentment^ 
and  made  successive  trials  light  and  met  more  willingly.  They  taught  him  to  say, 
*•  When  I  am  weak  I  am  strong ;  I  can  do  ell  things  through  Christ,"  &c.  IIL  Thb 
SEASONS  which  enforck  IT.  1.  The  power  which  has  allotted  our  state.  God 
reigns.  An  inscrutable  wisdom  and  overruling  providence  is  at  work.  How  un- 
reasonable, then,  to  complain  when  trouble  comes.  It  is  either  a  deserved  chastise- 
ment or  a  healthful  discipline.    Discontent  is  an  injustice  in  high  quarters.    Take, 


«HA».  nr.]  PHILIPPIAN8.  84? 

then,  your  happy  place,  it  is  yonr  heavenly  Father's  appointment  in  love.  2.  Con- 
tentment is  safety.  How  m 'ny  have  suffered  irretrievably  through  wandering  from 
"their  allotted  path,  or  wishing  and  striving  to  do  so.  The  humblest  cottage  is 
better  than  a  fever-stricken  or  Earthquake-shaken  palace.  3,  Contentment  en- 
hances our  enjoyment  and  diminishes  our  miseries.  Evils  become  lighter  by 
patient  endurance,  and  benefits  are  poisoned  by  discontent.  4.  The  miseries  of 
life  are  sufficiently  deep  and  extensive  without  adding  to  them,  5.  Contentment 
is  the  means  of  receiving  new  lessons  about  God.  (I.  S.  Spencer,  D.D.)  Con- 
tentment signifies  self-sulhcieucy.  Here  it  is  not  to  be  understood  absolutely  as  it 
it  taught  independence  in  nature,  not  wanting  anything  outside  of  self.  Paul  did 
not  mean  to  exclude  God  or  His  providence,  but  supposed  them — *'  not  as  if  we  were 
sufficient  of  ourselves,  but  our  sufficiency  is  of  God."  He  did  not  desire  or  lack 
more  than  what  God  had  supplied  him  with.  His  will  suited  his  state,  his  desire 
did  not  exceed  his  power.  The  object  of  contentment,  then,  is  the  present  state  of 
things,  whatever  it  may  be,  wherein  God  has  set  us.  Those  of  the  highest  fortune 
are  most  apt  to  respect  the  smallest  things,  whereas  a  poor  estate  is  easily  com- 
forted by  the  accession  of  little.  The  formal  object  may  seem  to  be  a  condition 
adverse  to  our  sense — but  since  all  men  are  in  such  a  condition  more  or  less,  there- 
fore any  state  may  be  the  object  of  contentedness,  and  prince  and  peasant  alike 
need  to  learn  this  lesson.  To  turn  now  to  the  acts  wherein  the  practice  consisted. 
L  As  TO  ODB  OPINIONS  AND  JUDGMENTS.  Conteutedness  requires  that — 1.  We 
should  believe  our  condition,  whatever  it  may  be,  to  be  determined  by  God,  or  at 
least  that  He  permits  it  according  to  His  pleasure.  2.  Hence  we  should  judge 
everything  tbat  happens  to  be  thoroughly  good,  worthy  of  God's  appointment,  and 
not  entertain  harsh  thoughts  of  Him.  3.  We  should  even  be  satisfied  in  our 
minds  that  according  to  God's  purpose  all  events  conduce  to  the;  welfare  not  only  of 
things  in  general  but  to  ours  in  particular.  4.  Hence  we  are  to  believe  that  our 
present  condition  is,  all  things  considered,  the  best — better  than  we  could  have 
devised  for  ourselves.  H.  As  to  the  depositions  of  will  and  affection.  1.  We 
should  entertain  all  occurrences,  how  grievous  soever,  with  entire  submission  to  the 
will  of  God.  2.  We  should  bear  all  things  with  steady  calmness  and  composednesa 
of  mind,  quelling  those  excesses  of  passion  which  the  sense  of  things  disgustful  is 
apt  to  excite.  3.  We  should  bear  the  worst  events  with  sweet  cheerfulness  and  not 
succumb  to  discouragement.  "  As  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing."  4.  We  should 
with  faith  and  hope  rely  and  wait  on  God  for  the  removal  or  easement  of  our 
afflictions,  or  confide  in  Him  for  grace  to  support  them  well.  "  Why  art  thou  cast 
down,"  &c.  5.  We  should  not  faint  or  languish-  No  adversity  should  impair  the 
forces  of  our  reason  or  spirit,  enervate  our  courage,  or  slacken  our  industry,  "If 
thou  faint  in  adversity  thy  strength  is  small."  6.  We  should  not  be  weary  of  our 
condition  or  have  irksome  longings  for  alterations,  but  with  a  quiet  indifference 
and  willingness  lie  under  it  during  God's  pleasure,  considering  "  Him  who  endured 
such  contradictions  of  sinners  against  Himself."  7.  We  should  by  adverse  accidents 
be  rendered  lowly  in  our  own  eyes,  meek  in  our  temper,  and  sensible  of  our  own 
onworthiness.  "  Be  humble  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God."  "  To  this  man  will 
I  look,"  &e.  8.  It  is  required  that  we  should,  notwithstanding  any  hardness  in 
our  condition,  be  kindly  affected  towards  others,  being  satisfied  and  pleased  with 
their  more  prosperous  state.  9.  Contentedness  implies  freedom  from  anxiety  in 
reference  to  provision  for  our  needs,  "  casting  our  burden  on  the  Lord,"  10.  It 
requires  that  we  should  curb  our  desires,  and  not  affect  more  in  quantity  or  better 
in  quality  than  our  nature  or  state  require.  "  He,"  as  Socrates  said,  "  is  nearest 
to  the  gods  (who  need  nothing)  that  needs  fewest  things."  11.  It  imports  that 
whatever  our  condition  is  our  mind  and  affections  should  be  squared  accordingly. 
If  we  are  rich  we  should  get  a  bountiful  heart ;  if  poor  we  should  be  frugal ;  if  high 
in  dignity,  well  ballasted;  if  low,  meek  and  steady.  III,  From  hence  should 
arise  cokrespondent  extebnal  demeanour.  1,  We  sliould  restrain  our  tongues 
from  all  unseemly  expressions  implying  displeasure  at  God's  providence.  '*  Where- 
fore doth  a  living  maa  complain?  "  "Be  still  and  know  that  I  am  God,"  2.  We 
should  declare  our  satisfaction  in  God's  dealings,  acknowledging  His  wisdom, 
justice,  and  goodness,  aud  blessing  Him  for  all.  3.  We  should  abstain  from  all 
unlawful  courses  towards  the  remedy  of  our  needs,  choosing  quietly  to  abide  under 
their  presence  rather  than  to  violently  relieve  ourselves.  4.  We  should,  notwith- 
standing adversity,  proceed  in  our  affairs  with  alacrity,  courage,  and  industry, 
allowing  no  grievance  to  render  us  Ustless  or  lazy.  Activity  is  a  good  way  to 
divert  and  the  readiest  way  to  remove  a  good  many  ills.     5.  We  should  behav« 


48  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 


onrselves  fairly  and  kindly  towards  the  instrnmenta  of  car  adversity,  "being 
reviled"  we  should  "ble}ss,"<fro.  (7.  Barrow,  D.D.)  Christian  contentment:— 
I.  Its  8PHEEE.  It  is  exercised  in  different  circumstances.  1.  In  the  midst  of 
competence,  in  which  case  it  suppresses  the  strivings  of  ambition  and  envious 
murmurings  on  account  of  the  succ<  sses  of  others.  2.  Under  hope  deferred,  in 
which  case  it  teaches  a  patient  waiting  for  God's  time  as  the  best  3.  Under 
pressure  of  adversity,  from  which  there  is  no  hope  of  escape  in  this  world,  in  which 
case  it  represses  fretfulness  and  a  charging  of  God  foolishly.  II.  Its  qualifica- 
tions AND  iLLDSTRATioNs.  1.  It  was  his  portion  of  worldly  goods  with  which  the 
apostle  was  content — not  with  his  spiritual  condition.  This  would  have  been  sin. 
With  this  we  should  be  discontented.  Nor  is  this  inconsistent  with  gratitude  for 
grace  received.  The  contentment  of  an  unrenewed  man  is  a  great  aggravation  of 
his  sinfulness.  But  while  discontented  on  account  of  the  evil  of  your  own  heart, 
be  not  discontented  with  the  slow  operations  of  God's  sanctifying  grace,  so  as  to 
fret  and  fume  that  you  are  not  already  perfect.  2.  Contentment  with  our  worldly 
condition  is  not  inconsistent  with  .endeavour  to  have  it  improved.  (1)  To  the 
poorest  man  Christianity  says,  "  Be  tbou  content,"  but  alno,  *'  be  diligent  in 
business  "  (1  Cor.  vii.  21).  The  conteutiuent  enjoined  is  for  the  time  being.  The 
man  is  poor  to-day,  and  for  this  day  faith  enjoins  him  to  be  satisfied.  But 
deliverance  from  poverty  may  be  best  for  to-morrow,  and  he  therefore  works  for  his 
extrication.  He  may  not  succeed,  but  he  says  it  appears  to  be  best  that  poverty 
should  be  continued  another  day,  and  thus  he  proceeds  till  relief  comes.  (2)  Some 
persons  of  a  tender  but  mistaken  conscience  feel  as  if  it  were  a  sin  to  attempt  to 
rise.  This  is  foolish.  It  is  our  commanded  duty  to  endeavour  to  improve  our 
circumstances,  only  we  must  not  murmur  if  we  do  not  succeed.  (3)  There  are  those 
who  presume  to  denou)ice  peo}>Ie  when  they  agitate  for  the  repeal  of  bad  laws — 
preaching  the  Christian  duty  of  content.  That  contentment  is  a  part  of  duty  is 
granted.  Iniquitous  legislation  is  as  much  a  permitted  judgment  of  God  as  famine, 
and  during  the  time  of  its  infliction  we  must  humble  ourselves.  But  in  both  cases 
a  man  is  a  criminal  who  does  not  use  all  means  for  the  removal  of  the  curse.  What 
would  have  been  our  condition  but  for  a  noble  Christian  patriotism.  3.  This  con- 
tentment is  relative  to  our  present  state,  and  not  absolute  in  respect  to  the  entire 
demands  of  our  nature.  Tlie  Christian  is  content  with  his  supplies  as  a  pilgrim. 
To  be  satisfied  with  the  world  as  a  home  is  sinful.  It  is  well  enough  as  a  land  to 
travel  in,  but  I  expect  something  better.  III.  The  manner  in  which  it  ib  to  bb 
CHERisHKD.  1.  Let  US  reflect  that  whatever  our  circumstances  they  are  the 
arraogeinent  of  the  providence  of  God,  who  has  a  sovereign  right  to  dispose  of  us. 
"Let  the  potsherds  strive  with  the  potsherds  of  earth,  but  woe  to  him  that  con- 
tendeth  with  his  Maker."  2.  It  is  requisite  that  we  should  acquire  a  habit  of 
looking  at  the  favourable  as  well  as  the  adverse  side.  If  you  are  poor,  God  has 
given  you  your  health  ;  if  He  has  taken  two  of  your  children  He  has  spared  a  third ; 
some  of  your  neighbours  are  worse  off ;  at  the  worst  you  have  your  Bible  and  your 
Saviour.  3.  Supposing  our  lives  were  affliction  throughout,  still  we  would  deserve 
worse.  4.  Gou  designs  our  advantage  in  every  calamity.  Christian  hope  is  the 
secret  of  Christian  contentment.  {W.  Avderson,  LL.D.)  Helps  to  contentment : — 
I.  CoNSiDEHATioN.  1.  Of  the  special  matter  of  it.  (1)  Who  orders  the  state,  and 
how  is  it  ordered  ?  (Psa.  xxxi.  15).  God  orders  things  (a)  irresistibly  (Isa.  xliiL 
13  ;  Eccles.  viii.  3 ;  Ephes.  i.  11) ;  {b)  righteously  (Gen.  xviii.  25 ;  Psa.  cxlv.  17 ; 
Rev.  XV.  3) ;  (c)  wisely  (Psa.  civ.  24)  ;  (d)  graciously  (Psa.  xxv.  10).  (2)  The  state 
itself,  (a)  It  is  mixed — the  good  more  than  the  evil ;  the  evil  is  our  desert 
and  the  good  of  grace,  (b)  It  is  common  (1  Cor.  x.  13 ;  1  Pet.  v.  9).  (c)  It  is 
proper  to  this  present  life,  which  is  but  a  pilgrimage,  (d)  It  might  be  worse. 
(3)  The  frame  of  contentment,  (a)  It  is  a  gracious  frame.  (6)  It  is  a  frame 
highly  pleasing  to  God.  (c)  It  is  a  frame  greatly  advantageous  to  ourselves. 
It  fills  with  coaifort ;  fits  for  duty ;  procures  the  mercy  we  desire,  or  something 
better  ;  sweetens  every  cup.  Whereas  discontent  is  a  sad  inlet  to  sin  ; 
a  preparation  to  all  temptations  ;  deprives  of  happiness ;  exposes  to  judgments 
(Psa.  cvi.  24-27  ;  1  Cor.  x.  10).  2.  Of  particular  cases  where  consideration  is  to  be 
acted  upon  in  order  to  contentment.  (1)  Lowness  of  estate.  Is  extreme  poverty 
the  case?  consider  then — (a)  The  Lord  maketh  poor  and  rich  (1  Sam.  ii.  7).  (6) 
None  are  so  poor  but  they  have  more  than  they  deserve,  (c)  Hitherto  the  Lord 
hath  provided,  and  if  you  trust  Him  will  still  provide  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  3  ;  Matt.  vi.  25 ; 
Heb.  xiii.  5).  (d)  A  little  with  God's  blessing  will  go  far  and  do  well  (Exod.  xxiii. 
25 ;  1  Kings  xviL  12).     («)  The  saint's  little  is  better  than  the  sinner's  all  (Prov« 


CHAP.  lY.J  PIIILIPPIANS.  849 

XT.  16;  Psa.  xxxviL  16).  (/)  No  man  can  judge  of  Gud'a  love  or  hatred  by  these 
things  (Eccles.  ix.  1  ;  Matt.  viii.  20 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  9).  {g)  God  keeps  you  low  in 
earthly  possessions,  but  how  is  it  with  you  in  hig)ier  atul  better  things  (Rev.  ii.  9 ; 
James  ii.  5  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  18  ;  Luke  xii.  21).  {h)  You  tJiiuk  God  is  strait  with  you  in 
temporal,  but  is  He  not  abundantly  gracious  in  spiritual  things?  (2)  There  are 
some  with  whom  it  is  much  better.  Consider  in  your  case — (a)  The  greatness  of 
the  sin  of  discontent  in  you  above  what  it  is  in  the  persons  spoken  of  before,  {b) 
How  thankful  would  many  be  if  tliey  were  in  your  position,  (c)  Christians  are  to 
bound  their  desires  after  things  below  (Jer.  xlv.  5 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  8  ;  Matt.  vi.  11).  (d) 
A  little  sufficeth  nature,  less  sut'iiceth  graue;  but  covetousness  is  never  satisfied. 
(t)  A  great  estate  is  not  the  best  estate  (Prov.  xxx.  8)  for  duty  (Eccles.  v.  13) ;  for 
safety — the  higher  the  building  the  more  endangered  ;  for  comfort.  (/)  The  con- 
tented man  is  never  poor  let  him  have  ever  so  little;  the  discontented  never 
rich  let  him  have  ever  so  much.  (//)  What  are  earthly  treasures  that  we  should 
be  greedy  of  them  ?  (1  Tim.  vi.  17  ;  Prov.  xxiii.  5).  {h)  The  less  we  have,  the  lesa 
we  shall  have  to  account  for.  (3)  There  are  those  who  have  lost  what  they  had. 
Consider — (a)  God  8  hand  is  in  losses  (Job  i.  21).  (b)  Something  is  gone,  but 
possibly  all  is  not  lost,  (c)  Did  you  really  need  them  ?  (1  Pet.  i.  6).  {d)  Suppose 
all  is  lost,  it  amounts  to  little  (1  Cor.  vii.  31).  (e)  If  thou  be  a  child  of  God  the 
best  is  secure.  3.  The  manner  in  which  consideration  is  to  be  managed.  It  must 
be — (1)  Frequent.  (2)  Speedy.  (3)  Serious.  II.  Godliness.  Tliis  produces 
contentment.  1.  As  it  rectities  the  several  faculties  of  the  soul.  (1)  It  rectifies 
the  understanding,  by  dispelling  natural  darkness  and  setting  up  a  saving  light. 

(2)  It  rectities  the  will ;  causing  it  to  comply  with  the  will  of  God.  (3)  It  rectifies 
the  affections  ;  taking  away  their  inordinancy  towards  earthly  things  and  keeping 
them  with  true  bounds.  (4)  It  makes  the  conscience  good  (Prov.  xv.  15).  2.  Aa 
it  makes  a  person  to  have  a  powerful  sense  of  God's  glory,  so  as  always  to  rest  in 
that  as  his  ultimate  and  most  desirable  good.  3.  In  the  general  habit  of  grace 
there  are  special  graces  which  further  contentment.     (1)  Humility.      (2)  Faith. 

(3)  Kepentance.  (4)  Heavenly  mindedness.  (5)  Self-denial.  IH.  Pkayer.  Upon 
this  the  two  others  depend.  It  funhf-rs  contentment.  1.  As  it  gives  a  vent  to  the 
mind  under  trouble.  2.  As  it  obtains  grace  and  strength  from  God.  (7".  Jacamb, 
D.D.)  Learning  to  be  content : — These  words  signify  how  contenteduess  may  be 
attained.  It  is  not  an  t-udjwment  innate  to  us,  but  it  is  a  product  of  discipline^ 
"I  have  learned."  It  was  a  question  of  Plato,  whether  virtue  is  to  be  l<^arned.  St. 
Paul  plainly  resolves  it  by  the  testimony  of  his  experience.  It  however  requires 
great  resolution  and  diligence  in  conquering  our  desires  ;  hence  it  is  an  art  which 
few  study.  I.  In  regard  to  God,  we  may  consider  that  equity  exacts,  gratitude 
requires,  and  reason  dictates  that  we  should  be  content;  or  that,  in  being  dis- 
contented, we  behave  ourselves  uubeseemingly  and  unworthily,  are  very  unjust, 
ungrateful,  and  foolish  towards  Him.  1.  The  point  of  equity  considered,  according 
to  the  gospel  rule,  "  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  will  with  mine  own  ?"  2. 
That  of  gratitude  ;  inasmuch  as  we  have  no  right  or  title  to  anything ;  all  we  have 
coming  from  God's  pure  bounty  and  designed  for  our  good.  3.  That  of  reason ; 
because  it  is  most  reasonable  to  acquiesce  in  God's  choice  of  our  estate,  He  being 
infinitely  more  wise  than  we  are ;  loves  us  better  than  we  li> . .  ourselves  ;  and  has  a 
right  to  dispose  of  us  as  He  pleases.  II.  In  regard  to  ourselves  we  may  observe 
much  reason  for  contentment.  1.  As  men  and  creatures,  we  are  naturally  indigent 
and  impotent ;  have  no  just  claim  to  anything,  nor  can  maintain  anything  by  our 
own  power.  Wherefore  how  little  soever  is  allowed  us  no  wrong  is  done  and  no 
reason  to  complain.  2.  And  on  a  moral  account  we  have  still  less.  (1)  As  sinners 
we  are  obnoxious  to  wrath  and  should  therefore  complain  of  nothing.  (2)  We  are 
God's  servants  and  shall  a  mere  servant,  or  slave,  presume  to  choose  his  place,  or 
determine  his  rank  in  the  family  ?  Is  it  not  fit  that  these  things  should  be  left  to 
the  Master's  discretion  and  pleasure  ?  (3)  Again,  if  we  consider  ourselves  as  the 
children  of  God  by  bitth  and  nature,  or  by  adoption  and  grace,  how  can  we  be  dis- 
oontenti^d  with  anything  ?  HI.  Ir  wb  oonsedeb  oob  condition,  be  it  what  it  may, 
we  can  have  no  reasonable  ground  for  discontent.  1.  Our  state  cannot  if  rightly 
considered  and  well  managed  be  msupportable.  The  defect  of  some  things  is  sup- 
plied by  other  enjoyments.  If  we  think  highly  of  some  things  no  wonder  our 
condition  is  unpleasant  if  we  want  them ;  and  if  we  consider  others  mighty  evils, 
if  they  come  upon  us  we  can  hardly  escape  being  displeased  ;  but  if  we  estimate  all 
things  acoordiiig  to  the  dictates  of  true  reason,  we  shall  find  that  neither  the 
sbsijuce  of  the  one  nor  the  presence  of  the  other  is  deplorable.     (1)  Take  poverty  ; 


850  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  it. 

that  is,  the  absence  ot  a  few  superfluous  things  which  please  our  fancy  rather  than 
answer  our  need,  and  without  which  nature  is  easily  t^atistied.  (2)  Take  his  case 
who  has  fallen  from  honour  into  contempt ;  that  may  be  only  a  change  in  the 
opinion  of  giddy  men,  the  breaking  of  a  bubble,  the  changing  of  the  wind.  (3) 
Take  him  who  is  slandered;  is  not  every  man  subject  to  this?  and  the  greatest 
and  wisest  most  exposed  to  it?  Or  is  thy  reproach  just?  Then  improve  this 
dealing  and  make  it  wholesome.  (4)  Take  him  who  is  disappointed  and  crossed  in 
his  undertakings.  Why  art  thou  disquieted  on  this  score?  Didst  thou  build  much 
expectation  on  uncertainties  ?  Didst  thou  not  foresee  a  possibility  that  thy  design 
might  miscarry  f  and  if  so,  why  art  thou  not  prepared  to  receive  what  liappeneth  ? 
(6)  Take  one  who  has  met  wth  unkindness  and  ingratitude  from  friends.  Such 
misbehaviour,  however,  is  more  their  calamity  than  ours.  The  loss  of  bad  friends 
is  no  damage,  but  an  advantage.  (6)  Take  him  who  mourns  the  death  of  friends. 
Can  he,  after  all,  lose  his  best  friend  ?  Neither  is  it  loss  which  he  laments  but  only 
separation  for  a  short  time.  He  is  only  gone  as  taking  a  little  journey.  But— (7) 
It  may  perhaps  displease  us,  that  the  course  of  this  world  does  not  go  right,  or 
according  to  our  mind  ;  that  justice  is  not  well  dispensed,  virtue  not  duly  considered, 
industry  not  sufficiently  rewarded  ;  but  favour,  partiality,  flattpry,  craft,  and  cor- 
raption,  carry  all  before  them.  Yet  why  should  this  displease  thee  7  Art  thon 
guilty  of  contributing  to  it  ?  then  mend  it  thyself :  if  not,  then  bear  it ;  for  so  it 
always  hath  been,  and  ever  will  be.  Yet  God  is  engaged  competently  to  provide  for 
us.  God  observeth  this  course  of  things,  yet  He  permits  it.  But  He  has  appointed 
a  judgment  hereafter.  2.  As  there  is  no  condition  here  perfectly  and  purely  good, 
80  there  is  none  so  thoroughly  bad,  that  it  has  not  somewhat  convenient  and  com- 
fortable therein.  Seldom  or  never  all  good  things  forsake  a  man  at  once,  and  in 
every  state  there  is  some  compensation  for  evil.  We  should  not  pore  over  small 
inconveniences  and  overlook  benefits.  This  hinders  us  reaping  satisfaction  in  all 
other  things.  3.  Is  our  condition  so  extremely  bad  that  it  might  not  be  worse  ? 
Surely  not.  God's  providence  will  not  BujBEer  it.  There  are  succours  always  ready 
against  extremities — our  own  wit  and  industry;  the  pity  and  help  of  others.  When 
all  is  gone  we  may  keep  the  inestimable  blessing  of  a  good  conscience,  have  hope  in 
God,  enjoy  His  favour.  Why,  then,  are  we  discontented.  4.  Then  look  at  the  uses 
of  adversity — the  school  of  wisdom,  the  purifying  furnace  of  the  soul,  God's 
method  of  reclaiming  sinners,  the  preparation  for  heaven.  Who  ever  became  great 
or  wise  or  good  without  adversity.  6.  Whatever  our  state  it  cannot  be  lasting. 
Hope  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  worst  state  that  can  be.  "  Take  no  thought  for  the 
morrow."  Mark  the  promises  that  none  who  hope  in  God  shall  be  disappointed. 
And  then  death  will  end  it  all  and  heaven  compensate  for  all  earthly  ills.  IV. 
Consider  the  world  and  the  general  state  op  men  here.  1.  Look  on  the  world 
as  generally  managed  by  men.  Art  thou  displeased  that  thou  dost  not  prosper 
therein  ?  If  thou  art  wise  thou  wilt  not  grieve,  for  perhaps  thou  hast  no  capacity 
nor  disposition.  This  world  is  for  worldlings,  2,  We  are  indeed  very  apt  to  look 
upward  towards  those  few,  who,  in  supposed  advantages  of  life,  seem  to  surpass  us, 
and  to  repine  at  their  fortune ;  but  seldom  do  we  cast  down  our  eyes  on  those 
innumerable  good  people,  who  lie  beneath  us  in  all  manner  of  accommodations; 
whereas  if  we  would  consider  the  case  of  most  men,  we  should  see  abundant 
reason  to  be  satisfied  with  our  own.  3.  If  even  we  would  take  care  diligently  to 
compare  our  state  with  that  of  per.'-ons  whom  we  are  most  apt  to  admire  and  envy, 
it  would  often  afford  matter  of  consolation  and  contentment  to  us.  4.  It  may  in- 
duce us  to  be  content,  if  we  consider  what  commonly  hath  been  the  lot  of  good 
men  in  the  world.  Scarcely  is  there  recorded  in  holy  Scripture  any  person  eminent 
for  goodness,  who  did  not  taste  deeply  of  wants  and  distresses — even  our  Lord. 
Have  all  these  llien,  "  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy,"  undergone  all  sorts  of 
inconvenience,  being  "destitute,  afflicted,  tormented;  "  and  shall  we  disdain,  or  be 
sorry  to  be  in  such  company?  V.  Consider  the  nature  of  the  duty  itself.  1. 
It  is  the  sovereign  remedy  for  all  poverty  and  suffering  ;  removing  them  or  allaying 
the  mischief  they  can  do  us.  2.  Its  happiness  is  better  than  any  arising  from 
secular  prosperity.  Satisfaction  springing  from  rational  content,  virtuous  disposi- 
tion, is  more  noble,  solid,  and  durable  than  any  fruition  of  worldly  goods  can  afford. 
3.  Contentment  is  the  best  way  of  bettering  our  condition,  disposing  us  to  employ 
advantages  as  they  occur,  and  securing  God's  blessing  (Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.) 
The  best  lesson  {Children's  sermon) : — The  world  is  a  school,  aud  we  have  to  learn 
our  lessons  in  it.  The  best  lesson  we  can  learn  is  contentment.  I.  Wht  it  is  thb 
best  I4ESS0N.     1.  Because  it  makes  those  who  learn  it  happy.     Nothing  in  the 


«HAi    IV.]  PHILIPPIANS.  851 

world  can  make  a  discontented  person  happy.  There  was  a  boy  once  who  only 
wanted  a  marble ;  when  he  had  the  marble,  he  only  wanted  a  ball ;  when  he  had 
a  ball,  he  only  wanted  a  top ;  when  he  had  a  top,  he  only  wanted  a  kite  :  and  when 
he  had  marble,  ball,  top,  and  kite,  he  was  not  happy.  There  was  a  man  once  who 
only  wanted  money;  when  he  had  money,  he  only  wauted  a  house;  when  he  had 
a  house,  he  only  wanted  land ;  when  he  had  land,  he  only  wanted  a  coach  ;  but 
when  be  had  money,  house,  land,  and  coach,  he  wanted  more  than  ever.  I 
remember,  when  I  was  a  boy,  reading  a  fable  about  a  mouse  that  went  to  a  spring 
with  a  sieve  to  carry  some  water  in  it.  He  dipped  the  sieve  in  the  water,  but,  of 
course,  as  soon  as  he  raised  it  up  the  water  all  ran  through.  He  tried  it  over  and 
over  again,  but  still  no  water  would  stay  in  the  sieve.  The  poor  mouse  hadn't 
sense  euoup;h  to  know  where  the  trouble  was.  He  never  thought  about  the  holes  in 
the  sieve.  The  fable  said  that  while  the  mouse  was  still  trying,  in  vain,  to  get  some 
water  in  the  sieve  to  carry  home,  there  came  a  little  bird  and  perched  on  a  branch 
of  the  tree  that  grew  near  the  spring.  He  saw  the  trouble  the  poor  mouse  was  in, 
and  kindly  sung  out  a  little  advice  to  him  in  these  simple  words : 

"  Stop  it  with  moss,  and  daub  it  with  clay,  and  then  you  may  carry  it  all  away." 

Trying  to  make  a  discontented  person  happy  is  like  trying  to  fill  a  sieve  with  water. 
However  much  you  pour  into  it,  it  all  runs  out  just  as  fast  as  you  pour  it  in.  If  you 
want  to  fill  the  sieve,  you  must  stop  the  holes  up.  Then  it  will  be  easy  enough  to 
fill  it.  Just  so  it  is  with  trying  to  make  discontented  people  happy.  It  is  impossible 
to  make  them  happy  while  they  are  discontented.  You  must  stop  up  the  holes ; 
you  must  take  away  their  discontent,  and  then  it  is  very  easy  to  make  them  happy. 
If  we  were  in  Paradise,  as  Adam  and  Eve  were,  we  should  not  be  happv  unless  we 
learned  to  be  content.  Nay,  if  we  were  in  heaven  even,  as  Satan  and  the  fallen 
angels  once  were,  we  should  be  unhappy  without  contentment.  It  was  because  Paul 
had  learned  this  lesson  that  he  could  be  happy,  and  sing  for  joy,  when  he  was  in  a 
dungeon,  and  his  back  was  all  bleeding  from  the  cruel  stripes  laid  upon  it.  2. 
Because  it  makes  those  who  learn  it  useful.  When  people  or  things  are  content  to 
do  or  be  what  God  made  them  for,  they  are  useful :  when  they  are  not  content  with 
this,  they  do  harm.  God  made  the  sun  to  shine  ;  the  sun  is  content  to  do  just  what 
God  made  it  for,  and  so  it  is  very  useful.  God  made  the  little  brooks  to  flow 
through  the  meadows,  giving  drink  to  the  cattle,  and  watering  the  grass  and  the 
roots  of  tlie  trees,  so  as  to  make  them  green,  and  help  them  to  grow.  While  they 
do  this  they  are  very  useful.  But  suppose  they  should  stop  flowing,  and  spread 
themselves  over  the  fields,  they  would  do  a  great  deal  of  harm.  God  made  our 
hearts  to  keep  beating,  and  sending  the  blood  all  over  our  bodies.  While  they  are 
content  to  do  this,  they  are  very  useful.  Let  them  only  stop  beating,  and  we  should 
die.  II.  Why  we  should  learn  it.  1.  Because  God  puts  us  where  we  are.  God 
puts  all  things  in  the  places  where  they  are.  The  sun  and  moon  and  stars  in  the 
sky,  the  birds  in  the  air,  the  fish  in  the  sea,  the  trees  in  the  woods,  the  grass  in  the  ' 
fields,  the  stones  and  metals  in  the  earth.  He  knows  best  where  to  put  things. 
When  people  try  to  change  what  God  has  done,  because  they  think  they  can  arrange 
things  better,  they  always  make  a  mistake.  2.  Because  God  wants  us  to  learn  it. 
This  we  know  (1)  from  what  He  has  said  (1  Tim.  vi.  8 ;  Heb.  xiii.  5).  (2)  From 
what  He  has  done.  He  has  filled  the  world  with  examples  of  contentment.  All  things 
that  God  has  made  are  content  to  be  where  He  has  put  them,  except  the  children 
of  Adam.  God  has  done  more  for  us  than  for  any  other  of  His  creatures.  We 
ought  to  be  the  most  contented  of  all,  and  yet  we  are  geneially  the  most  discon- 
tented. The  fisli  are  content  with  the  water  ;  the  birds  are  content  with  the  air. 
The  eagle,  as  he  soars  to  the  sun,  is  content  with  his  position  ;  and  so  is  the  worm 
that  crawls  in  its  slime,  or  the  blind  mole  that  digs  its  way  in  darkness  through  the 
earth.  All  the  trees  of  the  forest  are  content  to  grow  where  God  put  them.  The 
lily  of  the  valley  is  content  with  its  lowly  place,  and  so  is  the  little  flower  that 
blooms  unnoticed  on  the  side  of  the  bleak  mountain.  Wherever  you  look  you  may 
see  examples  of  contentment.  Only  think  of  the  grass.  It  is  spread  all  over  tha 
earth.  It  is  mowed  down  continually ;  it  is  trodden  on  and  trampled  under  foot  all 
the  time ;  and  yet  it  always  has  a  bright,  cheerful,  contented  look.  It  is  a  beautiful 
image  of  contentment.  3.  Because  Jesus  learned  and  practised  it.  It  must  have 
been  very  hard  for  Jesus  to  be  content  with  the  way  in  which  He  lived  in  this  world, 
because  it  was  so  totally  ditTerent  from  what  He  had  been  accustomed  to  before  He 
came  into  it.  A  bird  that  has  been  hatched  and  brought  up  in  a  cage  may  be 
contented  with  its  position,  and  live  happily  in  its  little  wire  prison.    T£fl  reason 


asa  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

is  that  it  hag  never  known  anything  better.  But  take  a  bird  that  has  been 
accustomed  to  its  liberty  in  the  open  air,  and  shut  it  up  in  a  small  cage.  It  cannot 
be  contented  there.  It  will  strike  its  wings  against  the  cage,  and  stretch  its  neck 
through  the  wires,  and  show  in  this  way  how  it  longs  for  the  free  air  of  heaven 
again.  Just  so  a  person  who  was  born  and  brought  up  in  a  garret  or  cellar,  and 
who  has  never  known  anything  better,  may  manage  to  be  content  there.  Bat  one 
who  has  lived  in  a  beautiful  palace  for  many  years  would  find  it  very  hard  to  live 
in  a  damp,  dark  cellar,  among  thieves  and  beggars.  But  Jesus  lived  in  heaven  before 
Hecamehere.  There  He  had  everything  that  He  wanted.  (R.  Newton,  D  .D.)  The 
condition  of  contentment : — To  be  contented  is  to  be  contained,  to  be  within  limits. 
Whatever  is  within  limits  is  likely  to  be  quiet.  A  walled  garden  is  one  of  the  quietest 
places  in  the  world  ;  its  high  walls  are  a  sign  of  contentment ;  within  them  are  so 
many  attractions  and  objects  of  delight;  the  world  is  shut  out,  and  through  the  great 
gates  one  can  look  out  upon  it  with  all  the  affectionateness  of  distance  and  all  the 
enchantment  borrowed  therefrom.  An  enclosed  garden  is  a  calm,  quiet  place,  a 
place  in  which  to  be  content.  So,  the  soul  of  man,  being  as  it  were  in  an  enclosed 
garden,  man's  spirit  being  within  limits,  is  thus  shut  into  a  calm,  quiet,  eunny 
content.  Now  there  are  limits  which  a  man  need  not  trouble  himself  much  about 
making ;  the  walls  of  circumstances  will  build  themselves  about  yoo.  But  if  yon 
are  a  very  wise  man  you  will  give  up  scraping  when  you  have  got  enough,  and  pu* 
yourself  within  limits.  Just  as  an  enclosed  garden  becomes  a  place  of  peace  and 
delight,  so  the  spirit  should  have  limits  round  it  and  let  those  limits  become  grounds 
of  quietness,  reasons  of  peace  and  content,  a  content  which  leads  a  man  to  be 
easy,  within  these  walls  to  be  so  satisfied  as  not  to  pine,  fret,  complain,  fuss,  kick, 
or  go  to  the  gates  and  scream  for  deliverance,  asking  passers  by,  "  Did  you  ever  see 
such  a  woe  as  mine."  The  contented  man  limited  and  bound  by  circumstances, 
makes  those  very  limits  the  cure  of  his  restlessness.  The  warrior  and  conqueror 
is  not  content,  but  seeks  to  add  kingdom  to  kingdom.  The  miser  is  not  content 
with  much,  but  seeks  to  make  more  money.  It  is  not  whether  your  garden  is  one 
rood  or  three  acres,  but  what  you  should  remember  is  that  there  is  a  wall,  that  so 
living  within  bounds,  be  they  large  or  small,  yon  may  possess  a  quiet  spirit  and  a 
happy  heart.  Things  would  then  perve  you,  instead  of  your  being  the  miserable 
eervant  of  circumstances.  You  would  then  make  life  bring  tribute  to  its  King, 
instead  of  doing  as  people  do,  hire  themselves  out  as  servants  to  their  goods,  as 
waiters  upon  their  chattels;  allowing  things  to  ride  over  them  instead  of  their 
being  masterful  over  things.  A  man  should  be  within  bounds,  but  within  those 
bounds  there  is  room  for  pleasure  and  service.  (G.  Dawson,  M.A.)  Contentment 
is  not  one  of  the  distinct  and  separate  sensibilities  of  the  heart,  standing  by  itself 
and  to  be  examined  and  understood  alone,  so  much  as  it  is  a  general  sensibililitj 
which  mingles  with  and  tempers  all  others — which  spreads  its  cast  and  character 
over  the  whole.  It  is  not  the  rock  on  the  landscape  nor  the  rill — it  is  not  the 
distant  mountain  of  fading  blue  which  loses  its  head  in  the  heavens — it  is  not  the 
tree,  or  the  flower,  or  the  contrast  between  light  and  shade,  or  that  indescribable 
Bomething  which  seems  to  give  it  life,  as  if  the  grass  grew,  and  the  flowers  breathed, 
and  the  winds  were  singing  some  song  of  pleasure  or  sighing  some  mournful 
requiem.  It  is  none  of  these.  These  can  be  more  clearly  described.  But  it  is 
rather  that  softness,  that  mellow  light,  which  lies  over  the  whole — which  sleeps  on 
rock,  and  river,  and  tree,  on  the  bosom  of  the  distant  mountain,  and  on  the  bosom 
of  the  humble  violet  that  blushes  in  the  sweetness  of  its  lowly  valley.  Content  is 
a  general  cast  of  sensibility  which  lies  all  over  the  heart.  (I.  S.  Spencer,  D.D,) 
Contentment  the  o^itcome  of  a  right  view  of  circumstances : — *'  How  dismal  you 
look,"  said  a  bucket  to  his  companion  as  they  were  going  to  the  well.  •' Ah  1  " 
replied  the  other,  "  I  was  reflecting  on  the  uselessnesa  of  oar  being  filled ;  for,  let 
as  go  away  ever  so  full,  we  always  come  back  empty."  ••  Dear  me  1  how  strange  to 
look  at  it  in  this  way,"  said  the  bucket.  ••  Now  I  enjoy  the  thought,  that  however 
empty  we  come,  we  always  go  back  full.  Only  look  at  it  in  that  light,  and  yon  will 
be  as  cheerful  as  I  am."  St.  Paul's  contentment: — If  his  trials  were  clouds  upon 
his  heavens,  his  contentment  was  the  deep  sonlight  in  which  they  bathed;  and,  just 
like  the  clouds  of  an  evening  sky,  they  made  the  heavens  more  beautiful  than  if  no 
clouds  were  there.  (I.  S.  Spencer,  D.D.)  Contentment  does  not  always  imply  pleo' 
sure : — I  may  be  content ;  that  is  to  say,  I  may  have  a  calm  patience  in  waiting  over 
night  at  a  miserable  inn  where  have  congregated  smagglers,  and  drunken  sailors,  and 
the  rift-raff  of  a  bad  neighbourhood.  If,  after  fighting  for  my  life  in  my  little  yacht, 
I  had  at  last  been  driven  up  on  shore,  myself  a  wreck,  and  had  crawled  out  of  tha 


CHAP,  rv.]  PHILIPPIANS.  853 

water,  and  staggered  to  tbe  light,  and  gone  in  there,  would  it  not  be  proper  for  ma 
to  say  :  '•  I  thaok  God  for  my  deliverance  and  for  my  safety  "  ?  And  yet  every 
element  is  distasteful  to  me.  The  air  reeks  v«'ith  bad  liquor  and  worse  oaths ;  and 
the  company  are  obscene,  and  vile,  aad  violent ;  the  conditions  are  detestable ;  but 
I  that  have  escaped  from  the  sea  can  say :  "  I  am  content  to  be  here.  Not  that  I 
am  pleased  at  being  there  particularly  ;  but  as  compared  with  something  else  it  ia 
tolerable.  I  have  learned  how  to  bear  this."  How  did  I  learn  it  ?  I  learned  it  by 
being  swirled  around  for  an  hour  in  the  whirlpools  of  the  sea.  I  learned  it  by 
being  thumped  and  pounded  by  the  waves.  I  learned  it  by  being  chilled  to  the 
Tery  marrow.  So  I  learned  to  be  patient  with  the  surroundings  in  the  midst  of 
which  I  found  myself.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  a  man  is  obliged  to  say  :  "  I 
like  these  circumstances,"  in  order  to  be  content  with  them.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Contentment  look*  at  what  is  left : — Am  I  fallen  into  the  hands  of  publicans  and 
sequestrators  who  have  taken  all  from  me  ?  What  now  ?  Let  me  look  about  me. 
They  have  left  me  the  sun  and  moon,  fire  and  water,  a  loving  wife,  and  many  friends 
to  pity  me,  and  some  to  relieve  me,  and  I  can  still  discourse :  and  unless  I  list, 
they  have  not  taken  away  my  merry  countenance,  and  a  cheerful  spirit,  and  a  good 
conscience ;  they  have  still  left  ine  the  providence  of  God,  and  all  the  promises  of 
the  gospel,  and  my  religion,  and  the  hop^s  of  heaven,  and  my  charter  to  them  too ; 
and  still  I  sleep  and  digest,  I  eat  and  drink,  I  read  and  meditate,  I  can  walk  in  my 
neighbours'  pleasant  fields  and  see  the  varieties  of  natural  beauties,  and  delight  in 
all  which  God  delights — that  is,  in  virtue  and  wisdom ;  in  the  whole  creation,  and 
in  God  Himself.  And  he  who  hath  so  many  causes  of  joy,  is  very  much  in  loye 
with  sorrow  and  peevishness  who  loses  all  these  pleasures,  and  chooses  to  sit  down 
on  his  little  handful  of  thorns.  (Jeremy  Taylor.)  Contentment  not  found  in  an 
exchange  of  places: — In  a  room,  there  was  a  gold  fish,  in  a  glass  globe,  in  water; 
and  there  was  a  canary  up  in  a  cage  by  the  window.  It  was  a  very  hot  day ;  and 
the  fish  in  the  globe,  and  the  canary  in  the  cage  began  talking  (of  course  you  know 
in  fables  anything  can  talk).  The  fish  said,  "I  with  I  could  sing  like  that  canary. 
I  should  like  to  be  up  there  in  that  cage."  And  the  canary,  who  was  uncommonly 
hot,  said,  "  Oh,  how  nice  to  be  down  in  that  cool  water  where  the  fish  is  1 " 
Suddenly  a  voice  said,  "  Canary,  go  down  to  the  water  1  Fish  go  up  into  the  cage  I ' 
Immediately  they  both  exchanged  places.  Weren't  they  happy  ?  Wasn't  the  fish 
happy  up  in  the  cage  ?  Wasn't  thea  mary  happy  down  in  the  cool  water  ?  How 
long  did  their  happiness  last,  do  you  ihink  ?  Ah  I  God  had  given  to  the  canary  and 
the  fish  "  according  to  their  ability."  He  had  given  each  a  place  suited  to  their 
natures.  (J.  Vaughm,  M.A.)  Bad  might  be  worse  : — For  every  bad  there  might  be  a 
worse ;  and  when  a  man  breaks  his  leg,  let  him  be  thankful  it  was  not  his  neck. 
{Bishc^  Hall.)  Contentment  not  inconsistent  with  discontent : — No  doctrine  of  con- 
tentment must  be  so  taught  as  to  lessen  a  man's  labours  in  the  removal  of  his  miseries 
and  the  improvement  of  his  state.  Contentment  is  of  the  spirit,  and  should  be  no 
discouragement  to  labour.  If  I  have  only  one  coat  to  my  back,  am  I  to  sit  down  and 
Bay,  **  I  am  perfectly  content"?  No.  I  must  be  content  with  one  whilst  I  have 
but  one,  but  my  contentment  must  not  hinder  me  from  trying  to  see  my  way  to 
get  two.  Cinderella,  while  among  the  ashes,  was  content  in  spirit,  though  she 
strove  to  get  out  of  the  nastiness  of  the  ashes.  But  I  see  people  sometimes  who 
are  so  friendly  with  their  miserable  circumstances  that  they  never  want  to  mend 
them — men  at  home  vvith  dirt  and  women  with  slovenliness,  until  they  come  to 
like  it.  It  is  true  that  if  you  have  got  to  live  with  an  ugly  person  you  must  try  to 
settle  down ;  but  not  with  dirt,  disease,  ignorance,  poverty.  Under  no  plea  of 
content  should  a  man  refuse  the  lawful  means  of  enlargement  and  betterment. 
If  yon  took  possession  of  a  new  garden  and  allowed  it  to  remain  always  full  of 
weeds,  and  then  if  you  took  me  round  and  said,  "  I  have  been  here  so  many  years; 
my  garden  is  always  full  of  weeds,  but  I  am  perfectly  content" — my  duty  then 
would  be  to  worry  you,  and  try  to  make  you  discontented.  A  man  who  is  content 
in  the  midst  of  a  weedy  garden  is  in  gloriously  content;  he  lets  his  circumstances 
degrade  him.  No  wise  contentment  bears  for  one  moment  longer  than  is  necessary 
a  removable  misery.  It  is  our  duty  rather  to  unite  with  the  utmost  care  for  the 
healing  of  the  wound,  the  patientest  bearing  of  the  suffering  from  the  wound.  He 
who,  having  a  wound,  did  not  seek  to  cure  it,  would  degrade  himself ;  but  he  who, 
while  patiently  bearing  the  necessary  wound,  seeks  to  cure  it,  is  a  contented  man. 
(G.  Dawson,  M.A.)  Content  not  found  in  circumstances: — I  knew  a  man  that 
had  both  health  and  riches,  and  several  houses  all  beautiful  and  ready  finished ; 
and  would  often  trouble  himself  and  family  to  be  removing  from  one  house  t^ 

23 


854  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  nr. 

another ;  and  being  asked  by  a  friend  why,  eplied :  "  It  was  to  find  content  in 
some  one  of  them."  But  his  friend,  knowing  his  temper,  told  him  if  he  would  find 
content  in  any  of  his  houses  he  must  leave  himself  behind  him  ;  for  content  will 
never  dwell  but  in  a  meek  and  quiet  soul.  And  this  may  appear  from  the  beati- 
tude — *•  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth;"  not  that  the  meek 
shall  not  also  obtain  mercy,  and  see  God,  and  be  comforted,  and  at  last  obtain  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  in  the  meantime  he,  and  he  only,  possesses  the  earth,  aa 
he  travels  towards  that  kingdom,  by  being  humble  and  cheerful  and  content  with 
what  his  good  God  has  allotted  him.       (Izaak  Waltcm.)  The  art  of  divine 

contentment : — I.  I  begin  with  the  first :  The  scholab  and  his  peoficiency — "  I 
have  learned."  Out  of  which  I  shall,  by  the  by,  observe  two  things  by  way 
of  paraphrase.  1.  The  apostle  doth  not  say,  "  I  have  heard  that  in  every 
estate  I  should  be  content,"  but  "I  have  learned."  It  is  one  thing  to  hear 
and  another  thing  to  learn,  as  it  is  one  thing  to  eat  and  another  thing  to 
concoct.  St.  Paul  was  a  practitioner.  Christians  hear  much,  bat,  it  is  to  be 
feared,  learn  little.  There  are  two  things  which  keep  ns  from  learning.  1. 
Slighting  what  we  hear.  Who  will  learn  that  which  he  thinks  is  scarce  worth 
learning  ?  2.  Forgetting  what  we  hear.  11.  This  word,  "  I  have  learned,"  ia  a 
word  imports  difficulty;  it  shows  how  hardly  the  apostle  oame  bt  content- 
MENT  o»  mind;  it  was  not  bred  in  nature.  The  business  of  religion  is  not  ao 
facile  as  most  do  imagine.  There  are  two  pregnant  reasons  why  there  must  be  ao 
much  study  and  exercitation.  1.  Because  spiritual  things  are  against  nature. 
2.  Because  spiritual  things  are  above  nature.  III.  I  come  to  the  main  thing,  thb 
LESSON  rrsELir — "In  whatsover  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content."  1.  It  ia  a 
hard  lesson.  The  angels  in  heaven  have  not  learned  it ;  they  were  not  contented. 
They  kept  not  their  estate  because  they  were  not  contented  with  their  estate.  Our 
first  parents,  clothed  with  the  white  robe  of  innocency  in  paradise,  had  not  learned 
to  be  content ;  they  had  aspiring  hearts.  0  then,  if  this  lesson  was  so  hard  to 
learn  in  innocency,  bow  hard  shall  we  find  it  who  are  clogged  with  corruption  f 
2.  It  ia  of  universal  extent;  it  concerns  all.  (1)  It  concerns  rich  men.  Bich 
men  have  their  discontents  as  well  as  others  I  (2)  The  doctrine  of  contentment 
concerns  poor  men.  It  is  much  when  poverty  hath  clipped  oar  wings  then  to  be  con- 
tent, but,  though  hard,  it  is  excellent ;  and  the  apostle  here  had  "  learned  in  every 
state  to  be  content."  A  contented  spirit  is  like  a  watch  :  though  yon  carry  it  ap 
and  down  with  you,  yet  the  spring  of  it  is  not  shaken  nor  the  wheels  out  of  order, 
but  the  watch  keeps  its  perfect  motion.  So  it  was  with  St.  Paul.  Though  God 
carried  him  into  various  conditions,  yet  he  was  not  lift  up  with  the  one,  nor  east 
down  with  the  other ;  the  spring  of  his  heart  was  not  broken,  the  wheels  of  hia 
affections  were  not  disordered,  but  kept  their  constant  motion  towards  heaven ; 
Btill  content.  The  ship  that  lies  at  anchor  may  sometimes  be  a  little  shaken,  but 
never  sinks  ;  flesh  and  blood  may  have  its  fears  and  disquiets,  but  grace  doth 
check  them  ;  a  Christian,  having  cast  anchor  in  heaven,  his  heart  never  sinks ;  a 
gracious  spirit  is  a  contented  spirit.  IV.  The  besolviko  of  some  questions. 
For  the  illustration  of  this  doctrine  I  shall  propound  these  questions.  1.  Whether 
a  Christian  may  not  be  sensible  of  his  condition,  and  yet  be  contented  ?  Yes ;  for 
else  he  is  not  a  saint,  but  a  stoic  2.  Whether  a  Christian  may  not  lay  open  his 
grievances  to  God,  and  yet  be  contented  ?  3.  What  is  it  properly  that  contentment 
doth  exclude  T  There  are  three  things  which  contentment  doth  banish  out  of  ita 
diocese,  and  which  can  by  no  means  consist  with  it.  (1)  It' excludes  a  vexatious 
repining;  this  is  properly  the  daughter  of  discontent.  Murmuring  is  nothing 
else  but  the  scum  which  boils  off  from  a  discontented  heart.  (2)  It  excludes  an 
nneven  discomposure  :  when  a  man  saith,  "  I  am  in  such  straits  that  I  know  not 
how  to  evolve  or  get  out,  I  shall  be  undone ; "  when  his  head  and  heart  are  so 
taken  np  that  he  ia  not  fit  to  pray  or  meditate.  (3)  It  excludes  a  childish 
despondency ;  and  this  ia  usually  consequent  opon  the  other.  A  despondent 
spirit  is  a  discontented  spirit.  V.  Showing  the  matdbs  or  contentment.  The 
nature  of  this  will  appear  more  clear  in  these  three  aphorisms.  1.  Contentment  ia  a 
divine  thing ;  it  becomes  ours,  not  by  acquisition,  but  infusion ;  it  ia  a  slip  taken  off 
from  the  tree  of  life,  and  planted  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  aoal ;  it  la  a  fmit 
that  growa  not  in  the  garden  of  philosophy,  but  is  of  a  heavenly  birth;  it  is 
therefore  very  observable  that  contentment  ia  joined  with  godliness,  and  goes  in 
equipage;  "godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain."  2.  Contentment  is  an 
intrinsical  thing  ;  it  lies  within  a  man  ;  not  in  the  bark,  but  the  root.  Contentment 
hath  both  ita  fountain  and  stream  in  the  soul.     The  beam  hath  not  its  light  from 


CHAP.  IV.]  PHILIPPIAN8,  855 

the  air ;  the  beams  of  comfort  which  a  contented  man  hath  do  not  arise  from 
foreign  comforts,  but  from  within.  3.  Contentment  is  a  habitual  thing ;  it  shines 
with  a  fixed  hght  in  the  firmament  of  the  soul.  Contentment  doth  not  appear 
only  now  and  then,  as  some  stars  which  are  seen  hut  seldom  ;  it  ia  a  settled 
temper  of  the  heart.  It  is  not  casual,  but  constant.  Aristotle,  in  his  rhetoric, 
distinguisheth  between  colours  in  the  face  that  arise  from  passion  and  those 
which  arise  from  complexion  ;  the  pale  face  may  look  pale  when  it  blusheth,  but  this 
is  only  a  passion.  He  is  said  properly  to  be  ruddy  and  sanguine  who  is  constantly  so  ; 
h  is  his  complexion.  He  is  not  a  contented  man  who  is  so  upon  an  occasion,  and 
perhaps  when  he  is  pleased,  but  who  is  so  constantly ;  it  is  the  habit  and  com. 
plexion  of  his  soul.  VI.  Reasons  peessino  to  holt  contentment.  1.  The  first 
is  Ood's  precept.  It  is  charged  upon  us  as  a  duty :  "  lie  content  with  such  things 
S3  you  have."  2.  The  second  reason  enforcing  contentment  is  God's  promise,  for 
He  hath  said,  "I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  Here  God  hath 
engaged  Himself  under  hand  and  seal  for  our  necessary  provisions.  True  faith 
will  take  God's  single  bond  without  calling  for  witnesses,  3.  Be  content  by  virtue 
of  a  decree.  Not  chance  or  fortune,  as  the  purblind  heathens  imagined;  no,  it  ia 
the  wise  God  that  hath  by  His  providence  fixed  me  in  this  orb.  We  stand  oft  in  onr 
own  light ;  if  we  should  sort  or  parcel  out  our  own  comforts,  we  should  hit  upon 
the  wrong.  Is  it  not  well  for  the  child  that  the  parent  doth  choose  for  it  ?  were 
it  left  to  itself,  it  would  perhaps  choose  a  knife  to  cut  its  own  finger.  A  man  in  • 
paroxysm  calls  for  wine,  which,  if  he  had  it,  were  little  better  than  poison  ;  it  ia 
well  for  the  patient  that  he  is  at  the  physician's  appointment.  God  sees,  in  His 
infinite  wisdom,  the  same  condition  is  not  convenient  for  all ;  that  which  is  good 
for  one  may  be  bad  for  another;  one  season  of  weather  will  not  serve  all  men's 
occasions — one  needs  sunshine,  another  rain ;  one  condition  of  life  will  not  fit 
every  man  no  more  than  one  suit  of  apparel  will  fit  everybody  ;  prosperity  is  not 
fit  for  all,  nor  yet  adversity.  VII.  Showing  bow  a  Chbistia^n  uat  mare  his 
ura  COMFOBTABLE.  It  shows  how  a  Christian  may  come  to  lead  a  comfortable 
life,  even  a  heaven  upon  earth,  be  the  times  what  they  will,  by  Christian  con- 
tentment. A  drop  or  two  of  vinegar  will  sour  a  whole  glass  of  wine.  Let  a  man 
have  the  affluence  and  confluence  of  worldly  comforts,  a  drop  or  two  of  discontent 
will  imbitter  and  poison  all.  Contentation  is  as  necessary  to  keep  the  life  comfort- 
able as  oil  is  necessary  to  keep  the  lamp  burning ;  the  clouds  of  discontent  do 
often  drop  the  showers  of  tears.  Why  dost  thou  complain  of  thy  troubles.  It  is 
not  trouble  that  troubles,  but  discontent ;  it  is  not  the  water  without  the  ship,  but 
the  water  that  gets  within  the  leak,  which  drowns  it ;  it  is  not  outward  affliction 
that  can  make  the  life  of  a  Christian  sad ;  a  contented  mind  would  sail  above 
these  waters,  but  when  there's  a  leak  of  discontent  open,  and  trouble  gets  into  the 
heart,  then  it  is  disquieted  and  sinks.  Do  therefore  as  the  mariners,  pump  the 
water  out  and  stop  the  spiritual  leak  in  thy  soul,  and  no  trouble  can  hurt  thee.  VIII. 
A  CHECK  TO  THE  DISCONTENTED  CHRISTIAN.  Every  man  is  complaining  that  his 
estate  is  no  better,  though  he  seldom  complains  that  his  heart  is  no  better.  How 
is  it  that  no  man  is  contented  ?  Very  few  Christians  have  learned  St.  Paul's 
lesson.  Neither  poor  nor  rich  know  how  to  be  content ;  they  can  learn  anything 
but  this,  1,  If  men  are  poor,  they  learn  to  be  envious  ;  they  malign  those  that 
are  above  them.  Another's  prosperity  is  an  eye-sore.  2.  If  men  are  rich,  they 
learn  to  be  covetous.  God  will  supply  our  wants,  but  must  He  satisfy  our  lusts 
too  ?  Many  are  discontented  for  a  very  trifle ;  another  hath  a  better  dress,  a 
richer  jewel,  a  newer  fashion,  Nero,  not  content  with  his  empire,  was  troubled 
that  the  musician  had  more  skill  in  playing  than  he,  IX,  A  suasive  to  content- 
MENT.  It  exhorts  us  to  labour  for  contentation  ;  this  is  that  which  doth  beiutify 
and  bespangle  a  Christian,  and  as  a  spiritual  embroidery  doth  set  him  off  in  the 
eyes  of  the  world.  God  is  pleased  sometimes  to  bring  His  children  very  low  and 
cut  them  short  in  their  estate ;  it  fares  with  them  as  with  that  widow  who  had 
nothing  in  her  house  "  save  a  pot  of  oil  " :  but  be  content.  1.  God  hath  taken 
away  your  estate,  but  not  your  portion.  Mary  hath  chosen  the  better  part, 
which  shall  not  be  taken  from  her,  2.  Perhaps,  if  thy  estate  had  not  been  lost, 
thy  soul  had  been  lost ;  outward  comforts  do  often  quench  inward  heat.  God  can 
bestow  a  jewel  upon  us,  but  we  fall  so  in  love  with  it,  that  we  forget  Him  that 
gave  it.  What  pity  is  it  that  we  should  commit  idolatry  with  the  creature  1  Be  con- 
tent. If  God  dam  up  our  outward  comforts,  it  is  that  the  stream  of  onr  love 
may  run  faster  another  way.  8,  If  your  estate  be  small,  yet  God  can  bless  a 
little.     It  is  not  bow  maoh  money  we  have,  bat  how  mach  blessing.     4.  You 


856  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  it. 

did  never  so  thrive  in  your  epiritnal  trade  ;  your  heart  was  never  so  low  as  sines 
your  condition  was  low  ;  you  were  never  so  poor  in  spirit,  never  bo  rich  in  faith. 
Yoa  did  never  ran  the  ways  of  God's  commandments  so  fast  as  since  some  of 
year  golden  weights  were  taken  off.  6.  Be  your  losses  what  they  will  in  this 
kind,  remember  in  every  loss  there  is  only  a  suffering,  but  in  every  discontent 
there  is  a  sin,  and  one  sin  is  worse  than  a  thousand  sufferings.  The  sixth 
apology  that  discontent  makes  is  disrespect  in  the  world.  I  have  not  that 
esteem  from  men  as  is  suitable  to  my  quality  and  grace.  And  doth  this  trouble  ? 
Consider — The  world  is  an  nnequal  judge  ;  as  it  is  full  of  change,  so  of  partiality. 
Discontent  arising  from  disrespect  savours  too  much  of  pride ;  an  humble 
Christian  hath  a  lower  opinion  of  himself  than  others  can  have  of  him.  The 
next  apology  is,  I  meet  with  very  great  sufferings  for  the  truth.  Your  sufferings 
are  not  so  great  as  your  sins.  Put  these  two  in  the  balance  and  see  which  weighs 
heaviest ;  where  sin  lies  heavy,  sufferings  lie  light.  The  next  apology  is  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked.  Well,  be  contented;  for  remember — 1.  These  are  not  the 
only  things,  nor  the  best  things  ;  they  are  mercies  without  the  pale.  2.  To  see 
the  wicked  flourish  is  matter  rather  of  pity  than  envy;  it  is  all  the  heaven 
they  must  have.  "  Woe  to  ye  that  are  rich,  for  ye  have  received  yoor  consola- 
tion." The  next  apology  that  discontent  makes  is  lowness  of  parts  and  gifts. 
I  cannot  (saith  the  Christian)  discourse  with  that  fluency,  nor  pray  with  that 
elegancy,  as  others.  Grace  is  beyond  gifts.  Thou  comparest  thy  grace  with 
another's  gifts,  there  is  a  vast  difference.  Grace  without  gifts  is  infinitely  better 
than  gifts  without  grace.  The  twelfth  apology  that  discontent  makes  for  itself  is 
this.  It  is  not  my  trouble  that  troubles  me,  but  it  is  my  sius  that  do  disquiet  and 
discontent  me.  Be  sure  it  be  so.  Do  not  prevaricate  with  God  and  thy  own  souL 
In  true  mourning  for  sin  when  the  present  suffering  is  removed,  yet  the  sorrow  is 
not  removed.  But  suppose  the  apology  be  real,  that  sin  is  the  ground  of  your 
discontent ;  yet,  I  answer,  a  man's  disquiet  about  sin  may  be  beyond  its  bounds  in 
these  three  cases.  1.  When  it  is  disheartening,  that  is,  when  it  sets  up  sin  above 
mercy.  2.  When  sorrow  is  indisposing  it  untunes  the  heart  for  prayer,  medita- 
tion, holy  conference;  it  cloisters  up  the  souL  This  is  not  sorrow,  but  rather 
suUenness,  and  doth  render  a  man  not  so  much  penitential  as  cynicaL  8.  When 
it  is  out  of  season.  I  see  no  reason  why  a  Christian  should  be  discontented, 
unless  for  his  discontent.  X.  Divikb  motives  to  contentmbnt.  The  first 
argument  to  oontentation.  1.  Consider  the  excellency  of  it.  Contentment  is  a 
flower  that  doth  not  grow  in  every  garden  ;  it  teacheth  a  man  how  in  the  midst  of 
want  to  abound.  Now  there  are  in  species  these  seven  rare  excellencies  in  con- 
tentment. (1)  A  contented  Christian  carries  heaven  about  him,  for  what  is  heaven 
but  that  sweet  repose  and  full  contentment  that  the  soul  shall  have  in  God  7  In 
contentment  there  is  the  firstfruits  of  heaven.  The  sails  of  a  mill  move  with  the 
wind,  but  the  mill  itself  stands  still,  an  emblem  of  contentment ;  when  our  out- 
ward estate  moves  with  the  wind  of  providence,  yet  the  heart  is  settled  through 
holy  contentment.  2.  Whatever  is  defective  in  the  creature  is  made  up  in  con- 
tentment. Wicked  men  are  often  disquieted  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  things ;  the 
contented  Christian  is  well  in  the  want  of  all  things.  He  is  poor  in  purse,  but 
rich  in  promise.  3.  Contentment  makes  a  man  in  tune  to  serve  God ;  it  oils  the 
wheels  of  the  soul  and  makes  it  more  agile  and  nimble ;  it  composeth  the  heart 
and  makes  it  fit  for  prayer,  meditation,  &o.  How  can  he  that  is  in  a  passion  of 
grief  or  discontent  "  attend  upon  the  Lord  without  distraction  f  "  Contentment 
doth  prepare  and  tune  the  heart.  4.  Contentment  is  the  spiritual  arch  or  pillar 
of  the  soul ;  it  fits  a  man  to  bear  burdens  ;  be  whose  heart  is  ready  to  sink  under 
the  least  sin,  by  virtue  of  this  hath  a  spirit  invincible  under  sufferings.  The 
contented  Christian  is  like  Samson  that  carried  away  the  gates  of  the  city  upon 
his  back.  He  ean  go  away  with  his  cross  cheerfully,  and  makes  nothing  of  it. 
5.  Contentment  prevents  many  sins  and  temptations.  It  prevents  many  sins. 
In  particular  there  are  two  sins  which  contentation  prevents.  (1)  Impatience. 
(2)  It  prevents  murmuring.  Contentment  prevents  many  temptations  ;  discontent 
is  a  devil  that  is  always  tempting.  It  puts  a  man  upon  indirect  means.  He  that 
is  poor  and  discontented  will  attempt  anything ;  he  will  go  to  the  devil  for  riches. 
Satan  takes  great  advantage  of  our  discontent ;  he  loves  to  fish  in  these  troubled 
waters.  6.  Contentment  sweetens  every  condition.  Hath  God  taken  away  my 
comforts  from  me  ?  It  is  well,  the  Comforter  still  abides.  Thus  contentment,  as 
s  honey-comb,  drops  sweetness  into  every  condition.  Contentation  is  full  of 
consolation.     ?•  Contentment  hath  this  excellency.    It  is  the  best  commentator 


CBAf.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  857 

npon  providence ;  it  makea  a  fair  interpretation  of  all  Ood'e  dealings.  The 
argument  to  oontentation  is,  Consider  the  evil  of  discontent.  Malcontent  hath  a 
mixture  of  grief  and  anger  in  it,  and  both  these  must  needs  raise  a  storm  in  the 
•oal.  Have  yon  not  seen  the  posture  of  a  sick  man  ?  Sometimes  he  will  sit  up 
on  his  bed,  by  and  by  he  will  lie  down,  and  when  he  is  down  he  is  not  quiet; 
first  he  turns  on  the  one  side  and  then  on  the  other ;  he  ia  restless.  This  is  just 
the  emblem  of  a  discontented  spirit.  Evil  1.  The  sordidness  of  it  is  worthy  of  a 
Christian.  (1)  It  is  unworthy  of  his  profession.  (2)  It  is  unworthy  of  the  relation 
we  stand  in  to  God.  Evil  2.  Consider  the  sinfuInesB  of  it,  which  appears  in 
three  things — the  causes,  the  concomitants,  the  consequences  of  it.  (1)  It  is 
sinful  in  tiie  causes,  such  as  pride.  The  second  cause  of  discontent  is  envy,  which 
Augustine  calls  the  sin  of  the  devil.  The  third  cause  is  covetousness.  This  is  a 
radical  sin.  The  fourth  cause  of  discontent  is  jealousy,  which  is  sometimes 
occasioned  through  melancholy  and  sometimes  misapprehension.  The  fifth 
cause  of  discontent  is  distrust,  which  is  a  great  degree  of  Atheism.  (2)  Discon- 
tent  is  joined  with  a  sullen  melaucholy.  Cheerfulness  credits  religion.  How  can 
the  discontented  person  be  cheerful  t  (3)  It  is  sinful  in  its  consequences,  which 
are  these,  (a)  It  makes  a  man  very  unlike  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  Spirit  of  God 
IB  a  meek  Spirit,  (b)  It  makes  a  man  like  the  devil ;  the  devil,  being  swelled 
with  the  poison  of  envy  and  malice,  is  never  content ;  just  so  is  the  malcontent. 
(e)  Discontent  disjoints  the  soul ;  it  untunes  the  heart  for  duty,  (d)  Discontent 
sometimes  unfits  for  the  very  use  of  reason.  Jonah,  in  a  passion  of  discontent, 
spake  no  better  than  blasphemy  and  nonsense  :  "  I  do  well  to  be  angry  even  unto 
death."  This  humour  doth  even  suspend  the  very  acts  of  reason,  (e)  Discontent 
does  not  only  disquiet  a  man's  self,  but  those  who  are  near  him.  This  evil  spirit 
troubles  families,  parishes,  &c.  Evil  3.  Consider  the  simplicity  of  it.  I  may 
say,  as  the  Psalmist,  *'  surely  they  are  disquieted  in  vain,"  which  appears  thus — 
(1)  Is  it  not  a  vain,  simple  thing  to  be  troubled  at  the  loss  of  that  which  is  in  its 
own  nature  perishing  and  changeable  t  (2)  Discontent  is  a  heart-breaking :  ••  by 
sorrow  of  the  heart  the  spirit  is  broken."  It  takes  away  the  comfort  of  life.  (3) 
Discontent  does  not  ease  as  of  our  burden,  but  it  makes  the  cross  heavier.  A 
eontented  spirit  goes  cheerfully  under  its  affliction.  (4)  Discontent  spins  out  our 
troubles  the  longer.  The  argument  to  oontentation  is  this.  Why  is  not  a  man  con- 
tent with  the  competency  which  he  hath  ?  Perhaps  if  he  had  more  he  would  be 
less  content.  The  world  is  such  that  the  more  we  have  the  more  we  crave ;  it 
cannot  fill  the  heart  of  man.  When  the  fire  burns,  how  do  you  quench  it  ?  Not 
by  putting  oil  on  the  flame,  or  laying  on  more  wood,  but  by  withdrawing  the  fuel. 
The  argument  to  contentation  is  the  shortness  of  life.  It  is  ''bat  a  vapour." 
The  argument  to  contentation  is.  Consider  seriously  the  nature  of  a  prosperous 
condition.  There  are  in  a  prosperous  estate  three  things.  1.  More  trouble.  2. 
In  a  prosperous  condition  there  is  more  danger.  8.  A  prosperous  condition  hath 
in  it  a  greater  reckoning ;  every  man  must  be  responsible  for  his  talents.  The 
argument  to  contentation  is  the  example  of  those  who  have  been  eminent  for  con- 
tentation. Examples  are  usually  more  forcible  than  precepts.  Abraham  being 
called  out  to  hot  service,  and  such  as  was  against  flesh  and  blood,  was  content. 
God  bid  him  offer  up  his  son  Isaac.  The  argument  to  oontentation  is  this.  To 
have  a  competency  and  to  want  contentment  is  a  great  judgment.  XI.  Thbeb 
THINGS  INSERTED  BT  WAT  OF  CAUTION.  In  the  next  place  I  come  to  lay  down  some 
necessary  cautions.  Though  I  say  a  man  should  be  content  in  every  estate,  yet 
there  are  three  estates  in  which  he  must  not  be  contented.  1.  He  must  not  be 
eontented  in  a  natural  estate ;  here  we  must  learn  not  to  be  content.  2.  Though, 
in  regard  to  externals,  a  man  should  be  in  every  estate  content,  yet  he  must  not 
be  content  in  such  a  condition  wherein  God  is  apparently  dishonoured.  3.  The 
third  caution  is,  though  iu  every  condition  we  must  be  content,  yet  we  are  not  to 
content  ourselves  with  a  little  grace.  Grace  is  tbe  best  blessing.  Though  we 
should  be  contented  with  a  competency  of  estate,  yet  not  with  a  competency  of 
grace.  XII.  Showing  how  a  Christian  may  know  whether  hb  hath  learned 
THIS  Divine  abt.  1.  A  contented  spirit  is  a  silent  spirit.  He  hath  not  one  word 
to  say  against  God  :  "  I  was  dumb  and  silent,  because  thou  didst  it,"  Content- 
ment silenceth  all  dispute :  "  He  sitteth  alone  and  keepeth  silence."  2.  A  con- 
tented spirit  is  a  cheerful  spirit.  The  Greeks  call  it  euthema.  Contentment  ia 
something  more  than  patience ;  for  patience  denotes  only  submission,  contentment 
denotes  cheerfulness.  3.  A  contented  spirit  is  a  thankful  spirit.  This  is  a  degree 
above  the  other ;  "  in  everything  giving  thanks."    4.  He  that  is  content  no  condi- 


858  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it; 

tion  eomes  amiss  to  him;  so  it  is  in  the  text,  "in  whatever  state  I  am."  He 
could  carry  a  greater  sail  or  lesser.  Thus  a  contented  Christian  knows  how  to  turn 
himself  to  any  condition.  5.  He  that  is  contented  with  his  condition,  to  rid  him- 
self out  of  trouble,  will  not  turn  himself  into  sin.  XIII.  Containing  a  Christian 
DiBECTOBT,  OB  RULES  ABOUT  CONTENTMENT.  And  here  I  shall  lay  down  some  rules 
for  holy  contentment.  Bule  1.  Advance  faith.  All  our  disquiets  do  issue 
immediately  from  unbelief.  It  is  this  that  raiseth  the  storm  of  discontent  in  the 
heart.  0  set  faith  a-work  I  How  doth  faith  work  contentment  ?  (1)  Faith  shows 
the  soul  that  whatever  its  trials  are,  yet  it  is  from  the  hand  of  a  father.  (2) 
Faith  sucks  the  honey  of  contentment  out  of  the  hive  of  promise.  Bule  2. 
Labour  for  assurance.  0  let  as  get  the  interest  cleared  between  God  and  our 
souls  1  Bule  3.  Get  an  humble  spirit.  The  humble  man  is  the  contented  man. 
If  his  estate  be  low,  his  heart  is  lower  than  his  estate,  therefore  be  content.  Bule 
4.  Keep  a  clear  conscience.  Contentment  is  the  manna  that  is  laid  up  in  the  ark 
of  a  good  conscience.  Bule  5.  Learn  to  deny  yourselves.  Look  well  to  your 
affections  ;  bridle  them  in.  (1)  Mortify  your  desires.  (2)  Moderate  your  delights. 
Set  not  your  heart  too  much  upon  any  creature.  What  we  over-love,  we  shall 
over-grieve.  Bule  6.  Get  much  of  heaven  into  your  heart.  Spiritual  things 
satisfy.  The  more  of  heaven  is  in  us,  the  less  earth  will  content  us.  Bule  7. 
Look  not  so  much  on  the  dark  side  of  your  condition  as  on  the  light.  Bule  8. 
Consider  in  what  a  posture  we  stand  here  in  the  world.  (1)  We  are  in  a  military 
condition ;  we  are  soldiers.  Now  a  soldier  is  content  with  anything.  (3)  We  are 
in  a  mendicant  condition;  we  are  beggars.  Bule  9.  Let  not  your  hope  depend 
upon  these  outward  things.  Bule  10.  Let  us  often  compare  our  condition.  Make 
this  five-fold  comparison.  (1)  Let  us  compare  our  condition  and  our  desert 
together.  (2)  Let  ua  compare  our  condition  with  others,  and  this  will  make  as 
content.  (3)  Let  us  compare  our  condition  with  Christ's  upon  earth.  (4)  Let  os 
compare  our  condition  with  what  it  was  once,  and  this  will  make  as  content. 
(5)  Let  as  compare  our  condition  with  what  it  shall  be  shortly.  Bule  11.  Get 
fancy  regulated.  It  is  the  fancy  which  raiseth  the  price  of  things  above  their  real 
worth.  Bule  12.  Consider  how  little  will  suffice  nature.  The  body  is  but  a  small 
continent,  and  is  easily  recruited.  Bule  13.  Believe  the  present  condition  is  best 
for  us.  Flesh  and  blood  is  not  a  competent  judge.  Bule  14.  Meditate  much  on 
the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed.  XIV.  Ot  consolation  to  thh  contented 
Christian.  To  a  contented  Christian  I  shall  say  for  a  farewell — God  is  exceedingly 
taken  with  such  a  frame  of  heart.  (T.  Watson.)  The  blessednest  of  content' 
tnent:— The  habit  of  looking  on  the  best  side  of  every  event  is  better  than 
£1,000   a    year.      {S.   Johnson,    LL.D.)  Sources    of  contentment: — Four  of 

ns  were  one  day  climbing  together  a  beautiful  hill  in  Switzerland,  and  when 
we  reached  a  bend  in  the  road,  we  stopped  to  rest,  and  to  enjoy  the  widespread 
prospect.  *'  How  charming  is  this  clear  fresh  air,  how  lovely  that  green 
valley,  and  how  graceful  is  that  silver  river  winding  all  along  1 "  But 
suddenly  regarding  my  companions  I  noticed  that  not  one  of  the  three  enjoyed 
the  view  at  all.  ''The  fact  is,"  said  the  first,  "I  have  had  no  pleasure  in 
my  walk;  I  have  a  thorn  in  my  foot."  And  so  is  our  passage  through  life 
hindered  in  enjoyment  by  one  troubling  sin,  a  conscience  ill  at  ease,  that 
makes  each  step  a  lame  one.  The  next  traveller  was  gazing,  it  is  true,  at  the 
prospect,  but  not  with  pure  enjoyment,  for  he  said :  "  How  I  wish  that  house 
down  there  were  mine  1  "  He,  too,  lost  the  true  delight  of  looking  at  fine  scenery, 
being  wholly  absorbed  in  the  wish  for  something  that  never  could  be  his.  As  for 
my  third  companion,  he  seemed  less  happy  even  than  the  others,  saying,  as  he 
looked  into  the  sky  with  a  face  of  anxious  foreboding :  "  I'm  afraid  it's  going  to 
rain."  Let  as  not  mar  the  prospects  of  happiness  by  a  halting  walk,  a  greedy 
wish,  or  by  undue  fear  of  that  evil  which  we  cannot  prevent.  {Sunday  at  Home.) 
Contentment  i»  rare : — Suppose  I  could  have  these  faces  gathered  and  brought  to 
me,  and  could  hold  them  thus,  and  should  ask,  "  Whose  image  and  superscription 
is  stamped  on  this  face?"  "Care  marked  this  face,"  would  be  the  (frequent) 
answer.  *•  Who  marked  this  one  r  "  ••  Fretfulness.'  ••And  this?"  "  Selfish- 
nessr"  "This?"  •' Suffering  stamped  this."  "Whatthis?"  "LustlLustl" 
••  And  this  ?  "  *'  Self-wUL"  •*  And  who  stamped  this  face  ?  "  I  should  ask  of  one 
— a  rare  and  sweet  one.  "  This  1  why,  where  did  you  get  it?  Whose  face  is  thisT 
How  beautiful  1  It  is  marked  by  the  sweet  peace  of  a  contented  spirit."  I  never 
Baw  more  than  a  dozen  of  these  in  my  life.  (ff.  W.  Beecher.)  Contentment: — A 
nunister  of  the  gospel,  passing  one  day  near  a  cottage,  was  attracted  to  its  door  by 


tmr.  IT,]  PHILIPPIANS,  855 

the  Bonnd  of  •  loud  and  eamest  voice.  It  was  a  bare  and  lonely  dwelling ;  the 
home  of  a  man  who  wai  childless,  old,  and  poor.  Drawing  near  this  mean  and 
bumble  cabin,  the  stranger  at  length  made  oat  these  words,  "  This,  and  Jesus 
Christ  too  !  this,  and  Jesus  Christ  too  I  "  as  they  were  repeated  over  and  over  in 
tones  of  deep  emotion ;  of  wonder,  gratitude,  and  praise.  His  cariosity  was  roused 
to  see  what  that  could  be  which  called  forth  such  fervent,  overflowing  thanks. 
Stealing  near,  he  looked  in  at  the  patched  and  broken  window ;  and  there  in  the 
form  of  a  grey,  bent,  worn-oat  son  of  toil,  at  a  rude  table,  with  hands  raised  to 
God,  and  his  eyes  fixed  on  some  crusts  of  bread  and  a  cup  of  water,  sat  piety, 
peace,  humility,  contentment,  exclaiming,  "Tliis,  and  Jesus  Christ  tool"  (T. 
OuthriCt  D.D.)  Contentment :  a  parable : — A  violet  shed  its  modest  beauties  at  tne 
turfy  foot  of  an  old  oak.  It  lived  there  many  days  during  the  kind  summer  in 
obscurity.  The  winds  and  the  rains  came  and  fell,  but  they  did  not  hurt  the 
violet.  Storms  often  crashed  among  the  boughs  of  the  oak.  And  one  day  said 
the  oak,  ••  Are  you  not  ashamed  of  yourself  when  you  look  np  at  me,  you  little 
thing  down  there,  when  you  see  how  large  I  am,  and  how  small  you  are ;  when 
yon  see  how  small  a  space  yoo  fill,  and  how  widely  my  branches  are  spread  ?  " 
♦•  No,"  said  the  violet,  '*  we  are  both  where  God  has  placed  as  ;  and  God  has  given 
cs  both  something.  He  has  given  to  you  strength,  to  me  sweetness  ;  and  I  offer 
Him  back  my  fragrance,  and  I  am  thankful."  •'  Sweetness  is  all  nonsense,"  said 
the  oak ;  **  a  few  days — a  month  at  most — where  and  what  will  yoa  be?  Yoa  will 
die,  and  the  place  of  yoar  grave  will  not  lift  the  ground  higher  by  a  blade  of  grass. 
I  hope  to  stand  some  time— ages,  perhaps— and  then,  when  I  am  out  down,  I  shall 
be  a  ship  to  bear  men  over  the  sea,  or  a  coffin  to  hold  the  dust  of  a  prince.  What 
is  your  lot  to  mine  t  "  *•  But,"  cheerfully  breathed  the  violet  back,  "  we  are  both 
what  God  made  us,  and  we  are  both  where  He  placed  us.  I  suppose  I  shall  die 
soon.  I  hope  to  die  fragrantly,  as  I  have  lived  fragrantly.  You  must  be  out  down 
at  last ;  it  does  not  matter,  that  I  see,  a  few  days  or  a  few  ages,  my  littleness  or 
your  largeness,  it  comes  to  the  same  thing  at  last.  We  are  what  God  made  as. 
We  are  where  God  placed  us.  God  gave  jou  strength  ;  God  gave  me  sweetness." 
{Paxton  Hood.)  Equanimity  reasonable  to  faith: — When  Archbishop  Leighton 
lost  his  patrimony  by  failure  of  a  merchant,  he  only  said  :  "  The  little  that  was  in 

Mr.  E 's  hands  hath  failed  me,  but  I  shall  either  have  no  need  of  it,  or  be 

supplied  in  some  other  way."  On  his  brother-in-law  expressing  surprise  that  he 
took  the  matter  so  easily,  he  answered :  "  If  when  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  after 
loosing  nineteen  times  as  much  of  yearly  income,  can  dance  and  sing,  the  solid 
hopes  of  Christianity  will  not  support  us,  we  had  better  be  in  another  world. 
{Sunday  at  Home.)  Making  the  best  of  circiimstancet : — Sydney  Smith,  when 
labouring  at  Foston-le-Clay,  in  Yorkshire,  though  he  did  not  feel  himself  to  be  in 
bis  proper  element,  went  cheerfully  to  work  in  the  determination  to  do  his  best. 
"  I  am  resolved,"  he  said,  "  to  like  it  and  reconcile  myself  to  it,  which  is  more 
manly  than  to  feign  myself  above  it,  and  to  send  ap  complaints  by  the  post  of  being 
thrown  away,  of  living  desolate,  and  such  like  trash."  So  Dr.  Hook,  when  leaving 
Leeds  for  Chichester,  said,  "  Wherever  I  may  be,  I  shall,  by  God's  blessing,  do 
with  all  my  might  what  my  hand  findeth  to  do,  and  if  I  do  not  find  work,  I  shall 
make  ii  "    (6'.  Smile$.) 

Ver.  12  I  know  both  how  to  be  abased,  and  I  know  how  to  abound. — The  Chris- 
tian— I.  Expects  vicissiTUDB.  XL  Knows  how  to  adapt  himself  fo  aia  circumstances. 
III.  Is  IKSTKUCTED  BY  THE  Spibit  OF  GoD.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  HovD  to  be  abased  : — Dur- 
ing the  periods  between  the  paroxysms  of  the  fever,  Cromwell  occupied  the  time  with 
listening  to  passages  from  the  sacred  volume,  or  by  a  resigned  or  despairing  refer- 
ence to  the  death  of  his  daughter.  *'  Read  to  me,"  he  said  to  his  wife,  in  one  of  these 
intervals,  '*  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians."  She  read  these  words  :  "  I  know  both 
bow  to  be  abased,  and  " — the  reader  paused.  "  That  verse,"  said  the  Protector, 
•*  once  saved  my  life  when  the  death  of  my  eldest  born,  the  infant  Oliver,  pierced 
my  heart  like  the  sharp  blade  of  a  poignard."  [Lamartine.)  The  knowledge  of 
properly  using  abundance  : — Paul  had  the  double  knowledge,  "  How  to  be  abased  " 
and  "  how  to  abound."  The  two  are  not  distinctly  separable — each  in  some  way 
conditions  the  other.  There  is  far  too  little  of  the  knowledge  how  to  abound.  Few 
men  who  abound  come  asking  how  to  abound.  Men  think  it  hard  enough  to  get 
rich,  but  a  very  easy  thing  to  be  rich.  No  man  has  a  right  to  be  anything  unless 
he  has  the  knowledge  of  how  to  be  that  thing.  When  Paul  says,  "  I  know  how  to 
abound,"  he  is  thinking  of  anything  which  makes  life  pleasant  and  ample — of  money. 


860  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ni, 

of  scholarsbip,  of  friendship,  of  great  spiritual  hopes  and  experiences.  Paul  did 
not  bave  all  these,  and  yet  he  had  the  knowledge  of  how  to  use  them.  The  power 
by  which  he  could  rob  abundance  of  its  dangers  was  the  knowledge  of  the  true 
perfection  of  a  soul  in  serving  Christ.  All  men  do  not  know  how  to  be  rich.  The 
generous,  sympathetic,  active,  kind,  rich  man  knows  how  to  be  rich.  What  is 
more  pitiable  than  the  blunderer  who  holds  wealth  and  knows  not  how  to  use  it? 
There  is  also  needed  a  knowledge  of  how  to  know  truth.  Here  Is  a  scholar  who 
can  give  you  any  information,  and  yet  you  feel  no  enrichment.  He  has  no  deep 
convictions,  no  faith.  He  has  grown  less  human.  He  values  his  knowledge  as  a 
botanist  his  specimens,  and  not  as  a  gardener  his  plants.  The  highest  knowledge 
comes  by  reverence  and  devotedness  to  God.  (Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)  The  diffi- 
culty of  managing  prosperity  : — Man  ton  says :  "A  garment  which  is  too  long  trails 
in  the  mire  and  soon  becomes  •  dirty  rag ;  and  it  is  easy  for  large  estates  to  become 
much  the  same.  It  is  a  haid  lesson  to  '  learn  to  abound  '  (Phil.  iv.  12).  We  say 
Bueh  a  one  would  do  well  to  be  a  lord  or  a  Jady  ;  but  it  is  a  harder  thing  than  we 
think  it  to  be."  It  is  hard  to  carry  a  full  cup  with  a  steady  hand.  High  places 
are  dizzy  places,  and  full  many  have  fallen  to  their  eternal  ruin  through  climbing 
aloft  without  having  grace  to  look  up.  The  simile  of  the  trailing  garment  used  by 
Manton    is  simple,  but  instructive.      (C.   H.   Spurgeon.)  1  am    instructed. 

Initiation  into  the  mysteries: — Formerly  rendered:  "I  bave  been  instructed,"  it  is 
given  in  the  Revised  Version,  "  I  have  been  taught  the  secret ;  "  while  Lightfoot 
BtiU  more  adequately  brings  out  the  meaning  :  "  I  have  been  initiated,  I  possess 
the  secret."  That  is  what  the  Greek  word  means.  And  here  we  have  one  of 
many  examples  where  a  word  of  strong  heathen  association  is  baptized  afresh,  and 
consecrated  to  signify  a  new  and  loftier  range  of  thoughts.  What  these  words 
meant  for  a  serious  and  good  man,  from  the  heathen  point  of  view,  was  that  he 
had  been  admitted  to  communicate  in  the  mysteries,  as  the  great  sacramental 
Berviees  of  Paganism  were  called.  He  had  taken  part  in  solemn  baptisms,  ex- 
pressing the  need  of  the  purification  of  the  soul.  He  had  listened  to  an  awful 
proclamation  from  an  ofiiciating  minister,  warning  off  all  murderers  and  all 
barbarians,  and,  in  later  times,  perhaps,  all  atheists,  and  Epicureans,  and  Chris- 
tians. For  these  secret  sacred  rites  were  intended  only  for  men  of  Greek  blood ; 
and  it  was  thought  neither  pleasing  to  the  gods  nor  good  for  the  State  thai 
strangers  should  intrude  upon  these  solemnities.  And  then,  in  these  ceremonies 
themselves,  he  had  been  made  to  pass  through  experiences  which  could  never  be 
forgotten  as  long  as  he  lived.  His  imagination  was  appealed  to  both  through  eye 
and  through  ear.  He  saw  the  representation  of  wanderings  through  the  darkness, 
as  amidst  some  maze ;  shapes  of  horror  were  revealed,  and  his  soul  was  filled  with 
trembling  and  terror.  He  was  made  to  pass  through  a  kind  of  mental  proof  or 
purgatory.  Then  all  was  changed.  There  was  a  sudden  illumination;  the  scenery 
of  beautiful  pastures  was  disclosed;  there  was  music,  and  dancing,  and  joy;  and 
he  walked  in  sweet  converse  with  the  pious  and  the  good.  At  the  crowning  point 
of  the  service  he  was  rapt  away  in  an  ecstasy  of  "  beholding,"  a  species  of  beatific 
vision.  He  seemed  to  see  the  meaning  of  life,  its  beginning  and  its  end;  he  beheld 
the  wicked  wallowing  in  filth  and  the  righteous  in  Paradise — a  blessed  climate, 
where  all  the  conditions  of  spiritual  and  physical  good  were  realized.  On  the 
whole,  these  sacramental  services  exerted  a  very  wholesome  effect  upon  the  oon- 
Bciences  of  the  people.  They  learned  to  meditate  on  death  and  eternity,  on  the 
need  of  the  soul  being  prepared  for  its  future,  on  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  and 
the  blessedness  of  the  just.  One  of  the  Athenian  orators,  in  boasting  to  his  fellow 
citizens  of  the  glories  of  their  native  land,  refers  to  the  great  mysteries  as  impart- 
ing "  good  hopes  for  eternity."  If  we  ask  the  question  how  it  was  that  these 
institutions  died  away  in  course  of  time,  the  simple  answer  seems  to  be  that,  in 
part,  they  were  overcome  by  the  superior  spirituality  and  energy  of  onr  own 
religion  ;  partly  that  they  had  themselves  waxed  corrupt,  and  had  become  sources 
of  corruption,  though  originally  good.  However,  the  rites  of  which  we  have  been 
speaking  went  on  for  a  long  time,  for  several  centuries  after  Paul.  When  this 
letter  was  read  in  the  Church  of  Philippi  many,  possibly  all,  of  the  Gentile  members 
were  initiated  persons.  And  when  this  solemn  word :  "  I  have  been  initiated," 
fell  upon  their  ear,  it  must  have  vibrated  in  all  its  power  through  their  imagina- 
tion. They  must  have  felt  that  their  beloved  teacher  was  giving  a  quite  new  turn 
to  the  word.  The  old  sacramental  and  pictorial  associations  had  vanished ;  and  in 
place  of  them  there  was  a  deep,  central,  spiritual  truth  spoken  of  as  the  secret  of 
PaoL    What  was  this  secret  ?     It  is  expressed  again  by  a  single  word,  "  content." 


CHAP.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  361 

(Prof.  E.  Johnton.)  The  secret  of  contentment: — It  was  the  beautiful  expression 
of  a  Christian,  who  had  been  rich,  when  he  was  asked  how  he  oould  bear 
his  reduced  state  so  happily,  "  When  I  was  rich,  I  had  God  in  everything, 
and  now  I  am  poor  I  have  everything  in  God."  The  value  of  contentment : — 
Contentment  is  the  best  food  to  preserve  a  sound  man,  and  the  best  medicina 
to  restore  a  sick  man.  It  resembles  the  gilt  on  nauseous  pills,  which  makes  a 
man  take  them  without  tasting  their  bitterness.  Contentment  will  make  a 
eottage  look  as  fair  as  a  palace.  He  is  not  a  poor  man  that  bath  but  little,  but 
he  is  a  poor  man  that  wants  much.  {William  Seeker.)  The  secret  explained: — 
Making  a  day's  excursion  from  Botzen,  in  the  Tyrol,  we  went  along  the  very 
narrowest  of  roads,  mere  alleys,  to  which  our  country  lanes  would  be  turnpike 
roads.  "Well,  you  may  be  sure  that  we  did  not  engage  an  ordinary  broad  carriage, 
for  that  would  have  found  the  passage  as  difficult  as  the  needle's  eye  to  the  camel ; 
but  our  landlord  had  a  very  narrow  chaise  for  us — just  the  very  thing  for  threading 
those  four-feet  passages.  Now,  I  must  make  you  hear  the  moral  of  it,  you  fretful 
little  gentlemen.  When  you  have  a  small  estate,  you  must  have  small  wants,  and 
by  contentment  suit  your  carriage  to  your  road.  "  Not  bo  easy,"  say  you  ?  '*  Very 
necessary  to  a  Christian,"  say  I.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  13.  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which  Btrengtheneth  me. — Here  wa 
find — I.  Weakness  and  strength.  The  believer  ia  weak  in  himself.  Looking  to 
the  •'  all  things  "  to  be  done  he  laments  this  with  shame  and  tears.  But  he  is  not 
alone.  Allied  to  Christ  he  is  strong  to  overcome  evil  and  to  do  good.  He  has 
courage  and  hope.  Nothing  in  the  way  of  duty  is  impossible  (2  Cor.  xii.  8-10). 
II.  Dependence  and  fbeedom.  Dependence  is  the  law  of  our  being.  Of  the 
natural  life  it  is  said,  "  In  God  .we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being  ;  "  how 
much  more  is  this  true  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  yet  we  are  free.  Of  our  own  choice 
we  trust  in  Christ ;  of  our  own  will,  every  moment  we  abide  in  Him.  "  I  can  " 
implies  the  personal  life,  reason,  conscience,  will,  and  endeavour.  IIL  Hcmilitt 
AND  aspiration.  Paul  was  remarkable  for  humility ;  it  grew  with  him.  But  ha 
was  not  discouraged.  Fired  with  the  noblest  ambition,  his  inspiration  was  from 
above.  So  with  all  Christians,  In  spite  of  conscious  weakness,  opposition,  and 
failure,  "  through  Christ "  they  take  heart  to  persevere.  ♦'  My  soul  cleaveth  to 
the  dust:  quicken  thou  me  according  to  Thy  Word."  IV.  Sdppebino  and  con- 
tentment. Paul's  life  was  marked  by  vicissitudes  and  trouble ;  he  was  now  in 
prison.  But  what  then  ?  His  soul  was  free  ;  there  was  peace  within,  Christ  waa 
with  him.  As  a  scholar  under  the  great  Master  he  had  learned  many  things, 
and  among  others  the  Divine  secret  of  content  (ver,  11),  So  with  Christians. 
Their  satisfaction  is  not  from  without  but  from  within  ;  not  from  the  lower  and 
perishable  things  of  the  world,  but  from  the  immortal  affection  of  their  Saviour 
and  God.  Learn — 1.  The  greatness  of  Christ  as  suggested  by  the  place  given 
Him  by  such  a  man  as  Paul.  Consider  his  zeal,  labours,  achievements,  and  yet 
he  ascribes  the  praise  of  all  to  Christ.  But  Paul  was  only  one  of  many.  2. 
The  grandeur  of  the  Christian  life.  There  is  no  limit  to  its  possibilities.  What 
has  been  done  is  only  an  earnest  of  what  wllThe  done.  Take  courage.  "  Through 
Christ,"  His  blood,  Word,  Spirit,  resurrection,  &c.,  all  things  are  possible.  What 
inspiration  here  for  prayer  and  holy  endeavour  (Eph.  iii.  20-21).  3.  The  certain 
triumph  of  Christianity.  Strengthened  by  Him,  His  people  shall  never  cease  to 
pray  and  strive,  till  all  the  kingdoms  of  this  worid  have  become  the  kingdom  of 
our  God  and  of  His  Christ.      (IF.  Forsyth.)  All-sufficiency   magnified .-—Tha 

former  part  of  the  sentence  would  be  a  piece  of  impudent  daring  without  the 
latter.  There  have  been  men  who,  puffed  up  with  vanity,  have  said,  "  I  can  do  all 
things."  Their  destruction  has  been  sure— Nebuchadnezzar,  Xerxes,  Napoleon.  And 
what  shall  we  say  to  our  apostle,  weak  in  presence  and  contemptible  in  speech,  the 
leader  of  a  hated  and  persecuted  sect.  Has  Gamaliel  taught  him  an  eloquence 
that  can  baffle  all  opposers  ?  Have  his  sufferings  given  him  so  stern  a  courage  that 
he  is  not  to  be  turned  away?  Is  it  on  himself  he  relies?  No;  he  turns  hTs  face 
towards  his  Saviour  and  with  devout  reverence  but  dauntless  courage,  "  Through 
Christ,"  <feo.  I.  The  measure  of  the  text.  It  is  exceeding  broad.  Paul  meant 
that  he  was  able— 1.  To  endure  all  trials.  2.  To  perform  all  duties.  8.  To 
conquer  all  corruptions.  He  once  said,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am,*^&o.  But 
he  did  not  stay  there,  "  Thanks  be  unto  God  that  giveth  us  the  victory."  Have  you 
a  violent  temper  ?  Through  Christ  you  can  curb  it.  Are  you  timid?  Christ  can 
give  you  a  lion's  boldness.    Are  yon  slothful?    Christ  can  make  yon  energetic. 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it. 

Are  yon  incapable  for  strong  effort  f  Christ  can  increase  your  capacity.  Are  you 
inconstant  ?  Christ  can  settle  you.  There  is  not  a  Hittite  or  Jebusite  in  the  whole 
land  that  cannot  be  cast  out.  4.  To  serve  God  in  any  state  (ver.  12).  Soma 
Christians  are  called  to  undergo  extreme  changes  from  wealth  to  poverty,  and  from 
poverty  to  wealth,  and,  alas,  there  is  often  a  corresponding  spiritual  change  ;  the  one 
desponds,  the  other  is  elated  or  becomes  avaricious.  This  need  not  be.  When  you 
gave  yourself  to  Christ  you  gave  yourself  wholly  to  serve  Him  in  everything  and 
anywhere.  6.  You  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  in  respect  to  aU  worlds.  In 
this  world  you  can  enlighten  and  uplift  it.  You  may  pass  through  the  dark  gate  of 
death  with  Christ  without  fear  into  the  world  of  spirits,  and  there  you  are  more 
than  conqueror.  II.  The  manner,  or  it.  None  of  us  can  explain  this ;  but  we  may 
see  how  the  acts  of't.lie  Spirit  for  Christ  tend  to  strengthen  the  soul  for  all  things. 

1.  By  strengthening  our  faith.  It  is  remarkable  how  timid  and  doubting  Christiana 
have  in  time  of  trial  behaved  most  bravely.  God  gives  faith  equal  to  the  emer- 
gency. Weak  faith  can  sprout  and  grow  till  it  becomes  great  under  the  pressure  of 
«  great  trial.  Nothing  braces  a  man's  nerves  like  the  cold  winter's  blast.  To- 
gether with  faith  often  comes  a  singular  firmness  of  mind.  When  John  Ardley  was 
brought  before  Bonner  the  latter  said,  "  The  fire  will  convert  you ;  faggots  are 
sharp  preachers."  Said  Ardley,  "I  am  not  afraid  to  try  it;  and  I  tell  thee,  Bishop, 
if  I  had  as  many  lives  as  I  have  hairs  on  my  head,  I  would  give  them  all  up  sooner 
than  I  would  give  up  Christ."  And  then  Christians  are  often  enabled  to  autieipate 
the  joys  of  heaven  when  their  pangs  are  greatest.  Look  at  old  Ignatius  with  his 
arm  in  the  lion's  mouth,  exclaiming,  "  Now  I  begin  to  be  a  Christian."  2.  By 
quickening  the  mental  faculties.  It  is  astonishing  how  poor  illiterate  persons  have 
been  able  to  refute  their  clever  opponents.  Cranmer  and  Bidley  were  no  match  for 
Jane  Bouchier  the  Baptist  martyr.  "  I  am  as  true  a  servant  of  God  as  any  of  you  ; 
and  if  you  put  your  poor  sister  to  death,  take  care  lest  God  should  let  loose  the 
wolf  of  Eome  on  you,  and  you  have  to  suffer  for  G&d,  too."  3.  By  enabling  the 
believer  to  overcojne  himself.  He  can  lose  all  things,  because  he  is  already  pre- 
pare^^b"?6  it ;  he  can  suffer  all  things,  because  he  does  not  value  his  body  as  the 
worldling  does ;  he  can  brave  all  things,  because  he  has  learned  to  fear  God,  and 
therefore  has  no  reason  to  fear  man  ;  he  can  perform  wonders,  because  his  body 
and  spirit  are  disciplined.  4.^ote  the  present  tense.  Not  Christ  has  strengthened, 
did  strengthen  at  conversion,  "As  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  IH,^^hb 
jiESSAQE  o»  IT.  1.  One  of  encouragement  to  those  who  are  doing  something  for 
Ciirist,  but  feel  painfully  their  own  inability.  Cease  not  from  God's  work,  because 
yoo  are  unable  to  perform  it  of  yourself.  Cease  from  yourself,  from  man.  Before 
Zernbbabel  the  mountain  shall  become  a  plain.  If  we  believed  great  things  we 
shonld  do  great  things.  Do  not  go  through  the  world  saying,  "  I  was  born  little.** 
Yon  were  not  meant  to  be  little.    Act  as  David  did  in  spite  of  his  brothers'  sneers. 

2.  Take  heed  that  you  do  it  in  Christ's  strength.  You  can  do  nothing  without  that. 
Go  not  forth  till  thou  hast  first  prayed.  The  battle  that  begins  with  holy  reliance 
on  God  means  victory.  3.  Paul  speaks  in  the  name  of  aU  Christians.  How  is  it 
that  some  of  yon  then  are  doing  nothing  ?  What  a  work  there  is  to  do  1  And  what 
may  not  one  resolute  Christian  accomplish.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  power  of  the 
Christian : — I.  Thebe  abe  two  main  eerors  by  which  men  are  deceivbd.  The  first 
is  the  fancy  that  they  can  do  all  things  that  they  wish  and  try  to  do  of  themsgjLves. 
The  second  is  that  they  cannot  and  need  not  do  anything.  These  have  been  the 
sources  of  two  of  the  most  mischievous  heresies,  the  one  undermining  all  spiritual, 
the  other  all  practical  religion  ;  the  first  is  Pelagianism,  the  other  Antinomianism. 
II.  The  end  of  these  errors  is  to  keep  men  in  bin.  Pride  says  it  will  pay  off  the 
debt  it  owes  to  God  when  it  has  grown  bigger.  "  Why  should  I  do  that  to-day," 
it  cries,  •'  which  I  can  do  any  day  whenever  I  please  ?"  Meanwhile  sloth  alleges 
that  it  is  a  bankrupt  and  demands  as  such  to  be  let  off  all  manner  of  payment,  for- 
getting that  a  negligent  and  fraudulent  bankrupt  has  no  claim  to  favour.  Pride 
says  it  can  obey  God  and  does  not.    Sloth  says  it  cannot  and  need  not.     III.  Thesh 

ERRORS,  tRBECONOIIiABLB    THOUGH    THET  MAY    SEEM,  ABB    OFTEN    FOUND    BIDE    BY    SIDE. 

They  are  Satan's  right  and  left  hand  in  which  he  tosses  our  souls  from  one  to  the 
other.  The  proud  man,  although  he  makes  himself  believe  that  he  can  obey  God  by 
himself,  must  be  often  warned  by  his  conscience  that  he  has  not  done  so.  At  such 
times  he  will  try  to  stifle  his  qualms  by  saying  that  he  has  done  his  best,  and  that 
Christ's  merits  will  be  suificient  to  make  up.  The  slothful  man,  too,  who  has 
drugged  his  conscience  with  the  notion  that  as  his  best  works  cannot  earn  heaven, 
mo  it  matters  not  what  his  works  are,  must  be  startled  now  and  then  by  scriptural 


OTAP.  IT. J  PIIILIPPIANS.  86a 

•xhortations  to  holiness  ;  bnt  when  so  startled  he  whispers  to  himself  that  let  tho 
worst  come  lo  the  worst  he  will  reform  by  and  by.  IV.  Both  these  errors  abb 
ANSWERED  BY  THE  TEXT,  which  picks  out  the  truth  involved  in  each  and  separates  it 
from  the  false.  When  an  error  is  long-lived  it  is  by  means  of  some  truth  mixed  up 
with  it.  1.  As  the  pride  of  man  says,  "  I  can  do  all  things,"  so  does  Paul ;  only  pride 
stops  short  here,  whereas  Paul  adds,  •'  through  Christ,"  <feo.  Pride  forgets  the  Fall, 
and  also  that  what  it  calls  its  own  strength  is  really  God's  gift.  2.  The  sluggard 
is  also  bereft  of  his  only  excuse.  God  never  demrinds  of  us  what  we  cannot  do  ; 
and  Paul  tells  us  that  there  is  no  limit  to  our  power  ;  he  poor,  weak,  frail  as  he  was, 
could  do  all  things  when  strengthened  by  Christ.  V.  What  doks  Paul  mean  bt 
THIS.  1.  Certainly  not  in  the  same  sense  that  God  can  do  all  things — make  a 
world,  arrest  the  sun,  Ac. ;  but — 2.  In  accordance  with  the  previous  verse.  These 
things,  however,  seem  to  some  hardly  sufficient  to  bear  the  lofty  declaration  of  the 
text,  and  would  rather  have  expected  to  hear  of  some  great  victory  gained  or  miracle 
wrought.  Yet  it  is  in  these  things  tliat  our  hardest  trials  lie,  for  they  are  the  things 
that  the  natural  man  cannot  do  of  himself.  He  may  brave  dangers  and  accomplish 
many  wonderful  works,  but  he  does  not  know  how  to  be  abased  and  how  to  abound. 
A  cup  knows  how  to  be  full  and  how  to  be  empty,  and  stands  equally  straight  in  either 
case.  But  man's  hand  cannot  lift  the  full  cup  and  will  not  lift  the  empty  one.  It 
ie  only  through  Christ  that  whether  the  Lord  giveth  or  taketh  away  we  can  say, 
"  Blessed  be  His  name."  8.  The  true  children  of  God  can  do  all  things  that  they 
can  ever  desire  to  do,  viz.,  the  will  of  God.  (Archd/'acon  Hare.)  Strength  by 
Christ ;— The  more  literal  rendering  is  "  I  am  strong  for  all  things  ";  or,  "  I  am 
equal  to  all  things,  Christ  invigorating  me,"  either  doing  or  suffering.  Let  ub  look 
at — I.  Christ  strenothknino  Pauu  1.  Everyman  needs  strength.  Weakness  ia 
so  much  less  of  life.  Lack  of  strength  is  Tfiore"senom9  thari  any  Tack  of  outward 
possession.  A  weak  rich  man  is  in  a  worse  position  than  a  strong  poor  man. 
Weakness  lessens  work,  reduces  enjoyment,  and  aggravates  suffering.  It  is  also 
the  cause  of  wickedness,  exposing  the  individual  to  fierce  temptation.  As  a  pre- 
servative against  sin  we  need  to  ask  for  daily  strength.  2.  Every  man  requires 
strengthening.  Even  the  strong  by  constitution  and  education.  The  child  learning 
to  walk  alone  is  strengthened  by  the  hand  of  the  mother,  and  the  aged  mother  is  in 
return  strengthened  by  the  arm  of  her  son.  The  boy  is  strengthened  to  leam  by 
his  tutor  or  employer,  and  the  man  to  pursue  the  objects  of  life  by  various  invigora- 
ting influences ;  while  all  are  strengthened  by  God.  3.  The  Christian  is  no  excep- 
tion. His  conversion  is  not  translation  to  ease.  There  are  times  when  he  liea 
down  in  green  pastures ;  but  he  lies  down  tired,  and  that  he  may  rise  stronger. 
We  rest  not  for  resting's  sake  but  for  work's  sake.  The  Christian  life  is  a  race  to  be 
ran  and  a  battle  to  be  fought.  To  cease  either  is  to  cease  to  be  a  Christian.  4.  A 
Christian's  strength  can  come  only  by  his  being  strengthened.  There  is  not  within 
the  man  as  a  man  or  a  Christian  any  stock  of  strength  given  at  the  commencement. 
Our  resources  are  supplied  as  we  need  them.  This  arrangement  keeps  as  close  to 
the  source  of  all  energy  and  wisdom,  communion  with  whom  alone,  apart  from  im- 
parted blessings,  invigorates.  5.  An  apostle  is  no  exception  to  this  rule.  On  the 
battle-field  the  eye  of  the  soldier  is  upon  the  officers  of  the  opposing  army.  So 
ministers  are  more  tried  than  others,  partly  because  of  their  vocation,  and  partly 
that  they  may  have  wisdom  and  grace  to  succour  the  tempted.  6.  And  Christ  did 
etrengthen  Paul.    By  His  example,  grace,  promises,  doctrines,  precepts*     IL  PauIi 

HEREBY  ASSURED   THAT  ALL   THINGS  WERE    POSSIBLE  TO   HIM.      He  felt  equal  tO  laboUT, 

suffering,  and  dying.  Tet  this  was  not  undue  self-confidence,  but  humility.  1,  If 
we  Christians  are  not  equal  to  all  the  demands  which  God  makes  upon  bs  our  in- 
ability involves  guilt.  Weakness  is  not  a  misfortune  but  a  crime,  needing  not  pity 
but  blame.  Christ  does  not  require  anything  impossible  or  injuriously  difficult, 
nothing  for  which  He  does  not  guarantee  strength.  2.  The  Divine  help  is  mani- 
fold and  constant.  Look  at  the  assistance  obtained  from— (1)  The  Scriptures,  which 
thoroughly  furnish  us  unto  all  good  works.  (2)  Providence,  underwhich  all  thingswork 
together  for  our  good.  (3)  Christian  principle — faith,  love,  hope,  joy,  obedience. 
3.  If  we  turn  from  this  various  help  to  Christ  personally  and  then  remember  that 
He  is  with  us,  immutable  in  His  love,  unfailing  in  His  resources,  unwearied  in  Hia 
oversight,  we  can  understand  what  Paul  meant.  (1)  I  cannot  do  many  things  which 
my  fellow  Christians  say  is  my  duty  ;  (2)  Nor  what  in  my  ignorance  I  conclude  to 
be  my  dutv  ;  (8)  Nor  what  is  actually  my  duty,  if  I  go  about  it  in  a  wrong  spirit  or 
way ;  (4)  But  Christ  will  strengthen  us  for  all  His  will.  What  can  hinder?  Not 
oar  ignorance,  for  He  is  our  teacher ;  not  our  feebleness,  for  He  never  breaks  th« 


864  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  if. 

bruised  reed  ;  not  our  sinfulness,  for  He  is  our  Saviour.  4.  This  assurance  covert 
all  the  necessities  of  our  Christian  life — perseverance,  cross-bearing  and  self-crnci- 
fixiou,  Christian  work,  the  prospect  and  exj)erience  of  death.  (S.  Martin.)  The 
fountain  of  strength  : — We  all  need  strength.  Whether  conscious  or  unconscioua 
of  it,  we  are  all  weak.  Our  very  strength  is  weakness.  We  may  trust  it  and  be 
deceived  by  it.  This  is  a  defect  we  cannot  supply.  The  exertion  of  weakness  can- 
not produce  strength.  V/e  must  look  out  of  ourselves  ;  and  to  save  us  from  a  vain 
search  God  sets  Christ  before  us  as  our  strength  and  strengthener.  I,  How  Chbist 
STRENGTHENS  US.  1.  Not  by  miracle  or  magic  ;  not  by  acting  upon  us  without  our 
knowledge  or  against  our  will,  but  through  our  own  intelligent  and  active,  powers, 
2.  By  instructing  us  in  the  knowledge  of  our  weakness  and  His  own  strength.  3. 
By  His  example,  showing  us  how  to  do  all  that  He  requires  in  His  own  life.  4.  By 
supplying  us  with  the  great  motive  power — His  constraining  love.  5.  By  working 
faith  in  us,  which  brings  us  into  vital  union  with  Him  who  is  the  source  of  strength. 
II.  Fob  what  He  steengthens  cs.  1.  To  fulfil  the  law  as  a  rule  of  duty.  2.  To 
resist  temptation.  3.  To  suffer  and  endure.  (J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Dependence 
on  Christ : — (Text  in  conjunction  with  John  xv.  6.)  Two  speakers.  Divine-human 
and  human.  From  how  different  a  platform  do  they  speak ;  one  from  conscious 
power  to  help,  the  other  from  conscious  need  of  help.  One  a  great  Giver,  the  other 
a  great  receiver.  A  fine  harmony  in  the  two  statements.  Though  Paul's  is  not 
quite  so  universal  as  Christ's,  it  forms  a  pleasing  testimony  to  the  correctness  of 
Christ's  statement,  and  the  usefulness  of  the  promised  aid.  I.  The  DrviNE  assertion, 
God  in  Christ  speaks.  1.  It  applies  to  man's  spiritual  life.  2.  To  His  every-day 
purpose  and  action.  "  Good  "  is  understood.  There  are  some  things  we  can  do  with- 
out Christ — and  yet  considering  Him  as  God  we  cannot  even  do  evil  without  the 
strength  He  supplies.  Similarly,  in  a  high  spiritual  sense,  we  can  do  nothing  good 
without  Him.  We  may  feel  our  dignity  affronted,  and  our  first  impulse  will  be 
denial  of,  or  objection  to  the  universality  of  the  statement.  But  our  life  will  prove 
that  Christ  is  right.  In  every  part  of  our  life  we  have  Christ's  influence.  The 
Christian  becomes  "a  law  unto  himself,"  but  behind  the  Christian  and  the  law  ia 
the  great  Inspirer — Christ.  Christ  is  the  only  one  who  can  make  this  sweeping 
assertion  without  fear  of  ultimate  contradiction.  II.  The  human  coNriRMATios. 
Paul  gives  particular  instances,  then  generalizes.  How  does  Christ  strengthen  usf 
1.  By  His  having  done  all  things  Himself.  In  all  life's  experiences,  conflicts, 
emergencies,  Christ  has  preceded  us.  We  have  to  walk  in  His  steps.  2.  By  the 
effects  of  His  woudrous  life.  We  linger  around  the  four  great  landmarks,  Bethle- 
hem, Nazareth,  Gethsemane,  Calvary,  and  they  are  a  ceaseless  inspiration  to  ns.  His 
miracles  have  made  many  a  life-path  brighter,  and  they  yield  constant  consolation. 
He  healed  the  sick  ;  sickness  can  be  better  borne.  He  hushed  the  waves ;  He  stills 
the  storm  to-day.  3.  By  the  effect  of  His  unique  teaching.  Every  word  of  His  is 
the  bread  of  life.  4.  By  His  Cross  and  death.  He  is  the  Saviour  from  the  curse  ol 
life — sin.  Thus  we  hear  Paul,  "  I  can  do  aU  things,"  not  by  his  immediate 
environment,  men,  or  things ;  not  by  his  inherent  energy ;  but  by  Christ  which 
"  strengtheneth  him  with  strength  in  his  soul  "  (Psa.  cxxxviii.  3).  Our  strength 
is  not  superseded.  It  is  linked  with  God's  and  made  the  grander  for  the  union. 
It  is  "  all  things,"  even  the  otherwise  impossible.  It  applies  to  the  whole  life. 
"Without  me — nothing."  Our  p.wer  "  through  Christ  which  strengthens  us"  is 
limitless.  So  should  our  gratitude  be.  {J.  E.  Swallow.)  Strength  through 
Christ : — When  I  was  at  Princeton,  Professor  Henry  had  so  constructed  a  huge  bar 
of  iron,  bent  into  the  form  of  a  horseshoe,  that  it  used  to  hang  suspended  from 
another  iron  bar  above  it.  Not  only  did  it  hang  there  but  it  upheld  four  thousand 
pounds  weight  attached  to  it  I  The  horseshoe  magnet  was  not  welded  or  glued  to 
the  metal  above  it,  but  through  the  iron  wire  coiled  round  it  there  ran  a  subtle 
current  of  electricity  from  a  galvanic  battery.  Stop  the  flow  of  the  current  for  one 
instant  and  the  huge  horseshoe  dropped.  So  does  all  the  lifting  power  of  the 
Christian  come  from  the  currents  of  spiritual  influence  which  flow  into  his  heart 
h-om  the  living  Jesus.  The  strength  of  the  Almighty  One  enters  into  the  behever. 
If  his  connection  with  Christ  is  cut  off,  in  an  instant  he  becomes  as  any  other  man. 
(r.  L.  Ciiyler,  D.D.)  The  secret  of  fortitude :— In  the  days  of  bloody  Mary  a 
poor  Protestant  was  condemned  to  be  burned  alive.  When  he  came  in  sight  of  the 
stake  he  exclaimed,  "  Oh  1  I  cannot  burn  1  I  cannot  burn  1 "  Those  who  heard 
him  supposed  he  intended  to  recant,  but  they  misunderstood  him.  He  felt  he 
needed  more  strength  to  bear  the  dread  ordeal  in  a  worthy  manner,  so  being  left  a 
few  moments  to  himself,  he  cried  in  an  agony  of  prayer  that  God  would  mor« 


CHA».    ▼.]  PHILIPPIANS,  861 

sensibly  reveal  Himself  to  him.  As  the  resalt  of  this,  instead  of  recanting,  he  cried 
out  triumphantly,  "  Now  I  can  burn  1  Now  I  can  burn  1  '*  {J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.) 
Strength  in  Christ: — "I  was  requested,"  said  the  late  Dr.  Maoleod,  "by  a  brother 
minister,  who  was  unwell,  to  go  and  visit  a  dying  boy.  He  told  me  before  soma 
remarkable  things  of  this  boy.  He  was  eleven  years  of  age,  and  during  three  years* 
sickness  had  manifested  the  most  patient  submission  to  the  will  of  God,  with  a 
singular  enlightenment  of  the  Spirit.  I  went  to  visit  him.  He  had  suffered  the 
most  excruciating  pain.  For  years  he  had  not  known  one  day's  rest.  I  gazed  with 
wonder  at  the  boy.  After  drawing  near  to  him,  and  speaking  some  words  of  sym- 
pathy, he  looked  at  me  with  his  blue  eyes — he  could  not  move,  it  was  the  night 
before  he  died — and  breathed  into  my  ear  these  few  words :  *  I  am  strong  in  Him.' 
The  words  were  few,  and  uttered  feebly;  they  were  the  words  of  a  feeble  child,  in  a 
poor  home,  where  the  only  ornament  was  that  of  a  meek,  and  quiet,  and  affectionata 
mother ;  but  these  words  seemed  to  lift  the  burden  from  the  very  hi-art ;  they  seemed 
to  make  the  world  more  beautiful  than  ever  it  was  before  ;  they  brought  home  to 
my  heart  a  great  and  a  blessed  truth.  May  all  of  us  be  strong  in  Hira."  Coiirageotu 
Christians  needed : — No  man  is  likely  to  accomplish  much  who  moodily  indulges  a 
desponding  view  of  his  own  capacities.  By  God's  help  the  weakest  of  us  may  be 
strong,  and  it  is  the  way  to  become  so,  to  resolve  never  to  give  up  a  good  work  till 
we  have  tried  our  best  to  achieve  it.  To  think  nothing  impossible  is  the  privilege 
of  faith.  We  deprecate  the  indolent  cowardice  of  the  man  who  always  felt  assured 
that  every  new  enterprise  would  be  too  much  for  him,  and  therefore  declined  it ; 
but  we  admire  the  pluck  of  the  ploughman  who  was  asked  on  his  cross-examination 
if  he  could  read  Greek,  and  replied  he  did  not  know,  because  he  had  never  tried. 
Those  Suffolk  horses  which  will  pull  at  a  post  till  they  drop  are  worth  a  thousand 
times  as  much  as  jibbing  animals  that  run  back  as  soon  as  ever  the  collar  begins  to 
press  them.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  hidden  source  of  power : — A  minister  says : 
**  The  other  day  I  was  up  in  Lancashire,  and  my  host  took  me  to  see  one  of  those 
monster  factories  which  are  the  wonders  of  civilization,  covering  acres  of  ground- 
nobody  knows  how  many  stories  high,  and  how  many  hundreds  of  windows  they 
have  to  let  in  the  light  upon  the  industrious  work-people  inside.  As  I  walked  in 
and  through  those  rooms,  and  went  from  one  story  to  another,  and  saw  the  rolling 
of  the  pinions  and  heard  the  rattling  of  the  wheels,  and  felt  the  vibration  of  the 
floor  beneath  my  feet,  while  the  raw  material  was  being,  as  by  magic,  brought  out 
ftt  the  other  end  to  be  a  robe  for  a  peasant  or  a  prince,  I  said,  '  Why,  where  in  the 
world  is  the  motive-power  that  sets  all  this  to  work  ? '  He  took  me  out  of  the 
building  altogether,  to  a  little  circumscribed  place  beneath,  where  there  was  only 
one  door  and  a  window  to  the  whole  room  ;  but  through  the  open  door  I  saw  the 
great  piston  moving  in  silent  and  majestic  power  as  it  was  doing  this  wondroug 
work.  'There,'  said  he,  'is  the  mighty  force  that  sets  the  work  in  motion.*" 
Power  through  the  Spirit  of  Christ: — A  young  Italian  boy  knocked  one  day  at  tha 
door  of  an  artist's  studio  in  Borne,  and  when  it  was  opened,  exclaimed,  "  Please, 
madam,  will  you  give  me  the  master's  brush  ?  '*  The  painter  was  dead,  and  tha 
boy,  feeling  inflamed  with  longing  to  be  an  artist,  wished  for  the  great  master's 
brush,  with  the  idea  that  it  would  inspire  him  with  his  genius.  The  lady  placed 
the  brush  belonging  to  her  departed  husband  in  the  hand  of  the  boy,  saying,  "  This 
is  his  brush  ;  try  it,  my  boy."  With  a  flush  of  earnestness  on  his  face,  he  tried,  but 
found  he  could  paint  no  better  with  the  master's  brush  than  with  his  own.  The 
lady  then  said  to  him,  "  You  cannot  paint  Uke  the  great  master  unless  you  have  his 
spirit."  {W.  Birch.)  Power  through  the  lov«  •/  Christ :— One  day,  one  of 
the  gigantic  eagles  of  Scotland  carried  away  an  infaat,  which  was  sleeping  by  tha 
fireside  in  its  mother's  cottage.  The  whole  village  ran  after  it ;  but  the  eagle  soon 
perched  itself  upon  the  loftiest  eyrie,  and  every  one  despaired  of  the  child  being 
recovered.  A  sailor  tried  to  climb  the  ascent,  bat  his  strong  limbs  trembled,  and 
he  was  at  last  obliged  to  give  ap  the  attempt.  A  robust  Highlander,  accustomed 
to  climb  the  hills,  tried  next,  and  even  his  limbs  gave  way,  and  he  was  in  fact  pre* 
oipitated  to  the  bottom.  But,  at  last,  a  poor  peasant  woman  came  forward.  She 
put  her  feet  on  one  shelf  of  the  rock,  then  on  a  second,  and  then  on  a  third ;  and  in 
this  manner,  amid  the  trembling  hearts  of  all  who  were  looking  on,  she  rose  to 
the  very  top  of  the  cliff,  and  at  last  whilst  the  breasts  of  those  below  were  heaving, 
came  down  step  by  step,  until,  amid  the  shouts  of  the  villagers,  she  stood  at  the 
bottom  of  the  rock  with  the  child  on  her  bosom.  Why  did  that  woman  succeed, 
when  the  strong  sailor  and  the  practised  Highlander  had  failed  7  Why,  becausa 
between  her  and  the  babe  there  was  a  tie ;  that  woman  was  the  mother  of  tha  babe. 


iOi  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  it. 

Let  there  be  love  to  Christ  and  to  sonls  in  your  hearts,  and  greater  wonders  will  b« 
aooomplished.    (Mamial  of  Anedotes.) 

Vera.  15-19.  Now,  ye  PMllpplans,  know  also  that  In  the  beginning  of  the  gospeL 
—Observe — I.  Thb  stbaitenbd  cikcumstanceb  of  the  apostlb.  II.  The  honodb- 
ABLB  coNDOCT  OF  THE  Philippians.  1.  Though  poor  (2  Cor.  viii.  2)  they  acknow- 
ledged their  debt.  2.  Stood  alone.  3.  R.^peated  their  bounty  of  their  own  free 
will.  III.  The  commendation  of  the  Spibit  of  God.  1.  Recorded  for  their 
honour.     2.  For  our  instruction.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        Liberality  to  the  minister  is 

— I.    HONOCBABLB.      II.    PbOFIIABLB.      III.   ACCEPTABLB   TO   GOD.       lY.   A  n<BDOB  07 
ABUNDANT   BLE83INO.       {Ibid.) 

Ver.  17.  Not  hecanse  I  desire  a  gift,  but  I  dsslre  finilt  that  may  ahonnd  to  yonx 
account. — The  nature  and  duty  of  giving : — I.  The  Christian's  object.  1.  Not  self, 
but  Christ.  2.  Not  the  world,  but  heaven.  3.  (And  the  minister  of  the  gospel 
especially  may  add),  not  yours,  but  you.  II.  The  Christian's  peactice.  1.  To  do 
something  for  God's  cause.  2.  To  devote  all  he  possibly  can  for  this  purpose.  8. 
To  do  this  as  a  privilege.  III.  The  Christian's  reward.  1.  It  is  personal  and  re- 
ciprocal— there  is  individual  satisfaction  and  return  of  benefits  given.  2.  It  is  fruit 
— continually  increasing  in  extent  and  value.  8.  It  is  eternal — a  reward  with 
Chript,  and  His  holy  angels  and  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect  (I.  W.  Tapper.) 
I.  The  NATtTBB  of  Christian  giving.  It  should  be — 1.  Systematic.  2.  Proportionate. 
3.  Regarded  as  a  plain  and  prescribed  duty.  4.  An  honoured  privilege.  II.  iTa 
FRtJiT  OB  reward.  1.  The  Divine  approval  and  promise.  2.  Soul  satisfaction.  8. 
Eternal  results  in  the  world  to  come.  (O.  Webber.)  It  is  more  blessed  to  give 
than  receive  : — I.  The  becipient — is  placed  under  obligation — if  unselfish  and 
content  he  has  no  desire  for  a  gift — values  it  chiefly  for  the  giver's  sake.  II.  Thb 
GIVER — gratifies  a  noble  feeling — sows  precious  seed— has  in  prospect  an  abundant 
harvest.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Fruit : — The  word  is  of  large  significance.  What  a 
place  it  occupies  in  nature  I  Where  is  the  work  of  husbandry,  or  the  process  of 
animal  or  vegetable  life,  in  which  this  is  not  the  one  point  of  importance?  What 
fruit  is  there  ?  (James  v.  7).  What  if  it  comes  not  T  What  if  after  all  the  hus- 
bandman's waiting  and  toil,  every  blossom  is  cut  off  by  frost,  and  every  ear  of  corn 
spoiled  by  blight  or  mildew  T  Will  he  be  consoled  by  the  reflection  that  the  trees 
in  the  earlier  spring  were  bright  with  every  form  of  promise,  or  that  the  fields  were 
once  green  with  the  springing  blade,  wet  with  abundant  rain,  or  warm  with  glorious 
sunshine?  The  one  thing  for  which  he  looked  was  fruit.  All  else  was  valuable 
only  as  a  prognostication  of  fruit.  If  the  hope  was  not  realized,  it  was  rather  a 
mockery  than  a  satisfaction.  And  this  word  fruit  was  transferred  by  the  gospel 
to  other  and  yet  more  important  uses.  Trace  it  through  the  Scriptures  of  the  New 
Testament,  through  the  discourses  of  our  Lord  and  the  writings  of  the  apostles,  and 
how  grave  and  anxious  are  the  questions  it  suggests  for  self-examination  (Luke  iii. 
8,  9  ;  Matt.  vii.  20,  xxi,  19,  43 ;  Luke  xiii.  7  ;  John  xv.  2  ;  Rom.  vi.  22  ;  James  iii. 
17;  Phil.  i.  11).  You  see  what  God  looks  for  ;  what  is  the  one  important  question 
as  concerns  each  of  us  ;  What  fruit  is  there  ?  In  the  great  parable  (Matt.  xiii.  3-23) 
in  which  our  Lord  classified  the  hearers  of  His  gospel  in  all  ages,  the  one  distinc- 
tion between  tme  and  false  profession  is  made  to  be  this  :  not  so  much  did  a  man 
listen,  receive,  or  love  the  sound  or  entertain  the  demands  of  the  gospel ;  but  rather, 
Was  there  any  fruit  ?  The  three  evil  hearers  were  alike  in  this — by  this  they  were 
equally  distinguishable  from  the  good  hearer — they  brought  no  fruit  to  perfection  ; 
while  he,  in  various  degrees,  but  in  reality,  deed,  and  truth,  was  seen  to  produce 
fruit.  Well,  therefore,  may  a  minister  who  understands  the  business  of  his  high 
calling  try  himself  and  his  ministry  by  this  one  criterion.  Is  there  any  fruit  7 
Well  may  he  as  he  stands  before  his  people  in  the  exercise  of  his  important  and 
responsible  ministry  address  himself  to  them  with  all  the  earnestness  of  one  plead- 
ing  for  his  life,  and  say,  I  desire  fruit  that  may  abound  to  your  account.  He  will 
not,  indeed,  mislead  them  as  to  the  nature  of  the  fruit  for  which  he  looks.  He  will 
never  speak  of  it  as  though  a  few  isolated  acts  of  self-denial  or  charity  were 
infallible  marks  of  good.  He  will  constantly  remind  them  that  only  a  heart  right 
with  God,  a  heart  truly  penitent  and  believing,  can  originate  such  acts  as  God  will 
approve.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  Giving  honours  the  giver : — It  is  told  of  John 
Wesley  that  when  he  bestowed  a  gift  or  rendered  any  one  a  service  he  lifted  his  hat 
as  though  he  were  receiving  instead  of  conferring  an  obligation.  (Christian 
Family.) 


OHA».  IT.J  PHILIPPIANS.  867 

Ver.  18.  I  have  all  and  abound. — Ministry  to  the  saints  an  acceptable  sacrifice : — 
L  The  iNDiviDOAi  receiving  the  benefit.  1.  A  Christian.  The  firat  duty  of 
Christians  is  towards  each  other.  Charity  does  not  stay  at  home,  but  it  begins 
there.  The  largest  hearted  charity  towards  the  ends  of  the  earth  will  not  excuse 
parsimoniousnesB  towards  our  fellow  believers  close  at  hand.  3.  An  aged  Christian. 
Paul  has  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day.  Every  Christian  has  a  claim  upon 
his  brother  Christian,  but  those  who  have  the  greatest  claim  are  those  who  are 
worn  out  in  the  service  of  their  Master.  3.  A  poor  Christian.  Although  an 
epostle  and  richly  endowed,  Paul  never  employed  his  endowments  on  his  own  behalf. 
After  having  surrendered  the  brightest  prospects  he  was  now  dependent  on  the 
charities  of  God's  people.  "  Blessed  is  the  man  who  considereth  the  poor."  4.  A 
Christian  minister,  who  having  expended  his  spiritual  gifts  on  his  people,  had  a 
right  to  their  temporal  support.  II.  The  benefit  bestowed.  "A  sacrifice."  1. 
ia  the  truest  sense  there  is  now  no  real  sacrifice.  By  one  offering  Christ  hath 
perfected  for  ever  them  who  are  sanctified.  2.  But  in  an  inferior  sense  sacrifices 
are  still  offered.  There  is  "the  sacrifice  of  praise"  and  the  sacrifice  of  charity. 
"To  do  good  and  to  communicate  forget  not,  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well 
pleased,"  3.  The  essence  of  sacrifice  is  self-denial.  It  is  that  which  costs  the 
offerer  something.  III.  The  value  ot  the  benefit.  1.  In  relation  to  God.  It 
is  acceptable  and  well-pleasing  to  Him — (1)  From  the  motive  from  which  it  springs. 
<2)  From  the  good  it  does.  2.  In  relation  to  the  object  of  the  benefit.  (1)  It  pro- 
duces satisfaction  and  gratitude.  (2)  It  becomes  a  means  of  usefulness.  "  Fruit 
to  your  account,"  (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Present  blessings  : — Such  is  Paul's  con- 
fession concerning  his  temporal  condition  even  in  the  midst  of  trials.  He  did  not 
look  on  this  life  with  bitterness,  or  refuse  to  enjoy  it.  He  was  not  soured  by  his 
trials,  but  felt  that  if  he  had  troubles  he  had  blessings  also.  Gloom  is  no  Christian 
temper.  We  must  Uve  in  sunshine,  even  when  we  sorrow.  We  ought  to  bless  God 
that  we  have — L  The  onr  or  life.  1.  And  not  merely  that  we  live,  but  for  those 
blessings  which  are  included  in  the  notion  of  our  living.  God  has  made  life  to 
imply  the  existence  of  certain  things  which  are  in  themselves  a  happiness.  We 
oonnot  live  without  the  means  of  life,  and  the  means  of  life  are  means  of  pleasure. 
It  might  have  been  ordered  that  life  should  be  sustained  by  means  neither 
pleasurable  nor  painful,  or  even  by  means  that  were  painful,  and  that  what  are 
the  extraordinary  means  of  preserving  life  should  be  the  ordinary.  Suppose,  then, 
that  food  were  medicine,  and  that  wounds  and  bruises  imparted  health  and  strength! 
On  the  contrary,  Ufe  is  sustained  by  blessings.  2.  The  gospel  guarantees  these 
things.  God  has  not  promised  what  the  world  understands  by  good  things  ;  things 
whose  good  is  only  in  the  imagmation,  large  estates,  sumptuous  furniture,  carnal, 
sensual  enjoyments,  <tc.  But  He  has  promised  that  life  shall  not  be  a  burden  but 
a  blessing.  3.  And  giving  us  as  much  as  this  He  bids  us  be  satisfied  with  it,  to 
confess  that  we  •*  have  all "  when  we  have  so  much  ;  that  we  "  abound  "  when  we 
have  enough.  He  promises  food,  raiment,  lodging,  and  He  bids  ua,  having  that, 
to  be  content.  IL  The  gift  of  sleep.  God  does  not  suffer  us  to  be  miserable  for 
a  long  time  together,  even  when  He  afflicts  us,  but  He  breaks  our  trials  into  por- 
tions ;  takes  us  out  of  this  world  ever  and  anon,  and  gives  us  holiday  time,  like 
children  at  schooL  Sleep  is  equally  the  comfort  and  recruiting  of  rich  and  poor. 
We  sleep  whether  we  are  in  sorrow  or  in  joy,  in  anxiety  or  hope.  IIL  The  bless- 
INOS  OF  THE  Christian  brotherhood.  As  food,  raiment,  sleep,  are  necessary 
conditions  of  life,  so  is  society.  When  God  removes  as  from  the  world  He  puts  ua 
into  the  Church ;  and  distance,  as  proved  in  the  case  of  St.  Paul,  does  not  break 
the  communion  of  saints.  IV.  The  blessings  of  present  peace  in  the  Church, 
freedom  from  persecution.  V.  The  privileges  ow  free  speech  and  action,  VL 
The  privileges  of  daily  worship  and  weekly  communion.  Let  us  then  enjoy 
our  present  blessings  and  bless  the  Giver.  (Cardinal  Newman.)  Gratitude: — 
I.  Is  ASSOCIATED  WITH  CONTENTMENT — it  has  euough — dcsires  no  more.  II.  Acknow- 
ledges ITS  OBLIGATION — fully — thankfully.  III.  Appreciates  the  spirit  op  the 
GIFT — love — sacrifice — well-pleasing    to    God.       {J.   Lyth,    D.D.)  Acceptable 

gsving : — It  is  related  of  Andrew  Fuller  that,  on  a  begging  tour  for  the  cause  of 
missions,  he  called  on  a  certain  wealthy  nobleman  to  whom  he  was  unknown,  but 
who  had  heard  much  of  Fuller's  talents  and  piety.  After  he  had  stated  to  him  the 
object  of  his  visit,  his  lordship  observed  that  he  thought  he  should  make  him  no 
donation.  Dr.  Fuller  was  preparing  to  return,  when  the  nobleman  remarked  that 
there  was  one  man  to  whom,  if  he  could  see  him,  he  thought  he  would  give  some- 
thing for  the  mission,  and  that  man  was  Andrew  Fuller.     Mr.  Fuller  immediately 


868  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cfcAi-  it. 

replied,  "  My  name,  sir,  is  Andrew  Fuller."  On  this  the  nobleman,  with  some 
hesitation,  gave  him  a  gainea.  Observing  the  indifference  of  the  donor,  Mr.  Fuller 
looked  him  in  the  face  with  mach  gravity,  and  said,  "  Does  this  donation,  sir,  come 
from  your  heart  ?  If  it  does  not,  I  wish  not  to  receive  it. "  The  nobleman  wa« 
melted  and  overcome  with  this  honest  frankness,  and  taking  from  his  parse  ten 
guineas  more,  said,  "  There,  sir,  these  come  from  my  heart."  Men  should  give  to 
the  cause  of  missions  cheerfully.  They  should  do  good  with  a  good  motive.  **  The 
Lord  loveth  a  cheerful  giver."    (J.  Whitecrosi.) 

Ver.  19.  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need. — The  need  and  tJi«  tupply : — Paul 
declares  that  the  contributions  of  his  Philippian  friends  are  pleasing  to  him,  and 
acceptable  to  God.  He  cannot  requite  their  kindness,  but  declares  that  God  can 
and  will.  I.  The  extent  of  the  supply.  The  emphasis  is  on  all.  1.  There  are 
many  promises  of  this  kind  even  in  the  Old  Testament.  "  They  that  seek  the  Lord 
shall  not  want  any  good  thing."  *'  No  good  thing  will  He  withhold  from  them  that 
walk  uprightly,"  &o.  But  in  all  their  fulness  we  find  them  only  in  the  gospel, 
where  Christ  tells  us  that  our  heavenly  Father  knows  our  need,  and  caring  as  He 
does  for  sparrows  and  lilies  will  much  more  care  for  us.  2.  This  promise  is  exceed- 
ing broad.  It  is  not  restricted — (1)  In  the  nature  of  its  object,  but  comprehends 
temporal  and  spiritual  good.  (2)  Nor  in  the  absolute  measure  of  the  good  it  pes- 
ees&es ;  not  your  occasional,  but  your  constant  need  ;  not  one  kind,  but  every  kind  ; 
not  a  portion,  but  all.  3.  It  is  possible  to  misinterpret  the  promise.  We  are  not 
to  make  it  the  ground  of  foolish  expectations.  God  will  not  do  for  us  what  we  can 
do  for  ourselves,  nor  gratify  our  whims.  The  promise  has  a  just  and  obvious  limit. 
God  will  supply  our  need.  He  does  more,  but  does  not  engage  to  do  so  ;  and  He 
is  the  final  and  righteous  Judge  of  what  our  needs  are.  We  may  not  feel  the  want 
of  what  God  sees  we  require.  We  may  desire  wealth,  or  health  of  body,  but  God 
may  see  that  we  need  spiritual  riches  and  health  of  soul,  and  to  give  the  latter  He 
may  have  to  withhold  the  former.  Take  the  case  of  Paul  who  prayed  for  deliver- 
ance from  his  thorn  in  the  flesh.  God's  response  was  grace  to  bear  it,  and  Paul  saw 
that  his  need  was  supplied,  and  then  gloried  in  his  infirmity.  II.  Its  means. — 
"  riches  in  glory,"  or  "  glorious  riches,"  a  phrase  indicative  of  the  wealth  of  Deity; 
but  more  than  this,  for  behind  the  works  of  His  hand  there  is  the  uncreated  wealth 
of  His  own  infinity.  Here  we  come  to  an  ocean  without  a  bottom  or  shore.  What 
we  see  gives  us  a  small  idea  of  the  Divine  possibility.  Notwithstanding  all  that 
God  has  given,  His  ability  to  give  remains  undiminished.  HI.  Its  medium.  The 
passage  is  sometimes  made  to  read  "  out  of  "  His  riches  and  glory.  This  is  true, 
but  what  Paul  means  is  that  our  need  is  supplied  by  a  certain  method.  We  are 
under  a  mediatorial  government.  By  Christ  God  made  the  worlds.  Through  Him, 
too,  comes  daily  bread  and  daily  pardon.  The  promises  of  God  are  yea  and  amen 
in  Christ  Jesus.  Apart  from  Him  there  is  no  mercy  to  any  one.  Prayer  is  only 
heard  as  offered  in  His  name.  IV.  Its  certainty.  There  is  no  doubt  or  con- 
tingency :  God  shall  do  it.  Some  one  has  said  that  the  apostle  here  draws  a  bill 
on  the  exchequer  of  heaven  that  God  will  make  the  wants  of  the  Philippians  His 
own  care.  Bather  let  us  say  that  he  draws  a  bill  which  he  is  assured  God  will 
honour  the  moment  it  is  presented  in  believing  prayer.  What  are  the  grounds  for 
this  ?  1.  The  apostle  knew  that  God  loved  His  own  children  with  a  peculiar  love, 
and  was  therefore  sure  to  take  care  of  the  Philippians.  2.  He  knew  that  God 
approved  of  their  act,  and  would  therefore  compensate  them.  3.  He  knew  his  own 
standing  with  God.  We  have  friends  for  whom  we  can  say  that  "  for  oui  sakes  " 
they  would  do  what  we  desire,  and  God  thus  puts  Himself  in  human  conditions 
and  enables  Paul  to  claim  Him  as  his  own.  {J.  Stacey,  D.D.)  Our  need  and 
titpply  : — I.  Examine  the  scope  of  the  promise.  There  is  danger  of  fanaticism  in 
the  interpretation  of  truth.  God  promises  to  supply  our  needs,  but  not  to  gratify 
our  wishes  or  whims.  II.  The  supplt  is  not  according  to  our  deserts,  but  according 
to  the  riches  of  His  glory  :  i.e.,  His  glorious  wealth.  The  resources  of  the  Trinity 
are  drawn  upon.  Jesus  bade  His  disciples  to  ask,  that  their  joy  might  be  full.  He 
does  not  delight  in  a  sad,  starved  Church,  but  in  one  that  is  joyful,  well-fed.  III. 
The  medium.  Through  Christ.  But  God  ordains  means  and  puts  us  under  con- 
ditions. As  in  agriculture,  so  here,  we  are  to  work  in  harmony  with  God's  estab- 
lished methods,  if  we  would  secure  fruits.  (M.  Staple,  D.D.)  Man's  needt  and 
God's  toealth : — I.  Man's  needs  and  God's  wealth.  1.  Man's  needs  are — (1) 
Physical.  There  is  no  creature  with  so  many  wants,  (a)  The  creatures  far  beneath 
him  have  not  so  long  and  so  helpless  an  infancy,  and  acquire  much  sooner  th« 


•HA».  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  869 

means  of  self  support.  (6)  There  are  successive  births  in  the  same  life.  Man 
passes  from  one  stage  to  another,  higher  and  still  higher ;  but  he  never  reaches  the 
platform  where  he  finds  peifectioa.  (c)  We  may  learn  the  greatness  of  his  nature 
from  the  character  of  his  wants.  He  must  have  a  world  made  for  him  and  all 
things  in  it  must  serve  him.  (d)  His  needs  are  constantly  recurring.  He  has 
marvellous  p:iwers  of  receptivity.  The  world  may  empty  its  treasures  at  his  feet, 
•nd  yet  leave  ci-ying  needs.  (2)  Social.  Life  can  only  develope  itself  by  clinging  to 
other  forms  of  life.  The  affections  require  some  object  round  which  to  twine,  and 
thus  give  beauty  to  hfe.  The  words  father,  mother,  brother,  &c.,  represent  the 
needs  of  his  social  nature.  Let  him  be  deprived  of  any  of  these  and  he  ever  after 
feels  that  he  is  poor.  (3)  Mental.  The  mind  in  its  best  state  is  like  the  garden 
of  Eden;  but  it  may  be  like  a  wilderness  which  brings  forth  only  thorns.  It  needs 
teachers,  books,  culture ;  the  libraries  of  the  world  represent  its  needs.  (4)  MoraL 
(o)  Man  is  a  sinner,  and  that  is  enough  to  express  his  utter  poverty.  He  needs 
nothing  short  of  God's  great  salvation.  He  has  left  his  Father's  house  and  gone 
into  a  far  country,  and  having  spent  all,  he  begins  to  be  in  want,  (b)  With  the  new 
life  there  are  new  capacities.  He  wants  light — the  cond  tionsof  life — and  God  who 
commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness  must  shine  in  our  heart  He  wants 
love — God.  Nothing  short  of  the  Infinite  can  satisfy  him.  (c)  There  are  great 
changes  in  this  life  which  give  birth  to  great  needs,  (d)  There  are  needs  which 
Btretch  into  the  future.  Man  has  time,  he  wants  eternity  ;  he  has  earth,  he  wants 
heaven ;  he  has  hout-es  and  lands,  he  needs  "  an  inheritance  incorruptible  and  un- 
defiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away."  He  wants  the  perfect  hfe,  without  suffering, 
without  sin,  without  sorrow.  2.  God's  wealth.  How  poor  all  words  are  in  describing 
the  riches  of  God,  the  boundless  wealth  of  His  nature.  (1)  There  are  some  figures 
that  help  us  ;  there  is  the  sun.  God  is  our  Sun.  The  sun  pours  light  not  only  on 
the  tops  of  the  mountains,  but  into  the  depths  of  the  valleys ;  gives  colourings  to 
the  countless  leaves  that  quiver  in  mighty  forests,  and  kindles  the  incense  of  the 
world.  There  are  the  pulsations  af  the  ocean.  In  its  fulness  it  pours  its  tide  on 
our  shores,  and  its  waters  flow  on  till  they  have  filled  every  bay  and  creek  and  inlet. 
The  pulsations  of  God's  goodness  are  felt  through  the  universe :  "  The  Lord  is  good 
to  all,  and  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works."  (2)  There  are  some  titles 
that  help  us,  such  as  the  •'  God  of  hope,"  the  "  God  of  peace,"  the  '•  God  of  all 
comfort,"  the  "  God  of  all  grace,"  the  '*  Father  of  mercies,"  the  *'  Father  of  lights." 
But  what  a  revelation  of  God's  wealth  we  have  when  we  are  told  "  God  is  love." 
His  promises  represent  His  wealth,  and  are  convertible  into  realities  any  day  and 
any  hoar.  His  gospel  reveals  His  purposes,  His  thoughts,  His  grace.  Do  you  want 
mercy?  "He  keepeth  mercy;"  it  is  treasured  in  His  nature  as  in  »  storehouse. 
Strength?  "He  giveth  power  to  the  faint."  Truth  for  your  understanding? 
There  are  revelations  as  you  are  able  to  bear  them,  visions  regulated  by  the  soul's 
capacities  to  see  them.  Love  for  your  heart?  Build  a  sanctuary,  let  its  dimensions 
be  vast,  for  in  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  the  temple  will  be  the  manifestations 
of  the  Divinity.  Get  up  into  one  of  the  world's  highest  mountains  and  look  around, 
and   then  claim  all.     II.  The  experience  op  the  highest  life  shows  the  con- 

ITBOTION  between  THE  NEEDS  OF   MAN    AND    THE    WEALTH    OF    GOD.       1.    The  life  of    the 

apostle  illustrates  our  text.  One  class  of  needs  creates  another,  and  if  the  highest 
are  supplied  the  others  can  be  endured.  The  man  who  wrote  the  text  had  suffered 
•very  kind  of  need,  and  had  therefore  large  conceptions  of  human  want ;  but  bis 
need  had  been  supplied,  and  therefore  he  had  large  conceptions  of  God's  wealth. 
S.  We  have  the  best  illustrations  of  this  in  his  prayers.  We  may  learn  from  the 
prayers  of  men  how  great  the  wealth  of  God  must  be.  "  God  is  able  to  do  exceeding 
abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think."  If  our  needs  took  outward  form,  what 
endless  processions  we  should  see  going  up  to  the  throne  of  God,  all  asking.  What 
prayers  have  gone  up  from  tabernacle,  temple,  venerable  sanctuaries,  the  pavements 
of  which  are  worn  b_v  generations  of  kneeling  worshippers.  What  prayers  have 
gone  up  from  men  in  the  depths,  from  men  in  the  height  I  What  prayers  we  have 
heard  prayed  from  our  fathers  and  mothers  i  What  prayers  we  have  prayed.  The 
answers  to  these  reveal  the  connection  between  man's  needs  and  God's  wealth. 
IIL  With  what  certainty  the  apostle  speaks.  This  certainty  mnst  have  come 
from  his  faith  in  God.  1.  In  the  affluence  of  the  Divine  life.  'The  universe  is  but 
the  outward  clothing  of  the  thought  of  God.  The  gospel  with  its  provision  for  the 
need  of  man  is  the  revelation  of  the  heart  of  God,  and  the  outpouring  of  its  love. 
2.  In  the  benevolence  of  the  Divine  nature,  wherever  God  proclaims  His  name,  He 
Bakes  His  goodnas.'i  to  pass  before  men.     If  our  relationship  to  our  children  is  the 

24 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  rr, 

proof  of  our  willingness  to  give  them  good  gifts,  how  much  more  so  in  regard  to 
God.  3.  In  the  inexhaustibleness  of  the  Divine  resources.  God  is  a  fountain 
always  overflowing :  if  the  streams  should  fail  there  would  be  a  universal  bank- 
ruptcy of  life.  IV.  With  what  intense  satisfaction  the  apostijE  speaks.  He 
had  a  large  mind  and  heart,  and  fitly  represented  the  genius  of  Christianity.  There 
are  some  who  think  only  of  themselves,  and  appear  to  value  the  gospel  aU  the  more  be- 
cause they  limit  it  to  a  few.  If  they  have  bread,  they  care  not  if  the  whole  race  starves; 
if  they  are  saved,  they  care  not  if  the  whole  world  is  lost.  But  this  treasure  was  placed 
in  the  aposile's  hands  and  in  ours  that  man  may  be  enriched.  Our  need  supplied 
is  an  assurance  that  God  will  supply  the  need  of  every  man.  V.  God  supplies  oub 
NEEDS  THROUGH  Jesus  Christ.  How  much  more  precious  gifts  are  when  they 
come  through  the  hands  of  those  who  love  us.  (£f.  J.  Bevis.)  Man's  need 
gupplied  from  God's  riches: — I.  Man's  necessity.  Strictly  speaking,  all  creatures 
are  equally  indigent,  whether  sinners  or  saints.  Out  of  God  there  is  no  self- 
sufficiency.  But  circumstances,  though  they  cannot  add  to  our  inherent  emptiness 
and  dependence,  may  add  materially  to  our  necessities,  and  that  in  three  ways.  1. 
When  a  creature  is  placed  in  a  situation  unfavourable  to  his  happiness.  An  infant, 
e.g.,  in  his  mother's  arms,  is  as  needy  as  want  and  helplessness  can  render  it,  bat 
take  it  from  its  mother  and  cast  it  into  the  sea  and  it  needs  to  be  rescued  as  well  as 
nourished ;  a  deliverer  as  well  as  a  mother.  2,  When  there  is  something  within 
himself  counteracting  his  welfare.  A  sick  man  needs  more  help  than  one  in  health ; 
a  man  with  a  wounded  spirit  more  comfort  than  one  with  a  mind  unwrung.  3. 
When  he  is  destined  for  a  high  station.  A  monarch's  son  requires  more  care  in 
training  than  a  peasant's.  A  barbarian  does  well  enough  in  his  native  woods,  hot 
Bet  him  apart  for  a  high  state  of  civilization  and  you  add  to  him  many  wants.  Put 
these  three  things  together  and  we  shall  have  some  idea  of  the  extent  and  urgency 
of  the  Christian's  need.  We  are  in  a  state  unfavourable  to  our  happiness ;  there  is 
sin  within  us ;  we  are  designated  for  a  station  for  whose  pursuits  we  have  naturally 
no  desire.  We  are  needy  as  creatures,  as  sinful  creatures,  as  redeemed  creatures. 
II.  God's  wealth.  The  apostle  has  not  in  his  mind  all  the  blessings  which  God 
possesses  in  Himself,  but  those  which  are  adapted  to  our  present  state  of  want  and 
our  future  state  of  exaltation — gospel  blessings,  "  the  riches  of  His  grace,"  the 
mercies  offered  to  sinners.  1.  The  figure  contains  two  ideas.  (1)  Their  abundance. 
It  is  not  one  or  two  pieces  of  gold  that  make  a  man  rich,  nor  power  to  relieve  one 
or  two  beggars.  There  must  be  large  resources.  And  where  is  the  want  for  which 
God's  gospel  does  not  offer  a  remedy  ?  Where  the  blessing  He  is  not  able  to 
bestow?  Millions  on  millions  can  no  more  exhaust  His  store  that  we  with  the 
hollow  of  our  hand  coold  empty  the  sea.  (2)  Their  excellence.  We  do  not  deem 
■worthless  things  riches  however  abundant.  A  mass  of  sand  would  never  be  called 
a  treasure.  And  what  so  precious  as  God's  mercies?  We  can  no  more  estimate 
their  value  than  their  abundance.  We  can  no  more  say  "  We  know  their  utmost 
worth"  than  "We  have  taken  them  all."  2.  Why  are  they  called  "riches  in 
glory  ?  "  Perhaps  the  term  (1)  may  refer  to  heaven,  the  storehouse  of  spiritual 
blessings.  (2)  Or  it  may  be  equivalent  to  "glorious  riches."  In  this  case  it  may 
mean  that  these  riches  (a)  are  magnificent  as  well  as  excellent  and  abundant.  (6) 
That  they  bring  glory  to  their  possessors,  and  are  honourably  acquired  and  spent. 
(c)  That  they  are  glorious  in  their  tendency  and  use.  They  not  only  come  out  of 
glory  but  lead  to  it — whereas  earthly  riches  are  often  debasing  and  injurious.  Ill, 
The  supply  for  this  necessity  out  of  this  wealth.  This  supply  is — 1.  Certain. 
2.  Abundant.  Not  according  to  our  necessities  but  to  God's  riches  ;  suited  to  His 
character  not  ours ;  commensurate  with  His  magnificence  rather  than  with  onr 
poverty  and  meanness.  3.  Adapted  to  our  real,  not  imaginary  need.  4.  Through 
Christ.  (1)  He  purchased  them  for  us.  "  Te  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  &o.  (2)  He  receives  them  for  us  as  our  representative.  (3)  He  bestows 
them  on  us.  It  is  the  connection  it  has  with  Christ  that  makes  this  supply  certain, 
for  it  is  the  stipulated  reward  of  His  sufferings ;  abundant,  for  those  suffering* 
were  of  infinite  worth ;  glorious,  because  its  bestowal  brings  glory  to  Him.  (C. 
Bradley,  M.  A.)  Provision  for  the  wa7j : — Joseph  filled  his  brethren's  sacks  with 
com,  which  they  were  to  carry  home  with  them.  But  in  addition  he  gave  them 
"provision  for  the  way."  This,  compared  with  the  other,  was  a  small  thing,  but 
the  other  would  never  have  reached  home  without  it.  So  we  know  that  there  is  » 
glorious  portion  in  the  heavenly  Canaan,  but  we  have  a  wilderness  journey  to  pro- 
vide for:  and  Jesus,  our  Covenant  Joseph,  who  has  charge  of  the  treasures  of 
heaven,  has  not  forgotten  this.      I.  The  nature  of  this  provision.     1.  This  iM 


caht.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  871 

embodied  in  the  word  "  need. "  This  is  all  that  God  undertakes  to  provide  for. 
There  are  many  things  that  others  have  that  we  should  like ;  there  are  many  thinga 
that  we  fef  1  we  could  make  good  use  of  if  we  had  them;  thjre  are  many  thinga 
that  our  pride,  ambition,  desire  for  self-indulgence  prompt  us  to  crave,  but  we  do 
not  find  them  in  this  provision.  2.  This  word  need  has  a  variety  of  meanings 
which  take  their  shape  from  the  character  and  aim  of  the  person  to  whom  it  refers. 
The  man  who  goes  to  business  with  the  consciousness  that  by  twelve  o'clock  he  has 
•  note  to  take  up  for  five  thousand  dollars — needs  that  amount  of  money.  The- 
mariner  needs  favouring  breezes  to  aid  him  in  reaching  port.  The  farmer  needs 
rain  and  sunshine  to  ripen  and  mature  the  grain.  And  so  in  the  case  of  the 
Christian.  His  need  does  not  take  in  what  will  minister  to  present  gratiti cation, 
but  what  will  be  useful  in  promoting  his  eternal  interest.  What  this  is  God  only 
knows  and  can  give.  3.  The  psalmist  teaches  ns  the  meaning  of  the  word  when 
he  says,  •'  No  good  thing  "  will  God  withhold  from  His  people.  But  this  good  thing 
may  mean  disappointment,  sickness,  poverty.  But  whatever  the  soul's  interest 
requires  is  our  need.  II.  Its  extent.  This  will  be  best  illustrated  by  scriptural 
examples.  1.  Job's  need  could  only  be  supplied  by  passing  through  a  peculiar 
experience ;  but  it  was  supplied.  He  was  led  into  the  furnace,  supported  through 
it,  and  brought  out  of  it.  2.  Noah's  need  could  not  be  met  without  a  demand  on 
faith  and  obedience  such  as  had  never  been  made  before.  But  Noah  believed  and 
obeyed  God,  built  the  ark  and  was  saved.  3.  Jacob's  need  could  only  be  met  by 
Joseph's  being  governor  of  Egypt,  and  this  involved  much  grief.  4.  Abraham's 
need  could  only  be  met  by  the  stern  call  to  offer  up  his  son,  and  the  result  of  that 
action  will  follow  him  throughout  eternity  in  untold  blessings.  6.  And  so  with 
Moses,  David,  Daniel,  Jonah,  and  PauL  III.  The  rule  by  which  this  provision 
is  regulated.  It  would  have  been  a  great  thing  had  the  apostle  said, "  According  to 
His  riches  in  grace."  These  riches  are  marvellous,  and  show  us  what  God  is  doing 
for  His  people  here.  But  '•  riches  in  glory  "  point  to  what  He  will  hereafter  do  for 
ns  in  heaven.  These  "  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard."  When  St.  John  gazed 
through  the  veil  he  only  tells  us  of  the  foundations  and  walls  of  the  heavenly  home 
as  made  of  precious  jewels  ;  its  gates  of  pearls,  and  streets  of  gold ;  and  then  leaves 
as  to  infer  what  the  "  riches  in  glory "  must  be.  Tempted,  burdened,  needy 
Christian,  the  riches  lavished  on  yonder  home  are  pledged  for  thy  supply.  IV.  The 
agent  by  whom  this  provision  is  administered.  How  tenderly  God  has  considered 
our  comfort  in  constituting  Christ  the  ajjent.  With  whom  could  the  administering 
of  this  supply  be  so  safely  left  as  with  Him?  1.  How  able  He  is  to  help.  2.  How 
willing.  8.  How  ready.  4.  How  close  and  always  at  hand.  V.  Its  certainty. 
This  is  the  promise  of  the  God  of  eternal  truth.  Did  His  promise  ever  fail  ?  Can 
the  scripture  be  broken.  (R.  Neteton,  D.D.)  Sure  supplies  : — I.  God  is  bich — 
gloriously  rich.  1.  In  life.  He  is  the  living  God.  2.  In  the  power  of  imparting 
Ufe — a  fountain  that  can  never  be  exhausted.  3.  In  strength.  "  Is  anything  too 
hard  for  the  Lord."  4.  In  knowledge  and  wisdom.  "  Oh,  the  depth,"  &a.  5.  In 
mercy.  "He  spared  not  His  own  Son."  6.  In  all  that  constitutes  goodness.  7. 
The  earth  is  full  of  His  riches — there  is  not  a  poor  province  in  creation.  8.  He  ia 
rich  in  possession,  for  "  all  things  were  created  by  Him  and  for  Him."  9.  Bich 
without  obligation  to  another,  for  **  of  Him,  and  through  Him,  and  to  Him,  are  all 
things."  10.  This  gloriously  rich  God  is  our  Father,  and  to  His  boundless  wealth 
His  firstborn  had  free  access.  But  they  became  prodigal,  and  all  their  younger 
children  have  trod  den  in  their  steps,  and  now  we  have  not  free  access  to  the  whole 
ot  our  Father's  wealth.  We  now  inherit  God's  glorious  riches  by  Christ  Jesus,  and 
become  heirs  of  God  by  becoming  joint  heirs  with  Him.  II.  The  Chbistian'b 
SUPPLIES  ABE  SORE.  This  is  Bccured — I.  By  the  source — God.  (1)  The  ordinary 
sources  of  supply  to  as  are  ever  changing  and  multiplying  as  we  advance.  The 
first  we  recognize  is  that  which  we  denominate  "  my  mother";  then  "my  father"; 
then  "my  teachers";  then  "my  books  and  companions";  then  "my  trade  or 
profession";  then  "my  husband,  wife,  friends,  country,  Church,"  (2)  But  these 
are  only  subordinate  sources  of  supply — cisterns  which  cannot  long  hold  water. 
My  mother  and  father — their  days  are  as  grass  ;  my  friends — how  many  are  worthy 
of  the  name ;  my  daily  calling — if  it  yield  bread  enough  is  a  weariness ;  the  happy 
wife  may  become  a  widow ;  upon  your  country  you  may  have  to  turn  your  back  ; 
the  Church  may  be  a  wilderness  to  you.  With  everything  yoa  now  term  "  my  •* 
yon  may  be  disappointed  and  disgusted.  (3)  But  Paul  is  positive  that  this  source 
shall  never  fail,  because  it  cannot.  2.  By  the  channel — Christ  Jesus.  (1)  When 
oar  supplies  fail  the  channel  is  sometimes  at  fault  and  not  the  source.    The  supply 


S7J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

of  fuel  in  midwinter  sometimes  fails,  not,  because  the  coal  fields  are  exhausted,  but 
beeause  the  snow  blocks  the  railways.     The  supply  of  water  or  gas  may  be  in- 
BufiQcient,  not  because  the  reservoirs  are  low,  but  because  the  pipes  are  broken.     A 
good  scheme  perishes  through  bad  agents  ;  and  though  sure  of  the  source  if  we  be 
doubtful  of  the  channel  we  can  never  speak  confidently  of  the  supply.     (2)  But  in 
this  case  we  are  as  sure  of  the  channel  as  we  are  of  the  source.    "  Jesus  Christ,  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,"     3.  By  the  scale  of  distribution.     "According 
to  His  glorious  riches."     (1)  Human  supplies  are  not  always  according  to  means. 
The  rich  husband  will  sometimes  supply  his  wife  so  sparingly  that  the  wife  of  the 
working  man  is  less  straitened.     Not  according  to  their  wealth  do  some  parents 
educate  their  children,  but  according  to  their  niggardliness.      Wealthy  masters 
remunerate  their  servants  according  to  their  own  selfish  hearts.     Offerings  cast  into 
God's  treasury  are  often  only  "  according  to  necessity."    But  when  we  find  men 
supplying  the  need  of  others  according  to  their  resources  we  are  sure  that  they  are 
kind  and  liberal,  and  are  sure  to  supply  the  need  of  all  that  are  dependent  upon 
them.     (2)  Now  God  gives  "  according  to  His  glorious  riches."     Not  as  the  poor 
give,  in  the  abundance  of  their  poverty ;  not  as  the  rich,  when  they  give  grudgingly; 
not  according  to  our  low  views,  restrained  prayer,  or  feeble  faith  ;  not  according  to 
any  liberality  we  see  in  each  other.     If  the  gloriously  rich  God  give  according  to 
His  wealth  we  may  say  with  confidence,  "  My  God  shall  supply,"  <fec.     UL  Thb 
KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD  IS  ESSENTIAL  TO  coNFiDBNCB  IN  HiM.     There  are  few  things  in 
which  we  are  oftener  disappointed  than  the  resources  of  our  supplies.     This  is 
especially  the  case  with  men  who  look  for  patrons  to  carry  them  forward.     The 
power  to  help  is  overestimated  :  disappointment  comes  and  confidence  is  wrecked- 
Now  this  man  knew  God,  and  that  knowledge  was  the  basis  of  his  trust.    He  had 
looked  to  God  for  the  supply  of  his  need  of  wisdom,  guidance,  protection,  strength, 
Ac. ,  and  God  had  supplied  it.     With  this  personal  experience  of  the  riches  of  the 
Divine  liberality,  he  says,  "  My  God   shall  supply  all  your  need."    (S.  Martin.) 
Comfort  for  the  needy  : — I.  YooR  need — is  great — diversified — constant.     II.  Th» 
SUPPLY — suitable — seasonable — abundant.     IH.  The   soubce  of  supply — certain — 
inexhaustible — free.     {J.   Lyth,  D.D.)        Filling  the  empty  vessels: — I.  Set  out 
THE  empty  vessels.     1.  It  is  not  supposed  that  you  need  to  borrow  other  people's 
needs :  you  have  enough  of  your  own.     Set  them  out — in  a  long  row,  all  of  them. 
Needs  for  your  body  and  needs  for  your  soul ;  needs  for  your  families,  for  the 
present,  for  the  future,  for  time,  and  for  eternity.     Your  needs  are  as  many  as  your 
moments  and  the  hairs  of  your  head.     2.  Some  of  these  empty  vessels  are  large 
and  are  growing  larger.     Our  wants  grow  upon  us.     One  loaf  sufficed  oaoe :  it 
■would  not  go  far  at  your  table  now  :  the  loaves  vanish  there  like  snow  in  the  sun. 
You  have  more  infirmities.     Ton  never  needed  so  much  as  you  do  now.     8.  Some 
of  these  needs,  if  supplied  to-night,  would  be  empty  vessels  to-morrow  morning. 
Yesterday's  old  patience  is  stale  stuff.     You  must  grow  more  of  that  sweet  herb  in 
your  garden.    We  are  like  the  fabled  vessels  of  mythology  that  were  so  full  of  holes 
tbat  the  fifty  daughters  of  Danaus  could  never  fill  them.     4.  Some  of  our  needs  are 
very  pressing.     Bring,  then,  your  urgent  needs.     Set  them  all  out  in  this  row  oi 
empty  pots.     II.  Who  is  to  fill  these  empty  vessels  T     My  God  will  supply  all 
your  need.     Nobody  else  can.     He  can.     Paul  says  :  See,  my  God  has  supplied  me. 
He  will  also  supply  you.     Paul's  God  is  the  God  of  providence.     He  is  also  the  God 
of  grace.     He  that  apared  not  His  own  Son,  shall  He  not  with  Him  freely  give  ns 
all  things  ?     He  is  also  the  God  of  heaven.    The  riches  of  nations  are  as  rags  and 
rottenness  in  comparison  with  His  resources.     III.  In  what  style  will  God  supply 
His  people's  needs  ?     IV.   By  what  means  does  the  Lobd  fill  His  people's 
needs?      (C.  H.    Spurgeon.)  The   Christian's  want   and   supply   book: — On   a 

tradesman's  table  I  noticed  a  book  labelled  "  Want  Book."  What  a  practical 
suggestion  fur  a  man  of  prayer  1  He  should  put  down  all  his  needs  on  the  tablets 
of  his  heart,  and  then  present  his  want  book  to  his  God.  If  we  knew  all  our  need, 
what  a  large  want  book  we  should  require  1  How  comforting  to  know  that  Jesus 
has  a  supply  book,  which  exactly  meets  our  want  book  1  Promises,  providences, 
and  Divine  visitations,  combine  to  meet  the  necessities  of  all  the  faithful.  (Ibid.) 
Ood  will  supply  our  need : — The  Rev.  Hansard  Knollys  was  among  the  Christian 
ministers,  who,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  were  the  subjects  of  persecution.  He 
was  prosecuted  in  the  High  Commission  Court  and  fled  to  America :  whence  after  a 
time  he  returned.  Having  lived  for  some  time  in  obscurity  in  Loudon,  he  had  but 
sixpence  left,  and  no  p;  ospect  for  the  support  of  his  family.  In  these  circumstances 
he  prayed,  encouraged  Lis  wife  to  remember  the  past  goodness  of  God,  and  to  reflect 


«HAP.  IT.]  PHILIPPIANS.  873 

on  the  promise,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee  "  ;  paid  his  lodging  and 
then  went  ont,  like  Abraham,  not  knowing  whither  he  went.  He  had  walked  only 
a  few  steps,  when  he  was  met  by  a  woman  who  told  him  that  some  Christian  friends 
bad  prepared  a  residence  for  him  and  his  family,  and  had  sent  him  money  and 
other  comforts.  They  were  impressed  with  this  manifestation  of  Divine  goodness 
to  them,  and  his  wife  exclaimed,  '*  0  dear  husband  1  how  sweet  it  is  to  live  by  faith, 
and  trast  God's  faithful  word  1  Let  us  rely  upon  Him  whilst  we  live,  and  trust  Him 
in  all  straits."  The  faithfulness  of  God  : — Eev.  J.  Brown,  of  Haddington,  said 
that  his  epitaph  might  appropriately  be,  "  Here  lies  one  of  the  cares  of  Providence, 
who  early  wanted  both  father  and  mother,  and  yet  never  missed  them."  (Thomas 
Cooper.)  Sufficiency  of  the  Divine  resources: — God  is  satisfied  with  Himself,  and 
BulHcient  to  His  own  happiness.  Therefore,  surely,  thei  e  is  enough  in  Hira  to  fill 
tho  creature.  That  which  fills  an  ocean  will  till  a  bucket ;  that  which  will  fill  a 
gallon  will  fill  a  pint ;  those  revenues  which  will  defray  an  emperor's  expenses  are 
enough  for  a  beggar  or  poor  mau.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  nearness  of  the  pravi. 
$ion : — Ability  and  willingness  to  help  are  not  sufficient  of  themselves.  They  must  be 
•Iways  at  band  just  when  and  where  wo  may  require  them.  How  often  the  help  of 
earthly  friends  fails  just  here.  We  see  this  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  case  of 
Hedley  Vicars.  He  was  wounded  in  one  of  those  sanguinary  conflicts  before 
Sebastopol.  His  wound  was  notnecessnily  mortal.  The  surgeon  understood  the 
nature  of  the  wound  perfectly.  Hp  fi^lt  sure  that  it  could  be  cured,  and  he  was 
perfectly  ready  and  willing  to  do  all  he  oould  for  hia  suffering  friend.  Bat  still 
Eedley  Vicars  died  of  that  wound.  And  why  7  Because  in  the  harry  and  tumult 
of  that  terrible  morning,  on  the  gray  heights  of  the  Crimea,  the  regiment  which 
Eedley  Vicars  commanded  was  carried  far  away  from  the  tent  that  held  the 
sopplies.  A  bandage  was  needed  to  tie  up  the  bleeding  artery.  But  this  bandage 
was  in  yon  distant  tent ;  and  ere  the  tent  could  be  reached,  the  brave  Christian 
soldier  was  no  more.  In  speaking  of  this  circumstance  afterwards,  at  a  publio 
meeting  in  England,  one  of  the  friends  of  the  departed  hero  said,  with  the  pathos 
of  true  affection,  "  If  there  had  been  a  bandage  within  reach — if  the  tent  of  supplies 
had  been  half  a  mile  nearer,  Hedley  Vicars  might  have  been  aUve  to-day."  There 
was  knowledge,  and  power,  and  willingness  to  help.  But  just  the  one  thing  needed 
was  not  at  band,  and  so  there  was  a  failure  to  meet  the  pressing  need.  But  such  a 
thing  can  never  occur  with  Him  in  whose  hands  our  supply  is  left.  (R.  Newton, 
D.D.)  TJie  exactness  of  the  Divine  supply : — Harms  of  Hermannsburg,  the  pastor 
of  •  poor  village  on  ihe  Luneberg  Heath  in  Hanover,  said  in  his  annual  missionary 
sermon  in  1857  :  "  I  have  expended  much  in  the  past  year  in  sending  out  the  ship 
with  her  fifteen  passengers,  for  the  printing  house,  the  press,  and  the  paper, 
altogether  14,781  dollars,  and  I  have  received  altogether  14,796  dollars,  so  I  have 
fifteen  dollars  over.  Is  not  that  a  wonder?  So  much  spent,  and  yet  something 
over  1  And  I  thank  God  that  He  has  given  us  the  fifteen  dollars  overplus.  Riches 
only  makes  cares.  God  has  heard  all  my  prayers.  He  has  given  me  no  riches,  and 
I  have  also  no  debts.  We  have  neither  collected  nor  begged,  but  waited  patiently 
on  God  in  prayer."  Christ  adapted  to  human  need : — You  cannot  name  a  noble 
fignre,  a  sweet  simile,  a  tender  or  attractive  relationship,  in  which  Jesus  is  not  set 
forth  for  the  comfort  and  encouragement  of  His  people.  Are  we  wounded  ?  He  is 
balm.  Are  we  sick?  He  is  medicine.  Are  we  naked?  He  is  clothing.  Are  we 
poor?  He  is  wealth.  Are  we  hungry?  He  is  bread.  Are  we  thirsty?  He  is 
water.  Are  we  in  debt  ?  He  is  our  Surety.  Are  we  in  darkness  ?  He  is  oar  Sun. 
Have  we  a  hoase  to  build  ?  He  is  the  Rock  on  which  to  build  it.  Have  we  a  black 
and  gathering  storm  to  face  ?  He  is  a  strong  tower  to  which  we  may  flee  and  be 
safe.  Are  we  to  be  tried  ?  He  is  our  Advocate.  Is  sentence  passed,  and  are  we 
under  condemnation  ?  He  is  our  pardon.  To  deck  Him  out  and  set  Him  forth 
Natnre  culls  her  finest  flowers,  brings  her  choicest  ornaments,  and  lays  these 
treasures  at  His  feet.  The  skies  contribute  their  stars.  The  sea  gives  ap  its  pearls. 
From  fields,  and  rivers,  and  mountains,  earth  brings  the  tribute  of  her  gems — her 
gold,  her  frankincense  and  myrrh,  the  Uly  of  the  valley,  the  clustered  vine,  and  the 
fragrant  rose  of  Sharon,  (r.  Outhrie,  D.D.)  Mercies  still  left : — There  was  a 
man  who  came  over  from  New  York  some  years  ago,  and  threw  himself  down  on  a 
lonnge  in  his  house  and  said,  *•  Well,  everything's  gone."    They  said,  '♦  What  do 

Eou  mean  ?  "  "  Oh,"  he  replied,  '•  We  have  had  to  suspend  payment ;  our  house 
as  gone  to  pieces — nothing  left."  His  little  child  bounded  from  the  other  side  of 
the  room  and  said,  "Papa,  yon  have  me  left."  And  the  wife,  who  had  been  very 
sympathetic,  and  very  helpful,  came  np  and  said,  "  My  d^ar,  yon  have  me  left.** 


371  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  rr. 

And  the  old  grandmother,  seated  in  a  comer  of  the  room,  put  up  her  spectacles  on 
her  wrinkled  forehead  and  said,  "  My  son,  you  have  all  the  promises  of  God  left.'* 
Then  the  merchant  burst  into  tears  and  said, "  What  an  ingrate  I  am  I  I  find  I  have 
a  great  many  things  left.  God,  forgive  me."  (r.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 
The  promise  should  innjnre  fearlessness  in  Divine  service : — Your  business — you 
cannot  neglect  that  1  Call  to  mind  the  story  of  the  rich  English  merchant  to  whom 
Elizabeth  gave  some  commission  of  importance,  and  he  demurred  to  undertake  it, 
saying,  "  Please,  your  majesty,  if  I  obey  your  behests  what  will  become  of  these 
affairs  of  mine  ?  "  And  his  monarch  answered,  "  Leave  those  things  to  me  ;  when 
you  are  employed  in  my  service  I  will  take  charge  of  your  business."  So  it  will  be 
with  you.  Do  but  surrender  yourself  to  Christ,  and  He,  of  His  own  free  will,  takes 
in  hand  all  your  affairs,  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Neglect  of  the  promise  : — Many 
years  ago,  an  aged  and  ragged  Indian  wandered  into  one  of  our  western  settlements, 
begging  for  f'lod  to  keep  him  from  starving.  A  bright-coloured  ribbon  was  seen 
round  his  neck,  from  which  there  hung  a  small  dirty  pouch.  On  being  asked  what 
it  was,  he  said  it  was  a  charm  given  him  in  his  younger  days.  He  opened  it,  and 
took  out  a  worn  and  crumpled  paper,  which  he  handed  the  person  speaking  to  him 
for  inspection.  It  proved,  on  examiimtion,  to  be  a  regular  discharge  from  the 
Federal  army,  entitling  him  to  a  pension  for  life,  and  signed  by  General  Washington 
himself.  Here  was  a  man,  with  a  promise  duly  signed,  which,  if  presented  in  the 
right  place,  would  have  secured  to  him  ample  provision  for  the  way  ;  and  yet  he 
was  wandering  about  hungry,  helpless,  and  forlorn,  and  begging  for  bread  to  keep 
him  from  starving  !  What  a  picture  we  have  here  of  many  Christians,  who,  with 
all  the  promises  of  Jesus  in  their  hands — with  the  charter  of  their  inheritance  in 
full  possession,  are  yet  gloomy,  and  sad,  and  starving  in  the  wilderness  1  {B. 
Newton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  20-23.  Now  unto  God  and  our  Father. — The  spirit  in  which  to  close  the 
year: — I.  The  doxoloqt.  1.  We  are  to  give  glory  to  God  as  to  our  heavenly  Father. 
We  are  not  to  regard  Him  as  a  tyrant,  nor  as  a  governor  merely,  but  as  a  kind  and 
loving  Father.  2.  We  are  to  give  Him  the  glory,  that  is,  the  honour  and  praise,  of 
all  His  mercies  to  ns.  II.  Benediction.  Grace  is  the  love  of  God  as  displayed  in 
Christ,  whereby  we  receive  all  those  unmerited  favourswhich  are  included  in  thegospel 
plan  of  salvation.  I.  The  beginning  of  religion  is  grace.  2.  Its  progress  in  the  soul 
depends  upon  grace.     {Homiletic  Monthly.)        Parting  thoughts  should  embrace — 

I.  Th/lnks  to  God.  II.  Lovb  to  the  brethben.  III.  Prater  foe  grace.  {J. 
Lyth,D.D.)        Observe — I.  The  globy  or  God — is  absolute — full  of  grace — eternal. 

II,  Its  acknowledgment — ia  due  from  all — in  truth — for  ever.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.\ 
Glory  is  due — I.  To  God — as  supreme — as  our  Father.  II.  From  all — in  heaven — 
and  on  earth.  III.  Fob  steb — in  time — and  eternity.  lY.  In  sincxbity  and 
TBUTH — amen.     [Ibid.) 

Ver.  21.  Salute  every  ealnt  In  Christ  Jesus. — I.  The  description  o»  a  tbttb 
BELIEVER.  1.  He  is  a  Saint,  i.e.,  a  separated  one.  (1)  So  God  regards  him  as  taken 
out  of  the  world  and  set  apart  for  Himself.  (2)  So  God  employs  bim.  He  is  a 
chosen  instrument.  While  God  uses  all  men  to  accomplish  His  general  designs, 
none  but  Christians  are  told  off  for  special  spiritual  uses.  (3)  So  the  world 
esteems  him;  sometimes  satirically,  sometimes  injuriously,  as  exhibiting  a 
contrast,  but  often  genuinely.  There  are  certain  things  which  will  never  be  said  or 
done  in  the  presence  of  a  Christian.  (4)  He  becomes  more  and  more  saintly:  by 
watchfulness,  avoidance  of  sin,  separation  from  the  world,  consecration  to  God.  2, 
He  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  (1)  Here  he  enters  a  new  world  and  enjoys  new  experiences, 
thoughts,  &c.  (2)  He  lives  a  new  life,  higher,  purer,  nobler.  (3)  Here  he  has  a 
charmed  existence.  Christ  guides,  protects,  supports  Him.  (4)  He  has  the 
promise  of  a  rich  reward.  With  Christ  here  is  to  be  with  Him  for  ever.  3.  But 
I  only  in  Christ  Jesus  is  he  a  samt.  (1)  Not  in  his  own  resolution,  endeavonrs, 
"  achievements.  (2)  But  in  the  enjovment  of  Christ's  life,  participating  in  His 
Spirit,  cleansed  in  His  blood,  following  His  example.  XL  The  democracy  or  th« 
Christian  Chubch.  1.  Our  Lord  established  a  society  of  those  who  believed  in  Him 
on  the  earth,  and  that  society  is  still  recognized  by  visible  signs.  There  are  many 
belonging  to  Christ  who  have  not  joined  themselves  to  any  body  of  believers.  It  is 
a  bad  thing  to  stand  outside  in  that  way,  waiting  for  a  perfect  Church.  If  you 
should  find  it  and  be  admitted  to  it,  it  would  from  that  day  be  imperfect.  2.  This 
Church  is  not  a  monarchy  as  Home  has  tried  to  make  it;  nor  an  oligarchy  ruled  by 


CHAP.  IV.]  PHILIPPIANS.  375 

a  few.  It  is  a  pure  true  republic.  In  it  all  believers  are  equal  before  the  law. 
True,  it  is  a  theocracy.  God  governs  it.  It  is  subject  to  Christ;  but  His  will  is 
exerted  over  individuals  according  to  tbeir  voluntary  actions.  The  earliest  Church 
realized  it.  The  latest  church  will  realize  it.  Every  saint  is  in  Christ  Jesus, 
What  higher  honour  can  they  have.  This  implies  equality  of  status,  privilege, 
responsibility,  and  reward.  III.  The  salutation.  Recognize  every  saint.  There 
are  no  lines  of  demarcation  between  saints.  1.  Theological  differences  are  often 
fictitious.  If  a  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  my  brother,  whatever  creed  he  may  profess. 
2.  Neither  are  ecclesiastical  lines  to  be  drawn  between  saints.  What  matter  if  a 
man  has  been  dipped  in  Jordan  or  sprinkled,  whether  he  calls  himself  by  one  name 
or  another  in  the  army  of  the  saved  ones.  Because  a  man  chooses  to  wear  one 
style  of  livery  we  are  not  to  stand  aloof  and  say,  "I  will  not  salute  you."  8.  Let 
aot  selfish  ends  divide  saints.  Look  not  so  much  at  the  name,  wealth  and  quality, 
rank,  &o.,  as  to  the  saint  side  of  everybody.  4.  What  business  in  the  Church  of 
God  have  jealousy,  recriminations,  criticism.  "Bless  and  curse  not."  Speak  as 
well  as  you  can  for  every  saint;  and  when  you  cannot,  keep  quiet.  (iS.  H.  Tyng, 
D.D.)  True  Christians  have — 1.  One  centre — Christ.  II.  One  character — 
saints  and  brethren.  III.  One  heart— they  love  one  another.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  brethren  which  are  with  me  greet  you.  All  the  saints  salute  you. — The 
earlier  ages  of  the  Church  were  marked  by  a  spirit  of  love;  so  that  Christiana 
actually  regarded  themselves  as  all  members  of  one  family.  The  moment  a  man 
embraced  Christianity,  he  was  regarded  as  a  brother  by  the  whole  Christian  body: 
a  thousand  hearts  at  once  beat  kindly  towards  bim;  and  multitudes,  who  were 
never  likely  to  see  him  in  the  flesh,  were  instantly  one  with  him  in  spirit.  The 
love  of  Christians  because  they  are  Christians,  no  regard  being  had  to  country  or 
condition — is  this  still  a  strongly  marked  characteristic  of  those  who  profess  them- 
selves the  disciples  of  the  Redeemer?  There  was  something  very  touching  and 
beautiful  in  Christ's  promise  to  such  as  should  forsake  all  for  his  sake — "He  shall 
receive  a  hundred-fold  now  in  this  time,  houses,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  and 
mothers,  and  children,  and  lands."  Thus  was  strikingly  verified  a  description  long 
before  given  of  God  by  the  Psalmist:  "He  setteth  the  solitary  in  families" — for 
they  who  were  to  all  appearance  abandoned,  left  orphaned  and  alone  in  the  world, 
found  themselves  surrounded  by  kinsmen.  The  criterion  of  genuine  Christianity 
remains  just  what  it  was:  "We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  hfe, 
because  we  love  the  brethren.  In  our  own  time  the  ends  of  the  earth  are  being 
wondrously  brought  together:  there  is  an  ever-growing  facility  of  communication 
between  country  and  country;  and  this  must  rapidly  break  down  many  barriers, 
and  bring  far-scattered  tribes  into  familiar  intercourse.  In  earlier  times,  nation 
was  widely  divided  from  nation:  the  inhabitants  of  different  lands  were  necessarily 
almost  strangers  to  each  other ;  and  you  could  not  have  expected  an  approximation 
to  universal  brotherhood.  But  then  it  was,  in  the  face  of  all  obstacles  to  personal 
communion,  that  the  spirit  of  Christianity  showed  its  comprehensive  and 
amalgamating  energies:  the  name  of  Christ  was  as  a  spell  to  annihilate  distance; 
to  plant  the  cross  in  a  land,  suflBced  to  make  that  land  one  with  districts  removed 
from  it  by  the  diameter  of  the  globe.  Alas  for  the  colder  temper  of  modern  times  t 
W«  have  been  led  into  these  remarks,  from  observing,  in  the  apostolical  writings, 
the  affectionate  greetings  which  the  members  of  one  Church  send  to  those  of 
another.  For  the  most  part,  these  Churches  had  no  intercourse  the  one  with  the 
other;  they  were  widely  separated  by  situation;  and,  had  it  not  been  for  the  bond 
of  a  common  faith,  their  members  would  have  been  as  much  strangers  as  though 
they  hoA  belonged  to  different  orders  of  being.    (H.  Melvtll,  B.D.) 

Ver.  2i.  Chiefly  they  that  are  of  Caesar's  household. — These  words — I.  Remind 
vs  OP  the  adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  men  everywhere.  1.  It  is  no  part  of  God's 
purpose  in  redemption  to  limit  its  blessings  to  a  nation  or  class.  Hence  the 
provisions  of  the  gospel  are  suited  to  the  circumstances  of  man  as  man.  It  knows 
nothing  of  the  distinctions  of  rich  and  poor,  noble  and  ignoble,  learned  and 
ignorant,  bond  and  free.  It  knows  them  only  as  sinners,  and  offers  salvation  to  all 
on  equal  terms.  Hence  in  the  early  Churches  we  find  slaves  like  Onesimus,  fisher- 
men like  Peter,  physicians  like  Luke,  lawyers  like  Zenas,  soldiers  like  Cornelius^, 
and  saints  in  Caesar's  household.  2.  The  gospel  is  still  of  universal  adaptation. 
Christ  is  still  the  Saviour  of  sinners,  and  has  disciples  in  every  country  and  amidst 
all  circumstances  and  conditions.  II.  Teaches  us  the  PossiBiLmr  of  saavnio  God 
IN  POSITIONS  OP  temptation  AND  Duricm/n.    h  Casar'B  hoosehold  was  the  last 


876  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  w. 

place  where  one  would  have  expected  to  find  saints.  Under  any  circnmslances  it 
could  not  be  favourable  to  conversions  and  Christian  growth;  and  it  was  now  at 
about  its  worst.  It  illustrates  the  sovreignty  of  Divine  grace  that  out  of  these 
circumstances  there  should  arise  witnesses  for  the  gospel.  It  must  have  required 
great  courage;  but  the  grace  that  called  them  sustained  them.  2.  So  it  is  always. 
There  are  some  positions  in  which  a  man  cannot  serve  God  because  they  are 
wrong.  There  are  others  lawful  enough,  yet  encompassed  by  temptation,  e.§.,  the 
position  of  the  sailor  shut  up  for  months  with  ungodly  shipmates,  that  of  the  pious 
Boldier  in  barracks  with  ungodly  comrades,  that  of  a  godly  citizen  among  scoffing 
fellow  workmen.  In  all  such  cases  God  is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  to  Hia 
servants.  Faint  not.  God  by  placing  you  in  a  post  of  trial  has  assigned  to  you  a 
post  of  honour.  Never  try  to  effect  a  compromise  between  right  and  wrong.  III. 
Tells  how  the  spibit  of  Christ  animates  all  His  followers.  That  spirit  is  love 
and  sympathy.  See  how  it  breathes  through  these  brotherly  salutations.  The  age 
wants  more  of  this  spirit.  What  Christ  requires  is  not  so  much  uniformity  of 
belief  and  worship  as  union  of  heart.  IV.  Illustrates  the  way  in  which 
Christians  mat  comfort  and  help  one  another.  1.  The  Philippians  needed 
comfort.  They  had  adversaries  and  were  in  danger  of  being  terrified  by  this.  The 
letter  itself  would  afford  deep  consolation,  this  postscript  especially  so.  The 
salutation  was  hot  much,  but  it  showed  thit  they  were  not  forgotten  at  the  throne 
of  grace.  2.  In  many  ways  comfort  and  help  may  be  afforded  if  there  be  only  a 
little  thoughtfulness.  A  truly  sympathetic  heart  can  give  help  with  a  look  and  a 
grasp  of  the  hand.  A  too  common  sin  is  thoughtlessness.  "  Evil  is  wrought  by 
want  of  thought,  as  well  as  want  of  heart."  The  youth  in  the  midst  of  scoffing 
companions,  the  young  girl  in  an  ungodly  house,  the  poor  man  battling  with 
poverty,  the  discouraged  Christian  worker — what  might  not  be  done  by  a  timely 
and  kind  word.  V.  A  suggestion  of  the  way  in  which  our  conduct  becomes  an 
EXAMPLE  AND  INFLUENCE  TO  OTHERS.  Little  did  the  Eomau  saints  think  that  their 
salutations  would  be  preserved  and  handed  down  through  the  centuries  for  the  use 
of  the  Church.  Kind  words  can  never  die.  Neither  can  kind  actions.  Our  names 
may  perish  but  we  shall  live.  Who  these  saints  were  we  cannot  tell.  Nevertheless 
their  power  is  felt  to-day.  {W.  Walters.)  The  saints  in  Casar's  Twusehold: — The 
throne  of  the  Caesars  was  at  this  time  occupied  by  Nero,  a  monster  rather  than  a 
man.  Certainly  if  ever  there  was  an  atmosphere  uncongenial  to  Christianity  it 
may  be  supposed  to  have  been  that  of  the  court  and  palace  of  this  bloody  debauchee. 
Yet  so  true  is  it  that  gospel  weapons  are  mighty  to  the  casting  down  of  strongholds 
that  there  were  here  Christians  of  the  highest  type  willing  to  give  their  profession 
all  publicity  by  sending  greetings  to  Christians  in  distant  cities.  I.  The  agenct 
WHICH  BROUGHT  BOUND  SO  UNLIKELY  A  RESULT.  The  mind  Daturally  turns  to  Paul's 
miraculous  gifts,  and  remembers  how  with  noble  intrepidity  Paul  rose  op  before  ths 
sages  of  Greece,  and  that  as  he  spoke  to  Felix,  the  slave  of  base  lusts,  the  haughty 
Roman  trembled.  It  is  easy  to  imagine,  therefore,  Paul  working  some  great 
miracle  to  command  the  attention  of  the  emperor  and  the  court,  and  then  reasoning 
of  temperance,  righteousness,  and  judgment  to  come.  But  this  fancy  would  be  in- 
correct. Paul  was  now  a  prisoner,  and  could  not  go  like  Moses,  rod  in  hand,  and 
compel  by  his  miracles  the  attention  of  the  profligate  king,  and  yet  it  was  at  this 
time  of  seeming  impotence  that  the  great  victory  was  won.  Nay,  it  appears 
actually  to  have  been  in  consequence  of  his  imprisonment.  Chap.  i.  12-14  shows 
the  two  ways  in  which  his  bonds  gave  enlargement  to  Christianity.  His  patience 
and  meekness  witnessed  for  the  truth  of  the  gospel  for  which  he  suffered,  and 
nerved  the  Christians  to  greater  energy.  II.  We  have  here  a  lesson  as  to  God's 
POWER  op  OVERRULING  EVIL  FOR  oooD.  We  are  apt  to  imagine  when  a  man  is  with- 
drawn from  active  duty  that  his  usefulness  is  gone.  But  a  minister  can  preach 
from  a  sick  bed  as  well  as  from  a  pulpit.  The  report  which  goes  forth  of  hia 
patience  and  fortitude  will  do  as  much  and  perhaps  more  towards  overcoming 
resistance  to  the  gospel  than  his  active  ministrations.  The  martyrs  did  most  for 
God  and  truth  when  actually  in  the  clutches  of  their  persecutors.  A  true  Christian 
is  never  laid  by.  The  influence  that  he  exerts  when  suffering  or  reduced  to  poverty 
is  often  greater  than  when  he  led  a  benevolent  enterprise.  Let  no  one  then  be 
discooraged.  III.  A  man  cannot  be  placed  in  circumstances  which  put  it  out  of 
HIS  POWEB  TO  GIVE  HEED  TO  THE  DUTIES  OF  RELIGION.  The  instance  of  saiuts  in 
Ceesar's  household  takes  away  the  excuse  that  temptations,  hindrances,  opposition 
render  piety  impossible.  Where  are  any  so  circumstanced  as  these  people? 
It     il     trae     that     more    appears     to    be     done     for    one    man     than    for 


CHAP.  IT.]  PEILIPPIANS.  877 

another,  and  that  Bome  oironmstanees  are  condncive  and  others  hindering  to 
religion.  But  under  every  possible  disadvantage  there  may  be  a  striving  with  evil 
and  a  following  after  good.  The  excnse  assumes  that  God  has  put  it  oat  of  some 
men's  power  to  provide  for  their  soul's  safety,  and  to  assume  this  is  to  contradict 
the  Divine  word,  and  to  throw  scorn  on  the  Divine  attributes.  Take  a  case  like  the 
one  before  us,  that  of  servants  in  an  irreligious  family.  Their  superiors  set  them  a 
bad  example,  give  them  few  opportunities  for  public  or  private  devotion,  and  would 
frown  on  or  ridicule  any  indication  of  piety.  Let  this  be  granted.  Yet  these 
difiBculties  would  disappear  before  earnest  resolve.  TLey  have  but  to  begin  and 
obstacles  would  be  gradually  lowered  and  strength  would  grow  by  exercise.  The 
Spirit  of  the  living  God  fails  no  man  who  is  not  false  to  himselt  IV.  These  saints 
not  only  belorg  :d  to  Cajsar's  household  at  the  time  of  their  conversion,  but 
REMAINED  AETEB  THEiB  coNTERSioH.  They  did  not  feel  it  their  duty  to  abandon 
their  stations  and  seek  others  apparently  more  favourable  to  religion.  So  that  it 
does  not  follow  that  a  man  is  to  withdraw  from  circumstances  of  danger  and  diffi- 
culty, and  place  himself  where  there  is  less  temptation  and  opposition.  It  is  true 
a  converted  man  is  not  justified  in  seeking  employment  where  it  would  be  specially 
ditl'icult  to  cultivate  religion ;  but  to  desert  it  because  it  made  religion  difficult 
would  be  to  declare  that  the  grace  which  had  converted  him  in  spite  of  disad- 
vantages would  not  suffice  to  establish  him,  and  to  mark  distrust  of  God's  Spirit. 
If  the  employment  were  sinful,  there  would  be  no  room  for  debate ;  but  if  only 
dangerous,  and  simply  required  a  greater  amount  of  vigilance  and  boldness,  to  for- 
sake it  would  prove  timidity  rather  than  prudence.  For,  e.g.,  a  Christian  noble- 
man in  a  corrupt  court,  or  servant  in  an  ungodly  family,  may  find  it  unlawful  to 
leave,  inasmuch  as  distinct  opportunity  may  be  afforded  of  doing  honour  to  God 
and  promoting  Christ's  cause.  They  are  placed  by  God  as  leaven  in  the  midst  ol 
an  unsound  mass.  Not  that  a  servant  has  to  travel  bevond  the  duties  of  hia 
station ;  he  has  simply  to  carry  his  Christianity  into  all  his  occupations,  and  to 
distinguish  himself  from  others  by  closer  attention  to  his  master's  interests,  stricter 
adherence  to  truth,  &c.  Let  an  irreligious  master  perceive  all  this,  and  he  will 
scarcely  fail  to  receive  an  impression  favourable  to  religion.  There  are  families  to 
which  the  preacher  can  gain  no  access.  God  forbid  that  pious  domestics  should 
hastily  withdraw  fiom  such.  V.  Wheresoever  God  makes  it  a  man's  duty,  thebb 
He  will  make  it  his  interest  to  remain.  If  He  employ  one  of  His  servants  in 
turning  others  from  sin.  He  will  cause  the  employment  to  conduce  to  that  servant's 
holiness.  Notice  the  "  chiefly  "  of  our  text.  Of  all  the  Eomau  Christians  the 
foremost  in  love  were  these  saints  who  probably  remained  in  Cassar's  service  for  the 
express  purpose  of  furthering  the  gospel.  Nor  need  we  feel  any  surprise  at  this. 
Absence  of  trial  is  not  the  most  favourable  thing  to  religious  growth.  Nero's 
palace  may  be  a  far  better  place  for  the  development  of  personal  piety  than  the  cell 
of  the  monk  ;  in  the  one  the  Christian  has  his  graces  put  continually  to  the  proof, 
and  this  serves  both  to  discover  and  strengthen  them  ;  in  the  other  there  may  bo 
comparatively  nothing  to  exercise  them.  And  then  the  God  of  all  grace,  who  has 
promised  that  His  people  shall  not  be  tempted  above  that  they  are  able,  will  bestow 
assistance  proportioned  to  their  wants.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  SainU  in  Casar's 
household  : — I.  It  is  possible  to  be  a  Christian  antwhere.  1.  Christianity  is  not  a 
thing  of  locality  but  of  character.  There  are  plants  which  will  bloom  in  some  lati- 
tudes and  die  in  others,  but  Christianity  can  live  where  man  can  live,  because  it 
consists  in  the  loyalty  of  the  heart  and  life  to  Christ.  Obadiah  kept  his  conscience  in 
the  house  of  Ahab,  Daniel  his  in  the  court  of  Babylon,  Nehemiah  his  in  the  Persian 
palace.  As  Jonathan  Edwards  says,  "  The  grace  of  God  can  live  where  neither  you 
nor  I  can."  In  the  abodes  of  poverty  humble  Christians  are  living  as  near  to  God  as 
Enoch.  Even  yet,  if  we  care  to  look  for  it,  we  may  find  the  lily  among  thorns.  2. 
What  is  true  of  places  is  true  of  occupations.  Unless  a  man's  business  is  sinful  he 
may  serve  God  in  any  profession.  The  Roman  army  was  a  very  poor  school  of  morals, 
yet  all  the  centurions  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament  were  good  men.  The 
sailor  is  proverbially  rough,  yet  some  of  the  best  Christians  have  been  sailors. 
What  heroic  godliness  has  been  manifested  by  miners  ?  3.  Now,  if  this  be  so  it 
follows — (1)  That  we  must  not  be  prejudiced  against  a  man  because  of  the  locality 
he  comes  from.  What  peril  Nathaniel  nearly  incurred  because  he  thought  Jesus 
came  from  Nazareth.  Test  a  man  by  what  he  is,  not  by  what  he  comes  from,  (2) 
That  we  ought  not  to  excuse  ourselves  for  our  lack  of  Christianity  by  pleading  the 
force  of  circumstances.  How  often  do  we  hear  one  saying,  "  It  is  no  use  trying  to 
be  a  Christian  where  I  am."    But  it  is  never  necessary  to  do  wrong.     Sin  is  a 


B78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

voluntary  thing,  and  no  external  force  can  constrain  a  man  to  commit  it.  One 
comes  home  intoxicated  and  pleads  that  he  met  some  friends  and  had  to  go  with 
them ;  another  excuses  his  extravagance  on  the  plea  that  he  must  keep  up  appear- 
ances ;  a  third  excuses  his  dishonourable  practices  because  he  is  in  danger  of 
bankruptcy.  But  if  you  cannot  help  doing  wrong  it  is  not  wrong,  but  it  is  the 
consciousness  of  being  able  to  help  it  that  makes  you  so  eager  to  use  the  excuse. 
II.  It  is  hakdeb  to  bk  a  Cheistian  in  some  places  than  in  others.  There  are 
households  in  which  it  seems  most  natural  for  a  child  to  grow  up  in  the  beauty  of 
holiness,  and  others  where  loyalty  to  Christ  is  met  with  opposition.  The  surround- 
ings of  some  occupations  are  more  trying  to  piety  than  others.  When  the  lym- 
phatic Dutchman,  who  took  things  easily,  said  to  his  excited  minister,  "  Dominie, 
restrain  your  temper,"  he  was  met  with  the  pertinent  reply,  "  Restrain  my  temper, 
sir !  I  restrain  more  temper  in  the  course  of  a  single  day  than  you  do  in  a  year." 
That  was  a  difference  of  temperament.  What  then  T  1.  The  Lord  knows  that 
this  is  so,  and  He  will  estimate  our  work  by  our  opportunity.  We  may  be  sure  that 
if  we  are  in  a  hard  place  He  will  give  us  strength  according  to  onr  need.  Each 
gets  his  own  grace.  "  Ilka  blade  of  grass  has  its  ain  drap  o'  dew,"  and  grace  is 
suited  to  the  place  in  which  one  dwells.  2.  We  ought  to  be  charitable  in  our 
judgment  of  each  other.  While  we  hold  ourselves  to  a  rigid  reckoning  in  all 
circumstances,  let  us  make  allowance  for  the  circumstances  of  others.  The  flower 
in  tlie  window  of  a  poor  man's  cottage  may  be  far  from  a  perfect  specimen,  but  it  la 
a  greater  marvel  than  the  superb  specimen  in  a  rich  man's  conservatory.  There 
may  be  more  honour  to  one  man  for  the  Christianity  he  has  maintained  in  the  face 
of  great  obstacles,  though  it  may  be  marked  with  blemishes,  than  there  is  to 
another  who  has  no  such  blemishes,  but  who  has  had  no  such  conflict.     III.  The 

HARDEE  THE  PLACE  IN  WHICH  WE  ABE  WE  SHOULD  BE  THE  MOBE  EARNEST  TO  MAIN- 
TAIN ouB  Christianitt.  Here,  however,  it  is  needful  to  know  what  the  hardest 
place  is.  It  is  not  always  that  where  there  is  the  greatest  external  resistance  to 
Christianity.  An  avowed  antagonist  the  Christian  meets  as  such ;  he  prepares 
himself  for  the  encounter,  and  is  not  taken  unawares ;  but  when  the  ungodly  meet 
him  as  friends,  then  he  is  in  real  peril.  The  world's  attentions  are  more  deadly 
than  its  antagonisms.  The  Church  is  in  the  world  as  a  boat  is  in  the  sea ;  it  can 
float  only  by  being  kept  above  it ;  and  if  we  let  it  become  waterlogged  it  will  be 
Bwamped.  IV.  The  greater  the  duticultt  wb  overcome  in  the  maintainanob 
OP  OUR  Christianity  the  gbeateb  will  be  oub  reward.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Sainthood  in  Nero's  household : — 1.  This  incidental  allusion  informs  us  that  already 
Jesus  was  confessed  before  emperors ;  men  that  in  irresponsible  power  and  savage 
cruelty  had  almost  lost  the  nature  of  men.  Faith  has  won  its  greatest  conquests 
on  straitened  and  sorrowful  fields.  2.  If  the  strength  and  joy  of  believing  are 
proportioned  to  the  weight  of  the  crosses  bom  for  it,  then  in  some  such  post  as  this 
we  must  look  for  the  bravest  witnesses  to  the  truth.  8.  We  eulogize  virtues  that 
flourish  only  in  a  favourite  soil  and  climate.  We  palliate  and  excuse  the  deficiencj, 
when  honesty  is  missing  in  the  household  of  Csesar.  We  forget  that  the  piety  of 
the  Church  and  of  society  dwindles  inevitably  unless  it  is  replenished  by  the  energy 
of  those  valiant  examples  which  will  dare  to  be  true  in  the  palaces  of  power,  and 
fashion,  and  mammon.  4.  There  are  yet  saints  in  Cesar's  household,  and  there  is 
as  good  cause  to  venerate  them  as  when  beasts  licked  up  their  blood  from  the  sand. 
For  the  substance  of  all  sainthood  which  has  vitality  enough  to  live  in  Caesar's 
household  is  this,  that  its  virtue  is  so  built  on  interior  foundations,  and  its  faith  so 
rooted  in  its  Divine  Master,  that  no  outward  opposition  can  break  it  down.  6, 
There  are  special  traits  essential  to  sainthood  in  Caesar's  household.  I.  Courage. 
Christianity  has  favour  for  every  noble  sentiment ;  and  so  she  offers  to  the  veteran 
soldier,  and  to  the  enthusiastic  youth,  a  field  for  bravery  grander  than  any  battle, 
in  the  resistance  of  moral  invasion.  Accordingly,  we  find  that,  very  soon,  Christi- 
anity seized  on  rough  warriors,  and  some  of  these  believers  about  the  person  of 
Nero  must  probably  have  been  guards  of  his  palace.  On  one  of  the  early  Christian 
monuments  at  Rome  there  is  an  epitaph  of  a  young  military  officer,  who  "lived 
long  enough  when  he  shed  his  blood  for  Christ."  But  Christ's  religion  courts  no 
consideration  from  armies.  Its  courage  is  of  another  kind — the  courage  that  bears 
wrong,  but  will  not  commit  it — that  saves  life,  rather  than  destroys  it;  that  springs 
from  an  unspotted  conscience  ;  that  goes  into  and  out  of  all  companies,  counting- 
houses,  caucuses,  and  churches,  with  an  uprightness  not  to  be  bent,  whether  yoa 
bring  threats,  or  sneers,  or  golden  baits  to  tempt  it ;  that  lifts  up  an  unblenchsd 
face  in  the  most  formidable  array  of  difficulties,  satisfied  to  stand  on  God's  side,  t« 


OTAT.  IV.  ]  PHILIPPIANS.  879 

listen  to  the  enooaragement  of  the  beatitades  and  to  hold  to  the  breastplate  of 
righteousness.  Wherever  snoh  Christian  courage  in  duty  is  there  will  be  saints  of 
Offisar's  household.  II.  Modkstt.  They  did  not  call  themselves  saints ;  Paul 
called  them  so.  They  did  not  boast  of  their  religion  ;  there  v^as  too  much  solemn 
sincerity  in  it.  They  did  not  lurk  about  the  temples  to  mock  the  soothsayers,  and 
to  disseminate  slanders  about  the  priesthood.  They  knew  the  joy  of  their  com- 
munion with  Jesus,  and  cared  more  for  that  than  for  the  admiration  of  the  citizens. 
That  was  their  Christian  modesty.  Disjoined  from  their  fortitude,  it  might  have 
degenerated  into  timidity.  And  that  is  often  our  danger.  There  are  persons  of  a 
diffident  disposition,  that  err  in  not  mixing  enough  boldness  of  resistance  with 
their  good  nature.  They  remain  inefficient  disciples  because  they  shrink  from 
public  notice.  This  is  to  turn  "  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit  "  into  a 
wformity,  and  to  rob  the  Master  of  the  testimony  that  is  His  due.  This  is  the 
danger  of  all  threatened  minorities,  but  they  will  get  strength  for  the  fiery  trial  by 
going  back  to  see  how  the  inmates  of  a  palace  full  of  gluttony,  licentiousness,  and 
aU  roval  vices,  held  their  allegiance  fast.  IIL  But  to  imitate  that  successful  blend« 
ing  of  modesty  and  courage,  they  will  want  a  third  quality,  namely,  indbpendencb. 
The  question  of  duty  once  settled,  all  gates  but  that  which  leads  to  acting  it  out 
must  be  shut.  And  beyond  that  point,  all  arguments  from  custom,  from  the  general 
expectation,  from  popular  applause,  from  public  or  private  gratification,  are  im- 
pertinent. Bemember,  these  saints  were  living  in  the  centre  of  the  great  world's 
energy  and  splendour,  and  in  the  very  focus  of  its  intelligence.  Independence  was 
•  virtue  quite  indispensable  to  them ;  but  not  a  whit  more  so  than  to  us.  For, 
every  day.  Providence,  through  our  own  instincts,  pushes  us  into  some  crisis  ol 
moral  peril,  where,  if  we  do  not  act  simply  of  ourselves,  and  take  our  direction  at 
first  hand  from  the  Spirit,  our  integrity  itself  is  gone.  IV.  And  superadded  to 
independence  and  modesty  and  courage  is  comstanot.  There  must  have  been  many 
days  when  it  would  have  been  easy  and  convenient  for  these  saints  to  slip  round 
into  the  old  comfortable  heathenism.  Inducements  were  not  wanting.  For  the 
ignorant  there  was  personal  safety.  For  the  cutivated  Seneca  was  alive.  But  they 
held  fast.  They  might  be  hunted  out,  and  see  their  teachers  slaughtered;  but  they 
gathered  again  the  next  evening,  and  other  hands,  veiling  to  be  mangled  by  the 
same  martyrdom,  broke  to  them  the  bread  of  life.  The  emperor  might  send  them 
out  to  build  his  baths  ;  they  raised  no  civil  rebellion,  but  while  they  bent  to  their 
slavery  they  kuelt  and  prayed  to  their  Father.  Arrows  might  pierce  their  bodies, 
but  they  believed  the  Lord  Jesus  would  receive  their  spirits.  God  is  asking  con- 
Btancy  of  us.  Our  Nero  is  self-love.  The  senses  are  the  Caesars  of  all  ages. 
Fashion  is  a  Eome  that  commissions  its  legions  and  spreads  its  silent  empire  wider 
than  the  Prastorian  eagles.  The  reigning  temper  of  the  world  is  the  imperishable 
persecutor  and  tyrant  of  the  faithful  soul.  And  so,  in  every  home  and  street  there 
are  chances  for  the  reappearing  of  saints  in  Caesar's  household.  {Bishop  Hunting- 
ton.) The  religion  of  charity  compatible  with  all  callings : — Notice  that  the 
"  chief "  salutations  came  from  the  unlikeliest  place.  It  is  a  rebuke  to  some  who 
think  that  Christianity  pervades  one  state  of  life  more  than  another.  At  times 
men  have  thought  that  the  Christian  religion  was  peculiarly  suitable  to  the  poor, 
and  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  officers  of  Caesar's  household.  Christ  preached  at 
first  to  the  lowly,  yet  wise  and  rich  were  also  called.  If  saints  are  found  in  Caesar's 
household  where  shall  they  not  be  found  ?  But  men  go  sighing  to  find  the  proper 
soil  for  religion,  and  go  to  the  desert  to  be  religious,  and  think  that  when  a  man 
is  a  beggar  he  must  be  nearest  heaven.  I.  Christianity  has  affinity  with  aui 
CALLINGS,  1.  With  riches,  because  the  great  grace  of  charity  can  be  exercised 
thereby.  Wlioso  has  charity  in  his  heart  and  wealth  in  his  hand  has  the  finest  gift 
of  God.  2.  With  statesmanship,  although  it  is  common  to  say  that  that  is  a  very 
uncongenial  atmosphere  for  a  Christian.  But  a  statesman  can  put  an  end  to  the 
foul  obstructions  that  hinder  truth  ;  he  can  make  laws  that  men  shall  be  no  longer 
housed  in  conditions  that  make  righteousness  impossible.  3.  With  the  soldier, 
though  some  think  not.  Though  the  day  will  come  when  war  shall  be  at  an  end, 
nevertheless  he  who  goes  forth  in  a  good  cause  stirred  by  the  spirit  of  verity  to  do 
righteousness  in  the  spirit  of  order,  obedience,  and  self  sacrifice,  between  him  and 
the  Christian  faith  are  strong  afiinities.  4.  With  retirement.  Christianity  has 
much  to  say  about  the  Wessings  of  quiet  existence,  in  deepening  the  wells  of  life. 
6.  With  business.  The  merchant  may  be  the  most  eminent  missionary.  6.  With 
art.  The  artist  who  gives  relief  to  the  tired  eye  and  brain,  who  preaches  the  God 
of  eternal  beauty,  and  the  spirit  which  underlies  all  visible  things,  is  in  harmony 


880  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

with  oar  faith.     II.  WErEREiN  consists  this  onitt  bt  which  the  spirit  o»  Cheisi 

HAS   AN    AFFINITY   WITH    EXTREMELY    OPPOSITE    CHARACTERISTICS  ?        1.    Let    US    Wander 

seemingly  for  a  time  and  answer  this  question  by  asking  another.  It  is  not  whether 
this  or  that  calling  or  characteristic  be  holy  or  not,  but  what  is  that  holiness  which 
justifies  us  in  calling  it  holy  ?  A  man  may  be  a  sweeper  of  chimneys  or  the  holder 
of  a  sceptre ;  but  the  sceptre  may  be  swayed  in  righteousness,  and  so  may  the 
besom.  The  righteousness  of  each  depends  on  the  degree  to  which  each  embodies 
in  his  calling  that  which  constitutes  righteousness.  2.  To  do  a  good  action  three 
things  are  essential.  (1)  That  you  know  what  you  are  doing.  (2)  That  you  do  it 
from  choice.  (3)  That  you  have  firmness  and  perseverance  to  do  the  like  at  all 
times.  3.  Having  knowledge,  intention,  and  persistence  in  the  performance  of 
that  which  is  just  and  wise,  the  question  becomes  this — What  is  that  which,  put  into 
voice  or  action,  constitutes  it  an  act  in  accord  with  the  Christian  faith  ?  Christianity 
pronounces  it  to  be  charity.  Charity  means  the  large,  loving,  constant  doing  of  aU 
things  great  and  small.  It  is  the  universal  spirit  to  which  there  is  nothing  great 
or  small.  A  king  through  charity  may  sway  the  sceptre,  and  a  room  may  be  swept 
to  the  glory  of  God.  So  in  Caesar's  household  and  Peter's  fishing  hut,  it  is  possible 
to  be  filled  with  that  which  constitutes  the  spirit  of  religion.  Therefore  it  is  a 
matter  of  indifference  what  your  calling  may  be.  If  you  are  scandal-mongers,  in- 
deed, is  is  impossible  to  be  charitable,  because  you  violate  the  first  principles  of 
charity.  When  one  lives  not  in  constant  piety  one  goes  back  to  Caesar's  household 
and  thinks  who  they  were.  (G.  Dawson,  ilf.il.)  Chrixtianity : — I.  Is  holy — it 
makes  men  saints.  II.  Mighty — it  enters  the  palace.  III.  Fearless — it  stands 
before  Nero.     IV.  KrND — it  teaches  love.      {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  composition  of 

Casar's  household: — The  household  of  the  emperor  consisted  mainly  of  troops  and 
of  slaves  who  ministered  to  his  wants  and  caprices  as  the  wealthiest  and  mos 
luxurious  of  Roman  magnates.  But  senators  and  knights  were  also  in  close  attend- 
ance upon  him,  equally  in  his  hours  of  business  and  relaxation.  These,  indeed, 
were  probably  masters  of  households  of  their  own ;  thus  Seneca,  the  most  intimate 
of  his  ministers,  enjoyed  a  private  residence  in  his  gardens  ;  Burrus,  the  prefect  of 
the  Prffitorians,  whose  duty  broughthim.nodoubt,  daily  into  the  imperial  presence, 
occupied  his  own  lodging  in  the  Praetorian  camp.  The  affairs  of  government  were 
transacted  chiefly  by  the  emperor's  freedmen,  some  of  them  notorious  for  their 
riches  and  influence,  court  favourites  who  had  been  enfranchised  by  himself  or  his 
predecessors.  These  also  had  each  his  own  palace  and  gardens,  in  which  he  vied 
with  the  proudest  of  the  ancient  aristocracy.  Nevertheless  these,  too,  were  so 
closely  attached  to  the  emperor's  person  that  they  might  claim  to  form  a  part  of 
Caesar's  household,  and  any  one  of  them  may  have  come  in  contact  with  Paul.  A 
man  of  Paul's  power  of  thought  and  language,  speaking  with  the  academic  tone  of  a 
scholar  of  Tarsus,  and  the  natural  fervour  of  a  Hebrew  prophet,  could  hardly  fail 
to  command  the  attention  of  the  feverish  students  of  moral  truth  who  abounded  in 
the  ranks  of  the  Roman  aristocracy.  But  if  such  turned  away  he  could  not  fail  to 
be  received  among  the  lower  class  of  the  emperor's  household  attendants,  both 
male  and  female,  who  filled  a  thousand  menial  offices  about  his  person,  and  that 
of  his  consort.  The  ministers  to  the  luxury  of  Poppaea  were  certainly  not  less 
numerous  than  those  who  discharged  similar  functions  for  Livia  before  her. 
Among  them  were  servants  of  the  chamber  and  the  ante-chamber,  servants  who 
waited  at  the  doors,  who  attended  at  the  bath,  who  assisted  at  the  toilet,  who  kept 
the  jewels,  who  read  at  the  empress's  couch,  who  sat  at  her  feet,  who  followed  her 
in  her  walks,  who  lulled  her  to  sleep  and  watched  over  her  slumbers,  who  had  charge 
of  her  purse,  and  distributed  the  tasks  of  the  whole  household.  The  persons  in 
waiting  on  the  emperor  were  probably  even  more  multitudinous,  and  while  many 
of  their  functions  were  merely  manual,  there  were  not  a  few  entrusted  with  affaire 
which  required  high  intellectual  training.  The  emperor  was  surrounded  with 
numerous  members  of  the  learned  classes  such  as  could  discharge  the  duties  of 
secretaries,  physicians,  professors  of  every  art  and  accomplishment  and  teachers  in 
philosophy.  To  have  access  to  Caesar's  household  was  to  be  put  into  communi- 
cation with  the  most  intelligent  people  of  the  day.  Over  Paul's  intercouse  with 
these  people  a  cloud  rests,  but  it  so  happens  that  recent  excavations  have  dis- 
covered the  names  of  various  persons  connected  with  the  court  of  Claudius  which 
are  identical  with  those  which  the  apostle  mentions  in  hia  Epistle  to  the  Romans. 
We  filnd  among  these  names  those  oi  Amphas,  Urbanus,  Stachys,  Apella,  Try- 
phena,  Tryphosa,  Rufus,  Hermas,  Potrobius  (Patrobas),  Philologus,  and  Nereus. 
Some  of  these,  no  doubt,  are  very  common  appellatives ;   bat  the  occorreno*  of 


obap.  IV.]  PEILIPPIAN8.  881 

BO  many  coincidences  can  hardly  be  accidentaL  And  the  easy  and  familiar  way 
in  which  the  apostle  introduses  the  mention  of  "  the  sainta  in  Ciesar's  house- 
hold," seems  to  imply  that  he  stood  on  an  easy  footing  with  them.  It  is  the  style 
of  one  who  went  in  and  ont  among  them,  of  a  man  who  dwelt  close  at  hand ; 
accessible  daily  as  they  passed  by  on  their  ordinary  avocations.  (Dean  Meri- 
vaU.) 

V«r.  23.  The  graco  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  yon  alL  Amen. — The 
benediction: — L  Its  oontsnxs — grace.  II.  Its  oompbehbnsivkmuss — it  embraces 
alL  IIL  Its  powkb — it  is  yea  and  amen.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Grace: — I.  Its 
■0UB0B8.  II.  Its  rui4Nsss.  III.  Ira  rLow.  lY.  Its  power.  (Ibid.)  In  parting 
with  bis  readers  the  apostle  wishes  them  to  possess  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesos; 
that  graoe  which — L  Bussssa  and  oBSBita.  IL  STsssaiaxas  un  ooasffliiKH, 
IIL  At  last  Bupuia  orro  «ix>ki.     {Prof.  Eadie,) 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE 
COLOSSIANS. 

L  Tm  Chttbob  to  wbiob  r  was  Wbittbn. — 1.  The  locality  and  people.  A  rich 
eantOD  of  Sonthem  Phrygia,  in  particnlar  the  small  basin  of  the  Lycos,  a  tributary 
of  the  Meander,  saw  some  active  Christian  centres  formed  within  it.  Three  towns 
Tery  close  to  each  other — Colossse,  Laodicea,  and  Hierapolis — filled  it  with  life. 
ColoBSffi,  which  in  old  days  was  the  most  important,  appeared  to  decline ;  it  was  a 
(own  which  remained  faithful  to  ancient  ways,  and  did  not  renew  itself.  Laodicea 
and  Hierapolis,  on  the  contrary,  became,  in  consequence  of  the  Boman  Empire, 
very  considerable  cities.  The  very  soul  of  all  this  beautiful  country  is  Mount 
Cadmus,  the  patriarch  of  all  the  mountains  of  Western  Asia — a  gigantic  mass,  full 
of  dark  precipices,  and  keeping  its  snows  all  the  year  round.  The  waters  which 
flow  down  from  it  freshen  one  of  the  slopes  of  the  valley,  upon  which  are  orchards 
filled  with  fruit  trees,  traversed  by  rivers  full  of  fish,  and  enlivened  with  storks 
which  are  quite  tame.  The  other  side  is  quite  given  up  to  the  strangest  freaks  of 
nature.  The  encrusting  properties  of  the  calcareous  waters  of  one  of  the  afiluenta 
of  the  Lycus,  and  the  enormous  mass  of  hot  water  \\hich  falls  in  a  cascade  from 
the  mountains  of  Hierapolis,  have  struck  the  plain  with  sterility,  and  formed  cre- 
vasses, quaint  caverns,  beds  of  subterranean  streams,  fantastic  piles,  and  layers  like 
petrified  snow,  serving  as  a  reservoir  for  waters  which  reflect  all  the  colours  of  the 
rainbow ;  deep  hollows  whence  far  resounding  waters  rush  on  in  a  succession  of 
cataracts.  On  this  side  the  heat  is  extreme,  the  soil  being  nothing  but  one  vast 
plain  paved  with  calcareous  blocks.  But  upon  the  heights  of  Hierapolis,  the  purity 
of  the  air,  the  splendid  light,  the  view  of  Mount  Cadmus,  swimming  like  another 
Olympus  in  a  lustrous  atmosphere,  the  burnt-up  summits  of  Phrygia  fading  into 
the  blue  heaven  in  a  rosy  tint,  the  opening  of  the  valley  of  the  Meander,  the  oblique 
outlines  of  Messogis,  the  far  white  summits  of  Tmolns,  produce  a  truly  dazzUng 
effect.  There  hved  St.  Philip  and  Papias ;  there  Epictetus  was  bom.  All  the 
valley  of  the  Lycus  presents  the  same  character  of  dreamy  mysticism.  The  popu- 
lation was  not  Greek  by  origin ;  it  was  partly  Phrygian.  There  was  also  round 
Mount  Cadmus  an  old  Semitic  settlement.  Jewish  colonies  had  been  transplanted 
from  Babylon  two  centuries  and  a  half  before,  and  had  first  brought  with  them 
flome  of  those  industries  (carpet  weaving,  &e.)  which,  under  Roman  Emperorsi 
produced  in  the  country  such  opulence  and  such  powerful  guilds  or  companies. 
Christianity  followed,  and  remained  for  three  centuries  the  religion'of  the  country. 
A  great  number  of  the  Christians  of  Ephesus  and  Rome  came  from  Phrygia.  The 
names  most  frequently  found  upon  Phrygian  monuments  are  the  old  Christian 
names,  Trophimus,  Tychicus,  Tryphena,  Onesimus.  {E.  Renan.)  2.  The  origin, 
growth,  and  circumstances  of  the  Church.  There  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that 
when  Paul  wrote  this  Epistle  he  bad  ever  visited  the  Church,  but  if  he  was  not 
directly  its  evangelist,  it  was  indirectly  indebted  to  him  for  its  knowledge  of  the 
truth.  Epaphras  had  been  his  delegate,  and  by  Epaphras  the  Colossians  had  been 
converted  to  the  gospel  (chap.  i.  6).    How  or  when  their  conversion  took  place  w« 


vi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS. 

have  no  direct  information.  Yet  it  can  hardly  be  wrong  to  connect  the  event  with 
St,  Paul's  long  sojourn  at  Ephesus  (a.d.  54-57).  It  is  possible  that  during  thia 
period  he  paid  short  visits  to  neighbouring  cities,  but  if  so  these  interruptions  to 
hia  residence  in  Ephesus  must  have  been  slight  and  infrequent  (Acts  xx,  18).  Yet 
though  the  apostle  himself  was  stationary,  his  teaching  and  influence  spread  far 
and  wide  (Acts  xix.  10,  26),  and  the  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  contains  salu- 
tations, not  from  Ephesus  alone,  but  from  the  "  Churches  of  Asia  "  generally  (1  Cor. 
xvi.  19  ;  cf.  2  Cor.  i.  8  ;  Rom.  xvi.  5).  To  Ephesus,  as  the  metropolis  of  Western 
Asia,  would  flock  crowds  from  all  the  towns  and  villages  far  and  near.  Thence 
they  would  carry  away,  each  to  his  own  neighbourhood,  the  spiritual  treasure  they 
had  unexpectedly  found.  Among  the  places  thus  represented  at  the  Asian  metro- 
polis would  doubtless  be  the  cities  lying  in  the  valley  of  the  Lycus.  The  bonds  of 
amity  between  these  places  and  Ephesus  were  unusually  strong.  The  "  Concord  of 
the  Laodiceans  and  Ephesians,"  the  "Concord  of  the  Hierapolitans  and  Ephesians," 
are  repeatedly  commemorated  on  medals  struck  for  the  purpose.  Thus  the  Coloa- 
sians,  Epapbras  and  Philemon,  the  latter  with  his  household  (Philem.  1,  2, 19),  and 
perhaps  also  the  Laodicean  Nymphas  (Col.  iv.  15)  would  fall  in  with  the  Apostle  to 
the  Gentiles,  and  hear  from  his  lips  the  first  tidings  of  a  heavenly  life.  But  what- 
ever service  may  have  been  rendered  by  Philemon  at  CoIosssb  or  by  Nymphas  at 
Laodicea,  it  was  to  Epapbras  especially  that  all  three  cities  were  indebted  for  their 
knowledge  of  the  Gospel  (chap.  iv.  12,  13),  and  he  looked  upon  himself  as  respon- 
sible for  the  spiritual  well-being  of  ah  alike.  We  pass  over  a  period  of  five  or  six 
years.  St.  Paul's  first  captivity  in  Rome  is  now  drawing  to  a  close.  During  thia 
interval  he  has  not  once  visited  the  valley  of  the  Lycus.  Two  circumstances,  one 
affecting  his  public  duties,  another  private  and  personal,  at  this  time  conspired  to 
bring  CoIosssb  prominently  before  his  notice.  (1)  He  had  received  a  visit  from 
Epapbras,  whose  mind  was  alarmed  at  the  dangerous  condition  of  the  Colossian 
and  neighbouring  Churches.  A  strange  heresy  had  broken  out  and  was  spreading 
rapidly.  The  faithful  evangelist,  therefore,  came  to  Rome  to  seek  Paul's  counsel 
and  assistance.  (2)  But  at  the  same  time  St.  Paul  was  also  in  commonication  with 
another  Colossian,  who  had  visited  Rome  under  very  different  circumstances. 
OnesimuK,  the  runaway  slave,  perhaps  accidentally,  perhaps  through  Epapbras, 
fell  in  with  his  master's  old  friend.  The  apostle  interested  himself  in  his  case  and 
transformed  him  from  a  good-for-nothing  slave  (Philem,  11)  into  a  faithful  and 
beloved  brother  (CoL  iv.  9;  of,  Philem,  16),  This  combination  of  ciroumstanoea 
called  Paul's  attention  to  the  Churches  of  the  Lycus  and  more  especially  to  Colossa. 
(Bishop  Liglitfoot.) 

n.  Where,  Wheh,  akd  Under  What  Circumstances  it  was  Written. — There  are 
in  the  Epistle  indications  of  the  time  and  place  of  writing  similar  to  those  found  in 
Ephesians  and  Philippians.  It  was  written  in  prison  (chap.  iv.  10,  18).  Like  the 
former  it  is  sent  by  Tychicus,  with  precisely  the  same  oflScial  commendation  of  him 
(chap.  iv.  7-8,  cf.  Eph.  vi.  21-22) ;  but  with  him  is  joined  Oneaimus,  the  Colossian 
slave,  the  bearer  of  the  Epistle  to  Philemon.  The  persons  named  in  the  concluding 
salutations  (chap.  iv.  7-14)  correspond,  with  the  exception  of  Justus,  with  those 
mentioned  to  Philemon  (vers.  23,  24) ;  two  of  them,  Aristarchus  and  Luke,  are 
known  to  have  accompanied  the  apostle  on  his  voyage  as  a  captive  to  Rome  (Act! 
xxvii.  2),  and  another,  Tychicus,  to  have  been  his  companion  on  the  journey  to 
Jerusalem,  which  preceded  the  beginning  of  that  captivity  at  Csesarea  (Acts  xx.  4). 
A  direction  is  given  to  forward  this  Epistle  to  Laodicea,  and  to  obtain  and  read  • 
letter  from  Laodicea  (chap.  iv.  16),  which  is,  in  all  probability,  our  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians,  an  encyclical  letter  addressed  to  sister  Churches.  All  these  indications 
point  to  one  conclusion — not  only  that  Colossians  is  one  of  the  Epistles  of  the  first 
captivity  (a.d.  61-63),  but  that  it  is  a  twin  Epistle  with  the  Ephesians,  sent  at  tht 


INTRODVCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.        Tii 

nme  time  and  hj  the  same  hand,  and  designed  to  be  interchanged  with  it  in  th« 
Churches  of  Co1us88b  and  Laodicea.    (BUJwp  Barry.) 

III.  Its  Occasion  and  Subject. — To  the  apostle's  lodgings  there  comes  a  brother 
from  Colossce,  Epaphras  by  name,  who  brings  with  him  bad  news  which  hardens 
Panl's  heart  with  Bolicitnde.  Many  a  night  would  he  and  Epaphras  spend  in  deep 
converse  on  the  matter,  with  the  stolid  Roman  legionary  to  whom  Paul  was  chained 
sitting  wearily  by.  The  tidings  were  that  a  strange  disease,  hatched  in  that  hot-bed 
of  religious  fancies,  the  dreamy  East,  was  threatening  the  faith  of  the  Colossian 
Christians.  A  peculiar  form  of  heresy,  compounded  of  Jewish  ritualism  and 
Oriental  mysticism,  was  being  vigorously  preached.  The  characteristic  Eastern 
dogma,  that  matter  is  evil  and  the  source  of  evil,  had  begun  to  infect  them.  The 
conclusion  was  quickly  drawn  that  God  and  matter  must  be  antagonistic,  and 
60  the  creation  and  government  of  this  world  could  not  have  come  directly  from 
Him.  The  endeavour  to  keep  the  pure  Divinity  and  the  gross  world  as  far  apart  as 
possible,  while  yet  an  intellectual  necessity  forbade  the  entire  breaking  of  the  bond 
between  them,  led  to  the  busy  working  of  the  imagination,  which  spanned  the 
void  guif  with  a  chain  of  intermediate  beings,  emanations,  abstractions,  each 
approaching  more  nearly  to  the  material.  Such  notions  made  wild  work  with  the 
plainest  moral  teachings  of  conscience  and  Christianity.  For  if  matter  be  the 
source  of  all  evil,  then  the  fountain  of  each  man's  sin  is  to  be  found  not  in  his  own 
perverted  will,  but  in  his  body;  and  the  cure  of  it  is  to  be  reached,  not  by  faith, 
which  plants  a  new  life  in  the  sinful  spirit,  but  simply  by  ascetic  mortification  of 
the  flesh.  Strangely  united  with  these  teachings  were  the  narrowest  doctrines  of 
Jewish  ritualism,  insisting  on  circumcision,  laws  regulating  food,  the  observance  of 
feast  days.  It  is  a  monstrous  combination,  a  cross  between  a  Talmudical  rabbi 
and  a  Buddhist  priest,  and  yet  it  is  not  unnatural  that,  after  soaring  in  these  lofty 
regions  of  speculation,  where  the  air  is  too  thin  to  suppoit  life,  men  should  be  glad 
to  get  hold  of  the  externals  of  an  elaborate  ritual.  Extremes  meet.  If  you  go  far 
enough  east  yon  are  west.  But  what  does  all  tliis  matter  to  us?  The  truth  which 
Paul  opposed  to  these  heresies  is  all-important  for  every  age.  It  was  simply  the 
Person  of  Christ  as  the  only  manifestation  of  the  Divine,  the  link  between  God  and 
the  Universe,  its  Creator  and  Preserver,  the  Life  and  Light  of  men,  the  Lord  and 
Inspirer  of  the  Church.  Christ  has  come,  laying  His  hand  upon  both  God  and 
man ;  therefore  there  is  no  need  or  place  for  a  misty  crowd  of  angelio  beings  or 
shadowy  abstractions  to  bridge  the  gulf  across  which  His  incarnation  flings  its 
single  solid  arch.  Christ  has  been  bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  there- 
fore that  cannot  be  the  source  of  evil  in  which  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  has 
dwelt  as  in  a  shrine.  Christ  has  come,  the  fountain  of  life  and  holiness,  therefore 
there  is  no  more  place  for  ascetic  mortifications  nor  for  Jewish  scrupulosities.  To 
urge  these  and  the  like  truths  this  letter  was  written.  Its  central  principle  is  the 
sovereign  and  exclusive  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  God-man,  the  victorious 
antagonist  of  these  dead  speculations,  and  the  destined  conqueror  of  all  the  doubts 
and  confusions  of  this  day.  If  we  grasp  with  mind  and  heart  that  truth,  we  can 
possess  our  souls  in  patience,  and  in  its  Ught  see  Ught,  where  else  ia  darkness  and 
oncertainty.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

TV.  It8  Genuineness. — 1.  The  external  testimony  is  considerable.  The  following 
verses  are  quoted  or  referred  to  in  the  Apostolic  Fathers :  chap.  i.  16  by  Barnabas ; 
ver.  18  by  Clement ;  ver.  25  by  Ignatius ;  chap.  iii.  4  by  Ignatius,  and  ver.  14  by 
Clement  Marcion,  the  earliest  herald  of  sceptical  criticism,  who  rejected  Timothy 
and  Titus,  admitted  Colossians  and  Philemon.  It  is  cited  by  Irenseas,  CSlement  of 
Alexandria,  Tertullian,  and  still  earlier  by  Theophilus  of  Antiooh  and  Justin 
Mjtftjyr.    All  candid  criticism  agrees  with  M.  Benan's  ooQcloaiou  that  the  Epistle 


Tili       INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8. 


is  "  to  be  received  unhesitatingly  as  the  work  of  St.  Paul."  (Bishop  Alexander.) 
2.  Internal  evidence.  None  but  Paul  could  have  written  it.  To  say  that  it  is  tm- 
Pauline  in  doctrine  is  to  make  an  arbitrary  assertion,  since  it  states  no  single  truth 
which  is  not  involved  in  his  previous  teachings.  The  fact  that  it  is  a  splendid 
development  of  those  teachings,  or  rather  an  expanded  statement  of  them  to  meet 
new  exigencies,  is  simply  in  its  favour.  Nor  do  I  see  how  any  one  familiar  with 
the  style  and  mind  of  St.  Paul  ean  fail  to  recognize  his  touch.  That  the  style 
should  lack  the  fire  and  passion  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  and  the  easy 
fervent  overflowing  of  thought  and  feeling  in  those  to  the  Thessalonians,  Corin- 
thians, and  Philippians,  is  perfectly  natural.  Of  all  the  converts  to  whom  Paul  had 
written,  the  Colossians  alone  were  entire  strangers  to  him.  He  had  not,  indeed, 
visited  Rome,  but  many  members  of  that  Church  were  personally  known  to  him, 
and  he  was  writing  on  a  familiar  theme  which  had  for  years  been  occupying  his 
thoughts.  The  mere  fact  that  he  had  already  written  on  the  same  topic  to  the 
Galatians  would  make  his  thoughts  flow  more  easily.  But  in  writing  to  the  Colos- 
sians he  was  handling  a  new  theme,  combatting  a  recent  error,  with  which  among 
Christians  he  had  not  come  into  personal  contact,  and  of  which  he  merely  knew  the 
special  characteristics  at  second  hand.  When  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  he 
reverts  to  the  same  kind  of  conceptions,  his  sentences  run  with  far  greater  ease. 
The  style  of  no  man  is  stereotyped,  and  least  of  all  is  this  the  case  with  a  man  so 
many  sided,  so  emotional,  so  original  as  St.  Paul.  His  manner  reflects  to  an 
unusual  degree  the  impressions  of  the  time,  place,  mood  in  which  he  was  writing. 
A  thousand  circumstances  unknown  to  us  may  have  given  to  this  Epistle  that  rigid 
character,  that  want  of  spontaneity  in  the  movement  of  the  sentences  which  led 
even  Ewald  into  the  improbable  conjecture  that  the  words  were  Timothy's,  though 
the  subject  and  the  thoughts  belong  to  Paul.  But  the  difference  of  style  between 
it  and  other  Epistles  is  no  greater  than  we  find  in  the  works  of  other  authors  at 
different  periods  of  their  Uves,  or  than  we  daily  observe  in  the  writings  and  speeches 
of  living  men  who  deal  with  different  topics  in  varying  moods.  {Archdeacon 
Farrar.) 

y.  Its  Relation  to  thx  Otheb  Epistles. — 1.  To  the  other  Epistles  in  general. 
Each  of  Paul's  greater  Epistles  has  its  one  salient  thought.  In  that  to  the  Romans 
it  is  justification  by  faith  ;  in  Ephesians  it  is  the  mystical  onion  of  Christ  and  His 
Church ;  in  Philippians  it  is  the  joy  of  Christian  progress ;  in  this  Epistle  it  is  the 
dignity  and  sole  sufficiency  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Mediator  and  Head  of  all  creation 
and  of  the  Church.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  2.  To  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians. 
It  is  in  exact  psychological  accordance  with  the  peculiarities  of  St.  Paul's  mind  and 
style  that,  if,  after  writing  a  letter  which  was  evoked  by  peculiar  circumstances,  and 
led  to  the  development  of  particular  truths,  he  utilized  the  opportunity  of  its 
despatch  to  send  another  letter,  which  had  no  such  immediate  object,  the  tonets  of 
the  first  letter  would  still  vibrate  in  the  second.  When  he  had  discharged  hiB 
immediate  duty  to  the  Church  of  CoIosssb,  the  topics  dwelt  upon  in  writing  to  the 
neighbouring  Churches  would  be  sure  to  bear  a  close  resemblance  to  those  which 
had  most  recently  been  occupying  his  thoughts.  Even  apart  from  special  informa- 
tion St.  Paul  may  have  seen  the  desirability  of  warning  Ephesus  and  its  depen- 
dencies against  a  peril  which  was  infusing  its  subtle  presence  within  so  short  a 
distance  from  them  ;  and  it  was  theu  natural  that  his  language  to  them  should  be 
marked  by  the  very  differences  which  separate  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  from 
that  to  the  Ephesians.  The  former  is  specific,  concrete,  and  polemical ;  the  latter 
is  abstract,  didactic,  general.  The  same  words  and  phrases  predominate  in  both; 
but  the  resemblances  are  far  more  marked  and  numerous  in  the  practical  exhorta- 
tions than  in  the  doctrinal  statements.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  he  ia 
primarily  oocapied  with  the  refutation  of  an  error ;  in  that  to  the  Ephesians  he  i» 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         ix 

absorbed  in  the  raptaroas  development  of  an  exalted  tratb.  The  main  theme  of 
the  Colossians  is  the  Person  of  Christ ;  that  of  the  Ephesians  is  the  life  of  Christ 
manifested  in  the  living  energy  of  His  Church  (Col.  ii.  19 ;  Eph.  iv.  16).  In  the 
former  Christ  is  the  "  Plentitnde  " — the  synthesis  and  totality  of  every  attribute  of 
God.  In  the  latter,  the  ideal  Church,  as  the  body  of  Christ,  is  the  Plentitnde,  the 
dpient  of  all  the  fulness  of  EUm  who  filled  all  things  with  alL  Christ's  Person 
most  prominent  in  the  Colossians ;  Christ's  body  in  the  Ephesians.  {Archdeacon 
arrar. )  The  Epistles  to  the  Ephesians  and  Colossians  deal  with  the  same  lines 
of  truth ;  they  differ  only  in  the  method  of  treatment.  That  to  the  Ephesians  is 
devotional  and  expository ;  that  to  the  Colossians  is  polemical.  In  the  Colossians 
the  dignity  of  Christ's  Person  is  put  forward  most  explicitly  as  against  the  specula- 
lions  of  a  Jndaizing  theosophy  which  degraded  Christ  to  the  rank  of  an  archangel, 
which  recommended  as  a  substitute  for  Christ's  redemptive  work  asoetio  obser- 
vanoes,  grounded  on  a  trust  in  the  cleansing  and  hallowing  properties  and  powers 
of  discipline.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  our  Lord's  personal  dignity  is 
Mserted  more  indirectly.  It  is  implied  in  His  reconciliation  of  Jews  and  heathens 
to  eaoh  other  and  to  Ood,  and  still  more  in  its  relation  to  the  predestination  of  the 
■aints.  In  both  Epistles  we  encounter  two  prominent  lines  of  thought,  each  in  a 
high  degree  pointing  to  Christ's  Divine  dignity.  The  first,  the  absolute  character 
of  the  Christian  faith  as  contrasted  with  the  relative  character  of  heathenism  and 
Judaism ;  the  second,  the  recreative  power  of  the  grace  of  Christ.  In  both  Epistles 
the  Church  is  considered  as  a  vast  spiritual  society  (Col.  i.  5,  6)  which,  besides 
embracing  as  its  heritage  all  the  races  of  the  world,  pierces  the  veil  of  the  unseen, 
and  includes  the  families  of  heaven  (Eph.  iii.  15)  in  its  majestic  compass.  Of  this 
■ociety  Chriet  is  the  Head  (Eph.  i.  22,  23).  He  is  the  predestined  point  of  unity  to 
which  earth  and  heaven,  Jew  and  Gentile,  meet  and  are  one  (Eph.  i.  10).  His  death 
U  the  triumph  of  peace  in  the  spiritual  world.  Peace  with  Qod  is  secured  through 
the  taking  away  of  the  law  of  condemnation  by  the  Cross  (CoL  ii.  14,  16).  Peace 
Among  men  is  secured  because  the  Cross  is  the  centre  of  the  regenerated  world  as 
of  the  moral  universe  (Col.  i.  20,  21).     (Canon  Liddon.) 

YL  lis  CoNTBNTS. — The  following  is  an  analysis  of  the  Epistle.  I.  Ihtboduotobt. 
1.  Opening  salutation  (i.  1,  2).  2.  Thanksgiving  for  the  progress  of  the  Colossians 
hitherto  (L  8-8).  8.  Prayer  for  their  future  advancement  in  knowledge  and  well 
doing  through  Christ  (L  9-13).  (This  leads  the  apostle  to  speak  of  Christ  as  the 
only  path  of  progress.)  IL  DocTRiNAih  The  Person  and  work  of  Christ  1. 
Through  the  Son  we  have  our  redemption  (i.  13,  14).  2.  The  pre-eminence  of  the 
Bon.  (1)  As  the  Head  of  the  natural  creation,  the  universe  (i.  15-19).  (2)  As  the 
Head  of  the  new  moral  creation,  the  Church  (i.  18).  Thus  He  is  first  in  all  things ; 
and  this  because  the  pleroma  has  its  abode  in  Him  (i.  19).  3.  The  work  of  the  Son 
— reconciliation  (1)  Described  generally  (i.  20).  (2)  Applied  specially  to  the 
Colossians  (i.  21-23).  (3)  St.  Paul's  own  part  in  carrying  out  this  work.  His 
Bufferings  and  preaching.  The  "  mystery "  with  which  he  is  charged  (i.  24-27). 
His  anxiety  on  behalf  of  all  (i.  28,  29) ;  and  more  especially  of  the  Coloseian  and 
neighbouring  Churches  (ii.  1-3).  This  expression  of  anxiety  leads  him  by  a  direct 
path  to  the  next  division  of  the  Epistle.  IH.  Polemical.  Warning  against  errors. 
1.  The  Colossians  charged  to  abide  in  the  truth  of  the  Gospel  as  they  received  it  at 
first,  and  not  to  be  led  astray  by  a  strange  philosophy  which  the  new  teachers  offer 
(ii  4-8).  (In  the  passage  which  follows  (ii.  9-23)  it  will  be  observed  how  St.  Paul 
vibrates  between  the  theological  and  practical  bearings  of  the  truth.)  2.  The  truth 
etated.  (1)  Positively,  (a)  The  pleroma  dwells  wholly  in  Christ  and  is  oommuni- 
eated  through  Him  (ii.  9-10).  (b)  The  true  circumcision  is  a  spiritual  circumcision 
(ii.  11,  12).  (2)  Negatively.  Christ  has— (a)  annulled  the  law  of  ordinanoea  (iL 
14).    {b)  Triumphed  over  all  spiritual  agencies,  however  powerfol  (iL  16).     H 


X  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0S8IAN8, 

Obligations  following  therenpon.  (1)  Gonseqnently  the  Colossians  mast  not — (a) 
either  sabmit  to  ritual  probibitions  (ii.  16,  17) ;  or,  (6)  sabstitute  tbe  worship  of 
inferior  beings  for  allegiance  to  the  Head  (ii.  18, 19).  (2)  On  the  contrary,  thia 
must  henceforth  be  their  role,  (a)  They  have  died  with  Christ ;  and  with  Him  they 
have  died  to  their  old  life,  to  worldly  ordinances  (ii.  20-23).  {h)  They  have  risen 
with  Christ ;  and  with  Him  they  have  risen  to  a  new  life,  to  heavenly  principles 
(iii.  1-4).  lY.  HoBTATOBT.  Practical  application  of  this  death  and  resurrection.  1. 
Comprehensive  rules.  (1)  What  vices  are  to  be  put  off,  being  moi-tified  in  this  death 
(iiL  6-11).  (2)  What  graces  are  to  be  put  on,  being  quickened  by  this  resurrection 
(iii.  12-17).  2.  Special  precepts.  (1)  The  obligations  of  wives  and  husbands  (iii. 
18-19) ;  children  and  parents  (iii.  20-21) ;  of  slaves  and  masters  (iii.  22-iv.  1).  (2) 
The  duty  of  prayer  and  thanksgiving ;  with  special  intercession  on  the  apostle's 
behalf  (iv.  2-4).  (3)  The  duty  of  propriety  in  behaviour  towards  the  unconverted 
(iv.  6-6).  V.  PebsonaIi.  1.  Explanations  relating  to  the  letter  itself  (iv.  7-9).  2. 
Salutations  from  divers  persons  (10-14).  3.  Salutations  to  divers  persons.  A 
message  relating  to  Laodicea  (16-17).     4.  Farewell  (18).     (Bishop  Lightfoot,) 

VII.  Its  Usefulness  in  Relation  to  Ebbob  in  AijL  Aoes.  The  so-called  "  Gnos- 
ticism "  with  which  this  Epistle  deals  is  nothing  more  than  a  form  of  error — a  phase 
of  the  crafty  working  of  systematic  deception — which  is  common  to  the  intellectual, 
moral,  and  spiritual  aberrations  of  all  ages  and  countries.  It  is  found  in  the  Zend 
Avesta,  in  Philo,  in  Neoplatonism,  in  the  Eabbala,  in  Yalentinus.  Abject  sacerdo- 
talism, superstitious  ritual,  extravagant  asceticism,  the  faithlessness  which  leads 
men  to  abandon  the  privilege  of  immediate  access  to  God,  and  to  thrust  between  the 
soul  and  its  One  Mediator  all  sorts  of  human  and  celestial  mediators ;  the  ambition 
which  builds  upon  the  unmanly  timidity  of  its  votaries  its  own  secure  and  tyrranous 
exaltation ;  the  substitution  of  an  easy  externalism  for  the  religion  of  the  heart ; 
the  fancy  that  God  cares  for  such  barren  self-denials  as  neither  deepen  our  own 
spirituality  nor  benefit  our  neighbour;  the  elaboration  of  unreasonable  systems 
which  give  the  pompous  name  of  Theology  to  vain  and  verbal  speculations  drawn 
by  elaborate  and  untenable  inferences  from  isolated  expressions  of  which  the  anti- 
nomies are  unfathomable,  and  of  which  the  true  exegetio  history  is  deliberately 
ignored ;  the  oscillating  reactions  which  lead  in  the  same  sect,  and  in  even  the 
same  individual  to  the  opposite  extremes  of  rigid  scrupulosity  and  antinomian 
license — these  are  the  germs  not  of  one  but  of  all  the  heresies ;  these  are  more  or 
less  the  elements  of  nearly  every  false  religion.  The  ponderous  technicalities  of 
the  systematizer ;  the  interested  self-assertions  of  the  priest ;  the  dreamy  speeulA' 
tions  of  the  mystic;  the  Pharisaic  conceit  of  the  externalist;  the  polemical 
bhibboleths  of  the  sectarian ;  the  spiritual  pride  and  narrow  one-sidedness  of  the 
Belf-tormentor ;  the  ruinous  identification  of  that  saving  faith  which  is  a  onion 
with  Christ  and  a  participation  of  His  life  with  the  theoretic  acceptance  of  a  num- 
ber of  formula — all  these  elements  have,  from  the  earliest  dawn  of  Christianity, 
mingled  in  the  tainted  stream  of  heresy  their  elements  of  ignorance,  self-interest, 
and  error.  In  their  dark  features  we  detect  a  common  resemblance.  There  was 
Gnosticism  in  the  days  of  Paul  as  there  is  Gnobticism  now,  though  neither  then  nor 
now  ii  it  recognized  andei  that  speoifio  name.    {ArcMtaetm  Furrar,) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTKATOS. 

COLOSSIANS. 

CHAPTER  L 

Vkbs.  1-5.  Paul  an  Apostle  of  Jesna  dirlst  by  the  will  of  God. — Tha  assertion  of 
6t.  Paul  that  the  afflictioDs  of  the  faithful  "  work  together  for  good  "  is  verified  by 
eonstant  experience  (Bom.  viii.  28  ;  Psa.  czix.  71).  As  roses,  the  sweetest  and 
fairest  flowers,  grow  on  a  thorny  stock,  so  from  the  piercing  afflictions  of  the  believer 
spring  sweet  and  salutary  examples.  The  imprisonment  of  St.  Paul  has  done  the 
Church  more  good  than  the  prosperity  of  the  rest  of  the  faithful  of  that  age.  I.  Tna 
IMSCBIPTION  of  the  Epistle.  We  now  inscribe  letters  with  the  names  of  those  to 
whom  we  write  at  the  beginning,  and  our  own  names  at  the  end.  Formerly  it 
was  the  custom  to  put  both  at  the  head  as  here.  1.  The  writers.  Paul — (1)  an 
apostle,  signifying  one  sent,  but  in  the  New  Testament  more  particularly  those  sent 
by  Christ  with  sovereign  and  independent  authority  to  pseach  the  gospel  and 
establish  the  Church.  To  exercise  this  office  it  was  necessary — (a)  to  have  seen 
Christ  alive  after  His  death  ;  {b)  to  have  received  the  commission  direct  from 
Christ ;  (c)  to  enjoy  an  extraordinary  measure  of  the  Holy  Spirit  for  miracles  and 
preaching.  Whence  it  appears  how  illogical  they  are  that  attribute  the  glory  ot 
apostleship  to  the  Pope,  who  possesses  none  of  these  qualifications.  (2)  "By  the 
will  of  God" — distinguishing  him  from  false  apostles  and  necessary — (a)  to 
maintain  his  honour  against  the  calumnies  of  seducers,  who  alleged  that  he  had 
not  lived  in  Christ's  day ;  (6)  to  establish  his  liberty  to  write  to  the  Colossians 
And  prove  to  them  their  duty.  (3)  To  his  own  name  Paul  adds  that  of  Timothy 
"  our  brother,"  as  having  the  same  faith,  and  labouring  in  the  same  work.  2, 
The  readers.  (1)  Saints.  Yon  cannot  be  Christians  unless  you  are  saints.  The 
body  of  Christ  is  too  vital  and  precious  to  have  dead  members.  (2)  FaithfuL 
Another  mark  of  the  true  Christian,  and  taken  from  that  faith  which  they  give 
to  the  gospel  of  the  Lord.  (3)  Brethren  signifies  the  holy  communion  they  had 
with  believers  of  whatever  rank,  as  begotten  of  the  same  Father — God ;  bom  of 
the  same  mother,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem ;  all  partaking  of  the  same  Divine 
nature,  nursed  in  the  same  family,  nurtured  in  the  same  hopes,  destined  to  the 
same  inheritance.  (4)  In  Christ,  because  of  Him,  and  by  Him,  and  in  Him  we 
have  this  sanctity,  faith,  and  fraternity.  (5)  Paul  wishes  them,  according  to 
his  custom,  "  grace " — the  favour  of  God,  and  His  saving  gifts,  and  Divine 
assistance;  "peace"  with  God  and  men,  a  word  which  signifies  all  kinds  of 
welfare  and  prosperity ;  "  from  God  our  Father  "  as  the  source,  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  channel.  II.  The  congbatclation  (vers.  8-5).  1.  The 
thanksgiving  is  for — (1)  the  faith  of  the  Colossians  ;  (2)  their  love  ;  (3)  their 
prospects  :  three  particulars  which  comprise  all  human  felicity.  The  part  which 
Paul  takes  in  their  happiness,  teaches  us  to  interest  ourselves  in  the  affairs  of 
our  brethren,  and  rejoice  with  those  who  rejoice,  and  weep  with  those  who  weep 
— not,  as  many  of  the  world,  the  reverse.  And  the  joy  that  we  have  in  the  good 
of  others  should  be  elevated  to  God  its  only  source.  2.  It  is  not  enough  to  render 
thanks  for  our  brethren,  we  must  pray  for  them.  Under  the  Old  Testament  the 
Divine  appellation  was  "The  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,"  the  patriarclia 
with  whom  He  oontraoted  the  old  covenant,  and  to  whom  He  promised  the  new ; 

1 


S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHi*.  j, 

nnder  the  New,  "  The  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  by  whom  He  has  abolished 
the  old  covenant  and  accomplished  the  new.  3.  The  true  matter  of  our  rejoicings 
for  others  is  not  that  God  has  given  them  health,  riches,  fame,  &o.,  but  faith  and 
love,  which  comprise  the  whole  kingdom  of  God,  the  one  its  beginning,  the  other 
its  accomplishment,  and  are  inseparable  the  one  from  the  other,  the  one  being  the 
root,  the  oiher  the  fruit  of  Christian  virtue.  4.  But  considering  the  worldly  con- 
dition of  these  believers,  there  seemed  no  great  cause  to  congratulate  them  on  their 
faith  and  love,  for  they  drew  affliction  on  them.  The  apostle  therefore  turns  his 
eye  of  faith  towards  the  future,  and  the  blessed  inheritance  is  as  certified  as  though 
it  were  already  in  their  hands.  A  good  man's  promise  is  as  good  as  its  fulfil- 
ment, much  more  God's.  Being  in  heaven,  the  Christian's  treasure  can  neither 
be  stolen  nor  soiled.  5.  This  sublime  hope  is  derived  from  the  truth  of  the 
gospel.  So  sublime  is  it  that  neither  sense  nor  reason,  nor  the  light  of  the  law 
could  have  discovered  it  (2  Tim.   i.    10).      (/.  Daille.)  The  writer  and   the 

readers : — Notice — I.  The  blending  of  lowliness  and  authority  in  Paul's 
DESIGNATION  OF  HIMSELF.  He  does  Dot  always  bring  his  apostolic  authority  to 
mind  in  his  letters.  In  his  earliest,  to  the  Thessalonians,  he  has  not  yet  adopted 
the  practice.  In  Philippians  he  hai  no  need,  for  it  was  not  gainsaid.  In  Philemon 
friendship  is  uppermost,  and  he  will  not  command  as  an  "  apostle,"  but  pleads  as 
"  the  prisoner  of  Christ  Jesus."     In  the  rest  he  puts  it  in  the  foreground,  as  here. 

I.  He  claims  the  apostolate  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word — equality  with  the 
original  apostles,  the  chosen  witnesses  of  Christ's  resurrection,  for  he,  too,  had 
Been  the  Lord,  and  his  whole  ministry  was  built  upon  the  fact.  2.  "  Through  the 
will  of  God  "  is  at  once  an  assertion  of  Divine  authority  and  of  mdependence,  and 
also  a  lowly  disclaimer  of  individual  merit  and  power.  3.  His  gracious  humility 
is  seen  in  his  association  of  his  young  brother  Timothy,  who  has  no  apostolic 
authority,  but  whose  concurrence  in  his  teaching  might  give  it  some  additional 
weight  ;  but  in  the  fiery  sweep  of  his  thoughts,  Timothy  is  soon  left  out  of  sight 
and  Paul  alone  pours  out  the  wealth  of  his  wisdom  and  the  warmth  of  his  heart. 

II.  The  noble  ideal  of  the  Christian  chabacter  bet  forth  in  the  designations 
OF  THE  CoLossiAN  Church.  Iu  his  earlier  letters  the  address  is  to  "the  Church," 
but  in  his  latter,  beginning  with  Romans,  and  including  Ephesians,  Philippians, 
and  Colossians,  he  drops  the  word,  aud  uses  expressions  which  regard  individuals 
rather  than  the  community.  This  did  not  arise  from  any  lower  estimate  of  "the 
Church,"  but  advancing  years  and  familiarity  with  his  work,  his  position,  and  his 
auditors,  all  tended  to  draw  him  closer  to  them,  and  led  to  the  disuse  of  the  formal 
and  official  term  in  favour  of  the  simpler  and  more  affectionate  "  brethren."  1. 
Saints — a  word  wofully  misapplied.  The  Church  has  given  it  as  a  special  honour 
to  a  few,  and  decorated  with  it  the  possessors  of  a  false  ideal  of  sanctity— that  of 
the  ascetic  sort.  The  world  has  used  it  with  a  sarcastic  intonation  as  if  it  implied 
loud  professions  and  small'performance,  not  without  a  touch  of  hypocrisy.  Saints 
are  not  people  living  in  cloisters,  but  men  and  women  immersed  in  the  vulgar  work 
of  every  day  life.  (1)  The  root  idea  of  the  word  is  not  moral  purity,  but  separation 
to  God.  Consecration  to  Him  is  the  root  from  which  the  white  flower  of  purity 
springs.  We  cannot  make  ourselves  pure,  but  we  can  yield  ourselves  to  God,  and 
the  purity  will  come.  (2)  We  have  also  the  idea  of  the  solemn  obligation  on  all 
Bo-called  Christians  to  devote  themselves  to  Him.  We  are  not  bound  to  this  as 
Christians ;  we  are  not  Christians  unless  we  consecrate  ourselves.  So  the  term 
does  not  belong  to  an  eminent  sort  of  Christians.  (3)  The  one  motive  which  will 
lead  us  to  bow  our  necks  to  the  easy  yoke,  and  come  out  of  the  misery  of  self 
pleasing  into  the  peace  of  serving  God,  is  drawn  from  the  great  love  of  Christ  who 
devoted  Himself,  and  bought  us  for  His  own,  by  giving  Himself  to  be  ours.  And  if 
drawn  by  this  we  give  ourselves  to  God,  He  gives  Himself  to  us.  •'  I  am  thine  " 
has  ever  for  its  chord  which  completes  the  fulness  of  its  music  "  Thou  art 
Mine."  And  so  "  saint  "  is  a  name  of  dignity.  (4)  There  is  implied  in  it,  too, 
safety.  If  I  belong  to  God  then  I  am  safe  from  the  touch  of  evil  and  the  taint 
of  decay.  2.  Faithful — trustworthy — true  to  the  stewardship  or  trusting ;  probably 
the  latter,  because  faith  underlies  consecration,  and  weaves  the  bond  which  uuites 
men  in  the  brotherhood,  for  it  brings  all  who  share  it  into  a  common  relation  to 
the  Father.  And  then  he  who  is  believing  will  be  faithful  m  the  sense  of  being 
worthy  of  confidence,  and  true  to  his  duty,  his  profession,  and  his  Lord.  3. 
Brethren.  (1)  That  strong  new  bond  of  union  among  men  the  most  unlike,  was  «^ 
Btrange  phenomenon  when  the  Roman  world  was  falling  to  pieces,  and  men  might 
well  wonder  as  they  saw  the  hearts  of  master  and  slave,  Greek  and  barbarian,  Jew 


CBAP  I. J  COLOSSI ANS. 


and  Gentile,  fused  into  one  glow  of  unselfish  love.  (2)  But  the  word  pointa  not 
merely  to  Christian  love,  but  to  the  common  possession  of  a  new  life.  It  leads 
Btraiglit  to  the  doctrine  of  regeneration,  and  proclaims  that  through  faith  in  Christ 
men  are  made  children  of  the  highest,  and  therefore  brethren.  "  To  as  many  aa 
received  Him,"  &o,  4.  In  Christ :  saints,  believers,  brethren,  are  in  Him  as  living 
things  are  in  the  atmosphere,  the  branch  in  the  vine,  members  in  the  body,  inhabi- 
tants in  a  house,  hearts  that  love  in  hearts  that  love,  parts  in  a  whole.      III.  Thh 

APOSTOLIC    WISH    WHICH    SETS   FORTH    THE    HIGH    IDEAL   TO    BE    DESIKED    FOB     CHCRCHE9 

AND  INDIVIDUALS.  '*  And  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  should  be  omitted.  Perhaps 
the  word  "  brethren "  was  lingering  in  Paul's  mind,  and  so  instinctively  he 
stopped  with  the  kindred  word  "Father."  1.  Grace  and  peace  blend  the  Western  and 
Eastern  forms  of  salutation,  and  surpass  both.  All  that  the  Greek  ?P«»ant  by  hia 
"grace"  and  the  Hebrew  by  his  "peace,"  the  ideally  happy  coudition  which 
differing  nations  have  placed  in  different  blessings,  and  all  loving  words  have 
wished  for  dear  ones,  is  secured  and  conveyed  to  every  one  who  trusts  in  Christ. 
2.  Grace  means — (1)  Love  in  exercise  to  those  who  are  below  the  lover  ;  (2)  the 
gifts  which  such  love  bestows  ;  (3)  the  effects  of  these  gifts  in  the  beauties  of 
character  and  conduct  developed  in  the  receivers.  So  here  first  the  gentleness 
of  the  Father,  next  the  outcome  of  that  love  which  never  visits  the  soul  empty- 
handed,  and  as  the  result  every  beauty  of  mind,  heart,  and  temper.  "Of  His  fulness 
we  have  received  grace  for  grace. "  3.  Peace  comes  after  grace.  For  tranquiUity 
of  soul  we  must  go  to  God,  and  He  gives  it  by  giving  us  His  love  and  its  gifts. 
There  must  be  first  peace  with  God  that  there  may  be  peace  from  God.  {A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  The  apostuUc  salutation: — Pondering  this  we  ask  three  questions.      L 

What  it  reveals  about  the  apostle.  1.  His  dignity :  "  An  apostle  by  the  will 
of  God,"  a  title — (1)  Directly  derived  from  God.  (2)  Abuudantly  justified — (a) 
by  supernatural  visions  and  experiences  ;  (b)  by  seals  of  success.  (3)  Employed 
here — (a)  Because  he  was  dealing  with  erroneous  teaching,  and  so  needed  a  claim 
of  authority,  {h)  He  was  personally  an  entire  stranger  to  the  Colossians.  (c)  He 
writes  from  prison,  and  it  was  well  that  he  should  remind  himself  and  them  of 
his  dignity.  He  was  a  prisoner,  but  he  was  none  the  less  an  apostle.  2.  His 
condescension:  "  Timotheus  our  brother."  He  was  no  fellow-apostle,  yet  his 
brother ;  his  boyish  convert,  yet  his  brother.  Great  souls  never  patronize ;  they 
elevate  men  of  whatever  station  or  age  into  brotherhood  with  them.  The  Greatest 
is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren.  II.  What  it  implies  about  the  Church.  It 
recalls  to  us — 1.  Its  locality  and  associations.  One  of  the  historic  Churches  in  the 
Talley  of  the  Lycus.  The  town  had  been  famous,  but  its  glory  was  waning.  Xerxes 
and  Cyrus  had  made  it  famous,  but  Paul's  letter  has  made  its  name  known  where 
Xerxes  and  Cyrus  have  never  been  heard  of.  2.  Its  character,  which  ought  to  be 
that  of  every  Church.  (1)  "Saints."  The  Old  Testament  description  of  Israel 
applied  to  Christians  to  indicate  union  to  God  and  consecration.  (2)  "  Faithful 
brethren,"  indicating  union  to  each  other.  All  freemasonries,  guilds,  <feo.,  are  but 
hints  of  what  the  Church  was  meant  to  be.  III.  What  it  suggestb  about  trdh 
blessedness.  1.  "  Grace "  is  a  Greek  thought  Christianized.  It  takes  the 
conception  of  grace  of  form,  gesture,  tone  into  the  spiritual  realm.  To  Paul  it  haa 
two  meanings.  (1)  It  is  to  be  enjoyed  as  the  attitude  of  God  in  Christ  towards 
men.  It  is  thus  the  Divine  pity,  gentleness,  favour ;  the  bearing  of  a  forgiving, 
condescending,  loving  God.  (2)  It  is  to  be  possessed  as  the  spirit  of  a  Christiao, 
It  is  thus  "the  grace  of  life,"  moral  beauty,  spiritual  loveliness.  It  is  the  in- 
dweUing  in  human  character  of  more  than  all  that  the  Greeks  conceived  in  their 
"  three  graces."  2.  "  Peace,"  which  may  include — (1)  Freedom  from  persecution 
— a  great  desideratum.  (2)  Absence  of  internal  dissension — one  main  purpose  of 
the  letter.  (3)  Inward  calm  of  heart,  and  quiet  confidence  in  God — ideal  peace, 
Christ's  peace.  The  wish  of  Paul  is  the  gift  of  .lesus.  (U.  R.  Thomas.)  1.  Thb 
BUPEBSCKiPTioN.  1.  The  writer.  (1)  His  Gentile  name,  kindred  in  form  and 
pronunciation  to  his  Hebrew  name,  was  that  of  an  honoured  family  in  Home.  Hia 
use  of  it  is  evidence  of  his  desire  to  keep  before  himself  and  others  the  relationship 
of  Jesus  to  Gentiles,  and  to  show  that  He  was  no  respecter  of  persona  who  gave 
Himself  a  ransom  for  all.  (2)  His  ofEce — messenger  of  Jesus  Christ ;  not  (2  Cor, 
viii.  23)  of  the  Churches.  The  expression  implies  that  Christ  has  a  message  for 
universal  man,  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  a  message  of  good  news.  (3)  His  Divine 
authority,  "  By  the  will  of  God,"  stated  to  shield  himself  from  the  charge  that  he 
was  running  unsent.  The  best  are  sometimes  misunderstood,  mistrusted,  and 
laspeoted.     Although  many  hare  no  special  call,  yet  all  can  do  something  after  th( 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

manner  of  a  humble  herald  to  diffuse  the  glad  tidings,  and  as  we  have  opportunity 
so  responsibility  is  iaid  upon  us  to  be  up  and  doing.  2.  Paul  associates  with 
himself  Timotheus  the  brother,  or  brother  Timothy,  not  his  own  in  particular,  nor 
theirs,  but  the  Church's  universally.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  are  a  brotherhood,  and 
every  individual  should  be  animated  in  relation  to  all  the  rest  with  the  feelings  of 
a  brother  or  a  sister.  3.  The  parties  addressed  were — (1)  In  his  judgment  of  charity, 
true  saints — a  fine  word  meaning  "  holy  ones,"  and  yet  it  has  been  pelted  for  ages 
with  moral  mire.  No  wonder,  for  it  has  been  assumed  by  pretenders,  and  claimed 
by  people  because  they  lived  in  cells  or  wore  a  certain  garb.  Unholy  men,  occu- 
pying a  certain  official  position,  have  been  and  are  obsequiously  addressed  aa 
"  Your  Holiness."  Saintliness  is  not  a  thing  of  profession  but  practice,  and 
springs  out  of  that  pure  heart  which  sees  God.  (2)  Faithful  brethren  in 
Christ.  That  was  the  secret  of  all  their  excellencies.  We  do  not  say  of  any 
one  that  he  is  in  Luther  or  Calvin,  Paul,  David,  or  Isaiah — but  "in  Christ. 
We  may  be  in  love,  peace,  joy;  and  in  some  kindred  way  we  may  be  in  Christ, 
even  as  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  being  in  Him.  Conversely,  Christ  is  in  us, 
when  He  is  the  object  of  the  faith  that  is  in  us.  We  never  fully  comprehend 
Him ;  but  He  comprehends  ua  as  members  are  comprehended  in  the  body  and 
branches  in  the  tree.  II.  Thb  salutation.  1.  A  cordial  greeting  of  this  kind 
was  common  with  the  apostle.  It  was  no  formality  or  empty  inflation.  He 
really  felt  most  kindly  towards  the  Colossians,  and  hence,  with  beautiful 
Christian  gentlemanliness,  he  no  sooner  names  them  than  he  hastens  to  set 
them  entirely  at  ease,  by  letting  them  feel  his  cordial  friendliness.  2.  The 
salutation  is  not  a  supplication,  but  rather  a  benediction.  In  the  former  we 
address  God,  in  the  latter  man.  3.  It  is  twofold — Greek  and  Hebrew,  being  a 
message  to  both  peoples.  (1)  The  word  "  grace,"  though  not  that  which  the 
Greeks  employed  in  their  salutation,  is  intimately  related  to  it.  When  Greek 
met  Greek  politely,  they  mutually  said,  "  Joy  to  thee."  The  apostle  slightly 
modifies  the  ordinary  Greek  phraseology,  and  lays  hold  of  a  word  which  directa 
attention  to  the  Divine  source  cf  joy.  The  English  "  grace,"  as  is  obvious  from 
its  two  adjectives  "  graceful "  and  "  gracious,"  denotes  that  which  occasions  joy. 
It  is  connected  with  gratitude  and  gratification  as  conditions  of  heart  that  are 
inspirations  of  joy.  But  the  term  is  employed  to  denote  that  greatest  joy-giving 
Idndness  which  when  found  in  the  heart  of  God  towards  ns  is  the  fountain  of 
joy  unspeakable.  From  the  constitution  of  the  mind,  lovingkindness  is  pre-emi- 
nently fitted  to  produce  joy.  (2)  The  Jewish  salutation,  "  Peace,"  is  strictly 
oriental  and  primitive.  It  had  naturally  sprung  up  when  there  were  no  extensive 
governments  or  codes  of  law,  when  men  were  apt  to  be  like  Ishmaelites  wherever 
they  travelled.  "^Tien  they  came  in  view  of  strangers  therefore,  if  no  hostile 
intent  w  as  entertained,  it  was  natural  to  call  out  "  Peace  1 "  As  time  rolled  on 
and  peoples  got  consolidated  into  organized  communities,  so  that  life  in  general 
became  secure,  the  import  of  the  salutation  became  gradually  and  increasingly 
enriched — equivalent  to  "  May  you  have  peace,  and  the  fruits  of  it  in  your  home, 
amongst  your  friends  and  neighbours,  in  your  heart."  But  as  the  apostle  turned 
to  Jesus,  "  peace  "  became  that  which  He  gave,  that  which  passed  all  understanding. 
{J.  Morison,  D.D.)  I.  An  exalted  and  important  office.  "  Apostle."  Paul 
waa  commissioned  to  declare  the  grandest  truths.  His  sphere  was  the  world,  and 
to  fill  it  involved  incredible  care,  work,  and  suffering.  The  office  was  created  by 
the  circumstances  of  the  time.  An  ordinary  officer  can  govern  a  garrison,  but  it 
requires  a  gifted  general  to  marshal  an  army  in  line  of  battle.  In  the  Divine 
governrcent  the  occasion  calls  forth  the  man.  II.  The  authority  that  designates 
AND  qualifies.  The  will  of  God  is  the  great  originating  and  governing  force. 
That  force  called  and  qualified  Paul  (Acts  ix.)-  In  undertakincj  the  highest  work 
for  God  it  is  not  enough  that  we  possess  learning,  gifts,  piety,  without  the  conscious- 
ness of  a  Divine  commission.  There  are  crises  when  it  is  necessary  to  have  thia 
to  fall  back  upon.  III.  A  familiar  Christian  relationship.  "  Timotheus  our 
brother."  He  was  Paul's  "own  son  in  the  faith,''  but  here  he  recognizes  him  on 
the  more  equal  footing  of  brother.  Christianity  is  a  brotherhood  ;  not  a  communism 
which  drags  down  all  to  its  own  level,  but  a  holy  confederacy  in  which  men  of  all 
ranks,  ages,  and  talents  unite.  His  equahty  is  based  on  a  moral  foundation.  The 
minister  whose  position  is  assured  loses  nothing  by  honouring  his  younger  brethren. 
IV.  Unity  of  sympathy  and  desire.  *'  Paul  and  Timothy."  The  closest  intimacy, 
notwithstanding  disparity  in  rank  and  ability.  V.  Suggestive  phases  of  Christiah 
OUA&AOTKB.     1.  Saints.     2.  Faithful  brethren.     Several  races  are  b  ere  united  in  m 


OHA?.  L]  COLO  SSI ANS. 


holy  and  faithful  brotherhood.  3.  The  sublime  origin  of  the  Christian  character 
"In  Christ."  VI.  The  saldtation  buii'i.icates  the  bestowment  of  highesi 
Divine  blessings.  1.  Grace.  A  term  inclusive  of  all  the  blessings  that  can  flow 
from  God.  2.  Peace.  Grace  expresses  the  spirit  in  which  Divine  manifestations 
come;  peace  the  result  they  accomplish.  (1)  Peace  with  God.  (2)  Peace  with 
each  other — peace  in  the  Church.  3.  The  source  of  the  blessings  desired.  The 
Father's  love  and  the  Son's  work  are  the  sole  source  of  every  bles^^ing,  while  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  the  agent  of  their  communication.  Learn  :  the  broad,  deep  charity 
of  the  apostolic  spirit,  and  the  scope  and  temper  of  the  prayers  we  should  offer  for 
the  raoa.    (G.  Barlow.) 

Ver.  2.  To  the  saints  and  faithful  brethren  In  Christ — Saints: — I.  Theib 
CHABACTER.  Holy  pefsuns.  The  idea  is  derived  from  the  sacred  vessels  of  the 
lemple,  which  might  not  be  appropriated  to  common  uses.  In  a  more  general 
sense,  saints  are  those  who  are  eminent  for  piety,  not  all  who  are  flattered 
or  derided  as  such.  One  who  is  truly  a  saint — 1.  Acknowledges  that  he  was  once 
a  lost  and  undone  sinner,  and  who  daily  brings  his  sins  for  pardon  and  his  graces 
for  increase  to  the  throne  of  grace.  2.  Has  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit.  He  is 
a  new  creature — loving  what  God  loves,  and  hating  what  He  hates.  3.  Is  zealous 
for  the  cause  of  Lis  Divine  Master.  Where  there  are  no  spiritual  actions  there  is 
no  spiritual  life.  The  chief  motives  are  fortitude  and  the  constraining  love  of 
Christ.  4.  Grows  in  grace.  II.  Theib  kelation  to  each  other.  1.  There  are 
three  kinds  of  brotherhood — natural,  such  as  that  between  Esau  and  Jacob ; 
national,  such  as  existed  among  the  Jews ;  spiritual,  by  adoption  and  grace.  The 
last  is  the  strongest,  purest,  and  most  enduring,  2.  Of  this  Christ  is  the  Elder 
Brother,  and  as  He  is  not  ashamed  to  own  this  relationship  should  we  be  either  in 
regard  to  Himself  or  the  poorest  member  of  the  family  ?  3.  Love  should  spring  out 
of  this  relationship.  This  is  most  natural ;  Christ  has  made  love  the  badge  of 
Christian  discipleship ;  it  is  "  good  and  pleasant  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in 
nnity."  4.  Its  distinguishing  attribute  is  fidelity.  Be  thou  faithful  in  defending 
your  brother  when  defamed,  in  admonishing  him  when  in  the  wrong,  in  helping 
him  in  difficulty,  in  comforting  him  in  trouble.  A  false  brother  is  worse  than  an 
open  foe.  III.  Theib  situation  in  the  world.  1.  Christians  in  the  midst  of 
heathens,  and  exposed  to  temptation  and  persecution.  2.  Believers  surrrounded  by 
heretics — their  faith  exposed  to  subtle  undermining  and  bold  attack.  3.  Few  as 
against  many.  Churches  are  often  thus  situated,  but  if  they  retain  their  holiness 
and  faithfulness  become  more  than  conquerors.  (2\  Watson,  B.A.)  Motives  to 
saintliness : — I.  As  oub  God  is  holy  so  must  we  be  (1  Pet.  i,  15).  II.  It  is  thb 
BND  o»  our  Divine  choice  (Eph.  i.  4).  III.  Our  calling  bindeth  us  (1  Thess. 
iv.  7).  IV.  Oub  redemption  (Titus  ii.  14).  V.  The  grace  of  God  teaches  os 
this  (Titus  ii.  11-12).  VI.  The  final  judgment  persuades  us  thereunto  (2  Pet. 
V.  11 ;  1  John  iii.  3).  VII.  The  right  constitution  of  the  Church  prohibits 
THE  UNHOLY  (Matt.  vii.  6).  Conclusion  :  1.  This  discovc  rs  to  ns  the  vanity  of  the 
Pope  in  restraining  a  title  common  to  all  believers  while  they  live  to  some  few 
whom  it  pleaseth  him  to  canonize  after  death.  2.  We  see  the  lewdness  of  many 
profane  Esaus  who  scoff  at  the  name.  3.  We  must  remember  what  kind  of  men 
we  must  be:  even  such  as  must  profess  and  practice  holiness.  (P.  Bayne,  B.D.) 
In  Christ. — This  mystical  but  most  real  union  of  Christians  with  their  Lord  is 
never  far  away  from  the  apostle's  thoughts,  and  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians 
it  is  the  very  burden  of  the  whole.  A  shallower  Christianity  tries  to  weaken  that 
great  phrase  to  something  more  intelligible  to  the  unspiritual  temper  and  poverty- 
stricken  experience  proper  to  it ;  but  no  justice  can  be  done  to  Paul's  teaching 
nnless  it  be  taken  in  all  its  depth  as  expressive  of  the  same  mutual  indwelling  and 
interlacing  of  spirit  with  spirit,  which  is  so  prominent  in  the  writings  of  John. 
There  is  one  point  of  contact  between  the  Pauline  and  Johannean  conceptions,  on 
the  difference  between  which  so  much  exaggeration  has  been  expended  ,  to  both  the 
inmost  essence  of  the  Christian  life  is  union  to  Christ,  and  abiuing  in  Him.  If  we 
are  Christians  we  are  in  Him  in  a  profounder  sense  than  creation  lives  and  moves 
and  has  its  being  in  God.  This  is  the  deepest  mystery  of  the  Christian  life.  To 
be  "  in  Him  "  is  to  be  complete.  "  In  Him  "  we  are  "  blessed  with  all  spiritual 
blessings."  "In  Him"  we  are  ** chosen. "  "In  Him"  God  "  freely  bestows  His 
grace  upon  ns."  "  In  Him  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,"  ♦•  In  Him  " 
*'  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth  are  gathered."  In  Him  is  the  better  life  of  an 
that  Ure.    In  Him  we  have  peace  though  the  world  be  seething  with  changed  all 


6  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [onA».  u 

etonn.  In  Him  we  conquer  though  earth  and  our  own  evil  be  all  in  arms  against 
as.  If  we  live  in  Him,  we  live  in  purity  and  joy.  If  we  die  in  Him,  we  die  in 
tranquil  trust.  If  our  gravestones  ruay  truly  carry  the  sweet  old  inscription, 
carved  on  many  a  nameless  slab  io  the  Catacombs,  "  In  Christo,''  they  will  also 
bear  the  other,  "  In  pace."  If  we  sleep  in  Him,  our  glory  is  assured,  •*  For  them 
also  that  sleep  in  Jesus,  will  God  bring  with  Him."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Grace 
and  peace. — Grace  is  introductory  good ;  peace  is  final  good :  he  therefore  who 
wishes  these  two  blessings  includes  every  intermeiliate  benefit.     I.  Grace  denotes — 

I.  The  gratuitous  act  of  the  Divine  will  accepting  man  in  Christ  and  pardoning  bia 
sins  (Eph.  ii.  5  ;  Bom.  iii.  24).  Tliis  free  love  of  God  is  the  first  gift  in  which  all 
other  gifts  are  bestowed.  2.  All  those  habitual  gifts  which  God  infuses  for  the 
sanctification  of  the  soul.  So  faith,  love,  and  all  virtues  and  salutary  endowments 
are  called  graces  (Eph.  iv.  7).  3.  The  actual  assistance  of  God,  whereby  the  regenerate, 
after  having  received  habitual  grace,  are  strengthened  to  perform  good  works,  and 
to  persevere  in  faith  and  godliness.  For  to  man  renewed  and  sanctified  by  grace, 
the  daily  aid  of  God  is  still  necessary  for  every  single  act.  The  union  of  all  these 
is  necessary :  inherent  grace  is  not  given  unless  the  grace  of  acceptance  has  pre- 
ceded it ;  neither  being  given  is  it  available  to  the  production  of  fruits,  unless  also 
the  efficacious  help  of  God  follow  and  accompany  it  through  every  individual  action. 

II.  Peace.  The  Hebrews  used  this  expression  as  we  use  the  expression  health  or 
joy  :  it  signifies  prosperity  marked  by  no  calamities  either  public  or  private  (Gen. 
xliii.  27;  Psa.  cxxii.  6).  But  with  the  apostles  it  is  used  more  extensively,  and 
comprehends  more  especially  spiritual  joy  and  prosperity.  Therefore  under  this 
term  Paul  desires  for  them — 1.  Internal  peace,  or  peace  of  conscience,  which  arises 
from  the  grace  of  God  accepting  ns  for  Christ's  sake  (John  xiv.  27 ;  Bom.  v.  1 ; 
Phil.  iv.  7).  2.  Brotherly  peace  ;  "  breaking  peace  they  exclude  grace."  This  is  a 
great  and  desirable  good,  and  is  frequently  celebrated  as  the  special  gift  of  God 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  33  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11).  The  seeds  of  schism  had  been  scattered  abroad  ; 
there  was  therefore  need  of  peace.  8.  That  external  peace  which  is  the  well-being 
of  the  Church ;  but  only  yet  so  far  as  it  does  not  militate  against  their  spiritual 
good  ;  for  sometimes  it  conduces  more  to  the  welfare  of  the  faithful  that  they  be 
afflicted  than  that  they  enjoy  external  tranquility.  III.  We  mat  gather — 1.  From 
the  order  itself,  as  he  places  grace  before  peace,  he  teaches  us— (1)  That  this  ia 
first  of  all  to  be  desired,  that  we  may  have  God  propitious.  If  He  be  hostile,  even 
blessings  will  be  turned  into  a  curse.  (2)  That  true  peace  cannot  belong  except  to 
those  only  who  are  in  favour  with  God.  •'  There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked."  (3) 
That  all  good  things  which  fall  to  the  lot  of  the  godly  are  streams  from  this 
fountain  of  Divine  grace.  2.  From  the  thing  itself  desired — (1)  Paul  shows  us  by 
his  own  example  the  duty  of  every  minister  of  the  gospel ;  which  is,  not  only  to 
preach  grace  and  peace  to  his  people,  but  from  their  inmost  souls  to  intreat  and 
implore  the  same  from  God  by  incessant  prayer  :  neither  is  sufficient  of  itself.  (2) 
He  reproves  the  folly  of  this  world,  in  which  almost  all  wish  for  themselves  and 
their  friends,  health,  riches,  and  honours ;  but  grace,  peace,  and  other  spiritual 
good  things,  they  neither  regard  nor  think  of.  But  Christ  commands  us  to  seek 
"first  the  kingdom  of  God"  (Matt.  vi.  33).  (3)  He  comforts  thegodly  and  faithful  by 
showing  them  that  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  peace  of  God  they  always  possess;  in 
comparison  of  which  good  things  whatsoever  fall  to  the  wicked  are  refuse.  "  A  God 
appeased,"  says  Bernard,  "tranquillizes  all  things,  and  to  behold  Him  at  peace  ia 
to  be  ourselves  at  peace.    (Bp.  Davenant.) 

Vers.  3-8.  We  give  thanks  to  Gk>d,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ — 
The  prelude : — I.  A  thankful  recognition  op  Christian  excellence  as  intro* 
DUOTORT  TO  WARNINGS  AND  REMONSTRANCES.  Almost  all  Paul's  Epistlcs  begin  thus. 
Gentle  rain  softens  the  ground,  and  prepares  it  to  receive  the  heavier  downfall 
which  would  else  mostly  run  off  the  hard  surface.  These  expressions  are  not 
comphments,  or  flattery  used  for  personal  ends,  but  uncalculated  expressions  of 
affection  which  deUghts  to  see  white  patches  in  the  blackest  character,  and  of 
wisdom  which  knows  that  the  nauseous  medicine  of  blame  is  most  easily  taken 
if  wrapped  in  a  capsule  of  honest  praise.  All  persons  in  authority  may  be  the 
better  for  taking  this  lesson.  2.  The  praise  is  cast  in  the  form  of  thanksgiving  to 
God,  as  the  true  fountain  of  all  that  is  good  in  men.  All  that  might  be  harmful 
in  direct  praise  is  thus  strained  out  of  it.  Christian  excellences  are  God's  gifts. 
The  fountain,  not  the  pitcher,  should  have  the  credit  of  the  water.  3.  There  were 
two  points  which  occasioned  his  thankfulness.  (1)  Faith.   This  is  sometimes  spokea 


<jniAP.  X.]  COLOSSIANS. 


of  as  "towards"  Jesns,  which  de.^cribes  the  act  by  its  direction,  as  if  it  were  th« 
going  out  of  man's  nature  to  the  true  goal  of  all  active  being.  "  On  "  Christ, 
describes  it  as  reposing  on  Him  as  the  end  of  all  seeking.  But  more  sweet  is  faith 
considered  as  '•  in  "  Him  as  its  home,  where  the  seeking  spirit  may  fold  its  wings, 
be  strengthened,  and  tranquillized,  (a)  In  all,  faith  is  the  same — simple  confi- 
dence.  But  how  unlike  are  the  objects ! — broken  reeds  in  the  one  case,  and  the 
firm  pillar  of  Divine  power  and  tenderness  in  the  other.  And  how  unlike,  alas  I 
the  fervency  and  constancy  of  our  trust  in  each  other  and  in  Him.  (b)  P'aith 
covers  the  whole  ground  of  man's  relation  to  God.  Fverything  that  binds  ts  to 
the  unseen  world  is  included  in  it.  (c)  From  that  fruitful  source  all  good  will 
coiua.  and  that  faith  lacks  its  best  warrant  which  does  not  lead  to  whatsoever  ia 
of  good  report.  (2)  As  faith  is  the  parent  of  all  virtue,  so  it  is  the  parent  of  love — 
the  whole  law  of  human  conduct  packed  into  one  word.  But  the  warmest  place  in 
a  Christian's  heart  will  belong  to  those  in  sympathy  vAth  his  deepest  self.  The 
sign  on  the  surface  of  earthly  relations  of  the  central  tire  of  faith  to  Christ  is  the 
fruitful  vintage  of  brotherly  love,  as  the  vineyards  bear  the  heaviest  clusters  on 
the  slopes  of  Vesuvius.  (3)  So  hore  we  have  two  members  of  the  familiar  triad, 
and  their  sister,  Hope,  is  not  far  off.  And  the  hope  laid  up  in  heaven  is  a  motive 
for  brotherly  love.  This  hope  is  not  the  emotion,  but  the  object,  and  the  ideas  of 
futurity  and  security  are  suggested  by  that  object  being  laid  up.  This  is  not  the 
main  motive,  but  it  is  legitimate  to  draw  subordinate  motives  for  holiness  from  the 
anticipation  of  future  blessedness,  and  to  use  that  prospect  to  reinforce  the  higher 
motives.     II.  A   b"lemn   reminder   of  the   trdth  and  worth  op  that  oospKii 

WHICH    WAS     THREATENED     BY     THE     BCDDINO     HERESIES    OF    THE     CoLOSSlAN     CHtJRCH. 

1.  He  begins  by  reminding  them  that  to  that  gospel  they  owed  all  their  knowledge 
and  hope  of  heaven.  Its  sole  certainty  is  built  on  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and 
its  sole  hope  on  His  death.  All  around  ns  we  see  those  who  reject  these  surrender 
their  faith  in  the  life  beyond.  2.  The  gospel  is  a  word  of  which  the  whole  subject 
and  contents  is  truth.  It  is  of  value,  not  because  it  feeds  sentiment  or  regulates 
conduct  only,  but  because  it  reveals  knowledge  about  the  deepest  things  of  God,  of 
which,  but  for  it,  man  would  know  nothing.  It  is  not  speculation,  but  truth ;  and 
truth  because  it  is  the  record  of  Him  who  is  "  the  Truth."  "To  whom  shall  we 
go  ?  "  If  elsewhere,  to  will-o'-the-wisps  and  BabeL  3.  This  gospel  had  been 
received  by  them.  "You  have  accepted  the  Word ;  see  that  your  future  le  con- 
sistent with  your  past."  Blessed  are  tbey  whose  creed  at  last  can  be  spoken  in  the 
lessons  learned  in  childhood,  to  which  experience  has  but  given  new  meaning.  4. 
This  gospel  was  filling  the  world.  "  All  the  world "  must  be  taken  with  an 
allowance  for  rhetorical  statement,  but  the  rapid  spread  of  Christianity  then,  and 
its  power  to  influence  all  sorts  of  men,  were  facts  that  needed  to  be  accounted 
for  if  the  gospel  were  not  true.  All  schisms  and  heresies  are  partial  and  local,  suit 
coteries,  and  are  the  product  of  circumstances ;  but  the  gospel  goes  through  the 
world,  and  draws  aU  men.  Dainties  are  for  the  few,  and  the  delicacies  of  one 
country  are  the  abominations  of  another ;  but  everybody  breaks  bread  and  lives  on 
it.  Do  not  fling  away  the  gospel,  which  belongs  to  all,  for  that  which  can  never 
live  in  the  popular  heart,  nor  influence  more  than  a  handful  of  "  superior  persons.'* 
6.  Another  plea  for  adherence  to  the  gospel  is  based  on  its  continuous  and  universiil 
fruitfulness.  It  brings  about  results  which  attest  its  claim  to  be  from  God.  Our 
imperfections  are  our  own  ;  our  good  is  its.  A  medicine  is  not  shown  to  be  power- 
less  if  a  sick  man  has  taken  it  irregularly.  This  rod  has  budded  at  all  events; 
have  any  of  its  antagonists'  rods  done  the  same  t  Don't  cast  it  away,  says  Paul, 
till  you  have  found  a  better.  6,  Thej  have  heard  a  gospel  which  reveals  the 
••  true  grace  of  God  " — another  argument  for  steadfastness.  In  opposition  to  it 
then,  as  now,  were  put  various  thoughts  and  requirements,  a  human  wisdom  and 
•  burdensome  code.  They  are  but  bony  things  to  try  and  live  on.  The  soul 
wants  something  more  than  bread  made  out  of  sawdust.  We  want  a  loving  God 
to  live  on,  whom  we  can  love  because  He  loves  ns.  Will  anything  but  the  gospel 
give  ns  that  ?  III.  The  apostolic  endorsement  of  Epaphras,  the  early  teacher 
of  the  Colossians,  whose  authority,  no  doubt,  was  imperilled  by  the  new  direction 
of  thought,  and  Paul  was  desirous  of  adding  the  weight  of  his  attestation  to  the 
complete  correspondence  between  his  own  teaching  and  that  of  Epaphras.  We 
know  nothing  of  him  except  from  this  letter  and  that  to  Philemon.  He  ia  a 
member  of  the  Colossian  Church  (iv.  12).  He  had  brought  the  tidings  which  filled 
the  apostle's  heart  with  joy  and  love  for  their  Christian  walk  (vers.  4-8),  and  of 
anxiety  lest  they  should  be  swept  away  from  their  steadfastness.      Epaphras 


9  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  V 

shared  this  (iv.  12),  He  was  in  some  sense  Paul's  "  fellow-prisoner,"  and  alone  off 
Paul's  companions  receives  the  name  of  "  fellow-servant,"  which  may  be  aa 
instance  of  Paul's  courteous  humility.  "  Don't  make  differences — we  are  both 
slaves  of  one  Master."  As  He  had  truly  represented  Paul,  so  he  had  lovingly 
represented  them.  Probably  those  who  questioned  Epaphras'  version  of  Paul's 
teaching  would  suspect  his  report  of  the  Church  ;  hence  the  double  witness  borne 
from  the  apostle's  generous  heart  to  both  parts  of  his  brother's  work.  Never  waa 
leader  truer  to  his  subordinates  than   Paul.     {A.   Maclaren,  D.D.)  Thanks- 

giving : — I.  The  ddty.  1.  Arises  out  of  an  express  command.  We  are  bound  to 
be  thankful  for  all  things  (Job  i.  21 ;  Isa.  xxiv.  15).  2.  Is  a  test  of  Christian 
character.  All  the  saints  have  been  distinguished  by  it,  and  have  treasured  up 
their  mercies  that  they  might  render  it.  To  be  lacking  in  it  is  to  lack  the  chief 
distinguishing  grace  of  Christian  character,  and  to  incur  the  greatest  sin — 
ingratitude.  3.  Must  always  form  a  prominent  feature  of  spiritual  worship- 
witness  the  Psalms,  4,  Is  most  reasonable  in  itself — when  we  consider  that  it 
is  the  best  return  we  can  make  for  any  blessing.  II.  Its  special  subjects,  Th» 
graces  of  the  spirit  in  ourselves  or  others,  1.  Faith  takes  the  precedence,  because 
it  is  the  first  and  root-grace.  Think  of  what  faith  does — saves,  is  the  evidence  of 
things  unseen,  casts  all  care  on  God,  &c,  2.  Love  which  is  fruitful  in  blessed  effects. 
The  loveless  man  is  miserable.  3.  A  good  hope  through  grace — which  anticipates 
heaven,     (T.  Watson,  B.A.)  Apostolic  tlianksgiving  : — I,  Its  spirit.      1.  It  is 

unselfish.  We  hear  the  prisoner  praise  and  exult  for  the  joys  of  others.  Arthur 
Helps  says :  "  It  is  a  noble  sight.  That  man  is  very  powerful  who  has  no 
more  hopes  for  himpelf,  who  looks  not  to  be  loved  or  admired  any  more,  to  have 
more  honour  and  dignity ;  but  whose  sole  thought  is  for  others,  and  who  only 
hves  for  them."  2.  Ungrudging,  He  is  about  to  deal  with  their  errors,  but  is 
eager  first  to  recognize  what  is  laudable.  There  are  two  sets  of  men,  those  who 
first  see  the  blemish,  then  the  beauty ;  and  those  who  first  admire  and  then  criticise. 
To  the  first  of  these  Paul  belonged.  3.  Constant.  II.  Its  subjects.  1.  The 
spiritual  possessions  of  the  Church,  Sometimes  Paul  views  faith  and  love  as 
leading  up  to  hope :  here  he  depicts  hope  as  kindling  faith  and  love.  (1)  The 
faith  is  Christ-centred.  (2)  The  love  is  practical.  (3)  The  hope  is  secure.  2.  The 
means  by  which  these  possessions  had  been  obtained.  (1)  The  giispel.  (a)  In  its 
universality,  (ft)  In  its  fertility.  The  gospel  is  not  only  vital,  but  reproductive. 
(2)  The  preacher.  3.  The  source  and  sphere  of  their  po8session,  "  Love  in  the 
Spirit  "  is  the  life  of  all  the  saints.  {U.  R.  Thomas.)  The  custom  of  the  apostle 
to  begin  his  Epistles  with  thanksgiving  showed  the  devout  habit  of  his  mind,  his 
constant  recognition  of  the  source  of  good,  and  his  interest  in  the  spiritual  condi- 
tion of  those  to  whom  he  wrote.  I,  Thanksgivino  an  essexti.\l  element  m 
PRAYER.  *'  We  give  thauks,  praying  always  for  you,"  II.  Tue  Beino  to  whom 
ALL  THANKSGIVING  IS  DUE,  "  The  God  and  Father  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
III,  The  okodnds  of  this  thanksgiving,  1.  The  reputation  of  their  faith  in 
Christ.  (1)  Christ  is  the  object  and  foundation  of  all  true  faith.  He  is  so 
as  the  Divinely-consecrated  Deliverer  of  our  race.  The  grandeur  of  His  work 
and  the  glory  of  His  character  are  suggested  by  the  titles  here  given.  (2y 
Faith  is  the  root-principle  of  Christian  life.  2.  Their  possession  of  an  expan- 
sive Christian  love.  Love  to  Christ  is  necessarily  involved,  for  love  to  the  saints  is 
our  affection  for  Christ's  image  in  them.  Love  is  all-embracing.  Peculiarities, 
defects,  differences  of  opinion,  are  no  barriers.  It  is  the  unanswerable  evidence 
of  moral  transformation  (1  John  iii,  14).  It  is  the  grandest  triumph  over  the 
natural  enmity  of  the  human  heart.  It  is  the  indissoluble  bond  of  choicest 
fellowship,  3.  Their  enjoyment  of  a  well-sustiiiued  hope.  (1)  Its  character.  The 
prospect  of  heaven — of  possessing  a  spiritual  inheritance  whose  wealth  never 
diminishes  and  whose  splendours  never  fade — of  seeing  Christ,  and  being  like 
Him  and  dwelling  with  Him  for  ever.  This  prospect  lifts  the  soul  above  the 
wearinesses,  disappointments,  and  suiferings  of  the  present  limited  life.  (2)  Its 
security  "  laid  up  " — safely  deposited  as  a  precious  jewel  in  God's  coffer.  There 
no  pilfering  hands  can  touch,  no  breath  tarnish,  no  moth  corrupt  it.  Earthly 
treasures  vanish,  and  to  God's  people  sometimes  nothing  but  hope  remains. 
Where  this  treasure  is  there  the  heart  should  be.  (3)  Its  source — the  gospel. 
It  alone  unfolds  the  mysteries  of  the  future.  How  dismal  the  outlook  where  hope 
is  unknown.  Lessons:  1,  We  should  thank  God  for  others  more  on  account  of 
their  spiritual  than  temporal  welfare,  2,  Learn  what  are  the  essential  elements 
of  the  Christian  character — faith,  love,  hope.     3.  The  proclamation  of  the  gospel 


CHAP.  i.:i  COLOSSIANS. 


should  be  welcomed,  and  its  message  pondered.  (0.  Barhv.)  The  eonneetion 
between  thanksgiving  and  prayer : — The  participle  marks  the  thanksgiving  as  piirt 
of  the  prayer,  and  the  adverb  makes  it  prominent,  indicating  that  when  they 
prayed  for  them  they  always  gave  thanks.  There  is  no  true  prayer  without 
thanksgiving.  Gratitude  intensifies  the  soul's  sense  of  dependence  on  God,  and 
prompts  the  cry  for  the  needed  help ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  earnest  prayer 
naturally  glides  into  fervent  thankfulness.  As  one  sin  is  interlinked  with  and 
produced  by  another,  so  the  use  of  one  grace  begets  another.  The  more  temporal 
things  are  used,  the  more  they  wear  and  waste ;  but  spiritual  things  are  strengthened 
and  increased  with  exercise.  Every  spiritual  grace  has  in  it  the  seed  of  an  endless 
reproductiveness.  Underlying  every  thanksgiving  for  others  is  a  spirit  of  tender, 
disinterested  love.  Moved  by  this  passion,  the  apostle,  from  the  midst  of  imprison- 
ment and  sorrow,  could  soar  on  the  vrings  of  gratitude  and  prayer  to  heaven, 
"  Thanksgiving  will  be  the  blisa  of  eternity."  (Passavajit.)  Five  Christian 
elements  : — I.  Chbistun  experience.  It  consists  in — 1.  Faith.  (1)  That  which 
leads  us  to  accept  as  true  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  concerning  Christ.  (2)  To 
depend  upon  Him  for  all  the  blessings  promised  by  Him.  (3)  To  constantly  apply 
to  Him  for  all  that  He  has  revealed  and  accomplished.  (4)  To  lay  hold  of  His 
friendship,  and  find  Him  in  every  respect  a  faithful,  suitable,  ever-present,  all- 
sufficient  friend.  2.  Love,  the  constant  attendant  of  faith,  and  by  which  faith 
works.  (1)  It  produces  universal  benevolence  to  all  the  world,  and  compassion  for 
perishing  sinners.  (2)  It  especially  delights  itself  in  the  saints  as  related  to  and 
bearing  the  image  of  Him  who  is  the  supreme  object  of  love.  (3)  It  will  evidence 
itself  in  love  to  Christ's  commands,  ways,  people.  3.  Hope.  (1)  Its  object  is 
heaven.  (2)  As  a  grace  it  dwells  in  the  heart,  always  in  some  measure  accom- 
panying faith  and  love,  (3)  It  is  with  the  Christian  even  in  his  darkest  moments. 
II.  Christian  commonion  consists  in — 1.  Joy  and  gratitude  to  God  on  behalf  of 
those  who  give  evidence  of  being  partakers  of  His  grace  in  truth.  This  is  quite 
distinct  from  ordinary  friendship.  (1)  It  is  founded  on  personal  attractions  or 
intimate  intercourse.  (2)  It  is  oneness  of  soul  which  subsists  in  the  absence  of 
every  other  consideration,  and  notwithstanding  unfavourable  circumstances.  2. 
Fervent  prayer  for  the  establishment  and  perfection  of  those  graces  in  the 
beginning  of  which  we  rejoice  (vers.  9,  10).  3.  Cheering  and  animating  each 
other  to  perseverance,  notwithstanding  all  the  trials  and  difficulties  we  may  meet 
(ver  11).  4.  Encouraging  each  other  constantly  to  keep  in  mind  our  infinite 
obligations  and  glorious  prospects  (vers.  12,  13).  III.  Christian  resources.  1. 
The  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  (ver.  5).  Till  this  came  the  Colossians  were 
strangers  to  faith,  love,  and  hope.  2.  The  instrumentality  of  ministers.  Epaphras 
and  Paul  were  dear  fellow-servants  and  faithful  ministers,  one  preaching  to  the 
Colossians,  by  which  they  believed,  and  both  labouring  for  their  establishment 
and  edification.  3.  Prayer  for  the  supply  of  all  those  spiritual  blessings  which  the 
saints  have  learned  to  appreciate  and  desire  (vers.  3-9).  4.  The  operations  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  which  gives  efficiency  to  all  love  (ver.  8)  is  especially  said  to  be  in 
the  Spirit,  who  is  indeed  the  agent  of  every  grace.  IV.  Christian  practice  (ver. 
6).  Wherever  the  gospel  is  preached,  and  attended  with  Divine  power  and 
efficacy,  it  brings  forth  fruit.  1.  In  the  conversion  of  sinners.  2.  Where  vital 
religion  is  possessed  it  is  evidenced  by  exemplary  deportment  and  diffusive 
benevolence.  There  is  fruit  that  both  the  Church  aud  the  world  can  see.  They 
cannot  see  our  love  to  Christ  or  our  hope  of  heaven,  but  they  can  see  our 
conscientifius  dealings  in  the  world,  our  charity,  our  unworldliness.  These  are 
fruits  which  give  evidence  of  vitality  and  vigour  in  the  root.  V.  Christian  expec- 
tations. Christians  have  a  hope  that  is  laid  up  for  them  in  heaven.  1.  As  to 
themselves,  it  is  secret  and  out  of  sight.  It  is  only  faith  that  can  realize  it. 
They  are  yet  in  their  minority  in  a  world  of  discipline  and  education ;  heirs, 
indeed,  but  not  of  age.  Supplies  are  sent  them  here,  but  their  hope,  their 
portion,  is  laid  up  in  heaven.  2.  It  is  treasured  up  in  a  place  of  perfect  security, 
80  that  no  enemy  or  thief  can  reach  it.  3.  It  is  laid  up  where  none  of  the  changes 
of  time  can  affect  it.  If  we  carried  it  about  with  us,  we  might  lose  it.  When  we 
die  we  should  drop  it ;  but  it  is  safe  in  heaven,  out  of  the  reach  of  disappoint- 
ment. Conclusion  :  1.  If  we  desire  spiritual  prosperity,  let  us  be  much  in  prayer 
for  ourselves  and  others.  Nothing  more  enlarges  our  capacity  for  holy  enjoyment. 
2.  If  we  possess  a  hope  in  heaven,  let  it  be  evidenced  by  superiority  to  the  world 
and  love  to  our  fellow-heirs.  3.  If  these  blessings  are  imparted  to  sinners  through 
tiie  inskumentality  of  the  gospel,  be  concerned  to  spread  the  gospel.    (/.  EirU4 


10  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

Christian  love  the  chief  grace  : — Love,  amid  the  other  graces  in  this  world. 
Is  like  a  cathedral  tower,  which  begins  on  the  earth,  and,  at  first,  is  surrounded 
by  the  other  parts  of  the  structure.  But,  at  length,  rising  above  buttressed  walls, 
and  arch,  and  parapet,  and  pinnacle,  it  shoots  spirelike  many  a  foot  right  into  the 
air,  so  high  that  the  huge  cross  on  its  summit  glows  like  a  spark  in  the  morning 
light,  and  shines  like  a  star  in  the  evening  sky,  when  the  rest  of  the  pile  i^ 
enveloped  in  darkness.  So  love,  here,  is  surrounded  by  the  other  graces,  and 
divides  the  honours  with  them ;  but  they  will  have  felt  the  wrap  of  night,  and  of 
darkness,  when  it  will  shine,  laminons,  against  the  sky  of  eternity.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.) 

Ver.  5.  For  the  hope  which  Is  laid  np  for  yon  in  heaven. — This  is — I.  A  vebi 
MABVBLLOus  HOPE.  1.  If  wc  consider  that  it  is  a  great  act  of  grace  that  sinners 
should  have  a  hope  at  all,  there  was  a  time  when  we  were  "  without  Christ, 
having  no  hope."  We  had  many  false  hopes,  little  will-o'-the-wisps,  which  danced 
before  us,  deceived  us,  and  led  us  into  the  bogs  of  presumption  and  error.  Each 
time  we  tried  to  rely  on  good  works,  outward  ceremonies,  and  good  resolutions,  wa 
were  disappointed  anew.  Now,  sinners  though  we  be,  we  have  a  hope.  2.  More 
marvellous  still  that  our  hope  should  be  associated  with  heaven.  It  seems  almost 
presumptuous  for  a  sinner  who  so  richly  deserves  hell  even  to  lift  up  his  eyes 
towards  heaven.  He  might  have  some  hope  of  purgatory,  if  there  were  such  a  place, 
but  is  not  the  hope  of  heaven  too  much  ?  Yet  we  have  no  fear  of  hell  or  purgatory. 
Heaven  awaits  all  believers.  Not  that  we  shall  have  a  glance  at  it ;  we  shall  have 
it  and  be  in  it.  3.  StUl  more  marvellous,  it  is  so  substantiaL  Paul  seems  hardly 
to  be  speaking  of  the  grace  of  hope,  since  that  dwells  in  our  bosoms,  but  rather 
the  object,  but  not  exclusively,  because  that  which  is  laid  up  in  heaven  is  not  a 
hope,  except  to  those  who  hope  for  it.  The  hope,  then,  is  so  substantial  that 
Paul  speaks  of  it  as  though  it  were  the  thing  itself.  A  man  may  have  hope  of 
wealth,  but  that  is  a  very  different  thing  from  being  wealthy ;  and  of  old  age,  and 
yet  not  reach  middle  life ;  but  this  Divine  hope  can  never  be  disappointed.  4. 
Because  it  is  th«  subject  of  Divine  revelation.  No  man  could  have  invented  it. 
The  prince  of  dreamers  could  not  have  imagined  it,  nor  the  master  of  logio 
inferred  it.  The  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  has  opened  a  window  in  heaven, 
and  bidden  us  look  on  our  own.  6.  Inasmuch  as  it  came  to  us  by  hearing, 
•'Whereof  ye  heard,"  not  by  working,  deserving,  penance,  and  sacrifice.  We 
heard  that  the  pierced  hand  of  Jesus  had  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all 
believers,  and  we  believed.  Will  we  not  prize  to  the  uttermost  the  sacred  word 
which  has  brought  us  such  a  hope?  6.  Because  the  substance  of  it  is  most 
extraordinary.  (1)  It  is  the  hope  of  victory,  for  we  shall  overcome  every  foe ;  (2)  of 
perfection,  for  we  shall  be  like  Christ ;  (3)  of  security  from  every  danger,  for  no 
temporal  evil  shall  come  near  ns,  no  mental  evil  intrude  upon  ns,  no  spiritual 
enemy  assail  ns ;  (4)  of  perfect  rest,  which  shall  be  consistent  with  continual 
service,  for,  like  the  angels,  we  shall  rest  on  the  wing — no  weary  limb  or  fevered 
brain  shall  follow  us ;  (5)  of  happiness  beyond  compare ;  (6)  of  everlasting  fellow- 
ship  with  Christ.  II.  A  host  skcubb  hope.  1.  Because  it  is  laid  up.  Bank 
calamities  make  business  men  very  careful  where  they  lay  up  their  treasures,  bat 
there  is  no  room  for  anxiety  for  what  God  takes  under  His  charge.  "  Laid  up," 
hidden  in  a  safe  place.  We  find  it  hard  to  lay  up  our  valuables  safely.  2.  Laid 
up  "  for  you."  There  is  a  crown  in  heaven  which  will  never  be  worn  by  any  other 
head  but  yours.  3.  Laid  up  "  in  heaven,"  where,  as  our  Saviour  says — (1)  "  Neither 
moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt" — no  process  of  decay  will  cause  your  treasure  to 
become  stale  and  worn  out.  (2)  •'  Nor  do  thieves  break  through  and  steal."  We 
cannot  imagine  Satan  undermining  the  bastions  of  heaven.  If  your  hope  lies  in 
the  bank,  it  may  break ;  if  in  an  empire,  it  may  melt  away ;  if  in  an  estate,  the 
deeds  may  be  questioned ;  if  in  any  human  creature,  death  may  bereave  you ;  if 
in  yourself,  it  is  deceitful  altogether.  4.  We  have  one  indisputable  certificate  and 
guarantee  for  it.  Notice  three  emphatic  words.  (1)  ••  In  the  word."  We  take  a 
good  man's  words  freely  ;  and  will  we  not  take  God's  word  much  more  readily  ? 
(2)  *'  Of  the  truth."  It  is  not  a  word  of  guess  or  probable  inference,  but  ol 
infallible  truth.  There  may  be  other  true  things  in  the  world,  but  God's  word  is 
the  essence  of  truth.  (3)  "  Of  the  gospel."  The  sum  and  substance  of  the  good 
news  is  this  glorious  hope.  III.  A  fowebfully  ini'lcential  hops.  1.  It  is  the 
parent  and  nurse  of  love.  "  The  love  which  ye  have  to  all  saints  for  the  hope," 
Sco,     That  ia  no  trifiing  fountain  of  action  which  leads  believing  hearts  to  loveu 


CHAP.  I.]  COLOSSIANS.  11 

S.  Love  is  part  of  ita  operation  on  oarselves,  but  it  affects  others  also.  (1)  It 
leads  ministers  and  gracious  people  to  give  thanks  to  God ;  (2)  to  pray  (ver.  9). 
{C.   H.  Spurgeon.)  The   heavenly  hope  : — I.  Thebb  is  oiten  to  man  a  pbos- 

MOT  or  FUTURE  QOOD.  The  apostle  here  speaks  about  a  hope.  Hope  is  the 
expectation  of  future  good.  There  is  no  being  who  is  not  the  subject  of  hope. 
We  are  not  content  to  exercise  this  passion  merely  in  reference  to  objects  which 
•re  on  this  side  the  grave.  We  all  think  of  the  state  into  which  we  expect  to 
remove.  Man  would  fain  live  for  ever ;  futurity  rises  on  the  soul ;  and  hope 
implants  the  high  desire  of  enjoying  it.  This  hope  is  inspired  by  the  goodness  of 
the  God  who  formed  us ;  He  has  been  pleased  to  grant  us  a  knowledge  by  which 
our  hopes  may  be  confirmed  and  conducted  to  their  final  goal  in  heaven.  A 
beautiful  vista  of  enjoyment  is  opened  before  us,  exactly  corresponding  with  our 
views  and  wishes.  Hope  is  the  balm  of  life ;  and  but  for  it  life  would  be  but  a 
dreadful  dungeon,  and  we  should  sink  into  all  the  horrors  of  despair.  Now,  look 
on  the  future ;  survey  the  landscape  which  revelation  has  sketched  out.  There 
are  the  many  mansions  in  which  God  the  Father,  His  Son,  His  people  reside. 
These  are  the  beautiful  similitudes  which  are  employed  to  inspire  our  hopes. 
They  are  abodes  of  purity ;  they  are  the  abodes  of  knowledge.  There  we  shall 
know  even  as  we  are  known.  They  are  abodes  of  triumph  ;  they  are  the  abodes  of 
blessed  companionship.  There  we  come  to  God,  to  Jesus,  to  the  spirits  of  the 
just  made  perfect.     They  are  the  abodes  of  life  and  immortality.     II.  Cebtain 

BEQUISITES   ABE   NECESSARY   FOB  PABTICIPATINa   IN   THAT   PBOBPEOT.      HopO  iS  founded 

on  faith ;  and  we  must  believe  before  we  can  hope  for  the  enjoyment  of  heaven. 
1.  There  must  be  faith  in  the  declarations  of  God  by  which  the  nature  of  these  pros- 
pects is  disclosed.  No  man  can  hope  for  that  in  which  he  does  not  believe.  There 
must  be  faith,  else  all  this  beautiful  scenery  will  only  be  like  the  work  of  fancy  or 
falsehood.  2.  Faith  in  the  method  of  mercy  revealed  by  God  as  the  only  way  through 
•which  a  participation  in  these  prospects  can  be  enjoyed.  God  has  not  only  revealed 
these  prospects,  but  also  the  way  to  the  enjoyment  of  them.    IH.  The  prospect  of 

TUTUBE   GOOD   BESTS  ON   THE   MOST   FIBM   AND  INVIOIABLE   SEOCBITT.      It    is  Said  tO  be 

"laid  up."  The  apostle  uses  the  same  expression,  "There  is  laid  up  for  me  a 
crown  of  righteousness. "  In  Hebrews  ix.  27  the  same  word  is  rendered  "appointed." 
It  is  a  thing  granted  on  a  firm  and  imperishable  security.  How  different,  then,  is 
it  from  the  hopes  of  earth.  Here  the  object  is  as  certain  as  if  yoo  grasped  it  in 
your  hand.  1.  It  rests  on  the  authority  of  the  Word  of  God.  Let  it  be  assumed 
that  the  author  of  your  hope  is  God.  Did  He  ever  inspire  hope,  and  plunge  into 
despair  ?  Did  He  ever  erect  a  building  which  He  will  not  protect  ?  Has 
He  not  power?  Is  He  not  wise?  Is  He  destitute  of  goodness?  "My  counsel 
shall  stand,  and  I  will  do  all  My  pleasure."  2.  The  word  of  God  is  ratified  by 
the  work  of  the  Redeemer.  All  the  work  of  Christ  is  to  give  firmness  to  what 
God  has  sworn.  "  All  the  promises  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  are  yea,  and  in  Him 
amen."  The  death  of  Christ  does  its  part,  as  it  is  the  sacrifice  by  which  the 
eurse  is  taken  away.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  testimony  that  the  atone- 
ment is  accepted.  The  present  residence  of  the  Saviour  is  another  foundation  ou 
which  this  hope  rests.  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  "Jesus  the  forerunner 
hath  entered  in."     IV.  These  prospects,  when  enjoyed  and  possessed,   must 

PBODUCB   THE    MOST   POWEBFUL   INFLUENCE   ON    THE    HEABT.        1.    It    eXcitCS     tO    moral 

purity  and  holiness  of  life.  You  hope  to  enter  heaven.  Heaven  is  a  holy  place. 
God  is  holy.  The  inhabitants  are  holy.  All  their  praises  centre  in  this  perfection. 
You  must  be  holy  in  heaven  ;  and  will  you  not  be  so  here  ?  "  Every  one  that  hath 
this  hope  purifieth  himself  as  He  is  pure."  2.  It  produces  calmness  and  peace 
amidst  the  troubles  and  trials  of  the  world.  The  man  who  has  so  good  a  hope  of 
heaven  need  not  grudge  to  encounter  a  few  troubles  on  earth.  3.  It  gives 
confidence  amid  the  approaches  of  decay  and  dissolution.  This  is  "  the 
hope  which  is  laid  up  for  Christians  in  heaven  I "  "  It  is  a  good  hope, 
a  lively  hope,  a  sweet  hope — a  hope  which  makes  the  coward  bold,  a 
hope  which  bears  above  the  world,"  Ac.  But  is  it  mine?  {J.  Parsons.) 
Hope  laid  up  in  heaven: — What  is  this  hope  but  the  glorious  life  we  look 
for?  Now,  where  should  the  life  of  the  branches  of  a  tree  be  kept  but  where 
the  root  is  ?  So  where  should  onr  glorious  life  be  hid  but  where  Christ,  the 
root  of  OS  all,  is  with  him?  Yea,  this  is  most  meet  and  behoveful  for  us.  If  an 
Englishman  should  sojourn  in  France  a  while,  and  had  great  treasure  to  receive, 
wooid  he  not  choose  rather  to  have  it  paid  him  at  the  Exchange  in  his  own  country 
Hbtax  to  have  it  there,  far  from  his  home,  and  stand  to  the  hazard  of  transporting  of 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caup.  t, 

it  ?  So  it  fareth  with  na.  It  is  safer  that  onr  wealth  should  be  paid  ns  in  heaven, 
our  own  country,  than  here  where  we  are  but  strangers  wayfaring  for  a  season.  (P. 
Bayne,  B.D.)  Christian  hope  : — •'  Our  hope  is  not  hung  upon  such  an  untwisted 
thread  as  •  I  imagine  so,'  or  '  It  is  likely ' ;  but  the  cable,  the  strong  rope  of  our 
fastened  anchor,  is  the  oath  and  promise  of  Him  who  is  eternal  verity  ;  our  salva- 
tion is  fastened  with  God's  own  hand,  and  Christ's  own  strength,  to  the  strong 
stake  of  God's  unchangeable  nature."    (S.  Rutherford.) 

Vers.  6,  6.  The  word  of  tbe  trutli  of  the  gospel  wMch  Is  come  unto  yon. — 

The  argument  for  the  gospel  based  on  the  triumphs  of  missions : — I.  Think  of  ths 

GOSPEL    AS    IT    AFFOHD8     INSPIRATION     TO     DISSEMINATE     ITSELF.       Christianity    is     the 

religion  of  universal  man.  It  recognizes  no  exception.  1.  The  principles  of  the 
kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ  are  themselves  universal.  They  deal  with  conditions 
which  belong  to  all  men.  They  impose  rules  which  all  can  obey.  They  grant 
their  privileges  without  distinction.  The  sin  they  would  destroy  is  the  sin  of  all 
men.  The  salvation  they  illustrate  is  offered  to  every  child  of  Adam.  Christ 
indicated  this  universality  by  explicit  declaration  in  the  conversation  with 
Nioodemus,  the  parables  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  great  commission.  This  idea 
was  fully  gained  by  the  apostles.  Not  at  first,  although  Peter  touched  it  in  his 
address  to  Cornelius ;  but  Paul  fully  developed  it.  Is  not  this  in  itself  unique  f 
Has  it  not  such  a  supreme  character  that  it  at  least  suggests  the  idea  of  a  Divine 
origin  ?  Why  should  it  belong  to  Christianity  alone  ?  2.  But  this  universalism  is 
much  more  than  an  intellectual  idea.  It  is  a  vital  and  energizing  force.  It  pro- 
pagates itself.  The  moment  a  man  becomes  a  Christian  he  is  filled  with  a  desire 
that  others  should  be  Christians.  3.  Hence  we  find  two  facts  in  the  history  of  the 
Church — its  aggressive  character,  and  its  exclusive  relation  to  all  other  faiths. 
The  Boman  pantheon  included  aU  the  gods  of  the  nations  conquered  by  Rome,  and 
would  have  welcomed  Christ,  but  He  would  not  enter  it.  He  demanded  the 
extrusion  of  every  other  divinity  ;  His  altar  alone  could  receive  the  sacrifices  of  a 
worshipping  world.  And  it  is  still  so.  Christianity  brooks  no  other  faith.  Is  not 
this  a  noteworthy  fact  ?  Whence  has  it  come  ?  4.  It  is  in  modern  missions  that 
we  may  find  the  practical  illustration  of  this  universalism  and  its  most  effective 
illustration.  II.  Think  of  the  unselfish  spikit  in  which  this  attempt  to  wm 
A  WORLD  HAS  BEEN  PROJECTED  AND  CARRIED  otfT.  1.  The  mere  dcsiro  for  imperial 
Bway  over  an  entire  race  may  of  itself  be  no  very  Divine  emotion.  Many  have 
experienced  it,  and  it  has  proved  to  be  a  spawn  of  hell  rather  than  a  birth  of 
heaven — Nimrod,  Alexander,  Csesar,  Napoleon.  But  this  is  not  the  spirit  that 
animates  the  modem  herald  of  the  Cross.  He  seeks  no  personal  glory,  his  gains 
are  small,  his  comforts  few  ;  with  no  weapons  but  a  book,  the  name  of  Jesus,  and 
a  holy  life,  he  moves  to  the  victory  of  a  world.  2.  I  know  all  that  can  be  said 
about  the  restless  spirit,  love  of  adventure,  desire  to  escape  the  dulness  of  average 
home  life,  and  the  glamour  of  missionary  fame.  But  these  emotions  are  fleeting, 
and  perish  if  there  be  no  recognition  in  places  of  note,  and  wither  before  old  age. 
But  this  is  not  the  experience  of  missionaries.  It  is  nearly  a  century  since 
evangelical  missions  were  started,  but  the  spirit  is  as  fresh  as  ever.  If  the 
romance  has  disappeared,  it  has  been  replaced  by  a  greater  devotion,  and  a  wiser, 
because  more  experienced,  energy.  What  is  the  earthly  fame  the  missionarj 
gains  7  Mention  half  a  dozen  names  out  of  hundreds  of  thousands  which  the 
world  signalizes.  What  his  wealth  ?  Scarce  a  pittance  for  old  age.  What  does 
a  thoughtful  inquirer  make  of  this  system  which  begets  such  a  quality  of  moral 
nature,  which  summons  to  its  work  such  a  noble  spirit  ?  Does  it  not  suggest  that 
God  must  be  the  author  of  the  truth  these  men  carry  forth,  and  the  inspirer  of  the 
sentiment  with  which  they  do  their  work?    III.  Think  of  the  marvellous  forcb 

WHICH    TH«    gospel    HAS    MANIFESTED    IH    ITS     SPREAD     THROUGH     THE     WORLD.       1.     We 

are  not  oonsidering  the  advance  of  a  nation  which  is  extending  its  government, 
arms,  commerce,  language,  or  tracing  the  progress  of  a  trade,  science,  or  any  other 
force  which  spends  itself  on  onr  physical  existence,  and  may  minister  to  the  baser 
side  of  oar  nature.  We  are  estimating  the  power  of  a  force  which  comes  to  each 
man  personally,  and  demands  thought,  obedience,  self-conquest,  and  the  dissolu- 
tion, it  may  be,  of  bonds  which  hold  him  to  his  past,  his  family,  and  his  interest. 
There  is  nothing  like  it.  It  is  the  only  moral  propagander  of  the  world.  2.  And 
yet  what  victories  it  has  gained.  Napoleon  confessed  that  his  paled  before  them. 
Bur  putting  aside  the  past  gains  of  the  gospel,  its  victories  over  Jewish  faith,  Greek 
pliilofloiihy,  Koiuan  law,  its  contest  with  Islam,  and  its  conquest  of  Europe,  oon- 


CBAT.  t]  00L0SSIAN8.  It 

eider  its  modem  achievementa.  Modem  missions  foond  the  Sonth  Sea  Islands  the 
home  of  naked  savages ;  to-day  thej  are  for  the  most  part  civilized,  and  reckoned 
among  the  nations.  Think  of  what  it  has  done  in  Madagascar,  and  what  it  is 
doing  in  India,  China,  Japan.  Wherever  we  turn  we  find  the  missionary.  He 
has  created  written  languages,  clothed  the  naked,  changed  the  savage  into  a  saint, 
made  lands  safe  for  the  trader,  freed  the  slave,  &c.     IV.  Think  of  thb  adaptation 

TO   THE    WANTS   OP    MAN    WHICH  THE   GOSPEL  HAS  EXHIBITED  IN  ITS  SPREAD  THEOUOHODT 

IHB  WORLD.  It  has  proved  itself  to  be  exactly  what  all  men  want,  and  what  they 
eould  readily  accept,  1.  How  varied  are  the  climes  into  which  it  has  been  carried, 
but  it  breathes  every  air,  and  finds  each  as  if  its  native  breath.  2.  All  colours  are 
alike  to  the  gospel.  3.  Age  makes  no  difference,  and  culture  renders  it  neither 
needless  nor  ineffectual.  4.  No  nation  outgrows  it.  5.  It  presents  a  point  at 
which  all  can  unite.  It  has  realized  the  unity  and  brotherhood  of  the  race. 
There  is  an  old  Arabic  proverb  which  declares  that  Islam  can  flourish  only  where 
the  palm  tree  grows,  but  the  Tree  of  Life  is  planted  in  every  soil,  and  blossoms  all 
over  the  world.  What  can  be  the  answer  of  a  thoughtful  mind  to  such  facts  as 
these?  (LI.  D.  Bevan,  D.D.)  The  perennial  fruitfulness  of  the  gospel: — The 
gospel  is  not  Hke  those  plants  which  exhaust  themselves  in  bearing  fruit,  and 
wither  away.  The  external  growth  keeps  pace  with  the  reproductive  energy. 
While  "beareth  fruit"  describes  the  inner  working,  "increasing"  gives  ffiie 
outward  extension  of  the  gospel.  The  words  "  and  increasing  "  are  not  found  in 
the  received  text,  but  the  authority  in  their  favour  is  overwhelming.  (Bishop 
Lightfoot.) 

Vers.  ft-8.  irhlch.  la  come  nnto  you  aa  It  Is  In  all  the  ■worU.—The  true  gospel 
universally  the  same  : — I.  In  its  adaptation  and  enterprise.  '•  Which  is  come 
nnto  you,  as  it  is  in  all  the  world."  The  gospel,  though  first  proclaimed  to  the 
Jews,  was  not  confined  to  them.  It  reached  and  changed  the  Colossians.  In 
them  all  races  were  represented.  The  world's  greatest  blessings  are  not 
indigenous ;  are  not  even  sought ;  they  are  sent  from  above.  Systems  of 
philosophy  lived  only  in  the  soil  that  produced  them.  Heresies  are  ethnic; 
truth  is  catholic.  The  success  of  Mohammedanism  was  of  a  different  character, 
and  effected  by  difierent  means.  It  depended  more  on  the  scimitar  than  the 
Koran.  Alexander,  Sesostris,  and  others  achieved  similar  conquests,  and  as 
rapidly,  by  the  force  of  arms.  The  victories  of  the  gospel  were  won  by  moral 
weapons.  II.  In  its  results.  "  Bringeth  forth  fruit  and  inoreaseth  as  it  does 
also  in  you."  The  fruit-bearing  denotes  its  inward  and  aubjective  influence 
on  the  soul  and  life ;  the  increasing  refers  to  its  outward  and  diffusive  in- 
fluence as  it  makes  progress  in  the  world.  The  metaphor  used  by  the  apostle 
suggests  that  the  gospel,  as  a  tree,  not  only  bears  fruit,  but  grows,  sending  forth  its 
roots  more  firmly  and  widely,  and  extending  its  branches  in  the  air.  We  cannot 
monopolize  that  which  is  intended  for  the  world.  It  is  intensely  practical,  and 
aims  at  results  corresponding  with  its  character.  The  individual  who  is  most 
spiritually  fruitful  will  be  most  active.  III.  In  the  manner  or  its  reception. 
"  Since  the  day  ye  heard  of  it,  and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  truth."  Faith  cometh 
by  hearing,  aod  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God.  The  mode  of  receiving  the  gospel  is 
the  same  to  all.  It  is  apprehended  by  the  understanding,  approved  by  the  judg- 
ment, and  embraced  by  the  affections.  It  is  not  enough  that  it  falls  on  the  ear 
like  the  strain  of  a  seraphic  melody,  not  enough  that  it  enters  the  understanding 
as  a  clearly  conceived,  full-orbed  truth,  not  enough  that  it  ripples  through  the 
sphere  of  the  emotions  as  an  unspeakable  ecstasy ;  unless,  aided  by  the  Divine 
Spirit,  it  be  cordially  embraced  by  the  heart  and  conscience  as  the  whole  truth— 
the  only  truth  that  saves.  It  is  in  the  gospel  only  that  we  *'  hear  of  the  grace  of 
God  "—the  good  news  that  He  has  provided  redemption  and  restoration  for  the 
race.  Nature,  with  all  its  revelations,  is  dumb  on  this  subject.  Providence,  with 
its  vast  repertory  of  mingled  mystery  and  bounty,  unfolds  it  not.  It  is  only  by 
believing  the  gospel  that,  like  the  Colossians,  we  can  "  know  the  grace  of  God  in 
truth."  IV.  In  the  method  of  its  propagation.  1.  It  is  propagated  by  preach- 
ing ••  as  ye  also  learned,"  lit.,  "  as  ye  were  instructed,"  in  the  truth  of  the  previoua 
verse.  Probably  Epaphras  first  preached  the  gospel  at  Colosse  and  the  neighbour- 
ing cities.  Preaching  is  the  Divinely -instituted  means  of  disseminating  the  gospel. 
It  cannot  be  superseded  by  any  other  agency.  "  It  pleased  God  by  the  foolishnesa 
of  preaching  to  save."  2.  It  is  propagated  by  men  thoroughly  qualified  for  the 
work.     (1)  The  apostle  recognized  Epaphras  as  a  oo-labourer  with  himself.    Th« 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  x. 

preacher  mnst  labour  as  belonging  to  ChriBt,  as  dependent  on  Him,  and  as  attached 
to  Him.     With  all  frankness,  affection,  and  modesty,  the  great  apostle  acknow- 
ledges Epaphras  as  '•  a  dear  fellow-laboarer."    Envy  and  jealousy  of  the  gifts  and 
reputation  of  others  are  pernicious  and  unjustifiable.    (2)  The  apostle  recognized 
Epaphras  as  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ.    (3)  The  apostle  recognized  Epaphras  as  a 
man  of  deep  spiritual  insight.     "  Who  also  declared  unto  us  your  love  in  the  spirit. " 
Love  is  the  leading  characteristic  of  the  gospel.     Lessons  :  1.  The  universality  of 
the  gospel  a  strong  evidence  of  the  Divine  authorship.     2.  Though  all  the  world 
were  to  reject  the  gospel  it  would  still  be  true.     3.  To  whomsoever  the  gospel 
comes,  the  imperative  duty  is  to  believe  it.     {George  Barlow.)        The  gospel,  itt 
spread  and  fruitfulnesB : — I.  The   admirable   progress   and   great   and   sudden 
SPREAD  OF  THE  GOSPEL.     1.  The  gospcl  had  come  to  the  Cdlossians,  a  people  living 
in  Phrygia,  a  province  infamous  for  its  abominations,  whence  had  issued  the 
mysteries  and  infernal  devotions  of  Cybele,  the  most  detestable  of  pagan  idols,  and 
in  whose  service  were  committed  the  most  shameful  horrors.  Whence  it  appears  that 
the  knowledge  of  God's  Word  is  a  donation  of  mere  grace,  and  not  the  payment  of 
merit.     The  apostle  tells  them,  not  that  they  had  come  to  the  gospel,  but  it  to 
them ;  to  show  us  that  it  is  God  who  comes  to  us,  who  prevents  us  by  His  grace, 
according  to  His  good  pleasure.     The  sick  go  to  the  physician  ;  here  the  Physician 
of  souls  goes  to  the  sick  (Luke  xix.  10  ;  Isa.  Ixv.  1).     2.  The  gospel  was  come  into 
all  the  world.     This  is  not  at  all  astonishing  if  the  other  apostles  and  evangelists 
laboured  each  according  to  his  measure.     We  read  of  the  extraordinary  diffusion  oi 
the  gospel  in  Justin,  Clement,  Tertullian,  and  even   Tacitus  acknowledges  that 
there  was  a  very  great  multitude  of  Christians  in  Kome.    3.  The  apostle  mentions 
this — (1)  To  confirm  them  the  more  in  the  faith  of  the  gospel.    Not  that  truth 
depends  on  its  success ;  theugh   all  the  world  were  against  it  that  would  be  un- 
shaken.     Yet  it  is  a  consolation  to  the   believer  to  see  the  extensive  diffusion 
of  his  faith;  and  the    more  converts,  the   greater    the    confirmation.      (a)    It 
was    not    full     thirty     years    since     the    crucifixion ;    how,    then,    could   the 
doctrine  of  the  Cross  have  made  so  great  a  way  in  so  little  time,  surmounted 
BO  many  obstacles,  flown  into   so  many  places,  if  it  were  not  Divine.      What 
other  system  has   accomplished  so  much,     (b)  Then  it  had  no   force  of  armg 
to  advance  it,  or  charms  of  eloquence  and  philosophy  to  commend  it.     Its  mis- 
sionaries were  fishermen  and  artizaus,  without  credit  or  experience,  persecuted, 
derided,  killed.     Yet  it  spread  everywhere.     (2)  Besides  the  confirmation  of  their 
faith  the  apostle  designed  to  fortify  them  against  the  errors  which  were  being  sown 
in  the  Church.    II.  Its  Divine  efficacy.     1.  It  brings  forth  fruit — faith,  love,  &o. 
It  is  this  energy  of  the  gospel  which  Christ  represents  in  Matt.  liii.    Wherever  the 
gospel  went  it  transformed  (Isa.  xli.  19,  Iv.  10,  11),  and  those  whom  it  transformed 
used  it  to  transform  others.     (1)  It  brought  forth  fruit  instantly— not  as  nature. 
The  moment  the  gospel  is  rightly  received  it  produces  fruit.    Receive  it  then  at 
once  (Psa.  xcv.  7,  8).    One  of  the  most  pernicious  artifices  of  the  enemy  is  to  induce 
men  to  defer  conversion.     You  cannot  be  the  Lord's  too  soon.     (2)  But  if  we  are 
required  to  bear  fruit  at  once,  it  follows  not  that  we  may  soon  after  cease  to  do  so, 
Bs  certain  trees  which,  if  they  are  the  first  to  flourish  are  the  first  to  fade  (Psa. 
xcii.  14).    2.  The  faith  of  the  gospel  is  "the  knowledge  of  the  grace  of  God," 
because  it  is  not  possible  to  enjoy  this  heavenly  doctrine  if  the  man  has  not 
received  the  mercy  it  offers  in  Jesus  Christ.    This  grace  is  the  heart  and  substance 
of  the  gospel.     When  Paul  says  that  they  "  heard  and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in 
truth,"  he  means  either— (1)  That  they  received  it  in  sincerity,  without  hypocrisy; 
or  (2)  That  it  was  delivered  to  them  pure,  and  without  mixture  of  Pharisaical 
superstition  or  philosophical  vanity ;  or  (3)  So  as  it  is  declared  in  the  gospel,  not 
on  error  and  fictions,  as  in  the  false  religions ;  nor  in  shadow  or  figure  as  in  the 
law,  but  nakedly  and  simply  aa  it  is  in  itself.    Of  these  three  expositions  the  first 
is  commendatory  of  the  Colossians,  the  second  of  Epaphras,  the  third  of  the  gospel 
itself.     {J.  Daille.)        The  progresa  of  Christianity: — The  following  statement,  a 
conjectural  but  probable  representation  of  the  progressive  increase  of  Christians  io 
the  world,  is  attributed  to  Sharon  Turner :  1st  century,  500,000 ;  2nd,  2,000,000 , 
8rd  5  000,000 ;  4th,  10,000,000  ;  5th,  15,000,000  ;  6th,  20,000,000  ;  7th,  24,000,000; 
8th,   30,000,000  ;    9th,   40,000,000 ;   10th,   50,000,000  ;    11th,   70,000,000  ;    12th, 
80,000,000 ;  13th,  75,000,000;  14th,  80,000,000;  15th,  100,000,000;  16th,  125,000,000; 
17th,  155,000,000  ;  18th,  200,000,000.    Although  this  is  only  a  mere  approximation, 
avid  a  very  loose  one,  to  the  actual  facts,  yet  it  is  interesting  and  instructive.    With 
the  exception  of  the  thirteenth  century  {tenebrosum,  as  the  late  Dr  Miller  called  it)^ 


CHA».  I.]  COLOSSIANS. 


the  progress  of  the  truth  has  been  ever  onward.  From  every  defeat  it  has  arisen 
afresh,  and  what  has  never  been  the  case  in  any  other  system,  religious,  social,  or 
intellectual,  has  revived  anew  from  the  ashes  of  its  own  inward  corruptions.  In 
this  nineteenth  century,  the  Christian  population  of  the  world  cannot  be  far  from 
three  hundred  millions ;  and  its  progress  now  is  more  rapid  than  in  any  period 
since  the  apostolic  age.  What  imagination  can  forecast  the  conquests  of  the  next 
fifty  years  !  The  leaven  is  working  in  every  land.  The  old  empires  of  idolatry 
ftud  superstition  are  effete,  and  ready  to  vanish ;  while  new  Christian  empires  are 
bom  almost  in  a  day.  Every  new  discovery  in  nature,  or  invention  in  art,  helps 
to  speed  the  gospel.  Trade,  commerce,  revolution,  exploration,  all  prepare  tiie 
way  and  herald  the  approach  of  the  heralds  of  the  cross.     {Dr.  Haven.) 

Ver  7.  As  ye  also  learned  of  Epaphras. — Epaphrai : — To  commend  Epaphras  to 
the  Colossians  and  secure  to  him  their  heart,  Paul  bears  a  strong  testimony  to  his 
fidelity  and  goodness.  1.  Paul  knew  how  very  important  it  is  that  churches  should 
have  a  good  opinion  of  their  pastors ;  and  with  what  artifices  the  enemy  labours  to 
ruin  their  reputation  among  their  flocks ;  on  this  account  he  here  exalts  Epaphras 
as  his  piety  deserved  ;  and,  to  remove  from  the  Colossians  all  suspicion  against  the 
purity  of  his  teachings,  expressly  assures  them  that  the  doctrine  which  they  had 
learned  of  him  was  the  same  gospel  of  which  he  had  spoken.  2.  And  from  this 
anxiety  of  the  apostle  ministers  should  learn  the  necessity  of  insuring  the  esteem  of 
their  people;  abstaining  not  from  evil  only,  but  also  from  its  appearances.  It  is 
not  enough  to  obtain  the  approval  of  our  own  conscience,  we  should  also  be 
prepared  to  satisfy  the  judgment  of  our  neighbours.  Innocence  is  necessary  for 
ourselves,  and  reputation  for  others.  3.  And  since  it  serves  to  edify  them,  we  are 
evidently  bound  to  preserve,  not  only  our  own,  but  also  the  reputation  of  our 
brethren.  Who  does  not  see  that  if  we  bite  and  rend  one  another,  the  disgraceful 
conduct  of  individuals  will  involve  us  aU  in  one  common  infamy  and  ruin  ?  4.  And 
Bee  also  that  as  the  reputation  of  pastors  is  a  public  good,  each  believer  owes  it  a 
peculiar  respect,  and  that  the  crime  of  those  who  unjustly  violate  it  is  a  kind  of 
sacrilege.  It  is  robbing  the  Church,  stealing  from  it  its  means  of  edification.  To 
return  to  Epaphras ;  the  apostle  calls  him— I.  His  "  dbab  fellow-servant." 
Admire — 1.  His  ingenuousness  ;  for  whereas  there  is  commonly  a  jealousy  between 
persons  of  the  same  profession,  St.  Paul  acknowledges  and  exalts  the  gifts  and 
piety  of  this  servant  of  God.  2.  His  kindness  ;  for  he  loves  him,  and  shows  that 
of  all  men  there  were  none  whom  he  more  tenderly  esteemed  than  the  faithful 
ministers  of  the  gospel.  3.  His  humility ;  in  that  being  raised  to  the  throne  of 
apostolic  dignity,  the  highest  in  the  Church,  he  makes  Epaphras,  as  it  were,  to  sit 
there  with  him,  owning  him  for  his  fellow.  II.  A  "  minister  of  Christ."  It  was 
much  to  be  fellow-servant  with  St.  Paul,  but  it  is  much  more  to  be  the  minister  of 
Christ,  the  Head  of  the  Church.  III.  A  *'  faithful  minister  :  "  the  apellation  of 
minister  was  his  in  common  with  many  others,  the  praise  of  faithfulness  with  few. 
It  is  all  that  the  apostle  required  in  a  good  steward  of  the  house  of  God  (1  Cor.  It. 
1,  2).  To  have  this  praise  the  minister  of  God  must — 1.  Seek  the  glory  of  his 
Master,  and  not  his  own.  2.  He  must  keep  close  to  his  orders  ;  not  parsimoniously 
concealing  from  his  sheep  any  of  the  things  committed  to  him  for  their  edification ; 
and  without  setting  before  them  anything  of  his  own  invention  beyond,  or  con- 
trary to,  the  will  of  the  chief  Shepherd.  IV.  A  faithful  minister  of  Christ  for 
Toc.  They  ought  therefore  to  love  him  both  for  the  dignity  of  his  office,  and  for 
the  profit  that  thereby  came  to  them.  For  though  we  are  bound  to  love  and  respect 
all  the  faithful  servants  of  God  in  general,  yet,  doubtless,  we  owe  them  particular 
affection  and  reverence  who  specially  consecrate  their  ministry  to  our  edification. 
{J.  Daille.)  The  praise  of  service  : — It  is  a  beautiful  though  a  faint  image  which 
shines  out  on  us  from  these  fragmentary  notices  of  this  Colossian  Epaphras — a  true 
Christian  bishop,  who  had  come  all  the  long  way  from  his  quiet  valley  in  the  depths  of 
Asia  Minor  to  get  guidance  about  his  flock  from  the  great  apostle,  and  who  bore  them 
on  his  heart  day  and  night,  and  prayed  much  for  them  while  so  far  away  from  them. 
How  strange  the  fortune  which  has  made  his  name  and  his  solicitudes  and  prayers 
immortal !  How  little  he  dreamed  that  such  embalming  was  to  be  given  to  his 
little  services,  and  that  they  were  to  be  crowned  with  such  exuberant  praise  1  The 
smallest  work  done  for  Jesus  Christ  lasts  for  ever,  whether  it  abide  in  men's 
memories  or  no.  Let  as  ever  live  as  those  who,  like  painters  in  fresco,  have  with 
Bvdft  hand  to  draw  lines  and  lay  on  colours  which  will  never  fade ;  and  let  as  by 
humble  faith  »nd  holy  life  earn  such  a  character  from  Paul's  Master.     The  Master'i 


19  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  b. 

••  well  done "  will  out-weigh  labonrs  and  toils,  and  the  depreciating  tongues  oi 
fellow-servants,  or  of  the  Master's  enemies.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  faithful 
minister  of  Christ : — I.  Thb  chabactkristics  of  a  faithpul  minister  of  Cheibt. 
1.  A  sincere  and  manifest  attachment  to  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  2.  He  receives 
his  doctrines  and  his  views  of  truth  from  the  pure  fountain  of  Divine  revelation. 
Moses  was  ordered  to  make  all  things  according  to  the  pattern  shown  him  on  the 
mount ;  and  every  faithful  minister  of  Christ  is  extremely  cautious  that  everything 
he  delivers  corresponds  with  the  rule  laid  down  by  his  Master.  He  makes  the 
Scriptures  his  guide — the  Holy  Word  of  God  his  instructor.  8.  While  he  knows 
ihe  truth,  he  without  reserve  honestly  delivers  the  Lord's  message.  Jeremiah  wa« 
commanded  by  God  to  deliver  all  the  message  which  the  Lord  gave  him,  and  not 
to  be  afraid  of  man.  He  will  not  hesitate  to  warn  sinners  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come,  and  will  be  equally  faithful  in  comforting  and  strengthening  behevers — in 
showing  to  them  their  privileges,  and  the  great  mercy  bestowed  upon  them  through 
their  covenant-head.  4.  While  he  preaches  a  whole  gospel,  giving  to  saints  and 
sinners  their  portion  in  due  season,  he  is  willing,  and  does  suffer,  if  need  be,  for 
righteousness'  sake.    5.  Perseverance  to  the  end:  "Be  thou  faithful,"  &o.    II. 

8nCH  A.  MINISTEB   IS   A  OBEAT   BLESSINa     TO    THE     FEOFLB    TO     WHOM   HB    Z8   8EKT  BT 

QoD.  1.  Because  he  leads  them  from  the  greatest  of  misery  to  the  greatest  of 
blessedness.  (1)  He  conducts  them  from  sin,  impenitenbe,  self-righteousness,  and 
onbelief ;  and  tne  man  who  does  this  is  our  true  friend.  (2)  He  leads  us  to  the 
enjoyment  of  the  most  distinguished  favours,  into  green  pastures — a  state  of  favour 
with  God,  of  union  with  Jesus  Christ,  of  holy  communion  with  the  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Spirit,  upon  earth,  and  a  state  of  happiness  when  we  die,  enabling  us  to 
rejoice  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  2.  Inasmuch  as  he  brings  to  their 
knowledge  those  holy  and  exalted  truths  that  fortifly  a  man  for  the  sufFerings  of 
time  and  the  hour  of  death.  8.  Inasmuch  as  by  opening  to  them  the  gospel,  he 
presents  them  with — what  ? — ah  I  with  what  philosophy  cannot  do — with  what  the 
reason  of  man  cannot  unfold — with  what  science  can  never  explore — with  what  all 
the  pride  of  learning  can  never  bring  to  light : — he  brings  life  and  immortality  to 
their  view.  III.  God  will  pot  honoub  on  a  faithful  ministey.  1.  By  the  witness 
of  the  Spirit  in  the  minister's  own  soul.  2.  Where  the  gospel  is  fully  preached 
God  is  generally  pleased  to  add  the  seal  of  His  approbation  to  it  by  means  of  the 
talents  of  His  minister.  8.  The  Lord  puts  honour  on  £[is  faithful  ministers,  both  in 
the  Church  and  in  the  world.  4.  The  faithful  minister  of  God  will  be  honoured  at 
the  day  of  judgment,  when  his  Master  shall  say  to  him,  "  Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant,"  etc.,  not  Well  done,  learned,  zealous,  eloquent,  successful  servant. 
Conclusion — 1.  A  faithful  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  gift  of  God.  2.  When  % 
faithful  minister  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  dies  he  goes  to  give  in  His 
cconnt.  8.  If  the  faithful  minister  goes  at  death  to  give  an  account  to  his 
toid  and  Master,  then  the  congregation  he  leaves  behind  ought  to  reflect 
nd  think  wbat  account  he  will  give  of  them.  {R.  McAll,  D.D.)  Ministerial 
esponsibility : — I  am  angry  when  I  hear  people  talk  about  the  "  awful 
esponsibility  "  of  being  a  minister.  People  sometimes  say  to  me,  "  I  shoulo  think 
yoo  would  shudder  when  you  stand  up  before  your  congregation."  I  shudder? 
what  should  I  shudder  for  t  Do  you  shudder  when  you  stand  up  before  a  garden 
of  flowers  7  Do  you  shudder  whan  yon  go  into  an  orchard  of  fruit  in  October  ? 
Do  you  shudder  when  you  stand  up  in  the  midst  of  all  the  richness  and  grandeur 
cf  nature  7  I  shudder  in  your  midst  ?  "  But  the  responsibility  I  "  I  have  no 
responsibility.  I  am  wiUing  to  do  my  duty ;  and  what  more  is  there  than  that  T 
I  will  not  stand  for  the  consequences.  I  will  do  the  best  I  can.  I  will  say  the  best 
things  I  can  every  Sunday ;  I  will  bring  the  truth  home  to  you,  and  I  will  do  it  in 
the  spirit  of  love.  Even  when  I  say  the  severest  things,  it  is  because  I  am  faithful 
to  love.  "  But  your  care  1 "  I  have  not  a  bit  of  care.  I  forget  the  sermon  a  great 
deal  quicker  than  you  do.  "  Your  burden  1 "  I  have  no  burden.  I  take  up  the 
battle,  and  I  lay  the  battle  aside  again  as  soon  as  it  is  over.  And  I  shall  sleep  to- 
night as  sweetly  as  any  man  that  is  here.  And  every  man  that  is  in  the  ministry, 
and  is  willing  to  love  men,  and  to  be  faithful  to  them,  will  find  joy  in  it  from  day  to 
day.  {H.  W.  Beecher).  Ministers  must  be  faithful : — A  dying  nobleman  once  sent 
for  the  clergyman  on  whose  ministry  he  had  attended,  and  said  to  him,  "  Do  you 
not  know  that  my  life  has  been  licentious,  and  that  I  have  violated  the  oommand* 
ments  of  God?  Yet  you  never  warned  me  of  my  danger!  "  The  clergyman  was 
silent.  When  the  nobleman  repeated  the  question,  he  replied,  •*  Yes,  my  lord,  yooi 
manner  of  living  was  not  unknown  lo  me ;  but  your  kindness,  and  my  feat  oi 


«HAV.   I. 


COLOSSIANS.  17 


«3ending  you,  deterred  me  from  reproving  you."  "How  cruel  I  how  wicked  1 "  said 
tne  dying  man.  "The  provision  I  made  for  you  and  your  family  ought  to  havo 
induced  care  and  fidelity.  You  have  neglected  to  warn  and  instruct  me,  and  now 
my  soul  will  be  lost."  A  picture  of  a  faithful  minister  : — Come  in ;  I  will  show  thee 
that  which  may  be  profitable  to  thee.  So  he  commanded  his  man  to  light  the 
candle,  and  bid  Christian  follow  him  ;  bo  he  had  him  into  a  private  room,  and  bid 
his  man  open  a  door,  the  which  when  he  had  done,  Christian  saw  the  picture  of  a 
?ery  grave  person  hung  up  against  the  wall,  and  this  was  the  fashion  of  it : — It 
had  eyes  lifted  up  to  heaven,  the  best  of  books  in  his  hand,  the  law  of  truth  was 
written  upon  it?  lips,  the  world  was  behind  his  back,  it  stood  as  if  it  pleaded  with 
men,  and  a  crown  of  gold  did  hang  over  his  head.  Then  said  Christian,  What 
means  this  ?  Interpreter :  The  man  whose  picture  this  is,  is  one  of  a  thousand  ;  he 
can  beget  children  (1  Cor.  iv.  5),  travail  in  birth  with  children  (Gal.  iv.  19),  and 
nurse  them  himself  when  they  are  born  (1  Thess.  ii.  7).  And,  whereas  thou  seest 
him  with  his  eyes  lifted  up  to  heaven,  the  best  of  books  in  his  hand,  and  the  law  of 
truth  writ  on  his  lips,  it  is  to  show  thee  that  his  work  is  to  know  and  unfold  dark 
things  to  sinners,  even  as  also  tliou  see?t  him  stand  as  if  he  pleaded  with  men  ; 
and  whereas  thou  seest  the  world  as  cast  behind  him,  and  that  a  crown  hangs  over 
his  head,  that  is  to  show  thee  that  slighting  and  despising  the  things  that  are 
present,  for  the  love  that  he  hath  to  his  Master's  service,  he  is  sure  in  the  world 
that  comes  next  to  have  glory  for  his  reward.     (Bunyan'i  "  Pilgrim't  Progrest.") 

Yet.  8.  Who  also  declared  tmto  na  your  love  In  the  Spirit. — The  apostle 
rejoiced  over  the  fact  that  the  Colossians  lived.  This  affirmation  is  to  be  proved. 
I.  Therk  are  vakiods  kinds  or  life — of  the  plant,  animal,  man.  Man  has  several 
lives,  that  of  the  animal,  since  he  has  a  body ;  that  of  the  intellect,  since  he  thinks ; 
that  of  tha  heart,  since  he  loves.  It  will  not  be  contested  that  thought  is  the  life  of 
the  intellect,  for  the  one  separated  from  the  other  is  nothing :  and  so  with  the  life 
of  the  heart — love.  Some  will  say  that  it  hates  also.  So  it  does,  for  we  cannot  love 
a  thing  without  hating  its  opposite.  But  the  life  of  the  heart  is  not  to  hate  and 
to  love,  because  hatred  is  not  the  true  object  of  the  heart.  It  ia  impossible  to 
produce  fire  without  making  ashes,  but  to  make  ashes  is  not  the  end  of  our  labours. 
Hatred  forms  the  ashes  of  the  fire  which  love  kindles,  but  it  is  not  on  those  ashes 
that  the  heart  lives.  The  hatred  which  springs  not  from  love  is  not  the  life  but 
the  death  of  the  heart ;  as  error  is  not  the  life  of  reason.  But  the  heart  haa 
another  death  which  is  egotism ;  which,  however,  irvolves  hatred,  for  a  man  cannot 
love  himself  exclusively  without  hating  others.  II.  The  life  of  the  heabt  is 
dtJPREMB.  1.  The  life  of  the  plant  is  inferior  to  that  of  the  animal,  that  of  the 
animal  inferior  to  that  of  man.  that  of  the  body  beneath  that  of  the  intellect,  that 
of  the  intellect  beneath  moral  life.  Matter  and  form  are  far  inferior  to  knowledge, 
and  knowledge  cannot  be  put  on  a  level  with  love.  2.  Then  that  which  constitutea 
ihe  value  of  each  of  these  lives  is  its  relation  to  a  superior  life.  Matter  is  of 
▼aloe  as  it  does  service  to  the  intellect,  and  the  intellect  is  degraded  when  it  does 
Bot  terminate  in  love.  If  therefore  a  man  wants  the  principal  life  for  which  ha 
has  received  all  others,  and  does  not  love,  he  is  dead.  3.  The  gospel  uniformly 
gives  supremacy  to  this  life  of  the  heart  or  love.  III.  The  love  of  which  thb 
APOSTLE  8PEAK8  IS  LOVE  d  THE  SPIRIT.  What  is  this  Spirit  ?  spirit  in  opposition  to 
matter  ?  and  is  the  expression  equivalent  to  spiritual  love  7  Eather  Paul  meana 
love  in  the  Spirit  of  God,  love  which  He  teaches  and  inspires.  But  this  does  not 
exclude  the  former.  For  our  spirit  is  the  better  part  of  us  which  the  Spirit  of  God 
has  come  to  set  at  liberty,  that  part  of  our  being  which  holds  communion  with 
God.  This  love,  then,  is — 1.  According  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  A  spiritual  love 
towards  the  true,  just,  divine,  immortal.  8.  And  so  not  (1)  carnal  affection,  which 
is  death  (Eom,  viii.  6) ;  (2)  interested  affection  ;  (3)  mere  natural  affection ;  although 
these  are  consecrated  and  renovated  by  the  Spirit,  after  which  the  creature  ia  loved 
in  and  for  God.  IV.  The  object  of  this  love.  God  supremely  and  then  others, 
forming  one  grand  unity  (John  xvii.  23).  V.  The  geeatest  example  of  this  lovtj 
IB  Christ.  In  Him  we  know  what  love  is,  but  it  was  manifested  in  Him  that  it 
might  be  diffused.    His  disciples  are  to  reflect  His  love.    VI.  This  love  BEisa  life, 

AND    ANIMATED    BT    THE    SPIEIT  OF  LIFE,  IS  IMMORTAIi.      VII.    HeLL  IS  THE   ABSENCB    OF 

THIS  LOVE.  It  is  that  empty  heart  which  has  been  violently  dissevered  from  ita 
affections  without  being  united  to  God,  a  heart  which  haa  need  of  love,  and  which 
finds  no  object  to  supply  this  want.  {A.  Vinet,  D.D.)  Two  reasons  for  lotyein  ths 
Spirit: — The  first,  a  general  one,  which  regards  the  very  nature  of  love:  to  wit,. 


19  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 


because  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  author  of  it ;  and  also  because  love  flows  from  <« 
spiritual  heart,  i.e.,  from  a  heart  regenerated  and  renewed.  Hence  observe  the 
dignity  of  Christian  love.  For  natural  love,  or  predilection,  arises  from  those 
inclinations  which  they  call  natixral  affections.  Worldly  love  arises  either  from 
views  of  interest  or  from  conformity  of  manners ;  carnal,  from  the  appetite  for 
pleasure.  To  all  these  something  corrupt,  sordid,  and  vicious  always  adheres. 
But  Christian  love  arises  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  is  altogether  full  of  holiness 
and  purity.  The  other  reason  why  the  love  of  the  Colossians  is  said  to  be  in  the 
spirit  ia  ^seeial,  and  hath  respect  to  Paul  himself ;  for,  they  had  never  seen  Paul, 
but  had  only  heard  of  him  through  Epaphras  and  others.  Because,  therefore,  they 
had  loved  him  whom  they  never  saw  in  the  flesh,  they  are  said  to  love  in  the  spirit. 
Therefore  the  word  spirit  is  taken  in  the  same  sense  as  in  1  Cor.  v.  3.  Hence 
observe,  that  the  duty  of  every  good  man  is,  to  embrace  with  spiritual  love  all  good 
men,  although  known  only  by  report.  That  any  one  may  be  esteemed  worthy  of 
our  love,  it  is  sufficient  if  he  be  known  in  respect  to  hia  virtue,  although  he  be 
unknown  in  person.     {Bishop  Davenant.) 

Vers.  9-14.    For  this  cause  we  also,  since  the  day  we  heard  It,  do  not  cease  to 
pray  for  you. — The  knowledge   of  the  Divine  will : — The  petition  asks — I.  Fob  a 

BESTOWMENT    0»    A    KNOWLEDGE    OF    THE    DiVIME    WILL    AS    ATTAINED    BT    A    8PIKITGAI. 

UNDEESTANDINO  AND  WISDOM.     The  faith  and  charity  of  the  Colossians  had  been  so 
reported  to  the  apostle  as  to  fill  his  heart  with  thankfulness,  which  took  its  habitual 
course,  that  of  unceasing  prayer.     Blending  the  subject  of  his   prayer  with  his 
purpose  in  offering  it,  St.  Paul  asks — 1.  Generally  that  they  may  be  filled,  «&c. — three 
terms  which  in  their  union   signify  an  impartation  from  above  of  a  thorough 
insight  into  the  will  of  God  as  directing  the  practical  life.     Based  on  the  eternal 
purpose  of  redemption,  this  will  is  the  counsel  of  human  sanctification.   As  a  matter 
of  request  it  is  the  Holy  Spirit's  operation  on  our  faculties  making  the  knowledge 
experimental,  rewriting  the  moral  law  on  the  heart,  and  making  it  there  supreme. 
2.  Particularly  the  apostle  connects  with  this  the  spiritual  wisdom  and  under- 
standing which  bring  Divine  knowledge  into  the  sphere  of  the  human  faculties. 
The  Holy  Spirit  imparts  it  to  the  "understanding  "  which  makes  it  the  object  of 
study,  and  aggregates  the  whole  into  wisdom,  which  is  the  practical  application  to 
life  of  the  precepts  which  the  understanding  embraces.     But  both  are  spiritual. 
The  unregenerate  understanding  may  make  the  moral  law  an  object  of  study,  and 
arrange  the  whole  into  a  system  of  rules  for  the  wisdom  of  human  ethics.     But 
in  the  regenerate  the  precepts  are  studied  in  tbe  light  of  the  new  nature,  and  the 
whole  wisdom  of  hoUness  is  the  result  of  a  teaching  that  is  "  from  above  "  (James 
i.  17).     II.  Fob  pbactical  conformity  with  that  will  in — 1.  Fruitfulness  (1)  in 
every  good  work.     All  the  manifestations  of  godliness  are  the  fruit  of  a  Divine 
life  within  wrought  by  Christ  indwelling  by  His  Spirit.     But  the  phrase  "every 
good  work  "  teaches  us  that  the  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds  of  holiness  are  our  own. 
In  their  secret  source  they  have  a  heavenly  origin,  in  their  manifestation  they  are 
human.     The  wonderful  completeness  arrests  attention.     The  tree  brings  forth  all 
the  fruits  that  the  infinite  diversity  of  the  relations  of  Ufe  permit.     (2)    The  words 
♦'  increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God  "  suggests  that  Christian  fruitfulness  knows 
no  limitation.    As  the  knowledge  of  God  and  His  will  grows,  the  fruits  of  obedience 
grow  likewise,  and  with  growing  sanctity  the  notion  of  the  Divine  Being  becornes 
more  clear.     But  the  general  spirit  of  the  prayer  recommends  the  former,  viz., 
that  the  enlarging  knowledge  of  God's  will,  as  "proved  "  in  its  varying apphcations 
in  daily  life,  leads  to  an  unlimited  increase  in  good  works.     To  the  Christian  the 
interior  law  of  God  unfolds  perpetually  new  obligations ;  and  as  it  does  this,  the 
oVedient   life  puts  on  new  aspects  of  perfection.      (3)  We  now  go  back  to   the 
glowing  words   which  precede  "  That  ye   might  walk,"  <fco.      Here  is  a  twofold 
standard,    (a)  Such  a  walk  as  should  do  honour  to  God.   {b)  Such  an  aim  to  secure 
His  approval  as  should  win  His  complacency  always  and  in  all  things.     There  is  a 
daring  completeness  in  this  sentence.     There  is  no  reservation  for  human  infirmity, 
no  undertone  of  deprecation  of  the  Divine  severity,  no  hint  of  a  tolerant  construction 
of  our  conduct.     2,  Endurance  presented  as  a  passive  patience  combined  with  an 
active  longsuffering.  (1)  While  the  Divina  knowledge  is  the  instrument  or  energy 
of  the  holy  life,  it  is  the  Divine  power  which  is  connected  with  the  patience  of 
that  holiness.     The  strength  of  God  of  course  accomplishes  all ;  but  that  strength 
is   "  made    perfect  in   weakness."      The    interior   discipline  of    religion  is  both 
endurance  of  what  is  imposed,  and  resistance  of  all  temptation  to  rebel.    Thuf 


our.  I.]  COLOSSI  AN  S.  » 

the  grandeur  of  the  Christian  conflict  is  that  the  omnipotence  of  God  is  brcKight 
flown  into  the  secret  arena  of  the  struggle.     He  infuses  every  kind  of  strength — 
strength  to  bear  the  inflictions  of  the  Divine  will  in  the  sorrows  of  life,  its  disappoint- 
ments, the  oppositions  of  evil,  the  inexhaustible  varieties  of  the  pressure  of  the  one 
great  cross ;  strength  to  resist  temptations  from  without,  in  the  assaults  of  Satan,  the 
waywardness  of  men,  persecution,  Ac.     (2)  If  this  be  the  case,  surely  the  believer 
should  "  count  it  all  joy  "  to  be  undergoing  temptation  and  that  only  in  the  feeling 
of  victory.     The  very  conflict  itself  is  joyous,  if  Divine  and  human  strength  unite  ; 
the  spirit  feels  most  here  what  it  is  to  be  one  with  Christ.    3.  Thanksgiving  entert 
into  all  the  other  elements  of  the  Christian  life,  and  is  not  merely  their  supplement. 
It  is  here  made  to  spring  solely  from  the  sense  of  redemption.     But  since  the 
perfecting  of  the  redemptional  scheme  all  the  benedictions  of  providence  become 
redemptional.     To  pass  from  the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  that  of  God's  dear  Son 
is  not  to  leave  the  kingdoms  of  nature  and  providence,  but  to  add  to  them,  as  he 
shows  further  on,  all  the  glory  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.     {W.  B. 
Fopcy  D.D.)         The  apostolic  prayer : — Chrysostom  said  to  those  who  would  realize 
the  classical  allusion  more  vividly  than  we  do,  "  that  as  in  the  games  we  urL;e  on 
those  who  are  near  victory,  so  Paul  here  prays  for  an  increase  of  Christian  attain- 
ment for  the  Church  that  had  already  attained  so  much. "     Hence  he  says,  "  For 
this  cause."  We  should  rightly  consider  this  prayer  for  such  increase : — (1)  Because  it 
teaches  us  what  we  should  seek  in  our  intercession  for  Churches.     Our  standard  of 
Church   prosperity  is  convicted  by  such  a  prayer;   our  right  plans  for  Church 
increase  are  here  inspired.     (2)  Because  it  teaches  us  what  we  are  to  seek  and 
expect  for  ourselves :  what  is  really  worth  aiming,  struggling,  praying  for.     Paul 
prays — 1.  That  their  knowledge  may  increase — doubtless  partly  because  of  the 
error  that  was  confusing  some,  but  also  because  knowledge  is  always  good.     Three 
expressions  describe  it  that  are  frequently  used  in  combination  in  Scripture,  and 
which  Aristotle  denotes  as  intellectual  virtues.     1.  Knowledge.     This  in  descriptive 
of  acquaintance  with  any  subject.     He  has  it  who  has  information.     It  is  essential 
as  the  basis  of  culture,  but  is  only  the  basis.     2.  Wisdom  is  higher  than  knowledge, 
and  includes  both  that  and  understanding.     Newman  well  calls  it  "  Reason  exer- 
cised upon  knowledge."    3.  Spiritual  understanding  the  application  of  knowledge  to 
practical  detail,  the  following  out  of  its  processes  to  daily  duty  and  to  the  spiritual 
realm.     II.  That  as  a  result  ov  their  knowledge  their  chakacter  may  ripen. 
The  knowledge  of  God's  will  must  result  in  action,  or  it  is  valueless.    The  character 
resulting  from  this  knowledge  includes — 1.  Walking  worthily  of  the  Lord.     The 
Christian  life  is  an  activity,  a  progress  tested  by  the  highest  standard.     2.  Increaa- 
ing  in  the  knowledge  of  God.     So  knowledge  increases.     This  time  it  is  more  than 
knowledge  of  God's  will,  it  is  knowledge  of  God's  self.     Obedi  nee  is  the  organ  ol 
spiritual  knowledge.     3.  Being  strengthened  with  all  might.     Energy,  inner  energy, 
inner  energy  of  the  highest  sort  for  endurance.    4.  Giving  thanks  to  the  Father. 
Life  shall  have  music  in  it — the  highest  music  of  praise.    For  what?    (1)  Fiinesi 
for    blessedness,    "  meet   for   inheritance."      An  inheritance  is  allotted  to  tnose 
who   are   ready  for  it.     (2)  Emancipation  from   the  power  of  darkness — rescu* 
from    the    tyranny  of    confusion,  ignorance,    peril,  evil.   (3)    Settlement   in   an 
empire   of   liberty,    order    and    honour.       (4)  And   through   and   above  all   for 
Christ  as  the  means  to    blessing,  and    Himself    the   chiefest   blessiug.    {U.   R. 
Thomas.)         The  power  of  unceasing    prayer: — "If    I    was    ever    brought    into 
the  kingdom  of  God,"  said  a  venerable  Christian  lady,  "  it  was, owing  to  the  inter- 
cessions of  old  Dr.  L.     He  married  me,  and  he  used  often  to  call  and  speak  a  few 
earnest  words  to  me  about  my  soul.     '  You  are  now  a  wife  and  a  mother,'  he  would 
say ;  •  do  not  delay  to  give  yourself  to  the  Lord,  and  to  pray  for  grace  to  fulfil  your 
duties.     I  shall  never  cease  to  plead  for  you.'"     The  thought  that  a  man  of  God 
was  pleading  for  her  before  God,  as  well  as  pleading  with  her  at  the  bar  of  her  own 
conscience,  was  the  point  which  seems  to  have  made  the  impression.         Sanctified 
knowledge : — Sanctified    knowledge  is   the    Holy   Spirit's    greatest    helper.     "  It 
carries  the  torch  before  faith ;  it  opens  the  door  of  eternity  to  hope  ;  it  presents 
love  with  a  perfectly  beautiful  object;  it  furiiishes  joy  with  its  sweetest  melodies; 
it  suppUes  patience  with  the  strongest  motives,  and  resignation  with  the  noblest 
patterns."      {S.    Chamock.)         Spiritual    knowledge: — The    difference    between 
believers  and  unbelievers  is  not  so  much  in  the  extent,  as  in  the  manner  of  their 
knowledge.     An  unbeliever  may  know  more,  and  be  able  to  talk  more  of  Divine 
things  than  many  believers,  but  he  knows  nothing  spiritually  and  savingly,  with  a 
holy,  heavenly  light    ▲  believer  may  comprehend  less,  but  he  apprehends  more. 


so  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  I> 

{O.  8.  Bowes.)  The  best  knowledge : — Many  there  are  that  are  accounted  deep 

Boholars,  great  lingnists,  excellent  mathematicians,  sharp  logicians,  knowing 
politicians,  fine  rhetoricians,  sweet  musicians,  &a.  These  may  be  good  or  bad,  as 
the  case  may  be,  but  he  is  certainly  the  best  grammarian  that  has  learnt  to  speak 
the  truth  from  his  heart ;  the  best  astronomer  that  hath  his  conversation  in 
heaven ;  the  best  musician  that  hath  learned  to  sing  the  praises  of  his  God ;  the 
best  arithmetician,  that  so  numbereth  his  days  as  to  apply  himself  to  wisdom ;  he 
is  knowing  in  ethics,  that  traineth  up  his  family  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord ;  he  is  the 
best  economist  who  is  wise  to  salvation,  prudent  in  giving  and  taking  good  counsel; 
he  is  the  best  politician,  and  he  is  a  good  linguist  that  speaks  the  language  of 
Canaan.    (/.  Spencer.) 

Vers.  9-12.  To  pray  for  you  and  desire  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  the 
knowledge.  The  prayer : — L  The  fountain  ob  boot  or  au,  Chbistian  chabacteb. 
"  That  je  might  be  filled  ....  understanding."  1,  The  thing  desired  is  the 
perfecting  of  the  Colossians  in  religious  knowledge.  (1)  The  idea  of  completeness 
up  to  the  height  of  their  capacity  is  given  in  "  filled  "  ;  like  some  jar  charged  with 
sparkling  water  up  to  the  brim.  (2)  The  advanced  degree  of  the  knowledge  is 
given  in  a  favourite  word  which  signifies  mature  knowledge,  deeper  apprehension  of 
God's  truth.  (3)  The  rich  variety  of  that  knowledge  is  set  forth  in  the  clauses  which 
may  read  "  filled  ....  so  that  ye  may  abound  in  ... .  wisdom  and  understanding," 
or  with  "  the  knowledge  of  His  will,"  i.e.,  manifested  in  that  will.  That  knowledge 
will  blossom  out  into  every  kind  of  wisdom  and  understanding.  2.  The  principles 
which  these  words  involve.  (1)  That  the  foundation  of  Christian  character  and 
conduct  is  laid  in  the  knowledge  of  the  will  of  God.  What  concerns  us  to  know  is 
not  abstract  truth,  or  revelation  or  speculative  thought,  but  God's  will.  No 
revelation  has  accomplished  its  purpose  when  a  man  has  simply  understood  it. 
The  light  is  knowledge  which  is  meant  to  shape  practice.  Had  this  been  remem- 
bered two  opposite  errors  would  have  been  avoided,  (a)  The  error  threatening  the 
Colossians,  that  Christianity  was  merely  a  system  of  truth  to  be  believed.  An 
anpraotioal  heterodoxy  was  their  danger,  an  unpractical  orthodoxy  is  ours.  The 
one  important  question  is,  does  our  Christianity  work  ?  (b)  The  converse  error  to 
that  of  unpractical  knowledge,  that  of  unintelligent  practice,  is  quite  as  bad .  A 
numerous  class  profess  to  attach  no  importance  to  Christian  doctrine,  but  put  all 
the  stress  on  Christian  morals.  What  God  hath  joined  together  let  no  man  put 
asunder.  Knowledge  is  sound  when  it  moulds  conduct ;  action  is  good  when  based 
on  knowledge.  (2)  Progress  in  knowledge  is  the  law  of  the  Christian  life.  There 
should  be  continual  advancement  in  the  apprehension  of  God's  will  from  the  first 
glimpse  which  saves  to  this  mature  knowledge.  The  progress  does  not  consist  in 
leaving  behind  old  truths,  but  in  the  profounder  conception  of  what  is  contained  in 
them.  The  same  constellations  which  burn  in  our  midnight  sky  looked  down  ou 
Chaldean  astronomers,  but  how  much  more  is  known  about  them  at  Greenwich 
than  was  dreamed  at  Babylon.  II.  The  riveb  ob  stems  or  Chbistian  conduct. 
1.  Worthily  of  the  Lord.  There  are  other  forms  of  the  same  expression  (Eph. 
iv.  1.;  Rom.  xvi.  2;  Phil.  i.  27;  1  Thess.  ii.  12),  in  all  of  which  there  is  the  idea  of 
a  standard  to  which  the  practical  life  is  to  be  conformed.  (1)  The  Christian  should 
"  walk  "  in  a  manner  corresponding  to  what  Christ  has  done  for  him.  We  say  that 
we  are  not  our  own,  but  bought  with  a  price.  Then  how  do  we  repay  that  costly 
purchase.  Nothing  short  of  complete  self -surrender  can  characterize  the  walk  that 
corresponds  with  our  obligations  to  Christ.  Repugnant  duties  then  become  tokens 
of  love,  pleasant  as  every  sacrifice  made  at  its  bidding  ever  is.  (2)  The  Christian 
should  act  in  a  manner  corresponding  to  Christ's  character  and  conduct.  Nothing 
less  than  the  effort  to  tread  in  Hia  footsteps  is  a  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord.  All 
unlikeness  to  His  pattern  is  a  dishonour  to  Him  and  to  ourselves.  2,  •'  Unto  all 
pleasing,"  which  sets  forth  the  great  aim  as  being  to  please  Christ  in  CTerything, 
and  satisfy  Him  by  our  conduct.  We  are  not  to  mind  other  people's  approbation. 
We  can  do  without  that.  What  does  it  matter  who  praise,  if  He  frowns  ?  or  who 
blame  if  He  smiles.  Nothing  will  so  spur  us  to  diligence,  and  make  all  life  solemn 
and  grand  as  the  thought  that  "we  labour  that  ....  we  may.be  well  pleasing 
to  Him."  Nothing  will  so  string  the  muscles  for  the  fight,  and  free  us  from  entangle- 
ments as  the  ambition  to  "  please  Him  who  hath  called  us  to  be  soldiers."  Men 
have  willingly  flung  away  their  hves  for  a  couple  of  lines  of  praise  in  a  dispatch. 
Let  us  try  to  live  and  die  bo  as  to  get  "honourable  mention  "from  our  Captain. 
Ul,  The  foubeold  steeams  ob  bbanches  into  which  this  genebal  conception  o» 


CHAP.  L]  COLOSSIANS.  SI 

Cbbibtian  oharactbb    PABTfl  IT8KLF.    1.  "Bearing  frnit  in    every  good    work." 

(1)  Here  the  man  in  whom  the  word  (ver.  6)  is  planted  is  regarded  as  the  producer 
of  fruit.  The  worthy  walk  will  be  first  manifested  in  the  production  of  a  rich 
variety  of  forms  of  goodness.  The  only  true  fruit  ia  goodness ;  all  else  is  leaves. 
Much  of  our  work  and  its  results  is  no  more  fruit  than  galls  on  oak  leaves. 

(2)  The  Christian  life  is  to  be  "fruitful  in  every  good  work."  We  should  seek  to  fill 
the  whole  circuit  of  the  year  with  various  holiness,  and  to  make  widely  different 
forms  of  goodness  our  own.  Let  as  aim  at  this  all  round  multiform  virtue,  and  not 
be  like  a  scene  for  a  stage,  all  gay  and  bright  on  one  side,  and  dirty  canvas  and 
stretchers  hung  with  cobwebs  on  the  other.  2.  "  Increasing  in  the  knowledge  of 
God."  The  figure  of  the  tree  is  probably  continued  here.  If  it  fruits,  its  girth  will 
increase,  its  branches  spread,  its  top  mount,  and  next  year  its  shadow  will  cover  a 
larger  circle.  Fruitfulness  in  good  works  leads  to  increased  knowledge,  and  all  true 
knowledge  tends  to  influence  action.  Obedience  gives  insight.  "If  any  man  will 
do  His  will,  he  shall  know,"  &o.  Moral  truth  becomes  dim  to  a  bad  man. 
Religious  truth  grows  bright  to  a  good  one.  3.  "  Strengthened  ....  joyfuluess." 
Knowing  and  doing  are  not  the  whole  of  life ;  there  are  sorrow  and  suffering  too. 

(1)  Here  again  we  have  Paul's  favourite  "all."  Every  kind  of  strength  that  God 
can  give  and  man  receive  is  to  be  sought  after.  And  that  Divine  power  is  to  flow 
into  us,  having  this  for  its  measure  and  limit — "  the  might  of  His  glory."  His 
"  glory  "  is  the  lustrous  light  of  his  self-revelation  ;  and  the  far-flashing  energy 
revealed  in  that  is  the  immeasurable  measure  of  the  strength  that  may  be  oura. 

(2)  And  what  exalted  mission  is  destined  for  this  f  Nothing  that  the  world  thinks 
great  — («)  patience,  including  the  idea  of  perseverance  in  the  right  course  and 
uncomp'aining  bearing  of  evil  as  sent  by  God;  (b)  long-suffering,  the  temper  under 
suffering  considered  as  a  wrong  and  injury  done  by  man.  (c)  With  joy — flowerH 
beneath  the  snow,  songs  in  the  night.  4.  Giving  thanks  unto  the  Father.  This  is 
the  summit  of  all,  and  is  to  be  diffused  through  all.  Thankfulness  should  mingle 
with  all  our  thoughts  and  feelings,  like  the  fragrance  of  some  perfume  penetrating 
the  scentless  air.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  comprehentive  apostolic  prayr: — It 
was — I.  ExPKEssrvE  of  deep  spiniTUAL  niTEKEST.  1.  Suggested  by  the  report  of 
active  Christian  virtues.  "For  this  cause."  They  had  believed  in  Christ,  loved  the 
brethren,  hoped  for  the  future,  borne  fruit.  All  this  excites  Paul's  grateful  heart 
to  pray  for  higher  blessings  for  them.  We  best  show  our  love  for  others  by  prayer. 
That  is  always  needed  since  Christian  vows  are  imperfect  and  may  decay  or  be 
abused.  2.  Constant  and  fervent.  "  Do  not  ceape."  Paul  had  undoubted  faith  in 
the  efficacy  of  prayer.  II.  For  amplest  knowledge.  1.  Themainsubject  of  this 
knowledge.  Man  thirsts  for  knowledge,  but  the  highest  is  the  knowledge  of  God ; 
not  simply  of  His  nature,  but  His  will.  2.  The  measure  in  which  the  knowledge 
may  be  possessed.  The  word  indicates  a  living,  complete  laiowledge  of  the  Divine 
will.  There  is  no  limit  to  our  increase  in  Divine  knowledge  but  our  own  capacity, 
diligence,  and  faith.  3.  The  practical  form  in  which  the  knowledge  should  be 
exercised.  "  In  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding."  The  word  spiritual 
applies  to  both  wisdom  and  understanding.  The  false  teachers  offered  a  wisdom 
which  had  only  a  show  of  it ;  an  empty  counterfeit  calling  itself  philosophy.  The 
wisdom  and  understanding  the  gospel  imparts  are  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  No 
amount  of  mental  or  moral  culture  can  supply  it.  This  was  the  power  lacked  by 
the  Galatians,  and  to  save  the  Colossians  from  their  fate  Paul  prays  that  they  may 
discern  between  the  true  and  the  false,  the  carnal  and  the  spiritual.  III.  Fob 
THE  LOFTIEST  CHRISTIAN  CAREER.  Observc — 1.  The  high  standard  of  Christian 
conduct.  For  this  purpose  we  are  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  will.  The  end 
of  knowledge  is  practice.  2.  The  rule  by  which  that  standard  is  maintained.  We 
are  not  to  please  ourselves  or  others  as  an  ultimate  object.  If  our  conduct  does  please 
parents,  friends,  country  as  well  as  God,  it  is  well ;  but  though  all  others  are  dis- 
pleased we  must  please  Him.  This  is  the  simplest,  as  well  as  the  grandest  rule  of 
life,  and  will  settle  many  perplexing  questions  of  human  duty.  3.  The  productive- 
ness of  Christian  consistency.  It  is  not  enough  to  bear  one  kind  of  fruit ;  there 
must  be  fertility  in  "  every  "  good  work.  The  Christian  is  in  sympathy  with  and 
will  promote  every  enterprise  that  aims  at  the  physical,  social,  or  moral  welfare  of 
man.  4.  Progress  in  Divine  knowledge.  We  can  recall  no  stage  in  which 
additional  knowledge  is  unnecessary.  Activity  in  goodness  sharpens  the  knowing 
faculty  and  adds  to  the  stores  of  wisdom,  and  increased  knowledge  stimulates  the 
worker  (John  vii.  17;  Matt.  xxv.  29).  IV.  For  strPERNAiuRAL  strength.  1.  Th« 
appropriateness  and  fulness  of  the  blessing  desired.     Man  is  morally  w^k  by  sin. 


2S  TUE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  I, 

Christ  introduced  another  force  which  counteracts  sin  and  will  overthrow  it.  All 
who  believe  in  Him  have  this  force  and  it  is  necessary  to  realize  the  blessings  for 
which  Paul  prays.  Our  enemies  are  numerous  and  our  infirmities  are  many.  We 
need,  therefore,  every  kind  of  strength  to  endure  onslaught  or  solicitation.  2.  Ita 
supernatural  source,  "  might  of  His  glory."  Moral  power  is  not  native  to  the 
Christian.  Power  is  an  attribute  of  God's  glory,  and  is  manifested  in  the  splendid 
works  of  creation.  3,  Its  great  practical  purpose.  Patience  is  the  temper  which 
does  not  easily  succumb  under  trial :  long-suffering,  or  long-mindedness,  is  the  self- 
restraint  which  does  not  hastily  retaliate  a  wroug.  Patience  respects  the  weight  of 
the  atiliction :  long-suffering  its  duration.  The  former  is  exercised  in  our  relation 
to  God,  the  latter  in  our  relation  to  man.  The  true  strength  of  the  behever 
consists,  not  so  much  in  what  he  can  do,  as  in  what  he  can  endure  (Isa.  xxx.  15). 
The  characteristic  of  both  patience  and  long-suffering  is  •'  Joyfulness."  To  suffer 
with  joyfulness  is  the  great  distinction  and  triumph  of  the  Christian  spirit.  The 
endurance  of  the  stoic  was  often  the  effect  of  pride  or  insensibility.  Learn: 
1.  How  sublime  are  the  topics  of  genuine  prayer.  2.  Deep  experimental  acquaintance 
with  the  things  of  God  is  essential  to  a  lofty  and  useful  career.  3.  Knowledge, 
wisdom,  spiritual  fertility  and  strength  are  the  gifts  of  God.  {G.  Barlow.)  A 
worthy  walk: — I.  Its  sooeces.  The  whole  ground  of  this  prayer  is  found  in  "who 
hath  made  ns  meet,"  "who  delivered  us  out  of  the  power  of  darkness." 
1.  The  gift  of  Divine  sonship.  2.  An  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  God's  will. 
We  must  know  what  God's  will  is  before  we  can  walk  worthily,  &e.  His 
will  is  revealed  in  His  Word.  3.  The  impartation  of  wisdom  and  spiritual 
understanding.  4.  The  bestowment  of  Divine  strength.  Sonship  does 
not  stand  alone.  II.  Its  fbdits.  1.  Good  works.  2.  Patient  endurance  of 
tribulations  as  well  as  perseverance  through  and  in  spite  of  them.  3.  Long- 
suB'ering  towards  personal  foes  and  the  enemies  of  the  truth.  HI.  Its  end.  A 
worthy  walk  begms  in  sonship,  proceeds  to  sanctification,  and  ends  in  glory. 
(Family  Churchman.)  Paul's  d/'iire  for  the  Colossians : — The  Colossians  were 
distinguished  for  love,  and  for  that  "  cause  "  the  apostle  shows  his  interest  in  them 
and  gratitude  for  it  by  praying  for  them.  Noble  example !  He  goes  on  to  say  that 
he  desired  certain  things  for  them — lit.,  "  asked,"  lifted  up  his  desires.  I.  Thh 
MATTER  or  THE  apostle's  desiee.  1.  That  they  might  be  filled  with  the  knowledge 
of  God's  will.  (1)  It  is  one  thing  to  have  a  full  knowledge  and  another  to  be 
filled  with  knowledge.  As  far  as  God  or  His  will  are  concerned  we  cannot  have  a 
full  knowledge.  God  only  knows  the  love,  the  glory,  the  will  of  God.  But  it  is 
possible  to  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  God.  The  smallest  of  cups  may  be  as  full  as 
the  great  ocean.  So  the  smallest  minds  may  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  God's  will. 
(2)  It  was  not  immense  spaces  of  vacant  imaginations  and  day-dreamings  that  he 
desired.but  knowledge  of  realities,  that  knowledge  which  is  "  the  principal  thing."  (3) 
But  not  numerous  details  of  knowledge  in  general ;  man's  mind  is  too  limited  for 
that.  He  must  choose  between  knowing  a  few  things  well  and  a  large  number 
indifferently.  Hence  Paul  limits  his  petition  to  one  all-important  department — the 
will  of  Goi  This  has  two  distinct  applications — what  God  is  determined  to  do 
Himself  and  what  He  is  desirous  that  we  should  do.  In  the  first  sense  it  is  used 
in  Ephesians  i.  11,  and  in  the  confession  of  Nebuchadnezzar ;  but  it  is  more 
frequently  used  in  the  second.  "  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth  " — not  done  by  Goda 
self.  So  far  as  God's  determination  to  take  His  own  way  is  concerned  His  will  is 
always  done.  The  reference  is  to  that  will  which  we  ought  to  do,  and  with  the 
knowledge  of  which  Paul  prayed  that  the  Colossians  might  be  filled.  2.  "  In  all 
wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding."  Wisdom  was  needed,  profitable  to  direct  to 
the  things  worthiest  and  best ;  and  understanding,  that  they  might  penetrate 
beneath  the  surface  of  things,  so  as  to  be  standing  under  them  and  thence  under- 
standing them.  When  thus  understood,  things  are  joined  together  in  a  unity  of 
subjective  thought,  and  a  higher  agency  than  man's  gets  abundant  scope  for  a 
gracious  and  beneficent  operation.  3.  But  the  highest  knowledge  is  but  a  means 
to  an  end  (1  Cor.  xiii.  1-3).  The  knowledge  possessed  by  God,  though  immense, 
is  not  the  most  glorious  of  His  attributes ;  even  to  Him  it  is  but  a  means  to  an 
end.  It  is  but  one  of  His  natural  attributes.  The  most  illustrious  of  God's 
attributes  are  the  moral — those  which  have  a  will  within  them.  II.  The  pubposb 
OF  HIS  DEsiBB.  It  is  not  therefore  surprising  that  the  apostle  should  guard  the 
Colossians  against  the  idea  that  they  need  aim  no  higher  than  this  knowledge.  He 
asked  that  they  might  have  it,  that — 1.  They  should  (1)  walk — lit.,  "walk  about." 
He  seized  a  prominent  feature  of  human  society.     Men  walk  hither  and  thither  in 


OTAP.  I.]  COLOSSTANS.  t3 

iheir  homes,  in  the  atreeta,  and  in  the  oonntry.      They  walk  oat  in  the  morning, 
"go  about  their  business";  and  in  the  evening  walk  about  within  the  circle  of 
their  friends  and  visit.     In   the  homes  mothers  walk   about  adjusting  various 
detiiils.     (2)  There  are  different  ways  of  demeaning  ourselves  as  we  walk  about. 
Some  go  about  stealthily  to  entrap  the  unwary  and  confiding ;  some  in  the  dark  to 
conceal  their  evil  deeds ;  some  bent  on  making  profit  of  otliers,  or  on  amusement. 
Paul  might  have  prayed  that  the  Colossians  might  walk  circumspectly,  humbly, 
consistently,  with  gifts  in  their  hands  or  love  in  their  hearts ;  but  he  chooses  to 
«ay  that  ye  may  walk  about  in  a  way  worthy  of  the  Lord.      (3)  It  is  assumed  that 
the  transcendent  worth  is  in  the  Lord.     As  the  Apocalyptic  visions  show  ns,  In  the 
estimation  of  all  heavenly  beings  He  is  infinitely  worthy ;  and  hence  it  is  that  He 
is  worth  ail  the  possible  honour  that  can  be  reflected  on  Him  by  the  most  beautiful 
demeanour  aud  most  costly  sacrifices  of  His  disciples.     Hence  we  should  ever 
make  it  our  aim  to  walk  worthy  of  Him,  and  all  oar  knowledge  must  be  sub- 
servient to  this.     2.  The  Colossians  are  told  that  if  they  do  so  Christ  will  take  note 
of  every  step  we  take,  and  be  pleased.     He  will  appreciate  onr  aim,  and  have  in 
reference  to  our  conduct  a  feeling  of  pleasure.     How  different  this  from  "  putting 
Him  to  an  open  shame."    We  may  make  our  Saviour  happy,  and  not  only  in 
reference  to  a  few  acts  of  exceptional  effort,  but  in  reference  to  all  the  humble 
incidents  of  our  every-day  life.      3.  But  nothing  will  be  really  pleasing  if  fruitftil- 
Dess  be  wanting.     (1)  Leaves  will  not  suflSce,  nor  blossoms.     Every  Colossian  waa 
to  be  a  tree  of  righteousness  to  bring  forth  frnit  for  the  refreshment  of  the  great 
Husbandman.     (2)  Fruitful  in  every  good  work — in  long-suffering  in  the  home  and 
beyond  ;  in  the  continual  restraint  and  guidance  of  all  the  passions ;  in  the  fruita 
of  the  Spirit — "  love,  joy,  peace,"  Ac.     (3)  What  are  the  means  of  this  abounding 
fruitf ulness ?     "By  the  knowledge  of  God."     The  most  effective  guarantee  for 
increase  in  fruitfulness  is  the  knowledge  of  God  with  which  he  desired  they  might 
be  filled.      "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  Thee,"  &c.     {J.  Moriton, 
D.D.)         Spiritual  knowledge  and  its  practical  results : — I.  Thb  preciocsness  of 
flPOiTtJiL  KNOWLEDOE.     Consider — 1.  The  intensity  of  the  apostle's  desire  for  it. 
It  is  the  subject  of  earnest,  ceaseless  prayer.     2.  The  men  for  whom  it  is  desired. 
Saints  and  faithful  brethren,  who  knew  the  grace  of   God  in  truth,  and  were 
bringing  forth  fruit  to  God.     We  must  not  cease  to  pray  for  those  who  know  the 
Lord  that  they  may  know  more.    3.  The  measure  of  this  knowledge.     "  Filled  " — 
grand  scholarship  to  have  mind,  heart,  whole  manhood  filled  with  knowledge. 
When  a  measure  is  full  of  wheat  there  is  no  room  for  chaff.     True  knowledge 
excludes  error.     If  we  have  empty  places  in  our  minds,  unstored  by  holy  teaching, 
they  will  be  an  invitation  to  the  devil  to  enter  and  dwell.     Try  and  know  Divine 
truth  more  intimately.     You  know  a  man,  for  you  pass  him  in  the  streets  with  a 
nod  ;  you  know  another  far  better,  for  you  loilge  in  the  same  house  with  him  ;  but 
you  know  him  best  of  all  whose  troubles  and  joys  you  have  shared,  and  with  whom 
you  have  had  the  closest  fellowship.     4.  The  matter  of  it.     The  revealed  will  of 
God.     (1)  The  perceptive  will.     "  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "     (2)  The  will 
of  God  as  it  constitutes  the  gospel.    "  This  is  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  that 
•very  one  that  believeth."     (3)  "  This  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification." 
6.  The  manner.     (I)  "In  all  wisdom,"  which  is  better  than  knowledge,  for  it  ia 
knowledge  rightly  used.      Knowledge  may  find  room  for  folly,  but  wisdom  casts  it 
oat.      Knowledge  may  be  the  horse,  but  wisdom  is  the  driver.    Wisdom  enables 
you  to  bring  your  knowledge  practically  to  bear  upon  life,  to  separate  the  precious 
from  the  vile,  and  rightly  conduct  your  affairs.      "  All  "   wisdom — wisdom  that 
will  be  useful  in  the  shop,  the  counting-house,  the  church,  &c.     (2)  That  wisdom 
operates  by  a  spiritual  understanding  that  is  powerful  within.     This  is  an  inwaid 
knowledge  of   truth,  a  spiritual  discernment,  taste,  experience,  and  reception  of 
truth  whereby  the  soul  feeds  upon  it  and  takes  it  into  herself.     II.  The  practical 
RESULT  OF  BPiRiTOAi/  KNOWLEDGE.     "  That   ye  may  walk " — not  that  they  might 
talk,  sit  down  and  meditate,  and  enjoy  themselves.      He  desires  that  they  may  be 
instructed,  so  as  to  walk — 1.  According  to  the  best  model.    Let  not  a  disciple  walk 
60  as  to  bring  disgrace  upon  his  Lord  1     When  you  walk  with  a  king  you  should  be 
royal  in  gait ;  when  you  commune  with  a  prince  yon  should  not  ace  the  clown.     It 
is  well  to  have  no  lower  standard  than  the  life  of  Jesus,  the  life  of  tenderness,  self- 
eacrifice,  love,  holy  service,  and  communion  with  God.      2.  So  as  to  be  pleasing  to 
otir  best  friend.     (1)  Some  live  to  please  themselves,  or  their  wives,  neighbours, 
and  some,  the  devil.     Our  business  is  to  please  Him  whose  servants  we   are. 
Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  Him,  much  less  please  Him.     (2)  Unto  all 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chi».  b 

pleasing — from  the  moment  we  rise  till  we  lie  down,  in  eating  and  drinking,  Ac 
(3)  Paul  desires  that  we  may  he  filled  v  ith  knowledge  to  this  end.  If  I  do  not  know 
the  will  of  God,  how  can  I  do  it  ?  3.  That  we  may  produce  the  best  fruit.  With- 
out knowledge  we  cannot  be  fruitful.  Some  are  hindered  in  this  because  they  do 
not  know  how  to  set  about  holy  service.  How  can  a  man  be  fruitful  as  a  preacher 
if  he  does  not  know  what  to  preach  ?  In  a  hundred  ways  ignorance  will  make  us 
run  risks,  lose  opportunities  of  usefulness,  and  fall  into  dangerous  mistakes.  4. 
That  he  may  cultivate  a  comprehensive  variety  of  the  best  things.  "In  every." 
Here  is  room  and  range  enough.  Let  works  of  obedience,  testimony,  zeal,  charity,, 
piety,  all  be  found  in  your  life.  Do  not  select  big  things  as  your  spiritual  lir.e,  but 
glorify  the  Lord  in  the  littles.  The  Lord  Jesus,  if  He  were  here,  would  gladly  do 
a  thousand  things  which  His  poor  little  servants  are  too  great  to  touch.  III.  Thb 
KEFLEX  ACTION  OF  HOLINESS  ON  KNOWLEDGE.  1.  HoUuess  is  the  load  to  knowledge. 
2.  This  knowledge  rises  in  tone — before  it  was  in  God's  will,  now  it  is  in  God 
Himself.  3.  He  would  have  in  us  increased  capacity  to  know  yet  more.  In  verse  9 
it  is  "  filled  ";  but  if  a  man  is  full  of  knowledge,  how  can  it  increase  ?  Make  the 
vessel  larger.  Let  no  man  think  he  can  go  no  further.  Bernard  says  :  "  He  is  not 
good  at  all  who  doth  not  desire  to  be  better."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Intercessory 
prayer : — It  would  be  &  useful  exercise  if  we  would  give  thanks  for  the  gifts  and 
graces  of  our  brethren.  I  am  afraid  that  we  are  more  inclined  to  spy  out  their 
faults,  and  to  suppose  that  we  deplore  them,  than  we  are  to  discern  the  work  oJ  the 
Holy  Spiiit  in  them.  Now,  Paul  surveyed  the  Church  at  Colosse,  and  observed 
their  faith,  love,  and  hope,  and  thaiiked  God  for  them.  But  he  noted  that  they 
were  somewhat  lacking  in  knowledge.  They  differed  from  the  Corinthians,  who 
abounded  in  talent  and  were  enriched  with  knowledge.  The  Colossians  had  fewer 
gifted  brethren,  and  as  Paul  would  not  have  them  come  behind  in  any  desirable 
attainment,  he  offered  this  prayer.  He  knew  that  spiritual  ignorance  is  the 
constant  source  of  error,  instability,  and  sorrow;  and  therefore  he  desired  that 
they  might  be  soundly  taught  in  the  things  of  God.     Intercessory  prayer  is — I.  ▲ 

VEBT    IMPORTANT    PART    OF    THE    WOBK    OF    CHRISTIANS    FOB    ONE    ANOTHER.        We   are 

not  sent  into  the  world  to  live  unto  ourselves,  but  we  are  members  of  one  body, 
and  each  member  is  expected  to  contribute  to  the  health  and  comfort  of  the  whole. 
We  cannot  all  preach  or  distribute  alms,  but  we  can  all  pray.  II.  An  invaluable 
PROOF  OF  LOVE  and  the  creator  of  more  love.  The  man  who  will  pray  for  me,  will 
forgive  me  if  I  offend  him,  and  relieve  me  if  I  am  in  necessity.     III.  An  infallible: 

MEANS    OF    OBTAINING    THE    BLESSINGS    WE    DESIRE    FOB    ODB    FRIENDS.        The    UUSelfish 

devotion  which  pleads  as  e.<igerly  for  others  as  for  itself  is  so  pleasing  to  God  that 
He  puts  great  honour  upon  it.  If  we  desire  any  blessing  for  tliem,  our  best  course 
is  to  pray.  If  we  wish  them  converted,  taught  of  God,  quickened  to  a  nobler  life, 
<fec. ,  take  the  case  to  God  in  prayer.  IV.  Will  be  all  the  mobe  valuable  if  ii 
xs  OUR  IMMEDIATE  BEsoRT.  "Since  the  day  we  heard  it."  Paul  began  to  pray  at 
once.     Whenever  you  perceive  the  holy  change  begun,  pray  at  once  that  it  may 

Eroceed  with  power,  and  we  shall  find  that  God  in  answering  quickly  gives  a  double 
lessing.  He  who  wins  earthly  riches  is  most  diligent  in  their  pursuit,  and  he 
shall  be  richest  towards  God  who  is  most  diligent  in  supplication.  V,  Will  be  all 
the  more  valuable  if  they  are  incessant  as  well  as  immediate.  "We  cease 
not."  He  was  always  praying  for  them  in  the  sense  he  explains,  "  and  to  desire." 
Desire  is  the  essence  of  prayer.  Though  you  cannot  be  always  speaking  in  prayer, 
you  can  be  always  desiring.  The  act  of  prayer  is  blessed,  the  habit  more  so,  the 
Bpirit  most   so,   and  this  can   continue  for   months  and   years.      VI.  Will  bb 

INCREASED    IN    VALUE    IF   OFFERED    IN    UNION   WITH    OTHER    SAINTS.       "We    alsO."       "If 

two  of  you  agree  as  touching  My  kingdom."  Here  is  Paul,  and  with  him  youthful 
Timothy,  who,  compared  with  Paul,  is  inconsiderable ;  yet  Paul's  prayer  is  all  the 
more  effectual  because  Timothy's  is  joined  to  it.  Our  Lord  sent  out  His  servants 
two  and  two,  and  it  is  well  when  they  come  back  to  Him  in  prayer  two  and  two. 
The  habit  of  frequent  prayer  together  is  to  be  commended.  (Ibid.)  The  value  oj 
intercessory  prayer  : — An  aged  woman,  a  member  of  my  church,  whom  I  frequently 
met,  always  appeared  to  me  to  have  a  more  than  common  interest  in  the  prosperity 
of  religion.  She  would  often  inquire  :  "  Are  any  of  our  young  people  coming  to 
Christ  ?  "  One  day,  as  I  was  passing  her  house,  she  called  me  in.  Says  she  ;  "  I 
asked  yon  to  some  in  here  because  I  wanted  to  tell  you  a  revival  is  coming." 
♦*  How  do  yon  know  that  ?  "  said  I.  "  Dear  me,"  says  she,  "  now  don't  think  me 
one  of  that  sort  of  folks  who  think  themselves  particular  favourites  of  the  Lord,  as 
they  were  inspired.    But  I  have  got  faith,  and  I  have  got  eyes  and  ears,  and  I 


OHA».  L]  COLOSSIANS.  21 

believe  in  prayer.  Perhaps  yon  may  think  me  too  certain,  but  I  tell  you  a  revival 
is  coming  ;  and  I  don't  know  it  by  a  miracle  either,  or  becanse  I  am  any  better 
than  other  people,  or  nearer  to  God.  But,  for  this  good  while,  every  day  when  I 
have  been  out  in  my  garden,  I  have  heard  that  old  deacon  "  (pointing  to  his  house) 
"  at  prayer  in  his  chamber,  where  he  thinks  nobody  hears  him.  The  window  is 
open  just  a  little  way  off  from  my  garden,  and  I  have  heard  him  praying  there 
every  day.  He  is  not  able  to  leave  his  house  much,  because  he  has  got  only  one 
leg ;  but  if  he  can't  work  he  can  pray ;  and  his  prayers  will  be  answered."  A 
revival  did  come.  Before  a  year  from  that  time  more  than  a  hundred  persons  in 
that  congregation  were  led  to  indulge  hope  that  they  had  been  born  of  the  Spirit. 
Among  them  were  a  son  and  a  daughter  of  that  old  man  of  prayer,  and  a  grandson 
of  this  woman  who  believed  in  prayer.  (/.  S.  Spencer,  D.D.)  The  blessed 
occupancy  : — This  is  possible.  Paul  was  in  its  enjoyment.  I.  The  natdre  of 
God's  will.  The  will  is  the  expression  of  the  inner  nature.  God  is  love.  His 
will  is  goodwill  to  all.  It  means  happiness  for  all  who  will  not  thwart  His  loving 
purpose,  n.  The  knowledge  of  God's  will.  This  can  be  obtained  by  being 
willing  to  do,  by  searching  the  Scriptures  and  listening  to  the  voice  of  the  Spirit. 
III.  The  measure  or  this  knowledge.  "  Filled  " — no  room  for  self.  Every 
cupboard  opened,  door  anlocked,  window  raised,  and  the  entire  being  flooded. 
Blessings  then  flow  out.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  knowledge  of  the  will  of 
God: — I.  The  will  of  God.  1.  The  phrase  brings  before  us  the  personality  of 
Deity.  He  is  not  a  blind  force,  but  a  conscious  being,  or  He  could  not  have  a  will. 
2.  The  text  contradicts  Deism,  which  says :  "  God  does  not  concern  Himself  with 
us."  3.  But  imagine  God  to  have  a  malevolent  will  concerning  us  1  As  it  is, 
however,  the  will  of  God  moves  not  merely  under  the  influence  of  His  intelligence 
and  righteousness,  but  of  His  mercy.  It  is  "in  Christ  Jesus  concerning  us."  4. 
This  will  has  reference  to  our  whole  uature.  (1)  To  our  mind ;  and  therefore 
God  has  put  before  us  doctrine.  God  has  a  wiD  concerning  our  thoughts,  and 
therefore  has  provided  us  with  themes  for  meditation.  (2)  To  our  hearts.  We 
may  not  trust,  distrust,  love,  everything  we  please.  God  has  indicated  the  objects 
and  the  measure  of  our  confidence  and  affection.  (3)  To  our  will ;  giving  us  prin- 
ciples and  motives,  and  rules  of  action,  so  that  His  will  directs  us  in  all  things. 
This  is  not  bondage,  but  freedom.  He  is  the  slave  who  is  tethered  to  his  whims 
and  wishes ;  he  is  free  who  moves  in  harmony  with  the  will  which  is  connected 
with  perfect  wisdom  and  love.  II.  The  will  of  God  revealed.  1.  Not  entirely,  as, 
e.g.,  to  your  future  circumstances  ;  these  are  mercifully  concealed.  2.  The  media 
employed.  (1)  Conscience — imperfect,  but  under  Christ's  influence  gradually 
becoming  sound.  (2)  God's  Word.  (3)  God's  Spirit.  (4)  Providence.  (5)  Christ, 
in  whom  it  is  perfectly  embodied.  3.  There  is  some  httle  difiiculty  in  getting  at 
this  will.  You  must  search  the  Scriptures,  and  carefully  analyze  your  own  con- 
science to  judge  whether  it  is  an  index  of  God's  will.  But  the  knowledge  is  well 
worth  the  trouble.  If  you  take  no  trouble  you  will  be  perplexed,  but  if  you  do  He 
will  teach  you.  III.  The  will  of  God  known.  The  revelation  is  distinct  from  the 
knowledge,  and  may  be  possessed  without  it.  The  knowledge  must  be  sought. 
Look  at  it  as — 1.  Full.  (1)  We  may  know  doctrine  and  not  precept ;  both,  and 
not  the  promises ;  or  all  partially.  Knowledge  is  full  when  we  know  all  we  need 
to  know.  (2)  A  young  disciple  in  his  novitiate  cannot  know  all  that  is  revealed, 
nor  indeed  the  mature.  There  are  many  things  concealed  from  the  Church  in  its 
present  state.  (3)  But  there  are  things  which  can  be  comprehended  in  the  present 
age,  and  the  present  state  of  the  believer's  mind.  The  Bible  opens  like  flowers. 
Ycu  must  sometimes  wait  before  a  text  and  seek  a  right  influence  on  your  spirit 
before  the  meaning  will  be  manifest.  The  Bible  to  the  child  has  one  manifestation, 
to  the  yonng  man  another,  and  to  the  mature  man  another.  2.  Correctly  applied. 
It  may  be  misapplied ;  hence  the  prayer  "  in  all  wisdom,"  &g.  We  must  get  below 
the  letter  to  the  underlying  Spirit,  and  with  Divine  sagacity  apply  it  to  our  circum- 
stances. 3.  A  fit  subject  for  prayer.  4.  A  subject  of  deep  anxiety  to  ministers  as 
essential  to  the  holiness  and  activity  of  the  Church.  (S.  Martin.)  The  knowledge 
of  God: — 1.  This  knowledge  Hes  at  the  foundation  of  all  true  religion.  It  is  the 
want  or  indistinctness  of  it  that  occasions  the  stupidity  of  sinners,  the  false  hopes 
of  professors,  and  most  of  the  religious  errors  that  abound.  Altnough  it  is  open  to 
all,  there  is  very  little  of  it.  There  is  so  much  unbelief,  pride,  worldliness,  guilt, 
which  shrinks  from  clear  views  of  God,  sluggishness,  which  binds  the  soul  to  earth, 
that  the  mass  even  of  Christians  pass  to  the  grave  with  a  very  incompetent  know* 
ledge  of  God.     Now  and  then  a  Christian  arises  of  pre-eminent  piety,  and  wheo 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohai.  t 

yon  sparch  for  the  cause  of  it  you  find  it  in  his  superior  knowledge  of  God.  1.  la 
general,  the  great  end  for  which  we  were  sent  into  the  world  was  to  learn  the 
character  of  our  Master,  by  studying  His  glories  in  His  works  and  word,  that  we 
might  obey  and  enjoy  Him.  The  object  on  which  His  eye  is  fixed,  and  which  Ha 
will  fully  attain,  is  that  the  earth  may  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  glory. 
8.  He  is  the  Being  with  whom  we  have  the  most  intimate  and  interesting  con- 
nection, and  therefore  it  chiefly  concerns  us  to  be  acquainted  with  Him,  "  In  Him 
we  live  and  move,"  <fec.,  and  He  will  be  our  final  Judge.  4.  There  is  room  for  far 
more  enlarged  knowledge  of  God  than  any  of  us  have  yet  acquired.  In  His  nature 
are  treasures  of  knowledge  which  eternal  research  will  not  exhaust.  Of  course 
none  but  Christ  could  with  perfect  propriety  say,  "I  know  this,"  but  we  njay 
follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.  5.  This  knowledge  is — I.  Most  pdbiftinq.  A  sight 
of  God  is  transforming.  When  with  open  face  we  behold,  as  in  a  glass,  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  we  are  charged  with  the  same  image.  When  God  is  seen  in  all  the 
majesty  of  His  glory  and  holiness  the  Christian  cannot,  dare  not,  wilfully  sin. 
II.  Most  humbling.  Other  knowledge  "puffeth  up,"  but  the  more  God  is  seen,  the 
more  abased  the  soul  will  be.  All  the  glooms  of  guilt  and  fears  of  hell  which  are 
not  accompanied  with  a  spiritual  discernment  of  God  will  not  humble  the  soul. 
When  Isaiah  saw  the  Lord  he  exclaimed,  "  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips,"  and  when 
Peter  discovered  the  Godhead  of  Christ  he  fell  at  His  feet,  saying,  "  Depart  from 
me,"  &c.  III.  Most  exalting.  It  will  do  more  to  ennoble  the  mind  and  elevate 
it  above  vulgar  disputes,  than  all  other  views.  If  it  is  a  dignity  to  be  intimately 
acquainted  with  great  men,  what  is  the  dignity  of  knowing  and  being  known  by 
God.  IV.  Most  blessed.  One  direct  view  of  God  fills  the  soul  with  greater  peace 
than  the  most  splendid  attainments  in  other  branches  of  knowledge,  and  than  all 
the  glories  of  the  world.  This  is  to  be  the  happiness  of  heaven,  because  nothing 
greater  can  be  provided,  (E.  D.  Gnjin,  D.D.)  The  experimental  knowledge  of 
God  the  end  of  all  Christian  endeavour : — It  is  for  the  want  of  keeping  this  end 
Bteadily  in  view  that  many  persons  make  so  little  progress.  Their  efforts  are  mis- 
directed.  They  confound  the  means  and  effects  of  religion  with  its  life.  Digging, 
manuring,  pruning,  and  fruit-bearing  are  not  the  life  of  a  tree.  What,  then,  is  the 
Boul  of  religion  towards  which  all  efforts  are  to  be  directed.  I.  The  life  of  teitb 
BELiGioN  IS  AN  EXPERIMENTAL  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD.  Such  an  appreciation  of  the 
excellence  of  His  character  as  satisfies  the  souL  Philip  said,  "  Show  us  the  Father, 
and  it  sufiiceth  us."  No  earthly  source  of  happiness  does  suffice.  The  pursuit  of 
earthly  desires  is  like  the  countryman's  chase  after  the  rainbow.  They  one  after 
the  other  disappoint  those  who  attain  them.-  Their  prismatic  colours  all  vanish 
when  we  come  close  to  them,  and  some  new  rainbow  is  seen  ahead  to  lure  us  into 
another  fruitless  pursuit.  But  our  Creator  does  not  mock  ns  by  implanting  great 
yearnings  after  happiness  which  have  nothing  to  correspond  to  them.  In  the  know- 
ledge and  enjoyment  of  Him  man  can  find  rest.     II.  This  knowledge  is  the  end 

OP    ENDS,   TO    WHICH   EVERY    OTHER    PART   OF   THE    RELIGIOUS   SYSTEM    IS   SUBORDINATED. 

It  is  the  end  of  the  atoning  and  interceding  work  of  our  Lord.  This  removes 
barriers  which  preclude  communion.  Any  knowledge  of  God  independently  of 
Christ  must  frighten  us  from  Him,  for  God  is  infinitely  holy,  and  His  holiness  ia 
a  consuming  fire.  III.  The  exercises  which  go  most  directly  to  this  end. 
1.  Living  much  with  Him.  If  we  only  come  across  a  man  occasionally  and  in 
public,  and  see  nothing  of  his  private  life,  we  cannot  be  said  to  know  him.  All 
the  knowledge  of  God  which  many  professing  Christians  have  is  derived  from  the 
formal  salute  they  make  to  Him  in  their  prayers.  But  no  progress  can  be  made  thus. 
Try  to  draw  God  down  into  your  daily  work  ;  consult  Him  about  it ;  offer  it  as  • 
contribution  to  His  service ;  ask  Him  to  help  you  in  it  and  to  bless  it ;  refer  to  Him 
in  your  temptations ;  go  back  at  once  to  Him  if  you  have  left  Him  ;  in  short,  walk 
hand  in  hand  with  Him,  dreading  above  all  things  to  quit  His  side ;  seek  not  so 
much  to  pray  as  to  live  in  an  atmosphere  of  prayer.  2.  Studying  His  mind  in  His 
Word.  We  may  be  said  to  know  an  author,  when  we  have  so  carefully  read  his 
works  as  to  imbibe  his  spirit.  It  is  through  His  Word  that  God  speaks  to  us,  as 
it  is  through  prayer  we  speak  to  Him.  Cultivate  a  taste  for  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures. *'  Oh,  how  sweet  are  Thy  words  unto  my  taste.  .  .  .  All  the  day  long 
is  my  study  of  it."  My  mind  in  which  it  is  stored  is  always  recurring  to  it  in 
the  intervals  of  business,  turning  it  over  with  fresh  inquiry  into  its  significance, 
finding  new  illustrations  of  its  truth  in  nature,  life,  and  experience.  Ther« 
IB  a  study  of  Scripture  which  is  analogous  to  ejaculatory  prayer,  which  inter- 
weaves the  Word  into  the  daily  hfe  of    the    Christian,    a   rumination  which. 


cBJLt.  L]  COLOSSIANS.  87 

can  be  carried  on  without  book.    S.  The  discipline  of  life.     If  a  man  has  no 
dealings  with  db  personally,  though  he  may  be  no  stranger  to  as  by  reputation,  w« 
cannot  be  said  to  know  him.    But  if  transactions  pass  between  us  his  character 
transpires.    Now  God  comes  close  up  to  us,  if  we  give  our  hearts  to  Him,  and  deala 
with  us  in  all  the  changing  scenes  of  life.     So  long  as  people  keep  Him  at  arm's 
length.  He  only  sweeps  round  the  circumference  of  their  existence.    Those  who 
desire  to  have  a  practical  knowledge  of  Him  in  His  dealings  try  to  learn  the  lesson 
of  every  part  of  their  experience.    IV.  Increase  in  the  knowledge  o»  God,  as  it 
obara'-terizes  the  true  Christian's  present  course  wiUi  bb  his  businebb  thbodghoux 
■irfiroiT.     We  are  not  to  conceive  of  a  glorified  saint  as  if  he  were  stereotyped 
and  could  advance  no  further  in  the  knowledge  of  God.     Our  nature  is  so  consti- 
tuted as  not  to  acquiesce  in  a  particular  measure  of  knowledge  on  any  subject.     And 
why,  as  God  is  infinite,  and  His  resources  of  wisdom,  power,  and  love  are  in- 
exhaustible, may  not  a  blessed  eternity  be  spent  in  fresh  discoveries  of  His  glory, 
each  of  which  vrill  throw  preceding  discoveries  into  the  shade  T     (Dean  Goulbum.) 
Ood  known  imperfectly  but  really  :  —No  man  can  take  a  pencil  and  mark  the  features 
of  Jehovah,  and  say  :  "  Thus  far  is  God,  and  no  farther."    How  poor  a  God  must 
that  be  whom  I  can  understand  1     He  would  be  no  larger  than  the  measure  of  my 
thought — and  that  would  be  small  indeed.     No  man  can  limit  and  define  God. 
after  all  intellectual  statements  have  been  made,  after  all  definitions  have  been 
given,  immensely  more  is  left  untouched  than  has  been  touched.  But  the  functions 
of  the  Divine  nature,  the  quality  of  that  nature  and  its  moral  essence,  one  may 
suspect  or  know  without  comprehending  all  of  God.  Bring  me  but  a  glass  of  water. 
And  I  know  what  water  is.     I  may  not  know,  if  I  have  not  travelled,  what  are  th« 
springs  in  the  mountain,  what  are  cascades,  what  are  the  streams  that  thunder 
through  deep  gorges,  what  are  broadening  rivers,  what  are  bays,  or  what  is  the 
ocean ;  and  yet  I  may  know  what  water  is.     A  drop  on  my  finger  tells  me  its 
quality.    From  that  I  know  that  it  is  not  wood,  that  it  is  not  rock,  that  it  is  not 
air,  that  it  is  not  anything  but  water.   I  am  not  able,  by  searching,  to  find  out  God 
onto  perfection ;  and  yet  I  know  that,  so  far  as  I  have  found  Him  out,  and  so  far 
as  He  is  ever  going  to  be  found  out,  whatever  there  is  in  nobility,  whatever  there  is 
in  goodness,  whatever  there  is  in  sweetness,  whatever  there  is  in  patience  ;  what- 
ever can  be  revealed   by  the  cradle,  by  the  crib,  by  the  couch,  by  the  table; 
whatever  there  is  in  household  love  and  in  other  loves;    whatever  there  is  in 
heroism  among  men  ;  whatever  there  is  of  good  report ;  whatever  has  been  achieved 
by  imagination  or  by  reason;   whatever  separates    man  from  the  brute  beast, 
and  lifts   him   above  the  clod — I  know  that  all  these  elements  belong  to  God, 
the  eternal  and  universal  Father.     Although  I  may  not  be  able  to  draw  an  ency- 
clopsediac  circle  and  say:  "All  inside  of  that  is  God,  and  anything  outside  of 
it  is  not  God ;  "  yet  I  know  that  everything  which   tends   upward,  that  every, 
thing  which  sets  from  a  lower  life   to  "a  higher,    that   everything   which   leads 
from  the  basilar  to  the  coronal,  that  everything  whose  results  are  good,  is  an 
interpretation  of  God,  who,  though  He  may  be  found  to  be  other  than  we  suppose, 
will  be  found  not  less,  but  more  glorious  than  we  suspect.      {H.   W.  Beecher.) 
Knowledge   of  Divine  will: — The    knowledge   of    the   Divine   vsill  embraces  in 
itself  the  knowledge  (1)  of  the  law,  which  shows  us  the  abyss  of  our  misery,  and 
also  proposes  to  the  regenerate  a  rule  of  new  life;  (2)  of  the  gospel,  which  opens 
to  U3  the  depths  of  Divine  mercy,  and  also  teaches  the  method  of  obtaining  salva- 
tion.    Neither  is  the  bare  apprehension  of  these  things  called  the  knowledge  of 
the  Divine  will,  but  the  efficacious  apprehension  which   applies  Christ  to   our- 
selves, and  expresses  the  rule  of  the  law  in  our  life  and  actions,  as  far  as  in  us  lies. 
{1    John    ii.    3)    the  commandments  as    well    concerning    faith    as    obedience. 
{Bishop  Davenant.)        Filled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  will  .-—The  world  is  in 
darkness.     This  is  the  beginning  of  a  natural  day.    The  sun  has  not  yet  risen. 
Here  is  a  great  building.     You  see  it ;  the  sun  rises  and  touches  the  top  of  it ; 
gradually  it  touches  the  highest  ridges  and  windows ;  then  it  comes  down,  and 
touches  another  story,  and  another,  till  at  last  the  light,  in  all  its  fulness  and 
amplitude,  fills  the  whole  house  and  bathes  the  whole  building  in  the  splendour  of 
its  rays.    Every  room — from  the  lowest  to  the  highest — all  filled  I    Now,  that  gives 
you  a  faint  idea  of  what  the  apostle  means.     The  knowledge  of  God  fills,  not  one 
faculty  alone,  not   the  intellect   looking  at    truth    objectively,  _  but    the    whole 
natcre ;    feeling,   imagination,  sensibility,    all    flooded  with   this    Divine   light. 
{T.   Pintiey.)        The  ute  of  spiritual  understanding: — By  wisdom  and  spiritual 
ocdeistajiding  the  Christians  at  Colosse  would  be  led  to  "  distinguish  things 


28  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha»»  I. 

that  differ " ;  to  detect  the  sophistry  of  new  teachera ;  to  discern  the  dan- 
gerous bearings  of  ingenious  but  seducing  systems  ;  to  keep  close  to  the 
letter  and  spirit  of  Scripture  ;  to  look  around  on  the  whole  compass  of  truth 
and  all  the  methods  of  God's  dispensations  before  they  committed  themselves  to 
any  conclusive  opinion  ;  to  use  every  part  of  Divine  revelation  for  the  purposes, 
and  in  the  proportion,  and  according  to  the  order,  and  in  the  epirit  of  the  divinely- 
inspired  record.  {Bishop  D.  Wilson.)  That  ye  walk  worthy  of  Vte  Lord. — Lif$ 
a  walk : — Having  entered  the  world,  at  once  we  leave  the  moment  of  our  nativity, 
as  a  starting-place,  and  incessantly  advance  towards  death,  as  a  common  habita- 
tion, where,  sooner  or  later,  all  men  meet.  Other  travellers  may,  if  they  please, 
delay  their  journey,  or  retrace  their  steps  ;  but  we  cannot  do  either.  Time, 
enfolding  us  from  the  first  moment  of  our  life,  perpetually  carries  us  forward, 
whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  whether  we  consent  to  it  or  resist,  without  permitting 
ns  to  turn  back,  or  indulge  in  the  shortest  repose.  We  are  like  him  on  board  a 
vessel  propelled  by  sea  and  wind,  whose  personal  motion  does  not  arrest  or  abate 
his  course.  But  as  the  roads  and  projects  of  travellers  are  very  different,  so  there 
is  a  great  diversity  of  habit  and  manners  in  men's  lives.  Wicked  men  follow  one 
way,  and  good  men  another.  The  pagan  steers  one  course,  the  Jew  another,  the 
Mohammedan  another,  and  the  Christian  another,  each  wholly  different  from  the 
others.  This  is  what  the  Scripture  calls  "  the  way  of  man  "  ;  that  is,  the  fashion 
and  method  of  life  which  each  man  follows.  And  suitably  to  this  expressive  figure, 
it  often  makes  use  of  the  word  walking,  to  signify  a  regulating  and  framing  of  the 
life  after  some  certain  manner,  whether  good  or  evil ;  meaning  the  tenor  of  our 
lives,  and  our  customary  deportment.  There  is  nothing  more  common  in  the 
Psalms,  and  in  the  Proverbs,  than  these  forms  of  speech  ;  "  to  walk  in  integrity  " ; 
or,  on  the  contrary,  "  to  walk  in  fraud  and  iniquity"  :  and  in  the  writings  of  the 
New  Testament,  "to  walk  in  light,"  or,  "in  darkness";  "after  the  Spirit,"  or, 
"  after  the  flesh";  with  other  similar  phrases,  all  signifying  a  certain  manner  and 
condition  of  life,  good  or  evil,  as  it  is  qualified.  Agreeably  to  this  scriptural  style, 
the  apostle  says  here,  "that  ye  might  walk";  meaning,  that  you  may  live,  that 
you  may  regulate  and  form  your  lives.  (J.  Daille.)  Walk  wortliihj  : — It  is  said 
that  among  the  high  Alps,  at  certain  seasons,  the  traveller  is  told  to  proceed 
quietly;  for  on  the  steep  slopes  overhead  the  snow  hangs  so  evenly  balanced  that 
the  sound  of  a  voice  or  the  report  of  a  gun  may  destroy  the  equilibrium,  and 
bring  down  an  immense  avalanche  that  will  overwhelm  everything  in  ruin  in  its 
downward  path.  And  so  about  our  way  there  may  be  a  soul  in  the  very  crisis  of 
its  moral  history,  trembling  between  life  and  death,  and  a  mere  touch  or  shadow 
may  determine  its  destiny.  A  young  lady,  who  was  deeply  impressed  with  the 
truth,  and  was  ready,  under  conviction  of  sin,  to  ask,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  ?  "  had  all  her  solemn  impressions  dissipated  by  the  unseemly  jestmg  of  a 
member  of  the  Church.  Her  irreverent  and  worldly  spirit  cast  a  repellent  shadow 
on  the  young  lady  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  How  important  that  we  should 
always  and  everywhere  walk  worthy  of  our  high  calling  as  Christians.  (T.  Stork.) 
Walking  so  as  to  please  God: — 1.  All  mere  speculative  knowledge  is  profitless.  If 
the  whole  world  of  science  were  before  me,  and  yet  if  its  principles  were  not  applied, 
it  might  puff  me  up  but  it  would  be  of  no  utility.  Much  more  is  this  so  with  regard 
to  Divine  truth.  I  may  have  all  knowledge,  but  if  I  lack  the  faith  that  worketh  by 
love  it  is  vain.  2.  But  there  is  one  peculiar  glory  about  Divine  truth — he  that 
knows  one  truth  cannot  be  wholly  ignorant  of  its  bearings.  It  is  a  chain  that  has 
involved  in  it  link  within  link,  and  he  that  touches  one  can  move  the  whole.  E.g., 
He  that  has  a  spiritual  knowledge  of  God  loves  Him,  and  he  that  loves  Him  lovea 
His  will,  and  he  that  loves  His  will  desires  to  do  it.  I.  The  wobtht  walk.  There 
are  similar  passages  in  Eph.  iv.  1 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  12.  1.  Every  man  living  in  sin  is 
dead,  a  cumberer  of  the  ground,  and  only  fit  to  be  cut  down.  This  is  his  worthless- 
ness.  He  is  an  unprofitable  servant  and  spiritually  worthless.  This  is  one  of  the  firs* 
teachings  of  the  Spirit,  and  even  the  saint  is  compelled  to  confess  that  in  Him 
dwelleth  no  good  thing  (Gen.  xxxii.  9-10).  This  was  the  confession  of  the 
Centurion  and  the  Prodigal.  2.  But  although  in  the  natural  man  this  is  so,  and  the 
spiritual  man  is  made  to  feel  it — yet  the  latter  knows  that  he  has  been  redeemed 
by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  redeemed  for  glory,  and  renewed  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  so  is  made  worthy  by  grace.  3.  Hence  he  is  under  powerful  obligations 
to  walk  worthy  by  being  fruitful  in  good  works.  This  the  natural  man  cannot  be 
any  more  than  a  bad  tree  can  produce  good  fruit,  but  the  renewed  man  can  be  and 
is.     Jl)  The  characteristics  of  a  good  work  are — (a)  that  God  has  commanded  it ; 


SHIP.  L]  COLOSSIANS. 


ib)  that  it  is  the  result  of  faith — for  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God. 
i'aith  first  pleads  the  righteousness  of  Christ  as  the  ground  of  acceptance,  and  then 
lays  hold  of  the  strength  of  Christ  as  the  power  for  performance.  "  In  the  Lord  I 
have  righteousness  and  strength."  (2)  In  these  sorts  of  works  we  are  to  be  fruit- 
ful. There  must  be  no  reserve.  All  we  have  and  are  is  to  be  devoted  to  God'a 
service.  II.  The  high  aim — to  please  God  in  all  things.  1.  This  is  impossible  to 
the  natural  man  who  is  without  faith.  Even  a  child  of  God  does  many  things  that 
•re  displeasing  to  God.  There  was  but  one  who  was  perfectly  well-pleasing  to  God. 
But  in  Him  we  are  pleasing  too — for  we  are  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him. 
2.  The  Christian  aims  at  acting  out  this  righteousness  in  unreserved  obedience,  in 
little  things  as  well  as  great — in  eating  and  drinking,  &c.  With  such  a  life  God 
is  well  pleased.  III.  The  Divine  knowledge.  Notice  the  order  of  procedure — 
knowing  the  will  of  God,  doing  it,  and  by  doing  it  brought  into  closer  acquaintance 
with  God.  •'  If  any  man  will  do  His  will  he  shall  know."  "Thus  shall  we  know  if 
we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  David  knew  more  than  the  aucients,  because  he 
kept  God's  precepts.  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  All  pleasing.  I.  What  is  meant 
BY  ALL  pleasing  ?  We  are  to  please  everybody  that  we  may  please  God.  1.  The 
wish  to  please  or  to  be  liked  by  everybody  is  a  virtue  or  a  sin  according  as  it  is  a 
means  or  an  end.  If  you  please  only  to  be  admired  it  is  selfish  and  has  no  religion  in 
it.  But  if  you  wish  to  please  that  Christ  may  be  liked,  and  that  you  may  have  more 
influence  for  good,  then  in  pleasing  others  you  will  please  God.  2.  By  this  rule  we 
reconcile  St.  Paul's  apparent  contradiction,  "  If  I  yet  pleased  men  I  should  not  be 
a  servant  of  Christ,"  with  "Let  every  one  of  us  please  his  neighbour  for  his  good 
to  edification."  It  is  evident  that  we  may,  on  the  one  hand,  so  make  compromises 
in  order  to  please  that  we  shall  not  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord,  and  that  on  the  other 
we  may  think  we  are  walking  worthy  of  the  Lord  by  a  strictness  and  severity  which 
are  certainly  not  unto  all  pleasing.  3.  It  would  be  quite  a  mistake  to  suppose  that 
Christ  did  not  please  men.  There  were  some,  of  course.  He  never  tried  to  please — 
the  proud  and  hypocritical.  But  he  pleased  the  multitude.  The  record  of  his  early 
life  is  "He  grew  in  favour  both  with  God  and  man ;"  and  afterwards  "all  the 
people  rejoiced  for  the  glorious  things  which  were  done  by  Him."  II.  How  did 
Christ  please  men  ?  and  how  mat  we  bt  pleasing  like  Him,  walk  worthy  of  Him  ? 
1.  The  first  secret  of  all  pleasing  is  humility.  If  you  meet  a  man  who  is  in  every- 
thing your  superior,  and  yet  he  treats  you  as  if  he  were  your  equal  without  the  least 
appearance  of  condescension,  there  is  a  charm  in  that  which  every  one  feels.  Thia 
was  exactly  what  Christ  did  and  what  we  are  to  do.  2,  Sympathy.  It  is  the  spring 
of  all  power  to  throw  yourself  into  another's  mind,  look  with  his  eye,  feel  with  hia 
touch,  to  do  this  with  all,  and  with  the  countenance  and  manner  as  well  as  the 
word,  and  to  be  always  respectful  with  your  sympathy.  This  ia  the  capability  to 
please,  and  Jesus  had  it  without  measure.  3.  That  potent  and  rare  art  of  seeing 
the  good  in  everybody.  Christ  saw  the  Israelite  indeed  in  the  rude  Nathaniel ;  He 
loved  the  impetuous,  self-ignorant  young  man;  and  asked  his  Father  to  forgive  Hia 
murderers  since  they  knew  not  what  they  did.  Is  there  then  anything  more  Christ- 
like  than  to  see  the  germ  of  piety  before  it  developea,  the  bit  of  blue  on  a  dark  sky, 
the  excuse  in  every  thing  ?  He  who  knows  how  to  do  that  "  walks  unto  all  pleasing." 
HL  It  is  the  duty  and  in  the  power  of  every  one  to  be  pleasing.  For  to  please  doea 
not  depend  upon  the  face,  dress,  form,  riches,  talents,  wealth,  &g.,  but  upon  moral 
character,  tact,  effort,  and  simple  motive.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Fruitful  In  every  good 
work.  Fruitfvlness  and  progress : — I.  Fertility  implies — 1.  Life,  A  fruit- bearing 
tree  is  necessarily  a  living  tree.  The  fruitful  Christian  has  been  grafted  into  the 
Saviour  and  partakes  of  His  life.  This  Life  is  worthy  of  our  nature,  capability,  and 
destiny.  How  different  the  idea  of  many.  Business,  money,  pleasure,  science, 
art — the  pursuit  of  these  is  life ;  all  that  it  demands  of  energy,  all  that  it  imparts  of 
joy,  2.  Culture.  The  tree  left  without  pruning  will  soon  bring  forth  leaves  only. 
Bo  the  fruitful  Christian  is  one  who  is  under  the  care  of  the  Divine  husbandman 
(John  XV.  2).  Abounding  fertility  is  the  result  of  His  gracious  culture.  The 
pruning  processes  of  His  providence  are  often  necessary.  Without  these  there  may 
be  woody  suckers  or  luxuriant  foUage,  but  no  fruit.  3.  The  Christian  living  in 
Christ  and  pruned  by  God  is  to  be  fruitful  in  every  good  work  (John  xv.  8).  The 
works  to  be  done  must  be  good  in  their  nature,  influence,  and  issue,  glorifying  to 
God,  beneficial  to  man,  and  worthy  of  the  hfe  the  Christian  has  in  union  with  BUa 
Lord.  Note  the  breadth  of  requirement — "  every."  The  physical  and  social  eleva- 
tion of  the  alien,  the  outcast,  and  the  ignorant  should  go  hand  and  hand  with  saving 
Agencies.    Was  Christ  not  Physician  for  body  and  soul,  the  loftiest  Philanthropist, 


89  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [•ha*,  t 

the  sincerest  Patriot,  the  truest  Friend?  II.  Progresb.  The  fruitfulness  is  not 
exhaustive.  The  tree  grows  all  the  more  healthily  when  its  fruitfulnesB  abounds. 
1.  Hence  the  connection  here  between  fertility  and  progress.  We  must  bear  fruit 
that  we  may  be  strong,  and  do  good  that  we  may  grow.  Many  forget  this  and  find 
that  "  withholding  more  than  is  meet  tendeth  to  poverty."  Their  selfishness 
starves  their  souls.  2.  The  real  means  of  growth  is  the  knowledge  of  God.  Our 
fruitfulness  may  be  a  condition,  but  it  cannot  make  us  grow.  The  knowledge  of 
God  is  the  true  nourishment  of  the  soul.  A  God  in  shadow  or  unknown  creates 
superstition,  and  to  view  Him  in  only  one  aspect  of  His  character  will  lead  either 
to  fanaticism  or  mysticism.  3.  This  knowledge  is  the  only  knowledge  which 
encompasses  our  whole  being  and  fills  the  whole  man.  It  suppUes  truth  for  the 
intellect,  conscience,  and  heart;  stimulus  and  nourishment  for  every  attribute  of 
our  being.  Devotion  to  mere  human  studies  may  develop  the  intellectual  side  of 
our  nature  at  the  expense  of  the  moral  and  social,  but  the  growth  which  this 
promotes  is  symmetrical  and  full.  Conclusion :  These  two  things  embrace  two 
sides  of  our  nature,  action  and  reflection.  They  act  and  react  on  each  other. 
The  activity  would  pass  into  formalism  were  it  not  fed  by  the  contemplation 
of  God.  Our  meditation  would  pass  into  fanaticism  were  it  not  regulated  by 
active  duty.  (J.  Spence,  D.D.)  Fruitfulness : — This  metaphor  is  taken 
from  a  tree ;  not  every  tree,  but  one  bearing  fruit  (Psa.  L  3 ;  John  xv.  5). 
From  this  comparison  note — 1.  As  no  tree  can  bear  fruit,  uiiless  it  hath  a 
certain  life-giving  seed  in  itself,  and  is  nourished  daily  with  good  sap;  so  no  one 
can  bear  spiritual  fruit,  unless  he  hath  in  himself  the  seed  of  the  Spirit,  and  i» 
daily  watered  with  the  outpourings  of  Divine  grace.  2.  As  that  tree  is  pleasing  to 
God,  which  does  not  occupy  the  ground  in  vain,  neither  dissipates  the  moisture 
which  it  draws  on  leaves  and  blossoms  alone ;  but  produces  good  fruits :  so  ha 
alone  is  pleasing  to  God,  who  does  not  uselessly  occupy  room  in  the  Church,  neither 
wears  the  appearance  and  form  of  godliness  alone,  but  puts  forth  its  power  and 
virtue  by  fruitfulness.  3.  As  a  tree  lives  and  bears  fruit  not  for  itself  but  its  owner, 
and  for  others  to  whom  he  sees  fit  to  impart  its  fruits  :  so  a  godly  man  ought  not  to 
live  for  himself  alone,  nor  to  care  only  that  his  life  be  honourable  to  himself,  but 
that  it  may  be  honourable  to  God  and  beneficial  to  all  his  brethren.  4.  Behold  the 
spacious  manner  in  which  the  fruitfulness  of  a  godly  man  is  exercised.  In  this  he 
differs  from  a  tree.  For  no  one  seeks  different  fruits  from  the  same  tree,  but  God 
expects  every  Christian  to  produce  every  kind  of  good  works  (Gal.  v.  22).  There 
are,  therefore,  two  things  to  be  noted  in  the  matter  of  the  fruitfulness.  (1)  That 
God  does  not  approve  of  every  kind  of  fruitfulness,  but  restricts  it  to  good  works. 
But  those  are  called  good  works  which  are  commanded  and  directed  by  God. 
Wisely  and  piously  spake  Cyprian,  "  The  exercises  of  righteousness  are  to  be  chosen 
not  by  our  own  will,  but  by  the  will  of  God."  And  in  Isaiah  God  complains  of  the 
Jews,  that  they  worshipped  Him  by  the  precepts  of  men  (Isa.  xxix.  13).  (2)  That 
fruitfulness  of  any  one  kind  is  not  sufficient,  but  we  must  be  fruitful  in  every  good 
work.  If  any  one  produce  the  good  fruit  of  alms  deeds,  and  mingle  with  them  the 
Impure  fruits  of  lewdness ;  or  if  any  one  be  conspicuous  for  chastity,  and  defile 
himself  by  avarice  ;  he  would  not  answer  the  Divine  will,  or  the  apostle's  desire  of 
being  fruitful  in  every  good  work :  nay,  he  is  accounted  by  God  bad  and  unclean. 
For  who  shall  say  that  any  one  is  clean,  who  is  wont  to  wallow  even  in  a  single  sewer? 

il  Thess.  v.  22-23).  {Bishop  Davenant.)  "  Fruitful  in  every  good  work "  ;— 
i'rom  the  decalogue  downwards.  Scripture  teaching  has  been  poured  impartially 
Into  two  moulds — to  know  the  truth  and  to  do  the  right.  I.  The  nature  of  each. 
1.  Fruitfulness  in  every  good  woik.  (1)  Work.  Tbey  who  find  Christ  find  rest, 
but  not  exemption  from  work  ;  "  peace  in  believing  "  only  supplies  a  foothold 
whereon  the  labourer  may  stand  more  steadily  and  so  work  with  more  effect. 
(2).  Good  work,  not  energy  of  action  merely,  (n)  The  Master  is  good  :  God.  (6)  The 
motive:  love,  (c)  The  aim  :  the  good  of  the  world,  (d)  The  standard :  the  law. 
(3)  Every,  (a)  Not  that  man  sh-uld  go  round  the  world  and  meddle  with  every- 
thing, but  that  he  should  nt  gleet  no  opportunity  that  comes  in  his  way.  Do  not 
waste  time  and  effort  in  trying  to  do  all  at  once,  but  cultivate  a  universal  willing- 
ness, (h)  Act  those  virtues,  too,  that  are  not  in  your  nature.  When  a  man  of 
might  beaij;  the  intirmitie-  of  t'  e  wt-akest,  and  the  timid  display  a  martyr  courage, 
there  is  more  cunspicuwus  evidi  nee  of  grace,  (c)  Do  not  pick  and  choose  but 
do  whsitever  God  hns  put  m  your  wav,  whether  the  opening  of  a  church  or  the 
diggi  g  of  a  wcl:,  the  suppoit  of  a  missionary  or  the  widening  of  a  street. 
\i)  F'iittul       Thi-    indicates-  .       "^pontaneousness.       The  tree    has    first   been 


au».  1.1  COLOSSIANS.  n 

made  good,  and  then  the  fruit  grows  spontaneously.  A  partaker  of  Christ  gives 
forth  Christ-like  actions.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  artificial  charity.  People  can 
tie  oranges  to  a  fir-tree;  but  true  Christian  beneficence  is  a  fruit  that  grows  and  is 
not  tied  on.  The  water  in  the  pipes  connected  with  a  reservoir  must  flow  by  reason 
of  the  pressure  from  above.  "The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us."  (6)  Sweet- 
ness and  profitableness,  (c)  Abundance.  2.  Increase  in  the  knowledge 
of  God.  (1)  In  obtaining  reconciliation  through  Christ  we  have  the  begin- 
ning of  this  knowledge,  and  those  who  attain  the  beginning  can  never  rest 
there  (2)  Among  other  features  of  the  Divine  nature  which  the  experienced 
disciple  knows  better  now,  the  Fatherhness  of  God  is  perhaps  that  in  which  the 
greatest  advances  are  attained.  It  is  long  ere  perfect  love  casts  out  all  fear  ;  but 
much  progress  is  made  in  its  diminution  by  the  inlet  of  confiding  love.  It  is  like 
the  process  of  exhausting  the  air  from  a  glass  cup,  and  so  making  it  adhere  more 
and  more  firmly  to  the  table.  More  and  more  fear  is  drawn  off  from  the  Christian's 
bosom  ;  more  aud  more  firmly  therefore  does  it  cleave  to  the  Almighty  strength  it 
leans  upon.  II.  The  dnion  and  reciprocal  relations  or  the  two.  1.  They  grow 
together  not  only  as  two  parallel  boughs  of  one  tree,  one  of  which  might  live  if  the 
other  were  wrenched  off.  The  union  is  like  two  sides  of  a  human  body  ;  if  one 
were  wanting  the  other  would  die.  2.  Contemplate  the  two  sides  alternately. 
(1)  Active  obedience  is  necesssary  to  the  increase  of  spiritual  experience.  Spiritual 
contemplation  soon  runs  to  seed  when  duty  is  neglected.  The  old  monks  desired  to 
increase  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  hid  themselves  in  caves  where  good  works 
were  impossible.  So  they  made  themselves  barren  in  that  wherein  God  had 
commanded  them  to  be  fruitful.  Simon  on  the  top  of  his  pillar  with  the  world 
wondering  at  him  as  a  saint,  did  not  know  God  so  well  as  he  might  if  he  had  kept 
a  shop  all  day  and  played  with  his  children  at  night.  In  active  hfe  you  will  make 
most  progreds  in  this  knowledge.  The  more  work  you  do  the  more  you  will  be 
wearied,  which  will  lead  you  to  lean  oftener  on  the  Father  and  thus  increase  your 
acquaintance.  (2)  Contemplative  communion  with  God  is  necessary  to  successful 
activity.  If  yoo  rush  into  work  without  prayer  the  work  will  wane  like  the  flame  of 
a  lamp  when  the  oil  is  exhausted.  When  our  work  increases  in  bulk  we  need  more 
of  experimental  communion  to  animate  the  extended  body.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 
Multiform  fruitfulness : — You  never  saw  in  nature  a  tree  which  yielded  all  sorts  of 
fruit,  and  yon  never  will.  I  have  seen  a  tree  so  grafted  that  it  produced  four  kinds 
of  fruit  at  one  time,  but  I  remarked  that  it  was  a  poor  business  in  reference  to  two 
of  the  varieties  ;  for  one  of  the  grafts,  more  natural  than  the  others  to  the  parent 
Btem,  drew  off  the  most  of  the  sap,  and  flourished  well,  but  robbed  the  other 
branches.  The  second  sort  of  fruit  managed  to  live  pretty  fairly,  but  not  so  well  aa 
it  would  have  done  on  its  own  stem.  As  for  the  third  and  fourth,  they  were  mere 
attempts  at  fruit  of  the  smallest  size.  This  tree  was  shuwn  to  me  as  a  great 
curiosity  ;  it  is  not  likely  that  practical  gardeners  will  be  encouraged  by  the 
experiment.  But  what  would  yon  think  of  a  tree  upon  which  you  saw  grapes,  and 
figs,  and  ohves,  and  apples,  and  all  other  good  fruits  growing  at  one  time  ?  This 
is  the  emblem  of  what  instructed  believers  will  become  :  they  will  produce  all  sorts 
of  goodness  and  graeiousness  to  the  honour  of  their  heavenly  Father.  I  have  no 
doubt  that  you  will  naturally  abound  most  in  certain  good  works  for  which  you 
have  the  largest  capacity,  but  still  nothing  ought  to  come  amiss  to  yoo.  In  the 
great  house  of  the  Church  we  want  servants  who  will  not  be  simply  cooks  or  house- 
maids, but  general  servants,  maids  of  all-work,  prepared  to  do  anything  and 
everything.  I  have  known  persons  in  household  employment  in  England  who 
would  not  do  a  turn  beyond  their  special  work  to  save  their  masters'  lives: 
these  are  a  sort  of  servants  of  whom  the  fewer  the  better.  In  India  this 
is  carried  to  a  ridiculous  extreme.  The  Hindoo  water-bearer  will  not  sweep 
the  house,  nor  light  a  fire,  nor  brush  your  clothes — he  will  fetch 
water,  and  nothing  else:  you  must,  therefore,  have  a  servant  for 
each  separate  thing,  and  then  each  man  will  do  his  own  little  bit,  but 
he  will  not  go  an  inch  beyond.  When  we  enter  into  Christ's  Church  we 
should  come  prepared  to  wash  the  saints'  feet,  or  bear  their  burdens,  or  bind  up 
their  wounds,  or  fight  their  foes,  or  act  as  steward,  or  shepherd,  or  nurse.  It  has 
been  well  said  that  if  two  angels  in  heaven  were  summoned  to  serve  the  Lord,  and 
there  were  two  works  to  be  done,  an  empire  to  be  ruled,  or  a  crossing  to  be  swept, 
neither  angel  would  have  a  choice  as  to  which  should  be  appointed  him,  but  would 
gladly  abide  the  will  of  the  Lord.  Let  us  be  equally  prepared  for  anything,  for 
eTerything  by  which  fruit  can  be  produced  for  the  Well-beloved.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


n  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  1. 

The  necessity  of  Divine  knowledge  to  Christian  fruitfulnest : — There  is  a  well  in  your 
garden,  and  a  pamp  for  raising  the  water  to  the  surface.  This  for  ordinary  seasons 
is  Bofficient.  But  at  length  a  drought  compels  you  to  make  a  greater  demand  upon 
the  well.  Every  day  you  ply  the  handle  harder  and  longer,  to  preserve  the  life  of 
the  languishing  vegetation.  At  last  the  supply  fails,  and  yon  ply  your  task  in  vain. 
No  water  comes,  because  there  has  been  too  much  working  ;  the  work  degenerates 
into  a  barren  noise.  What  then  1  Sink  your  well  deeper,  and  it  will  stand  a  greater 
strain.  We  must  go  and  do  likewise  when,  by  too  long-continued  activity,  our 
movement  becomes  fruitless  labour.  When  we  work  till  our  souls  are  wrought  out, 
we  must  go  deeper  down  into  the  hidden  veins  of  the  soul's  supply — go  deeper  into 
the  love  of  God,  by  secret  communion  with  the  Saviour ;  and  the  increase  of  His 
favour  consciously  compassing  your  soul  will  sustain  a  new  and  greater  effort  of 
Christian  activity.  (W.  Arnot,I).D.)  The  necessity  of  Christian  fruitfulness  to 
Divine  knowledge : — In  the  case  of  the  monks,  their  kite,  so  to  speak,  was  pointing 
heavenward  and  rising;  but  it  was  not  rising  far  enough  nor  fast  enough.  It 
seemed  to  be  struggling  upward,  but  held  in  check  by  the  string  that  attached  it  to  the 
ground.  That  line  which  bound  it  to  the  earth  seemed  the  only  hindrance  of  its 
flight  to  heaven.  Like  foolish  children,  they  cut  the  line  that  bound  it  to  the  earth, 
expecting  to  see  it  then  rising  unimpeded  to  the  sky ;  but,  lo !  the  kite  when  so  set 
free,  instead  of  ascending  majestically  to  heaven,  whirled  round  two  or  three  times 
wildly,  giddily,  and  then  fell  flat  upon  the  ground.  Such  was  the  result  of  Rome's 
effort  to  raise  her  votaries  to  heaven,  by  cutting  their  connection  with  the  earth. 
The  so-called  saints  fell  lower  than  before.  {Ibid.)  Tlie  essential  connection  between 
knowledge  and  piety  : — As  the  swing  of  the  pendulum  to  the  right  becomes  the  power 
which  carries  it  to  the  left,  and  its  swing  to  the  left  the  power  which  carries  it  back 
to  the  right ;  so  true  good-doing  makes  the  doer  know  God  more,  and  true  know- 
ledge of  God  sends  back  the  scholar  with  a  new  impulse  to  hia  work  in  the  world. 
Moreover,  by  the  balancing  alternations  of  the  pendulum  aberrations  are  prevented, 
and  the  steady,  true-going  of  the  clock  is  secured ;  so  the  Christian  life  goes  best 
which  goes  between  a  deep,  comtemplative,  spiritual  knowledge  of  God,  and  hearty 
practical  work,  as  far  as  opportunity  offers,  for  every  interest  of  every  brother  man. 
These  two  God  hath  joined ;  let  no  man  dare  to  put  them  asunder.  (Ibid.)  No 
work  must  be  declined : — You  have  probably  read  of  a  certain  renowned  corporal  in 
the  American  service  a  century  ago.  A  general  as  he  rode  along  saw  a  body  of  men 
endeavouring  to  lift  timber.  They  were  short-handed,  and  the  work  lagged,  but 
their  famous  corporal  stood  by  ordering  them  about  at  a  magnificent  rate.  The 
general  paused  and  said,  "  Why  don't  you  lend  them  help  and  put  your  shoulder  to 
it  ?  "  "  Why,  sir,"  said  the  great  little  officer,  "  how  can  you  think  of  such  a  thingf 
Do  you  know  who  I  am  ?  I  am  a  corporal  1  "  The  general  got  off  his  horse,  pulled 
off  his  coat,  and  helped  to  move  the  timber,  and  by  his  judicious  help  the  soldiers 
achieved  their  task.  Then  he  turned  to  the  high  and  mighty  gentleman  and  said, 
"  Mr.  Corporal,  next  time  you  want  a  man  to  do  such  work  as  this  yoa  oan  send  for 
me.    I  am  General  Washington."    (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  11.  Streng:thened  with  all  might  according  to  His  glorious  power. — God^t 
all  strength : — I.  Thb  bteength.  1.  The  reference  is  not  to  intellectual  strength- 
slthough  no  doubt  as  a  highly  intellectual  man,  the  apostle  would  highly  prize  this 
in  his  brethren.  It  is  important  as  a  shield  to  protect  from  imposition,  for 
guidance  in  times  of  sifting  or  wild  speculation,  and  its  possession  widens  the 
distance  between  man  and  the  lower  creation,  and  assimilates  to  Him  whose  under- 
standing is  infinite.  2.  Here  reference  is  to  power  distinctively  spiritual.  Paul 
prayed  that  they  might  be  strengthened  in  their  ethical  principles,  so  that  they 
might  be  stronger  in  their  faith,  hope,  and  love.  This  was  important  for  their 
Christian  consistency,  usefulness,  and  prosperity.  II.  The  steengthenino. 
"  Strengthened  in  all  strength."  As  if  the  apostle  conceived  them  as  needing  to  be 
immersed  in  some  other  one's  strength  greater  than  their  own :  and  as  he  was  thinking 
of  Divine  strength,  he  did  not  scrapie  to  say  "  all "  strength,  i.e.,  strength  all- 
snfficient.  Not  merely  enough  for  some  duties  and  trials,  but  such  as  would  enable 
them  to  say,  "  I  can  do  all  things"  (Phil.  iv.  13).  All  kinds  of  strength  belong  to 
God,  physical,  intellectual,  moral.  "  Nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Lord."  "  Power 
belongeth  unto  God,"  and  not  only  that  which  can  create  and  uphold.  What  power 
of  perception  from  which  nothing  is  hidden  1  of  memory!  looking  back  into  infinity; 
of  prevision !  looking  forward  into  eternity.  Hence  this  moral  power.  What  power 
of  goodness,  righteousness,  compassion,  and  forgiving  fervour — all  inherently  infi- 


<OTAP.  I.]  COLOSSIANS.  83 

nite.  No  wonder  Paul  speaks  of  "the  power  of  His  glory,"  the  power  that  is  inherent 
in  His  glory  and  therefore  glorious.  No  wonder  that  he  desires  that  the  Colossians 
abould  be  steeped  in  it.  III.  The  result  of  the  strknotheninq.  1.  Patience  is 
needed  on  the  part  of  all  in  such  a  world  as  this.  Men  everywhere  have  had  trials 
that  have  taxed  them  to  the  utmost,  and  will  continue  to  have.  But  the  reference 
here  is  to  the  trials  which  Christians  have  in  addition  as  Christians,  to  which  they 
•le  exposed  for  the  gospel's  sake  at  home  and  iu  society.  2.  Long-suffering  is  akin 
to  patient  endurance.  It  is  the  opposite  of  irascibility  in  relation  to  persons  who 
deal  with  us  unreasonably  or  unkindly,  whereas  patience  has  to  do  with  things. 
With  trying  things  our  difficulty  is  to  endure ;  ^  ith  trying  persons  to  suppress 
irritability.  3.  But  these  are  not  enough.  Paul  wants  joyfulness  in  addition.  But 
he  knew  that  "  tLie  happy  God"  could  and  woulu  make  "all  things  work  together 
for  good,"  and  so  enab.e  His  people  to  **  rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway."  (J.  Morison, 
D.D.)  Strengthened  with  glorious  power: — I.  Why  does  ,the  apostle  say, 
BTRENOTHENED  WITH  "  ALL "  MIGHT?  1.  To  intimate  that  we  fight  not  against  one 
enemy,  neither  are  opposed  by  weapons  on  one  side  only,  but  by  many,  and  on  every 
side.  Unless  we  overcome  these  enemies,  one  and  all,  we  are  conquered.  There  is 
therefore  need  of  all  might  against  every  kind  of  enemy.  II.  The  apostle  could 
have  said,  we  are  strengthened  by  God,  or  by  His  power ;  but  he  adds  this  epithet, 
GLORIOUS  POWER.  1.  That  we  may  place  the  greater  confidence  in  this  Divine  power. 
Because  this  very  word  contains  in  itself  an  earnest  of  victory  and  triumph  ;  for 
this  could  not  be  glorious  power,  if  it  might  be  overcome  by  an  evil  spirit  and  sin 
(Kom.  viii.).  2.  It  is  called  glorious  power  on  account  of  the  admirable  mode  of 
conquering  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh.  For  the  Spirit  of  God  not  immediately, 
by  His  absolute  power,  beats  off  these  enemies  of  our  salvation  ;  but  by  inspiring 
OS  with  strength,  causes  even  ourselves  to  trample  them  under.  Moreover,  that 
power  must  necessarily  be  very  admirable  and  glorious  which  makes  feeble  man, 
clothed  with  sinful  fiesh,  to  overcome  the  insults  and  wiles  of  devils,  the  alarms 
and  solicitations  of  the  flesh,  the  hatred,  snares,  and  injuries  of  the  whole  world. 
Of  this  glorious  power  God  Himself  speaks  (2  Cor.  xii.  9;  Vide  1  Cor.  i.  27). 
{Bishop  Davenant.)  The  source  and  object  of  spiritual  strength: — I.  The  process 
EXPERIENCED.  "Strengthened  with  all  might."  1.  Man  is  essentially  weak,  and 
his  frequent  boasting  of  strength  is  but  a  sign  of  it.  Adam  was  weak,  and  fell 
before  the  first  assault ;  and  now  that  sin,  thus  triumphing,  has  entered  into  our 
world,  degenerate  men  are  weaker  still.  It  was  when  we  were  without  strength  that 
God  laid  help  on  One  mighty  to  save.  2.  Yet  men  rarely  think  of  their  weakness, 
and  consider  themselves  equal  to  all  the  demands  made  upon  them.  It  is  only 
when  a  man  receives  new  power  that  he  is  conscious  of  his  weakness.  It  is  when 
you  try  to  stem  a  torrent  that  yon  know  its  force,  so  when  a  Christian  begins  to 
crucify  his  flesh  he  knows  its  power.  But  for  him  there  is  might  to  overcome.  Yet 
how  much  weakness  is  manifest  in  professors.  You  see  men  conquered  by  the  love 
of  the  world,  and  those  who  began  well  slackening  their  pace,  and  instead  of  resisting 
the  allurements  around  them  becoming  entangled  by  them  and  falling  into  spiritual 
apostasy.  S.  Mark  the  fulness  of  the  blessing.  (1)  With  might  for  all  the  faculties 
of  the  soul,  so  that  every  power  of  manhood  shall  be  invigorated.  (2)  For  all  the 
wants  of  life  created  by  its  varied  circumstances  of  prosperity  and  adversity.  II. 
The  Divine  principle  manifested — "  according  to  the  power  of  His  glory  "  (Eph. 
iii.  16).  1.  Spiritual  power,  then,  is  not  indigenous  to  the  soul ;  it  is  from  God, 
who  alone  knows  its  capacities  and  needs.  If  the  word  or  smile  of  an  earthly 
parent  can  strengthen  the  soul  of  his  child,  much  more  God.  We  can  only 
influence  from  without,  God  from  within.  2.  The  principle  of  this  Divine  action 
is  "  according,"  Ac.  Often  are  God's  power  and  glory  conjoined  (Psa.  Ixiii.  2 ;  Rev. 
xix.  1).  Power  is  an  essential  attribute  of  the  Divine  glory.  (1)  The  glory  of  God 
is  powerful  in  creation.  "  The  heavens  declare,"  &c.  Power  is  everywhere 
apparent.  Even  the  thoughtless,  who  have  no  eye  to  trace  His  wisdom  and  no 
heart  to  acknowledge  His  goodness,  are  constrained  to  see  "  His  eternal  power  and 
Godhead."  (2)  In  providence  (Psa.  liii.  11 ;  Job  ix.  19  ;  Dan.  iv.  35).  What  power 
in  ordering  times  and  seasons,  governing  a  tumultuous  world,  restraining  powers 
of  darkness  and  preserving  a  feeble  Church.  (3)  In  redemption.  Christ,  who  is 
"the  brightness  of  His  glory,"  is  "the  power  of  God."  The  exceeding  greatnebS 
of  His  power  working  by  His  spirit  accomplishes  the  new  creation  and  strengthens 
the  souls  of  His  children.  3.  The  expression  suggests  the  measure  of  the  might 
imparted — not  according  to  human  power  or  angelio  might,  but  according  to  a 
Divine  measure.    As  the  power  of  the  Divine  glory  is  manifested  in  nature,  provi- 

8 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  % 

deuce,  oi  redemption,  so  will  it  be  in  the  souls,  experiences,  and  triamphs  of  His 
people.  4.  It  is  also  the  model  of  our  might.  We  may  be  strengthened  with  a 
might  correKponding  to  the  power  of  God's  glory,  so  that  we  shall  be  strong  in 
accordance  with  our  finite  nature  as  God  is  strong  according  to  His  infinite  nature. 
in.  The  oreat  moral  purpose  op  this  strengthening — not  so  much  to  do  as  to 
Buffer,  which  rsquires  the  greatest  strength.  1.  Patience  has  its  sphere  in  relation 
to  God.  (1)  In  the  endurance  of  trial  Our  discipline  is  often  protracted,  and  we  are 
apt  to  sink.  How  much  we  need  the  promised  strength.  (2)  In  anticipation  of 
coming  good.  The  deliverance  is  long  protracted.  We  become  impatient,  and  ask, 
•'  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming  ?  "  and  impatience  often  leads  to  sin,  and  is 
always  a  sign  of  weakness.  To  possess  our  souls  in  patience  and  bide  God's  time 
requires  His  strength.  Long-suffering  has  its  sphere  in  relation  to  man,  and  means 
long-mindednesB  as  opposed  to  shortness  of  temper  in  the  midst  of  irritation. 
It  requires  the  strength  of  God  to  imitate  His  forbearance  who  '*  endured 
such  contradiction  of  sinners."  3.  The  spirit  of  this  patience  or  joyfulness  pro- 
duced by  a  consciousness  of  power  to  strengthen,  deliver,  reward.  {J.  Spence,  D.D.) 
Patience : — Patience  is  the  superintendent  of  all  the  affairs  of  God,  and  withoat 
it  it  is  not  possible  to  execute  His  commands  or  to  wait  for  His  promises.  It 
defeats  all  its  enemies  without  toil.  Its  repose  is  more  efficacious  than  the  move- 
ments and  deeds  of  others.  It  renders  those  things  salutary  to  us  which,  of  their 
own  nature,  are  most  pernicious.  It  changes  poisons  into  remedies,  and  defeats 
into  victories.  It  rejoices  the  angels,  it  confounds  devils,  it  overcomes  the  world. 
It  subdues  the  greatest  courage,  and  converts  the  most  obstinate  hearts.  It  is  the 
strength  and  the  triumph  of  the  Church,  according  to  the  saying  of  the  ancient 
oracle,  "  In  returning  and  rest  shall  ye  be  saved  ;  in  quietness  and  in  confidence 
shall  be  your  strength."  (Tertullian.)  Patience  and  long -suffering : — "Long- 
suffering  "  will  be  found  to  express  patience  in  respect  of  persons,  and  "  patience  " 
the  same  in  respect  to  things.  The  man  is  long-suffering,  who,  having  to  do  with 
injurious  persons  does  not  suffer  himself  easily  to  be  provoked  by  them,  or  to  blaie 
up  intu  anger.  The  man  is  patient  who,  under  a  great  siege  of  trials,  bears  up  and 
does  not  lose  heart  or  courage  (Rom.  v.  3  ;  2  Cor.  i.  6).  We  should  speak,  there- 
fore, of  the  long-suffering  of  David  (2  Sam.  xvi.  10-18),  the  patience  of  Job 
(James  v.  11).  Thus,  while  both  graces  are  ascribed  to  the  saints,  only 
long-suffering  is  an  attribute  of  God.  Men  may  tempt  and  provoke  Him,  and  He 
may  and  does  display  an  infinite  long-suffering  in  regard  of  them  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6 ; 
Fmm.  ii.  4  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  20) ;  there  may  be  a  resistance  to  God  in  men,  because  He 
respects  the  wills  with  which  He  has  created  them,  even  when  those  wills 
are  fighting  against  Him.  But  there  can  be  no  resistance  to  God,  nor  burden  upon 
Him,  the  Almighty,  from  things;  therefore  patience  cannot  find  place  in  Him,  nor 
is  it  ever  rightly  ascribed  to  Him ;  for  when  God  is  called  "the  God  of  patience  " 
(BoiB.  XV.  5)  this  does  not  mean  God  whose  attribute  patience  is,  but  God  who  gives 
patience  to  His  people.  (See  also  1  Pet.  v.  10;  Heb.  xiii.  20;  Rom.  xv.  13). 
{Archbishop  Trench.)  The  two  words  occur  in  the  same  context  in  2  Cor.  vi.  4,6; 
2  Tim.  iii.  10;  James  v.  10-11.  The  difference  of  meaning  is  best  seen  in  their 
opposites.  While  patience  is  the  temper  which  does  not  easily  succumb  under 
suffering,  long-suffering  is  the  self-restraint  that  does  not  hastily  retaliate  a  wrong. 
The  one  is  opposed  to  cowardice  or  despondency,  the  other  to  wrath  or  revenge 
(Prov.  XV.  18;  xvi.  32).  (Bislwp  Lightfoot.)  Peace  in  pain: — "I  have  been 
ready  to  doubt,"  said  Dr.  Payson,  "  whether  pain  be  really  an  evil;  for  though 
more  pain  was  crowded  into  last  week  than  any  other  week  of  my  life,  yet  it  waa 
one    of    the    happiest    weeks    of    my    life,    and    now    I    am    ready    to    say, 

•  Come  what  wiU,  come  sickness,  pain,  agony,  poverty,  loss  of  friends ; 
only  let  God  come  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  welcome.' "  Later,  on 
his  death-bed,  he  said,  "  Every  bone  is  almost  dislocated  with  pain ;  yet 
while  my  body  is  thus  tortured,  my  soul  is  perfectly  happy  and  peaceful,  more 
happy  than  I  can  possibly  express  to  you.  I  seem  to  swim  in  a  flood  of  glory  which 
God  pours  down  on  me."  Patient  long-suffering : — I  heard  of  a  city  missionary 
who  was  going  along  one  of  the  streets  and  saw  a  little  girl  sleeping  on  the  steps  of 
a  door,  and  he  awoke  her,  and  said,  "  Why  are  you  sleeping  here  in  this  drizzling 
rain  ?  "  And  she  said,  "  My  father  has  turned  me  out  of  doors.  He's  a  drunkard, 
and  I'm  waiting  till  he  falls  asleep,  and  then  I'm  going  into  the  hoase."  The  next 
morning  the  drunken  father  awakened  from  his  dream  of  iniquity,  and  he  saw  hig 
little  girl  preparing  his  breakfast,  and  he  said,  ••  Milly,why  do  you  stay  with  me?" 

*  Oh,"  she  said,  "  father,  I  love  you  ;  and  my  mother,  when  she  died,  said  I  mnsi 


CHAP.  I.]  COLO  SSI ANS.  81 

never  leave  yon.  She  said  the  rum  fiend  wonid  sometimes  go  oat  of  yoa,  and  then 
yon  would  be  very  kind  to  me;  and  so  she  said  I  was  never  to  leave  yon,  and,  father, 
I  never  will." 

Vers.  13-14.  Giving:  thankB  onto  the  Father  which  hath  made  vm  meet. — The 
Father'n  gift  through  the  Son  : — 1.  These  grounds  of  thanksgiving  are  bat  various 
aspects  of  the  great  blessing  of  salvation.  The  diamond  flashes  green  and  purple  and 
yellow  and  red,  according  to  the  angle  at  which  its  facets  catch  the  eye.  2.  All  these 
blessings  are  the  present  possessions  of  Christians.  S.  Note  the  remarkable  corre- 
spondence with  Acts  XX vi.  17-18.  I.  The  first  ground  of  thankfulness  which  all 
Christians  have  is  that  thky  are  fit  fob  the  inhebitakce.  The  metaphor  is  drawn 
from  Israel's  "inheritance"  of  Canaan.  Unfortunately  our  use  of  "heir"  and 
"  inheritance  "  is  confined  to  succession  on  death.  In  Scripture  it  implies  posses- 
sion by  lot,  and  points  to  the  fact  that  the  people  did  not  win  their  land,  but  "  God 
had  a  favour  unto  them."  So  the  Christian  inheritance  is  not  won  by  merit,  but 
given  by  God's  goodness.  1.  Is  it  present  or  future  ?  Both :  because  whatever 
may  wait  to  be  revealed,  the  essence  of  all  which  heaven  can  bring  is  ours  to-day 
who  live  in  the  faith  and  love  of  Christ.  The  difference  is  one  of  degree,  not  of 
kind.  He  who  can  say,  "  The  Lord  is  the  portion  of  my  inheritance  "  will  neither 
leave  his  treasures  behind  by  death,  nor  enter  on  a  new  inheritance.  Its  beginnings 
are  here  but  as  the  "  earnest,"  limited,  in  comparison,  as  the  tuft  of  grass  which 
used  to  be  given  to  a  new  possessor,  when  set  against  the  broad  lands  from  which 
it  was  plucked.  Here  the  idea  is  that  of  a  present  fitness  for  a  mainly  futur* 
inheritance.  2.  The  inheritance  is  **  in  the  light,"  a  realm  where  parity  and  know- 
ledge and  gladness  dwell.  3.  From  this  it  follows  that  it  can  only  be  possessed  by 
saints.  There  is  no  merit,  but  there  is  oongruity.  If  it  be  a  kingdom  of  light, 
then  only  souls  who  love  the  light  can  go  thither,  and  until  owls  and  bats  rejoice  in 
the  sunshine  there  will  be  no  way  of  being  fit  but  by  ourselves  being  "  light  in  the 
Lord."  4.  But  men  not  perfectly  pure  are  fit.  The  Colossians  were  made  meet 
at  their  conversion.  Incipient  faith  in  Christ  works  a  change  so  great  as  to  fit  us, 
for  although  it  be  but  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  it  shapes  from  henceforth  oar 
personal  being.  There  is  nothing  in  this  inconsistent  with  the  need  of  continual 
growth  in  congruity.  True  fitness  will  become  more  and  more  fit.  5.  The  land 
was  parted  among  the  tribes  according  to  their  strength  ;  some  had  a  wider, 
some  a  narrower  strip.  So  as  there  are  differences  of  character  here  there  will  be 
differences  in  participation  hereafter.  *'  Star  differethfrom  star."  II.  The  second 
ground  is  the  change  of  King  and  countby.  In  the  "  deliverance  "  there  may 
be  a  reference  to  that  of  Israel  suggested  by  "inheritance,"  while  the  "  translation" 
may  be  derived  from  the  practice  of  deporting  whole  bodies  of  natives  from  con- 
quered kingdoms  to  some  other  part  of  the  conqueror's  realm.  1.  The  two  kingdoms 
and  their  kings.  (1)  The  power  of  darkness  (Luke  xxii.  18)  implies  harsh,  arbitrary 
dominion,  a  realm  of  cruel  and  grinding  sway.  Men  who  are  not  Christians  live 
in  a  subjection  to  darkness  of  ignorance,  misery,  and  sin.  (2)  What  a  wonderful 
contrast  do  the  other  kingdom  and  King  present  !  The  Son  who  is  the  object 
of  God's  love.  Wherever  men  lovingly  obey  Christ  is  His  kingdom  of  light, 
gladness,  hope,  knowledge,  and  righteousness.  2.  The  transference  of  subjects. 
A  great  conqueror  has  come,  and  speaks  to  us  as  Sennacherib  did  to  the  Jews 
(2  Kings  xviii.  31-32).  If  we  listen  He  will  lead  us  away  and  plant  us,  not  as  pining 
exiles,  but  as  happy  citizens  in  the  kingdom  which  the  Father  has  appointed,  3. 
The  transference  is  effected  the  moment  we  yield  our  heart  to  Christ.  When  we 
die  we  shall  change  provinces,  but  not  kingdoms  or  King,  only  we  shall  see  the 
King  in  His  beauty.  III.  The  heart  and  centre  of  all  thankfulness  is  the  redemp- 
tion WE  RECEIVE  THROUGH  Christ.  1.  Redemption  is  the  act  of  delivering  a  captive 
by  ransom.  So  it  is  the  same  as  the  deliverance  of  the  previous  verse,  only  what 
is  there  an  act  of  power  is  here  an  act  of  self-sacrificing  love.  Christ's  death  breaks 
the  chains,  sets  us  free,  and  acquires  us  for  Himself.  2.  The  essential  element  of 
this  redemption  is  forgiveness,  not  only  the  removal  of  legal  penalties,  however. 
The  truest  penalty  of  sin  is  that  death  which  is  separation  from  God  ;  and  the  con- 
ceptions of  judicial  pardon  and  Fatherly  forgiveness  unite  in  the  removal  of  that 
separation  and  the  deliverance  of  the  heart  and  conscience  from  the  burden  of  guilt 
and  a  Father's  wrath.  3.  Such  forgiveness  leads  to  that  full  deliverance  from  the 
power  of  darkness  which  is  the  completion  of  redemption.  Forgiveness  means 
"  sending  away  "  not  only  as  guilt  but  as  habit.  4.  The  condition  of  possessing 
this  redemption  is  anion  with  Christ.     "  In  whom."    We  cannot  get  Hi«  gifts 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

\pithout  Himself.     6.   Redemption  is  a  present   and  growing  possession.     "Wa 
have,"  or  "  are  having."   (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  inheritance  of  the  faithful : — 
1.  In  the  spirit  of  "joyfulness"  Paul  stirs  up  his  brethren  to  gratitude.    2.  Thil 
gratitude  was  due  to  God.   They  owed  much  to  Epaphras,  Paul,  and  Philemon,  and 
others.     Many  are  the  subordinate  cisterns  out  of  which  all  have  drawn  refreshing 
water.  But  the  water  that  is  there,  is  there  only  because  it  has  been  supplied  from  the 
overflow  of  the  inexhaustible  fountain  above.  3.  God  is'Tfte  Father  ";  not  the  Father 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  my  Father,  yours,  or  ours ;  but  absolutely  the  original,  arche- 
typal fountain  from  which  all  other  excellent  fatherhoods  are  derived.    Full  scope 
is  thus  left  to  the  Colossians  to  claim  their  peculiar  share  of  the  blessing  laid  up 
in  the  Divine  Fatherhood,  e.g. — I.  Meetness  fob  the  heavenly  inheritance.     A 
desire  is  expres:=ed  that  they  should  be  led  out  beyond  themselves.   "  Giving  thanks 
to  the  Father  who  hath  made  "  not  you,  not  myself,  Timothy  and  all  true  brethren; 
"us."     1.  The  inheritance.     There  are  many  heritages ;  some  eviL    This  is  "an 
inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled,"  &c.,  and  thus  onein  heaven,  "an  eternal  inherit- 
ance " — in  one  word,  perfected  salvation.  To  the  heirs  of  this  angels  are  ministers, 
and  they,  being  "  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ,"  are  "  heirs  of 
all  things,"  as  they  are  Christ's  and  Christ  is  God's.    2.  It  is  the  inheritance 
of  "  the  saints."    There  are  two  classes  among  men.    The  inheritance  belongs  to 
the  "  holy  ones."   3.  It  is  in  "  the  light,"   But  it  belongs  not  only  to  those  who  are 
in  the  light,  but  to  those  who  are  in  the  dusk.    4.  For  this  God  has  made  us  meet 
to  be  "partakers,"  i.e.,  partners,  sharers,  which  annihilates  selfishness.     Things 
are  not  equally  distributed  here,  but  they  will  be  there  ;  and  even  here,  like  an 
earnest  of  what  is  coming,  one  of  the  greatest  of  Divine  boons,  the  light,  unlike 
our  farthing  candles,  is  wondrously  impartial     6.  For  this  we  need  •'  meetness," 
not  for  salvation,  but  for  the  heritage.   Through  sin  we  are  disquaUfied.    Happiness 
is  interchangeable  with  holiness.     Hence  we  need  transformation.     ••  Nothing  that 
defileth  shall  enter  "  there.     II.  The  great  deliveeance,     1.  The  apostle  was  a 
rescued  man,  and  so  was  Timothy,  and  the  Colossians.     They  had  all  experienced 
emancipation  and  were  free.     2.  The  Divine  Father,  who  feels  peculiarly  at  home 
in  heaven,  was  the  Author  of  their  freedom,  as  He  is  of  all  liberty.    Men  have  sold 
themselves,  but  as  His  offspring  they  have  a  right  to  the  prerogatives  of  children, 
and  God  has  come  d  iwn  in  the  person  of  Jesus  to  make  them  free.    3.  This  rescue 
is  from  the  power  of  darkness.     (1)  Men  are  in  the  dark  in  reference  to  all  that 
was  most  important  to  their  weal ;  as  to  their  own  nature,  the  character  of  God, 
and  forgiveness.    (2)  This  darkness  involves  the  obscuration  of  all  that  is  fitted  to 
impart  delight.     Svhen  we  are  out  at  night  we  might  wander  in  the  choicest 
gardens,  and  be  surrounded  with  enchanting  scenery,  but  it  would  be  utterly  blank ; 
even  if  we  were  in  delightful  company  we  should  not  be  able  to  adequately  appre- 
ciate it.     (8)  More  than  this  is  involved.     Darkness  means  danger,  and  hence  the 
Colossians  had  been  under  its  "  power."  which  is  darkness  personified.      The  idea 
is  tyrannous  power,  power  to  do  harm,  because  power  in  which  malice  predominates. 
4.  But  the  Great  Father  hath  rescued  us  from  this  and  translated  us.     (1)  Paul 
intended  a  contrast  between  the  two  conditions  which  lie  on  the  opposite  sides  of 
the  line  that  is  drawn  by  faith  in  Christ.     The  apostle  delighted  in  this  contrast, 
hence  his  frequent  allusions  to  it— and  no  wonder  (see  Acts  xxvi.  17-18).    (2)  They 
were  translated,  i.e.,  transferred.     The  Jews  were  familiar  with  the  idea.    Again 
and  again  had  masses  of  them  been  transported  as  prisoners  of  war.     But  this  is 
a  translation  not  into  slavery  and  degradation,  but  out  of  them.     But  Paul  does 
not  say  as  we  might  expect,  into  "  light,"  but  into  "  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son  " 
— the  kingdom  of  heaven  where  Jesus  reigns.     In  the  expression  "  the  Son  of  His 
love  "  we  see  what  we  ought  to  feel  towards  Jesus.   He  should  be  our  dear  sovereign, 
and  we  should  •'  love  Him,  for  He  first  loved  us."     (J.  Morison,  D.D.)         The 
inheritance : — I.    Heaven   is   an    inheritance.      How  prone  men  are  to  attach 
importance  to  their  good  works,  and  how  averse  is  human  pride  to  admit  that  our 
own  righteousness  is  as  filthy  rags.     This  arises  perhaps  from  the  feeling  that  if 
our  works  are  destitute  of  merit  they  must  disincline  God  to  save  us.     But  how  un- 
scriptural  is  this  fear.     One  would  think  tbat  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal  had  been 
invented  to  refute  it.     In  spite  of  what  has  been  written,  and  the  controversies  that 
have  waxed  hot  on  the  question,  the  fact  that  heaven  is  an  inheritance  proves 
that  it  cannot  be  the  reward  of  good  works.     II.  Heaven  is  an  heritage  of  free 
GRACE.     We  have  no  such  legal  claim  to  it  as  may  be  established  by  some  earthly 
inheritance.     Heirs  have  entered  on  the  property  of  those  between  whom  and  them 
ihere  existed  no  acquaintanceship.    We  are  constituted  heirs  of  heaven  by  virtue 


du*.  1.]  C0L08SIANS. 


of    Bonship.      Thus    heaven  is   not  merely  an  inheritance  but  a  home.      HL 
The   heibs   of  heaven    beqcirb    to    bb    uacb   meet  fob   it.      1.   No  elevation 
from    obscurity    to    honour,   or    poverty   to   affluence,   represents   the   difference 
between    a  state    of    sin    in   which   grace  finds   us   and  the   state   of  glory   to 
which   it  raises   us.     2.  What  were  the  most  tempting  banquet  to   one    with- 
out appetite,  or  the  most  beauteous  scene  to  the  blind  T     Just  what  heaven  would 
be  to  man  with  his  ruined  nature,  low  passions,  and  guilty  conscience.     Incapable 
of  enjoying  its  holy  beauties  and  happiness,  he  would  find  nothing  there  to  delight 
his  senses.     Such  an  inheritance  would  be  like  the  gift  of  a  library  to  a  savage.   3. 
It  is  the  curse  of  vice,  that  where  its  desires  outlive  the  power  of  gratification  or 
are  denied  indulgence  they  become  a  torment.     What  then  would  a  drunkard  do  in 
heaven  ?    Or  a  voluptuary,  or  a  worldling  ?     4.  Hence  the  need  of  being  made  new 
creatures  in  Christ ;  and,  by  reason  of  remaining  corruption,  of  getting  with  the 
title  to  the  inheritance,  a  greater  meetness  for  it  ;    of  sanctitication  as  well  as 
salvation.    It  was  the  office  of  Christ  to  purchase  heaven;  it  is  the  woik  of  the 
Spirit  to  prepare  the  heirs.    Thus  renewed  and  sanctified  we  sLall  carry  a  holy 
nature  to  a  holy  place.     IV.  As  heaven  is  the  gift  of  God,  so  meetness  for  it  la 
THE  WORK  OF  GoD.    By  whatever  instruments  God  executes  His  work,  the  work  is 
not  ours  but  His.      {T.    Guthrie,   D.D.)        I.  The  inheritance.    It  is — 1.  God 
like-ness.    Christians  are  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  (2  Pet.  i.  4).     Children 
inherit  their  father's  nature ;  so  we  receive  our  heavenly  Father's  spirit,  and  the 
Divine  nature  is  formed  in  us.  We  are  conformed  to  the  image  of  God's  Son,  who  la 
the  image  of  the  invisible  God  in  gentleness,  beneficence,  and  perfectness  of  character. 
2    Eternal  life.     This  is  no  blessedness  to  the  wicked,  for  it  is  continuance  in  sin 
and  misery;  for  the  righteous  it  is  everlasting  holiness  and  happiness.     3.  Heaven. 
It  is  pleasant  to  think  of  heaven  as  a  state,  much  more  so  as  a  place — home.     II. 
This  inheritance  cannot  be  merited.     1.  Ail  the  riches  of  the  earth  cannot  buy  it, 
nor  all  its  valour  win  it.     "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  ....  for  Thou  hast  redeemed 
ns."     2.  It  is  our  Father's  gift.    He  is  not  like  Jacob,  who  selected  a  favourite  son. 
The  inheritance  is  oiJered  to  all.     3.  It  is  meant  purposely  for  the  children.     Some 
men  die  without  a  will,  but  God  has  made  special  provision  for  us,     4.  It  has  been 
purchased  by  the  death  of  Christ.      III.  "The  inheritors.      "Saints  in   hght." 
1.  They  see  the  love  of  God.     Some  may  ask  of  their  professed  lovers,  "  do  you 
love  me  ?  "     But  the  saints  in  light  do  not  need  to  ask  this  question  of  God.     2. 
They  are  eternal  realities,  which  to  others  seem  as  dreams.     (W.  Birch.)       What  it 
inheritance  f — The  pay  of  a  soldier  is  not  inheritance,  nor  the  fees  of  a  physician, 
nor  the  gains  of  trade,  nor  the  wages  of    labour.      Rewards  of  toil  or  skill  are 
earned  by  the  hands  that  receive  them.    What  is  inherited,  on  the  other  hand,  may 
be  the  property  of  a  new-bom  babe ;  and  so  you  may  see  the  coronet,  which  was 
won  by  the  stout  arm  of  valour,  and  first  blazoned  on  a  battered  shield,  standing 
above  the  cradle  of  an  infant.      True,   the   ample   estate,   the  noble   rank,   the 
hereditary  honours  were  won.    But  they  that  won  them  are  long  dead,  and  under- 
neatb  tattered  banners,  ouce  borne  before  them  in  bloody  fight,  but  now  hung  high 
in  the  house  of  God,  the  grim  old  barons  sleep  in  their  tombs.     The  rewards  of 
their  prowess  have  descended  to  their  successors,  who,  holding  these,  enjoy  honours 
and  estates,  which  we  do  not  grudge  them,  but  which  their  wealth  never  bought, 
and  their  courage  never  won.     Thus  the  saints  hold  heaven.     In  the  terms  of  law, 
it  is  theirs,  not  by  conquest  but  inheritance.    It  has  been  won  for  them  by  Jesus 
Christ.     (T.  Guthrie.)         The  inheritance  not  the  reward  of  merit: — When  one  of 
the  kings  of  England  said  to  the  assembled  barons,  "By  what  right  hold  ye  your 
lands  ? "   they  stepped    forward    before    the    king,   and,   drawing    their   swords, 
exclaimed,  "  By  these  we  hold  our  lands."     But  no  deeds  of  ours  can  obtain  and 
hold  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.     When  the  first  Napoleon  had  made 
himself  Emperor,  and  was  about  to  be  crowned,  the  Roman  Pontiff  approached  him 
bearing  the  crown ;  but  Napoleon  reached  out  his  hand,  took  the  crown,  and  him- 
self placed  it  upon  his  head  ;  then  he  stood  up  before  the  assembled  multitude,  aa 
if  to  say,  "  My  own  arm  hath  won  the  victory,  and  my  own  courage  hath  lifted  me 
to  this  position."    But  in  our  case,  which  of  us  can  earn  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light  f    If  our  celestial  position  depended  on  our  merits,  I  fear  many  of 
as  would  never  get  through  the  gate  of  the  city  of  the  saints.     [W.  Birch.)        The 
inheritance  of  light: — 1.  Turn  from  your  inheritance  of  tears,  anxiety,  transitory 
stewardship  ;  and  yon  who  have  an  inheritance  of  fame,  respectability,  &c.,  and 
lift  up  yonr  eyes  to  the  inheritance  of  light.     2.  We  have  here  an  expression  in- 
comprehensible to  many,  but  comprehended  by  a  new  illumination ;  as  a  bird  of 


W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

the  greenwood  may  comprehend  freedom,  an  antelope  the  wide  wilderness,  a 
creature  of  the  waters  its  native  seas.  Thus  not  only  by  original  but  informed 
instinct  do  we  comprehend  the  inheritance.  3.  The  text  stands  in  contrast  to  that 
other  inheritance  from  whence  we  have  been  delivered — the  power  of  darkness, 
beneath  whose  sway  we  all  were  born,  and  familiarity  with  which  enables  us  to 
appreciate  the  inheritance  of  light.  We  have  heard  of  the  salt  mines  of  Cracow, 
where  human  beings  labour  and  never  see  the  eyes  of  the  sun.  To  one  born  there 
how  strange  the  stories  of  the  upper  world.  It  is  a  picture  of  the  human  heart 
without  the  Saviour ;  its  faculties  are  all  like  spars  and  crystals  in  a  cavern,  and 
how  hearty  its  rapture  when  it  surveys  its  new  world,  and  is  made  meet  for  the 
inheritance.  4.  It  is  a  purchased  and  promised  possession,  and  is  ours  neither  by 
purchase  nor  conquest.  How  could  we,  born  in  caves  of  darkness,  have  battled 
our  way  up  to  the  terraces  of  light  ?  How  have  passed  through  opposing  hosts  of 
darkness,  and  entered  within  the  shining  enclosures  ?  5.  What  is  it  ?  We  can 
understand  a  human  inheritance,  park  and  mansion.  The  inheritance  of  hght  is 
our  true  and  real  being ;  pure  vision ;  the  insight  of  a  holy  nature.  It  represents 
a  perfect  union  of  the  nature  and  the  state.  The  mind  and  heart  are  full  of  light, 
and  the  light  within  creates  light  around.  This  is  heaven ;  the  residence  of  God 
who  '*  is  light,"  and  of  His  people  who  are  "  the  children  of  light."  Even  on  earth 
we  are  able,  in  a  degree,  to  rise  to  it.  We  know  the  light  within,  without,  and 
beyond,  and  their  respective  glories.  {Paxton  Hood.)  The  inheritance  of  the 
saints ; — I.  The  inheritance.  1.  It  is  our  common  state,  just  as  there  is  a  common 
salvation.  An  earthly  inheritance  is  impaired  by  division,  but  here  the  number  of 
possessors  really  adds  to  the  happiness  of  the  individual  partaker.  Though  one 
star  differeth  from  another  in  glory,  all  shine.  2.  How  shaU  we  estimate  the 
inheritance  ?  Compared  with  this  what  is  that  of  the  worldling,  of  the  Jews  in 
Canaan,  of  Adam  before  the  fall,  of  the  angels  t  Angels  can  never  know  the 
pleasures  of  reconciliation.  3.  What  are  we  to  think  of  the  state  of  blessedness 
that  is  intended  to  display  the  value  of  that  blood  which  purchased  it  ?  4.  The 
possessors  are  saints,  holy  beings,  for  "without  hoUness  no  man  can  see  the 
Lord."  They  are  partakers  of^God's  holiness,  but  are  encompassed  with  infirmities 
till  they  join  "  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect ; "  then  they  will  be  presented 
"faultless  before  the  throne."  5.  The  region.  Hell  is  darkness,  and  so  is  the 
world.  But  the  Church  is  light,  and  its  members  children  of  the  light.  And  yet 
while  here  they  are  only  able  to  survey  the  glimmering  of  the  day.  Now  they  walk 
by  faith,  mistake  appearances  for  realities,  are  baffled  in  their  inquiries,  unable  to 
discern  their  privileges  and  true  friends.  But  it  will  not  be  always  so,  for  heaven 
is  all  light — perfect,  endless  light.  II.  The  meetness  fob  it.  Man  is  both  guilty 
and  depraved.  Two  things  are  necessary  for  his  restoration — justification  and 
flanctification,  the  one  delivering  from  condemnation,  the  other  bringing  us  into 
communion  with  God ;  the  one  is  a  change  of  our  state,  the  other  of  our  nature ; 
the  one  is  derived  from  Christ'srighteousness,  and  is  instantaneous ;  the  other  from 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  is  gradual.  The  one  gives  as  a  title  to  oar  inheritance,  the 
other  gives  ns  meetness  for  it.  1.  The  nature  of  this  meetness.  The  renewing  of 
the  Holy  Spirit ;  giving  us  new  views,  principles,  and  habitudes.  How  is  a  man 
made  meet  for  any  earthly  station  ?  Take  a  youth :  he  is  apprenticed,  begins  with 
the  elementary  parts  and  rises  to  the  more  difficult,  till  he  reaches  the  knowledge 
of  the  whole,  and  then  launches  away  for  himself.  A  child  learns  to  walk  by 
walking ;  a  musician  learns  to  play  by  playing.  So  we  are  made  meet  for  heaven 
by  doing  its  work  and  enjoying  its  pleasures  now.  The  work  of  heaven  is  to  praise 
and  serve  God,  and  its  happiness  to  be  in  communion  with  Him.  This  we  enjoy 
now.  2.  Its  necessity.  A  man  suddenly  gains  a  fortune  for  which  he  is  not  quali- 
fied; the  consequence  is  that  "the  prosperity  of  fools  destroys  them."  The 
French,  living  so  long  under  tyranny,  were  not  prepared  for  the  sudden  enjoyment 
of  liberty,  and  so  ran  mad.  The  higher  the  destination  of  a  man,  the  more  he 
needs  meetness.  God  does  not  exclude  the  unregenerate  from  heaven,  they  exclude 
themselves.  "  Except  a  man  be  bom  again,"  &c.  The  impossibility  does  not 
arise  from  God's  decree,  but  from  the  nature  of  things.  The  devil  would  be  a  tor- 
ment to  himself  in  heaven.  Happiness  does  not  arise  merely  from  the  excellence 
of  the  object,  but  from  being  right  suited  to  it.  3.  The  author  of  it  is  God.  The 
very  operation  shows  this,  "  He  that  wrought  us  for  this  selfsame  thing  is  God," 
Ac.  lif  we  are  a  "  building"  we  are  "  His  workmanship  ; "  if  fruitful,  "  in  Him  ia 
our  fruit  found  ;"  if  a  tree,  "  of  His  planting."  4.  Its  sureness — "  hath  made  us." 
JII.  The  pkaise.    "  Giving  thanks."   This  is — 1.  Deserved.    God  has  infinite  claims 


«HA».  I.]  COLOSSIANS.  89 

on  our  gratitnde.  2.  Distinguishing ;  more  for  spiritual  than  temporal  mercies. 
8.  Practical.  "  Thanksgiving  is  good  ;  thanks-living  is  better."  4.  Never  ending 
(W.  Jay.)  The  inheritance  of  the  saints: — I.  An  raTERESTiNO  view  or  tub 
jruTUBB  WORLD  AB  INHERITED  BY  BELIEVERS.  There  are  many  such  views  in  Scripture ; 
here  it  is  described  as  "  light,"  indicating  a  place  of  splendour.  Light  arrays 
all  nature  with  beauty.  2.  Of  ceaseless  activity.  Darkness  and  sleep  are  related. 
"  There  shall  be  no  night  there,"  bat  a  busy  array  of  spirits  which  never  grows 
languid,  noble  exercise  which  will  never  end.  3.  Of  purity.  Darkness  is  an 
emblem  i)f  sin  ;  light  of  holiness.  Evil  covets  darkness,  courts  error  to  stifle  con- 
science, which  will  work  when  in  the  light.  A  soul  desirous  of  holiness  comes  to 
the  Ught,  that  its  deeds,  if  evil,  may  be  corrected  ;  and  if  good,  be  manifested  that 
they  are  wrought  in  God.  Here  our  holiness  is  imperfect,  but  in  heaven  the 
Church  is  "  without  spot."  There  we  shall  never  sin  through  ignorance,  or  fail  of 
duty.  4.  Of  permanent  felicity.  Night  is  an  emblem  of  affliction  ;  light  of  glad- 
ness. Sorrow  courts  the  night,  joy  the  day  ;  and  the  vicissitudes  of  day  and  night 
are  emblematical.  Our  blesdings  have  their  dawn,  noon,  and  setting.  But  the 
saints  are  in  eternal  light,  where  no  sickness  blasts,  no  death  devours,  no  injustice 
grinds,  &c.,  and  where  no  depression  abates  spiritual  enjoyments,  and  no  temp- 
tation  clouds  the  sun  of  heavenly  manifestations.  The  permanency  of  holiness 
gives  permanency  to  bliss.  5.  Of  knowledge.  We  come  out  of  darkness  into 
marvellous  light,  but  still  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly.  The  illuminated  circle 
about  us  is  enveloped  in  haze.  Into  the  mightier  plans  of  God  even  piety  would 
humbly  pry.  Into  the  difficulties  of  some  great  doctrines  we  are  sometimes  urged 
to  look.  How  many  Bible  texts  are  obscure,  and  is  there  one  of  which  we  see  the 
fulness?  Who  would  not  have  the  mystery  of  his  little  life  unfolded,  and  all 
prophecy  converted  into  history,  and,  above  all,  rise  to  a  nearer  vipion  of  God? 
But  there  we  shall  know  as  we  are  known.     II.  The  meetness  wrought  by  God 

DI  THE  HEARTS  OF    THOSE    WHO   ARE    RAISED  TO   THE    ENJOYMENT   OF   THIS   INHERITANCE. 

1.  A  relative  meetness  expressed  by  "  inheritance."  Our  natural  heirship  is 
forfeited  by  sin.  Eedemption  has  brought  it  back ;  but  we  become  heirs  by 
becoming  children,  and  we  are  made  children  by  the  faith  which  secures  for  us  the 
blessing  of  justification.  Till  this  there  is  no  meetness  of  relation.  2.  Personal 
meetness.  "Saints."  There  is  a  correspondence  between  a  hallowed  state  and 
heaven.  A  man  who  has  a  distaste  for  God's  service  cannot  enjoy  the  worship  day 
and  night  for  ever.  The  man  who  shuns  the  light  of  truth  could  not  bear  the 
eternal  light  of  God's  countenance.  The  lover  of  pleasure  could  not  relish  its 
spiritual  juys.  3.  This  meetness  is  the  work  of  Ood.  4.  Give  thanks  to  Him  for 
it  in  others  and  in  yourself.  (R.  Watson.)  Meetness  for  heaven: — I.  Thk 
MEETNESS.  The  Subject  excludes  natural  meetness :  the  only  natural  meetness 
man  has  is  for  hell,  for  the  sinner  has  in  him  all  the  elements  of  it.  Meetness  for 
heaven  refers — 1.  To  the  renewal  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Heaven  is  the  abode  of  the 
holy,  and  man  must  be  partaker  of  a  nature  which  corresponds  with  the  purity  and 
enjoyment  of  heaven  (Eph.  v.  5 ;  Rev.  xxi.  27  ;  John  iii,  3).  2.  To  the  atoning 
work  of  Jesus.  The  meetness  of  the  title,  justification  by  faith.  3.  To  the  adoption 
of  the  believer.  God  has  made  him  a  son,  and  so  an  heir.  4.  To  all  Ood's 
disciplinary  dealings  with  His  people  which  are  to  meeten  them  for  heaven.  U. 
The  INHERITANCE,  1.  Hcavcu  is  our  inheritance.  (1)  For  which  we  are  destined 
(Eph.  i.  11) ;  (2)  which  has  been  purchased  by  Christ  (Heb.  ix.  15);  (3)  which  is 
*'  incorruptible,"  <fec.  (1  Pet.  i.  4) ;  (4)  and  of  which  we  have  the  earnest  here. 
(5)  Its  vastness  and  ilUmitability  is  unfolded  in  Rev.  xxi.  7.  2.  Whose  this  inheri- 
tance is.  (1)  Who  are  the  saints  7  Fanatics,  says  the  world ;  the  baptized,  say  the 
Traotarians ;  the  Lord's  holy  ones,  says  the  Bible,  washed  in  Christ's  blood,  renewed 
by  and  possessing  God's  Spirit.  (2)  They  are  saints  in  light,  which  may  refer — (a)  to 
themselves  as  children  of  the  light,  who  have  the  light  of  truth  and  holiness  with- 
out which  intellectual  or  moral  excellence  is  vain ;  (6)  or  to  the  glorified  saints  in 
their  present  abode,  which  is  the  dwelling  of  Him  who  is  "  Light,  and  no  darkness 
at  all,"  the  place  of  perfect  purity  and  knowledge  of  which  light  is  the  symbol 
(Isa.  Ix.  19  I  Rev.  xxii.  5,  xxi.  23).  3.  The  saints  are  "  partakers  "  of  this  inheri- 
tance. They  have  it  already  with  all  the  saints  of  God,  in  foretaste  and  antepast. 
m.  The  PRECEPT  based  upon  the  subject.  "  Giving  thanks."  1.  To  whom  the 
grateful  acknowledgment  is  made — "  the  Father."  Heaven  is  the  Father's  gift, 
2.  On  what  grounds.  (1)  The  provision  of  a  Saviour.  (2)  The  enjoying  of  the  pre. 
paring  Spirit.  (3)  The  prepared  inheritance.  (4)  The  upholding  power  which  brings 
UB  safely  to  the  inheritance.    Conclusion :  1.  Cultivate  an  habitual,  growing  meet- 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  t, 

ness.  Be  not  satisfied  with  present  attainments.  2.  Look  upon  all  the  Lord'fi. 
covenant  dealings  with  you  as  only  preparatory  to  your  approaching  emancipation 
from  all  sin  and  sorrow.  3.  Let  the  subject  cheer  you  in  bereavement.  (0. 
Winslow,  D.D.)  Meetness  for  the  saintly  inheritance : — The  Epistle  has  been 
hitherto  occupied  with  prefatory  observations.  Here  Paul  enters  upon  his  principal 
theme.  I.  The  opulent  inheritance  provided  for  the  good.  1.  It  is  a  present 
and  prospective  possession.  (1)  The  saints  even  now  "  walk  in  the  light  as  He  ia 
in  the  light."  They  have  a  measure  of  knowledge,  but  it  is  dimmed  by  macy 
obscurities :  of  purity,  but  it  is  surrounded  with  imperfections  :  of  joy,  but  it  ia 
moderated  by  sorrows.  The  prospective  knowledge  shall  be  unclouded,  parity 
unsullied,  joy  uninterrupted.  2.  It  is  a  possession  provided  for  the  good.  Not 
for  the  impenitent,  the  worldly.  It  is  an  inheritance  where  only  the  pure  in  heart 
can  dwell.  3.  It  is  a  possession  freely  given.  The  legal  heir  has  no  need  to  work 
for  his  inheritance :  he  enters  by  right  of  succession,  or  testatorial  bequest.  The 
saint  enters  upon  his  inheritance  of  righteousness,  not  by  natural  descent,  or  self- 
constitnted  right.      II.  The  special  meetness  for  the  inheritance.      This  is— 

1.  Absolutely  necessary.  A  monarch  can  raise  the  barest  slave  to  a  dukedom,  but  h& 
cannot  give  him  fitness  for  its  duties.  He  may  change  his  state,  but  cannot  change 
his  nature.  2.  Consists  in  the  loving  conformity  of  the  human  will  to  the  Divine. 
The  celestial  spirits  find  their  highest  glory  and  blessedness  in  this.  3.  Is  a  Divine 
work.  (1)  God  provides  the  inheritance,  gives  the  title,  confers  the  moral  fitness. 
None  but  the  Almighty  Father  could  do  this.  III.  The  ddtt  wb  owe  to  th» 
generous  Donor.  Gratitude.  1.  Practical.  2.  Fervent.  3.  Constant.  (G.  Barlow.) 
Meetness  for  the  inheritance  of  the  mints  in  light: — 1.  It  is  the  special  glory  of  the 
gospel  that  it  first  distinctly  enlarged  the  prospects  of  men  into  the  depths  of 
eternity ;  it  first  authoritatively  taught  us  that  the  present  existence  is  the  meanest 
portion  of  our  inheritance,  and  thus  changed  for  ever  the  whole  science  of  life. 

2.  Life  for  eternity  is  already  begun  :  from  the  hour  of  our  regeneration  we  are 
introduced  into  the  spiritual  world.  The  Christian's  life  of  heavenliness  is  the 
first  stage  of  heaven.  The  doctrine  of  the  New  Testament  is  not  that  men  now 
wholly  mortal,  shall  hereafter,  in  reward  of  fidelity,  be  miraculously  raised  to  die 
no  more ;  but  that  "  he  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  There  is  a  power  now  within 
the  Christian  of  which  his  celestial  immortality  shall  be  the  proper  fruit.  3. 
Therefore  men  must  not  only  win  heaven  as  a  reward,  but  be  suited  to  it  as  a  life. 
Men  may  reckon  on  easy  pardon,  but  they  cannot  suppress  dismay  if  they  reflect 
that  pardon  itself,  were  it  possible,  would  be  vain  as  long  as  the  pardoned  sinner 
were  unfit  for  the  society  of  heaven.  Such  a  pardon  could  but  aggravate  the  keen 
sense  of  hopeless,  irremediable  misery.  What  we  are  to  be  in  heaven  we  must  be 
on  earth.  4.  We  are  under  a  course  of  education  for  heaven ;  the  life  of  heaven 
then  must  be  practised  on  earth,  if  the  child  of  God  would  learn  his  profession  for 
eternity.  Heaven  is  the  model  on  which  we  are  to  reconstruct  our  nature.  The 
inheritance  for  which  we  are  made  meet  is  to  determine  and  regulate  the  whole 
course  of  our  present  existence.  5.  But  here  arises  a  difficulty.  We  know  so  little 
of  this  pattern.  Then  we  know  little  of  the  details — the  abodes  in  which  we  shall 
dwell,  the  companions  with  whom  we  shall  rejoice,  the  bodies  we  shall  wear ;  but 
the  principles  of  that  life,  these  are  clear  and  undisputable,  as  e.g.,  that  the  business 
and  beatitude  of  heaven  must  consist  in  conformity  to  the  will  of  God.  6.  This, 
then,  the  great  characteristic  of  heaven,  must  be  equally  the  law  of  the  earth.  The 
habit  must  be  ours,  not  merely  of  acting  from  higher  principles  than  self-interest  or 
passion,  but  of  acting  exclusively  from  obedience  to  the  known  appointment  of 
God.  AH  other  motives,  however  attractive,  are  of  the  earth  earthy.  7.  Here, 
then,  is  the  charge  that  religion  brings  against  the  world.  It  is  not  that  the  world 
does  not  abound  in  manifestations  of  moral  as  well  as  physical  beauty,  but  that  all 
that  is  excellent  in  the  natural  man  is  excellent  irrespective  of  his  God.  No  virtue 
but  godliness  ;  no  excellence  but  that  which  tends  to  God;  no  rule  of  life  but  that 
which  trains  for  God  can  ever  be  the  virtue,  or  affection,  or  rule  fitted  for  a  creature 
travelling  to  God's  own  eternity.  8.  Contrast,  then,  this  sole  abiding  principle  of 
eternal  happiness  with  the  life  around  us.  We  shall  exclude  open  and  allowed 
vice,  and  come  among  the  amiabilities  and  noblenesses  of  our  social  life.  That  the 
adulterer  and  the  thief  should  disclaim  subjection  to  God  is  not  surprising;  but 
the  depth  and  universality  of  the  rebellion  is  seen  in  the  vast  spheres  of  human 
excellence  into  which  God  never  enters  ;  in  the  amiability  which  loves  all  but  God ; 
in  the  self-devotion  that  never  surrenders  one  gratification  for  the  sake  of  God. 
How  conspicuously  is  this  often  seen  in  family  affection.    9.  How,  then,  shall  thia 


CHAP.  1.1  COLOSSIANS.  41 

meetness  be  wrought  ?  Solely  by  cultivating  affections  that  rest  in  heaven  and 
God,  and  by  devoting  our  earthly  affections  not  merely  as  their  own  instinctive 
impulses  lead,  but  also  in  felt  and  constant  conformity  to  His  appointment.  10. 
Faith,  hope,  and  love  are  the  instruments  which,  gradually  uniting  the  heart  to  the 
spiritual  world  and  its  Lord,  separate  it  from  earth,  predispose  it  for  heaven,  win 
the  will  to  His  service,  and  train  the  soul  for  the  fellowship  and  heritage  of  the 
paints.  These  are  the  habits  that  must  be  attained,  or  heaven  is  hopeless.  11. 
What  are  the  specific  functions  of  these  preparatory  graces.  (1)  Faith  is  the  realizing 
power.  Its  office  is  to  make  us  see  the  unseen,  to  be  the  visual  sense  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  Beholding  God  even  now  around  us,  it  prepares  for  heaven,  by  already 
habituating  to  the  presence  of  heaven's  Master.  (2)  Hope  is  the  consoling  and 
fortifying  power.  She  prepares  for  heaven  by  maintaining  the  constant  desire  and 
expectation  of  its  promised  enjoyments.  (3)  But  love  is  the  uniting  power,  the 
perfection  of  all.  In  its  highest  degrees  it  is  not  so  much  preparation  for  heaven 
as  heaven  already  begun  ;  for  we  know  of  nothing  more  perfect  in  heaven  than  the 
fulness  of  loving  God.  Hence  "  Love  never  faileth."  It  makes  the  commandments 
"  not  grievous  "  here,  and  thus  prepares  for  a  state  where  their  fulfilment  shall  be 
supreme  delight.  (W.  A.  Butler,  M.A.)  Tlit  joy  of  light: — In  one  of  our 
northern  coal-pits  there  was  a  little  boy  employed  in  a  lonely  and  dangerous  part 
of  the  mine.  One  day  a  visitor  to  the  coal-pit  asked  the  boy  about  his  work,  and 
the  child  answered,  "Yes,  it  is  very  lonely  here,  but  I  pick  up  the  little  bits  of 
candle  thrown  away  by  the  colliers,  and  join  them  together,  and  when  I  get  a  light 
I  sing."  (H.  J.  W.  Brixton,  M.A.)  Meetness  for  heaven: — A  pious  military 
officer  desirous  to  ascertain  what  were  the  real  feelings  and  views  of  a  dying 
soldier,  whom  he  had  been  instrumental  in  bringing  to  the  truth,  said,  "  WilUam, 
I  am  going  to  ask  you  a  strange  question.  Suppose  you  could  carry  your  sins  with 
you  to  heaven,  would  that  satisfy  you  7  "  The  poor  dying  lad  replied,  with  a 
most  affecting  smile,  "  Why,  sir,  what  sort  of  a  heaven  would  that  be  to  me  ?  It 
would  be  just  like  a  pig  in  a  parlour."  "I  need  not  add,"  continues  the  ofiScer, 
"  that  he  was  panting  after  a  heaven  of  holiness,  and  was  convinced  that  if  he 
died  in  sin  he  would  be  quite  out  of  his  element  in  a  heaven  of  purity.  {W. 
Baxendale.)  Meetness  for  the  inheritance  : — We  are  so  far  meet  that  we  are  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved,  adopted  into  the  family,  and  fitted  by  Divine  approbation  to 
dwell  with  the  saints  in  light.  There  is  a  woman  chosen  to  be  a  bride ;  she  is  fitted  to 
be  married,  fitted  to  enter  into  the  honourable  state  and  condition  of  matrimony ; 
but  at  present  she  has  not  on  the  bridal  garment,  she  is  not  like  the  bride 
adorned  for  her  husband.  You  do  not  see  her  yet  robed  in  her  elegant  attire,  with 
her  ornaments  upon  her,  but  you  know  she  is  fitted  to  be  a  bride,  she  is  received 
and  welcomed  as  such  in  the  family  of  her  destination.  So  Christ  has  chosen  Hia 
Church  to  be  married  to  Him  ;  she  has  not  yet  put  on  her  bridal  garment,  and  all 
that  beautiful  array  in  which  she  shall  stand  before  the  Father's  throne,  but  not- 
withstanding, there  is  such  a  fitness  in  her  to  be  the  bride  of  Christ,  when  she  shall 
have  bathed  herself  for  a  little  while,  and  lain  for  a  little  while  in  the  bed  of  spices 
— there  is  such  a  fitness  in  her  character,  such  a  grace-given  adaptation  in  her  to 
become  the  royal  bride  of  her  glorious  Lord,  and  to  become  a  partaker  of  the  enjoy- 
ments of  bliss — that  it  may  be  said  of  the  Church  as  a  whole,  and  of  every  member 
of  it,  that  they  are  "  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  The  Greek 
word,  moreover,  bears  some  such  meaning  as  this,  though  I  cannot  give  the  exact 
idiom,  it  is  always  difficult  when  a  word  is  not  used  often.  This  word  is  only  used 
twice,  that  I  am  aware  of,  in  the  New  Testament.  The  word  may  be  employed  fo^ 
"suitable,"  or,  I  think,  "sufficient."  "He  hath  made  us  meet" — sufficient — "to 
be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  But  I  cannot  give  my  idea 
without  borrowing  another  figure.  When  a  ^hild  is  bom,  it  is  at  once  endowed 
with  all  the  faculties  of  humanity.  If  those  powers  are  awanting  at  first,  they  will 
not  come  afterwards.  It  has  eyes,  it  has  hands,  it  has  feet,  and  all  its  physical 
organs.  These  of  course  are  as  it  were  in  embryo.  The  senses  though  perfect  at 
first,  must  be  gradually  developed,  and  the  understanding  gradually  matured.  It 
can  see  but  little,  it  cannot  discern  distances  ;  it  can  hear,  but  it  cannot  hear  dis- 
tinctly enough  at  first  to  know  from  what  direction  the  sound  comes;  but  you 
never  find  a  new  kg,  a  new  arm,  a  new  eye,  or  a  new  ear  growing  on  that  child. 
Each  of  these  powers  will  expand  and  enlarge,  but  still  there  is  the  whole  man 
there  at  first,  and  the  child  is  sufficient  for  a  man.  Let  but  God  in  His  infinite 
providence  cause  it  to  feed,  and  give  it  strength  and  increase,  it  has  sufficient  for 
manhood.     It  does  not  want  either  arm  or  leg,  nose  or  ear ;  yoa  cannot  make  it 


4fl  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  v 

grow  a  new  member ;  nor  does  it  require  a  new  member  either ;  all  are  there.    la 
like  manner,  the  moment  a  man  is  regenerated,  there  is  every  faculty  in  his  new 
creation  that  there  shall  be,  even  when  he  gets  to  heaven.     It  only  needs  to  be  de- 
veloped and  brought  out :  he  will  not  have  a  new  power,  he  will  not  have  a  new  grace, 
he  will  have  those  which  he  had  before,  developed  and  brought  out.    Just  as  we  are 
told  by  the  careful  observer,  that  in  the  acorn  there  is  in  embryo  every  root  and 
every  bough  and  every  leaf  of  the  future  tree,  which  only  requires  to  be  developed 
and  brought  out  in  their  fulness  ;  so,  in  the  true  believer,  there  is  a  sufficiency  or 
meetnesB  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.    All  that  he  requires  is,  not  that 
a  new  thing  should  be  implanted,  but  that  which  God  has  put  there  in  the  moment 
of  regeneration,  shall  be  cherished  and  nurtured,  and  made  to  grow  and  increase, 
till  it  comes  unto  perfection  and  he  enters  into  "  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light."    (C  H.  Spurgeon,)        Unmeettiess  for  the  inheritance: — I  knew  a  man  who 
had  amassed  great  wealth ;  but  had  no  children  to  inherit  it.     Smitten,  however, 
with  the  strange  propensity  to  found  a  house,  he  left  his  riches  to  a  distant  relative. 
His  successor  found  himself  suddenly  raised  from  poverty  to  affluence,  and  thrown 
into  a  position  he  had  not  been  trained  to  fill.   He  was  oast  into  the  society  of  those 
to  whose  tastes  and  habits  and  accomplishments  he  was  an  utter  and  awkward 
stranger.    Did  many  envy  this  child  of  fortune  ?    They  might  have  spared  their 
envy.     Left  in  his  original  obscurity  he  had  been  a  happy  peasant,  whistling  hia 
way  home  from  the  plough  to  a  thatched  cottage,  or  on  winter  nights,  around  the 
blazing  faggots,  laughing  loud  and  merry  among  unpolished  boors.     Child  of  mis- 
fortune 1     He  buried  his  happiness  in  the  grave  of  his  benefactor.      Neither 
qualified  by  nature  nor  fitted  by  education  for  his  position,  he  was  separated  from  hia 
old,  only  to  be  despised  by  his  new,  associates.     And  how  bitterly  was  he  disap- 
pointed to  find  that,  in  exchanging  poverty  for  opulence,  daily  toil  for  luxurious 
indolence,  humble  friends  for  more  distinguished  companions,  a  hard  bed  for  one 
of  down,  this  turn  in  his  fortunes  had  fiung  him  on  a  couch,  not  of  roses,  but  of 
thorns  1     In  his  case,  the  hopes  of  the  living  and  the  intentions  of  the  dead  wer« 
alike  frustrated.    The  prize  had  proved  a  blank ;  a  necessary  result  of  this  fatal 
oversight,  that  the  heir  had  not  been  made  meet  for  the  inheritance.    Is  such 
training  needful  for  an  earthly  estate  ?    How  much  more  for  heaven.    (T.  Guthrie, 
D.D.)        The  saints  in  light : — Light  1     The  shadows  of  a  temporary  dispensation 
shall  have  passed  away,  and  the  whole  plan  of  the  Creator's  dealings  be  spread 
before  the  admiring  saints,  one  blaze  of   beauty.    Light  1    The  discrepancies  of 
Providence,  the  seeming  contradictions  in  God's  government  of  the  universe,  the 
obscurities  which  are  caused  by  knowing  only  in  part — all  this  shall  have  been 
removed,  and  no  dark  spot  be  left  behind.    Light !    It  shall  not  be  the  brilliancy 
of  the  material  son  which  makes  the  future  landscape  indescribably  radiant :  "  the 
city  hath  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon,  to  shine  in  it,  for  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  doth  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof."    Light  I     The  sainta 
themselves  purged  from  all  that  is  corruptible,  the  purified  soul  in  the  imperishable 
body,  shall  be  wondrously  luminous.    Even  here,  as  St.  Paul  expresses  it,  they 
'*  shine  as  lights  in  the  world,"  but  hereafter,  perfectly  conformed  to  the  image  of 
Christ,  of  whom  we  are  told  that  at  His  transfiguration,  which  exhibited  what 
glorified  humanity  shall  be,  "  His  face  did  shine  as  the  sun,  and  His  raiment  was  white 
as  the  light,"  they  shall  be  conspicuous  among  all  orders  of  intelligence  transformed 
into  glowing,  beaming  likenesses  of  Him  whose  irradiations  occupy  the  universe. 
"Light,"  said  the  Psalmist,  "  ia  sown  for  the  righteous;  "  and  the  seeds,  we  may 
add,  of  the  glorious  harvest  are  deposited  in  our  souls  whilst  working  out  our  own 
salvation.    Holiness  is  the  moral  light,  and  the  germ  of  heavenly  purity  is  the 
element  of  heavenly  splendour.     Be  it  now,  then,  our  endeavour  to  vr&Vk  as  children 
of  light,  having  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness.     There  must 
be — we  press  this  again  and  again  on  your  attention — there  must  be  a  corres- 
pondence between  the  scene  and  the  creature.     The  inheritance  is  one  of  light ; 
therefore  the  heir  also,  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  must  be  "light  in  the  Lord." 
We  will  aim,  then,  God  being  our  help,  so  to  improve  the  state  of  discipline,  thai 
casting  off  the  ignorance  and  corruption  in  which  we  are  naturally  enveloped,  we 
may  at  length  be  placed  with  those  righteous  men  of  whom  Christ  said,  "  They 
shall  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father."      (H.  Melvill,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  Who  hath  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  darkness. — Tht  great 
moral  translation: — I.  Involves  oub  enfranchisement  feom  a  statb  or  dabe  cap- 
tivity.    1.  The  unrenewed  are  in  a  realm  of  moral  darkness.   (1)  Darkness  denotefl 


CHAP,  t]  COLOSSIANS.  43 

ignorance — moral  blindness  about  the  great  mysteries  of  being,  of  sin  and  safifering, 
the  deep  significance  of  life.  It  is  possible  to  know  much  about  religion,  to  hold 
religious  ideas  at  second  hand  ;  yet  be  totally  in  the  dark  as  to  the  experience  of 
those  ideas.  (2)  Darkness  denotes  danger  and  misery.  2.  In  this  realm  the  unre- 
newed are  held  in  captivity.  3.  From  this  realm  God  graciously  liberates.  "  Who 
bath  delivered  us."  (1)  For  the  slaves  of  sin  there  ia  no  help  but  in  God.  It  is 
the  nature  of  sin  to  incapacitate  its  victim  for  self-enfranchisement.  He  is  unwilling 
to  be  free.  (2)  The  word  "  deliver  "  means  to  snatch,  or  rescue  from  danger,  even 
though  the  person  seized  may  at  first  be  unwilling  to  escape,  as  Lot  from  Sodom. 
God  does  not  force  the  human  will.  (3)  Our  enfranchisement  may  be  painful.  II. 
Places  ub  in  a.  condition  of  highest  moral  freedom  and  privilege.  1.  We  are 
transferred  to  a  kingdom,  "Hath  translated  us  into  the  kingdom."  Power  detains 
captives ;  a  kingdom  fosters  willing  citizens.  Tyranny  has  no  law  but  the  will  of 
a  despot ;  a  kingdom  implies  good  government,  based  on  law.  The  kingdom  of  God 
has  an  earthly  and  heavenly  aspect,  both  of  which  are  governed  by  one  and  the 
same  sceptre.  It  resembles  a  city  divided  by  a  river,  but  both  parts  controlled  by 
the  same  municipal  authority,  and  having  one  common  franchise.  There  is  no 
middle  state  between  the  power  of  darkness  and  the  kingdom  of  grace  :  all  who 
breathe  are  either  in  the  one  or  the  other.  2.  We  are  placed  under  the  rule  of  a 
beneficent  and  glorious  King.  "  The  Son  of  His  love."  The  manifestation  of 
Christ  is  the  manifestation  of  Divine  love  (1  John  iv.  9).  The  kingdom  into  which 
believers  are  translated  is  founded  on  love  :  its  entire  government  is  carried  on  by 
love.  The  acts  of  suffering  and  death,  by  which  Christ  won  his  kingly  dignity,  were 
revelations  of  love.  Under  such  a  monarch  we  are  sure  of  protection,  guidance, 
support,  and  final  victory.  III.  Is  effected  by  "  redemption."  1.  The  means. 
"Through  His  blood,"     2.  The  effects.     3.  The  Author.     (G.  Barlow.)  The 

great  spiritual  change : — I.  The  momentous  change.  1.  Is  from  the  power  of 
darkness.  Darkness  is  thus  personified  as  a  monarch,  not  a  mere  force.  Under 
this  the  Colossians  were  living  till  they  received  the  gospel.  Neither  the  light  of 
their  Gentile  philosophy  nor  the  fitful  course  of  their  culture  could  rescue  them. 
The  very  light  that  was  in  them  was  darkness.  This  is  the  condition  of  all  men 
naturally.  Darkness  is — (1)  Ignorance.  Men  are  ignorant  of  God  and  themselves 
(1  Cor.  ii.  14).  They  may  learn  lessons  of  God's  power  and  wisdom  in  creation, 
admire  the  hterature  and  poetry  of  revelation,  and  believe  in  a  future  state ;  but 
they  have  no  true  knowledge  of  their  moral  condition,  of  God  as  their  Father, 
Christ  as  their  Saviour,  or  of  the  blessedness  of  holiness.  (2)  It  leads  to  error.  In 
the  absence  of  light  the  traveller  mistakes  his  way.  Men  think  they  are  in  the  road 
to  heaven  as  they  wander  up  and  down  the  bye-paths  of  religious  formality,  of  their 
own  resolutions,  or  of  some  superstition.  Deluded  by  this  darkness  they  make  no 
effort  to  live  for  God  and  work  out  their  own  salvation.  (3)  Such  a  condition  must 
be  one  of  danger.  The  belated  traveller  cannot  distinguish  friend  from  foe,  land  from 
water.  Unconscious  of  peril,  and  perhaps  thinking  of  home,  he  draws  near  a  preci- 
pice, falls  over  and  is  killed.  (4)  Darkness  promotes  discomfort  and  fear.  There 
u  A  gloomy  uncertainty  and  dread  of  the  future,  a  bondage  of  the  soul  through  the 
fear  of  death.  He  cannot  be  happy  who  knows  not  God  as  his  Friend,  and  has  no 
meetness  for  the  future.  2.  The  process  of  deliverance.  (1)  It  may  involve  not  a 
little  that  is  painful.  To  a  man  soundly  asleep  the  sudden  cry  of  "  fire  "  ii  not 
welcome.  So  this  deliverance  involves  a  distressing  inward  struggle  and  the  abandon- 
ment of  many  a  pleasure.  (2)  Whither  is  the  delivered  soul  brought  ?  He  ia  not 
rescued  and  left  to  wander  in  search  of  a  home,  but  has  a  title  and  guidance  to  the 
kingdom  of  God's  Son.  (a)  This  kingdom  is  so  called  because  it  belongs  to  Him  by 
right,  who  founded,  formed,  and  rules  over  it.  (fc)  Something  of  its  character 
may  be  learned  from  His  :  the  Son  of  God's  love  (John  iii.  35).  Who  can  tell  the 
peace  and  blessedness  of  those  subjects  on  whom  God's  boundless  love  rests.  3. 
This  dehverance  is  the  most  important  and  wonderful  event  in  a  man's  history.  It 
is  a  present  privilege  and  prepares  for,  and  is  a  pledge  of  the  future  inheritance.  4. 
It  is  exclusively  the  work  of  God.  II.  The  Divine  means  foe  the  accomplishment 
or  THIS  end.  1,  A  putting  forth  of  power  on  the  part  ol  the  deliverer  manifested 
by  the  mediation  of  Christ.  Although  the  words,  "  through  His  blood,"  are  not 
found  in  the  earlier  MSS.,  and  may  have  been  borrowed  from  Eph.  i.  7;  yet  the 
text  involves  their  meaning.  Men  are  sold  under  sin  and  condemned  ;  from  this 
state  deliverance  comes  by  redemption  ;  redemption  implies  a  price  paid  ;  the  ran- 
som is  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  In  His  Cross  there  was  a  vindication  of  God'i 
righteousness  and  power  to  rescue  from  sin  (1  Peter  iii.  18,  ii.  14 ;  Gal.  iii.  13 ; 


«4  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  li 

Eph.  V.  2).     2.  This  redemption  is  **  in  Christ."    His  blood  was  the  ransom,  but 
He  is  the  Redeemer,  and  it  is  only  in  living  union  with  Him  that  we  can  receive  iti 
blessing.     Just  as  we  rest  and  walk  in  Him  have  we  evidence  that  we  are  amongst 
the  redeemed.    3.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  this  redemption  must,  in  effect,  be  the 
raising  of  the  soul  to  obedience  and  purity  (2  Cor.  v.  17).     The  blessing  character- 
istic  of  redemption :  forgiveness.     This — (1)  is  its  first  blessing  (Romans  v,  1).  (2) 
Its  most  urgent  and  momentous  blessing.  (3)  The  most  direct,  flowing  immediately 
from  Christ  and  reaching  us  directly  through  His  expiation.  (4)  The  blessing  which 
opens  the  way  for  all  others.     (J.  Spence,  D.D.)        Bedemption : — L  Who?     Th« 
Father.     And  no  one  else  ought  to,  or  could,  deliver  man,  but  God.    1.  None  other 
ought,  because  (as  Tertullian  observes) "  by  this  act  he  would  forcibly  take  away  from 
the  Cieator  His  own  servant."     For  so  great  is  this  benefit  of  deliverance,  that  it 
binds  us  more  than  the  benefit  of  creation.   2.  But  neither  could  any  other  deliver. 
For  he  must  necessarily  be  stronger  than  the  devil  who  could  wrest  his  prey  from 
him  (Matt.  xii.  29).     But  who  could  overcome  and  bind  this  prince  of  darkness 
except  the  mighty  God  alone  ?    It  was  He,  therefore,  who  plucked  us  from  him. 
II.  Whom,  or  what  soit  of  persons  God  delivered  ?    And  this  consideration  may  be 
twofold.     1.  Of  those  who  were  to  be  delivered.     Previous  to  our  deliverance  we 
were  not  only  diseased  and  weak,  but  opposed  to  our  own  deliverance  (Rom.  v.). 
(1)  Observe  the  immeasurable  love  of  God,  who  would  deliver  such  persons  :  for  no 
one  cares  to  redeem  a  thing  of  no  value.      (2)  The  infinite  power  of  God  who 
delivered  man  in  spite  of  the  devil.     2.  As  to  those  who  have  been  delivered;  after 
that  they  are  faithful  and  holy,  who  before  were  rebels  and  unholy.     "  Us  "  refers 
to  verses  4-6.     Hence  it  is  manifest — (1)  The  dreams  of  carnal  men  of  deliverance 
are  vain.     The  Israelites,  while  serving  Pharaoh  and  lusting  after  the  fleslipots, 
were  not  in  the  enjoyment  of  liberty ;  so  Christians  while  obeying  the  devil  and 
delighting  in  sin  are  not  delivered.     (2)  Hence,  also,  we  infer  for  the  consolation  of 
the  godly  that  they  alone  are  free;  the  ungodly,  although  they  glitter  in  the  eyes  of 
men,  are  slaves.     III.  From  what?     The  power  of  darkness.     1.  From  the  power 
of  the  devil  who  is  the  prince  of  darkness.     We  all  are  born  under  his  kingdom,  so 
that  he  worketh  in  us  according  to  his  own  will.     But  this  prince  of  darkness  is 
bruised  under  the  feet  of  the  faithful  (Rom.  xvi.  20),  to  whom,  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
new  streugth  is  administered  to  trample  upon  this  unclean  spirit.     2.  From  the 
power  of  bin,  which  hath  blinded  the  understanding,  corrupted  the  will,  and  placed 
OS  in  a  condition  of  darkness  both  as  to  knowledge  and  to  spiritual  and  saving 
practice  (Eph.  v.  8;  John  i.  5,  iiit  19).     Now  from  this  darkness  God  has  rescued 
us.     He  pours  in  the  light  of  faith  and  imparts  the  Spirit  of  holiness ;  which  bless- 
ings being  bestowed,  this  power  and  dominion  of  sin  is  dissolved  (Rom.  vi.  14).     3. 
From  the  power  of  hell,  i.e.,  from  the  miseries  and  calamities  which  arise  from  the 
guilt  of  reigning  sin.     From  the  power  of  this  they  are  delivered  by  the  Divine 
mercy  (Rom.  viii.  1).     Observe — (1)  For  instruction.     The  whole  world  is  involved 
in  darkness  under  the  devil,  neither  is  there  a  spark  of  saving  light  before  deUver- 
ance  ;  for  we  are  in  "  the  power  of  darkness."     (2)  For  caution.     The  redeemed 
ought  to  have  no  fellowship  with  the  works  of  darkness  ;  for  they  are  rescued  from 
the  power  of  the  devil  and  of  sin,  and,  therefore,  by  serving  these  they  show  them- 
selves to  be  deserters  (Rom.  xiii.  12).     (3)  For  consolation.  Although  the  godly  are 
often  troubled  yet  they  are  delivered  from  a  misery  compared  with  which  all  external 
evils  are  trifling.     IV.  To  what?      1.    The  nature  of  the  translation.      (1)  The 
word  is  borrowed  from  those  who  plant  colonies  and  compel  persons  to  migrate  to 
inhabit  some  new  region.  So  God  has  translated  us  from  the  kingdom  of  darkness, 
which  is  the  native  soil  of  us  all.    (2)  How  hath  He  translated  us  ?   We  may  under- 
stand that  from  the  context.    God  translates  us  when  He  illuminates  our  hearts  by 
pouring  into  them  faith,  when  He  changes  our  will  by  imparting  grace;  for,  being 
enlightened  and  sanctified,  a  man  is  by  that  very  act  translated  from  the  power  of 
darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  His  Son ;  because  He  cannot  possibly  be  at  the  same 
time  a  citizen  of  two  cities  which  observe  contrary  laws.    Here  observe.  To  be  de- 
livered it  is  not  enough  that  we  be  called  to  this  kingdom,  and  admonished  to 
desert  that  other.    (3)  Therefore  He  is  to  be  regarded  with  the  highest  honour,  for 
BO  colonies  are  accustomed  to  regard  their  founder.    2.  What  is  intended  by  this 
word  kingdom  ?    The  Kingdom  of  God,  Christ,  heaven,    (1)  Is  put  for  the  state  of 
glory  (Matt.  yi.  33;  1  Cor.  vi.  9).   This  the  aaiuts  have  by  right,  and  hope,  but  not 
in  possession.     (2)  For  the  promulgation  and  knowledge  of  the  gospel  (Matt.  xiii. 
11 ;  xxi.  43).    Bat  this  the  saints  have  only  in  common  with  other  professors.     (3) 
For  a  state  of  grace,  remission  of  sins,  renovation,  and  Divine  favour  on  account 


CBAT.  t,]  COLOSSIANS.  4S 

of  Chriet,  the  Mediator  ;  and  for  the  whole  multitude  of  those  who  are  in  this  stata 
(Lake  xviii.  21 ;  Rom.  xiv.  17).  I  deem  this  to  be  the  proper  sense  of  this  expres- 
Bion.  3.  Why  the  apostle  calls  it  the  kingdom  of  the  Son,  and  not  of  heaven, 
or  of  light.  Because — (1)  God  admits  no  one  to  it  except  through  His  Son  as 
Mediator.  He  ia  the  channel  of  grace.  Through  Him  its  streams  flow  to  us,  and 
we  are  planted  in  the  kingdom  (Eph.  i.  3,  8).  (2)  Christ,  the  Mediator,  received  it 
from  the  Father  to  govern  it  to  the  end  of  time  (Luke  xxii.  29).  (3)  Paul  wished  to 
open  the  way  and  make  an  easy  transition  for  discoursing  on  the  person  of  the  Son. 
For  he  immediately  enters  upon  that  doctrine,  which  he  could  not  so  aptly  have 
proceeded  to  uuless  he  had  expressly  named  the  Son.  (4)  Christ  is  rightly  called 
the  Son  of  the  Father's  love,  because  He  hath  the  Father's  whole  and  entire  love 
communicated  to  Him,  even  as  He  had  His  essence.  This  is  a  great  consolation  to 
the  godly  man,  when  he  calls  to  mind  that  he  is  not  merely  a  subject,  but  a  mem- 
ber of  Christ  so  beloved  of  God.  For  hence  he  derives  the  hope  of  obtaining  from 
God  whatever  is  necessary  to  salvation.  (Bp.  Davenant.)  I.  Man  is  now  in 
SOUL  MISERY.  1.  Naturally.  We  are  children  of  wrath  by  nature.  2.  Judiciarily. 
We  are  under  condemnation.  3.  Universally.  Soul  death  hath  passed  over  all 
men.  H.  Man  needs  deliverance.  1.  We  are  sensible  enough  of  bodily  misery, 
but  insensible  to  soul  misery ;  yet  the  former  is  but  to  make  us  sensible  of  the  latter. 
'Tis  God  pulling  the  rope  without  to  make  the  bell  speak  within.  2.  Without  our 
sense  of  the  need  of  deliverance,  that  deliverance  will  never  come.  B.  What  tem- 
poral and  eternal  horrors  are  there  for  the  unsaved.  HI.  Man  mat  be  delivered. 
Christ  "  snatched  "  souls  out  of  darkness  and  danger.  1.  He  moves  strongly  to 
save.  Snatching  speaks  an  act  of  force ;  Christ  overturns  all  that  stands  in  His 
way  when  He  puts  forth  to  deliver  a  souL  2.  He  moves  swiftly  to  save.  Snatching 
notes  swif  c  motion.  There  is  but  a  step  between  hell  and  that  soul  that  is  under 
the  power  of  darkness;  what,  therefore,  is  done  must  be  done  speedily  or  the  soul 
is  lost.  3.  Christ  moves  thoroughly  to  save.  Snatching,  speaks  a  full  assuming  of 
that  which  was  wholly  another's.  That  which  I  snatch  from  my  enemy  in  war  ia 
whoUy  mine  own,  and  Christ,  having  plucked  us  out  of  the  hands  of  Satan,  claims 
as  as  his  own.  4.  Christ  moves  preventiugly.  Snatching  speaks  an  act  unthought 
of,  force  surprising,  the  surprised  dreaming  nothing.  Christ  catcbeth  sinners  in  a 
dead  sleep.  Soldiers  are  sometimes  so  caught ;  the  devil's  soldiers  are  all  so.  5. 
Christ  moves  ravishingly.  This  is  love  smiling,  and  the  soul  ia  taken.  lY.  Thb 
DELIVERED.  1.  Love  the  Redeemer.  2.  Obey  Him.  (N.  Lockyer,  M.A.)  Tlie 
power  of  darknest : — I.  Look  at  the  state  of  nature  and  sin  as  one  of  dabeness. 
Sin  is  as  opposed  to  holiness  as  darkness  is  to  Ught,  and  as  different  from  holinesa 
as  midnight  from  noonday.  Our  state  by  nature  is  one  of  double  darkness.  We 
have  neither  light  nor  sight.  That  we  may  be  saved  we  require  two  things — a 
medium  to  see  by,  anil  eyes  to  see  with ;  the  revelation  of  the  gospel,  and  regeneration 
of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  Christ  as  an  object  for  faith  to  see,  faith  as  an  eye  to  see  Christ. 
As  inhabitants  of  a  Christian  land  we  already  possess  one  of  these.  There  is  fulnesa 
of  hght,  and  yet  multitudes  are  wrecked  and  perish,  and  unless  He,  wbo  gave  light 
to  the  blind,  touch  your  eyes  their  fate  will  be  yours.  There  are  animals  that  are 
born  blind  ;  but  after  a  few  days  their  eyelids  are  unsealed  and  they  are  delivered 
from  the  power  of  darkness.  But  not  ten  years  will  do  for  us  such  friendly  office. 
Not  that  we  shall  be  always  blind.  Eternity  opens  the  darkest  eyes,  but  when  too 
late,  "  He  lift  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torment."  1.  Darkness  is  a  state  of  indolence. 
Night  is  the  proper  period  for  rest.  Yet  in  its  hours  of  darkness  and  repose,  this  city 
presents  no  true  picture  of  our  state  by  natura.  We  see  it  where  a  city  sleeps,  while 
eager  angels  point  Lot's  eyes  to  the  break  of  day,  and  urge  his  tardy  steps  through 
the  doomed  streets  of  Sodom.  Rouse  thee,  then,  and  betake  thee  to  the  Saviour. 
The  plague  of  Egyptian  darkness  is,  perhaps,  the  best  illustration.  ♦'  They  saw  not 
one  another,  neither  rose  any  from  his  place  for  three  days."  Many  a  man  has  not 
risen  from  his  place  for  ten  times  three  years  and  more.  He  is  no  nearer  heaven 
than  he  was  long,  long  ago.  "  Give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election 
sore."  2.  Darkness  is  a  state  of  ignorance.  Ugliness  and  beauty,  friend  and  foe, 
are  all  one  in  the  dark,  and  so  are  the  solid  ground  and  the  yawning  precipice. 
Many  a  gallant  ship  has  perished  in  a  fog,  and  many  a  sinner  in  guilty  ignorance. 
The  greatest  of  mistakes  is  to  miss  the  path  of  heaven,  and  yet  how  many,  turning 
from  Christ,  are  missing  it  ?  Some  think  that  their  charities  and  duties  will  save 
them ;  others  a  routine  of  outward  services ;  others  that  they  may  go  on  a  little 
longer  in  sin  and  then  turn.  3.  Darkness  is  a  state  of  danger.  (1)  As  locks  and 
bars  prove  neither  Ufe  nor  property  is  safe  at  night.  The  provvhng  thief,  the  hiding 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

assassin,  the  gaudy  tempter  are  but  types  of  the  great  enemy  who  takes  advantage 
of  spiritual  darkness  to  ruin  sinners.  (2)  Such  danger  is  there  in  darkuess  that 
people  have  perishe'd  almost  at  their  own  doors  :  and  many  die  at  the  gate  of  salva- 
tion, and  by  the  very  door  of  heaven  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).  (3J  In  respect  of  its  power  over 
men  what  can  be  compared  to  mental,  moral,  and  spiritual  darkness?  (a)  Look  at 
Popery  1  She  immures  her  votaries  in  a  gloomier  dungeon  than  ever  held  her 
victims.  God  sends  them  His  blessed  Word,  but  they  dare  not  open  it ;  and,  greatest 
triumph  of  darkness,  they  refuse  instruction.  "If  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be  dark- 
ness, how  great  is  that  darkuess?  "  (6)  But  how  many  among  ourselves  lie  under  the 
delusion  that  though  the  happiness  they  seek  in  the  world  has  eluded  their  grasp^  they 
will  yet  embrace  the  mocking  phantom  !  How  many  are  putting  away  the  claims  ol 
Christ  and  tbeir  souls  to  a  more  convenient  season  ?  Many  fancy  themselves  safe 
who  are  ready  to  perish.  II.  Even  God's  people  remain  in  more  or  less  darkness, 
60  LONO  AS  THET  ARE  HERE.  1.  They  may  be  in  darkness  through  ignorance.  (1) 
Having  abandoned  the  works  of  darkness,  and  "  become  children  of  light,"  yet  all 
do  not  enjoy  the  same  measure  of  light,  nor  possess  eqaal  powers  of  sight ;  henoe 
those  conflicting  views  which  have  separated  brother  from  brother.  (2)  While  some 
saints  enjoy  a  clear  assurance  of  their  salvation,  others  pass  their  days  in 
despondency.  By  the  help  of  God's  Word,  their  compass,  they  succeed  in  steering 
their  way  to  heaven,  but  it  is  over  a  troubled  sea,  and  under  a  cloudy  sky.  2.  They 
may  be  in  darkness  through  sin.  So  long  as  you  walk  in  the  path  of  God's  com- 
mandments you  walk  in  the  light ;  but  in  turning  aside  from  that  we  have  with- 
drawn from  it.  He  that  descends  into  a  pit  leaves  the  light,  not  the  light  him. 
And  the  deeper  the  saint  sinks  in  sin,  the  darker  it  grows.  God  will  not  smile  on 
His  child  sinning;  and  that  which  would  befall  our  world  were  the  sun  withdrawn 
befalls  his  soul ;  a  chilling  cold  follows  on  the  darkness,  and  but  for  restoring  grace 
death  would  ensue.  3.  They  may  be  in  more  or  less  darkness  as  to  their  spiritual 
state.  It  is  easy  to  account  for  such  a  case  as  David's ;  but  there  are  cases  of 
religious  desertion  that  do  not  admit  of  being  thus  explained.  Hear  that  "  My  God, 
My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me."  In  such  cases,  however,  God  does  not  leave 
you  comfortless.  You  may  retain  your  hold  when  you  lose  your  sight  of  Him ;  and 
the  sun,  which  has  struggled  through  clouds  all  day  long,  often  breaks  forth  into 
golden  splendour  at  his  setting.  Not  seldom  have  hopes  that  never  brighten 
life  broken  forth  to  gild  the  departing  hour.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The 
nnconsciousness  of  the  sinner  under  the  power  of  darknest: — If  we  lay  in  some 
darksome  prison  loaden  with  irons,  as  many  as  we  could  bear,  committed  to 
the  custody  of  some  Cerberus-like  keeper  ;  how  would  we  lament  our  hard 
fortune  ?  but  to  lie  in  such  a  condition  wherein  is  no  light  of  knowledge  of  God, 
loaden  with  chains  of  darkness,  hellish  lusts  of  wrath,  covetousness,  pride,  filthi- 
ness,  in  the  custody  of  the  devil  himself,  this  none  bewaileth.  [P.  Bayne,  B.D.) 
The  kingdom  of  Christ : — I.  The  importance  which  Christ  Himself  attaches 
TO  His  kinglt  claims.  1.  There  are  crowns  worn  by  living  monarchs  of  which  it 
would  be  difficult  to  estimate  the  value.  The  price  paid  for  their  jewels  is  the  least 
part  of  it.  They  cost  thousands  of  lives.  And  yet  in  His  esteem,  and  in  odjs, 
Christ's  crown  outweighs  them  all.  He  gave  his  life  for  it.  2.  The  connection 
between  our  Lord's  suilerings  and  these  claims  marks  some  of  the  most  touching 
scenes  in  His  history.  The  people  rejected  Him  in  His  kingly  character.  "  We 
will  not  have  this  King  to  reign  over  us."  The  soldiers  reviled  Him  as  a  King  ;  and 
His  claim  to  be  such  was  the  crime  for  which  He  was  crucified.  It  was  a  kingly 
inscription  that  stood  above  His  dying  head.  3.  Our  Lord  had  the  strongest  tempta- 
tion to  abandon  these  claims  ;  and  if  He  refused  to  give  them  up  in  the  desert  when 
tempted  by  the  devil,  when  He  had  not  a  morsel  to  eat,  and  at  the  bar,  when  to 
have  parted  with  them  would  have  saved  His  life,  He  is  not  likely  to  yield  them 
now.  He  has  now  no  inducement  to  do  so.  A  friendless  prisoner  no  more.  He 
stands  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  claims  to  reign  over  all  whom  He  has  con- 
quered by  love  and  redeemed  by  blood.  4.  Would  God  we  could  live  up  to  that 
truth.  How  often  is  it  forgotten  !  each  of  us  doing  what  is  right  in  his  own  eye«, 
as  though  there  were  no  King  in  Israel.  Oh,  that  we  were  all  as  anxious  to  be 
delivered  from  the  power  as  we  are  to  escape  the  punishment  of  sin.  II.  From 
WHOM  Christ  received  His  Kingdom.  1.  Not  from  the  Jews.  "His  own  received  Him 
not."  Once  they  tried  to  thrust  royal  honours  on  Him  :  afterwards  they  bore  Him 
in  royal  state  to  the  capital,  and  then  they  crucified  Him.  The  only  crown  our 
Lord  gets  from  man  is  woven  with  thorns.  Had  Christ  consented  to  rule  on  their 
terms  the  Jews  would  have  made  Him  king.    Now  to-day  how  many  would  accept 


CHAT.  I.]  COL0S8IANS.  47 

Jesns  if  He  would  allow  them  to  retain  their  sins.  But  He  accepts  not  the  crown 
if  sin  is  to  wield  the  sceptre.  2.  Not  from  His  own  people.  The  sceptre  which  a 
female  hand  sways  so  gracefully  over  the  greatest,  freest  empire  in  the  world  was 
wrenched  two  hundred  years  ago  from  the  grasp  of  a  poor  popish  bigot ;  and  his 
successor  was  borne  to  the  vacant  throne  on  the  arms  of  a  people  who  considered 
crowned  heads  less  sacred  than  their  liberties  and  religion.  Is  it  by  any  such  act 
that  Christ  is  crowned  ?  Is  He  a  popular  monarch  in  this  sense  f  No.  Here  the 
king  elects  His  subjecta,  not  the  subjects  their  king  ;  and  in  that  and  other  senses 
His  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world.  Aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and 
enemies  to  God,  it  is  necessary  that  Christ  should  first  choose  you  as  His  subjects, 
before  you  can  choose  Him  as  your  King.  Christ  reigus  by  conquest,  but  His  reign 
is  not  one  of  terror.  He  reigns  as  He  conquered,  by  love.  Enthroned  in  the  heart 
He  rules  through  the  affections.  3.  From  God.  When  we  look  at  the  two  great 
occasions  on  which  our  Lord  was  crowned,  what  a  contrast  do  they  present.  The 
ecene  of  the  firtst  is  laid  on  earth.  Behold  Him  stripped  of  His  garments,  tied  to 
a  post,  scourged,  clothed  with  an  old  purple  robe,  a  wreath  of  thorns  upon  His 
head.  Some  in  bitter  mockery  bend  the  knee  as  to  a  GsBsar  and  shoot,  "  Hail, 
King  of  the  Jews."  Turn  now  to  the  other.  The  cross  is  vacant,  the  court  empty, 
and  from  the  vine-covered  sides  of  Olivet  a  band  of  men  are  joyfully  descending. 
While  the  disciples  come  down  to  the  world,  Jesus  goes  up  to  heaven  escorted  by  a 
host  of  angels.  His  battle  over,  and  the  great  victory  won,  the  Conqueror  is  now  to 
be  crowned.  Behold  the  scene  as  revealed  by  anticipation  to  the  rapt  eyes  of  Daniel 
(vii.  13).  III.  In  vithat  OHASAOTEn  Jesos  holds  this  kimqdom.  Not  as  God  or  as 
man,  but  as  God-man.  Our  Lord  appeared  in  both  these  characters  at  the  grave  of 
Lazarus.  "  Jesus  wept,"  and  yet  Death  cowers  before  His  eye.  So  on  the  Sea  of 
Galilee,  the  Son  of  Mary  sleeps,  but  raising  His  hand  He  said  to  the  rude  storm, 
"  Peace,  be  still."  Those  two  natures  He  still  retains.  As  both  God  and  man  He 
occupies  the  thrones  of  grace  and  providence — holding  under  His  dominion  all 
worlds  ;  for  in  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,  and  He  has  been 
Bade  Head  over  all  things  to  His  Church.  Simply  as  God  there  oould  be  no  addi- 
tion to  His  possessions,  nor  could  He  receive  them  simply  as  man.  IV.  Seek  an 
INTEREST  IN  THIS  KINGDOM.  Your  eternal  welfare  turns  on  that.  You  must  be 
crowned  in  heaven  or  cursed  in  hell.  1.  Are  you  poor  ?  That  is  no  bar.  "  Blessed 
are  the  poor  in  spirit. "  2.  Are  you  degraded  ?  That  does  not  exclude  you  from  the 
mercy  and  grace  of  God.  3.  Have  you  done  nothing  to  merit  this  kingdom?  Who 
has  ?  4.  Though  you  are  not  saved  by  obedience,  remember  that  submission  to 
Christ's  commandment  is  required  of  all  who  belong  to  His  kingdom.  5.  In  a 
general  sense  we  are  all  His  subjects ;  but  in  a  saving  sense  Christ's  kiugdom  is  not 
without,  but  within.  Unless  the  heart  be  right  with  Christ,  all  is  wrong.  (T.  Guthrie, 
D.  D. )  "His  dear  Son  "  ; — Or  more  correctly,  the  Son  of  His  love.  Christ  is  so 
because — I.  He  is  most  wobthy  of  all  others  to  be  loved.  As  Judas  is  the  '*  Son 
of  Perdition,"  %  e.,  most  worthy  to  be  condemned.      II.  He  was  fbom  EVERLASTDia 

BEGOTTEN   OF   THE    LOVE    OF   HiS    FATHER.      He    is    God'S    "  OWD  "  SoU.      III.    He   IE 

INFINITELY  FILLED  WITH  A  SENSE  OF  His  LOVE.  "  I  always  do  the  things  that  please 
Him."  IV.  It  is  He  by  whom  love  is  derived  into  others.  He  makes  all  other 
«ons  beloved.  They  are  all  loved  because  of  Him  and  through  Him.  He  imparts 
the  lowest  graces.  This  is  all  very  comfortable.  1.  He  is  like  to  speed  anything 
He  requests  the  Father  for  us,  and  will  be  sure  to  preserve  us.  2.  He  is  a  King's 
Bon,  and  infinitely  beloved  of  His  Father.  How  excellent  a  thing,  then,  to  be 
Christ's  member.  (N.  Byjield.)  Religion  a  great  change : — In  an  early  period  of 
the  ministry  of  the  Rev.  John  Wesley,  he  visited  Epworth,  in  Lincolnshire,  where 
his  father  had  formerly  been  minister,  but  found  the  people  greatly  opposed  to  what 
they  considered  his  new  notions.  He  tells  us,  in  his  journal,  that  many  persons 
were  convinced  of  the  importance  of  the  truths  he  delivered  from  the  tombstone  of 
his  father,  some  of  whom  were  conveyed  in  a  waggon  to  a  neighbouring  justice  of 
the  peace,  to  answer  for  the  heresy  with  which  they  were  charged.  Mr.  Wesley 
rode  over  also.  When  the  magistrate  asked  what  these  persons  had  done,  there  was 
a  deep  silence ;  for  that  was  a  point  their  conductors  had  forgotten.  At  length,  one 
of  them  said,  "  Why,  they  pretend  to  be  better  than  other  people;  and,  besides, 
they  pray  from  morning  to  night."  He  asked,  "But  have  they  done  anything 
besides  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir,"  said  an  old  man,  "  An't  please  your  worship,  they  have  oon- 
Tarted  my  wife.  Till  she  went  among  them,  she  had  snob  a  tongue,  and  now  she 
Is  as  qaiet  as  a  lamb."  "  Carry  them  back,  carry  them  back,"  replied  the  jastioe, 
**  «nd  let  them  ooDvert  all  the  scolds  in  the  town. "   (Arvine.)      "  TraiulaUdtis"  :— 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

The  word  is  a  metaphor,  and  the  comparison  is  taken  from  plants  in  nature,  and 
there  are  divers  things  signified  unto  ns  in  the  similitude.  As  trees  are  translated 
ip  winter,  not  in  the  spring,  so  commonly  our  redemption  is  applied  in  the  days  of 
special  affliction  and  sorrow:  and  as  the  plant  is  not  first  fruitful  and  then  trans- 
lated, but  therefore  translated  that  it  may  bear  fruit,  bo  we  are  not  therefore 
redeemed  because  God  was  in  love  with  our  fruits ;  but  therefore  translated  out  of  the 
kingdom  of  dairkness,  that  we  might  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God.  And  as  a  tree  may 
be  truly  removed,  and  new  planted,  and  yet  not  presently  bear  fruit,  so  may  a 
Christian  be  truly  translated,  and  yet  in  the  first  instant  of  his  conversion  he  may 
not  show  forth  all  the  fruit  he  doth  desire.  In  particular,  translating  hath  two 
things  in  it.  I.  Pulling  up.  The  pulling  up  of  a  tree  shadows  out  three  things 
in  the  conversion  of  a  sinner.  1.  Separation  from  the  world :  he  cannot  be  in  Christ 
that  hath  his  heart  rooted  in  the  earth,  and  keeps  his  old  standing  amongst  these 
trees,  the  wicked  of  the  world.  2.  Deliverance  both  from  original  sin  in  the  reign 
of  it  (which  is  the  moisture  of  the  old  earth),  and  also  from  hardness  of  heart  (for 
translating  hath  removing  of  the  mould  and  stones  that  were  about  tbe  root).  3. 
Godly  sorrow  raised  by  the  sense  of  the  strokes  of  the  axe  of  God's  threatenings, 
and  by  the  loss  of  many  sprouts  and  branches  that  were  hidden  in  the  earth.  A 
Christian  cannot  escape  without  sorrow  ;  for  he  hath  many  an  unprofitable  sprout 
of  vanity,  and  sinful  profit  and  pleasure  he  must  part  with.  II.  Thb  betting  of 
THTt  THEE  notes — 1.  Our  engrafting  into  Christ  by  the  Spirit  of  God  through  faith. 
2.  Our  communion  with  the  saints  (the  fruitful  trees  in  God's  orchard),  as  also  it 
notes  our  preservation  by  the  infusion  of  the  sap  of  holy  graces.  Conclusion :  And 
it  is  worthy  to  be  noted  that  He  saith  "translated  us,"  to  teach  us  that  there  remains 
in  man  the  same  nature  after  calling  that  was  before ;  for  our  natures  are  not 
destroyed  in  conversion,  but  translated :  there  remains  the  same  faculties  in  the 
Boul,  and  the  same  powers  in  the  body  ;  yea,  the  constitution  and  complexion  of  man 
is  not  destroyed,  as  the  melancholy  man  doth  not  cease  to  be  so  after  conversion, 
only  the  humour  is  sanctified  unto  a  fitness  for  godly  sorrow,  and  holy  meditation, 
and  the  easy  renouncing  of  the  world,  &o.,  and  the  like  may  be  said  of  other 
humours  in  man's  nature.     (N.  ByMd.)         The  translation: — I.  In  deuvering 

His  PEOPIiB  FBOM  THE  POWEB  OF  DABKNESS,  ChBIST  SAVES  THEM  FBOM  KTEBNAL  PER- 
DITION. People  talk  about  the  mercy  of  God  in  a  way  for  which  they  have  no 
warrant  in  His  Word:  and  ignoring  His  holiness,  justice,  and  truth,  they  lay  this  and 
the  other  vain  hope  as  a  flattering  unction  to  their  sonla.  II.  How  wk  abb  brought 
INTO  Chbist'b  kingdom.  1.  By  translation.  (1)  There  is  a  difference  between 
being  transformed  and  translated.  The  first  describes  a  change  of  character,  the 
second  of  state.  These  changes  are  coincident ;  but  the  transformation  is  not  com- 
plete until  the  time  for  the  second  translation.  Then  those  who  were  translated  at 
conversion  into  a  state  of  grace,  are  translated  at  death  into  a  state  of  glory.  (2) 
It  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  God  is  only  active  and  man  passive  in  this  work. 
You  may  translate  a  man  from  one  earthly  kingdom  into  another  while  he  is  asleep, 
and  at  death  a  man  may  be  translated  to  glory  in  a  state  of  unconsciousness  ;  but 
it  is  not  in  this  placid  way  that  sinners  pass  out  of  darkness  into  Christ's  kingdom. 
2.  This  translation  is  attended  by  sufifering  and  self-denial.  Killed  by  a  blow,  or 
deprived  of  existence  and  consciousness  by  an  opiate,  a  man  may  die  to  natural  life 
unconsciously,  but  never  to  sin.  Hence  those  striking  figures  of  crucifixion.  But 
the  crovra  is  worthy  of  the  cross.  True  there  is  much  more  pain  in  going  to  hell  than 
to  heaven,  and  although  this  were  not,  one  hour  of  glory  will  recompense  all  the 
Bufferings  of  earth.  But  be  assured  that  as  it  is  among  pangs  and  birth  strugglea 
that  a  man  is  born  the  first  time,  so  when  he  is  born  again,  Christ  baptizes  with  fire. 
How  often  has  water  fallen  on  the  calm  brow  of  a  sleeping  infant  who  has  been 
translated  thus  into  the  visible  Church.  But  a  fiery  baptism  1  Can  a  man  take 
fire  into  his  bosom  and  not  be  burned  ?  God  is  a  consuming  fire  to  His  people's 
sins,  and  He  cannot  be  so  without  them  knowing  it.  3.  In  this  translation  God  and 
man  are  active.  Our  Lord  ascended  from  earth  to  heaven  without  effort ;  not  so 
His  people  from  nature  unto  grace.  We  receive  salvation,  still  we  must  put  forth 
our  hand  to  take  it,  as  a  drowning  man  clutches  the  saving  rope.  God  worka  in 
grace  as  in  nature ;  helps  the  man  who  helps  himself.  The  reason  why  men  are  not 
saved  is  not  that  God  hath  forgotten  to  be  gracious,  or  that  the  blood  of  Christ  has 
lost  its  efficacy  ;  but  because  men  will  take  no  pains  to  be  saved.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
The  duty  of  tliankfulness  for  tlie  deliverance : — If  we  had  some  grievous  tyrant  ruling 
over  us,  and  God  should  take  him  away  and  set  a  prince  of  singular  clemency  over 
OS,  should  not  the  blessing  of  aU  the  kingdom  come  upon  Him  for  bo  singular  a 


.  I.]  COLOSSIANS.  49 

change  ?  But  when  He  taketh  the  devil's  iron  yokes  off  our  necka  and  bringeth  na 
under  the  kingdom  of  that  most  meek  King  who  will  not  bruise  a  broken  reed,  nor 
quench  the  smoking  flax,  here  none  in  comparison  is  thankful.  {P.  Bayne,  B.D.) 
God  it  the  Deliverer : — King  Theodore  kept  two  or  three  British  subjects  in  prison, 
and  no  entreaty,  expostulation,  threat,  could  induce  him  to  release  them.  At  last 
the  British  nation  arose  and  said,  *'  At  all  costs  the  prisoners  must  be  released  ;  " 
and  so  (leneral  Napier  led  his  army  along  the  defiles  over  the  mountains.  At  length 
he  oame  to  Magdala,  the  capital  of  Abyssinia.  King  Theodore  was  conquered  and 
slain,  and  so  General  Napier  ascended  to  the  capital.  But  perhaps  some  of  you  do 
not  know  that  as  General  Napier  rode  into  the  city,  those  captives,  bowed  down 
wiUx  their  long  imprisonment,  came  near  to  him,  and  laid  their  hands  upon  his 
horse's  saddle  and  thanked  him  as  their  deliverer.  He  said  to  them,  "  Do  not  thank 
me ;  God  is  the  deliverer.  The  Christians  in  England  have  been  praying  for  you." 
</.  L.  Nye.) 

Vers.  14-20,    In  Whom.     The  deity  of  Christ : — Christ  is  Divine  because — I.  Ha 

HAS  REDEEMED  US.  II.  He  18  THE  CllEATOR  OF  ALL  THINGS.  III.  AlL  THINQ8  WEBB 
CREATED  FOR  HiS  QLORT.       IV.    HiS  ETERNAL  PRE-EXISTENCE.       V.    By  HiM  ALL  TUINOS 

CONSIST.  {B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  Christ  first: — I.  In  the  metaphysical  order.  1. 
He  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God.  2.  It  pleased  God  that  in  Him  should  all 
fulness  (of  the  Divine  attributes)  dwell.  He  is  therefore  the  Mediator  of  the  know- 
ledge of  God.  II.  In  the  physical  order.  The  first  thesis  determined  the  relation 
of  Christ  to  God;  this  establishes  His  relation  to  Nature.  1.  He  is  before  all  things, 
the  firstborn  (heir)  of  all  creation.  2.  He  is  the  Author  of  all  that  exists.  Con- 
eequently  He  is  the  Mediator  of  existence  or  natural  life.  III.  In  the  theological 
ORDER,  which,  as  does  the  following,  refers  to  His  relations  with  men.  1.  He  is  the 
Redeemer.  2.  The  reconciler.  Thus  He  is  the  Mediator  of  the  restoration  of  the 
normal  relation  of  man  to  God.  IV.  In  the  moral  ordeb.  He  is  the  head  of  the 
spiritual  body — the  Church — and  therefore  is  the  Mediator  of  the  new  life  or  the 
spiritual  creation.  V.  In  the  apocalyptic  order,  i.e.,  of  the  order  of  the  things  to 
oome.  He  has  died,  as  all  men  die,  but  He  has  also  risen,  and  in  that  He  has  taken 
precedence  of  all,  and  His  own  will  follow  Him.  Consequently  He  is  the  Mediator 
of  life  etemaL  (Professor  Reust.)  Jesiu  Christ  the  end  of  the  creation : — (text  in 
oonjanction  with  Eph.  i.  9-10;  iii.  9-11.)  I.  Statement.  1.  The  creation  looked 
forward  to  the  Christ  from  the  beginning.  Without  Him  for  its  goal  it  were  pur- 
poseless.  Not  that  he  was  latent  in  nature  to  be  evolved,  but  it  was  the  plan  of 
creation  that  it  should  reach  its  consummation  in  Him.  2.  In  Him  the  universe 
subsists,  is  banded  togf'ther  because  it  completes  itself  in  Him.  Without  Him  it 
would  disintegrate  and  be  a  chaos  instead  of  a  cosmos.  3.  Although  sin  has  dis- 
turbed the  scheme  of  things  and  would  wreck  all,  the  original  plan  holds  in  Christ. 
The  injury  will  be  repaired  and  the  universe  attain  its  end.  II.  Plan  or  creation. 
1.  Matter  is  brought  into  being  (Gen.  i.  1),  and  is  rudimental  (Gen.  i.  2).  The 
Holy  Ghost  whose  province  is  evolution  and  organization  broods  over  the  elemental 
abyss.  At  length  light  becomes  with,  doubtless,  its  kindred  agents,  heat,  electricity. 
Processes  go  on,  and  the  atmosphere  is  constituted.  The  new  agents  become 
additional  forces,  and  there  results  the  mineral  kingdom  (Gen.  i.  8-10).  2.  This  is 
a  preparation  for  higher  planes  of  being.  The  lioral  world  has  a  becoming,  assimi- 
lating all  that  has  gone  before,  and  transforming  them  into  the  living  organisms  of 
root,  trunk,  bough,  fruit,  Ac.  8.  The  vegetable  world  is  a  prophecy  of  something 
higher.  In  due  time  the  animal  world  gathers  up  the  elements  of  all  below  it,  and 
exalts  them  into  more  complex  and  nobler  organisms.  4.  There  is  a  pause.  The 
eternal  Three-in-One  sit  in  council  (Gea.  i.  26  ;  ii.  7).  (1)  The  creation  has  been  in 
travail  with  man  as  to  his  bodily  nature  in  all  the  preceding  formations.  Man  is  the 
compendium,  the  apex  of  physical  nature.  (2)  In  his  creation  another  department  of 
the  spiritual  world  comes  in  view.  It  seeks  to  ally  itself  with  the  physical.  It  also 
would  complete  itself  in  man.  By  the  inbreathing  of  the  Almighty  man  becomes  a 
living  soul.  The  two  realms  thus  meet  in  him,  and  invest  him  with  imique  dignity 
and  prerogative.  He  is  the  microcosm  of  the  universe.  (3)  Of  what  man  is  thia 
ideal  true  ?  Of  the  first  Adam  ?  He  is  man  inchoate,  in  germ  and  possibilities  only, 
not  in  the  fulness  of  perfection.  Can  he  raise  himself  and  put  all  nature  under 
him  as  its  head?  The  tree  of  life  blossoms  with  promiRe,  but  he  cannot  bridge  the 
«hasm  between  the  Infinite  and  the  finite.  Ttiere  must  be  a  higher  sphere  than 
nature  or  man  to  bring  out  their  meaning.  If  the  Eternal  Word  will  become  man 
the  problem  is  solved — the  mighty  void  between  God  and  man  will  be  filled  up.    6. 

4 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  » 

The  Son  ti  God  did  become  man.  He  passed  through  every  ordeal  triumphantly, 
and  was  glorified  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  The  universe  is  glorified  in  Him.  Thus 
did  He  sum  up  in  Himself  the  creation.  It  tended  towards  Him  from  the  first,  and 
finds  its  last,  deepest  sense  and  full  satisfaction  in  Him  the  true,  archetypal  Man. 
in.  CoKOLiiARiES.  1.  The  creation  is  a  unity,  not  a  granulated  mass  of  things  having  no 
other  relation  but  mechanical  juxtaposition ;  but  an  organic  whole,  having  one  Head 
who  fills  all  things  from  Himself,  and  sends  energy  and  direction  through  the  whole. 
Each  several  part  has  its  due  relation  to  the  others,  and  the  whole  to  Christ.  2, 
The  Insarnation  belongs  to  creation.  It  is  its  crown,  and  is  essential  to  its  order 
and  perfection.  It  is  not  an  intrusion.  It  is  sin  that  is  the  innovation  in  the  order 
of  the  universe.  And  the  Incarnation  carries  in  it  plenary  resources  for  the  over- 
mastering of  sin.  By  His  obedience  unto  death  the  Head  of  the  universe  rendered 
satisfaction  for  human  guilt ;  and  by  the  powers  of  the  Incarnation  He  will  cast 
out  sin.  Somewhere,  in  the  outer  darkness,  some  cesspool  shall  receive  all  the  filth 
of  the  universe  and  hide  it  for  ever.  3.  There  is  suggested  a  solution  of  the  problem 
of  miracles.  They  are  no  violations  of  the  plan  of  creation.  Each  succeeding 
system  bore  in  itself  higher  forces  and  methods  than  the  preceding,  but  without 
disturbance.  So  humanity  imported  into  the  world  methods  and  powers  supreme 
over  all  beneath  it,  but  in  entire  harmony  therewith.  That  such  ascendency  should 
show  itself  in  our  Lord's  miracles  there  is  nothing  contranatural.  Sin  being  foreign 
has  brought  an  unnatural  condition  of  things,  and  our  Lord's  hushing  of  the  storm, 
expulsion  of  demons,  healing  the  sick,  and  raising  the  dead,  were  but  foretokenings 
of  the  coming  restitution  of  all  things  to  their  natural  state  of  purity,  health,  and 
life.  To  put  creation  back  again  into  its  regular  condition  is  not  to  do  violence  to 
nature.  As  Augustine  says,  "  A  miracle  is  not  a  contradiction  of  nature,  but  of 
nature  as  man  knows  it."  4.  Here  is  the  solution  of  the  astronomical  objection  to 
Christianity.  Astronomy  is  supposed  to  demonstrate  man's  extreme  littleness,  and 
to  show  that  his  actions  good  or  bad  are  beneath  the  notice  of  God.  But  man  in 
Christ  is  the  end  of  the  universe.  In  Him  man  stands  in  closest  union  with 
the  Infinite  centre  of  all  being.  "  All  things  are  His  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  21-23).  It 
is  quality,  not  quantity,  that  counts  in  the  trancendental  calculus.  Man  must  be 
intrinsically  of  greater  value  than  all  that  went  to  prepare  the  way  for  him.  This 
will  serve  to  explain  the  interest  of  angels  in  him.  The  Incarnation  signifies  thai 
man  has  an  inherent  dignity  no  hugeness  of  the  physical  world  and  no  grandeur  of 
angels  can  equal.  He  has  no  superior  but  God,  and  to  Him  aloKe  his  knee  should 
bow.  5.  If  the  all  is  one  organic  unity,  the  lower  joined  to  the  higher,  and  looking 
forward  to  it,  then  there  must  be  a  correspondence  between  the  lower  and  the  higher. 
The  natural  will  be  a  parable  of  the  supernatural,  and  all  types  must  sum  them- 
selves up  in  Christ  their  prototype.  Science  will  yet  see  the  harmony  of  reason  and 
faith.  6.  Christ  being  the  Firstborn  and  Head  of  the  creation,  He  is  the  Priest  of  the 
universe  (Heb.  v.  7).  All  other  priesthood  must  be  derived  from  Him.  All  worship  must 
be  offered  through  Him.  All  blessing  will  return  from  God  through  Him.  7.  Christ  i» 
the  end  of  history.  The  movement  of  our  race  is  a  process  towards  manhood  in 
Christ.  Sin  has  distracted  the  current,  but  has  not  anested  it.  The  religions,  philo- 
BophieSj  and  governments  of  the  old  world  prepared  the  way  for  the  first  advent.  A 
mighty  impulse  was  thrilled  through  the  nation  from  that  day  directing  all  movements 
towards  the  second  advent.  8.  Seeing  that  Christ  is  head  ovsr  all,  all  things  must  be- 
come subject  to  Him.  We  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  Him.  Sin  has  disnaturalized 
man,  but  it  shall  be  overruled  and  made  to  serve  the  very  ends  it  sought  to  frustrate 
(1  Cor.  XV.  24-28;  2  Tim.  ii.  19).  Evil  does  not  inhere  in  matter.  Matter  will  be 
transformed  (Eom.  viii.  19-22).  9.  The  Incarnation  must  needs  be  perpetual. 
Were  the  Son  of  God  to  lay  aside  His  humanity,  the  creation  would  fail  of  its  end 
and  complement.  It  confers  upon  the  creation  supreme  blessing  ;  to  relinquish  it 
would  entail  a  deep  curse.  10.  Men  must  needs  come  into  full  and  permanent 
union  with  Christ.  Severed  from  Him  they  can  do  nothing.  Sin,  the  dis- 
cord in  the  everlasting  order,  must  be  renounced.  Christ  must  abide  in  men 
and  they  in  Him,  in  order  that  sin  may  be  eliminated.  Only  thus  can  they  attain 
the  Divine  Ideal  transformation  into  true  manhood  in  the  image  of  God.  (C.  P. 
Jtnnings.)  The  witness  of  creation  to  the  gospel : — 1.  The  subject  of  the  chapter 
is  the  glory  of  the  Son  of  God.  (1)  In  His  essential  relation  to  God  He  is  the  true 
eikon  basilike — only  image  which  nja  not  idolatry  to  worship.  (2)  His  relation  to 
the  universe  is  that  of  immediate  Creator.  (3)  His  permanent  relation  to  every 
creature  is  that  of  a  central  point  for  all  phenomena.  (4)  His  headship  over  the 
new  redeemed  humanity  is  that  of  the  first-born  among  the  dead,  the  sooroe  oi 


CEAP.  L]  COLOSSIANS.  51 

risen  life  to  all  the  body.  (5)  His  central  pre-eminence  in  the  whole  spiritual  world 
lies  in  the  fact  that  He  is  Peacemaker  by  blood,  the  sole  Reconciler  to  God.  Never 
did  John  soar  higher  or  sweep  a  wider  horizon  than  this.  2.  To  confine  ourselves 
to  one  thought  here,  Christ  is  the  only  link  of  connection  between  created  mindi 
and  the  unapproachable,  unknowaMe  Godhead.  "  Image  of  the  invisible  God  "  ia 
parallel  with  John's  "No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,"  &c.,  with  Heb.  i,  1-2, 
and  with  the  Mas*ier'8  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me,  hath  seen  the  Father."  The  function 
of  Bevealer,  however,  does  not  attach  to  Christ's  incarnate  life  only;  He  was  the 
Word  of  God  before,  and  revealed  God  in  creation.  From  this  follows  that  God  the 
E«vealer,  when  He  tells  of  God  in  Nature  aud  in  Redemption  must  speak  in  har- 
monious terms.  Both  discoveries  must  agree,  and  hence  we  expect  to  find  certain 
lines  iu  physics  leading  up  to  Christianity,  certain  thoughts  of  the  Divine  mind 
which  grow  clearer  when  I  cast  back  fresh  light  from  redemption,  3.  What,  then, 
is  there  in  nature  to  fit  into  the  representation  of  Deity  which  we  gather  from — I, 
The  Incabnation.  1.  This  stands  on  the  threshold  of  the  Christian  system,  and 
has  no  parallel  in  history,  and  at  first  sight  none  in  nature.  Yet  look  a  little  closer, 
and  you  will  find  that  it  rests  upon  the  fact  that  man  was  made  in  the  image  of 
his  Maker.  For  the  Son  and  perfect  Image  of  Godhead  to  become  man — making 
the  thoughts,  emotions,  and  activities  of  our  nature  a  glass  wherein  to  mirror  the 
heart  of  Deity — implies  some  affinity  between  the  Divine  and  human,  or  some 
previous  resemblance  of  man  to  God.  Reason  must,  in  some  fashion,  reflect  the 
thoughts  of  God,  and  Tirtue  His  holiness,  and  points  of  moral  and  intellectual 
contact  must  bind  the  human  spirit  to  that  of  the  Incarnate  Redeemer.  How  else 
could  God  become  incarnate  to  redeem  ?  2.  Now  nature  is  alive  with  thoughts 
that  are  very  human.  God  utters  His  mind  in  His  works,  and  that  mind  is  like 
our  own.  If  that  were  not  so  science  would  be  impossible.  The  world's  Maker 
and  its  observer  must  have  something  in  common,  if  the  observer  is  to  understand 
the  Maker's  meaning.  A  world  put  together  by  a  Being  whose  notions  of  truth, 
utility,  purpose,  &c.,  bore  no  relation  to  mine  would  be  a  world  unintelligible  to  me. 
But  the  world  satisfies  the  reason  and  gratifies  the  taste  of  the  human  student,  who 
detects  in  it  with  joy  another  mind  at  work  similar  to  his  own.  (1)  You  know  how 
keen  is  the  pleasure  many  take  in  mechanical  contrivance,  but  the  pages  of  modern 
books  of  science  are  full  of  beautiful  contrivances.  (2)  Equally  human  is  the 
parsimony  of  nature.  He  who  made  this  world  does  not  overcome  difficulties  by 
inventing  some  fresh  force  for  every  occasion  ;  He  will  rather  go  round  about  to 
make  existing  instruments  answer  a  new  purpose.  To  the  same  economical  habit 
it  is  due  that  through  the  organized  tribes  of  being  certain  radical  types  are  perse- 
veringly  adhered  to.  A  few  governing  ideas,  modified  in  details  only  as  far  as  need- 
ful, are  made  to  do  service,  and  give  rise  to  endless  diversity.  This  is  just  the  style 
of  workmanship  that  workmen  admire.  (3)  Very  human,  too,  is  the  place  occupied 
in  the  works  of  God  by  beauty  and  utility.  In  man's  productions  decoration  ia 
always  subordinated  to  convenience,  and  wise  men  will  sacrifice  the  ornamental 
without  remorse  when  it  can  be  gained  only  at  the  expense  of  human  well-being. 
Now  the  original  school  of  all  art  is  the  handiwork  of  God.  So  lavish  is  His 
decoration  of  the  most  unnoticed  objects  that  He  must  do  it  because  He  loves  it ; 
yet  it  is  never  put  before  utility.  Nay,  some  animals  have  been  made  unlovely  to 
suit  their  convenience  ;  but  even  in  them  ornament  is  introduced  where  it  can  do 
no  harm.  3.  Nature,  then,  betrays  in  its  Creator  a  mind  so  like  our  own  as  to  lay 
a  foundation  for  the  Incarnation.  The  Son  in  impressing  on  all  things  His  stamp, 
as  God's  image  left  a  signature  so  human-like  that  we  can  well  credit  the  old 
Scripture  when  it  says  man  wears  the  likeness  of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  we  see  a 
propriety  in  the  announcement  of  the  new  scripture  that  the  same  Son  wears  the 
nature  which  He  had  on  purpose  made  so  correspondent  with  His  own.  Creation 
of  man's  mind  in  God's  image ;  incarnation  of  God's  image  in  manhood — these 
are  two  answering  facts,  the  one  witnessed  by  science,  the  other  by  the  gospeL 
II.  The  Atonement.  1.  In  so  far  as  this  is  a  moral  fact,  whereas  in  nature  there 
is  neither  sin  nor  retribution,  and  therefore  no  need  of  atonement,  we  cannot  expect 
to  find  there  any  suggestion  of  reconciUation  with  God.  Nevertheless  nature  indi- 
cates that  the  Creator  possesses  moral  qualities,  and  is  a  character  as  well  aa  an 
intellect.  2.  Some  particulars  of  this.  (1)  Thinkers  have  been  startled  by  the 
gospel  declaration  that  God  cares  for  so  insignificant  a  creature  as  man.  But  does 
He  appear  to  the  student  as  a  person  likely  to  overlook  any  interest  because  it  ia 
minute.  Remember  what  pains  the  scientists  tell  us  have  been  expended  on  the 
most  tiny  and  obscure  piece  of  organized  matter  to  perfect  its  adaptation  to  its 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  St 

place,  and  to  elaborate  every  organ  of  it  for  its  proper  purpose.  It  is  for  investi- 
gators to  tell  us  whether  they  do  not  find  traces  of  kindness  in  this  snch  as  bespeak 
a  benevolent  heart  as  well  as  a  contriving  intellect.  If  they  do,  then  the  love  of  God, 
which  seeks  and  saves  one  lost  soul,  is  but  the  crown  of  a  character  patient,  conside- 
rate, which  has  left  its  traces  on  the  lower  creation.  (2)  But  there  are  facts  of  an 
opposite  order.  Violence,  death,  extinction  have  always  obtained.  But  whatever 
difficulties  attend  this  frightful  havoc  of  life,  the  sacrifice  ministers  always  to  some 
npward  movement.  Lower  life  feeds  higher  life,  or  the  individual  becomes  a  victim 
to  some  agency  needful  for  the  general  good,  the  gale,  the  flood,  the  hghtning :  or, 
as  the  earth  grows  fit  to  bear  nobler  forms,  the  earlier  ones  pass  away.  We  read 
here  the  law  of  sacrifice — unconscious  and  involuntary,  indeed,  because  these 
creatures  have  no  power  of  moral  choice  ;  but  true,  nevertheless,  because  sacrificed 
for  some  nobler  good  and  more  enduring  end.  See  how  beasts  of  prey  have  to 
make  room  for  population,  and  serviceable  animals  are  slaughtered  for  man's  use. 
When  I  pass  from  this  scene  to  Golgotha  I  am  not  conscious  of  any  violent  shock. 
There  is  pain  for  the  good  of  others,  and  death  as  the  price  of  life.  The  Maker  of 
the  suffering  creation  is  not  afraid  to  suffer  for  others.  He  obeys  His  own  law,  and 
the  cross  would  have  been  a  far  more  surprising  spectacle  had  it  stood  upon  an 
earth  where  no  creature  ever  bled  to  advance  creation's  good.  (3)  The  only  key  we 
can  find  to  the  Atonement  lies  in  the  inviolability  of  Divine  law.  To  magnify  that 
God  gave  His  Son  to  die.  Now  it  would  have  been  surprising  had  the  Son  aa 
Creator  betrayed  any  indifference  to  the  violence  of  natural  law,  and  yet  come  aa 
Redeemer  to  die  to  vindicate  moral  law.  No  such  inconsistency  appears.  Physical 
students  insist  on  the  constancy  with  which  the  former  avenges  transgression ;  and  so 
the  latter  decrees  death  for  disobedience.  And  it  could  so  little  be  set  aside  in  favour 
of  mercy,  that  not  until  the  Lawgiver  had  Himself  honoured  His  own  statute,  and 
suffered  His  own  penalty,  did  He  forgive.  3.  As  far,  then,  as  such  indications  go, 
the  face  of  God,  as  traced  indistinctly  in  Creation,  answers  to  His  face  as  its  glory 
shines  in  the  gospel  of  Christ.  (J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  We  have  redemption  through 
His  hlood. — I.  Eedemption.  Deliverance — 1.  From  the  guilt  of  sin,  original  or 
actual,  of  omission  or  commission.  2.  From  the  power  and  prevalence  of  sin 
(Rom.  vi.  14 ;  Heb.  ix.  13-14 ;  Acts  iii.  26 ;  I  Pet.  L  18 ;  Matt.  i.  21 ;  Titus  ii.  14). 
8.  From  the  tyranny  of  Satan  (Col.  i.  13  ;  1  John  iii.  8;  Luke  xxii.  31-32).  4.  From 
the  curse  of  the  law  (GaL  iii.  13  ;  iv.  5).  5.  From  the  wrath  of  God.  (1)  In  thia 
world  (Rom.  v.  1;  Lukeii.  14).  (2)  In  the  next  (1  Thess.  i.  10;  Acts  iv.  12).  II. 
Its  means:  "His  blood."  1.  It  was  necessary  that  our  Redeemer  should  be  man 
as  well  as  God  (1  Tim.  ii.  5  ;  Heb.  ii.  14-17),  that  He  might  mediate  between  both 
parties  (Job  ix,  33).  1.  That  He  should  suffer  (Heb.  viii.  6  ;  Luke  xxiv.  26)  a  bloody 
death  (Heb.  ix.  22).  (1)  To  expiate  our  sins  (1  John  it  2;  Isa.  liii.  6-6).  (2)  To 
conquer  Satan  (Heb.  ii.  14).  (3)  To  reconcile  God  to  ns  and  us  to  God  (Rom.  v. 
10-11;  Eph.  ii.  16).  III.  Its  benefit.  "Forgiveness  of  sins."  1.  The  names 
in  Scripture  given  to  it.  (1)  Remission  (Acts  ii.  38),  dismission,  releasing  (Isa.  lii. 
1).  2.  Mercifulness  to  our  sins  (Heb.  viii.  12 ;  Luke  xviii.  13).  (2)  Passmg  over 
Bin  (Rom.  iii.  25).  (4)  Purging  from  sin  (Psa.  Ii.  7).  (5)  Not  remembering  our 
sins  (Jer.  xxxi.  34  ;  Heb.  viii.  12).  (6)  Covering  sin  (Psa.  xxxii.  1;  IzzxT.  2  ;  U.  9J. 
(7)  Taking  away  and  removing  sin  (Psa.  ciii.  10-12 ;  Exod.  xxxiv.  7 ;  Lev.  xvi. 
20-22).  (8)  Casting  behind  God's  back  (Isa.  xxxviii.  17;  Psa.  xc.  8).  (9)  Blotting 
out  sin  (Isa.  xliii.  25  ;  xliv.  22).  (10)  Not  imputing  sin  (Psa.  xxxii.  1-2  ;  Rom.  iv. 
7-8).  (11)  Casting  it  in  the  depth  of  the  sea  (Mic.  vii.  18-19).  2.  The  nature  of 
it :  an  act  of  God's  grace,  whereby  He  absolves  us  from  the  obligation  to  those 
punishments,  which  by  His  law  are  due  to  us  for  those  sins.  (1)  In  general  it  is 
an  act  of  God's  grace,  (a)  Of  God.  It  is  ascribed  to  Him  alone  (Exod.  xxxiv.  7  ; 
Mark  ii.  7).  We  are  to  ask  it  of  Him  only  (Matt.  vi.  12).  He  alone  justifies 
(Rom.  viii.  33).  Our  sins  are  only  against  Him  (Psa.  Ii.  4|.  (6)  Of  Hia  grace — 
not  wisdom,  power,  justice  (Isa.  xliii.  25) — in  Christ  (Eph.  i.  7).  (2)  The  epecifio 
difference,  (a)  We  are  obliged  to  bear  the  punishments  due  by  God's  law  to  sin 
(Gal.  iii.  10).  (6)  God  takes  off  that  obligation  (2  Sam.  xii.  13;  Mark  iii.  28-29). 
IV.  This  BENErrr  ra  onlt  by  Chbist's  death.  1.  All  mankind  is  guilty  before 
God,  and  so  obnoxious  to  His  wrath  and  everlasting  punishment  (Rom.  iii.  19 ; 
Gal.  iii.  22).  2.  The  eternal  Son  was  pleased  to  take  man's  nature  upon  Him  so 
«8  to  become  both  God  and  man  in  one  person  (Isa.  vii.  14  ;  Rom.  ix.  5 ;  Phil.  ii. 
6-7).  8.  Christ  in  this  nature  was  pleased  to  suffer  disgrace,  the  curses  of  the  law 
IGai.  iii  13).  The  wrath  of  God  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  An  ignominious,  accursed, 
fftinfal,  ana  bloody  death ;  and  all  for  sin,  the  only  cause  of  death  (Hib.  x.  12). 


CHAP,  i.]  COLOSSIANS.  61 

4.  Christ  suffered  all  this,  not  for  Himself  (1  Pet.  ii.  22,  iii.  18 ;  Heb.  viL  26),  bat 
lor  us  who  partake  of  that  nature  in  which  He  suffered  (Isa.  liii.  5-6;  Rom.  iv.  26; 
Gal.  i.  4  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  3).  5.  These  sufferings  were  of  greater  worth  than  if  all  men 
had  suffered  eternal  death  fActs  xx.  28),  6.  Hence  God  was  pleased  to  accept  ol 
them  as  a  sufficient  price  oi  our  redemption,  and  satisfaction  to  His  justice  for  out 
sins  (Matt.  xx.  28;  1  Tim.  ii.  6;  Eph.  i.  6).  7.  God's  justice  being  thus  satisfied, 
He  is  reconciled  unto  us,  and  takes  off  our  obligations  to  punishment,  by  reason  of 
what  His  Son  underwent  for  us ;  and  therefore  for  His  sake  is  said  to  pardon  our 
sins  (Eom.  v.  10;  Col.  i.  20;  2  Cor.  v.  21).  V.  Use.  1.  Honce  you  may  learn 
what  ground  we  have  to  trust  in  Christ  for  pardon  (Rom.  viii.  34).  2.  Hence 
be  advised  to  make  it  your  business  to  get  your  sins  forgiven :  considering — 
(1)  How  miserable  you  are  without  it :  God  is  angry  (Psa.  vii.  11)  ;  hell  is 
threatened.  (2)  How  happy  with  it  (Psa.  xxxii.  1-2).  Your  persons  accepted  and 
justified  (Psa.  xxxii.  1-2;  Rom.  iv.  6-7) ;  God  reconciled  and  become  your  friend 
(Rom.  V.  1,  9-10.  3.  All  things  working  for  your  good,  and  glory  for  your  reward. 
{Bishop  Beveridge.)  Redemption : — The  liberty  for  which  the   slave  longs  is, 

perhaps,  the  sweetest  earthly  cup  man  drinks.  Health  has  been  often  said  to  be 
the  greatest  earthly  blessing.  What  are  money,  luxury,  titles,  a  crown  even,  without 
it ;  but  what  is  health  without  liberty.  We  sympathize  with  the  instinctive  love  of 
freedom  in  animals — the  noisy  joy  of  the  dog  when  he  gets  off  his  chain  ;  the  noble 
eagle  chained  to  the  perch,  strangling  in  its  struggles  to  escape.  Much  more  do  we 
sympathize  with  our  fellow-creatures,  whether  slaves  or  citizens,  who  have  made 
l.\ie  altars  of  liberty  red  with  their  blood,  preferring  death  to  bondage.  But  there 
ih  a  more  degrading  and  dreadful  slavery,  that  of  the  slaves  of  Satan,  who  are  sold 
under  sin.  Would  that  we  set  the  same  price  on  spiritual  as  we  do  on  earthly 
liberty!  What  struggles  would  then  be  made  and  prayers  offered  for  salvation! 
And  when  saved  ourselves,  how  anxious  we  should  be  for  the  salvation  of  others. 
I.  We  all  need  redemption.  To  a  man  who  knows  he  is  nigh  unto  death  offer 
a  medicine  that  will  cure  him,  and  he  will  buy  it  at  any  price ;  but  offer  the  same  to 
one  who  believes  himself  in  health  and  he  holds  it  cheap.  For  a  similar  reason 
are  Christ  and  His  redemption  rejected  of  men.  So  the  great  work  of  God's  Spirit 
is  to  rouse  a  man  from  the  torpor  induced  by  the  poison  of  sin.  And  blessed  the 
book,  preacher,  or  providence  that  sends  the  conviction  into  our  hearts.  For  to  a 
soul  convinced  of  misery  who  so  welcome  as  the  Saviour?  1.  The  slavery  of  sin  is 
natural  to  man.  We  pity  the  mother  as  robbed  of  one  of  her  best  joys,  who  knows 
that  the  little  creature  on  her  bosom  is  a  slave.  But  that  calamity  is  ours.  "  In 
sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  "  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin."  "Ye  were  the 
slaves  of  sin  " — not  one  hired  for  a  period,  but  branded  with  the  mark  of  a  perpetual 
bondage.  2.  This  slavery  is  the  universal  state  of  man.  Slavery  is  the  worst  and 
oldest  of  human  institutions.  At  an  early  period,  in  Cain,  he  who  should  have 
been  his  brother's  keeper,  became  his  murderer ;  and  when  man  did  become  his 
brother's  keeper,  it  was  too  often  as  an  owner.  But,  wherever  slavery  obtained, 
some  were  free.  It  is  not  so  with  sin.  The  king  and  the  beggar  are  both  slaves ; 
every  man's  heart  is  black,  whatever  his  face  may  be.  8.  This  slavery  is  the  state 
of  all  unconverted  men.  (1)  Some  are  slaves  of  gold.  What  bondage  is  equal  to 
that  ?  for  a  man  to  harden  his  heart  to  the  claims  of  pity,  to  deny  his  own  flesh 
and  blood,  to  lie  and  cheat,  or,  if  not,  throw  his  soul  away  for  money.  (2)  Some 
are  slaves  of  lust.  To  what  base  society  and  acts  of  villainy  do  their  tyrant  passions 
condemn  them.  The  thief  that  steals  my  money  is  a  man  of  honour  compared  with 
him  who  steals  a  woman's  virtue.  (2)  Some  are  slaves  of  drunkenness.  Of  all 
slavery  this  is  the  most  helpless  and  hopeless.  Other  sins  drown  conscience,  this 
reason  as  well.  (3)  Some  are  slaves  to  the  opinions  of  the  world.  The  Macedonian 
boasted  that  he  had  conquered  the  world ;  the  world  can  boast  that  it  has  conquered 
them.  Theirs'  the  miserable  condition  of  a  servant  who  has  to  bear  in  some  ill- 
governed  household  the  caprices,  not  of  one  mistress,  but  of  many.  IL  OuB 
BEDEMPTioN  IS  NOT  A  SIMPLE  MATTER  OF  TIME.  Every  fifty  years,  and  in  certain  cases, 
seven,  redeemed  the  Hebrew.  Everywhere  time  works  changes,  the  young  grow  old, 
the  poor  get  rich,  the  rich  poor.  Time  alters  the  form  of  the  globe.  But  amid 
these  changes  the  condition  of  the  sinner  alters  not.  The  longer  you  live  in  sin  the 
more  hopeless  is  salvation.  Do  you  say.  But  what  am  I  to  do  ?  Can  I  redeem  myself  ? 
Assuredly  not.  But  are  we  to  sit  still  as  though  redemption  would  come  like  a  jubilee 
in  the  common  course  of  providence  •  No,  we  are  to  be  up  and  doing.  I  do  not  say 
that  we  are  to  rise  like  an  oppressed  nation  which  wrings  its  liberties  from  a  tyrant 
band ;  nor  that  we  can  purchase  redemption  ;  nor  that  through  works  of  righteous- 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRA19R.  [cha».  i. 

Bess  we  can  lay  any  claim  to  its  blessings.  And  yet  I  say,  "  Labour  for  the  meat  that 
endureth  onto  everlasting  life."  There  are  various  ways  of  being  diligent.  Though 
men  call  him  idle  the  poor  beggar  is  as  diligent  as  others ;  and  such  as  that 
suppliant's,  along  with  the  use  of  other  means,  are  the  labours  to  which  God'a 
mercy  and  your  own  necessities  call  you.  Unable  to  save  yourself,  besiege  the 
throne  of  grace.  III.  Christ  is  the  Kedeemer.  There  is  no  other.  His  types 
and  symbols  teach  this.  There  was  but  one  ark  in  the  flood,  and  all  perished  save 
those  who  sailed  in  it.  There  was  but  one  altar  in  the  Temple,  one  way  through 
the  Red  Sea,  "one  Mediator  between  God  and  man."  1.  Christ  does  not  redeem 
ns  by  simply  revealing  the  truth.  Were  He  a  Saviour  only  in  this  sense  there  are 
others.  From  "  the  Sun  of  Righteousness "  He  changes  into  a  star,  one  of  a 
constellation  which  is  formed  of  Moses  and  the  prophets.  Many  of  them,  indeed, 
had  more  to  do  in  revealing  God's  will  than  Christ.  No  book  bears  His  name, 
and  the  truths  which  fell  from  Him  form  but  a  fraction  of  Scripture.  Yet  who 
but  He  is  set  forth  as  the  Redeemer,  in  whose  name  else  are  we  commanded  to 
believe  and  be  baptized  ?  2.  Christ  does  not  redeem  us  by  His  example.  That  man 
is  in  a  sense  my  saviour  who  leads  me  safely  along  any  dangerous  path,  and  in 
a  corresponding  way  some  say  Christ  redeemed  us.  He  set  us  such  an  example, 
that  by  following  His  steps  we  may  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Alas  for  safety 
if  it  turn  on  that  I  Walk  as  He  walked  I  Who  is  sufficient  for  that  ?  We  should 
certainly  attempt  to  follow  Jesus,  yet  our  best  attempts  will  leave  us  more  and 
more  convinced  that  our  only  hope  for  redemption  lies  in  the  mercy  of  the  Father 
and  the  merits  of  the  Son.  3.  Christ  has  redeemed  us  by  suffering  in  our  room 
and  stead.  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission."  "  The  blood  of  Jesua 
Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  I.  What  remission  of  bins 
n.  1.  Sin  is  a  violation  of  the  law  of  God  (1  John  iii.  4).  In  this  law  there  is  the 
precei)t  which  is  the  rule  of  duty,  and  the  sanction  or  penalty  which  shows 
what  God  might  do  if  He  dealt  with  us  according  to  our  merit.  Accordingly  in  sin 
there  is — (1)  The  fault.  Man,  God's  subject,  and  obliged  to  Him  by  His  benefits, 
swerves  from  the  rule  of  his  duty  and  exposes  himself  to  God's  judgment.  (2)  The 
guilt,  which  is  liableness  to  punishment.  2.  Forgiveness  is  a  dissolving  the  obligation 
to  punishmerit,  a  freedom  in  God's  way  from  the  consequences  of  sin.  (1)  It  ia 
not  a  disannulling  of  the  act  as  a  natural  action.     What  is  done  cannot  be  undone. 

(2)  Nor  is  it  abolished  as  a  criminal  action.  Forgiveness  does  not  make  a  fault  to 
be  no  fault.     The  innocent  are  acquitted,  but  the  guilty  are  pardoned  as  sinners. 

(3)  Nor  is  the  merit  of  the  sinful  act  lessened,  it  still  deserves  punishment.  (4) 
Forgiveness  therefore  is  a  passing  by  the  fault  so  that  it  shall  not  rise  up  in  judg- 
ment against  us.  The  fault  is  the  sinner's,  the  punishment  the  Judge's,  which  He 
may  fashion  on  certain  terms  stated  in  the  law  of  grace.  I  prove  it  (1)  from  the 
nature  of  the  thing,  for  there  is  such  a  relation  between  the  fault  and  the  guilt,  the 
sin  and  punishment ;  that  the  one  cannot  be  without  the  other.  Therefore,  if  the 
Judge  will  not  impute  the  fault  there  will  be  an  immunity  from  punishment. 
(2)  From  the  common  rule  of  speaking  among  men.  He  cannot  be  said  to  forgive 
a  fault  who  exacts  punishment;  and  what  do  men  mean  when  they  pray  for  pardon 
but  that  they  may  be  exempted  from  punishment  ?  (3)  It  would  impeach  the 
justice  and  mercy  of  God  were  He  to  punish  where  He  has  pardoned.  (4)  Scripture 
phrases  show  that  God  blots  out  our  sins  (Psa.  Ixxi.  2,  xxxii.  1 ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  17 ; 
Micah  vii.  19 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  34).  II.  The  nature  of  redemption.  1.  Our  being 
re<ieemed  supposes  a  captivity  and  bondage.  (1)  Unrenewed  men  are  slaves  to  sin 
(Titus  iii.  3  ;  John  viii.  34).  Men  imagine  a  life  of  vanity  to  be  a  very  good  life, 
and  it  were  so  if  liberty  consisted  in  doing  what  we  list  ratlier  than  what  we  ought. 
But  it  is  not,  and  experience  shows  that  men  cannot  leave  their  base  satisfactions. 

(2)  As  they  are  under  sin  so  they  are  under  Satan  (Eph.  ii.  2  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  26). 

(3)  For  this  they  are  under  the  curse  of  God.  2.  To  recover  us  there  was  a  price 
to  be  paid  by  way  of  ransom  to  God.  We  are  not  delivered  by  praver,  nor  mere 
force,  nor  out  of  pity,  but  by  just  satisfaction  to  provoked  justice.  The  price  was 
not  paid  to  Satan,  who  is  a  usurper — from  him  we  are  delivered  by  force— but  to 
God.  Man  had  not  sinned  against  Satan,  but  God,  to  whom  belong  condemnation 
or  pardon.  And  God  being  satisfied,  Satan  has  no  power  over  us.  That  redemption 
implies  payment  of  a  price  is  clear  (Matt.  xx.  28;  1  Tim.  ii.  6).  Christ  in 
recovering  men  in  dealing  with  God  is  set  forth  as  a  Lamb  slain  (Rev.  v.  5,  6) ; 
in  dealing  with  Satan  as  a  lion  recovering  the  prey.  A  ransom  was  necessary 
because  God  had  made  a  former  covenant  which  was  not  to  be  quit  but  upon 
▼aluable  consideration,  lest  His  moral  attributes  should  fall  to  the  ground.    (1)  Thi 


CHAP,  u]  COLOSSIANS.  U 

honour  of  His  justice  was  to  be  secured  (Rom.  iii.  5,  6;  Gen.  xviii.  25).  If  God 
should  pardon  without  satisfaction  how  should  He  be  reverenced  as  the  holy 
Governor  of  the  world  ?  Hence  Eom.  iii.  25,  26.  (2)  His  wisdom.  If  the  law  should 
be  recalled,  the  Lawgiver  would  run  the  hazard  of  levity.  (3)  His  holy  natnr« 
would  not  permit  it.  Some  way  must  be  found  to  signify  His  hatred  of  sin 
^Psa.  xi.  6).  (4)  His  authority.  It  would  be  a  derogation  to  the  authority  of  His 
law  if  it  might  be  broken  with  impunity.  (5)  His  truth.  God's  word  is  not  to  be 
regarded  as  a  scarecrow  (Gen.  iii.  5  ;  Deut.  xxix.  19,  20).  3.  None  was  fit  to  give 
this  ransom  but  Jesus  Christ,  the  God-man.  He  was  man  to  undertake  it  in  our 
name,  God  to  perform  it  in  His  own  strength  ;  a  man  that  He  might  be  under  the 
law  and  die,  God  that  He  might  put  the  stamp  upon  the  metal  and  make  it  current 
coin.  By  taking  human  nature  a  price  was  put  into  His  hands,  to  which  Hia 
Divine  nature  gave  the  requisite  value  (Acts  xx.  28  ;  Heb.  ix.  13).  4.  Nothing  per- 
formed by  Christ  could  be  a  sufficient  ransom  but' His  death.  (1)  To  answer  the 
types  wherein  without  shedding  of  blood  was  no  remission.  (2)  In  the  nature  of 
the  thing  (Jolm  viii.  20).  Death  was  threatened  to  sin,  and  feared  by  the  sinner, 
and  must  be  borne,  therefore,  for  deliverance.  5.  From  this  ransom  there  is  a  liberty 
resulting  to  us  ;  but  not  a  liberty  to  sin  (Ilom.  vi.  22).  Christ  came  not  to  free  us 
from  the  duty  of  the  law,  but  its  penalty,  otherwise  it  would  promote  the  devil's 
interest.  He  redeemed  us  that  we  might  serve  God,  6.  We  are  not  partakers  of 
this  liberty  till  we  are  united  to  Christ  by  faith  "in  whom."  Ill,  Remission  of 
8IN8  IS  A  PBiNciPAL  PABT  OF  REDEMPTION.  1.  How  a  part.  (1)  Redemption  is  taken 
for  the  laying  down  of  the  price.  That  was  done  on  the  cross  (Heb.  ix.  12).  (2)  In 
its  application.  Besides  the  ransom  there  is  actual  deliverance.  Complete  redemp- 
tion we  shall  enjoy  at  the  last  day  (Rom.  viii.  23 ;  Eph.  iv.  30,  i.  14).  Begun 
deliverance,  which  we  now  enjoy  by  faith,  consists  of  justification  (Eph,  i,  7),  where 
flin  is  freely  pardoned,  and  we  delivered  from  evil  and  wrath  ;  and  sanctification 
(1  Peter  i.  is  ;  Titus  ii.  14).  2.  A  principal  part,  for — (1)  The  power  of  Satan  is 
destroyed  (Acts  xxvi.  18).  (2)  The  reign  of  sin  is  broken.  The  gift  of  the  sancti- 
fying Spirit  is  part  of  our  pardon  applied  (Col.  ii.  13).  (3)  We  are  eased  of  our 
tormenting  fears.  (4)  Death  is  unstinged  (1  Cor.  iv.  56),  (5)  The  obligation  to 
eternal  punishment  ceases,     IV.  Use,     To  persuade  you  to  seek  after  this  benefit. 

1.  We  all  once  needed  it.  Nothing  but  pardon  will  serve  your  turn.  (1)  Not  for- 
bearance on  God's  part.     (2)  Not  senseless  forgetfulness  or  baseless  hope  on  yours. 

2.  The  best  of  us  still  need  it.  Renewed  sins  need  new  pardon  ;  daily  infirmitiea 
daily  repentance.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  1.  The  apostle  had  been  speaking  of 
Christian  privileges  as  being  matters  of  present  enjoyment — meetness  for  heaven; 

•deliverance  from  sin,  etc.,  are  in  the  actual  possession  of  the  Christian.  2.  There 
are  two  methods  proposed  by  which  men  hope  to  secure  God's  favour.  Thousands 
consider  it  presumption  to  profess  to  have  it,  but  hope  to  do  so  after  they  have 
prayed  more  and  done  more  good  deeds.  God's  method  is  the  reverse.  What 
man  places  at  the  end  He  places  at  the  beginning  ;  what  man  says  "  work  for,"  He 
says  •'  work  from."    Turning  away  our  thoughts  from  self  He  fixes  them  on  Christ. 

3.  The  different  results  on  feeling  resulting  are  immense.  The  man  who  works 
for  future  forgiveness  has  at  best  the  spirit  of  a  servant ;  he  who  takes  forgiveness 
now  as  God's  free  gift  in  Christ  enjoys  reconciliation  and  sonship.  I.  Redemption 
AS  IDENTICAL  WITH  FORGIVENESS  of  sius.  1.  Redemption  is  something  more  than 
rescae.  If  you  see  a  man  in  danger  and  pluck  him  out  you  save  but  not  redeem 
him.  If  you  see  a  man  oppressed  and  snatch  him  from  bis  enemy  you  deliver  but 
not  redeem  him.  Redemption  is  the  release  of  a  man  by  the  payment  of  ransom. 
We  by  our  transgressions  have  exposed  ourselves  to  God's  law,  which  knows  no 
pity,  holds  us  in  its  grasp,  and  will  inflict,  unless  we  are  delivered,  the  fearful 
penalty  of  eternal  death.  But  if  that  penalty  be  remitted  we  are  redeemed,  and 
so  forgiveness  is  equivalent  to  redemption.  But  sin  has  also  brought  us  under  its 
own  power,  and  so  made  us  its  slaves ;  and  the  only  way  of  securing  us  and  setting 
as  free  is  forgiveness.  2.  The  one  thing  we  absolutely  require  as  sinners  is  the 
remission  of  the  horrible  penalty,  and  it  is  neither  irrational  nor  immoral  to  be 
afraid  of  that  penalty  ;  but  we  must  be  released  from  the  power  of  sin  before  oar 
happiness  can  be  secured.  Tell  me  that  I  am  not  to  be  punished  and  you  have 
made  me  glad,  but  you  have  not  inspired  me  with  love  to  God.  But  tell  me  that 
the  means  of  forgiveness  is  the  sacrifice  of  God's  dear  Son,  that  God  pardons  not 
only  as  a  Sovereign  but  as  a  Father,  and  the  power  of  sin  will  be  broken,  and 
I  enter  on  the  joyful,  ennobling  service  of  love.  II.  Redemption  as  kfpectkd 
THBouoH  THE  BLOOD  OF  Chkist      1.  In  Phil,  ii,  the  apostle,  in  speaking  at  Christ's 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohai'.  i. 

death,  has  in  view  Christ's  obedience  ;  here  in  using  the  term  "  blood"  his  idea  i» 
expiation,  and  so  elsewhere  where  the  word  is  used ;  because  in  the  Jewish  sac- 
rifices it  was  not  the  death  of  the  victim,  but  its  blood  that  was  the  typical  instrn- 
ment  of  expiation.  2.  Such  a  redemption  is  necessary  to  meet  the  demands  of  the 
heart  and  to  produce  a  changed  feeling  towards  God.  (1)  Forgiveness  must  be 
a  righteous  forgiveness  ;  not  a  mere  easy,  weak-minded  passing  over  of  transgres- 
sion. Eedemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ  meets  this  demand  of  the  awakened 
consilience,  for  in  the  cross  God  appears  more  awful  than  elsewhere  in  His  hatred 
of  sin  and  His  determination  to  punish  it,  (2)  But  it  is  also  the  forgiveness  of  a 
Father  we  want,  and  nowhere  have  we  such  an  exhibition  of  God's  love  as  in  the 
cross.  Conclusion. — This  redemption  is  only  to  be  had  in  Christ.  Out  of  Him, 
however  respectable  and  moral,  we  are  slaves  of  sin  and  exposed  to  the  curse, 
(G,  Calthrop,  M.A.)  Plan  of  redemption : — Suppose  a  large  graveyard  surrounded 
by  a  high  wall,  with  only  one  entrance  by  a  large  iron  gate  which  is  fast  bolted. 
Within  these  walls  are  tens  of  thousands  of  human  beings,  by  one  disease  de- 
scending to  tlie  grave.  There  is  no  balm  to  relieve  them,  no  physician  there  :  they 
must  perish.  This  is  the  condition  of  man  as  a  sinner.  All  have  sinned,  and  the 
Boul  that  sinneth  shall  die.  While  man  was  in  this  deplorable  state,  Mercy,  an 
attribute  of  Deity,  came  down  and  stood  at  the  gate,  looked  at  the  scene,  and  wept 
over  it,  exclaiming,  "  Oh,  that  I  might  enter  1  I  would  bind  up  their  wounds ; 
I  would  relieve  their  sorrows  ;  I  would  save  their  souls."  While  Mercy  stood 
weeping  at  the  gate,  an  embassy  of  angels,  commissioned  from  the  court  of  heaven 
to  some  other  world,  passing  over,  paused  at  the  sight,  and  Heaven  forgave  that 
pause.  Seeing  Mercy  standing  there,  they  cried,  "  Mercy,  Mercy,  can  you  not 
enter  ?  can  you  look  upon  this  scene,  and  not  pity  ?  can  you  pity,  and  not 
relieve?  "  Mercy  replied,  '•  I  can  see ;  "  and  in  her  tears  she  added,  "  I  pity,  but 
cannot  relieve." — "  Why  can  you  not  enter  ?  " — "  Oh  1  "  said  Mercy,  "  Justice  has 
barred  the  gate  against  me,  and  I  cannot,  must  not,  unbar  it."  At  this  moment 
Justice  himself  appeared,  as  it  were  to  watch  the  gate.  The  angels  inquired  of 
him,  "  Why  will  you  not  let  Mercy  in  7  "  Justice  replied,  "  My  law  is  broken,  and 
it  must  be  honoured  :  die  they  or  Justice  must."  At  this  there  appeared  a  form 
among  the  angelic  band,  like  unto  the  Son  of  God,  who,  addressing  Himself  to 
Justice,  said,  "What  are  thy  demands?"  Justice  replied,  '*  My  terms  are  stern 
and  rigid.  I  must  have  sickness  for  their  health  ;  I  must  have  ignominy  for  their 
honour ;  I  must  have  death  for  life ;  without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission." — "Justice,"  said  the  Son  of  God,  "I  accept  thy  terms.  On  Me  be 
this  wrong,  and  let  Mercy  enter." — "  When,"  said  Justice,  "  will  you  perform  this 
promise  ?  "  Jesus  replied,  "  Four  thousand  years  hence,  upon  the  hill  of  Calvary, 
without  the  gates  of  Jerusalem,  I  will  perform  it  in  My  own  person."  The  deed 
was  prepared  and  signed  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God.  Justice  was  satis- 
fied ;  and  Mercy  entered,  preaching  salvation  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  The  deed 
was  committed  to  the  patriarchs ;  by  them  to  the  kings  of  Israel  and  the  prophets ; 
by  them  it  was  preserved  till  Daniel's  seventy  weeks  were  accomplished;  and,  at 
the  appointed  time,  Justice  appeared  on  the  hill  of  Calvary,  and  Mercy  presented 
to  him  the  important  deed.  "  Where,"  said  Justice,  "  is  the  Son  of  God  ? " 
Mercy  answered,  "  Behold  Him  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill,  bearing  His  own  cross  ;  " 
and  then  he  departed,  and  stood  aloof  at  the  hour  of  trial.  Jesus  ascended  the  hill, 
while  in  His  train  followed  His  weeping  Church.  Justice  immediately  presented 
Him  with  the  important  deed,  saying,  "  This  is  the  day  when  this  bond  is  to  be 
executed."  When  He  received  it,  did  He  tear  it  in  pieces,  and  give  it  to  the  winds 
of  heaven?  No  :  He  nailed  it  to  His  cross,  exclaiming,  "  It  is  finished  1 "  Justice 
called  on  holy  fire  to  come  down,  and  consume  the  sacrifice.  Holy  fire  descended : 
it  swallowed  His  humanity;  but,  when  it  touched  His  divinity,  it  expired,  and 
there  was  darkness  over  the  whole  heavens ;  but,  glory  to  God  in  the.  highest  I  on 
earth  peace,  and  good-will  to  men.  (Christmag  Evans.)  The  greatness  of  redemp 
tion: — If  that  a  king  should  empty  all  his  cofi'ers,  and  alienate  all  his  crown  land 
to  rescue  his  subjects,  he  should  show  himself  a  natural  prince  :  but  what  is  this 
to  that  ransom  which  our  King  hath  tendered  ?  (P.  Bayne,  B.D.)  Redemption 
incomplete  until  accepted  by  faith  in  Christ : — Suppose  there  were  twenty  traitors 
in  the  Tower  lay  condemned  ;  say  again,  the  prince  should  yield  his  father  such 
patisfaction  for  some  whom  he  would  save,  wherewith  the  king  his  father  should 
be  contented,  and  give  him  their  pardon  thereupon ;  here  the  thing  is  done  betwixt 
the  king  and  his  son,  yet  till  the  prince  send  to  thim,  write  to  the  keeper  to  deliver 
such  and  such  to  him,  they  are  in  the  state  they  were  in,  and  so  continue.    So  i^ 


CEAi  u]  COLOSSIANS.  67 

IB  with  God,  Christ,  and  us  :  the  redemption  is  all  concluded  betwixt  God  and  Hia 
beloved  Son ;  yet  till  this  is  eSectaally  made  known  to  oar  hearts,  so  that  thej 
believe  on  this  grace  of  Christ,  we  are  as  we  were,  in  hold,  in  the  fear  of  onr  con- 
demnation. We  are  justified  through  the  redemption  in  Christ,  but  bo  that  befor« 
it  can  be  applied  in  us  we  must  have  faith  in  His  blood,  being  set  forth  unto  us  in 
the  word  preached.  Can  we  have  the  strength  of  bread  without  eating  bread  ? 
No  more  can  we  have  any  benefit  by  the  bread  of  life  without  believing  on  Him. 
In  Christ  by  faith  we  have  these  things.  {Ibid.)  Redemption  partial  and 
complete  : — We  have  that  redemption  which  consists  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and 
having  obtained  it  are  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  the  devil,  of  sin,  and  of  hell. 
The  devil  cannot  any  longer  detain  us  as  captives,  rule  us  as  his  slaves,  and  drive 
D8  here  and  there  as  he  pleases ;  sin  itself  which  cleaves  to  us  cannot  reign  in  us  ; 
finally,  even  hell  cannot  torment  us  with  perpetual  fear,  or  claim  any  lordship 
over  us.  For,  our  sins  being  remitted,  the  power  of  the  devil  is  broken,  the  wrath 
of  God  is  removed,  the  condemnation  of  eternal  death  is  taken  away.  From  all 
these  things,  therefore,  we  have  redemption  at  the  same  time  that  we  have  forgive- 
ness of  sins.  But  there  is  yet  another  bondage,  \\z.,  that  of  the  corruption  of  our 
bodies,  and  of  eternal  sufferings,  from  which  the  elect  are  not  yet  redeemed,  but 
shall  be  redeemed  at  the  coming  of  Christ  (Luke  xxi.  28).  The  apostle  calls  this 
the  redemption  of  the  purchased  possession  (Eph.  i.  14).  This  also  Christ  merited 
for  us :  but  He  would  not  bestow  npon  believers  at  once  this  incorruption  of  their 
bodies,  and  deliverance  from  present  external  miseries,  and  from  the  remains  of 
Bin,  for  the'foUowing  reasons.  1.  Lest  the  condition  of  the  Head  and  of  the  members 
should  be  plainly  dissimilar.  For  Christ  Himself  was  a  Man  of  sorrows :  He  did 
not  at  once  sit  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  in  glory,  but  first  underwent 
hunger,  thirst,  crucifixion,  and  death  :  it  is  therefore  but  consistent  that  the 
members  of  Christ  should  pass  likewise  through  sufferings  and  death  itself  to 
glory.  2.  They  are  not  fully  redeemed  from  these  bodily  afflictions,  neither  from 
the  remains  of  sin,  that  they  may  have  matter  for  glorifying  God,  whilst  they 
endure  them  with  the  greatest  constancy  and  patience,  whilst  they  resist  with  all 
their  might  all  the  lusts  of  sin  ;  that  God,  even  as  a  just  Judge,  mav  confer  upon 
them,  after  having  well  fought  this  fight,  the  unfading  crown.  3.  He  would  not 
BtJ^ightway  deliver  the  faithful  from  this  bodily  misery  instantly,  lest  Christians 
should  seem  to  embrace  Christ  on  account  of  this  temporal  deliverance,  rather 
than  on  account  of  that  spiritual  one.  {Bishop  Davevant.)  Redemption  God^s 
forgiveness  as  King  and  Father : — Suppose  that  a  son  had  sinned  grievously  against 
a  parent  who  was  also  a  king.  By  the  son's  breach  of  the  laws  h*  has  exposed 
himself  to  a  certain  penalty;  but  he  has  also  alienated  himself  from  his  father — 
produced  in  his  heart  a  spirit  of  distrust  and  aversion  which  becomes  deeper  and 
more  intense  the  longer  he  holds  aloof.  There  are  two  things  then  to  be  con- 
sidered :  the  punishment  to  which  the  son  is  liable  ;  and  the  depraving,  alienating 
influence  which  his  transgrf;ssion  exercises  over  hia  mind.  Now,  if  the  breach 
is  ever  to  be  healed,  it  will  not  be  enough  for  the  father  to  say,  "  I  remit  the 
penalty  of  your  transgression  :  I  forbear  to  strike  :  you  may  go."  The  son  may, 
will,  be  glad  to  escape  suffering,  but  he  will  not  be  drawn  thereby  in  love  towards 
his  father.  The  old  alienation  will  rankle  still,  and  will  break  out  presently  in 
fresh  offences.  Something  more,  then,  is  needed,  viz.,  the  exhibition  of  the 
father's  love  towards  the  erring  son  ;  there  is  needed  that  it  be  said,  "  I  not  only 
release  you  from  merited  suffering ;  but  I  forgive  you  :  I  open  my  heart  to  you, 
and  take  you  back  into  it.  I  am  only  too  glad  to  welcome  you  to  my  heart  and 
home,  with  the  feeling  that  my  child  is  no  longer  a  wanderer  and  an  alien,  but  has 
given  me  back  his  love."  Then  the  power  of  the  transgression  will  be  broken,  and 
the  interrupted  relation  between  father  and  child  will  be  restored.  Precisely  in  the 
same  way,  if  forgiveness  of  sin  meant  simply  the  remission  of  penalties,  there 
would  be  in  the  heart  of  the  sinner  nothing  but  a  cold  and  selfish  thankfulness  and 
Belf-congratulation  for  escape  from  pain.  But  our  sins  are  forgiven  us  in  such 
a  way  that  the  heart  of  a  loving  Father  is  displayed  in  the  act.  {G.  Calthrop,  M.A.) 
Redemption  atonement  for  and  remission  of  sin  : — It  is  the  Day  of  Atonement.  Two 
young  kids  of  the  goats  are  presented  before  the  Lord  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle. 
Those  young  spotless  creatures  are  a  double  type  of  Jesus  when  in  the  councils  of 
eternity  He  presented  Himself  before  Jehovah,  saying,  '*  Lo,  I  come  to  do  Thy  will, 
O  God."  The  lot  is  cast — one  for  the  Lord,  the  other  for  the  scapegoat — to  deter- 
mine which  shall  represent  our  Saviour  in  the  act  of  His  death,  and  which  in  the 
imit  of  His  death,  viz..  the  bearing  of  the  sins  of  the  people.    The  first  falls  as  • 


51  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

Bin-offering.  The  high  priest  havinq;  canght  its  flowing  blood  in  a  golden  bowl, 
enters  within  the  veil,  and,  alone,  eprinkles  it  upon  the  merey-seat.  Coming  forth, 
he  goes  up  to  the  living  goat ;  standing  over  it,  he  lays  his  hands  upon  its  head ; 
and,  amid  solemn  silence,  confesses  over  the  dumb  creature  all  the  sins  of  the 
people.  The  prayer  finished,  that  goat  bears  on  its  devoted  head  the  guilt  of  the 
people.  And  now  observe  the  act  which  foreshadowed  how  Jesus  by  taking  our 
sins  bore  them  away.  The  congregation  opens,  forming  a  lane  that  stretches  away 
from  the  tabernacle  to  the  boundless  desert.  While  every  lip  is  sealed,  and  every 
eye  intent,  a  "  fit "  man  steps  forth,  and  taking  hold  of  the  victim,  he  leads  it  on 
and  away  through  the  parted  crowd.  Amid  the  haze  of  the  burning  sands  and 
distant  horizon  their  forms  grow  less  and  less,  and  at  length  vanish  from  sight. 
He  and  that  goat  are  now  alone.  They  travel  on  and  further  on,  till,  removed 
beyond  the  reach  of  any  human  eye,  far  oft  in  the  distant  wilderness,  he  casta 
loose  the  sin-laden  creature.  And  when,  after  the  lapse  of  hours,  the  people 
descry  a  speck  in  the  distance,  which  draws  neaier  and  nearer,  until  they  recognize 
the  "fit  "  man,  the  people  see,  and  we  in  figure  see  also,  how  our  Lord,  when  He  waa 
made  an  offering  for  sin,  took  the  load  of  our  guilt  upon  Him,  bearing  it  away,  aa 
it  were,  to  a  land  that  was  not  known.  *'  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so 
far  hath  He  removed  our  transgressions  from  us."  (T.  Giithrie,  D.D.)  Pardon, 
not  justice,  wanted : — A  French  girl  of  fourteen  appeared  before  Napoleon,  and 
casting  herself  at  his  feet,  cried,  "  Pardon,  sire  I  pardon  for  my  father  I  "  "And 
who  is  your  father?"  asked  Napoleon,  "and  who  are  you?"  "My  name  ia 
Lajolia,"  she  said,  and  with  flowing  tears  added,  "  but,  sire,  my  father  is  doomed 
to  die."  "  Ah,  young  lady,"  replied  Napoleon,  "  I  can  do  nothing  for  you.  It  is 
the  second  time  your  father  has  been  found  guilty  against  the  State."  "  Alas  1 " 
exclaimed  the  poor  girl,  "  I  know  it,  sire ;  but  I  do  not  ask  for  justice,  I  implore 
pardon.  I  beseech  you  to  forgive  my  father  I "  After  a  momentary  struggle  of 
feeling.  Napoleon  gently  took  the  hand  of  the  young  maiden,  and  said,  "  Well,  my 
child,  for  your  sake  I  will  pardon  your  father.  That  is  enough.  Now  leave  me." 
The  value  of  pardon  : — A  man  named  John  Welsh  lay  in  prison  in  Chicago  under 
sentence  of  death.  His  friends  tried  to  get  his  sentence  commuted  to  imprison- 
ment for  life.  The  day  before  that  fixed  for  his  execution  arrived  without  any 
favourable  reply  being  received.  The  prisoner  sat  in  his  cell  listening  and  longing 
earnestly  for  a  respite.  Presently  he  heard  the  rumbling  of  a  car.  It  brought  the 
materials  for  the  scaffold,  and  soon  he  heard  the  stroke  of  the  hammers,  and  pic- 
tured himself  hanging  on  the  scaffold  he  could  hear  them  raising.  The  sound 
almost  drove  him  frantic,  and  he  begged  that  he  might  be  taken  anywhere  away  from 
the  dreadful  noise.  He  was  taken  to  a  distant  cell,  and  there  he  sat  on  the  edge  of  his 
bed,  haunted  with  gloomy  thoughts,  all  hope  gone.  He  was  startled  from  his 
reverie  by  a  hurried  step  along  the  corridor.  The  key  was  thrust  into  the  lock, 
and  one  of  the  officers  of  the  prison  stood  before  him.  He  held  in  his  hand 
a  paper  signed  by  the  Governor  of  the  State  of  Illinois.  It  was  a  commutation  of 
his  sentence.  How  the  truth  burst  upon  his  mind  1  When  the  paper  was  handed 
to  him  he  could  not  read  it  for  tears,  but  it  was  a  paper  bringing  him  his  life,  and 
he  hugged  it  and  kissed  it.  (H.  W.  Taylor.)  Forgiveness  and  remission  oj  sins: — 
Strictly  speaking  it  is  not  sins  that  are  forgiven,  but  their  penalty.  All  men  know 
what  "  to  give  "  is ;  but  what  is  it  to  /or-give  ?  To  forth-g\\e  or  give  forth.  When 
a  man  in  ancient  times  forgave,  he  gave  forth  fi'om  himself  something  he  was 
entitled  to  retain.  When  a  man  does  injury  to  another  he  is  liable  to  a  penalty, 
and  formerly  every  penalty  short  of  death  consisted  of  valuable  material  such  aa 
live  cattle  or  money ;  and  it  was  that,  laid  at  the  injured  person's  feet,  that  waa 
given  forth  from  the  receiver,  when  he  was  willing  to  forgive  the  injurer.  Pre- 
cisely speaking  it  was  not  the  injury  that  was  forth-given ;  the  injury  was  never 
at  the  disposal  of  the  injured  person.  It  was  the  penalty  incurred  by  the  injury 
that  was  forth-given.  And  whatever  the  penalty  might  be,  though  death  itself, 
if  it  was  not  exacted  it  was  forgiven.  So  when  God  forgives  He  generously  refrains 
from  exacting  the  penalty  we  have  incurred.  Another  word  is  remission,  which 
is  a  beautiful  variation.  There  is  mission  in  it.  When  any  one  is  sent  forth  some 
end  is  contemplated.  That  end  is  his  mission.  Be  of  course  means  back.  To 
remit  is  to  send  back.  In  ancient  times  when  the  material  of  the  penalty  of  a 
transgression  was  sent  to  the  injured  person,  he  had  it  in  his  option  graciously 
to  send  it  back.  That  was  the  remission  of  the  penalty  of  the  sin.  The  phrase  is  now 
condensed,  and  we  speak  not  orly  of  the  remission  of  the  penalty,  but  of  the  remis- 
aioo  of  the  sin.     The  expression  is  practically  equivalent  in  Biblical  representation 


OSAP.  L]  COLOSSIANS.  59 

to  the  word  redemption,  so  that  the  two  phrases  reciprocally  throw  light  on  each 
other.  la  this  light  it  is  seen  that,  as  a  matter  of  principle,  it  mnst  always  be  a 
diflSculty  in  moral  government  to  give  scope  to  the  forgiveness  of  crimes,  or  the 
remission  of  the  penalty  of  transgressions.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  there  shonld 
be  difficalty  in  the  Divine  government.     (J.  Moriton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16-19.  Who  Is  the  Image  of  the  Invisible  God.— This  is  the  most  exhanstive 

assertion  of  our  Lord's  Godhead  to  be  found  in  St.  Paul's  writings.  This  magnificent 
dogmatic  passage  is  introduced,  after  the  apostle's  manner,  with  a  strictly  practical 
object.  The  Colossian  Church  was  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  a  theosophic  doctrine 
which  degraded  Christ  to  the  rank  of  one  of  a  long  series  of  inferior  beings  supposed 
to  range  between  man  and  the  Supreme  God.  Against  this  assertion  Paul  asserts 
that  Christ  is :  I.  The  imaqe  of  thk  invisiblk  God.  The  expression  supplements 
the  title  of  "  the  Son."  As  "  the  Son,"  Christ  is  derived  eternally  from  the  Father, 
and  of  one  substance  with  Him.  As  "  the  image  "  Christ  is  in  that  one  substance, 
the  exact  likeness  of  the  Father,  in  all  things  except  being  the  Father.  He  is  the 
image  of  the  Father,  not  as  the  Father,  but  as  God.  The  *'  image "  is  indeed 
originally  God's  unbegun,  unending  reflection  of  Himself  in  Himself,  but  is  also 
the  organ  whereby  God,  in  His  essence  invisible,  reveals  Himself  to  His  creatures. 
Thus  the  '*  image  "  is  naturally,  so  to  speak,  the  Creator,  since  creation  is  the  first 
revelation  God  has  made  of  Himself.  Man  is  the  highest  point  in  the  visible 
universe ;  in  man,  God's  attributes  are  most  luminously  exhibited ;  man  is  the 
image  and  glory  of  God  (1  Cor.  xi.  7).  But  Christ  is  the  adequate  image  of  God, 
God's  self-reflection  in  His  own  thought,  eternally  present  with  Himself.  IL  As 
the  image  Christ  is  the  fibst-bobn  of  all  creation,  i.e.,  not  the  first  in  rank  among 
created  beings,  but  begotten  before  any  created  beings.  That  this  is  the  true  sense 
of  the  expression  is  etymologically  certain ;  but  it  is  also  the  only  sense  which  is  in 
real  harmony  with  the  relation  in  which,  according  to  the  context,  Christ  stands  to 
the  universe.  Of  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  of  things  seen  and  unseen,  of  the 
various  orders  of  the  angelic  hierarchy,  it  is  said  that  they  were  created :  1.  In 
Christ.  There  was  no  creative  process  external  to  and  independent  of  Him ;  since 
the  archetypal  forms  after  which  the  creatures  are  modelled  and  the  sources  of 
their  strength  and  consistency  of  being  eternally  reside  in  Him.  2.  By  Him.  Tbe 
force  which  has  summoned  the  worlds  out  of  nothingness  into  being,  and  which 
npholds  them  in  being  is  His;  He  wields  it;  He  is  the  one  producer  and  sustainer 
of  all  created  existence.  3.  For  Him.  He  is  not  as  Arianism  pretended,  merely 
an  inferior  workman  creating  for  the  glory  of  a  higher  Master ;  He  creates  for  Him- 
self ;  He  is  the  end  of  all  things  as  well  as  their  immediate  source ;  and  in  living 
for  Him  every  creature  finds  at  once  the  explanation  and  law  of  its  being.  For  He 
is  before  all  things,  and  by  Him  all  things  consist.  HI.  After  such  a  statement  it 
follows  naturally  that  the  fulness,  i.e.,  the  entire  cycle  of  the  Divine  attributes, 
considered  as  a  series  of  forces,  dwells  in  Him  ;  and  this  not  in  any  ideal  or  tran- 
Bcendental  manner,  but  with  that  actual  reality  which  men  attach  to  the  presence 
of  material  bodies  which  they  can  feel  and  measure  through  the  organs  of  sense 
(chap.  ii.  9).  Although  throughout  this  Epistle  the  word  Logos  is  never  introduced, 
it  is  plain  that  the  Image  of  St.  Paul  is  equivalent  in  His  rank  and  functions  to  the 
Logos  of  St.  John.  Each  exists  prior  to  creation  ;  each  is  the  one  agent  in  crea- 
tion ;  each  is  a  Divine  person ;  each  is  equal  with  God  and  shares  His  essential  life; 
eaih  is  really  none  other  than  God.  {Canon  Liddon.)  The  person  of  Christ : — 
I.  As  belated  to  God.  "Image."  Some  interpret  this  of  the  essential  image; 
others  as  setting  forth  Christ  as  God's  messenger,  or  as  perfect  man,  in  allusion  to 
Gen.  i.  26.  But  there  is  a  great  difference  between  man  made  ••  in,"  "  after,"  or 
"according  to  "  God's  image,  and  Christ  "the  image"  itself.  1.  An  image  (1) 
differs  widely  from  a  shadow.  The  Old  Testament  discoveries  of  Christ  are  called 
"  shadows,"  and  though  a  shadow  presupposes  substance,  it  is  only  a  mere  appear- 
ance (Heb.  X.  1),  (2)  Is  more  than  a  similitude.  One  thing  may  be  very  similar 
to  another  in  some  things,  and  yet  in  others  be  very  unlike.  The  sun  is  a  similitude, 
bat  not  an  image  of  God.  ^3)  Corresponds  entirely  with  that  which  it  represents — 
a  perfect  model  and  transcript.  The  cast  is  an  exact  sampler  of  the  mould ;  the 
wax  bears  a  correct  impress  of  the  seal,  not  merely  in  general  figure,  but  in  every 
line.  The  word  therefore  shows  that  Christ  is  the  very  form  of  God  in  whom  are 
embodied  all  His  perfections.  2.  This  suggests  that  (1)  the  dignity  of  our  Saviour'* 
person  stamps  infinite  merit  on  His  work.  (2)  Since  it  is  to  the  Divine  image  that 
believers  have  to  be  conformed,  we  have  some  idea  of  the  privileges  and  dignitj  to 


i9  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  S. 

which  we  shall  be  exalted.     (3)  In  Christ's  glorious  person  we  may  read  oar  own 
defects.     II.  As  belated  to  the  universe.     1.  He  is  Creator :  from  which  it  is  clear 
that  all  things  had  a  beginning,  and  that  nothing  exists  that  does  not  owe  its  exis- 
tence  to  Christ ;  and  therefore  Christ  is  the  lawful  proprietor  of  all  things.     That 
there  may  be  no  cavil  we  have  a  particular  enumeration  of  His  works :  ['.,  In  their 
nniversality,  "  all  things  "  ;  (2)  their  properties,  "  visible  and  invisible '  ;  (3)  their 
grades  in  the  scale  of  being,  "  thrones,  &c."     Try  to  elevate  your  thoughts  to  the 
dignity  of  this  subject.    What  an  Almighty  Saviour  you  have.     He  is  above  all 
human  portraiture.     His  name  is  "  Wonderful."     2.  But  if  Christ  be  all  this,  then 
(1)  here  is  an  end  of  Atheism,  Deism,  Unitarianism.    (2)  What  a  claim  have  Christ's 
meanest  creatures  on  our  consideration.     (3)  How  desperate  their  condition  who 
will  not  have  Him  to  reign  over  them.    III.  As  related  to  His  Church.     "  Head." 
1.  By  Divine  appointment ;  and  as  the  natural  head  is  the  highest  part  of  the  body, 
BO  Christ  has  in  all  things  the  pre-eminence.     2.  In  respect  of  His  wisdom.     The 
head  is  the  seat  of  mind.     There  are  all  the  organs  and  mental  phenomena :  the 
eye  to  see,  &c.     "  In  Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."    3. 
As  regards  spiritual  sustenation  and  support.     The  head  is  where  most  of  the  vital 
functions  are  which  impart  energy  through  the  system,  and  diffuse  pleasure  or  pain, 
joy  or  sorrow.     So  Christ  transmits  whatever  supplies  are  required  for  the  Church's 
welfare ;  through  Him  the  whole  body  increases  with  the  increase  of  God.    Lessons : 
We  have  a  Saviour — 1.  Almighty.     2.  Sympathizing.     3.  Everlasting.     {T.Watson, 
B.A.)        The  dignity  of  Christ: — I.  Christ  in  His  pre-incabnate  state.    This 
dignity  is  represented  by  two  brief  clauses  dealing  with — 1.  His  relation  to  the  God- 
head, "image."     There  is  a  distinction  between  image  and  likeness.     Likeness 
represents  superficial  resemblance,  as  when  two  leaves  from  the  same  tree  are  said 
to  be  Uke  each  other;  image  indicates  resemblance  by  participation  in  the  same  life 
by  reproduction  of  essence.    Likeness  is  that  which  is  superficial  and  partial,  image 
that  which  is  essential  and  exhaustive.     Our  Lord  is  that  representation  of  God 
which  God  could  not  but  have.     Whatever  of  glory  dwells  in  the  Eternal  Father  is 
eternally  imaged  in  His  Son.    2.  His  relation  to  the  universe.    (1)  "  In  Him  all 
things  were  made,"  t.<.,  the  creative  energy  not  only  passed  through  Him,  as  the 
volume  of  a  river's  waters  passes  through  its  rock-hewn  channels,  but  the  creative 
energy  dwells  in  Him,  belongs  to  Him,  as  the  hfe  of  His  life,  essentially  and_  eter- 
nally.   (2)  In  Him  also  all  things  consist,  stand  together ;  in  Him  the  universe 
finds  its  unity  and  coherence.     We  talk  about  the  laws  of  nature.    If  it  were  pos- 
sible for  us  to  trace  the  laws  of  nature  and  of  history  to  their  point  of  convergence, 
we  should  find  that  to  be  nothing  less  than  the  personal  sovereignty  of  Jesus  Christ. 
(3)  He  is  the  universal  Governor.     For  Him  all  things  exist,  to  serve  His  purpose 
and  to  manifest  His  glory.     Jesns  Christ  is  the  first,  efficient,  and  final  cause  of  all 
created  existence.    3.  Now  these  separate  clauses  are  dove-tailed  into  the  clause 
preceding  them,  "the  firstborn,"  for  that  expression  does  not  mean  that  our  Lord 
is  the  first  creature,  either  in  time  or  in  rank.     The  emphasis  must  be  put  upon 
both  adjectives,  ••  firstborn."    The  primacy  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  creation  is  the 
primacy  of  birth.    He  alone  is  bom,  not  made ;  all  other  things  are  made,  not  bom; 
and  there  is  a  very  marked  distinction  between  these  two.    Our  thoughts  are  bom 
of  our  intelligence ;  our  works  are  the  product  of  our  hands.     The  things  that  we 
make  are  outside  of  ourselves ;  they  may  perish,  and  our  being  be  not  affected ;  but 
the  thoughts  that  are  born  within  us  and  of  us  are  a  part  of  our  being ;  when  you 
touch  them  vou  touch  yourself.    Our  Lord's  place  in  the  universe  is  that  of  the 
firstborn ;  His  own  being  is  rooted  in  the  very  being  of  God,  as  inseparable  from 
Him  as  thought  is  from  being.    Therefore  He  is  called  the  Eternal  Word  of  God. 
Thought  always  precedes  achievement,  just  as  a  great  cathedral  is  born  in  the  mind 
of  the  architect  before  the  click  of  a  chisel  is  heard.     Even  so  is  Christ  the  first- 
born of  creation  as  holding  in  His  living  thought  all  the  realms  and  ages.    Thus 
far  the  essential  majesty  of  the  Divine  Christ.     This  is  a  glory  that  blinds  us,  but 
does  not  kindle  nor  transfigure  us.    IL  The  apostle  passes  to  the  glory  of  Him 
WHO  TABERNACLED  IS  HUMAN  FLESH.    As  crcatiou  fiuds  lo.  Him  its  head,  unity,  and 
coherence,  so  also  does  the  kingdom  of  grace.     These  are  not  two  systems,  joining 
each  other  as  two  circles  might  have  their  contact  at  a  single  point,  or  overlapping, 
but  are  one,  because  the  sovereignty  of  each  and  both  is  mvested  in  Christ.     1.  In 
His  relation  to  redemption  Christ  is  "  the  beginning,  the  firstborn  from  among  tb« 
dead,"  not  the  first  who  came  forth  from  tne  grave  in  rank  or  time.     His  relation 
to  the  kingdom  of  grace  as  to  that  of  nature  is  birth,  i.e.,  in  Him  the  resurrection 
finds  its  original  and  eternal  home.    It  is  not  merely  said  that  He  is  risen,  bat 


cmir.  t.]  COLOSSIANS.  61 

that  He  is  ••  the  Resarreotion  and  the  Life."  2.  As  He  is  said  to  be  the  source  ol 
spiritual  creative  energy,  so  also  ia  it  declared  that  the  authority  of  spiritual  con- 
trol is  vested  iu  Him.  He  is  Head  of  the  Church,  to  whom  alone  our  prayers  are  to 
be  addressed,  and  through  whom  alone  the  answer  of  God  can  come  to  us.  Be- 
tween us  and  God  there  are  no  hierarchies  of  principalities  and  powers,  no  army  of 
saints  and  martyrs.  The  way  is  clear  through  Christ.  There  is  but  one  Mediator. 
Just  as  the  head  interprets,  gathers  up,  and  responds  to  the  multitudinous  demands 
of  the  body  that  are  telegi'aphed  along  the  nervous  filaments  of  sensation,  so 
also  does  Christ,  as  the  Head  of  His  Church,  interpret  her  needs  and  respond  to  her 
prayers.  The  heart  does  not  always  pray  as  do  the  lips,  and  our  wishes  are  some- 
times very  different  from  our  wants :  but  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  knows  how 
to  interpret,  and  always  pierces  to  the  deepest  need.  And  so  when  the  strength  of 
our  hands  fails  us,  and  our  wisdom  is  staggered  by  the  problems  that  front  us,  a 
larger  wisdom  and  a  mightier  hope  come  pulsing  into  our  feebleness.  3.  Great 
prerogatives  are  these,  but  they  are  not  a  temporary  investiture.  They  belong  to 
Him  by  eternal  right,  "  for  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  all  fulness  should 
dwell. "  Grace  has  in  Him  its  eternal  dwelling-place.  And  so  long  as  the  redeemed 
shall  endure  will  He  be  their  loving  and  loved  Head.  For  in  Him  both  God  and 
man  find  their  suflScient  and  eternal  reconciliation.  4.  This  great  reconciliation  ia 
not  merely  problematical  and  partial,  it  is  positive  and  universal.  The  tenses  are 
in  the  past.  We  are  living  to-day,  not  in  the  dispensation  of  the  wrath  of  God,  but 
in  the  dispensation  of  His  redeeming  grace.  God  is  sending  forth  His  ministers, 
bidding  all  to  repent,  assuring  them  that  the  feast  is  ready,  and  that  it  is  only  waiting 
for  the  guests.  The  age  of  demoralization  passed  away  eighteen  hundred  years 
ago.  The  age  of  reconstruction  began  when  on  the  cross  our  Lord  said,  "  It  is 
finished!  "  That  was  the  burial  of  the  old,  as  it  was  the  birth  of  the  new;  and 
ever  since,  and  until  the  end  of  time,  in  spite  of  opposition  and  apparent  defeat,  all 
things  have  been  and  shall  be  working  together  for  good,  and  surely,  though  slowly, 
advancing  the  cause  of  God's  eternal  righteousness.  HI.  Pbactical  infebences. 
1.  We  have  been  led  by  the  apostle  to  the  most  exalted  conceivable  position  whence 
we  can  look  out  on  the  works  of  God  and  upon  the  history  of  the  world.  We  have 
been  led  through  all  the  grades  of  being,  from  matter  in  its  crudest  form  to  mind 
in  its  loftiest  manifestation,  and  we  have  seen  that  in  Christ  the  whole  universe  of 
created  existence  finds  its  unity  and  coherence,  while  the  awful  struggle  of  right 
against  wrong,  truth  against  falsehood,  find  in  Him  its  consummation  and  ending. 
This  is  something  that  neither  science  nor  philosophy  can  give.  In  Him  all  con- 
tradictions are  solved  between  the  seen  and  the  unseen,  the  created  and  the  un- 
created, the  sin  of  man  and  the  righteousness  of  God.  2.  If  it  be  true  that  both 
creation  and  redemption  find  in  Christ  their  living  centre,  then  it  is  also  plain  that 
only  in  proportion  as  we  enter  into  the  mind  of  Christ  can  we  understand  aright 
either  the  works  of  God,  or  the  histoiy  of  the  race,  or  the  revelation  of  His  character 
and  purposes  in  Scripture.  3.  Here,  too,  is  the  only  solution  of  the  vexed  question 
of  Christian  union.  How  shall  that  unity  be  brought  about?  Certainly  not  by 
creeds  nor  by  forms.  There  is  only  one  name,  one  sign,  that  can  subdue  us  all, 
and  that  is  the  sign  that  must  conquer  the  world,  the  flaming  cross  of  Jesus  Christ. 
When  we  bow  before  that,  and  all  our  faces  are  turned  reverently  toward  the  One 
on  the  throne,  then  shall  enmity  perish,  and  we  shall  be  one,  even  as  He  and  the 
Father  are  one.  4.  The  incomparable  dignity  of  our  Lord  should  awaken  in  ns  a 
three-fold  attachment.  (1)  It  should  awaken  in  us  a  feeling  of  reverence.  As  no 
one  of  us  would  think  of  standing  before  a  throned  king  without  becoming  humility, 
it  behoves  us  when  we  come  into  our  Creator's  presence  to  bow  with  reverence  at 
His  feet.  (2)  But  incomparable  as  is  His  dignity,  it  is  for  ever  joined  with  our  com- 
mon nature ;  and  therefore,  while  it  calls  for  reverence  it  also  calls  for  trust.  He 
is  the  Head  of  the  Church,  and  therefore  we  ought  to  come  not  only  reverently,  but 
confidently  and  boldly.  There  ought  to  be  joy  as  well  as  reverence  in  our  worship 
and  in  our  service.  (3)  This  incomparable  dignity  ought  also  to  fill  us  with  assurance 
and  courage.  (A.  J.  F.  Behrends,  D.D.)  The  Divine  pre-eminence  of  Christ:— 
I.  Christ's  pre-eminencb.  1.  His  supremacy  in  relation  to  God.  ••  Image  "  means 
(1)  The  supreme  likeness  of  God.  (2)  The  supreme  representation  of  God.  (3) 
The  supreme  manifestation  of  God.  2.  His  supremacy  in  relation  to  nature.  We 
have  (1)  His  dignity,  '•  firstborn,"  telling  of  His  age,  heirship,  authority.  (2)  His 
creative  and  sustaining  agency.  All  is  made  by  Him  and  consists  in  Him.  In  His 
miracles  He  was  the  Divine  Ulysses  whose  use  of  his  love  proclaimed  him  lord. 
(3)  His  consummating  glory.    Cx«ation  exists  for  Him  as  well  as  by  Him.    Bm   ■ 


it  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

its  end  as  well  as  its  origin.  3.  His  supremacy  in  relation  to  His  Church.  He  la 
(1)  Its  sovereign,  ••Head";  (2)  Its  force,  ••Beginning."  (3)  Life,  "Firstborn  from 
the  dead."  His  risen  life  is  the  life  of  the  Church.  II.  The  explanation  of  Hia 
PRE-EMINENCE  IS  His  DiviNE  PLENITUDE.  He  is  the  Pleroma,  the  totality  of  Divine 
attributes  and  powers.  1.  In  Him  are  all  the  Divine  resources.  He  is  the  fulness 
of  wisdom,  power,  love.  2.  In  Him  all  those  resources  permanently  "dwell" 
Because  He  is  thus  full  of  God,  He  must  in  pre-eminence  be  fully  God.     III.  Thb 

WOEK  OF  ChEIST  IN  HiS    PEE-EMINENCE   AND    PLENITUDE    IS    THE  WORK   OF   BECONCILIA- 

noN.  1.  Reconcile  what  ?  ••  All  things."  2.  How  ?  "  By  the  blood  of  His  cross." 
(U.  R.  Thomas.)  The  glory  of  the  Son: — There  are  here  three  grand  conceptiona 
of  Christ's  relations.  I.  To  God.  Paul  uses  language  which  was  familiar  on  the 
lips  of  his  antagonists.  Alexandrian  Judaism  had  much  to  say  about  the  •'  Word," 
and  spoke  of  it  as  the  Image  of  God.  Probably  this  teaching  reached  Colossaa.  An 
image  is  a  likeness  as  of  a  king's  head  on  a  coin  or  a  face  in  a  mirror.  Here  it  is 
that  which  makes  the  invisible  visible.  1.  God  in  Himself  is  inconceivable  and 
unapproachable.  "No  man  hath  seen,"  &c.  He  is  beyond  the  sense  and  above 
understanding.  There  is  in  every  human  spirit  a  dim  consciousness  of  His  pre- 
sence, but  that  is  not  knowledge.  Creatural  limitations  and  man's  sin  prevents  it. 
2.  Christ  is  the  perfect  manifestation  of  God.  Through  Him  we  know  all  that  we 
can  know  of  God.  ••He  that  hath  seen  Me,"  &o.  The  great  fathomless,  shoreless 
ocean  of  the  Divine  nature  is  like  a  "  closed  sea."  Christ  is  the  broad  river  which 
brings  its  waters  to  men.  Our  souls  cry  for  the  living  God ;  and  never  will  that 
orphaned  cry  be  answered  but  in  the  possession  of  Christ,  in  whom  we  possess  the 
Father  also.  II.  To  ceeation.  "Firstborn."  1.  At  first  sight  this  seems  to 
include  Him  in  the  great  family  of  creatures  as  the  eldest,  but  it  is  shown  not  to  be 
the  intention  in  the  next  verse,  which  alleges  that  Christ  was  before,  and  is  the 
agent  of,  all  creation.  The  true  meaning  is  that  He  is  firstborn  in  comparison 
with,  or  reference  to,  all  creati  <n.  2.  The  title  implies  priority  in  existence  and 
supremacy.  It  applies  to  the  Eternal  Word  and  not  to  His  incarnation.  3.  The 
necessary  clauses  state  more  fully  this  relation  and  so  confirm  and  explain  the  title. 
(1)  The  whole  universe  is  set  in  one  class,  and  He  alone  over  against  it.  Four 
times  in  one  sentence  we  have  •'  all  things  "  repeated,  and  traced  to  Him  as  Creator 
and  Lord,  (a)  *•  In  the  heavens  and  earth  "  is  quoted  from  Genesis,  and  is  intended, 
as  then,  to  be  an  exhaustive  enumeration  of  the  creation  according  to  plan.  (/3) 
••Things  visible  and  invisible"  includes  the  whole  under  another  principle  of 
division — there  are  visible  things  in  heaven,  and  may  be  invisible  on  earth,  but 
wherever  they  are  He  made  them,  (y)  '•Whether  thrones,"  &c.,  an  enumeration 
alluding  to  dreamy  speculations  about  an  angelic  hierarchy  filling  the  space  between 
God  and  men.  (2)  The  language  employed  brings  into  strong  relief  the  manifold 
variety  of  relations  which  the  Son  sustains  to  the  universe.  The  Greek  means 
" all  things  considered  as  a  unity."  (o)  •'In  Him,"  regards  Him  as  the  creative 
centre  or  reservoir  in  which  all  creative  force  resided,  and  was  in  a  definite  act  put 
forth.  The  error  of  the  Gnostics  was  to  put  the  act  of  creation  and  the  thing 
created  as  far  away  as  possible  from  God,  and  is  here  met.  (/3)  But  tbe  possible 
dangers  of  that  profound  truth  are  averted  by  the  preposition  •'  through  "  Him. 
That  presupposes  the  clear  demarcation  between  creature  and  creator,  and  extricates 
the  person  of  the  firstborn  from  all  risk  of  being  confounded  with  the  creation, 
while  it  makes  Him  the  medium  of  the  Divine  energy,  and  so  shows  His  relation  to 
the  Divine  nature.  He  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  and  accordingly  through 
Him  have  all  things  been  created.  "  The  express  image  of  His  person  by  whom  He 
made  the  worlds."  (y)  '•  For  Him."  All  things  sprung  from  His  will,  and  return 
thither  again.  These  relations  are  more  than  once  declared  of  the  Father.  What 
theory  of  Christ's  person  explains  the  fact  ?  3.  His  existence  before  the  creation  is 
repeated.  "He"  is  emphatic,  ••He  Himself";  •'is"  emphasises  not  only  pre- 
existence,  but  absolute  existence.  "  He  was "  would  not  have  said  so  much  as 
"  He  is  before  all  things."  "  Before  Abraham  was  I  am."  4.  In  Him  all  things 
hold  together.  He  is  tbe  element  in  and  by  which  is  that  continued  creation  which 
is  the  preservation  of  the  universe.  He  links  all  creatures  and  forces  into  a  co- 
opcrant  whole,  reconciling  their  antagonisms,  and  melting  all  their  notes  into 
music  which  God  may  hear,  however  discordant  it  may  be  to  as.  III.  To  thb 
Chuech.  a  parallel  is  plainly  intended  between  Christ's  relation  to  the  material 
creation  and  to  the  spiritual.  As  is  the  pre-incamate  word  to  the  universe,  so  ia 
the  incarnate  Christ  to  tbe  Church.  1.  Christ  the  Head  and  the  Church  His  body. 
Popular  physiology  regards  the  head  as  the  seat  of  life.    So  our  Lord  is  the  Boorot 


1.1  COLOSSIANS.  6b 


of  that  spiritual  life  whicb  flows  from  Him  into  His  members,  and  is  sight  in  the 
eye,  strength  in  the  arm,  swiftness  in  the  foot,  colour  in  the  cheek,  richly  various 
in  its  manifestations,  but  one  in  its  nature  audall  Flis.  That  thought  leads  to  Him 
as  the  centre  of  unity  by  whom  the  many  members  become  one  body.  The  head, 
too,  is  the  symbol  of  authority.  2.  Christ  is  the  beginning  of  the  Church.  In  nature 
He  was  before  all,  and  the  source  of  all.  So  "  the  beginning  "  does  not  mean  the 
first  member  of  a  series,  but  the  power  which  causes  the  series  to  begin.  The  root 
is  the  beginning  of  flowers,  although  we  may  say  the  first  flower  is.  3.  He  is  head 
and  beginning  by  means  of  His  resurrection.  (1)  He  is  firstborn  from  the  dead, 
and  His  communication  of  spiritual  life  to  His  Church  requires  the  historical  fact 
of  His  resurrection,  for  a  dead  Christ  could  not  be  the  source  of  life.  (2)  He  is  the 
beginning  through  His  resurrection,  too,  in  regard  to  raising  us  from  the  dead. 
He  is  the  firstfruits,  and  bears  promise  of  a  mighty  harvest.  Because  He  lives  we 
shall  live  also.  4.  So  Paul  concludes  that  in  all  things  He  is  first,  and  all  things 
are  that  He  may  be  first  Whether  in  nature  or  grace  the  pre-eminence  is  supreme. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.    15.  Christ  the  Image  of  the  Invisible  God.— I.  Christ  ib  tbb   Ihaob 
OF    God.      Image   signifies  that  which  represents   another,   and  as  things   are 
variously  represented,   so   there  is   a  great    variety   of    images.      1.    Some    are 
imperfect,  and  express  but  some  particular,  and  that  defectively.      {1)  Artificial 
images,  whether  drawn,  sculptured,   or   embroiilered,  represent  only  tne   colour, 
figure,   and   lineaments,   and   have  nothing  of   life  and  nature.      (2)  Adam,  who 
was  called  God's  image  because  the  conditions  of  his  nature  had  some  resemblance 
to  the  properties  of  God — intellect,  will,  and  lordship  ;    but  he  had  not   God's 
essence.     2.  Some  are  perfect.      We  call  a  child  the  image  of  his  father,  inasmuch 
as  he  has  not  merely  the  colour  or  figure  of  his  parent,  but  his  nature  and  properties, 
Boul,  body,  life,  Ac.      So  a  prince  has  not  only  the  appearance  of  his  predecessor's 
power,  but  its  substance  (Gen.  v.  3).     3.  In  which  of  these  two  senses  is  the  figure 
true  of  Christ  ?  Surely  not  in  the  sense  that  man  is  the  image  of  God.  For  intending 
to  exalt  Christ  and  to  show  that  His  dignity  is  so  great  as  to  capacitate  Him 
to  save  us,  it  would  ill  suit  his  design  if  the  apostle  attributed  no  more  to  Him  than 
what  holds  good  for  any  man.     Read  our  Lord's  own  testimony  (John  xiv.  9,  xii. 
45).     Now  where  is  the  portrait  of  which  it  may  be  said  that  he  who  has  seen  it 
has  seen  him  whom  it  represents  7    This  can  only  be  found  in  one  which  contains 
the  nature  of  the  original  (Heb.  i.  3).      (1)  God's  nature  is  perfectly  represented  in 
Christ.      Hence  He  is  called  God  over  and  over  again.      (2)  Christ  represents  the 
Father  in  His  properties,  eternity,  immutability,  wisdom,  Ac.      (3)  In  His  works 
(John  V.  19;  Heb.  i.  10;  John  i.  3,  Ac).      4.  Now  no  child  perfectly  represents 
his  father  ;  there  are  differences  of  manner,  disposition,  feature:  but  Christ  repre- 
sents the  Father  in  everything.     6.  This  sacred  truth  overthrows  two  heresies — the 
Babellian  and  the  Arian.    The  former  confounded  the  Son  with  the  Father,  the  latter 
rent  them  asunder.    Those  took  from  the  Son  His  person,  these  His  nature.     Paul 
demonstrates  the  Sabellian  error  herj,  lor  no  one  is  the  image  of  himself ;  and  the 
Arian,  for  Christ  could  not  be  a  perfect  image  unless  He  had  the  same  nature  as 
the  Father.     II.  God,  whose  image  Jesus  is,  is  invisibui.     1.  The  Divine  nature 
is  spiritual,  and  hence  invisible,  inasmuch  as  the  eye  sees  only  corporeal  objects. 
For  this  cause,  Moses,  in  teaching  that  there  is  nothing  material  in  the  Divine 
essence  that  might  be  represented  by  pencil  or  chisel,  remonstrates  to  them  that 
when  God  manifested  Himself  they  "  saw  no  similitude  "  (Deut.  iv.  12,  15).  Whence 
He  infers  they  must  make  no  graven  image.     2.  But  the  meaning  here  is  also  that 
God  is  incomprehensible.     Seeing  is  often  put  for  knowing.     The  Seraphim  cover 
their  faces  to  embody  this  truth  (Isa.  vi.  2).      Through  His  grace  indeed  we  may 
know  something  of  His  nature  (Heb.  i.  1) ;  but  however  clear  it  does  not  amount  to 
a  seeing,  i.e.,  an  apprehension  which  conceives  the  proper  form  of  the  subject.     3. 
Why  is  this  quality  mentioned  here  ?  To  show  us  that  God  has  manifested  Himself 
to  us  by  His  Son.     There  is  a  secret  opposition  between  image  and  invisible.     Ood 
has  a  nature  so  impenetrable  that  without  this  His  Image  men  would  not  have 
known  Him.    (1)  By  Him  He  made,  preserves,  and  governs  the  world.   To  Him  we 
must  refer  the  revelations  of  God  under  the  Old  Testament.      (2)  But  here  the 
reference  is  to  what  took  place  in  the  fulness  of  time.      In  Christ  we  see  all  the 
wonders  of  the  invisible  Father — His  justice,  mercy,  power,  Ac,  in  all  their  com- 
pleteness, whereas  creation  only  shows  the  edges.      (J.DaiRp.)  The  image  of 
Ood :— We  believe  in  many  things  we  never  saw,  on  the  evidence  of  other  senses 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  l 

than  sight.  We  believe  in  music,  invisible  odours,  nay,  in  what  we  can  neither 
hear,  taste,  smell,  nor  touch — our  own  life,  our  soul.  Thus  it  were  irrational  to  dis- 
believe  in  God  because  He  is  invisible.  Still  we  are  tempted  to  forget  His  existence, 
and  as  for  the  ungodly  "  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts."      L  I  would  wabn  too 

AOAINST  allowing   GoD  TO  BE   OUT   OF   MIND   BECAUSE  Hb  18  OUT  OF   SIGHT.       1.    ThiS 

is  a  danger  to  which  our  very  constitution  exposes  us.  Hence  the  necessity  of 
striving  to  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight.  This  is  difiBcult  because  we  are  creatures  ol 
sense.  The  dead  are  out  of  sight  and  so  often  forgotten,  the  eternal  world,  the 
devil,  and  so  God.  2.  Why  should  the  invisibility  of  God  be  turned  into  a  tempta- 
tion to  sin  7  It  should  rather  minister  to  holy  care.  How  solemn  the  thought  that 
an  unseen  Being  is  ever  at  our  side  I  Were  this  realised,  then  bad  thoughts  would 
be  banished,  and  unholy  deeds  crushed,  and  purity  and  heavenliness  imparted  to 
the  life  and  conduct.  II.  The  visible  revelations  o!"  the  invisiblk  in  the  Old 
Testament  were  most  probably  manifestations  of  the  Son  of  God.  To  Jacob 
at  Peniel,  to  Joshua  at  Jericho,  to  Manoah,  to  Isaiah  (chap,  vi.),  and  to  others  God 
appeared.  How  are  we  to  rconcile  this  with  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  "  ? 
Only  by  regarding  these  appearances  as  manifestations  of  Him  who  is  "  the  image 
of  the  invisible  God."  This  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  other  passages  in  the 
history  of  redemption.  We  know  for  certain  that  the  fruits  of  the  incarnation  were 
anticipated,  and  the  fruits  of  His  death  enjoyed  before  He  died.  Why  not,  then, 
the  fact  of  the  incarnation  ?  Viewed  in  this  light,  these  Old  Testament  stories 
acquire  a  deeper  and  more  enduring  interest.  In  the  guide  ol  Abraham's  pilgrimage 
I  see  the  guide  of  my  own.  Jacob's  success  in  wrestUng  imparts  vigour  to  my 
prayers.  III.  The  greatness  of  the  worker  corresponds  with  tmb  greatness  of 
the  work.  It  is  not  always  bo.  Sometimes  God  accomplishes  mighty  ends  by 
feeble  instruments  in  both  nature  and  grace.  But  redemption  is  diSerentiated  in 
greatness,  grandeur,  and  difficulty  from  all  the  other  works  of  God.  It  cost  more 
love,  labour,  and  wisdom  than  all  yon  starry  universe.  But  great  as  is  the  work  the 
Worker  ia  greater — the  visible  Image  of  the  invisible  God.      IV.  God  as  revealed 

VISEBLT   IN   JE8U8   MEETS  AND     SATISFIES     ONE   OF     OCR     STRONGEST     WANTS.        1.    The 

second  commandment  runs  more  counter  to  our  nature  than  any  other.  (1)  Look 
at  the  heathen  world.  For  long  ages  the  world  was  given  up  to  idolatry  with  the 
exception  of  a  single  people.  To  fix  the  mind  on  an  invisible  Being  seemed  like 
attempting  to  anchor  a  vessel  on  a  flowing  tide.  And  as  a  climbing  plant,  for  lack 
of  a  better  stay,  vnU  throw  its  arms  round  a  rotting  tree :  rather  than  want  some- 
thing palpable  to  which  their  thoughts  might  cling,  men  have  worshipped  the 
Divine  Being  thiough  the  most  hideous  forms.  (2)  Look  at  the  proneness  to 
sensuous  worship  among  the  Jews.  (3)  We  find  the  evidence  of  this  prosperity  in 
the  Christian  Church.  Fancy  some  old  Roman  rising  from  his  grave  on  the  banks 
of  tiie  Tiber,  what  could  he  suppose  but  that  the  "  Eternal  City  "  had  changed  her 
idols,  and  by  some  strange  turn  of  fortune  had  given  to  one  Jesus  the  old  throne  of 
Jupiter  and  assigned  the  crown  which  Juno  wore  in  his  days  to  another  queen  of 
heaven  ?  2.  In  what  way  are  we  to  account  for  this  universal  tendency  t  It  is  not 
enongh  to  call  it  folly ;  the  feelings  from  which  it  springs  are  deeply  rooted  in  onl 
nature.  Ton  tell  me  that  God  is  infinite,  incomprehensible ;  but  it  is  as  difficult  for 
me  to  make  such  a  Being  the  object  of  my  affections  as  to  grasp  a  sound  or  detain 
a  shadow.  This  heart  craves  something  more  congenial  to  my  nature,  and  seeks  in 
God  a  palpable  object  for  its  affections  to  cling  to.  3.  Now  see  how  this  want  is 
met  in  the  Gospel  by  Him  who  "  knoweth  our  frame."  In  His  incarnate  Son  the 
Infinite  is  brought  within  the  limits  of  my  understanding,  the  Invisible  is  revealed 
to  my  sight.  In  that  eye  bent  upon  me  I  see  Divine  love  in  a  form  I  can  feel.  God 
addresses  me  in  human  tones,  and  stands  before  me  in  the  fashion  of  a  man ;  and 
when  I  fall  at  His  feet  with  Thomas  I  am  an  image  worshipper  but  no  idolater,  for 
I  bend  to  the  "  image  of  the  invisible  God."  V.  In  what  sense  is  Christ  the 
Image  of  the  invisible  God  ?  1.  It  means  much  more  than  mere  resemblance ; 
it  conveys  the  idea  of  shadow  less  than  of  substance.  I  have  known  an  infant  bea« 
such  a  resemblance  to  his  father  that  what  his  tongae  could  not  tell  his  face  did  : 
and  people  struck  by  the  Ukeness  exclaimed,  "  He  is  the  very  image  of  his  father." 
Such  was  Adam  in  his  state  of  innocence.  Now  it  ma^  be  said  that  as  our  Lord, 
like  the  first  Adam,  was  holy,  he  is  therefore  called  the  image  of  God ;  yet  that  does 
not  exhaust  the  meaning,  nor  is  it  on  that  account  that  Paul  ealls  Him  the  second 
Adam.  Nor  have  they  sounded  the  depths  who  say  He  was  so  called  because  He 
was  endowed  with  power  to  do  the  works  of  God.  For  many  others  have  been  in 
that  sense  equally  images  of  God.     But  where  are  they  represented  as  '♦  God  mani* 


I.]  COLOSSIANS.  85 

test  in  the  flesh  "  ?  2.  In  Christ's  character  and  works  we  have  a  living,  visible, 
perfect  image  of  the  invisible  God.  (1)  In  iHim  we  see  the  power  of  God,  and  notably 
at  the  grave  of  Lazarus.  To  make  something  out  of  nothing  is  a  work  more  visibly 
stamped  with  divinity  than  to  make  one  thing  out  of  another — a  living  man  out  of 
lifeless  dust,  and  then  on  that  mountain  side  the  bread  multiplies.  (2)  In  Christ 
we  have  the  image  of  a  holy  God.  (.S)  In  Christ  we  have  the  image  of  a  God  willing 
end  waiting  to  save.      {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  image  of  the  invisible  God  : — I 

draw  out  from  my  pocket  a  little  miniature,  and  look  upon  it  and  tears  drop  from 
my  eyes.  What  is  it  ?  A.  piece  of  ivory.  What  is  on  it  T  A  face  that  some  artist 
has  painted  there.  It  is  a  radiant  face.  My  history  is  connected  with  it.  When 
I  look  upon  it  tides  of  feeling  swell  in  me.  Some  one  comes  to  me,  and  says : 
"  What  is  that  ?  "  I  say,  "  It  is  my  mother."  "  Your  mother  1  I  should  call  it  a 
piece  of  ivory  with  water-colours  on  it."  To  me  it  is  my  mother.  When  you  come 
io  scratch  it,  and  analyze  it,  and  scrutinize  the  elements  of  it,  to  be  sure  it  is  only 
a  sign  or  dumb  show,  but  it  brings  to  me  that  which  is  no  sign  nor  dumb  show. 
According  to  the  law  of  my  mind,  through  it  I  have  brought  back,  interpreted, 
refreshed,  revived,  made  patent  in  me,  all  the  sense  of  what  a  loving  mother  was. 
So  I  take  my  conception  of  Christ  as  He  is  painted  in  dead  letters  on  dead  paper, 
and  to  me  is  interpreted  the  glory,  the  sweetness,  the  patience,  the  love,  the  joy- 
inspiring  nature  of  God ;  and  1  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  *'  Christ  is  my  God,"  juet  as 
I  would  not  hesitate  to  say  of  that  picture,  •*  It  is  my  mother."  "  But,"  says  a 
man,  "  you  do  not  mean  that  yon  really  sucked  at  the  breast  of  that  picture  ?  "  No, 
I  did  not ;  but  I  will  not  allow  any  one  to  drive  me  into  any  such  minute  analysis 
as  that.  Now  I  hold  that  the  Lord  JesuB  Christ,  as  represented  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, brings  to  my  mind  all  the  effluence  of  brightness  and  beauty  which  I  am 
capable  of  understanding.  I  can  take  in  no  more.  He  is  said  to  be  the  express 
image  of  God's  glory.  He  reveals  to  us  a  God  whose  interest  in  man  is  inherent, 
and  who  through  His  mercy  and  goodness  made  sacrifices  for  it.  God  so  loved  the 
world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son  to  die  for  it.  What  is  the  only  begotten 
Son  of  God  ?  Who  knows  ?  Who  can  know  f  That  His  only  begotten  Son  is 
precious  to  Him  we  may  know,  judging  from  the  experience  of  an  earthly  father  ; 
and  we  cannot  doubt  that  when  He  gave  Christ  to  come  into  life,  and  humble  Him- 
self to  man's  condition,  and  take  upon  Himself  an  ignominious  death.  He  sacrificed 
that  which  was  exceedingly  dear  to  Him.  And  this  act  is  a  revelation  of  the  feeling 
of  God  toward  the  human  race.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Chritt  the  image  of  God: — 
There  is  in  Rome  an  elegant  fresco  by  Gnido — "The  Aurora."  It  covers  a  lofty 
ceiling.  Looking  up  at  it  from  the  pavement  your  neck  grows  stifif,  your  head  dizzy, 
and  the  figures  indistinct.  You  soon  tire  and  turn  &way.  The  owner  of  the  palace 
has  placed  a  broad  mirror  near  the  floor.  You  may  now  sit  down  before  it  as  at  a 
table,  and  at  your  leisure  look  into  the  mirror,  and  enjoy  the  fresco  that  is  above 
yoa.  There  is  no  more  weariness,  nor  indistinctness,  nor  dizziness.  Like  the 
Rospiglioso  mirror  beneath  "  The  Aurora,"  Christ  reflects  the  glory  of  the  Divine 
nature  to  the  eye  of  man.  Chritt  it  intended  to  be  familiarly  kvown : — The  whole 
value  of  the  gospels  to  Erasmus  lay  in  the  vividness  with  which  they  brought  home 
to  their  readers  the  personal  impression  of  Christ  Himself.  "  Were  we  to  have 
Been  Him  with  our  own  eyes,  we  should  not  have  so  intimate  a  knowledge  as  they 
give  ns  of  Christ,  speaking,  heaUng,  dying,  rising  again,  as  it  were  in  our  very 
presence.  ...  If  the  footprints  of  Christ  are  shown  qs  in  any  place,  we  kneel  down 
and  adore  them.  Why  do  we  not  rather  venerate  the  living  and  breathing  picture 
of  Him  in  these  books  7  ...  It  may  be  the  safer  course,"  he  goes  on,  with  charac- 
teristic irony,  "  to  conceal  the  state  mysteries  of  kings,  but  Christ  desires  His  myste- 
ries to  be  spread  abroad  as  openly  as  was  possible.  {Littlest  "  Historical  Lights") 
The  firstborn: — The  expression  as  it  stands  is  somewhat  ambiguous.  1.  Does 
it  imply  that  all  creatures  have  been  born,  but  that  Jesus  was  bom  before 
them  ?  Impossible.  All  human  creatures  have  been  bom,  all  at  least  but 
the  first ;  and  even  he  was  "  the  son  of  God "  (Luke  iii,  38).  We  are  all 
"  God's  offspring."  But,  except  in  poetry,  we  can  scarcely  speak  of  the  birth 
of  the  earth,  ocean,  stars,  <fec.  They  have  been  created,  not  born;  they  are 
the  creatures  rather  than  the  children  of  God.  2.  Nor  can  the  meaning  be  first- 
bom  within  the  circle  of  all  creation  ;  for  the  higher  nature  of  Jesus  is  not  within 
that  circle:  it  is  far  above  it;  before  Abraham,  and  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  He  was 
and  is.  8.  The  apostle's  idea  is  that  Jesus  is  the  hereditary  Lord  of  the  whole 
creation.  The  representation  is  based  on  the  prerogative  that  is  still  attached  in 
many  lands  to  primogeniture.     That  prerogative  is  great.    In  virtue  of  it  the  first* 

6 


6«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caa.  h. 

born  of  the  Queen  is  Prince  of  Wales ;  of  the  Emperor  of  Germany,  Crown  Prince;  of 
the  late  Emperor  Napoleon,  Prince  Imperial.  In  ancient  times  and  among  th© 
apostle's  people,  in  the  days  of  their  national  grandeur,  there  was  a  corresponding 
privilege  attached  to  the  royal  firstborn.  And  hence  in  the  course  of  time  the  word 
came  to  be  so  employed  that  the  ideas  of  birth  and  priority  of  birth  got  sometimes 
to  be  merged  out  of  sight,  while  the  ideas  of  special  hereditary  privilege,  prerogative, 
and  honour  stood  prominently  forth.  Hence  God  said  to  Pharaoh,  "  Israel  is  My 
son.  My  firstborn,"  because  they  were  in  distinction  from  other  peoples  the  reci- 
pients of  the  advantages  which  were  the  natural  prerequisites  of  primogeniture. 
Again  in  Jer.  xixi.  9  the  idea  of  priority  in  birth  is  entirely  shaded  off,  for  that 
priority  could  not  be  affirmed  of  Ephraim — the  reference  is  to  peculiarity  of  prero- 
gative and  honour.  Take  again  Heb.  xii.  22,  23.  Here  Christians  are  called  the 
firstborn,  and  not  Christians  in  heaven,  for  they  are  distinguished  from  the  "  spirits 
of  just  men  made  perfect,"  but  Christiana  on  earth.  All  such  Christians,  though 
scattered,  and  variously  denominated,  are  "  the  one  general  assembly  and  Church 
of  the  firstborn."  This  shows  that  the  term  may  be  and  is  ased  without  priority  of 
birth,  and  in  the  sense  of  being  God's  very  highly-favoured  children.  All  the 
blessings  of  primogeniture  are  theirs  because  they  are  Christ's,  the  Firstborn.  As 
He  is  the  Crown  Prince  of  the  universe,  the  Prince  Imperial  and  hereditary  Lord  of 
the  whole  creation,  they  are  constituted  joint  heirs  with  Him  of  the  "  inheritance 
incorruptible,"  Ac.  Again,  this  interpretation  is  supported  by  Eom.  viii.  29. 
"  Firstborn  among  many  brethren  "  is  a  notable  expression.  We  cannot  suppose 
that  God  desired  to  secure  the  Saviour  a  relation  of  chronological  priority.  Jesus 
was  already  before  all.  The  idea  is  that  it  was  the  aim  of  God  to  remove  from  the 
peerless  Son  the  condition  of  solitariness  in  the  parental  and  heavenly  home.  This 
aim  was  accomplished  by  surrounding  Him  with  a  circle  of  multitudinous  brethren, 
bearing  the  familiar  family  likeness,  who  might  be  sharers  with  Him  in  His  inheri- 
tance of  glory.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Christ  is  one  of  us  : — On  the  centenary  of 
the  birth  of  Robert  Stephenson,  there  was  a  very  large  demonstration  at  Newcastle. 
The  town  was  paraded  by  a  vast  procession  who  carried  banners  in  honour  of  the 
distinguished  engineer.  In  the  procession  there  was  a  band  of  peasants,  who  carried 
a  little  banner  of  very  ordinafy  appearance,  but  bearing  the  words,  "  He  was  one 
of  us."  They  were  inhabitants  of  the  small  village  in  which  Robert  Stephenson 
had  been  born,  and  had  come  to  do  him  honour.  They  had  a  right  to  a  prominent 
position  in  that  day's  proceedings,  because  he  to  whom  so  many  thousands  did 
honour  was  one  of  them.  Even  so,  whatever  praise  the  thrones,  dominions,  princi- 
paMties,  and  powers  can  ascribe  to  Christ  in  that  grand  celebration  when  time  shall 
be  no  more,  we  from  earth  can  wave  our  banners  with  the  words  written  on  them, 
"  He  was  one  of  us." 

Yer.  16.    By  Him  were  all  things  created. — I.  Boub  or  thosk  ojlSsb  whiob 

HJiUSTBATE    TBK   HABMONt    BETWEEN    NATUBAIi    BELIOION    IKD    OCB   CbBISTIAN    FAITH. 

I.  The  doctrine  of  the  beii;^  of  a  God.  I  do  not  need  to  open  the  Bible  to  learn 
that.  It  is  enough  that  I  open  my  eyes,  and  turn  them  on  the  book  of  natare, 
where  it  stands  legibly  written  on  every  page.  2.  So  also  is  the  doctrine  that  man 
is  a  sinner.  It  is  enough  to  open  my  heart,  or  read  in  the  light  of  conscience  the 
blotted  record  of  my  past  life.  3.  Such  also  is  the  doctrine  that  sin  deserves 
punishment.  Hell  is  no  discovery  of  the  Bible.  In  vain  do  men  flee  from  Christi- 
anity to  escape  what  their  uneasy  conscience  feels  to  be  a  painful  doctrine.  4. 
Such  also  is  the  doctrine  that  man  cannot  save  himself.  In  what  country  or  what 
age  of  heathenism  does  man  appear  standing  erect  before  his  God,  demanding 
justice?  In  none.  All  her  temples  had  vicarious  sacrifices  and  atoning  altars.  6. 
Such  also  is  the  doctrine  that  the  soul  survives  death.  This  hope  has  been  a  star 
that  shone  in  every  sky,  a  flower  that  bloomed  in  the  poorest  soil.  Although  it 
cannot  be  said  that  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  is  to  be  placed  in  the  same  clas* 
with  those  universal  fixed  beliefs,  yet  may  not  the  feelings  which  prompt  to  such 
tender  care  of  the  lifeless  body  have  suggested  the  idea  ?  Different  from  these,  the 
doctrine  of  God  incarnate  is  one  which  nature  nowhere  teaches  us.  Our  proofs 
of  this  must  be  sought  for  in  Scripture.     In  illustration  of  this  remark,  notice  that — 

II.  The  Word  of  God  both  here  and  elsewebe  abcbibes  the  wobk  of  creation  to 
Jesds  (1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  Eph.  iii.  9 ;  .7ohn  i.  3).  Our  Lord  has  been  connected  with 
creation  son^etimes  more  in  beautiful  fancies  than  in  plain  facts.  There  is  m 
^.ovrex,  e.g.,  which  the  pipty  of  other  days  associated  with  the  piety  and  love  of 
Calvary.     In  the  form  anJ  arrangement  of  its  parts  it  presents  such  a  remarkable 


CHAF.  I.]  COLOSSIANS.  6* 

resemblance  to  the  cross  and  nails,  enriched  by  a  halo  of  floral  glory,  that,  as  il 
originally  made  to  anticipate  and  afterwards  left  to  commemorate  our  Redeemer'a 
Bufferings,  it  has  received  the  name  of  the  passion  Jloicer,  And  I  remember  how,  ixt 
wooded  dell,  or  on  brown  heather  hill,  we  were  wont  to  pull  up  a  fern,  and  having 
out  its  root  across  wonder  on  the  initials  Jesus  Christ  printed  there  on  the  wounded 
stem.  And  when  the  mariner,  leaving  our  northern  latitudes,  pushes  southward,  ha 
sees  a  starry  cross  emerging  from  the  deep  ;  and  as  his  course  tends  further  it  rises 
higher  in  the  heavens,  till,  when  the  pole-star  has  dipped  beneath  the  wave,  he 
gazes  with  awe  and  wonder  at  the  sign  of  salvation  blazing  above  his  head.  In 
these  things  a  devout  superstition  sought  to  gratify  its  affections.  It  is  not,  how- 
ever, in  these  fancies  that  we  seek  or  see  our  Lord's  connection  with  nature.  But 
as,  with  the  genius  that  aspires  to  immortality,  the  painter  leaves  his  name  in  th© 
corner  of  the  canvas,  so  Inspiration,  dipping  her  pen  in  indelible  truth,  haa 
inscribed  the  name  of  Jesus  on  all  we  see — on  sun  and  stars,  flower  and  tree,  rock  and 
mountain,  the  unstable  waters  and  the  firm  laud;  and  also  on  what  we  do  not  see — 
angels  and  spirits,  the  city  and  heavens  of  the  eternal  world.  This  is  not  fancy, 
but  fact.  No  voice  ever  sounded  more  distinctly  than  that  of  revealed  truth 
proclaiming  the  Creatorship  of  Jesus,  and  hence  His  Lordship  of  all.  (T.  Guthrie^ 
D.D.)  Christ  the  Creator: — I.  Consideb  the  statement  itself.  1.  Heaven 
itself  was  created  by  and  for  Christ  Jesus.  (1)  There  is  such  a  place,  as  well  as 
such  a  state,  and  of  that  place  Jesus  is  the  centre.  (2)  It  was  created  for  Jesus, 
and  for  the  people  wh:/m  He  will  bring  there  to  be  one  for  ever  with  Himself.  (3) 
It  exists  by  Jesus  and  for  Jesus,  (a)  Prepared  by  Jesus.  He  is  the  designer  of  it. 
(b)  Reflects  Jesus.  He  is  the  soul  of  it.  (c)  Praises  Jesus.  He  is  the  King  of  it. 
2.  The  angels.  All  their  ranks  were  made  by  Him  and  for  Him.  (1)  To  worship 
Him,  and  glorify  Him  with  their  adoration.  (2)  To  rejoice  with  Him  and  in  Him, 
as  they  do  when  sinners  repent.  (3)  To  guard  Christ's  people  in  hfe,  and  bring 
them  to  Him  in  death.  (4)  To  carry  out  His  purposes  of  judgment,  as  with 
Pharaoh,  Ac.  (5)  To  achieve  His  purposes  of  deliverance,  as  Peter  from  prison, 
8.  This  world  was  made  by  Him  to  be — (1)  A  place  for  Him  to  live  and  die  upon. 
(2)  A  stage  for  His  people  to  live  and  act  upon.  (3)  A  province  to  be  fully  restored 
to  His  dominion.  (4)  A  new  world  in  the  ages  to  come,  to  bless  other  worlds,  if 
such  there  be  ;  and  to  display,  for  ever,  the  glories  of  Jesus.  4.  All  the  lower 
creatures  are  for  Jesus.  "And  that  are  in  earth."  (1)  They  are  needful  to  man, 
and  80  to  our  Lord's  system  of  grace.  (2)  They  are  illustrations  of  Christ's 
wisdom,  power,  and  goodness.  (3)  They  are  to  be  treated  kindly  for  His  sake. 
6.  Men  were  created  by  and  for  Christ.  (1)  That  He  might  display  a  special 
phase  of  power  and  skill,  in  creating  spiritual  beings  embodied  in  material  forms. 
(2)  That  He  might  become  Himself  one  of  them.  (3)  That  He  might  Himself  be 
the  Head  of  a  remarkable  order  of  beings  who  know  both  good  and  evil,  are  childrea 
of  God,  are  bound  to  God  by  ties  of  gratitude,  and  are  one  with  His  Son.  (4)  That 
for  these  He  might  die:  to  save  them,  and  to  make  them  His  companions,  friends, 
and  worshippers  for  ever.  (5)  That  human  thrones,  even  when  occupied  by  wicked 
men,  might  be  made  to  subserve  His  purpose  by  restraint  or  by  overruling.  IL 
Review  the  eefleotions  hencb  akisino.  1.  Jesus,  then,  is  God.  "By  Him  were 
all  things  created."  2.  Jesus  is  the  clue  of  the  universe ;  its  centre  and  expla- 
nation. All  things  are  to  be  seen  in  the  light  of  the  cross,  and  all  things  reflect 
light  on  the  cross.  For  Him  all  things  exist.  3.  To  live  to  Jesus,  then,  is  to  find 
out  the  true  object  of  our  being,  and  to  be  in  accord  with  all  creation.  4.  Not 
living  to  Jesus,  we  can  have  no  blessing.  5.  We  can  only  live  for  Him  as  we  live 
by  Him,  for  so  all  things  do.  6.  It  is  clear  that  He  must  triumph.  All  is  going 
well.  If  we  look  at  history  from  His  throne,  all  things  are  "  for  Him."  ••  He  must 
reign."  Let  as  comfort  one  another  with  these  words.  What  an  honour  to  be  the 
smallest  page  in  the  retinue  of  such  a  prince!  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Advent 
in  Creation : — A  very  narrow  notion  of  the  functions  of  Christ  is  afloat  in  the 
atmosphere  of  popular  religious  thought,  though  not  formulated  into  dogmatic 
phrases.  It  is  that  our  Lord  is  limited  in  work  and  even  in  nature  to  the  mission 
of  redemption.  Such  an  idea  implies  that  Christ  is  dependent  on  the  existence  ol 
sin,  and  that  His  very  being  is  but  an  expedient  required  for  the  deliverance  ol 
man.  So  stated  the  doctrine  is  monstrous.  If  there  had  been  no  sin,  Christ 
would  have  visited  the  world  in  some  way  of  Divine  goodness.  He  came  in  the 
creation  before  the  birth  of  sin.  I.  The  FAtr.  1.  As  regards  the  relation  of 
Christ  to  creation.  This  is  threefold.  (1)  In  Christ  is  the  fundamental  basis  of 
creation.     "  In  Him,"  i.e.,  His  thoughts,  are  the  archetypes  of  the  worlds  and  theil 


6S  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  % 

contents,  and  the  genesis  of  them  follows  the  principles  of  His  nature.  (2)  Christ 
is  the  instrumental  agent  of  creation  "  through  Him."  He  is  the  Mediator  in 
creation  as  well  as  redemption.  (3)  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  creation.  ''  Unto 
Him,"  i.e.,  all  things  grow  into  His  likeness,  they  move  upwards  towards  the 
realization  of  His  life.  Christ  in  His  human  nature  was  the  highest  development 
of  the  upward  movement  of  creation.  They  are  also  destined  to  serve  and  glorify 
Him.  2.  As  regards  the  scope  and  range  of  the  work  of  Christ.  This  was 
universal  in  creation.  It  included  :  (1)  All  things  visible  and  invisible,  i.e.,  physical 
and  spiritual  existences,  or  things  within  our  observation  and  the  infinite 
population  of  the  spaces  beyond.  (2)  All  orders  of  being,  '•  thrones,"  &c.,  none  too 
great  for  His  power,  none  too  small  for  His  care.  (3)  Every  variety  and  evry 
individual.  Different  classes  are  specified.  Creation  is  not  a  work  merely  of 
general  laws,  it  implies  individual  formation  under  them.  II.  Inferences.  1.  JLa 
regards  Christ.  (1)  His  pre-existence.  That  which  was  Divine  in  Christ  was  before 
all  things.  The  Christ-side  of  God,  all  that  is  so  touching  and  winning  in  the 
marvellous  revelation  of  God  in  Jesus,  is  no  new  plmse  of  His  character.  It  was 
before  the  sterner  revelation  of  Sinai.  It  is  eternal  (Heb.  xiii.  8).  (2)  His  glory. 
All  that  is  great  and  beautiful  in  creation  glorifies  Him  through  whom  it  came  into 
existence.  2.  As  regards  the  creation.  (1)  This  must  be  in  harmony  with  Christ. 
Therefore — (a)  We  must  interpret  its  darker  phases  by  what  we  know  of  the  spirit 
and  character  of  Christ.  (6)  We  must  expect  that  ultimately  its  laws  and  forces 
will  make  for  Christianity,  breathing  benedictions  on  the  faithful  followers  of  Christ, 
and  bringing  natural  penalties  on  those  who  rebel  against  His  rule.  (2)  We  should 
endeavour  to  trace  indications  of  the  presence  of  Christ  in  nature.  {W.  J.  Adeney, 
M.A.)  The  work  of  creation  by  and  for  Jesus  Christ : — I.  Christ  is  the  Cbeatob 
OF  ALL  THINGS.  Whatever  is  the  act  of  creation  it  must  be  the  Divine  act ;  and 
whoever  is  the  Creator  He  must  be  Divine.  1.  Creation  is  always  averred  to  be  a 
Divine  act  (Gen.  i.  1,  <&c.).  It  answers  to  our  idea  of  the  highest  omnipotence,  for 
"the  things  which  are  made  were  not  made  of  the  things  which  do  appear."  2.  The 
creating  act  is  always  set  before  us  as  the  basis  on  which  the  exclusive  honours  of 
the  Deity  are  challenged.  (1)  God  puts  His  right  to  worship  on  this  act.  (2)  He 
suspends  the  veracity  of  His  statements  on  it.  (3)  His  majesty  and  pre-eminence 
are  made  to  depend  upon  it.  3.  The  creating  act  is  always  represented  as  designed 
to  manifest  the  glory  of  Him  by  whom  it  was  done.  "  For  thy  pleasure  they  are 
and  were  created."  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God."  4.  The  creating  act 
constitutes  the  very  groundwork  of  natural  religion.  "  We  will  wait  upon  Thee,  for 
Thou  hast  made  all  these  things."  5.  There  is  a  validity  stamped  upon  all  the 
blessings  of  revelation,  because  they  issue  from  Him  who  is  this  universal  Creator. 
The  great  blessings  of  the  gospel  are  placed  in  immediate  connection  with  this 
omnific  act.  (1)  Eeconciliation.  "All  things  are  of  God,  who  hath  reconciled 
us."  (2)  Atonement.  "It  became  Him,  for  whom  are  all  things,"  &c,  (3)  Illumi- 
nation. "  God,  who  hath  commanded  the  light  to  shine,"  &c.  (4)  Protection.  Let 
us  commit  our  souls  to  Him  as  a  faithful  Creator.  6.  Idolatry  is  reprobated  on 
this  exclusive  ground,  that  it  is  offered  to  those  who  are  not  the  makers  of  the 
universe.  "Worshipping  and  serving  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator."  7. 
Creation  is  always  considered  an  unassisted  act.  "  I  am  the  Lord  that  maketh 
all  things."  8.  Now,  without  any  qualification  or  exception,  creation  is  attributed 
to  Christ ;  how,  then,  can  we  deny  Him  to  be  Divine  7     II.  All  things  webh 

CBKATED  FOR  ChRIST,    AND    FORM    HiS    BIGHT  AND    PREROGATIVE.         1.      There    are    tWO 

forms  of  the  Divine  foreknowledge.  (1)  God  is  acquainted  with  actions  however 
future.  (2)  God  realizes  in  His  own  mind  what  would  be  the  issue  of  circum- 
stances had  they  been  different  from  what  they  are.  "  They  would  have 
repented  long  ago."  2.  We  are  assured,  then,  that  this  universe  being  created 
for  Christ  was  not  a  supplementary  design  upon  some  previous  arrangement 
that  had  been  tried  and  had  failed.  This  is  our  method,  not  God's.  Christ 
vsTOUght  this  instrument,  and  it  shall  go  on  in  His  service.  3.  Foreseeing  sin  He 
made  the  world  in  which  it  was  to  be  vanquished,  and  hence  we  read  of  God's 
eternal  purpose,  and  of  "  the  Lamb  which  was  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world."  The  world  is  still  in  revolt,  but  the  eternal  purpose  shall  be  accom- 
plished, and  all  the  .forces  of  nature  and  history  shall  contribute  to  it.  4.  More 
particularly  all  things  are  created  for  Christ,  inasmuch  as — (1 )  They  furnish  the 
scenes  of  His  mediation.  '*  Lo,  I  come  !  "  The  earth  claimed  His  birth,  life,  and 
entombment.  He  made  it  the  seat  of  His  Church.  Here  is  the  sphere  of  His  Spirit's 
Influence.    This  is  the  receptacle  of  His  most  complacent  operations,  where  He  ia 


OHi».  I.]  COLOSSIANS. 


satisfied  for  all  the  travail  of  His  soul.  This  is  the  arena  of  His  spiritual  victories. 
(2)  They  are  tributaries  to  His  praise.  All  things  are  created  to  do  Him  direct 
homage.  Angels  do ;  the  redeemed  will ;  devils  and  sinners  shall.  HI,  Thh 
CONNECTION  BETWEEN  THE  TWO  PKOPosiTioNS.  That  Christ  is  the  Creator  and 
Proprietor  of  all  things.  1.  This  is  shown  by  arguing  the  difliculty  of  our  redemp- 
tion, because  only  the  Creator  could  surmount  it.  2.  The  sufficiency  of  that 
redemption  because  the  Creator  has  wrought  it.  {R.  W.  Hamilton,  LL.D.) 
Christ  the  end  of  creation:  — I.  The  text  furnishes  a  proof  of  our  Lord's  Divinity. 
1.  He  is  in  the  position  of  a  servant  who  works  for  others ;  He  is  a  Master  who, 
by  other  hands  or  His  own,  works  for  Himself.  Look  at  the  condition  of  man. 
Whatever  office  he  fills  in  Providence  he  is  a  servant,  and  on  crowned  monarchs, 
who  are  but  upper  servants,  Paul  lays  the  duty  of  doing  all  to  the  glory  of  God. 
Nor  do  angels,  although  holding  a  much  higher  rank,  differ  from  us  in  this  respect. 
"  I  am  thy  fellow-servant."  "  The  Lord  hath  made  all  things  for  Himself."  Thia 
prerogative  is  held  by  Christ.  2.  Some  have  attempted  to  evade  the  argument  for 
our  Lord's  Divinity  based  on  the  fact  of  creation.  The  objectors  say  that  He 
created  by  such  power  as  Elijah  received  from  God  to  restore  the  widow's  son,  i&c. 
But  the  text  cuts  the  ground  under  their  feet.  Did  Elijah  bring  back  the  dead  for 
himself  and  his  own  glory  ?  If  Christ  was  less  than  God,  then  in  kindling  the  sun 
He  no  more  acted  for  Himself  than  a  domestic  does  in  kindling  a  fire.  It  is  the 
nature  of  a  creature  to  hold  a  servant's  place.  Now  if  Jesus  were  man  He  waa 
justly  condemned,  for  He  laid  Himself  open  to  the  charge  of  blasphemy,  since,  aa 
the  Jews  truly  averred,  He  made  Himself  the  Son  of  God,  "  equal  with  God  "  To 
the  "all  Mine  are  Thine,"  Christ  ad  led  "  Thine  are  Mine."  All  that  is  God's  ia 
Christ's,  is  the  consistent  testimony  of  the  New  Testament.  II.  The  qlory  of  God 
Wis  THE  ORIGINAL  PURPOSE  OF  CREATION,  Sin  had  to  Bome  extent  blighted  the 
beauty  of  creation.  Still  the  Psalmist  said,  "  The  heavens  declare,"  &c.,  and  tha 
closer  we  examine  the  works  of  God,  tlie  higher  our  admiration  rises.  *'  The  whole 
earth  is  full  of  His  glory."  Some  things  remain  unaffected  by  the  blight  of  sin,  as 
God  made  them  for  Himself;  the  flowers  have  lost  none  of  their  fragrance,  and 
seas  and  seasons,  obedient  to  their  original  impulse,  roll  on  as  of  old  to  their 
Maker's  glory.  But  from  man,  alas  !  how  is  the  glory  departed  1  Look  at  his  body 
when  the  light  of  his  eye  is  quenched  ;  or  look  at  his  soul.  What  glory  does  God 
get  from  many  of  us  I  III.  God  will  makb  even  the  wicked  and  their  sins 
BEDOUND  TO  His  OLORY.  A  Strange  machine  is  this  of  Providence.  Virtue  is 
struggling  with  the  temptations  of  poverty,  the  wicked  are  in  great  power,  spreading 
like  a  green  bay-tree.  Sin  triumphs,  and  devils  seem  to  defeat  the  purposes  of  God. 
Defeat  the  purposes  of  God  1  Impossible.  Did  you  ever  stand  beneath  the  leadeo 
lowering  cloud,  and  mark  the  lightnings  leap,  and  think  that  you  could  grasp  tha 
bolt  and  change  its  path  7  StiU  more  foolish  and  vain  his  thought  who  fancies  that 
he  can  arrest  God's  purposes.  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh.  Do 
you,  e.g.,  injure  a  godly  man  ?  God  is  using  you  to  train  up  His  child  in  the  grace 
of  patience.  Messenger  of  Satan  I  dost  thou  buffet  an  apostle  J  God  uses  thee  to 
keep  him  humble,  and  to  teach  him  to  wear  his  honours  meekly.  No  man  Uveth 
for  himself.  The  most  bold  and  God-hating  sinners  may  rest  assured  that  when 
the  machine  of  Providence  has  done  its  work,  and  the  secret  purposes  of  God  are 
fully  completed,  it  shall  be  seen  how  the  Lord  hath  made  all  things  for  Himself. 
IV.  Since  Christ  hath  made  all  things  for  Himself,  His  people  abb  called  to 
CONSECBATB  THEMSELVBB  AND  THEIR  ALL  TO  His  OLORY.  To  this  wc  are  Called  by  the 
obligations  of  both  a  natural  and  spiritual  creation.  This  may  expose  as  to  pain  i 
but  what  pain  Jesus  endured  for  us  1  What  owest  thou  unto  thy  Lord  1  You  can- 
not tell  that ;  therefore  lay  your  all  at  His  feet.  He  who  lives  for  Christ  has  one 
end  in  view  which  lends  dignity  to  his  life.  Glorify  Christ  and  you  shall  enjoy 
Him.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  What  is  said  of  the  Father  in  1  Cor.  viii.  6,  tha 
same  is  here  said  of  the  Son.  All  things  mast  find  their  meeting-point,  their 
reconciliation,  at  length  in  Him  from  whom  they  took  their  rise — in  the  Word  as  tha 
mediatorial  agent,  and  through  the  Word  in  the  Fathe^as  the  primary  source. 
The  Word  is  the  final  cause  as  well  as  the  creative  agent  of  the  universe.  This 
nltimate  goal  of  the  present  dispensation  in  time  is  similarly  stated  in  several 
passages.  It  is  represented — 1.  As  the  birth-throe  and  deliverance  of  all  creation 
through  Christ  (Rom.  viii.  19,  &c.).  2.  The  absolute  and  final  subjection  of 
universal  nature  to  Him  (1  Cor.  xv.  28).  3.  The  reconciliation  of  all  things 
through  Him  (ver.  20).  4.  The  gathering  in  one  head  of  the  universe  in  Him 
(£ph.  i.  10).    The  Eternal  Word  is  the  goal  of  the  universe,  as  He  was  the  starting* 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  t. 

point.  It  must  end  in  unity,  as  it  proceeded  from  unity,  and  the  centre  of  thia 
unity  is  Christ.  (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  '•  Thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or 
fowtrt "; — The  Colossian  heretics  seem  to  have  held  that  all  matter  was  evil,  and 
that  therefore  the  material  creation  could  not  have  come  directly  from  a  good  God, 
but  was  in  a  certain  sense  opposed  to  Him,  or  at  all  events  separated  from  Him  by 
an  immense  gulf.  The  void  space  was  bridged  by  a  chain  of  beings,  half  abstrac- 
tions and  half  persons,  gradually  becoming  more  and  more  material.  The  lowest 
of  them  had  created  the  material  universe  and  now  governed  it,  and  were  all  to 
be  propitiated  by  worship.  Paul  opposes  the  solid  truth  to  these  dreams,  and 
instead  of  a  crowd  of  powers  and  angelic  beings  in  whom  the  effulgence  of  Deity  was 
gradually  darkened,  and  the  spirit  became  more  and  more  thickened  into  matter, 
he  lifts  high  and  .clear  against  that  background  of  faith  the  solitary  figure  of  the 
one  Christ.  He  fills  all  the  space  between  God  and  man.  There  is  no  need  for  a 
crowd  of  shadowy  beings  to  link  heaven  with  earth.  There  is  a  tone  of  contemp- 
tuous impatience  in  Paul's  voice  as  he  quotes  the  pompous  hst  of  sensuous  titles 
which  a  busy  fancy  had  coined.  It  is  as  if  he  had  said.  You  are  being  told  a  great 
deal  about  these  angel  hierarchies,  and  know  all  about  their  ranks  and  gradations. 
I  do  not  know  anything  about  them ;  but  this  I  know,  that  if,  amid  the  unseen 
things  in  the  heavens  or  the  earth,  there  be  any  such,  my  Lord  made  them,  and  is 
their  Master.  He  is  first  and  last  in  all  things,  to  be  listened  to,  loved,  and 
worshipped  by  men.  As  when  the  full  moon  rises,  so  when  Christ  appears,  all  the 
iesser  stars  with  which  Alexandrian  and  Eastern  speculation  had  peopled  the 
abysses  of  the  sky  are  lost  in  the  mellow  radiance,  and  instead  of  a  crowd  of  flickering 
ineffectual  lights  there  is  one  perfect  orb,  "and  heaven  is  overflowed."  "We  see 
no  creature  any  more  save  Jesus  only."     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  By  Him  all  things  consist. — That  is,  Christ  upholds,  rules,  and 
governs  all  things  by  His  providence,  as  is  shown  elsewhere  (Heb.  i.  2,  3 ;  Prov. 
viii.  15  ;  John  v.  12).  Christ  is  not  Uke  a  carpenter  that  makes  his  house  and  then 
leaves  it,  or  Uke  a  shipwright  that  frames  his  ship  and  never  guides  it.  I.  All 
THINGS  ARE  SAID  TO  CONSIST  IN  HiM  in  icspect  of  1 — Conservation:  in  that  He  keeps 
all  things  in  their  being.  2.  Precept:  in  that  from  Him  are  prescribed  the  laws  by 
which  nature,  policy,  and  religion  are  governed.  3.  Operation  :  in  that  all  things 
move  in  Him.  4.  His  position  of  means  to  end.  5.  As  the  universal  cause  of 
mature  and  natural  instincts  in  all  creatures,  by  which  they  further  their  own 
preservation.  II.  In  Him  all  things  consist.  1.  As  He  is  God — (1)  In  respect  of 
ubiquity ;  He  comprehends  all  things,  and  is  comprehended  of  nothing.  The 
nations  are  but  a  drop  of  His  bucket,  and  time  but  a  drop  of  His  eternity.  (2)  In 
respect  of  power  ;  in  that  this  whole  frame  stirreth.  (3)  In  respect  of  omniscience 
mnd  wisdom,  for  all  is  within  His  knowledge,  and  receiveth  order  from  His  wisdom. 
(4:)  In  respect  of  decree,  for  the  world  to  be  made  did  from  everlasting  hang  in  the 
foreknowledge  and  pre-ordination  of  Christ.  2.  As  He  is  Eedeemer.  All  things  con- 
sist in  Him — (1)  Because  He  is  that  atonement  which  kept  the  world  from  being 
dissolved.  (2)  Because  the  respect  of  Him  and  His  Church  is  that  which  keeps  up 
the  world  to  this  day.  Were  His  body  complete  the  world  could  not  stand  one 
iionr.  (3)  Because  the  promise  made  to  man  concerning  His  prosperity  in  the  use 
of  all  creatures  is  made  in  Christ.  III.  In  Him  all  things  consist.  Which  word 
notes — 1.  Order.  By  an  excellent  order  the  creatures  agree  together  in  a  glorious 
frame ;  for  God  is  the  God  of  order,  not  of  confusion.  (1)  But  are  there  not 
many  evils  in  the  world  ?  (a)  There  may  be  order  in  respect  of  God,  though  not 
in  respect  of  us.  (5)  It  follows  not  that  there  is  no  order  because  we  see  none 
(Eom.  xi.  33).  (c)  Many  of  the  reasons  of  human  misery  are  revealed — sin  en- 
tailing punishment,  (d)  There  may  be  order  in  respect  of  the  whole,  though  no* 
in  respect  of  every  part.  (2)  But  there  are  many  sins  in  the  world,  and  those  con- 
sist not  in  Christ,  neither  tend  they  to  order,  (a)  These  are  restrained  by  Christ. 
46)  Work  out  His  purposes.  2.  Continuance.  The  world,  men,  and  lower 
■creatures,  <&c.,  are  maintained  in  being  by  Christ,  3.  Co-operation.  By  the  provi- 
vdence  of  Christ  all  things  work  together.  (1)  For  Christ's  glory;  (2)  for  His 
people's  good.  4.  Immortality.  Uses — 1.  For  reproof  of  men's  security  in  sin. 
Seeing  that  all  things  consist  in  Christ,  they  cannot  stir  but  He  seeth  them.  2.  It 
should  teach  us  to  trust  in  Christ,  not  in  second  causes.  3.  If  all  things  consist  in 
Christ,  then  much  more  are  the  righteous  preserved  with  a  special  preservation. 
(N.  By  field.)  All  things  exist  in  Christ: — AH  things  stand  together  in  Him  as 
the  oausal  and  conditional  sphere  of  their  continued  existence.     In  Him  they  live 


«Bl».  1.]  C0L08SIANS.  71 

«nd  move  and  have  their  being,  and  in  Him  the  Bustentation  or  upholding  of  the 
nniverse  rests.  How  wondrous,  then,  the  glory  and  power  of  the  Son  of  God  I 
Without  Him  the  sun  would  not  shine,  nor  the  seasons  revolve  ;  without  Him  the 
rain  would  not  descend,  nor  the  rivers  run,  nor  the  trees  grow,  nor  the  oceans  ebb 
and  flow.  His  power  is  necessary  to  summer  and  winter,  seed-time  and  harvest, 
to  earth  and  sky.  He  upholdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power,  and  without 
Him  creation  would  collapse.  Every  province  of  the  empire  of  immensity,  with 
fill  its  contents  of  life,  force,  and  motion,  depends  on  Him.  The  intellect  of  angels 
reflects  His  light,  the  fire  of  seraphs  is  the  glow  of  His  love,  the  energy  of  our  own 
souls  is  an  evidence  of  His  beneficence  and  skill.  In  Him  all  things  consist — the 
power  of  their  support,  the  primal  centre  of  their  order,  the  rule  of  their  operation. 
This  is  the  Being  in  whom  we  have  redemption.  What  sublimity  His  greatness 
flheds  around  the  gospel  1  What  moral  richness  His  gospel  throws  around  nature 
and  humanity  1  How  lofty  should  be  our  adoration,  how  strong  our  confidence, 
how  warm  oui  love,  how  complete  our  submission  I     {J.  Spence,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  And  He  1b  the  Head  of  the  body,  the  Church. — Christ  and  His 
Church: — I.  Thb  Chobch.  1.  The  English  word  is  formed  from  KvpiaKf) — be- 
longing to  the  Lord.  (1)  Sometimes  a  distinction  is  draw  between  Church  and 
congregation.  Although  Christ  is  Lord  of  all,  yet  He  bears  a  peculiarly  endearing 
telationship  to  the  company  within  the  congregation  who  constitute  the  Church 
proper.  They  are  His  "peculiar"  possession,  people,  servants,  and  friends. 
(2)  Sometimes  we  call  the  edifice  in  which  the  disciples  assemble  a  church,  and 
properly,  because  it  belongs  to  the  Lord.  2.  The  word  is  a  translation  of  UicXrjaia, 
and  is  peculiarly  applicable  to  the  people  as  distinguished  from  the  place.  It  was 
borrowed  from  those  Greeks  who  had  free  municipal  institutions.  Slaves  were  not 
■permitted  to  form  part  of  the  company,  and  were  not  eligible  to  municipal  ofiBcea 
and  honours,  and  had  no  voice  or  vote.  A  church,  therefore,  is  a  company  of  free 
men.  3.  The  two  meanings  in  combination  reach  the  idea  that  the  Church  of 
Christ  is  the  company  of  free  men  whose  privilege  it  is  to  belong  to  the  Lord. 
4.  Christians  are  a  '*  body,"  an  organized  community,  in  which  all  the  members, 
however  humble,  find  a  place  and  do  a  work,  and  not  a  mere  heterogeneous  mob. 
Each  member  can  be  helpful  to  the  others.  II.  The  Head.  This  implies — 1.  That 
Christ  belongs  to  the  body,  the  Church.  He  is  not  outside  and  merely  over  it.  He 
IB  within  it  aa  its  principal  member.  He  partakes  of  its  moral  nature,  and  then  of 
the  moral  nature  of  all  its  members.  He  is  free  as  they  are,  only  more  gloriously ; 
it  is  His  joy  also  to  be  useful,  only  His  devotion  is  far  more  sublime.  3.  The 
tepresentation  is  incomplete.  He  is  Heart  too — both  head  and  heart  in  one ;  even 
as  He  is  comer-stone  at  every  comer,  and  all  round  the  Temple  of  God.  As  the 
Heart,  He  is  the  centre  of  all  the  vitalizing  influences  that  build  the  whole  body 
into  the  fulness  of  health  and  vigour ;  the  fountain  of  the  love  which  is  the 
Bweetest  outcome  of  manhood.  3.  As  the  Head,  He  thinks  for  the  whole  body,  and 
plans  and  guides.  The  hands  cannot  think  for  themselves,  though  they  are  noble 
workers ;  the  feet  do  not  know  where  to  go,  but  beautiful  are  they  when  running 
«rrands  at  the  bidding  of  the  love  that  is  in  the  heart,  or  of  the  life  that  emanates 
from  the  head.  III.  The  beginning.  Of  what  ?  Jesus  was  "  the  beginning  of  the 
tjreation  of  God."  Here  He  is  at  once — 1.  The  beginning  of  the  resurrection 
life,  being  Himself  *'  the  firstborn  from  among  the  dead,"  and  thus — 2.  The 
beginning  of  the  Church  of  the  hving  God  ;  the  Head  of  that  body  in  which,  even 
as  it  exists  on  earth,  there  is  a  spring-seed  of  that  higher  life  that  has  been  brought 
within  the  reach  of  all.  IV.  Christ  is  consequently  eminently  qualified  to  have  in 
all  things  THE  PRE-EMINENCE.  It  was  the  Father's  pleasure  that  he  should  have  it. 
He  has  it  now  as  His  right,  and  will  continue  so  to  have  it,  until  all  opposition  to 
itB  rule  be  swept  away  for  ever.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Head  of  the 
Church : — L  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  Chukch  in  each  of  His  natuees.  For 
here  He  is  called  the  Head  of  the  Church,  who  had  before  been  called  the  image  of 
the  invisible  God.  But  that  image  was  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  the  incarnate 
Word  :  therefore  Christ,  the  God-man,  is  the  Head  of  the  Church.  For  the  Church 
ought  to  possess  such  a  head  as  might  have  a  natural  conformity  with  the  rest  of 
the  members  to  be  incorporated  in  it.  Now  this  conformity  suits  Christ  according 
to  Hifl  human  nature ;  whence  Christ  and  the  Church  are  called  one  flesh  (Eph. 
▼.  31).  But  it  was  also  necessary  that  the  Church  should  have  such  a  head  aa 
«oaM  infuse  into  it  spiritual  life.  This  is  the  province  of  God  alone  ;  whence  God 
is  plainly  called  the  husband  and  the  Head  of  the  Church  (Psa.  xlv.  10).    Heno* 


72  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

many  observations  arise :  1.  Whereas  the  Head  of  the  Church  ia  God,  we  infer 
(1)  that  the  Church  will  abide  for  ever,  neither  shall  the  gates  of  hell  prevail 
against  it;  for  if  God  be  with  ns,  who  shall  be  against  us  ?  A  less  than  God  would 
have  been  incompetent  to  the  protection  of  the  Church  ;  for  the  devil,  and  almost 
the  whole  world,  wage  conptant  war  against  it.  (2)  That  the  members  of  the 
Church  ought  to  obey  their  Head  in  all  things.  For  there  is  an  infinite  obligation 
which  binds  every  creature  to  obey  its  God ;  but  that  obligation,  if  possible,  sur- 
passes infinite,  whereby  the  Church,  redeemed  and  sanctified,  is  bound  to  be  subject 
to  its  God,  its  mystical  and  life-giving  Head.  (3)  That  the  ascension  of  Christ  into 
heaven  has  not  deprived  the  Church  of  its  Head  :  nay,  He  is  present,  and  will  be 
always  present,  with  His  whole  Church,  by  the  power  of  His  Divinity,  although  He 
may  not  appear  to  our  eyes  by  His  bodily  presence.  2.  Inasmuch  as  our  Head  is 
a  man,  we  infer  two  things  :  (1)  On  account  of  His  alliance  of  nature.  He  must  ol 
necessity  intimately  love  us,  and  have  such  a  keen  sense  of  our  miseries  as  to  be 
most  ready  to  succour  us  (Judg.  z.  16 ;  Heb.  ii.  17,  18).  (2)  We  have  this  comfort, 
that  every  ground  of  triumphing  over  us  is  tnken  from  the  devil.  He  overcame 
the  first  Adam,  the  head  of  the  race ;  but  the  Second  Adam,  the  Head  of  the 
Church,  overcame  him.  Nay,  in  Christ,  we  who  are  His  members  conquer,  just  as 
in  Adam  we  were  conquered.  II.  In  what  respects  Christ  is  called  the  Head. 
1.  The  head  differs  from  its  members — (1)  In  eminence  or  dignity.  The  head 
possesses  more  perfectly  all  the  senses  than  the  subordinate  members;  so  Christ, 
the  mystical  Head,  possesses  all  spiritual  grace  more  abundantly  than  men  and 
angels  put  together  (John  iii.  34).  (2)  In  way  of  direction  or  government.  The 
head  regulates  and  directs ;  the  members  are  ruled  and  directed.  So  Christ  has 
the  absolute  government  of  the  Church  (Eph.  v.  22,  23).  (3)  In  way  of  causality 
or  influence.  For  the  head  communicates  sense  and  motion  to  all  its  members. 
So  Christ  sends  forth  spiritual  life  and  the  motion  of  grace  into  His  members  which 
are  otherwise  insensible,  dead,  and  destitute  of  all  spiritual  motion  (John  xv.  5  ; 
Phil.  iv.  13).  2.  Tliose  things  in  which  the  agreement  of  the  head  and  the  members 
is  perceived.  (1)  The  natural  head  hath  a  natural  conformity  with  the  rest  of  the 
members ;  for  as  Horace  hath  rightly  said,  it  would  be  monstrous  and  ridiculous 
•'  if  a  painter  should  form  a  design  of  uniting  a  horse's  neck  to  a  human  head." 
Thus  monstrous  would  it  be  if  the  Head  of  the  Church  had  not  a  natural  con- 
formity with  the  Church.  But  Christ  hath  this,  as  is  shown  (Heb.  iL).  (2)  The 
head  and  the  members  have  a  conformity  in  their  destination  to  the  same  end, 
via.,  the  preservation  and  safety  of  the  whole  person:  thus  Christ,  and  Hia 
members,  which  are  one  person,  are  ordained  to  the  attainment  of  eternal  glory 
and  happiness ;  and  to  the  accomplishment  of  this  end  both  head  and  members 
assiduously  co-operate.  This  is  the  care  of  the  Head,  to  lead  its  members  to  final 
blessedness  (John  xvii.  12).  Hence  He  is  called  the  Saviour  of  the  body  (Eph.  v. 
23).  (3)  They  agree  in  the  circumstance  of  their  having  a  continuous  union  with 
each  other,  and  all  of  them  deriving  tbeir  motion  and  intellectuality  from  the  same 
soah  So  this  mystical  Head,  and  all  the  members  of  it,  have  a  certain  mutual 
continuity,  and  have  their  spiritual  intellectuality  and  vivifying  principle  from  the 
same  source.  For  there  is  between  Christ  and  His  members  an  uninterrupted 
union  by  means  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Eph.  iv.  16).  III.  Who  and  what  are  they 
OUT  OF  WHOM  THE  BODY  OF  Christ  IS  COMPOSED  ?  1.  The  term  Church  is  derived 
from  a  word  signifying  "to  call  out  ";  it  is  therefore  an  assembly  of  those  called 
out.  And  this  calling  is  effected  by  the  njitiistry  of  the  gospel,  and  other  means 
which  God  has  appointed.  2.  This  external  vocation  and  profession  constitutes 
the  visible  Church.  But  there  is  also  another  more  effectual  vocation  joined  to 
this  in  some  persons,  namely,  by  grace  implanted  through  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  hearts  of  the  called.  3.  Then  it  follows — (1)  That  those  who  stand  related  to 
the  Church  as  evil  humours  to  the  human  body  are  not  true  members  of  the 
Church ;  for  each  sound  body  desires  the  preservation  of  its  members ;  but  it  does 
not  preserve  evil  humours,  but  expels  them.  (2)  That  those  wbo  stand  related  to 
the  Church  as  dead  men  to  humanity  are  not  true  members  of  the  Church  ;  such 
as  wicked  men  and  infidels.  (3)  That  those  whom  th6  Church  itself  would  not 
acknowledge  as  members  or  its  parts,  if  it  knew  what  they  are,  Christ,  who  knows 
all  things,  does  not  acknowledge  (4)  That  the  Church,  which  is  the  body  of 
Christ,  hath  no  member  which  doth  not  receive  a  vital  influx  from  the  Head  :  for 
the  same  Spirit  is  diffused  from  the  Head  to  all  the  members  (Rom.  viii.  9).  But 
infidels  and  the  wicked  have  not  this  vitaUty  of  grace  flowing  from  the  Head. 
^6)  Ihftt  the  same  man  ia  not  at  the  same  time  a  member  of  Christ  and  of  the 


CHJ*.  1.  COLOSSIANS.  73 


devil ;  bat  the  wicked  men  are  nnmbered  amongst  the  servants  and  the  children 
of  the  devil  (John  viii.  38,  44),  therefore  they  are  not  to  be  reckoned  among  the 
members  of  Christ.  4.  We  conclude,  therefore,  that  this  body  of  the  Church,  of 
which  Christ  Himself  is  the  Head,  does  not  consist  of  any  unfaithful  and  wicked 
members,  but  of  the  pious  and  holy  alone ;  whom  God  delivers  from  the  power 
of  darkness,  and  translates  into  the  kingdom  of  His  dear  Son.  6.  Hence  we  may 
learn — (1)  It  is  not  sufficient  for  salvation  to  be  a  member  of  any  visible  Church  by 
an  outward  profession  of  faith,  unless  you  are  a  member  of  the  Catholic  Church 
by  a  true  faith  and  the  Spirit  dwelling  in  the  heart.  (2)  It  is  not  befitting 
Christians  to  envy  those  who  are  endowed  with  the  more  excellent  gifts ;  because 
they  are  members  of  the  same  body :  what,  therefore,  is  conferred  on  one,  that 
should  be  esteemed  as  given  to  all.  (3)  Since  godly  members  are  of  the  same  body, 
it  behoves  them  to  be  ready  to  assist  each  other ;  and  they  ought  to  feel  equally 
affected  with  the  good  or  evil  which  fall  to  others  as  with  their  own  (1  Cor.  xii. 
26).  {Bp.  Davenant.)  The  Head  of  the  Church: — I.  What  is  meant  bt  oub 
Lord's  Headship  ?  1.  His  representation  of  the  Church  as  a  body.  At  the  first 
creation  God  dealt  with  the  race  as  represented  in  Adam — hence  original  sin.  In 
order  to  salvation,  which  was  only  possible,  perhaps,  because  we  did  not  fall  singly, 
God  instituted  a  second  federation,  of  which  Christ  is  the  Head,  the  second  Adam. 
Christians  are  chosen,  accepted,  and  preserved  in  Him.  2.  Our  Lord  is  Head  in  a 
mystical  sense  (Col.  ii.  19].  (1)  The  head  is  indispensable  to  life  ;  so  Jesus  is  the 
vitalizing  Head  of  all  His  people.  "  He  is  our  life."  Separation  from  Him  ia 
spiritual  death.  (2)  The  head  is  the  throne  of  supreme  government.  It  is  from 
the  brain  that  the  mandate  issues  which  uplifts  the  hand,  &c.  Thus  in  the  Church 
Christ  is  the  great  directing  Head ;  from  Him  the  only  binding  commands  go  forth ; 
to  Him  the  spiritual  yield  a  cheerful  homage.  (3)  The  head  is  the  glory  of  the 
body.  There  the  chief  beauty  of  manhood  dwells.  Christ  is  fairer  than  the 
children  of  men,  and  in  Him  the  beauty  of  the  Church  is  summed  up.  3.  Christ's 
Headship  is  conjugal.  He  is  the  Bridegroom,  the  Church  is  His  Bride.  As  the 
husband  exercises  headship  in  the  house,  not  at  all  tyrannical  or  magisterial,  but 
founded  upon  the  rule  of  nature  and  endorsed  by  the  consent  of  love,  so  Christ 
rules  in  His  Church,  not  as  a  despot  compelUng  His  subject  bride  against  her 
will,  but  as  a  husband  well  beloved,  obtaining  obedience  from  the  heart.  4.  Christ 
is  Head  as  King  in  Zion.  "  One  is  your  Master,"  &c.  To  no  other  do  we  render 
spiritual  obeisance.  Martyrs  have  bled  for  this  truth.  Some  Churches  have 
not  learned  it.  II.  What  it  implies.  Since  Christ  is  Head  of  the  Church — 
1.  He  alone  can  determine  doctrines  for  her.  It  is  nothing  that  a  doctrine  comes 
dbwn  with  gray  antiquity  to  make  it  venerable.  All  the  fathers,  divines,  and  con- 
fessors put  together  cannot  add  a  word  to  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 
Nothing  is  doctrine  to  the  Church  but  what  is  contained  in  the  Scriptures.  2.  He 
only  can  legislate  for  the  Church.  In  a  state,  if  a  knot  of  persons  should  profess  to 
make  laws  for  the  kingdom  they  would  be  laughed  at ;  if  they  should  attempt  to 
enforce  them  they  would  be  amen^ible  to  punishment.  So  the  Church  has  no 
power  to  make  laws  for  herself  since  i-he  is  not  her  own  head  ;  and  no  one  has  any 
right  to  make  laws  for  her  but  Christ.  3.  He  is  the  living  administrator  in  the 
Church ;  but  as  monarchs  often  administer  through  lieutenants,  so  Christ  ad- 
ministers through  His  Spirit  who  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  His  people.  WhtB  we 
search  the  Law  Book  He  is  their  guide.  4.  This  sole  authority  must  be  maintained 
rigorously.  (1)  Some  would  have  us  guided  by  results.  It  has  been  discussed 
whether  missions  should  continue  since  there  are  so  few  converts.  But  how  can 
the  question  be  raised  when  He  has  said,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  &c.  (2)  We  are 
not  to  be  guided  by  the  times.  Our  King  and  laws  are  the  same,  and  let  the  times 
be  scientific  or  barbaric,  our  duty  is  the  same.  III.  On  what  does  it  rest  ?  1. 
On  the  natural  supremacy  of  Christ's  nature.  He  is  perfect  man  and  God  over  all 
blessed  for  ever.  2.  On  His  redemption.  3.  On  His  conquest.  4.  On  the  Divine 
decree  (Psa.  ii.).  IV.  What  does  it  teach?  1.  Does  it  not  make  each  inquire,  "  If 
the  entire  Church  is  to  yield  this  obedience,  am  I  yielding  it"?  2.  Am  I  in  the  habit 
of  judging  according  to  my  wishes  or  according  to  the  Statute  Book  of  the  King  ? 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  body  nnd  its  Head  : — What  striking  figures  are  employed 
to  describe  the  union  between  Christ  and  His  Church  1  1.  They  are  the  flock,  He 
is  the  Shepherd  (John  x.  11-14).  They  are  the  bride.  He  is  the  Bridegroom  (Kev. 
xxi.  2-6).  3.  They  are  the  branches.  He  is  the  Stem.  4.  Here,  and  elsewhere, 
they  are  the  body.  He  the  Head.  I.  How  close  the  connection  between  the  head 
and  the  body.    Yet  as  elose  is  that  between  Christ  and  His  Charch.    Not  onlj  ie  it 


74  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oatP.  l. 

near  and  dear  to  Him,  it  is  identified  with  Him  (Eph.  i.  23).  His  human  body  wai 
not  less  necessary  to  His  completeness  as  a  man  than  His  Gharch  is  to  the  com- 
pleteness of  His  glory.  It  was  much  for  Christ  to  notice,  more  to  pity,  more  still 
to  die  for  sinners,  but  to  draw  so  near  to  them  as  this — well  may  Paul  call  it  a 
great  mystery.  IL  What  a  fellow  feeling  there  is  between  the  body  and  tha 
head  I  Is  a  man's  body  in  pain,  and  does  not  the  head  know  and  feel,  and  the 
tongue  complain  ?  So  when  the  Church  suffers  the  Saviour  feels  (Heb.  iv.  15; 
Matt.  XXV.  40).  III.  What  a  beautiful  confobmitt  ;  how  exactly  is  the  head  pro- 
portioned to  the  body,  and  how  precisely  is  it  suited  in  its  make  to  the  body's  wants  1 
Suppose  the  head  of  a  brute  were  affixed,  not  only  would  the  sight  be  monstrous, 
but  that  which  the  body's  fashion  renders  necessary  could  never  be  supplied.  And 
is  not  the  Head  of  this  Church  exactly  what  it  wants?  Christians  need  Almighty 
succour  and  support,  such  as  could  be  given  by  no  merely  human  head.  IV.  What 
an  EMINENT  STATION  doBs  the  head  occupy,  when  by  its  various  senses  and  faculties 
it  is  capable  of  regulating  and  directing  all  our  movements  I  So  Jesus  is  made 
"  Head  over  all  things  to  His  Church,"  that  He  may  preside  over  all  its  concerns, 
and  order  the  whole  course  of  its  events.  He  sees,  hears,  speaks,  and  thinks  for  it. 
It  is  guided  by  His  eye,  directed  by  His  wisdom,  recommended  by  His  intercession. 
V.  The  human  head  mat  be  separated  from  the  body.  Hence  the  body  in  that 
case  dies.  But  the  Church  cannot  die  because  no  separation  can  take  place  between 
it  and  its  Head  (Kom.  viii.  35-39).  Conclusion — 1.  Is  the  Head  gone  up  into 
heaven  ?  Then  the  members  will  follow.  2.  Are  we  members  of  this  body  T  not 
members  of  the  visible  Church,  nor  professors  of  Christianity.  3.  This  union  ia 
effected  by  faith,  cemented  by  love,  and  exhibited  in  obedience.  {A.  Roberts,  M.A.) 
The  Head : — The  importance  of  a  military  position  may  be  always  estimated  by  the 
determination  with  which  it  is  on  the  one  hand  assailed,  and  on  the  other  defended. 
According  to  this  rule  we  should  conclude  that  the  Church  has  regarded  the  Head- 
ship of  her  Lord  as  the  very  key  of  the  position.  For  Christ's  crown,  and  His  sola 
right  to  rule  His  own  house  without  Caesar's  interference,  her  costliest  and  most 
powerful  sacrifices  have  been  made.  Peter  and  John  were  the  first  to  publicly 
maintain  this  doctrine  (Acts  iv.  19,  v.  29).  I.  Christ's  body  is  the  Church. 
While  all  other  bodies  shall  die,  this  is  deathless.  *'  Because  I  live,"  (fee.  Thia 
body,  paradox  as  it  sounds,  is  ever  changing  and  yet  unchangeable ;  one  undying 
whole  formed  of  dying  parts.  Yet  not  more  strange  than  things  in  nature.  You 
are  not  the  same  person  you  were  a  year  ago.  Look  at  a  river.  The  exile  returns 
to  the  haunt  of  his  early  years,  and  there  the  river  flows  as  it  did  when  he  was 
young  ;  yet  the  Uquidations  have  undergone  perpetual  change.  And  so  the  stream 
of  time  bears  on  to  eternity,  and  the  stream  of  grace  on  to  glory,  successive  genera- 
tions, while  the  Church  herself,  like  a  river  fed  by  perennial  fountains,  remains 
unchangeable  in  Christ's  immutability,  in  His  immortality  immortal.    II.  Christ's 

BODY,  WHICH  IS  NOT  IDENTICAL  WITH  ANY  ONE  ChCRCH,  IS  FORMED  OF  ALL  TRUE 
BELIEVERS,    TO    WHATEVER   DENOMINATION    THEY    MAY   BELONG.      MothcrS   are   prOHB    tO 

think  their  own  daughters  loveliest,  and  nothing  is  more  natural  than  to  say  of  our 
own  denomination,  "  Many  daughters  have  done  virtuously,  but  thou  excellest  them 
all."  But  to  foster  a  spirit  of  sectarianism  is  an  offence  as  great  as  to  sin  against 
His  truth.  In  some  respects  bigotry  is  worse  than  heresy ;  and  most  hateful  of  all 
in  Ood's  sight  is  the  haughty  Churchism  which  says,  "  Stand  by,  I  am  holier  than 
thou."  HI.  Christ's  body,  in  a  sense,  embraces  all  those  churches  which 
BOLD  THE  essential  TRUTHS  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  There  is  a  broad  Une  between  tha 
essentials  and  the  circumstantials  of  the  faith.  Yet  what  unnatural  attempts  at 
uniformity  have  men  made,  as  if  uniformity  were  a  law  of  God  1  On  no  such  model 
has  God  constructed  our  world.  God,  while  He  preserves  unity,  delights  in  variety. 
Why  then  insist  on  all  men  observing  a  uniform  style  of  worship,  or  thinking  alike 
on  matters  non-essential  to  salvation  ?  You  might  as  well  insist  on  all  men  wearing 
the  same  expression,  or  speaking  in  the  same  tone.  How  tolerant  was  Paul  of 
differences!  His  Church  has  not  followed  her  Lord's  example.  Christ  drove 
thieves  from  the  temple,  but  His  followers  have  cast  out  their  brethren.  Divisions 
are  bad  things.  I  have  no  sympathy  with  those  who,  confounding  charity  with 
indifference,  regard  matters  of  religion  as  not  worth  disputing  about.  Such  a  state 
of  death  is  worse  than  war.  Yet  divisions  are  had  things.  Therefore  we  ought  to 
aim  to  heal  them,  and  where  we  cannot  do  that  to  soften  their  asperities.  "  Blested 
are  the  peacemakers,"  Let  us  recognize  a  common  brotherhood,  and  love  one 
another  as  Christ  has  loved  us.  Branches  of  a  tree  which  is  siill  one  in  root,  stem, 
tap,  flower,  and  frait ;  members  of  the  same  family,  travellers  to  the  same  home. 


9BAf.  I.]  COLOSSIANS.  76 

Bee  that  ye  fall  not  ont  by  the  way.  IV.  As  Head  of  the  Church  Chkist  is  thb 
LITE  or  THE  MEMBERS.  1.  By  means  of  the  connection  which  grace  establishes 
between  Him  and  the  believer,  He  maintains  our  spiritual  life.  "  Without  Me  ye 
can  do  nothing."  All  our  wishes,  words,  and  works,  however  expressed  ia  looks, 
sounds,  and  movements,  are  bom  in  the  brain,  and  there  is  not  a  good  wish,  word, 
or  work  but  Christ  was  its  fountain-head.  2.  He  is  the  source  of  our  spiritual 
life.  We  must  not  confound  the  means  of  life  with  its  first  cause.  The  life  which 
Christ  gave  tou  was  His  own.  If  any  heavenly  fire  bums  in  you  Christ  kindled  it. 
The  spirit  life  is  not  hereditary,  *'  not  of  blood  or  of  the  will  of  the  flesh."  By  His 
life  He  now  maintains  as.  V.  As  Heap  or  the  Church  Christ  rules  its  mem- 
bers. It  is  not  pain  that  makes  the  insect  go  spinning  round  and  round  to  the 
entertainment  of  the  thoughtless  boy  who  has  beheaded  it.  It  has  lost  in  the  head 
that  which  preserves  harmony  among  the  members,  and  prevents  such  anarchy  as 
there  was  in  the  body  politic  when  there  was  no  king  in  Israel,  and  every  man  did 
what  was  right  to  his  own  eyes.  Seated  as  becomes  a  king,  in  the  highest  place, 
the  head  gives  law  to  all  beneath  it.  Its  subjects  never  mutiny.  Patterns  of  the 
obedience  we  should  yield  to  Christ,  the  members  hesitate  not  to  obey  the  head 
even  to  their  own  loss  and  sufFering.  How  happy  we  should  be  were  our  hearts, 
minds,  bodies,  as  obedient  to  Christ  as  the  hand  and  tongue  to  the  head  that  rules 
them  I  What  else  but  this  is  needed  to  preserve  the  purity  and  peace  of  our  souls, 
and  restore  the  same  to  distracted  churches  ?  There  is  no  essential  difference 
between  the  evangelical  denominations,  and  what  should  hinder  them  from  being 
as  ready  to  love  and  help  one  the  other  as  my  foot  is  ready  to  run  in  the  service  of 
my  hand  ?  YI.  As  Head  of  ths  Church  Christ  sympathizes  with  His  members. 
••  All  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea  ;  "  all  the  nerves  run  into  the  brain,  and  throagh 
them  mind  corresponds  with  matter-  ]nn\'r^a  through  the  eyes,  &c.  Let  the  foot 
but  touch  a  thorn,  and  it  is  instant  y  withdi'a ah.  HowT  PainthriUlng  along  the 
nerves  flashes  the  danger  upward  lu  ,.  o  iiead,  which,  by  another  set  of  nerves, 
flashes  back  an  immediate  order,  so  that  before  the  thorn  is  buried  in  the  flesh  the 
foot  is  withdrawn.  Such  is  the  sympathy  between  Christ  and  His  people.  He  is 
in  closest  communication  with  them,  and  by  means  of  lines  which  pass  from  ^rth 
to  heaven  the  meanest  cottage  is  joined  to  the  throne  of  God.  No  accident  breaks 
that  telegraph.  The  lines  of  Providence  radiate  out,  and  the  lines  of  prayer  radiate 
in.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  One  with  Christ: — The  moment  I  make  of  myself  and 
Christ  two,  I  am  all  wrong.  But  when  I  see  that  we  are  one,  all  is  rest  and  peace. 
{Luther.)  The  Holy  Catholic  Church : — I.  Its  nature  and  characteristics. 
"A  congregation  of  faithful  men,"  &e.  (Aots  lix.).  1.  The  members  of  which  it  is 
composed.  (1)  Their  privileges.  They  are  believers — faithful  men,  chosen,  re- 
deemed, regenerated,  sanctified.  (2)  You  must  view  them  as  brought  together  in 
the  bonds  of  a  common  profession  ;  for  they  are  faithful  men  assembled.  Solitary 
individuals,  however  eminent  for  piety,  cannot  form  a  church  (Matt,  xviii.  15).  (3) 
They  must  be  brought  together  for  rehgious  purposes.  A  company  of  believers 
brought  together  for  secular  ends  would  not  be  a  church.  They  must  assemble  to 
worship  God,  hear  His  Word,  communicate,  Ac.  (4)  These  thus  congregated  are 
distinguished  by  the  general  consistency  of  their  outward  behaviour.  Hypocrites 
and  evil  persons  may  be  found  in  the  Church,  but  they  are  not  of  it.  2.  Its 
characteristics.  (1)  Unity.  The  Church  is  one  in  (a)  The  foundation  on  which  it 
rests.  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay."  (b)  Its  worship.  "  Through  Him  we 
all  have  access."  (c)  Its  sympathy  and  spirit,  which  is  much  to  be  preferred  to 
uniformity  of  opinion.  (2)  Sanctity.  This  does  not  refer  to  external  and  ritual 
holiness,  but  to  real  and  internal.  "Be  ye  holy."  (3)  Catholicity,  diffusiveness, 
generality.  We  may  each  of  us  have  our  denominational  preferences,  but  we  must 
not  unchurch  one  another.  The  Church  is  catholic  in  the  following  particulars  : 
(a)  It  is  the  true  Church  wherever  it  may  be,  as  to  country  or  clime,  (b)  It  is 
found  equally  among  all  denominations  who  are  in  connection  with  the  Head.  IL 
The  relation  in  which  Christ  stands  to  it.  1.  He  is  the  teaching  Head.  From 
Him  as  the  great  Prophet  of  the  Church  flows  all  the  light  by  which  it  is  illumined 
and  cheered.  "  In  Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom,"  Ac.  2.  He  is  the 
Head  of  influence.    3.  The  Head  of  government — both  legislative  and  executive. 

4.  The  only  Head.  (1)  Appointed  as  such.  (2)  Necessarily  so.  There  can  be  but 
one  head  of  the  body.  3.  AU-suflScient.  III.  The  duties  we  owe  to  this  hal- 
LowsD  confederacy.  1.  To  try  the  spirits,  whether  they  be  of  God — the  pretensions 
of  those  who  offer  themselves  to  our  notice  as  assumed  members  of  the  Church. 

5.  lo  admire  the  goodness  of  Christ  in  undertaking  this  government.    S.  To  in- 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  |» 

quire  whether  we  belong  to  the  Holy  Catholic  Church.  4.  To  exult  in  its  prospective 
triumphs.  6.  To  look  forward  to  the  glorious  consummation  when  this  one  Church 
shall  be  presented  in  its  full  numbers  before  the  throne.  {G.  Clayton,  M.A.) 
Church  authority : — It  is  indispensable  to  every  society  to  have  a  central  person  or 
idea  round  which  it  may  revolve  ;  a  supreme  government  to  which  it  must  refer 
and  submit.  The  will  of  the  person,  the  essence  of  the  idea,  is  the  reason  and  law 
of  its  existence.  Such  in  the  Church  is  Christ.  Accordingly  He  combines  in  Him- 
self all  the  elements  of  which  the  Church  is  to  consist.  The  idea  of  Christian  life 
is  that  the  qualities  of  spiritual  and  visible  worlds  should  be  brought  together.  It 
recognizes,  therefore,  as  its  appropriate  Head  the  God-man  who  combines  the  Divine 
nature  to  be  communicated,  and  the  human  capacity  for  its  communication,  an<S 
who  embodied  in  His  incarnate  life  the  model  of  what  human  nature  should  be. 
Around  the  Mediator,  then,  all  believing  men  are  gathered.  He  is  the  central  figure 
around  whom  the  Church  is  grouped,  the  essential  bond  and  reason  of  its  existence. 
As  Head  of  the  Church  Christ  is — I.  The  source  of  the  peculiab  truths  whesebt 
IT  IS  FOUNDED.  That  which  constitutes  a  society  is  not  the  truth  it  has  in  common 
with  others,  but  that  which  is  peculiar  to  itself.  A  literary  society  may  have  a 
morality  common  to  themselves  and  hundreds  about  them  ;  but  it  is  their  peculiar 
element  of  literature  which  constitutes  them  a  literary  society.  So  the  Church  may 
have  a  great  deal  of  the  morality  common  to  them  and  nnregenerate  men,  and  so 
with  theological  ideas.  Hence  the  name  Christian  cannot  be  accorded  to  those 
who  deny  the  Deity  and  atonement  of  Christ,  and  the  personality  and  regenerating 
influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  these  are  the  characteristic  revelations  of  the 
New  Testament.  Of  these  truths  Christ  is  the  source,  and  all  His  work  concerns 
itself  with  them.  As  the  great  Prophet  of  the  Church  He  announces  them,  as  its 
Priest  He  realizes  them,  as  its  King  He  reigns  to  enforce  them.  II.  The  bourcb 
OF  THE  spiEiTUAL  LIFE  WHEREIN  IT  CONSISTS.  The  idea  of  a  socicty  is  the  reception 
by  its  members,  and  their  practical  embodiment  of  its  peculiar  truths.  The  Church 
is,  therefore,  more  than  an  association  of  theoretic  believers  in  the  atonement  and 
regeneration ;  it  lives  under  their  power  and  for  their  promulgation.  Common 
theories  only  bring  men  into  juxtaposition;  common  experiences  knit  them  together. 
The  truth  which  Christ  has  given  the  Giiurch  becomes  a  quickening  thing.  1.  This 
supposes  that  previously  men  were  dead.  Moral  death  is  the  most  lamentable  of 
all  deaths.  2.  In  this  condition  Christ  finds  him.  "  You  hath  He  quickened." 
Hestoration  to  moral  Ufe  is  effected — (1)  By  His  atonement,  by  which  He  rescues 
men  from  legal  death,  and  procures  a  reversal  of  the  sentence  of  condemnation. 
(2)  By  His  Spirit  the  soul  is  quickened,  and  men  having  the  Spirit  of  Christ  are 
bom  again.  (3)  This  moral  life  is  a  right  state  of  the  heart  towards  God,  and  ia 
sustained  by  these  truths.  They  constrain  to  holy  obedience.  III.  The  souecb 
OF  ALL  the  authority  OR  LAW  WHEREWITH  IT  IS  REGULATED,  He  determines 
the  precise,  direction  and  shape  which  spiritual  feeling  should  assume,  bnt 
such  direction  need  not  interfere  with  the  spontaneousness  of  the  feeling.  And  so 
the  Christian  precept  prompts  the  desire  for  duty  and  directs  it,  but  is  nowhere 
arbitrary.  Thus  is  it  also  in  the  associated  life  of  the  Church.  Whatever  law 
Christ  has  given  He  has  given  in  accordance  with  the  spontaneous  prompting  of 
Church  life  ;  the  prompting  might  be  vague,  the  precept  enlightens  it.  At  the  same 
time,  when  institutions  are  needed  Christ  alone  has  authority  to  enjoin  them  aa 
laws.  This  we  see  e.g.,  in  the  sacraments.  Christ  is  the  sole  legislator,  and  fot 
any  individual  to  interpose  an  authority  between  Christ  and  the  Church  is  open 
rebellion.  IV.  Christ  administers  the  providences  which  constitute  its  expert- 
ENCB.  This  is  part  of  His  mediatorial  right  in  pursuance  of  His  purpose  of  world 
restoration.  1.  Within  the  Church  He  orders  the  Bocceasion  and  distinctions  of 
its  ministry,  the  accession  or  removal  of  its  members,  their  spiritual  birth  or  trans- 
lation, their  trials  and  privileges.  2.  Without  the  Church  He  determines  or  permits 
the  experiences  that  shall  visit  it ;  the  waves  that  shall  beat  upon  the  ark ;  the 
assaults  upon  the  fortress.  Lessons — 1.  If  Christ  be  the  source  of  all  spiritual 
truth  and  Ufe,  our  constant  temper  should  be  practical  gratitude  for  our  participation 
of  it.  2.  If  Christ  be  the  source  of  all  authority,  our  constant  habit  should  be  holy 
obedience.  8.  If  Christ  provides,  then  we  may  safely  leave  all  things  in  His  hands. 
4.  Let  ns  assure  ourselves  of  its  final  and  glorious  triumph.  (H.  Allon,  D.D.) 
Who  is  the  beginning. — Hamea  and  titles  among  men  are  generally  insignificant, 
and  not  characteristio  of  the  persons  who  wear  them ;  but  Christ's  are  both  descrip- 
tive and  recommendatory.  Ha  is  the  beginning.  I.  As  to  His  Divins  nature. 
It  implies  His  eternity  and  self -existence.      He  is  not  God  by  derivation  and 


.  1.]  C0L0SSIAN8.  IT 

Bommission.  He  is  before  all  things,  and  by  Him  all  things  consist.  He  is  there- 
lore  the  beginning  and  fountain  of  created  existence.  He  who  received  life  from 
none  communicates  life  to  all.  Not  only  our  being  but  our  intellectual  and  moral 
excellencies  are  from  Him.  By  His  power  we  are  what  we  are  as  men ;  by  His  grace 
we  are  what  we  are  as  Christians.  II.  As  Mediator.  1.  He  ia  the  origin  of  the 
Church  of  God.  It  is  He  that  has  raised  it  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  fall.  Is  it  a 
temple  ?  He  builds  it.  Is  it  a  garden  ?  He  plants  it.  2.  He  is  the  beginning  to 
individual  saints.  Our  life  is  from  His  death,  and  all  the  streams  of  blessedness 
flow  from  His  fulness.  More  particularly  (1)  He  is  the  source  of  reconciliation  and 
the  beginning  of  our  peace  with  God.  Our  prayers  and  tears  have  no  influence  ; 
neither  our  own  work  nor  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  There  is  no  admission  to  Divine 
favour  without  satisfaction  to  Divine  justice  ;  and  Christ  alone  has  made  that  by 
the  Cross.  (2)  He  is  the  beginning  in  reference  to  the  change  wrought  in  us  by 
regeneration.  This  change  is  wrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  as  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  "  He  shall  receive  of  Mine."  Christ  within  us  is  the  hope  of  glory.  Ha 
is  our  Life.  8.  With  respect  to  the  resurrection.  His  own  was  the  pattern  and 
pledge  of  that  of  His  saints.  The  same  Spirit  who  quickened  Him  shall  also 
quicken  us.  Learn — 1.  The  honour  that  is  due  to  Christ.  2.  As  Christ  is  the 
beginning  of  all  spiritual  blessings,  so  those  blessings  can  belong  to  none  bat  those 
who  are  in  Him.  3.  He  who  is  the  beginning  is  also  the  end  ;  and  this  secures  the 
happiness  of  all  the  saints.  He  who  has  begun  will  also  finish  (Heb.  xii.  2). 
Christ  the  beginning  : — The  same  place  and  dignity  that  Christ  has  in  the  order  of 
nature  He  has  in  the  order  of  grace ;  He  is  the  beginning  of  the  new  as  He  was  also 
of  the  old  creation,  I.  In  the  way  or  order  as  first  and  chief  of  the  renewed 
STATE.  1.  As  Founder  and  Builder  of  the  Church  (Matt.  xvi.  18  ;  Heb.  iii.  3-6). 
One  of  the  noblest  of  God's  works  is  His  Church  of  the  firstborn ;  none  could 
constitute  it  but  the  God-man.  For  the  materials  are  sinful  and  guilty  men. 
Neither  men  nor  angels  could  raise  them  into  a  holy  temple  to  God.  2.  As  the 
Lord  of  the  Church  (Heb.  ii.  7).  II.  In  the  way  of  caosajlitt.  1.  As  a  moral, 
meritorious  cause  (1  John  iv.  9,  10).  2.  As  an  efficient  cause  by  His  Spirit  who 
works  in  the  members  of  His  mystical  body  (2  Cor.  v.  17  ;  Eph.  ii.  10).  The  in- 
fluence we  have  from  our  Head  is — (1)  Life  (Gal.  ii.  20 ;  John  vi.  57).  (2)  Likeness 
(Gal.  iv.  19 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18).  It  is  for  the  honour  of  Christ  that  His  image  should 
be  upon  His  members,  to  distinguish  them  from  others.  As  to  life.  He  is  the  root 
(John  XV.  1,  2) ;  as  to  likeness,  He  is  the  pattern  (Eom.  viii.  29).  IIL  The  reason 
OF  this.  1.  It  is  for  the  honour  of  the  Son  to  be  the  Head  of  the  new  world.  In 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  all  thing  are  new;  a  new  covenant,  paradise,  ministry, 
ordinances,  members,  and  so  a  new  Head  or  Second  Adam  (1  Cor.  xv.  45).  It  is 
suited  to  our  lost  estate.  (T.  Mantoji,  D.D.)  The  beginning: — I.  This  term 
EXPRESSES  Christ's  Divine  NATURE.  He  must  be  Divine  who  is  "almighty,"  and 
"  who  is,  and  was,  and  is  to  come  " ;  and  since  "  the  beginning  "  is  a  title  applied 
in  the  same  passage  (Bev.  i.  8),  Paul  pronounces  Him  Divine.  U.  It  expresses 
Christ's  relation  to  His  Church.  1.  The  beginning  of  a  tree  is  the  seed  it 
springs  from.  The  giant  oak  had  its  origin  in  the  acorn.  Now  as  a  seed  Christ 
was  apparently  of  little  promise,  "  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground,"  yet  out  of  Him 
has  grown  that  Church  which  shall  bear  the  blessings  of  salvation  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth.  2.  A  house,  again,  begins  at  the  foundation.  The  first  stone  laid  is 
the  founilation-stone.  Christ  is  this,  a  tried  stone,  a  firm  and  immovable  basis  for 
the  believer.  4.  The  Author  of  our  faith,  the  Founder  of  the  Church,  began  it,  ere 
■an  or  stars  shone  in  heaven.  He  provided  for  the  fall  before  it  happened.  He 
had  the  lifeboat  on  the  beach  before  the  bark  was  stranded,  or  launched,  or  even 
built,     he  was  "  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."     III.  He  is 

THE  BEGINNING   OF  SALVATION  TO   EVERY    INDIVIDUAL   BELIEVER.       1,    Whatever  WaS  the 

instrument  employed  it  was  His  grace  that  began  what  had  a  beginning.  The 
preacher  was  a  man  but  drawing  a  bow  at  a  venture.  It  was  Christ's  eye  that  aimed 
the  shaft,  and  His  strength  that  bent  the  bow.  When  our  sins  were  carrying  us  out 
to  burial  He  stopped  the  bier  and  imparted  life.  2.  As  Christ  is  the  beginner,  so 
is  He  the  finisher  of  our  faith.  He  does  no  half  work,  half  saving,  or  half  sanctifying 
a  man.  Trust  Him  that  when  He  has  begun  a  good  work  He  will  cairy  it  on  to  the 
end.  (r.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Tlie  firstborn  from  the  dead. — L  Open  the  terms. 
"Firstborn."  If  the  grave  was  as  a  womb  to  Christ,  and  His  resurrection  as  a 
birth,  then  Christ  was  in  a  manner  bom  when  He  rose.  Only  He  hath  the  prece- 
dency ;  surely  others  will  follow  Him  (Acts  xxvl.  23 ;  1  Cor.  xt.  20).  As  in  the 
consecration  of  the  firstfruits  the  whole  narvest  was  consecrated,  so  Christ  by  rising 


n  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  I. 

raises  all.  11.  Vindicate  the  notion.  Two  objections  lie  against  it.  1.  Many  were 
raised  before  Him  or  by  Him  (1  Kings  xvii. ;  2  Kings  iv.,  xiii.  21 ;  Luke  vii.  15, 
viii  55  ;  John  xi.  44  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  62).  (1)  We  must  distinguish  between  a  proper 
and  improper  resurrection.  He  arose  by  a  proper,  which  is  to  rise  to  a  life  immortal ; 
they  only  to  a  mortal  estate,  and  so  the  great  disease  was  rather  removed  than 
cured  (Acts  xiii.  34).  (2)  Others  were  raised  by  the  power  and  virtue  of  His  lesur- 
reotion,  but  He  by  His  own  power  (John  viii.  18).  Thus  Christ  is  said  not  only  to 
be  raised  again,  but  to  rise  (Rom.  iv.  25).  (3)  All  those  who  rose  before,  rose  only 
by  special  dispensation  to  lay  down  their  bodies  again  when  God  should  see  fit,  and 
rose  only  as  private  persons.  But  Christ  rose  as  a  public  Person,  and  once  for  alL 
2.  Concerning  the  raising  of  the  wicked.  Christ  cannot  be  the  firstborn  to  them 
who  belong  not  to  His  mystical  body.  The  firstborn  implies  a  relation  to  the  rest 
of  the  family.  The  offering  of  the  firstfruits  did  not  sanctify  the  tares  and  weeds. 
(1)  Certainly  the  wicked  shall  rise  again  (Acts  xxiv.  15 ;  John  v.  28,  29) ;  but  (2) 
they  will  be  raised  by  Christ  as  a  Judge,  not  as  a  Redeemer.  The  one  sort  are  raised 
by  the  powerjof  His  vindictive  justice,  the  other  by  the  Holy  Ghost  by  virtue  of  Hia 
covenant  (Rom.  viii.  11) ;  the  one  by  Christ's  power  from  without  as  Judge  of  dead 
and  living,  the  other  by  an  inward  quickening  influence  flowing  from  Him  as  their 
proper  Head.  (3)  The  wicked  are  forced  to  appear  to  receive  their  sentence,  the  other 
go  joyfully  to  meet  the  Bridegroom  and  enter  into  eternal  life.    III.  How  is  this  an 

EVIDENCB  AND   ASSURANCE   TO  ALL   CHRISTIANS   OF  THEIR   HAPPY   AND   GLORIOUS   BESUB- 

EECTioN  ?  1.  There  shall  be  a  resurrection.  It  is  necessary  to  prove  that — (1) 
Because  it  is  the  foundation  of  all  godliness  (2  Cor.  xv.  32).  (2)  Because  it  is  not 
easy  of  belief.  The  great  and  public  evidence  thereof  is  Christ's  which  makes 
ours — (a)  Possible.  That  is  the  least  we  can  gather  from  it  (1  Cor.  xv.  13).  (&)  Easy. 
By  rising  Christ  has  conquered  death  (1  Cor.  xv.  57  ;  Heb.  ii.  14).  (c)  Certain  and 
necessary  from — First,  our  relation  to  Christ  as  Head.  He  cannot  live  gloriously  in 
heaven  and  leave  His  members  under  the  power  of  death  (Eph.  i.  23,  iv.  13), 
otherwise  He  would  be  a  maimed  Christ.  Second,  the  charge  and  office  of 
Christ  (John  vL  39).  Third,  the  mercy  of  God  through  the  merits  of  Christ 
to  the  faithful  who  have  hazarded  their  lives  for  His  sake  (1  Thess.  iv.  14 ; 
2  Cor.  iv.  14).  2.  The  resurrection  to  the  faithful  will  be  happy  and  glorious. 
(1)  Because  Christ's  is  not  only  a  cause,  but  pattern.  The  members  were  appointed 
to  be  conformed  to  their  Head  (Rom.  viii.  19  ;  1  Pet.  i.  21).  (2)  By  the  grant  of 
God.  They  have  a  right  and  title  to  it.  Being  admitted  to  His  family  they  may 
expect  to  be  admitted  into  His  presence ;  and  they  have  the  Holy  Spirit  as  an 
earnest  till  it  be  accomplished  (Eph.  i.  14,  iv,  30 ;  Rom.  viii.  28).     IV.  The  Usb 

IS  TO  PERSUADE  TOtJ  TO  THE    BELIEF  OF  THESE  TWO  GRAND  ABTICLES  OF  FAITH.       1.    The 

resurrection  of  Christ.  That  is  the  great  foundati'^n  of  faith  (1  Cor.  xv.  14).  All 
the  apostles'  preaching  was  built  on  this  supposition.  (1)  Partly  because  this  ia 
the  great  evidence  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  (Acts  xxiii.  31,  xiii.  33).  (2) 
Partly  to  show  that  He  is  in  a  capacity  to  convey  spiritual  and  eternal  life  to  others ; 
which,  if  He  had  continued  in  the  state  of  death,  He  could  not  be  (John  xiv.  19  ; 
1  Pet.  i.  3  ;  Eph.  i.  20-21).  2.  Your  own  resurrection.  (1)  Consider  it  as  a  work  of 
omnipotency.  To  an  infinite  power  there  can  be  no  difficulty  (Phil.  iii.  21 ;  Zech. 
viii.  6).  (2)  We  have  relief  from  the  justice  of  God.  He  is  the  rewarder  of  good 
and  bad,  but  He  does  not  dispense  His  rewards  in  this  life  (1  Cor.  xv.  29).  (3)  God'g 
unchangeable  love,  which  inclines  Him  to  seek  the  dust  of  His  confederates ;  there- 
fore Christ  proves  the  resurrection  from  God's  covenant  title  (Matt.  xxii.  31).  (T. 
Manton,D.D.)  The  firstborn : — Christ  is  the  firstborn  from  the  dead.  I.  In  th> 
DIGNITY  OF  His  person.  He  is  the  greatest  who  ever  entered  or  shall  ever  leave  the 
gates  of  death.  Isaiah  in  one  of  his  boldest  flights  of  fancy  sets  forth  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Babylonian  monarchy.  He  sees  a  mighty  king  descending  into  the 
grave,  breaking  its  awful  silence  and  entering  alone  the  dark  domain  of  a  monarch 
mightier  than  himself.  On  his  ear  fall  the  voices  of  kings  long  buried,  muttering, 
"  Art  thou  become  as  we  7  "  When  we  die  we  sink  into  the  grave  as  snowflakes  on 
the  water,  but  Christ  being  the  Lord  of  glory,  the  fountain  of  life,  His  descent  into 
the  tomb  was  an  event  which  may  well  be  set  forth  by  the  prophet's  imagery.  I 
can  fancy  all  the  dead  astonished  at  His  coming.  Fancy  some  great,  good  monarch 
thrust  into  the  common  jail ;  and  were  such  a  reverse  of  fortune  borne  out  of  love 
to  His  subjects,  how  would  it  move  their  love  and  admiration  as  well  as  their  wonder 
and  pity  1  Yet  what  were  such  an  event  compared  with  what,  unnoticed  by  the 
world,  took  place  in  the  garden  ?  Christ's  descent  into  the  tomb  awoke  death  from 
its  deepest  apathy.     That  awoke  those  who  are  heedless  of  the  shock  of  earthquakes 


OUP.  I.]  COLOSSIANS.  79 

The  graves  were  opened.  Waiting  for  Him  to  lead  the  way,  many  dead  saints  left 
the  tomb.  II.  Because  He  rose  by  His  own  power.  There  is  no  sensibility, 
passion,  or  power  in  the  dead.  They  can  do  nothing  to  help  themselves.  In  all 
cases  but  Christ's,  life  was  given,  not  taken  back.  III.  Bkcause  He  is  the  only 
ONE  WHO  never  ROSE  TO  DIE  AGAIN.  The  otliers  twice  drank  the  bitter  cup.  IV. 
Bkcause  He  h;*8  taken  precedence  of  His  people.  It  is  better  for  me,  if  I  am  a 
poor  man  standing  in  need  of  royal  favours,  to  have  a  friend  at  court  than  in  my 
own  humble  cottage ;  and  it  is  better  for  us  that  Christ  is  with  the  Father  in 
heaven  than  with  us  on  earth.  But  apart  from  that,  precedence  was  His  right. 
The  King  precedes  His  train  ;  the  Head  was  first  out  of  the  grave,  afterwards  the 
body  and  its  members.  It  is  as  the  prelude  to  our  own  resurrection  that  Christ's 
is  to  us  the  object  of  the  greatest  satisfaction  and  joy.  Henceforth  the  grave  holds 
but  a  lease  of  the  saints.  Because  He  rose  we  shall  rise.  If  we  are  reconciled  to 
God  through  Jesus  Christ  what  reconciling  views  of  death  does  this  open  to  ua  ! 
(T.  Outhrir,  D.D.)  The  Divine  harbinger: — Sweeter  to  our  ear  than  the  full 
chorus  of  bright  skies  and  green  wood  are  the  first  notes  of  the  warbler  that  pipes 
away  the  winter,  and  breaks  in  on  its  long,  drear  silence  1  And  more  welcome  to  our 
eye  than  the  flush  of  summer's  gayest  flowers  is  the  simple  snowdrop  that  hangs  ita 
pure  white  bell  above  the  dead,  bare  ground.  And  why?  These  are  the  firstborn 
of  the  year,  the  forerunners  of  a  crowd  to  follow.  In  that  group  of  silver  bella 
that  ring  in  the  spring  with  its  joys  and  loves  and  singing  birds,  my  fancy's  eye 
sees  the  naked  earth  clothed  with  beauty,  the  streams,  like  children  let  loose, 
dancing  and  laughing,  and  rejoicing  in  their  freedom,  bleak  winter  gone,  and 
nature's  annual  resurrection.  And  in  that  solitary  simple  note  my  fancy  hears  the 
carol  of  larks,  wide  moor,  hillside,  and  woodlands  full  of  song  and  ringing  with  all 
music.  And  in  Christ,  the  Fiistborn,  I  see  the  grave  giving  up  its  dead  :  from  the 
depths  of  the  sea,  from  lonely  wiklerness  and  crowded  churchyard  they  come,  like 
the  dew  of  the  grass,  an  innumerable  multitude.  Bisen  Lord  1  we  rejoice  in  Thy 
resurrection.  We  hail  it  as  the  harbinger  and  blessed  pledge  of  our  own.  The 
first  to  come  forth.  Thou  art  the  Elder  Brother  of  a  family  whose  countless 
numbers  the  patriarch  saw  in  the  dust  of  the  desert,  whose  holy  beauty  he  saw 
shining  in  the  bright  stars  of  heaven.  (Ibid.)  That  in  all  things  He  might 
have  the  pre-eminence. — The  Pre-eminent  One  : — It  is  the  ordination  of  providence 
that  in  every  society  or  profession  there  should  be  a  head — some  one  who  should 
have  the  pre-eminence.  The  father  ought  to  be  the  chief  of  his  house.  Israel 
was  governed  by  God,  yet  He  chose  Moses  as  His  vice-gerent,  and  wlien  the  nation 
was  afterwards  divided  into  tens,  hundreds,  &o.,  still  Moses  retained  the  pre- 
eminence. No  society  could  hang  together  without  this.  The  same  ordination 
holds  good  in  the  Church.  From  its  members  some  are  made  eminent  pastors,  d'o., 
yet  there  is  but  one  to  whom  the  pre-eminence  belongs.  And  we  are  told  the 
reason  of  it.  Among  men  we  see  eminence  variously  displayed :  one  is  eminent 
for  wisdom,  another  for  power,  and  so  on ;  but  Christ  is  pre-eminent  in  all  things. 
Therefore  Christ  is  reserved  for  this  honour ;  and  that  not  simply  as  God,  but  as 
Mediator.  Christ  has  pre-eminence.  I.  In  the  estimation  of  Deity.  1.  On 
whom  does  the  Father  concentrate  His  love  and  delight  ?  Jehovah  calls  Him  His 
own  Son,  His  dear  Son,  His  beloved  Son.  Christ  is  the  only  begotten  Son  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father,  and  He  speaks  of  the  glory  He  had  before  the  world  was. 
Thrice  did  the  Father  glorify  Him — at  His  baptism,  transfiguration,  and  just  before 
His  passion.  At  His  incarnation  the  Father  said,  "  Let  all  the  angels  of  God 
worship  Him,"  and  after  His  burial  sent  angels  to  roll  away  the  stone.  2.  The 
Bame  pre-eminence  is  given  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  anointed  Him  with  the  oil  of 
gladness  above  His  fellows — descended  on  Him  at  His  baptism,  glorifies  Him,  and 
receives  of  His.  II.  In  the  testimony  of  the  Scriptureb.  "  They  wrote  of  Me." 
**  The  testimony  of  Jesus  ia  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  Every  metaphor  that  the 
glowing  glories  of  earth  or  heaven  have  offered  is  selected  to  put  honour  on  His 
brow.  1.  Consider  His  titles — Foundation,  Door,  Captain,  Advocate,  Judge,  &c 
2.  His  offices — Prophet,  Priest,  King,  Shepherd,  &c.  III.  As  bxbibitcd  in  the 
GLORY  OF  His  works.  1.  Creation.  Angels  have  done  wonders,  and  men  ;  but 
whoever  saw  anything  equal  to  the  works  of  Christ  ?  2.  Providence.  "  The 
government  is  on  His  shoulders."  3.  Redemption.  IV.  In  the  opinion  of  be- 
liiEVEBS.  There  are  many  who  are  very  dear  to  us  on  earth  and  in  heaven ;  but 
•who  has  the  pre-eminence?  "Unto  you  that  believe  He  is  precious."  "He  is 
the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely."  V.  In  the  happiness  of 
HEAVKN.    To  be  with  Christ,  apart  from  the  consideration  of  its  other  elories.  that 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<mA».  & 

is  heaven.  Conclusion.  Give  Christ  the  pre-eminence.  1.  In  year  hearts.  8. 
In  yoor  houses.  3.  Labour  that  He  may  have  it  in  the  whole  world.  (J.  Sherman.) 
Chrut  pre-eminent : — I.  He  is  the  first.  1.  He  is  pre-eminent  in  age  (ver.  15). 
"  Before  Abraham  was  I  am."  2.  In  the  work  of  redemption,  "  firstborn  from  the 
dead."  II.  He  is  the  mightiest.  1.  As  Creator  (ver.  16).  2.  As  Preserver  (ver. 
17).  3.  As  Destroyer.  We  cannot  destroy  the  tiniest  piece  of  matter.  He  can 
desolate  a  world.  III.  He  is  the  eichest.  He  owns — 1.  All  the  treasures  of 
creation  (ver.  10).  2,  All  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  (chap.  ii.  3).  8. 
All  the  treasures  of  grace  (ver.  19).  IV.  He  is  the  highest.  1.  He  now  occupies 
the  throne  of  mercy.  2.  He  will  leave  this  for  the  throne  of  judgment.  3.  He 
will  finally  sit  on  the  throne  of  glory  and  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  V.  He  is  thb 
liOVELiEST.  "  The  altogether  lovely."  1.  As  the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory. 
2.  As  the  fairest  of  the  children  of  men.  VI.  He  is  the  last  as  He  is  the  First. 
He  only  hath  immortality ;  ours  is  derived  from  Him.  {U.  G.  Guinness.)  Christ 
pre-eminent  in  all  things : — Some  are  eminent  for  one  thing,  some  for  another. 
Some  are  distinguished  for  vast  wealth,  some  are  ennobled  by  intellectual  resources, 
some  obtain  a  name  for  personal  bravery,  but  none  has  pre-eminence  in  all  things. 
But  in  whatever  light  we  look  at  Christ  He  is  pre-eminent.  I.  In  His  Divine  and 
MTSTERI008  NATURE.  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  "  mighty  God,"<fec.  II.  In  the 
UNRIVALLED  GLORY  OP  His  PERFECTIONS.  He  has  every  attribute  of  Deity,  and 
"  Whatever  things  the  Father  doeth,  these  doeth  the  Son  likewise."  IH.  In  thb 
BTTJPENDoos  CHARACTER  OF  His  WORKS.  1.  All  creation  is  His  handiwork.  2.  In  the 
work  of  Providence  governing  and  sustaining  the  universe.  IV.  In  the  illustrious 
DiGNiTT  OF  His  offices.  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls ;  His  tht  one  is  for  ever  and 
ever  ;  He  is  the  Mediator  of  a  better  covenant;  in  Him,  as  Prophet,  are  hid  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  V.  In  thb  consistent  tb:stimony  of  Scrip- 
ture. Take  any  doctrine  you  choose,  it  must  have  some  connection  with  Christ. 
Promises  send  us  to  Christ  to  fulfil  them ;  precepts  send  us  to  Christ,  by  whose 
strength  alone  we  can  perform  them ;  threatenings  send  us  to  Christ,  by  whose 
atonement  and  intercession  alone  they  can  be  averted.  Take  Christ  from  the  Bible 
and  you  its  life  ;  its  promises  have  no  reality,  its  prophecies  are  empty  words,  its 
laws  lose  their  power,  and  its  hopes  their  animation  and  realization.  VI.  In  the 
STUPENDOUS  WORK  OF  HUMAN  REDEMPTION.  For  this  He  alonc  was  competent.  Sal- 
vation begins  and  ends  with  Him.  VII.  In  Christian  experience.  The  Christian's 
faith  is  faith  in  Christ;  his  joy,  joy  in  Christ;  his  strength,  strength  in  Christ;  his 
life,  life  in  Christ.  Think  of  what  is  necessary  to  a  perfect  Christian  and  you  will 
find  it  all  in  Christ.  All  worship  is  to  be  oiiered  in  His  name,  and  all  obedience 
rendered  Him.  VIII.  In  Christian  preaching  and  testimony.  To  bear  witness  to 
Christ  and  to  secure  Him  homage  is  the  end  of  our  creation.  IX.  Christ  will 
yet  have  pre-eminence  in  the  world.  {W.  P.  Appelbe,  LL.D.)  Christ  in  all 
things  the  pre-eminent : — Nature  and  the  Bible  are  alike  in  this  respect — that  yon 
find  in  each  two  kinds  of  objects :  the  one  simple,  quiet,  beautiful ;  the  other  grand, 
majestic,  overpowering.  In  this  chapter  we  get  amongst  the  Highlands  of  Revela- 
tion. I.  The  supremacy  of  Christ.  1.  As  extending  over  two  spheres,  the  realms 
of  nature  and  grace,  the  universe  and  the  Church.  (1)  He  is  the  "  firstborn  of  every 
creature."  We  cannot  suppose  Him  to  be  a  creature,  because  "  He  is  before  all 
things,"  &6.  In  Rabbinical  literature  Jehovah  is  styled  the  firstborn  of  creation, 
by  which  is  meant  that  He  is  supreme  over  the  universe ;  for  the  birthright  carried 
with  it  supremacy.  In  like  manner  the  phrase  must  be  taken  in  reference  to 
Christ.  His  dominion  extends  to  all  things  in  heaven  :  sun,  moon,  stars,  &c.,  and 
angels  who  never  fell ;  to  things  on  earth :  the  globe  and  its  inhabitants,  all  mineral, 
vegetable,  animal,  and  human  existence.  (2)  He  is  Head  of  the  Church.  Lord 
of  the  Church's  mind — in  their  religious  thinking  believers  are  to  think  under 
Him.  Lord  of  the  Church's  heart — in  their  affections  believers  are  to  be  guided  by 
Him.  Lord  of  the  Church's  life — for  His  Word  is  law.  2.  This  supremacy  has 
been  obtained  in  two  different  ways.  (1)  Christ's  birthright  of  authority  and  power 
over  the  universe  is  by  creation.  (2)  In  His  redemptive  work  He  is  the  firstborn  of 
the  dead.  He  is  the  firstborn  in  both,  but  creation  is  by  hfe;  redemption  ia 
t,  hrongh  death.  3.  There  is  a  distinction  between  the  relations  in  which  the 
ei  eated  universe  and  the  redeemed  Church  stands  to  Him.  He  made  the  one ;  He 
is  the  Head  of  the  other.  The  universe  is  a  grand  collection  of  things  made  by 
His  power  and  for  His  use.  Thus  we  are  led  to  separate  between  the  universe  and 
Christ  He  is  do  iiart  of  it.  Bnt  in  relation  to  the  Church  the  distinction  is 
dropped,  and  an  idc-a  of  most  intimate  union  introduced — it  is  His  body,  which  if 


«JHAP.  L]  VOLOSSIANS.  81 

nowhere  attributed  of  nature.     4.  This  pre-eminence  issues  in  the  union  of  th« 
two  realms.     Ver.  20  should  be  read  in  connection  with  this.     The  reconciliation 
goes  further  than  persons  and  laws  and  governments.    Thus  much  appears.     (1) 
That  Christ,  in  His  mediatorial  reign,  through  His  death,  becomes  the  Lord  ana 
Guardian  of  the  entire  universe  of  holy  beings,  redeemed  and  unfallen ;  that  He 
gathers  all  in  one  uuto  God,  and  is  equally  King  of  earth  and  heaven.     (2)  That 
the  sin  of  man  has  disturbed  the  relation  between  Him  and  angels ;  that  man 
getting  out  of  place,  throws  into  disorder  the  whole  sphere  of  existence  to  which 
he  belongs,  as  a  wandering  star  would  the  solar  system,  and  that  Christ,  by  putting 
men  right,  reconciles  them  to  angels  and  angels  to  them.     (8)  That  without  an 
atonement  it  was  an  unbefitting  thing  that  heaven  should  receive  depraved  mortals  ; 
bat  that  with  an  atonement  it  is  quite  befitting  that  men  redeemed  and  sanctified 
flhould  enter  the  ranks  of  the  glorified  ;  and  that  in  the  end  such  will  be  the  number 
of  the  saved,  and  the  relation  in  which  they  stand  to  the  rest  of  the  universe,  that 
in  some  sense  a  reconciliation  of  all  things  will  be  accomplished.     5.  Let  me  ask 
whether  in  correspondence  with  these  views  of  Christ's  supremacy  He  has  pre- 
eminence in  our  hearts  and  lives?     II.  Toe  plenitude  (ver.  19).     1.  The  fulness 
of  the  Father  exists  in  Christ  as  it  nowhere  else  does.     In  nature  there  are  streams 
of  the  Divine  glory,  yet  the  ocean  fulness  is  not  there.    In  the  reason  of  man  there 
are  Divine  sparks ;  in  the  history  of  the  world  Divine  footprints  ;  in  the  souls  of 
believers  and  the  united  virtues  of  the  Church  there  is  much  Divine  light  and 
goodness ;  but  the  fulness  nowhere,  not  even  in  the  Bible,  only  in  Christ.     And 
wherever  else  in  any  measure  it  is,  it  is  from  Him.     He  is  the  Creator  and  Upholder 
of  the  world ;  Light  and  Lord  of  human  reason ;  Sovereign  of  the  ages  ;  Giver  of 
gracious  power;  Inspirer  and  Subject  of  the  Book  of  books.     2.  This  plenitude 
must  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  supremacy  of  Christ.     (1)  In  creation  He  has 
the  pre-eminence,  because  in  Him  all  fulness  dwells  of  infinite  power,  wisdom, 
goodness.     (2)  How  could  He  be  Head  over  all  things  to  His  Church  if  He  were  a 
man?    A  created  Saviour  could  not  supply  all  our  need ;  but  in  the  Divine  Christ 
there  ia  all  fulness  of  pardoning  mercy,  renewing  power,  supporting  love,  strength 
lor  a  day  of  trouble,  a  dying  hour.     3.  The  pre-emiuence  and  fulness  of  Christ 
constitute  the  leading  object  of  our  blessed  faith.     Agencies  are  needed  to  bring 
men  to  Him,  but  nothing  can  add  to  the  completeness  of  those  who  are  in  Him. 
{J.   Stoughton,  D.D.)         Christ  is  pre-eTuinriit : — I.  As  to  His  personality.     He 
stands  unique.    All  the  elements  in  His  make  up  to  which  the  term  human  can  be 
applied  show  Him  to  be  pre-eminently  human.     He  came  into  the  world  by  the 
gateway  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  but  He  is  not  a  Jew.    He  belonged  to  1800  ago,  and 
yet  He  is  of  no  age.     He  spent  His  days  and  nights  under  the  Eastern  skies,  but 
He  is  of  no  clime.    He  gathers  up  into  Himself  all  the  best  elements  in  Jewish, 
Greek,  and  Koman  life.    He  was  pre-eminently  moral  and  devotional ;  He  was  in 
sympathy  with  everything  beautiful ;  He  glorified  the  moral  law,  was  loyal  to  the 
aational,  and  had  worldwide  ambitions,  only,  unlike  those  of  Eome,  they  were 
benevolent.    II.  As  to  His  ideas  of  God  and  man.     The  test  of  pre-eminence  of 
nature  is  largeness  of  idea  on  these  themes.     1.  The  idea  Christ  gave  us  of  God 
was  pre-eminent.     No  one  ever  approached  it.     There  had  been  many  attempts  to 
put  the  nature  of  God  into  a  word,  but  all  had  failed  till  He  said  "Father."     2. 
So  with  His  idea  of  the  nature  of  man.     The  noblest  man  among  the  Jews  was 
the  chief  of  the  Pharisees  or  Sadducees ;  among  the  Greeks  the  most  physically 
beautiful ;  among  the  Romans  the  strong  man  able  to  trample  every  one  who  was  in 
His  path  into  the  dust.     Under  the  influence  of  Jesus  the  noblest  man  is  the 
gentlest,  humanest,  chastest,  and  most  charitable.     This  is  a  new  idea.     3.  Other 
ideas  help  us  to  see  how  pre-eminently  Jesus  was  the  world's  greatest  thinker,  such 
as  the  brotherhood  of  man ;  the  idea  that  love  of  God  is  best  expressed  in  the 
service  of  man,  the  idea  that  the  worst  man  may  be  saved.     III.  As  to  His  mission 
IN  the  world.    No  other  man  ever  carried  on  such  a  mission  or  was  capable  of 
entertaining  the  idea  of  it.     It  was  to  bring  a  revolted  world  back  into  such  an 
allegiance  as  is  worthy  of  God  to  accept  and  man  to  give ;  not  forced,  but  based  on 
love.     The  accomplishment  of  such  a  mission  seems  to  us  impossible,  but  in 
individuals  it  has  been  accomplished,  and  will  yet  be  in  the  whole  world.     IV.  As 
TO  unbiassed  human  OPINION  OF  HiM.     Only  one  conspicuous  man  in  the  world  of 
literature  has  been  blind  to  His  excellency — Voltaire ;  but  Rousseau,  another  great 
«ceptio,  wrote,  "If  the  Ufe  and  death  of  Socrates  be  those  of  a  saint,  the  life  and 
death  of  Jesas  are  those  of  a  God."    Napoleon  I.,  the  old  Boman,  back  again  in 
ihe  Christian  centuries,  said, "  I  know  men,  Jesas  was  not  a  man."  {B.  Thomat,  DJ).) 

6 


69  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  fc 

Vers.  19-22.  For  It  pleased  the  Father  that  In  Elm  shoiild  all  fulness  dwelL— > 

The  reconciling  Son : — I.  As  before  we  have  Cheist  in  relation  to  God.  1.  lo 
the  use  of  the  term  "  fulness,"  which  was  a  very  important  term  in  Gnostic  specu- 
lations, there  is  a  reference  to  some  of  the  heretical  teachers'  expressions.  What 
fulness?  (chap.  ii.  9).  The  abundance  or  totality  of  the  Divine  attributes.  We  have  no 
need  to  look  to  nature  for  fragmentary  revelations  of  God's  character — that  He  has 
fully  and  finally  declared  in  His  Son.  2.  "Dwell"  implies  permanent  abode, 
chosen,  perhaps,  to  oppose  the  view  that  the  union  of  the  Divine  and  human  in 
Christ  was  but  temporary.  3.  This  is  the  result  of  the  Father's  good  pleasure. 
The  Father  determined  the  work  of  the  Son,  and  delighted  in  it.  II.  Again,  aa 
before,  we  have  Christ  and  the  tJNrvERSE,  of  which  He  is  not  only  the  Maker, 
Sustainer,  and  Lord,  but  through  the  blood  of  the  Cross  reconciles  all  things  to 
Himself.  Probably  the  false  teachers  had  dreams  of  reconciling  agents.  Paul  lifta 
up  in  opposition  the  one  Sovereign  Mediator  whose  Cross  is  the  bond  of  peace  for 
the  universe.  I.  Observe  the  distinct  reference  of  these  words  to  the  former 
clauses.  "  Through  Him  "  was  creation ;  "  through  Him  "  is  reconciliation.  "  All 
things"  were  made,  sustained  by,  and  subordinated  to  Him;  the  same  "all 
things  "  are  reconciled.  A  significant  change  in  the  order  is  noticeable.  ••  Ib 
the  heavens'  and  upon  the  earth  "  the  order  of  creation  ;  but  in  reconciliation  tha 
order  is  reversed.  2.  The  correspondence  shows  that  the  reconciliation  affects  not 
only  rational  and  responsible  creatures,  but  '•  things."  The  width  of  reconcilia- 
tion is  the  same  as  that  of  the  creation.  Then  these  words  refer  mainly  to  the 
restitution  of  the  material  universe  to  its  primal  obedience,  and  represent  Christ 
the  Creator  removing  by  His  Cross  the  shadow  that  has  passed  over  nature  by 
reason  of  sin.  1.  Man's  sin  has  made  the  physical  world  "  subject  to  vanity." 
Man  by  sin  has  compelled  dead  matter  to  be  his  instrument  in  aots  of  rebellion 
against  God.  He  has  polluted  the  world  by  sin,  and  laid  unnumbered  woes  on  the 
living  creatures.  This  evil  shall  be  done  away  by  the  reconciling  power  of  the 
blood  of  the  Cross.  The  universe  is  one  because  the  Cross  pierces  its  heights  and 
depths.  2.  The  reference  to  things  in  heaven  may  also  be  occasioned  by  the  dreama 
of  the  hei"etical  teachers.  As  to  reconciliation  proper  among  spiritual  beings  in  that 
realm,  there  can  be  no  question  of  it.  There  is  no  enmity  among  angels.  Still,  if  tha 
reference  be  to  them,  then  we  know  that  to  the  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly 
places  the  Cross  has  been  the  teacher  of  unlearned  depths  in  the  Divine  nature  and 
purposes,  the  knowledge  of  which  has  drawn  them  nearer  to  the  heait  of  God  aiid 
made  their  union  with  Him  more  blessed  and  close.  3.  Sublime  and  great  beyond 
all  otar  dreams  shall  be  the  issue.  Certain  as  the  throne  of  God  is  it  that  His 
purposes  shall  be  accomplished.  The  great  sight  of  the  Seer  of  Patmos  is  the  best 
commentary  on  our  text  (Rev.  v.  9-13).  III.  Christ  and  His  reconciiiIng  work  in 
THE  Church.  We  have  still  the  parallel  kept  up.  As  in  verse  18  He  was  represent- 
ing as  giving  life  to  the  Church  in  a  higher  fashion  than  to  the  universe,  so,  with 
a  similar  heightening  of  the  meaning  of  reconciliation.  He  is  here  set  forth  as  its 
giver  to  the  Church.  1.  Observe  the  solemn  description  of  men  before  it. 
*'  Alienated,"  not  "  aliens,"  but  having  become  so.  The  seat  of  the  enmity  is  in 
that  inner  man  which  thinks  and  wills,  and  its  sphere  of  manifestation  is  "  in  evil 
works  "  which  are  religiously  acts  of  hostility  to  God  because  morally  bad.  This  ia 
thought  nowadays  a  too  harsh  description.  But  the  charge  is  not  that  of  conscious, 
active  hostility,  but  of  practical  want  of  affection  as  manifested  by  habitual  dis- 
obedience or  inattention  to  God's  wishes  and  by  indifference  and  separation  from 
Him  in  heart  and  mind.  2.  Here  as  uniformly  God  Himself  is  the  Beconciler,  it 
is  we  who  are  reconciled.  The  Divine  patience  loves  on  through  all  our  enmity,  and 
though  perfect  love  meeting  human  sin  must  ever  become  wrath,  it  never  becomes 
hatred.  3.  The  means  of  reconciliation.  (1)  "  The  body,"  &c.,  an  exuberance  of 
language  to  correct,  perhaps,  the  error  of  that  our  Lord's  body  was  only  a  phantasm, 
or  to  guard  against  the  risk  of  confounding  it  with  "His  body  the  Church,"  or  as 
showing  how  full  His  mind  was  of  the  overwhelming  wonder  of  the  fact.  (2)  But 
the  Incarnation  is  not  the  whole  gospel ;  "  through  daath  "  Christ's  death  has  so 
met  the  requirements  of  the  Divine  law,  that  Divine  love  can  come  freely  forth  and 
forgive  sinful  men.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  reconciling  work  of  the  great 
Mediator : — I.  The  unique  guALiFicAxioN  of  the  obeat  Mediator.  1.  In  Him  all 
fulness  dwells.  2.  It  is  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father  that  this  fulness  should 
reside  in  the  Son.  IL  The  beconcilino  wobs  or  the  obeat  Mediator.  1.  The 
extent  of  the  reconcUiation.  (1)  Sinful  creatiues  on  earth  are  reconciled  to  God  in 
Chriat.    (2)  Sinful  and  sinless  creatures  are  reconciled.     (3)  Sinless  and  unfallen 


«Hiv.  L]  COL0SSIAN8.  8S 

creatures  are  brought  nearer  to  God  in  Christ  III.  The  means  bt  which  thh 
BECONCiLiATioN  IS  EFFECTED.  LessoDs  I — 1.  The  great  Mediator  has  every  qualifica- 
tion for  His  stupendous  work.  2.  The  reconciliation  of  a  disorganized  universe  ia 
beyond  the  power  of  any  subordinate  agent.  8.  KebelHous  man  can  be  restored  to 
peace  with  God  only  as  he  yields  himself  up  to  the  great  Mediator.  (G.  Barloio.) 
Reconciliation : — I.  In  the  Person  that  redeems  us  we  find  fulness.  I.  And 
there  had  need  be  so.  (1)  He  found  our  measure  of  sin  full  towards  God.  When  a 
river  swells  it  will  find  out  all  the  channels  and  overflow  the  whole  field  ;  bo  sin  hath 
foand  an  issue  at  the  ear,  eye,  tongue,  hands,  feet,  and  so  overflows  all.  (2)  God's 
measure  of  anger  was  full  too.  (3)  Then  it  pleased  the  Father  that  there  should 
be  another  fulness  to  overflow  these.  2.  This  ia  "  all  fulness,"  and  is  only  in  Christ. 
Elijah  had  a  great  portion  of  the  Spirit ;  Elisha  sees  that  that  will  not  serve  Him, 
and  so  asks  a  double  portion ;  but  still  but  portions.  Stephen  is  full  of  faith,  a 
blessed  fulness  where  there  is  no  room  for  doubt;  Dorcas  is  full  of  good  works,  a 
fulness  above  faith  ;  Mary  is  full  of  grace,  which  ia  a  fulness  above  both  ;  but  yet 
not  "  all  fulness."  I  shall  be  as  full  as  Paul  in  heaven,  i.e.,  have  as  full  a  vessel, 
but  not  so  full  a  cellar.  Christ  only  hath  an  infinite  content  and  capacity,  and  so 
an  infinite  fulness.  3.  But  was  Christ  God  before,  and  is  there  a  supplementary 
fulness?  Tea.  To  make  Him  a  competent  person  to  redeem  man  aomething  waa 
to  be  added  to  Christ  though  He  were  God ;  wherein  we  see  the  incomprehensible- 
ness  of  man's  ain,  that  even  to  God  Himself  there  was  required  something  else  than 
God  before  we  could  be  redeemed.  Perfect  God,  there  ia  the  fulness  of  th« 
Eedeemer's  dignity ;  perfect  man,  there  ia  the  fulness  of  His  capacity  to  suffer  and 
pay  our  debt.  This  was  a  strange  fulness,  for  it  was  a  fulness  of  emptiness,  all 
humiliation  and  exinanition  by  His  obedience  unto  death.  4.  How  came  Christ  by 
all  this  fulness?  "It  pleased  the  Father."  II.  The  pacification.  It  is  much 
that  God  would  admit  any  peace  ;  more  that  for  peace  He  should  require  blood  ; 
more  still  that  it  should  be  the  blood  of  Him  who  was  injured ;  most  of  all  that  it 
should  be  tLe  blood  of  the  Cross,  i.e.,  death.  1.  Then  there  was  a  heavy  war 
befoid ;  for  the  Lord  of  Hosts  was  our  enemy ;  and  what  can  all  our  musters  come 
to  when  He  is  against  us  ?  2.  But  what  is  the  peace,  and  how  are  we  included  in  it  ? 
A  man  must  not  think  himself  included  in  it  because  he  feels  no  effects  of  this 
war.  Though  there  be  no  blow  stricken,  the  war  remains  in  the  time  of  truce. 
But  here  is  no  truce.  All  this  while  that  thou  enjoyest  this  imaginary  security  the 
enemy  underminea  thee,  and  will  blow  thee  up  at  l>4st  more  irrevocably  than  if  ho 
had  battered  thee  with  outward  calamities  all  the  time.  But  in  thia  text  there  ia 
true  peace,  and  one  already  made,  and  made  by  Him  who  lacked  nothing  for  the 
making  of  it.  3.  Is  effusion  of  blood  the  way  of  peace  ?  That  may  make  them 
from  whom  it  ia  drawn  glad  of  peace.  But  here  mercy  and  truth  are  met  together. 
God  would  be  true  to  His  own  justice  and  be  merciful  to  us.  Justice  required 
blood,  for  without  it  is  no  remission.  Under  the  law  it  was  blood  of  bulla  and  goata ; 
here  it  is  His  blood.  "  Greater  love,"  &c.  (John  xv.  13) ;  but  He  who  aaid  ao  laid 
down  His  life  shamefully  and  painfully  for  His  enemies.     III.  The  applicatiow 

THEREOF  to  ALL  TO  WHOM  THAT  RECONCILIATION  APPEUTAINS.      All  this  WaS  doue,  and  yet 

the  apostle  prays  us  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  The  general  peace  was  made  by  Cbrist'i 
death,  as  a  general  pardon  ia  given  at  the  King's  coming;  we  hnv  to  accept  it. 
1.  There  ia  a  reconciliation  of  things  in  heaven.  (1)  The  saints,  who  ixached  forth 
the  hand  of  faith  to  lay  hold  of  Christ  before  He  came.  (2)  Angels,  who  were  con- 
firmed in  perfect  holiness  and  blessedness.  2.  Things  on  earth.  (1)  The  creature 
who  by  virtue  of  it  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption.  (2)  Men. 
3.  But  the  most  proper  and  literal  meaning  is  that  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth 
be  reconciled  to  God ;  i.e.,  His  glory,  to  a  fitter  disposition  to  glorify  Him,  by  being 
reconciled  to  one  another  in  Christ;  that  in  Him,  as  Head  of  the  Church,  they  in 
heaven  and  we  on  earth  be  united  together  as  one  body  in  the  communion  of  saints 
(Eph.  i.  10).  4.  Here  there  is  still  reconciliation  to  be  made,  not  only  toward  one 
another  on  the  bond  of  charity,  but  on  ourselves.  In  ourselves  we  find  things  in 
heaven  and  on  earth  to  reconcile.  There  is  heavenly  zeal  to  be  reconciled  to 
discretion  ;  heavenly  purity  to  one  another's  infirmities ;  heavenly  liberty  to  a 
care  for  the  promotion  of  scandal.  Till  the  flesh  and  spirit  be  reconciled  this 
reconciliation  is  not  accomplished ;  but  both  are,  in  Christ,  when  in  all  the  faculties 
of  soul  and  body  we  glorify  Him.  (J.  Donne,  D.D.)  The  fulness : — L  A  pabtx- 
CULAB  FULNESS  dwclt  in  Christ.  The  definitive  article  "  the  "  has  reference  not  to 
fulness  in  general.  It  would  not  be  to  the  honour  of  Jeaua  to  have  all  fulness 
whatsoever.    We  read  of  some  whoae  cupa  and  platters  were  full  of  extortion  and 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ^ 

excess;  of  Elymaa,  who  was  "full  of  subtlety,"  &c. ;  of  men  who  were  "full  of 
envy,  murder,"  &o.  In  Jesus  it  is  some  conspicuously  glorious  fulness.  II.  A 
Divine  fulness.  The  apostle  refers  to  it  in  chap.  ii.  9 — the  fulnet,s  of  the  Godhead, 
not  only  really  and  spiritually,  but  bodily,  in  an  incarnated  condition,  and  thus 
conspicuously,  and  in  such  a  way  as  made  it  a  reasonable  thing  to  ascribe  to  our 
Lord  the  work  of  creation  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  headship  of  the  Church  on 
the  other.  I.  The  Godhead  is  full  of  power.  "  Nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Lord." 
Ail  that  fulness,  too,  is  in  Jesus,  so  that  He  is  able  to  wheel  the  worlds  in  their 
orbits  and  "  to  save  to  the  uttermost,"  &g.  2.  The  Godhead  is  full  of  righteousness. 
In  God  is  "  uo  darkness  at  all."  Our  Lord  is  "  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous,"  whom 
no  one  can  convict  of  sin  ;  and  He  is  so  full  that  His  righteousness  is  available, 
not  to  Himself  alone,  but  "  ucto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe."  3.  The 
Godhead  is  full  of  love.  "God  is  love."  Jesus  said,  "Greater  love  than  this," 
&c.  4.  Hence,  too,  there  was  in  Him  fulness  "of  grace  and  truth,"  of  meekness, 
tenderness,  gentleness.  III.  A  permanent  fulness.  "Dwelt."  The  Father  did 
not  desire  that  the  fulness  of  Godhead  should  stream  through  our  Saviour,  illumi- 
nating and  glorifying  His  nature  as  it  passed,  and  then  vanish.  It  is  the  same  in 
glory  "  to-day,  yesterday,  and  for  ever."  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  I,  The  fulness 
IHAT  IS  IN  Christ.  1.  All  fulness.  Ahasuerus  promised  Esther  that  her  request 
Ehould  be  granted  though  it  cost  him  half  his  kingdom.  Chriet  offers  nothing 
by  halves.  "It  pleased  the  Father,"  &o.  Transferring  Divine  wealth  to  our 
account  in  the  bank  of  heaven,  and  giving  us  an  unlimited  credit  there,  Jesus 
says:  "All  things  whatsoever  ye  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  receive."  2. 
All  fulness  of  mercy  to  pardon  sin.  The  gospel  proclaims  a  universal  amnesty. 
When  the  last  gun  is  fired,  and  pardon  proclaimed  in  reconquered:  provinces,  ia 
it  not  always  marked  by  n  .  able  exceptions?  But  from  Christ's  pardoning  mercy 
none  are  excepted  save  those  who  except  themselves.  It  reaches  the  vilest  sinner. 
It  binds  a  zone  of  mercy  round  the  world,  and  perish  the  hands  that  would 
narrow  it  by  a  hair's  breadth.  None  shall  be  damned  but  those  who  damn 
themselves.  One  might  fancy  that  now  all  are  certain  to  be  saved.  Who  will  not 
accept  of  it  ?  Offer  a  starving  man  bread,  a  poor  man  money,  a  sick  man  health, 
A  lifeboat  in  the  wreck,  how  gladly  will  they  be  accepted  1  But  salvation,  the  one 
thing  needful,  is  the  one  thing  man  will  not  accept.  He  will  stoop  to  pick  up  a 
piece  of  gold  out  of  the  mire,  but  he  will  not  rise  out  of  the  mire  to  receive 
a  crown  from  heaven.  What  infatuation  1  3.  All  fulness  of  grace  to  sanctify. 
Why  are  the  best  of  us  no  better,  holier,  happier  ?  Hath  God  forgotten  to  be 
gracious  ?  No.  He  who  justified  can  sanctify,  and  with  holiness  give  fulness 
of  joy  and  pleasures  for  evermore.  There  is  efficiency  and  sufficiency  in  Jesus 
to  complete  what  He  has  begun.  There  are  stores  of  grace  which  are  like 
the  widow's  barrel  that  grew  no  emptier  for  the  meals  it  furnished.  "  My  grace 
is  sufficient  for  thee. "  With  a  well  ever  flowing  our  vessels  need  never  be  empty. 
No  earthly  fortune  will  stand  daily  visits  to  the  bank,  but  this  will.  You  may  ask 
too  little,  but  you  cannot  ask  too  much  ;  you  may  go  too  seldom,  but  you  cannot  go 
too  often  to  the  throne.  II.  There  is  a  constant  supply  of  banctiftino  and 
PABDONiNG  OBACE  IN  Chbist.  "  Dwell,"  Hot  come  and  go,  like  a  wayfaring  man, 
like  a  shallow,  noisy,  treacherous  brook  that  fails  when  most  needed,  but  like  the 
deep-seated  spring  that,  rising  silently,  though  affluently,  at  the  mountain's  foot, 
and  having  unseen  communication  with  its  exhaustless  supplies,  is  ever  flowing 
over  its  grassy  margin,  equally  unaffected  by  the  long  droughts  that  dry  the  wells  and 
the  frosts  that  pave  the  neighbouring  lake  with  ice.     (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The 

fulness  of  Christ : — I.  The  fulness  of  Christ.  1.  A  fulness  of  all  Divine  attributes 
and  perfections.  Omnipotence  in  creation  ;  omniscience,  wisdom,  and  goodness  in 
providence  ;  grace  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit ;  justice  in  the  grand  assize,  Ac, 
are  all  His.  Hence  fulness  of  worship  is  offered  Him  in  heaven  (Rev.  iii.  2)  and 
earth.  2.  A  fulness  of  truth  and  wisdom  for  the  instruction  of  man.  John  tells 
us  that  He  is  full  of  truth ;  Christ  says,  "  I  am  the  truth  " ;  and  Paul  says,  "  In 
Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  (1)  All  the  rays  of 
Divine  truth  which  have  ever  enlightened  prophets  and  apostles,  guided  wandering 
sinners  back  to  God,  and  blessed  the  Church  with  purity  and  consolation,  were 
emanations  from  Him,  the  great  Prophet  of  the  Church.  (2)  In  the  Scriptures  we 
have  the  mind  of  Christ.  (3)  But  while  the  Bible  is  sufficient,  such  is  the  power 
which  prejudice,  nnbelief,  and  ignorance  exert  over  the  mind,  that  the  influence  of 
Christ  is  requisite  to  the  reception  of  the  truth.  Our  prayer,  then,  before  the  open 
Bible  should  be,  "  Open  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold  wondrous  things,"  dfec.    3.  A 


CUP.  I.]  COLOSSIANS.  88 

falness  of  merit  to  justify  every  believer  in  His  name.  (1)  Convinced  of  sin,  onr 
great  question  is,  "  How  can  man  be  just  with  God  ? "  It  is  evident  that  we 
cannot  be  just  in  our  own  righteousness,  nor  in  that  of  the  holiest  saints,  for 
they  were  indt^bted  to  another  for  the  robe  they  wear  ;  nor  in  that  of  angels, 
for  no  creature,  however  elevated,  can  render  an  obedience  exceeding  the  law 
of  his  creation,  and  consequently  can  have  no  works  of  supererogation  which  can 
be  disposed  of  for  the  benefit  of  others.  (2)  No  cheering  answer  can  reach  us  but 
that  which  comes  from  Calvary.  By  His  obedience  unto  death,  the  law  broken  by 
Qs  is  honoured,  its  precepts  fulfilled,  and  its  penalty  endured.  (3)  By  faith  we 
become  interested  in  Jesus,  and  thus  are  justified  freely  by  His  grace.  4.  A 
fulness  of  power  to  accomplish  all  the  purposes  for  which  the  mediatorial  office 
was  instituted.  He  sits  upon  the  throne  wielding  the  omnipotent  sceptre  of 
universal  dominion,  and  reigns  over  all  for  the  benefit  of  the  Church.  5.  A  fulness 
of  grace  and  compassion  to  relieve  and  comfort  His  afflicted  servants  (Heb.  iv. 
14).  n.  It  is  the  pleasure  of  the  Father  that  this  fulness  should  dwell 
IN  Christ.  1.  It  is  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  counsels.  2.  It  meets  with  the 
Divine  approbation.  Conclusion:  The  subject — 1.  Directs  believers  to  the  source 
of  aU  consolation.  2,  Sinners  to  the  source  of  all  salvation.  (Congregational 
Remembrancer.)  Fulness  of  grace  in  Christ : — I.  By  fulness  of  grace  we  under- 
stand all  those  perfections  to  which  the  term  grace  extends  itself.     II.  Why  was  it 

NECESSARY   THAT   THIS    FULNESS   OF   GRACE    SHOULD    BE    IN    ChRIST  ?       1.    The    fitUCSS  of 

things  required  it,  on  account  of  the  union  of  His  soul  with  the  Word.  For  it  ia 
proper  that  in  proportion  as  anything  is  nearer  to  the  influential  cause,  so  much 
the  more  abundantly  should  it  partake  of  the  influence  itself.  Since,  therefore, 
God  Himself  is  the  fountain  of  grace,  the  soul  of  Chiist,  so  near  to  God,  cannot 
but  abound  in  grace.  2.  Necessity  requires  it,  from  consideration  of  the  end,  on 
account  of  the  relation  between  Christ  and  the  race.  For  grace  was  to  be  bestowed 
on  him,  not  as  on  a  private  person,  but  as  the  universal  fountain  from  whom  it 
might  be  transfused  into  the  rest  of  men.  But  in  this  fountain  all  the  parts  ought 
to  be  full  and  combined.  The  evangelist  shows  that  grace  is  shed  abroad  from 
Christ  (John  i.  16  ;  Eph.  iv.  7).  III.  This  fulness  of  grace  is  pecullar  to 
Christ  alone.  To  prove  which,  notice:  In  the  saints  militant  there  is  not  a 
fulness  of  grace ;  for  it  cannot  consist  with  so  many  remains  of  the  old  man  :  for 
a  fulness  of  grace  leaves  no  room  for  sin.  But  not  even  in  the  very  saints 
triumphant.  For  if  one  star  differeth  from  another  star  in  light  and  magnitude, 
then  how  much  more  does  it  differ  from  the  sun  ?  But  an  objection  is  raised,  that 
the  Virgin  Mary,  for  instance,  is  said  to  be  "  full  of  grace  "  (Luke  i.  28) ;  and 
Stephen  also  "full  of  grace  and  power"  (Acts  vi.  8);  and  that  therefore  a  fulness 
of  grace  is  not  peculiar  to  Christ.  I  answer.  The  fulness  of  grace  is  twofold :  one 
may  be  regarded  on  the  part  of  grace  itself,  when  a  man  hath  it  in  the  greatest 
extent,  both  as  to  every  kiud  of  grace,  and  in  the  greatest  perfection  as  to  degree. 
This  is  the  fulness  of  Christ  alone.  The  other  regards  grace  on  the  part  of 
the  possessor  when  a  man  hath  it  as  fully  and  as  sufSciently  as  his  state  and 
condition  can  contain.  Hence  observe — 1.  That  God  is  not  accustomed  to  impose 
au  office  upon  any  one  without  at  the  same  time  conferring  upon  him  all  those 
powers  which  are  necessary  for  the  discharge  of  it :  He  lays  upon  Christ  the 
office  of  Head  of  the  Church  ;  but  He  also  imparts  to  Him  a  fuhess  of  grace. 
Therefore,  whoever  thrust  themselves  into  offices,  for  the  administration  of  which 
they  are  altogether  incompetent,  are  not  called  to  them  by  God,  but  are  impelled 
either  by  avarice  or  ambition.  2.  Since  there  is  a  fulness  of  grace  in  Christ  alone, 
we  must  expect  its  streams  to  flow  to  us  from  Him  alone :  they  who  seek  grace 
elsewhere  commit  two  evils  (Jer.  ii.  13).  (Bishop  Davenant.)  The  fulnei<s  of 
Christ  the  treasury  of  the  saints  : — L  Therb  is  a  glorious  fulness  in  Jesus. 
1.  Enough  to  enable  a  saint  to  rise  to  the  highest  degree  of  grace.  If  there 
be  anything  lacking  for  the  attainment  of  the  Divine  image,  it  is  not  a  deficiency 
Christward ;  it  is  occasioned  by  shortcomings  in  ourselves.  If  sin  is  to  be  over- 
come, the  conquering  power  dwells  in  Him  in  its  fulness ;  if  virtue  is  to  be 
attained,  sanctifying  energy  resides  in  Him  to  perfection.  2.  Enough  for  the 
conquest  of  the  world.  The  Lord  God  omnipotent  shall  reign  from  shore  to  shore. 
We  have  in  Christ  all  the  might  that  is  needed  for  subduing  the  nations  ;  let  us  go 
into  His  armoury,  and  we  shall  receive  invincible  weapons  and  almighty  strength. 
8,  Every  fulness  for  teaching,  convincing,  converting,  sanctifying,  and  keeping 
onto  the  end,  II.  The  fulness  is  in  Jesus  now.  1.  The  glory  of  the  past 
exercises  a  depressing  influence  over  many  Christians.     Scarcely  anj  Church 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 


realizes  that  it  can  do  what  its  fiist  promoters  did.  A  people  are  in  an  evil 
case  when  their  heroism  is  historical.  In  Jesus  all  fulness  dwells  for  Paul, 
Luther,  "Whitfield,  you  and  me.  Christianity  has  not  lost  its  pristine  strength  ; 
we  have  lost  our  faith.  Why  should  we  not  have  a  greater  Peutecost  than  Peter 
saw  T  The  times  have  altered,  but  Jesus  is  the  Eternal.  2.  A  great  many  hav« 
their  eye  on  the  future  only.  But  it  doesn't  say  that  the  fulness  shall  dwelL 
Whatever  shall  yet  be  done  by  His  grace  may  be  done  to-day.  Our  laziness  puts 
off  the  work  of  conquest ;  and  want  of  faith  makes  us  dote  upon  the  millennium 
instead  of  hearing  the  Spirit's  voice  to-day.  8.  Our  churches  believe  that  there  ia 
great  fulness  in  Christ,  and  thrit  sometimes  they  ought  to  enjoy  it.  The  progress 
of  Christianity  is  to  be  by  tides  which  ebb  and  flow.  There  are  to  be  revivals  hke 
spring,  which  must  alternate  with  lethargies  like  winter.  But  it  is  not  the  Lord's 
pleasure  that  a  fulness  should  reside  in  Jesus  during  revivals,  and  then  withdraw. 
May  we  feel  that  we  have  not  to  drink  of  an  intermittent  spring,  nor  to  work  with 
an  occasional  industry  1  III.  The  position  of  this  fulness  is  encoueagino  so 
us  IN  THE  MATTEB  OF  OBTAINING  IT.  It  is  "  in  Him,"  wherc  you  can  receive  it, 
in  your  Brother,  who  loves  to  give  it.  It  is  yours.  Since  Christ  is  yoiirs,  all  that 
is  in  Him  is  yours.  It  pleases  God  for  you  to  partake  of  it.  It  is  a  matter  for 
gratitude  that  it  is  not  placed  in  us,  for  then  we  should  not  have  to  go  so  often  to 
Christ;  nor  in  an  angel,  who  would  not  be  so  attractive  as  Christ.  IV.  We  ought 
TO  U8B  THIS  FULNESS.  1.  Bclicve  in  great  things.  2.  Expect  them.  3.  Attempt 
them.  4.  Do  not  talk  about  this,  but  set  about  it.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Tlie 
fulness  of  Christ  : — The  fulness  of  power  which  creation  manifests,  and  the  fulness 
of  glory  which  the  Church  reveals,  and  the  fulness  of  grace  which  the  Godhead 
contains,  dwell  in  Christ.  That  is  His  fulness.  But  oh,  "how  small  a  portion  ia 
heard  of  Him  I  "  (Job  xsvi,  14).  A  little  child  is  led  down  to  our  sea-coast,  and  ia 
told,  "  That  is  the  ocean  "  ;  a  little  child  is  taken  to  the  sea-coast  in  Canada,  and 
is  told,  ♦*  That  is  the  ocean"  ;  and  a  little  child  is  taken  to  the  sea-coast  in  Australia, 
and  is  told,  "  That  is  the  ocean."  But  the  ocean  fills  the  intervening  two  thousand 
five  hundred  miles  between  the  first  and  second,  the  fourteen  thousand  miles 
between  the  second  and  third,  and  the  fifteen  thousand  miles  between  the  third 
and  the  first.  They  have  seen  the  ocean,  but  its  fulness  fills  all  that  lies  between 
them,  and  all  that  is  beyond  the  horizon  which  bounds  their  vision.  (H.  Brooke.) 
Ho  liviit  to  the  fulness  in  Christ : — I  have  felt  it  an  interesting  thing  to  stand  by 
the  grassy  edge  of  a  rolling  river,  and  think  how  it  has  been  rolling  on  for  six 
thousand  years,  slaking  the  thirst  and  watering  the  fields  of  a  hundred  generations, 
and  yet  there  is  no  sign  of  waste  or  want  there  ;  and  it  is  an  interesting  thing  to 
mark  the  sun  rise  above  the  shoulder  of  a  mountain,  or  where  the  sky  is  thick  with 
clouds  to  see  him  leap  from  his  ocean  bed,  and  think  he  has  melted  the  snows  of 
BO  many  winters,  revived  the  verdure  of  so  many  springs,  painted  the  flowers  of  ao 
many  summers,  and  ripened  the  corn  of  so  many  autumns,  and  yet  is  as  big  and  as 
brilliant  as  ever,  his  eye  not  dimmed,  his  strength  not  abated,  and  his  floods 
of  glory  none  the  less  for  centuries  of  profusion.  But  what  is  that  rolling  river, 
what  is  yon  bright  sun,  but  images  of  the  blessed  fulness  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ,  a 
fulness  that  should  encourage  the  most  hopeless  of  you  to  hope,  a  fulness  that 
should  prevail  upon  the  vilest  sinner  to  come,  and  a  fulness  that  should  animate 
the  efforts  of  missionaries  and  of  missionary  societies  to  go  on  in  the  strength 
of  Him  who  has  all  power  in  earth  and  heaven,  who  shall  carry  on  His  triumphs 
till  the  whole  world  has  been  subdued,  and  all  the  nations  of  this  world  and 
its  kingdoms  shall  "  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ."  {T. 
Guthrie,  D.D.)  Fulness  of  Christ  cannot  he  supplemented : — Truly  the  revelation 
ia  by  no  means  scant,  for  there  is  vastly  more  revealed  in  the  person  of  Christ  than 
we  shall  be  likely  to  learn  in  this  mortal  life,  and  even  eternity  will  not  be  too  long  for 
the  discovery  of  all  the  glory  of  God  which  shines  forth  in  the  person  of  the  Word 
made  flesh.  Those  who  would  supplement  Christianity  had  better  first  add  to  the 
brilliance  of  the  sun  or  the  fulness  of  the  sea.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  And  having 

made  peace  by  the  blood  of  His  Cross. — It  is  great  to  "  reconcile "  ;  greater 
"through  Himself";  greater,  again,  "through  His  blood";  greatest  of  all 
"  through  His  Cross."  Here  are  five  things  to  be  admired — reconciliation,  to 
God,  through  Himself,  by  death,  by  the  Cross.  (Chrysostom.)  The  Reconciler : — 
I.  Bt  NATURE  MAN  IS  AT  ENMiTT  WITH  GoD.  As  God  is  lovc,  SO  the  camal  mind 
is  enmity  ;  this  being  so  much  the  nature,  essence,  element  of  its  existence,  that 
if  you  took  away  the  enmity  it  would  cease  to  be.  It  is  not  always  in  activity, 
bot  sins,  hke  seeds,  lie  dormant,  and  only  await  circumstances  to  develop  thenu. 


OHAP  I.]  COLOSSLINS.  87 

This  is  a  doctrine  into  wLich  the  believer  does  not  need  to  be  reasoned.  He  feels 
it.  The  text  takes  it  for  granted ;  for  what  need  can  there  be  to  make  peace 
between  friends  ?  Not  friends  require  to  be  reconciled,  only  foes.  But  does  God 
appear  as  reciprocating  our  enmity,  as  the  enemy  of  man  ?  No  ;  not  even  when 
He  condemns  him.  He  does  not  hate  the  sinner,  though  He  hates  his  sins.  He 
hath  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked.  II.  God  desires  to  be  reconciled 
TO  His  enemies.  1.  Man  stands  upon  his  dignity.  The  injured  says  to  the 
injuror — and  each  generally  thinks  not  himself,  but  the  other  such — "  He  is  to 
come  to  me  ;  I  am  not  to  go  to  him."  You  may  tell  him  that  it  is  noble  to  make 
j^ie  first  advances.  "  No,"  he  says,  "  he  must  acknowledge  his  offence,  and  I  will 
not  refuse  my  hand."  Strange  terms  for  those  to  stand  on  who  know  the  grace  of 
God.  If  God  had  so  dealt  with  us,  we  should  have  gone  to  helL  2.  Does  God 
stand  upon  His  dignity,  the  justice  of  the  case  ?  If  ever  any  might,  it  was 
He.  No,  He  takes  the  humiliation  to  Flimself,  and  might  be  supposed  to  be 
the  injurer,  not  the  injured.  Veiling  His  majesty,  and  leaving  heaven  to  seek  oar 
door.  He  stands,  knocks,  waits  there,  beseeching  us  as  though  it  were  a  favour  to 
be  reconciled.  Salvation  has  its  fountain,  not  in  the  Cross,  but  in  the  bosom 
of  the  Father.  III.  To  make  our  peace  with  God,  Jesus  Christ  laid  down 
His  life.  1.  The  price  of  pardon  was  nothing  less  than  "  the  blood  of  God." 
2.  Purchasing  our  peace  at  such  a  price,  God  has  done  more  for  us  than  for 
all  the  universe  besides.  (T.  Guthrif,  D.D.)  The  atonement : — I.  The  influence 
of  the  blood  of  the  Cross  on  God.  "  Peace  "  cannot  mean  the  actual  reconciliation 
of  man  to  God,  for  it  is  prior  to  and  with  the  design  of  afterwards  effecting  it.  It 
most  therefore  have  been  peace  that  looked  toward  God,  for  He  is  the  only  other 
party  to  the  enmity.  But  this  could  not  have  been  a  change  in  God  Himself  or 
His  purposes,  for  He  is  immutable  ;  nor  any  alteration  in  His  feelings  towards 
sin,  for  that  must  ever  be  the  abominable  thing  which  He  hates  ;  still  less 
the  purchase  of  His  love  for  man,  for  the  whole  purpose  of  reconciliation  sprang 
out  of  His  "  pleasure."  But  it  is  the  effect  produced  by  the  death  of  Christ 
Dpon  God's  moral  government,  so  that  it  became  possible  for  Him  to  forgive 
righteously.  It  will  follow — 1.  That  they  are  greatly  in  error  who  maintain  that 
the  only  purpose  of  Christ's  death  was  to  reconcile  man  to  God  by  the  simple 
manifestation  of  Divine  love.  The  fact  is  there  are  two  elements  in  the  Cross- 
love  and  righteousness — and  we  must  allow  neither  to  overshadow  the  other, 
II  we  do,  in  one  case  the  gospel  will  assume  the  appearance  of  indifference  to 
eTil,  in  the  other  it  will  be  made  to  assume  an  appearance  of  terror.  2.  That  they 
•re  greatly  in  error  who  make  little  of  the  death  of  Christ  "  Without  shedding  ol 
blood  is  no  remission."  II.  The  blood  of  the  Cross  as  it  respects  man.  "  Things 
on  earth  "  may  perhaps  be  taken  to  mean  the  whole  lower  creation  which  "  groans 
and  travails  in  pain,"  &a. ;  but  as  the  curse  passed  on  the  earth  through  man,  so 
must  the  blessing.  How,  then,  are  men  reconciled  to  God?  More  than  pardon 
through  the  satisfaction  of  God's  justice  was  needed  ;  for  sin  has  not  only  broken 
the  law,  but  filled  the  sinner's  heart  with  enmity  against  God.  But — 1.  The 
atonement  of  Christ  has  also  secured  tbe  Holy  Spirit  for  the  regeneration  of 
human  hearts.  2.  Then  the  Spirit  uses  the  story  of  Christ's  love  and  death  to 
remove  the  enmity.  All  along  the  sinner  has  been  misjudging  God  ;  bnt  when  he, 
through  the  Spirit,  is  led  to  see  that  God  has  given  Christ  to  secure  his  pardon, 
he  discovers  that  he  has  done  God  the  foulest  wrong,  and  returns  in  penitence 
and  affection  to  Him.  III.  The  blood  of  the  Cross  as  it  affects  anobls.  They, 
si  eonrse,  cannot  be  reconciled  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term ;  bat  the  work 
•f  Christ  has  let  them  see  further  into  the  heart  of  God,  drawn  them  nearer 
to  Him,  and  given  them  a  higher  degree  of  blessedness.  Conclusion  :  1.  All 
obstacles  have  been  taken  out  of  the  way  of  a  sinner's  salvation  as  far  as  God  is 
concerned.  If  they  are  not  saved,  it  is  because  they  reject  God's  overtures  of 
reconciliation.  2.  If  the  sinner  passes  from  earth  nnreconciled,  there  is  no 
salvation  for  him.  The  text  says  nothing  of  "things  under  the  earth."  (W.  M. 
Taylor,  D.D.)  Peace  through  the  blood  of  the  Cross : — I.  The  Father  makes 
THIS  PEACE,  This  is  noteworthy.  A  different  representation  might  have  been 
given — has  been  given  elsewhere.  Christ  is  our  peace,  and  through  Him  we  can 
approach  the  Father  without  dismay.  But  the  teaching  here  is  that  the  great 
transaction  of  the  Cross  was  not  needed  to  enlist  the  interest  of  the  Father,  or  to 
render  Him  willing  to  rescue  as,  or  to  procure  oar  love.  It  was  His  love 
that  procured  the  Cross.  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  Himself,  bat  delights 
to  do  the  will   of  the  Father.    II.  This  peace   has   been   made.     1.  The  id«a 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.*. 

is  not  that  war  has  ceased.  (1)  Alas  I  it  has  not  in  our  world.  (2)  Ne« 
in  the  human  heart  (ver.  21).  (3)  Nor  in  other  spheres  (Eph.  vi.  12). 
2.  But  it  has  been  made  in  this  sense  that,  so  far  as  the  earth's  popu- 
lations are  concerned,  an  armistice  has  been  proclaimed  by  the  Lord  Para- 
mount of  the  ui;iverse.  A  halt  has  been  called  to  the  legions  of  retribution-  All 
the  steps  have  been  taken  by  the  Divine  Governor  that  were  needful  to  render  it  a 
fit,  safe,  and  glorious  thing  on  His  part  to  conclude  peace,  and  has  sent  messengers 
to  proclaim  peace  to  them  that  are  afar  off  and  to  them  that  are  nigh.  III.  He 
has  made  peace  thkough  the  blood  of  the  Cross.  The  idea  is  that  at  a  very 
great  cost  He  has  made  the  peace.  The  Father  while  infinitely  loving  the  Son  saw 
it  to  be  a  fitting  thing  to  surrender  Him  to  a  cruel  death.  But  in  the  endurance  of 
the  crucifixion  there  was  a  manifestation  of  high  regard  for  the  law,  hatred  to  sin, 
and  love  of  the  sinner.  IV.  He  is  now  labodrinq  to  secure  the  acceptance  and 
EFFECTrvENEss  OF  THIS  PEACE.  Not  ouly  did  the  Divine  Father  make  peace  1,800 
years  ago,  and  then  leave  sinners  to  accept  it  or  reject  it,  indifferent  as  to  the  result, 
•' My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."  Both  Father  and  Son  are  working 
together  at  every  point  in  the  world  of  matter  and  on  every  heart  in  the  world  of 
mind.  {J,  Morison,  D.D.)  Peace  by  the  blood  of  Christ : — There  is  a  young  girl 
in  heaven  now,  once  a  member  of  our  Church.  I  went  with  one  of  my  beloved 
deacons  to  see  her  when  she  was  very  near  her  departure.  Sbe  was  in  the  last 
stage  of  consumption.  She  said  to  me,  "  It  is  sad  to  be  so  very  weak,  but  I  think, 
if  I  had  my  choice,  I  would  rather  be  here  than  be  in  health,  for  it  is  very  precious 
to  me.  I  know  that  my  Eedeemer  liveth,  and  I  am  waiting  for  the  moment  when 
He  shall  send  His  chariot  of  fire  to  take  me  up  to  Him."  I  put  the  question, 
"  Have  you  not  any  doubts  ?  "  "  No,  none,  sir  ;  why  should  I  ?  I  clasp  my  arms 
around  the  neck  of  Christ."  "  And  have  not  you  any  fear  about  your  sins  ?  " 
"  No,  sir;  they  are  all  forgiven.  I  trust  the  Saviour's  precious  blood."  "And  do 
you  think  you  will  be  as  brave  as  this  when  you  come  actually  to  die  ?  "  "  Not  if 
He  leaves  me,  sir ;  but  He  will  never  leave  me,  for  He  has  said,  "  I  will  never  leave 
thee  nor  forsake  thee."*  {C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  And  you,  that  were  sometim* 
alienated  and  enemies  Inyoiir  mind. — Reconciliation  by  Christ ;— 1.  There  are  only 
two  kinds  of  goodness  possible,  that  of  those  who  have  never  erred,  that  of  those 
who  have  been  recovered.  It  is  plain  that  ours  must  be  the  latter.  2.  Appointed 
to  these  are  two  kinds  of  happiness,  the  blessedness  of  entire  ignorance  of  guilt, 
and  the  blessedness  of  forgiveness,  the  latter  of  which  is  superior  in  intensity  and 
fulness.  3.  There  are  two  kinds  of  friendship,  that  which  Las  never  had  a  shock, 
and  that  which,  after  having  been  doubted,  is  at  last  made  sure.  The  happiness  of 
the  last  is  perhaps  the  greater,  as  illustrated  by  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal.  This 
leadsus  to  our  subject — Reconciliation.  I.  Estrangement,  1.  Its  cause,  "Wicked 
works,"  voluntary  deeds.  Sin  is  not  merely  a  foreign  disease  introduced  into  the 
constitution.  You  are  a  responsible  individual,  have  done  deeds  that  are  wrong  of 
the  mind,  hand,  tongue.  2.  Its  result.  (1)  Alienation — the  feeling  that  God  is 
our  enemy.  Alienation  was  a  more  forcible  expression  then.  There  is  now  little 
diiJerence  between  the  alien  and  the  citizen.  But  the  alien  from  the  Jewish 
commonwealth  had  no  power  to  share  in  its  religious  privileges,  and  was  popularly 
regarded  as  a  "  dog."  In  the  Roman  commonwealth  the  word  had  a  still  stronger 
meaning;  it  was  to  be  separated  from  the  authority  and  protection  of  Roman  law, 
and  to  be  subject  to  degrading  penalties.  Hence  Paul's  protest  at  Philippi  against 
scourging,  as  he  was  not  an  alien.  Paul's  conception  of  alienation  is  given  in 
Eph.  ii,  12 :  it  is  to  have  no  place  in  the  universe,  to  feel  God  your  enemy,  to  be 
estranged  from  Him  and  banished  from  His  presence.  What  is  this  but  hell  t 
(2)  Enmity  against  God.  The  illustration  of  the  process  we  have  seen  in  every- 
day life.  Strength  of  attachment  settles  down  to  indifference,  and  at  last  to  hatred. 
A  secret  sense  of  wrong  intrudes,  and  we  cannot  escape,  save  by  throwing  the  blame 
somewhere.  By  degrees  a  cankered  spot  begins,  you  irritate  it  until  the  mortifica- 
tion becomes  entire,  and  alienation  settles  down  into  animosity.  And  such  is  the 
history  of  alienation  from  God.  Different  characters  arrive  at  it  in  different  ways, 
(a)  Weak  minds  throw  the  blame  on  circumstances,  and  regard  themselves  as 
victims  of  a  cruel  fate,  the  blame  belonging  not  to  them,  but  God.  (6)  In  the  case 
of  stronger  and  more  vicious  characters,  humiliation  degrades,  and  degradation 
produces  anger.  The  outcast  turns  with  defiance  on  respectability  merely  because 
it  is  respectable.  So  some  sinners  stand  at  bay,  as  it  were,  to  their  Maker. 
II.  Reconciliation.  1.  Christ  has  reconciled  man  to  God.  (1)  By  exhibiting  the 
character  of  God.     The  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  the  voice  of  God  proclaiming  love. 


CHAP,  1.1  COLOSSIANS. 


(2)  When  the  miud  has  comprehended  this,  then  comes  the  blessed  feeling  of  recon- 
ciliation. The  change  of  feeling  within  us  changes  God  to  us.  2.  Christ  haa 
reconciled  man  to  man.  (1)  Men  have  tried  other  methods.  Let  the  political 
economist  come  forward  with  his  principle  of  selfishness  and  tell  us  that  this  is 
t;hat  by  which  alone  the  wealth  of  nations  can  accrue.  He  may  get  a  nation  in 
which  there  aie  a  wealthy  few  and  a  miserable  many,  but  not  a  brotherhood  of 
Christians.  Try  the  principle  of  moral  rule ;  say  that  men  should  love  one 
another — will  that  nuike  them  ?  You  may  come  forward  with  the  crushing  rule  of 
political  authority.  Papal  Kome  has  tried  that  and  failed.  She  bound  up  the 
masses  of  the  race  as  a  gigantic  iceberg ;  but  she  could  give  only  a  temporary 
principle  of  cohesion.  (2)  Therefore  we  come  back  to  the  Cross :  through  this  alone 
we  learn  that  there  ia  one  Father,  one  Elder  Brother,  in  whom  all  can  be  brothers. 
Catch  the  spirit  of  that  Cross,  the  spirit  of  giving,  suffering,  loving,  and  man  will  be 
reconciled  to  man.  3.  By  the  Redeemer's  atonement  man  becomes  reconciled  to 
himself.  That  is  necessary  because  it  is  so  hard  to  forgive  ourselves.  You  may 
obtaiu  remission,  but  you  cannot  get  back  the  feeling  of  self-respect  and  unity 
within.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  surrender  to  the  will  of  God ;  go  and  sacrifice 
yourself  for  the  happiness  of  others,  and  the  calm  feeling  will  come.  4.  Man 
becomes  reconciled  to  duty.  There  is  no  discord  more  terrible  than  that  between 
man  and  duty.  There  are  few  of  us  who  fancy  we  have  found  our  proper  places  in 
this  world.  We  think  that  we  are  fit  for  higher  things.  But  study  that 
marvellous  Life  and  you  will  see  that  the  whole  of  its  details  are  ungenial,  mean, 
trivial,  wretched  circumstances.  It  is  not  by  change  of  circumstances,  but  by 
fitting  our  spirits  to  the  circumstances  in  which  God  has  placed  us,  that  we  can  be 
reconciled  to  life  and  dutv.  If  the  duties  be  not  noble,  let  us  ennoble  them  by 
doing  them  in  a  noble  t^pirit.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  nature  and  issues 
of  reconciliation: — I.  The  Chbistun's  past  condition.  1.  Alirnation.  The  idea 
is  that  of  belonging  to  a  different  community,  morally  at  a  distance  from  God. 
Man's  spirit  formed  for  God  is  naturally  averse  from  Him.  No  sooner  was  our 
first  father  guilty  than  he  fled  from  the  presence  of  his  Maker.  (1)  This  alienation 
is  spiritual  death,  for  the  soul  cannot  realize  its  true  life  away  from  God.  (2)  The 
spirit  of  alienation  is  hostility.  2.  The  seat  of  this  enmity  is  in  the  thought  and 
feeling,  It  need  not  be  apparent.  If  we  are  wilfully  separated  from  one  to  whom 
we  owe  love  and  allegiance,  hard  thoughts  of  him  to  justify  ourselves  will  arise  and 
then  enmity  of  heart.  Men  may  profess  to  like  an  ideal  God,  but  the  God  of  the 
Bible  who  claims  their  affection  and  service  ia  no  object  of  attraction  to  the  natural 
mind.  Take  any  gathering  of  men  and  you  can  introduce  no  subject  more  forbid- 
ding than  that  of  God.  3.  This  hostility  has  an  outward  embodiment  in  the 
practical  sphere  of  wicked  works  not  nece.ssarily  into  flagrant  vice.  Every  act  of 
disobedience  is  evil,  however  compatible  with  social  virtue  and  refinement,  because 
rebellion  against  God.  4.  This  is  a  melancholy  indictment,  but  a  true  one. 
Perhaps  the  darkest  count  against  humanity  is  that  in  regions  of  civilization  and 
culture  there  can  be  so  much  that  is  pleasant  and  elevating  without  any  recognition 
of  God.  II.  The  Christian's  present  privilegk.  1.  It  is  not  God  who  is  said  to 
be  reconciled.  God  is  reconciled  in  Christ,  and  is  seeking  to  reconcile  the  world 
onto  Himself.  2.  In  this  reconciliation — (1)  Friendship  is  restored.  The  aliena- 
tion and  enmity  are  removed,  and  the  sinner  brought  nigh.  No  friendship  can  be 
compared  with  this  :  that  of  the  world  worketh  death,  this  ia  life  and  glory. 
(2)  Fellowship  is  resumed.  Man  was  formed  for  this,  but  sin  interrupted  it,  and  now 
in  it  man  finds  his  highest  enjoyment.  3.  But  how  does  it  come  ?  "  In  the  body 
of  His  flesh,"  &o.  (1)  The  assumption  of  a  human  body  brought  Jesus  into  fraternal 
relationship  with  men.  (2)  His  death  brings  us  into  relationship.  4.  The  apostle 
utterly  demolishes  these  theories  which  make  httle  of  the  death  of  Christ  while 
they  profess  to  make  much  of  His  life  and  teaching.  III.  The  Christian's 
FUTURE  PROSPECT  (ver.  23).  {J.  Spence,  D.D.)  The  personal  blessings  of  recon- 
ciliation:— I.  Sin  has  placed  man  in  antagonism  to  God.  1.  Man  is  estranged 
from  God.  Sin  severs  the  soul  from  God.  The  principle  of  cohesion — the  con- 
Bciousness  of  rectitude — is  gone,  and  the  sinner,  breaking  away  from  the  centre  of 
all  goodness,  drifts  into  the  wilderness  of  alienation.  Sin  leads  man  to  shun  the 
Divine  presence  and  disregard  the  Divine  overtures.  It  is  a  state  of  danger  and 
spiritual  death.  How  few  are  conscious  of  it  I  2.  Man  is  hostile  to  God.  Enmity 
follows  estrangement,  and  both  have  their  seat  in  the  mind.  The  mind  of  man 
opposes  the  mind  of  God,  sets  up  a  rival  kingdom,  and  organizes  an  active 
rebellion  against  the  Divine  Euler  (Bom.  viii.  7).     If  the  hostility  is  not  always 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lb 

open,  it  is  in  the  mind.  3.  Man's  estrangement  and  hostility  are  evident  in  his 
actions.  II.  Man  is  keconciled  to  God  in  Christ.  1.  The  distinguished  blessing. 
"  Now  hath  He  reconciled."  2.  The  gracious  medium  of  the  blessing.  "  In  the 
body  of  His  flesh  through  death."  III.  The  Divine  purpose  in  eeconoiuation  la 
TO  promote  man's  highest  blessedness.  1.  The  highest  blessedness  of  man  con- 
sists in  his  moraJ  purity.  "  To  present  you  holy."  2.  In  His  personal  blameless- 
ness.     B.  In  His  freedom  from  censure.     {O.  Barlow.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  To  present  yon  holy  and  tunblameable  and  nnreproveaMe  In  His 
sight. — The  ultimate  purpose  of  reconciliation : — I.  The  cltimate  pdrpose  of 
God  in  the  work  of  Christ.  1.  In  "  present "  there  is  possibly  a  sacrificial 
allusion  (Rom.  xii.  1),  or  the  more  eloquent  metaphor  of  the  bringing  of  the  bride 
to  the  husband  by  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom  (2  Cor.  ii.  2 ;  Eph.  v.  27),  or 
perhaps  it  means  simply  "  to  sit  in  the  presence  of."  The  reference  is  to  the  day 
of  judgment  (2  Cor.  iv.  14).  In  the  light  of  that  revealing  day  His  purpose  is 
that  we  shall  stand  "holy,"  i.e.,  devoted  to  God,  and  therefore  pure,  " without 
blemish,"  as  the  offerings  had  to  be,  and  "unreproveable,"  against  whom  no  charge 
can  be  brought.  They  must  be  spotless  indeed  who  are  "  without  fault  before  the 
throne."  2.  All  the  hues  of  thought  in  the  preceding  section  lead  up  to  this  peak. 
The  meaning  of  God  in  creation  and  redemption  cannot  be  fathomed  without  taking 
into  view  the  future  perfecting  of  men.  The  Christian  ideal  of  the  possibilities  for 
men  is  the  noblest  vision  that  can  animate  our  hopes.  Nothing  short  of  this 
satisfies  God's  heart,  for  it  has  to  be  connected  with  •'  It  pleased  the  Father."  Nor 
will  anything  less  exhaust  the  power  of  the  reconciling  Christ.  His  Cross  and 
passion  reach  no  adequate  result  short  of  the  perfecting  of  the  saints.  We  ought, 
then,  to  keep  before  us  this  as  the  crowning  object  of  Christianity ;  not  to  make  as 
happy  except  as  a  consequence  of  holiness.  Nothing  less  should  satisfy  us. 
II.  The  conditions  on  which  the  accomplishment  or  that  purpose  depends. 
1.  Generally  speaking,  a  steadfast  adherence  to  the  gospel.  "  If  ye  continue  in  th« 
exercise  of  your  faith."  This  continuance  is  explained — (1)  Positively,  "grounded," 
I.e.,  built  into  a  foundation,  and  "steadfast,"  as  banded  into  the  firm  rock,  andbO 
partaking  of  its  fixedness.  (2)  Negatively,  "  not  moved  away,"  a  process  that  m&y 
be  continually  going  on,  and  in  which,  by  some  force  constantly  acting  from  without, 
they  may  be  imperceptibly  pushed  ofif  from  the  foundation,  i.e.,  the  hope  evoked 
or  held  out  by  the  gospel.  2.  Some  plain  lessons  may  be  drawn  from  these  words. 
(1)  There  is  an  "  if."  However  great  the  powers  of  Christ,  and  deep  the  desire, 
and  fixed  the  purpose  of  God,  no  fulfilment  of  these  is  possible  except  on  the  con~ 
dition  of  our  habitual  exercise  of  faith.  The  gospel  does  not  act  on  men  by  magic. 
"  He  could  not  do,  .  .  .  because  of  their  unbelief."  (2)  It  must  be  present  faith  that 
leads  to  present  results.  We  cannot  make  an  arrangement  by  which  we  exercise 
faith  wholesale  once  for  all,  and  secure  a  delivery  of  its  blessings  in  small  quantities 
for  a  time  after.  (3)  If  our  lives  are  to  be  firm  we  must  have  a  foundation  outside 
of  ourselves.  If  my  practical  life  be  not  built  on  Christ  the  blows  of  circumstance 
will  make  it  reel  and  stagger.  (4)  This  Christ-derived  steadfastness  will  make  us 
able  to  resist  influences  that  would  move  us  away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel.  If 
we  do  not  look  to  our  moorings  we  shall  drift  away  down  stream  and  never  know 
we  are  moving.  Many  a  man  is  completely  unaware  how  completely  his 
Christian  faith  has  gone  till  some  crisis  comes  when  he  needs  it.  III.  A  three- 
fold motive  for  adhebenck  to  the  gospel.  1.  "  The  gospel  which  ye  heard." 
Paul  would  have  them  recall  what  they  heard  at  their  conversion,  and  tamper  with 
no  teachiug  inconsistent  with  it.  He  also  appeals  to  their  experience.  "  Have  these 
truths  become  less  precious  ?  "  To  us  the  same  appeal  comes.  The  word  has  been 
sounding  in  our  ears  since  childhood.  The  "  one  thing  "  we  know  is  not  to  be 
lightly  abandoned.  2.  This  gospel  was  "  preached  "  in  all  creation  under  heaven," 
whereas  the  heretical  teachings  only  belonged  to  a  class.  All  errors  are  transient 
and  limited  ;  but  the  gospel  can  go  into  any  corner  under  heaven.  3.  "  Whereof  I 
Paul  am  made  a  minister."  (1)  This  is  not  merely  an  appeal  to  their  affection, 
though  that  is  perfectly  legitimate.  (2)  He  puts  stress  upon  the  fact  that  he 
became  a  minister,  as  being  an  evidence  of  Christianity  ;  which  indeed  it  is. 
{A.  Alaclaren,  D.D.)  Holiness  through  Christ : — "  What  are  you  doing  here  by 
vourself  ?  "  asked  a  man  of  his  neighbour  one  day.  "  I  am  reading  a  book  thai 
has  only  two  leaves,"  was  the  reply.  "  Then  it  won't  take  you  long  to  read  it," 
said  the  other.  Months  passed  away,  and  they  met  again.  "  Well,  what  are  yoa 
doing  now  1"     "1  am  still  reading  my  little  book."     "  What  I  and  only  two  leavei 


CHA».  L]  COLOSSIANS.  91 

in  it  7  "  "  Yes ;  a  white  leaf  and  a  red  one."  •♦  I  don't  understand  yon."  *'  Well, 
the  white  leaf  is  the  holiness  of  God,  and  the  red  leaf  is  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
His  Son.  When  I  study  the  white  leaf,  and  see  my  sin  in  the  light  of  God's 
holiness,  I  am  glad  to  turn  to  the  red  leaf  and  rest  my  eye  on  the  blood  of  Jesas. 
And  when  I  realize  the  preciousness  and  efficacy  of  the  Saviour's  blood,  I  feel  a 
longing  for  holiness,  and  turn  again  to  the  white  leaf.  The  little  book  will  occupy 
me  all  my  life,  and  I  expect  it  will  be  my  joyful  meditation  through  eternity." 
{New  Encyclopedia  if  Anecdotes.) 

Vet.  23.  If  ye  continue  In  the  faith. — The  condition  of  man'f  final  blessed- 
neu : — Man's  final  blessedness  depends  on — I.  His  onbwebvinq  continuance  in 
THE  FAITH.  There  is  implied  a  continuance  in — 1.  The  doctrines  of  the  faith. 
What  a  man  believes  has  a  powerful  influence  in  moulding  his  character.  Unbelief 
lures  the  soul  from  its  confidence,  sets  it  adrift  amidst  the  cross  currents  of  doubt, 
and  exposes  it  to  moral  shipwreck.  The  soul's  safety  is  ensured  not  by  an  in- 
fatuated devotion  to  mere  opinions,  but  by  an  intelligent  and  constant  faith  in 
Divine  verities.  2.  In  the  profession  of  the  faith.  The  believer  is  a  witness  for  the 
truth,  and  it  is  imperative  that  he  should  bear  his  testimony  (Rom.  x.  9,  10 ;  Matt. 
X.  32).  3.  The  practice  of  the  faith.  Faith  supplies  the  motive  and  rule  of  all 
right  conduct.  4.  Continuance  in  the  faith  must  be  permanent.  "  Grounded  and 
settled."  In  order  to  permanency  in  the  faith,  the  truth  must  be — (1)  Apprehended 
intelligently.  (2)  Embraced  cordially.  (3)  Maintained  courageously.  II.  Hia 
ONCHANGiNO  ADHERENCE  TO  THE  GOSPEL  HOPE.  1.  The  gospcl  rcvcals  a  bright  future. 
2.  The  gospel  to  be  effectual  must  come  in  contact  with  individual  mind.  "  Which 
ye  have  heard."  Epaphras  had  declared  to  them  the  Divine  message.  3.  The 
gospel  is  adapted  to  universal  man.  "  Which  was  preached  to  every  creature  which 
is  under  heaven."  4.  The  gospel  invested  the  apostle  with  an  office  of  high 
authority.  *•  Whereof  I,  Paul,  am  made  a  minister."  There  is  an  implied  possi- 
bility of  relinquishing  our  hold  of  gospel  hope.  The  multiplicity  and  fulness  of 
our  blessings  may  prove  a  snare  to  us  ;  prosperity  tempts  to  relax  watchfulness. 
Our  retention  of  the  gospel  hope  is  rendered  immovable — (1)  By  constant  prayer  ; 
(2)  Growing  aoquaintance  with  the  Word  of  promise ;  (3)  Continual  anticipation 
of  future  bhss.  {G.  Barlow.)  Our  life-work  : — In  the  end  of  vers.  22  and  28  we 
learn  the  great  object  of  salvation.  We  should  be  fellow-workers  with  God  in  this 
(Phil.  ii.  12).  Like  an  artist  student  copying  the  work  of  a  great  master  under 
his  superintendence,  we  must  "work  out  "  the  beauty  of  Christ  in  our  lives,  though 
the  great  Master  Himself  must  give  the  finishing  touch  and  make  it  perfect.  Here 
we  are  told  what  the  Christian's  course  of  conduct  must  be  if  this  end  is  attained, 
I.  The  foundation,  the  starting-point,  "  the  gospel."  1.  From  various  expressions 
in  the  chapter  we  can  learn  what  Paul  means  by  "  gospel."  (1)  News  of  a  personal 
Saviour  (vers.  20,  28 ;  cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  11).  (2)  The  blood  of  the  Cross  (ver.  20; 
cf.  Heb.  ix.  22).  (3)  An  indwelling  Saviour  (ver.  27)  The  searching  medicine: 
the  healing  balm ;  the  pledge  and  security  of  salvation.  2.  The  responsibility  oi 
the  Colossians  in  connection  with  this  gospel.  (1)  "  Which  ye  have  heard."  The 
hearing  has  put  them  in  a  new  position  (John  xv.  24).  (2)  It  was  preached  univer- 
sally. Every  one  now  has  the  offer.  (3)  Paul  a  minister  of  this  gospel.  The 
gospel  yon  have  heard  from  Epapnras  your  minister  is  mine.  I  got  it  by  the 
revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  (Gal.  i.  12).  8.  This  gospel  demands  faith  and  hope. 
These,  like  light  and  heat,  go  together ;  the  two  poles  on  which  Christian  life  turns. 
Faith  fixes  the. lower  end  of  the  ladder  on  the  Eock,  and  Hope  rests  the  higher  end 
in  the  promised  glory.  II.  Perseverance  therein.  1.  Faith  must  be  kept  in 
continual  exercise.  Religion  is  a  life  of  faith.  (1)  Continuance  a  necessary 
consequence  of  true  faith.  Three  things  are  wanted  for  a  good  harvest — good  seed, 
soil,  sunshine,  and  shower.  Having  these  the  harvest  is  a  necessity.  So  in  spiritual 
things ;  the  only  thing  we  have  to  do  with  is  the  soil ;  the  seed  is  good,  and  sun- 
shine and  shower  are  assured.  If  the  soil  "  receives  "  and  retains  the  Word,  there 
must  be  "  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,"  &c.  (2)  Here,  then,  is  the  test  of  faith. 
Is  it  the  faith  that  continues  and  overcomes  the  world  7  That  opens  the  soil,  and 
draws  down  the  roots  into  its  bosom?  That  keeps  the  vessels  filled  with  oil  while 
the  virgins  wait  ?  That  draws  the  fruit-bearing  sap  from  the  True  Vine  ?  (3)  The 
connection  of  faith  is  not  loose  and  wavering.  "  Grounded  "  like  the  foundation 
of  Eddystone — a  grip— an  identification.  "  Settled  " — seated,  restful,  satisfied,  un- 
doubting.  2.  Hope  meanwhile  is  steadily  maintained.  We  have  the  object  of  hope  in 
two  words — *'  with  Him,"  ••  like  Him."     That  consummation  we  are  never  to  loM 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [amr,  u 

sight  of.  Faith  helps  here  ;  it  makes  substantial  the  things  hoped  for,  and  makes 
evident  the  things  not  seen  :  the  telescope  which  brings  within  the  range  of  hope's 
vision  the  unseen.  Conclusion: — 1.  There  is  danger  implied  in  this  waning,  and 
experience  shows  how  real  it  is.  2.  Steady  progress  inculcated.  To  move  on  the 
only  way  to  keep  from  moving  away.  The  unseen  should  act  as  a  magnet  drawing 
US  to  itself.  "Looking  for  and  hasting  unto."  (J.J.  Black,  LL.D.)  Be  not 
moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  goajiel.— Stand  fast : — It  has  cost  many  a  soul 
a  great  struggle  to  obtain  this  hope,  and  when  attained  do  not  think  that  the  conflict 
is  over.  It  then  becomes  more  iierce.  Be  not  moved  away,  however — I.  From  thh 
euBJECT  OF  THAT  HOPE.  What  is  that  ?  It  is  the  hope — 1,  Of  full  salvation,  that 
we  shall  be  "  presented  holy,  unblameable,"  &c.  "  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  him 
purifieth  himself,"  &c.  2.  Of  final  perseverance,  that  He  who  has  begun  a  good 
work  in  us  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  Of  the  resurrection. 
Christ  brougl)t  not  one-half,  but  the  whole  trinity  of  our  manhood.  4.  Of  the  second 
advent.  5.  Of  bein^,  not  in  purgatory,  but  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  II.  From  the 
GROUND  OF  THAT  HOPE.  1.  The  rich,  free,  sovereign  grace  of  God.  He  who  could 
save  the  dying  thief  can  save  all.  2.  The  merit  of  Christ,  which  is  the  only  ground 
on  which  God  saves  men.  3.  The  Divine  pledge  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Christ 
shall  not  perish,  &c.  4.  The  immutability  of  God.  5.  The  infallibility  of  the 
Scriptures.  III.  How  we  may  be  moved  away  from  that  hope.  1.  By  a  conceit 
of  ourselves.  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,"  &c.  2.  By  despondency. 
Satan  does  not  mind  whether  you  jump  up  or  jump  down  from  the  rock.  The  least 
sin  ought  to  make  you  humble,  the  greatest  ought  not  to  make  you  despair.  3.  By 
false  teaching.  If  you  have  been  persuaded  that  Christ  is  not  Divine,  or  not  the 
only  Priest,  or  that  you  have  merit  of  your  own,  you  are  removed.  4.  By  hoping 
to  live  by  feelings  instead  of  faith.  5.  By  a  dazzle  of  intellect  and  "  modern 
thought."  6.  By  persecution,  sneers,  and  ridicule.  IV.  Why  we  will  not  bb 
MOVED  AWAY  FROM  THAT  HOPE.  1.  Becausc  there  is  nothing  to  take  its  place. 
2.  Because  if  we  did  we  should  soon  be  in  bondage.  3.  Because  we  should  become 
mean,  miserable  wretches  who  have  deserted  their  Saviour.  4.  Because  it  would 
be  something  like  a  soldier  entrenched  in  an  impregnable  fortress  accepting  an 
invitation  to  come  out.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  good  hope  distinguished: — I.  Its 
DISTINGUISHING  CHARACTERISTICS.     1.  It  is  in  haimouy  with  God's  plan  of  salvation. 

2.  It  springs  from  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  heart.  3.  It  is  grounded  on 
the  truth  and  power  of  God,  Not  upon  impressions  and  feelings — no,  but  upon 
the  declarations,  promises,  and  Almighty  power  of  Him  who  has  "  laid  up  the  hope 
for  us  in  heaven.  II.  Its  invabiable  influence.  1.  It  produces  holiness  (1  John 
iii.  2,  3).  2.  It  begets  Christian  resignation  (Heb.  vi.  18,  19).  3.  It  enkindles  piona 
zeal  (1  Thess.  i.  3).  4.  It  lights  up  the  valley  of  death.  Reflections : — 1.  It  ia 
dismal  to  be  without  hope  (Eph.  ii.  12).     2.  It  is  madness  to  deceive  ourselves. 

3.  It  is  necessary  to  be  watchful  and  persevering.  (Congregational  Pulpit.) 
Changeful  Christians  : — Oh,  how  many  there  are  that  are  never  settled.  The  tree 
which  should  be  transplanted  every  week  would  soon  die.  Nay,  if  it  were  moved, 
no  matter  how  skilfully,  once  every  year,  no  gardener  would  expect  fruit  from  it. 
How  many  Christians  there  be  that  are  transplanting  themselves  constantly,  even 
as  to  their  doctrinal  sentiments.  There  be  some  who  believe  according  to  the  last 
speaker ;  and  there  be  others  who  do  not  know  what  they  do  believe,  but  they 
believe  almost  anything  that  is  told  them.  Men  have  come  to  believe  that  it  doea 
not  matter  what  they  do  believe — who  are  like  the  weathercock  upon  the  steeple^ 
they  will  turn  just  as  the  wind  blows.  As  good  Mr.  Whitfield  said,  '|  You  might  aa 
well  measure  the  moon  for  a  suit  of  clothes  as  tell  their  doctrinal  sentiments,"  for 
they  are  ever  changing.  Now,  I  pray  that  this  may  be  taken  away  from  any  of  yon, 
if  this  be  your  weakness,  and  that  you  may  be  settled.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Ini' 
movable  Christians  : — Cyprian,  when  on  his  road  to  suffer  martyrdom,  was  told  by 
the  emperor  that  he  would  give  him  time  to  consider  whether  he  had  not  better 
cast  a  grain  of  incense  into  the  fire,  in  honour  of  idols,  than  die  so  degraded  a 
death.  The  martyr  nobly  answered,  "There  needs  no  dehberation  in  the  case." 
John  Hubs  was  offered  a  pardon  when  at  the  stake,  about  to  suffer  for  his  attache 
ment  to  Christ,  if  he  would  recant;  his  reply  was,  "I  am  here  ready  to  suffet 
death,"  Anne  Askew  when  asked  under  similar  circumstances  to  avoid  the  flames, 
answered,  "I  came  not  here  to  deny  my  God  and  Master."  Mr.  Thomas  Hawkea, 
an  Essex  gentleman,  said,  on  a  like  occasion,  "  If  I  had  a  hundred  bodies,  I  would 
suffer  them  all  to  be  torn  in  pieces,  rather  than  recant."  WTien  the  cruel  Bonner 
told  John  Ardly  of  the  pain  connected  with  burning,  and  how  bard  it  mast  be  to 


.  I.]  COLOSSI ANS.  n 

endure  it,  with  a  view  to  leading  the  martyr  to  recant,  he  replied,  "  If  I  had  aa 
many  lives  as  I  have  hairs  on  my  head,  I  would  lose  them  all  in  tlie  fire,  before  I 
would  lose  Christ."  Galeazius,  a  gentleman  of  great  wealth,  who  suffered  martyr- 
dom at  St.  Angelo,  in  Italy,  beiiig  much  entreated  by  his  friends  to  recant,  replied, 
•*  Death  is  much  sweeter  to  me  with  the  testimony  of  truth,  than  life  with  its  least 
denial,"  {Arrine.)  Which  was  preached  to  every  creature. — There  may  be 
seven  observations  gathered  out  of  this  speech  of  the  apostle.  1.  That  doctrine 
only  is  true  wliich  is  agreeable  to  the  doctrine  of  the  apostles,  by  which  the  world 
was  converted  to  God.  2.  That  no  power  is  like  the  power  of  the  Word  of  God. 
Here  it  converts  a  wo'ld  in  a  short  time.  And  our  eyes  have  beheld  that  it  hath 
almost  in  as  short  time  restored  a  world  of  men  from  the  power  of  antichrist. 
3.  That  the  words  "  all  "  and  "  every  one  "  are  not  always  in  Scripture  to  be  under- 
stood universally  of  all  the  singular  persons  in  the  world,  as  the  universalista 
conceive.  4.  They  were  but  a  few  fishermen  that  did  this  great  work,  and  they  were 
much  opposed  and  persecuted,  and  in  some  less  matters  they  jarred  sometime 
among  themselves.  Whence  we  may  observe  that  doctrine  may  be  exceeding 
effectual,  though  (1)  but  few  teach  it ;  (2)  though  they  be  but  of  mean  estate  and 
condition  ;  (3)  though  it  be  opposed  by  cross  and  contrary  tpaching ;  (4)  though  it 
be  persecuted ;  (5)  though  the  people  be  indisposed  and  nozzled  in  sin  and 
superstition,  as  the  Gentiles  were ;  (6)  though  the  preacher  be  often  restrained ; 
(7)  though  there  be  some  dissension  in  less  matters.  6.  That  in  the  conversion 
of  sinners  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons  ;  men  of  any  age,  nation,  sex,  condition, 
life  or  quality,  may  be  converted  by  the  gospel.  6.  It  is  that  preaching  is  the 
ordinary  means  to  convert  every  creature,  so  as  ordinarily  there  is  none  converted 
but  by  preaching.  7.  If  any  one  ask  what  shall  become  of  those  nations,  or 
particular  persons,  that  never  yet  heard  of  the  gospel,  I  answer,  the  way  of  God 
in  divers  things  is  not  revealed,  and  His  judgments  are  a  great  deep.  It  belongs  to 
Ds  to  look  to  ourselves  to  whom  the  gospel  is  come.     (N.  Byfield.) 

Ver.  24.  Who  now  rejoice  In  my  BUfferinga  for  you. — Joy  in  differing : — The 
Taat  region  of  human  sorrow  is  to  most  a  dark  and  dreary  desert.  But  if  we  saw 
truly  we  should  find  many  streams  of  refreshment,  many  annny  spots,  and  on  all 
sides  evidences  of  the  Divine  tenderness.  Here  we  find  Paul  at  home  in  the  region 
of  suSering — rejoicing  amid  mysteries  which  fill  most  men  with  darkness.  And  no 
wonder,  for  he  had  been  led  to  gather  that  his  eufiferings  were  supplementary  to 
those  of  Christ,  and  essential  to  the  well-being  of  the  Church,  I.  The  suffbb- 
iNQs  OF  Chbist.  1.  This  is  a  subject  of  which  we  can  know  little.  All  the  notes 
that  have  been  marshalled  into  harmony  by  the  great  rulers  of  song  tell  most  of 
the  unexplored  regions  of  music.  The  fire  which  sparkles  from  the  flint  when 
struck  with  steel  tells  most  of  the  unspent  fire  within.  And  so  all  the  outward 
manifestations  of  Christ  sufifering  tells  most  of  the  inexpressible  anguish  of  Hii 
heart.  That  it  was  terrible  beyond  human  thought  is  indicated — (1)  by  the  pro- 
phecies concerning  the  Man  of  Sorrows;  (2)  by  His  sudden  death  of  a  broken 
heart ;  (3)  by  the  exquisite  sensibility  of  His  holy  nature.  2.  But  while  it  ia  im- 
possible to  know  fully  His  Bufferings,  some  facta  concerning  them  are  revealed.  (1) 
They  were  borne  voluntarily  for  men,  (2)  The  spring  of  His  sacrificing  of  Himself 
was  His  infinite  love.  ^3)  Consequently  Hia  sufferings  were  not  only  compatible 
with  His  unspeakable  joy,  but  were  the  cause  of  what  was  unspeakable  in  it 
(Heb.  xii.  3).  3.  Christ  in  His  life  of  sacrifice  declared  the  Father's  love  for  men, 
and  in  His  life  mirrored  the  life  of  God.  God  is  ever  spending  Himself  for  Hia 
children,  and  ia  ever  unspent.  *'  He  that  spared  not,"  &o.  We  infer,  then,  that  the 
purest  joy  of  heaven  is  sacrifice,  and  since  Christ  is  the  firstborn  among  many 
brethren,  that  He  should  furnish  the  ideal  of  all  true  hving ;  which  throws  light 
upon  the  text.  II,  The  surrEKiNos  of  Paul.  These  were  twofold ;  those  which 
He  voluntarily  endured  for  the  sake  of  the  Church,  and  those  which  were  personal 
end  inevitable.  1.  He  did  not  seek  suffering  for  its  own  sake.  As  an  end  it  waa 
contemptible,  but  as  a  means  to  the  well-being  of  the  universe  it  waa  sublime. 
Paul'a  joy  was  not  in  the  suffering,  but  in  the  love  of  which  suffering  was  the 
medium  of  expression.  Aa  the  love  of  fatherland  inspires  the  patriot  to  bleed  for 
his  country,  so  the  love  of  men  made  the  apostle  ready  to  sacrifice  anything  for 
them.  And  as  he  did  so  he  was  filled  with  Divine  ecstasy.  2.  But  His  love 
for  Christ  was  a  richer  source  of  gladness  amid  His  suffering.  We  want  always 
to  know  all  we  can  about  those  we  love.  One  of  the  great  ends  of  Paul's  life  was  to 
know  Christ,  and  the  idea  of  being  in  fellowship  with  Christ  in  His  sufferingB  waa 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  t. 

full  of  glory  to  Him.  He  would  be  in  a  position  for  realizing  more  of  that  love  whiob 
passeth  knowledge.  Love's  fullest  revelations  can  only  be  made  in  suffering.  The 
mother  never  knew  the  strength  and  blessedness  of  a  mother's  love  until  her  child 
became  ill,  and  until  she  lost  herself  in  all-consuming  love  for  it.  It  has  been  the 
common  testimony  of  Christ's  most  afflicted  ones,  that  in  the  hour  of  their  greatest 
suffering  they  have  had  the  profoundest  sense  of  Christ's  love.  Christ  meets  us 
where  Love's  grandest  revelations  are  possible.  There  Paul  rejoiced  in  His  suffer- 
ings. UL  The  supplementary  chabacter  of  Paul's  sufferings  to  Christ's  a51> 
their'  bubservency  to  the  well-being  of  the  Church.  1.  There  cannot  be  any- 
thing meritorious  in  suffering.  "  After  ye  have  done  all,  ye  are  unprofitable 
servants."  Yet  there  is  a  vicarious  element  in  suffering  borne  for  others.  Our 
Lord's  life  affected  men  through  the  idea  of  sacritice.  In  the  Cross  we  see  sin 
condemned  and  the  glory  of  the  Divine  rectitude  and  mercy  displayed.  But  Christ 
is  no  longer  with  us,  and  His  sufferings  are  over.  How,  then,  shall  we  convey  the 
idea  of  His  self-sacrificing  love  ?  By  preaching  partly,  but  mostly  in  the  imitation 
of  it  in  the  self-sacrificing  lives  of  His  people.  Thus  do  Christians  "  fill  up  "  that 
which  is  behind  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  2.  The  sufferings  of  Christian  people 
are  among  the  chief  means  of  deepening  and  enlarging  their  power  of  sympathy. 
In  Christ  sympathy  was  one  of  the  mightiest  forces  for  savii)g  men.  ♦*  The  bruised 
reed  will  He  not  break,"  &c.  Sympathy  is  the  secret  of  true  blessedness  and  use- 
fulness. Christ  was  perfected  through  suffering. — "  And  in  that  He  suffered,"  <fec. — 
and  by  having  it  perfected  in  Himself  the  apostle  felt  that  He  was  "filling  up," 
&c.  3.  Affliction  is  everywhere  regarded  in  the  Scriptures  as  a  necessity  for  the 
Christian  in  this  world.  When  sanctified  it  breaks  down  our  wills,  subdues  our 
hearts,  moulds  us  more  and  more  into  the  likeness  of  Christ.  How  does  this  affect 
the  Church  ?  Is  it  not  Christ's  body  ?  The  increased  life  of  the  individual  members 
then,  must  affect  the  whole  body  through  the  spiritual  veins  and  nerves  and  joints 
which  bind  the  members  to  each  other,  and  all  to  Christ  the  Head.  The  lowliest 
sufferer,  therefore,  is  not  suffering  in  vain,  he  is  "  filling  up,"  &c.  (if.  Simori). 
Joy  in  suffering  : — A  great  pleasure  in  giving.  No  pleasure  so  great  as  to  be  able 
to  give  or  serve.  Pleasure  in  personally  going  without,  in  order  to  give  to  another, 
or  serve  another;  that  is,  in  putting  yourself  to  pain  for  the  sake  of  another.  Our 
sufferings  really  are  a  giving  to  others  and  serving  others,  though  possibly  we  may 
not  see  how.  It  is  very  often  the  case  that  losses  or  pain  do  a  great  deal  of  good 
to  the  person  who  suffers  them.  When  we  know  that  a  pain  or  loss  of  ours  does 
some  good  to  some  one  else,  to  some  one  whom  we  truly  love,  then  it  is  a  very 
different  thing — then  we  rejoice  in  it.  The  mother  rejoices  in  her  pain  for  her 
child.  In  this  way,  look  at  the  misery  and  sorrow  in  the  world ;  to  think  of  it  as 
being  borne,  not  by  each  one  for  himself,  but  by  every  one  for  others  ;  as  serving 
others  in  some  unseen  way.  We  shall  see  in  the  future  state  how  our  pain  was  borne 
for  others,  and  be  glad  that  thus  we  served.  God  has  revealed  to  us  in  Christ  both 
that  His  own  life  is  a  life  of  sacrifice  and  service,  and  that  ours  truly  is  so  too.  The 
work  of  making  mankind  perfect  is  helped  on  by  all  that  we  are  called  upon  to  bear. 
We  help  God's  work  by  our  sorrows.  They  are  God's  special  gift  to  us  of  serving ; 
it  is  God's  best  gift  to  us — the  privilege  He  gave  His  Son — to  be  used  and  sacrificed 
for  the  best  and  greatest  end.  The  result  which  glorifies  and  makes  good  the  pain- 
ful part  of  human  life  is  one  that  we  cannot  see.  To  make  sacrifice  for  others 
always  joyful  to  us,  our  own  life  must  be  made  more  perfect.  {James  Hinton.) 
The  joy  of  mffering  for  the  Church: — A  stolid  indifference  to,  and  heroic  endurance 
of,  suffering,  was  not  unknown  to  paganism.  But  Christianity  alone  has  taught  us 
to  rejoice  in  it.  Observe — I.  The  representative  character  of  the  apostlb's 
bufferings.  1.  He  represented  the  suffering  Saviour.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that 
Christ's  sufferings  were  incomplete.  His  passion  was  the  one  perfect  and  i^ufficient 
sacrifice  for  sin.  No  one  conld  represent  this.  But  while  His  personal  sufferings 
are  over  He  so  thoroughly  identifies  Himself  with  His  people  that  their  afflictions 
become  His  own.  Paul  represented  the  suffering  Saviour  in  what  he  endured  for 
Him  and  the  Church.  Thus  He  could  say,  "  The  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in 
us;"  and  so  may  the  Church  as  Christ's  representative  to-day  (Matt.  xxv.).  2.  The 
Bufferings  of  the  apostle  supplemented  what  was  lacking  in  the  afflictions  of  Christ 
"Fill  up."  Every  age  of  the  church  has  its  measure  of  suffering.  The  church  is 
bnilt  up  by  repeated  acts  of  self-denial  in  successive  individuals  and  generations. 
They  continue  the  w»rk  which  Christ  began.  The  great  Mediator  suffered  to  effect 
oar  salvation ;  and  His  people,  on  their  part,  fill  up  the  suffering  needed  for  th« 
perfection  of  their  spiritual  life,  and  for  the  full  display  of  the  Divine  glory.    U. 


u]  COLOSSI ANS.  95 

The  TICABI0U8  ohaeactbr  of  thb  apostle's  8UFFEBIN08,  "  PoF  his  body's  sake, 
which  is  the  Church."  1.  The  apostle's  sufferiugs  for  the  Church  (1)  confirmed 
the  faith  of  her  converts ;  (2)  were  for  the  consolation  of  the  Church.  "  Whether 
we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  your  consolation  and  salvation."  "  Great  hearts  can  only 
be  made  by  great  troubles.  The  spade  of  trouble  digs  the  reservoir  of  comfort 
deeper,  and  makes  more  room  for  the  water  of  consolation."  When  James 
Bainham,  who  suffered  under  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.,  was  in  the  midst  of  the 
flames  which  had  half  consumed  his  arms  and  legs,  he  said  aloud:  "  0  ye  Papists, 
ye  look  for  miracles,  and  here  now  you  may  see  a  miracle ;  for  in  this  fire  I  feel  no 
more  pain  than  if  I  were  in  a  bed  of  down  ;  but  it  is  to  me  a  bed  of  roses  " ;  (3) 
tended  to  promote  its  increase.  The  more  the  Egyptians  afflicted  the  Hebrews 
the  more  they  multiplied.  The  devil's  way  of  extinguishing  goodness,  is  God's  way 
of  advancing  it.  III.  The  high-toned  spirit  of  the  apostle's  sufferinob.  '*  Who 
now  rejoice."  Nature  shrinks  from  suffering.  It  is  altogether  above  nature  t» 
triumph  in  it.  It  is  Christianity  alone  that  inspires  us  with  joy  in  tribulation. 
(6.  Barlow.)  Suffering  working  perfection : — Just  as  a  certain  amount  of  heat 
in  the  furnace  is  required  to  produce  certain  definite  effects  upon  the  metal,  so  it 
would  seem  as  though  a  certain  definite  amount  of  suffering,  recognized  by  the 
infinit*  wisdom  of  God,  were  necessary  to  work  out  the  perfection  of  that  body  of 
which  Christ  is  the  Head.  As  we  each  cheerfully  and  thankfully  bear  our  share, 
what  a  joy  to  think  that,  along  with  the  Head,  we  are  contributing  in  oor  measure 
to  the  perfecting  of  the  whole.     {W.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.) 

Vers.  25-27.  Whereof  I  am  mad*  a  minister. — The  preeminent  honour  and 
lublime  theme  of  the  Christian  ministry : — I.  The  Christian  ministry  is  a  Divine 
IN8TITDTI0N.  1.  The  Christian  minister  is  divinely  commissioned.  **  Dispen- 
Bation"  involves  the  idea  of  stewardship.  2.  The  true  minister  is  charged  with  the 
most  complete  proclamation  of  the  Divine  Word,      II.  The  Christian  ministry 

DEALS    WITH    A    THEME    OF    PROFOUND    BIONIFICANCE    AND    INEFFABLE    WORTH.       1.     It    is 

designated  a  mystery.  Tbe  gospel  is  still  a  mystery  to  the  unconverted.  2.  It  is 
a  mystery  unveiled  to  those  who  are  morally  fitted  to  understand  it.  *'  To  His 
saints."  God  chose  His  own  time  for  making  it  known.  Like  all  the  Divine 
procedures,  the  development  was  gradual,  increasing  in  clearness  and  completeness 
as  the  fulness  of  time  approached.  It  is  an  axiom  in  optics  that  the  eye  only  sees 
what  it  brings  with  it  the  power  to  see  :  and  in  spiritual  things  the  soul  compre- 
hends the  revelation  of  God  only  as  it  is  fitted  by  the  Spirit.  3.  The  revelation  of 
the  mystery  was  an  act  of  the  Divine  will.  **  To  whom  God  would  make  known." 
There  was  nothing  impelling  Him  to  unfold  it  but  His  own  good  pleasure,  4.  The 
revelation  of  the  mystery  endowed  humanity  with  a  vast  inheritance  of  moral 
wealth.  "  What  is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  this  mystery."  (1)  This  inheritance 
enriched  the  most  needy.  It  was  exhibited  "  among  the  Gentiles."  (2)  This  in- 
heritance includes  the  hope  inspired  by  the  indwelling  Christ.  '*  Which  is  Christ 
in  you,  the  hope  of  glory."  Lesions — 1.  The  Christian  ministry  involves  solemn 
responsibilities,  2.  "The  transcendent  theme  of  the  Christian  ministry  is  divinely 
revealed.  3.  Personal  experience  of  the  grace  of  God  endows  man  with  the  clearest 
insight  into  its  mystery  and  the  most  satisfying  possession  of  its  spiritual  riches. 
(<jf.  Barlow.)  Divine  ordination  to  the  mi^iistry  : — If  they  say,  "  You  have  gifts 
for  preaching,  and  yon  might  have  been  a  tolerable  preacher  if  you  had  been 
properly  ordained,"  I  reply  that  I  was  properly  ordained.  My  father  ordained 
me.  Ah  I  I  was  better  ordained  than  that :  my  greater  Father  ordained  me.  He 
ordiiined  me  twice:  first,  when  He  put  his  hand  on  my  head  before  I  was  born,  and 
said,  "  Be  a  head ; "  and  then,  after  I  had  carried  it  round  a  few  years,  when  Ha 
stretched  out  His  hand  and  touched  my  heart  rather  than  my  head,  and  said,  "Be 
ordained  again. "  First,  He  makes  the  head-piece  to  think  ;  and  then  He  touches  the 
heart,  and  says,  "  Go  preach  My  gospel."  When  a  man  has  had  that  doue  to  him, 
he  is  ordained.  A  pope  could  not  make  him  any  better ;  a  bishop  could  not  make 
him  any  better ;  a  whole  presbytery  could  not  make  him  any  better.  {H.  W.  Belcher. ) 
St.  Paul  a  proof  of  hit  gospel : — This  is  not  merely  an  appeal  to  their  affection  for 
him,  though  that  is  perfectly  legitimate.  Holy  words  may  be  holier  because  dear 
lips  have  taught  them  to  us,  and  even  the  truth  of  God  may  allowably  have  a  firmer 
hold  npon  our  hearts  because  of  our  love  for  some  who  have  ministered  it  to  us.  It 
is  a  poor  commentary  on  a  preacher's  work  if,  after  long  service  to  a  congregation, 
his  words  do  not  come  with  power  given  to  them  by  old  affection  and  confidence. 
The  humblest  teacher  who  hias  done  his  master's  errand  will  have  aome  to  whom 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

he  can  appeal,  as  Paul  did,  and  nrge  them  to  keep  hold  of  the  message  he  haa 
preached.  But  there  is  more  than  that  in  the  apostle's  mind.  He  was  accustomed 
to  quote  the  fact  that  he,  the  persecutor,  had  been  made  the  messenger  of  Christ, 
as  a  living  proof  of  the  infinite  mercy  and  power  of  that  ascended  Lord,  whom  His 
eyes  saw  on  the  road  to  Damascus.  So  here  he  puts  stvess  on  the  fact  that  he 
became  a  minister  as  being  an  "evidence  of  Christianity."  The  history  of  his 
conversion  is  one  of  the  strongest  proofs  of  the  resurrection  and  ascension  of  Jesus 
Christ.  You  know,  he  seems  to  say,  what  turned  me  from  being  a  persecutor  into 
an  apostle.  It  was  because  I  saw  the  Uving  Christ,  and  "  heard  the  words  of  His 
mouth,"  and,  I  beseech  you,  listen  to  no  words  which  make  His  dominion  less 
sovereign,  and  His  sole  and  sufficient  work  on  the  Cross  less  mighty.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  26.  The  mys'ery  which  hath  been  hid  from  ag^es  and  ft-om  generations. 
The  gospel  mystery  : — The  term  "  mystery,"  as  here  used  twice,  and  oiten  in  this 
epistle,  does  not  describe  what  is  essentially  incomprehensible,  but  rather  what  was 
hidden  and  ia  now  revealed.  The  gospel  is  a  mystery,  but  a  mystery  that  is  to  be 
preached  fully,  and  into  which  (as  the  word  borrowed  from  the  ancient  mysteries  in 
ver.  28  suggests)  every  man  may  be  initiated-  I.  The  gospel  a  mystery.  All 
religion  deals  with  mystery.  Genuine  mystery  is  the  stamp  of  a  religious 
Divinity — false  mystery  is  the  counterfeit  superstition  stamp.  In  its  aspect  to- 
wards the  vast,  the  infinite,  the  Divine,  religion  must  always  have  some  mystery 
toman.  IL  The  gospel  a  mystery  that  was  long  secret  from  man.  "  The  secret 
things  belong  unto  God."  There  are  hidden  facts  and  laws  in  nature  that  science 
has  only  gradually  discovered,  or  is  now  only  gradually  discovering  ;  hidden  moral 
meanings  in  nature  and  history  that  poets'  sight  only  can  descry,  and  poets'  song 
only  describe.  There  were  hidden  things  in  religion  that  only  holy  men  of  old, 
moved  by  the  Holy  (Thost,  could  reveal.  III.  The  gospel  is  a  mvstery  that  is  now 
FULLY  REVEALED.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  guesses  of  nobler  pagans,  or  ihe 
anticipations  of  patriarchs,  or  the  predictions  of  prophets,  it  was  only  as  the  pale 
light  of  very  early  dawn  upon  the  hills  of  antiquity.  It  was  noon  when  Christ 
lived,  taught,  died.  The  seal  was  broken,  the  secret  revealed.  What  secret  ? 
IV.  The  gospel  is  the  revealed  secret  of  God's  universal  redeeming  love. 
Christ  is  fully  proclaimed,  and  Christ  is  the  mystery.  In  Him  are  all  the  treasures 
of  God  stored  away.  1.  All  the  mystery  is  proclaimed  in  Christ.  As  the  rainbow 
has  all  possible  colours  in  its  wondrous  arc,  as  the  fablt^d  music  of  the  spheres  has 
all  possible  tones  in  its  chord,  so  in  Christ  is  all  the  wisdom,  righteousness,  love  of 
God.  2.  All  men  may  receive  the  blessings  of  this  mystery.  Christ,  and  Christ 
freely  given  to  the  Gentiles,  given  to  be  an  indwelling  power  in  them,  is  the  great 
mystery  which,  as  Paul  dwelt  in  it,  made  Him  proclaim  it  with  newer  and  deepen- 
ing joy.  {U.  R.  Tfiomas.)  I.  The  mystery.  1.  The  term  is  borrowed  from  the 
ancient  systems  in  which  certain  rites  and  doctrines  were  communicated  to  the 
initiated  (Phil.  iv.  12,  and  the  word  "perfect,"  which  means  "initiated,"  in  ver. 
28).  Potentous  theories  have  been  spun  out  of  this  word.  The  Greek  mysteries 
implied  secrecy ;  the  rites  were  done  in  deep  obscurity ;  the  esoteric  doctrineii 
were  muttered  in  the  ear.  The  Christian  mysteries  are  spoken  on  the  housetop, 
nor  does  the  word  imply  anything  as  to  the  comprehensibility  of  the  doctrines  or 
facts  which  are  so  called.  3.  We  talk  about  "  mysteries,"  meaning  thereby  truths 
that  transcend  human  faculties.  But  the  New  Testament  mystery  may  be,  and  most 
frequently  is,  a  fact  perfectly  comprehensible  when  once  spoken.  "  Behold  I  show 
you  a  mystery:  we  shall  not  all  sleep,"  <Src.  There  is  nothing  incomprehensible  in 
that.  We  should  never  have  known  it  if  we  had  not  been  told  ;  but  when  told  it  ia 
quite  level  with  our  faculties.  The  word  is  most  frequently  used  in  connection 
with  the  notion  of  declaring.  It  frequently  occurs  in  this  epistle  and  in  the 
Ephesians,  and  in  every  instance  but  one  refers  to  a  fact  perfectly  plain  when  once 
made  known — the  entrance  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  Church.  4.  Then  it  follows 
that "  a  steward  of  the  mysteries  "  is  simply  a  man  who  has  truths,  formerly  unknown 
but  now  revealed,  in  charge  to  all  who  will  hearken,  and  neither  the  claims  of  a 
priesthood  nor  the  demand  for  the  unquestioning  submission  of  the  intellect  have 
any  foundation  in  this  much-abused  term.  II.  The  substance  of  the  mystery.  1. 
The  wonderful  fact  that  all  barriers  were  broken  down.  He  saw  in  that  the  proof 
and  prophecy  of  the  world-wide  destination  of  the  gospel.  There  is  no  greater 
revolution  in  history  than  the  cutting  loose,  through  Him,  of  Christianity  from 
Jodaism,  and  widening  the  Church  to  the  width  of  the  raoe.     No  wonder  that  ha 


t]  COLOSSIANS.  97 

waa  misunderstood  and  hated  by  Jewish  Christians  all  his  days.  He  thinks  of  these 
©ooe  heathens  and  now  Christians  at  Colossoe,  and  of  many  another  little  com- 
aaanity  in  Judea,  Asia,  Greece,  and  Italy  ;  and  as  he  thinks  of  how  a  solid  bond  of 
brotherhood  bound  them  together  in  spite  of  their  differences  of  race  and  culture, 
the  vision  of  the  oneness  of  mankind  in  the  Cross  of  Christ  shines  out  before  him 
as  uo  other  man  had  seen  it  till  then.  2.  That  Christ  dwelt  in  their  hearts.  That 
d->relling  reveals  the  exuberant  abundance  of  glory.  To  Paul  the  "  mystery"  was 
all  running  over  with  riches,  and  blazing'  with  fresh  radiance,  and  the  possession 
of  Christ  was  a  pledge  of  future  blessedness.  The  closer  we  keep  to  Him  the 
dearer  will  be  our  vision  of  that  blessedness.  Anything  seems  more  credible  to  a 
man  who  has  Christ  abiding  in  Him,  than  that  such  a  trifle  as  death  should  have 
power  to  end  such  a  union.  This  hope  is  offered  to  all.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  mystery  mamfett : — Christ,  by  His  incarnation,  answered  the  vague  and  un- 
satisfactory queries  of  the  world.  1.  The  Second  Person  of  the  Godhead  was 
inspected  by  the  ancients  to  be  the  active  agent  of  the  unknown  God.  Seneca : 
*'  Whoever  formed  the  universe,  whether  the  Almighty  God  Himself,  or  that 
incorporeal  reason  which  was  the  artificer  of  these  vast  concerns."  2.  The  ancients 
conceived  this  Second  Person  to  stand  to  the  First  in  the  relation  of  a  word  to  the 
thought  which  it  expresses.  Zendavesta:  "0,  Ormuzd,  what  is  that  great  word  given 
by  God,  that  living  and  powerful  word,  which  existed  before  the  heavens,  before  the 
waters,  before  the  earth,  before  the  flocks?"  Compare  Philo's  "Philosophy  o£ 
the  Logos  "  with  the  Introduction  to  John's  Gospel.  3.  The  ancients  looked  for 
some  incarnation  of  the  Divine  Word.  Persian  Sei  osch,  Hindoo  Vishnu.  Plato  : 
•'  It  is  necessary  that  a  Lawgiver  be  sent  from  heaven  to  instruct  men ;  and  this 
Lawgiver  must  be  more  than  a  man."  Jewish  expectancy.  4.  The  ancients  tried 
to  furnish  the  ideal  of  perfect  human  character — e.g.,  the  ideals  of  Confucius, 
Socrates,  Seneca.  The  mythologio  personages.  Christ  appeared  manifestly  (1) 
perfectly  a  man,  (2)  a  perfect  man,  and  challenged  all  moralists.  "  Which  of  yoa 
convinceth  Me  of  sin?  "  6.  The  ancients  had  the  idea  of  atonement.  Altars  lined 
the  track  of  history.  Christ's  cry  when  coming  into  the  world :  *'  A  body  hast  thou 
prepared  Me.  Lo  !  I  come  to  do  thy  will."  John  the  Baptist's  recognition : 
*•  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  1 "  6.  The  ancients  tried  to  demonstrate  the  per- 
petuity of  human  life.  Our  strongest  points  in  the  philosophy  of  immortality 
announced  by  Plato.  The  mythology  of  Greeks  and  Scandinavians.  Christ'a 
declaration,  "  I  am  the  Besurrection  and  the  Life,"  demonstrated  bj  His  resurreo- 
tion.    {Ho7niletie  Revieto). 

Yer.  27.  To  whom  God  would  ma&e  known  what  is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  this 

mystery. — The  gospel  mystery  : — The  gospel  is  the  grand  secret.  To  the  mass  of  man- 
kind it  was  utterly  unknown,  and  the  chosen  people  only  perceived  dimly  through  the 
smoke  of  sacrifices  and  the  veil  of  types.  It  must  ever  have  been  a  mystery  but  for 
revelation,  and  must  be  so  still  unless  Christ  comes  to  dwell  within.  Then  all  is  clear. 
I.  The  essencs  of  this  mystery  is  Christ.  It  is  uncertain  what  ia  the  antecedent 
to  •'  which  " — "  mystery,"  "  riches,"  or  "  glory."  If  it  be  mystery,  then  Christ  ia 
"the  mystery  of  godliness";  if  glory,  Christ  is  the  brightnesa  of  His  Father's 
glory ;  if  riches,  there  are  •'  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  The  essence  of 
this  mystery  is — 1.  Christ  Himself:  God-Man,  in  which  connection  we  must 
remember  the  glorious  work  He  undertook  and  finished  on  our  behalf ;  and  (2)  His 
•flSces,  prophet,  priest,  king,  friend,  brother,  head,  &o.  Whatever  Christ  is  His 
people  are  in  Him :  crucified,  dead,  risen  in  13im ;  in  Him  we  live  eternally,  and 
lit  in  heavenly  places.  This  is  the  essence  of  the  whole  gospel.  He  who  does  not 
preach  Christ  preaches  no  gospel.  There  is  no  more  possibility  of  a  gospel  without 
Christ  than  a  day  without  the  sun  or  a  river  without  water.  2.  Christ  Himself  and 
DO  other.  Never  be  put  off  with  books  or  conversations.  Nothing  short  of  reaching 
•nd  touching  Christ  will  serve  your  turn.  3.  Christ  Himself  rather  than  anything 
which  Christ  gives.  How  different  He  ia  from  all  our  other  friends  and  helpers. 
They  bring  good  things,  but  Jesus  gives  us  Himself.  He  does  not  merely  give  aa 
wisdom,  righteousness,  <fec.,  He  Himself  is  made  of  God  all  these  things  to  us. 
When  you  are  ill  you  are  glad  to  see  the  doctor,  but  when  you  are  well  you  want  to 
get  rid  of  him  ;  but  you  can  never  do  without  Christ.  When  cured  we  want  to  see 
Jesua  more  than  ever.  4.  Christ  alone  is  enough.  Some  hold  a  candle  to  the  sun 
by  preaching  Christ  and  man's  philosophy  or  priestcraft.  II.  The  sweetness  of 
this  mystery  which  is  Christ  in  you.  This  is  a  grand  advance.  Christ  in  heaven, 
Christ  free  to  poor  sinners  is  precious,  but  Christ  in  the  heart  is  most  precious  of 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  & 

all.  A  loaf  is  a  good  thing,  but  if  we  could  not  get  it  within  us  we  should  die  of 
starvation.  A  medicine  may  be  a  noble  cure,  but  if  kept  in  the  phial  would  do  U9 
no  good.  Christ  in  you  is — 1.  Christ  accepted  by  faith.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing 
that  Christ  should  enter  a  man,  but  still  more  wonderful  that  He  should  enter  by 
60  narrow  an  opening  as  our  little  faith.  There  is  the  sun,  yet  it  can  come  through 
the  narrowest  chink  ;  but  we  should  pull  up  the  blinds,  and  let  him  shine  in  in  all 
his  glory.  Grow  in  faith,  then,  and  take  in  Christ  more  inllj.  2.  Christ  possessed. 
Nothing  is  so  much  a  man's  own  as  that  which  is  within  him.  Men  may  question 
whether  an  acre  or  a  house  is  yours,  but  not  yesterday's  meal.  3.  Christ  experienced. 
There  may  be  a  valuable  medicine,  but  it  is  of  no  efficacy  to  a  man  until  it  is  within 
him.  When  it  commences  to  purify  and  strengthen,  he  knows  it  without  the  testi- 
mony of  others.  When  Christ  is  in  you  curing  your  sin,  and  filling  your  soul  with 
Icve  to  holiness,  then  will  you  know  the  Lord.  4.  Christ  reigning.  5.  Christ  filling, 
e.  Christ  transfiguring.  You  thrust  a  bar  of  iron  into  the  fire,  and  keep  it  there 
till  the  fire  enters  it,  it  is  then  like  fire  itself.  "  I  Uve,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  livetb 
in  me."  III.  The  outlook  of  all  this  is  Cheist  in  you  the  hope  of  glory.  1. 
Glory.  Surely  that  belongs  to  God  only.  Yes,  but  Christ  says,  "The  glory  Thon  hast 
given  Me  I  have  given  them."  2.  How  do  we  know  that  we  are  to  have  glory  ?  (1) 
Christ  makes  as  glorious  now  by  His  coming,  which  is  a  pledge  of  future  glory. 

(2)  Christ  has  entered  into  covenant  with  God  to  bring  His  people  home  to  glory. 
IS)  The  Christ  who  has  come  to  live  with  us  will  never  leave  us  till  we  are  glorified. 
(C7.  H.  Spurgeon. )  Christ  in  you : — I.  Christ  in  you  means  Christ  embraced  by 
faith  as  our  righteousness  and  strength.  This  is  the  sure  ground  on  which  we  may 
hope  for  glory  (Eph.  iii.  17).  When  a  sinner's  heart  is  opened  to  see  the  excellence 
of  the  Saviour,  it  inwardly  embraces  Him,  and  every  discovery  renews  this  act  of 
inward  cleaving.  Then  every  reproach,  temptation,  fall,  affliction,  makes  the  soul 
more  fully  embrace  Him  (see  Gal.  iv.  19;  John  xv.  4,  xvii.  23,26).  II.  The  effect* 
cF  this  union.  1.  The  mind  of  Christ  is  formed  in  the  soul  (1  Cor.  ii.  16).  The 
believer  thinks  as  Christ  does,  and  so  has  the  spirit  of  a  sound  mind  (2  Tim.  i.  7). 
Not,  of  course,  that  he  has  the  omniscience  and  infallibe  judgment  of  his  Lord, 
but  up  to  his  light  he  sees  as  Christ  does,  (1)  Sin  to  be  abominable.  (2)  The  gospel^ 
its  glory  and  completeness.  (3)  The  world  and  its  vanity,  (4)  Time  and  its  value. 
(5)  Eternity.     As  did  Christ  he  sees  everything  in  its  light.    2.  The  heart  of  Christ. 

(1)  There  is  the  same  love  to  God  in  both.     (2)  The  same  aversion  to  God's  frown. 

(3)  The  same  love  to  the  saints.  (4)  The  same  compassion  for  sinners.  {R.  M. 
McCheyne,  M.A.)  Christ  in  you  an  expanding  force  : — When  Christ  once  enters 
into  a  soul,  by  degrees  He  occupies  the  whole  of  it.  Did  you  ever  hear  the  legend 
of  a  man  whose  garden  produced  nothing  else  but  weeds,  till  at  last  he  met  with  a 
strange  foreign  fiower  of  singular  vitality.  The  story  is  that  he  sowed  a  handful 
of  this  seed  in  his  overgrown  garden,  and  left  it  to  work  its  own  sweet  way.  He 
slept  and  rose,  and  knew  not  how  the  seed  was  growing  till  on  a  day  he  opened  the 
gate  and  saw  a  sight  which  much  astounded  him.  He  knew  that  the  seed  would 
produce  a  dainty  fiower  and  he  looked  for  it ;  but  he  had  little  dreamed  that  th& 
plant  would  cover  the  whole  garden.  So  it  was  :  the  flower  had  exterminated  •very 
weed,  till  as  he  looked  from  one  end  to  the  other  from  wall  to  wall  he  could  see 
nothing  but  the  fair  colours  of  that  rare  plant,  and  smell  nothing  but  its  delicious 
perfume.  Christ  is  that  plant  of  renown.  If  He  be  sown  in  the  soil  of  your  soul. 
He  will  gradually  eat  out  the  roots  of  all  ill  weeds  and  poisonous  plants,  till  over 
all  your  nature  there  shall  be  Christ  in  you.  God  grant  we  may  realize  the  picture 
in  our  own  hearts,  and  then  we  shall  be  in  paradise.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  in 
you  the  hope  of  glory  : — I.  The  subject  of  the  Apostle's  declaration.  1.  "  Glory  " 
refers  to  the  felicity  of  a  future  life  as  discovered  by  the  gospel ;  "  the  hope  "  is 
that  "laid  up  for  us  in  heaven."  Of  a  life  after  death  the  Gentiles  knew  nothing 
with  certainty,  and  the  Jews  only  dimly.  "  Life  and  immortality  were  brought  to 
light  by  the  gospel."  2,  This  glory  was  one  of  (1)  character,  "  a  glory  to  be  revealed 
in  us  " — a  personal  perfection  to  adorn  the  world,  •'  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness." 

(2)  Condition  and  place.  It  refers  to  the  light  and  participation  of  that  incompar- 
able splendour  which  emanates  from  the  throne  and  pervades  the  residence  of  Deity. 
God  is  light,  and  "dwelleth  in  a  light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto."  In 
consistency  with  this  the  heavenly  mansions  are  "  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light";  all  the  luminaries  of  heaven  are  excluded  as  unnecessary  appendages  in 
consequence  of  the  surpassing  splendour  derived  immediately  from  God  and  the 
Lamb.  II.  The  medium  of  this  hope :  Christ.  He  was  the  author  and  bestower 
of  it.    He  had  not  only  revealed  the  object,  and  imparted  knowledge  respecting  it^ 


eaiP.  I.J  COLOSSIANS.  99 

bnt  had  opened  the  way  to  its  enjoyment.  He  was  "  the  way,  the  trnth,  and  the 
life,"  and  they  needed  nothing  besides.  It  was  inconsistent  with  His  grace  and 
truth,  omnipotence,  love,  and  with  the  perfection  of  His  work  on  earth,  for  Him 
to  have  recourse  to  Jewish  ceremonies,  personal  suffering,  or  philosophic  specula- 
tions, as  a  means  of  augu-ienting  their  confidence,  or  securing  their  possession  of 
the  anticipated  eternity.  III.  The  senses  in  which  Christ  la  in  us  pebsonallt 
AND  EXPEBiMENT^u^LY.  1.  Faith  In  Christ  as  the  great  sacrifice.  It  is  thus  that 
the  life  is  derived  that  can  never  perish,  and  that  a  union  is  established  with  Christ 
which  will  lead  Him  to  remember  us  when  He  cometh  in  His  kingdom.  "  I  am 
crucified  with  Christ,"  &o.  "  That  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith."  2. 
The  influence  of  His  Spiiit  who  effects  that  change  in  our  nature  which  "  makes  us 
meet  for  the  inheritance,"  &c.  3.  The  habitual  remembrance  of  His  laws  and  the 
consequent  exhibition  in  affectionate  obedience  (John  xv,  4,  7,  10,  11).     Lessons — 

1.  The  unspeakable  importance  and  value  of  religion.  2.  How  delightful  to  have 
Buch  a  hope  of  glory  to  cling  to  ;  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  sure  and  steadfast,  among 
the  billows  and  eddies  of  that  turbulent  stream  on  which  we  are  embarked.  (T. 
Binney.)  I.  Glory,  another  word  for  heaven,  setting  forth — 1.  Its  excellence. 
Nothing  is  esteemed  glorious  but  what  is  of  transcendent  worth.  The  Jews  felt 
this,  hence  the  Hebrew  word  signifies  also  weight  and  substance.  So  heaven  is  called 
♦'  an  exceeding  weight  of  glory."  2.  Its  magnificence.  Mere  excellence  is  not 
glory,  to  be  that  it  must  be  known  and  seen.  The  sun  is  not  glorious  behind  a 
cloud ;  a  diamond  must  be  brought  forth  and  polished  to  be  glorious.  So  the  glory 
oJ  heaven  consists  in  the  discovery  of  its  excellencies — the  Father  in  His  majesty, 
the  Son  in  His  grace  and  love,  holiness  in  its  perfection  and  beauty,  Ac  "  Thine 
eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  His  beauty."  II.  The  hope  of  glory.  This  brings  ua 
down  to  earth,  but  still  with  heaven  in  our  sight.  But  there  is  a  hope  even  of 
heaven  not  worth  the  Laving.  We  read  of  a  hope  that  perishes,  that  shall  be  cut 
off  like  a  spider's  web  and  the  giving  up  of  the  ghost.  May  that  be  destroyed, 
for  a  false  hope  is  worse  than  none  at  all.  The  true  hope  is  distinguished  from 
this  by  three  marks.  1.  It  comes  down  from  heaven.  We  cannot  create  it ;  no 
fellow-creature  can  persuade  us  into  it.  It  is  the  gift  of  the  heavenly  Spirit  to  the 
renewed  heart.  It  resembles  faith  and  rests  on  the  same  foundation,  yet  it  differs 
from  it.     "  There  is  a  world  of  glory,"  says  faith,     "  I  am  going  to  it,"  says  hope. 

2.  It  longs  and  looks  for  heaven.  It  is  an  "  earnest  expectation  "  like  that  of  the 
Btorm-tossed  mariner  for  the  desired  haven.  3.  It  carries  the  soul  on  towards 
heaven  and  makes  meet  for  it.  "Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth 
himself,"  &c.  III.  Christ.  He  is  connected  not  with  the  glory  but  with  the  hope, 
as  its  foundation.  Take  Him  away  and  there  is  no  hope,  1.  Christ  has  purchased 
glory  for  us.  As  sinners  and  rebels  we  were  farther  from  it  than  any  beggar  is  from 
a  crown.  But  He  has  paid  the  ransom  which  delivers  us  from  condemnation,  and 
which  entitles  us  to  glory.  2.  He  has  actually  taken  possession  of  glory  for  ns. 
Hence  the  believer's  hope  is  connected  with  the  ascension — "  The  anchor  of  the 
Boul,"  &c.  3,  Christ  has  pledged  Himself  to  bring  believers  to  glory.  IV.  Chbist 
IN  CB.  What  this  means  is  more  than  we  can  tell.  Picture  to  yourselves  a  house, 
comfortless  within,  and  falling  to  decay.  Let  a  stranger  enter  it,  he  may  act  in  two 
ways.  He  may  secrete  himself  in  some  dark  comer,  and,  watching  his  opportunity, 
do  much  mischief  without  its  inhabitants  even  knowing  he  is  there.  Thus  Satan 
is  acting  in  the  hearts  of  thousands,  who  little  think  he  is  near  them,  much  less 
within  them.  But  suppose  that  stranger  to  be  a  man  of  another  character,  and.  aa 
soon  as  he  goes  in,  to  throw  open  the  windows,  and  to  let  in  the  air  and  light.  See 
him  then  discovering  himself  to  the  inhabitants  of  it.  "I  am  come  to  live  wvth 
you,"  he  says,  "  if  you  will  let  me,  as  your  friend  and  brother.  But  this  filthinesa 
I  cannot  bear,  nor  this  disorder.  I  love  comfort  and  cheerfulness."  And  then  he 
Bets  about  cleansing  that  house,  putting  it  in  order,  adorning  and  repairing  it, 
strengthening  its  walls'and  closing  up  every  fissure,  so  that  when  the  wintry  storm 
beats,  no  wind  or  rain  can  enter  it,  and  nothing  shake  it.  And  then  while  he  is 
doing  this,  he  goes  about  enlivening  it  with  his  presence,  and  making  the  voice  of 
joy  and  praise  to  be  heard  from  day  to  day  in  every  room  of  it.  Oh,  yon  would 
say,  what  an  altered  house  I  What  a  blessed  guest  has  that  man  proved  in  it  1 
Now  the  Lord  Jesus  when  he  enters  a  sinner's  soul  acts  exactly  thus.  (C.  Bradley, 
M.A.)  Christ  in  you  : — This  strange  thing  once  startled  an  emperor.  Ignatius, 
who  had  assumed  the  name  Theophorus  to  express  this  gospel  truth,  stood  before 
him  to  vindicate  his  profession  of  Christianity,  "  Who  is  Theophorus?  "  haughtily 
asked  th>  heathen  monarch.     "  He  who  has  Christ  in  his  breast,"  said  the  martyi. 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  m, 

"  Dost  thou,  then,  carry  Him,  who  was  crucified,  within  thee  ?  "  Eaising  his  voice 
with  holy  animation,  while  an  almost  heavenly  brightness  played  upon  his  pallid 
countenance,  the  Christian  hero  replied,  "  I  do — I  do  ;  for  it  is  written,  *  I  dwell  in 
them,  and  walk  in  them! '"  (W.  H.  Luckenbach.)  1.  Glory  is  the  greatest  word 
in  our  language.  It  is  one  of  God's  most  magnificent  titles.  It  is  the  object  ol 
the  true  believer's  hope,  and  whatever  else  he  relinquishes  he  will  not  part  with 
this.  He  lives  and  dies  in  hope.  2.  This  hope  arises  from  the  indwelling  of  the 
Saviour.  He  is  in  us  as  the  source  of  life  and  the  principle  of  action.  3.  This 
union  is  not  essential  like-that  which  subsists  between  the  sacred  Three  ;  nor  is  it 
personal  like  that  between  the  Divine  and  human  natures  of  our  Lord,  nor  merely 
an  operative  or  influential  union  like  that  between  God  and  His  creatures  ;  but  a 
mystical  and  spiritual  union,  a  union  of  affection,  interest,  and  design.  It  is  also 
mutual  and  reciprocal.  He  dwells  in  us,  and  we  dwell  in  Him  (John  xiv.  23 ; 
Gal.  ii.  20;  Eev.  iii.  20).  I.  Explain  and  illustrate  the  truth  of  the  text. 
1.  Christ  is  revealed  in  the  gospel  as  the  hope  of  glory.  In  order  that  He  may  be 
received  He  must  be  outwardly  proposed  by  the  ministration  of  the  Word  (Eom.  x. 
14  ;  Bev.  i.  2).  By  the  discovery  the  gospel  makes  of  Christ's  ability  and  willing- 
ness to  save,  it  opens  a  door  of  hope  to  the  vilest  (Eom.  xv.  4 ;  Col.  i.  23 ;  Heb.  vi. 
18).  2.  Christ  crucified  is  the  foundation  of  our  hope,  by  becoming  the  meritorious 
cause  of  it.  3.  Christ  is  the  hope  of  glory  efficiently  by  the  operation  of  His  Spirit 
in  our  hearts  (Eom.  viii,  9).  Without  that  any  hope  of  salvation  is  visionary. 
4.  Christ  dwelling  in  the  heart  is  the  evidence  that  He  is  to  us  the  hope  of  glory, 
»nd  by  no  other  means  can  that  hope  be  ascertained.  He  is  our  life ;  but  in  order  to 
this  He  must  live  in  us.  After  all  that  He  has  done  and  is  doing  for  us,  there  is 
Bomething  continually  to  be  done  within  (Eom.  x.  6-9).  II.  Establish  and  confirm 
the  leading  sentiment.  1.  Christ  being  in  us  is  the  best  evidence  of  our  being  in 
Him,  and  the  testimony  of  an  angel  could  not  make  it  more  satisfactory  (1  John 
V.  11-12 ;  Eph.  i.  3-4 ;  1  Tim.  i.  9).  2.  Christ  in  us  is  the  nourishment  of  our 
hope.  "  Greater  is  He  that  is  in  you,"  &c.  3.  Christ  in  us  is  the  pledge  and 
earnest  of  our  hope.  To  have  Christ  in  us  is  the  life  of  grace ;  to  be  with  Christ 
is  the  hope  of  glory  ;  and  the  two  go  together.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  hope  of 
glory : — The  late  Isaac  Pitt  was  suilering  from  what  appeared  to  be  an  attack  of 
rheumatic  gout,  from  which  no  serious  danger  was  apprehended.  His  friends  were 
startled  by  the  announcement  of  the  physician,  "  There  is  no  hope."  Another 
medical  man  was  called  for  consultation.  "  Doctor,"  said  the  sick  man,  •*  I  wish 
to  know  the  very  truth  ;  do  not  conceal  anything.  Do  you  think  I  shall  recover  ?  " 
«« We  will  do  all  we  can,  but  we  fear  there  is  no  hope  of  recovery."  "  Thank  you," 
he  rejoined,  •'  I  should  like  you  to  do  all  you  can  ;  but  if  not  successful,  I  have  • 
hope.  A  ransom  has  been  provided,  a  Saviour  has  been  sent :  I  accept  the  ransom, 
I  believe  in  the  Saviour."  When  the  doctor  says  there  is  no  hope  for  the  body,  thia 
hope  of  glory  is  an  anchor  for  the  soul.     {New  Testament  Anecdotes.)  Christ  in 

the  heart : — David  Hume,  the  great  historian  of  England,  and  noted  enemy  of  the 
Christian  faith,  once  overheard  his  servant-man  John  repeating  the  text,  "  Christ 
in  you,  the  hope  of  glory."  *'  You  know  that's  all  nonsense,"-  said  Hume;  "I  wonder 
that  a  sensible  man  like  you  can  believe  it.  If  Christ  be  in  heaven,  as  you  say,  how 
can  He  be  in  you  ?  He  can't  be  in  two  places  at  one  time.  And  then  to  be  '  in 
you,'  I  don't  understand  it."  "  David  Hume,"  said  John,  "  you  wrote  the  '  History 
of  Englafid,'  and  I  read  it  page  by  page  with  great  delight.  You  say  in  that  history 
that  the  one  redeeming  feature  in  the  life  of  '  Bloody  Mary '  was,  that  when  she 
was  dying,  the  news  came  to  her  that  Calais  had  been  captured,  and  that  on  that 
occasion  she  raised  herself  up  in  bed,  and  said  to  her  maids  of  honour,  '  When  I 
die,  take  out  my  heart,  and  you  will  find  "  Calais  "  written  on  it.'  Now,  what  more 
Calais  written  on  Mary's  heart,  than  Christ  on  mine?  Take  out  my  heart,  and  you 
will  find  Christ  written  on  it."  (J.  L.  Nye.)  Christ  in  the  heart  the  believer^n 
hope  : — I.  Christ  dwells  in  believers.  1.  Christ  is  in  you  who  truly  believe  in 
him.  Faith  brings  Him  into  union  with  the  soul.  2.  Christ  is  in  you  as  He  engages 
your  first  affections.  3.  Christ  is  in  you  as  His  likeness  is  impressed  on  your  souls. 
Where  this  is  there  will  be — (1)  Aversion  to  sin.  (2)  Delight  in  the  law  of  God. 
(3)  Zeal  for  the  Divine  glory.  (4)  Habitual  submission  to  the  Divine  will.  4.  Christ 
is  in  you  if  His  Spirit  dwell  in  you — *'  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ," 
&Q.  II.  Chbist  in  believers  is  the  hope  of  glory.  1.  Their  hope  is  founded 
in  Christ  (1  Tim.  i.  1).  Nor  can  the  hope  of  a  sinful  creature  rest  anywhere  else 
with  safety.  2.  Their  hope  is  communicated  by  Christ.  3.  Their  hope  is 
maintained  by  Christ.     They  cherish  this  hope  as  Christ  is  in  them.     Learn— -1. 


our.  I.]  COLOSSIANS.  101 

The  happy  condition  of  the  believer.  He  may  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God. 
2.  The  importance  of  earnest  endeavours  to  know  our  state  before  God.  8,  The 
fallacy  of  that  hope  that  is  not  founded  on  the  Saviour,  and  productive  of  con- 
formity to  Him.  (Congregational  ItevienibraTicer.)  The  Indwelling  of  Christ : — 
There  are  four  methods  by  which  we  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  1.  The 
historical.  Without  this  we  cannot  become  acquainted  with  the  true  portraiture  of 
Christ.  It  is  true  that  one  may  study  the  Gospels  intellectually,  and  derive  from 
them  a  conception  of  Christ  that  is  truly  noble,  but  which  is  not  vital  and  powerful : 
but  this  is  the  ubuse  of  a  right  thing.  The  study  of  the  work  and  character  of 
Christ  is  antecedent  and  ausilliary  to  a  true  experience  of  Christ.  2.  The  theo- 
logical. This  is  often  carried  to  excess  and  abused,  but  none  the  less  there  is  a 
place  for  it.  It  is  a  matter  of  transcendent  interest  to  know  whether  Christ 
believed  He  was  Divine.  Views  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Saviour  which  run  low  will, 
averaging  them  through  the  ages,  be  productive  of  a  low  tone  of  spirituality  and 
vice  versa.  Nevertheless  a  man  may  have  a  right  theology  of  Christ,  and  yet  not  be 
possessed  of  Christ.  It  is  auxilliary  only.  3.  The  apostle  taught  that  there  was 
something  more  than  this,  viz. ,  a  living  Christ  who  may  be  a  part  of  our  lives. 
L  In  order  that  He  may  be  my  Christ  He  must  be  one  in  whose  hands  is  thb 
WHOLE  sphere  IN  WHICH  I  LIVE  AND  ACT,  Lord  over  all  the  causes  which  are 
influencing  me.  1.  No  man  ever  contests  in  himself  and  strives  to  release  himself 
from  what  is  low  arid  base,  and  reaches  toward  the  higher  and  nobler,  if  he  does 
not  feel  the  need  of  God.  When  we  are  looking  down  we  are  our  own  gods,  but 
when  we  strive  upwards  we  feel  the  necessity  of  supernal  influences.  2.  Now  as 
when  I  hunger,  my  hunger  says  there  is  food,  as  when  my  eye  was  made  it  said 
there  waf?  light  to  match  it,  so  I  know  that  certain  struggles  and  yearnings  point  ta 
Bomething  higher.  3.  These  yearnings  are  met  in  Him  of  whom  the  previous 
verses  of  this  chapter  point.  No  man  who  is  limited  by  specialities,  physician, 
teacher,  friend,  &c.,  can  give  me  the  help  I  need.  He  must  be  as  He  is,  the 
embodiment  of  all  power,  and  Lord  over  all.  4.  But  in  order  to  this  He  must  be 
mine,  mine  as  really  as  if  I  were  the  only  human  being  in  the  universe  :  not  of 
course  to  the  exclusion  of  others — but  as  my  father  was  not  less  wholly  mine 
because  he  was  my  brothers'  too.  II.  In  order  to  meet  the  exigency  or  inr 
nature  and  experience  I  MUST  HAVE  A  Christ  WHO  LOVES  ME.  1.  I  canuot  live 
without  love  ;  but  human  love  is  inadequate.  2.  Yet  how  am  I  to  be  loved, 
and  thus  live.  I  can  never  hope  to  deserve  it.  Here  the  transcendent  love  of 
Christ  comes  in.  He  loves  the  loveless,  and  asks  no  more  but  that  I  let  Him  love 
me.  3.  The  consciousness  of  this  unspeakable  love  is  most  potent  and  inspiring. 
III.  It  is  necessary  that  Christ  should  be  in  me,  a  Being  whose  love,  power» 
and  whole  nature  and  influence  I  feel  within  developing  in  me  the  superior  qualities 
of  the  spiritual  elements,  and  giving  authority  and  power  to  love  and  hope,  and 
faith  and  conscience.  And  there  is  a  direct  sympathetic  action  of  the  Divine  mind 
on  ours.  Indeed,  we  act  on  each  other.  If  you  sigh  in  the  presence  of  another 
man,  he  will  sigh ;  if  you  laugh,  he  will  smile.  And  so  if  the  heart  be  open  and  th* 
moral  nature  sensitive,  Christ  acts  upon  the  thought  and  feeling  so  that  we  are 
guided  by  Him.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  Indwelling  Saviour : — There  are  three 
features  which  mark  the  relationship  indicated  by  the  text.  I.  It  is  an  intimatb 
RELATION.  1.  It  is  Hot  a  mere  sacramental  relation.  That  may  exist  and  be 
altogether  an  external  thing,  and  leave  the  heart  possessed  entirely  by  another  than 
Christ.  3.  The  relationship  between  Christ  and  His  people  is  not  exhausted  by 
euch  images  as  shepherd,  husband,  &o.,  which  are  external,  however  intimate. 
Persons  may  be  near  and  yet  be  utter  strangers.  8.  This  relation  is  internal  a& 
the  branch  is  in  the  vine,  than  which  nothing  can  be  closer.  II.  An  endcbino^ 
RELATION.  All  other  relations,  parent  and  child,  husband  and  wife,  teacher  and 
scholar,  are  terminable ;  but  this  is  not  aifected  by  the  vicissitudes  of  time.  It  is 
everlasting ;  by  faith  now,  by  sight  by  and  by.  III.  An  intensely  pbactical 
RELATION.  1.  There  are  many  relations  that  are  merely  nominal  and  honorary, 
gratifying  to  ambition,  but  conveying  no  substantial  good.  It  is  not  so  with  this. 
For  Christ  is  in  His  people.  1.  As  the  ground  of  their  pardon  and  acceptance. 
2.  As  their  best  Friend.  We  turn  to  a  real  friend — (1)  To  counsel  us  in  perplexity. 
(2)  To  lessen  our  sorrow.  (3)  To  heighten  our  joys.  Jesus  does  all  this  as  the 
best  earthly  friend  can  never  do.  Conclusion  :  The  subject  sugj^ests  its  proud 
point  of  distinction  between  the  man  who  is  a  Christian  and  the  man  who  is  not. 

is.  NeiPton,  D.D.)        The  true  Christ  of  Man  is — I.  In  the  soul.     He  is   not   the 
/hrist  of  ihe  Book  and  the  creed  merely.    He  is  in  the  soul — 1.  As  the  chiei 


lot  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  fc 

object  of  love.  2.  The  chief  subject  of  thought.  3.  The  chief  sovereign  of 
activities.  II.  The  inspibeh  of  the  soblimest  hope.  This  hope  is — 1.  Directed 
to  the  highest  object,  "  glory."  The  glory  of  goodness,  of  moral  assimilation  with 
God.  Hope  for  goodness  is  the  virtuous  hope.  2.  Based  on  the  surest  foundatioa 
—Christ's  word  and  influence.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  28.  Whom  we  preach. — Th^  Apostolic  Ministry  .^—1.  Ira  8TTB8tanos. 
*'  Christ."  1.  In  the  dignity  of  His  person  (verses  12-19.)  2.  Therefore  Christ 
only.  Some  preach  themselves,  morality,  human  systems,  philosophy.  3.  Christ 
always.  If  I  come  into  the  pulpit  with  another  theme,  concluding  I  shall  have 
other  opportunities,  and  so  compel  Him  to  give  place,  it  may  be  the  last  time 
I  shall  preach.  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory.  This  includes  two  things — 
(1)  Christ,  in  His  intimate  relation  to  the  believer.  (2)  Christ,  in  all  the  animating 
hopes  of  futurity.  "  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory."  This  can  counteract  the 
darkness  of  the  future.  II.  Its  manner.  1.  Warning.  (1)  Fidelity  demands  this. 
The  world  must  not  only  be  instructed,  but  admonished.  Let  us  take  warning.  A 
few  blessings  yet  remain;  but  they  will  soon  be  gone;  let  us  not  trifle  with  them  also. 
^2)  The  voice  of  death  urges  this  upon  us.  (Eead  Ezek.  xxxiii.  2-9.)  2.  Teach- 
ing.  Here  two  things  are  essential.  (1)  Simplicity.  No  one  can  teach  who  does 
not  make  himself  understood.  There  must  be  ability  to  communicate.  Some  lock 
up  their  ideas  as  the  miser  his  wealth,  and  perishes  with  it.  (2)  Diligence  also  is 
necessary.  We  must  be  "  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season."  (3)  This  must  be 
done  individually,  "teaching  every  mau."  Here  much  care,  prudence,  aud  promp- 
titude is  required.  Let  men  see  how  intent  we  are  on  their  salvation.  (4)  Wisely 
also — "  In  all  wisdom,"  seeking  out  suitable  season  to  speak  to  the  heart.  Various 
means  must  be  employed,  and  we  must  accommodate  ourselves  to  the  capacities  of 
those  whom  we  address.  III.  Its  end.  1.  A  final  presentation.  Christ  is  to 
present  all  to  the  Father,  and  the  minister  all  to  the  Son.  2.  A  personal  presenta- 
tion, i.e.,  all  must  stand  before  Him.  3.  A  presentation  of  acceptance ;  therefore 
all  will  not  be  presented.  4.  It  is  a  perfect  presentation — "  That  we  may  present 
every  man  perfect."  (1)  It  is  a  perfection  of  knowledge — "  What  I  do,  thou 
knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."  (2)  It  is  a  perfection  in 
righteousness.  (3)  As  to  the  perfection  of  glory,  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,"  &o.  "  It 
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  5.  It  is  a  ministerial  presentation.  The 
minister  must  of  necessity  be  a  witness  as  to  the  reception  or  rejection  of  his 
ministry,  and  give  an  account.  (W.  B.  Collyer,  D.D.)  I.  The  geeat  subject  of 
an  evangelical  ministry.  We  preach  Christ.  1.  In  the  dignity  of  His  person. 
2.  His  deep  humiliation.  3.  His  infinite  atonement.  4.  His  distinct  offices  ag 
Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  5.  The  fulness  and  sufficiency  of  His  grace  for  all  the 
purposes  ol  our  present,  complete,  and  everlasting  salvation.  6.  The  purity  of  Hia 
character,  "leaving  ns  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His  steps."  7.  As  our 
great  Leader  to  a  mighty  and  glorious  victory.  8.  As  our  judge.  II.  The  manneb 
IN  which  this  subject  is  to  be  applied  to  the  ttndebstandino  and  the  conscibncb. 
1.  Warning  every  man  of  the  danger  of  (1)  Denying  Christ.  (2)  Substituting  any- 
thing in  the  room  of  Christ.  (3)  Slighting  Christ  or  neglecting  Him  in  any  way. 
(4)  Perverting  the  grace  of  Christ  or  neglecting  to  improve  it.  2.  Teaching  every 
man  (1)  His  privilege — to  enjoy  through  Christ  remission  of  sins — to  be  adopted 
into  God's  family — to  be  sanctified  wholly — to  obtain  a  seat  at  last  in  the  kingdom 
of  God's  glory.  (2)  The  way  to  obtain  these  privileges — "  Kepentance  toward  God 
and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (3)  His  duty  (a)  to  God,  to  love,  serve, 
honour,  and  obey  Him,  and  that  until  death ;  (5)  to  the  nation,  of  which  he  is  a 
subject,  "to  fear  God  and  work  righteousness.",  (c)  To  the  world,  of  whichghe  is 
a  citizen.  III.  The  gkeat  end  which  a  Chkistian  minister  has  to  keep  in  view. 
That  every  man  may  be — 1.  Perfectly  instructed  in  the  doctrines,  privileges,  and 
duties  of  the  Christian  faith.  2.  Perfected  in  the  love  of  Christ.  3.  So  as  to  be 
presented  blameless  at  the  coming  of  Christ.  {J.  Waterhouse.)  I.  Whom  a  GospeIi 
Minister  should  preach.  Christ.  1.  On  the  cross.  No  other  sacrifice  but 
His  could  avail  to  roU  the  reproach  from  a  guilty  world.  There  is  salvation  in 
none  other.  2.  In  the  grave  triumphing  over  death,  bringing  life  and  immortality 
to  light,  becoming  the  pledge  of  our  resurrection.  3.  On  the  throne  able  to  save, 
protect,  rule.  4.  On  the  judgment-seat.  II.  How  a  gospel  minister  shoulb 
PREACH.  1,  Warning  every  man  (1)  by  the  threatenings  of  the  Divine  law  ;  (2)  of 
his  responsibility  for  religious  privileges.  2.  Teaching  every  man — (1)  The  love  of 
"God.     (2)  The  duty  of  man.     III.  The  great  end  of  this  pbeachimo.     To  present 


<aup.  L]  COLOSSIANS.  loa 

-every  man — 1.  Perfect  in  the  attributes  of  a  renewed  and  glorified  nature.  9.  To 
be  secured  by  union  with  Christ.  (D.  Moore,  31. A.)  I.  The  Natube  of  the 
Apostolic  Ministry — '*  Preach."  1.  Paul  was  no  ritualist.  The  day  for  ritualism 
was  gone  by.  The  Christ  dimly  seen  in  the  world's  childhood  through  the  old 
economy  was  now  fully  revealed,  and  must  be  presented  in  a  manner  suited  to  the 
reason  and  heart  of  full-grown  men.  2.  Paul  had  no  philosophy  to  elaborate  ;  the 
realities  of  the  gospel  had  superseded  its  speculations  useful  as  they  once  were. 
8.  Paul  was  a  preacher.  He  proclaimed  war  against  sinners,  peace  to  the  penitent. 
U,  Its  subject.  1,  A  personal  act,  not  a  sublime  legend  or  poetic  myth. 
2.  Christ  as  distinguished  from  every  other  person.  (1)  From  angelic  or  saintly 
mediators.  (2)  From  himself,  "  We  preach  not  ourselves,"  etc.  3.  Christ  as  a 
Person  as  distinguished  from  Christianity  or  any  part  of  it  as  a  thing.  Christ,  and 
ocl  merely  (1)  Christ's  example.  (2)  Christian  theology.  (3)  The  sacraments. 
III.  Its  Chakacteristic  was  to  so  present  Christ  that  the  Master  might  do  His  own 
work  in  His  own  way.  Hence  his  ministry  was — 1.  Admonitory.  (1)  He  preached 
«  Saviour.  So  as  to'  show  that  the  cost  and  character  of  His  salvation  were  such 
as  to  involve  those  to  whom  He  was  oiiered  in  a  tremendous  responsibility.  (2) 
He  preached  Christ  as  the  only  Saviour,  and  thus  set  the  issues  of  accepting  or 
rejecting  Him  clearly  before  men.  (3)  As  the  Judge.  2.  Instructive.  Paul 
teaches  every  man  by  (1)  Setting  forth  the  Instructor.  (2)  The  Teacher  as  the 
education — "  That  I  may  know  Him. "  (3)  Wise.  "In  all  wisdom."  (4)  Universal. 
"Everyman."  IV.  Its  aim.  1.  Christ  is  the  sphere  in  which  Christian  perfection 
is  to  be  attained.  2.  In  Christ  the  believer  is  perfect.  3.  Perfect  in  Christ  we  are 
presented  for  acceptance,  consecration,  work,  warfare,  and  reward.  {J.  W.  Bum.) 
The  Chrutian  Ministry.  The  false  teachers  had  a  good  deal  to  say  about  a  higher 
wisdom  reserved  for  the  initiated.  They  apparently  treated  the  Apostolic  teaching 
as  trivial  rudiments  only  fit  for  the  vulgar  crowd.  They  had  their  initiated  class 
to  whom  their  mysteries  were  entrusted  in  whispers.  Such  absurdities  excited 
Paul's  special  abhorrence.  He  had  broken  with  Judaism  on  the  very  ground  of  its 
exolusiveness.  These  dreamers  were  trying  to  enforce  an  intellectual  exclusivenesa 
quite  as  opposed  to  the  gospel.  So  the  apostle  takes  up  their  phrases — "  Mystery," 
"perfect"  or  initiated,  "wisdom,"  and  presses  them  into  the  service  of  the 
.principle  that  the  most  recondite  secrets  of  the  gospel  were  for  every  man.  Our 
business  is  to  tell  out  as  fully  and  loudly  as  we  can  to  all,  all  the  vrisdom  we  have 
learned,  I.  The  Apostle's  statement  of  His  work.  1.  Not  a  theory  or  a  system, 
but  a  living  Person.  (1)  The  peculiarity  of  Christianity  is  that  you  cannot  take  its 
message  and  put  aside  Christ.  His  Person  is  inextricably  intertwined  with  His 
teaching,  which  centres  in  Him  who  is  "  The  Truth."  You  may  separate  between 
Buddha's  and  Confueius's  teaching  and  themselves,  but  you  cannot  do  so  with  Jesus. 
If  we  think  less  of  Him  than  Paul  does  in  this  chapter,  we  shall  scarcely  feel  that 
He  should  be  the  preachers  theme ;  but  if  He  is  to  us  what  He  was  to  him,  then  oar 
own  message  will  be  "  Behold  the  Lamb."  Let  who  will  preach  abstractions,  the 
Christian  minister  has  to  preach  Christ.  (2)  To  preach  Him  is  to  set  forth  His 
person,  and  the  facts  of  His  life  and  death,  and  to  accompany  these  with  that 
explanation  which  turns  a  biography  into  a  gospel.  "  The  gospel  which  "  Paul 
preached  was  "how  that  Christ  died."  That  is  biography,  and  to  stop  there  is 
not  to  preach  Christ ;  but  add  "  for  our  sins,"  etc.,  and  you  preach  Christ.  (3)  A 
ministry  of  which  Christ  is  manifestly  the  centre  may  sweep  a  wide  circumference, 
and  include  many  themes.  The  requirement  bars  out  no  province  of  thought  or 
experience,  but  demands  that  all  themes  should  lead  up  to  Christ,  and  that  His 
name,  like  some  deep  tone  on  an  organ,  shall  be  heard  sounding  on  through  all  the 
ripple  and  change  of  the  higher  notes.  2.  The  manner  of  the  Apostle's  activity. 
(1)  "  We  proclaim,"  tell  out  fully,  clearly,  earnestly.  We  are  not  muttering 
mystery-mongers.  We  cry  in  the  streets  to  every  man.  (2)  This  implies  that  the 
speaker  has  a  message,  that  he  is  not  a  speaker  of  his  own  words  or  thoughts,  bat 
of  what  has  been  told  him  to  tell.  3.  This  connection  of  the  minister's  office. 
(1)  Contrasts  with  the  priestly  theory.  "  We  preach,"  not  we  sacrifice,  work  miracles 
at  any  altar,  or  impart  grace  by  any  rites,  but  by  the  manifestation  of  the  truth 
discharge  our  office,  and  spread  the  blessings  of  Christ.  (2)  Contrasts  with  the 
false  teacher's  style  of  speech,  which  finds  its  parallel  in  much  modern  talk.  Their 
basiness  was  to  argue  and  refine  and  speculate.  They  sat  in  a  lecturer's  chair  ;  we 
stand  in  a  preacher's  pulpit.  If  the  Christian  minister  allows  the  philosopher  in 
him  to  overpower  the  herald,  and  substitutes  his  thoughts  about  the  message  oi  his 
arguments  in  favour  of  it  for  the  message  itsalf,  he  abdicates  his  office.     4.   Wa 


1.04  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (oa4».  I. 

hear  many  demands  to-day  for  a  "higher  type  of  preaching,"  which  I  would 
heartily  echo,  if  only  it  be  preaching,  the  proclamation  of  the  great  facta  ot 
Christ's  work.  But  many  are  trying  to  play  up  to  the  requirements  ot 
the  age  by  turning  their  sermons  into  disserlations,  philosophical,  moral, 
or  sesthetio.  We  need  to  fall  back  upon  this  "Whom  we  preach,"  and 
oppose  that  to  the  demands  of  an  age  one  half  of  which  "  require 
a  sign,"  and  would  degrade  the  minister  into  a  priest,  and  the  other  calls 
for  "  wisdom,"  and  would  turn  him  into  a  professor.  II.  The  vaetinq  methods 
BY  WHICH  THIS  ONE  GREAT  END  IS  PURSUED.  1.  Warciug  or  admonishing.  (1) 
The  teacliing  of  morality  is  an  essential  part  of  preaching  Christ.  But  the  moral 
teaching  which  is  confined  to  general  principles  is  woefully  like  repeating  platitudes 
and  firing  blank  cartridges ;  yet  if  the  preacher  goes  beyond  these  toothless 
generalities,  he  is  met  with  the  cry  of  "  personalities."  But  there  is  no  preaching 
Christ  completely  which  does  not  include  plain  speaking  about  plain  duties.  (2) 
Nor  is  such  preaching  complete  without  plain  warning  of  the  end  of  sin.  People 
like  to  have  the  smooth  side  of  truth  always  uppermost ;  but  there  are  no  rougher 
words  about  what  wrong-doers  come  to  than  some  of  Christ's;  and  he  has  only 
given  one  half  of  his  Master's  message  who  hides  or  softens  "  the  wages  of  sin  is 
death."  (3)  But  all  this  must  be  connected  with  and  built  on  Christ.  Christian 
morality  has  Jesus  for  its  perfect  exemplar.  His  love  for  its  motive,  His  grace  for 
its  power.  Nothing  is  more  impotent  than  mere  moral  teaching.  2.  "  Teach- 
ing." In  the  facts  of  Christ's  life  and  death,  as  we  grow  up  to  understand  them, 
we  get  to  see  more  and  more  the  key  to  all  things,  and  the  Christian  minister's 
business  is  to  be  ever  learning  and  teaching  more  and  more  of  the  manifold  wisdom 
of  God.  He  must  seek  to  present  all  sides  of  truth,  teaching  all  wisdom,  and  so 
escaping  from  his  own  limited  manntrisms.  The  Christian  ministry  is  distinctly 
educational,  and  is  more  than  the  "siiiple  preaching  "  which  is  the  "  avoidance  of 
mere  dogma  "  or  the  repetition  of  "  B»'lieve."  The  New  Testament  and  common 
sense  require  more  from  a  teacher.  3.  Observe  the  repetition  of  "every  man," 
which  is  Paul's  protest  against  an  intellectual  aristocracy,  and  his  affirmation  that 
Christianity  is  for  all.  III.  The  ultimate  end  of  these  Divine  methods.  1. 
Presentation  at  the  Judgment.  2.  Perfection.  The  word  may  be  used  in  its 
technical  meaning  of  "initiated,"  but  negatively  it  implies  the  entire  removal  of 
all  defects,  and  positively  the  complete  possession  of  all  that  belongs  to  human 
nature  as  God  meant  it  to  be.  3.  This  completeness  is  attainable  only  in  Christ, 
by  that  vital  union  with  Him  brought  about  by  faith,  which  will  pour  His  Spirit 
into  ours.  4.  This  is  possible  for  every  man.  There  are  no  hopeless  classes. 
IV.  The  struggle  and  the  strength  with  which  Paul  reaches  toward  this  aim. 
1.  He  has  found  that  he  cannot  do  his  work  easily.  That  great  purpose  made  a 
slave  of  him.  I  not  only  preach,  I  toil  like  a  man  tugging  at  an  oar,  and  putting 
all  his  might  into  each  stroke.  Perhaps  there  were  people  who  thought  the 
preacher's  life  an  easy  one,  and  so  the  apostle  had  to  insist  that  the  most  exhaus- 
tive work  is  that  of  heart  and  brain.  The  minister  who  is  afraid  of  putting  all  his 
strength  into  his  work,  up  to  the  point  of  weariness,  will  never  do  much  good. 
S.  There  must  be  not  only  toil,  but  conflict,  "  striving,"  contending  with 
hindrances,  without  and  within,  which  sought  to  mar  his  work.  3.  Now  for  the 
strength.  The  measure  of  our  power  is  Christ's  power  in  us.  He  whose  presence 
makes  the  struggle  necessary,  by  His  presence  strengthens  us  for  it.  We  have 
not  only  His  presence  beside  us  as  an  ally,  but  His  grace  within  us.  Let  us  take 
courage  then  for  all  work  and  conflict.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christ  pereonally 
the  subject  of  preaching : — Suppose  that  a  man  has  heard  of  a  great  physician 
who  understands  his  complaint.  He  has  travelled  a  great  many  miles  to  see  this 
celebrated  doctor ;  but  when  he  gets  to  the  door  they  tell  him  that  he  is  out. 
•'Well,"  says  he,  "  then  I  must  wait  till  he  is  in."  "You  need  not  wait,"  they 
reply,  "  his  assistant  is  at  home."  The  sufl'ering  man,  who  has  been  often  dis- 
appointed, answers,  "  I  do  not  care  about  his  assistant,  I  want  to  see  the  man 
himself :  mine  is  a  desperate  case,  but  I  have  heard  that  this  physician  has  cured 
the  like ;  I  must,  therefore,  see  fem."  "Well,"  say  they,  "he  is  out;  but  there 
are  his  books;  you  can  see  his  books."  "Thank  you,"  he  says,  "I  cannot  be 
content  with  his  books ;  I  want  the  living  man,  and  nothing  less.  It  is  to  him 
that  I  must  speak,  and  from  him  I  will  receive  instructions."  "  Do  you  see  that 
cabinet?"  "Yes."  "It  is  full  of  his  medicines."  The  sick  man  answers,  "I 
dare  say  they  are  very  good,  but  they  are  of  no  use  to  me  without  the  doctor :  I 
want  their  owner  to  prescribe  for  me,  or  I  shall  die  of  my  disease."    "But  see," 


CHA».  I.J  COLOSSIANS.  105 

cries  one,  "  here  is  a  person  who  has  been  cured  by  him,  a  man  of  great  experience, 
who  has  been  present  at  many  remarkable  operations.  Go  into  the  inquiry-room 
with  him,  and  he  will  tell  you  all  about  the  mode  of  cure."  The  afflicted  man 
answers,  "I  am  much  obliged  to  you,  but  all  your  talk  only  makes  me  long  the 
more  to  see  the  doctor.  I  came  to  see  him,  and  I  am  not  going  to  be  put  off  with 
anything  else.  I  must  see  the  man  himself,  for  myself.  He  has  made  my  disease 
a  speciality;  he  knows  how  to  handle  my  case,  and  I  will  stop  till  I  see  him," 
Now,  if  you  are  seeking  Christ,  imitate  this  sick  man,  or  else  you  will  miss  the 
mark  altogether.  Never  be  put  off  with  books  or  conversations.  Be  not  content 
with  Christian  people  talking  to  you,  or  preachers  preaching  to  you,  or  the  Bible 
being  read  to  you,  or  prayers  being  offered  for  you.  Anything  short  of  Jesus  will 
leave  you  short  of  salvation.  You  have  to  reach  Christ,  and  touch  Christ,  and 
nothing  short  of  this  will  serve  your  turn.  Picture  the  case  of  the  prodigal  son 
when  he  went  home.  Suppose  when  he  reached  the  house  the  elder  brother  had 
come  i^J  meet  him.  I  must  make  a  supposition  that  the  elder  brother  had  made 
Limself  amiable  ;  and  then  I  hear  him  say,  "  Come  in,  brother;  welcome  home  !  " 
But  I  see  the  returning  one  stand  there  with  the  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  I  hear  him 
lament,  "  I  want  to  see  my  father.  I  must  tell  him  that  I  have  sinned  and  done 
evil  in  his  sight."  An  old  servant  whispers,  "Master  John,  I  am  glad  to  see 
you  back.  Be  happy,  for  all  the  servants  are  rejoiced  to  hear  the  sound  of  your 
voice.  It  is  true  your  father  will  not  see  you,  but  he  has  ordered  the  fatted  calf 
to  be  killed  for  you  ;  and  here  is  the  best  robe,  and  a  ring,  and  shoes  for  your  feet, 
and  we  are  told  to  put  them  upon  you."  All  this  would  not  content  the  poor 
penitent.  I  think  I  hear  him  cry — "  I  do  not  despise  anything  my  father  gives 
me,  for  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  as  his  hired  servant ;  but  what  is  all  this  unless  I 
see  his  face,  and  know  that  he  forgives  me  ?  "  We  are  not  content  to  preach  unless 
Jesus  Himself  be  the  theme.  We  do  not  set  before  you  something  about  Christ, 
nor  something  that  belongs  to  Christ,  nor  something  procured  by  Christ,  nor  some- 
body that  has  known  Christ,  nor  some  truth  which  extols  Christ ;  but  we  preach 
Christ  crucified.  We  preach  not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Ministerial  faithfulness: — You  will  be  interested  in  hearing  the 
particulars  of  the  final  interview  between  the  Prince  of  Wales  (afterwards  George 
IV.)  and  the  late  Bishop  of  London  (Porteus),  which  have  lately  been  communi- 
efct«d  to  me.  Among  other  good  people  with  whom  my  infonnant  is  intimate  ia 
Mr.  Owen,  minister  of  Fulham,  who  was  in  a  manner  the  Bishop's  parish  clergy- 
man, and  long  his  chaplain.  It  seems  his  Boyal  Highness  had  sent  out  a 
summons  for  a  great  military  review,  which  was  to  take  place  on  a  Sunday.  The 
Bishop  had  been  confined  to  his  house,  and  did  not  hope,  nor,  I  suppose,  wish,  ever 
in  this  world  to  go  out  again.  He  ordered  his  carriage,  however,  upon  hearing  this, 
proceeded  to  Carlton  House,  and  waited  upon  the  Prince,  who  received  him  very 
graciously.  He  said,  "I  am  come,  sir,  urged  by  my  regard  to  you,  to  your 
father,  and  to  this  great  nation,  who  are  anxiously  beholding  every  public  action 
of  yours.  I  am  on  the  verge  of  time ;  new  prospects  open  to  me ;  the  favour  of 
human  beings,  or  their  displeasure,  is  as  nothing  to  me  now.  I  am  come  to  warn 
your  Boyal  Highness  of  the  awful  consequences  of  your  breaking  down  the  very 
little  that  remains  of  distinction  to  the  day  that  the  Author  of  all  power  has 
hallowed,  and  set  apart  for  Himself."  He  went  on  in  pathetic  terms  to  represent 
the  awful  responsibility  to  which  the  Prince  exposed  himself,  and  how  much  benefit 
or  injury  might  result  to  the  immortal  souls  of  millions  by  his  consulting  or 
neglecting  the  revealed  will  of  the  King  of  kings ;  and,  after  much  tender  and 
awful  exhortation,  concluded  with  saying,  "  You  see  how  your  father,  greatly  your 
inferior  in  talent  and  capacity,  has  been  a  blessing  to  all  around  him  and  to  the 
nation  at  large,  because  he  made  it  the  study  and  business  of  his  life  to  exert  all  his 
abilities  for  the  good  of  his  people,  to  study  and  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  to  give 
an  example  to  the  world  of  a  life  regulated  by  the  precepts  of  Christian  morality ; 
he  has  been  an  object  of  respect  and  veneration  to  the  whole  world  for  so  doing  it. 
If  he  has  done  much,  you,  with  your  excellent  abilities  and  pleasing  and  popular 
manners,  may  do  much  more.  It  is  impossible  for  you  to  remain  stationary  in  this 
avrful  crisis ;  you  must  rise  to  true  glory  and  renown,  and  lead  millions  in  the  same 
path  by  the  power  of  your  example,  or  sink  to  sudden  and  perpetual  ruin,  aggra- 
vated by  the  great  numbers  whom  your  fall  will  diaw  with  you  to  the  same 
destruction.  And  now,  were  I  able  to  rise,  or  were  ai.y  one  here  who  would  assist 
me,  I  Bhoold,  with  the  awful  feeUng  of  a  dying  man,  give  my  last  blessing  to  your 
Boyal  Highness."    The  Prince  upon  this  burst  into  tears,  and  fell  on  his  knees 


10«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

before  the  Bishop,  who  bestowed  upon  him,  with  folded  hands,  his  dying  benedic- 
tion ;  the  Prince  then,  in  the  most  gracious  and  affecting  manner,  assisted  him 
himself  to  go  down,  and  put  him  into  his  carriage.  The  Bishop  went  home,  nerer 
came  out  again,  and  died  the  fifth  day  after.  On  hearing  of  his  death,  the  Prince 
shut  himself  up,  and  was  heard  by  his  attendants  to  sob  as  under  deep  affliction. 
I  think  I  have  now  given  you  a  brief  but  faithful  account  of  this  transaction  as  I 
heard  it.  {Memoirs  of  Mrs.  Grant  of  Laggan.)  Sinners  must  be  warned  : — John 
Eliaa  was  a  Welsh  preacher  of  great  power.  On  one  occasion  he  went  to  Ehuddlan 
to  preach  in  the  open  air  on  Sunday,  during  which  a  fair  was  held  there  to  sell 
and  buy  articles  used  in  the  time  of  harvest.  Scythes,  sickles,  etc.,  were  sold  there 
on  that  day.  Crowds  of  ungodly  people  were  present.  Mr.  Elias  ascended  some 
steps  near  a  public-house,  as  a  messenger  of  God  to  denounce  the  desecration  of 
His  day.  His  prayer  arrested  at  the  commencement  the  attention  of  all  present. 
He  acknowledged  with  trembling  voice  how  the  people  in  the  fair  were  bringing 
God's  wrath  upon  their  heads  by  violating  His  holy  day.  The  contagion  of  serious 
apprehension  of  danger  spread  through  the  throngs  in  the  fair.  They  hid  their 
sickles  and  scythes  as  if  the  Judge  of  the  world  had  come  to  call  them  to  account 
for  their  rebellion  against  Him.  Mirth  and  music  were  hushed  under  the  power  of 
the  dread  which  ruled  all  hearts.  At  the  conclusion  of  his  discourse  the  people 
quietly  but  quickly  wended  their  way  toward  home,  glad  that  a  storm  of  fire  and 
brimstone  had  not  consumed  them.  On  preaching  Christ : — There  was  a  devoted 
clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England,  Mr.  Mackenzie,  of  HoUoway,  London,  who 
used  to  go  down  to  Wemyss  Bay  every  year  for  his  holiday ;  and  then  he  would 
also  preach  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  God  laid  His  hand  heavily  upon 
that  godly  minister,  and  when  he  was  lying  on  his  death-bed,  the  saintly  Mr. 
Pennef ather,  of  Mildmay,  went  to  see  him ;  and  the  dying  minister  looked  up  at 
his  kind  visitor  and  said,  "  If  God  should  raise  me  up  from  this  sick  bed,  I  should 
not  preach  the  doctrines  less,  but  I  should  preach  the  person  of  Christ  more."  [Mr. 
WiUon.)  Motives  to  earnestness  : — We  read  that  the  Rev.  Charles  Simeon  kept 
the  picture  of  Henry  Martyn  in  his  study.  Move  where  he  would  through  the 
apartment,  it  seemed  to  keep  its  eyes  upon  him,  and  ever  to  say  to  him,  "  Be 
earnest,  be  earnest ;  don't  trifle,  don't  trifle  "  ;  and  the  good  Simeon  would  gently 
bow  to  the  speaking  picture,  and,  with  a  smile,  reply,  *'  Yes,  I  will  be  in  earnest ; 
I  will,  I  will  be  in  earnest ;  I  will  not  trifle,  for  souls  are  perishing,  and  Jesus  is 
to  b«  glorified."  Oh,  Christian,  look  away  to  Martyn's  Master,  to  Simeon's 
Savionr,  to  the  omniscient  One.  Ever  realize  the  inspection  of  His  eye,  and  hear 
His  voice  of  tenderest  importunity,  "  Be  instant ;  entreat  with  all  long-suffering 
and  tears.  Be  faithful  unto  death ;  for  lo,  I  come  quickly,  and  My  reward  is  with 
Me."  (S.  J.  Moore.)  An  earnest  preacher  : — When  Dr.  Chalmers  occupied  the 
chair  of  philosophy  in  the  College  of  St.  Andrews,  he  used  to  gather  into  his  own 
house  each  Sabbath  evening  the  poorest  and  most  ignorant  of  the  vagrant  children 
of  the  neighbourhood  ;  and  his  biography  states  that  for  that  audience  he  prepared 
himself  as  carefully,  with  his  pen  in  his  hand,  as  for  his  class  in  the  University. 
So,  on  a  winter  day,  through  frost,  and  in  the  face  of  a  driving  snow-storm,  jon 
might  have  seen  him  walking  five  miles  to  fulfil  an  appointment  of  religious 
worship  with  a  httle  company  of  rustic  people  at  Kihnany — and  there,  amid  some 
ilhterate,  shivering  cottagers,  too  few  for  a  church  or  chapel,  met  in  a  damp  room 
— an  audience  that  many  men  would  have  thought  it  expedient  to  dismiss  at  once, 
"  on  account  of  the  weather,"  and  many  more  would  have  put  off  with  some  crude, 
unpremeditated  talk — he  preached  as  laboured  and  as  eloquent  a  sermon  as  would 
have  moved  to  rapture  and  wonder  the  learning  and  fashion  of  Glasgow  or  of 
London.  It  is  only  of  such  earnest  stuff  as  this  that  the  truly  commanding  per- 
sons in  any  of  the  elevated  ranges  of  action  or  of  learning  are  made.  Faithful- 
ness reciprocated  : — I  was  seventeen  years  old  when  I  went  to  Boston.  On  Sunday 
I  went  into  a  Bible-class  in  one  of  the  churches.  I  had  been  there  bat  a  few  Sun- 
days before  that  teacher  came  down  into  the  shoe-store  where  I  was  engaged,  and 
put  his  hand  on  my  shoulder,  and  spoke  to  me  about  my  soul.  He  was  the  first 
man  |hat  ever  spoke  to  me  about  my  soul.  He  shed  tears.  I  forget  now  what  he 
said,  but  I  never  vrill  forget  the  pressure  of  his  hand  and  those  tears.  Seventeen 
years  rolled  away,  and  one  dark,  rainy  night  I  was  speaking  in  Worcester ;  a  yotmg 
man,  after  the  meeting,  came  up  the  aisle  and  said  to  me,  "  I  have  heard  my 
father  speak  of  you,  so  after  that  I  thought  I  would  Uke  to  become  acquainted 
with  you."  "  Who  is  your  father  ?  "  "  Edward  Kemble."  My  old  teacher  I  The 
thought  passed  across  my  mind,  "  Oh,  if  I  could  do  for  his  son  what  he  did  for 


OKAP.  Lj  COLOSSIANS.  107 

me."  I  put  my  hand  on  his  shoulder,  and  said,  "  Henry,  are  yon  a  Christian  ?  " 
The  tears  started  as  he  said,  "No,  sir;  but  would  like  to  be."  Thank  God  for 
that  1  I  preached  Christ  to  him ;  but  he  could  believe  all  that  was  in  the  Bible 
•gainst  sinners,  like  many  others,  but  not  what  was  for  them.  .  ,  .  Briefly,  he 
believed  at  last,  and  comforted  his  dying  mother  with  the  knowledge  of  this  fact 
And  his  sister's  conversion  followed.  (D.  L.  Moody.)  Earnestness  in  waitiing  men  : — 
A  story  is  told  of  a  traveller  who  was  journeying  in  the  darkness  along  a  road  that 
led  to  a  deep  and  rapid  river,  which,  swollen  by  sudden  rains,  was  chafing  and 
ro&ring  within  its  precipitous  banks.  The  bridge  that  crossed  the  stream  had 
been  swept  away  by  the  torrent,  but  he  knew  it  not.  A  man  met  him,  and  after 
inquiring  whither  he  was  bound,  said  to  him  in  an  indifferent  way,  "  Are  you 
aware  that  the  bridge  is  gone?"  "No,"  was  the  answer.  "Why  do  you  think 
60  ?  "  "Oh,  I  heard  such  a  report  this  afternoon,  and  I  think  you  had  better  not 
proceed."  Deceived  by  the  hesitating  and  undecided  manner,  the  traveller  pushed 
onward.  Soon  another,  meeting  him,  cried  out  in  consternation,  "  Sir,  sir,  the 
bridge  is  gone."  "  Oh,  yes,"  replied  the  wayfarer,  "  some  one  told  me  tlmt  story 
a  little  distance  back  ;  but  from  the  careless  tone  with  which  he  told  it,  I  am  sure 
it  is  an  idle  talk."  "  Oh,  it  is  true,  it  is  true  !  "  exclaimed  the  other.  "  I  know 
the  bridge  is  gone,  for  I  barely  escaped  being  carried  away  with  it  myself.  Danger 
is  before  you,  and  you  must  not  go  on."  And  in  the  excitement  of  Lis  feelings  he 
grasped  him  by  the  hands,  and  besought  him  not  to  rush  upon  manifest  destruc- 
tion. Convinced  by  the  earnest  voice,  eyes,  gesture,  the  traveller  turned  back  and 
was  saved.  (W.  Baxendale.)  Perfect  In  Christ  Jesua. — The  exalted  aim  of  the 
Christian  minister : — In  one  of  the  compartments  of  the  London  Express  the  other 
day,  an  eminent  artist  was  trying  to  hurt  the  feehngs  of  a  Baptist  minister  who 
was  travelling  in  his  company.  The  artist  said,  contemptuously,  "  Preaching  la 
such  a  very  low  occupation  I  "  The  minister  replied,  "  Pray,  sir,  will  you  tell 
me  what  is  your  chief  object  inUfe?"  The  painter  said,  "Why,  of  course,  my 
chief  object  is  to  make  great  pictures."  The  minister  observed,  "  Well,  that  may 
be  ft  worthy  object ;  but,  in  my  opinion,  the  highest  aim  in  life  is  to  make  good 
men.  Pictures  perish  ;  men  are  everlasting."  "  Ah,"  said  the  painter,  "  you  are 
right ;  the  humblest  preacher  who  by  example  as  well  as  precept  inspires  goodness 
in  men  is  much  more  useful  to  the  world  than  the  most  eminent  artist."  (W. 
Birch.)  I.  The  faithful  are  said  to  be  perfect.  1.  Comparatively  with  the 
unconverted.  Eeligion  will  make  a  man  perfect  in  comparison  of  that  which  by 
nature  men  can  attain  unto.  2.  They  may  be  said  to  be  perfect  who  want  nothing 
that  is  absolutely  necessary  for  salvation.  3.  In  righteousness  there  is  perfection, 
and  so  they  shall  be  absolutely  perfect  at  the  day  of  judgment,  and  are  already 
perfect  in  respect  of  justification ;  yea,  this  word  is  given  to  the  sanctification  of 
the  faithful,  and  that  two  ways— (1)  As  to  be  perfect  notes  nothing  else  but  to  be 
a  strong  man  in  Christ  (Heb.  v.  alt.).  (2)  As  to  be  upright  is  accepted  with  Ood 
for  perfection,  by  the  benefit  of  the  covenant  of  grace  and  the  intercession  of 
Christ.  Thus  I  think  the  very  word  is  used  in  these  places:  1  Cor.  ii.  6,  Phil.  iii. 
15,  James  i.  17,  Heb.  vi.  1,  12,  13.  Thus  there  is  perfection  in  doctrine  (Heb. 
Ti.  1),  in  faith  (James  ii.  22),  in  hope  (1  Peter  i.  13),  in  love  (1  John  iv.  18  and 
John  xvii.  23),  m  understanding  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20).  II.  But  who  is  a  STBOMa  man 
ZM  Christ    ob   a    feri-ect    man?      1.  He    that  can    forgive    his  enemies,  and 

Eray  for  them,  and  do  good  to  them  (Matt.  v.  48).  2.  He  that  finishes  his  work ; 
e  doth  not  begin  slightly  and  work  for  a  spirt,  but  perseveres  (John  xvii.  4).  3. 
He  that  holds  constant  amity  and  holy  communion  with  God  s  children  (1  John 
iv.  12;  John  xvii.  23).  4.  He  that  renounces  the  world,  denies  himself,  and 
consecrates  his  life  to  God  (Bom.  xii.  12).  5.  He  that  is  not  carried  away  with 
every  wind  of  doctrine,  but  follows  the  truth  with  all  constant  unmovableness 
(Eph.  iv.  13,  14).  6.  He  that  presseth  after  perfection  (Phil.  iii.  13,  14,  15,  x.  9). 
7.  He  that  hath  a  plerophory  or  full  assurance  of  the  will  of  God  towards  him 
(Col.  iv.  12).  8.  He  that  can  digest  the  stronger  doctrines  of  religion  (Heb.  v.  14). 
9.  Patience  hath  in  him  her  perfect  work  (James  i.  4).  10.  He  sins  not  in  word 
(James  iii.  12).  11.  He  keeps  the  word  (1  John  ii.  5).  12.  He  is  settled  in  the 
love  of  God,  and  hath  not  fear,  but  boldness  (1  John  iv.  17,  18).  (N.  Byfield.) 
Aim  at  perfection: — Aim  at  perfection  in  everything,  though  in  most  things  it  is 
onattainable.  They  who  aim  at  it  and  persevere  will  come  much  nearer  to  it  than 
those  whose  laziness  and  despondency  make  them  give  it  up  as  unattainable. 
(Lord  Chesterfield.)  Attaining  perfection: — At  present  the  believer  is  like  the 
marble  in  the  hands  of  the  sculptor ;  but  though  day  by  day  he  may  give  fresh 


10«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ^ 

touches  and  work  the  marble  into  greater  emulation  of  the  original,  the  resem- 
blance will  be  far  from  complete  until  death.  Each  fresh  degree  of  likeness  is  A 
fresh  advance  towards  perfection,  It  must  then  be  when  every  feature  is  moulded 
into  similitude,  when  all  traces  of  feebleness  and  depravity  are  swept  away  for 
ever,  the  statue  breathes,  and  the  picture  burns  with  Deity — it  must  be  that  then 
we  "  shall  be  tilled."  We  shall  look  on  the  descending  Mediator,  and,  as  though 
the  ardent  gaze  drew  down  celestial  fire,  we  shall  seem  instantly  to  pass  through 
the  refiner's  furnace,  and  leaving  behind  all  the  dishonour  of  the  grave,  and  all  the 
dross  of  corruptible  humanity,  spring  upward,  an  ethereal,  rapid-glowing  thing, 
Christ's  image  extracted  by  Christ's  lustre.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Growth  in 
perfection : — The  thing  which  is  most  perfect,  if  it  be  susceptible  of  growth  at  all, 
will  have  the  most  sure  and  rapid  growth.  Which  grows  most  and  in  the  best 
manner,  the  flower  which  is  whole  and  perfect  in  its  incipient  state,  or  that  which 
has  a  canker  in  it,  or  is  otherwise  injured  in  its  parts  ?  Which  will  grow  the  most 
rapidly  and  symmetrically,  the  child  which  is  perfect  in  its  infancy,  or  one  that  ia 
afflicted  with  some  malformation  ?  Facts  of  this  kind  make  it  clear  that,  althou§^ 
it  is  possible  for  a  person  who  is  partially  holy  to  grow  in  holiness,  a  person  who 
is  entirely  holy  wiU  grow  much  more.  (T.  G.  Vpham,  LL.D.)  Perfection  a 
life'i  work  : — The  process  of  Christian  perfection  is  like  that  which  a  portrait  goea 
through  under  the  hand  of  an  artist.  When  a  man  is  converted,  he  is  but  an 
outline  sketch  of  a  character  which  he  is  to  fiU  up.  He  first  lays  in  the  dead 
colouring ;  then  comes  the  work  of  laying  in  the  colours  ;  and  he  goes  on  day 
after  day,  week  after  week,  year  after  year,  blending  them  and  heightening  the 
effect.  It  is  a  life's  work ;  and  when  he  dies,  he  is  still  laying  in  and  blending 
the  colours  and  heightening  the  effect.     {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  29.  Wheretuito  I  also  labour,  striving  according  to  His  working. — Work 
in  UM  and  work  by  u* : — The  work  of  Christ  in  us  and  for  us  does  not  exempt  as 
from  work.  Nor  does  the  Holy  Spirit's  operation  supersede  human  effort,  but 
rather  excites  it.  This  truth  is  illustrated  in — I.  The  believeb's  salvation.  If 
any  man  be  saved,  the  work  within  is  entirely  wrought  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  but 
that  does  not  exempt  from,  but  necessitates,  energetic  labour.  To  enforce  this  we 
remark — 1.  That  the  Christian  life  is  always  described  as  a  thing  of  energy  :  as  a 
journey,  a  race,  a  boxing  match.  2.  That  there  is  no  illustration  in  Scripture 
which  allows  the  supposition  that  heaven  is  won  by  sloth.  That  is  everywhere 
condemned.  3.  That  it  is  natural  it  should  be  so.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  comes 
the  sinner  sees  his  danger,  and  exclaims,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  He 
sees  the  excellence  of  salvation,  and  is  desirous  of  finding  the  pearl  of  great  price 
at  all  costs.  Having  found  Christ,  the  believer  is  moved  at  once  to  glorify  Him 
with  all  his  powers.  4.  That  it  is  most  certain  that  all  saving  acts  must  be  per- 
formed by  the  man  himself.  Faith  is  the  gift  of  God,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  never 
believed  for  anybody.  Eepentance  is  His  work,  but  the  sinner  must  repent.  He 
helps  our  infirmities  in  prayer,  but  we  have  to  pray.  5.  That  if  He  were  not  made 
active,  but  one  simply  called  upon,  there  is  a  reduction  of  manhood  to  materialisnt. 
There  is  no  moral  good  or  evil  to  me  in  a  work  which  is  not  my  own.  In  the 
Square  of  St.  Mark,  at  Venice,  at  certain  hours  the  bell  of  the  clock  is  struck  by 
two  bronze  figures  as  large  as  life,  wielding  hammers.  Now,  nobody  ever  thought 
of  presenting  thanks  to  those  bronze  men  for  the  diligence  with  which  they  have 
struck  the  hours  ;  of  course,  they  cannot  help  it,  they  are  vrrought  upon  by 
machinery,  and  they  strike  the  hours  from  necessity.  Some  years  ago  a  stranger 
was  upon  the  top  of  the  tower,  and  incautiously  went  too  near  one  of  these  bronze 
men ;  his  time  was  come  to  strike  the  hoar ;  he  knocked  the  stranger  from  the 
battlement  of  the  tower  and  killed  him  ;  nobody  said  the  bronze  man  ought  to  be 
hanged ;  nobody  ever  laid  it  to  his  charge  at  all  There  was  no  moral  good  or 
moral  evil,  because  there  was  no  will  in  the  concern.  It  was  not  a  moral  act, 
because  no  mind  and  heart  gave  consent  to  it.  Am  I  to  beheve  that  grace  reduces 
men  to  this  ?  6.  I  warn  any  who  imagine  a  man  ia  a  merely  passive  being  in 
salvation  against  putting  their  theory  into  practice.  II.  Thb  uinistbt  or  th> 
8AINTS  IN  THB  CONVERSION  OF  oTHSBs.  The  HoIy  Spirit  alone  can  convert  a  sool, 
bat  wherever  He  works,  as  a  general  rale,  it  is  in  connection  with  the  earnest 
efforts  of  Christian  men.  This  is  clear — 1.  From  the  example  of  the  text.  Paal 
certifies  that  the  salvation  of  souls  is  the  sole  work  of  Christ,  but  he  declares  that 
He  laboured  "  agonizing."  Labouring  means — (1)  Abundant  work.  No  man  can 
be  said  to  labour  who  only  does  half  a  day's  work ;  and  a  sool  labourer  will  not 


«HAP.  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  109 

make  bis  work  a  by-play,  bnt  pat  in  long  bours,  and  be  ever  at  it.  (2)  Hard  work. 
He  is  no  labourer  wbo  takes  a  spade  to  play  with  it  as  a  little  child  apon  the  sand. 
^3)  Personal  work.  No  man  is  a  labourer  wbo  works  through  bis  servants ;  and 
the  power  of  the  Church  lies  in  the  personal  influence  of  her  members.  (4)  All 
this  must  have  combined  with  it  inward  soul  conflict.  If  your  heart  never  breaks 
for  another,  you  will  never  be  the  means  of  breaking  his  heart.  2.  This  is  plain 
from  the  work  itself.  (1)  Souls  are  not  converted,  as  a  rule,  without  previous 
prayer.  So  we  must  be  stirred  up  to  prayer,  and  the  petitions  God  hears  are  not 
those  of  people  half  asleep.  (2)  Souls  are  saved  instrnmentally  through  teaching, 
bat  not  cold,  dead  teaching.  Some  warn  souls  in  such  a  careless  tone  as  to  create 
anbelief.  (3)  Teaching  is  not  all ;  we  must  nse  earnest,  persevering  persuasion. 
8.  Earnest  zeal  is  a  natural  result  of  the  Spirit's  working  on  the  soul.  (1)  He 
sanotifles  in  each  the  natural  instinct  which  leads  them  to  wish  others  to  be  like 
themselves.  Having  experienced  salvation,  we  desire  others  to  have  the  same 
happiness.  (2)  He  bestirs  in  us  the  impulse  of  gratitude  to  Christ,  and  so  conse- 
oration  to  Him.  (3)  He  sanctifies  the  desire  for  the  prosperity  of  the  community 
to  which  we  belong,  and  so  we  ardently  labour  for  the  saccess  of  the  Charch.  4. 
The  whole  history  of  the  Church  oonflrms  what  has  been  stated,  oar  Lord's 
ministry,  Penteoost,  Chrysostom  and  Augustine,  Lather,  do.    {0.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


OHAPTEB  n. 

TaBi.  1-4.  For  I  would  that  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  I  hav«  for  yoiL— 

Minigterial  anxiety : — This  anxiety  was  occasioned  by  the  subtle  errors  preva- 
lent in  Colossas.  Error  cannot  come  into  collision  with  truth  without  creating 
confusion  of  ideas,  mental  distraction,  and  moral  restlessness.     This  anxiety  was — 

I.  Intensk.  The  thought  of  the  preceding  verse  is  here  expanded.  The  conflict 
refers  not  so  much  to  outward  trial,  &o.,  as  to  his  fervent  and  importunate  wrestling 
with  God.  The  error  must  have  been  serious  to  occasion  this  struggle;  great  soula 
are  not  affected  with  trifles.  People  little  know  what  their  pastors  pass  through. 
A  knowledge  of  this  anxiety,  however,  is  often  necessary  to  create  a  responsive 
sympathy,  and  to  teach  the  people  the  care  they  should  have  for  their  own  salvation. 

II.  DisiNTERESTBD.  "  As  many  as  have  not  seen  my  face" — not  only  Colossians 
and  Laodiceans.  III.  Had  beferencb  to  the  highest  spiritual  attainments  o* 
BELIEVERS.  Paul  was  solicitous — 1.  For  the  confirmation  of  their  faith, "  comforted," 
i.e.,  encouraged,  confirmed.  He  knew  how  error  disintegrated  the  heart's  confidence 
and  produced  trouble,  doubt,  perplexity.  2.  For  their  union  in  love.  Without  this 
no  solid  comfort.  Error  snaps  the  bond  of  love  and  splits  the  Church  into  parties. 
8.  For  theii  enrichment  with  the  unspeakable  wealth  of  the  Divine  mystery.  (1) 
This  mystery  is  explained  in  the  unique  Person  and  endowments  of  Christ.  (2) 
The  believer  is  privileged  to  attain  to  a  full  knowledge  of  the  Divine  mystery.  (3) 
Thia  understanding  is  the  true  enrichment  of  the  mind.  "  Unto  all  riches."  This 
rast  store  is  opposed  to  the  poverty  of  the  mind  which  has  only  a  few  confused 
unconnected  truths  about  the  gospel.  "  Full  assurance"  means  unclouded  percep- 
tion and  firm  conviction.  This  is  secured  only  by  diligent  study  and  inner 
illumination  of  the  Spirit.  Every  other  kind  of  knowledge  is  poor  and  unsatisfying. 
IV.  Prompted  the  apostle  to  faithfully  warn  the  Chukch.  Error  is  seductive. 
It  is  needful  to  keep  a  vigilant  outlook  in  regard  to  its  enticing  words.  The  most 
effectual  antidote  to  any  heresy  is  the  simple  proclamation  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ.  Lessons — 1.  The  true  minister  is  anxious  to  promote  the  highest  good  of 
the  people.  2.  All  truth  finds  its  explanation  and  error  its  refutation  in  Christ,  the 
Boarce  of  eternal  vrisdom.  3.  False  doctrine  should  be  fearlessly  and  faithfully 
exposed.  (G.  Barlow.)  PauVs  striving  for  the  Colossiant: — The  strain  of  the 
apostle's  agony  for  the  Colossian  Church  is  here  continued.  Note  the  consummate 
art  with  which  he  prepares  the  way  for  his  warnings.  I.  The  conflict  itself  was 
that  of  the  arena,  and  '*  great."  1.  No  external  conflict  can  be  meant,  for  he  could 
itrike  no  blows  for  them ;  but  he  could  send  them  ammunition,  and  this  Epistle  hag 
been  a  magazine  and  arsenal  ever  since.    Bat  the  real  struggle  was  in  his  owa 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  n. 

heart.  In  that  lonely  prison  cell,  and  with  burdens  enough  of  his  own,  like  soma 
soldier  left  behind  to  guard  the  base,  his  thoughts  were  in  the  field.  2.  For  all 
Christians,  sympathy  in  the  battle  of  God,  which  is  being  waged  all  over  the  world, 
is  a  plain  duty.  Wheresoever  our  prison  may  be,  we  are  bound  to  take  an  eager 
share  in  the  conflict  by  interest,  such  help  as  we  can  render,  and  that  intercession 
which  may  sway  the  fortunes  of  the  field  though  the  uplifted  hands  grasp  no 
weapons.  The  men  who  bear  the  brunt  of  the  battle  are  not  the  only  combatants. 
In  many  a  quiet  home  where  wives  and  mothers  sit  there  is  an  agony  as  intense  as 
in  the  battle.  It  was  a  law  in  Israel,  "As  his  part  is,"  &o.  (1  Sam.  xxx.  24).  So 
all  Christians  who  in  heart  and  sympathy  have  taken  part  shall  be  counted  aa 
combatants  and  crowned  as  victors.  II.  Those  foe  whom  the  coNriiicT  was 
ENDURED.  "As  many  as  have  not  seen,"  &c.  The  Colossians  might  think  th&t  he 
cared  less  for  them  than  for  those  communities  he  had  planted  or  watered.  They 
had  never  felt  the  magnetism  of  his  personal  presence,  and  were  at  a  disadvantage 
from  not  having  had  the  inspiration  and  direction  of  his  personal  teaching.  But 
Paul  shows  them  that  from  this  very  fact  they  had  a  warmer  place  in  his  heart. 
He  was  not  so  enslaved  by  sense  that  his  love  could  not  travel  beyond  the  limits  o£ 
his  eyesight.  III.  The  object  in  view.  1.  That  their  hearts  might  be  comforted. 
(1)  Heart,  in  Scripture,  means  thought  as  well  as  emotion.  (2)  Comfort  is  mora 
than  consolation.  The  cloud  that  hung  over  the  Church  was  not  about  to  break  in 
sorrows  needing  consolation,  but  in  practical  errors  needing  strength  to  resist.  /3o 
Paul  desires  that  they  may  be  encouraged  not  to  quail,  but  to  fight  with  good  cheer. 
And  what  we  want  is  the  brave  spirit  and  the  serene  assurance  of  victory  in  our 
struggles.  What  have  we  to  do  with  fear,  seeing  that  One  fights  by  oar  side  who 
teaches  our  hands  to  war  ?  2.  The  way  to  secure  this  is  union  in  love.  (1)  Love  is 
the  true  bond  which  unites  men,  and  therefore  adds  to  the  strength  of  each.  Litti© 
faggots  bound  together  are  strong.  The  solitary  heart  is  timid  and  weak,  but  manj 
weaknesses  brought  together  make  a  strength,  as  slimly  built  houses  in  a  row  hold 
each  other  up.  Loose  grains  of  sand  are  moved  by  a  breath ;  compacted  they  are 
a  rock  against  which  the  Atlantic  beats  in  vain.  A  real  moral  defence  against  even 
intellectual  error  is  found  in  the  compaction  of  Christian  love.  A  community  so 
interlocked  will  throw  off  many  evils,  as  a  Roman  legion  with  linked  shields  roofed 
itself  over  against  missiles  from  the  walls  of  a  besieged  city,  or  as  the  imbricated 
scales  of  a  fish  keep  it  dry.  (2)  But  the  love  is  not  merely  love  to  one  another,  but 
common  love  to  Christ,  the  bond  of  union  and  true  strengthener  of  men's  hearts. 
3.  This  compaction  in  love  will  lead  to  a  wealth  of  certitude  in  the  possession  of 
the  truth.  It  tends  to  "  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance,"  <fec.  (1)  In  times  of, 
religious  unsettlement  Christian  men  are  tempted  to  lower  their  own  tone,  and  to 
say  •*  It  is  so  "  with  less  certainty,  because  so  many  are  saying  *'  It  is  not  so.'- 
Some  are  so  afraid  of  being  thought  narrow  that  they  seek  the  reputation  oi 
liberality  by  talking  as  if  there  were  a  film  of  doubt  over  even  the  truths  "  moat 
surely  believed."  Few  things  are  more  needed  now  than  this  full  assurance;  (2> 
This  wealth  of  conviction  is  attained  by  living  in  the  love  of  God.  If  we  love  we 
shall  possess  an  experience  which  verifies  the  truth  for  us.  Rich  in  the  possession 
of  this  confirmation  of  the  gospel  by  the  blessings  it  brings,  and  which  witness  to 
their  source  as  verdant  banks  do  to  the  stream,  we  shall  have  a  right  to  oppose  to 
many  a  doubt  the  full  assurance  born  of  love ;  and  while  others  are  disputing 
whether  there  be  any  Lord,  or  living  Christ,  or  forgiveness,  or  providence,  we  shall 
know  that  they  are  ours  because  we  have  felt  the  wealth  and  power  they  have  brought 
into  our  lives.  4.  This  unity  of  love  will  lead  to  full  knowledge  of  the  mystery  of 
God.  (1)  That  mystery  has  its  stages.  The  revelation  is  finished,  but  our  appre- 
hension of  it  may  grow,  and  although  we  shall  never  outgrow  it,  reflection  and 
experience  will  explain  and  deepen  it.  Suppose  a  man  could  set  out  from  the  great 
planet  that  moves  in  the  outermost  rim  of  our  system,  and  travel  slowly  inwards 
to  the  great  central  sun,  how  the  disc  would  grow,  and  the  light  and  warmth 
increase  with  each  million  of  miles,  till  what  had  seemed  a  point  filled  the  whole 
sky  1  (2)  The  stages  are  infinite  because  in  Him  are  all  the  treasures,  &c.  These 
four  words  are  all  familiar  on  the  lips  of  later  Gnostics,  and  were  no  doubt  in  the 
mouths  of  the  false  teachers.  The  apostle  would  claim  for  his  Gospel  all  which  they 
falsely  claimed  for  their  dreams,  (a)  All  wisdom  and  knov  ledge  are  in  Christ.  Ha 
is  the  Light  of  men,  and  all  thought  and  truth  of  every  sort  came  from  Him  who  w 
the  Eternal  Word.  All  other  media  of  revelation  have  but  uttered  broken  syllables. 
Christ  still  pursues  this  work,  (b)  In  Christ,  as  in  a  great  storehouse,  lie  all  the 
riches  of  spiritual  wisdom,  the  massive  ingots  of  solid  gold,  which  when  coined  into 


eaa.  it]  COLOSSIANS.  Ill 

cret  la  and  doctrine«  are  the  wealth  of  the  Church,  (c)  In  Christ  these  treasures 
are  hidden,  but  not  as  the  heretic's  mysteries  from  the  vulgar  crowd,  but  only  from 
eyea  thst  will  not  t%e  them;  bidden  that  seeking  souls  may  have  the  pleasure  of 
•eeking,  and  th<»  'est  of  finding;  hidden  aa  men  store  provisions  in  the  Arctic 
regions,  in  order  shat  tlie  bears  may  not  find  them,  and  sbipwrecked  sailors  may. 
ConolusioQ  :  Such  thoughts  have  a  special  message  for  times  of  agitation.  We  are 
Burrc/unded  by  eager  voices  proclaiming  profounder  truths  and  wisdom  than  the 
gosp<3l  gives  us.  In  joyful  antagonism  Christian  men  have  to  hold  fast  by  the 
confidence  that  all  Divine  wisdom  is  laid  up  in  Christ.  The  new  problems  of  each 
geteration  will  find  their  answers  in  Him.  We  need  not  cast  aside  the  truth 
learned  at  our  mothers'  knees;  but  if  we  keep  true  to  Christ  and  strive  to  widen  our 
minds  to  the  breadth  of  that  great  message,  it  will  grow  as  we  gaze,  even  as  the 
nightly  heavens  expand  to  the  eye  which  steadfastly  looks  into  them  and  reveal 
violet  abysses,  sowu  with  sparkling  points,  each  of  which  is  a  sun.  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  Three  wonderful  tilings  : — I.  A  noble  anxiety.  Paul  pictures  here  his 
eagerness  as  that  of  the  racer  and  wrestler.  So  far  there  is  nothing  very  rare,  for 
the  spectacle  of  anxious  men  struggling  with  keenest  eagerness  to  gain  some 
purpose  of  their  own  is  common.  But  the  elements  of  nobleness  here  discovered 
in  Paul  are — 1.  His  anxiety  for  others.  He  says  to  the  men  of  Colossse,  "My 
conflict  is  for  you."  It  is  no  self-centred  life  that  Paul  lives  when  he  spends  him- 
self lavishly  for  these  early  churches.  2.  His  anxiety  for  the  absent.  There  is  a 
counterfeit  coin  in  current  speech,  "  Out  of  sight,  out  of  mind."  It  is  a  proverb 
coined  in  the  mint  of  a  very  shallow  and  selfish  life.  Such  a  spirit  (1)  limits 
power,  (2)  narrows  character.  Whilst  real  care  for  the  absent — (1)  Increases  the 
power  of  the  mind.  It  gets  strong  enough  to  wing  its  pinions  over  oceans,  and 
even  to  pierce  other  worlds.  (2)  Cultivates  spiritual  habit.  It  delivers  a  man  from 
being  the  creature  of  sense.  3.  His  anxiety  for  those  with  whom  he  had  no  direct 
connection.  He  is  oaring  for  a  group  of  churches  on  the  Lycus  that  he  had  not 
•ven  visited.  It  was  pure,  disinterested  love.  Wherein  does  the  modern  gospel 
of  altruism  excel  this  gospel  Paul  believed  and  practised?  and  where  has  altruism 
the  motives  with  which  Christianity  pulsates,  or  the  examples  that  Christianity  can 
cite?  II.  A  BLESSED  EXPERIENCE.  Analyzing  these  verses  we  find  signs — 1.  Of 
personal  comfort.  The  word  "  comfort"  here,  as  in  the  word  "Comforter,"  points 
to  more  than  solace,  it  tells  of  encouragement  and  strengthening.  What  better 
experience  could  he  desire  for  the  members  of  this  young  Church  than  that  their 
hearts  should  be  comforted?  But  to  that  is  added  the  blessing  of  social  security. 
Few  expressions  can  describe  a  completer  unity  than  this  "knit  together."  It 
means  an  interweaving  of  sympathies,  an  interlinking  of  destinies;  and  this  is 
obtained  by  the  highest  and  surest  method  "in  love."  3.  Of  firm  conviction,  "  and 
all  assurance."  There  is  much  more  than  opinion,  there  is  conviction;  and 
conviction  of  man's  noblest  faculty,  the  understanding,  which  is  more  than  the 
reason  alone.  And  this  supreme  conviction  is,  as  to  the  truth,  of  the  supremest 
importance,  viz.,  the  acknowledgment  of  the  open  secret  about  God.  HI.  An  open 
SECRET.  Paul  did  not  mean  by  mystery  an  unknowable,  mystical  something;  but 
rather  a  truth  once  hidden  but  no  longer  concealed ;  a  truth  fully,  freely  revealed. 
The  self -revelation  of  Christ  is  the  revelation  of  man,  of  duty,  of  God,  of  heaven. 
In  Him  were  stored  away  all  the  riches  of  truth  and  love  for  which  men  cried.  He 
is  the  exhaustless  storehouse  of  God's  supplies  for  man's  higher  nature.  He  is  the 
vast  mine  of  thought,  of  sympathy,  of  grace ;  and  only  the  industrious  who  sink  the 
shaft  of  inquiry,  fellowship,  faith,  will  know  what  the  mine  contains.  (17.  R. 
Thomag.)  The  full  assurance  of  knowledge : — The  second  Colossian  prayer  is  the 
sequel  of  the  first  (chap.  i.  9-14),  inasmuch  as  it  shows  at  once  the  end  of  all 
practical  obedience  and  the  ground  of  all  practical  knowledge.  The  words  that 
introduce  it  show  it  to  be  a  supplement,  and  also  that  the  apostle's  request  now 
deepens  into  a  "great  agony"  which  is  akin  to  our  Lord's.  The  matter  of  his 
supplication  is  expressed  in  the  form  of  the  end  which  its  answer  would  obtain,  the 
full  assurance  of  their  understanding  of  Christ,  the  mystery  of  God.  I.  How  this 
IB  TO  BE  obtained.  1.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  separate  the  "full  assurance"  from 
the  process  by  which  it  is  reached.  It  is  a  branch,  together  with  the  "knitting 
together  in  love"  of  the  one  common  trunk,  "the  comfort  of  the  heart."  This 
last  root  principle  of  all  religious  establishment  is  the  full  work  of  the  Paraclete, 
and  the  "  heart"  is  the  inner  man  in  which  the  Spirit  carries  on  His  renewing  work. 
Hence  from  this  common  principle  spring  two  developments — one  of  charity,  the 
other  of  knowledRC — and  these  are  united.    The  lov«  of  God  stroiur  in  the  heart  ol 


11«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  n. 

each,  the  bond  of  perfectness,  is  as  "brotherly  love,"  the  bond  of  union  in  which 
all  are  edified.  Thus  while  carnal  knowledge  "puffeth  up,"  and  makes  a  hollow 
fellowship,  love  "buildeth  up"  both  the  individual  and  the  community.  They 
have  the  riches  of  the  knowledge  of  God  imparted  to  them  in  the  radiations  of 
Divine  light  through  the  Word,  by  the  Spirit.  These  riches  are  the  common 
heritage  of  the  sacred  Treasury;  but  every  one's  individual  knowledge  is  His  own. 
2.  This  "full  assurance"  is  the  clear,  deep,  unclouded  confidence  in  the  reality  of 
the  objeotB  of  knowledge  which  the  understanding  grasps,  excluding  hesitation  and 
fortifying  against  error.  This  grace  comes  from  the  "comfort"  of  the  Spirit, 
through  the  diligent  study  of  the  mystery  hid  in  Christ.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  threa 
kinds  of  assurance.  (1)  The  full  assurance  of  faith — the  deeply  wrought  conviction 
of  the  reality,  and  the  possession  of  the  present  object.  (2)  The  assurance  of  hop* 
— the  full  conviction  of  the  reality  of  its  objects  as  our  own  in  reservation.  (3)  The 
full  assurance  of  understanding  is  more  general  in  its  object,  including  all  the  truths 
of  the  common  salvation,  of  the  unity,  harmony,  and  practical  consequences  of 
which  the  understanding  is  fully  assured.  So  far  as  the  individual  truths  of  thia 
knowledge  are  embraced  for  salvation,  the  soul  exerts  its  faith  in  full  assurance;  bo 
lar  as  they  belong  to  the  future,  its  hope;  bnt  so  far  as  they  are  independent  of 
present  and  future,  and  are  the  possession  of  the  mind  and  not  of  the  experience, 
the  floul  delivers  them  to  the  care  of  the  understanding.  II.  What  it  is  in  itself. 
The  mystery  of  God  which  is  Christ.  This  being  the  precise  sentence  which  St. 
Paul  wrote,  we  are  taught  by  him  that  the  Person  of  Christ,  God-man,  is  the 
central  and  all-comprehending  mystery.  1.  The  secret  as  it  has  been  expounded 
in  the  previous  chapter  is  impenetrable  to  human  intellect.  It  is  the  mystery  of 
God,  and  He  alone  can  understand  it.  2.  But  it  ia  shown  forth  in  such  a  manner 
that  we  may  have  a  full  and  distinct  knowledge,  for  this  is  the  word,  not  acknow- 
ledgment. There  is  a  difference  between  penetrating  a  mystery  and  beholding  and 
knowing  it.  In  the  richness  of  its  full  assurance  the  understanding  collects  all  the 
elements  that  go  to  the  conception  of  the  Divine-human  Person,  and  unites  tbem 
in  one  supreme  object  of  knowledge,  certitude,  assurance.  3.  Yet  this  object 
contains  all  other  objects.  In  this  are  hid  "all  the  treasures,"  &o.  To  the  riches 
of  full  assurance  correspond  the  riches  of  the  truths  of  which  it  is  assured.  All 
other  intellectual  treasures  are  of  phenomena  and  time,  and  must  pass  away.  If 
the  vast  fabric  of  thmgs  be  destroyed  or  reconstructed,  all  extant  physical  science 
becomes  obsolete.  But  the  knowledge  of  Christ  is  alwavs  becoming  richer.  As  the 
individual  grows  daily  in  it,  so  also  does  the  Church  behold  more  and  more  the 
development  of  "  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God"  in  Christ.  III.  What  it  effects. 
The  apostle's  reason  for  the  prayer  was  his  deep  desire  to  defend  the  Colossians 
•gainst  "oppositions  of  science,"  &o.  The  full  assurance  of  understanding  in  the 
psjstery  of  Christ  would  be  their  effectual  safeguard.  The  mind  once  raised  to  thia 
region  of  cloudless  certitude  would  not  easily  be  seduced  to  descend  into  the  region 
of  scepticism,  where  doubt  chases  doubt  in  never-ceasing  restlessness  of  caprice. 
Gnosticism  under  other  names  is  still  darkening  the  counsel  of  the  hypostatic 
union.  Hence  the  necessity  of  this  prayer  to-day.  (IF.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  St. 
Paul't  conflict : — As  gardeners  are  not  satisfied  with  sowing  good  seed,  but  also  take 
care  to  eradicate  weeds,  so  in  spiritual  husbandry  it  is  not  enough  to  cast  the  Word 
into  souls;  the  soil  must  be  cleansed  of  the  pernicious  weeds  of  error  sown  privily 
by  an  enemy's  hand,  or  the  Divine  tillage  will  be  marred.  Hence  St.  Paul  in 
chap,  i,  having  established  the  truth,  now  defends  it  against  heresy,  and  these 
verses  are  the  entrance  to  the  controversy.  I.  Thk  conflict.  What  the  apostle 
affirmed  at  the  close  of  chap.  L  he  here  particularizes.  He  means — 1.  The 
solicitude  which  the  consideration  of  the  Churches  drew  upon  him.  For  though 
their  faith  and  constancy  afforded  him  satisfaction,  the  temptations  around  them 
and  their  human  weakness  led  to  the  apprehension  that  they  might  be  drawn  from 
piety.  Love  is  never  without  this,  but  the  apostle's  was  so  great  that  he  felt  as 
though  ha  had  suffered  their  alBictions  himself  (2  Cor.  xi.  29,  of.  also  verse  3). 
2.  Bnt  more,  he  comprises  here  all  that  he  did  to  avert  the  danger.  (1)  He  was 
perpetually  in  prayer  for  them  (2  Thess.  i.  ii;  Phil.  L  4;  CoL  i.  9).  (2)  To 
prayer  he  added  action,  and  as  he  assails  the  enemy,  he  smartly  appeals  to  the 
faithful,  admonishing  and  encouraging  them  to  needful  firmness.  (3)  The  combat, 
however,  did  not  terminate  here.  He  often  came  to  blows,  cheerfully  suffering 
persecution.  His  very  chain  and  prison  were  part  of  his  conflict,  and  hence  he  told 
them  (chap,  i.  24)  he  suffered  for  them;  because  in  effect  it  was  for  maintaini 
the  liberty  of  the  Gentiles  that  he  wsis  suffering.    3.  Admire  the  zeal  and  lov 


4JHAP.  iL]  OOLOSSIANS.  1)M 

this  holy  man.  He  stood,  as  we  may  say,  on  the  scaffold,  yet  their  danger  troabled 
him  more  than  his  own,  and  neither  prison  nor  death  was  able  to  diminish  hifl 
affection,  or  make  him  lay  aside  the  least  of  his  cares.  4.  Observe  his  prudence. 
To  dispose  their  hearts  and  gain  authority  for  his  remonstrances,  he  sets  before 
them  his  solicitudes  for  their  salvation.  5.  The  apostle's  conflict  is  exemplary. 
Let  ministers  learn  what  thoy  owe  to  their  flocks.  Without  this  strife  we  cannot 
•void  the  censure  of  the  Supreme  Pastor.  IL  Its  design.  Paul  fought  to  secure 
to  them  a  treasure  and  to  prevent  the  enemy  snatching  it  away.  Therefore  he 
ehows  that  they  were  in  danger  of  losing  it.  It  consisted  of — 1.  Comfort  of  heart 
which  heresy  necessarily  disturbs,  because  it  shalies  the  truth  and  certainty  of  the 
evangelical  doctrine  on  which  it  is  founded.  This  should  make  us  jealous  for  the 
purity  of  the  gospel.  Food,  however  wholesome,  will  kill  if  mingled  with  poison.  2. 
Union  in  love.  Their  seducers  troubled  that  by  sowing  the  seeds  of  doctrinal 
division.  This  union  is  necessary  to  comfort,  for  what  joy  can  there  be  in  the 
trouble  of  division  ?  3.  The  abounding  of  a  full  assurance  of  understanding.  The 
order  here  is  to  be  noted.  These  three  things  are  of  such  a  nature  that  the  first 
depends  upon  the  second,  and  the  second  upon  the  third.  (1)  The  knowledge  of  a 
Christian  should  be  understanding,  i.e.,  he  should  see  in  the  clearness  of  heavenly 
light  the  verities  which  God  has  revealed,  not  that  we  are  bound  to  comprehend 
them,  which  would  be  impossible;  but  we  are  to  know  them  as  far  as  they  are 
revealed.  Here  we  see  how  far  a  blind  faith  is  from  the  knowledge  of  a  believer. 
Paul  would  have  the  faithful  intelligent.  (2)  "All  riches  of  understanding." 
Abundance  of  knowledge,  so  that  we  may  be  ignorant  of  none  of  the  mysteries  of 
Divine  truth.  If  we  do  not,  how  shall  we  distinguish  the  voice  of  the  shepherd 
from  that  of  a  stranger ?  (3)  "Assurance."  Though  matters  of  faith  are  not  laid 
open  to  the  senses  or  reason,  yet  the  truth  of  them  is  so  evident,  that  as  soon  as  the 
clouds  of  passion  and  prejudice  are  dispersed  by  the  Spirit  it  shines  into  our  hearts 
and  makes  itself  to  be  believed.  Thus  must  it  be  known  with  certainty  and  not 
with  doubting  (Eph.  iv.  14).  Whereby  you  see  how  false  is  the  opinion  of  Home, 
which  makes  the  belief  of  Christianity  to  depend  on  the  testimony  of  her  prelates. 
4.  The  apostle  confines  the  Christian's  understanding  within  the  bounds  of  its  true 
subject — the  mystery  of — (1)  The  Father,  because  He  is  the  author  of  the  gospel,  and 
has  manifested  Himself  through  it.  (2)  Of  Christ,  for  He  has  brought  this  doctrine 
from  the  bosom  of  the  Father  and  set  it  in  our  view;  and  He  is  the  principal 
subject  of  it,  without  whose  teaching  and  merit  we  can  have  no  true  happiness. 
Conclusion :  1.  Paul's  desire  teaches  us  our  duty.  2.  Urge  not  the  vain  excuse 
that  you  are  not  ministers,  and  therefore  do  not  need  extensive  knowledge.  The 
Colossians  were  no  more  ministers  than  you.  We  are  all  engaged  in  the  same  war, 
and  privates  need  arms  as  much  as  officers.  (J.  Daill£.)  Soul  prosperity  : — I. 
Its  design.  "  That  their  hearts  might  be  comforted."  There  may  be  pleasure  in 
which  mirth  is  frolicsome  and  laughter  mad  ;  a  thrill  of  lone  delight  may  sweep 
across  the  soul  beneath  some  grand  or  peaceful  scene.  There  may  be  brief  and 
dangerous  rapture  in  some  wild  moment ;  but  no  heart  was  ever  comforted  amidst 
scenes  like  these,  either  in  possession  or  memory.  The  word  has  a  hearty  English 
fround  about  it,  and  embodies  all  the  unutterable  meanings  that  lie  hidden  in  that 
word  "  home."  The  leading  idea  is  that  of  quiet  after  tempests,  a  present  of  peace 
after  a  past  of  trouble.  And  so  no  heart  can  be  comforted  in  Christ  which  has  not 
agonized  in  penitence.  The  great  calm  comes  to  the  soul  after  the  storm  raised  by 
the  convincing  Spirit,  when  it  finds  the  atonement  sufiicient  and  the  Saviour 
willing.  It  must  spring  from  faith.  H.  Its  constituents.  1.  "  Being  knit 
together  in  love."  (1)  Ihe  word  applies  to  the  fitting  of  the  parts  of  a  house  in 
harmony.  Modern  architecture  delights  in  the  symmetry  of  buildings,  different 
parts  are  arranged  to  be  mutually  strengthening  without  external  aid.  (2)  So  the 
heart  in  love  is  to  be  knit  together,  the  strongest  and  surest  of  bonds.  It  is  the 
root  of  all  other  graces,  the  ground  on  which  the  temple  is  to  rise ;  "  rooted  and 
grounded  in  love."  It  is  the  bracelet  that  clasps  the  other  graces,  at  once  a 
protection  and  decoration.  "Above  all  put  on  charity."  It  is  the  mark  of  the 
Divine  relationship,  indwelling,  image.  (3)  The  necessity  of  this  to  comfort  is 
obvious.  Without  it  hope  will  be  a  transient  emotion,  labour  an  intolerable 
drudgery,  God  alienated,  the  Church  rent.  2.  "  Unto  all  riches,"  &o.  (1)  The 
possession  of  an  assured  faith,  the  importance  of  an  intellectual  perception  of  the 
troth,  and  of  a  decisive  grasp  of  its  great  principles,  is  often  urged  by  Paul ;  and 
Ohrist  prayed  that  Peter's  faith  might  not  fail  amidst  the  siftinga  of  Satan.  Do 
iMt  oar  own  hearts  witness  to  the  necessity  of  this  ?    There  is  oomiort  in  tnut 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  m 

bnt  none  in  suspicion  and  misgiving.  (2)  Mark  the  wealthy  repetition  of  the 
apostle's  words.  When  Solomon  speaks  of  understanding  he  can  scarcely  find 
imagery  sufficiently  brilliant  to  set  its  value  forth.  The  apostle  is  not  satisfied  thai 
that  only  shall  be  the  believer's  dowry  ;  there  is  not  only  understanding,  but  "assur- 
ance"— -knowledge  deepening  into  conviction;  "full,"  no  doubt  hungering  upon 
the  Spirit,  the  truth  ss  ^oroughly  appreciated  that  the  principle  becomes  enfibred 
with  man's  nature,  a  belonging  of  his,  his  riches  which  no  panic  can  scatter  and  no 
thief  steal.  (3)  The  tendency  of  the  present  age  is  to  leave  old  beliefs  behind,  and 
it  is  considered  a  proof  of  manliness  to  have  outgrown  the  faith  of  our  childhood, 
which  yet  was  the  faith  upon  which  the  sturdy  manhood  of  our  fathers  grew.  But 
surely  it  were  a  weary  world  if  in  this  nineteenth  century  there  is  nothing  settled. 
Life  is  all  too  short  to  be  spent  in  dreams.  Men  die  while  we  are  battling  with 
problems.  And  in  all  doubt  there  is  discomfort,  danger,  and  death.  To  the  sincere 
and  candid  Christianity  oilers  her  evidences  and  all  her  "  riches  of  the  full  assur- 
ance," &c.  Press  forward,  you  shall  know  if  you  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.  3. 
There  must  be  testimony  if  the  heart  is  "  knit  together  in  love,"  &c.  (1)  It  is  not 
to  be  kept  within  like  a  concealed  treasure,  but  it  is  to  be  "acknowledged."  The 
dnty  of  confession  is  parallel  with  that  of  faith,  and  if  faith  be  hid  it  will  die.  (2) 
The  "  mystery  "  is  to  be  acknowledged.  The  greatest  triumph  of  faith  ia  when 
proud  reason  bows,  the  rebel  will  submits,  and  the  awed  senses  fear  as  they  enter 
into  the  cloud.  This  is  the  mystery  of  Gud  in  Christ.  Do  not  let  us  do  the  Saviour 
the  dishonour  of  denying  Him  either  by  the  he  of  speech  or  the  lie  of  silence.  Bold 
witness-bearing  will  be  found  to  be  a  solid  comfort  to  the  soul.  4.  In  regard  to  thia 
mystery  the  apostle's  words  are  cumulative,  and  each  has  a  distinct  significance. 
(1)  "  Of  God."  How  much  of  mystery  is  here  1  Yet  what  a  comfort  1  How  sad  it 
would  be  to  sit  down  in  a  world  like  ours  without  a  God,  with  chance  as  our  creator 
and  circumstances  our  governor ;  or  with  gods  like  those  of  heathenism.  But  while 
the  atheist  cannot  find  a  God,  and  the  deist  denies  His  existence,  and  the  pantheist 
reduces  Him  to  an  abstraction,  the  Christian  rejoices  to  believe  that  there  is  around 
him  God,  living,  acting,  personal  (2)  "  Of  the  Father,"  a  greater  mystery.  He 
who  is  omnipotent,  <&c.,  maintains  a  relationship  analogous  to  that  of  human 
fatherhood  only,  of  infinite  power  and  tenderness.  What  a  comfort  is  this  mystsry  f 
We  live  not  under  a  despot's  tyranny,  but  a  Father's  smile ;  this  makes  duty  light, 
and  sorrow  bearable.  (3)  "Of  Christ."  The  mystery  deepens  as  we  travel  on,. 
This  makes  God  "  Immanuel."  God's  own  San  stoops  to  take  on  Himself  a  curse 
that  none  but  Omnipotence  could  inflict,  and  none  but  Omnipotence  bear.  _  But 
vast  as  is  the  mystery  the  comfort  is  vaster.  Heaven  and  earth  reconciled ; 
salvation  for  the  most  abandoned.  (W.  M.  Punslwn,  LL.D.)  That  their 
lieartB  might  be  comforted. — The  triple  fruit  of  evangelical  doctrine: — The 
apostle  contends  that  they  should  persist  in  this.  I.  That  thehi  hearts  might 
BE  COMFORTED.  Perseverance  in  Christian  doctrine  brings  true  comfort.  1.  Because 
salvation  by  Christ  alone  brings  tranquillity  to  the  troubled  conscience.  For  as  the 
modulations  of  harmony  are  applied  to  arouse  the  mind  when  sorrowful,  so  the 
promises  of  God  in  Ctrist  bring  peace  to  men's  hearts  (Rom.  v.  1 ;  2  These. 
ii.  16 ;  Phil.  ii.  1).  2.  Because  the  doctrine  of  innovators  harassed  men's  minds 
with  scruples  and  anxieties.  To  be  exempt  from  these  is  a  great  part  of  spiritual 
consolation.  IL  Being  knit  together  in  love  as  carpenters  fit  together  two 
pieces  o*  wood,  so  that  they  adhere  in  indissoluble  union.  This  concord  of  minds 
is — 1.  A  fruit,  because  the  intellect  is  the  leader  of  the  will  (Acts  iv.  32).  Unity  of 
faith  is  the  firmest  bond  of  unity  of  mind.  Love  is  the  fruit  of  unanimity  of  faith 
which  so  binds  the  minds  of  the  godly,  that  though  some  light  offences  intervene, 
yet  as  the  boughs  of  the  same  tree,  driven  asunder  by  the  wind,  immediately  come 
together  again  because  fixed  in  one  root,  so  with  the  minds  of  the  faithful,  because 
still  rooted  in  the  same  faith.  2.  A  condition  without  which  spiritual  comfort  is 
not  obtained.  For  comfort  is  not  had  out  of  Christ ;  if  any  one  lives  without  love, 
he  is  without  Christ,  and  vice  versa.  III.  Unto  all  riches  of  the  full  assurancb 
OF  UNDERSTANDING.  1.  The  faith  of  Christians  is  augmented  in  richness  when 
they  who  have  learned  only  the  principles  and  elements  proceed  to  farther  attain- 
ments. For  as  in  other  sciences  the  principles  are  few,  but  contain  innumerable 
conclusions,  so  here  some  few  necessary  principles  are  presented  to  tender  minds, 
and  afterwards  a  rich  treasury  of  sacred  knowledge  is  collected  for  every  purpose  of 
salvation  by  meditation,  hearing,  and  chiefly  the  internal  operation  and  teaching 
of  the  Spirit.  They  therefore  who  persevere  in  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  thene« 
obtain  all  riohes.    Henoe— (1)  The  laity  should  not  be  content  with  an  elementacy 


vniT.  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  Itl 

knowledge  in  religious  matterg  ^Heb.  vi.  1).  (2J  When  these  riches  ar«  sought,  th« 
means  necessary  to  their  attainment  should  oe  sought.  He  who  would  have 
treasure  must  dig.  2.  Full  assurance  denotes  that  firm  and  certain  adherence  to 
what  is  believed  which  springs  from  the  internal  operation  of  the  Spirit  illumi- 
nating the  intellect,  inchning  the  will,  and  firmly  stamping  the  impress  of  the 
things  beheved  on  the  mmd  itself.  This  is  at  length  attained  by  those  who  remaia 
firm  in  the  doctrine  of  faith.  For  as  trees  newly  planted  are  swayed  by  the  wind, 
80  the  early  faith  of  the  godly  wavers  with  many  doubts ;  but  the  same  trees  in 
course  of  time  fix  their  roots  deeper,  so  faith  shoots  its  roots  deeper  into  the  mind, 
and  at  length,  by  grace,  acquires  that  steadiness  which  cannot  be  overthrown 
(Eph.  iv.  14).  Hence  we  learn — (1)  That  the  faith  of  a  Christian  ought  not  to  depend 
on  others,  but  be  settled  by  the  efficacy  of  the  Spirit,  so  that  if  ecclesiastics,  or  the 
whole  world  even,  should  depart  from  the  faith,  yet  every  one  of  the  laity  should 
hold  to  it  (Gal.  i.  9).  (2)  How  Komanists  err  who  think  that  the  assurance  of  our 
faith  lies  in  the  breast  of  the  Pope.  That  cannot  give  full  assurance  to  my  heart, 
but  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  can  and  does  (1  John  ii.  27).  (3)  That  their  com- 
plaint is  unjust  who  aver  that  we  cannot  arrive  at  this  assurance  since  there  are  so 
many  sects  and  controversies.  We  attain  truth  not  by  disputing,  but  from 
Him  who  alone  can  both  know  and  teach.  3.  The  understanding  fully  assured 
(Eph.  i.  17 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9).  Hence  that  is  not  a  Divine,  but  animal  faith,  which 
has  no  comprehension  of  the  things  believed.  Such  a  faith  Stapbylus  extols  in 
the  collier  who  professed  that  he  believed  what  the  Church  believed,  and  the 
Church  believed  what  he  held,  whilst  he  was  ignorant  all  the  time  what  either  the 
Church  or  himself  held.  4.  To  the  acknowledgment,  &c.  (1)  Under  the  word 
"mystery  "  the  apostle  includes  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  gospel  which  is  so  called, 
because  human  reason  of  itself  would  never  have  found  the  way  of  salvation  but 
for  it.  (Bishop  Davenant.)  Knit  together  in  love. — Christian  unity  : — I.  Its 
NATURE.  1.  There  are  two  kinds  of  Chribtian  unity.  (1)  Among  all  believers 
there  exists  a  vital  union.  By  our  faith  in  Christ  we  are  united  to  Him  and  to 
each  other  as  members  of  our  body  connected  with  the  living  head.  This  union 
exists  in  spite  of  all  diversities  of  character  and  creed.  The  uniting  power  is  faith. 
Without  that  we  are  dead,  and  death  means  separation.  (2)  But  the  text  speaks 
of  another  union,  or  it  is  a  superfluity.  The  Colossians  were  already  partakers  of 
the  union  common  to  all  Christians.  Now  the  apostle  prays  that  they  may  be  knit 
together  in  love.  This  is  not  a  doctrinal  union ;  desirable  as  that  may  be,  it  is  only 
a  anion  of  head.  Nor  is  it  an  ecclesiastical  union  ;  desirable  as  that  may  be,  it  is 
yet  mechanical  and  external.  This  is  eternal,  spiritual,  vital.  2.  The  word  is 
translated  compacted  (Eph.  iv.  16),  proving  (Acts  ix.  22),  assuredly  gathering 
(Acts  xvi.  10),  and  means  to  make  to  come  together.  The  Colossians  were  not  so 
compacted  as  the  apostle  wished  them  to  be.  Seducers  had  disturbed  their  fraternal 
concord.  So  the  apostle  prays  that  their  affections  may  intertwine  and  interlace  ; 
or  that  as  a  broken  joint  when  reset  knits  itself  to  the  other  members  of  the  body, 
BO  the  members  of  the  body  of  believers  might  be  united  to  one  another,  love  being 
the  uniting  power.  3.  Each  Church  should  be  a  confederated  body,  so  consoli 
dated  into  one  as  to  be  invincible  in  conflict  with  the  powers  of  evil.  4.  We  caa 
have  this  unity  without  dull  uniformity.  There  is  unity  in  the  Godhead,  yet  not 
uniformity ;  unity  among  the  angels,  but  they  have  degrees  of  power  and  dignity  ; 
diversity  among  the  stars,  yet  they  are  all  related  to  the  central  sun.  This  unity 
does  not  destroy  our  individuality  or  our  right  of  private  judgment.  The  Church's 
▼esture  may  have  divers  colours,  but  it  must  be  without  seam.  Individual  members 
may  resemble  the  rainbow  which  combines  the  seven  prismatic  colours  into  one 
glorious  arch,  or  like  the  ocean  iu  ita  unfettered  flow,  "  distinct  as  the  billows,  but 
one  as  the  sea."  U.  Its  necessity.  1.  Being  destitute  of  this  unity,  no  body  of 
Christians  can  answer  the  end  of  its  existence.  It  is  only  where  brethren  dwell 
together  in  unity  that  the  Lord  commands  His  blessing.  2.  This  unity  is  essential 
to  the  presence  and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  only  when  believers  are 
" builded  together "  that  they  are  a  fit  "habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit." 
Not  before  the  temple  was  compacted  did  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  fill  the  house.'* 
When  "  they  were  all  of  one  accord  in  one  place,"  there  came  the  blessings  of 
Pentecost.  3.  It  is  only  when  united  that  a  Church  is  powerful  for  good.  Separate 
the  particles  of  a  ponderous  hammer,  and  each  atom  will  fall  harmless  as  a  snow- 
flake  ;  but  welded  into  one,  and  wielded  by  the  arm  of  the  quarryman,  it  will  split 
granite.  Let  the  waters  of  Niagara  be  divided  into  separate  drops,  and  they  are  no 
more  than  a  Scotch  mist.    4.  Without  it  a  Christian  Church  maj  anj  daj  b« 


116  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Bcattered.  It  is  but  a  heap  of  sand  the  separate  particles  of  which  may  be  separated 
by  a  gust  of  wind.  6,  It  is  necessary  to  Christian  comfort.  We  are  so  constituted 
as  to  be  dependent  on  each  other.  To  preserve  a  frigid  isolation  is  to  create  misery. 
III.  The  power  which  secuees  it.  Love,  without  which  no  real  union  is  possible. 
The  universe  has  no  equal  force  to  that  of  love.  We  may  think  alike  on  doctrines, 
polity,  and  methods  of  work,  but  unless  our  hearts  are  full  of  love  to  Christ  and 
one  another  we  are  not  united.  This  power  is  to  be  obtained  at  the  Cross,  the 
birthplace  of  Christian  love.  (W.  Williains.)  All  riches  of  the  full  assurance 
Of  understanding. — I.  The  things  of  which  wk  should  be  assdked.  1.  The 
things  done  by  Christ  (Luke  i.  1).  2.  The  knowlege  of  our  liberty  in  things 
indifferent.  3.  The  persuasion  of  the  truth  of  their  ministries  to  whom  we  subject 
our  souls  (2  Tim.  iv.  5,  17).  4.  The  doctrine  of  the  religion  we  profess.  5.  The 
hope  of  a  better  life  (Heb.  vi.  12).  6.  Faith  in  God's  favour  upon  the  warrant  of 
God's  Word  and  Spirit.  II.  The  signs  of  fdix  aseubance.  1.  It  will  receive 
the  Word  in  aiBiction  with  much  joy  (1  Thess.  L  6).  1.  It  will  not  be  carried 
about  by  every  wind  of  doctrine  (Eph.  iv.  14).  3.  It  is  industi-ious  in  the  duties 
of  love  to  God's  children  (Heb.  vi.  11,  12).  4.  It  is  unrebukable,  and  full  of 
integrity  of  life.  It  cannot  stand  with  any  presumptuous  sin  (Heb.  x.  22).  5.  It 
will  give  glory  to  God  against  all  sense  and  reason  (Rom.  iv,  20).  6.  It  mortifies 
and  extinguishes  all  headstrong  affections  (Isa.  xi.  7,  9).  7.  It  is  carried  with  full 
Bails  into  holy  duties,  and  is  faithful  in  good  works.  8.  It  is  able  to  admonish  (Rom. 
XV.  14).  III.  The  riches  op  FULii  assurance.  1.  Our  spiritual  riches  lie — (1)  In 
the  Word  of  Christ  dwelling  in  us  (chap.  iii.  16).  (2)  In  the  Spirit  of  Christ  (Tit. 
iii.  6).  (3)  In  works  of  mercy  and  liberality  (Eph.  ii.  4;  2  Cor.  viii.  1,  ix.  11). 
(4)  In  Bufferings  and  patience.  (5)  In  prayer  (Rom.  x.  11).  (6)  In  good  works. 
(1  Tim.  vi.  18).  (7)  In  utterance  and  all  holy  knowledge  (1  Cor.  i.  5).  (8)  In  our 
faith  (James  ii.  5).  2.  Worthily  is  full  assurance  called  riches,  for  it  does  all  that 
riches  can  do  to  men.  It  comforts  the  heart  and  defends  from  dangers  much  better 
than  outward  riches.  It  gains  the  godly  truer  reputation  than  houses,  lands,  or 
money.  It  abounds  more  to  mercy  and  well-doing  with  more  sufficiency  than  out- 
ward riches,  and  buys  for  the  soul  all  necessaries.  It  settles  the  heart  against  all 
changes,  makes  a  man  stand  against  the  rage  of  tyrants  and  death  itself ;  yea,  it 
prevails  with  God,  and,  knowing  Him  fully,  does  not  fail  to  trust  Him  fully  in  spite 
of  mysterious  providences.  "  Though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  Him."  It  brings 
a  man  the  certain  pardon  of  all  his  offences,  and  settles  his  heart  in  his  religion 
'  better  than  ten  thousand  arguments  and  volumes  of  controversies.  Conclusion : 
L  This  fuU  assurance  may  be  bad  in  this  life  (1  Thess.  i.  5  ;  Heb.  vi. 
11,  X.  22;  Rom.  iv.  21).  2.  Therefore  we  are  bound  to  labour  for  it 
{N.    Byjield.)  The  full    assurance    of  understanding : — I.  The    knowledgb 

OB  undebstandino  to  which  assurance  belongs,  1.  Men  have  two  kinds 
of  knowledge  respecting  Divine  things — the  one  of  the  intellect  alone,  which 
is  the  fruit  of  study,  just  as  the  natural  sciences  are  ;  the  other  a  higher  knowledge 
boilt  upon  the  former,  or  the  former  transfigured.  It  baptizes  the  understanding 
with  feeling,  and  the  feeling  with  Divine  influences.  It  is  the  product  of  love  and 
obedience  more  than  of  inquiry,  and  is  rather  the  gift  of  God  than  the  acquisition 
of  man.  2.  But  although  distinguished  these  are  not  to  be  separated.  We  can 
possess  the  lower  without  the  higher,  bat  not  the  higher  without  the  lower.  Intel- 
leotoal  knowledge  of  the  things  of  God  is  right  as  far  as  it  goes.  Its  objects  are 
true  and  its  apprehension  of  them  is  correct.  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hear- 
ing  implies  an  understanding  of  what  is  heard.  This  is  the  window  which  admiti 
into  the  soul  the  light  of  heaven ;  and  as  the  room  is  lighter  if  the  window  be  large 
and  clear,  so  also  the  spiritual  knowledge  is  likely  to  be  more  vivid  if  the  natural 
knowledge  of  God's  things  be  abundant.  The  function  of  the  one  is  to  build  the 
altar,  arrange  the  wood,  and  plan  the  sacrifice ;  the  function  of  the  other  is  to  bring 
the  fire  from  heaven.  8.  But  this  is  insufficient,  and  the  super-excellence  of 
spiritual  knowledge  makes  it  appear  pale  and  poor  in  comparison.  It  is  superficial. 
It  does  not  penetrate  down  to  the  heart  and  will,  bat  lies  on  the  surface  of  the 
mind  ;  nor  does  it  pierce  beyond  the  outward  aspect  of  God's  truth,  and  is  not  in 
oommanion  with  its  glory.  4.  Look  at  the  texts  which  explain  the  nature  of  the 
higher  knowledge.  (1)  1  Cor.  vui.  1-8.  Its  fundamental  element  is  love ;  love 
comprehending  what  the  most  cultured  intellect  without  love  cannot  receive.  The 
knowledge  which  is  not  grounded  in  love  does  not  build  up,  but  only  puffs  op.  (2) 
CoL  i.  9, 10.  Its  nature  is  spiritual  because  its  source  is  supernatural,  and  9onoemfl 
itseli  with  the  highest  aspects  of  God's  truth  which  ve  hid  from  the  natond  man. 


.  n.]  C0L0SSIAN8,  IIT 

It  is  a  power  which  rules  the  whole  man  and  results  in  a  walk  pleasing  to  God. 
The  highest  degree  of  it,  therefore,  constitutes  the  perfection  of  the  religious  life. 
(3)  Philip,  i.  9-11.  Here  again  the  chief  element  is  love.  II.  The  assurancb 
BELONGING  TO  THIS  KNOWLEDGE.  1.  The  assurauce  is  not  a  property  added  to  the 
knowledge,  but  the  cream  of  the  knowledge  itself,  and  the  higher  and  mora 
extensive  the  knowledge  the  stronger  the  assurance.  2.  Some  Christians  have  an 
assurance  which  to  some  extent  is  the  result  of  study  (Luke  i.  4 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  15). 
This  is  not  possessed  by  all  the  saints.  They  are  not  able  to  impart  this  assured 
knowledge  concerning  things  in  which  they  have  been  but  imperfectly  instructed. 
But  they  have  assurance  of  the  greatest  personal  value.  Reasons  may  be  circulated, 
but  not  intuitions  and  experiences.  My  neighbour  must  see  with  his  own  eyes  and 
feel  with  his  own  heait  what  I  see  and  feel  in  order  to  partake  of  the  same  assur- 
ance. It  is  a  revelation  on  the  one  side  and  an  intuition  on  the  other.  {J.  Hughes, 
D.D.)  There  is  no  wealth  for  man's  soul  hke  the  spiritual  consciousness  of  the 
glory  of  the  truth  of  God.  I.  By  it  every  part  of  our  intellectual  and  moral 
NATURE  IS  ENRICHED.  1.  It  givcs  light  to  the  mind,  such  a  light  as  only  comes 
from  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  dissipating  darkness,  clearing  away  doubts,  solving 
perplexities  that  nothing  else  can  remove,  so  that  the  man  illuminated  by  it  becomes 
a  child  of  light  and  of  the  day.  2.  It  gives  peace  to  the  conscience,  even  the  peace 
passing  all  understanding  which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  3.  It 
sheds  abroad  in  the  heart  that  love  which  is  its  true  life,  the  love  of  God  and  Christ 
to  man.  4.  It  gives  purity  to  the  life  and  nobleness  to  the  character,  bringing  it 
under  the  influence  of  heavenly  motives  and  the  Divine  operation,  so  that  the  man 
is  transformed  into  the  image  of  God  from  glory  to  glory.  5.  It  gives  glory  to  man- 
hood,  making  it  a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  enriching  it  with  the  prospect 
ol  the  unfading  crown  and  eternal  blessedness.  II.  These  riches  can  never 
PERISH.  Other  riches  may  take  to  themselves  wings  and  fly  away,  or  otherwise 
disappoint,  but  the  wealth  which  the  gospel  gives  torm^  part  of  ourselves  for  ever- 
more. Disease  caunot  aSect  it ;  death  cannot  invalidate  its  worth  ;  the  cares  of 
time  and  the  trials  of  life  only  tend  to  enhance  its  value  and  brighten  its  posses- 
sion to  the  soul.  {J.  Spence,  D.D.)  In  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of 
wisdom  and  knowledge. — The  hidden  treasures  of  wisdom  in  Christ : — Wisdom  does 
not  consist  in  wide  and  varied  knowledge.  A  student  may  be  a  walking  encyclo- 
pasdia,  and  yet  be  far  from  being  a  wise  man.  Wisdom  is  the  practical  apphcation 
of  knowledge,  the  attainment  of  the  highest  moral  results  by  the  best  means.  The 
cry  of  the  human  intellect  in  all  ages  is  for  wisdom.  The  greatest  souls  have 
toiled  for  it  and  failed.  It  is  a  Divine  revelation.  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not 
God.  The  wisdom  which  all  need  is  found  only  in  Christ.  Observe — I.  That 
Christ  is  the  inexhaustible  source  of  the  truest  wisdom.  The  false  teachers 
at  Colossae,  like  certain  pretentious  philosophers  of  modern  times,  boasted  of  the 
vast  range  of  their  wisdom  and  knowledge.  They  discussed  questions  which  are 
reproduced  to-day — the  wisdom  of  this  world  which  comes  to  naught.  But  it  is 
only  in  Christ  that  we  find  all  the  treasures  which  furnish  and  enrich  the  mind 
and  guide  in  the  way  of  salvation.  If  we  classify  the  principal  sources  of  human 
knowledge,  only  in  Christ  does  each  department  find  its  fullest  explication  and  derive 
its  worth.  1.  He  is  the  loftiest  ideal  and  purest  inspiration  of  the  poet.  Poetry 
occuj^ies  an  important  place  in  human  culture.  It  has  been  abused,  but  the  true 
poet  pants  after  the  noblest  expression  of  the  beautiful  and  the  good.  Of  this, 
Christ  is  the  embodiment,  and  the  poet  exhausts  all  his  resources  in  portraying  the 
hneaments  of  His  character.  2.  He  is  the  grandest  hero  of  the  historian.  History 
would  be  an  unsolvable  enigma  could  the  name  of  Christ  be  struck  out.  The  story 
of  redemption  unites  Christ  with  the  destiny  of  man  in  all  ages.  3.  He  is  promi- 
nent among  the  sublimest  themes  of  the  philosopher.  A  philosophy  that  does  not 
recognize  the  Divine  plunges  its  votaries  in  labyrinthine  darkness.  Its  legitimate 
oflice  is  to  conduct  to  God.  II.  That  the  treasures  of  Divink  wisdom  are 
discoverable  by  the  sincere  and  earnest  seeker.  They  are  hid,  but  not  so  as 
to  be  beyond  our  reach.  They  are  intended  for  discovery  and  appropriation.  Their 
brilliancy  sparkles  even  in  their  hiding-place.  They  are  like  a  mine  whose  riches, 
though  faintly  indicated  on  the  surface,  are  concealed  in  the  depths.  The  more 
diligently  the  mine  is  worked  the  more  precious  and  abundant  the  ore  appears. 
Lessons — 1.  Man  universally  covets  wisdom.  2.  The  highest  wisdom  is  treasured 
op  in  Christ  for  man.  3.  If  man  finds  it  not,  it  is  his  own  fault.  (G.  Barlow.) 
The  boundless  wealth  of  wisdom  in  Christ : — "  Where  shall  wisdom  be  found  ?  "  &c. 
(Job  xxviii.  12-20).  These  sublime  words  have  been  echoed  by  the  inquiring  spirits 


Hi  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

of  every  age ;  but  the  only  true  reply  is  in  the  text.  There  are  modem  forms  of  old 
ColoBsian  error :  those  who  say  that  there  is  no  reliable  truth  but  in  the  facts  ol 
nature  ;  no  religion  but  in  science  ;  no  progress  but  in  rejecting  revelation.      I.  In 

ChBIST   ABE    HID    ALL    THE     TEEASDEE8     OF    WISDOM    AND     KNOWLEDGE.         1.     TllCy     are 

deposited  in  Him  as  the  God-man,  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  &c.  2.  Know- 
ledge is  simply  enlightenment,  acquaintance  with  truth;  wisdom  is  the  use  and 
result  of  that  enlightenment,  the  application  of  the  truth.  Knowledge  is  the  study, 
wisdom  its  fruit.  3.  Treasures  suggest  great  value  and  excellence.  All  the 
treasures  are  in  Christ ;  not  select  truths,  but  all  kinds  of  truth.  As  all  things  were 
made  and  consist  by  Christ,  so  all  branches  of  knowledge  for  the  human  soul  have 
s  relation  to  Him  and  find  their  truest  meaning  in  Him.  1.  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
key  to  human  history.  (1)  The  history  of  ancient  nations  cannot  be  considered 
thoroughly  apart  from  the  Jews,  with  whom  they  were  brought  into  contact,  and 
every  one  sees  that  the  Hebrews  had  relations  with  Jesus,  clear,  manifold,  and  vital. 
Their  ancient  records,  too,  bear  constant  reference  to  One,  the  light  of  whose 
promised  and  expected  advent  flashed  back  on  Egypt,  Assyria,  &c.,  making  every 
page  of  this  history  instinct  with  living  interest.  (2)  The  same  holds  good  in  regard 
to  modern  nations.  The  unbeliever  may  reject  Christ,  still  he  has  to  account  for 
the  presence  of  His  religion  and  to  explain  its  influence  as  by  far  the  mightiest 
moral  impulse  which  men  or  nations  have  received.  The  pathway  of  Christ's 
name  and  influence  is  easily  traced  among  the  nations  in  the  lines  of  light  and 
liberty.  2.  Christ  is  the  ground  of  all  true  philosophy.  (1)  Nature  is  hung  with 
all  the  insignia  of  Divine  skill,  power,  and  glory.  Yet  experience  proves  that  the 
light  of  nature  cannot  make  this  impression  an  abiding  principle  of  action.  It  is 
only  when  we  see  the  material  world  as  the  theatre  of  redemption,  and  the  work  of 
creation  the  work  of  the  Keconciler,  that  nature  leads  up  to  nature's  God.  (2)  The 
philosophy  of  mind  likewise  finds  its  meaning  in  Christ.  How  is  it  possible  to 
estimate  the  value  of  the  soul  without  a  knowledge  of  Him  whose  death  was  the 
price  of  its  redemption  ?  Philosophy  teaches  something  of  the  prerogatives  of  reason, 
of  the  power  of  conscience,  and  of  the  relation  of  the  animal  to  the  spiritual 
nature :  but  what  do  we  find  ?  The  harmony  of  this  lofty  nature  disturbed,  ita 
liberty  gone,  the  prerogative  of  reason  overborne  by  the  power  of  passion.  Where 
is  the  hght  or  wisdom  that  can  secure  the  harmony  between  what  man  is  and  what 
he  ought  to  be  ?  Where  is  the  knowledge  or  power  that  can  bring  beauty  out  of  the 
chaos  which  religion  discovers  7  It  is  in  Christ  alone :  in  Him  are  hid  all  the 
treasures  of  the  only  wisdom  which  expounds  the  lofty  relations  of  man's  mental 
being  and  the  value  and  vigour  of  his  spirit.  (3)  The  philosophy  of  morals  in  the 
relation  of  man  to  man,  and  to  society  at  large,  is  a  perplexing  study.  We  see 
virtue  oppressed  and  vice  triumphant,  might  supreme  over  right,  &c.  The  solution 
is  in  the  gospel.  In  the  knowledge  of  Christ  we  see  the  rule  of  a  "  righteous 
Father  " — the  triumph  of  law  and  of  love,  the  harmony  of  righteousness  and  peace, 
and  the  evidence  that  whatever  anomalies  may  appear  in  society  now,  all  will  yet 
be  explained  and  rectified,  and  issue  in  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  man.  3. 
Christ  is  the  substance  of  a  true  theology.  (1)  All  saving  knowledge  of  God  and 
OUT  relations  to  Him  we  find  in  Christ.  (2)  The  peace  with  God  which  men  have 
Bought  everywhere  by  sacrifice  and  prayer  is  secured  by  Him  who  is  the  propitiation 
for  our  sins.  (3)  The  future,  which  has  baSled  all  human  inquiries,  has  been 
revealed  by  Him  who  has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  II.  The  kelation 
OF  Christ  generallt  to  all  human  studies.  1.  In  Him  the  mind  finds  its  truest 
stimulus  and  healthiest  impulse.  He  is  the  fosterer  and  guide  of  all  wise  intel- 
lectual pursuits.  It  is  in  countries  where  He  is  known  and  worshipped  that 
literature  and  science  exercise  their  widest  sway.  He  emancipates  the  mind  from 
the  bondage  of  corruption  and  fear,  and  as  the  wisdom  of  God  hallows  all  wisdom. 
(1)  If  we  investigate  nature,  does  it  make  no  difference  whether  we  examine 
a  world  without  God,  or  a  world  which  God  has  made  the  object  of  His  special 
interest  ?  (2)  If  we  study  the  human  mind,  will  it  make  no  difference  whether  we 
view  it  as  a  taper  to  be  extinguished  or  the  oSspring  of  an  infinite  Father?  (3)  If 
we  examine  the  human  frame,  will  it  make  no  diiierence  whether  we  consider  it  as 
destined  to  rot  in  the  grave,  or  as  the  tabernacle  of  the  immortal  spirit  destined  to 
be  restored?  WTio  does  not  see  that  the  light  which  Christ  brings  enhances  and 
elevates  every  branch  of  knowledge  ?  2.  The  word  "  hid"  implies  that  wisdom  and 
knowledge  are  stored  up  in  Him  in  a  hidden  manner,  suggesting — (1)  Concealment. 
All  these  treasures  are  not  seen  at  once  by  the  bodily  or  spiritual  eye.  They  are 
bid  from  the  thoughtless  and  unbelieving  world,  from  the  vain  and  unassisted 


<jHA».  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  119 

intellect  (1  Cor.  ii.  8).  God  haa  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and 
revealed  them  unto  babes.  Just  as  many  with  an  uneducated  eye  traverse  a 
country  rich  in  mineral  wealth,  and  have  no  idea  of  what  lies  under  the  surface,  bo 
the  treasures  that  are  hid  in  Christ  are  only  seen  by  the  eye  of  faith,  and  found  bj" 
the  devout  and  contrite  soul  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  (2)  But  these  treasures 
thus  hid  are  intended  for  discovery  and  appropriation.  They  are  gradually 
Dnfolded.  The  number  of  those  enriched  dailj'  increases,  yet  the  riches  are  still 
inexhaustible,  and  the  oldest  disciples  are  ever  discoveiing  some  new  vein  of 
preciousness  in  their  Lord.  So  it  will  ever  be.  {J.  Spence,  D.D. )  Earthly  and 
heavenly  riches: — "  This  morning,"  says  Mr.  Fuller,  "  I  have  read  another  of 
Edwards'  sermons,  on  '  God,  the  Christian's  Portion,'  from  Psa.  Ixxiii.  25.  The 
latter  part  comes  very  close,  and  I  feel  myself  at  a  loss  what  to  judge  as  to  God's 
being  my  chief  good.  He  asks,  whether  wo  had  rather  live  in  this  world  rich  and 
without  God,  or  poor  and  with  Him  ?  Perhaps  I  should  not  be  so  much  at  a  loss  to 
decide  this  question  as  another ;  namely,  had  I  rather  be  rich  in  this  world  and 
enjoy  but  little  of  God,  or  poor  and  enjoy  much  of  God?  I  am  confident  the 
practice  of  great  numbers  of  professing  Christians  declares  that  they  prefer  the 
former ;  and  in  some  instances  I  feel  guilty  of  the  same  thing."  The  trea mires  of 
Christ  in  relation  to  educntion: — When  the  apostle  spoke  of  the  wisdom  hid  in 
Christ,  he  meant  by  "  wisdom  "  just  what  his  adversaries  meant,  that  is,  the  know- 
ledge of  man  in  those  sublime  relations  that  connect  him  with  God  and  God's 
universal  plan.  Now  this  is  a  sort  of  knowledge  to  which  everything  may  be 
expected  to  contribute  some  remote  and  faint  light ;  but  the  point  here  to  be  observed 
is,  that  the  revelation  of  Christ  Jesus,  alone  and  unaided,  flashes  a  beam  of  splendour 
npon  it  in  which  all  others  are  lost  and  disappear.  Nor  this  only,  but  as  all 
knowledge  is  mainly  valuable  as  it  helps  our  efforts  for  this  last  and  mightiest 
knowledge  of  ourselves  and  God,  so  when  this  is  attained,  through  virtue  of  the 
Christian  truth,  it,  in  its  turn,  radiates  back  upon  all  the  departments  of  knowledge 
a  new  and  blessed  light.  And  thus  the  revelation  of  Christ  not  merely  teaches  na 
in  itself  a  series  of  truths  of  inexpressible  importance,  and  without  it  wholly 
nnattainable,  but  it  also,  as  a  great  central  discovery,  harmonizes  all  our  beliefs, 
sacred  and  secular,  binds  them  together  as  its  own  servants,  gives  them  a  new 
interest,  and  position,  and  colouring,  and  dignifies  the  pursuit  of  them  as  a  labour 
in  the  very  cause  of  God  Himself, — begun  and  prosecuted  with  a  view  to  His  glory 
— for  to  know  the  beauty  of  the  temple  is  to  know  the  glory  of  the  architect.  And 
hence,  so  far  are  we  who  advocate  the  revelation  of  Christ  as  the  basis  of  education, 
from  (as  our  slanderers  have  it)  restricting  or  dreading  the  free  search  ol 
natural  knowledge,  that,  on  the  contrary,  when  once  the  corner-stone  has  been  fixed 
in  our  foundation,  we  exult  in  a  science  and  a  philosophy  that  is  subservient  to  the 
faith  of  Christ ;  we  hail  every  bright  discovery  as  a  new  tribute  to  the  creating  and 
redeeming  God  whom  we  adore.  Let  but  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  reign  in  the 
centre  of  the  soul,  and  we  know  that  every  element  of  inferior  knowledge  will  dispose 
itself  to  revolve  harmoniously  around  it  1  ( W.  Archer  Butler,  M.A .)  This  I  Ba.y 
lest  any  man  should  begrolle  you. — As  men  love  and  desire  only  those  things  which 
have  an  appearance  of  good,  so  they  believe  only  those  which  have  a  semblance  of 
truth.  This  advantage  which  truth  naturally  has  over  falsehood  compels  its 
enemies  to  counterfeit  its  mask  and  wear  its  livery,  as  coiners  give  their  copper  or 
lead  the  colour  of  gold  or  silver  in  order  to  pass  it  as  current  coin ;  othervrise 
neither  error  nor  base  coin  have  a  chance  of  acceptance.  And  as  Christianity  com- 
prises the  most  important  truths,  so  there  never  was  a  system  which  impostors  have 
so  laboured  to  corrupt ;  and  so,  therefore,  ought  we  to  strenuously  endeavonr  to 
sever  the  falsehood  which  has  been  palmed  off  as  the  truth.  This  is  one  of 
the  most  important  duties  of  our  lives.  It  is  loss  to  take  bad  money  for  good ; 
it  is  hurtful  to  receive  an  error  for  truth  in  the  simplest  matters ;  but  here  the 
consequence  of  imposture  is  irreparable.  So  here  and  elsewhere  the  apostle  warns 
the  faithful  against  it  (Rom.  xvi.  17 ;  1  Thess.  v.  21  ;  Eph.  iv.  14 ;  Heb.  v.  14). 
I.  The  dangeb  of  the  Colossians  of  being  deceived  with  enticing  words.  There 
never  was  a  servant  of  Christ  who  was  not  beset  by  such  a  temptation.  As  soon  as 
Satan  sees  the  truth  of  the  gospel  appear  he  raises  up  impostors  to  corrupt  it,  and  to 
alienate  its  professors  from  its  purity.  1.  The  term  employed  means  to  deceive  by 
false  and  ensnaring  ratiocination.  'These  bad  men,  knowing  that  we  are  not  induced 
to  embrace  anything  without  some  reason,  our  nature  demanding  that  the  under- 
standing should  precede  the  will,  begin  there  to  effect  our  ruin.  It  is  a  sophism,  a 
false  arguing  which  by  its  vain  appearance  and  fallacious  blaze  leads  men  into  en-or, 


ISO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  a, 

as  those  fataons  fires  which,  rising  at  night,  conduct  those  who  follow  them  orer 
precipices.  Satan,  tbe  father  of  all  sophisters,  took  this  course  first,  attacking 
our  first  parents'  understandings  in  the  first  place,  and  beguiling  them 
that  he  might  destroy  them.  All  whom  he  has  since  employed  have  followed  the 
same  method.  No  heretic  ever  appeared  who  did  not  paint  over  his  impostures 
with  specious  reasons.  Some  act  maliciously,  and  in  defiance  of  their  own  con- 
sciences ;  others  through  ignorance  (Rom.  x.  2),  like  most  of  those  of  the  Roman 
communion.  But  we  must  take  heed  of  both.  As  poison  fails  not  to  kill  the  man 
who  takes  it,  though  given  in  ignorance  ;  so  error,  from  whatever  hand  it  come,  has  a 
bad  efiect.  2.  The  means  which  false  teachers  use  are  "  enticing  words  "  (Rom. 
xvi.  18 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  4).  Under  this  term  are  comprehended  all  that  attractiveness 
of  discourse  which  is  apt  to  touch  and  win  hearts.  Eloquence  too  often  makes 
things,  as  it  were  by  enchantment,  appear  quite  opposite — honey  wormwood,  black 
white,  and  vice  versa.  It  can  subveii;  a  cause,  however  good ;  and  establish  it,  how- 
ever bad.  It  has  frequently  procured  condemnation  for  the  innocent,  while  th& 
guilty  have  been  acquitted  with  applause.  But  among  all  the  busy  people  who  us® 
it  none  more  perniciously  employ  it  than  corrupters  of  religion.  Not  that  eloquence 
is  to  be  decried.  It  has  done  good  service  to  the  gospel,  and  Paul,  who  here  con- 
demns it  as  a  vehicle  of  error,  does  not  reject  it  in  the  service  of  the  truth.  But  a» 
innocence  is  not  always  the  best  clothed,  so  truth  frequently  is  not  the  most  richly 
decked.  II.  The  means  of  guabdino  against  it.  "  This  I  say  " — what  ?  "  In  Him 
are  hid  all  the  treasures,"  Ac.  None  of  the  wiles  of  error  can  stand  before  these. 
Whoever  has  this  principle  in  his  heart  wiU  receive  nothmg  out  of  Christ,  and  so 
has  his  ears  effectually  closed  against  the  seductions  of  error.  (J.  Daille.)  The. 
true  tnfoguard  against  error  ; — Paul  fortifies  the  disciples  by  exalting  the  master  and 
urging  the  inexhaustible  significance  of  His  Person  and  message.  To  learn  tha 
fuU  meaning  and  preciousness  of  Christ  is  to  be  armed  against  error.  The  positive 
truth  concerning  Him,  by  pre-occupying  mind  and  heart,  guards  beforehand  against 
the  most  specious  teachings.  If  you  fill  the  coffer  with  gold,  nobody  wiU  want, 
and  there  will  be  no  room  for  pinchbeck.  A  living  grasp  of  Christ  will  keep  us 
from  being  swept  away  by  the  current  of  prevailing  popular  opinion,  which  is 
always  much  more  likely  to  be  wrong  than  right,  and  is  sure  to  be  exaggerated  and 
onesided  at  the  best.  A  personal  consciousness  of  His  power  and  sweetness  will 
give  an  instinctive  repugnance  to  teaching  that  would  lower  His  dignity  and  debase 
His  work.  If  He  be  the  centre  and  anchorage  of  all  our  thoughts,  we  shall  not  be 
tempted  to  go  elsewhere  in  search  of  the  treasures  of  wisdom.  He  who  has  found 
the  one  pearl  of  great  price  needs  no  more  to  go  seeking  goodly  pearls,  but  only  day 
by  day  more  completely  to  lose  self,  and  give  up  all  else,  that  he  may  win  more 
and  more  of  Christ  his  all.  If  we  keep  our  hearts  and  minds  in  communion  with 
our  Lord,  and  have  experience  of  His  preciousness,  that  will  preserve  uo  from 
many  a  snare,  will  give  us  a  wisdom  beyond  much  logic,  will  solve  for  us  many  o£ 
the  questions  most  hotly  debated  to-day,  and  will  show  us  that  many  more  are 
nnimportant  and  uninteresting  to  us.  And  even  if  we  should  be  led  to  wrong  con- 
clusions on  some  matters,  "  if  we  drink  any  deadly  thing  it  shall  not  hurt "  us. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Satan's  method: — "This  is  the  devil's  device,  first  to  maze 
people,  as  birds  are  with  a  light  and  a  bell  in  the  night,  and  then  to  drive  them 
into  the  net.  If  you  would  keep  to  wholesome  doctrine,  keep  to  a  form  of  whole- 
some words,  and  do  not  place  religion  in  conceited  speaking."  Would  that  this 
advice  of  Manton's  were  heeded.  We  have  those  about  us  who  are  for  ever  invent- 
ing some  new  thing,  and  using  the  old  orthodox  terms  in  an  altogether  nov«l  sense. 
Their  hearers  are  first  dazzled  with  the  clever  candle  light,  and  cannot  make  oat 
what  the  novel  brilliance  means  ;  and  when  they  are  thoroughly  bewildered,  a  great 
noise  and  tinkling  is  made  of  pretended  wisdom  and  deep  thought,  so  that  the  poor 
Bouls  are  ready  to  fly  anywhere  and  anyhow.  Thus  the  fowler's  business  ia 
effectually  done,  and  by  this  means,  if  it  were  possible,  they  would  ensnare  the 
very  elect.  The  safest  way  for  simple  souls  is  to  keep  to  a  definite  and  decided 
gospel  ministry.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Error  it  insidious: — Error  is  insidious  in 
its  approaches.  It  flatters  by  liberality  and  betrays  by  sophism.  We  are  not 
reconciled  to  it  at  once.  There  are  disgusts  to  be  allayed  and  fears  to  be  van- 
quished. Little  by  little  are  we  allured.  Tbe  voyager  eaters  a  current  which  seemfs 
propitious,  there  is  no  apparent  diversion  from  his  course,  his  bark  speeds  well,  his 
oar  does  not  toil  nor  his  sail  stmin.  In  his  or nfidence  all  promises  success.  But 
while  be  examines,  scarcely  does  it  f-eem  that  he  has  advanced.  Much  again  and 
•gain  remiuds  him  of  what  he  has  noticed  just  before.     A  strange  familiarity  im- 


OBAS.  lu]  COLOSSIANS.  121 

presses  his  sense.  Still  current  flows  into  current,  while  onward  and  buoyant  ii 
his  track.  Soon  he  feels  an  unnatural  vibration.  Where  he  ghded,  he  now  whirls 
along.  The  truth  seizes  upon  him.  He  is  sweeping  a  whirlpool.  Long  since  ha 
has  entered  the  verge  of  a  maelstrom,  and  he  is  now  the  sport  of  its  gyrations.  No 
power  is  left  his  helm  or  mast ;  he  is  the  trembling  unresisting  prey.  He  hears  the 
roar ;  ho  is  drawn  into  the  suck  of  the  vortex.  Not  only  the  circle  lessens,  the 
very  surface  slcipes.  The  central  funnel  and  abyss,  darkheaving,  smooth,  vitreous, 
yawns.  The  mariner  shrieks,  the  skiff  is  swallowed  up,  where  the  waters  only 
separate  to  close,  where  the  outermost  attraction  was  but  the  minister  to  the 
faiaine  of  this  devouring  maw.     (Dr.  E.  W.  Hamilton.) 

Ver.  5.  Though  I  be  ahsent  In  the  flesh. — I.  The  modh  of  the  APosTLE'g 
ATFECTioN  towards  the  Colossians.  1.  He  shows  that  he  was  never  bo  far  away 
from  them  but  in  mind,  care,  and  thought  he  was  with  them.  This  was  necessary 
lest  they  should  think  he  was  ignorant  of  them  and  indifferent  to  them,  never 
having  visited  them.  It  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  lover  not  to  be  severed  in  mind 
from  those  whom  he  loves,  altbon^h  separated  by  space.  2.  He  rejoiced  at  what 
he  beheld  in  them,  and  expressed  himself  thus,  lest  they  should  suppose  he  doubted 
their  constancy  since  he  so  earnestly  exhorted  them  to  perseverance  (Phil.  iv.  1). 
3.  Hence  we  infer  that — (1)  A  minister  ought  to  be  always  present  with  his  flock — if 
not  in  body,  by  care  and  thought  and  prayer.  (2)  A  minister's  true  joy  arises  from 
the  fact  that  his  people  continue  and  increase  in  spiritual  blessings,  not  that  he 
himself  is  enriched  in  temporals.  (3)  The  state  which  occasions  his  joy  should 
cause  his  solicitude  ;  for  Paul  in  consequence  of  his  joy  at  their  state,  labours  the 
more  earnestly  lest  they  be  cast  down  by  impostors.  II.  The  cause  of  the 
apostle's  affection.  Note  that  his  praise  is  most  skilful  and  a  strong  inducement 
to  perseverance  in  the  thing  praised.  He  who  praises  what  you  do  declares — (1) 
That  it  is  good,  for  otherwise  it  would  not  be  fit  to  be  praised.  (2)  That  it  is  easy 
to  you,  because  you  have  so  long  effected  it.  (3)  That  it  would  be  disgraceful  if 
you  desist,  because  praise  earned  is  never  lost  without  shame.  The  apostle  rejoiced 
because  of — 1.  Their  order,  which  denotes — (1)  The  settled  manners  of  the  indi- 
viduals. Goodness  of  manners  is  constantly  included  in  "  order  "  in  the  scriptures, 
just  as,  on  the  contrary,  they  who  are  of  bad  manners  are  said  to  walk  disorderly 
(2  Thess.  iii.  6).  (2)  The  well-appointed  discipline  of  the  Church  ;  which  teaches 
ministers  to  rule  well,  subjects  to  obey  duly  ;  and  compels  the  negligent  and 
refractory  to  perform  their  duty  (1  Cor.  xiv.  40  ;  1  Tim.  i,  3).  (3)  Their  agreement 
Bnd  concord.  "  Order  "  is  a  military  term,  and  denotes  a  compact  body  of  soldiers 
marshalled  in  due  order.  He  intimates,  therefore,  that  he  regarded  them  as  a 
well-arranged  phalanx,  cleaving  together  in  the  unity  of  the  faith,  and  therefore 
invincible.  2.  Their  steadfastness  of  faith  in  Christ,  which  denotes — (1)  That  they 
Buffered  not  the  true  doctrine  to  be  wrested  from  them,  but  remained  firm  and 
umnoveable  in  it  like  soldiers  at  their  post.  (2)  That  they  did  not  permit  strange 
doctrines  to  mingle  with  it ;  but  filled  their  minda  with  sacred  truth,  the  iuventiona 
of  men  being  excluded  from  the  business  of  faith.  For  that  is  properly  said  to  be 
•oUd  which  is  full  of  itself  alone.  3.  Hence  we  learn — (1)  when  the  mind  wavers 
and  vacillates  between  various  opinions,  that  is  not  a  steadfast  faith,  but  an  empty 
shadow  of  it.  It  is  the  will  of  God,  therefore  that  our  assent  to  the  cause  of 
religion  be  without  hesitation.  A  faith  suspended  between  conflicting  opinions 
is  reproved  (1  Kings  xviii.  11).  (2)  That  faith  also  which  together  with  the 
gospel  admits  the  traditions  and  inventions  of  men  is  not  steadfast  but  hollow. 
{Bp.  Davenant.)  Phase*  of  human  nature : — I.  A  poweb  that  is  common  to  mah 
AS  MAN.  "  Though  I  be  absent  .  .  .  spirit."  Here  is  a  power  of  going  forth  from 
the  body — visiting  distant  scenes  and  taking  an  interest  in  them.  This  power  we 
are  always  using.  Our  minds  are  ever  away  somewhere — they  move  with  lightning 
rapidity  across  oceans,  continents,  and  even  worlds ;  they  span  the  ages  in  a 
moment.  We  thank  God  for  this  power.  Brutes  have  it  not ;  it  makes  ns  indepen- 
dent of  time  and  space,  and  gives  to  life  an  eternal  freshness  and  an  infinite 
variety.  II.  A  spiritual  condition  peccliab  to  some  men.  1.  Spiritual  order — 
harmony  with  ourselves,  the  universe,  God.  2.  Stability.  Steadfastness  to  Christ, 
settled  in  hope,  confidence.     What  a  blessed  state  1  how  devoutly  to  be  desired  ! 

III.    A    SOCIAL    DELIGHT    EXPEBIENCED    BY    ChRISTLY    MEN.       "  Joyiug,"  &C.        ThoUgh 

Paul's  body  was  in  Borne,  his  spirit  was  in  CoIossbb  rejoicing  in  the  happiness  of 
the  Christians  there.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  separation  of  friends: — I.  Thb 
•ONDITION  AMTioiPATBD — "  Though  I  be  absent  in  the  body."      1.  Whatever  may  be 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ttk 

the  number  and  importance  of  oar  relations  to  onr  fellows,  we  are  unable  to  ba 
personally  in  contact  with  them  in  every  place.  Mercifully  we  are  not  permitted 
to  be  ubiquitous,  and  are  only  suffered  to  be  migratory  for  self-preservation.  Thii 
restriction  promotes  the  order,  improvement,  and  happiness  of  society.  2.  But  is 
not  it  a  hindrance  to  the  discharge  of  our  relationships  to  be  absent  from  them  ? 
No,  or  it  would  not  be  made  the  rule  for  us  by  an  all-wise  God.  Observe  how  it  ia 
made  the  law  of  Providence  in  regard  to  our  nearest  relations :  "  A  man  shall  leave 
father  and  mother,  and  cleave  to  his  wife."  In  how  many  business  necessitates 
absence  in  the  flesh,  3.  God  would  teach  as  by  this  law — (1)  The  temporary 
nature  of  existing  relations  in  the  flesh,  so  that  we  are  warned  not  to  regard  such 
AS  our  highest  ties.  Father  and  mother,  husband  and  wife,  are  sweet  bonds;  but 
the  fact  that  so  many  circumstances  cause  absence,  and  that  death  will  soon  close 
such  relations,  ought  to  lead  us  to  seek  other  and  more  enduring  relations  in  the 
spirit.  **  Who  is  my  mother,"  said  Jesus.  "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God,"  &c. 
(2)  The  duty  of  improving  our  relationships  while  yet  present.  Did  we  realize  the 
law  of  absence  would  not  a  greater  spirit  of  kindness,  forbearance,  and  service  be 
excited  ?  ^3)  Not  to  look  to  the  arm  of  flesh,  but  to  God.  The  tendency  to  make 
much  of  tne  human  instrument  because  he  is  present  is  natural  to  man.  Christ 
declared  His  absence  in  the  flesh  to  be  expedient  for  His  disciples.  Who  can 
doubt  that  one  design  of  Christ  in  the  changes  of  spheres  appointed  to  His  minis- 
ters, e.g.,  is  to  elevate  His  Church's  faith  and  to  excite  them  to  rely  on  His  Spirit. 
(4)  The  cultivation  of  Christian  love  in  its  highest  exercise.  The  love  exercised 
when  present  has  to  be  purified  from  inferior  motives  by  absence.  Absence  from 
his  country  purifies  the  fires  of  a  patriot's  love.  So  instead  of  loving  the  Colos- 
Bians  less,  Paul  loved  them  the  more.  II.  The  communion  maintained.  Happily 
we  are  so  constituted  that  the  law  which  compels  our  fleshly  separations  ia 
abundantly  compensated  by  the  liberty  of  the  spirit.  Paul  was  with  the  Colossians 
in  spirit,  praying  for  them  wherever  he  might  be,  and  meeting  them  around  a  common 
mercy  seat.  (O.  R,  Birch.)  Apottolie  praise  of  order  and  ttability : — The  apostle 
commended — -I.  The  extkbnal  obdeb  of  the  Church — "Beholding  your  order." 
This  is  mentioned  first  because  it  first  meets  the  eye,  though  all  external  disciphne 
must  spring  from  faith.  II.  The  apostle  ohebished  a  deep,  personal  interest  in 
TBEiB  WELFARE.  1.  In  Spirit  He  was  present  with  them.  2.  While  the  Church  pre- 
serves its  order  and  stability  it  is  invulnerable.  8.  It  is  cause  of  rejoicing  when  the 
Church  faithfully  maintains  the  conquests  already  won.  (G.  Barlow.)  Order  and 
tteadfastne$s  : — The  apostle  looked  forth  from  Eome  with  that  spiritual  second  sight 
to  which  distance  is  as  nothing.  He  surveyed  churches  remote  in  space,  the  Colossian 
among  the  rest.  In  praising  its  condition,  he  uses  an  image  derived  from  the  order 
and  solidity  of  the  soldiers  of  the  Prffitorian  guard,  whom  he  saw  so  constantly 
during  his  captivity  (Philip,  i.  13;  Eph.  vi,  11  ;  Philip,  iv.  7).  "Order"  properly 
consists  in  the  due  disposition  of  parts  in  reference  to  the  whole;  steadfastness" 
lit.  "what  is  made  firm  ;"  hence  sometimes  the  solidified  body,  the  solid  strength 
of  an  army  (1  Maccabees  ix.  143 ;  x,  50),  The  first  is  the  orderly  organization, 
without  which  strength  evaporates ;  the  second  solid  strength,  without  which  order 
is  a  hollow  parade.  The  Church's  proper  organic  form  and  solid  definite  conviction 
of  the  unalterable  elements  of  the  Christian  creed  are  closely  connected  in  the 
apostle's  mind  as  they  have  been  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  The  Colossian 
Church  presents  itself  to  him  as  an  army — as  to  the  Church's  form,  in  serried  order; 
as  to  the  Church's  creed,  solid  at  the  core,  (Bp.  Alexander.)  A  lofty  Church 
ideal.  I.  Outwardly,  an  orderly  disciplined  army.  1.  Paul  was  no  martinet, 
anxious  about  the  pedantry  of  the  parade  ground,  but  he  knew  the  need  of  organiza- 
tion and  drill — a  place  for  every  man  and  every  man  in  his  place.  Order  does  not 
merely  mean  obedience  to  authority.  There  may  be  equal  order  under  widely 
different  forms  of  polity.  The  legionaries  were  drawn  up  in  close  ranks,  the  light- 
armed  skirmishers  more  loosely.  In  the  one  case  the  phalanx  was  more,  and  the 
individual  less ;  in  the  other,  more  play  was  given  to  the  single  man ;  but  the 
difierenoe  between  them  was  not  that  of  order  and  disorder,  but  that  of  two  systems, 
each  organized  but  on  different  principles,  and  for  different  purposes.  2.  Soma 
Churches  give  more  weight  to  the  principle  of  authority  ;  others  to  that  of  indivi- 
duality ;  but  the  former  has  no  right  to  reproach  the  other  as  necessarily  defective 
in  order.  Some  Churches  are  all  drill ;  the  Churches  of  looser  organization  are  in 
danger  of  making  too  little  of  organization.  But  both  need  that  all  their  members 
should  be  more  penetrated  with  the  sense  of  unity,  and  should  fill  each  his  place 
in  the  work  of  the  body.    The  proportion  of  idlers  in  all  Churches  is  a  scandal  and 


«BA».  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  193 

a  weakness.  However  officered  a  Church  may  be,  no  joy  would  fill  an  apostle's 
heart  in  beholding  it,  if  the  mass  of  its  members  had  no  share  in  its  activities. 
Every  society  of  professed  Christians  should  be  like  a  man-of-war's  crew,  each  of 
whom  knows  the  exact  inch  where  he  has  to  stand  when  the  whistle  sounds,  and  the 
precise  thing  he  has  to  do  in  gun  drill.  II.  Inwardlt,  a  sxedfast  faith.  1.  Per- 
fection of  discipline  is  not  enough.  That  may  stiffen  into  routine  if  there  be  not 
fiomething  deeper.  We  want  life  even  more  than  order.  The  soldiers  who  set 
David  on  the  throne  were  "  men  that  could  keep  rank,  they  were  not  of  a  double 
heart " — discipline  and  whole-hearted  enthusiasm.  Both  are  needed.  If  there  be 
not  courage  and  devotion,  there  is  nothing  worth  disciplining.  The  Church  that 
has  the  most  complete  order  and  not  also  steadfastness  of  faith  will  be  like  the 
German  armies,  all  pipe-clay  and  drill,  which  ran  like  hares  before  the  ragged 
levies  which  the  French  revolution  flung  across  the  border.  2.  If  the  rendering 
"steadfastness"  be  adopted,  the  phrase  will  mean  "  firmness  which  characterizes 
your  faith."  But  some  propose  "foundation,"  that  which  is  made  steadfast,  in 
which  case  the  meaning  will  either  be  "  the  firm  foundation  (for  your  lives)  which 
consists  of  your  faith,"  or,  "  the  firm  foundation  which  your  faith  has."  Paul 
rejoices,  seeing  that  their  faith  towards  Christ  has  a  basis  unshaken  by  assaults. 
8.  Such  a  rock  foundation  and  consequent  steadfastness  must  faith  have,  if  it  is  to 
be  worthy  of  the  name,  and  to  manifest  its  true  power.  A  tremulous  faith  may  be 
a  true  faith,  but  the  very  idea  of  faith  implies  solid  assurance  and  fixed  confidence. 
It  should  not  be  like  a  card  castle  that  the  light  breath  of  a  scornful  laugh  will 
throw  down,  but  "  a  tower  of  strength  that  stands  foursquare  to  all  the  winds  that 
blow."  We  should  seek  to  make  it  so,  nor  let  the  fluctuations  of  our  hearts  cause 
it  to  fluctuate.  And  that  we  may  do  bo  we  must  keep  up  a  true  and  close  com- 
munion with  Jesus  Christ.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  faith  and  order  of  the 
gospel  recommended.  I.  The  order  of  a  gospel  Church.  It  was  the  constant 
custom  of  the  apostles  to  organize  their  converts  into  Churches  (Acts  xv.  36,  41). 
The  order  may  be  considered  in  relation  to  the  whole  Church  as  a  body  (1  Cor.  xiv. 
40 ;  Titus  i.  5),  and  to  its  members  in  their  personal  behaviour  (2  Thess.  iii.  6, 11). 
Both  of  these  will  be  taken  in  if  we  consider  the  order  of  a  Church  of  Christ.  1. 
With  respect  to  its  constitution.  (1)  New  Testament  Churches  consist  of  such 
Christians  as  meet  together  in  a  given  place  for  religious  worship  and  discipline. 
The  word  Church  signifies  (a)  the  catholic  invisible  Church  which  consists  of  all  the 
elect  united  to  Christ  their  head  (Eph.  L  22  ;  v.  25) :  (6)  the  universal  visible 
Church  or  kingdom  of  Christ ;  (c)  a  Christian  family  all  of  which  are  professed 
believers  joining  together  in  the  worship  of  God  (Col.  iv.  15;  Eom.  ivi.  3,  5,  10,  15). 
(d)  But  the  most  common  sense  ia  that  of  particular  Churches  founded  for 
the  celebration  of  sacred  ordinances.  Hence  we  read  of  the  Church  at  Corinth,  at 
Rome,  &o.  (2)  These  Churches  consist  of  professing  believers  who,  in  the  judgment 
of  charity,  are  real  saints  (Col.  i,  2 ;  Eom.  i.  7  ;  1  Cor.  i.  2,  Ac.)  (3)  These  profess- 
ing believers  are  formed  into  a  Church  state,  by  mutual  agreement,  for  walking 
together  in  all  the  ordinances  of  Christ  according  to  the  will  of  God  (Matt,  xviii. 
15-20 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  Acts  ii.  41,  42,  46 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  13).  2.  With  respect  to  its 
officers.  It  cannot  be  completed  without  these  who  are  necessary  for  the  regular 
adminstration.  These  are — 1.  Bishops  or  Elders  (Phil.  i.  1 ;  Acts  xx.  28),  whose 
office  is  to  feed  the  flock  (Acts  xx.  17  ;  Jer.  iii.  15),  to  rule  well  and  labour  in  word 
and  doctrine  (1  Tim.  v.  17).  (2)  Deacons,  who  have  care  of  the  secular  affairs  of 
the  Church  (Acts  vi.)  8.  With  respect  to  its  worship.  A  particular  Church  is  the 
seat  of  all  ordinances,  and  when  it  is  furnished  with  proper  officers  it  is  in  due 
order  for  the  celebration  of  them.  Churches  ought  to  join  in  the  ordinances  of 
general  communion,  whether  they  have  a  pastor  or  not  (Acta  xii.  5 ;  Matt,  xviii, 
19-20).  But  preaching,  blessing  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  the  administration  of 
the  sacraments  are  a  proper  province  of  the  pastor,  with  the  agreement  of  the 
Church  as  to  time  and  place.  As  ministers  are  not  to  be  lords  over  God's  heritage 
{1  Pet.  V.  3  ;  2  Cor.  i.  24),  so  neither  they  nor  the  people  are  to  call  any  man  master 
(Matt,  xxiii.  8-10).  4.  As  to  its  discipline  (Matt,  xviii.  17;  2  Cor.  ii.  6-8).  Aa 
any  society  has  the  right  of  including  and  excluding  members,  bo  has  the  Church. 
And  aa  for  government,  Acts  xv.  shows  that  even  when  apostles  were  presiding  the 
Church  had  a  right  of  being  consulted.  5.  Wiih  respect  to  the  purity  of  its 
manners,  and  the  behaviour  of  its  members  towards  one  another  and  their  pastor. 
They  are  saints  and  should  be  holy ;  they  are  brethren  and  should  be  kind  and 
helpful ;  they  are  under  their  pastors  (Heb.  xiii.  17)  and  should  encourage, 
strengthen,  and  submit  to  them.     II.  The  steadfastness  of  their  faith  in  Chrisii 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a. 

1.  Christ  is  the  object  of  their  faith.  2.  Faith  is  the  doctrine  (Gal.  i.  23  ;  Phil.  i. 
27  ;  Jude  3)  and  the  grace  of  faith.  Both  are  probably  meant  here  (see  vers.  7,  8» 
andver.  6).  3.  Steadfastness  signifies — (1)  The  substantial  solidity  of  their  faith  io 
opposition  to  flashy  notions  and  corrupt  mixtures  (1  Cor.  ii.  5,  and  vers.  4,  7,  8). 
(2)  Its  strength  in  opposition  to  v?eakness  (Kom.  iv.  18,  21).  (3)  Its  constancy  in 
opposition  to  wavering  (Heb.  vi.  19  ;  Eph.  iv.  14,  15 ;  Col.  i.  23 ;  Heb.  x.  29). 
(4)  A  holy  resolution  or  courage,  in  opposition  to  shyness  or  cowardice  in  thair 
profession  of  it  (Col.  i.  4 ;  Eom.  i.  8  ;  1  Tbess.  i.  8 ;  Heb.  x.  23).  III.  Thb  jot 
THAT  ATTENDS  THE  BEHOLDING  OF  THESE.  1.  On  the  part  of  pastoT,  people,  and 
other  Cburches.  2.  Because  thereby  Christ  is  honoured,  the  Church  edified,  religion 
recommended,  the  faith  confirmed,  and  other  believers  encouraged.  {J.  Gnyse, 
D.D.)  The  value  of  steadfast  faith: — Faith  is  the  standard-bearer  in  every 
spiritual  conflict ;  and  if  the  standard-bearer  fall,  then  it  is  an  evil  day.  If  faith 
fails,  everything  fails  :  courage  fails,  patience  fails,  hope  fails,  love  fails,  joy  fails. 
Faith  is  the  root-grace;  and  if  this  he  not  in  order,  then  the  leafage  of  the  soul, 
which  shows  itself  in  the  form  of  other  graces,  will  soon  begin  to  wither.  (C.  H, 
Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  A,  7.  As  ye  have  received  Clirlst  Jesns  the  Lord  so  walk  ye  in  Him. 

— Christian  activity  the  safeguard  of  the  Church : — This  letter  was  written  under 
opposite  feelings — feelings  that  never  seem  absent  from  the  apostle — the  most 
intense  faith  in  the  gospel  and  the  most  intense  fear  for  it.  No  shadow  of  doubt 
crossed  his  mind  that  it  was  God's  gospel,  and  that  the  whole  power  of  God  went 
with  it ;  and  yet  he  was  filled  with  fear  for  it  and  its  success  in  the  world.  This 
seems  a  strange  contradiction,  but  it  was  no  difficulty  of  St.  Paul's  day,  it  is  the 
difl3culty  of  all  times.  We  believe  in  the  gospel,  and  yet  we  are  constantly  seeking 
to  preserve  it.  Why  ?  We  are  afraid  for  the  gospel  not  because  it  is  not  Divine, 
but  because  it  is.  The  world  may  be  trusted  to  provide  for  its  own.  Its  products 
grow  naturally,  as  weeds  grow.  But  the  Divine  gift  comes  from  another  clime,  and 
because  it  will  not  thrive  without  care  and  culture  we  fear.  It  is  because  it  is  the 
ark  of  God  we  carry  that  we  tremble  as  we  put  our  hands  to  it.  The  ark  will 
never  perish,  but  the  hands  that  bear  it  may  falter,  and  for  a  time  let  it  fall  into 
the  hands  of  its  enemies.  The  Church  shall  never  perish,  but  there  is  no  promise 
that  the  living  branch  shall  not  be  scathed  by  unbelief  or  godlessness.  Because 
of  the  preciousness  of  the  treasure  we  hold  in  earthen  vessels,  we  rejoice  and 
tremble  as  we  receive  it  in  trust  from  God.  As  we  send  out  new  missionaries,  and 
as  the  faith  of  Christ  passes  into  new  recepticles,  we  think  of  how  the  faith  shall 
be  preserved.  We  know  of  the  Divine  Word  which  is  a  light  to  our  path,  and  the 
creeds  and  sacraments  ;  but  our  text  speaks  of  another  safeguard.  If  the  Colos- 
sians  were  to  be  rooted  and  built  up  and  preserved  from  the  corruptions  of  the 
world,  philosophy,  and  vain  deceits,  it  was  not  to  be  by  the  possession  of  the  Word, 
creeds,  and  sacraments,  but  in  addition  by  walking  in  Cbrist  as  they  bad  received 
Him.  Activity  in  Christian  life  and  work  serves  to  defend  and  preserve  the  faith. 
I.  Because  it  is  perpetually  proving  it.  Christianity  is  a  science,  the  know- 
ledge of  God ;  but  it  is  an  applied  science,  and  the  application  of  the  science  of  the 
knowledge  of  God  is  walking  with  God.  Astronomy  is  a  science ;  navigation  ia 
astronomy  applied  to  practice.  Every  time  the  sailor  unfolds  his  map  at  sea,  and 
is  enabled  to  mark  the  very  spot  where  his  ship  is,  he  has  a  fresh  proof  that 
astronomy  is  true.  There  is  many  a  captain  who  carries  his  vessel  into  port  who 
is  quite  sure  that  his  nautical  tables  are  true,  who  cannot  astronomically  prove 
them  ;  but  he  has  practical  proofs,  and  the  oftener  he  avails  himself  of  that,  the 
lurer  he  is.  1,  So  it  is  with  our  faith.  The  Trinity,  Incarnation,  Atonement,  are 
mysterious  things ;  but  we  prove  them  as  we  find  this  to  be  true,  that  the  faith 
which  makes  us  know  Him  makes  us  know  ourselves,  and  brings  us  into  a  nearer, 
living,  and  deeper  communion  with  Him.  2.  Prayer  is  a  mystery.  Who  can  prove 
to  us  how  and  why  it  is  answered  7  But  who  knows  that  prayer  is  answered?  He 
■who  has  gone  down  upon  his  knees  and  has  risen  with  new  light  and  strength.  So 
walk  in  Chnst,  so  carry  and  work  the  mysteries  of  faith  into  your  Ufe,  and  then  yoa 
will  have  continued  proofs  of  the  truth  of  your  faith.  II.  Because  use  is  a  means 
OT  SAFETY.  That  which  we  possess,  however  precious,  we  are  more  likely  to  lose  if 
we  lock  it  np  than  if  we  use  it  daily.  It  may  be  stolen  long  before  we  get  to  know 
it.  Bat  what  we  constantly  nse  we  miss  directly  it  is  gone.  So  with  the  Christian 
faith.  It  is  those  portions  that  we  live  by  and  in,  that  as  we  daily  use  them  it 
becomes  impossible  to  lose.    But  let  there  be  any  part  of  your  creed  that  is  not 


CHAP,  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  12S 

woven  into  daily  life,  and  the  adversary  may  be  stealing  it  before  you  wist.  III. 
Because  it  tknds  to  the  sanctification  of  the  sodl.  If  the  mystery  of  the  faith 
is  to  be  held  in  a  pure  conscience,  then  as  the  conscience  grows  purer  will  be  the 
Burer  grasp  of  the  mystery  of  faith.  It  is  in  the  light  of  the  single  eye  that  God's 
truth  reveals  itself.  If  the  treasure  be  held  in  earthen  vessels,  then  it  depends 
upon  the  purity  of  the  vessel  whether  its  contents  be  preserved  in  sweetness.  And 
among  purifying  methods  activity  is  one  of  the  most  effective.  An  article  in  con- 
stant use  often  keeps  itself  clean.  (Bishop  Magee.)  The  Christian  life  : — I.  The 
eftEAi  BLESSING.  "Ye  have  received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."  1.  Acceptance  of 
Christ.  A  voluntary  act.  2.  Possession  of  Christ.  Having  received  Him  He  is 
ours,  and  we  share  all  His  acts.  (1)  Christ  died  :  we  die  with  Him  (Gal.  ii.  20),  and 
eo  are  free  from  the  penalty  of  sin  in  the  eyes  of  the  law.  (2)  Christ  was  buried 
(ver.  12)  and  we  with  Him,  and  so  became  dead  to  our  former  life  (Eom.  vi.  4).  (3) 
Christ  rose,  and  we  rise  with  Him  into  newness  of  life  (ver.  13).  (4)  Christ  is  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  and  we  ascend  with  Him  into  the  honours  and  safety  of  the 
heavenly  life  (chap.  iii.  1-3).  II.  The  urgent  doty.  1.  Walk,  implying — (1)  Pro- 
gress, not  only  motion.  There  may  be  motion  in  the  sap  of  a  plant,  but  the  plant 
is  fixed ;  and  in  a  ball  struck  by  a  bat,  but  that  is  forced,  not  voluntary ;  but  a 
walk  implies  personal  activity.  So  in  the  Christian  walk,  (a)  We  must  not  stay 
at  the  starting-point,  {b)  We  must  not  loiter,  "Forgetting  the  things  behind." 
(c)  We  must  not  walk  as  in  a  circle,  *'  laying  again  the  foundation  of  repentance," 
&o,  (2)  Change  of  scene.  In  a  walk  our  eyes  are  ever  dwelling  on  something 
fresh.  So  we  must  ever  be  finding  something  new  in  Christ.  (3)  Our  walk  is  to 
be  "  in  Him."  He  is  to  be  seen  in  us.  Others  are  to  know  our  Master  by  our  life. 
2.  Eooted  in  Him.  (1)  The  root  gives  stability  to  the  tree.  Those  trees  are  most 
stable  whose  roots  take  the  largest  and  deepest  hold.  (2)  The  life  of  a  tree 
depends  upon  its  rootedness ;  uproot  it  and  you  destroy  it.  So  we  die  if  not  rooted 
in  Christ  our  Life.  3.  Built  up  in  Him.  (1)  Constant  additions.  (2)  Growing 
solidity.  (3)  Ultimate  perfection.  (4)  Exhibition  of  the  Architect's  skill,  patience, 
and  power.  4.  Stablished  in  the  faith.  We  must  have  Christ  in  us  or  we  shall 
be  overthrown.  We  are  not  to  be  a  vane  turning  at  every  breath  of  wind,  nor  a 
plant  taking  such  slight  hold  that  some  stronger  blast  will  overthrow  ;  but  lika  an 
oak  or  a  house  on  a  rock,  so  stablished  that  no  power  can  move.  This  is  necessary 
in  view  of  the  various  influences  to  which  Christian  hfe  is  exposed.  III.  The 
BTBONo  MOTIVE.  1.  The  obligation — "  As."  Having  received  Christ  we  are  bound 
to  walk  in  Him.  2.  The  appeal — "Ye."  Think  of  what  you  were  and  wnat 
Christ  has  made  you.  Show  your  gratitude  by  walking  in  Him.  {J.  Gill.)  Sug- 
gestive features  of  the  Christian  life  : — I.  The  Chbistian  life  begins  in  a  peesonaIi 
RECEPTION  OF  Christ.  "  As  ye  have  therefore  received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord." 
Rehgion  is  the  receiving  of  a  Divine  gift.  It  is  the  growth  and  development  of  the 
supernatural  in  man.  Christ  is  received — 1.  As  the  Christ.  The  Colossian 
heresy  aimed  at  subverting  the  true  idea  of  the  Anointed  One,  commissioned  by  the 
Father  to  effect  the  reconciliation  of  the  world  to  Himself ;  it  interposed  a  series  of 
angelic  mediators.  To  receive  the  Son  of  God  effectually  is  to  receive  Him  in  aU 
that  He  claimed  to  be,  and  to  do,  as  the  Divine,  specially-anointed  Son,  who  is  the 
only  mediator  between  man  and  God.  It  is  of  unspeakable  importance  to  catch 
the  true  idea  of  the  character  and  ofi3ce  of  Christ  at  the  beginning  of  the  Christian 
life.  2.  As  Jesus  the  Lord.  Our  reception  of  Christ  does  not  place  us  beyond 
the  reach  of  law,  but  creates  in  as  the  capacity  for  rendering  an  intelligent  and 
cheerful  obedience.  8.  By  an  act  of  faith.  To  receive  Christ  is  to  believe 
in  Him.  II.  The  Chbistian  lxte  is  oovebned  by  the  law  or  Christ.  To  walk 
in  Christ  implies — 1.  A  recognition  of  Him  in  all  things.  In  everything 
that  constitutes  our  daily  life — business,  home,  society,  friendships,  pleasures, 
cares,  &o.,  we  may  trace  the  presence  of  Christ  and  recognize  His  rule.  2.  A 
complete  consecration  to  Him.  3.  A  continual  approximation  to  the  highest  life  in 
Him.      UI.    The  Chbistian  ufe  is   supported  and   established  by   faith   in 

FOLLY   declared   TBUTH.  IV.     ThE    CHRISTIAN   LIFE     HAS    ITS    MOST     APPROPBUTB 

OUTFLOW  IN  THANKSGiNiNG.  This  is  the  end  of  all  human  conduct.  Thanks- 
giving should  be  expressed  in  every  word  and  appear  in  every  action.  (G.  Barlow.) 
The  threefold  growth :  —  I.  The  Christian's  downward  growth.  *'  Booted 
in  Him."  All  of  strength  and  fruitfulness  there  is  in  us  depends  on  the  depth 
with  which  we  strike  down  into  the  life  and  love  of  God.  Measuring  and  grasping 
the  love  of  God,  Paul  begins  downward.  "  Rooted  and  grounded."  We  can  only 
fMch  loftily  upward,  and  broadly  outward,  as  we  strike  deeply  downward.    For  m 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  height  of  a  tree  is  generally  in  proportion  to  its  depth,  the  outreaching  of  ita 
branches  according  to  the  down-striking  of  its  roots,  so  a  Christian  cannot  fail  of 
attaining  to  a  lofty  life,  if  only  he  can  first  attain  to  a  lowly  life.  We  can  see  at  a 
glance  how  much  depends  on  this  being  rooted  in  Christ.  1.  Our  fruitfulness,  A 
fruitfulness  that  continues  in  spite  of  surrounding  drought,  and  barrenness,  and 
death — how  shall  it  be  maintained  ?  I  recently  witnessed  the  effects  of  long  con- 
tinued drought.  The  growing  corn  stood  parched  and  earless.  The  reason  is  not 
simply  the  long  absence  of  rain  in  summer,  but  also  the  superabundance  of  rain 
in  spring — that  on  this  account  the  roots  of  the  corn  and  wheat  ran  along  on  the 
surface  without  striking  down  into  the  bottom  soil.  The  plants  had  such  pros- 
perous rains  in  spring  that  they  made  no  provision  for  a  dry  time  by  going  down 
into  the  rich  depths.  2.  Our  strength.  You  have  seen  the  oak  smitten  by  the 
whirlwind,  and  how  with  its  giant  arms  it  has  caught  the  tempest  in  its  embrace, 
and  hurled  it  back,  defeated,  while  itself  stood  firm  and  unmoved  in  its  rooted 
strength.  It  is  pitiful  to  see  a  godless  man  trying  to  be  steadfast  in  affliction.  Ho 
has  no  hidden  hold  on  God  by  faith  and  prayer ;  he  has  not  been  sinking  his  faith 
deeper  and  deeper  into  the  heart  of  Christ  as  the  years  rolled  on.  And  now,  wnen 
the  shock  comes,  he  has  nothing  to  hold  him.  His  friends  try  to  prop  him  up  with 
prudential  maxims.  But  props  can  never  take  the  place  of  roots.  3.  Purity. 
"  Consider  the  lily  how  it  grows."  It  is  in  the  stream,  but  not  of  it.  Down  deep 
into  the  rich  and  nourishing  earth  it  strikes  its  roots,  and  so  grows  on  the  nutri- 
ment of  the  hidden  soil.  If  you  can  reach  down  into  God,  and  feed  altogether  on 
Him,  yon  may  present  the  beautiful  spectacle.  II.  The  Christian's  upwabd  gbowth. 
"Eooted  and'  built  up  in  Him."  1.  Not  built  up  as  the  house  is  built,  with 
materials  gathered  here  and  there,  and  wrought  together  from  without.  The  tree 
builds  itself  from  the  heart,  and  so  does  the  Christian.  Morality  seeks  to  overlay 
men  with  good  works.  Its  office  is  to  get  them  to  take  on  goodness  in  successive 
layers,  by  contact  with  good  men  and  good  books.  Here  is  organic  growth  as 
against  mechanical,  vital  increase  as  against  artificial.  2.  The  duty  of  habitual 
aspiration  after  the  highest  attainments  in  grace  is  here  urged.  It  has  been  said 
that  no  man  can  gaze  on  the  marble  statue  of  the  Apollo  Belvidere  without  stand- 
ing more  erect,  and  dilating  his  form  in  unconscious  imitation.  If  the  perfect 
physical  form  produces  such  impression,  how  much  more  the  man  who  is  perfect 
in  spiritual  stature  and  in  moral  greatness — the  man  Christ  Jesus  ?  III.  The 
Christian's  OUTWARD  growth.  "Abounding  therein  with  thanksgiving."  This  is 
the  branching  out  into  all  service,  and  fruitfulness,  and  praise.  1.  The  one  sig- 
nificant fact  concerning  the  gifts  of  God  to  us  is  their  exceeding  abundance.  The 
grace  of  God  which  bringeth  salvation  "  was  exceeding  abundant."  The  mercy  of 
God  is  "  abundant  mercy."  "  The  Holy  Ghost  is  shed  forth  abundantly."  It  is 
*' our  God  who  will  abundantly  pardon."  "An  entrance  be  ministered  unto  you 
abundantly  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  God."  And  as  though  to  sum  up  all, 
the  apostle  writes  of  Him  who  is  "  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that 
we  ask  or  think."  2.  What  is  the  abundance  bestowed  for  except  that  it  may  flow 
out  in  abounding  blessings  to  others  ?  (A.  J,  Gordon,  D.D.)  Retrotpection  the  basi» 
of  progress : — I.  Christian  consciousness  in  its  apprehension  of  Christ.  "  Ye 
have  received  Chri-t  Jesus  the  Lord.''  1.  There  are  two  opposing  theories  as  to 
the  Person  of  Clnist — the  rationalistic,  which  rules  out  His  Godhead;  the  revealed, 
which  is  the  basis  of  the  catholic  faith.  The  one  holds  to  Him  as  the  perfection  of 
humanity,  the  other  as  the  incarnation  of  Deity.  2.  Two  systems  of  theology 
widely  distinct  are  dependent  on  these  the  vries.  The  one  puts  man  at  the  centre, 
and  is  wholly  human  ;  the  other  enthrones  God,  and  is  essentially  Divine.  Two 
of  the  widest  extremes  of  religious  life  flow  from  these  systems.  The  first  is  a 
religion  of  self-development,  and  depends  on  personal  culture.  In  the  second, 
regeneration  is  a  supernatural  birth  superinduced  by  a  power  coming 
directly  from  God.  The  one  has  its  type  in  education,  the  other  in  faith. 
3.  There  is  only  one  Christ.  He  is  not  a  variable  or  divisible  quantity.  Hia 
personality  is  definite.  His  claims  absolute,  His  work  specific.  4.  It  is  within 
the  one  or  the  other  of  these  systems  that  we  must  posit  oar  decisions. 
We  cannot  accept  of  both.  If  the  one  is  true  the  other  is  false.  We  must 
be  for  Christ  or  against  Him.  II.  Christian  consciousness  in  its  reception  of 
Christ.  "Ye  have  received."  1.  There  is  agreement  with  some  shades  of 
difference  in  the  terms  receiving,  believing,  trusting,  Christ.  He  who  intelligently 
believes  the  testimony,  trusts  in  the  promise  and  receives  the  gift.  "  To  as  many 
•s  received  Him,"  Ac.    Here  are  two  things  implied.     (1)  Faith  receives  the  who]« 


cmtr.  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  I2f 

Christ.  All  that  we  see  of  the  incarnate  Word  in  His  acts,  teaching,  death,  &c., 
Christian  faith  accepts.  And  then  a  supernatural  person  necessitates  a  super- 
natural mission  ;  and  also  the  system  being  given,  we  should  expect  to  find  what 
we  do  find,  a  supernatural  person  its  central  figure.  Christ  and  His  system  are 
co-ordinate  and  identical.  Accept  of  Christ,  and  you  must  receive  His  truth. 
Receive  the  record,  and  you  must  accept  His  person.  Faith  thus  makes  all  the 
truth  a  welcome  guest  to  the  Christian  heart.  (2)  On  the  side  of  faith  Christ 
asks  and  gets  the  whole  of  man.  The  full  integrity  of  the  mental  and  moral  life 
goes  over  in  this  act  of  faith  to  Christ.  Thus  there  is  a  virtual  exchange  of  two 
individual  persons,  a  mutual  transfer  of  relations  and  interests,  out  of  which 
comes  the  sublime  unity  of  a  new  and  indivisible  life.  "  I  am  crucified  with 
Christ,"  &o.  2.  The  life  of  faith,  as  embodied  in  the  moralities  of  Christian 
living,  is  thus  provided  for,  and  follows  this  consecrating  act.  "  Rooted  and  built 
up  and  Btablishtd."  (1)  Life  has  its  genesis  in  a  root — faith  in  Christ.  All  life  is 
a"feeding  thing.  From  the  flower  in  the  wall  up  to  the  brain  and  soul  all  things 
live  by  what  they  feed  upon.  In  all  life  there  is  that  into  which  life  strikes  its 
root.  (2)  Growth  is  a  result  of  manifold  processes.  It  is  not  a  mechanical 
product.  You  can  fabricate  material  structures :  growth  is  an  organic  creation. 
To  make  an  atom  or  a  world  or  to  destroy  them  may  require  no  more  than 
the  instant  volition  of  God.  To  grow  a  grain  of  wheat  He  employs  the  grandest 
forces  in  the  universe ;  and  these  are  yoked  by  a  thousand  subtle  laws  kept  at 
work  by  His  personal  will.  How  much  more  grand  are  the  agencies  with  which  He 
originates,  feeds,  and  glorifies  life  in  the  soul  of  man  is  seen  in  this,  tliat  in  the  one 
service  He  harnesses  law,  and  in  the  other  He  incarnates  Himself.  "  He  is  our 
life."  (3)  In  the  fervid  enunciation  of  figures  the  apostle  appears  for  a  moment 
to  get  into  a  complication  of  incongruous  similitudes — •'  walking  "  implying  action, 
"  rooted  "  demanding  rest ;  and  yet  there  is  consistency.  Progress  upward  in  the 
corn,  e.g.,  comes  out  of  fixedness  of  root.  Unroot  it,  and  you  kill  its  growth.  So 
we  "  grow  up  in  all  things  into  Christ "  only  as  we  rest  in  the  fixedness  of  faith. 
III.  Chkistian  consciousness  in  its  subjection  to  Christ.  1.  The  emphasis  is 
on  the  word  "Lord."  What  is  this  sovereign  headship  of  Christ?  (1^  In  the 
Church  mediatorially,  "  He  is  the  head  of  the  body  " ;  administratively,  "  He 
is  Lord  of  all  " ;  virtually,  and  in  fact,  "  He  is  our  Ufe."  (2)  Higher  up  in  the 
ranges  of  spiritual  life  "  in  all  things  He  has  the  pre-eminence."  God  has  highly 
exalted  Him.  All  the  angels  of  God  worship  Him.  (3)  In  the  material  worlds 
"  He  is  before  all  things,  and  by  Him  all  things  consist."  They  are  what  He 
makes  them  and  where  He  places  them.  They  get  their  use  and  glory  as  He 
employs  them.  All  agencies,  influences,  events,  ages,  are  tributary  to  Christ. 
(4)  So  in  the  future  of  the  world's  history  "  He  must  reign."  Man's  proud  intellect, 
his  enterprise,  wealth,  art,  science,  <tc.,  are  coming,  and  must  filially  come,  to 
serve  Him.  2.  But  there  is  a  more  close  and  vital  relation  in  the  faith  that  gives 
to  Christ  the  lordship  over  His  people.  What,  then,  is  the  dominion  under  which 
we  (Voluntarily  place  ourselves  in  our  surrender  to  Christ  ?  (1)  Its  sphere  is  specific. 
"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  yon  " — where  the  personality  of  the  man  is. 

(2)  Its  claim  is  absolute.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own."  Christ  claims  to  be  monarch 
absolute   over  mind,  body,  &c.,  because  all  has  been  "  bought  with  a  price." 

(3)  And  the  mind  is  free  and  unconstrained  in  its  surrender.  Man's  will  is  free ; 
and  yet  how  man  may  exert  that  freedom,  on  what  objects,  for  what  ends,  and 
with  what  results,  is  to  be  determined  by  the  authority  of  the  Lord  Christ. 
•'  One  is  your  Master."  {J.  Burton.)  Faith  is  receiving  Christ :  —  Suppose 
that  you  should  go  to  a  baker's  window,  and  stand  there  for  an  hour,  and  stare 
at  the  bread,  I  do  not  think  that  the  sight  would  fill  you  much.  No,  you  mus-t 
eat,  or  else  there  might  be  tons  of  bread  within  reach,  and  yet  you  would  die 
of  famine.  You  might  be  buried  in  a  grave  of  bread,  and  it  would  be  of  no 
use  to  you.  Even  manna  would  not  nourish  you  unless  you  ate  it.  You  must 
receive  food  into  yourself,  or  it  is  not  food  to  you.  The  Saviour  Himself,  if  you 
do  not  receive  Him  by  faUh,  will  be  no  Saviour  to  you.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  As 
and  So  .-—There  is  great  safety  in  going  back  to  first  principles.  To  make  sure  of 
being  in  the  right  way,  it  is  good  to  look  back  at  the  entrance.  Well  begun 
is  half  done.  The  Colossians  have  commenced  well;  let  them  go  on  as  they 
have  begun.  I.  The  fact  stated.  Sincere  believers  have  "  received "  Christ. 
This  is  the  old  gospel  word.  Here  ia  no  evolution  from  within,  but  a  gift  from 
without  heartily  accepted  by  the  soul.  This  is  free  grace  language  ;  "  received," 
not  earned  or  purchased.    Not  received  Christ's  words — though  that  is  true,  for  we 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

prize  every  precept  and  doctrine — bnt  received  Christ.  Observe — 1.  The  persouality 
of  Him  whom  they  received.  '•  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,"  His  person,  Godhead, 
humanity,  Himself  into  their  (1)  knowledge;  (2)  understanding;  (3)  affections; 
(4)  trust ;  (5)  as  their  life  at  their  new  birth,  for  when  they  received  Him  He  gave 
them  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God.  2.  The  threefold  character  in  which  they 
received  Him.  (1)  As  Christ  anointed  and  commissioned  of  God  ;  (2)  as  Jesus,  the 
Saviour  to  redeem  and  sanctify  them  ;  (3)  as  the  Lord  to  reign  and  rule  over  them 
with  undivided  sway.  3.  The  looking  away  from  self  in  this  saving  act  of  recep- 
tion. It  is  not  said,  as  ye  have  fought  for  Jesus  and  won  Him ;  or,  studied  the 
truth  and  discovered  Christ  Jesns;  but,  as  ye  have  "received"  Him.  This  etHns 
us  of  everything  like  boasting,  for  all  we  do  is  to  receive,  i.  The  blessed 
certainty  of  the  experience  of  those  to  whom  Paul  wrote :  "  As  ye  have  received 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."  They  had  really  received  Jesus;  they  had  found  the 
blessing  to  be  real :  no  doubt  remained  as  to  their  possession  of  it.  II.  Thh 
COUNSEL  given:  "So  walk  ye  in  Him."  There  are  four  things  suggested  by 
"  walk."  1.  Life.  2.  Continuance.  3.  Activity.  4.  Progress.  III.  The  model 
WHICH  18  PRESENTED  TO  US.  We  are  to  walk  in  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  "  as  we 
received  Him."  And  how  was  that  ?  We  received  Him — 1.  Gratefully.  2.  Humbly. 
8.  Joyfully.  4.  Effectually.  5.  Unreservedly.  Thus  we  should  contiuue  to  walk 
in  Him,  evermore  in  our  daily  life  excelling  in  all  these  points.  Alas,  some 
have  never  received  Jesus  1  Our  closing  words  must  be  addressed  to  such. 
{Ibid.)  Receiving  Christ  and  walking  in  Him: — It  was  quite  in  accordance 
with  Paul's  logical  mind  that  he  should  often  place  what  he  is  teaching  in 
a  proposition:  "As  ye  have  received,  so  walk."  All  true  religion  lies  in  that 
analogy.  1.  The  keception.  1.  As  what  ?  (1)  As  Christ,  the  anointed  of  God ; 
(2)  as  Jesus,  your  Divine  Saviour;  (3)  as  Lord,  *^^?  King  of  your  heart.  2.  How  ? 
By  an  act  of  faith.  Faith  was  the  hand  that  took  the  inestimable  gift.  3. 
Whither?  Into  your  hearts.  4.  With  what  consequence?  He  became  nnited  to 
your  very  being,  and  is  now  your  own.  U.  The  walk.  1.  As  the  reception  was 
an  act  of  faith,  so  the  walk  must  be  a  walk  of  faith.  2.  As  we  received  pardon  for 
sin,  so  we  must  walk  in  liberty,  free  from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  fear.  3.  As  we 
received  Christ  Jesus  as  Lord,  so  we  must  walk  in  the  path  of  His  commandments. 
(J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  life  and  walk  of  faith : — We  shall  deal  with  the  text — 
I.  By  way  op  exposition.  1.  The  life  of  faith  is  represented  as  (1)  receiving. 
This  implies  (a)  the  opposite  of  anything  like  merit,  (b)  A  sense  of  realization 
making  the  matter  a  reaUty.  One  cannot  receive  a  ehadow  or  a  phantom,  but 
only  something  substantial.  While  we  are  without  faith  Christ  is  a  name  or 
a  history  merely.  By  the  act  of  faith  Christ  becomes  a  real  person  in  our 
consciousness,  (c)  Grasping  it.  What  I  receive  becomes  my  own,  so  by  faith 
Christ  becomes  my  Christ.  Look  at  some  of  the  senses  in  which  the  word  is 
used  in  Scripture,  such  as — (d)  Taking — we  take  Christ  into  us  as  the  empty  vessel 
takes  in  water,  (e)  Holding — what  we  take  in.  A  seive  does  not  receive  water. 
The  hfe  of  faith  consists  in  holding  Christ  within  us  the  hope  of  glory. 
Believing.  "He  came  to  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not."  (/)  Enter- 
taining. Thus  the  barbarous  people  at  Melita  received  Paul.  After  we  have 
found  Christ  we  entreat  Him  to  come  in  and  sup  with  db.  (g)  Enjoying.  We 
read  of  receiving  the  crown  of  life,  which  means  enjoying  heaven  and  being 
satisfied  with  its  bliss ;  and  so  vihen  we  receive  Christ  we  enjoy  Him.  (2) 
Receiving  Christ.  Salvation  may  be  described  as  the  blind  receiving  sight,  the 
dead  life,  &c.  ;  but  we  have  not  only  received  these  things,  we  have  received 
Christ,  both  as  Saviour  and  Lord,  in  His  Divinity  and  humanity.  (3)  This  ia 
a  matter  of  certainty;  and  the  apostle  goes  on  to  argue  from  it.  It  is  not  a 
supposition  or  a  hope,  or  a  trust,  but  a  fact.  "  Ye  have."  2.  The  walk  of  faith. 
(1)  Walk  implies  (a)  action.  The  reoepiion  of  Christ  is  not  to  be  made  a  mere 
thing  of  thought  for  the  chamber.  We  must  not  sit  down  in  indolence,  but  carry 
into  practical  effect  what  we  believe,  (b)  Perseverance ;  not  only  being  in  Christ 
to-day,  but  all  our  life,  (c)  Habit.  A  man's  walk  is  the  constant  tenor  of 
hie  life,  (d)  Continuance.  It  is  not  to  be  suspended.  How  many  people  think 
that  in  the  morning  and  evening  they  ought  to  come  into  the  company  of  Christ, 
and  then  they  may  be  in  the  world  all  day.  (2)  Christ  is  to  be  the  element 
in  which  we  are  to  walk.  If  a  man  has  Ut  cross  a  river,  he  fords  it  quickly, 
but  just  as  we  walk  in  the  air  are  we  to  walk  in  Christ,  (a)  As  Christ  was  when 
we  received  Him  the  only  ground  of  our  faith,  so  long  as  we  live  we  are  to  stand  to 
the  same  point,    (b)  We  received  Christ  as  the  substwice  of  our  faith,  and  just  aa 


jp.  B.]  COLOSSIANS.  138 

▼on  then  no  more  doubted  the  reality  of  Christ  than  your  own  existence,  so  walk  ye 
tn  Him.  (c)  Then  Christ  was  the  joy  of  your  souls ;  let  Him  always  be  so.  (d)  He 
was  then  the  object  of  your  love,  and  must  be  for  ever.  II.  By  way  of  advocacy. 
Suppose  that  having  been  bo  far  saved  by  Christ  we  should  begin  to  walk  in 
eome  one  else,  what  then  ?  1.  What  a  dishonour  to  our  Lord.  2.  What  reason 
is  there  for  the  change?  (1)  Has  Christ  proved  Himself  insufiScient?  (2)  Can 
philosophy  and  vain  deceit  offer  you  a  wisdom  such  as  His  ?  (3)  Do  ceremonies 
tempt  you  ?  You  have  all  that  you  can  require  in  Christ.  3.  What  can  your 
heart  desire  beyond  God  ?  Having  Christ,  you  have  God,  and  having  God,  yon 
have  everything.  III.  By  way  of  application.  1.  To  those  who  complain  of 
•  want  of  communion.  If  it  were  worth  your  while  to  comt  to  Him  at  first, 
it  IB  worth  while  for  you  always  to  keep  to  Him.  2.  To  those  who  complain  of  a 
want  of  comfort.  No  wonder,  if  you  do  not  live  near  the  source  of  consolation. 
8.  To  the  inconsistent.  When  a  man  walks  in  Christ,  he  acts  as  Christ  would  act. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Christly  character: — In  this  statement  of  fact  Paul's 

argument  culminates.  He  appeals  to  their  experience.  They  had  received  the 
doctrine  of  Christ  from  Epaphras,  and  He  Himself  had  entered  their  hearts.  I. 
The  OBiGiN  of  the  Christly  character.  "Received  Christ,"  which  means  to  accept 
Him — 1.  As  the  supreme  object  of  the  soul's  love.  2.  As  the  imperial  guide 
of  the  soul's  activities.  3.  As  the  only  Physician  of  the  soul's  diseases.  This  is 
the  reception — not  merely  the  reception  of  His  doctrines  into  the  intellect,  but 
Himself  into  the  heart  as  its  moral  monarch.  II.  Its  peooress.  "Walk  in  Him." 
This  iinplies — 1.  A  most  vital  connection  with  Him,  "  In  Him."  In  His  ideas, 
cpirit,  aimb,  character.  2.  A  possibility  of  walking  out  of  Him.  Peter  did  so. 
Man's  liberty  as  a  responsible  being  and  the  Word  of  God  show  this.  3.  A  real 
personal  exertion.  No  one  can  walk  for  us.  (D.  Thomat,  D.D.)  Christ  it  the 
believer'i  foundation: — The  lighthouse  tower,  that  stands  among  the  lumbling 
waves,  seems  to  have  nothing  but  them  to  rest  on,  yet  there,  stately  and  stable,  it 
stands,  beautiful  in  the  calm,  and  calm  in  the  wintry  tempest,  guiding  the  sailor 
on  to  his  desired  haven,  past  the  rolling  reef,  through  the  gloom  of  the  darkest 
night,  and  the  waters  of  the  gloomiest  sea.  Why  is  it  stable  ?  Ton  see  nothing 
but  the  waves,  but  beneath  the  waves,  down  below  the  rolling,  tumbling  billows,  its 
foundation  is  the  solid  rock.  And  what  that  tower  is  to  the  house  on  yon  sand-bank 
Christ's  righteousness  is  to  mine,  Christ's  works  to  my  best  ones.  {T.  Guthrie.) 
Progrets  i»  gradual : — Gradual  ascent  is  as  necessary  to  the  mind  in  order  to  its 
reaching  a  great  idea,  as  it  is  to  the  body  in  order  to  its  reaching  a  great  height. 
We  cannot  ascend  to  the  pinnacle  of  a  cathedral,  which  towers  aloft  in  air,  without 
either  steps  or  an  inclined  plane.  We  cannot  reach  the  summit  of  a  mountain 
without  first  toiling  up  its  base,  then  traversing  its  breast,  and  then  successively 
crossing  the  limits  where  verdure  passes  into  crag,  and  crag  into  a  wilderness 
of  snow.  Even  when  we  have  gained  the  highest  point,  we  are  still,  it  ia  true,  at 
an  infinite  distance  from  the  blue  vault  of  the  firmament  which  stretches  above  our 
beads.  Still  we  have  a  better  and  more  exalted  view  of  what  that  firmament  is : 
we  have  at  least  risen  above  the  fogs  and  mists  which  obscure  its  glory ;  and  the 
Air  which  encompasses  us  is  transparent  to  the  eye,  and  invigorating  to  the  frame. 
Now,  the  law  of  man's  bodily  progress  is  also  the  law  of  his  mental  progress.  Both 
most  be  gradual.  No  grand  idea  can  be  realized  except  by  successive  steps  and 
^tat^es,  which  the  mind  must  use  as  landing-places  in  its  ascent.   (Dr.  Goulbum.) 

"^er.  8.  Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  yon  throngh  philosophy  and  vain  deceit. — 
'**«  fpoiler  and  hit  implevient : — See  to  it,  says  Paul,  lest  there  be  some  one — I  do 
%ol  say  more,  yon  can  guess  my  meaning — to  carry  yon  off  as  his  spoil  (not  take 
•ixiil  from  you).  The  expression  grasps  powerfully  the  essence  of  the  proselytizing 
spirit ;  the  proselytizing  spoil  is  the  person  proselytized.  He  aims  at  doing  this 
through  that  which  is  at  once  in  its  arrogant  claims  a  high  philosophy,  and  in  its 
miserable  reality  an  empty  deceit ;  a  philosophy,  artful,  moulded  ia  accordance  with 
an  esoteric  system,  pervaded  by  five  fatal  deficiencies.  I.  It  is  merely  traditional, 
and,  therefore,  of  precarious  truth.  II.  It  is  human,  and,  therefore,  deficient  in 
authority.  III.  It  is  elementary,  belonging  to  the  "  outworn  ci%ed,"  to  the  rudi- 
ments of  religion,  and,  therefore,  unfitted  for  Christian  manhood.  IV.  It  is 
UATERiAL,  not  Connected  with  the  soul's  true  home  and  centre,  but  with  the  palpabl* 
and  external,  and  is,  therefore,  deficient  in  spirituality.  V.  And  being  all  this, 
assuredly,  and  as  matter  of  fact,  it  is  not  after  Christ.  {Tip.  Alexander.)  The 
false  teachers  aimed  at  making  the  Colossians  their  prey,  carrying  them  off  body  and 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha*.  n 

soul.  They  had  been  rescued  from  the  bondage  of  darkness  ;  they  had  been  trans* 
ferred  to  the  kingdom  of  light ;  they  had  been  settled  there  as  free  citizens  (chap.  L 
12,  13) ;  and  now  there  was  a  danger  that  they  should  fall  into  «  state  worse  than 
their  former  slavery,  that  they  should  be  carried  off  as  so  much  booty  (Comp.  2 
Tim.  iii.  6).  {Bp.  Liglitfoot.)  Philosophy  discriminated  : — Philosophy,  taken  in 
its  simplest  accei^tation,  is  only  a  higher  degree  of  good  sense,  which,  not  pretend- 
ing to  know  all  tilings,  desires  to  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  those  objects,  the- 
knowledge  of  which  has  been  placed  within  our  reach.  It  sets  no  value  on  names 
and  appearances ;  prejudice  is  not  the  basis  of  any  of  its  judgments  ;  neither 
number  nor  time  has  the  effect  of  transforming  error  into  truth.  It  believes  not, 
denies  not,  affirms  not,  at  hazard,  or  on  slight  grounds.  Not  trusting  to  a  first  look 
it  searches  for  differences  under  resemblances,  and  resemblances  under  differences ; 
alternately  uniting  what  the  vulgar  separate,  and  separating  what  they  unite.  While 
all  facts  are  isolated  to  the  inattentive  eye,  they  are  connected  and  linked  together 
by  the  eye  of  philosophy,  which  does  what  it  can  to  trace  the  chain  which  unites 
them.  In  every  case  fixing  on  what  is  essential,  and  throwing  aside  what  is 
merely  accidental,  it  oomes  at  last  to  recognize  a  common  nature,  a  common 
principle,  a  common  origin,  in  objects  which  seemed  at  first  to  have  nothing  in 
common.  It  thus  reduces  the  innumerable  facts  of  the  moral  and  physical  world 
to  a  small  number  of  ideas,  and  these  to  a  smaller  number  still,  always  gravitating 
towards  the  unity  which  it  will  never  reach,  but  to  which  a  mysterious  power  con- 
strains it  always  to  aspire.  To  say  all  in  one  word,  philosophy  differs  from  vulgar 
reason,  in  applying  itself  to  penetrate  from  the  exterior  of  things  or  their  envelope, 
to  their  principle,  or  at  least  to  the  idea  which  explains  the  greatest  number  of 
possible  facts,  and  before  which  it  is  constrained  to  stop  as  if  out  of  breath.  When 
shall  it  stop  ?  What  is  its  legitimate  sphere  ?  This  question  is  of  more  importance 
than  any  other.  Philosophy  does  not  gain  more  honour  by  extending  its  search, 
than  by  recoguizing  its  limits.  It  reigns  in  this  apparent  dethronement.  It  is  its 
glory  to  know  how  to  restrict  itself,  just  as  in  the  domain  of  morality  it  is  the  glory 
of  ^e  will  to  stop  in  proper  time  and  make  an  effort  upon  itself.  But  in  order  to 
know  what  it  is  able  and  what  unable  to  do,  it  takes  account  of  its  processes  and 
instruments,  compares  its  means  with  its  end,  and  not  being  able  to  place  all  its 
greatness  in  knowledge  finds  part  of  it  in  confessing  its  ignorance,  and  so  to  speak, 
in  knowing  certainly  that  it  does  not  know.  St.  Paul  did  not  repudiate  this 
philosophy,  and  could  have  no  intention  to  repudiate  it.  He  knew  as  well  as  we, 
that  in  matters  of  religion,  and  even  of  revealed  religion,  there  may  be  either  a  good 
or  a  bad  philosophy,  but  that  at  all  events  there  is  philosophy.  We  cannot  condemn 
philosophy  without  condemning  ourselves  to  silence  on  the  subject  of  religion  which 
presupposes  it,  and  guides  it,  and  would  create  it  if  it  did  not  previously  exist.  Ac- 
cordingly St.  Paul  has  not  condemned  it ;  and  when  he  warns  his  disciples  against 
a  science  "  falsely  so  called,"  his  words  imply  the  existence  of  a  science  that  is  true. 
Now  philosophy  is  a  part  of  science,  or  ra'her  is  itself  the  science  of  science.  Nor, 
moreover,  could  he  have  condemned  it,  without  condemning  himself  who  has  made 
such  happy  and  frequent  use  of  it.  It  were  vain  to  deny  that  the  writings  of  St. 
Paul  and  of  St.  Jolm  are  full  of  the  highest  philosophy.  Let  us  be  understood. 
We  do  not  say  full  of  sublime  truth,  but  of  that  philosophy  which  we  have 
endeavoured  to  characterize,  which  rises  from  appearances  to  reality,  from  accident 
to  essence,  from  the  particular  to  the  general,  from  variable  facts  to  immutable- 
principles.  (A.  Vinet,  D.D.)  St.  Paul's  attitude  towards  philosophy  : — Th& 
apostle  does  not  condemn  "philosophy"  absolutely  :  the  philosophy  and  vain  deceit 
of  this  passage  corresponds  to  what  he  says  in  1  Tim.  vi.  20.  But  though  it  is  not 
condemned  it  is  disparaged  by  the  connection  in  which  it  is  placed.  The  term  was 
doubtless  used  by  the  false  teachers  to  describe  their  system.  Though  essentially 
Greek  as  a  name  and  an  idea  it  had  found  its  way  into  Jewish  circles.  Philo  used 
it  in  speaking  of  the  Hebrew  religion  and  Mosaic  law,  and  also  of  Essenism,  which 
was  probably  the  progenitor  of  the  Colossian  heresy.  So,  too,  Josephus  speaks  of 
three  Jewish  sects  as  philosophies.  It  should  be  remembered  also,  that  in  this  later 
age,  owing  to  Roman  influence,  the  term  was  used  to  describe  practical  not  less  than 
speculative  systems,  so  that  it  would  cover  the  ascetic  life  as  well  as  the  mystic 
th*o8ophy  of  the  Colossian  heretics.  Hence  the  apostle  is  here  flinging  back  at  these 
false  teachers  a  favourite  term  of  their  own — "  their  vaunted  philosophy,  which  i* 
hollow  and  misleading."  The  word,  indeed,  could  claim  a  truly  noble  origin  ;  for 
it  is  said  to  have  arisen  out  of  the  humility  of  Pythagoras  who  called  himself  ''m 
lover  of  wisdom."    In  each  a  sense  the  term  would  entirely  accord  with  the  spirii 


CSA>.  n]  COLOSSIANS.  181 

•nd  teaciiing  of  St.  Paul ;  for  it  bore  testimony  to  the  insnfficienoy  of  the  hnman 
intellect  and  the  need  of  a  revelation.  But  in  his  age  it  had  come  to  be  associated 
generally  with  the  idea  of  subtle  dialectics  and  profitless  speculation ;  while  in  this 
particular  instance  it  was  combined  with  a  mystic  cosmogony  and  angelology  which 
contributed  a  fresh  element  of  danger.  As  contrasted  with  the  power  and  fulness 
and  certainty  of  revelation,  all  such  philosophy  was  foolishness  (1  Cor.  i.  20).  It 
ie  worth  observing  that  this  word,  which  to  the  Greeks  denoted  the  highest  effort 
o^  the  intellect,  occurs  here  alone  in  St.  Paul,  just  as  he  uses  "  virtue,"  which  was 
thw't  term  to  express  the  highest  moral  excellence,  in  a  single  passage  only  (Phil. 
ir  ">.  The  reason  is  much  the  same  in  both  cases.  The  gospel  had  deposed  the 
te»TO8  as  inadequate  to  the  higher  standard,  whether  of  knowledge  or  of  practice, 
wmch  it  had  introduced.  The  attitude  of  the  fathers  towards  philosophy  while  it 
was  a  living  thing  was  various.  Clement,  who  was  followed  in  the  main  by 
tho  oBjlier  Alexandines,  regards  Greek  philosophy  not  only  as  a  preUminary  train- 
ing lor  the  gospel,  but  even  as  in  some  sense  a  covenant  given  by  God  to  the  Greeks. 
Others,  who  were  the  great  majority,  and  of  whom  Tertullian  may  be  taken  as  an 
»&treme  type,  set  their  forces  directly  against  it,  seeing  in  it  only  the  parent  of  all 
heretical  teaching.  St.  Paul's  speech  at  Athens,  on  the  only  occasion  when  he  ia 
known  to  have  been  brought  into  direct  personal  contact  with  Greek  philosophers 
(Acts  xvii.  18),  shows  that  his  sympathies  would  have  been  at  least  as  much  with 
Clement's  representations  as  with  TertuUian's.  {Bp.  Lightfoot.)  Philotophy  true 
and  false : — I.  True  philosophy  is  not  condemned  by  St.  Paul.  We  cannot  under- 
stand this  concerning  any  branch  or  the  whole  body,  lest  God  be  called  into 
judgment.  For  philosophy  is  the  ofifspring  of  right  reason ;  and  this  light  of  reason 
is  infused  into  the  mind  by  God.  We,  therefore,  judge  not  the  discipline  of  the 
Platouists,  Ac,  to  be  true  philosophy,  but  the  principles  of  every  one  which  agree 
with  truth  and  morals.  The  errors  of  theologians  do  not  pertain  to  theology,  nor 
do  those  of  philosophers  and  philosophy.  These  we  are  free  to  condemn,  but  not 
truth  discovered  by  natural  reason.  II.  What  kind  of  philosophy  is  excluded  by 
THE  APOSTLE.  That  which  is  vain  and  deceitful,  viz.,  the  product  of  reason  carried 
beyond  its  bounds.  Philosophy  is  to  be  Ustened  to  when  it  pronounces  about 
things  subject  to  itself.but  when  it  would  determine  concerning  the  worship  of  God 
and  salvation,  &o.,  which  are  beyond  the  grasp  of  reason  and  depend  wholly  on  reve- 
lation, it  brings  nothing  solid  or  true.  St.  Paul  alleges  the  cause  of  this  in  1  Cor. 
ii.  14.  As  animals  can  judge  very  well  concerning  things  which  relate  to  sense,  yet 
cannot  judge  of  human  affairs,  neither  can  men  pronounce  by  natural  lig;ht  respect- 
ing heavenly  doctrine,  although  they  may  determine  by  it  what  is  good  and  right  in 
human  concerns.  This  was  the  error  of  the  false  teachers  who,  in  speculating 
about  the  method  of  approach  to  God  and  of  redemption,  went  beyond  the  declara- 
tions which  God  had  made  on  these  matters.  III.  The  abuse  and  use  of  philosophy. 
1.  Its  abuse.  (1)  When  it  attempts  to  deduce  the  fundamentals  of  religion  from 
its  own  principles.  These  principles  may  be  true,  but  there  cannot  be  elicited  from 
them  what  is  to  be  determined  respecting  the  Trinity,  e.g.,  which  is  to  be  deduced 
from  higher  principles,  viz.,  the  will  of  God  revealed  in  His  Word.  (2)  When  it 
opposes  its  own  principles  which  are  true  in  the  order  of  nature  to  theological 
principles  which  are  above  the  order  of  nature.  Thus  it  is  tme  that  out 
of  nothing,  nothing  can  be  made ;  but  philosophers  err  when  they  think  they 
can  hence  conclude  against  creation  which  the  Scriptures  teach  as  done  not  by 
virtue  of  natural  causes,  but  by  the  power  of  God.  (3)  When  it  obtrudes  for 
legitimate  conclusions  its  errors  drawn  sometimes  by  false  consequences  from  true 
premises.  2.  Its  uses.  (1)  For  the  clear  understanding  of  many  passages  of 
Scripture.  Although  the  principles  of  our  religion  are  derived  from  God,  yet  there 
are  many  examples  and  illustrations  which  cannot  be  understood  without  the  aid  of 
human  literature.  Its  references  to  the  heavenly  bodies  require  the  knowledge  of 
astronomy;  to  animals,  of  natural  history,  &o.  (2)  For  discriminating  between  and 
treating  religious  controversies ;  for  appreciating  the  coherence  and  mutual  estab- 
lishment of  heavenly  doctrine,  and  for  determining  what  is  consistent  and  incon- 
sistent with  them.  Our  faith  ascends  above  reason,  but  not  irrationally.  I  beheve 
the  resurrection,  because  reason  proves  the  doctrine  to  be  delivered  in  the  Bible.  I 
do  not  believe  in  purgatory  because  reason  can  collect  it  from  no  part  of  Scripture 
according  to  the  rules  of  sound  logic.  This  use  of  reason  in  sacred  things  God 
approves  and  requires  (Eph.  v.  17,  iv.  14  ;  1  These,  v.  21 ;  Acts  xvii.  11).  (3)  For 
the  instruction  of  those  who  have  not  yet  embraced  Christ,  and  for  resistance  if 
they  fihooid  oppose  religion.    He  who  has  hved  in  darkness  Ib  not  to  be  drawa 


ISa  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

directly  into  the  snnlight  lest  he  should  be  overpowered  rather  than  enlightened  ; 
BO  they,  who  have  been  educated  in  paganism  are  first  to  be  awakened  by  reasons 
drawn  from  natural  light  (Acta  xvii.  24).  And  then  it  is  to  be  employed  as  a  ram- 
part and  weapon  against  opponents.  Julian  the  apostate  said  "  We  are  caught  by 
our  own  wings  "  when  he  saw  the  philosophers  routed  by  the  Christians  through 
the  advantages  of  philosophy.  (4)  For  Christian  education,  since  the  mind  is  pre- 
pared and  rendered  more  acute  by  philosophical  studies,  and  our  discourses  on 
sacred  things  are  much  enriched  by  the  good  sayings  of  philosophers.  (5)  For 
the  delight  of  hearers.  As  Clemens  says,  "The  truth  which  is  sought  from 
Scripture  is  as  necessary  to  the  life  as  bread ;  but  that  which  is  sought  from  other 
instruction  is  as  sauce  and  sweetmeats."  {Bp.Daveiiant.)  Philosophy  and  its  counter- 
feit: — I.  The  codnterfeit  op  a  good  thing.  1.  The  good  thing — "philosophy." 
Etymologically  it  means  love  of  wisdom,  but  in  modern  use  it  stands  for  a  system 
of  knowledge.  When  applied  to  any  particular  department  of  knowledge,  it  stands 
for  the  collection  of  general  laws  or  principles  under  which  all  the  subordinate 
phenomena  of  facts  relating  to  that  subject  are  comprehended.  It  is  a  good  thing 
because — (1)  Christ's  spirit  is  good.  Christ's  spirit  is  a  love  of  truth,  a  desire  to 
find  out  the  first  principles  or  reason  of  things  ;  a  desire  to  penetrate  all  phenomena 
and  to  enter  in  and  study  that  invisible  region  where  all  the  hidden  forces  of  the 
universe  are  at  work.  (2)  Its  process  is  good — observation,  comparison,  generaliza- 
tion. Such  a  process  is  soul-quickening,  invigorating,  and  ennobling.  (3)  Its 
results  are  good.  All  the  arts  that  bless  and  adorn  the  civilized  world  are  but  ideas 
reached  by  philosophy.  2.  The  counterfeit.  There  is  a  false  philosophy,  a 
miserable  imitation  of  the  true.  (1)  It  is  deceptive,  "  vain  deceit."  It  is  mere 
fiction,  guesses,  castles  in  the  air.  Its  light,  such  as  it  is,  is  a  mere  ignis  fatuus 
rising  out  of  the  muddy  marshes  of  a  vain  imagination.  (2)  It  is  ill  founded — 
"  After  the  tradition,"  &c.  It  has  its  origin  in  mere  human  guesses,  and  the  rough 
undigested  elements  of  a  mere  worldly  knowledge.  It  is  built  on  crudities.  (3)  It  is 
anti-Christian — "  not  after  Christ."  Not  after  the  subject,  style,  and  spirit  of  His 
teaching.  II.  The  counterfeit  of  a  good  thing  is  dangerous.  What  thousands 
in  all  ages  have  been  made  a  prey  of  by  counterfeit  philosophy !  They  have  been 
plundered  and  borne  away  into  confusion  and  ruin  by  wrong  ideas  of  God,  the  uni- 
verse, and  man  and  his  nature,  obligations,  and  destiny.  "  Beware  "  of  it.  1.  It 
has  many  forms.  It  appears — (1)  In  natural  sciences.  (2)  In  ontological  theories. 
(3)  In  theological  creeds.  (4)  In  ethical  enactments.  2.  It  has  fascinating  aspects. 
It  often  comes  in  the  stateliness  of  the  scholar,  in  the  force  of  the  reasoner,  in  the 
grandeur  of  the  rhetorician,  in  the  sublimity  of  the  poet.  3.  It  works  insidiously. 
It  instils  its  errors  quietly  ;  and  silently  as  the  laws  of  nature  they  often  work  out 
their  own  ends.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  marks  of  a  false  philosophy  ; — It  ifl 
known — L  Bv  its  profitless  speculations.  II.  Bt  its  purelt  human  obigin. 
"After  the  tradition  of  men."  1.  The  human  mind  is  limited.  2.  All  human 
knowledge  is  imperfect.  "  If  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth  anything,  he  knoweth 
nothing  yet  aa  he  ought  to  know."  III.  Bt  its  undue  bxaltation  of  blbmentabt 
PBiNCiPLBB.  "  After  the  rudiments  of  the  world."  A  true  philosophy,  while 
starting  necessarily  with  elementary  principles,  conducts  to  increasing  knowledge 
and  spiritual  exaltation  and  liberty.  A  false  philosophy  fetters  the  mind  by 
exaggerating  the  importance  of  first  principles  and  insisting  on  their  eternal 
obligation.  IV.  By  its  Christlessness.  "And  not  after  Christ."  V.  By  its 
destbdctive  influence.  "Spoil  you" — not  strip  off,  but  carry  away  as  spoil 
(Gen.  xiv.  12-16).  Man  is  never  so  grievously  despoiled  as  when  his  soul  is  robbed 
by  error.  "  The  thief  cometh  not,"  &c.  (John  x.  10).  VL  Against  a  falss 
fhilosopht  the  Chubch  must  bb  faithfully  wabned.  1.  Because  it  is  seductive 
in  its  pretensions.  2.  Because  it  is  baneful  in  its  effect.  (G.  Barlow.) 
The  bane  and  the  antidote : — I.  The  poison.  "  Take  heed  "  implies  a  real,  not  an 
hypothetical  danger.  Paul  is  not  crying  "  wolf."  "Any  one,"  i.e.,  somebody  ;  aa 
if  he  had  said,  "  I  name  no  name? — it  is  not  the  persons,  but  the  principles  I  fight 
against — but  you  know  whom  1  mean."  "Maketh  spoil  of  you."  He  sees  the 
converts  taken  prisoners,  and  led  away  with  a  cord  round  their  necks,  like  the 
strings  of  captives  on  the  Assyrian  monuments.  He  had  spoken  in  chap.  i.  13  of 
the  conqueror  who  had  translated  them ;  now  he  fears  lest  a  robber  horde,  making 
•  raid  upon  the  peaceful  colonists  in  their  happy  new  homes,  may  sweep  them  again 
into  bondage.  The  cord  whose  fatal  noose  will  be  tightened  round  them  if  they  do 
not  take  care  is  ••  philosophy  and  vain  deceit."  If  Paul  had  been  writing  in  English 
ke  would  have  put  philosophy  in  inverted  commas,  to  show  that  he  was  quoting 


CHAP,  u.]  COLOSSIANS.  133 

the  heretical  teachers'  own  name  for  their  system.  For  true  love  of  wisdom  neithel 
Paul  nor  Paul  s  Master  have  anything  but  praise.  The  thing  spoken  of  here  has  no 
resemblance,  except  in  name,  to  what  the  Greeks  in  their  better  days  called  philo- 
sophy, and  nothing  warrants  the  representation  that  Christianity  is  antagonistic  to 
it.  1.  "  Empty  deceit "  describes  this  system.  It  is  like  a  bladder  full  of  wind. 
Its  lofty  preteusion  is  that  it  is  a  love  of  wisdom,  but  if  we  look  at  it  closely  it  is  a 
fraud.  2.  It  is  "  after  the  traditions  of  men."  (1)  It  is  significant  that  the  expres- 
sion is  a  word  of  Christ's  (Mark  vii.  8).  The  portentous  and  smothering  under- 
growth of  such  traditions  is  preserved  in  the  Talmud,  where  for  thousands  of  pages 
we  get  nothing  but  Babbi  So-and-so  said  this,  but  Eabbi  So-and-so  said  that,  until 
we  feel  stifled,  and  long  for  one  Divine  word  to  still  all  the  babble.  The  oriental 
element  in  the  heresy,  on  the  other  hand,  prided  itself  on  a  hidden  teaching  too 
sacred  to  be  entrusted  to  books,  and  was  passed  from  lip  to  lip  in  some  close  con- 
clave. The  fact  that  all  this  had  no  higher  source  than  man's  imaginings,  seems 
to  Paul  the  condeui nation  of  the  whole  system.  His  theory  is  that  in  Christ  every 
man  has  the  full  truth.  What  an  absurd  descent  then  to  "  turn  away  from  Him 
that  speaketh  from  heaven "  to  human  voices  and  thoughts.  (2)  These  special 
forms  of  tradition  trouble  no  man  now.  But  the  tendency  to  give  heed  to  human 
teachers,  and  to  suSer  them  to  come  between  us  and  Christ  is  deep  in  us  all. 
There  is  at  one  extreme  the  man  who  believes  in  no  revelation,  but  pays  his  teacher 
a  deference  as  absolute  as  that  which  he  regards  superstition  when  rendered  to 
Christ.  At  the  other  are  the  Christians  who  will  not  let  Christ  and  the  Scripture 
speak  unless  the  Church  be  present  at  the  interview,  like  a  jailer,  with  a  bunch  of 
man-made  creeds  jingling  at  its  belt  3.  It  is  "  after  the  rudiments  of  the  world." 
(1)  Rudiments  means  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and  hence  "elements,"  "first 
principles,"  the  A,  B,  C,  of  a  science.  They  boasted  of  mysterious  doctrines  for 
the  initiated,  of  which  the  plain  truths  Paul  preached  were  but  "milk  for  babes." 
Paul  retorts  that  the  true  mystery  is  the  Word  he  preached,  and  that  the  poverty- 
stricken  elements  were  in  that  swelling  inanity  which  called  itself  wisdom  and 
was  not.  He  brands  it  as  rudiments  of  "  the  world,"  which  is  worse,  as  belonging 
to  the  outward  and  material,  and  not  to  the  higher  region  of  the  spiritual,  where 
Christian  thought  ought  to  dwell.  Its  use  in  Gal.  iv.  3,  points  to  a  similar  meanmg 
here.  He  regards  it  as  a  retrogression  to  childish  things,  and  as  a  pitiable  descent 
to  a  lower  sphere.  (2)  The  forms  which  were  urged  on  the  Colossians  are  long 
since  antiquated,  but  the  tendency  to  turn  Christianity  into  ceremonial  is  running 
with  a  powerful  current  to-day.  But  enlisting  the  senses  as  allies  of  the  spirit  in 
worship  is  risky  work.  The  theory  that  such  aids  make  a  ladder,  by  which  the 
soul  may  ascend  to  God,  is  perilously  apt  to  be  confuted  by  experience,  which 
finds  that  the  soul  is  quite  as  likely  to  go  down  the  ladder  as  up.  Stained  windows 
are  lovely,  and  white  windows  are  "  barnUke  "  ;  but  perhaps  if  the  object  is  to  get 
light  these  solemn  purples  and  glowing  yellows  are  rather  in  the  way.  A  lesson  for 
the  day  is  Paul's  principle  here,  that  a  Christianity  making  much  of  ceremonies  is 
a  retrogression.  4.  Paul  sums  up  his  indictment  in  one  damning  clause — "  not 
after  Christ."  He  is  neither  its  origin,  substance,  rule,  nor  standard.  H.  Thb 
ANTIDOTE  (vers.  9-10).  1.  These  words  may  be  a  reason  for  the  warning,  "  take 
heed  for ;  "  or  they  may  be  a  reason  for  the  exclusion  of  Christless  teaching.  Any- 
thing not  after  Christ  is  ipso  facto  wrong.  "  In  Him  "  is  placed  with  emphasis  at 
the  beginning,  and  implies  "  nowhere  else."  "Dwelleth,"  i.e.,  has  its  permanent 
abode.  "  All  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  i.e.,  the  whole  unbounded  attributes  ol 
Deity.  "  Bodily  "  points  to  the  incarnation,  and  is  an  advance  on  chap.  i.  19.  So 
we  are  pointed  to  the  glorified  humanity  of  Christ  as  the  abode  now  and  for  ever 
of  all  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  nature  which  is  thereby  brought  very  near  to  ua. 
This  truth  shivers  all  the  dreams  about  angel-mediators,  and  brands  as  folly  every 
attempt  to  learn  God  anywhere  but  in  Him.  2.  If  He  be  the  sole  temple  of  Deity 
why  go  anywhere  else  to  see  or  possess  God  ?  "  In  Him  ye  are  full,"  which  sets 
forth  their  living  incorporation  in  Christ,  and  consequent  participation  in  His  ful- 
ness. Every  one  may  enter  into  that  union  by  continuous  faith.  All  the  fulness 
of  God  is  in  Him,  that  from  Him  it  may  pass  to  us.  According  to  our  need  it  will  vary 
itself,  being  to  each  what  the  moment  most  requires — wisdom,  or  strength,  or  beauty, 
or  patience.  3.  The  process  of  receiving  all  the  Divine  fulness  is  a  continuous  one. 
We  can  but  be  approximating  to  the  possession  of  the  infinite  treasure,  and  since  thA 
treasure  is  infinite,  and  we  can  indefinitely  grow  in  capacity  of  receiving  God,  there 
must  be  an  eternal  continuance  of  the  filling,  and  an  eternal  increase  of  the 
measore  of  what  fills  us.    The  indwelling  Christ  will  "enlarge  the  plaoe  of  Hia 


1S4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

habitation,"  as  the  walla  stretch  and  the  roof  soars.  He  will  fill  the  greater  honse 
with  the  light  of  His  presence  and  the  fragrance  of  His  name.  4.  From  such 
thoughts  Paul  would  have  us  draw  the  conclusion — how  foolish  it  must  be  to  go  to 
any  other  source  for  the  supply  of  our  needs.  Christ  is  "  the  Head  of  all  princi- 
pality," (fee.  Why  then  go  to  the  ministers  when  we  have  access  to  the  King  ? 
Why  leave  the  fountain  of  living  water  for  the  broken  cisterns?  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  The  gospel  to  he  preached  in  its  purity  : — Astronomers  tell  us  that  the 
light  of  the  sun  is  pure  white  light,  but  when  it  comes  in  contact  with  the  atmos< 
phere  of  our  earth  it  becomes  discoloured,  simply  because  the  medium  through 
which  it  passes  is  impure.  So  it  is  with  the  light  of  heaven  when  it  passes  through 
the  traditions  of  men.  (S.  H,  Leary,  B.C.L.)  The  pure  milk  of  God's  Word  is 
not  to  be  adulterated  with  the  chalk  of  human  opinions.  {Ibid.)  The  gospel  to 
be  preached  timply : — Of  the  works  of  a  famous  alcliymist  of  the  tnirteenth  century, 
it  is  said  that,  "  whoever  would  read  his  book  to  find  out  the  secret  would  employ 
all  his  labour  in  vain."  All  the  gold  makers  who  have  written  upon  their  favourite 
mystery  are  in  the  like  predicament,  no  one  can  comprehend  what  the  secret  is 
which  they  pretend  to  divulge.  May  we  not  shrewdly  guess  that  if  they  had  any 
secret  to  tell  they  would  put  it  in  intelligible  language,  and  that  their  pompous  and 
involved  sentences  are  only  a  screen  for  their  utter  ignorance  of  the  matter  ?  When 
we  hear  preachers  talking  of  Divine  things  in  a  style  savouring  more  of  meta- 
physical subtlety  than  of  gospel  plainness ;  when  the  seeking  sinner  cannot  find 
out  the  way  of  salvation  because  of  their  philosophical  jargon,  may  we  not  with 
jastice  suspect  that  the  preacher  does  not  know  the  gospel,  and  conceals  his  cul- 
pable ignorance  behind  the  veil  of  rhetorical  magniloquence?  Surely  if  the  man 
understood  a  matter  so  important  to  all  his  hearers  as  the  way  of  salvation,  he 
would  feel  constrained  to  tell  it  out  in  words  which  all  might  comprehend.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  9.  In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily. — I.  The  hobsb, 
or  place  of  residence — "  in  Him."  In  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  or  in  that  human 
nature  in  which  He  carried  on  the  business  of  our  salvation ;  as  despicable  and 
abject  as  it  was  in  the  eyes  of  men,  yet  it  was  the  temple  and  seat  of  the  Godhead. 
II.  The  inhabitant — "  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  ;  "  not  a  portion  of  God  only,  or 
His  gifts  and  graces  (as  we  are  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  1  Pet.  i.  4.), 
but  the  whole  Godhead.  HI.  The  manner — *'  bodily."  The  word  may  relate — 1. 
To  the  shadows  and  figures  of  the  law,  and  so  it  signifieth  essentially,  substantially. 
Ood  dwelt  in  the  tabernacle,  temple,  or  ark  of  the  covenant,  (tv/ij3oX(k<5c,  because  of 
the  figures  of  His  presence.  In  Christ,  awiiariKwc,  as  His  human  nature  was  the 
true  tabernacle  or  temple  in  which  He  resideth.  Christ  calls  His  human  nature  a 
temple  (John  ii.  19),  or  else — 2.  With  respect  to  the  intimacy  and  closeness  of  the 
union.  So  aiofiaTucdQ,  may  be  rendered  personally  ;  for  body  is  often  put  for  a  person. 
The  two  natures  were  so  united  in  Him,  that  He  is  one  Christ.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
Thefulnest  of  Christ : — Ships  have  been  wrecked  by  mistaking  one  light  for  another. 
Men  in  life's  voyage  often  make  the  same  terrible  blunder.  Signals  of  danger, 
however,  are  set  up  by  God  to  save  us  from  so  tragic  an  end.  False  teachers  were 
proclaiming  fantastic  doctrines,  but  of  such  death-luring  lights  the  apostle  bids  the 
Colossians  beware.  We  need  the  same  warning.  Error  confronts  us  in  magazines, 
newspapers,  and  pulpits.  Paul  would  have  us  know  that  all  doctrine  is  false 
which  does  not  radiate  from  Christ.  Note — I.  Man's  condition  is  a  neoessitoui 
ONE.  1.  He  has  Divinely  implanted  longings  for  whose  satisfaction  he  has  to  go 
ont  of  himself.  He  has  (1)  Social  cravings.  He  was  not  designed  for  loneliness 
but  for  companionship.  (2)  Mental  cravings,  which  sometimes  show  themselves  in 
the  form  of  curiosity ;  but  the  more  cultured  a  man  becomes,  his  mental  longings 
assume  a  higher  form.  The  journeys  taken,  libraries  collected,  the  efforts  made  to 
ransack  past  and  present  witness  to  these.  (3)  Moral  and  spiritual  cravings. 
What  efforts  he  has  made  to  know  God  and  be  at  peace  with  Him.  2.  These 
longings  distinguish  man  from  the  animal  creation,  and  witness  to  the  grandeur  ot 
His  soul.  3.  Their  existence  implies  that  there  is  somewhere  that  by  which  they 
may  be  satisfied.  II.  Man's  necessitous  condition  is  coupiiETELT  met  by  thb 
DrviNB  FULNESS.  This  fulness  is — 1.  The  plenitude  of  the  Godhead.  Who  can 
describe  this  ?  It  is  a  fathomless  ocean  and  a  limitless  sky.  All  we  can  say  ia 
that  it  is  a  fulness  out  of  which  all  our  need  may  be  supplied.  But  we  may  know 
of  boundless  wealth,  and  yet  remain  destitute  because  not  able  or  permitted  to 
itpproach  it.     Is  this  so  here  7    No.     As  the  beams  fiow  from  the  sun's  fnlnes* 


<SBAP.  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  13* 

within  the  reach  and  for  the  nse  of  every  tree  and  hedgerow,  bo  the  Divine  fulness 
has  come  down  to  us  all.  2.  In  the  person  of  Christ,  not  typically  but  really. 
<1)  He  meets  our  social  cravings.  He  has  become  one  with  us  in  sharing  our 
common  life,  with  its  sorrows  and  joys.  No  one  need  now  be  lonely,  since  here  ia 
One  "who  has  everything  for  which  we  yearn.  (2)  He  meets  our  mental  cravings. 
He  is  the  Truth,  the  Light  of  the  world,  the  Wisdom  of  God.  (3)  He  meets  our 
moral  cravings  in  His  revelation  of  the  Father,  and  in  His  atonement  for  sin. 
Why,  then,  go  to  philosophy  or  sacraments  which  can  only  disappoint.  3.  Present 
and  unchanging.  The  Colossian  heretics  held  a  temporary  fulness;  Paul  affirms 
tha  Divine  fulness  "  dwells"  in  Him  now  and  for  ever.  Earthly  things  filter  away 
with  pitiless  haste,  but  He  is  "  the  same  to-day,"  &c.  Then  while  we  should  avoid 
going  elsewhere  we  should  flee  to  Him  at  once.  His  willingness  is  equal  to  Hia 
«b:lity  to  distribute.  (£.  H.  Palmer.)  The  fulness  of  God  dwelling  in  Christ : — 
I.  The  IMPORT  of  the  text.  1.  All  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead.  The  original 
signifies  that  by  which  a  thing  is  filled,  completed,  or  made  perfect.  •*  The  earth 
is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof,"  i.e.,  all  it  contains.  So  the  text  means  all 
the  natural  and  moral  attributes,  everything  which  renders  the  Divine  nature  com- 
plete. It  cannot  mean  anything  less,  for  if  one  perfection  were  taken  away  there 
would  be  something  wanting  to,  and  therefore  destructive  of  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead.  2.  All  this  fuluess  dwells  in  Christ.  The  word  is  not  that  used  in  John 
i.  14,  to  dwell  in  a  tabernacle — a  temporary  residence,  but  one  which  signifies  to 
live  in  a  house,  a  permanent  habitation.  So  then  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
dwells  in  Christ  abidingly.  3.  Eodily  means  real  and  substantial  as  against 
shadowy  and  figurative.  The  Mosaic  law  was  a  shadow,  Christ  was  the  body.  II. 
This  impobt  corresponds  with  other  Scriptures.  1.  We  are  taught  in  many 
places  that  the  Father  and  the  Spirit  dwelt  in  Christ.  Our  Lord  often  declared  that 
the  Father  dwelt  in  Him,  and  added  "He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father." 
He  is  also  represented  as  having  the  Spirit  without  measure.  Now  the  whole 
Godhead  is  included  in  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit.  Wherever  these  dwell  there  is  the 
Divine  fulness.  They  dwell  in  Christ.  2.  Christ  is  represented  as  possessing  all 
the  perfections  of  Deity — omnipotence  in  creation  and  Providence  ;  omniscience  in 
His  knowledge  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  heart  of  man  ;  omnipresence  in  being 
with  His  disciples  alway.  In  fact.  He  is  all  in  all,  and  therefore  has  the  fulness  of 
the  Godhead  bodily.  III.  Inferences.  If  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  is  in 
Christ,  then — 1.  In  Him  alone  can  God  be  found.  Men  have  forsaken  God ;  but 
they  must  find  Him  again  or  be  lost  for  ever.  It  is  His  will  that  men  should  seek 
after  Him  if  haply  they  may  find  Him.  Now  if  we  wish  to  find  any  one  we  most 
^o  to  His  residence.  So  since  the  whole  Godhead  resides  in  Jesus  as  in  a  per- 
manent habitation,  we  must  repair  to  Him  to  find  God.  *•  I  am  the  Way,  the 
Truth,"  Ac.  "  No  man  knoweth  the  Father  but  the  Son,"  Ac.  Men  may  seek 
film  in  the  works  of  creation,  in  providence,  in  His  Word  ;  but  they  will  never  find 
Him  till  they  come  to  Christ,  for  even  the  Scriptures  can  only  make  us  wise  unto 
salvation  through  Him.  But  if  we  come  to  Him,  God  who  commanded  the  light  to 
shine  out  of  darkness  will  give  as  the  knowledge  of  His  glory  in  the  face  of  Jesna 
Christ.  2.  No  man  can  obtain  a  portion  of  that  fulness  except  by  applying  to 
Christ.  Did  all  the  light  of  the  universe  dwell  in  the  sun  ;  none  could  obtain  light 
•xcept  from  the  sun.  Were  all  the  water  that  exists  collected  into  one  reservoir 
cone  could  obtain  water  but  by  applying  to  that  reservoir.  Now,  unless  we 
obtain  some  of  this  fulness,  we  must  pine  in  eternal  want.  The  mercy  which 
pardons  sin,  the  lit  ht  which  illumines  the  mind,  the  grace  which  purifies  the  heart, 
the  strength  which  resists  and  overcomes,  the  consolation  which  supports,  bright 
bope  and  everlasting  joy  flow  from  this,  and  no  man  can  partake  of  them  without 
partaking  of  it.  Infinitely  better  to  be  destitute  of  everything  else  than  to  want 
this.  For  it  the  Saviour  invites  us  to  apply  to  Him.  3.  The  necessity  and  worth 
of  faith  in  Him.  Look  first  at  Him  and  see  in  Him  an  inexhaustible  fulness  of 
blessing  ;  look  next  at  mankind  wanting  everything  and  therefore  wretched.  Now 
what  is  wanted  is  a  channel  of  communication  through  which  this  fulness  may 
flow,  so  as  to  be  filled  with  it.  Such  a  channel  is  faith.  Hence  John  says  of 
believers,  and  of  those  only,  •*  Of  His  fulness  we  have  received."  {E.  Fayton^ 
D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  Te  are  complete  in  Trim.  The  false  teachers  at  Colossse  were  Jews, 
4>nt  not  Jadaizers.  They  were  philosophers.  They  designed  to  substitute 
philosophy  for  Christianity,  not  by  denying  the  latter,  but  by  explaining  it.    They 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

distinguished  between  faith  and  knowledge.  Faith  was  for  the  people,  knowledge 
for  the  educated  few.  The  objects  of  faith  were  the  historical  and  doctrinal  state- 
ments of  the  Bible.  The  objects  of  knowledge  were  the  speculative  truths  under- 
lying those  statements,  and  into  which  they  were  to  be  sublimated,  Paul's  object 
is  to  prove— I,  That  philosopht  was  an  utter  failuee.  He  pronounces  it — 1. 
Vain,  i.e.,  void  (1)  of  truth;  (2)  of  reality;  (3)  of  worth  and  power.  2,  Deceit. 
It  disappointed  expectation,  and  betrayed  those  who  trusted  to  its  guidance.  Thia 
was  no  slight  matter,  and  so  he  warned  his  readers  lest  any  man  in  this  way  should 
make  a  prey  of  them  to  their  utter  destruction,     II.  That  all  the  objects  which 

PHILOSOPHY  VAINLY  ATTEMPTED  WEKE  EFFECTOALLT  ACCOMPLISHED  IN  ChRIST,     1.   What 

does  Paul  mean  by  philosophy?  Some  say  heathen  as  opposed  to  Christian 
philosophy ;  others  that  particular  system  that  prevailed  at  CoIosssb — the  Gnostic. 
Every  one  would  say  false  and  not  true,  yours  and  not  mine.  There  must  be  some 
way  of  deciding  this  question.  The  apostle  decides  for  us,  (1)  By  what  he  says 
of  the  system  he  opposes.  By  philosophy  he  means  systems  of  that  nature,  Thia 
system  undertook  to  determine  a  priori  and  from  the  principles  of  reason,  (a)  The 
nature  of  God,  or  of  absolute  Being,  {h)  His  relation  to  the  world,  or  what  the 
world  was  in  relation  to  Him.  (c)  What  tbe  origin,  nature,  and  destiny  of 
man,  {d)  What  Christ  is,  and  how  he  effects  the  restoration  of  man,  (2)  By  the 
arguments  he  uses  against  it.  He  includes  in  philosophy  every  system  against 
which  those  arguments  legitimately  bear,  (a)  He  argues  that  these  are  matters 
about  which,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  we  can  know  nothing.  They  are  matters 
of  revelation  (1  Cor.  ii.  9-11 ;  John  i.  18).  [h)  He  shows  that  God  in  the  Scrip- 
tures has  declared  the  wisdom  of  this  world  to  be  folly  (1  Cor.  L  20).  (c)  Ex- 
perience has  proved  that  the  world  by  wisdom  knows  not  God.  (d)  God  has 
determined  to  save  man  not  by  philosophy,  but  by  the  gospel.  2.  Paul  does  not 
depreciate  reason.  The  senses  have  their  sphere  ;  so  has  reason.  But  there  is  a 
supernatural  or  spiritual  sphere  into  which  reason  cannot  enter.  We  might  as  well 
judge  of  a  syllogism  by  the  tongue.  This  conclusion  is  sustained  by  conscious- 
ness. What  do  you  know  ?  There  lies  the  grave  !  Where  does  it  lead  to  ?  3.  Wa 
see,  therefore,  that  Paul  by  philosophy  does  not  mean — (1)  Exclusively  the  Oriental 
philosophy  ;  for  what  he  says  here  he  says  to  the  Corinthians.  (2)  Not  natural, 
mental,  or  moral  philosophy.  (3)  But  any  attempt  to  solve  the  great  problema 
above  mentioned  a  priori.  III.  All  that  philosophy  vainly  pretends  to  do  la 
DONE  IN  Christ.  1.  As  to  knowledge.  That  is  necessary,  even  of  these  supreme 
problems.  In  Christ  are  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  and  He  is  the 
only  source  of  knowledge.  The  knowledge  He  gives  is  sure,  satisfying,  sanctifying. 
2.  Eedemption.  (1)  It  is  objective — pardon,  reconciliation.  This  is  accomplished 
by  Christ's  atoning  work.  (2)  It  is  subjective — delivery  from  inward  sin  and 
restoration  of  Divine  life.  This  Christ  does  because  in  Him  dwells  the  fulness  of 
the  Godhead,  &c.  We  are  filled  with  God  in  Him.  3,  Restoration  to  our  former 
status,  to  the  kingdom  of  light :  it  is  exaltation.  This  is  done  by  being  made 
partakers  of  the  glory  of  Christ,  4.  All  this  depends  on  our  union  with  Him, 
which  is— (1)  Representative,  (2)  Spiritual,  (3)  Voluntary,  by  faith.  Lessons: 
1,  We  must  not  trust  to  our  own  reason  or  to  that  of  others  for  instruction  in 
these  great  points,  2,  We  have  sure  knowledge  in  the  gospel,  and  to  reject  it  is 
certain  perdition.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Ye  are  complete  in  Him : — 1,  Christ  is  the 
one  infallible  Teacher  of  the  Churcn.  Elsewhere  you  tread  on  the  deceptive  sand 
or  treacherous  marsh  which  by  an  appearance  of  solidity  lures  you  to  proceed  and 
then  sinks  under  your  weight.  His  teaching  alone  places  you  on  the  rock. 
Ancient  mariners  sailed  by  the  light  of  the  stars,  but  when  clouds  intervened  they 
were  beset  with  dangers.  Taking  the  words  of  Jesus  you  shall  cross  the  sea  of  life 
with  safety,  but  if  you  allow  human  philosophy,  tradition,  priesthoods,  &c.,  to 
intervene,  your  course  must  be  perilous.  2.  He  is  the  Head  of  the  Church,  and 
alone  has  a  right  to  command  in  spiritual  things.  We  honour  the  Fathers,  love 
the  names  of  saints  and  reformers,  but  we  must  not  make  them  lords.  "  One  is 
your  Master."  (1)  The  constitution  of  His  Person  qualifies  Him  for  this  spiritual 
throne.  Divine  knowledge,  wisdom,  power,  dwell  in  Him,  united  to  tenderest 
human  sympathies.  (2)  Moreover  He  purchased  us  with  His  own  blood,  and  His 
people  are  made  willing  subjects  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit,  3,  The  spiritual 
increase  of  the  Church  is  derived  from  Him,  Religious  progress  is  a  growing 
np  into  Him  in  all  things,  Christ  is  our  life.  Reject  Him,  and  you  are 
east  forth  as  a  severed  branch  and  burned ;  but  united  to  Him  a  Divine  virtue  shall 
pass  into  your  soul,  and  yon  shall  b«  made  "perfect  and  entire,  wanting  nothing." 


CHAP,  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  187 

4.  These  things  being  bo,  the  teaching  that  has  a  tendency  to  draw  us  away  from 
Christ  is  to  be  rejected.  The  apostle  warns  the  Colossians  against  errors  which 
would  have  this  eiJect.  The  things  he  names  are  still  in  the  world  under  different 
forms,  and  his  ailvice  is  as  needful  as  ever.  They  were  in  danger  from — I. 
Philosophy.  1,  St.  Paul  does  not  speak  against  love  of  knowledge,  for  this  is  as 
natural  as  the  desire  for  food.  Nor  did  he  suppose  that  the  gospel  had  anything 
to  fear  from  it.  False  religions  may  thrive  in  ignorance  as  bats  in  the  dark,  but 
pare  Christianity,  like  the  eagle,  delights  to  look  the  sun  in  the  face.  Be  philoso- 
phers if  you  will,  explore  the  wonders  of  nature,  and  the  gospel  will  no  more  suffer 
than  the  finding  of  new  planets  will  extinguish  the  sun.  2.  But  the  Colossian 
philosophy  was  the  vain  and  bewildering  theories  of  men.  Speculations  concern- 
ing God  are  of  little  value,  for  He  is  found  not  by  our  searching,  but  by  his  revealing, 
and  that  in  Him  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead.  Extinguish 
this  light  and  hold  in  your  hand  the  torch  of  philosophy,  and  what  do  you  make  of 
the  black  expanse  before  you— the  many  gods  of  the  heathen,  the  no-God  of  the 
atheist,  the  blind  necessity  of  the  fatalist,  or  nothing  but  matter  with  the  materialist, 
or  nothing  but  God  with  the  pantheist?  3.  Three  things  are  certain.  (1)  Man 
must  have  a  religion,  (2)  He  cannot  discover  a  satisfying  one  by  himself.  (3)  He 
should  receive  thankfully  that  provided  by  Christ,  who  is  our  hfe  and  in  whom  we 
are  complete.  II.  The  traditions  of  men.  1.  By  tradition  we  mean  doctrine, 
precept,  custom  not  named  in  the  Word  of  God.  Jewish  traditions,  embodied  in 
the  Talmud,  were  mingled  at  CoIossbb  with  mental  philosophy  and  the  truths  of  the 
gospel.  This  Paul  regarded  as  injurious  to  spiritual  life.  2.  The  belief  in  tradi- 
tion is  not  extinct.  The  Greek  and  Bom  an  Churches  receive  it  as  a  rule  of  faith 
co-ordinate  with  the  Bible.  And  other  Churches,  more  pure  and  enlightened,  are 
not  entirely  free.  (1)  There  are  traditional  systems  of  spiritual  truth.  Men  of 
other  days  melted  the  Divine  doctrines  and  cast  them  in  human  moulds.  The 
gospel  bears  the  same  relation  to  these  forms  as  a  painting  to  its  frame.  We  may 
change  the  frame,  but  must  not  efface  a  single  feature  of  the  picture.  (2)  There  is 
ft  traditional  mode  of  speech  with  which  you  must  clothe  the  truth  or  be  suspected 
of  heresy.  3.  Tiadition  is  at  best  an  uncertam  guide.  It  may  be  a  pillar  of  fire, 
or  an  ignis  fatuus.  But  we  have  the  words  of  Jesus,  the  glorious  and  everlasting 
gospel ;  and  our  faith  should  rest  in  that,  and  not  in  fairy  tales  of  Jewish,  Koman, 
or  Protestant  tradition.  "Ye  are  complete  in  Him."  III.  The  sacred  rites  and 
SEASONS  OF  A  FORMER  DISPENSATION  (ver.  16).  Many  are  still  Jewish  in  their  feelings. 
1.  To  many  the  Lords  day  is  still  the  Jewish  Sabbath.  Yet  its  very  name  shows  it 
to  be  a  different  day,  and  can  we  fear  for  its  sancitity  while  we  regard  it  as  com- 
memorative of  the  resurrection.  Moreover,  it  is  necessary  for  rest  and  devotion. 
Keep  it,  then,  as  given,  not  by  Moses,  but  by  Christ.  2.  Baptism  as  set  forth  in 
the  New  Testament  is  beautiful  and  instructive.  It  acknowledges  our  sinfulness, 
symbolizes  the  purification  of  the  Spirit,  and  puts  a  seal  on  the  baptized  that  he 
belongs  to  Christ.  But  when  it  is  regarded  as  regenerative,  and  as  creating  a  rela- 
tion which  it  only  recognizes,  the  si<^n  is  mistaken  for  the  thing  signified,  and  a 
simple  ordinance  converted  into  a  fruitful  error.     3.  The  Lord's  Supper,  in  its  sim- 

Elicity,  is  an  impressive  representation  of  Christ's  sufferings,  a  vivid  expression  of 
[is  love,  an  historical  evidence  for  the  gospel.  Men  have  built  monuments  to  keep 
their  names  in  human  memory,  but  time  has  blotted  them  out.  Therefore  our 
Saviour  ordained  for  His  memorials  productions  of  nature  that  will  last  as  long  as 
the  world.  Penetrate  their  meaning,  and  you  will  understand  what  Christ  is  to  you. 
But  when  the  idea  of  spiritual  magic  is  introduced,  instead  of  being  helpful  to  piety, 
it  becomes  a  stumbling-block  and  an  offence.  IV.  The  worship  of  angels  (ver.  18). 
This  old  error  still  lives.  The  honour  paid  by  Eome  to  angels  exceeds  that  paid  to 
Christ.  It  was  an  error  to  think  that  we  in  England  had  done  with  her  for  ever. 
She  is  very  busy  in  this  land,  and  wherever  her  teaching  is  received  angels  are 
worshipped.  We  should  avoid  her  and  repudiate  her  claims.  Begone,  spirit  of 
error;  that  we  may  behold  God  in  Jesus  Christ.  We  are  "complete  in  Him." 
(T.  Jones,  D.D.)  Complete  in  Christ  : — "  Complete"  is  carried  on  from  ver.  9. 
*'  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead,"  "  and  ye  are  full  (same  word)  in  Him."  I.  Ful- 
ness IN  Christ.  If  you  had  heard  Christ  speak  you  would  have  said  nothing  can 
be  taken  away  or  added  to  those  words  without  diminishing  their  force  or  beauty. 
If  you  had  seen  Christ  act  you  would  have  felt  that  His  action  came  up  to  the  ful- 
ness of  which  that  action  was  capable.  His  heart  was  nothing  but  love ;  and  His 
work,  although  confined  to  a  few  years,  fulfilled  the  infinite  counsel  of  the  Trinity. 
The  Father  looked  down  and  saw  no  flaw  and  was  satisfied.    IL  This  ruunsa 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

WAB  TO   BB   THE   ONB   TBEASUEE -HOUSE   OP   THE    ChUBCH    FOB  EV«B   (John  i.   16;    Eph. 

iv.  7).  And  every  believer  being  separately  endowed,  the  whole  Church  is  made 
His  body,  "  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all."  So  we  are  filled,  complete; 
and  the  Church  is  the  complement  of  Jesus.  III.  The  process  by  which  thb 
COMPLETENESS  IS  BFTECTED  18  UNION  WITH  Chbist.  1.  The  unlon  is  a  simple, 
positive  fact  once  for  all.  The  Holy  Spirit  enters  a  man's  mind  and  unites  hia 
thoughts,  feelings,  desires,  <&c.,  with  those  of  Christ,  and  that  Spirit  in  both  is 
onion.  2.  If  there  be  union  the  completeness  will  follow,  just  as  a  vessel  must  fill 
itself  from  the  fountain  with  which  it  is  connected.  IV.  We  naturally  yearn 
AND  STRIVE  TOR  COMPLETENESS,  BUT  FAIL  EVERYWHERE.  1.  No  man  evsr  yet  Came 
Dp  to  the  point  of  which  he  knew  his  powers  were  capable.  2.  None  of  those 
sources  of  gratification  with  which  God  has  furnished  us  ever  gave  entire  satisfac- 
tion. 3.  There  is  not  a  man  who  has  not  his  weak  points ;  but  above  all  men  the 
Christian  feels  his  incompleteness.  The  better  he  prays  the  more  he  feels  his  prayer 
deficient.  The  higher  his  attainments  the  farther  off  he  seems  from  what  he 
wants.  And  no  Christian  friend,  no  Church,  no  ordinance,  no  grace,  is  all  he  once 
expected  they  would  be,  4.  Life  is  one  vast  incompleteness.  V.  We  are  com- 
PLBTB  IN  Him.  1.  From  His  cross  our  Lord  said  "  It  is  finished. "  From  the  time 
of  creation  down  to  that  hour  those  words  could  not  have  been  spoken  about  any 
human  undertaking.  But  He  said  it,  and  mark  the  consequence.  You  have  to  do 
with  a  salvation  which  is  perfectly  complete.  If  you  think  you  are  to  do  anything 
yoo  detract  from  the  completeness  of  Christ.  2.  We  have  a  twofold  completeness. 
(1)  That  which  we  draw  from  Christ.  The  whole  disposal  of  God's  gifts  is  dele- 
gated to  Christ.  In  Him  all  things  are  treasured  up  for  our  sakes.  Hence  He  will 
supply  (a)  our  temporal  needs.  The  Christian,  therefore,  must  not  be  anxious 
about  them.  (6)  Strength  and  wisdom  for  every  work  we  have  to  do.  The  Chris- 
tian, then,  must  not  despair  about  his  weakness  and  ignorance,  (c)  Grace  for 
Christian  growth  and  comfort  The  Christian  must  not  despond  when  deprived  of 
outward  means  and  help.  (2)  That  in  which  we  stand  in  Christ.  God  sees  all  who 
believe  in  Christ,  and  accepts  Christ  for  them.  Hence  everything  we  do  in  faith 
loses  itself  in  some  corresponding  thing  that  Christ  has  done.  Our  prayer,  e.g., 
mingles  with  Christ's  intercession.  What  is  wanting  He  supplies,  what  is  redun- 
dant He  deducts.  His  perfume  gives  it  sweetness,  and  so  it  goes  to  the  throne,  how 
different  from  when  it  left  us,  ••  complete."  He  is  "  made  unto  us  wisdom  and 
righteousness,"  &c.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Complete  in  Christ: — 1,  Every  valu- 
able mechanism  represents  a  principle  peculiar  to  itself.  It  may  have  many  im- 
portant adjuncts,  but  there  must  be  one  principle  which  imparts  its  force  to  all  the 
rest.  2.  In  the  same  manner  men  are  of  large  or  small  account  as  they  recognize 
their  individuality.  Each  stone  is  hewed  for  its  special  place,  and  to  fail  to  appre- 
ciate oar  purpose  is  to  degrade  our  manhood  and  to  insult  the  prescience  of  the 
Divine  Architect.  S.  The  claim  of  Christianity  to  be  is  that  it,  in  like  manner, 
embodies  one  distinctive  fact.  Ethically  considered  it  has  mach  in  common  with 
other  systems ;  but  its  central  feature  or  force  is,  as  its  name  indicates,  the  Christ 
element.  The  degree  in  which  Christ  is  present  in  the  heart  marks  the  purity  of 
the  Christianity.  4.  The  declaration,  "  Ye  are  complete  in  Him,"  goes  much  further 
than  the  recognition  of  Christ  as  an  historic  character  as  we  associate  Mahomet 
with  Islam,  &o.  It  is  Christ  interpenetrat  n^  Christianity  at  every  point.  The 
Scriptures  assert  for  Christ  comprehensive,  all-filling  character  and  capacities.  "  I 
am  the  Way,"  &o.  '*  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  ••  In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  ful- 
ness of  the  Godhead,"  &c.  Observe — I.  This  completeness  in  Christ  in  contrast 
WITH  ALL  others.  1.  Ko  life  is  or  can  be  in  itself  alone.  We  sustain  a  multitude  of 
important  relations,  family,  civil,  &c.,  but  it  would  not  be  possible  to  apply  the 
language  of  the  text  to  them.  Of  no  relation,  even  the  most  valuable,  can 
it  be  said,  "  This  is  essential."  It  seems  to  be  the  destiny  of  man  to  grow 
oat  of  existing  states,  and  use  them  only  as  the  oar  employs  the  water 
that  it  dips  as  a  leverage  for  progress.  And  we  may  thank  God  that  in  a 
world  where  death  spares  nothing  that  there  is  no  person  or  con- 
dition wherein  our  completeness  lies.  The  king,  hero,  father  dies ;  the  nation, 
community,  family  mourns  as  if  nature  had  stopped  in  its  courses  ;  but  to-morrow 
the  world  moves  on  unchanged  save  that  one  grave  more  has  furrowed  its  surface. 
That  any  of  us  is  essential  to  the  place  he  occupies  is  but  a  fiction  of  his  own 
weakness  or  a  flattering  adulation  of  his  admirers.  Only  in  God  all  things  con- 
sist. 2.  The  reason  of  this,  and  as  marking  the  essential  difference  between  our 
relations  to  any  other  and  to  Christ,  is  that  the  former  are  m  a  sense  conventionaL 


CHAP,  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  18» 

We  found  them,  we  have  become  habituated  to  them,  nevertheless  they  are  not 
essential.  Of  one  only  can  thia  be  said.  That  we  are  complete  in  Christ 
renders  necessary  the  preceding  declaration  which  shows  that  what  God  can  do 
for  us  Christ  can  do.     11.  That  we  aee  complete  ik  Christ  necessakily  implies 

THAT  APART    FROM    HiM    WE    HAVE    NO    MORAL    STANDING    PLACE.       1.    I  CarC  UOt  to  argUB 

the  question  of  degrees.  Incompleteness  where  perfection  is  demanded,  where 
the  judgment  is  by  an  infinitely  holy  standard,  is  as  condemnatory  and  destructive 
of  our  moral  basis  as  any  degree  of  sin.  Some  years  ago  a  large  object  glass  was 
prepared  for  a  telescope.  With  all  the  care  employed,  a  single  defective  spot  was 
found  upon  the  otherwise  perfect  lens.  It  was  not  broken,  there  was  no  flaw,  but 
it  was  condemned.  Its  purpose  was  to  be  a  clear  itndeviating  eye  turned  towards 
the  heavens  accurately  to  determine  localities,  &o.  That  single  imperfection  was 
its  entire  condemnation.  This  is  the  idea  of  human  depravity.  The  defect  in  the 
web  of  the  cloth  renders  the  whole  piece  unmarketable.  Slight  incompleteness  is  still 
incompleteuess,  and  when  the  judgment  is  upon  righteousness  the  ground  is  taken 
from  our  feet.  2.  It  would  be  curious  to  investigate  by  what  process  so  many 
cooly  conclude  to  risk  the  great  ordeal  upon  their  personal  moral  standing,  which 
even  their  fellow-men  pronounce  defective.  A  principle  that  may  well  command 
this  easy-going  complacency  to  halt  is  that  the  nature  of  sincere  virtue  is  ever 
discontent  with  attainments.  As  eminence  with  the  pencil  or  chisel  leads  to  the 
detection  of  manifold  deficiencies  and  desire  for  a  higher  ideal,  so  the  advance 
towards  holiness,  instead  of  satisfying,  always  reveals  a  disheartening  lack,  and 
as  invariably  leads  to  a  search  for  some  other  mode  of  satisfying  the  requirement 
of  conscience.  3.  May  it  not  be  that  this  failure  to  perceive  our  own  incomplete- 
ness, and  the  necessity  of  a  better  justifying  righteousness,  is  rather  to  be  ascribed 
to  moral  blindness  than  accepted  as  an  evidence  of  superior  virtue  ?  For  if  once 
our  incompleteness  out  of  Christ  be  admitted,  then  the  neglect  to  obey  the  gospel 
is  reduced  to  a  childish  trifling  with  oar  eternal  interest.  4.  Yet  how  can  one 
more  fully  commend  the  completeness  there  is  in  Christ  than  to  point  to  that  spot- 
less life  consummated  by  the  sacrificial  death  of  the  cross?  For  all  the  way 
through — where  the  suffering  by  innocence  must  either  mean  injustice  on  the  part 
of  God,  or  justice  receiving  satisfaction  for  us — there  is  not  a  step  or  act  which  is 
not  eloquent  with  the  perfection  of  that  sacrifice.  You  are  asked  to  trust  a 
Saviour  of  whom  it  is  asked,  "  Who  is  he  that  condemneth,"  &o.  Here  is  your 
completeness.  It  pleads  no  weak  abandonment  by  God  of  His  holiness.  Redemp- 
tion in  Christ  is  the  crown  of  that  holiness  as  it  is  the  expression  of  God's  love. 
in.  This  completeness  gathers  in  the  circle  or  its  embrace  every  consciocs 
WAyT.  It  keeps  as  well  as  saves.  Christ's  intercessory  prayer  is  not  a  supplica- 
tion such  as  we  oifer,  but  a  claim  and  recapitulation  of  what  had  been  secured  by  His 
expiation.  And  in  virtue  of  that  Christ  will  bring  with  Him  His  saints,  and  stand  at 
heaven's  gates  claiming  for  them  admission  by  His  victory  over  the  grave.  Christ's 
completeness  must  be  one  which  does  not  exhaust  itself  on  a  past  forgiveness.  It 
must  not  only  cleanse,  but  keep  me  clean.  2.  The  independence  of  God  of  every 
human  condition,  for  the  success  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and  the  completeness  for  all 
its  requirements,  is  found  in  Christ.  Men  have  come  and  gone;  some  have  seemed 
BO  important  that  hope  almost  expired  in  their  departure,  as  Melancthon  felt  when 
Lather  died.  Yet  how  local  are  all  such  influences.  God  uses  men,  and  so  do 
we;  bat  even  with  us  how  inconsiderable  is  a  man.  How  quickly  is  the  gap 
filled.  God's  Church  is  not  complete  in  man,  but  in  Christ.  (E.  P.  Terhune, 
DJ).)  Christians  completn  in  Christ : — I.  What  is  meant  by  Christians  bkino 
ooMPLETx  f  1.  The  word  means  "  full,  wanting  nothing " ;  and  as  applied  to 
ChristianB,  it  means  that  they  have  everything  necessary  for  life  and  godliness, 
happiness  and  immortality.  2.  The  things  needed  in  order  to  being  complete. 
(1)  Wisdom  and  knowledge — meeting  natural  ignorance  of,  and  conflicting  theories 
about,  God  and  the  way  of  salvation.  (2)  Pardon  and  righteousness.  As  sinners 
men  cannot  stand  before  God  in  judgment.  They  are  andean  in  His  sight,  and 
without  forgiveness  and  acceptance  they  must  perish.  (3)  Holiness  and  parity. 
The  heart  is  naturally  evil,  and  by  habit  and  indulgence  acquires  strength  for  evil. 
Unless  this  is  cleansed  there  can  be  no  meetness  for  heaven.  (4)  Consolation  and 
peace.  Forgiveness  is  not  enough,  there  must  be  a  consciousness  of  it,  so  that  the 
sense  of  shame,  the  deepest  of  our  discomforts,  may  be  banished,  and  the  sense 
of  reconciliation  with  God  take  its  place.  (5)  Support  and  strength  in  view  of 
trials,  labours,  enemies.  (6)  Deliverance  from  the  power  of  death  and  the  grave. 
n.  How  Christians  become  complete.     "  In  Cluist."    Because  being  God  and 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiP.  n, 

man  all  fulness  dwells  in  Him,  and  out  of  this  fulness  all  our  need  is  supplied. 
1.  "  In  Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  By  His  Word 
He  instructs,  by  His  providence  He  guides,  and  by  His  Spirit  He  opens  the  mind 
to  instruct  both.  2.  "  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,"  and  has  thus  brought 
in  an  everlasting  righteousness,  by  means  of  which  believers  are  accepted.  3.  Hia 
grace  creates  the  heart  anew,  subdues  sin,  and  developes  in  holiness.  4.  Ha 
brings  peace  to  the  troubled  conscience  and  consolation  to  the  broken  heart.  5.  Ha 
is  the  strength,  defence,  and  support  of  His  people.  6.  He  hath  abolished  death. 
{E.  Cooper,  M.A.)  Believers  complete  in  Christ: — I.  On  eakth.  1.  In  theil 
union  to  Christ.  2.  In  their  justification.  3.  In  Christ's  fulness.  4.  In  their 
title  to  heaven.  II.  In  heaven.  1.  As  regards  their  persons — the  union  of  body 
and  soul  with  the  perfection  of  nature  and  grace.  2.  As  regards  their  mental 
faculties — in  receptivity  and  memory.  3,  As  regards  the  graces  of  the  Spirit — 
faith  lost  to  sight,  hope  in  fruition,  love  in  God.  4.  As  regards  their  fellowship — 
undivided,  uninterrupted,  with  our  predecessors,  contemporaries,  followers,  God. 
5.  As  regards  their  happiness — perfect  enjoyment,  perfect  service.  (A.  Fletcher, 
D.D.)  Completed  life : — We  are  to  look  to  Christ  alone.  I.  For  the  fbeeino 
OF  ODE  SPIRIT  FROM  ALL  EVIL.  But  how  shall  thls  great  purification  and  perfecting 
be  attained  ?  The  appeal  is  to  Omnipotent  Grace.  And  God's  response  is  made 
known  in  Jesus  Christ:  "It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulnesa 
dwell "  of  pardoning  and  cleansing  grace.  In  Him  "  who  is  the  head  of  all 
principality  and  power"  are  we  to  look  for  the  sin-expelling  force — the  force  to 
correct,  to  purify  our  deepest  life.  1.  And  we  must  not  call  in  any  foreign  aid ; 
we  are  "complete  in  Him."  These  Colossians  were  tempted  by  Gentile  philosophy 
on  one  side,  and  Jewish  ecclesiastic  ism  on  the  other,  but  the  apostle  reminds  them 
that  everything  they  wanted  was  in  Christ,  and  they  were  to  confine  themselves  severely 
to  His  fellowship.  2.  And  Christ  can  save  us  completely.  "  Whiter  than  snow." 
Let  us  remember  that  Christ  aims  at  our  "  completeness,"  and  let  us  not  rest  short 
of  that  ideal.  It  is  a  present  blessing.  II.  For  the  perfecting  of  our  nature  in  all  it3 
POWERS.  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell."  In  Christ  we 
behold  the  fulness  of  "  the  Godhead  bodily,"  and  also  the  fulness  of  humanity. 
1.  We  need  not  travel  beyond  Christ — He  is  the  ideal  and  the  perfecter  of  the  race. 
All  colours  are  in  the  sun,  and  all  the  infinite  differentiations  of  colour  found  on 
the  landscapes  of  nature,  in  the  vapours  of  the  firmament,  in  the  play  of  the  sea 
— all  are  in  the  light.  And  in  Jesus  we  have  the  full-orbed  humanity,  all  the 
graces  by  which  man  can  be  adorned.  When  we  study  the  character  of  ordinary 
men  it  is  like  entering  an  ordinary  garden,  in  which  are  a  few  fair  flowers  with  an 
unfortunate  admixture  of  weeds ;  when  we  study  the  moral  character  of  extra- 
ordinary men  it  is  like  entering  the  grounds  of  some  great  rose-grower  or  orchid 
connoisseur — many  delightful  things  greeting  our  eyes.  But  on  beholding  Christ, 
it  is  like  being  set  down  in  Kew  Gardens,  where  the  vegetation  of  the  whole  earth 
blooms.  In  these  days  certain  critics  are  very  anxious  to  send  us  to  the  sacred 
writings  of  China,  India,  Arabia,  Persia.  "Very  valuable  indeed  are  those  writings 
from  certain  points  of  view,  but  they  have  nothing  to  add  to  the  ideal  of  humanity 
given  in  Christ.  2.  In  Christ  we  are  to  attain  the  perfection  of  our  nature.  We 
have  not  only  completeness  in  Him,  but  we  are  to  become  complete  in  Him.  Men 
talk  about  the  narrowness  of  Christianity,  its  commandments  and  prohibitions; 
they  want  a  system  of  religion,  wider,  freer.  Now,  the  tree  on  the  heath  or  in  the 
street  may  rebel  against  the  iron  bars  which  girdle  it.  Says  the  grumbling 
sapling,  "I  don't  like  this  iron  cage;  I  want  liberty,  I  want  room."  Room  1  it 
has  plenty  of  room  at  the  top.  It  has  room  for  its  branches  to  stir  with  every 
wind  of  heaven,  to  catch  all  the  dew  of  the  morning,  all  the  light  cf  the  sun,  all 
the  wealth  of  the  shower ;  room  for  the  singing  birds,  room  to  leaf,  to  blossom,  to 
fruit.  Room  1  The  iron  bars  protect  you  from  beneath,  but  a  whole  sky  is  wait- 
ing for  you  up  above.  So,  whilst  the  New  Testament  rings  us  round  with  protec- 
tive prohibitions,  Jesus  Christ  stands  over  us  like  a  sky,  pouring  down  npon 
us  richest  influence,  and  drawing  forth  all  the  powers  of  our  nature  to  their 
fullest  perfection.  There  is  room  for  our  whole  personaUty,  our  bodily  instincts, 
mental  faculties,  imagination,  wit,  judgment,  logic,  speculation  ;  for  our  social 
instincts,  all  the  sensibilities  of  kinship,  friendship,  patriotism  ;  for  our  ethical 
sense,  for  our  heart  with  all  its  wealth  of  affection.  Christianity  is  not  wide  enough 
for  a  theatre  at  one  end  and  a  prize  ring  at  the  other,  but  wide  enough  for  what- 
ever is  trae  and  pure  in  knowledge,  science,  art,  pleasure,  patriotism,  business, 
love.    We  are  not  straitened  in  Christ ;  let  us  not  be  straitened  in  ourselves,  but  so 


CHAP,  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  141 

live  in  the  faith  of  the  Lord  Josus  that  all  the  riohea  of  our  nature  may  be 
realized,  that  vie  may  "  come  to  the  measure  of  the  statare  of  the  fulness  of 
Christ."  III.  Fob  the  btrenothening  of  our  life  in  all  righteousness.  1.  In 
Christ  we  attain  completeness  alike  in  spiritual  and  in  practical  virtue.  Holiness 
is  that  side  of  goodness  which  looks  towards  God ;  morality  is  that  side  which 
looks  towards  society.  And  in  both  Christ  perfects  us — filling  us  with  reverence, 
admiration,  love  toward  God,  aud  strengthening  us  to  fulhl  all  practical  virtue. 
2.  In  Christ  we  attain  completeness  in  universal  virtue.  If  we  have  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  it  will  display  itself  in  every  possible  virtue — that  Spirit  being  the  essence 
cf  universal  virtue.  Just  as  in  the  doctrine  of  the  convertibility  of  force,  we  are 
taught  that  heat  may  become  light,  aud  light  electricity,  and  electricity  maj^netism, 
and  magnetism  chemical  ailiuity,  and  chemical  affinity  be  changed  into  motion — 
one  force  with  many  manifestations — so  the  Spirit  of  Christ  displays  itself,  now  as 
meekness,  now  as  courage,  now  as  temperance,  now  as  purity,  just  as  circumstances 
require,  but  yet  is  all  the  time  the  one  same  Divine  force.  It  makes  of  one  a  good 
master,  another  a  good  servant ;  one  a  good  prince,  another  a  good  subject ;  one  a 
good  husband,  anotber  a  good  wife ;  one  a  good  parent,  another  a  good  child. 
The  Spirit  of  Christ  fits  men  for  every  rank,  adorns  them  with  every  grace.  Ye 
"  are  comijlete  in  Him."  Conclusion  :  We  must  feel  condemned  for  our  incom- 
pleteness ;  and  yet  from  time  to  time  how  near  we  come  to  a  life  altogether  full, 
rich,  glorious  I  One  of  our  magazines  had  a  striking  paragraph,  entitled,  "  I  have 
touched  the  gold,"  aud  it  went  on  to  relate  how  a  diver  uttered  these  words  on 
coming  up  from  a  sunken  gold  ship,  and  the  writer  proceeded  to  show  how  in 
religion  we  often  touch  the  gold  and  yet  never  quite  reahze  it.  Oh  1  how  often 
have  we  touched  the  gold — the  strength  that  more  than  overcomes,  the  perfect 
peace,  the  faith  which  asks  and  receives,  the  love  that  many  waters  cannot  quench, 
the  purity  that  keeps  itself  pure,  the  joy  that  is  unspeakable,  the  hope  full  of  glory 
— we  touch  the  gold,  we  always  know  when  we  touch  gold  it  is  such  a  pleasant 
feeling,  and  yet  fail  to  possess  it.  Let  us  trust  in  Christ  with  all  our  heart ;  let  us 
do  it  now,  so  shall  every  man  be  presented  perfect  in  Him.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.) 
The  completing  of  the  toxd: — If  we  are  only  to  be  complete  in  Christ,  then  we  must 
be  incomplete  without  Him.  It  follows  then  that  a  soul  after  being  made  is  still 
to  be  completed.  It  may  be  a  germ  to  be  developed,  or  a  blasted  germ  to  be 
restored.  Here  then  is  the  true  work  of  Christ's  salvation,  the  completiug  of  the 
soul.  I.  What  do  wk  mean  by  the  completing  of  the  soul?  1.  We  constantly 
assume  the  necessity  of  a  great  afterwork  to  be  done  on  the  soul  of  our  child  to 
make  it  the  complete  man  or  woman  we  desire  it  to  be.  What  we  call  education 
is  only  our  attempt  to  bring  it  to  completeness.  The  result  is  a  being  in  higher 
quantity  and  finer  quality,  and  of  enlarged  capacity  for  action  and  enjoyment. 
2.  But  it  is  not  to  be  assumed  that  we  are  right  in  all  our  conceptions  of  what 
takes  place  in  the  training  of  minds.  (1)  They  will  not  be  complete  if  only  fully 
educated  intellectually.  Sometimes  they  will  be  hampered  by  scholarly  attain- 
ments, drugged  by  great  authorities,  and  incapacitated  by  the  overload  they  have 
taken.  Perhaps  one  hour  with  God  would  have  done  more  in  the  widening  of  con- 
eciousness  and  the  kindling  of  divinist  fires  than  whole  years  of  school  drill.  (2) 
Bometimes  we  think  our  child  is  only  going  to  be  complete  when  educated  away 
from  certain  ranges  of  employment.  If  he  can  only  be  a  blacksmith,  or  a  school 
teacher  even,  we  think  that  we  have  not  made  enough  of  him.  Were  he  a  qualified 
eommander,  physician,  lawyer,  &c,,  we  should  think  him  more  nearly  up  to  the 
measure  of  his  possibilities.  But  God  does  not  grade  our  completeness  by  any  such 
law.  He  may  have  rated  Bezaleel  the  brazier  far  above  Aaron  the  priest.  Who- 
ever came  nearer  to  being  mated  with  Shakespeare  than  the  tinker  Bunyan?  A 
great  soul  can  be  fashioned  anywhere  if  only  God  is  with  him.  God  nowhere 
allows  that  souls  are  kept  back  from  completeness  by  their  employments.  3.  No 
mere  schoohng,  to  whatever  grade  of  hfe  or  social  estimation  it  may  lead,  is  any 
but  the  faintest  approximation  to  the  completion  of  the  souh  IL  How  does  it 
appear  to  need  any  such  completion  7  If  this  were  a  question  relating  to  Adam 
in  his  innocence,  we  should  say  that  he  was  a  full-grown,  beautiful  child,  but  yet  a 
child  ;  that  his  perceptions  are  all  to  be  gotten,  his  will  trained,  habits  formed,  &c. 
Until  then  he  is  so  incomplete  that  he  will  not  stand  fast  in  good,  but  pluuge  into 
UTong.  Our  first  man,  commonly  thought  so  grandly  perfect,  is  put  on  probation 
Oiily  that  he  may  get  his  nature  so  matured  in  good  that  he  will  come  out  able  to 
etand.  Our  question  after  this  relates  to  him  under  the  couditious  of  moral 
disaster  into  which  he  has  fallen.    1.  The  soul  scarcely  at  all  answers  its  true  end. 


141  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  n. 

There  is  a  feeling  everywhere  that  souls  are  going  wide  of  the  matk.  A  watch  is 
complete  when  it  keeps  time,  not  when  it  quarrels  with  the  notations  of  suns  and 
dials  and  almanacks.  A  vintage  process  is  complete  when  it  makes  wine,  not 
when  it  makes  vinegar.  Souls  in  like  manner  are  complete  when  they  make  the 
good  they  were  made  for.  2.  Their  enjoyment  is  not  full,  but  confessedly  a  great 
way  short  of  it.  Their  instincts  are  unfulfilled,  their  wants  unsupplied,  their 
objects  not  found.  They  are  tormented  with  a  general  unrest.  It  would  not  be  so 
if  they  were  complete.  They  would  be  exactly  full  of  enjoyment,  just  as  by  their 
inborn  necessity  they  crave  to  be.  No  bee  misses  the  shape  of  its  cells,  no  bird  the 
direction  of  its  flight,  no  plant  the  colour  and  kind  of  its  flower.  No  more  will 
a  soul  its  enjoyment  unless  incomplete,  sweltering  in  some  torment  of  inbred  dis- 
order. 3.  Souls  do  not  fulfil  the  standards  of  beauty,  truth,  and  right.  These  are 
standards  we  all  admit,  just  as  all  flowers  and  fruits  have  standard  colours  and 
figures  of  their  kind.  An  apple  is  not  complete  when  it  comes  out  a  gourd  ;  nor  a 
rose  when  it  comes  forth  blue.  When  a  soul,  then,  misses  its  kind,  and  pats  forth 
itself  in  deformity,  falsity,  and  wrong,  it  is  a  witness  to  its  incompleteness.  4. 
Take  a  more  surface  view,  and  let  the  question  settle  itself  under  mere  first 
impressions.  How  then  is  it  that  there  is  so  much  meanness,  passion,  want  of 
self-government  in  individuals  ;  and  so  many  quarrels,  acts  of  injustice,  and  blood- 
shed in  society  ?  Who  can  imagine  mere  creatures  complete  in  their  order  ? 
Suppose  all  the  grains  in  a  bushel  of  wheat  were  to  act  on  themselves  and  towards 
one  another  thus  1  And  the  reason  why  they  do  not  do  so  is  because  they  are 
complete  creatures,  resting  in  their  own  perfect  mould,  and  in  harmony  with  each 
other — they  that  are  at  the  top  lying  just  as  heavily,  and  those  at  the  bottom 
supporting  the  weight  just  as  bravely  as  they  must.  Souls  completed  in  their  order 
would  do  the  same,  j  ust  as  all  God's  finished  worlds  and  societies  in  glory  do,  without 
one  rasping  of  a  bad  thought,  or  pang  of  mutual  accusation.  5.  We  have  a  way 
of  saying  concerning  a  man  that  he  is  ruined  or  blasted  by  his  vices :  in  which 
we  refer  mentally  to  the  incomplete  state  of  the  flower  which  we  say  is  blasted 
when  it  does  not  come  to  fruit.  And  the  figure  is  rightly  chosen.  Such  men  are 
incomplete,  6.  It  is  a  very  curious  distinction  of  souls  that,  being  finite,  they 
have  yet  infinite  wants  and  aspirations ;  their  very  longing  is  to  be  completed  in 
the  outspreading  of  some  infinite  possession.  What  a  falling  short,  therefore,  is 
it  when  they  fall  short  of  God.  III.  How  in  Christ  they  can  be  made  complete. 
Here  we  discover  three  great  agencies  provided  for  the  purpose.  1.  Inspira- 
tions. (1)  Separated  from  God  man  is  nothing.  Existing  in  mere  self-hood  he 
cannot  push  himself  out  in  any  way  so  as  to  be  complete  as  from  himself.  A 
sponge  might  as  well  complete  itself  in  dry  air ;  it  must  let  in  and  possess  the  sea. 
Just  so  a  soul  must  have  God's  properties  flowing  in  and  through — liberty  and  life 
in  His  life,  power  in  His  power ;  it  must  be  true  in  His  truth,  righteous  in  His 
righteousness.  (2)  Now,  it  is  in  this  inspiration  force  that  Christ  arranges  for  in 
His  gift  of  the  Spirit.  He  enters  the  soul  to  fill  out  every  lack,  configuring  it 
inwardly  to  all  that  is  most  perfect  in  Himself,  turning  its  very  liberty  towards 
all  it  wants  and  needs  to  receive.  2.  We  have  ideals  in  Christ,  who  lives  God 
in  human  figure  and  relation,  so  that  we  have  in  Him  all  that  requires  to  be  completed 
in  us.  Christ  is  the  mirror  that  glasses  God's  image  before  us,  and  the  Spirit  is  the 
plastic  force  within  that  transfers  and  photographs  that  image,  so  that  '•  beholding  aa 
in  an  image,"  <fec.  (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  3.  To  make  the  provision  perfect,  we  are  set  in 
a  various  scheme  of  relations  that  we  may  have  a  training  in  duties  and  qualities, 
and  be  perfected  by  means  of  them.  And  we  have  as  our  remarkable  advantage 
Christ  the  Divine  man  with  us  in  these  relations,  so  that  trying  to  do  the  exact 
Christly  thing  in  them  all  we  are  to  get  benefit  in  so  many  forms  and  degrees,  and 
be  brought  when  all  is  done  and  suffered  to  a  completeness  in  the  will  of  God.  In 
this  wondrous  mill  every  blemish  is  to  be  removed,  till  at  last  there  will  be  no 
spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing.  IV.  Thb  gospel  of  Chbist  is  the  only  poweb 
ABLE  TO  BRING  MEN  THUS  FORWARD.  1.  We  try  educatiou,  getting  much  from  it, 
but  never  anything  which  approaches  a  standard  of  completeness.  2.  What  we 
call  self-improvement  is  a  poor  desultory  affair,  polishing  one  thing,  while  another 
goes  rough  by  neglect,  and  all  issuing  in  a  great  self-consciousness  painful  to 
behold,  and  in  itself  how  dry.  3.  We  try  self-government  under  the  standards  of 
morality,  but  the  most  we  obtain  is  to  pile  up  what  we  think  good  acts  on  one 
another,  as  a  man  piles  his  day's  wages,  bnt  then  they  will  be  as  dry  and  with  as 
little  continuity.  4.  There  is  another  way  greatly  praised — philosophy.  But  its 
ideals  are  for  ever  oat-running  its  possible  attainments,  and  the  fine  philosophic 


CHAP    a,]  COLOSSIANS.  148 

consciousness  will  be  only  a  kind  of  equilibrium  under  dryness  and  felt  limitation. 
And  the  wars  of  the  mind  are  perhaps  kenneled  by  it  but  not  composed.  5.  There 
is  nothing,  in  short,  but  religion  that  can  be  looked  to  for  the  completing  of  th« 
Bonl ;  because  as  nothing  else  does — (1)  It  takes  hold  of  the  soul  s  eternity  and  its 
Bin,  to  raise  up,  harmonize,  purify,  and  settle  it  in  a  rest  of  everlasting  equilibrium 
in  God.  (2)  It  takes  hold  of  all  possible  conditions,  completing  as  truly  the  menial  as 
the  employer,  the  unlettered  as  the  scholar.  (3)  It  completes  one  degree  of  capacity 
8S  certainly  as  another,  preparing  the  feeblest  to  fill  out  his  measure  as  roundly 
and  blissfully  as  the  highest.  {H,  Btishnell,  D.D.)  Every  need  of  man  supplied 
«R  Christ : — I.  The  errors  Paul  desires  to  coonteract.  These  were  the  current 
•*  philosophy  "  of  the  day.  There  were  many  forms  of  thought  which  preceded 
Christianity.  For  hundreds  of  years  men  had  been  indulging  in  speculation, 
groping  after  light,  and  weaving  systems ;  and  the  Colossian  philosophy  seems  to 
have  been  an  amalgamation  of  the  four  principal.  1.  The  philosophy  of  Plato, 
with  its  mystic  doctrine  of  everything  having  an  archetypal  model.  2.  Jewish 
fables  and  endless  genealogies  picked  up  by  the  exiles  in  Babylon.  3.  Ceremonialism 
and  the  observing  of  days,  &o.  4.  Gnosticism,  the  affectation  of  superior  knowledge. 
II.  The  dootrink  with  which  he  would  counteract  these  errors.  "  Ye  are 
complete  in  Him."  1.  Note  who  and  what  Christ  is.  The  glory  of  Christ  is  set 
over  against  these  speculations.  (1)  He  possesses  the  loftiest  ideal — "All  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead,"  not  one  of  His  emanations,  and  that  fulness  "  bodily," 
brought  within  the  comprehension  of  man.  2.  He  has  done  a  great  work 
(chap.  i.  20).  It  is  not  matter  that  is  sinful,  but  man,  and  from  this  Christ  redeems 
him.  (3)  He  sustains  a  glorious  relation  to  the  universe  (chap.  i.  15,  18;  ii.  19). 
He  is  not  one  of  an  illustrious  order,  but  Creator  and  Head  of  all.  4.  He  maintains 
a  close  union  to  the  man  who  accepts  Him  (chap.  i.  27).  2.  If  Christ  is  all  this  to 
a  man,  then  that  man  is  complete  in  Him.  (1)  If  a  man  be  striving  after  the 
knowledge  of  God,  he  is  complete  in  Christ.  This  has  been  the  problem  of 
philosophy  from  Thales  till  now.  What  is  the  first  principle  T  Water,  air,  fire, 
mind,  love,  have  each  in  turn  been  the  answer.  And  now  a  "philosophy"  ia 
confessing  the  problem  insoluble,  calling  God  by  a  name  more  hopeless  than  that 
on  the  Athenian  altar — the  Unknowable.  But  who  that  knows  Christ  can  ever  be 
thus  in  the  dark  (John  xiv.  9).  (2)  If  a  man  would  approach  God  he  is  complete 
in  Christ.  Afar  from  God  man  cannot  rest,  but  sin  keeps  him  away.  But  through 
Christ  we  have  access  (John  xiv.  6 ;  Heb.  x.  19)  and  close  fellowship.  (3)  If  a  man 
is  anxious  about  his  standing  before  God  he  is  complete  in  Christ.  Through  Him 
we  may  have  a  better  and  firmer  one  than  Adam's.  In  Christ  a  man  stands  accepted 
and  welcomed  with  nought  wanting  to  the  fulness  of  his  redemption.  (4)  If  a 
man  wants  to  lead  a  holy  life  he  is  complete  in  Christ.  This  was  the  aim  of  the 
Gnostics ;  not  holiness  indeed,  but  freedom  from  the  impurities  of  matter.  Hence 
they  tried  asceticism.  But  sin  is  not  to  be  purged  by  scourging  the  body.  Christ 
however  can  kill  it  by  the  power  of  a  new  life  which  His  Spirit  implants.  (5)  If  a 
man  is  longing  for  light  on  the  great  questions  of  destiny  he  is  complete  in  Christ, 
who  has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  (6)  Do  we  ask  for  a  bond  of 
brotherhood  in  the  human  race  ?  We  are  complete  in  Christ  in  whom  there  is 
neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  &o.  (7)  Do  we  ask  for  a  redemption  that  shall  perfect 
body,  as  well  as  soul  and  spirit  J  We  are  complete  in  Him  who  is  "  the  Saviour  of 
the  body"  and  "the  resurrection  and  the  life."  III.  The  sditabilitt  of  this 
doctrine  for  codnteracting  modern  errors.  The  true  method  of  meeting  false 
doctrine  is  to  show  that  all  our  nature  craves  is  to  be  found  in  Christ.  But  since 
Christ  is  enough  in  Himself  He  must  be  accepted  as  being  so,  and  not  as  the  mere 
complement  of  some  other  system.  1.  Are  you  in  peril  of  Kationalism  ?  Learn 
what  Jesus  is,  and  you  will  find  reason  and  conscience  to  say,  "  Here  is  one  at 
whose  feet  we  can  sit  to  be  their  enUghtener  and  lord."  2.  Are  you  attracted  by 
Positivism  ?  Here  in  Christ  is  all  that  is  attractive  in  its  assertions,  and  nought 
of  its  dismal  negations.  They  worship  they  know  not  what  in  worshipping 
"  Humanity."  But  no  one  who  has  ever  caught  a  gUmpse  of  Christ  can  ever  barter 
a  living  Saviour  for  that.  One  in  the  race  and  yet  over  it.  Over  it,  that  He  might 
redeem,  educate,  and  glorify  it ;  and  yet  who  can  give  to  each  member  eternal  life. 
8.  Do  the  claims  of  a  so-called  priesthood  attract  you  ?  If  you  knew  what  Christ 
is  yoo  would  let  no  one  have  the  impertinence  to  come  between  you  and  Him.  We 
need  a  mediator  between  God  and  man ;  but  none  between  us  and  Jesus.  Con- 
clusion ;  This  doctrine  ia  grand  enough  for  the  philosopher,  yet  simple  enough  for 
iiB  all.    We  are  complete  in  Chriat  for  living  or  dying ;  for  time  or  eternity.    (C. 


144  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

Clemance,  D.D.)  Completely  furnished: — Manton  says  "  He  that  is  in  a  journey 
to  heaven  must  be  provided  for  all  weathers  :  for  though  it  be  sunshine  when  he 
first  sets  forth,  a  storm  will  overtake  him  before  he  cometh  to  his  journey's  end." 
Have  faith  in  Christ  and  you  are  ready  for  anything,  thankful  for  everything,  afiaid 
of  nothing.  '*  Ye  are  complete  in  him."  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  WMcli  is  tlie  head 
of  all  principality  and  power. — Angels: — I.  In  themselves.  For  their  excellency 
of  nature,  as  they  are  here  called  principalities,  so  elsewhere  they  are  called  "  stars 
of  the  morning,"  '•  sons  of  God,"  yea,  "  Gods."  II.  In  REiiiTioN  to  Christ  so  they  are 
implied  to  be  of  the  body,  and  Christ  to  be  their  Head.  Now  we  may  not  marvel 
at  it,  that  Christ  should  be  the  head  of  angels,  for  there  be  divers  distinct  benefits, 
which  angels  from  thence  do  receive,  which  by  natural  creation  they  had  not.  1. 
They  are  vouchsafed  a  place  in  the  mystical  body  under  Christ,  that  they  might  b« 
received,  as  it  were  into  the  new  order  in  Christ,  2.  A  peace  is  made  between 
them  and  man  in  Christ.  3.  The  room  of  angels  fallen  is  supplied  by  the  elect, 
the  society  of  angels  being  much  maimed  by  their  fall.  4.  They  are  refreshed  with 
singular  joy  for  the  conversion  of  the  elect ;  besides  the  enlarging  of  their 
knowledge,  that  they  are  vouchsafed  the  understanding  of  the  secrets  of  the 
gospel.  5.  They  receive  from  Christ  confirming  grace,  and  so  assurance  that  they 
shall  never  fall :  which  is  their  chief  benefit.  6.  Their  obedience  in  its  own  nature 
is  imperfect,  though  not  sinful,  and  therefore  may  need  to  be  covered  by  Christ's 
perfections.  III.  In  relation  to  the  body  of  Christ.  1.  They  are  like  masters 
and  tutors,  to  whom  the  great  King  of  heaven  sends  out  His  children  to  nurse.  God 
doth  adopt  children,  and  after  commit  tbem  to  be  kept  by  those  most  noble  citizens 
of  heaven.  2.  They  execute  judgment  upon  the  enemies  of  the  Church.  They 
attend  us  at  the  hour  of  death,  and  carry  our  souls  to  heaven.  They  shall  gather 
our  bodies  together  at  the  last  day.  3.  For  the  accomplishment  of  all  designmenti 
for  our  good,  they  stand  always  looking  on  the  face  of  God  to  receive  command- 
ments. Conclusion  :  Inasmuch  as  Christ  is  the  head  of  all  principalities  and  powers, 
we  may  comfort  ourselves  divers  ways.  1.  If  Christ  fill  the  angels,  how  much  more 
can  He  out  of  His  fulness  fill  us  in  the  supply  of  all  our  wants.  2.  Shall  we  not 
rejoice  in  the  grace  here  is  done  to  ns,  in  that  we  are  united  into  communion  with 
angels  under  our  Head  ?  yea,  and  that  such  glorious  creatures,  are  appointed  to  be 
our  attendants,  why  should  we  fear  when  Christ  and  His  angels  will  be  so  ready 
about  us.  8.  This  may  also  instruct  us,  we  need  not  be  ashamed  of  Christ's  service, 
deeing  the  very  angels  follow  Him  and  depend  upon  Him.  A  prince  that  kept  great 
princes  to  be  his  domestic  servants,  were  like  to  be  much  sought  to  for  preferment 
of  such  as  would  follow  him.  Oh  I  how  should  we  long  after  Christ  who  is  Head 
ever  such  glorious  creatures  as  the  angels  are  1    (N.  Byjield.) 

Vers.  11-12.  In  whom  also  ye  are  circumcised  wltb  the  circumcision  made 
without  tiands. — Christian  circumcision  : — I.  Is  inward  and  spiritual.  II.  Is  com- 
plete. Manual  circumcision  was  the  cutting  away  of  only  a  small  part  of  the  flesh. 
Bat  the  spiritual  circumcision  consists  in  putting  off  the  whole  body  of  our  corrupt 
nature — the  entire  fleshly  principle.  IIL  Is  Divine.  "  By  the  circumcision  of 
Christ."  It  is  wrought,  without  hands,  by  the  inward  power  of  the  Divine  Spirit 
of  Christ.  IV.  Is  realized  by  the  thorough  identification  of  the  helievkb 
WITH  Christ  in  His  death  and  resurrection.  V.  Is  wrought  in  the  soul  by  a 
spiritual  baptism.  '*  Buried  with  Him  in  baptism,  wherein  also  ye  are  risen  with 
Him."  VI.  Is  RECEIVED  BY  FAITH.  "  Through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God, 
who  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead."  Faith  is  not  a  natural  product  of  the  human 
heart.  It  is  a  Divine  gift,  bestowed  on  man  by  a  Divine  operation.  (O.  Barlow.) 
The  circumcision  of  Christ : — I.  Evsby  real  Christian  has  expbbienoed  the  tbuk 
ciBCUMCisioN.  The  argument  is  that  oiroumcisioa  was  unnecessary,  since  the 
Colossians  had  undergone  the  new  birth  which  it  signified.  1.  It  is  spiritual,  and 
plainly  distinguished  from  that  which  was  made  with  hands.  The  idea  was  not  a 
novel  one  (Deut.  x.  16,  ixx.  6  ;  Jer.  ii.  26 ;  Ezek.  xliv.  7  ;  Acts  vii.  51 ;  Rom.  iL 
28-29).  2.  The  true  character  of  the  operation  is  the  putting  oflE  of  the  body  of 
the  flesh,  "  the  old  man,"  corrupt  human  nature,  with  all  its  carnal  instincts  and 
tendencies.  Manual  circumcision  cut  off  only  a  small  part  of  the  flesh,  the  spiritual 
18  an  entire  transformation  of  the  whole  man.  Old  habits  are  abandoned,  evil 
associations  forsaken,  and  the  soul  is  ushered  into  a  new  Ufe,  with  new  thoughts, 
affections,  <fec.  It  is  a  putting  on  of  the  new  man.  3.  It  is  Divine,  **  the  circum- 
cision of  Christ,"  ordained  and  communicated  by  Him,  with  Him  for  its  author 
and  model.     II.  Tuis  true  circumcision  is  rbalized  only  in  union  with  Chbist  zx 


<OHA».  n.]  COLOSSIANB.  lit 

Hi8  DEATH,  BURIAL,  AND  RESURRECTION.  1.  The  Savionf  died  for  as,  and  when  the 
auxiuus  sinner  trusts  Christ  he  is  regarded  as  having  died  with  Him,  2.  The  reahty 
of  death  is  evinced  by  burial,  and  the  denth  of  the  believer  with  Chiist  is  the 
tasting  off  of  the  body  of  the  flesh.  The  old  man  is  sepulchred.  3.  The  soul  in 
regeneration  arises  with  Christ  to  a  new  and  holy  life.  III.  This  union  is  realized 
IN  THE  BAPTISM.  It  is  generally  assumed  that  the  allusion  here  is  to  immersion. 
1.  But  it  is  difficult  to  see  any  resemblance  between  this  and  the  depositing  of 
Christ's  body  in  a  rock-hewn  sepulchre.  The  reference  is  to  the  baptism  of  the 
Spirit — the  washing  of  regeneration  (1  Cor.  xii.  13,  cf.  1  Cor.  i.  14).  The  theory 
of  immersion  is  that  it  is  the  profession  of  a  regeneration  which  has  already  taken 
place ;  but  with  St.  Paul  the  burial  and  resurrection  are  coincident  with  the  baptism. 
It  is  quite  possible  to  die  and  rise  with  Christ  without  water  baptism,  but  not 
without  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit.  2.  Why  does  Paul  speak  disparagingly  of  "  hand- 
wrought  "  circumcision,  and  proclaim  its  needlessness,  if  be  is  to  pass  immediately 
to  speak  of  the  efficacy  of  "  hand-wrought "  baptism  ?  To  introduce  that  would 
be  to  introduce  the  very  element  of  ceremonialism  which  he  is  denouncing.  IV. 
The  PBiNCirLE  through  which  this  spiritual  baptism  18  RECEIVED — "  through 
faith."  1.  It  i-3  surprising  that  so  many  should  rej^ard  the  baptism  in  which  the 
disciple  is  said  to  rise  with  Christ  as  that  of  water.  No  one  is  raised  out  of  water 
by  faith,  but  by  the  arms  which  immersed  him.  The  baptism  of  the  Spirit  is 
received  by  faith  :  an  unbeliever  cannot  receive  it.  2.  "  In  the  operation  of  God  " 
does  not  mean  that  that  is  the  origin  but  the  object  of  faith.  If  I  believe  in  the 
power  that  raised  Christ,  I  believe  in  the  power  vvhich  has  acce]  ted  His  suretyship 
for  me.  This  faith  regards  Christ's  resurrection  as  the  keystone  of  Christianity, 
the  centre  of  confidence,  the  only  basis  of  hope.  {J.  Spence,  D.D,)  The  true 
circumcision : — There  are  two  tendencies  ever  at  work  to  corrupt  religion.  One  ia 
of  the  intellect,  the  temptation  of  the  cultured  few,  which  turns  religion  into 
theological  speculation ;  the  other  of  the  senses,  that  of  the  vulgar  many,  which 
torus  religion  into  a  theatrical  spectacle.  But  opposite  as  these  are  they  were 
united  at  Coloss;e.  To  the  teaching  of  the  necessity  of  circumcision — I.  The  apostle 
opposes  the  position  that  all  Christian  men  by  vibtuk  or  theib  union  with  Christ 
HAVE  RECEIVED  THE  TRUE  ciBcuucisioN,  of  which  the  outwaid  rite  was  the  shadow, 
and  therefore  now  obsolete.  1.  The  language  points  to  a  definite  past  time.  When 
they  became  Christians  a  change  passed  over  them  parabled  by  circumcision.  (1) 
It  is  not  made  with  hands,  i.e.,  it  is  not  a  rite  but  a  reahty,  not  transacted  in  the 
flesh  bnt  in  the  spirit,  not  a  removal  of  ceremonial  impurity,  but  a  cleansing  of  the 
heart  (Deut.  xzx.  6).  (2)  It  consists  in  the  putting  off  of  the  body  of  the  flesh — 
"the  sins  of"  is  an  inteipdation — a  complete  stripping  oS  from  oneself,  as  of 
clothes,  in  contrast  with  a  removal  of  a  small  part  of  the  body.  It  ia  true  that 
Christian  men,  alasl  realize  this  by  slow  degrees ;  but  on  the  Divine  side  it  ia  com- 
plete. Christ  gives  perfect  emancipation,  and  if  it  ia  only  partial  it  is  because  we 
have  not  taken  the  things  that  are  freely  given.  The  foe  may  keep  op  a  guerilla 
warfare  after  he  is  substantially  defeated,  but  his  entire  subjugation  ia  certain  if  we 
keep  hold  of  the  strength  of  Christ.  (3)  It  is  of  Christ ;  not  that  He  submitted  to 
it,  but  instituted  it.  2.  What  is  the  bearing  of  this  statement  on  the  apostle'a 
purpose  ?  That  circumcision  is  an  anachronism,  **  as  if  a  flower  should  shut,  and 
be  a  bud  again."  (1)  The  true  centre  of  gravity,  of  Christianity,  then,  is  in  moral 
transformation.  Surely  Christ  who  gives  men  a  new  Ufe  by  union  with  Himself  by 
faith  has  delivered  man  from  the  "  yoke  of  bondage,"  if  He  has  done  anything  at 
all.  How  far  away  from  Paul's  conception,  then,  are  those  which  busy  themselves 
with  punctilios  of  observance  1  But  the  hatred  of  forma  may  be  as  completely  a 
form  as  the  most  elaborate  rituaL  We  need  to  have  our  eyes  turned  away  to  the 
far  higher  thing,  the  service  of  the  transformed  nature.  (2)  The  conquest  of  the 
animal  nature  is  the  certain  outcome  of  anion  with  Christ  and  that  alone.  Paul 
did  not  regard  matter  as  evil,  as  the  Colossian  teachers  did,  nor  the  body  as  the 
source  of  all  sin.  But  he  knew  that  the  fiercest  temptations  came  from  it,  and  that 
the  foulest  stains  upon  the  conscience  were  splashed  from  the  mud  which  it  threw. 
It  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death  to  find  some  means  of  taming  the  animal  that  ia 
in  as  all.  We  all  know  of  wrecked  lives  which  have  been  driven  on  the  rocks  by 
the  wild  passions  of  the  flesh  ;  and  when  we  come  to  add  its  weaknesses,  limitations, 
and  needs,  and  remember  how  high  purposes  are  frustrated  by  its  shrinking  from 
toil,  and  bow  often  mists  born  from  its  undrained  swamps  darken  the  vision  of 
truth  and  Qod,  we  do  not  need  to  be  Gnostics  to  believe  that  goodness  requires 
the  flesh  to  be  aobdaed.    Bat  no  asceticisms  oi  resolves  will  do  what  we  want. 

10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  & 


Much  repression  may  be  effected  by  force  of  will,  but  it  is  like  a  man  holding  t 
wolf  by  the  jaws.  The  arms  begin  to  ache  and  the  grip  to  grow  slack,  and  he  feels 
his  strength  ebbing,  and  knows  that  as  soon  as  he  lets  go  the  brute  will  be  at  hit 
throat.  Nothing  tames  the  wild  beast  in  us  but  Christ.  He  binds  it  in  a  silken 
lash,  and  that  gentle  constraint  is  strong  because  the  fierceness  is  gone.  Christianity 
would  be  easy  were  it  a  round  of  observances.  Anybody  can  fast  or  wear  a  hair 
shirt,  but  the  putting  oS  of  the  body  of  the  flesh  is  a  harder  thing.  Emotion, 
theology,  ceremonial,  may  have  their  value,  but  a  religion  that  includes  them  all 
and  leaves  out  the  subjugation  of  the  flesh  is  worthless.  If  we  are  in  Christ  we 
shall  not  live  in  the  fie^h.  II.  Paul  meets  the  false  teaching  by  a  reference  to 
Chbistian  baptism  as  being  theChkistian  sign  of  the  inward  change.  1.  The  form 
of  expression  in  the  Greek  implies  that  the  circumcision  and  burial  with  Christ  in 
baptism  are  contemporaneous.  You  have  been  baptized — does  not  that  express  all 
that  circumcision  meant  and  more  t  (1)  This  reference  is  quite  consistent  with 
the  subordinate  importance  of  ritual.  Some  forms  are  necessary  to  a  visible  Church, 
and  Christ  has  given  us  two :  one  symbolizing  the  initial  spiritual  act  of  Christian 
life,  and  the  other  the  constantly  repeated  process  of  Christian  nourishment.  (2) 
The  form  here  presupposed  is  immersion.  (3)  There  are  but  two  theories  :  the  one 
is  that  baptism  effects  the  change,  and  elevates  it  into  more  than  the  importance  of 
which  Paul  sought  to  deprive  circumcision,  confuses  the  distinction  between  the 
Church  and  the  world,  lulls  men  into  a  false  security,  obscures  the  central  truth  of 
Christianity  that  faith  makes  a  Christian,  gives  the  basis  for  a  portentous  sacer- 
dotalism, and  is  shivered  to  pieces  against  the  plain  facts  of  daily  life.  But  it  i» 
conclusively  disposed  of  by  the  words,  "  through  faith  in  the  operation,"  &o.  What 
remains,  then,  but  that  baptism  is  associated  with  the  change,  because  in  the  Divine 
order  it  is  meant  to  be  its  outward  symbol  ?  2.  Note  the  thoroughness  of  the  change. 
It  is  more  than  a  circumcision;  it  is  burial  and  resurrection.  (1)  We  partake  of 
Christ's  death  inasmuch  as— (a)  we  ally  ourselves  to  it  by  our  faith  as  the 
saerifice  for  our  sins ;  (h)  by  the  power  of  His  Cross  we  are  drawn  to  slay  our  old 
nature,  dying  to  the  habits,  desires,  <fec.,  in  which  we  lived.  (2)  If  we  are  thus 
made  conformable  to  His  death,  we  shall  know  the  power  of  His  resurrection,  (a) 
It  will  be  a  guarantee  of  our  own.  (b)  The  seal  of  His  perfect  work  on  the  Cross, 
and  shall  know  it  as  a  token  of  God's  acceptance;  (c)  the  type  of  our  spiritual 
resurrection  now.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Burled  with  Eim.— The  believer's 
identification  with  Christ :— It  was  with  St.  Paul  a  principle  that  the  whole 
Christian  life  is  a  following  of  the  blessed  steps  of  one  holy  life,  an  imitation  of 
Christ.  We  are  in  Him — I.  CoNCErvED  and  born  (Gal.  iv.  19).  IL  CRDCiriEn 
(Gal.  ii  20;  Kom.  vi.  5).  IIL  Dead  (Eom.  vi.  3,  vii.  4;  cf.  1  Pet.  iv.  1).  IV. 
Buried  (Eom.  vi  4).  V.  Risen  (Rom.  vi.  6 ;  Col.  iii.  1).  VI.  Ascended  and 
REiGNDJQ  (Eph.  ii.  4-6).  What  is  done  or  suffered  by  Him  historically  is  done  in 
ns  analogously  and  mystically  now,  and  will  be  completed  historically  and  actually 
hereafter.  This  is  the  underlying  principle  ol  the  order  of  the  Christian  year. 
{Bishop  Alexander.) 

Vera.  18,  14.  And  you  being  dead  in  your  sins. — Spiritual  death : — L  To  what 

EXTENT    AND  TO   WHAT   PERSONS    THIS    CONDITION    APPLIES.       1.    The  tcrmS  of   the   text 

include  Jews  and  Gentiles.  The  Jews  were  spiritually  dead  notwithstanding  the 
ordinance  of  circumcision;  the  Gentiles  in  their  uncircumcision.  The  great  error 
of  Judaism  as  the  rabbis  made  it  was  to  mistake  religious  ordinances  for  religion; 
equally  fatal  is  the  same  error  in  its  pseudo-Christian  shape.  2.  It  is  clear  that 
this  state  is  not  predicated  of  heathen  and  profligates  only ;  it  is  the  normal  con- 
dition in  which  men  are  born,  and  in  which  they  live  and  die  without  grace.  This 
is  clear  from  chap.  I  13  ;  Matt.  21,  22  ;  John  vi.  53-63  ;  1  John  iii.  14.  3.  What- 
ever privileges  of  pious  parentage,  godly  training,  gospel  ministrations,  &c.,  we 
may  have  been  favoured,  over  and  above  these  we  "  must  be  born  again."  IL 
Some  of  the  particulars  involved  in  this  condition.  In  death  is  implied — L 
Deprivation — there  is  something  lost.  We  do  not  say  that  a  stone  is  dead,  it  never 
lived.  Hence  the  view  of  a  stone  on  the  highway  excites  no  emotion  or  sympathy ; 
but  how  different  with  regard  to  a  dead  bird,  much  more  a  dead  man  or  a  dead 
friend.  Once  there  was  spiritual  life  in  man.  He  was  made  a  living  soul ;  now  he 
is  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  having  lost  it.  And  yet  how  strange  that  the 
spectacle  of  this  most  terrible  of  deaths  scarcely  moves  us.  2.  Corruption.  Life 
has  its  degrees :  vegetable,  animal,  rational,  but  in  death  there  are  no  degrees ;  all 
the  dead  are  equally  corrupt.   There  are  differences  in  the  sight  of  man,  oomparinc 


n.]  C0L0SSIAN8.  14T 

man  with  man;  there  are  some  better  characters  than  others,  of  more  nataral 
virtue,  and  society  owes  them  reverence ;  but  society  was  not  our  maker  and  is  not 
our  judge.  This  reflection  should  humble  as.  '•Who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from 
another?  "  3.  Helplessness.  "  A  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion,"  who  is  aa 
incapable  as  his  own  shadow.  The  dead  soul  is  equally  helpless  ;  without  foreign 
aid  it  must  lie  like  the  tree  where  it  has  fallen.  Spiritual  life  must  be  communicated 
before  the  soul  can  move.  4.  Resurrection.  The  decayed  vegetable  dies,  but  to  be 
reproduced  in  another  form.  Every  falhng  leaf  that  strews  the  earth  in  autumn 
with  the  silent  evidences  of  the  fall  of  man,  seems  to  catch  a  whisper  from  the 
breeze,  "  Thou  shalt  rise  again."  So  whan  man  dies  the  principle  of  his  existence 
is  not  destroyed  but  withdrawn.  But,  alas  for  the  soul  that  has  lain  in  the  death 
of  sin  before  the  body  has  reached  the  grave;  that  shall  indeed  rise  again,  but  "  to 
shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  (J.  B,  Owen,  M.A.)  The  dead  soul : — The 
dead,  as  insusceptible  as  their  kindred  dust,  cannot  be  won  back  to  the  activities  of 
life.  No  voice  reaches  them,  no  spectacle  arouses  them,  no  terror  seizes  them.  The 
analogies  of  death  in  souls  spiritually  dead  are  full  of  painful  truth.  They  are 
insensible  to  the  attractions  and  momentousness  of  Divine  and  eternal  realities. 
They  are  not  touched  by  that  which  is  tender  in  Divine  love  nor  awed  by  that  which 
is  terrible  in  Divine  law.  Alienation  from  God  ever  produces  spiritual  callousness. 
With  an  eye  to  discern  sensible  beauty  in  the  marvels  of  crealion  and  the  triumphs 
of  art,  there  is  no  perception  of  the  grander  beauties  of  holiness,  no  apprehension 
of  the  character  and  glory  of  the  Almighty.  With  an  ear  to  hear  and  a  taste  to 
appreciate  the  rich  harmonies  of  sound,  and  the  eloquence  of  human  tongues,  there 
is  no  ear  to  hear  the  voice  of  God  or  the  whisperings  of  His  gracious  Spirit,  the 
only  true  and  saving  Teacher  of  men.  With  a  heart  that  can  feel  for  the  woes  and 
miseries  of  our  fellow-creatures,  and  that  can  cherish  kindness  towards  them,  there 
is  no  conscious  love  to  God,  and  no  cheerful  response  to  His  claimg.  The  mind 
may  be  acute,  the  disposition  amiable,  the  character  virtuous,  and  yet  the  soul  be 
dead,  alien  from  God,  and  blind  to  its  own  greatest  needs.  (J.  Spence,  D.D.)  The 
tram  it  ion  from  death  to  life : — The  physical  order  is  a  descent  from  life  to  death;  the 
spiritual  order  an  ascent  from  death  to  life.  I.  Tqk  natdeal  condition  of  hdmanitt 
la  one  or  spiritual  death.  Man  is  in  a  condition  of — 1.  Spiritual  insensibility. 
The  dead  know  nothing,  appreciate  nothing ;  nor  does  the  sinner  of  the  things  of 
God.  2.  Moral  corruption.  "And  the  uncircumcision  of  your  flesh,"  Death 
unbinds  the  forces  that  brace  up  the  body  in  life,  and  leaves  it  a  prey  to  the  power 
of  corruption.  3.  Condemnation,  (1)  The  Divine  ordinances  record  an  indictment 
against  the  transgressor,  (a)  Handwriting.  The  primary  reference  is  to  the  Jews, 
who  might  be  said  to  have  signed  the  contract  when  they  bound  themselves,  by  a 
curse,  to  observe  all  the  enactments  of  the  law  (Deut.  xxvii.  14-26).  (i)  Ordinances, 
though  referring  primarily  to  the  Mosaic  ordinances,  include  all  forms  of  positive 
decrees  in  which  moral  or  social  principles  are  embodied  or  religious  duties  defined. 
Man  everywhere  is  under  law,  written  or  unwritten  ;  and  he  is  morally  obligated  to 
obey  it.  (2)  The  Divine  ordinances  are  hostile  towards  the  transgressor,  "  Which 
was  contrary  to  as,"  We  are  often  painfully  reminded  of  our  broken  bond,  as  the 
debtor  is  often  reminded  of  his  undischarged  obligation.  II,  The  believeb  u 
raised  into  a  condition  of  spiritual  life.  1.  This  life  begins  in  the  oonscioasuesa 
of  Uberty,  "  Having  forgiven  you  all  trespasses."  2.  It  implies  a  freedom  from 
all  condemnation.  III.  The  transition  of  the  soul  from  death  to  life  is  a 
Divine  work.  1,  God  only  can  raise  the  dead.  2.  He  does  so  by  a  blessed  union 
with  Christ,  8.  Which  issues  in  immortal  life.  (G.  Barlow.)  Quickened. — 
Characteristic*  of  the  new  life : — I.  Spontameity.  Life  is  neither  mechanical  nor 
forced,  but  proceeds  from  the  principle  of  vitality  within.  When  man  by  grace 
begins  to  live  anew,  what  was  formerly  a  burden,  if  it  received  any  attention  at  all, 
becomes  a  pleasure.  Commandments  which  were  grievous  are  now  joyous,  and  the 
newborn  energy  finds  its  spontaneous  manifestation  in  loving  loyalty  to  God's  will, 
II.  Assimilation.  Life  is  nourished  by  that  which  may  seem  foreign  to  its  nature. 
The  rose  can  draw  beauty  and  fragrance  from  pestilent  manure,  juices  of  the  soil, 
radiance  of  sunshine  and  showers  from  heaven.  So  the  new  life  derives  strengtb 
even  from  trial  and  the  bread  of  sorrow.  All  things  work  together  for  its  good,  not 
excepting  the  entanglements  of  the  flesh  and  the  cares  of  the  world.  Ill,  Gbowth,> 
AH  life  grows,  and  the  Christian  who  does  not  has  an  unhealthy  life.  His  privilege' 
is  to  be  like  a  tree  (Psa,  L  3).     IV.  Aspiration.    Life  everywhere  seeks  to  reach  the 

{>erfeotion  of  its  nature.     Spiritual  life  comes  from  above  and  seeks  to  rise  to  the 
evel  of  its  source.  It  cannot  rest  satisfied  with  the  world,  bat  puts  forth  its  tendrils 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt. 

Godwards.  V.  iNDiviDUAijnT.  No  two  plants,  bladea  of  grass,  animsls,  men,  ara 
exactly  alike.  God  loves  variety  iu  grace  as  well  as  nature.  So  some  Christians 
are  intellectual,  some  emotional,  some  jiiactical ;  yet  all  are  one  in  Christ,  (J. 
Spence,   D.D.)  The  great  deliverance  : — I.  Thk  miserable  condition    of  oub 

NATURE.  1.  All  the  children  of  Adam  are  reckoned  as  dead.  (1)  Because  Divine 
grace,  the  soul,  as  it  were,  of  the  soul,  being  withdrawn,  a  polluting  mass  of  deadly 
vices  succeeded  in  tbeir  room,  (2)  Because  they  lie  under  the  sentence  of  eternal 
death  (Eph,  ii,  3),  2,  The  causes  of  this  death  are — (1)  Actual  transgressions  of 
the  Divine  law — "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death,"  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die." 
(a)  This  is  the  death  of  grace  inasmuch  as  sin  by  its  impurity  dissolves  the  gracious 
union  of  the  soul  to  God  in  which  our  life  consists  (Isa.  lix.  2).  (h)  The  death 
of  hell  (Rom.  ii.  9),  (2)  The  uncircumcision  of  your  flesh,  i.e.,  original  sin,  which 
is  derived  by  carnal  propagation  and  renders  the  very  soul,  as  it  were,  carnal 

!Deut.  X.  16  ;  Jer.  ix.  25).  Every  natural  man  is  dead  in  this  his  native  corruption. 
a)  The  understanding,  which  is  the  eye  of  the  soul,  is  darkened  and  blinded  as  to 
spiritual  things  (1  Cor.  ii.  14),  and  rushes  into  errors  and  deceivings  (Gal.  v.  20), 
(6)  The  will  is  depraved,  its  good  desires  weak,  its  unlawful  desires  strong  (Gen.  vi, 
6 ;  Rom.  iii,).  (c)  The  inferior  powers  of  the  soul  are  disordered,  so  that  they 
refuse  to  obey  the  law  of  the  mind  (Rom.  vii.  23).  Hence  the  affections  control, 
and  are  not  controlled  by  reason.  3.  Lessons  :  (1)  Since  every  man  in  a  state  of 
nature  is  dead,  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  free  will,  by  its  own  strength,  to  prepare 
for  conversion,  even  as  a  dead  man  cannot  dispose  himself  for  his  resurrection 
(Lam,  V.  21).  (2)  No  man  can  dispose  himself  to  any  motion  to  quicken  himself 
unless  his  mind  be  formed  to  the  life  of  grace  by  God.  For  as  every  natural  opera- 
tion supposes  a  natural  power,  so  every  spiritual  motion  a  spiritual  power  (Ezek.  xi. 
19).  (3)  Since  the  cause  of  death  is  sin,  the  madness  of  men  is  discovered  who 
administer  that  deadly  poison  to  the  soul  and  are  guilty  of  its  murder,  II,  The 
Delivekeb  ;  God  in  Christ,  by  Christ,  and  with  Christ.  God  alone  could  impart 
animal  life  to  this  earth ;  He  alone,  therefore,  can  impart  spiritual  life  to  carnal 
men,  which  is  a  greater  work  than  creation  (Eph.  ii.  10;.  Hence  we  may  learn — 
1.  The  eternal  love  of  God  the  Father.  We  shudder  to  touch  the  dead  bodies  of 
our  friends ;  but  God  is  not  only  ready  to  touch  but  to  embrace  and  restore  our 
dead  souls.  This  should  inflame  us  with  love  to  Him.  2.  The  infinite  guilt  of  sin 
which  could  not  be  acquitted,  and  we  justified  but  by  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Christ.  This  should  excite  our  hatred  and  avoidance  of  sin.  HI.  The  deliterancb. 
1.  The  forgiveness  of  our  trespasses.  In  this  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  it  is — (1) 
Gratuitous,  xaptaaixevo^.  being  derived  from  grace  itself.  It  is  gratuitous  on  our 
part,  for  we  are  absolved  without  any  price  paid  by  ourselves  ;  but  on  the  part  of 
Christ  we  are  redeemed  with  the  price  of  His  precious  blood  (Rom.  iii.  24),  and 
andeed  either  a  gratuitous  remission  or  none  at  all  must  be  admitted.  As  to  our- 
selves, we  are  not  able  to  pay,  since  the  debt  is  infinite ;  nor  can  we  blot  out  our 
sins  by  suffering,  because  no  suffering  of  the  guilty  is  deletive  of  sin.  (2)  Universal — 
"  All  trespasses."  For  it  does  not  accord  with  Divine  majesty  and  goodness  to  remit 
some  of  our  debts  and  require  the  rest  from  us.  Because — (a)  The  blood  of  Christ 
being  received  as  a  ransom,  it  would  be  unjust  not  to  remit  all,  since  that  outweighs 
all.  (6)  To  forgive  is  an  act  of  paternal  love  and  cannot  dwell  with  enmity ;  but 
enmity  remains  with  unremitted  sin,  and  those  who  admit  a  partial  remission  make 
God  at  once  reconciled  and  hostile,  (c)  Unless  we  reckon  on  full  remission,  remission 
is  vain  ;  for  its  end  is  life  eternal,  which  a  partial  remission  cannot  yield  the  hope 
of,  because  death  is  the  wages  of  even  one  sin  (Jer.  xxiiii,  8 ;  Micah  vii,  19 ; 
1  John  i.  9).  2,  Hence  we  derive  these  corollaries — (1)  To  forgive  sins  is  the 
property  of  God  alone ;  for  who  can  forgive  another  his  debt  while  the  will  of  the 
creditor  is  not  yet  understood  (Isa,  xliii,  25).  (2)  As  universal  remission  is  granted 
on  God's  part  there  ought  to  be  a  universal  detestation  of  it  on  ours.  (3)  Troubled 
consciences  may  be  sustained,  for  though  sin  be  not  destroyed  upon  faith  it  is 
forgiven.  {Bisfwp  Davenant.)  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  quickener: — The  same 
(shower  blesses  various  lands  in  different  degrees,  according  to  their  respective 
eusceptibilities.  It  makes  the  grass  to  spring  up  in  the  mead,  the  grain  to  vegetate 
in  the  field,  the  shrub  to  grow  on  the  plain,  and  the  flowers  to  blossom  in  the 
garden ;  and  these  are  garnished  with  every  hue  of  loveliness — the  Uly  and  the 
violet,  the  rose  and  the  daisy :  all  these  worketh  the  same  Spirit  that  renews  the 
face  of  the  earth.  The  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  descending  on  the  moral  soil, 
produce  "blessing  in  variety  " — convictions  in  the  guilty,  illumination  in  the  igno- 
taut,  holiness  in  Uie  defiled,  itrength  in  the  feeble,  and  comfort  in  the  distressaL 


CHAP,  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  141 

As  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  He  imparts  a  pure  taste;  as  the  Spirit  of  glory,  He  throwa 
ft  radiance  over  the  character ;  as  the  Spirit  of  life,  He  revives  religion ;  as  the 
Spirit  of  truth,  He  gives  transparency  to  the  conduct ;  as  the  Spirit  of  prayer,  He 
melts  the  soul  into  devotion ;  and,  as  the  Spirit  of  grace,  He  imbues  with  benevo- 
lence, and  covers  the  face  of  the  earth  with  the  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love. 
(r.  IV.  Jenlnjn,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  Blotting  out  the  bandwrltlng  of  ordinances.— I.  Thh  handwkitino.     1. 

It  is  often  the  practice  of  Scripture  to  hkt;n  a  sin  to  a  debt :  whence  remitting  it 
is  equivalent  to  pardoning  it  (Matt.  vi.  12 ;  cf.  Luke  xi.  4).  Indeed  the  Chaldees 
and  Syrians  used  the  words  sinner  and  debtor  interchangeably.  The  reason  is  that 
there  is  a  resemblance  between  the  two.  As  the  one  obliges  the  debtor  to  payment, 
the  otlier  obliges  the  sinner  to  punishment.  As  a  debt  gives  the  creditor  power 
■  over  his  debtor,  so  sin  consigns  the  offender  to  God.  2.  The  word  *'  handwriting  " 
signides  an  acknowledgement  signed  by  us  that  we  owe  a  certain  sum  and  bind 
ourselves  to  pay.  It  is  an  authentic  testimony  of  our  debt,  and  makes  our  body  and 
goods  liable.  The  handwriting  of  the  text  is  the  instrument  of  our  condemnation, 
and  subjects  us  to  the  justice  of  God.  3.  This  handwriting  was  the  old  law,  as  the 
word  "  ordinances,"  the  following  context,  and  the  purpose  of  the  apostle  to  show 
that  Judaism  was  not  binding  on  the  Colossians,  prove.  4.  This  handwriting  in 
itbelf  is  good  and  profitable,  but  it  became  "  contrary  "  through  sin.  (1)  It  serves 
to  convict  us,  as  an  obligation  produced  in  judgment  stops  the  mouth  of  an  unfaitb- 
fo^  debtor.  (2)  It  is  against  our  inclinations,  which  are  lawless.  (.3)  It  threatens 
punishment,  which  we  feel  to  be  deserved  and  which  we  cannot  evade.  II.  Wuat  is 
LONE  WITH  IT  ?  It  is  made  void  by  the  Cros-s.  1.  It  is  blotted  out,  as  it  is  usual 
with  men  when  a  debt  is  paid  to  efface  the  name  of  tlie  creditor  and  the  amount  be 
owed.  So  God  has  erased  the  handwriting  of  this  debt  which  was  written  in  His 
law  for  our  consciences.  2.  The  means  employed  is  some  fluid,  as  ink,  which  ia 
drawn  over  the  page ;  so  our  obligation  is  made  void  by  the  effusion  of  Christ's  blood. 
3.  Men  who  are  exact  not  only  efface  their  debtors'  writings  but  tear  them  up,  that 
no  sign  of  the  debt  may  remain.  So  God  has  so  effaced  the  handwriting  against  us 
that  not  even  the  erasures  appear  ;  it  is  rent  by  the  nails  of  the  cross.  Conclusion  : 
1.  This  furnishes  us  with  a  clear  proof  of  Christ's  satisfaction.  If  Christ's  death  is 
merely  an  example  the  law  could  sustain  no  injury,  and  if  these  words  can  be  applied 
to  Him  they  can  be  applied  to  other  martyrs  ;  but  who  would  dare  to  do  that  ?  2. 
This  shows  us  the  error  oi  the  doctrine  of  human  merit  :  for  God  can  exact  nothing 
now  that  Christ  has  paid  all.  3.  The  enjoyment  of  this  privilege  wrought  on  the 
cross  is  conditional  upon  faith.  (J.  Daille.)  The  Juindwriting  blotted  out : — L 
What  is  meant  by  handweitino  ?  1.  Opinions  are  various  ;  yet  all  agree  in  this 
that  something  is  intended  which  by  force  of  testimony  may  prove  us  guilty  before 
God.  Some  assert  it  to  be — (1)  The  covenant  of  God  with  Adam  (Gen.  ii.  17),  for 
this  being  violuted,  Adam  and  his  posterity  were  held  guilty  of  death  as  by  a  bond, 
(2)  The  stipulation  of  the  Jews  (Exod.  xix.  7,  8),  by  which  they  bound  themselves  to 
perfect  obedience,  by  the  non-performance  of  which  they  might  be  justly  condemned 
by  their  own  hand.  (3)  The  remembrance  of  our  sins  in  the  Divine  mind  and  in 
our  own  conscience  (Isa.  xliii.  25),  by  which  we  are  convicted,  as  by  a  bond,  ^he 
Divine  law  says,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord,"  &c.  Conscience  suggests,  •*  I  have 
not  done  so,  and  am,  therefore,  cursed.  (4)  Cei-emonial  rites  which  testified  to 
guOt,  circumcision  to  depravity,  purifications  to  the  filthiness  of  sin,  sacrifices  to 
the  heinousness  of  guilt.  2.  I  explain  it  to  mean  the  moral  law  binding  to  perfect 
obedience  and  condemning  defect,  laden  with  rites  as  appendages.  II.  How  la  it 
AGAINST  cs  ?  1.  As  to  the  moral  law,  it  is  holy,  just,  and  good ;  nevertheless  it  has 
become  deadly  to  us  through  sin  (Eom.  vii.  12,  13),  because — (1)  It  propounds 
decrees  contrary  to  human  nature  (Rom.  vii.  12,  13).  (2)  It  arraigns,  convicts,  and 
brings  as  in  guilty  of  sin  (Bom.  iii  20).  (3)  It  denounces  against  us  the  sentence 
of  condemnation  (Gal.  iii.  10).  2.  As  to  ordinances,  they  were  contrary,  because — 
(1)  They  were  almost  infinite  as  to  number,  and  most  burdensome  as  to  observance. 
Hence  the  appeal,  Gal.  v.  1.  (2)  By  their  signification  and  testimony.  For  although 
they  seemed  to  promise  the  destruction  of  sin,  yet  there  entered  into  them  a  confes- 
sion rather  than  expiation  thereof.  III.  How  it  is  uadb  void.  1.  Universally 
and  suificiently  as  it  respects  God ;  because  by  the  blood  of  Christ  such  satisfaction 
is  made  to  God  that  according  to  His  own  justice  He  is  engaged  to  acquit  those 
debtors  who  flee  by  faith  to  the  Deliverer.  2.  Particularly  and  efiScaciously  when 
it  is  blotted  out  from  the  conscience  of  those  who  lay  hold  of  God  by  faith  (Kom.  v. 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  n. 

1).  There  is  no  peace  to  a  man  who  B«e8  himself  overwhelmed  in  debt  and 
entangled  hy  a  bond ;  but  when  Christ's  deliverance  is  accepted  the  soul  enters  into 
peace.  3.  Notice  the  beautiful  gradation.  Not  content  with  telling  us  we  are  for- 
given, Paul  subjoins  that  the  handwriting  is  blotted  out ;  but  lest  auy  should  think 
that  it  is  not  so,  but  that  a  new  charge  may  be  raised,  he  adds  it  is  "  taken  out  of 
the  way  "  ;  and  lest  it  should  be  thought  to  be  preserved  somewhere,  and  may  yet 
be  preferred,  he  says  it  is  nailed  to  the  Cross,  rent  in  pieces.  Conclusion :  We 
learn — 1.  From  the  handwriting.  (1)  Since  every  man  through  it  is  guilty  of  death, 
how  dreadful  is  the  condition  of  those  who  trample  on  the  blood  by  which  alone  the 
handwriting  can  be  blotted  out.  God  will  require  from  them  the  uttermost  farthing. 
(2)  We  see  the  insane  pride  of  those  who  think  they  can  satisfy  God,  yea,  pay  Him 
more  than  is  due  by  works  of  supererogation.  But  what  need  then  of  blotting  out 
the  handwriting  by  the  Cross?  2.  From  its  contrariety.  (1)  The  depravity  and 
corruption  of  our  nature  ;  for  at  its  institution  it  was  friendly  and  wholesome.  (2) 
The  error  of  those  who  would  restore  ceremonies  and  rob  us  of  our  liberty  in  Christ. 
3.  From  the  abolition.  (1)  Since  it  is  deprived  of  its  condemning  force  we  infer 
that  it  still  retains  its  diiecting  force,  and  so  we  have  not  a  licence  to  sin  but  a 
motive  to  obey  (Luke  i.  74,  75).  (2)  Since  the  comfort  of  a  troubled  conscience 
consists  in  its  being  blotted  out,  we  must  labour  to  maintain  by  faith  not  only  that 
Christ  has  procured  that  but  that  it  is  blotted  out  as  respects  ourselves.  A  debtor 
does  not  consider  himself  safe  until  he  has  seen  with  his  own  eyes  that  his  bond  is 
cancelled.  {Bp.  Daveuant.)  Ovr  indictment  cancelled  by  the  Cross : — Liberty  is 
the  way  to  true  life  for  man.  A  slave  has  nothing  to  live  for :  but  proclaim  his 
freedom,  and  he  becomes  another  being.  So  with  the  man  whom  God  sets  free. 
Quickening  from  God  comes  in  forgiveness  of  sins.  1.  The  indictment  against 
OS — the  law  of  God  as  expressed  in  the  ten  commandments  and  written  in  the  heart 
(Bom.  ii.  14).  1.  Here  we  have  man's  moral  obligation,  of  which  men  everywhere 
have  been  more  or  less  conscious.  Moral  sense  of  the  two  great  duties  of  love  to 
God  »nd  our  neighbour  is  everywhere  diffused.  The  handwriting  is  so  on  every 
man's  soul  that  he  knows  and  feels  that  some  things  ought  to  be  done  while  others 
are  forbidden  as  wrong.  Many  attempt  to  efface  the  handwriting,  as  well  as  to  defy 
it,  but  that  only  confirms  the  fact  that  it  exists  in  all  the  fulness  of  its  claim.  2. 
This  handwriting  is  "  against  us  "  because  we  have  broken  it.  The  law  is  for  the  law- 
less, and  its  verdict  is  only  against  the  sinful.  It  commands  our  supreme  love  to  God, 
and  we  have  not  loved  Him.  This  is  the  debt  we  owe  to  God  as  our  Creator  and 
Father ;  we  have  not  paid  it  and  now  cannot.  3.  It  is  also  *•  contrary  to  as." 
The  terms  are  not  exactly  equivalent.  The  one  expresses  silent  condemnation, 
the  other  a  positive  hostility.  A  man  may  owe  a  debt  he  cannot  pay,  and  this  fact 
is  an  obligation  against  him,  even  though  there  be  no  positive  demand  for  payment. 
Bat  if  by  the  process  of  "  dunning  "  the  debt  is  often  brought  before  him,  and  he  is 
unpleasantly  reminded  of  it,  then  the  obligation  is  not  only  against  him,  it  is 
contrary  to  him  :  it  disturbs  his  peace  and  fills  him  with  diead.  So  the  Divine  law 
acting  on  the  law  of  our  mind  is  constantly  reminding  us  of  our  obligation,  and  la 
hostile  to  our  peace.  Its  spirituality  is  against  us,  for  we  are  carnal ;  its  purity,  for 
we  are  unholy;  its  justice,  for  we  have  kept  back  God's  due.  Sach  is  the  indict- 
ment, "  that  every  mouth  may  be  stopped  "  (Rom.  iii.  19).  II.  The  indictmekt 
OAJicEiii.£i>.  The  verdict  against  sinful  men  is  erased  or  wiped  out.  This  idea  often 
reeurs  in  Scripture  in  reference  to  sin — "blot  out  all  my  iniquities."  2.  It  is  taken 
oot  of  the  way ;  not  that  the  law  and  moral  obligation  are  abolished,  but  the  verdict 
is  removed  so  that  it  cannot  be  adduced  for  our  condemnation.  Literally  it  is 
"  taken  out  of  the  midst,"  as  if  the  handwriting  had  lain  between  God  and  His 
people — a  barrier  to  their  approach  to  Him,  and  to  their  peace  with  Him.  t.  The 
means.  Nailing  to  the  cross  and  so  des^truction.  Its  condemning  force  was 
exhausted  on  Christ,  so  that  it  is  powerless  against  all  who  are  in  Him.  This  ia 
oar  discharge  :  the  law  has  been  fulfilled,  and  its  finding  against  as  for  ever  taken 
away.  (J.  Spence,  D.D.)  The  Cross  the  death  of  law: — I.  Thb  handwriting  ob 
BOND.  1.  "  Law  "  means  primarily  the  ceremonial  law  which  was  being  pressed  on 
the  Colossians.  The  early  controversies  on  this  matter  are  difficult  for  us  to 
understand.  It  is  harder  to  change  customs  than  creeds,  and  religious  observances 
live  on,  as  every  Maypole  on  a  village  green  tells  us,  long  after  the  beliefs  which 
animated  them  are  forgotten.  So  there  was  a  party  who  refused  the  admittance  of 
Gentile  converts  to  the  Church  except  through  the  old  doorway  of  circumcision. 
This  was  the  point  at  issue  between  Paul  and  these  teachers.  2.  But  the  modem 
dibtinction  between  moral  and  ceremonial  had  no  existence  in  Paul's  mind,  nor  in 


n.]  COLOSSIANS.  Ul 

the  Old  Testament,  where  we  find  the  highest  morality  and  the  merest  ritnal  inter- 
Btratified.  The  law  was  a  homogeneous  whole.  3.  And  the  principles  laid  down 
are  true  about  all  law.  Law,  as  such,  is  dealt  with  by  Christianity  in  the  same  way 
as  tiie  God-given  code.  4.  Law,  Paul  tells  us,  is  antagonistic  It  stands  opposite, 
frowning  at  us  and  barring  our  road.  (1)  Is  it  then  become  our  enemy  because  it 
tells  us  the  truth  ?  This  conception  is  a  strange  contrast  to  the  rapturous  delight 
of  Psalmists  in  it.  Surely  God's  greatest  gilt  to  man  is  the  knowledge  of  His  will, 
and  law  is  beneficent,  a  light,  and  a  guide,  and  even  its  strokes  are  merciful.  (2) 
Nevertheless  the  antagonism  is  very  real  As  with  God,  so  with  law — if  we  be 
against  Him,  He  cannot  but  be  against  us.  We  make  Him  our  dearest  friend  or 
our  foe.  The  revelation  of  duty  to  which  we  are  not  inclined  is  ever  unwelcome. 
Law  is  against  us  because — (a)  It  comes  like  a  taskmaster  bidding  us  do,  but  neither 
putting  the  inclination  into  our  hearts  nor  the  power  into  our  hands,  (b)  The 
revelation  of  unfulfilled  duty  is  the  accusation  of  the  defaulter,  (c)  It  comes  with 
threatenings  and  foretastes  of  penalty.  Thus,  as  standard,  accuser,  and  avenger, 
it  is  against  us.  (3)  We  all  know  this.  Each  of  us  has  seen  that  apparition  like 
the  sword-bearing  angel  that  Balaam  saw,  blocking  our  path  when  we  wanted  to 
"  go  frowardly  in  the  way  of  our  heart."  The  law  of  the  Lord  should  be  "  sweeter 
than  honey,"  etc.,  but  the  corruption  of  the  best  is  the  worst,  and  we  can  make  it 
poison.  Obeyed,  it  is  as  the  chariot  of  fire  to  bear  us  heavenward ;  disobeyed,  it  is 
an  iron  car  crushing  all  who  set  themselves  against  it.  II.  Its  destrcotion  in 
THB  Cboss.  1.  The  Cross  ends  the  law's  power  of  punishment.  Paul  believed  that 
the  burden  and  penalty  of  sin  had  been  laid  onCbrist,  and  trusting  ourselves  to  the 
power  of  that  great  sacrifice,  the  dread  of  punishment  will  fade  from  our  hearts,  and 
the  law  will  have  to  draw  the  bolts  of  the  prison  and  let  the  captive  go  free.  2.  The 
Cross  is  the  end  of  the  law  as  ceremonial.  The  Jewish  ritual  had  the  prediction  of 
the  Great  Sacrifice  for  its  highest  purpose.  When  the  fruit  has  set  there  is  no 
more  need  for  petals.  We  have  the  reality  and  do  not  need  the  shadow.  3.  The 
Cross  is  the  end  of  the  law  as  moral  rule.  Of  course  it  is  not  meant  that  Christian 
men  are  freed  from  the  obligations  of  morality,  but  that  we  are  not  bound  to  do 
"  the  things  contained  in  the  law  "  because  they  are  there.  Duty  is  duty  now 
because  we  see  the  pattern  of  conduct  and  character  in  Christ.  The  weakness  of 
law  is  that  it  has  no  power  to  get  its  commandments  obeyed  ;  but  Christ  puts  His 
love  in  our  hearts,  and  so  we  pass  from  the  dominion  of  an  external  commandment 
into  the  liberty  of  an  inward  spirit.  The  long  schism  between  duty  and  inclination 
ta  at  an  end.  So  a  higher  morality  ought  to  characterize  the  partakers  of  the  life 
of  Chiist.  Law  died  with  Christ  on  the  cross  that  it  might  rise  and  reign  in  our 
inmost  hearts.  (A,  Maclaren,  D.D.)  CanceHed  and  nailed  up : — There  is  a 
beautiful  oriental  custom  which  illustrates  the  Atonement.  When  a  debt  had  to  be 
settled  either  by  payment  or  forgiveness,  the  creditor  took  the  cancelled  bond  and 
nailed  it  over  the  door  of  him  who  had  owed  it,  that  all  passers  by  might  see  that 
it  was  paid.  So  there  is  the  Cross,  the  door  of  grace,  behind  which  a  bankrupt 
world  lies  in  hopeless  debt  to  the  law.  See  Jesus  our  bondman  and  brother,  coming 
forth  with  a  long  list  of  our  indebtedness  in  His  hand.  He  lifts  it  up  where  God 
and  angels  and  men  may  see  it,  and  there  as  the  nail  goes  through  His  hand  it  goes 
through  the  bond  of  our  transgressions  to  cancel  it  for  ever.  Come  to  that  Cross  I 
Not  in  order  that  you  may  wash  away  your  sins  by  your  tears  or  atone  for  them  by 
your  good  works,  or  efface  them  by  your  sophistries  and  self-deceptions.  But  come 
rather  that  you  may  read  the  long  black  list  that  is  against  you,  and  be  pierced  to 
your  heart  by  sorrow  that  you  have  offended  such  a  Being  ;  and  then  that  lifting  up 
your  eyes  you  may  see  God  turning  His  eyes  at  that  same  cross  at  which  yon  are 
looking,  and  saying,  *'  I,  even  I,  am  He  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions,"  &c. 
{New  Ti'stament  Anecdotes.)  The  law  it  against  sinners: — There  are  stronger 
things  in  the  world  than  force.  There  are  powers  more  difficult  to  overcome  than 
strong  01  brazen  gates.  Suppose  we  found  a  prisoner  condemned  to  die,  and 
locked  up  in  his  cell,  and  we  were  to  ask  ourselves  how  he  could  be  saved  from 
execution.  There  would  appear  great  difficulty  in  getting  him  out  of  prison. 
That  iron  door,  with  its  great  bolt ;  that  high  window,  with  its  guard  of  strong 
bars;  those  thick,  strong  walls;  those  heavy  gates  outside;  that  watchful  jailer, — 
how  impossible  it  seems  to  overcome  them  all  1  Yet  these  are  not  the  only 
difficulties,  nor  the  greatest.  There  is  another  thing,  stronger  than  all  these, 
holding  the  poor  prisoner  to  death :  there  is  the  sentence  of  the  law.  For, 
anless  he  would  himself  become  a  criminal,  no  man  dares  to  help  the  con- 
demned one  out.  Get  the  sentence  repealed,  and  the  other  diffioolties  ar* 
Mmoved.    (/.  Edmond,  D.D.) 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OJUP.  i& 

Ver.  16.  Having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  or,  having  stripped  off  and 
put  away  the  powers  of  evil.  Chri  t  took  upon  Hii-uself  our  human  nature  with 
all  its  temptations  (Heb.  iv.  15).  The  powers  of  evil  gathered  about  Him.  Again 
and  again  they  assailed  Him,  but  each  fresh  assault  ended  in  a  new  defeat.  In  the 
wilderness  He  was  tempted  by  Satan  ;  but  Satan  retired  for  a  time  baffled  and 
defeated  (Luke  iv,  l.S).  Through  the  voice  of  His  chief  disciple  the  temptation 
was  renewed,  and  He  was  entreated  to  decline  His  appointed  sufferings  and  death. 
Satan  was  again  driven  off  (Matt.  xvi.  23  ;  comp.  viii.  31).  Then  the  last  hour 
c&mp.  This  was  the  great  crisis  of  all,  when  the  power  of  darkness  made  itself 
felt  (Luke  xxii.  5,S),  when  the  prince  of  this  world  asserted  his  tyrrany  (John  xiL 
81).  The  final  act  in  the  conflict  began  with  the  agony  in  Gethsemane,  and  ended 
with  the  cross  of  Calvary.  The  victory  was  complete.  The  enemy  of  man  was 
defeated.  The  powers  of  evil,  which  had  clung  like  a  Nessus  robe  about  His 
humanity,  were  torn  off  and  cast  a^ide  for  ever.  And  the  victory  of  man  is  in- 
volved in  the  victory  of  Christ.  In  His  death  we  too  are  divested  of  the  poisonous 
clinging  garments  of  temptation,  and  sin,  and  death.  For  this  image  of  th© 
garments  see  Isa.  Ixiv.  6,  but  especially  Zechariah  iii.  In  this  prophetic  passage 
the  image  is  used  of  His  type  and  namesake,  the  Jesus  of  the  Eestoration,  not  in 
His  own  person,  but  as  the  High  Priest  and  representative  of  a  guilty,  but  cleansed 
and  forgiven  people,  with  whom  He  is  identified.  The  "  powers  "  specially  meant 
are  those  of  Eph.  vi.  12.  "  Displayed  "  as  a  victor  displays  his  captives  or  tropliiea 
in  a  triumphal  procession.  Nowhere  does  the  word  convey  the  idea  of  making  an 
example,  but  signifies  to  display,  publish,  proclaim.  "  Boldly,"  not  publicly, 
although  the  latter  idea  may  be  sometimes  connected  with  the  word  as  a  secondary 
notion  (John  vii.  4).  "  Leading  them  in  triumph,"  the  same  metaphor  as  in  2  Cor. 
ii.  14.  Here,  however,  it  is  the  defeated  powers  of  evil ;  there  the  subjugated 
persons  of  men  who  are  led  in  public,  chained  to  the  triumphal  car  of  Chriat.  "  In 
the  Cross."  The  violence  of  the  metaphor  is  its  justification.  The  paradox  of  the 
crucifixion  is  thus  placed  in  its  strongest  light — triumph  in  helplessness,  glory  in 
shame.     The  convict's  gibbet  is   the   victor's  car,      (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  Christ 

triumphant : — To  the  eye  of  reason  the  Cross  is  the  centre  of  sorrow,  the  lowest 
depth  of  shame;  to  the  Jew  a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greek  foolishness.  How 
different,  however,  to  the  eye  of  faith — a  token  of  glory,  a  field  of  triumph,  the 
chariot  in  which  Christ  rode  when  He  led  captivity  captive.  I.  Chbist  making  a 
gpoiL  OF  PKiNciPAXixiES  AND  POWERS.  1.  The  coutest.  Satan,  leagued  with  sin  and 
death,  had  made  this  world  the  home  of  woe.  He  found  our  first  pareuts  in  Eden  ; 
they  became  his  slaves.  Yet  the  voice  of  mercy  was  heard  even  while  the  fetters 
were  being  rivetted — "  Ye  shall  be  free."  The  earth  groaned  and  travailed  ia 
its  bondage.  In  the  fulness  of  time,  the  Deliverer  came  forth  born  of  a 
woman.  Then  came  the  Temptation ;  eventually  the  Passion ;  at  last  the 
Cross.  Hark  how  the  Conqueror  cries,  "  It  is  finished."  Where  are  now  His 
enemies?  All  defeated.  2.  The  division  of  the  spoil.  (1)  He  disarmed  His 
enemies.  Satan  had  in  his  hand  a  sharp  sword  called  the  Law.  This  was  wrested 
from  his  hand.  Death  was  depriverl  of  bis  darts,  which  were  broken  in  two,  and 
the  feather  end  returned  that  he  might  never  destroy  the  ransomed.  Sin,  Satan's 
armour  bearer,  was  def^poiled  of  his  shield.  (2)  Victors  carry  away  all  the  treasures 
belonging  to  the  vanquisbed.  Satan  had  taken  away  all  our  possessions — Paradise 
with  all  its  joy  and  peace — not  that  he  could  enjoy  them — but  Christ  has  gotten 
them  all  back.  (3)  Victors  take  away  all  the  ornaments  from  the  enemy,  the 
crown  and  jewels.  Satan's  crown  is  taken  away,  his  sovereignty  is  gone.  He  may 
tempt,  but  he  cannot  compel,  threaten  but  not  subdue.  3.  What  says  this  to  us  f 
If  Christ  has  spoiled  Satan,  let  us  not  be  afraid  to  encounter  him.  (1)  If  h© 
accuse  you,  reply,  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  V  "  (2)  If 
he  condemn  you,  ask,  "  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  "  (3)  If  he  threaten  to  divide 
you,  shout,  "  I  am  persuaded,"  &c.  (4)  If  he  let  loose  your  sins  upon  you,  dash  the 
hell  dogs  aside  with  this,  "  If  any  man  sin,"  &o.  (5)  If  death  should  threaten  you, 
exclaim,  "  Oh  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  "  &o.  Your  battles  shall  turn  to  your 
advantage.  The  more  numerous  they  are  the  greater  the  spoil.  Your  tribulation 
shall  work  patience,  &c.  II.  The  tbiumph.  1.  Most  of  the  old  commentators 
refer  this  to  the  resurrection  and  the  ascension;  Paul  refers  it  to  the  Cross,  but 
the  Cross  as  the  ground  of  the  ultimate  triumph  when  Christ  shall  enter  on  Hia 
reign  over  an  undisputed  universe.  2.  Picture  this  triumph.  The  pearlv  gates 
open,  anpels  crowd  on  the  battlements.  (1)  The  vanguard  of  the  redeemed 
approach  the  city.     Abel  comes  in  alone,  and  then  follow  the  patriarchs,  prophets. 


CHAP,  n.]  COLOSSI ANS.  151 

heroes,  of  four  thousand  years.  (2)  The  Prince  of  the  House  of  David,  with  Satan, 
Bin,  and  death  in  eternal  captivity.  (3)  Then  the  great  mass  of  His  people — 
fathers,  reformers,  &c.  (4)  I  might  describe  the  mighty  pictures  at  the  end  of  th« 
procession,  for  in  the  old  Roman  triumphs  the  deeds  of  the  conqueror  were 
depicted  in  paintings,  the  towns  he  had  taken,  the  battles  he  had  fought.  I  might 
present  hell  destroyed ;  heaven's  gates  opened  by  the  golden  lever  of  Christ's 
atonement ;  the  grave  despoiled.  Conclusion :  Where  will  you  be  ?  Among  the 
captives  or  in  the  Conqueror's  train?  (C.  H.  Sjntrgeon.)  The  triumph  of  tlie 
CrosM : — I.  Was  over  the  powers  of  evtii.  1.  The  existence  of  evil  is  a  painful 
fact,  we  meet  with  it  everywhere.  2.  Evil  is  embodied  in  invisible  and  potent 
personalities,  called — (1)  Principulities,  because  of  their  excellency,  knowledge,  and 
station.  (2)  Powers,  becwuse  of  the  mighty  influence  they  wield  and  the  terrible 
havoc  they  work.  They  exist  in  vast  numbers  (2  Pet.  iv.  2  ;  Jude  6),  and  are  the 
bitter  fues  of  man  (Eph.  vi.  12).  II.  Was  achieved  afteb  severe  conflict.  The 
conflict  was — 1.  Continuous  from  the  Fall  to  the  Cross.  2.  Fierce.  3.  Deadly 
(Luke  xxii.  53 ;  John  xii.  30).  IIL  Was  signal  and  complete.  Lessons :  1.  Christ 
has  conquered  the  powers  of  evil.  2.  To  the  believer  ultimate  victory  is  certain. 
3.  Keep  up  a  brave  heart  in  the  fiercest  conflict.  (G.  Barlow.)  Christ's  victory : — 
The  shock  that  buried  Lisbon  in  1755  never  ceased  to  vibrate  till  it  reached  the 
wilds  of  Scotland  and  the  vineyards  of  Madeira.  It  was  felt  among  the  islands  of 
the  Grecian  Archipelago,  and  it  changed  the  level  of  the  solitary  lakes  that  sleep 
beneath  the  shadows  of  the  North  Alps.  Even  so  the  shock  that  Satan's  kingdom 
sustained  when  Christianity  was  established  will  not  cease  to  vibrate  till  it  move 
the  whole  world.  {Christ  and  other  Masters.)  Believers  share  the  triumph  of 
Christ : — "  I  belong  to  death's  Master,"  was  the  expression  of  a  Christian  woman 
lately,  who  at  length  died  of  internal  cancer.  She  was  attended  by  a  Eoman 
Catholic  nurse,  who  was  very  much  astonished  at  the  calm  patience  and  peace  of 
the  poor  suiferer.  A  lady  called  to  see  her  one  day.  The  door  was  opened  by  the 
nurse.  "  How  is  Mrs.  Bristow  to-day  ?  "  inquired  the  visitor.  •'  She  is  very  ill, 
sir,"  was  the  reply.  The  nurse  then  gave  the  following  details : — "  Last  night  she 
was  seized  with  violent  pain,  and  I  thought  she  was  dying.  I  said  to  her,  '  You 
are  dying ;  shall  I  send  for  a  clergyman  to  prepare  you  for  death  t '  '  Oh,  no,' 
she  said,  *  I  want  no  minister,  for  I  am  ready  to  die  at  any  moment.'  *  But,'  I 
said,  •  are  you  not  afraid  to  die  ? '  '  No,  indeed,  not  a  bit,'  she  replied.  *  Tell  me 
why  you  are  not  afraid  to  die,  when  you  have  not  been  prepared  by  your  clergy- 
man, nor  received  the  rites  of  jour  Church?'  I  said.  'Because,'  she  replied, 
joyously,  '  I  belong  to  death's  Master.  I  am  a  poor  sinner  saved  by  grace,  and  His 
blood  has  washed  away  my  sin,  and  secured  me  a  title  to  glory.'  "  The  triumph 
of  Gliriat : — I  do  not  admire  Napoleon,  except  in  the  matter  of  his  cool  courage, 
bat  for  that  he  was  noteworthy.  They  always  represent  him  in  the  midht  of  the 
battle  with  folded  arms.  His  eagle  eye  is  on  the  conflict,  but  he  is  motionless  as 
a  statue.  Every  soldier  in  the  imperial  army  felt  that  victory  was  sure,  for  the 
captain  was  so  self-possessed.  If  he  had  been  hurrying  too  and  fro,  rushing  hero, 
there,  and  everywhere,  and  making  a  great  fuss  about  everything,  they  would  have 
inferred  that  defeat  was  impending.  But  see  him  yonder  I  All  is  well.  He  knowa 
what  he  is  at.  It  is  all  right,  for  he  does  not  strive,  nor  cry,  nor  cause  his  voice  to 
be  heard ;  he  is  calin,  for  he  can  see  that  all  is  well.  There  stands  the  Crucified 
this  day,  upon  the  vantage  ground,  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  He  surveys  the 
battle-field  in  calm  expectancy  until  His  enemies  are  made  His  footstool.  (C7.  H. 
Spurgeon. ) 

Vers.  1&-17.  Let  no  man  therefore  Judge  you. — Christian  liberty : — L  Th« 
POINTS  IN  WHICH  THAT  LIBERTY  IS  TO  BE  KXEKcisED.  1.  Those  which,  in  addi- 
tion to  circumcision,  were  principally  in  question  were — (1)  Meat  and  drink, 
which  refers  to  unclean  things,  things  offered  to  idols,  and  perhaps  the  Nazarite 
vow.  As  there  were  few  Jewish  regulations  as  to  drink,  probably  other  ascetic 
practices  were  in  question.  (2)  Sacred  seasons — annual  festivals,  the  monthly 
feast  of  the  new  moon,  and  the  weekly  Sabbath.  2.  The  relation  of  the  Gentile 
converts  to  these  was  really  the  question  whether  Christianity  was  to  be  more  than 
a  Jewish  sect,  and  the  main  force  which,  under  God,  settled  the  contest  was  the 
vehemence  and  logic  of  Paul.  3.  He  lays  down  the  ground  on  which  the  whole 
matter  was  to  be  settled.  They  are  a  "  shadow,"  &o.  "  Coming  events  cast  theif 
shadows  before."  The  great  work  of  Christ  whose  "  goings  forth  have  been  from 
everlasting,"  may  be  thought  of  as  having  set  out  from  the  Throne  aa  soon  as  tinM 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHir. « 

was,  like  the  beams  of  some  far-ofF  star  that  have  not  yet  reached  a  dark  world. 
The  liRht  from  the  Throne  is  behind  Him  as  He  advances  across  the  centuries,  and 
the  shadow  is  thrown  far  in  front.  II.  This  involves  thb  pubelt  prophetic  and 
BTMBOLic  CHARACTEB  OF  THE  Old  TESTAMENT  OKDEB.  1.  Sacrifice,  altar,  pricst, 
temple,  spoke  of  Christ.  (1)  The  distinctions  of  meats  were  meant  to  familiarize 
men  with  the  conceptions  of  purity  and  impurity,  and  so,  by  stimulating  con- 
Bcience  to  work  the  need  of  a  Purifier.  (2)  The  yearly  feasts  set  forth  various 
aspects  of  Christ's  work,  and  the  Sabbath  showed  in  outward  form  the  rest  into 
which  He  leads  His  people  who  cease  from  their  own  works  and  wear  His  yoke. 
And  all  are  like  outriders  who  precede  a  prince  on  his  progress,  and  as  they  gallop 
through  sleeping  villages  rouse  them  with  the  cry,  "  the  king  is  coming."  2.  And 
when  the  king  has  come  where  are  the  heralds?  When  the  reality,  who  wants  the 
shadows?  And  if  that  which  threw  the  shadow  forward  has  arrived,  how  shall  the 
shadow  be  visible  too  ?  III.  Therefore  the  cessation  of  all  these  observances  a 
INVOLVED  IN  THEIR  PROPHETIC  CHAEACTEB.  1,  The  practical  conclusioH  is  not,  *'  let 
no  man  observe  these  any  more,"  but  "  let  no  man  judge  you  "  about  them.  He 
does  not  quarrel  with  the  rites,  but  with  men  insistiug  on  them.  2.  His  own 
practice  is  the  best  commentary  on  his  meaning.  When  they  said  to  him,  "  Yoa 
must  circumcise  Titus,"  he  said,  "  Then  I  will  not."  When  nobody  tried  to  compel 
him  he  circumcised  Timothy  to  avoid  scandals.  8.  In  times  of  transition,  wise 
supporters  of  the  new  will  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  break  with  the  old.  The  brown 
sheaths  remain  on  the  twigs  after  the  tender  green  leaf  has  burst  from  within  them, 
but  there  is  no  need  to  pull  them  off,  for  they  will  drop  presently.  4.  The  bearing 
of  Paul's  principles  on  the  religious  observance  of  Sunday.  (1)  The  obligation  of 
the  Jewish  Sabbath  has  passed  away,  but  the  institution  of  a  weekly  day  of  rest  is 
put  in  Scripture  independently  and  prior  to  the  Mosaic  institution.  That  is  the 
natural  conclusion  from  the  narrative  in  Genesis,  the  fact  that  Sabbath  was  made 
for  man,  i.e.,  for  the  race,  and  the  traces  of  a  pre-Mosaic  Sa'obath,  e.g.,  in  Assyria. 
It  is  a  physical  and  moral  necessity,  and  that  is  a  mistaken  benevolence  which  on 
the  plea  of  culture  or  amusement  for  the  many,  compels  the  labour  of  the  few. 
(2)  The  gradual  growing  up  of  the  practice  of  observing  "  the  Lord's  day  "  is  in 
accordance  with  the  whole  spirit  of  the  New  Covenant,  which  has  next  to  nothing 
to  say  about  externals,  but  leaves  the  new  life  to  shape  itself.  The  necessity  of  a 
day  of  rest  is  not  less  now  than  at  the  first.  I  distrust  the  spirituality  which  pro- 
fesses that  all  life  is  a  Sabbath,  and  therefore  holds  itself  absolved  from  special 
seasons  of  worship ;  but  it  is  better  to  think  of  the  day  as  a  great  gift  for  the 
highest  purposes,  than  to  keep  it  as  a  mere  commandment.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  ceremonial  and  the  realin  religion: — Ceremonial  in  religion — I.  Can  foem  no 
JTJBT  BASIS  FOB  iNnviDDAL  CONDEMNATION.  "  Let  HO  man  judgc  you."  The  essence 
of  rehgion  does  not  consist  in  the  outward  form,  but  the  inward  spirit.  II.  Is 
rspiCAL  OF  THE  REAL.  Rites  have  their  place  in  the  culture  of  the  race,  and  in 
their  proper  sphere  are  important.  They  sketch  the  outlines  of  truths,  and  are 
valuable  only  as  they  conduct  to  the  realities  they  predict  and  typify.  III.  la 
ABOLISHED  AND  RENDERED  NDGATOBY  BY  THE  REAL.  It  is  a  dangerous  infatuation  to 
snatch  at  the  shadow  when  we  may  embrace  the  substance.  Lessons  :  1.  Learn  to 
exercise  forbearance  in  externals.  2.  Christ  alone  can  satisfy  the  deepest  craving 
of  the  soul.  (G.  Barlow.)  The  shadow  and  the  substance: — "  Therefore "  marks 
the  connection.  The  handwriting  is  destroyed,  Christians  are  free  ;  why  then  go 
back  to  the  elements  of  bindfige.  I.  The  admonition.  1.  Eating  and  drink- 
ing have  reference  to  the  dietetic  injunctions  of  Mosaism.  These  had  a  strong 
hold  of  the  Jewish  mind  (Acts  x.  9-16).  The  distinctions  of  days  point  collectively 
to  the  periodical  feasts  and  sacred  seasons.  And  the  idea  was  that  all  this  was 
essential  to  salvation,  and  so  obligatory  on  Gentile  Christians.  2.  Against  this 
notion  Paul  asserts  the  great  principle  of  Christian  liberty.  Such  things  ought 
never  to  be  a  criterion  of  piety.  Yet  how  strong  is  the  tendency  to-day  to  forbid 
certain  kinds  of  food  at  certain  seasons,  and  to  insist  on  saints'  days.  The  doctrine 
here  is  that  one  kind  of  food  is  as  lawful,  and  one  day  as  sacred,  as  another.  All 
these  distinctions  have  passed  away,  and  are  no  longer  binding.  That  we  are  at 
liberty  to  observe  certain  days,  such  as  those  on  which  we  commemorate  the  great 
redemptive  facts,  e.g.,  Christmas,  Easter,  &c.,  there  can  he  no  doubt,  but  they  are 
not  obligatory  (Rom.  xiv.  6).  3.  The  great  practical  question  is  that  which  relates 
to  the  Sabbath.  The  seventh  day  was  long  kept  along  with  the  first ;  but  this  was 
condemned  as  Judaizing  by  the  Council  of  Laodicea  (a.d.  364).  The  apostle 
declares  that  a  Christian's  true  piety  la  not  to  be  judged  by  hu  regard  of  th« 


n.]  C0L0SSIAN8.  165 

Jewish  Sabbath  any  more  than  to  the  other  festivals.  That  was  a  shadow  of  the 
Lord's  day.  That  a  seventh  portion  of  our  time  should  be  specially  given  to  God 
is  based  on  considerations  as  old  as  creation  ;  but  the  foundation  and  character  of 
the  Lord's  day  are  altogether  changed  from  those  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath.  Its  true 
principle  is  allegiance  to  a  living  Saviour  whose  resurrection  on  that  day  it  com- 
memorates, as  laying  the  foundation  of  a  new  spiritual  creation.  The  Saviour's 
appearances  on  that  day  subsequent  to  His  resurrection,  and  the  usage  of  the 
apostles,  hallow  the  first  day  of  the  week,  and  make  it  with  a  Divine  fitness  and 
beauty  the  Christian's  day  of  rest.  II.  The  akgument.  The  coming  Saviour  as 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  in  the  establishment  of  the  Jewish  economy,  flung  a 
shadow  of  His  approaching  advent  and  dispensation  down  on  the  descendants  of 
Abraham,  that  they  might  walk  in  it,  and  conserve  the  worship  and  truth  of  God. 
As  a  shadow  it  was — 1.  Predicted  and  foretold  that  something  grander  was  coming. 
3.  It  was  prefigurative.  A  shadow  is  a  likeness,  however  faint,  and  the  truths  em- 
bodied  in  Christ  were  dimly  typified  in  Judaism.  3.  But  as  a  shadow  is  evanes- 
cent, it  was  made  to  vanish  away  when  that  which  was  perfect  had  come.  Then 
it  answered  its  purpose  and  disappeared.  The  reality  was  reached  in  the  Son  of 
God.  {J.  Spence,  JD.D.)  Religion,  freedom,  and  joy  : — Religion  is  not  like  the 
prophet's  roll,  sweet  as  honey  when  it  was  in  his  mouth,  but  as  bitter  as  gall  in  his 
belly.  Religion  is  no  sullen  stoicism,  no  sour  Pharisaism  :  it  does  not  consist  in  a 
few  melancholy  passions,  in  some  dejected  looks  or  depressions  of  mind  ;  but  it 
consists  in  freedom,  love,  peace,  life,  and  power  ;  the  more  it  com^s  to  be  digested 
into  our  lives,  the  more  sweet  and  lovely  we  shall  find  it  to  be.  Those  spots  and 
wrinkles  which  corrupt  minds  think  they  see  in  the  face  of  religion  are,  indeed, 
nowhere  else  but  in  their  own  deformed  and  misshapen  apprehensions.  It  is  no 
wonder,  when  a  defiled  fancy  comes  to  be  the  glass,  if  yoa  have  an  unlovely 
reflection.     (John  Smith.) 

Vers.  18-19.  Let  no  man  beguile  you  of  your  reward  In  a  volnntary  humility. 
—■It  is  evident  that  "  humility  "  here  is  degraded  and  discoloured  by  the  tinge 
which  is  given  it  by  its  close  connection  with  the  words  "in  a  voluntary."  This 
is  a  rendering  in  the  LXX.  of  a  Hebrew  word  signifying  "  taking  a  delight  in, 
having  one's  own  inclination  gratified  in."  6i\u  is  used  of  that  which  a  man 
does  of  his  own  notion,  and  passes  over  into  the  notion  of  sheer  self-will  and 
arbitrariness.  Thus  we  learn  the  important  lesion  that  virtues  and  graces  are  too 
delicate  for  the  rough  admeasurement  of  mere  hard  and  fast  moral  lines.  Their 
beauty  and  acceptability  depart,  and  may  even  turn  into  their  opposites.  Wilful 
■elf-oomplacency  in  humility  is  censured  by  St.  Paul  as  inconsistent  with  the  sweet 
unconsciousness  of  true  humility.  It  becomes  the  worst  pride,  or  the  most  abject 
meanness — the  pride  or  the  meanness  which  apes  humility.  The  word  "  will 
worship  "  in  ver.  23  shows  that  s  strong  sense  of  6t\o),  as  intense  self-will,  was 
present  to  St.  Paul's  mind.  There  as  here,  self-will  imparts  a  contamination  to 
the  virtue  with  which  it  is  associated.  Humility  and  worship  themselves  become 
pride  and  superstition.  Hence  in  Luke  i.  48  the  word  should  be  rendered  "  low 
estate,"  not  humility.  One  who  says,  "  I  am  bumble,"  is  not  humble.  Mary 
does  not  profess  humility,  she  practices  it.  (Bp.  Alexander.)  Speculative  and 
practical  error : — I.  Thb  bpecolativk  bidb  of  th«  Colossian  bbbest.  In  the 
Authorized  Version  the  apostle  is  made  to  bring  a  charge  of  presumption  against 
the  false  teachers  "  intruding  into  the  things  which  he  hath  not  seen."  But  this 
is  a  strange  argument  for  one  whose  whole  walk  was  by  faith  and  not  by  sight,  and 
who  would  hardly  count  it  an  answer  to  a  professed  revelation  to  say  "  you  are 
intruding  into  that  which  you  have  not  seen,  and  therefore  you  cannot  know  "  with 
modern  materialists.  But  this  difiBculty  is  removed  in  the  Revised  Version,  which, 
on  high  authority,  omits  the  "not,"  and  inverts  the  argument.  Again,  the  Greek 
word  "  intruding  into  "  means  "  dwelling  in  "  or  "  taking  his  stand  upon,"  and  the 
charge  now  becomes  that  of  self-complacent  self-conceit.  1.  This  man  has  "  seen 
things,"  the  exact  equivalent  of  our  "  a  man  has  views,"  a  phrase  of  which  obscure 
thinkers  are  very  fond.  The  Colossian  speculator  may  have  professed  to  see  visions 
and  revelations  of  the  Lord,  and  to  have  come  back  from  the  third  heaven  to 
reveal  them ;  or,  if  not  this,  to  have  seen  things  in  the  tone  of  an  arrogant 
thinker,  who  gives  his  notions  the  style  of  certainties,  verified  with  the  eye  of 
the  mind,  "  dwelling  in "  them  with  complacent  satisfaction  as  the  whole  of 
truth.  2.  Or  we  may  take  the  marginal  reading,  "  taking  his  stand  upon "  his 
tiewB ;  regarding  them  as  land  which  he  has  won  with  his  intellectual  bow  and 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

Bpear,  and  from  which  he  can  go  on  to  move  or  conquer  the  nniverse.  3.  These 
new  thinkers  spoke  much  of  the  mind,  made  knowledge  the  bait  of  their  entice 
ments,  endeavoured  to  establish  an  aristocracy  of  intellect  within  that  Christian 
society  which  was  free  to  all  comers,  and  in  which  the  wise  and  prudent  are  sot 
side  by  side  with  babes.  How  striking  is  St.  Paul's  language,  "idly-inflated  with 
the  mind  of  his  flesh."  So  far  from  being  edified  into  the  spiritual  realm  it  was 
merely  puffed  up,  and  had  its  moving  power  in  the  repudiated  sphere  of  matter. 
That  Paul  would  so  describe  all  so-called  modem  thought  which  sets  aside  Christ 
is  certain.  II.  We  pass  on  to  verse  23  to  the  PEACTicAii  side  of  the  new  heeesy. 
1.  Here  we  have  its  treatment  of  matter,  how  its  teachers  sought  by  ceremonial 
prohibitions  (ver.  21)  to  counteract  the  deadly  influence  of  sense  in  spirit,  and  to 
mortify  the  body  as  an  enemy  of  the  spiritual  life.  It  was  a  plausible,  and  perhaps, 
in  its  origin,  a  well-intentioned  effort.  It  was  nobler  than  that  which  treats  matter 
as  of  no  moment.  But  the  two  perversions  have  one  root.  Asceticism  and  licence 
both  rob  the  body  of  its  dignity  as  the  servant  of  the  spirit.  2.  St.  Paul  admits  that 
the  ascetic  rules  have  a  show  of  wisdom;  they  speak  plausibly,  and  promise  largely  by 
their  will  worship,  i.e.,  their  religion  of  self-imposed  observances ;  by  their  humility, 
i.e.,  their  obsequiousness  ;  and  by  their  severity  to  the  body,  i.e.,  their  mortifying 
restrictions.  3.  Thus  far  both  versions  agree.  But  now  the  Authorized  Version 
says,  "  not  in  any  honour  to  the  satisfying  of  the  flesh."  This  leaves  out  a  particle 
which  demands  a  contrast.  But  without  this  is  it  in  accordance  with  St.  Paul's 
teaching  to  blame  a  system  for  not  satisfying  the  flesh  T  Indeed,  the  Greek  word 
is  "  indulgence."  But  the  Revised  Version  has  inserted  the  particle  of  antithesis, 
and  reads,  "  but  are  not  of  any  value  against  the  indulgence  of  the  flesh."  The 
language  is  borrowed  from  the  medical  profession.  V/hat  is  good  for  it  ?  What  is 
a  valuable  remedy  for  such  and  such  a  disease  ?  Indulgence  of  the  flesh  is  the 
disease ;  can  asceticism  cure  it  7  St.  Paul  says  no  I  It  sounds  well,  professes 
loudly,  but  has  no  real  value.  4.  Bules  of  abstinence,  regulations  as  to  food  or 
drink — lawful,  indeed,  but  from  which  it  is  an  act  of  religion  to  abstain — have  a 
show  of  wisdom  ;  they  point  to  a  terrible  evil  and  profess  to  cure  it ;  they  are  well 
sounding  words,  "  temperance  "  and  the  like ;  they  talk  of  the  value  of  humility  in 
bending  the  neck  to  discipline.  St.  Paul  does  not  deny  that  the  conquest  of  the 
body  is  good,  and  that  the  means  have  something  to  say  for  themselves ;  but  he 
declires  as  a  man  of  large  experience  who  has  tried  all  means,  and  who  is  taught 
of  God  that  all  such  regulations  will  fail.  III.  The  tbue  pbinciplb  of  Chbistian 
THiNKiMO  AND  LrviNO.  I.  In  Christ  Jesus  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge.  They  who  do  not  hold  fast  the  Head  therefore,  whatever  they  may 
think  or  see  or  dream,  cannot  but  be  puffed  up  and  not  edified.  2.  In  Christ  with 
whom  our  life  is  hid  in  God  (chap.  iii.  1)  can  alone  be  found  the  secret  of  the 
victory  over  the  flesh  which  is  the  professed  object  of  every  system  of  ethics.  If 
ye  are  dead  what  need  of  "touch  not,"  &c.  ?  If  ye  are  risen  the  chains  of  flesh 
shall  fall  off  by  the  influence  of  the  spiritual  life.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  The  angels 
and  the  Head: — I.  The  waenino.  1.  " Let  no  man  rob  you  of  your  prize."  The 
metaphor  is  that  of  the  race  or  wrestling  ground ;  the  judge  is  Christ,  the  reward 
18  the  crown,  not  of  fading  bay  leaves,  but  of  sprays  from  the  "  tree  of  life  "  which 
dower  with  blessedness  the  brows  round  which  they  are  wreathed.  The  tendency 
of  the  heresy  is  to  rob  them  of  this.  No  names  were  mentioned,  but  the  portrait 
of  the  robber  is  drawn  with  four  rapid  but  accurate  strokes  of  the  pencil.  (1) 
"  Delighting  in  humility  and  the  worshipping  of  angels" — (a)  The  humility  haa 
not  a  genuine  ring  about  it.  Self-conscious  humility  in  which  a  man  takes  delight 
is  Dot  the  real  thing.  A  man  who  knows  that  he  is  hurable  and  is  self-oomplacent 
about  it,  glancing  out  of  the  corners  of  his  downcast  eyes  at  any  mirror  where  he 
can  see  himself,  is  not  humble  at  all.  "  The  devil's  darling  vice  is  the  pride  that 
apes  humility."  (b)  So  very  humble  were  these  people  that  they  would  not 
venture  to  pray  to  God.  The  utmost  they  could  do  was  to  lay  hold  of  the  lowest 
link  of  a  long  chain  of  angel  mediators  in  hope  that  the  vibration  might  run  upwards 
through  all  the  links,  and  perhaps  reach  the  throne  at  last.  Such  fantastic  abase- 
ment which  would  not  take  God  at  His  word,  nor  draw  near  to  Him  through  Christ, 
was  the  very  height  of  pride.  (2)  "  Dwelling  in  the  things  he  hath  seen,"  i.e., 
by  visions,  &o.  The  charge  against  the  false  teachers  was  of  "  walking  in  a  vain 
show  "  of  unreal  imaginations.  (3)  "  Vainly  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind." 
The  self-conscious  humility  was  only  skin  deep,  and  covered  the  utmost  intellectual 
arrogance.  The  false  teacher  was  like  a  blown  bladder,  dropsical  from  conceit  ot 
**  intellectual  ability "  which  was  after  all  only  the  instrument  of  the  flesh,  tht 


CHA*.  n.]  C0L08SIANS,  161 

•inful  self.  Of  coarse,  enoh  could  bare  no  grip  of  Christ,  from  whom  anch 
tempers  were  sure  to  detach.  (4)  Therefore,  the  damning  indictment  closes  with 
"not  holding  the  head."  2.  The  epecial  forms  of  these  errors  are  gone ;  but  the 
tendencies  which  underlay  them  are  as  rampant  as  ever.  (1)  The  worship  of  angels 
is  dead,  but  we  are  often  tempted  to  think  that  we  are  too  sinful  to  claim  our 
portion  of  the  promises.  The  spurious  humility  is  by  no  means  out  of  date, 
which  knows  better  than  God  whether  He  can  forgive,  and  grasps  at  others  as  well 
as  Christ,  the  one  Mediator.  (2)  We  do  not  see  visions  and  dream  dreams,  except 
that  here  and  there  some  one  is  led  astray  by  "  spirituaUsm,"  but  plenty  of  us 
•ttach  more  importance  to  our  speculations  than  to  the  clear  revelation  of  God  in 
Christ.  The  "uuseen  world"  has  for  many  an  unwholesome  attraction.  The 
Gnostic  spirit  is  still  among  us  which  despises  the  foundation  truths  of  the  gospel 
as  milk  for  babes,  and  values  its  baseless  artificial  speculations  about  subordinate 
matters  which  are  unrevealed  because  they  are  subordinate,  and  fascinating  to  some 
minds  because  unrevealed,  far  above  the  truths  which  are  clear  because  they  are 
vital,  and  inspired  because  clear.  (3)  And  a  swollen  self-conceit  is,  of  all  things, 
the  most  certain  to  keep  a  man  away  from  Christ.  We  must  feel  our  utter  helpless- 
ness and  need  before  we  shall  lay  hold  of  Him ;  and  whatever  slackens  our  hold  of 
Christ  tends  to  deprive  us  of  the  final  prize.  ••  Hold  fast  that  thou  hast ;  let  no 
man  take  thy  crown."  II.  The  sooeck  and  manner  op  all  true  growth  is  set 
forth  in  order  to  enforce  the  warning  and  to  emphasize  the  need  of  holding  the 
head.  1.  Christ  is  not  merely  represented  as  supreme  and  sovereign,  but  as  the 
source  of  spiritual  life.  2.  That  life  which  flows  through  the  head  is  diffused 
through  the  whole  body  by  the  various  and  harmonious  action  of  all  the  parts. 
The  body  is  "supplied  and  knit  together,"  i.e.,  the  functions  of  nutrition  and 
compaction  into  a  whole  are  performed  by  the  '•  joints  and  bands,"  in  which  last 
word  are  included  muscles,  nerves,  tendons.  Their  action  is  the  condition  of  growth, 
but  the  Head  is  the  source  of  all.  Churches  have  been  bound  together  by  other 
bonds,  such  as  creeds,  polity,  nationality ;  bat  an  external  bond  is  only  like  a 
rope  round  a  bundle  of  faggots.  3.  The  blessed  results  of  supply  and  unity  are 
eftected  through  the  action  of  the  various  parts.  If  each  organ  is  in  healthy 
action  the  body  grows.  There  is  diversity  in  offices ;  the  same  life  is  light  in  the 
eyes,  beauty  in  the  cheek,  strength  in  the  hand,  thought  in  the  brain.  The  effect 
of  Christianity  is  to  heighten  individuality,  and  to  give  to  each  man  his  own  proper 
*'  gift  from  God."  The  perfect  light  is  the  blending  of  all  colours.  4.  A  community 
where  each  member  thus  holds  firmly  by  the  Head  will  increase  with  the  increase 
of  God.  There  is  an  increase  not  of  God.  These  heretical  teachers  were  swollen 
with  dropsical  self-conceit.  The  individual  may  increase  in  apparent  knowledge, 
in  volubility,  in  visions  and  speculations,  in  so-called  Christian  work;  the  Clmrch 
may  increase  in  members,  wealth,  influence,  Ac,  and  it  may  not  be  sound  growth, 
but  proud  flesh  that  needs  the  knife.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  teduetive  peril 
of  a  false  philosophy  : — A  false  philosophy — I.  Threatens  to  bob  the  bklietee  of 
HIS  REWARD.  Many  erroneous  opinions  may  be  held  without  invalidating  salva- 
tion ;  but  any  error  that  depreciates  our  estimate  of  Christ,  and  interrupts  the 
advance  of  our  Christian  life,  is  a  robbery.  U.  Advocates  the  most  PRESUMPinous 
AND  PERILOUS  SPECULATIONS.  1.  It  affects  a  spuiious  humility.  God  is  unknowable 
to  the  limited  powers  of  man,  so  it  reasons.  But  this  humility  was  voluntary, 
self-induced,  and  was  in  reality  another  form  of  spiritual  pride.  2.  It  invents  a 
dangerous  system  of  angelolatry.  3.  It  pretends  to  a  knowledge  of  the  mysterious. 
Locke  says  a  work  in  the  drawer  of  a  cabinet  might  as  weh  pretend  to  guess  at  the 
aonstruction  of  the  universe,  as  man  venture  to  speculate  about  the  unseen  world. 
III.  Ignores  the  Divine  source  of  all  spiritual  increase.  1.  Christ  is  the 
great  Head  of  the  Church — the  centre  of  its  unity,  the  source  of  its  life,  authority, 
and  influence.  2.  The  Church  is  vitally  and  essentially  united  to  Christ.  3.  The 
vital  union  of  the  Church  with  Christ  is  the  condition  of  spiritual  increase. 
Lessons :  A  false  philosophy — 1.  Distorts  the  giandest  truths.  2.  Substitutes  for 
truth  the  most  perilous  speculations.  3.  Against  its  teachings  be  ever  on  your 
guard.     (O.  Barlow.)        Angel  worship: — I.  The  ,\postle  brands  the  seducers 

AND    CONCLUDES    THAT   NO   EEGABD   18  TO    BE    PAID    TO    THEM.        1.    BecaUSe    in     SaCred 

things  they  arrogated  to  themselves,  by  no  right  whatever,  a  power  of  determining 
as  the  judges  were  accustomed  in  contests.  These  voluntary  umpires  decreed  the 
reward  of  eternal  life  to  none  who  were  unwilling  to  subscribe  to  their  doctrines. 
Therefore,  as  St.  Paul  struck  at  this  asurpation,  we  must  understand  that  no  such 
power  is  granted  to  man  that  he  should  determine  anything  in  religion  of  his  own 


e 


£) 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

will ;  but  is  bound  to  judge  according  to  Scripture  (Isa.  viii.  20).  Hence  estimate 
Romish  tyranny  which  claims  this  very  power.  2.  They  abused  their  power  to 
deceive  Christians,  A  director  of  the  games,  if  he  should  order  any  one  to  run 
outside  the  course,  would  deprive  him  of  his  prize  ;  because  he  would  never  that 
way  arrive  at  the  goal  So  they  who  direct  Christians  to  seek  salvation  apart  from 
Christ,  endeavour  to  beguile  them  of  their  reward  (Heb.  iii.  14).  This  condemna- 
tion rests  on  all  who  would  lead  us  from  the  simplicity  of  Christ.     II.  He  show* 

IN    WHAT    INSTANCB    THET    ABUSED    THErB   U8UBPED   AUTHORITT.       The  fooUsh  lowlineSSB 

of  mind  which  would  seek  the  mediation  of  angels  rather  than  that  of  Christ,  i» 
rebuked  because  Christ  is  more  united  to  us  than  the  angels  (Rom.  v.  2 ;  Heb.  iv.  16 ; 
Eph.  iii.  12).  1.  Because  from  this  and  similar  places  there  arises  between  us  and 
the  Papists  •  great  controversy  about  the  worship  of  angels  and  deceased  sainta 
who  are  equal  to  the  angels  (Luke  xx.  36) ;  let  us  see  with  whom  the  truth  lies. 
(1)  Religious  worship,  wliether  it  be  called  latria  or  dulia,  is  given  to  God  alone, 
and  not  to  angels  or  saints.  "  Religion,"  says  Cicero,  "  is  that  which  is  comprised 
in  the  pious  worship  of  the  gods,"  and  Hilary  says  that  "religion  paid  to  the 
creature  is  accursed."  With  this  Scripture  agrees  (Deut.  vi.  13  ;  Gal.  iv.  8;  Rev. 
xix.  10).  The  foundation  of  religious  worship  is  infinite  excellence  apprehended 
under  the  consideration  of  our  first  cause  and  chief  good ;  it  is  not  a  sufficient 
reason  therefore,  for  offering  to  them,  that  angels  and  saints  are  endowed  with 
supernatural  gifts,  or  procure  for  us  many  good  things,  unless  they  are  the  first 
and  chief  cause  to  us  of  our  chief  good.  (2)  The  Papists  ascribe  to  angels  and 
even  to  saints  supreme  religious  worship  no  less  than  these  seducers  here  censured, 
(a)  Prayer  is  an  act  of  latria  or  highest  worship  ;  for  where  we  pray  we  acknowledge 
that  its  object  can  hear,  deliver,  and  answer  (Pjea.  1.  15).  But  this  is  offered  to 
saints.  (6)  To  make  a  vow  to  another  is  an  act  of  latria,  due  to  God  alone  (Isa.  xix. 
21 ;  Psa.  L  14).  But  vows  are  made  to  angels  and  saints,  (c)  To  erect  a  house 
of  prayer,  to  raise  altars  and  offer  incense  upon  them  to  any  one  is  to  pay  Divine 
honour  to  him  (Exod.  xxx.  37 ;  Matt.  xxi.  13).  But  this  is  done  wholesale  by 
Rome  to  the  angels  and  saints.  2.  Paul  rejects  this  doctrine,  because  (1)  it  pro- 
ceeded from  those  who  are  accustomed  rashly  to  invent  and  speak  about  matters 
unknown  to  them  (1  Tim.  i.  7).  For  they  cannot  trace  angel  or  saint  worship  to 
the  Word  of  God,  or  learn  it  from  the  example  of  prophets  or  apostles.  Hence  w© 
may  infer — (a)  That  their  bold  curiosity  is  not  to  be  endured  who  intrude  them- 
selves into  the  determining  of  things,  the  investigation  of  which  surpasses  human 
wit  (Rom.  xii.  3).  {b)  Concerning  religious  matters  nothing  should  be  determined 
without  a  sure  foundation,  i.e.,  the  Word  of  God,  for  whatever  things  we  see 
relating  to  our  salvation  we  find  here.  He  who  obtrudes  anything  not  found  there, 
hath  not  seen  it  but  imagined  it.  (c)  They,  therefore,  exercise  tyranny  over  the 
Church  who  anathematize  all  who  reject  commandments  of  men  for  articles  of 
faith.  (2)  The  authors  of  this  doctrine  are  puffed  up  with  pride,  and  thence  pre- 
sume that  their  inventions  are  the  dictates  of  truth.  The  fleshly  mind  denotes  the 
animal  man,  or  perspicacity,  unenlightened  by  the  Spirit  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  {Bp. 
Davenant.)  False  confidences : — One  of  the  saddest  incidents  connected  with  the 
disastrous  fire  at  Chicago  is  that  so  many  trusted  not  onl.v  their  goods,  but  their 
lives,  to  buildings  that  were  regarded  as  fireproof,  and  that  they  perished  together. 
Dr.  Goodall  records  similar  incidents  connected  with  the  great  fire  at  Constantinople 
in  1831,  and  makes  a  suggestive  reflection :  •'  We,  like  many  others,  fared  the  worse 
for  living  in  houses  which  were  considered  fire-proof.  In  the  great  burning  day 
may  no  such  false  confidence  prove  our  ruin."  {Christian  Age.)  Humility  before 
God  : — Thomas  a  Becket  wore  coarse  sackcloth  made  of  goats'  hair  from  the  arms 
to  the  knees,  but  his  outer  garments  were  remarkable  for  splenilour  and  extreme 
costliness,  to  the  end  that,  thus  deceiving  human  eyes,  he  might  please  the  sight  of 
God.  {Hoveden.)  How  self-will  may  be  lost: — A  person  who  had  long  practised 
many  auaterities,  without  finding  any  comfort  or  change  of  heart,  was  once  com- 
plaining to  the  Bishop  of  Alst  of  his  state.  "  Alas  1  "  said  he,  "  self-will  and 
self-righteousness  follow  me  everywhere.  Only  tell  me  when  you  think  I  shall 
learn  to  leave  self.  Will  it  be  by  study,  or  prayer,  or  good  works ? "  "I  think,"^ 
replied  the  bishop,  "  that  the  place  where  you  lose  self  will  be  that  where  you  find 
your  Saviour."  Not  bolding  the  Head. — Th*  union  between  head  and  body  : — The 
discoveries  of  modern  physiology  have  invested  the  apostle's  language  with  far 
greater  distinctness  and  force  than  it  can  have  worn  to  his  own  contemporaries. 
Any  exposition  of  the  nervous  system  more  especially  reads  like  •  conmaentary  oB 
his  image  of  the  relations  between  the  body  and  the  head.    At  every  tarn  we  meet 


«Ai>.  n.]  COLOSSIANS.  159 

with  some  fresh  illnstration  which  kindles  it  with  a  flood  of  light.  The  volition 
communicated  from  the  braiu  to  the  limbs,  the  sensations  of  the  extremities  tele- 
graphed back  to  the  brain,  the  absolute  mutual  sympathy  between  the  head  and  the 
members,  the  instantaneous  paralysis  ensuing  on  the  interruption  of  continuity,  all 
these  add  to  the  completeness  and  life  of  the  image.  Bearing  in  mind  the  diversity 
of  opinion  among  ancient  physiologists,  we  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  in  the  text, 
not  only  with  the  correctness  of  the  image,  but  also  with  the  propriety  of  the 
terms  ;  and  we  are  forcibly  reminded  that  among  the  apostle's  most  intimate 
compHnions  at  this  time  was  one  whom  he  calls  "the  beloved  physician  "  (iv,  14). 
{Bp.  Lightfoot.)  The  Head  and  the  body: — L  The  Head  supplies  ali.  things 
iSECESSARX  TO  ITS  MEMBERS.  In  worfchippiug  angels  the  seducers  diminished  the 
dignity  of  Christ,  for  they  took  away  from  Him  the  prerogative  of  the  Head,  and 
incorrectly  judged  of  His  virtue  and  sufficiency.  For  Christ,  the  God  Man,  is  Head 
of  the  Church.  If  they  acknowledged  Him  as  God  they  would  seek  from  Him  alone 
grace  and  salvation ;  if  as  man,  they  would  not  solicit  angels  to  intercede  for 
them,  since  Christ,  our  Elder  Brother,  sits  contin.ially  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 
Hence  we  may  infer — 1.  That  they  who  are  concerned  about  their  salvation, 
ought  never  to  turn  their  eyes  from  their  Head  in  whom  alone  is  salvation.  2. 
Christians  are  seduced  to  do  so,  and  do  not  hold  the  Head,  whenever  they  embrace 
new  doctrines,  worship,  means  of  salvation  never  prescribed  by  Christ  and  His 
apostles  (1  Tim.  vi.  3,  4).  II.  The  Head  binds  and  knits  together  the  same 
TO  ITSELF  AND  TO  EACH  OTHER.  1,  The  effcct  obtained  from  cleaving  to  Christ  ia 
that  the  whole  body  has  by  joints  nourishment  ministered.  (1)  The  joints  are — 
(a)  The  Spirit  of  Christ  (Rom.  viii.  9).  As  that  member  is  not  united  to  the  head 
which  is  not  animated  by  the  same  essence  as  the  head  itself,  neither  ia  that 
Christian  united  to  Christ  who  lacks  His  Spirit.  (6)  The  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  e.g.,  faith 
by  which  as  a  secondary  mean  we  are  united  to  Christ,  and  receive  the  remission 
of  sins  and  all  the  grace  promised  in  the  gospel  (John  vi.  35).  (2)  The  whole  body 
thas  adhering  to  Christ  hath  nourishment  ministered.  The  Greeks  called  him 
"  minister  "  who  supplied  all  the  apparatus  to  the  leaders  of  the  sacred  dances.  By 
a  metaphor  derived  from  this  he  is  said  *•  to  supply  the  expenditure  "  who  furnishes 
to  another  the  things  necessary  for  any  particular  object ;  and  the  word  nsed  by 
Paul  signifies  the  doing  of  this  copiously  and  abundantly  by  Christ,  who  supplies 
all  the  means  of  salvation.  For  whether  we  regard  the  grace  making  grateful,  or 
grace  gratuitously  given,  Christ  abundantly  euppliee  both  to  His  Church  by  His 
Spirit,  (a)  Of  that  grace  which  has  reference  to  justification  and  sanctification, 
Paul  testifies  rRom.  viii,  10 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  9)  that  it  is  ministered  to  all  His  members 
by  Christ.  (6)  The  same  with  that  which  relates  to  the  edification  of  the  Church 
(1  Cor.  xii.  7,  &o.  ;  Eph.  iv.  11).  (3)  We  may  here  observ»^(a)  That  in  the  whole 
body  of  the  Church  is  not  a  single  dry  member,  but  all  are  watered  by  streams  of 
grace  flowing  from  the  Head.  (6)  To  adhere  to  the  Pope  as  a  visible  head,  does  not 
constitute  membership,  but  adherence  to  Christ  Therefore  the  ungodly  are  not 
true  members,  to  whatever  visible  Church  joined,  unless  by  the  joints  of  the  Spirit 
and  faith  they  are  united  to  Christ,  (c)  As  to  doctrine  and  salvation  the  Church 
is  supplied  from  its  Head,  not  one  member  from  another,  (d)  The  Papists  err,  who 
will  have  the  Church  to  draw  the  doctrine  of  salvation,  not  alone  from  Christ, 
but  from  tradition  ;  who  will  have  her  receive  holiness,  merit,  &o. ,  not  from  Christ 
alone,  but  the  saints.  If  this  be  so,  the  text  is  not  true.  2.  By  virtue  of  the 
Head,  the  whole  body  is  knit  together  (Rom.  xii.  5).  The  "  bands"  Are  the  same — 
the  Spirit  and  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  For  the  same  Spirit  who  unites  us  to  Christ 
ia  the  principal  band  by  which  we  are  united  to  each  other  (1  Cor.  xii.  13),  and 
after  He  is  infused  into  all  the  ligaments  of  the  Church,  He  enkindles  in  every  one 
that  excellent  gift  of  charity  which  ia  also  the  firmest  bond  of  cohesion.  The 
other  ties  are  diversities  of  gifts  and  callings  emanating  from  the  same  Spirit 
(Eph.  iv.  11,  12).  III.  The  fruit  of  this  union.  1.  While  united  to  Christ  by 
faith,  and  knit  together  by  love,  the  whole  body  of  the  Church  increaseth  in  faith, 
love,  holiness,  and  all  saving  grace.  This  growth  is 'said  to  he  of  God  as  He  is  the 
primary  agent  (1  Cor.  iii.  6),  and  because  it  tends  to  His  glory  as  the  ultimate  end. 
2.  Observe  of  this  increase — (1)  As  there  is  a  growth  in  the  natural  body  in  all  ita 
parts,  BO  in  the  mystical  body  all  the  members  increase  spiritually.  (2)  Not  every 
increase  is  approved.  A  member  of  the  body  is  not  said  to  increase  when  it  ia 
inflated  with  any  bad  humour.  So  the  piety  of  a  Christian  man  is  not  increased 
when  his  mind  is  filled  with  tradition  and  will  worship,  which  pi  oceed  not  from  the 
Spirit,  but  from  the  empty  nund  of  ignorance  and  pride.     (3)  Be  not  deceived  by 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  fcHAP.  n. 

that  incongmous  mass  of  opinions  of  the  Bomisb  Church.  The  kingdom  of  the 
Pope  may  be  increased,  viz.,  by  temporal  things,  traditions,  superstitions,  not  by 
the  knowledge  of  God  and  piety.  {Bp.  Davenant.)  (See  also  on  chap.  i.  18,  and 
Eph.  W.  16.) 

Vers.  20-23.  If  ye  be  dead  with  Christ  from  the  rudiments  of  the  world. — Two 
final  testt  of  the  false  teaching : — I.  The  Christian's  death  with  Christ.  1.  To 
Paul  the  Cross  of  Christ  was  the  altar  on  which  the  oblation  had  been  offered  which 
took  away  bis  sin,  and  because  of  that  the  law  of  his  own  life,  and  the  power  which 
assimilated  him  to  his  Lord.  (1)  We  talk  of  an  old  man  being  dead  to  youthful 
follies  and  passions  and  ambitions,  and  we  mean  that  they  have  ceased  to  interest 
him,  that  he  is  separated  from,  and  insensible  to  them.  So  if  we  have  got  hold  of 
Christ  as  our  Saviour,  that  will  deaden  ua  to  all  which  was  our  life.  (2)  Strong 
emotion,  too,  makes  us  insensible  to  things  around.  Many  a  man  amid  the  excite- 
ment of  the  battlefield  "  receives,  but  recks  not  of  the  wound."  Absorption  of 
thought  and  interest  leads  to  "  absence  of  mind  "  when  surroundings  are  entirely 
unfelt.  Higher  tastes  drive  out  lower  ones,  as  some  great  stream  turned  into  a  new 
channel  will  sweep  it  clear  of  mud.  So  if  we  are  joined  to  Christ  He  will  fill  our 
eouls  with  strong  emotions  and  interests  which  wiU  deaden  our  sensitiveness  to 
things  around.  2.  To  what  shall  we  die  if  we  are  Christians  ?  (1)  To  sin  (Eom. 
vi.  11).  (2)  To  self  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15).  (3)  To  the  law  (Rom.  vii.  6).  (4)  To  the 
world  (Gal.  vi.  14).  Here  it  is  to  "  the  rudiments  of  the  world  "  (ver.  8).  Elemen- 
tary  precepts,  fit  for  babes,  moving  in  the  region  of  the  material.  Why  then, 
triumphantly  asks  Paul,  do  you  subject  yourselves  to  ordinances  (ver.  4)  such  as 
"  handle  not,  nor  taste,  nor  touch,"  vehement  reiterations  of  the  ascetic  teachers 
with  an  increasing  intolerance — don't  lay  hold  of,  don't  touch  with  the  tip  of  your 
finger.  So  asceticism  grows  by  indulgence.  And,  then,  the  whole  thing  is  out  of 
date,  and  a  misapprehension  of  the  genius  of  Christianity.  Man's  work  in  religion 
is  ever  to  confine  it  to  the  surface.  Ciirist's  work  is  to  focus  it  on  the  inner  man  of 
the  heart,  knowing  that  if  that  be  right  the  visible  will  come  right.  3.  Paul  goes 
on  to  show  (ver.  22)  that  these  meats  and  drinks,  of  which  bo  much  is  said,  are 
perishable.  Ton  cannot  use  them  without  using  them  up.  Is  it  fitting  for  men 
who  Lave  died  with  Christ  to  this  perishable  world  to  make  so  much  of  its  perishing 
things  ?  But  we  may  widen  the  thought  so  as  to  make  it  include  sybaritic  luxury  as 
well  as  asceticism.  Dives  in  his  purple  and  the  monk  in  his  hair  shirt,  both  make 
too  much  of  "  what  they  should  put  on."  The  one  with  his  feasts  and  the  other  with 
his  fasts,  both  think  too  much  of  what  they  shall  eat  and  drink.  The  man  who  hves 
on  high  with  his  Lord  puts  all  these  things  in  their  right  place.  There  are  things 
which  do  not  perish  with  the  using.  All  Christlike  graces  grow  with  exercise.  4. 
The  final  inconsistency  between  the  Christian  position  and  these  practical  errors  is 
glanced  at  in  "after  the  commandments  of  men."  A  quotation,  used  by  our  Lord, 
from  Isa.  zxix.  13.  It  is  not  fitting  for  those  in  union  with  Christ  to  be  under  the 
authority  of  men.  Here  is  the  true  democracy  of  the  Christian  society — "  Ye  were 
redeemed  with  a  price ;  be  not  servants  of  men. "  We  are  bound  to  take  our  orders 
from  one  Master.  II.  The  failure  of  thk  false  teaching  to  attain  its  end  (ver. 
23).  1.  The  apostle  admits  that  it  had  a  show  of  wisdom,  and  was  very  fascinating. 
It  had  the  look — (1)  Of  devotion  and  zealous  worship  ;  but  on  closer  examination 
it  is  the  indulgence  of  the  will  and  not  surrender  to  God.  They  are  not  worshipping 
TTim  as  He  has  appointed,  and  therefore  not  at  all.  Whether  offered  in  a  eathedral 
or  a  bam,  in  a  cope  or  a  fustian  jacket,  such  service  is  not  accepted.  (2)  Of 
humility.  It  looked  very  humble  to  say,  We  cannot  suppose  that  such  flesh-encom- 
passed creatures  can  have  fellowship  with  God;  but  it  was  a  great  deal  more 
humble  to  take  Him  at  Hia  word  and  allow  him  to  settle  possiblities.  (3)  Of 
discipline.  Any  asceticism  is  a  great  deal  more  to  men's  taste  than  abandoning 
self.  They  will  rather  stick  hooks  in  their  backs  than  give  up  their  sins  or  yield  up 
their  wills.  Our  poor  human  nature  travesties  Christ's  solemn  command  to  deny 
ourselves  into  doing  something  unpleasant  to  recommend  ourselves  to  God.  2.  The 
conclusive  condemnation,  however,  lies  in  the  fact  that  tbey  "  are  not  of  any  value 
against  the  indulgence  of  the  flesh  "  (see  on  ver.  18).  This  is  one  great  end  of  all 
moral  and  spiritual  discipline,  and  if  practical  regulations  do  not  secure  it  they  are 
worthless.  By  "  flesh  "  is  meant  the  entire  unrenewed  self  which  thinks,  and  feels, 
and  wills  apart  from  God.  To  indulge  and  satisfy  it  is  to  die,  to  slay  and  suppress 
it  is  to  live.  A  man  may  be  keeping  the  whole  round  of  "ordinances  "  and  seven 
devils  may  be  in  his  heart.    They  distinctly  tend  to  foster  some  of  the  "  worka  of 


«B4r.  n.]  eaiJUSSIANS.  1«1 

the  flesh,"  such  as  self-righteousness  and  uncharitableness,  and  they  fts  distinctly 
fail  to  subdue  any  of  them.  A  man  may  stand  on  a  pillar  like  Simon  Stylites  for 
J  ears  and  be  none  the  Letter.  The  world  and  the  flesh  are  willing  that  Christianity 
ebould  shrivel  into  a  religion  of  prohibitions  and  ceremonials,  because  all  manner  of 
vices  and  meannesses  may  thrive  and  breed  under  them  like  scorpions  under  stones. 
There  is  only  one  thing  that  will  put  the  collar  on  the  neck  of  the  animal  within  us, 
and  that  is  the  power  of  the  indwelling  Christ.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Ritualism 
described  and  condemned: — I.  The  appeal — 1.  Was  to  their  position  and  profession 
as  Christians.  They  had  died  with  Christ,  and,  therefore,  to  that  which  was  ful- 
filled in  His  death.  2.  Was  based  upon  their  Christian  liberty.  What  had  they  to 
do  with  those  things  from  which  they  were  delivered  by  Christ's  death — the  mere 
material  alphabet  of  religion  ?  It  was  as  ridiculous  as  if  an  educated  man  should 
go  back  to  his  spelling  book  ;  or  a  liberated  slave  fear  his  task  maeter.  3.  Described 
the  character  of  the  bondage  of  which  they  were  in  danger,  "Touch  not,"  &c., 
are  not  Paul's  words,  but  the  mottoes  of  the  heretical  teachers,  and  refer  to  distinc- 
tions in  meats  and  drinks.  True  Christians  ought  to  be  far  above  the  region  of 
Buch  carnal  commandments,  for  to  tbem  all  things  are  pure,  and  every  creature  of 
God  good.  Moreover,  they  perish  in  the  using,  and  how  then  can  they  benefit  the 
Boal?  (Rom.  xiv.  17  ;  1  Cor.  viii.  8).  And  lastly  they  are  based  on  human  authority, 
whereas  the  Christian  owes  allegiance  to  none  but  Christ.  II.  The  abqument.  1. 
The  ordinances  are  pretentious.  They  have  a  show  of  wisdom.  (1)  In  will  worship, 
or  some  mode  of  worship  God  has  not  required.  (2)  In  humility.  But  it  is  an 
affectation  of  lowliness  which  cannot  look  up  directly  to  God  in  Christ,  but  thinks 
it  necessary  to  fiud  some  subordinate  mediators.  Such  prevails  now.  (3)  In 
neglecting  the  body.  The  fleshly  tabernacle  may  indeed  be  weakened  without  the 
slightest  effect  in  conquering  any  sinful  tendency  in  the  soul.  (4)  How  these 
rudiments  of  the  world  had  a  show  of  wisdom  is  not  difficult  to  see.  To  go  beyond 
the  Divine  requirement  in  self-denial,  and  do  works  of  supererogation  has  the 
appearance  of  magnanimity.  2.  These  ordinances  are  really  worthless.  (1) 
Negatively — "  Not  in  any  honour  " — they  are  of  no  spiritual  efficacy.  (2)  Positively 
— they  gratify  the  flesh,  and  prop  op  the  fleshly  mind  with  notions  of  its  self- 
righteousness  and  sufficiency.  Lessons :  1.  The  vanity  and  error  of  asceticism. 
2.  The  sacredness  of  Christian  liberty.  {J.  Spence,  D.D.)  The  ceremonial  in 
religion  : — I.  Is  simply  elementakt.  "  The  rudiments  of  the  world."  It  is  in  its 
nature  transitory  and  imperfect.  It  conveys  knowledge  but  in  part ;  and  when  that 
which  is  perfect  is  come,  then  that  which  is  in  part  is  done  away.  II.  Is  xinwortht 
IHB  SUBMISSION  OT  THE  Chkistun  BELIEVER.  The  believer  is  hberated  from  the 
slavery  of  the  ceremonial.  III.  In  its  main  featubes  is  universallt  the  same.  1. 
It  is  the  same  in  its  dictatorial  prohibitions.  "  Touch  not,"  &o.  2.  It  is  the  same 
in  its  undue  exaltation  of  the  external  and  the  transitory,  "  Which  perish,"  &o. 
8.  It  is  the  same  in  its  human  origin.  **  After  the  commandments  and  doctrines  of 
men."  The  ceremonial  in  religion  is  an  accumulation  of  the  commandments  and 
doctrines  of  men.  Depending  on  human  authority,  it  has  no  value  in  itself  ;  and 
when  it  is  made  obligatory  in  order  to  salvation,  it  is  an  insult  to  Christ,  and  an 
intolerable  servitude  to  man.  IV.  Can  never  satisfy  the  many-sided  wants  of 
bdmanity.  1.  It  pretends  to  a  wisdom  it  does  not  possess.  (1)  In  self-imposed 
methods  of  worship.  The  enthusiast  for  the  ceremonial  argues  that  he  who  only  does 
what  God  positively  demands  does  only  what  is  common  ;  but  h*^  who  goes  beyond 
reaches  a  higher  degree  of  saintliness.  (2)  In  the  affectation  of  a  spurious  humiUty. 
It  is  a  pretence  of  wisdom  to  renounce  all  worldly  splendour,  and  profess  to  live  in 
poverty  and  seclusion.  (3)  In  an  unjustifiable  indifference  to  bodily  wants.  The 
body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  is  to  be  honoured,  and  all  its  just  wants 
satisfied,  in  order  that  its  best  powers  may  be  employed  in  the  service  of  God.  But 
the  abuse  of  the  body  in  starvation  and  neglect  is  a  folly  and  a  sin.  2.  It  is  of  no 
value  in  preventing  the  indulgence  of  the  flesh.  "  Not  in  any  honour  to  the  satis- 
fying of  the  flesh."  The  radical  error  of  the  ascetic  lies  in  his  belief  that  evil  resides 
in  matter.  Not  the  body,  but  in  the  soul  is  the  source  of  sin.  (G.  Barlnw.) 
Religion  does  not  consist  in  bodily  neglect : — John  Wesley,  before  his  conversion, 
anxiously  seeking  re^^t  for  his  soul,  proposed  to  himself  a  solitary  life  in  one  of  the 
Yorkshire  dales.  His  wise  mother  interposed,  admonishing  him  prophetically 
"that  God  had  better  work  for  him  to  do."  He  travelled  some  miles  to  consult 
" a  serious  man."  "The  Bible  knows  nothing  of  a  solitary  religion,"  says  this 
good  man,  and  Wesley  turned  about  his  face  toward  that  great  career  which  was  to 
make  his  history  a  part  of  the  history  of  I  is  cotmtry  and  of  the  world.    (R.  Steveiu.) 

11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ntr 

The  »ouV$  true  freedom  in  Christ  alone : — Let  me  tell  you  again  my  old  story  of  thr 
eagle.  For  many  months  it  pined  and  drooped  in  its  cage,  and  seemed  to  have  for- 
gotten that  it  was  of  the  lineage  of  the  old  plumed  kings  of  the  forest  and  the 
mountain  ;  and  its  bright  eye  faded,  and  its  strong  wings  drooped,  and  its  kingly 
crest  was  bowed,  and  its  plumes  were  torn  and  soiled  amid  the  bars  and  dust  of  its 
prison-house.  So,  in  pity  of  its  forlorn  life,  we  carried  its  cage  out  to  the  open 
air,  and  broke  the  iron  wire  and  flung  wide  the  lowly  door  ;  and  slowly,  falteringly, 
despondingly,  it  crept  forth  to  the  sultry  air  of  that  cloudy  summer  noon  and  looked 
listlessly  about  it.  But  just  then,  from  a  rift  in  an  overhanging  cloud,  a  golden 
Bunbeam  flashed  upon  the  scene.  And  it  was  enough.  Then  it  lifted  its  loyal 
crcgt,  the  dim  eye  blazed  again,  the  soiled  plumes  unfolded  and  rustled,  the  strong 
wings  moved  themselves,  with  a  rapturous  cry  it  sprang  heavenward.  Higher, 
higher,  in  broader,  braver  circles  it  mounted  toward  the  firmament,  and  we  saw  it 
no  more  as  it  rushed  through  the  storm-clouds  and  soared  to  the  sun.  And  would, 
0  ye  winged  spirits  1  who  dream  and  pine  in  this  poor  earthly  bondage,  that  only 
one  ray  from  the  blessed  Sun  of  Righteousness  might  fall  on  you  this  hour  I  for 
then  would  there  be  the  flash  of  a  glorious  eye  and  a  cry  of  rapture,  and  a  sway  of 
exulting  wings,  as  another  redeemed  and  risen  spirit  sprang  heavenward  unto  Godt 
(C.  Wadsworthf  DJ).) 


CHAPTER  m. 

Vebs.  1-4.  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ.— JJiwri  with  Chritt  .'—There  Is  no  doubt 
a  supposition  in  the  "if."  The  apostle  takes  it  for  granted  that  Christians  wer© 
raised  together  with  Christ,  and  admonishes  them,  therefore,  to  evince  it  in  their 
life.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  represented  as  giving  to  EQs  people — L  A  new 
AIM.  Man  is  born  to  aspire,  and  when  he  rises  with  the  victorious  Christ  he  aspire* 
to  heavenly  things.  The  new  quest  is  for  righteousness,  holiness,  patience,  devo- 
tion, love,  and  self-sacrifice.  II.  A  new  heakt.  The  affections  are  to  be  set  on 
things  above,  not  as  in  the  unregenerate  state  on  earthly  things.  It  might  be 
possible  to  seek  heavenly  things  merely  in  obedience  to  authority  or  convictions  of 
duty,  but  that  we  may  be  raised  above  that,  we  are  encouraged  to  set  our  whole 
heart  and  mind  upon  Divine  realities.  III.  A  new  life.  Dead  to  the  world,  they 
have  nevertheless  a  resurrection  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  And  their  earthly 
life  of  duty  and  endurance  corresponds  with  the  secret  fountain  from  which  it  flows. 
IV.  A  NEW  HOPE  which — 1.  Respects  Christ — "  He  shall  be  manifested."  It  is  the 
blessed  hope,  the  glorious  appearing.  He  shall  come  the  second  time  without  sin 
onto  salvation.  2.  Respects  Christians.  Spiritually  raised  with  Christ,  they  will 
share  His  revelation.  {Family  Churchman.)  1.  St.  Paul  has  just  been  dealing 
with  a  system  of  repression  and  abstinence  which  had  a  vain  show  of  wisdom,  but 
did  not  touch  the  spring  of  action,  and  was  therefore  of  no  value  in  resistance  tc 
indulgence  of  the  flesh.  Would  you  know,  he  asks,  how  yon  may  be  lifted  above 
the  tyranny  of  sense,  and  be  initiated  into  the  true  secret  of  temperance  and 
chastity  1  To  go  back  to  a  system  of  bondage  fit  only  for  the  childhood  of  the  race 
is  to  forget  the  characteristic  feature  of  Christianity,  which  is  the  elevating  of  the 
whole  man  into  a  new  region  of  thought  and  action,  in  virtue  of  onion  with  One 
who  has  ascended  into  that  heaven  where  your  true  life  is  hid  with  Him  in  God. 
2.  This  is  Paul's  great  doctrine.  (1)  He  seems  almost  to  picture  a  pursuit  of  the 
sinner  by  the  Avenger  of  blood  which  is  disappointed  by  his  reception  into  the  City 
of  Refuge.  ••  That  I  may  win  Christ  and  be  found  in  Him,"  so  that  when  I  am  looked 
for  only  Christ  is  to  be  seen.  (2)  But  inclusion  in  Christ  is  more  than  for  safety, 
it  is  for  comfort  in  trouble,  strength  in  weakness,  life  in  death.  3.  This  union  is 
expressed  in  a  retrospective  way.  If  I  am  in  Christ  I  am  in  Him  as  that  which  He 
is  now,  as  one  who  has  died,  risen  and  ascended ;  and  when  He  died  I  died,  and 
when  God  exalted  Him  He  set  me  with  Him.  Henceforth  I  must  live  the  risen 
life,  and  live  above  the  world  as  one  who  has  done  with  its  cares,  toils,  and  lying 
vanities.  "  He  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin  ;  "  he  that  is  raised  must  mind  the 
things  above,  have  them  for  his  interest,  employment,  study,  affection,  so  thafi 
when  the  veil  is  removed  which  now  hides  Him  we  may  be  manifested  with  Him;, 


CHAP,  m.]  COLOSfiJAFP  lfi3 

L  The  resurrection  of  Christ  n  a  tact,  as  mnoh  of  history  as  of  the  faith  of 
Christendom,  and  attested  bj  oonvinoing  evidence  on  the  part  of  nnexceptionabia 
witnesses.  II.  Our  resurrection  with  Christ  is  a  fact  spiritual,  but  real, 
AND  CONTAINED  IN  Christ's  RESURRECTION.  To  some  minds  a  spiritual  fact  is  a 
self-contradiction.  But  a  spiritual  fact  is,  above  all  other  kinds,  a  factor  in  history. 
It  sets  in  motion  influences  which  change  the  face  of  nations,  working  those 
miracles  of  good  in  comparison  with  which  the  rise  and  fall  of  dynasties  are  vanity. 
III.  This  resurrection  is  effected  bt  union  with  Christ.  The  word  "  union  "  ia 
used  very  loosely.  We  speak  of  a  combination  of  a  few  thousands  for  a  purpose 
salutary  or  mischievous  as  union,  little  thinking  what  the  term  is  which  we  take  in 
vain.  But  this  union  is  one  which  man  cannot  have  with  man.  It  is  a  union  of 
spirit,  and  such  that  the  spirit  of  the  Saviour  not  only  influences  the  spirit  of  the 
man  from  outside,  as  our  mind  is  wrought  upon  by  speech  or  books,  but  from 
within.  "He  shall  be  in  you."  IV.  How  and  when  is  this  union  realized.  Paul 
says  that  all  we  who  are  baptized  into  Christ,  there  and  then  put  on  Christ.  "  We 
were  buried  with  Him  by  our  baptism  into  death."  If  this  realization  of  Christ 
has  not  yet  been  given  us,  let  us  not  take  refuge  in  names  and  forms,  saying,  "  I 
have  it  as  a  thing  of  course,  for  I  have  been  baptized."  If  you  have  it  you  will 
know  it ;  if  you  have  it  not  yet  it  is  yours  by  right.  Baptism  is  at  any  rate  the 
promise  of  God,  to  each  one,  of  his  grace  and  acceptance  in  proportion  to  the  need 
and  entreaty.  V.  This  union  is  between  Christ  in  heaven  and  us.  That 
Christ  is  there  need  not  repel  any  one  from  seeking  Him.  "  He  ascended  that  He 
might  fill  all  things."  When  He  was  upon  earth  He  did  not  even  fill  Palestine. 
Now  by  virtue  of  His  exaltation  He  can  fill  every  soul  with  Himself.  VI.  Therefore 
WE  MUST  SEEK  THE  THINGS  ABOVE.  1.  The  coutrast  is  to  things  on  earth — harassing 
anxiety,  importunate  vanity,  consuming  ambition,  exciting  pleasure,  shameful  self- 
indulgence.  The  things  above  are  the  realities  of  which  these  are  counterfeits, 
the  grand  and  satisfying  pursuits  of  which  these  are  the  phantoms,  things  which 
bring  comfort  and  peace  and  rest  to  the  soul.  2.  Every  honest  searching  of  the 
heart  to  root  out  what  God  hates,  every  earnest  effort  after  forgiveness,  every 
aspiration  after  a  Diviner  hfe,  every  sincere  endeavour,  is  a  seeking  after  the  things 
above.  3.  By  degrees  there  shall  be  in  every  such  seeker  a  change  of  places  between 
earth  and  heaven.  From  seeking  he  shall  rise  to  thinking  the  things  above,  and 
when  at  last  the  door  opens,  and  he  is  called  in  to  see  the  King  in  His  beauty,  he  shall 
find  himself  in  no  strange  scene  or  company.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Christ  and  the 
higher  nature  : — That  there  is  a  higher  life  which  we  may  and  ought  to  live,  all  men, 
in  whom  there  is  any  religion,  feel;  and  what  is  peculiar  to  the  gospel  is  not  the  bare 
idea  of  this  life,  but  the  revelation  of  its  character,  power,  and  attainment.  I.  The 
HATURE  of  this  higher  life.  1.  It  is  "  above."  But  is  not  this  just  what  has  been  ob- 
jected to — that  Christianity  concerns  itself  with  another  world  rather  than  with  this  7 
And  is  not  this  very  exaltation  a  weakness  and  a  delusion.  What  nobler  ideal  can 
there  be  than  to  make  the  present  life  better.  But  Christ's  ideal  was  a  kingdom, 
in  our  hearts,  it  is  true,  yet  "  of  heaven,"  not  of  earth.  It  was,  in  short,  a  higher 
Divine  life  that  was  to  irradiate  our  poor  human  life,  and  to  glorify  it.  It  was  no 
development  from  below,  but  a  revelation  from  on  high,  and  without  this  Chris- 
tianity has  no  meaning.  Cut  away  its  Divine  side,  and  it  is  destroyed.  2.  This  life 
is  not  merely  in  the  future,  although  it  embraces  it.  It  concerns  itself  with  another 
world,  yet  it  does  not  despise  things  on  the  earth.  The  kingdom  is  now,  and  not  to  be 
reached  after  death,  and  the  things  above  are  to  be  possessed  now.  These  are  the 
things  of  which  the  apostle  speaks  presently,  "kindness,"  &c.  Spiritual  qualities.  The 
apostle  does  not  contrast  heaven  and  earth  as  places,  nor  set  the  future  life  against 
the  present,  but  the  spiritual  against  the  natural,  the  carnal  against  the  Divine. 
The  higher  life  takes  up  the  present  and  glorifies  it,  and  finds  its  development  in 
every  variety  of  well-doing.  It  embraces  every  real  virtue,  and  beautifies  and  en- 
nobles the  life  that  now  is  as  well  as  that  to  come.  II.  Its  source  and  motive 
POWER.  It  is  no  process  of  self-culture  or  moral  discipline.  It  springs  only  from 
the  living  root  Christ.  It  is  a  new  life  rising  on  the  extinction  of  the  old  life  of 
self.  The  same  Divine  power  which  raised  Christ  from  the  dead  is  supposed  to 
live  and  work  in  Christians.  But  out  of  Christ  there  is  no  higher  life  in  the  Christian 
sense.  But  is  this  so  ?  Are  there  not  many  beautiful  characters  who  never  heard 
of  Christ;  and  are  there  not  many  Christians  far  from  stainless?  Yes,  but — 1.  The 
Christian  type  of  character  is  to  be  estimated  by  its  ideal,  as  rendered  by  the 
highest  examf  les,  and  not  by  the  conduct  of  all  professors.  It  ia  true  that  the  best 
ClSristians  but  feebly  represent  Christ,  yet  where  is  there  any  list  of  worthies  to  be 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

compared  with  the  roll  of  Christian  saints  ?  And  all  such  have  declared  their 
Btrengih  for  good  to  lie  in  the  fact  that  their  life  was  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  2.  U 
there  is  goodness  where  the  name  of  Christ  is  unknown,  or  which  refuses  to  acknow- 
ledge Him,  let  us  not  deny  it.  If  we  must  have  a  theory  the  true  one  is  that  all 
goodness,  even  when  seeming  to  be  apart  from  Christ,  has  really  its  root  in  Him. 
(Principal  Tulloch.)  The  hidden  life : — At  the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter  St. 
Paul  exposes  the  error  of  those  who  would  bring  back  Christians  to  the  rudiments 
of  the  world;  but  with  that  rapidity  of  thought  which  is  characteristic  of  him,  he 
passes  on  to  other  rudiments — everything  that  is  loved  and  cultivated  by  the  flesh — 
and  makes  no  distinction  between  rites  and  worldliness,  resting  on  the  similarity 
between  them.  I.  The  Divine  life  produces  dying  to  the  world.  It  would  be 
wrong  to  hold  the  reverse,  of  course.  If  you  are  risen  with  Christ,  your  life  is  no 
longer  here  below,  but  where  Christ  is.  Here  comes  a  series  of  transformations. 
1.  Spiritual  death.  You  were  dead  in  sins,  but  Christ  has  raised  you  (see  Col.  ii. 
12,  13 ;  Eph.  ii.  6,  6 ;  1  Pet.  i.  3).  2.  In  the  very  act  of  raising  you  Christ  has 
subjected  you  to  a  new  death — to  the  world.  These  two  facts  correspond  as  the 
projections  of  a  coin  do  with  the  depressions  of  the  mould.  Eesurrection  is  the 
relievo  of  the  coin ;  it  produces  the  void  which  is  death :  for  our  life  cannot  be 
everywhere  ;  if  it  is  in  heaven  it  is  not  on  the  earth  (ver.  4).     II.  It  is  true  that  WB 

LIVE    HERE    BT   OUR    NECESSARY  LITE,  BUT  THE  BEST   PART  OF  OURSELVES  13  KLSEWHEBB. 

We  live  where  our  heart  is.  The  prisoner  lives  nowhere  less  than  in  his  cell.  Yoa 
Bay  of  the  person  you  passionately  iove,  "  She  has  stolen  my  heart."  Whenany  one 
is  indifferent  to  his  surroundings  we  say,  "  His  heart  is  elsewhere."  It  is  with  the 
heart  we  live  our  real  life  ;  "  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  It  can  restrict  itself 
to  earthly  things,  but  it  can  also  have  its  conversation  in  heaven.     III.  We  must 

BK     quite     clear     AS    TO     THE     MEANING     OF     THE     WORDS     "  ABOVE  "     AND     "  BELOW," 

"  HEAVEN  "  AND  "  EARTH."  Earth  and  heaven  here  are  not  exactly  places  and  times, 
but  principles  called  after  the  place  and  time  of  their  perfect  realization.  To  detach 
ourselves  from  earth  is  not  to  detach  ourselves  from  activity,  but  to  detach  our 
hearts  from  earthly  principles,  and  attach  them  to  the  principles  to  be  realized  in 
heaven.  To  fulfil  social  duties.  &c.,  under  God's  eye  is  not  to  do  earthly  but 
heavenly  things.  And  so  the  Christian  becomes  attached  to  the  place  and  time, 
where  the  true  principle  finds  its  realization,  and  detached  from  that  where  the 
false  principle  is  realized.  Nevertheless,  we  must  not  be  drawn  into  a  false 
spirituality,  a  selfish  separation  from  earth  while  attached  to  it  in  affection.  It  is 
an  admirable  thing  when  he  who  is  weaned  from  life  appreciates  it ;  for  he  despises 
what  in  it  is  contemptible,  and  esteems  in  it  what  is  reallv  worth  esteem.  IV.  Thb 
LIFE  WEANED  FROM  EARTH  IS  HIDDEN  from  the  world,  and  does  not  seem  life.  Foi 
life  does  not  consist  in  the  involuntary  fact  commonly  called  by  the  name.  The 
world  judges,  and  rightly  from  its  premises,  that  visible  things  are  alone  worthy  ol 
attachment,  that  a  man  who  does  not  attend  to  them  does  not  live.  And  yet  every- 
thing is  not  obscure  in  regard  to  the  Christian.  He  is  unknown  and  yet  known. 
It  is  impossible  to  see  a  Christian  without  paying,  "  There  is  something  peculiar 
there!  His  hfe  declares  him  to  be  a  Christian."  But  because  this  life  is  not 
understood  it  is  denied.  The  natural  man  sees  something,  but  he  does  not 
regard  it  as  life.  And  yet  the  Christian  lives  ;  he  is  not  an  anchorite.  He  has 
everything  that  others  have  as  men,  but  as  a  Christian  more.  Worldlings 
may  consider  sin  as  essential  to  humanity ;  but  it  mutilates  a  man,  Christianity 
increases  him,  and  faith  takes  away  sin.  As  a  man  the  Christian  mixes 
himself  up  in  the  business  of  life,  for  the  earth  belongs  to  his  God ;  but 
in  spite  of  this  he  is  not  understood,  because  the  common  aim  which  all  pursue 
is  with  him  only  a  means  of  attaining  a  higher  end.  And  from  misunderstand- 
ing to  contempt  and  calumniation  the  distance  is  not  great.  Whatever  we  may 
do  in  order  to  have  peace  with  all  men  we  shall  never  succeed  unless  we 
walk  on  the  same  footing.  Thus  the  Christian  is  treated  as  dead,  and  with  the 
same  repugnance  as  is  felt  towards  a  dead  man  in  the  physical  sense.  V. 
What  motives  has  the  Christian  to  consent  to  this,  and  to  accept  the  con- 
BEguENCES?  1.  In  reality  he  Uves,  and  God  knows  that  he  lives,  and  that  is 
enough.  Those  small  and  charming  flowers  which  bloom  in  the  desert  or  on  the 
mountain-top  will  fold  up  their  leaves  without  being  seen  by  any  human  eye.  God 
sees  them,  that  is  enough.  In  the  Middle  Ages  unknovpn  workmen  spent  their 
lives  in  rearing  glorious  cathedrals  ;  some,  working  in  positions  dangerous  and 
difficult  of  access,  carved  wonders  of  art  and  patience  which  are  not  seen  except  as 
jroa  climb  to  the  tops  of  columns.    It  was  enough  that  God  saw  their  work,  and 


CHAP.  iulJ  COLOSSIANS.  165 

that  throughout  the  ages  a  continual  hymn  sliould  rise  to  Him  from  the  midst  ol 
tlie  stone.  So  with  the  Christian.  2.  What  grand  compensation.  Obscurity  does 
not  hinder  greatness.  (1)  A  great  work  has  been  wrought  for  and  in  the  Christian. 
He  is  a  king,  although  disguit-ed.  (2)  There  is  greatness  in  what  he  does  by  the 
■trength  of  God,  subjugation  of  passions,  resignation,  <X;c.  3.  But  ih"  Christian 
will  appear  when  Cbrist  appears,  and  under  what  glorious  circumstances  (Phil.  ii. 
10,  11;  Matt.  X.  32;  xiii.  43;  Dan.  xii.  3).  {A.  Vinet,  D.D.)  mien  will  the 
world  grow  better  f — The  world  is  full  of  lamentations.  The  times  are  bad  ;  busi- 
ness is  stagnant.  There  is  no  confidence,  but  everywhere  mistrust  and  discontent. 
Everybody  ?ays  that  this  stute  of  things  cannot  last.  There  are  plenty  of  social 
qaacks.  We  have  been  flooded  with  laws  for  improving  the  conditions  of  life  ;  but 
the  aonfusion  is  only  the  greater.  New  ecclesiastical  laws  have  been  made,  but 
entire  classes  are  alienated  from  the  Church.  Then  when  will  the  world  be 
better?  When  each  one  ol  us  begins  to  grow  better  himself  ;  and  if  any  one  could 
devise  the  means  of  bringing  al'out  that  result  it  would  be  of  more  use  than  all 
modern  experiments.  But  we  have  the  means  in  the  well-tried  Word  of  (!>od  and 
its  Divine  powers.  The  world  will  grow  better.  I.  When  we  die  and  kise  with 
Chbist.  1.  There  was  a  time  when  a  great  deal  was  f-aid  about  the  moral  improve- 
ment of  the  race.  If  men  laid  aside  their  grosser  sins  and  endeavoured  to  live 
rirtuously,  all  would  be  well.  The  theory  was  not  confirmed  by  the  facts.  To-day 
men  have  fallen  into  a  similar  error.  Culture  is  now  the  Saviour.  All  honour  to  it ; 
but  history  proves  that  a  man  may  be  learned  in  every  branch  of  kuowleoge,  and 
yet  he  utterly  bad.  2.  One  of  the  most  a' surd  suppositious  which  lies  at  tiie  root 
of  most  modem  experiments  is  that  human  nature  is  good.  The  Seriptui'e  doctrine 
to  the  contrary,  though  much  decried,  is  a  fact  of  which  every  parent  can  convince 
himselL  If  the  world  is  to  be  made  better  a  commencement  must  be  made  with 
the  inuer  life  of  each  man.  The  old  nature  must  die,  and  a  new  one  arise,  or  j'oa 
may  as  soon  build  the  top  storey  of  a  house  before  you  have  laid  the  foundation. 
8.  Accordingly  in  Scripture  this  renewal  is  everywhere  insisted  upon.  Ye  are  dead 
and  ye  have  risen,  and  siuce  ye  are  risen  seek  the  things  that  are  above.  It  is  not 
by  mere  accident  that  this  renewing  is  thus  described,  and  in  connection  with  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ.  There  was  needed  for  it  a  spiritual  energy  which 
does  not  exist  in  us,  but  is  in  Christ,  the  risen  One.  4.  This  new  life  is  by  virtue 
of  a  personal  surrender  by  faith  to  Christ  (cbap.  ii.  12).  Thus  we  die  to  sin  and 
the  WO!  Id.  Anew  purpose  is  disclosed,  viz.,  to  please  God  and  enjoy  fellowship 
with  Him  ;  a  new  rule  of  thought  and  action — the  will  of  God;  a  new  impelling 
principle — the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  thus  we  come  with  our  whole  personal  life  into  a 
higher  order — the  heavenly.  What  further  proof  do  we  need  that  when  this  happens 
things  are  better  T  II.  When  heavenly-mixdedness  fills  all  hearts.  1.  That 
which  is  below  is  the  earthly  world,  with  its  tangible  but  perishable  things;  and 
the  more  the  pursuit  of  them  grows  to  a  longing  after  them,  the  worse  will  it  be  for 
the  inner  and  outer  life.  For  this  lower  world,  however  beautiful,  can  never  satisfy 
the  heart,  and  the  void  is  filled  with  base  passions  or  wild  schemes.  2.  The  world 
above  is  closed  against  the  earthly  mind.  The  natural  man  has  no  eye  for  its 
glory,  no  ear  for  its  language.  Nevertheless  it  is  the  real  world,  where  Christ  is 
seated,  its  light,  life,  and  supreme  attraction.  When  the  mind  is  fixed  on  this  the 
earthly  life  is  glorified.  For  though  Christ  is  exalted  He  dwells  on  earth  with  Hia 
faithful  ones,  and,  therefore,  brings  heaven  down  below.  Attachment  to  Him  does 
not  incapacitate  us  for  the  business  of  life,  but  only  makes  as  independent  of  what 
is  sinful  and  selfish,  and  teaches  us  to  serve  God  in  all  things.  3.  Who  can  doubt» 
therefore,  that  this  heavenly-mindedness  would  be  better  for  the  home,  the  shop, 
the  nation.  III.  When  Christ  shall  be  revealed.  Now  the  Christian's  life  is  hid. 
The  world  understands  not  its  nature,  power,  or  effects.  But  it  shall  be  manifest  at 
the  appearing  of  Christ — and  then  in  its  full  perfection.  It  will  indeed  be  better  then. 
{G.  Maurer.)  Of  the  returrection : — I.  Two  suppositions.  1.  Christ's  resurrection. 
This  needs  no  ♦•  if . "  It  is  a  certainty.  Three  hundred  years  the  world  opposed  it,  and 
ever  since  has  supposed  it.  But  it  is  not  supposed  by  itself,  and  ours  inferred,  but 
ours  supposed  Ukewise.  And  as  they  are  so  closely  linked  that  one  supposition  serveth 
for  them,  so  they  are  woven  together  that  one  preposition  (with)  holdeth  them.  2. 
Our  resunection.  (1)  "If  ye."  Why  only  to  a  certain  "  ye  "?  Concerns  it  not  all  f 
As  Christ  died  so  is  He  risen  for  all,  and  all  shall  rise.  Yes,  but  not  all  to  the 
"  right  hand,"  a  good  many  to  the  left.  The  resurrection  reaches  to  all ;  this 
only  to  such  as  "  seek,"  and  "  set  their  minds."  (2)  If  ye  "  be  risen."  Is  the  tense 
light  ?    For  when  we  hear  of  the  resurrection  we  are  earned  to  the  last  day.    H.» 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nx. 

rose,  we  eay,  we  $hall  rise.  But  here  the  resurrection  is  already.  Fall  we 
in,  then,  with  those  who  say  that  the  resurrection  is  past  (2  Tim.  ii.  18)  ?  No ;  but 
we  believe  that  as  there  is  one  to  come  of  the  body,  bo  there  is  one  which  we  are  to 
pass  here,  of  the  mind's.  There  are  the  first  and  second  resurrections  (Bev.  xx.  6) ; 
and  all  the  good  or  evil  of  the  second  depends  on  the  passing  or  not  passing  the 
first.  "  Christ  is  risen  "  is  not  enough,  nay  is  nothing  at  all,  if  He  be  risen  without 
us.  3.  "  II "  Is  it  so  7  If  He  is  risen  cry  to  Him  to  draw  thee,  as  He  said  He 
would  (John  xiL  32) ;  the  soul  first  as  being  from  above,  so  the  more  easily  drawn 
to  things  above,  and  then  with  itself  the  soul  to  elevate  the  flesh.  II.  The  double 
INFERENCE — "Seek";  "Set  your  minds."  1.  The  two  acts  jointly;  for  disjoined 
they  may  not  be.  One  is  little  worth  without  the  other.  (1)  There  be  that  "  seek," 
and  be  very  busy  in  it,  and  yet  savour  (Matt.  xvi.  23,  same  word)  not  the  things  of  God. 
Some  possessed  with  false  principles  fall  a  seeking ;  zealous,  but  without  true  know- 
ledge to  fix  their  minds  aright  (Prov.  xix.  2).  "  The  mind  misled  will  set  the 
affections  awry."  Look  but  to  the  close  of  chapter  ii.  Then  they  seek  so  as  they 
will  not  taste,  handle,  or  touch.  Some  seek  as  to  worship  angels,  and  spare  not 
their  own  bodies,  and  yet  with  all  their  seeking  not  *'  risen  with  Christ."  (2)  On 
the  other  side  there  be  that  "  savour  Christ,  but  seek  themselves  "  (PhiL  ii.  21). 
They  have  knowledge  competent,  but  no  endeavour ;  they  sit  still  and  seek  not. 
(3)  So  that  both  may  be  kept  together,"  seek  "  and  "  set  your  minds"  both.  As  in  the 
body  a  rheumatic  head  spoils  the  stomach,  and  a  distempered  stomach  the  head,  so 
here.  The  mind  mistaking  misleads  the  affections,  and  a  wrong-set  affection  puts 
the  mind  out  of  frame.  2.  The  acts  severally.  (1)  Seek;  he  shall  not  stumble  or 
hit  upon  it  unawares.  If  the  Saviour  knew  the  way  well,  it  is  hard  to  hit  (Matt. 
vii .  14).  Pains  and  diligence  are  requisite.  It  were  great  folly  when  we  see  daily 
things  without  travail  will  not  be  come  by,  to  think  that  things  above  will  drop  into 
our  lap.  Pilate  asked,  *'  What  is  truth  ?  "  and  went  his  way  before  he  had  the 
answer.  He  never  deserved  to  find  what  truth  was.  (2)  But  we  shall  never  seek 
as  we  should  unless  we  "  set  our  minds."  For  a  man  will  never  kindly  seek  that 
he  hath  no  mind  to.  That  we  may  seek  things  above  we  must  prize  them  as  a 
silver  mine  (Prov.  iii.  14),  as  a  treasure  hid  in  a  field  (Matt.  xiii.  44),  and  sell  all 
to  compass  them.  Then,  he  that  seeks  should  have  as  well  eyes  to  discern,  as  feet 
to  go  about  it,  i.e.,  have  knowledge.  To  seek  we  know  not  what  is  but  to  err,  and 
never  find  that  we  seek  for.  Four  things  are  in  this.  (1)  To  set  the  mind,  not  the 
fancy,  and  seek  as  many  do  with  no  other  ground  but  their  own  conceits.  Yet  seek 
they  will,  and  have  all  fhe  world  follow  them,  and  have  nothing  to  follow  after  but 
their  own  foUy.  So  as  being  very  idiots  they  take  themselves  for  the  only  men  who 
«ver  had  wisdom  to  know  what  to  seek  or  how.  (2)  But  it  is  not  an  act  of  the 
understanding  alone.  It  is  to  set  our  mind  not  only  to  know,  but  to  mind  it ;  not 
only  to  distinguish  tastes,  but  in  and  with  the  taste  to  feel  such  delight  as  will  lead 
OS  to  seek  it  again  more  earnestly.  (3)  So  to  savour  it  that  to  seek  it  is  our  wisdom 
^Deut.  iv.  6).  To  think  when  ye  are  about  the  things  above  that  you  are  about  the 
wisest  action  of  your  lives.  (4)  Not  the  contemplative  wisdom  only,  but  the  active. 
To  show  that  not  only  our  grounds  for  judgment,  but  our  rules  for  action,  are  to  be 
aet  thence.  What  will  He  who  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  say  or  think  of 
what  I  am  about  ?  May  I  offer  it  to  Him  ?  Will  He  help  me  forward  with  it,  and 
reward  me  for  it  ?  8.  The  order.  "  Seek  "  first — (1)  To  teach  us  that  it  is  the  first 
thing  we  are  to  have  a  care  of  (Matt,  vi  33).  (2)  Because  there  is  more  need  of 
diligence  in  this  business  than  aught  else.  Always  we  have  more  ado  to  quicken 
the  affection  than  to  inform  the  judgment.  III.  The  two  befebences  or  objects  of 
hope.  Best — "sitteth";  glory— "at  the  right  hand  of  God."  1.  The  things  we 
are  to  seek,  Ac.,  are  "above."  (1)  To  do  this  we  shall  be  easily  entreated.  We 
yield,  presently,  to  seek  to  be  above  others  in  favour,  honour,  place,  and  power. 
All  would  be  above,  "bramble"  (Judg.  ix.  15)  and  all,  and  nothing  is  too  high  for 
ns,  not  even  the  "  right  hand  "  (Matt.  xx.  21).  (2)  The  apostle  saw  clearly  that  we 
should  err  here,  hence  he  tells  us  that  "above"  is  not  on  earth,  but  in  heaven.  So 
the  fault  he  finds  is  that  our  •'  above  "  is  too  low.  (a)  The  very  frame  of  body  has 
an  upward  tendency,  and  bids  us  look  thither.  And  that  way  should  our  soul 
make.  It  came  from  thence,  and  thither  it  should  draw  again,  and  we  do  but 
crook  our  souls  against  their  nature  when  we  set  them  to  seek  nothing  but  here 
Ibelow.  (6)  And  if  nature  would  have  us  no  moles,  grace  would  have  us  mount  up 
as  eagles — "  Where  the  body  is  "  (Luke  xvii.  37).  For  contrary  to  the  philosopher'a 
sentence,  **  things  above  concern  us  not;"  they  chiefly  concern  us.  2.  "Above"  if 
Christ,  and  with  Him  the  things  we  of  all  others  seek  for.     (1)  Rest  (Psa.  It.  6), 


3HA?.  m.J  C0L0SSIAN8.  16T 

Ajid  it  is  not  the  body's  concern  so  mnoh  as  the  soul's.  The  soul  is  from  above, 
and  never  finds  rest  but  in  her  own  place  (Psa,  cxvi.  17 ;  Heb.  iii.  11,  18-19).  But 
we  seek  glory  more,  and  for  it  we  are  content  to  deprive  ourselves  of  rest,  which 
otherwise  we  love  well  enough.  For  no  rest  will  give  us  full  content  but  at  the 
right  hand.  Where  are  they  to  be  found  ?  Not  here,  and  therefore  it  is  folly  to 
seek  them  here.  In  this  troublesome  tumultuous  place  there  is  no  rest  (Mio.  ii. 
10)  nor  glory,  for  in  our  gardens  of  delight  there  are  worms,  and  spiders  in  kings' 
palaces.  And  whatever  we  fancy  we  have  of  either  it  is  at  the  expense  of  the  other. 
Rest  is  a  thing  inglorious,  and  glory  a  thing  restless.  3.  But  both  are  united  above, 
where  we  "  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  God  "  with  Christ ;  and  then  we  have  them  not 
so  that  our  rest  may  be  sometimes  broken,  and  our  glory  sometimes  tarnished,  but 
both  perfectly  and  forever.  {Bishop  Andrewei.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ  an 
argument  for  seeking  things  above: — I.  The  dutt  to  which  wk  are  exhorted. 
Affirmatively,  to  seek  and  set  our  affections  on  things  above ;  negatively,  not  on 
things  on  the  earth.  1.  The  act.  In  "  seek  "  and  "  set  your  affections  "  are  com- 
prehended (1)  An  act  of  the  understanding.  Heaven  and  the  way  of  getting  there 
should  be  much  in  our  thoughts.  (2)  An  act  of  our  affections,  that  we  love  and  desire 
the  things  above  proportionately  to  their  excellence.  (3)  Activity  and  industry  in 
the  prosecution  of  these  things,  if  by  any  means  we  may  attain  them.  When  our 
understandings  have  dwelt  long  enough  on  our  heavenly  treasures  as  to  work  on 
our  affections,  these,  like  so  many  springs  of  motion,  will  set  our  endeavours  on 
work  for  the  obtaining  what  we  so  much  love  and  desire.  (4)  A  clear  preference  of 
the  things  above  to  the  things  of  the  earth  when  they  come  in  competition.  **  Sst 
your  affections  "  is  often  used  for  taking  part  with  one  side  when  two  parties  or 
interests  come  into  competition.  So  when  heaven  and  earth,  the  interests  of  your 
pouls  and  of  your  bodies,  a  holy  and  a  sinful  course  come  into  competition,  choose 
4he  better  part  (ver.  5).  2.  The  objects  of  this  act  (1)  God  in  Christ.  (2)  Th« 
blessed  state  of  glory  in  the  next  life.  (3)  The  dispositions  to  be  acquired  and  the 
duties  to  be  performed  as  necessary  qualifications  for  the  obtaining  this  happiness. 
II.  The  force  op  the  arguments  used  to  peksuadb  ds  to  it.  1.  "  If  ye  be  risen 
with  Christ,  seek,"  &c.,  i.e.,  (1)  If  ye  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  This 
was  the  great  seal  of  His  ministry  and  confirmation  of  His  doctrine :  and  one  great 
branch  of  His  doctrine  was  that  we  should  lay  up  for  ourselves  treasures  in  heaven. 
(2)  If  we  resemble  Him  in  His  resurrection.  He  is  our  pattern  in  His  saving  acts 
as  well  as  in  His  virtues.  So  as  He  died  for  sin  we  must  die  to  it ;  if  He  rose  we 
must  rise  into  newness  of  life ;  if  He  ascended  so  should  we  in  our  hearts  (Col.  ii. 
12  ;  Bom.  vi.  4-5,  9-11).  (3)  If  we  are  partakers  of  the  power  of  His  resurrection 
(John  xi.  25  ;  Eph.  i.  19 ;  Phil.  iii.  10  ;  Col.  ii.  13).  2.  "  Seek  the  things  which  are 
above  where  Christ  sitteth  "  (Luke  xxiv.  26  ;  Eph.  i.  20-22).  (1)  The  force  of  this 
argument  is  from  the  relation  between  the  head  and  the  members.  The  members 
have  an  affection  for  the  head  which  makes  them  aspire  heavenwards ;  and  the 
head  has  an  influence  upon  the  members  (John  xii.  32-33).  (2)  The  gift  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  the  fruit  of  Christ's  ascension,  and  it  is  by  BUs  operation  upon  onr 
hearts  that  our  affections  are  fixed  on  heavenly  things,  as  against  the  connter 
allurements  of  the  world.  3.  The  transcendent  excellence  of  heavenly  things  above 
things  of  the  earth,  which  the  apostle  intimates  by  the  opposition,  "  Set  your 
affections,"  &c.  (Archbishop  Tillotson.)  Following  the  risen  Christ : — I.  Odb 
SPIRITUAL  RISING  WITH  Christ.  The  '*  if  "  is  used  logically,  not  theologically,  by 
way  of  argument,  and  not  by  way  of  doubt.  1.  We  were  dead  in  sin,  but  having 
believed  in  Christ  we  have  been  quickened  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  we  are  dead  no 
longer.  We  remember  the  first  sensation  of  life,  how  it  seemed  to  tingle  just  as 
drowning  persons  when  coming  back  to  life  suffer  great  pain.  Conviction  was 
wrought  in  us,  and  a  dread  of  judgment,  and  a  sense  of  condemnation,  but  these 
were  tokens  of  life,  but  that  life  gradually  deepened  until  the  eye  was  opened,  and 
the  restored  hand  stretched  itself  out,  the  foot  began  to  move  in  the  way  of 
obedience,  and  the  heart  felt  the  sweet  glow  of  love  within.  2.  There  has  been 
wrought  in  us  a  wonderful  change.  Before  regeneration  our  soul  was  as  our  body 
will  be  when  it  dies.  (1)  Sown  in  corruption.  In  some  cases  it  did  not  appear  on 
the  surface;  in  others  it  was  something  fearful  to  look  upon.  Now  the  new  life  has 
overcome  it,  for  it  is  an  incorruptible  seed,  and  liveth  for  ever.  (2)  In  dishonour. 
Sin  is  a  shameful  thing;  but  "behold  what  manner  of  love"  (1  John  iii.  1). 
«  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  my  sight,"  Ac,  "  Unto  you  which  believe  He  is  an 
honour."  (3)  In  weakness.  When  we  were  th3  captives  of  sin  we  coald  do  nothing 
good ;  but  "  when  we  were  without  strength  iu  tiae  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly. 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  foH4F.  m. 

Now  we  know  the  power  of  His  resurrection  "  (John  i.  12 ;  Phil.  iv.  13).  (4)  A 
natural  body.  Aforetime  we  were  natural  men,  and  discerned  not  the  things  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.    Now  a  spirit  has  been  created  in  us  which  lives  for  spiritual  objects. 

3.  In  consequence  of  receiving  this  life  and  undergoing  this  change  the  things  of 
the  world  become  a  tomb  to  us.  To  a  dead  man  a  tomb  is  as  good  a  dwelling  as  he 
can  want ;  but  the  moment  he  lives  he  cannot  endure  it.  So  when  we  were  natural 
men  earthly  things  contented  us.  (1)  A  merely  outward  religion  satisfied  us ;  a  dead 
form  suited  a  dead  soul.  Judaism  pleased  those  who  put  themselves  under  its  yoke; 
traditions,  ordinances  make  pretty  furniture  for  a  dead  man's  chamber  ;  but  when 
eternal  life  enters  the  soul  they  are  flung  off.  A  living  man  demands  such  gar- 
ments as  are  suitable  for  life.  2.  Merely  carnal  objects  become  as  the  grave  to  us, 
whether  sinful  pleasures  or  selfish  gains.  They  are  as  a  cofiSn  to  the  renewed  man : 
he  cries  for  liberty.  4.  We  are  wholly  raised  from  the  dead  in  a  spiritual  sense. 
Our  Lord  did  not  have  His  head  quickened  while  His  feet  were  in  the  sepulchre. 
So  we  have  been  renewed  in  every  part.  We  have  received,  although  it  be  in  its 
infancy,  a  perfect  life  in  Christ  Jesus ;  our  ear  is  awakened,  our  eye  opened,  our 
feet  nimble.  5.  We  are  so  raised  that  we  shall  die  no  more.  "  Christ  being  raised, 
death  hath  no  more  dominion,"  &c.  So  we.  H.  Let  us  exercise  the  new  man  in 
SUITABLE  PUKSDiTS.  1.  Let  US  Icave  the  sepulchre.  (1)  The  vault  of  a  mere  outward 
religion,  and  worship  God  in  Spirit  and  in  truth.  (2)  The  vault  of  carnal  enjoy- 
ments. These  ought  to  be  as  dead  things  to  the  man  who  is  risen  with  Christ. 
2.  Let  us  hasten  to  forget  every  evil  as  our  Lord  hastened  to  leave  the  tomb.  He 
made  the  three  days  as  short  as  possible ;  so  let  there  be  no  lingering  and  hankering 
after  the  flesh.  3.  As  our  Lord  spent  a  short  season  with  His  disciples,  we  are  to 
spend  our  forty  days  in  holy  service.  (1)  In  greater  seclusion  from  the  world  and 
greater  nearness  to  heaven.  (2)  In  testimony,  even  as  He  manifested  Himself,  to 
the  resurrection  power  of  God.  (3)  In  comforting  the  saints.  (4)  In  setting  every- 
thing in  order  for  the  furtherance  of  His  kingdom.  4.  Let  our  whole  minds  ascend 
to  heaven  with  Christ ;  not  a  stray  thought.  (1)  Because  we  need  heavenly  things, 
prize  them,  and  hope  to  gain  them.  (2)  After  heavenly  things,  faith,  hope,  do. 
(3)  Heavenly  objects — the  glory  of  God,  not  your  own ;  the  good  of  man.  (4) 
Heavenly  joys.  Your  treasure  is  above,  let  your  hearts  be  with  it.  5.  What  a 
magnet  Christ  should  be.  Where  should  the  wife's  thoughts  be  but  with  her  absent 
and  beloved  one?  (1)  Christ  is  sitting,  for  His  work  is  done;  rise  and  rest  with 
Him.     (2)  At  the  right  hand  of  God,  in  the  place  of  honour  and  favour.    III.  Let 

THB  NEW  LIFE    DELIGHT    ITSELF   WITH    SUITABLE    OBJECTS.       "  Have  a  TClish   foT  thiUgS 

above";  "study  them  industriously";  "set  your  mind  on  them."  What  are 
they  r  1.  God  Himself.  "  Delight  thyself  in  the  Lord."  What  is  all  the 
world  if  He  be  gone ;  and  if  you  have  Him,  what  though  all  the  world  be 
gone  ?  2.  Jesus  who  is  God,  but  truly  man.  Meditate  on  His  Divine  Person, 
His  perfect  work,    Ac.      3.   The   New  Jerusalem   of    the    Church    triumphant. 

4.  Heaven,  the  place  of  holiness  after  sin,  of  rest  after  work,  of  riches  after 
poverty,  of  health  and  life  after  sickness  and  death.  (C  E.  Spurgeon.} 
Risen  with  Christ: — I.  Christ  is  risen.  This  appears — (1)  From  the  Holy 
Ssriptures.  (2)  From  eye-witnesses.  (3)  From  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit.  IL 
Christians  are  risen  with  Christ.  What  is  this?  (Bph.  iL  5-6;  Col.  ii,  12,  20.) 
1.  Christ  is  our  Head,  and  a  public  Person  (Eph.  v.  23).  2.  Whatever  He  did.  He 
did  it  not  in  a  private  but  a  public  capacity,  and  therefore  we  are  looked  upon  as 
doing  it  in  Him  (Isa.  liii.  5).  3.  Hence,  when  He  arose,  we  arose  in  Him  and  with 
Him.  4.  Metaphorically  we  rise  from  sin.  III.  Being  risen  with  Christ  we  abb 
TO  SEEK  the  things  ABOVE.  1.  What  things  ?  (1)  The  perfection  of  graces.  (2)  The 
society  of  angels.  (3)  The  vision  of  Christ  (John  xvii.  24).  (4)  The  enjoyment  of 
God ;  consisting  (a)  in  our  clear  knowledge  of  Him  (John  xvii.  3).  (b)  Perfect  love 
to  Him.  (c)  Infinite  expressions  of  love  from  Him  (Zeph.  iii.  17).  2.  How  seek 
them?  It  implies — (1)  Our  knowledge  of  them.  (2)  Our  love  for  them.  (3)  Our 
labouring  to  be  instated  in  them  (Matt.  vi.  33).  IV.  Why  should  thet  who  abb 
risen  with  Christ  seek  the  things  above  ?  1.  Because  now  all  things  else  are  below 
them.  2.  Their  inheritance  is  there.  V.  Use.  1.  Motives.  (1)  The  things  below 
are  unsuitable,  the  things  above  suitable.  (2)  They  empty  and  deceiving ;  these 
full  and  satisfying;  nay,  there  is  more  happiness  in  seeking  heaven  than  enjoying 
earth.  (3)  They  uncertain  to  be  attained  ;  these  certain  if  sought  for.  (4)  Thej 
mixed  with  troubles,  these  pure  comforts.  (5)  They  transient  and  fading,  these 
perpetual  and  everlasting.  2.  Means.  (1)  Exercise  graces — repentance,  faith  (Heb, 
xi.  5-6).     (2)  Perform  duties.     (Btilwp  Bcveridge.)        The   Chriati/in  risen  vith 


CHAP,  m.]  C0L0SSIAN8.  169 

Christ : — I.  A  glorious  tbdth  supposkd — that  believers  are  risen  with  Christ.  Thii 
involves — 1.  A  firm  belief  in  His  resurrection.  This  doctrine  is  of  paramount  im- 
portance as  the  principal  evidence  of  Christianity.  Every  other  doctrine  hangs 
Dpon  it.  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  where — (1)  Our  access  to  God.  (2)  Our  success  in 
prayer.  (3)  Our  hope  of  pardon.  (4)  Our  holy  aspirations.  (5)  Our  bright  prospects 
(see  1  Cor.  iv.  14-19).  2.  A  personal  experience  of  its  power.  (1)  In  the  renewing 
of  the  mind.  (2]  The  changing  of  tbe  heart.  (3)  The  quickening  of  the  spirit. 
(4)  Newness  of  life.  3.  A  well-grounded  anticipation  of  conformity  with  His  resur- 
rection. (1)  Spiritual  life  with  Him  now  in  heaven.  (2)  Completeness  of  bodily 
and  sonl  likeness  to  Him  by  and  by.  H.  A  momentous  duty  required.  1.  The 
superiority  of  its  object — "the  things  aViove."  (1)  The  glorious  state  of  happiness 
in  reserve  for  believers  in  heaven.  (2)  The  sublime  realities  of  religion  that  belong 
by  way  of  preparation  to  the  heavenly  state-growth  in  grace  and  knowledge  ; 
spirituality  of  mind,  holiness,  devotion  to  God,  love  to  His  people.  How  superior 
to  the  pleasures  of  the  ungodly.  2.  The  extent  of  its  application.  It  implies  more 
than  a  belief  in  things  above,  and  includes — (1)  A  persuasion  of  their  value.  We 
shall  not  be  induced  to  seek  what  we  do  not  value.  Worldly  men  underrate  them  : 
but  rising  with  Christ  brings  spiritual  perception,  by  which  they  are  viewed  in  the 
light  of  eternity.  (2)  A  fixing  of  the  mind  on  them — choosing  them  in  preference 
to  sublunary  things.  The  wisdom  of  the  Christian's  choice  will  be  seen  when  the 
universe  is  in  ruins.  "  The  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal."  (3)  A  diligent 
-pursuit  after  them  in  the  use  of  the  appointed  means.  Beware  of  the  fascinations 
of  the  world.  Cultivate  heavenly  dispositions.  3.  The  power  of  its  motive.  (1)  In 
general.  The  principles  we  profess  call  for  it ;  the  profession  we  make  demands  it ; 
love,  gratitude,  our  own  interest  and  God's  glory,  all  urge  us  to  it.  (2)  In  particular. 
Mark  the  Person — Christ.  He  is  over  all.  Mark  the  posture — "  Sitteth,"  &o. — 
one  of  dignity  and  authority.  This  was  the  joy  set  before  Him,  and  is  the  joy  set 
before  as?  {Ehcrvzer  Temple.)  Tlie  risen  life:  —  I.  "Risen  with  Christ." 
1.  In  the  earliest  Christian  teaching  the  resurrection  dominates  over  all  other 
Christian  doctrines.  It  is  the  palmary  proof  of  the  truth  of  Christianity.  It 
rested  upon  the  evidences  of  the  senses,  and  accordingly  the  first  ministerial  effort 
of  the  apostles  was  to  publish  the  fact,  and  let  it  do  its  proper  work  in  the  under- 
standings and  consciences  of  men  (Acts  iv.  32,  &c.).  The  resurrection  is  equally 
prominent  in  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul.  But  here  the  apostle  teaches  us  its  relation, 
cot  to  Christian  belief,  but  to  Christian  living.  It  is  not  pressed  upon  us  as  a 
"  detached  and  unfruitful  dogma  " ;  it  is  a  vitalizing  principle  in  the  living  souL 
Indeed  all  Christian  doctrine  in  the  Christian  soul  is  inseparable  from  Christian 
practice.  The  practical  relation  between  the  two  is  observable  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles. 
They  are  not  separated  in  the  two  sections  into  which  he  usually  diviiles  his  letters. 
With  him  the  moral  element  interpenetrates  doctrine,  and  rises  spontaneously  out 
of  it ;  while  the  dogmatic  truth  is  continually  reasserted  as  the  motive  or  basis  of 
the  morality.  In  the  text  the  resurrection  is  a  germinant  principle  out  of  which 
the  Boul  derives  its  new  life,  and  by  which  the  laws  and  obligations  of  that  life  are 
determined.  This  is  not  a  mere  metaphor  (Eph.  i.  18-20) ;  but  if  it  were,  % 
metaphor  surely  means  something :  it,  conveys  a  truth  under  the  form  of  an 
illustration.  What,  then,  is  the  truth  latent  beneath  the  metaphor?  3.  This 
resurrection  with  Christ  is  not  merely  a  movement,  a  shifting  of  s{)iritual  position 
from  a  lower  to  a  higher  point  in  the  same  sphere.  That  would  be  an  elevation. 
(1)  It  is  necessary  to  mark  this  distinction,  because  the  one  is  often  confounded 
with  the  other.  Individuals,  families,  populations,  are  often  ''elevated"  without 
being  "  risen  with  Christ."  A  certain  mental  and  moral  elevation  is  the  natural 
result  of  contact  with  a  Divine  religion  ;  may  be  received  unconsciously  ;  comes  as 
if  from  some  subtle  element  afloat  in  the  atmosphere;  passes  unnoticed  into  a 
literary  school,  philosophical  system,  or  political  society ;  and  may  thenceforward 
be  detected  in  half-formed  ideas,  and  fitful  currents  of  thought,  or  turns  of  ex- 
pression. It  comes  to  men  as  they  gaze  on  the  fair  form  of  the  Church,  or  aa 
they  mark  a  Christian  who  is  seriously  living  for  another  world.  (2)  But  what  is 
this  elevation  worth  ?  Felix  underwent  a  certain  "  elevation  "  of  conscience  ; 
Agrippa  was  raised  above  his  natural  level ;  but  in  each  case  the  moral  pulsation 
died  away.  The  Emperor  Alexander  Severus  underwent  a  certain  elevation  when 
he  assigned  a  niche  in  the  Imperial  Pantheon  to  the  statue  of  Jesus;  so  did 
Julian,  who  in  his  letters  applauds  the  love  and  discipline  of  the  Church.  The 
same  may  be  said  of  Boussean,  who  enhanced  the  beauty  of  the  French  language 
in  expressing  his  sense  of  the  gospel,  and  of  those  modern  writers  of  fiction  nho 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAF.  m. 

lavish  their  encomiama  with  no  sparing  or  graceless  hand  upon  the  religion  of  our 
Lord,  and  who  yet  apologize  for  the  errors  which  His  teaching  condemns.  But 
these  were  not  risen  with  Christ,  (3)  We  here  touch  on  a  distinction  that  is  vital, 
and  which  is  based  upon  the  deeper  difference  which  parts  nature  from  grace. 
Moral  elevation  lies  within  the  sphere  of  nature,  and  may  be  accounted  for  by  the 
operation  of  natural  causes ;  spiritual  resurrection  belongs  to  nature  just  as  little  as 
does  the  resurrection  of  a  corpse.  4.  Resurrection  with  Christ  is  a  supernatural 
thing.  What  is  meant  by  this?  Any  idea  of  the  supernatural — (1)  Presupposes 
belief  in  God  as  a  personal  agent  Clearly,  therefore,  it  must  be  rejected  by  those 
philosophers  which  deny  the  primary  truths  of  theism.  («)  The  Positdviet  must 
see  in  it  a  stupid  phantom  to  be  relegated  to  "  the  theological  period"  of  human 
development,  {b)  The  Pantheist  will  object  to  it  as  implying  a  distinction  which, 
if  it  be  admitted,  must  be  fatal  to  the  essential  principles  of  his  philosophy, 
(c)  Nor  does  it  approve  itself  to  the  sensuous  materialism  which  is  sceptical  of  all 
that  lies  beyond.  (</)  But  no  serious  Theist  can  deny  its  possibility.  He  who 
made  the  world  ^hich  we  touch  can  superadd  another  world  which  we  cannot 
touch.  (2)  As  the  term  enters  theology  it  is  concerned  with  the  relations  which 
God  has  established  between  Himself  and  man  in  the  higher  sphere,  each  as,  e.g., 
that  union  with  Christ,  part  of  which  is  expressed  in  rising  with  Him.  The  lesson 
of  our  text  ia  often  not  learnt ;  because  the  difficulty  of  learning  it  is  spiritual 
rather  than  intellectual.  To  understand  it  we  must  be  living  the  life  of  the 
supernatural  resurrection.  The  apostle  elsewhere  explains  what  be  means  (Eph.  ii. 
3-6 ;  i.  17-20).  What  wonder  that  all  around  us  in  the  Church  is  supernatural, 
if  it  be  a  continuous  exercise  of  the  power  which  raised  Jesns  from  the  dead? 
Or  that  in  Christian  souls  we  behold  graces  of  which  nature  is  incapable.  II. 
"Seek  those  things  which  ake  above."  1.  Seek,  above  all,  communion  with 
God,  work  for  God,  rest  in  the  felt  presence  of  God,  and  the  final  reward  in  God  ; 
and  then  all  that  is  highest  and  purest  in  the  sphere  of  nature.  2.  What  a  rule 
for  conversation.  All  may  do  something  to  raise  or  degrade  it.  Each  may  insist 
that  in  his  presence  it  shall  keep  a  pure  tone ;  and  a  few  men  who  are  simply 
determined  to  maintain  an  elevated  standard  of  social  intercourse  can  affect  for 
good  an  entire  society.  3.  What  a  mle  for  making  friendships !  How  much 
depends  for  time  and  eternity  on  the  choice  of  one  whose  affections  shall  be 
entwined  in  ours.  4.  What  a  motto  for  a  library,  and  even  for  sacred  studies  I 
5.  What  a  solemn  word  for  those  who  are  deciding  their  line  of  work  for  life, 
particularly  if  they  are  seeking  the  ministry  of  souls.  6.  But  above  all,  the  text 
is  a  rule  for  the  regulation  and  employment  of  secret  thought,  (Cajion  Liddon.) 
Believert  risen  with  Christ,  and  their  duty  in  consequence  : — I.  A  fact  admitted  : 
the  resurrection  of  Christ.  1,  That  He  was  dead  cannot  be  questioned.  2.  He 
was  buried.  What  became  of  His  body  ?  8.  He  rose,  and  in  the  providence  of 
God  many  circumstances  transpired  to  render  it  obvious  and  undeniable.  II.  Thb 
PEiviLEGE  SUPPOSED.  Christians  are  risen  with  Christ.  1.  Professedly,  by  joining 
the  Church ;  coming  to  the  Lord's  table ;  confession  with  the  tongue.  2.  Repre- 
sentatively, by  virtue  of  that  federal  union  with  Christ  by  which  His  acts  become 
theirs.  3.  Spiritually,  from  death  in  sin  to  a  hfe  of  faith,  hope,  acceptance,  holi- 
ness, daty.  4.  By  anticipation,  having  the  pledges,  earnests,  and  first-fruits  of 
exaltation  with  Christ.  These  anticipations  differ  in  various  Christians,  but  four 
seasons  are  peculiarly  favourable  to  it — (1)  The  solitude  of  the  closet.  (2)  The 
ordinances  of  God's  house.  (3)  Affliction.  (4)  The  dying  hour.  IIL  A  dutt 
ENJOINED.  1.  The  things  themselves  are  described  not  by  their  nature,  bnt  by  their 
residence,  which  shows  their  excellency.  There  is  no  night  there,  no  pain,  no  sin; 
but  the  peace  that  passeth  understanding  ;  the  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  ; 
beloved  connexions ;  the  good  of  all  ages ;  angels ;  Christ.  2.  We  should  seek 
them  because  they  are — (1)  Necessary.  While  many  things  are  desirable  and  some 
important,  one  thing  is  needful.  (2)  Attainable.  You  are  not  quite  sure  of  earthly 
things.  8.  Tbey  must  be  sought — (1)  Principally.  "  Seek  ye  first,"  &c.  (2)  In- 
tensely. (3)  Perseveringly.  IV.  An  inference  derived.  "If."  1.  It  is  surely 
desirable  to  know  this,  2.  There  is  no  evidence  of  our  religions  condition  that  can 
be  depended  upon  separately  from  heavenly-mindedness.  3.  If  yon  are  seeking  the 
things  above,  they  must  correspond  with  your  condition,  and  your  practice  must 
accord  with  your  profession.  Conclusion  :  1.  Some  entirely  disregard  the  things 
above.  2.  Others  regard  them  as  doubtful.  3.  Others  "declare  plainly  that 
they  seek  a  country."  {W.  Jay.)  Seek  those  thlngfs  that  are  above. — Con- 
template— I.  The  sublime  objects  to  which  the  exhortation  relates.  The 
fatore  blessedness  of  believers  in  heaven.    Notice — 1.  The  perfection  of  character 


CHAP,  m-]  COLOSSIANS.  171 

they  shall  exhibit.  There  they  shall  partake  of  God's  nature,  and  be  holy  as  He  is 
holy.  It  is  impossible  for  sin  and  sinners  to  enter  there.  There  is  no  imperfection 
in  things  above.  The  most  eminent  saints  have  faults  and  blemishes,  but  there 
they  shall  be  free  from  spot  or  wrinkle.  2.  The  exercises  in  vrhich  they  shall  be 
engaged.  Ease  is  sometimes  regarded  as  necessary  to  enjoyment.  But  analogy 
and  revelation  are  against  the  sentiment.  A  heaven  of  ease  would  be  death  rather 
than  life.  The  service  of  heaven  constitutes  one  part  of  the  blessedness  of  the 
angels,  and  we  are  to  be  equal  with  them.  And  how  multiphed  must  be  the  actions 
involved  in  a  service  which  night  never  interrupts,  of  a  mind  and  body  that  are 
never  wearied,  and  of  an  existence  which  knows  no  end  I  This  view  may  tend  to 
moderate  our  surprise  and  sorrow  at  the  deaths  of  eminent  and  useful  Christians, 
who  now  spend  their  energies  over  wider  regions.  3.  The  happiness  of  which  they 
shall  participate.  All  religious  experience  on  earth  affords  but  a  faint  emblem  of 
the  bliss  of  heaven.  Here,  however  great,  it  is  much  marred,  but  there  it  ia 
perfect,  because  all  the  saints  are  made  perfectly  holy.  Here  they  taste  the 
streams,  there  the  fountain,  and  the  happiness  is  made  complete  by  a  sight  oi 
Jesus'  face.  4.  The  friendships  they  shall  share.  Man  is  constituted  for  society. 
Place  him  in  solitude  and  he  will  pine  and  wither.  But  in  heaven  we  shall 
enjoy  the  company  of  angels,  of  the  wise  and  good  of  all  ages,  of  our  own  loved 
ones.  We  look  for  those  breaches  which  are  made  in  our  holy  connexions  to  be 
repaired  there.  II.  The  conduct  enjoined  dpon  ds  in  kelation  to  them.  "  Seek" 
them.  1.  This  implies  belief  of  them.  (1)  Those  who  have  just  views  of  tha 
Divine  perfections  will  believe  in  the  possibility  of  such  a  state  as  we  have  con- 
templated.  (2)  Numerous  considerations  indicate  the  probability.  Every  man 
has  that  within  him  which  thinks  and  wills,  &o.,  which  cannot  be  the  result  of  a 
material  organization,  is  perfectly  distinct  from  the  body,  and  will  not  be  more 
endangered  by  the  dissolution  of  the  latter  than  a  sunbeam  is  crushed  by  the 
demolition  of  the  house  through  which  it  is  passing.  Then  again,  the  strong 
desire  of  immortality,  common  to  men,  is  an  argument  in  its  favour.  Why  should 
God  universally  plant  a  desire  He  never  meant  to  gratify  ?  (3)  But  why  argue  it3 
probability  when  I  have  a  Bible  which  tells  me  it  is  certain.  2.  It  impUes  that 
attention  is  directed  much  towards  them.  They  must  be  minded  as  well  as 
credited.  This  is  necessary  because  of  the  wrong  bias  the  mind  has  received. 
{!)  Too  must  labour  that  your  minds  may  acquire  a  heavenly  direction,  seeing 
that  you  are  surrounded  by  the  secularities  of  life.  (2)  The  thoughts  must  go 
frequently  forth,  not  now  and  then  with  long  intervals  between.  Not  that  it  ia 
inconsistent  with  diligence  in  business,  &o. ;  for  that  also  is  the  service  of  God. 
3.  To  set  our  attachment  upon  them.  Surely  it  would  be  inconsistent  in  one  who 
is  going  to  heaven  not  to  set  his  heart  upon  it.  4.  Dilij;ent  and  persevering 
exertions  to  obtain  them  are  included.  Belief  awakens  attention,  attention  kindles 
desires  for  possession,  desires  give  birth  to  efforts.  You  are  called  upon,  then,  to 
ose  the  means.  Christ  is  our  "  Way "  to  the  holy  of  holies,  and  faith,  prayer, 
meditation,  &c.,  are  the  means.  IIL  Sous  hotitss  ob  considebations  which  shottld 
lUPEL  ui  TO  THIS  coNDDCT.  1.  A  regard  to  consistency.  "  You  who  were  dead 
have  been  quickened,  and  are  risen  with  Christ,  therefore,"  &o.  From  so  great  • 
difference  of  state  it  is  expected  that  the  greatest  difference  of  conduct  should 
follow,  t.  The  reasonableness  of  the  duty.  Can  there  be  anything  more  reason- 
able than  that  among  the  multiplicity  of  things  which  court  attention,  we  should 
seek  those  that  are  most  excellent  and  enduring.  As  well  might  a  chemist  hope 
for  a  universal  elixir  from  polluted  water,  as  mankind  expect  from  earthly  things 
tha  light  and  bUss  of  their  immortal  souls.  Besides,  earthly  things  are  transitory 
as  well  as  vain.  Like  the  bubble  that  glitters  in  all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow,  but, 
whilst  we  view  it,  bursts,  and  is  no  more ;  like  the  splendid  hues  that  bedeck  the 
insects'  wings  fluttering  in  the  sunbeam,  but  which  are  brushed  off  as  soon  as  the 
beam  is  withdrawn,  so  rapidly  do  they  flee  away.  3.  The  present  advantages 
resulting  from  the  exercise  here  enjoined.  By  a  wise  and  gracious  appointment  of 
God,  duty  and  interest  are  joined  together.  "  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all 
things,"  &c.  4.  The  things  above  are  the  scene  in  which  are  displayed  Christ's 
presence  and  glory.  The  argument  of  the  apostle  and  the  Saviour's  prayer  (John 
xvii. )  are  that  we  should  meet  Him  there.  In  conclusion  :  be  admonished  by  the 
consideration  of  the  dreadful  alternative  which  must  inevitably  follow  the  neglect 
of  tnia  duty.  If  you  follow  not  holiness  you  cannot  see  the  Lord.  {J.  Beaumont, 
M,D.)  Seeking  thingt  above  : — L  This  is  the  business  of  the  understanding. 
I.  Of  Ute  yean  the  word  "  thinker "  has  been  employed  to  designate  those  whe 


172  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cut*,  m. 

bring  their  reasoning  faculties  to  bear  on  abstract  problems,  and  who  give  proof  of 
this  by  lectures  and  books,  and  of  no  others.  If  this  use  is  correct,  thinkers 
would  constitute  a  select  class  indeed ;  it  would  be  just  as  reasonable  to  confine  tha 
term  '  worker  "  to  a  manual  labourer.  But  all  human  beings  think,  and  this  is 
none  the  less  true  because  the  understanding  apprehends  what  is  before  it  indis- 
tinctly. The  eye  may  none  the  less  see  because  the  objects  are  somewhat  confused. 
2.  Thus  the  solemn  question  arises,  "  What  do  we  think  about  ?  "  For  most  of  the 
day  we  have  no  choice.  To  give  your  mind  to  it  is  the  condition  of  all  good  work. 
But  there  is  a  fixed  hour  when  business  ends  and  we  regain  liberty  of  thought. 
What  do  you  habitually  think  about  then  ?  The  question  is  important,  for  the 
instructive  direction  of  thought  at  such  times  may  tell  us  much  about  our  real 
selves  and  our  destiny.  3.  Is  it  not  true  that  the  mind  of  many  is  occupied  with  . 
much  that  does  not  guide  it  heavenwards  ?  It  is  almost  at  the  mercy  of  the  first 
claimant ;  weighted  with  the  importunity  of  sense ;  dissipated  or  distorted  by 
passion ;  darkened  by  avoidance  of  God.  What  mean  those  long  periods  spent 
over  a  work  of  fiction  which  suggests  at  almost  every  page  what  it  dares  not 
describe ;  those  long  hours  of  sullen  moodiness,  or  of  hard  thoughts  of  God  ? 
4.  It  is  sometimes  thought  that  if  thought  is  only  active  it  must  needs  be  good, 
and  that  only  when  it  stagnates  it  breeds  evil.  But  thought  may  be  exercised  on 
subjects  that  degrade  it,  and  in  proportion  to  its  activity.  5.  Easter  then  bids 
thought  rise  heavenward  with  Christ ;  it  is  the  warrant  and  pattern  of  mental 
resurrection.  Before  Christ  rose  men  had  thought  and  written  about  another 
world ;  but  at  best  the  veil  was  only  half  withdrawn.  Men  hoped  and  guessed. 
But  Christ  made  it  clear  and  certain,  and  bade  thought  arise  into  the  world  beyond 
the  stars,  into  which  He  passed  to  prepare  a  place  for  us.  6.  Seek  then  in  thought 
the  things  above.  Seek  the  conversation  of  the  wise,  make  the  most  of  whatever 
enlarges  and  ennobles.  In  all  higher  and  purer  regions  of  thought  you  are  nearer 
Christ  (Phil.  It.  8).  But  as  you  seek,  cry  Excelsior  1  Rest  not  until  you  have 
struggled  beyond  literature,  Bcience,  and  nature,  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  where 
Chriit  the  King  of  Glory  sits.  II.  This  is  the  business  of  the  affections.  1. 
The  affections  are  a  particular  department  of  desire.  (1)  Desire  is  the  strongest 
motive  power  in  the  soul,  it  is  v^hat  gravitation  is  to  matter.  When  we  know  upon 
what  desire  is  set,  we  know  the  direction  a  soul  is  taking.  If  its  objects  are  in 
heaven  then  the  soul  is  moving  upwards,  if  earthly  then  downwards  (Matt.  vi.  21). 

(2)  Desire  is  the  raw  material  which  is  fashioned  on  the  one  hand  into  covetous- 
ness,  or  ambition,  or  sensuality,  or  into  the  love  of  God  on  the  other  (James  i.  15). 

(3)  Desire  was  meant  to  attach  the  soul  to  God  by  a  spiritual  attraction  that 
should  keep  it,  though  in  its  freedom,  true  to  its  centre,  just  as  the  planets  move 
ever  round  their  central  sun.  And  sin  resembles  those  catastrophes  which  might 
result  if  it  were  conceivable  that  a  planet  should  leave  its  orbit  and  dash  wildly 
into  space.  2.  God  gives  to  every  man  a  certain  measure  of  that  affection  which 
is  a  department  of  desue.  It  is  dealt  out  by  us  partly  to  those  whom  providence 
has  appointed  to  receive  it — a  father,  mother ,  &c. ;  and  also  on  objects  which  we  choose 
to  be  its  recipients.  So  we  may  squander  it  on  the  pleasures  of  sense,  or  compress 
it  into  high  self-sacrifice.  But  we  do  not  spend  it  twice.  Since  the  being  vAio 
loves  is  finite  the  supply  is  limited  ;  and  the  despair  of  those  who  have  given  their 
all  at  the  bidding  of  some  unlawful  pleasure  is  to  find,  while  life  is  still  young, 
but  all  too  late,  that  the  heart  may  be  like  a  dried-np  spring,  '*  without  natural 
affection  "  (Bom.  i.  31 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  3).  That  *'  wasting  fever  of  the  heart "  is 
almost  worse  than  the  moral  death  of  which,  if  anassuaged,  it  is  the  assured 
presentiment.  3.  Seek,  then,  with  your  affections  the  things  above.  As  truth  la 
the  prize  of  the  understanding,  so  beauty  is  the  prize  of  the  heart.  Let  the  Eternal 
Beauty  woo  and  win  your  hearts.  In  that  higher  world  there  are  many  objects 
(1  Cor.  ii.  9)  to  win  them;  but  there  is  One  above  all  others  who  has  claims  such 
as  no  other  can  have  upon  them.  To  love  Him  is  to  love  a  Being  who  sustains 
love  (Horn.  t.  6 ;  Eph.  vi.  24).  He  is  the  only  Being  in  loving  whom  the  heart  can 
never  incor  the  risk  of  exhaustion  or  disappointment.  III.  It  is  the  business  of 
THE  WILL.  There  is  at  the  centre  of  our  being  a  power  which  rules  all  others, 
which,  while  professing  obedience  to  reason,  not  seldom  arranges  its  premises  and 
settles  its  conclusions,  and  which  gives  play  to  affection  or  restrains  it  almost  at 
discretion.  It  is  not  reason  nor  feehng  which  in  the  last  resort  rules  the  soul,  and 
by  which  the  great  question  of  its  destiny  must  be  decided.  Grant  that  the  will 
is  weakened,  this  weakness  has  been  corrected  in  those  who  are  risen  with  Christ 
(Phil.  iv.  3).    Away  with  the  faint-hearted  and  false  notion  that  religious  effort  ik 


CHIP,  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  171 

an  affair  of  temperament  I  Natural  disposition  may  make  things  easy  or  difficult, 
but  it  cannot  arrest  the  upward  movemeut  of  a  free,  because  regenerate,  will.  We 
have  been  made  masters  of  ourselves  by  Christ,  and  we  cannot  shift  the  responsi- 
bility. {Canon  Liddon. )  High  ground  for  tlie  affections : — Thou  puttest  wheat  in  the 
low  ground,  and  thy  friend  comes,  who  knows  the  nature  of  the  com  and  the  land, 
and  instructs  thine  nnskilfulness,  and  says  to  thee,  "What  hast  thou  done?  thou 
hast  put  the  corn  in  the  flat  soil,  in  the  lower  land ;  the  soil  is  moist ;  the  seed  will 
rot,  and  thou  wilt  lose  thy  labour."  Thou  answerest,  "  What,  then,  must  I  do  ?  '■ 
"Remove  it,"  he  says,  "  into  the  higher  ground-"  Dost  thou,  then,  give  ear  to  a 
friend  who  gives  thee  counsel  about  thy  corn,  and  despisest  thou  God,  who  gives 
thee  counsel  about  thy  heart  ?  Thou  f earest  to  put  thy  corn  in  the  low  ground, 
and  wilt  thou  lose  thine  heart  in  the  earth  ?  (T.  U.  Leary.)  Hovieiaards : — As 
the  fire  mounteth  upwards  to  its  proper  place,  and  as  the  needle  still  trembleth  till 
it  stands  at  the  north ;  so  the  soul,  once  inflamed  with  the  heavenly  flre,  and 
acquainted  with  her  first  original,  cannot  bo  at  rest  until  it  finds  ilse'.f  in  that  com- 
fortable way  which  certainly  leads  homewards.  (Ibid.)  Above  the  tide : — There 
is  a  plant  called  samphire,  which  grows  only  on  cliSs  netir  the  sea.  But  though  it 
grows  near  the  salt  sea  waves,  yet  it  is  never  found  on  any  part  of  a  cliS  which  is 
not  above  the  reach  of  the  tide.  On  one  occasion,  a  party  of  shipwrecked  sailors, 
flung  ashore,  were  struggling  up  the  face  of  precipitous  rocks,  afraid  of  the 
advancing  tide  overtaking  them,  when  one  of  their  number  hghted  upon  a  plant 
of  samphire,  growing  luxuriantly.  Instantly  he  raised  a  shout  of  joy,  assuring  his 
companions,  by  this  token,  they  were  now  in  safety.  The  sea  might  come  near 
this  spot,  and  perhaps  cast  up  its  spray,  but  would  never  be  found  reaching  it. 
Such  is  the  position  of  a  soul  in  Christ :  justified  and  united  to  Him,  the  person 
may  be  in  full  sight  still  of  the  world's  threatening  and  angry  waves,  but  he  is 
perfectly  safe,  and  he  cannot  be  overwhelmed.  {J.  L.  Nye.)  Reasoiu  for  teeking 
the  things  above  : — The  things  above — I.  Form  thb  proper  object  of  ocb  beoabd. 
Every  person  should  attend  to  the  things  which  relate  to  his  own  honje.  But  the 
home  of  a  Christian  is  above.  There  is  "his  Father's  house."  II.  They  abs  ths 
OBJECT  FOB  WHICH  MAN  13  BY  HIS  NATUBK  MADE  *,  and  especially  for  which  he  is  pre- 
pared in  his  sanctified  character.  1.  By  the  constitution  of  his  mind,  man  requires 
an  object  of  a  spiritual  and  eternal  kind.  Nothing  of  a  worldly  nature,  however 
multiplied,  is  congenial  with  the  tendencies  and  desires  of  the  immortal  spirit. 
2.  Much  more,  the  Christian,  as  renewed  in  his  spirit  by  the  power  of  God,  must 
"  seek  the  things  above,"  as  alone  suited  to  his  soul.  Spirituality  is  the  essence  of 
the  Christian ;  he  breathes  and  tends  heavenward.  III.  Theib  transcendent 
EXCELLENCE.  There  aU  is  perfection ;  all  holiness  and  happiness.  There  are  in- 
conceivable glories  in  the  heavenly  world.  Whatever  can  render  it  a  scene  worthy 
of  the  majesty  of  God,  of  the  intiuite  merit  and  purchase  of  the  Son  of  God,  of  the 
most  enlarged  desires  and  hopes  of  the  redeemed  ;  all  is  collected  and  perfect  there. 
IV.  Theib  perpetuity.  The  smallest  good,  of  a  lasting  duration,  is  deemed  prefer- 
able to  a  much  greater  benefit  that  is  only  transient.  But  the  things  which  are 
not  seen  are  eternal.  V.  The  certainty  of  bdccess  assdked  to  all  that  bbek 
them  in  the  bight  way.  In  the  pursuit  of  all  earthly  objects  there  is  no 
certainty  of  attainment.  Conclusion :  What  reasons,  then,  exist  why  we  should 
seek  these  things  wiih  increased  earnestness  I  1.  The  apostle,  who  wrote  the 
text,  affords  a  striking  example  of  the  manner  in  which  we  should  seek  them 
(Phil.  iii.  12-14).  2.  These  reasons  are  always  growing  stronger ;  every  moment 
is  impairing  the  lustre  and  the  value  of  everything  below ;  while  every  moment 
is  adding  to  the  nearness  and  importance  of  eternal  things.  (Robert  Hall, 
M.A.)  The   heavenly   aspirations   of    the   renewed  nature: — I.   The   intimate 

connection  between  Christ  and  His  people.  "  Dead  with  Christ,"  "  Risen  with 
Christ."  The  latter  phrase  implies — 1.  That  the  soul  was  once  dead  in  sin. 
The  body  of  the  sinner  lives — his  mind  is  vigorous,  but  his  soul  is  dead.  It 
sees  no  beauty  in  Christ,  hears  not  the  gospel,  is  unmoved  by  the  love  of  God,  is 
insensible  to  the  terrors  of  the  coming  judgment.  2.  The  same  power  which  raised 
Christ  from  the  dead  raises  dead  souls  to  life.  II.  The  doty  enjoined — "  Seek,"  <feo. 
1.  The  godliness  is  not  merely  a  "  state,"  but  a  "life."  2.  In  this  active  course 
the  Christian  is  not  treated  as  a  mere  machine — moved  irrespective  of  his  will. 
God's  power  is  manifested  in  it  all,  but  the  Christian  himself  is  to  "  seek."  3.  Wa 
•re  hot  left  in  ignorance  of  the  object  of  our  search.  "  Things  above."  This 
indicates — (1)  Their  character.  "  Things  above  " — spiritual,  heavenly,  Godlike, 
boly,  pure.    (2)  Their  locality.    Satisfaction  is  not  to  be  found  in  earthly  things. 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  i& 

III,  The  iNDtrcEMENT  TO  THIS  LIFE.  "  Christ  sitteth  "  above.  It  is  His  will  that 
those  whom  the  Father  has  given  Him  be  with  Him  where  He  is.  Christ's  position 
is — 1,  One  of  honour.  "The  right  hand."  Him  hath  "God  greatly  exalted  to 
be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour."  2.  One  of  power.  "The  right  hand"  is  a  symbol 
of  authority.  From  heaven  He  shall  come  to  judge  the  world.  3.  Meanwhile  i» 
is  the  position  of  an  Intercessor.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  Excelsior: — The  resurrrction 
of  Christ  occupies  a  central  place  in  the  gospel  system,  and  from  it  lines  of  vital 
connection  radiate  to  every  doctrine.  As  planets  revolve  round  the  central  sun, 
and  derive  light  and  heat  therefrom,  so  every  doctrine  connected  with  man's  salva- 
tion circles  round  the  risen  Christ.  1.  Apart  from  this  no  guilty  man  can  be  justified, 
for  Christ  was  raised  for  our  justification.  "  If  Christ  be  not  risen  we  are  yet  dead 
in  our  sins."  2.  But  now  is  Christ  risen,  and  the  opposite  results  follow.  L  A 
TACT  ASSUMED,  viz.,  that  Christ  has  risen.  1,  A  fact  which  Christ  foresaw  would 
possess  transcendent  interest.   When  the  Jews  asked  a  sign,  this  was  the  one  given. 

2.  A  fact  well  certified,  or  no  fact  in  history  is,  and  sceptics  to  be  consistent  mast 
destroy  their  Livy,  Cassar,  Gibbon,  and  Grote.  No  one  of  Christ's  friends  was  pre- 
disposed to  belief.  The  jealousy  of  the  priesthood  was  a  safeguard  against  deception. 

3.  A  fact  which  alone  can  account  for  the  apostle's  heroio  service.  II.  A  suppobi- 
BioN.  "  If,"  &o.  In  Paul's  view  regeneration  and  progress  could  not  be  disjoined. 
Ascension  must  follow  resurrection.  To  rise  with  Christ  means — 1.  A  transition 
from  darkness  to  light.  The  grave  symbolizes  our  state  of  moral  darkness,  con. 
version  is  the  dawning  of  heavenly  light,  2.  From  bondage  to  liberty.  The  grave 
is  an  emblem  of  captivity.  When  Christ  rose.  He  led  captivity  captive.  3.  From 
death  to  life.  Christ  liveth  in  us,  and  because  He  lives  we  shall  live  also.  III.  Ah 
iNSPiBiNG  EXHORTATION.  1.  Eveiy  JEorm  of  life  has  its  corresponding  form  of  activity. 
•'  If  you  live,"  says  Paul,  "  grow."  Superior  life  is  manifested  by  superior  conduct. 
2.  Our  aspiration  should  have  a  definite  aim.  The  things  above  are  those  which 
purify  and  ennoble.  (1)  Knowledge,  of  God,  Scripture,  &c.  (2)  Faith.  (3)  Love. 
(4)  Eighteousness.  (5)  Conformity  to  Christ.  3.  The  exhortation  is  supported  by 
a  principle  of  self-consistence.  You  have  risen,  rise  higher  stiU.  On  what  ground 
have  we  started  on  the  heavenly  race  if  we  do  not  mean  to  continue  1  (D.  Daviet, 
M.A.)  Aspiring  towards  heaven  : — Ere  autumn  has  tinted  the  woodlands,  or  the 
cornfields  are  falling  to  the  reaper's  song,  or  hoary  hill-tops,  hke  grey  hairs  on  an 
aged  head,  gi^e  warning  of  winter's  approach,  I  have  seen  the  swallow's  brood 
pruning  their  feathers,  and  putting  their  long  wings  to  the  proof  ;  and,  though  they 
might  return  to  their  nests  in  the  window-eaves,  or  alight  again  on  the  house-tops, 
they  darted  away  in  the  direction  of  sunny  lands.  Thus  they  showed  that  they 
were  birds  bound  for  a  foreign  clime,  and  that  the  period  of  their  migration  from 
the  scene  of  their  birth  was  nigh  at  hand,  Grace  also  has  its  prognostics.  They 
are  infallible  as  those  of  nature.  So,  when  the  soul,  filled  with  longiugs  to  be  gone, 
is  often  darting  away  to  glory,  and,  soaring  upward,  rises  on  the  wings  of  faith,  till 
this  great  world,  from  her  sublime  elevation,  looks  a  little  thing,  God's  people  know 
that  they  have  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit,  (T,  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  Christian 
temper : — First,  then,  those  who  do  "  seek  the  things  which  are  above,"  as  a  matter 
ot  fact,  become  elevated  in  tone  and  temper.  Do  not  think  that  tone  and  temper 
are  nothing.  In  the  best  pictures  of  great  masters,  tone  is  almost  everything. 
Form  goes  for  much.  Form,  indeed,  and  the  steadiness  of  the  drawing,  go  for  very 
much  in  the  "  composition  "  of  the  picture  ;  but  deprive  it  of  the  wonderful  nan  so 
che  called  tone,  and  it  stands  out  hard  and  unpleasing,  and  supplies  to  the  soul  no 
real  pleasure.  On  the  other  hand,  let  the  tone  of  the  true  artist  be  there,  and  now 
it  covers  in  a  preat  degree  even  badness  in  the  drawing.  In  the  same  way,  in 
nature,  atmosphere  counts  for  much,  very  much,  in  the  charm  of  a  scene,  in  its 
power,  that  is,  to  touch  the  heart ;  and  when  you  come  to  personal  life,  what  tone 
is  to  the  picture,  what  atmosphere  is  to  the  landscape,  such  is  general  temper  to 
the  human  character.  {Knox  Little.)  Attaining  higher  life: — I  have  known 
men  who  have  been  up  in  balloons,  and  they  have  told  me  that  when  they  want 
to  rise  higher  they  just  tlirow  out  some  of  the  sand  with  which  they  ballast  the 
balloon.  Now,  I  believe  one  reason  why  so  many  people  are  earthly-minded 
and  have  so  little  of  the  spirit  of  heaven,  is  that  they  have  got  too  much 
ballast  in  the  shape  of  love  for  earthly  joys  and  gains  ;  and  what  you  want  is 
to  throw  out  some  of  the  sand,  and  you  will  rise  higher.  (D.  L.  Moody.) 
The  affections  elevated : — On  board  iron  vessels  it  is  a  common  thing  to  see  a  com- 
pass placed  aloft,  to  be  as  much  away  from  the  cause  of  aberration  as  possible ;  a 
wise  hiut  to  us  to  elevate  our  afiections  and  desires ;  the  nearer  to  God,  the  lest 
swayed  by  worldly  influences.     (C.  H  Spurgeon.) 


CHAP,  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  17S 

Ver.  2.  Set  your  affections  on  things  above.— T/fn/ys  above :— It  h  implied  in 
this  exhortation  that  the  things  above  are — I.  Known  to  us.  We  may  loTe  the 
unseen,  not  the  unknown.  We  know  them  through  the  Scriptures.  II.  Ouks.  We 
may  not  set  our  hearts  on  what  is  not  ours.     But  "  all  things  are  ours."     III.  Ir 

WE    DO    NOT    SET    OOB    AFFECl'IONS    UPON    THEM    WE    SHALL    ON    THINOS    BELOW.        Empty 

man's  heart  cannot  be.  IV.  They  are  those  amid  which  evert  Christian  will 
eooN  BE  PLACED  FOB  ETERNITY.  It  bccomcs  the  pilgrims  of  time  to  visit  by  faith 
their  future  home.  V.  They  are  fitted  and  worthy  to  occupy  a  Christian's  soul. 
None  else  are.  VI.  They  have  a  transcendent  excellency.  Note  the  Apocalyptic 
figures  of  them.     VII.  They  endure  for  ever.     All  else  is  perishable.     VIII.  In 

BETTINO  our  AFFECTIONS  ON    THEM  WE    ARE    CERTAIN    OF    SUCCESS.       Ws   Can  Say  this  Of 

nothing  else.  IX,  They  become  daily  moke  and  more  important,  while  the  things 
o»  KABTH  GROW  DAILY  LESS  SO.  Every  day  lessens  the  duration  of  temporal  things 
Bnd  brings  us  nearer  to  eternal  thiuRS.  X.  They  cast  down  upon  us  a  transforming 
BEAUTY,  Man's  heart  never  acts  without  being  acted  upon.  Contact  with  the  good 
sanctities ;  communion  with  the  happy  gladdens.  Conclusion :  Seek  these  things 
then — 1.  In  the  Scripture.  2.  In  Christ.  3.  In  the  ministry  of  the  gospel.  4.  On 
the  Sabbath.  5.  In  prayer.  (J.  Camming,  D.D.)  Setting  the  affections  on  thingt 
above: — L  What  things  above?  Things  above  nature  and  above  earth,  II.  What 
things  on  EARTH  ?  (1  John  ii.  16  ;  Gen.  iii.  6).  1.  Lust  of  the  flesh — pleasures,  2, 
Lust  of  the  eye— riches  (Eccles.  v.  11).  3.  Pride  of  life — honours.  III.  What  by 
AFFECTIONS?     1.  The  Understanding  and  meditation.     2.  The  will  and  aflections. 

(1)  Love.  (2)  Desire.  (3)  Joy.  IV.  These  affections  abb  not  to  be  set  on 
THINGS  UPON  EABTH  (Psa.  Ixii.  10).  1.  They  are  below  us  (Phil.  iii.  8).  2.  Unsuit- 
able to  tis.  8.  Unsatisfying  (1  Cor.  vii.  81;  Job  zxx.  15;  Psa.  Ixxviii.  39; 
Hob.  liii.  13 ;  Prov.  xxiii.  5 ;  Luke  viii.  18).  4.  Troublesome  and  vexatious 
(Matt.  xiii.  22).     5.  Unnecessary.     (1)  To  the  making  of  us  happy  (Job  xxviii.  15), 

(2)  To  the  bringing  us  to  happiness.  6,  Fleeting  and  unconstaut  (Prov.  xxiii.  5; 
2  Sam.  xix.  43,  xxi. ;  Belshazzar ;  Luke  xii.  19,  20).  Uses :  1.  Information,  (1) 
How  sin  hath  debased  and  infatuated  mankind.  (2)  See  the  folly  of  covetous 
worldlings.  (3)  See  the  easiness  of  charity.  What  a  little  thing  God  demands, 
and  what  vast  returns  there  will  be  (Matt.  x.  41,  42).  (4)  What  little  cause  men 
have  to  be  troubled  for  the  want  of  such  things.  (5)  Or  others  to  be  proud  of 
having  them.  2.  Exhortation.  Consider  if  ye  do  set  your  affections  on  things 
below — (1)  Ye  cross  God's  end  in  giving  them.  (2)  Ye  provoke  Him  to  take  them 
away  (Psa.  IxxviiL  6-7).  (3)  Or  to  give  you  them  for  your  portion  (Psa.  xvii.  14). 
^4)  The  more  you  affect  them,  the  less  comfort  you  will  have  in  them  (Psa.  cvi.  15). 
(6)  They  will  divert  your  thoughts  from  heaven  (Psa.  x.  3,  4).  (6)  And  so  disturb 
you  in  duty  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31).  (7)  It  is  gross  idolatry  (Col.  iii.  5).  (8)  You  have 
better  things  to  mind  (Matt,  vi  33  ;  Col.  iii.  1).  V.  We  are  to  bet  oue  affection! 
ON  THINGS  ABOVE.  1.  Why  f  Bccause — (1)  They  are  suitable  for  our  affections 
(Psa.  xvii.  15).  (2)  Our  chief  relations  are  three,  (a)  Our  Father  (Luke  xii.  32 ; 
John  XX.  17  ;  Mai.  i.  6).  (6)  Our  Husband  (Hos.  ii.  16  ;  Isa.  liv.  5).  (c)  Brethren 
(Heb.  ii.  11 ;  Bom.  viii.  29).  (3)  Our  treasure  is  there,  (a)  Riches  (Matt.  vi.  19-21). 
(6)  Honours  (1  Sam.  ii.  30).  (c)  Pleasures  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  (d)  Your  affections  were 
made  on  purpose  for  these  things  (Prov.  xvi.  4).  (e)  Setting  your  affections  on  them 
now  is  the  way  to  come  to  their  enjoyment  nereafter.  2.  What?  (1)  Our 
thoughts  (Phil.  iv.  8).  (a)  Upon  God  (Psa.  x,  4 ;  cxxxix.  18).  (6)  Upon  Christ 
(Luke  xxii.  11-19).  (c)  Upon  the  Scripture  that  leads  to  them  (Psa.  i.  2).  (2)  Our 
love  (Deut.  vi.  5).  (3)  Desire  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  25 ;  Phil.  i.  23).  (4)  Hope  (Rom.  v.  2). 
(5)  Joy  (Psa.  iv.  6-7  ;  1  Pet.  i.  8).  3.  How?  (1)  In  the  most  intense  degree  (Luke 
xiv.  26).  (2)  Constantly.  Uses:  1.  Examination.  (1)  What  do  you  most  think 
of  ?  (2)  What  are  you  most  loath  to  part  with  ?  (3)  What  do  you  spend  most  tim« 
about  ?  (Mark  iv.  19).  2.  Exhortation.  "  Set  your  affections,"  Ac.  (1)  There  ia 
nothing  else  worthy  of  them  (1  John  ii.  15).  (2)  This  will  keep  you  from  doating 
on  the  world  (Phil.  iii.  8).  (3)  It  will  keep  you  from  grieving  too  much  about  tha 
affairs  of  this  life  (Phil.  iv.  11,  12).  (4)  It  will  make  you  more  active  in  all  duties 
(Acts  XX.  24).  (5)  By  so  doing  you  will  partly  enjoy  them  (2  Cor.  xii  2,  3).  (6) 
This  will  make  you  willing  to  die  (Phil.  i.  23).  (7)  And  fit  you  for  the  enjoyment 
of  God  after  death.  {Bishop  Beveridge.)  Affections  rightly  placed  : — I.  Thb 
AFFECTIONS  are — 1.  The  motions  of  the  reasonable  soul.  When  Jerusalem  waa 
much  affected  about  the  tidings  of  Christ's  birth  it  is  said  that  "  all  Jerusalem  was 
moved."  And  when  the  Jews  were  affected  against  Paul  they  "were  moved  with 
•nvy.     8.  So  they  are  the  movings  of  the  soul  whereby  the  heart  is  sensibly  carried 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0HA».  m. 

out  upon  what  is  good  or  evil  3.  And  as  it  is  sensibly  carried  out  towards,  so  it 
must  embrace  the  same.  By  one  we  follow  what  is  good  and  the  other  shun 
what  is  evil.  There  are  several  aSectiona,  but  all  are  ministers  of  love.  I  love  a 
thing  and,  if  absent,  desire  it ;  if  present,  delight  in  it.  If  I  hate  a  thing  I  shun 
it  or  am  angry  with  it.  II.  The  affections  are  to  be  set  on  things  above,  and  not 
ON  iHijTGS  ON  THE  EABTH.  1.  What,  may  we  not  at  all  affect  the  things  of  earth? 
Yes,  ye  may  desire  them,  and  grieve  at  the  loss  of  them,  and  both  desire  and  grief 
are  affections.  (1)  But  not  for  themselves,  only  in  deference  to  Christ  and  in 
subordination  to  God.  You  are  commanded  to  love  your  wives,  husbands,  Ac, 
because  you  can  love  them  in  the  Lord — but  nowhere  to  love  ouraelves,  moneyf 
&c.,  because  "  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  Him,' 
(2)  In  comparison  with  spiritual  things  your  affection  for  tiiem  is  to  be  as  no  affection 
"  Let  him  that  rejoiceth  be  as  though  he  rejoiced  not."  "Thou  shalt  love  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart."  2.  Why  are  we  to  set  our  affections  on  things 
above?  Because,  if  they  aie  not  set  on  Christ  and  the  things  of  Christ — (1)  Yoa 
will  not  be  found  marriageable  unto  Him.  That  woman  is  not  fit  to  be 
married  to  a  man  whose  affections  are  not  knit  to  him.  (2)  You  will  never  own 
Him.  Ardent  lov«  is  required  for  faithful  testimony,  and  those  who  are  ashamed 
of  Christ,  of  them  will  He  be  ashamed.  (3)  Our  affections  will  never  be  drawn 
from  things  beneath.  Sin  is  mortified  by  the  contrary  good ;  the  joy  and  grief  of 
the  world  by  spiritual  joy  and  grief.  The  snow  is  melted  by  the  warm  beams  of 
the  sun,  and  the  more  your  hearts  are  warmed  with  love  to  Christ,  the  easier  will 
earthly  affections  fall  away.  (4)  We  shall  never  press  much  after  the  knowledge 
and  enj'vment  of  heavenly  things.  A  child  if  he  have  no  affection  for  his  book 
will  never  make  a  scholar.  (.5)  We  shall  never  be  zealous  for  God,  for  zeal  is  the 
heat  of  Divine  love.  (G)  We  shall  never  do  any  great  thing  for  God.  The  reason 
for  David's  great  gift  was  his  affection  (1  Chron.  xxix.  3).  (7)  We  shall  never 
please  God  in  anything  we  do  (Rom.  xii.  11).  (8)  We  shall  not  be  safe  from  apostasy. 
Conclusion  :  Do  you  set  your  affections  on  things  above  ?  1.  This  is  a  hard  thing 
to  do :  for  it  means  to  have  a  sympathy  with  that  against  which  we  had  an  anti- 
pathy ;  and  to  change  our  sympathies  into  antipathies,  and  vice  versa,  is  no  easy 
matter.  2.  It  is  on^^  thing  to  affect  the  best  things  and  have  some  affections  for 
them,  and  another  thing  to  set  our  affections  on  them.  Herod  heard  John  gladly, 
and  the  stony  ground  received  the  Word  with  joy.  3.  If  men's  affections  were  set 
on  things  above  they  would  not  be  so  indifferent  in  the  things  of  God  as  they  are. 
For  this  is  described  as  hungering  and  thirsting.  4.  Then  they  would  always  carry 
these  things  about  with  them  in  their  minds.  5.  They  would  seek  them  first,  ol 
their  age,  day,  and  competition ;  in  youth,  morning,  and  before  all.  6.  They  would 
be  often  speaking  of  them,  and  would  love  to  hear  others  (Psa.  xlv.  1).  7.  They 
would  be  mo-t  indulgent  and  tender  of  them.  8.  They  would  not  be  put  off  with 
any  slight  evidence  of  their  interest  in  them.  {W.  Bridge,  M.A.)  Affections  the 
wings  of  the  sovl : — If  you  will  go  to  the  banks  of  a  little  stream  and  watch  the 
flies  that  come  and  bathe  in  it  you  will  notice  that  while  they  plunge  their 
bodies  in  the  water,  they  keep  their  wings  high  out  of  it ;  and  after  swimming 
about  a  little  while  they  fly  away  with  their  wings  unwet  through  the  sunny 
air.  Now  that  is  a  lesson  for  us.  Here  we  are  immers-ed  in  the  cares  and 
business  of  the  world ;  but  let  us  keep  the  wings  of  our  soul,  our  faith  and 
our  love,  out  of  the  world,  that  with  these  unclogged  we  may  be  ready  to  take 
our  flight  to  heaven.  {J.  Inglis.)  Spirituality  a  safeguard  against  temptation: — 
"Birds,"  says  Manton,  "  are  seldom  taken  in  their  flight ;  the  more  we  are  upon 
the  wing  of  heavenly  thoughts  the  more  we  escape  snares."  Oh  that  we  would 
remember  this,  and  never  tarry  long  on  the  ground  lest  the  fowler  ensnare  us.  We 
need  to  be  much  taken  up  with  Divine  things,  rising  in  thought  above  these  tem- 
poral matters,  or  else  the  world  will  entangle  us,  and  we  shall  be  Uke  birds  held 
with  limed  twigs,  or  encompassed  in  a  net.  Up,  then,  my  heart.  Up  from 
the  weedy  ditches  and  briery  hedges  of  the  world  into  tlie  clear  atmosphere  of 
heaven.  There,  were  the  dews  of  grace  are  born,  and  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  is 
Lord  paramount,  and  the  blessed  wind  of  the  Spirit  blows  from  the  everlasting 
hills,  thou  wilt  find  rest  on  the  wing,  and  sing  for  joy  where  thine  enemies  cannot 
even  see  thee.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  affections  to  he  habitually  heavenward:  — 
After  painting  the  Sistine  ceiling,  Michael  Angelo  found  that  the  habit  of  looking 
npward,  whfcb  that  long-continued  work  rendered  necessary,  made  it  for  some  time 
impossible  to  read  or  to  look  carefully  at  a  drawing  except  in  the  same  attitude. 
So  oar  converse  with  heaven  should  afieot  our  attitude  in  looking  at  the  tbingi 


.  m.3  COL0SSIAN8.  177 

VI  earth.  (T.  F,  B.  Tinling,  B,A.)  The  sitpreme  attachment  due  to  spiritual 
oojecis : — L  Affection  is  the  goino  out  of  the  soul  toward  object8  within 
rra  view.  1.  How  happy  it  were  if  affection  might  go  just  at  its  own  pleasure  and 
all  be  i-ight  and  safe,  i.e.,  that  an  infallible  perception  accompaniod  it  with  which 
the  moral  taste  strictly  agreed.  Then  nothing  would  attract  it  that  ought  not ;  it 
would  be  in  repulsion  to  all  evil,  and  both  in  the  right  degrees.  2.  But  this  ia  not 
BO.  (1)  Our  nature,  composed  of  two  kinds  of  being,  places  us  U3  strict  relation  to 
two  different  economies.  Therefore  there  is  great  difficulty  in  apportioning  the 
regards  towards  these  in  due  proportion.  (2)  By  the  output  of  our  nature  our 
relation  to  one  class  of  interests  ia  immediate  and  sensible,  while  the  relation  to 
things  spiritual  is  only  through  thought  and  faith.  (3)  Our  nature  is  suuk  in  such 
a  state  that  it  has  a  most  obstinate  tendency  to  give  itself  to  the  inferior  class  of 
interests,  the  eff'ect  of  which  is  to  throw  away  the  supreme  interests  of  the  soul. 
(4)  One  would  imngiue  the  terror  of  this  to  make  the  doctrine  of  Divine  grace 
welcome.    Except  in  reliance  on  this  we  should  hear  the  text  with  despair.    IL  A 

MEASURE    OF   AFFKCTION    FOR    THINGS    ON    EAllXH  IS  LEC.ITIMATB.       Good  men  haVe  USCd 

an  indiscreet  language  almost  of  reqraring  an  indifference  to  or  contempt  for  earthly 
things  ;  and  according  to  this  thero  is  one  essential  inconsistency  between  our  duty 
and  the  condition  in  which  God  has  placed  us.  But  our  interests  here  have  claims 
that  must  be  allowed,  1.  Thmk  in  how  many  ways  we  derive  pleasure  or  pain 
from  earthly  things.  Surely  our  Creator  does  not  desire  the  pleasure  denied  ©r 
the  pain  endured  more  than  is  inevitable,  or  disciplinary.  And,  therefore,  we  may 
in  measure  desire  the  pleasing,  and  be  anxious  to  avoid  the  painful.  2.  Think  how 
much  care  is  necess-ary  to  avoid  the  ills  of  life,  and  that  we  may  have  the  most 
benefit  of  its  relations.  Affection  is  inevitably  and  justly  set  on  health,  near  rela- 
tives, and  as  a  matter  concerning  him  and  them,  on  his  temporal  condition.  And 
then  a  man  that  looks  on  the  conduct  of  public  affairs,  by  which  his  own,  hia 
family's,  and  his  fellow-citizens*  welfare  are  affected,  will  necessarily  feel  consider- 
able interest  in  that  direction.  Again,  if  a  man  be  of  a  cultivated  intellect  and 
taste,  he  cannot  help  being  affected  by  the  beauties  of  nature  and  the  great  works 
and  discoveries  of  men.  3.  But  how  sad  it  is  that  the  relations  of  the  present  are 
all  which  many  recognize.  Think  if  they  were  exhorted  to  such  an  utter  indifference 
to  their  temporal  interests  as  they  indulge  respecting  their  eternal  ones.  What 
madness  would  be  charged.  ■  A  fortiori,  then,  is  not  theirs  an  awful  madness. 
HI.  Supreme  affection  should  be  reserved  for  things  above.  1.  By  the 
aobler  part  of  oar  nature  we  are  placed  in  solemn  relations  with  another  economy 
comporting  with  its  immortality — to  God,  the  one  infinite  Being ;  to  the  Redeemer, 
the  Lord  of  the  new  economy;  to  an  unseen  state  of  holy  companionships  and  endless 
felicity.  How  marvellous  that  the  soul  can  consent  to  stay  in  the  dust  when  it  might 
live  beyond  the  stars.  2.  What  then  should  be  the  comparative  state  ot  the  affec- 
tions as  towards  the  former  and  the  latter  ?  (1)  The  answer  can  but  be  that  there 
must  be,  at  the  lowest,  a  decided  preponderance  in  favour  of  the  spiritual  and  the 
eternal.  Otherwise  how  is  the  great  purpose  of  Christ  accomplished  who  came  to 
redeem  us  to  them  ?  (2)  But  if  no  more  than  barely  this  is  attained,  how  often  it 
\i  likely  to  be  put  in  doubt.  We  should  aspire  to  have  therefore  more  than  a  pre- 
pemderance.      IV.  What,  then,  mat   be    taej!n   as   proofs   that   wb  hate  the 

»EQU1RED    preponderance    OF   AFFECTION    FOB   THINGS   ABOVE.      In    mOSt    CaSCS    this  is 

a  matter  of  prompt  and  nneqmvocal  consciousness ;  but  in  this  the  best  men  find 
tests  valuable.  1.  Let  a  man  examine  when  he  is  strongly  interested  in  some 
•amporal  concern  whether  he  can  say  more  than  all  this  is  the  interest  I  feel  in 
'ihings  above.  2.  When  he  is  greatly  pleased  with  something,  and  his  thoughts 
Buddenly  turn  to  higher  objects,  is  he  then  more  pleased  ?  3.  Or  is  he  solicitous 
that  this  temporal  good  may  not  injure  his  spiritual  interests?  4.  If  he  suffers  in 
ifoods  or  body  does  he  feel  that  he  would  far  rather  suffer  so  than  in  soul,  and 
does  he  feel  a  strong  overbalancing  consolation  from  above.  6.  Is  he  more  pleased 
«o  give  earnest  application  to  higher  things  than  to  inferior,  and  that  he  would 
vacrifice  more  for  one  than  for  the  other  ?  6.  Does  he  check  his  temporal  pursuits 
directly  they  interfere  with  heavenly,  and  double  his  diUgence  in  regard  to  the 
♦Atter.  7.  Do  heavenly  things  grow  increasingly  attractive  the  nearer  he  gets  to 
Uiem  ?     [John  Foster. )  Tlie  heavenly  inheritance  preferred : — I.  Suppose  two 

«,aJBCTS   ADMITTED   TO    BB    OF   BQUAL   VALUE     PRESENTED    THEMSELVES   IN    COMPETITION 

•WB  OOB  FAVOUB.      1.  In  pursuing  one  of  them  we  can  only  gain  itself,  but  in 

pursuing  the  other  we  gain  it  and  a  large  share  of   its  competitor — who  could 

•iiit&M  auout  making  an  election  ?    So  if  a  man  choose  the  earthly  he  can  cain 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cka».  m. 

none  of  the  heavenly ;  whereas  if  he  choose  the  heavenly,  besides  securing  it,  h» 
gains  the  best  of  the  earthly.  Nay,  the  choice  of  the  heavenly  portion  is  the  more 
promising  way  of  obtaining  the  earthly  on  the  ground  of  the  greater  prudence  and 
Buperior  morality  which  the  choice  inspires,  together  with  the  blessing  of  God. 
And  further,  this  is  the  only  way  of  finding  satisfaction  in  earthly  things,  and 
without  that  satisfaction  they  are  worthless.  3.  We  shall  be  wise  if  we  prefer  that 
which  we  are  sure  of  attaining,  and  resist  that  of  which  it  is  doubtful  if  we  ever 
gain  it.  You  who  have  chosen  the  earthly  consider  what  a  gambler's  work  you 
make  of  the  pursuit  of  happiness.  You  must  have  the  whole  of  your  uncertain 
Ufe  in  health  ;  you  must  be  pure  amidst  temptations  without  grace ;  you  must  have 
uninterrupted  business  prosperity  ;  a  wife  who  shall  prove  a  helpmeet  although 
chosen  under  dubious  circumstances,  and  children  who  shall  love  and  honour  yoa 
in  spite  of  a  godless  education.  And  happiness,  according  to  your  estimate, 
depends  on  such  chances  as  these.  But  the  happiness  of  him  that  seeks 
the  things  above  is  independent  of  these,  and  is  assured  not  only  now,  but  for 
ever.  3.  Wisdom  will  prefer  that  which  requires  less  labour.  Beflect,  then,  what 
skilfulness,  scheming,  racing,  anxiety,  sleeplessness  are  required  for  gaining  and 
retaining  earthly  things.  Not  that  the  life  of  the  heavenly  seeker  is  one  of  sloth, 
but  his  heavenly-mindedness  enables  him  to  go  through  the  same  work  without  the 
same  disturbance,  and  to  add  others  of  a  benevolent  character  by  way  of  pastime. 
II.  Box  THE  TWO  THINGS  ABE  NOT  OF  EQUAi  VALUE,  and  though  the  pursuit  of  the 
heavenly  excluded  the  earthly,  though  it  were  uncertain  while  the  pursuit  of  the 
earthly  were  certain,  and  though  it  were  more  laborious,  yet — 1.  Its  intrinsic  value 
would  outweigh  all  adverse  considerations.  The  earthly  is  mainly  for  the  body  and 
fortune,  the  heavenly  for  both  body  and  soul  and  for  eternity.  2.  Its  necessity  to 
our  happiness  is  another  weighty  consideration.  Earthly  things  are  only  at  best  a 
temporary  convenience ;  but  without  the  heavenly  a  man  perishes  for  ever.  Let, 
then,  the  most  depressing  view  of  Ufe  be  taken,  it  is  soon  over,  and  then  the 
Christian  is  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  But  where  is  the  worldling  after  every  earthly 
gratification  then  7     (W.  Anderson,  LL.D.)         The  vital  transference: — I.  The 

FOLLY    OF     BETTINQ     OUB     AFFECTIONS    ON   THINGS   ON   THB   EABTH.        1.   They    dcstrOy 

while  they  please.  (1)  Take  riches ;  there  is  no  harm  in  preferring  them  to 
poverty;  but  thousands  are  destroyed  by  the  pleasure  of  their  accumulation,  bodily, 
spiritually,  and  eternally.  Men  demean  themselvea,  defraud,  and  lie  for  money, 
and  think  of  nothing  else.  You  have  not  got  so  far  as  that  ?  But  you  will  acknow- 
ledge that  during  the  week  if  you  hewed  away  all  that  was  given  to  earthly  things 
there  would  not  be  much  left.  (2)  Take  the  approval  of  the  world.  A  good  name 
is,  of  course,  an  immense  power  for  good :  but  thousands  have  gone  down  under 
worldly  applause.  Beauty,  genius,  everything  that  men  and  women  have  have  been 
sacrificed  for  this,  and  as  they  went  up  in  fame  went  down  in  character.  Think  of 
Byron,  Sheridan,  Burns,  &c.  The  approval  of  the  world  while  it  pleases  it  damns. 
3.  They  are  unsatisfactory.  (1)  Where  is  the  man  who  has  been  made  happy  by 
temporal  success.  First  a  man  wants  to  make  a  living,  then  a  competency,  then  a 
superfluity,  then  he  wants  more.  The  husks  of  this  wilderness  can  never  satisfy 
the  hunger  of  the  soul.  How  is  it  with  you  now  with  your  large  house  of  twenty 
rooms  sumptuously  furnished  ;  are  you  any  happier  than  when  you  had  only  two  T 
If  you  have  never  found  out  the  true  secret  of  life — the  love  of  God  and  His  service, 
you  are  not  so  happy.  Besides,  if  they  had  all  that  they  profess,  we  cannot  keep 
them.  How  many  dollars  is  Croesus  worth  now  f  (2)  We  cannot  depend  on  friend- 
ship*. Some  play  us  false ;  the  truest  leave  ns.  (3)  We  cannot  build  on  domestio 
enjoyments,  pure  and  holy  though  they  be.  II.  Transfee,  then,  toub  affections 
TO  things  above.  1.  We  ought  to  do  so.  We  have  a  throne  there,  a  multitude  to 
greet  us,  and  Jesus.  2.  If  we  did  so  it  would  change  everything  in  us,  and  make 
us  more  gentle,  loving,  hopeful,  and  when  we  come  to  die  we  should  need  no  Jacob's 
ladder  or  angel's  wing.  3.  The  apostle  had  such  an  idea  of  heaven  that  it  made 
tne  troubles  of  life  seem  insignificant.  "This  hght  affliction."  (T.  De  Witt 
Talmage,   D.D.)  Drawings    toward   heaven: — A  man   was  passing  along  the 

street,  and  saw  a  blind  boy  seated  on  his  father's  knee,  holding  in  his  hand  a  kite- 
string,  the  kite  flying  away  in  the  air.  The  man  said,  "  Is  it  any  satisfaction  to 
you,  my  lad,  to  fly  that  kite,  when  you  cannot  see  it  ?  "  "0  yes,  sir,"  he  replied, 
"  I  cannot  see  it,  but  I  can  feel  it  pull. "  And  so  out  of  this  dark  world,  and  amid 
this  bUndness  of  sin,  we  feel  something  drawing  us  heavenwards  ;  and  though  we 
eannot  see  the  tbrones,  and  the  joy,  and  the  coronation,  blessed  be  God,  we  can  fee) 
them  pulL     {Ibid.)         The  antidote  to  asceticitm  and  tentualism: — You  most  not 


CHA».  in.]  COLOSSIANS.  ■»?» 

only  seek  heaven ;  you  must  also  think  heaven.  (Cf,  Phil.  iii.  19,  20.)  Extremes 
meet.  Here  the  apostle  points  the  antithesis  between  earthly  and  heavenly  things 
to  controvert  a  Gnostic  asceticism :  in  the  Philippian  letter  he  uses  the  same  contrast 
to  denounce  an  Epicurean  sensualism.  Both  alike  are  guilty  of  the  same  funda- 
mental  error  ;  both  alike  concentrate  their  thoughts  on  material,  mundane  things, 
{Bishop  Lightfoot.)  The  death  of  Melancthon: — "Is  there  anything  else  you 

want  ? "  was  asked  Melancthon  on  his  deathbed.  "  Nothing  but  heaven,"  was 
the  reply.  Not  on  things  on  the  earth : — In  return  for  his  splendid  services  to 
China,  Gordon  would  accept  only  the  distinctions  of  the  "  Yellow  Jacket  "  and  the 
"  Peacock's  Feather,"  which  correspond  to  our  own  orders  of  the  Garter  and  the 
Bath.  Of  these  rewards  he  wrote  to  his  mother  :  "  I  do  not  care  twopence  about 
these  things,  but  know  that  you  and  my  father  like  them."  The  Chinese  Govern- 
ment twice  offered  him  a  fortune.  On  the  first  occasion  ten  thousand  taels  were 
actually  brought  into  his  room,  but  he  drove  out  the  bearers  of  the  treasure,  and 
would  not  even  look  at  it.  On  the  second  occasion  the  sum  was  still  larijer,  but 
this  also  he  declined,  and  afterwards  he  wrote  home  : — "  I  do  not  want  anything, 
either  money  or  honours,  from  either  the  Chinese  Government  or  our  own.  As  for 
the  honours,  I  do  not  value  them  at  all.  I  know  that  I  am  doing  a  great  deal  ol 
good,  and,  liking  my  profession,  do  not  mind  going  on  with  my  work.  Do  not 
think  I  am  ill-tempered,  but  I  do  not  care  one  jot  about  my  promotion,  or  what 
people  may  say.  I  know  I  shall  leave  China  as  poor  as  I  entered  it,  but  with  the 
knowledge  that  through  my  weak  instrumentality  upwards  of  eighty  to  one  hundred 
thousand  lives  have  been  spared."  (E.  flake.)  The  heart  miiplaced: — To  set  the 
heart  on  the  creature  is  to  set  a  diamond  in  lead,  or  to  lock  coals  in  a  cabinet  and 
throw  jewels  into  a  cellar.  (Bishop  Reynolds.)  Vanity  of  earthly  thingt : — 
iEsop'i  fable  says  : — "A  pigeon  oppressed  by  excessive  thirst,  saw  a  goblet  of  water 
painted  on  a  sign-board.  Not  supposing  it  to  be  only  a  picture,  she  flew  towards 
it  with  a  loud  whirr,  and  unwittingly  dashed  against  the  signboard,  and  jarred 
herself  terribly.  Having  broken  her  wings  by  the  blow,  she  fell  to  the  ground,  and 
was  killed  by  one  of  the  bystanders."  The  mockeries  of  the  world  are  many,  and 
those  who  are  deluded  by  them  not  only  miss  the  joys  they  looked  for,  but  in  their 
eager  pursuit  of  vanity  bring  ruin  upon  their  souls.  We  call  the  dove  silly  to  be 
deceived  by  a  picture,  however  cleverly  painted,  but  what  epithet  shall  we  apply 
to  those  who  are  duped  by  the  transparently  false  allurements  of  the  world  I  {C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Attractions  of  the  world: — Nearly  all  can  recall  that  favourite  fiction 
of  their  childhood,  the  voyage  of  Sinbad  the  sailor  into  the  Indian  Sea,  They  will 
remember  that  magnetic  rock  that  rose  from  the  surface  of  the  placid  waters. 
Silently  Sinbad's  vessel  was  attracted  k)wards  it ;  silently  the  bolts  were  drawn  oat 
of  the  ship's  side,  one  by  one,  through  the  subtle  attraction  of  that  magnetic  rock. 
And  when  the  fated  vessel  drew  so  near  that  every  bolt  and  clamp  was  unloosed,  the 
whole  structure  of  bulwark,  mast,  and  spars  tumbled  into  ruin  on  the  sea,  and  the 
sleeping  sailors  awoke  to  their  drowning  agonies.  So  stands  the  magnetic  rock  of 
worldliness  athwart  the  Christian's  path.  Itn  attraction  is  subtle,  silent,  slow,  bat 
fearfully  powerful  on  every  soul  that  floats  within  its  range.  Under  its  enchanting 
spell  bolt  after  bolt  of  good  resolution,  clamp  after  clamp  of  Christian  obligation, 
are  stealthily  drawn  out.  What  matters  it  how  long  or  how  fair  has  been  the 
man's  profession  of  religion,  or  how  flauntingly  the  flag  of  his  orthodoxy  floats 
from  the  masthead  ?  Let  sudden  temptation  smite  the  unbolted  professor,  and  in 
an  hour  he  is  a  wreck.  He  cannot  hold  together  in  a  tempest  of  trial,  he  cannot 
go  out  on  any  cruise  of  Christian  service,  because  he  is  no  longer  held  together 
by  a  Divine  principle  within.  It  has  been  drawn  out  of  him  by  that  mightj 
loadstone  of  attraction,  a  sinfal,  godless,  self-pampering,  Christ-rejecting  world. 
(Cuyler.)  Earthly    and   heavenly  thingt: — As   it   is   but   foolish  childishness 

that  makes  children  bo  delight  in  baubles  that  they  would  not  leave  them 
for  all  your  lands,  so  it  is  but  foolish  worldliness,  and  fleshliness,  and  wickei- 
ness,  that  makes  you  so  much  delight  in  your  houses,  and  lands,  and  meat,  and 
drink,  and  ease,  and  honour,  as  that  you  would  not  part  with  them  for  heaveolj 
delights.  But  what  will  you  do  for  pleasure  when  these  are  gone  ?  Do  yoo  lut 
think  of  that  f  When  your  pleasures  end  in  horror,  and  go  oat  like  a  taper,  th» 
pleasures  of  the  saints  are  then  at  their  best.  (R.  Baxter.)  Earthly -mindti- 
nest : — It  is  storied  of  Henry  the  Fourth  of  France,  asking  the  Duke  of  Alva  if  b& 
had  ohserved  the  eclipses  happening  in  that  year,  he  answered,  that  he  had  eo 
much  business  on  earth,  that  he  had  no  leisure  to  look  up  to  heaven.  A  sad  thir^ 
it  is  for  men  to  be  so  bent,  and  their  hearts  so  set  on  the  things  of  this  world,  m 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOR.  [chap.  in. 


not  to  cast  up  a  look  to  the  things  that  are  in  heaven  ;  nay,  not  to  regard  though 
God  brings  heaven  down  to  them  in  His  Word  and  sacraments.  Yet  so  it  is; 
most  men  are  of  this  Spanish  general's  mind;,  witness  the  oxen,  the  farms, 
the  pleasures,  the  profits  and  preferments,  that  men  are  so  fast  glued  unto, 
that  they  have  hardly  leisure  to  entertain  a  thought  of  any  goodness.  (J.  Spence.) 
Love  of  the  world : — A  dervish  once  went  into  a  confectioner's  shop.  The  con- 
fectioner, to  honour  him,  poured  some  honey  into  a  dish  before  him.  Immediately 
a  swarm  of  flies  settled,  as  was  their  wont,  upon  the  honey  ;  some  upon  the  edge  of 
the  dish,  but  the  greater  number  in  the  middle.  The  confectioner  then  took  up  a 
whisk  to  drive  them  off,  when  those  upon  the  side  flew  away  with  ease,  but  the 
others  were  prevented  from  rising,  the  honey  clinging  to  their  wings,  and_  were 
involved  in  ruin.  The  dervish  noticed  this,  and  remarked,  "  That  honey-dish  is 
like  the  world,  and  the  honey  like  its  pleasures.  Those  who  enjoy  them  with 
moderation  and  contentment,  when  the  whisk  of  death  approaches,  not  having 
their  hearts  filled  with  the  love  of  them,  can  with  ease  escape  its  snare  ;  while  all 
who,  like  the  foolish  flies,  have  given  themselves  whoUy  to  their  sweetness  will 
meet  with  destruction."    {From  the  Hindustani.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  For  ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  Is  hid  with  Christ  la  God.— TA« 
Christian's  life: — I.  The   Christian's   death.     "Ye  are  dead."     Is  not  this   a 
paradox  ?   Did  not  Christ  come  that  we  might  have  life  abundantly.   And  yet  when 
we  enter  His  service  we  are  told  to  die.     Who  can  solve  the  enigma  ?     Scripture 
only.  1.  "  She  that  liveth  in  pleasure,"  &o.  (1  Tim.  v.  6) — dead  to  spiritual  things. 
In  that  heart  there  beats  no  pulse  for  God ;  in  that  spirit  there  is  no  desire  of 
heaven ;  pleasures  of  sense  engross  it.    Just  the  reverse  of  this  will  explain  the 
text.    Whosoever,  therefore,  will  be  a  friend  of  the  world  is  an  enemy  to  God- 
Impiety  has  entered  into  an  unholy  compact  to  amalgamate  the  two ;  but  it  is  a 
covenant  with  death,  and  shall  be  disannulled.    The  Christian  regards  the  world 
as  though  it  were  not,  although  the  difference  may  not  be  apparent  to  a  superficial 
observer.    Try  him.    Let  his  duty  be  set  before  him,  and  however  difficult  he  will 
not  shirk  it.    Mark  him  in  sorrow  sustained  by  an  energy  of  which  the  world 
wotteth  not.    He  is  risen  with  Christ.    2.  The  Christian  is  crucified  with  Christ, 
and  is  so  dead  to  sin.  As  by  the  Saviour's  dying,  the  power  of  death  was  destroyed, 
■0  by  the  sinner's  dying  it  is  dethroned,  and  he  becomes  a  new  creature  in  Christ. 
II.  Tee  Christian's  life.     It  is  hid  with  Christ  in   God.     1.  In  the   sense  of 
secreoy.      (1)  Eevelation  has  not  been  minute  in  new  discoveries  of  the  better 
world.  Just  enough  is  known  to  increase  faith  and  confirm  hope.  This  is  necessary 
(o  the  idea  of  probation,  for  perfect  knowledge  would  leave  no  room  for  faith. 
Hence  we  only  know  in  part.     Our  senses  can  give  no  information,  for  it  is  out  of 
(heir  province ;  it  baffles  reason  ;  imagination  may  plume  her  tireless  pinions,  and 
revel  in  the  ideal  magnificence  she  can  call  into  being,  but  still  it  hath  not  entered 
into  the  heart  of  man.     None  of  those  who  have  travelled  the  road  have  returned. 
(2)  This  is  a  secrecy  of  mercy.     The  eye  of  the  mind,  like  the  eye  of  the  body,  is 
mjured  by  excess  of  light;  and  the  office  of  faith  would  be  prematurely  gone. 
2.  In  the  sense  of  security.     We  are  continually  reminded  of  the  instability  of  all 
around  us.    Fair  buds  of  promise  are  blighted  by  the  wintry  blast.    Friends  twine 
themselves  round  our  affections,  and  then  die.     The  world  is  rapidly  decaying. 
Bat  the  life  to  come  abideth.     Time  affects  not  them  who  live  for  ever.     Death  is 
destoyed  for  them,  and  so  they  are  safe.     Where  is  it  hidden  ?    With  Christ. 
Where  He  is — in  that  land  where  "  there  shall  in  nowise  enter  anything  that  can 
hurt  or  destroy. "    "  In  God,"  in  His  great  heart — who  is  never  faithless  to  His 
promise,  and  whose  perfections  are  pledged  to  confer  it.    How  can  we  be  dis- 
trustful 7    III.  The  Chbistian'b  prospects  (ver.  4).    These  words  imply — 1.  Enjoy- 
ment.    Scanty  as  is  oar  knowledge  of  the  future,  enough  is  revealed  to  exalt  oar 
highest  hopes.      It  is  brought  before  us  as   an  inheritance  incorruptible  and 
andefiled ;  as  a  paradise  amongst  whose  trees  of  life  there  lurks  no  serpent ;  a 
country  every  fresh  revelation  of  whose  beauties  shall  augment  our  knowledge  and 
joy ;  a  city  whose  every  gate  is  of  jewellery,  whose  every  street  is  a  suntrack  ;  as  a 
temple,  and  above  all  as  oar  Father's  house  where  our  elder  Brother  dwells.    Yet 
these  are  but  emblems.      2.   Manifestation.      The  irreligious  world  perceives  a 
difference  between  it  and  the  children  of  God  which  it  cannot  understand.     It 
thinks  not  that  that  man  whom  it  charges  with  hypocrisy  or  fanaticism  is  among 
the  favoured  ones  of  heaven,  and  that  beneath  a  beggar's  robes  there  throbs  a 
prince's  soul.    Bide  your  time.    With  what  different  feelings  will  they  be  regarded 


CHiP.  in]  C0L0SSIAN8.  181 

when  they  appear  with  Him  in  the  glory  of  the  Father  and  with  the  holy  angels. 
IV.  Toe  Christian's  duty  (ver.  2).  If  all  this  be  the  case,  how  can  we  resist  the 
conclusion  ?  For  a  Christian  to  be  absorbed  in  the  gainfulness  of  the  world  is  at 
once  an  infatuation  and  a  sin.  It  is  as  though  a  prince  were  to  revel  with  beggars. 
What  have  you,  of  the  blood  royal  of  heaven,  to  do  with  this  vain  fleeting  show  ? 
Call  faith  to  your  aid — "the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  (W.  31.  Punshm^ 
LLJ).)  The  present  condition  and  future  glory  of  life  in  Christ: — Observe — 
L  That  the  present  condition  of  the  believer's  lite  in  Christ  involves  k 
NEW  relation  to  OUTWARD  THINGS.  "  For  ye  are  dead."  There  was  a  time  when 
be  lived  in,  to,  and  for  the  world.  But  now,  while  still  in  it,  he  is  dead  to  its 
charms  and  to  its  ordinances.  All  the  mainsprings  of  activity  are  changed.  Man 
lives  where  he  loves.  II.  That  the  present  condition  of  the  believer's  life 
IN  Christ  is  one  of  concealment  from  the  outward  world.  1.  It  is  hid.  All 
life  is  hid.  Its  origin  is  a  profound  mystery.  The  botanist  fails  to  discover  it. 
The  scalpel  of  the  anatomist  has  not  pierced  its  dark  domain.  Its  presence  is 
known  only  by  its  effects.  It  is  not  a  life  of  vulgar  display.  2.  It  is  hid  with 
Christ.  Christ  Himself  was  hidden  when  here,  and  is  now  to  the  world,  and  the 
believer's  life  is  with  Him  as  a  river  concealed  in  a  hidden  channel  flowing  beneath. 
This  hiding  indicates  (1)  dependence.  It  is  not  hid  with  the  believer  himself ;  he 
derives  it  from  Christ,  and  on  Him  depends  for  its  nourishment.  The  springs  of  this 
lifd  abide  when  every  other  source  is  exhausted.  (2)  Security.  Our  life  is  safer  in  His 
keeping  than  it  could  be  in  our  own.  Man  was  once  entrusted  with  it, and  he  lost  it. 

1.  It  is  hid  in  the  depths  of  the  Godhead,  Not  lost  in  the  abyss  of  Deity,  as  th« 
mystic  or  pantheist  would  teach ;  but  so  hid  as  to  retain  its  own  conscious  indi- 
viduality, while  sharing  in  the  boundless  life  of  God.  III.  That  the  bei-ieveb's 
L(FB  IN  Christ  will,  in  the  future,  be  manifested  in  ineffable  glory.  1. 
There  will  be  a  signal  manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  future.  2.  The  b  liever  will 
share  in  the  ineffable  glory  of  that  manifestation.  This  implies  (1)  public  recog- 
nition. The  believer,  obscure  and  despised  on  earth,  is  acknowledged  before  the 
universe  as  related  to  Christ.  All  the  ends  of  secrecy  are  answered.  The  hidden 
is  revealed.  (2)  A  personal  participation  in  the  splendour  of  Cljrist's  triumph  and 
in  the  bliss  of  His  character,  (G.  Barlow.)  The  Christian  life  is — L  A  death. 
"Ye  are  dead."  1.  You  have  retained  an  individuality,  but  lost  a  consciousness. 
You  had  a  knowledge  once  of  which  you  have  no  knowledge  now.  Your  old  sins 
are  like  names  on  a  tombstone  ;  once  they  were  your  whole  being  and  personality. 

2.  "Dead,"  for  how  can  life  be  sustained  without  food?  and  the  old  life  is  nnali- 
mented.  Yon  have  ceased  to  fulfil  the  lusts  and  thus  to  maintain  the  being.  3. 
"  Dead,"  for  you  are  a  mystery  to  the  world.  They  think  there  are  no  pure  men 
and  women,  but  there  are,  and  they  have  been  crucified  with  Christ.  II.  A  Divine 
GIFT  LOST  AND  RESTORED.  Life  was  the  most  precious  jewel  in  the  gift  of  God.  God 
inbreathed  this  life — gave  it  to  man  to  keep  it.  Man  threw  it  awny.  Then  said 
Christ,  "  I  will  recover  it,  and  crown  him  again,"  "  I  am  come  that  they  might 
have  life."  But  it  could  only  be  recovered  at  the  expense  of  His  own.  He  con- 
quered, and  a  second  time  "  God  hath  given  unto  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in 
His  Son."  And  from  that  moment  He  said  to  His  people,  "  I  am  the  Keeper  of 
your  life."  That  jewel  must  not  be  thrown  away  again.  III.  Hidden.  All  life  is. 
The  life  of  a  tree,  of  an  insect,  eludes  the  physiologist.  It  is  an  awful  mystery. 
We  have,  too,  to  feel  in  our  friendships  that  the  heart  that  beat  very  near  to  us, 
even  after  all  its  confidences,  is  hidden.  Our  spiritual  life  is  hidden.  1.  In  its 
origin.  It  is  a  Divine  seed.  It  is  the  breath  of  the  holy.  When  men  attempt  to 
reason  on  this  matter  their  processes  are  sometimes  startling  and  their  conclusions 
nninstructive.  It  is  "  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent,"  &c.  It  is  hidden,  but 
Divinely  true,  2.  In  its  development.  "The  world  knoweth  us  not  because  it 
knew  Him  not."  True,  we  may  be  known  by  our  deeds,  but  we  are  hidden,  like  a 
pearl  in  the  sea,  a  star  in  the  daytime.  But  God  sees  what  we  see  not.  He  watches 
the  growth,  tends  and  trains  His  loved  ones.  But  the  growth  of  a  Christian  often 
contradicts  the  expectations  of  the  world.  When  the  world  says.  Behold  their 
weakness,  Christ  says.  Behold  their  strength,  and  vice  versa.  Your  hopes,  fears, 
praj'ers,  Ac,  the  world  never  saw.  All  the  most  sacred  things  are  secret.  3.  In  its 
destiny.  As  all  waters  run  into  the  sea,  so  all  fulness  in  us  terminates  in  our 
fulness  in  Him,  IV.  Safe.  We  feel  this  for  our  lost  friends  ;  let  us  feel  it  for 
ourselves  and  our  living  dear  ones.  The  treasure  we  could  not  keep  is  guarded 
among  the  regalia  of  the  skies.  The  forces  of  eternity  bind  us  to  our  Lord  as  the 
•artb  is  held  in  order  by  her  parent  sun.     Good  people  are  neither  bom,  nor  live, 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

nor  die  by  chance.  So  of  little  children.  Why  are  they  born  to  die  ?  it  seems  so 
vain,  the  parents  solicitude  and  agony.  No,  it  is  not  vain.  "  Their  life  is  hid  with 
Christ  in  God."  A  citizen  mav  be  safe,  although  the  walls  may  be  destroyed ;  the 
man,  although  the  dress  be  destroyed ;  the  root,  although  the  flower  may  be 
destroyed  ;  the  soul,  although  the  body  be  destroyed.  Diseases  and  fiends  may 
prowl  around,  and  fires  consume,  but  they  cannot  touch  him  whose  life  is  hid,  &c. 
V.  To  BE  MANIFESTED  IN  GLOEY.  1.  Glory !  What  is  that  ?  The  revelation  of  the 
hidden  life.  Think  of  it  less  as  the  triumph  of  the  conqueror  than  as  the  ecstasy 
of  the  new-born  delight  in  the  thrice  holy  state.  2.  With  Him.  In  the  deeper 
recesses  of  the  heavenly  state,  when  glory  does  not  cast  too  dreadful  a  brilliancy; 
there  meditating  on  the  wonder  that  we  appear  with  Him,  that  we  have  seen  Him 
emile,  that  He  has  introduced  us  to  our  dear  ones,  that  He  will  employ  us  in  holy 
toil.  3.  Meanwhile,  in  the  presence  of  this  thought,  let  all  light  afflictions  be  for- 
gotten. (Paxton  Hood.)  T he  hidden  life : — I.  Its  reality.  A  traveller  in  Brazil 
on  passing  a  mountain,  was  informed  that  there  was  a  priceless  treasure  in  the 
heart  of  it,  which,  when  disenchanted,  would  appear.  WLat  was  a  fiction  here  is 
a  truth  concerning  the  interest  of  the  Christian  in  Christ,  the  Rock  of  Ages.  Our 
title  to  salvation  is  in  Him  ;  but  He  is  hidden.  None  the  less  sure,  however,  is  it 
that  we  are  saved  if  we  believe  in  Him.  Two  considerations  may  assure  us.  1. 
The  consciousness  of  spiritual  change.  We  have  changed  views  and  feelings  in 
regard  to  God  and  His  claims.  We  have  peace  where  once  was  disturbance.  We 
have  the  Spirit  of  Adoption,  who  bears  witness  with  our  spirit  (Eom.  viii.  16).  2. 
The  evidence  of  spiritual  character :  walking  in  the  light,  fruitfulness,  Christly 
dispositions,  Christian  service.  The  life  of  the  Christian  is  a  testimony  to  the 
power  of  Divine  grace.  Without  Christ  we  can  do  nothing  ;  but  our  character  and 
actions  show  that  we  have  Him.  II.  Its  preciousness.  Great  store  is  set  on  it  as 
men  set  upon  tbe  treasures  which  they  used  to  bury.  Statesmen,  philanthropists, 
<fec.,  are  presented  with  the  freedom  of  a  city,  and  the  pledge  of  honour  is  enclosed 
in  a  golden  casket.  Our  citizenship  is  in  heaven  with  Christ.  What  dignities  are 
consequently  conferred  upon  us  ?  We  are  sons,  heirs,  kings,  priests.  The  service 
and  death  of  Christ  made  this  privilege  possible,  and  with  it  "  all  things  are  ours," 
and  to  keep  it  we  willingly  count  "all  things  loss."  III.  Its  sdbe  guardianship. 
There  is  nothing  valuable  but  is  exposed  to  danger.  Full  well  we  know  the  peril  of 
the  spiritual  life,  and  if  it  were  in  our  own  custody  we  should  soon  lose  it.  But  who 
can  erase  the  shining  characters  from  the  life-roll  of  heaven,  traced  by  the  finger  of 
God  ?  Satan's  dark  hand  cannot  reach  the  archives  of  heaven.  A  phosphoric 
flame  can  be  kept  alight  in  water  by  electric  influence  communicated  through  a 
wire ;  so  the  life  of  God  can  be  maintained  within  us,  notwithstanding  all  that 
tends  to  extinguish  it,  through  the  influence  derived  from  Christ.  The  late  Duke 
of  Brunswick  had  an  iron  jewel  chest  which  was  so  skilfully  contrived  that  when 
anyone  opened  it,  who  knew  not  the  secret,  bells  rung,  and  pistols  were  fired.  But 
skilful  thieves  one  night  dug  through  the  wall  against  which  it  was  placed,  pierced 
the  chest,  and  stole  many  of  the  gems.  And,  however  careful  we  might  be,  if  there 
were  not  One  greater  and  more  vigilant  than  ourselves  our  life  treasure  would  be 
lost.  IV.  Its  reserve.  *'  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  The  glory 
that  shall  be  revealed  is  not  yet  manifest.  Hence  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  and 
therefore  treats  us  with  contempt.  The  world  values  rank,  wealth,  parade,  &c. 
But  some  day  there  will  be  a  full  recognition.  Look  upon  a  landscape  in  winter, 
how  dark  the  trees,  dull  the  grass,  cold  and  uninteresting  the  scene.  But  look 
again  when  spring  and  summer  have  breathed  their  influences  abroad ;  what 
luxurious  foliage,  flower-enamelled  turf,  singing  birds.  The  hidden  Ufe  is  come 
forth  and  is  acknowledged.  Once,  when  Lord  Macaulay  was  surrounded  by  courtly 
friends  in  a  brilliant  assemblage  he  recognized  and  shook  hands  with  a  retiring 
literary  man  whose  genius  he  knew,  but  whom  others  passed  by.  Christ  at  last 
shall  confess  His  own  before  His  Father  and  the  angels.  But  till  then  this  life  and 
glory  are  hid  in  Christ.  Yet  be  encouraged ;  your  redemption  draweth  nigh.  V. 
Its  deathlessness.  The  perishable  body  shall  decay,  but  the  life  secured  by  Christ 
shall  not  be  harmed.  He  will  bring  it  forth  and  crown  it.  A  cloud  passes  over  the 
nightly  sky  ;  but  you  wait,  and  a  breeze  chases  the  mist  away,  and  then  all  the 
splendour  of  the  starry  firmament  bursts  on  your  gaze.  So  death  is  but  a  passing 
eclipse.  "  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine,"  &c.  "  When  Christ,  who  is  our  life, 
shall  appear."  Conclusion:  1.  Prize  this  hfe.  2.  Seek  the  proof  of  its  possession. 
3.  Thank  Ood  for  it.  4.  In  patience  possess  your  8»uls.  (G.  Mc  Michael,  B.A.) 
Death  and  li/e  in  Chritt : — I.  Where  odb  life  is  not.      It  is  not  in  ourselves. 


CHAT,  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  183 

"  Ye  are  dead."  1.  How  completely  the  image  of  bodily  death  in  the  senseless, 
motionless,  aud  unimpressive  state  of  the  mortal  frame,  compared  with  its  vigour 
and  activity  during  life,  represents  the  natural  condition  of  the  soul  before  God. 
Talk  to  the  dead  of  the  most  stirring  truths,  surround  them  with  all  that  charms 
the  living,  lavish  upon  them  all  the  endearments  that  the  heart  can  bestow,  and 
what  return  will  you  receive?  Just  so  is  it  with  the  soul  in  its  unconverted  state. 
How  else  is  it  that  men  hear  these  verities  of  God  and  go  on  as  though  there  were 
no  soul,  God,  eternity  ?  It  is  because  the  soul  is  dead,  cannot  see,  hear,  feel.  2. 
Eat  this  absence  of  life  is  ascribed  to  the  converted  likewise.  They  are  not  dead 
■o  as  to  denote  the  actual  want  of  life,  for  Christ  is  their  life ;  but  dead  because 
they  have  not  this  life  in  themselves.  The  soul  has  no  power  to  quicken  and 
regenerate  itself.  Shall  the  dead  raise  the  dead  1  Who  has  not  striven  to  rouse 
the  stagnant  affections,  kindle  the  cold  desire,  to  walk  closer  with  God,  and  render 
a  more  zealous  obedience,  yet  found  his  efforts  profitless  as  trees  thrice  dead.  It  is 
weD  for  as  to  know  the  depth  of  our  own  need,  and  the  feebleness  of  our  best 
strength.  It  is  from  ignorance  that  we  make  these  efforts  in  our  own  strength,  and 
fail  till  the  heart  grows  sick.  Yes,  and  grace  does  not  on  this  side  heaven  remove 
this  state  of  impotency.  At  no  stage  does  God  give  the  soul  life  in  itself ;  He 
imparts  and  renews  it,  as  the  soul  has  need,  all  fresh  from  Himself  in  daily  streams 
to  meet  daily  wants.  He  does  not  in  one  act  of  conversion  store  the  soul  with  a 
treasure  of  strength,  but  breathes  into  it  more  and  more  of  His  spirit,  keeping  the 
eoul  dependent  on  Himself  as  a  child  on  its  parent.  II.  Whebe  odb  hifs  is. 
"  Hid  with  Christ  in  God."  1.  But  why  not  have  given  man  life  directly  in  Him- 
self ?  This  is  what  God  really  did  ;  but  man  lost  it  beneath  his  first  temptatioru 
Then  was  moved  the  fount  of  Divine  compassion,  and  through  a  scheme  of  redemp- 
tion, culminating  in  Christ's  resurrection,  life  is  procured  for  man  again.  2.  Then 
comes  the  question.  Into  whose  keeping  shall  this  life  be  put  ?  Doubtless  life  will 
be  in  man  himself  hereafter;  but  that  will  be  in  heaven,  when  the  adversary,  all 
boand  and  fettered,  shall  have  been  cast  into  his  own  place.  But  in  whom  shall  it 
be  placed  meanwhile ?  (1)  In  man,  who  had  already  once  lost  it?  Entrusted  to 
fallen  man  to  keep  that  which  uufallen  man  could  not  keep  ?  Our  experience  may 
well  teach  us  how  dark  had  been  our  lot,  if  the  preservation  of  our  spiritual  life 
amid  this  world  of  sin  had  been  left  merely  to  our  own  strength.  (2)  Should  it, 
then,  have  been  entrusted  to  some  mighty  archangel  7  Ah  I  then  we  had  seen  war, 
when  angel  was  mated  against  angel,  and  we,  all  fearful,  had  seen  our  all  at  stake 
upon  a  dubious  contest.  (3)  Nol  that  gift  which,  once  lost,  had  been  recovered  at 
BO  vast  a  cost,  had  it  been  a  second  time  lost  could  never  have  been  a  second  time 
recovered — for  God  had  no  second  Son  to  give.  That  life  was  not  to  be  liglAly 
imperilled,  and  therefore  God  laid  it  up  in  His  own  Son,  that  He  who  had  purchased 
should  preserve  what  He  had  purchased,  and  against  whose  infinite  strength  all 
hell  is  weak  to  snatch  one  soul  that  trusts  in  Him.  "  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which 
is  committed  unto  Him,"  &c.  (E.  Garbett,  M.A.)  I.  The  Christian's  death  and 
LIFE.  1.  Two  periods  in  the  history  of  a  Christian  :  death,  resurrection  (Comp. 
Eph.  ii.  1,  and  1  Pet.  i.  3).  2.  Why  these  expressions — death,  life?  Three  kinds 
of  life — bodily ;  of  the  heart ;  religious.  The  last  alone  real,  according  to  the 
gospel.  It  consists  in  setting  our  affections  on  things  above,  and  is  in  God  with 
Christ,  Christ  having  borne  our  life  away  we  are  dead.  "  Set  not  your  affections 
on  things  on  the  earth."  (1)  The  earth  is  not  our  place.  (2)  The  Christian, 
although  dead,  is  not  useless  nor  desolate  in  spirit,  for  He  has  God.  (3)  Neverthe- 
leee  he  is  de»d — (a)  To  sin.  (b)  To  the  world,  (c)  He  has  fixed  his  goal  beyond 
all  that  is  transitory ;  he  is  a  stranger,  a  traveller,  a  passer-by.  He  is  dead,  and 
appears  dead.  How  natural  this  is.  Nothing  troubles,  or  excites,  or  astounds  him ; 
gives  the  right  cheek,  &c. ;  this  man  it  is  said  bas  no  blood  in  his  veins.  3.  Yet 
he  lives,  but  his  life  is  hidden.  In  one  sense  it  is  not  so.  But — (1)  Its  principle  is 
hidden.  (2)  Its  best  parts  are  invisible — prayer,  &c.  (3)  The  Christian  conceals 
himself.  When  all  the  world  speaks  well  of  you,  tremble.  II  Motives  fob 
TAKING  cp  one's  POSITION.  1.  Christ  has  not  yet  appeared.  Christ  is  known  and 
unknown.  "  Shall  the  disciple  be  more  than  his  Master  ? "  2.  The  Christian  ia 
«een  of  God,  this  must  be  enough.  There  are  flowers  on  inaccessible  heights  seen 
only  by  Him.  Mediaeval  sculptors  carved  exquisite  images  on  the  top  of  pillars  to 
be  "  seen  of  God."  3.  Glorious  compensations — king  in  disguise.  4.  Promise  of 
being ■  manifested  some  day.  "He  that  shall  confess  Me  "  (Dan.  xii.  3).  IIL 
Application.  All  this  is  Christianity,  neither  more  nor  less.  You  might  be  asked, 
Lee  you  risen  ?    Are  you  dead  ?    I  ask — 1.  Do  yon  love  invisible  things  ?    Angels 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap,  nfc 

love  them.     2.  Do  you  love  the  hidden  life  ?    To  be  last,  &o.     8.  Do  you  feel  that 
this  is  your  safety  as  well  as  your  natural  position?    Or  do  you  perform  all  your 
actions  with  a  view  of  bemg  seen  of  men.     (A.  Vmet,  D.D.)         The  hidden  lije  : — 
1.  What  gives  Christ's  mediatorship  its  practical  dignity  is  not  only  its  display  of 
Divine  mercy  but  also  its  titness  to  invigorate  and  encourage  a  spiritual  life  in  the 
believer  ;  and  the  most  reverential  view  of  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  is  the  largest 
producer  of  daily  holiness,  as  well  as  the  dearest  to  the  heart.     2.  The  first  fact 
that  we  encounter  in  the  historic  consciousness  of  the  Church  is  Christ's  invisible 
supremacy  as  its  head  and  Lord  in  the  private  hearts  of  disciples  and  in  their  public 
organization  and  activity.     No  sooner  was  Jesus  gone  than,  with  the  widest  diver. 
eities  of  taptes  and  habits,  they  were  united  in  one  common  bond  of  a  hidden  life. 
Jouiney  where  they  will  their  hearts  cling  to  one  invisible  Matter.    3.  And  so  it 
has  been  in  the  line  of  spiritual  descent  every  since.     Personal  fellowship  with 
Christ  has  been  the  hereditary  blood  in  the  veins  of  the  Church.     This  inward  life 
we  have  now  to  interpret.     I.  In  its  necessity.     The  need  of  sharing  the  Mediator'a 
life  lies  within  the  soul  itself.     1.  From  the  consciousness  of  spiritual  deficiency. 
(1)  We  all  feel  that  we  are  not  what  we  ought  to  be,  but  terribly  otherwise.     (2} 
Now  if  we  lived  under  an  abstract  law  this  sense  of  deficiency  would  remain  an 
inoperative  discontent  at  having  fallen  short  only  of  an  ideal  standard,  so  that  we 
should  be  but  offenders  against  our  own  ambition,  not  sinners.     (3)     On  the  con- 
trary, we  are  under  the  government  of  a  personal  God.     Our  goings  astray  are  not 
mistakes,  but  sins ;  not  merely  dwarfings  of  our  manhood's  stature,  but  affronts 
against  a  h(  avenly  Father.    His  law  is  good,  but  our  lives  are  not.     Suppose  the 
past  score  settled  by  repentance,  who  of  us  but  knows  that  he  will  sin  again.     (4) 
What,  then,  were  our  life  without  a  Mediator  reconciling  it  ?     What,  except  it  were 
animated  by  His  power,  and  forgiven  by  His  pardon  ?     2.  From  the  native  notion 
of  perfection.     (1)  The  trace  of  glory  past,  and  pledge  of  immortality  to  be  lingers 
with  us.     The  soul  will  not  be  content  wi(h  its  degradation.     Nicodemus  dreams  of 
a  character  saintlier  than  a  Pharisee,  and  feels  his  way  to  Christ.     (2)  Here  again, 
if  there  were  no  personal  God  to  whom  these  aspirations  reach  up,  if  they  did  not 
culminate  in  the  supreme  desire  for  harmony  with  the  holy  Father,  then  we  should 
need  no  Mediator,  and  these  notions  would  be  only  transient  visitants.     But  the 
moment  our  eyes  are  opened  on  our  true  relations  to  God  we  see  that  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  a  satisfactory  striving  after  ideal  t-tandards,  but  only  after  reconcilia- 
tion with  Him,  that  the  restless  heart  gets  peace  at  the  moment  of  the  conviction 
that  God  is  its  friend.     Perfection  of  character  is  not  to  be  gained  except  by  that 
inspiration ;  a  pea^^eful  progress  in  goodness  comes  only  by  that  faith.     (3)  And 
now  again,  the  only  way  to  the  Father  is  by  the  Son.     For  in  Christ  every  ideal  of 
excellence  is  realized.     We  no  longer  aim  at  the  cloudy  excellence  of  imagination. 
Christ  is  before  us.     Those  that  place  their  bauds  in  His  He  leads  to  the  Father. 
To  be  ChiistUke  is  to  be  perfect ;  to  have  faith  in  Christ  is  to  be  brought  near  to 
God.    II.  Its  natdee.     In  what  special  kinds  of  force  do  its  power  and  peace  and 
charm  consist.     1.  In  this,  that  being  received  into  our  faith  in  just  these  two 
characters   in  which  we  need  Him,    (1)    Christ  creates  within  the  disciples  the 
freedom  that  comes  from  the  consciousness  of  being  forgiven.     That  is  the  beginning 
of  all  healthful  obeditnce.     What  was  a  dismal  compulsion  before  becomes  a  spon- 
taneous and  freewill  offering  now.     With  life  all  is  new  ;  its  spring  is  gratitude,  not 
law;  its  principle  love,  not  fear  ;  its  end,  the  Divine  glory  and  man's  good,  not  a 
eelfish  salvation.     But  this  life  is  thankfully  and  joyously  hid  with  Christ.     Ex- 
punge the  CroBs,  and  in  what  other  gospel  will  you  look  for  the  glad  tidings  of 
forgiveness.     (2)  Christ  directs  the  disciple's  practical  energies  to  a  model  that  ia 
Divine.     Christ  is  the  pattern  for  the  energies  that  form   character.      But  the 
example  of  Jesus  loses  its  grandest  inspiration  when  He  is  made  to  stand  apart 
from  His  followers.     It  is  not  a  statue  outside  us,  but  a  vital  force  working  within. 
To  have  our  life  hid  with  Him  we  must  have  Him  formed  in  us.     And  the  pattern 
is  not  the  Christ  of  Caesar's  time,  but  the  ever  living  Immanuel.     Paul  had  that 
fellowship  so  palpably  that  he  said,  "I  live,  yet  not  I,"  &c.     2.  The  life  hid  with 
Christ  in  God  is  a  life  constantly  invigorated  by  Christ's  quickening  spirit  received 
by  faith.      4.    The  doctrine  of  spiritual  union  through  Christ  with  God  affects 
devotion.     He  who  is  conscious  of  it  knows  it  by  the  richer  interest  given  to  his 
prayers.     For  it  reveals  Christ  as  our  "  advocate  with  the  Father."     How  can  He 
intercede  for  us  but  by  a  present  acquaintance  with  our  needs  ?     Praying  in  His 
name  is  something  more  than  repeatiug  a  proposition  at  the  end  of  our  petitions. 
It  must  be  praying  from  the  feehng  that  He  knows  the  substance  of  our  prayer  and 


CHAP,  in.]  C0L08SIANS.  185 

the  heart  it  confesses,  and  that  He  aids  it  by  His  prevailing  sympathies  now  as 
much  as  when  He  taught  His  disciples  to  say,  "  Our  Father."  4.  Even  in  those 
relations  wliich  lie  most  directly  between  our  souls  and  the  Father,  which  might 
therefore  seem  to  be  most  independent  of  a  Mediator,  the  highest  style  of  piety  ia 
not  seen  without  a  lively  sense  of  Christ.  That  faith,  e.g.,  that  every  concern  in 
our  lives  is  contrived  for  us  by  a  sympathizing  God,  a  faith  which  embosoms  us  in 
a  care  so  fatherly  that  we  want  some  warmer  word  than  Providence  to  express  it,  is 
not  found  except  in  hearts  alive  with  personal  love  for  Christ.  IH.  Its  eesults. 
1.  It  is  the  life  of  love.  Being  hid  with  Christ  it  is  penetrated  with  the  spirit  of 
Him  who  loved  as  never  man  loved.  Being  hid  in  God  it  is  suffused  by  the 
affections  of  Him  whose  name  is  Love.  No  man  hating  bis  brother  can 
abide  in  this  fellowship,  no  despiser  of  the  poor,  no  bigot,  no  oppressor,  no 
conceited  Pharisee.  Jesus  is  charity,  and  to  live  in  Him  is  to  live  mercifully, 
fraternally,  and  liberally.  When  the  world's  life  is  hid  with  Him,  the  bloodshed  of 
nations,  the  overreachings  of  commerce,  the  unequal  administrations  of  govern- 
ments, the  barbarous  contrasts  in  Christian  cities,  the  hatreds  of  households,  will 
yield  to  a  constructive  principle  of  heavenly  order.  "  I  in  'them,"  &c. — the  social 
life  of  the  disciples  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  2.  This  hfe  solves  the  old  contradic- 
tion between  works  and  faith.  Christian  character  is  not  a  mosaic  of  moralities, 
but  a  growth.  All  we  have  to  do  is  to  receive  Christ,  and  then  the  fruits  of  daily 
righteousness  will  naturally  spring  forth,  in  all  forms  of  manly  uprightness,  womanly 
serenity,  conscientious  citizenship,  beneficeat  industry.  3.  The  doctrine  gives  the 
world  truth  in  all  its  uncompromising  rigour  and  concrete  applications.  If  Jesus 
be  admitted  in  all  the  purity  of  His  transparent  soul  as  a  visible  witness  of  the  con- 
ventional veracity  that  is  satisfied  if  it  equivocates  by  l>ing  labels,  or  evasions  in  a 
bargain,  and  artifices  in  law  courts,  of  the  silly  falsehoods  of  flattery,  or  cowardly 
falsehoods  to  avoid  ot^ence,  who  would  dare  to  confront  with  them  the  look  of  His 
Divine  rebuke  ?  Christ,  then,  hid  in  the  heart,  is  the  test  and  guardian  of  truth. 
4.  And  of  justice  no  less;  not  that  formal  honesty,  which  is  only  a  moral  name 
for  a  selfish  policy,  not  the  legal  integrity  which  has  no  higher  sanction  than  the 
letter  of  the  statute  book,  and  so  cheats  the  helpless  or  steals  a  competitor's  reputa- 
tion, but  rather  that  spiritual  justice  which  treats  every  man  uprightly  because  a 
child  of  God,  although  only  a  servant  or  an  office  boy.  5.  The  hiding  of  our  life  with 
Christ  corrects  the  error  that  religion  is  a  product  of  humanity.  A  few  conquests 
over  matter  have  flattered  us  into  the  conceit  that  God  must  look  down  with  vast 
ocmplacency  on  our  attainments,  and  so  we  come  to  substitute  decorum  for  piety, 
and  fancy  that  we  make  oursel  ves  acceptable  w  ith  God.  A  reception  of  Christ  would 
expel  this  self-reference  and  measurement.  The  inner  life  in  Christ  is  offered 
because  otherwise  the  soul  is  weak  and  dark.  {Buhop  Huntington.)  The  hidden 
life : — Standing  by  the  telegraph  wires  we  may  often  hear  the  mystic  wailing  and 
sighing  of  the  winds  among  them,  like  the  strains  of  an  Mohan  harp ;  but  one 
knows  nothing  of  the  message  which  is  flashing  along  them.  Joyous  inay  be  the 
inner  language  of  those  wires,  swift  as  the  lightning,  far-reaching  and  full  of  mean- 
ing, but  a  stranger  meddles  not  therewith.  Fit  emblem  of  a  believer's  inner  life  ; 
men  hear  our  notes  of  outward  sorrow  wrung  from  us  by  external  circumstances, 
but  the  message  of  celestial  peace,  the  Divine  communings  with  a  better  land,  the 
Bwift  heart-throbs  of  heaven-born  desire,  they  cannot  perceive  :  the  carnal  see  but 
the  outer  manhood,  but  the  life  bidden  with  Christ  in  God  flesh  and  blood  cannot 
discern.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  hidden  life  of  the  Christian: — I.  The  treasure. 
Natural  life  is  a  treasure.  How  highly  we  value  it.  When  sick  what  measures  we 
take  for  recovery.  But  what  is  that  compared  with  the  life  of  the  soul  ?  The  life 
referred  to  is — 1.  A  life  of  justification  (Rom.  viii.  32).  2.  A  life  of  sanctification 
(Eph.  ii.  10).  3.  An  eternal  life  of  glory.  II.  Its  concealment.  1.  It  is  hid  from 
tbe  world,  not  in  its  characteristics  and  effects,  but  in  its  nature  and  spiritual 
operations.  Communion  with  God,  justification,  assurance.  Christian  peace  and 
joy,  are  all  inscrutable  to  the  natural  man,  because  only  spiritually  discerned  (1  Cor. 
i.  11).  2.  It  is  partly  hidden  from  Christians  themselves.  Not  that  a  man  can  be 
a  Christian  without  knowing  it ;  but  there  are  ever  fresh  and  astonishing  phases 
opening  up,  e.g.,  in  the  apprehension  of  the  meaning  of  Scripture,  and  in  the 
heights  and  depths  of  Christian  experience  (1  John  iii.  2).  And  the  greatest 
mystery  is  that  we  are  Christians  at  all.  3.  It  is  hidden  for  safety.  Because  bo 
precious  it  is  placed  out  of  Satan's  reach.  III.  Its  caretaker — "with  Christ." 
This  may  mean — 1.  Mystical  union  with  Him  (Eph.  v.  26).  2.  Federal  anion.  We 
kre  repres«nted  by  Christ  in  all  that  He  has  done  and  is,  and  the  Father  regards  as 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

as  in  Him,  Nothing,  then,  can  injure  us,  since  Christ  has  borne  all  the  injuriei 
which  the  law  could  inflict.  We  cannot  be  arrested  for  our  debt  since  Christ  haa 
paid  it ;  nor  condemned  for  our  crime  since  Christ  has  borne  our  curse  (Rom.  viii.  1). 
3.  Vital  union  (John  xv.  1-5).  The  continuance  of  our  life  is  provided  for,  and  its 
abiding  fruitfulness.  IV.  Its  hiding-place.  "  In  God."  God  accepts  the  charge,  and 
with  Cbrist  elevates  us  to — 1.  Divine  dignity.  We  are  of  heaven  while  on  earth  ;  in 
God  while  before  men.  2.  Divine  rest.  Who  can  doubt  or  sorrow  who  has  a  revela- 
tion and  experience  of  the  character  of  God  ?  (T.  B.  Baker,  M.A.)  Life  hid  in 
Christ : — I.  What  of  the  death  which  precedes  this  life  ?  I.  It  is  a  conscioua 
death.  There  is  no  spiritual  chloroform  in  the  dispensary  of  the  Great  Physician. 
Man  is  wide  awake  during  the  whole  process  of  conviction  and  conversion.  No 
drug  is  wanted  to  stupify,  but  like  the  Saviour's  death  consciousness  must  not  be 
disturbed  or  destroyed.  2.  It  is  a  willing  death.  The  will,  like  a  brave  helmsman, 
conducts  the  soul  out  of  the  troubled  waters  of  sin,  and  shapes  and  steers  the 
course  for  the  peaceful  haven.  Here  is  another  parallel.  What  gave  value  to  the 
death  of  Christ  was  its  willingness.  3.  It  is  an  honourable  death.  Was  it 
becoming  at  every  Waterloo  banquet  to  drink  a  toast  in  solemn  silence  in 
honour  of  the  brave  who  fell?  Men  hang  out  the  tattered  colours  in  our 
national  sanctuaries  as  honourable  trophies.  We  turn  to  a  nobler  warfare 
with  grander  issues.  When  the  black  flag  of  rebellion  is  hauled  down,  the  spirit 
of  hostility  is  changed  into  devotion,  reverence,  fellowship,  and  service.  When 
a  man  ceases  to  do  evU  and  learns  to  do  well,  when  he  dies  to  sin  and  lives  to 
God,  we  may  call  his  death  an  honourable  one.  4,  It  is  a  useful  death.  Who 
shall  calculate  the  usefulness  of  death.  Who  shall  reckon  for  us  the  value  of  the 
death  of  Sir  John  Franklin  in  the  land  of  ice;  of  Allan  Gardiner  in  the  land  of 
fire  ;  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  <&o.  T  So  here  ;  the  tomb  in  which  these  dead  are  buried 
is  changed  into  the  "  womb  of  the  morning,"  and  they  become  *'  children  of  the 
light  and  of  the  day."  II,  What  of  the  life  which  follows  this  death?  1.  It 
is  a  life  of  safety  (Psa,  xxvii.  5).  "  Hid  with  Christ ;  "  what  a  companion  I  Hid 
"in  God";  how  impregnable.  What  slender  bulwarks  man  erects.  "  I  hid  my- 
self," is  the  sorrowful  expression  of  impotency,  and  is  not  a  wiser  policy  than  that 
of  the  ostrich  who  buries  her  head  in  the  sand  when  escape  has  become  impossible. 
2.  It  is  a  life  of  privilege.  That  holy  margin  of  the  Saviour's  time  between  Hia 
resurrection  and  ascension  helps  us  to  understand  our  privileges.  How  He  com- 
forts, confirms,  and  feeds.  What  recognition  and  communion.  Outsiders  could 
not  see  it.  "  Their  eyes  were  holden."  3.  It  is  a  life  of  mystery.  "It  doth  not 
yet  appear,"  &c.  We  know  in  part  only.  (H.  T.  Miller.)  The  Christian's  life 
hid  with  Christ : — I.  We  aee  in  the  smdst  of  two  worlds,  a  seen  and  an  unseen, 
as  we  ourselves  are  two  selves,  seen  and  unseen ;  the  unseen  showing  itself  in  our 
countenance,  and  impressing  some  portion  of  our  character  upon  it,  still,  for  the 
most  part,  unseen  except  by  God,  And  even  our  very  soul  is  of  a  twofold  character, 
belonging  in  part  to  the  world  of  sense,  in  part  to  the  unseen  world ;  and  belonging 
most  to  either  according  as  the  corrupt  nature  or  the  new  life  gains  the  mastery. 
And  each  of  these  worlds  is  real,  in  that  each  acts  upon  our  soul  and  moulds  it  for 
heaven  or  hell.  But  to  us  that  only  is  real  which  we  realize.  Our  soul  hanga 
between  the  two,  and  as  it  is  drawn  down  or  up,  it  loses  sight  of  that  from  which  it  is 
withdrawn.  1.  To  fleshly  persons  this  world  is  their  all ;  they  have  no  senses  for  the 
unseen  which  they  love  not.  They  lose  the  power  to  think  of  God.  The  truths 
relating  to  God  become  fainter  and  fainter,  and  in  some  dreadful  cases  God  is 
thought  of  "  as  such  an  one  as  himself."  The  natural  mind  can  think  of  God  only 
as  one  with  the  world.  Among  the  heathen  this  is  seen  most  nakedly  (Rom.  i,  28 ; 
21-23),  "The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God;  "  the  impure,  then,  cannot  see  Him. 
"  In  His  light  we  shall  see  lipht ;  "  they,  then,  who  have  it  not  in  them  must  be  blind 
(1  Cor,  ii.  14),  2.  In  like  way  as  men  become  spiritual,  they,  too,  lose  their  power 
of  discernment  of  the  things  of  the  flesh.  They  cannot  understand  the  world,  nor 
the  world  them.  Having  learned  desire  to  be  last,  they  cannot  understand  man'a 
ambition  to  be  first ;  nor  covetousness,  having  learned  that  poverty  with  Christ  ia 
the  true  riches ;  nor  pride,  knowing  the  blessedness  of  humility.  The  sounds,  maxims, 
and  pursuits  of  the  world  are  unreal  to  the  Christian.  All  seems  hollow  :  ita  merri- 
ment a  heaviness ;  its  eagerness  a  chasing  of  the  wind  ;  its  show  a  painted  mask  ; 
its  laughter  madness ;  its  pleasures  revolting  (1  Cor,  ii.  16 ;  Luke  xvii.  15).  II. 
Since,  teen,  the  Chbistian's  life  is  hid,  he  must  be  prepared  fob  the  wobld's 
lasuNDEBSTANDiNGB  AND  OPPOSITION.  1.  This  naturally  follows  (1  John  iii.  1 ;  John 
i.  10),  and  Christians  should  take  it  cheerfully.    It  is  an  eternal  law  that  we  under* 


•HAP.  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  18? 

f  tsnd  those  only  to  whom  we  are  like.  We  hare  no  power  of  judging  except  by  the 
principles  and  standards  we  have  made  our  own.  We  cannot  see  what  is  beyond 
oar  range  of  vision.  So  the  world  judging  by  its  own  standards  cannot  understand 
the  Christian.  It  could  not  act  on  his  principles,  and  so  thinks  him  a  dissembler 
or  mad  (Mark  iii.  21 ;  Acts  xxvi.  24).  The  world  must  misjudge  us,  however  careful 
we  are  to  avoid  offence  ;  and  God  would  teach  us  hereby  to  commit  ourselves  to  His 
judgment  (Psa.  xxxvii,  5,  6).  2.  The  world  misjudges  because  it  knows  nothing  of 
the  inner  experiences  of  the  Christian  life.  They  who  live  amid  the  tumult  of  the 
outward  cannot  hear  the  secret  whispers  of  His  love  by  which  God  speaks  to  souls 
that  seek  Him.  They  cannot  tell  the  secret  thrill  of  joy  in  the  hope  that  we  are 
indeed  God's,  and  shall  be  His  for  ever.  They  cannot  tell  the  sweetness  when  the 
•onl  feels  itself  beloved.     III.  Since  oub  life  is  hid,  wb  most  beware  how  wb  prb- 

JUDOB   ANYTHING  THAT  GoD  BBE8  NECES8ABT  FOB  THAT  LIFE.       We    Understand  Only  SO 

much  as  we,  by  acting,  know.  So  we  must  not  be  prejudiced  against  what  comea 
to  us  in  the  form  of  untried  self-disciplme  and  self-denial.  One  of  the  most  fre- 
quent hindrances  to  a  more  excellent  way  is  that  men,  instead  of  trying  it,  ask  of 
what  good  it  is.     At  every  stage  knowledge  is  the  reward  of  obedience.     IV.  Sinob 

ODB  life  IB  hid  WE  MUST  NOT  BE  DOWNCAST  IT  WE  HATE  NOT  THE  BEFRESHMENT  WB 
WOULD  HAVE,  NOR  SEE  AT  ONCE  THE  END  OF  ODB  ACTIONS  AND  OURSELVES  (1  Johu  iii.  2). 

We  are  hidden  from  ourselves.  We  know  not  what  we  are.  We  see  ourselves 
surrounded  by  death,  and  amidst  this  death  have  earnests  of  life  (Bom.  viii.  23) ; 
but  since  our  love  is  imperfect,  ao  is  our  life  and  our  sense  of  life.  Its  source  is 
our  Lord  hidden,  streaming  thence  to  us  through  the  Comforter,  discovering  itself 
in  holy  aspirations,  strength,  victories ;  but  since  it  is  hidden  we  must  not  long  for 
it  as  though  revealed.  Had  we  the  fulness  of  that  life  it  were  heaven  itself.  Now 
we  have  at  one  time  the  brightness  of  His  presence  that  we  may  be  cheered  onward  ; 
now   it  is  veiled  that  we  may  be  humbled.     Y.  It  will  eveb  be  that  or  this 

BIDDEN    lite,    THE    VERT    HIOEEST     DEGREES    WILL    BB    WHAT    WB     LEAST     UNDERSTAND. 

For  it  is  of  God.  And  since,  being  finite,  we  cannot  grasp  the  infinite,  our  nearest 
approaches  to  Him  will  ever  be  what  we  can  least  grasp  or  analyze.  When  caught 
up  into  the  third  heaven  what  Paul  heard  were  words  unspeakable ;  his  inward 
sense  heard  what  words  could  not  embody  ;  and  eo  in  our  degree,  our  highest  bliss 
is  what  we  can  least  represent  or  define,  or  reason  upon;  yet  we  know  it  to  be  real. 

VI.    As  THIS    HIDDEN    LIFE    IS    OBTAINED,  80    IT    IS    TO    BE    MAINTAINED   AND    PERFECTED 

BT  DEADNE88  TO  THE  WORLD.  Death  to  the  world  is  life  to  God ;  the  life  in  God 
deadens  to  the  world.  The  less  we  live  for  things  outward  the  stronger  bums  our 
inward  life.  The  more  we  live  amid  the  distractions  of  the  world,  the  less  vivid  is 
the  life  of  the  soul.  It  matters  not  wherein  we  are  employed  or  how.  We  may  in 
the  most  sacred  things  forget  God,  or  in  the  most  common  things  serve  Him.  We 
may  be  promoting  His  truth,  and  ourselves  be  the  unfruitful  conduit  through  which 
it  flows  ;  or  we  may  in  the  meanest  things  be  living  to  His  glory,  and  thereby  pro- 
moting it.  Self-denying  duty,  love,  and  contemplation  together  advance  this  Ufe  ; 
but  not  either  alone.  Conclusion  :  1.  It  is  our  office  to  see  how,  day  by  day,  we 
may  be  more  hidden  from  the  world,  that  we  may  be  more  with  God.  2.  As  this  life 
is  God's  great  gift,  and  our  present  duty  is  to  cherish  it,  so  it  is  our  stay  and  support 
to  know  that  it  is  hid,  &c.  (Isa.  xxvi.  3;  Psa.  xxvii.  5  ;  xxxi.  29).  As  evil  reacheth 
Him  not,  nor  losses  affect  Him,  nor  dispraise  hurt  Him,  so  not  the  Christian.  And 
if  (bo  now,  how  much  more  hereafter  (Rom.  viii.  35-39).  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 
The  hidden  life — with  Christ  in  God : — It  Is  hidden — I.  In  its  origin.  Conversior 
is  a  hidden  operation.  We  have  read  many  accounts  of  it.  We  are  told  how  cer- 
tain words,  thoughts,  providences,  were  followed  by  certain  feelings,  resolutions, 
actions,  but  the  change  itself  is  beyond  the  cognizance  of  the  person  changed. 
"  The  wind  bloweth,"  &c.  II.  In  its  greatest  moments.  1.  That  of  self-dedica- 
tion. When  a  man  takes  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  his  country,  it  is  in  the  presence 
of  others;  but  when  he  swears  fealty  to  God,  he  is  hidden  with  God.  2.  That  of 
communion  with  God,  The  soul  wants  something  more  than  is  supplied  by  public 
worship,  3.  Those  of  its  highest  joys,  as  when  Jesus  was  transfigured,  He  was  hid 
from  His  disciples  by  the  bright  overshadowing  cloud.  4.  Those  of  its  deepest 
Borrows,  as  Jesus  was  separated  from  His  disciples  in  Gethsemane.  The  greatest 
actions  have  not  appeared  on  the  public  stage  of  history  :  they  are  obscure,  un- 
chronicled,  unmonumented,  but  God  has  seen  and  estimated  them.  IIL  From  thb 
BYB  OF  the  world.  The  life  of  the  world  consists  in  being  alive  unto  sin  and  dead 
onto  God.  The  Christian  has  withdrawn  from  and  is  dead  to  this.  Hence  though 
bifi  life  be  manifest  as  the  sun,  the  world  cannot  see  him.     "  If  our  gospel  be  hid,' 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

*c.  Nature  may  be  hidden  in  two  ways ;  at  midnight  by  darkness,  at  noonday 
by  blindness.  When  Christ  appeared  the  world  knew  Him  not ;  so  with  His  dis- 
ciples. It  requires  a  Christian  to  understand  a  Christian.  The  world  has  not  tne 
key  to  the  Christian  life.  IV.  With  Christ.  1.  As  our  representative.  The  union 
between  the  believer  and  his  Lord  is  a  hidden  one.  It  is  the  sheet  anchor  of 
spiritual  life  cast  within  the  veil,  and  therefore  hidden ;  but  it  is  in  the  strength  of 
that  the  soul  can  ride  securely  through  the  tempest  of  time.  2.  As  the  object  of 
our  affections.  Our  true  home  is  the  spot  towards  which  the  heart  tremblingly 
turns  as  the  needle  to  the  pole.  "  Where  your  treasure  is,"  &c.  3.  The  full  meaning 
of  our  present  life  is  hidden  with  Christ.  It  is  full  of  mystery.  Think  of  its 
suffering;  its  relation  with  sin;  its  mortality,  &c.  4.  The  final  glory  of  this  life 
is  hid  with  Christ,  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear,"  &c.  V,  In  God.  God  Himself  is 
the  hidden  one.  "Verily  Thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  Thyself."  "  Canst  thou  by 
searchiug,"  &c.  What  safety,  comfort,  joy,  the  Christian  has.  (F.  Ferguson.) 
The  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God : — Have  we  not  heard  of  rivers  rolling  in  their 
calm  and  apparent  majesty,  hidden  from  the  eye  by  the  deep  woods,  by  the  solemn 
mountains,  and  the  wide-extending  prairie  ?  Hidden  !  nay,  has  it  not  been  our  lot 
to  listen  to  the  murmn rings  of  far-off  mountain  streams  we  could  not  see?  The 
Christian's  life  is  such ;  like  one  of  those  glorious  streams  born  and  taking  its  rise 
in  far-off  mountains,  then  descending  the  awful  sides  of  the  rugged  hill,  and  shooting 
into  light ;  then  winding  and  wending  its  way  through  villages  and  fields,  by  cities 
and  by  towns ;  more  or  less  quiet,  more  or  less  observed ;  then  betaking  itself  to 
far-off  country  places  again  ;  telling,  as  it  rolls,  no  story  of  its  birth,  and  little  of 
its  means  of  widening  growth  ;  now  watering  the  giant  oak,  and  the  graceful  beech, 
and  the  lovely  elm ;  and  apparently  lost  in  creeping  its  way  by  sedgy  nettle-beds, 
and  banks  covered  with  the  hemlock  and  the  weed ;  but  not  less  useful  in  the  one 
place  than  the  other,  till  at  last,  beyond  sight,  it  is  lost  in  the  distant  sea.  So,  for 
all  purposes  of  illustration,  it  is  with  the  Christian  life  and  the  life  of  God,  as 
revealed  in  the  human  soul.  (Paxton  Hood.)  The  need  of  an  inner  life : — On 
a  winter's  night  I  have  noticed  a  row  of  cottages,  with  a  deep  load  of  snow  on 
their  several  roofs:  but  as  the  day  wore  on,  large  fragments  began  to  tumble  from 
the  eaves  of  this  one  and  that  other,  till,  by  and  by,  there  was  a  simultaneous 
avalanche,  and  the  whole  heap  slid  over  in  powdery  ruin  on  the  pavement,  and 
before  the  sun  went  down  you  saw  each  roof  as  clear  and  dry  as  on  a  summer's  eve. 
But  here  and  there  you  would  observe  one  with  its  snow-mantle  unbroken,  and  a 
ruff  of  stiff  icicles  around  it.  What  made  the  difference  ?  The  difference  was  to 
be  found  within.  Some  of  these  huts  were  empty,  or  the  lonely  inhabitant  cowered 
over  a  scanty  fire ;  whilst  the  peopled  hearth  and  the  high-blazing  faggots  of  the 
rest  created  such  an  inward  warmth  that  grim  winter  melted  and  relaxed  his  grip, 
and  the  loosened  mass  folded  off  and  tumbled  over  on  the  trampled  street.  It  is 
possible  by  some  outside  process  to  push  the  main  volume  of  snow  from  the  frosty 
roof,  or  chip  off  the  icicles  one  by  one.  But  they  will  form  again,  and  it  needs  an 
inward  heat  to  create  a  total  thaw.  And  so,  by  sundry  processes,  you  may  clear  off 
from  a  man's  conduct  the  dead  weight  of  conspicuous  sins  ;  but  it  needs  a  hidden 
heat,  a  vital  warmth  within,  to  produce  such  a  separation  between  the  soul  and  its 
besetting  iniquities,  that  the  whole  wintry  incubus,  the  entire  body  of  sin,  will  come 
spontaneously  away.  The  vital  warmth  is  the  love  of  God  abundantly  shed 
abroad — the  kindly  glow  which  the  Comforter  diffuses  in  the  soul  which  He  makes 
His  home.  His  genial  inhabitation  thaws  that  soul  and  its  favourite  sins  asunder, 
and  makes  the  indolence  and  self-indulgence  and  indevotion  fall  off  from  their  old 
resting  place  on  that  dissolving  heart.  The  easiest  form  of  self-mortification  is  a 
fervent  spirit.  (James  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  lost  taste: — A  traveller  who  was 
asked  whether  he  did  not  admire  the  structure  of  some  stately  building  made  reply, 
"  No  ;  for  I  have  been  at  Kome,  where  better  are  to  be  seen  every  day."  The 

power  of  a  new  affection : — Dr,  Chalmers,  riding  on  a  stage-coach  by  the  side  ol  the 
driver,  said,  "  John,  why  do  you  hit  that  off  leader  such  a  crack  with  your  lash  ?  " 
"  Away  yonder  there's  a  white  stone ;  that  off  leader  is  afraid  of  that  stone  ;  eo,by 
the  crack  of  my  whip  and  the  pain  in  his  legs,  I  want  to  get  his  idea  off  from  it." 
Dr,  Chalmers  went  home,  elaborated  the  idea,  and  wrote,  "  The  Expulsive  Power  of 
a  New  Affection."  You  must  drive  off  the  devil  and  kill  the  world  by  patting  anew 
idea  in  the  mind.     (Dr.  Fish.) 

Ver.  4.  When  Christ  who  Is  our  life  shall  appear  then  shall  ye  also  appear  ■wltb 

Him  In  glory. — Christ  our  life: — What  is  meant  by  life?   The  word  is  very  compr»- 


CHAP,  in.]  COLOSSIANS.  189 

hensive,  and  includes — 1.  Appropriate  activity.  2.  Happiness.  The  life  here  intended 
13  (1)  not  natural  life;  (2)  not  intellectual  life;  (3)  but  spiritual  and  eternal  life. 
Christ  is  our  lite  in  that  He  is — I.  Its  Author.  1.  He  saves  us  from  death.  (1)  By 
His  atonement  which  satisfies  the  law.  (2)  By  delivering  us  from  the  power  of 
Satan.  2.  He  is  the  author  of  inward  spiritual  life.  Because — (1)  He  procures  fur 
OB  the  gift  of  the  life-giving  Spirit.  He  has  redeemed  us  in  order  that  He  miyht 
receive  the  promise  of  the  Spnit.  (2)  He  not  only  merits,  but  imparts  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  11.  Its  object.  1.  The  exercises  in  which  Christian  life  consists 
terminate  on  Him.  2.  The  happiness  involved  consists  in  fellowship  with  Him. 
He  is  our  life  as  He  is  our  joy,  portion,  inheritance.  III.  Its  end.  It  is  Christ 
for  us  to  live.  While  others  live  for  themselves — some  for  their  country,  some  for 
mankind — the  believer  lives  for  Christ.  It  is  the  great  design  of  his  life  to  promote 
Christ's  glory  and  advance  His  kingdom.  Inferences :  1.  Test  of  character. 
The  difference  between  the  true  and  nominal  Christian  lies  here.  The  one  seeks 
and  regards  Christ  as  His  life  only  as  He  delivers  from  death ;  the  other  as  the  end 
and  object  of  life.  2.  The  true  way  to  grow  in  grace,  or  to  get  life,  is  to  come  to 
Christ.  3.  The  happiness  and  duty  of  thus  making  Christ  our  life.  (C.  Hodge, 
D.D.)  Christ  our  life  : — 1.  Life  is  seen  around  us  striking  out  in  tender  beauty 
in  the  tiny  flower  which  opens  its  delicate  bosom  to  the  light  of  the  sun,  or  deve- 
loping into  majesty  and  grandeur  in  the  giants  of  the  forest — this  is  vegetable  life. 

2.  Life  is  seen  breaking  out  in  the  songs  of  biids,  and  displayed  in  the  movements 
of  the  lower  creatures  and  in  the  manifold  activities  of  men — this  is  animal  life. 

3.  Life  is  seen  in  the  f  peculations  of  the  philosopher,  the  research  of  the  historian, 
the  musings  of  the  poet,  and  the  contrivances  of  the  architect  and  mechanician — 
this  is  intellectual  life.  4.  Life  is  seen  in  that  hatred  to  sin,  those  yearnings  after 
holiness,  those  graces  of  faith,  hope,  d'c,  the  anticipation  for  heaven  which 
characterize  the  true  Christian — this  is  spiritual  hfe.  To  Christ  all  these  may 
be  traced,  but  Paul  is  here  speaking  of  the  last.  L  Chbist  on  the  cross  is  thb 
80DE0E  OF  ouB  LIFE.  Spiritual  life  is  no  new  principle  ;  it  was  bestowed  by  Christ 
as  the  Almighty  Creator.  But  here  we  have  to  view  Christ  not  as  the  Lord  of  life, 
but  the  victim  of  death.  What  an  amazing  contrast.  Yet  by  the  latter  Hb 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  From  this  His  life  flows  out  to  those  dead 
in  sin.  II.  Christ  in  the  hkabt  is  the  essence  or  our  life.  He  not  only  pro- 
cures, but  is  our  life.  "  I  am  the  life."  When  we  receive  life  we  receive  Him. 
The  faith  which  saves  embraces  not  an  abstraction,  a  truth,  bat  a  Person.  Many 
are  satisfied  with  knowing  about  Christ — the  Christian  has  vital  onion  with  TTim. 
III.  Christ  in  His  ordinances  is  the  support  of  oub  life.  All  life  requires  sag- 
tenanoe.  A  flower  that  receives  no  rain  or  sunshine  withers.  God  has  appointed 
means  for  the  nourishment  of  our  hfe.  1.  Secret  prayer.  What  is  this?  An 
interview  with  a  Person,  not  the  mere  utterance  of  desire  breathed  into  the  vacant 
air ;  growing  intimacy  with  Christ ;  the  soaring  of  the  soul  into  the  atmosphere 
of  love  and  joy  which  makes  the  pulse  of  life  beat  more  firmly.  •*  The  Christian'^ 
vital  breath,"  &o.  2.  The  Sabbath,  and  its  opportunities  for  sustained  intercourse 
with  Christ  in  sanctuary  services  (Psa.  Ixiii.  2).  The  want  of  profit  in  these  arisea 
from  not  seeking  God  in  them.  Those  who  fijid  Him  receive  augmentation  of  life. 
8.  The  Lord's  Supper,  in  which  Christ  brings  Himself  specially  near,  and  to 
realize  Him  in  it  is  to  receive  out  of  His  fulness  grace  for  grace.  IV.  Christ  on 
eabtb  is  the  pattern  or  oub  life.  All  life  has  some  outward  manifestation. 
ETery  grace  embodies  itself  in  act.  "  Work  of  faith,"  &c.  God  has  given  us  a 
rule  in  His  Word  after  which  we  should  conform  ourselves.  But  He  has  taught 
OB  also  by  example.  In  Christ's  lowly  condition  He  has  taught  us  not  to  be 
ashamed  of  our  poverty.  As  a  workman  He  ennobled  trade.  The  sorrowful  may 
be  comforted  by  thinking  of  the  Man  of  sorrows.  What  an  example  we  have  in 
Him  of  self-sacrifice,  love,  forgiveness,  courage,  &o.  The  closer  we  study  His  life 
the  more  we  shall  be  assimilated  to  it  as  Moses  was  to  the  glory  of  God  (2  Cor. 
iii.  18).  V.  Christ  in  heaven  is  the  consummation  of  our  life.  Here  we  have 
bat  grace,  glory  lies  beyond.  His  presence  in  glory  is  a  pledge  that  we  shall  share 
it.  The  bonds  of  anion  will  be  drawn  closer.  "  For  ever  with  the  Lord,"  &e. 
Conclusion :  There  is  no  true  life  but  in  Christ.  Let  us  beware  lest  Christ's  lamenta- 
tion, "Ye  wiU  not  come  unto  Me,"  Ac.,  be  over  us.  {W.  Steele,  M.A.)  ChrUt 
our  life  : — "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  "  The  proper  answer  is  the  text.  It  is  not 
said  merely  that  He  lives  in  as,  or  that  we  live  by  Him  or  throagh  Him,  bat  that 
He  is  oar  life.  Let  as  apply  this — L  To  the  Christian's  belative  life  :  justifica- 
tion.    1.  We  are  all  dead  in  law.    The  soul  destitute  of  the  favour  of  God  is  dead. 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  raL 

There  remains  only  the  execution  of  the  sentence  to  complete  our  misery.  2.  Id 
this  state  Christ  finds  us  and  undertakes  to  be  our  life.  One  of  the  first  qnestions 
of  an  awakened  soul  is,  "  How  shall  m  man  be  just  with  God  ? "  The  gospel 
replies,  ••  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  There  was  such  merit  in  His  crosa 
that  God,  though  just,  becomes  a  Saviour.  It  is  not  by  the  works  of  the  law  or 
repentance,  but  by  the  atonement  laid  hold  of  by  faith  that  we  legally  live.  But 
this  only  justifies  us  instrumentally  ;  Christ  through  it  meritoriously.  Whatever 
view  the  Scriptures  take  of  it — release  from  curse,  deliverance  from  wrath,  remis- 
sion of  penalty,  acceptance  with  God — Christ  is  always  the  author.  II.  To  thb 
Chbistian'b  actual  life  :  sanctification.  1.  Our  death  in  sin  is  not  only  a  death 
in  law,  but  a  proper  alienation  from  the  life  of  God.  Before  we  can  be  restored 
to  communion  with  God  a  life  of  purity  must  be  imparted.  Of  this  Christ  is  th© 
cause,  His  Spirit  the  agent.  His  word  the  instrument,  His  example  the  model. 
The  outcome  of  all  which  is  that  as  He  was  so  are  we  in  the  world.  2.  But  Christ 
is  our  life  not  only  as  it  respects  the  way  in  which  we  are  made  holy,  but  as  it 
respects  holiness  in  detail.  He  is  (1)  the  life  of  all  Christian  graces,  (a)  Faith 
which  gives  life  to  good  works,  holy  tempers,  joyful  affections ;  but  faith  is  looking 
to  an  object;  that  object  is  Christ.  It  is  receiving  a  gift;  that  gift  is  Christ. 
(b)  Hope.  Our  anchor  is  cast  within  the  vail,  and  is  sure  and  steadfast ;  bat  if 
Christ  had  not  entered  first  our  attempts  to  cast  it  had  been  in  vain,  (c)  Love. 
Christ  is  its  object,  purifier,  director.  (2)  The  life  of  all  Christian  duties.  They 
are  inspired  by  Him  and  directed  to  His  glory.  (3)  The  life  of  Christian  ordinances. 
These  will  be  wells  without  water  if  He  be  absent — sacraments,  prayers,  thanks- 
giving, preaching.  III.  The  Christian's  tutdre  life.  1.  Of  resurrection.  (1)  As 
His  power  is  the  agent  to  effect  it.  (2)  Because  His  raised  body  will  be  its  model. 
(3)  Inasmuch  as  His  appearance  the  second  time  will  be  its  signal.     2.  Of  glory. 

(1)  It  is  His  to  assign  to  each  saint  his  proper  place  and  occupation  in  heaven. 

(2)  His  presence  mainly  constitutes  the  bliss  of  heaven.  (3)  The  degrees  of 
heavenly  glory  will  be  regulated  by  the  degrees  of  our  nearness  and  intimacy  to 
Christ.  Conclusion :  1.  The  subject  addresses  itself  most  powerfully  to  the  hearers 
of  the  gospel.  Preachers  labour  in  vain,  hearers  listen  in  vain,  if  there  be  no  com- 
munication of  life.  2.  To  earnest  seekers  of  salvation  the  subject  affords  much 
encouragement.  You  want  pardon,  purity,  strength,  hope.  Secure  Christ  for  your 
life  and  you  will  have  all.  3.  Let  Christians  learn  to  be  grateful,  consistent, 
useful.  (Jabez  Bunting,  D.D.)  Christ  our  life  : — No  thoughtful  man  can  be 
satisfied  with  a  mere  worldly  life — continued  existence,  a  round  of  selfish  pursuits, 
and  sensual  delights  which  deaden  the  finest  instincts.  I.  The  vital  pbinciplb 
THAT  IS  RECOGNIZED.  The  relation  between  Christ  and  His  people  is  vital  Christ 
is  not  merely  the  source  and  support  of  their  life,  but  is  it.  There  can  be  no  life — 
physical,  mental,  or  spiritual — apart  from  the  action  of  the  Divine  mind.  A 
sculptor  may  carve  a  most  life-like  figure,  but  he  cannot  impart  the  vital  principle. 
1.  This  life  is  spiritual  in  its  nature.  The  Christian  is  surrounded  by  material 
things,  and  resides  in  a  material  body ;  but  his  spiritual  life  is  distinct.  Christ 
creates  and  controls  it.  It  is  the  life  of  faith,  hope,  love.  2.  It  is  eternal  in  its 
duration.  It  does  not  prevent  physical  dissolution,  but  survives  it.  Christ  has 
given  us  the  fullest  assurance  of  our  immortaUty  ?  It  is  part  of  the  Divine  life  ; 
therefore  age  cannot  enfeeble  its  powers,  disease  cannot  impair  its  beauty,  and 
death  cannot  terminate  its  existence.  3.  What  is  your  life  ?  Are  you  living  to 
gratify  the  lowest  or  highest  instincts  of  your  nature?  If  the  former  your  life  is 
not  worth  living.  II.  The  splendid  spectacle  that  is  predicted.  1.  The  manner 
of  Christ's  appearing  "  in  the  glory  of  His  Father  with  the  holy  angels."  It  is  a 
splendid  sight  to  witness  a  military  review,  to  see  the  glittering  swords,  serried 
ranks,  waving  banners,  to  hear  the  clattering  drums,  martial  strains,  triumphant 
shout.  But  no  earthly  scene  is  worth  comparing  with  the  grandeur  and  solemnity 
of  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  Millions  were  ignorant  of  His  first  advent ;  all 
shall  see  His  second.  2.  Its  purpose.  (1)  To  be  glorified.  Once  He  appeared  in 
weakness  and  humiliation ;  then  in  power  and  majesty.  (2)  To  glorify  us.  3.  Its 
time.  Unknown,  and  to  attempt  to  settle  it  is  to  trifle  with  God's  Word-  When 
it  comes  it  will  be  sudden  and  unexpected.  III.  Thb  olorious  hopb  that  u 
awakened.  From  the  cradle  to  the  grave  our  life  is  inspired  by  hope.  The 
Christian  hope  is — 1.  That  one  day  we  shall  be  with  Christ.  There  are  earthly 
companionships  for  which  the  heart  sighs.  Our  affections  cling  to  those  we  love. 
The  believer  clings  to  Christ  who  is  the  object  of  all  his  hope  and  desire.  2.  That 
one  day  we  shall  participate  in  Christ's  glory.    What  that  glory  is  no  mind  can 


CHAP,  m.]  C0L0SSIAN8.  191 

eonceive.  Can  the  seed  understand  the  sweetness  and  beauty  of  the  flower? 
the  stone  the  form  and  grace  of  the  statue?  Here  God's  children  are  often  pooi 
and  unknown.  By  and  by  Christ  will  recognize,  honour,  crown  them.  The  poet's 
fame  is  brief,  the  soldier's  glory  uncertain,  the  king's  crown  perishable,  but  the 
Christian's  triumph  certain  and  eternal.  (J.  T.  Woodhouse.)  Christ  our  life : — 
Yet  to  appear.  I.  Christ  is  o0b  life.  1.  This  is  John's  way  of  talking.  "  In 
Him  was  life,"  <S:c.  (1)  Christ  is  the  source  of  our  life.  "  As  the  ]f'ather  raiseth 
np  the  dead,"  Ac.  Jesus  is  our  Alpha  as  well  as  Omega.  We  should  have  been  dead 
in  sin  if  it  had  not  been  said,  "  You  hath  He  quickened."  He  gives  us  the  living 
water,  which  is  in  us  a  well  springing  up  into  everlasting  life,  (2)  Its  substance. 
There  is  much  mystery  in  the  new  nature,  but  none  as  to  what  is  its  life.  Pene- 
trate the  believer's  heart  and  you  will  find  Christ's  love  throbbing  there  ;  penetrate 
his  brain  and  you  will  find  Christ  to  be  its  central  thought.  (3)  Its  sustenance. 
He  is  the  living  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven.  (4)  Its  solace.  His  loving- 
kindness  is  better  than  hfe,  (5)  Its  object.  As  speeds  the  ship  towards  the  port, 
the  arrow  to  its  goal,  so  flies  the  Christian  towards  the  perfecting  of  His  fellowship 
with  Christ,  As  the  soldier  fights  for  his  captain  and  is  crowned  in  his  captain's 
victory,  so  the  Christian.  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ."  (6)  Its  exemplar.  The 
Christian  has  the  portrait  of  Christ  before  him  as  the  artist  has  the  Greek  sculp- 
tures. If  he  wants  to  study  life,  he  studies  from  Christ.  Husbands  and  wives 
truly  knit  together  grow  somewhat  like  each  other  in  expression,  if  not  in  feature, 
and  the  heart  in  near  fellowship  with  Jesus  must  grow  like  Him.  Grace  is  the 
light,  our  loving  heart  the  sensitive  plate,  Jesus  the  object  who  fills  the  lens  of  the 
Boul,  and  soon  a  heavenly  photograph  of  His  character  is  produced — similarity  of 
spirit,  temper,  motive,  action.  2.  What  is  true  concerning  our  spiritual  life  now 
is  equally  true  of  our  spiritual  life  in  heaven.  3.  This  life  of  Christ  marks  our 
dignity.  Kings  cannot  claim  it  as  such.  Talk  of  their  blue  blood  and  pedigree, 
here  is  something  more.  4.  This  accounts  for  Christian  holiness.  How  can  a 
man  remain  in  sin  if  Christ  is  his  life?  5.  See  how  secure  the  Christian  is.  Unless 
Christ  dies  he  cannot  die.  II.  Christ  is  hidden,  so,  therefore,  is  our  life.  1.  To 
the  unspiritual  Christ  is  as  though  Ho  did  not  exist.  The  worldling  can  neither 
see,  taste,  nor  handle  Him.  Yet  unseen  as  He  is  He  is  in  heaven,  full  of  joy, 
pleading  before  the  throne,  reigning,  and  having  fellowship  with  His  saints  every- 
where. 2.  The  servant  is  as  his  Lord,  and  is  treated  accordingly.  III.  Christ 
WILL  ONE  DAT  APPEAR  AND  WE  WITH  HiM.  1,  How?  (1)  In  pcrson.  (2)  With  great 
•plendour.  2.  When?  No  one  knows,  and  it  is  impertinent  to  inquire.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon. )  Christ  our  life  and  our  hope : — There  are  two  things  in  daily  life 
which  exert  a  great  influence  over  men — fear  and  hope.  A  man  will  work  hard 
through  fear  that  want  may  come  or  through  hope  of  bettering  his  condition.  God 
appeals  to  both  to  awaken  conscience  and  stir  up  the  heart  to  diligence.  "  Flee 
from  the  wrath  to  come."  "Lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  "Mortify,"  <feo.  (vers. 
6,  6,  and  text).  I.  Christ  our  life.  Many  are  Christ's  glorious  titles,  but  none 
more  precious  than  this.  Christ  is  our  life  inasmuch  as  He  negatively  delivers  from 
death.  But  He  does  much  more.  In  a  positive  sense  He  is  our  life.  1,  In  bringing 
spiritual  and  eternal  life  to  the  soul  dead  in  sin.  There  is  no  life  without  light. 
When  God  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  life  soon  came.  So  "  in  Him  was  light,  and 
the  light  was  the  life  of  men."  We  cannot  believe  Christ  till  we  know  Him ;  when 
we  know  Him  we  believe,  and  by  faith  comes  life.  "  This  is  life  eternal,"  <feo.  2.  In 
being  the  indwelling  life  of  the  souL  An  infidel  once  said  to  a  negro,  "  How  can 
God  dwell  in  man  and  man  in  God  T "  "  How  can  fire  be  in  iron  and  iron  in  fire? 
When  the  bar  is  in  the  furnace,"  was  the  reply.  "In  Christ."  "  Christ  in  yoa." 
3.  Through  the  soul's  going  out  to  Him  for  spiritual  life  and  blessing.  Plants 
stretch  towards  the  light.  If  they  are  closed  in  a  dark  house,  and  there  be  s  chink 
through  which  the  light  shines,  they  will  stretch  in  that  direction.  Where  there  is 
spiritual  life  it  will  move  towards  Christ  in  faith  and  love.  4.  In  being  the  strength 
of  our  life.  Herein  lies  alone  our  power  for  good  against  eviL  It  is  no  easy  thing 
to  live  the  Christian  life  ;  and  forms  afford  little  help  against  temptation  and  for 
duty.  The  old  man  must  be  thrown  off  and  the  new  man  put  on,  and  Christ  only 
is  sufficient  for  that.  And  just  as  we  are  strong  in  Christ  shall  we  be  able  to  dis- 
charge the  duties  here  laid  down,  11.  Christ  our  hope,  1,  The  present  position 
of  the  Christian  is  good :  his  prospect  is  equally  good.  Hence  not  only  Christ 
emcified,  bot  Christ  coming  was  the  subject  of  apostolic  teaching.  Christ's  first 
coming  was  the  desire  of  all  nations ;  His  second  the  grand  hope  of  the  Church, 
8.  His  redeemed  people  will  appear  with  Him.     (1)  They  will  for  ever  emerge  from 


192  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m. 

their  obscurity.  (2)  They  will  be  made  glorioas.  The  ambition  of  many  is  to 
shine  in  positions  of  honour ;  but  surpassing  every  earthly  distinction  will  be  that 
of  appearing  with  Christ.  *'  If  we  suffer  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him,"  and  "  be 
like  Him."  A  dying  soldier  said  to  his  friend,  **  I  am  going  to  the  front."  The 
front  is  a  position  of  danger  and  honour.  This  good  soldier  of  Christ  was  going 
to  the  front  Jio  meet  the  last  enemy,  and  also  to  receive  the  crown  of  victory. 
(T.  West,  B.A.)  Christ  tJie  life  and  hope  of  believers : — Paul  in  the  previous  verse 
tells  believers  that  their  life  is  hid.  "  When  shall  it  be  discovered  ?  "  they  might 
object.  He  here  tells  them.  I.  Christ  is  oub  lifb.  1.  As  its  author  (John  xiv.  6). 
2.  As  its  matter  (John  vi.  48).  3.  As  its  exerciser  and  actor  (John  xv.  5).  4.  As 
its  strengthener  and  cherisher  (Psa.  cxxxviii.  3).  5.  As  its  completer  and  finisher 
(Heb.  xii.  2;  Phil.  i.  6).  This  being  the  case  let  us— (1)  Not  repent  of  anything 
done,  suffered,  or  lost  for  Him.  "  All  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life." 
(2)  Highly  priza  the  Lord  Jesus,  He  is  worthy,  and  consider  how  highly  He  prizes 
you ;  and  a  Christ  highly  prized  will  be  gloriously  obeyed.  II.  Believers  shalIi 
AT  last  appeab  glokiods  (Judges  XV.  14 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  43-44,  51-55  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  13  ; 
Matt.  xix.  26-28).  The  reasons  are  because — 1.  The  day  of  their  appearing  will  be 
the  marriage  day  of  the  lamb.  Mourning  weeds  will  be  put  off,  and  glorious  robes 
put  on.  2.  They  shall  appear  as  kings  crowned  ;  here  they  are  kings  elected  with 
the  crown  in  reversion  (2  Tim.  iv.  7-8).  3.  Their  enemies  and  persecutors  will  see 
them  in  their  true  character  as  God's  favoured  ones.  4.  Their  manifestation  will 
make  much  for  the  honour  of  Christ.  The  more  glorious  the  body  or  the  bride, 
the  more  glorious  the  head  or  bridegroom.  6.  The  wicked  will  then  justify  the 
goodness  and  mercy  of  God  in  His  dealings  with  His  people.  Objections  will  then 
be  answered  (Job  xxi.  15  ;  Mai.  iii.  14).  6.  They  shall  be  employed  in  glorious 
work  (1  Cor.  vi  2-3).  (T.  Brooks.)  Christ  the  life  and  hope  of  the  Church: — I. 
Chbist  is  otjb  life.  Our  life  is  bound  up  with  His.  He  is  Source,  Medium, 
Giver.  This  destroys  every  hope  of  obtaining  salvation  without  Him.  Then 
let  the  sinner  trust  Him  alone ;  and  let  this  truth  fill  the  Christian  with  joy.  II. 
Chbist  is  now  hid.  1.  He  was  so  to  the  Old  Testament  Church,  before  His  first 
coming ;  He  is  bo  to  the  New  Testament  Church  before  His  second  coming.  There 
is  nothing  that  speaks  to  our  eyes  or  ears.  But  this  is  true  also  of  God  Himself. 
2.  But  as  the  invisible  things  of  God  are  manifested  in  creation,  so  the  invisible 
things  of  Christ  are  made  patent  by  the  infiuence  of  His  preached  truth  upon  the 
mind  and  heart.  We  live  "by  faith  not  by  sight."  3.  This  does  not  interfere  with 
His  purposes  of  mercy.  Both  God  and  Christ  can  bless  without  discovery  to  the 
senses,  and  if  this  fact  becomes  a  snare  and  an  affliction  to  those  who  trust  Him, 
it  is  because  they  seek  fiUm  by  sense  not  by  faith.  4.  By  this  arrangement  the 
gospel  appeals  to  the  higher  elements  of  our  nature,  to  those  faculties  which 
identify  vm  with  the  angels ;  and  thus  it  tends  to  lift  us  above  the  seen  and 
temporal.  It  compels  us  to  think,  and  should  call  forth  gratitude.  III.  Christ 
SHALL  ONE  DAT  APPEAB.  1.  This  subject  is  shrouded  in  mystery,  and  every  specula- 
tion as  to  the  time,  &o.,  has  been  falsified;  which  should  warn  us  off,  and  turn  na 
to  practical  preparation  for  His  coming.  2.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  Christ 
appears — (1)  in  proportion  as  His  cause  triumphs ;  (2)  to  nations,  that  knew  Him 
not,  when  they  receive  His  gospel ;  (3)  to  believers  at  conversion  and  every  stage 
of  the  spiritual  life ;  (4)  to  dying  saints ;  (5)  to  His  people  in  the  disembodied 
state.  But  these  are  all  different  from  and  inferior  to  the  manifestation  at  the  last 
day.  3.  His  second  coming  is  looked  forward  to  not  only  by  the  Church  on  earth. 
Patriarchs,  Ac,  who  never  saw  Him  on  earth  await  it ;  so  do  glorified  saints  who 
have  not  forgotten  the  promises  they  learned  here.  4.  The  purposes  for  which  He 
shall  appear  are  important  in  relation  to — (1)  His  adversaries,  who  shall  be  com- 
pletely subdued.  (2)  His  friends,  who  have  been  aspersed  and  persecuted,  and 
shall  then  be  honoured  and  rewarded.  (3)  Himself ;  for  His  honour  will  then  be 
vindicated  in  the  presence  of  the  Jew,  unbeliever,  and  denier  of  His  Godhead.  (4) 
God,  whose  justice  and  mercy  have  been  denied.  IV.  His  people  shall  appear 
WITH  Him  in  oloby.  1.  As  Christ  is  hid  so  are  His  people.  The  angels  know  them 
(Luke  XV.  ;  Heb.  i.)  but  not  the  world,  and  sometimes  not  one  another  ;  and  many 
are  hid  in  heaven.  2.  When  He  appears  so  will  they.  (1)  In  countless  multitudes; 
think  of  the  milliocs  of  infants  who  have  been  saved  the  conflict,  and  the  milUons 
of  believers  who  have  triumphed  over  it.  (2)  In  distinct  individuality,  as  "  every 
eye  shall  see  Him,"  so  they.  (3)  As  identified  with  Christ.  "  Thine  they  were, 
and  Thou  hast  given  them  Me."  (4)  In  glory — free  from  sin  and  sorrow;  publicly 
•oquitted ;  possessed  of  the  kingdom ;  body  and  soul  happy  for  ever,  and  both  like 


«Hii>.  m.]  COLOSSIANS,  198 

Christ.  Let  us  hasten  forward  to  meet  this  glory.  {Joseph  Davies.)  The  Chri$' 
tiaii's  winter  and  summer  : — In  winter  the  green  tree  is  like  the  dry.  Summer  comes, 
and  the  living  »oot  produces  leaves  and  fruits.  So  our  winter  is  the  concealment 
of  Christ,  our  summer  His  manifestation  (ver.  3).  Yes,  dead  full  Burely.  But  dead 
in  appearance,  alive  at  the  roots.  And  think  of  the  summer  burst  which  is  to 
follow — when  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear.  Lo,  my  covenant,  dear  God  I  I 
will  die  to  myself  that  Thou  mayest  live  in  me.  {Augustine.)  Anticipations  of 
glory: — Do  you  ever  feel  like  those  lions  in  the  Zoological  Gardens,  restlessly 
walking  up  and  down  before  the  bars  of  their  cage,  and  seeming  to  feel  that 
they  were  never  meant  to  be  confined?  Sometimes  they  are  for  thrusting  their 
heads  through  the  bars,  and  then  for  dashing  back  and  tearing  the  back  of 
their  dungeon,  or  for  rending  up  the  pavement  beneath  them,  as  if  tbey  yearned  for 
liberty.  Does  your  soul  ever  want  to  get  free  from  her  cage  ?  Here  is  an  iron  bar 
of  sin,  of  doubt,  and  there  is  another  iron  bar  of  mistrust  and  infirmity  You 
may  have  seen  an  eagle  with  a  chain  upon  its  foot,  standing  on  a  rock — poor  un- 
happy thing  I  it  flaps  its  wings — looks  up  to  the  sun — wants  to  fly  right  straight 
ahead  at  it  and  stare  the  sun  out  of  countenance — looks  to  the  blue  sky,  and  seems 
as  if  it  could  snifif  the  blue  beyond  the  dusky  clouds,  and  wants  to  be  away ;  and 
so  it  tries  its  wings  and  dreams  of  mounting — but  that  chain,  that  cruel  chain, 
remorselessly  holds  it  down.  Has  not  it  often  been  so  with  yon  7  You  feel,  "  I  am 
Dot  meant  to  be  what  I  am  ;  I  have  a  something  in  me  which  is  adapted  for 
«omething  better  and  higher,  and  I  want  to  mount  and  soar,  but  that  chain — that 
dragging  chain  of  the  body  of  sin  and  death  will  keep  me  down."  Now  it  is  to 
euch  as  you  that  this  text  comes,  and  says  to  you,  "  Yes,  your  present  state  is  not 
your  soul's  true  condition,  you  have  a  hidden  life  in  you ;  that  life  of  yours  pants  to 
get  out  of  the  bonds  and  fetters  which  control  it,  and  it  shall  be  delivered  soon,  for 
Christ  is  coming,  and  the  same  appearance  that  belongs  to  Him  belongs  to  yon. , 
And  then  your  day  of  true  happiness,  and  joy,  and  peace,  and  everything  that 
yoa  are  panting  for,  and  longing  for,  shall  certainly  come  too."  I  wonder 
whether  the  httle  oak  inside  the  acorn  —  for  there  is  a  whole  oak  there,  and 
there  are  all  the  roots,  and  all  the  boughs,  and  everything  inside  that  acorn — 
I  wonder  whether  that  httle  oak  inside  the  acorn  ever  has  any  premonition  of 
the  summer  weather  that  will  float  over  it  a  hundred  years  hence,  and  of  the  mists 
that  will  hang  in  autumn  on  its  sere  leaves,  and  of  the  hundreds  of  acorns 
which  itself  will  cast,  every  autumn,  upon  the  earth,  when  it  shall  become  in 
the  forest  a  great  tree.  You  and  I  are  Uke  that  acorn ;  inside  of  each  of  us  are 
the  germs  of  great  things.  There  is  the  tree  that  we  are  to  be — I  mean  there 
is  the  spiritual  thing  we  are  to  be,  both  in  body  and  soul  even  now  within  us,  and 
sometimes  here  below,  in  happy  moments,  we  get  some  inklings  of  what  we  are  to 
be  ;  and  then  how  we  want  to  burst  the  shell,  to  get  out  of  the  acorn  and  to  be  the 
oak  1  Ay,  but  stop.  Christ  has  not  come,  Christian,  and  you  cannot  get  out  of 
that  till  the  time  shall  come  for  Jesus  to  appear,  and  then  shall  you  appear  with 
Him  in  glory.  You  will  very  soon  perceive  in  your  rainwater  certain  ugly  little 
things  which  swim  and  twist  about  in  it,  always  trying  if  they  can  to  reach  the 
Burface  and  breathe  through  one  end  of  their  bodies.  What  makes  these  little 
•things  so  Uvely,  these  innumerable  little  things  like  very  small  tadpoles,  why  are 
they  so  lively  ?  Possibly  they  have  an  idea  of  what  they  are  going  to  be.  The  day 
will  come  when  all  of  a  sudden  there  will  come  out  of  the  case  of  the  creature 
that  you  have  had  swimming  about  in  your  water,  a  long-legged  thing  with  two 
bright  gauze-like  wings,  which  will  mount  into  the  air,  and  on  a  summer's  evening 
will  dance  in  the  sunlight.  It  is  a  gnat  you  have  swimming  there  in  one  of  its 
earliest  stages.  You  are  just  like  that ;  you  are  an  undeveloped  being ;  you  have 
not  your  wings  yet,  and  yet  sometimes  in  your  activity  for  Christ,  when  the  strong 
desires  of  something  better  are  upon  you,  you  leap  in  foretaste  of  the  bliss  to  come 
I  do  not  know  what  I  am  to  be,  but  I  feel  that  there  is  a  heart  withiu  me  too  big  for 
these  ribs  to  hold,  I  have  an  immortal  spark  which  cannot  have  been  intended  to 
burn  on  this  poor  earth,  and  then  to  go  out ;  it  must  have  been  meant  to  burn  on 
heaven's  altar.  Wait  a  bit,  and  when  Christ  comes  you  will  know  what  you  are. 
We  are  in  the  chrysalis  state  now,  and  those  who  are  the  liveliest  worms  among  ua 
grow  more  and  more  uneasy  in  that  chrysalis  state.  Some  are  so  frozen  up  in  it 
that  they  forget  the  hereafter,  and  appear  content  to  remain  a  chrysalis  for  ever. 
But  others  of  us  feel  we  would  sooner  not  be  than  be  what  we  now  are  for  ever,  we 
feel  as  if  we  must  burst  our  bonds,  and  when  that  time  of  bursting  shall  oome, 
when  the  chrysalis  shall  get  its  painted  wings  and  mount  to  the  land  of  flowcra. 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

then  shall  we  be  satisfied.  "  When  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  we  als® 
shall  appear  with  Him  in  glory."     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  5-9.  Mortify,  therefore,  your  memhers  which  are  upon  the  earth. — Slaying 
self: — Mortify,  therefore,  because  ye  were  raised  with  Christ.  The  homeliest 
moral  teaching  of  the  Epistle  is  based  upon  its  "mystical"  theology.  Character 
is  the  outcome  and  test  of  doctrine.  But  too  many  people  deal  with  their  beliefs 
as  they  do  with  their  hassocks  and  hymn-books  in  their  pews,  so  it  is  necessary 
to  put  the  practical  issues  very  plainly.  I.  The  paradox  op  selp-slatinq  as  thb 
ALL-EMBRACING  DUTY  OP  A  Cheistian.  *'  Mortifj "  couveys  less  than  is  meant. 
••  Slay  your  members  "  is  the  spiritual  duty  which  stands  over  against  the  error  of 
"  severity  to  the  body  "  against  which  the  Colossians  had  been  warned  (chap.  ii.  23). 
It  consists  in  the  destruction  of  the  passions  and  desires.  1.  Paul's  anthropology 
regards  men  as  wrong  and  having  to  get  right.  A  great  deal  of  moral  teaching 
talks  as  if  men  were  rather  inclined  to  be  good,  and  its  lofty  sentiments  go  over 
people's  heads.  The  serpent  has  twined  itself  round  my  limbs,  and  unless  yoa 
give  me  a  knife  to  cut  its  loathsome  coils  it  is  cruel  to  bid  me  walk.  Culture  is  not 
the  beginning  of  good  husbandry.  You  must  first  stub  up  the  thorns  and  sift  out 
the  poisonous  weeds  or  you  will  have  wild  grapes.  2.  The  root  of  all  such  slaying 
is  being  dead  with  Christ  to  the  world.  What  asceticism  cannot  do  in  that  it 
is  weak  through  the  flesh,  union  with  Christ  will  do ;  it  will  subdue  sin  in  the 
flesh.  3.  There  must,  however,  be  vigorous  determination.  "  Slaying ' '  cannot 
be  pleasant  and  easy.  It  is  easier  to  cut  oS  the  hand  which  is  not  me  than 
to  sacrifice  passions  and  desires  which  are  myself.  The  paths  of  religion  are 
ways  of  pleasantness,  but  they  are  steep,  and  climbing  is  not  easy.  The  way  to 
heaven  is  not  by  "  the  primrose  path."  That  leads  to  "  the  everlasting  bonfire." 
Men  obtain  forgiveness  and  eternal  life  as  a  gift  by  faith  ;  but  they  achieve  holiness, 
which  is  the  permeating  of  their  characters  with  that  eternal  life,  by  patient  believ- 
ing effort.       II.    A  GRIM  CATALOGUE  OF    THE  CONDEMNED  TO  DEATH.       Paul    Slauds    lik& 

a  jailer  at  the  prison  door,  with  the  fatal  roll  in  his  hand,  and  reads  out  the 
names  of  the  evildoers  for  whom  the  tumbril  waits  to  carry  them  to  the  guillotine. 
It  is  an  ugly  list,  but  we  need  plain  speaking,  for  these  evils  are  rampant  now. 
1.  Fornication  covers  the  whole  ground  of  immoral  sexual  relations.  2.  All  an- 
cleanness  embraces  every  manifestation  in  word,  look,  or  deed  of  the  impure 
spirit.  3.  Passion  and  evil  desire  are  sources  of  evil  deeds,  and  include  all 
forms  of  hungry  appetite  for  "the  things  that  are  upon  the  earth."  4.  Covetous- 
ness,  whose  connection  with  sensuality  is  significant.  The  worldly  nature  flies  for 
solace  either  to  the  pleasures  of  appetite  or  acquisition.  How  many  respectatie 
middle-aged  gentlemen  are  now  mainly  devoted  to  making  money  whose  youth  was 
foul  with  sensual  indulgence.  Covetousness  is  "  promoted  vice,  lust  super- 
annuated." And  it  is  idolatry,  a  fetish  worship,  which  is  the  religion  of  thousands 
who  masquerade  as  Christians.  III.  The  exhortation  is  enforced  bt  a  solemn 
NOTE  of  warning  (ver.  6).  1.  The  thought  of  wrath  is  unwelcome  because  thought 
inconsistent  with  God's  love.  But  wrath  is  love  wounded,  thrown  back  upon 
itself,  and  compelled  to  assume  the  form  of  aversion,  and  to  do  its  "  strange  work  " 
of  punishment.  God  would  not  be  holy  if  it  were  all  the  same  to  Him  whether 
a  man  was  good  or  bad;  and  the  modern  revulsion  against  "wrath"  is  usually 
accompanied  with  weakened  conceptions  of  God's  holiness.  Instead  of  exalting,  it 
degrades  His  love  to  free  it  from  the  admixture  of  wrath,  which  is  like  alloy  with 
gold,  giving  firmness  to  what  were  else  too  soft  for  use.  Such  a  God  is  not  love 
but  impotent  good  nature.  2.  The  wrath  "  cometh."  That  may  express  the  con- 
tinuous present  incidence  of  wrath  or  the  present  of  prophetic  certainty.  That  wrath 
comes  now  in  plain  and  bitter  consequences,  and  the  present  may  be  taken  as  the 
herald  of  a  still  more  solemn  manifestation  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  The  first 
fiery  drops  that  fell  on  Lot's  path  as  he  fled  were  not  more  surely  percursors  of  an 
overwhelming  rain,  nor  bade  him  flee  for  his  life  more  urgently,  than  the  pre- 
sent punishment  of  sin  proclaims  its  own  future  punishment,  and  exhorts  us  to 
flee  to  Jesus  from  the  wrath  to  come.  IV.  A  further  motive  is  the  remembbancb- 
OP  A  SINFUL  PAST.  1.  "Walking."  That  in  which  men  walk  is  the  atmosphere 
encompassing  them ;  or  to  walk  in  anything  is  to  have  the  active  life  occupied  by 
it.  The  Colossians  had  trodden  the  evil  path  and  iuhaled  the  poisonous  atmos- 
phere. "Lived"  means  more  than  "  Your  natural  life  was  passed  among  them." 
In  that  sense  they  still  lived  there.  But  whereas  they  were  now  living  in  Christ,  the 
phrase  describes  the  condition  which  is  the  opposite  of  the  present — "  When  ta* 


CHAP,  in.]  C0L0S8IANS.  195 

roots  of  year  life,  tastes,  affections,  &o.,  were  immersed,  as  in  some  fecalent  bog, 
in  these  and  kindred  evils."  2.  This  retrospect  is  meant  to  awaken  penitence  and  to 
kindle  thankfulness,  and  by  both  emotions  to  stimulate  the  resolute  casting  aside 
of  that  evil  in  which  they  once,  like  others,  wallowed.  The  gulf  between  the  pre- 
■ent  and  the  past  of  a  regenerate  man  is  too  wide  and  deep  to  be  bridged  by  filimsy 
eompromises.  It  is  impossible  to  walk  firmly  if  one  foot  be  down  in  the  gutter  and 
the  other  up  on  the  curb-stone.  V.  We  have  as  conclusion  a  still  wideb  exhorta- 
tion TO  AN  ENTIRE  STRIPPINO  OFT  OF  THE  SINS  OP  THE  OLD  STATE  (verS.  8,  9).       1.    The 

Golossians,  as  well  as  other  heathen,  had  been  walking  and  living  in  muddy  ways; 
but  now  their  life  was  hid,  &o.,  and  that  in  common  with  a  community  to  join 
which  they  had  left  another.  Let  them  keep  step  with  their  new  comrades, 
and  strip  themselves,  as  their  new  associates  do,  of  the  uniform  they  wore  in 
that  other  regiment.  2.  This  second  catalogue  of  vices  summarizes  the  varioua 
forms  of  wicked  hatred  in  contrast  with  the  various  forms  of  wicked  love  in  the 
other  list.  The  fierce  rush  of  unhallowed  passion  is  put  first,  and  the  contrary 
iow  of  chill  malignity  second;  for  in  the  spiritual  world  as  in  the  physical,  a 
storm  blowing  from  one  quarter  is  usually  followed  by  violent  gales  from  the 
opposite.  Luat  ever  passes  into  cruelty,  and  dwells  "  hard  by  hate."  Malice  is 
evil  desire  iced.  (1)  Auger.  There  is  a  righteous  anger  which  is  part  of  the 
new  man ;  but  here  it  is  the  inverted  reflection  of  the  earthly  and  passionate 
Inst  after  the  fiesh.  If  anger  rises  keep  the  lid  on,  and  don't  let  it  get  the 
length  of  wrath.  But  do  not  think  that  its  suppression  is  enough,  saying,  "  I  did 
not  show  it  " — strip  off  anger,  the  emotion  as  well  as  the  manifestation.  But  "  I 
have  naturally  a  hot  disposition  "  ;  but  Christianity  was  sent  to  subdue  and  change 
natural  dispositions.  (2)  Malice.  Axiger  boils  over  in  wrath,  and  then  cools  down 
into  malignity  ;  and  malice  as  cold  and  colourless  as  sulphuric  acid,  and  burning 
like  it  is  worse  than  boiling  rage.  (3)  It  is  significant  that  while  the  expressions  of 
wicked  love  were  deeds,  those  of  wicked  hate  are  words.  The  "  blasphemy "  of 
Authorised  Version  is  bitter  "  railing  "  of  Revised  Version — speech  that  injures, 
which  when  directed  against  God  is  blasphemy,  and  agaiast  man  vituperation. 
4.  Lying  has  its  proper  place  here  because  it  comes  from  a  deficiency  of  love  or  a 
predominance  of  selfishness.  A  lie  ignores  my  brother's  claims  upon  me,  and  is 
poisoned  bread  instead  of  the  heavenly  manna  of  pure  truth.  (A.  Maclareriy 
D.D.)  The  fie$h  to  be  crucified: — A  brave  officer  said  once  to  his  soldiers  in 
a  day  of  battle,  "Unless  you  kill  your  enemies  they  will  kill  you."  In  hke 
manner  may  it  be  said,  "Unless  we  crucify  the  flesh,  it  will  be  our  everlasting  ruin." 
The  mortification  of  the  iinful  principle  in  man  : — I.  The  sinful  principle  has  ah 
ACTivs  outward  DEVELOPMENT.  L  It  is  mundane  in  its  tendencies.  "  Your  mem- 
bers," &c.  It  teaches  the  soul  to  grovel  when  it  ought  to  soar.  2.  It  is  manifested 
in  acts  of  gross  sensuality.  "  Fornication,"  &o.  3.  It  is  recognized  by  debasing 
idolatry.     Covetousness  is  insatiable  lust  for  material  possessions.    XL  "rHK  activb 

OUTGOINGS    OF    THE    SINFUL    PRINCIPLE    CALL    FOR    DiVINE    VENGEANCE    (ver.    6).       The 

wrath  of  God  is  not  a  malignant  unreasoning  passion.  Nor  is  it  a 
figure  of  speech  into  which  the  maudlin  philosophers  of  the  day  would  fain 
resolve  it,  but  an  awful  reality.     III.  The  indulgence  of  the  sinful  pbinciplb 

IN  MAN  IS  inconsistent  WITH  THB  NEW  LIFE  HE  HAS  IN  CiUlIST  (vCr.  7).  IV.  ThAX 
the    sinful  principle  in  man  is  THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  MOST    MALIGNANT    PASSIONS  (verS. 

8,  9).  The  former  classification  embraced  sins  which  related  more  especially  tc  self : 
this  includes  sins  which  have  a  bearing  upon  others.  1.  There  are  sins  of  the 
heart  and  temper.     2.  There  are  sins  of  the  tongue.     V.  The  sinful  pbinciplb 

IN  MAN,  AND  ALL  ITS  OUT-GOINGS,  MUST   BE  WHOLLY  RENOUNCED  AND  RESOLUTELY  MOETI- 

fied.  "  Now  ye  also  put  off  all  these"  (vers.  8,  9).  (G.  Barlow.)  Denying  the 
flesh  : — A  brave  officer  said  once  to  his  soldiers  in  a  day  of  battle,  "  Unless  you  kill 
your  enemies,  they  will  kill  you."  In  like  manner  may  it  be  said,  "Unless  we 
crucify  the  flesh,  it  will  be  our  everlasting  ruin."  Mortifying  thefiesh: — Panting 
after  perfection  Dr.  Judson  strove  to  subdue  every  sinful  habit  and  senseward 
tendency.  Finding  that  for  want  of  funds  the  Mission  was  languishing,  he  cast 
into  the  treasury  his  patrimonial  estate.  Finding  that  his  nicety  and  love  of  neat- 
ness interfered  with  his  labours  among  the  filthy  Karens,  he  sought  to  vanquish 
this  repugnance  by  nursing  those  sick  of  most  loathsome  diseases.  Finding  that 
his  youthful  love  of  fame  was  not  utterly  extinguished,  he  threw  into  the  fiie  his 
correspondence,  including  a  letter  of  thanks  he  had  received  from  the  Governor- 
General  of  India,  and  every  document  which  might  contribute  to  his  posthumous 
renown.     And  finding  that  his  soul  still  clave  unto  the  earth,  he  took  temporary 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [01U».  m. 

leave  of  all  his  friends,  and  retired  into  a  but  on  the  edge  of  the  jungle,  and  sub- 
sisting on  a  little  rice,  for  several  weeks  he  gave  himself  entirely  to  communion 
with  God.  (T.Hamilton,  D.D.)  Corruptions  overcome  by  grace: — My  gardeners 
were  removing  a  large  tree  which  grew  near  a  wall  and  as  it  would  weaken  the 
wall  to  stub  up  the  roots,  it  was  agreed  that  the  stump  should  remain  in  the 
ground.  But  how  were  we  to  prevent  the  stump  from  sprouting,  and  so  disarrang- 
ing the  gravel-walk.  The  gardener's  prescription  was,  to  cover  it  with  a  layer  of 
salt.  I  mused  awhile,  and  thought  that  the  readiest  way  to  ke«p  down  my  ever- 
sprouting  corruptions  in  future  would  be  to  sow  them  well  with  the  salt  of  grace. 
O  Lord,  help  me  so  to  do.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Corruptions  overcome  gradually: — 
When  Sir  Christopher  Wren  w»8  engaged  in  demolishing  the  ruins  of  old  St.  Paul's 
in  order  to  make  room  for  his  new  cathedral,  he  used  a  battering-ram  with  which 
thirty  men  continued  to  beat  upon  a  part  of  the  wall  for  a  whole  day.  The  work- 
men, not  discerning  any  immediate  effect,  thought  this  a  waste  of  time ;  but  Wren, 
who  knew  that  the  internal  motion  thus  communicated  must  be  operating,  encour- 
aged them  to  persevere.  On  the  second  day,  the  wall  began  to  tremble  at  the  top, 
and  fell  in  a  few  hours.  If  our  prayers  and  repentances  do  not  appear  to  overcome 
oor  corruptions,  we  must  continue  still  to  use  these  gracious  battering-rams,  for  in 
due  time  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  the  power  of  evil  shall  be  overthrown.  Lord, 
enable  me  to  give  hearty  blows  by  the  power  of  thy  Holy  Spirit  until  the  gates  of 
hell  in  my  soul  shall  be  made  to  totter  and  fall.  (Ibid.)  Covetousness. — 
Covetousness  : — 1.  Is  a  thirst  for  gain.  When  it  burns  in  a  man's  heart,  he  must 
make  some  effort  to  obtain  relief.  He  must  try  either  to  extinguish  or  satisfy  it ; 
to  starve  it  by  a  religious  self-denial,  or  feed  it  by  a  carnal  indulgence.  2.  Covetous- 
ness is  ruinous  to  the  individual,  to  the  nation,  and  to  the  Church,  and  the  elements 
which  go  to  constitute  the  material  prosperity  of  each  contain  in  them  the  seeds  of 
ruin.  Hence  the  stern  exhortation,  "  Take  heed  and  beware  of  covetousness."  I.  Its 
OOMPANT.  Things  and  men  are  known  by  the  company  they  keep.  It  is  the  com- 
panion of  fornication.  The  collocation  is  not  accidental,  it  is  uniform  (1  Cor.  v.  11 ; 
Eph.  T.  3 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  14.)  When  a  man  has  plunged  into  some  fashionable  vice, 
he  is  indignant  to  find  that  the  law  makes  him  stand  side  by  side  with  more  vulgar 
convicts.  So  with  covetous  people  who  find  themselves  here  branded  with  the 
same  infamy  as  the  unclean.  All  its  respectability  is  here  stripped  off.  Covetous- 
ness is  like  sins  of  uncleanness,  in  that  it  is — 1.  The  unlawful  direction  and 
acting  of  desires  not  in  themselves  unlawful.  Its  great  strength  lies  here. 
The  complex  apparatus  of  trade  is  innocently  and  dutifully  set  in  motion  ;  but  who 
Bhall  tell  when  it  ceases  to  be  impelled  by  virtue  and  begins  to  be  impelled  by  vice. 
But  the  evil  spirit  enters,  and  when  mammon  gets  the  power,  he  allows  others  to 
retain  the  name ;  and  the  love  of  money  takes  the  place  of  a  God-fearing,  man- 
loving  sense  of  duty,  as  the  motive-power  in  a  man's  soul.  2.  It  grows  by  indul- 
gence. It  grows  by  what  it  feeds  on.  The  desire  of  the  mind  as  well  as  of  the  body 
is  inflamed  by  tasting  its  unhallowed  gratification.  It  burns  in  the  breast  like  a 
fire,  and  fuel  added,  increases  its  burning.  And  the  man  who  makes  money  an 
object  to  be  aimed  at  for  its  own  sake  is  by  common  consent  called  a  miser  (miser- 
able  one).  Mammon  first  entraps,  and  then  tortures  its  victims.  Many  would  be 
afraid  to  dally  with  approaches  to  lasciviousness  (Prov.  v.  5).  But  the  two  lasts 
are  bom  brothers.  3.  The  least  incipient  indulgence  displeases  God,  and  sears  the 
conscience.  Although  the  disease  may  never  grow  to  such  a  height  that  men  will 
call  you  a  miser,  yet  He  who  looketh  on  the  heart  is  angry  when  He  sees  a  covetous 
desire.  He  who  has  said  '*  Whoso  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,"  &c.,  has 
not  a  more  indulgent  rule  whereby  to  judge  this  kindred  sin.  II.  Its  characteb. 
Idolatry.  Other  Scriptures  less  directly,  but  no  less  surely,  affirm  the  same  (Luke 
xvi.  13 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17  ;  Job  xxxi.  2o-28).  It  is  not  the  form  or  name  of  the  idol 
that  God  regards,  but  the  heart-homage  of  the  worshipper.  This  leads  us  back  to 
the  former  topic  ;  idolatiy  is  represented  as  uncleanness  in  the  Bible.  God  is  our 
Husband,  and  to  transfer  our  affections  from  Him  is  adultery.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D). 
Covetousness  ;— ^The  Komans  worshipped  their  standards ;  and  the  Roman  standard 
happened  to  be  an  eagle.  Our  standard  is  only  one-tenth  of  an  eagle — a  dollar— 
but  we  make  all  even  by  adoring  it  with  tenfold  devotion.  (Edgar  A.  Poe,) 
Gold  in  tht  heart : — Mr.  Fuller  was  one  day  taken  into  the  Bank  of  England, 
where  one  of  the  clerks,  to  whom  he  had  occasion  to  speak,  showed  him  some 
ingots  of  gold.  He  took  one  of  them  into  his  hand,  examined  it  with  soma 
care,  and  then,  laying  it  down,  remarked  to  his  friend,  "  How  much  better  to 
hav*  tliis   in  the  band  than   in   the   heart !  "        Covetousness  is  idolatry : — L 


CHAP    m.]  COLOSSI ANS.  m 

What  is  cotexousnbss  f  1.  There  is  a  good  covetouaness  (1  Cor.  xii.  31),  as 
of  grace  and  glory.  2.  Sinful :  to  love  the  world  inordinately.  (1)  In  tb« 
inordinate  desire  of  riches — above  God's  glory  and  onr  own  spiritual  good. 
(2)  In  the  sinful  acquiring  them  (a)  As  to  matter — another's  goods  (1  Kings 
xxi.).  (b)  As  to  manner  and  means — unjust  (Prov.  x.  2;  xxviii.  8).  (3)  In  the 
wrongful  retaining  them — not  laying  them  out  for  the  ends  God  has  appointed. 
II.  What  is  idoiiAtby  ?  1.  External.  2.  Internal :  worship  given  to  what  is  not 
God  (John  iv.  24),  III.  How  is  covetousness  ikolitrt?  1.  In  that  (1)  man 
admires  riches  (Rom.  xi.  33).  (2)  Loves  it  (Matt.  xxii.  37).  (3)  Desires  it  (Psa. 
Ixxiii.  25).  (4)  Fears  losing  it  (Matt.  x.  28).  (5)  Trusts  on  (1  Tim.  vi.  17 ;  Mark 
X.  23,  24).  (6)  Grieves  for  the  loss  of.  (7)  Rejoices  in  (Phil.  iv.  4).  (8)  Labours 
after  (Matt.  vi.  33).  2.  Objections.  (1)  "I  worship  no  images."  Yes,  of  thine 
own  fancy.  (2)  "  I  do  not  fall  down  to  them."  But  in  thy  soul,  and  that  is  the 
principal.  (3)  "I  offer  no  sheep  or  rams."  But  thyself.  The  Phoenicians  and 
Carthaginians  offered  men,  but  yours  is  the  greater  sin.  For  they  offered  bodies 
not  souls,  others  not  themselves.  (4)  "We  do  not  look  upon  them  as  gols."  Yon 
do  in  effect,  because  as  the  chiefest  good.  You  know  them  to  be  no  gods,  and  yet 
worship  them  as  such.  IV.  Signs.  1.  Such  as  whose  thoughts  run  more  upon 
earth  than  heaven  (Luke  xii.  22,  25,  29).  2.  Whose  joy  and  grief  depend  on  out- 
ward successes  (Luke  xii.  19).  3.  Who  strive  to  be  rich,  but  no  matter  how.  4. 
Whose  desires  increase  with  their  estate.  6.  Who  grudge  the  time  spent  in  Divine 
duty  (Amos  viii.  6).  6.  Whose  hearts  are  upon  the  world,  while  their  body  is 
before  God  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31).  7.  Who  do  not  improve  the  estates  God  has  given 
them  (Matt.  xxv.  24-25).  V.  Use.  Avoid  it.  Consider — 1.  How  odious  it  is  to 
God  (Psa.  x.  3).  2.  How  injurious  to  our  neighbour,  3.  Dangerous  to  us  (1  John 
ii.  15 ;  1  Tim.  vL  10).  It  fills  the  heart  with  anxiety  (1  Tim.  vi.  9-10)  and  will 
certainly  keep  us  from  heaven  (1  Cor.  vi.  9-10).  4.  Foolish  in  itself.  (1)  To  act  so 
much  below  ourselves,  (2)  To  throw  away  our  souls  for  vanity  (Matt.  xvi.  26). 
^3)  To  spend  that  little  time  on  earth,  wherein  we  should  prepare  for  heaven. 
(4,  To  make  oneself  a  slave  for  he  knows  not  whom  (Psa.  xxxix.  6 ;  Eccles.  iv.  8). 
Vl,  Means.  1.  Think  much  of  the  vanity  of  earth  and  the  glory  of  heaven. 
8.  Act  faith  in  the  promises  (Psa.  xxxvi.  25 ;  Heb.  xiii.  5^.  3.  Meditate  on  the 
universal  providence  of  God,  and  His  fatherly  care  (Luke  xii.  31,  32  ;  Matt.  vi.  25, 
Ac.).  4.  Be  much  in  prayer.  6.  Often  remember  the  text  (1  John  v.  21).  {Bp. 
Beveridge.)  The  idolatry  of  covetcitsnesg  : — Idolatry  is  the  earliest  thing 
mentioned  in  the  decalogue,  and  coveting  the  latest.  The  two  tables  bend  round 
and  touch  each  other  so  closely  that  he  who  breaks  the  tenth  commandment  breaks 
the  first.  The  inordinate  love  and  pursuit  of  wealth  are  simply  heathenish,  and  are 
put  down  on  the  same  level  as  the  worship  of  images.  Gold  seems  in  many 
respects  very  like  a  god.  I.  In  the  attribdtes  it  possesses.  1.  Omniscience. 
Wealth  seems  to  know  everything.  Let  any  novelty  be  presented  and  men  will 
know  of  it  instantly.  Yon  cannot  keep  any  plan  or  line  of  business  secret  if  there 
is  any  money  in  it.  2.  Omnipresence.  The  least  opening  for  business  invites 
competition,  and  so  wealth  rushes  in.  "  Mammon  wins  its  way  where  seraphs  might 
despair."  8.  Omnipotence.  How  many  of  us  know  to  our  sorrow  the  power  o£ 
riches  I  the  overmastering,  crushing  opposition  it  sets  up  before  every  poor  man's 
enterprise.  Gold  rules  the  world,  covers  the  land,  buys  up  the  offices  of  the  nation, 
sways  the  sceptre  of  social  influence.  II.  The  worship  it  attracts.  1.  The  roar 
of  excited  men  who  clamour  with  each  other  in  the  death  grapple  of  competition, 
how  little  does  it  differ  from  the  cries  of  the  Town  Hall  of  Ephesus.  2.  But  this 
is  not  mere  lip-worship.  The  devotees  are  as  desperately  in  earnest  as  the  priests 
of  Baal  on  CarrneL  Body  and  soul  are  consecrated.  III.  The  favours  it  bestows. 
The  fine  residence,  the  gorgeous  apparel,  the  flowing  wine,  the  tremulous  obeisance 
of  the  seedy  gentleman,  the  obsequious  flattery  of  the  lady  whose  charms  have 
faded,  the  adulation  of  the  crowd,  the  flutter  in  the  market,  the  cringe  of  ancient 
enemies ;  and  then  the  fine  funeral,  and  the  marble  tomb.  "  Verily  they  have  their 
reward."  Wealth,  as  a  duty,  is  not  remarkably  beneficent,  but  it  would  be  un- 
candid  to  say  that  he  has  nothing  to  bestow  on  his  faithful  devotees.  The  world  like* 
priestcraft ;  and  the  priest  has  power  according  to  his  nearness  to  his  duty,  and  to: 
the  faith  of  the  populace.  And  hence  there  is  no  hierarchy  so  absolutely  revered, 
feared,  and  obeyed  as  those  who  crowd  the  temples  of  gold.  IV.  The  scourges  it 
iNTLicTB.  The  temples  of  heathenism  are  beautiful,  but  the  gods  are  ugly  because 
malignant.  They  are  supposed  to  maltreat  and  even  eat  their  subjects,  and 
mammon  is  well  typed  in  them.    His  most  noticeable  characteristic  is  that  he  loves 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  in. 

to  trample  on  and  de  rour  his  devotees.  "  He  that  trusteth  in  his  riches  shall  fall." 
There  are  some  sins  which  seem  to  be  considered  by  the  Almighty  as  sufficient  for 
their  own  punishment,  such  as  pride  and  anger ;  passion  means  suffering.  So 
here  this  trusting  in  riches  possesses  a  kind  of  inflated  power  to  baloon  one  up  to 
Boch  a  height  that  he  suffocates  and  falls  headlong  into  ruin.  It  is  painful  to  see 
%--  how  rich  men  pitch  on  each  other  when  any  one  falls  into  diflBculty.  The  horrible 
heartlessness  with  which  a  neighbourhood  will  devour  a  broken  estate  reminds  one 
of  the  fabled  furies.  Conclusion :  1.  See,  then,  why  God  strikes  against  this  sin. 
It  sets  up  another  god  in  the  place  of  Him.  One  of  the  Roman  Emperors  offered 
Jesus  a  place  beside  Jupiter.  It  would  not  do  then,  neither  will  it  now.  God  will 
have  all  or  none.  2.  See  how  covetousness  destroys  grace  and  piety.  "  What  agree- 
ment hath  the  temple  of  God  with  idols  ? "  3.  See  how  it  ruins  all  one's  future, 
"  Ephraim  is  joined  to  his  idols,"  Ac.  But  when  one's  god  is  gone,  where  is  he  I 
Shiouds  have  no  pockets.  4.  See  how  it  prevents  all  hope  of  progress  in  a 
Church.  "  Will  a  man  rob  God,"  <feo.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  For  which 
things'  sake  the  wrath  of  God  cometh. — Dissuasives  from  evil : — I.  The  destbuc- 
TivE  CONSEQUENCE.  1.  The  cause,  "  fornication,"  <fec.,  not  that  we  should  conclude 
that  it  is  peculiar  to  these  sins  alone  to  excite  the  Divine  wrath,  but  because  upon 
these  which  especially  overthrow  human  happiness  God  is  especially  provoked 
(Heb.  X.  81).  The  apostle  wished  to  point  out  distinctly  the  cause  of  human 
misery  and  Divine  judgment.  (1)  That  God  might  be  cleared  from  all  suspicion  of 
injustice.  God  the  Father  of  mercies  is  not  indifferent  to  evil,  but  is  incensed 
against  it.  (2)  To  throw  a  restraint  on  the  wicked.  Those  who  are  proof  against 
reason  and  right  may  yield  to  fear.  2.  The  effect.  The  wrath  of  God  ;  or  the 
punishment  inflicted  by  wrath.  Augustine  says,  "  The  anger  of  God  is  not  the 
perturbation  of  an  excited  mind,  but  the  tranquil  constitution  of  righteous  judg- 
ment. This  wrath  is  particularly  connected  with  sins  of  the  kind  referred 
to  here  (Gen.  vi.  11,  17  ;  xviii.  20;  xix.  24).  8.  The  persons  subjected  to  it — 
'*  Children  of  disobedience."  Two  crimes  are  involved — unbelief  and  disobedience, 
the  latter  as  the  genuine  offspring  of  the  former  (1  Peter  iii.  20 ;  Matt  xxiv. 
38-39:  Gen.  xix.  ,14;  Zech.  vii.  11).  4.  From  these  things  draw  the  follow- 
ing instructions.  (1)  Under  public  calamities  we  must  not  murmur  against 
<Jod ;  but  impute  them  to  our  sins.  (2)  Oppose  to  solicitation  to  sin  the 
flonsideration  of  the  Divine  wrath.  (3)  Nothing  is  more  to  be  desired 
than  the  Divine  favour,  nothing  more  to  be  dreaded  than  the  Divine  wrath.  (4J 
God  is  not  so  much  provoked  by  sin  as  by  the  obstinacy  of  the  sinner.  (5)  How- 
ever much  the  children  of  disobedience  flatter  themselves,  the  wrath  now  cometh 
apon  them,  and  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry.  (6)  The  same  holds  good  of  God's 
children  when  disobedient.  II.  The  removal  of  the  cause  (ver.  7).  Sin  is  the 
reigning  cause  of  a  wicked  life  ;  but  sin  is  not  living  in  you,  but  mortified  ;  the 
cause,  therefore,  having  ceased,  the  effect  ceases.  1.  From  the  consideration  of 
iheir  former  life  learn — (1)  Nothing  is  more  unhappy  than  unrenewed  man.  To 
walk  in  sin  with  pleasure  is  to  hasten  towards  hell  with  pleasure  (Rom.  vi.  23). 
(2)  The  fruits  of  a  man  in  a  corrupt  state  are  not  works  preparatory  to  grace,  or, 
deserving  of  eternal  life — congruity,  as  the  schoolmen  say — but  are  preparatory  to 
hell,  and  meritorious  of  eternal  death,  from  condignity.  2.  From  their  new  state 
learn — (1)  It  is  not  idle  for  the  renewed  to  call  to  mind  tbeir  former  state,  inasmuch  aa 
the  apostle  reminds  the  Colossians  of  theirs,  not  to  upbraid,  but  to  encourage  tbem. 
(2)  Christians  ought  not  to  take  it  amiss  when  ministers  remind  them  of  their  former 
state  (Rom.  vi.  19 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  10-11 ;  Eph.  ii.  11-13).  (3)  The  regenerate  receive 
a  twofold  advantage  from  a  notice  of  this  kind.  They  are  excited  (a)  To  gratitude 
(Rom.  vL  17 ;  1  Tim.  i.  12-13).  (6)  To  newness  of  life  (Rom.  xiii.  12 ;  Eph.  v.  8). 
{Bishop  Davenant.)  The  wrath  of  God  a  present  thing : — It  is  not  merely  a  thing 
of  the  past,  as  seen  in  the  deluge,  the  destruction  of  Sodom,  the  overthrow  of 
Israel  in  the  wilderness  *,  nor  a  thing  wholly  reserved  for  the  world  to  come.  It 
cometh  as  an  enduring  and  essential  principle  of  the  Divine  government.  In 
physical  debihty  and  disease,  in  a  shattered  constitution,  in  dethroned  reason,  in 
destroyed  power,  you  often  witness  the  working  of  a  righteous  retribution,  the 
j[iarkB  of  Divine  indignation  against  sin.  A  sight  of  terrible  penalty  under  God's 
law  is  it,  to  see  a  man  carrying  to  a  premature  grave  the  evidences  in  his  body  of 
Ood's  curse  on  sins  of  sensuality  ;  to  see  the  rich  man,  who  has  hved  in  avarice 
for  gold,  and  has  amassed  it  in  millions,  now  in  his  old  age  unable  to  enjoy 
it,  and  haunted  with  the  idea  of  dying  in  a  workhouse  ;  to  see  a  man  of  pleasure, 
-who  has  tried  and  exhausted  all  the  resources  of  the  world  in  flnding  it,  now  ending 


«HAP,  m.]  C010SSIAN8,  199 

his  days  as  a  gloomy  maniac.  Yet  these  cases  are  nothing  as  compared  with  "the 
wrath  to  come  ;  "  only  a  few  drops  from  a  dark  and  dismal  cloud,  which  will  here- 
after discharge  itself  in  a  storm  of  "  judgment  and  fiery  indignation."  (J.  Spence, 
D.D.)  The  children  of  disobedience : — Men  are  sent  to  the  ants  to  learn  diligence, 
to  the  conies  to  learn  that  there  is  a  way  which  terminates  in  a  great  rock,  to  the 
locusts  to  learn  how  littles,  when  combined,  may  become  mighty,  sufficient  for  all 
the  duty  and  obligation  of  the  day.  What  if  it  be  found  at  last  that  all  the  lower 
orders  and  ranks  of  creation  have  been  obedient,  dutiful,  loyal,  and  that  the  child 
only  has  wounded  the  great  heart.  "  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,"  Ac.  God  has  no 
trouble  with  His  creatures — no  trouble  with  His  great  constellations — they  never 
mutinied  against  Him  ;  He  has  had  no  trouble  with  His  forests,  no  rebel  host  ever 
banded  themselves  there.  Where  has  His  sorrow  lain  1  His  own  child,  His  beloved 
one,  in  whom  He  has  written,  in  fairest  hues,  the  perfectneBS  of  His  own  beauty, 
that  child  has  lifted  up  his  puny  fist  and  smitten  Him,  not  in  the  face  only,  but  in 
His  heart  of  love,  which  can  be  only  forgiven  by  shedding  sacrificial  blood.  {J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  Effects  of  disobedience  : — "  Let  the  sickles  alone,"  said  a  farmer 
to  his  son,  who  was  left  in  the  fields  while  the  reapers  went  to  dinner,  Jamea 
obeyed  his  father  for  a  time ;  but  at  length  he  grew  lonesome,  and  took  up  a  sickle, 
"just  to  look  at  it."  He  then  felt  its  edge,  and  at  last  thought  he  would  cut  "  one 
handful."  In  so  doing,  he  cut  his  little  finger,  inflicting  a  wound  which  rendered 
the  middle  joint  useless  for  life.  When  it  was  healed  an  ugly  scar  and  a  stiff 
finger  were  lasting  mementoes  of  his  disobedience.  Disobedience  to  his  heavenly 
Father  leaves  a  scar  on  the  sinner's  soul,  and  lessens  his  capacity  for  virtue.  (E. 
Foster.)  The  wrath  of  God: — The  wrath  of  God  is  like  great  waters  that  are 
dammed  for  the  present ;  they  increase  more  and  more,  and  rise  higher  and  higher, 
till  an  outlet  is  given  ;  and  the  higher  the  stream  is  stopped,  the  more  rapid  and 
mighty  is  its  course,  when  once  it  is  let  loose.  If  God  should  only  withdraw 
His  hand  from  the  flood-gate,  it  would  immediately  fly  open,  and  the  fiery 
floods  of  the  fierceness  and  wrath  of  God  would  rush  forth  with  inconceivable 
fury,  and  would  come  upon  you  with  omnipotent  power ;  and  if  your  strength 
were  ten  thousand  times  greater  than  it  is,  yea,  ten  thousand  times  greater 
than  the  strength  of  the  stoutest,  sturdiest  devil  in  hell,  it  would  be  nothing  to 
withstand  or  endure  it.  (Jonathan  Edwards.)  But  now  ye  also  put  off  all 
these. — The  believer's  view  of  past  sin : — I  once  walked  into  a  garden  with 
a  lady  to  gather  some  flowers.  There  was  one  large  bush  whose  branches  were 
bending  under  the  weight  of  the  most  beautiful  roses.  We  both  gazed  upon 
it  with  admiration.  There  was  one  flower  on  it  which  seemed  to  shine  above 
all  the  rest  in  beauty.  This  lady  pressed  forward  into  the  thick  bush,  and 
reached  far  over  to  pluck  it.  As  she  did  this  a  black  snake,  which  was  hid  in  the 
bush,  wrapped  itself  round  her  arm.  She  was  alarmed  beyond  all  description,  and 
ran  from  the  garden  screaming,  and  almost  in  convulsions.  During  all  that  daj 
she  suffered  very  much  with  fear  ;  her  whole  body  trembled,  and  it  was  a  long  time 
before  she  could  be  quieted.  That  lady  is  still  alive.  Such  is  her  hatred  now  of 
the  whole  serpent  race,  that  she  has  never  since  been  able  to  look  at  a  snake,  even 
though  it  were  dead.  No  one  could  ever  persuade  her  to  venture  again  into  a 
cluster  of  bushes,  even  to  pluck  a  beautiful  rose.  Now  this  is  the  way  the  sinner 
acts  who  truly  repents  of  his  sins.  He  thinks  of  sin  as  the  serpent  that  once 
coiled  itself  round  him.  He  hates  it.  He  dreads  it.  He  flies  from  it.  He  fears  the 
places  where  it  inhabits.  He  does  not  willingly  go  into  the  haunts.  He  will  no  mora 
play  with  sin  than  this  lady  would  afterwards  have  fondled  snakes.  {Bishop  Meade.) 
Conversion  and  the  old  nature : — There  are  a  great  many  men  who  are  like  one  of 
my  roses.  I  bought  a  Gloire  de  Dijon.  It  was  said  to  be  one  of  the  few  ever- 
blooming  roses.  It  was  grafted  on  a  manetti-stalk — a  kind  of  dog-rose,  a  rampant 
and  enormous  grower,  and  a  very  good  stalk  to  graft  fine  roses  on.  I  planted  it. 
It  throve  the  first  part  of  the  summer,  and  the  last  part  of  the  summer  it  grew 
with  great  vigour ;  and  I  quite  gloried,  when  the  next  spring  came,  in  my  Gloire  de 
Dijonr  It  had  wood  enough  to  make  twenty  such  roses  as  these  finer  varietiea 
usually  have ;  and  I  was  in  the  amplitude  of  triumph.  I  said,  "  My  soil  suits  it 
exactly  in  this  climate  ;  and  I  will  write  an  article  for  the  Monthly  Gardener,  and 
tell  what  luck  I  have  had  with  it."  So  I  waited  and  waited  and  waited  till  it 
blossomed ;  and  behold  1  it  was  one  of  these  worthless,  quarter-of-a-dollar,  single- 
blossonled  roses.  And  when  I  came  to  examine  it  I  found  that  it  was  grafted, 
and  that  there  was  a  little  bit  of  a  graft  down  near  the  ground,  and  that  it 
was  the  manetti-sproat  that  had  grown  to  such  a  prodigious  size.     Now,  I 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in; 

have  seen  a  great  many  people  converted,  in  whom  the  conversion  did  not  grow, 
but   the  old   nature   did.      [H.    W.   Beecher.)  I.    Thb   general  persuasion. 

1.  The  circumstance  of  time — "  now."  Ye  did  indulge  in  these  as  long  as  siu  lived, 
bat  now,  since  sin  is  mortified,  ye  must  put  these  things  away  (Rom.  xiii.  12;  1 
Thess.  V.  6-6).  2.  The  act  commanded.  The  word  may  be  explained  eiiher  to 
"  put  off  "  as  men  put  off  their  old  and  dirty  clothes,  or  to  "  lay  aside  "  from  the 
affections  and  senses,  as  dead  bodies  shut  up  in  sepulchres.  The  last  best  agrees 
with  "mortify."  3.  Learn  then — (1)  We  must  not  account  sin  a  pleasure,  but  a 
thing  to  be  hated  as  deadly  poison,  or  to  be  avoided  as  a  putrid  carcase.  (2)  Thfa 
putting  off  apphes  to  all  sin,  of  which  anger,  &c.,  are  only  samples.  II.  We  are  to 
put  off  siNB  OF  THE  HEAET.  1.  What  they  are.  (1)  Anger,  an  inordinate  desire 
to  injure  one's  neighbour  for  some  past  offence.  Damascenus  defines  it  as  "  an 
appetite  for  revenge,  and  in  this  what  the  schoolmen  term  the  "  formal "  of  anger 
is  contained.  (2)  Wrath  denotes  the  hasty  excitement  of  this  passion,  and  that 
accession  of  blood  round  the  heart  which  schoolmen  call  the  "material"  of  anger. 
"Wrath,"  says  Damascenus,  "is  the  boiling  up  of  the  blood  around  the  heart, 
and  arises  from  the  kindling  of  resentment."  (3)  Malice  some  affirm  to  be  that 
vicious  propensity  which  infects  all  the  affections  and  desires,  and  inclines  them  to 
evil;  and  Bernard,  "  the  taste  for  evil,"  which  makes  evil  sweet  and  good  insipid. 
But  it  is  rather  that  machination  of  evil  in  the  heart  which  is  wont  to  arise  from 
anger  in  malevolent  minds  (Gen.  iv.  5  ;  xxvii.  41).  2.  The  reasons  why  they 
should  be  extirpated.  Because — (1)  Through  anger  wisdom  is  lost,  and  reason  for 
the  time  extinguished  (Eccles.  vii.  19).  "  Anger  is  a  short  madness."  (2)  Justice 
is  violated  ;  for  while  an  exasperated  mind  sits  in  judgment  everything  which  its  fury 
may  suggest  it  thinks  right  (James  i.  20;  Gen.  xxxiv. ;  of.  xlix.  7).  (3)  The  kindness 
of  social  life  is  lost  (Prov.  xxii.  2^).  (4)  The  illumination  of  the  Spirit  is  shut  out. 
(5)  Forgiveness  of  sin  is  hindered  (Matt.  xi.  26).  (6)  The  attribute  of  God  is 
usurped  with  sacrilegious  audacity  (Prov.  xx.  22  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  35).  An  angry  man 
makes  himself  the  judge,  and  would  have  God  the  executioner.  3.  But  is  all  anger 
unlawful  ?  No  1  for  God  has  implanted  in  the  mind  the  faculty  of  anger,  and 
Christ  was  angry  (Mark  iii.  5).  Hence  the  apostle  enjoins,  "Be  ye  angry  and  sin 
not."  (1)  Anger  is  good — (a)  Which  arises  from  a  good  motive,  viz.,  from  the 
love  of  God  or  our  neighbour.  (6)  Which  tends  to  a  good  end,  the  glory  of  God 
and  the  correction  of  our  neighbour,  (c)  Which  proceeds  according  to  a  good  rule, 
awaiting  or  following  the  determination  of  reason.  Basil  would  have  anger  to  be  a 
bridled  horse,  which  obeys  reason  as  a  curb.  (2)  Anger  is  evil — (a)  Which  arisea 
from  a  bad  beginning — hatred  or  love  of  praise,  (b)  Which  tends  to  a  bad  end — 
revenge  and  our  neighbour's  injury,  (c)  Which  is  exercised  in  an  improper  manner, 
forestalling  the  judgment  of  reason.  III.  Sins  of  tub  mouth,  arising  from  the 
inordinate  affections  of  the  heart.  1.  What  they  are.  (1)  Evil  speaking.  Blas- 
phemy means  injuring  the  fame  of  another  by  evil  words,  (a)  It  is  offered  to  God ; 
first,  when  that  which  is  repu<<nant  to  His  nature  is  attributed  to  Him;  secondly, 
when  that  which  most  befits  Him  is  taken  away  ;  thirdly,  when  that  which  is  His 
property  is  attributed  to  the  creature.  So  heinous  was  it  that  God  made  it  • 
capital  crime  (Lev.  xxiv.  16,  23).  (b)  It  is  offered  to  man  (Rom.  iii.  8;  1  Cor.  iv.  13; 
Tit  iii.  2),  and  is  secret  (detraction)  and  open  (railing).  Rash  and  angry  persona 
take  the  open  course ;  the  crafty  and  malicious  the  secret.  Its  grievousness  is 
evident.  First,  it  greatly  injures  the  person  himself.  His  reputation,  a  principal 
external  blessing  is  wounded,  and  is  not  easy  to  repair,  since  the  quantity  of  the 
loss  cannot  be  estimated.  Secondly,  it  greatly  injures  those  who  take  it  up,  en- 
gendering as  it  does  suspicions  and  strifes  (Psa.  cxx.  2).  Thirdly,  it  is  a  great 
injury  done  to  God.  For  as  He  is  praised  in  the  saints  when  the  works  He  effects 
in  them  are  praised ;  so  when  they  are  defamed  He  is  defamed.  (2)  Corollaries. 
(a)  Such  as  respect  the  blasphemers.  First,  the  habit  argues  an  unregenerate 
state,  for  it  is  one  of  the  principal  deeds  of  the  old  man.  Second,  slanderers  are 
unhappy,  for,  as  Nazianzen  says,  "  It  is  the  extreme  of  misery  to  place  one's  com- 
fort not  in  one's  own  happiness,  but  in  the  evils  of  others."  Third,  they  are  the 
disciples  of  the  devil  (Rev.  xii.  10).  (6)  Such  as  respect  hearers.  First,  since  it  ia 
"o  great  a  crime,  those  who  delight  to  hear  it  are  not  void  of  sin.  Each  has  a  devil; 
this  in  the  ear,  that  in  the  tongue.  Second,  it  behoves  a  pious  man  to  turn  away 
from  and  reprove  slanderers,  and  to  defend  his  brother  (Prov.  xxv.  23  ;  Psa.  oi.  5  ; 
Job  xxix.  17).  (c)  Respecting  those  injured.  First,  grieve  more  for  the  slanderer 
than  for  what  he  says.  Second,  slander  harms  not  a  good  conscience.  Third, 
there  is  the  counterbalancing  testimony  of  conscience  and  good  men.    Fourth,  d» 


OHA».  in.1  COLOSSIANS.  201 

not  be  provoked  to  return  evil  for  evil  (1  Cor.  v.  12).  2.  Filthy  commnnication 
(Eph.  ii.  29  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  33).  This  is  to  be  avoided  because — (1)  It  nialces  that 
most  precious  and  peculiar  faculty  of  speech  foul  and  ridiculous.  (2)  It  iudicatea 
a  corrupt  mind.  (3)  It  is  opposed  to  the  sacred  profession  of  a  Christian  (Eph.  v. 
3-4).  (4)  It  corrupts  speaker  and  hearers.  Wherefore  rebuke  it  in  others.  Avoid 
it  yourselves.      {Bishop   Davenant.)  Anger:  —  There     is    an    a'ger    that   ia 

damnable  ;  it  is  the  anger  of  selfishness.  There  is  an  anger  that  is  majestic  as  the 
frown  of  Jehovah's  brow  ;  it  is  the  auger  of  truth  and  love.  If  a  man  meets  with 
injustice,  it  is  not  required  that  he  should  not  be  roused  to  meet  it ;  but  if  he  is 
angry  after  he  has  had  time  to  think  upon  it  that  is  sinful.  The  flame  is  not 
■wrong,  but  the  coals  are.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  evils  of  bad  tamper: — There 
are  households  where  this  demon  of  anger  governs  all  at  its  pleasure,  incessantly 
troubling  the  concord  of  husband  and  wife,  the  union  of  parents  and  children,  and 
the  peace  of  masters  and  servants.  There  is  nothing  done,  nothing  said,  but  iu 
anger.  You  would  say  of  these  houses,  that  they  are  the  fabled  cavern  of  Eolus, 
where  the  winds  shut  up  in  it  are  heard  night  and  day,  roaring  and  blustering. 
There  is  no  climate,  no  sea,  no  coast  in  all  the  earth,  where  storms  are  greater  or 
more  frequent.  For  whereas  natural  tempests  happen  but  at  some  seasons  of  the 
year,  in  these  miserable  houses  no  calm  is  ever  !:een  ;  and  there  needs  but  one 
petty  action,  one  word,  yea,  one  look,  to  raise  storms  of  many  days'  continuance  : 
as  it  is  said  of  certain  lakes  in  the  mountains  of  Berne,  that  if  one  cast  but  a  stone 
into  them,  the  surrounding  air  becomes  turbid,  and  is  immediately  filled  with  winds 
and  clouds,  which  soon  issue  lightning,  thunder,  and  excessive  rain.  Yea,  there 
are  some  whose  passion  is  so  violent,  that  it  cannot  be  kept  within  the  enclosure  of 
their  houses.  It  issues  out  of  doors,  and  without  respect  to  the  faces  of  those  who 
pass  by,  without  apprehension  of  scandal,  audaciously  shows  itself  in  public,  and 
acts  its  tragedies  in  the  presence  of  all  the  world.  {J.  Daille.)  Control  of  temper: — 
When  M.  de  Persigny  was  French  Minister  of  the  Interior  he  received  a  visit  one 
day  from  a  friend.  A  warm  discussion  arose  between  them.  Suddenly  an  usher 
entered  and  handed  the  minister  a  note.  On  opening  it  he  at  once  changed  his 
tone  of  voice,  and  assumed  a  quiet  and  urbane  manner.  Puzzled  as  to  the  contents 
of  the  note,  and  by  the  marked  effect  it  had  suddenly  produced  upon  the  minister, 
bis  friend  cast  a  furtive  glance  at  it,  when,  to  his  astonishment,  he  perceived  that 
it  was  simply  a  plain  sheet  of  paper.  More  puzzled  than  ever  the  gentleman  took 
his  leave,  and  proceeded  to  interrogate  the  usher.  "  Sir,"  said  he,  "here  is  the 
explanation,  which  I  must  beg  you  to  keep  secret.  My  master  is  very  liable  to  lose 
his  temper.  As  he  is  aware  of  his  weakness,  he  has  ordered  me,  each  time  his 
voice  is  raised  sufiQcient  to  be  audible  in  the  ante-room,  without  delay  to  place  a 
sheet  of  paper  in  an  envelope  and  take  it  to  him.  ^That  reminds  him  that  his 
temper  is  getting  the  better  of  hira,  and  he  at  once  calms  himself.  Just  now  I 
heard  his  voice  rising,  and  immediately  carried  out  my  instructions."  (IT-'.  Baxen- 
dale.)  Malice  : — The  word  is  of  great  extent,  and  signifies  in  general  that  venom 
and  evil  of  sin  which  is  diffused  through  any  one  of  our  passions,  wliichever  it  be. 
But  here,  as  frequently  elsewhere,  I  suppose  it  is  taken  for  the  malignity  of  anger ; 
when  a  mischievous  and  vindictive  stomach  inwardly  broods  on  its  passion,  and 
feeds  its  fire  under  the  ashes,  hatching  some  ill  turn  for  the  person  it  aims  at,  and 
waiting  for  opportunity  to  break  out.  Such  a  man  works  under  ground,  as  miners 
do,  and  appears  not  till  the  min  he  prepares  for  his  enemy  is  fully  ready.  Hia 
passion  is  like  a  stinted  fire,  that  does  not  burn  up  till  its  season.  Of  all  kinds  of 
•nger,  there  is  none  more  black  and  malignant  in  itself,  or  more  noxious  and 
pernicious  in  its  effects.  Wherefore  the  apostle  calls  it  malice,  naughtiness,  or 
malignity  particularly ;  and  it  seems  to  be  the  same  thing  he  elsewhere  calls  bitter- 
ness. {J.  Daille.)  Blasphemy,  its  nature: — Though  the  term,  in  our  tongue, 
imports  words  spoken  to  the  offence  of  God,  when  things  unworthy  of  his  greatness, 
and  holiness,  and  truth,  are  attributed  to  Him,  or  those  which  belong  to  Him  are 
denied  Him ;  or  when  that  which  is  proper  to  His  divinity  is  communicated  to 
creatures ;  yet  in  the  Greek,  that  is,  in  the  language  the  apostle  speaks,  the  word 
"  blasphemy  "  generally  signifies  any  offensive,  injurious  speech,  whoever  it  oonoems, 
whether  God,  or  angels,  or  men.  The  truth  is,  this  word,  if  we  respect  its  origin 
or  etymology,  simply  denotes  injuring  the  reputation,  or  offending  some  one's 
honour.  Consequently,  St.  Paul  uses  it  not  only  here,  but  also  in  other  places,  to 
signify  such  revilings  and  detractions  as  are  directed  properly  to  men,  and  not  to 
God  (1  Cor.  iv.  13 ;  Titus  iiL  2).  (Ibid.)  The  evil  speaker  .—While  the  Lord 
desires  as  to  consider  the  good  qualities  with  which  He  has  endowed  His  creatures, 


201  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

to  the  end  that  we  might  praise  and  esteem  them,  and  imitate  them,  the  evil- 
epeaker  looks  upon  nothing  but  their  defects  and  vices.  And  as  vultures  fly  over 
lair  meadows,  and  flowery  and  sweet-smelling  fields,  and  alight  only  on  dunghills, 
and  places  full  of  carrion  and  infection  ;  and  as  flies,  vnthoat  touching  the  sound 
parts  of  the  body,  fasten  only  upon  sores  and  ulcers ;  so  the  evil-speaker,  without 
BO  much  as  noticing  what  is  graceful  and  happy  in  the  lives  of  men,  falls  upon  that 
which  is  weak  and  sickly  in  them.  If  they  have  chanced  to  stumble,  as  is  very 
ordinary  in  this  infirmity  of  our  nature,  it  is  upon  this  that  he  fixes  ;  in  this  he 
takes  pleasure,  this  he  gladly  exposes  and  publishes,  amplifying  and  exaggerating 
it  with  his  infernal  rhetoric.  It  is  by  this  he  knows  persons ;  it  is  by  this  he  marks 
them  out  and  describes  them  ;  as  bad  painters,  who  represent  nothing  so  exactly 
as  the  moles  and  scars  of  the  faces  which  they  draw,  the  deformity  of  the  nose,  the 
protuberance  of  the  lips,  and  other  such  marks  which  they  have  from  the  birth,  or 
receive  by  some  accident.  Charity  covers  sins,  and  forgets  them  ;  the  evil-speaker 
divulges  them,  and  remembers  them  perpetually,  and  takes  out  of  the  grave  that 
which  had  been  buried  in  oblivion,  and  brings  it  to  light  again.  He  loves  pollution, 
and  feeds  on  nothing  but  poisons  and  filth.  And  for  this  end  he  has  always  a 
sufiBcient  store  of  such  provision  by  him.  His  memory  is  a  magazine,  or  rather  a 
sink,  where  he  heaps  up  the  villainies,  the  sins,  and  the  scandals,  not  of  his  own 
neighbourhood,  or  his  own  quarter  only,  but  of  the  whole  city  ;  yea,  if  he  possibly 
can,  of  the  whole  state.  It  is  from  this  diabolical  treasury  that  he  derives  the 
subject  of  his  sweetest  thoughts  and  most  pleasing  entertainments.  These  things 
are  his  perfumes  and  his  dainties.  But  he  is  not  content  only  to  rake  together  and 
lay  open  the  imperfections  which  he  finds  in  his  neighbours ;  he  is  so  malignant 
that  he  feigns  more,  and  fancies  some  where  there  are  none.  He  spreads  it  abroad 
for  truth  ;  and  that  he  may  persuade  others  of  it,  he  artificially  colours  his  fictions, 
giving  out  shows  for  truths,  and  shadows  for  substances.  He  so  bitterly  hates  all 
good,  that  where  be  sees  any  he  bespatters,  blackens,  and  disguises  it,  and  causes 
it  to  pass  for  evil.  And  as  the  snail  sullies  the  lustre  of  the  fairest  flowers  with  its 
sordid  slime  ;  just  so  this  bad  man,  by  the  poison  of  his  malignity,  defames  the 
most  grateful  virtues,  and  turns  them  into  vices.  He  takes  valour  for  temerity, 
and  patience  for  stupidity;  justice  for  cruelty,  and  prudence  for  craftiness.  Him 
that  is  liberal  he  calls  prodigal,  and  the  frugal  person  covetous.  If  you  be  religious, 
be  will  not  fail  to  accuse  you  of  superstition ;  and  if  you  be  free  and  generous,  and 
far  from  superstition,  he  will  accuse  you  of  being  profane.  In  fact,  there  is  no 
virtue  nor  perfection  for  which  this  wicked  man  has  not  found  an  infamous  name, 
taken  from  the  vice  that  borders  next  upon  it.  To  this  iniquity  he  usually  adds  a 
base  and  black  piece  of  treachery,  when,  to  cause  his  poisons  to  be  the  more  easily 
swallowed,  he  mischievously  sugars  them,  beginning  his  detractions  with  a  preface 
of  praise,  and  with  an  affected  commendation  of  the  persons  whom  he  intends  to 
revile ;  protesting,  at  his  entrance,  that  he  loves  and  respects  them,  for  the  purpose 
of  creating  a  belief  that  it  is  nothing  but  the  mere  force  and  evidence  of  truth  that 
constrains  him  to  speak  evil  of  them.  He  kisses  his  man  at  meeting,  and  then 
murders  him,  as  Joab  formerly  did :  he  crowns  his  victims  before  he  kills  them :  a 
fraud  which,  notwithstanding  its  ordinary  occurrence,  is  the  blackest  that  can  be 
perpetrated.  (Ihid.)  Slander  cannot  be  recalled: — A  lady  presented  herself  to 
Philip  Neri  one  day,  accusing  herself  of  being  a  slanderer.  "  Do  you  frequently 
fall  into  this  fault?"  inquired  he.  "Yes,  my  father,  very  often."  "My  dear 
child,"  said  Philip,  '*  your  fault  is  great,  but  the  mercy  of  God  is  still  greater.  For 
your  penance  do  as  follows :  Go  purchase  a  chicken,  and  walk  a  certain  distance, 
plucking  the  feathers  as  you  go  along.  Your  walk  finished,  return  to  me."  Ac- 
cordingly she  repaired  to  the  market,  did  as  she  was  bidden,  and  in  a  short  time 
returnei  •*  Ah,"  said  Philip,  "  you  have  been  very  faithful  to  the  first  part  of  my 
orders.  Retrace  your  steps,  and  gather  up  one  by  one  all  the  feathers  you  have 
scattered."  "  But,  father,"  exclaimed  the  poor  woman,  "  I  cast  them  carelessly  on 
every  side ;  the  wind  carried  them  in  every  direction.  How  can  I  recover  them  ?  " 
"  Well,  my  child,"  repUed  he,  "so  is  it  with  your  words  of  slander;  like  the 
feathers,  they  have  been  scattered.  Call  them  back  if  you  can.  Go  and  sin  no 
more."  (W.  Baxendale.)  Filthy  conversation: — As  offensive  breath  betokens 
some  inward  indisposition  and  corruption ;  so  filthy  and  dishonest  conversation 
discovers  the  impurity  and  unchastity  that  are  in  the  soul  of  him  who  uses  it. 
Hence  the  apostle  in  another  place  expressly  puts  this  among  other  parts  of 
Christian  sanctity,  that  our  conversation  be  pure,  chaste,  and  honest  (Eph.  v.  3-4 ; 
IT.  29).     {J,  Daille.)        Parity  of  conversation: — It  is  related  that  General  Grant 


€HAP.  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  803 

was  once  sitting  in  his  tent  with  officers  around  him,  when  a  general  came  in  in 
much  glee  and  said  :  "  I  have  a  good  story  to  tell ;  there  are  no  ladies  present,  I 
believe."  "  No,"  said  General  Grant,  "  but  there  are  gentlemen  present."  The 
man's  countenance  fell ;  the  good  story  was  never  told.  Some  Chribtians  could 
learn  a  good  lesson  from  the  great  commander's  remark.     {Christian,  Boston.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Lie  not  one  to  another:  seeing  that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man 
and  his  deeds. — Spiritual  renewal  in  Christ : — The  apostle  enforces  his  exhorta- 
tion by  two  arguments:  first,  "  Ye  died  with  Christ,"  &c. ;  second,  "  Ye  have  put 
oflf  the  old  man,"  <feo.  I.  Evert  Christun  is  the  stjbject  of  a  change.  The 
"  old  man  "  refers  to  our  degenerate  nature,  and  "  its  deeds  "  the  practical  outcome 
of  this  degeneracy.  The  "  new  man  "  is  the  new  nature,  for  the  creation  of  which 
God  has  provided  in  His  Son.  The  grand  change  takes  place  in  the  heart,  and  is 
perfected  in  the  life.  This  change  is — 1.  Divine  in  its  origin.  It  is  not  the  result 
of  human  skill  or  self-development.  2.  Progressive  in  its  nature,  "  which  is  being 
renewed."  There  i3  in  every  case  a  commencement,  whether  known  or  not,  at 
regeneration ;  but  as  in  the  case  of  the  new-born  infant,  its  powers  have  to  be 
expanded  and  renewed  day  by  day.  At  no  point  in  this  progress  can  the  Christian 
say,  "  I  have  attained  or  am  perfect."  There  is  in  this  fact  (1)  a  solace  which 
may  well  prevent  discouragement  at  the  consciousness  of  manifold  imperfections ; 
and  (2)  a  stimulus  which  should  lead  us  to  seek  with  ardour  the  influence  and 
evidence  of  a  progressive  piety.  A  statue  under  the  chisel  of  the  sculptor  is  ever 
being  renewed,  until  the  marble  form  assumes  a  perfect  likeness  of  the  ideal ;  so 
under  the  hand  of  God  the  soul  grows  in  the  attributes  of  spiritual  life  and 
the  beauties  of  holiness.  3.  Glorious  in  its  model.  "After  the  image  of  Him." 
Christ  is  "  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,"  and  comformity  to  Him  is  the  pattern 
of  our  renewal.  This  includes  much  more  than  the  mere  restoration  of  the  image 
lost  by  Adam.  4.  Grand  in  its  result.  "  Kenewed  into  knowledge";  i.e., 
knowledge  is  not  the  means,  but  the  purpose.  It  is  that  of  God  and  things 
Divine.  To  know  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  He  has  sent,  is  life  eternal.  To 
the  attainment  of  some  kinds  of  knowledge  character  is  essential,  and  pre- 
eminently it  is  so  here.  It  is  to  be  an  intuition — not  a  cold  intellectual 
acquisition  (Kom,  xii,  2  ;  Eph,  iii.  16-19).  Life  without  this  change  is  vanity. 
The  "  old  man  "  may  be  rich  and  strong,  but  the  "  new  man  "  only  can  see 
God  and   enter  heaven,     "Except  a    man   be   born  again,"   &c.     II.   In  this 

SPIRITUAL     RENEWAL     HUMAN     DISTINCTIONS     ABE      OF     NO     AVAIL     OR     ADVANTAGE.       1, 

National  distinctions:  "Greek  and  Jew."  One  nation  has  no  advantage  over 
another.  The  sensual  Hindoo,  the  literary  Chinaman,  the  stolid  Hottentot,  the 
energetic  European,  are  alike  by  sin  removed  from  the  life  of  God  ;  and  the  gospe! 
is  equally  adapted  to  all.  2,  Kitual  distinctions  (Gal.  vi  15).  A  man  born 
in  a  Christian  country  requires  a  change  of  heart  as  much  as  one  who  dwells  in 
a  pagan  land.  There  may  be  much  higher  external  privilege  in  one  case  than  in 
the  other,  but  that  does  not  confer  the  change,  nor  is  it  to  be  confounded  with  it. 
8.  Political  distinction :  "  Barbarian,  Scythian."  The  Scythians  were  at  the  lowest 
point  of  the  scale  of  civilization.  The  savage  and  the  pohshed  citizen  require  alike 
the  washing  of  regeneration.  4,  Social  distinction  :  "Bond,  free."  The  diversities 
of  condition  which  divide  men  ere  unrecognized.  Here  rich  and  poor  meet 
together.  Ill,  In  this  spiritual  change  Christ  is  evertthing.  "  All  and  in 
rU,  Christ."  1,  He  is  the  principle  of  the  change.  Every  Christian  is  created 
anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  2,  He  is  its  sustenance  and  strength.  As  the  renewed 
soul  feeds  on  Him  by  faith,  so  it  grows  up  in  Him.  There  can  be  no  advancement 
away  from  Him.  3.  He  is  its  perfection.  We  are  to  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall 
see  Him  as  He  is,  {J.  Spence,  D.D.)  The  new  nature  wrought  out  in  the 
new  life: — I,  The  change  op  the  Spirit's  dress.  1,  We  have  the  same  idea 
before.  "Death"  is  equivalent  to  the  "putting  off  of  the  old,"  and  "resur- 
rection "  to  "  putting  on  of  the  new."  The  figure  of  the  change  of  dress  to 
express  change  of  moral  character  is  frequent  in  Scripture.  "  Let  thy  priests 
be  clothed  with  righteousness."  Zechariah  saw  the  high-priest  change  his  filthy 
garments  for  festal  robes  when  God  "caused  his  iniquity  to  pass  from  him."  See 
also  Christ's  parables  of  the  Wedding  Garment  and  Prodigal  Son,  and  Paul's 
exhortation  to  Christ's  soldiers  to  put  off  their  night-gear,  "  the  works  of  dark- 
ness," &q.  In  every  reformatory  the  first  thing  done  is  to  strip  off  and  bum  the 
rags  of  the  new-comers,  and  then  give  them  a  bath,  and  dress  them  in  clean 
olothes.      Character  is  the  garb  of  the  soul.      Habit  means  costume  and  custom. 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

2,  The  apostle  hazards  a  mixed  metaphor — "Put  on  the  new  man" — to  show 
that  what  is  put  off  and  on  is  much  more  truly  part  of  themselves  than  an  article 
of  dress.  There  is  a  deeper  self  which  remains,  the  true  man,  the  centre  of 
personality.  Thus  the  figure  expresses  the  depth  of  the  change  and  the  identity 
of  the  person.  3.  This  entire  change  is  assumed  as  having  been  realized  at  that 
point  of  time  when  the  Colossians  began  to  put  their  trust  in  Christ.  (1)  Of 
course  the  contrast  between  the  old  and  the  new  is  greatest  in  converted  heathens. 
With  us,  where  Christianity  is  widely  diffused,  there  is  less  room  for  a  marked 
revolution.  Many  can  point  to  no  sudden  change,  or  if  they  have  been  consciout 
of  a  change,  have  passed  through  it  as  gradually  as  night  passes  into  day.  (2) 
But  there  are  those  who  have  grown  up  without  God  who  must  become  Christiana 
by  sudden  conversion.  And  why  should  this  be  regarded  as  impossible?  Is  it 
not  often  the  case  that  some  ignored  principle  has  come,  like  a  meteor  in  the 
atmosphere,  into  a  man's  mind,  and  exploded  and  blown  to  pieces  the  habits  of 
a  lifetime  ?  And  why  should  not  this  be  so  with  the  truth  of  God's  great  love  in 
Christ  ?  (3)  The  New  Testament  does  not  insist  that  everybody  must  become  a 
Christian  in  the  same  fashion.  Sometimes  there  will  be  a  dividing  line  between 
the  two  states  as  sharp  as  the  boundary  of  adjoining  kingdoms ;  sometimes  the 
one  will  melt  imperceptibly  into  the  other.  Sometimes  the  revolution  will  be  as 
swift  as  that  of  the  wheel  of  a  locomotive,  sometimes  slow  and  silent  as  the  move- 
ment of  a  planet.  4.  But  however  brought  about,  this  is  a  certain  mark  of  the 
Christian  life.  (1)  If  there  be  any  reality  in  the  act  by  which  we  have  laid  hold  of 
Christ,  old  things  wiU  have  passed  away — tastes,  desires,  &c. — and  all  things  will 
have  become  new,  because  we  move  with  a  new  love,  have  a  new  hope,  aim,  song. 
(2)  This  is  a  most  needful  test  for  those  who  put  too  much  stress  on  believing  and 
feeling.  Nor  is  it  less  needful  to  remember  that  this  is  a  consequence  of  faith  in 
Christ.  Nothing  else  will  strip  the  foul  robes  from  a  man.  To  try  to  begin  with 
the  second  stage  is  like  trying  to  build  a  house  at  the  second  story.  5.  The 
practical  conclusion:  "Seeing  that."  The  change,  though  taking  place  in  the 
inmost  nature,  needs  to  be  wrought  into  character  and  wrought  out  in  conduct. 
The  leaven  is  in  the  dough,  but  to  knead  it  thoroughly  into  the  mass  is  a  lifelong 
task,  only  accomplished  by  our  continually  repeated  efforts.  6.  So  the  apparently 
illogical,  Put  off  what  yon  have  put  off,  and  put  on  what  you  have  put  on,  is 
vindicated.  It  means,  Be  consistent  with  your  deepest  selves  ;  carry  out  in  detail 
what  you  have  already  done  in  bulk.  Cast  out  the  enemy  already  ejected  from  the 
central  fortress,  from  the  isolated  positions  he  still  occupies.  You  may  put  off  the 
old  man,  for  he  is  put  off  already;  you  must  do  so,  for  there  is  still  danger  of  his 
again  wrapping  his  poisonous  rags  about  your  limbs.  II.  The  continuous  gbowth 
OF  THE  NKW  MAN,  ITS  AIM  AND  PATTERN.  1.  The  new  man  is  "  being  renewed  " — 
a  continuous  process,  perhaps  slow  and  difficult  to  discern,  but,  like  all  powers  and 
habits,  it  steadily  increases ;  and  a  similar  process  works  to  opposite  results  in  the 
old  man  (Eph,  iv.  22).  2.  This  renewing  is  on  the  man,  not  by  him.  There  is  a 
Divine  side.  The  renewing  is  not  merely  effected  by  us,  nor  due  only  to  the  vital 
power  of  the  new  man,  but  by  the  "renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  So  there  is 
hope  for  ns  in  our  striving,  for  He  helps  us.    "  Work  out  your  own  salvation,"  &c. 

3.  The  new  man  is  renewed  "  unto  knowledge."  Possibly  there  may  be  an  allusion 
to  the  pretensions  of  the  false  teachers  to  a  higher  wisdom.  There  is  but  one  way 
to  press  into  the  depths  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  viz.,  growth  into  EUs  likeness. 
We  understand  one  another  best  by  sympathy.  We  know  God  only  on  condition 
of  resemblance.  For  all  simple  souls,  bewildered  by  the  strife  of  tongues,  and 
unapt  for  speculation,  this  is  a  message  of  gladness.  4.  The  new  man  is  created 
after  "the  image,"  &c.  As  in  the  first  creation,  so  in  the  new.  But  the  old 
image  consisted  mainly  in  the  reasonable  soul,  the  self-conscious  personality,  the 
broad  distinctions  between  men  and  animals.  That  humanity,  in  a  sense,  still 
has,  though  marred.  The  coin  bears  His  image  and  superscription,  though  rusty 
and  defaced.  But  the  new  image  consists  in  holiness.  Though  the  majestic 
infinitudes  of  God  can  have  no  likeness  in  man,  we  may  be  "  holy  as  He  is  holy," 
be  "imitators  of  God,"  "walk  in  love  as  He  hath  loved  us,"  and  "in  the  light  aa 
He  is  in  the  light."  III.  The  oband  unity  of  this  creation.  1.  "  Christ  is  all." 
Wherever  that  new  nature  is  found,  it  lives  by  the  life  of  Christ.  2.  All  who  are 
His  partake  of  that  common  gift.  He  is  in  all.  There  is  no  privileged  class,  as 
these  teachers  afiSrmed.  Necessarily,  therefore,  surface  distinctions  disappeatr. 
Paul's  catalogue  may  be  profitably  compared  with  Gal.  iii.  28.  (1)  Greek  and 
Jew.     The  cleft  of  national  distinctions,  which  never  yawned  more  widely  than 


CBAt.  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  201 

this,  eeases  to  separate.  (2)  Circumcision  and  ancircumcision.  Nothing  makes 
deeper  and  bitterer  antagonisms  than  differences  in  religious  forms.  (3)  Barbarian, 
Scythian  :  which  reflects  the  Greek  contempt  for  outside  races  as  of  lower  culture. 
A  cultivated  class  is  always  tempted  to  superciliousness,  and  a  half-cultivated  class 
more  so,  as  was  the  case  at  GoIosssb.  In  the  interests  of  the  humble  virtues 
Christianity  wars  against  the  pride  of  culture,  the  most  heartless  of  all.  (4) 
Bondman,  freeman.  That  gulf  was  too  wide  for  compassion  to  cross,  though  not 
for  hatred  to  stride  over.  The  effacement  of  this  distinction  is  seen  in  the  letter 
to  Philemon  which  was  despatched  with  this.  3.  Christianity  waged  no  direct 
war  against  these  evils.  Bevolution  cures  nothing.  The  only  way  to  get  rid  of 
btIIs  engendered  in  the  constitution  of  society  is  to  elevate  and  change  the  tone  of 
thought  and  feeling,  and  then  they  die  of  atrophy.  Change  the  cUmate,  and  you 
change  the  vegetation.  Until  you  do,  neither  mowing  nor  uprooting  will  get  rid 
of  the  foul  growths.  So  the  gospel  does  with  all  these  lines  of  demarcation 
between  men.  Wliat  becomes  of  the  ridges  of  sand  that  separate  pool  from  pool 
at  low  water  *  The  tide  comes  up  and  over  them,  and  makes  them  all  one,  gathered 
into  the  oneness  of  the  great  sea.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  New  leaves  pushing 
off  the  old  : — -Manton  says  that "  Old  leaves,  if  they  remain  upon  the  trees  through 
the  autumn  and  the  winter,  fall  off  in  the  spring."  We  have  seen  a  hedge  all 
thick  with  dry  leaves  throughout  the  winter,  and  neither  frost  nor  wind  has 
removed  the  withered  foliage,  but  the  spring  has  soon  made  a  clearance.  The  new 
life  dislodges  the  old,  pushing  it  away  as  unsuitable  to  it.  So  our  old  corruptions 
are  best  removed  by  the  growth  of  new  graces.  *'  Old  things  are  passed  away ; 
behold  all  things  are  become  new."  It  is  as  the  new  life  buds  and  opens  that  the 
old,  worn-out  things  of  our  former  state  are  compelled  to  quit  their  hold  of  us. 
Our  wisdom  lies  in  living  near  to  God,  that  by  the  power  of  His  Holy  Spirit  all  our 
graces  may  be  vigorous,  and  may  exercise  a  sin-expelling  power  over  our  lives  :  the 
new  leaves  of  grace  pushing  off  our  old  sere  affections  aud  habits  of  sin.  With 
converts  from  the  world  it  is  often  better  not  to  lay  down  stringent  rules  as 
to  worldly  amusements,  but  leave  the  new  life  and  its  holier  joys  to  push  off  the 
old  pleasures.  Thus  it  will  be  done  more  naturally  and  more  effectively.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Life  changed  fur  the  better; — The  leader  of  a  very  ungodly  set  of  fellows 
in  a  dye-house  became  converted.  Two  of  his  fellow-workmen  were  so  struck  with 
the  change  that  for  a  time  they  followed  him  in  his  new  way,  and  behaved  hke  good 
Christians.  The  ridicule  and  violence  of  the  rest  were,  however,  too  strong  for 
their  resolution,  and  they  turned  to  their  old  ways,  while  John,  the  first  convert, 
clung  close  to  Christ,  and  stood  firm  as  a  rock.  John  did  not  say  much,  but 
he  answered  scoffs  and  railing  by  a  consistent  Christiyn  life.  One  day,  however, 
when  his  fellow-workmen  were  boasting  what  good  infidelity  could  do,  and  how 
much  harm  the  Bible  had  done,  his  soul  was  stirred  within  him ;  he  turned  round, 
and  said,  feelingly,  but  firmly,  "  Well,  let  us  deal  plainly  in  this  matter,  my 
friends,  and  judge  of  the  tree  by  the  fruit  it  bears.  You  call  yourselves  infidels. 
Let  us  see  what  your  principles  do.  I  suppose  what  they  do  on  a  small  scale  they 
will  do  on  a  large  one.  Now,  there  are  Tom  and  Jem,"  pointing  to  the  two  who 
went  with  him  and  then  turned  back,  "  You  have  tried  your  principles  on  them. 
When  they  tried  to  serve  Christ,  they  were  civil,  good-tempered,  kind  husbands 
and  fathers.  They  were  cheerful,  hardworking,  and  ready  to  oblige.  What  have 
you  made  them  ?  Look  and  see.  They  are  cast  down  and  cross ;  their  mouths 
are  full  of  cursing  and  filthiness  ;  they  are  drunk  every  week  ;  their  children  half 
clothed,  their  wives  broken-hearted,  their  homes  wretched.  Now,  I  have  tried 
Christ  and  His  religion,  and  what  has  it  done  for  me  ?  You  know  well  what  I 
used  to  be.  There  was  none  of  you  who  could  drink  so  much,  swear  so  desperately, 
and  fight  so  masterly.  I  had  no  money,  and  no  one  would  trust  me.  My  wife 
was  illused  ;  I  was  ill-humoured,  hateful,  and  hating.  What  has  religion  done 
for  me  ?  Thank  God,  I  am  not  afraid  to  put  it  to  you.  Am  I  not  a  happier  man 
than  I  was  ?  Am  I  not  a  better  workman  and  a  kinder  companion  ?  Would  I 
once  have  put  up  with  what  I  now  bear  from  you  ?  I  could  beat  any  of  you  as 
easily  now  as  ever.  Why  don't  IT  Do  you  ever  hear  a  foul  word  from  my  mouth, 
or  catch  me  at  a  public  house?  Go  and  ask  my  neighbours  if  I  have  not  altered 
for  the  better.  Go  and  ask  my  wife.  Let  my  house  bear  witness.  God  be  praised, 
here  is  ^vhat  Christianity  has  done  for  me ;  there  is  what  infidelity  has  done  for 
Jem  and  Tom."  John  stopped.  The  dyers  had  not  a  word  to  say.  He  used  a 
logic  they  could  not  answer— the  logic  of  a  life.  {Family  Treasury.)  The  nature 
of  lying : —It  the  following  three  circumstances  coucur — that  what  is  ottered  be 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

false,  that  it  was  wished  to  annoance  a  falsehood,  and  that  it  was  the  intention  to 
deceive — then  it  has  the  qualities  of  a  lie  complete ;  for  it  is  false  both  materially 
and  formally.  (Thomas  Aquinas.)  Kinds  of  liet : — There  are  lies  pernicious, 
oflScious,  and  jocose.  The  first  is  employed  for  the  sake  of  injury;  the  second 
for  that  of  assistance  ;  the  third  for  diversion.  But  the  Scripture  denies  any 
one  of  these  to  be  lawful  (Rev.  xxi.  8,  xxii.  15  ;  Prov.  xii.  22 ;  Eph.  iv.  25). 
{Bishop  Davenant.)  Lying  against  reason: — Language  was  instituted,  not  that 
men  might  deceive  one  another  by  it,  but  that  they  should  use  it  to  tell  their 
mutual  thoughts  ;  it  is  therefore  an  act  unlawful  to  reason  for  one  to  utter  words 
to  signify  that  which  he  doeth  not  intend  in  his  mind.  (Durandut.)  Speech  and 
mind  must  be  at  one : — Language  is  a  natural  sign  of  the  understanding ;  it  is 
therefore  unnatural  that  any  one  should  signify  that  by  his  speech  which  does 
not  exist  in  his  mind.  {Aquinas.)  The  disgrace  of  lying : — Clear  and  sound 
dealing  is  the  honour  of  man's  nature;  and  that  mixture  of  falsehood  is  like 
alloy  in  gold  or  silver,  which  may  make  the  metal  work  better,  but  it  debaseth 
it.  For  these  windings  and  crooked  courses  are  the  goings  of  the  serpent,  which 
goeth  basely  upon  the  belly,  not  upon  the  feet.  There  is  no  vice  that  doth  so 
cover  a  man  with  shame  as  to  be  found  false  and  perfidious ;  and  therefore 
Montaigne  saith  prettily,  "If  it  be  well  weighed,  to  say  that  a  man  lieth  is  aa 
to  say  that  he  is  brave  towards  God  and  a  coward  towards  men.  For  a  lie  faces 
God  and  shrinks  from  man."  (Lord  Bacon.)  Lying  unsafe  : — A  liar  is  sooner 
caught  than  a  cripple.  Liars  should  have  good  memories.  A  lie  has  no  legs. 
(Proverbs.)  Falsehood  difficult  to  inaintain  : — It  is  difficult  to  maintain  false- 
hood. When  the  materials  of  a  building  are  solid  blocks  of  stone,  very  rude 
architecture  will  suffice ;  but  a  structure  of  rotten  materials  needs  the  most  careful 
adjustment  in  order  to  make  it  stand.  (Archbishop  Whately.)  The  folly  of 
lying : — Truth  is  always  consistent  with  itself,  and  needs  nothing  to  help  it  out ; 
it  is  always  near  at  hand,  sits  upon  our  lips,  and  is  ready  to  drop  out  before  we 
are  aware.  A  lie  is  troublesome,  and  sets  a  man's  invention  upon  the  rack  ;  and 
one  trick  needs  a  great  many  more  to  make  it  good.  It  is  like  building  on  a  false 
foundation,  which  continually  stands  in  need  of  props  to  shore  it  up ;  and  proves 
at  last  more  chargeable  than  to  have  raised  a  substantial  building  at  first  on  a  true 
and  solid  foundation.     (Addison.)  Acting  a  lie  : — Once   while  Rowland  Hill 

was  spending  an  evening  at  the  house  of  a  friend,  a  lady,  who  was  there  on  a 
visit,  retired,  that  her  little  girl  of  four  years  old  might  go  to  bed.  She  returned 
in  about  half  an  hour,  and  said  to  a  lady  near  her:  "  She  is  gone  to  sleep  ;  I  put 
on  my  nightcap,  and  lay  down  by  her,  and  she  soon  dropped  off."  Mr.  HiU,  who 
overheard  this,  said :  "  Excuse  me,  madam  :  do  you  wish  your  child  to  grow  up  a 
har?"  "Oh  dear,  no,  sir;  I  should  be  shocked  at  such  a  thing."  "Then  bear 
with  me  when  I  say  you  must  never  act  a  lie  before  her.  Children  are  very  quick 
observers,  and  soon  learn  that  that  which  assumes  to  be  what  it  is  not  is  a  lie, 
whether  acted  or  spoken."  This  was  uttered  with  a  kindness  which  precluded 
offence,  yet  with  a  seriousness  that  could  not  be  forgotten.  Folly  and  misery  of 

lying : — The  folly  of  lying  consists  in  its  defeating  its  own  purpose.  A  habit  of 
lying  is  generally  detected  in  the  end ;  and  after  detection,  the  liar,  instead 
of  deceiving,  will  not  even  be  believed  when  he  happens  to  speak  the  truth. 
Nay,  every  single  lie  is  attended  with  such  a  variety  of  circumstances  which  lead 
to  a  detection,  that  it  is  often  discovered.  The  use  generally  made  of  a  lie  is  to  cover 
a  fault ;  but  as  this  end  is  seldom  answered,  we  only  aggravate  what  we  wish  to 
conceal.  In  point  even  of  prudence,  an  honest  confession  would  serve  us  better. 
(JR.  Gilpin.)  Example  of  truthfulness: — In  the  course  of  my  acquaintance  with 
Sir  Robert  Peel  I  never  knew  a  man  in  whose  truth  and  justice  I  had  a  more 
lively  confidence.  In  the  whole  course  of  my  communication  with  him  I  never 
knew  an  instance  in  which  he  did  not  show  the  strongest  attachment  to  truth, 
and  I  never  saw,  in  the  whole  course  of  my  life,  the  smallest  reason  for  suspecting 
that  he  stated  anything  which  he  did  not  firmly  believe  to  be  the  fact.  (The  Duke 
of  Wellingto7i.)  Love  of  truth: — One  drizzly  March  evening,  Stonewall  Jackson 
was  about  to  start  at  dusk  for  the  residence  of  a  friend  a  mile  distant.  "  Is  it 
imperative  that  you  go  to-night?"  he  was  asked.  "  Not  specially  so,"  he  replied. 
"  Then  why  walk  a  mile  in  the  rain  if  to-morrow  will  do  as  well  ? "     "  Well,  I 

was  talking  with  Colonel  M this  morning,  and  told  him  that  my  conversation 

with  Cadet  D was  held  in  barracks  on  Monday.     I  have  since  recollected  that 

it  was  held  on  the  parade-ground,  and  that  it  was  on  Tuesday."  "  Does  anything 
depend  on  this  statement  ?  "    "Nothing  whatever."    "  Why,  in  the  name  of  reason, 


e«AP.  m.]  COLO  SSI ANS.  Mf 

then,  do  von  walk  a  mile  in  the  rain  for  a  perfectly  unimportant  thing  ?  "  "  Simply 
because  I  have  discovered  it  was  a  misstatement,  and  I  could  not  sleep  comfortaMy 
to-nit,'ht  unless  I  corrected  it."  And  go  he  did.  (H.  O.  Mackay.)  Truth  and 
falsehood : — I.  The  nature  of  the  sin  of  lying.  The  youngest  of  ns  knows  the 
thing  too  well — the  intentional  leading  of  others  to  understand  as  true  what  we 
know  to  be  false.  1.  It  may  be  by  a  lying  word — a  sin  of  the  tongue,  telling  a  lie, 
speaking  a  lie.  2.  It  may  be  by  a  lying  look — a  sin  of  the  eye — looking  a  lie.  3. 
It  may  be  a  lying  act — a  sin  of  the  hand — acting  a  Ue.  This  is  one  of  the  most 
common  forms  of  it,  and  least  thought  of.  Still  to  keep  by  school-life  :  It  is  the 
hour  for  arithmetic.  You  have  got  some  hard  sums  to  do — too  hard  for  you 
to  master  without  more  time  than  you  have  got  now.  You  ask  your  ntighbour  to 
show  you  his  slate,  or  you  look  over  the  shoulder  of  the  boy  before  you  who  is 
always  correct,  you  see  you  have  been  mistaken,  rub  out  the  wrong  figures,  fill  in 
the  right — in  a  moment  you  are  on  your  feet  as  having  finished  your  work,  read  off 
your  sum,  get  your  mark,  and,  with  it,  credit  for  being  one  of  the  few  who  are 
correct.  That  is  a  theft,  but  it  is  also  a  Ue  ;  it  is  stealing,  but  it  is  also  lying.  It 
was  not  the  tongue,  but  the  hand  that  did  it.  And  here  let  me  warn  you  against 
being  parties  to  the  lies  of  others.  You  are  a  young  servant.  You  have  broken 
accidentally  a  favourite  china  bowl.  You  do  not  know  what  to  do.  It  is  the  first  time 
Buch  a  thing  has  happened  with  you.  You  fear  your  mistress  will  be  angry ;  perhaps 
you  will  have  to  replace  it  out  of  your  half-year's  wage,  small  as  it  is,  just  on  purpose 
to  make  you  more  careful  for  the  future.  So  instead  of  making  an  immediate  and 
full  confession,  explaining  how  it  took  place,  and  saying  you  will  be  more  careful  in 
time  to  come,  yon  take  up  the  pieces,  and  lay  them  aside  till  you  have  opportunity 
of  getting  them  out  of  the  way ;  or  you  join  the  broken  piece  in  as  neatly  as  you 
can,  set  the  bowl  in  the  press,  and  the  discovery  is  never  made  that  you  had  any 
band  in  it,  till  you  are  in  another  situation.  You  have  been  acting  a  lie ;  and  I 
can  hardly  over-estimate  the  wrong  yon  have  done,  most  of  all  to  yourself.  When 
Jacob  put  the  kid-skins  on  his  hands  and  neck,  and  served  up  dainty  meat  to  his 
old  blind  father  Isaac,  passing  himself  ofi  for  bis  brother  Esau,  he  acted  a  lie ;  it 
was  lying  kindness.  Before  leaving  this  head,  let  me  say  a  word  regarding 
equivocating — that  is,  saying  what  has  a  double  meaning — what  may  be  taken  up 
io  two  ways — the  mere  word  true,  the  thing  false — a  kind  of  half-lie.  II.  The 
CHARACTEB  of  this  sin.  It  would  take  long  to  brmg  out  all  the  bad  features  of  it. 
Take  the  following :  1.  It  is  a  cowardly  thing.  No  brave  boy  would  lie.  Cowards 
tell  lies.  Fear  lies  at  the  bottom  of  falsehood,  and  no  liar  need  pretend  to  be  brave. 
If  I  were  in  search  of  courageous  boys,  I  would  seek  truthful  ones.  Our  Scottish 
martyrs,  the  good  Covenanters  in  olden  times,  were  bright  examples  of  strict  ad- 
herence, not  only  to  the  truth,  but  to  truthfulness  ;  and  where  shall  we  find  any 
more  brave  ?  A  lie  would  have  saved  their  lives — a  single  lying  act — one  lying 
bow  of  the  head — but  they  would  not.  2.  It  is  a  mean  thing.  It  is  not  manly. 
Some  of  the  cases  I  have  meu tinned,  showing  utter  disregard  to  the  feelings  and 
interests  of  others,  are  base,  shabby  contemptible  in  the  extreme.  Never  expect 
much  at  the  haryi  of  liars.  They  would  sacrifice  your  interests  to  their  own  any 
day.  3.  It  is  a  God-dishonouring  thing.  How  much  is  said  of  God  in  connection 
with  truth  I  He  is  called  the  "God  of  truth."  It  is  said.  He  "  keepeth  truth  for 
ever."  Every  word  of  His  is  so  unchangeable  that  His  "  truth  "  is  just  used  for 
His  "word";  they  mean  the  same  thing.  He  is  called  "God  who  cannot  lie." 
His  people  are  called  "  children  that  will  not  lie."  Lying  lips  are  said  to  be  "  an 
abomination  "  to  Him.  Truth  is  part  of  God's  likeness — God's  image.  What  dis- 
honour, then,  must  be  done  to  the  God  of  truth  by  lying  I  You  don't  like  lying  things ; 
a  lying  apple,  beautiful  and  inviting  without,  but  rotten  within ;  a  lying  penny, 
bright  but  bad  ;  a  lying  cat,  that  invites  you  to  make  much  of  it,  and  seems  ever 
so  friendly,  and  then  bites  or  scratches  you  ;  a  lying  lottery,  that  promises  a  prize 
and  gives  a  blank  ;  a  lying  branch,  that  invites  your  foot  to  rest  upon  it,  and  then 
gives  way  and  throws  you  to  the  ground.  And  God  dislikes  lying  things  too.  This 
is  the  worst  feature  in  it  all — it  is  so  dishonouring  to  God.  This  is  seen  in  the 
way  He  speaks  of  it  and  punishes  it.  4.  It  is  a  devilish  thing.  God  is  the  "  God 
of  truth,"  the  devil  is  the  "  father  of  lies,"  is  a  "liar,"  ay,  and  the  father  of  liars. 
Lying  is  so  vile  a  thing,  and  the  word  "  lie  "  is  so  black,  even  to  the  world,  even  to 
the  wicked,  even  to  careless  children,  that  they  try  to  use  it  as  little  as  possible, 
and  it  is  spoken  and  thought  lightly  of,  under  another  name — a  "  fib  ;  "  "  it  was 
only  a  fib  " — a  kind  of  harmless,  innocent  falsehood — a  little  lie — a  softer  name  for 
a  bad,  black  thing.     III.  The  dai^qeb  of  it.    1.  It  is  a  growing  sixu     By  this  I 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in, 

mean  it  is  always  increasing.  One  lie  leads  to  and  necessitates  another,  till  no  one 
knows  where  it  will  end.  Il  is  like  a  snowball,  the  further  it  is  rolled  the  more  it 
increases  in  -size.  Once  or  twice  indulged,  it  soon  becomes  a  habit.  2.  It  leads 
to  and  is  linked  with  many  other  sins.  You  seldom  find  lying  alone.  It  is  some- 
thing like  drinking :  it  leads  to  almost  every  other  sin,  and  all  other  sins  seek  its 
help,  and  hide  themselves  under  it.  I  can  hardly  fancy  a  liar  to  be  honest — either 
to  fear  God  or  regard  man.  3.  It  degrades  the  whole  character.  When  a  habit 
of  lying  has  been  formed,  we  may  well  fear  the  worst.  When  truthfulness  goes, 
the  whole  character  goes  along  with  it.  There  is  an  end  to  all  confidence.  For  a 
young  apprentice,  or  a  young  servant,  there  is  nothing  I  fear  so  much  as  untruth- 
fulness.  IV.  The  punishment  of  it.  This  is  two-fold.  1.  Here — in  the  present 
world.  There  is  the  loss  of  character ;  the  loss  of  all  respect.  There  is  degra- 
dation ;  misery;  shame.  No  one  can  respect  a  liar.  It  carries  its  own  punishment 
with  it.  2.  Hereaitsr — in  the  world  to  come.  Eemember,  dear  children  I  that 
sooner  or  later  the  lie  will  be  discovered — every  lie  I  If  not  here,  at  any  rate  here- 
after, v.  Our  DUTY  regarding  it.  "  Lie  not :  putting  away  lying — speak  the 
truth."  1.  Strive  against  it.  2.  Watch  against  it.  You  must  not  leave  the  door 
open.  8.  Pray  against  it.  4.  Seek  to  love  the  truth.  Get  the  heart  filled  with 
the  love  of  Christ,  and  then  you  will  love  the  truth,  and  of  necessity  hate  lying. 
Every  effort  will  strengthen  you,  and  the  more  you  seek  after  the  truth,  the  stronger 
you  will  become  in  it.  Eather  be  simple  than  deceitful ;  rather  be  the  cheated  than 
the  cheater,  for  it  is  written,  "  The  Lord  preserveth  the  simple."     {J.  H.  Wilson.) 

Ver.  10.  And  have  put  on  the  new  man. — In  allusion  to  the  white  garments 
with  which  the  primitive  converts,  having  first  laid  aside  their  heathen  vestments, 
were  wont  to  be  arrayed,  St.  Paul  exhorts  the  Colossians  to  "  put  off  the  old  man 
with  his  deeds,  and  to  put  on  the  new  man."  Christians  should  no  more  dishonour 
God  and  disgrace  religion  by  any  of  the  vices  and  passions  of  their  natural  state, 
than  a  courtier  should  insult  his  prince  by  appearing  before  him  in  squalid  and 
ragged  attire.  But  this  is  not  enough — this  is  negative  merely.  The  Christian 
must  also  actually  array  himself  in  the  white  and  becoming  dress  of  Ids  new 
character  and  relation  ;  as  a  courtier  would  not  only  abstain  from  insulting  his 
prince  by  wearing  defiled  and  mean  garments,  but  would  also  be  studious  to  attire 
himself,  when  approaching  his  presence,  with  the  suitable  and  ornamental  dress 
which  he  knew  was  required.  {Bishop  D.  Wilson.)  Which  Is  being  renewed. — 
Divine  creation  is  not  a  mere  mechanical  work.  It  is  wholly  different  from  all 
work  of  ours.  The  builder  builds  a  house,  and  when  it  is  built  he  has  done  with 
it,  and  may  never  see  it  again ;  still  the  house  stands.  An  ai'tist  paints  his 
picture ;  it  passes  from  the  easel,  it  is  hung  in  the  gallery ;  he  has  done  with  it ; 
he  does  not  stand  there  day  by  day,  with  brush  and  palette,  keeping  the  yellows 
Lrilhant,  and  the  purples  rich,  and  the  browns  mellow.  A  poet  writes  his  verses, 
prints  them,  and  he  has  done  with  them.  The  pathos,  beauty,  music  remain ; 
they  touch  the  heart,  charm  the  ear,  kindle  the  imagination  of  millions  in  many 
ages  and  lands  long  after  his  own  heart  has  ceased  to  throb,  and  the  fire  of  his 
own  ^©nlus  is  quenched.  This  is  not  the  kind  of  relation  between  God  and  Hia 
creatures.  He  transcends  the  universe,  but  is  immanent  in  it ;  it  only  exists  &3 
long  as  He  sustains  it.  If  He  were  to  let  it  go  it  would  pass  into  chaos — into 
nothing.  Its  enduring  forces  are  the  witnesses  of  His  eternal  power.  The 
universe,  this  vast  temple  which  God  has  vaa>\e  for  Him-elf,  would  not  stand  if  the 
Builder  were  to  leave  it ;  its  foundations  would  shake,  its  walls  be  rent,  it  would 
sink  in  ruins.  The  glory  of  the  mountain,  lake,  and  river  would  not  remain  like  the 
artist's  picture,  if  the  Divine  Artist  were  to  leave  it,  every  outline  would  lose  its  firm- 
ness and  gra<'e,  every  colour  its  softness  or  its  strength,  and  the  canvas  would  forget 
the  beauty  which  had  covered  it.  The  revelation  of  thought  which  God  has  given 
in  all  created  things  would  not  remain  if  He,  the  great  Teacher  and  Poet,  ceased  to  live 
or  ceased  to  speak  ;  the  great  poem  would  perish,  it  remains  only  as  long  as  living 
inspiration  is  in  it.  God  creates,  and,  as  we  are  accustomed  to  say,  sustains.  But 
the  word  is  inadequate;  it  suggests  too  mechanical  and  external  a  relation  between 
God  and  what  He  has  made.  His  action  might  almost  be  described  as  a  continuous 
creation.  His  power  is  within  every  created  thing,  active,  persistent,  or  what  He 
has  created  would  cease  to  be.  His  thought  is  within  every  created  thing,  deter- 
mining, maintaining  its  form,  the  characteristic  mode  of  its  existence.  The  sun 
'sea  over  sea  and  land,  and  creates  the  day ;  but  the  sun  renews  the  day  from 

Bent  to  moment,  or  the  day  would  pass  back  into  night.     So  were  it  not  tot 


-OHAP.  m.)  COLOSSI ANS.  20t 

the  great  power  of  God  ever  active,  all  things  would  cease  to  be.  The  new  man 
was  created  by  Him  ;  day  by  day  the  new  man  is  kept  new  by  the  fresh  and  con- 
tinuous activity  of  the  same  power  that  brought  it  into  being.  Every  niotiient,  in 
%  true  sense,  we  are  bom  again,  just  as  the  stream  has  the  continuous  birth  from 
the  mountain,  and  the  light  from  the  sun  ;  every  moment  we  are  arising  anew  from 
the  dead,  every  moment  there  passes  into  us  afresh  the  energy  of  the  creative 
power ;  we  are  being  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the  image  of  Him  that  created 
QB.  And,  therefore,  as  we  begin  to  live  in  answer  to  our  faith,  so  we  continue  to 
live  in  answer  to  our  faith.  We  never  stand  apart  and  alone.  Yesterday's 
inspiration  gives  us  no  light  to-day  ;  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  was  active 
in  us  yesterday  is  unavailing  for  to-day's  righteouaness.  And  ibis  new  life  is  also 
a  lite  of  continuous  prayer.  What  is  the  real  meaning  of  indisposition  to  prayer? 
It  means  that  the  spirit  of  independence  is  mastering  us,  and  for  us  independence 
means  death.  We  are  living  only  as  God  lives  in  us.  {R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  The 
Image  of  God  restored  to  vien : — 1.  Man  was  created  in  the  image  of  God. 
Righteous  as  Go.l  was  righteous  he  saw  God  in  his  own  nature ;  other  intelligent 
creatures  saw  God  in  him ;  and  God  in  His  offspring  saw  Himself.  2.  The  image 
of  God  is  now  defaced.  The  substance  remiins,  but  its  glorious  attributes  are 
gone.  The  form  abides  but  the  glurious  featuies  are  not  there.  3.  To  be  right 
and  blessed  men  must  recover  this  image.  Without  likeness  to  God  we  are  unable 
to  appreciate  His  revelations,  and  incapable  of  filial  intercourse.  4.  By  his  own 
power  or  with  the  assistance  of  his  fellows,  no  man  can  recover  it.  "That  which 
IS  born  of  the  flesh  is  ilesh,"  therefore  he  must  be  "born  notof  blood,"  &c.,  "but 
of   God."    I.  God   has  made  pijovision  fob  thb  benewal  of  His  image  in  man. 

I.  This  provision  consists  in — (1)  The  atonement  w'lich  justifies  God's  interposi- 
tion for  man's  rogeneration.  If  without  a  sacrifice  God  had  restored  man,  the  idea 
of  misfortune,  not  guilt,  would  have  been  associated  with  man's  fallen  state.  But 
now  Bin  appears  exceed mg  sinful.  (2)  The  living  Mediator  is  the  way  for  man  to 
God — as  the  source  of  life  and  light.  (3)  The  testimony  of  God's  Word  informs 
men  of  the  atom-ment  and  Mediator.  How  can  they  avail  themselves  of  what  they 
have  not  hoard  ?  (4)  The  Holy  Spirit  so  acts  npon  the  heart  as  to  produce 
sympathy  with  the  testimony  of  the  gospel ;  and  under  His  influence  men  believe 
God's  Word  and  are  born  again.  2.  There  is  provision:  the  recovery  of  God's 
image  is  possible.  The  aged  cannot  become  young,  the  diseased  healthful,  the 
mutilated  whole  ;  but  man  may  be  renewed.  Nature  illustrates  this.  Trees  shed 
their  leaves  in  autumn,  and  remain  in  winter  as  thoa).^h  dead.  In  the  spring  the 
Bap  rises  and  circulates,  the  branches  extend,  and  the  foliage  returns.  The 
plumage  of  the  bird  loses  its  vigour  and  gloss,  but  moulting  recovers  strength  and 
restores  beauty.  The  human  btruj  is  exhausted  through  the  waste  of  its  functional 
operations,  and  for  its  renewal  we  have  provision  in  food  and  sleep.  And  for  the 
soul  there  is  as  real  a  provision.  Let  none  despair.  There  is  balm  in  Gilead,  &o, 
3.  This  provision  is  of  God.  He  first  thought  of  making  it,  not  man ;  and  He  has 
carried  out  this  design.  (1)  The  creative  power  of  God  is  unlimited.  "The 
things  which  are  impossible  with  men,"  &c.  (2)  Power  connected  with  malevolence 
is  a  fearful  coujhination,  but  how  changed  the  aspect  of  power  when  the  hand  and 
arm  of  love.  What  benevolence  is  here.  "Behold  what  manner  of  love,"  &c. 
This  proves — (1)  That  God  is  faultless  concerning  the  entrance  of  eviL  (2)  That 
He  has  no  complacency  in  the  evil  of  men.  (3)  That  he  has  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  either  of  holiness  or  joy.  (4)  That  He  delights  in  mercy.  4.  There  is  but 
one  provision.  If  men  could  have  restored  themselves  or  each  other,  God  would 
not  have  made  provision.  As  you  cannot  respire  by  the  light,  nor  see  by  the  air, 
but  vice  versa,  so  you  cannot  be  regenerated  by  intellectual  or  social  education. 

II.  Men  ABE,  THBODQH  THE  DiVINK  PROVISION,  ACTUALLY  REGENERATED  INTO  THE  IMAGE  OT 

God.  1.  Its  sphere.  (1)  Not  the  body,  although  regeneration  does  effect  salutary 
changes  here.  Where  vice  has  reigned,  regeneration  arrests  disease  and  restores 
health.  Where  passions  have  been  dominant,  the  countenance  is  changed.  It 
also  affects  temporal  circumstances  by  improving  habits.  (2)  The  soul  is  its  true 
seat,  and  the  change  consists  in  the  leading  forth  Godwards  of  all  its  powers, 
and  the  awakening  of  all  its  susceptibilities,  (a)  A  renewed  man  thinks,  and  his 
knowledge  is  of  God  and  Christ,  (b)  He  feels,  and  his  affections  are  led  away  from 
the  unlawful  and  are  fixed  on  the  good,  (e)  His  conscience  is  rectified  and  made 
sensitive,  and  His  will  and  actions  are  brought  ander  its  controL  (d)  Over  the 
world  he  is  a  conqueror,  (e)  He  is  made  like  Christ,  and  through  Christ  like  God. 
S.  Its  nature.    (1)  It  is  radical  and  general.    It  penetrates  to  the  core  of  the  aooL 

li 


aiO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  spreads  itself  over  the  entire  surface.  The  likeness  of  a  statue  to  its  subject 
is  merely  on  the  face  of  the  marble ;  as  you  get  below  you  reach  the  unlike.  (2) 
Its  perfection  is  a  work  of  time.  A  man  is  bom  again  so  soon  as  he  believes  in 
Christ ;  but  into  the  likeness  of  God  he  grows  up.  Conclusion  :  Such  changes  are 
effected,  and  cannot  be  questioned.  John  i.  13,  James  i.  13,  and  1  Peter  i.  23  hold 
good  to-day  everywhere.  1.  When  the  provision  of  God's  mercy  for  the  regenera- 
tion of  the  race  is  unknown,  no  such  change  is  observed  to  take  place.  2.  When 
regeneration  does  take  place,  the  remedial  dispensation  of  the  gospel  is  acknow- 
ledged as  the  means.  (S.  Martin.)  Religious  affections  arise  from  spiritual 
enlightenment : — In  order  to  have  the  love  of  Divine  things,  in  the  exercise  of 
which  religion  consists,  the  soul  must  be  spiritually  enlightened  so  as  to  apprehend 
them.  I.  The  Scriptures  teach  that  qeacious  affections  arise  fbom  spieituai, 
UNDERSTANDING  (1  Jolin  iv.  7 ;  Phil.  i.  9 ;  Rom.  x.  2  ;  Psa.  xciii.  3-4  ;  John  vi.  45  ; 
Luke  xi.  52).  1.  Affections  which  arise  from  external  impressions  on  the  imagina- 
tion are  not  gracious.  2.  The  same  is  tiue  of  those  which  are  awakened  by  texts 
of  Scripture  which  come  to  the  mind  without  carrying  any  instruction  in  them. 
When  Christ  makes  the  Scriptures  a  means  of  the  heart  burning  with  gracious 
affections,  it  is  by  opening  the  Scriptures  to  men's  understandings  (Luke  xxiv.  32). 
3.  Affections  that  have  their  ground  in  bodily  sensation,  freedom  of  speech  in 
prayer,  aptness  of  thought,  and  the  like,  are  not  derived  from  spiritual  instruction. 
Hence  the  affection  is  not  gracious,  unless  the  light  in  the  understanding,  which  is 
its  origin,  be  spiritual.  There  is,  therefore,  a  "spiritual,  supernatural  understanding 
of  Divine  things  that  is  peculiar  to  the  saints,  and  wliieh  those  who  are  not  saints 
know  nothing  of"  (1  Cor.  ii.  14  ;  1  John  iii.  6).  11.  This  spiritual  enlightenment 
CONSISTS  IN  "  a  sense  of  the  heart  of  the  supreme  beauty  and  sweetness  of  the 
holiness  or  moral  perfection  of  Divine  things,  together  with  all  that  discerning  and 
knowledge  of  the  things  of  religion  that  depends  upon  and  flows  from  such  a 
sense."  1.  There  is  tlms  a  difference  between  speculative  knowledge  and  that 
which  is  experimental  (Ri)m.  ii.  20  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  14).  2.  He  is  led  by  the  Spirit  who 
is  first  instructed  in  his  duty,  and  then  powerfully  inclined  to  comply  with  such 
Divine  instruction.  III.  Some  conciatsions.  1.  This  spiritual  sense  will  enable  the 
soul  to  determine  what  actions  are  right  and  becoming  to  Christians  more  readily 
than  the  greatest  abihties  without  it.  2.  This  sense  will  be  distinguished  from 
forms  of  enthusiasm  and  supposed  discoveries  of  truth  and  communications  other 
than  those  which  the  Scriptures  have  always  contained.  3.  Satan  and  evil  spirita 
have  power  to  tempt  us  through  the  imagination.  We  need  to  guard  against  vain 
imaginations.  4.  We  need  to  distinguish  "  between  lively  imaginations  that  spring 
from  strong  affections,  and  strong  affections  that  arise  from  lively  imaginations." 
What  is  external  and  natural  in  its  origin  cannot  be  spiritual  and  graciooa.  (L.  O. 
Thompson. ) 

Ver.  11.  Where  there  Is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew. — Comparing  the  enumeration 
here  with  that  in  Gal.  iii.  28,  we  mark  this  difference.  In  Galatians  the  abohtion 
of  all  distinctions  is  stated  in  the  broadest  way  by  the  selection  of  three  typical 
instances :  Religious  prerogative,  Jew  and  Greek ;  social  caste,  bond  and  free ; 
natural  sex,  male  and  female.  Here,  on  the  other  hand,  the  examples  are  chosen 
with  special  reference  to  the  circumstances  of  the  Colossian  Church.  1.  The 
Judaism  of  the  Colossian  heretics  is  met  by  Greek  and  Jew,  and  as  it  manifested 
itself  especially  in  enforcing  circumcision,  this  is  further  emphasized  by  "circum. 
cision  nor  uncircumcision."  2.  Their  Gnosticism  is  met  by  "Barbarian,  Sythian." 
They  laid  special  stress  on  intelligence,  penetration,  gnosis.  The  apostle  offers  the 
full  privileges  of  the  gospel  to  barbarians  even  of  the  lowest  type.  In  Rom.  i.  14 
the  division  "Greek  and  Barbarian"  is  almost  synonymous  with  wise  and  unwise. 
3.  Sp^'cial  circumstances  connected  with  an  eminent  member  of  the  Colossian 
Church  had  directed  his  attention  at  this  moment  to  the  relation  of  master  and 
slaves.  Hence  he  cannot  leave  the  subject  without  adding  "  bond,  free."  (Bishop 
JJghtfoot.)  The  high  level : — I.  The  gospel  peoduoes  the  new  man.  1. 
Before  man  is  made  anew  all  influences  fail  to  produce  the  change.  The 
glories  of  heaven  never  move  him  to  praise,  the  riches  of  the  earth  never 
touch  his  gratitude.  Like  a  withered  tree,  which  receives  no  benefit  from 
sunshine  or  shower,  gracious  influences  made  no  impression.  3.  But  thrown 
into  the  crucible  and  mould  of  the  Cross,  he  comes  out  a  new  man.  New 
thoughts  crowd  the  theatre  of  his  mind,  new  emotions  flower  in  the  garden  of 
his  aoul,  new  prospects  enliven  his  future,  and  impelled  by  new  oonvictionB  ha 


OHA».  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  211 

builds  op  a  new  character.  When  ignorant  become  learned  and  subjects  kings, 
there  is  less  change  than  when  liona  become  Iambs,  and  God's  enemies  Uia  fiieuds. 
8.  The  new  man  is  possible  to  all.  Tou  cannot  make  poets,  painters,  musicians, 
soldiers,  statesmen  of  all  men,  but  the  gospel  can  renovate  all.  II.  The  gospeij 
UNiiES  MANKIND  UNDEB  ONE  HEAD.  1.  There  wsre  distinctions.  (1)  The  national 
contrast  between  Jew  and  Greek  was  strong.  The  boast  of  race,  achievements, 
culture,  &o.,  created  mutual  contempt.  Those  who  gloried  in  Alexander  ani 
Socrates  were  scornfully  reminded  of  David  and  Solomon.  (2)  The  religious 
distinction  was  still  sharper.  (3)  That  between  high  and  low  was  observed  with 
rigour,  there  being  no  middle  class.  2.  All  these  distinctions  must  be  sunk  and 
the  race  come  up  by  another  way.  (1)  All  men  must  humble  themselves  in  the 
sight  of  God.  The  gospel  does  not  propose  to  readjust  these  various  claims,  but 
to  press  regeneration  on  alL  Paul  once  prided  himself  on  his  distinctions,  but 
ihey  vanished  in  view  of  the  great  question,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ? " 
(2)  The  gospel  leads  to  an  exaltation  which  leaves  the  most  exalted  human  stations 
behind.  Stars  shine  brightly  till  the  sun  appears.  The  barbarian  at  the  foot  of 
the  Cross  is  higher  than  Csesar  on  his  throne.  He  who  embraces  Christ  is  rich, 
while  the  millionaire  who  trusts  in  riches  is  poor.  III.  The  gospel  assimilates 
HUMAN  LITE  TO  THAT  OF  Christ.  1.  Christ  absorbs  every  other  condition  which 
influences  the  mind.  The  river  which  flows  over  mountain  and  dale  preserves  its 
name  and  identity  all  the  way  to  its  mouth — then  it  is  lost.  So  with  him  whose 
life-streams  flow  towards  Christ,  they  will  be  absorbed  in  the  ocean  of  His  love.  We 
Borrender  all  to  the  claims  of  the  Cross.  2.  Christ  is  seen  and  felt  in  all  the  relations 
of  life.  Nature,  duty,  &c. ,  which  before  were  Christless,  are  now  full  of  Christ. 
8.  As  Christ  is  all  in  all  and  we  in  Him,  therefore  ail  things  are  ours.  {T.  Davies, 
Ph.  D.)  Christ  la  all. — Christ  u  all : — There  are  two  worlds,  the  old  and  the  new. 
These  are  peopled  by  two  sorts  of  manhood,  the  old  man,  and  the  new  man,  con- 
cerning whom  see  verses  9,  10.  L  What  there  is  not  in  the  new.  When  w© 
come  to  be  renewed  after  the  image  of  Him  that  created  us,  we  find  an  obliteration 
of — 1.  National  distinctions:  "  \Vhere  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew."  Jesus  ia 
The  Man.  In  the  broadest  sense  He  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile.  Jesus  furnishes 
as  with  a  new  patriotism,  loyalty,  and  clanship,  which  we  may  safely  indulge  to 
the  utmost.  2.  Ceremonial  distinctions :  "  There  is  neither  circumcision  nor 
uncircumcision."  The  separating  rite  is  abolished,  and  the  peculiar  privilege  of  a 
nation  born  after  the  flesh  is  gone  with  it.  3.  Social  distinctions :  "  There  is 
neither  bond  nor  free."  We  are  enabled  through  Divine  grace  to  see  that  these 
distinctions  are — (1)  Transient  (2)  Superficial.  (3)  Of  small  value.  (4)  Non- 
existent in  the  spiritual  realm.  What  a  blessed  blending  of  all  men  in  one  body 
is  brought  about  by  our  Lord  Jesus  I  Let  us  all  work  in  the  direction  of  unity. 
II.  What  there  is  in  the  new.  "Christ  is  aU  and  in  all."  1.  All  our  culture. 
In  Him  we  emulate  and  excel  the  •*  Greek. "  2.  All  our  revelation.  We  glory  in 
Him  even  as  the  "Jew"  gloried  in  receiving  the  oracles  of  God.  3.  All  our 
rituaL  We  have  no  "circumcision."  All  Scriptural  ordinances  are  of  Him. 
4.  All  oar  simplicity.  5.  All  our  natural  traditions.  He  is  mure  to  us  than  the 
freshest  ideas  which  cross  the  mind  of  the  "  Barbarian."  6.  All  our  unconquer- 
ableness  and  liberty.  The  "  Scythian  "  had  not  such  boundless  independence  as  we 
find  in  Him.  7.  All  as  our  Master,  if  we  be  "  bond."  Happy  servitude  of  which  He  is 
the  head  1  8.  Our  Magna  Charta :  yea,  our  liberty  itself  if  we  be  "  free. "  Conclusion  : 
•■  Christ  all  and  in  all "  furnishes  a  test  question  for  us.  1.  Is  Christ  so  great  with 
as  that  He  is  oar  all  ?  2.  Is  Christ  so  broadly  and  fully  with  us  that  He  is  all  in 
oar  all?  3.  Is  He,  then,  all  in  our  trust,  our  hope,  our  assurance,  our  joy,  our 
aim,  oar  strength,  our  wisdom — in  a  word,  "  all  in  all "  ?  4.  If  so,  are  we  living  in  all 
for  Him?  5.  Are  we  doing  all  for  Him,  because  He  is  all  to  us?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
But  Christ  i$  all  in  all : — Here  in  the  text  Christ  is  said  to  be  all ;  but  in  what 
sense  is  Christ  all  ?  1.  Christ  is  all  by  way  of  eminency ;  all  good  things  are 
eminently  to  be  found  in  Him,  as  the  sun  doth  virtually  contain  in  it  the  light  of 
the  lesser  stars.  2.  Christ  is  all,  by  way  of  derivation  ;  all  good  things  are  trans- 
mitted and  conveyed  to  us  through  Christ ;  as  your  rich  commodities,  jewels,  and 
spices  come  by  sea,  so  all  heavenly  blessings  sail  to  us  through  the  red  sea  oi 
Christ's  blood  ;  "  through  Him  and  to  Him  are  all  things."  Christ  is  that  spiritual 
pipe,  through  which  the  golden  oil  of  mercy  empties  itself  into  the  souL  Chrisfi 
must  needs  be  all,  for  "  in  Him  dweUeth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead."  He  hath 
a  partnership  with  God  the  Father;  "all  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  Mine;  " 
so  that  there  is  enough  in  Him  to  scatter  all  oar  fears,  to  remove  all  oar  burdeni^ 


2M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

to  snpply  all  our  -wants;  there  can  be  no  defect  in  that  which  is  infinite.  It  shows  a« 
the  glorious  fulness  of  Jesus  Christ;  "  He  is  all  in  all."  Christ  is  a  paacply,  a  maga- 
sine  and  storehouse  of  all  spiritual  riches  :  you  may  go  with  the  bee  from  flower  to 
flower,  and  suck  here  and  there  a  little  sweetness,  but  you  will  p ever  have  enough  till 
you  come  to  Christ,  for  He  is  "all  in  all."  Now,  in  particular,  Christ  is  in  all  six  re- 
spects :  1.  Christ  is  all  in  regard  of  righteousness — ' '  He  is  made  to  us  righteousness. " 
2.  Christ  is  all  in  regard  of  sanctification — "He  is  made  to  us  sanctification."  This 
doth  tune  and  prepare  the  soul  for  heaven;  it  turns  iron  into  gold;  it  makes  the  heart 
which  was  Satan's  picture,  Christ's  epistle.  There  must  be  first  our  days  of  purifica- 
tion before  our  days  of  glorification.  What  a  blessed  work  is  thisl  A  soul  beautified 
and  adorned  with  grace,  is  like  the  firmament  bespangled  with  glittering  stars.  But 
whence  is  this?  Christ  is  all ;  He  is  made  to  us  sanctification  ;  He  it  is  that  sends 
His  Spirit  into  our  hearts  to  be  a  refiner's  fire,  to  burn  up  our  dross,  and  make  our 
graces  sparkle  like  gold  in  the  furnace  ;  Christ  ariseth  upon  the  soul  '*  with  healing 
in  His  wings."  3.  Christ  is  all  in  regard  of  Divine  acceptance.  As  Joseph  did 
present  his  brethren  before  Pharaoh,  and  brought  them  into  favour  with  the  king, 
■so  the  Lord  Jesus  carries  the  name  of  the  saints  upon  His  breast,  and  presents  them 
before  His  Father,  so  bringing  them  into  repute  and  honour.  Through  the  red 
glass  everything  appears  of  a  red  colour;  through  the  blood  of  Christ  we  look  of  a 
sanguine  complexion,  ruddy  and  beautiful  in  God's  eyes.  4.  Christ  is  all  in  regard 
of  Divine  assistance;  a  Christian's  strength  lies  in  Christ.  Whence  is  it  a  Christian 
is  able  to  do  duty,  to  resist  temptation,  but  through  Christ's  strengthening  ?  5. 
Christ  is  all  in  regard  of  pacification;  when  conscience  is  in  an  agony,  and  burns 
as  hell  in  the  sense  of  God's  wrath  ;  now  Christ  is  all,  He  pours  the  palm  of  Hia 
blood  into  these  wounds.  He  maketh  the  storm  a  calm.  Christ  doth  not  only  make 
peace  in  the  court  of  heaven,  but  in  the  court  of  conscience ;  He  not  only  makes 
peace  above  us,  but  within  us.  6.  Christ  is  all  in  regard  of  remuneration ;  He  it  is 
that  crowns  us  after  all  our  labours  and  sufferings.  If  Christ  be  all,  it  shows  what  a 
vast  disproportion  there  is  between  Christ  and  thecreatura;  there  is  as  much  differ- 
ence as  between  ens  and  nihil;  Christ  is  all  in  all,  and  the  creature  is  nothing  at  all : 
••  wilt  thoa  set  thine  eyes  on  that  which  is  not  ?  "  In  all  our  spiritual  wants  we 
ehoald  repair  to  Christ  as  Jacob's  sons  did  to  their  brother  Joseph.  He  opened  all 
the  store-houses,  and  "gave  to  his  brethren  corn  and  provision  for  the  way."  Thus 
the  Lord  hath  made  Christ  our  Joseph;  "in  whom  are  hid  all  treasures."  If 
Ohrist  be  all,  see  here  the  Christian's  inventory,  how  rich  is  he  that  hath  Christ  1 
he  hath  all  that  may  make  him  completely  happy.  Plutarch  reports  that  the  wife 
of  Phocion  being  asked  where  her  jewels  were,  she  answered,  "  My  husband,  and 
bis  triumphs  are  my  jewels  1  "  so,  if  a  Christian  be  asked,  where  are  his  riches,  ho 
will  say,  "  Christ  is  my  riches."  How  could  a  Christian  sit  down  satisfied  with 
Ohrist  I  "  Christ  is  aU."  What  though  he  wants  other  things,  is  not  Christ 
enough?  If  a  man  hath  sun-^hine,  he  doth  not  complain  he  wants  the  light  of  a 
candle.  Thou  hast  Christ  with  all  His  perquisites  and  royalties  I  Suppose  a  father 
should  deny  his  son  furniture  for  his  house,  but  should  settle  all  his  land  upon 
him,  had  he  any  cause  to  complain  t  If  God  denies  thee  a  little  furniture  in  the 
world,  but  in  the  meantime  settles  His  land  upon  thee.  He  gives  thee  the  field 
wherein  the  pearl  of  price  is  hid,  hast  thou  any  cause  to  repine  ?  A  Christian  that 
wants  necessaries,  yet  having  Christ,  he  hath  the  one  thing  needful ;  "  ye  are  com- 
plete in  Him."  What  1  complete  in  Christ,  and  not  content  with  Christ  t  If 
Christ  be  all,  see  the  deplorable  condition  of  a  Christless  person  ;  he  is  poor,  he  is 
worth  nothing ;  "  thou  are  wretched,  miserable,  and  poor,"  &c.  The  sadness  of  a 
man  that  wants  Christ  will  appear  in  these  seven  particulars.  1.  He  hath  no 
iastification.  2.  He  that  wants  Christ,  wants  the  beauty  of  holiness ;  Jesus  Christ 
18  a  Uving  spring  of  grace ;  •*  full  of  grace  and  truth."  3.  He  that  wants  Christ, 
wants  His  freedom;  "if  the  Son  make  you  free,  you  shall  be  free  indeed,"  4.  He 
that  wants  Christ,  hath  no  ability  for  service.  5.  He  that  wants  Christ,  hath  no 
consolation  ;  Christ  is  called  "  the  consolation  of  Israel."  A  Christless  soul  is  a 
oomfortless  soul.  6.  He  that  wants  Christ,  hath  no  salvation.  1.  If  Christ  be  all, 
then  let  a  high  valuation  upon  Jesus  Christ ;  "  to  you  which  believe.  He  is  precious." 
%  If  Jesus  Christ  be  all,  then  make  sare  of  Christ ;  never  leave  trading  in  ordi- 
nanees,  till  you  have  gotten  this  pearl  of  price.  In  Christ  there  is  the  accumu- 
lation of  all  good  things.  And  that  I  may  persuade  all  to  get  Christ,  let  me  show 
what  tn  enriching  blessing  Christ  is.  1.  Christ  is  a  supreme  good ;  put  what  yoa 
will  in  tht  balance  with  Christ,  He  doth  infinitely  outweigh.  Is  life  sweet?  Christ 
:s  better:  He  is  the  life  of  the  soul;  "His  loving-kindness  is  better  than  Ufa.** 


CHAP  in.]  COLOSSIANS.  213 

3.  Christ  is  A  snfScient  good ;  He  who  hath  Christ,  needs  no  more;  be  ^vho  hath 
the  ocean,  needs  not  the  cistern.  3.  Christ  is  a  sanctifying  good,  He  makes  every 
condition  happy  to  us,  He  sweetens  all  our  comforts,  and  sanctifies  all  our  crosses. 

4.  Christ  is  a  select,  choice  good.  God  shows  more  love  in  giving  us  Christ,  than  in 
giving  us  crowns  and  kinf^doms.  5.  Christ  is  such  a  good,  as  without  which 
nothing  is  good,  without  Christ  health  is  not  good,  it  is  fuel  for  lust :  riches  are 
not  good,  they  are  golden  snares ;  ordinances  are  not  good,  though  they  are  good  ia 
themselves,  yet  not  good  to  us.  6.  Christ  is  an  enduring  good ;  other  things  are 
like  the  lamp,  which  while  it  shines  it  spends,  the  heavens  ••  shall  wax  old  like  a 
garment."  7.  Christ  is  a  diffusive,  communicative  good  ;  He  is  full,  not  only  as  a 
vessel,  but  as  a  spring.  He  is  willing  to  give  Himself  to  us.  But  how  shall  I  get  a 
part  in  Christ?  1.  See  your  need  of  Christ,  know  that  you  are  undone  without 
Him.  2.  Be  importunate  after  Christ.  *'Lord,  give  me  Christ,  or  I  die!"  3.  Be 
content  to  have  Christ,  as  Christ  is  otTered,  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour.  1.  Make  Christ 
all  in  your  understanding,  be  ambitious  to  know  nothing  but  Christ.  What  is  it  to 
have  knowledge  in  physio — to  be  able  with  Escniapius  and  Galen  to  discourse  of 
the  causes  and  symptoms  of  a  disease,  and  what  is  proper  to  apply,  and  in  the 
meantime  to  be  ignorant  of  the  healing  under  Christ's  wings  ?  What  is  it  to  have 
knowledge  in  astronomy — to  discourse  of  the  stars  and  planets,  and  to  be  ignorant 
of  Christ,  that  bright  moniing-star  which  leads  to  heaven?  We  cannot  know  God 
but  through  Christ.  2.  Make  Christ  all  in  your  a£fe'.ition8.  Love  nothing  but 
Christ;  love  is  the  choicest  affection,  it  is  the  richest  jewel  the  creature  hath  to 
bestow ;  O  if  Christ  be  all,  love  Him  better  than  al! !  3.  Make  Christ  all  in  your 
abilities,  do  all  in  His  strength,  "  be  strong  in  the  Ij<n-i,  and  in  the  power  of  Hia 
might."  When  you  are  to  resist  a  tentation,  to  monifya  corruption,  do  not  go  out 
in  your  own  strength,  but  in  the  strength  of  Christ :  "  be  strong  in  the  Lord." 
4.  Make  Christ  all  in  your  aims;  do  all  to  His  giory.  5.  Make  Christ  all  in  your 
affiance;  trust  to  none  but  Christ  for  salvation;  the  Papists  make  Christ  some- 
thing, but  not  all.  6.  Make  Christ  all  in  your  joy.  "God  forbid  that  I  should 
glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  Wlien  a  Christian  sees  a 
deficiency  in  himself,  he  may  see  an  all-sufficiency  in  his  Saviour:  "happy 
is  that  people  whose  God  is  the  Lordl"  That  servant  needs  not  want  who 
hath  his  master's  full  purse  at  command :  he  needs  not  want  who  hath  Christ, 
for  "Christ  is  all  and  in  all."  {T.  Watson.)  Christ  is  all:— The  doctrine 
of  the  text — I.  Accounts  fob  the  essential  sniiLARiTT  of  Christian  chabacteb. 
Innumerable  are  the  causes  of  diversity — constitutional  peculiarities,  external 
circumstances,  accidental  associations.  But  amidst  all  these,  whether  men  are 
elaves  or  freemen,  rude  or  civilized,  Ac,  the  Christian  principle  equalizes  all, 
as  forming  a  common  centre,  a  standard  under  which  all  are  enli-ted,  the  source 
of  their  felicity,  the  rejoicing  of  their  hearts.  Chribt  is  all  in  all  1.  To  those 
who  believe  in  Him.  2.  In  all  the  felicities  of  an  eternal  life.  II.  Illubtbates 
THE  TEUK  UNITY  OF  THE  Chubch.  To  producc  Unity  Uniformity  has  been  attempted, 
but  this  is  different  from  oneness  of  spirit.  No  visible  accordance  by  subscribing 
to  formularies  or  uniting  in  observances  can  realize  unity.  There  will  be  a  period 
when  this  will  be  realized  ;  but  amidst  all  that  separates,  amidst  all  that  enemies 
and  friends  have  done  to  injure  the  cause,  there  is  a  real  and  effective  unity  between 
Christi^n8.  Bring  believers  of  every  age,  class,  name  together,  and  one  chord  will 
vibrate  in  every  heart,  one  topic  be  the  theme  of  every  song,  one  principle  the  life 
of  all.  They  are  all  in  Christ  and  therefore  one :  one  in  relationship,  sympathy, 
jny,  sorrow,  hope.  IIL  Pboves  the  dniversalitt  of  the  Christian  dispensation. 
This  is  the  religion  of  man ;  adapted  to  him  wherever  you  find  him,  whether  scorched 
by  Indian  suns  or  blanched  by  northern  snows.  AH  men  are  lost ;  Christianity 
comea  to  save  all  men.  The  religion  of  Christ,  unlike  any  other,  has  nothing  local 
or  restrictive.  There  are  no  circumstantials  in  it  to  narrow  its  range.  This 
universality — 1.  Is  founded  on  the  condition  of  man  in  all  circumstances.  2.  Is 
proved  by  its  actual  results  wherever  received.  3.  Is  provided  for  by  the  security 
of  the  everlasting  covenant.  4.  Is  guaranteed  to  the  Church  by  the  presence  of 
Christ,  IV.  Constitutes  the  great  subject  of  the  Christian  ministry,  and 
ASSIGNS  the  true  CAUSE  OF  ITS  EFFICIENCY,     "  I  if  I  be  lifted  up,"  &c.  V.  Exhibits 

AN  ADEQUATE  80UBCE  OF    CONSOLATION  AND    SUPPORT    IN    THE    PBOSPECT    OF  DEATH    AND 

ETERNITY.  1.  It  secures  a  victory  over  the  king  of  terrors.  2.  It  ensures  an 
abundant  entrance  into  heaven.  (J.  Fletclier,  D.D.)  Christ  is  all : — These  three 
words  are  the  essence  of  Christianity.  If  our  hearts  really  go  along  with  them  it 
is  well.    If  not  we  have  much  to  learn.    Christ  is  alL    I.  Ik  all  ibjb  cooksxls 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ru. 

OF  God  concekninq  man.    1.  There  was  a  time  when  this  earth  had  no  being, 
where  was  Christ  then  ?  (John  i.  1 ;  PhiL   ii.  6 ;  John  xvii.  5,  24 ;  Prov.  vii,  23). 
2.  There  came  a  time  when  this  earth  was  created  in  its  present  order.   Where  wai 
Christ  then  ?  (John  i.  3 ;  CoL  i.  16 ;  Heb.  i.  10 ;  Prov.  viii.  27-30).     3.  There  came 
a  day  when  sin  entered  the  world.     Where  was  Christ  then  ?  (Gen.  iii.  15).     4. 
There  came  a  time  when  the  world  seemed   buried  in  ignorance  of   God.     For 
4,000  years  the  nations  of  the  earth  appeared  to  have  clean  forgotten  the  God  that 
made  them  (1  Cor.  i.  21).     What  did  Christ  do  then  ?    Left  His  [eternal  glory  and 
came  down  to  provide  a  salvation.     6.  There  is  a  time  coming  when  sin  shall  be 
cast  out  from  this  world  (Bom.  viii.  22  ;  Acts  iii.  21 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  13 ;  Isa.  xi.  9). 
Where  shall  Christ  be  then  ?  And  what  shall  He  do  ?  (Matt.  xxiv.  30  ;  Eev.  xi.  15  ; 
Psa.  ii.  8  ;  Phil.  ii.  10-11 ;  Dan.  vii.  14).    6.  There  is  a  day  coming  when  all  men 
sball  be  judged.     Where  will  Christ  be  then  ?  (John  v.   22 ;  Matt.    xxv.  32 ;  2 
Cor.  V.  10).     Now,  if  any  think  little  of  Christ,  he  is  very  unlike  God.    He  is  of 
one  mind  and  God  of  another.     In  all  the  eternal  counsels  of  God  the  Father,  in 
creation,  redemption,  restitution,  and  judgment  Christ  is  all  (John  v.  23).     II.  In 
THE  INSPIRED  BOOKS  WHICH  MAKE  OP  THE  BiBLE.     1.  It  was  Christ  cmcified  who  was 
set  forth  in  every  Old  Testament  sacrifice  (1  Pet.  iii.  18).    2.  It  was  Christ  to  whom 
Abel  looked  when  he  offered  a  better  sacrifice  than  Cain  (Heb.  xi.  4).    8.  It  waa 
Christ  of  whom  Enoch  prophesied  in  the  days  of  abounding  wickedness  before  the 
flood  (Jude  15).     4.  It  was  Christ  to  whom  Abraham  looked  when  he  dwelt  in 
tents  in  the  land  of  promise  (John  viii.  56).     5.  It  was  Christ  of  whom  Jacob 
spoke  to  his  sons,  as  he  lay  dying  (Gen.  xlix.  10).    6.  It  was  Christ  who  was  the 
subject  of  the  ceremonial  law.    The  sacrifices,  altar,  priesthood,  &c.,  were  emblems 
of  Christ  and  His  work  (GaL  iii.  24).     7.  It  was  Christ  to  whom  God  directed  the 
attention  of  Israel  by  all  the  miracles  of  the  wilderness  (1  Cor.  x.  4 ;  John  iii.  14). 
8.  It  was  Christ  of  whom  the  Judges  were  types.     9.  It  was  Christ  of  whom  David 
was  a  type.     10.  It  was  Christ  of  whom  all  the  prophets  from  Isaiah  to  Malachi 
spoke  (1  Pet.  i.  11).     11.  It  is  Christ  of  whom  the  whole  New  Testament  is  full. 
The  Gospels  are  Christ  living  among  men ;  the  Epistles  are  Christ  explained  and 
exalted  ;  the  Acts  are  Christ  proclaimed.    What  is  the  Bible  to  you  T    A  book  of 
good  moral  precepts,  or  one  in  which  "  Christ  is  all  and  in  all  "  T     If  not  the  latter 
you  have  used  it  to  little  purpose.     You  are  hke  a  man  who  studies  the  solar 
system  and  leaves  out  the  sun.      HI.  In  the  religion  of  all  trde  Christians. 
Christ  is  all — 1.  In  a  sinner's  justification  before  God  (Eph.  iii.  12  ;  Rom.  iii.  26). 
Wherewith  shall  man  come  before  God  ?    Shall  we  say  we  have  done  our  duty,  and 
bring  forward  prayers,  morality,  church -going?     Which  of  these  will  stand  God'i 
searching  inspection?    None.     We  must  come  through  Jesus.     (1)  His  rjghleous- 
nesa  is  the  only  robe  which  can  cover  us.     (2)  His  name  our  only  shibboleth  at  the 
gate  of  heaf  en.     (3)  His  blood  the  only  mark  that  can  save  us  from  destruction, 
2.  In  a  Christian's  sanctification.     (1)  No  man  is  holy  till  he  is  united  to  Christ 
(John  XV.  5).     (2)  None  grows  in  holiness  except  he  abide  in  Christ  (Col.  ii.  6-7). 
S.  In  a  Christian's  comfort  in  time  present.    A  saved  soul  has  many  sorrowi 
and  trials,  which  were  unbearable  but  for  Christ  (Phil.  ii.  1).     Jesus  is  a  brother 
born  for  adversity  (Heb.  iv.  15).     We  talk  of  the  preciousness  of  sympathy,  but 
there  is  none  like  that  of  Christ  (Psa.  xciv.  19 ;  cxxiv.  5).     In  Him  alone  there  is 
no  failure.    Rich  men  are  disappointed  in  their  wealth,  learned  men  in  their  books, 
husbands  in  their  wives,  Ac,  staie^men  in  their  places  ;  but  none  was  ever  dis- 
appointed in  Christ.     4.  In  a  Christian's  hopes  for  time  to  come.    He  has  a  good 
hope,  the  worldly  man  has  none.     It  is  a  blessed  hope  (Titus  ii.  13 ;  Psa.  Ixii.  5). 
IV.  In  heaven.     1.  Like  the  altar  in  Solomon's  temple  Christ  will  be  the  grand 
object  in  heaven  (Eev.   v.   6 ;  xxi.   23).     2.  His  praise  will  be  our  eternal  song 
(Rev.  v.  12-13).     8.  His  service  will  be  our  one  occupation  (Rev.  vii.  15).     4.  His 
presence  will  be  our  one  everlasting  enjoyment  (Rev.  xxii.  4;  Psa,  xvii.  15).     All 
this  being  the  case,  then  Christ  ought  to  be  all  in  alL     V.  In  the  visible  Church. 
Splendid  buildings,  gorgeous  ceremonies,  troops  of  ordained  men  are  nothing  in 
the  sight  of  God  if   Christ  be  not  magnified.      VI.  In  the  Christian  ministry. 
Its  one  work  is  to  lift  up  Christ.     Conclusion  ;    Learn — 1.  The  utter  uselessnesa 
of  a  Christless  religion.     2.  The  enormous  folly  of  joining  anything  with  Christ  in 
the  matter  of  palvation.     3.  If  you  want  to  be  saved  to  apply  direct  to  Christ. 
4.  If  you  be  Christians  deal  with  Him  as  if  you  really  believed  this  ;  trust  Him  far 
more  than  you  have  ever  done.     (Bishop  Ryle.)         Christ  is  all : — I.  Bt  whom  thib 
TP.UTH  IS  KEcooNi-'ED.     1.  There  are  many  to  whom  Ctirist  is  nothing ;  He  scarcely 
enters  into  their  though  lo.     2.  There  are  others  to  whom  Christ  is  something  but 


CKAP.  m.)  COLOSSI ANS.  215 

not  much.  They  are  anxious  to  save  themselves,  and  use  the  merits  of  Christ  as  a 
Bort  of  iDakeweight  to  their  own  slight  deficiencies.  3.  Others  think  Him  to  b« 
much  but  not  all,  and  so  want  to  feel  more,  repent  more,  before  they  accept  Him. 
A.  Some  regard  Christ  as  all  in  some  things,  in  justification,  e.g.,  but  not  sancti- 
ficatioD,  whereas  it  is  said  that  He  is  "  made  unto  us  wisdom,"  &o.  There  is  no 
point  between  the  gates  of  hell  and  the  gates  of  heaven  where  a  behever  has  to  say, 
Christ  fails  me  here  and  I  must  rely  on  my  own  endeavours.  6.  This  is  a  truth 
which  every  believer  recognizes,  and  on  which  the  Church,  in  spite  of  its  divisions, 
is  one.  The  man  who  cannot  say  this  is  no  Christian,  the  man  who  can  is.  II. 
What  this  tbuth  includeb.  1.  Christ  is  all  by  way  of  (1)  National  distinction. 
As  a  man  I  may  rejoice  that  I  am  an  Englishman,  but  not  with  the  same  joy  aa 
that  I  am  a  Christian.  A  Christian  foreigner  is  more  allied  to  me  than  a  godless 
Briton.  (2)  Subject  for  glorying.  The  Greek  said,  "  We  are  a  nation  of  heroes, 
remember  Sparta  "  ;  but  when  he  joined  the  Church  he  boasted  of  a  nobler  victory 
through  the  Cross.  So  the  Jew  laid  aside  his  national  traditions ;  the  Scytbian 
spoke  the  language  of  Canaan  as  correctly  as  his  Greek  brother;  the  slave  was  no 
longer  a  slave  when  he  breathed  the  air  of  a  Christian  Church.  (3)  Sinlul 
national  customs.  Each  asked  no  more,  What  did  my  ancestors  do  ?  but  what 
does  Christ  bid  me  do?  2.  Christ  is  all  to  us — (1)  Godwards.  We  need  a 
Mediator;  Christ  is  that.  "Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's 
elect  ?  "  (2)  Before  our  enemies.  Satan,  and  the  world  with  all  its  vicissitudes. 
(3)  Within  ourselves.  If  we  look  into  our  inner  nature  we  see  all  manner  of 
deficiencies ;  but  when  we  see  Christ  there  we  know  that  He  will  destroy  the  works 
of  the  devil  and  perfect  that  which  He  has  begun  in  us.  3.  Christ  is  all.  (1)  For 
us.  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  "  He  made  Him  to  be 
sin  for  us,"  &c.  (2)  To  us.  We  have  no  other  hope  but  in  His  righteousness. 
(3)  In  us.  Whatever  there  is  in  us  that  is  not  of  Christ  will  have  to  come  out. 
Christ  on  the  cross  saved  us  by  becoming  Christ  iu  the  heart.  4.  Shift  the  kaleido- 
scope; Christ  is  all.  (1)  The  channel  of  all.  All  the  love  and  mercy  of  God  flow 
through  Him.  Other  conduits  are  dry,  but  this  is  always  full.  (2)  The  pledge  of 
all.  "  He  that  spared  not  His  own  son,"  <fec.  (3)  The  sum  of  alL  When  we  travel 
we  need  only  to  take  money  which  answereth  all  things.  So  Christ  has  the  sub- 
stance of  all  good.  5.  Christ  is  all  (1)  we  desire;  (2)  can  conceive.  III.  What 
THIS  TROTH  INVOLVES.  1.  The  excellence  of  Christ.  Of  whom  else  could  this  be 
said  ?  There  are  many  good  things  in  this  world,  but  nothing  that  is  good  for 
everything.  Some  plants  may  be  good  medicine  but  not  good  cordial ;  but  the  plant 
of  renown  is  good  every  way.  Good  clothing  is  not  able  to  stay  your  hunger,  but 
Christ  is  the  bread  of  heaven  and  the  best  robe.  2.  The  safety  and  blessedness  of  the 
behever.  Christ  is  all  that  he  will  as  well  as  does  want ;  but  we  are  devoid  of  all  when 
destitute  of  Christ.  3.  A  rebuke  for  the  doubts  of  many  seekers.  "I  have  not 
this  or  that,"  but  Christ  has  it  if  it  be  good  for  anything.  4.  A  rebuke  for  the  cold- 
ness of  saints.  If  Christ  be  all,  how  is  it  we  prize  and  love  Him  so  httle  ?  5.  A 
means  of  measuring  young  converts.  We  ought  not  to  expect  them  to  be 
philosophers  or  divines.  Is  Christ  all  in  all  to  them?  If  so,  welcome  them. 
6.  A  measure  for  ministers.  Is  Christ  all  in  their  preaching?  7.  A  help  to 
estimate  our  devotions.  IV.  What  this  tbuth  eeqdibes — the  exhibition  of  a  Christ- 
like life.  {C,  H.  Spurgeon.)  Chritt  all  in  all: — Christianity  is  simply  Christ. 
Without  His  person  there  is  nothing  left  that  is  distinctively  Christian.  Other 
religions  may  be  separated  from  their  founders;  and  we  may  take  any  feature  away 
without  destroying  its  force.  But  separate  any  truth  of  Christianity  from  Christ 
and  it  has  lost  its  peculiar  character.  Christ  is  the  all  in  all — I.  Of  Christian 
MORALiTTT.  Even  sceptics  admit  the  extraordinary  reformatory  effect  of  Chris- 
tianity. This  is  not  due  to  any  new  truth  of  morals  Christ  gave  to  the  world. 
His  system  is  original  in  the  new  form  and  power  given  to  truth.  It  would  be 
absurd  to  deny  the  claim  of  an  inventor  to  originality,  simply  because  the 
materials  of  his  machine  were  known  before.  But  the  peculiar  power  which  has 
made  Christian  morality  so  effective  is  the  living  person  of  Jesus.  Embodied  in 
Him  the  truth  is  seen  and  felt  and  loved  as  never  before.  We  first  love  Him  and 
then  we  love  the  purity,  charity,  &c.,  which  make  Him  "  the  altogether  lovely," 
and  enthusiasm  for  these  follows.  When  the  sun  has  set,  the  mountains,  plains, 
and  rivers  may  be  still  visible,  but  their  glory  has  gone.  When  the  person  of 
Jesus  is  removed  from  His  moral  system,  its  precepts  and  maxims  are  there 
still,  but  their  charm  has  gone.  II.  Of  Christian  philantbophv.  There  is  no  such 
-self-sacrifice  and  devotion  as  in  Christianity.  Y/itness  the  history  of  missionary  and 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHi?.  nu 

charitable  effort.  Its  secret  inspiration  is  "  The  love  of  Christ  eonstraineth  ng," 
There  are  other  motives,  and  Christians  feel  them  as  much  as  non-Christians — th© 
beauty  of  self-sacrifice,  the  fine  sentiment  of  humanity,  the  grandeur  of  heroio 
effort.  But  the  grand  inspiration  is  as  Paul  puts  it.  A  child  will  work  wonders 
tinder  tlie  approving  eye  of  father  or  mother.  A  soldier  will  fight  marvellously 
under  the  eye  of  his  captain.  A  Highland  chief  fell ;  and  his  clan  thinking  him 
slain  began  to  waver,  but  raising  himself  on  his  elbow  he  called,  "  My  children,  I 
am  not  dead,  I  am  looking  at  you."  That  turned  defeat  into  victory.  At  the  battle 
of  Ivry  Heary  IV.  said,  "  My  children,  when  you  lose  sight  of  your  colours  rally 
to  my  white  plume.  You  will  always  find  it  in  the  way  to  glory."  So  when 
every  other  motive  fails ;  when  the  flags  of  humanity,  sentiment,  duty  have  gone 
down,  the  Christian  rallies  round  the  Captain  of  his  salvation.  III.  Op  Chbistian 
CONSOLATION.  It  is  not  in  any  new  philosophy  of  suffering,  or  philosophical  way  of 
looking  at  it,  that  the  Christian  finds  that  peace  which  the  world  knows  not  nor  can 
give.  Take  to  an  afflicted  Christian  even  Paul's  "  These  light  afflictions,"  &o.,  and 
you  elicit  no  peculiar  response.  But  speak  to  him  of  the  personal  love  and  sympathy 
of  Jesus;  say,  "In  all  thy  affliction  He  is  afflicted";  point  out  to  him  in  the 
dark  valley  he  is  treading  the  bloody  foot-prints  of  his  Ketleemer ;  show  him  in 
the  furnace  "  one  hke  unto  the  Son  of  Man,"  and  mark  the  different  effect. 
IV.  Of  the  Christian  plan  of  salvation.  Conclusion :  Learn — 1.  The  folly  of  that 
cant  about  retaining  all  that  is  essential  in  Christianity  without  the  person  of 
Christ.  2.  That  to  be  a  Christian  is  to  be  in  personal  communion  with  Christ. 
{S.  P.  Sprechcr,  D.D.)  Christ  all  in  all: — I.  For  the  eighteousness  op  the 
Church.  He  is  the  Lord  our  Righteousness.  "  He  hath  made  Him  to  be  sin  for 
ns,"  &c.  II.  In  a  sinner's  acceptance  before  God.  "  No  man  comelh  to  the 
Father  but  by  Me."  III.  For  the  sanctification  of  believers.  "  Made  unto  us 
.  .  .  sanctification."  IV.  For  the  assistance  of  a  saint's  weakness.  "Present 
help  in  time  of  trouble."  "My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  V.  For  the  tran- 
quility OF  THE  Chiustian's  SOUL.  "  We  have  peace  with  God  thiough  our  Ln-d 
Jesus  Christ."  "  The  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understandin;?,"  &o.  VI. 
In  the  gracious  rewards  offered  to  His  disciples.  "Father,  I  will  that  .  .  . 
they  be  with  Me."  Inferences  :  1.  How  great  the  difference  between  Christ  as  our 
portion,  and  all  those  sources  of  comfort  which  earth  can  afford.  The  one  is  "  the 
fountain  of  living  waters,"  the  other  "  broken  cisterns."  All  are  yours  if  ye  are 
Christ's.  2.  The  believer  should  glory  in  none  but  Him.  3.  How  deplorable  the 
condition  of  those  who  have  no  interest  in  Him.  4.  Let  ns  make  Him  all  in  all  to 
ourselves.  (1)  In  our  understandings;  (2)  affections ;  (3)  ability  ;  (4)  every  aim 
and  action.  (E.  P.  Buddicomh,  M.A.)  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  all  in  all: — 1. 
There  are  some  persons  who  have  no  essentials  in  their  creed,  and  others  no 
circumstantials.  (1)  Some  seem  perfectly  regardless  of  doctrinal  principles ;  it 
is  nothing  to  them  whetlier  they  address  the  Supreme  Being  as  "  Jehovah,  Jot© 
and  Lord,"  whether  Christ  is  Divine  or  merely  human,  and  whether  His  sacrifice  is 
an  atonement  or  an  example.  (2)  Others  regard  everything  as  equally  important, 
and  lay  as  much  stress  upon  discipline  as  on  doctrine,  on  the  mode  of  administer- 
ing an  ordinance  as  upon  the  ordinance  itself,  and  plead  as  much  for  "  mint, 
anise,"  &c.,  as  for  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law.  (3)  While  one  of  thes© 
parties  has  no  room  for  faith,  the  other  has  no  room  for  charity.  Both  extremes 
are  to  be  avoided.  2.  Surely  there  are  differences  between  things,  between  specu- 
lative opinion  and  a  practical  truth,  the  ornament  of  a  bridge  and  the  key-stone  of 
an  arch,  a  man  maimed  and  a  man  dead.  The  Scriptures,  therefore,  diminish  the 
value  of  inferior  things  in  religion,  and  magnify  the  importance  of  the  superior 
ones.  Hence,  it  everywhere  shows  that  Christ  is  all  in  all.  This  is  sO; — L  In  thb 
0PEBATI0N8  OP  DiviNE  GRACE.  1.  Redemption.  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price,"  and 
this  price  is  "  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  2.  Justification.  "By  Him  all  that 
believe  are  justified  from  all  things."  Men  talk  of  making  their  peace  with  God. 
That  is  made  "  by  the  blood  of  Christ's  cross  "  ;  all  that  is  required  is  to  accept  it. 
8.  Renovation.  We  are  "  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus."  4.  Perseverance.  The 
righteous  hold  on  their  way  not  by  their  own  resolutions  and  efforts,  but  because  H© 
is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  We  are  "more  tban  conquerors  through  Him." 
6.  Glorification.  "  When  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,"  cfeo.  II.  In  thb 
rESTiMONT  OP  Scripture.  The  Bible  is  a  revelation  of  Christ,  and  is  therefor© 
called  "  the  Word  of  Christ."  Christ  is  all  in  all.  1.  In  the  historical  part.  In 
Adam  yon  see  him  as  the  head  and  representative  of  his  people ;  in  Noah,  as  tb« 
restorer  of  the  new  world ;  in  Isaac,  as  a  burnt  offering ;  in  Joseph,  as  humbled  anA 


CHAP,  in.]  COLOSSIANS.  217 

exalted,  and  the  sarionr  of  his  father's  honse ;  in  Aaron,  as  a  high  priest ;  is 
Moses,  as  a  lawgiver ;  in  Joshua,  as  the  leader  and  commander  of  the  people ;  in 
Solomon,  as  the  Prince  of  Peace ;  in  Jonah,  rising  again  the  third  day.  2.  In 
the  Levitical  part,  which  waa  a  shadow  of  which  He  is  the  body.  Everything 
in  this  dispensation  reminds  ua  of  Christ:  the  smitten  rock,  of  His  refreshment; 
the  manna,  of  the  Bread  of  Life;  the  mercy  seat,  of  His  propitiation ;  the  pass- 
over,  of  His  blood  sprinkled  on  the  conscience  securing  us  from  the  avenger ;  the 
Bacrifices,  of  His  atonement.  3.  In  the  prophetical  part.  "  To  Him  gave  all  the 
prophets  witness."  **  The  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  4.  The 
promissory  part.  The  promises  are  only  "  exceeding  great  and  precioua,"  as  they 
are  •' Yea  and  Amen  in  Him."  5.  The  evangelical  part.  6.  The  epistolary  part. 
III.  In  tub  wobk  of  the  ministbt.  1.  In  its  institution.  When  He  ascended  on 
high  He  gave  gifts  to  men,  and  gave  some  apostles,  Ac,  *' for  the  work  of  the 
ministry."  2.  In  its  commission.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world."  3.  In  its  qualifi- 
cation. He  only  can  make  men  "  able  ministers  of  the  New  Testament."  4.  In 
its  successes.  He  confirms  the  word  by  signs  following.  5.  In  its  theme.  "  God 
forbid  that  I  should  gloiy,"  Ao.  All  other  themes  radiate  from  or  converge  in  Him 
— God,  providence,  heaven.  IV.  In  the  estimation  of  His  peoplk.  1.  This 
applies  to  Abraham,  who  "  rejoiced  to  see  his  day  "  ;  to  Moses,  who  esteemed  His 
**  reproach  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt";  to  Job,  who  knew  that 
his  Redeemer  lived  ;  to  David,  to  whom  He  was  "  fairer  than  the  children  of  men  " ; 
to  the  Church,  in  whose  sight  He  is  "  altogether  lovely  "  ;  to  Simeon,  who  saw  in 
Him  God's  salvation  ;  to  Paul,  who  esteemed  all  things  loss  for  the  excellency  of 
His  knowledge  ;  to  the  first  Christians,  who  exclaimed,  "  Whom  not  having  seen  we 
love  "  ;  to  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  who  said,  "  We  cannot  dispute  for  Him,  bat 
we  can  burn  for  Him."  2.  This  applies  to  His  own  people  now,  for  He  is  all  in  all 
in  their  thoughts,  desires,  experience,  actions.  (IF.  Jay.)  Christ  is  a  Christian's 
all : — 1.  By  a  Christian  is  meant :  (1)  Negatively  :  not  those  who  have  nothing  more 
to  declare  them  such  than  their  baptism  and  professions  (Rev.  iii.  1).  We  accountthem 
monsters  who  have  faces  of  men  and  limbs  of  beasts,  and  they  are  religious  monsters 
who  have  the  faces  of  Christians  and  the  lives  of  pagans.  (2)  Positively :  those  who  are 
liraelites  indeed.  2.  To  such  Christ  is  all  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  Wearefoohsh,  but  Christ  is 
our  "  wisdom  ";  wo  are  guilty,  but  He  is  our  "  righteousness  "  ;  we  are  polluted,  but 
He  is  our  "  sancti fixation  " ;  we  are  lost  and  undone,  but  He  is  our  "  redemption  "  ; 
we  are  empty.  He  is  a  full  fountain  ;  we  are  necessitous  and  indigent,  in  Him 
dwells  all  fulness  of  everything  (Col.  i.  19;  ii.  3,  9,  10).  The  rich  merchant  was 
none  the  poorer  for  parting  with  all  for  the  pearl  of  great  price  (Matt.  lii.  45-46). 
3.  When  ever  so  much  is  said,  there  cannot  be  a  greater  word  than  "all."  The 
Greeks  deemed  it  an  excellency  to  speak  much  in  few  words  ;  "  an  ocean  of  matter 
in  a  drop  of  words. "  The  apostle  gives  us  here  gold  in  the  wedge,  which  we  are  to 
beat  out.  The  two  names  given  by  the  ancient  philosophers  to  God  were  "  The 
Being,"  and  "  The  All."  These  the  apostle  gives  to  Christ.  Physicians  speak  of 
an  universal  medicine,  but  Jesus  is  a  true  panacea.  There  are  thousands  of  cases 
in  which  no  other  can  help,  but  not  one  in  which  Christ  cannot  help  fully. 
I.  Wherein  Christ  is  all.  1.  To  all  Christians,  to  free  them  from  whatever 
might  hinder  their  salvation.  (1)  Sin.  This  he  does  (a)  by  expiating  its  guilt,  and 
so  removing  the  wrath  of  God  (Eph.  v.  6 ;  Rom.  viii.  1).  This  neither  legal 
Bacrifices  nor  good  works  could  do  ;  but  Christ  not  only  frees  us  from  condemnation 
bat  confers  the  adoption  of  children  (Rom.  viii.  14-16).  (b)  By  cleansing  its 
pollution  (Zech.  xiii.  1),  and  restoring  us  to  purity  (Isa.  i.  18).  (c)  By  conquering 
its  tyranny,  and  reigning  Himself  where  it  once  held  sway,  {d)  By  redeeming  us 
from  Its  bondage,  and   giving  us  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 

(2)  The  oppositions  of  Satan,  his  wiles  and  subtleties.  These  are  of  great  impor- 
tance, as  our  first  parents  knew ;  and  we,  though  redeemed,  are  not  exempt  from 
them  (2  Cor.  xi.  3).  But  Christ  hath  spoiled  him  (Col.  ii.  15),  and  led  captivity 
captive  (Eph.  iv.  8).      Christ  is  all,  and  in  that  we  may  rely  for  resisting  power. 

(3)  The  disturbancei,  allurements,  discouragements,  smiles  and  fiowns  of  a 
profane  world.  Be  of  good  cheer,  Christ  hath  overcome  it :  live  by  faith  in  Him 
who  is  your  all,  and  you  will  overcome.  2.  To  fill  the  souls  of  believers  with  all 
that  good  which  may  capacitate  them  for  happiness.  The  experience  of  grace  is 
•asential  for  the  enjoyment  of  glory.  Heaven  must  be  brought  down  into  our  souls, 
before  we  can  ascend  thither  (Col.  i.  12 ;  Eph.  v.  5).  We  are  by  nature  unmeet, 
and  could  we  enter  heaven  in  a  state  of  nature,  it  would  not  be  heaven  for  us 
(Rom.  viii.   6,  7),  because  all  delight  arises  from  the  suitableness  of  object  t* 


218  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

subject.  Now  Christ  is  all  in  this  respect  (John  i.  16,  x.  10 ;  Eph.  ▼.  8,  ii.  6-10). 
3.  To  till  all  ordinance;^  with  power.  These  are  means  of  salvation,  and  through 
His  concurrence  effectual  means.  Yet  they  are  but  empty  pipes  unless  Christ  ia 
pleased  to  fill  them,  who  "hlleth  all  in  all"  (Eph.  i.  23).  It  is  He  who  baptizes 
with  the  Holv  Ghost ;  and  in  the  preaching  of  the  Word  speaks  to  the  heart  (Luke 
xxiv.  32).  While  the  disciples  fished  alone  they  caught  nothing ;  but  when  Christ 
came  they  caught  multitudes  (John  xxi.  3-6).  4,  To  fill  every  condition  with 
comfort.  The  best  condition  is  not  good  without  Him,  nor  the  worst  bad  with 
Him  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  10;  Ixxiii.  25  ;  Ixiii.  3).  The  sense  of  Christ's  love  enabled  Paul 
to  overcome  all  adversaries  (Eom.  viii.  38,  39).  5.  To  furnish  us  with  strength  to 
persevere.  The  way  to  heaven  is  no  smooth  and  easy  way  (Matt.  vii.  14 ;  Acts  xiv. 
22) :  and  inasmuch  as  the  crown  is  reserved  for  the  head  of  perseverance  (Rev, 
ii.  10),  we  require  a  strength  greater  than  our  own  (Rom.  vii.  24).  In  ourselves  we 
can  do  nothing  (John  xv.  5 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  5),  but  in  Him  who  is  our  all,  we  can  do 
all  things  (Phil.  iv.  13).  Thus  the  Christian  is  complete  in  Christ  (Col.  ii.  10). 
II.  How  18  Christ  cob  all?  1.  Negatively:  not  so  as  to  excuse  us  from  all 
endeavours.  Christ's  sufficiency  does  not  excuse,  but  engage  our  industry  (Phil, 
ii.  12-13).  It  is  God  who  does  all ;  therefore,  do  all  you  can.  2.  Positively :  (1) 
By  way  of  impetration,  inasmuch  as  our  salvation  was  His  purchase.  Whence  is  it 
that  they  who  have  brought  themselves  under  the  deserts  of  hell,  may  have  the 
hopes,  means,  and  first  fruits  of  heaven?  All  are  the  price  of  Christ's  blood 
(Eph.  V.  25-27  ;  Acts  xx.  28  ;  John  xv.  13).  It  was  by  His  own  blood  that  He 
entered  heaven,  and  opened  the  door  for  all  who  are  incorporated  into  Him  (Heb. 
ix.  12 ;  X.  19,  20).  (2)  By  way  of  application,  inasmuch  as  He  brings  home  the 
blessings  He  has  purchased  into  the  soul  of  His  people.  He  has  not  only  purchased 
salvation  for  them,  but  them  for  it :  not  only  the  possibility  of  heaven,  but  the 
proprietorship,  and  this  is  necessary  to  every  comfort.  What  are  the  treasures  of 
the  Indies  to  him  who  only  hears  of  them?  Mere  stories.  WTiat  are  the  glories 
of  heaven  to  him  deprived  of  the  enjoyment  of  them  ?  Mere  torments.  But  we 
enjoy  all  in  Christ.  What  the  root  is  to  the  tree,  the  vine  to  the  branches,  the 
head  to  the  body,  all  this  is  Christ  to  believers  (Col.  ii.  7  ;  John  xv.  1,  6  ;  Eph.  i. 
22-23),  viz.,  not  only  a  treasury  of  all  good,  but  a  fountain  continually  streaming 
down  blessings  into  our  souls.  III.  What  advantage  is  it  to  have  oub  all  in 
Christ.  1.  Because  our  salvation  can  be  in  no  hands  so  safe  as  Christ's.  Had  it 
beep  in  ours,  alas  for  us ;  but  in  His  who  is  able  to  save  to  the  utmost  it  is  secure. 
Hence,  as  we  cau  have  no  other  Saviour  beside  Him,  we  cannot  have  any  other 
like  Him  (Acts  iv.  12).  2.  Because  our  salvation  could  have  been  in  no  way  so 
comfortable.  As  God  has  the  glory  of  every  attribute,  so  Christians  have  the 
comfort  of  every  attribute  in  this  way  of  salvation.  Apphcation  :  1.  If  Christ  be 
all,  then  there  is  no  ground  for  despondency,  either  from  your  own  deficiencies  or 
those  of  creature  helps.  You  need  nothing  since  Christ  is  your  all.  (1)  You  have 
the  sum  of  all.  Though  you  have  not  estates,  friends,  worldly  comforts,  you  have 
Christ,  who  more  than  makes  up  for  the  want  of  them.  The  cistern  may  well  be 
dispensed  with  by  him  who  lives  at  the  fountain  ;  and  the  light  of  a  candle  by 
him  who  enjoys  the  sun  (2  Cor.  vi.  10).  (2)  You  have  the  pledge  of  all  (Rom. 
viii.  32).  2.  VVhat  cause  have  we  to  be  thankful  for  Christ  (Gen.  xxxii.  10  ;  Eph. 
i.  3).  3.  How  great  is  their  folly  and  misery  who  keep  at  a  distance  from  Christ 
(John  V.  40  ;  Eph.  ii.  12).  4.  That  Christ  may  be  all  in  all  to  you.  (1)  Labour  to 
get  your  judgments  settled  in  the  belief  that  all  things  in  the  world  are  nothing 
without  Christ.  (2)  Cast  out  all  inmates  which,  because  they  are  unmeet  com- 
panions for  Christ,  may  hinder  His  taking  possession  of  your  souls.  The  ark 
and  Dagon  could  not  stand  together  in  the  same  room  ^Amos  iii.  3).  (3)  Accept 
Christ  on  His  own  terms.  (4)  Measure  all  things  by  tneir  reference  to  Christ. 
(5)  Be  serious  in  resolving  this  great  question — Whether  Christ  who  is  all  to 
sincere  Christians  is  all  to  you.  (a)  Are  you  conformable  unto  Christ  (Rom.  viii 
9 ;  Phil.  ii.  5 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  17  ;  2  Cor.  v.  17).  (6)  Are  you  all  to  Him  in  your 
affections  (Psa.  Ixiii.  3 ;  Ixxiii.  5  ;  Heb.  xi.  26 ;  Matt.  x.  37) ;  in  your  acknowledge- 
ments (1  Cor.  XV.  10 ;  Eph.  v.  20) ;  in  your  contentment  and  satisfaction  (Heb.  iii. 
17-18) ;  in  your  dependencies  and  expectations ;  in  your  designs  and  aims  (Phil. 
i.  20).  {W.  Whitaker,  A.M.)  Christ  everything  to  the  Christian  : — The  happiness  we 
derive  from  creatures  is  like  a  beggar's  garment;  it  is  made  up  of  pieces  and 
patches,  and  is  worth  very  little  after  all.  But  the  blessedness  we  derive  from  the 
Saviour  is  simple  and  complete.  In  Him  all  fulness  dwells.  He  is  coeval  with 
every  period.    He  is  answerable  to  e  rery  condition.    He  is  a  Physician  to  heal,  a 


CHi».  ni.]  C0L0SSIAN8.  tl9 

Counsellor  to  advise,  a  King  to  govern,  a  Friend  to  sympathise,  a  Father  to  pro- 
vide. He  is  a  Foundation  to  sustain,  a  Eoot  to  enliven,  a  Fountain  to  refresh. 
Ee  is  the  Shadow  from  the  heat,  the  Bread  of  Life,  the  Morning  Star,  the  Sun  of 
Bighteousness — all  and  in  all.  No  creature  can  be  a  substitute  for  Him,  but  He 
can  supply  the  place  of  every  creature.  {W.  Jay.)  Christ  all  in  all  in  death: — 
Foster  Kutherford  when  dying  said,  "  He  has  indeed  been  a  precious  Christ  to  me  ; 
and  now  I  feel  Him  to  be  my  rock,  my  strength,  my  rest,  my  hope,  my  joy,  my  all 
in  all.  '  Robert  Newton  said,  "  Christ  Jesus  the  Saviour  of  sinners  and  life  of  the 
dead.  1  am  going,  going,  going,  to  glory  I  Farewell,  sin  1  farewell,  death  1 
Praise  the  Lord  1 " 

Vers.  12-15.  Put  on,  therefore,  a*  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved,— TAe 
eisentials  of  a  Christian  character  : — T)ie  Christian  character  is  distinguished  by — I. 
A  BPECiAii  DESIC3NATI0N,  signifying — 1.  Divine  obtioe — "  Elect."  2.  Personal  purity 
— "Holy."  The  evidence  and  practical  result  of  election  (Eph.  i,  4).  3.  Divine 
affection — "Beloved."  Each  of  these  epithets  has  the  force  of  a  motive.  XL  A 
HBABTFELT  syMPATHT.  Aiising  from — 1.  A  spirit  of  tender  mercy — "  Bowels  of 
mercy" — a  phrase  expressing  the  effect  on  the  body  of  btrong  emotions  of  pity.  A 
genuine  pity  is  not  only  visible  on  the  countenance,  and  uttered  by  the  lips,  but  ia 
felt  in  the  inmost  heart,  and  prompts  to  generous  actions.  2.  A  spirit  of  l^indness. 
in.  A  GENUINE  HUMILITY.  1.  This  is  uot  undue  self-depreciation,  but  a  proper 
estimate  of  self.  2.  It  proceeds  from  exalted  views  of  God.  3.  It  is  fruitful,  as 
that  branch  in  the  garden  which  is  most  heavily  laden  with  fruit  is  neart  st  the 
ground.  IV.  A  gentle  and  patient  spikit.  1.  "  Meekness "  (Judges  viii.  2), 
which  is  slow  to  take  and  scorns  to  give  offence.  2.  "  Longsuffering,"  meekness 
continued,  though  subjected  to  the  strongest  provocations.  V.  A  pbacticai. 
manifestation  of  a  spirit  of  mutual  forbearance  and  forgiveness.  1.  This  is 
to  be  exercised  universally — "  Any."  Quarrel  would  be  better  rendered  complaint. 
It  takes  two  to  make  a  quarrel ;  the  Christian  shoubl  never  be  one.  2.  It  is  en- 
forced by  the  highest  example — "Even  as  Christ."  The  heart  that  is  not  moved  by 
this  is  incorrigible.  Lessons — 1.  The  unity  of  Christian  character  is  made  up  of 
many  separate  essential  graces.  2.  The  condition  of  thin;.;s  in  this  world  affords 
ample  scope  for  the  exercise  of  every  Christian  grace.  3.  To  forgive  is  at  once 
the  most  diflBcult  and  most  Christlike.     {W.  Barlow.)         The  contuvie  of  a  iaint : — 

1.  Clothing  is  the  external  badge  of  individuality.  Without  clothing,  or  with  an 
absolute  uniformity  of  clothing,  it  would  scarcely  be  possible  for  one  man  to  be 
known  from  another.  And  much  of  the  character  comes  out  in  one's  dress.  The 
vain,  the  proud,  the  miserly,  the  profligate,  the  orderly,  or  the  reckless  man,  may 
often  be  quickly  distinguished  by  his  dre^s.  So  a  man's  disposition  is  the  dress  of 
his  soul.  You  know  the  ton*  of  spirit  which  distinguishes  him  from  another,  and 
yoQ  are  struck  with  it  as  soon  as  you  are  in  his  company.  The  word  "habit" 
may  be  applied  either  to  the  material  or  to  the  immaterial  parts  and  adjuncts  of 
the  human  being,  and  it  is  a  oonneciing  link  between  the  dress  of  the  body  and 
the  disposition  of  the  soul  2.  There  are  distinctive  costumes  peculiar  to  certain 
elasses  or  communities.  There  are  national  costumes,  by  which  an  Englishman 
IB  known  from  a  Turk,  a  German  from  a  Spaniard,  &o.  There  are  costumes  of 
the  sexes,  and  of  various  ages.  There  are  costumes  of  professions  and  trades,  as 
the  soldier's,  the  sailor's,  the  king's,  the  judge's,  &o.  Thus  also  there  are 
characteristic  phases  of  mind  which  belong  to  special  classes.  8.  Let  us  apply 
these  things  to  Christians.  With  due  allowance  for  individual  idiosyncrasies, 
there  is  yet  a  certain  tone  and  temper  of  mind  which  should  belong  to  every  child 
of  God.  It  should  be  to  him  as  a  suit  of  clothes,  at  once  significant  of  his 
character  and  citizenslfip,  and  also  contributing  to  his  comfort  and  comeliness. 
The  parts  of  this  suit  are  here  carefully  enumerated,  and  you  will  see  how  admir- 
ably they  correspond  with  one  another.  I.  Tbb  costume  of  a  saint  as  here 
DESCBTBED.  1.  "  Bowels  of  mercies,"  a  yearning  and  tender  sympathy  with  the 
sorrowful  and  afflicted  :  as  opposed  to  carelessness  or  cruel  delight  in  their  griefs. 

2.  "  Kindness,"  active  goodwill,  not  merely  ready  to  sympathize  with  suffering, 
but  in  every  way  to  do  good  to  others.  It  is  simple,  pure,  brotherly,  and  dis- 
interested. 3.  "  Humbleness  of  mind  "  has  two  phases.  It  is  a  low  estimate  of 
ourselves,  and  it  leads  us  highly  to  estimate  others  in  comparison  with  ourselves. 
4.  "  Meekness  "  is  a  spirit  of  patience  and  self-control  under  reproach,  mis- 
representation, and  unkind  treatment  by  others.  6.  •' Long-suffering  "  elongates 
meekness,  and  stretches  it  out,  if  unkindness  from  others  should  be  systematio  and 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  lO, 

long  contiuued.  6.  "Forbearing  one  another,"  in  case  of  little  bitches  and  provoca- 
tions. 7.  "  Forgiving  one  another,"  in  case  of  actual  injury  to  character  or  estate. 
8.  "  Over  all  these  put  on  charity."  This  is  like  a  girdle  round  the  loins,  or  like  an 
easy-fitting  toga,  or  cloak,  which  is  at  once  elegant  and  useful.  It  completes  our 
spiritual  dress,  and  adds  a  general  grace  to  the  entire  outfit.  Further,  all  this  is 
not  to  be  merely  "  put  on."  There  is  a  radical  cause  wbich  should  produce  it  all. 
This  lies  deep  in  the  heart ;  and  without  it,  the  rest  would  be  a  cloak  of  hypocrisy. 
'•  Let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  your  hearts."  It  is  the  peace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Where  this  is  in  the  heart,  the  outward  clothing  will  have  an  inward  root.  It  will 
be  like  the  natural  and  vital  clothing  of  the  autumn  trees,  and  not  like  the  artificial 
attire  of  the  human  body  :  the  outward  and  the  inward  will  correspond.  We  shall 
put  on  externally,  by  putting  out  or  developing  from  within,  all  the  graces  here 
sketched.  II.  The  appkopriateness  of  this  attire.  1.  Consider  your  position  as 
God's  elect — holy  and  beloved.  God's  election  of  yon  has  exemplified  in  Him  all 
these  graces,  therefore  it  is  right  that  you  should  exhibit  them  as  well.  Besides, 
vou  are  called  to  be  like  Him,  and  euch  as  He  can  admire;  therefore,  conform  to 
His  character  in  these  particulars.  2.  Consider  especially  His  grace  in  forgiving 
your  sins.  How  great  tliat  boon  I  It  is  a  small  thing  to  ask  you  to  do  the  same 
for  others.  3.  Your  vocation  as  a.  Christian  Church  demands  the  exercise  of  these 
virtues.  You  are  called  to  be  one  compact  and  corporate  body  in  the  Lord.  There 
should  be  no  schism,  no  lack  of  mutual  sympathy  and  interest  among  you.  On  the 
contrary,  there  should  be  the  utmost  gentleness,  kindness,  patience,  &c.  This  ia 
the  dress  which  God  requires  you  to  wear.  Do  you  possess  it  ?  Seek  it  more  fully 
now :  renew  it  continually,  and  so  walk,  worthy  of  the  high  vocation  wherewith  ye 
are  called,  and  be  thankful.  (T.  G.  Uorton.)  The  garments  of  the  renewed 
soul: — Because  the  new  nature  has  been  assumed,  therefore  array  your  souls  in 
vesture  corresponding  ;  because  Christ  is  all  in  all  clothe  yourselves  with  all 
brotherly  graces  corresiDonding  to  that  unity  into  which  Christians  are  brought  by 
their  common  possession  of  Christ.  I.  Ak  enumeration  op  the  faib  garments 
OF  THE  NEW  MAN.  1.  Let  US  go  over  the  wardrobe  of  the  consecrated  soul.  (1)  A 
heart  of  compassion ;  the  rendering  by  conventional  propriety  of  a  phrase  it  regards 
as  coarse,  simply  because  Jews  choose  one  part  of  the  body  and  we  another  as  the 
supposed  seat  of  the  emotions.  Is  it  not  beautiful  that  the  series  should  begin 
with  pity  ?  What  every  man  needs,  and  most  often,  and  yet  what  is  so  difScult  to 
achieve  in  the  face  of  obstructions  of  occupation,  selfishness,  and  custom.  There- 
fore we  have  to  make  conscious  efforts  to  "  put "  it  "  on."  Without  it  no  help  will 
be  of  much  use  to  the  receiver,  nor  any  to  the  giver.  Aid  flung  to  a  man  as  a  bone 
to  a  dog  usually  gets  as  much  gratitude  as  it  deserves.  But  if  we  make  another's 
sorrows  ours,  that  teaches  us  tact  and  gentleness.  But  beware  of  letting  the  emotion 
be  excited,  and  then  not  allowing  it  to  act.  (2)  Kindness.  Avrider  benignity,  with 
which  some  are  so  dowered  that  they  come  like  the  sunshine.  But  all  can  cultivate 
it.  When  we  come  out  of  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  we  shall  bear  some 
reflection  of  Him  whose  •*  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works."  This  is  the 
opposite  of  that  world ly  wisdom  which  prides  itself  on  its  knowledge  of  men  and  is 
suspicious  of  everybody.  It  is  the  most  powerful  solvent  of  ill-will  and  indifference. 
(3)  Humility.  That  seems  to  bring  a  virtue  occupied  with  self  into  the  middle  of  a 
series  referring  exclusively  to  others.  But  the  following  graces  have  reference  to 
our  demeanour  under  slights  and  injuries,  and  humility  constitutes  the  foundation 
for  the  right  bearing  of  these.  This  is  not  necessarily  blindness  to  our  strong 
points.  Milton  would  be  none  the  less  humble  though  he  was  sure  that  his  work 
was  better  than  that  of  Sternhold  and  Hopkins.  Any  unchristian  fire  of  pride 
which  the  devil's  breath  may  blow  up  should  be  damped  by  "  What  hast  thou  that 
thou  hast  not  received?"  and  "  Who  is  pure  before  God's  judgment-seat?  "  (4) 
The  distinction  between  meekness  and  long-suffering  is  slight.  The  former  is  the 
temper  which  accepts  God's  dealings,  or  evil  inflicted  by  men  without  resistance,  and 
its  opposite  is  rudeness  or  harshness;  the  latter  the  long  holding  out  before  giving 
way  to  a  temptation  to  an  action  or  passion,  and  its  opposite  is  swift  resentment. 
While  long-suffering  does  not  get  angry  soon,  meekness  does  not  get  angry  at  all.  (5) 
Forbearing  and  forgiving  are  meekness  and  long-suffering  in  exercise.  A  man  may 
forbear  and  bite  his  Ups  till  the  blood  come  rather  than  speak  unkindly,  but  forgive- 
ness is  an  entire  wiping  of  enmity  and  irritation  out  of  the  heart.  2.  Is  this  a 
type  of  character  that  the  world  admirep  f  Is  it  not  uncommonly  like  what  most 
people  call  '•  a  poor  spiritless  creature  "  ?  It  was  a  new  man  emphatically,  for  the 
world  had  never  seen  anything  like  it;  and  it  is  a  new  man  still.     It  may  be  tme 


cmr.  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  221 

that  Christianity  has  added  no  new  virtue  to  those  prescribed  by  conscience,  but  it 
has  altered  the  perspective  of  the  whole,  and  created  a  type  of  excellence  in  which 
the  gentler  virtues  predominate,  and  the  novelty  of  which  is  proved  by  the  reluc- 
tance of  men  to  recognize  it.  By  its  side  worldly  "  heroic  virtues  "  are  vulgar  and 
glaring,  like  some  daub  of  a  soldier  on  a  sign-board  by  the  side  of  Angelico's  white- 
robed  visions.  Better  is  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city.  3. 
The  great  pattern  and  motive  of  forgiveness.  '♦  As  Christ  has  forgiven  us."  (1)  The 
B.  V.  adapts  the  reading  of  •*  the  Lord  "  which  recalls  the  parable  about  the  ser- 
vant who  had  been  forgiven  by  his  "Lord,"  and  yet  squeezed  the  last  farthing  out 
of  his  fellow-seiTant.  The  parallel  passage  in  the  Ephesians  speaks  of  •'  God  for 
Christ's  sake  forgiving  us."  Observe  the  interchange  of  Divine  office  «nd  attri- 
butes. What  notion  of  Christ's  Person  underlies  it?  (2)  Christ's  forgiveness  is 
not  simply  revealed  that  trembling  hearts  may  be  made  calm.  A  heart  softened  by 
pardon  will  be  a  heart  apt  to  pardon.  (3)  This  new  pattern  and  motive  make  the 
novelty  and  difference  of  Christian  morality.  "As  I  have  loved  you  "makes  "Love 
one  another  "  a  new  commandment.  Obedience  to  one  we  love  is  delightful.  (4)  We 
have  each  to  choose  what  shall  be  the  pattern  for  ns.  The  world  takes  Cojsar,  the 
Christian  takes  Christ.  (5)  This  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  Lord's  prayer,  which 
teaches  us  that  our  forgiveness  is  the  condition  of  God's.  Without  the  first  we  shall 
not  be  conscious  of  the  second.  IL  The  oibdlx  which  keeps  tbb  qarments  in 
THEiB  PLACES.  1.  "  Above  all  "  is  equivalent  to  "  over."  The  silken  sash  of  love 
will  brace  all  the  rest  into  a  unity.  "  PerfectnesB  "  does  not  mean  that  it  is  the 
perfect  principle  of  union,  but  is  a  collective  expression  for  the  various  graces  which 
together  make  up  perfection.  Love  knits  into  a  harmonious  whole  virtues  which 
would  otherwise  be  fragmentary  and  incomplete.  2.  We  can  conceive  of  the  dis- 
positions named  as  existing  in  some  fashion  without  love,  but  let  love  come  into 
the  heart  and  knit  a  man  to  the  poor  creature  whom  he  bad  only  pitied  before,  or 
to  the  enemy  whom  he  had  only  been  able  to  forgive  with  an  effort,  and  it  lifts 
these  into  a  nobler  hfe.  3.  Perhaps  there  is  the  deeper  truth  that  love  produces  all 
these  graces.  The  virtues  are  best  cultivated  by  cultivating  it.  Paul  elsewhere 
ealls  love  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  even  as  his  Master  had  taught  him  that  all  the 
duties  were  summed  up  in  love  to  God  and  love  to  man.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Tfie  elect  and  their  duties: — I.  The  QnAuriEB  of  the  elect  of  God.  1.  They 
are  chosen  and  separated  from  the  world  to  serve  God  according  to  the  discipline  ol 
the  gospel  (Eph.  i.  4).  It  is  this  that  Moses  represented  to  ancient  Israel  the  type 
of  the  new  (Deut.  xxvi.  18).  They  who  boast  of  being  elected  but  lead  a  godless 
life  mock  God  and  man.  Election  is  ever  accompanied  by  conversion  and  sancti- 
fication.  No  one  knows  of  his  election  but  by  its  eiJects.  2.  They  are  holy — all  ol 
them.  Paul  is  not  of  Rome's  opinion  that  none  are  saints  but  the  canonized.  In 
the  Creed,  the  Church,  which  is  the  body  of  all  true  Christians,  is  called  holy,  and 
the  communion  of  saints.  No  man  can  be  a  Christian  who  is  not  a  saint  (Rom. 
viii.  9).  This  quality  obliges  us  to  the  following  virtues  which  are  parts  of  holiness 
<LeT.  xi.  44 ;  xx.  26).  3.  Beloved  of  God.  This  obliges  us  to  love  God,  the  effect 
of  which  is — (1)  Obedience,  which  includes  every  virtue  (John  xiv.  15).  (2)  Trans- 
formation into  the  thing  loved ;  so  that  God  being  charity,  justice,  and  holiness,  if 
we  love  Him,  we  shall  put  these  on.  II.  The  graces  of  thb  elect.  1.  Mercy  is 
a  tenderness  which  causes  us  to  commiserate  the  miseries  of  others  as  if  we  took 
part  in  them  ourselves.  "  Bowels  of  mercies  "  is  a  Hebrew  expression  signifying 
that  the  real  virtue  is  one  which  moves  the  heart,  and  is  not  merely  a  face  expression. 
The  gospel  has  no  affinity  with  stoicism,  which  holds  compassion  to  be  an  infirmity 
(Luke  vi.  36  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  8 ;  Rom.  liii.  16),  and  is  exemplified  in  Christ  (Heb.  v.  2 ; 
iv.  15).  2.  Kindness  is  a  goodness  of  nature  that  takes  pleasure  in  obliging  and 
avoids  injuring.  We  are  obliged  to  this  by  our  stewardship  of  God's  manifold 
grace.  3.  Humility  is  the  mother  of  patience  and  the  nurse  of  charity.  It  is  a 
difficult  virtue  to  proud  man,  and  its  difficulty  arises  out  of  our  ignorance  ol  our- 
selves and  our  relation  to  God.  Could  we  know  this  pride  would  be  impossible, 
4.  Meekness  is  gentleness,  the  most  amiable  ornament  of  life,  which  receives  every 
one  with  an  open  heart  and  pleasing  countenance,  takes  things  in  good  part,  and  ia 
proof  against  self-injurious  irritations.  5.  Patience  is  the  sister  of  gentleness,  and 
undergoes  affronts  under  which  gentleness  might  break  down.  6.  For  the  better 
clearing  of  these  Paul  adds — (1)  Forbearance  (Matt.  xii.  20).  (2)  Forgiveness 
(Matt.  xvLii.  35).  III.  The  exemplar  of  thb  elect  (Eph.  iv.  32).  What  stronger 
reason  could  he  urge?  Christ  being  the  image  to  which  we  ought  to  be  conformed, 
faow  shall  we  be  His  living  portraits  if  we  have  not  the  goodness  He  has  shown  to 


22i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  t& 

us  ?  (Matt,  xviii.  32-33).  We  were  His  enemies,  and  His  treatment  of  as  must  be 
our  inspiration  and  model  in  our  treatment  of  our  enemies.  {J.  BailU.)  Gentle 
Christians : — A  true  Christian  is  like  the  lily  which  stings  no  one,  and  yet  he  lives 
among  those  who  are  full  of  sharpness.  He  aims  to  please,  and  not  to  provoke, 
and  yet  he  lives  among  those  whose  existence  is  a  standing  menace.  The  thorn 
tears  and  lacerates  :  it  is  all  armed  from  its  root  to  its  topmost  branch,  defying  all 
comers.  But  theiesta\ids  the  lily,  smiling,  not  defying  ;  charming,  and  not  harming. 
Such  is  the  real  Christian,  holy,  harmless,  full  of  love  and  gentleness  and  tender- 
ness. Therein  lieth  his  excellence.  Who  would  not  stop  and  turn  aside  to  see  a 
lily  among  thorns,  and  think  he  reads  a  promise  from  his  God  to  comfort  him  amid 
distress  ?  Such  is  a  true  Christian  :  he  is  a  consolation  in  his  family,  a  comfort  in 
his  neighbourhood,  an  ornament  to  his  profession,  and  a  benediction  to  his  age. 
He  is  all  tenderness  and  gentleness,  and  yet  it  may  be  he  lives  among  the  envious, 
the  malicious,  and  the  profane,  a  lily  among  thorns.  The  thorn  saith,  "  Keep 
away;  no  one  shall  touch  me  with  impunity."  The  lily  cries,  "I  come  to  you,  I 
shed  my  soul  abroad  to  please  you. "  The  power  of  kindness : — A  Christian  lady, 
in  the  course  of  visitation,  was  told  of  a  very  depraved  woman,  who  was  ruining 
herself  by  debauchery,  but  was  of  so  violent  a  temper  that  no  one  durst  interfere 
with  her.  She  proposed  to  go  up  and  see  her,  but  was  warned,  ••  she  will  kill  you." 
She  bethought  her,  "  If  my  Lord  were  here.  He  would  do  it."  She  went  and  entered 
the  miserable  apartment,  and  saw  her  lying  in  a  corner  as  if  a  bundle  of  rags.  She 
spoke,  and  an  old,  withered,  miserable-looking  creature  raised  herself  upon  her 
elbow,  and  with  frenzied  look,  demanded  what  she  wanted.  She  replied,  "  I  love 
you ;  I  want  to  be  kind  to  you,  because  Jesus  loves  you."  She  went  forward  and 
kissed  her  brow,  and,  notwithstanding  violent,  repelling  words,  kissed  her  again. 
Then  came  the  exclamation,  "  Go  away,  go  away  I  you  will  break  my  heart ;  you  put 
me  in  mind  of  my  mother.  Never  has  any  one  kissed  me  as  she  did  ;  never  have 
I  been  so  treated  since  I  lost  her  :  many  kicks  and  blows  have  I  had,  but  no 
kisses  like  this."  The  fountain  of  feeling  was  opened,  the  confidence  of  the  heart 
was  won,  and  step  by  step  that  all  but  utterly  lost  soul  was  led  back  to  Jesus. 
Elect. — As  to  this  matter  of  election,  I  would  to  God  that  some  who  object  to  it 
were  as  common  sense  in  this  matter  as  they  are  in  the  daily  actions  of  ordinary 
life.  Let  me  assume  that  a  purse  has  been  lost  in  the  next  street  containing  a 
thousand  guineas,  and  that  whoever  finds  it  may  keep  it.  "  Ha !  "  we  say.  "  Well, 
only  one  can  find  it ;  what  is  the  good  of  a  thousand  seeking  it  7  Only  one  can 
have  it ;  and  if  I  am  elected  to  be  the  man,  it  will  come  in  my  way."  I  never  heard 
people  reasoning  so  in  an  affair  of  that  kind.  Though  only  one  may  have  it,  ten 
thousand  will  strive  for  it  if  they  know  the  conditions.  There  is  one  prize  to  be 
given  in  a  school  of  five  hundred  scholars.  The  boys  say, "  Well,  only  one  of  us 
can  get  it,  why  should  five  hundred  of  us  be  toiling  and  fagging  to  get  it  ? " 
Another  boy  says,  "  I  know  if  I  am  to  have  the  prize  I  shall  get  it ;  so  I  shall  read 
no  books,  and  make  no  preparation."  You  would  not  allow  a  boy  to  reason  so. 
Yet  there  are  men  who  say  this,  "  If  we  are  called  to  heaven  we'll  get  to  heaven  ;  if 
we  are  elected  to  be  saved,  we  need  not  make  any  effort  about  it."  "  Thou  wicked 
and  slothful  servant ;  out  of  thine  own  mouth  I  condemn  thee ;  the  whole  action  of 
thy  evil  life  shall  be  thy  answer  on  the  day  of  judgment."  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Election : — A  senator  related  to  his  son  the  account  of  the  book  containing  the 
names  of  illustrious  members  of  the  commonwealth.  The  son  desired  to  see  the 
outside.  It  was  glorious  to  look  upon.  "  Oh  !  let  me  open  it,"  said  he.  "Nay," 
said  the  father,  "  it's  known  only  to  the  council."  Then  said  the  son,  "  Tell  me  if 
my  name  is  there."  "  And  that,"  said  the  father,  "  is  a  secret  known  only  to  the 
council,  and  cannot  be  divulged."  Then  he  desired  to  know  for  what  achievements 
the  names  were  inscribed  in  that  book.  The  father  told  him ;  and  related  the 
noble  deeds  by  which  they  had  eternized  their  names.  "  Such,"  said  he,  '*  are 
written,  and  none  but  such  are  written  in  the  book, "  "  And  will  my  name  be 
there?"  asked  the  son.  "  I  cannot  tell  thee,"  said  the  father;  "but  if  thy  deeds 
are  like  theirs,  thou  shalt  be  written  in  the  book ;  if  not,  thou  shalt  not  be  written." 
And  then  the  son  consulted  with  himself,  and  he  found  that  his  whole  deeds  were 
playing,  and  singing,  and  drinking,  and  amusing  himself ;  and  he  found  that  this 
was  not  noble.  And  as  he  could  not  count  on  his  name  being  there  as  yet,  he 
determined  to  make  his  calUng  and  election  sure.  And  thus  "  by  patient  continu- 
ance in  well  doing,  the  end  is  crowned  with  glory.  {Paxton  Hood.)  Holy. — Tfu 
nature  of  holinest : — Holiness  is  religion  shining.  It  is  the  candle  lighted,  and  not 
hid  under  a  bushel,  but  lighting  the  house.    It  is  religious  principle  pat  into 


CHAP,  in.]  C0L0SSIAN8.  SSS 

motion.  It  is  the  love  of  God  sent  forth  into  circulation,  on  the  feet  and  with  the 
hands  of  love  to  man.  It  is  faith  gone  to  work.  It  is  charity  coined  into  actions, 
and  devotion  breathing  benedictions  on  human  suffering,  while  it  goes  up  in 
intercessions  to  the  Father  of  all  piety.  {Bishop  Huntington.)  A  holy  life  is 
made  up  of  a  number  of  small  things.  Little  words,  not  eloquent  speeches  or 
Bennons  ;  little  deeds,  not  miracles,  nor  battles,  nor  one  great  heroic  act  or  mighty 
martyrdom.  The  constant  sunbeam,  not  the  lightning;  the  waters  of  Siloam 
"that  go  softly"  in  the  meek  mission  of  refreshment,  not  the  "waters  of  the  river 
great  and  many,"  rushing  down  in  torrents,  are  the  emblems  of  a  holy  life.  The 
avoidance  of  little  evils,  little  sins,  little  inconsistencies,  weaknesses,  follies,  indis- 
eretions,  imprudencies,  foibles,  indulgencies  of  self  and  of  the  flesh  ;  the  avoidance 
of  such-like  things  as  these  goes  far  to  make  up  at  least  the  negative  beauty  of  a 
holy  life.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  A  holy  Ghxirch: — A  living  thing  grows  from  itself, 
and  not  by  accession  from  without  as  a  house  grows.  A  flower  does  not  grow  by 
adding  a  leaf  to  it,  nor  a  tree  by  fastening  a  branch  to  it,  nor  a  man  by  fixing  a  limb 
to  his  frame.  Everything  that  has  life  grows  by  a  converting  process,  which  trans- 
forms the  food  into  means  of  nourishment  and  enlargement.  A  holy  Church  lives, 
and  its  holiness  converts  all  its  ordinances  and  provisions  into  meacs  of  deep- 
rooted,  solid,  enlarged,  and  beautiful  usefulness.  (T.  W.  Jenkyn,  D.D.)  Beloved. — 
The  thought  that  someone  loves  us  has  grent  restraining  influence.  A  young  man 
or  woman  may  be  here  without  friends,  alone  in  this  vast  city  and  surrounded  by  a 
thousand  snares.  But  you  cannot  forget  that  far  away  in  some  distant  town  or 
village  there  is  a  father  whose  heart  yearns  towards  you,  a  mother  who  never  ceases 
with  many  tears  to  pray  for  you — and  the  thought  that  there  is  at  least  one  in  the 
world  who  loves  you,  is  a  stimulus  to  exertion,  a  safeguard  against  evil.  Many  an 
effort  to  do  right  is  prompted  by  the  thought  that  you  are  "beloved;"  many  a 
debasing  pleasure  is  rejected,  from  many  a  seducing  snare  you  turn  aside,  because 
you  desire  to  act  worthy  of  such  love.  And  we  are  "  beloved"  of  God.  What  an 
honour  is  this  1  Insignificant,  sinful  creatures  of  earth — thought  of,  cared  for, 
beloved  in  heaven  !  If  so,  shall  we  not  "  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  we 
are  called  ?  "  Can  we  rejoice  in  being  "  beloved  "  of  God  while  indulging  enmity 
towards  our  brethren  ?  Shall  the  fellow-servanti  hate  one  another  while  thus 
beloved  by  their  Lord  and  Master  ?  "  Put  on,  therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy 
and  beloved,  bowels  of  mercies."  {Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  The  King's  livery  ; — As 
the  soldier  who  is  in  the  queen's  service  is  required  to  appear  in  his  uniform,  that  all 
may  know  his  calling,  so  the  soldier  of  Christ  must  appear  clothed  in  certain 
characteristics  needful  to  prove  his  loyalty,  and  show  his  allegiance  to  his  Lord.  (J. 
Spence,  D.D.)  Bowels  of  mercies  (see  Phil.  i.  8). — I.  Thb  nature  op  this 
ORACB.  The  real  inward  and  unpretended  affection  of  condoling  with  another's 
woe.  The  phrase  is  a  Hebraism,  and  is  taken  from  the  emotion,  and,  as  it  were, 
concussion  which  is  felt  in  the  stomach,  in  deep  affections  of  the  mind  (Gen.  xliii.  30  ; 
Lam.  ii.  11 ;  Luke  i.  78  ;  Phil.  ii.  1).  The  apostle  wisely  begins  with  the  expression 
of  condolence  ;  because  from  hence  flows  the  act  of  relief ;  and  because,  as  Gregory 
says,  "  it  is  more  to  compassionate  any  one  from  the  heart,  than  to  give:  for  he 
who  gives  what  is  external,  gives  what  does  not  belong  to  his  own  person  ;  but  he 
who  gives  compassion,  gives  somewhat  of  himself."  II.  Its  objects.  1.  Persona 
who  have  none  to  give  them  relief,  as  widows  and  orphans.  2.  But  in  general  it 
comprehends  all  oppressed  with  misery — the  poor,  the  prisoner,  the  sick,  the 
afflicted.  III.  Its  motives.  1.  The  express  and  oft  repeated  command  of  God 
(Luke  vi.  36 ;  Eom.  xii.  15  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  8).  Whence  Gregory  Nazianzen  says,  "  If 
thou  hast  nothing,  give  but  a  tear ;  for  pity  is  a  great  solace  to  the  alHicted."  2. 
The  examples  of  the  prophets,  of  Christ,  and  the  apostles,  and  of  all  good  men 
(Jer.  ix.  1 ;  Matt.  ix.  36  ;  Luke  xix.  41 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  29),  Hence  that  saying  of  the 
poet,  '« The  good  are  tear-abounding  men,"  3.  The  conformity  of  nature,  and  the 
possibility  of  suffering  similar  things.  The  possibility  of  suffering  similar  evils, 
when  seriously  considered,  forces  mercy  from  any  man  that  is  not  destitute  of  feel- 
ing. For  what  has  happened  to  some  one  may  happen  to  any  one.  IV.  Hbncb  wb 
coNCLUDK — 1.  The  apathy  of  the  Stoics  must  be  exploded  by  a  Christian  ;  as  not 
agreeing  either  with  our  natural  condition  r  our  supernatural  regeneration. 
Prosper  well  remarks,  "We  are  not  in  fault  for  having  affections,  but  for  making 
a  bad  use  of  them."  2.  Bowels  of  mercy  are  found  in  every  regenerate 
person :  he  is  therefore  moved  at  the  very  fi  st  view  of  another's  misery.  8. 
^hey  who,  ere  they  can  be  excited  to  mercy,  ust  have  much  solicitation  from 
ihe  afflicted,  can  Uj  claim  to  little  or  noth  ng  of   the  spiritual  man ;   thej 


3M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB,  [chap.  m. 

who  are  not  moved  by  these,  have  nothing  homan  in  them.  {Bishop  DaveTiant.) 
Pity  : — Ab  love  is  the  most  delightful  passion,  pity  is  nothing  else  than  love  softened 
by  a  degree  of  sorrow.  It  is  a  kind  of  pleasing  anguish  as  well  as  generons  sym- 
pathy that  knits  mankind  together,  and  blends  them  in  the  same  common  lot. 
(Addison.)  The  power  of  compaision: — There  is  something  marvellous  in  the 
spirit  of  compassion.  I  do  not  mean  that  it  seems  to  feel  a  positive  pleasure  in 
breathing  the  atmosphere  of  distress,  nor  that  it  seems  to  find  time  for  every  kind 
of  well-doing,  nor  that  the  heart  and  memory  are  so  enlarged  that  a  range  of 
interest  ten  times  wider  and  more  varied  than  personal  interest  finds  room,  but  that 
compassion,  though  it  is  not  talent  nor  energy,  stands  in  the  stead  of  these  and 
does  their  work.  The  social  good  that  is  done  in  the  world  is  not  the  work  of  its 
greatest  minds.  These  set  themselves  one  great  task,  and  gather  up  all  their 
powers  for  its  accomplishment.  They  are  jealous  even  of  the  minutes  of  their 
time.  They  resist  all  distractions.  The  compassionate  man  gives  up  his  time  to 
others,  and  yet  seems  to  find  time  for  all  things.  Like  the  bread  miraculously 
multiplied,  he  gives,  and  yet  he  gathers  up  for  himself  more  than  he  gave.  How 
great,  again,  is  its  power  to  find  its  way  to  the  miserable  heart.  Convince  the 
wretched  man  that  you  know  his  misery  and  would  ease  his  burden,  and  you  have 
aheady  made  it  lighter.  Show  the  vicious  man  that  you  can  see  in  him  something 
worth  caring  for,  and  you  thereby  take  off  the  despair  that  is  at  the  bottom  of  so 
much  vice.  Let  your  enemy  see  that  you  have  not  room  in  your  heart  for  auy 
bitterness  against  him,  and  his  arm  will  fall  powerless.  {Archbishop  Thomson.) 
jReligion  moves  to  pity : — Now  I  would  like  you  to  mark  that  there  is  not  a  true 
grace  of  a  Christian  man,  nor  a  true  activity  of  the  disciple  of  Christ,  which  doea 
not  lead  to  pity  and  love  like  this.  Eepentance  leads  to  it,  for  repentance  laments 
selfishness  as  the  essence  of  its  evil,  and  dreads  relapsing  into  a  religion  which 
would  be  merely  a  selfishness  refined  ;  and  repentance  remembers  its  lost  estate, 
the  fearful  pit  and  miry  clay,  and  pities  those  that  are  still  struggling  in  it ;  so 
repentance  cherishes  love  and  moves  to  pity.  Faith  kindles  these  virtues.  Yoa 
cannot  take  refuge  in  the  heart  of  Christ,  and  build  your  hope  upon  redeeming 
love,  and  rejoice  in  His  saving  pity  that  stooped  to  Calvary,  without  catching  some 
of  tlie  qualities  on  which  you  rest.  Your  heart  softens  with  the  warmth  of  that 
heart  on  which  it  rests,  and  is  kindled  by  the  pity  in  which  it  takes  refuge.  As  our 
faith  leads  to  these  qualities,  decision  moves  to  them.  Except  we  deny  ourselves  we 
cannot  be  disciples.  Self-renunciation,  which  is  the  beginning  of  discipleship, 
leaves  the  heart  free  to  cherish  love.  The  comforts  of  religion  move  to  them. 
Forgiveness,  and  peace,  and  hope,  and  gratitude  swell  the  heart  with  the  question, 
"  What  shall  I  render  ?  "  and  move  it  to  share  its  mercies  with  those  that  stiU  lack 
them.  All  adoration  of  God  kindles  them.  In  the  degree  in  which  we  see  Him  as 
He  is,  see  Him  in  the  face  of  Christ,  see  Him  as  He  weeps  over  Jerusalem  or  groans 
on  Calvary,  in  the  degree  in  which  we  see  the  pitiful  woe  that  sometimes  fills  God's 
heart :  in  that  degree  we  are  changed.  All  hope  changes  the  heart  and  fills  it  with 
this  spirit.  Hope  of  earthly  providence  and  hope  of  immortal  heaven,  both  move 
men  to  pity  and  to  love.  Every  step  you  take  in  following  Christ  kindles  pity,  for 
when  He  leads  it  is  not  always  unto  green  pastures  and  rapturous  heights :  it  is  to 
the  haunts  of  misery,  to  the  widows  of  Nain,  to  homes  of  grief.  He  would  use  us, 
borrows  onr  hand  to  wipe  away  a  tear,  our  voice  to  still  a  grief.  Exactly  in  that 
degree  in  which  He  employs  us,  and  we  follow  Him  step  by  step,  exactly  in  that 
degree  do  we  catch  the  spirit  in  which  He  lived,  and  the  compassion  which  is  the  ever- 
lasting motive  and  the  perpetual  habit  of  our  God.  So  that  I  want  you  to  observe  that 
there  is  not  a  single  Christian  instinct,  activity,  relationship,  employment,  or  grace 
which  does  not  work  out  in  love  and  pity.  (R.  Glover.)  Pity  the  secret  of  pro- 
phetic light : — I  want  to  point  out  that  in  love  and  pity,  such  as  is  here  expressed, 
you  have  not  merely  the  work  of  the  disciple,  but  you  have  the  secret  of  prophetic 
light :  that  Paul's  hght  was  due,  not  to  his  genius,  not  to  his  erudition,  not  even  so 
much  specially  to  heavenly  effulgence  that  visited  him,  as  to  the  fact  that  he  had 
a  heart  of  love  and  pity  that  could  enter  and  absorb  the  light  of  God.  Is  it  not 
obvious  that  it  was  so  ?  We  know  God  by  what  is  kindred  to  Him,  and  by  what 
resembles  Him.  It  was  Paul's  love  of  man  that  could  read  God's  love  of  man,  that 
gazed  on  God  till  '*  the  shadow  "  grew  into  a  "  face  "  and  the  "  face  "  of  God  was 
seen  glowing  with  infinite  love.  He  would  have  been  in  the  darkness  till  now  if 
his  love  had  not  permitted  him  to  see  God's  love.  The  light  is  ever  shining.  It  is 
the  eje,  the  eye  of  the  Leart,  that  is  wanted  ;  and  that  he  had.  He  looked  on  man, 
not  with  the  cynical  eye  that  sees  only  what  moves  men  to  despair  of,  or  to  despis» 


OHAP.  in.]  COLOSSI ANS.  »fi 

them  ;  but  he  looked  with  a  loving  heart,  and  could  see  the  world  in  God's  light ; 
aomething  that  made  man  a  pearl  of  great  price  in  his  Saviour's  eyes.  He  could 
see  Divine  movings  in  them  ;  high  capacity  ;  possibilities  of  change ;  unrest — all 
these  Divine  elements,  on  which  grace  could  move,  and  which  j^race  could  lead  to 
light.  He  looked  in  the  face  of  Christ,  and  his  yearning  permitted  him  to  behold 
Christ's  yearning,  so  that  his  love  and  his  pity  enlarged  his  heart,  and  opened  it  to 
light.  He  walked  in  the  light  of  the  Lord,  and  truths  too  grand  for  poorer  eyes 
lay  naked  and  open  to  his.  One  of  the  greatest  theologians  of  the  century,  Neander, 
took  for  his  motto,  "It  is  the  heart  that  makes  the  theologian."  And  one  of  the 
greates*  historians,  Niebuhr,  uttered  some  similar  words :  "  I  have  said,  again  and 
again,  I  will  have  no  metaphysical  deity,  but  the  God  of  the  Bible,  who  is  heart  to 
heart."  (Ibid.)  Kindness. — The  blfsshigs  of  a  benignant  spirit: — I.  In  what  kind- 
ness CONSISTS.  1.  In  a  disposition  to  be  pleased ;  a  willingness  to  be  satisfied  with 
others.  This  goes  a  long  way  towards  our  being  actually  pleased.  This  temper  stands 
opposed  to  the  spirit  of  fault-finding,  the  propensity  to  magnify  trifles.  2.  In  a  dispo- 
sition to  attribute  to  others  good  motives  when  we  can  do  so.  One  of  the  rights  of 
every  man  is  to  have  it  supposed  that  he  acts  with  good  intentions  until  it  is  proved 
to  the  contrary.  8.  In  bearing  with  the  infirmities  of  others.  We  do  not  journey 
long  with  a  fellow  traveller  before  we  find  that  he  is  far  from  perfection,  and  the 
closer  our  relations  become  the  more  necessity  there  is  for  bearing  patiently  the 
foibles  of  others.  In  the  most  tender  connexions,  that  of  husband  and  wife,  &o., 
it  may  require  much  of  a  gentle  and  yielding  spirit  to  so  adapt  ourselves  that  life 
shall  move  on  smoothly  and  harmoniously.  When  there  is  a  disposition  to  do  this 
we  sooB  learn  to  bear  and  forbear,  and  to  avoid  the  look,  gesture,  allusion,  that 
woald  excite  improperly  the  mind  of  oar  friend.  Like  children,  we  must  allow 
each  other  to  build  his  own  play-house  in  his  own  way.  Conscious  of  our  own 
imperfection  we  must  be  indulgent  to  others.  4.  In  not  blaming  others  harshly 
when  they  fall  into  sin.  In  no  circumstances  do  men  need  kindness  so  much  aa 
here.  We  weep  with  the  bereaved,  we  sympathize  with  the  unfortunate  ;  but  when 
a  man  is  overtaken  in  a  fault  om*  sympathies  frequently  die.  Yet  they  ought  then 
to  be  in  fullest  operation  (Gal.  vi.  1).  Remember — (1)  He  is  a  brother  still.  (2) 
If  all  the  circumstances  were  known  the  aspect  ought  to  be  changed  (Luke  vi.  37  ; 
1  Pet.  iv.  8).  (3)  An  explanation  may  remove  the  difficulty,  therefore  give  him  the 
opportunity.  6.  It  prompts  as  to  aid  others  when  in  oar  power.  If  relief  cannot 
be  afforded  it  should  be  declined  with  a  gentle  and  benevolent  heart.  II.  Its  vaijUS. 
1.  Much  of  the  comfort  of  life  depends  npon  it.  Life  is  made  up  of  little  things, 
which,  if  displaced,  render  us  miserable.  Breathing,  the  beating  of  the  heart,  the 
oircalation  of  the  blood,  are  small  matters,  and  ordinarily  scarcely  noticed,  but  when 
deranged  we  are  sensible  of  their  importance.  So  in  morals  and  social  intercourse. 
The  happiness  of  life  depends  not  so  much  on  great  and  glorious  deeds  as  on  qaiet 
duties,  the  gentle  spirit,  the  cheerful  answer,  the  smihng  face,  &q.  2.  Usefulnesi 
depends  upon  it.  This  and  far  more  than  on  deeds  which  excite  general  admiration. 
The  rivulet  that  glides  through  the  meadow  is  far  more  useful  than  the  grand 
cataract.  £[indness  prompts  us  to  seek  the  good  and  happiness  of  others.  And  it 
is  by  this,  and  not  by  great  martyrdoms,  that  men  will  judge  of  the  nature  of  the 
gospel.  All  usefulness  may  be  prevented  by  a  sour  temper.  Nothing  will  com- 
pensate for  the  want  of  that  charity  which  is  "kind."  3.  It  is  commended  by  the 
example  of  Jesus  (2  Cor.  x.  1).  Christ  performed  great  deeds,  but  not  that  we 
should  imitate  them.  But  He  was  meek  and  gentle  that  we  might  be  so  too.  (A. 
Barnes,  D.D.)  Kindness : — The  fundamental  idea  of  kindness  is  ascertained  by 
tracing  the  connection  between  kindred  or  kin  and  kindness.  The  latter  is  the 
feeling  natural  to  us  in  relation  to  our  own  kind.  1.  Take  the  innermost  circle  of 
kindred,  the  home,  and  that  which  constitutes  its  sweetness  is  kindness.  Unkind- 
ness,  then,  is  most  unnatural.  In  German  and  Dutch  the  word  for  child  is  kind. 
Kindness  was  first  of  all  the  relation  of  a  child  to  its  parents,  and  then  the  feeling 
of  a  parent  for  a  child.  That  was  the  original  and  architypal  kindness,  is  its  ever 
present  and  undying  element,  and  gives  character  and  tone  to  all  the  more  extended 
instances  of  kindness  which  ripple  out  with  the  extension  of  our  kinship.  2. 
Though  our  kindred  begins  in  our  homes  it  does  not  end  there.  We  have  remoter 
relatives  to  whom  it  is  our  duty,  and  the  prompting  of  our  natures,  to  be  kind. 
Our  nation  consists  of  individuals  who  are  of  our  own  kind,  and  we  ought  to  be 
kindly  towards  them  all  And  then  our  kith  and  kin  are  found  in  colonies,  and  the 
parent  state  should  always  feel  kindly  towards  them,  and  when  any  colony  grows 
into  an  independent  nation,  like  the  United  States  of  America,  it  would  be  ft 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nt 

calamity  and  a  sin  if  kindliness  on  either  side  were  to  cease.  8.  The  family 
relationship  extends  farther  than  to  those  who  manifest  their  kinship  by  the  use  of 
the  common  mother  tongue,  embalmed  in  the  English  Bible.  The  Dutch  and 
Germans  are  our  cousins,  so  are  the  Danes;  and  there  was  a  time  when  the  Greeks 
also,  and  the  Romans  belonged  to  the  same  family  circle.  Their  ancestors  came 
from  the  same  paternal  home  in  Asia  from  which  our  ancestors  came ;  and  so  with 
the  Hindoos,  and  hence  the  old  old  words  which  are  common  to  the  now  diverse 
languages.  4.  Indeed,  all  the  nations  are  kindred  to  each  other.  All  the  families 
of  the  earth  belong  to  the  great  family  of  man — mankind  ;  hence  all  owe  kindness 
to  one  another.  Hence  Peter  exhorts  us  to  add  to  our  godliness  brotherly  kindness. 
Some  think  it  more  difficult  to  attain  the  former  than  the  latter.  In  some  respects 
it  is,  in  others  not :  and  so  the  apostle  urges  us  to  seek  the  latter  by  way  of  the 
former.  In  mere  speculation  we  might  have  supposed  that  man  must  first  climb  to 
the  terrestrial  thing — "brotherly  kindness" — and  thence  ascend  to  the  celestial. 
But  the  reverse  is  the  true  and  better  order.  We  must  first  get  right  with  God  the 
Father — then,  and  not  till  then,  shall  we  get  right  with  man  the  brother.  (J. 
Morison,  D.D.)  The  power  of  kindnest: — "Go  away  from  there,  you  old  beggar 
boy  1  You've  no  right  to  be  looking  at  our  flowers,"  shouted  a  little  fellow  from 
the  garden  where  he  was  standing.  The  poor  boy,  who  was  pale,  dirty,  and  ragged, 
was  leaning  against  the  fence,  admiring  the  splendid  show  of  roses  and  tulips 
within.  His  face  reddened  with  anger  at  the  rude  language,  and  he  was  about  to 
answer  defiantly,  when  a  little  girl  sprang  out  from  an  arbour  near,  and  looking  at 
both,  said  to  her  brother, — "  How  could  you  speak  so,  Herbert  I  I'm  sure  his 
looking  at  the  flowers  don't  hurt  us."  And  then,  to  soothe  the  wounded  feelings  of 
the  stranger,  she  added :  "  Little  boy,  I'll  pick  you  some  flowers,  if  you'll  wait  a 
moment,"  and  she  immediately  gathered  a  pretty  bouquet,  and  handed  it  through 
the  fence.  His  face  brightened  with  surprise  and  pleasure,  and  he  earnestly  thanked 
her.  Twelve  years  after  this  occurrence,  the  girl  had  grown  to  a  woman.  One 
bright  afternoon  she  was  walking  with  her  husband  in  the  garden,  when  she 
observed  a  young  man  in  workman's  dress,  leaning  over  the  fence,  and  looking 
attentively  at  her  and  at  the  flowers.  Turning  to  her  husband,  she  said, — "  It  does 
me  good  to  see  people  admiring  the  garden  ;  I'll  give  that  young  man  some  of  thfr 
flowers;"  and  approaching  him  she  said,  "Are  you  fond  of  flowers,  sir?  It  will 
give  me  great  pleasure  to  gather  you  some. "  The  young  workman  looked  a  moment 
into  her  fair  face,  and  then  said  in  a  voice  tremulous  with  feeling :  "  Twelve  years 
ago  I  stood  here  a  ragged  little  beggar  boy,  and  you  showed  me  the  same  kindness. 
The  bright  flowers  and  your  pleasant  words  made  a  new  boy  of  me ;  aye,  and  they 
have  made  a  man  of  me,  too.  Your  face,  madam,  has  been  a  light  to  me  in  many 
dark  hours  of  life  ;  and  now,  thank  God,  though  that  boy  is  still  an  humble,  hard- 
working man,  he  is  an  honest  and  grateful  one."  Tears  stood  in  the  eyes  of  the 
lady  as,  turning  to  her  husband,  she  said,  "  God  put  it  into  my  young  heart  to  do 
that  kindness,  and  see  how  great  a  reward  it  has  brought.  {American  Agriculturist.) 
Humbleness  of  mind. — I.  The  nature  of  this  temper  :  A  low  apprehension  or 
esteem  of  ourselves  (Rom.  xii.  3),  the  opposite  to  pride  and  arrogance.  The  word 
leads  as  to  consider  the  disposition  of  mind ;  for  there  may  be  a  humility  of 
behaviour  which  covers  a  very  proud  heart.  In  consists  of — 1.  A  humble  appre- 
hension of  our  own  knowledge  (1  Cor.  viii.  1).  There  is  nothing  of  which  men  are 
more  proud.  Many  would  sooner  bear  a  reflection  on  their  moral  characters  than 
on  their  understandings.  The  serpent  was  early  sensible  that  this  was  man's  weak 
side  (Gen.  iii.  5).  And  no  kind  of  pride  has  more  need  of  a  cure  (Job  xi.  12).  So 
it  will  include — (1)  A  sense  of  the  natural  imperfection  of  our  faculties  (Job  xi.  7). 
This  will  dispose  ns  to  receive  God's  revelation  (1  Cor.  ii.  10-11).  (2)  An  appre- 
hension of  our  own  fallibility.  Humility  in  this  view  would  teach  us  (a)  not  on  that 
accoudtto  surrender  ourselves  to  the  absolute  control  of  others.  To  this  Rome 
would  lead  us  in  pretence  of  infallibility ;  and  if  any  others  would  lead  us  to  such 
an  implicit  faith  in  their  dictates,  while  they  disclaim  infallibility,  their  claim  is 
still  more  absurd.  We  must  answer  for  ourselves  to  God  in  the  great  day ;  and 
therefore  it  can  neither  be  a  laudable  nor  a  safe  humility  to  take  our  religion  from 
the  dictates  of  fallible  men.  (b)  But  a  just  apprehension  of  our  liableness  to 
mistake  should  induce  us  in  all  our  searches  after  Divine  truth  to  be  very  desirous 
of  Divine  illumination  and  guidance  (Psa.  xxv.  4-5).  It  should  keep  us  ever  open 
to  further  light  and  willing  to  learn.  (3)  A  moderate  apprehension  of  our  own 
attainments  in  knowledge  when  we  compare  them  with  the  attainments  of  other 
men  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9 ;  viii.  2).     If  some  know  less,  others  know  more  than  we.    {if 


CHAP,  in.]  COLOSSIANS.  221 

A  persuasion  of  the  small  value  of  the  most  exalted  knowledge  without  a  suitable 
practical  influence  (John  xiii.  7 ;  Luke  xii.  47-48).  A  man  of  low  attainments,  if 
his  heart  is  right  with  God,  is  truly  acceptable;  while  a  resolved  sinner,  though  ho 
understood  all  mysteries,  will  be  eternaUy  disowned  by  Him.  Exalted  knowledge 
may  leave  a  man  of  no  better  a  temper  than  a  devil.  2.  Humble  thoughts  of  our 
own  goodness.  Not  that  we  are  to  be  insensible  to  anything  that  is  truly  good  in 
Ds ;  but  Christian  humility  includes — (1)  A  sense  of  the  undes^ervingness  of  our 
own  goodness  at  the  Lands  of  God  even  if  it  was  perfect  (Luke  xvii.  10).  (2)  An 
apprehension  of  the  disparity  between  the  goodness  of  God  and  that  of  any 
creature  (Luke  xviii.  19).  (3)  An  affecting  conviction  of  our  own  sinfulness  (Luke 
T.  31-32).  (4)  A  sense  of  the  imperfection  of  our  goodness  at  its  best  (Psa.  xix.  12). 
(5)  An  acknowledgment  that  we  are  principally  indebted  to  God  for  whatever  is 
good  in  us  (Phil.  i.  6;  1  Cor.  iv.  7,  vi.  11,  xv.  10).  (6)  A  modest  apprehension  of 
our  own  goodness  compared  with  that  of  other  men  (Phil.  ii.  3).  3.  A  humble 
sense  of  our  dependence  and  wants — (1)  As  regards  God.  (a)  In  the  sphere  of 
nature  (Acts  xvii.  28).  (b)  In  the  sphere  of  grace.  We  should  have  a  deep  sense  of 
our  need  of  His  mercy  to  pardon  our  sins  and  His  grace  to  help  our  infirmities. 
(2)  As  regards  our  fellow-creatures.  It  is  ordered  by  the  law  of  our  creation  that 
we  cannot  comfortably  subsist  independent  of  them  (Eccles.  v.  9).  Every  link  in 
the  chain  of  societies  contributes  to  the  good  of  the  whole  (1  Cor.  xii.  21,  24).  And 
then  in  the  changeableness  of  human  affairs,  those  who  are  now  in  the  most 
prosperous  estate  know  not  how  soon  they  may  need  the  kind  offices  of  the  lowliest. 
4.  A  modest  apprehension  of  our  own  rank  and  station.  (1)  As  compared  with 
God  W6  cannot  think  too  low  of  ourselves  (Isa.  xl.  15).  All  our  relations  to  Him 
bespeak  the  profoundest  submission,  as  His  creatures,  subjects,  children  (Psa.  viii. 
4,  cxliv.  3  ;  Job  vii.  17).  Humility  will  teach  us  to  dispute  neither  the  precepts 
nor  the  providences  of  Him  who  has  a  natural  authority  over  us.  (2)  Eevelation 
teaches  us  that  we  are  bfneath  other  invisible  beings  (Psa.  vii.  5).  (3)  For  our 
fellow-creatnres  we  should  consider  them  all  as  of  the  same  nature  with  us,  and 
therefore  near  akin  (Acts  xvii.  26),  and  that  distinctions  in  outward  circumstances 
are  in  the  account  of  God  and  in  themselves  but  little  things  (Rom.  xiii.  7,  xii.  16). 
IL  The  SPECIAL  OBLIGATIONS  WHICH  BEST  ON  Christians  to  cultivate  this  temper. 
1.  Humility  is  a  grace  of  the  first  rank.  (1)  It  is  mentioned  in  Scripture  with 
peculiar  marks  of  distinction  (Micah  vi.  8 ;  Prov.  viii,  13 ;  Psa.  cxxxviii.  6  ;  Matt. 
V.  4,  xviii.  4).  (2)  The  most  distinguished  promises  are  made  to  it  (Psa.  ix.  12,  z. 
17  ;  Isa.  Ivii.  15 ;  James  iv.  6 ;  1  Pet.  v.  5 ;  Matt,  xxxiii.  12).  (3)  It  is  in  its  own 
nature  a  necessary  introduction  to  the  other  graces  and  duties  of  Christianity. 
This  is  not  a  relipion  for  the  proud  but  for  the  lowly,  (a)  Humihty  is  necessary  to 
faith.  Without  this  we  shall  not  have  a  disposition  to  receive  a  revelation.  Pride 
and  self-sufficiency  was  the  reason  why  Christ  crucified  was  a  stumbling-block  to 
the  Jew,  &c.  (b)  To  obedience.  A  proud  heart  says,  "  Who  is  the  Lord  over  me  ?  " 
Humility  asks,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thoa  have  me  to  do?  "  (c)  To  the  acceptance  of 
Christ  as  offered  in  the  gospel  (Luke  v.  31 ;  Rev.  iii.  17-18  ;  Lake  xviii.  9-13).  (d) 
To  the  reception  of  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  (e)  To  perseverance,  for  without 
it  we  shall  be  ready  to  take  offence  at  crosses.  (/)  To  the  reception  of  assistance 
in  the  way  to  heaven  from  other  men.  Those  who  are  wise  in  their  own  conceit 
despise  admonitions,  {g)  To  the  performance  of  Christian  duty.  2.  It  is  this 
grace  which  adorns  every  other  virtue  and  recommends  religion  to  every  beholder 
(1  Pet.  V.  6).  8.  It  is  recommended  by  the  example  of  Christ.  (1)  His  incarna- 
tion was  the  greatest  instance  of  humility  (Phil.  ii.  3,  5,  &o. ;  2  Cor.  viii.  9).  (2) 
When  He  appeared  in  human  nature  He  affected  not  worldly  honour  (Luke  ii.  7-11 ; 
Matt.  xiii.  55).  (3)  As  a  man  He  was  the  pattern  of  great  humility  toward  God 
(John  viii.  50,  vii.  18 ;  Mark  xiii.  32  ;  Matt.  xix.  17).  (4)  He  was  the  pattern  of 
the  greatest  humility  to  mankind,  (a)  He  was  ready  to  condescend  to  the  meanest 
in  order  to  their  good  (Matt.  viii.  6;  Mark  x.  46  ;  John  iv.  27  ;  Matt,  xviii.  1-10, 
xix.  13-14).  (&)  He  was  willing  to  stoop  to  the  meanest  offices  for  the  meanest 
persons  (Mark  i.  41 ;  John  xiii.  5  ;  Matt.  xx.  28).  (c)  He  was  not  above  receiving 
and  acknowledging  the  respect  shown  Him  by  the  meanest  (Luke  viii.  3 ;  Matt.  xxi. 
15,  xxvi.  13).  Learn,  then,  like  Him,  to  be  meek  and  lowly  of  heart.  4.  Humility 
is  a  grace  which  will  go  along  with  us  to  heaven.  The  only  inhabitants  of  that 
world  who  were  ever  lifted  up  with  pride  have  been  cast  out.  The  angels  abase 
themselves  (Isa.  vi.  2,  3 ;  Rev.  iv.  10,  v.  10,  vii.  11,  xi.  16),  and  humility  will  receive 
•  glorious  reward  (Matt  xxv.).  Like  charity,  it  never  faileth.  (Dr.  Evatu.) 
Huviility  a  safeguard : — A  French  general,  riding  on  horseback  at  the  head  of  hia 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap    m, 

troops,  heard  a  soldier  complain  and  say,  "  It  is  very  easy  for  tlie  general  to  com- 
mand us  forward  while  he  rides  and  we  walL"  Then  the  general  dismounted  and 
compelled  the  complaining  soldier  to  get  on  his  horse.  Coming  through  a  ravine  a 
bullet  from  a  shai-pshooter  struck  the  rider  and  he  fell  dead.  Then  the  general 
said, "  How  much  safer  it  is  to  walk  than  to  ride."  Humility  and  cheerfulness : — 
Observe  the  peculiar  characters  of  the  grass  which  adapt  it  especially  for  the  service 
of  man  are  humility  and  cheerfulness — its  humility,  in  that  it  seems  created  only 
for  lowest  service,  appointed  to  be  trodden  on  and  fed  upon ;  its  cheerfulness,  in 
that  it  seems  to  exalt  under  all  kinds  of  violence  and  suffering.  You  roll  it,  and  it 
is  the  stronger  next  day ;  you  mow  it,  and  it  multiplies  its  shoots  as  if  it  were 
grateful ;  you  tread  upon  it,  and  it  only  sends  up  richer  perfume.  Spring  comes, 
and  it  rejoices  with  all  the  earth,  glowing  with  variegated  flame  of  flowers,  waving 
in  soft  depth  of  fruitful  strength.  Winter  comes,  and  though  it  will  not  mock  its 
fellow-plants  by  growing  then,  it  vdll  not  pine  and  mourn,  and  turn  colourless  or 
leafless  as  they.  It  is  always  green,  and  is  only  the  brighter  and  gayer  for  the  hoar 
frost.  (J.  Euskin.)  Meekness. — Meekness:  its  nature: — Meekness  is  love  at 
school,  at  the  Saviour's  school.  It  is  the  disciple  learning  to  know  himself,  to  fear, 
distrust,  and  abhor  himself.  It  is  the  disciple  practising  the  sweet,  but  self- 
emptying  lesson  of  putting  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  finding  all  his  righteousness  in 
that  righteous  other.  It  is  the  disciple  learning  the  defects  of  his  own  character, 
and  taking  hints  from  hostile  as  well  as  fiiendly  monitors.  It  is  the  disciple 
praying  and  watching  for  the  improvement  of  his  talents,  the  mellowing  of  his  temper, 
and  the  amelioration  of  his  character.  It  is  the  loving  Christian  at  his  Saviour's 
feet,  learning  from  Him  who  is  meek  and  lowly,  and  finding  rest  for  his  own  soul. 
(James  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Meekness  :  its  blending: — It  is  power  blended  with 
gentleness,  boldness  with  humility,  the  harmlessness  of  the  dove  with  the  prowess 
of  the  lion.  It  is  the  soul  in  the  majesty  of  self-possession,  elevated  above  the 
precipitant,  the  irascible,  the  boisterous,  the  revengeful.  It  is  the  soul  throwing 
its  benignant  smiles  on  the  furious  face  of  the  foe,  and  penetrating  his  heart  and 
paralyzing  his  arm  with  the  look  of  love.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Meekness:  itt 
power : — Sir  Walter  Ealeigh,  a  man  of  courage  and  honour,  was  once  insulted  by  a 
hot-headed  youth,  who  challenged  him,  and  on  his  refusal  spat  upon  him  in  public. 
The  knight,  taking  out  his  handkerchief,  made  this  reply :  '•  Young  man,  if  I  could 
as  easily  wipe  your  blood  from  my  conscience  as  I  can  this  injury  from  my  face,  I 
would  this  moment  take  away  your  life."  The  youth  was  so  struck  with  a  sense  of 
his  misbehaviour  that  he  fell  upon  his  knees  and  asked  forgiveness.  (E.  Foster.) 
Meekness  :  its  blessedness  : — It  is  in  the  lowly  valley  that  the  sun's  warmth  is  truly 
genial ;  unless  indeed  there  are  mountains  so  close  and  abrupt  as  to  overshadow  it. 
Then  noisome  vapours  may  be  bred  there ;  but  otherwise,  in  the  valley  we  may 
behold  the  wonderful  blessing  bestowed  upon  the  meek  that  they  shall  inherit  the 
earth.  It  is  theirs  for  this  very  reason,  because  they  do  not  seek  it.  They  do  not 
exalt  their  heads  like  icebergs,  which,  by  the  by,  are  driven  away  from  earth,  and 
cluster — or  rather  jostle — round  the  pole ;  but  they  flow  along  the  earth  humbly  and 
eilently ;  and  wherever  they  flow  they  bless  it ;  and  so  all  its  beauty  and  all  ita 
richness  are  reflected  in  their  peaceful  bosoms.  (Archdeacon  Hare.)  Meekness : 
its  usefulness : — The  timber  of  the  elder  tree  is  the  softest,  and  can  without  difficulty 
be  split,  cut,  and  wrought,  and  yet  it  does  not  rot  in  water.  The  greater  part  ol 
the  city  of  Venice  stands  upon  piles  of  elder,  which,  sunk  into  the  sea,  form  the 
foundation  of  massive  builuings.  It  is  the  same  with  meek  hearts.  There  is  no 
better  foundation  for  important  undertakings  of  public  or  private  utility  than  that 
intelligent  modesty  which  is  gentle  indeed,  and  ready  to  yield  as  far  as  a  good 
conscience  will  allow,  but  which,  nevertheless,  lasts  and  continues  stable,  in  the 
flood  of  contradiction.  (Gotthold.)  Long-suffering  is  threefold. — I.  In  judg- 
ment ;  when,  in  doubtful  cases,  we  suspend  our  opinions  and  censures.  II.  IM 
words;  which  consists  either  in  not  answering,  or  in  giving  soft  answers.  III.  In 
DEEDS ;  when  we  render  not  evil  for  evil.  (N.  By  field.)  Long-suffering  rewarded : — 
Some  years  ago  I  had  in  my  garden  a  tree  that  never  bore.  One  day  I  was  going 
down,  with  my  axe  in  my  hand,  to  fell  it.  My  wife  met  me  in  the  pathway  and 
pleaded  for  it,  saying,  "Why,  the  spring  is  now  very  near;  stay,  and  see  whether 
there  may  not  be  some  change;  and,  if  not,  you  can  deal  with  it  accordingly."  Aa 
I  never  repented  following  lier  advice,  I  yielded  to  it  now;  and  what  was  the  con- 
eequence  ?  In  a  few  weeks  the  tree  was  covered  in  blossoms  ;  and  in  a  few  weeks 
more  it  was  bending  with  fruit.  "  Ah,"  said  I,"  this  should  teaoh  me  not  to  out 
down  too  soon,  i.e.,  not  to  consider  persons  incorrigible  or  abandoned  too  sooD,  BO 
M  to  give  op  hope  and  the  use  of  the  means  in  their  behalf.     (W.  Jay.) 


CHAP.  in.J  C0L0SSIAN8.  92S 

Ver.  13.  Forbearing  one  anotlier,  and  forgiving'  one  another. — Forbearance : — 
To  forbear  is  not  only  freely  to  forgive,  but  to  meet  half  way,  with  extended 
hand  (E.T.E.B.).  During  the  celebrated  John  Henderson's  residence  at  Oxford, 
a  student  of  a  neighbouring  college,  proud  of  his  logical  achievements,  waa 
Bolicitoua  of  a  private  disputation.  Some  mutual  friends  introduced  him,  and 
having  chosen  his  subject,  they  conversed  for  some  time  with  eqnal  candour 
and  moderation ;  but  at  length  Henderson's  antagonist,  perceiving  his  own 
confusion  inevitable,  in  the  height  of  passion  threw  a  full  glass  of  wine  in 
Henderson's  face.  The  latter,  without  altering  his  features,  or  changiag  his 
position,  gently  wiped  his  face,  and  coolly  replied,  "This,  sir,  is  a  digression.  Now 
for  the  argument."  A  greater  victory  than  any  controversial  success  could  have 
given  him.  {Cottle.)  Divine  forgiveness  admired  and  imitated: — I.  Study  the 
PATTERN  OF  FoRGiVENEsa.  1.  Wliat  is  this  forgiveucss  of  Christ?  (1)  He  forgave 
offences  most  great  and  grievous.  Men  dul  all  they  could  against  Him.  Say  not 
that  you  have  never  thus  transgressed.  "  He  was  despised,  and  we  esteemed  Him 
not."  These  offences  were  unprovoked.  Towards  no  man  had  He  acted  harshly. 
Such  is  human  depravity  that  His  very  virtue  provoked  hostility.  "  They  hated 
Me  without  a  cause."  He  continues  to  forgive  causeless  wrong.  (2)  He  forgave 
the  most  unworthy  persons.  None  deserved  such  kindness;  in  fact,  to  talk  of 
deserving  it  is  a  coutradiction.  If  He  had  left  us  in  our  sin  we  could  have  brought 
no  complaint  against  Him.  (3)  He  had  always  power  to  execute  vengeance.  Some 
pardon  because  they  cannot  punish.  Half  the  forgiveness  in  the  world  comes  from 
weakn'^ss  of  hand  rather  than  forj^iveness  of  heart.  2.  How  did  He  forgive  ? 
(1)  Unsolicited.  Before  we  had  thought  of  mercy  He  had  thoughts  of  mercy 
toward  U3.  "I  have  blotted  out  .  .  .  return  unto  Me."  Pardon  is  not  first  as 
matter  of  experience,  but  it  is  as  matter  of  fact  with  God.  (2)  Heartily.  Forgive- 
ness when  it  cornea  from  human  lips  in  studied  phrase  is  not  worth  the  having  t 
but  when  Jesus  absolves  it  is  from  the  heart,  and  sin  is  put  away  for  ever. 
(3)  Completely.  He  keeps  no  back  reckonings.  **  I  will  not  remember  thy  sins.'* 
iJven  fathers,  when  they  have  forgiven  a  wayward  child,  will,  perhaps,  throw  the 
offence  in  his  teeth  years  after ;  but  Christ  says,  "  Thy  sins  shall  not  be  mentioned 
against  thee  any  more."  (4)  Continuously.  He  forgave  us  long  ago.  He  still 
forgivea.  It  is  not  a  reprieve,  but  a  free  pardon.  (5)  Graciously.  Some  people  make 
it  appear  as  though  they  were  coming  down  from  such  awful  heights.  You  never 
feel  that  about  Christ.  He  never  scalds  the  sinner  with  scornful  pity.  (6)  Greatly. 
The  offence  had  brought  trouble  into  the  world,  and  He  bore  that  trouble.     Some 

?eople  hand  us  over  to  consequences ;  Christ  delivers  us  from  them.  (7)  Consciously, 
here  is  a  theory  abroad  that  we  may  be  forgiven  and  not  know  it.  But  the  Holy 
Spirit  writes  forgiveness  on  our  hearts.  II.  Copy  it  fob  yourselves.  1.  Thia 
precept  is  universally  applicable.  It  is  unqualified  in  its  range.  It  is  not  put  that 
superiors  are  to  forgive  inferiors,  or  the  less  are  to  forgive  the  greater.  The  rich 
are  to  be  forbearing  to  the  poor,  and  the  poor  to  the  rich  ;  the  elder  is  to  forgive 
the  junior  for  his  imprudence,  and  the  junior  the  elder  for  his  petnlenee  and  slow- 
ness.  S.  This  forbearance  and  forgiveness  are  vital.  No  man  is  a  child  of  God 
who  has  not  a  likeness  to  God ;  and  no  man  is  forgiven  who  will  not  himself 
forgive.  3.  Gloriously  ermobling.  Eevenge  is  paltry  ;  forgiveness  is  great-minded, 
David  was  greater  than  Saul,  and  Saul  acknowledged  it.  To  win  a  battle  is  a  little 
thing  if  fought  out  with  sword  and  gun,  but  to  win  it  in  God's  way  with  love  and 
forgiveness  is  the  best  of  victories.  A  nation  in  fighting,  even  if  it  wins  the 
campaign,  has  to  suffer,  but  he  that  overcomes  by  love  is  aU  the  better  and  stronger 
for  it.  4.  Logically  appropriate  to  all.  If  our  Lord  has  forgiven  us  ten  thousand 
talents,  how  can  we  take  our  brother  by  the  throat  for  one  hundred  pence.  6.  Most 
forcibly  sustained  by  the  example  in  the  text.  "  Even  as  Christ."  It  is  said — 
(1)  "  If  you  pass  by  every  wanton  offence  you  will  come  to  be  despised."  But  haa 
Christ's  honour  suffered  ?  Far  from  it.  It  is  His  glory  to  forgive.  (2)  "  If  we 
overlook  offences,  other  people  may  be  tempted  to  wrong  us."  But  has  any  been 
tempted  to  do  so  because  Christ  has  forgiven  you  7  Why,  that  is  the  very  ground- 
work of  holiness.  (3)  "  I  know  several  pious  persons  who  are  unforgiving."  But 
that  proves  their  impiety ;  and  if  it  did  not,  the  Master  is  your  example,  not  your 
feUow-servant,  particularly  in  his  faults.  (4)  "  These  persons  would  not  have- 
forgiven  me."  Just  so ;  but  you  are  a  child  of  God,  and  must  not  lower  yoor 
standard  down  to  that  of  publicans  and  sinners.  (5)  "  I  would  forgive  him,  bat 
he  does  not  deserve  it."  That  is  why  yon  are  to  forgive  him ;  if  he  deserved  it  yoa 
would  be  bound  to  do  him  the  jnstice  he  could  claim.     (6)  "  I  cannot  forgive.*^ 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ML 

You  "  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengthens  you."  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Huvian  forgiveness : — The  world  is  rife  with  human  quarrels;  families,  neighbour- 
hoods,  Churches,  have  their  quarrels.  They  arise  from  many  principles  in  the 
depraved  heart  besides  misunderstandings.  Hence  forgiveness  is  important.  The 
text  sugi^ests  two  things  concerning  forgiveness.  I.  The  doty.  Here  it  is  urged 
as  vrell  as  in  other  places  (Rom.  xii.  19).  Besides  this  there  are  two  reasons. 
1.  You  desire  forgiveness  yourself.  Who  would  like  to  have  the  vengeance  of  a 
man  always  in  his  heart  towards  him  ?  If  you  would  like  forgiveness,  you  must  do 
as  you  would  be  done  by.  2.  You  need  forgiveness  yourself  when  you  have 
offended.  He  who  cannot  forgive  others  breaks  the  bridge  over  which  he  himself 
has  to  pass.  Besides,  an  unforgiving  spirit  is  an  injury  to  its  possessor.  II.  Its 
MODEL.  "  Even  as  Christ."  1.  How  did  Christ  forgive?  Promptly,  generously, 
fully,  without  any  reflection  upon  past  offences.  2.  Examples  :  The  woman  taken 
in  adultery.  His  enemies — "  Father,  forgive  them."  The  dying  thief.  (D.Thomas, 
D.D.)  Forgiveness  implies — 1.  The  remission  of  the  right  to  retaliate  when  safe 
and  proper.  2.  The  dismissal  of  the  revengeful  feelings  which  injury  may  have 
excited.  3.  The  revival  of  those  feehngs  of  goodwill  which  it  becomes  us  habitually 
to  cherish.  (W.  Fleming.)  Forth-giving  : — To  forgive  a  thing  is  to  "  forthgive  " 
by  your  own  act  and  freewill,  to  give  it  forth  from  you  that  it  may  go  clean  out  from 
you — out  of  sight  and  out  of  mind.  Forgivness  a  distinctively  Christian  virtue : — 
We  cannot  say  that  it  was  unknown  to  the  ancients  ;  under  certain  conditions,  no 
doubt,  it  was  very  common.  In  domestic  life,  in  which  all  the  germs  of  Christian 
virtue  are  to  be  found,  it  was  undoubtedly  common.  Undoubtedly  friends  fell  out 
and  were  reconciled  in  antiquity  as  among  ourselves.  But  when  the  only  relation 
between  the  two  parties  was  that  of  injurer  and  injured,  and  the  only  claim  of  the 
offender  to  forgiveness  was  that  he  was  a  human  being,  then  forgiveness  seems  not 
only  not  to  have  been  practised,  but  not  to  have  been  enjoined  nor  approved.  People 
not  only  did  not  forgive  their  enemies,  but  did  not  wish  to  do  so,  nor  think  better 
of  themselves  for  having  done  so.  That  man  considered  himself  fortunate  who  on 
his  deathbed  could  say,  in  reviewing  his  past  life,  that  no  one  had  done  more  good 
to  his  friends  or  more  mischief  to  his  foes.  The  Roman  Triumph,  with  its 
naked  ostentation  of  revenge,  fairly  represents  the  common  feeling  of  the  ancients. 
Nevertheless,  forgiveness  even  of  any  enemy  was  not  unknown  to  them.  They 
could  conceive  it,  and  they  could  feel  that  there  was  a  Divine  beauty  in  it,  but  it 
seemed  to  them  more  than  could  be  expected  of  human  nature,  superhuman. 
{Ecce  Homo.)  International  forgiveness  : — Is  that  which  is  right  between  indi- 
viduals wrong  as  between  societies  ?  Am  I  to  forbear  and  forgive  when  acting 
alone,  but  when  associated  with  two  or  three  others  am  I  to  manifest  a  different 
■pirit  T  Is  my  individual  conscience  to  be  merged  in  the  associated  conscience,  and 
does  the  Christian  law  for  a  society  differ  from  the  law  for  individuals  ?  Enlarge 
the  society  till  it  becomes  the  nation.  Is  the  law  of  Christ  abrogated  ?  It  would 
seem  to  be  so  considered  by  the  "  Christian  nations"  of  the  world.  Why  is  Europe 
in  time  of  peace  an  entrenched  camp?  Why  are  millions  of  the  strongest  and 
healthiest  men  withdrawn  from  productive  labours  and  domestic  life  to  be  trained 
in  the  art  of  killing,  while  the  people  groan  under  the  burden  of  a  taxation  and  a 
poverty  God  never  sent  ?  Because  in  international  law  there  is  so  little  recognition 
of  the  Divine  precept — "forbearing  one  another  and  forgiving  one  another." 
Because  many  who  in  their  private  relations  manifest  meekness  and  gentleness,  as 
politicians  and  statesmen  seem  to  think  the  old  Pagan  law  is  unrepealed.  How 
few  of  the  wars  which  have  desolated  Europe  during  the  last  thousand  years  would 
have  been  waged  had  it  been  more  than  nominally  Christian  1  If  instead  of 
resenting  every  supposed  affront,  of  vindicating  on  every  petty  occasion  what  is 
called  the  honour  of  a  flag,  of  supposing  the  dignity  of  an  empire  precludes  all 
forbearance,  patience,  and  concession,  there  had  been  even  a  little  of  the  "  bowels 
of  mercies,  kindness,  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness,  long-suffering  "  enjoined  in 
oar  text,  the  history  of  the  world  had  been  differently  written ;  heathen  nations 
would  have  said,  "  see  how  these  Christians  love ;  "  instead  of  the  flags  of  Europe 
inspiring  terror  in  distant  regions,  they  would  have  been  everywhere  hailed  as 
symbols  of  peace ;  and  the  old  prophecy  would  have  had  a  fulfilment  in  the  case  of 
Christendom — "the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  is  Mount  Zion."  {Newman  Hall,  LL.B 
A  qnarreL  —A  quarrel :  Both  sides  wrong : — In  most  quarrels  there  is  a  fault  on 
both  sides.  A  quarrel  may  be  compared  to  a  spark,  which  cannot  be  produced 
without  a  flint  as  well  as  a  steel ;  either  of  them  may  hammer  on  wood  for  ever, 
no  fire  will  follow.     [R.  South.)        Quarrels  prolonged  : — "  I  have  seen  in  the  south 


<OHAP.  III.]  COLOSSIANS.  831. 

of  France  a  row  of  beggars  sitting  on  the  side  of  a  bridge,  day  after  day,  winter 
and  bummer,  sho\Ting  sore  legs  and  sore  arms ;  these  sores  never  get  well,  they 
were  kept  continually  raw  with  caustic  in  order  to  excite  compassion  and  obtain 
alma.  And  the  most  bitter  jealousy  reigned  between  these  beggars  as  to  the 
size  and  irritability  of  their  respective  sores.  The  man  with  only  an  inflamed 
knee  burned  with  envy  of  the  man  whose  whole  leg  was  raw.  Not  for  all  the 
world  would  they  let  their  wounds  heal,  as  that  would  cut  o£f  from  them  a  means 
of  livelihood.  I  fear  a  great  many  people  love  their  grievances  against  neigh- 
bours much  as  those  beggars  loved  their  sores.  They  keep  them  constantly  open 
and  irritable  by  inventing  and  applying  fresh  aggravations.  They  are  proud  of 
them,  they  like  to  expose  their  wrongs,  as  they  call  them,  to  all  their  neighbours." 
{8.  Baring-Gould.) 

Ter,  14.  And  above  all  these  things  put  on  charity. — The  grace  of  charity  : — L 
Charity  is  the  greatest  of  graces  in  the  width  and  extent  of  its  sphere.  Other 
graces  have  particular  things  with  which  they  are  more  intimately  concerned ; 
special  parts  of  life  on  which  they  throw  tbe  light  of  their  charm  ;  special  times  in 
which  they  actively  operate.  They  are  like  the  winds  that  blow,  the  rain  that  falls, 
the  snow  that  covers,  or  the  lightning  that  purifies  sometimes.  But  charity  is  like 
the  Divine  sunlight  that  shines  on  always,  works  always,  tempers  the  winds,  wanna 
the  rains,  dissipates  the  mists,  melts  the  snow;  sometimes  seen  and  felt,  sometimes 
unseen,  but  never  ceasing  its  influence,  and  recognizing  no  earth  limits  to  its  sphere. 
Charity  covers  the  whole  life  and  relationships  of  the  Christian,  and  1  Cor.  xiii. 
maps  out  and  distinguishes  them.  1.  The  sphere  of  a  brother's  opinions.  2.  The 
sphere  of  a  brother's  failings.  8.  The  sphere  of  a  brother's  sorrows.  4.  The 
sphere  of  a  brother's  sins.  II.  Because  of  the  difticultt  with  which  it  is  at- 
tained. Difficulty  is  often  the  test  of  value.  Gold  is  valued  because  of  the  cost 
and  toil  of  procuring  it.  Charity  is  difiQcult  mainly  through  the  separatings  of  sin. 
Sin  broke  up  the  fellowship  of  the  human  family,  and  filled  the  world  with  opposing 
interests.  Charity  is  to  heal  these  great  wounds,  temper  the  opposing  relations, 
and  on  its  own  substantial  basis  to  make  the  human  family  one  again.  And,  as 
charity  is  God's  own  nature,  we  have  first  to  be  reconciled  to,  and  come  into  sym- 
pathy with  Him.  III.  Because  it  never  faileth.  The  summer  flowers  which 
blossom  in  beauty  fade  and  fail.  Charity  is  no  summer  flower  born  of  earth,  sun- 
shine, and  showers.  It  is  a  heaven-born  plant ;  its  flowers  never  fail ;  it  is  like 
the  tree  of  life.  (R.  Tuck,  B.  A.)  Gospel  charity: — There  is  no  grace  or  duty 
that  is  not  commanded  in  Scripture,  but  this  is  commanded  above  all  others  (1  Pet. 
iv.  8 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  31).  I.  The  nature  of  this  love.  It  is  the  second  great  duty 
brought  to  light  by  the  gospel.  There  is  a  natural  love  which  follows  on  natnral 
relations,  and  there  is  a  love  which  arises  from  society  in  sin  or  in  pleasure,  from 
a  suitalleness  of  humour  in  conversation,  or  of  design  as  to  political  ends,  bat  all 
these  are  utter  strangers  to  evangelical  love.  And  therefore,  when  it  was  first 
brought  to  Ught  by  the  gospel,  the  heathen  were  amazed.  "See  how  these  Chris- 
tians love  one  another."  What  is  this  love.  1.  It  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v. 
22),  as  contradistinguished  from  that  which  arises  from  our  natural  inclination. 
2.  It  is  an  effect  of  faith.  "Faith  worketh  by  love."  How?  When  it  respects 
God's  command  requiring  this  love,  His  promise  accepting  it,  and  His  glory  where- 
anto  it  is  directed.  Self  may  work  by  love  sometimes,  and  flesh,  interest,  and  repu- 
tation, but  not  by  this  love.  3.  It  is  that  which  knits  the  souls  of  believers  with 
an  entire  affection  (Eph.  iv.  16 ;  Psa.  xvi.  2).  (1)  The  whole  mystical  body  of 
Christ  being  the  adequate  object  of  gospel  love,  it  is  indispensably  required  of  us 
that  we  love  all  believers  as  such.  But  this  is  accompanied  by  some  limitations. 
(a)  In  the  exercise  of  it,  it  will  much  answer  the  evidence  that  persons  are  interested 
in  the  body  of  Christ.  There  are  some  whose  opinions  and  practices  will  exercise 
the  most  extensive  charity  to  judge  that  they  belong  to  it.  Yet,  according  to  our 
evidence,  so  is  our  love  to  be.  (b)  There  may  be  degrees  in  our  love,  especially  as 
to  delight  and  valuation,  according  as  we  see  more  or  less  of  the  image  of  Christ 
upon  a  believer,  this  likeness  being  the  formal  reason  of  this  love,  (c)  Its  exercise 
must  be  determined  by  opportunities.  (2)  There  is  required  an  inchnation  to  all 
acts  of  love  towards  all  believers,  as  opportunity  shall  serve.  If  we  turn  our  face 
away  from  our  brother  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  us  ?  If  it  be  in  as  let  it  be 
advantaged  by  any  opportunity,  and  it  will  break  through  difficulties  and  pleas  of 
flesh  and  blood.  (3)  Christ  has  provided  us  with  a  safe,  suitable,  and  constant 
abject  by  His  institution  of  partioolar  Chnrohes.   Let  none,  then,  pretend  that  thev 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

love  the  brethren  in  general  while  their  love  is  not  exercised  towards  those  in  th» 
same  Church  society  with  them.  II.  The  geounds  why  this  love  is  so  neces- 
BAKT.  1.  Because  it  is  the  great  way  whereby  we  can  give  testimony  to  the  power 
of  the  gospel  (John  xvii.  21-23).  There  is  no  oneness  but  that  whereof  love  is  the 
bond  of  perfectness,  that  will  give  conviction  unto  the  world  that  God  hath  sent 
Christ,  for  He  alone  can  give  it.  2.  We  have  no  evidence  that  we  are  disciplea 
without  it  (John  xiiL  34-85).  3.  This  is  that  in  which  the  communion  of  saintE 
principally  consists.  (1)  The  fountain  and  spring  of  this  communion  is  our  com- 
mon participation  of  one  Spirit  from  the  one  Head,  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  This  com- 
mimion  is  expressed  in  the  participation  of  the  same  ordinances  in  the  same  Church. 
(3)  The  life  and  formal  reason  of  this  communion  is  love.  Eph.  iv.  16-16  is  the 
most  glorious  description  of  this  communion  of  saints.  It  begins  in  love — "  speak- 
ing the  truth  in  love ;  "  it  ends  in  love — "  edifying  itself  in  love  ;  "  it  is  carried  on  by 
love  ;  it  is  all  love.  III.  Cautions  against  its  hindrances.  1.  Take  heed  of  a  mo- 
rose disposition.  If  it  does  not  hinder  some  fruits  of  love,  yet  it  sullies  the  glory  of 
its  exercise.  Grace  is  intended  to  change  our  natural  temper  and  make  the  froward 
meek,  and  the  passionate  patient.  2.  Take  heed  of  hindrances  which  may  attend 
your  state  and  condition.  Riches  and  honour  encompass  with  so  many  circum- 
stances that  it  is  difficult  to  break  through  them  to  familiarity  with  the  meanest 
members  of  the  Church.  The  gospel  leaves  you  your  providential  advantages,  but 
in  things  which  concern  your  communion  it  lays  all  level  (James  ii.).  We  all  serv» 
one  common  Master,  who  for  our  sakes  became  poor.  3.  Take  heed  of  satisfying 
yourselves  with  the  duties  of  love  without  looking  after  the  entire  working  of  the 
grace  of  love.  {J.  Owen,  D.D.)  Charity  the  bond  of  perfectness : — These  words 
come  after  an  exhortation  to  the  practice  of  the  Christian  virtues  of  mercy,  &o. 
In  addition  to  these  we  are  to  put  on  charity,  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness. 
Not  perfect  bond,  but  that  which  renders  perfect.  Love  is  that  which  unites  all 
the  others  into  a  complete  whole.  Another  interpretation  is  to  this  effect.  As  in 
ver.  14,  Paul  has  said  in  the  Church  and  in  Christ  "  there  is  neither  Greek  nor 
Jew,"  (fee,  he  says  here  that  love  is  the  unifying  principle  which  binds  together 
all  the  otherwise  discordant  members  of  the  Church.  I.  Love  is  used  of — 1. 
Benevolence  to  man.  2.  God's  love  to  us.  3.  Our  love  to  God.  4.  Brotherly 
love  among  Christians.  5.  Love  in  general  as  a  Christian  grace  without  specifica- 
tion of  object.  Its  characteristics  are  noted  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  II.  Of  this  lovk  it  i» 
taught — 1.  That  without  this  all  our  passions,  professions,  hopes,  are  vain  and 
worthless.  No  amount  of  orthodoxy,  power,  natural  or  supernatural,  devotion, 
almsgiving.  Church  membership,  assiduity  in  religious  duties,  is  of  any  avail.  2. 
That  this  love  is  the  fruit  of  faith.  It  cannot  exist  without  it,  and  faith  without  it 
is  dead.  3.  It  is  the  bond  of  perfectness.  (1)  It  unites  all  the  Christian  virtues. 
(2)  It  unites  all  the  members  of  Christ's  body.  4.  It  is  the  image  of  God.  It 
makes  us  like  Christ.  5.  It  is  the  beauty  and  blessedness  of  heaven.  Perfection 
of  the  religion  of  the  Bible.  (1)  Not  ritualism,  benevolence,  orthodoxy,  but  (2} 
Faith  which  works  by  love.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Love  the  bond  of  perfectness: — 
The  Christian  is  here  conceived  a  cleansed  and  beautifully-robed  man,  fitted  to 
enter  the  presence  of  the  great  King.  He  describes  the  work  which  we  have  to  do 
in  order  to  prepare  ourselves  for  the  royal  audience.  There  is  an  inner  cleansing 
of  the  heart,  the  thoughts,  the  secret  springs  of  our  being.  "  Mortify,  therefore, 
your  members  which  are  upon  the  earth."  There  is  also  a  putting  off  of  the  old 
garments  of  self,  pride,  and  indulgence ;  the  clean  spirit  cannot  do  with  the  foal 
clothes  ;  and  there  is  the  putting  on  of  the  new  dress — the  various  garments  that 
compose  it  are  called,  "bowels  of  mercies,  kindness,  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness, 
long-suffering,  and  forgiving."  These  are,  as  it  were,  the  under-garments ;  the 
man  is  not  clothed  fit  for  the  presence  of  the  Divine  royalty  without  the  robe, 
worked  in  graceful  colours,  made  of  finest  material,  hanging  in  graceful  folds, 
putting  the  touch  of  harmony  and  grace  on  all  the  other  garments,  and  being,  as 
it  were,  "  the  bond  of  perfectness,"  finishing  off  and  perfecting  the  whole  dress. 
That  over-covering,  all-hallowing  robe  is  charity;  in  its  adornings,  and  com- 
pletings,  and  harmonisings,  being  the  very  "  bond  of  perfectness  "  to  a  gracious 
character.  {R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  Love  a  perfecting  grace  : — Here  is  an  evident  allusion 
to  the  zone  of  the  orientalists,  which  was  generally  adorned  with  jewels  and  orna- 
ments, and  which,  by  adjusting  the  folds  of  the  drapery,  served  at  once  to  give  a 
beautiful  form  to  the  human  figure,  and  to  unite  and  perfect  the  whole  dress.  The 
use  the  apostle  here  makes  of  the  metaphor  is  apparent :  as  the  zone  was  a  most 
material  part  of  the  dress,  combining  and  perfecting  all,  and  giving  symmetry  and 


CHAP.  HI.]  COLOSSIANS.  23& 

beanty  to  the  form  of  the  person  by  whom  it  was  worn  ;  so  charity  is  the  best  of  all 
the  graces,  perfecting  and  combining  the  whole  in  beauty  and  in  love.  And,  like 
that  also,  we  may  remark  that  it  is  pat  on  last.  Men  in  general  are  much  more 
anxious  to  hate  and  to  destroy  than  to  love  and  do  good;  and  even  after  they  seem 
to  have  imbibed  much  of  the  Christian  temper,  this  sacred  bond,  this  beautiful 
zone,  is  long  wanting.  (R.  Hewlett,  D.D.)  Love  the  perfection  of  the  Christian 
character : — Love  is  the  most  potent  affection  of  the  human  heart.     I.  It  is  the 

PBIUS  ELEMENT  IN  EVERT  OTBXB  GRACE  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHARACTER.       It  is  the  SOUl  of 

every  virtue,  and  the  guarantee  of  a  genuine  sincerity.  Without  it  all  the  rest  are 
but  glittering  sins.  It  is  possible  to  have  all  those  mentioned  in  ver.  12 ;  but 
without  love  they  would  be  meaningless,  cold,  and  dead.  Mercy  would  degenerate 
into  sentimentality,  kindness  into  extravagance,  humility  into  mock  depreciation, 
long-suffering  into  dull,  dogged  stupidity,  II.  It  oco'upies  the  most  exaltes 
PLACE  IN  Christian  character.  *'  Above  all  these  things,"  as  the  outer  garment 
covers  and  binds  together  the  rest.  III.  Love  is  the  pledge  of  permanency  in 
THE  Christian  character.  As  the  girdle,  or  cincture,  bound  together  the  loose 
flowing  robes  of  the  ancients,  so  love  is  the  power  that  holds  together  all  those 
graces  which  together  make  up  perfection.  Love  is  the  preservative  force  in  the 
Christian  character.  Without  it,  knowledge  would  lose  its  enterprise,  mercy  and 
kindness  become  languid,  humility  faint,  and  long-suffering  indifferent.  Love 
binds  together  in  a  bond  which  time  cannot  injure,  the  enemy  unloose,  or 
death  destroy.  IV.  The  perfection  of  the  Christian  character  is  seen  in 
THE  practical  manifestation  of  lovb.  "  Put  on  charity."  1.  Love  is  indis- 
pensable. It  is  possible  to  possess  many  beautiful  traits — much  that  is  humane 
and  aimiable — without  being  a  complete  Christian  :  to  be  very  near  perfection,  and 
yet  lack  one  thing.  Without  love  all  other  graces  are  as  sounding  brass  and  a 
tinkling  cymbal.  2.  Love  is  susceptible  of  individual  cultivation.  Lessons: 
1.  The  mere  profession  of  Christianity  is  empty  and  valueless.  2.  Every  grace  of 
the  Christian  character  must  be  diligently  exercised.  3.  Above  and  through  all 
other  graces  love  must  operate.  (G.  Barlow.)  Love  is  over  aU,  and  the  bond 
of  perfectness,  because — I.  It  is  of  greater  extent  than  ant  other  virtue. 
Mercy  and  kindness,  and  humbleness  and  forgiveness,  are  separate  graces ;  but 
love  embraces  them  all,  regards  generally  our  neighbour  and  those  in  adversity,  our 
friends  and  enemies,  the  good  and  the  bad.  II.  Without  it  all  other  graces 
ABB  VAIN  and  delusive.  Mercy  without  it  is  weakness  ;  humility,  debasement, 
meekness,  cajolery,  and  deceit ;  patience,  stupidity  ;  forgiveness,  hypocrisy  ;  all  is 
inconsistent,  heartless,  wayward,  selfish.  III.  It  supplies  the  want  or  remedies 
THE  DEFECT  OF  ANT  OTHER  GRACES  AND  VIRTUES.  FoT  we  are  always  falling  short 
in  one  or  other,  from  indwelling  sin,  from  temptation,  from  cast  of  character,  from 
peculiar  circumstances.  A  sweet  charitable  temper  provides  the  articles  of  Chris- 
tian attire  in  which  we  are  from  time  to  time  most  defective,  supplies  their  place, 
hides  their  imperfections,  remedies  the  ill  effects  of  their  absence.  {Bishop  D. 
Wilson.)  Love  the  '* finish  "  of  the  Christian  character  : — When  the  cutler  brings 
his  goods  to  market,  he  may  have  the  best  of  steel  in  the  blade  and  the  best  of  horn 
in  the  handle,  and  every  part  may  be  rivetted  strongly ;  but  if  the  blade  has  not 
been  polished,  and  if  there  be  no  finishing  work  in  the  handle,  he  cannot  sell  his 
stock.  It  is  just  as  good  for  practical  purposes  as  though  it  were  finished ;  but 
people  do  not  want  it.  They  want  their  blades  polished  and  their  handles  finished, 
and  they  are  so  used  to  having  goods  sand-papered  and  burnished,  that  they  wil! 
not  take  them  unless  they  are  so.  There  must  be  art  in  them.  And  this  is 
carried  so  far,  that  when  articles  are  good  for  nothing  art  is  put  on  the  outside  to 
make  them  seem  good  for  something.  And  men  buy  things  for  the  sake  of  their 
looks.  The  idea  of  perfection  lies  in  the  direction  of  the  assthetic  ;  and  as  much  so 
in  social  and  moral  elements  as  in  physical  things.  Men  are  not  now  finished  in 
any  respect  in  their  higher  relations.  I  mean  even  good  men.  There  are  hundreds 
of  men  that  are  in  the  main  laying  out  their  life  and  character  in  right  directions, 
and  on  right  foundations ;  but  how  few  men  know  how  to  be  good  variously,  sys- 
tematically, gracefully,  genially,  sweetly,  beautifully.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  When 
the  apostle  speaks  so  highly  of  charity,  he  does  not  mean  to  disparage  the  other 
graces.  They  also  are  most  beautiful,  considered  apart  from  charity,  only  charity 
has  such  a  sun-like  excellence,  in  its  presence  all  star-like  beauty,  and  even  moon- 
like beauty,  seem  to  grow  dim  and  fade  away.  Compare  the  diamond  with  a  com- 
mon wayside  stone,  and  we  are  not  greatly  impressed  with  its  superiority ;  the 
contrast  is  too  great.     Set  it  in  the  royal  crown ;  encircle  it  with  pearls ;  let  it 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nt 

compare  with  other  jewels ;  with  ruby,  and  garnet,  and  emerald ;  then  the  depth  of 
its  crystal  purity  Beema  so  impressive,  and  the  flashing  of  its  light  so  exquisite. 
Set  charity  alongside  "  humbleness,  bowels  of  mercies,  long-suffering,"  or  forgiving, 
then  it  seems  to  gather  up  into  itself  much  of  the  charm  and  loveliness  of  such 
graces,  and  stands  forth  in  the  centre  of  them  all,  "  the  very  bond  of  perfectness." 
R.  Tuck,  B.A.) 

Ver.  15.  And  let  the  peace  of  God  rule  In  your  hearts. — The  peace  of  Chritt : — 
The  various  reading  "peace  of  Christ"  is  not  only  recommended  by  MS. 
authority,  but  has  the  advantage  of  bringing  the  expression  into  connection  with 
the  great  words  of  our  Lord,  "Peace  I  leave  you,"  &c.  A  strange  legacy  left  at  a 
strange  moment.  It  was  but  an  hour  or  so  since  He  had  been  "  troubled  in  spirit" 
as  He  thought  of  the  betrayer — and  in  an  hour  more  He  would  be  beneath  the 
olives  of  Gethsemane ;  and  yet  even  at  such  a  time  He  bestows  on  His  friends  some 
share  in  His  deep  repose  of  spirit.  Surely  the  "  peace  of  Christ "  must  mean  what 
"  My  peace  "  meant :  not  only  the  peace  which  He  gives,  but  the  peace  which  lay 
like  a  great  calm  on  the  sea  on  His  own  deep  heart,  and  we  must  not  restrict  it  to 
mataal  concord.  When  He  gave  us  His  peace  He  gave  us  some  share  in  that  meek 
submission  of  will  to  His  Father's  will,  and  in  that  stainless  purity,  which  were  its 
chief  elements.  The  hearts  and  lives  of  men  are  made  troubled  not  by  circum- 
stances, but  by  themselves.  Whoever  can  keep  his  own  will  in  harmony  with 
God's  enters  into  rest.  Even  if  within  and  without  are  fightings,  there  may  be  a 
central  peace.  Christ's  peace  was  the  result  of  the  perfect  harmony  of  His  nature. 
All  was  co-operant  to  one  great  purpose ;  desires  and  passions  did  not  war  with 
conscience  and  reason,  nor  did  the  flesh  lust  against  the  spirit.  Though  that 
complete  uniting  of  all  our  inner  selves  is  not  attained  on  earth,  yet  its  beginnings 
are  given  us  by  Christ,  and  in  Him  we  may  be  at  peace  with  ourselves,  and  have 
one  great  ruling  power  binding  all  our  conflicting  desires  in  one,  as  the  moon  draws 
after  her  the  heaped  waters  of  the  sea.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  power  of  Divine 
peace: — The  connection  between  this  verse  and  the  foregoing  is  obvious.  The  man 
who  has  this  peace  is  most  likely  to  cultivate  love.  Christian  calmness  is  the  con- 
comitant  and  stimulus  of  Christian  affection  which  is  hindered  by  doubt,  anxiety,  or 
fear.  I.  The  nature  and  value  of  this  blessing.  1.  It  is  the  highest  blessing. 
It  is  peace  with  God  and  the  rest  of  the  soul  m  Him — the  peace  which  comes  from 
Christ  and  through  Him.  In  its  character  it  is  that  which  Christ  Himself  enjoys, 
and  when  we  have  it,  with  no  gloom  from  the  past,  no  iorebodings  for  the  future, 
no  pursuing  vengeance  and  no  depressing  fear,  we  stand  strong  and  calm  amid  the 
troubles  of  this  world,  like  the  rock  unmoved  amid  the  ocean  surges.  It  is  a  Divine 
tranqnilUty  which  the  world  cannot  take  away  and  no  earthly  sorrow  diminish.  2. 
It  is  a  present  blessing — not  one  hoped  for  to  be  realized  by  and  by.  Yet  there  are 
many  who  are  in  uncertainty  about  it,  and  they  go  about  doubting  and  unhappy. 
It  ought  not  to  be  so  when  Christ  gives  it  freely.  Come  forth  and  dwell  in  the 
glory  of  the  Divine  love  and  it  will  flow  into  the  souL  3.  It  is  a  powerful  blessing. 
(1)  A  power  of  stimulus.  It  is  the  mightiest  help  on  the  side  of  piety,  it  leads  and 
lifts  the  soul  to  Him  from  whom  it  comes.  (2)  A  power  of  defence  (Phil.  iv.  7). 
fa)  It  fortifies  against  temptation  and  sin  ;  (5)  against  infidelity.  A  Christian  may 
be  a  poor  logician  and  unacquainted  with  historical  evidences,  but  if  Divine  peace 
rules  his  heart,  he  has  a  stronger  defence  than  reason  or  learning  can  supply.  (3) 
A  power  of  control.  It  is  a  wise  and  safe  monitor.  We  are  often  perplexed  as  to 
what  is  right  or  wrong  in  pursuits,  amusements,  alliances,  &o.  But  if  the  peace  of 
God  is  supreme  it  will  settle  these  moral  difficulties  at  once.  (4)  A  power  of  con- 
centration. It  gathers  together  all  the  powers  of  manhood  that  they  may  go  forth 
in  obedience  to  Christ.  It  enabled  Paul,  freed  as  he  was  by  it  from  all  doubts  and 
fears,  to  say,  "This  one  thing  I  do."  II.  Inducements  and  encouragements  to 
ITS  bealization.  1.  The  Divine  call  to  it — "  To  which  we  also  are  called."  They 
surely  forget  this  who  go  in  doubt  or  uncertainty.  It  is  God's  gracious  design  that 
we  should  have  it.  The  gospel  summons  as  to  happiness,  "  Peace  on  earth  "  was 
the  proclamation  of  the  angels.  To  give  it  was  the  mission  of  Christ,  and  His 
promise  to  the  disciples,  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but  in  Me  peace." 
2.  Our  condition  in  this  world  of  turmoil  and  sin.  By  it  we  may  be  raised  above 
the  sorrows  and  anxieties  of  time.  We  can  and  ought  to  be  calm  when  other  men 
are  agitated — when  panic  is  abroad,  credit  shaken,  commerce  paralyzed,  the  bonds 
of  society  loosened,  human  hopes  stricken.  3.  The  unity  of  the  Church — "  in  one 
body."    The  more  we  are  conscious  of  it,  and  let  it  rule,  the  more  shall  we  con- 


CHAP.  nL]  COLOSSIANS.  23h 

tribute  to  the  manifcBt  oneness  of  the  body  of  Christ.  No  strifes  and  divisions  can 
exist  where  it  reigns.  III.  Thb  spibit  in  which  it  is  to  bb  chebished.  Thankful- 
ness is  an  habitual  exercise  of  the  Christian  soul ;  here  it  is  for  peaoe.  And  when 
we  think  that  God  has  called  us  to  it,  and  contemplate  the  way  in  which  it  has 
eome  to  us  through  the  Cross,  and  estimate  its  value  in  this  world  of  sorrow,  how 
profound  should  be  our  gratitude.  (J.  Spence,  D.D.)  The  ruling  peace  of 
Chrut : — The  figure  is  that  of  the  umpire  or  abitrator  at  the  games  who,  looking 
down  on  the  arena,  watches  that  the  combatants  strive  lawfully,  and  adjudges  the 
prize.  The  peace  of  Christ,  then,  is  to  sit  enthroned  as  umpire  in  the  heart ;  or  if 
we  might  give  a  medissval  instead  of  a  classical  shape  to  the  figure,  that  fair 
sovereign,  Peace,  is  to  be  Queen  of  the  Tournament,  and  her  "  eyes  rain  influence 
and  adjudge  the  prize."  When  contending  impulses  and  reasons  distract  and  seem 
to  pull  us  in  opposite  directions,  let  her  settle  which  is  to  prevail.  We  may  make 
a  rude  test  of  good  and  evil  by  their  effects  on  our  inward  repose.  Whatever  mars 
oor  tranquillity,  ruffling  the  surface  so  that  Christ's  image  is  no  longer  visible,  is  to 
be  avoided.  That  stillness  of  spirit  is  very  sensitive,  and  shrinks  away  at  the 
presence  of  an  evil  thing.  Let  it  be  for  us  what  the  barometer  is  to  the  sailor,  and 
if  it  sinks  let  us  be  sure  that  a  storm  is  at  hand.  There  is  nothing  so  precious  that 
it  is  worth  while  to  lose  the  peace  of  Christ  for  the  sake  of  it.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D  ) 
The  peace  of  God  ruling  the  heart: — There  are  here  four  pieces  of  advice.  I. 
Possess  the  peace  of  God.  Many  persons  have  peace  but  it  is  a  false  peace,  the 
peace  of  ignorance,  stupidity,  indifierence — the  followers  of  the  false  prophet  who 
cried  "peace,  peace,"  when  there  was  no  peace.  Woe  to  the  man  whose  peace  of 
mind  is  like  the  deadly  smoothness  of  the  current  just  as  it  nears  the  cataract ! 
The  text  refers  to — 1.  Peace  with  God.  If  you  are  reconciled  through  Jesus  Christ, 
don't  act  as  though  it  were  doubtful  (Rom.  ▼.  1).  Growing  out  of  this  there  is 
peace  with  God  in  all  His  providences  which  can  only  come  through  an  entire 
■ubmission  to  the  Divine  will.  If  thon  canst  not  change  thy  place  change  thy 
mind  till  thy  mind  shall  love  thy  place.  If  forgiven  why  raise  minor  points.  It  is 
like  quarreling  on  small  points  of  law  when  the  great  case  has  been  decided.  2. 
Peace  such  as  God  commends.  Perfect  peace  with  Himself  and  then  with  all  men. 
What  are  men's  offences  against  us  compared  with  those  which  God  has  forgiven  ? 
And  what  can  men  do  to  us  at  the  worst  that  we  should  fear  or  revenge  their 
injuries  f  *•  Peace  on  earth  :  good-will  toward  men."  3.  Peaoe  which  God  workn 
in  the  soul.  We  cannot  create  this.  To  take  the  wild-beast  heart  out  of  us  and  to 
put  a  new  heart  in  us  is  a  Divine  work.  4.  The  peace  of  God — a  Hebraism  for 
excellence,  as  great  mountains  and  trees  are  called  hills  and  trees  of  God.  It  is 
greater  than  any  other  peace.  It  is  the  holiest,  deepest,  one  which  passeth  all 
understanding,  and  eterual.  II.  Let  this  peace  edle  in  todb  heabts.  1.  In 
order  to  peace  there  must  be  a  ruler.  Those  people  who  are  for  putting  down  all 
governors  may  bid  farewell  to  peace.  The  worst  king  is  better  than  the  despotism 
of  the  mob,  the  carnival  of  misrule  wherein  every  man  doth  what  is  right  in  his 
own  eyes,  and  all  eyes  love  darkness  rather  than  light.  See  how  it  is  in  a  hoase  ! 
Where  the  head  is  not  the  head,  the  hand  is  not  the  hand,  and  nothing  is  itself. 
Yon  must  have  a  governing  faculty  somewhere;  and  if  nothing  governs  within  your 
heart  the  devil  governs.  2.  It  is  a  blessed  gift  of  grace  when  the  peace  of  God  rules 
in  the  heart.  If  it  is  in  your  heart  at  all,  it  must  rule,  for  it  has  power  to  put  down 
all  rebellion.  When  a  riot  arises  we  appeal  to  the  lawful  power  to  come  and  put 
down  the  uproar.  So  in  our  hearts  we  can  say  to  the  master  principle,  the  peace  of 
God,  "Come,  put  down  my  murmuring,  arrest  this  bad  temper,  help  me  that  I  may 
not  break  out  into  anger."  3.  Yield  yourself  to  the  blessed  umpireship  of  the  peace 
of  God.  Resolve  to  judge  all  things  by  it,  and  do  nothing  that  would  upset  its 
government.  If  you  do — say  by  getting  angry — you  harm  yourself  physically,  but 
much  more  spiritually.  In  such  a  case  you  cannot  pray  as  you  did,  nor  read  some 
scriptures  as  you  did,  nor  look  the  Well-beloved  in  the  face  and  say  "  I  am  acting 
in  a  way  that  pleases  Him."  It  is  therefore  a  serious  thing  for  a  believer  to  break 
this  peace.  4.  If  a  man  has  this  peace  he  may  go  down  to  any  meeting,  however 
turbulent — and  yet  he  will  be  wise  to  answer  and  be  silent,  to  do  or  not  to  do,  for  it 
will  keep  him  quiet.  But  if  his  mind  be  unhinged  before  the  Lord  he  will  be  weak 
as  another  man,  and  say  and  do  what  he  will  wish  to  wipe  out  with  tears.  III. 
Stbengthbn  YO0B8ELF  BY  God's  Spirit  WITH  AEGDMENTS.  Remember — 1.  Only  can 
you  be  happy  in  heart  and  healthy  in  spirit  as  long  as  yon  keep  the  peace  of  God. 
2.  Only  then  can  the  Charoh  prosper.  A  Church  disputing  is  a  Church  committing 
suicide;   and  most  disputes  are  about  little  points?    3.   Only  thus  can   God   be 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

glorified.  H  you  are  always  fretting  and  anxious  how  can  you  promote  that ;  or  U 
you  are  finding  fault  with  everybody.  4.  God  calls  you  to  this.  If  you  are  not  a 
peaceful  man  you  have  not  inherited  your  true  calling.  He  called  you  to  be  a 
peacemaker.  5.  He  calls  you  in  one  body.  What  would  you  think  of  the  hand  if 
it  should  aay,  "  I  will  have  no  peace  with  the  eye,"  or  the  foot  if  it  should  say,  "  I 
will  not  carry  the  heavy  body  about"  ?  What  is  to  become  of  the  glory  of  Christ  if 
the  members  Uve  in  contention?  IV.  Occopt  your  minds  healthily — "Be  ye 
thankful."  1.  That  is  the  way  to  keep  our  peace  with  God.  Bless  Him  for  all 
your  miseries  as  well  as  for  all  your  mercies.  2.  That  is  the  way  to  keep  our  peace 
with  men.  Be  thankful  in  the  home,  society,  &o.,  for  benefits  received.  (G.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Unity  and  Peace : — 1.  It  may  surprise  us  to  find  peace  urged  as  a 
duty,  whereas  it  seems  a  matter  over  which  we  have  no  control.  But  the  text 
proceeds  upon  the  supposition  and  urges  thankfulness  for  it  also.  2.  Moreover, 
remember  that  these  words  were  written  when  the  apostle  lay  in  prison,  expecting  a 
violent  death  ;  when  false  doctrines  were  rife  and  religious  animosities  fierce;  and 
they  are  part  of  an  eager  controversial  Epistle.  Therefore  it  is  possible  to  be  in  the 
midst  of  danger,  to  breathe  the  atmosphere  of  religious  controversy,  and  even  to  be 
a  controversialist,  and  yet  the  soul  not  lose  its  deep  peace.  Joined  with  this  is  the 
doctrine  of  Church  unity  as  its  basis.  I.  The  unity  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 
1.  Distinguish  bet  s^een  the  unity  of  comprehensiveness  and  that  of  singularity^ 
The  army  is  one,  that  is  the  oneness  of  unity ;  the  soldier  is  one,  that  is  the  oneness 
of  the  unit.  The  body  is  a  unity  of  manifold  comprehensiveness,  a  member  of  a 
body  exhibits  a  unity  of  singularity.  Without  unity  peace  is  impossible.  There  is 
no  peace  in  a  soldier,  but  there  is  in  an  army ;  none  in  a  limb,  only  in  a  body.  In 
order  to  have  peace  you  must  have  a  higher  unity,  and  herein  consists  the  unity  of 
God's  own  being.  When  the  Unitarian  speaks  of  God  as  one,  he  means  simply 
singularity  of  number.  We  mean  that  He  is  of  manifold  comprehensiveness.  "  I 
and  My  Father  are  one."  2.  Unity  subsists  between  things  dissimilar.  (1)  There 
is  no  unity  in  the  separate  atoms  of  a  sand-pit ;  they  are  things  similar.  Even  if 
they  be  hardened  into  a  mass  they  are  only  a  mass.  There  is  no  unity  in  a  flock  of 
sheep  ;  it  is  simply  a  repetition  of  things  similar.  (2)  But  a  body  is  made  up  of 
dissimilar  members  and  is  thus  a  unity ;  so  that  if  you  strike  off  from  this  any  one 
member  the  unity  is  destroyed  and  only  a  part  is  left.  (3)  So  with  the  Church. 
(a)  The  unity  of  its  ages  is  not  that  every  age  is  the  repetition  of  every  other,  but 
that  each  has  put  forth  its  own  fragment  of  truth.  In  early  ages  martyrdom  pro- 
claimed the  eternal  sanctity  of  truth  rather  than  give  up  which  a  man  must  lose 
bis  life.  This  age  by  its  revolutions  and  socialisms  proclaims  the  brotherhood  of 
man.  So  that  just  as  every  separate  ray — violet,  blue,  and  orange — make  up  the  white 
ray,  so  these  manifold  fragments  blended  make  up  the  perfect  white  ray  of  truth. 
(h)  With  regard  to  individuals.  At  the  reformation,  e.g.,  it  was  given  to  one  to  pro- 
claim that  salvation  is  not  local;  to  another,  justification  by  faith;  to  another,  the 
sovereignty  of  God;  to  others,  the  supremacy  of  the  Scriptures,  the  right  of  private 
judgment,  the  duty  of  the  individual  conscience,  (c)  So  again  with  regard  to 
Churches.  Would  we  force  upon  others  our  Anglicanism  ?  Then  in  consistency 
you  are  bound  to  demand  that  in  God's  world  there  shall  be  but  one  colour,  and 
one  note.  But  the  various  Churches  advance  different  truths,  varieties  to  be 
blended  in  unity.  3.  Unity  consists  in  submission  to  one  single  influence  or  spirit. 
Take  away  the  unifying  life  of  the  body,  and  decomposition  berjins,  the  principle  of 
cohesion  being  gone.  We  know  the  power  of  a  single  living  inliuence.  Take,  e.g., 
the  power  wherewith  the  orator  holds  together  a  thousand  men  as  if  they  wsre  one; 
or  that  which  coneentiates  the  conflicting  feelings  of  a  people  when  the  threat  of 
foreign  invasion  has  fused  down  the  edges  of  variance  and  makes  the  classes  of  this 
manifold  and  mighty  England  one ;  or  the  mighty  winds  which  hold  together  the 
various  atoms  of  the  desert,  so  that  they  rush  like  a  living  thing  across  the  wilder- 
ness. And  this  is  the  unity  of  the  Church,  the  subjection  to  the  one  uniting  spirit 
of  its  God.  You  cannot  produce  unity  by  ecclesiastical  discipline,  by  consenting  to 
some  form  of  expression,  such  as  •'  Let  us  agree  to  differ,"  by  parliamentary  enact- 
ments. Give  UB  the  living  Spirit  of  God  and  we  shall  be  one.  This  was  exhibited 
at  Pentecost,  and  may  be  ao  ayain.  II.  The  inward  peace  of  thb  members  of  thh 
Church.  1.  This  peace  is  when  a  man  is  contented  with  his  lot,  when  the  flesh  is 
subdued  to  the  spirit,  and  when  he  feels  in  his  heart  that  all  is  right.  To  this  we 
are  called,  ••  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour,  &o."  2.  This  was  the  dying  bequest 
of  Christ ;  and  herein  lies  the  power  of  Christianity  to  satisfy  the  deepest  want  oJ 
man — the  repose  of  acquiescence  in  the  will  of  God.     3.  It  is  God's  peace.     God  ia 


«iup.  m.]  C0L0SSIAN8.  237 

rest.  The  *'I  am"  of  God  is  contrasted  with  the  "I  am  becoming  "of  all  other 
things.  And  this  peace  arises  out  of  His  unity.  There  is  no  discord  between  th« 
powers  and  attributes  of  God.  4.  It  is  »  living  peace,  and  must  be  distinguished 
from  the  peace  of  the  man  who  lives  for  and  enjoys  self :  the  peace  on  the  surface 
of  the  oaverued  lake  that  no  wind  can  stir ;  that  is  the  peace  of  stagnation  :  the 
peace  of  the  stones  which  have  fallen  down  the  mountain's  side ;  that  is  the  peace 
of  inanity :  the  peace  in  the  hearts  of  enemies  who  he  together  on  the  battle  field  ; 
their  animosity  is  silenced  in  death.  If  ours  is  the  peace  of  the  sensualist,  or  of  in- 
action, apathy  or  sin,  we  may  whisper  to  ourselves  "  Peace,  peace,"  but  there  will 
be  no  peace.  6.  It  is  the  peace  which  comes  from  an  inward  power — "  rule." 
There  is  no  peace  except  where  there  is  the  possibility  of  the  opposite  of  peace, 
although  now  restrained  and  controlled.  You  do  not  speak  of  the  peace  of  a  grain 
of  sand,  or  of  a  mere  pond,  but  of  the  sea,  because  its  opposite  is  there  implied. 
And  we  make  a  great  mistake  when  we  say  there  is  strength  in  passion.  If  the 
passions  of  a  man  are  strong,  the  man  is  weak  if  he  cannot  control  them.  The  real 
strength  of  a  man  is  calmness,  the  word  of  Christ  sayiug,  "  Peace  1  "  and  there  is 
"a  great  calm."  6.  It  is  the  peace  of  reception,  but  not  of  inaction.  ^1)  The 
peace  of  obedience.  Very  great  is  this  when  a  man  has  his  lot  fixed,  and  his  mind 
made  up,  and  sees  his  destiny  before  him  and  acquiesces  in  it.  Deep  is  the  peace 
of  a  soldier  to  whom  has  been  assigned  an  untenable  position,  with  the  command, 
"  Keep  that,  even  if  you  die,"  and  he  obediently  remains  to  die.  Great  was  the 
peace  of  Elisha.  "  Knowest  thou,"  said  the  excited  men  around  him,  "  that  the 
Lord  will  take,"  &o.  "Yea,  I  know  it;  hold  ye  your  peace."  (2)  The  peace  of 
gratefulness ;  that  peace  which  Israel  had  when  these  words  were  spoken.  "  Stand 
Btill  and  see  the  salvation  of  God."  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  heart  controls 
the  life: — An  engine,  dragging  its  train  on  the  rail,  is  sweeping  along  the  landsi^ape. 
As  it  comes  near  it  strikes  awe  into  the  spectator.  Its  furious  fire  and  smoke,  its 
rapid  whirling  wheels,  its  mighty  mass  shaking  the  ground  beneath  it,  and  the 
stealthy  quickness  of  its  approach, — its  whole  appearance  and  adjuncts  make  the 
observer  bate  his  breath  till  it  is  past.  What  power  would  suffice  to  arrest  that 
giant  strength.  Although  a  hundred  men  should  stand  up  before  it,  or  seize  its 
whirling  wheels,  it  would  cast  them  down,  and  over  their  mangled  bodies  hold  on 
its  unimpeded  course,  with  nothing  to  mark  the  occurrence  but  a  quiver  as  it 
cleared  the  heap.  But  there  is  a  certain  spot  in  the  machinery  where  the  touch  of 
a  little  child  will  make  the  monster  slacken  his  pace,  creep  gently  forwt^rd,  stand 
still,  slide  back,  like  a  spaniel  fawning  under  an  angry  word  at  the  feet  of  his 
master.  I  find  a  law  in  my  members  that  when  I  would  do  good  evil  is  present 
with  me.  No  power  in  heaven  or  earth  will  arrest  that  downward  fall,  unless  it  bo 
laid  upon  the  heart.  (W.  Arnot,  T>.D.)  Be  ye  XhiaxMIvl.— Thankfulness  :^l 
Things  to  bk  thankful  fob.  1.  Providential  mercies.  (1)  Your  food.  (2)  Yoar 
clothing.  (3)  Your  health.  (4)  Your  learning.  (5)  Your  reason.  (6)  Your 
parents,  friends,  and  homes.  (7)  Deliverance  from  danger.  2.  The  means  of 
grace.  (1)  Your  Bible.  (2)  Your  sabbaths.  (3)  Prayer.  (4)  Christian  companion- 
ships. (5)  Christian  books.  3.  Christ  and  salvation.  II.  Thb  ways  of  showino 
THANKFULNESS.  1.  In  word.  Thank  God — (1)  at  your  meals.  (2)  In  your  prayers. 
(3)  In  your  praises.  2.  In  deed.  (1)  By  giving  of  our  money.  (2)  Your  time. 
(3)  Yourselves.  III.  The  sin  ok  cnthankfolness.  It  is  ranked  with  the  vilest 
sins.  (J.  H.  Wilson,  M.A.)  Thunkfulness ;  natural: — If  you  consider  the 
oniverse  as  one  body,  you  shall  find  society  and  conversation  to  supply  the  office  of 
the  blood  and  spirits :  and  it  is  gratitude  that  makes  them  circulate.  Look  over 
the  whole  creation,  and  you  shall  see  that  the  band  or  cement  which  holds  together 
all  the  parts  of  this  glorious  fabric  is  gratitude  or  something  like  it.  You  may 
observe  it  in  all  the  elements ;  for  does  not  the  air  feed  the  tlame,  and  does  not  the 
flame  at  the  same  time  warm  and  enlighten  the  air?  Is  not  the  sea  always  sending 
forth  as  well  as  taking  inf  And  does  not  the  earth  quit  scores  with  all  the 
elements,  in  the  noble  fruits  and  productions  that  issue  from  it  f  And  in  all  the 
light  and  influence  that  the  heavens  bestow  on  this  lower  world,  though  the  lower 
world  cannot  equal  their  benefaction,  yet,  with  a  kind  of  grateful  return,  it  reflects 
those  rays  that  it  cannot  lecompeuse;  so  that  there  is  some  return,  however, 
although  there  can  be  no  requital.  {R.  Sonth,  D.D.)  Thankfulness  should  be 
practical: — As  physicians  judge  of  the  condition  of  men's  hearts  by  the  pulse  that 
beats  in  their  arms  and  not  by  the  words  that  proceed  from  their  mouths;  so  we 
may  judge  of  the  thankfulness  of  men  by  their  lives  rather  than  by  their  professions. 
(E.  Foatcr.)        Qratiiude  the  one  thing  needed: — A  gentleman  in  Bombay  seeing 


238  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

an  anchorite  sitting  nnder  a  cocoa  nnt  tree,  asked  for  an  interest  in  his  prayers. 
The  anchorite  replied  he  would  with  pleasure  grant  the  request,  but  he  scarce  knew 
what  best  to  ask  for  him.  "  I  have  seen  you  often,"  he  said,  and  you  appear  to 
have  everything  you  want  that  can  conduce  to  human  happiness ;  perhaps  the  be  a 
thing  I  can  ask  for  you  will  be  a  grateful  heart.  (W.  Baxendale.)  Rest  and  be 
tliankful : — There  is  a  picturesque  tract  of  the  Western  Highlands  of  Scotland,  in 
passing  through  which  the  traveller  has  to  ascend  a  long  winding  path,  very  steep, 
rough,  and  lonely,  leading  up  a  wild  and  desolate  glen.  The  savage  and  awful 
grandeur  of  the  scenery,  with  its  bare  hills  and  rocks,  is  hardly  equalled  in  this 
counti-y.  But  if  the  traveller  goes  up  that  glen  on  foot  (and  it  is  hardly  possible  to 
go  up  it  otherwise),  his  appreciation  of  the  scene  around  him  is  gradually  overborne 
by  the  sense  of  pure  physical  fatigue.  Not  without  a  great  strain  upon  limbs  and 
lieart,  can  that  rugged  way  be  traversed.  At  last  you  reach  a  ridge,  whence  the 
road  descends  steeply  on  the  other  side  of  the  hill.  You  have  ended  your  cUmbing, 
and  you  may  now  begin  to  go  down  again,  from  whichever  side  you  come.  And 
there,  at  this  summit,  you  will  find  a  rude  seat  of  stone,  which  bears  the  inscription 
in  deeply-cut  letters,  "  Best  and  be  thankful."  Many  weary  travellers  have  rested 
there :  let  us  trust  that  s  good  many  have  been  thankful.  We  all  know 
that  the  like  name  has  been  given  to  more  than  one  or  two  hke  resting- 
places,  that  it  is  borne  by  various  seats,  at  the  top  of  various  steep  ascents 
in  this  coimtry.  There  is  something  pleasing,  and  something  touching,  in  the 
simple  natural  piety  which  has  dictated  the  homely  name.  He  was  a  heathen  who 
said  it,  but  he  spoke  well  who  said,  Wheresoever  man  feels  himself  in  peace  and 
rest,  let  him  think  of  God,  and  give  thanks  to  Him.  "Eest  and  be  thankful," 
says  the  stone  in  the  Highland  glen:  "Be  ye  thankful,"  says  St.  Paul  to  the 
Christians  of  ColossaB.  It  is  not  said  to  whom  we  are  to  be  thankful.  There  is  a 
touch  of  natural  piety  in  the  fact,  that  that  does  not  need  to  be  said.  That  is  taken 
for  granted  I  We  all  know  who  it  is  that  is  the  Giver  of  all  good :  and  when  we 
are  told,  generally,  to  be  thankful,  of  course  we  know  to  whom  1  Resting  at  the 
summit  of  the  mountain  path,  it  is  not  to  the  man  who  erected  that  seat  for  the 
weary  traveller :  though  it  is  fit  and  right  that  he  should  be  kindly  thought  of  while 
we  are  enjoying  the  effect  of  his  work,  yet  we  are  to  look  beyond  him  to  a  cause 
above  him.  He  erected  that  seat,  acting  (as  it  were)  for  God :  every  mortal  who 
does  a  kind  and  good  deed,  in  a  right  spirit,  is  acting  for  God,  and  in  God's  name : 
and  he  went  away  when  his  work  was  done,  asking  of  the  wayfarer,  putting  his 
request  on  record  with  a  pen  of  iron  upon  the  stone,— that  for  whatever  comfort 
and  rfsst  might  be  experienced  there,  the  wayfarer  might  bestow  his  thanks  in  tha 
right  quarter.    And  St.  Paul  does  just  the  same  1     {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  Let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  rlctdj.— The  Word  of  Chritt: — 

I.  What  is  it?  The  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  1.  Christ  is 
their  author.  2.  He  is  their  subject-matter — they  testify  of  Him.  Christ  is  the 
Word,  the  wisdom  of  God,  the  truth ;  and  truth  as  well  as  grace  came  by  Him. 

II.  How  SHALL  WB  TBEAT  IT  ?  1.  Let  it  dwell  in  us.  It  must  not  be  as  a  stranger, 
or  a  visitor,  or  as  an  acquaintance  with  whom  we  are  not  specially  intimate,  or  as 
a  friend  away  and  seldom  seen,  but  rather  as  a  resident  member  of  our  family 
with  whom  we  are  in  constant  and  loving  communication.  2.  Let  it  dwell  in  you. 
It  is  not  enough  that  it  be  in  our  liouse,  study,  pocket,  and  so  at  hand.     It  must 

'  be  in  our  heart,  pervading  our  whole  spiritual  nature,  directing  and  controlling  all 
oar  life  and  conduct.  "  Thy  Word  have  I  hid  in  my  heart."  "  Out  of  the  heart  are 
the  issues  of  life."  8.  Let  it  dwell  in  you  richly,  plentifully,  profoundly.  Thit 
implies — (1)  An  intimate  knowledge  of  the  truth.  (2)  A  believing,  saving  experience 
of  the  truth.  We  should  seek  to  understand  it  in  its  inmost  compass ;  in  all  iti 
bearings  and  relations,  and  then  gladly  receive  it,  in  the  love  of  it,  into  good  and 
honest  hearta  (James  i.  2).  (r.  W.  Sydnor.)  The  school  of  the  Word  :—l.  Thb 
liBssoN-BooK.  The  Word  of  Christ,  so  called,  because — 1.  He  is  its  central  theme. 
The  beginning  of  the  story  of  the  race  is  told  that  the  first  Adam  may  prepare  the 
way  for  the  second:  then  the  mass  of  the  race  is  forgotten,  and  one  chosen 
family  selected  because  Christ  was  to  come  out  of  it.  The  songs,  prophecies, 
teachings  of  the  Old  Testament  are  full  of  Christ,  and  its  characters  are  as 
fragments  of  the  perfect  character  of  Jesus.  The  ethics  of  the  book  find  their 
full  manifestation  in  Him.  The  Gospels  are  biographies  of  Him,  and  the  Epistles 
expositions  of  the  truths  of  that  biography.  3.  It  was  originated  by  Christ. 
Some  write  of  what  they  see  or  hear,  but  Christ  produces  the  history  He  causes 


CHAP,  m.]  COLOSSIANS  239 

to  be  recorded.  He  not  only  breathed  His  Spirit  upnn  men's  minds  that  thev 
might  write  its  doctrines;  He  produced  the  facts  which  are  thi'  basis  of  the 
doctrines.  Pardon  is  taught;  but  He  made  the  atonement  by  His  death. 
Immortality  is  taught;  but  He  revealed  it  first  by  His  resurrection.  3.  He 
dwells  in  it.  Men  are  in  quest  of  Christ,  and  seek  Him  in  sacraments  and  holy 
things  and  places.  But  we  have  "  not  to  ascend  into  heaven  to  bring  Him  down," 
&o.  "The  Word  is  ni<^  thee."  Christ  is  in  His  Word,  not  as  Plato  in  his 
republic  or  Shakespeare  in  his  plays,  but  as  a  living  and  operating  power.  "  My 
words  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life."  4.  Through  it  He  works.  There  is  not  a 
process  of  grace  promised  or  commended  that  it  does  not  promote.  (1)  Conviction 
of  sin.  *'  The  entrance  of  Thy  Word  giveth  liglit. "  "  The  Word  is  powerful, 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword."  (2)  Conversion.  "The  law  of  the  Lord  is 
perfect,  converting  the  soul."  (3)  Salvation  from  sin,  "  Thy  Word  have  I  hid  in 
my  heart,"  &o.     (4)  Edification.     "The  Word  of  His  grane  ...  is  able  to  build 

Iou  up,"  Ac.  (5)  All  sound  Christian  profit.  "  Is  profitable  for  doctrine,"  &c. 
I.  The  school.  1.  The  Church  generally.  Christ  appointed  the  Church  to 
teach  His  Word,  and  His  Word  forms  the  basis  of  her  creeds,  and  the  final 
authority  when  those  creeds  are  questioned.  It  is  to  be  exalted  iu  her  worship, 
commemorated  in  her  sacraments,  and  proclaimed  and  defended  in  her  pulpits. 
2.  The  school  of  devotion ;  the  prayer-meeting.  3.  The  school  of  experience ; 
the  class  or  fellowship-meeting.  4.  The  school  of  the  family,  where  children 
learn  theology,  and  the  Divine  character  and  administration,  by  object-lessons,  by 
what  father  and  mother  say  and  do.  5.  But  pre-eminently  is  the  Sunday  school 
the  school  of  the  Word.  III.  The  teacheu.  1.  His  qualification.  The  Word  is 
to  dwell  in  him  richly — in  his  tongue  as  its  expounder ;  in  his  memory  as  a 
student ;  in  his  heart  as  a  believer :  so  that  when  he  prays  he  uses  it,  when  he 
teaches  texts  come  to  his  tongue-ends,  and  as  he  lives  he  illustrates  it.  It  must 
BO  dwell  in  him  that  he  will  delight  in  it,  love  to  quote  it,  go  to  sleep  in  times  of 
Btorm  resting  upon  it,  and  use  it  in  the  hour  of  death  as  the  key  to  the  kingdom. 
2.  His  method.  (1)  Teaching ;  (2)  admonishing  ;  (3)  translating  into  life.  {Biflwp 
Vincent.)  The  indwelling  of  the  Word: — There  is  nothing  easier  than  to  hear 
the  Word  with  a  general  ret^ard,  and  few  things  more  difficult  than  to  receive  it  as 
a  principle  of  spiritual  life.  Satan  hinders ;  cumbering  with  mach  business, 
diverting  with  trifles,  or  disturbing  with  wicked  imaginations  or  affections.  I. 
The  Word  op  Christ.  1.  In  a  special  and  limited  sense  this  is  the  gospel, 
beeanse  He  preached  and  published  it.  2.  In  a  larger  sense  it  is  both  Testaments, 
for  He  is  the  author  of  both.  3.  Then  in  listening  to  Bible  teaching  we  are 
listening  to  Christ  Himself.  "  The  Word  "  is  one  of  His  titles,  and  He  would  have 
as  honour  it  by  honouring  the  Scriptures  which  testify  of  Him.  4.  It  is  some- 
times called  the  Word  of  the  Kmgdom,  because  it  shows  the  way  to  the  kingdom  of 
grace,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  the  kingdom  of  glory;  "the  Word  of  life," 
because  the  instrument  of  regeneration  and  spiritual  sustentation.  5.  Bat  though 
necessary,  how  many  unnecessary  things  are  preferred  before  it.  It  is  the  polar  star 
which  shines  ont  in  the  spiritual  firmament  to  point  you  to  Christ ;  and  yet  in  how 
many  instances  is  the  glimmering  taper  of  human  reason  preferred !  It  opens  a 
well  of  life ;  yet  many  choose  the  broken  cistern.  II.  Its  dwellino-plack.  1.  It 
is  to  dwell.  (1)  This  points  out  a  contrast  between  a  settled  and  vagrant  life. 
With  the  mere  wanderer  we  hold  little  in  common :  the  resident  is  well  known. 
As  you  give  yourself  up  to  the  study  of  the  sacred  oracles,  the  miud  of  the  Spirit 
becomes  imparted  to  your  own.  (2)  This  is  an  allusion  to  God's  "  dwelling  "  in 
the  Holy  cf  Holies.  Christ's  Word  is  to  be  as  the  Shekinah.  2.  It  is  to  dwell 
within :  n«t  in  the  understanding  merely  to  enlighten  it,  nor  in  the  judgment  to 
inform  and  convince  it,  but  to  be  deeply  seated  and  treasured  up  in  the  heart. 
"  I  will  write  My  law  in  their  inward  parts,"  <feo.  And  unless  it  is  so  written  it 
is  quite  certain  that  we  have  no  interest  in  the  covenant.  (1)  It  is  to  dwell  there 
as  a  man  dwells  in  his  own  house,  which  he  is  proud  of  calling  his  castle,  and 
which  is  not  as  a  temporary  tent.  "  If  ye  continue  in  My  Word,"  <feo.  How 
many  there  are  who  give  it  only  the  entertainment  of  a  wayfaring  man  who 
obtains  with  difficulty  a  lodging  for  the  night,  and  in  the  morning  is  gone.  (2)  In 
order  thns  to  dwell  it  must  be  mixed  with  faith.  Without  faith  it  may  produce 
various  effects ;  it  may  make  you,  like  Herod,  "do  many  things,"  and  induce  you» 
like  Felix,  "  to  hear  Paul  gladly  " ;  it  may  produce  feelings  of  wonder,  &c. ;  bat 
it  is  only  when  received  in  faith  that  it  can  really  profit.  III.  The  measubb  ra 
WHICH  IT  IS  TO  DWELL  IN  US.    1.  Bichly  :  not  as  a  scanty  stream,  but  m  a  fall 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

flowing  river.  Yon  are  not  to  be  content  with  partial  views  of  God's  truth.  Ths 
whole  written  Word  is  the  soul's  pasturage.  "  All  Scripture  ...  is  profitable." 
"Man  shall  not  Uve  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word,"  Ac.  2.  This  requires 
prayerful  searching,  and  much  more  than  reading  in  haste  a  chapter  in  the 
morning  or  at  night.  We  do  not  search  after  worldly  wealth  so.  3.  This  rich 
indwelling  will  be  fruitful  in  (1)  comfort ;  (2)  holiness ;  (3)  revived  spiritual  life. 
{T.   Watson,  B.A.)  Tlie  indwelling  Word  of  Christ: — 1.   This  exhortation  is 

connected  with  the  exhortation  out  of  which  it  springs  (vers.  14-16) ;  and  with 
the  outward  expression  in  which  it  finds  vent  (ver.  16).  2.  The  Word  of  Christ  is 
not  His  personal  teaching  merely,  but  the  whole  Bible  as  His  present  Word, 
affording  the  materials  of  present  speech.  3.  Its  indwelling  is  personal,  and  is 
not  to  be  evaporated,  as  if  it  referred  to  the  Church  collective  (Eom.  viii.  11 ;  2  Cor, 
vi.  16 ;  Eph.  iii.  17 ;  2  Tim.  i.  6,  14).  I.  Let  the  Wobd  of  Christ  dwklij  in 
YOU.  1.  This  implies  a  sense  of  the  preciousness  of  Christ  Himself  realized  by 
faith.  (1)  No  one's  word  will  be  precious  to  you  unless  he  is  precious  whose  word 
it  is.  The  word  of  one  you  dislike  will  be  contemptuously  rejected  ;  the  word  of 
one  who  is  an  object  of  indifference  will  pass  swiftly  by  you.  (2)  How  much 
of  the  Word  of  Christ  may  be  missed  unless  He  is  precious.  In  many  parts  you 
think  that  He  is  only  dimly  and  distantly  to  be  found,  and  even  passages  fullest  of 
Him  do  not  bring  Him  as  speaking  personally  to  you.  But  it  is  only  as  it  does 
that  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  Christ.  A  friend's  letter  is  his  word  to  me 
when  by  means  of  it  I  call  him  up  before  me  in  his  own  loved  person  speaking  to 
me.  Then  it  dwells  in  me.  Thus,  through  my  love  to  Him  and  His  preciousness 
to  me,  Scriptures  which  seem  to  have  Uttlo  to  do  with  Him  may  become  His 
Word  to  me.  2.  The  preciousness  of  Christ's  Word,  as  well  as  of  Christ  Himself, 
is  essential  to  its  dwelling  in  you.  (1)  If  Christ  is  precious,  His  Word  must 
be  precious.  The  word  of  a  precious  friend  is  precious  even  before  you  know 
what  it  contains.  Its  very  outside  is  welcome.  But  it  becomes  more  so  as  yon 
study  it,  and  especially  if  it  be  of  real  value.  (2)  Most  Christians  can  name  a 
text  apparently  having  little  to  do  with  Christ,  which  has  become,  nevertheless,  one 
of  His  best  remembrancers.  It  is  connected  with  some  marked  crisis ;  as  a  whisper 
of  consolation,  a  breath  of  pity  in  sinfulness,  felt  as  the  Word  of  Christ  just  then 
wanted.  (3)  The  way  of  finding  Christ  all  through  the  Bible  is  not  merely  to 
get  it  to  speak  of  Christ,  but  to  get  Christ  to  speak  to  you  about  it;  and  so 
to  make  it  all  His,  t.<.,  let  it  all,  every  bit  and  fragment  of  it,  be  welded  into  yom.' 
experience,  with  Christ  living  in  you  the  hope  of  glory.  (4)  This  may  be  by  the 
Spirit  being  given  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  faith.  He  teaches  you  all  things  as 
said  by  Christ.  Do  not  force  it  to  tell  of  Christ  formally,  so  as  to  offend  critics 
and  offend  ordinary  readers.  Take  it  in  its  plain  meaning,  but  expect  that  Christ 
in  it  may  have  some  lesson  to  teach ;  some  comfort  to  impart  ;  some  rebuke  to 
administer.  3.  The  felt  preciousness  of  real  present  and  living  intercourse 
between  Christ  and  jou  will  cause  the  Word,  as  His,  to  abide  in  you.  (1)  That 
Word  sustains  the  intercourse,  and  is  for  colloquial  uses.  You  are  to  dwell  in 
Christ  and  He  in  you,  but  communion  cannot  long  be  maintained  without  language. 
We  may  dream  of  this  mutual  indwelling  after  some  vague,  sleepy  fashion  ;  but  if 
it  is  to  be  more  than  a  dream  there  must  be  talk  between  us.  He  Himself  deals 
with  this  subject  (John  xv.  7  ;  xvi.  23).  This  can  only  be  realized  by  the  Comforter 
"  bringing  to  remembrance  whatsoever  He  hath  said  unto  you."  His  Word,  then, 
must  be  the  staple  of  the  verbal  intercourse.  He  uses  it  in  speaking  to  you,  and 
you  in  speaking  to  Him.  (2)  Thus  used,  it  will  dwell.  Otherwise,  while  whole 
strings  of  texts  or  chapters  may  be  retained  in  the  memory,  and  may  be  glibly 
quoted,  the  virtue  will  be  gone  out  of  them.  If  you  would  have  the  Word  to 
abide  in  yon  as  the  precious  Word  of  a  precious  Saviour,  you  must  always  turn 
it  to  account  in  fellowship  with  Him.  II.  Eichlt.  1.  In  quantity.  Let  the 
mind  and  soul  be  richly  stored.  Ah  !  how  much  there  is  of  the  Bible  that  does 
not  dwell  in  you  because  you  do  not  realize  it  as  the  Word  of  Christ ;  whole 
chapters  that  Lave  not  been  linked  to  any  gracious  dealing  of  Christ.  2.  In 
quality.  (1)  A  rich  manure  is  one  that  enriches  the  soil ;  and  it  dwells  in  the  soil 
richly  in  proportion  hs  it  enriches  it,  turning  its  hard,  dry  sterility  into  fruitful  mould. 
So  let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  as  to  enrich  your  souls.  (2)  But  it  must 
be  as  the  Word  of  Christ.  For  such  is  the  poverty  and  perversity  of  the  soil,  that 
otherwise  even  the  Word  will,  instead  of  enriching  the  soul,  become  partaker  of  its 
deadness,  and  end  in  being  as  salt  which  has  lost  its  savour.  The  letter  killeth, 
but  the  Spirit  giveth  life,  making  it  truly  the  living  Word  of  a  living  Christ.     (B) 


<ma,  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  S41 

And  how  penetrating,  as  well  as  powerful,  should  be  its  virtue.  It  should  reaoh  to 
«very  nook  of  your  life.  3.  In  correspondence  to  the  riches  of  Him  whose  Word  it 
is.  Biches  of  goodness,  glory,  wisdom,  knowledge,  grace  ;  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ.  4.  It  is  to  dwell  in  you,  not  only  as  rich  receivers,  but  dispensers.  "  Freely 
ye  have  received,  freely  give."  You  are  to  be  richly  productive,  fruit-bearing,  in 
iaith,  in  good  works.  6.  Notice  the  social  bearing  of  the  precept  as  embedded  in 
the  context  (vers.  12-16  on  the  one  hand,  and  ver.  16  on  the  other).  In  either 
view  this  indwelling  is  not  to  be  like  a  mass  of  dead  matter  crammed  into  a  dead 
receptacle ;  as  bales  are  packed  in  a  warehouse,  or  loads  of  unread  learning 
are  crowded  on  library  shelves  for  show.  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the 
mouth,  the  life,  the  hand  must  speak.  (R.  S.  CandU»h,  D.D.)  Indwelling  of 
the  Word  of  Christ : — I.  The  Word  of  Christ.  1.  The  literal  Word  of  Christ  is 
one  of  the  most  wonderful  things  that  ever  has  been  in  the  world.  Not  from 
Roman  rostrum,  nor  in  terms  of  Greek  philosophy,  nor  as  a  Jewish  rabbi,  but 
simply  and  naturally  to  simple  and  ordinary  men  wherever  they  could  be  got 
together,  and  as  He  spake  the  words  seem  to  root  themselves  hi  the  heart, 
and  grew  a  living  force  in  the  life  of  the  nation.  Then  came  the  alternative 
that  He  must  keep  silence  or  die ;  but  He  went  on  speaking  till  He  said,  "  It 
is  finished."  Immediately  on  His  resurrection  He  began  to  speak,  and  when  He 
went  away  He  left  nothiug  behind  Him  but  His  Word.  At  that  time  His  life  and 
death  were  unknown  powers,  and  He  did  not  leave  the  least  written  explanation  of 
them,  nor  were  the  Gospels  in  existence  at  the  time  of  this  Epistle  ;  but  there  was 
the  Word  of  Christ  in  its  newness  and  energy.  2.  Whether  or  not  that  Word 
would  have  lived  without  a  literary  embodiment  we  are  not  required  to  settle. 
For  evidently  it  was  Christ's  purpose  to  condense  His  living  speech  into  writings 
for  the  instruction  of  men.  And  there  is  clear  reference  here  to  the  written  as 
well  as  the  spoken  Word.  Thus  the  phrase  takes  its  most  comprehensive  sense — 
the  gospel — all  that  is  revealed  of  God  for  human  salvation.  3.  Manifestly  all 
this  lies  solely  in  the  Scriptures.  There  is  authoritative  Word  of  Christ  for  us 
nowhere  else.  But  here  the  Book  is  all  His.  He  has  fulfilled  it,  explained  it, 
inspired  it,  made  it  a  living  Word  from  first  to  last,  that  He  might  by  His  Spirit 
give  it  living  and  blessed  applications.  II.  Its  indwelling.  Yield  yourselves  up 
«s  sacred  dwellings  to  be  occupied  with  it.  1.  This  means  that  other  tenants  are 
not  to  remain  unless  in  full  agreement  with  this  chief  dweller.  Thoughts  and 
words  of  men,  plans  of  earthly  ambition,  pleasures  of  sin — away  1  All  thoughts 
are  to  be  ruled,  all  cares  hallowed  by  it,  and  all  enjoyments  made  safe  and  good. 
It  must  be  this  much,  or  it  can  be  nothing  vital.  Christ's  Word  in  the  morning, 
selfish  prudence  all  through  the  day  ;  Christ's  Word  for  religious  service,  the  word 
of  man  for  the  mercantile  transaction  ;  Christ's  Word  for  sickness  and  death, 
other  words  for  times  of  health  and  pleasure ;  will  not  do.  The  tenant  will  only 
occupy  as  sole  possessor  of  the  tenement.  2.  Let  it  dwell.  There  is  plenty 
of  it  to  fill  the  wonderful  house.  (1)  Down  to  the  deepest  base  of  life  it  will 
go,  where  passions  lurk,  and  flowing  round  and  through  them,  it  will  purge 
away  what  is  unhallowed,  leaving  only  wholesome  forces  to  strengthen  and  perfect 
character.  (2)  Into  the  rooms  that  lie  more  open  to  common  day,  and  more  level 
with  the  world,  where  many  busy  feet  come  and  go — where  knowledge  gathers 
her  stores,  prudence  holds  her  scales,  judgment  records  her  decisions,  diligence 
plies  her  tasks,  acquisition  counts  her  gains,  and  foresight  watches  the  opening 
future ;  into  all  these  the  living  Word  will  enter,  and  at  her  ingress  the 
darkening  shadow  melts,  the  wrinkles  of  care  are  smoothed,  and  slippery 
things  cease  their  blandishments,  and  injustice  and  unkindness  hide  their 
heads.  (3)  Up  higher  yet,  where  imagination  lights  her  lamp,  and  inven- 
tion stirs  her  fires,  and  desire  bends  the  knee,  looking  upward,  and  hope 
sits  watching  with  nothing  between  her  and  the  stars.  3.  Eichly — in  its 
best  forms  and  sweetest  fragrance,  with  all  its  luminous,  guiding  powers.  Fill 
yourselves  with  it.  Open  all  the  doors,  fling  wide  the  windows.  You  have  only  to 
do  that.  You  have  not  to  make  the  Word :  it  is  nigh  thee  in  thy  heart  and  in  thy 
i  mouth  if  thou  wilt  but  let  it  dwell  in  thee  richly.  4.  But  here  is  more  than  a  mere 
I  passive  allowance.  There  is  a  direct  appeal  to  the  will  and  to  the  activity  of  the 
mind.  The  Word,  abundant  as  it  is,  will  not  come  to  dwell  at  all  without  consent 
and  careful  and  diligent  endeavour.  Much  "wisdom"  is  needed  for  the  due 
remembrance  and  seasonable  entertainment  of  the  various  parts  in  order  to  apply 
it  to  meet  the  wants  of  life  as  they  arise.  In  this  every  man  must  be  his  own 
minister.    Wc  do  not  need  the  whole  Bible  every  day ;  we  need  it  as  we  need  corn 

16 


242  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

in  the  granary,  as  the  lamps  by  night.  There  is  many  a  passage  in  reserve.  We 
glance  at  them  to-day  with  only  a  general  interest,  but  the  day  will  come  when  they 
will  be  as  thousands  of  gold  and  silver.  Meantime  it  is  a  great  matter  to  know 
what  is  daily  bread  for  this  day.  (1)  Am  I  in  the  dark  about  myself,  about  the 
world  ?  Then  it  will  be  wise  to  let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  me  as  a  revelation. 
(2)  Am  I  doubting  and  desponding,  finding  few  signs  of  grace?  Then  let  me 
remember  the  Word  of  Christ  as  a  word  of  assured  salvation,  saving  the  eyes  from 
tears,  the  feet  from  falling,  and  the  soul  from  death.  (3)  Am  I,  though  calmed 
with  forgiveness,  very  weak,  and  unfit  for  continuing  the  struggle  of  the  nobler  Ufe  ? 
Then  let  me  take  some  strong  promise,  adapted  to  the  need,  and  drink  it  up  as  a 
fainting  man  would  drink  a  cordial  until  I  am  refreshed.  (4)  Am  I  sorrowing  ? 
Can  I  forget  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled."  (5)  Am  I  passing  away  from  earth 
and  time  ?  More  than  ever  do  I  need  to  take  Him  at  His  word  :  "  I  wiU  not  leave 
nor  forsake. "  IH.  The  outflow.  One  of  the  divinest  and  most  necessary  truths 
is  that  we  must  give  in  order  to  have.  The  Word  of  Christ,  in  order  to  secure 
continuance,  must  be  always  leaving  us.  Go  among  the  mountains,  and  you  will 
see  that  it  is  the  living  stream  that  flows  away ;  and  where  it  flows  the  grass  is 
green,  and  the  flowers  bloom,  and  the  cattle  drink,  and  the  children  linger  to  dip 
the  foot  and  hear  the  song.  Yet  the  spring  is  in  no  way  exhausted.  It  is  fed  by 
the  drawing  sun,  the  condensing  mountains,  the  bountiful  clouds,  the  wide  sea. 
Let  your  inner  life,  nourished  by  the  indwelling  Word,  have  not  ostentatious  and 
noisy,  but  natural  and  continuous  expression.  Its  light  will  come  to  you  from  the 
land  of  lights.  So  will  you  draw  from  the  infinite  ocean  of  Divine  love  (see  vers . 
16,  17).  A  beautiful  life;  a  lite  of  poetry  and  heart  music;  a  life,  too,  open  alike 
to  all.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Psalms  and  byztms  and  spiritual  songs. — L  The 
Psalms  of  the  Old  Testament  have  no  single  and  universally  accepted  designation 
in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  They  first  obtained  such  in  the  Septuagint.  Psahn 
comes  from  a  word  signifying  properly  a  touching,  and  then  a  touching  of  a  stringed 
instrument  with  a  plectrum,  and  next  the  instrument  itself,  and  lastly  the  song 
sung  with  this  musical  accompaniment.  It  was  in  this  latest  stage  that  the  word 
was  adopted  by  the  Septuagint,  and  to  this  agree  the  ecclesiastical  definitions  of  it. 
In  all  probability  the  word  here  and  in  Eph.  v.  19  refers  to  the  inspired  Psalms  of 
the  Hebrew  canon,  and  certainly  designates  these  on  all  other  occasions  where  it  is 
met  with  in  the  New  Testament,  with  the  doubtful  exception  of  1  Cor.  xiv.  16.  The 
psalms,  then,  which  the  apostle  would  have  the  faithful  to  sing  to  one  another  are 
those  of  David,  Asaph,  and  the  other  sweet  singers  of  Israel.  II.  Htmns.  While 
the  "psalm  "  by  right  of  primogeniture,  as  at  once  the  oldest  and  most  venerable, 
occupies  the  foremost  place,  the  Church  of  Christ  does  not  restrict  herself  to  such, 
but  claims  the  freedom  of  bringing  new  things  as  well  as  old  out  of  her  treasure 
house,  a  new  salvation  demanding  a  new  song.  It  was  the  essence  of  a  Greek 
"  hymn  "  that  it  should  be  addressed  to,  or  be  in  praise  of  a  god  or  a  hero,  i.e.,  a 
deified  man,  as  Callisthenes  reminded  Alexander,  who,  claiming  hymns  for  himself, 
or  suffering  them  to  be  addressed  to  him,  implicitly  accepted  divine  honours.  In 
the  gradual  breaking  down  of  the  distinction  between  the  human  and  the  divine 
which  marked  the  fallen  days  of  Greece  and  Bome,  with  the  usurping  on  the  part 
of  men  of  divine  honours,  the  hymn  came  more  and  more  to  be  applied  to  men ; 
although  this  was  not  without  remonstrance.  When  the  word  was  assumed  into 
the  language  of  the  Church,  this  essential  distinction  clung  to  it  still.  A  "  psalm  " 
might  be  a  De  profundis,  the  story  of  man's  deliverance,  or  a  commemoration  of 
mercies  received;  and  of  a  "spiritual  song"  much  the  same  could  be  said ;  a 
"  hymn  "  must  always  be  more  or  less  of  a  Magnificat,  a  direct  address  of  praise 
and  glory  to  God.  Augustine  in  more  places  than  one  states  the  essentials  of  a 
hymn.  1.  It  must  be  sung.  2.  It  must  be  praise.  3.  It  must  be  to  God.  But 
though  "  hymn "  was  a  word  freely  adopted  in  the  fourth  century,  it  nowhere 
occars  in  the  early  Fathers,  probably  because  it  was  so  steeped  in  heathenism,  so 
linked  with  profane  associations,  there  were  so  many  hymns  to  Zeus,  Hermes, 
Aphrodite,  Ac,  that  the  early  Christians  shrank  from  it.  We  may  confidently 
assume  that  the  hymns  referred  to  in  the  text  were  direct  addresses  to  God,  snch 
as  Luke  i.  46-56,  68-79  ;  Acts  iv.  24,  and  that  which  Paul  and  Silas  sang  in  the 
Philippian  dungeon  (Acts  xvi.  25).  How  noble,  how  magnificent  uninspired  hymns 
could  prove  we  have  evidence  in  the  Te  Deum,  in  the  Veni  Creator  Spirittis,  and  in 
many  a  later  heritage  which  the  Church  has  acquired.  That  the  Church,  brought 
at  the  time  when  St.  Paul  wrote  into  a  new  and  marvellous  world  of  realities,  would 
be  rich  in  these  we  might  be  sure,  even  if  no  evidence  existed  to  this  eSect.  Of  lo^ 


vrnxp.  in.]  COLOSSIANS.  243 


evidence,  however,  there  is  abundance  (Eph.  v.  14;  1  Tim.  iii.  16;  2  Tim.  K.  11-14). 
And  as  it  was  quit©  impossible  that  the  Church,  releasing  itself  from  the  Jewish 
Bynat;;ogue,  should  fall  into  the  same  mistake  as  some  portions  of  the  Reformed 
Church,  we  may  be  sure  that  it  adopted  into  liturgic  use,  not  psalms  only,  but  also 
hymns,  singing  them  to  Christ  as  God  (Pliny,  Ep.  x.  96) ;  though  this  we  may  con- 
clude, more  largely  in  Churches  gathered  out  of  the  heathen  world  than  in  those 
wherein  a  strong  Jewish  element  existed.  III.  Spikitcal  sonos.  'O^^  is  the  only 
■word  of  this  group  which  the  Apocalypse  knows  (v.  9,  xiv.  3,  xt.  3).  St  Paul,  on 
the  two  occasions  when  he  employs  it,  adds  "  spiritual "  to  it,  and  this,  no  doabt, 
because  "  Ode"  by  itself  might  mean  any  kind  of  song,  as  of  battle,  of  harvest,  or 
festal,  or  hymeneal,  while  "psalm,"  from  its  Hebrew  use,  and  "hymn,"  from  ita 
Greek,  did  not  need  such  qualification.  The  epithet  thus  applied  does  not  affirm 
that  these  odes  were  Divinely  inspired,  any  more  than  the  spiritual  man  is  an  in- 
spired man  (1  Cor.  iii.  1;  Gal.  vi.  1),  but  only  that  they  were  such  as  were  composed 
by  spiritual  men,  and  moved  in  the  sphere  of  spiritual  things.  How  are  we,  then, 
to  distinguish  these  from  the  former  two.  If  "  psalms  "  represent  the  heritage  of 
sacred  song  derived  by  the  Christian  Church  from  the  Jewish,  the  "  hymns  and 
spiritual  songs  "  will  cover  what  further  in  the  same  kind  it  produced  out  of  its  own 
bosom ;  but  with  a  difference.  What  the  hymns  were  we  have  seen ;  but  Christian 
thought  and  feeling  will  soon  have  expanded  into  a  wider  range  of  poetic  utterances 
than  those  in  which  there  is  a  direct  address  to  the  Deity.  If  we  turn,  e.g.,  to 
Harbert's  Temple,  or  Keble's  Christian  Year,  there  are  many  poems  in  both,  which, 
as  certainly  they  are  not  "psalms,"  so  as  little  do  they  possess  the  characteristics 
of  hymns.  *'  Spiritual  songs  "  these  might  be  fitly  called  ;  even  as  in  almost  all 
our  collections  of  so-called  "  hymns  "  there  are  not  a  few  which  by  much  juster 
title  would  bear  this  name.  (Archbishop  Trench.)  The  poets  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment : — I.  The  extent  of  the  poetic  endowment  in  the  pbimitive  Chubchk8» 
That  it  was  extensively  bestowed  we  may  conceive — 1.  From  the  frequent  reference 
made  to  it  (1  Cor.  xiv.  26).  In  Corinth  it  was  valued  as  a  charismata  (see  also  Eph. 
V.  19 ;  James  v.  13).  2.  From  the  universality  of  the  preternatural  endowment. 
The  gift  of  the  Spirit  was  generally  bestowed,  and  this  would  rouse  the  poetic  faculty 
in  all  who  had  it,  and  consecrate  it  to  sacred  uses.  8.  From  the  universality  of 
excited  feelings  in  the  apostolic  Churches,  Most  of  those  who  embraced  religion 
were  subject  to  extraordinary  excitement,  and  poetry  is  the  language  of  excited 
feelings.  To  the  unconverted  this  inspiration  was  madness  or  intoxication,  II. 
Its  chakacteb.  Poetical  productions  have  a  character.  They  are  fruitful  or 
barren,  corrupt  or  chaste.  There  is  much  in  our  great  poets  repugnant  to  our 
sense  of  propriety  and  which  we  would  fain  suppress  ;  but  the  mere  fact  that  these 
early  Christian  poets  were  under  the  power  of  the  Spirit  would  show  that  their 
poetry  must  have  been  high  and  pure.  There  are  three  things  which  determine 
the  value  of  poetry.  1.  Intellectual  merit.  This  was  high  with  the  primitive 
Christians.  "  Let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly."  Christian  truth  is 
calculated  to  incite  the  highest  feelings  of  the  soul,  and  these  lofty  emotions  woald 
find  utterance  in  "  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs."  The  profoundest  feelings 
of  our  nature  can  only  be  expressed  in  poetry.  The  highest  strains  of  the  orator 
are  poetical.  2,  Moral  purity.  "  Admonishing  one  another,"  This  implies  a 
deep  concern  for  each  other's  moral  welfare.  The  basis  of  this  concern  is  personal 
morality,  and  issued  in  strains  that  were  morally  improving,  3.  Poetic  conception. 
The  ideas  of  the  primitive  Christians  were  imaginative  and  creative.  IIL  Its 
UTILITY.  Every  Divine  gift  is  bestowed  for  a  useful  purpose.  What  is  the  ase  ot 
this?  1.  For  personal  enjoyment.  The  true  poet  lives  in  a  creation  of  his  own, 
and  in  the  deepest  soUtude  he  communes  with  the  mfinite  source  of  light,  life,  love, 
and  beauty.  "  Poetry,"  said  Coleridge,  "  has  been  to  me  its  own  exceeding  great 
reward.  It  has  soothed  my  affliction,  it  has  endeared  solitude,  and  it  has  given  me 
the  habit  of  wishing  to  discover  the  good  and  beautiful  in  all  that  surrounds  me." 
2,  As  an  element  in  public  worship.  Nothing  adorns,  enlivens,  and  augments  the 
interest  of  public  worship  more  than  music.  It  secures  the  harmony  of  hearts  as 
well  as  of  voices.  3.  It  is  of  social  utility.  Poetry  has  exercised  a  powerful 
influence  on  society  in  all  ages,  for  consolation,  inspiration,  &c.  (P.  L.  Davies^ 
M.A.)  The  service  of  song : — I,  The  duty,      1.  Singing  is  Goci's  ordinance, 

.binding  all  sorts  of  men  (Eph.  vi,  19 ;  James  v.  13 ;  Psa,  Ixvi.  1-2,  xcii.  1,  cxxxv,  3). 
This  is  a  part  of  our  piety,  and  is  a  most  comely  thing.  2.  A  Christian 
should  recreate  himself  chiefiy  this  way  (James  t,  13),  God  does  not  allow  as  tO' 
shoulder  oat  this  with  other  recrtntions.    3,  We  should  sing  in  oar  houses  as  weli 


844  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap.  to. 

as  in  our  Churches.  (1)  For  daily  exercise  (Psa.  ci.  1-2).  (2)  When  Christiana 
meet  together  (1  Cor.  xiv.  26  ;  Eph.  v.  19).  II.  The  manker.  1.  We  should 
teach  and  admonish  by  singing,  and  that — (1)  ourselves,  by  considering  the  matter. 
(2)  Others,  as  ministers  in  appointing  hymns  for  the  congregation,  or  masters  of 
the  family,  or  when  Christians  meet,  there  should  be  choice  of  such  psalms  as  may 
comfort  or  rebuke  according  to  occasion  (1  Cor.  xiv.  26).  2.  We  must  sing  with 
grace.  This  is  diversely  interpreted ;  some  understand  it  of  the  dexterity  that 
should  be  used  in  singing ;  others  of  the  comeliness,  right  order,  reverence,  or 
delight  of  the  heart;  others  of  thanksgiving.  But  I  think  that  to  sing  with 
grace  is  to  exercise  the  graces  of  the  heart  in  singing,  i.e.,  with  holy  joy  (Psa. 
ix.  2) ;  trust  in  God's  mercies  (Psa.  xiii.  5)  ;  a  holy  commemoration  of  God'a 
benefits  (Psa.  xlvii.  6) ;  yea,  with  the  desire  of  our  hearts  that  our  singing  may 
be  acceptable  (Pea.  civ.  33-34).  3.  We  must  sing  with  our  hearts,  not  with  our 
tongues  only  for  ostentation.  To  sing  with  the  heart  is  to  sing  with  the  under- 
standing (Psa.  xlvii.  7;  1  Cor.  xiv.  14),  with  sense  and  feeling.  Hence  we  ar& 
said  to  prepare  our  hearts  before  we  sing  (Psa.  Ivii.  7).  Then  we  must  sing 
earnestly  and  awake  out  of  our  lethargy  (Psa.  Ivii.  8).  4.  We  must  sing  to  the 
Lord  (Eph.  v.  19),  both  to  God's  glory  and  with  a  sense  of  His  presence,  and 
npon  a  holy  remembrance  of  His  blessings.  III.  The  uses.  1.  For  instruction. 
When  we  are  merry  to  sing  psalms  (James  v.  13),  yea,  to  account  this  a 
heavenly  melody  (Eph.  v.  19).  2.  For  reproof  of  such  as  delight  in  profane 
Bongs.  (N.  Byfield.)  The  conditions  of  the  service  of  song : — I.  Psalms,  &c., 
mast  be  spibitcal.  1.  As  to  the  origin.  As  Moses,  David,  and  others  ander 
the  impulse  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  composed  their  psalms,  <&c.,  so  we,  whether  we 
sing  the  same  or  others,  ought  to  do  it  under  the  same  direction  (Eph.  v.  18, 
19).  2.  As  to  matter;  they  treat  of  spiritual  things,  relating  to  the  glory  ol 
God  and  our  salvation  ;  not  of  secular  and  vain  matters.  II.  They  must  bb 
BONG  WITH  grace.  1.  With  gratitude.  The  word  sometimes  means  this  (1  Cor. 
XV.  67 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  14).  Gratitude  is  not  improperly  joined  to  songs  ;  because  we 
are  moved  to  sing  in  joyous  and  prosperous  circumstances,  in  which  condition 
thankfulness  is  binding  and  necessary.  2.  With  gracious  affability,  which 
conveys  both  pleasure  and  utility  to  the  hearers  ;  so  that  what  Horace  says 
concerning  poets  may  be  said  of  these  spiritual  songs.  "They  would  both 
profit  and  deUght."  So  the  word  means  in  chap.  iv.  6,  and  Eph.  iv.  29.  III. 
They  must  be  sdnq  in  the  heart,  i.e.,  from  the  inmost  affection.  And  rightly 
is  an  ardent  emotion  required,  for  the  action  of  singing  declares  the  inward  exulta- 
tion of  the  heart.  He  therefore  acts  the  hypocrite  who  sings  with  the  heart  asleep. 
Hence  David  not  only  tunes  his  voice  to  the  harp,  but  his  voice  before  either  (Psa. 
Ivii.  7-8).  So  Mary  (Luke  i.  46-47).  Do  not  think  one  thing  and  sing  another. 
IV.  They  must  be  sung  unto  the  Lord.  The  songs  of  Christians  ought  not  to 
aim  at  promoting  dissoluteness  or  gain ;  but  to  be  employed  in  celebrating  the 
praises  of  the  Eedeemer.  Corollaries :  1.  The  castom  of  singing  is  useful,  and  ia 
to  be  adopted  in  the  assembling  of  Christians,  as  well  in  public  as  in  private.  2. 
It  is  so  to  be  performed,  that  they  who  hear  may  from  thence  derive  spiritual 
pleasure  and  edification.  Therefore  farewell  to  all  nugatory,  and  much  more  to 
impure  songs.  3.  In  singing  it  ought  to  be  our  especial  care  that  the  heart  be 
affected ;  they  who  neglect  this,  may  perhaps  please  men  by  an  artificial  sweetness 
of  voice,  but  they  will  displease  God  by  an  odious  impurity  of  heart.  4.  What 
things  are  done  for  cheerfulness  and  relaxation  of  the  mind  by  Christians,  ought  to 
be  of  such  a  kind  as  are  agreeable  to  Christ  and  religion :  we  must  therefore  detest 
the  madness  of  those  who  cannot  be  cheerful  without  the  reproach  of  Christ  and 
the  ridicule  of  religion.  (Bp.  Davenant.)  The  service  of  song  a  means  of  Christian 
edification  : — Whenever  a  great  quickening  of  religious  life  comes,  a  great  burst  of 
Christian  song  comes  with  it.  The  mediaval  Latin  hymns  cluster  round  the  early 
pore  days  of  the  monastic  orders ;  Luther's  rough  stormy  hymns  were  as  powerful 
as  his  treatises ;  the  mystic  tenderness  and  rapture  of  Charles  Wesley  have  become 
the  possession  of  the  whole  Church.  The  early  hymns  were  of  a  dogmatic 
eharaoter.  No  doubt  just  as  in  many  a  missionary  Church  a  hymn  is  found  to  be 
the  best  vehicle  for  conveying  the  truth,  so  it  was  in  these  early  Churches,  which 
were  made  np  largely  of  slaves  and  women — both  uneducated.  *•  Singing  the 
gospel "  is  a  very  old  invention  though  the  name  be  new.  In  these  early  commu- 
nities Paul  said,  "Every  one  of  you  hath  a  psalm,  a  doctrine."  If  a  man  had 
•ome  fragment  of  an  old  psalm,  or  some  strain  that  had  come  fresh  from  the 
Ghristian  heart,  ha  might  sing  it,  and  hif  brethren  would  lifltan.    W«  do  not  hav* 


CHAP.  iu.j  COLOSSIANS.  946 

that  Rort  of  psalmody  now.  But  what  a  long  way  we  have  travelled  from  it  to  a 
modern  congregation,  standing  with  liooks  that  they  scarcely  look  at,  and  "  worship- 
ping "  in  a  hymn  which  half  of  them  do  not  open  their  months  to  sing  at  all,  and 
the  other  half  do  in  a  voice  inaudible  three  pews  ofif.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The 
hyimiology  of  the  Church  has  from  the  first  been  a  most  important  element  in  her 
holy  progress  and  means  of  usefulness.  A  large  part  of  the  Bible  is  poetry. 
Instruction  thus  conveyed  aids  the  memory  and  makes  a  greater  impression  on  the 
mind.  How  constantly  did  David  find  relief  in  expressing  his  hopes  and  fears,  his 
joys  and  sorrows  in  song;  and  in  the  record  of  his  experience  how  precious  is  the 
boon  he  has  left  for  the  instruction  and  encouragement  of  God's  children  in  all  ages. 
There  was  a  special  impressiveness  in  the  use  of  psalms  and  hymns  in  the  early 
Church.  Tlie  fii'st  forms  of  literature  in  every  country  and  in  great  national  move- 
ments are  for  the  most  part  in  song.  Thus  it  was  in  Greece ;  thus  it  was  in  Scot- 
land. Facts  of  history,  deeds  of  prowess,  wonderful  providences,  are  handed  down 
in  song,  and  are  in  this  form  better  remembered  and  more  easily  preserved.  In  oar 
own  day,  with  the  power  of  the  printing  p!es>=,  this  may  not  be  so  necessary  ;  but 
when  books  had  to  be  copied  in  MS.,  and  books  were  scanty,  the  citation  of  song 
and  psalm  formed  an  important  element  of  instruction.  It  has  been  said,  by  a 
well-known  author,  that  if  he  were  allowed  to  make  the  songs  of  a  nation,  he  cared 
not  who  made  the  laws.  The  hymns  of  the  Church  have  often  been  as  the  very 
shrine  of  spiritual  life,  for  the  preservation  of  doctrine,  and  the  means  of  progress. 
How  many  cares  have  been  relieved  by  some  well-known  hymn?  How  many 
Christians  have  crossed  the  river  strong  in  the  faith  with  the  words  of  some  precious 
stanza  on  their  tongues  whicli  they  learnt  in  the  Sunday  school?  (J.  Spence,  D.D.) 
Singing  with  gn^ace  In  your  hearts  unto  the  Lord. — Pbrygia  was  proverbially  a 
land  of  music.  A  music  of  wild  excitement  was  used  in  the  worship  of  Cybele,  and 
of  Salazion,  the  Phrygian  Dionysos.  Hence  St.  Paul  might  be  the  more  anxions 
that  Christian  singing  should  be  sweet  and  graceful  in  a  Phrygian  Church.  For  a 
deep  feeling  of  anxiety  on  the  part  of  a  ruler  in  the  ancient  Church  that  sacred  song 
should  be  beautiful,  see  the  story  how  Ignatius  brought  back  the  melody  of  angels 
heard  in  vision  to  his  Church  at  Antioch  (Socrates,  Hist.  vi.  8).  Heartfelt  singing 
is  not  voiceless  singing  (Psa.  cxi.  1).  The  Psalmist's  praise  was  in  his  heart,  but 
it  must  have  been  vocal  also,  for  it  was  such  praise  as  is  offered  in  the  "  assembly." 
Tbe  three  conditions  of  sacred  song  are  sweetness  of  vocal  expression,  fulness  of 
inward  devotion,  direction  to  a  Divine  object.  These  are  expressed  in  this  clause. 
^/  (1)  As  to  outward  expression — "gracefully,  sweetly,  so  as  to  give  pleasure  and  be 
attractive."  (2)  As  to  inward  devotion — "  heartfelt."  (3)  As  to  the  Being 
addressed — "  to  the  Lord."  The  cine  to  the  real  meaning  of  the  passage  is  to  bear 
in  mind  that  the  apostle  is  speaking  of  singing  as  a  Church  duty,  a  part  of  tha 
Church's  corporate  life,  a  declaration  of  peace  among  her  children,  and  a  means  of 
edification.  The  recognition  of  sweetness  and  pleasingness  as  an  element  of  publio 
worship  is  very  interesting  and  important.  Such  care  for  singing,  again,  is  quite 
of  a  piece  with  Paul's  high  ideal  of  womanly  grace  and  beauty  in  youth  (1  Cor.  xi. 
15),  priestlike  dignity  in  age  (Titos  iL  3),  with  his  recognition  of  things  •*  lovely  " 
(Phil.  iv.  3),  with  his  appeal  to  primary  aesthetic  instincts  ^1  Cor.  xi.  13),  with  his 
horror  of  "  confusion  "  in  publio  worship  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33),  with  the  word  for  a  grave 
and  majestic  beauty  in  public  service  expressed  in  that  great  foundation-rubrio 
(1  Cor  xiv.  40).  It  shows  how  thoughtfully  he  considered  local  circumstances,  and 
adapted  his  lessons  to  them.  Phrygian  music  was  apt  to  become  the  accompani- 
ment of  tbe  passionate  and  unmanly  wailing  of  Asian  barbarism.  As  Plato  says, 
"  The  Phrygian  strain  was  adapted  for  sacred  rites  and  fanatical  excitement,  being 
of  almost  frenzied  wildness."  {Bp.  Alexander.)  Power  of  a  hymn : — On  one  of 
the  days  when  President  Garfield  lay  dying  at  the  seaside,  he  was  a  little  better, 
and  was  permitted  to  sit  by  the  window,  while  Mrs.  Garfield  was  in  the  adjoining 
room.  Love,  hope,  and  gratitude  filled  her  heart  as  she  sang  the  hymn  commencing 
•'  Guide  me,  0  Thou  great  Jehovah  !  "  As  the  soft  and  plaintive  notes  floated 
into  the  sick  chamber,  the  President  turned  his  eyes  up  to  Dr.  Bliss,  and  asked, 
"Is  that  Crete?"  "Yes,"  replied  the  doctor;  "it  is  Mrs.  Garfield."  "Quick, 
open  the  door  a  little,"  anxiously  responded  the  sick  man.  Dr.  Bliss  opened  the 
door,  and  after  listening  a  few  moments  Mr.  Garfield  exclaimed,  as  the  large  tears 
coursed  down  his  sunken  cheeks,  "Glorious,  Bliss,  isn't  it?"  {W.  Baxi'ndale.) 
Power  of  a  hymn : — A  little  boy  came  to  one  of  our  city  missionaries,  and  holding 
out  a  dirty  and  well-worn  bit  of  printed  paper,  said,  "  Please,  sir,  father  sent 
me  to  get  a  clean  paper  like  that."      Taking   it  from  his   hand  the  missionary 


246  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nx. 

found  it  was  a  bill  with  the  hymn  "  Just  as  I  am  "  printed  upon  it.  He  looked 
down  into  the  little  earnest  face  and  asked  the  boy  where  he  got  it,  and  why 
he  wanted  a  clean  copy.  "  We  found  it,  sir,  in  sister's  pocket  after  she  died ; 
and  she  used  to  sing  it  all  the  time  she  was  sick,  and  loved  it  so  much  that 
father  wanted  to  get  a  clean  one  to  put  in  a  frame  to  hang  up.  Won't  you 
give  us  one,  sir  ?  "  (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)  Saved  by  a  hymn  : — On  board  the 
ill-fated  steamer  Seawanhaka  was  one  of  the  Fisk  University  singers.  Before 
leaving  the  burning  steamer  and  committing  himself  to  the  merciless  waves,  ha 
carefully  fastened  upon  himself  and  his  wife  life  preservers.  Some  one  cruelly 
dragged  away  that  of  his  wife,  leaving  her  without  hope,  except  as  she  could 
cling  to  her  husband.  This  she  did,  placing  her  hands  firmly  on  his  shoulders, 
and  resting  there  until,  her  strength  becoming  exhausted,  she  said,  "  I  can  hold 
on  no  longer  1 "  "  Try  a  little  longer,"  was  the  response  of  the  wearied  and 
agonized  husband,  "  let  us  sing  •  Rock  of  Ages.' "  And  as  the  sweet  strains 
floated  over  the  troubled  waters,  reaching  the  ears  of  the  sinking  and  dying, 
little  did  they  know,  those  sweet  singers  of  Israel,  whom  they  comforted.  But, 
lol  as  they  sang,  one  after  another  of  the  exhausted  ones  were  seen  raising 
their  heads  above  the  overwhelming  waves,  joining  with  a  last  effort  in  the 
eweet,  dying,  pleading  prayer,  "  Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me,"  &o.  With  the 
song  seemed  to  come  strength  ;  another  and  yet  another  was  encouraged  to  renewed 
effort.  Soon  in  the  distance  a  boat  was  seen  approaching  I  Could  they  hold  out 
a  little  longer  7  Singing  still,  they  tried,  and  soon  with  superhuman  strength 
laid  hold  of  the  lifeboat,  upon  which  they  were  borne  in  safety  to  land.  This  is  no 
fiction ;  it  was  related  by  the  singer  himself,  who  said  he  believed  Toplady's  sweet 
"  Rock  of  Ages  "  saved  many  another  besides  himself  and  wife.  And  this  was  only 
salvation  from  temporal  death  I  But,  methinks,  from  the  bright  world  yonder  the 
good  Toplady  must  be  rejoicing  that  God  ever  taught  him  to  write  that  hymn,  which 
has  helped  to  save  so  many  from  eternal  death,  as,  catching  its  spirit,  they  have 
learned  to  east  themselves  alone  for  help  on  that  dear  "  Rock  of  Ages," — cleft,  sinner, 
for  them,  for  you,  and  for  me,  and  which  ever  stands  rent  asunder  that  it  may 
shelter  those  who  atter  the  cry, "  Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee."    {Canadian  Baptist). 

Ver.  17.  Whatsoever  ye  do  In  word  or  deed,  do  all  In  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus. — Method  and  mtisic,  or  the  art  of  lioly  and  happy  living  : — It  is  always  an 
advantage  to  have  the  laws  of  a  kingdom  as  concise  as  possible.  The  amount  of 
litigation  caused  by  the  English  code  is  immense.  In  God's  government  the  matter 
is  plain  enough — included  in  ten  commandments,  and  further  reduced  by  Christ  to 
two.  Our  text  is  an  instance  of  the  terseness  of  Divine  precepts.  It  contains  a 
law  applicable  to  every  action,  word,  thought,  place,  circumstance  in  a  few  brief 
words.  It  is  a  great  advantage  to  a  mechanic  to  be  able  to  carry  with  him  a 
pocket  rule  or  square.  And  so  we  have  here  a  compendious  rule  in  life  which  can 
never  fail.  I.  Holt  walkino  described.  *'  Whatsoever,"  &c.  This  rule  applies  to 
those  who  are  in  Christ.  The  unconverted  require  a  radical  change  before  they 
can  carry  it  out.  You  cannot  walk  as  a  believer  if  you  have  not  believed.  But 
having  begun  at  the  beginning,  and  taken  the  step  of  salvation  by  faith,  the  walk 
has  to  be  carried  on  by  following  this  injunction,  which  means — 1.  To  do  all  through 
the  oflQce  and  name  of  Christ  as  Mediator.  (1)  You  are  bound  to  offer  daily  praise: 
it  must  be  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  (2)  You  are  to  abound  in  prayer.  His 
name  gives  power  to  prayer  ;  it  is  not  so  much  your  earnestness  and  sincerity,  but 
His  blood  that  speaks  to  God.  (3)  You  are  to  give  Him  your  time  and  services  in 
teaching  the  ignorant,  &c. ;  they  can  only  be  acceptable  in  Him.  (4)  Yon  are  to 
give  of  your  substance  ;  if  you  give  all  your  wealth,  the  offering  presented  without 
Christ  is  nothing.  2.  Do  all  under  the  authority  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  your  King. 
The  business  of  a  Christian  upon  earth  is  not  an  independent  one  ;  he  is  a  steward 
for  Christ.  3.  Do  all  under  the  sanction  of  Christ  as  our  example.  It  is  an  admir- 
able course  to  ask,  "  What  would  Christ  have  done  in  these  circumstances  ?  "  4.  Do 
all  as  to  the  glory  of  Christ.  The  Christian  must  not  seek  self.  6.  Do  all  in  the 
strength  of  Christ.  With  Him  is  the  residue  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  is  the 
believer's  power.  These  words  are  a  rebuke — (1)  to  those  who  do  nothing  in  Christ's 
name  ;  (2)  to  those  who  glory  in  the  name  of  men,  as  of  churches  or  of  saints  ;  (3) 
to  those  professors  who  dishonour  the  name  under  which  they  profess  to  live.  We 
have — II.  Holt  music  pbescribed — •'  Giving  thanks,"  &c.  Soldiers  march  to 
battle  to  trumpet  and  drum,  &c..  and  it  is  an  excellent  thing  when  Christian  men 
know  how  to  sing  as  well  as  work.   The  best  music  consists  in  thankfulness  to  God. 


in.]  OOLOSSIANS.  U7 

We  onght  to  praise  Him  in  all  things,  but  more  particnlarly  In  the  exercise  of 
religion.  Some  people  are  so  afraid  of  joy,  that  they  seem  to  labour  under  the 
delusion  that  all  who  are  devout  must  be  unhappy.  The  text  tells  us  under  what 
aspect  we  should  regard  God  when  thus  thanking  Him.  It  ia  as  a  Father.  III. 
HoiiY  MOTIVES  INCULCATED.  Inscribed  on  our  hearts  are  reasons  which  must  secure 
obedience.  These  are — 1.  Gratitude.  All  we  have  has  been  received  from  the 
Father  through  Christ.  2,  The  worthiness  of  Christ.  "  Him  hath  God  exalted  to 
be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour."  3.  Love.  He  claims  our  love,  and  He  gives  us  His. 
iC.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Suggestive  $ummary  of  Christian  duty  : — I,  The  ouidinq  law 
«r  Christian  duty.  "  Do  all  in  the  name,"  &c.  In  Christ  is — 1.  The  purest  motive 
to  duty.  Motive  originates  and  governs  action,  and  makes  it  good  or  bad.  It  is 
only  iu  Christ  we  find  the  holiest  and  purest  motive ;  in  Him  love  takes  the  place  of 
sellishness  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15).  2.  The  noblest  pattern  of  duty.  3.  The  highest  end 
of  duty.  He  is  the  goal  towards  which  all  actions  tend.  There  is  no  higher  name 
for  it — "  is  above  every  name."  4.  The  final  authority  of  duty.  II.  Its  untvebsaii 
OBiaoATioN — "  Whatsoever  ye  do,"  &o.  There  must  be — 1.  A  recognition  of  Christ 
in  everything.  2.  Absolute  dependence  on  Christ  at  all  times.  3.  Supreme  devotion 
to  Christ.  III.  Iti  dnvakying  spirit — "  Giving  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  by 
Him."  Lessons  :  1.  The  name  of  Christ  is  the  greatest  power  in  the  universe.  2. 
All  duty  gathers  its  significance  and  blessedness  from  its  relation  to  Christ.  3.  A 
thankful  spirit  is  happy  in  enterprise,  brave  in  difiBculties,  and  patient  in  reverses, 
(6.  Barlow.)  Godly  living: — This  was  applied  to  the  "elect  of  God"  v.  12. 

This  is  the  title  given  by  the  apostle  to  Christians.  A  course  of  action  is  appointed 
for  them  to  carry  out.  I.  What  ib  to  be  done  ?  "  Do  all."  The  "  all  "  refers  to 
every  act  of  religious  life.  There  is  to  be — (1)  Humbleness  of  mind  ;  (2)  longsuffering ; 
(3)  meekness  ;  above  all  (4)  charity.  The  word  of  Christ  must  dwell  richly  in  the 
heart  (see  previous  verse).  II.  How  it  is  to  be  cabried  out — "  In  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus."  This  implies  three  things.  1.  By  the  authority  of  Christ  (Acts  iii.  6). 
2.  For  the  sake  of  Christ  (Mark  ix.  41).  3.  For  the  glory  of  Christ  (Acts  xv.  26). 
{Preacher's  Analyst.)  Th«  motive  power  of  a  holy  life  : — This  is  one  of  the  bold 
sweeping  statemen-ts  of  Scripture.  However  extraordinary  and  extravagant,  it  is  in 
keeping  with  the  whole  spirit  of  Christianity.  Unlike  other  religions,  that  of  Christ 
admits  of  no  compromises.  It  will  have  all  or  nothing,  the  first  place  or  none.  The 
author  of  nature  and  the  author  of  Christianity  give  tokens  of  being  one  and  the 
flame,  in  that  their  principles  are  alike  simple,  universal,  imperious,  inexorable.  In 
both  is  the  same  quiet  exertion  of  power,  the  same  calm  majesty  of  law,  and  the 
laws  of  each  can  never  be  trifled  with  with  impunity.  The  law  of  gravity  does  not 
admit  of  dispute,  neither  does  the  law  that  eternal  life  is  to  be  found  through  the 
Son  of  God.  Observe — I.  The  extreme  breadth  and  lofty  spirit  of  Christian 
DUTY.  '*  Whatsoever,"  Ac.  These  words  cover  the  whole  sphere  of  Christian 
activity.  Our  words,  thoughts,  desires,  labours,  &c.,  are  to  be  under  the  habitual 
influence  of  a  sacred  and  sanctifying  power  which  lies  lurking  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  There  are  one  or  two  simple  explanations  which  show  that  there  is  no 
real  extravagance  in  this  large  demand.  1.  If  the  Christian  law  is  just  another 
name  for  the  law  of  truth,  love,  and  holiness,  it  is  quite  clear  that  we  shall  never 
get  out  of  the  range  of  that  law,  neither  in  this  world  nor  the  next.  Not  more  cer- 
tainly does  the  law  of  gravity  reach  from  world  to  world  than  does  this  law  prevail 
wherever  intelligence  exists.  2.  If  religion  consists  in  entering  the  service  of  a  God 
who  looks  not  on  the  outward  appearance  but  on  the  heart,  that  religion  will  be  the 
only  true  one  which  produces  right  dispositions  towards  Him  of  faithfulness  in  all 
things,  the  smallest  as  well  as  the  biggest.  The  spirit  we  are  of  determines  the 
character  of  our  actions  whether  they  are  holy  or  unholy.  The  life  of  the  saint  and 
of  the  sinner  are  made  up  very  much  of  the  same  commonplace  duties,  and  in  all 
that  is  patent  to  the  world  there  may  be  little  difference  between  them  :  but  the 
spirit  by  which  they  are  actuated  constitutes  a  gulf  between  them  as  wide  as  that 
which  divides  light  and  darkness,  heaven  and  hell.  3.  It  were  well  for  the  Church 
and  the  world  if  we  recognized  more  clearly  this  breadth  of  Christian  duty.  There 
is  no  act,  however  little,  which  Christ  does  not  see  and  touch,  and  which  may  not 
tend  as  much  to  His  honour  as  the  songs  of  the  Seraphim;  there  is  no  affection, 
talent,  energy  on  which  He  does  not  put  His  hand  and  say,  "  That  is  mine,"  and 
which  may  not  be  transformed  into  a  wrrship  ae  sincere  as  that  of  the  communion  ; 
no  step  we  can  take  in  life  over  which  He  does  not  watch,  and  which  may  not  be 
made  a  step  on  the  road  that  brings  us  nearer  Him ;  no  time  here  or  hereafter  when 
i1  will  not  be  a  delightful  duty  to  "  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."    This 


248  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  m. 

ronnd  world  may  therefore  become  to  us  a  temple,  and  this  little  lifea  song  of  praisa, 
II.  The  motive  power  of  a  holy  life.  The  stress  lies  on  "  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus."  1.  All  the  apparent  extravagance  of  the  injunction  vanishes  when  we  lay 
our  hands  on  the  secret  of  the  Divine  life.  In  the  realm  of  spirit  as  of  matter  when  we 
see  a  great  result  we  know  that  behind  it  is  a  great  cause  ;  and  we  may  search  the 
world  and  we  shall  not  find  a  power  over  human  hearts  comparable  with  that  which 
lies  in  this  name.  What  combination  of  forces  has  cut  so  deep  a  groove  across  the 
world  ?  One  or  two  of  the  world's  heroes  and  sages  have  won  wide  admiration  and 
respect,  but  who  has  laid  his  hand  on  so  many  hearts  and  touched  for  good  so 
many  lives  ?  Bad  as  the  world  is,  what  is  good  in  it  is  due  to  Christ.  Even  now 
the  good  is  gaining  the  victory,  and  the  King  is  Christ.  Blot  out  that  name  and  you 
blot  out  the  best  part  of  history,  all  that  is  purest  in  morals,  elevating  in  literature, 
gentle  in  manners,  merciful  in  laws.  Time  weakens  other  forces,  but  it  adds  vigour 
to  this.  2.  There  is  no  need  to  enter  into  the  various  component  elements  which 
go  to  make  up  this  moral  force.  What  He  was  and  did  for  us,  and  above  all  what 
He  now  is  and  does,  explains  it.  One  phrase  holds  it  all — "  He  died  for  me."  In 
Jesus  we  have  not  a  man  dead  long  ago,  but  a  living  Saviour  and  King  ever  near  us, 
bearing  the  one  name  by  which  we  may  be  saved.  It  is  His  presence  by  His  Spirit 
in  the  hearts  of  His  people  which  is  the  motive  power  of  their  holy  life,  "  The  love 
of  Christ  constraineth  us."  III.  The  sacredness  of  common  life  and  laboue.  The 
key-note  of  this  chapter  is  that  religion  is  a  life  in  Christ,  so  all-pervading  and  all- 
permeating  this  life  that  it  hallows  everything.  1.  One  of  the  leading  peculiarities 
of  the  religion  of  Jesus  is  that  it  virtually  annihilated  the  distinction  between  the 
secular  and  the  sacred.  As  it  overstepped  all  barriers  of  climate,  colour,  and  race 
to  call  men  brethren,  so  it  passed  over  all  barriers  of  priestly  function  to  make  all 
men  holy,  and  so  all  men  are  now  made  priests  unto  God.  2.  What  God  hath  joined 
together  let  no  man  put  asunder ;  and  He  has  wedded  religion  and  life.  That  is  no 
religion  which  we  cannot  carry  with  us  wherever  we  go ;  into  our  pleasures  and 
sorrows,  our  business  and  closets.  (i7.  Macgregor,  D.D.)  Things  sacred  and 
things  secular : — It  is  one  of  the  most  precious  effects  of  Christianity  that  it  gives 
interest  and  dignity  to  commonplace  life.  Think  how  it  would  bear  on  the  obscure 
toilers  of  Ephesus,  Corinth,  or  Eome.  Artizan,  labourer,  soldier,  slave,  would  learn 
the  truth  that  God  cared  for  him,  and  designed  him  for  a  glorious  destiny.  It  ia 
through  Christ  that  life  is  worthy  of  the  name  of  Ufe.  The  distinction  between  things 
secular  and  things  sacred  has  wrought  unspeakable  mischief.  Involves  one  rule  of 
life  for  the  person  in  holy  orders,  and  another  for  the  man  who  has  not  received  a 
religious  vocation.  The  monk  or  the  nun  is  a  "  religious  ;  "  if  any  be  not  a  priest, 
or  monk,  or  nun,  that  person  need  not  be  so  religious.  It  is  a  detestable,  an  irre- 
ligious distinction.  1.  It  is  a  distinction  which  would  have  been  utteelt  fobeign 
TO  the  mind  of  an  early  Christian,  and  is  quite  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the  New 
Testament.  Christ,  therein  revealed,  has  laid  hold  upon  the  whole  of  life.  He  has 
consecrated  what  we  call  secular  employments  by  Himself  engaging  in  them.  Pos- 
sible to  eat  and  drink  to  the  glory  of  God.  II,  This  distinction  is  bad,  because  it 
vanishes  on  nearer  observation.  We  find  it  perfectly  impossible  to  draw  a  sharp 
line.  Art,  science,  politics,  business,  everyday  duty,  instead  of  being  detached  from 
religion,  have  such  intimate  relations  with  it  that  they  are,  or  may  be,  and  ought  to 
be,  themselves  essentially  religious.  A  bad  sermon  on  the  text,  "  Behold  I  stapd  at 
the  door  and  knock,"  is  (it  would  seem)  sacred  ;  but  to  paint  the  well-known  picture 
illustrating  same  text  was  secular.  To  write  hymns  sacred.  Then  was  it  a  sacred 
or  a  secular  work  to  write  "Paradise  Lost,"  Wordsworth's  "Excursion,"  or  Cow- 
per's  "  Task  "?  Surely,  too,  all  great  music  is  most  truly  religious.  Again,  is  it  a 
sacred  or  a  secular  work  when  a  young  girl,  under  a  deep  sense  of  duty,  consecrates 
her  life  to  attendance  upon  a  suffering  mother  ?  Contrariwise,  consider  what  are 
generally  classed  as  sacred  works — praying,  preaching,  administering  sacraments, 
visiting  the  sick.  How  intensely  secular  they  may  become !  How  mean  and  per- 
functory the  spirit  in  which  they  may  be  performed  1  How  easily  may  their  motive 
come  to  be  that  so  well  expressed  in  Bible  words — "  Put  me  into  one  of  the  priest's 
ofiQces,  that  I  may  eat  a  piece  of  bread."  III.  This  distinction  is  radically 
irreligious.  Implies  that  all  things  are  not  of  God.  Churches  are,  but  not  houses 
we  live  in.  Clergymen,  but  not  men  of  other  professions  and  employments.  Sun- 
day, but  not  other  six  days.  But  Christ  claimed  the  world  for  Himself  and  His 
Father,  in  the  sense  that  He  claimed  everything  in  the  world.  Factories  and  rail- 
ways, camps  and  courts  of  law,  mansions,  museums,  and  picture-galleries,  to  say 
nothing  of  the  world  cf  trees,  and  rivers,  and  birds,  and  flowers,  form  part  of  th« 


CHAP.  lit.]  COLOSSIANS.  S49 

world  which  belongs  to  Him,  the  Heir  of  all  things.  This  is  the  only  religious  view 
of  life.  IV.  Seek,  then,  to  make  your  whole  life  religio08.  Pure  religion  is 
when  the  sense  of  God's  love,  of  the  vastness  of  His  claims,  of  the  breadth  of  His 
commandments,  so  works  through  the  life  as  to  make  it  one  organic  whole,  and 
when  the  poor  unworthy  distinction  of  secular  and  sacred  is  forgotten  ;  when  what 
is  most  religious  is  most  human,  and  what  is  commonest  is  ennobled  and  justified 
by  the  grace  which  flows  from  "Christ  our  Life."  (J.  A.  Jacob,  D.D.)  Doing 
all  in  the  name  of  Clirist: — I.  What  this  is.  1.  To  go  to  God  through  Him  (John 
XV.  3,  16;  xvi.  23-26).  2.  To  do  all  by  His  authority  (Matt,  xviii.  18-20,  xxviii. 
18-20 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  15).  3.  To  do  all  by  His  strength  (Acts  iv.  6-7,  10  ;  1  Sam.  xvii. 
45 ;  Phil.  iv.  13 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  9).  Without  Him  we  can  do  nothing,  with  Him  every- 
thing (1  Cor.  XV.  10).  4.  For  His  glory  (1  Cor.  x.  31 ;  John  v.  23 ;  Rev.  v.  12,  13"). 
5.  To  live  a  life  of  faith  for  a  supply  of  all  things  for  life  and  godliness  (2  Pet.  1,  2, 
3;  John  xvi.  23).  6.  To  walk  in  the  religion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (Micah  iv.  5;  2 
Tim.  ii.  19  ;  Matt.  x.  22 ;  Luke  xxi.  17 ;  Rev.  ii.  3,  13).  7.  To  follow  His  example 
(Matt.  xvi.  24 ;  1  John  ii.  6;  1  Pet.  ii.  21-23).  IL  Why  we  are  to  do  it.  1.  Be- 
cause all  we  are,  have,  or  can  do,  is  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.  22,  23).  (1)  All  grace  and 
strength  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  (2)  Adoption  (Eph.  i.  5).  (3)  Reconciliation  with  God  (2 
Cor.  V.  18).  (4)  All  our  actual  supplies  (Phil.  iv.  19).  2.  Because  the  Father  has 
highly  exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a  name  which  is  above  every  name  (Phil.  ii. 
8-10).  Therefore  we  must  all  honour  the  Son  as  the  Father  (John  v.  23).  3.  Because 
we  cannot  be  accepted  but  by  Him  (Eph.  i.  6  ;  Heb.  xiii.  15,  v.  1).  4.  Because  all 
that  comes  from  God  to  us  must  be  by  His  hand.  III.  How  wb  may  do  it.  1.  We 
must  be  supposed  to  be  in  Christ  first  (John  xv.  4-5).  2.  Supposing  this  we  must 
exercise  faith  upon  Him,  and  have  constant  recourse  to  Him,  in  all  tliat  we  do  for 
the  supplies  of  His  grace  and  Spirit  (1  Pet.  ii,  20,  v.  7 ;  John  xvi.  16,  xvi.  23,  26). 
3.  We  must  live  in  close  communion  with  Jesus  in  the  use  of  all  His  ordinances 
(Zech.  iv.  12).  4.  We  must  exercise  our  thoughts  much  upon  Him,  and  be  much 
taken  up  with  Him  in  the  course  of  our  lives  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  23).  IV.  Some  uses.  I. 
It  is  not  in  our  power  to  act  as  we  please,  or  for  our  own  ends  (Rom.  xiv.  7-8).  2. 
The  impiety  of  those  who  invoke  Christ's  name  on  their  wicked  courses.  8.  We 
cannot  expect  Go.l's  blessing  on  anything  not  done  in  Christ's  name.  {H.  Wilkinson, 
D.D.)  Doing  nil  to  the  Lord  Jesus: — All  have  felt  at  times  a  painful  void  after 
absorption  in  active  duty.  There  has  been  nothing  sinful,  on  the  contrary  the 
work,  it  may  be,  has  been  sacred,  undertaken  with  prayer,  and  been  for  the  good  of 
man  and  the  glory  of  God,  and  yet  there  is  no  satisfaction.  I.  Where  is  the  evil 
in  this  ?  It  is  that  we  are  slow  to  learn  in  act  what  we  know  in  our  souls,  that  we 
can  do  nothing  good  without  God.  We  take  it  for  granted  and  so  forget  it.  1.  As  to 
ordinary  matters  men,  e.g.,  think  it  unlikely  they  will  die  to-day  because  they  have 
lived  safely  through  so  many  dangers,  and  take  it  for  granted  that  their  food  will 
nourish  them  because  it  has  always  done  so.  Where,  then,  is  there  any  room  for 
dependence  on  God  even  with  prayer  for  protection  and  blessing,  since  the  feeling 
assumes  that  they  will  be  granted  without  any  prayer  at  all.  2.  As  to  deeds  of 
grace.  It  is  well,  as  people's  devotions  now  are,  if  Christians  really  prayed  to 
God  to  carry  them  through  the  trials  of  the  day,  as  really  believing  that  for  this 
they  needed  the  special  help  of  God.  How  many,  if  they  pray  at  all,  hope  to  do 
right  and  escape  flagrant  wrong  almost  through  the  intention  of  doing  or  not  doing, 
and  think  that  if  they  call  upon  God  in  some  general  way  things  will  not  be  much 
amiss  with  them.  3.  As  to  daily  life.  Many  Christians  seem  to  think  that  in 
the  daily  deeds  and  words  of  life  they  either  cannot  or  else  must  sin,  and  that 
these  two  are  much  the  same.  What  people  hate  is  being  in  earnest  at  all, 
and  so  they  do  not  wish  to  pray  for  the  grace  of  God  lest  they  should  have  to  be 
at  the  pains  of  using  it.  So  they  are  ready  to  think  that  they  cannot  help 
themselves,  that  they  must  fall  into  sins  of  infirmity,  and  thus  they  cast  their 
faults  on  God,  or  they  look  upon  them  as  no  great  faults  at  all,  and  so  they 
act  as  though  they  could  not  sin.  And  apart  from  these  who  learns,  in  the  midst 
of  his  conscious  and  acknowledged  besetting  sin,  to  ask  for  the  grace  of  God  7  The 
angry,  sinful  word  again  and  again  escapes,  and  the  thought  of  God  at  best  but 
follows  it.  II.  The  remedy.  "  Whatsoever  ye  do,"  &c.,  as  one  bearing  His  name, 
in  the  might  of  His  name,  and  to  its  glory.  Refer  all  things  to  Him.  Let  Him  be 
the  begmning  from  whom  all  flows,  the  end  in  whom  all  are  gathered,  our  aim,  our 
reward.  Have  Him  before  thee  as  the  pattern  whom  thou  art  to  copy ;  the 
Redeemer  in  whom  is  thy  strength,  the  Master  and  Friend  whom  thou  art  to  serve 
and  please,  thy  Creator  and  thy  heaven.    1.  But  can,  one  will  say,  all  the  little  acta 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

of  life  be  done  to  Him  ?  Were  it  not  almost  an  indignity  to  bring  them  in  reference 
to  His  great  Majesty  ?  On  the  contrary,  great  love  shows  itself  most  in  little  acts. 
Nothing  is  too  small  to  be  done  for  one  deeply  loved,  and  nothing  but  deep  love 
will  do  unweariedly  all  little  things  to  please  whom  it  loves.  Little  things  are  the 
very  instances  of  acceptable  service  in  Scripture.  It  says  not,  "  Give  your  bodies 
to  be  burned  for  the  glory  of  God,"  but,  "  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,"  &o.  2.  How, 
then,  can  they  be  done  ?  Do  them  as  thou  wouldest  if  thou  sawest  God  by  thee, 
with  prayer  that  they  may  be  done  aright.  He  eats  and  drinks  to  the  glory  of 
God,  who  does  so  not  for  pleasure,  but  for  strength  for  God's  service ;  He  sleeps  to 
God's  glory,  who  rests  in  Christ,  hoping  to  rise  to  do  Him  honour  ;  he  does  hia 
daily  task  to  the  glory  of  God  who  plies  it  under  the  eye  of  God,  and  does  it  or 
not  as  and  how  he  thinks  God  would  have  it  done  or  not.  3.  How  can  we  do  both 
at  once  without  distraction — study,  speak,  or  do  and  think  of  Christ  at  the  same 
time?  Will  not  work  be  done  carelessly  ?  Be  thine  own  judge ?  Hast  thou  ever 
deeply  loved  parent,  bride,  husband,  or  child  ?  Didst  thou  find  that  thou  toiledst 
for  them  less  diligently  because  thou  thoughtest  of  and  toiledst  for  them  ?  Or 
hast  thou  done  anything  for  man's  praise,  feeling  that  the  eye  whose  praise  thoa 
prizedst  was  upon  thee?  Was  this  a  hindrance  ?  Nay,  a  good  and  a  spur  which 
quickened  every  nerve.  And  who  looks  down  upon  us  ?  Our  Father,  our  Friend 
and  Brother,  who  came  down  from  heaven  and  suffered  for  us,  is  ready  to  help  and 
reward  us.  And  shall  not  such  love  quicken  us  to  do  all  things  better.  Does  it  not 
give  strength  to  self-denial  to  take  up  our  cross  after  Jesus  ?  gladness  to  alms- 
giving to  give  to  Jesus?  cast  a  holy  reverence  round  a  sick  room  when  we  minister 
to  Jesus  ?  impart  sweetness  to  teaching  children  that  in  them  we  receive  Jesus  ? 
When  thou  hast  learned  to  do  all  things  to  Jesus,  it  will  shed  pleasure  over  all  dull 
things,  softness  over  hard  things,  peace  over  trial.  It  will  make  contradiction 
sweet,  to  bear  it  meekly  with  Jesus  ;  poverty,  honourable  to  be  poor  with  Jesus ; 
toil,  gladsome  to  labour  for  Jesus.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Common  work  in  the 
nam£  of  Jesus: — Wherever  we  are  called  to  work  we  must  dedicate  the  labours 
of  our  hands  or  our  brain  to  God,  doing  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Solomon  was  called  to  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  but  every  man  who  is  an 
honest  worker,  who  does  his  best  in  the  place  where  heaven  has  put  him,  is  build- 
ing up  a  temple,  holy,  acceptable  to  God.  The  Minister  of  State  in  his  cabinet, 
labouring  to  do  right  and  caring  nothing  for  popularity;  and  the  little  servant-maid 
in  the  kitchen,  who  scorns  to  tell  a  lie,  or  neglect  her  daily  duties,  are  both  in  their 
respective  stations  working  for  God,  doing  their  duty.  None  but  pure  gold  may 
receive  the  special  goldsmith's  mark,  none  but  true,  honest  work  can  bear  the  mark 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  (H.  J.  W.  Buxton,  WI.A.)  Every -day  religion: — Plato  had 
a  fable  which  I  have  now  nearly  forgotten,  but  it  ran  something  like  this  :  He  said 
spirits  of  the  other  world  came  back  to  this  world  to  find  a  body  and  find  a  sphere 
of  work.  One  spirit  came  and  took  the  body  of  a  king  and  did  his  work.  Another 
spirit  came  and  t>ok  the  body  of  a  poet  and  did  his  work.  After  a  while  Ulysses 
came,  and  he  said,  "  Why,  all  the  fine  bodies  are  taken,  and  all  the  grand  work  is 
taken.  There  is  nothing  left  for  me."  And  some  one  replied,  "  Ah  1  the  best  one 
has  been  left  for  you."  Ulysses  said,  "  What's  that  ?  "  And  the  reply  was,  "  The 
body  of  a  common  man,  doing  a  common  work,  and  for  a  common  reward."  A 
good  fable  for  the  world,  and  just  as  good  a  fable  for  the  Church.  "  Whether  ye 
eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  it  to  the  glory  of  God."  (T.  De  Witt 
Talmage,  D.D.)  The  essence  of  piety  : — I  begin  to  see  that  religion  consists  not 
so  much  in  joyous  feelings  as  in  a  constant  exercise  of  devotedness  to  God,  and  in 
laying  ourselves  out  for  the  good  of  others.  {D.  Stewart.)  The  all-pervasiveness 
of  religion  : — Religion  is  one  of  the  colours  of  life  which  mingles  most  intimately 
with  all  the  other  colours  of  the  palette.  It  is  that  which  lends  them  their 
appearance  of  depth,  and  the  best  of  their  brilliance.  If  by  a  subtle  process  it  is 
taken  away,  all  become  tarnished  and  discoloured.  (W.  Mallock.)  The  acceptable 
prayer : — As  a  petition  to  the  Queen  can  only  reach  her  through  the  hands  of  a 
minister,  so  we  can  only  approach  God  the  Father  through  His  Son  Jesus  Christ. 
All  our  prayer  and  praises  mast  be  offered  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Very 
many  of  those  prayers  are  like  letters  with  no  name  and  address  upon  them,  which 
never  reach  their  destination.  What  is  it  that  makes  our  public  services  in  church 
30  frequently  cold  and  spiritless  ?  Why  is  it  that  some  of  us  look  on  church-going 
as  an  irksome  task,  and  the  hours  spent  in  God's  house  as  the  most  wearisome  of 
our  lives  ?  The  reason  is  simply  this,  that  their  services  are  being  offered  in  the 
wrong  name.     One  offers  it  in  his  own  name,  he  is  sacrificing  to  selfishness ; 


OHAT.  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  S61 

another  offers  it  in  the  name  of  fashion,  another  in  the  name  of  respectability, 
but  there  can  be  no  reality  in  our  services  unless  offered  in  the  name  of  Christ. 
{H.  J.  W.  Buxton,  M.A.)  Consistency  and  gratitude: — I.  "Whatsoever  tb  do 
IN  WORD  OR  DEED,"  &0.  1.  Paul  here  clearly  gives  to  Christ  the  whole  of  life. 
The  conceptions,  affections,  and  resolutions  of  the  soul  refer  to  words  and  works  as 
being  the  principles  and  motives  of  them.  For  it  is  impossible  that  they  should  be 
in  the  name  of  Christ  except  our  understandings  and  will  so  address  them.  The 
Spirit  moves  all,  and  upon  this  the  difference  between  man's  actions  depends.  It 
is  this  that  gives  them  the  right  and  title  they  have  in  Christian  morality.  Works 
that  are  the  same  as  to  external  action  are  good  in  one  and  bad  in  another.  The 
aims  of  an  ambitious  man  and  of  a  true  believer  have  no  external  difference,  yet  if 
you  examine  the  inward  springs  of  both,  you  will  find  one  a  piece  of  vanity,  the 
other  a  fruit  of  charity.  2.  Tne  rule  is  short  and  easy,  but  of  almost  infinite  use. 
As  a  little  square  serves  an  artificer  to  design  and  mark  out  a  multitude  of  lines, 
and  to  correct  those  that  are  amiss,  so  by  this  Uttle  rule  there  is  no  human  action 
respecting  which  we  canuot  ascertain  whether  it  is  right  or  wrong ;  nor  is  there 
any  part  of  our  lives  which  this  rule  is  not  capable  of  guiding  and  forming  to 
perfection.  3.  Specifically  the  name  of  Christ  is  the  rule.  (1)  As  the  name  of 
God  signifies  the  Hebrew  word  by  which  the  Lord  distinguishes  Himself,  so  Jesus 
is  sometimes  taken  for  the  name  which  was  given  by  express  Divine  command. 
But  it  is  not  thus  taken  here  as  if  Paul  simply  intended  that  in  our  actions  and 
discourses  we  should  always  intermix  the  word  Jesus,  or  at  least  preface  it.  (2)  The 
name  of  God  is  taken  for  the  power,  authority,  and  will  of  God  (Deut.  xviii.  19; 
2  Kings  ii.  24;  Psa.  xx.  7,  Ixxxix.  16,  24  ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  45  ;  2  Chron.  xiv.  11).  So 
in  like  manner  the  name  of  Jesus  (Acts  iv.  7  ;  Matt.  viL  22,  xxiv.  5,  xviii.  20).  So 
the  apostle  means — (a)  That  we  refer  all  to  His  glory,  (b)  That  we  act  according 
to  His  will,  (c)  That  we  live  in  entire  confidence  in  and  dependence  upon  Him. 
4.  By  this  (1)  Paul  banishes  from  our  mind  all  unfruitful  works  of  darkness,  it 
being  evident  that  we  can  do  nothing  that  is  opposed  to  His  will.  (2)  He  perfects 
and  enlivens  those  of  our  works  which  of  themselves  are  commanded  of  God, 
engrafting  on  them  the  true  motive  and  directing  them  to  the  true  end.  (3)  He 
sacritices  those  which  are  in  tbeir  nature  indifferent ;  e.g.,  if  this  rule  is  observed 
in  eating  and  drinking,  acts  indifferent  in  their  nature,  {a)  the  sacred  name  will 
purge  them  of  the  excess  of  intemperance  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  foolish 
scruples  of  superstition  on  the  other,  (h)  Being  referred  to  the  glory  of  God,  from 
indifferent  they  become  holy  and  acceptable  to  God.  3.  We  must  not  so  take  the 
precept  as  if  we  were  obliged  in  every  act  and  word  to  raise  our  thoughts  directly 
to  Christ.  It  is  sufficient  that  we  frequently  and  ordinarily  make  this  application 
of  mind.  But  it  is  necessary  that  we  have  this  deposition  so  formed  in  our  hearts, 
that  when  circumstances  allow  us  to  think  of  Christ  our  souls  may  lean  that  way 
as  being  habituated  to  it.  IL  GrviNO  thanks  unto  God  and  the  Father  by  Him." 
These  words  may  be  taken  as  an  independent  precept  (Eph.  v.  20)  or  a  reason  for 
the  preceding  rule,  a  title  under  which  we  ought  to  do  all  things  in  the  name  of 
Christ,  80  that  our  whole  life  may  be  an  act  of  gratitude  through  Christ,  which  is 
to  be  ^preferred.  1.  Thanksgiving  is  one  of  the  most  necessary  and  universal 
offices  of  a  Christian.  Eemember  what  we  are  to  God  through  creation,  providence, 
and  grace.  2.  God  the  Father  is  the  proper  object  of  gratitude  as  the  first  principle 
of  action,  though  not  to  the  exclusion  of  the  Son  and  Spirit.  3.  By  Jesus  this 
gratitude  is  to  be  rendered.  (1)  He  is  the  channel  by  which  all  God's  goodness  is 
poured  upon  us.  (2)  Our  thanks  cannot  be  grateful  to  the  Father  except  addressed 
and  presented  by  Christ.  Application :  1.  For  the  confirmation  of  faith.  (1)  We 
have  a  proof  of  the  divinity  of  Christ.  The  faithful  neither  rejoice,  nor  speak 
nor  act,  but  in  the  name  of  God — but  here  it  is  required  that  our  whole  life  be 
referred  to  the  name  of  Christ.  It  must  therefore  be  concluded  that  He  is  not  a 
creature,  but  very  God.  (2)  Is  it  not  an  outrage  to  require  that  saints  should  share 
this  honour  with  Christ  as  Rome  does  ?  (Acts  iv.  12 ;  1  Cor.  i.  12).  2.  For  the 
instruction  of  our  faith.  (1)  If  we  would  be  truly  Christians,  we  must  have  Christ 
continually  before  us  as  the  pole  star,  the  rale  of  our  whole  life.  (2)  How  many 
of  us  fall  short  of  this.  (J.  Daille.)  The  reality  of  religion: — I.  Christianity 
a  A  REALITY,  AND  DEALS  WITH  REAIJTIE8.  1.  If  it  could  be  shown  that  its  require- 
ments were  unreal,  its  statements  exaggerated,  its  views  of  attainment  unreason- 
able, it  would  lose  immensely  in  its  character  for  truth  and  its  power  for  good. 
2.  Here  we  may  fall  into  opposite  mistakes.  (1)  We  may  take  the  sayings  of 
Scripture  strictly  to  the  letter,  set  them  down  as  exaggerated,  and  above  our 


252  THJ^:  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

capacities.  This  is  the  way  with  worldly  people.  They  admire  the  gospel,  buk 
never  think  of  realizing  it.  It  is  to  them  a  mere  night  of  stars  to  wonder  and  gaze 
at,  not  a  sun  to  light  them  to  their  daily  work,  and  warm  their  hearts  with  love. 
(2)  Some  religious  people,  like  the  former,  strain  the  Bible  to  its  literal  meaning, 
and  then  require  that  meaning  in  full,  and  thus  lead  to  the  same  point,  and 
encourage  indolence  and  unbelief.  (3)  Owing  to  a  mixture  of  these  we  find 
Christian  precept  and  practice  widely  sundered.  And  so  men  satisfy  themselves 
with  being  Christian  hearers  and  heathen  Uvers,  without  the  least  suspicion  of 
inconsistency.  3.  Owing  to  this  enormous  abuses  have  sprung  up  under  the 
shadow  of  the  Church.  A  large  proportion  of  the  infidelity  of  the  working  classes 
is  due  to  this  unreal  teaching.  A  strained  and  exaggerated  view  of  religion  has 
been  put  before  them,  ahen  from  their  habits  of  thought,  and  by  no  means  supported 
by  the  example  of  its  professors.  II.  The  text  is  a  bemedy  fob  uNBEAiiin  in 
RELIGION.  1.  Observe  the  extent  of  this  saying.  It  is  plain  that  it  must  propose 
some  motive  and  rule  which  shall  touch  daily  life  at  every  point.  (1)  Nothing  is 
more  common  than  a  man  with  a  powerful  motive  which  rules  his  whole  life — gain, 
ambition,  love  of  family,  science,  art,  victory,  the  exercise  of  an  energetic  nature. 
But  whatever  it  be,  reality  is  its  necessary  condition.  There  are  of  course  many 
visionaries,  men  pursuing  objects  which  have  no  real  existence,  but  to  them  they 
are  not  unreal.  (2)  Observe  how  such  motives  act.  (a)  As  to  their  inward 
influence  on  the  man  himself.  Are  they  evermore  in  his  view  and  present  to  his 
thoughts  ?  Or  is  not  their  influence  for  the  most  part  rather  a  constraining 
power  of  which  he  is  unconscious,  rather  than  a  stimulus  carried  on  by  con- 
scious effort?  Take  a  man  whose  motives  is  the  advancement  of  himself  or  his 
family.  Such  an  object  is  consciously  present  when  he  chooses  to  reflect  on  it, 
but  day  by  day  in  the  toil  and  struggle  he  is  not  ever  thinking  of  it,  but  he  is 
pursuing  it.  The  labourer  working  under  the  useful  light  and  genial  warmth  does 
not  lose  his  time  and  dazzle  his  sight  in  gazing  on  the  sun,  but  plies  his  arm  with 
his  eye  fixed  on  his  work,  and  so  uses  for  its  intended  purpose  the  light  God  has 
bestowed.  (&)  They  are  seldom  loudly  professed,  so  seldom  that  a  man  professing 
loudly  a  given  motive  arouses  suspicion  that  he  is  acting  on  some  other,  and  only 
using  this  as  a  blind.  Here,  as  in  nature,  the  deepest  is  the  stillest ;  but  by  this 
very  nil  Iness  all  who  are  observant  know  its  depth.  Whatever  mystery  a  man 
makes  of  his  object  in  life,  spectators  generally  arrive  at  correct  conclusions. 
2.  Recur  to  the  motive  of  the  text.  (1)  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  persons 
who  pursue  objects  which  only  appear  real  to  them,  and  those  whose  objects  are 
absolutely  real.  In  the  case  of  the  former  pursuit  will  lead  away  from,  in  the  case 
of  the  latter  it  will  lead  to,  the  truth.  It  is  not  necessary  that  a  motive  should  be 
based  on  reality  to  be  all-constraining,  but  it  is  in  order  that  it  may  be  a  worthy 
motive  for  an  intelligent  being.  (2)  The  facts  implied  in  the  name,  "  The  Lord 
Jesus,"  rest  upon  evidence  as  strong  as  can  possibly  be  alleged  for  anything.  The 
belief  in  Christ  is  not  only  the  unavoidable  conclusion  of  a  sound  mind  from 
evidence,  but  the  only  satisfactory  way  to  account  for  the  state  of  the  world  in 
which  we  find  ourselves.  (3)  But  based  on  reality  it  must  also  be  real  to  me,  or  it 
cannot  be  my  motive.  It  must  have  points  of  contact  with  every  part  of  my  life. 
Has  it  these  points  ?  Not  if  our  Lord  be  a  mere  teacher.  Mere  precepts  cannot 
touch  us  at  all  points,  or  constrain  us  to  do  all  things  in  a  teacher's  name.  Bat 
our  Lord,  being  God,  became  man,  bore  onr  sins  and  carried  our  sorrows,  grew  up 
through  our  life,  and  tasted  death  for  every  man.  Take  any  life,  in  any  condiiica 
or  time,  and  there  is  help  and  hope  for  it  in  Jesus.  (4)  Now  suppose  a  man 
embrace  Jesus  as  his  Saviour — let  Christ's  love  become  the  acknowledged  fact  of 
His  life,  then  it  will  become  a  constraining  motive,  and  will  not  be  contented  with 
influencing  some  of  his  faculties,  employing  some  of  his  time ;  from  the  nature  ol 
things  it  must  have  all — Christ  is  mine,  and  I  am  His,  and  whatever  I  do,  spiritual 
or  secular,  business  or  recreation,  I  must  do  all  in  His  name.  (5)  There  are  certain 
solemn  times  when  this  great  motive  is  and  must  be  expressly  recognized ;  but 
when  the  whole  man  is  possessed  with  the  love  of  Christ,  the  whole  ordinary  being 
follows  the  direction  of  the  central  impulse.  The  Christian  at  his  daily  task  is  not 
ever  pondering  !»piritual  truths.  He  would  be  a  bad  workman  and  a  bad  Christian 
if  he  were.  (6)  Such  deep  constraining  motive  is  not  usually  displayed  before 
men;  but  its  existence  is  not  easily  concealed.  If  a  man  be  a  Christian,  men 
will  take  knowledge  of  him  that  he  has  been  with  Jesus.  {Dean  Alford,} 
Christian  ends  lend  grandeur  to  human  life : — He  who  Uves  for  the  glory  of  God  has 
an  end  in  view  which  lends  dignity  to  the  man  and  to  his  life.   Bring  common  iron 


CHAP.  III.]  COLOSSIANS.  253 

into  proper  contact  with  the  magnet,  it  will  borrow  the  strange  attractive  virtue, 
and  its^elf  become  magnetic  The  merest  crystal  fragment,  that  has  been  flung  out 
into  the  field  and  trampled  on  the  ground,  shines  like  a  diamond  when  sunbeams 
stoop  to  kiss  it.  And  who  has  not  seen  the  dullest  rain-cloud,  when  it  turned  its 
weeping  face  to  the  sun,  change  into  glory,  and,  in  the  bow  that  spans  it,  present 
to  tbe  eyes  of  age  and  infancy,  alike  of  the  philosopher  who  studies,  and  of  the 
simple  joyous  child  who  runs  to  catch  it,  the  most  brilliant  and  beautiful  pheno- 
menon in  nature  ?  Thus,  from  what  they  look  at  and  come  in  contact  with, 
common  things  acquire  uncommon  glory.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  namt  oj 
Jesus  set  in  work : — Those  old  saints  of  the  Middle  Ages,  how  dearly  they  loved  to 
Bet  the  name  of  Jesus  forth  everywhere,  by  all  means,  in  every  curious  work  of  art : 
not  merely  of  Church  art,  mind  you,  but  of  household  and  domestic  furniture. 
Go,  for  example,  into  many  of  the  farms  round  here,  and  notice  the  fire-dogs  that 
stand  in  the  yawning  chimney :  how  they  are  wrought  at  the  sides  into  those  most 
blessed  of  all  letters,  the  I.H.C.,  by  which  our  dear  Lord  is  set  forth.  Nothing  so 
mean  that  it  was  thought  unworthy  of  this  monogram  ;  nothing  so  glorious  that 
it  was  coDiidered  unfit  to  have  that  excelling  glory  added  thereto.  There  they 
taught  us  the  great  lesson — "  Do  everything  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Yes, 
silver  and  gold  and  gems  conspired  together  to  mark  out  this  name  on  the  paten, 
or  the  chalice,  or  the  shrine ;  the  manufacturer  of  Limoges  worked  it  out  in  his 
enamel ;  in  the  monastery  potteries  they  burnt  it  in  on  their  tiles ;  in  convents  they 
embroidered  it  on  chasuble  and  cope;  in  the  glorious  windows  of  churches  the 
light  came  in,  sanctified,  as  it  were,  and  hallowed  by  the  name  of  the  True  Light; 
.  .  .  the  poor  peasant  was  encouraged,  with  his  clasp  knife,  to  consecrate  his  house 
by  carving  the  same  name  on  the  hutch  of  his  door  or  the  barge-boards  of  his 
roof ;  the  name  of  salvation  could  not  be  out  of  place  among  the  dwellings  of  those 
who  looked  to  be  saved ;  the  name  which  to  adore  wiU  be  the  work  of  eternity, 
could  never  be  out  of  place  for  the  meditation  and  the  worship  of  earth.  (Dr.  Neale.) 

Ver.  18. -iv.  1.  Wives  submit  yourselves  unto  your  own  husbands. — The  Christian 
family : — 1.  In  the  family,  Christianity  has  signally  displayed  its  power  of  refining, 
ennobling  and  sanctifying  earthly  relationships.  Domestic  life  as  seen  in  Christian 
homes  is  a  purely  Christian  creation,  and  would  have  been  a  new  revelation  at  ColossaB 
as  it  is  in  many  a  mission  field  to-day.  2.  Domestic  happiness  and  family  Chris- 
tianity are  made  up  of  very  homely  elements.  One  duty  is  prescribed  here  for  one 
member  of  each  of  the  three  family  groups,  and  varying  forms  of  another  for  the 
other.  The  wife,  child,  servant,  are  to  obey  ;  the  husband  to  love,  the  father  to 
show  his  love  in  gentle  considerateness,  the  master  to  yield  his  servants  their  dues. 
Like  some  perfume  distilled  Lom  common  flowers  which  grow  on  every  bank,  the 
domestic  piety  which  makes  home  a  house  of  God  and  a  gate  of  heaven,  is  prepared 
Irom  these  two  simples — obedience  and  love.  L  The  reciprocal  duties  of  wives 
AND  HUSBANDS.  1.  The  Christian  ideal  of  the  wife's  duty  has  for  its  centre  subjec- 
tion. (1)  Some  will  smile  at  that  as  a  survival  of  a  barbarous  theory  of  marriage ; 
but  turn  to  Ephesians  v.  22-33,  and  you  will  find  that  marriage  is  regarded  from  a 
high  and  sacred  point  of  view.  To  Paul  all  eartlily  relationships  were  moulded 
after  patterns  of  things  in  the  heavens.  What  the  Church's  subjection  to  Christ  is, 
such  is  the  wife's  to  the  husband,  a  subjection  of  which  love  is  the  very  soul.  As 
in  the  loving  obedience  of  the  believing  soul  to  Christ,  the  wife  submits  not  because 
she  has  found  a  master,  but  because  her  heart  has  found  its  rest.  Thus  everything 
harsh  and  degrading  disappears.  It  is  a  joy  to  serve  where  the  heart  is  engaged, 
•nd  that  is  eminently  true  of  the  feminine  nature.  For  its  full  satisfaction  a 
woman's  heart  needs  to  look  up,  and  to  serve  where  it  loves.  In  this  nobler,  purer, 
more  unselfish  love,  as  much  as  in  physicial  constitution,  is  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  Divine  ideal  of  marriage.  (2)  The  subjection  is  limited  by  "  We  must  obey 
God  rather  than  man,"  and  there  are  cases  in  which  on  the  principle  of  "  Tools  to 
those  who  can  use  them,"  the  rule  falls  to  the  wife  as  the  stronger  character. 
Popular  sarcasm,  however,  shows  this  to  be  contrary  to  the  true  ideal.  And  then 
woman's  intellectual  and  moral  qualities  render  it  wise  for  a  man  to  take  her 
counsel.  But  all  such  considerations  are  consittent  with  apostolic  teaching.  2. 
What  of  the  husband's  duty  ?  He  is  to  love.  (1)  Because  he  loves  he  is  not  to  be 
harsh.  He  is  to  be  as  patient  and  self-sacrificing  as  Christ,  that  he  may  bless  and 
help.  That  solemn  example  lifts  the  whole  emotion  and  carries  the  lesson  that 
man's  love  is  to  evoke  the  woman's  subjection,  just  as  in  the  heavenly  pattern 
Christ'i  love  melts  and  moves  human  wills  to  glad  obedience  which  is  liberty. 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  nx. 

(2)  Where  there  is  such  love  there  will  be  no  tenacious  adherence  to  rights.  Love 
uttering  a  wish  speaks  music  to  love  listening,  and  love  obeying  the  wish  is  free 
and  a  queen.  3.  The  young  are  to  remember  that  the  nobleness  and  heart  repose 
of  their  whole  lives  may  be  made  or  marred  by  marriage,  and  to  take  heed  whef^ 
they  fix  their  affections.  If  a  man  and  woman  love  and  marry  in  the  Lord,  He  will 
be  in  the  midst,  a  third  who  will  make  them  one,  and  that  threefold  cord  will  not 
be  quickly  broken.  II.  The  eeciprocal  duties  of  children  and  pakents — 
Obedience  and  gentle  authority.  1.  The  injunction  to  children  is  laconic  and 
universal.      (1)    The  only  limitation   is  when  God's  command  is  contradicted. 

(2)  The  enforcement  is  that  it  is  "  well  pleasing  in  the  Lord."  To  all  who  can 
appreciate  the  beauty  of  goodness  is  filial  obedience  beautiful.  In  Ephesians  it  is 
regarded  as  '*  right "  appealing  to  the  natural  conscience.  (3)  The  idea  of  a 
father's  power  and  a  child's  obedience  has  been  much  softened  by  Christianity,  but 
rather  from  the  greater  prominence  given  to  love,  than  from  the  limitation  given  to 
obedience.  There  is  now  great  laxity  in  reaction  from  the  too  great  severity  of  past 
times.  Many  causes  lead  to  this.  Children  are  better  educated  than  their  parents, 
and  a  sense  of  inferiority  often  makes  a  parent  hesitate  to  command,  as  well  as  a 
misplaced  tenderness  makes  him  hesitate  to  forbid.  But  it  is  unkind  to  place  on 
young  shoulders  "  the  weight  of  too  much  liberty."  Consult  your  children  less, 
command  them  more.  (4)  And  as  to  children,  here  is  the  one  thing  God  would  have 
you  do,  and  which  is  moreover  pleasing  to  those  whose  approbation  is  worth 
having,  and  will  save  many  a  sting  of  conscience  now  which  may  tingle  again 
when  all  too  late.  Kemember  Dr.  Johnson  standing  bareheaded  in  Lichfield 
market-place,  in  remorseful  remembrance  of  boyish  disobedience.  2.  The  law  for 
parents  is  addressed  to  fathers,  partly  because  mothers  have  less  need  of  it  and 
partly  because  fathers  are  the  head  of  the  household.  (1)  How  do  parents  provoke 
their  children  ?  By  unreasonable  commands,  by  capricious  jerks  at  the  bridle 
alternating  with  capricious  dropping  of  the  reins  altogether,  ungovernable  tempers, 
frequent  rebukes  and  sparing  praise.  And  what  follows  ?  "  Wrath,"  as  Ephesians 
has  it,  and  then  apathy.  "  I  cannot  please,  whatever  I  do,"  leads  to  a  rankling 
sense  of  unjustice  and  then  to  recklessness,  "  it  is  useless  to  try."  Paul's  theory  of 
the  training  of  children  is  connected  with  his  central  doctrine,  that  love  is  the  life 
of  service,  and  faith  the  parent  of  righteousness.  When  a  child  loves  and  trusts, 
he  will  obey.  Children's  obedience  must  be  fed  on  love  and  praise.  (2)  So  parents 
are  to  let  the  sunshine  of  their  smile  ripen  their  children's  love  to  fruit  of  obedi- 
ence, and  remember  that  frost  in  spring  scatters  the  blossoms  on  the  grass.  Many 
a  father  di'ives  his  child  into  evil  by  keeping  him  at  a  distance.  He  should  make 
his  boy  a  companion  and  a  playmate,  and  try  to  keep  him  nearer  to  himself  than 
to  any  one  else  ;  then  his  opinions  will  be  an  oracle,  and  his  lightest  wish  a  law. 

(3)  Parents  would  do  well,  too,  to  remember  Eph.  vi.  4,  and  Deut.  vi.  6-7,  and  not 
relegate  religious  instruction  to  others.  Children  drift  away  from  a  faith  which 
their  parents  do  not  care  enough  about  to  teach.  III.  The  reciprocal  duties  of 
MASTERS  AND  SERVANTS.  Obedience  and  justice.  1.  These  servants  are  slaves.  Paul 
recognized  that  "  sum  of  all  villainies,"  but  his  gospel  had  principles  which  cut  up 
slavery  by  the  roots.  Christ  and  His  apostles  did  not  war  agamst  it  nor  against 
any  existing  institutions — "  First  make  the  tree  good,"  &o.  Mould  men,  and  the 
men  will  mould  institutions.  And  ao  slavery  has  died  in  all  Christian  lands  now. 
But  the  principles  laid  down  here  are  applicable  to  all  forms  of  service.  2.  Note 
the  extent  of  the  servant's  obedience.  (1)  "  In  all  things,"  the  limit  again  being 
God's  command,  but  iuward  completeness  is  insisted  on,  "  not  with  eye  service," 
<feo.  We  have  a  proverb  about  the  worth  of  the  master's  eye,  which  bears  witness 
that  the  same  fault  clings  to  hired  service,  and  thus  darkens  into  theft.  All 
scamped  work,  all  productions  which  are  got  up  to  look  better  than  they  are,  all 
fussy  parade  of  diligence  when  under  inspection  and  slackness  afterwards  are 
transfixed  here,  "  But  in  singleness  of  heart,"  &c.,  with  undivided  motive,  which  is 
the  antithesis  and  cure  for  "eye  service" — and  "fearing  God,"  which  is  opposed 
to  "  pleasing  men."  (2)  Then  follows  the  positive  injunction,  lifting  obedience  to 
an  earthly  master  into  a  religious  duty,  and  transfiguring  the  slave's  lot.  This 
evokes  new  powers,  and  renewed  consecration.  (3)  The  stimulus  of  a  great  hope  is 
added.  Whatever  their  earthly  masters  failed  to  give  them,  if  they  are  Christ's 
they  will  be  treated  as  sons  and  receive  the  son's  portion.  Christ  remains  in  no 
man's  debt.  (4)  The  last  word  is  a  warning  against  neglect  of  duty.  The  wrong- 
doer  will  receive  retribution,  but  it  does  not  warrant  an  inferior's  breach  of  moral 
law.    Two  blacks  do  not  make  a  white — a  lesson  to  oppressed  peoples  and  theii 


aus.  ni]  COLOSSIANS.  258 

champions.  8.  Masters  are  bidden  to  give  their  slaves  what  is  equitable.  A  start- 
ling injunction  respecting  those  who  were  chattels  and  not  persons.  (1)  The 
apostle  does  not  define  what  is  just  and  equal.  The  main  thing  was  to  drive  home 
the  conviction  that  there  are  duties  owing  to  slaves  and  employes.  We  are  far  from 
ft  satisfactory  discharge  of  these  yet,  but  everybody  admits  the  principle — and  we 
have  mainly  to  thank  Christianity  for  that.  Paul  does  not  say,  "  Give  them  what  ia 
kind  and  patronizing."  Charity  likes  to  come  in  and  supplies  wants  which  would 
never  have  been  felt  had  there  been  equity.  (2)  The  duty  of  masters  is  enforced  by 
the  fact  that  they  have  a  Master  who  is  to  be  their  pattern.  Give  your  servants 
what  you  expect  and  need  to  get  from  Christ.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Husbands 
and  wives  : — The  duty  of  the  latter  is  put  first,  because  obedience  is  more  difficult 
and  distasteful  than  love,  and  because  the  love  of  the  husband  largely  depends  on 
the  «ubjection  of  the  wife.  I.  As  to  wives.  1.  The  proposition  that  wives  ought 
to  be  subject  to  their  husbands.  (1)  In  general  this  subjection  is  a  Divine  dispo- 
sition whereby  the  more  imperfect  are  subordinate  to  the  more  perfect,  in  order  to 
their  government  and  preservation.  Without  this,  neither  natural  affairs,  nor 
political  societies,  nor  even  the  world  could  subsist.  From  whence  follow — (a) 
The  author  of  creatures  would  not  have  them  confounded  through  disorder  (1  Cor. 
xiv.  13).  (6)  It  is  not  the  mark  of  a  base  but  of  a  generous  mind  to  be  subject  to 
his  superiors.  ''Everyman  in  proportion  to  his  depravity  bears  a  ruler  with  rude 
impatience,  (c)  Those  who  shake  oli'  the  yoke  of  due  subjection  are  blind  to  their  own 
interests.  "  Obedience  is  the  mother  of  prosperity."  (2)  In  particular  this  subjection 
consists  in — (a)  The  internal  act  of  the  heart  and  the  acknowledgment  of  the  mind 
(Eph.  V,  33  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  6).  (b)  Conformity  of  manners  and  affections.  As  a  mirror 
adorned  with  gems  and  skilfully  polished  is  nothing  unless  it  express  a  true  likeness  of 
the  person  looking  into  it ;  so  a  wife,  however  endowed  and  beautiful,  is  nothing  un- 
less she  render  herself  conformable  to  the  manners  of  her  husband  (1  Cor.  vii.  37). 
(c)  Performance  of  wifely  duties — conjugal  love  (Gen.  ii.  18  ;  Titus  ii.  4 ;  Prov.  xxxi. 
12) — care  of  the  children  and  the  house  (Titus  ii.  4-5).  The  Egyptian  women  had 
no  shoes,  that  they  might  learn  to  keep  at  home.     (3)  The  reasons  for  this  subjection. 

!a)  The  Divine  appointment  (Gen.  iii.  16).  (6)  The  natural  imperfection  of  the  woman 
1  Pet.  iii.  7).  (c)  The  order  of  creation.  Woman  was  created  after,  out  of,  and 
for  man  (1  Cor.  xi.  8-9).  (d)  The  transgression  of  the  woman  (1  Tim.  ii.  14).  (2) 
The  disadvantage  of  refusing  this  subjection.  The  violation  of  natural  order  every- 
where is  productive  of  disastrous  disturbances.  (4)  The  hindrances  to  this  subjec- 
tion, (a)  Pride,  which  makes  the  wife  disesteem  her  husband  as  unworthy  to 
command  her.  To  obviate  this  evil  let  her  remember  that  her  husband's  dignity 
and  her  own  inferiority  are  not  to  be  estimated  from  virtues,  figure,  nobility,  or 
riches ;  but  from  Divine  ordination ;  that  pride  is  of  the  devil,  who,  as  he  incited 
Eve,  instills  the  same  poison  into  her  daughters,  (b)  Defect  of  love.  She  studies 
not  to  please  her  husband  who  is  displeased  with  him.  This  evil  will  be  avoided 
if  parents  would  not  compel  their  daughters  to  odious  nuptials  (Gen.  xxiv.  57-58) ; 
if  women  would  beware  of  marrying  for  honour  and  riches  ;  and  if  after  marriage 
they  would  avoid  all  occasions  of  offence,  (c)  Foolish  vanities,  such  as  an  immode- 
rate desire  of  appearing  in  public,  extravagance  in  dress,  &o.  2.  The  limitation  of 
the  proposition — "  As  it  is  fit  in  the  Lord ;  "  as  far  as  God  permits,  and  as  far  as  it  is 
l^efitting  women  who  are  in  the  Lord.  The  occasion  of  this  arose  from  the  circum- 
stance that  many  believing  women  were  united  to  unbelieving  husbands.  If  their 
husbands  should  strive  to  compel  them  to  idolatrous  worship  they  must  resist 
(Acts  V.  29).  The  foundation  for  this  is  that  all  authority  is  derived  from  God  and 
subordinate  to  Him.  From  whence  it  follows — (1)  That  thus  wives  render  a  sub- 
mission grateful  to  God  Himself.  (2)  That  the  wife  is  bound  to  be  a  companion  of 
her  husband  in  everything  but  sin.  (3)  That  it  is  impious  to  choose  a  husband  who 
is  likely  to  persuade  his  wife  to  do  such  things  as  are  not  fit  in  the  Lord.  II.  As 
TO  HUSBANDS.  1.  The  precept  enjoining  love.  (1)  The  affection  of  love  itself  is 
required.  This  gives  the  heart  to  the  thing  loved,  which  is  the  most  precious 
gift,  and  that  in  which  all  else  is  given.  (2)  This  affection  will  express  itself 
(a)  In  living  at  home,  delighted  with  the  wife's  presence  and  company,  and  not 
seeking  others  in  preference  (Prov.  v.  18-19).  This  effect  we  see  in  Christ's  love 
toward  His  Church  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  (b)  In  direction  and  instruction  in  all  those 
things  which  relate  to  this  life  and  the  next  (1  Cor.  xiv.  35),  because  both  are 
partners  in  earthly  things  and  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life  (1  Pet.  iiL  7). 
(c)  Provision  of  all  necessary  things,  in  imitation  of  Christ's  care  of  His  Church. 
He  who  neglects  this,  subjects  himself  to  heavy  censure  (1  Tim.  v.  8).     (3)  In  order 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

to  perform  this  duty  let  a  man  beware  of  marrying — (a)  By  the  eyes  alone, 
i.e.,  choosing  for  mere  external  beauty.  Love  which  rests  on  such  an  unstable 
(oundation  cannot  be  firm  and  constant  (6)  By  the  fingers,  i.e.,  choosing  for 
money.  The  man  who  does  this  seeks  not  a  wife  but  a  money  porter,  and  after 
he  has  laid  his  claws  on  the  money,  he  regards  not  of  a  straw  the 
porter.  2.  The  injunction  forbidding  bitterness.  Plutarch  says,  "  They  who  sacri- 
ficed at  the  rites  of  Juno,  took  out  the  gall  of  the  victim,  signifying  by  the  ceremony 
that  it  was  not  fit  that  bile  and  bitterness  should  enter  into  the  married  state." 
The  bitterness  here  prohibited  shows  itself — (1)  In  the  affections.  Without  saying 
or  doing  anything  injurious  a  husband  embittered  against  his  wife  can  make  her 
life  exceedingly  bitter.  That  this  is  to  be  avoided  we  gather  (a)  from  the  precept 
itself,  which  admits  of  no  exception.  As  a  wife  is  bound  to  obey  her  husband  in 
spite  of  his  many  imperfections,  so  the  husband  is  bound  to  love  the  wife  notwith- 
standing hers.  (6)  From  the  example  of  Christ  (Eph.  v.  29).  (2)  In  words.  A 
tender  mind  is  wounded  no  less  by  bitter  words,  than  the  body  is  by  snarp  weapons. 
(3)  In  actions.  God  gave  not  Eve  to  Adam  as  a  slave  but  as  a  companion  and  help- 
meet. This  tyranny  is  exercised  (a)  when  the  wife  is  removed  from  domestic  rule 
and  degraded  to  the  rank  of  a  maid,  even  perhaps  subjected  to  one  of  them.  (Prov. 
xxxi.  27 ;  Titus  ii.  5).  (6)  When  things  pertaining  to  her  dignity  or  necessity  are 
denied,  (c)  When  she  ii  treated  with  cruelty.  {Bp.  Davenant.)  Relative 
duties — husbands  and  wivet: — The  root  of  all  society  is  the  family.  (Gen.  ii.  18  ; 
Psa.  Ixviii.  6).  The  real  strength  and  virtae  of  a  nation  consist  to  a  great  extent  in 
the  purity  of  family  ties ;  and  in  this,  more  than  anything  else  socially,  has  the 
religion  of  Christ  blessed  the  world.  Of  the  domestic  institution,  conjugal  life  and 
love  are  the  very  element  and  fountain  (Eph.  v.  25-33 ;  Titus  ii.  4-5 ;  1  Peter  iii 
1-7).  L  Thb  duty  of  the  wifb.  1.  The  subjection  is  not  that  of  a  drudge  or 
slave,  to  be  ruled  by  force.  It  means  that  in  the  home,  as  everywhere  else,  "order 
is  heaven's  first  law. "  If  there  is  to  be  peace  and  happiness  in  the  home  there 
must  not  be  two  co-ordinate  authorities.  The  husband  is  to  be  the  house-band — 
the  strength  and  bond  of  the  family.  The  submission  required  of  s  wife  involves 
— (1)  A  sense  of  dependence.  In  manythings  this  is  unavoidable,  she  being  the 
weaker  vessel,  and  created  in  a  condition  of  dependence  {1  Cor.  xi.  8-9).  When 
she  tried  to  lead  her  husband  and  undertook  to  govern,  the  issue  was  disastrous  for 
both.  This  dependence  is  touchingly  illustrated  in  the  social  sympathy  for,  and 
Divine  promises  to  widows,  because  she  is  deprived  of  her  earthly  prop  and  stay. 
(2)  A  feeling  of  deference.  "  Sarah  obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him  lord."  Many 
husbands,  it  may  be  said,  do  not  deserve  this,  and  the  wife  may  sometimes  take 
advantage  of  a  husband's  weakness  for  his  good.  If  a  woman  has  married  a  man 
she  cannot  respect,  she  may  have  herself  to  blame;  but  his  weakness  does  not 
exempt  her  from  the  duty  of  honouring  him  as  her  husband.  If  he  abdicate  his 
position,  she  may  be  obliged  to  take  the  lead,  yet  the  true  wife  will  strive  to  do  it  in 
such  a  way  as  not  to  wound  him.  (3)  A  spirit  of  devotedness.  It  is  beautiful  to 
see  a  loving  wife  clinging  hopefully  and  prayerfully  to  a  bad  husband.  Just  as  for- 
bidding is  it  to  hear  a  wife  complaining  all  round  the  parish.  A  good  wife  will  care 
for  her  husband's  comfort  and  character  as  her  own  ;  and  when  he  is  harassed  will 
do  her  best  to  make  him  forget  his  anxieties  (Prov.  xxxi.  10-12).  2.  The  reason 
for  this  injunction — "as  it  is  fit  in  the  Lord."  It  is  God's  will  that  it  should  be  so, 
and  also  the  dictate  of  common  sense.  Where  there  are  two  wills  seeking  for 
mastery  there  will  be  wrangling  and  bitterness.  But  the  wife  is  not  a  slave  to  do 
the  bidding  of  a  taskmaster,  losing  in  a  mechanical  obedience  the  sense  of  responsi- 
bility. No  1  she  may  not  do  wrong  to  please  her  husband.  Her  own  relation  to 
God  will  determine  the  standard  of  right  and  limit  of  duty.  How  much  has  a 
Christian  wife  in  her  power !  By  submission  she  may  gain  conquests  for  Christ, 
and  commend  the  Lord  whom  she  supremely  loves.  II.  The  duty  of  the  husband. 
The  sum  and  fountain  of  all  other  duties  is  love.  1.  Positively — "  love  your 
wives."  1.  Paul  does  not  say  as  the  complement  of  submission,  "Rale  your  wivei 
wisely,  keep  them  in  their  position."  The  rule  of  love  is  sweet  and  easily  borne. 
Either  side  is,  perhaps,  apt  to  forget  its  own  special  obligation  :  the  wife  is  not  so 
likely  to  forget  her  love  as  her  subjection,  nor  the  husband  his  authority  as  hia 
love.  But  he  will  most  surely  and  fully  receive  the  acknowledgment  due  to  him 
who  truly  loves;  and  she  will  be  most  tenderly  loved  who  shows  most  heartily 
deference.  Let  the  love  which  won  the  youthful  bride  be  continued  and  augmented 
2.  This  love  must  be  manifested.  It  is  too  often  taken  as  a  matter  of  course. 
Contact  with  the  world  often  deadens  the  sasceptibihties,  and  love  is  left  to  care  for 


in.]  COLOSSIANS.  267 

itself  and  struggle  for  a  precarious  existence.  But  the  wife  craves  for  love,  and  a 
tone  of  t<inderuess  will  make  her  soul  brighten  for  days  amid  the  manifold  cares  of 
home.  It  is  one  thing  to  be  silly  in  the  expression  of  a  rapturous  fondness  and 
quite  another  to  be  manly  in  the  exhibition  of  a  sincere  affection.  If  a  man  is  not 
ashamed  of  being  married  he  ought  not  to  be  ashamed  of  showing  his  love,  in,  e.g., 
preferring  his  wife's  society,  in  seeking  to  please  her,  in  taking  an  interest  in  those 
things  which  specially  occupy  her  thought.  And  she  has  a  right  to  expect  it 
amidst  the  monotony  of  her  household  cares.  2.  Negatively — "  Be  not  bitter 
against  them."  It  is  possible  to  have  a  general  sentiment  of  affection  and  yet  to  be 
bitter.  This  spirit  is  grossly  wrong  in  a  Christian  man  to  the  woman  who  has 
given  op  all  for  him.  It  may  be  exhibited  in  surly  silence  as  well  as  in  sharp 
words.  There  will  be  need  of  forbearance  on  both  sides.  Some  homes,  alas,  are  in 
a  state  of  chronic  conflict.  He  commands  imperiously;  she  resists  proudly.  Some 
men  are  pleasant  and  genial  abroad,  but  churlish  at  home.  Marriage  is  left  us  as  a 
wreck  saved  from  Paradise;  according  to  our  spirit  and  conduct  it  will  be  either  a 
reminder  of  "paradise  lost,"  or  a  help  towards  "paradise  regained  "  (<7.  Spence, 
D.D.)  Wife:  meaning  of  the  word: — It  literally  means  a  weaver.  The  wife  is 
the  person  who  weaves.  Before  our  great  factories  arose,  one  of  the  great  employ- 
ments in  every  house  was  the  fabrication  of  clothing;  every  family  made  its  own. 
The  wool  was  spun  into  thread  by  the  girls,  who  were  therefore  called  "spinsters"; 
the  thread  was  woven  by  their  mother,  who  was  accordingly  called  the  weaver  or  the 
wife;  and  another  remnant  of  this  old  truth  we  discover  in  the  word  heirloom, 
applied  to  any  old  piece  of  furniture  which  has  come  down  to  us  from  our  ancestors, 
and  which,  though  it  may  be  a  chair  or  bed,  shows  that  a  loom  was  once  the  most 
important  piece  of  furniture  in  the  house.  Thus  in  the  word  wife  is  wrapped  up  a 
hint  of  earnest,  indoor,  stay-at-home  occupations,  as  being  fitted  for  her  who  bears 
this  name.  Quahties  of  a  wife : — A  good  wife  should  be  like  three  things;  which 
three  things  she  should  not  be  like.  1.  She  should  be  like  a  snail,  to  keep  within 
her  own  house ;  but  she  should  not  be  like  the  snail  to  carry  all  she  has  upon  her 
back.  2.  She  should  be  like  an  echo,  to  speak  when  spoken  to;  but  she  should  not 
be  like  an  echo,  always  to  have  the  last  word.  3.  She  should  be  like  a  town  clock, 
always  to  keep  time  and  regularity;  but  she  should  not  be  like  a  town  clock,  speak  so 
loud  that  all  the  town  may  hear  her.  (Old  writer.)  The  value  of  submisstvenets 
in  wives: — A  pleasure-loving  husband  boasted  of  tne  good  temper  of  his  wife;  and 
•  wager  was  laid  that  she  would  rise  at  midnight  and  give  the  company  a  supper 
with  perfect  cheerfulness.  It  was  put  to  the  test,  and  the  boast  of  the  husband  was 
found  true.  One  of  the  company  thus  addressed  the  lady,  "Madam,  your  civility 
fills  us  with  surprise.  Our  unreasonable  visit  is  in  consequence  of  a  wager  which 
we  have  certainly  lost.  As  you  cannot  approve  of  our  conduct,  give  me  leave  to 
ask  what  can  possibly  induce  you  to  behave  with  so  much  kindness  to  ns?" 
"Sir,"  she  replied,  "When  I  married,  my  husband  and  myself  were  both  uncon- 
verted.  It  has  pleased  God  to  call  me  out  of  that  dangerous  condition.  My 
husband  continues  in  it.  I  tremble  lor  his  future,  and  therefore  try  to  make  hia 
present  as  comfortable  as  possible."  "I  thank  you  for  the  warning,  my  dear," 
aaid  her  husband,  "  by  the  grace  of  God  I  will  change  my  conduct,"  From  that 
time  he  became  another  man.  {E.  Foster.)  A  considerate  wife: — When  Mr. 
Disraeli  retired  from  office  he  was  offered  an  earldom.  He  declined  it  with  the  in- 
timation that  if  there  was  any  reward  thought  to  be  deserved,  he  wished  it  to  be 
conferred  upon  his  wife,  to  whom  he  attributed  all  his  success.  His  wife  therefore 
became  Viscountess  Beaconsfield.  On  the  day,  long  before  this,  when  he  was  to 
enfold  the  Budget,  he  entered  the  carriage  absorbed  in  thouglit,  his  wife  quietly 
taking  her  seat  beside  him.  In  getting  in,  her  finger  was  caught  by  the  door, 
which  shutting  upon  it  held  it  so  fast  that  she  could  not  withdraw  it.  Fearful  ol 
driving  figures  and  arguments  from  his  head,  she  uttered  no  cry  nor  made  any 
movement  until  they  reached  the  House;  nor  did  Disraeli  hear  of  it  till  long  after. 
All  that  evening  the  faithful  wife  sat  in  the  gallery,  that  her  husband's  quick  eye 
might  not  miss  her  from  it,  bearing  her  pain  like  a  martyr,  and  like  a  woman  who 
loves.  (Ibid.)  Husband:  meaning  of  the  word: — It  means  literally  "the  band 
of  the  house,"  the  support  of  it,  the  person  who  keeps  it  together,  as  a  band  keeps 
together  a  sheaf  of  corn.  There  are  many  married  men  who  are  not  huebands, 
because  they  are  not  bands  of  the  house.  In  many  cases  the  wife  is  the  husband, 
who  by  her  prudence  and  economy  keeps  the  house  together.  The  man  who  by  hia 
dissolate  habits  strips  his  house  of  all  comfort,  is  only  a  husband  in  a  legal  sense. 
fie  is  not  a  honseband ;  instead  of  keeping  things  together  he  scatters  them.     (Ibid.) 

17 


368  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  i& 

Husbajid's  love  : — Tiberius  Gracchus,  the  Koman,  finding  two  snakes  in  his  bed, 
and  consulting  with  the  soothsayers,  was  told  that  one  of  them  must  be  killed; 
yet,  if  he  killed  the  male,  he  himself  would  die  shortly;  if  the  female,  his  wife 
would  die.  His  love  to  his  wife,  Cornelia,  was  so  great,  that  he  killed  the  male, 
saith  Plutarch,  and  died  quickly.  (G.  Swinnock,  M.A.)  A  wife  not  loved  too 
much : — Bowland  Hill  often  felt  much  grieved  at  the  false  reports  which  were 
circulated  of  many  of  his  sayings,  especially  those  respecting  his  publicly 
mentioning  Mrs.  Hill.  His  attentions  to  her  till  the  close  of  life  were  of  the 
most  gentlemanly  and  affectionate  kind.  The  high  view  he  entertained  of  her 
may  be  seen  from  the  following  fact: — A  friend  having  informed  Mr.  Hill  of 
the  sudden  death  of  a  lady,  the  wife  of  a  minister,  remarked,  "I  am  afraid  our 
dear  minister  loved  his  wife  too  well,  and  the  Lord  in  wisdom  has  removed  her." 
"What,  sir?"  replied  Mr.  Hill,  with  the  deepest  feeling,  *' can  a  man  love  a 
good  wife  too  much?  Impossible,  sir,  unless  he  can  love  her  better  than  Christ 
loves  the  Church."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Husband's  love  reciprocated: — Xeno- 
phon  relates,  tbat  when  Cyrus  had  taken  captive  a  young  prince  of  Armenia^ 
together  with  his  beautiful  and  blooming  wife,  of  whom  he  was  remarkably 
fond,  they  were  brought  before  the  tribunal  of  Cyrus  to  receive  their  sentence. 
The  warrior  inquired  of  the  prince  what  he  would  give  to  be  reinstated  in  his- 
kingdom,  and  he  replied  that  he  valued  his  crown  and  his  liberty  at  a  very 
low  rate ;  but  if  the  noble  conqueror  would  restore  his  beloved  wife  to  her 
former  dignity  and  possessions,  he  would  willingly  pay  his  life  for  the  pur- 
chase. The  prisoners  were  dismissed,  to  enjoy  their  freedom  and  former 
honours  ;  and  each  was  lavish  in  praises  of  the  conqueror.  "  And  you,"  said  the 
prince,  addressing  his  wife,  "  what  think  you  of  Cyrus  ?  "  "I  did  not  observe 
him,"  she  replied.  "Not  observe  him  !  "  exclaimed  her  husband  ;  "  upon  whom,^ 
then,  was  your  attention  fixed  ? "  '*  Upon  that  dear  and  generous  man,"  she 
replied,  "who  declared  his  readiness  to  purchase  my  liberty  at  the  expense  of  his 
hfe."  {Christian  Age.)  The  influence  of  a  wife: — The  tear  of  a  loving  girl,  says 
an  old  book,  is  like  a  dewdrop  on  a  rose ;  but  one  on  the  cheek  of  a  wife  is  a  drop 
of  poison  to  her  husband.  Try  to  appear  cheerful  and  contented,  and  your 
husband  will  be  so,  and  when  you  have  made  him  happy,  you  will  become  so,  not 
in  appearance  but  in  reality.  The  skill  required  is  not  so  great.  Nothing  flatters 
a  man  so  much  as  the  happiness  of  his  wife  :  he  is  always  proud  of  himself  as  the 
Bource  of  it.  (J.  Moser.)  A  wife's  influence  : — As  I  was  conversing  with  a  pioua 
old  man,  I  inquired  what  were  the  means  of  his  conversion.  For  a  moment  he 
paused.  I  perceived  I  had  touched  a  tender  string.  Tears  gushed  from  his  eyes, 
while,  with  deep  emotion,  he  replied,  "  My  wife  was  brought  to  God  some  year* 
before  myself.  I  persecuted  and  abused  her  because  of  her  religion.  She,  however, 
returned  nothing  but  kindness,  constantly  manifesting  an  anxiety  to  promote  my 
comfort  and  happiness ;  and  it  was  her  amiable  conduct,  when  suffering  ill  treat- 
ment from  me,  that  first  sent  the  arrows  of  conviction  to  my  soul."  (N.  Y. 
Observer.) 

Vers.  20-21,  Children,  obey  your  parents  In  all  things. — The  muhtal  ojlcei  oj 
parents  and  children: — Among  all  those  mutual  offices  by  which  society  is  pre- 
served those  incumbent  on  parents  and  children  are  the  most  important.  If  a  man 
neglect  his  children  or  misgovern  them,  how  will  he  duly  treat  other  dependants  ? 
Or  if  a  child  shake  off  the  parental  yoke,  how  will  he  bear  that  of  a  master  or 
prince?  Whereas  a  good  child  in  the  house  is  Ukely  to  be  a  good  subject  in  the 
state,  and  a  good  father  will  prove  a  good  master  and  magistrate  (1  Tim.  iii.  4-5). 

1.  The  duty  of  children.  1.  Those  addressed  are  of  either  sex.  Daughters, 
therefore,  must  not  urge  their  weakness,  nor  sons  their  strength,  as  a  reason  why 
obedience  should  be  dispensed  with.  Nor  must  time  or  fortune,  for  children,  of 
whatever  age  or  rank,  are  unalterably  their  father's  and  mother's  (Gen.  xlvi.  29). 

2.  The  duty  is  obedience :  which  includes  the  "honour"  prescribed  by  the  law. 
But  the  term  is  used  to  show  us  that  this  honour  is  not  a  vain  respect,  and  ta 
condemn  hypocritical  obsequiousness  (Matt.  xxi.  30).  3.  The  extent  of  the  duty  is 
universal.  This  is  natural,  and  would  have  been  literal  but  for  sin.  Now,  how- 
ever, exceptions  must  be  introduced  (Eph.  vi.  1),  and  obedience  in  things  not 
"  well  pleasing  to  the  Lord  "  is  prohibited.  If  a  father  should  command  his  son 
to  be  an  idolater,  or  to  kill  or  hate  his  neighbour,  or  forbid  him  to  emlri¥3e  the 
service  of  God,  obedience  would  be  criminal  (Luke  xiv.  26;  Matt.  x.  £^).  But 
children  are  to  obey — (1)  In  those  things  which  are  conformable  to  thi  Divine 


CBAT.  ra.]  COLOSSIANS.  259 

will — in  which  oaiie  God's  law  has  an  additional  sanction — viz.,  parental  authority, 
and  disobedience  involves,  therefore,  double  guilt.  (2)  In  things  indifferent.  I 
wish  that  fathers  would  confine  themselves  to  what  is  human,  yet  if  they  com- 
mand anything  not  repugnant  to  God's  law,  however  harsh,  it  must  be  obeyed. 
(3)  Whence  it  appears  how  dangerous  and  contrary  to  the  Word  of  God  is  the 
doctrine  of  Rome,  which  enfranchises  children  from  this  authority,  daughters  at 
twelve  and  sons  at  fourteen,  giving  them  liberty,  in  spite  of  their  parents,  to  enter 
a  cloister.  This  directly  contradicts  Nimib.  xxx.  3-8 ;  Matt.  xv.  4^6.  4.  The 
enforcement.  The  apostle  might  have  urged  the  justice  of  the  thing  itself, 
gratitude  prompting  it ;  or  from  nature,  which  has  engraven  this  law  on  animals ; 
or  from  the  custom  of  all  nations,  who  have  authorized  the  veneration  of  parents 
as  of  sacred  persons,  and  made  piety  at  once  Divine  worship  and  filial  obedience. 
But  he  alleges  nothing  but  the  sole  will  of  God.  That  this  is  well  pleasing  to  God 
is  seen — (1)  From  His  commandment.  (2)  The  promise  annexed.  (3)  The 
punishments  threatened  (Deut.  xxi.  18 ;  Ex.  xxi.  17 :  Levit.  xx.  9  ;  Prov.  xx.  20, 
XXX.  17).  (4)  His  Fatherly  relation  (Mai.  i,  6).  U.  The  duties  of  parents. 
1.  The  provocation  forbidden  is  an  ill  effect  of  the  abuse  of  parental  authority. 
Fathers  provoke  their  children — (1)  When  they  deny  them  a  suitable  maintenance 
(1  Tim.  V.  8).  (2)  When  they  give  them  inhuman  or  unrighteous  commands 
(1  Sam.  XX.  34 ;  Matt.  xiv.  8).  (3)  When  without  necessity  they  compel  them  to 
perform  sordid  actions.  (4)  When  they  assail  them  with  irritating  or  angry 
words  (1  Sam.  xx.  30).  (5)  When  they  chastise  them  beyond  measure  or  desert 
(2  Sam.  vii.  14).  2.  To  dissuade  fathers  from  this  fault,  the  apostle  shows  the 
evil  it  produces.  Nothing  more  dejects  the  heart  of  a  child  than  undue  rigour. 
(1)  It  saddens  him  when  in  the  countenance  and  actions  of  that  person  to  whom 
he  should  be  most  dear  he  sees  nothing  but  aversion.  (2)  It  intimidates  and 
deprives  him  of  all  courage  for  a  good  undertaking ;  for,  finding  himself  ill-treated 
by  his  father,  what  can  he  hope  for  from  others.  (3)  Some  get  hardened,  and  fall 
by  degrees  into  desperate  impiety.  {J,  Daille.)  The  obligations  of  parents  and 
children: — I.  The  duty  of  cuildken.     1.  The  duty  itself  contains  four  things. 

(1)  Reverence  (Levit.  xix.  3,  20 ;  Heb.  xii.  9).  (a)  With  respect  to  speech,  that  it 
be  agreeable  to  the  relation,  graced  with  humility  and  modesty,  giving  them 
honourable  titles,  pleasing  answers,  respectful  requests,  (b)  With  respect  to 
behaviour.  Rude  and  haughty  looks  cannot  comport  with  this  duty.  (2)  Obser- 
vance,     (a)   Attending  to  their  instructions.      (6)   Executing  their  commands. 

(c)  Depending  on   their  counsels — as  regards  a  calling   in  life,   and  marriage. 

(d)  Following  their  examples.  (3)  Pious  regards,  (a)  With  respect  to  their 
benevolence  towards  us.  (b)  With  respect  to  their  claims  when  in  indigence,  in 
infirmity,  or  dead.  (4)  Submission,  (a)  To  their  admonitions,  (b)  To  their 
corrections.  2.  The  extent  of  the  duty.  We  cannot  imagine  that  this  is  so 
universal  and  absolute  as  obedience  to  God.  He  is  the  only  absolute  lawgiver 
(Jsimes  iv.  12),  and  when  parental  claims  conflict  with  His,  we  are  absolved  from 
our  obedience.  Hence  we  find  Acrotatus  commended  among  the  ancients  because, 
when  his  parents  had  required  of  him  to  do  an  unjust  thing,  he  answered,  "  I 
know  you  are  willing  I  should  do  that  which  is  just,  for  so  you  taught  me  to  do ; 
I  will  therefore  do  what  you  desire,  but  not  what  you  bid."  3.  The  reason  for 
the  duty  :  because  it  is  well  pleasing  to  the  Lord.  The  supreme  authority  of  our 
heavenly  Father  makes  any  duties  He  requires  highly  reasonable :  and  in  pleasing  God 
you  please  your  parents  and  yourself  too,  for  you  must  needs  be  happy  when  God  and 
you  are  pleased  (Psa.  xix.  11 ;  £ph.  vi.  1).  11.  The  office  of  pabents.  They  are  not 
to  irritate  their  children,  but,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  to  so  comport  themselves  i* 
good  government  as  to  secure  their  children's  honour.  Let  us  look,  then,  at  thii 
positive  side  of  the  matter.  1.  The  more  general  parental  duties.  (1)  Prayer  for 
all  necessary  things,  but  more  particularly  that  they  may  be  God's  children.  (2) 
Goo4  behaviour   (Prov.   xx.  7 ;   iii.   22).      2.  More  particular.      (1)   Sustenance. 

(2)  Education  (Eph.  vi.  4 ;  Prov.  xxii.  6).  (3)  Disposal  into  some  fit  employment 
and  marriage.  III.  The  means  of  manaoino  the  duties  of  both  belationb.  1. 
To  children.  (1)  Be  thoroughly  sensible  of  the  mischief  of  disobedience,  and  th« 
benefit  of  obedience.  (2)  Remove  all  tendencies  to  the  dishonour  of  parents,  and 
set  a  value  on  their  instructions.  (3)  Perform  all  with  sincerity  and  impartiality 
to  both  parents.  (4)  Set  about  your  filial  duties  willingly  and  readily.  (5) 
Persevere  in  all,  whatever  temptations  you  meet  with.  2.  To  parents.  (1)  B« 
sure  you  keep  up  the  Ufe  and  power  of  godliness  in  your  domestic  practice. 
(2)  Maintain  yoor  parental  authority,  and  assert  the  dignity  of  your  relation,  yet 


(60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ou 

with  love  and  mildnesa.  (3)  Sweeten  all  with  expressions  of  endearment,  to 
insinuate  the  more  into  their    affections,  but    still    with    Christian    prudence. 

(4)  Endeavour  to  carry  it  with  all  evenness  and  impartiality  to  every  child, 
according  to  a  rational  proportion.  {Richard  Adams,  A.M.)  The  duties  of 
parents  and  children : — God  hath  set  the  solitary  in  families.  The  domestic 
constitution  is  the  type  of  all  governments.  If  discipline  is  neglected  in  the 
home,  it  is  rarely  that  the  loss  is  made  up  afterwards.  Coleridge  has  said :  "  li 
you  bring  up  your  children  in  a  way  which  puts  them  oat  of  sympathy  with  the 
religious  feelings  of  the  nation  in  which  tbey  live,  the  chances  are  that  they  will 
ultimately  turn  out  ruffians  or  fanatics,  and  one  as  likely  as  the  other."  Lord 
Bacon  observes  that  fathers  have  most  comfort  of  the  good  proof  of  their  sons ; 
but  the  mothers  have  most  discomfort  of  their  ill  proof.  It  is  therefore  of  vital 
importance  that  the  reciprocal  duties  of  parents  and  children  should  be  faithfully 
and  diligently  observed.  I.  The  duty  of  the  child  to  thb  parent  is  to  obey. 
1,  This  obedience  is  universal.  "  In  all  things."  The  law  commands:  "Honour 
thy  father,"  &c.,  and  the  most  signal  way  is  to  obey.  Parents  have  the  wisdom  of 
experience,  and  know  the  dangers  that  threaten  their  children,  and  are  in  a 
position  to  offer  judicious  counsel.  Filial  obedience  should  be  prompt,  cheerful, 
self-denying,  uniform  ;  not  dilatory  and  reluctant.  2.  This  obedience  is  qualified 
and  limited  by  the  Divine  approvaL  II.  The  duty  of  the  parent  to  the  child 
IS  TO  BULE.  1.  The  parent  is  not  to  rule  in  a  spirit  of  exasperating  severity.  An 
excessive  severity  is  as  baneful  as  an  excessive  indulgence.  2.  To  rule  in  a  spirit 
of  exasperating  severity  tends  only  to  dishearten.  A  certain  writer  has  signifi- 
cantly said :  "  What  if  God  should  place  in  your  hand  a  diamond,  and  tell  you  to 
inscribe  on  it  a  sentence  which  should  be  read  at  the  last  day,  and  shown  there  as 
an  index  of  your  own  thoughts  and  feelings  ?  What  care,  what  caution,  would 
\ou  exercise  in  the  selection.  Now  this  is  what  God  has  done.  He  has  placed 
before  you  the  immortal  minds  of  your  children,  more  imperishable  than  the 
diamond,  on  which  you  are  about  to  inscribe  every  day  and  every  hour,  by  your 
instruction,  by  your  spirit,  or  by  your  example,  something  that  will  remain  and 
be  exhibited  for  or  against  you  at  the  judgment  day  I  "  Lessons :  1.  To  rule  wisely 
we  must  first  learn  to  obey.  2.  Disobedience  is  the  essence  of  all  sin.  3.  That 
government  is  the  most  effective  that  tempers  justice  with  mercy.  ((?.  Barlow.) 
Children  entreated  to  obey  their  parents: — I.  Why  you  should  obey.  1.  Because 
it  is  your  duty.  (1)  God  commands  it,  and  He  is  so  good  that  we  ought  to  obey 
Him,  and  so  great  that  He  will  not  allow  disobedience  to  go  unpunished.  (2)  Your 
parents  command  it,  to  whom  you  owe  your  all  of  earthly  happiness.  2.  Because 
it  is  your  interest.  Neither  God  nor  your  parents  would  wish  it  if  it  were  not  for 
your  good.  (1)  It  will  secure  for  you  God's  blessing,  whereas  disobedience  will 
bring  down  His  curse.  Remember  Hophni  and  Phinehas,  and  Absalom.  (2)  It 
will  make  you  cheerful  and  happy  in  your  minds,  whereas  disobedience  makes  you 
sullen  and  disagreeable  to  yourselves  as  well  as  others.  (3)  ft  promotes  your  daily 
improvement.  Disobey,  and  your  evil  dispositions  will  become  daily  more 
tyrannical.     (4)  It  makes  others  love  you :  but  no  one  likes  a  disobedient  child. 

(5)  It  is  most  favourable  to  conversion,  but  the  contrary  almost  precludes  the 
nope  of  it.  3.  Because  you  have  the  perfect  pattern  of  our  Lord  to  urge  you  to 
obey.  II.  How  you  should  obey.  1.  Religiously.  With  a  regard  to  what  pleases 
God,  and  not  what  pleases  self  or  parents  so  much.  2.  Heartily  and  sincerely,  aa 
opposed  to  that  hypocritical  obedience  which  some  children  yield  when  their 
parents  are  in  sight,  because  they  are  afraid  of  the  consequences.  8.  Completely. 
It  is  of  no  use  for  children  to  obey  in  some  things  and  disobey  in  others ;  to  do 
half  what  their  parents  command,  and  leave  half  undone.  4.  Instantly,  without 
waiting  to  ask  the  reason,  or  promising  to  obey  at  some  future  time.  6.  Cheer- 
fully. There  ia  an  obedience  of  the  hand,  but  a  disobedience  of  the  heart.  6. 
Always.  Not  simply  till  you  go  to  business,  or  are  of  age,  or  married.  "Despise 
not  thy  mother  when  she  is  old."  (B.  W.Noel,  M.A.)  Obediince  of  children:'-^ 
The  commander  of  the  Orient,  before  the  Battle  of  the  Nile,  placed  his  son, 
Cassabianoa,  thirteen  years  of  age,  on  certain  duty,  to  stay  at  his  post  till 
relieved  by  his  father's  order.  Soon  after  the  fatber  was  slain.  The  boy  held  hia 
post  in  the  midst  of  fearful  carnage,  ignorant  of  his  father's  fate ;  and  while 
the  sailors  were  deserting  the  burning  and  sinking  ship,  he  cried,  "  Father,  may  I 
go?"  The  permission  did  not  come,  and  there  he  stood  at  his  post  and  perished. 
{E.  Foster.)  Obedience  to  a  master  : — The  Hon.  Thomas  H.  Benton  was  for 
tnaoy  yean  a  United  States  senator.     When  making  a  speech  in  New  Tork 


CHAP,  in.]  COLOSSIANS.  261 

once,  he  turned  to  the  ladies  present,  and  spoke  about  his  mother  ia  this 
way :  "  My  mother  asked  me  never  to  use  tobacco,  and  I  have  never  touched 
it  from  that  day  to  this.  She  asked  me  never  to  gamble,  and  I  never  learned 
to  gamble.  When  I  was  seven  years  old  she  asked  me  not  to  drink.  I  made 
•  resolution  of  total  abstiuence.  That  resolution  I  have  never  broken.  And 
now,  whatever  honour  I  may  have  gained,  I  owe  it  to  my  mother."  yffi.^^'a 
Highway.)  The  rarity  of  obedience: — A  tradesman  advertised  for  a  boy  to 
assist  in  his  shop,  and  go  on  errands.  A  few  hours  after  the  morning  papers 
were  circulated  he  had  his  sliop  thronged  with  all  kinds  of  boys.  Not  know- 
ing which  to  choose  he  advertised  again:  "Wanted,  to  assist  in  a  shop,  a  boy 
who  obeys  his  mother."  Only  two  boys  ventured  to  apply  for  the  situation. 
{J.  Bate.)  Safety  of  obedience : — A  pointsman  in  Prussia  was  at  the  junc- 
tion of  two  lines  of  railway,  his  lever  in  hand  for  a  train  that  was  signalled. 
The  engine  was  within  a  few  seconds  of  reaching  the  embankment,  when  the 
man,  on  turning  his  head,  perceived  his  httle  boy  playing  on  the  rails  on  the 
line  the  train  was  to  pass  over.  "  Lie  down  !  "  he  shouted  to  the  child,  but 
as  to  himself,  he  remained  at  his  post.  The  train  passed  safely  on  its  way.  The 
father  rushed  forward  expecting  to  take  up  a  corpse,  but  what  was  his  joy  oil 
finding  that  the  boy  had  at  once  obe.ved  his  order!  He  had  lain  down,  and  the 
whole  train  passed  over  him  without  injury.  The  next  day  the  king  sent  for  the 
man,  and  attached  to  his  breast  the  medal  for  civil  courage.  Disobedience 
regretted  : — When  I  was  a  boy,  and  a  little  reckless,  my  mother  used  to  say  to  me, 
♦•  be  Witt,  you  will  be  sorry  for  this  when  I  am  gone."  I  remember  just  Ijow  she 
iooked,  with  her  cap  and  spectacles.  I  remember  just  how  she  sat  with  the  Bible 
on  her  lap.  I  laughed  the  admonition  off,  but  she  never  said  a  truer  thing  in  all 
her  life.  I  have  been  sorry  for  it  ever  since.  (T.  De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.} 
Fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  wrath,  lest  they  be  discouraged.—  The 
treatment  that  discourages  piety : — Discouraged,  Paul  means,  in  good.  Hia 
language  is  addressed  to  fathers,  for  he  seems  to  have  had  in  view  the  case  of 
advanced  children ;  and  yet  the  language  is  equally  applicable  to  the  case  of 
mothers  and  very  little  children.  Children  are  discouraged  and  hardened  to  good 
— I,  By  too  Mt:cH  prohibition.  There  is  a  monotony  of  continuous  prohibition 
which  is  really  awful.  It  does  not  stop  with  ten,  like  the  words  of  Sinai,  but  keeps 
up  the  thunder  from  day  to  day.  All  commandments,  of  course,  in  such  a  strain 
come  to  sound  very  much  alike,  and  as  they  are  all  equally  annoying,  the  child 
learns  to  hate  them  all.  The  study  should  be  rather  to  forbid  as  few  things  aa 
possible,  and  then  soundly  to  enforce  what  is  forbidden.  II.  By  unfeeling  and 
ABSOLUTE  GOVERNMENT.  If  a  Christian  father  is  felt  to  be  a  tyrant,  he  will  seem 
to  his  child  to  be  a  tyrant  in  God's  name,  and  that  will  be  enough  to  create  a 
Bullen  prejudice  against  all  sacred  things.  Nor  is  the  case  improved  when  the 
child  is  cowed  into  fear  of  such  a  parent,  and  thus  reduced  to  submission.  Thera 
is  a  beautiful  courage  in  a  child's  approach  to  God ;  but  if  his  courage  evea 
toward  his  father  is  broken  down,  he  will  only  shrink  from  God  with  a  greater 
fear.  III.  By  an  oveb-exactino  manner  and  a  difficulty  in  being  pleased. 
Children  love  approbation,  and  are  specially  disappointed  when  they  fail  of  it  in. 
their  meritorious  endeavours,  and  especially  when  they  are  blamed  for  a  trivial 
defect  which,  had  they  known,  they  would  have  avoided.  But  some  parents 
appear  to  think  it  a  matter  of  faithfulness  to  be  not  easily  pleised,  lest  thc' 
children  should  have  loose  impressions  of  duty.  They  do  not  consider  how  they 
would  fare  if  God  should  treat  them  in  the  same  manner.  But  what  can  win  a 
child  to  attempt  to  please  God  when  His  earthly  representative  is  so  difficult  to 
please  ?  IV.  By  holding  displeasure  too  long,  and  yielding  with  too  great 
difficulty.  It  is  right  when  children  have  done  wrong  to  make  them  feel  your 
displeasure ;  but  that  should  not  take  the  manner  of  a  grudge,  and  hold  on  after 
repentance.  On  the  contrary,  there  should  be  a  hastening  towards  the  child  like 
the  prodigal's  father,  otherwise  repentance  will  be  turned  into  a  sullen  aversion, 
and  into  a  feeling  that  there  is  the  same  heavy  tariff  of  displeasure  to  be  paid 
when  he  would  turn  towards  God.  V.  By  hasty  and  false  accusations.  When, 
good  intentions  are  rated  low,  and  children  are  put  under  the  ban  of  dishonour,, 
they  ara  very  likely  to  show  that  they  are  no  better  than  they  are  taken  to  be.. 
To  batter  pelf-respect  is  the  surest  way  to  break  every  natural  charm  of  virtue  andf 
religion.  The  effect  is  scarcely  better  where  acknowledged  faults  are  exaggerated 
and  set  off  by  colours  of  derision.  It  vrill  do  for  a  parent  to  be  severely  just,  but 
exaggerated  justice  is  injustice,  and  more  terribly  so  when  it  assumes  the  Christiami 


269  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chu".  m, 

name.  VI.  Bt  keeping  children  in  a  continual  torment  of  suppression.  We  have 
no  right  to  be  anxious  anywhere;  it  is  unbelief  which  trust  in  God  should  set  at  rest. 
And  we  have  less  right  to  be,  in  that  it  destroys  the  comfort  of  others.  Only  to  be  in 
a  room  with  an  anxious  person  is  enough  to  make  one  positively  unhappy.  What, 
then,  is  the  woe  put  upon  a  hapless  little  one  who  is  shot  up  day  by  day  to  the 
fearing  look  and  deprecating  whine,  and  supercautionary  keeping  of  a  nervously 
anxious  mother.  Nothing  will  so  dreadfully  overcast  the  sky  of  childhood  as  the 
weather  this  makes.  It  worries  the  child  in  every  putting  forth  and  play  lest  he 
should  be  hurt,  and  takes  him  away  from  every  contact  with  the  great  world's 
occasions  that  would  school  him  for  manhood.  And  then,  since  the  child  will 
most  certainly  learn  how  little  reason  there  was  for  this  eternal  distress,  he  is  sure 
to  be  issued  finally  in  a  feeling  of  confirmed  disrespect.  No,  there  must  be  a 
certain  courage  in  maternity  and  the  religion  of  it.  The  child  must  be  wisely 
trusted  to  danger,  and  shown  how  to  conquer  it.  VII.  By  givinq  them  tests  of 
character  that  ABE  INAPPROPRIATE  TO  THEIR  AGE.  A  child  loscs  his  temper,  and 
the  conclusion  forthwith  sprung  upon  him  is  that  he  has  a  bad  heart.  Whereupon 
he  is  reluctant  to  pray,  as  if  the  wrong  were  conclusive  against  him.  But  how 
would  the  father  or  mother  fare  if  tested  by  the  same  rule?  So,  if  the  child 
evinces  a  desire  to  play  on  Sunday,  has  not  the  father,  who  has  outgrown  play, 
occupied  himself  even  in  church  with  his  secular  schemes  ?  If  a  child  is  wholly 
perverse,  it  will  not  discourage  him  to  tell  him  of  it ;  but  if  he  wants  to  be  good, 
he  should  be  shown  how  ready  God  is  to  help  him  and  to  forgive  his  faults.     VIIL 

By   THE    HOLDING    ALOOF    SYSTEM    BY   WHICH    CHILDREN    ARE    DENIED  A  RECOGNITION  0» 

THEiB  Church  membership.  The  child  giving  evidence,  however  beautiful,  of  his 
piety,  is  still  kept  back  from  the  Lord's  table,  for  the  simple  defect  of  years.  Aa 
if  years  were  a  Scriptural  evidence  of  grace.  No  plan  could  be  devised  for  the  dis- 
couragement of  piety  in  children  more  certain  in  its  object.  They  are  only  mocked 
and  tantalized  by  their  baptism  itself.     (H.  Bushnell,  D.D.) 

Vers.  22-25.  Servants,  obey  In  aJl  things  your  masters. — Servants  and  mastert : — 
I.  A  PRECKPT  OF  obedience.  1.  The  occasion  of  this  precept  seems  to  spring  from 
the  circumstance  that  converted  servants  tbought  themselves  exempt  from  servi- 
tude. The  error  had  some  colour.  If  masters  embraced  Christianity  with  their 
slaves  it  seemed  unjust  to  hold  them  in  bondage  ;  and  if  masters  still  adhered  to 
paganism,  what  right  had  they,  the  servants  of  Satan,  over  those  who  were  now 
Christ's  free  men  ?  2.  The  precept  involves — (1)  Humility  in  receiving  the  com- 
mands of  another.  (2)  Alacrity  in  executing  them.  (3)  Universality  "in  all 
things  "  lawful  and  honest.  He  that  is  lord  of  the  flesh  must  not  command  con- 
trary to  the  Lord  of  the  Spirit  (Matt.  x.  28).  3.  Instructions.  (1)  Christianity 
does  not  subvert  political  order,  such  as  depriving  heathen  masters  of  their  legitimate 
authority  over  Christian  servants.  Therefore  those  err  who  think  all  authority  to 
be  opposed  to  evangelical  liberty,  and  papists  who  have  it  that  the  authority  of  a 
king  over  subjects  is  dissolved  by  heresy.  (2)  Christianity  frees  from  the  yoke  of 
human  servitude  that  which  is  the  best  and  most  excellent  thing  in  man,  viz.,  the 
epirit  and  conscience  (Gal.  v.  1).  They  therefore  err  who  would  rule  the  consciences 
of  men  either  by  ecclesiastical  or  physical  force.  (3)  Christians  ought  to  obey  even 
■the  unjust  commands  of  their  masters  (1  Pet.  ii.  18).  II.  The  manner  of  obeying. 
1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  with  eyeservice — a  disease  familiar  to  servants — obedience 
under  the  eye  (Luke  xii.  45).  (2)  As  men-pleasers — the  cause  of  the  disease.  Aa 
comedians  who  act  in  order  to  please  that  they  may  obtain  benefit  do  not  mount  tha 
stage  unless  people  are  looking  on,  so  men-pleasers  move  not  a  hand  unless  their 
masters  are  there  to  behold  and  applaud.  2.  Positively.  The  remedies  for  the 
disease.  (1)  Singleness  of  heart,  which  is  opposed  to  deceitful  eye-service.  He 
who  serves  his  master  to  the  eye  seems  to  have  two  hearts ;  one  dutiful,  which 
excites  to  obedience  in  the  master's  presence  ;  the  other  undutiful,  which  impels  to 
idleness  in  the  master's  absence.  But  he  who  obeys  with  singleness  of  heart  has 
one  heart  alone  and  ever  the  same,  which  moves  to  duty  irrespective  of  his  master's 
presence  or  absence.  (2)  Fearing  God.  As  the  study  of  deceitful  pleasing  can 
produce  nothing  but  eye-service,  so  the  fear  of  God  produces  simplicity  and  sincerity. 
He  who  fears  man  alone  will  be  changeable,  inasmuch  as  it  is  excited  by  presence 
and  allayed  by  absence;  but  the  fear  of  God  is  constant  because  He  is  always 
present.  (3)  From  the  heart,  (a)  Not  compulsorily  and  unwillingly.  We  do  any- 
thing heartily  when  the  mind  rejoices  in  what  the  hand  does.  On  the  contrary, 
when  tha  mind  mormars,  although  the  outward  act  may  be  performed,  yet  it  ia 


CHA*.  lo.]  COLOSSIANS.  96S 

done  from  the  body  rather  than  from  the  mind,  (b)  Benevolence  of  spirit  towards 
the  commander  of  the  work  (Eph.  vL  7).  No  one  obeys  better  than  he  who  renders 
obedience  from  love.  (4)  As  to  the  Lord.  As  those  who  serve  the  Lord  mor« 
especially  than  men.  Because — (a)  They  who  obey  are  more  servants  of  Christ 
than  of  earthly  masters.  Earthly  masters  buy  their  servants'  bodies  with  silver 
and  gold;  Christ  redeems  both  soul  and  body  with  His  blood  for  perpetual  liberty. 
(b)  They  obey  earthly  masters  only  at  the  appointment  of  Christ,  and  Him  through 
them  His  stewards,  (c)  Christ  commands  tbem  to  obey  their  masters.  III.  In- 
centives TO  OBEDIENCE.  1.  The  promisc.  (1)  The  Bestower  of  the  reward.  The 
apostle  rightly  would  have  those  servants  expect  a  reward  from  Christ.  For  earthly 
masters  give  food  and  clothing  to  slaves  as  due  in  common  with  beasts.  They  are 
consoled,  therefore,  by  the  fact  that  they  have  a  heavenly  Master  who  will  not  suiler 
them  to  be  destitute  of  a  reward.  (2)  The  quality  of  the  reward.  "  Reward  "  and 
*'  inheritance  "  seem  incongruous ;  the  first  beiug  paid  to  labourers,  the  latter  given 
to  children.  The  celestial  reward  is  called  hire  or  wages,  not  because  merited,  but 
because  of  the  resemblance  in  some  sense  between  the  two.  (a)  As  hire  is  only 
given  to  workmen,  so  the  heavenly  kingdom  is  not  given  to  the  indolent.  (6)  As 
hire  is  not  given  until  work  is  finished,  so  heaven  is  not  bestowed  until  life  is  ended. 
But  the  heavenly  reward  is  unlike  hire — (a)  in  that  it  is  given,  not  according  to  the 
merit  of  the  workman,  but  from  the  grace  and  liberality  of  the  bestower  (Luke  xvii. 
10) ;  (b)  in  that  it  is  not  proportioned  to  labours  bestowed,  for  finite  has  no  pro- 
portion to  infinite.  2.  The  confirmation  of  the  promise,  "  Ye  serve  the  Lord 
Christ  "  (Matt.  xxv.  40-45).  All  works  of  obedience  are  rendered  to  Christ  because 
commanded  by  Him.  3.  Corollaries.  (1)  No  service  is  dishonourable  since  all  is 
rendered  to  Christ.  (2)  No  honour  screens  a  wicked  man  from  disgrace  since  he 
serves  an  infamous  master.  (3)  They  who,  being  placed  under  the  rule  of  others, 
are  unwilling  to  serve,  are  rebels  against  Christ  (1  Sam.  viii.  7).  (4)  We  ought  not 
to  obey  any  who  is  opposed  to  the  will  of  Christ.  (Bishop  Davenant.)  The  dutiet 
of  servants: — I.  The  dutt  of  a  servant  is  to  obey  his  master  in  all  things 
8BLATINQ  TO  HIS  STATE  OF  SERVITUDE.  There  is  nothing  degrading  in  service.  It 
is  the  employment  of  angels,  and  is  ennobled  by  the  example  of  Christ.  To  obey  in 
all  things  is  not  pleasant  or  easy ;  but  the  Christian  servant  will  strive  to  accom- 
plish  the  task.  He  consults  not  his  own  but  his  master's  will,  nay,  time.  But  his 
employer  is  only  according  to  the  flesh,  and  has  no  power  over  the  spirit ;  nor  ig 
he  to  command  anything  forbidden  by  God.  II.  The  servant's  duty  is  to  vm 
disohaboed  IN  A  8PIKIT  OF  8INCEBITT.  1.  Free  from  duplicity.  From  the  treat- 
ment he  received  the  slave  was  tempted  to  be  diligent  in  the  presence  of  his  master, 
but  indolent  and  reckless  in  his  absence.  Christianity  has  elevated  man  from 
slavery,  and  provided  him  with  the  highest  motives  to  moral  action.  2.  It  is  to  be 
done  in  the  fear  of  God.  "Fearing  God" — the  one  Lord  as  contrasted  with  the 
master  according  to  the  flesh.  The  Christian  servant  has  a  conscience  to  satisfy. 
The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  holiest  motive  power  in  all  acceptable  service.  He  who 
serves  man  as  he  seeks  to  serve  God  will  take  care  that  the  Divine  and  human 
interests  do  not  collide.  III.  The  servant  is  to  act  feom  the  loftiest  bb- 
LiGiODS  principle.  1.  In  every  duty  God  is  to  be  recognized.  "And  whatsoever 
ye  do,  do  it  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men."  This  will  give  a  moral  dignity  to 
the  most  menial  employment,  and  exalt  the  common  drudgery  of  toil  into  a  means 
of  religious  refreshment.  2.  In  every  duty  the  best  powers  should  be  exercised. 
"  Do  it  heartily."  If  the  heart  be  engaged,  it  will  put  into  operation  the  best 
powers  of  the  whole  man.  No  work  is  well  done  when  the  heart  is  not  in  it.  IV. 
Faithful  sbbvicb  will  meet  with  a  qlobioub  eewabd  (ver.  24).  V.  Evebt  act 
o»  INJUSTICE  will  MEET  WITH  IMPARTIAL  BETBiBUTioN  (voT.  25).  Some  regard  the 
wrong-doer  referred  to  in  this  verse  as  the  servant  who  defrauds  the  master  of  his 
service ;  others,  as  the  master  who  defrauds  the  servant  of  his  just  recompense. 
But  the  words  announce  a  general  principle  which  is  equally  applicable  to  both. 
The  philosophers  of  Greece  taught,  and  the  laws  of  Rome  assumed,  that  the  slave 
was  a  chattel,  and  that  as  a  chattel,  he  had  no  rights.  The  New  Testament  shows 
that  between  both  there  is  a  reciprocity  of  duties  and  of  penalties.  The  injustice 
done  in  the  world,  whether  by  master  or  by  servant,  shall  be  impartially  redressed, 
nnd  the  injured  one  vindicated  at  the  day  of  final  retribution.  (Gf.  Barlow.) 
'Joving  service  is  true  service : — To  lead  a  discouraged  people  to  the  Holy  War  is  as 
lifiBcult  as  for  Xerxes'  commanders  to  conduct  the  Persian  troops  to  battle  against 
""vhe  Greeks.  The  vassals  of  the  great  king  were  driven  to  the  conflict  by  whips  and 
r'  icks,  for  they  were  afraid  to  fight :  do  you  wonder  that  they  were  defeated  ?    A. 


•264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

Church  that  needs  constant  exhorting  and  compelling  accomplishes  nothing.  The 
Greeks  had  no  need  of  blows  and  threats,  for  each  man  was  a  lion,  and  courted  the 
encounter,  however  great  the  odds  against  him.  Each  Spartan  fought  con  amore  ; 
he  was  never  more  at  home  than  when  contending  for  the  altars  and  for  the  heartha 
of  his  country.  We  want  Christian  men  of  this  same  sort,  who  have  faith  in  their 
principles,  faith  in  the  doctrines  of  grace,  faith  in  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son, 
and  God  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  who  therefore  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  in 
these  days  when  piety  is  mocked  at  from  the  pulpit,  and  the  gospel  is  sneered  at 
by  professional  preachers.  We  need  men  who  love  the  truth,  to  whom  it  is  dear 
as  their  lives ;  men  into  whose  hearts  the  old  doctrine  is  burned  by  the  hand  of 
God's  Spirit  through  a  deep  experience  of  its  necessity  and  of  its  power.  We  need 
no  more  of  those  who  will  parrot  what  they  are  taught,  but  we  want  men  who  will 
speak  what  they  know.  Oh,  for  a  troop  of  men  like  John  Knox,  heroes  of  the 
martyr  and  covenanter  stock  1  Then  would  Jehovah  of  hosts  have  a  people  to 
serve  Him  who  would  be  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His  might.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  Faithfulness  in  work: — A  carpenter  was  once   asked  why  he 

troubled  to  finish  off  a  magistrate's  bench  so  carefully?  His  reply  was,  •'  I  can't 
do  otherwise  ;  besides,  I  may  have  to  sit  on  it  one  of  these  days."  (U.  D.  Machay.) 

Ver.  23.  Whatsoever  ye  do,  do  It  heartily,  as  imto  the  Lord. — Servants  of  Christ : — 
The  apostle  was  speaking  to  slaves,  who  must  have  felt  their  condition  to  be  irk- 
some and  degrading,  but  he  applies  a  principle  which  altogether  transforms  it. 
They  are  to  feel  and  act  as  servants  of  Christ.  This  principle  is  of  far-reaching 
application.  We  are  to  serve  Christ  by  discharging  all  the  duties  of  life  so  as  to 
please  Him.  This  suggests  a  train  of  thought  which  has  a  special  suitableness  to 
young  men.  Note  then  the  things  which  are  essential  to  the  realization  of  this 
lofty  ideal  of  Christian  service.  I.  There  must  be  a  full  bukrendeb  of  xh« 
WHOLE  BEING  TO  CHRIST.  "  No  man  cau  serve  two  masters."  "  He  that  is  not 
with  Me  is  against  Me."  Alas  !  how  many  act  as  though  they  bad  made  a  bargain 
with  Christ ;  that  part  of  their  nature  should  be  given  to  Him,  and  part  retained 
for  the  world  and  i^elf.  In  certain  circumstances  tliey  seem  devout  and  earnest 
believers,  in  others  frivolous  and  worldly.  Such  a  course  is  dishonouring  to  Christ, 
and  injurious  to  their  own  souls.  There  are  families  in  which  the  children  having 
been  asked  to  do  something,  refuse  or  delay  ;  then  a  struggle  ensues,  involving 
discomfort  to  both  parents  and  children.  In  others  the  first  intimation  is  followed 
by  prompt  obedience.  In  the  one  case  is  love,  order,  and  happiness;  in  the  other 
the  reverse.  Why  ?  In  the  one  case  the  children  had  learned  to  obey,  in  the  other 
they  had  not.  So  some  of  God's  children  have  not  learned  to  surrender  their  wills 
utterly  to  Him  ;  hence  every  act  of  obedience  involves  a  struggle ;  but  some  have 
learnt  to  make  the  struggle  once  for  all,  and  are  now  happy  in  that  service  which 
is  perfect  freedom.  II.  Strive  to  be  efficient  in  tour  worldly  calling. 
"  Whatsoever,"  whether  the  work  of  master  or  servant,  prince  or  peasant,  *' do  it 
as  to  the  Lord."  When  we  can  recognize  Christ  as  our  Master,  and  our  work  as 
rendered  to  Him,  it  should  make  us  faithful  servants,  whoever  may  be  our  imme- 
diate employer.  Unfortunately  this  has  not  been  always  acted  on,  and  religion  has 
been  regarded  as  a  disqunlifi cation  for  eflicient  service.  A  lad  once  said,  when 
urged  to  decision,  *'  I  would  like  to  learn  my  business  before  being  converted,  for  I 
notice  that  the  pious  men  in  my  father's  employ  are  not  generally  good  workmen." 
I  want  you  to  wipe  out  this  reproach,  and  try  to  excel  in  everything  for  the  sake  of 
Christ — whether  in  school,  workshop,  or  counting-house,  d'C.  The  influence  of 
Christian  character  and  effort  is  greatly  enhanced  when  connected  with  superiority 
in  business.  A  working  man  who  had  recently  come  to  reside  in  a  northern  village, 
was  asked,  as  he  was  strolling  in  the  fields  one  Sunday,  to  attend  a  cottage  service 
where  the  speaker  was  goiug  to  preach.  The  invitation  was  ruilely  declined,  and  on 
mentioning  the  matter  to  an  acquaintance  who  came  up  immediately,  he  was  asked 
if  he  knew  who  the  preacher  was.  "No."  "Why  that  is  Thompson,  the  best 
forgeman  in  the  district."  "Oh,  indeed,  I  have  often  heard  of  Thompson's  work ; 
I  will  go  and  hear  him  preach."     He  did  so  and  became  a  new  man.     III.  Stritr 

TO   ACQUIRE    MENTAL    CULTURE    AND  GENERAL  INTELLIGENCE    FOR    THE    SAKE    OF    ChRIST. 

1.  It  will  open  to  you  many  avenues  of  enjoyment.  2.  It  will  enable  you  to  discover 
riches  and  beauty  in  the  Divine  word  which  would  otherwise  be  concealed.  3.  It 
will  help  to  keep  you  free  from  the  religious  crotchets  by  which  the  Christian  life 
is  now  weakened  and  disfigured.  4.  It  will  give  you  greater  power  to  serve  Christy 
Edward  Irving  had  in  his  Glasgow  congregation  the  wife  of  a  shoemaker,  who  wm 


CHAP,  m.]  COLOSSIANS.  S68 

a  determined  infideL  In'ing  visited  him  day  after  day  withont  prodncing  any 
impression.  Cut  one  day  he  eat  down  beside  him  and  began  talking  about  his 
work  and  the  material  he  was  then  handling.  The  man  became  interested,  for  he 
found  that  the  minister  knew  as  much  about  his  trade  as  he  did  himself.  Next 
Sunday  he  went  to  church,  and  when  taunted  by  his  former  companions,  replied, 
"Mr.  Irving  is  no  fool,  he  kens  leather."  IV.  Have  some  special  work  to  do 
FOB  Christ.  The  field  of  Christian  usefulness  is  wide,  and  there  can  be  no  diffi- 
culty in  finding  suitable  work.  To  help  you  in  this — 1.  Be  regular  and  faithful  in 
yonr  devotions.  2.  Try  to  do  every  day  sometLing  simply  for  Christ's  sake — 
repress  your  temper,  speak  to  some  friend  about  salvation,  practise  some  self- 
denial,  for  Christ's  sake,  and  with  the  help  of  the  Spirit.  Conclusion  :  Are  you 
serving  CLrist  or  Satan?  Yon  must  be  one  or  the  other.  (G.  D.  Macgregor.) 
Do  all  for  God  : — 1.  When  we  remember  that  our  destiny  is  to  live  with  Christ  and 
glorified  beings,  and  that  any  work  that  does  not  fit  us  for  that  is  a  great  imper- 
tinence, it  is  alarming  at  first  sight  to  note  that  the  great  bulk  of  our  occupations 
are  of  the  earth,  earthy.  All  professions  and  trades  are  for  the  purpose  of  supply- 
ing defects  in  the  existing  order,  and,  therefore,  when  that  order  is  no  more,  and  is 
superseded  by  one  in  which  there  are  no  defects,  the  occupations  of  this  life  must 
necessarily  die  a  natural  death.  Is  there  not,  then,  something  which  seems  in- 
appropriate in  the  circumstance  that  all  this  short  life  should  be  taken  np  in  doing 
what  has  no  reference  to  eternity,  and  will  be  swept  away  like  so  much  litter?  2. 
It  was  just  this  feeling  that  gave  rise  to  Monasticism.  Men  assumed  that  eternity 
would  be  given  up  to  prayer  and  praise ;  tliese,  therefore,  must  be  the  earthly 
occupations  of  religious  men.  Let  us  not  rail  at  their  mistake,  for  it  is  a  common 
assumption  that  a  secular  pursuit  is  an  obstacle  to  a  religious  mind.  Hence  a 
seriously  disposed  young  man  is  pointed  out  as  de><tined  for  the  Church.  3.  As  the 
pushing  of  a  false  theory  to  its  extreme  point  is  one  method  of  showing  its  fallacy, 
imagine  it  to  be  God's  will  that  all  Christians  should  have  a  directly  spiritual  pursuit. 
What  then  ?  The  system  of  society  is  brought  to  a  dead-lock.  Take  away  the  variety 
of  callings,  reduce  all  to  that  of  the  monk,  and  civilization  is  undermiued  and  we 
revert  to  barbarism.  This  assuredly  cannot  be  the  will  of  Him  who  has  implanted  in 
OS  the  instincts  which  develope  into  civilization.  4.  But  if  this  cannot  be  the  will  of 
God,  then  it  must  be  His  will  that  this  man  should  ply  some  humble  craft ;  that  this 
other  should  have  the  duties  of  a  large  estate;  that  a  third  should  go  to  the  desk ; 
a  fourth  minister  to  the  sick;  a  fifth  fight  the  battles  of  his  country.  Now  if  this 
be  the  case  the  greatest  harm  is  done  when  a  man  thrusts  himself  out  from  his 
proper  vocation.  Each  man's  wisdom  and  happiness  must  he  in  doing  the  work 
God  has  given  him.  So  thought  St.  Paul.  He  did  not  urge  his  converts  to  join 
him  in  his  missionary  journeys,  but  to  abide  in  his  calling  with  God.  5.  "  With 
God."  This  wraps  up  the  secret  of  which  we  are  in  search,  how  we  may  serve 
God  in  our  daily  business.  How  can  this  be  done?  By  throwing  into  the  work  a 
pure  and  holy  intention.  Intention  is  to  our  actions  what  the  soul  is  to  the  body. 
As  the  soul,  not  the  body,  makes  us  moral  agents,  so  motive  gives  action  a  moral 
character.  To  kill  a  man,  of  malice  prepense,  is  murder;  but  to  kill  him  by 
accident  is  no  sin  at  all.  A  good  work,  such  as  prayer,  becomes  hypocrisy  if  done 
for  the  praise  of  men.  6.  Now  the  great  bulk  of  life's  work  is  done  with  no  inten- 
tion whatever  of  serving  God.  (1)  The  intention  of  some  in  their  work  is  simply 
to  gain  a  livelihood :  a  perfectly  innocent  and  even  good  motive,  but  not  spiritual 
and  such  as  redeems  the  work  from  earthiness.  (2)  Others  labour  with  a  view  of 
gaining  eminence.  The  effects  of  work  done  in  this  spirit,  if  it  does  not  meet  with 
success,  are  sad  to  witness.  (3)  Others  mainly  work  from  energy  of  mind.  They 
would  be  miserable  if  idle ;  but  that  work  has  of  course  no  spiritual  character. 
(4)  Another  class  work  from  the  high  and  elevating  motive  of  duty ;  but  if  the 
intention  have  no  reference  to  God's  appointment  it  has  no  more  spirituality  than 
might  have  been  found  in  the  mind  of  Cicero  or  Sep'^ca.  (5)  A  great  mass  of 
human  activity  has  no  intention  ^t  all,  and  so  runs  to  waste  from  a  spiritual  point 
of  view.  Multitudes  work  mechanically,  and  by  the  same  instinct  of  routine  as  a 
horse  in  a  mill.  But  man  is  surely  made  for  something  nobler  than  to  work  by 
mere  force  of  habit.  7.  Now  what  is  the  true  motive  which  lifts  np  the  humblest 
duties  into  a  higher  atmosphere?  This — "Whatsoever  ye  do,"  &c.  The  primary 
reference  is  to  the  duties  of  slaves,  the  lowest  imagmable.  The  a  fortiori  inference 
is  this,  that  if  the  drudgery  of  a  slave  admits  of  such  a  consecration,  much  more 
does  any  nobler  form  of  business.  No  man  after  this  can  say,  "  My  duties  are  bo 
▼ery  commonplace   that  they  cannot   have  a  religious  dignity  and  valae."    8 


SM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Practical  eonnsels.  (1)  Before  you  go  to  your  task  fix  it  in  your  mind  that  all 
lawful  pursuits  are  departments  of  God's  harvest-field  in  which  He  has  called 
Christians  to  labour.  (2)  Pursue  your  own  calling  with  the  conscious  intention  of 
furthering  His  work  and  will.  (3)  Then  put  your  hand  to  it  bravely,  keeping  before 
yoQ  the  main  aim  of  pleasing  Him  with  diligence  and  zeal.  (4)  Imagine  Jesua 
surveying  your  work  as  He  will  do  it  at  the  last  day,  and  strive  that  there  may  be 
no  flaw  in  it.  (Bean  Goulburn.)  Working  : — Were  I  to  ask,  "  What  was  the 
purpose  for  which  you  were  sent  into  the  world,"  I  should  get  a  variety  of  replies. 
But  the  right  answer  would  be.  To  work.  So  the  Bible  tells  us,  and  Providence 
and  the  world  around.  Work  is  not  an  evil,  but  a  good.  There  is  work  in  heaven. 
Adam  unfallen  was  a  working  man.  If  there  had  been  no  sin  the  world  would  not 
have  been  a  world  of  idleness.  And  what  is  true  of  us  is  true  of  all  God's  creatures. 
Take  water  ;  it  never  stands  still.  Take  horses,  or  even  the  birds,  how  soon  they 
have  to  work  for  a  living.  Our  test  tells  us  how  to  work  and  for  whom  to  work. 
Take  then  its  instruction  as  a  guide  for^L  School  wobk.  Many  wish  there  were 
no  such  thing.  This  is  foolish,  for  schools  make  all  the  difference  between  us  and 
heathens.  How  hard  it  is  for  a  man  to  get  on  in  life  who  has  had  a  poor  educa- 
tion. School  work  is  hard,  but  it  will  be  made  all  the  Ughter  if  done  heartily  and 
to  the  Lord ;  and  then  there  would  be  no  need  for  the  coaxing  and  bribing  and 
threatening  that  are  so  common.  II.  Home  woek.  Young  people  should  make 
themselves  useful  at  home,  and  not  expect  that  everybody  should  be  attending  upon 
them.  Home  work  is  an  important  part  of  the  training  for  after  life ;  and  there  ia 
nothing  in  it  beneath  the  dignity  of  any  girl.  And  what  a  comfort  it  would  make 
you,  and  what  a  saving  you  might  be  to  mother's  cares.  And  the  reason  it  is  re- 
pulsive  is  because  you  do  not  take  to  it  in  a  right  spirit.  Throw  heart  in  it,  and  it 
will  soon  be  enjoyable.  III.  Business  wore.  Whatever  is  worth  doing  at  all  is 
worth  doing  well — the  work  even  of  a  message-boy,  crossing  sweeper,  or  shoe- 
black. It  is  often  when  people  are  busy  at  their  work  that  God  comes  with  a 
blessing.  Moses,  Gideon,  Elisha,  the  shepherds,  the  apostles  were  all  called  when 
at  their  work.  Is  yours  humble  ?  You  can  exalt  it  by  taking  it  as  Christ's,  and  by 
doing  it  with  all  your  heart.  IV.  Soul  wobk.  This  is  done  more  for  us  than  by 
us.  And  yet  we  have  to  "  work  out "  what  God  works  in.  This  will  have  to  be 
done  heartily  and  unto  the  Lord,  or  literally  not  at  all.  We  have  to  escape — 
which  surely  involves  earnestness — to  Jesus.  V.  Christian  wore.  Every  work  ia 
Christian  if  done  for  Christ,  but  there  is  work  more  especially  done  for  Him. 
When  a  little  girl's  mother  comes  to  visit  her  at  school,  she  wants  to  introduce  all 
her  friends  to  her.  Your  work  is  to  introduce  them  to  Jesus.  You  need  not  be  a 
missionary. to  do  this.  {J.  H.  Wilson^  M.A.)  "Not  unto  men": — It  is  related 
that  when  Phidias,  the  great  sculptor  who  carved  statues  for  one  of  the  temples 
of  antiquity,  was  labouring  with  minute  fidelity  upon  the  hair  o  i  the  back  of  the 
head  of  one  of  the  historic  figures  which  was  to  be  elevated  from  the  pavement  to 
the  very  apex  of  the  building,  or  placed  along  the  frieze,  some  one  expostulated 
with  him,  saying,  "  Why  do  you  take  such  great  pains  with  the  hair  ?  It  is  never 
to  be  seen."  His  simple  reply  was,  "The  gods  will  see  it."  So  he  laboured 
thoroughly  in  the  minutest  things,  not  for  the  eyes  of  men  but  for  the  eyes  of  the 
gods.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Knowing  that  of  the  Lord  ye  shall  receive  the  Inherit- 
ance ;  for  ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ. — Christian  Socialism  : — Christianity,  though 
altogether  opposed  to  those  levelling  theories  which  disaffected  men  industriously 
broach,  places  the  highest  and  the  lowest  on  a  par  in  the  competition  for  eternity. 
Christianity  is  the  best  upholder  of  the  distinctions  in  society ;  and  he  can  have 
read  his  Bible  to  little  purpose  who  does  not  see  the  appointment  of  God  that  there 
should  be  rich  and  poor  in  the  world,  master  and  servant ;  who  does  not  perceive 
that  want  of  loyalty  is  want  of  religion,  and  that  there  is  no  more  direct  rebellion 
against  the  Creator  than  resistance  to  any  constituted  authority,  or  the  endeavour 
to  bring  round  that  boasted  equality  in  which  all  shall  have  the  same  rights,  or  to 
speak  more  truly,  in  which  none  shall  have  any.  But  if  Christianity  makes  it 
sinful  to  repine  against  servitude,  it  gives  a  dignity  to  the  servant  who  would  still 
remain  in  servitude.  It  tells  the  servant,  that  if  faithful  here,  he  may  rank  with 
his  master  hereafter,  even  though  the  employment  of  the  master  has  been  the 
advancement  of  Christ's  cause  on  earth.  And  oh  1  it  should  be  a  surprisingly 
cheerful  thing  to  those  who  have  to  wear  away  life  in  the  meanest  occupations, 
that,  as  immortal  beings,  they  are  not  one  jot  disadvantaged  by  their  temporal 
position,  but  they  make  as  much  progress  in  the  Christian  race  as  those  placed 
tA    the  very  highest    summit  in    the  Christian    office.      (Ibid.)         Living   for 


CBAi.  m.]  C0L0SSIAN8.  S67 

Christ : — L  Unitt  o»  pcbposb  is  necessary.  1.  For  the  development  of  character. 
2.  For  success  iu  life.  Glory,  self-interest,  benevolence,  each  gives  unity  and  force, 
whereas  a  man  without  any  such  governing  principle  becomes  weak ;  and  it  is 
only  by  making  one  object  predominant  and  seeking  that  object  that  great  results 
are  achieved.      II.    That  which  orvES  unity  to  the  Christian  life  is  Christ. 

1.  He  is  the  unifying  principle  of  Christian  theology.  2.  Of  the  inward  life  of  the 
Christian.  3.  Of  his  outward  and  active  life.  We  have  an  illustration  of  this  in 
Paul,  iu  his  theology,  experience,  and  work.  Negatively  he  did  not  seek  wealth  or 
honour,  aither  as  his  main  or  subordinate  object.  He  simply  sought  the  glory  of 
Christ.  III.  The  qlobt  or  Christ  should  be  oub  aim.  1.  Because  it  is  our  duty. 
This  is  the  highest  thing  we  can  do.  Whatever  else  we  do  will,  in  the  end,  be 
regarded  as  nothing.  2.  Our  inward  holiness  and  happiness  will  thereby  be  best 
advanced.  3.  Only  thus  can  we  be  really  useful.  Thus  only  do  we  associate  ourselves 
with  the  saints  and  angels.  The  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom  is  the  only  thing 
worth  living  for.  4.  Christ  has  died  for  you,  redeemed  you.  You  are  not  your  own 
but  His.  Serve  Him,  then,  under  the  constraint  of  His  love.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.) 
The  perfect  service: — It  would  be  truthful  to  say  that  all  "  serve  the  Lord  Christ." 
Some  agaiust  their  will — Pharisees,  Pilate,  Judas,  &o.  Some  unconsciously — all 
who  spread  the  true  refinement  of  art,  the  researches  of  science,  the  charities  of 
philanthropy.  But  Paul  is  not  now  speaking  to  such,  but  "to  the  saints  and 
faithful  brethren  in  Christ  at  Colossae."  And  these  words  indicate  about  the  life 
service  of  all  true  Christians.  L  Its  motive.  The  constraint  is  "  for  Christ's 
sake."  Such  motive  is— 1.  Deep  enough.  It  has  its  hands  on  all  the  hidden 
springs  of  purpose  and  love.  2.  Abiding  enough.  To  please  others  who  may 
change  or  die,  or  please  self,  which  is  fickle  and  disappointing,  cannot  ensure  the 
prolonged  service  men  can  render  to  the  eternal  and  unchanging  Christ.  II.  Its 
pattern.  In  some  warfare  the  commander  says,  "  Go  " ;  in  this  He  says,  '•  Follow 
Me."  "  He  was  in  all  points  tempted,"  <fec.  "He  has  left  us  an  example."  III. 
Its  help.  The  fishers  after  their  night  of  bootless  toil,  Peter  walking  on  the  waves, 
Paul  receiving  grace  to  endure  a  hidden  sorrow,  are  specimens  of  men  needing  and 
receiving  help  from  Christ.  IV.  Ixs  comprehensiveness.  It  includes  all  circum- 
stances, whether  of  artizan  or  statesman ;  all  ages,  whether  of  child  or  patriarch  ; 
of  all  spheres,  whether  of  the  inward  or  outward  life.  "  Whatsoever  ye  do."  "V. 
Its  consummation.  It  has  now  the  approval  of  conscience  and  the  Master;  it  will 
ultimately  receive  *'  the  reward  of  the  inheritance."  ( U.  R.  Thomas.)  The  service 
of  Christ  is — I.  Honourable  service.  We  serve  the  Lord  Christ — King  of  kings, 
and  Lord  of  lords.  The  servants  of  royalty  are  nobles;  so  we  are  kings  and 
priests  unto  God.  IL  Beasonablb  service.  The  master  had  a  claim  upon  the 
slave  as  his  property  won  in  war  or  purchased  by  money.  We  have  been  bought 
with  a  price.  Christ  has  a  right  based  upon  His  service  of  love  ;  we  should  respond 
with  gratitude.  III.  Entire  service.  The  slave  was  his  master's  altogether — self, 
family,  belongings,  Ac.  So  Christ  claims  all  we  are  and  all  we  have — time,  money, 
secularities,  and  not  merely  Sabbaths,  worship,  &o.  IV.  Happy  service.  Some- 
times the  road  is  rough,  but  the  motive  for  treading  it  makes  it  smooth,  and  the 
companionship  of  Him  we  love  relieves  its  tedium  and  lightens  its  darkness. 
V.  Easy  service.  '•  Take  My  yoke  upon  you  .  .  .  and  ye  shall  find  rest."  Love 
is  the  magic  power  which  makes  what  is  irksome  pleasurable.  VI.  The  service  of 
FRIENDSHIP  (John  XV.  15).  It  is  the  badge  of  true  Christian  discipleship — not  creeds, 
professions,  sentiments,  &q.    VII.  Lucrative  service.    1.  It  is  its  own  reward  here. 

2.  It  has  an  exceeding  great  reward  by  and  by.  (A.  C.  Price,  B.A.)  How  diffi- 
culties in  Christ's  service  are  overcome : — Sometimes  when  a  man's  limb  has  been 
broken,  and  long  weeks  of  rest  are  necessary  in  order  that  the  fractured  bones  may 
reunite,  there  is  danger  lest  the  limb  should  become  permanently  contracted ;  so 
as  soon  as  it  is  safe  to  do  so,  the  patient  is  ordered  to  exercise  the  limb.  At 
first  the  exercise  gives  acute  pain,  but  after  awhile,  as  vigour  and  strength  return 
to  the  limb,  in  the  thrill  of  health  that  he  feels,  the  man  forgets  the  pain  and  is 
glad.  Now  sin  has  dislocated  man's  moral  nature,  and  though  by  grace  it  may 
have  been  reset,  still  God's  wise  exercise  of  it  is  exceedingly  painful ;  but  then  this 
exercise  begets  spiritual  health,  and  that  health  sends  such  a  thrill  of  pleasure 
through  the  soul  that  the  very  act  of  obedience  to,  and  service  of,  Christ,  gains 
strength  to  obey  and  serve ;  and  with  increasing  strength  difficulty  after  difficulty 
disavpears,  pain  goes,  pleasure  comes,  and  the  Christian  is  master  of  his  work,  and 
delights  in  it.  (Ibid.)  What  makes  ChrisVs  service  easy  and  pleasant: — That 
huge  piece  of  timber  which  lies  there  in  that  quiet  oreek,  txom  which  the  tide  has 


•68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

receded,  leaving  it  dry  and  immovable  in  the  sand  ;  try  to  shift  it,  and  it  is  only 
with  the  utmost  difficulty  that  you  can  do  so.  But  wait  till  the  tide  comes  in,  and 
the  waters  flow  around  it.  Make  the  attempt  now,  and  with  what  comparative  ease 
you  accomplish  it  1  Even  so  there  are  ten  thousand  things  in  the  way  of  duty  laid 
4ipon  us  by  God  which,  so  long  as  the  heart  is  unrenewed,  seem  hard  and  burden- 
some, but  all  of  which  yield  when  once  the  love  of  Christ  has  once  entered  and 
filled  the  heart,  are  cheerfully  taken  up  and  done  with  ease  and  joy  to  the  Lcred 
One.  A  little  child  had  given  to  her  by  a  friend  a  bunch  of  ripe,  beautiful  grtpee. 
Just  as  she  was  about  to  eat  them  her  mother  said,  "  My  child,  will  you  give  me 
those  grapes  ?  *'  The  little  one  looked  at  the  grapes  and  then  at  the  mother  whom 
she  loved ;  and  then  after  a  pause,  as  the  mother's  love  came  rushing  with  full  tide 
into  her  heart,  and  overmastering  every  other  feeling,  she  flung  the  grapes  into  her 
mother's  lap,  and  with  a  kiss  surrendered  them  all  (Matt,  xviii.  3).  The  love  of 
Christ  makes  sacrifice  easy  and  delightful.  (Ibid.)  The  ruling  motive  of  Christ'$ 
servants : — You  cannot  serve  two  masters — you  must  serve  one  or  other.  If  your 
work  is  first  with  yon,  and  your  fee  second,  work  is  your  master,  and  the  Lord  of 
work,  who  is  God.  But  if  your  fee  is  first  with  you,  and  your  work  second,  fee  is 
your  master,  and  the  lord  of  fee,  who  is  the  devil ;  and  not  only  the  devil,  but  the 
lowest  of  devils — "  the  least  erected  fiend  that  fell."  So  there  you  have  it  in  brief 
terms — work  first,  you  are  God's  servants ;  fee  first,  you  are  the  fiend's.  And  it 
makes  a  difference,  now  and  ever,  believe  me,  whether  you  serve  Him  who  has  on 
His  vesture  and  thigh  written,  "  King  of  kings,"  and  whose  service  is  perfect  free- 
dom ;  and  him  on  whose  vesture  and  thigh  is  written,  "  Slave  of  slaves,"  and 
whose  service  is  perfect  slavery.  (John  Ruskin.)  The  stire  reivard  of  Ghrist't 
tervants : — When  Calvin  was  banished  from  ungrateful  Geneva,  he  said,  "  Most 
assuredly  if  I  had  merely  served  man,  this  would  have  been  a  poor  re- 
compense ;  but  it  is  my  happiness  that  I  have  served  Him  who  never  fails  to 
reward  His  servants  to  the  full  extent  of  His  promise.*'  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
All  for  Jetu»: — The  gospel  does  not  barely  supply  us  with  directions,  but  furnishes 
us  with  reasons  and  power  for  obedience.  The  apostle  knew  that  the  conditions  of 
believers  are  various,  and  therefore  laid  down  distinct  precepts  for  masters  and 
servants,  (&c.,  but  proposed  a  common  motive  for  all.  Our  translation  is  in  the 
indicative  and  states  the  fact — "  Ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ."  Is  that  so  f  If  not,  the 
original  will  bear  rendering  in  the  imperative — "  Serve  ye  the  Lord  Christ."  What 
an  exaltation  for  a  slave  of  Satan  to  become  a  servant  of  Christ.  "  Thy  gentleness 
hath  made  me  great."  It  is  a  greater  honour  to  serve  Christ  in  the  most  menial 
capacity  than  to  occupy  the  throne  of  the  Caesars.  To  serve  us  He  laid  aside  His 
glorious  array  and  girt  Him  with  the  garments  of  a  servant.  In  our  turn  let  as 
serve  Him  alone  and  for  ever.  Ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ — I.  In  the  common  acts 
OF  LiFB.  The  fact  that  the  text  was  addressed  to  the  lowest  is  instructive.  He 
does  not  address  this  choice  saying  to  masters,  preachers,  deacons,  magistrates,  or 
persons  of  influence,  but  to  slaves.  He  goes  to  the  kitchen,  the  field,  c&c,  to  his 
toiling  brethren.  If  the  poor  slave  should  serve  Jesus  bow  much  more  ought  I  ? 
1.  Those  who  are  in  a  low  estate  serve  the  Lord  Christ.  (1)  By  a  quiet  acquiescence 
in  the  arrangement  of  Providence  which  has  placed  them  where  they  are.  While 
the  race  is  as  it  is  some  must  serve.  When  a  man  can  say,  "  I  have  learned  in 
whatsoever  state  I  am  to  be  content,"  that  is  obedience  and  the  service  of  Chriet. 
(2)  By  exercising  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  the  discharge  of  our  calling.  An 
honest,  trustworthy  servant  is  a  standing  evidence  of  the  power  of  religion,  and 
preaches  in  the  nursery,  workshop,  and  many  places  where  a  preacher  would  not 
be  admitted,  a  silent  but  effective  sermon.  This  was  how  the  gospel  spread  in 
Bome.  (3)  By  displaying  the  joy  of  the  Lord  in  our  service.  Many  have  been  won 
to  Christ  by  the  cheerfulness  of  poor  Christians.  It  was  so  in  Paul's  day.  The 
Christian  slave  would  not  join  in  the  jollity  of  the  heathen  festivals,  but  whenever 
any  one  was  in  trouble  he  was  the  cheerful  comforter.  (4)  By  performing  th© 
common  acts  of  life  as  unto  Christ's  self.  To  the  man  of  God  nothing  is  secular, 
everything  is  sacred.  ••  What  God  hath  cleansed,  that  call  thou  not  common."  2. 
This  view  of  things — (1)  Ennobles  life.  The  bondsman  is  henceforth  free  ;  he  serves 
not  man  but  God.  (2)  Cheers  the  darkest  shades.  (3)  Ensures  a  reward.  (4) 
Should  stimulate  zeal.  If  you  serve  the  Lord  Christ,  serve  Him  welL  If  yon  had 
work  to  do  for  Her  Majesty  you  would  try  to  do  your  best.  II.  In  religious  actions. 
Every  professor  should  have  something  to  do  for  Christ.  It  would  be  well  if  our 
Church  discipline  permitted  us  to  turn  out  every  drone.  They  are  of  little  use  in 
honey  making  and  ar«  at  the  bottom  of  all  quarrels.    But  all  who  work  are  not 


«BAP.  m.]  COLO  SSI  AN  S.  969 

necessarily  serving  Christ.  1.  Some  serve  in  a  legal  spirit.  This  spirit  has  a 
measure  of  power  in  it,  as  the  lash  drives  the  slave.  Bat  Christians  are  free  and 
should  serve  Christ  from  gratitude  and  not  from  fear.  2.  Some  in  a  spirit  of  formality, 
•B  a  part  of  the  general  routine  of  their  existence.  It  is  the  proper  thing  to  go  to 
a  place  of  worship,  to  give  their  guinea,  &o.  Christ  is  not  served  by  such 
mechanical  working.  8.  Some  in  a  party  spirit,  who  serve  not  Christ  but  their  own 
denomination,  and  who  would  almost  be  vexed  at  Christ  being  honoured  by  any 
other  Beet.  4.  Some  out  of  the  ambition  to  be  thought  useful.  Our  parents  or 
friends  wish  us  to  be  active  in  the  Church,  and  therefore  we  do  it.  6.  We  must 
rise  above  all  this.  What  we  do  we  must  do  for  the  Master  alone.  III.  In  speciUj 
ACTS  DONE  TO  HiMSELF.  We  desirc  not  only  to  aid  our  friend  in  his  projects,  but  to 
do  something  for  him  himself.  So  we  want  to  do  something,  personally,  for  our 
Divine  Benefactor.  1.  We  can  adore  Him.  We  may  be  doing  nothing  for  our 
fellows  while  thus  occupied,  but  Jesus  is  dearer  to  as  than  the  whole  race.  And  as 
we  adore  Him  in  secret  so  we  should  extol  Him  in  public.  2.  We  should  pray  for 
Him.  "  Prayer  shall  be  made  for  Him  continually."  It  is  delightful  to  pray  for 
sinners  and  for  saints,  but  there  should  be  special  prayer  for  the  extension  of 
Christ's  kingdom,  that  He  may  see  the  travail  of  His  soul.  3.  There  should  be  much 
communion  with  Him.  "  If  any  man  serve  Me  let  him  follow  Me,  and  where  I  am 
there  shall  also  My  servant  be."  To  be  near  Him  is  one  of  the  essentials  of  service. 
Let  no  day  pass  without  a  word  with  Jesus.  You  are  His  spouse — can  you  live 
without  a  loving  word  from  your  husband  ?  4.  You  should  sit  at  His  feet  and 
learn  of  Him,  studying  His  Word.  Martha  prepared  a  feast  for  Christ  and  did 
well,  but  Jesus  gave  Mary  the  preference.  6.  You  must  obey  Him.  *'  If  ye  love 
Me  keep  My  commandments,"  not  simply  build  chapels,  &o.  6.  You  must  be 
willing  to  bear  reproach  for  His  sake.  7.  Care  for  His  Church.  "  Lovest  thou 
Me? — feed  My  sheep."  If  you  cannot  serve  with  your  tongue  yon  can  feed  the 
hungry,  clothe  the  naked,  *o.  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the 
least  of  these,"  &o.  8.  Bestow  upon  Him  little  wastefulnesses  of  love — breaking 
alabaster  boxes  of  very  precious  ointment  on  Him.  Think  of  something  now  and 
then  that  you  could  not  justify  in  prudence.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon,) 

Ver.  25.  He  that  doeth  wrong  shall  receive  for  the  wrong  which  he  hath  done. — 
L  Punishment  thbeatened.  1.  To  masters.  (1)  Imperious  masters  wrong  their 
servants,  (a)  By  defrauding  them  of  their  clothing,  food,  or  wages.  (6)  By 
imposing  labours  beyond  their  strength,  (c)  By  afiSicting  them  with  reproaches 
and  unjust  stripes,  for  all  of  which  see  Exod.  v.  (2)  For  these  wrongs  servants 
are  not  to  rise  against  their  masters  in  anger,  nor  leave  their  tasks  through  idle- 
rwsfl  :  God  will  see  due  punishment  done  as  He  did  to  the  Egyptian  oppressors.  2. 
To  servants.  (1)  Contumacious  servants  wrong  their  masters  as  far  as  they  do  not 
pay  them  due  obedience  and  reverence ;  and  deceitful  and  slothful  servants  because 
they  do  not  yield  due  submission,  or  do  so  without  sincerity.  (2)  These  shall  be 
punished  for  their  dishonesty  by  God  the  Avenger  and  Judge  (2  Kings  ▼.).  3. 
Instructions  to  both.  (1)  In  all  sin  it  is  determined  by  God  that  punishment  shall 
be  inflicted.  What,  then,  can  it  profit  to  have  avoided  the  avenging  hand  of  men, 
and  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  ?  (2)  Earthly  masters,  however 
powerful,  cannot  with  impunity  trample  on  their  dependants,  for  they  are  subject  to 
God,  and  must  render  an  account  before  His  tribunal.  (3)  Those  who  are  wronged 
must  n'^t  revenge,  but  leave  that  to  God.  II.  An  objection  anticipated.  1. 
Masters  might  object,  Who  shall  call  us  to  account  ?  Slaves  were  accounted  as 
nothing.  According  to  the  lawyers  no  wrong  could  be  done  to  them.  But  in  case 
of  arraignment,  by  power  and  bribery  it  was  easy  to  secure  acquittal.  The  apostle 
aflBrmed  that  in  the  final  court  there  was  a  judge  who  recognized  the  rights  of 
slaves  and  who  was  not  to  be  terrified  by  power,  nor  turned  aside  by  favour  or 
bribes  (Job  xsxiv.  19).  2.  Servants  might  object,  If  we  neglect  the  duties  of  our 
wretched  bondage  surely  the  merciful  God  will  not  punish  us.  Paul  denies  that 
God  can  favour  the  poor  more  than  the  rich  (Exod.  xxiii.  3 ;  Levit.  xix.  15).  3. 
Instructions.  (1)  Not  only  the  wrongs  done  to  the  great,  but  those  to  the  small 
have  God  alike  for  their  avenger.  (2)  It  behoves  those  who  act  for  God  on  earth  to 
imitate  this  Divine  justice.  A  judge  should  be  a  sanctuary  for  all  impartially. 
(Bishop  Davenant.)  Betribution  in  this  life : — Herod  the  Great,  the  slayer  of  the 
innocents,  and  first  persecutor  of  Christianity,  was  overwhelmed  with  agonizing 
physical  disease  ;  and  his  numerous  family  was  extinct  in  a  hundred  years.  Pilate, 
who  condemned  Christ,  was  soon  after  expelled  from  office  and  conunitted  soicide. 


«70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  nt. 

Nero,  after  slaying  thoasands  of  Christians,  attempted  to  take  his  own  life ;  hot 
faiUng  through  cowardice,  called  others  to  his  aid.  The  persecutor  Domitian  was 
murdered  by  his  own  people.  So  it  was  with  Caius,  Severus,  and  Heliogabalus. 
Scarcely  one  of  the  prominent  persecutors  of  the  Church  escaped  signal  retribution. 
Claudius  was  eaten  of  worms.  Decius,  GaUus,  Aurelian,  Maximin  all  died  violent 
deaths.  Maximinius  put  out  the  eyes  of  thousands  of  subjects,  and  himself  died 
of  a  fearful  disease  of  the  eyes.  Valens,  who  caused  fourscore  presbyters  to  be  sent 
to  sea  in  a  ship  and  burnt  alive,  was  himself  defeated  by  the  Goths,  ded  to  a  cottage 
which  was  fired,  and  he  perished  in  the  flames.  (E,  Foster.)  The  certainty  oj 
future  retribution : — As  you  stood  some  stormy  day  upon  a  sea  cliff,  and  marked  the 
giant  billow  rise  from  the  deep  to  rush  on  with  foaming  crest,  and  throw  itsel!E  thun- 
dering  on  the  trembUng  shore,  did  you  ever  fancy  that  yon  eould  stay  its  course,  and 
hurl  it  back  into  the  depths  of  the  ocean  t  Did  you  ever  stand  beneath  the  leaden, 
lowering  cloud,  and  mark  the  lightning's  leap  as  it  shot  and  flashed,  dazzling 
athwart  the  gloom,  and  think  that  you  could  grasp  the  bolt,  and  change  its  path  ? 
Still  more  vain  and  foolish  his  thought,  who  fancies  that  he  can  arrest  or  turn 
aside  the  purpose  of  God.  {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  Divine  justice : — Justice  in 
general  is  the  giving  every  one  their  due.  In  God  it  is  that  attribute  whereby  He 
disposeth  aU  things  according  to  the  rule  of  equity  (Deut.  xxxii.  4;  Psa.  xi.  6), 
and  rendereth  to  every  man  according  to  his  works  without  respect  of  persons  (Psa. 
Ixii.  12 ;  Job  xxxiv.  11,  19 ;  Cant.  vi.  6-7).  God  is  positively  or  affirmatively  just 
^Zeph.  iii.  6) ;  He  is  eminently  the  Just  One  f  Acts  vii.  62) ;  He  is  superlatively  most 
just  (Job  xxxiv.  17).  Wilt  thou  condemn  Him  who  is  most  just  J  or,  as  some  read 
it,  justice — justice  without  the  least  tincture,  mixture,  or  shadow  of  injustice.  He 
giveth  to  all  their  due,  without  fear  of  evil.  He  standeth  in  awe  of  none  for  their 
power  or  greatness.  His  day  of  vengeance  is  against  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  and  the 
oaks  of  Bashan,  and  all  the  high  mountains  (Isa.  ii.  13-14),  without  hope  of  gain. 
Men  are  unjust  for  bribes  (Hosea  iv.  14) ;  but  riches  prevail  not  in  the  day  of  His 
wrath  (Prov.  xi.  4  ;  Ezek.  vii.  19).  He  is  no  taker  of  gifts  (2  Chron.  xix.  7),  and 
without  respect  to  any  in  their  honours  or  outward  excellencies  (Jer.  xxii.  24).  He 
will  not  pluck  the  signet  from  His  hand  in  the  day  of  His  justice.  Israel  were  a 
people  near  to  Him  (Deut.  iv.  7 ;  Psa.  cxlviii.  14),  yet  He  doth  not  spare  them  when 
they  rebel  against  Him  (Psa.  Ixxiv.  1-3  ;  xliv.  10-14 ;  Jer.  vii.  12).  Adam  and  the 
angels  were  great  and  excellent  beings,  yet  when  they  sinned  He  made  them  suffer. 
He  accepteth  not  the  persons  of  princes  nor  regardeth  the  rich  more  than  the  poor 
(Job  xxxiv.  19).  Men  may  do  justly,  God  must  do  justly.  (G.  Swinnock).  Wrong- 
doing returns  upon  the  sinner : — Do  you  remember  that  poem  of  Southey's  about 
Sir  Balph  the  Eover  ?  On  the  east  of  Scotland,  near  Arbroath,  in  the  old  days,  • 
good  man  had  placed  a  float  with  a  bell  attached  on  the  dangerous  Inchcape  Bock, 
BO  that  the  mariners  hearing  it  might  keep  away.  This  Sir  Balph  the  Bover,  in  a 
moment  of  devilry,  cut  away  both  float  and  bell.  It  was  a  cruel  thing  to  do. 
Years  passed.  Sir  Balph  roamed  over  many  parts  of  the  world.  In  the  end  he 
returned  to  Scotland.  As  he  neared  the  coast  a  storm  arose.  Where  was  he  ? 
Where  was  the  ship  drifting  f  Oh  that  he  knew  where  he  was !  Oh  that  he  could 
hear  the  bell  on  the  Inchcape  Bock!  But  years  ago,  in  his  sinful  folly,  he,  with  his 
own  hands,  had  cut  it  away.  Hark !  to  that  grating  sound  heard  amid  the  storm, 
felt  amid  the  breakers ;  the  ship  is  struck ;  the  rock  penetrates  her,  she  goat  to 
pieces,  and  with  curses  of  rage  and  despair,  the  sinner's  sin  has  foxmd  him  out ; 
he  ginks  to  rise  ao  more  antil  the  great  day  of  judgment.    {O.  Litting,  LL^.) 


OHAPTEB  17. 


Ybb.  1.  Blasters,  give  tmto  your  servants  that  whlcli  is  jnst  and  eqnaL — I. 
Thb  dtttt  of  lusTBBS.  They  are  not  required  to  abdicate  their  mastership,  bat 
to  exercise  it  as  a  service  for  Christ.  1.  Justice  has  reference  to  servants  as 
workers.  They  are  to  receive  fair  remuneration.  The  price  of  labour  is  generally 
regulated  by  supply  and  demand.  This  is  a  maxim  of  political  economy.  Wages 
sannot  be  fixed  by  fancy  and  philanthropy.    If  I  can  get  work  done  for  6s.  a 


CHAP.  IT.]  COLOSSIANS.  871 


day,  why  should  I  give  78,  f  Stiil,  there  is  great  scope  for  the  exercise  of  religion. 
Servants  may  be  ignorant  of  the  market  price  of  labour,  and  it  is  unrighteous  to 
take  advantage  of  it.  It  might  be  difiQcult  on  the  grounds  of  political  economy  to 
Bay  that  the  squire  or  farmer  should  give  more  than  10s.  or  12s.  a  week  when  he  can  get 
abundance  of  l;^bour  at  that  price,  but  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  this  would  not 
satisfy  a  Christian  master.  It  is  surely  wrong  to  show  more  care  for  the  horses 
which  draw  the  plough  than  for  the  man  who  holds  it.  The  man  who  has  found 
out  the  lowest  price  at  which  some  starving  needlewoman  will  do  "slop"  work,  the 
mistress  who  makes  a  workhouse  girl  her  drudge  for  a  mere  pittance,  may  do  what 
they  think  is  just;  but  hardly  if  a  Christian.  2.  Equal  involves  equality  as  well  as 
equity,  and  has  in  it  the  element  of  reciprocity.  (1)  If  by  the  energy  and  skill  of  his 
operatives  an  employer  is  greatly  benefitted,  should  all  the  profits  be  his  ?  Is  it 
right  after  a  series  of  successful  years,  when  a  reaction  sets  in,  to  close  a  factory 
and  send  the  hands  adrift  ?  Some  employers  have  kept  on,  and  been  rewarded 
with  attachment  aud  devotion.  (2)  Servants  should  be  treated  as  having  like 
feelings  and  sensibilities  with  their  masters.  They  ought  not  to  be,  as  in  many 
cases  they  are,  treated  as  destitute  of  feeling.  (3)  Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that 
they  have  characters  to  be  cultivated,  and  much  depends  on  your  example  and 
treatment.  It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  they  will  give  their  best  efforts  for  those 
who  are  reckless  in  their  habits  and  indifferent  to  just  claims.  "  Like  master,  like 
man."  (4)  Servants  have  souls  to  be  saved.  A  clergyman  waited  on  the  principals 
of  a  large  city  house  and  asked  for  facilities  to  attend  to  the  spiritual  good  of  the 
employees.  He  was  promptly  told  that  the  firm  had  nothing  to  do  with  their  souls. 
Happily  Christian  employers  are  now  waking  up  to  their  responsibility  (John  xiii. 
13-15).  II.  The  motive  by  which  this  is  enforced  —  "Knowing,"  &o.  The 
servant  is  required  to  serve  his  master  as  if  he  were  serving  Christ,  and  the  master 
is  to  use  his  authority  as  if  he  too  were  serving  Christ.  Many  masters  hold  the 
responsibility  of  servants,  and  yet  ignore  their  own.  Nothing  is  more  displeasing 
to  God  than  this  (Job  xxxi.  13-15).  The  issues  of  the  great  day  depend  on  our 
conduct  towards  each  other.  What  we  have  done  to  the  poorest  Christ  will  regard 
as  having  been   done   to   Himself.      (J.  Spence,  D.D.)  Master  and  man: — 

Observe — 1.  The  first  step  towards  righteousness  between  master  and  man,  mistress 
and  maid,  is  to  respect  the  relation.  2.  Every  human  being  has  a  right  to  himself, 
consistent  with  the  rights  of  others.  When  he  sells  himself,  hands  or  brains,  for 
honourable  ends,  he  is  to  be  respected.  The  cook  makes  as  respectable  sale  of  her 
arts  in  the  kitchen  as  the  owner  of  the  real  estate  in  renting  a  house.  Here  is 
safety.  The  poorest  creature  you  employ  never  contracted  to  sell  self-respect. 
S.  The  strong,  moreover,  should  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak.  4.  You  may  be 
conscience  to  your  servants.  What  are  the  servants,  for  the  most  part  ?  Grown-up 
children.  They  ape  you ;  talk  large,  as  you  do  at  times ;  try  to  dress  like  you. 
You  are  your  servant's  example — the  keeper  of  his  conscience.  You  pray  every 
morning  for  your  wife,  your  children,  your  property,  clear  down  to  the  fence  at 
the  rear  of  the  lot  behind  the  stable,  but  never  for  Jack  in  the  stable.  5.  There 
should  be  a  reciprocity  of  interest  felt  between  a  Christian  master  and  his  man. 
Nothing  in  social  life  has  been  more  admirable  than  the  magnificent  loyalty  of  old 
servants.  Eead  of  it  in  the  armour-bearers  of  Hebrew  kings,  the  squires  of  days 
of  chivalry.  After  faithful  years  he,  the  old  servant,  tried  and  true,  did  the 
honours  of  the  castle,  and  set  the  turret  pennant  for  great  festivals.  He  spread 
the  plates,  and  made  the  feast  ready  in  oaken  halls;  he  conducted  fair  and  brave 
to  their  chambers.  On  ei rands  of  knightly  valour,  he  accompanied  his  lord;  he 
carried  the  helmet,  the  shield,  the  gauntlets,  the  armour  all,  and  bore  the  banner 
of  the  house ;  he  gave  the  battle-cry,  and  when,  borne  down,  his  liege  would  fall, 
the  old  servant  bore  him  from  the  field ;  and  so  he  won  the  right  to  wear  golden 
spurs — no  longer  a  servant,  but  a  knight  of  the  line.  In  comparison  with  this 
shining  loyalty  of  a  barbarous  age,  how  pitiful  the  frequent  bickerings  and  mutual 
hurt  of  Christian  times.  An  old  family  servant,  after  ten  years,  comes  to  look 
upon  your  home  as  her  home — all  she  has  in  this  world.  She  has  clung  tc 
you  in  five  movings,  and  knew  just  where  everything  belonged.  She  knows  your 
ways,  moods,  likes  and  dislikes.  She  has  had  her  flare-ups,  and  you  forgave  and 
said  nothing ;  in  return,  she  has  seen  flare-ups  above  her  floor,  and  said  nothing. 
She's  been  sick,  and  you  waited  for  her  recovery — how  she  thanked  you ;  and  that 
winter  you  were  all  sick  she  paid  you  back  with  interest.  She  prefers  you  to  the 
savings  bank.  She  has  known  Master  Charley  from  birth,  and  has  nigh  spoiled 
him ;  and  that  other  one  down  in  Greenwood  she  remembers,  and  surprises  yoa 


rti  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

by  saying,  "This  is  the  15th  of  May,  the  day  he  died."  God  bless  you,  good 
creature.  She  has  wept  in  the  doorway  at  three  of  your  funerals;  she  has  laughed 
in  the  doorway  at  two  household  marriages ;  and  how  she  boasts  of  her  cake. 
You  leave  everything  in  her  hands  and  go  on  long  journeys ;  you  return  and  find 
aU  safe,  and  exclaim,  "  God  bless  her ;  she  shall  stay  with  us  until  she  goes  on 
that  long,  long  journey."  All  this  is  possible.  But  it  is  only  possible  to  those 
who  carry  Christ's  rule  everywhere,  even  the  rule  of  this  text.  Brethren,  let  ua 
treat  all  artizans,  serving  tradesmen,  labourers,  and  workers  as  wa  wish  Christ  to 
treat  us,  till  the  time  when  He  shall  "  call  us  no  longer  servants,  but  friends." 
{Emory  J.  Haynes.)  Masters  deal  unequally  many  ways : — 1.  When  they  require 
inconvenient  things ;  for  though  the  servant  must  obey,  yet  the  master  sins  in 
requiring  unequal  things.  2.  When  they  impose  more  work  than  they  have  strength 
to  do.  3.  When  they  turn  them  away  when  they  are  sick  ;  for  it  is  equal  that  as 
thou  hast  had  their  labour  when  they  were  well,  so  thou  shouldest  keep  them  when 
they  are  sick.  4.  When  they  restrain  them  of  liberty  for  their  souls.  If  thou 
have  the  work  of  their  bodies,  it  is  equal  that  thou  take  care  for  their  souls ;  and 
if  they  serve  thee  six  days,  it  is  very  equal  thou  shouldest  proclaim  liberty  to  them 
to  do  God's  work  on  the  Sabbath  day.  5.  When  they  restrain  and  withhold  their 
meat  and  wages.  6.  When  they  send  them  out  of  their  service  empty,  after  many 
years'  bondage,  and  not  provide  that  they  may  have  some  means  to  live  after- 
wards. 7.  When  they  hear  every  word  that  men  say  of  their  servants  (Eccles.  vii. 
23).  8.  When  they  bring  up  their  servants  delicately  (Prov.  xxvii.  23).  9.  When 
they  leave  the  whole  care  of  their  earthly  business  to  their  servants,  and  fail  to 
know  the  state  of  them  for  themselves  (Prov.  xxvii.  28).     (N.  Byfield.) 

Ver.  2.  Continue  In  prayer,  and  watcli  In  the  same  with  thanksglTlng. — We 
are  here  instructed  to  pray  with— I.  Earnest  perseverance.  1.  The  word  ren- 
dered "  continue  "  means  to  ajiply  with  ardour  and  assiduity  to  any  difficult  and 
laborious  thing  until  you  shall  have  brought  it  to  the  wished-for  end,  and  obtained 
the  victory.  Two  things,  therefore,  are  involved  —(1)  Earnestness,  or  intention  of 
mind,  which  is  necessary,  because  (a)  occasions  for  prayer  are  such  as  ought  to 
excite  the  mind  seriously  and  with  the  whole  strength.  The  magnitude  of  our 
intention  is  wont  to  correspond  with  the  magnitude  of  the  business  in  hand.  Tu 
seek  the  good  things  of  God  perfunctorily.  What  is  this  but  to  mock  God  ?  (6)  Dead 
and  sleepy  prayers  from  a  mind  wandering  or  benumbed  neither  reach  heaven  nor 
move  God  to  hear.  Our  prayer  is  a  messenger  between  God  and  us ;  but  if  the 
messenger  loiters  or  falls  asleep,  he  will  neither  reach  his  destination  nor  effect 
his  business.  "  With  what  effrontery,"  says  Cyprian,  "  dost  thou  require  to  be 
heard  of  God,  when  thou  dost  not  thyself  hear  thy  own  voice."  (c)  The  heart 
inflamed  with  this  spiritual  heat  grows  soft,  and  is  dilated,  and  becomes  more  apt 
and  capable  for  receiving  the  Divine  gifts,  (d)  The  saiuts  in  Scripture  thus 
prayed.  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxii.  28),  Moses,  the  psalmists  (James  v.  1).  (2)  Assiduity 
or  frequency  (Luke  xviii.  1 ;  1  "Thess.  v.  17).  Not  that  we  are  to  be  ever  on  our 
knees,  but  that  the  desire  of  prayer  is  never  laid  aside  either  by  weariness  of 
expectation  or  despair  of  obtaining  it,  and  that  God  should  be  frequently  pleaded 
with.  Inducements  to  this,  (a)  We  have  constant  causes  for  prayer — the  blessinga 
we  have,  the  blessings  we  want,  and  the  evils  we  suffer.  (6)  Constancy  is  the 
most  effectual  means  of  obtaining  what  we  seek  (Luke  xviii. ;  Matt,  xv.),  (c)  This 
perseverance  greatly  contributes  to  the  declaring,  increasing,  and  strengthening  of 
onr  faith  (Psa.  v.  3).  2.  Instructions.  (1)  Regarding  intention,  (a)  Whereaa 
we  are  exhorted  to  fervour,  we  must  conclude  that  we  are  so  frigid  and  torpid  aa 
to  need  a  monitor  to  arouse  us  (Matt.  xxvi.  40).  (6)  We  need  the  Spirit  of  prayer 
(Bom.  viii.  2).  (c)  Prayers  that  are  not  understood  are  of  little  moment,  which 
condemns  those  of  the  Papists  in  an  unknown  tongue.  Paul  condemns  them 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  16).  Augustine  says:  "The  people  ought  to  understand  the  prayers 
of  their  priests,  that  they  may  have  their  attention  fixed  upon  God  by  a  common 
feeling."  Even  Roman  theologians  have  condemned  them.  Parisiensis  says: 
"It  is  reckoned  among  the  follies  of  that  messenger  (£.«.,  prayer)  that  he  neither 
cares  nor  thinks  of  those  concerns  except  this  alone,  that  he  offers  a  petition  to 
God,  and  is  altogether  ignorant  of  what  it  contains,  and  what  is  sought  by  it. 
And  these  things  are  manifest  in  all  those  praying  persons  who  mutter  with  their 
lips  alone,  understanding  nothing  whatever  of  those  things  which  the  words  ol 
their  prayers  signify."  And  Cajetan  confesses  "  that  it  is  better  for  the  edification 
of  the  Church,"  and  founds  it  on  1  Cor.  xiv.     (2)  Regarding  perseverance,    (a)  We 


OHAP.  IT.]  COLOSSIANS.  S78 

iinnst  take  care  not  to  be  drawn  away  from  prayer  by  pleasure,  business,  &c.  For  if 
jou  cut  the  nerves  you  leave  the  whole  body  without  motion  and  strength ;  so  if 
you  set  aside  prayer,  the  nerve  of  the  soul,  you  maim  the  man  and  deprive  him  of 
-spiritual  motion,  (b)  The  misery  of  the  ungodly ;  who,  as  they  are  void  of  faith 
and  love,  cannot  pray  except  for  form's  sake,  and  what  is  more  miserable  than  to 
■be  cut  off  from  the  fountain  of  blessedness  ?  Conversely  we  learn  the  blessedness 
of  the  godly.  IL  Watchfulness.  1.  Nightly  vigils.  (1)  The  Christians  of  the 
apostle's  times,  on  account  of  their  enemies,  were  often  compelled  to  nocturnal 
•Bsemblies  (Acts  xii.  12;  xx  7).  The  custom  was  continued  long  after  the  need  of 
it  had  ceased ;  but  was  subsequently  abandoned  because  of  abuses.  Hence  the 
sermons  of  the  fathers  on  the  vigils  of  the  Nativity,  Easter,  the  Martyrs,  <feo.  (2) 
Besides  these  public  vigils,  holy  men  sometimes  spent  sleepless  nights  in  private 
■devotion  (Psa.  xxii.  2,  Ixxvii.  6  ;  Acts  xvi.  25  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  38-39 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  5).  2. 
The  vigils  of  the  mind.  The  mind  is  watchful  when  no  ways  asleep  in  sin  and 
worldly  things,  but  always  lively.  To  this  we  are  called  by  Christ  (Mark  xiii. 
35-36;  Rev.  iii.  2,  xvi.  15);  by  Paul  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1»;  1  Thess.  v.  6);  by  Peter 
(1  Pet.  V.  8).  3.  Instructions.  Hence  is  iufened  (1)  the  sottishness  of  our 
age :  we  sleep  at  prayers  in  the  open  day ;  our  fathers  spent  whole  nights  in 
■prayer.  (2)  Our  impiety  and  vanity :  for  vigils  among  us  are  scarcely  destined  to 
tinything  but  folly  or  wickedness.  (3)  Then  he  raises  his  voice  to  God  in  vain  who 
sleeps  in  his  life.  (4)  The  prayers  of  the  ungodly  are  dreams,  recited  while  the 
heart  ia  asleep  in  sin.  III.  Thanksoivino.  1.  Petitioners  should  be  grateful  for 
blessings  already  granted.  Aristotle  wisely  observed  :  '*  A  return  is  required  to 
preserve  friendship,"  but  we  can  return  to  God  nothing  but  gratitude  (Psa.  cxvi. 
12).  2.  Thanks  are  due  for  things  (1)  deferred :  for  they  are  delayed  only  till  a 
more  advantageous  time,  and  that  we  may  esteem  them  more  when  bestowed, 
^2)  Denied  ;  because  God  knew  they  would  be  hurtful,  and  those  useful  which 
we  deprecated.  3.  Hence  we  are  taught  (1)  that  men  are  more  prone  to  ask 
or  complain  than  to  be  thankful.  (2)  That  ungrateful  men  are  not  fit 
to  pray.  (8)  That  good  and  evil  must  not  be  measured  by  our  sense,  but 
left  to  the  judgment  of  God  our  Father,  who  will  always  send  us  the  best 
things  (1  Thess.  v.  18).  (Bishop  Davenant.)  Prayer: — I.  Continue.  Let 
cot  your  intercessions  be  as  the  morning  cloud.  How  prevalent  we  are  in 
adversity ;  but  what  about  prosperity  ?  1.  The  duty  on  the  part  of  (1) 
convinced  sinners.  Pray  on  till  the  blessing  comes.  (2)  Saints — not  only  for 
temporal  blessings,  but  for  more  faith,  holiness,  usefulness.  The  more  we  pray  the 
riper  will  be  our  graces.  (3)  Churches.  Pentecost,  as  every  great  revival,  was 
preceded  by  persevering  prayer.  2.  This  duty  need  not  interfere  with  others — our 
business,  e.g.  Prayer  to  the  neglect  of  business  was  sternly  condemned  by  Paul  in 
the  case  of  the  Thessalonians.  You  may  not  always  be  in  the  exercise,  but  yoa 
may  always  be  in  the  spirit  of  prayer.  If  not  always  shooting  your  arrows  up  to 
heaven,  keep  your  bow  well  stringed.  3.  Reasons  for  this  duty.  (1)  God  will 
«nswer.  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive " — not  always  at  once,  but  in  God's  time ; 
pray  till  that  comes.  (2)  The  world  will  be  blessed.  Continue,  then,  to  pray  till 
Christ  become  the  universal  King.  (3)  Souls  shall  be  saved.  (4)  Satan's  castle 
shall  be  destroyed — not  with  one  blow  of  the  battering-ram,  however.  But  batter 
away  till  it  falls.  II.  Watch.  1.  For  you  vrill  be  drowsy  if  you  watch  not.  How 
many  men  and  Churches  are  asleep  in  prayer  because  they  do  not  watch.  2.  For 
as  soon  as  you  begin  to  pray  enemies  will  commence  to  attack.  No  one  was  ever  in 
earnest  wiUiout  finding  that  the  devil  was  in  earnest  too.  3.  Watch  while  you 
pray  for  propitious  events  which  may  help  you  in  the  answer  to  your  prayer.  We 
cannot  make  the  wind  blow,  but  we  can  spread  the  sails ;  and  when  the  Spirit 
comes  we  may  be  ready.  4.  Watch  for  fresh  arguments  for  prayer.  Heaven's  gate 
is  not  to  be  stormed  by  one  weapon,  but  by  many.  5.  Watch  for  the  answers. 
When  you  post  a  letter  to  your  friend  you  watch  for  the  answer.  III.  Grva 
THANSs.  We  should  not  go  to  God  as  mournful  beings  who  plead  piteously  with  a 
hard  master  who  loves  not  to  give.  When  you  give  a  penny  to  a  beggar  you  like 
to  see  him  smile,  and  you  give  at  the  next  application  because  of  previous  gratitude. 
So  go  to  God  with  a  thankful  mind.  (C7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Some  qualities  of 
grayer; — With  the  Scriptures  as  our  gniae  we  cannot  question  the  obligation  or 
value  of  prayer.  The  qualities  here  spoken  of  are — I.  Steadfastness  (R.  V.) 
^Acts  i.  14  ;  xii.  6).  The  word  means  earnest  adherence  and  attention,  whether  to 
«  person  or  a  thing.  How  weary  we  grow  of  prayer  1  How  glad  some  formal 
worshippers  are  when  the  benediction  is  pronounced.     This  is  a  word  against — 1. 

18 


t74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  m 

Neglectors  of  God'a  worship.  2.  Forgetters  of  private  devotion.  II.  Watohfui^ 
NESS  (Eph.  vi.  18).  1.  Against  wandering  thoughts.  2.  Against  unbelief.  3. 
Against  dulness  and  heaviness.  III.  Thankfulness.  St.  Paul's  idea  of  this  duty 
may  be  gathered  from  the  fact  that  the  word  he  here  employs,  although  rare 
elsewhere,  is  found  thirty-seven  times  in  his  writings,  and  is  often  joined  to  prayer. 
To  be  always  asking  and  never  thanking  cannot  be  right.  Whenever  we  pray  we 
must  utter  thanks.  {Family  Churchman.)  Continuance  in  prayer  : — Anglers, 
though  they  have  fished  many  hours  and  caught  nothing,  do  not  therefore  break 
their  rod  aud  line,  but  draw  out  the  hook  and  look  at  their  bait,  which,  it  may  be, 
was  fallen  off  or  not  well  hung  on,  and  mend  it,  and  then  throw  it  in  again.  So 
when  thou  hast  been  earnest  in  thy  prayers,  and  yet  received  no  answer,  reflect 
upon  them  ;  consider  whether  something  were  not  amiss  either  in  thy  preparation 
or  thy  manner  or  thy  petition.  It  is  possible  thou  mightest  desire  stones  instead 
of  bread,  or  forget  to  deliver  thy  petition  to  the  only  Master  of  requests,  the  Lord 
Jesus,  that  He  might  present  them  to  the  Father.  No  wonder,  then,  thou  hast 
failed.  Be  diligent  to  And  out  the  fault,  amend  it,  and  then  fall  to  work  again 
with  confidence  that  thou  wilt  not  labour  in  vain.  The  archer,  if  he  shoot  once, 
and  again,  and  miss  the  mark,  considereth  whether  he  did  not  shoot  too  high  or 
too  low,  or  too  much  on  the  right  or  the  left,  and  then  taketh  the  same  arrow 
again,  only  reformeth  his  former  error,  and  winneth  the  wager.  ((?.  Swinnockf 
M.A.)  The  necessity  of  persevering  prayer : — In  the  black  country  of  England 
you  who  have  travelled  will  have  observed  fires  which  never  in  your  recol- 
lection have  been  quenched.  I  beUeve  there  are  some  which  have  been  kept 
burning  for  more  than  fifty  years,  both  night  and  day,  every  day  in  the  year. 
They  are  never  allowed  to  go  out,  because  we  are  informed  that  the  manufacturers 
would  find  it  amazingly  expensive  again  to  get  the  furnace  to  its  needed  red  heat. 
Indeed,  the  blast  furnace,  I  suppose,  would  all  but  ruin  the  proprietor  if  it  were 
allowed  to  go  out  once  every  week ;  he  would  probably  never  get  it  up  to  its  right 
heat  until  the  time  came  for  letting  the  fire  out  again.  Now,  as  with  these 
tremendous  furnaces  which  must  burn  every  day,  or  else  they  will  be  useless,  they 
must  be  kept  burning,  or  else  it  will  be  hard  to  get  them  up  to  the  proper  heat,  so 
ought  it  to  be  in  all  the  Churches  of  God ;  they  should  be  as  flaming  fires  both 
night  and  day  ;  chaldron  after  chaldron  of  the  coal  of  earnestness  should  be  put  to 
the  furnace  ;  all  the  fuel  of  earnestness  which  can  be  gathered  from  the  hearts  of 
men  should  be  cast  upon  the  burning  pile.  The  heavens  should  be  always  red  with 
the  glorious  illumination,  and  then,  then  might  you  expect  to  see  the  Church 
prospering  in  her  Divine  business,  and  hard  hearts  melted  before  the  fire  of  the 
Spirit.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  value  of  constant  prayer: — There  should  rnu 
through  all  our  lives  the  music  of  continual  prayer,  heard  beneath  all  our  varying 
occupations  like  some  prolonged  deep  bass  note,  that  bears  up  and  gives  dignity  ta 
the  lighter  melody  that  rises  and  falls  and  changes  above  it,  like  the  spray  on  the 
crest  of  a  great  wave.  Our  lives  will  then  be  noble,  and  grave,  and  woven  into  a 
harmonious  unity,  when  they  are  based  upon  continual  communion  with,  con- 
tinual desire  after,  and  continual  submission  to,  God.  If  they  are  not,  they  will 
be  worth  nothing,  and  will  come  to  nothing.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  power 
of  constant  prayer : — Some  time  ago,  on  the  coast  of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  a  woman 
thought  she  heard,  in  the  midst  of  the  howling  tempest,  the  voice  of  a  man.  She 
listened ;  it  was  repeated ;  she  strained  her  ear  again,  and  she  caught,  amid  the 
crack  of  the  blast  and  the  thundering  of  the  winds,  another  cry  for  help.  She  ran 
at  once  to  the  beaohmen,  who  launched  their  boat,  and  some  three  poor  mariners 
who  were  clinging  to  the  mast  were  saved.  Had  that  cry  been  but  once,  and  not 
again,  either  she  might  have  doubted  as  to  whether  she  had  heard  it  at  all,  or  else 
she  would  have  drawn  the  melancholy  conclusion  that  they  had  been  swept  into  the 
watery  waste,  and  that  help  would  have  come  too  late.  So  when  a  man  prays  but 
once, either  we  may  think  that  he  cries  not  at  all,  or  else  that  his  desires  are  swallowed 
up  in  the  wild  waste  of  his  sins,  and  he  himself  is  sucked  down  into  the  vortex  of 
destruction,  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Watchfulness  in  prayer : — Watch  thereunto; 
as  a  sentinel  suspecting  the  approach  of  an  enemy ;  as  a  watchman  guarding  the 
city  during  the  darkness  of  the  night ;  as  a  physician  attending  all  the  symptoms 
of  a  disease ;  as  the  keeper  of  a  prison  watching  an  insidious  and  treacherous 
criminal.  Our  hearts  need  all  this  care ;  spiritual  enemies  are  near  ;  the  darkness 
of  the  soul  exposes  it  to  danger  ;  the  disease  of  sin  requires  a  watchful  treatment ; 
and  the  unparalleled  deceitfulness  of  the  affections  can  never  safely  be  trusted  for 
a  momenU    No ;  we  must  watch  before  prayer  in  order  to  dismiss  the  world  from 


OOP.  IT.]  COLOSSIANS.  275 

our  thoughts,  to  gather  up  our  minda  in  God,  and  to  implore  the  Holy  Spirit'* 
help.  We  must  watch  during  prayer  ;  to  guard  against  distraction,  against  the  incur- 
Bious  of  evil  thoughts,  against  wanderings  of  mind,  and  decay  of  fervour  in  our 
supplications.  We  must  watch  after  prayer,  in  order  that  we  may  act  consistently 
with  what  we  have  been  imploring  of  Almighty  God,  wait  His  time  for  answering 
ns,  and  not  lose  the  visitations  of  grace ;  for  with  God  are  the  moments  of  life,  of 
mercy,  of  enlargement,  and  of  gracious  consolation.  (Bishop  D.  Wilson.)  The 
need  of  watchfulness : — In  riding  along  the  south  coast  of  England  you  may  have 
noticed  the  old  Martello  towers  in  constant  succession  very  near  to  each  other, 
'ihey  are  the  result  of  an  old  scheme  of  protecting  our  coast  from  our  ancient 
enemies.  It  was  supposed  that  as  soon  as  ever  a  French  ship  was  seen  in  the 
distance  the  beacon  would  be  fired  at  the  Martello  tower,  and  then,  across  old 
England,  wherever  her  sons  dwelt,  there  would  flash  the  fiery  signal  news  that  the 
enemy  was  at  hand,  and  every  man  would  seize  the  weapon  that  was  next  to  him 
to  dash  the  invader  from  the  shore.  Now,  we  need  that  the  Church  of  Christ 
should  be  guarded  with  Martello  towers  of  sacred  watchers,  who  shall  day  and 
night  look  out  for  the  attack  of  the  enemy.  For  the  enemy  will  come ;  if  he  come 
not  when  we  are  prayerless,  he  will  surely  come  when  we  are  prayerful.  He  will 
show  the  cloven  hoof  as  soon  as  ever  we  show  the  bended  knee.  If  our  motto  be 
"  Prayer,"  his  watchword  will  be  "  Fierce  attack."  Watch,  then,  while  ye  continue 
in  prayer.  ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Thanksgiving  : — Every  prayer  should  be  blended 
with  gratitude,  without  the  perfume  of  which,  the  incense  of  devotion  lacks  one 
element  of  fragrance.  The  sense  of  need,  or  the  consciousness  of  sin,  may  evoke 
"  strong  crying  and  tears,"  but  the  completest  prayer  rises  confident  from  a  grateful 
heart,  which  weaves  memory  into  hope,  and  asks  much  because  it  has  received 
much.  A  true  recognition  of  the  lovingkindness  of  the  past  has  much  to  do  with 
making  our  communion  sweet,  our  desires  believing,  our  submission  cheerfuU 
Thankfulness  is  the  feather  that  wings  the  arrow  of  prayer — the  height  from  which 
our  souls  rise  most  easily  to  the  sky.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  day  of  thankS' 
giving : — I  have  heard  that  in  New  England,  after  the  Puritans  had  settled  there 
a  long  while,  they  used  to  have  very  often  a  day  of  humiliation,  fasting,  and  prayer, 
till  they  had  so  many  days  of  fasting,  humiliation,  and  prayer,  that  at  last  a  good 
senator  proposed  that  they  should  change  it  for  once,  and  have  a  day  of  thanks- 
giving. It  is  of  little  use  to  be  always  fasting ;  we  ought  sometimes  to  give  thanka 
for  mercies  received.    (<7.  H.  Spurgeon. ) 

Vers.  8-4.  Withal  praying  also  for  as  that  God  would  open  unto  na  a  door  of  utter- 
ance.— Tht  people's  prayer  and  the  minister's  work: — I.  Thb  persons  fob  whom  wh 
MUST  PRAY.  "  For  us,"  Paul,  Timothy,  &c.  1.  Observe  in  general  (1)  That  we 
ought  to  pray  not  for  ourselves  alone,  but  for  others.  (2)  That  to  get  a  large  heart 
in  prayer,  and  perseverance  in  its  practice,  we  must  endeavour  to  help  others  by 
prayer.  (3)  That  Christians  should  desire  the  prayers  of  others,  as  carnal  men 
make  use  of  their  friends  to  get  wealth,  offices,  &c.  2.  Learn  in  particular  (1)  That 
the  greatest  in  the  Church  need  the  prayers  of  the  meanest.  (2)  That  in  hearing 
prayer  God  is  no  acceptor  of  persons.  He  is  as  willing  to  hear  the  Colossians* 
prayers  for  Paul  as  Paul's  for  the  Colossians.  (3)  That  Churches  should  pray  for 
their  own  ministers.  (4)  That  Christians  should  pray  for  all  ministers.  Paul  does 
not  desire  their  prayers  for  himself  alone.  Such  a  desire  in  some  might  evidence 
spiritual  pride  and  envy.  II.  Thb  things  to  be  pkated  fob.  1.  That  a  door  of 
utterance  may  be  opened.  (1)  This  comprehends — (a)  Liberty  to  preach  the  gospeL 
{b)  Opportunity,  (c)  Preaching  power,  (d)  Courage  to  rebuke  sin,  and  declare  all 
God's  counsel  without  fear  of  any  man.  (e)  Success  :  such  utterance  as  will  open  the 
door  into  the  heart.  (2)  Whence  learn  what  makes  a  happy  pastor :  not  wealth, 
popularity,  &c.,  but  liberty,  cfec.  This  taxes — (a)  Dumb  ministers  that  utter  nothing. 
(b)  Fantastical  ministers  who  preach  their  own  vanities,  speaking  only  pleasing 
things,  (c)  Idle  ministers  who  preach  not  all  God's  counsels  in  season  and  out. 
(d)  Cold  ministers.  (3)  Note  the  fact  that  Paul  was  in  prison,  yet  he  sought  not 
liberty  for  himself,  but  for  the  gospel.  Be  thankful  then  for  freedom  in  both  senses,. 
and  labour  to  prevent  those  things  which  stop  the  mouths  of  God's  n  inisters.  These 
are — (a)  Ignorance  and  sin  in  ministers  themselves.  Polluted  lips  are  no  lips  for 
utterance.  The  lips  of  preachers  should  be  touched  with  knowledge,  zeal,  and 
mortification,  (b)  The  sins  of  the  people  (Ezek.  iii.  24-27).  (c)  The  violence  of 
persecution  (1  Cor.  xvi.  9 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  2).  [d)  Discouragement  and  fear  (1  Cor. 
a  ri.  9,  12 ;  Heb.  xiii.  17).    (e)  Human  wisdom  which  destroys  the  profit  of  th«> 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

hearer  and  the  power  of  the  preacher.  2.  That  God  may  open  it.  (1)  The  hearts 
of  the  best  ministers  are  shut  until  God  opens  them  and  dispenses  the  gift,  (2)  'Tis 
God  only  that  opens  to  men  the  door  of  utterance.  He  "  creates  the  fruit  of  the 
lips  to  be  peace  "  :  "  He  opens  and  no  man  shuts."  If  He  gives  liberty  who  can 
restrain!  III.  The  end  fob  which  the  things  aee  asked.  That  the  mystery  of 
Christ  may  be  manifested.     1.  The  mystery.   (1)  To  whom  is  the  gospel  a  mystery  ? 

(a)  To  the  Gentiles  :  that  there  should  be  a  Saviour.  (6)  To  the  Jews  :  that  salva- 
tion should  be  in  a  carpenter's  son.  (c)  To  the  Papists  :  that  He  should  be  the 
only  Saviour,  (d)  To  heretics :  that  He  should  be  a  Divine  human  Saviour,  (e) 
To  the  carnal  man  :  that  He  should  be  a  Saviour  in  particular  to  him.  {/)  To  the 
godly  man :  that  He  should  be  such  a  Saviour.  (2)  How  is  it  a  mystery  ?  Because 
of  the  hiding  of  it — (a)  In  the  breast  of  God  from  all  eternity,  (b)  In  the  shadows 
and  types  of  the  ceremonial  law.  (c)  In  the  treasury  of  the  Scriptures,  (d)  In  the 
person,  obedience,  and  passion  of  Christ,  (e)  In  the  hearts  of  Christians.  (3)  Why 
is  it  a  mystery  to  wicked  men  ?  Through — (a)  The  veil  of  their  ignorance,  {b) 
Custom  in  sin  and  pleasure,  &c.  (c)  Judicial  blindness.  (4)  Is  it  a  mystery  ?  Then 
it  should  teach  us — (a)  To  esteem  God's  ministers  as  its  dispensers  (1  Cor.  iv.  2). 

(b)  To  strive  by  all  means  to  gain  the  open  knowledge  of  this  secret  (Eph.  i.  8-9) ; 
but  because  every  vessel  is  not  meet  to  bear  this  measure  we  should  get  a  pure  con- 
Bcience  to  carry  this  mystery  of  faith  in  (1  Tim.  iii.  9).  (c)  To  account  this  the 
highest  blessedness  (Matt.  xiii.  11).  2.  Its  manifestation  :  clear  sound  preaching. 
(1)  It  is  not  enough  to  preach,  we  must  preach  as  becometh  this  mystery,  (a)  With 
power  (1  Thess.  i,  5).  {b)  With  instance  and  all  watchfulness  (2  i'im.  iv.  2-6),  (c) 
With  patience  and  constancy  (1  Cor.  iv.  9  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  4).  (d)  With  assurance 
(2  Cor.  iv.  13).  (e)  With  all  wilUngness  (1  Cor.  ix.  16-17).  (/)  With  all  faith- 
falness  (1  Cor.  iv.  2).  (g)  With  all  zeal,  knowing  the  terror  of  the  Lord  (2  Cor.  v.  11 ; 
1  Thess.  ii.  12).  (h)  With  all  holy  behaviour  (1  Thess.  ii.  11).  (2)  The  people 
mast  also  hear,  as  becometh  the  mystery  of  Christ,  with  attention,  patience, 
reverence,  sincerity,  hunger,  and  fruitfulness.  (N.Byfield.)  Ministers  dependent 
on  the  prayers  of  the  people: — There  is  much  criticism  bestowed  upon  preachers, 
much  of  canvassing  of  their  doctrines,  much  readiness  in  imagining  that  they  are 
swerving  from  what  is  orthodox  and  sound,  much  complaining  that  they  are  not 
simple  enough  or  too  simple,  not  profound  enough,  or  not  practical  enough,  or  not 
interesting  enough,  or  not  searching  enough  ;  but  is  there  much  of  prayer  that  God 
would  guide  them  into  the  knowledge  of  truth,  and  put  into  their  mouths  the 
messages  most  appropriate  to  the  several  classes  of  hearers  J  Indeed,  we  say  not 
this  in  order  to  exculpate  the  minister,  as  though  he  were  not  himself  answerable 
for  erroneous  or  defective  ministrations ;  but,  probably,  in  most  cases,  the  blame  is 
at  least  to  be  divided,  and  as  a  general  rule  the  parish  or  district  which  has  derived 
least  good  from  its  pastor,  is  the  parish  or  district  which  has  offered  the  least  prayer 
for  its  pastor.  Whilst  a  congregation  is  murmuring  that  its  teacher  never  seems  to 
get  beyond  the  first  elements  of  truth,  there  is,  perhaps,  scarcely  one  of  its  members 
who  makes  it  a  point  of  conscience  frequently  to  ask  God  to  open  to  that 
teacher  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge ;  whilst  the  pews  are  occupied  with 
fears  and  suspicions  that  something  unsound  or  even  heretical  has  found  way  into 
the  pulpit,  there  is  hardly  one  of  the  hearers  who  offers  his  daily  supplications  that 
God  would  keep  the  instructor  from  being  carried  about  by  the  winds  of  false  doc> 
trine.  What  marvel,  then,  if  there  is  but  little  progress  in  spiritual  things,  and 
the  pabUo  ministrations  of  the  Word  seem  instrumental  to  the  converting  and 
confirming  but  few?  The  hands  even  of  Moses  fell,  when  not  sustained  by  Aaron 
and  Ur  ;  and  even  St.  Paul  leant  on  converts  at  Colossae,  when  hoping  to  be  honoured 
in  making  converts  at  Rome.  (fl.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Revival  through  prayer: — ^A 
once  popular  minister  gradually  lost  his  influence  and  congregation.  The  blame 
was  laid  entirely  upon  him.  Some  of  his  Church  officials  went  to  talk  with  him  on 
the  subject.  He  replied:  "I  am  quite  sensible  of  all  you  say,  for  I  feel  it  to  be 
true;  and  the  reason  of  it  is,  I  have  lost  my  prayer-book."  He  explained  :  "  Once 
my  preaching  was  acceptable,  many  were  edified  by  it,  and  numbers  were  added  to 
the  Church,  which  was  then  in  a  prosperous  state.  But  we  were  then  a  praying 
people.  Prayer  was  restrained,  and  the  present  condition  of  things  followed.  Let 
VLB  return  to  the  same  means,  and  the  same  results  may  be  expected."  They  acted 
apon  this  suggestion,  and,  in  a  short  time,  the  minister  was  as  popular  as  he  had 
ever  been,  and  the  Church  was  again  in  a  flourishing  state.  The  great  apostle  felt 
iht  necessity  of  co-operative  sympathy  and  prayer  (Rom.  xv.  30;  2  Thess.  iii.  1). 
{o.  Barlow.)        The  door  c/  utterance  was  a  door  for  the  Word  to  pass  throagh 


CHA».  i7,J  COLOSSIANS,  27T 

(1  Cor.  xvi.  9  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  12).  In  the  rush  and  press  of  thought  the  fettered  gospel 
seems  to  be  iilentified  with  the  apostle  •*  in  bonds."  The  Word  is  a  captive  with 
him.  They  are  to  pray  therefore  that  God  would  open  before  him  a  door  that  the 
imprisoned  Word  may  pass  through  and  speed  onward  (2  Tim.  ii.  9 ;  2  Thess,  iii.  1). 
{Bishop  Alexander.)  Doors  shut  and  open: — The  door  of  utterance  was  closed  and 
barred,  as  it  were,  upon  the  apostle  by  his  imprisonment.  It  had  previously  re- 
mained open  for  a  series  of  years  ^Rom.  xv.  19).  Now  he  was  an  ambassador  in  bonds. 
Thus,  in  every  age  of  the  Churcn,  the  door  is  at  times  shut  to  the  dissemination 
of  the  gospel  by  the  obstacles  which  the  world  and  Satan  raise;  by  the  persecution 
ond  imprisonment  or  banishment  of  the  faithful  missionary  or  minister ;  by  strong 
prejudices  excited  in  men's  minds,  as  in  India  years  ago,  so  that  they  will  allow  no 
opening  for  the  gospel ;  by  a  prevalent  spirit  of  infidelity,  as  during  the  first  French 
revolution ;  by  a  failure  of  means  in  religious  societies  ;  by  heresies  and  tendencies 
to  popery  for  a  time  prevailing  ;  and  by  the  rapid  deaths  of  eminent  missionaries 
and  ministers.  Then  again  the  door  is  opened  from  time  to  time  by  the  mercy  of 
God  ;  as  when  Paul  was  liberated  from  prison  and  allowed  again  to  prosecute  for  a 
lew  years  his  evangelical  labours  ;  as,  in  other  ages  and  places,  when  persecutions 
cease,  and  the  civil  magistrate  protects  the  true  religion ;  when  the  heathen  and 
Mabommedau  nations  are  placed  under  the  sway,  or  brought  into  contact  with 
Protestant  Christian  powers ;  when  heresies  and  leanings  towards  popery  are 
checked ;  when  faithful  men  are  raised  up,  qualified,  and  placed  in  important 
situations  of  service  ;  when  translations  of  the  Scriptures  are  made  and  widely 
diifused  ;  when  kings  and  princes  are  touched  with  grace,  and  take  an  active  interest 
in  the  spread  of  the  gospel,  as  Frederick  the  Wise  of  Saxony,  at  the  period  of  the 
Reformation,  and  when  a  spirit  of  inquiry,  like  that  among  the  noble  Berseans,  is 
excited,  to  "  search  the  Scriptures  daily  to  see  whether  the  things  "  brought  to  their 
knowledge  are  indeed  so.  But  the  door  of  utterance  also  includes  God's  giving 
scope  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  by  removing  external  hindrances ;  His  granting 
to  ministers  by  His  Spirit  suitable  gifts  and  graces  for  discharging  their  office  ;  and 
His  vouchsafing  by  the  same  Spirit  efficacy  to  their  word  that  it  may  enter  the 
hearts  of  the  hearers.  What  a  vast  field  of  intercessory  prayer  is  here  presented  ! 
(Bis)iop  D.  Wilson.)  For  which  I  am  also  In  bonds. — St.  Paul  was  an  ambassador 
for  Christ.  According  to  the  law  of  nations,  there  is  a  sacredness  about  the  person 
of  an  ambassador,  which  is  never  violated  unless  by  the  desj^erate  or  the  barbarous. 
Let  one  country  send  an  ambassador  to  another,  with  the  hope  of  adjusting  points 
in  litigation  between  the  two,  and  though  the  proposed  terms  may  be  utterly  re- 
pudiated, and  nothing  but  a  war  of  extermination  will  t-ati-fy  the  people  to  whom 
the  embassage  is  come,  yet  is  the  ambassador  commonly  treated  with  every  mark  of 
respect ;  his  office  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  for  his  personal  safety,  and  until  he  have 
been  honourably  dismissed  and  scrupulously  escorted,  no  steps  can  be  taken  against 
the  nation  whose  representative  he  is.  And  if  in  any  case  a  diiJerent  course  is 
pursued — if  the  people  ill-use  the  ambassador,  depriving  him  of  liberty,  and  yet 
more  of  life,  there  is  an  indignant  exclamation  throughout  the  civilized  world ;  a 
hundred  provinces  are  ready  to  make  common  cause  with  a  nation  so  deeply  injured 
in  the  person  of  its  representative,  and  the  tribe  which  has  done  the  wrong  is 
immediately  as  though  placed  under  sentence  of  outlawry.  Or,  to  take  a  more 
pertinent  case.  Suppose  a  revolt  to  have  occurred  in  one  of  the  provinces  of  an 
empire.  The  king  is  loth  to  proceed  to  extremities,  and  therefore  sends  an  ambas- 
sador with  proffers  and  terms  of  reconciliation.  But  the  rebels,  though  they 
cannot  disprove  his  credentials,  nor  doubt  his  authority,  not  satisfied  with  con- 
temptuously rejecting  his  offers,  cast  him  into  prison  and  bind  him  with  chains. 
Now,  tell  us,  what  a  feeling  of  indignation  would  pervade  a  whole  country,  and 
how  like  a  watchword,  in  which  every  class  of  the  community  joined,  there  would 
pass  through  the  land  the  cry,  "  An  ambassador  in  bonds!  "  "  An  ambassador  iu 
bonds  I  " — why,  this  is  St.  Paul's  account  of  himself  in  the  text.  He  is  an  ambas- 
sador of  Christ  to  publish  the  gospel,  "  for  which,"  says  he,  "  I  am  in  bonds."  He 
gi^es  the  description  without  comment,  as  though  sufficient  by  itself,  and  by  its 
strangeness,  to  arrest  the  most  unthinking.  {H.  Melvill,  D.D.)  Prayer  for 
ministers  : — The  Rev.  Solomon  Stoddard,  the  predecessor  of  the  far-famed  President 
Edwards,  was  engaged  by  his  people  on  an  emergency.  They  soon  found  themselves 
disappointed,  for  he  gave  no  indications  of  a  renewed  and  serious  mind.  In  thii 
difficulty  their  resource  was  prayer.  They  agreed  to  set  apart  a  day  for  special 
fasting  and  prayer,  in  reference  to  their  pastor.  Many  of  the  persons  meeting  for 
this  purpose  bad  necessarily  to  pass  the  door  of  the  minister.    Mr.  Stoddard  hailed 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [coii.  rr. 

a  plain  man  whom  he  knew,  and  addressed  him,  "  What  is  all  this  ?  What  is  doing 
to-day  ?  "  The  reply  was,  "  The  people,  sir,  are  all  meeting  to  pray  for  your  con- 
version." It  sank  into  his  heart.  He  exclaimed  to  himself,  "  Then  it  is  time  I 
prayed  for  myself  1 "  He  was  not  seen  that  day.  He  was  seeking  in  solitude  what 
they  were  asking  in  company ;  and,  "  while  they  were  yet  speaking,"  they  were 
heard  and  answered.  The  pastor  gave  unquestionable  evidence  of  the  change ;  he 
laboured  amongst  a  beloved  and  devoted  people  for  nearly  half  a  century,  and  was, 
lor  that  period,  deservedly  ranked  among  the  most  able  and  asefol  of  Christian 
ministers. 

Vers.  5-6.  Wali  to  wisdom  towards  them  that  are  without — The  wise  conduct 
of  life: — The  conduct  of  life  is  to  be  regulated — I.  Accobding  to  the  dictates  of 
THE  HIGHEST  WISDOM.  1.  Religion  IS  a  Uf  6.  "Walk."  2.  Eeligion  is  a  life  shaped 
and  controlled  by  the  highest  wisdom.  "  Walk  in  wisdom."  3.  Eeligion  is  a  life 
that  should  be  instructive  to  the  irreligious.  "Toward  them  that  are  without." 
4.  Eehgion  is  a  Ufe  that  impels  the  seizure  of  every  opportunity  for  good-doing. 
♦'  Redeeming  the  time  " — buying  up  the  opportunities.  Opportunity  is  the  flower 
of  time  which  blooms  for  a  moment  and  is  gone  for  ever.    II.  By  judicious  speech. 

1.  Christian  speech  should  be  gracious.    "Let  jour  speech  be  alway  with  grace." 

2.  Christian  speech  should  be  piquant.  "  Seasoned  with  salt."  3.  Christian  speech 
should  be  practical.  "That  ye  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  every  man." 
(G.  Barlow.)  Christian  worldly  wisdom: — The  Church  sojourns  for  the  most 
part  amidst  people  of  another  profession.  Whole  nations  have  shut  the  door  against 
Christ.  In  so-called  Christian  nations  vast  multitudes  are  non-Christian.  Even  in 
private  famiUes  there  is  this  partition.  Hence  the  apostle  having  regulated  the 
duties  of  Christians  among  themselves  now  points  out  those  toward  aliens.  I.  Our 
CONVERSATION  WITH  THOSE  WHO  ABE  WITHOUT  IN  GENERAL.  1.  We  are  to  Walk  wisely ; 
not  that  we  are  to  walk  foolishly  amongst  ourselves.  But  as  when  a  soldier  is  in  an 
enemy's  country  he  stands  much  more  on  his  guard,  and  as  we  use  more  ceremony 
towards  strangers  than  friends ;  so  we  are  to  be  more  careful  before  the  world  than 
the  Church.  (1)  The  end  in  view  is  to  win  them  to  Christ,  or  to  prevent,  at  least, 
their  taking  offence  at  religion  when  in  our  accidental  encounters  or  our  deliberate 
designs.  In  our  converse  as  civil  subjects  with  foreigners  it  would  not  be  suffered 
us  to  attempt  to  withdraw  them  from  their  allegiance,  but  as  subjects  of  Christ 
our  main  duty  is  to  rescue  the  slaves  of  Satan  the  common  enemy.  (2)  In  pursuing 
this  end  the  diversity  of  the  persons  has  to  be  carefully  considered,  their  different 
conditions  and  capacities.  The  same  things  do  not  suit  all,  and  all  are  not  averse 
to  religion,  and  while  there  are  those  who  are  of  a  furious  disposition,  there  are 
those  who  are  sweet  and  tractable.  The  Master  (Matt.  vii.  6)  urges  this  wise  dis- 
crimination, and  intimates  the  disastrous  consequences  of  the  want  of  it,  which 
experience  also  confirms.  But  we  are  to  love  all  alike,  while  we  treat  them  diffe- 
rently (Matt.  V.  44).  (3)  The  choice  of  means,  (a)  Christian  wisdom  excludes  all 
actions  contrary  to  piety,  which  are  quite  contrary  to  the  end  in  view  as  well  aa 
offensive  to  God,  conscience,  and  our  neighbour,  repelling  from  instead  of  attracting 
men  to  Christ  (2  Sam.  xil  14 ;  Rom.  ii.  23-24 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  1 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  3 ;  Titus 
ii.  10).  (b)  We  owe  those  that  are  without  not  only  abstinence  from  evil,  but  the 
performance  of  what  is  good  (Rom.  xiii.  7-8).  God  forbid  that  we  should  ever 
allow  the  conceit  that  it  is  lawful  to  break  promises  with  them  or  deceive  them. 
God  will  not  be  served  with  unrighteousness  and  treachery.  Dues  must  be  rendered 
too,  not  from  fear,  but  for  conscience  sake,  (c)  But  we  are  not  only  to  yield  what 
they  can  rightly  claim,  but  humanity,  courtesy,  assistance,  as  often  as,  and  even 
before  they  ask,  and  thus  imitate  Him  who  blesses  both  the  just  and  the  unjust. 
Account  any  one  your  neighbour,  even  if  a  Samaritan  or  pagan.  By  this  at  least 
you  will  prevent  him  caluminating  your  religion,  (d)  We  must  accommodate  our- 
selves as  far  as  piety  will  admit ;  not  needlessly  opposing  them,  nay,  willingly 
yielding  our  rights  and  conforming  ourselves  to  their  wills  in  things  indifferent, 
that  they  may  see  that  our  piety  is  not  founded  on  oapriciousness  (1  Cor.  ix.  19-22 ; 
ci  2  Cor.  vi.  14-15).  (e)  We  must  also  avoid  all  actions  or  speeches  likely  to  annoy. 
2.  Redeeming  the  time  contains  the  utility  and  fruit  of  this  wise  demeanour  (Dan. 
ii.  8 ;  Eph.  v.  15-lG).  As  a  wise  mariner  when  the  wind  arises,  and  the  water« 
threaten,  and  the  presages  of  a  tempest  appear,  hauls  in  his  sails  and  prepares  for 
the  storm,  then,  accommodating  himself  to  the  violence  of  the  waves,  lets  drive  a 
little,  not  daring  to  bear  up  full  against  it,  all  to  gain  time  and  redeem  himself  by 
■uch  care  and  conduct  out  of  so  sad  and  angry  a  season  ;  so  Paul  would  have  oa 


OTU».  IT.]  C0L0SSIAN8.  t78 

ose  the  same  industry  to  ward  off  the  blows  which  are  menaced  by  the  unfavourable 
disposition  towards  us  of  those  without.     II.  The  qualities  in  pabticulab  which 

OtJB   8PEECH    OUGHT   TO   HAVE    IN    THAT    CONVERSE.       "  Let  yOUF  SpCech,"  Ao.       1.  TWs 

is  necessary  (1  Pet.  iii.  15).  This  is  the  most  tender  part  of  our  converse  with 
xaen,  and  should  be  managed  with  the  greatest  exactness.  An  answer  here  is 
capable  of  amending  or  impairing  the  condition  of  a  whole  Christian  people.  Wise 
and  moderate  discourse  has  sometimes  averted  or  stayed  persecution  ;  whereas 
indiscreet,  although  true,  speech  has  mightily  troubled  the  peace  of  the  Church. 
How  needful,  then,  that  our  speech  should  be  with  grace.  2.  The  qualities.  (1) 
Truth  is  presupposed  (Eph.  iv.  25).  (2)  Grace  is  not  rhetorical  embellishment,  but 
speech  without  gall,  venom,  and  virulency,  and  so  managed  as  not  to  offend.  (8) 
Well  salted,  t.e.,  seasoned  with  pruJence  ;  for  as  salt  dessicates  meat  and  eats  out 
the  moisture  and  putrid  humour,  leaving  a  sharpness  pleasing  to  the  taste,  so  Chris- 
tian prudence  works  out  all  that  is  noxious  from  speech  and  tempers  it  in  such  a 
manner  that  the  vigour  it  leaves  pleases  the  spirit.  3.  The  use— that  it  may  appear 
that  we  know  how  to  answer  every  one.  (1)  Paul's  calling  our  discourses  an 
answering  intimates  that  we  should  not  speak  without  judgment  and  deliberation. 
•<2)  We  ought  to  diversify  our  speech  according  to  the  difference  of  persons.  The  dis- 
positions of  some  require  firmness  and  freedom,  those  of  others  tenderness.  {J. 
Dailli.)  The  wise  and  winsome  walk: — Christ's  mission  was  to  outsiders:  bo 
was  His  commission  to  His  disciples.  This  holds  good  now.  Every  one  who 
enters  the  Church  enters  not  only  into  a  peculiar  relation  with  Christ,  but  with  the 
world  also.  "Let  your  light  so  shine,"  &o.  Outsiders  watoh  ns  sharply,  and 
Christ  intended  they  should.  The  Christian  is  the  only  Bible  the  great  majority 
«ver  look  at ;  then  we  ought  to  live  as  to  require  no  commentary  to  explain  us.  We 
are  doorkeepers  to  the  way  of  life  not  to  block  the  way  but  to  let  others  in.  I. 
Walk  wisely.  1.  So  as  not  to  give  the  lie  to  our  professions.  We  tell  the  uncon- 
verted that  Christianity  will  make  them  cheerful  under  trials ;  do  we  fret  under 
them  7  We  talk  about  patience  ;  do  we  lose  temper  under  the  first  provocation  ? 
In  the  prayer-meeting  we  pray  as  though  religion  were  the  one  thing  needful:  are 
social  ambition  or  money-grabbing  the  chief  end  of  our  lives  outside  ?  If  in  walking 
through  an  orchard  we  pick  up  a  fair-looking  apple,  but  on  putting  our  teeth  to  it 
find  it  sour,  we  fling  it  away ;  so  we  are  known  by  our  fruits.  Very  few  are  made 
infidels  by  pernicious  books,  but  many  are  by  inconsistent  Christians.  On  the 
other  hand,  a  noble,  godly  life  is  the  most  convincing  of  sermons.  2.  We  can 
never  win  outsiders  by  compromising  with  them.  The  people  of  the  world  do  not 
expect  ns  to  live  as  they  do  ;  and  when  we  surrender  our  principles  they  are  secretly 
disgusted.  To  draw  men  out  of  a  pit  we  must  have  a  firm,  strong  foothold  or 
they  will  draw  us  in.  He  who  walks  closest  to  Christ  will  have  most  converting 
power.  8.  The  subject  has  a  vital  connection  with  direct  efforts  for  the  conversion 
of  men.  *'  He  that  is  wise  winneth  souls."  How  little  commonsense  many  employ 
in  trying  to  bring  their  children,  scholars,  or  friends  to  the  Saviour.  A  father 
asks  people  to  pray  for  his  boy,  and  then  treats  him  so  as  to  harden  him.  Some 
people  badger  their  children  with  ill-timed  or  tempered  talk  about  their  souls.  And 
yet  nothing  requires  more  tact  and  gentleness.  If  we  want  to  water  a  flower  we 
do  not  dash  a  p»ilful  over  it,  but  sprinkle  it.  God  does  not  send  His  Spirit  as  a 
waterspout,  but  as  rain.  Paul  was  consumed  with  zeal,  yet  showed  wonderful 
sagacity  in  adaptation.  II.  Watch  for  opportunities.  "  Kedeeming  the  time." 
Chances  must  be  sought  for  putting  in  the  right  word,  and  when  God  sends  it  we 
must  make  the  most  of  it.  We  must  go  on  the  principle  of  now  or  never.  This 
will  make  us  eager  to  embrace  opportunities ;  and  in  turn  we  must  urge  the 
undecided  to  embrace  Christ  at  once.  Every  act  of  kindness  to  the  unconverted 
will  help  ns.  (T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Godly  walk  in  evil  company : — Though  evil 
men  are  not  to  be  the  subjects  of  the  Christian's  choice,  yet  he  must  sometimes 
fall  into  their  company  or  go  out  of  the  world  (1  Cor.  v.  10).  Civil  commerce  with 
them  is  lawful,  though  friendship  be  sinful.  Christianity  must  help  us  as  a 
glaso  window  to  let  in  the  light  but  keep  out  the  rain.  The  apostle  gives  ns  a 
special  precept  for  our  pious  carriage  among  ungodly  men.  I.  The  qualification 
OF  THE  ACT — "  Walk  wisely."  He  who  walketh  according  to  the  rule  of  the  Word 
is  a  wise  walker  (Job  xxviii.  28 ;  Psa.  cxix.  1 ;  Gal.  vi.  16).  We  must  walk  by 
precept,  not  by  pattern :  he  may  be  a  good  courtier  but  a  bad  Christian  who  suits 
his  conduct  to  his  company.  If,  like  musicians,  we  play  no  lessons  but  what  the 
company  calls  for,  our  music  will  be  jarring  in  the  ears  of  God  (Gal.  i.  10).  II.  Thh 
specification  or  the  subject.    Wicked  men  are  said  to  be  without.     1.  Because 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CHA».  tr, 

visible  without  the  Church  (1  Cor.  v.  12-13).  2.  Eeally  without  God  and  Christ 
(Eph.  ii.  12).  3.  Eventually  without  heaven  (Rev.  xxii.  15 ;  Lake  xiii.  25).  III. 
Motives  for  caution.  1.  Evil  company  is  infectious  (Psa.  cvi.  35).  2.  See  that 
when  compelled  to  mingle  with  it  that  thou  get  good  from  it :  let  it  show  thee  the 
importance  of  wisdom  and  watchfulness.  IV.  Rules  for  conduct.  1.  Keep  thyself 
unspotted  from  sin.  Wicked  men,  as  dyers  and  painters,  are  besmeared  themselves 
and  besmear  others.  The  saint  should  resemble  the  carbuncle,  which  being  cast 
in  the  fire,  shines  all  the  brighter.  Rust  will  fret  into  the  hardest  steel,  but  not 
into  ithe  emerald.  Thy  duty  is,  as  clothes  well  dyed,  to  keep  thy  colour  in  all 
weatners ;  and,  as  a  good  constitution,  to  retain  thy  health  in  the  most  unwhole- 
some vapours.  2.  Do  not  needlessly  expose  thyself  to  suffering.  Christ  did  not 
commit  himself  to  the  Jews,  because  He  knew  their  hearts.  Set  a  watch  before  thy 
tongue  lest  it  prove  thy  sepulchre  (Eccles.  iii.  7  ;  Amos  v.  13).  Thy  care  must  be 
always  to  own  Christ,  but  as  thy  policy  should  not  eat  up  thy  zeal  neither  should 
thy  zeal  thy  wisdom.  Zeal  to  a  Christian  is  like  the  high  wind  filling  the  sails  of 
a  ship,-  which  unless  it  be  ballasted  with  discretion  doth  but  the  sooner  overtura 
it.  3.  Be  sure  thou  dost  not  deny  Christ  and  disown  thy  profession.  Though  it 
behoveth  thee  to  walk  wisely,  because  sinners  lie  in  wait  to  destroy  thy  life,  yet  be 
careful  not  to  walk  wickedly,  for  sin  lieth  in  wait  to  destroy  thy  souL  The  light  of 
religion  ought  not  to  be  carried  in  a  dark  lantern,  and  only  shown  when  interest 
permits  (Matt.  x.  33 ;  2  Kings  xvii.  41 ;  Neh.  xiii.  24).  4.  Labour  to  get  some  good 
by  such  as  are  evil.  A  gracious  person  may  improve  the  vilest  sinner's  company 
to  his  own  spiritual  profit.     (1)  Let  thy  zeal  be  more  inflamed  (Psa.  cxix.  39,  127). 

(2)  Let  thy  heart  be  more  enlarged  in  thankfulness  that  Christ  hath  saved  thee. 

(3)  Thy  care  and  watchfulness  should  be  increased.  The  falls  of  others  should  b» 
sea-marks  for  warning  to  avoid  those  rocks  and  shallows  if  thou  wouldest  avoid 
shipwreck  (1  Cor.  x,  6,  16).  5.  Endeavour  their  reformation.  Thy  duty  as  a  good 
physician  is  to  loathe  the  noisome  disease,  but  to  pity  and  strive  to  recover  the 
patient.  Thy  Father  doth  good  to  all ;  remember  thou  art  His  son  and  copy  Him. 
Christ  never  sat  at  table  with  sinners  but  He  made  better  cheer  than  He  found.  Be 
not  discouraged  at  the  weakness  of  thy  gifts,  but  consider  that  the  event  depends 
upon  Him  who  set  thee  at  work,  and  that  it  is  all  one  to  Him  whether  thou  hast 
great,  small,  or  no  means.  A  fly  may  hinder  an  elephant  from  sleeping.  A 
little  boat  may  land  a  man  on  a  large  continent.  Endeavour  to  reform  them.  (1) 
By  wholesome  counsel.  There  is  a  special  art  in  baiting  the  hook  aright,  so  as  thou 
mayest  take  sinners  ere  they  are  aware  (2  Cor.  xii.  16).  When  amongst  moral  men 
commend  morality,  yet  discover  its  insufficiency,  and  so  cause  them  to  run  to  Christ 
for  help  (Matt.  v.  20).  When  amongst  the  profane  bring  in  wisely  an  instance  of 
God's  judgments.  Sometimes  conversation  on  earthly  subjects  may  be  turned  by 
degrees  into  heavenly.  Do  they  ask,  "  What  news  ?  "  After  prudent  preface  say 
that  thou  canst  tell  them  good  news  from  a  far  country — Christ  Jesus  came  to  save 
sinners.  Do  they  ask  how  such  and  such  do  ?  Acquaint  them  of  their  worldly 
welfare,  and,  if  convenient,  of  the  health  of  their  soul.  Do  they  ask  the  price  of 
commodities  7  Raise  their  heart  to  the  wine  and  milk  to  be  had  without  money, 
&c.  This  is  true  alchemy  and  will  turn  all  to  gold.  See  our  Lord's  example 
(Matt.  XV.  20 ;  John  iv.  21,  vi.  25-27).  (2)  By  thy  gracious  carriage  in  their  com- 
pany. A  Christian  is  God's  jewel  (Mai.  iii.  17),  and  should  always  cast  a  radiancy 
before  the  eyes  of  others  (Phil.  ii.  15 ;  Titus  ii.  7,  8) ;  1  Pet.  iii.  15,  16).  Grace 
powerfully  but  silently  opposes  wickedness,  and  forces  reverence  from  its  bitterest 
enemies.  The  righteousness  of  Noah  condemned  the  old  world ;  the  holiness  of 
John  gained  respect  from  Herod  ;  the  sanctity  of  the  three  worthies  triumphed  in 
the  conscience  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the  innocence  of  Daniel  in  the  soul  of 
Darius  (1  Pet.  ii.  11-12).  (3)  By  faithful  reprehension  ;  but — (a)  Be  sure  the  thing 
thou  reprovest  be  a  sin.  Some  show  much  heat  but  little  holiness  in  makiog  a 
great  stir  about  nothing  (Josh.  xxii.  16;  Sam.  ii).  It  is  dant^erous  to  apply 
medicines  on  the  bare  supposition  of  sickness.  Then,  again,  he  that  reproves  the 
deed  will  do  more  harm  than  good  if  he  is  not  able  to  convince  the  doer  (Titus  i.  9; 
Job  vi.  25).  Mistaken  or  misapplied  arguments  seldom  reprove  any  but  the  arguer, 
and  him  they  always  reprove,  (b)  Reprove  seriously.  Reproof  is  an  edged  tool 
and  must  not  be  jested  with.  Cold  reproofs  are  like  the  noise  of  cannons  a  great 
way  off.  He  that  reproves  sin  merrily  and  makes  the  company  laugh  will  destroy 
the  sinner  instead  of  his  sin.  Some  men  shoot  their  reprehensions,  like  pellets 
through  a  pipe,  with  no  more  strength  than  would  kill  a  sparrow.  He  that  *rouI^ 
hit  the  mark  must  draw  his  arrow  of  reproof  home.     The  hammer  of  the  worl 


CHAP.  IV.  J  COLOSSI  AN  8.  281 

breaks  not  the  heart  if  it  be  laid  lightly  on.  Be  the  reproof  never  so  gracioua,  and 
the  plaster  never  so  good,  it  will  be  ineffectual  if  not  Applied  to  the  patient  himself 
(2  Sam.  xii.  7  ;  Acts  ii.  B6-37).  (c)  Reprove  seasonably.  It  is  not  necessary  and 
convenient  at  all  seasons.  The  best  medicine  will  be  thrown  away  if  given  at  an 
nnfit  time.  A  fool  will  always  be  talking,  but  a  wise  man  will  keep  a  word  for 
afterward  (Prov.  xxix.).  Small  fish  are  twitched  up  with  the  violence  of  a  sudden 
pull,  when  the  like  action  would  break  the  line  whereon  a  great  one  hangs.  Fabius 
conquered  by  delaying,  but  CsB.sar  overcame  by  expedition,  (d)  Reprove  prudently 
(Prov.  XXV.  12) .  JEvery  mountebank  is  not  fit  for  this  office.  Have  respect  to  the 
quality  of  the  person.  Superiors  must  be  amended  by  exhortation,  equals  by 
friendly  admonition,  inferiors  by  gentle  reproof.  Have  respect  also  to  the  disposi- 
tion of  the  offender.  Some  in  their  fainting  fits  are  recovered  easily  with  sprinkling 
cold  water  on  their  faces,  others  must  be  rubbed  hard.  Some  men  are  like  briars, 
and  have  to  be  handled  gently  ;  others,  like  nettles,  have  to  be  dealt  with  roughly 
(Jude  22,  23).  The  sturdy  oak  will  not  be  so  easily  bent  as  the  gentle  willow. 
Respect  also  is  to  be  had  to  faults.  Wise  physicians  will  distinguish  between  a 
pimple  and  a  plague  sore.  Who  would  give  so  great  a  blow  to  kill  a  fly  as  to  kill 
an  ox  7  (e)  Reprove  compassionately.  The  iron  of  Asher's  shoes  were  dipped  in 
oil.  Reproofs  should  be  as  ointments  gently  rubbed  in  by  the  warm  fire  of  love. 
The  reprover  should  have  a  lion's  stout  heart  if  he  would  be  faithful,  and  a  lady's 
soft  hand,  or  he  is  not  likely  to  be  successful.  He  that  would  gather  fruit  must 
pluck  the  bough  gently  towards  him  ;  if  too  hard  he  may  break  it.  6.  Mourn  for 
the  sins  thou  canst  not  amend  (Psa.  cxix.  135  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  8).  {G.  Swinnock,  M.A.) 
The  duties  of  those  within  to  those  vcitlioxit : — Those  who  are  within  are  those  who 
have  "  fled  for  refuge  "  to  Christ,  and  are  within  the  fold,  the  fortress,  the  ark. 
Men  who  sit  safe  within  while  the  storm  howls,  may  simply  think  with  selfish  com- 
placency of  those  exposed  to  its  fierceness.  The  phrase  may  express  spiritual 
pride  and  even  contempt.  All  close  corporations  tend  to  generate  dislike  and 
scorn  of  outsiders,  and  the  Church  has  had  its  own  share  of  such  feeling  ;  but  there 
is  no  trace  of  anything  of  the  sort  here.  Rather  is  there  pathos  and  pity  in  the 
world,  and  a  recognition  that  their  sad  condition  gives  these  outsiders  a  claim  on 
Christian  men,  who  are  bound  to  go  out  to  their  help  to  bring  them  in.  Precisely 
because  they  are  "  without "  do  those  within  owe  them  a  wise  walk,  that  "  if  any 
will  not  hear  the  Word,  they  may  without  the  Word  be  won."  We  owe  them  such 
a  walk  as  may  tend  to  bring  them  in,  and  if  our  walk  does  not  seem  to  them  very 
attractive,  small  wonder  if  they  prefer  to  remain  where  they  are.  Let  us  take  care 
lest  instead  of  being  door-keepers  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  to  beckon  passers-by 
and  draw  them  in,  we  block  the  doorway,  and  keep  them  from  seeing  the  wonders 
within.      (A.   Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christian  deportment   towards  unbelievers: — 

•'  Toward  them  that  are  without,"  whatever  their  conduct,  appearance,  profession, 
we  must  '*  walk  in  wisdom."  They  may  be  within  the  circle  of  our  acquaintance, 
and  of  our  own  household.  While  we  feel  that  between  us  and  the  fellow  Christian 
who  was  but  yesterday  a  stranger  a  bond  stronger  than  death,  between  us  and  the 
object  of  our  warmest  human  love  there  is  a  wall  of  separation.  To  such  and  all 
"  without " — L  Do  YOUR  duty — your  daily  duty,  especially  in  little  things,  faith- 
fully. Do  what  is  right  for  you  as  a  man ;  and  what  is  right  for  you  as  a  man  is 
doubly  right  for  you  as  a  Christian.  And  you  are  doubly  in  the  wrong  if  yon  as  a 
Christian  man  are  not  scrupulously  honest,  if  you  give  way  to  rudeness,  irritability, 
vulgarity,  selfishness.  II.  Love  them — not  simply  their  souls.  We  do  not  read  of 
God  and  Christ  loving  people's  souls.  God  loved  the  world;  Christ  tasted  death 
for  every  man.  Be  human.  There  is  no  opposition  between  manhood  and  holiness. 
The  Holy  One  revealed  Himself  to  sinners  as  the  Son  of  Man,  one  of  themselves : 
and  this  was  the  secret  of  His  power.  III.  Be  natural — yourselves.  Do  not  have 
a  Christian  face  and  voice  taking  the  place  of  your  own.  Speak  plainly.  Christiana 
are  often  charged  with  affectation,  Unnaturalness  does  not  come  from  having  too 
much  religion,  but  from  not  having  enough.  What  could  be  more  natural  than  the 
words  and  ways  of  Christ  ?  IV.  Be  true — not  simply  do  not  tell  lies,  but  be 
transparent.  Let  men  be  able  to  see  through  you,  to  perceive  that  there  is  no  guile, 
no  hidden  motives,  that  while  you  profess  to  love  God  supremely  you  are  not  loving 
something  else  more  than  God.  V.  Be  humble.  Christ  was  meek  and  lowly  of 
heart " ;  and  what  ought  we  to  be  ?  Be  humble  under  a  sense  of  your  sinfulness 
and  under  the  weight  of  God's  mercies.  Do  not  try  to  impress  others  with  youi 
superiority,  or  you  will  make  the  contrary  impression.  VL  Be  holy.  Avoid 
the  least  appearance  of  evil.    Let  it  be  seen  from  your  conduct  that  your  religion 


281  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

is  not  a  matter  of  theory,  emotion,  talk,  but  a  matter  of  fact.  Bemember  what 
Peter  says  to  wives  who  have  unbelieving  husbands.  A  young  man  was  asked, 
"  Under  whose  preaching  were  you  converted  ?  "  "  Under  my  aunt's  practice,"  was 
the  reply.  VII.  Be  happy.  If  there  is  sunshine  on  your  countenances  others 
will  believe  that  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness  is  in  your  hearts.  But  if  we  speak 
about  that  Sun  and  they  never  see  anything  but  darkness  and  gloom  they  will 
not  believe.  VIII.  Be  kind.  Do  not  simply  love  them;  show  it  in  common 
or  rather  uTioommon  kindness.  Treat  men  as  Christ  treated  yoa.  He  never 
put  on  airs.  Eemember  how  he  treated  Zacchseus,  the  woman  of  Samaria, 
&e.  {A.  Monod,  D.D.)  The  wisdom  of  kindness  as  a  means  of  conversion: — 
There  was  an  infidel  who  was  dangerously  ill,  and  a  colporteur  went  to 
see  him.  The  man  would  not  receive  him,  and  asked  him  never  to  come 
again.  The  colporteur,  after  a  few  words,  left  the  house,  but  he  noticed  that 
the  man  was  very  poor.  There  seemed  to  be  none  of  the  things  necessary  to 
health  about  his  home.  What  did  the  colporteur  do?  He  did  not  go  and  write  an 
address  about  charity,  but  he  went  to  the  grocer's  and  he  sent  provisions  to  the 
man.  A  little  time  after,  he  went  again.  He  was  well  received.  The  man  said, 
"If  you  please,  sir,  was  it  yoa  who  sent  those  provisions?"  "Well,  yes,  it  was; 
but  do  not  let  us  talk  about  that."  "  It  was  very  kind  of  you.  I  treated  yon  with 
so  much  discourtesy,  and  you  were  so  good  to  me  1  My  unbelieving  friends,  who 
profess  to  love  me,  have  not  done  anything  for  me,  but  here  you  have  sent  me  these 
provisions.  Please  read  me  something  out  of  your  Book."  He  read  to  him,  and 
visited  bim  again  and  again.  Before  that  man  died  he  was  brought  to  a  knowledge 
of  Christ.  The  work  had  been  begun  by  an  act  of  kindness.  Pastor  Funcke,  of 
Bremen,  went  to  see  a  working-man,  whom  he  describes  as  a  tall,  strong  man,  with 
a  red  beard,  living  in  a  miserable  little  place,  up  a  flight  of  rickety  stairs.  The 
man  would  not  listen  to  him  at  all,  but  flew  into  a  passion,  saying:  "I  don't  want 
to  hear  anything  about  your  God.  I  don't  believe  there  is  a  God."  Then,  clench- 
ing his  fist,  he  said,  "This  is  my  god!"  and  bringing  it  down  on  the  table  with  a 
thump,  he  added :  •'  If  ever  I  find  yoa  on  these  premises  again,  I  will  put  my  god 
into  your  facel"  The  pastor  went  away,  but  a  few  days  later,  hearing  that  the 
man  was  out  of  employment,  he  busied  himself  in  finding  a  situation  for  him. 
By-and-by  the  man  heard  of  this.  He  went  to  him  and  said,  "  Is  it  true,  sir,  that 
you  took  the  trouble  to  find  me  this  employment?"  "Why,  yes,  it  is  true." 
"Well,"  he  said,  "all  Christians  are  not  hypocrites  I"  That  was,  to  him,  a 
discovery,  it  seems.  He  invited  the  pastor  to  his  house,  and  listened  to  him. 
"  And  now,"  says  Mr.  Funcke,  "  he,  his  wife,  and  children,  are  amongst  the  best  of 
my  church  members,  and  theirs  is  one  of  the  happiest  homes  in  the  parish." 
Surely,  this  was  "  walking  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  are  without."  Now  I  will 
give  you  a  fact  of  another  kind,  that  will,  perhaps,  meet  some  of  our  own  difficulties. 
It  was  told  me  by  the  sister  of  the  young  man  of  whom  I  am  about  to  speak.  H© 
had  a  pious  father.  They  lived  in  a  large  town.  One  day  he  asked  his  father  if  he 
might  go  to  the  theatre.  As  he  was  no  longer  a  mere  boy,  of  course  the  father 
could  not  prevent  him  from  going.  "  You  know  I  disapprove  of  these  things,"  he 
said;  "I  think  it  will  do  you  harm;  but,  of  course,  I  cannot  forbid  you  to  go." 
Well,  the  young  man  felt  rather  uncomfortable ;  however,  he  went.  He  came 
home  late  (it  was  a  winter  night),  just  expecting  to  grope  his  way  to  his  room. 
But  he  found  a  lighted  lamp,  a  bright  fire,  and  something  warm  to  eat  and  drink. 
His  father  did  not  wait  for  him,  and  that  was  also  wise;  it  would  have  seemed  as 
if  he  had  watched  for  his  return  to  lecture  him.  No ;  bat  he  had  made  ready  & 
welcome  for  him.  What  effect  did  that  have  ?  It  had  the  effect  of  drawing  that 
son's  heart  toward  his  father  more  than  anything  else  could  have  done,  and  of 
greatly  diminishmg,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  his  taste  for  the  theatre.  This  much  I 
know,  that  he  became  a  faithful  disciple  of  Christ,  and  was  about  to  enter  the 
minititry,  when  God  took  him  to  Himself,  several  years  ago.  {Ibid.)  Redeem- 
ing the  time.  Take  a  lesson  from — I.  The  merchant.  How  he  redeems  the 
time ;  by  wise  employment  of  capital,  by  sedulous  attention  to  his  business,  by 
sagacious  plans,  watchfulness  for  openings,  and  correct  balancing  of  his  affairs  from 
time  to  time.  Here  is  an  example  for  the  Christian,  who  should  augment  and 
employ  his  spiritual  capital  of  gifts  and  graces,  by  industry,  intelligence,  and  self- 
denial,  and  know  exactly  how  his  soul  stands  with  God.  U.  The  fabmeb.  Note 
his  knowledge  and  thrifty  management  of  his  stock  and  crops.  How  carefully  he 
prepares  the  ground  at  the  proper  season,  then  sows  the  seed,  then  removes  all 
obstractions  from  the  soil,  reaps  and  garners  the  harvest,  and  finally  seeks  the  best 


.  IV.]  COLOSSIANS.  f8S 

market  to  sell  it  in.  Where  would  the  farmer  be  but  for  his  constant  and  habitual 
redemption  of  time.  The  Christian  should  act  like  him  in  regard  to  the  Divine 
seed- wheat  in  his  own  mind  or  that  of  others  (Eccles.  xi.  6 ;  Isa.  xxxii.  20 ; 
Psa.  cxxvi.  6).  III.  The  stddent,  philosopher,  and  statesman.  No  man  ever  rose 
to  eminence  who  did  not  wisely  employ  his  time.  The  student  economizes  every 
moment  and  never  tires  in  his  researches.  The  philosopher  tests  by  science  and 
reason  the  mysteries  of  nature,  omitting  no  opportunity  or  detail.  And  thus  the 
gtatesman  studies  the  complicated  problems  of  politics  and  provides  for  their 
solution  in  season  and  out.  And  so  the  Christian  student,  the  eyes  of  whose 
understanding  are  opened,  ponders  Divine  truth.  The  Christian  philosopher  here 
learns  the  origin,  nature,  and  end  of  all  things.  And  the  Christian,  being  a  states- 
man, too,  feeds  on  schemes  of  advancement  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  in  each 
capacity  he  needs  to  redeem  the  time  ;  and  if  any  day  passes  without  embracing 
some  opportunity  for  learning  new  truth,  or  doing  some  fresh  good,  he  should  feel 
with  that  Eoman  Emperor  who  said,  ••  I  have  lost  a  day."  (J.  G.  Angley,  M.A.) 
Redeeming  the  time : — The  wheels  of  nature  are  not  made  to  roll  backward ;  every- 
thing presses  on  towards  eternity;  from  the  birth  of  time,  an  impetuous  current 
has  set  in,  which  bears  all  the  sons  of  men  towards  that  interminable  ocean. 
Meanwhile,  heaven  is  attracting  to  itself  whatever  is  congenial  to  its  nature,  is 
enriching  itself  by  the  spoils  of  earth,  and  collecting  within  its  capacious  bosom 
whatever  is  pure,  permanent,  and  Divine,  leaving  nothing  for  the  last  fire  to  con- 
sume but  the  objects  and  the  slaves  of  concupiscence ;  while  everything  which 
grace  has  prepared  and  beautified  shall  be  gathered,  from  the  ruins  of  the  world, 
to  adorn  the  eternal  city,  "  which  hath  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon,  to 
shine  in  it ;  for  the  glory  of  God  doth  enlighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  there- 
of." Let  us  obey  the  voice  that  calls  us  thither,  let  us  seek  the  things  that  are 
above,  and  no  longer  cleave  to  a  world  which  must  shortly  perish,  and  which  we 
mast  shortly  quit,  while  we  neglect  to  prepare  for  that  in  which  we  are  invited  to 
dwell  for  ever.  (Robert  Hall.)  The  redemption  of  time: — I.  The  importance  of 
TiuB.  This  may  be  inferred  from  the  names  given  it  in  Scripture — "The  day  of 
salvation,"  "The  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,"  "An  appointed  time."  It  is  the 
season  in  which  alone  the  business  of  religion  can  be  transacted.  Those  advise 
badly  who  say  "there  is  time  enough  yet,"  for  who  knows  what  a  day  may  bring 
forth.  It  may  be  longer  or  shorter,  but  the  day  of  salvation,  like  any  other,  is 
limited,  and  must  soon  come  to  an  end.  II.  The  rapidity  of  the  flight  of  ttue. 
"  Time  and  tide  wait  for  no  man."  The  little  we  have  on  hand  is  all  we  have,  and 
even  this  short  space  is  hurrying  on  so  fast  that  to  catch  it  is  like  dipping  your 
hand  in  a  running  stream  which  glides  through  the  fingers  that  would  detain  it. 
The  Egyptians  represented  it  as  a  serpent  creeping  on  silently  and  gliding  away 
imperceptibly.  And  yet  there  are  those  who  act  as  though  it  had  no  assignable 
limit.  III.  The  large  portion  of  our  time  lost.  The  season  of  boyhood — much 
of  which  was  wasted  in  indolence ;  the  season  of  youth — much  of  which  was  simply 
dissipated ;  the  season  of  riper  years — how  much  of  that  is  being  lost  in  the  pursuit 
of  shadows.  Some  misspend  time  because  they  have  no  proper  object  to  engage 
their  attention.  How  many  fashionable  people  there  are  who  are  quite  at  a  loss 
what  to  make  of  themseves.  Others  lose  much  time  in  mere  delays  and  in  expect- 
ing what  will  never  come.  IV.  Thk  best  means  of  bedeeminq  it.  1.  Misspend 
no  more.  Treasure  up  scraps  of  time.  He  who  is  prodigal  of  a  minute  spends  far 
above  his  estate.  2.  Rise  early.  3.  Husband  your  time  well  during  the  day.  {T. 
Watson,  B.A.)  The  redemption  of  time: — 1.  What  is  time?  (1)  Measured 
duration.  Hours,  days,  &o.,  are  measured  by  periodical  revolutions.  (2)  Successive 
dnration — past,  present,  to  come.  (3)  Limited  duration.  Time  was  not,  began, 
will  cease.  2.  Time  is  distinguished  from  eternity — which  is  absolute  duration, 
without  measure,  <&c.  3.  But  time  in  the  text  is  rather  special  seasons  and 
opportunities.  4.  To  redeem  (1)  in  the  common  notion  is  to  recover  by  some 
valuable  consideration  what  has  been  forfeited — property,  liberty,  yea,  our  souls,  by 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  This  cannot  apply  to  time,  because  no  consideration 
can  recover  the  smallest  portion  of  it  when  once  gone.  (2)  In  a  moral  sense  we 
may  redeem  it  by  a  carelul,  prayerful,  religious  improvement  of  what  remains. 
Time  ought  to  be  improved  because  —  L  Its  value  is  inexpressible.  We  argue 
the  worth  of  it — 1.  From  the  great  business  of  it.  (1)  As  regards  self.  Were  man  a 
mere  animated  piece  of  flesh  and  blood  he  would  have  some  plausibility  for  saying 
"Let  us  eat  and  drink,"  &c.  But  he  is  a  rational,  immortal,  and  accountable 
being,  and  the   great  business  of    time  is  to  get  ready  for  eternity.    It  is  not 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

necessary  that  we  should  be  rich,  great,  honourable ;  but  it  is  necessary  that  we 
should  be  saved.     "What  shall  it  profit,"  &c.     (2)  But  we  are  not  aloue,   and 
therefore  our  great  business  is  not  only  to  get  but  to  do  good  ;  not  only  to  work  out 
our  own  salvation,  but  to  promote  that  of    others.     2.  From  the  price  of  time. 
When  man  sinned  all  was  lust,  time  included,  but  the  forfeited  blessing  comes  back 
through  the  death  of  Christ.     3.  From  the  manner  in  which  providence  allots  ua 
time.     Common  things  may  be  obtained  in  large  quantities.     Not  so  things  that 
are  precious — a  grain  of  gold,  e.g.     So  time  is  not  dealt  out  in  large  portions.     No 
man  receives  a  year  at  once,  only  a  moment.     How  should  that  moment,  then,  b« 
improved.    4.  Shall  we    consult    the  wise,    great,  and    good    on     this    subject. 
Moses  (Psa.  xc.)  :  Solomon,  "Eemember  now  thy  Creator;  Christ,  "I  must  wcik,' 
&c. ;  that  Pagan  i^rince  who,  when  a  day  had  passed  without  a  good  deedj  exclaimed, 
"I  have  lost  a  day."     5.  Ask  death-beds.     "Doctor,"  said  a  dying  man,  "the 
whole  of  my  estate  for  half-an-hour,"  but  no,  the  whole  of  his  estate  could  not 
purchase  half  a  moment.     6.  Travel  to  the  regions  of  sorrow  and  despair.     How 
would  they  hail  a  second  probation  1     They  had  time,  they  abused  it ;  their  time  is 
gone.     7.  Travel  to  the  mansions  of  light.     The  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect 
are  there,  because  they  redeemed  the  time  for  the  purpose  of  preparing  for  eternity. 
II.  The  duration  of  tijie  is  short.     1.    How  frequently  we  express  ourselves 
incorrectly  on  this  subject.     A  man  who  has  been  unwell  for  a  few  weeks  says  h© 
has  been  ill  a  long  time.    But  no  portion  of  time  is  long  in  reference  to  eternity. 
There  is  some  comparison  between  an  atom  and  the  globe,  because  the  globe  only 
contains  so  many  atoms,  but  there  can  be  no  comparison  between  the  little  utom  of 
time  and  unmeasurable  eternity.     2.  If  time  be  short  comparatively,  what  is  the 
time  of  our  life.     "  The  time  is  short."     How  short.    Before  the  flood  some  lived 
nearly  one  thousand  years.    After  the  flood  there  was  a  reduction.     By  the  time  of 
Moses  the  period  was  seventy  or  eighty.    How  few  reach  even  that  now.    A  friend 
of  mine  once  ascertained  the  average  age  of  persons  buried  in  a  country  church- 
yard; it  was  fourteen  years.     Our  life  is  but  "a  step  between  us  and  death";  "a 
hand-breadth";   "a  weaver's  shuttle";  "grass";  "a  vapour."     Then  we  have 
not  a  moment  to  waste.     III.    Much  of  odr  shobt  time  has  elapsed.     1.   The 
morning  of  life  has  gone  with  many  of  us.    Prize  the  morning  of  life,  young 
people  t     It  is  the  best  part  of  the  day.     If  it  be  wasted  we  have  but  little  hope  of 
subsequent  periods.     "In  the  morning  sow  thy  seed."     When  it  was  morning  with 
many  of  us  how  impatient  we  were  to  have  it  noon  and  be  men.     2.  Noon  has 
come  and  gone,  and  it  seems  only  yesterday  that  we  were  young.     3.  Some  are  ia 
the  evening,  the  last  mile-stone  is  in  view,  the  taper  must  soon  expire,  and  the 
hour-glass  run  out.     A  man  may  regain  lost  health,  wealth,  friends,  but  never  time. 
Then  how  we  ought  to  redeem  what  remains.    IV.  What  remains  is  uncertain. 
We  can  ascertain  how  much  has  been  expended,  not  what  is  left.    The  rich  fool 
talked  of  years.     God  did  uot  talk  of  a  single  day.     "This  night."    How  numerous 
are  sudden  deaths.     "Lord,  teach  us  to  number  our  days."     V.  Nothing  can 
compensate  fob  the  loss  of  time.     A  wise  man  will  part  with  nothing  except  for 
its  value,  yet  many  part  with  time  for  nothing.     1.  For  folly,  vanity,  vice — time- 
consumers,  time-killers.     2.  For  any  kind  of  amusement-seeking  customers  to  take 
it  off  their  hands.     3.  For  business,  at  the  expense  of  the  true  riches.     4.  For 
honour,  at  the  expense  of  heaven's  patent  of  nobility.  But  none  of  us  are  absolutely 
bankrupt.     Time  remains — redeem  it.     VI.  God  has  made  eternity  to  depend  on 
TIME.     What  an  awful  thing,  then,  to  live.     "  Infinite  joy  or  endless  woe  attends  on 
every  breath."     {Robert  Newton,  D.D.)        The  merchandise  of  time: — The  word 
here  translated  "  redeem  "  literally  means  to  purchase  in  the  market,  and  ie  quite 
different  from  the  theological  term,  which  means  to  re-purchase.     Time  is  thus 
presented  to  us  as  a  precious  commodity.     I.  The  obligations  to  the  practice  of 
MAKING  merchandise  OF  TIME.     1.  On  the  mode  in  which  we  employ  our  time  our 
everlasting  destiny  depends.     One  of  the  plainest  principles  of  commerce  is  that 
any  commodity  is  desirable  in  proportion  to  the  returns  it  is  capable  of  securing. 
The  same  principle  applies  here.    The  everlasting  consequences  which  flow  from 
it  give  to  time  transcendent  value.     Were  it  not  for  these  we  might  say,  "Let  us 
eat  and  drink,"  &o.     Just  as  a  merchant,  then,  is  most  anxious  about  a  profitable 
bargain  so   ought  we  to   be  about  redeeming  the    time.     2.  Time  is  short  and 
uncertain.     In  commerce  the  rarity  of  an  article  enhances  its  value,  and  should 
any  doubt  exist  as  to  another  opportunity  for  procuring  it  the  merchant  is  pro- 
portionably  anxious  to  obtain  it  without  delay.     Had  we  for  certain  a  considerable 
period  to  live  in  oar  neglect  might  be  excused ;  but  as  it  is  we  are  bad  spiritual 


CHAP.  IV.]  COLOSSIANS.  286 

merchants  if  we  fail  to  redeem  the  time.  3.  Unless  you  check  the  progress  of  sin 
now  it  will  become  every  day  more  difficult,  and  eventually  become  impossible. 
What  merchant  would  allow  an  unprofitable  line  of  business  to  lengthen  out  as 
men  do  the  life  of  sin.  He  stops  promptly,  lest  by  delay  all  chance  of  retrieving 
hii  fortune  should  be  gone.    II.  Dibections  for  coiipiiYiNQ  with  the  exhortation. 

1.  Have  a  plan  or  system  for  the  distribution  of  time.  Every  man  of  business 
knows  the  importance  of  pre-arrangement  and  method.  How  much  more  so  is  this 
on  which  hang  such  infinite  issues.  In  your  plan  set  aside  time  for  devotion.  2. 
Beware  of  those  things  which  rob  you  of  the  best  portion  of  it.  (1)  Idleness.  (2) 
Undue  devotion  to  matters  of  subordinate  importance.  (3)  Overdone  amusements. 
8.  Watch  for  and  improve  those  occasions  in  which  you  can  best  promote  not  only 
your  own  eternal  interests  but  those  of  others,  and  particularly  of  your  family.  4. 
Accustom  yourselves  to  serious  and  impartial  self-examination.  Take  stock  as  men 
of  business  do.  (P.  Grant.)  The  right  use  of  time  : — If  this  year  is  to  be  more 
valuable  than  the  last,  we  must  more  carefully  attend  to  the  use  of  our  time.  I. 
When  to  use  time  rightly.     1.  Now.    The  present  moment  is  a  king  in  disguise. 

2.  While  it  is  oura.  The  past  is  a  memory  ;  the  future,  an  undivided  inheritance. 
8.  The  present  ia  the  only  moment  which  can  be  used.  II.  How  to  u^e  time 
rightly.  1.  By  a  circumspect  walk.  2.  By  wisdom  in  its  employment.  3.  By 
helpful  recreation.  Avoid  the  two  extremes  of  overwork  and  no  work.  4.  By  the 
redemption  of  every  fleeting  moment.  Take  care  of  the  seconds,  and  the  hours  will 
take  care  of  themselves.  Devote  it  all  to  God.  III.  Why  should  we  use  time 
rightly  f  1.  Because  of  its  value.  The  destiny  of  eternity  hangs  upon  a  moment 
of  time.  2.  The  time  is  short.  3.  When  lost  it  can  never  be  redeemed.  4.  All 
that  we  have  to  do  must  be  done  quickly.  5.  We  shall  have  to  account  for  our 
time.  IV.  Lessons  :  1.  We  shall  make  the  most  of  time,  if  we  work  in  it  with  zeal 
and  diligence.  2.  We  should  see  to  it  that  we  are  unreprovable  in  its  use  and  in 
our  work  and  recreation.  3.  We  should  seek  out,  and  not  merely  wait  for,  time  in 
which  to  benefit  others,  or  reprove  the  evils  of  our  day.  John  the  Baptist  reproved 
Herod  at  the  cost  of  his  head;  Jesus  freely  gave  Himself  for  us  all,  and  tha 
disciples  devoted  their  whole  lifetime  to  teaching,  preaching,  exhorting,  and  re- 
proving. 4.  We  should  learn  to  be  more  faithful  in  the  use  of  the  present,  because 
so  much  of  the  past  has  run  to  waste.  6.  Avoid  procrastination  and  building  air- 
oastles.  6.  Daily  examine  what  use  yon  have  made  of  your  time.  V.  Illdstbativb 
Scriptures.  Eccles.  viii.  5,  ix.  10,  xii.  1 ;  Bom.  xii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  29  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  2  ; 
Gal.  vi.  10  ;  Eph.  vi.  13  ;  Col.  iv.  6  ;  James  iv.  13-15  ;  1  Peter  i.  17 ;  Rev.  xxii.  20. 
(L.  0.  Thompson.)  The  value  of  time : — The  value  set  on  time  by  the  Duke  of  Wel- 
lington was  one  of  his  most  marked  characteristics.  He  once  wrote  to  Dr.  Hutton  for 
information  as  to  the  scientific  acquirements  of  a  young  oflBcer  who  had  been  under 
his  instructions.  The  doctor  thought  he  could  not  do  less  than  answer  the  question 
verbally,  and  made  an  appointment  accordingly.    Directly  the  Duke  saw  him  he 

eaid,  "  I  am  obliged  to  you,  doctor,  for  the  trouble  you  have  taken.     Is fit  for  the 

post?"    Clearing  his  throat  Dr.  Hutton  began,  "No  man  more  so;  I  can " 

"That's  quite  sufficient,"  said  Wellington,  "I  know  how  valuable  your  time  is; 
mine  just  now  is  equally  so.  I  will  not  detain  you  any  longer.  Good-morning." 
On  another  occasion  he  made  an  appointment  with  a  civio  dignitary  who  was  five 
minutes  late,  and  on  finding  the  Duke  watch  in  hand  and  very  angry,  pleaded,  "It 
is  only  five  minutes,  your  grace."  "  Only  five  minutes  1 "  he  replied,  "five  minutes 
unpunctuality  would  have  before  now  lost  me  a  battle."  Next  time  the  magnate 
took  care,  as  he  thought,  to  be  on  the  safe  side.  When  the  Duke  appeared  he 
greeted  him  rather  triumphantly.  "  You  see,  your  grace,  I  was  five  minutes  before 
yon  this  time."  "  Shows  how  little  you  know  time's  value,"  said  the  old  Field- 
Marshal,  "I  am  here  to  the  moment.  I  cannot  afford  to  waste  five  minutes." 
The  value  of  a  minister's  time : — An  American  clergyman  in  the  early  part  of  his 
ministry,  being  in  London,  called  upon  the  late  Matthew  Wilks.  He  received  him 
with  courtesy,  and  entered  into  conversation,  which  was  kept  up  briskly,  till  the 
most  important  religious  intelligence  in  possession  of  each  was  imparted.  Suddenly 
there  was  a  pause ;  it  was  broken  by  Mr.  Wilks.  "  Have  you  anything  more  to 
communicate?"  "No,  nothing  of  special  interest."  "Any  further  inquiries  to 
make?"  "None."  "Then  you  must  leave  me;  I  have  my  Master's  business  to 
attend  to.  Good-morning."  "  Here,"  says  the  minister,  "  I  received  a  lesson  on 
the  impropriety  of  intrusion,  and  the  most  manly  method  of  preventing  it."  (W. 
Baxendale.)  Wesley's  economy  of  time : — The  diligence  of  Mr.  Wesley  in  redeem- 
ing time  has  often  been  noticed ;  but  it  is  scarcely  possible  for  those  who  were  not 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

intimate  with  him  to  have  a  just  idea  of  his  faithfulness  in  this  respect.  In  many 
things  he  was  gentle  and  easy  to  be  entreated ;  in  this,  decided  and  inexorable. 
One  day  his  chaise  was  delayed  heyond  the  appointed  time  He  had  put  up  hia 
papers  and  left  the  apartment.  While  waiting  at  the  door  he  was  heard  to  say,  "  I 
have  lost  ten  minutes  for  ever."  (Ibid.)  Improve  the  moments  : — If  we  were  to 
see  a  woodman  felling  eight  large  trees  in  a  forest  every  week,  or  four  hundred 
every  year,  we  should  some  of  us  say,  "  What  a  pity  I "  yet  in  one  large  steam 
sawing-mill,  visited  by  Mr.  Mayhew,  that  was  just  the  number  employed  to  make 
lucifer  matches,  1,123,200,000  matches  were  made  in  one  year  out  of  the  above 
400  trees !  This  may  remind  one  of  the  remark  of  Howe,  "  What  a  folly  it  is  to 
dread  the  thought  of  throwing  away  one's  life  at  once,  and  yet  to  have  no  regard 
for  throwing  it  away  by  parcels  and  piecemeal ! "    {Bowes.) 

Yer.  6.  Let  you^  speech  be  alway  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt. — I.  Thb 
EXHORTATION.  1.  What :  Your  speech.  (1)  It  is  not  sufficient  to  order  our  life  and 
actions  well  unless  we  at  the  same  time  regulate  our  words  (James  i.  26).  (2)  Not 
only  is  there  danger  of  guilt  and  damnation  from  wicked  actions,  but  from  wicked 
speeches  (James  iii.  8 ;  Prov.  xviii.  21).  (3)  It  is  the  mark  of  a  perfect  Christian 
to  manage  his  discourse  rightly  (James  iii.  2).  2.  How  long :  always.  Whenever 
we  speak  we  must  speak  as  we  ought.  Hence  they  are  to  be  reproved  who  only 
speak  soberly  before  grave  men,  or  in  affliction.  While  in  their  banquets,  or  private 
conversation,  they  regard  it  as  a  privilege  to  talk  obscurely  or  foolishly.  8.  In 
what  manner :  with  grace  as  it  were  seasoned  with  salt,  i.e.,  with  religious  pru- 
dence flowing  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  first  directs  the  heart,  then  the  tongue. 
(1)  As  salt  extracts  noxious  humours  and  banishes  putresency  from  meat,  so  the 
grace  of  wisdom  represses  idle  language,  and  represses  wicked  and  impure  (Eph. 
iv.  20.)  (2)  As  salt  is  helpful  to  digestion,  so  wisdom  is  suited  to  edification  (Eccles. 
xii.  10.)  4.  Instructions  :  (1)  No  discourse  of  Christians  ought  to  be  insipid ;  but 
that  is  deemed  as  unsavoury  which  is  either  hurtful  or  unprofitable.  (2)  It  is  not 
sufficient  to  season  our  speech  with  any  any  kind  of  salt,  but  we  must  do  it  with 
the  salt  of  wisdom.  The  salt  of  satirical  virulence  must  be  discarded,  and  that  of 
jocularity  be  used  sparingly.  (3)  They  are  altogether  destitute  of  this  salt  who 
blab  out  words — (a)  corruptmg  the  mind  by  heresy  and  doubt ;  (6)  corrupting  the 
heart  by  obscure  or  irreligious  sayings.  For  it  is  the  office  of  salt  to  restrain  not 
to  promote  corruption.  II.  The  amplification.  1.  The  fountain  of  sound  speech: 
knowledge  drawn  from  the  Word  of  God,  laid  up  in  the  speaker's  mind.  "  That 
ye  may  know."  2.  Its  use — '*  that  it  may  be  answered  to  every  man  as  it  isfit,"i.e., 
(1)  To  unbelievers  requiring  a  reason  of  our  faith,  constantly  and  prudently,  lest  we 
expose  religion  to  ridicule.  (2)  To  heretics  impugning  the  faith,  vigorously  and 
bravely  to  maintain  religion.  (3)  To  the  ignorant,  that  we  may  impart  saving  know- 
ledge. (4)  To  the  afflicted,  that  we  may  minister  comfort.  3.  Corollaries:  (1)  All 
Christians  must  endeavour  to  obtain  that  knowledge  of  Divine  things  which  may 
guide  them  to  render  a  reason  for  their  faith  (1  Pet.  iii.  15;  2  Cor.  viii.  7).  (2) 
Hence  the  wickedness  and  folly  of  Romanists  who  would  take  away  the  salt  of  the 
Divine  Word  from  the  people.  {Bp.  Davenant.)  Gracious  speech: — I.  The 
PRECEPT  deals  with  the  properties  of  speech,  1.  Graciousness.  (1)  In  respect  to 
the  cause  good  words  are  gracious,  (a)  Because  they  flow  from  the  free  grace  of 
God  without  our  merit,  for  we  do  not  deserve  to  be  trusted  with  a  single  good  word. 
Reason  yields  us  conceits,  and  nature  an  instrument  to  ppeak  by,  but  it  is  the  God 
of  nature  by  His  free  grace  that  gives  us  good  words,  (b)  Our  words  ought  to  pro- 
ceed from  some  grace  of  God  in  the  heart,  as  from  knowledge,  faith,  joy,  love, 
sorrow,  fear,  &c.,  and  in  this  sense,  when  on  the  tongue,  they  carry  the  name  of 
the  fountain  whence  they  flow.  ("2)  In  respect  of  the  subject:  the  matter  we  talk 
of  must  be  good,  words  of  instruction,  conifort,  faith,  hope,  &c.,  and  all  seasoned 
by  the  daily  memory  and  mention  of  God's  grace  to  us  in  Christ  (Psa.  xl.  11.) 
(3)  In  respect  of  the  effect :  such  as  tend  to  build  up  and  minister  grace  to  the 
hearers  (Eph.  iv.  29).  (a)  Fair  words,  (b)  Inoffensive  words  and  not  railing, 
bitter,  slanderous,  blasphemous,  or  filthy:  no,  nor  even  such  jesting  words  as 
irritate,  disgrace,  and  bite,  (c)  Seasonable  words  (Prov.  xv.  23).  (d)  Wholesome 
words  (Eph.  iv.  29).  2.  Powdered  with  salt.  The  reference  is  to  the  salt  of 
sacrifice,  and  the  salt  of  preservation.  (1)  It  is  implied  that  there  are  corrupt 
words  which  want  seasoning,  (a)  The  talk  of  the  covetous  is  of  mammon,  (b) 
Epicures  talk  of  sports  and  pleasures,  (c)  The  superstitious  of  the  signs  of 
heaven,  do.     {d)  The  wrathful  of  vengeance,    (e)  The  ambitious  of  their  pros- 


CHAP.  IT.]  COLOSSIANS.  J87 

peots.  (2)  Christians  must  seasoa  this  corruption,  (a)  There  is  the  salt  of  doc* 
trine,  whereby  those  who  have  it  become  the  salt  of  the  earth,  (b)  The  salt  of 
mortihcation,  which  every  Christian  must  have  in  himself,  (c)  The  salt  of  dis- 
cretion (James  iii.  2).  II.  The  end  of  the  precept — "  That  ye  may  know  how  to 
answer."  Observe,  in  general,  that  by  speaking  well  we  learn  to  speak  well ;  and 
that  the  soundest  knowledge  is  experimental.  Ue  knows  not  how  to  answer  that 
practice  himself,  no  matter  how  many  arguments  he  may  have  in  his  head.  To 
answer  does  not  always  mean  to  reply,  but  sometimes  to  continue  to  speak  (Matt. 
xi.  25).  1.  As  to  answering  unbelievers.  Notice — (1)  True  grace  is  sure  to  be 
opposed  ;  let  therefore  every  Christian  expect  it,  and  be  prepared  for  it.  (2)  Every 
Christian  ought  to  answer  for  the  truth  wherever  and  by  whomsoever,  opposed. 
(3)  It  is  not  easy  to  answer  well,  therefore  note  the  requisities — (a)  Deliberation 
and  understanding  of  the  matter,  (b)  Prayer  (Frov.  xvi.  1 ;  Habak  ii.  1).  (c) 
Faith  in  God's  favour  and  promise  (Matt.  x.  19  ;  Psa.  cxix.  41-42),  (d)  Discretion 
concerning  time,  place,  occasion,  persons  (Prov,  xxv.  11 ;  xxvi.  4,  6).  (e)  Patience. 
(/)  Humility,  (g)  A  good  conscieuce  (1  Pet.  15,  16).  2.  As  to  answering  be- 
lievers, observe  that — (1)  Christians  should  propound  their  doubts  one  to  another. 
(2)  Strong  Christians  should  help  the  weak  with  instruction  and  arguments  (liom. 
ii.  19).  (3)  However  hard  all  answers  should  be  gracious,  seasonable,  and  profit- 
able. (4)  Custom  in  gracious  speech  breeds,  by  God's  blessing,  an  ability  to  give 
Bound  judgment,  advice,  and  resolution  of  doubts.  It  is  not  wit,  learning,  or 
authority,  that  breeds  this.  (..V.  Byjield. )  The  right  use  of  speech  : — When  we 
consider  the  importance  of  speech,  the  ease  with  which  we  speak,  and  the  pleasure 
we  derive  from  this  faculty,  no  wonder  so  much  labour  has  been  taken  to  improve 
it.  Hundreds  of  rhetoricians  have  giving  rules  respecting  "  the  art  of  speaking 
well."  But  that  is  really  a  Christian  grace.  Christianity  alone  lays  down  the 
fundamental  rules  of  good  speaking,  and  puts  us  in  the  way  of  doing  most  good 
with  the  talent  of  speech.  I.  Thb  precept  shows — 1.  The  character  of  Christian 
converse.  It  must  be  gracious.  (1)  Good  words  flow  from  grace  no  less  than  good 
deeds.  When  God  gave  you  a  new  heart  He  gave  you  a  new  tongue.  Words  are 
the  pictures  of  thought,  and  "  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth 
speaketh."  When  grace  is  in  the  heart  means  will  be  employed  to  forward  the 
work  of  grace  in  others  (Psa.  Ixvi.  16).  (2)  Speech  is  always  to  be  with  grace,  not 
now  and  then.  How  many  Christians  there  are  whose  words  at  times  are  all  they 
ought  to  be,  and  at  others  the  reverse.  2.  Its  properties — '*  seasoned  with  salt." 
(1)  Salt  is  an  article  of  food,  so  our  conversation  should  be  morally  and  in- 
tellectually nutritive.  (3)  Salt  gives  a  relish  to  ordinary  food.  How  helpful  may 
converse  be  in  making  the  dry  monotonies  of  life  and  the  hard  fare  of  affliction 
palatable.  (3)  Salt  preserves,  and  so  should  speech  preserve  the  family,  neigh- 
bourhood, country.  How  many  a  family,  society,  nation,  have  been  preserved  from 
corruption  by  the  wise  counsels  of  a  father,  citizen,  statesman.  (4)  Salt  heals 
(2  Kings  ii.  21),  and  so  a  few  gracious  words  of  meekness  have  healed  the  most 
serious  breaches.  '*  A  soft  answer  turneth  away  wrath."  II.  Tub  end  and  use  or 
THE  pbeobpt — "  That  ye  may  know,"  &o.  How  much  wisdom  is  needed  for  this. 
Many  a  good  man  has  done  much  mischief  for  want  of  prudence  here ;  by  ill- 
timed  zeal,  dogmatism,  offensive  statement  of  truth,  wrangling  discussion.  For 
the  better  ordering  of  speech — 1.  Consider  the  end  of  it  Speech  was  not  given  to 
man  for  God's  sake.  He  can  tell  the  meaning  of  the  heart  without  words  ;  nor  for 
our  own  sakes — it  is  unnecessary  for  the  perception  of  individual  wants ;  but  for  the 
benefit  of  others.  Becollect,  then,  when  you  open  your  lips  that  it  should  be  for 
the  good  of  those  who  hear  you.  2.  Meditate  before  speaking.  '*  If  you  think 
twice  before  you  speak  once,  you  will  speak  twice  the  better  for  it."  8.  Be  moderate 
in  speech.  It  is  evident  by  the  design  of  providence  that  the  faculty  of  speech 
should  be  used  less  than  most  others.  We  have  but  one  tongue,  but  two  ears,  two 
eyes,  &o.  "Let  thy  words  be  few."  "Let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slow  to 
speak."  "A  fool  is  known  by  the  multitude  of  words."  The  weakest  minds  are 
often  the  most  garrulous  ;  they  unconsciously  make  up  in  number  of  words  what 
they  lack  in  wisdom;  whereas  the  wisest  try  to  say  much  in  few  words.  There  is 
far  the  most  depth  where  there  is  least  noise.  (T.  Watson,  B^.)  Conversation: — 
L  By  aPBBOB  with  obace  the  apostle  does  not  mean  what  is  so  often  miscalled 
religions  conversation.  This  is  good  in  fit  time  and  place,  and  to  proper  persons. 
But  it  is  distasteful  and  injurious  when  obtruded  unseasonably ;  worthless  when  it 
nms  into  perplexing  technicalities ;  offensive  when  it  degenerates  into  unmeaning 
tmai ;  misohievoas  when  it  feeds  the  habit  of  morbid  introspection.    But  there  is 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOB.  [cha*.  it. 

a  grace  which,  blending  with  speech,  on  all  sorts  of  subjects  and  occasions,  may 
make  the  whole  intercourse  of  life  religious.  Our  Saviour  at  Bethany  would  not 
talk  with  His  friends  only  on  God  and  heaven,  but  about  their  earthly  concerns  and 
friends ;  yet  there  was  that  in  all  His  words  which  indicated  Him  as  the  Holy  One 
of  God,  The  traits  of  grace  which  should  mark  the  conversations  of  Christiams 
are — 1.  Truth.  The  Christian  has,  of  course,  put  away  lying;  yet  there  are 
excellent  persons  who  are  careless  as  to  exact  and  literal  truth,  on  whose  lips 
a  surmise  takes  the  place  of  a  fact,  and  who,  while  they  would  not  for  their  right 
hand  make  a  lie  for  themselves,  are  not  equally  scrupulous  about  lies  made  by 
others,  or  those  which  grow  from  tongue  to  tongue.  Yet  there  is  no  deviation  from 
truth  which  may  not  either  do  mischief  to  others,  or  reflect  on  hitu  who  gives  it 
currency.  How  few  confine  themselves  to  what  they  know  I  There  are  so  many 
things  outside  this  limit  which  give  zest  to  social  intercourse ;  while  literal  speech 
is  so  jejune  and  dull.  Yet  speech  thus  weighed  may  save  from  fearful  complicity 
in  evil.  2.  Sincerity — (1)  in  the  expression  of  opinions.  On  many  subjects  on 
which  the  clear  utterance  of  all  who  think  soberly  would  be  as  efficient  in  de- 
molishing the  wrong  and  establishing  the  right  as  Joshua's  trumpet  blast,  good 
men  pause  to  listen  when  they  ought  to  speak,  or  speak  ambiguously  so  that  their 
words  may  seem  to  favour  the  winning  side.  Hence  public  opinion  on  subjects  of 
prime  importance  is  manufactured  by  those  interested  in  the  wrong.  No  moral 
force  is  so  mighty  as  outspoken  Christian  opinion.  It  is  a  trust,  therefore,  for  the 
common  good,  and  should  be  used — (2)  In  the  expression  of  feeling.  Silence  or 
sincerity  should  be  the  alternative.  Bad  feeling  ought  not  to  be  uttered,  but  while 
it  rankles  in  the  heart  it  ought  not  to  be  forced  into  hypocritical  utterance.  Let 
the  artifice  which  gives  truth-like  expression  to  the  proper  feelings  we  do  not  feel 
be  exchanged  into  the  endeavour  to  suppress  in  our  heaits  all  we  should  blush  to 
otter.  But  every  genuine  emotion  demands  and  merits  unconstrained  expression. 
Admii'ation,  enthusiasm,  love  of  beauty,  all  kindly  sympathies,  by  natural  and 
hearty  utterance  gain  strength,  and  bless  those  who  speak  and  those  who  hear ; 
while  he  who  keeps  right  feehngs  under  a  perpetual  restraint  becomes  the  cold  and 
passionless  clod  he  tries  to  seem.  3.  Kindness.  (1)  The  tongue  is  the  chief  instru- 
ment of  and  hindrance  to  charity.  What  is  charity  without  it  ?  It  is  only  the  very 
abject  that  can  enjoy  mere  alms,  and  what  is  coldly  or  chidingly  given  starves  and 
chills  the  soul  whUe  it  feeds  and  warms  the  body  :  whereas  there  are  words  which 
bless  even  the  poor  more  than  gifts,  by  imparting  inspiration  and  awakening  hope. 
(2)  In  ordinary  social  life,  too,  kind  speech  is  demanded  beyond  all  other  forms  of 
kindness.  More  unhappiness  is  caused  through  unkind  speech  than  through  all 
else  combined.  What  beneficent  agency  can  be  compared  with  that  of  him  or  her 
in  whose  ears  all  scandal  lies  buried,  and  whose  lips  are  hollowed  for  gentle 
ministries  of  encouragement  and  refinement.  (3)  It  is  not  enough  that  we  pull  up 
all  roots  of  bitterness  from  the  heart.  There  is  not  a  little  of  tinkind  speech 
that  is  not  meant  to  be  so.  The  fibres  of  human  feeling  are  tremulously  sensitive 
to  our  unskilled  touch.  4.  Modesty.  "  In  honour  preferring  one  another  "  is  a 
rule  for  conversation.  The  opinionativeness  which  always  knows  it  is  right  and 
everybody  else  wrong ;  self-assertion,  the  ambition  for  effect  barely  tolerable  in 
genius  are  disgusting  in  mediocrity.  Mutual  instruction  and  entertainment  are 
the  chief  uses  of  conversation,  and  these  ends  are  defeated  when  one  assumes  as 
his  the  right  to  be  an  oracle.  6.  Beverence.  When  the  tone  of  reverence  is  low, 
there  is  a  vicious  tendency  to  introduce  sacred  things  to  give  raciness  to  an  anec- 
dote, or  to  point  a  jest.  But  when  the  natural  track  of  conversation  leads  near  the 
oracles  of  God,  there  should  always  be  in  our  speech  that  which  corresponds  to  the 
taking  off  of  the  shoes  of  our  feet  on  holy  ground,  II.  Speech  seasoned  with 
BALT,  i.e.,  not  insipid,  as  talk  is  that  is  only  negatively  good.  1.  Its  importance. 
It  is  frequently  lack  of  salt  that  has  brought  religious  conversation  into  disrepute. 
The  more  grace  there  is  in  the  words  the  more  salt  do  they  need  to  make  them 
palatable,  and  to  render  them  worthy  of  themes  so  high.  In  the  intercourse  ol 
daily  life  there  is  a  willingness  merely  to  fill  up  the  time  with  a  continuous  flow  of 
words,  no  matter  with  how  little  wit  or  sense  or  even  freshness.  But  the 
Christian  should  regard  the  capacity  for  conversation  as  a  talent  to  be  employed  for 
precious  uses.  More  than  anything  else  it  makes  home  attractive,  gives  a  charm  to 
society,  and  counteracts,  when  well  employed,  the  charm  of  vicious  society.  2. 
Its  cultivation.  In  order  to  talk  well  (1)  we  must  not  enter  into  conversation 
lazily  and  listlessly.  It  is  not  thus  that  we  engage  in  other  recreations,  the  best  ol 
which  are  only  varied  employments.    (2)  We  need  to  train  ourselves  and  should 


CHAP.  IT.]  COLOSSIANS.  289 

keep  ourselves  abreast  of  oarrent  topics,  and  so  exercise  our  minds  upon  them  that 
we  may  not  reproduce  the  hackneyed  commonplaces  of  the  press  and  street.  (3) 
We  need  to  read  much  and  well  with  a  view  of  being  conversant  with  what  every- 
body is  ready  to  talk  about,  and  to  have  our  own  speciality  from  which  we  can 
contribute  to  the  common  stock  of  knowledge.  (4)  Then  as  to  conversational 
power  there  is  the  widest  difference  between  him  who  moves  ever  as  in  a  blind  study, 
and  him  who  goes  through  life  with  his  eyes  and  ears  wide  open.  The  incidents  of 
a  walk  through  crowded  streets  or  country  lanes,  the  treasured  experiences  of  dis- 
tant travel,  the  curious  information  gleaned  from  transient  fellow-wayfarers,  the 
contents  of  an  old  book  may  add  largely  to  one's  materials  for  pleasant  and 
appetising  conversation.  (5)  We  must  throw  ourselves  unreservedly  into  social 
intercourse  instead  of  keeping  up  our  own  insulated  trains  of  thought,  listening  by 
snatches,  and  answering  at  haphazard.  If  we  want  to  meditate  let  it  be  in  soli- 
tude. If  we  talk,  that  is  our  work  for  the  time  being,  and  let  us  put  our  best  into 
it.  If  the  theme  be  grave,  let  it  have  our  ripest  thoughts  in  well- weighted  utter- 
ance; if  gay,  let  us  contribute  what  we  can  of  mirth.  III.  Bat  with  the  salt 
NKVEB  roROET  THE  GRACE.  Not  mere  amusement  is  the  Christian's  aim,  but  edifi- 
cation, i.e.,  building  up  the  social  edifice  with  its  substantial  foundation,  JErame,  and 
walls  of  solid  principle,  with  its  firm  fretwork  and  tracery  that  shall  lack  no 
element  of  beauty.  There  are  occasions  on  which  he  must  speak  directly  in 
defence  of  the  truth  and  plead  his  Master's  cause,  and  sometimes  deal  out  rebuka 
But  there  are  more  numerous  occasions  when,  with  a  heart  always  loyal,  he  can 
serve  the  cause  of  virtue  much  more  efficiently  by  talking  on  common  subjects  in 
•  Christian  way,  and  by  droppmg  unostentatiously,  ever  and  anon,  a  word  in  season 
that  may  be  a  seed-thought  for  a  spiritual  harvest.  (A.  P.  Feabody,  D.D.) 
Christ'i  truth  in  relation  to  our  daily  conversation : — L  The  labob  spacb  which 
WORDS  OCCUPY  Dj  HDMAN  LITE.  1.  On  account  of  their  number.  Great  part  of 
human  life  is  passed  in  talking.  How  many  millions  of  words  are  uttered  in  the 
course  of  a  long  human  Ufe.  2.  On  account  of  their  consequences.  There  are 
many  things  which  are  very  easy  to  do,  but  the  effects  of  which  will  last  for  ages. 
It  is  easy  to  sow  an  acorn,  it  is  soon  done ;  but  the  growth  of  the  acorn  is  not  soon 
done ;  it  becomes  an  oak,  which  will  defy  the  tempests  of  a  thousand  years.  The 
conflagration  of  Chicago  was  very  soon  done.     II.  The  impobtancb  of  speciaIi 

SELE-EXAMINATION   IN    REFERENCE   TO   OUB   WORDS.          III.    EaENEST   LISTENINO    TO   THE 

Divine  voices,  the  cube  fob  vain  speech  and  the  sodbce  of  obacious  speech.  1. 
The  cure  for  vain  speech.  St.  James  says,  "  Be  ye  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak." 
2.  The  source  of   gracious  speech.      IV.  Odb  words  abb  not  to  bb  all  about 

BELIOION,  but  to  BB  PERVADED  BY  THE  SPIRIT  OF  BELIOION.  V.  GUB  CONVERSATION 
BXINO    TBCB    SEASONED,    WX    SHALL    ENOW   HOW    WE    OUOHT    TO    ANSWEB    EVEBY    UAN. 

(R.  Abercrombie,  M.A.)  Speech  seasoned  with  salt: — That  does  not  mean  the 
"Attic  salt  of  wit."  There  is  nothing  more  wearisome  than  the  talk  of  men  who 
are  always  trying  to  be  piquant  and  brilliant.  Such  speech  is  like  a  **  pillar  of 
•alt,"  it  sparkles,  but  is  cold,  and  has  points  that  wound,  and  it  tastes  bitter.  That 
is  not  what  Paul  recommends.  I.  Salt  was  used  in  sacrifice.  Let  the  sacrificial 
salt  be  applied  to  all  our  words,  i.e.,  let  all  we  say  be  offered  to  God,  "  a  sacrifice 
of  praise  to  God  continually."  II.  Salt  preserves.  Put  into  your  speech  what 
will  keep  it  from  rotting.  "Let  no  corrupt  communication  proceed  out  of  your 
month."  Frivolous  talk,  dreary  gossip,  ill-natured,  idle,  to  say  nothing  of  foul  and 
wicked  words,  will  be  silenced  when  your  speech  is  seasoned  with  salt.  III.  Salt 
•ITES  SAVOUB  TO  FOOD.  Do  Hot  deal  in  insipid  generalities,  but  suit  your  words  to 
your  hearers,  "  that  ye  may  know,"  &e.  Speech  that  tits  close  to  the  character- 
istics and  wants  of  the  people  to  whom  it  is  spoken  is  sure  to  be  interesting,  but 
that  which  does  not  will  for  them  be  insipid.  Commonplaces  that  hit  full  against 
the  hearer  will  be  no  commonplaces  to  him,  and  the  most  brilliant  words  that  do 
not  meet  his  minds  or  needs  will  to  him  be  tasteless  "  as  the  white  of  an  egg." 
Individual  peculiarities,  then,  must  determine  the  wise  way  of  approach  to  each 
man,  and  there  will  be  a  wide  variety  of  methods.  Paul's  language  to  the  wild  hill 
tribes  of  Lycaonia  was  not  the  same  as  to  the  cultivated,  curious  crowd  on  Mara 
Hill,  and  his  sermons  in  the  synagogues  have  a  different  tone  from  his  reaionings 
before  Felix.  IV.  Salt  has  to  be  rubbed  in  if  it  is  to  do  any  good.  Preaching 
to  a  congregation  has  its  own  place  and  value ;  but  private  and  personal  talk, 
honestly -and  wisely  done,  will  effect  more  than  the  most  eloquent  preaching. 
Better  to  drill  the  seeds,  dropping  them  one  by  one  into  the  little  pits  made  for  theii 
reception,  than  to  sow  them  broadcast.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)      Seasoning  a  letter  >— 

19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cmr.  r^ 

I  have  read  of  a  lady  who,  writing  to  a  young  man  in  the  navy,  ihonght,  "  Shall 
I  close  this  as  anybody  would,  or  shall  I  say  a  word  for  my  Master  ?  "  and,  lifting 
up  her  heart  for  a  moment,  she  wrote,  telling  him  that  his  constant  change  of 
scene  and  place  was  an  apt  illustration  of  the  Word,  "  Here  we  have  no  continuing 
city,"  and  asked  if  he  could  say,  "I  seek  one  to  come."  Trembling  she  folded  it, 
and  sent  it  off.  Back  came  the  answer :  "  Thank  you  so  much  for  those  kind 
words.  I  am  an  orphan,  and  no  one  has  spoken  to  me  like  that  since  my  mother 
died,  long  years  ago."  The  arrow,  shot  at  venture,  hit  home,  and  the  young  man 
shortly  after  rejoiced  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  peace.  A 
word  spoken  in  season : — A  clergyman  sailing  up  the  Hudson  Kiver  in  a  sloop,  some 
forty  years  since,  was  pained  by  the  profaneness  of  a  young  man.  Seeking  a 
favourable  opportunity,  he  told  him  he  had  wounded  his  feelings  by  speaking 
against  his  best  friend — the  Saviour.  The  young  man  showed  no  relentings,  and 
at  one  of  the  landings  left  the  boat.  Seven  years  after,  as  this  clergyman  went  ta 
the  General  Assembly  at  Philadelphia,  a  young  minister  accosted  him,  saying  he 
thought  he  remembered  his  countenance,  and  asked  him  if  he  was  not  on  board  & 
sloop  on  the  Hudson  Biver,  seven  years  before,  with  a  profane  young  man.  "  I," 
said  he,  "  am  that  young  man.  Aiter  I  left  the  sloop  I  thought  I  had  injured  both 
you  and  your  Saviour.  I  was  led  to  Him  for  mercy,  and  I  felt  that  I  must  preach 
His  love  to  others.  I  am  now  in  the  ministry,  and  have  come  as  a  representative 
to  this  Assembly."  (British  Workman.)  Salt: — Do  not  mistake  vinegar  for  oil, 
or  pepper  for  salt.  "  Seasoned  with  salt."  Let  it  be  tasteful  and  savoury.  I 
read,  quite  lately,  a  most  striking  incident,  showing  the  power  of  grace  seasoned 
with  salt  in  speaking  a  timely  word  to  one  that  was  without.  An  officer  in  your 
army  was  led  to  help  a  lady  who  was  an  earnest  worker  among  soldiers.  One  even- 
ing,  after  helping  at  a  soldiers'  tea,  he  came  to  her,  evidently  much  excited,  and 
Baid,  "  I  have  almost  made  up  my  mind  that  I  will  never  come  here  again."  She 
expressed,  of  course,  her  regret,  and  asked  what  had  happened.  "  Oh,  So-and-so 
has  been  at  me  about  coming  here  as  I  do,  and  being  such  a  card-player  as  I  am. 
But  I  can't  give  up  my  cards ;  that  I  shall  never  do."  "  Oh,"  said  the  lady,  "  I  am 
Borry  that  you  have  been  spoken  to  in  that  way.  You  can't  give  up  your  cards.  I 
should  never  ask  you  to  do  that.  Why,  it  is  all  you  have  got.  You  must  have 
Eomething."  Well,  that  was  "grace  seasoned  with  salt,"  for  it  brought  him  to  him- 
self. He  saw  that  if  that  card-playing  was  taken  from  him  he  had  nothing  left ; 
and  he  had  no  rest  until  the  love  of  Jesus  had  delivered  him  from  the  love  of  the 
world.  (A.  Monod,  D.D.)  A  turn  in  the  talk: — I  shall  never  forget  the  way  a 
thirsty  individual  once  begged  of  me  on  Clapham  Common.  I  saw  him  with  a  very 
large  truck  in  which  he  was  carrying  a  very  small  parcel,  and  I  wondered  why  he 
bad  not  put  the  parcel  in  his  pocket  and  left  the  machine  at  home.  I  said,  "  It 
looks  odd  to  see  so  large  a  truck  for  so  small  a  load."  He  stopped,  and,  looking  me 
seriously  in  the  face,  he  said,  "  Yes,  sir,  it  is  a  very  odd  thing ;  but  do  you  know  I 
have  met  with  an  odder  thing  than  that  this  very  day.  I  have  been  about  working 
and  sweating  all  this  'ere  blessed  day,  and  till  now  I  haven't  met  a  single  gentleman 
that  looked  as  if  he'd  give  me  a  pint  of  beer  till  I  saw  you."  I  considered  that 
turn  in  the  conversation  very  neatly  managed ;  and  we,  with  a  far  better  subject 
npon  our  minds,  ought  to  be  equally  able  to  introduce  the  topic  on  which  our  heart 
is  set.  There  was  an  ease  in  the  man's  manner  which  I  envied,  for  I  did  not  find 
it  quite  so  simple  a  matter  to  introduce  my  own  topic  to  his  notice ;  yet  if  I  had 
been  thinking  as  much  about  how  I  could  do  him  good  as  he  had  upon  how  to 
obtain  a  drink,  I  feel  sure  I  should  have  succeeded  in  reaching  my  point.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Wise  words  spoken  in  reason : — Travelling  by  diligence  from  Geneva 
to  Dole  with  a  Eoman  Catholic,  I  said  to  him,  simply,  "  I  should  like  to  speak  to 
you  about  your  soul,  but  I  don't  know  how  to  go  about  it."  "  Well,  sir,  go  on," 
Baid  the  man,  heartily.  I  continued,  or  rather  we  continued,  and,  on  leaving 
him,  I  had  the  happiness  of  hearing  him  thank  God  for  having  made  some  one 
epeak  to  him  of  salvation,  and  he  begged  me  to  send  him  a  Bible.  In  general,  I 
have  found  that  if  one  commences  a  conversation  of  this  kind  with  kindness  and- 
politeness,  one  will  be  always  listened  to.  This  is,  besides,  the  only  way  to  suc- 
ceed. (C.  Malan.)  Religion  in  conversation: — "  What  awakened  you  ?"  said  a 
Christian  minister  on  one  occasion  to  a  young  friend.  "  It  was  what  you  said  to 
me  one  evening  coming  oat  of  the  lecture-room.  As  you  took  me  by  the  hand,  yoo 
Baid,  '  Mary,  one  thing  is  needful.'  Yon  said  nothing  else,  and  passed  on ;  but  I 
could  not  forget  it."  It  was  a  word  spoken  in  the  Spirit,  and  the  Lord  accompanied! 
it  with  saving  power,     The  Bcolptor,  Bacon,  being  an  earnest  Christian,  used  to 


CHAP.  IV.]  COLOSSIANS.  291 

•eek  opportunitieB  of  introdaoing  religion  into  his  conversation.  On  one  of  these 
occasions,  the  lady  he  addressed,  said,  "  As  to  that,  my  religion  is  to  fear  God, 
and  keep  His  commandments ;  so  we  will  talk  no  more  on  such  matters."  Bacon 
replied, "  But,  madam,  you  will  recollect  it  is  said,  '  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake 
often  one  to  another.'  "    [J.  F.  B.  Tinling.) 

Vers.  7-11.  All  my  state  shall  T^cMcus  declare  unto  yon. — Christian  commenda- 
tions arid  salutations  : — "  What  is  in  a  name  1 "  Nothing,  is  the  ordinary  reply,  but 
there  may  be  much.  The  names  of  Solomon,  Alexander,  Napoleon,  and  Paul  are 
associated  with  important  events  in  history.  Each  is  a  record,  and  stirs  up 
admiration,  desire,  dislike,  or  sorrow  as  the  case  may  be.  If  the  names  of  great  men 
interest  us,  those  of  the  good  men  who  shared  the  labours  of  St.  Paul  may  also  do  so. 
Those  labours  are  more  important  than  the  conquests  of  captains  and  the  specula- 
tions of  philosophers.  Note — I.  The  value  op  Christian  feeendship.  True 
friendship  will — 1.  Show  a  kindly  interest  in  the  welfare  of  its  objects.  Paul  had 
such  an  interest  in  the  Colossians  and  vice  versa.  2.  Mutual  interest  will  lead  to 
reciprocal  communications.  Paul  could  not  go  to  Colossse  so  he  sent  T.ychicua 
and  Onesimus  to  inform  them  of  himself  and  the  affairs  of  Christ's  kingdom, 
to  comfort  them  and  bring  back  a  report.  3.  Distance  and  diflSculty  will  not  be 
allowed  to  stand  in  the  way.  Colossa  was  far  off  and  Paul  was  in  prison,  but 
both  were  surmounted.  4.  Written  messages  will  not  be  allowed  to  supersede 
personal  communications  when  the  latter  are  practicable.  So  Paul  sent  his  Epistle 
by  trusted  friends  who  were  charged  also  with  verbal  communications,  better 
spoken  than  written.  11.  The  propriety  of  Christun  commendations.  In  naming 
the  two  messengers  he  speaks  of  them  in  high  terras,  but  not  in  the  style  of  fulsome 
eulogy.  1.  Tychicus  is  (1)  "a  beloved  brother"  which  indicates  his  relation  to  the 
Church.  (2)  "  Faithful  minister,"  or  attendant,  which  indicates  his  relation  to  the 
Apostle  as  a  trusty  helper.  (3)  "  Fellow  servant  in  the  Lord,"  which  indicates  his 
relation  to  Christ — a  coadjutor  of  the  apostle  in  the  service  of  the  same  Master. 

2.  Onesimus,  the  whilom  runaway  slave,  is  now  a  faithful  and  beloved  brother — 
a  commendation  which  would  secure  for  him  the  welcome  that  he  sorely  needed, 

3.  The  spirit  of  this  commendation  should  be  cultivated.  The  true  ground  of 
honour  is  not  in  a  man's  social  standing,  but  in  his  moral  worth  and  relation  to 
Christ.  III.  The  force  of  Christian  salutations.  1.  Christianity  sanctifies  the 
commonest  things.  How  common  for  us  to  send  our  respects  to  some  friend 
through  the  letter  of  another.  "  Give  him  my  kind  regards,"  &c.  We  have  only 
to  think  of  St.  Paul  as  here  using  the  expressions  equivalent  in  his  day.  Little  did 
these  good  men  think  that  their  simple  expressions  of  affection  would  be  handed 
down  to  prove  the  sympathy  and  the  unity  of  the  Church  throughout  the  world  and 
time.  2.  The  saluting  brethren  were  Jews,  which  would  show  to  the  Gentile  Church 
that  they  had  learned  what  the  apostle  would  teach  them,  not  to  call  anything 
that  God  had  cleansed  common  or  unclean.  IV.  The  solace  of  Christian 
oo-operation.  1.  Loneliness  is  very  depressing,  but  the  apostle  was  spared  this. 
2.  Co-operation  in  labour  divides  its  burden  and  ensures  success.  3.  Unity  in 
Christian  toil  brings  the  greatest  in  touch  with  the  humblest,  and  gives  the 
humblest  a  share  in  the  glory  of  the  greatest.  (J.  Spence,  D.D.)  Side  lights  on 
Church  life  in  the  early  times  : — A  straw  will  indicate  the  direction  of  a  current ;  a 
bit  of  glass  will  reveal  a  star  ;  a  kick  of  the  foot  may  discover  a  treasure ;  a  word, 
a  look,  an  involuntary  movement  will  disclose  the  leading  tendency  of  an  individual 
character ;  so,  on  the  crowded  stage  of  life  it  is  not  always  gigantic  and  public 
scenes  that  are  most  instructive,  but  rather  trivial,  undesigned  incidents  un- 
noticed by  an  ordinary  observer.  We  learn — I.  Christun  sympathy.  1.  As 
fostering  mutual  interest  in  tidings  concerning  the  work  of  God.  The  apostle, 
though  in  prison  and  separated  from  the  Colossians,  does  not  abate  anything  of  his 
interest  in  their  welfare.  2.  As  a  source  of  encouragement  and  strength  in  the 
Christian  life.  "That  he  might  know  your  estate  and  comfort  your  heart." 
II.  Christian  commendation  (ver.  7).  The  apostle  speaks  of  his  two  messengers 
in  a  way  calculated  to  ensure  their  favourable  reception  by  the  Colossians,  and  a 
respectful  attention  to  their  message.  III.  Christian  courtesy.  Those  who  sent 
their  salutations  were  of  the  circumcision.  The  Christian  spirit  triumphed  over 
their  prejudices,  and  their  greeting  would  be  all  the  more  valued  as  an  expression 
of  their  personal  esteem,  their  brotherly  affection,  and  their  oneness  in  Christ. 
That  courtesy  is  most  refined,  graceful,  gentle,  and  acceptable  that  springs  from  a 
Christian  spirit.    lY.  Christian  helpfulness  (ver.  11).    How  conaolix^  is  the 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

sympathy  and  co-operation  of  a  faithful  few.  (G.  Barlow.)  The  sympnthetie 
$pirit.  I.  Oct  of  a  common  faith  in  Chkist  springs  a  common  sympathy.  Here  ii 
a  man  who  never  saw  the  Colossians  writing  to  them  as  a  mother  might  write  to 
her  son.  Epaphras,  not  he,  had  brought  them  to  Christ,  yet  he  loves  them  as 
much  as  though  they  had  been  his  own  children  in  the  faith.  This  arose  out  of 
the  simple  fact  that  they  both  believed  in  a  common  Saviour.  And  as  it  was  with 
them  it  should  be  with  us.  Man  is  a  social  being,  and  there  are  many  points  in 
his  nature  which  are  sympathetic.  There  are  intellectual  affinities  and  moral 
affinities;  besides  which  there  are  extra  grounds  of  sympathy.  But  apart  from 
blood  relationships  there  is  no  sphere  in  which  the  sympathetic  spirit  works  so 
mightily  as  in  the  Christian  Church.  The  same  faith  incites  us  believers  of  the 
nineteenth  century  as  incited  those  of  the  first.  Our  faith  was  theirs :  their 
sympathy  should  be  ours.  II.  Christian  sympathy  will  seek  and  find  outlet  and 
MANIFESTATION.  1.  Paul's  heart  is  touched  with  sympathy  ;  how  can  he  show  it. 
He  is  a  prisoner.  It  is  true  be  clings  to  the  hope  of  revisiting  Asia,  but  sympathy 
does  not  like  delays.  And  as  he  cannot  go  himself  he  sends  Tychicus  as  his  deputy. 
Here,  as  in  other  things,  "  Where  there's  a  will  there's  a  way."  S.  Where  there  is 
genuine  sympathy  the  best  way  for  its  manifestation  will  somehow  open  up.  That 
was  the  case  here.  Tychicus  was  an  Asiatic  (Acts  xx.  4),  and  was  therefore  a 
convenient  messenger.  Perhaps  he  had  offered  himself  for  the  mission.  And 
besides,  Onesimus  had  to  go  to  Colossas  to  his  master.  III.  Christian  sympathy  is 
HARD  TO  SATISFY.  When  it  is  at  full  heat  it  does  not  ask  how  little,  but  how  much 
't  may  do.  The  letter  itself  indicates  the  deepest  thought  and  care  for  their 
welfare  ;  but  this  is  not  enough,  Tychicus  and  Onesimus  must  be  bearers  of  oral 
iuessages  of  comfort.  You  manifest  sympathy  as  you  run  down  a  steep  hill.  When 
once  you  set  off  yon  must  go  on  ;  only  there  is  this  difference,  when  the  foot  of  the 
hill  is  reached  you  stop,  but  in  the  path  of  love  there  is  no  stopping.  IV.  The 
sympathetic  SPIRIT  WILL  AS  A  RULE  ACT  WISELY.  The  messenger  in  this  case  was 
the  best  who  could  have  been  selected.  1,  He  was  "  the  beloved  brother  "  (Eph, 
vi.  21) ;  a  brother  who  had  a  large  heart,  and  who,  consequently,  had  insinuated 
himself  into  the  good  graces  of  his  fellow  Christians.  He  was  a  favourite  among 
them,  they  all  liked  him,  and  so  he  was  just  the  man  to  send.  2.  He  was  "  a 
faithful  minister."  The  apostle  speaks  from  personal  experience,  Tychicus  had 
taken  care  of  Paul,  and  was  therefore  a  tried  man.  His  conscience  was  as  large  as 
his  heart ;  his  kindness  was  not  at  the  expense  of  his  justice.  Faithfulness  was 
needed  at  Colossse  as  much  as  kindness,  for  Paul  had  a  gieat  conflict  about  that 
Church.  3.  "  A  fellow  servant."  Whoever  went  to  Colossae  must  be  armed  with 
authority,  and  therefore  Paul  places  the  messenger  on  the  same  footing  as  himself. 
V.  The  sympathetic  spniiT  is  both  contagious  and  infectious.  Some  things  are 
contagious  which  are  not  infectious  ;  sympathy  is  both.  Tychicus  and  Onesimus 
caught  it ;  it  was  conveyed  to  the  distant  Colossians.  I  can  touch  my  neighbour 
and  make  him  sympathetic  too,  i.e.,  if  there  be  any  affinity  between  us ;  and  I  can 
also  send  its  electric  current  to  my  friend  thousands  of  miles  away.  It  can  be 
transmitted  by  the  simplest  implement — a  pen.  VI,  The  sympathetic  spirit  never 
FAILS.  It  is  a  form  of  charity.  It  is  like  the  sun — only  let  it  shine  on,  and  as  it 
shines  stronger  and  stronger,  the  hard  frost  will  relax  its  deadly  grasp,  winter  will 
disappear,  and  spring  with  its  flowers  and  music  will  come,  VII.  We  can  all 
acquire  the  sympathetic  SPIRIT.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  Tychicus  was 
a  great  man.  He  was  not  an  apostle,  but  he  had  a  large  warm  heart.  If  we  can- 
not render  Christ  head  service  we  can  heart  service,  (A.  Scott.)  Tychicus  and 
Onesimus,  the  letter  bearen : — I.  Tychicus.  1.  The  man  and  his  mission.  He  was 
probably  one  of  the  fruits  of  the  apostle's  residence  in  Ephesus.  On  his  way  to 
Jerusalem  after  the  riot  he  was  joined  by  seven  friends,  Tychicus  was  one  of  the 
two  from  Asia  ;  the  other  was  Trophimus,  whom  we  know  to  have  been  an  Ephesian 
(Acts  xxi.  29),  as  Tychicus  probably  was.  This  was  about  68  a,d.  Then  came  an 
interval  of  three  or  four  years,  and  then  the  apostle  is  in  Eome.  Whether  Tychicus 
was  with  him  all  the  time  we  do  not  know,  but  these  verses,  written  a.d.  62  or  68, 
imply  a  considerable  period  of  service.  He  is  now  sent  to  CoIosseb.  The  same 
words  are  employed  about  him  in  the  contemporaneous  letter  to  the  Ephesians. 
Evidently,  then,  he  carried  both  letters  on  the  same  journey,  and  one  reason  was 
that  he  was  a  native  of  the  province,  and  probably  of  Ephesus.  "  You  go,  Tychicus. 
It  is  your  home;  they  all  know  you,"  The  most  careful  students  now  think  that 
the  Ephesian  Epistle  was  meant  to  go  the  round  of  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor, 
beginning  with  Ephesus.  If  that  be  so  Tychicus  would  necessarily  come  to  Laodicea, 


CHAP.  IT.J  COLOSSIANS.  293 

which  was  only  a  few  miles  from  Colossae,  and  so  coald  conveniently  deliver  this 
Epistle.  After  this  we  get  two  more  glimpses  of  the  man  ;  one  in  the  Epistle  to 
Titus,  when  the  apostle  intended  to  despatch  him  to  Crete,  and  the  last  in  2  Tim^ 
iv.  2  (a.d.  67).  "  Tychicus  have  I  sent  to  Ephesus,"  as  if  he  had  said,  "  Now  go 
home,  my  friend  !  You  have  been  a  faithful  servant  for  ten  years.  I  need  you  no 
more.  Take  my  blessing.  God  be  with  you  I  "  So  they  parted — he  that  was  for 
death  to  die  I  and  he  that  was  for  life,  to  live  and  treasure  the  memory  of  Paul  for 
the  rest  of  his  days.  2.  His  character  and  work.  (1)  As  for  his  personal  godliness 
acd  goodness,  he  is  "a  beloved  brother,"  as  are  all  who  love  Christ.  (2)  He  was 
"  a  faithful  minister  "  or  personal  attendant.  Paul  always  seems  to  have  had  one  or 
two  such  about  him.  Probably  he  was  no  great  hand  at  managing  aSairs,  and 
needed  a  plain  common-sense  nature  to  act  as  secretary  and  factotum.  Men  of 
genius,  and  men  devoted  to  some  great  cause,  want  some  person  to  fill  such 
a  homely  office.  Common  sense,  willingness  to  be  troubled  with  small  secular 
details,  and  hearty  love  for  the  chief,  and  desire  to  spare  him,  were  the  qualifications. 
Such  probably  was  Tychicus — no  orator,  thinker,  organizer,  but  a  plain  soul 
who  did  not  shrink  from  rough  work  if  it  would  help  the  cause.  (3)  He  was  "  a 
fellow-servant  in  the  Lord."  As  if  he  had  said,  "  Do  not  suppose  there  is  much 
difference  between  us.  We  have  both,  as  I  have  been  reminding  you,  a  common 
Master."  The  delicacy  of  the  term  thus  given  to  the  commendation  is  a  beautiful 
indication  of  Paul's  chivalrous  nature.  No  wonder  that  such  a  soul  bound  men 
like  Tychicus  to  him.  3.  Lessons.  (1)  Small  things  done  for  Christ  are  great.  In 
some  powerful  engine  there  is  a  little  screw,  and  if  it  drop  out  the  huge  piston 
cannot  rise  nor  the  huge  crank  turn.  There  is  a  great  rudder  that  steers  an  iron- 
clad. It  moves  on  a  "  pintle  "  a  few  inches  long.  If  that  bit  of  iron  were  gone 
what  would  be  the  use  of  the  ship.  There  is  an  old  jingle  about  losing  a  shoe  for 
the  want  of  a  nail,  •  horse  for  want  of  a  shoe,  a  man  for  want  of  a  hor^e,  a  battle 
for  want  of  a  man,  a  kingdom  for  loss  of  a  battle.  The  intervening  links  may  be 
left  out — and  the  nail  and  the  kingdom  brought  together.  What  is  the  use  of 
writing  letters  if  you  cannot  get  them  delivered  ?  It  takes  both  Paul  and  Tychicus 
to  get  the  letter  into  the  hands  of  the  Colossians.  (2)  The  sacredness  of  secular 
work  done  for  Christ.  When  Tychicus  is  caring  for  Paul,  his  work  is  "  in  the 
Lord."  The  distinction  between  sacred  and  secular,  like  that  of  great  and  small, 
disappears  from  work  done  for  and  in  Jesus,  All  done  for  the  same  God  it  the 
same  in  essence,  for  it  is  all  worship.  (3)  Fleeting  things  done  for  Christ  are 
eternal.  How  astonished  Tychicus  would  have  been  if  anybody  had  told  him  that 
those  two  precious  letters  in  his  scrip  would  outlast  all  the  pomp  of  the  city,  and 
that  his  name,  because  written  in  them,  would  be  known  to  the  end  of  time  all 
over  the  world,  (a)  They  are  eternal  in  Christ's  memory,  however  they  may  fall 
from  man's  remembrance,  (b)  They  are  perpetual  in  their  consequences.  True, 
no  man's  contribution  to  the  sum  of  ricrhteousness  can  very  long  be  traced,  any 
more  than  the  rain-drop  that  refreshed  the  harebell  can  be  traced  in  a  burn,  or 
river,  or  sea ;  but  it  is  there.  The  Colossian  Church,  with  its  sisters,  is  gone  ;  but 
Christian  men  all  over  the  world  owe  something  to  Tychicus'  care,  Paul  meant  to 
teach  a  handful  of  obscure  believers  ;  he  has  edified  a  world.  (4)  As  the  reward  is 
given  not  to  the  outward  deed,  but  to  the  motive  which  settles  its  value,  all  work 
done  from  the  same  motive  is  alike  in  reward,  however  different  in  form.  Paul  in 
the  front,  Tychicus  in  the  rear,  shall  share  alike  at  last.  "He  that  receiveth  a 
prophet,"  &c.  II.  Onesimus.  1.  The  man  and  his  character.  He  is  the  same  as  we 
read  of  in  Philemon.  He  had  been  a  good-for-nothing  servant,  and  apparently  had 
robbed  his  master  and  then  fled  to  Rome.  Somehow  or  other  he  had  found  Paul,  and 
Paul's  master  had  found  him.  And  now  he  goes  back  to  his  owner.  With  beautiful 
consideiateness  the  apostle  unites  him  with  Tychicus,  and  refers  the  Church  to 
him  as  an  authority.  But  with  sensitive  regard  he  omits  the  "  fellow-slave,"  which 
might  have  hurt,  but  he  cannot  leave  out  the  "  faithful,"  because  Onesimus  had 
been  eminently  unfaithful.  There  is  no  reference  to  his  flight,  &c.  The  Church 
has  nothing  to  do  with  these,  only  Philemon.  2.  Lessons.  (1)  The  transforming 
power  of  Christianity.  Slaves  had  well-known  vices  of  which  Onesimus  had  his  full 
share.  Think  of  him  as  he  left  CoIosssb  ;  and  think  of  him  as  he  went  back  Paul's 
trusted  representative.  What  had  happened  ?  Nothing  but  this — the  message  had 
come  to  Him.  *'  Onesimus  1  Christ  has  died  for  thee  and  lives  to  bless  thee. 
Beljev6st  thou  this  ?  "  And  he  believed.  It  had  changed  his  whole  being.  He  is 
a  living  illustration  of  Paul's  teaching.  He  is  dead  with  Christ  to  his  old  self ;  he 
lives  with  Christ  a  new  life.    The  gospel  can  do  that.    Nothing  else  cwi.    The^ 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

gospel  despairs  of  none ;  none  are  beyond  its  power,  (2)  The  power  the  gospel  haa 
of  binding  men  into  a  trne  brotherhood.  We  can  scarcely  picture  to  ourselves  the 
gulf  which  separated  master  from  slave  ;  Christianity  gathered  both  into  one 
family.  All  true  union  must  be  based  on  oneness  in  Christ.  The  world  must 
recognize  that  "  One  is  your  Master,"  before  it  comes  to  believe  that  "  AU  ye  are 
brethren."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Tychicus  vi&s  a  native  of  proconsular  Asia 
(Acts  XX.  4),  and  perhaps  of  Ephesus  (2  Tim.  iv.  12).  He  is  found  with  St.  Paul  at 
three  different  epochs  in  his  life.  1.  He  accompanied  him  when  on  his  way  east- 
ward at  the  close  of  the  third  missionary  journey,  a.d.  58  (Acts  xx.  4J,  and  probably, 
like  Trophimus  (Acts  xxi.  29),  went  with  him  to  Jerusalem.  It  is  probable  that 
Tychicus,  together  with  others  mentioned  among  Paul's  numerous  retinue  on  this 
occasion,  was  a  delegate  appointed  by  his  own  Church  according  to  the  apostle's 
injunctions  (1  Cor.  xvi,  3-4),  to  bear  the  contributions  of  his  brethren  to  the  poor 
Christians  of  Judaea ;  and,  if  so,  he  may  possibly  be  the  person  commended  as 
"the  brother,"  Ac.  (2  Cor.  viii.  18).  2.  We  find  Tychicus  again  in  St.  Paul's  company 
here,  probably  towards  the  end  of  the  first  Eoman  captivity,  a.d.  62,  63.  3.  Once 
more  at  the  close  of  St.  Paul's  life  (about  a.d.  67)  he  appears  again  to  have 
associated  himself  with  the  apostle  (Tit.  iii.  12 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  12).  Tychicus  is  not 
so  common  a  name  as  some  others,  but  it  is  found  occasionally  in  inscriptions 
which  belong  to  Asia  Minor,  and  persons  bearing  it  are  commemorated  on  coins 
(Bp.  Lightfoot.)  Value  of  a  comforter  : — But  so  have  I  seen  the  sun  kiss  the 
frozen  earth,  which  was  bound  up  with  the  images  of  death,  and  the  oddex  breath 
of  the  north  ;  and  then  the  waters  break  from  their  enclosures,  and  melt  with  joy, 
and  run  in  useful  channels  ;  and  the  flies  do  rise  again  from  their  little  graves  in 
walls,  and  dance  a  while  in  the  air,  to  tell  that  there  is  joy  within,  and  that  the 
great  Mother  of  creatures  will  open  the  stock  of  her  new  refreshment,  become 
useful  to  mankind,  and  sing  praises  to  her  Redeemer.  So  is  the  heart  of  a  sorrow- 
ful man  under  the  discourses  of  a  wise  comforter.  He  breaks  from  the  despairs  of 
the  grave,  and  the  fetters  and  chains  of  sorrow ;  he  blesses  Ood,  and  he  blesses 
thee,  and  he  feels  his  life  returning ;  for  to  be  miserable  is  death,  but  nothing  is  life 
but  to  be  comforted.  And  God  is  pleased  with  no  music  from  below  so  much  as  in 
the  thanksgiving  songs  of  relieved  widows,  of  supported  orphans,  of  rejoicing  and 
comforted  and  thankful  persons.     (Bp.  Taylor.) 

Yer.  9.  With  Oneslmna  a  faithful  and  beloved  brother  who  is  one  of  yon. — I. 
Thb  pebson.  Onesimus  teaches  us — 1.  To  despise  no  one  for  his  former  misdeeds 
after  he  has  come  to  his  right  mind.  This  Onesimus  was  once  contemptible,  useless, 
and  a  runaway  slave,  but  after  his  conversion  he  was  thought  worthy  by  the  chiefest 
apostle  of  a  mission  of  great  honour.  They  therefore  sin  grievously  who  reproach 
the  truly  converted  for  their  former  evils,  than  to  congratulate  them  on  their  new 
nature.  God  estimates  men  not  by  what  they  have  put  off,  but  by  what  they  have 
put  on  (Ezek.  xviii.  22).  II.  His  commendation.  1.  He  is  a  faithful  brother,  i.e., 
not  only  a  Christian,  but  a  genuine  one ;  for  many  who  have  assumed  the  name 
have  denied  the  thing  (Gal.  ii.  4 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  2-4).  Hence  we  may  observe — (1)  We 
should  endeavour  to  answer  to  our  name  and  profession  ;  for  to  be  called  a  Chris- 
tian, faithful,  &a.,  and  not  be  so,  is  to  be  loaded  with  false  titles  and  dishonour- 
able (Rev.  iii.  1).  (2)  They  are  to  be  loved  by  all  the  pious,  and  to  be  embraced 
with  both  arms  who  are  faithful  in  their  Christian  profession  and  special  vocation. 
(3)  Nothing  is  more  dangerous  than  those  perfidious  brethren  who  feign  religion 
while  they  despise  it  (2  Cor.  xi.  26).  2.  He  was  loved  warmly  by  Paul,  who  was 
not  accustomed  to  receive  any  into  intimate  friendship  except  they  were  worthy. 
Therefore  the  apostle  wished  them  to  infer  that  Onesimus  deserved  to  be  beloved  by 
them.  (1)  It  is  a  sign  of  a  good  Christian  to  be  dear  to  his  pastor.  (2)  It  becomes 
a  prudent  minister  to  embrace  the  most  pious  with  peculiar  affection  (Phil.  iv.  1). 
(3)  It  ought  to  be  the  care  of  all  believers  to  be  beloved  by  their  pastors.  3.  He 
was  one  of  themselves.  Although  this  was  not  much  in  his  praise,  it  made  him 
acceptable,  for  what  is  our  own  is  wont  to  be  prized  more  than  what  is  not.  (1) 
It  is  proper  to  treat,  then,  with  peculiar  affection  those  who  are  of  the  same  blood, 
country,  society,  as  ourselves.  (2)  It  is  contemptible  to  neglect  our  own,  and  to 
extol  the  distant  at  the  expense  of  the  near  (Mark  xiii.  57).  UI.  His  mission.  To 
make  known  what  was  going  on  with  the  apostle  and  at  Rome.  Tychicus  was  also 
entrusted  with  the  same,  but  in  adding  Onesimus  he  provided  two  witnesses  that 
the  thing  might  be  established.  (Bishop  Bavenant.)  Onesirmis  was  a  native,  or 
oertainly  an  inhabitant,  of  Colosssa,  since  Paul  refers  to  him  as  "one  of  you.'* 


«HAP.  IT.]  COLOSSIANS.  S95 

This  confirms  the  presumption  which  his  name  affords  that  he  was  a  Gentile. 
Slaves  were  numerous  in  Phrygia,  and  the  very  name  Phrygian  was  almost  synony- 
mous with  that  of  slave.  Hence  it  happened  that  in  writing  to  the  Colossians 
(iii.  22-  iv.  1)  Paul  had  to  instruct  them  concerning  the  duties  of  servants  and 
masters  towards  each  other.  Onesimus  was  one  of  this  unfortunate  class  of  persons, 
who  escaped  from  his  master  and  fled  to  Rome,  where  in  the  midst  of  its  vast 
populatiou  he  could  hope  to  be  concealed,  and  to  bafifle  the  efforts  which  were  so 
often  made  in  sach  oases  for  retaking  the  fugitive.  Whether  he  had  any  other 
motive  for  the  flight  than  the  natural  love  of  liberty  we  have  not  the  means  of 
deciding.  It  has  been  generally  supposed  that  he  had  cortimitted  some  offence,  as 
•theft  or  embezzlement,  and  feared  the  punishment  of  his  guilt  (Philemon  18). 
Though  it  may  be  doubted  whether  Onesimus  heard  the  gospel  for  the  first  time  in 
Borne,  it  is  beyond  question  that  he  was  led  to  embrace  the  gospel  there  through 
the  apostle's  instrumentality  (Philemon  10).  As  there  were  believers  in  Phrygia 
when  the  apostle  passed  through  the  region  on  his  third  missionary  journey 
(Acts  xviii.  23),  and  as  Onesimus  belonged  to  a  Christian  household  (Philemon  2), 
it  is  not  improbable  that  he  knew  something  of  Christian  doctrine  before  he  went 
to  Eome.  How  long  a  time  elapsed  between  his  escape  and  his  conversion  wa 
cannot  decide.  After  the  latter  event,  however,  the  most  happy  and  friendly  rela- 
tions sprang  up  between  the  teacher  and  the  disciple.  The  situation  of  the  apostle 
must  have  made  him  keenly  alive  to  the  sympathies  of  Christian  friendship,  and 
dependent  upon  others  for  various  services.  Onesimus  appears  to  have  supplied 
this  want  in  an  eminent  degree.  -  He  won  entirely  the  apostle's  heart,  and  made 
himself  so  useful  that  Paul  wished  to  keep  him,  and  yielded  him  up  only  in 
obedience  to  that  sensitive  regard  for  the  feelings  and  rights  of  others  of  which  his 
conduct  on  this  occasion  was  a  conspicuous  example.  The  traditional  notices  of 
Onesimus  are  not  of  great  value.  Some  of  the  later  fathers  assert  that  Onesimus 
was  set  free  and  became  Bishop  of  Beroea,  and  that  he  made  his  way  to  Eome  again 
and  died  a  martyr  under  Nero.  {H.  B.  Hackett,  D.D.)  The  excellence  of  faith- 
fulnest : — A  year  ago  last  summer  I  visited  Yellowstone  Park.  I  had  read  a  great 
deal  of  the  geysers,  and  seen  pictures  of  them,  but  now  it  was  my  privilege  to  see 
them  rise  grandly  and  proudly  in  dizzy  heights,  then  fall  in  graceful  spray.  They 
had  great  names  given  them.  Some  were  called  "  The  Wonderful,"  "  The 
Monarch,"  others  "  The  Lion"  and  "  The  Lioness,"  but  you  never  can  depend  on 
their  regularity  of  action.  A  traveller  may  visit  them  and  wait  around  four  or  five 
days  without  witnessing  a  performance,  getting  only  labour  for  his  pains,  though 
you  cannot  tell  when  they  will  play.  When  they  do  they  are  very  beautiful.  But 
there  is  one  geyser,  named  the  "  Old  Faithful,"  that  is  not  so  large,  and  doesn't 
make  such  a  grand  display,  but  you  can  always  depend  on  it.  It  plays  at  certain 
times,  and  never  fails.  If  you  are  there  at  1  o'clock,  or  five  minutes  before,  you  will 
see  the  water  shoot  up  at  a  height  of  60  or  70  feet.  At  1.55  it  will  play  again,  not 
rising  at  such  height  as  the  other  geysers,  nor  making  such  a  roaring  noise,  butyoo 
can  depend  on  it.  It  always  comes  to  time,  and  never  fails  in  a  performance.  I 
at  once  respected  that  geyser.  It  was  faithiol  in  its  performance  and  sore.  That 
is  the  key  to  a  successful  life.     {A.  Little.) 

Vers.  10-11.    ArlBtarchus,  my  fellow-prlaoner,  salutetb  you. — The  salutatioiu  : — 

1.  Ths  duty  of  salutation.  The  Greek  word  signifies  either  to  embrace,  as  we 
are  accustomed  to  do  one  who  has  been  long  absent,  or  to  salute  by  word  of  mouth 
or  letter.  This  salutation  is  the  auspicious  prayer  of  health  and  happiness  from 
Qod  the  Author  of  all  good.  That  this  duty  is  not  to  be  neglected  by  the  Christian 
appears — 1.  From  the  command  of  Christ  (Matt.  x.  12).  2.  From  the  uniform 
example  of  St.  Paul  3.  From  its  manifold  utility.  For  such  a  habit  (1)  not  only 
expresses  the  mutual  happiness  which  ought  to  flourish  among  Christians,  but 
promotes  it.  (2)  When  flowing  from  a  heart  purified  by  faith  and  inflamed  by  love, 
brings  down  the  wished-for  blessing.  II.  Inferences  and  lessons.  Observe — 1. 
That  the  external  duties  of  humanity,  of  which  salutation  is  one,  are  diligently  to 
be  performed  by  pious  men.  Augustine  says,  "  If  any  one  should  not  salute  him 
whom  he  may  meet,  he  will  not  be  accounted  a  man  by  the  traveller,  but  a  post." 

2.  That  tbey  are  to  be  performed  not  only  in  conformity  with  custom,  but  from 
Jove  and  pure  charity.  For  he  incurs  the  guilt  of  hypocrisy  who  salutes  him  whom 
he  does  not  wish  health  and  prosperity.  So  Judas  saluted  Christ  (Matt.  xxvi.  49). 
S.  That  they  sin  who  would  have  this  duty  of  Christian  charity  to  serve  their  prida 
»nd  ambition.     So  the  Pharisees  loved  salutations  in  the  market  places.    4.  That 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSfRATOE.  [chap.  rr. 

they  act  basely  who  instead  of  saluting  perform  an  aot  of  adulation.    (Bishop  Dave 
nant.)  Aristarchus  was  a  Thessalonian,  and  so  perhaps  one  of  Paul's  early 

European  converts  (Acts  xx.  4).  He  was  a  Jew,  but  like  so  many  of  his  brethren  of 
the  dispersion,  bore  a  Greek  name.  He  was  with  Paul  in  Ephesus  at  the  time  of 
the  riot,  and  was  one  of  the  two  whom  the  excited  mob  dragged  into  the  theatre  to 
the  peril  of  their  lives.  We  next  find  him  a  member  of  the  deputation  which  joined 
Paul  on  his  voyage  to  Jerusalem.  He  was  in  Palestine  with  Paul,  and  sailed  with 
him  thence  (Acts  xxvii.  2).  Probably  he  went  home  to  Thessalonica  at  some  point 
of  the  journey,  rejoining  Paul  subsequently.  At  any  rate,  here  he  is  standing  by 
Paul  and  enthusiastically  devoted  to  his  work.  He  receives  here  an  honourable  and 
remarkable  title,  "my  fellow-prisoner."  Now  it  is  to  be  noted  that  in  the  Epistle 
to  Philemon,  where  almost  all  these  names  reappear,  it  is  not  Aristarchus  bat 
Epaphras  who  is  honoured  by  this  epithet,  and  that  interchange  has  been  explained 
by  a  supposition  that  Paul's  friends  took  it  in  turn  to  keep  him  company,  and  were 
allowed  to  live  with  him  on  condition  of  submitting  to  the  same  restrictions  and 
military  guardianship.  There  is  no  positive  evidence  in  favour  of  this,  but  it  is  not 
improbable,  and  helps  to  give  an  interesting  glimpse  of  Paul's  prison  life,  and  of 
the  loyal  devotion  which  surrounded  him.  [A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Marcus — the 
John  Mark  of  the  Acta.  He  was  once  the  subject  of  a  sharp  contention  between 
Paul  and  Barnabas,  which  issued  in  the  separation  of  these  good  men  (Acta  xv. 
37-39).  On  a  missionary  tour  previous  to  that  painful  occasion,  Mark  had  left 
them,  perhaps  unhandsomely  (Acts  xiii.  13) ;  and  Paul,  to  indicate  his  sense  of 
Mark's  conduct,  refused  to  take  Lim  with  them  on  a  subsequent  occasion.  Barnabas, 
being  a  near  kinsman,  may  have  been  prejudiced  in  favour  of  his  relative.  What 
were  the  commands  regarding  him  which  the  Colossians  had  already  received  it  is 
in  vain  for  us  to  conjecture.  Mark  evidently  contemplated  a  journey  which  would 
lead  him  to  Colossae,  and  the  Colossians  are  here  enjoined  to  give  him  a  cordial 
reception.  The  apostle  thereby  intimates  the  restoration  of  Mark  to  his  full  confi- 
dence. The  cloud  under  which  his  character  for  zeal  had  lain  seems  to  have  quite 
passed  away.  A  single  error,  even  in  one  engaged  in  the  public  ministry,  is  not 
enough  to  warrant  the  entire  withdrawal  of  confidence.  But  why  this  mention  of 
Mark  in  relation  to  a  Church  with  which  he  hod  no  special  connection  ?  It  was  at 
Perga  in  Pamphylia  that  Mark  left  the  apostle,  and  as  CoIosssb  was  not  far  away 
from  the  spliere  of  the  subsequent  labours  of  the  missionaries,  Mark's  defection  and 
Paul's  displeasure  could  not  fail  to  be  generally  known.  It  was  beautiful  and 
proper,  therefore,  that  having  in  the  interval  seen  reason  to  receive  Mark  again  into 
favour,  the  apostle  should  make  this  change  known,  and  give  the  Churches  of 
Phrygia  a  charge  to  receive  him  with  due  confidence  and  cordiality  as  a  faithful 
evangelist  for  Christ.  (J.  Spence,  D.D.)  Jesus  which  Is  ca,lled  Justus. — How 
startling  to  come  across  that  name  borne  by  this  obscure  Christian  !  How  it  helps 
us  to  feel  the  humble  manhood  of  Christ,  by  showing  us  that  many  another  Jewish 
boy  bore  the  same  name  :  common  and  undistinguished  then,  though  too  holy  to 
be  given  to  any  since.  His  surname  Justus,  may  perhaps,  like  the  same  name  given 
to  James,  hint  his  rigorous  adherence  to  Judaism,  and  so  may  indicate  that  like 
Paul  himself,  he  came  from  the  straitcst  sect  of  their  religion  into  the  large  liberty 
in  which  he  now  rejoiced.  He  seems  to  have  been  of  no  importance  in  the  Church, 
for  his  name  is  the  only  one  in  this  context  which  does  not  re-appear  in  Philemon, 
and  we  never  hear  of  him  again.  A  strange  fate  his  1  to  be  made  immortal  by 
three  words,  and  because  he  wanted  to  send  a  loving  message  to  CoIosssb  !  Why 
men  have  striven  and  schemed  and  broken  their  hearts,  and  flung  away  their  lives 
to  grasp  the  bubble  of  postlmruous  fame  ;  and  bow  easily  this  good  "  Jesus  which 
ia  called  Justus  "  has  got  it  1  He  has  his  name  written  for  ever  on  the  world's 
memory,  and  he  very  likely  never  knew  it,  and  does  not  know  it,  and  was  never  a 
bit  the  better  for  it  1  What  a  satire  on  "  the  last  infirmity  of  noble  minds  I  "  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Who  are  of  tte  circumcision. — These  three  men,  the  only 
three  Jewish  Christians  in  Rome  who  bad  the  least  sympathy  with  Paul  and  his 
work,  give  us  in  their  isolation  a  vivid  illustration  of  the  antagonism  which  he  had 
to  face  from  that  portion  of  the  Early  Church.  The  bulk  of  the  Palistinian  Jewish 
Christians  held  that  the  Gentiles  must  pass  through  Judaism  on  their  road  to 
Christianity,  and  as  the  champion  of  Gentile  liberty  Paul  was  worried  and  hindered 
by  them  all  his  life.  They  had  next  to  no  missionary  zeal,  but  they  followed  him 
and  made  mischief  wherever  they  could.  If  we  can  fancy  some  modem  sect  that 
Bends  out  no  missionaries  of  its  own,  but  delights  to  come  in  where  better  men  have 
forced  a  passage,  and  upset  their  work  by  preaching  their  own  crotchets,  we  get 


CHIP.  rv.J  COLOSSIANS.  291 

precisely  the  thing  which  dogged  St.  Paul.  There  was  evidently  a  oonsiderabla 
body  of  tbese  men  in  Borne.  They  preached  Christ  of  "  envy  and  strife,"  and  only 
these  three  were  large-hearted  enough  to  take  their  stand  by  his  side,  it  was 
a  brave  thing  to  do.  Only  those  who  have  lived  in  an  atmosphere  of  misconstrnc- 
tion  can  understand  what  a  cordial  the  clasp  of  a  hand  or  the  word  of  sympathy 
is.  These  men  were  like  the  old  soldier  who  clapped  Luther  on  the  shoulder  on  hia 
way  to  the  Diet  of  Worms  with  "  Little  monk  1  little  monk  I  you  are  about  to  make 
a  nobler  stand  to-day  than  we  in  all  our  battles  have  ever  done.  If  your  cause  is  just, 
and  you  are  sure  of  it,  go  forward  in  God's  name,  and  fear  nothing."  But  the  best 
comfort  Paul  could  have  was  help  in  his  work.  He  did  not  go  about  the  world 
whimpering  for  sympathy.  He  was  much  too  strong  a  man  for  that.  He  wanted 
men  to  come  down  into  the  trench  with  him,  and  shovel  and  wheel  there  till  they 
had  made  in  the  desert  a  highway  for  the  King.  This  is  what  these  men  did,  and 
BO  were  a  comfort  to  him.  He  uses  a  half  medical  teim,  which,  perhaps,  he  had 
caught  from  the  physician  at  his  elbow,  which  we  might  perhaps  parallel  by  saying 
they  had  been  a  cordial  to  him — like  a  refreshing  draught  to  a  weary  man,  or  some 
whiff  of  pure  air  stealing  into  a  close  chamber  and  lifting  the  curls  from  some  hot 
brow.  The  true  cordial  for  a  true  worker  is  that  others  get  into  the  traces  and  pull 
by  his  side.  (C.  H.  Spurgemi.)  Pellow-workers. — Co-operation  in  work  for 
Christ : — Jesus  sent  out  His  disciples  by  twos,  for  He  knew  that  each  would  cheer 
his  fellow.  Service  is  usually  best  in  companionships:  he  who  works  altogether 
alone  will  be  in  his  temper  either  too  high  or  too  low,  censorious  or  despondiug. 
Two  are  better  far  than  one  ;  they  not  only  accomplish  twice  the  work,  as  we  might 
have  expected,  but  they  frequently  multiply  their  power  seven  times  by  their  co- 
operation. Happy  are  those  wedded  souls  whose  life  of  love  to  their  Lord  and  one 
another  is  like  the  cluster  on  the  staff,  which  they  joyfully  bear  along !  Happy 
those  Christian  companions  who  share  each  other's  joys  and  sorrows,  and  so  pass 
onward  to  the  skies  knit  together  as  one  man.  Communication  enriches,  reticence 
impoverishes.  Communion  is  strength,  solitude  is  weakness.  Alone,  the  fine  old 
beech  yields  to  the  blast,  and  lies  prone  upon  the  sward  ;  in  the  forest,  supporting 
each  other,  the  trees  laugh  at  the  hurricane.  The  sheep  of  Jesus  fllock  together ; 
the  social  element  is  the  genius  of  Christianity.  To  find  a  brother  is  to  find  a  pearl 
of  great  price  ;  to  retain  a  friend  is  to  treasure  up  the  purest  gold.  Between  two 
upon  a  staff  we  find  happiness.  The  monastic  or  hermit  death-life  is  not  our 
RIaster'B  beau  ideal,  but  holy  companionship  is  His  chosen  means  for  affording  us 
help  in  service  and  advance  in  joy.  {Ibid.)  The  power  of  comhination: — The 
house  martin  (Chelidon  urbica),  our  common  summer  visitor  to  all  parts  of  Europe, 
seems  quite  to  understand  that  combination  is  strength.  These  birds  possess  some 
sort  of  intelligence  with  each  other  which  enables  them  to  combine  their  efforts  to 
effect  some  desired  purpose.  Dupont  de  Nemr>ur3  says — "  I  once  saw  a  martin 
which  had  unfortunately,  I  know  not  how,  caught  its  foot  in  the  running  knot  of  a 
thread,  the  other  end  of  which  was  attached  to  a  gutter  of  the  College  des  Quatre 
Nations.  Its  strength  being  exhausted,  it  hung  and  cried  at  the  end  of  the  thread, 
which  it  raised  sometimes  by  trying  to  fly  away.  All  the  martins  of  the  great  basin 
between  the  bridge  of  the  Tuilleries  and  the  Pont  Neuf,  and  perhaps  from  a  still 
greater  distance,  collected  to  the  number  of  several  thousands.  They  formed  a 
cloud,  all  emitting  cries  of  alarm  and  pity.  After  much  hesitation  and  a  tumultuous 
consultation,  one  of  them  invented  a  mode  of  delivering  their  companion,  made  the 
others  understand  it,  and  commenced  its  execution.  All  those  that  were  within 
reach  came  in  turn,  as  if  running  at  the  ring,  and  gave  a  peck  to  the  thread  in 
passing.  These  blows,  all  directed  upon  the  same  point,  succeeded  each  other  every 
second,  or  even  still  more  frequently.  Half  an  hour  of  this  work  was  suflBcient  to 
cut  through  the  thread,  and  set  the  captive  at  liberty."  No  union  of  men  for  a 
common  purpose  could  more  completely  illustrate  the  truth  that  combination  is 
strength.      {Scientific  Illustrations.)  Value  of  a  faithful  friend : — One  of  the 

company  despatched  a  servant  for  a  luts,  and  on  its  being  brought  it  had  lost  tune, 
as  happens  to  these  instruments  when  exposed  to  the  changes  of  the  atmosphere. 
While  he  was  tightening  the  strings,  Gotthold's  thoughts  ran  thus,  "  What  is  sweeter 
than  a  well-tuned  lute,  and  what  more  delightful  than  a  faithful  friend  who  can 
cheer  as  in  sorrow  with  affectionate  discourse?  Nothing,  however,  is  sooner 
nntuned  than  a  lute,  and  nothing  is  more  fickle  than  a  friend.  The  tone  of  the  one 
changes  with  the  weather,  that  of  the  other  with  fortune.  With  a  clear  sky  and  a 
bright  sun  yoa  will  have  friends  in  plenty ;  but  let  fortune  frown  and  the  firmament 
be  overoABt,  then  they  will  prove  like  the  strings  of  the  lute,  of  which  yoa  tighten 


898  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [otap.  ly. 

(en  before  yon  find  one  which  will  bear  the  tension  or  keep  the  pitch."  How 
Christians  may  comfort  others : — When  this  church  was  being  built  I  became 
acquainted  with  one  of  the  carpenters — a  plain  man — who  worked  upon  it,  and  I 
had  many  chats  with  him  afterwards.  That  day,  being  a  Christian  (scmetimes  I 
am  not  one),  when  I  met  him,  as  he  came  down  the  street,  I  stopped  and  spoke  to 
him,  and  shook  hands  with  him.  And  giving  me,  as  I  noticed,  a  peculiar  look, 
and  keeping  hold  of  my  hand,  he  said,  "  Now,  sir,  you  do  not  know  how  much  good 
this  does  me."  •'  What  ?  "  said  I.  "  Well,  your  speaking  to  me  and  shaking 
hands  with  me."  Said  he,  "  I  shall  go  home  to-night,  and  say  to  my  wife,  '  I  met 
Mr.  Beecher  to-day.'  '  Ah  I '  she  will  say,  '  what  did  he  say  ?  '  and  the  children 
will  look  up  too.  And  I  will  tell  them,  '  He  stopped  me  and  shook  hands  with  me, 
and  asked  if  I  was  getting  along  well.'  And  they  will  talk  about  that  for  a  week.  You 
have  no  idea  how  much  good  it  does  a  plain  man  to  be  noticed,  and  to  be  made  to 
ieel  that  he  is  not  a  nobody."    {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  12-18.  Epaphras,  who  Is  one  of  you. — The  sympathy  of  Christianity  : — 
1.  If  you  think  of  Christianity  as  a  great  thought,  a  transcendental  doctrine,  a 
grand  conception,  you  are  right ;  and  if  you  think  the  preacher  is  called  upon  to 
speak  the  language  of  earth  in  the  accent  of  heaven  and  expound  celestial  mysteries, 
you  are  right.  But  this  is  not  aU.  A  man  who  would  describe  the  present  scene 
as  all  firmament  would  be  wrong  ;  but  a  man  who  omitted  the  firmament  from  a 
landscape  would  be  a  fool.  It  is  the  sky  in  a  landscape  painting  that  often  first 
attracts  attention.  There  could  be  no  landscape  were  there  no  sky.  So  with  this 
great  Christian  truth  :  it  is  firmamental,  but  it  is  the  sky  out  of  which  our  land- 
scape comes — the  immeasurable,  out  of  which  our  units  and  definite  lines  are  given 
to  UB.  Christianity  is  not  only  the  highest  metaphysic,  it  is  the  most  absolute 
practical  teaching  and  sympathy.  2.  What  have  these  personal  salutations  to  do 
in  the  Bible  ?  When  the  apostle  began  this  great  letter,  he  seemed  to  strike  a 
grand  key,  and  to  call  the  universe  to  hear.  He  speaks  of  One  who  is  the  "  image 
of  the  invisible  God,"  &c.  That  is  grand  music.  Let  that  organ  roll  out  ita 
rythmic  thunders,  and  while  they  charm  us  make  us  solemn  ;  but  here  at  the  end 
he  begins  to  talk  about  Aristarchus,  <&o.  Is  he  out  of  tune  at  last?  Does  the 
anthem  die  off  into  a  mean  piping,  or  is  there  still  sweet  music  in  it,  encompassing, 
not  shaking,  the  high  heavens,  but  making  the  household  glad,  filling  every  room 
of  it  with  sacred  glee.  3.  The  more  Christianity  is  understood  the  more  will  man- 
hood go  up  in  value.  Christianity  takes  us  all  in  charge— women,  poor  people,  the 
sick.  It  goes  to  the  merchant  and  says :  "  I  have  seen  to-day  many  poor,  sick 
ones,  who  want  kindly  treatment  and  practical  sympathy,  and  you  must  give  it. 
Any  religion  that  talks  so  about  men  and  to  men  is  presumptively  a  true  religion. 
Christianity  has  a  message  from  every  man  to  every  other  man.  L  "  Epaphras, 
WHO  IS  ONE  or  Ton."  1.  Being  a  native  of  Colossae  he  carries  it  in  his  heart  to 
Borne.  The  idea  of  the  Church  is  domestic.  We  do  not  realize  that.  Our  idea  of 
it  is  approximation  without  identity,  proximity  without  sympathy,  a  hebdomadal 
meeting  and  a  week-long  parting,  a  cold  "  how  do  ?  "  without  answer  being  waited 
for.  The  poor,  simple  soul  thought  you  meant  it,  and  was  just  about  to  tell  yoa 
how  he  did  when  you  jumped  into  your  chariot  and  drove  off.  Christ's  idea  was 
that  of  a  house,  and  Paul  that  of  a  family — "  in  whom  the  whole  family,"  do.  See 
how  these  Christians  love  one  another.  They  have  a  great  respect  for  one  another, 
a  marvellous  respect,  an  official  respect ;  but  the  old  apostolic  unity  and  downright 
warm  love^where  is  it  ?  And  echo  answers  where  ?  2.  **  One  of  you,"  though 
not  at  home.  We  think  that  going  from  home  deprives  a  man  of  his  proper 
belongings  in  the  Church,  A  young  man  leaves  us  and  goes  to  New  Zealand,  Is 
he  no  longer  one  of  osf  The  poor  lad's  heart  ached  when  the  "good-bye"  was 
forced  out  of  him ;  but  now  that  he  is  fifteen  thousand  miles  away  we  say,  *•  He 
once  belonged  to  as."  We  want  a  warmer  language  and  a  more  affectionate 
fellowship  in  God,  How  large  a  Church  would  be  if  we  interpreted  its  membership 
in  this  way,  that  a  man  who  is  in  a  far-off  city  is  still  one  of  us,  and  still  claims  os, 
wonders  what  hymns  we  are  singing,  and  what  the  text  is.  We  are  in  danger  of 
degrading  the  church  into  a  meeting-house,  a  place  of  casual  association,  and  of 
cutting  off  all  those  fine  living  bonds  which  ought  to  be  independent  of  time  and 
place,  which  make  Rome  Colossas  and  Colossae  Borne,  every  land  a  home,  and 
every  Christian  a  brother,  II.  A  bebvant  or  Christ.  1.  Are  you  fond  of  titles? 
This  is  the  one  the  King  will  give  you.  It  is  select,  and  yet  might  be  universaL 
Let  the  noblest  envy  you.     Other  titles  are  sounds,  sometimes  sounds  and  fury. 


<JHAi>.  tf.]  COLOSSI ANS. 


signifying  nothing.  But  this  signifies  to  be  the  slave  of  Him  "  who  though  He  was 
rich,"  &c.  2.  What  are  the  signs  by  which  a  servant  of  Christ  is  known  ?  Those 
who  are  skilled  in  such  things  can  go  through  a  picture  gallery  and  say,  "  This 
picture  is  after  So-and-so."  There  is  a  manner  that  can  be  but  feebly  imitated  by 
the  most  skilful  hands.  So  you  cannot  mistake  a  man  who  has  been  with  Christ. 
In  the  early  days  there  were  those  who  took  knowledge  of  disciples  that  they  had 
been  with  Jesus.  You  have  been  in  a  garden  of  spices ;  I  know  it ;  you  bring  the 
fragrance  with  you.  You  have  seen  some  solemn  sight ;  I  know  it ;  vulgarity  is 
ironed  out  of  your  face,  and  it  is  transfigured.  You  have  heard  strange  music,  and 
all  the  meaner  elements  have  been  taken  out  of  you.  You  have  been  with  Christ, 
and  I  know  it  by  the  tenderness  and  simplicity  of  your  speech,  by  the  diligence  of 
your  service,  by  the  lavishness  of  your  liberality.  III.  "  Salutbth  you."  That 
would  not  do  now.  I  get  letters  from  Christian  friends  that  I  would  not  send  to  a 
day  labourer  whom  I  had  never  seen  in  my  life  before.  They  are  too  correct  to  be 
true,  too  proper  to  be  good.  IV.  •'  Always  labouring  fervently  for  you  in 
PRAYER."  1,  I  do  not  know  that  Epaphras  was  an  eloquent  preacher,  but  he  was 
mighty  in  intercession.  He  threw  his  arms  around  his  native  Church,  and  toiled  in 
piayer  for  them  till  his  brow  was  bedewed  as  with  agony,  and  his  whole  face  lighted 
up  with  saintly  expectation  that  he  might  see  the  descending  blessing.  That  I  can 
do  for  my  friends.  I  may  not  be  able  to  write  elaborate  letters,  but  I  can  pray  for 
them.  That  you  can  do  for  me.  2.  What  did  Epaphras  pray  for?  "That  ye 
may  stand  perfect — like  a  ship  in  full  gale."  Let  that  be  my  posture  ;  no  harsh, 
bitter  wind  striking  me  in  the  face,  and  making  my  sea-faring  diiEcult,  but  a  great 
favouring  gale,  bearing  me  onward,  all  sail  set,  towards  the  will  of  God.  (/.  Parker, 
D.D.)  The  ministry  of  Epaphras: — I.  His  object  :  that  the  Colossians  might 
"stand  perfect,"  &c.  The  will  of  God  has  reference — 1.  To  our  perfection  in 
the  knowledge  of  revealed  truth.  The  Bible  is  a  revelation  of  God's  will  with 
respect  to  us,  and  is  able  to  make  ns  wise  unto  salvation.  Why  has  God  put  it 
before  us  but  that  we  should  study  it.  Our  Lord  reproved  His  disciples  because 
of  their  want  of  due  attention  to  His  teaching,  and  the  Hebrews  are  rebuked 
for  their  want  of  proficiency,  and  are  exhorted  to  go  on  to  perfection.  This 
perfect  knowledge  is  necessary — (1)  To  religious  usefiJness.  (2)  To  progressive 
and  entire  sanctification.  "  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth."  2.  To  our  salva- 
tion from  sin.  This  must  be  complete  before  we  can  enter  heaven ;  but  provision 
is  made  in  the  blood  "  which  cleanseth  from  all  sin,"  and  in  the  grace  of  the  Spirit 
who  "  sanctifies  wholly."  3.  To  the  graces  of  the  Spirit.  (1)  Faith.  This  admits  of 
degrees.  There  is  the  weak  faith  of  "  babes  "  ;  the  strong  faith  of  "  young  men"; 
the  ripe  faith  of  "  fathers,"  when  it  is  perfect.  (2)  Love.  This  admits  of  degrees. 
I  may  have  a  sincere  love  for  God,  and  yet  not  love  Him  "  with  all  my  heart  " ;  a 
sincere  love  of  man,  and  yet  not  as  myself.  But  the  love  set  forth  in  Scripture  is 
"  perfect  love. "  (3)  Hope.  All  Christians  have  this,  but  not  all  in  an  equal  degree. 
It  is  not  every  believer  who  can  say  with  John,  "Even  so;  come,  Lord  Jesus." 
That  is,  however,  the  "full  assurance  of  hope  "for  which  we  should  all  strive. 
(4)  The  passive  graces,  such  as  patience,  which  is  to  "  have  her  perfect  work  that 
ye  may  be  perfect,"  <fec.  4.  To  our  actual  conduct  in  the  world.  Christ's  religion 
IS  a  practical  religion  (Titus  ii.  11-12),  and  is  to  assume  a  perfect  form  (Heb.  xiii. 
20-21).  To  bring  up  His  people  to  this  standard  God  has  said,  *'  My  grace  is 
sufficient  for  thee."  5.  To  our  stability  and  perseverance.  Epaphras  is  anxious 
not  only  that  the  Colossians  should  be  perfect  in  their  conformity  to  the  Divine 
will,  but  that  they  should  "  stand  "  in  that  state  to  the  end  of  life.  It  is  the  end 
which  crowns  the  work.  It  is  not  he  who  runs  well  for  a  season,  but  he  who 
oontinues  to  the  end,  to  whom  the  promise  of  life  is  given.  II.  The  means  of 
BECUBiNO  THIS  OBJECT — Prayer.  From  this  we  learn — 1.  That  Christians  can  only 
be  brought  to  this  high  standard  by  God's  grace  and  blessing.  Had  they  been  able 
of  themselves,  prayer  would  have  been  presumptuous.  We  do  not  ask  God  to  do 
for  us  what  we  can  do  for  ourselves.  But  we  never  can  be  made  Christians  but 
by  God — and  God  can  make  perfect  Christians  ;  and  the  power  of  Christ  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  must  not  be  Umited.  2.  That  prayer  is  available  with  God  for  obtain- 
ing needful  grace.  There  are  some  who  restrict  the  power  of  prayer  to  its  subjective 
influence.  If  this  were  true,  prayer  for  others  would  be  of  no  avail.  I  might  pray 
for  one  whom  I  love,  and  my  prayer  might  exercise  my  benevolent  feelings,  but  the 
person  for  whom  I  pray  will  receive  no  benefit.  Away  with  so  God -dishonouring  a 
notion.  Some  of  yon,  perhaps,  have  near  relatives  across  the  sea.  Take  encourage- 
mept.     Gk>d's  arm  of  power  and  mercy  can  reach  them.    Bring  their  eases  before 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Him.  (1)  Notice  the  earnestness  anl  importunity  of  his  prayer.  True  prayer  is 
a  labour.  We  ought  in  prayer  to  labour  for  a  just  apprehension  of  the  Divine 
character,  of  the  mediation  of  Christ,  of  the  import  of  the  promises.  (2)  Notice 
(he  connection  of  prayer  with  this  object — the  fulfilment  of  God's  will.  The  glory 
of  God  is  dear  to  every  pious  heart.  Our  Lord,  therefore,  taught  us  to  pray,  '*  Thy 
will  be  done,"  &c.  3.  That  the  honour  of  true  religion  is  connected  with  the  per- 
fection of  Christian  character.  The  world  judges  of  Christians  by  their  conduct. 
4.  That  the  welfare  of  Christians  is  connected  with  their  perfection  of  character. 
Spiritual  as  well  as  bodily  happiness  depends  on  the  state  of  the  health.  (T.  Jack- 
son.)  Labouring  fervently  for  you  in  prayers. — Prayer  the  noblest  form  of 
work: — 1.  Prayer  is  religion  in  action,  and  is  the  noblest  kind  of  human  exertion. 
It  is  the  one  department  of  action  in  which  man  realizes  the  highest  privilege  and 
capacities  of  his  being.  And  in  doing  this  he  is  enriched  and  ennobled  almost  in- 
definitely. 2.  That  this  view  of  prayer  is  not  universal  is  notorious.  It  is  thought 
an  excellent  thing  for  clergymen,  recluses,  sentimentalists,  and  women  and  children 
generally ;  that  it  has  its  uses  as  a  form  of  desultory  occupation,  an  outlet  for  feel- 
ing, a  means  of  discipline,  bat  altogether  less  worthy  of  the  energies  of  a  thinking 
man  than  hard  work  in  study  or  business.  3.  In  response  to  this  let  those  speak 
who  have  really  prayed.  They  sometimes  describe  prayer  with  Jacob,  as  a  wrestling 
together  with  an  unseen  power,  which  may  last  even  to  the  break  of  day  (Gen. 
xxxii.  24),  or  with  Paul,  as  a  concerted  struggle  (Rom.  xv.  30).  They  have  their 
eyes  fixed  on  the  Great  Intercessor  in  Getbsemane  (Luke  xxii.  44).  Importunity 
is  of  the  essence  of  successful  prayer  (Luke  xi.  8  ;  xviii.  5  ;  Matt.  xv.  27-28  ;  Mark 
vii.  28-29) ;  and  importunity  means  not  dreaminess,  but  sustained  work,  and  of  ao 
energetic  character  (Matt.  xi.  12).  Bishop  Hamilton,  of  Salisbury,  once  said  that 
'*  no  man  was  likely  to  do  much  good  in  prayer  who  did  not  begin  by  looking  upon 
it  in  the  light  of  a  work,  to  be  prepared  for  aud  persevered  in  with  all  the  earnest- 
ness which  we  bring  to  bear  on  subjects  which  are  the  most  interesting  and  neces- 
sary." This  will  appear  if  we  take  an  act  of  prayer  to  pieces.  To  pray  is — I.  To 
PUT  THE  ONDERSTANDiNo  IN  MOTION,  and  to  direct  it  upon  the  highest  object  ta 
which  it  can  address  itself.  How  overwhelming  are  the  truths  which  pass  before 
us — a  boundless  Power,  an  eternal  Existence.  Then  the  substance  of  the  petition, 
its  motives,  the  issues  which  depend  on  its  being  granted  or  refused  preseat  them- 
selves to  the  mind,  as  does  the  Intercessor  who  presents  our  prayers.  II.  To  put 
THE  AFFECTIONS  IN  MOTION,  The  objcct  of  prayer  is  the  uncreated  Lovo,  and  to  be 
in  His  presence  is  to  be  conscious  of  heart  expansion;  and  when  the  matter  of 
prayer  is  blessing  for  others  and  not  for  self,  all  the  best  emotions  and  sentiments 
are  called  into  play  (Matt.  xv.  8  ;  1  John  iii.  21-22).  III.  To  pdt  the  will  im 
MOTION,  just  as  decidedly  as  we  do  when  we  sit  down  to  read  hard,  or  to  walk  up  a 
steep  hill  against  time  (John  ix.  31 ;  Matt.  vii.  21 ;  James  iv.  7-8 ;  all  of  which 
imply  that  prayer  in  which  the  will  is  not  engaged  is  worthless.  That  sovereign 
power  does  not  merely  impel  us  to  make  the  first  necessary  mental  effort,  but 
enters  most  penetratingly  and  vitally  into  the  very  action  of  prayer  itself  (Gen. 
xxxii.  26).  These  three  ingredients  of  prayer  are  ingredients  in  all  real  work, 
whether  of  the  brains  or  the  hands.  The  ditJerence  is  that  in  prayer  they  are  more 
equally  balanced.  Study  may  in  time  become  intellectual  habit,  which  scarcely 
demands  any  effort  of  will ;  handiwork  may  in  time  become  so  mechanical  as  to 
require  little  or  no  guidance  from  thought ;  each  may  exist  without  the  co-operation 
of  the  affections.  Not  so  prayer.  It  is  always  the  joint  act  of  the  will  and  the 
understanding,  impelled  by  the  affections ;  and  when  either  will  or  intelhgence  is 
wanting,  prayer  at  once  ceases  to  be  itself,  by  degenerating  into  a  barren,  intel- 
lectual exercise,  or  into  a  mechanical  and  unspiritual  routine.  (Canon  Liddon.) 
Fervent  labour  in  prayer : — The  word  here  used  signifies  to  strive,  or  wrcsstle,  as 
those  do  who  strive  for  mastery;  it  notes  the  vehemency  and  fervency  of  this  man's 
prayers  for  the  Colossians.  As  the  wrestlers  do  bend  and  writhe  and  strolcb  and 
strain  every  joint  of  their  bodies,  so  did  Epaphras  every  joint  of  his  soul  that  he 
might  be  victorious  with  God  upon  the  Colossians'  account.  So  Jacob  when  alone 
with  God  (Gen.  xxxii.  24-27 ;  Hos.  xii.  4-5)  wrestles  and  weeps,  and  weeps  and 
wrestles ;  he  holds  his  hold,  and  will  not  let  God  go,  till  as  a  Prince  he  has  pre- 
vailed. (T.  Brooks.)  The  value  of  intercessory  prayer: — This  was  no  passing 
wish,  sentimental  desire,  transient  emotion.  The  burden  of  Epaphras'  heart  was 
the  good  of  the  Church,  and  in  proportion  to  the  fervency  of  hia  affection  was 
the  importonity  of  his  petition.  There  may  be  no  help  more  needed,  no  succour 
more  sure,  than  that  obtained  through  prayer.      Who  can  tell  what  good  may 


nur.  IV.]  COLOSSIANS.  801 

come  to  the  wilful  and  wayward  boy  far  away  at  sea,  or  in  some  distant  land, 
from  the  unceasing  intercessions  of  his  mother,  wrestling  for  him  with  God? 
You  have  a  dear  friend  in  sorrow  at  a  distance.  You  cannot  reach  him  to 
comfort  him,  but  you  can  reach  him  by  prayer  more  effectively  than  if 
you  could  see  him  face  to  face.  Many  a  time  has  God's  work  revived,  and  rich 
spiritual  blessing  come  to  a  congregation,  through  the  earnest  supplication  of  some 
obscure  member.  We  do  not  ourselves  know  all  that  we  owe  to  the  prayers  of 
others.  There  are  circumstances  in  which  we  can  do  nothing  but  pray  for  those  in 
whom  we  are  deeply  interested.  Especially  is  it  so  with  pa>tors.  Some  may  seem 
ready  to  faint  in  the  conflict ;  some  fair  blossoms  of  spiritual  promise  may  be  going 
up  as  dust ;  some  often  warned  and  entreated  may  be  becoming  more  callous,  or  on 
the  point  of  making  shipwreck  of  faith,  &c. ;  what  can  be  done  for  such  ?  The 
mightiest  resource  is  persevering  prayer.  It  is  God  alone  whose  help  is  all  power- 
ful, and  this  prayer  can  secure.  (J.  Spence,  D.D.)  The  power  of  prayer: — A 
spoonful  of  water  sets  a  hydraulic  press  in  motion,  and  brings  into  operation  a  force 
of  tons'  weight ;  so  a  drop  of  prayer  at  one  end  may  move  an  influence  at  the  other 
which  is  omnipotent.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  That  ye  may  stand  perfect  and 
complete  in  all  the  will  of  God. — Standing  in  perfectness : — 1.  There  is  no  kind  of 
qualilication  to  this,  no  hint  that  Paul  thought  that  Epapbras  was  asking  with  an 
extravagant  expectation.  They  were  no  sham  prayers  ;  struggles  after  imjjossible 
attainments,  but  those  that  he  and  Paul  thought  might  be  reahzed.  Such  prayers 
are  in  conflict  with  modern  notions,  which  regard  perfection  as  beyond  the  range  of 
practical  Christianity.  2.  What  made  Epapbras  believe  that  he  might  ask  this  ? 
(1)  Paul's  teaching.  "We  pray  for  this,  even  your  perfection."  "  That  we  may 
present  every  man  perfect."  (2)  Christ's  words,  "  Be  ye  perfect,"  &c.  3.  Was 
this  an  attainment  to  be  expected  in  this  life  or  the  next  ?  In  this.  Paul  wrote  that 
he  had  not  attained,  &c.,  but  he  appealed  to  the  Philippians  on  the  supposition 
that  he  and  they  were  perfect.  And  so  Christ  teaches  us  to  pray,  "  Thy  will  be 
done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,"  i.e.,  perfectly.  There  is  no  difficulty  here.  It  is 
our  duty  to  be  entirely  conformed  to  the  will  of  God,  and  yet  see  a  point  beyond  our 
highest  attainments,  and  say,  "We  must  reach  that  also."  Let  us  consider  the 
purpose  of  these  prayers.  I.  Neqativelt.  1.  It  is  not  that  full  knowledge  and 
obedience  may  be  achieved  at  once.  This  is  impossible  under  the  conditions  im- 
posed by  the  flesh,  and  both  will  be  progressive  under  heavenly  conditions.  But 
we  are  to  act  according  to  our  several  ability.  A  child  in  the  alphabet  class  must 
not  be  expected  to  do  the  work  of  the  higher  forms,  either  in  the  school  of  nature  or 
of  grace.  It  is  enough  that  each  does  thoroughly  what  is  allotted  to  it.  An  infant 
is  perfect,  but  not  in  the  same  sense  as  a  man.  So  it  is  in  the  kingdom  of  God. 
2.  It  is  not  that  temptation  will  be  absent.  Both  Paul  and  Christ  were  fiercely 
tempted.  3.  It  is  not  that  there  will  be  an  unbroken  flow  of  joy  and  peace.  No 
person  is  capable  of  being  continuously  under  the  same  emotions,  and  alternations 
of  joy  and  gloom  make  no  difference  to  our  spiritual  standing,  so  long  as  under 
both  we  abide  in  God.  There  were  changes  of  feeling  in  Paul  and  Christ.  II. 
Positively.  It  is  that  we  may  do  the  will  of  God  as  far  as  we  know  it  We  are 
not  to  ordain  an  impossible  standard.  Our  King  distributes  to  ua  a  variety  of 
talents.  Hence  the  young  act  differently  from  the  old  ;  men  from  women ;  sickly 
from  healthy,  and  yet  in  each  the  love  of  God  may  be  perfected,  viz.,  in  the  keeping 
of  His  commandments.  And  these  commandments  have  a  wonderful  variety,  and 
relate  to  secular  as  well  as  spiritual  employments,  since  all  life  by  the  Christian  is 
devoted  to  God.  Do  you  say  that  this  is  an  easy  kind  of  perfection  ?  Try  it — Or 
that  it  is  inconspicuous  P  True,  so  was  Christ's  generally.  Only  on  occasions  did 
His  divinity  flash  forth.  2.  It  is  that  we  may  ose  the  means  for  our  fulfilling  the 
will  of  God  perfectly.  Epapbras  laboured  in  prayers,  which  denotes  the  power 
from  which  we  are  to  derive  our  ability.  We  must  go  to  God  and  He  will  supply 
all  our  need  :  in  faith  in  His  faithfulness  who  has  promised,  ••  who  also  will  do  it," 
even  sanctify  us  wholly.  (D.  G.  Watt,  M.A.)  Christian  perfection:— A  Christian 
may  be  said  to  be  perfect  in  respect — I.  Of  the  cause  or  fountain  of  holiness  ;  so 
good  gifts  are  said  to  be  perfect  (James  i.  17),  as  they  are  from  God.  II.  Of  con- 
secration (Heb.  i.  10 ;  v.  9).  Christ  was  perfect  because  set  apart  to  a  perfect 
calling  which  He  fulfilled  perfectly.  IIL  Of  acceptation,  not  in  respect  of  opera- 
tion, the  Lord  accounting  our  confession  of  imperfection  for  perfection.  IV.  Of 
FABTs,  though  not  in  respect  of  degrees ;  he  is  perfect  in  that  he  hath  holiness  in 
•very  part,  thoogh  not  in  each  measore.  Thus  to  be  perfect  is  to  be  sanctified 
throughout.    V.  Comparattvelt,  not  positively.    A  Christian  that  makes  conscience 


309  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i?, 

of  all  his  ways,  and  can  love  his  enemies,  is  perfect  (Matt.  y.  48),  in  comparison  of 
carnal  men,  that  follow  the  swing  of  their  own  corruptions  and  affections.  VI.  Of 
TROTH,  though  not  in  respect  of  absoluteness.  Thus  he  is  perfect,  because  he  desires 
and  endeavours  after  perfection,  though  in  act  he  attains  it  not.  VII.  Of  men  or 
common  estimation,  and  so  he  is  perfect  that  is  unrebukable.  VIII.  Of  the  end, 
and  so  he  may  be  said  to  be  perfect — 1.  In  intention,  because  he  sets  perfection  a» 
a  mark  to  shoot  at  (Phil.  iii.).  2.  In  respect  of  duration,  because  he  holds  out  to 
the  end.  3.  In  respect  of  accomplishment,  because  he  finisheth  what  he  under- 
taketh  in  godliness,  or  mortification,  he  doth  it  not  by  halves,  or  in  some  parts  of 
it,  for  so  to  perfect  is  translated  to  finish  (Acts  xx.  24;  John  iv.  34,  xvii.  4).  (N. 
Byfield.)  All  the  will  of  God: — There  are  people  who  would  be  content  to  do 
Bome  part  of  what  God  wills,  provided  they  might  be  excused  the  rest ;  as,  for 
example,  to  believe  the  truth  which  God  has  revealed,  but  not  to  do  the  good  works 
which  He  has  commanded ;  or  to  exercise  some  of  them,  but  utterly  fail  in  others : 
as  they  who  live  fair  with  men,  but  remain  in  impiety,  and  in  the  profession  of 
error ;  or  those,  on  the  contrary,  who  make  profession  of  error ;  or  those, 
again,  who  make  open  profession  of  the  pure  service  of  God,  but  spare  not 
either  the  goods  or  honour  of  their  neighbours  ;  or  who,  abstaining  from  one 
vice,  license  themselves  to  others ;  who  are  chaste,  but  covetous ;  or  liberal  and 
beneficial  to  the  poor,  but  corrupt  and  incontinent.  This  partition  is  unjust,  in- 
jurious to  God,  impossible  in  truth,  and  incompatible  with  the  nature  of  the  things 
themselves.  {J.  Daille.)  He  hath  a  great  zeal  for  yoiL — The  nature  of  zeal: — 
Zeal  is  an  intense  earnestness  for  the  accomplishment  of  its  object.  It  is  defined 
in  our  latest  dictionary  as  a  passionate  ardour  in  the  pursuit  and  accomplishment 
of  it.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a  great  excitement  of  feeling,  mere  demonstrative  warmth 
of  expression,  mere  quickness  of  the  motion,  but  something  far  more  deep  and  en- 
during. It  is  a  working,  practical  energy  ;  a  power  which  may  be  directed  to  things 
indifferent,  good  or  bad.  (E.  Garbett,  M.A.)  Fervent  zeal: — A  little  before  his 
death  Gregory  Thaumaturgus  made  a  strict  inquiry  whether  there  were  any 
persons  in  the  city  and  neighbourhood  still  strangers  to  Christianity.  Being 
told  there  were  about  seventeen  in  all,  he  sighed,  and  lifting  up  his  eyes  to 
heaven,  appealed  to  God  how  much  it  troubled  him  that  any  of  his  fellow-to^vnsmen 
should  still  remain  unacquainted  with  salvation,  {Milner.)  It  is  said  of  Holy 
Bradford,  preaching,  reading,  and  prayer,  was  his  whole  life,  "I  rejoice,"  said 
Bishop  Jewel,  "  that  my  body  is  exhausted  in  the  labours  of  my  holy  callmg."  .  .  . 
"  Let  racks,  fires,  pulleys,  and  all  manner  of  torments  come,  so  I  may  win  Christ,"' 
said  Ignatius.  (Watson.)  Reinerius,  their  adversary,  declai-es  "  that  a  certain. 
Waldensian  heretic,  with  a  view  of  turning  a  person  from  the  Catholic  faith  (for 
such  he  calls  the  Romish  errors),  swam  over  a  river  in  the  night,  and  in  the  wintoi, 
to  come  to  him,  and  to  teach  him  the  novel  doctrines."  (Milner.)  Laodlcea 
(see  on  chap.  ii.  1).  Hlerapolls. — On  the  north  side  of  the  valley  of  Lycus,  oppo- 
site to  the  sloping  hills  which  mark  the  site  of  Laodicea,  is  a  broad  level  terrace 
jutting  out  from  the  mountain  side,  and  overhanging  the  plain  with  almost  preci- 
pitous sides.  On  this  plateau  are  scattered  the  vast  ruins  of  Hierapolis.  It  is  here 
that  the  remarkable  physical  features  which  distinguish  the  valley  display  them- 
selves in  the  fullest  perfection.  Over  the  steep  cliffs  which  support  the  plateau  of 
the  city  tumble  cascades  of  pure  white  stone,  the  deposit  of  calcareous  matter  from 
the  streams  which,  after  traversing  this  upper  level,  are  precipitated  over  the  ledge 
into  the  plain  beneath,  and  assume  the  most  fantastic  shapes  in  their  descent.  At 
one  time  overhanging  in  cornices  fringed  with  stalactites,  at  another  hollowed 
out  into  basins  or  broken  up  with  ridges,  they  mark  the  site  of  the  city  at  a  dis- 
tance, glistening  on  the  mountain  side  like  foaming  cataracts  frozen  in  the  fall. 
Like  Laodicea,  Hierapolis  was  at  this  time  an  important  and  a  growing  city,  though 
not  like  Laodicea,  holding  Metropolitan  rank.  Besides  the  trade  in  dyed  wools, 
which  it  shared  in  common  with  the  neighbouring  towns,  it  had  a  source  of  wealth 
peculiar  to  itself.  The  streams  to  which  the  scenery  owes  its  remarkable  feature* 
are  endowed  with  valuable  medicinal  qualities,  while  at  the  same  time  they  are  sa 
copious  that  the  ancient  city  is  described  as  full  of  self-made  baths.  An  inscrip- 
tion still  legible  celebrates  their  virtues,  "  Hail,  fairest  soil  in  all  broad  Asia'* 
realm  ;  hail,  golden  city,  nymph  Divine,  bedecked  with  flowing  rills,  thy  jewels,'* 
and  (EsculapiuB  and  Hygeia  appear  on  still  extant  coins.  To  the  ancient  magni- 
ficence of  Hierapolis  its  ruins  bear  ample  testimony.  A  city  which  combined  the 
pursuit  of  health  and  gaiety  had  fitly  chosen  as  its  patron  deity  Apollo,  the  god 
alike  of  medicine  and  festivity,  here  worshipped  as  ••  Archegetes,"  the  founder. 


CHAF.  IT.]  COLOSSI ANS.  80S 

Bat  more  important,  as  illustrating  its  religious  temper,  is  the  fact,  that  there  was  a 
spot  called  the  Plutonium,  a  hot  well  or  spring,  from  whose  hot  mouth  issued  a 
fatal  memphitic  vapour,  from  the  effects  of  which  the  mutilated  priests  of  Cybele 
alone,  so  it  was  believed,  were  free.  Indeed  this  city  appears  to  have  been  a  chief 
centre  of  the  passionate  mystical  devotion  of  aucient  Phrygia.  But  in  addition  to 
this  religious  rites  were  borrowed  from  other  parts  of  the  East,  more  especially 
from  Egypt.  By  the  multitude  of  her  temples  Hierapolis  established  her  right  ta 
the  title  of  the  '*  sacred  city  "  which  she  bore.  Though,  at  this  time,  we  have  no 
record  of  her  famous  citizens,  such  as  graced  the  annals  of  Laodicea,  yet  a  genera- 
tion or  two  later  she  numbered  among  her  sons  one  nobler  far  than  the  rhetori- 
cians, sophists,  millionaires,  and  princes,  of  whom  her  neighbour  could  boast.  The 
lame  slave,  Epictetus,  the  loftiest  of  heathen  moralists,  must  have  been  grovring 
up  to  manhood  when  the  first  rumours  of  the  gospel  reached  his  native  city.  Did 
any  chance  throw  him  across  the  path  of  Epaphras,  or  of  St.  Paul  ?  We  should 
be  glad  to  think  that  the  greatest  of  Christian  aud  the  greatest  of  heathen  preachers 
met  together  face  to  face.  Such  a  meeting  would  solve  more  than  one  riddle,  and 
explain  some  strange  coincidences  in  their  writings.  Drawn  by  trade,  and  by  its 
charms  as  a  gay  watering-place,  a  very  considerable  colony  of  Jews  settled  down  in 
Hierapolis,  which  gave  point  to  a  Talmudic  complaint,  "  The  wines  and  baths  of 
Phrygia  have  separated  the  ten  tribes  from  Israel."  After  the  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem one  of  the  chief  settlements  of  the  Christian  dispersion  was  here,  which 
explains  how  the  Phrygian  Churches  assumed  such  a  prominence  in  the  eccle- 
Biastical  history  of  the  second  century.  Here  settled  Philip  of  Bethsaida,  the  early 
friend  and  fellow-townsman  of  St.  John,  who  took  up  his  abode  in  Ephesus,  and 
the  first  apostle  who  held  communication  with  the  Gentiles  (John  xii.  20).  Here 
he  died  and  was  buried  ;  and  here,  after  his  decease,  lived  his  two  virgin  daughters, 
from  whom  Papias  heard  several  stories  of  the  first  preachers  of  the  gospel,  which 
he  transmitted  to  posterity  in  his  work.  Papias  was,  probably,  a  native  of  Hiera- 
polis, of  which  he  afterwards  became  bishop.  He  was  succeeded  by  Abcrcius,  and 
Abercius  by  the  great  controversialist  and  apologist,  Claudius  ApoUinaris,  and 
presided  at  a  council  in  this  city  at  which  Montanism  was  condemned.  At  a  later 
date  the  influence  of  both  Hierapolis  and  Laodicea  declined.  They  take  no  great 
part  in  the  great  controversies  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries.  Among  their 
bishops  there  is  not  one  who  has  left  his  mark  on  history.  They  take  only  a  silent 
part  in  the  great  councils,  and  more  than  onoe  wavered  in  their  allegiance  to  the 
orthodox  faith.     (Bishop  Lightfoot.) 

Yer.  14.  Luke  the  1»eloved  physician  and  Demas  greet  you. — Lulce  the  beloved 

physician : — At  the  moment  of  the  transition  of  Christianity  from  Asia  to  Europe 
Luke  was  enrolled  among  St.  Paul's  companions.  We  ascertain  this  by  a  change 
of  a  pronoun — "  they  "  (Acts  xvi.  6),  "  we  "  (Acts  xvi.  10).  The  same  language  ia 
continued  in  the  narration  of  what  took  place  at  Philippi,  and  so  Luke  is  very 
pointedly  associated  with  this  neighbourhood.  But  again  we  lose  sight  of  the 
expression  from  the  time  Paul  quits  Macedonia,  and  we  do  not  discern  any  trace 
of  it  till  Paul  is  in  Macedonia  again  (Acts  xx.  5,  6).  From  this  time  he  appears 
to  have  been  in  close  companionship  with  the  apostle,  and  to  have  gone  with  him 
tc  Rome  (Acts  xxviii.  16  ;  Philemon  24 ;  Col.  iv.  14).  A  baseless  tradition  says 
that  he  was  a  painter  ;  and  yet  in  one  sense  it  is  most  true.  In  the  Acts,  besides 
many  minor  portraits,  we  have  a  full-length  picture  of  the  great  apostle,  without 
which  we  could  not  have  fully  known  St.  Paul,  and  one  drawn  by  the  hand  of  a 
friend.  We  see  how  thoroughly  the  biographer  sinks  and  forgets  himself,  revealing 
his  ardent  and  steady  friendship  and  modesty.  But  much  more  is  made  known 
to  us  concerning  St.  Luke  through  what  is  said  of  him  by  St.  Paul.  He  speaks 
of  him  not  merely  as  his  "  fellow  labourer,"  but  also  as  "  the  beloved  physician." 
The  mere  fact  that  his  profession  is  ppecified  is  full  of  interest.  There  are  only 
two  other  snch  cases  in  the  record  which  we  have  of  the  companions  of  our  apostle. 
"  Demetrius,  tne  silversmith  "  (Acts  xix.  24),  though  his  conduct  had  much  to  do 
with  a  very  important  passage  of  St.  Paul's  career,  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  been 
one  of  his  companions :  and  of  "  Alexander  the  coppersmith,"  or  "  Zenas  the 
lawyer"  (2  Tim.  iv.  14;  Titus  iii.  13),  we  know  little.  Lydia,  "the  seller  of  purple" 
(Acts  xvi.  14),  was  probably  brought  to  Philippi,  and  thus  within  the  sacred  circle 
of  apostolic  companionship,  by  the  exigencies  of  her  trade — while  of  Aquila  and 
Priscilla,  who  were  "  tent-makers,"  we  are  distinctly  told  that  Paul  "  abode  with 
them,  because  he  was  of  the  same  craft"  (Acts  xviii.  3).     Similarly,  there  can 


804  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

hardly  be  a  doubt  that  St.  Luke's  professional  life  was  the  occasion  of  his  coming 
into  close  contact  with  St.  Paul.  Physicians  were  men  of  high  education,  and  this 
would  establish  an  easy  link  of  connection  with  one  who,  besides  other  great 
qualifications  for  his  work,  was  a  man  of  literary  culture.    But  there  is  a  stroag 

[)robability  that  a  deeper  union  between  the  two  men  subsisted  than  that  of  intel- 
ectual  tastes.  St.  Paul  had  been  suffering  from  serious  illness  in  Galatia  (Gal. 
iv.  13),  and  very  soon  afterwards  St.  Luke  appears  with  him  at  Troas.  During 
subsequent  years  they  were  frequently  associated  in  the  closest  manner,  and  we 
have  the  best  reasons  for  believing  that  the  apostle's  health  was  dehcate.  What 
BO  natural  as  to  suppose  that  the  first  acquaintance  at  Troas  was  marked  by  the 
exercise  of  St.  Luke's  professional  skill,  and  that  the  same  skill  was  on  many  sub- 
Bequent  occasions  available  for  the  alleviation  of  suffering  and  fatigue?  How 
entirely  this  explains  the  peculiar  warmth  and  definiteness  of  the  allusion  here ! 
We  must  carefully  observe,  too,  that  it  is  not  merely  St.  Luke's  medical  knowledge 
which  St.  Paul  mentions,  but  that  he  calls  him  "  beloved  "  in  connection  with  this 
characteristic.  There  seems  to  be  evidently  here  the  sense  of  personal  gratitude 
for  benefits  received.  It  is  natural  to  attempt  to  trace  out  some  indications  in  St. 
Luke's  writings  of  the  fact  that  he  was  a  physician.  Thus  it  is  in  his  Gospel 
alone,  in  the  record  of  that  first  sermon  at  Nazareth,  that  we  find  the  prominent 
mention  of  the  "  healing "  of  both  mind  and  body  as  a  characteristic  of  the 
Saviour's  mission ;  and  here  only,  at  the  close  of  that  sermon,  have  we  the  quoting 
of  that  pointed  proverb — "  Physician,  heal  thyself  "  (Luke  iv.  18,  23).  With  this 
may  be  classed  a  phrase  which  is  unique  in  this  Gospel,  in  the  account  of  what 
took  place  soon  afterwards — "  The  power  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  heal  them  " 
(Luke  V.  17).  So  again,  we  have,  twice  repeated,  in  this  Gospel,  a  peculiar  phrase 
having  reference  to  recovery  from  sickness  :  "  There  went  virtue  out  of  Him  and 
healed  them  all:"  "Somebody  hath  touched  Me;  for  I  perceive  that  virtue  la 
gone  out  of  Me  "  (Luke  vi.  19 ;  viii.  46).  But,  above  all,  we  must  notice  what  is 
almost  an  amusing  corroboration  of  the  view  concerning  the  existence  of  this  pro- 
fessional feeling  in  St.  Luke's  Gospel.  In  the  account  which  the  other  evangelist 
gives  of  the  woman  healed  a  reflection  seems  to  be  thrown  on  the  skill  of  the  phy- 
sicians (Mark  v.  26) ;  whereas  St.  Luke  casts  no  imputation  on  the  skill  of  thos« 
who  belonged  to  his  own  profession  (Luke  viii.  43).  Similarly  we  trace  indications 
of  the  physician's  mind  in  the  mention  of  technical  details  and  in  the  use  of  appro- 
priate medical  terms.  In  the  account  of  the  healing  of  Peter's  wife's  mother  when 
St.  Luke  describes  the  fever  as  a  *'  great "  fever,  and  speaks  of  Jesus  as  "  standing 
over  "  the  patient,  he  is  really  using  technical  forms  of  expression  ;  while  still  by 
the  words,  **  He  rebuked  the  fever,"  he  is  careful  to  mark  the  miraculous  nature 
of  the  cure  (Luke  iv.  38,  39).  In  the  Acts  the  writer  has  an  evident  teiidency  to 
dwell  on  symptoms ;  and  this  is  a  true  mark  of  the  medical  mind.  Thus,  in 
relating  the  case  of  the  lame  man  at  the  temple  gate,  it  is  not  merely  the  fact 
of  the  recovery  which  is  stated,  but  it  is  said  that  "  the  feet  and  ankle  bones 
received  strength : "  and  it  is  added  further,  as  if  to  mark  the  stages  of  the 
recovery,  that  **  he  stood  up  and  walked  "  (Acts  iii.  7,  8).  So  the  stages  of  the 
blindness  of  Elymas  at  Paphos  are  indicated,  and  the  symptoms  of  the  case,  as 
well  as  the  mere  fact  of  the  loss  of  sight,  when  it  is  said  that,  on  the  ntterance 
of  St.  Paul's  stem  anathema,  "  there  fell  on  him  a  mist  and  a  darkness,  and  he 
went  about  seeking  some  to  lead  him  by  the  hand  "  (Acts  xiii.  11).  The  last 
instance  may  be  furnished  by  the  record  of  St.  Paul's  stay  in  Malta,  after  the  ship- 
wreck. A  miraculous  cure  was  worked  there  on  the  father  of  Publius,  "  the  chief 
man  of  the  island,"  who  was  suffering  from  dysentery  in  an  aggravated  form ;  and 
the  language  which  St.  Luke  appUes  to  the  patient  is  as  exact  and  appropriate 
as  if  he  himself  had  been  called  in  to  treat  the  case  professionally  (Acts  xxviii.  8). 
{Dean  Howson.)  Luke  the  beloved  physician : — Note — I.  The  conqbuity  between 
Luke's  profession  and  the  religion  of  which  he  had  become  the  possessoe. 
1.  The  predominating  characteristic  of  Christianity  among  the  religions  of  the 
world  is  its  humanity.  It  brings  relief  to  the  physical  ills  which  curse  the  race. 
Christ  acted  as  the  Great  Physician.  "The  works  that  I  do  shall  ye  do  also." 
Where  the  gospel  comes  the  laws  of  health  and  the  healing  art  receive  attention 
such  as  cannot  be  found  among  heathens.  In  the  palmiest  days  of  Greece  these 
matters  were  terribly  neglected.  2.  The  requirements  and  tendencies  of  Chris- 
tianity involve  attention  to  what  is  the  physician's  peculiar  care.  Physical  well- 
being  is  essential  to  vigour  of  mind,  healthy  affections,  pure  morals,  both  in  the 
individual  and  in  the  community.   Diseased  nervous  conditions  render  the  practica 


CiUJ>.  IT.]  COLOSSIANS.  805 

of  Bome  Christian  virtues  well-nigh  impossible.     II.  The  ai>aptation  of  the  oospki, 

TO  THE  LEARNED  AND  RICH,  AS  WELL  AS  TO  THE  POOR  AND  LLLITEKATJ5.      Religion  in  tljO 

ancient  world  was  often  a  luxury  for  the  well-to-do.  The  glory  of  the  Saviour's 
ministry  and  its  novelty  was,  "  To  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached."  There  ia  no 
room  in  it  for  despising  culture.  Dependence  was  placed,  not  upon  the  wild  out- 
burst of  fanaticism  or  the  erratic  movements  of  ignorance,  but  upon  the  calm 
energy  of  disciplined  intelligence.  Paul  was  himself  a  scholar  of  rare  attainments, 
as  was  Moses  in  the  older  economy,  as  also  was  Luke.  Their  mark  on  Christianity 
ia  the  deepest,  their  influeuee  the  strongest.  Crude,  misshapen  theologies  are  the 
product,  not  of  the  educateil,  but  of  smatterers.  Luke  was  a  physician  when  he 
believed  the  gospel.  1.  The  rich  and  scientific  need  its  grace  as  much  as  the 
poorest  and  most  illiterate.  Its  revelations  make  special  demands  upon  the  reason 
of  the  wise.  2.  Luke's  example  shows  us  that  cultivated  intelligence  does  not  find 
it  impossible  to  assent  eilher  to  the  evidences  or  the  doctrines  of  Christianity. 

III.  Here  is  an  example  of  professional  godliness,  Luke  practised  as  a  physician 
and  preached  as  an  evangelist.  For  long  the  healing  art  was  in  the  hands  of 
ecclesiastics.  Modern  division  of  labour  has  dissociated  them.  But  the  two  can 
work  together  and  work  into  each  other's  hands.  But  as  the  physician  has  to  be 
with  men  under  the  darkest  shadows  of  their  lives  and  in  the  deepest  depths,  how 
essential  that  the  spirit  of  their  work  should  be  the  spirit  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows. 
Luke  was  Paul's  beloved  friend.  It  is  a  calamity  when  the  physician  is  unworthy 
of  such  a  confidence  on  the  part  of  an  apostle.  Luke's  faithful  consistency  is  full 
of  practical  admonition.  Being  dead  he  yet  speaks.  Faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  the 
Physician  of  souls,  is  the  only  but  all-sufiicient  means  of  salvation.  So  Luke,  the 
beloved  physician,  teaches.  {The  Preacher's  Monthly.)  Religion  and  the  medical 
profession: — I.  The  deference  shown  to  medical  science.  Medicine  has  always 
occupied  a  conspicuous  place  among  the  sciences.  It  has  to  do  with  that  which 
intimately  concerns  ns.  Our  nature  is  not  what  it  was  as  it  came  from  the  hand 
of  God.  Sin  has  turned  this  world  into  a  vast  lazar-house.  No  individual  ulti- 
mately escapes.  Naturally  men  have  sought  amelioration,  and  their  cry  has 
always  been  met.  Even  the  most  savage  tribes  have  "  medicine  men."  So  high 
was  the  estimate  put  on  this  act  that  it  was  regarded  as  akin  to  the  supernatural 
and  was  chiefly  in  the  hands  of  the  priesthood.  Among  the  Egyptians  the  know- 
ledge of  medicine  was  a  profound  secret,  and  in  Greece  it  was  carefuUy  concealed 
and  transmitted  from  father  to  son  by  the  priests  of  ^sculapius,  to  whom  belonged 
Hippocrates.  Although  medicine  has  ceased  to  be  a  secret  it  has  lost  nothing  of 
its  hold  on  the  respect  and  confidence  of  mankind.  As  in  religion  men  speak  lightly 
of  the  profession,  but  as  soon  as  a  man,  however  sceptical,  is  sick  he  sends  for  the 
doctor.  And  no  profession,  except  that  which  deals  with  the  healing  of  the  soul, 
has  more  claims  on  our  gratitude.  When  the  body  is  racked  with  pain  or  parched 
with  fever  the  physician  comes  as  a  minister  of  mercy,  and  without  the  boon  which 
be  brings  what  is  the  value  of  all  other  earthly  blessings.  The  banquet  is  spread 
in  vain  for  the  man  who  has  no  appetite,  and  riches,  friends,  <&o.,  avail  nothing. 
II.  The  benevolence  of  the  medical  pbofebsion.  Their  labours  are  not  the  most 
remunerative.  Compared  with  commerce  the  returns  are  meagre ;  yet  what 
deserves  ampler  remuneration,  not  only  on  account  of  the  benefits  conferred,  but 
because  of  the  exhaustive  character  of  the  work.  The  merchant  is  always  sure 
of  hia  evenings  and  Sundays  ;  the  doctor  never.  And  people  make  allowances 
when  other  men  fail  to  keep  their  engagements,  but  no  excuse  is  allowed  the 
doctor.  Serving  all  classes  self-sacrificingly  he  is  eminently  the  benefactor  of  the 
poor.  III.  The  religious  drawbacks  of  the  trofession.  1.  It  might  seem  that 
no  class  could  be  more  favourably  situated  for  having  the  claims  of  religion  enforced 
npon  them.  With  the  memento  mori  ever  before  him  how  can  the  doctor  forget 
that  he,  too,  must  die.  Familiarity  breeds  contempt,  however,  here  as  elsewhere, 
or  if  not,  it  blunts  the  edge  of  providential  appeals.  2.  Then,  again,  there  is  the 
temptation  to  materialism  into  which  so  many  medical  men  fall.  Scientific 
research  has  to  do  with  matter  alone,  and  is  incapable  of  discovering  the  soul ; 
but  that  does  not  prove  there  is  no  soul,  which  scientists  too  often   assume. 

IV.  The  reliqiodb  responsibilities  of  the  profession.  Obligation  is  proportioned 
to  opportunity  in  doing  good.  Who  has  such  power  over  the  confidence  and  the 
affections  as  the  doctor  T  With  what  eagerness  are  his  visits  expected,  and  how 
much  better  does  a  patient  often  feel  simply  because  the  doctor  has  been.  But 
how  immeasurably  would  the  happy  effects  of  his  visits  be  enhanced  if  he  com 
bined  with  his  proper  office  that  of  physician  for  the  soul.    Words  of  encourage- 

20 


808  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  it. 

ment  and  consolation  would  be  of  more  value  because  leas  prt  ^sional  than  those 
of  the  minister,  and  what  could  be  more  imitative  of  the  example  of  the  Great 
Physician.    He  comes,  too,  just  at  the  time  for  making  a  religions  impression. 
In   health  men  are  callous,  but  sickness  brings  home  Bubjecta  of  momentous 
importance.     (/.  Leyburn,  D.D.)        The  importance  of  religion  to  the  $tudy  and 
practice  of  medicine  : — (To  medical  students, )     This  science  is  a  most  pleasing  and 
imp-Ttent  study.     Its  object  is  the  prevention  and  cure  of  disease.     Next  to  the 
health  of  a  man's  soul  is  the  health  of  his  body.     Without  this  enjoyment  and 
usefulness  is  impaired  and  suffering  brought  on  society  in  general.     A  great  many 
men  have  and  are  engaged  in  it,  and  no  class  is  more  worthy  of  our  respect. 
Witness  their  gratuitous   attention  to  the  poor  and  at  hospitals,  their  remoa- 
etrances  against  the  evils  which  infest  the  community.     I.  Illubteatb  thb  senti- 
ment IN  THE  CHAEAOTEB  OF  LuKE.    He  was  a  native  of  Antioch  in  Syria,  where 
he  probably  studied  at  its  famous  university.     Some  say  that  he  was  a  pupil 
of  Galen,  but  the  dates  seem  to  disprove  this.     1.  His  practice  as  a  physician 
is  not  stated,  whether  large  or  small,  but  "  the  beloved  physician  "  implies  much 
to  Paul  and  perhaps  many  others.     He  was  beloved — (1)  As  a  physician.     Ho'w 
valuable  to  Paul  to  have  a  companion  who  understood  medicine  !     How  often  did 
he  require  attention  through  stripes,  bruises,  ill-health,  and  exhausted  energies. 
(2)  Ab  a  friend.    A  man  whose  mind  was  cultivated  by  science  and  who  could  write 
those  elegant  dedications  to  Theophilus,  and  the  books  of  which  they  are  the 
prefaces,  must  have  been  very  congenial  to  a  mind  like  Paul's.     (3)  As  a  helpe*. 
The  healing  art  has  been  always  a  powerful  help  to  the  gospel.    The  physician  can 
get  a  word  in  where  the  clergyman  cannot.    2.  Note  the  importance  of  religion  to 
him  as  a  physician.     (1)  It  gave  him  a  decided  character.     He  chose  to  leave  his 
residence  and  practice  to  travel,  not  for  pleasure  or  in  the  interests  of  science,  but 
with  a  persecuted  missionary  to  propagate  the  gospel.     We  are  not  all  called  to 
follow  this  example,  but  it  shows  how  piety  enables  a  man  to  prize  real  excellence, 
choose  and  do  the  greatest  good,  and  not  to  be  ashamed  of  God  when  it  is  fashionable 
to  deny  Him.     (2)  It  made  him  useful.     He,  like  his  Master,  was  cast  among  the 
diseased.     Miracles  were  not  filways  necessary,  hence  Christ  was  sparing  of  them. 
He  that  cures  the  body  does  well ;  he  that  cures  the  soul  does  better ;  he  that 
cures  both  does  best.     The  name  of  Luke  the  "  beloved  physician  "  is  admired,  but 
Luke  the  evangelist  all  nations  shall  bless.     II.  Pbove  the  sentiment  in  bespkct 
TO  TOUESELVES.     Religion  is  important.     1.  To  prepare  you  for  study.     You  of  all 
men  require  a  peaceful,  not  a  torturing,  conscience;  a  mind  at  rest,  not  driven 
to  and  fro  with  the  speculations  of  every  religious  adventurer.     The  religion  of 
Christ  gives  this.     2.  To  accompany  scientific  investigations.     You  have  t6  study 
the  noblest  work  of  God.     That  religion  accelerates  this  study  is  proved  by  David 
(Psa.  oxxxix.)  and  Solomon  (Eccles.  xii.).     Here  is  a  knowledge  of  anatomy  in  ita 
most  beauteous  form.     How  can  you  investigate  this  without  rigfit  views  of  God  t 
Wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  display  themselves  in  every  exhibition  of  the  human 
body.     And  that  science  should  lead  to  materialism  is  astounding.    3.  To  aid  use- 
fulness in  practice.    Patients  are  often  dependent  for  their  recovery  on  the  state  of 
their  mind.     Disease  is  aggravated  by  anxiety,  murmuring,  and  irreligious  views  of 
God.   If  without  the  formality  of  a  clerical  visit  you  can  soothe  the  mind  and  drop  into 
it  a  Divine  promise,  howvastly  your  usefulness  will  be  augmented.  And  besides,  there 
will  be  cases  which  no  medicine  can  reach.     What  will  you  do  then  if  you  are  not 
qualified  by  religion  to  be  a  physician  for  the  mind  ?    4.  To  exalt  the  character. 
The  man  who  reverences  God  and  promotes  the  highest  interests  of  others  may 
be  sneered  at  by  infidels  and  profligates,  and  perhaps  looked  down  upon  by  otier 
members  of  his  profession ;  but  ask  the  public  what  they  think  of  such  a  man. 
But,  better  still,  such  a  man  will  stand  well  in  the  estimation  of  God.     5.  To  pro- 
mote your  own    happiness.     (J.   Sherman.)         Demas   (Philemon    24),  perhaps 
Demetrius.    Is  the  curt  mention  of  this  man  contrasted  with  the  full  affectionate 
recognition  of  St.  Luke  the  cloud  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand  which  prepares  aa 
for  the  subsequent  darkness  that  hangs  over  him?  (2   Tim.   iv.   10).     {Bishop 
Alexander.)         We  know  no  more  about  him  except   the  melancholy  record, 
"Demas  hath   forsaken  me,"   &c.     Perhaps  he  was  a  Thessalonian,  and  went 
home.     His  love  of  the  world  was  his  reason  for  abandoning  Paul.    Probably  it 
was  on  the  side  of  danger  that  the  world  tempted  him.     He  was  a  coward,  and 
preferred  a  whole  skin  to  a  clear  conscience.     In  immediate  connection  with  the 
record  of  his  desertion  we  read,  "  At  my  first  answer,  no  man  stood  by  me,  but  all 
men  forsook  me."     As  the  same  word  is  used,  probably  Demas  was  one  of  those 


CHAP,  nr.]  COLOSSIANS.  807 

timid  friends  whose  courage  was  not  eqnal  to  standing  by  Paul  when  be  thrust  hia 
head  into  the  lion's  mouth.  Let  us  not  be  too  hard  on  a  constancy  that  warped  in 
BO  fierce  a  heat.  He  may  not  have  been  an  apostate  Christian,  though  he  was  a 
faithless  friend.  Perhaps,  away  in  Thessalonica,  he  repented  him  of  his  evil,  and 
perhaps  Paul  and  Demas  met  again  before  the  throne,  and  there  clasped  insepar- 
able hands.  Let  us  not  judge  a  man  of  whom  we  know  so  little,  but  take  to  our- 
selves the  lesson  of  humility  and  self-distrust.  That  world  that  was  too  strong  for 
Demas  will  be  too  strong  for  us  if  we  front  it  in  our  own  strength.  It  is 
ubiquitous,  working  on  us  everywhere,  and  always  like  the  pressure  of  the 
atmosphere  upon  our  bodies.  Its  might  will  crush  us,  unless  we  can  climb  to,  and 
dwell  on,  the  heights  of  communion  with  God,  where  pressure  is  diminished.  It 
acted  on  Demas  through  his  fears.  It  acts  on  us  through  our  ambitions,  affec- 
tions, and  desires.  So,  seeing  that  miserable  wreck  of  Christian  constancy,  and 
considering  ourselves  lest  we  also  be  tempted,  let  us  not  judge  another,  but  look  at 
home.  There  is  more  than  enough  there  to  make  profound  self-distrust  our  truest 
wisdom,  and  to  teach  us  to  pray,  "  Hold  thou  me  up  and  I  shall  be  safe."  {A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Luke  and  Demos: — These  two  names  in  juxtaposition  and 
subsequent  separation  suggest — I.  The  basis  of  Christian  friendship,  1.  Society 
is  divided  into  many  classes.  Men  are  bound  together  by  similarity  of  pursuit, 
taste,  attainment.  The  basis  of  their  union  may  be  pecuniary  equality,  political 
agreement,  or  common  occupation.  But  such  friendships  are  temporary,  being 
based  on  what  is  temporary.  A  man's  circumstances  may  alter,  his  tastes  change  ; 
easy  then  for  friends  to  be  sundered.  The  poor  basis  of  worldly  friendship  may 
resist  the  sapping  waters  of  change.  But  this  is  the  exception ;  hence  we  say, 
"  What  devotion  1  "  Self-interest  may  bind  men  together,  and  even  a  common 
consciousness  of  wrong.  But  let  self  be  imperilled,  and  where  is  the  cohesion 
then?  2.  The  basis  of  Christian  friendship  is  common  love  to  a  common  Lord. 
"A  new  commandment  give  I  unto  you  that  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have  loved 
you."  There  is  the  measure  and  the  motive.  The  coolness  of  some  professors 
shows  how  they  lack  the  spirit  of  Christ.  As  we  are  in  Him,  and  imbued  with 
His  spirit,  shall  we  be  one  in  Him.  In  the  primitive  Church  men  of  different 
ranks  and  pursuits,  &c. ,  "  continued  in  the  apostles'  .  .  .  fellowship."  And  then 
Paul,  a  man  of  large  intelligence,  wide  learning,  good  family,  &c. — just  the  man  to 
hold  others  aloof — after  the  heavenly  vision,  gathered  into  his  friendship  Luke  the 
physician,  Onesimus  the  runaway  slave,  and  Demas.  Beautiful  his  friendship  with 
men  of  less  degree.  And  when  he  writes  to  distant  brethren  he  says,  *'  Luke, 
I  shall  mention  your  name,  and,  Demas,  yours."  U.  Common  Christian  labotjb 
IS  A  CEMENTING  FORCE  IN  CHRISTIAN  FRIENDSHIP.  In  Writing  to  Philemou,  Paul 
shows  the  thing  which  bound  them  together.  Demas,  Luke,  my  fellow-workers. 
Paul  had  an  utter  impatience  of  idleness.  He  had  not  only  the  faculty  of  industry, 
but  of  setting  others  to  work.  And  whoever  co-operated  with  him,  however 
humble,  received  the  title  of  "fellow-worker."  1.  Luke  was  such;  and  was  very 
valuable  to  the  ott-afHicted  apostle  as — (1)  A  physician.  Invaluable  everywhere, 
especially  so  in  prison,  the  sedentary  life  of  which  told  upon  the  apostle's  never 
stalwart  frame.  But  Luke  was  with  him  with  his  physic  and  his  words,  "  doing 
good  like  medicine."  (2)  As  a  congenial  fellow-traveller  and  helper  in  missionary 
work.  (3)  The  hand  that  could  wield  a  lancet  could  also  use  a  skilful  pen,  and  by 
bis  Gospel  and  Acts  he  has  laid  the  Church  under  perpetual  obligations.  2.  What 
of  Demas  ?  Wliat  he  could  do  is  not  written.  But  he  did  something.  He  was  no 
idler.  Paul  calls  him  a  fellow- worker.  He  was  no  Luke,  but  as  there  are  diver- 
sities of  gifts,  so  he  had  his  special  line,  as  has  every  one.  8.  Common  labour 
will  draw  us  together.  From  the  general  down  to  the  drummer-boy,  all  in  an 
army,  when  the  battle  is  expected,  feel  knit  together,  for  they  have  a  common 
enemy ;  and  when  the  enemy  is  vanquished,  they  rejoice  in  a  common  victory. 
Let  all  Christians  unite  against  evil  and  for  God,  and  that  will  unite  all  hearts. 

III.     WORLDLINESS      IS       THE      DISINTEGRATING      FORCE      IN       CHRISTIAN       FRIENDSHIP. 

Pleasant  is  our  first  brief  view  of  Demas — sharer  of  work  and  affection  with 
Luke.  Later  on  Paul  writes,  "  Demas  forsook  me  .  .  .  only  Luke  is  with  me." 
Paul  can  ill  spare  a  friend  now,  for  "  the  time  of  his  departure  is  at  hand."  On 
his  release  from  prison  Paul  had  two  or  three  years  of  Christian  labour.  Did 
Demas  go  with  him  ?  Again  Paul  is  cast  into  a  Roman  cell.  Still  Demas  is  hia 
friend;  bat  only  for  a  while.  How  much  of  sincerity  mingled  with  this  man's 
profession  of  Christ  7  Did  he  leave  under  temptation  ?  Was  he  recovered?  It  is 
worthy  of  note  that  in  the  three  times  he  is  mentioned  there  is  no  bononrablft 


309  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it, 


epithet  attached  to  his  name.  Was  Paul  in  doubt  of  him?  Did  his  quick  eje 
detect  in  him  an  ambitious  spirit,  or  a  love  of  ease,  or  a  hunger  for  human 
approbation  ?  He  went  to  Tbessalonica.  Did  his  pagan  parents  seduce  him  back 
to  idolatry  ?  Or  had  some  heathen  beauty  captivated  and  drawn  his  love  from  that 
■which  ought  to  have  been  supreme  ?  Was  he  ever  recovered  ?  Let  us  hope  so  ; 
although  tradition  says  he  became  a  heathen  priest,  and  was  struck  dead  with 
lightning  while  officiating  at  the  altar.  Whatever  his  end,  worldliness  was  hia 
irnmediate  ruin.  Many  are  the  modern  confirmatory  instances.  Many  once 
Christian  workers  are  now  idlers.  Shall  the  queen's  soldier  turn  deserter  because 
of  his  difficulties  or  comrades?  Loyalty  to  queen  and  countiy  forbid.  Shall  the 
Christian's  duty  be  less  binding  ?  God  help  us  to  stay  with  Luke,  and  not  desert 
with  Demas.  What  did  he  gain ?  What  is  that  gain  to  him  now?  (G.  T.  Coster.) 
How  strikingly  these  two  contrasted  characters  bring  out— I.  The  possibilitt  o» 

MEN    BEING    EXPOSED    TO     THE    SAME    IITFLUENCES,    AND    YET    ENDING    FAR    AWAY    FBOM 

EACH  OTHER  !  They  set  out  from  the  same  point,  and  travelled  side  by  side,  subject 
to  the  same  training,  in  contact  with  the  magnetic  attraction  of  Paul's  personality, 
and  at  the  end  they  are  wide  as  the  poles  asunder.  Starting  from  the  same 
level,  one  line  inclines  ever  so  little  upwards,  the  other  imperceptibly  downwards. 
Pursue  them  far  enough,  and  there  is  room  for  the  whole  solar  system  in  the  space 
between  them.  So  two  children  trained  at  one  mother's  knee,  subjects  of  the  same 
prayers,  with  the  same  good  influence  upon  both,  may  grow  up,  one  to  break  a 
mother's  heart  and  to  disgrace  a  father's  name,  and  the  other  to  walk  in  the  way 
of  godliness  and  to  serve  the  God  of  his  fathers.  Circumstances  are  mighty ;  but 
tbB  use  we  make  of  circumstances  lies  with  ourselves.  As  we  trim  our  sails  and 
set  our  rudder,  the  same  breeze  will  take  us  in  opposite  directions.  We  are  the 
architects  ami  builders  of  our  own  characters,  and  may  so  use  the  most  unfavour- 
able influences  as  to  wholesomely  harden  our  natures  thereby,  and  we  may  so 
misuse  the  most  favourable  as  only  thereby  to  increase  our  blameworthiness  for 
wasted  opportunities.  II.  We  are  reminded,  too,  from  these  two  men  who  stand 
before  us  like  a  double  star — one  bright,  one  dark— that  no  loftiness  of  Cheibtian 

POSITION    NOR    LENGTH    OF    CHRISTIAN    PROFESSION    IS    A   GUARANTEE     AGAINST     FALLING 

AND  APOSTASY.  As  wc  read  in  another  book,  for  which  also  the  Church  has  to 
thank  a  prison  cell — the  place  where  so  many  of  its  precious  possessions  have 
been  written— there  is  a  backway  to  the  pit  from  the  gate  of  the  Celestial^  City. 
Demas  had  stood  high  in  the  Church,  and  had  been  admitted  to  the  close  intimacy 
of  the  apostle,  was  evidently  no  raw  novice,  and  yet  the  world  could  drag  him,  back 
from  so  eminent  a  place  in  which  he  had  long  fltood.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he 
standeth,"  Ac.    {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.    Salute  the  brethren  which  are  in  Laodlcea^  and  Nymphaa.— JEarZy 

Church  life  : — I.  The  brethren  at  Laodicea.  This  salutation  teaches  us — 1. 
That  brotherly  love  should  flourish  among  all  Christians.  The  philosophers  of 
old  said  that  "  a  wise  man  was  a  friend  to  a  wise  man,  although  unknown  " ;  but 
we  may  say  that  a  Christian  is  a  brother,  although  unknown;  yea,  he  is  more 
united  than  any  natural  brother  (Acts  iv.  32).  2.  This  brotherly  love  is  not  only 
declared  by  words,  but  by  services,  as  often  as  brethren,  even  they  who  live  in 
remote  churches,  need  our  assistance.  For  to  salute  one  by  word  as  a  brother, 
and  not  to  promote  the  welfare  of  a  brother,  is  the  work  of  derision  rather  than  of 
love.  II.  The  Church  which  was  in  the  house  of  Nymphas.  Either  the 
assembly  of  Christians  meeting  there  or  his  private  family,  which,  for  its  piety, 
merited  the  name  of  Church.  There  is  no  harm  in  understanding  it  in  both  senses. 
1.  Every  collection  of  believers,  although,  on  account  of  its  smallness,  may  be 
included  in  the  walls  of  a  private  house,  and  although,  on  account  of  their  enemies, 
they  meet  in  nocturnal  assemblies,  is  a  true  Church,  a  member  of  the  Church 
Universal.  2.  The  Papists  therefore  err  who  acknowledge  no  Church  unless  that 
which  has  the  sovereignty,  and  is  ever  before  the  eyes  of  the  world,  for  sometimes 
through  persecution  the  Church  cannot  move  in  the  pubhc  sight  at  all  (Rev.  xii.  6)6 
Bo  when  the  Arians  ruled,  Athanasius  and  the  orthodox  :were  compelled  to  retire 
into  comers.  3.  It  is  the  duty  of  every  head  of  a  family  so  to  train  his  children 
and  servants  that  his  house  may  deservedly  obtain  the  name  of  a  church  (Gen. 
xviii.  19;  Josh.  xxiv.  15),  and  those  who  neglect  this  are  unworthy  of  the  name  of 
Christians.  {Bithop  Davenant.)  Thr.  Church  in  the  house: — In  that  the  apostle 
calls  this  household  a  Church,  we  may  note  that  a  religious  and  well-ordered  family 
is  as  it  were  a  little  Choroh.     Now,  do  we  learn  from  hence  that  our  houses  are 


CHAP,  nr.]  COLOSSIANS.  80« 

Churches?  Then  these  things  will  follow.  1.  That  God's  worship  and  piety 
must  be  set  up  in  them.  How  can  they  be  Churches  of  God  if  God  be  not  served 
in  them  ?  2.  All  must  be  done  there  in  order,  and  quietness,  and  silence,  for  so  it 
is  or  sliould  be  in  the  Church.  3.  Evil  persons  that  are  incorrigible  must  not 
dwell  there,  but  must  be  oast  out  (Psa.  ci.).  4.  The  husband  or  master  of  the 
family  must  dwell  there  as  a  man  of  knowledge,  and  wives,  children,  and  servants 
must  obey  as  the  Church  doth  Christ.  Conclusion  :  1,  Are  our  families  Churches? 
Why,  then,  religious  families  are  in  a  happy  case,  for  then  God  Himself  will  dwell 
there ;  so  as  a  stranger  coming  to  such  places  may  say,  as  Jacob  did  of  Bethel, 
'*  Surely  God  is  in  this  place."  2.  Should  our  families  be  Churches?  Oh,  then, 
woe  unto  the  world  of  profane  households.  (N.  Byfield.)  The  Church  in  the 
hovue  of  Nyinphat : — We  read  that  Priscilla  and  Aquila  had  such  both  in  their  house 
at  Kome  (Kom.  xvi.  6)  and  in  Ephesus  (1  Cor.  xvi.  19),  and  that  Philemon  had  one 
in  his  house  at  CoIossbb.  This  may  have  been  the  families,  or  small  congregations 
meeting  in  these  houses.  The  expression  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  primitive 
elasticity  of  Church  order  and  fluidity  of  ecclesiastical  language.  The  word  Church 
Lad  not  yet  been  fixed  to  its  present  technical  sense.  There  was  but  one  Church 
in  Laodicea,  and  yet  within  it  was  this  little  Church — an  imperium  in  imperio — as  il 
the  word  had  not  yet  come  to  mean  more  than  an  assembly,  and  as  if  all  the  arrange- 
ments of  order  and  worship  of  later  days  were  undreamed  of  yet.  The  life  was 
there,  but  the  forms  which  were  to  grow  out  of  the  life,  and  to  protect  it  sometimes, 
and  to  stifle  it  often,  were  only  beginning  to  show  themselves,  and  were  certainly 
not  yet  felt  to  be  forms.  If  the  Church  in  the  house  of  Nymphas  consisted  of — 
I.  His  own  family  and  dependents,  it  stands  for  us  as  a  lesson  of  what  every 
family  which  has  a  Christian  man  or  woman  at  its  head  ought  to  be.  Little  know- 
ledge of  so-called  Christian  households  is  needed  to  be  sure  that  domestic  religion 
ie  woefully  neglected  to-day.  Family  worship  and  instruction  are  disused,  one 
fears,  in  many  homes,  the  beads  of  which  can  remember  both  in  their  fathers' 
houses  ;  and  the  unspoken  atmosphere  of  religion  does  not  fill  the  house  with  its 
aroma  as  it  ought  to  do.  If  a  Christian  householder  have  not  "  a  Church  in  his 
house,"  the  family  union  is  tending  to  become  "  a  synagogue  of  Satan."  A  like 
suggestion  may  be  made  if  this  Church — II.  Included  mork  than  familt  and 
DEPENDENTS.  It  is  a  miserable  thing  when  social  intercourse  plays  freely  round 
every  other  subject,  and  taboos  all  mention  of  religion ;  when  Christian  people 
choose  society  for  worldly  advantages,  and  for  every  reason  under  heaven — some- 
times a  long  way  under — except  those  of  a  common  faith,  and  of  the  desire  to 
increase  il.  It  is  not  needful  to  lay  down  extravag  nt,  impracticable  restrictions, 
by  insisting  that  we  should  limit  our  society  to  religious  men,  or  our  conversation 
to  religious  subjects.  But  it  is  a  bad  sign  when  our  associates  are  chosen  for 
every  other  reason  bnt  their  religion,  and  when  our  talk  flows  copiously  on  all  other 
subjects,  and  becomes  a  constrained  driblet  when  religion  comes  to  be  spoken  of. 
Let  us  strive  to  carry  about  with  us  an  influence  which  shall  permeate  all  social 
intercourse,  and  make  it,  if  not  directly  religious,  yet  never  antagonistic  to  religion, 
and  always  capable  of  passing  easily  and  naturally  into  the  highest  regions.  Our 
godly  forefathers  used  to  carve  texts  over  their  doors.  Let  us  do  the  same  in 
another  faebion,  so  that  all  who  cross  our  threshold  may  feel  that  they  have  come 
into  a  Christian  household,  where  cheerful  godliness  sweetens  and  brightens  the 
sanctities  of  home.  (A.  Maclaren.  D.D.)  Church  duties  at  home : — Two  Christians 
met  on  a  Monday  morning.  Both  were  parents.  As  was  natural,  the  conversation 
turned  upon  the  services  of  the  previous  day.  The  first  speaker  opened  by  saying, 
"  We  bad  a  sermon  from  our  minister  last  night  on  the  religious  instruction 
of  children.  Why  didn't  you  come  and  hear  it? "  "Because,"  said  the  other,  "I 
was  at  home  doing  it  1 "     (Christian    Treasury.)  Home  example: — It    was    a 

source  of  much  trouble  to  some  fishes  to  see  a  number  of  lobsters  swimming  back- 
wards instead  of  forwards.  They  therefore  called  a  meeting ;  and  it  was  deter- 
mined to  open  a  class  for  their  instruction,  which  was  done,  and  a  number  of 
young  lobsters  came,  for  the  fishes  gravely  argued  that  if  they  commenced  with 
the  young  ones,  as  they  grew  up  they  would  learn  to  swim  aright.  At  first  they 
did  very  well ;  but  afterwards,  when  they  returned  home,  and  saw  their  fathers 
and  mothers  swimming  in  the  old  way,  they  soon  forgot  their  lessons.  So  many 
a  child  well  taught  at  school  is  drifted  backwards  by  a  bad  home  influence. 
{Bible  Class  Magazine.)  The  Church  anywhere  :— The  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 

is  found  wherever  He  is  known,  served,  and  adored  according  to  His  gospel  ; 
within  the  enclosure  of  the  walls  of  a  house,  or  in  the  very  caverns  of  moantaiti-. 


8ie  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

and  coverts  of  the  wildernesB,  whither  the  Holy  Spirit  expressly  foretells  us  that 
the  spouse  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  sometimes  constrained  to  retire.  (J.  Daille.) 
A  prayerless  Iwme : — I  shall  never  forget  the  impression  made  upon  me  during  the 
first  year  of  my  ministry  by  a  mechanic  whom  I  had  visited,  and  on  whom  I 
urged  the  paramount  duty  of  family  prayer.  One  day  he  entered  my  study,  and 
bursting  into  tears,  said,  "  You  remember  that  girl,  sir ;  she  was  my  only  chili 
She  died  suddenly  this  morning.  She  has  gone,  I  hope,  to  God.  But  if  bo,  she 
can  tell  Him  what  now  breaks  my  heart — that  she  never  heard  a  prayer  in  her 
father's  house  or  from  her  father's  Ups !  Oh  that  she  were  with  me  but  one  day 
again  I"    (Norman  Macleod.) 

Yer.  16.  When  this  Epistle  Is  read  among  you,  eaose  it  to  be  read  also  In 
the  Church  of  the  Laodiceans. — I.  The  apostle  wished  his  Epistle  to  be  bead  is 
THE  WHOLE  Chuech.  Heuce  observe — 1.  That  the  sacred  Scriptures  were  not 
written  for  the  clergy,  but  for  all  Christian  people,  and  that  the  ordinary  reading 
of  the  Scriptures  obtained  in  the  primitive  Church  (1  Thess.  v.  27).  And  that  this 
was  in  a  language  understood  by  the  people  is  plain  from  Justin  Martyr,  Tertullian, 
and  other  fathers.  2.  That  they  do  err  who  deny  that  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures 
conduces  to  the  edification  of  a  Christian  people  unless  there  be  an  exposition  by 
the  preacher.  This  is  not  to  detract  from  the  utility  or  necessity  of  preaching. 
Nevertheless,  we  assert  with  the  Psalmist  (Psa.  xix.  7).  II.  He  ordered  them  to 
COMMUNICATE  THIS  EpiSTLE  TO  THE  Laodiceaks.  1.  Because  the  doctrine  of  the 
Epistle  is  general,  and  on  that  account  was  not  to  be  reserved  for  the  private  use 
of  the  Church,  but  to  be  communicated  to  the  whole  Church  of  God,  but  first  to 
their  nearest  neighbours,  who,  having  read  the  autograph,  could  take  copies  of 
them  and  scatter  them  abroad.  2.  Because  Laodicea  was  infected  with  the  same 
error  as  Colossse.  Observe,  then,  that  among  all  the  Churches  of  God,  and 
especially  neighbouring  ones,  there  ought  to  be  a  communication  of  spiritual 
benefits,  so  that  if  one  Church  should  have  anything  that  might  contribute  to  the 
edification  of  another,  it  should  not  grudge  to  impart  it.  {Bishop  Davenant.) 
The  Epistles  a  common  means  of  edification: — The  first  Churches  were  edified  by 
the  mutual  interchange  of  apostolical  Epistles,  and  by  the  public  reading  of 
them.  An  Epistle  sent  to  one  Church  became  in  reality  the  common  property  of 
all  the  Churches,  and  this  fact  led,  at  no  very  long  period,  to  the  formation  of  the 
canon  of  the  New  Testament.  These  Epistles  were  eagerly  sought  after,  frequently 
copied,  and  devoutly  cherished,  so  that  complete  collections  of  them  were  made. 
They  were  carefully  distinguished  from  other  writings,  and,  by  the  voice  of  the 
Churches,  to  them  exclusively  was  accorded  a  place  in  the  sacred  canon.  In  this 
arrangement  the  wisdom  of  God  was  providentially  manifested.  By  such  use  of 
the  Holy  Scripture  the  first  Christians  were  nourished  in  their  faith,  and  built  up 
in  the  love  and  hope  of  the  gospel.  Healthful  religion  from  that  time  to  this,  and, 
indeed,  previously,  under  the  Jewish  ecomony,  has  been  connected  with  a  free, 
frequent,  and  devout  use  of  Holy  Scripture.  This  alone,  by  the  blessing  of  God, 
can  preserve  the  purity  and  living  power  of  a  Church.  Shut  out  the  Word  of 
God,  and  superstition  and  spiritual  death  will  creep  in.  It  is  by  the  use  of  the 
unadulterated  *'  milk  of  the  Word  "  that  the  disciples  are  to  grow  (1  Pet.  ii.  2). 
It  is  the  "engrafted  Word"  which  saves  (James  i.  21).  It  is  through  the  com- 
fort of  the  Scriptures  that  wt  have  hope  (Eom.  xv.  4).  And  all  Scripture  is 
profitable  (2  Tim.  iii.  16-17).  (J.  Spence,  D.D.)  General  reading  of  Scripture 
allowed  : — Nothing  is  more  condemnatory  of  the  practice  of  Eome  than  this  plain 
nnequivocal  command.  Yet  Komanists  prohibit  the  general  perusal  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, and  read  only  small  portions,  and  these  in  an  unknovra  tongue,  in  public 
worship.  St.  Paul  orders  his  entire  Epistle  to  be  read  publicly.  But  if  one 
Epistle,  then  all  Epistles  are  equally  required  to  be  read.  The  Old  Testament  was, 
as  we  know,  constantly  recited  in  the  Jewish  synagogues,  as  is  manifest  by  the  case 
of  our  Lord  at  Nazareth  and  St.  Paul  at  Antioch  (Acts  xiii.  15)  ;  and  in  the  face 
of  the  apostle's  command  respecting  his  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians, 
Romanism  sets  up  its  prohibitions.  Can  we  wonder  that  all  evils  and  superstitions 
should  follow ;  that  the  invocation  of  saints,  the  worship  of  images,  the  adoration 
of  the  Virgin,  and  the  veneration  of  altars,  tombs,  and  rehcs  should  supersede 
the  mediation  of  Christ ;  and  that  a  multitude  of  uncommanded  ceremonies  and 
abstinences,  and  a  whole  torrent  of  will- worship,  should  follow  in  the  train  T 
(Bishop  D.  Wilson.)  The  Epistle  from  Laodicea. — The  connection  forbids  us  to 
■appose  that  this  means  a  letter  by  the  Laodiceans.    Both  letters  are  plainly 


CHAP.  XT.]  COLOSSIANS.  Sll 

Fanline  Epistles,  and  the  latter  is  said  to  be  "  from  Laodicea,"  simply  because 
the  Colossians  were  to  procure  it  from  that  place.  The  "from"  does  not  imply 
authorship,  but  transmission.  What,  then,  has  become  of  that  letter  ?  Is  it  lost  ? 
So  say  some ;  but  a  more  probable  opinion  is  that  it  is  the  Epistle  we  know  as  that 
to  the  Ephesians.  Very  weighty  authorities  omit  the  words  "In  Ephesus"  in 
verse  1  of  that  Epistle.  The  conjecture  is  a  reasonable  one  that  the  letter  was 
intended  for   a  circle  of  Churches,  and   had  originally  no  place  named  in  the 

superscription,  just  as  we  might  issue  circulars   "To  the   Church  in  ," 

leaving  a  blank  to  be  filled  in  with  different  names.  This  conjecture  is  streng- 
thened by  the  marked  absence  of  personal  references  in  the  letter,  which,  in  that 
respect,  forms  a  striking  contrast  to  Colossians,  which  it  so  .strongly  resembles  in 
other  particulars.  Probably,  therefore,  Tychicus  had  both  letters  put  into  his 
hands  for  dehvery.  The  circular  would  go  first  to  Ephesus,  as  the  most  important 
Church  in  Asia,  and  thence  would  be  carried  by  him  to  one  community  after 
another,  till  he  reached  Laodicea,  from  which  he  would  come  further  up  the 
valley  to  Colossa),  bringing  both  letters  with  him.  The  Colossians  are  not  told 
to  get  the  letter  from  Laodicea,  but  to  be  sure  they  read  it.  Tychicus  would  see 
that  it  came  to  them ;  their  business  was  to  see  that  they  marked,  learned,  and 
inwardly  digested  it.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  And  say  to  ArcMppua,  Take  heed  to  the  ministry. — Often  men  who 
were  once  faithful  grow  negligent  in  the  ministry.  1.  Sometimes  from  discourage- 
ments from  their  people,  either  because  they  profit  not,  or  lieuause  they  weary  their 
teachers.  2.  Sometimes  this  comes  from  the  corruption  of  their  own  natures  ;  they 
grow  soon  weary  of  God's  work,  or,  having  taken  more  work  to  do  than  they  are 
sufficient  for,  they  grow  to  neglect  all ;  or  they  are  drawn  away  with  the  love  of  the 
world.  3.  Sometimes  God  Himself  for  the  wickedness  of  their  lives  casts  a  barren- 
ness upon  their  hearts,  and  blasteth  their  gifts.  In  this  exhortation  four  things 
may  be  noted.  L  Who  is  he  that  is  exhorted  ?  "  Say  to  Archippus. "  This 
teaches  us  that — 1.  The  sinner  must  be  told  of  his  sin  (Lev.  xix.  17).  2.  Such 
as  offend  publicly  must  be  told  of  it  publicly.  3.  Ministers  as  well  as  others  may 
be  rebuked,  though  some  clergymen  are  so  sore  and  so  proud,  that  they  may  not  be 
touched ;  and  many  times  it  is  a  just  juUjj;inent  of  God  that  no  man  should  rebuke 
them.  No  man's  learning  or  greatness  of  place  can  so  protect  them,  but  that  they 
may  be  told  of  their  faults ;  it  is  too  commonly  known  they  can  sin  as  well  as  others ; 
why,  then,  should  tbey  not  be  rebuked  as  well  as  others?  4.  The  people  may  put 
their  teachers  in  mind  of  their  faults  ;  as  thej'  ou^'ht  to  encourage  them  in  well-doing, 
80  may  they  admonish  them  for  what  is  evil.  5.  Ministers  must  be  told  of  their  faults 
by  their  people  with  great  reverence,  and  heedfulness,  and  wisdom,  according  to  that 
direction :  "  Eebuke  not  an  elder,  but  exhort  him  as  a  father."  6.  Tbey  must  say  it 
to  him,  not  say  it  of  him.     Ministers  ought  not  to  be  traduced  behind  their  backs. 

7.  He  doth  not  threaten  him  if  he  do  not,  which  implies  he  hoped  their  exhortation 
would  speed ;  certainly  it  is  a  great  praise  to  profit  by  admonition.  II.  The  matteb 
CHARGED  UPON  HIM.  "Take  heed  to  thy  ministry."  Note — 1.  Consideration,  a 
weighing  and  meditation  of  the  greatness  of  the  function,  of  the  dignity  of  it,  and 
the  duty  also,  with  the  accounts  he  must  make  to  God  and  His  high  calling  and  the 
great  price  of  souls,  &o.  2.  Divers  of  the  worthy  qualities  of  a  minister,  as  care, 
attendance,  watchfulness,  aptness  to  teach,  and  divide  the  word  aright ;  discretion, 
to  give  every  one  his  portion ;  diligence,  gentleness,  in  not  marring  the  doctrine 
with  passion ;    patience  to  endure  the  work  and  labour  of   his  ministry,  &c. 

8.  Caution,  and  so  ministers  must  take  heed  both  of  (1)  what  is  within  them  of 
their  own  divinations,  of  idleness,  of  the  objections  of  their  own  flesh,  and  the 
temptations  of  the  devil.  (2)  Without  them  they  must  take  heed  of  the  new  errors 
that  will  daily  rise ;  of  the  sins  of  the  people,  with  all  the  methods  of  Satan  in 
devising,  committing,  or  defending  of  sin,  of  men's  fancies  ;  and  for  persons,  they 
must  take  heed  of  hypocrites,  and  open  adversaries,  domestical  vipers,  and  foreign 
foes,  false  brethren,  and  professed  idolaters.  III.  The  reason  by  which  it  is 
raoED.  "  Which  thou  hast  received  in  the  Lord."  1.  Because  it  is  God's  free 
grace  that  he  is  chosen  to  be  a  minister  (Eom.  v.  1).  2.  Because  he  is  inwardly 
called  and  qualified  by  God.  3.  Because  he  received  his  outward  authority,  though 
from  men,  yet  by  direction  and  warrant  of  God's  Word.  4.  Because  he  receives  it 
for  the  Lord — that  is  to  God's  glory,  and  the  furtherance  of  His  kingdom,  over  the 
mystical  body  of  Christ.  The  use  is  threefold.  First,  the  people  should  therefore 
learn  to  seek  their  ministers  of  God.     Secondly,  ministers  should  hence  learn  not 


313  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  iv, 

to  b«  prond,  for  they  received  their  ministry  of  God ;  it  was  His  gift,  not  theii 
deserts ;  not  idle,  for  they  are  to  do  God's  work.  Thirdly,  ininisters  may  henc« 
gather  their  own  safety  notwithstanding  the  oppositions  of  the  world,  that  God 
that  called  them  will  perfect  them.  IV.  To  fulfil  it.  1.  By  constancy,  holding 
out  in  it  to  the  end,  to  go  on,  and  not  look  back  when  they  are  at  plough.  2.  By 
^^  faithful  performance  of  it  with  a  due  respect  of  all  the  charge  they  have  received 
of  God,  thus  to  fulfil  it  is  to  show  the  people  all  the  counsel  of  God ;  it  is  to  rebuke 
all  sorts  of  sins  and  sinners  ;  it  is  faithfully  to  do  every  kind  of  work  that  belongs 
,,  to  ih&h  ministry  whether  public  &i  private.  (N.  By  field.)  The  ministry  of 
Arehippus: — It  is  probable  that  Archippus  was  a  young  pastor  recently  appointed 
to  the  Church  at  Laodicea.  Already  signs  of  slackened  zeal  began  to  appear, 
which  afterwards  culminated  in  the  state  of  lukewarmness  for  which  this  Church 
was  denounced  (Rev.  iii.  19).  The  condition  of  preacher  and  people  react  upon 
each  other;  the  Church  takes  its  colour  from,  and  communicates  it  to  its 
pastor.  Hence  the  apostle,  well  knowing  the  perils  surrounding  the  inexperienced 
Archippus,  sends  to  him  this  timely  warning  to  take  heed  to  his  ministry.  He 
is  reminded  of — I.  Thb  dieect  authority  of  the  ministbt.  "In  the  Lord." 
II.  The  ntPLiEo  dangebs  or  the  ministbt.      "Take  heed."     HI.  Thb   impeba- 

TIVB   PEE80N1L  DEMANDS   OF   THE   MINISTBY.      "  That    thoU    fulfil  it."      (G.    Barlow.) 

Archippus  and  hit  ministry  : — A  sharp  message  that,  and  especially  sharp  as  being 
sent  through  others.  If  this  Archippus  were  a  member  of  the  Church  at  Colossas, 
it  is  remarkable  that  Paul  should  not  have  spoken  to  him  directly,  as  he  did  to 
Eoodia  and  Syntyche  (Phil.  iv.  2).  But  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  he  was. 
He  is  named  in  the  Epistle  to  Philemon  in  such  immediate  connection  with  the 
latter  and  his  wife  Apphia,  that  he  has  been  supposed  to  be  their  son.  At  all 
events,  he  was  intimately  associated  with  the  Church  in  the  house  of  Philemon, 
who,  as  we  know,  was  a  Colossian.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  difficulty  referred 
to,  and  the  fact  that  the  whole  section  is  concerned  with  Laodicea,  points  to  the 
conclusion  that  Archippus,  though  perhaps  a  native  and  even  resident  at  Colossas 
had  his  ministry  in  connection  with  a  neighbouring  Church.  But  what  does  it 
matter  where  he  worked  ?  Not  very  much  perhaps  ;  and  yet  one  cannot  but  read  this 
grave  exhortation  to  a  man  who  was  evidently  getting  languid  and  negligent, 
withoat  remembering  what  we  hear  about  Laodicea  and  its  angel  when  next  we 
neet  it.  It  is  not  impossible  that  Archippus  may  have  received  the  message  more 
wfol  than  Paul's.  "  Because  thou  art  neither  hot  nor  cold,"  &c  Be  that  as  it 
may— I.  Each  or  rs  hab  a  ministbt,  or  sphere  of  service.  We  may  fill  it  full, 
with  earnest  devotion  and  patient  heroism,  as  some  expanding  gas  fiUs  out  the 
silken  round  of  its  containing  vessel,  or  we  may  breathe  into  it  only  enough  to 
occupy  a  httle  portion,  while  all  the  rest  hangs  empty  .and  flaccid.  II.  A  bacbbd 
MOTIVE  BNHAMCss  THE  OBLiOATioN.  We  have  received  it  "  in  the  Lord."  In  union 
with  Pim  it  has  been  laid  upon  us.  No  earthly  hand  has  imposed  it,  nor  does  it 
arise  from  mere  earthly  relationships.  III.  There  must  bb  diligent  watohful- 
MBSS  TO  FULFIL  DUB  MiNisTBT.  1.  We  have  to  take  heed  to  our  service,  reflect 
apon  it,  its  extent,  nature,  imperativeness,  the  manner  of  discharging  it,  and  the 
means  of  fitting  us  for  it.  We  have  to  keep  it  before  us.  Unless  we  are  absorbed 
in  it,  we  shall  not  fulfil  it.  2.  We  have  to  take  heed  to  ourselves,  ever  feeling  our 
weakness  and  the  strong  antagonisms  in  our  own  natures  which  hinder  our  dis- 
charge of  the  plainest  and  most  imperative  duties.  3.  Let  us  remember,  too,  that 
if  we  begin,  like  Archippas,  to  be  a  Uttle  languid  and  perfunctory  in  onr  work,  we 
may  end  where  the  Church  at  Laodicea  ended.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The 
Christian  ministry: — I.  The  Chbistian  ministet  is  a  solemn  and  bespomsiblb 
TBUST.  1.  It  is  Divine  in  its  bestowal.  "  Beceived  in  the  Lord."  2.  It  is  personal 
in  its  responsibility.  "  Which  thou  hast  received."  3.  It  involves  the  communi- 
cation  of  good  to  others.  "  Ministry."  4.  It  has  a  special  aspect  of  importance  for 
the  individual  minister.  "The  Ministry."  II.  The  Christian  ministbt  demands 
unbweevino  fideutt  in  accomplishing  its  lofty  mission.  "  That  thou  fulfil  it." 
1.  Divine  truth  must  be  clearly  apprehended  and  profoundly  reaUzed,  2.  The 
whole  truth  must  be  declared.  3.  The  declaration  of  truth  must  be  full  and 
ooarageons.  HI.  The  Chbistun  ministry  is  subbounded  by  peculiar  perils. 
"  Take  heed."  A  shrewd  and  ever  wakeful  vigilance  is  needed  against — 1.  The 
stealthy  encroachments  of  error.  2.  The  pernicious  influences  of  the  world. 
8.  The  subtle  temptations  to  unfaithfulness.  (G.  Barlow.)  Ministers  mtitt  look 
to  Christ  their  Master  for  direction : — At  the  battle  of  Lake  Erie,  when,  in  the 
sweeping  havoc  which  was  sometimes  made,  a  number  of  men  were  shot  away  from 


CHAP.  IT.]  COLOSSIANS.  81t 

•round  a  gun,  the  survivors  looked  silently  around  to  Perry,  and  then  stepped  into 
their  places.  When  he  looked  at  the  poor  fellows  who  lay  wounded  and  weltering 
on  the  deck,  he  always  found  their  faces  turned  towards  him,  and  their  eyes  fixed 
on  his  oountenanoe.  In  the  midst  of  trials  and  labours  the  minister  should  keep 
his  eyes  on  the  great  Leader,  Christ. 

Ver.  18.  The  salutation  of  m*.  Paul — Words  of  farexDell : — Last  words  have  in 
them  a  nameless  touch  of  pathos.     They  linger  in  the  memory  as  a  loved,  familiar 
presence,  soothe  life's  sorrows,  and  exert  upon  the  soul  a  strange  fascination.    Ab 
the  years  rush  by,  how  rich  in  meaning  do  the  words  of  dying  lipa  become,  as  when 
Caesar  said,  sadly:  "And  thou,  Brutus  1"   or  when  John  Quincy  Adams  said: 
"  This  is  the  last  of  earth  ;  "  or  Mirabeau's  frantic  cry  for  "  Music,"  after  a  life  of 
discord ;    or  George  Washington's  calm  statement :  •'  It  is  well ; "  or  Wesley's 
triumphant  utterance  :  "  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is  with  us  1 "    And  these  closing 
words  of  the  high-souled  apostle,  written  from  his  prison,  in  the  prospect  of 
threatened  death,  carry  with  them  a  significance  and  tenderness  which  will  be 
felt  wherever  this  Epistle  is  read,    I.  A  personally  inscbibkd  salutation.  The  rest 
of  the  Epistle  was  dictated  by  the  apostle  to  an  amanuensis.    He  adds  his  own 
salutation  not  only  as  an  expression  of    his  love,  but  also  as  a  mark  of    the 
authenticity  of  the  document.     It  were  worthy  of  the  pencil  of  genius  to  pourtray 
the  noble  prisoner,  whose  right  hand  was  linked  to  the  left  of  his  military  jailor, 
tracing  with  tremulous  fingers  the  final  words  to  those  for  whose  sake  he  was  in  bonds  I 
How  would  the  hand-writing  of  such  a  man  be  prized  and  venerated,  and  with  what 
holy  eagerness  would  his  words  be  read  and  pondered  1    II.  A  touchino  bemindeb. 
"Bemember  my  bonds."    The  apostle  was  in  prison,  not  for  any  offence  against 
the  laws  of  God  or  man,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  gospeL     The  Church  of  Christ  in 
all  ages  has  had  abundant  reason  to  remember  with  gratitude  and  praise  the  bonds 
of  the  great  apostle,  not  only  for  the  stimulating  example  of  holy  patience  and 
dignified  submission  displayed  under  trying  circumstances,  but  for  his  unspeakably 
precious  literary  work.  The  Epistle  begins  and  ends  with  blessing ;  and  between  these 
two  extremes  lies  a  body  of  truth  which  has  dispensed  blessings  to  thousands,  and 
is  destined  to  bless  thousands  more.    The  benediction  is  short,  but  instinct  with 
life,  and  laden  with  Divine  beneficence.     Grace  is  inclusive  of  all  the  good  God  can 
bestow,  or  man  receive.    Lessons  :  1.  Praise  God  for  a  well-authenticated  Bible. 
2.  Praise  God  for  the  teachings  of  a  Buffering  life.     8.  Praise  God  for  His  bound* 
less  grace.    {O.  Barlow.)        Bemember  my  bonds. — Chains: — Being  bound  by  a 
ohain,  Paul  had  to  employ  a  secretary,  and  then  at  the  close  of  the  letter  he  would 
raise  his  own  manacled  hand,  and  add  a  few  words  of  loving  salutation.    Under 
these  circumstances  his  writing  would  be  awkward  and  ill-formed.    He  looks  at  the 
MS.     He  sees  his  friend's  work  so  neat,  and  his  own  writing  disfiguring  the  MS. 
"  What  will  the  Colossians  think  of  this  ?    They  may  regard  it  as  an  indication 
of  carelessness.    I  will  tell  them  the  reason — my  bonds.     They  will  not  misunder> 
stand  now. "    This  is  a  small  circumstance,  but  there  is  this  in  it :  If  the  great 
apostle  needed  consideration,  and  had  something  which  spoiled  the  perfection  of 
his  work,  and  which,  being  remembered,  accounted  for  the  imperfection,  may  it  not 
be  true  of  others  also  ?    We  have  all  a  chain  of  some  kind.     I.  How  many  chains 
THERE  ABs  THAT  NEED  TO  BE  BEMEMBERED.    1.  Temperament  ofteu  hinders  men 
from  being  and  doing  what  others  expect  of  them.     Some  are  impulsive,  others 
slow  ;  some  are  irritable,  others  placid ;  some  must  work  spasmodically,  others  are 
dogged ;  some  are  sanguine,  others  despondent.    Yon  see  all  this  in  the  family 
eircle,  where  you  make  allowance.    You  see  it  in  the  Church ;  remember  it  there. 
2.  The  bondage  of  education,  i.e.,  the  training  of  a  lifetime,  leads  to  misnnder- 
standings.     One  man  has  had  a  rough,  and  another  a  gentle,  bringing  up.    They 
meet  as  brethren — the  one  hearty,  the  other  reserved.     The  one  thinks  the  other 
rude  ;  the  other  thinks  his  brother  cold.    Yet  both  are  equally  friendly  and  loyal. 
What  they  want  is  to  remember  one  another's  bonds.  3.  Family  ties  are  sometimes 
bonds.      How  many  live  in  unsympathetic  homes  which  restrain  their  better 
impulses,  and  act  as  a  clog  to  their  activities.     How  many  have  claims  upon 
them  of  which  others  know  nothing,  and  which    make    them    appear   parsi- 
monions.       4.    What  a  chain,  too,   is    some    forgiven    sin.      It  hinders  men 
from    taking    positions    which    others  in  ignorance  would  thrust  upon    them. 
JBflt  snoh  a  sin  barred  David  from  building  the  Temple.    There  is  a  sense 
in  which  we  should  forget  a  man's  past — in  kindness;  but  there  are  times 
vhen  we  should  remember  it  in  love.    It  will  thus  account  for  maoh  that  i* 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ns. 

Tinaoeoantable.  IL  How  important  it  k  that  these  bonds  shouud  be  remembered. 
When  a  man  is  appointed  to  do  some  work  in  a  public  observatory,  he  is  set  to  take 
some  well- ascertained  observations,  that  any  deviation  on  his  part  from  the  average 
vision  may  be  ascertained.  And  this  deviation  is  called  his  "  personal  difference," 
and  is  allowed  for.  If  forgotten  it  would  make  his  work  useless.  Something  like 
this  should  be  done  by  Christians.  Allowance  should  be  made  for  each  man's 
"  personal  difference."  Our  brother's  chain  should  be  remembered,  1.  In  justice 
to  him.  Otherwise  we  shall  deem  him  less  worthy  than  he  is.  2.  In  justice  to 
ourselves  and  to  our  faith.  We  cannot  but  believe  more  fully  in  the  Saviour  if  we 
measure  His  influence,  which  we  cannot  do  if  we  misjudge  our  brother.  8.  In 
justice  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  8o  long  as  we  forget  our  neighbour's  chain  we  shall 
misunderstand  him,  and  so  be  unable  to  co-operate  with  him  in  Christian  work. 
III.  There  is  a  right  and  a  wrong  bide  to  this  memory.  1.  Remember  your 
brother's  chain  and  this  will  make  you  more  charitable  in  your  judgments.  2.  Be- 
member  only  your  own  and  it  will  make  you  petulant  and  sensitive.  3.  Forget  yonr 
own  chain,  then,  but  never  that  of  others.  {J.  Ogle.)  The  limitations  of  life : — 
We  have  all  our  bonds  and  feel  fettered  somehow.  Continually  we  discover  that  the 
realization  of  oar  aspirations,  or  the  attainment  of  our  purposes,  is  marred  by  some 
chain,  even  as  the  penmanship  of  Paul  was  made  angular  and  irregular  by  his 
bonds.  Thus  we  are  each  carrying  about  with  us  a  chain,  of  which,  so  long  as  we 
are  working  within  its  limits,  we  may  be  largely  unconscious,  but  which  bringa  na 
to  a  stand  the  moment  we  have  gone  to  its  farthest  length.  The  business  man  is 
bound  to  his  counting-house  by  a  cord  which  neither  his  God  nor  his  conscience 
wUl  allow  him  to  break.  The  invalid  is  held  down  to  her  couch,  and  ber  devoted 
nurse  is  kept  continually  at  the  bedside  of  the  sick  one  by  a  cord,  which  is  not  the 
less  real  because  it  is  invisible,  or  the  less  powerful  because  its  strands  consist  of 
love.  The  mother,  wherever  she  goes,  feels  tugging  at  her  heart  the  silken  string 
that  ties  her  to  the  cradle.  The  poor  man  is  hampered  by  his  poverty,  and  the 
servant  has  his  service  of  God  in  some  sort  conditioned  and  qualified  by  the  duties 
which  he  owes  to  his  earthly  master.  We  may  find  a  few  things  suggested  which 
may  reconcile  us  to  our  bonds.  I.  The  apostle's  bonds  were  no  disgrace  to  him. 
1.  His  chain  was  the  trophy  of  principle,  and  was  more  ornamental  to  him  than 
the  bracelets  of  our  fashionable  ladies  are  to  them.  He  could  not  blame  his  own 
folly  or  wickedness  for  his  present  condition.  It  came  to  him  when  he  was  in  the 
way  of  duty,  and  the  consciousness  of  that  was  a  support  and  solace  to  him  all 
through.  2.  But  it  is  quite  similar  with  our  providential  limitations.  There  is  no 
disgrace  in  poverty  or  in  sickness,  provided  only  we  have  not  brought  it  upon  our- 
selves by  our  iniquity.  The  business  man  has  no  need  to  be  ashamed  of  hia 
attention  to  his  counting-house.  The  mother  cannot  think  that  she  is  disgraced 
by  the  little  ones  that  fill  the  nursery  with  their  glee.  And  if  there  be  anywhere  on 
earth  the  human  incarnation  of  that  angel  who  ministered  to  our  Lord  in  His 
anguish,  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  devoted  nurse  who  tends  the  fevered  sufferer.  Let 
us  not  condemn  ourselves  if,  because  we  are  unavoidably  called  to  the  discharge  of 
such  duties,  we  cannot  give  ourselves  to  work  in  some  department  of  Church 
activity.  3.  But  the  tendency  of  much  that  is  said  nowadays  is  to  make  one  dis- 
satisfied  with  himself  if  he  be  not  engaged  in  some  ecclesiastical  work.  It  is  good 
to  realize  Wesley's  idea,  "all  at  work,  and  always  at  work."  But  I  have  known  a 
gentle  heart  well-nigh  broken  because  a  minister  as  good  as  declared  that  those  who 
did  not  engage  in  a  certain  kind  of  work,  were  unworthy  to  be  called  Christians. 
But  that  quiet  one  was  every  day  doing  a  kind  of  service  for  Christ  which  required 
far  more  self-denial,  and  one  which  she  could  not  have  neglected  without  sin.  Bat 
the  service  of  suffering  is  as  well  pleasing  to  God  as  is  that  of  working.  Holiness 
comes  out  in  suffering  as  well  as  in  working.  And  so,  provided  we  maintain 
holiness  within  the  limits  of  our  chain,  it  is  no  disgrace  to  us  that  we  cannot  go 
beyond  them.  IL  Paul's  bonds  did  not  prevent  him  from  being  useful.  1.  No 
doubt  Paul  was  sometimes  saddened  by  the  thought  that  his  long  imprisonment 
had  kept  him  from  missionary  work,  and  yet  in  the  long  run  he  became  convinced 
that  his  chain  had  really  advanced  the  cause  of  Christ  (Phil.  i.  12-13).  (1)  The 
Boldier  to  whom  he  was  chained  was  changed  every  four  hours,  so  by  embracing  the 
opportunity  of  conversing  with  each  of  his  guards  Paul  became  instrumental  in  the 
conversion  of  many  soldiers,  and  introduced  the  leaven  of  Christianity  into  the 
Boman  army.  "  My  bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest  throughout  the  praetorian  guard, 
and  in  all  other  places."  He  came  into  contact  with  the  lowest  and  the  highest  of 
the  people,  and  was  blessed  in  the  salvation  not  only  of  the  runaway  slave  OnesimuB, 


CHAP.  IT.]  COLOSSIANS.  BIS 

bat  also  of  some  of  the  iDmates  of  Csssar's  household.  (2)  It  was  at  this  time  that 
he  wrote  his  letters  to  the  Philippians,  Colossians,  Ephesians,  and  Philemon  ;  and 
who  may  estimate  the  results  these  Epistles  have  produced  and  are  produoing. 
Thus  Paul  was  laid  aside  from  personal  activity  for  a  time,  in  order  that,  through 
these  letters,  he  might  work  for  all  time.  2.  There  is  much  in  all  this  to  stimulate 
and  encourage  us.  How  much  the  business  man  might  accomplish  for  the  Lord, 
if  he  were  only  to  do  with  those  who  are  brought  into  contact  with  him  what  Paul 
did  with  his  soldier  guardians  1  And  is  there  on  this  earth  any  sanctuary  so  blessed 
fts  the  sick  chamber,  where  the  pulpit  is  a  couch  of  suSering,  and  the  preacher  is 
a  patient,  loving,  gentle  one  who  tries  to  bear  all  for  Christ  ?  It  may  seem  a  great 
hardship  to  the  mother  that  she  is  kept  by  family  cares  from  taking  a  share  in  any 
departments  of  active  benevolence.  But  wait  until  that  bright-eved  boy  has  grown 
up  to  be  a  godly  man,  or  it  may  be  a  useful  minister,  and  then  she  will  have  the 
satisfaction  of  knowing  that  the  influence  of  her  training  is  telling  through  him 
upon  thousands  of  hearts.  We  never  lose  in  the  long  run,  even  in  the  matter  of 
usefulness,  by  giving  ourselves  to  the  nearest  work,  and  to  which  we  seem  bound  by 
a  chain  we  cannot  and  dare  not  break.  Another  person  can  do  as  well  in  a  mission 
school,  but  who,  save  she,  can  be  a  mother  to  her  children.  In  the  day  of  final 
apocalypse  few  things  will  surprise  us  more  than  the  benefits  which  have  sprung 
from  the  labours  of  some  humble  Christian  who  thought  that  sha  was  doing  nothing. 
Courage,  then  1  You  may  be  fettered,  but  He  whom  you  serve  is  not  bound.  III. 
Paul's  bonds  did  not  mar  his  happiness.  When  he  was  in  the  prison  of  Philippi 
he  "  sang  praises  unto  God,"  and  we  cannot  but  feel  that  he  was  speaking  his  own 
experience  in  his  injunctions  to  that  Church  (Phil.  iv.  i-8).  Nor  is  this  all.  In 
the  Epistles  of  his  first  imprisonment  there  is  an  elevation  of  thought  and  a  glad- 
some spirit  which  we  hardly  discover  in  any  other.  In  any  case  his  chain  had  not 
bound  his  heart.  In  the  days  of  superstition  men  wore  charms  about  them  under 
the  belief  that  they  would  thereby  ensure  themselves  against  disease.  But  no  mere 
external  appliance  can  keep  sorrow  from  the  soul.  We  must  have  Christ  within  to 
charm  misery  away.  He  "  giveth  songs  in  the  night."  It  is  au  easy  thing  to  sing 
in  the  day  of  health  and  prosperity ;  but  only  Christ  can  make  us  sing  in  want  and 
bondage.  IV.  Paul's  bonds  did  not  lessen  his  bbwabd.  Opportunity  is  the 
measure  of  responsibility.  He  who  sat  over  against  the  treasury  pronounced  the 
noblest  eulogy  over  her  who  had  cast  into  it  the  smallest  coin — because  in  estimating 
her  merit  He  "  remembered  her  bonds."  He  knew  that  her  heart  was  larger  than 
her  means,  and  that  she  was  lamenting  all  the  time  that  she  had  not  more  to  give. 
So  He  will  give  the  same  kindly  consideration  to  the  diflerent  providential  hindrances 
with  which  we  have  to  contend ;  and  haply  they,  who  through  their  lives  have  been 
regretting  that  they  have  done  so  little,  may  hear  the  unexpected  encomium,  "  He 
hath  done  what  he  could,"  "  He  hath  done  more  than  they  all."  We  are  thought- 
lessly apt  to  connect  reward  with  activity  ;  Christ  has  connected  it  with  character, 
and  that  is  indicated  and  strengthened  by  suffering  and  patience  as  well  as  work. 
Consciousness  of  limitation  may  make  a  man  painfully  conscious  of  the  imperfec- 
tiont  of  the  little  he  is  able  to  do.  '*  It  is  not  all  I  once  planned  to  do.  It  was  in 
my  heart  to  make  it  much  better  I  Master  1  Remember  my  bonds  1  "  And  the 
appeal  will  not  be  made  in  vain,  for  the  reply  will  come  :  "  Well  done  1  enter  thou 
into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Bonds  worn  for  Christ: — We 
should  not  forget  that  we,  too,  are  in  some  sort  "  the  prisoners  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  and  ought  to  wear  our  bonds  patiently  in  remembrance  of  Him.  I  saw 
lately  in  a  sketch  of  the  philosopher  Morse,  a  simple  incident  that  may  help  here  to 
illustrate  my  meaning.  In  his  early  painting  days,  Morse  went  into  the  studio  of 
Benjamin  West,  with  whom  he  was  a  special  favourite.  That  great  artist  was  then 
engaged  upon  his  famous  picture  of  Christ  Bejected,  and  after  carefully  examining 
his  visitor's  hands,  he  said  to  him,  "  Let  me  tie  you  with  this  cord,  and  place  yon 
there  while  I  paint  in  the  hands  of  the  Saviour."  So  he  stood  still  until  the  work 
was  done,  bound,  as  it  were,  in  the  Saviour's  stead.  I  can  fancy  that  a  strange 
thrill  would  pass  through  Morse's  breast  as  he  thought  of  being,  in  any  lowliest 
manner,  identified  thus  directly  with  the  Lord.  But  that  was  only  in  a  picture. 
In  the  sternly  real  hfe  of  every  day,  however,  we  are  each  in  some  way  bound  by  a 
chain  in  the  Redeemer's  stead,  as  representing  Him  on  earth ;  let  us  see  to  it, 
therefore,  that  we  wear  it  as  meekly  and  as  bravely  as  He  wore  that  wherewith  for 
our  Bakes  He  was  fastened  to  the  lictor's  stake.  Thus  again  we  come  to  that  cross 
whereon  for  as  the  Saviour  died,  and  find  in  it  a  motive  strong  enough  to  induce  us 
to  bear  anything,  or  do  anything.    {Ibid.)        Bonds  no  hindrance  to  happiness : — 


Sl«  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  n, 

▲a  I  was  writing  there  broke  npon  my  ears  the  song  of  a  canary  bird  hanging  in  the 
room  overhead.  Its  trilling  notes  were  not  a  whit  less  joyoas  than  those  which  I 
have  often  heard  rained  down  from  the  infinite  expanse  of  heaven  by  the  little 
skylark  of  my  native  land.  In  spite  of  its  cage  that  tiny  warbler  sings,  and  when 
its  yoang  mistress  goes  to  speak  to  it,  there  is  a  flutter  of  joy  in  its  wings,  as  with 
ruffled  neck  and  chattering  gladness  it  leaps  to  bid  her  welcome.  So  let  us  accept 
our  bonds,  whether  of  poverty,  or  weakness,  or  duty,  as  the  bird  accepts  its  cage. 
You  may  cage  the  bird,  but  you  cannot  cage  its  song.  No  more  can  you  confine  or 
restrain  the  joy  of  the  heart  which,  accepting  its  condition,  sees  God  in  it  and 
greets  Him  from  it.  To  fret  at  oar  circumstances  will  not  improve  them  ;  bat  it 
will  make  as  worse  oorsevles.  On  the  other  baud,  the  way  to  get  the  motrt  happi- 
neat  oat  of  lifo  is  to  carry  Christ  eontinaally  in  oar  hearts.    (I2)i^) 


Date  Due 


{'  '  v<fi 


