Suirtiatijiji II- 1 {■ — • 

SirtiljmjWi H- j_, L,i. ' I ■—:- 



=~E;=^" ''924 101 104 556 











BHMTuUfum 



^«1 



"•;!■;; ■■i.r;:;; i-r«n ns?' 












Biill^i^SiJiS 



CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 





Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this bool< is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104556 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 

EDITED BY THE 

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D,, 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER; 
AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY THE 



VBm. AECHDEACON F. W. FAEEAE, D.D., F.E.S.— EIGHT EEV. H. COTTEEHL, D.D., 
F.E.S.E.— VBET EEV. PEtNCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— EEV. CANON G. 
EAWUNSQH. M.A.-.EEV. A. PLTJMMEE, M.A., D.D. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
Nbw Yoke akd Tobonto. 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 



EDITED BT THE 



REV. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, M.A., 

VIOAB AMa BDIUIi DEAN OF R. TAHOBAM, AXD EXAJflSiaia ^mAVt.^r^ XO TBE U>BD 
BUHOP or «U>00B8TEB AID BBISIOIi; 

ijn> BT THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, MX 



JEEEMIAH. 

By rev. T. K. CHEYNE, M.A., 

HOTOB OF TBESimia, ASV LATE FEUiOW OF BAUJOL OOUiiaE, OZIOEIK 

l^omtUtfts 
Bt rev. W. F. ADENEY, M.A. 

f^omUfes bs Farious ^utjbots: 

EBV. D. TOUNG, BA. B V. S. OONWAT, BA 

KEY. J. WAITE, BJk. BEY. A. F. MUIB, lUL 

VOL. II. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New Yoek and Toronto. 



36^r/3 6 



THE 



BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAFTEB XXX. 



This and the thiee next chapters form a 
kind of book in themselves, which contrasts 
admirably with oh. zxriL — xxis. In the 
latter Jeremiah aimed at casting down the 
delusive hope that the time of trial would 
eoon be over and the captives restored; here 
be assumes that all are aware of the sad 
reality, and concentrates himself on the 
happier topioe of comfort ana encourage- 
ment. Oh. zxz. and xzxi. shine out among 
all Jeremiah's prophecies; there is a com- 
bination of softness and vigour which, even 
from a purely literary point of view, is most 
attractive. Strictly speaking, they ought 
to form but one chapter; they represent (as 
ver. 4 states) the revelation from Jehovah 
" concerning Israel and concerning Judah." 
It is, indeed, most touching, this yearning 
of the inspired prophet tor the reunion of 
the two branches of the nation (comp. ch. 
iii. 1 — iy. 2), A "union in spirit" was not 
enough for him; there must be a visible 
drawing together, to prove to all men that, 
as Ood is one, so his people is one. God's 
love is imperishable, and his election of Israel 
cannot be reversed. The very extent of 
Israel's misery ia a pledge that her God will 
not leave her to herself too long. And how 
is the restoration of Israel to be conceived 7 
Surely nothing less than a new covenant 
will satisfy the conditions of the problem — 
a new covenant written in the heart. Some- 
thing akin to this encouraging prophecy 
may be traced here and there in earlier 

JEBBMIAH — II. 



chapters (see eh. iii 14 — 19; xvi. 14, 15; 

xxiii. 3 — 8 ; but here the prophet is entirely 
absorbed in that glorious future which could 
alone save him from utter despondency. 

Ver. 2. — Write thee all the words ... in 
a hook. The form of expression leaves it 
doubtful whether a sumuiary of all Jere- 
miah's previous discouroes is intended, or 
merely of the promises concerning Israel 
and Judah which he had just received. 
There are, no doubt, numerous allusions to 
preceding chapters, but ver. 5 seems rather 
to favour the latter view. The word rendered 
" book " will equally suit a short discourse 
like the present (comp. ch. 11, 60) and a large 
collection of prophecies as in ch. xxxvi. 2. 
Observe, the discourse was to be written 
down at once, without having been delivered 
orally ; it was to be laid up as a pledge that 
God would interpose for Ids people (comp. 
Isa. XXX. 8 ; Hab. ii. 2, 3). 

Vers. 5 — 11. — The great judgment of 
Israel's deliverance. It is nothing less than 
the "day of Jehovah" which the prophet 
sees m spirit — a day whiith ia " great" (ver. 
7 ; comp. Joel ii. 11 ; Zeph. i, 14) and terrible 
(vers. 5, 6; comp. Amos v. 18, 20; Isa. xili. 
6 ; Joel ii. 1, 11) for Israel, a day of " trouble" 
(ver. 7), but for his enemies of destruction. 

Ver. 5. — ^A voice of trembling; rather, a 
lound of trenibling, a sound causing men 
to tremble; doubtless it is "the sound of 
the trumpet, the alarm of war" (ch. iv. 19). 
Of fear, and not of peace; rather, there u 
fear, and no pea/ie. " Peace," as usual, means 
the harmony of a well-orJered, secure, and 
peaceful community. Literally, it is whole- 
ness ; its opposite is " breaking," i.e. outward 
ruin and inward anguish. 

Ver. 6. — Whether a man doth travail with 
child. Great, indeed, must be the terror 
when no adequate figure suggests itself but 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEEBMIAH. [oh. 



1—24. 



that of a woman in her panga (comp. oh. 
Ti. 24; ziii. 21; xxii. 23; Isa. xiii. 8). All 
faces are tTirned into paleness. So Joel (ii. 
6) and Nahum (ii. 10), "All faces wilhdraw 
their colour." For "paleness" the Septuagint 
has "jaundice " — a possible meaning of the 
Hebrew; comp. xAwpis, "pale, bilious-look- 
ing" in medical writings, but properly 
*' greenish-yellow," like the Jaebiew noun. 

Ver. 7.— That day; i.e. "the day of 
Jehovah," the day of the great judgment 
upon the world, of which the fall of Babylon 
is regarded as the openin>i; scene. It is even 
the time of Jacob's trouble; rather, and a 
time of diitress shaU it be (even) to Jacob. 

Ver. 8. — His yoke. Not that imposed by 
the enemy (as Isa. z. 22 and xiv. 25 might 
snggest), but that suffered by Jacob. This 
is clear from the last clause of the verse. 

Ver. 9. — David their king ; viz. the 
"righteous Branch " or "Plant" of ch. 
xxiiiS. 

Vers. 10, 11. — ^Therefore fear thou not, 
my servant Jacob, etc. These two verses, 
omitted in the Septuagint, are among the 
passages which Hitzig (carrying out an idea 
of Movers) attributes to the editorial band 
of the author (a pious Jew of the Captivity, 
according to him) of Isa. xl. — Ixvi., and it 
cannot be denied that the tone and phrase- 
ology of ver. 10 is more akin to that of Isa. 
zl. — ^Ixvi than to those of the greater part of 
Jeremiah. Graf, in controverting Hitzig's 
view, points out, however, that the expres- 
sions referred to by Hitzig as " Deutero- 
Isaianic," are also found in other books 
besides the latter part of Isaiah, and that, 
on the other hand, " the expressions of ver. 
11 are all as foreign to Isa. zl. — Ixvi. as they 
•re current in Jeremiah." As for the ex- 
pression, "my servant Jacob" (which only 
occnrs again in Jeremiah in the duplicate of 
this passage, ch. xlvi. 27, 28, and which is 
specially characteristic of the second part of 
Uaiah), it is worth noticing that it is found 
once in the Book of Ezeklel (xxxvU. 25), 
whioh, on Hitzig's theory, was written before 
the so-called Second Isaiah. It still remains 
for the student to consider whether these 
two verses are not an insertion by some later 
hand (without attempting to discover whose 
that hand was). That the proplietic writings 
have received additions from editors and 
scribes is a fact which cannot reasonably be 
gainsaid, supported as it is by the phenomena 
of the historical books. It would be very 
natural for a pious Jew in the Captivity, not 
wholly devoid himself of the spirit of pro- 
phecy, to encourage his people, in the Name 
of the Lord, wifii this glowing word of 
promise. 

Ver. 11. — In measure; rather, according 
to what if Jutt; i.e. not capriciously, to 
satisfy • feeling of revenge such as the 



untaught mind is apt to ascribe to God (see 
on ch. X. 24). And wiU not, etc. ; Tather,/or 
I cannot. 

Vers. 12 — 17. — ^Miserable indeed is the 
condition of Israel I No wonder ; for its sins 
were great. And yet, just because it is so 
forlorn, Jehovah will interpose for its relief. 

Ver. 12. — For thus saith, etc. If the two 
preceding verses are a later insertion, we must 
render, But surely (more strictly, surely, but 
particles of asseveration easily acquire an 
adversative force from the context). Bright, 
indeed, is the prospect for Judah, "out 
surely " Ills present condition is very much 
the reverse; comp. Isa. ix. 1 (Authorized 
Version, " nevertheless "). Thy bruise is in- 
curable, etc. One of Jeremiah's characteristic 
repetitions (see ch. x. 19; ziv. 17; xv. 18). 
That thou mayest be bound up. This ren- 
dering follows the accents. But the mixture 
of figures is very incongruous. It is much 
better to connect the words a little differently 
and to render, for thy sore thou hast no medi- 
cines (nor any) plaster. 

Ver. 14. — All thy lovers J f.e. the peoples 
confederate with thee (as ch. xxii. 20). 

Ver. 16. — Therefore; i.e. because of the 
extremity of thy need. Comp. Isa. x. 23, 
24, "The Lord Jehovah Sab&oth shall 
make a consumption. . . . Therefore be not 
afraid of Assyria ; '' and Isa. xxz. 17, 18, 
"At the rebuke of five shall ye flee. . . . 
And therefore will Jehovah wait, that he 
may be gracious unto you." 

Ver. 17. — ^Bestore health ; rather, amly a 
bandage. They called thee an Outcast. Jeho- 
vah, speaiing after the manner of men, 
cannot bear to hear his enemies, as they 
pass along, scornfully denominating the 
holy city an Outcast 

Vers. 18 — 22. — A picture of the regenerate 
commonwealth of Israel. 

Ver. 18. — Upon her own heap; rather, 
upon her own mound, the teU or eminence 
on which an Eastern town was built (comp. 
Josh. xi. 13, where "in their strength" 
should rather be "on their own mound"). 
ShaU remain ; rather, shall be inhabited. 

Ver. 19. — (Comp. this verse with ch. 
xxxiii. 11.) Out of them; t.e. out of city 
and palace. They shall not be few ; rather, 
not be diminished. They shall not he small; 
rather, not be lightly regarded. 

Ver. 20. — Their children; rather, Aii 
children ; i.e. the " children of Israel." 

Ver. 21. — The futuie rulers of Israel 
shall be of the native stock, not foreign 
tyrants. Their nobles; rather, his noble 
one, a synonym for "his ruler," i.e. the 
(earthly) king of Israel. It is remarkable 
that no reference is made here to the Messiah, 
who, in fact, is not as conspicuous a figure 
in the prophecies of Jeremiah as in those of 
Isaiah. And yet even in Isaiah there is one 



CH. XXX. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



striking prophecy in which the inspired seer 
uses language not (in the hands of a literalist) 
Teoouoilable with the prospect of the personal 
Messiah. The Messiah appears, as it were, 
in a lightning flash, and then disappears for 
a time. The prophecy of Isaiah referred to 
is Isa. zxzii. 1, 2 (comp. oh. xxxiii. 17), in 
which the prospect of a truly God-fearing 
king, with princes of the same hiigh character, 
entirely occupies the mind of the writer. 
" Nothing indicates that the Messiah is in- 
tended; king and princes are placed quite 
on a level, in aooordanoe with the actual 
state of things under the so-called mon- 
archy." And I will cause him to draw 
near. It is doubtful whether Israel or 
Israel's ruler is referred to. A priestly 
relation (such as " drawing near " implies, 
see Humb. zvi. 5) might be predicated of 
either, at any rate in the regenerate form of 
the Israelitish commonwealth ; but it is more 
natural to suppose the ruler to be here in- 
dicated, for it is scarcely descriptive enough 
to lay that he shall twlong to the chosen 



people. Who is this that engaged his heart ; 
rather, that pledgefh his heart (or, cottroge) ; 
i.e. that ventureth. The rejuption of the 
old line of Davidic kings might well raise 
the thouo;ht that the intimate relation 
between Jehovah and his earthly representa- 
tive for Israel, promisKd of old to David (2 
Sam. vii.), could no longer be hoped for. 
But with this renewed promise the kings of 
the new Davidic line may veuture to "draw 
near ; " otherwise^who is he that ven- 
tureth t 

Yet. 22. — This verse is omitted in the 
Septuagiut, and (unless the existence of 
later insertions is denied altogetlier) is all 
bnt certainly due to a later hand (comp. oh. 
vii. 23). Comp. on vers. 10, 11. 

Vers. 23, 24. — These verses occur in a 
form evidently more original in oh. xxiii. 
19, 20. In all probability they were first 
inserted from memory in the margin, and 
then incorporated into the text at a time 
subsequent (how long subsequent we cannot 
say) to Jeremiah. 



H0MILETI08. 

T«r. 8. — •" Sarlpture — the written Ward of Ood." Jeremiah wm Teqnired to wnte 
his prophecy in a book. Israel had received the Law first by a voice of thunder, but 
the voice was followed by the writing on the tables of stone (Exod. xxxiv. 1). St. John 
was commanded to write his vision in a book (Rev. i. 11). Without definite commands 
of this character, prophets and apostles, historians and evangelists, have committed to 
writing what they knew and taught. Thus we have a written revelation, a Bible. 
We may see the great value of this without becoming guilty of bibliolatry, or lowering 
our spiritual conceptions to slavi.ih subservience to the " letter that killeth." 

I. CONSIDBB THE VAL0B OF SOBIPTURB, AS CONTAININO THE WoED OF Gk)D IB 

WBITINO. 1. Accuracy. Words may be spoken in haste, under excitement ; a book is 
presumably considered and reconsidered, its words weighed and measured. " Writing 
makes an exact man " (Bacon). 2. Permanence. The spoken word may soon be for- 
L'otten, or it may be recollected imperfectly with unconscious embellishments and 
deficiencies. The written word can be studied carefully and at leisure. 3. Publicity. 
The spoken word is heard only by one audience, present in one place, at one time. 
The written word is capable of being spread over a wider area. If but one copy is 
written, this can be sent about and frequently re-read to various hearers, like the 
circular letters of the New Testament. But the book can be copied, and thus the area 
of its influence enlarged. Since the invention of printing, and with the facilities for 
multiplying and cheapening the production of books, this extensive influence of litera- 
ture beyond that of speech has been immensely increased. 4. Transmission to the 
futwre. The spoken word dies with the breath that utters it ; the written word can 
be treasured for ages, and transmitted to distant generations. The orator is peculiarly 
a man of his own age ; the literary genius belongs to all time. If the Divine Word 
had been handed down only by tradition we know how terribly it must have been cor- 
rupted. We in these later days can enjoy its fresh power because it is crystallized in 
literature, because prophecy has become Scripture. 

II. Consider the way in which wb should deal with Soripturk that contains 
THE WOBD OF God. Several duties and wise courses of action are suggested by the fact that 
the Word of God is written in a book, viz. : 1. Oare to preserve the purity of the text. 
Correct readings and accurate renderings of this are of first importance, since they guard 
the thoughts of God from perversion. 2. Reverence for the authority of ScHpture 
If we believe that it embodies the words and ideas of God, we shall feel that, •vea 



4 THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. txx. 1—24 

when it teaches spiritual principles which we cannot as yet see well established, U haa 
ft dldm to be listened to with the reverence of the ignorant pupil fur his wiser master. 
Ai br as it brings before us God's thoughts, it must be rettd and examined and esti- 
mated by quite a different standard from that by which we decide questions of purely 
human literature. 3. Diligence in searching the Scriptures. The Bible is to be used. 
It is not to be treated as many men treat the classics, " without which no gentleman's 
library can be complete," but as a text-book, a book of daily reference. It must also 
be inquired into. There are mines of spiritual wealth to di":, things new as well as 
things old that a well-furnished scribe can bring out of it. There is in it " milk for 
babes, and meat for strong men," and the latter needs to be " read, marked, learned, 
and inwardly digested," if we would profit by it. 4. Care tc extract the spiritual 
thought from the visible letter. The letter is human, the form of speech is human. 
It is the spiritual idea that is Divine, and this is the most important thing to ns. 
This is the real and eternal truth, the Word of life and power. We need an inspiration 
ourselves to help us to peel off the husk of speech, and find the precious kernel ol 
Divine thought beneath. 

Vers. 10, 11. — " Fear not." I. Why Israel might fbab. For various reasons, rla. : 
1. Present trouhle. Already some had been led into exile. What was thus experienced 
seemed to presage future and worse distress. Grief tends to despondency. In disap- 
pointment we are ready to think that all things must grow worse and worse. 2. The 
anticipation of necessary punishment. This is confirmed in the prophetic message — 
" for I cannot leave thee altogether unpunished." Guilt is the parent of fear. " Con- 
science makes cowards of us all." 3. Incurable wretchedness. (Ver. 12.) Left to them- 
selves, the people were in a hopeless condition. (1) They could not cure their moral 
disease ; Josiah's abortive reformation was a proof of this. (2) They could not cure their 
external distress; it was vain to attempt to break the yoke of great Babylon. 4. 
Solitude, " All thy lovers have forgotten thee " (ver. 14). In the hour of trial boon 
companions fall away and leave their wretched comrade forlorn and helpless. The soul 
must fiice its darkest trouble alone. While society dispels fear, the silence and desertion 
of loneliness provoke it. It is not surprising, therefore, that with so many concurrent 
Incentives to fear Israel should be overwhelmed with it, nor is it surprising that 
similar causes should produce a similar effect among us. Yet it is not thu less deplor- 
able. Fear is an evil. It is distressing beyond measure. The vague and threatening 
spectres of horror that haunt the imagination of the soul wheu it is a slave to fear may 
be &r more painful than the real evils of which they are the magnified shadows. But 
fear is injurious as well as painful. It paralyzes effort, dissuades from dangerous tasks 
of duty, drives to rash and foolish resorts for escape. It is important to see if so sad 
and injurious a condition can be avoided. 

n. Wht Ibbael should not feab. For variotis reasons, viz. ; 1. 2^e security oj 
Ood'i service. Israel was Gh)d's servant. It is reasonable to suppose that God will 
protect and save those whom he honours with his name and calls to his work. 2. The 
promise of ultimate deliverance. " Lo, I will save thee from afer," etc. Fear may 
threaten now, but rest and quietude will come in the future. Fear must be overcome 
by hope, the darkness of the near future triumphed over by the exceeding brightness of 
the greater future. We shall not fear what the world can do against us when we live 
in the hope of what eternity will do for us. Looking at ourselves, we see our woimds 
incurable, and we despair ; looking at the good Physician, we see the promise of health, 
and we hope. 3. The assurance of the |>resence o/ God. " For I am with thee." Thus 
Abraham was not to I'ear because God was his " Shield, and exceeding great Reward " 
(Gen. XV. 1); and David could say, "Though I walk through the valley of the shadow 
of death, I will fear no evil : for thou art with me ; thy rod and thy staff they comfort 
me " (Ps. xxiii. 4). When hope fails faith may yet be strong. Better than the vision 
of the future haven far over the waves are the strong hand and sure eye of the 
pilot with us in the storm. When the hope of heaven fails faith in God may still sus- 
tain us. i. A knowledge ol the limitation and good purpose of suffering. This is (1) 
given to correct, either as chastisement for sin, or as pruning to make the fruit-bearing 
branch more fruitful ; and (2) given only in just measure, not beyond desert, require- 
ment, or endurance. If we nave these reasonable thoughts about our troubles ther will 



CH. XXX. 1—24.] TEE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 5 

not be able to conjure up the terrors of illimitable distress which they naturally inipire 
when we do not see that they are controlled by purposes of Divine goodness. 

Ver. 17. — Divine heeding, I. God re the sbeat Healer of his people. 1. God ii 
not satisfied to leave his people unhelped in sin and wretchedness. We may grow accus- 
tomed to the evil of the world till wo pass it unheeded. But it is not so with the 
Father of us all. He cannot endure the perpetual continuance of the wretchedness 
we accept (for others) with so little concern. 2. God designs to restore his people. It 
would seem easier to destroy the old weary world and create a new world, than to 
redeem and restore that which is so abandoned. But it is the glory of the gospel that 
it seeks and saves the lost. 3. The restoration of God's people can only be effected 
through the heeding of them. Israel cannot be restored to the Holy Land until the 
people are healed of their unholiness, and restored to God spiritually. Men are too 
ready to regard redemption externally as a change of state, a deliverance from distress 
and ruin, a gift of blessings, heaven, etc. It is all this, but not primarily. In the first 
and chief place redemption is healing, is not a change of circumstances, but a change 
in the soul itself. The richest possessions are of little use to the sick man. The sick 
body needs health, not wealth ; and the sick soul needs healing before all external changes 
of condition. 4. It is a great thing to see the source of this healing in God. No soul 
can cure itself. No man can heal his fellow. The disease is naturally incurable (ver. 
12). It is healed only by God and through a miracle. The miracles of (Jhrist are thus 
visible parables of his great work of redemption. The good Physician saves men's souls 
by working miracles of spiritual healing upon them. 

IL The obeatness of his people's distbess inclines God to heal them. Because 
Israel is called " an Outcast," God interferes to save him. David prays that God will 
pardon his iniquity, "for it is great " (Ps. xxv. 11). We feel that our sin is so great 
that we dare not ask for forgiveness, our wretchedness so abject that it is useless to seek 
for deliverance. But we may reverse the argument. The greater the sin the more does it 
need forgiveness, the deeper the misery the more loudly does it call for help. As claims 
of merit we have nothing. But when we look for pleas for mercy we find that the very 
bitterness of distress creates them. As the Judge, God cannot be invoked to help the 
sinner j as the Healer, he is most ready to come in the deepest need. The reasons for 
this are apparent. 1. The love of God. Love is moved by need rather than by desert. 
If God loves his children he will be most leady to help in their sorest distress. 2. The 
honour of God. The people who were called by the Niime of God were also called 
"outcasts." Here was a reproach on the great Name of their God. For his Name's 
lake God saves. 3. The special design of redemption. The physician finds his 
vocation in the healing art. Sickness is a call for the exercise of special functions. 
The worse the patient is, the more may he expect of the physician's care and attention. 
"They that are whole need not the physician." He is the helper of the sick. Therefore 
the very greatness of a man's sin and wretcheilness, instead of discouraging his faith, 
should encourage him to seek Christ, They who are in such circumstances may know 
that they are the very persons Christ chiefly seeks to help. 

Vers. 18 — 21. — Joys of redemption. The joys of the restoration of Israel are 
suggestive of the joys of redemption which belong to those who have been healed of 
their sins and recovered to the favour of God. Let us consider some of the elements <A 
these joys. 

L A EESTOBATioN TO LOST BIGHTS AHD POSSESSIONS. The oity is to be built again 
" upon her own mound." The people not only find the vines they grow in Ghaldea 
fruitful; they are restored to their own land. The prodigal would not have been 
satisfied if his comrades had helped him to affluence and pleasure again; he must 
return to the old home. There is something imperfect in the return of prosperity to 
Job in the fact that though he has greater riches and as many sons and daughters as 
before his calamities, his dead children are not raised from the grave, and the loss of them 
cannot be really compensated by the gift of a new family. So is it with earthly losses. 
The greatest are irretrievable. But the glory of God's ultimate salvation is that it 
restores old lost blessings as well as gives new blessings, both comforting memory arid 
latisfying hope. 



6 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxx 1—24 

n. As KRJOTUENT OF INWARD OLADNKSS AND THANKSGIVING. The true life 18 the 

inner life. Outward sunshine may find this black as midniglit, and leave it sd. It is 
much, therefore, to know that redemption from sin brings real gladness. We mioht 
have thought that it would h<ive been haunted with dark memories. But God's 
deliverance is so complete that it dis-pcls tlie gloom of a guilty conscience. The 
Christian should, therefore, be a man of inward joys and thankfulness. 

III. An extension of power and oloky. The exiles were scattered and their 
noalth and influence lost; the return at first promised liltlo satisfaction to tlie pooi 
and feeble band of patriots that attempted to rebuild the ruins of the ancient nation. 
But great promises encouraged the faithful to believe that ultimately their numbers would 
be multiplied, that they should have glury, and not " be lightly regardtd," and should 
be ruled by men of their own people ol noble and royal orders. The Christian Church 
began, like restored Israel, in a small and humble sphi,i-e. But she has grown marvel- 
lously, and is destined to grow in numbers, in power, and in glory. Redemption is a 
work worthy of God; no meagre saving of a few as "by the skin of their teeth," but 
a work of right royal magnificence, calling multitudes to its blessings, and giving them 
liberty and honour for their old shame and bondage. The Christian receives more than 
salvation ; he is an heir of glory. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1 — 3. — Written in a took ; or, words held over. The portion of these prophecies 
here referred to (probably ch. xxx., xxxi.) contains the most tender expressions of 
the Divine love. It is full of revelations of the deep unalterable affection and gracious 
purpose of God for his ] eople, even when they were as yet unrepentant. They are 
regarded in it as sorrowing for their sin, and returning spiritually to him who restored 
them to their land. Now, many of these statements it would have been inexpedient 
for the exiles to hear, whilst as yet they showed no sign of contrition. The prophet is 
therefore bidden to write them in a book, that they may be read at the fitting season. 
The words of Christ, " I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear 
them now," are strikingly parallel. This command impresses us with — 

L The fulness of the Divine Word. It is not one communication but many, 
and under circumstances of the utmost conceivable variety. Not in one book but 
many — a library, representing every stage of human history and spiritual progress. 
No age or exigency of human nature has found God silent. How great is the multitude 
of his messages! How many words have been spoken and acted that have not been 
recorded (cf. John xxi. 25) I The written book is like a vessel let down into the great 
ecean of the unwritten words and deeds of the Eternal. 

II. God'b care and adaptation with respect to it. This prophecy was to be 
preserved in a book, that no portion of it should be allowed to perish until its fitting 
time should arrive. The words it contained were all precious, and of pregnant 
significance in the future of the Church and the world. The adaptation of the 
prophecy is not less striking. It would not bear public announcement at the time 
of its communication to the prophet, and it might have imperilled his life ; but it 
occurred then in the natural order of God's thought and purpose ; by-and-by the 
people would be in a better mood and frame to consider it; therefore it was held ovei-. 
It is written in a book that it may present a faithful transcript of the Divine thought. 
The progress of revelation has been slow ; hut that is not the fault of the Revealer, but 
the necessity imposed by the conditions of human progress. "In the fulness of the 
time God sent forth his Son " (Gal. iv. 4 ; cf. 1 Pet. i. 20). 

III. The reasons there mav be for the dark dispensations of Providence. 
Who in these stern times could tell the depth of the tenderness of God ? It is 
necessary on such occasions to appeal to the fears of transgressors. The most awful 
calamities that befall the Church and the individual Christian are inflicted in love; but 
that love cannot express itself until the requirements of righteousness have been 
satisfied. The soul that is afllicted ought, theiefore, to submit itself to the mighty hand 
cf God, and wait patiently ior light. The best wine is kept to the last ; tiie gospel 
intprprets all antecedent revelations. 



OH. XXX. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 1 

IV. The infinite rioheb of ebvelation that await the spiritual matdbitt 
OF THE SAINTS. There are educative, wayfaring truths ; and there are truths at which 
we are to arrive in the end of our growth and pilgrimage. Truth is not only pro- 
spective but reflective; not only directive to the feet of the Christian, but revealing the 
mind and heart of God. How much U held over until these earthly days are ended 
(of. lCor.:Kiii. 12)?— M. 

Ver. 16.— The twofold vwnder of I$raePs tdlvation. L The punishment of its 
ENEMIES. 1. Because of their strength. The enemies of Israel, especially Babylon, 
were very strong. But they contained within themselves the elements of their own 
destruction. It is a property of the world, in all its aspects, to appear strong and real 
and stable. This illusion must be dissipated in order to the free spiritual development 
of Clod's children ; therefore Christ has said, " Be not afraid ; I have overcome the 
world." How many and how great have been the foes of the Church, and the Indi- 
vidtul saint ! yet has God reduced them to nothingness. 2. Because of the manner of 
their punishment. Evidently more than one nation is referred to here, and they are 
dealt with in sovereign autliority. "The nations are but as a drop in a bucket." 
(1) Their guilt towards Israel determines the measure of their requital. The Church 
is the centre and pivot of the world's destiny. In it and for its sake the world is 
judged (cf. Matt. xxv. 40, 45). (2) The degrees of punishment will correspond to tlie 
guilt. Even in vast concerns and through long time God observes an exact and 
equitable rule of award. 

II. Its own hecovert. This was to be not only partial but complete, and was to 
be a terror to the onlookino; nations. 1. Nothing could he more unlikely at the time this 
was spoken. This was a part of the wonder of God's saving power, and a vindication 
of his agency. 2. That which men despised and neglected Ood raised up. He thereby 
proved the freedom of his grace, and demonstrated the impossibility of salvation by 
works. The matchless condescension and infinite love of God were proved in this, 
that Zion deservedly rejected is nevertheless restored. The power was of God. 
Nothing is so abject as a spiritual organism without the Spirit of God ; nothing is sc 
glorious or sufficient when the Spirit of God is present. 3. The historic accomplishment 
of this was to he outdone hy the spiritual. Evidently the reference is through the 
immediately impending event to the spiritual future of the Messiah. God's goodness 
has ever some higher possibility sheathed in its first expressions. The imperfect 
efforts of Nehemiah and his colleagues but shadow forth the achievements of the cross. 
The new Israel will be incomparably more holy, powerful, and blessed than the old. 
Daily are the miracles of his saving mercy being performed ; " the chief of sinners," 
the fallen, the outcast, are being welcomed into the company of the redeemed and 
regenerate. — M, 



Vers. 18 — 22. — The multitude of Ood's mercies, A rapid and brilliant ennmeration 
of the characteristics of national glory and human happiness and well-being. Repre- 
sentative and suggestive, but not exhaustive. 

I. Severally specified. Set forth with great distinctness, as one might in a 
legal document ; and yet a complete and comprehensive view of a nation's restoration. 
1. Return of the people to their own land. (Ver. 18.) The representatives of those who 
had been exiled would be brought back. The shifty and uncertain character of their 
sojourning (" tents ") in a strange land would be exchanged for a settled, civic life. 
As an outward symbol of this Jerusalem would be rebuilt upon its ruins. " He that 
made of the city a heap (Isa. xxv. 1) can when he pleaseth make of a heap a city 
again " (Henry). The habits and customs, the public order and life of God's people, are 
important as being sacred even as their specially religious observances, and are therefore 
cared for. True religion is not merely to sojourn in the world, but to dwell there, and 
influence permanently the conditions and usages of human life. Nothing less than the 
reconstitution of human society is herein sought (cf. John xvii. 15). 2. Restoration 
of religious institutions. (Vers. 18 — 20.) Of these the chief, centre, and condition of 
all the res* — the temple, or " palace " — is first referred to. From its conspicuous and 
characteristic position amongst the public buildings of the city, it is mentioned iu 
connection with its rebuilding. Because of its presence therein the latter is alsu 



8 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ch.xxx.1— 24 

Mcred; and bo it is said, " Out of ihem shall proceed, '' etc. The great festivalB are 
to be restored. Worship, in its most imposing and joyous forms, will be celebrated; 
and this supposes for its possibility the presence in Israel of a religious, self-governing 
community. The siiiritual training of the people will be resumed (ver. 20). Much 
attention was always devoted by pious Jews to the upbringing of their children, who 
are here promised to be "as aforetime," i.e. as Jewish childien were wont to be accord- 
ing to the covenant, strictly and piously brought up. In this a fresh security is 
afforded of the religious and social prosperity of God's people. The Church can never 
afford to ignore the upbringing of the children. As it is a positive injunction (" Feed 
my lambs "), so is it a gracious privilege and favour granted to his servants that they 
should discharge it. The sunniest and most hopeful department of religious effort 
is that which relates to the young. " How is it your flowers are so grandly developed ? " 
was asked of a gardener. " Chiefly," he replied, "because I take care of my seedlings." 
The sacred community of Israel will also thereby be increased and established. New, 
trained members will be supplied for the spiritual ofiBces, and the ordinary membership 
of the congregation. It is observable that the chief increase of the Church is thus 
implied to be Irom within itself. And so it must be to-day. 3. National prosperity. 
This appears in the first place as social well-being. The family life will be greatly 
blessed, and the population multiplied. It is a result of moral order, etc., and also a means 
of securing and extending the influence of righteousness. In the next place is political 
freedom. Tyranny will be abolished (ver. 20) ; and their ruler shall be one of them- 
4>elves, representing their aims and aspirations, and not imposed upon them by a foreign 
conqueror. Lastly, political influence will extend abroad (ver. 19). 4. Covenant 
relations will he renewed. (Ver. 22.) This is the culminating and all-comprehensive 
blessing. Whilst the preceding suppose this, they are really but as antecedents to 
its complete realization. God will then recognize his people, and regard them with 
complacency. Neither will be ashamed of the other. 

II. Mutually belated. How essential is it that human life, in its interests and 
activities, should be regarded as a whole, the secular with the religious, the duty with 
the right, the responsibility with the privilege 1 It is a distinct loss when one portion 
of it is taken apart from the others and concentrates attention upon itself. Here we 
have a grand ideal for the individual and the community: the life of man, to be com- 
plete and healthy in its development, must extend indefinitely outwards and upwards. 
The deepest reverence for truth, righteousness, and God is consistent with the truest 
liberty. The blessings and good things of life, to be truly enjoyed, must be received as 
sacramental ; as the outcome and expression of communion between man and God. — M. 

Ver. 21. — Th« ideal ruler. The immediate reference is to Zerubbabel and the 
elders who returned from the Captivity ; but there is a larger significance than any 
merely human personage could exhaust or satisfactorily correspond to. There can be 
no doubt as to the Messianic character of this promise. But it is precisely the vague- 
ness of the reference, the primary uncertainty as to who it was to be in whom all the 
hope of Israel was to be realized, that constituted the moral force of the prediction. 
In Israel was the secular government to be identified with and crowned by the moral 
and spiritual; but to the very last was it kept in reserve as to whether or not the 
kingdom thus foretold was to be of this world. Jesus Christ hail hiniself to declare 
the real essence and nature of liis kingdom. He constituted the ideal Ruler of Israel — 

I. In his relation to his sdbjeots. 1. He was to b& of the same kindred, A 
stronger guarantee of the Divine favour could not bo given. No foreigner was to 
hold permanent sway over the Israel of God. In one of themselves the holy people 
would find a legitimate centre for loyal attachment and patriotic devotion. That from 
their own midst their Prince should spring was proof that their independence, liberty, 
and national individuality should be preserved. He would therefore represent its 
honour, and secure for himself the strongest personal attachment. The ho(es of the 
race would be embodied in such a personage, who would vitally perpetuate its glory. 
2. He was to be allied to them in their experience and sympathies. As their fellow- 
countryman he will understand their aims and aspirations. By the vicissitudes oi 
their fortune his sympathies will bo drawn forth, and he will share the enthqsiasni 
of their future. In Jesus Christ these conditions were fulfilled. 



OH. XXXI. 1—40.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEBEMIAH. 9 

• 

n. In hib mediatobial qiflcbnoe. "To draw near" is used in > priestly or 
mediatorial sense. Israel as a people, or as represented in its ruler, wag to have this 
privilege conferred upon it. A Divine as well as a human qualification is therefore 
requisite for the perfect governor ; he must not only belong to the people but he must 
please God. 1. The grace of Ood will rest upon, him and work within him. Oi' 
Zerubbabel in the first instance, but much more of Christ, is this statement true. He 
was " full of grace and truth." He is the great Temple-builder and Restorer of the 
kingdom ; and he is the Accepted of God : " Thou art my beloved Son ; in thee I 
am well pleased " (Luke iii. 22). 2. His oum natv/re wilt respond to the Divine 
influence. He is to be one who " engages his heart to npproach unto " God. Responsi- 
bility drives him to no rash or illegitimate expedients, but to a Divine trust and a 
desire to please his God. In all this tliere is evinct^d the utmost freedom (cf. Matt. 
iv. 1 ; xvi. 22 ; Luke xii. 50 ; John xii. 27 ; Matt, xxvii. 42). 3. 2%e admiration and 
delight of God are to be called forth by him. " Who is this," etc. ? is no inquiry for 
the sake of information, but an expression of complacency and satisfaction. This 
feeling finds frequent expression in the prophets, and is noticed in the Gospels. It is 
for the subjects of such a King to yield themselves to his rule, and Identify themselves 
with his pripstly intercession. It should be their great desire to be in him, " who 
of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,and redemption " 
(1 Cor. iL 30).— M. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXXI 



Ver». 1 — 6. — The promise of ch. ixx. 22 

is expressly declared to apply to both eeo- 
tions of the nation. Jeliovah thus solemnly 
declares his purpose of mercy, and dwells 
with special kindness on the happy future 
of Ephralm. 

Yer. 2. — The people which were left of 
the sword, ttc. ; literally, the people of those 
left of the sword. Tlie expression clearly 
implies that the Jews at the time spoken of 
had escaped, or were about to escape, in some 
great battle or some otlici' kind of slaughter, 
Hence the " finding grace in the wilderness " 
cannot refer to the sequel of the passage 
through the Bed Sea, and we must perforce 
explain it of the second great deliverance, 
viz. from the Babylonian exile. This view 
is strongly confirmed by ch. li. 50, where the 
Israelites who escape the predicted slaughter 
itt Babylon are called " escaped ones from 
the sword," and exhorted to remember 
Jehovah and Jerusalem " afar off." The 
" wilderness " of the present pass.ige, like 
the "afar off" of ch. li. (and of the next 
verse) seems to mean Babylon, which was, 
by comparison with the highly favoured 
Judah, a " barren and dry laud " (comp. Ps. 
Ixiii. i), a spiritual Arabia. It may be 
objected that the tense here is the perfect ; 
but there is abundance of analogy for ex- 
plaining it as the prophetic perfect. The 
restoration of the chosen people to favour is 
as certain in the Divine counsels as if it 
were already an event past. (It seems less 
appropriate to understand " the wilderness " 
of the country which separated Assyria 
from Palestine. It was in Ba^)ylon that 



the covenant of Sinai was renewed to God's 
repentant people.) Even Israel, when I 
went to cause him to rest; rather, when 1 
went to cause Israel to rest (literally, to cause 
him — Israel — to rest ; but the pleonastic pro- 
noun need not be represented iu the English), 
Another possible and perhaps preferable 
rendering is, J will go to cause, etc. " Best " 
could only be had in the consciousness of 
God's favour. With all the outward pros- 
perity of many of the Jews in Babylon, 
there was no true " rest." Oomp. oh. vi. 16, 
" Ask for the old paths . . . and walk therein, 
and ye shall find rest for your souls " (the 
same verbal root in the Hebrew for "rest " 
in both passages). 

Yer. 3. — The Lord hath appeared of old 
unto me. The Church of the faithfullsrael is 
the speaker. "From afar" (so we ought to 
render,ratherthan "of old ")shesee8 Jehovah, 
with the eye of faith, approaching to redeem 
her ; comp. Isa. xl. 10 and lix. 20 (only that 
in these passages it is to Jerusalem, and not 
to Babylon, that Jehovah " comes " as the 
Redeemer) ; also the premise in ch. xxx. 10, 
" I will save thee from afar," and ch. li. 50, 
quoted above. (Septuagint reads " unto 
him ; " but an abrupt change of person is 
not uncommon in Hebrew.) Saying, Yea, I 
have loved thee, etc. " Saying " is inserted 
to make the connection plainer. The genius 
of Hebrew does not require such a distinct 
indiuatiou of a change of speakers as our 
Western languages. For other instances of 
this, see Gen. iv. 25 ; xxvi. 7 ; xxxii. 81 ; 
1 Kings XX. 81. With loving-kindness 
have I drawn thee ; rather, do I continue 
luving-hindness unto thee- " To continue " 
is literally, to draw out at lengtk. Tht 



10 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. ttti , i_4a 



Idea Ib the same as that in the great pro- 
phecy which follows that of the suffering 
SaTiour, " With everlasting l^indnesa will I 
have meruy on theu " (Isa. lir. 8 ; comp. 
▼er. 10). 

Ver. 4. — I will build thee. A nation, 
like a family, is frequently compared to a 
building (so ch. xii. 16; xxiv. 6; comp. 
Eph. ii. 22). virgin of Israel. The 
people of Israel is personified as a virgin 
(corrjp. ch. xiv. 7). Adorned with thy tabrets. 
The expression will nut, of course, bear to be 
logically criticized, for it was not the whole 
people who wint out with " tabrets " or 
** timbrels," but the " damsels," who, it is 
true, formed an important part of religious 
processions (Ps. Ixviii. 25), and doubtless of 
secular ones also (comp. Judg. xi. 34). 
Joyousness is an essential part of the 
Biblical ideal butli of religion and of a 
normal state of society : " The joy of the 
Lord is your strength." 

Ver. 5. — The mountains of Samaria. " Sa- 
maria" is used, equally witli Ephraim, for 
the northern kingdom. Shall eat them as 
oommon things; rather, skull enjoy the fruit. 
The word, however, literally means shall 
profane them. The more common phrase, 
" shall eat the fruit," occurs in Isa. Ixv. 21, 
where the same promise is given. The law 
was that newly planted fruit trees should be 
left alone for three years ; that in the fourth 
year their fruit should be consecrated to 
Ood ; and that in the fifrh year tlieir fruit 
might be " profaned," i.e. devoted to ordinary 
uses (comp. Dent. xx. 6 ; xxviii. 30). 

Ver. 6. — The termination of the schism 
between north and south will be shown by 
the anxiety of the Kphraimites (see on " Sa- 
maria," ver. 5) to take part with their brethren 
in thu festival of the new moon. It was tlie 
custom, at any rate in later times, to station 
watchmen at elevated points to give notice 
of thefirbt appearance of " the slender sickle, 
which shines so brightly in the clear Oriental 
heaven." Let us go up. . Not with reference 
to the physical elevatiun of Jerusalem, for 
the phrase, " to go up," is used of an army 
withdrawing from Jerusalem (ch. xxi. 2 ; 
xxxiv. 2i). This seems to indicate that the 
term was sometimes used in a weakened 
sense, to which parallels might easily be 
given. These words, '' Arise ye, and let us 
go up," etc., were, at a later period, the for- 
mula with »hich the leader of the pilgrims 
from any piirticuliir district summoned the 
members of his caravan to fall into the pro- 
cessinn. 

Vers. 7 — 14. — The restoration of Israel; 
its bie:iseduess and joyousuess. 

Ver. 7. — Sing with gladness, etc. It is not 
stated who are addresoed; but we may 
doubtless understand, from lea. Ixvi. 10, 
** all ye who tove him," whether Jews or 



Gentiles. The latter, too^ are Intereited in 
the restoration of Israel, because Israel is 
as it were a "priest" or mediator for the 
other nations (Isa. Ixi. 6). Among the chiei 
of the nations ; rather, because of the chief oj 
the nations. Israel is called the " chief of 
the nations " (so, with a cognate word for 
"chief," in Amos vi. 1) because Jehovah 
has " chosen " it as his peculium (to use the 
language of the Vulgate), Deut. vii. 6, and 
because no other nation " bath God so nigh 
unto them," and " hath statutes and judg- 
ments so righteous," as Israel (Deut. iv. 7, 8). 

Ver. 8. — The weakest among the Israelites 
will share the blessings with the strongest, 
even the blind and the lame (comp. Isa. 
xxxiii. 23, " The lame take the prey "). 
Elsewhere we are told that, in the Messianic 
age, " the eyes of t: e blind shall see," and 
"the lame man shall leap as an hart" (Isa. 
XXXV. 5, 6). Shall return thither ; rather, 
hither; i.e. to Palestine, where Jeremiah 
writes this prophecy. The word for com- 
pany is kahal, the proper word in the Penta- 
teuch for the Israelitish national " congre- 
gation." 

Ver. 9. — With weeping ; i.e. with a joy 
dashed with sorrow at the thought of the 
sin which has rendered such an interposition 
necessary (comp. ch. xxxi. 18). Cause them 
to walk by the rivers of waters. The reference 
here is primarily to the homeward journey 
of the exiles, which shall be free from the 
trials of the first Exudus, but not exclu 
sively (see on next verse). The question 
arises how this prediction is to be recon- 
ciled with facts. For, as Kimohi has 
remarked, we find no reference to miracles 
performed for the Jews who returned from 
Babylon. A twofold reply seems admissible 
We may say either that to those who enjoy 
a vivid sense of the favour and protection 
of God no trial is grievous, no circumstances 
exclude an under-current of joy (comp. Ps. 
xxiii ) ; or that the prophecy is still waiting 
for its complete fulfilment, Israel having 
still a great future reserved for it upon its 
recognition of the true Messiah. In a 
straight way; or, in an even way, i.e. one 
free from hindrances. Oomp. Ezra's prayer 
(Ezra viii. 21), and Ps. evil. 7, in both o( 
which passages " right " should probably be 
"even." Ephraim is my firstborn. It is 
doubted whether this simply means Uiat 
Ephraim (i.e. North Israel) ahull be in no 
respect inferior to Judiih— a strong form of 
expression being chosen, on account of the 
longer continuance of Ephraira's captivity : 
or whether it implies a restoration to the 
tribes of Joseph of (he prerogative conferred 
upon the sons of Joseph (1 Chron. v. 1, 2; 
oomp. Gen. xlviii. 15). The former view 
seems hardly consistent with the dignity of 
a prophetic writer. " Forms of expression." 



OH. xm. 1—40.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



11 



i.e. rhetorical plirases, may be admitted in 
poeticiil passages, but hardly in solemn 
prophetic revelations. It was true that 
Judah had •' prevailed above his brethren ; " 
but tlie original " gift of God " to Ephraim 
was " without repentance." With regard to 
the fulfilment of this prediction, we must 
remember that the remnant of the northern 
tribes whose faith was strong enough to 
induce thorn t" profit by the eilict of Cyrus, 
was smaller than that of the southern. 
Hence the outward signs of God's favour to 
Ephraim could not be bO great as thpy 
would have been hud the moral conditions 
of the fulfilment of the promise been more 
fully complied with. 

Ver. 10.— The isles ; t.«. the distant 
countries of the West (see on ch. ii. 10). 
So great an event as the restoration of the 
chosen people would be of world-wide impor- 
tance. He that scattered Israel will gather 
him, etc. "The Israelites were the flock 
of Jehovah (Fs. Ixxvii. 20; Izxx. 1), but 
during the Captivity a scattered and mieer- 
ihle fl:x:k. Jeremiah says that his eye 
'shall run down with tears, because the 
flock of Jehovah is carried away captive' 
(oh. xiii. 17). The change in the fortune! 
of the Jews is compared by the prophets 
to a shepherd's seeking his lost sheep, and 
feeding them again in green pastures (cli. 
xxxi. 10 ; 1. 19 ; Ezek. xxxiv. 11—16). The 
reference is not so much to the home- 
ward journey of the exiles as to the state of 
temporal and spiritual happiness in which 
they would find themselves on their return. 
The same figures occur in a psalm, where a 
reference to the retuin from exile is ex- 
cluded by the pre-exile date, ' ._ . . feed 
them also, and carry them for ever' (Pa. 
xxviii. 9)"(irom the writer's note on Isa. 
xl. 11). 

Ver. 12. — Shall flow together to the good- 
ness of the Lord; i.e. the Gphraimites, niter 
praising God on the holy hill, shall spread 
themselves over their own territory like au 
overflowing stream, and enjoy the "good- 
ness" or good gifts of Jehovah — the corn 
(not simply the wheat), the wine, the oil, 
etc. (comp. Deut. viii. 8). Sorrow ; rather, 
languitli. As Dr. Payne Smith well says, 
"It expresses the poverty and hL-lpUbSiiess of 
exili s unable from home-sickness and want 
of confidence to do anything, with spirit 
Restored to their homes, they will be as 
full of vigour as a garden irrigated with 
water under a Southern sun." 

Ver. 13.— Young and old, men and 
women, shall give themselves up to joy and 
merriment, the centre of the mirtlj being 
the maideus with the timbrels (ver. 4). 
Both young men and old together ; rather, 
and young taen and old (shall rejoice) to- 
jether. 



Ver. 14. — And I will satiate; literally, 
water (same word as in Ps. xxxvi. 8). The 
" fatness" means the fat parts of the thank 
offerings, which were given to the priests 
(Lev. vii. 34). Satisfied. " Satiated " would 
be a happier rendering. The word U dif- 
fereut from that rendered "satiate" iust 
above. 

Vers. 15 — 22. — From thia glorious prospect 
Jeremiah's eye turns to the melancholy 
present. The land of Ephraim is orphaned 
and desolate. The prophet seems to hear 
Riicliel weeping for her banished children, 
and comforts her with the assurance that 
tliey shall yet be restored. For Ephraim 
has come li> repentance, and longs for recon- 
ciliation with his God, and God, who has 
overheard his soliloquy, relents, and comes 
to meet him with gracious promises. Then 
another voice is heard summoning Ephraim 
to prepare for his journey home. T his verse is 
quoted by St. Matthew (ii 17) with reference 
to the massacre of the innocents, with riri 
iir\riptieri prefixed. The latter formula of 
itself suggests that there was a previous ful- 
filment of the prophecy, but that the analogy 
of ihe circumstances of the innocents jus- 
tifies — nay, requires— the admission of a 
second fulfilment. In fact, the promise of the 
Messianic age seemed in as much danger of 
being rendered void when Herod wreaked 
his ftiry on the children of Bethlehem, as 
when the tribes of Israel were scattered in 
exile. Dean Stanley finds a geographical 
inconsistency in the two passages. " The 
context of oh. zzzi. 15 implies that the 
Bamab of the prophet was in the northern 
kingdom, probably Bamah of Benjamin. 
The context of Matt. ii. 18, on the other 
hand, implies that the Eamah of the evange- 
list was within sight of Bethlehem" ('Sinai 
and Palestine,' p. 225). But thi* remark 
involves the assumption that the quotation 
was not intended merely as an application. 

Ver. 15.— A voice was heard ; rather, it 
heard. It is a participle, indioatint< the 
continuance of the action. In Bamah. In 
the neighbourhood of which town Bachel 
was buried, acoonling to 1 Sam. x. 2 (" the 
city " where Samuel and Saul were — ix. 25 — 
appears to have been Bamah). Eachel 
weeping for her children. Bachel (" Eahel " 
is only a Germanizing way of writing the 
name), being the ancestress of the three 
tribes, Ephraim, Manasseh, aid Benjamin, 
is represented as feeling like a mother for 
all the tribes connected with those three. 
Her " weeping " is no mere figure of speech. 
Jeremiah believes that the patriarchs and 
holy men of old continue to feel an interest 
in the fortunes of theii descendants (comp. 
Isa. Ixiii. 16> 

Ver. 16.— Bachel i» admonished to oeasa 
from weeping, because her work hM not 



12 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxm. 1— lOl 



really been in Tain ; hei children shall be re- 
stored. Thy work shall he rewarded. Like 
the Servant of the Lord, Kacliel had said 
{though with the voiceless language of 
tears), "I have laboured in vain ; I have 
spent my strength for nought and in vain;" 
and like the ocean-mother of Zidon,"Ihave 
not travailed, nor brought forth children, 
neither nourislied up young men, nor brought 
up virgins " (Isa. xxiii. 4). Rachel's work 
had 1>ec:n that of rearing up the patriarchs, 
"in whose loins" the tribes themselves 
were, in a certain sense. From the land 
of the enemy ; i.e. f i cm the countries of 
Israel's dispersion. But in the spirit of St. 
Matthew, we may fill the passage with a 
higher meiming, of which the prophet (like 
Shakespeare sometimes) was unconscious, 
namely, "from death;" and tlie passage 
thus becomes an undesigned prophecy of 
the Resurrection. 

Yer. 17. — Hope in thine end ; rather, 
hope for thy future (oomp. on oh. xxix. 11). 
There is no occasion to reader, with the Sep- 
tuagint and Rosenmiiller, " for thy posterity " 
(comp. Fs. cxiz. 13, Hebrew) ; for Rachel 
identifies herself by sympathy with her 
descendants. 

Vera. 18, 19.— The ground of this hope, 
viz. that Ephraim will humble himself 
with deep contrition. 

Yer. 18. — IkS a bnllook nnaoonstomed to 
the yoke; literally, a» an untaught calf 
(comp. Hob. z. 11). Tnrn thou me, etc. 
Jeremiah has a peculiarly deep view of con- 
version Isaiah (i. 16 — 20) simply calls 
upon his hearers to change their course of 
life; Jeremiah represents penitent Ephiaim 
as beseeching God so to prepare him that 
he may indeed " turn." 

Yer. 19. — ^After that I was turned, I re- 
pented ; rather, after my turning away (as 
oh. viii. 4), / hiave repented. It is a dif- 
ferent kind of "turning" which is here 
meant, a turning away from God. I was 
instmcted ; literally, 1 teat made to hnovo; 
i.e. brought to my senses by punishment. 
I smote upon my thigh; rather, I have 
smitten, etc. Ephraim describes his present 
state of mind, and the symbols by which 
he translates it into act. Smiting upon the 
thigh was a sign of mourning (comp. Ezek. 
xxi. 17), I £d bear, etc. ; rather, I have 
borne, eto. The "reproach of Ephraim't 
youth " is that which be brought upon him- 
self in early timea by his unfaithfulness to 
Jehovah. 

Yer. 20. — The Divine speaker asks, as it 
were in sorprise, whether Ephraim, who has 
BO flagrantly sinned against him, can really b« 
his dear (or, preetoue) son, bis pleasant child 
(literally, child ofearetting, i.e. one caressed). 
The latter expression occurs in a remark- 
aUa paasag* of Isaiah (t. 1). Sinoe I spake 



against him ; rather, at often tu I ipakt 
against him; ie. as often as I pronounced 
sentence against Ephraim — such a sentence 
as is recorded in Isa. ix. 8 — 21 (where the 
future tenses should be perfects) and zxviii. 
1 — 4. We must remember that, with God, 
to speak is to perform. Often as Jehovah 
punished Israel, he still remembered him 
in love — a love which was the pledge of his 
future restoration to favour upon his true 
repentance. I do earnestly remember; 
rather, 1 verily remembered. " To remem- 
ber " is the Old Testament term for provi- 
dential care (comp. Gen. viii. 1; xlz. 29). 
My bowels are troubled; literally, sounds 
moan (so Isa. xvi. 11 ; Ixiii. 15). Something 
analogous to the thrilling sensation of deep 
human grief is predicated of Jehovah. Such 
is the "humility" of the GJod of> revelation 
(Ps. xviii. 35 ; comp. Hos. xL 8). 

Yer. 21. — Set thee up waymarki. The 
" virgin of Israel " is addressed. She ia 
directed to mark out the road for the return- 
ing exiles. The command is obviously rhe- 
torical in form ; the general sense is that the 
Israelites are to call to mind the road so 
familiar to their forefathers, though only 
known to themselves by tradition. The 
word rendered "way marks" occurs again in 
2 Kings xzxiii. 17 and Ezek. xxxiz. 15. It 
apparently means a stone pillar, whioh 
might be used either as a waymark or a 
sepulchral monument. The high heapi 
seem to mean much the same thin^ ; " sign- 
posts" would be a better rendering. Set 
thine heart toward the highway ; rather, 
turn thy thoughts, etc., for the heart is here 
evidently the symbol of the intellectual 
rather than the moral life (comp. 1 Kings 
X. 2, and mauy other passages). A passage 
in the Psalms (Ixxxiv. 6) will occur to 
every one, in which a psalmist, longing at a 
distance for the services of tiie temple, pro- 
nounces blessed the man " in whose heart 
are the highways [to Zion];" here, it is 
true, " heart " has the double meaning of 
"mind "and " aff'ections," but "highway" 
has almost exactly the same sense as in the 
passage before us. To these thy oitieB. The 
unseen speaker is supposed to be in Palestine. 
Yer. 22.— How long wUt thou go about 1 
We must suppose the Israelites to be he itat- 
ing whether to set out on tlieir journey or 
not They are now admonished to put away 
their rebellious reluctance, and a speoiu 
reason for this is added. The Lord hafh 
created — i.e. hath decreed to create — a new 
thing in the earth (or, tn the land) ; comp. 
Isa. xliii. 19 whioh suggests that a complete 
reversal of ordinary experience is indicated, 
as indeeil the word " create " of itself pro- 
pares us to expect. And what is this pro- 
mise grunted as a sign to reluctant Israel I 
▲ woman shall oompaia a man; i.«. instead 



ad. xxxL 1— 40.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, 



IS 



of shyly keeping aloof, o; worse (ae hitherto), 
Israel, Jehovah's bride, shall, witli eager 
affection, press around her Divine husband. 
The phrase, however, ia extremely dirticult. 
Of other explanations, the most plausible 
philologically is that of Sohniirrer and 
Oesenius, " a woman shall protect a man " 
(comp. Deut. xxxii. 10). The part of a 
sentinel, pacing round and round his charge, 
seems most unfitted for a woman. When 
enemies are abroad, it is the men's natural 
duty to perform this part for the women. 
But in the coming age, the conntry sliull be 
so free from danger that the places of men 
and women may safely be reversed. But 
would a paradox of tliis kind be likely to 
be uttered in this connection ? Surely a 
clearer statement would be necessary to 
remove the reluctance of the Israelites. 
Vers. 19, 20 suggest that Ephraim needed 
reassurance as to the attitude of Jehuvah 
towards him. The promise of ver. 22, as 
explained above, would give precisely the 
needed strength and comfort. The ex|io&i- 
tion of St, Jerome and other Fathers, that 
the birth of Christ from a virgin is referred 
to, is altogether inadmissible, (1) because 
the nouns which form the subject and the 
predicate respectively indicate sex, not age, 
and the first in particular cannot be tortured 
so as to mean " virgin ; " and (2) there is no 
article to confine the reference to any 
particular persons. 

Vers. 23—26. — But the prophet would 
not have Judah suppose that Ephraim has 
supplanted her; slie too shall be restored, 
and shall enjoy a happy pastoral and agri- 
cultural life.: 

Ver. 23. — As yet ; rather, again (as ver. 
1). Mountain of holiness. Does this mean 
simply Mount Zinn, or the whole highland 
country of Judah (comp. Isa. xi. 9) ? The 
former view is the safer ; it is by no means 
clear that ""mountain" in Isaiah or any- 
where else in the Old Testament means the 
Holy Land. 

Ver. 2i. — The ideal of outward life ex- 
liibited by thfe prophets is still the agricul- 
tural and pastoral. Jeremiah puts this 
more forcibly than the Authorized Version 
represents. Instead of. And there shall 
dwell in Judah, etc., he says, And there shall 
dwell therein (viz. in the land) Judah and 
all his cities together as husbandmen, and they 
shall go about with flocks, i.e. they shall 
attend to their ancient pursuits without let 
or hindrance from invaders (comp. Isa. 
xxxii. 20). "Go about" (literally, break up) 
is tlie regular word for the periodical jour- 
nejing of the nomad life. 

Vei , 25. — For Jehovah will have fulfilled 
every unsatisfied craving. I have satiated 
(literally, watered) means " I have decreed 
to satiate ; " it is the perfect of prophetic 



certitude, which represents an event as 
already having taken place in the Divine 
counsels. Sorrowful; rather, languishing 
(see on ver. 12) 

Ver. 26. — TTpon this I awaked, etc. 
Who the speaker ia here has been mncb 
debated. That Jehuvah is meant is not an 
admissible view. A weak believer may say 
complainingly, "Why sleepest thou? "but 
God himsi If cannot be represented under the 
image of a sleeper. There seems, however, to 
be no reason why the prophet should not 
have used this fonguage. The doubt is 
whether a real, physical sleep is meant, or 
merely an ecstatic condition resembling 
sleep. Hengstenberg decides for the latter. 
But there is no parallel for sleep in the 
sense of ecstasy, and, on the other hand, 
there is evidence enough for dreams as the 
channels of Divine revelation (Gen. xxxi. 
10, 11; 1 Kings iii. 5; ix. 2; Joel ii. 28). 
As Naeeelsbach points out, tliia is the only 
nnqualiliedly comforting prophecy in the 
whole book, and may well have left a sweet 
savour in the prophet's memory. Stem, 
indeed, was the reality which the moment 
of his waking brought back to him. 

Vers. 27— 30.— The physical side of the 
Messianic blessing. Its effect npon the 
heart of tlie pardoned sinners will be such 
that they will fnlly recognize the justice of 
the Divine judgments. There will no longer 
be any room for a certain favourite proverb ; 
the death of a sinner will be imiversally 
acknowledged to be the reward of his per- 
sonal sin (Keil). 

Ver. 27. — I will sow, etc The passage 
may be illustrated by Isa. xxvi. 18, wheie 
the Church of the restored exiles is repre- 
sented as complaining that the land (of 
Judah) has not been brought into a state of 
security, and that inhabitants (in sufficient 
numbers) have not been begotten. Similarly 
he^e, only the tone of complaint is wanting. 
'Ihe thought has suggested itself — Will 
the Israelites of the latter days be sufiScient 
to fill up the land ? Yes, is the answer of 
revelation ; for Jehovah will perform a 
wonder, and make the people and their 
cattle so prolific that it will seem as if 
children and young cattle grew up like 
plants. 

Ver. 28. — ^As I have watched ... so will 
I watch, etc. The allusion is to the twofold 
commission given to the prophet (ch. i. 10), 
which was partly to pluck up and to destroy, 
partly to build and to plant. Jehovah has 
hitherto been " watchful " (another point of 
contact with cli. i. ; see on ch. i. 12) over 
the fulfilment of the destructive prophecies ; 
he will now be equally zealous for that of 
the promises of regeneration. 

Ver. 29.— Have eaten a soui grape ; rather, 
(our grapes. The prophet (like EiekieL 



14 



THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xixi. 1— 10. 



ek. ZTi'ii.) condemns the use of this proverb, 
and declares that the sinner is the artificer 
of his own ruin. At first sight, it may seem 
as if Jeremiah opposes the second command- 
ment, which describes how God " visits 
the iniquity of the fathers upon the chil- 
dren " (Ezod. zx. 5). This, however, can- 
not really be, for he endorses this declaration 
later on (oh. zxxii 18). The fact is that he 
is not BO much condemuing the proverb, as 
the blasphemous application of it made by 
the Jews of his time. It is an eternal truth 
that sin perpetuates itself (except by the 
miracles of grace) in the children of trans- 
gressors, and intensified sin leads to inten- 
sified punishment. Bnt the children of 
transgressors do not cease to be responsible 
for their own share in the sin ; — this was the 
truth which Jeremiah's contemporaries ig- 
aored. He does not deny the solidarity of 
the family or the race, but he superadds the 
neglected truth of the special responsibility 
of the individual. This is one among many 
evidences of the deepening sense of indi- 
vidual life in the later period of the Jewish 
monarchy. (A somewhat different view is 
offered by Delitzsch, ' Messianic Prophecies,' 
§ 50. Accordiug to him, Jeremiah lool^s 
forward to a time when the individual shall 
be liberated from the consequences of his 
solidarity with his race, and when person- 
ality shall be "invested with its rights." 
But can the individual be thus liberated ?) 
Vers. 31 — 34. — The new covenant. A 
prophecy which stands out from the rest of 
Jeremiah by its evangelical character, in 
which it strongly reminds us of parts of the 
second half of Isaiah. The doctrine of the 
covenant is "the thread which binds to- 
gether the hopes and the fears of the pro- 
phet, his certainty of coming woe, his 
certainty of ultimate blessing." A coven- 
ant was granted of old, but that covenant 
had on man's side been broken. Still " the 
gifts and calling of God are not to be 
retracted " (Bom, zi. 29) ; and Jeremiah 
felt that the very nature of God guaranteed 
the renewal of the covenant on a new basis. 
"Covenant" is, no doubt, an unfortunate 
rendering. Tlie Hebrew word so rendered 
means, primarily, a decision or appointment, 
and there is a whole group of passages in 
the Old Testament which requires this 
meaning (see the present writer's note, in 
' The Prophecies of Isaiah,' on Isa. xlii. 6). 
We retain it, however, as that with wliich 
the reader is familiar, and only remind him 
that God is everything, and man nothing, 
in fixing the terms of the transaction. The 
characteristics of the new covenant are 
^ three : (1) The relation between God and 
' his people is protected from all risk by 
God l]imself making the people what he 
would have them be. (2) " Whereas, in the 



case of the old, the law of duty was written 
on . dbhs of stone, in the c^ise of the new 
the law is to he written on the heart ; where- 
as, under the old, owing to the ritual charac- 
ter of the worship, the knowledge of God 
and his will was a complicated affair, in 
which men generally were helplessly depen- 
dent on a professional class, under the new, 
the worship of God would be reduced to the 
simplest spiritual elements, and it would be 
in every man's power to know God at first 
hand, the sole requisite for such knowledge 
am would then be required being a pure 
heart." And (3) " whereas, under the old, 
the provisions for the cancelling of sin were 
very unsatisfactory, and utterly unfit to 
perfect the worshipper as to conscience, by 
dealing thoroughly with the problem of 
guilt, under the new God would o^rant to 
his people a real, absolute, and perennial 
forgiveness, so that the abiding relation be- 
tween him and them should be a^i if sin had 
never existed" (Dr. A. B. Bruce, in The 
Expoeitm, January, 1880, pp. 70, 71). Comp. 
the abolition of the ark indicated in cb. 
iii. 16. — The inspired author of Hebrews 
tells us (viii. 6 — 13), speaking generally, that 
this promise delivered through Jeremiah 
was fulfilled in the gospel. But it must be 
remembered that the gospel has not yet 
taken form outwardly, except in a compa- 
ratively meagre sense. If the Jews as a 
nation (that is, the better part or kernel of 
Israel) should embrace the gospel, not neces- 
sarily iu the logical expression familiar to 
the West, but in its essential facts and truths, 
we should see quite another embodiment 
of the promise, and feel the spiritual im- 
pulse in ourselves as we have not yet done. 
It seems appropriate, in conclusiun, to quote 
a finely expressed passage from De Quin- 
cey's exposition of the New Testament term 
lj.erivoia. Without pledging ourselves to the 
absolute correctness of his explanation of 
that word, his language may be well applied 
to Jeremiah's prophecy. " What would 
have been thought of any prophet, if he 
should have promised to transfigurate tlie 
celestial mechanics ; if he had said, ' I will 
create a new pole-star, a new zodiac, and 
new laws of gravitation;' briefly,*! will 
make new earth and new heavens' ? And yet 
a thousand times more awful it was to un- 
dertake the writing of new laws npon the 
spiritual conscience of man." 

Ver. 32. — ^Although I was an hnsband unto 
them. The translation of the Septuagint Kdyi 
illj.i\ri<ra aJrHv, is undoubtedly wrong, though 
adopted for consistency's sake by the author 
of Hebrews (viii. 9). The phrase is the 
same as in ch. iii. 14, where even the Septua 
gint has cyii /caTanvpieiaa i/uif. 

Ver. 33.— After those days ; i.e. after they 
have fully come ; not, after they are over 



OH. XXXI. 1— 40.J THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



16 



I will put my law, etc. Of course, not the 
Pentateuch, but the principles of which 
the rules in the Pentateuch were the tem- 
porary application. It is not here denied 
that there were, or might be, some undor 
the Old Testament dispens^ation who had 
the Divine Law in their heart (see some of 
the psalms), but speaking of the people as 
a whole, it must be said that the Law was 
an external dictator rather than a bosom 
friend, a mechanical rule rather than a 
\6yos ifu^vTos (Jas. i. 21). 

Ver. 34. — On this verse, see note on the 
paragraph. 

Vers. 35 — 37. — Guarantee of Israel's na- 
tional continuance. A marvellous promise, 
in the face of the Babylonian Captivity. 

Ver. 35. — The ordinances of the moon ; i.a. 
the moon in its appointed changes (com p. ch. 
xzxiii. 23). Which divideth the sea when, 
etc. ; rather, which ttirreth up the sea, to that, 
etc This is one of the points of content 
in Jeremiah with the latter part of Isaiah 
(see Isa. li. 17 ; and comp. Job xxvi. 12). 

Ver. 37. -Thus saith the lord. " It is 
not without meaning that the prophet so 
frequently repeats: 'Thus saith the Lord.' 
This formed the A and a ; liis word was 
the sole ground of hope for Israel. Apart 
from it, despair was as reasonable as now it 
was nnreasonable " (Hengstenberg). 

Vers. 38 — 40. — The connection is not very 
clear. The main point of these verses is tliat 
Jerusalem, when rebuilt, shall be altogether 
" the Lord's." Its circumference shall eien 
be extended with the single object of in- 
cluding spots at present unclean, but then 
to become holy like the rest of the city. 
According to Hengstenberg and Keil, Jeru- 
salem is here a Bgure of the kingdom of 
God in the latter days. 

Yer. 88.— The tower of EaiumeeL Thii 



lay at the north-east corner of the city (Neh. 
iii. 1 ; xii. 39). The gate of the corner. At 
the north-west corner (2 Kings xiv. 13; 2 
Ohron. xxvi. 9). Botli this and the tower 
of Hananeel are mentioned together again 
in the prophecy of the glorification of Jeru- 
salem, in Zech. xiv. 10. 

Ver. 39. — Over against it upon the hiU 
Gareb ; rather, straight furward unto the hill 
Gareb. The hill of Gareb is not mentioned 
elsewhere ; its meaning is probably " Leper's 
Hill." It must, of course, have been outside 
the city, and may be identified (after 
Schleussner anJ Hitzig) with " the fourth 
hill, which is called Bezetha" (Josephus, 
' De Bell. Jud.,' v. 4, 2). To Goath ; rather, 
to Goiih. But the reading of the Pushito, 
" to Gibeah," should probably be adopted. 

Ver. 40. — The southern boundary of the 
city. The whole vaUey of the dead bodies, 
and of the ashes ; rather, , . . even the dead 
bodies and the ashes. It is assumed by most 
that Jeremiah means the valley of Hinnom, 
whieh, after its defilement by Josiah (2 
Kings xxiii. 10), had become a receptacle of 
rubbish and offal. It is, however, against 
this view that the word for *' valley " is not 
gai (elsewhere connected with Hinnom), but 
'enwi, i.e. " deep-lying plain." The " dead 
bodies " are the corpses of men and animals, 
destroyed by the judgment of God, and 
lying unburied ; but where, seems uncertain, 
Ashes. Wood ashes are not here meant, but 
those of flesh and fat, which remained after 
the burning of a sacrificial victim (see 
Lev. i. 16 ; and comp. iv. 12). The horse 
gate. Mentioned in Neh. iii. 28. Holy 
unto the Lord. The nuclean spots in the 
neighbourhood having been transformed. 
The expression reminds us of Exod. xxviii 
36 (the legend on the forefront of the high 
priest's mitie). 



HOMILETICa 
Ver, 1. — TTie close relations of Ood and his people. I. Thx occasion of thb 

ESTABLISHMENT OF CLOSE BELATIONS BETWEEN GoD AND HIS PEOPLE. 1. After chastise- 
ment. This and the other blessings (iromised in "the book of consolation" are to 
follow the endurance of the Captiviiy. God often accords the choicest spiritual blessings 
to those of his children who are called to endure the bitterest trials. 2. After repent- 
ance. The penple learned to grieve for their wickedness, and return to Ood in penitence 
and trust under the wholesome lessons of adversity, 'i'hen they were ready for reunion 
with God. Mere suffeiing will not lead to this. Suffering is useful just because it may 
be a, means of leading us to humble ourselves and turn to God. 3. Accompanying a 
restoration of temporal prosperity. The glories of the restoration referred to in the last 
cha[)ter are closely associated with the high spiritual privileges promised in the text. 
Earthly good things are of little use unless they are crowned by higher blessings. Tlie 
difference between the prosperity of the wicked and that of true Christians is that the 
one is the highest good enjoyed, and thus tends to become an idol and a snare, while 
the other is subordinate to tetter things and purified by their pervading influence. 
Thus received, prosperity may be safely enjoyed. 4. CJontemporaneoiuly with the 



16 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEKEMIAH. [oh. xxxi. 1—40. 

punishment of the wicked. " At the same time," etc. God is disoriminating in his 
judgments because he is calm and just, though we cannot discern his course and aim. 
The highest spiritual good is received only when our spiritual foes are overthrown. 

II. The pkusons who enjot these close relations. 1. Israel. The promise was 
to the favoured nation, to the exclusion of others. Elsewhere prophets foretoM the spread 
of the blessings of redemption to all nations, but always on the understanding that 
those nations entered into the Jewish covenant and became spiritual Israelites. The 
highest blessings are offered to all men, but with the condition that they who would 
receive them become his true children. The invitation is to mankind ; the promise is 
to the people of God. 2. The families of Israel. God gives distinct family gifts, 
blessing children through their parents. Religion sanctifies the family. Family life is 
the largest and highest form of natural human life. 3. wlK the families of Israel. The 
privileges are not confined to certain selected families — to those which had always 
remained faithful, to any spiritual aristocracy, to any priestly order ; not Aaron's family 
alone, nor Levi's tribe, nor Judah to the exclusion of the ten tribes ; but all are to be 
restored. All Christians are called to the free enjoyment of God's peculiar people; 
spiritual privileges are confined within no exclusive limitations. All Christians are 
kings and priests; all can now enter the holiest sanctuary, enjoy the closest communion 
with God. 

III. The charaotee of these close relations. 1. It has a human side : " I will be 
the God of all the families of Israel." (1) Jehovah is acknowledged. The people had 
followed Baal. They return to the true God. Christians who acknowledge God and 
Christ should frankly confess their faith. (2) God is worshipped. If he is regarded 
by us as becomes his being and character, he must be honoured as well as acknowledged. 
(3) God is obeyed. If he is admitted to be our God, he must be submitted to as our 
sovereign Lord. (4) God is trusted. Our God is our supreme Helper. When we 
enter into right relations with God, we learn to confide in him. (5) God is enjoyed. 
He is our God as our Portion. 2. The character of this relation between God and his 
people has also a Divine side : "And they shall be my people." Religion is not only 
an exercise of human spiritual activities; it is also a sphere in which God works, 
influencing his people. Though his people are unworthy of God, he is not ashamed of 
them. He owns them. If God regards any men as his people, great consequences 
follow. (1) He will prize them as his treasures, showing to them love, bestowing upon 
them favours, guarding them from harm. (2) He will lay obligatioDs upon them, call 
them to service, honour them with trusts. These two characteristics of the close 
relation of God and his people are nearly allied. God will not h(mour and protect us 
while we forget or disown him ; but bis great favours to ua help us the better to ow]t 
and serve him. 

Ver. 8. — The everlasting love of God, God appeared "from afar" to Jeremiah. 
When he seems to have forsaken us he is not loving us the less. In these dark hoars 
he may give to us, as to Jeremiah, the richest assurance of his everlasting love. 

I. Consider the wonder of the fact that God's love is everlastiko. There ia 
» wonder about this fact, since there are so many things that might well be thought 
likely to limit and stay the love of God to such beings as we are, viz. : 1. Our unworthi- 
ness. God is holy, and must delight only in holiness; he is great, and can create 
innumerable beings of far higher powers than ours. Why, then, should he love such 
imperfect creatures as men? — why love those who are corrupt and sinful? 2. Our 
indifference. Love looks for a return of love ; but men have treated God's love with 
neglect. Through the long ages during which God has been visiting his children with 
ceaseless loving-kindness they have been coldly turning aside to their own ways, deaf 
to the entreaties of an infinite condescension. 3. Our unfaithfulnets. For love to 
remain unbroken it is expected that it should be honoured by fidelity. Unfaithfulness 
is naturally regarded as a reason for withdrawing the privileges of affection. But God's 
children have been untrue to him. They have forsaken his ways, abused his blessings, 
flung insult on his mercy. How, then, can he continue to love them ? It is, indeed, 
a marvel that, through these long ages of the world's wild wanderings, God should still 
follow his unworthy children with ceaseless love, never refusing to bless them, always 
•utreating them to return to him. And it must be a marvel to as that, through all the 



OH. XXXI. 1—40.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 17 



years of our unworthy lives, he has shown the same long-suffering, forbearing meroy tc 
each of us. It is wonderful that God should ever love such unworthy creatures as we 
are, but it is " passing strange " that he should not cease to love us after all our provo- 
cations of his wrath, that he should love us with "an everlasting love," and should 
" have continued his loving-kindness unto" us. 

II. Inquire into some of the reasons wht God's lotb is EVERLASTiNa. We must 
not look for these in any hidden merits of our own, which our modesty has passed ovei 
while God's favour has been won by them. The secret of the love of God and of its 
eternal endurance is to be sought in his nature and in his relations to us. 1. Z%e nature 
of Qod. " God is love." He loves because he cannot but love, because he delights to love, 
because his love must be ever flowing and is so vast that it must needs flow out 
eternally in all directions. It is not the attraction of the object, but the character of 
the love, that accounts for its perpetual endurance. The earth is bathed in summer 
sunlight without having any peculiar attractions for light — only because the vast stores 
of the sun must ever empty themselves by radiating out into space. The stream fer- 
tilizes the valley through no influence of the plants drawing it thither, but just because 
abundant springs pour forth their waters. And God radiates love, pours forth floods ot 
blessing, because he is full of love, because love has its laws of diffusion. Such love is 
not destroyed by the unwoithiness of the object. Closed shutters do nut prevent the 
sunshine from playing about the house. Sandy deserts, in which the waters of the 
stream are lost, do not stay the torrents from flowing down the mountain-sides. It is 
the nature ot true and perfect love to be eternal. " Charity endureth all thincrs," and 
" never faileth." " Love is love for evermore." 2. God's relations with us. God is our 
Father. We are his children by nature, and can never cease to be so. The prodigal 
son was an unworthy child, yet in his degradation he could still think of hia /at/ic7 
(Luke XV. 17). A parent's love is not caused nor limited by the merits of lii- 
children. It has a deeper, a more unselfish source. It survives all the destruction vi 
just claims. God's love is the perfect parent's love. A mother whose daughter had 
left the home years back always kept her door on the latch at night, that, if her poo: 
child returned at any hour, she should never find it barred against her. Human natur 
is weak. A mother's love may fail, but God's never (Isa. xlix. 15). 

III. NOTB THE PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES THAT FLOW FROM THE BVEULASTINO LOVE 

OF Gk>D. 1. God will do all that is possible for our highest good. We may believe witi: 
William Law "that no creature can sufler from any evil from which infinite goodnest- 
can deliver it." Qod has gone so far as to give his only begutten Son to die for us 
(John iii. 16). We may be sure that he will do all else that is ever possible for the 
salvation and blessing of his children. May we not, then, well hope that an ever- 
lasting love will outlast and wear down all opposition of the stubborn but finite natures 
even of the worst of us, though it take vast ages to accomplish the result? At m1 
events, he is a rash man who would set limits to the future triumphs of the "ceaseles.-, 
unexhausted grace" of God. 2. We should return to him with trust and love. Tl,< 
worst man living, if he repent, netd not dread a harsh reception, for God's love has oul 
lived his sins. Here is infinite encouragement for penitence; here is hope for tic 
lowest. God loves even him. Surely, therefore, God will welcome his unworthy chi!i; 
when he rettirns home. We have in this everlasting love of God inducements to ur < 
us (1) to repent and no longer abuse his goodness ; (2) to trust in him ; (3) to love hiui 
in return for his love ; (4) to find our rest and joy in him ; (5) to devote ourselves to hi- 
service (with love " all tasks aie sweet ") ; and (6) to love our brethren with Qod-like 
love for the sake of God's love (1 John iv. 11). 

Vers. 15—17. — Rachel weeping for her childrm,. I. Bachel has natubal cause 
FOE HEB GBIEF. Sword, pestilence, and famine ravage the land. The invasion by 
Nebuchadnezzar desolates the old home of the family of Rachel, bringing death to those 
who cling to it and scattering the survivors in exile. Such a calamity was in itseii 
most mournful ; but the disappointment it brought to the cherished hopes of Israel in a 
"olden future deepened the distress to despair. It looked as though it were the shipwreck 
of all the Messianic dreams of ancient prophecy. So also the " massacre of the innocents,' 
with reference to which these words of Jeremiah are quoted in the New Testament, wan 
more than an ordinary disaster. It threatened Christ and his redemption. If earthly 

JSBEHIAH — ^It. ( 



18 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, li^"- J^^^i. ■!■— iw 

trouble is great, how far greater would be the destruction of the higher spiritual hopei 
of (Jod's people 1 We may be thankful that we have n* such cause of distress as that 
of Rachel at Ramah and at Bethlehem. Though the Christian's earthly fortunes may 
be tempest-tosserl, his highest hopes are founded on a Rook. No worUUy trouhle can 
touch these. It is noteworthy that Rachel, and not Jacob, is here represented as 
weeping for her children. It is the mother's heart that breaks first when her children 
are taken from her. Even the savage tigress knows this natural grief. It is so hitler 
that no earthly consolation can assuage it. 

II. Rachel aivBS natural vent to hbb obiek She weeps. She may thank God 
for tears ; they are nature's relief to a burdened heart. It is best not to hide a sorrow till 
it eats out the heart like a canker. 

" Give sorrow words ; the grief that does not speak 
Whispers the o'erfraught heart and bids it break." 

Christ does not inflict harsh and unnatural restraints upon mourners, like those of 
Stoicism. At the grave of Lazarus "Jesus wept." St. Paul invites sympathetic 
Christians to "weep with them that weep." Yet it is well to convert our tears into 
prayers. If the bruised spirit cannot speak, cannot think, can but moan, yet it may 
make its inarticulate cry an utterance to heaven that the all-pitiful God will heir. 
The mistake of the mourner is not that she " refuseth to be comforted " — " comfort 
scorned of devils" may be but a mockery — but that while she weeps she forgets to 
bring her burden to him who has prcimised to sustain. It is natural to express s-orrow ; 
it is Christian to carry the sorrow to Christ. 

III. Rachel has Divine consolations foh hbe griep. Human comfort is vain in 
such anguish as hers. Our little platitudes with which we would quiet the mourner are 
plasters that only irritate the wound they cannot heal. But God has his higher con- 
solations. He does not bid the tears to stay without good reason. Rachel is to reirain 
her voice from weeping because there is hope for her in time to come. Jesus bade tlie 
widow of Nain not to weep because he was about to restore her son. God will wipe 
away all tears from his cliildren's eyes by giving them a real harvest of joy for their 
sowing in tears. The Christian is comforted by hope. He should not sorrow as those 
without hope. Israel was to be restored to Canaan. The Christian families shall be 
reunited in the home above. 

Ver. 18. — Ephraim's return. I. The most abandoned op God's ohildkbn mat 
■ETUBN TO HIM. Ephraim was unfaithful before Judah, and fell into greater wicked- 
ness. The northern tribes were punished for their sins by a scattering that destroyed 
for ever their national existence as a separate kingdom. Yet even Ephraim is to 
return. No one of God's children — no one of the great human family, we of the New 
Testament revelation may say — is beyond God's love. God loved Ephraim as well as 
Judih. Ephraim is a dear son (ver. 20). God loves the whole world. Therefore all 
may return ; therefore we may be sure God has a way by which all can return. Christ, 
lifted up, will draw all men unto himself. 

II. God leads his children to desire to eeturn to him bt means op ohastisb- 
MBNT. Ephraim says, " Thou didst correct me, and I received correction." Herein is 
one of the chief ends of suffering ; even when deserved for sin it is not to give penal 
deserts and only satisfy justice, but rather to urge the wrong-doer to see his fault and 
repent. Chastisement leads to reflection, humbles, makes us feel our need and help- 
lessness, shows the want of God and his consolations, and so inclines us to return to 
him. To profit us, however, it must be rightly endured. We must receive correction, 
not harden our hearts against it. 

III. Before returning to God, men abb both foolish and obstinate in sin. 
Ephraim is like "an untaught calf." Ephraim had worshiiiped calves; in course of 
time Ephraim degrailed himself to the nature of his gods. We cannot rise higher than 
the object of our worship. Every man is made after the image of his God ; but in all 
men this special quality of Ephraim js found so long as they remain away from God in 
sin. 1,^ They &va foolish as the untaught calf. The wicked man may be worldly wise, 
but he is ignorant in spiritual matters— must become a little child, and learn as a child, 
If he would enter the kingdom of heaven. 2. They are obstinaie. Pride and self-will 



DH. XXXI. 1—40.] THE BOOK OP THE PKOPHET JEREMIAH. 19 

rule the unrepentant heart. Herein is the great hindrance to the wholesome fruits of 
chastisement. 

IV. The Divine life in man beqins with the turning bound of the soul 
TOWAEDS G-OD. This "convirsion" is the first step. U may not he suddenly dis- 
cernible. It may not be indicated by any one epoch in our history. But it must take 
place. We have beeo wandering further and further from God. The most momentous 
step is the first step back to him. We have to learn the necessity of this ; to under- 
stand that while we remain in the old way, however pleasant it may be, it is leading ua 
away from God, our mission, and our home ; to see the importance of a change, a 
revolution, a reuieneration, a new creation. Religion cannot begin with a sinful man in 
a mere improvement, much less in a natural development. He must turn round. 

V. God only can turn his ohilurbn back to himself. tCphraim prays, "Turn 
thou me, and I will return." We lack the desire to return until he "from whom all 
i;oud desires proceed " implants the earnest wish in our hearts. We have not the 
strength to return. Old habits ol sin are fetters that bind us down to the old life. The 
will is corrupt, and therefore we cannot will nrijjht. But God does move us to return 
and give us power to return. The gospel is nut only an invitation ; it is the power of 
God. By his Spirit God gives us new birth and tlie free life of his children. Yet for 
this grace we must seek in faith and penitence. Ephraim prays that Gud will turn 
him. We cannot turn ourselves. God will not turn us against our will. If we seek 
his grace, he will turn us to himself. 

Ver. 25. — Divine satis/action. There are always the weary who need rest, the 
sorrowful who need consolation. 1. Naturally we all have restless longings, large 
desires that go out beyond the present and the attainable. The soul has its appetites, 
its hunger, its thirst. 2. Sin and sorrow have deepened our need. The Jews in their 
calamities were a type of mankind in its sin and weariness. 

I. No EARTHLY SATISFACTION WILL MEET THESE WANTS. Food for the body cannot 
satisfy the soul. Man is nut able to live by bread alune. The life is more than meat. 
We are too large for the woild and its gifts, rich and abundant as they may be. 

" We look before and after, 
And pine for what is not; 
Our Bincerest laughter 

With some pain is frailght ; 
Oni iweetest songs are those that tell ot saddest thoaght." 

(Shelley.) 

Henoe the restlessness and dissatisfaction we experience in the height of prosperity. 
Thank God for these feelings. They are indications of a heavenly birth, indications of 
immortality. 

II. God offers us full satisfaction. He will satisfy — satiate. 1. God gives all 
we need. God does not keep his children on half-rations. He has rich stores, and he 
offers freely. From our broken cisterns we turn to his ever-flowing fountains. 2. What 
God gives is of the kind we need — true light, not mocking speculations ; Divine con- 
eolations of hope and peace, not barren philosophic maxims, but full and free forgiveness. 
What God does he docs perfectly. He does not call us to a bare salvation, but to a full 
satisfaction, meeting the peculiar and deep wants of the soul with the special satis- 
faction they need, an^l bestowing this to satiation 

III. The full enjoyment op Divine satisfaction belongs to the pdtube. Much 
may be enjoyed now. Larger faith would open at once more abundant stores. God's 
hand is not shortened. It is we who limit our own enjoyment of his grace by unbelief 
and sinfulness. Still there can be no perfect satisfaction in this imperfect world. 
Heaven will be totally different from earth in the fact that here we are always reaching 
out to the beyond ; there for the first time all needs will be satisfied. The hope of such 
a condition should lead to patience and a faithful following of the way of the cross now 
that leads to the home of rest hereafter. 

Ver. 29. — Heredity and individual responsibility. The passage before us is interesting 
aa Indicating a great advance in freedom and justice of thought from the old orthodoxy 



20 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxl 1—44 

that was satisfied with the punishment of children together with their parents to a new 
and wiser doctrine of individual reponsibility. But it is important to observe that it ia 
more than a si_n of advancing thought. It is a prophecy concerning fects, a prediction 
nf a higher justice of the future. The old notion here condemned is not condemned 
because it is false ; nay, it is treated as true for the present. The new idea is not 
substituted as a 1 ettcv interpretation ot the facts of experience ; it is a description of a 
highur urdev of facis not yet realized. The old doctrine applies with a considerable 
measure of trutli to Juiiaism ; the new is part ot the larger justice of Christianity. For 
tlie Jewish religion was essentially a family religion; its advantages came to the 
individual through the nation, the tribe, the family; the first condition for receiving 
them was descent frmii Ahraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But Christianity is fundamentally 
individualistic. It elevates the family, it creates the Church — one grand family of 
Christian brethren ; but it begins with individual ;"aith and ends with individual 
respoBsibility. Nevertheless, we have not yet perfect justice. Jeremiah's prophecy is 
still a prophecy to us. Let us examine the two conditions of life that are brought before 
us by the contrast of prediction with the present order of affairs. 

I. The peksent condition of heredity. It is true now that if " the fathers have 
eaten some <;rapes the children's teeth are set on edge." Hereditary punishment and 
hereditary moml corruption are among the darkest mysteries of "all this unintelligible 
world." But they are tiacts that toUow necessary social and physiological laws. 1. 
Children suffei the punishment of ttieir parents' sins. Poverty, dishonour, disease, pass 
trom parent to child. The child of a spendthrift becomes a beggar, the son of a thief is 
ostracized, the drunkard's child diseased, perhaps insane. 2, Children inherit moral 
corruption from their parents. Where this is the case it may be thought to lighten 
the mystery of hereilitary punishment. However that may be, it is itself a deeper 
mystery, a more horrible injustice. It is remarked that if God visits "the iniquity ot 
the fathers u[ on the children unto the third and fourth generation," it is to generations 
of " them that hate " him. But if the wickedness that seems to justify the long-lived 
punishment is also hereditary, is not the case the more hard ? Now, Jeremiah teaches 
us that we are not to be satisfied with this as a final and equitable arrangement. It 
belongs to these present times that are out of joint, and it will be superseded by a 
better order. 

II. The future condition of iNDiviDaAi. besponsibilitt. (Ver. 30.) This was 
to come with the Messianic era. We have seen it beginning in the revelation of 
Christianity. It can only be perfected when Christ's work is perfected by his second 
advent for judgment. A right social order may do something in tlus direction. 
Jeremiah anticipated a wiser, more discriminating exercise of jtistice in the restored 
nation alter the Captivity. But tlie full realization must be left for a future dispensation 
oi Divine justice. At the last every man will be called upon alone to answer for his own 
sins, and judgment will be swift and appropriate. Present inequalities will then be 
rectified. .Meniiwhile the injustice of hereditary punishmint can be compensated, not 
only by future alleviations but by turning the punishment into a wholesome discipline, 
while the injustice of moral corruption will be corrected ultimately by judging a man 
according to the free choice of his will — how he behaved when he was free to act, how 
far he took new steps downwards, with all due allowance for natural weakness and 
hereditary tendencies. 

Vers. 31 — 34. — Tfie new covenant. I. The aEANTiNGOFANBWOOVENANT. Hitherto 
the Messianic era with all its glories has been regarded as the development and perfection 
of earlier ages. Here, for the first time, it is revealed as the realization of an entirely 
new order. This is the first clear indication of the difference between the Law and the 
gospel which gi-ew more distinct as the latter was better understood, till St. Paul 
accomplished his great work of finally severing the two. In these verses we have the 
first justification for dividii^ig religion into two dispensations and the Bible into two 
"Ttstaments." They constitute a great landmark in the history of religious thought. 
To us who live in the Christian age they are luither most practically valuable for tlje 
description they give of our high and peculiar privileges and the promises they contain 
of greater blessing yet to be unfolded. Still, it is important to observ'B that theso 
[)i! ^jleges and blessi:igs were not always enjoyed. 1. Truth is eternal, but the know- 



cm. XXM. 1—40.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. U 

ledge of truth i$ progressive. Hence the religious ideas of the race change, widen, ri««i 

to higher visions. The Bible is a pro-'ressive revelation. Theology — the human 
interpretation of Scripture and speculation on Divine things — is also progressive. 
Christians must not be bound by the ipsissima verba of Old Testament texts. The Old 
Testament itself says thut these shall be superseded. Christians of one age should not 
be fettered by the orthodoxy of an earlier age. 2. God is changeless, but his modes o/ 
action vary according to the varying conditions of men. The same principles of justice 
and love ever pervade his dealings with his creatures. But, like the parent who changes 
his domesiio regulations as his family grows older, God has new dispensations for the 
later ages of the human family. He educates his children through different standards. 
There must ever be milk for babes and meat for strong men. Children need restraints 
and simple instruction, which gradually give place to more freedom and confidence and 
higher teacliiiiii;. These changing requirements are met by the suitable adaptation of 
God's revelation from age to age. 

II. The contents of the new covenant. 1. The Law written in the heart takss 
the place of the Law written on the stone tables. Religion becomes more internal, 
spiritual, personal. (1) Real knowlege is enjoyed. The peo|ile might have the Law in 
writing, and never read it or fail to understand what might be to them mere wor Is. 
The Law in the heart is understood, grasped, possessed in thought, not only in words. 
(2) Pr nciples take the place of outward ordinances. For a multitude of jietty details, 
for a complication of rules, for a set of narrow maxims, men are to have large prin- 
ciples in their hearts, such as truth, justice, purity, love to God, and love to man. 
This makes n ligion and morality more comprehensive, more deep, more real, and at the 
same time more free. (3) Affection becomes the ruling motive. Tlie Law is in the 
heart as a treasure, loved rather than feared, obeyed from healthy impulse instead of 
compulsion. It becomes part of a man's very soul. Ultimately, from being a constraint 
to his will, it becomes identical witli his will, transforming that to its own image. 2. 
The spread of the knowledge of the true God is to he universal. (1) It is vouchsafed 
to the individual. The distinctions of the priestly class and of the prophetic order are 
abolishe<l. All Christians are priests ; all may enjoy a measure of prophetic inspiration 
(Joel ii. 28, 29 ; Rev. i. 4). This is partly a result of the first principle. An outward 
religion only can be corporate and representative. Thoughts are private; spirituality 
is personal ; inward religiousness is individuaL {'i) It is promised to all men. All 
nations are to enjoy the new, larger privileges. Christ breaks down the middle wall 
of partition between Jew and Gentile. This great fact is also partly a result of the 
first principle. National distinctions are mostly external. Questions of birth and 
geographical boundary that have much to do with a visible organization and the 
administration of external laws do not apply to spiritual conditions. It is right that 
an inward spiritual law should be universal. But the promise goes beyond the character 
of the new dispensation to an assurance of its universal acceptance. "All men shall 
know the Lord, from the least unto the greatest " — young and old, simple and noble, 
foolish and wise, worthless and good, savage and civilized. Here is the great encourage- 
ment for Christian missions. They do not follow a mere desire of charity. They are 
realizing a prumisfe of God. 3. These results follow perfect forgiveness of sin. This 
is the peculiiirly Christian and evangelical element of the new covenant. The Law can 
only 'oe wiitten on the heart after the old sin has been washed out. The enjoyment of 
spiritual religious knowledge must follow a renewal of the spiritual nature. These 
privileges were impossible under the Law, because no outward ordinances, no " blood of 
bulls and goats," could take away sin. But when Christ came as the | erfect Sacrifice, 
" the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world," and brought in perfect 
forgiveness, he mado it possible for us to enjoy the inward yision and brought the 
privilege within the reach of all men. 

Vers. 35 — 37. — Guarantees of perpetuity. These words are a promise to the Jews, 
ind plainly refer to the national existence of Israel ; but tlie breadtli and spirituality 
jf the covenant they confirm warrants us in seeing in them the pledges of God's faith- 
fulness and the Church's stability for all who enjoy the privileges of the covenant. 
These pledges are to be seeu in the symbolism of nature. The God of grace is the God 
of nature. Spiritual revelation i hrows light on the vague religion of nature ; but natnrr 



22 THE BOOK Of THE tEGPHET JEEEMIAH. [ch. xixL 1— 40. 

bends ktck oonfirmations for the truths of the higher revelation. Two are named 
lii;re. ' 

I. The UMiroBHiTY of law. This great doctrine has come to the forefront of 
modern science. By some it is thought to be a difficulty in the way of religious belief. 
But Jeremiah shows us how to regard it as an encouragement for faith. It proves to 
us the unchangeableness of God. Events shift and vary, but laws remain. The seasons 
come and go, but the sun still shines and rules them. Though the sea rages and roars, 
its wild waves are curbed by invisible reins, linked to heavenly motions, obedient to 
unvarying laws. So we may learn that amid the changing circumstances of life ami 
the varying actions of God in providence the same great principles are maintained 
and the promises of God work out their blessed results unceasingly. This is true of 
God's thoughts and will. It is true of our personal enjoyment of the privileges of his 
covenant. Israel is to endure. The Church is founded on a rock. The " final per- 
severance " of the Christian follows from his identification of his life with eternal laws 
of God. God will no more cast off his people than the sun cease to rule the seasons or 
the moon the tides ; for iu grace, as in nature, eternal laws and principles preserve eternal 
stability to the spiritual universe. 

II. The immeasubable gbeatness of the itnivebbe As a mere figure of speech, 
ver. 37 is highly expressive. By appealing to an impossible feat God pledges his word 
the more clearly and the more forcibly. But we have here also an analogy based upon 
common principles of the material and spiritual worlds. 1. The Creator of heaven and 
earth is too great to be changeable. Change is a sign of weakness. Strength secures 
stability. 2. Our action is a small thing in the sight of God. It cannot shake the 
loundations of the universe, cannot even touch them. To us it appears to revolutionize 
all things ; but God sees it in its true light and treats it with calm pity. It is not in 
the power of such beings as we are to overturn the counsels of God. 3. As nature is 
wrapped in mystery, so is the spiritual kingdom of God. There are in both hidden 
forces the action of which we cannot predict. Therefore it is rash and foolish for us to 
judge God's actions by our limited knowledge. He may appear to cast his people off. 
We may no longer see him. His actions may seem harsh and cruel. But we are not 
competent to judge. Out of the mystery of I^ature and her dark depths of being, out 
of midnight and winter, there issue life and light ; out of God's darkest dispensations ol 
providence his eternal counsels of love proceed to their unerring beneficent results. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 2. — Grace preparing for grace. There is some doubt as to the time alluded to, 
whether that of the Exodus or that of the Exile. A careful examination wou Id seem to 
make it clear that the former alone corresponds to the description. Pharaoh's cruel 
edict and the judgments and wars of the desert thinned the ranks of the Israelites. A 
remnant was left, with whom God entered into covenant relationship. Their survival 
under these circumstances was a sign of the Divine favour, at the time hard to be under- 
stood, but in the future abundantly confirmed. 1'heir ultimate entrance into Canaan 
was the seal of their acceptance. 

I. The peesbnt tboubleb of saints abe no pboof of theib bejeotion. The history 
of the Church shows this. Here is an instance ; there have been many such. The best 
of God's servants have been most severely tried, and that just before attaining great 
rewards and satisfactions. The exiles ot Babylon are, therefore, to be of good cheer. 
The afflictions of the present may not only be the punishment for past transgressions, but 
much more — a preparation for future blessedness and usefulness, a grace in germ if not 
in formation. In the case of the Church they may bring back to a study of the title-deedi 
of faith; in that of the individual they may promote humility, heart-searching, and 
efforts to amend. However hard to bear, they should be endured as a grace preparing 
for grace. 

II. Whebe the essence of God's qbace is pbesent, the fulness of it uat be 
WAITED FOB. 1. What t« the essential element in grace f Is it not the consciousness 
of acceptance with God? The child of God knows that be is such, and that therefore 
he is the iiubject of gracious infiueuces from the Holy Spirit, and heir of all that b truly 



^H. XXXI. 1—40.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JERKMIAH. 23 

good. 2. It is in view of this that pi ese7U circumstances are to he interpreted. Tlie 
good as well as the evil. Our true, eternal blessedness lies beyond our greatest prescni 
happiness, amongst the " things prepared." Our anxiety shuiild be, not for immediate 
pos!>essions, but for meetness for the iuheritauce, and for entering in by the right 
way. — M. 

Ver. 3. — Tlie character of the Divine love inferred from its history. I. Its history 
1. It was self-declared. A free, spontaneous promise on Goil's part. This revelation 
was itself a grace, as the actual sentiment of God toward Israil might have been con- 
cealed. By the circumstances of its declaration all doubt was removed, and it became 
a fundamental article of Jewish faith, and a factor of Jewish lile and national develop- 
ment. 2. It existid from the very first. (Of. Deut. iv. 37 ; x. 15.) The dealings of God 
with Abraham, and with the ciiiidren of Israel In Egypt, proved tliis. Anticipating 
the beginnings of spiritual life : " We love him, because he first loved us " (1 John iv. 
19 ; of. Bom. iv. 9 — 12). 3. It was constant and unceasing. With this truth the 
Israelites were familiar. Too often they had presumed upon it. But the continued 
existence of such a little nation in the midst of its great neiglibours was nothing less 
than a miracle of watchful, unceasing, Divine love. 4. Z7ie saws favour is extended 
to the Babylonian exiles. It comes to them freely as it came to tiieir ancestors. 
Through them the same purpose of love would work, and their mislortunes wouhl be 
overruled for ultimate blessing. 

II. Its chabactee as inferred from this. A love like this was as remarkable as 
it was vast, and had to be accounted for. A misunderstanding of its character had 
frequently involved the Jews in national crimes and disasters. 1. It was gracious and 
undeserved. There was nothing in the fathers to create such an affection ; as little 
was there anything in themselves. And even if there had, the constancy of it througli- 
out 80 many ages of idolatry and wickedness demonstrated that it could not be the 
reward of human desert. 2. It was merciful and righteous in its purpose. This it was 
which sanctified it and endued it with such moral power. A love of delight and com- 
placency, independently of the character of those upon whom it was bosUiwed, would 
have been weak and reprehensible. But the enduring mercy of God, whilst it is a con- 
tinual reproof to the impenitent, is full of encouragement and help to the weakest soul 
that truly seeks for righteousness. The misfortunes of Israel were as much the proofs 
of that love as the prosperity ; the one consistent purpose of redemption stringing 
to^iether the most diverse historic experiences. Did he choose Israel? it was that they 
" should be holy."— M. 

Ver. 6. — The unity of the Church. Bphraira represented the ten tribes of Israel, and 
Jerusalem the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, the sections of the divided kingdom. In 
days to come this division was to be healed, as the " watchmen" or prophets of Israel 
would lead their people tu th temple at Jerusalem. 

I. TUE IMPOBTANCE OF UNITY AMONGST God's PEOPLE IB SHOWN BY THE PRUMI- 

HENCE GIVEN TO IT IN THIS PROPHECY. Dissension and strife betvveen the loUowem 
v[ truth is not only an unseemly spectacle, it is productive of misery and ruin. Judah 
and ihe ten tribes were too jealous of one another to unite in works of defence or 
internal administration. The rival temples of Gerizim and Jerusalem were mi.schievous 
in their influence, and, as time would accentuate differences, there would be danger ol 
the common truth being forgotten. The unity of the Church must ever be importunt 
tc those whose hearts are filled with the love of God. Christ's prayer (John xvii. -1) 
shows how dear the thought is to the purest and best. The children of God should be 
bound together in the closest bonds of sympathy and love. Only thus will their 
etiorts to evangelize the world be successful, and the glory of the kingdom of God be 
realized on earth. 

II. By WHAT INFLUENCES WAS IT TO BE BRonGHT ABOUT? That there were 
various causes tending to this result is evident to every student of sacred history. But 
chief amongst these were : 1. The events of providence, by which they discovered, amidst 
exile and misery, a common brotherhood and faith, and attained to : 2. .4 more intense 
spiritual aim and life. The desire to meet with God overcame all prejudice and differ* 
ence, and revealed the true unity of IsraeL The nearer they were to God the nearer 



2i THE BOOK OF THE PKOi'HET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxi. 1— 4a 

they became to one another, and the more they delighted in assembling together (Ezra 
iii. 1 ; Isa. ii. 3 ; Micah iv. 2). 3. Qod was to manifest himself in the person of his Son 
at Jerusalem. To the temple, then, all eyes were increasingly turned as the appointed 
time drew on. 4. Tliro ugh Christ's connection with the temple, local holy places wert 
abolished, and men sought God through him. (John it. 21.) — M. 

Vers. 10 — 14. — The redemption of Israel a great and notable event. It is to be pro- 
claimed as ot universal import and consequence. The scattering of Israel may be alluded 
to in speaking of " the nations " and " the isles," or these may be addressed simply 
as onlookers of the mighty drama. What happens to God's people must concern the 
whole world. 

I. As AN EXHIBITION OP DiviNB GBACB AND POWER. (Vers. 10, 11.) 1. It betokened 
the restoration of Qod's favour. (Ver. 10.) The term of punishment was to draw to 
a close, and the era of reconciliation to commence. Just as he had " scattered " the 
Israelites, now he was about to recall them to Canaan. In the one act, as in the other, 
ihe Divine intervention and its moral significance would be made manifest. The 
greatest judgments of God on earth have their limits. " He will not always chide, 
neither will he keep his anger for ever." How carefully should the times of Divine 
discipline and reconciliation be observed by those who are concerned in them ! 2. The 
power of Qod would be displayed in it. (Vers. 10, 11 ; cf. ver. 8.) As Sovereign. 
The words used, " He that scattered Israel will gather hini," would seem to mean — he 
that scattered Israel would alone know where to discover them again. The figure of 
a shepherd and his flock is also suggestive of skill and authority. As the restored 
unity and national life of Israel were to be a marvellous phenomenon, much more 
would the spiritual unity of God's people diroughout the world, of which the former 
was but the prototype. " The Lord knoweth them that are his." Another proof of 
the Divine power was afforded in the fact that Israel was to be delivered irom one 
" that was stronger than he." The power of Nebuchadnezzar was to be broken. So 
the world-power which prevents the true freedom and unity ol the Church from being 
realized will be destroyed. Indeed, already Christ has declared himself as " him that 
overcometh the world ; " and in view of tliis the " little flock " are not to be dismayed. 
The day is coming when all enemies will be pat under the feet of Christ, the Lord of 
the Church. 

XL As BESULTINO VS HATIONAL AND BPIBITtJAL PR08PEBITT. (Vers. 12 — 14.) It 

was not only to be a restoration of the people to their own land. God does nothing by 
halves. The industry, social and national development, and the spiiitual life of Israel 
would be abundantly blessed. 1. The well-being of Ood^s people is viewed as connected. 
The spiritual with the material, and the material with the spiritual. There is no austerity 
in the religion of the restored, and yet their life is full of the spirit and practice of 
religion. The blessing of God upon the fruits of the eai th is gratefully recognized, and 
■8 with a common thankfulness tlie people "flow together " to the great festivuls of the 
temple. It is only as men exhibit this spirit — the spirit of righteousness and thank- 
fulness — that the earth will yield the fulness of her increase. Other things being equal, 
the good man will succeed better than the wicked, even in secular pursuits. " Godliness 
is profitable unto all things," etc. (I Tim. iv. 8). 2. It is to be complete and glorious. 
How spontaneous the piety of the redeemed ! In the picture here sketched we seem 
to catch a glimpse of the fulness of the millennial joy. It is a state of overflowing, 
ecstatic blessedness. The religious and the secular pursuits of men are to be harmonized. 
Age is to forget its weakness, and the bereaved their grief. The Church is to share in 
the general prosperity, and, as a consequence of the efficiency and fervour of its minis- 
trations, the people are to be " satisfied with my goodness." When shall this vision of 
human life in its wholeness and its glory be realized ? Our own times exhibit few 
signs of such a golden age. Yet the Word of the Lord has spoken it, and we ahould 
with patience both labour and look for its fulfilment.— M. 

Vers. 15 — ^17. — "Bahtl we^ng for her children." The great mother of Israel and 
Judah is represented by a figure as mourning over the desolation of the land. God 
comforts the sorrow thus occasioned by a promise greater than could be fulfilled In the 
return of the Babylonian captivity. Rahel was an ancestress of the Old Testament 



OH. xxxL 1— 40.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 26 

Church, vrhose spirit she might be said to personify. The Church of Christ may still 
be said to weep for her children, and to be comforted by the promises of God. 
Matthew's referecce to this passage is only accommodative — a spiritual and not a literal 
|)arallel. We may understand the passage, therefore, as rejiresen tative of — 

I. The 80UK0W of thb Chubch. 1. Us occasion. The loss of her sons and daughters 
through sin, alienation, or death. Especially might this apply in times of spiritual 
sterility and worldly influence. The Church cannot look upon the indifference or hostility 
of her legitimate children without grief. 2. Its intensity. Loud and bitter, as of one 
not to be consoled. The blessing of which she is bereft proniised to be so great ; the 
consequences to the " banished ones " themselves may be so serious. Are Christ's 
people sufficiently alive to the losses which are continually inflicted upon his communion 
through worldliness or particular sins ? 3. lU character. Ver. 16, " Thy work." 
Energy has been put forth. All her resources have been exhausted in vain efforts for 
the recovery of the exiles. In the first instance our concern for the " banished ones " 
should lead us to persistent and manifold effort for their restoration ; and when that 
fails, we must cast ourselves in lamentation and prayer before God. In this way our 
sorrow shall prove to be a " work," in a double sense. 

II. Hbb consolation. 1. The restoration of the lost ones ii promised. This would 
be tiie only adequate comfort for those who mourn over dear ones as spiritually dead. 
God's scheme of redemption is greater than our Utmost hopes or prepari\tions. 2. This 
viiU in a sense he the reward of her work. When direct and immediate efforts have 
failed, a further Divine grace will prove effectual. The children of tlie Church are 
beneath the eye of God, who will lead them back again from the captivity of sin, and 
even from tlie sepulchres of spiritual death. The labours and prayers of the faithful 
shall not be in vain in the Lord. The unity of sjiritiial labour in the past, present, and 
future (of. John iv. 37, 38). 3. Qod himself comforts her even now. In his " exceed- 
ing great and precious promises." By the Spirit of hope. By the gradual realization 
of the fruits of salvation. The end is made very real and bright through faith. — M. 

Vers. 18 — 21. — Ephraim lemoaning himself; or, the penitent's restoration. The 
exiled Israelites are represented as about to grieve over their apostasy, and to seek God 
in confession and prayer. The answer of God is full of mercy and encouragement. 
The Captivity is to be brought back, and the cities of Israel are to be again occupied. 

I. The 8TA8E8 AND PROCESSES OF TBUB EEPENTAN03L (Vers. 18, 19.) 1. Convic- 
tion and acknowledgment of sin. The unbroken steer a forcible metaphor, but not 
stronger than the circumstances warrant. How stupid and heinous our offences seem 
when once we see them in G6d's light ! It is sin that is bemoaned, not mere misfortune 
or pain ; and ihe wrong done to the Divine character by our unbelief and misconcep- 
tion. 2. Flayer for conversion. The stubborn resister of God's commands is now 
consciously helpless to convert himself. He feels how necessary the power and grace 
of God to " turn " him. 3. 2%e complete work of repentance is now accomplished. 
Sorrow for past sins and shame for inward depravity are felt as never before. With 
deeper knowledge of God's mercy and his own sin, the sinner attains to more intense 
sorrow and shame. " Smote upon my thigh " (cf. Ezek. xxL 12 ; Homer, ' Iliad,' xv. 
113 : xvi. 124). 

II. God's answbb to thk fenitent. (Vers. 20, 21.) He prophesies this experience 
from afar; he represents himself as overhearing it. The first beginnings of grace in 
ihe heart, although invisible to human eyes, are noted by our heavenly Father. 1. Com- 
placency, sympathy, and mercy are awakened in the Divine mind. 2. Encouragement 
is given. By promise of salvation, and by directions as to the way by which sinners 
are to return (ver. 21). 3. Ood declares his oum readiness to receive us. Ha will 
go forth like the father of the prodigal — M. 

Ters. 31—34, — The new covenant. Religion is only possible and of advantage as 
based upon an understanding between mat, and God. The perpetuation of the word 
" covenant," in the New as well as in the Old Testament, shows how essential this 
idea is. And God's infinite mercy and royal condescension is shown in instituting a 
new covenant vvlien the old was " ready to vanish away." 

L As BEbULTiNQ FBOU THB OLD COVENANT. 1. /( wou necessitated byjpast failur*. 



Se THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxi. 1— 4a 

The first covenant had lieen repeatedly and flagrantly broken. As a system of morals, 
it was perfect and without flaw ; but human nature, being corrupt, was unable to keep ita 
conditions (Rom. vii. 12). Universal corruption witnessed to the hopelessness of sal- 
vation by such a method. And yet the transgressions of men were not thereby excused. 
The essential depravity of man was revealed in a stronger and more definite character; 
but it already existed, and was an occasion of the Divine anger. As the author of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews phrases it, God, " finding fault with them " (Heb. viii. 8) 
reminds Judah. and Israel of his delivering mercy (" I took them by the hand," etc.), and 
declares his constancy and uninterrupted tenderness (" I was an husband" etc.). 2. It 
illustrated Divine mercy. In strict justice the transgressors of the Law had no claim 
to any consideration. They had incurred the righteous displeasure of God. But his 
merciful purpose was not laid aside. Another opportunity of salvation was afforded, 
and when the first covenant failed, a second covenant was designed of grander concep- 
tion and more universal adaptation. The love of God. affronted, does not withdraw 
itself, but busies itself with new schemes to supplement human frailty and diminisb the 
occasions and possibilities of failure. 

II. In its distinctive diffeebncb from rr. It is evident from this description 
that the gospel dispensation is referred to. The characteristics of the new covenant are 
mentioned as differing from those of the old in : 1. Inwardness. A form of speech 
signifying that the Law would be rooted in the affections of men, and grow up withm 
them as a second natuie. Paul, whilst conscious of the condemnation of the Law, yet 
approved it as " holy, and just, and gond." No longer will it be a limiting, restraining 
influence acting from without, but an impulse and inspiration from witliin. It is much 
the same in effect as when God promises to give his Spirit to men. And, indeed, a work 
like this — the new birtli — as it is beyond the power of mun, must be effected by the 
power of God. He will reveal himself to them by an inwaid experience. 2. Univer- 
sality. A revelation of this kind will naturally be more extensive than one which 
appeals first to the intellect. Being spiritual and experimental, it will anticipate and 
underlie intellectual apprehension. The child and the unlearned person will thereby be 
placed on an equality with the scholar and the wise man. Yet is not this light given 
U Israel, or Judah, or to any others, apart from their own voluntary acceptance of it. 
It is to be distingui.--hed from the natural light of conscience as involving a voluntary 
submission of the will to the revealed will of God, and as originating in the recognition 
of a new filial relation between the soul and God. Thus it is said, '' He will^reveal 
himself to them as he does not unto the world." And because of the supernatural cha- 
racter of this revelation, " the least " are placed at an advantage relatively to " the 
greatest;" for " JSotmany wise men after the flesh, not inauy mighty, not many noble, 
are called" (1 Cor. i. 26). The possession of this Divine illumination wdl of itself con- 
stitute a man a citizen of the new Israel, of which it is an essential feature that all its 
constituents shall know God. 3. Absoluteness and duration. " I will forgive their 
i&iquity, and I will remember their sin no more." Acceptance with God is, therefore, 
final and cou)plete. Under the new covenant the sins of the redeemed are not only 
forgiven, \m.t forgotten ; not only cancelled, but " blotted out as a morning cloud " (Isa. 
xliv. 22) ; not only removed from before his face, but " cast behind his back into the 
depths of the sea " (Micah vii. 19). Under the Levitical priesihood, offering for sins had 
frequently to be made, being in itself powerless to take them away ; but Christ's sacri- 
fice, being of absolute avail with God, would only have to be once offered in order " to 
perfect for ever them that are sanctified " (Heb. x. 14). — M. 

Ver. 84, — Missions put an end to. Many persons, at the outset of modern missicnary 
enterprise, strongly objected to it upon various pleas, but chiefly as an interference with 
providential arrangements and an opposition to the will of God. Even now there are 
some who regard it as a quixotic and presumptuous folly. It may console such persons 
to know that even the Bible looks forward to the abolition of missions. But in a very 
different way from theirs 1 

I. The means bt which this is to be accomplished. 1. What it is. Com- 
municaiion of the knowledge of God. Not by one act or word, but in a sustained and 
continuous way. By careful and intelligent explanation of God's character, laws, and 
purpose ; even more by realizing in one's own life and behaviour the love and grace o) 



oa, till. 1—40.] THE Book of the PfiOPHBT JEREMIAH. 27 

Ood. Every lile ought to be a revelation of God. 2. Where it is to be applied. The 
important tning to observe here is the point of departure. Qui- eyes are not to be in the 
ends of the earth. The persons upon whom our iirst efforts are to be put forth are 
close beside us — our " brother " and our " neighbour." 'i'liis describes an immediate and 
direct responsibility. How many have fulfilled it? Some such work as this was done 
when the Jews returned from the Exile, without teachers numerous or learned enough 
for the instruction of the people in the Law. The scribes of the great synagogue gave 
tiiemselves to the work, making itinerant journeys throughout Israel and Judah at 
stated intervals. But this was not sufficient, and so it had to be sujiplemented by 
popular and domestic efforts. Happily the peoi le were enthusiastic and earnest, anrl, 
literally, every man taught his brother and his neighbour. This wa? but a prelude to 
the work which the Church of Christ has to take up. The missionaries and ministers 
of the cross are to " go every where " preaching the Word. But that will not sufBoe. 
Multitudes are hungering for the truth as it is in Christ — multitudes whom we person- 
ally may never hope to reach. What, then, can we do ? We can tell our brother and 
our neighbour — in that way the tiJings of salvation will spread ; and others more at 
liberty and more enterprising may be encouraged by our zeal and liberality to go forth 
to heathen nations. In any case the first quarter to which the Church should look for 
increase is within itsdf. The language is explicit, and no man need waste his time in 
inquiring, "Who is my neighbour ? " The parable of the good Samaritan has settled 
that matter for all time. 

II The evidence that it is accomplished. 1. Universal knowledge of Ood. The 
goSf«l is intended for all men. Every man has a personal interest in its message. To 
keep back the truth from any one who has come within our reach is a sin ; especially is 
this the case with regard to those who are our daily companions and closest friends. 
The words are not satirical, but a gracious promise. It is an end towards which wo 
should hopefully and constantly aim. Some day it will be realized ; " for the earth 
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea " (Isa. xi. 9 ; 
Ilab. ii. 14). So long as one soul is ignorant of Ood, we arebound to continue the work. 
2. Universal experience of the hlessinys of salvation. It is no speculative abstraction we 
have to communicate, but a " word " which has iu it the power to awaken, convert, and 
reconcile eternally to God. This knowledge of him is therefore experimental and prac- 
tical. It will not leave men as it finds ti.eni. It will purify and redeem, and introduce 
them to the blessedness of a complete and enduring salvation. God will seal the 
labours of his servants by "signs following" — by righteous and holy fruits, and by 
the assurance that the sins of them that believe through their teaching will be forgiven 
for ever. — M. 

Vers. 38 — 40. — 2%e new Jerusalem. The law or condition of the spiritual life of the 
future having been referred to, the organized embodiment or community to which they 
will give rise is next described. This will be — 

I. The antitype of the old Jerusalem. 1. An organized community. With 
permanent constitutinn and laws, and subject to a central authorit)'. Comprehending 
and unifying the manifold relations of human life. A true " ciiy of God" on earth. 
2. With an earthly manifestation. It would not be a mere idea, but would realize itself, 
in part at least, in sensible forms and external manifestations. It would be the incar- 
nation of spiritual principles and their practical realization. 3. And a sacred character. 
This would be its distinguishing characteristic, as it had been that of the former city. 
There would be a wall of consecraiion, and a special aim and direction given to the life, 
of which it would be the dwelling-place and home. It would be built " to the Lord," 
and would in its entirety be " holy to the Lord." 

II. CoKTEASTED WITH IT 1. Mm'e complete in its surroundings and defence*. Jeho- 
ash bad destroyed the wall in the north and north-east, in the reign of Amaziah. On 
tnis side, therefore, the old city was most defenceless. A large portion of this was 
rebuilt by Nehemiah (iii. 1), but probably not the whole. The new city will be 
entirely rebuilt and thoroughly defended, "a city compact and built together." 2. 
More comprehensive. Outlying jilaces would be included, and the bounds of the ril i 
vastly extended. The whole earth will be included in the city of salvation. 8. More 
inclusively consecrated. The hill Gareb (perhaps that of the lepers), and the hill Gua. .. 



•23 THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHBT JERi:>MlAH. [en. xxxl 1— 40. 

(possibly Golgotha), and the valley of Einnom, the foul Gehenna— even these which 
had confronted the old city as a reproach, would be cleansed, transformed, and included. 
The sources of disease and the occasions of defilement would thus be entirely removed. 
4. More permanent in its duration. It is to be preserved from all injury, and is to 
stand for ever. 

III. Wholly distinct tbom it. At no time In the history of Israel were these 
predictions fulfilled with regard to the earthly Jerusalem. Portions ot the description 
might appear to correspond with what took place in the time of Nehemiah and others, 
but in its entirety it is evident that the city here spoken of is utterly distinct from the 
geographical and historical Jerusalem. It is associated with it according to the law ot 
Divine continuity, but in itself it is a new creation. The " wall great and high " is of 
no earthly material ; the extension is not one of yards or miles, but of nations and 
ages; the consecration of the unclean places is but typical of the regenerative force oi 
Christianity, which reclaims the moral wastes of the world, and purifies the carnal 
affections and sinful tendencies of human nature ; and no material city could ever 
" stand for aye." Only the kingdom and Church of Christ could satisfy the conditions 
of such a prophecy. — M. 

Vera. 1 — 9. — The restoration of Israel. To cheer the hearts of the exiles, to lift up 
the despondent, and to vindicate the faithfulness of God, is the intent of this and the 
many other predictions concerning the restoration of Israel. In a limited sense they 
were fulfilled by the restoration at the close of the Captivity; but the events of that 
period can hardly be said to have filled up the meaning of the emphatic language 
which the prophets were wont to employ. Hence it has been felt to be necessary to 
look further for the complete fulfilment of these many most glorious predictions. And 
in the yet future restoration of Israel, in the gathering home to their own land again 
in all their national entirety, not a few see the real meaning of the prophets' words. 
Others, whilst clearly seeing that the return of the exiles from Babylon could not 
satisfy the inspired Word, find that which more than meets the case in the restoration 
of humanity at large — ^in that which our Saviour called " the regeneration," and St, 
Peter "the restitution of all things," and St. Paul "the gathering of all things in 
one, even in Christ." And, as in a microcosm, we may see in the redemption of every 
individual soul the varied characteristics which shall be more broadly and conspicuously 
displayed when these prophetic utterances shall have their perfect fulfilment in the 
kingdom of God. In the above verses (1 — 9) some of these characteristics are indicated ; 
«.y.— 

I. Its Author. This is the Lord. See how in all these opening verses this fact is 
emphatically proclaimed. In ver. 1 it is the Lord who declareth that he " will be the 
God," etc ; in the second verse " the Lord" speaks, saying, " I caused him to rest ; " in 
the third the Lord it is who declares to his servant the unchanging love whiih is at 
the root of all this restoration ; and in ver. 4 it is again, " / wdl build thee," etc. Let 
these prophecies be understood as they may, the blessin<is of which they tell are every 
one of them due to the Lord alone, whether we apply them to the return from exile, 
the national restoration of Israel yet to come, the redemption of humanity, or to the 
individual soul. He is the gracious Author of every such restoration, and to him is the 
praise to be given. 

II. 'i HE BLESSINGS OP SUCH RESTORATION. There will be : 1. Gladness and joy. (Cf. 
vers. 4, 7.) Under the imagery of a festive dance the prophet declares this. The 
mournful monotone of humanity's sorrow, its ceaseless moan, shall be rejiLiced by the 
song, the dance, the shout of joy. 2. Peace. For centuries the vine-clad hills of 
Samara bad been the object of the marauder's repefited attack ; invasion after invasion 
had fallen upon " the planters " that planted there. But now, undisturbed, unmolested, 
they shall not merely plant, but eat the fruit of their vines. It is an image of unruffled 
peace which arises from the perfect security in which God's people shall for ever dwell. 
In the turmoil of life, amid its tossings to and fro, and its painful agitations, there are 
not a few to whom the thought of this blessed peace is the chief cliarm of the hoped- 
for future. 3. CTmiij/. (Ver. 6.) The watchmen of Epbraim, who were stationed on the 
high mountains to proclaim the advents of the feasts and festivals of God's people, 
•hall cry, " Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion." What a change here from the old sad 



OH. xxzL 1— 40.] THK BOOK OF THE PBOFHET JEBEMIAH. 29 



Then Israel would not worship in Zion, but itood aloof in her own worship 
within her own borders. But now Israel and Judah shall go together to worship in Zion. 
Not discord now, but blessed unity. It can hardly be questioned that the spirit of 
strife, which is an all but universal feature in human character, and never has been 
wanting in vigorous expression, must have been designed for some good end. But who 
will not welcome the dxy when it can be done without, and the nations shall learn war 
no more ? 4. Ood shall he all and in all. The going up to Zion shall be " to the Lord 
our God." This fact is the key-stone of the whole arch of promise and of blessing. 
Without it all would crumble away, could have no existence, still less permanence. 

III. Its peocebb. 1. The proclamation of God's grace is made. Faith to believe it 
is given. Then and thence " praise " to God for his goodness and " prayer " pleading with 
God to make good his word. " Lord, save," etc. (ver. 7). 2. ITien God actually 
proceeiis to bring them away from the many lands where they are scattered. Distance 
is no obstacle (ver. 8). Their own infirmities shall not hinder (ver. 8). The dreadful 
desert, with its thirst, its pathless extent, its rough rock-strewn ways, shall not hinder ; 
for (ver. 9) G id shall give them " rivers of waters," and " a straight way wherein they shall 
not stumble." 3. We see them approaching their own land : " They shall come with 
weepin^i," etc. (ver. 9). It is the sense of God's goodness that more than aught besides 
leads to that godly sorrow which is the sure guarantee of complete abandonment of those 
sins which in the past had lirought such evil upon them, and which, until abandoned, 
would render restoration impossible. 

IV. The reason and motive op it. Ver. 9, " For I am Israel's Father," etc. It is 
this fact of the fatherhood of God that explains the darkest experiences of life, for 
such experiences are God's disciplines, the pruning of the vine, etc. And it enables us 
to sustain them and warrants the highest and most blessed hopes for those who are 
called upon to endure them. God's fatherhood is at the same time the most awful and 
the most blessed fact the soul can know. Let us see to it that, by loving obedience to 
his wUl, we know only the Father's smile and escape the Father's frown. — C. 

Ver. 1. — The steps of the kingdom of Ood. " I will be the God of all the families 
of Israel, and they shall be my people." Day by day we pray, " Thy kingdom come," 
and what that means the next sentence of the prayer tells us. It is that God's will 
should be done on earth as it is done in heaven. All blessedness for man is contained 
in the fulfilment of this prayer, even as all man's misery is due to its non-fulfilment. 
But how do we expect the kingdom ol God to cunie ? By what means will the blessed 
condition of God's will being perfectly done on earth be brought about? The answer 
which is commonly ^iven is that, by means of tlie preaching of the gospel and the 
consequent conversion of the ungodly world, the kingdom of God shall come. Hence 
the prayer is perpetually put up that God would send his Spirit, and make his Word 
powerful in men's conversion. Now, God forbid that any shoulcl disparage such work, 
or do aught other than desire most earnestly that the preaching of God's Word may be 
far, far more successful U> this end ihau it commonly is. Would that the Church might 
win from the world far more numerous converts than have yet been given to her] 
God speed the work of conversion ! But it is not by this means alone that thecoming 
of God's kingdom is to be brought about. There is anotlitr, a more ancient, and we 
may also say a more scriptural and therefore more successful way, and that is hy the 
increase of godly families. When God is the God of all the families in Israel, then 
the nation shall be his people. The family, the Church, the kingdom of God, — these 
are the successive steps by which, according to the Scriptures, it is the Divine intent to 
bring in the kingdom. 

I. The family. God has not taken means to secure the perpetuation of any 
special poliiical, ecclesiastical, or social institutions, but he has determined that, 
whilst these may come and go, the institution of ttie family shall abide. Therefore 
from the beginning " God made man in his own image," " male and female created he 
them." The Divine ideal contained this twofold element. And he has also ordered 
it that the one should be in all respects the complement of the other, and as such shoukl 
mutually seek and delight in the conipanionshii) of the other. And to their union he 
gave the blessed gift of children and the love ihat accompanies them, and so amid all 
'.he vicissitudes of nations and go\eriiments. tlje in»lilat:on of the familv has been 



30 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [ch. xxxi. 1— 40. 

perpetuated ; that has not perished, whatever else may have. And there results frotn 
all this the formation of a certain spirit and type of character. There aie family like- 
nesses, not in feature and form only, but in mental, moral, and physical characteristics 
as well. And these enlarge and become chnracteristics of whole tribes, races, nations. 
It is evident, therefore, that, in the institution of the family, there is present a propa- 
gating power for whatever moral and spiritual forces the heads of such family may be 
themselves possessed with. Abraham, God knew, would be sure to "order his house- 
hold " after him. And to this day the characteristics of the Jewish race are discernible 
everywhere. Mural and spiritual forces travel along this road rather than any other. 
It is Qod's great highway for those principles which, when fully embraced by men's 
hearts, shall bring in the kingdom of God itself. And it is by the natural increase ot 
the family that God designs his truth should spread and his way come to be known 
upon earth, and his saving health amongst all nations. But ere this be accomplished 
the family will have developed into — 

II. The Chubch. This will be the further step in the coming of the kingdom of 
God. When one and another household are possessed of a common spirit, share a 
common faith and hope, and render obedience to one Divine law, it is in accordance 
with all spiritual instincts that these should meet together for their mutual com Tort, 
edification, and support. " Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another." 
And so strong has been in all ages the force of this spiritual instinct, that no fear oi 
persecution, no terror that their enemies could inflict, has been able to deter those who 
believed in God from thus meeting together. There need have been no martyrs, or 
scarce any, if the faithful would but have individually kept their opinions to them- 
selves. But spiritual force cannot be dammed in and held back. It will be sure ere 
long to burst through all restraints and barriers and go its own way. But this irre- 
pressible instinct has been the cause and creator of the Church. And such holy 
convocations have reacted on the family and deepening the hold of those sacred 
principles which first drew the members of the Church together have made more firm the 
ifaith and hope which already existed. Thus by the Church the spirit of the family 
is not only preserved, but strengthened, and its perpetuation and reproduction made 
more certain In the future. And the process goes on. Divine principles, faith in God, 
fear and love of his Name, established in the family, expand and develop into the 
Church, and there slowly, with ever-accelerating force, surely and irresistibly, they 
make their way until at length it will be seen that the godly seed has the start 
of the seed of the wicked one, and is ever pushing it out of the way, driving it forth 
from its long - held but usurped dominion. In illustration of this see how the 
Christian races do even now inherit the earth. The Puritans of America, the colonies 
that are ever being founded by our own people. See, too, how the Jews have ever 
held their own — what tenacity of life, what spiritual force, are inherent in them. These 
are but illustrations, and but feeble ones, of how spiritual lorce, if it take possession 
of the family, will live and spread and grow until the mustard shall become the goodly 
tree. And thus — rather than by occasional conversions from the ranks of the worldly 
— does it seem God's mind and will tliat the coming of — 

III. The kinqdom of God should be brought about. "There la an established 
hereditary moral connection between parents and their offspring, and every known 
principle of reason, of justice, and of holiness suggests that this connection exists for 
purposes of good, anil not exclusively for purposes of evil." " The character of the 
t'aniily lies at the very foundation of all permanent moral improvement in the human 
race generally, and in Christian Churches in particular; and until it be intelligently, 
and, under the influence of right principles, practically attended to, all the preaching 
and all the religious machinery with which we are furnished will fail, as they have 
hitherto failed, to improve materially the moral condition of the world." As Baxter 
says, " The preaching of the Word by public ministers is not the first ordinary means of 
grace to any but those that were graceless till they came to hear such preaching ; that 
is, to those on whom the first appointed means — godly nurture in the family — hath 
been neglected or proved vain. 1 duubt not to a£Srm thai a godly education is God'a 
first •nd ordinary appointed means for the begetting of actual faith and other graces in 
the children of believers. Public preaching is appointed for the conversion of those 
only that have miaaed the blessing of the first appointed means." leg; let God be tk* 



CH. XXXI. 1 -40.] THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET JERliMIAH. 31 

God of our familes, and he will soon become the God of our nation, the God of tha 
whule liuiiiaii race, and his kingdom will have come, and his will be done on earth as it 
is doue in heaven. — C. 

¥6^2. — Troubles h-sened by increase. "The people which were . . . wilderness." 
Tlie sword by which Israi'l had been decimated, her ranks thinned, her homes desolated 
■—what a trouble was th^t ! And now it is to be followed by " the wilderness " — that 
"waste howling wilderness'' so vividly described by Moses (Deut. i. 19; viii. 15; 
ixxii. 10). Tliis would seem another, a new, a sore trouble, but it was to be the 
means of healing the wound caused by the first. Cf. " I have given the valley of 
Achor for a door of hope " (Hos. ii. 15). 

I. The meaning of these words. It is not easy to say certainly what sword and 
what wildenit'ss the prophet had in liis mind when he thus wrote. Perhaps the sword 
of I'haraoh and tlie wilderness of Sinai. Yet more likely the sword of their Babylonian 
conquerors ; and the wilderness, that great Syrian desert across which they must travel 
on their homeward way — a wilderness far more deserving of the dread epithets which 
Moses applied to the wilderness of Sinai. Or the wilderness may mean the whole 
condition of the Jews in their exile, tlje deep sorrow, shame, and distress which their 
captivity seemed to threaten them with. 

II. But, let it be understood how it may, the prophetic statement is tkue. In 
the wilderness of Sinai what grace God's people found there 1 Blessings in basket and 
in store, in guidance, governance, guardianship; in instruction, discipline, and develop- 
ment as a nation : how they were welded together, trained for duty, qualified for the 
lii;ih honc^iT God designed for them I And in the wilderness which they had to cross 
01) their return from their exile, infested, then as now, with robber tribes, to whom their 
comparatively scant numbers, their unwarlike character, and above all their treasures 
of gold and silver destined for the temple of God, would offer an irresistible temptation, 
how could the exiles have escaped this peril of the wilderness, to say nothing of many 
others, but lor the grace of God ? It was emphatically true that they " found grace in 
the wilderness." Those dreary leagues of burning sand, the awful dangers of the way, 
might well have daunted them, and no doubt did deter the majority of the people from 
ill attempt at return ; for it was but a remnant that came back. But all these perils 
were surmounted. Day after day for four months the caravan of the exiles crept along 
the wilderness way. " Unlike that oi Siuai, it was diversified by no towering mountains, 
no delicious palm groves, no gushing springs. A hard gravel plain tnira the moment 
they left the banks of the Euphrates till they reached the northern extremity of Syria, 
with no solace except the occasional wells and walled stations. Ferocious hordes of 
Bedouin robbers then, as now, swept the whole trail." But like their great ancestor, 
" they went forth to go into the land of Canaan ; and into the laud of Canaau thej 
came." " They,'' as he, " found grace in the wilderness." And so abundant was that 
grace that their perilous enterprise became a veritable march of triumph. "The 
redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion ; and everlasting 
joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and 
mourning shall flee away." " As before some royal potentate, there would go before 
them an invisible Protector, who should remove the hard stones from the bare feet of 
those that ran beside the camels, and cast them up in piles on either side to mark the 
broad track seen for miles along the desert." (Cf. Isa. xl. 1 — 4, for description of this 
'^lace loiind in the wilderness.) And so what seemed so sore a trouble added on to the 
sword of the exile, was in reality the healing of the wound caused by that sword. But 
this is olten the Divine plan. The second trouble heals the first, and so trouble ii 
lessened by increase. Note — 

III. Further illustrations. The plague of London was followed by the fire, but 
that fire purged the city as nothing else could, and no such plague has visited it since. 
In medical science it is well known how often one disease is driven out by another. In 
the hot, close valleys of mountainous lands the wild storm is welcomed, notwith- 
standing its fierce might, overturning and destroying in ruthless manner, for it purges 
the whole atmosphere and drives away the seeds of disease and death. The heat was 
terrible, and the storm, but the second trouble lessened the first. To have to leaT« 
Paradise and to go out into a wilderness in which thorns and briars should aDound 



Sa THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEUEMIAH. [ca. xxxt 1—40 

was another trouble, but the labaur the second demanded was to be the healing force 
whereby the first luss should be lessened and the curse turned into a blessing. What 
a tissue of troubles Jacob's life seemit to have been made up of I and yet once and again 
the new trouble healed the old. The imprisonment of his sons in Kgypt led to his 
recovery of his lost son Joseph, Death follows on disease. Ah! what a new trouble 
is death in instances not a few I but in that wilderness of thi.^ grave what ^race the 
departed soul finds there I Take our Lord's illustration of the birih of childrrn: how 
the last sorrows of the birth-throes, the dread hour of ti'avail, because thereby a new 
life is born, are with all the pain that went before forgotten, " remembered no more " I 
And in things spiritual the law of our text is true. The prodigal's outward misery was 
followed by the inward pangs of shame, remorse, and sorrow. But they led to the 
" I will arise and go," etc. And to a renewed soul what misery there is in the return 
of temptation ! and if it have overcome the soul, what yet greater misery haunts the 
soul then ! " Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, Lord." But that new disttess 
is to render the recurrence of the first less and less possible, and by-and-by impossible. 
In God's providential ordering of our affairs, this same law is often shown. '1 he 
straitened means that follow bereavement of the bread-winner of the household — 
that poverty often develops character, compels the mind to turn from perpetual brooding 
over its loss, which it is so apt to do, draws forth sympathy of friends, and in innumer- 
able ways works good. "All things" do, as a fact, " work together for good to them 
that love God." 

IV. The philosophy of thm, (Cf. Rom. v. 3, 4.) The outward ills may not always 
be removed, bnt their power to do aught else than bless the believer is taken away. 
Instead of casting him down, they lead him into the full possession of that hope, 
having which tlie soni is independent of all that man or hell can do against it. 

V. Its lesson. If "the wilderness" should follow "the sword," we need not fear; 
that is to say, it a second sorrow should come upon the steps of a former one, we may 
regard it as a probable means of lessening the lormer, and not increasing it. 'i'he long 
sorrow of no Isaac born to Abraham was followed by the awful command to slay him ; 
but that led to an issue that swallowed up in glory and joy all the darkness and sorruw 
of all the past, and lit up all the future of the long ages to come with a liuht whose 
r\diance is as bright to-day as ever. Then let our song be, " Father, I wait thy daily 
»/ill," etc.— 0. 

Ver. 3. — The love of Ood. In these chapters, the thirtieth and the thirty-first, we 
have a delightful change from the prolonged accusations, warnin^rs, and threateeiings 
which form the staple of well-nigh all that has gone before. Here we have a series of 
good and comfortable words designed for the encouragement of God's peoiile in the 
midst of the sorrows of their exile. This verse declares that the love of God was the 
real cause of all that had befallen his people. Now — 

I. Without doitbt thekb was much in their history that seemed to be 
VERT CONTRARY TO WHAT LOVE WOULD DO. "I have loved thcc with an everlasting 
love," said God. " What I " we can imagine a perjilexed soul exclaiming — " What I love, 
everlastiii'4 love, and Israel a scattered people, her throne overturned, her kings slain 
or in exile, her people perished by tens of thousands, her lemple and city burnt with 
fire, her lot so exceeding liard, bitter, and hopelessl Where is the love in all this? " 
And so it is still. It is Ijard to persuade men to believe in the love of God ; to 
understand how, under the omnipotent rule of a beneficent and loving G"d, these many 
things can be which we know by experience are — pain, loss, disaiipointment, death, 
and yet worse, moral evil, sin in all its forms ; and the darkness in which we continue 
in regard to all these. Who can imderstand all this, or adecju.itely explain the great 
mysteiiea of human life? 

II. But nevertheless God's love is at the root of all thinqs. "I have loved 
thee with an everlasting love " was true for Israel and is true for us. For note in 
regard to Israel : 1. The purpose of Ood towards them was such as love only would 
cherish. What of honour and glory and blessing did God not design for his people 1 
The whole of tlie Scriptures teem with his promises and declarations as to this. They 
were to be his people and he would be their God, in all the fulness of blessed meaning 
that such an assurance intends, 2. And there wah tut other way whei eby hi» gracioui 



OK. XXXI. 1—40.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET JEKEMIAH. 3S 

ends could he secured, less painful tlian that which he had been constiained to adopt. 
We may be sure of tins ; for the same love that first formed the p;racious purpose would 
be certain to chooBe the most direct and hajjpy means to secure it. For : 3. It was in 
the power of Jsi ad — a power which they exercised with fatal effect for themselves — 
lo compel Qod to take circuitous routes to reach his designed end. The heart of a 
people cannot be dealt with as God deals with mere matter. The poWer of choice, the 
free-will of man, can baffle for a long time the benevolence of God, and delay and thwart 
not a little the accomplisliment of that on which his heart is set. They would try their 
own ways, and only when they hnd found how full of sorrow these were would they 
consent to God's way. And all this involved long weary years and much and 
manifold sorrow. 4. And what was true of Israel is true of manldnd at large. God 
has purposes of grace for man. He so loved the world, and loves it still. But sin can 
for a while baffle God, and compel the use of the pains and penalties which we see 
associated with it, in order to eruaicate the love of it Irom the heart of man. 

III. No OTHER SET BO UNLOCKS THE FBOBLEM OF LIFE. If We find it hard at times 
even with this key, we shall find it much harder with any other. No malignant being 
would have implanted love in human hearts. The existence of that one Messed 
principle in man renders the word of the faithless servant, " I knew thee that thou 
wert a hard man," for ever glaringly untrue. A capricious being would not have 
established " the reign of love " which we find eveiy where. The settled uniformity of 
the principles on which God's univer.se is governed disprove that. An indififeient 
being, such as the Epicureans taught that the gods were, would not have contrived so 
many means whereby the ease and comfort of his creatures are secured. Only a God 
of love would be to man what we perpetually see God is to us. The innumerable and 
palpable proofs of his beneficence afSrm this, and when we regard the sorrows and ills 
of life as but love's sharp remedies, they will not disprove it. 

IV. Our wisdom is to assume, even where we cannot prove rr, that this is bo. 
For thus we shall surely come to find more and more "the soul of good" that there 
is in even the most evil things, and we shall be able to " both hope and quietly wait for 
the salvation of the Lord." — 0. 

Ver. 3. — GotTs will done at last. I. What b that iriLi,? To gather his children 
round him. God creates each individual soul only that he may have fresh objects on 
which to lavish his love. The " dower of blessed children " which God gives to us, he 
gives because he delights in the possession of children. And the Father of us all wants 
us to gather around him in the true home of our souls. 

II. The motive of that will. Love. What else can it be 1 

III. The form it assumes. Everlasting love. It wears not out, it " hopeth all 
things, beareth all things, endureth all things." 

IV. Its exercise. Drawing men to himself. How perpetually and by what 
manifold a<j;encies this is being accomplished 1 " I, if 1 be lifted up . . . will draw all 
men unto me," said he who came to do the will of God. 

V. The great power which that will employs. Loving-kindness. "With loving- 
kindness have," etc. Seen most of all in the attraction of the cross of Christ. 

VI. The bksistance it implies. There is such resistance — sin. 

VII. Its ultimate result. " I have drawn thee." The Father will be able to-say 
that of all his children when Christ's work is finished. " Then cometh the end, when 
he shall have delivered up the kingdom to his Father, that God may be all in all." — C. 

Ver. 10. — The Scatterer the Oatherer, " He that scattered Israel," etc. It is 
possible that there should be a scattering which hAs vo gathering. Not seldom we see 
men squandering every gift and blessing God has endowed them with — time, health, 
opportunities, friends, etc. And such scattering has often no gathering to follow it, 
save of the appropriate harvest of ruin whose seed has been so diligently sown. But 
thi-re may be also a gathering which has never been preceded hy any scattering. The 
Father's house may never have been forsaken, the children therein may have grown up 
in his love and service, without a thought or wish for the far country whither prodigals 
love to go. As the former fact, the scattering that has no gathering, is the saddest of 
all, so this latter, the gathering which has known no scattering, is the most blessed 

JEREMIAH H. B 



M THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. £oH. xxxi. 1—40. 

of all. It is that of those who have lived ever in the love of God ; it is that of the 
holy angels. But there ia a scattering which is followed ly a gathering. Such is 
spoken of in this verse (10). God was the Author of hoth in regard to IsraeL Let us 
take — 

I. Illustrations of such pbocbdtjbb. There is that of the sower. He scatters 
his grain in the furrows, and throws it broadcast o'er the land. But by-and-by he 
gathers in the rich harvest. The merchant. He scatters his wealth in this venture and 
in that, in the confidence that he shall, in due time, gather large increase of wealth 
thereby. The father of a family, when disease has broken out in the home. The 
children are sent hither and thither, scattered, but with the intent that when the 
disease is banished they may all be gathered again without loss or harm. And Ood 
has scattered the children of men, and the fortunes of men oftentimes, but with the 
intent of gathering them again. Job. Jacob. Israel's exile. The sending forth and 
return of our Lord's apostles. The persecution of the Church about Stephen. The 
whole company of the children of God which are scattered abroad, all to be gathered in 
at last iu the Father's house on high. 

IL Reasons or rr. In the case of such as the sower, etc., these are obvious. But 
the reasons that influence them in their conduct are akin to those which we may 
believe order the like Divine procedure. By scattering his people hither and thither 
broadcast o'er the world, God looks for a harvest from such seed ; and how often he has 
gathered such harvest from such sowing 1 And the parent's reason — scattering hii- 
children to protect them from evil which would have befallen them had they remained 
together in one place, but purposing to gather them again when the fear of the evil is 
no more — how much of the painful scatterings which in this life we know and 
experience may be explained so 1 When the fire of the foe threatens the massed ranks 
of an army, the commander scatters his men, bids them take " open order," and so 
saves them. When the fire ceases, they close up once more. It was to save men from 
a great sin that God scattered them at Babel. Such divisions and separations are 
needful now. But he that scattereth will gather. 

ILL Lessons. 1. Submission. There is wise and good reasoii for all that now is. 
What is, is best. 2. Hope. Yes ; " let our eyes look right on, and our eyelids straight 
before us." " He that scattereth will gather." Meanwhile : 3. Obedience. If God have 
scattered me or mine, inquire why he has done so. Put yourself in line with QfA'a 
purposes ; for " he always wins who sides with thee." — 0. 

Ver. Hi — Strong, stronger, strongest. Israel, Babylon, God. Note — 
L The stbong. Was not Israel so? Regarding Israel as including Judah and 
Jerusalem, how strong, even materially, was Israeli In her numbers, wealth, fortresses 
— especially Jerusalem, which was one of the most impie.;nable of all the cities of the 
world ! in her privileges, memories, promised help of God ! in her past prestige and 
influence I in her long traditions of freedom and greatness ! and in much beside 1 But 
Israel may be taken as a type of all humanity. Looking upon our first parents, the 
head of our race, surely we should have thought their position of baiipiness, holiness, 
and Divine favour, impregnable. What safeguard did they lack? what motive to 
withstand the tempter was wanting? And how many there are now who say of 
themselves, and others think it, that they shall never be moved? Their mountain 
seems to stand so strong. Lands where pure gospel ministry exists ; children of godly 
homes; men who have long walked in God's ways. But facts all too often show that, 
" strong " as these may be, there is — 

II. 'The stbonqer one who overcomes them. The Chaldean armies were too strong 
for Israel. " The hand of " Babylon " was stronger than he." And the facts of human 
life all reveal how humanity has come under the cruel dominance of one who is stronger 
than man. Behold the body, a prey to feebleness, disease, pain, and death ; the mind, 
to corrupt imagination, to delusion, and deceit ; the affections clinging to things evil, 
debased, perverted; the wt72 enslaved, made to do that which it wuiild not; the sovl 
earth-bound, unable to rise up to God and heaven, as it was made to do. Yes ; the 
evidence is abundant and everywhere that a stronger than man has overcome him to 
his harm. But this verse tells of deliverance from the hand of this stronger one, by one 
vho is — 



OH. xxH, 1—40.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 8S 

m. The STBONaEST of all. It came true of Israel, and shall come true agaia. It is 
true in regard to humanity and the indivirlual soul. It may be thought, considering 
the comparatively small number of the exiles who returned to Jerusalem, that this 
prediction was scarcely verified. But in the increase of the Jewish race in the lands of 
their exile, in their preservation from the hatred of their enemies (cf. Boole of Esther), 
in the deliverance of them from the snare of idolatry, in the implantation in their 
hearts of a deeper love and understanding of QoA's Word, — in all these and in other 
respects Israel was delivered. And humanity t< redeemed, ransomed. When Christ 
said, " It is finished," then was virtually accomplished that deliverance for which, in its 
full realization, the world yet groans. But in every triumph of Divine grace, every 
conversion, every breaking away from evil, every tightening of the blessed bonds which 
bind us to Christ, every advance the gospel makes, every missionary triumph, every 
act of self-consecration, there is present proof of what by-and-by shall be perfectly 
proved. And the means by which all this is accomplished are sug'jested to us by the 
word " ransomed; " it sends our thoughts to him who said of himselT that he came to 
give his life a "ransom for man\." Therefore: 1. Let us earh look on beyond that 
mighty one, the prince of this world, who is stronger than we, to him, the Saviour ol 
us all, the Mightiest, who is stronger than he. 2. And ask ourselves the question — 
Under whose rule and service do we ourselves live? That i« the all-important question. 
Qod help us to give it the right answer. — 0. 

7er. 14. — Satisfied. I. There ib a satisfaction which is not to n desibed. 
1. That of the worldling, which says, " Soul, take thine ease," etc. 2. That of conven- 
tionalism. This looks only to the ordinary standard of religious attainment, and so 
long as it can come up tolerably near to that standard, it desires no more. They are 
"at ease in Zion," and the "woe" denounced on such is theirs. 3. Of Pharisaism, 
which thanks God that it is not as other men are. 4. 0/the Sloic, that has drilled itsell' not 
to feel the sorrows of men. 5. Of the selfish, which, because it swiins, cares not who sinks. 

II. But there is a satisfaction which is greatly to be desired. 1. That of trust, 
which prevents all murmuring at the dispensations of God, and which says, " 1 will 
trust, and not be afraid." 2. That of meekness, which says, " It is the Lord ; let him do 
what seemeth good in his sight." 3. That of belief in God's promises in Christ. 
"Being justified by faith, we have peace with God." 4. That of experience — the 
consciousness that God is carrying on his work within us, deepeiung the hoM of that 
which is good, loosening more and more the power of that which is eviL Conscious- 
ness of growth in grace. But none of these, precious as they are, come up to what is 
meant here. For it tells us that — 

III. There is a satisfaction better than all these. It is that of the realization 
of the promises of Qod. This, not now, but hereafter. In all the kingdom of nature 
where God has implanted any hunger, he has made provision for its supply. Is the 
soul of man to bo the solitary exception ? The seeds obtain their full development ere 
they die ; but not one single soul that God has created ever does so. We cannot be 
satisfied with either what we know or attain to here. What satisfaction we have is 
all based on the conviction that we know not, see not, possess not, now ; we shall here- 
after. See to it, that we be in the road that leadeth to that realization. ** I am the 
Way," said Jesus. — 0. 

Vers. 15 — 17. — Strong consolation. In this touching passage let ns note— 
I. The scene. The exiles, with bowed heads and many tears, are being hurried away 
from their beloved land. Pierce soldiery urge them on. The smuking ruins of their 
towns, cities, homes, and, above all, of the greatly beloved city of God, Jerusalem, are 
behind them. A wail of distress goes up from these broken-hearted captives as they 
stand on the frontier hills of their land, and have to say farewell to it for ever. The 
whole scene rose up vividly before the prophet, and he seems to see the spirit of Rachel, 
the genius of their nation, the mother of the tribes on whose border-land the exiles are 
now standing. She hovers over the sad-hearted company, her face wet with uncon- 
trollable tears, and her lamentations for her poor lost children heard incessantly. She 
has arisen from her tomb, which was hard by Ramah, and ic bewailing the misery of 
her childrea. 



M THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ch. xxxi. 1— 4C 

IL The sorrow. It is that of parents for their children. How intense this sorrovi 
l> 1 Rachel refuses to be comforted, because her children are not. It is greater than the 
sorrow of the cliildren. In God's blessed ordering of things, children rarely grieve 
deeply. They soon fuigot, us tliey oui;lit to do. It is not they that fjrieve, Imt thiii 
parents for them. And if tlit parents' grief be griater than that of the children, it is 
greater still than that which the patents feel for themselves. It mnttets little what 
becomes of them : it is the children for whom they care. What a holy thing this love 
of parents isl It is by me,ins of this, appealing to it, that "out of the mouths oi 
babes," etc. And hnw fre'juent, in this weary world of ours! We know how the dce\' 
distress of those motlicrs whose little ones Herod slew recalled the sorrow told of here. 
The words of the prophet find plentiful application. Not on one ground alone, but un 
many, parents often have to mourn for thoir children. But for the people of God thcrt 
is ever — 

III. Rich consolation. 1. Is the sorrow, as here, that which is caused ly the sight oj 
sore calamity cominc/ upon our children which we cannot ward offi Oh, hnw many a 
father, as he looks around the circle of his cliildren, seems to see a black spectre of care 
hovering over every one of those curly heads ! and the vision sends a chill into his very 
soul. Their mother is to die, the means of their support is failing, disease has already 
fastened on some of them; trouble manifold is appointed for them. Their foes are 
many, their friends few. Now, to all such parents this word of consolation is sent. It 
tells us how God will care fur them if we cannot. His love will never fail, and there 
is hope for them. Life, after all, will not be to them what we think. anxious fathers 
and mothers — and what a crowd of you there are ! — trust the God of Israel for your 
children. 2. Or is it the sorrow that comes from having prodigal children t This is 
a sorrow worse still. But art thou, parent, a believer in Gud? dost thou seek him 
evermore in fervent prayer? Then be assured that he who caused that the prodigal 
of whom our Saviour tells should " come to himself," will do the like for thine. Nevir 
believe that the seed of the godly, for whom earnest prayer is offsred, can be ultimately 
loi"*-. 3. Or is it that you have been bereaved of your children t So was it with the 
mothers at Bethlehem, to whose sorrow St. Matthew applies these wurds. The 
salvation of children is as certain as the existence of God himself. To think otherwise 
would be to render impossible all hope, trust, and love towards God. "Of such is the 
kingdom of heaven;" "Their angels do always behold the face of my Father which 
is in heaven ; " " It is not the will of your Father in heaven that one of these little 
ones should perish." True, heartless because childless priests have taught that there 
is a K»»J«« tn/antem— a children's hell. Good God 1 that any should believe it I And 
yet in many disiricts still the children who die unbaptized are refused Christian burial. 
But we turn from theologians to God's Word, and clasp the precious promise of these 
verses to our hearts, as, thank God, we are altogether warranted in doing. Let, then, 
all to whom God has given children trust him for them — for their budies' and their 
souls' welfare, for their well-being in the life that now is and in that which is to come, 
whilst you continue to bow your knees to " the God and Father ... in whom every faujiiy 
in heaven and earth is named." — C. 

Vers. 18, 19. — Bemoaning on^'s self. The very word suggests sorrow, weariness, distress. 
And all the more when the reason of such bemoaning is not something external to 
ourselves, as when Rachel wept for her children, but something in ourselves, when we 
are the cause of our own distress. 

I. Inquire wherefore this bemoaning. 1. That he had called down upon himseli 
I he chastisements of God. 2. That these chastisements had been ol no avaiL 3. Tiiut 
now it was made evident there was no hope of amendment in himself. 

II. Comforting thoughts cokcebnisg this bemoaning. 1. The Lord surely heard 
■ t. Cf. " There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that 
repenteth." 2. There is no attempt to excuse or palliate his sin. 3. That it had led 
him to despair of help in himself. 4. That in his misery he seeks the Lord. 6. That 
it was and is the forerunner of genuine conversion. 

CoNOLUBioN. 1. Welcome the smart and pain of sorrow for sin. 2. Dread that 
apathy which it so common in the slaves of sin. 3. Remember that it is only as the 
Lord turn* us that our conversion is genuine and real. — C. 



cH. XXXI. 1—40.^ THE Book OF THE PRO? HET JEREMIAH. 37 

Ver. 18. — Our yokes. I. That which is hard and yoke-lilce is appointed for ug alL 

II. The reason of this appointment is that thereby we may reuder service which 
otherwise we could not. 

III. That to refaseor resist this yoke will bring down the chastisements of Ood. 

IV. That until we are really turned to God by his grace we shall so resist. 

V. We do not cease Irom such folly without great pain. " I have . . . heard Ephraim 
bemoaning himself." 

YI. In that pain is our hope.— Oi 

Ver. 19. — Oonversiim and repentaTice. L Both thesb abk told of hebb. Conver- 
sion is. It is spoken of as " being turned " and " instructed." Bepentance is. It is 
spoken of plainly, and again figuratively : " I smote upon my thigh." This is a common 
mode of expressing indignation and grief. 

II. And bepentance is said to come aftbb conversion. And this is ever so. 
Not that there is no repentance prior to conversion. There is, and a genuine one. The 
"bemoaning" spoken of in the previous verse tells of that repentance which comes 
prior to conversion. But the true, deep, abiding repentance comes after. It consists, 
not so much in some passionate outburst of sorrow over sin, but in a settled hatred of 
it, and a remembrance ever with shame of the time when we allowed ourselves in it. In 
proportion as we see the love of God in Christ will this repentance deepen. It is in the 
light of that love that sin takes on its daikest hue. And if it be not so, then our 
conversion, our turning, our beinj instructed, has been apparent, not real. For — 

III. Thbre may be bepentance without conversion. We find many instances 
in Scripture of transgressors saying, " I have sinned," and their words were true, and 
fflt to bo true by themselves. They were the utterance of grief and real distress ; but 
because such repentance never roused the energies of the will to resolve on tlie abandon- 
ment of the sin, therefore, thou<rh there was repentance, it led to no ci inversion. And 
even a true repentance in its initial stages, and until it has led the soul really to God, 
exists without conversion. It is a most solemn fact that there can be real distress 
about sin, and yet no forsaking of it. And if sin be not forsaken, then this distress, 
which is God's distinct call to turn unto him and live, grows fainter and fainter with 
every repetition of the sin. 

IV. And there mat be the fruits of conversion without repentanok. There 
may be the hatred of sin, the love of goodness and of God, without the previous 
process of conversion. The gift of regeneration is essential to every soul, but some 
regenerate ones are kept by the grace of God from ever needing that deep repentance 
which is essential to conversion. It is possible to grow up in the kingdom of God, 
never to go away from the Father's house. 'I'hat does not mean to be faultless, but to 
live, as the settled tenor of one's life, in love, obedience, and trust. These are the most 
blessed ones, who are " kept from the evil that it should not hurt them," to whom the 
Father will say, " Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is ihine." But — 

V. Generally there has deen both in God's saved ones. Tnerefore it is safer 
for the most of us to conclude that we need both, and to seek both from him who is 
"exalted to give repentaLice and remission of sins." And let us not be content witli 
repentance alone, unless it lead on to conversion, nor let us deem our conversion 
genuine unless it cause, as here in this verse, our repentance to deepen more and 
more.— 0. 

Vers. 31 — 34. — The new covenant. The consideration of this new covenant will 
enable us to understand how it is that, whilst many Christian men are at peace and 
content in regard to their justification before God and their aoceijtance with him, they 
are very far from content in regard to their attainment in Christian character and 
their practical sanctification. The reason is that, whilst they are content simply to 
look in laith to Christ for the former, they forget that this is precisely the condition of 
the latter also. Hence they are for ever struggling and making good resolves, labouring 
earnestly to conquer this sin and that and to win one and another as yet unwon grace. 
But the new covenant is a promise, is the assurance indeed, that God has taken the 
matter of our salvation into his own hands. It is all of grace; he gives everything; 
DOtniug 1« left to our own solitary efiorc. If we read over the words of the covenant 



88 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxu. 1— 40. 

as they are given here from first to last, theve is not a single word about anything to 
be done by us. The whole covenant is not so much between man and his Maker ai 
between Jehovah and man's Representative, the Lord Jesus Christ. The human Bide 
of the covenant has been already fulfilled by Jesus, and there remains nothing now but 
(he covenant of giving, not the covenant of requirements. The whole covenant with 
iTgard to us, the pfople of God, now stands tlius : " I will give this ; I u ill bestow that ; 
I will fulfil this promise; I will grant tliat favour." The old covenant said, "Do this, 
and thou shalt live." The new says, "I will do all." In considering this new covenant, 
note — 

I. Its bKsemblanoeb to the old. 1. Both are based on the goodneu of another. 
The Jew in the old covenant knew that it was for Abraham's sake he had been chosen 
and called and privileged above all other nations. And that our privileges are all 
" for Christ's sake " is among the alphabet of the truths of the faith we hold. 2. Both 
dema/nd fitness and preparation for the enjoyment of the blessings they promise. For 
the Jew, obedience to the Law of God was tlje condition of his entering into and living 
happily in the land God had promised to his fathers. Because they failed in this 
obedience, the carcases of a whole generation of them ftU in the wilderness. And for 
the Christian, faith is the imperative condition. " He that believeth shall be saved, 
aud h(! that believeth not shall be damned." 3. Both gave help and direction for the 
ftdfilment of these conditions. To Israel was given an external Law ; to the Christian, 
an indwelling Spirit. Hence most fitly was the gift of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost; 
for that day commemorated the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai. It was fitting, 
therefore, that the giving of the new law of the new life should be on the day that 
told of the giving ot the law for the old life. 

II. Its CONTRASTS. 1. The old co\ena,ntTe\a,teA to the possession ^ an earthly inJteri- 
lance, the new to the attainment of a spiritual character. The one was of earth, the other 
of heaven. The one held before Israel the winning and keeping of the promised land ; 
the other, the possession of likeness to God. 2. The old covenant was chiefly charac- 
terized by external law ; the new, by the gift of the Spirit. 3. The old asked before it 
gave ; the new gave before it asked. True, there was the promise made to Abraham, but 
Israel could not enter into it unless they kept the commandments of God. But in the 
new covenant God does not ask for holiness till he has given the Holy Spirit, until he 
has put his Law in our inward parts, and written it upon our hearts. As when he bade 
the palsied rise and walk, he did not ask before he gave ; lor along with the command 
went the power to obey. And this power resides in the influence of the love of Christ 
upon the beln ving soul. It is at the cross of Christ that the writing of the Law upon 
the heart most ot all takes place. Regeneration is ia connection, inseparable connection, 
with the cross. Do any ask — 

III. The kbabon of the old covenant, notwithstanddtg it so peepetdallt 
FAILED ? It was necessary to show the hopelessness of all covenants of works. Twice 
had the experiment been tried; with our first parents, Adam and Eve, in the garden of 
Eden ; then under the most advantageous circumstances such covenant was tried and 
failed again with Israel. 

IV. The superioeity of the new. It is manifold and manifest — in its nobler aim, 
in its universality, in its nobler result in character, in its surer foundation, in its light 
and easy yoke, etc. 

Conclusion. Do any say, " I have not yet experienced the blessings of this new 
covenant " ? Remember the Law is not written ail at once, and that we must seek the 
Lord's help. It is his work. — 0. 

Vers. 31 — 33. — Oreai encouragements for those returning to Ood. It is sad enough 
that there should be any going away from God so as to require a return. It is better 
never to have gone away from him than to return after such departure. Better be the 
son to whom the Father says, " Thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine," 
than the one who came back in misery and shame, notwithstanding all the compas- 
sionate love wherewith he was welcomed. Let all young children, and they who have 
the training of them, remember this ; and all young converts to Christ. The same 
grace that forgives the going away, when in pen'tence the wanderer comes back, is 
ready to prevent any such going away at all. A id this preventive grace is what we 



•'H. XXXI. 1—40.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHKT JEREMIAH. S> 



should fill desire and seek. But the sad fact is that vast numbers have wandered from 
[Jod. How few can leave themselves out of the prophet's confession, "All we like 
jheep have gone astray, we have turned aside every one to his own way " ! In this 
emergency the question arises as to what is to be done. If God were at once to inflict 
vengemce on the transgressor, or, which would amount to the same thing, if the 
wanilerer were allowed to go on in his own way, none could complain or say that God 
did aught that was unjust. But instead of that, he mercifully causes that the way of 
the transgressor should be hard ; he makes it grievous unto him, to the eud that he 
may weary of it and long for the good ways he has left. And by-and-by he will and 
does, and it is here at this point the blessed promise of these verses meets him for his 
great encouragement. He has fouad out how bitter and evil a thing it is to sin against 
the Lord, how full of folly and madness his conduct has been, and In deep humility 
and contrition he is returning " with his whole heart." But such as thus return are 
full of self-distrust and deep fear lest they should wander off again and fall once more. 
They have been beguiled before and led to doubt God's Word. Now, these verses pro- 
mise that the three great avenues by means of which unbelief, the fountain sin of all 
sin, enters the man, shall each one be securely guarded against such entrance for the 
future. The verse contains three distinct promises. Note how such safegaard is 
secured by — 

L The FIRST PROMISE. "I will put my Law in their inward parts," etc. (ver. 33). Now, 
the avenue that this guarded was that of the understanding. The people to whom 
the prophet wrote had been sorely tempted to question whether, after all, God was the 
Lord — that is, was the supreme Buler and Disposer of all events ; for had they not seen 
how other nations who acknowUdged him not had risen up and prospered, whilst his 
own faithful people had often been in sore straits? (Cf. homily on Idolatry, oh. x. 
1 — 17, vol. i. p. 275.) There was very much to be said in favour of the gods of other 
nations, and very much was said. And when all this was encouraged and secretly 
seconded by the lurking likings of their lower nature, what wonder if their under- 
standings in regard to this great question were sometimes bewildered? We can see how 
unbelief would find occasion to enter in in force through such bewildered and doubting 
minds. And perhaps never can the question be settled by the intellect alone. God 
does not reveal himself in all his infinitude to that part of our nature. It is the hewt 
which must know " that he is the Lord." But this promise is for this very thing. 
Such a heart shall be given. The rational conclusions of the understanding shall be 
supported by the mighty force of the heart's intuitions, and the two combined will for 
ever render utterly impossible all doubt whether God be the Lord. The peace of God 
keeps the heart and mind in Christ Jesus (Phil. iv.). If we have not heart-knowledge 
of God, that of the intellect alone will be likely to fall away and leave us with no 
knowledge of God at alL How blessed, then, cann(jt but be this promise to all those 
who, because they have lacked such knowledge hitherto, have sinned and brought ou 
themselves such distress, but who now are returning to God with their whole heart 1 
It is a mighty encouragement indeed. 

IL 1'uB SECOND PROMISE. " And they shall be my people." The avenue that this 
guards is that of man's circumstances. Doubt does often enter by such way. If a man 
be surrounded with distress, almost worn out with "the slings and arrows of outrageous 
fortune," broken-hearted and bankrupt of all earthly good, let none condemn such, or 
only those who are themselves without sin though they have been in like manner 
tried, if doubt do haunt these troubled ones and faith in God dies down. Do we not 
admire Job just because he held so fast to his faith under such awful circumstances ? 
Is not our very admiration of him proof of our conviction as to the sore difficulty ot 
faith keeping its hold at such times ? Did not even he than whom Christ said nona 
of women bom was greater— John the Baptist — find the drear dungeon into which 
Herod had flung him, and the cruel death which he knew awaited him, more than hit 
spirit could bear ? And so he sent to the Lord, saying, " Art thou he that shoula 
come, or," etc. ? Oh, it is easy under sunny skies and amid happy surroundings and 
when all is well, to sing sweet hymns about trusting in God and the blessedness of faith. 
But let all that prosperity vanish, and be replaced by gr.m, gaunt poverty, in which 
and because of which you have to see your beloved wife or children, or both, hunger 
and perhaps die, because you have not enough to ward off from them the sufferingi 



40 THE BOOK OJf' THE PROPHEl JEREMIAH. | bh. xxxi. 1—40. 

they have to endure. Ah I where would be the faith of myriads ol those well-to-do 
Christians who love to sing " Sweet it is to trust in him " ? Not a Utile of the sad 
unbelief of the poor is accounted for, and we cannot but think rendered iar less guiltful, 
by the fact of the terrible privations that are so often their lot. (Ct. homily on The 
moral disadvantages of the poor, eh. v. 4, vol. i. p. 133.) But this promise, " They shall 
be my people," assures that such trial of faith sliall not be permitted. For the promise 
means that God will bestow on them such signal favour; he will so graciously deal with 
them that it shall become evident to all that they are his people, the beloved of the 
Lord. They shall have that " blessing which maketh rich and addeth no sorrow thereto." 
They shall not any more have to eat the bread of affliction or driuk the water of afflic- 
tion, but their circumstances shall he so happy and peaceful as to utterly prevent that 
unbelief to which adversity so often gives rise. The beggar Lazarus is carried by the 
luigels into Abraham's bosom; not one word is said about his character; and this 
surely seems to teach that the poor, to whom belief in the love of God has been so 
difficult here, shall hereafter in happier circumstances see and enjoy that love of which 
here they are only tola. Of coursn, happy circumstances, such as are involved in this 
promise, would be of little avail without the bestowment of the other promise, " a heart 
to know that I am the Lord ; " but with that tiiis gives a double defence, within which 
blessed are they who abide. And if it be said that God does not now, as he did in Old 
Testament days, make any promise to his servants that they shall be exempt from 
adversity, as in fact they are not, it is to be remembered that they have far clearer 
light than had the saints of the Old Testament concerning that blessed home ol God's 
Ijeople, ot whose inhabitants it is said, " They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any 
more, neithet shall the sun light upon them, nor," etc. If not now, assuredly then, 
.■>liall they be known as God's people by the happy external lot which will be theirs. 

III. The third promise. " I will be their God." The avenue which this guards is 
I hat ot the heart. Man's understanding may be convinced, and his circumstances be 
iiU favourable and prosperous, but if he have not rest of his soul in God, unbelief will 
still assail and, not unlikely, overcome him. " Nostrum cor inquietum est donee 
requiescat in te." He must be able to say of the Lord, " He is my God " (Ps. xc 2), 
ere ever he has rest in God. God must be his joy ; he must " delight himself also iu 
the Lord," and be happy in God, would he effectually bar out all unbelief. But this 
third promise ensures this. " I will be their God." It tells of this joy which they 
shall have in him, and of their happy rest in him. 

Conclusion. Then let us " return unto Ood with our whole heart." Perhaps it is 
because we have not returned in this whole-hearted way that we yet have to wait for 
these promises to be fulfilled ; and that we still find unbelief, though banished for a 
while, yet returning and haunting us once more. It is said of Joshua and Caleb that 
they served the Lord " fully." It is this thoroughness which is needed. Let but this 
be, and the understanding will be satisfied ; the circumstances of our life will be 
pleasing to us, because they are those the Lord pleases ; and our heart shall sing for 
gladnMS, because God is our " exceeding joy." — C. 

Var. 82. — God the Husband of his peoplt. (Of. homily on ch. liL 14.)— CL 

Ver. 8. — The everlasting Ityve of Ood. L In contrast to other lovers. Note ch. 
XXX. 14, " All thy lovers have forgotten thee," etc. Israel had had many lovers pro- 
fessing regard and offering service ; but what had their regard and service come to ? 
They were now cold, careless, perhaps even hostile. They had shown the appearance 
of love to Israel, not that they cared for Israel, but because they themselves were 
advantaged. Now, that is no true affection which changes when the thing loved 
ceases to gratify us. Yet this was all the affection of these other lovers amounted to^ 
a mere name of love ; a feeling which, in the course of time, was to evince their own 
instability and bring shame to them. But God is a contrast to all this. He loves 
with an everlasting love. He loves Israel, not only in the days of prosperity and wealth 
and beauty, but in the days of downfall and despair. His thought penetrates through 
to the abiding worth of humanity. We do not slander humaii affection, or in any way 
uiider-estimate it, when we say that man cannot love his fellow-man as OtoA loves him, 
God it i» who fiiat of all shows man what love really is ; then man, having the 8];drit 



cH. XXXI. 1— 40.J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



of the Divine Father breathed into him, learns to love also. We cannot attain to any- 
thing which will give us the light to say with respect to duration that ours is an ever- 
lasting love; but, as true Christians, we may have something of the quality of that 
atlection. 

II. In spite of unreciprocated affection. Israel had had other lovers, and she 
liad loved them In return. They had bestowed gifts on her, and she had bestowed 
gifts on them, and so there was profession of mutual regard as long as it was profitable 
to make it. But tliere was no love to God. His holiness, his goodness, was not seen. 
Year by year his open hand was stretohe'l forth, tilled with the corn and the wine and 
the oil ; and the people greedily laid hold of the gifts, and thought nothing' of the Giver. 
Not but what there were imlividuals whose hearts went out gratefully and devotedly to 
God, as the Psalms show. But then these individuals would not find very many to 
respond to the invitation, "Oh, love the Lord, all ye his saints." And still the love of 
God goes on. Men need the manifestntions ut God's love all the more, just because 
of their unreciprocating attitude towaids him. Love caimot prevent the headstrong 
prodigal from seeking his own desires, but it can keep things ready for the season of 
repentance and return. The manifestations of the Divine love are to constitute a great 
spectacle, breaking down the heart of the selfish man. 

Hi. The love is declared when most the declaration is needed. Love does 
not always look like love. The spurious puts on the appearance of the genuine, and the 
genuine gets hidden behind the necessary minifestations of righteousness and fidelity 
to law. They that break law must be punished and suffer. They that have false, 
unstable, misleading lovers cannot escape the consequence of their foolish connection 
with them in the day when the lovers are destroyed and go into captivity (ch. xxii. 
20, 22). Israel itself must suffer loss and go into exile and sit with dust and ushcs on 
its head. But in that very day conies the assurance of everlasting love. The lower 
skies are filled with cloud and stui'ui and rain, but the abiding sun is still above, and 
its radiance will remain when the storm has passed away. — Y. 

Ver. 5. — Work yet to he found in the vineyard. Here is to be an evideEOt of the 
everlasting love spoken of in ver. 3. 

I. The restoration of what had been lost. This is not the first prophecy in the 
hook concerning vineyards. It had been declared that the nation from afar should eat 
up the vines and the fig trees of Israel (ch. v. 17). " I will surely consume, saith the 
Lord. There shall be no grapes on the vine " (ch. viii. 13). The bright prophecy here 
could not have been made but for the dark piophecies going before. The literal fulfil- 
ment ol the prophecy is, of course, the least part of it. Tlie deepest meaning is thai, 
whatever we may lose through God's chastisements, we shall get much more in a 
spiritual and truly abiding way. 

II. The future is described dj terms of the past. One of the occupations of the 
past had been to plant vineyards in Samaria. Wliat associations there must have been 
with the sunny slopes ! It is the way of God to speak of future comforts and glories in 
terms drawn from the present and from things around us. The future will give oppor- 
tunities for profitable work. We shall always have some place to work in which shall 
be as the mountains of Samaria, and some work to do which shall be as the planting of 
vines. Fruitless toil and crushed hopes are but a disciplining episode in the career 
of those who are the heirs of eternal life. 

IH. The stability implied in this promise. Five years, according to the Mosaic 
Law, had to pass Irom the planting to the time of fiuitage. The prophecy was therefore 
a prophecy of peaceful settlement. The whole outlook gave a sense of security. Looked 
at in this light, one sees th" reason of previous overthrowing and destruction, 'i'he aim 
is to get down to something solid aud stable, to purify the heart from unworthy aims 
and love of the fleeting. The tilings that are shaken are removed, that the things which 
cannot be shaken may remain. 

IV. The racLusivENESs of this promise. Vineyards are to be planted, but vine- 
yards' are not the first necessity of life. To promise the planting of vineyards implied 
the promise of other things. The corn and the oil went along with the wine. The' 
vineyard is doubtless here mentioned as a symbol ot joy. He who is able to plant a' 
vineyard i* able to plant all good things. Note the evidence we have of the temporal 



42 THE BOOK OP THE PfiOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxl 1— 4a 

fulfilment of this promise. Prom vineyards our Lord drew some of his most sus<;estive 
teaching. We may be sure they had often been seen by him, and their spiritual signifi- 
cance apprehended. Vine-planting was a suitable industry, an industry to b.: ux|iected 
in the land out of which the spies had brought the ponderous cluster of grapes. — Y. 

Vers. 8, 9. — Ood the Gatherer of his people. I. Whence he gathers thbm. The 
place is spoken of very indefinitely, not from any doiibt as to its reality, but because it 
was lar;j;ely a terra incognita. It was the land away in the northward direction, but 
what its extent or what its power for mischief there were but few who could guess. 
One thing, however, was possible to consider in the days of exile, when the north 
country had become a sad actual experience, namely, how Jeremiah had been sent to 
speak joyful tidings as well as mournful ones with respect to the power of this north 
country. True, he had spoken again and again concerning the evil and the great 
destruction coming out of the north ; but here is a word from the same man and under 
the same authority to say that the power of the north country is not to continue. God 
uses even great nations for his own purposes. There is indication that these powers of 
the north were astonished at their own success. " The kings of the earth, and all 
the inhabitants of the world, would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy 
should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem" (Lam. iv. 12). They were only the 
agents of God, and God could take his people out of their midst again when once the 
Exile had done its work. Distance is no difficulty. God can hinder or facilitate in a 
journey just as seems him best. Once he kept his people forty years in a journey from 
one land to another that, if he had chosen, might have been accomplished in a very 
short time. 

II. Those whom he gathers. The Lord's compassions fail not. To the yonng, the 
•trong, the healthy, those perfect in body, nothing was needed but to say, "The time 
is come for return. Make your start." But then all were not so placed. The weak- 
lings have ever to be considered, and God considers them, as it were, first of all. There 
are the blind — God will keep them in the way ; there are the lame — God will provide 
that they be conveyed and sufficiently helped; there are women, witii all their peculiar 
anxieties, who need to be dealt with very tenderly, and all grounds for alarm taken out 
of their way as far as possible. Well, God specifies these cases as representative of the 
provision he makes for every sort of weakness. It is the mark of Gud's way for men 
that it is a way for the weak, a way in which provision is made for every sort of infir- 
mity. Tiiere are ways in the world which are only for the strong ; the weak soon get 
pushed aside. And God can bring all these weak people along, because the right 
spirit is in them. They come in weeping and in prayer. You can be eyes to a blind 
man, if he admits his blindness and is willing to be guided; but if he insists upon it 
that he can see, what are you to do with him? This is the only means by which 
God's true people can be gathered into one way, moving with one purpose towards 
one place, namely, that they be each one of them from the very heart submitted to the 
Divine will and control. 

III. The spirit in which God gathers. The spirit of a father. Israel must needs 
go into exile and chastisement for a while; but the place left vacant is the child's 
place, and none but the child can fill it. It is the evidence of a father's tenderness that 
he cares for the blind and the lame and the weak. The house of Israel had said to a 
stock, "Tliou art my father; and to a stone. Thou hast brought me forth." And their 
delusion had borne fruit in banishment and captivity. But the true Father remembered 
tliem all the time ; and with the power of the true God and in the spirit of the true 
Father, he gathered them and guided them home. — Y. 

Ver. 10. — The Scatterer also the Gatherer. I. God as the Soattbreb. Seeing that 
the Scatterei becomes the Gatherer, it is evident that scattering is used to describe his 
action by a sort of accommodation. Outwardly it looks like scattering ; but there is a 
spirit and a purpose and a regulative principle in the action which makes it to be really 
only a stage in a more complete gathering worthy of the name. It is, perhaps, worthy 
of note that there is in the Hebrew woid something of the idea of scattering even as 
seed is scattered. Now, when seed is scattered, it is with a perfect knowledge of th« 
large gathering which will result. Seed is not flung at random, and then left for ever. 



OB. XXXI. 1—40,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 43 

Beforehand theie is preparation and afterwards there is expectation. And so we see 
that when God uses the same name for an action that we do, it by no means follows 
that he is doing just the same thing as we should indicate by the name. Note 
also that in this very prophecy here there is a reference to a very old intimation of 
the distresses that might come on Israel in the event of disobedience, " I will scatter 
you among the heathen " (Lev. xxvi. 33). 

II, God as the Gathebeb. What a difference here between man and God I Often 
times it is easy for man to scatter ; but how shall he gather again ? One fool can undo 
in a few hours what wise and diligent men have taken years in building up. But since 
God scatters upon principle, he knows where every fragment is, and continues to super- 
intend aiid guide it as part of the whole. We see only disjointed parts, and so there is 
something very nondescript and puzzling and ineffectual-looking about their operations. 
God, however, sees the whole. Hence the insistence in apostolic teaching upon unity. 
Christians could not be kept in one place. Persecution drove them apart ; the needs of 
the gospel sent each apostle into his own field ; and Christians sprang up in many far- 
separated places. But though scattered and separated in appearance, they were still 
one, because the one Spirit was in them. The gathering prmciple is, in Christians, a 
principle that rises dominant over all earthly distinctions. Men cannot be kept per- 
manently together unless the Christian spirit is in them ; and if the Christian spirit is 
in them, there is no power that can keep them permanently separated. 

III. God as he who keeps his people fbom a second scattebino. We cannot put 
too much force into this thouglit of God keeping his people as a shepherd does his flock. 
What a significance it adds to the way in which Jesus speaks of himself as the good 
Shepherd! Who shall scatter when it is God's will to gather and to unite in an abiding 
company ? Who shall scatter when he who gathers has in liim not only the spirit of a 
khepherd, but also the power to keep his sheep from all danger ? And what a warnin i 
to us againat lil needless separations I Men are betrayed into danger to themselves by 
pushing individual liberty to extremes. The shepherd will keep every member of the 
flock so long as it holds to the fiock. God will only keep us so long as we are in his 
iray, within his boundaries, subject to his directions. — T. 

Vers. 12—14. — Praise waiting for Ood in Zion. I. The place of fbaibe. To 
speak of Zion was to speak of the dwelling-place of Jehovah. To sing in the height 
of Zion, therefore, was to sing, as it were, at the door of God's own house. While Goil 
ever visited idolatry with the severest punishment^, he yet localized his presence by the 
sanctities connected with the ark. It was the holy of holies that made Zion a sacred 
place, and if the people were helped in praise and worship by assembling there, then 
there is every reason for mentioning Zion as the great place of national rejoicing. But 
we must take care not to consider any literal fulfilment of this prophecy as suflScient. 
The word is one taking our thoughts to that Mount Zion, which is part of the city of 
the living God, of the heavenly Jerusalem. The days of earthly localization are for 
ever past. The principle of assembly now is that, wherever two or three are gatherer I 
together in the Name of Christ, there he is in their midst. 

II. The CAnsE of pbaise. Praise and gladness always have some cause, but tl •■ 
question remains to be asked whether it be a cause which God will approve. If it lie 
gladness rising out of some selfish triumph or gain, then tlie joy will assuredly i><' 
turned into mourning. But here the goodness of Jehovah is emphatically describi d 
as being the cause of the joy and singing. There is something substantial to sing 
about— coin, and wine, and oil, and cattle : the appropriate produce of the land, some- 
thing that is at once the reward of righteous striving and the gift of an approviiu 
God. Everything is right externally and internally. The very life of the people i- 
like a watered garden, which surely is a very suggestive expression to indicate that all 
is as it ought to be. A watered garden suggests a piece of knd worth cultivating, wi II 
cultivated, and supplied with every factor contributing to fruitfulness. But what lias 
been said of the place of praise must also be said of the cause of praise. Com and wine 
and all tlie rest of the good things are only symbnls of deeper blessings that have to do 
with the satisfaction of the heart. " Man livcth not by bread alone, but by every 
word that piuceedeth out of the moutli of Gud." It is an easy thing for him, if needs 
be, to make up the defects of nature, which he showed at the feeding of the fivi. 



44 THE BOOK OF THE PKOPKET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxi. 1—40 

tliousand. Yet, in spite of this, famines are not always interfered with. God i* no< 
solicitous to go beyond what he has provided in nature for the support of natural lifa 
15ut he is solicitous that we should apprehend the great spiritual abundance within our 
reach. The deepest meaning of this prophecy is that spiritual men only can really praise 
God, because they are praisinj; him out of hearts that are being sustained by the 
richness of spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. 

I II. The obbtaintt of pbaisb. The satisfied heart must praise, else there is a proof 
that the heart is not really satisfied. Satisfaction can no more be concealed than dissatis- 
faction. When in the writings of the apostles we come across outbursts of doxology, it 
is just what we might expect as being in harmony with the greatness of the blessings 
received. And this is just what often makes the praise part of worship eminently 
unsatisfactory, that men are thanking God for what they have not received. All 
compositions having praise and thanksgiving for their elements, and being successful 
compositions, must, by the very nature of the case, owe their origin to some actual 
experience of Gud's goodness. Hence it is important in this passage to notice how 
three things are bound togetlier in the one prediction. 1. There is the gift of God. 
2. The consequent satisfaction. 3. The irrepressible joy. And what greater gift can 
we have from God than a heart filled with pure, abiding joy, free from reproach, free 
irom apprehension? 

IV. The univbrbalitt of thk fbaibb. Young and old, priests and people, are 
joined together in the common song. God's spiritual blessings are for all. There is 
much significance in that promise, " I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness." 
That means that the people are right religiously, and that again means that the priests 
are attentive to their own pro|ier duty. Liberality to all Christian institutions, to all 
that is truly evangelistic and charitable, to all that is in the way of the highest ministry 
to mankind, is • sign of spiritual prosperity. — Y. 

Vers. 15 — 17. — Sorrowing mothen and their consolatum. L Thk OBiErs ot 
BEREAVED MOTHERS. There is an innumerable company of women who have seen 
the children die to whom they themselves had given birth, and Rachel is their great 
representative. She stands before us here as the mother of a nation ; for surely it only 
spoils a grand poetical idea to attach her to some tribes rather than others. She sees 
the nation which sprang from her husband Jacob going from the land of promise into 
captivity, and straightway she reckons it as a dead nation. Bear in mind distinctly 
that the mourning is not over dead individuals, but over a dead nation. The indi- 
viduals went on living, but the nation in its pride and privilege was gone. So one 
might think of some representative spirit bewailing dead Greece and dead Rome. The 
figure, moreover, derives its strength from what must have been very frequent in the land 
of Israel, as in every land before or since, namely, the sad sight presented by a mother 
weeping over her dead child. The mother's sorrow is unique ; its elements can only 
be imperfectly apprehended by others. The object of so much hope, solicitude, and 
pleasure is gone. The proper order of things is reversed. The mother should see the 
child grow to manhood or womanhood, and then go first into the unseen world. Death, 
coming in this way, seems to furnish a plausible ground of complaint, and if anything 
can be said to lessen the mystery and the sorrow and make hope rise in the heart, it 
should be said. 

II. Consolation in buoh time of grief. The real Rachel needed no such consolation. 
But bereaved mothers both need it and can have it. They have worked for something 
else than death and the breaking off of their purposes, and their work shall not be in 
vain. Death is a great deceiver in making his power seem greater than it is. When 
children are taken from this world into the next, opportunities are not lost, they are 
only changed. God will assuredly not allow the highest joys belonging to human 
nature to suffer from a cause so purely external as the duration of temporal existence. 
When Herod slew the children at Bethlehem, this prophecy had a sort of fulfilment, 
and surely so far as it was fulfilled it was fulfilled altogether. To every one of those 
weeping mothers it might have been said, " Refrain thy voice from weeping and thine 
eyes from tears." The weeping and the tears are natural enough, but after all they have 
no sufficient ground in reason. As a general rule, life must be taken with all its risks 
»nd casualties, seeing that risk and casualty, as we call them, are after til, according 



OH. zxxi. 1— 40.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. M 

to a Iaw. Sometimes there are extraordinary preseryations of infant life, and wben 
some life so delivered has afterwards unfolded into eminence and usefulness, thwe is a 
talk of something specially providential in the preservation. Some such preserved 
lives, however, turn out a great curse, Hnd then where is the providence ? The great 
thing every mother should seek is such faithfulness, such wisdom, such right dealing 
in all ways as will enable her to be a true mother to her children, however long they 
live. Then, whatever happens, there is the certainty that her work will be rewarded. 
The work of individual obedience can never come to anything but reward in the end. 
The mischief is that very often we want the reward to come in our way and not in 
God's.— Y. 

▼er. 26, — Sioeet sleep. Assuming that Jeremiah is here the speaker, what a 
suggestion -there is of restless, unrefreshing nights on otlier occasions I And little 
wonder. It may have been the case that many of his prophecies came to him at 
night, and if so, considering the elements of those prophecies, his nights must often 
have been very troubled ones. But if we look attentively at the contents of ch. 
XXX. and xxxi., we find very sufficient causes for the sweetness of the prophet's sleep. 
Jehovah makes one long announcement of favour, restoration, and comfort. Hitherto 
when the prophet has had to listen to Jehovah, if there have been consolatory 
utterances, they have been mingled with denunciation and words of the most melan- 
choly import. But now there is one unbroken stream of good tidings, and the effect is 
shown even in sleep. And if in sleep, how much more in waking hours I The whole 
ro\md of the day becomes diffeient when God looks favourably on the life. Sweetness 
of sleeping hours must come from all being right in waking hours. Now, with 
Jeremiah, as to his own personal life, all was right in waking hours, but with his 
nation all was wrong ; and so through the day he went about seeing sin and foreseeing 
suffering, and at night his vivid imagination must often have kept him awake or 
peopled what broken sleep he got with the most terrible drenms. Bad men may 
sleep better than good ones, so long as there is nothing to awaken their selfish fears 
and good men spend restless nights over the troubles of those in whom they are 
interested. Yet the restlessness must come from the failing to see the abiding goodness 
of God. Here, for a little, God drove every cloud from the sky of his servant, and 
showed him how heavenly brightness was a thing entirely above earthly confusions ; 
and then his servant could get sweet sleep. And God will give to all that wait upon 
him that quiet calm of the heart which is to our higher life what sweet sleep is to the 
body. It is God's will that our present life, with all its varied needs, should have all 
the refreshment he can give. — Y. 

Vers. 29, 30. — Jehovah visiting the individual for his sins. I. The sin of bomb 
AND THE SUFFERING OF OTHERS. This is put before us in a very striking figure. 
Literally, the taste of a sour grape would be an instantaneous sensation ; but here we 
are asked to imagine the possibility of a man getting whatever other advantnge there 
might be in the giape, whatever nouri.shment, whatever refreshment, and then handing 
on the one bad element of sourness. And truly it often seems as if there were tliis 
kind of division. The wrong-doer goes on succeeding, enjoying himself, getting his full 
of life, and then his children come in to find that the father's wrong-doing is like a 
millstone round their necks, destroying every chance they might otherwise have. The 
figure here presents from the human side that fact of experience which from the Divine 
side is presented as a law. "I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity 
of the fathers upon the children " (Exod. xx. 5). 

IL The bin of some and their own suFFERma. We need to look somewhat care- 
fully at the point brought out in ver. 30. At first it seems as if daily experience were 
contradicted, for we leap to an inference that the children's teeth will not he set on 
edge by the sour grapes their fathers have eaten ; whereas it is abundantly plain that 
children still suffer for the sins of their fathers. But observe that this is not at all 
denied. The great point insisted on is that the fathers will suffer themselves; and thie 
is a point that needs to be insisted on, for the fallacy is continually arising that a man 
may, by some magic, gome precaution, escape the consequences of his evfl, and M he 
may escape from some consequences. But observe, again, the all-comprehending word 



M THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxi. 1—40 

here used, " he shall die," and this word has a retrospective force. Ther« nerer has 
been any other law but that a man shall die for his own iniquity. Possibly we should 
take this passage as having some sort of reference to the old custom of making revenge 
an hereditary thing. If the doer of a wrong escaped vengeance and died peacefully in 
his bed, then his son stood in the father's place, and became an object of attack till the 
punishment due to the father was visited on him. It seems so plain to us that a man 
should die for his own iniquity, punishment falling on the head of him who does the 
wrong, that we find it hard to imagine a day when the ethical code was otherwise. 
Whereas it is tolerably clear that in Old Testament times and countries the feeling was 
that somebody must he punished; and if the real crimiual escaped, why, then take his 
Qcarest blood relation. That the Christian looks on things so differently la the clearest 
proof that this prophecy has been fulfilled. 

Ill, The need there is that evert onk bhould olassift thb strrFEBiNafl of hib 
LIFE. It is not enough that we seek deliverance from suffering. It is right for us to 
do so, and suffering, we may be sure, is not by the will of God. But as there is suffering 
which comes from causes within our control, so there is suffering coming from causes 
uutside our control ; and it is with the former only that we can deal. Besides, it is the 
worst sufiering, seeing that it comes from trouble and unrest of conscience. God has so 
made us that the worst wounds from others are but as surface scratches compared with 
the wounds that in our folly we inflict on ourselves. Then we have to look, not only 
on the sufferings, but enjoyments. We may so live as to rise above the worst that men 
can do to us, and at the same time, we may be the better for whatever good man is 
disposed to do. If sometimes it is true that the fathers eat sour grapes and the 
children's teeth get set on edge, is it not also true that the fathers eat sweet grapes, 
yet little of the sveetness they seem to taste — ^it is a sweetness standing over for the 
children ? — ^Y. 

Vers. 31 — 34. — The new eoverumt and the old. I. The light oar OR ths old 

COVENANT. It would be a mistake to describe it as a covenant that failed. Paradoxical 
as the expression sounds, the very breaking of the covenant furnished the proof of its 
success. It made man's position clearer to him ; it prepared the world for Christ. The 
old covenant had been broken in spite of all the teaching connected with it. " Enow 
Jehovah " had been dinned into the ear, and doubtless many had a notion that they 
did know Jehovah, whereas all that they knew was a certain round of ritual observances. 
At all events, it was a knowledge that left iniquity unforgiven and sin still registered 
in the book of God's remembrance. It was such a knowledge as the wrong-doer has of 
his judge. It was the knowledge of a force that thwarted all selflshness, and came with 
overwhelming completeness to ruin the plans of man. It was not the knowledge coming 
from trust and leading to greater trust — knowledge of God as a Guide, Director, and 
Provider. Tet some indeed knew. The man who said to his neighbour and his brother, 
" Enow Jehovah," must have been, in some instances at least, one who himself had 
some real knowledge. As there were men of the reforming spirit before the Reforma- 
tion, so there were Christians in essence before Christianity. The breaking of the old 
covenant shows the thing that was needed, namely, a new power in the hearts of men. 
The knowledge of God is not to be gained by mere teaching. Teaching has its place, 
and withia its own limits is indispensable ; but who could teach a child to eat, to see, 
to hear ? If faculties are not inborn, we cannot do anything with them. 

IL Thk confident fbeoictions on the new covenant. The old covenant starts 
with law ; the new one springs out of life. Ver. 33 gives one of the Old Testament 
ways of expressing the doctrine of regeneration. God writes the laws of spiritual life 
on the heart, just as he writes the laws ot' natural life on every natural germ ; and then 
all the rest is a matter of unfolding, of growth, of encouragement, of culture. The old 
covenant was one long, exhaustive, thorough experiment by which the fact became 
clear thnt in the natural man there was nothing to unfold. The new covenant esta- 
blished within a very brief period that, given a new life-principle working within him, 
man is indeed a being of glorious capabilities. The first man of the new covenant, in 
point of quality, is of course the Maii Christ Jesus himself. OtoA's Law was written in 
the heart of his Son. Here is one way in which the Law and the prophets are com- 
pleted. The ark with its inscriptions vanishes ; we bear nothing of it later than oh. iii 



OH. xxxiL 1—44.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEBJiMIAH. « 

16. And in its place there comes the loving heart trusted to the utmoBt liberty. Well 
might there be confidence in speaking of the new coveuant. When good seed and good 
soil and favourable circumstaDces meet, then there is certainty of perfect and abundaat 
fruit. The new covenant is above all things a covenant with the individual. It is 
made to depend upon individual susceptibility and individual fidelity. Also it is a 
knowledge that comes in repentance, forgiveness, and favour. And all this teaches us 
that a special meaning must be put into the term, " people of God." The true people of 
God are constituted by the aggregation of individual believers. They do not begin 
their journey to the heavenly land of promise marching as one constrained company 
tniuugh a miraculous Red Sea passage ; they rather go, one by one, through • ■traitened 
entrance, even through a needle's eye, some of them. — Y. 

Vers. 35 — 37. — The seed of Israel ; signs of its everlasting duration, L Thbt abb 
siQHB WITH MUCH REVELATION OF GoD IN THEM. The suu, the moou, the stars, the 
heavenly spaces with all their occupants, the terrestrial surface with the fathomless 
depths beneath it. We shall never know all that is to be known about these exist- 
ences; but we may soon know enough to know througli them something of their 
Maker. That they are the common work of one hand, the common expression of one 
wisdom and love, soon becomes plain. The unity of all we see is a truth becoming 
clearer in the light of t^cientilic investigation. God drove Israel from the land they had 
polluted and forfeited by their idolatries ; but their share in the common possessions of 
mankind remained. It is plain that man gets good from all these signs here mentioned, 
and the largeness of the good depends on the righteousness and understanding shown in 
the use. 

II. Thet ABE SIGNS WITHIN THE COMPREHENSION OF ALL, Evcn a child Can be made 
to understand the unfailing regularity that belongs to them. They are signs all over 
the world. It is not a sign drawn from Jerusalem or from anything comparatively 
stable in the Isrnelites' peculiar experience. Sun and moon and stars know nothing of 
national distinctions. Each nation doubtless can claim its territory to the very centre 
of the globe, tuit beyond a certain depth, that globe is defiant of them alL One man 
'may know more than another of the constitution of these signs, by reason of peculiar 
opportunities, but all can know enough for the purpose here required. 

IIL Thet are signs drawn from God's independent operation. Not from opeia- 
tions which as a general rule depend on our co-oijeration. Uod's operations in sun, 
moon, and stars are induijendent of us — unaffecti.d by our disobedience, our negligence, 
unsteadiness ; uplifted far above our interference. Indeed, what can show more clearly 
how God's operations on the e.irth's surface are interfered with by human ignorance and 
indolence than the contrast with heaven's regularity ? 

IV. The thing signified will outlast the signs. The thing signified is the 
jverlasting duration of the seed of Israel. That seed will remain when the signs them- 
jelves, having done their work, are vanished. The things that are seen are temporal. 
As our body is but the earthly house of this tabernacle, so the visible universe itself 
is but as the tabernacle wbirein God dwells with us. But all these visible things will 
come to their end vvlien they have done their work, not through failure of Divine power. 
They will disappear into a more gloiious transformation, aid serve some purpose to 
God's true Israel, the very outlines of which we cannot yet comprehend. — T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXXIL 

Jeremiah was far from wishing to depress 
his fellow-couutrymen to the point of dis- 
believing in the inalienable promises of 
God to Israel. He fully recognized an 



the God of his people Israel, though for 

wise purposes he chose to hide his face for 
a time. His own fuith was intense, to the 
pitch of an even Roman lieroism (see Livy, 
xxvi. 11). The opportunity, (or rather — see 
below — the right) nI purchasing a piece u( 



slement of truth in the preaching of the ground at Anathotu was the occasion whitdi 
' false prophets,'' viz. that Jehovah was still called furth thu must striking proof of hit 



48 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxsn. 1—44. 



sublime confidence in God. Not that he 
understood how it could be God's will that 
he, in the besieged city, should constitute 
himself a landed proprietor. He had his 
di£Boulties; but instead of brooding over 
them, he laid them before Jehovah iii prayer. 
And the Divine revelation came that, though 
long-continued transgressions had brought 
upon Judah the sorest punishment, they 
should yet be restored to their land ; and, 
though tlie firat covenant had been broken, 
a second and an everlasting ocvenant 
should in future times be granted to God'i 
people; and tl!.« sign that the £rst part of 
this promise sho^ild in very deed be realized 
is the purchase nf the field by Jeremiah. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — 'iTime and rircumstances of 
the followino; revelation. It took place in 
the tenth year of Zedekiali, the eifjhteenth 
of Nebucharlnezzar (eoinp. cli. xxv. 1 ; lii. 
12). The sienje of Jernsalera had begun in 
the preceding year (ch. xxxix. 1). but had 
been temporarily raised on the apiiroach 
of an Egyptian army ch. xxxvii. 5, 11). 
Jeremiah, who had dec'ared i esistance hope- 
less, had been accused of tr !i.son, and im- 
prisoned (ch. xxxvii. 13^ lod in prison he 
remain(d till the close of the siege. Like 
St. Paul at Romp, howevei, he was allowed 
free communication with visitors, as appears 
from ver. 8 and ch. xxxviii. 1. Vers. 2 — 5 
are parenthetical (see on ver. 6). 

Ver. 2. —In the court of the prison ; or, the 
court of tile guard, which adjoined tlie royal 
palace (Neli. iii. 25). 

Ver. 3. — Had shut him up. A brief and 
general account of the cireumstaiices re- 
lated more in full in ch. xxxvii. For the 
prophecies referred to, see ch. xxxiv. 3 — 5 ; 
xxxvii. 17; xxxviii. 17—23 (the following 
verse is almost identical with ch. xxxiv. 3). 

Ver. ."S. — Until I visit him; i.e. until I 
take notice of hira. " To visit " is used in 
a good (ch. xxvii. 22; xxlx. 10) as well as 
in a bad sense (ch. vi. 15; xlix. 8), so that 
no definite announcement is made respect- 
ing Zedeklah's future. 'I'here was no object 
to gain by extending the scope of the reve- 
lation beyond the immediate present, and 
Zedekiah's offences did not require such an 
anticipative punishment as the clear predic- 
tion of the details of his fate (oh. xxxix. 6, 
7; lii. 11). 

Vers. 6— 15.— The purchase of the field. 
Ver. 6 resinries ver. 1, after the long paren- 
thesis in vers. 2 — 5. 

Ver. 7.— Hauameel. Another form of 
Hananeel; com p. Teffc/n, in the Septuagint 
= Goshen, MaSia/x = Midian. In ch. xxxi. 
38 the Authorized Version has Hananeel, 
ahd the Septuagint 'Aco^c^A (of course, the 



persons referred to are different). The 
son of Shallnm thine uncle. It is strange 
that Hanameel should be called at once 
Jeremiah's uncle's son and his uncle ; and 
yet this is the case — the former in vers. 8, 
9, the latter in ver. 12. There is, therefore, 
no reason why we should deviate (as most 
commentators do) from the ordinary Hebrew 
usage, and suppose " thine uncle " in this 
verse to refer to Shallum, and not rather to 
Hauameel. But how are we to explain this 
singular vaiiation in phraseology ? Either 
from the fact that the Hebrew for " uncle " 
is simply a word expressive of affection (it 
means " beloved," see e.g. Isa. v. 1 ), end 
might, th<refoie, just as well be applied to 
a cousin as to an uncle ; or else, upon the 
supposition that the word for "son (of)" 
has fallen out of the text before "mine 
uncle," both in this verse and in ver. 12. 

Ver. 8. — The right of inheritance (or 
rather, of tailing possession) is thine. The 
right, however, was dependent on the pre- 
vious right of redeeming the land. Hence 
the speaker continues: The redemption is 
thine ; buy it for thyself. The Law directs, 
" If thy brother be waxjn poor, and hath sold 
away some ot his possession, and if any of 
his kin come to redeem it, then shall h* 
redeem that which his I'rother sold " (Lev 
xxv. 2.')). Jeremiah's kinsman, however, 
ascribe." to him the right of pre-emp- 
tion. This is not mentioned in LeTitieus ; 
but, of course, no one would care to puiuhase 
a property till he was sure that the next kins- 
man would not insist on redeeming it. No 
one, it may be remarked, could purchase 
land unconditionally — the usufruct of it till 
the year of jubilee was all that was legally 
transferable ; and even the original occu- 
pant had only a life interest in liis land, 
the ownership of which was, stri^'tly speak- 
ing, vested in the commune. This seems to 
be the necessary inference from a compre- 
hensive view of the passages relative to 
land m the Old Testament (see Mr. Fen- 
ton's ' Early Hebrew Life ; ' and an article 
in the Church Quarterly Meoii-v), July, 1880). 
Then I knew, etc. \ve may, perhaps, 
interpret this notice combined with that in 
ver. 6 thus : Jeremiah had had a presenti- 
ment, founded, perhaps, upon the distress to 
which his cousin had been reduced, that 
the latter would invite him to carry out 
the provisions of the Law ; and his pre- 
sentiments were generally so ordeied by 
the Divine Spirit of prophecy as to be rati- 
fied by the event. Still, he had » measure 
of uncertainty till Hanameel actually came 
to him. and so demonstrated " that this had 
been the word of the Lord." In recording 
the circumstances, he not unnaturally re- 
flects his later feeling of certitude in hii 
i description of the presentiment. 



OH. xim. 1— 44.] THE BOOK OP THE PliUPHBT JEREMIAH. 



i9 



Ver. 9. — Seventeen shekels of sUver ; i«. 
abont £2 5a. id. (taking the shekel at 
2a. 8(2.). This has been thought a small price. 
Thirty shekels were paid for the potter'i 
field (Matt, xxvii. 7); fifty by David, for 
Arannah's threshing-floor and oxen (2 Sam. 
zziv. 4). The Hebrew has " seven shekels 
and ten of silver ; " henoe the Targum in- 
creases the price by supplying "minas" 
before " of silver," bringing up the sum to 
one hundred and seven ehekels. This, 
however, seems too much. Even if Jere- 
miah wished to be liberal, he would hardly 
have been able to go so far (probably) in 
excess of the market price. Who would 
have purchased the land on speculation, if 
Jeremiah had refused? The famine made 
life, the siege, a continuance of personal 
liberty, terribly uncertain. And, putting 
this oat of the question, there may have 
been but a short time to elapse before the 
year of jubilee, when the land would revert 
to its original occupant (see above). The 
singular form ot expression in the Hebrew, 
at which the Targum stumbled, may, per- 
haps, be the usnal style of legal docu- 
ments. 

Vers. 10—14. — The Authorized Version 
is here so far wrong, on technical terms, that 
it seems best to retranslate the whole pas- 
sage : " And 1 wrote (the circumstances) 
in the deed, and sealed it, and took wit- 
nesses, and weighed the money in the 
balance. And I took the purchase deed, 
that which was sealed (containing the offer 
and the conditions), and that which was 
open ; and I gave the purchase deed unto 
Barach the son of Neriah, the son of Maa- 
seiah (rather, Makhseiah), in the sight of 
Hanameel my uncle, and in the sight of the 
witnesses who subscribed the purchase deed, 
m the sight of all the Jews who were sitting 
in the court ot the guard. And I charged 
Bamoh before them, saying. Thus saith 
Jehovah Sabftoth, the God of Israel, Take 
these deeds, this sealed pnroliase deed, and 
tms open deed; and put them into an 
earthen vessel, that tliey may continue 
many days." The deed was made in two 
copies, so that if the open one were lost, or 
suspected of having been tampered with, an 
appeal might always be made to the sealed 
copy. The latter was to be placed in an 
ei^hen vessel, to preserve it from injury by 
damp. It ought to be added that the words 
in ver. 11, rendered " containing the offer 
and the conditions," are difficult. " Contain- 
ing" is not expressed in the Hebrew, and 
" offer " is not the ordinary meaning, though 
etymologically justifiable. 

Yer. 15.— Shall be possessed; rather, 
ikall be bought. 

Vers. 16 — 25. — Jeremiah obeys the 
Divine command, but is so besieged by 

JESEIOAH — ^Q. 



Misgivings that he applies for • Anthw 

revelation of God's purposes. 

Ver. 17.— Ah, Lord God! rather, Abu I O 
Lord Jehovah (as eh. L 6). Too hard for 
thee. It is the word usually rendered 
"wonderful," but rather indicating that 
thing or person lies outside the eemmon 
order (comp. Gen. xviii 14). 

Ver. 18. — Into the bosom, eto. The 
ample dress of an Eastern rendering a bag 
or basket unnecessary (comp. Buth iii. 
15). 

Ver. 20. — Even onto this day. A loose 
expression. Jeremiah simply means that 
signs and wonders equal to those wrought 
in Egypt have continued to the present 
time. And in Israel ; rather, both in Israel. 

Ver. 21. — Almost identical with Dent, 
xxvi. 8. The great terror which the Is- 
raelites inspired is constantly referred to 
(see Deut. li 25 ; Exod. xxiii. 27 ; Josh. 

T.l). 

Ver. 24. — Behold the mounts (see aa oh. 
vi 6). Is given. Besistance being hope- 
less, Jerusalem was virtually in the bauds 
of its besiegers. 

Ver. 25. — For the city is given ; rather, 
whereat. It is a refieotion of the prophet's. 

Vers. 26—44. — The Divine answer. This 
falls into two parts. First, Jehovah re- 
peats the burden of so many prophecies,, 
that Israel has only to blame himself for 
his punishment (vers. 26 — 35); and then 
a bright future is disclosed beyond the 
gloomy interval of conquest and captivity — 
a future when men shall buy fields, and 
comply with all the legal formalities, pre- 
cisely as Jeremiah has done (vers. 36 11 ). 

Ver. 28. — I will give ; rather, / am on 
(he point of giving (present participle). 

Ver. 29. — ^And bum it. A still more 
significant prediction to Jewish hearers than 
to us, for it implies that Jerusalem had be 
come utterly rebellious, and deserved the 
punishment of the old Canaanitish cities. 
It was to be made a eh^em (Deut. iii. 6). 

Ver. 30. — ^From their youth (see on oh 
iii. 24, 25; xxli. 21). The children of 
Israel, in the first naif of the verse, must 
have a narrower sense than in the second 
half. The fall of Jerusalem is the climax 
of the series of punishments which the two 
separated and yet (in God's sight) united 
portions of the people of Israel have had to 
undergo. 

Ver. 31.— From the day that they built 
it. It is useless to tell an impassioned 
orator that his words are twt strictly con- 
sistent with primitive history. The Is- 
raelites may not have built Jerusalem, but 
Jeremiah was not to be debarred from tLe 
strongest form of expression open to him for 
such a reason. He means " from the earliest 
times." 



60 



THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHEl JEREMIAH. [OH. xxxiL 1— 44 



Vers. 84, 85.— Repeated, with slight 
variations, from oh. vii. 30, 31. " Baal " 
and " Molech " are identified as in ch. xix. 
5 (= ch. vii. 31), aiid even more distinctly. 

Ver 36. — And now therefore. This in- 
troduces the strange and lovely contrast to 
the gloomy picture which has gone before. 
It will be observed that there is no direct 
reference to Jerusalem, but the capital was 
only empliasized before as the heart of the 
nation, and it would, of course, be no com- 
fort to say that Jerusalem's inhabitants 
(alone) would be restored. 

Ver. 39. — One heart, and one way. Unity 
xs always given as the " note " ot the ideal. 
Messianic period (oomp. Zeph. iii. 9; Zech. 
xiv. 9; John x. 16). That they may fear 
me for ever. Tliis reminds us of a phrase in 
the exhortation in Dent. iv. 10, as the next 
clause does of Dent. vi. 24. 

Ver. 40. — ^An everlasting covenant. It ia 
the "new covenant" of ch. xxxi. 31, etc., 
which is meant (for the phrase, comp. Isa. 
Iv. 3 ; Ezek. xxxvii. 26). That I will not 
turn ... to do them good. The comma in 
the Authorized Version impairs the sense. 
The prophet means, "That I will not 



cease to show them favonr " (oomp. Isa. 11t. 
10). 

Ver. 41.— Assuredly ; literally, toitt/oift- 
fulneet ; I.e. with perfect sincerity, without 
an arriere pensie, as the next words explain 
it; comp. 1 Sam. xii. 24; Isa. xxxviii. 3 
(Graf). 

Ver. 42. — Like as I have brought, etc. 
The prophet still has in his mind tlie thought 
expressed in ch. xxxi. 28, that the brighter 
part of his revelations must as surely be 
accomplished as the darker. 

Ver. 43. — Fields; rather, land; the He- 
brew has "the field," i.e. the open country 
(as oh. iv. 17, etc.). We must then continue 
" in this country," and in ver. 44, " men 
shall buy lands." 

Ver. 44.— Subscribe evidences; rattier, 
write (particulars of their purchase) in the 
deed (as ver. 10). In the land of Benjamin, 
etc. The catalogue of the distiicts of the 
Jewish kingdom beightens the realistic 
effect (see on cb. xvii. 26). Everywhere the 
old social system will be reproduced in its 
entirety. The land of Benjamin is men- 
tioned first, on account oi the property of 
Jeremiah at Anathoth. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Ven, 6 — 9. — Faith tested iy action. Jerusalem is besie°;ed ; the fields are occupied 

by the invader ; Jeremiah knows that the Jews will be driven from their country; he 
is a prisoner. Yet he buys of piece of land 1 The transaction is carried out calmly, 
carefully, with all legal exactitude, and every precaution against future mistakes as to 
ownership, just as if the prophet were at liberty to enter into possession and enjoy his 
purchase without fear of molestation. His conduct is striking ; to those who heard his 
warnings of the approaching Captivity it would seem singularly inconsistent. But the 
secret of it is explained to us, and this shows it to be a sublime act of faith. It was 
right that Jeremiah should make the purchase under ordinary circumstances, to keep 
the land in the family. He was now urged by a Divine impulse, which made him feel 
without doubt that it was God's will that he should buy the land, and he did it without 
questioning. After he had made the purchase, however, he inquired of (Jod for the 
meaning of it, and was assured that the land of Israel would revert to the Jews after the 
Captivity, and would be bought and sold again with confidence in security of possession. 
Jeremiah's purchase was to be an anticipation of that happy future. His conduct is 
thus an illustration of the influence of faith on outward actions. 

L Faith will kbvbal itself m deeds. Faith is not a merely intellectual exercise. 
It is primarily that which connects thought with action, and it is invariably an active 
principle. " Faith without works is dead." Jeremiah showed his faith by his works. 
A man's faith may be measured by the influence it has upon his conduct. The trying 
time is when faitli comes into conflict with present impressions. Then, if those impres- 
sions are vivid and faith is feeble, they may overcome it. It is useless to claim to 
have an unquestioning conviction in face of such a failure. The failure proves the 
deficiency of taith. We should all ask ourselves — How far does our faith mould our 
conduct ? How different would our life be if our faith wei;e to cease ? Would the efiect 
be but slight or would it be a very revolution ? The answer to these questions will 
ietermine whether our faith is a solid reality or a dreamy sentiment. 

II. Though faith is a spiritual grace, it will influknoe oub conduct im 
SECULAR AFFAIRS. Jeremiah showed his faith by the very thorough way in which he 
carried through Mt elaborate piece of conveyancing business. He did not confine hia 



OH. xxxiL 1— 44.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 61 

faith to the temple and to his preaching. He showed it in the market-place and in husi- 
ness. The sharp line which we draw between the spiritual and the secular is false and 
irreligious. Rellgiua will he satis&ed with no liiuited sphere. It claims the whole 
domain of life. Faith cannot be confined to any section of our conduct. If it is real,' 
it will he a broad fundamental principle influencing all we do. If our faith bears no 
fruit in our business, it is a vain and woithless thing. 

III. Faith in God will lead to implicit obkdibnob to his will. Jeremiah 
believed that God wished him to buy the field, and he did so, though at first he could 
not discover the utility of the purcliase. 1. Faith will lead to obedience. It has two 
sides — a passive side, that shows itself in trust, submission, resignation; and an active 
side, that expresses itself in obedience. Tliere are those who seem to ignore the latter. 
To them faith is wholly receptive, simply a leaving of our case in the hands of God and, 
accepting what he gives. But the obedience of faith is not less important than its 
submission. 2. This obedience must be implicit. From the nature of the case we 
cannot at first understand all the reasons of the command. If we could there would be 
no room for faith. But when we know that God is great and good, and know that a 
certain act is according to his will, faith will find her place in doing it in the darkness, 
resting assured that all is right. 

IV. God's promises fully justify hopeful action under dabk oibodmstanobs. 
Jeremiah's conduct looked inconsistent. It was justiflfd by God's promise of the 
restoration. When all is dark in the present we are inclined to despair of the future. 
But the future is in God's hands, and he has promised deliverance and blessedness to 
his people. Faith in God, therefore, will be a parent of hope. Because we trust God, 
we know that he will fulfil his good promises, and therefore we can act as though we 
saw the accomplishment of them. 

"Vers. 16—25. — 3%e prayer of a perplexed soul. L The oenebal ceharaoteb or 
THE prayer. Jeremiah. is sorely perplexed by God's command to him to buy a field 
when the Jews are about to be driven from the land aud he is a prisoner at Jerusalem. 
He does not permit his perplexity to paralyze his obedience. But offer he has done the 
thing commanded by God he naturally and rightly seeks an explanation of the strange 
Divine commission. It is right that we should bring our doubts and difficulties to God. 
Though we should not allow them to hinder our performance of duty, we cannot help 
feeling them, and if we have true confidence in God we shall frankly confess them to 
him. We often trouble ourselves sorely, without ground, because we keep our doubts 
to ourselves, and try to solve them in the twilight of our own confused thinking, when, 
if we had more faith or more courage, we should bring them to God to seek such a 
solution as may be vouclisafed to us in the light of his presence. The character of 
Jeremiah's prayer and the way in which he thus seeks relief from God are deeply 
significant. He does not begin by asking the meaning of the command that perplexes 
him. Most of his prayer contains no reference to this. It is devoted to a contemplation 
of God, of his nature, his grace, and the justice of his severe actions. Thus he prepares 
his own soul for a, right view of God's dealings with him. It would be well if our 
prayers contained more of this contemplation of God. Let us understand that the 
deepest prayer is not petition, but communion. It is more important that we should 
be brought near to God and realize rightly his presence and nature than that we should 
ask certain definite things of him. Therefore that part of prayer which in words 
may consist of invocation and adoration, should not be treated as a mere introductory 
formula, such as that with which we address a person of title. It is neither a mere 
call like that of the priests of Baal to obtain a hearing (1 Kings xviii. 26), nor only 
an expression of praise and thankfulness as a fitting introduction to a request for 
further favours. It should be felt to be the most precious element in prayer, the means 
by whicli our souls are lifted into fellowship with heaven. If it secures this result, the 
chief end of our prayer is attained. Then, if ever, our difficulties will vanish and our 
wants be satisfied, even if there be no change in God's actions towards us. 

II. The lbadivo details of the pbayeb. 1. A contemplation of the greatness of 
God (ver. 17). This is realized by a consideration of the stupendous works of God !■ 
nature. Thence we learn (1) that as God accomplishes suoli great works as are mani- 
fested in creation, no difiiculty or failure-can arise from his inability to bring about the 



M THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAK [oh. xxxii. 1—44 

very best condition of affairs ; and yet (2) that surrounding such great works thera 
must be ineffable mysteries, so that we may be perplexed by much that comes from so 
wonderful a being as God. ~ 2. A contemplation of the goodness and wisdom of God 
(vers. 18, 19). God is kind to multitudes, and yet necessarily searching in his justice. 
U^erefore it is apparent that he will require no unreasonable sacrifice and no useless 
eiertion. His commands may appear arbitrary and capricious. But his character 
teaches us to trust that the strangest of them are governed by his mercy, justice, and 
wisdom. 3. A contemplation of the providential action of God (vers. 20 — 22). A review 
of providence should confirm our faith even under the strangest trials. God had 
delivered Israel in the past, fulfilled his promises in the face of apparently iijsuperable 
difficulties, and given them a rich inheritance. Was there not good ground to trust 
him after that ? 4. A contemplation of the justice of God's severest actions (vers. 23, 
24). From this we see that the calamities of judgment are deserved. That fact should 
increase our faith in God, though by itself it may make hope more difficult, as it did ia 
the case of Jeremiah. 5. A confession of perplexity at God's command (ver. 25). 
This is not made till after the contemplation of the character and works of God. The 
contemplation has not destroyed the diffioiilty, but it has prepared the prophet to 
receive an explanation. Thus it is well that we should confess our doubts distinctly 
to God and ask for light, and if we do this after prayer and spiritual communion with 
God, we may hope that light will open upon us as it did upon Jeremiah. 

Ver. 27. — The omnipotence cf Ood. L The soubob of tub omnipotenob of God. 
1. His essential being. He is the Lord, Jehovah, the Self-Existent. God is not only 
greater than all other existences, he differs from them in his essential being. He is 
eternal ; they have come into being. He is self-contained ; they are created. 2. God's 
relation to all other existences. He is the God of all flesh. He b the First Cause, the 
Source of the first being of all things, and the ground of their continued being. But 
for him they could never have been and could not now endure. We human creatures, 
" flesh," may realize this especially in regard to ourselves. Therefore to us in particular 
God, who created us all, and in whom we all live and move and have our being, must 
be almighty. 

II. Apparent limitations to the omnipotence of God. 1. The character of Ood. 
We say that God cannot do wrong. But this simply means that his character is such 
that he never will do wrong. He is physically as able to do the actions which are 
wrong as those which are right. If he were not, there would be no goodness in his 
refraining, for purity is not impotence to do evil, but a will not to do it in face of the 
power to do it. Omnipotence is a physical characteristic. Goodness, the moral 
characteristic, does not destroy this by controlling the action of it. The power of the 
steam-engine is not lessened because the driver turns the steam on and off at will. 2. 
'She free-will of man. This introduces an unfathomable mystery, which no philosophy 
has solved or is ever likely to solve. But the mystery is more especially felt on our 
side. If God created us and gave to us free-will, and, being omnipotent, can at any time 
destroy us and withdraw it, this must not be regarded as any real limitation to his 
power. 

III. How A oonsideeation of the omnipotence of Gk)D SHOULD affect oub con- 
BUOT. We are not called to worship mere power. To do so would be to renounce the 
rights of conscience. We worship God, not because he is almighty, but because he is 
supremely good and morally great. But starting fi-om this position, we have to take 
account also of the omnipotence of God. 1. It shows the utter vanity ofaU resistance 
to the will of God. This is a most obvious inference ? The more strange, then, that 
it is H> little acted on. We need to feel it as well as to believe it. 2. It should lead us 
to tnttt that God will overcome difficulties which to us appear insuperable. The 
restoration of Israel appeared impossible ; the salvation of the world seems too great 
and difficult to be realized ; there are special difficulties in special cases, but some with 
all, so that we may exclaim, "Who then can be saved?" But if "with God all 
things are possible " (Matt. lix. 26), how can we fix any limit to the ultimate triumphs 
of redemption? "The mercy of the Lord endureth forever;" then God will always 
sedc the recovery of his lost children. " Is anything too hard for me ? " Then, in spite of 
pr^'^eiitt imbelief, impenitence, wild wanderings further astray, may we not believe that 



OH. xxxn. 1—44.3 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET jEREMlAfl. U 

he will find his children at last? 8. These considerations should lead in to seek tbe 

help of OocFt ttrength in onr weakness. How foolish for the sailors to weary them- 
selves toiling in yain at their oars against the tide, when if they would spread their 
sails the strong wind would carry them swiftly on I How foolish of us to toil on only 
in our natural power and with mere earthly means, when there an heavenly influences 
of omnipotence ready to help us if we will seek them 1 

Ter. 39. — Unity. L IJnitt is FBOinsED as a charactebistio of the ooldeh aoe 
OF THE F0TUKE. This Is Unity of thought, " one heart," and unity of conduct, " one 
way." Men shall then see " eye to eye," discord and controversy cease, peace and 
amity prevail. There may still be diversity of ideas in the sense of persunal difference, 
because individual characters, positions, and opportunities must still vary. But in 
a perfect condition there will be no discord. The variations will harmonize. So all will 
not do exactly the same thing in exactly the same manner. There will, doubtless, 
be various spheres of action and various personal styles of work. But these will not 
conflict. They will all tend the same way. 

II. Unity is involvbd dj the idea of perfection. 1. Unity of thought. Truth 
is one. It may be variously conceived ; at first broken lights caught up in opposite 
quarters may look very different. But the more we eliminate personal " views," the 
more we can get of the white light of facts, the nearer we approach to the central verity, 
the more unity shall we obtain. Absolute truth is an absolute unity. This is apparent 
in mathematics. Two and two cannot be both four and five at the same time — four to 
one man, five to his neighbour. 2. Unity of action. As there is but one absolute 
truth, so there is but one absolute right. Under all circumstances there can be but one 
thing which is absolutely the best to be done. That one thing is the right. Till we 
find this, we make blundering attempts to reach it from different directions. Hence the 
contradictions in the conduct even in good meiL When the right is found and followed 
by all, there must be unity of conduct. 

III. Unity is to be realized thkodqh the perfected influence of Christianity. 
It was promised as one of the great Messianic blessings. In Christianity we see the 
growing realization of those blessings. 1. This is accomplished by the personal 
influence of Christ. One powerful centre of attraction binds into unity all that comes 
under its influence. The sun makes one system of the several planets that revolve 
about it. The general of genius welds the scattered regiments of his army into one 
body through his common command over them and their common devotion to him. 
Christ exerts a similar influence. He is broad enough in his humanity and strong 
enough in his divinity to attract and influence all kinds of men. Thus " he is our Peace, 
who made both " (Jew and Gentile) " one, and broke down the middle wall of partition " 
(Eph. iL 14), All may see a unity of truth in him who is " the Light of the world," 
and be led in one way as they follow his footsteps. 2. This unity is further realized in 
the inwardness of Ghristianity. The new covenant is written on the heart (oh. xxxi. 
33). We differ most in externals ; under various clothes there beats the same human 
heart. When we come to the heart we come to unity. Thus the inward principles of 
truth and love in Christianity tend to bind Christians together. We are divided 
because these have not yet their perfect work. No external compulsion will accom- 
plish the same end. On the contrary, this will only aggravate internal dissension. 
Persecution is the parent of heresy ; charity is the mother of unity. 

Ver. 41. — Qol rejoicing. I, God has joy. He is not indifferent, nor is he morose ; 
we are to think of him as the "blessed" God, i.e. as essentially happy. The brightness 
and beauty of the world are reflections from the blessedness of God. Because he is 
glad, nature is glad, flowers bloom, birds sing, young creatures bound with delight. 
Nothing is more sad in perversions of religion than the representations of God as a 
gloomy tyrant. Less terrible, but scarcely less false, are those monkish ideas which 
deny the tyranny but cherish the gloom of a sombre divinity more suited to chill, dark 
cloisters than to that glorious temple of nature in which the eternal presence dwells 
and manifests himself symbolically. These fragrant meadows, broad rolling seas of 
moorland neatlier, rich green forest-cities of busy insect life, flashing ocean waves, and 
the pun blue sky above, and ali and lovely in cieation, swell «■« 



S4 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH, [ch, ixxii. 1—44 

symphony of gladness, because the mighty Spirit that haunts them is himself over- 
flowing with joy. Our God is a Sun. And if divinity is sunny, so should religion be. 
The happy God will rejoice in the happiness of his children. Innocent mirth, though 
forbidden by Puritan sourness, can be no offence to such a God. The typical citizens 
of his kingdom are little children ; and what is so joyous as childhood ? 

II. God finds jot in his children. Here is the wonderful fact about the joy of 
God. He must have joy in his own puiity and perfection. Then he has infinite 
resources at his command. The whole universe can be made to minister to his delight. 
All high and pure intelligences that form the choir of heaven aim at glorifying him. 
Yet he finds delight in such poor creatures as we are, in his fallen and erring children. 
How is this? 1. Because God is ?owe. He loves all his children. Love finds delight in 
the loved ; so God is compared to the bridegi oom rejoicing over the bride (Isa. Ixii. 5). 
2. Because God is essentially blessed. The happy find sources of gladness in the most 
unlikely quarters, just as the cheeriest scenes cannot lift the load of sadness from those 
who are naturally mournful. God is so joyous that he finds joy even in us. 

III. God finds jot in blessino his children. He rejoices over them to do them 
good. God's joy is most unselfish. It is the great^t blessedness — the blessidness of 
giving rather than that of receiving. It is the joy of sacrifice. God, being good, can 
find joy only in good ; being merciful, can find none in harshness. He must punish the 
wicked, but he takes no delight in that. Like the shepherd who has recovered the lost 
sheep, like the woman who has found the lost money, like the father who has welcomed 
the wanderer home again safe and sound, God rejoices in the return of the penitent, till 
his joy ovei flows and is caught up by the angels about his throne. From this we may 
learn (1) confidence if we return as penitents; (2) assurance that all our life is safe 
in his hands ; (3) care not to grieve bis Spirit ; (4) desire to live in communion 
with him. 

ly. GoD WILL CALL HIS CHILDREN TO BHABE IB HIS JOT. All joy IS Sympathetic. 
We call our friends and our neighbours to rejoice with us. But if we have special joy 
in any person we naturally desire this joy to be reciprocal. Christ desired his disciples 
to share his joy (John xv. 11). Joy is contagious. If we are with the happy and in 
sympathy with them, we naturally receive a share of their gladness. Whence comes 
the joy we anticipate in heaven? Escape from the evils of this life when God shall 
wipe away the tears from all eyes? Deliverance from sin and temptation? Beunion 
with the lost but not forgotten blessed dead? Opportunities for ha] ipy service? All 
these things and more; but the^e are not the sources of chief joy. That is to share the 
joy of God, to be " for ever with the Lord." 

HOMILIES BY TARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers, 1 — 6. — Silencing a prophet. A short time before an attempt was made upon 
his life ; now it is imagined that the prophet will yield to harsh treatment and 
intimidation. The natural heart of man is so foolish that it cannot but credit man 
with the authorship of Divine truth, and suppose that he can control and modify the 
inspired messages of God. Nay, the sinner is often so left to himself as to suppose 
that his own precautions will prevent the communications of God's Spirit, or at least the 
carrying of these into effect i 

I. Faithful witnesses of the tbuth hat sohetimes bk brought into oheat 
BTBAITB. God does not guarantee a smooth experience and an easy life to his servants. 
Quite the contrary. His Son prepares his disciples for suffering many things (Matt. x. 
16—22). Jeremiah would seem to be alternately exposed to harshness and kindness — 
he was in the prison and yet in the palace. The bribe, or the deceitful promise, may 
be as great a trial as the cruelty. Seclusion for a prophet and patriot must have been 
very hard to endure at such a time, and full of spiritual perplexity. Great things were 
being done, and national destinies decided, whilst he was held fast, helpless, and with 
little reliable information of what was going on. So God often lays aside his servants 
just at a time when there would seem to be most occasion for their activity. " His 
thoughts are not as our thoughts." 

II. The Wobd of God is not thereby hindebed. 1. 7( m not sQenced, (Ver. 1 ; 
eC ch. zxziU. 1.) The communion of the soul with Gkid cannot be broken by externa] 



CH. XXTIL 1—44.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JEEEMIAH. 66 



meana. Aa well might one nj, "Thus far, and no further," to the ocean or the day. 

Many of the graodest revelations of God dale from prisons. 2. Resistance only hastens 
its progress and fulfilment. Persecution ani martyrdom have done more for Christianit} 
than a thousand direct agencies. How the voices multiply t 3. Those who oppose it 
ensure its speedy visitation upon themselves. 

in. God will uphold and comfort his afflicted servants. The greatest 
trial to Jeremiah would have heeu Gud's silence: at this season the "Word of the 
Lord " must have heen his greatest consolation and reassurance. Earthly deprivation 
may he heavenly Uberty. Sufferers for the truth know and feel that God is with 
them. — M. 

Vers. 6 — 15.— Purchasing hy Divine command. The passage a locus dassieus for 
various questions and formalities connected with the Mosaic Law. Ahraham bought a 
field for his dead ; Jeremiah bought one for a nation yet unborn. If no other circum- 
stance had been recorded concerning the latter, this alone would entitle him to be 
enrolled amongst the fathers of the faithfuL 

I. God's servants are bometihes called to perform strange and BnrauLAB 
ACTIONS. The piophet bidden to purchase a field when the land is overrun by the 
Chaldeans ; a poor man to procure and expend money upon a speculation for which 
there was no earthly security ; a prisoner to acquire laud there seemed so little likeli- 
hood of his ever seeing. Much of Christian duty is summed up in that experience. 
We are not to stumble at earthly anomalies or anachronisms, but to live and labour 
and spend " as seeing him who is invisible." 

II. The will of God is a sufficient reason fob Doina such things. That is, 
the revealed will. Men who act by revelation have not to ask for reasons before acting. 
Obedience is their role ; afterwards they may ask for light. Christians have to commit 
their way unto the hoii, and trust where they cannot trace. They are led by a higher 
reason, which cannot err. 

III. What God commands ought to n dons fbomftlt, lovinqlt, axd with 
EXACTITUDE. Jeremiah at once performs the duty. He liasteas to relieve his kins- 
man from perplexity and loss. And the business part of the engagement is executed 
with the greatest care and all the formalities of law. No flaw is suffered to enter into 
the bargain. The importance and duty of Christians being model busine.ss men. What 
is done for God and under his supervision should be done thoroughly. Justice precedes 
and facilitates charity. 

IV. Transactions apparently small and trifling mat have great meanings. 
How different the feelings of the parties to this transaction 1 The money absolutely of 
little amount ; relatively it was worth much. We are reminded of the widow's mite. 
That document was the title deed to a kingdom. This is the spirit in which Christiana 
should do business. We ought never to forget that we are heirs of the kingdom. The 
world has been sold under sin, but we are free. Let us strive to " lay up treasure in 
heaven." Let us make our title clear to its liberties and joys. In the meanest under- 
taking let us be guided by this spirit. In the confidence of Christ let us redeem the 
world. Let our motto be "Everything in the spirit of Christ!" Men cannot be 
just and honest unless they are inspired, even for the least things, as Jeremiah was. A 
large and general brotherliness, an implicit faith in God's Word, ought to govern us in 
all our affairs. Above all, our own relation to Christ, our personal transactions with 
him, should at once, with prayer and laith, be made sure 1 — M. 

Vers. 16 — 25. — The prayer of Jeremiah. L Cleab and unmistakable duties 
SHOULD BE fulfilled ERE MEN ENTER UPON DiviNE EXERCISES. The deed had already 
been executed. 

II. Circumstances or tbial ass pebplexitt should lias men to thx thbonb 

or GRACE. 

III. The known character and past action of God should influence men's 
judgments op present experiences and strengthen their faith. It is good ta 
rehearse these even in private devotions. 

IV. SlN8 SHOULD BE FREELY AND HONESTLY CONFESSED. 

V. One saint mat intercede fob mant sinners. 



5« THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, ton. xxxu. 1—44 

VI. The fbateb of faith ib answebed. (Vera. 26 — 44.) — M, 

Vers. 37 — 40. — TJie unities of the Divine kingdom. (Cf. John xvii.) L Unitt d 

THE EXPERIENCE AND PBTVILEGES OP 8ATINO OBACE. (Ver. 37.) 

II. Unity with God. 

III. Unity in spieit and laboub with one anothbb. (Ver. 39.) 

IV. Unity of DESTiNY. (Ver. 40.) — M. 

Vers. 1—44. — A story of OocPs sustaining grace. This whole chapter may be 
summed up under some such heading as this. For it begins with showing us CJod's 
servant Jeremiah in a position in which he sorely needed sustaining grace, and then it 
proceeds to narrate the threefold process by which this grace was communicated to him. 
The manner in which God sustained Jeremiah is very much akin to that in which ho will 
sustain all his servants who may be in similar need. If any be so now, let them give 
hged to this record. Note — 

L The need of God's servant. Ver. 2 tells us that Jeremiah was at this time 
shut up in prison. His confinement was not so severe as that which he had suffered in 
his former prison; but yet there was very much in his present circumstances to make 
him need the sustaining grace of God. The story of his imprisonments is full of inte- 
rest, but it has to be gathered here a little and there a little from different parts of his 
prophecies. These have been compiled on a principle which it is impossible to discover. 
Events of early date are placed in later chapters, and those of later date in early chapters. 
The chronological confusion is complete. Hence it is the task of every student of these 
prophecies to disentangle this confusion so far as it may be done. In saying this, 
nothing is charged against the inspiration and authority of the book. That remains 
intact ; but our reverence for what is so evidently of God in the book does not hinder 
tliat we should note and regret the disorderly way in which some human hands — whose 
wa know not — have put together its various parts. Tracing out, however, the history 
of these imprisonments, it would seem that they were brought about somewhat as 
follows. Jeremiah had clearly foreseen and foretold that the ungodliness of the people 
would bring down the Divine chastisements. Moreover, he discerned and declared with 
equal clearness that the instrument of Gud's wrath would be the rapidly rising empire 
of Babylon. He saw how everything yielded to the might of her armies ; that no 
power, not even that of Egypt, could withstand her assault. But all this was by no 
means so clearly seen by those to whom Jeremiah was sent. They did not believe in 
the nearness of God's judgments, and were not a little angry with the taithful prophet 
for denouncing them. But Jeremiah saw also that, certain as was the approach of these 
judgments, they probably would be mitigated if, instead of exasperating the armies 
of Babylon by useless resistance, they submitted themselves and acknowledged her 
•upremacy (cf. ch. xxvii.). But the same spirit in the nobles and princes of Judah 
and in the people generally, which made them refuse to listen to him when he 
told of God's judgments coming upon them, made them impatient of his oft-repeated 
counsels to do now the best thing under the circumstances — bow to the Babylonian 
storm, and so, though they could not save all, yet save some of their cherished posses- 
sions. But at length it became evident that Babylon did mean to assail them. Instead, 
however, of adopting either of the two better methods — of humbling themselves before 
God and imploring his protection, or of conciliating the Babylonian king, they formed 
alliance with Egypt (ch. xxxvii.), notwithstaniUng Jeremiah's solemn assurance of the 
uselessness of such alliance. But in the ninth year of Zedekiah the Chaldean army 
besieged Jerusalem. Jeremiah (ch. xxxiv. 2) plainly tells the king how hopeless 
aU resistance is. Under the alarm of this siege, the wealthy Jews released their 
poorer brethren, of whom, contrary to God's Law, they had made bond slaves (ch. 
xxxiv.). But the Egyptian army coming to their aid (ch. xxxvii. 5), the Chaldeani 
idised the siege. Thinking now that all cause for fear was gone, the Jewish leaders 
quickly went back to their old ways, and, though indignantly denounced by Jeremiah 
(oh. xxxiv.), enslaved their brethren again. But he bad taken advantage of the 
withdrawal of the Babylonian forces to quit the city. It was no place for him. 
His purpose, however, was prevented. Foes not a few, to whom his fidelity had been 
hateful, now seized on him on the pretence that he was about to desert to the 



OH. XXIII. 1—44.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 67 

Chaldeans (ch. xxxvii.). In the insolence begotten of their fancied deliverance, they 
thought they might do anything to God's servant. They therefore dragged him 
before the princes, procured his condemnation, smote him, and then cast him into 
deep dungeons, vrhere, had he lingered long, death must soon have put an end to 
his misery. But the King Zedekiah, whose mind was ill at ease, and who could not 
help believing Jeremiah, whilst allowing himself to be overawed by the violence 
of those around him, sent for the prophet and caused him to be placed in less severe 
custody. But he was not to stay there long. His former enemies came round the 
king, and brought such accusations against him that the king, weakly yielding as 
his manner was, gave him up to their will ; like as Pilate delivered Jesus. Speedily 
they flung him into a dungeon, which appears to have been a disused well, the bottom 
of which was still deep in mire. There they leave him miserably to perish. But 
again he is delivered. An eunuch of the court intercedes for him, and he is drawn up 
tenderly and carefully, as his half-dying state probably required, from the horrible pit 
into which he had been cast, and brought back again into that milder captivity which 
is indicated by " the court of the prison," and where we find him when this chapter 
(xxzii.) opens. Now, if we try and realize the prophet's condition, we can easily see how 
a despondency like to that of John the Baptist when he sent two, of his disciples to 
Jesus to ask him, " Art thou he that should come," etc. ? — we can see how a like 
despondency might well have fallen upon the prophet's mind. He was no robust, 
stern Stoic, to whom rough treatment and the scorn and hate of his fellow-men were as 
nothing. His piteous pleading for his life (ch. zxxvii. 20), his ready yielding to the 
king's suggested subterfuge (ch. xxxviii. 27), his reiterated confessions of his distress, 
'he long wail of his lamentations, all reveal a man who, though in the strength of 
Uod's grace he would not flinch in delivering the message God had entrusted to him, 
whatever it was, whoever might oppose, nevertheless felt keenly the perils- of his posi- 
tion and the misery of his lot. Again and a^ain had he been seemingly given over unto 
death, and even now there was nought but tlie poor protection of the word of the weakest 
of monarchs to save him from the rage that was ready to destroy him the first oppor- 
tunity that should be given. His whole horizon was dark, unillumined by any cheer^ 
ing ray of hope. If the besieging armies did their worst — and it seemed certain that the 
obstinacy of the people would provoke them to do so— what prospect of deliverance and 
restoration could there be then ? For himself and for his country the outlook was all dark. 
II. But, next, see how God met his need. He did this in a threefold manner. 1. 
He led Mm to commit himself openly to the/aith of the restoration of Israel. He had 
proclaimed this re::toration many tiuies before. He was now by a public significant act 
to avow again bis confidence in what God had promised. - This is the meaning of the. 
purchase of the land told of in vers. 6 — 15. In the most explicit formal manner he 
was to do this which his own predictions of the Babylonian conquest seemed to render 
absurd. It seemed like throwing money away. Why the vendor wanted to sell the 
ground we do not know. The conviction that all was lost for Judah may have led to 
it. But when the ofl^er was made, as God told Jeremiah it would be, he saw that it was 
from the Lord, and that he was, by purchasing it, to testify to his faith that the land 
should be restored to them again. Heace he did all in the most formal manner : paid 
for it, took receipt, registered the purchase, and had duplicate made out, handed over 
the documents to Baruch in presence of many witnesses. Now, had Jeremiah refused 
to buy this property, it would be tantamount to his apostasy from laith, to his renoun- 
cing all his trust in God. His despondency would bid him do so. But the thought of 
throwing up all faith, renouncing it, and denjing God, the very thought seems to have 
provoked a blessed reaction, and to have made him resolve that ho would make it yet 
more difBcult tor himself to go back from his faith by committing himself to it in this 
open, deliberate, and formal way. Thus Qod made him use what faith he had in order 
to his winning more. " To him that hath," and uses what he has, " shall be given." 
It is ever so. Have you little of the spirit of prayer ? Pray, and more will be yours. 
Little love to God ? Do something especially and avowedly for him, and your love will 
deepen. As with the body and the mind, in trade and all departments of life, the use 
of what strength we have gains more. 2. By leading him to lay all his difficultie* 
lefore Ood. This is the meaning of the prayer in vers. 17 — 25. After the prophet 
had committed himself by this purchase of the land, a purchase so irrational and 



58 THE BOOK OF THB PBUPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxjui. 1—44:. 

absurd as it would seem in many eyes, and as it perhaps partly seemed even in Ms 
own eyes, he felt need still of more assurance and confidence tlian he yet possessed. 
And K) in this prayer he pours out his perplexities before God. And if we analyze 
this prayer, we shall see that he begins by going over in devout confession and adora- 
tion the many reasons which ought to establish his faith. First he confesses the sure 
truth — nothing is too hard for the Lord. Then he proceeds from this general truth to 
several proofs of it in Israel's own history — how, in spite of all difficulty, God redeemed, 
preserved, and settled his people in the land he promised. Then he turns to the per- 
plexing facts which, at the moment, were so staggering his own mind — the dreadful 
wickedness of the people and the actual presence of God's judgments. How, in the 
face of all this, could God's promises be fulfilled? It is as if he had said, "Lord, 1 
believe, I ought to believe, but I am sore perplexed, I desire to believe yet more ; help 
my unbelief." Such seems to have been the meaning of this prayer. It is prayer 
because this is its meaning, though there is not one word of petition in the whole oi 
it. The prayer has to be read between the lines. And God does ever so read the 
desires of his servants, even when not expressed in words, or when words are used that 
are not formal prayers. Nor can we doubt that thus coming to the Lord with his per- 
plexities was of great help to the prophet. It must have been so ; it ever is so. 3. Ood 
gives him fresh grasp of his promises, new asswcmce of the truth of his Word. This is 
the third and last step in this sustaining grace, of which this whole chapter tells. The 
account of this answer to the prophet's prayer is given in vers. 26 — 44. He gave him 
to feel afresh the blessed truth that nothing was too hard for the Lord (ver. 27). There- 
fore it mattered not, even though he could not understand all God's ways, though the 
Chaldean armies were thundering at the gates of Jerusalem, though the people were so 
hopelessly wicked. " Therefore (ver. 36) " saitb the Lord," and then follows a whole 
series of " I wills " and " shall be's, in which God again bears in upon his servant's soul 
the certainty of the things he had already declared. And more than be had declared 
should be — a spiritual restoration as well as a literal one. And then (vers. 43, 44), 
referring to Jeremiah's own transaction, "fields shall be bought in this land," etc. 
That which now seemed so unreasonable and hopeless should be matter of everyday 
occurrence in the blessed times of restoration which Gnd would surely bring about. 
The instruction, therefore, for every perplexed soul is — ^Use what faith thou hast ; tell 
•11 thy perplexities to God; receive the new assurance of bis faithfulness ha will 
rarely give. — C. 

Ver. 6. — blessed death I " Until I visit him." Zedekiah does not seem to have 
been a bad man, though he did evil. Weak rather than wicked. One like our own 
Charles I. or Louis XVI. of France. One of those men unhappily called to places of great 
responsibility and difficulty, without the moral strength requisite for so arduous a post. 
A sadder life than that of King Zedekiah, the last king of Judah and Jerusalem, can- 
not be conceived. It is a piteous tale. Bereaved, a captive, blinded, he was dragged to 
Babylon, and there died. And it is because the prophet of God recognizes that death 
to such an one could not but be a sweet messenger of relief, therefore he calls it " the 
Lord visiting him." True, the visit of the Lord often means the wrath of the Lord. 
He will " visit the sins of the fathers," etc. But it yet more often means the goodness 
of the Lord. " The Lord hath visited and redeemed his people." He visited Hannah. 
He visits his flock. And this gentler meaning it has here ; for the sore punishment 
of his sins Zedekiah liad already been visited. This visit, therefore, tells of Crod's 
merciful visitation. 

I. Death hot always a visit of mebot. Not to those who die in their sins. It is 
represented often as the judgment of God. " It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands 
of the living God," as they who die impenitent and unbelieving fall. 

IL But death is hobe often the Lobd's visit of mebot. It is : 1. To (hose 
whom Ood punishes in this life. Zedekiah was an instance. Gf. those of whom St. 
Paul says (1 Cor. xL 33) that they were judged now that they might not be condemned 
with the world. And probably there are many such. 2. To the sorrowful and ihosa 
whose lives are a prolonged pain. We speak of death for such as being a merciful 
relief; and we are right. 3. To all believers in the Lord Jesus Christ. Death for 
them is the Lord's visiting them — Christ's coming again, as he said he would, and 



OH. rsxn. 1— 44J THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 69 

receiving them unto himself, that where he is they may be also. Which kind d Tisi- 
tation of the Lord shall death be to ua t — 0. 

Vers. 6 — 15, — A parable of redemption. For the sake of variety and interest, it is 
lawful uow and then to make the transactions of earth tell of the transactions of 
heaven ; to make prosaic matters of fact — as the redeeming of this field — parables of 
spiritual realities. Let us so deal with this narrative. Here was — 

L A POSSESSION IN AN eneut'b fowbb. The field, as the whole land virtually was 
80 at that very moment. So man. 

IL The Loed promptino kbdemption. Jeremiah knew that it was " of the Lord." 
God is tlie Author of redemption. " He BO loved the world that," etc. " God was in 
Christ reconciling," etc. 

III. The Kedgemeb voluntabilt undebtaeino the wore. Jeremiah might 
have refused. So Christ thought not his equality with God a thing he should 
tenaciously retain, but emptied himself (Phil. iii.). " For our sakes, though he was 
rich, yet ho became poor." 

IV. The seeming hopelessness of such eedemption. What likelihood did there 
seem in Jeremiah's payment that he should ever possess the land? What could 
Christ's cross do to redeem man ? " The oifence of the cross." 

V. Redemption accomplished and attested. The prophet paid the silver, and the 
transaction was attested in due form. Christ paid our ransom, and that that great 
purchase was valid was attested by the resurrection from the dead : that was the seal. 

VI. Witnesses are commissioned to declare the tbuth. (Vers. 12, 13.) So 
Christ commanded his apostles to testify of what he had done. 

VII. The twofold testimony. (Ver. 14.) There was that which was sealed and 
that which was open. So is it of the great redemption. There is a testimony that is 
sealed, hidden from the world, but revealed to the believer by the Spirit of God in his 
inward experience, the witness of God in his soul, the Spirit bearing witness with his 
spirit. And there is that which is open — the historic evidence of the resurrection of 
Christ and of the truth of Christianity. 

VIII. The depositaries of this testimony. The prophet put his in an earthen 
vessel. We, too, have this treasure in earthen vessels. Let the literal suggest the 
spiritual; Jeremiah, Paul. 

IX. The underlying and effectuating will. (Ver. 15.) The Lord luould have 
the land to be restored, the Cajjtivity should return. So he " will have all men to be 
saved." Have we claimed our share in this redeeming work ? — 0. 

Ver. 19. — Nothing hid from God. " Thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the 
sons of men." No truth more forgotten than this. Men assent to it, but it has no power 
over the vast mass of men, and far too little power even over religious men. How 
different it is with the presence or absence of our fellow-creatures ! We have often 
much to conceal from them, and we would often make great efforts to prevent them 
knowing much of our lives. Hence it makes all the difference in the world to us 
whether they be with us or away from us. It regulaies our conduct, our words, our 
looks, our very tone and movement. But how little of such effect does the thought 
of the Divine eye seeing all and always what we are and do, even to the understanding 
of our thoughts afar off 1 Therefore such forgetfulness of God's presence as that which 
we are all of us so liable to be guilty of requires that we should diligently consider the 
many proofs of the truth declared in this verse. Note some of them. 

I. He has laid down laws to begulatb and govern the ways of men. He 
has done this not only for those that are open and manifest, but those that are most 
secret as well. He is a " discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart" (cf. Ps, 
cxxxix.). " God looketh at the heart." Now, he could not thus largely and minutely 
lay down these laws if he did not know completely the ways which they concern. 

II. He discovers them. If we have been engaged in some secret way, or such as 
we thought was secret, where no eye was upon us as we imagined ; if afterwards some 
one meets us and tells us all that we did, we know that, unseen to us, he must by 
himself or by others have been present at that secret hour. Now, thus we know that 
God has been ever present For: I. EeteUs us all about thtm "WJi»tlr3Era7'' 3l«ft 



M THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH. foH. xsxu. 1— 44. 

•speciallj. Is conscience, bat God telling ni tlmt he is perfectly acquainted with all 
that we thought unknown ? 2. He tdh others of them. He told David (1 Sam. 
xxiii. 12) that the men of Eeilah would deliver him up into the hand of Saul. He 
told Joseph of Herod's purpose to kill the infant Saviour. He warned the wise men 
from whom Herod hoped to have acquired the knowledge he needed. And again, he 
warned Joseph about Archelaus. And many such instances there are. Now, they all 
■kiKf ^Ot Qod knows all the ways of men. 

III. He turns tbbu which way hb wnx. Sometimes he gives men their heart's 
desiie, satisfying the longing soul. Sometimes he overrules them for ends far other 
than the doers of them designed. As when they crucified our Lord (Acts ii. 23), God 
ordered which way their sin should issue, which was quite other than they thought (cf. 
history of Joseph). Sometimes he baffles and denies them altogether. If he did not, 
this world would be hell. What if all the sin men conceive of they were to commit 1 
Hence (Gen. xx. 6) God says he withheld Abimelech from sinning against Abraham, 
and suffered him not to touch Sarah. And God is for ever graciously strangling sin in 
its very birth. But all this shows that " his eyes are open upon all the ways of the 
sons of men." 

IV. He recompenses them. I. When our secret ways have been evil, cannot we 
tell in the darkening of the face of God that he knows all? And when they have been 
such as the Lord delighteth to see in secret, do not our hearts know when we come to 
him that there is the answering smile ? 2. And he recompenses them in his present 
outward dealings with us. The sinner's most secret sin finds him out not seldom in 
this world. And the patient continuance in well-doing, however humble and obscure, 
rarely fails to meet with its reward, 3, And God will judge them in the last great 
day. Then the thoughts of all hearts shall be revealed. " God shall bring every 
work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil." 
Again is it made evident that be knows all. He is " the Father who seeth in secret." 

Conclusion. Understand what is the right use of this great doctrine. Not that 
we should be trying every hour of the day to be thinking of the all-seeing eye of God. 
We cannot, and God does not intend that we should, be ever thus conscious of his 
presence. Children are not of the presence of their parents. They are utterly uncon- 
strained. But should need arise for their parents' help, should they be tempted to do 
what they know their parents would forbid, then in a moment they become conscious 
of their piesence, and the needed aid is asked for, and the tempting sin is resisted. 
Now, thus should we remember the continual presence of God. " The right state of 
mind plainly is to have the thought of God's presence so perpetually at hand that, as 
with Joseph in his great temptation, it shall always start before us whenever it is 
wanted." This is living with God and communion with Christ ; and it is won by 
prayer and close walking with him, and blessed are they who win. — 0. 

Ver. 27. — Truth confessed, hut not realized. " Is there anything too hard for the 
Lord ? " In ver. 17 the prophet had confessed " nothing is too hard for thee," but 
it ia evident that, though he thus confessed the blessed truth, he did not realize it so 
as to enjoy it and get the comfort of it (cf. homily on vers. 1 — 44). Now, there are 
many causes which hinder our realization of this truth which we nevertheless both 
confess and believe. But they may all be summed up under the three headings of 
trouble, guilt, and sin. It was the first of these, though not exclusively, which was 
clouding the prophet's mind, and making even this axiom of Divine truth seem doubtful 
for the time. Glance at these causes of this sad questioning whether some things be 
not too hard for the Lord, and their several cures. 

I. Qbbat tbouble. Cf. circumstances of the time and of prophet especially. Oh, 
what doubt and misgiving do the troubles of life, the terrible events, " the stings and 
arrows of outrageous fortune," cause to souls not a fewl It was so here. Now, observe 
thea/ntidute to this doubt. To strengthen his faith the prophet draws an argument from 
the creation. Then, with no resources from without, God formed the earth and the 
world. Then, when the material out of which the ordered universe should come had 
all to be brought into order, " the earth was without form and void, and darkness," 
etc. Then, when all was created, all had to be preserved and daily sustained. Let 
any one contemplate the proofs that these &cts give of tht existence, the power, the 



AH. xxin. 1— 44.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 61 

vrisdom, and the beneficence of God, and the question, " Is anything too hard for thee ? " 
can meet with but one answer. How can any doubt the Divine reaourcei in view of 
the creating and sustaining providence of God. 

II. Guilt. If it be hard sometimes in the face of the calamities of life to realize 
the fulness of the Divine resources, it is harder still in the face of human guilt. Is 
there a God able and willing to supply my material and temporal need ? is a question 
less difGcult than that which asks whether there be a God able and willing to pardon 
my sin. For to minds not few nor feeble, the forgiveness of sin seems an insoluble 
problem. If the punishment of sin be righteous, and every witness afiSrms that it is, 
ought God to remit it ? And if it be inevitable, the sure reaping of the previous sowing, 
can God remit it? Have we not something here that is too hard even for the Lord ? 
If in all departments of nature, we everywhere see effects surely following their 
appropriate causes, and if spiritual death be the appropriate effect of sin, how can this 
cause and tffect be severed any more than any other ? True, the human will can step 
in and arrest or turn aside this or that effect; we see this perpetually. But here is 
a question, not of power, but of right, not in the sphere of the material, but of that 
which is moral. It is a case in which mere power goes for nothing. What, then, is to 
be done? The atonement of our Lord Jesus Christ solves the problem. He, in our 
humanity, offered to God for us that perfect sacrifice whereby all who claim their share 
in its benefits are pardoned, accepted, and saved. " God was in Christ, reconciling," 
etc. (2 Cor. v.). It is everywhere recognized that a true confession of wrong done, and 
an earnest entreaty for forgiveness, should sufBce to remove all wrath on account of such 
wrong from the heart of the offended one. That law which God enjoins upon us he 
observes himself. " The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit," etc. But such confession 
of human sin and intercession for its forgiveness Christ offered in humanity to God for 
us, and so God can be just and yet the Justifier of him who believeth in Jesus. Thus 
is this hard problem solved ; the " Lamb of God taketh away the sin of the world." But 
there is— 

III. Sm. Can God subdue that in the heartof a man? When we see the outrajres, 
the iuration, the strength of hold, the universality, the attractiveness, the prestige, and 
the lore of sin, it does seem as if the subjugation of this was too hard even for the 
Lord. To turn back the tides, to reverse the law of gravity, to alter any other law of 
the universe, — this were an easy task compared with the stupendous change which must 
be wrought in man before the love of sin can die out of him, and the love of God 
rule in its stead. What endeavours have been made I what schemes devised ! what 
philosophies elaborated! but all in vain. Hence, despair for ourselves and for others 
too often predominates in our souls. Evil we are, and evil we must be. Who can 
bring a clean thing out of an unclean ? Can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit ? 
But " there is nothing too hard for the Lord." The history of the Church of God proves 
that there is, in the regenerating, sanctifying Spirit of Qod, that power which is needed 
here. He is the renewing, transforming, sanctifying Spirit. Baptized with the Spirit, 
" I walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit." " The law of the Spirit of life in 
Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death." May we more and 
more, as we may and should, in our own experience, prove tliis true.^^. 

Vers. 81 — 33. — Lovi* labour apparently hst. As we read this record (ver. 33) of 
the perseverinix and earnest, but nevertheless fruitless, labours of God's servants, and 
remember that they were sent by the Lord, we are almost led to ask, " To what piu- 
pose is this waste V " We can understand loving, earnest labour persevere.l in, though 
nothing may come of it, when those who so toil are sustained by hope, even though it 
may be sometimes hoping against hope. But " love ho{>eth all things, believeth all 
things, endureth all things," and "never faileth." How many and how pathetic are the 
stories that might be told where such love has toiled to save some reprobate from th« 
doom he would" persist in bringing on himself !— the loving wife, sister, mother, striving 
to save those who won't be saved 1 How full this weary world is of such cases I But it 
is evident that these continue to labour and pray because they cannot know that they 
shall fail, and their hope is that they shall succeed. How David fasted and wept 
whilst his child was yet alive ! but when the child was dead, David arose and ate, 
auuinted himself, and put on his ro^al robes. And when his servants aiked him 



82 THE BOOK OF THE FROPHET JEREMIAH, [on. xxxn. 1 — 44» 



wherefore he so altered his behaviour, he said, "Whilst he was alive I fasted and wept: 
for I said, Who can tell if God will be gracious to me, that the child may live? Bat now 
he is dead, wherefore should I fast ? Can I bring him back a^ain ? " It was hope that 
sustained the sorrowing king ; but when hope was gone, he gave over his fruitless toil 
Now, all this we can understand and sympathize with. But in the long-continued 
ministry of Jeremiah and others like him, when all the while God knew what the end 
would be, how apparently wasted it would all be, when he could never have any hope of 
B different result from that which actually occurred, the inquiry is suggested — Where- 
fore did God commission, and wherefore does he still, such fruitless toil ? " Known 
unto God are all his works from the beginning." There can be nothing contingent with 
him. Hope is a mental condition impossible to God ; he cannot be said to hope for 
anything. It is entirely human ; but to an omniscient and omnipotent Being who 
"ordereth all things after the counsel of his own will," hope, or doubt, or uncertainty of 
»ny kind cannot be. Therefore, knowingly, with full certainty that all his servant's 
severe labour would not bring the people to repentance, as in fact it did not, neverthe- 
less God commissioned him and his fellow-servants to go and speak to them. How are 
we to explain this ? Reasons suggest themselves in connection with — 

I. The peofbet himself. 1. That his trust in God might not fail. Had the career 
of the guilty nation been cut short because God foresaw what the certain end would be, 
such certain foresight being impossible to any but God, the faith of his servants wo'-M 
have been severely strained. They had ever heard of God as the long-suffering God. 
They would have found it hard to believe that, if but more time had been given, and » 
longer ministry allowed, and the whole truth had been put before the people persever- 
ingly and earnestly, they would after all have remained unrepentant. The miserable 
paralysis of doubt as to the Divine equity would have fastened on them, and their 
power as his prophets would have thenceforth ceased. 2. That trust and love might be 
greatly increased. This could not but be when the prophet saw that the long-suffering 
of God was no mere word, but a reality, a reality greater than could have been con- 
ceived. What human authority would endure to be despised and set at nought as God 
endured that his should be? " Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity," 
etc. ? Such was once and again the adoring exclamation of those whb witnessed and 
marvelled at the all but infinite patience of God. And this too when all the while GK)d 
knew, as his prophet did not, that there was no hope. " We are saved by hope ; " but 
there it no such salvation for Ood. He goes on blessing and doing good to those whom 
he knows will turn upon him in defiance and black ingratitude to the last day of their 
hves. It is wonderful The Saviour went about doing good amongst a people whom 
he knew would crucify him. What an added conception of the Divine love does this 
fact give I Now that his servants the prophets might yet more know and rejoice in the 
God in whom they believed, God was and is long-suffering to those whom neverthe- 
less he is compelled to condemn. 3. The prophet's own spiritual improvement. Such 
labour, severe though it be, is not lost on him who engages in it. Was not " the 
Captain of our salvation made perfect through sufferings," and those of a kindred kind ? 
And for the discipline and development of the spiritual powers of his servants, to 
further in them that which is well pleasing in his sight, and for which process the 
unseen and eternal world will, in all probability, have constant thougii blessed employ, 
— for such reasons God keeps his servants in the world, and spares the world, guilty 
and ready for condemnation though it be. 

II. The witnesses and all thkt who should afterwards heab of hib jodq- 
MENTS ON THE GUILTY NATION. 1. The righteousness of God would be vindicated. All 
would see that it was not without cause God dealt with them as he did. 2. Sinners in 
all ages would be warned not to presume on the long-suffering of God. St. Paul say* 
of these ancient records, "All these things were written for our learning." 3, Sin 
would he seen to be exceeding sinful. Men are ready to attribute their sorrows to any 
and every cause but sin. But by thus branding sin with God's mark of sore displeasure, 
men would be better able to resist its attractions and overcome its power. 

IIL The unrepentant feoplis thismhelves. God having borne with them so long, 
now that at length his judgment had come, the remembrance of that long-suffering 
iroxHi : 1. Silence them. AH would feel that God was just when he spoke against 
\im flondeauied them. That Ps. li. and other penitential psalma 



OH. xxxn. 1— 44.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 6S 

bear many marks of having been adapted to, If not produced by, the sorrows of the Exile ; 
cf. too Ezra's^ confession and prayer. 2. Humble them. Jeremiah declares once and 
again that it is their " pride " which was causing them to persist in their evil ways (cf. 
oh. xiii. l'7). They had trusted in their national descent, on the possession of so many 
and so great privileges; cf. " The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, ... are 
these " (oh. vii.). As they realized their present misery they would see the worthless- 
ness of all those lying words in which they had so fondly trusted, and they would be 
bowed down with shame, as they now knew what their pride had brought upon them- 
selves and their children. " Humbled in the dust" would be the fitting description of 
them as they thought of the way in which they had despised the long-continued and 
loving warnings of God. 3. Convert them. For God intended that they should be 
restored ; he would bring them again, give them a heart to know him (cf. vers. 36 — 
44). And no means could be more adapted to subserve this end than those which 
God employed. Had they been cut off in their guilt, or had the Exile taken place 
much earlier, there could not have been the feeling which we know was aroused, and 
which was so salutary that they were without excuse. I'he wise physician knows that 
there are fit times and seasons for the successful administration of his medicines, 
and till such times all administration of those medicines would be of no avail. And 
so, until a right condition of mind was brought about in the exiled people, no real 
conversion could take place. They must be without excuse before they could be 
made to feel that they were so, and therefore a further reason why God bore with 
them so long, that this their utter iuexcusableness and their undeniable guilt might 
be the more deeply felt and more contritely and sincerely confessed. 4. Accomplish 
the number of his elect amongst them. For it is not to be thought that the prophet's 
ministry was utterly lost. The better part of the people were called out, educated, 
and prepared for the purifying discipline which awaited them by means of it. And 
It was that which brought the exiles back sadder but yet wiser men. And during 
the Exile the souls of the people were nurtured by the prophet's words which, during 
this prolonged ministry, he had spoken to them. That ministry was one proof out of 
so many more that God's Word shall not return to him void, although, in regard to 
immediate and much-desired effect, it may seem as if all were apparently lost. Now, 
all these considerations which apply to Jeremiah and his ministry and the long- 
suffering of God with Judah, apply with equal force to like long-suffering of God now — 
for God often repeats his mercies and judgments both — and happy shall we be if the 
gracious purposes of God in his forbearance are realized by us. — 0. 

Vers. 36 — 41. — The reflner'i fire. The better part of Judah were cRst as precions 
metal into a crucible by their being sent into exile at Babylon. And the effect was as 
that which results from such purifying process. Note — 

I. Without doubt theik exile tried them as fire. Fire is often the symbol of 
pain; and that there was indeed pain and sore distress in the exiles' lot is certain. 
Degradation, slavery, loss of their land, their high privileges as the people of God, in 
short, of their worldly all, had to be submitted to by them ; and they lived, where they 
were permitted tolive, at the mere caprice of a powerful, despotic, and merciless monarch. 
What that caprice could do, and often actually inflicted in the way of cruel tyranny 
and oppression, the books of the Bible which belong to the times of the Captivity, and 
the sculptures brought from those lands and now in the museums of this and other coun- 
tries, clearly reveal — ^the merciless slaughters and the horrible punishments, etc. And 
all this woe they had brought on others — as their children — who were entirely innocent 
of their parents' wrong. "The fathers had eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth 
were set on edge." And to add to their distress was the bitter reflection that they 
were designed to have filled a position so entirely different and better; that they were 
intended to be the first in the favour of God, but now had become last ; and all this by 
their own persistent, wilful wickedness, wickedness persisted in in spite of every kind 
of warning, protest, and entreaty that God could send them. Yes, it was as fire, as a 
fiiniace seven times heated. 

IL But it was nevertheless as a eefinbe's fire. It was to issue in their good. 
For it did not destroy them. They were to be brought out of all this woe. " I will 
bring them again " (ver. 37). And it should work them good by separating them from: 



6* THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEKBMlAH. L"^ xxxii. 1—44 



1. Their sins. They were torn away from the Bcenes, the people, the places, the manl- 
'fold circumstances, which were inseparahle from that idolatry into which they had m 
often fallen. 2. And from those who tempted them thereto. For that loose, evil 
multitude which were dealt with apparently less sternly than themselves at the fint, 
were the prompters and the peisuaders to that wickedness which had wrought them 
80 much harm. Those who were obnoxious and therefore, in ch. xxiv., compared to 
the figs which could not he eaten, were, though left awhile in the possession of their 
own land, at length destroyed. The corrupt and poisonous leaven was taken utterly 
•way, so that that which was sound and healthful or capable of becoming so might 
be preserved. The pure ore was separated from the base alloy, the worthless dross, by 
the action of this refiner's Ore. 

III. In proof of this, note : 1. God brought them back' to their own land. 2. They 
had given them " a heart to know " God. 3. And their after history proved this. For 
they were a noble people for generations afterwards. Of course, there were the less 
worthy amongst them ; but let their records be studied, their thrilling Maccabean history, 
for example, and it will be seen what a refining process that was through which they had 
been made — as was so necessary for them and for mankind at large, who were to be 
blessed by means of them — to pass. The absence of prophets and prophesyings, which 
is so marked a feature of the history written on that page which separates the Old 
Testament from the New, instead ot being a reproach to them, is rather a proof that 
their genera] national health was such that the sharp surgery, the stem ministry, of the 
prophetic order was not then needed as it had been, so deplorably. La former days. 

IV. What made the difference between them and the baser sort who were 
destroyed. It was the possession of tlie Spirit of GhxL The holy fire enkindled by 
him had been all but quenched, but not entireiy ; the dying embers could be made to 
glow mth radiant heat once again. But of that fire God has said, " It shall ever be 
burning on the altar, it shall never go out ; " and though they had all but smothered it 
beneath the heap of idolatrous superstitions and practices, and other evil compliances 
with wrong, it was burning still. And the exile across that wide desert to the plains ot 
Babylon let in again the air from heaven, and the fire burnt up once more. And that 
this might be, God dealt with them as he did, and as he ever does, blessed be his Name 1 
in like circumstances. 

Conclusion. Paul's question, therefore, comes to our mind as we study such history 
as this : " Have ye received the Holy Ghost?" Seek him ; tor he will baflBe the power 
of the destroyer, and, better still, if we will but follow his leading, he will keep us 
from ever needing to be cast into the crucible as these were, and from needing the 
refiner's fire. That would have been best ot all, but thank GxkI there is a second best. 
" Covet earnestly the best gifts."—©. 

Ver. 42. — The ratio of sorrow amdjoy. I. Teibk is such batio. Sorrow and joy 
are not flung down at hap-hazard into this world at the caprice of the Buler of all, and 
irrespective one of the other, only that for the mass of men the sorrow is far greater 
and more pervading than the joy. But the relations between these two it is the glory 
of Scripture and of the gospel especially to reveal. 

II. Scbiftitbe teaches it. Here in this verse ; ct. also Ps. xc, " Make us glad 
according to the days," etc. ; Job ii. 10, " Shall we receive good at the hand of God, 
and shall we not also receive evil ? " parable of Dives and Lazarus : " Thou in thy life- 
time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things ; but now he is com- 
forted, and thou art tormented " (Luke xvi.). 

III. Natube illubtbateb it. It is said that on the Scotch lakes the depth of the 
lake is almost always the same as the height of the surrounding hills. And is it not 
the same with the great depths of ocean and the lofty mouhtaius of the world ? They 
have long, long winter in the Northern climes, but when the light does come back, the 
day so stretches out that you can read by the light of the midnight sun. And if we look 
into the faces of men, those indices of the soul within, it will be found that the looks of 
sorrow and of joy are about equally distributed. Cbd is not a partial, unjust Father, 
petting one and neglecting others of his children. Sometimes we think so, but a larger 
survey will lead to truer thought. 

IV. It 18 A tbuth full of oomfobt. For it teaches : 1. That if sorrow h» mnt, toy it 



OH. xxxn. 1— 44.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 66 

not far <iff. " If I had been a little child among the Israelites, I think I should have 
known, when father set the bitter herbs upon the table, that the lamb was roasting 
somewhere, and would be set out too^' With bitter herbs shall ye eat it ' — and so if 
there be bitter herbs, the dainty dish is near " (Spurgeon). 2. That the two come from 
the same hand. If there be a designed proportion then, not two independent minds are 
at work, but one only ; ratio and proportion ever argue unity of mind. There is not an 
evil god who hurls sorrow upon men, and another a gracious God who sends only joy. 
That was the old Manicliasan heresy, which is not dead yet. But the truth is that 
there is a likeness, a proportion between the good which God sends upon his people and 
the eyil he has brought upon them. From one hand both come. Bat — 

V. The ratio is not equal toe the child or God. " Our light a£9iction, which 
is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." 
The proportion of the evil we suffer to the good we shall enjoy is not that of equals, 
but that of the very little to the infinitely great. 

VI. The belationship also is that of mothbe and child. Sorrow is the mother 
of joy. Cf. our Lord's own metaphor : " A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, 
because her hour is come : but as soon as she is delivered of the child she remembereth 
no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world." " Weeping may 
endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning." Cf. also above : " Our light aflSio- 
tion . . . worketh for us," etc., so that joy is begotten of sorrow. 

TIL BoT this can only be fob the child of God. Therefom^ 

" Help, Lord, that we may oome 
To thy saints' happy home. 
Where a thousand years 
As one day appears ; 

Nor go 
Where one day appears 
As a thonsandi years 

For woe I* 

a 

Vers. 6 — 16. — Jeremiah showing Ms faith by his works, Jeremiah, as a prophet ol 
Jehovah, had not only to utter warnings and predictions, but to show, on needful occa- 
sion, that he himself believed in them. He who would have others obey the Lord, 
must keep on persuading them to obedience by being prominent in obedience himself. 
Observe — 

I. How the Lobd fbefabeb Jebemiah aoainst a diffioitltt. Hanameel, we may 
take it, was coming in any case with this proposition of purchase, and, but for the Divine 
warning, might have come on the prophet unexpectedly, so that he would hardly know 
what to do. There may have been many considerations to perplex Jeremiah. But all 
perplexities were removed by a plain commandment. Moreover, Jeremiah was helped to 
come into an obedient and restful mood of mind by the very fact that the visit of his 
relative was foretold. He was made to feel that God's eye was on him — on his ways, 
his needs, his difficulties. Things he himself could not prepare for, God prepared for. 
Instead of the prophet having to ask, " Shall I buy or shall I not? " his way was made 
clear by a plain commandment. And surely we have here an indication how God ever 
watches over his true servants. We make difficulties greater than they otherwise 
would be by neglecting to ascertain whether there be not some clear expression of God'." 
will concerning them. 

II. The example herb given to ub of the obbdibnob of faith. Jeremiah, left to 
Mmself, might very well have said that this was no time either for buying or selling. 
The King of Babylon's army would soon have the whole country, and where then could 
be the worth of purchases and contracts ? Let us for a moment suppose there had 
been no Divine commandment at all, and that Jeremiah had been left to his own 
Judgment to decide on Hanameel's demand. If he had refused to buy, then there would 
not have been wanting those to exclaim that Jeremiah, so eloquent about the neglected 
duties of others, was shirking his own duties. On the other hand, if he had bought, 
then he would have been viewed with suspicion, as not really believing, after all, in the 
alienation of the land to Babyloo. And of course, actually buying as he did, no doubt 

jkbxmiah— n. » 



66 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxn. 1— 44. 

some sarcastic criticisms were made on his conduct. But then, through all, he was 
secure in the certainty that he was doing God's will. The transaction, however incon- 
sistent or ridiculous it might look to others, was really one of the most prudent and 
well-based that ever man engaged in. Jeremiah himsc'lf could not well see how things 
were going to come right again, but he trusted in the foresight and omnipotence ol 
Jehovah. — Y. 

Ver. 33. — Man's neglect of OocCs teaching. I. God'b attitude as a Tbachei 
TOWARDS MAN. God's Complaint is that man turns to him the back and not the face. 
Hence we are to understand that God turns his face to us, full of meaning and very 
earnestly. Consider that expression, " I will guide thee with mine eye." Of course all 
such expressions are purely anthropomorphic, but behind them there is the truth that, 
when God speaks to us, it is in the same way as we do when we are most earnest and 
concerned in speaking. We speak then in every feature. 

II. God's assiduity as a Tmachbr. Rising early and teaching them. The effort 
to make the people understand truth and duty is continuous and unremitting. Nothing 
was left undone that could be done, so far as the Teacher's side was concerned. Laws 
and symbols, great providences, great deliverances, great punitive visitations on other 
peoples, punishments of men like Eorah and Achan and Saul, chastisements like those 
of David, — thus Israelite-history abounded in lessons from God. Here is instruc- 
tion from the great Teacher to all teachers. God was ready to seize on every oppor- 
tunity to give a lesson, for opportunity is a great part ot success. And seeing that God 
is thus declared among his people as a great Teacher, we should look on the Old Testa- 
ment as a lesson-book, and study how far it may be useful to us. For though we have 
our own peculiar lesson-book in the New Testament, yet even the New Testament 
becomes clearer the better we understand the Old. 

III, Man's attitude as scholar towards God. His proper attitude is with the 
face, eyes looking on the Teacher, an expression oMnterest manifested, ready with the 
lip to ask further instruction and explanation. 

rV. TkB FAOBS of these people WEBB TURNED TO OTHER TEACHERS. The faCt is, 

man must ever be learning from somebody ; and Israel, with the back to God, had its 
face towards the priests of idolatry, the ministers of cruelty, and was obedient to all 
their worst instructions. Let every one who has truth to teach and heavenly light to 
give remember that he is a rival of those who teach falsehood, error, cruelty, vice, 
superstition. If he ia not successful in teaching the principles that liberate the spirit, 
then others will be successful in leading it into the worst of bondage. — Y. 

Vers, 36 — 41. — The bonds of abiding attachment to Ood. Jeremiah has seen the 
war prospect, and it is one of siege, captivity, and destruction. He speaks as one who 
has the long-tbreatened hour before his eyes (ver. 24). But God, looking from a higher 
point, sees the enduring bright result beyond. Observe in this passaue — 

I. God's thorough good will towards his people. His will is ever to show favour 
and do good to mankind. That will is always in action, but it can only be in mani- 
festation when men themselves, by their spirit of submission to God and obedience to 
his directions, make such a matiifestation possible. As he is thorough in his anger 
against the rebellious and idolatrous, so he is thorough in his favour towards the 
repentant. It is well that we should ever rtmemher this deep good will of God to 
men when things are going wrong with us. The fault of untoward experiences may be 
in U8 or it may be in others ; it cannot be in God. We must not put down to 
arbitrariness in him the painful workings of that law which manifests itself in sequence 
to human ignorance and folly. 

II. God's buffioibnt opportunity to do good to his peoplk. The confident tone 
that runs through this passage is most encouraging. Bad as the people have been, far 
as they have been driven, widely as they have been scattered, God can put all right 
again if only the people are willing to have it so. All God waits for is to hear the 
jffodigal nation say, " I will arise and go to my Father." If only we give God the 
opportunity, he will make us to abound in supplies for our necessities and blessedness. 
We let many opportunities slip for doing good, and never do we use any such oppor- 
tunity to the full. But God delights in the opportunities men give him, and here is an 



OH. xxxn. 1— 44.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 61 

illustration of how he presses forward to use them. " I will plant them in thiA land 
assuredly with my whole heart and with my whole soul." Only he willing to be a 
plant of God's own planting, and there is no reason why you should not feel the whole 
heart and soul of God going out for your highest good. 

III. God working towards thk itoity of his people. One is reminded of the 
unity proclaimed in Eph. iv. 3 — 6 : one God, one people, one heart, one way, one 
covenant because an everlasting one, one character for the future. This unity stands 
out in contrast to the previous scattering. The previous scattering was only an out- 
ward symbol of the scattering within. If even the people had continued in Jerusalem, 
that would have given them no unity save the unity of place, which is the most pre- 
carious, mocking, and delusive of all unities. But the new iinliy is that of one heart. As 
0E8 life flows through all the organs of the body, making the life of each the life of all 
and the life of all the life of each, so God will make it among his true people. God 
binds each to himself by the law written in the heart, and so all are bound to one 
another. 

IV. The everlasting covenant thus made possible. God has now found some- 
thing deep in the heart of his people whereby he can get an abiding hold. His 
covenant finds a firm anchorage in the regenerated inward man. With one heart and 
one way there is a starting-point for doing Diviiie good, not to one generation, but to 
many. How much good we may hinder by our spiritual blindness and indifference! 
And on the- other hand, what copious showers of blessing may be the result of a timely 
turning to God 1 — Y. 

Ver. 42. — SvU the measure of good. I. With beoard to certainty. Here is evil 
actually upon the city and country. Evil that has come, not in some inexplicable, 
unexpected way, but in correspondence with prophetic announcements, extending over 
a long time and frequently repeated. And now out of the very perceived certainty of 
this evil, God takes occasion to create ground of hope and encouragement for the people. 
He who without fail has sent chastisement for the disobedient will equally without fail 
keep all his promises to the obedient. It is the principle of sowing and reaping. The 
harvest will assuredly be according to the seed that is sown. We have the choice of 
alternatives, and only of alternatives. Either by our negligence we shall lay ourselves 
open to have God bring great evils upon us, or by our obedience and regard we shall 
receive all that great good which God promises to those who obey. 

n. With regard to agency. The emphasis of the verse is especially upon the 
agent. Those who fail to see that it is God who has brought all this great evil will 
fail to get much comfort from his most comprehensive and gracious promises. Behind 
the unseen inst ruments we must see the unseen Director and Controller. We must try to 
trace out the wrath of God in manifestation against the unrighteousness of men. As we 
trace the miseries that come from human selfishness and self-indulgence, we must learn 
to see God in them — God as well as man ; we must recognize righteous law as well as 
wicked folly. We are not to depend for the best things upon uncertain man, but upon 
God, with his unvarying love, his exhaustless power. 

III. With regard to extent. One would not wish for its own sake to measure 
the height, and depth, the breadth, and length, of human misery, but we have to do it 
to estimate its cause and bring about its cure. And always the peril is to look upon it 
superficially and hastily. Now, by this very superficiality and haste we miss a great 
source of gladness. For our estimate of possible good must have for one of its elements 
our experience of actual evil, A man must sink low if he would rise high. We do 
not mean, of course, that he must sink low by an exceptionally depraved and vicious 
life ; that would be to recommend what Paul denounces — sinning in order that grace may 
abound. We must sink low in our estimate of ourselves. We must see that, unless 
we also repent, a great evil will inevitably come upon us, whereas, if we are wisely 
obedient, we shall b« the recipients of a splendid good — • good which ever kM ill 
foremimen in the gradous promises of God. — ^Yi 



M 



THB BOOK OP THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxiii. 1— 2«, 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXXIIl. 



A ohbpter of promiees, having reference, 
first, to the people and kingdom in general 
(vers. 4 — 13), and then to the royal and 
priestly offices in particular (vers. 14 — 26). 
The first part is but the expansion of 
passages in the preceding prophecy, to 
which this chapter is attached by the 
opening verse. The remaining portion ia 
less closely connected; it is occupied by 
promises of the perpetual duration of the 
house of David and of the Levites. It 
should be noticed by the student that there 
are diflScaltiei connected with the author- 
ship of vers. 14, 26 (see below). 

Ver. 1. — In the court of the prison ; Mther, 
of the guard (ch. xsxii. 2). 

Ver. 2.— Thus saith the lord, the Uaker 
thereof, etc. ; rather, Thus taith Jehovah, uho 
doeth it, Jehovah who frameth it that he may 
ettdblish it, whose name it Jehovah. It was 
needless to express the object of the verbs. 
Jehovah's great purpose is the regeneration 
of his people. To " frame " or " form " if 
synonymous with " purpose " (see on ch. 
xviii. 11). The meaning of the verse is that 
Jehovah's very Name is a pledge of his 
fidelity to his promises (comp. ch. xxxii. 18). 
To " establish " is synonymous with to 
carry out." 

Ver. 3. — Mighty things; rather, secret 
things (literally, inaccessible). It must be 
admitted that this introduction hardly oor- 
responds to the sequel, which does not 
contain any special secrets, as we should 
have thought. Either vers. 2, 3 have been 
inserted by a later (inspired) editor, whose 
mind was absorbed in high thoughts of the 
latter days — for this view may be urged 
the style and phraseology, which are hardly 
those of the surrounding chapters, liardly 
those of Jeremiah ; or else we must adopt 
Hengstenberg's perhaps over-subtle sug- 
gestion, which, however, does not touch 
the question of the phraseology, "that 
throughout Scripture dead knowledge ii 
not regarded as knowledge ; that the hope 
of restoration had, in the natural man, in 
the prophet, as well as in all believers, an 
enemy who strove to darken and extinguish 
it; that therefore it was ever new," or, in 
the words of Jeremiah, "great and secret 
things, which thou knowest not." 

Vei». 4^9.— The houses of Jerusalem, 
destroyed by the engines of the besitgers or 
filled with d«ad bodies, shall be restored; 



the captives shall be brought back; their 
sins shall be forgiven, and God be glorified. 

Ver. 4 — By the mounts, and by the sword ; 
rather, because of the mounds (aee on eh. 
X xxii. 24) and because of the weapons of war 
The latter are the warlike instruments used 
by tlie besiegers from their batteries or 
breastworks. 

Ver. 5. — They oome to fight with the Chal- 
deans, but it is, etc. The passage is obscure, 
so obscure that we cannot avoid inferring 
that it is corrupt. "They come" could 
only refer to the Jews, but these would 
rather be said to "go out;" the Hebrew 
writers are particular in distinguishing 
between to "oome" and to "go out." 
Besides, there is no gi ammatical connection 
with the preceding verse. The Septuagint 
omits "they come," but the passage still 
remains enigmatical. 

Ver. 6.— I will bring it health and cure, 
eto._ "Health" is properly the fresh skin 
which grows over a healing wound (as oh. 
viii. 22 ; xxx. 17). First the city is spoken of; 
then its inhabitants. Will reveal unto them ; 
or perhaps, will roll unto them (comp. ch. xi. 
20 ; IX. 12). In this case the figure will be 
that of a mighty stream (comp. Amos v. 24; 
Isa. xlviii. 18; Ixvi. 12). Truth; rather, 
continuance (comp. ch. liv. 13). 

Ver. 7. — I will cause the captivity ... to 
return (see on oh. ixii. 14). Will build 
them (see on ch. xxxi. 14). 

Ver. 8. — I will cleanse them, etc. Bestored 
prosperity without spiritual purification 
would be of no avail ; how could it give 
happiness (comp. ch. xxxi. 34)? 

Ver. 9.— And it shall be ; vi«. Jerusalem. 
A name of joy ; rather, on the analogy of 
Isa. Iv. 13, etc., a monument of joy ; i.e. joy- 
giving. They shall fear and tremble. As 
feeling the contrast between tlieir •' unprofit- 
able" idol-gods and the faithful God of 
Israel. 

Ver. 10.— In this place; i.e. «in this 
land," as in ch. vii. 7 and elsewhere. Shall 
be desolate ; rather, is desolate. 

Ver. 11. — The sacrifloe of praise (see on 
ch. xvii. 26). 

Ver. 12. — An habitation ; rather, a pasture 
(including the idea of an encampment). The 
oxpreseion reminds us of ch. xxiii. 3, 4, but 
it is preferable to take the present passage 
in its literal sense rather than •■ meta- 
phorical. 

Ver. 13.— In the eltiei, eto. A parallel 
description to ch. xvii. 26 ; xxxii. 44. The 
vale; rather, the lowland (about the Medi- 
terranean, on the south). The south. It is 
the Negeb, or south country, which is meant 



oa. XXxm. 1— 26.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEKEMIAH. 



TTndei the hands; rather, at the beek. Of 
him that telleth them. Comp. Milton, 
•L'Allegro'— 

" And every sheplierd tells his tale 
Under the hawthorn in the dale." 

Virgil, 'Eel.,' iii. 34— 

" Bisque die nnmerant ambo pecus, alter et 
hsedoB." 

Vera. 14 — 26. — These verses are omitted 
in the Septuagint, and some leadiDg critics 
think that bo'h the stvle and the cuntents 
point to a dlflerent author from our prophet. 
In particular it is urged that the promise of 
a multitude of Levltes and of descendants 
of David is isolated among the prophecies of 
Jeremiah, who elsewhere speaks of a single 
great representative of David as tlie object 
of pious hope, and of the intercourse between 
Jehovah and his people as being closer and 
more immediate than under the old Law. 
A variation in the form of expressing the 
Messianic hope is, however, not of much 
importance. Isaiah, for instance, sometimes 
refers to a single ideal king (ix. 6, etc.); 
sometimes to a succession of noble, God- 
fearing kings (xxxii. 1 ; xxxiii. 17). 

Ver. 14. — That good thing which I have 
promised; viz. in the parallel passage, oh. 
ixiii. 5, 6 (which see). 

Ver. 15. — The Branch of righteonsnesB ; 
rather, the Plant of rightemune$s (see on eh. 
zxiiL 5). 

Ver. 16. — ^Wherewith she shall be called ; 
viz. Jerusalem ; in ch. xxiii. 6, the parallel 
passage, the subject is "Israel," unless 
there is a corruption of the text. The Lord 
our righteousness ; rather, The Lord (is) our 
righteousnese. 

Ver. 17.— David shall never want a man, 
etc. This is, in fact, a republication of 
the promise given by Nathan in 2 Sam. 
vii. 12 — 16. It agrees in form with the 
announcements in 1 Kings ii. 4; viii. 25; 
ix. 5. 

Ver. 18. — Neither shall the priests the 
Levites, etc. It has been thought that this 
passage is inconsistent with the prophecies 
of a time when the ark sliould no more be 
remembered (oh. iii. 16), and when all should 
know Jehovah from the least to the greiitest 
(ch. xxxi. 34). But though sin offerings 
would in this glorious time become things 
of the past, yet thank oflerings are expressly 
excepted from abolition (ver. 11), and 



in ch. xzxi. 14 a special latter-day promise 
is given to the priests. Moreover, Ezekiel, 
who repeats the prophecy of the new spiritual 
covenant (xi. 19; xxxvi. 26; xxxvii. 26), 
gives an elaborate sketch of a new temple 
with a saoriScial system (ch. xl., etc.) ; and, 
if there is any inconsistency, we find the 
same one in the latter part of Isaiah. In 
Isa. Ixi. 6 the whole regenerate people ol' 
Israel is called " the priests of Jehovah ; " 
but in Isa. Ixvi. 21 the prophet distinctly 
states that there will be, in some sense, a 
priestly class within the chosen people. 

Vers. 20 — 22. — The constant, regular suc- 
cession of day and night is an emblem of 
the equally regular supply of royal descend- 
ants of David and of Levitical priests, and 
the countless grains of sand are symbolic of 
the wonderful increase of their numbers. 
At first sight the latter part of the promise 
seems a little unlike a blessing. Bat wo 
have seen already (on ch. xix. 3) that the 
members of the various branches of the 
royal family probably occupied the princi- 
pal offices of the state, and the prophet 
imagines the future in form^ borrowed from 
the present. A numerous sacerdotal class 
seemed equally necessary for the due mag- 
nificence of the ritual; and we must 
remember that preternatural fertility of 
the soil was a standing element of Mes- 
sianic descriptions. The expressions used 
are, no doubt, hyperbolical, but the 
meaning seems clear enough. (Hengsten- 
berg's notion, that the prophet rather indi- 
cates the abolition of the royal and sacerdotal 
distinctions (comp. Exod. xix. 6), is surely 
very far-fetched.) 

Vers. 23 — 26. — The permanence of Israel 
as the people of Ood, with rulers of the 
house of David. 

Ver. 24. — This people ; «.«. not Egyptians 
or Babylonians (as some have supposed), 
but the people of Judah, regarded as alien- 
ated from Jehovah (hence the tonch of 
disparagement), as el^ewbere in Jeremiah 
(ch. iv. 10, 11; V. 14, 23; vi. 19; vii. 33, 
etc.). There were unworthy Jews, who, 
seeing their nation fallen from its high 
estate, despaired of its deliverance and 
regeneration. That they should be no more, 
etc. ; rather, to that they are no more a 
people — no more an independent people. 
Tlie "two families," of course, are the 
"two houses of Israel" (Isa. viii. 14), t.«. 
the two kingdoms of Israel and Judah. 



H0M1LBTI08. 

Yen. 1— ^. — An invitation to prayer. I. The circumstahcbs of thb nrnxATioii. 
(Ver. 1.) 1. It was to Jeremiah; i.e. (1) to a good man. All men may pray, but it 
is " the supplication of a righteous man that availeth much in its working " (Jas. v. 
16) ; and (2) a prophet Therefore a prophet needs to pray. No man knows so much 



7* THE BOOK OP TflE PROPHET JEBBMlAfl. [oh. xxxra. 1— 26, 

or is 80 far ailvaiiced spiritually as to be able to dispense with prayer. Christ prayed. 

2. The invitation came to Jeremiah in prison. Stone walls cannot shut out God from 
us, nor prevent our souls from rising in prayer to him. The persecutor cannot rob his 
victim of his choicest jewel. Qod often visits the soul in scenes of earthly distress. 

3. The invitation came a second time. God repeatedly visits his troubled children. The 
prayer of yesterday will not make that of to-day needless. 4. The invitation to prayer 
did not bring deliverance from trouble. Though God visited Jeremiah in prison once 
and again, the prophet still remained there. We have no right to think that when God 
visits us for good he will remove our earthly trouble ; he may find it better to bless us 
in it. Therefore, on the other hand, the continuance of the trouble is no evidence that 
we are deserted by God — ^perhaps the reverse, because "whom the Lord loveth he 
chasteneth." 

II. Thb obounds op the invitation. (Ver. 2.) God gives to Jeremiah good 
grounds for assurance in prayer before inviting him to pray. We cannot pray to an 
unknown God with intelligence and earnestness. To pray with faith we must have 
grounds of confidence. These are offered to the propliet in the manifestation of the 
nature of God in his works, and the revelation of his higher character in the sacred 
Name, Jehovah. 1. The manifestation of God in his works. (1) He is the Maker of 
all things ; therefore he has power to make all right again. (2) He established the 
world ; therefore there is a permanence in the law, and will, and procedure of God, 
which no passing accidents can set aside. 2. The revelation of his higher Name, 
" Jehovah ; " " The Lord in his Name." This revelation not only suggests the self- 
existent and eternal supremacy of God, so infinitely superior to all those evil powers of 
life feared by us timid mortals ; it is also associated with the willingness of God to 
save, since it was revealed in connection with the deliverance from Egypt (Exod. iii, 
14), it may well be quoted in anticipation of the deliverance from Babylon. 

III. The ohabacteb of the invitation. (Ver. 3.) 1. God invites to prayer. 
Therefore (1) we may have good assurance that he will hear prajer; and (2) neverthe- 
less, we are reminded that, though he is favourably disposed to us, he waits to bless ug 
until we " call unto " him. 2. God promises a revelation in response to prayer. Here 
is an encouragement that the prayer will not be fruitless. The Bible does not represent 
prayer as a mere subjective exercise; it treats it as a power prevailing with God, 
securing from him blessings asked. We have here a special encouragement for the 
perplexed to pray for light. Mysteries are not necessarily eternally hidden. Some 
once hidden have been revealed (fi.g. Col. i. 26); others may yet be made more clear. 
The seeker after truth should be a man of prayer. The deepest spiritual truth is not 
discoverable by speculation ; it is revealed in communion. It is seen through spiritual 
thought and sympathy with God, aided by his Spirit's inspiration. 

Ver. —(See on oh. xxx. 17.) 

Ver. 8. — Forgiveness and cleansing. I. Foroivenebs and oleansino must be closely 
ASSOCIATED. When God pardons he also cleanses. The first justification that treats 
as righteous by forgi eness is the seed of the second justification that makes righteous 
It is often noted that it would be neither just in God nor wholesome for us that sm 
should be pardoned without the creation of a clean heart. But we should observe 
further that it would no even be possible for this to happen. For the essence of 
forgiveness is reconciliation, not a mere remission of penalties. Even if these are 
remitted, while personal enmity is cherished there can be no forgiving. To forgive is 
to efiect a mutual reconciliation after alienation through wrong-doing on one side, by 
concession on the other. The very act of reconciliation implies such a change in the 
person forgiven as involves the cessation of all opposition on his side. Now, in the root 
of it sin is just departure from QoA, and its ripe fruit is enmity to God. Forgiveness 
must, therefore, by its very nature, imply a cleansing from this sin. * 

II. God fbomises febfect oleanbino and fobqiveness. 1. This is given hy Ood, 
He only can forgive, since it is against him that we have sinned. He only can cleanse, 
since only the Creator can create anew. 2. This is given through Christ. Hints of th« 
means only appear in the Old Testament. The gospel revelation brings it more clearly 
befoM us (1 Pet. ii. 24), In the sight of the cross we see the great assurance of deliver- 



OH. xxxin. 1—26.] THE BOOK- OP THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH. Tl 

ance from sin in the revelation of the means by which this is brought about. Since 
Christ has died for our sins we have pjood reason to ask for forgiveness and cleansing. 
3. The promised cleansing and forgiveness are perfect ; i.e. (1) from all sins — none can 
be too black for the "Lord of all flesh" to overcome, for "is there anything too hard 
for him " ? and (2) a complete deliverance — a forgiveness that forgets and bears no 
grudge, a cleansing that leaves no stain and produces a regeneration of life. 

in. Perfect fobgiveness and oleaksino abb to be keceived through rbpbnt- 
ANOE AKD FAITH. 1. As God accomplishes the perfect deliverance from sin, it is 
foolish for us to begin a .small and imperfect and certainly futile cleansing on our own 
account. But we must desire the justification and the pardon, else it is unreasonable 
to expect God to bestow them. This' desire, real and active, is repentance. 2. Then 
must follow /a»</i. It is not necessary for us to understand the rationale of the atone- 
ment in order to profit liy the fruits of it. But it is necessary to trust in the Saviour. 
Faith is a very different thing from an intellectual comprehension and conviction of 
a complex set of doctrines. It is a personal trust. This trust is an essential condition 
of cleansing and forgiveness. Till we yield ourselves to the influence of God's grace, 
and trust to his love, we cannot expect him to deliver us, 

Ver. 9. — The Church an honour to God. What is here promised to the Jews finds its 
fulfilment, not in the Jews alone, nor in them at all until they submit to the Christian 
influences of thiTnew covenant, but in all the spiritual Israel — in the Church of Christ. 

I. Consider the pact that the Church is an honoub to God. It is described 
as a " monument of joy " because God takes delight in it (oh. xxxii. 41), and as 
" a praise and an honour " because by means of it God's glory is manifested abroad. 
This, in turn, is an honour to the Church. Though God picks his fallen children up 
from the mire of sin he does not leave them in shame and degradation. The prodigal 
is stripped of his rags and clothed with the best robe. God regards his Church, even 
here, with the stains of war and toil and sin upon her, as capable of manifesting forth 
his glory. What greater mission could she have ? 

II. Inquire into the souroeb of this honoub. How comes it that the Church 
is an honour to God ? Her own excellences can scarcely be considered as glorious in 
themselves. It is not in the inherent worth of these that we find the secret of the 
glory given by the Church to God. The Church is formed by God, redeemed by his 
mercy, delivered by his power, maintained by his help. Her very existence is a 
witness to God's forgiving and restoring grace. All that she does for good is not accom- 
plished by her own might, but through the inspiration of his Spirit. The picture is 
an honour to the painter because it is 'the fruit of his well-directed labour. We do 
not admire it only for its simple beauty. If it is a representation of the humblest scene 
in nature, the reality must be infinitely more beautiful than the picture ; yet we give 
great admiration to the work of art because it is a work and because it reveals art. 
So the Church is an honour to God as the fruit of his work and of Christ's sacrifice. 

III. Note the effects op this honour. 1. It is to impress the world. The 
Jews were a standing witness of the power and goodness of God to the neighbouring 
nations. The Church of Christ is called to a similar mission on a world-wide scale. 
The very existence of the Church as the ark upon the waters preserved and blessed by 
God is one of the greatest means of making known the grace and glory of redemption. 
More eloquent than any words is the silent testimony of the good and peaceful lives of 
godly men. 2. Therefore a great responsibility rests upon all Christians. God entrusts 
his honoui to his Church. If, therefore, she can glorify him, she has also the power to 
bring disnonour on his Name. The " good soldier of Jesus Christ " is an honour to his 
Captain ; but the sluggard, the coward, and the traitor are a discredit to his high name, 
tnd their faithlessness does something to smirch the beauty of the banner of redemption. 

Vers. 10 — 13. — Tovm and country life. In describing the happy future of Israel 
»fter the restoration Jeremiah draws a pair of idyllic pictures of town and country life. 
Both the city of Jerusalem and the outlying regions were so depopulated and wasted 
by the Chaldean invasion that it was difficult to believe the sun of prosperity would 
ever shine on them again. But undtr the providence of God there is a wonderful 
recuperative power in the human world as well as in the naturaL It is remarkabk 



72 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [0=- x^"i- 1—26 

how soon the battle-field with its hideous relics becomes a flowery meadow. The 
rapid revival of the French nation afier the war of 1870 was an astonishment to Europe. 
This may be accounted for partly on natural principles, since war rarely touches the 
permanent resources of a country ; if it drains the stream, it does not stanch the fountain- 
head. The capital of a country is always being consumed and remade in peaceful 
times, so that the destruction of it in war is not so great a calamity as might appear at 
first sight. But a true revival of prosperity depends on higher causes. A nation is 
only really prosperous when its peo{ile are advancing in moral tone, when there is a 
Divine root to their recovery. This is implied in the description of restored IsraeL 
Let us consider the two pictures of the restoration. 

I. Town life. In the happy city described by Jeremiah there is a repopulation ol 
the deserted streets. What a melancholy sight is a city in ruins, silent and solitary 1 
The very suggestion of life and bustle increases the gloom of the unnatural stillness that 
haunts tlio place. The first step towards restoration is to bring baoli the inhabitants. 
The strength of a nation resides ultimately in its population. No empire has yet been 
ruined through over-population; many, firem Rome downwards, by the decay ot 
population. There was a great economic truth in the Hebrew estimate of the value 
of a thickly inhabited country. In the city we see this concentrated. That is a human 
world in itself. If man is a social being, if co-operation and sympathy are good things, 
there we may look for true advancing prosperity. But the congregation of human 
beings in a city aggravates the evils of life when these are not restrained. In the city 
disease, misery, vice, and crime find their victims. The saddest sight in modern 
civilization (?) ii the wretched condition of the back slums of the greatest cities ol 
Europe, and the moral state of too much of the re mainder. Men do not find prosperity 
and happiness by merely crowding together. In Jeremiah's picture of the new Jeru- 
salem there is no room for those ugly scenes that Victor Hugo and Dickens make 
&miliar in their representations of Paris and London. There is joy. There is worship. 
There is sacrifice and devotion to God. When the temple is the true centre of the 
city, when religion presides over her commerce and her pleasure, then, and then only, 
can true happiness be enjoyed by the citizens. 

II. CotTNTRY LiFB. Jeremiah paints a companion picture ol country life with 
skilful adaptation of parallels and contrasts. Tlie sceue is pastoral. Prosperity is 
witnessed in quiet industry and growing wealtn of flocks and herds. Such a life is no 
more idle than that of the city — often less so, and it is more calm. The stimulus 
of competition and the aid of co-operation are lost, but the reflections of solitude are 
gained ; communion with nature takes the place of communion with man. This may be 
an ideal state of happiness to him who knows how to enjoy it. Both forms of life will 
be blessed when rightly followed; neither when abused. Dr. Johnson showed bis 
wisdom in appreciating the merits of town life, but Cowper had good reasons for 
preferring the country. Country life has its vices, its ignorance, narrowness, and 
brutality, its poverty and lonely distresses. This also needs a higher life to keep it 
pure and happy. The Christian may find good in whichever condition hia lot ia cast, 
since God can bless both to him. 

Ver. 15. — " The Branch of righteousness,^ If these words were intended by the prophet 
to refer to a succession of kings the promise they contain is nevertheless fulfilled in 
one, and one only, Jesus Christ. The glory of redeemed Israel is to find its consum- 
mation in the restoration of the throne of David with righteous government. The true 
glory of redemption is seen in the righteous rule of Christ. Much of what is taught 
here ia similar to the suggestions of a former passage (ch. xxiiL 6). But the versa 
before ns has also some lessons of its own, viz. — 

I. Chbist 18 A Bbanob (ob Sfbout) of biohteoubness. He ii of the stock of 
David, preserving the tradition and inheriting the rights of the royal family But he 
ia ikr above the old kings in character as well as in nature. Jeremiah repeatedly 
insisted on a fact that is only too apparent in the historical books of the Old Testament 
— the fact that the ruin of Israel was largely due to the bad conduct of her kings. Christ 
is tha one perfectly righteous King. This righteousness of Christ is of great significance, 
1 It iecures and justifies his position. There is no reason to depose him as there was 
to denoae mtaj of tha ancient kings. 2. It give* kim great claima Sm bonour aiad 



aa. CKiii. 1— 26.] THE BOOK Of THfi PROPHET JE&EMlAH. U 

obedience from his subjects. Sucli a king deserves loyal service. 3. It gives worth 
to his sacrifice. Clirist is a Priest as well as a King — the Melchitiedec of the New 
Testament. When he intercedes for the world, and so redeems to himself " a people 
of acquisition" (1 Pet. ii. 9), his righteousness affords weight to his jileadiug. 4. It 
malies his example to be of supreme authority. As the righteous King he is the type 
of what the righteous subject should be. A further inference, drawn by the prophet 
himself, is worth more extended notice. 

IL Chbibt maintains a bightboub aovBENMENT. Under • personal rule the 
sharacter of the administration is an exact reflex of the character of the monarch. We 
■ee in the history of the Jews how bad conduct in the kings meant iniquitous treatment 
of the subjects. Christ, the righteous King, will necessarily rule rigliteously. From 
this fact certain important consequences flow. 1. Negatively, Christ will abolish the 
njustice under which many of his people suffer. It may be necessary that the process 
jhall be slow. But it must be accomplished in the golden future. Meanwhile it is a 
consolation for the wronged to feel that even now they are not unfairly dealt with by 
their great Master ; and surely to the Christian Christ's behaviour should be far more 
important than anything the world may do. 2. Positively, Christ will maintain the 
right, and effectually rebuke the wrong within his kingdom ; he is a King as well as a 
Saviour, and a righteous King executing judgment. Mild and gentle, he is yet holy and 
firm. The Christian who would enjoy the favour of his Master must win his approval 
by loyal obedience and pure living. Christ is no lax and careless Monarch. It would 
be ill for bis Church if he were so. 3. Christ will lead his people into righteousness. 
He rules in righteousness, not only to execute justice, but to make his people righteous. 
This is the highest idea of righteous government. How do we stand in relation to this 
righteous kingship of Christ ? Are we submitting to it for our own improvement and 
his glory ? Are we ignoring, or resisting, or dishonouring it only to bring a judgment 
from the righteous Gfod upon our heads? Let the careless remnmber that the Saviour 
i« a King and a Judge. 

Ter. 16.— (See on ch. xxliL «J| 

Vers. 19 — ^26. — Nature'$ aids to faith. We see faith and science flung into conflict. 
In the Bible they not only harmonize, but science is regarded as a stay to faith, and 
nature, instead of being treated as a hindrance to faith, is repeatedly called in to 
strengthen it. As science advances old formulas are necessarily discarded. But may 
we not approach the difficulties of our age in the spirit of the Bible, and hope for some 
large synthesis which shall restore the old relation of science as the handmaid of 
religion ? In the mean time the general correspondences suggested by Jeremiah are as 
true now as they were in his day. 

L The permanence of nature ib ah absttranoe of thb febhankkob of oraoe. 
The same God rules in the physical and spiritual spheres. In the one he is not 
capricious and uncertain. Why should we fear his being so in the other? Night, 
tempest, winter — things dark and wild — do not set aside the eternal ordinances of 
beneficent nature. The blue sky survives the black cloud that hides it for a season 
only to reveal it the more clearly after shedding itself in thunder-showers. Why, then, 
should we think that the heavenly grace of God's love should be less enduring ? If the 
ordinances of nature fail we may expect the same of the covenant of grace, but not till 
then, since both depend on the same Divine endurance. 

IL Thb successions of nature are pledges of the buccessionb of obaoe. 
Nature is ever changing, though changing according to uniform laws. In spiritual 
experience we meet with change. Neither of God's kingdoms is a Chinese empire. 
Progress marks both ; and progress means change. But the change, though it alters 
events, does not alter principl es ; it only develo]:* t li em to fuller exercise. Do th e changes 
of life make us fear the loss of God's blessing ? Let us remember that the changes in 
nature do not upset its laws. Our experience varies, but God's love is changeless. He 
shows this love, however, rather by a succession of blessings than by maintaiuiug present 
blessings unaltered. So is it in nature — day and night, summer and winter, alternate. 
To-day's grace will not last for to-morrow ; but new grace will be bestowed then if «• 
•eek it. The succession does not fail in nature, nor will it in gracet 



1i ME BOOK OP ME PEOPSET jEREMlAfl. loS- Xiini. 1— 26. 

III. Tmt ABDiTDAirox of hatubb is a fbojiise of thb abundance of OB ace. 
We cannot count the stars. Can we count the contents of our own world ? ol one 
small section of it? The great and multitudinous variety of nature was a wonder 
to the ancient Hebrews. How much more wonderful is it to us! There we see no 
failing of resources,, but an infinite abundance, an almost rtckless prodigality that 
sometimes shocks our economic notions, fouude.i as they are ou ihe requirements ol 
limited means, but not applicable to an infinite wealth. Why then should we fear 
that the lountains of grace that flow from the same God should ever run dry ? God 
administers his grace with a royal bounty. There is enough for all ; there is abundance 
for each. 

HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTHORS. 
Ver. 1. — (Of. ch. xxxii. 1 — 5.) — M. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — Bevelation of Qod's purpose to him who perfomw his will. Jeremiah 
had resolutely witnessed to the truth, and now he was confined in the king's prison in 
order to his being silenced. But so far from the Divine comraunicaiions being less 
frequent, they were more so, and, if possible, more weighty and important. The word 
of the Lord came to him the second time (ver. 1), and a gracious revelation of Gkid's 
power and willingness to bless. 

I. God is with those who buffeb fob his bake. It was a token of his love 
that Jeremiah should receive this assurance, and one which he was most certain to 
appreciate. Prisoners and martyrs for conscience' sake in all ages of the Church have 
been similarly consoled. There are special and peculiar consolations for persons so 
situated. God is nearer then than at other times. His promises are greater and brighter, 
and his presence more felt. Who would not suffer thus to be thus comforted ? 

II. God requests ub to abe of him thb things we most desibe. Not that there 
are not circumstances of such a character as to call forth spontaneous proofs of his 
favour and love. Bat seeking and asking are exercises of faith, which cannot long 
be dispensed with in our intercourse with our heavenly Father, even although " he 
knoweth what things we have need ■ if before we ask him " (l^Iatt. vi. 8). And this 
because : 1. The exercises of the soui in prayer and faith are greater benefits in them- 
selves than most things that are to be procured through them. 2. SucA exercises are a 
preparation of the soul for heavenly gifts and communications, and keep it in readiness 
for them. 3. They are pleasing to God, and gratify his love. The answer is certain, 
and, indeed, waiting ; but he lores to lie asked. There is no more endearing position 
in the sight of God than that of prayer. 

IIL Those who faithfully obey God's will will lbabn bomethino of his pur- 
pobb. Gevelations of surpassing magnitude await the prophet in the darkness of his 
prison-house. He did not hesitate to proclaim God's will, and to submit to the con- 
sequences of so doing ; he is to receive his reward in further disclosures. And these are 
of the most gracious and consolatory description. But apart from this, the mere com- 
munication of the Divine purpose to him was a sign of favour and honour ; his truest 
satisfaction and peace were to be found in hearing God's voice, and being considered 
worthy to share the secrets of the Divine future. Man is steward of the present ; Goil 
retains his hold upon the future, and only discloses it for the reward of laithfiil men, 
and for great and merciful ends. 1. Great things, in their scope, character, ancl 
influences as belonging to salvation. 2. Secret things (Authorized Version renders this 
word " mighty "). >]ot belonging to ordinary experience, but to God's counseL — ^M. 

Yerik 16, 16.— {Vide on oh. xxiii. 6, 6.)— IL 

Vers. 17, 18. — Perpetuation of the kingly and priestly stock. L Tmt sionifioancb 
OF these offices. To single out these two offices from the others existing within the 
Jewish nation is to emphasize their importance. They are thereby recognized as tbs 
pillars of the theocratic constitution. 1. The king. The grandest unit of human 
society. Evidently no accidental office, but an ordained and significant one. The 
king, ai representative of God, was the supreme authority of the stete. As the chosen 



~ii. XXxin. 1—26.] tHE BOOK OF THE tROPHET jEREMIAfl. IS 

of God, or as legitimately descended from such a one, he ruled by Divine right. He 
was the centre of patriotic attachment, and the autlioritative emhodiment and enforcer 
of Divine righteousness — at least that was the ideal. Hdw few of the princes of the 
Davidio succession realized this the history of Judah can witness. But it was ever held 
before the people as a sacred promise that a " king should reign in righteousness." 
2. The priest. The covenant of priesthood was a covenant of peace (Numb. xxv. 12), 
of life and peace (Mai. ii. 5). It was the mediatorial or reconciling element in the con- 
stitution — that through which the nation in its individual (itizens, and as a whole, 
was related acceptably with God, and made partaker of his righteousness. The conse- 
cration of the priesthood in a mediate sense sanctified the people ; and in the continued 
existence of the priesthood a guarantee was afforded of the favour of God and the 
permanence of Israel's mission as the righteous servant of God. 

II. How THE PKOMisB WAS FULFiiXED. What Is actually predicted concerning the 
Davidic and Levitical succession is that it will never be quite cut off; it will never 
happen that there is wanting any one in whom the house may be perpetuated. In the 
Captivity such a gap took place: Jeconiah was written childless. But it was never 
to occur again. Now, how are we to unrlerstand this promise? In its literal sense 
it was only approximately fulfilled; spiritually and figuratively the fulfilment was 
complete : 1. In our Lord Jesus Christ. Of the house of David after the flesh, he is 
eternal King and Lord of the spiritual Israel. He is also "a Priest for ever after the 
order of Melchisedeo." As the great High Priest of mankind, he appears before God 
" making continual intercession " (Heb. viii. 3). 2. Christians, too, realize the. ideal here 
presented. Through the atoning work of Christ they are made " kings and priests," a 
"royal priesthood" (1 Pet. ii. 5—8). The identification of the Lord with his servant 
dignifies and ennobles the latter, making him a new centre of spiritual dominion and of 
intercessory and reconciling influence. " If we suffer [endure] we shall also reign with 
him" (2 Tim. ii. 12) is a promise which looks forward to the completion of the Messi- 
anic kingdom. The Levitical priesthood, too, is lost and absorbed in the priestly 
character of Christ and his people. — M. 

Vers. 19 — 22. — The covenant of Ood permanent as the laws of nature. A curious 
inversion of Gen. viii. 22, but very instructive. There, what is considered by the 
secular mind as secured by the laws of matter ojierating mechanically, is declared as a 
promise, and consequently as dependent upon the good will and gracious purpose of 
God ; here, what appears at first to be within the power of one or both parties to it, is 
stated to be as absolute and permanent as if it were not a moral engagement but a 
material law. Accepting, as in vers. 17 and 18, the Messianic as the true fulfilment of 
this prediction, what do we learn ? 

I. The intrinsic poweb of God's Word. The creative fiat was omnipotent ; the 
promise is to be not less so. It is as if a power dwelt within it to bjing to pass what it 
declares. Of course this is not so in the one case any more than in the other. God is in 
his Word, making it effectual even to its remotest end. We are reminded of Christ's 
utterance, •' Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away," 
which seems to make an even stronger assertion. Equally potent is the Word of God 
in the gospel, its warnings, invitations, and transforming energies. 

U. The absolute, eternal significance of the person and work of Christ. 
The human element in the Divine covenant relation has ever been the variable and 
uncertain one. But through the unique personality of the God-Man, and of his atoning 
sacrifice, that element is strengthened and made secure. An incarnation like that of 
Emmanuel, an act like the death on the cross, once achieved is irreversible, and its 
consequences must affect the remotest eternity. The spiritual laws comprehended and 
illustrated in the tran.sactiuns of the gospel are as irreversible as those of nature ; and 
in the person and work of Christ there is an objective basis presented that can never 
be destroyed by the weaknesses or unbelief of men, any more than "my covenant of the 
day, and my covenant of the night." 

IIL The spiritual xnfluenoe of the new covenant. (Ver. 22.) It is really » 
creative word, because it calls into existence the 'Church or community of believers, 
who are the true successors of the seed of David and the Levitical priesthood. In its 
constant triumphs and the ever-increasing nature of the Metwianis kingdov.; 



9t THB BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxzin. 1~2<' 



■ecurities art given for the perpetuation of the kingly and priestly functions as deve- 
loped through the grace of (jod in human nature. Where the gospel is faithfully 
preachsd, and spiritual life truly energizes, helievers will, as at Pentecost, be " added 
daily " and " multiplied." It is like leaven, a seed, etc. As appealing to the deepest 
needs and yearnings of human nature, it is hound to overcome the world and compre- 
hend the whole race within the zone of its influence. " So shall my word be that goeth 
forth out of my mouth ; it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that 
which I please, and it shall prosper t» the thing whereto I sent it " (Isa. It, 11). — M. 

Ver. 3. — 2%e reasonableness of prayer, " Call upon me, and I will answer thee," etc. 
This is one of the blessed promises of God given for the help of sorrowful and struggling 
men. None but God knows how many have been helped by it and by the glorious 
throng of Divine words which are like unto it, or how often, or how mightily. "Ah! 
you think so," replies a voice not unfrequently nor too modestly heard in these days. 
'Tis the voice of the disciples of science, which says, " Yes ; you religious people think 
God answers your prayers and hears you when you call upon him ; but really it is no 
such thing ; it is all a mistake, and, what is more, you ought to know and confess it, 
and therefore give over what you are pleased to call your prayers. Prayer 1 how is 
such a thing possible in a universe governed everywhere by fixed laws as ours is ? 
Where in such an order is there room for what you call ' answers to prayer ' ? It is 
scientifically impossible, not to say absurd, and the marvel is that people don't see 
this." So speak, and some of them with far more of arrogance and scorn than now repre- 
liented, not a few of the scientists of the day. The calling upon God in the day of 
trouble is nothing more, so one of the most distinguished of modem philosophers has 
said, than the piteous cry of the hare when she knows that the hounds are upon her. 
A bitter cry of distress wrung out from the soul. It is thought by those who utter 
it to go up to Ckid, and that God will hear it and help; but that is all a vain imagination ; 
it goes out into mere space ; nothing does come of it, and nothing can. This is what is 
(aid, and i' is based upon the observed uniformity and inflexibility of law. All science 
is built up upon this faith of the unbroken order and regularity of law, and without it 
there could be no science, and indeed no life at all. The reign of law is everywhere ; 
how then can prayer be reasonable ? and where is there room for those Divine inter- 
positions which prayer asks for and thinks it receives ? What is the use, then, of the 
mother weeping her heart out in her prayers that God would give back the health of 
her beloved child? What the use of national fasts and days of prayer for rain, for 
removal of pestilence, tor restoration of the health of princes, and the like ? If these 
things lie in the order of fixed law, they will come to pass without any prayer; if not, 
they will not be in spite of all the prayers of all the Churches in all the world. Now, 
this is what is so loudly and largely being said on all sides. What have we to reply 7 
Has the Christian preacher nought to urge on the other side ? We think he has. He 
has a right to ask the scientists such questions as these — 

I. Has bcienoe discovered all God's fixed laws? Are you quite sure that 
nowhere there may be some law which shall provide for these results which Christians 
call " answers to prayer " ? We are bound to be grateful for the magnificent discoveries 
of the laws of the universe which science has already made. But has it discovered all 
these laws ? and if not, why amongst those as yet undiscovered ones may there not be 
that which the Christian needs to justify his prayer ? It is the same argument as 
John Foster urges against the atheistic doctrine that there is no God 1 " What ages 
and lights are requisite for this attainment, the knowing that there is no God ! This 
intelligence involves the very attributes of divinity, while a God is denied. For unless 
this man is omnipresent, unless he is at this moment in evsry place in the universe, he 
cannot know but that in some place there may be manifestations of a Deity by which 
even he would be overpowered. . . . Unless he knows all things, that is, precludes 
another deity by being one himself, he cannot kru>w that the Being whose existence he 
rejects does not exist." Now, in like manner, the Christian may meet the scientific 
unbeliever by asking him whether he has traced every effect up to its cause. May 
not, then, the cause you do not know be the one which meets the Christian's need and 
secures answer to his legitimate prayers ? 

II, What uore bioht has soiknob to bejeot the faoib fbom which thk UaugxiAl 



OH, XXXIII. 1—26.] THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET JEEBMIAH. 77 

DEDUOEB BIB DOOTBCtE THAT GoD ANSWEBS PRAYER, THAK THE CHRISTIAN HAS TO REJECT 
THE rAOTB UFOK WHICH SCIENCE BABES HER DOCTRINE OF INVARIABLE LAW ? Science 

marshals her facts. They are a goodly array, and drawn from all departments of 
creation, animate and inanimate ; from all kinds of living organisms, whether animal or 
vegetable; and they have forced upon you, we readily admit, the conviction of the 
universality and invariability of natural law. Christians are bound to believe you. We 
are not going to question your facts, though we may some of your inferences from them. 
Let your facts once be proved to be facts, as so many of them have been, and we will 
candidly accept them. Tes, though they compel us to set aside some old and cherished 
Interpretations of Scripture, and to confess that we have read our Bibles wrongly in 
more than one instance. We trust you in your statement of facts ; we believe you to 
be good men and true. Kow we turn and ask you to deal with us and our facts in like 
manner. For we, too, have facts from which we have drawn the conclusion that, let 
prayer he according to the will of God, he will assuredly answer it. Some of our facts 
which have much force with us you perhaps would not admit, since you would explain 
them on the groimd of mere coincidence, and we could not prove that, apart from prayer, 
they could not have been. E.g. persons in distress have called upon God ; relief has 
unexpectedly come and in very remarkable ways. The believer looks on such instances 
as answers to prayer ; nothing can persuade him that they are not. Still, it cannot 
be denied that they may have occurred without such prayer. Other such instances 
are those in which life despaired of has been given back in answer to, or in connectioa 
with, fervent prayer for such restoration; as the Prince of Wales's recovery in 1872. 
Now, this recovery might have been — we cannot prove that it could not — apart from 
prayer, and therefore, whilst these instances are very convincing to the believer, they are 
not so to others. But there are facts concerning which we can say they are valid for 
our argument, because they never have occurred and never do occur, apart from prayer, 
E.g. in the coming away of any soul fiom its attachment to the world to surrender 
itself in trust and love to Christ — that which is called conversion ; was this ever known 
apart from prayer ? Did ever any find the Lord without seeking him — i.e. without 
prayer? Also in the ordinary conduct of the Christian life, who among us is able to 
keep his garments unspotted from the world, to overcome besetting sin, to confront 
and conquer temptation, to preserve the hands clean and the heart pure, without con- 
tinual prayer ? Again, who are they that have attained to a high degree of spiritual 
life and vigour, to whom it is their habit to walk with God ; who " rejoice in the Lord 
always ; " who are God's saints indeed, the very elect, about whose being born of God we 
have no doubt? Now, every one of these will tell you that they owed their all to the 
habit their Lord enabled them to maintain of constant prayer. Press on in thought to 
the realms of the blest, move up and down amid the throng of God's redeemed ; is 
there one who has or could have attained that blessedness if on earth he had not sought 
God in prayer and called on the Name of the Lord ? So with any really living Church, 
B Church that is a power for good, a blessing to the neighbourhood, a Church at peace, 
at work, and blessed with the prosperity of God, is the life of such a Church ever 
possible apart from this same power of prayer ? Its life is nurtured, not by its wealth, 
numbers, rank, culture, intellect, eloquence, or any such gifts, but by its prayefs. All 
the rest would let it starve ; by prayer alone it lives. One other instance — the winning 
of our children for God. Does any parent or teacher ever secure this great joy without 
prayer ? Never. Such are our facts ; in them we are sure that God answers prayer ; and 
hence we believe also that in the material world he does the same. And as we receive 
the facts of science, so we ask that our facts may be received likewise. 

III. Ib not God ona Father ? The scientific hypothesis denies his fatherhood, if 
not his very existence altogether. If he do exist, he is, according to the scientist, so 
enclosed in his own laws and in the visible adjustment of things that he has no room 
for freedom of choice, for exercise of will. Like the mainspring of a watch, he is shut 
up in his own works, and can only act in one given way. Or, like the locomotives en our 
railways, he must keep to the rigid appointed iron track, and not swerve therefrom inl 
the least. But that is not our conception of God, We believe him to have a mind, • 
will, a heart ; and hence we conclude that, like the best earthly parents, whilst keeping 
ever in view the true welfare of his children, he yet allows himself, within those limits, 
freedom of action as may seem to him wisest and best. Now, within these Umits there ia 



78 THE BOOK 01 THE PBOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxiii. 1— 26l 

room for prayer and room for answers to prayer. We cannot believe him to be bo tied 
down by his physical laws that, when it is consistent with the highest good of hia 
children, and yet more when it ia necessary for that good, he is unable to modify or alter 
them even though he would. A God so bound by physical law is really no God, and 
the creed of the atheist will alone harmonize with the assertions of science. If there 
be a God, he must be a personal God ; but if he be a Person, then he must have will, the 
power of choice ; but if he have will, he must be able to modify the action of hia laws, 
as we can and do continually ; and if he be our Father, as we believe, then we need 
not doubt that the fervent believing prayer of his children will avail much to induce him 
to modify his laws for our good. And hence we maintain that it is good to call upon him, 
and that he is nigh unto such and will save them. Prayer, then, is not unreasonable if 
there be a God ; not unreasonable ii we adopt the very methods of science itself, and 
deduce our doctrine from our facts ; not unreasonable, unless it can be shown that icienca 
is aware of and has registered every fixed law of God. — 0. 

Ver. 6. — The Divine treatment of »in. " Behold, I will bring It health and cure, »nd 
I will cure them." Here, as in so many other Scriptures, the moral, political, social, and 
spiritual recovery of Israel is spoken of under the image of bodily healing. For all 
healings of the body are types and pledges of the better healing. If God so cares for 
the body, which to-day is and to-morrow is cast into the tomb, shall he not care for the 
soul, which is eternal ? This ver. 6 is a promise that the Divine treatment of sin shall 
be effectual. The Lord is Jehovah-rophi. He heals them that have ne^ of healing. 

I. Sin la an awful fact. All nations have recognized this and mourned over it. 
But it has not been created by Christianity. True, the Christian faith brands it with the 
stigma of shame as none other does ; for everywhere sin has cast its deep shadow and driven 
noble souls, not a few, to utter despair. But it was here before Christianity. Hence — 

II. The (jubstion of (JDBStions has been — What is to bb done with it? And 
the answers have been very different. Note: 1. The answer of the philosopher, which 
extenuates it, on the ground : (1) Of the imperfection of our nature. If we knew more, 
it is said, had larger comprehension of truth, we should not sin. But is that true ? Is 
increase of knowledge always increase of virtue ? Are little children, who know lo 
little, less virtuous than many an educated man ? The names that are accursed for ever, 
Nero, Herod, Balaam, Philip II. of Spain, Alva, and many more, were all educated men. 
(2) Of the tyranny of the body. It is this cursed flesh, they say. Get rid of that, 
and the soul will be pure. Hence one reason wherefore St. Paul's doctrine of the 
resurrection was so opposed at Corinth, because they thought it was a bringing back 
of all that dread source of evil which it was hoped was done with for ever when 
death came. Now, no doubt, the flesh is the occasion of sins not a few. But there 
are many sins, and those which probably God will most sternly condemn, which are 
quite independent of the body. Malice, envy, hatred, and all uncharitableness need no 
" flesh " for their existence. And even in those sins which are especially of the 
flesh, myriads of victories over it, victories continually renewed, prove that it can, as it 
ought to, be kept under and brought into subjection. (3) Of its being a form of good. 
Without it, it is urged, virtue could not be attained ; for it b in the conflict with sin 
that virtue is developed, disciplined, and strengthened. Virtue would lie dormant, 
lethargic, and be a miserable weakling, were it not that sin roused her up, exasperated 
her, and forced her to stand on her defence. But such argument confounds temptation 
with sin. What is urged is true of temptation, but never of sin. Nor is sin needed as 
the foil, the dark background on which virtue shall shine out with greater lustre than but 
for this foil had been possible to it. For sin is, some affirm, a necessary condition, almost 
an ingredient, of good. Moral evil cannot be so evil as it is thought. The devil is not 
so black M he is painted. But is sin necessary to manifest goodness Y Where, then, is 
such background in God, or in the angels, or in the saints in glory ? None, therefore, o< 
these extenuations will stand. Beason, conscience, and God's Word alike condemn them. 
'i. There it the answer of despair, which regards it as inevitable and invincible. This 
answer does not make light of it, but regards it as that which can neither be helped 
nor overcome. They believe there is a kingdom of evil, independent of God, with its all 
but omnipoteat, omnipresent, and omniscient head, like unto God. This was the creed 
of ancient Persia, against which, that his countrymen might not be carried away by it, 



oa xxxm. 1— 26.J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 7» 

Isaiah protested with all his might ; of. Isa. xlv. 5 — 7, " I am the Lord, and there is 
none else, there is no God heside me ... I form the light, and create darkness : I make 
peace, and create evil : I the Lord do all these things." And Manicheism was a like 
heresy. And the moral despair which regards sin as inevitable is practical Manicheism. 
But this is a terrible error ; for be who has come to believe in the existence of a god of 
evil as well as a God of goodness will soon come to believe only in the former and not 
in the latter at all. Moreover, conscience in her.deepest utterances gives no countenance 
\o this invincibility of evil. " Father, I have sinned," is its confession. It never urges 
that it had no power to resist — that it was forced to sin. It is a dread snare of the 
devil to persuade men that sin is invincible. Believe him not. Myriads of holy souls 
give him the lie ; and, through the might of Christ your Lord, you may give him the 
lie likewise. But note now — 

III. Chbist's answeb to this question. This verse is one of innumerable otheri 
which afBrm the same truth. 1. He does not make light of it or extenuate it. His high 
and holy teaching, his blameless life, the doom he pronounced on sin, above all, the 
death he died, were one emphatic protest against and condemnation of sin. But : 

2. Se did not regard it as invincible. He distinctly promises deliverance from it, and : 

3. This he gives. By blotting out the record of the past. By the present help of his 
Spirit. By the bright prospect of eternal life. Pacts prove all this. He healed them 
that had need of healing. No disease baffled him. His resources did not run out, and 
the healing was a real one. And to it is still. Let us come to bim and see.— G. 

Yer. 9. — Fruits of pardon. Some of these are declared here ; e.g.— 

I. In beoabd to God. li Joy. God, not Deus impassibilis — a God who does not 
feel. 2. Praise and honour. The theme of the Church on earth, and especially in 
heaven, is this, " Unto him that loved us," etc. There is no glory equal to that which 
shall accrue to God by " Jesus Christ," for through him pardon comes to guilty men. 

II. In beoabd to the pakdoned themselves. They enjoy the goodness and pros- 
perity which God procures them. Pardon is not mere acquittal, but acceptance and 
adoption, and hence the goodness and prosperity. 

III. In beqabd to the wobld at laboe. "They shall fear and tremble." Why 
this ? 1. Because of its manifestation of power. His people a feeble flock, hut thus 
raised and exalted. 2. Because of its exposure of idolatry. It will be seen how foolish 
they have been to trust in their false gods. 3. Because of its manifestation of grace. 
The fear and trembling shall not be of dread so much as of repentance — repentance 
wrought by the evident grace of God in the rich pardon he has bestowed. — C. 

Vers. 10 — 18. — Paradise lost and regained. I. The pictube of a fabadise i<ost. 
This is given in ver. 10. The land desolate ; the flocks and herds all gone ; no human 
being to be seen ; the cities laid waste. Now, this meagre outline would recall to the 
mind of the Jews the blessed days when the land teemed with inhabitants ; when the 
cities were numerous, wealthy, populous, and strong ; when the hills and dales of 
their country-side were covered over with flocks ; and when, in the glad prosperity of all, 
the very fields were said " to shout for joy and also sing" (Ps. Ixv.). But all that is 
past ; desolation reigns, the lauds stripped, the cities burnt with fire, and the people 
slain or in exile ; the whole land desolate of both man and beast. 

II. Pabadise beoained. Such is the bright, joyous picture set forth in these verses 
(11 — 18). Its elements are : 1. Righteousness. Not mere innocence, as in Eden, but 
virtue tested and triumphant, and so issuing in a settled righteousness. This must be 
the basis of all truly blessed life. The people must be all righteous. This secured by 
him who is called " the righteous Branch," " the Lord our Righteousness." 2. Love. 
(See Ter. 11.) The joyous picture of the gladness of the bridegroom and the bride. And 
that companionship which is the most blessed in the world, and that love which is 
deepest and purest of all, are fitly taken as the symbol of that love which shall con- 
stitute the home of God's redeemed more than a paradise regained. 3. Worship. (Ver. 
11.) The picture of the t«mple service has risen up before the prophet's mind. Ha 
hears the glad chant, the loud response of the people, " Praise the Lord." He sees tht 
altar &e and the priests and sacrifices, and by this representation he teaches us that 
u;orslt]p ia part of the blessedness that is to be. i. Healthfid and universal employ. 



80 THE BOOK OF THE rROPHBT JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxm. 1— 2« 

(Vew. 12, 13.) It has often been said, " God made the country, man made the 
town ; " and the saying may be read truly or falsely, as each one wills. For he who 
says there is nought of God in the city speaks as falsely as he who says there is onljr 
God in the country. But there can be no doubt that the highest, purest, and mos»' 
healthful forms of life are connected with the country. " Four words, each of them full 
of meaning, comprise the conceptions which we attribute to the paradisaical state. 
They are these innoeence, love, rural life, piety ; aad it is towards these conditions of 
earthly happiness that the human mind reverts, as often as it turns, sickened and 
disappointed, from the pursuit of whatever else it may have ever laboured to acquire. 
The innocence we here think of is not virtue recovered, but it is moral perfectness, 
darkened by no thought oi knowledge of the contrary. This paradisaical love is con- 
jugal fondness, free from sensuous taint. This rural life is the constant flow of summe^ 
days, spent in garden and field, exempt from oui exacted toiL This piety of paradise 
is the grateful approach of the finite to the Infinite — ? correspondence that is neither 
clouded nor apprehensive of a cloud '" (Isaac Taylor). Now, in these verses, when the 
prophet would set forth the blessed life that the restored people should enjoy, he draw 
a picture, not of city, but of country life; not of hard exacting toil, but of healthful, 
peaceful occupation — the pastoral life ol a quiet, beautiful land. It is a symbol of all 
healthful employ, and such employ shall be t turthei feature in the blessedness that is 
to be. Therefore, " Sursura corda ! '" a righteous, loving, worshiplul, and healthful lile 
awaits the sons of men " for I will causi theii captivity to return, and have mercy 
on them," saith the Lord. — 0. 

Ver. 11. — The propheft refrain. ' For 1 will cause tc return the captivity of the 
land." This declaration is heard again and again. We have it in substance times 
without number in this and in previous chapters. We have a similar statement in ch. 
xxxii. 37. But we have the exact words, the very same form of expression, in ch. 
xxxii. 44, and in vers. 7 and 26 of this chapter. Hence we have called it the prophet's 
refrain. And the like theme of God's purposes ot grace towards mankind generally 
should be the refrain of all the jTophets of the Lord in these our days. For — 

I. The blessings assueed are similar. In connection with each several repetition 
of this promise, " I will cause their captivity to return," is named some specific blessing 
which that return shall bring along with it. In connection with its first mention (ch. 
xxxiL 44) God's purpose is given as the reason wherefore his now afflicted people 
should again possess their land. And there is a life eternal, a true, real, blessed me for 
humanity ; a life compared with which this life is like the hard lot oi the captive Israe 
compared with the glowing glad life promised in the days when their captivity should 
return. Then in connection with its second mention (ver. 7 ol this chapter) there is the 
promise of " health and cure," moral and spiritual health, when their iniquity should 
be cleansed and their sin forgiven. And is not the promise of man's rtdemption like to 
this ? In the eternal life there shall be health and cure indeed. And with the third 
mention oi this promise (ver. 11) there is associated gladness and joy. " There 
shall be . . . the voice of joy and the voice of gladness," etc. (ver. 11). And with the 
fourth there is (ver. 26 of this chapter) the promise ot permanence for all that has 
been before, the permanency as of the covenant of day and night, and the perpetual 
sovereignty of their own royal house, the seed of David. And so we look for a new 
order of things, which shall not be as this, troubled and transient, but characterized by 
• rest and joy that shall be eternal. Thus analogous are the blessings promised to the 
return of Israel and the redemption of mankind. 

II. The motives of such proolamation of God's fubposes of grace ahk alike. 
The reason of the prophet's refrain were such as these. 1. He so delighted in the truth 
he had to tell. Often and often he bad been charged with a message of a far less 
welcome kind ; but this was blessed to his soul. And so, would we effectually speak oi 
God's purposes of grace, they must be the joy of our soul. We must ourselves delight in 
them. 2. He really belieued it. The oft repetition ot this word shows his confidence 
in it. He speaks with no bated breath. " I believed, therefore have I spoken." And 
this must ever be the spiritual force with which our gospel must be charged if it is to 
have any efiect on those who hear it. 3. He knew it would so comfort the cast down. 
Many already were mourning along with the prophet over the desolations so surely 



OH. xxxiiL i— 26.J THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET JEREMIAK 81 

coming on the land, and many more when away in exile would mourn. But the 
prophet knew that their hearts would he cheered and sustained hy the earnest and 
confident assurance that " their captivity should return." For their sake, therefore, Lc 
reiterated this word. And in order to our now earnestly proclaiming tiie message ol 
God's lore, we too must believe that it will do the people good, that it will bd for their 
help and comfort. And we must have for them, as the prophet had for his people, a 
real love and concern. This has ever been an attendant of and is essential to a successful 
ministry. 4. Ih knew that it would so vindicate Ood. Questionings and perplexitie.- 
not a few were being occasioned by the prophet's solemn declarations of the cominp 
destruction. They contrasted his terrible word with the oft-repeated promises made by 
Grod " to David aud to his seed for ever," and to Zion, concerning which he had said, 
•' There will I dwell, for I have delighted in it." I'hese and the many more like promise 
seemed for ever to forbid the possibility of that which the prophet, and now the actua 
course of events, declared to be close at hand. How were the two to be reconciled, and 
the truth and goodness of God to be vindicated? It was by the truth declared in this 
refrain of the prophet. That rendered both Divine words harmonious and true. Thus 
the enemies of the prophet would be silenced, and the company of them that feared 
God would he reassured. The house of God was dear to the prophet ; and so must 
it be to us would we earnestly preach his Word. " The zeal of thine house hath 
eaten me up; " " Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business? " So was 
it spoken of or by the Lord Jesus Christ ; and so in like manner in our measure and 
degree must it be true of us if we are to be true witnesses for him and for his grace. 
The gospel is the vindication of God to-day, as the return of the Captivity was in the 
days.of the prophet. And being jealous for God, he proclaimed incessantly that return, 
as we must the redemption of mankind. — C. 

Ver. 16. — " The Lord our Bighteoumeu." (Cf. homily on ch. xxiii. 6.) — 0. 

Vers. 17, 18. — Do the prophets prophesy falsely t If the statements of these verses 
be taken literally, it would seem as if they did. The house of Israel never, since its 
exile, has had a throne at all, nor has any descendant of David been acknowledged as 
its prince. Yet these verses say, " David shall never want," etc. And, literally, it 
never can come to pass, for in the lapse and confusion of the ages their genealogical 
tables have been utterly lost, so that none can certainly say who is of the house of 
David or who of the house of Levi. The Asmonean princes who occupied the throne 
of Judah were of the tribe of Levi, and Herod was no Jew at all. Now, the promise 
of these verses is one that is perpetually repeated (cf. 2 Sam. vii. 16 ; 1 Kings ii. 4 ; 
Ps. Ixxxix. 4, 29, 36 j Numb. xxv. 12, etc.). How, then, are they to be understood, 
since events have most surely falsified them if understood in any hteral way? And so 
the Prophet Hosea cheered the ten tribes of Israel — those of whom we speak now as 
the lost ten tribes — by promises of their restoration, and Jeremiah does the same (cf. 
Hos. vi. 2 ; ch. iii. 14, etc. ; 1. 17 — 20, etc.). But in spite of all these prophecies, the " ten 
tribes never were restored, and never, as a whole, received any favour from God after they 
went into captivity " (Pusey). Now, what shall we say to these things ? Shall we say — 

I. The prophets webb but men, and hence thet were certain to bb wrong 
WHEN thet ventured INTO THE DOMAIN OF THE FUTURE ? Tliis is the rationalist's 
reply. He attributes all these utterances to the wish to cheer their countrymen in 
their sorrow, and perhaps to maintain their own credit. Sanguine enthusiasm will 
account for all. Is, then, the estimate that our Lord and his apostles and the Church 
universal held concerning these " holy men of old, who spake as they were moved by 
the Holy Ghost," to be regarded as lalse ? Are the prophets themselves to be con- 
victed as liars, afiSrming, " Thus saith the Lord," when not the Lord, but only their 
own poor weak selves were speaking ? And are all the manifest fulfilments of pro- 
phecy to go for nothing in establishing their authority ? The rationalist's reply will 
not do. 

II. That the exiles did not fulfil the conditions of the promised bbstoba- 
TioN ? (Cf. homily on A never-to-be-forgotten principle of interpretation, vol. 1, p. 
451.) But does this principle apply here ? No ; for the promise of restoration carries 
along with it the promise of the " new covenant," which included " the new heart " — tht 

JEBEMIAH — II • 



82 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh, xxxin. 1—28. 

heart of Btone taken away and the heart of flesh giyen instead. The conditioiM neces- 
sary for the restoration were the subjects of promise as much as the restoration itself. 
God took the whole matter into his own hand. 

III. That the prophets, like the apostles concbrnino the ebtuen of the 
Lord, did not know concerninq the return of the Captivity? The apostles do 
undoubtedly speak of the Lord's return as a thing close at hand, to be looked for in 
their own day. But such language is to be regardSi rather as the language of desire 
than of knowledge. For the Lord had distinctly told them that it was not for them to 
know the times and the seasons. Therefore we can only regard their words as those 
of desire, hope — permitted hope, indeed, but not of Divine assurance. May we do thus 
with the prophetic word on the return of the Captivity ? No ; because they so distinctly 
claim the Divine authority (cf. vers. 25 and 26 of this chapter and passim, for what 
they affirm). The apostles do not ; 1 'I'hess. iv. 15, " By the word of the Lord," is an 
exception. The Lord's revelation referred only to such as should be alive and remain 
at his coming, not to that generation then living. 

IV. That the promise is but delated ? This is loudly maintained by many. They 
who believe that the Jews will be restored to their native land, expect it on the express 
ground that Canaan has never been actually and permanently theirs. A certain tract 
of country, three hundred miles in length by two hundred in breadth, must be given, 
or olsu they think the promise has been broken. " If there be nothing yet future for 
Israel, then the magnificence of the promise has been lost in the poverty of its accom- 
plishment." This reply is not to be lightly dismissed. If the kingdom of God, for 
whose coming we daily pray, do mean that which all who heard our Lord so perpetually 
speak about it, understood it to mean — and he never, in the main substance of their 
belief, even hinted that they were wrong — if it mean the reign of God upon earth, as we 
believe it does, in which, under Christ, the Isiael of God, the Church, shall be first 
in the kingdom of heaven, having been of those blessed ones who bad part in " the 
first resurrection," then the literal fulfilment of the prophetic word may reasonably be 
looked for. This was " the hope of Israel," of which St. Paul spoke ; " the restitution of 
all things," and " the times of refreshing," of which St. Pet«r spoke ; and this belief has 
at least this vast advantage, that it enables those who hold it to read the Scriptures 
literally, and to understand by David, Jerusalem, Levi, Israel, etc., that which they 
seem to mean, and not whatsoever the too facile process of spiritualizins; may say 
that they mean. Of course, if the kingdom is of this world, this age, as our Lord dis- 
tinctly told Pilate it was not, then a literal fulfilment of these prophecies is out of the 
question ; but regarded as the kingdom to be revealed in another age, after the resur- 
rection and the Lord's return, then all is as possible as it will be blessed. 

V. That it is fulfilled already ? This is what they afiirm who regard our Lcrd 
as embodying in himself both the regal and priestly functions, and the Cliurch as 
being the nation whom God has restored. The Jew's national life and his relision were 
the two things most dear to him. These, it is said, have been preserved to him in the 
Church, and in him who is the Church's Head. But surely these are the exigencies of 
exegesis, and but preteroea nihil, 

VI. That such predictions are instances of God's law of illusion ? (Cf. on this 
F. Eobertsou's sermons on the ' Illusions of Life,' vol. iii. p. 83.) We have illusions 
in nature. The sun, etc., seem to move round us whilst we are at rest. The hedges, 
fields, etc., fly along whilst the train in which we are seems to be stationary. Tho 
miragei We have them in moral and mental life. 

' Hnpe springs eternal in the human breast, 
>Vhich never is, but always to be, blest." 

What pictures we draw in our youth of what life is going to be for nsl Then see what 
life really turns out. We are all subjects of the law of illusion. Now, was it so in 
these Bible histories? Abraham was promised Canaan. But he never had a foot of it 
to call his own (cf. Acts vii. 5). All the patriarchs "died in the faith, not having 
received the promises, but were persuaded of them " (cf. Heb. xi.). The early Church 
was persuaded that " the Lord was at irand ; " " the coming of the Lord draweth nigh." 
And yet he never came, and has not come to this day. Now, may not these prediction! 



OH. xxxm. 1—26.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 83 

be further instances of this law of illusion ? Ten thousand times " No," exclaim as 
many people; "it is to make God a liar." Is it so? Of course, then, we would 
rather not be deceived ; we would have all our illusions done away. Would we ? As 
for " Hope," let her be put an end to, seeing what an incurable liar she is. But distin- 
guish between being subject to delusion and illusion. He who is subject to the 
former ho[<es for some good thing and gets nothing. He who is subject to the latter, 
hopes fur some good thing and, if the illusion be of God's permission, gets something 
letter. Our hopes lure us on. We acquire character, habits of patient industry, etc., 
better far than the mere material thing hoped for. The patriarchs hoped for an 
earthly Canaan ; they won such faith in God that by it they all " obtained a good 
report." They never complained of God deceiving them (read Heb. xi.); for they 
knew that, if not the thing they hoped for was given, God had provided that which was 
better (Heb. xi. 8 — 10). Our own belief is that, in regard to this world, these promises 
were illusions, but in regard to the world to come, they shall in substance and reality 
be fulfilled there. Meanwhile let us all have faith in God, who, in ways better far than 
we think, will fulfil that which now it sometimes seems as if he never fulfilled at alL — C. 

Ver. 6, — The abundance of peace and truth. I. Thb need of such a bevelation. 
There is already abundance of discord, mutual hostility, instability, deceit. What a 
picture of misery is at once suggested by contrast with the state presented in this 
promise 1 Instead of the welcome salutation of peace, there is too often threatening. 
And when the salutation does come, it is too often only a mere conventional expression, 
and in some instances even an elaborated hypocrisy put forward to carry on war behind 
it, and instead of the feeling that one is on a sure foundation, there are continual quak- 
ings tliat disturb what is underneath, and continual blasts that disturb what is above. 
And beside what attacks man from without, there is within a spirit of hostility and 
rivalry to others, a spirit striving to shake their position and triumph over them. So 
that peace and truth need to be revealed within us first of all. We need, not merely to 
have amicable feelings towards others, freedom from envy and malice, but we need 
positive cordiality. Loving, unselfish cohesion is the true way to escape bitter habitual 
contention. Moreover, this peace and truth are needed in abumlance. It must be said 
of them, as is said in the New Testament of God's Spirit, that they are given without 
measure. The promise of the peace that passeth all understanding is assuredly a 
promise correspondent to our necessity. 

II. The fact of auoH a bevelation. Peace is revealed in Jesus Christ. In him 
there is the secret of a composure and a steadfastness unaffected by all the common 
causes of discord and instability. He had an unusual number of enemies, and this 
because he was so persistent in declaring righteousness ; and yet all the time he had 
that peace within which showed how outside forces only affected the mere shell of life. 
In this life there was ever the joint manifestation of peace and steadfastness, and the 
steadfastness was explained by the fact that he came from God, continued in God, did 
the will of God, and so, ever having this hold on the Eternal, and being held by the 
Eternal, the shaking influences of time did ever more and more both to reveal his 
strength and their own weakness. All the exhortations of Jesus with respect to faith 
are meant to reveal to us the abundance of peace and truth. With what pity Jesus 
must look on the abortive, melancholy attempts of men to trust in the untrustworthy ! 
and yet the unveiled magnificence of peace and truth is unseen. What we have to do 
is to look desiringly, hopefully, towards God's revelation ; for surely the complete reve- 
lation includes not only something gracious to be seen, but full insight to see it. The 
apocalypse to John in Fatmos came to one who " was in the Spirit on the Lord's 
day."— Y. 

Vera. 10, 11. — The mournful stillness of the present, and the gladsome voice* of the 
future. L The peesent stillness. What makes it so painful ? Not all stillness is 
Iiainful; indeed, stillness is often very grateful, a thing to to sought, a timely refuge for 
those who are stunned and confused by the clamours of the world. The stillness of 
night is pleasant after the noise of day. The stillness of the mountain and the wilder- 
ness seems more still when one has come from the city's bustle. There is even some- 
thing suggestive of escape into everlasting peace when one looks at the stillness ef 



8i THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxiil 1—26. 

death as contrasted with all the power of sound in the previous life. But the stillneis 
here is painful, because it does not come in any noriuiil way ; it is stillness where there 
ought to be sound — sounds of trafBo, sounds of friendly intercourse, suunds of children 
playing, sounds of worship. To come into the individual life, it is the silence of the 
dumb, the silence of that which was made to speak, intended to speak, and can only be 
silent beoauhe of some inexplicable interference with natural constitutioa Dumbness 
ought not to be, and so the state of things here represented, when in the houses and 
streets of Jerusalem there was sound neither of man nor beast, was one which ought 
not to have been. There was no occasion for it in the very constitution of things. It 
came by man's own bringing of it. The present silence had been preceded by many 
voices that ought never to have been heard — voices of threatening, voices of greedy 
demand, voices of reveufie, voices of complaint and of indignant appeal against injustice. 
II. The voicbs of the futube. The sounds of life are to flow back into the now 
desolate streets, but they are to be the sounds of a different kind of life. Sounds 
springing from righteousness within and from a principle of obedience to Jehovah. 
Sounds that come from a universally satisfied people. Kot sounds of joy and gladness 
in palaces, and sounds of privation and despair in hovels ; but sunshine falling every- 
where, and everywhere the hearts of the people ready to break forth into song. In the 
eleventh verse there is first of all the general indication of gladness. Every one is 
full of healthy life, which, as a matter of course, breaks forth into joyful manifesta- 
tion. Then, as a very significant illustration, there is the gladness of the bridegroom 
and the bridei This signifies a stable society, a hopeful prospect, the joys of home life. 
Probably there was no joy so demonstrative as that connected with wedding festi- 
vities. Then the joy of religion comes in to crown and conclude all. Praise to Jehovah 
for his goodness and his enduring mercy, and offerings of thanksgiving in his house. If 
joy of this kind had been absent, the other joy would not long have lasted. From 
what God sends down into our lives as causes of abiding joy, we must send back tc 
him responses of intelligent and heart-felt praise. — Y. 

Vers. 12, 13. — Returning flocks. In ch. xzsi, there has been mention of planting 
vineyards, and of God's goodness with respect to the corn, the wine, the oil. But 
agriculture was only one of the important industries of the land. To have set plough- 
men and vine-dressers to work again, and left shepherds unprovided for, would have 
meant only • partial restoration. God has a remembrance of all classes of the com- 
munity, and all varieties of the surface of the earth. Shepherds were not to go away 
into exile without a special promise to comfort them. By " causing the flocks to lie 
down " we may take to be meant that a sense of security and restfulness will be estab- 
lished ; and that " the flocks will pass again under the hands of him that telletb them " 
suggests their numerousness. There seems to be also a distinct remembrance of the 
places most appropriate for flocks. Nor must we let slip the spiritual sense of this 
prophecy when we call to mind the references to pastoral life in the New Testament 
It is the [)Ower of Christ, the Branch of righteousness growing up uuto David, who 
makes spiritual flocks and spiritual pastors to abound. And instead of the selection 
from the literal flocks for sacrifices, there is the self-presentation of every one in the 
spiritual flock as a living sacrifice. — Y. 

Yer. 16.— The righteous Scion of David. Here is a great leading prediction, which 
enables u$ to interpret as to the time and mode in which the rest of the glorious pre- 
dictions connected with it were to be fulfilled. We know full well who this righteous 
Scion was, and when we look at his work, we can translate all the figurative language 
into spiritual realities. We no longer go looking for Israel and Jerusalem in any mere 
local way, and the vineyards and corn-lands and pastures of the restored people of God 
we understand to be only feeble indications of the spiritual satisfactions coming through 
Christ. Note — 

I. The origin of this RKiHTEOus SoiON. He springs from David. According to the 
flesh, he is connected with a name su>!gestive of past days of prosperity and glory, 
David himself is emphatically to be reckoned as a righteous stock. That he fell into 
grievous backslidings is not to be denied ; but we know his aspirations, his sighingg 
and strugglings after conformity with the Law of God, 



CH. xxxin. 1— 26,J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. B6 

IL Thb implied contrast with other scions who were not eiqhteoub. Sciona 
of unrighteousness had already spruDg up, had their day, and done their mischief. 
Their portion made their charactfr and doings peculiarly pernicious. With a dis- 
position to act unjustly and unrighteously, they had power to act over a very large 
area. So we should ever contrast Christ with the men of large powers who hava widely 
influenced the world, and yet have influenced it for evil, hecause their powers have been 
directed by selflshness and error. There can he no doubt that a son of David means 
here one who will act as a king ; and that reminds us how many kings have been 
tyrants, looking on those under them as merely so much convenient material, by which 
they might effect their plans. The exiled people, tljmking of their restoration, would 
have to include the thought of king in the complete weal ; and surely this would bring 
very distinctly before them the evil some ot their kings had wrought in the past. 

III. The coming Scion in his righteousness. Eighteousness is emphasized as his 
great quality. It is needed in a king above all things that he should be just. He 
must not be an Ahab stealing Naboth's vineyard. Being in a fiercer light than other 
' men, he must be unusually careful as to the aspect of his actions. Love is not men- 
tioned here as a quality of this Scion, not because it is not needed, but because 
righteousness is the great quality that, for the comfort of Jeremiah's auditors, needed 
to be emphasized. Nevertheless, it is well for us to remember that this Scion of David 
secure* righteousness, because he ever acts from a loving heart. — Y. 

Vers. 17, 18. — King and prie$t in perpetuity. The declarations of these Tertes 
come by a natural association after the declaration of his advent who is the righteous 
Scion of David. Kingship and priesthood in perpetuity — that is tlie general assurance ; 
but what a difference between the assurance looked at from the point of view given by 
Jeremiah's time and the point of view given by ours 1 We look back on the achieve- 
ments of history, and then see how much more a prediction means than anything 
that could have been supposed possible at the time it was spoken. Observe — 

I. The needful perpetuity op the offices. Kingship and priesthood cannot 
perish out of God's true Israel. There must always be a king; there must always be a 
priest. These offices, properly discharged and honoured, are as needful to the prosperity 
of Israel as fruitful lands and pastures well occupied with flocks. All government has 
to come at last to some personal authority. That the authority of some single person 
rests on the choice and acceptance of the many does not make that authority less 
needful, less real. And so with priesthood. The priestly ofBce is needed, however it 
may change its forms and channels. Mediation between God and man is a necessity, 
which more and more unfolds its depths as man reflects more on the possibilities of his 
being. Even priestcraft, with its marked repugnances to intelligence and liberty, has at 
least this much good about it, that it is a testimony to man's need of mediation. 

II. The WAT IN which the perpetuity is manifested. The king is one ; the 
priest is one. Looking back, we are made to see this clearly. "Of his reign there 
shall be no end," says Gabriel to Mary. Whatever wisdom, power, and beneficence are 
in Jesus, are in perpetual exercise. Death, which ends the authority of purely human 
kings, only enlarged and deepened the authi>rity of Jesus. He not only claims per- 
petuity for his demands, but we have ample reason now to say that the claim is 
admitted. And as to priesthood, what more need be said than make a reference to 
the expositions of the priesthood of Jesus made in the Epistle to the Hebrews ? It 
is the piiesthood for ever according to the order of Melchisedec. What an abidingly 
helpful thouj^ht it should be that we look to a Mediator ever active in sympathy with 
human wants, ever understanding them, knowing them indeed far laetter than the 
subjects of them ! All the externalities are gone — sacritires of teasts, furnishings of 
the holy place, symbolic garments of the priests, symbolic ordinances of service; but 
the reality remains and must remain in the priesthood of Jesus Christ. The deepest 
evils of human life, the evils that cause all others, are swept away by the priesthood of 
Jesus. And so also the greatest goods of human life, those that are seminal and full 
of energy towards the production of other goods, come through the same priesthood. 
Compared with the possibilities of the future, the predictions of these verses are, indeed, 
only at the beginninu of their fulfilment. — Y 



8« 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ch. xxxiv. 1—22. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

Thii chapter must be taken In connection 
with oh. XXXV. The whole section consists 
of three passages, introduced with a super- 
scription in the same form, but otherwise 
unrelated. It serves to finisli off the earlier 
prophetic portion of the book, ch. xxxvi. 
opening a series of narratives. 

The first passage (oh. xxxiv. 1 — 7) is 
virtually a postscript to ch. xxxii., xxxiii. ; 
it apparently contains the prophecy referred 
to in ch. xxxii. 3 — 5 as the cause of Jere- 
miah's imprisonment. The same prophecy 
recurs in a shorter form in oh. xxxvii. 17, 
and, by comparing the context of this passage 
with ch. xxxiL 1, etc., we are enabled to infer 
that the original prophecy was uttered at 
the renewal of the siege of Jerusalem by the 
Chaldeans, who had withdrawn for a time 
on the news of the approach of Pharaoh's 
army. 

Ver. 1. — ^All the kingdoms of the earth ; 
etc. ; rather, of fie land,. The accumulation 
of phrases is to convey the composite 
character of the Chaldean army. And 
against all the cities thereof ; i.e. the fortified 
cities which still held out — against Lachish 
and Azekab, if no more (ver. 7). 

Vers. 2, 3.— (Comp. these verses with oh. 
xxxii. 3—5.) 

Ver. 4. — Yet hear the word of the Lord, 
ete. Cleady this introduces a limitation of 
the foieguing threat. Zedekiah will, it is 
true, be carried to Babylon, but he will not 
suffer a violent death ; he will " die in 
peace," and be buried with all customary 
royal honours. A difiiculty, however, lias 
been felt in admitting this view. How 
conld Zedekiah be said to die in peace, when 
he was "in prison till the day of his death " 
(oh. lit 11)? and how could the deposed 
king of a captive people be honoured with • 
public mourning ? The reply is (1) that, as 
compared with a cruel d( atli by flaying or 
impalement, it wa* " peace " to live in the 
obscure quiet of a prison ; and (2) that, as 
the Jews appear to have been left very njuch 
to themselves (see Ezekiel, passim), it is 
credible enough that they were allowed to 
show the customary honours to a deceased 
representative of Uavid. At any rate, the 
allernative view seems not in accordance 
with sound exegesis, viz. that the verse 
naeans this, " If thou obey the word of the 
Jjoti, and lorrender thyself to Nebuchad- 



nezzar, thou shalt live and die In peaceable 
possession of the throne." What parallel 
can be produced for tliis violent interpreta- 
tion? 

Ver. 5. — With the burnings of thy fathers. 
It was customary to burn spices at royal 
funerals (2 Chron. xvi. 14 ; xxi. 19). Say- 
ing, Ah lord ! (see on oh. xxii. 18). 

The second of the group of prophecies in 
oh. xxxiv., XXXV. is composed of vers. 8 — 22. 
It conti^ins a denunciation of the Jews who, at 
the beginning of the siege, had emancipated 
their Hebrew slaves (according to Exod. 
xxi. 1—4 ; Dent. xv. 12), but after the with- 
drawal of the Chaldeans had resumed pos- 
session of them. Ver. 21 is couched in a form 
which indicates the precise date of the pro- 
phecy, viz. before the Chaldeans returned to 
renew the siege of Jerusalem. 

Ver. 8. — A covenant. The scene of this 
" covenant " was the temple (vers. 15, 18). 
Solemn agreements of this kind were not 
uncommon (conip. 2 Chron. xv. 12; 2 Kings 
xi. 17; xxiii. 3; Neh. x.). To proclaim liberty 
unto them. The phrase, a very peculiar one, 
is taken from the law of jubilee (Lev. ixv. 
10), though tlie prescription on which the 
covenant was based refers exclusively to the 
seventh year of the slave's servitude. 

Ver. 9.— Should serve himself of them; 
literally, should work through them; Le. 
"should employ them for forced labour;" 
■s in ch. XXV. 13. 

Ver. 10. — Now when all the princes, etc. 
This verse should rather be rendered tlius: 
Then all the princes, and all the people, etc., 
obeyed, every one letting his slave, and every 
one his handmaid, go free, not serving them- 
selves of them any more; they even obeyed, 
and let them go. 

Ver. 13. — Out of the house of bondmen. 
Egypt had been a " house of bondmen " to 
their fathers (Exod. xiii 3; Deut. vi. 12, 
and elsewhere); let them not make the holy 
city thus grievous to those who were equally 
with themselves children of Jehovah's 
redeemed ones. 

Ver. 14. — At the end of seven years, etc. 
This is the literal rendering, but the sense, 
as is clear from tlie parallel passage in Deut. 
XV. 12, and indeed from the next clause of 
this vejy verse, is " in the seventh (not, the 
eightli) year." 

Ver. 15. — Ye were now turned; or, y» 
returned (the primary meaning is simply 
" to turn ; " hence (1) to turn away, as in 
ver. 16; (2) to return, as here; oomfK oh. 
viii. 4). 



OH. ixxiT. 1— 22.J THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



87 



Ver. 17. — I proclaim a liberty for you. 
Judab is henceforth to be " lord of himself — 
that heritage of woe ; " or ratlier, he is to 
become the slave of Sword, Pestilence, and 
Famine. The "liberty" now proclaimed 
does not profit Judab, who so much desires 
it. I will make you to be removed ; rather, 
/ toill make you a shuddering (as ch. xv. 4). 

Ver. 18. — When they out the calf in 
twain, eto. This clause should be translated 
diiierently, and placed, for clearness, in a 
parenthesis (the calf tehich they cut in twain, 
and between the parts of which they passed). 
The division of the calf might, in fact, be 
calltid in Hebrew either " the covenant " or 
"the token of the covenant" (oomp. Gen. 
xvii. 10, 11). It was a solemn assurance 
that be who should transgress God's Law 



ihould share the same fate tm the Tietim. 
The same idea seems to have dictated the 
Hebrew phrase, " to cut a covenant," and the 
Greek and Latin equivalents (Spxia rdfivetf. 
fiedus icere) ; comp. the parallel narrative 
in Gen. xv. 10. 

Yer. 20. — ^And their dead bodies, etc. 
One of Jeremiah's repetitions (see oh. vii. 
33). 

Ver. 21.— And Zedekiah . . , and his 
princes. Graf infers from the separate men- 
tion of the king and his princes that these had 
themselves been unfaithful to the covenant. 
But the threat in this verse seems merely 
intended to enforce the preceding one by 
specializing the most prominent sufferers. 
Parallel passage: ch. xzi. 7. Which are 
gone np from you (see ch. zxzviL S> 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — l.—A king's doom. Jeremiah reveals to King Zedekiah his approaching 
doom. The invader is already occupying the land and coming up before the walls of 
Jerusalem (ver. 7). It is now too late to escape, resistance is vain, the doom is certain. 
What a terrible scene is that in the royal palace when the mournful prophet stands up to 
deliver his message to the terror-stricken monarch I Such events are rare in history. 
Yet the general truths on which the message of Jeremiah depended are eternal and 
clear to all who will see them. We have no prophet to tell us of the exact nature and 
date of our future judgments. But we know the principles of God's government and can 
apply them to ourselves. We know that God is just and must punish sin ; we know 
that " the wages of sin is death." Therefore, though no voice sounds in our ears, the 
sentence is virtually pronounced every day we sin, and hangs over us continually until 
our sin is forgiven. 

I. The doom. 1. The city is to he destroyed. She has shared the king's sin, there- 
fore she must share his punishment. The destruction of Jerusalem was especially a 
blow to Zi'dekiah. They who have most can lose most. Jerusalem was a favoured 
city — the greater, therefore, was the guilt of her apostasy, and the heavier must be her 
doom. Past favours are no charms against future judgments. 2. The king shall not 
escai>e. (Ver. 3.) Rank is no safeguard against the jiidgmentof Heaven. God will call 
kings to account. So all who have accepted responsible posts will have to answer for 
their conduct in them. Zedekiah would find his suCferings aggravated by being a 
witness to the triumph of Nebuchadnezzar. Shame, remorse, mental anguish, are to 
the sensitive worse penalties than bodily torture. 

II. The mitigation. The doom is not utter. " In wrath God remembers mercy.'' 
God never delights to punish, never gives one blow more than is absolutely necessary ; 
does not hate, but pities and grieves for the victim. So Zedekiah 's life is to be spared, 
and he is to receive a measure of honour in his captivity. There are degrees of punish- 
ment in the Divine execution of justice — some will be beaten with few stripes, some 
with many (Luke lii. 47, 48). In this fact we may see the hope of mercy to the 
penitent, for God does not wholly cast a soul off. The shadows fall thick, but the 
darkness is not that of midnight. When trouble comes we are too ready to complain 
if we do not fall into despair. We should look for mitigating circumstances, those rifts 
in the clouds that tell of the mercy not yet wholly gone, and give hopes of lisht after 
the storm is over. But it is foolish for any to take spiritual comfort to himself for the 
future life in such thoughts as these, for we may well fear that the lightest doom then 
will be unspeakably terrible. The refuge we are to seek is not in that poor mitigation, 
but in the full forgiveness and perfect salvation of Christ now offered to the worst men, 
even to those over whom hangs the heaviest threat of doom (Heb. vii. 25). 

Yen, 8—11. — Superficial repentance. In liberating their slaves under the influence 



38 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxiv. 1— 22. 

of terror, and reclaiming them when the cause of alarm had disappeared, the Jews afford 
a striking instance of superficial repentance. This must he distiutruished from an insin* 
cere repentance referred to in an earlier prophecy (oh. iii. 10). That is nothing but a 
• hollow mockery fi-om the first, a mere pretence of conscious hypocrisy; but this is 
genuine go far as it goes— only it goes but a very little way. 

I. The 0AU8B op superficial eepbktanoe is feab of painfdl consequences. 
When the invader was at their gates Zedekiah and his people were so terrified that they 
were willing to do and promise anything that would mitigate the wrath of God who 
had permitted the calamity to visit them for their sins. Fear was the sole motive of 
their hasty covenant of emancipation. Now, this may be a useful initiative of » 
thorough repentance ; but then it must lead to deeper feelings of hearty detestation of 
Bin on its own account. Fear of penalties, without any abhorrence of the moral evil 
that merits them can only produce superficial results. Earnest repentance involves a 
turning from sin rather than a flight from its penalties. Hence the importance of 
seeking to lead men to repentance through influencing the conscience, rather than by 
means of mere appeals to selfish terror. Thus St. Paul reasoned with Felix "of 
righteousness and temperance " as well as of "judgment to come " (Acts xxiv. 25). 
Lurid pictures of the horrors of hell may work upon the feelings of people with 
visible effect, but if these take the place of the far more di£5cult rousing of the moral 
sense, the effect of them will be very superficial and not all spiiituaL Such a sen- 
sational style of preaching is tempting because it is easy, and apparently very effective, 
but its fruits are disappointing, and come short of the less pretentious efforts that aim 
at awakening the conscience, 

II. The oharacteeistio op sdpbrfioiaIi bepentanoe is ohanob of conduct with- 
out ohanqe of heart. That was no genuine reformation which Zedekiah hurried 
through in the face of imminent danger. True, the slaves were freed and the Law was 
obeyed. But there was no indication of a revived respect for the Law, nor of a lessen- 
ing of greed and cruelty, nor of a larger recognition of the rights of fellow-citizens. 
There was no chnnge of heart, in fact. Such is the result of a repentance of fear 
without conviction of conscience. This reformation is worthless in the sight of God, 
who looks at the disposition of the heart. 

IlL The effect of superficial bepentanoe is a tempobaby befobmation. As 
Eoon as Nebuchadnezzar withdrew his army, the Jews renounced their covenant and 
took back their slaves. The motive for the change was gone, and with it the change 
ceased. A repentance of terror is not likely to outlive the terror. The fears of the 
night are forgotten in the thoughtless confidence of the day. This is strikingly illus- 
trated in the vacillation of Pharaoh — willing to let the Hebrews go while a plague 
was raging, but withdrawing bis promise as soon as it was stayed. Therefore this 
superficial repentance is practically worthless. Nothing can be solid and enduring in 
life that does not spring from personal conviction and true feeling. We need a real 
desire to turn from sin, and a determination to seek a better life for its own sake, in 
order to secure a lasting change. For this we must seek Divine grace, in order that we 
may be " born from above." 

Ver. 17. — Liberal punishment for tlliberal wnduct. The Jews will not set free 
their enslaved fellow-citizens ; God therefore liberates sword, pestilence, and famine 
upon them. If they are illiberal in their conduct, Gbd will not be stinted in his punish- 
ment of them. 

I. The evils op life abb under the restraint op God. They appear to be 
uncontrolled, but they are really God's slaves. He holds in the hounds of retribution 
with his leash. They would fain tear their victim. But they vent their rage in vain 
till their Matiter lets them loose. Men can only be tormented by Satan when they are 
delivered over to Satan (1 Cor. v. 5). 

II. Oub conduct determines oue fate. The terrible doom is no chance accident, 
nor is it a cruel act of despotism. It depends upon our behaviour whether or no God 
will liberate the powers of evil to do their fell work upon us. 

III. Illiberal conduct will lead to personal loss. The mean man overreaches 
himself. " There is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty" 
(Frov. xL 24). History has proved that slavery is a commercial failure. Slave laboui 



OH. XXXIV. 1—22.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 89 

Is most expensive. But beyond this it may bring upon itself justly earned calamities. 
Slavery was the curse of the ancient world — the scene of its blackest iniquity, and the 
root of its direst misery. Few things are more terrible in the history of Rome than 
the social wars rising out of slavery. The persistent clinging to slavery by the 
Southern States of America caused the evils of war to be set free amongst them. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOR& 

Vers. 8 — 22. — False obedience. An incident of the siege of Jerusalem by the 
Chaldeans. At the first alarm the liberation of the Hebrew slaves was declared and 
solemnly ratified, according to the sabbatic law, which had long sunk into desuetude, 
i'he aim of this was a purely military one, viz. the advantage to be derived from the 
services of the freedmen in the army, and the removal of disabilities that might occa- 
sion disaifection within the walls. Yet an appearance of religion was given to it by the 
form it was made to assume as connected with the Law, and the solemn rites which 
were observed. That it was really only a time-serving expedient was shown by the 
restoration oi the state of slavery directly it appeared as if the Chaldeans were going 
to desist from their purpose. 

I. Wherein it differs from true obedience. Tliis will consist in the essence of 
the action, which, bein<; moral, must have to do with motives. The form of the action 
was religious, but the real aim of it was one of selfish policy. Good people and bad 
are frequently found doing the same good and proper actions, but events frequently 
prove that they have acted from the most opposite motives. It was not to glorify 
God or to benefit the bondmen that the edict was put forth, but simply to advance 
their own interests and to " serve themselves " in a more effective way of their 
brethren. When righteousness is immediately and evidently advantageons, there are 
many who will become formally righteous ; and when religion is fashionable, there are 
many who will be religious. When misdeeds are rectified it is so far a good thing ; 
but that the reform may be real and permanent it must proceed from true repentance, 
and an earnest desire to serve God and the interests of our fellow-men. 

II. Considerations deteruining the beal natubk of beputed obediekcb. In 
discovering the true character of reputed obedience it is well to study : 1. The circum- 
ttances. Here there were immediate pressure and distress, the existence of a dangerous 
element in the state, and the possibihty of advantages from the military service of the 
freedmen. The greatest care is requisite in judging of the professions of persons in 
straitened or perilous circumstances, and to whom religion presents pecuniary, social, or 
other advantages. The existence of such circumstances affords a presumption against 
the genuineness of their conversion ; and yet it is not of itself conclusive. A better 
criterion is to be found in : 2. Subsequent conduct. The speedy consignment of the 
freedmen back again to a state of slavery showed that the observance of the Law was 
unreal. Actions are ever more eloquent than words. So, when ardent and apparently 
enthusiastic professions rapidly cool down, and give place to calculating and selfish 
conduct, we see that the religious movement has had no deep root or has been unreal 
from its commencement. Death-bed repentances are proverbially doubtful, because of 
the impossibility in most cases of applying this test ; nevertheless we are justified 
in believing that in some cases these are genuine. Prisoners frequently belie their 
declarations when set at liberty. The subject of false repentance may deceive himself, 
the emotion being genuine, but the nature not being radically changed. Hence the 
necessity of insisting upon continued obedience from all who are under the influence of 
conviction, or who appear to be so. 

III. The peculiar offbnsivbness of false obedibnok. It ia not a simple act of 
transgression, but complex and supremely self-conscious. As on this occasion the 
Jews Were manifoldly sinful in (1) their breach of faith with God and their fellow- 
countrymen ; (2) in the dishonour they showed to God by lightly regarding the most 
solemn oath and ordinance ; and (3) in the hypocrisy by which the whole proceeding was 
characterized ; so the false saint is a sinner of the deepest dye. Nor is he at liberty to 
confine his transgression within definite and foreseen limits; once committed to the 
false attitude, a repetition and intricate complexity of sin ii inevitable. It u, there- 
fore, often a culminating sin. 



90 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ch. xxxiT. 1— 2a 

IV. The punishment of false obedience. (Vers. 17 — 22.) The penalty inflicted 
is very terrible and thorough ; as if there were no hope for such men to be spiritually 
renewed again. 1. Exemplary. A curious and instructive parallelism between their 
crime and its punishment is to be observed: " Behold, I proclaim a liberty for you," 
and " Their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts 
of the earth." This is in harmony with the didactic and symbolical character of the 
old dispensation. 2. Thorough and unmitigated. No word of hope or compassion is 
uttered. An end is to be made of such transgressions. 3. An element of scorn and 
contempt is dtscoverable. There is a terrible irony in the words, " I proclaim a liberty 
for you,'' etc., which reveal the depth and absoluteness of their curse. The gospel dis- 
pensation, as it offers greater privileges and blessings to the truly penitent, is also 
accompanied with more awful penalties (Heb. iv. 11, 12 ; vL 4 — 8 ; x. 29 ; Prov. i 
26).— M. 

Vers. l—7,—I7ie Lord, the prophet, and the king. It is a sad scene that these verses 
bring before us. 

I. The Lobd seeking to bave the lost. This was the intent of the prophet's being 
charged with his message to King Zedekiah. If it were possible to save him, the Lord 
would do so, and, therefore, sent his servant again and yet again. Not lightly will 
the Lord let any evil-doer go his own way. 

II. The prophet faithfully disohabgino a terrible duty. It was terrible every 
way, 1. In itself. To have to be the bearer of such evil tidings, and to one unprepared 
and unwilling to give heed to them. How much pleasanter to prophesy smooth things 
than these evil ones I 2. To his influence as a prophet. Men would desire to disbelieve 
him, and at length would — as they had done — persuade themselves tl)at they might do 
so. A whole atmosphere of unbelief and dislike would surround him and shut up men's 
ears and hearts against him. 3. To his personal safety. Of course nothing but enmity 
was to be expected from such messages as these, and the prophet reaped the harvest to 
the full. They sought his life again and again, and wrought him all the ill they could 
(cf. subsequent chapters). And yet the prophet of God faithfully went through with 
his commission. Here is the test of fidelity, not in speaking that which men expect of 
you and will praise you for, but in speaking, when needful, that which men hate to hear. 
Can we lay claim to aught of such fidelity as this ? 

III. The kinq infatuated by evil counsels. There is reason to believe that, left 
to himself, lie would have hearkened to the prophet. But those around him persuaded 
him to disregard all that the prophet said. Hence this opportunity of salvation for 
himself and for his people was put away. For had he obeyed, the threatening would not 
have been carried out (cf. ch. xviii. 8 — 12). But his heart was hardened by the deceit- 
fulness of sin. In face of that, no fidelity, no evidence, no earnestness of appeal, no 
pleading, no voice of conscience, could prevail. He was joined to his idols. Because 
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of man is 
set in him sfcadrastly to do evil. Pray that from all such hardness of heart and con- 
tempt of God's Word and commandment, the Lord would deliver us. — 0, 

Ver. 2. — 3%e woe of weakness. " Zedekiah, King of Judah." The life of this 
unhappy monarch is a piteous but powerful illustration of the misery of instability 
of character, the sorrows that dog the footsteps of the infirm will. What men need, 
in order to be happier and better than they are, is not more knowledge of what is 
right — they are amply supplied with that; or the presence of plentiful good purpose 
and desire to do the right — hell itself is paved with good intentions; but what is 
needed is strength of will, firmness and stability of character. It is for lack of that 
that men go so wrong and make such a miserable confusion of their own life and that 
of others. The history of Zedekiah illustrates all this. Therefore note — 

I. His character as shown by his history. He was son of the good King Josiah, 
and may have been one of the " princes " carried off to Babylon in the days of Jehoiakim. 
He appears to have attracted the favourable notice of Nebuchadnezzar, probably on the 
ground of the hope that Jeremiah the prophet cherished concerning him. That hope 
was expressed in the name given him — Zedekiah, "the Lord our Righteousness," a name 
fulfiUca only in One, hut telling of the hopes that gathered round this young king. At 



OH, XXXIV. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAtt 01 

twenty-one years of age he was placed on the throne of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar, sad 
then the extreme difficulties of his position became evident. In his own country and 
in those adjoining, a smouldering rebellion prevailed. This the great enemy of Babylon, 
Egypt, did not fail to fan and further to the utmost of her power. Only a leader was 
wanting, and the rebellion would at once break forth. The chief of Zedekiali's own people 
were eager for him to head the revolt. For a time he refused, and seems (cf. ch. IL 59) 
to have taken a solemn oath of allegiance to Kebuchadnezzar. But keeping this oath was 
Dot easy. It was a cruel position for him, and he had not the strength which so critical 
a time and emergency demanded. The influence of Jeremiah and his fear of the Baby- 
lonian power drew him one way ; the clamour of his princes, priests, and people, and 
the promised aid of Egypt drew him another. And so at length he yielded, and treated 
his oath as so many idle words. Loud and stern were the protests of the prophet of 
God against such shameless and senseless falseliood (cf. Ezek. xvii. 14; ch. xxviii.). But 
the princes of his court, as he himself pathetically admits (ch. xxxviii.), had him com- 
pletely under their influence : " Against them," he complains, " it is not the king that 
can do anything." He was thus driven to disregard the counsels of the prophet, which, 
as the event proved, were perfectly sound ; and "he who might have kept the fra<!:meDta 
of the kingdom together, and maintained for some generations longer the worship of 
Jehovah, brought its final ruin on his country, destruction on the temple, death to his 
family, and a cruel torment and a miserable captivity on himself." And there are 
other recorded instances of his lack of moral strength. His allowing the rich men and 
all those who, contrary to the Law, had held their brethren as bondslaves, to enslave 
them once more, notwithstanding that in the most solenm way they had covenanted 
with God not to do so; then his treatment of tbe Prophet Jeremiah, — all showed, not so 
much that he was wicked, as that he was weak. Cruelly imprisoned by his enemies, the 
king sent for the prophet and placed him in gentler captivity in the court of his own 
palace. But there assailed by the angry accusations of the prophet's foes, the king 
yielded, and let them cast him into m horrible pit, where, had he been long left, he must 
have miserably perished. Conscience, stiried up by the remonstrance of a faithful 
servant, led the king to interpose again for his relief, and to have him remitted 
to his prison in the king's court. There Zedekiah treated him kindly; when the 
famine was raging in the city, he procured bread for him ; he asked his prayers, and 
held long and frequent converse with him, but was all the while in abject fear lest the 
nobles should discover what their conversation had been about, and he prevailed upon 
the prophet to condescend to an evasion of the truth in order not to betray him, poor 
weak king that he was (ch. zxxviii.). Altogether wise was the counsel the prophet 
gave, but the king wuuld and he would not. He did not know his own mind. But 
events moved on. The city was captured. The king and his household endeavoured to 
escape, were caught, carried before Nebuchadnezzar ; his children were crucified in his 
presence ; then his eyes were put out ; and, loaded with fetters, he was dragged across the 
weary desert to B-ibvlon, where he lived in misery until the Lord visited him (ch. xxxii. 
5) — that is, until the Lord mercifully sent death to put an end to all his woe. It 
is a pitiful story, but one that teaches much concerning this instability of character 
which was this poor monarch's ruin. 

II. What this history suggests as to such character. It suggests: 1. Its nature. 
That it is a halting perpetually between two opinions — a condition of perpetual inde- 
cision 1 You never know where to find such men, or can be sure as to what they will do. 
They promise so well ; they turn out so ill. Like a chip on a stream, driven, tossed, 
turned hither and thither, entangled, engulfed at last — so is such a man. In secular 
matters it is ruin, in spiritual it is more disastrous still. 2. Its results. What a 
miserable man this Zedekiah must have been ! And so are all such. The debtor's 
pillow is proverbially a restless one, because of its wretchedness. Yet more so is that of 
the man who has no will of his own. And what sorrow he brings upon others I He 
drags them down into the same vortex in which he is himself swallowed up. What 
ruin is wrought by such men in all the circles to which they belong! 3. lis cause. 
Want of a guiding principle in life. Without this, having no fixed rules, secular life is 
ruined. But in things .spiritual this endeavour to serve God and mammon, this 
iivided heart, is absolutely fatal. In such men the surrender to Christ has never been 
thorough and complete. They are as the seed on the stony ground. 4. Its curt. Livinji 



j3 the book of the PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxit. 1— 22. 

under the abiding realization of the presence of Christ. In armies that have begun to 
waver, the approach, the word, the eye of their leader has rallied them again and won 
them victory. So if, when tempted to waver, we feel the eye of Christ on vm, wt 
shall be firm. Therefore let him be the Lord of your souls. — G. 

Vers. 8 — 22. — Playing fast and loose with Ood. See the history. Under fear 
occasioned by the prophet's earnest appeals and the obvious fact that the judgment 
of God was drawing near — for the Chaldeans were at the gates — the king and his 
people solemnly vow to release their slaves. They had no right to retain them ; they 
were sinning against Gud and them in so doing. Hence th%y let them go. But the 
fear departs, they thiuk their danger has disappeared, and they enslave their brethren 
again. It was an abominable wickedness, and the prophet denounces awful doom upon 
them for it. Now, concerning such playing fast and loose with God, note that — 

I. This is a vert fbequent sin. Illustrations are Pharaoh, Balaam, Israel's whole 
career. And there are many such instances now. All insincere repentances are such. 
They may be : 1. Very general. This was so. All the people joined, high and low. 
Like the professed repentance of the people at John's baptism. 2. Very loUmnly 
entered upon. How deeply moved these people seemed I What vows they uttered ! 
3. And some fruits meet for repentance may he produced. These people did for a while 
set free their slaves. There was a real reformation for the time. The evil spirit went 
out of the man. 4. Bui yet it is all worthless, fur the evil spirit returns, and with 
increased power. The repentance was so short-lived that it was as if it had never been. 
Yea, worse : " The last end of that man was worse than the first." 

n. Its obiqin and cause are the unchanqed heart. Underneath the superficial 
soil there is, in spite of all the seeming repentance, the hard layer of rock. The motive 
was not the conviction of sin wrought by the Holy Spirit, but a craven fear and a 
desire, therefore, to buy off God's anger. And in this case it was a cheap way, for 
liberating their slaves was the best means of securing a strong addition to the forces 
by which they would defend their city and themselves. Hence, when danger ceased, as 
they thought, their repentance ceased along with it. What need we all have to be on 
our guard against the semblances of real religion which our evil hearts are ao prone 
to take up with ! And what need to pray that the Lord would show us if we be now 
self-deceived, and that he would perfectly renew our hearts within us I 

III. Its guilt is vert great. What an outrage it is to God I We would not bear 
the like conduct from our fellow-men. What awful presumption it manifests I what 
hardness of heart! And its guilt is the more aggravated because such conduct so 
plainly shows that we clearly know and understand God's will, though we only make 
pretence of obeying it. 

IV. Its doom is very terrible. See the burning words of the prophet here (vers. 
17 — 22). And we have portents of that future doom in the hardening of the heart, the 
searing of the conscience, the being " given over to a reprobate mind," the audacity in 
wickedness which such conduct produces. How hard to bring such men to repentance ! 
or, if conviction of sin do come, into what depths of despair does it plunge the sinner ! 
All these are indications of the holy displeasure of God which rests on such sin. May 
he keep us from it. — C. 

Ver. 17. — Slavery. " Ye have not hearkened unto me," etc. The Jews had become 
shamefully guilty of this sin of enslaving their brethren. They who had once been 
slaves them.selves, but redeemed by God ; they whose whole Law was a protest against 
it in its real forms of permanence and cruelty; they who were on no higher level than 
those they enslaved, all being on the same equality with God, members of the same 
race, worshippers of the same God ; — the slavery they were now practising was abhorrent 
indeed. Concerning slavery — the permanent and absolut* possession of a fellow-man, 
to buy and sell and do with him as he please — this is ever a great sin. 

L Nature condemns it. 1. We have a moral nature, a conscience, and this plainly 
condemns the degradation of a human being to a mere chattel. 2. Think of ourselves 
as daves, and then how prompt we are to condemn. But if one man may be so held, 
then every man may. S. All are on an equality before Ood, and have equal rightH and 
responsibilities. 4. And chiefly because man is made in the image of Ood. Dai* we 



OH. XXXIV. 1—22.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 93 

make a chattel of him who bears the image and superscription of Deity ? At onca our 
heart condemns. 

II. The Word of God condemns it. 1. Not by direct prohibition. Enough is 
known in the circumstances of the ages of the Bible to show abundant reason wherefore 
the servants of God were not commissioned to go and everywhere denounce this practice. 
2. Kor by the absence of examples of good men who kept slaves. It was the universal 
practice. 3. Nor by absence tf implied sanctions of this relationship. These facts have 
been urged in its favour, but we may urge: (1) That if everything not distinctly pro- 
hibited in the Bible be right, then many very wrong things would be justified. For 
very few detailed rules for definite acts are given, but principles from which the mind 
of God may be easily inferred and his Law applied to all the minutiaa of daily lire. 
(2) Paul no more sanctioned slavery than he did the vilest despotism, for if he told 
slaves to obey their masters, he bade all men be subject to the higher powen. Now, 
Nero was on the throne at that time. What the Word of God and experience alike 
teach is that the violent subversion of evil almost always inflicts greater evil than it 
removes. (3) And the sacred writers had faith in the sure, even if silent, spread of 
the great principles of Christ which tau^ht " All things whatsoever ye would that men 
should do to you, do ye even so to them." (4) And as to the Old Testament slavery and 
the Mosaic laws in regard to it, it is to be noted that it was a far milder and more 
genial thing than aught that modern times have known ; and next, that the laws of 
Moses were given on this matter " for the hardness of men's hearts," so that, as with 
the law of divorce, what could not wisely be at once put down should be so limited and 
controlled as to be divested of its greater evils. But no greater slander or falsehood 
can be maintained than to say that the Bible upholds slavery. Its tone and teaching 
and its universal influence have been to put an end everywhere to the accursed thing. 

III. ExFEsiENOB CONDEMNS IT. Its influence on the slave, on the master, on the 
nation, the Church; its moral, domestic, political influence,— all are disastrous and 
deadly. It is the prolific parent of the worst vices — selfishness, cruelty, licentiousness, 
tyranny. It has sealed the doom of all nations that have adhered to it, and must ever 
do so; whilst justice and freedom have ever had resting on them the manifest blessing 
of God. Christ came to preach liberty to the captives; his gospel it the Magna 
Charta of the human race. — 0. 

Vers. 8 — 22.— A right act done 4n m wrong ipirit. I. Consider the act itself. 
It was emphatically a right act in itself. It did not become right or necessary merely 
by becoming a covenanted thing. It was an act that meant the attainment of liberty 
to a very considerable number of people who were not their own masters, Ctoi is 
always on the side of liberty, for only to the free individual is full opportunity given 
of serving God. And yet this must be said with qualification. External liberty is 
only of use when it is accompanied with deliverance from inward bondage. Hence, in 
the New Testament, no great stress is laid upon civil liberty ; that would come in due 
time, and, irresistibly, by the growth and conquering power of Christian principle. The 
stress in the New Testament is on the maintenance by the individual of liberty within 
himself^ But in ancient Israel there was a God-governed nation as well as God- 
governed individuals, and civil liberty had to be sought as far as possible by Divine 
provisions and commands. 

II. The OAnsE of the liberation, bo fab as it was accomplished. There is some 
obscurity as to the origin of the covenant and act. Some unmentinned motive seems 
to have combined king and people to resolve on the liberation of all slaves ; but it could 
only have been a motive of fear and worldly prudence. The same sort of forces must 
have been in operation as we observe in Pharaoh. A plague drags him a little in 
the direction of letting Israel go ; then the plague ceases, and he draws back again. 
External force, then, or a shallow repentance, or perhaps something of both, led the 
people into making this covenant. It was not a deep pity for the oppressed that moved 
them. The covenant did not come from a deep and perfect insight into the golden 
rule. Thus there is a revelation of the moral attainments of the people. It is already 
shown to us how little the better they were for all their opportunities of knowing God's 
Law and wilL 

III. Tax BEBULT or A siOHT ACT DONE III A WBOKO spiBiT. The result is ]u>t what 



H 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ou. xxxv. 1—19 



might hare been expected, InconTenience, awkwardness, daily, almost hourly, irrita- 
tion, must have come at once. Just try to estimate some of the results. Only when 
the slaves had hecome free would the masters understand how dependent they had 
been upon them. The work of the covenant was not done when the slave was liberated. 
Really, it was only begun. The master had then to set to work for himself. Eia 
former servant is now given opportunity to become his rival., Moreover, the liberated 
slave himself does not all at once get the spirit of a free man. Wlien things have been 
going wrong tor generations, they cannot be got right by some magical swiftness. 
Hence, many potent considerations tempted the masters in forcing a return to the 
former state of things. They had not counted the cost in beginning, and thus, it 
seems, they were able to take only a very few steps in the right course. 

IV. The punishment. This is specially attached to the breaking of the covenant. 
The people liad really no excuse to offer for breaking it, save the inconvenience anil 
the temporal loss occasioned by keeping it. As far as we can see, this particular 
covenant was a voluntary one on their part. It recognized a law that had been made 
in the very coming out from the land of bondage, and it was a covenant to perform a 
certain outward act. The punishment was just enough ; the real wonder would have 
been U loniethiTig of the kind had failed to fall on those breaking such a covenant.— Y. 



EXPOSITION". 



CHAPTER XXXV. 



The third member of this group of short 
prophecies. In it, Jeremiaii points to the 
faithful obedience of the Ki cliabites, as 
putting to shame the infidelity of Judah- 
ites. It belongs obviously to the time before 
the arrival of Nebuchadneuar, perhaps to 
the summer of B.C. G06. (See Dr. Plump- 
tre's poem, " The House of the Beohabltes," 
part ii., in * Lazarus and other Poems.') 

Yer. 2. — ^The house of the Beohabltes 
(" house " equivalent to " family "). From a 
notice in 1 Chron. ii. 55 it appears that the 
Rechabites were a subdivision of the 
Kenites, the nomad tribe so closely con- 
nected with the Israelites (Judg. i. 16; It. 
IS — 22; comp. Numb. x. 29), especially 
with the tribe of Judah (1 Sam. xxvii. 10; 
XXX. 29). The names of Jonadab and of 
Jaazaniah and his progenitors (which in- 
clude the sacred Name), together with the 
zeal of Jonaiiab for the worship of Jehovah 
(2 Kings s. 15, 2.^), seem to indicate that 
the religion of the Rechabites approximated 
closely to that of the Israelites. There seem, 
in fact, to have been two branches of tlie 
Kenites — one having Edomitish, tlie other 
Israelitish, affinities. Recordu of the former 
•till exist in the Sinuitlo inscrijitlonB, and 
in the Arabian histories; indeed, there is 
■till a tribe called JJetiu-1-Qain (often con- 
tracted into iielqeiii) in tiie BelqA (the 
ancient land of Ammon); and it would 
seem that there is an Arab tribe in Aiabia 
Petr«a, eastward of Keiak, which traces 
itself to Heber the Kenite, and goes by the 
name of Yehud Ohebr, though it now denies 
any connection with Jews. There wore also 



Jews of Khaibar, near Mecca, who played 
an important part in the early history o( 
Islam (see farther ' Zeitschr. der deutschen 
morgoiiland. Gesellsohaft,' viii. 706; xiv. 
438; xxviii. 568, 571). Into one of the 
chambers. There were many " chambers " 
of different sizes attached to the temple, 
and employed partly for stores, partly for 
councils and assemblies, partly for guard- 
chambers, and other official purposes 
(comp. 1 Chron. xxviii. 12 ; Ezek. xl. 17). In 
ch. xxxvi. 10 we even find a private person 
occupying one of the "chambers." That 
into which Jeremiah conducted the Beohab- 
ltes was, no doubt, one of the largest size ; 
it was appropriated to the use of a single 
priestly family — the " loni of Hanan " (ver. 

4)- 

Yer. 4. — A man of Ood. The title, ae- 
cording to Hebrew usage, belongs to Hanan, 
not to his father, and means " prophet" (see 
e.g. 1 Kings xli. 22) ; comp. Plumptre — 

" There the chamber stands 
Where Hanan's followers gather np the 

words 
Their master speaks." 

The chamber of the princes ; i.e. the room 
" where the princes," t.«. the most distin- 
guished laymen, especially the "elders of 
the people," assembled before the temple 
services. Maaseiah the son of Shallum. 
Probably the father of Zephaniah, "the 
second [or, ' deputy '] priest " (ch. Hi. 24), 
himself a functionary of high rank, as he 
is called a keeper of the door (or rather, 
threshold). There were three of these 
" keepers," corresponding to the number of 
the gates of the temple, and they ranked 
immediately after the high priest and his 
deputy (oh. 111. 24); comp." I had rather be 



€iH. XXXV. 1—19.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEBEMIAH. 



9? 



k doorkeeper," etc., in one of the Eorahite 
psalms (Ixxxiv. 10). 

Ver. 5. — Pots tall of vine ; rather, bowls, 
large round vessels (crateres), out of which 
the drinking-cups were filled. 

Yer. 6.— Jonadah the son of Rechab out 
father. Jonadah (the contemporary of King 
Jehu) is here called the " father " of the 
Rechabites (comp. vers. 14, 16), in the same 
sense in which the disciples of the prophets 
are called the " sons of the prophets ; " he 
was a teacher, if not (in some sense) a 
prophet. This illustrates the uncompromis- 
ing zeal of Jonadab in 2 Kings x. 23; the 
religion of Baal was probably at the oppo- 
site pole in the matter of luxury to that of 
Jehovah •* practised by Jonadab. 

" Not for you the life 
Of sloth and ease within the city's gates, 
Where idol-feasts are held, and incense 

smokes 
To Baalim and Ashtaroth ; where man 
Loses bis manhood, and the scoffers sit 
Perverting judgment, selfish, snft, impure." 
(I'lumptre.) 

7e shall drink no wine, etc. The Bechab- 
ites were, in fact, typical Arabs. The Wuh- 
habee movement, in our own century, may be 
taken as partly parallel, thuugh, of course, 
a settled life is not one of the abominations 
of tlie neo-orthodox Islam. A still more 
complete parallel is given by Diodoius 
Siculus (xix. 91), who states it to be the 
law of the Nabatsoans, " neither to sow corn, 
nor to plant any fruit-bearing herb, nor to 
drink wine, nor to prepare houses," and 
gives as the motive of this the preservation 
of their independence. 

Ver. 11. — And for fear of the army ol 
tlw Syrians. We are expressly told in S 



Kings xxiv. 8 that, after the rebellion of 
Jehoiakim, " bands of Syrians " made inenr- 
sions into Judah. 

Ver. 12. — Then came the word of the 
Lord, etc. The substance of the severe ad- 
dress which follows must have been delivered 
in one of the outer courts of the temple, 
when Jeremiah had left the Becliabites. 

Ver. 16. — Because, etc. Tliis rendering is 
against Hebrew usame, and any reader will 
see that the obedience of the Rechabites 
stands in no inner connection with the sen- 
tence pronounced upon Judah. Ver. 16 is 
rather an emphatic recapitu'ation of what 
has preceded. It runs literally, (J gay') that 
the sons of Jonadab have peiformed, etc., but 
{that) this people hath not hearkened unto me ; 
or, in more Enu;lish phraseology, " Yea, the 
ions of Jonadub," etc. 

Vers. 18, 19. — ^A promise to the Rechab- 
ites (perhaps removed from its original 
connection). The form of the promise ii 
remarkable ; it runs, Jonadab the son of 
Eechab shall not want a man to stand before 
me for ever. The phrase is, as Dr. Plump- 
tre remarks, " all but essentially liturgical. 
It is used of the Levites (Dcut. x. 8; xviii. 
5, 7), of the worship of tlie patriarchs (Gen. 
xix. 27), of the priests (1 Kings viii. 11; 2 
Chron. xxii. 1 1 ; Neh. vii. 65), of prophets 
(1 Kings xviii. 15), of priests and Levites 
together (Ps. cxxxiv. 1 ; cxxxv. 2)." It is, 
however, rash, perhaps, to maintain, with 
the same acute scholar, that the Becliabites 
were adopted into the tribe of Levi. The 
phrase may be simply chosen to indicate the 
singular favour with which Jehovah re- 
garded the Bechabites — a favour only to be 
compared to that accorded to his most 
lionoured servants among the Israelites — 
the patriarchs, the priests, and the prophets. 



HOMTLETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — The Rechnhites. A curious interest attaches to tliese sinaular people, 
whose relation to the settled life of the Jews may be compared to that of the gipsies in 
modern Europe. They were nomads in the midst of cities, preserving the habits of the 
desert among all the scenes of civilization. But they were in some respects strikingly 
superior to their more civilized neighbours — a people whose simplicity and abstemious- 
ness was a living rebuke to the debased luxury of the times. Three leading character- 
istics of the Hechabites are worthy of special note. 

I. Thbib nomadic habits. It is refreshing to meet these quiet, simple people after 
wearying ourselves with sickening sights of the vice and hyprocrisy of the court and 
city life of Jerusalem. We are inclined to think too much of external civilization. 
Making allowance for exasgerations and eccentricities, we may find some much-needed 
lessons in the protest of Mr. Ruskin against the industrial ideal of the age. Inventions, 
commerce, wealth, — these are but means to an end. What is the use of the working ol 
wonderful machinery if the outcome is poor and profitless? Many a man's business is a 
Frankenstein which becomes a tyrant to him. By others the science and resources of 
the age are only used as ministers to selfish pleasures. Thus the men and women may 
be none the better for all the advance that is made in the material appliance! of the 
most complex civilization. Yet the personal condition of these men and women, ann 



9« THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET JEEEMIAH. loh. xxxv. 1—1* 

not tliat of the machinery of life, is the one matter of final importance. The quieter, 
simpler life of the Eechabites had many points which it would be instructive for us to 
consider. It was out of all tlie rush and worry of town life. It was calm and compa- 
ratively free from care. With few wants, the Eechal)ites had few anxieties. Are we so 
much better oflf than they in this respect? Then, as a wandering life, it was a reminder 
of the truth, so often forgotten to our serious harm, that all men who live a life higher 
than the earthly must be pilgrims and strangers here, and must " seek " a better 
country, that is, a " heavenly." The man of the world is rooted to the earth ; and is 
there not a danger lest many of us should be so absorbed in the busy pursuits of the 
world as to neglect greater interests, or so satisfied with earthly possessions as to forget 
that this is not our rest ? 

II. Their abstemiousness. These Eecliabites were the prototypes of the modem 
teetotalers. They were no ascetics. They made no pretence to the peculiar holiness of 
the "self-imposed worship" of "dealing hardly with the body" (Col. ii. 23). On the 
contrary, they were probably a cheerful and unpretentious people, finding more human 
happiness in a simple abstemious life than the citizens of Jerusalem could ever dis- 
cover in the unwholesome luxuries of a corrupt civilization. They teach a lesson which 
our age greatly needs. We may differ as to the necessity or desirability of total absti- 
nence from wine and such things. But all of us should feel the terrible danger that 
comes from the enervating influence of luxury. In the present day we see little ol 
"plain living and high thinking." Life is both eager and materialistic. It wovdd be 
well if we could deny ourselves more, that there i<hould be less grossness about our 
habits, dragging us down from the calm heights of spirituality. 

III. Theib chanoelessness. The Eechabites are like the Arabs of the desert who 
were contemporaries of the Pharaohs, and who live now just as they lived in the days of 
Abraham. Where shall we find such staunch conservalives? Now, of course, we 
Western Christians believe in a principle of progress, and rightly set ourselves to realize 
it. But in the pursuit we may lose something that tlie Eechabites retained. Mere 
change is not progress, and a restless love of change endangers the fruitfulness of 
measures which take time to ripen. On the other hand, there is a true loyalty to the 
past, a just fidelity ta our forefathers. At all events, it is grand to see a people inde- 
pendent of passing fashions, bold to resist the spirit of the age when they think that 
wrong for them, and firm in their own convictions and determinatious. Such conduct 
is bracing to witness ; unhappily it is not common. 

Vers. 11 — 17. — Filud obedience. The filial obedience of the Eechabites is here adduced 
as a rebuke to the people of Israel for their disobedience to their Father in heaven. 

I. We owe a duty of filial obedience to God. Obligation corresponds to privi- 
lege ; peculiar relationship involves peculiar duties. If God is our Father, we owe 
special obedience to God on account of our relationship with him. The doctrine of 
the fatherhood of God is no excuse for the relaxation of the fidelity which we felt to be 
obligatory so long as he was regarded only as our supreme Euler. Instead of making 
us more careless, this doctrine should increase the assiduity of our devotion. Strict 
religionists who dread the moral effects of the modern broad enunciation of this great 
truth, and lax self-indulgent people who fancy it will allow them to defy the Law of 
God at pleasure, both fall hito a grievous mistake. The father has rights over his 
children possessed by no one else, and they owe obedience to him as to no other person. 
This was recognized and carried out much further in the ancient world thwx it is 
among us. 1. It is based on nature; the child naturally belongs to the parent. 2. It 
is increased by experience. For years the child is wholly de[)endent on his parents. 
Helpless, and needing constant attention, he finds in them sustenance, protection, and 
happiness. Parental anxiety, labour, and sacrifice should bind the children by ties ol 
deepest gratitude. Eepayment is impossible, nor is it expected ; but the least that can 
be done is to offer obedience. 3. It is recognized by law. The old Eoman law gave 
the father absolute power over the life of his child. Modern law, though it interferes 
more with the relations of the family, sanctions wide parental rights. Now, if God is 
our Father, similar obligations bind us to filial obedience to him over and above the 
obligation we may feel to his Law, his holiness, and his supremacy (Mai. i. 6). 

n. TbI mCOLKCT OF FILIAL OBEDIENCE TO GOD IB BEBUEED BY THE NEOUEOT 01 



OH. XXXT. 1— 19.J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 97 

FILIAL OBEDIENCE TO MEN. The Rechabites were a rebuke to the Israelites. Tet the 
Israelites had less excuse for disobeying their heavenly Father than the Rechabites 
would have had for neglecting the ordinances of their ancestor. Matthew Henry clearly 
indicates the points of contrast somewhat as follows. I give his thoughts with abriilg- 
ment : — 1. The Rechabites were obedient to one who was but a man ; but the Jews 
were disobedient to an infinite and eternal God. 2. Jonadab was long since dead, 
and could neither take cognizance of their disobedience nor give correction for it ; but 
God lives for ever to see how his laws are observed, and to punish disobedience. 3. The 
Rechabites were never put in mind of their obligations to their father; but God often 
sent his prophets to his people, " rising early and speaking," etc. 4. Jonadab never did 
that for his seed which God bad done for his people ; he left them a charge, but left them 
Qo estate to bear the charge ; but God had given his people a good land, etc. 6. God did 
not tie up his people to so much hardship as Jonadab required of his descendants ; and 
yet Jonadab's orders were obeyed, and God's were not. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOKa. 

Vers. I — 6. — Temptation iy Divine command. I. So fab as it went it was real. The 
scene and the circumstances of authority and religious sanction given to the invitation 
were calculated to influence the mind. The " pots full of wine " were also an appeal to 
the eye. God has tried his servants often, but with no intention of making them fall. 
He tried Job, Abraham, David, etc. He often does this by his providence, the with- 
holding of his grace, etc. 

II. It was bone with the certaintt that the temftation would be resisted. 
The same wisdom that devised the incident knew what would be its issue. We are 
assured of God that he tempteth no man (Jas. i. 13), and that he will not suffer men 
to be tempted beyond their ability to resist (1 Cor. 1. 13). Yet God is continually testing 
and trying his people, that they may discover their own weaknesses and apply to him 
for succour. 

III. A great end was to be served. The scene ii dramatic and carefully arranged, 
that it may be publicly impressive. The lesson to be learnt on this occasion is not that 
of temperance, but simply of filial obedience in one of its most singular and emphatic 
illustrations. To Israel the lesson was a comparative one. They were put to shame 
by the steadfastness of men who had no such exalted Person to obey in the matter of 
their peculiar customs, but who yet had unswervingly adhered to it. Israel, with all the 
reasons for a similar fidelity, had been weak and fickle, and finally apostate. Men are 
tried, not only for their own sakes, but for the sake of others. The patience of the 
saints is a potent reason for our patience and obedience. Christ himself is the Example 
ftnd Inspiration for all mankind. He was faithful when he was tempted by circum- 
stances infinitely more trying than any that can assail us; and his power ia at our 
disposal when we ask for it. — M. 

Vers. 6 — 10. — TO« filial obedience of tK» Bechabiies. There is something very 
remarkable in this simple history. Originally aliens in race (1 Chron. ii. 55), they gained 
a place in the land of Israel (Judg. i. lli). Jonadab the son of Rechab, the ancestor of 
the race, was the true founder of the family. His character was so high that Jehu 
affected his company in order to gain esteem from the people (2 Kings x. 15, 16), 
From him their ascetic rule of life was received, and they had continued to observe it 
with unswerving strictness. We have here an illustration of — 

I. An ezaooerated vibtite. 1. Their asceticism was a real virtue. In its various 
elements of temperance, simplicity, and hardihood, it presents a most exemplary and 
attractive aspect. It must have tended to holiness and happiness. It would be well 
for the men of our own day were they to imitate this race in these respects. Most of 
our social evils are easily traceable to the influence of intemperance, luxury, etc. It 
was a noble ideal nobly realized ; yet : 2. It was exaggerated beyond natural limits. 
This is the penalty of those who rigidly observe one mode of life. Excellent as that 
may be at the first, and, as a whole, may still continue to be, it gets out of joint with 
the advancing customs of the age, isolates its votaries from the general current of tha 

JEREMIAH — II. H 



98 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEEEMIAH, Loh- "XT. 1— 19. 

national life, and stereotypes the degree of civilization or barbarism which gave it birth. 
In its rigid observance it leads to anachronisms, inconvenieDces, etc. Its accidental 
features become more noticeable than its essential ones. Unless grounded on suCBcient 
reasons and continually referred to these, unless adapted in its accidental features to 
the changing circumstances of the world, — it tends to become unreal, and to produce 
unreal moral distinctions. There is something of weakness to be detected in the expla- 
nation of their presence in Jerusalem (ver. H). They were out of place. 3. The secret 
of this was that it was/ounded upon an exaggerated sentiment. Asceticism is in itself 
neither good nor bad. It receives its real moral importance from the motives and 
aims that underlie it. In this instance the motive was excellent so far as it was legiti- 
mate, but it was clothed with a factitious sacredness and obligation. Consistently 
carried out, such a principle would stay all progress and sanction the most horrible 
crimes. That their ancestor had enjoined their mode of life was hardly a suCBcient 
reason for it, and the motive of policy with which he had commanded it was not an 
exalted one. The true justification for a peculiar mode of life, especially when of this 
trying description, must be found in the great human and spiritual aims which religloa 
— especially in its later evangelical phase — ^presents for our achievement. To guard the 
weakness of a brother, to further the moral and religious welfare of men, and to glorify 
God by holiness and unselfishness of conduct, are aims that may be ours if we wilL 

II. A MAGNIFIED PERSONAL INFLUENCE. The hold this man obtained over the con- 
duct of his descendants through so many generations was most remarkable. A man ol 
marked character, great reputation for sanctity, wisdom, and power of impressing others 
with his [leculiar views, forms a conception of what life ought to be, especially for those 
who, like his own family, are strangers living on sufierance in the midst of another 
people. The Eastern feeling of respect for parents and reverence for ancestors and of 
I he sacredness of tradition and custom associates itself with his teaching and example, 
and soon his rule of life becomes a fixed, ineradicable principle amongst his descendants 
far more potent than any law of the statute-book. This shows : 1. 2%« power oj 
personal influence. " Influence is the best kind of power." It belongs more or less to 
all of us ; and we shall be held responsible for its legitimate increase and direction. 
The influence of any one of us is probably both greater and less than he suspects. It is 
a natural and proper instinct for man to seek this moral power, and the relations of life 
afford many opportunities for acquiring and exercising it. Parents. 2. The importance 
of securing that our influence shall he of the right kind. Ultimate results and effects 
must be left to God ; but we have to do with our own character and aims, and with the 
known tendency of the means at our disposal. We should seek that our influence 
should be of the very highest kind. It is better to discover moral principles and com- 
municate spiritual inspirations than merely to initiate a custom. Jonadab's influence 
was on the whole very salutary, but it was not of the highest kind, because he did not 
furnish his imitators with a morally sufficient motive. So fixed and mechanical, indeed, 
had their obedience become that they appeared to have more regard to his precept than 
for the direct command of God (ver. 5). In this respect Jesus Christ is immeasurably 
his superior. His precepts are self-evident, and commended by his own personal 
example. He did not appeal to mere self-preservation, but to the noblest moral instincts 
and principles of our nature. We are not coerced by the personality of Jesus, but 
persuaded by the sweet leasonableness of his doctrine and Spirit. Influence like this 
may be slower in making its way, but in the end it is sure to be more lasting and 
universal — M. 

Vers. 18, 19. — The blessing of the Rechabitet, I. What it included. It is very start, 
ling to find that their blessing is precisely that which is pronounced upon the spiritual 
Israel of the future. There are two factors in the blessing. 1. Continuity of the family. 
2. Perpetuation of its religious standing and moral character: " To stand hefwe me for 
ever." It is said that descendants of the Bechabites have been discovered in Youcan, 
and that they still observe the strict regimen of their forefathers. 

II. Why it was bestowed. The reason given is simple enough, vii. their filial 
obedience; but it hardly seems to account for the character of the blessing. It is mani- 
fest that the bestowal of such a blessing is not to be taken as implying that their con- 
duct had attained to the highest moral standard. £ut it is signiticant that the fifth 



OH. XXXV. 1— !».] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. »S 

commandment, enjoining tliis very duty, should be the first with promise. Why ii 
emphasis laid upon filial. obedience in the Old and New Testaments ? Is it not because 
the sentiment of filial affection and respect is a necessary antecedent and preparativ6 
for the love of Ood, which is the supreme and univ^sal law of life f Of the latter 
it is the shadow and type. Secondary occasions for the solemn utterance of the 
blessing on this occasiou were probably found in (1) the fact that their conduct had 
furnished a signal reproof of the apostasy of the nation from its true, eternal Father; 
(2) that they acted up to the light which they had ; and (3) that the principle of filial 
obedience, and the habits of temperance which in their case it had enjoined, wen 
thereby more powerfully commended to the observance of men. — M, 

Vers. 5, 6. — Fathers of temperanee. " Intertwined with the history of Israel ig that of 
a wild and independent tribe of Kenites. When the western Israelites abandoned the 
roving Arab life to settle in the cities of Canaan, the Kenites still retained their pastoral 
habits. One of the characteristics which we trace in their history was a fierce resent- 
ment against oppression and idolatry. It was a Kenite woman, Jael, who smote Sisera, 
even in her own tent. It was a Kenite sheik, Jonadab, the son of Rechab, who 
washed his fierce hands in the blood of Baal's worshippers and Ahab's bouse (1 Kingi 
xvi.)." The free and eaccor air of the desert bad ])assed into their lives, and they loved it 
dearly, and determined never to abandon it, especially when they saw the ruin wrought 
by the oppression and luxury which were overspreading the inhabitants of the cities 
they knew most of. Hence the Rechabite vow. But the triumphant march of the vast 
squadrons of Nebuchadnezzar swept the deserts as well as the cities which lay in his 
way. And for the time even the hardy Kenites were compelled to set up their tents 
witliin the walls of Jerusalim. To them God sent Jeremiah, that he might test and 
behold and then declare their fidelity to their ancient vow. Amid a population given 
to excess and gluttony, their total abstinence from wine and their temperate habits 
could not but excite attention, as much as the strange sight of their black tents pitched 
in the open spaces and squares of the city. Intimation was given to Jeremiah to teach 
from their obedience a lesson on the disobedience of the people amid whom they were 
sojourning. " Inviting these rude and faithful Bedouins into a chamber of the temple, 
he gave them the invitation which the revellers of Jerusalem would only have been too 
eager to accept, ' Drink ye wine.' But the Rechabites were not to be tempted. They 
had adopted their law of temperance at the bidding of a mighty ancestor, as a protection 
against the temptation of cities. They continued it because conscience approved and 
health rewarded a noble choice. Broken once — even to please a prophet of the Lord — 
it might be broken again, and soon the glory of their race would have fled. Therefore 
they at once replied, plainly, even bluntly, 'We will drink no wine; for,' etc" Now, 
learn from this — 

I. God sanctions the tempebancb vow. (Of. ver. 18.) How many and manifold are 
these sanctions 1 By tlie rewards of obedience thereto; by the doom which follows 
disobedience to the laws of temperance; by his providence and his Spirit speaking 
within ; by the laws of health, of thrift, of social well-being, of conscience; by sanctions 
negative and positive alike ; by the example of some of the foremost and best of men, 
and by his Word ; — by all, he witnesses in favour of the temperance vow. 

II. And thbbb is sorb need for it. " If I were to tell you," says one, " that there 
Is in the British Isles a being into whose treasuries are annually poured in unpro- 
ductive consumption more than one hundred and forty millions of our national wealth ; 
whose actions crush year by year more victims than have been crushed for centuries 
together by the car of Juggernaut; whose unchecked power causes year by year horrors 
incomparably more multitudinous than those which the carnage of any battle-fields can 
present; if I were to say that the services wrought by this being were, if any at all, 
which is an open question, yet almost valueless in kind, infinitesimal in extent, while, 
on the other hand, the direct admitted indisputable miseries he inflicts were terrible in 
virulence and vast in ramification ; if I were to say that at his right hand and at his left, 
as eager and ever active ministers, stood Idiocy and Pauperism, Degradation and Bru- 
tality ; and at that point you were all to rise up at once and cry aloud, 'Tell us the nam* 
of this being, that we may drive him with execration from the midst of us, and that every 
one of us may strive to extirpate his power and expel his polluting footsteps from our 



100 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH, [ch, xxxY. 1— 19. 

soil ; ' and if I were to say that, far from doing this, we all as a nation, and nearly all ol 
us as individuals, crown him with garlands, honour him with social customs, introduce 
him into gladdest gatlierings, sing songs in his glory, build myriads of temples to his 
service, familiarize our very children with his fame and praise ; — were I to say this, then 
sentence by sentence, clause by clause, word by word, it would be literally true, not of 
a man, but of a thing, and that thing intoxicating drink." 

III. How MAT WK FURTHBE THE TBMPEBANOB CAUSE? Certainly there is no help 
equal tu that of taking this vow ourselves. If, wherever we are, we will touch not, 
taste not, handle not, on the ground that we regard it as the curse of this land, that 
entire abstinence will speak more eloquently than aught beside. And besides this, train 
your children as Jonadab trained his; command them, sayinj;, "Ye shall drink no 
wine." A generation so trained, what a difference they would make on the siis of 
temperance and all that is good 1 Never allow a sneer at those who have taket the 
temperance vow. Strike at the aids and abettors of intemperance, such as badly 
drained, ill-lighted, comfortless, unveatilated houses ; lack of means of reasonable recrea- 
tion and amusement ; want of education and leisure, etc. Never treat drunkenness, 
however grotesque and absurd its forms, as a thing to be laughed at. We never really 
hate that at which we laugh. And let each one be sure that he does something in this 
great cause, that he comea " to the help of the Lord against the mighty." — 0. 

Ver. 14. — The children put to ihame iy the ttranger. The men of Judah were the 
children, inmates of God's house, members especially of his family. These Bechabites, 
a wandering tribe of the desert, were the stranger. But their fidelity to the command 
laid upon them by their ancestor Jonadab is contrasted with and rebukes the shameful 
disregard of the laws of God, of which the men of Judah were so guilty. For near 
three hundred years the Rechabites had, out of regard for their father's ordinance, 
adhered to their self-denying customs, and were adhering to them still, whilst God's own 
people had set at nought all his counsel and would none of his Law. 

I. Obsebve this contrast. 1. In the motives for obedience which existed on either 
side. The one was an earthly father, the other Divine ; the one man, the other God. 
The one, long dead, and whose right to control the actions of his descendants had there- 
fore lapsed ; the other, the ever-living God, whose right is as eteinal as himself. The 
one had given an arbitrary command against which much might have been urged ; the 
other had given commands which reitson, conscience, and experience alike consented to 
as wise and good, 2. In the nature of the obedience rendered. The one was full of sell- 
denial — ^a hajd, stern law ; the other contemplated life in a land flowing with milk and 
honey, and its ways were ways of pleasantness, and all its paths peace. 3. In the 
results 0/ obedience. In the one, obedience had kept together a small, hardy tribe ol 
half-barbarian herdsmen, without home, friends, religion, wealth, or any marked earthly 
good. In the other, obedience had been crowned with every blessing, so that all men 
confessed, " Blessed is the man that ieareth the Lord." And yet, notwithstanding the 
service of the Lord was every way better, that service was disregarded by his people, 
whilst the ill-requited obedience to a long-deceased ancestor had been so faithfully 
maintained. 

II. And such contrast still exists. Look at the obedience rendered to the 
laws of the Kor&n by the followers of Mahomet ; to the laws of honour, of trade, of 
human masters ; everywhere we may see human law obeyed, whilst Divine are set at 
nought. The world can command the prompt, implicit obedience of her votaries ; but 
God calls, and no man answers. 

III. Explain such contrasts. It is because to those who faithfully obey human 
laws the transient and inferior are as if they wore eternal and supreme, whilst to those 
who profess to be bound by Divine laws the eternal and supreme are as if they 
were transient and inferior. 

IV. What do such facts bat to us ? Seek the purged vision, that we may clearly 
see the relative values of things, that our estimates may be corrected, and so we may 
come to regard as " first " the kingdom of God and his righteousness, knd " all other 
things " M secondary thereto. — C. 

?«, 15. — (Of, homily on The Divine long-tufiering worn out, toL 1, p. 204.) — CL 



OH. XXXV. 1—19.] THE BOOK OF THE PliOPHET JEREMIAH. 101 

Vers. 18, 19. — Rewardt of filial piety. We have an instance hero. Literally, th« 
promise annexed to the commandment, " Honour thy father," etc., was fulfilled ; foi 
their " days were long in the land which the Lord their God gave them." Now— 

I. There abb buch bewards. 1. Promised in God's Word (cf. paatim), 2. Yimble 
in happy home life. 3. Perpetuated in prosperous communities, nations, etc. 4. 
Sanctioned by the laws of nature, of man, and of God. 

II. They are the peoducts and proofs of the love of (Jod to mah. Hence : 
1. The heart of the parent is filled with love to his children. 2. This love leads to 
desire earnestly the cliild's well-being. 3. To secure this, God has given (1) a respon- 
sive love in the heart of the child towards its parent ; (2) the instinct of trust ; (3) the 
direct sanctions of his Word, his Spirit, his providence, to strengthen and maintain 
that filial piety which so ministers to the <:ood of all. 

III. The great Exemplab op such piety. Out Lord Jesug Christ. "I do 
always," he said, " those things which please my Father." As God is the realization of 
perfect fatherhood, so is the Lord Jesus Christ the embodiment of perfect sonship. 
That sonship was tested and tried as no human sonship ever can be, and it never failed, 
even under the pressure of the agony, the cross, the seeming abandonment. In him, 
therefore, we see our Model, and in his exaltation now our reward. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — The power of a father's command. The Rechabite habit is, of course, 
brought forward here to contrast obedience to an earthly and arbitrary demand with the 
disolicdience of Israel to heavenly and essentially righteous laws. But it is worth while 
to look into this Rechabite habit altogether, in its origin, its causes, its results, its power. 

I. The OBiaiN of this habit. The only information we have here is that the habit 
originated in a command of Jonadab. But, of course, Jonadab must have had some 
reason seeming weighty to him ; and on looking at 2 Kings x. we can make a shrewd 
guess as to the ends he had in view. He sees the sanguinary and extirpating zeal oi 
Jehu against the scions of Ahab and the worshippers of Baal, and is it not fair to pre- 
sume that he wished to guard his kinsfolk and posterity against falling into idolatry 
such as would involve a like terrible fate ? > Then it occurs to him that he csm best do 
this by separating his people from the dwellers in IsraeL This can best be done by 
urging on them to live a wandering and pastoral life ; and stUl again, the tent life is to 
be secured by separating the Kechabites from the Israelites in their pleasures. The 
Rechabite has his plain rule of conduct : " I drink no wine." "Very well," says the 
indulgent, idolatrous Israelite, "I care not for your .company." Idolatry was always 
connected with debauchery, sensuality, and indulgence of animal passions, and to all 
these things wine might come to be a minister. Unquestionably Jonadab was a shrewd 
man, and something of what he aimed at he seems to have gained. 

II. The test of this habit. No doubt the habit had often been tested, and 
presumably the same answer would ever be given : " Our father has commanded us to 
drink no wine." Was it a sufficient reason, one may ask ? To which it may be replied 
that, generally speaking, a father's command would not be enough. We must always 
ask — What is the thing commanded ? Here the question is simply one of positive precept. 
No one could say that drinking wine was a moral duty, or that the Bechabites injured 
any one by refusing to drink it. And, indeed, they might have enlarged on the advan- 
tages that had come to them through their strict compliance with Jonadab's command. 
But, in doing so, they entered on debatable ground, and might have been forced into 
argument. They did the best thing in their position — they fell back on • simple, 
unreasoning assertion of ancestral custom. Notice, too, the circumstances in which this 
habit was tested. They are divinely prepared circumstances. It is not a band of 
revellers in the house of feasting who ask them to drink wine. God commands it to be 
put before them in the house of the Lord, and in the chamber of a man of God. God 
wishes his people to see for themselves the power of a paternal request ; for never before 
surely had the reasons seemed so great for depai°tlng from the rule. 

III. The disadvantages of this habit. The habit did secure what Jonadab 
meant it to secure. The R^echabites had been kept apart from Israel. But now notice 
that an advantage gained from some purely external practice is very likely to have 
Bome accompanying disadvantage. The Bechabites become tent-dwellers, and then, on 
the approach of the Chaldeans, having no continuing city, no place of defence, they fle« 



102 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. Lch xxxt. 1—19. 

to Jerusalem. After all, the principle of Rechabitism, the principle of separation and 
isolation, has its limits. If we would fairly claim the advantages of human society in 
times of peril, we mnst not play the hermit and ascetic at other times. To be in the 
world and yet not ol it, that is both the problem and the possibility. — Y. 

Vers. 12 — 17. — Bechahites unconsciously reproving Israelites, I. How fab the men 
OP JuDAH WERE REALLY ooNnEMNED ; «.«. How far Were the cases really parallel ? 
The first question to be asked is — Were the men of Judah as able to obey the command- 
ments of Jehovah as the Rechabites were to obey the precept of Jonadab? and, of 
course, the answer is that for many reasons they were not. But passing this over for 
the present, let us notice the one respect in which Israelites were lamentably different 
from Kechabitea. The Rechabites gloried in their attachment to the precept of their 
ancestor ; it was a sort of point of honour with them ; whereas the Israelites were in 
no way grieved, humiliated, or ashamed because of their disobedience. If only it had 
been a continual and sore trouble of heart that there was not in them strength to obey God, 
why, this very trouble would have been a measure of obedience. But they both dis- 
obeyed and disobeyed in the most heedless and audacious way. Instead of receiving 
prophets with contrition and as messengers of God, they laughed them to scorn, abused 
them, and even put them to death. And similarly the Rechabites reprove us. In the 
midst of all our natural inability to give a true obedience to Divine requirements, we 
should be incessantly troubled by this ; then would the way be made open for revealing 
to us how obedience becomes possible. 

II. How FAB THE Rechabites WERE REALLY FBAisED. After all, Rechabite and 
Israelite were really the same sort of beings. If they had exchanged places, they 
would haye exchanged conduct. The Israelite was quite capable of sticking, with 
utmost tenacity, to some external rule. And the Rechabite, we may be quite sure, was 
equally incapable, with the Israelite, of obeying the commandments of God. But the 
Rechabite was to be praised in this that he recognized an authority outside of his own 
wishes. The law under which he lived might not go very far; but it operated with 
certainty so far as it did go. The Rechabite would have died rather than violate the 
ancestral prohibition. God ever recognizes conformity to law as a good thing. We 
must, therefore, not go seeking in these Rechabites more than God has appointed us to 
find. The one good thing in them was singled out to point a most humiliating lesson 
and vindicate the need of a severe chastisement. Compared with the benefits of Jehovah 
toward Israel, what had Jonadab done for the Rechabites ? — Y. 

Vers. 18, 19. — Qod's recognition of the Rechabite obedience. This is just in accor- 
dance with what we might expect. The Rechabites, when they have been used to put 
Israel to shame, are not allovf^ed to go away without a sufScient stamp on their noble 
conduct. The Divine estimate of that conduct is sufficiently shown by the words 
Jeremiah is authorized to speak. 

I. God will always recognize a sPiRrr of obbdibnok. Here we lay emphasis, 
not so much on actual obedience, as on a spirit of obedience. As to actual obedience, 
there may be dispute of claim and conflict as to authorities. But the spirit of obedience 
is one running through the whole of life. And God must have seen the spirit of 
obedience very strong in these Rechabites. Perhaps it is not too much to say that, if 
they bad been in the place of Israel, it would have been a sore grief to them that they 
were not able properly to obey the commandments of Jehovah. Their obedience was 
tried, it must be remembered, not in the ordinary associations of life, but in extraordi- 
nary and difficult circumstances. They showed the stuff that martyrs are made of, and 
if God specially recognized their obedience in what was only a matter of external con- 
duct, how sure we may be that he will recognize all obedience that goes deeper I The 
thing he would have us do is to find out the right Master, right Teacher, right Leader, 
and then follow him to the death. 

IL 1'he PABTictTLAB PROMISE WHICH GoD HAKES HEBE. Ycry likely, in a cert^n 
sense, it was literally fulfilled. We must take " for ever " in the limited meaning so 
often found in the Scriptures, and then we shall have no difficulty in believing that the 
Bechahites for many generations had a special providence surrounding them. Bui 
recollecting the spiritual significance of prophecy, we may take " for evw " in iU largest 



OH. xxxvi. 1— 32.J THE BOOK- OF THE PllOt'HKT JEREMIAH. 



103 



8en86. The essence of the promise is not fulfilled to sons of Jonadab according to the 
flesh. Promises to natural succession were only to serve a temporary purpose. As all 
who have a spirit of trust in them are reckoned children of Abraham, so all who have 
in them the spirit of obedience may be reckoned children of Jonadab. Where the 
spirit of obedience is, knowledge of God's will becomes easy. Where the spirit oi 
obedience is, actual obedience becomes easier and easier and more a matter of satis- 
tactioQ. — Y. 



EXrOSITION. 



CHAPTERS XXXVL— XXXVIII. 
Nabbatite ov Events pbecediko thb 

SlESE OF JeBUSALEM. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 
Thb Boll or Prophecy oestboted bt 
Jehoiaeim. 
In the fourth year of Jehoiakim (which, 
it is important to remember, was the first 
of Nebucliadnezzar) Jeremiah was directed 
to write down all his previous revelations, 
from the beginning of bis ministry to the 
present day. Such, at least, is the literal 
meaning of vers. 1, 2 ; but it would seem 
thai the literal meaning can hardly be the 
right one. First of all, a historically ao- 
eurate reproduction of tlie prophecies would 
not have suited Jeremiah's object, which 
was not historical, but practical ; he desired 
to give a salutary shock to the people by 
bringing before them the fatal consequencci 
of their evil deeds. And uext, it appears 
from ver. 29 that tlie purport of the roll 
which the king burned was tliat the King of 
Babylon should " come and destroy this 
land ; " whereas it is clear that Jeremiah 
had uttered many other important declara- 
tions in the course of his already long 
ministry. 

Now, it is remarkable, and points the 
way to • solution of the problem, that oh. 
XIV. Is said (ver. 1) to have been written 
in the very same year to which the narrative 
before us refers, and that it is mainly con- 
cerned with the invasion of Nebuchadnezzar 
and its consequences (indeed, entirely so, if 
we admit that ch. xxv. 12, 26 have received 
interpolation). 

Is not thit the prophecy which Jeremiah 
dictated to Baruoh ? ' and is not ver. 2 a loose, 

' There is a striking confirmation of this 
fiew ill the relation of ch. vii. to ch. xxvi., 
the former containing the propheoy shortly 
gummed up in the latter. 



inaccurate statement due to a later editor ? 
That the prophetic as well as the historical 
books have passed through various phases 
(without detriment to their religious value) 
is becoming more and more evident. The 
■eventh and eighth chapters of Isaiah, and 
the tliirty-seventh and thirty-eighth of the 
same book, have demonstrably been brought 
into their present shape by an editor 
(see Cheyne's 'Prophecies of Isaiah,' vol. 
i.) ; is it not highly reasonable to conjecture 
that these narrative chapters of Jeremiah 
have, to a greater or less extent, passed 
through a similar process (see below on 
ver. 6)? (The main point of this theory— 
that relative to ch. xxv. — has been brought 
forward by Dr. H. Griitz, in his ' Monats- 
Bchrift fur Gescliichte uud Wisseiischaft des 
Judenthums,' vol. xxiii. p. 298, etc.) 

Ver. 4, — Bamch. Already mentioned as 
Jeremiah's attendant, in ch. xxxii. 12. He 
appears to have been of high rank (see on 
ver. 15), as Josepljus, indeed, expressly 
states (' Ant,,' x. 9, 1). Maaseiah, bis grand- 
father, was governor of the city (2 Chron. 
xxxiv. 8), and Seraiah his brother (oh. li. 59) 
held some equally honourable, tliough not 
80 easily definable, position in the court. 

Ver. 5, — I am shut up. Not so ; Jeremiah 
was not detained by material force. Some 
strong reason he had (perhaps of a cere- 
monial kind), but as it was irrelevant to 
the narrative, it is not given. Render, 
I am detained (same verb as in 1 Sam. 
xii. 7). 

Ver. 6. — TTpon the fasting-day. The 
mention of the fast-day suggests that ver. 
9 is out of its place, which again confirms 
the view that the narrative before us has 
received its present form from an editor. 
In the ears of aU Judah (see ver. 9). 

Ver. 7. — They will present their supplica- 
tion; literally, their tupplication will fall 
(as margin). The phrase seems to be sug- 
gested by the gesture of a suppliant. Hence 
humility is one idea ; but success is entirely 
another. That which lights down before 
one's eyes cannot be disregarded. Hence, 
in ch. xxxvii. 20 and xlii. 2, tke Authorized 
Version renders, "be Mcepted." Tbb is. 



104 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxvl 1— 32 



at any rate, a better rendering than that 
quoted above, which is both weak In itself 
and obscures the cnnnection. And will 
return; rather, so that they return. "Ke- 
turning,"t.e. repentance, is necessary, because 
their " evil ways " have provoki d Jehovah 
to "great anger and fury;" but is only 
possible by the Divine I'elp (comp. Acta 
v. 31, "To give repentance unto Israel"). 
Hence prayer is the iirst duty. 

Ver. 9. — In the fifth year of Jehoiakim. 
It is remarkable that the 8eptuagint has 
here the eighth year; and Josephus, too, 
relates that Jehoi»kim paid tribute to Nebu- 
chadnezzar in his eighih year. This latter 
statement seems to tally with the notices 
in 2 Kings xxiv. The vassaLige of Je- 
hoiakim ia there said to have lasted three 
years ; this followed the rebellion ; while 
the siege of Jerusalem was reserved for the 
short reign of Jehoiachin. Now, as this 
siege must have been the punishment of 
Jehoiakim's rebellion, and as the reign of 
the latter king lasted eleven years, we are 
brought to the same date as that given by 
Josephus for the commencement of the 
vassalage, viz. the eighth year. It is to 
this year, then, that 2 Kings xxiv. 1 refers 
when it says, " In his days Nebuchadnezzar 
King of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim 
became his servant ; " and also the narrative 
before as in the statement th:it " they pro- 
claimed a fast before Jehovuh to all the 
people in Jerusalem, and to all the people 
thiit came from the cities of Judah unto 
Jerusalem." What otht i event would have 
produced such a concourie of worshippers ? 
The battle of Carcbemisli (which took place 
in the fourth year of Jehoiukim)? But it 
was by no means clear as yet that .the con- 
sequences of this would be disastrous for 
Judah. Carchemish was too far off for the 
people of Judah to show such serious alarm 
(similarly Gratz, ' Monatsschrift,' etc., vol. 
xxiii. p. 300). If so, Jeremiah kept his 
prophecy by him for several years, till the 
right moment came. The ninth month. As 
this is a winter month (see ver. 22), Jere- 
miah evidently reckons by the B.ibvlonian 
calendar, the ninth month of which, Kisiluv 
(Hebrew, Chisleu), began from the new 
moon of December. 

Ver. 10. — The ohamber (see on ch. xxxv. 
4) of Oemariah . . . the scribe. Gemariah 
was favourably disposed to Jeremiah (ver. 
25); he was probably the brother of 
Jeremiah's friend, Ahikam (ch. xxvi. 21). 
He was one of the royal secretaries, and 
reckoned among the " princes " (see ver. 
12). In the higher eonrt. "Higher" equi- 
valent to "inner." The new gate (see on 
ch. XX. 2). 

Ver. 12. — He went down (see on oh. 
ixvL 10). Sat there. In deliberaticm on 



the affairs of the state. Elishama the BOiibe. 
Gemariah, then, had a colleague. So in 
Solomon's cabinet (if the word may be used) 
there were two soferim, or secretaries, one 
perhaps for the civil and one for the military 
business (1 Kings iv. 3; comp. ch. lii._25) 
Elnathan. Mentioned already, ch. ixvi. 22. 

Ver. 14.— Jehudi ... the son of Cushi. 
A genealogy which contains a history. 
Jehudi is not a true proper name, any more 
than Gadi (" a Gadite "), the quasi-name of 
the father of Menahem (2 Kings xv. 14), 
or than Oushi, the quasl-name of Jehudi's 
great-grandfather. Cushi himself was, 
doubtless, an Ethiopian, and probably (like 
Ebed-meleoh, ch. xxxviii. 7) a eunuch, or 
at least chamberlain; his son and grandson 
were both woruhippera of Jehovah (as their 
names indicate), but were not qualified to 
become Jewish citizens. The Egyptian 
was nut, indeed, to be abhorred, but not until 
the third generation could his descendants 
be admitted into " the congregation " (Deut. 
xxiii. 8). Egypt and Ethiopia were historic- 
ally connected (see Lenormant's 'Ancient 
History,' index to vol. i.). For the name of 
"Jehudi," comp. " Jehudith," daughter ot 
Beeri the Hittite (Gen. xxvL 34). 

Ver. 15. — Sit down now. The princes 
evidently recognize Baruch as belonging to 
B family of distinction (see on ver. 4) ; and 
from vers. 19, 25 we may infer that they 
were favourably inclined both to Baruch 
and to his master (comp. ch xxvi.). 

Ver. 16. — They were afraid both one ana 
other ; rather, they Sumed thudderingly ont 
to another. Such an announcement as 
Jeremiah's at such a serious crisis startled 
them by its boldness. We may infer that 
the prophet had for some time, by Divine 
command, kept his sombre anticipations in 
the background. We will surely tell the 
king; rather, we have to tell the king. 
Friendly feeling would have prompted tliem 
to hush up the affair (see ch. xxvii. 20, 21), 
but duty forbade. 

Ver. 17. — How didst thou write all these 
words at his mouth % Two questions seem 
to be combined here — " How didst thou 
write all these words?" and "Didst thou 
write it all at his mouth 7 " Baruch's answer 
is good for both. 

Ver. 18. — He pronounced, etc.; rather, 
He kept dictating . . . while I wrote with 
ink, etc. The tiddition of the last clause 
suggests (and was, perhaps, intended to do 
so) that Baruch's function was simply 
mechanical. 

Ver. 20. — Into the eonrt; i.t. into tb« 
inner court, in which the royal apartments 
were apparently aitnated (comp. 1 Kings 
vii. 8). 

Ver. 21.— Which stood biside the king; 
literally, . . . above the king. The standing 



CH. xxxVL 1— 32.J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



105 



ooortien, of ootuse, rose above the king; 
comp. Isk. Ti. 2, " Seraphim stood above 
him." 

Ver. 22. — In the winter-house ; i.e. that 
part of the royal palace Q>eih, honse, may 
also be rendered apartment) which was 
arranged for a winter habitation (comp. 
Amos iii. 15). According to Dr. Thomson 
('The Land and the Book,' p. 309), the 
more airy part of a house is called " summer- 
house," and the more sheltered room " winter- 
house." The ninth month, in which the 
events now being related took place, corre- 
gponded appiOximately to our December. It 
was, therefiire, the cold and rainy season ; 
December is a stormy month in Palestine. 
A lire on the hearth ; rather, in the chafing- 
dish (or, brazier). It was a vessel with live 
coals placed in the centre of the room, still 
used in the East in cold weather. 

Ver. 23. — Three or four leaves; rather, 
columng or cmnpartments. " Leaves " would 
imply that it was B book out of wliich 
Jehudi read, whereas it was a roll (m'gillah 
never has any other meaning). But " books " 
were not yet known, nor would a knife have 
been necessary to separate the pages. He 
out it. The subject may be either the king 
or Jehudi (at the bidding of the king). 
The term implies that the action of cutting 
was repeated several times ; but we are not 
to suppose that each successive portion was 
cut off as it was read. The indignation of 
the hearer translated itself into the repeated 
mutilation of the roll, until all the roll was 
(oast into the fire and) consumed. With 



the penknife ; literally, with fh« $arS)e', 
knife. On the hearth; vsAheT, in the chafing- 
dinh (or, brazier). 

Ver. 24. — Yet they were not afraid. Un- 
like Josiah (2 Kings xxii. 11), and even 
Ahab (1 Kings, xxi. 27). Nor any of hii 
seryants; t.e. the courtiers, aa opposed to 
the " princes." 

Ver. 26. — The son of Hammeleoh ; rather, 
a royal prince (we should render similarly 
in oh. xxxviii. 6; 1 Kings xxii. 26 ; 2 Kings 
xi. 1, 2 ; Zepb. i. 8). We have seen already 
that the number of such royal princes was 
very large (see on ch. xvii. 9) ; any one, in 
fact, who had a king among his ancestors 
was a " royal prince." The Lord hid them ; 
i.e. saved them from discovery. 

Vers. 27 — 32. — Punishment denoanoed 
against Jehoiakim, and second writing o' 
the former prophecy. 

Ver. 29. — Thou shalt say to Jehoiakim , 
rather, concerning Jehoiakim. Intercourse 
between Jehoiakim and the prophet was 
broken off by the preceding scene. The 
speech begins in tbe oratio directa, but soon 
passes into the obliqua. Cause co cease . . . 
man and beast. A foreible description of 
the completeness of the devastation. 

Ver. 30. — He shall have none co sit, etc. 
Substantially a repetition of the prophecy 
in oh. xxii. 18, 19 (comp. 30). 

Ver. 31. — I will bring upon them, eto. 
(comp. ch. XXXV. 17 ; xix. 15). 

Ver. 32. — Many like words. Thus Je. 
hoiakim gained nothing by ttia tin (comp 
Introduction). 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1—4. — The writing of the roll. I. Who were engaged in the wbitino of 
THE ROLL? 1. Ood. (1) The thoughts of the propheoies to be recorded Were inspired 
by God. " Pro|ihecy " means " inspired utterance." Jeremiah was to write " the words 
that I have spoken unto thee." We should seek in the Bible chiefly, not the scribe's 
letters (grammatical study), nor the prophet's words (historical theology), but God's 
thoughts (spiritual truth). (2) God commanded the writing of the roll (ver. 2). The 
Bible is given to us by (Jod. It is his will that the sayings of ancient prophets and 
apostles should be the lamp for all ages. Therefore (o) he will bless the right reading 
of the Bible, and (6) he will call us to account for the use we make of it. 2. Jeremiah. 
God does not speak to mankind by a direct and audible voice as with the thunder-tones 
of Sinai. He speaks through an instrument — a man, a prophet. And this prophet is 
plainly not just a mechanical mouthpiece to the Divine voice. His personality counts 
for something. His style, mode of thought, experience, general knowledge, spiritual 
condition, etc., all mould his utterances of inspired truth. Jeremiah's prophecies are 
characteristic of Jeremiah. 3. Baruch. The scribe has neither the genius to conceire 
the thought, nor the oratorical and literary gifts to clothe it in language. He is a 
simple amanuensis. Yet his work is important. For some reason not expressed, 
possibly like St. Paul on account of bodily weakness, Jeremiah did not write out his 
prophecies with his own hand. Thus work was found for Baruch. God finds ofSces 
Borresponding to all varieties of gifts. But the less gifted are too often ambitious to per- 
form the more honoured tasks of greater men, or, failing in these, they are often reluctant 
to fulfil their more lowly calling. 



106 THE BOOK OP THn PROPHET .EEEMlAtl. [oh. ixxvL 1— 32 



n. Wht was the roll written ? This roll was not to contain a new composition, 
ft was to be only a writing of utterances which had already been made public. Why, 
then, was it written? 1. That the prophecies might be preserved. Truth is eternaL 
A truth once discovered should he cherished as a lasting possession. It may be lost, 
but it can never decay. " The Word of the Lord endiireth for ever ; " therefore the record 
of it should be preserved as of permanent value. 2. That the prophecies might reach 
a larger audience. The roll could be frequently perused and by various readers. 
Hevelation is not for the few initiated ; it is for all who need its light. 3. That the 
prophecies might be reread to those who had already heard them. The use of them 
was not expended when they were first spoken. We are too ready to be attracted by 
mere novelty. The latest books and the latest ideas are run after to the neglect of greater 
thoughts and greater works of older date. But truth is more important than novelty. 
And old truths need to be repeated, because (1) they may have been received with 
inattention at the first hearing ; (2) they may be better understood or newly applicable 
under fresh circumstances, and after the hearer has gained larger powers of insight by 
his growing experience ; (3) they may be so profound as to be practically inexhaustible, 
or so eternally fresh and inspiring as to be always useful ; (4) they fail of their end till 
they affect our conduct, and must be repeated " line upon hue " while men fail to do 
what they know. 4. That the prophecies might he studied carefully and compared 
together. So we should study the Bible, searching the Scriptures and comparing parts 
together, as we can only do when the whole lies written before us. 

III. What was the scope and aim op the boll ? 1. It was a record of God^t wrath 
against sin and a denunciation of judgment. The words so important that they needed 
to be thus recorded were spoken " against Israel, and against Judah, and against all 
the nations " (ver. 2). People like to forget disagreeable ideas and cherish only those 
that please them. let there are times when it is for our own profit to face them. 
Surely it is best to know our danger if by the knowledge of it we can find a means to 
escape it, or, at the worst, be prepared to meet it. But if the revelation of judgment, 
and of temporal judament, contained in Jeremiah's prophecies was so precious as to be 
committed to writing under a solemn Divine commission, what value shall we set on 
the revelations of heavenly things and declarations of the glad tidings of salvation that 
are written in other parts of the Bible ? 2. It aimed at leading the people to repentance. 
(Ver. 3.) The threats of future calamities were first uttered with this end, and they were 
to be repeated for the same object. Thus the darkest words of revelation are spoken 
in mercy. If they are repeated, it is because God is so forbearing and anxious to save 
chat he will not give his people up. The aim of revelation is practical. It is a lamp to 
jur feet (Ps. cxix. 105). The cliief purpose of its warnings and its words of grace is 
to lead us back from sin to God. Thus the Bible, though the crowning work of all 
literature, should not be regarded chiefly from a literary point of view, but rather aa 
conttuning messages from our Father to guide and help our conduct. 

Vers. 5 — ^21. — The reading of the roU. I. The reader. Baruch, the secretary of 
Jeremiah, is sent to read the roll. We do not know what cause detains the prophet. 
He has often made bold utterances in public before this. But if he cannot go the 
truth must not be hidden. " The Word of God is not bound " (2 Tim. ii. 9). Truth is 
more important than the speaker. It matters little who is the messenger ; all importance 
attaches to the message. Men forget this when they run after a Jeremiah and neglect 
a Baruch, though the scribe may be the bearer of the prophet's teachings. We should 
recollect hnw much more important the gospel preached is than the man who preaches 
it. If a Chrysostom, a Paul, or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel but the 
trae gospel of Christ, " let him be anathema." But if Christ is proclaimed, we must be 
thankful for that, though the preacher and his conduct may not quite ai>prove themselves 
to us (Phil. i. 18). Perhaps it was best that the prophet should not appear in person 
to repeat his message. His presence might rouse personal feelings to the neglect of his 
message. He desired the truth to carry its own fair weight. Baruch did his work 
bravely and modestly. In repeating the prophet's unpopular words, he would invite the 
odium that attached to them to pass on to himself. But his duty was to read the roll. 
Ood would see to the consequences. With this courage there was a remarkable modesty. 
The occasion was a tempting opportunity for Baruch to exercise hin own powers by way 



OH. xxxTt 1— 32.J THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 107 

of comment or addition. But he said nothing beyond what was written in the roll 
He knew his place. The scribe is not a prophet. Why should not the great sermona 
of great preachers be sometimes read in our churches ? 

II. The OIRCDM8TANCE8 OF THE BEADING. The roU was read to three audiences. 
1. The people (vers. 9, 10). The Bible is a book for the peopls, not for the priests or 
the learned only. The occasion of that reading was " a tasting-day " (ver. 6). Then 
the people would be in the best mood for receiving the call to repentance. We should 
learn to speak " in season." The place of the reading was the temple (rer. 10). 
Instruction should be associated with worship. 2. The princes (vers. 11 — 19). Divine 
truth is of importance to all classes. They who are in responsible positions are especially 
called upon to study the signs of the times. 3. The king (vers. 20, 21). It was 
necessary that what concerned the fate of the kingdom should receive the most careful 
consideration of its monarch. Even kings must bow before the utterance of truth. A 
prophet can speak with authority to a king. 

III. The effect of reading. The effect on the people is not here indicated. 
Probably little moral good came of it ; but there was evideutly some impression made 
if the feelings of one man, Michaiah, may he taken in illustration. This man was so 
much stirred by what he heard that he immediately reported it to the princes at the 
court (vers. 11 — 13). From this report other consequences flowed. If but one man out 
of a great congregation is seriously impressed by a sermon, that sermon has not failed ; 
possibly through the one man it may be instrumental in effecting vast and lasting good. 
When the roll was read to the princes they were first dismayed (ver. 16). How graphic is 
that picture of the great men of the kingdom as " they turned shuddering one to another," 
terrified and confounded by the prophet's words I Perhaps some of them had heard the 
same words before unmoved. The time may come when the most hardened will be 
roused. The terror of princes might be a wholesome beginning of a genuine repentance. 
But if no appropriate action followed, it would soon die away, leaving the conscience 
the more hardened and demoralized. We need to "bring foTth/ruits meet for repent- 
ance." The princes inquired as to the origin of the roll. Were its words true ? On 
what authority were they written? Such inquiries are reasonable. We should have a 
reason for accepting what we believe to be a Divine message. Yet it is dangerous to 
divert attention from the moral weight of truth by too much intellectual criticism about 
literary curiosities. The princes reported the matter to the king with a warning to 
Baruch — patriotic and generous conduct. The king's reception of the book was very 
difierent. Unlike the princes, who neither accepted the message without question, noi 
rejected it for its unpleasant contents, but inquired calmly and careluliy as to tht 
authority of it, Jehoiakim flew into a rage and hastily destroyed it. What an act ol 
supreme folly 1 The truth was not the less important because the record of it waa burnt. 
" We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth " (2 Cor. xiii. 8). 

Vers. 22 — 26.-2^ hurtling of the roll. When the princes informed Jehoiakim of 
the circumstances connected with the reading of Jeremiah's prophecies, the king sent an 
attendant, Jehudi, to fetch the roll and read it to him. It has been said that he showed 
contempt for the Word of God by relegating the reading to a page instead of sending for 
Baruch. But Baruch had probably escaped to seclusion at the warning of the courtiers 
(ver. 19), and as he had left the roll in other hands, what was more natural than that 
Jehoiakim should send for it without a thought of Jeremiah's appointment of a reader ? 
Indeed, it matters little who reads ; the question is — How is the reading received ? 

I. CoNSiDKB THE ACTION OF THE KINO. It was December — the cold and rainj 
month. A fire blazed on the brazier. As the roll was read, the king cut it up and flung 
the sections into the fire, till he had destroyed the whole of it. His action was one of 
rage and folly. He would have no more of the prophet's dreadful words for himself; he 
would prevent them from further influencing others ; he would vent his rage upon the 
record, though he could not touch the truths contained in it. Are there not many who 
inwardly sympathize with this violence of Jehoiakim ? They dare not say they wish 
the Bible to be destroyed. But there are things in it which testify against them so 
strongly that they would keep them for ever out of sight. The special features of 
Jehoiakim'i action are significant. 1. It was beyond M* rights. King as he was, the roll 
did not bdiODg to hint. Neither bad h« any authority over the inspired word of prophecy. 



108 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxsvl 1—32 

Earthly pownr confers no privilege and power in Divine things. 2. It was ftrutoWj 
violent. Jehoiakim cut up and burnt tlie roll — that was all he could do. To refute iti 
contents was beyond his [.lOwer. 3. It was vain and futile. The roll might be burnt 
but the truth it contained could not be destroyed, nor could it even be suppressed. 
Another roll could be written, and the burning of the first would be an advertisement 
for the second. Violent opposition thus benefits the cause it would destroy. The 
burning of Tyndale's Bibles was one of the best means for securing the circulation ol 
a larger number of Eojlish Bibles. 4. It was suggested by a temptation. The fire 
was at hand — an unusual thing, apparently, just suited to the occasion. There is an 
evil providence as well as a higher providence of good. It is not safe to follow the 
superficial indication of events. That is as likely to come from below as from above. 
5. It was deliberate. Piece by piece the roll was cut up and burnt. Hasty passion 
might excuse the first burning, but not the whole process. 6. It was complete. All 
the roll was consumed. There was no discrimination. The act was symbolical. The 
rejection of one part of truth will lead to the rejection of the whole of it. 7. It was 
really injurious only to the perpetrator. The roll could not feel ; the truth could not 
be destroyed ; another roll could be written. But the burning of the roll was to the 
king's own loss. That roll contained the only available prescription for the healing of 
the distresses of himself and his kingdom. The Bible is really sent for the go«d oi 
the worst of men. Their rejection of it is only to their own loss. 

II. CoNsiDGB THE CONDUCT OF TEE COURTIERS. 1. Some stood by and voatched the 
burning. They did not aid it ; but they did not hinder it. Therefore they shared the 
responsibility of the king. For we are resposible for the evil we will not restrain as 
well as for that we commit, so that in doing little harm we may yet be guilty of much. 
The courtiers had no valid excuse for their indifference. Royal authority cannot justify 
acquiescence in wrong. Personal fear is no excuse, since it is better to die for the right 
than desert it in sheer cowardice. These men showed no fear (vcr. 24). They had 
been alarmed (ver. 16). But religious fears are transitory, and if not acted on leave the 
heart more hardened than they find it. 2. Some expostulated. These men had been 
more permanently affected by the reading of Baruch. They carried the impressions 
made in the temple to their conduct at the court. That is a proof of a real influence 
of the words of Jeremiah upon them. It is little that we feel the weight of religion 
in church. The test is how far this dwells with us in the world, and when it would 
urge to unpopular, difiicuU, or dangerous actions. 

Vers. 27 — 32. — The rewriting of the roU. Under the inspiration of God Jeremiah 
requires Baruch to write another roll, containing all that was in the curnt roll and also 
some additional matter. We may take the following points connected with the 
rewriting of the roll — 

I. The frustration of all attempts to suppress Divnnt truth. Jehoiakim is 
a kin^ and a tyrant. But there is a limit to his power. It is vain for him to attempt 
to hinder the declaration of Grud's truth. If one roll is burnt another can be written. 
If one prophet were killed another could be raised up. Truth is eternal. It will 
survive all enmity, and it will find its way ultimately to the light. He who is against 
it plays a losing game. 

II. Tee persistence of God's desiqns. They are not to be set aside by all the 
scheming and all the violence of men. God does not change because we oppose his 
wilL 1'here is something awlul in the thought of that great, inflexible will, firm as 
granite ajiainst all the raging of man's foolish passions. By opposition we can only 
bring ourselves into collision with it to our hurt, as the waves dash themselves to 
spray on the rock they cannot break. Wo cannot stay its invincible progress— 

" Though the mills of God grind slowly, 
Yet they grind exceeding small." 

If we wish to find God's will working with us and for our good, we must submit to it 
We cannot expect the great God to change his plans to suit our inclinations. 

III. The continuance of God's mbbot. Why should the roll be rewritten ? The 
threats it contained could be executed without any reissue of them. If all fair warn- 
ings vere disregarded, no more could be required. True, and no more were required. 



OH. XXXVI. 1—32.J THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 10£ 

Tet out of his great, long-suffering grace God Issued his warnings afresh. This ia tha 
deeper truth that underlies the command to write out the prophecies once more. Tha 
same truth is illustrated in all the history of the Jews. God sent a succession oi 
prophiits, "rising up early and sending," to impress upon the people the same unheeded 
lessons. The continuance of revelation with us is a reminder of God's forbearing mercy. 

Ver. 32 (last clause). — The development of revelation. " And there were added 
besides unto them many like words." The second roll was a transcript of the first, 
but with numerous additions, though these were ail similar in character to the original 
prophecies. We have here, on a small scale, an instance of that development of reve- 
lation which is evolved on similar principles through the whole realm of knowledge. 

I. Revelation follows a process of ORAonAL development. There are those to 
whom the word "development" has an evil sound, because of the excuse Roman 
Catholics have found in it for perversions of New Testament doctrines ; while others 
object to it on account of its use in the scientific world, where they think it is meant 
tu take the place of the will and wisdom of God. But the abuse of a word should not 
hide us from the important idea that it naturally denotes. Nothing is more true and 
grand and wonderful in all God's works than the principle of development which his 
great power and wisdom has made to run through them. The dawn advances through 
twilight to full day ; the seed grows slowly— '" first the blade, then the ear, then the 
full com in the ear ; " man begins life as an infant, and toils up to his full stature 
through yeai's of childhood and youth ; the kingdom of heaven began as a grain of 
mustard seed, and is slowly spreading till, from the work of that little company in the 
upper room at Jerusalem, " the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the 
waters cover the sea." Revelation is no exception to the same universal Divine 
process. God did not fiash all his tcuth upon the world in one dazzling moment. The 
Bible is a slow growth of many centuries. Progress is observable in the Old Testa- 
ment. Isaiah saw further than it was given to Abraham to see. Jeremiah's vision of 
the new covenant (ch. xxxi. 31 — 34) is in advance of the Levitical Law. The New 
Testament is a decided manifestation of broader knowledge and fuller light tlum the 
earlier revelation contained. Christ said to his disciples, " I have yet many things to 
say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now " (John xvi. 12). St. Paul's teachings go 
beyond the doctrines held in his day by the Church at Jerusalem. We cannot say that 
God has nothing further to reveal. The Christian believes that " holy Scripture con- 
taineth all things necessary to salvation." But all the analogy of God's past action 
would lead us to think that there may be much truth which men were not at first able 
to see in the Scripture, and yet which may be known in successive ages and found to 
be of great profit. 1. The human occasion of this development of revelation may be 
seen in the fact that the thoughts of men grow. God h-veals his truth in human 
thinking. Men must seek him, and, feeling after the truth, are rewarded by God's 
revelation. But the revelation is proportionate to the progress of the search. 2. The 
Divine purpose of this development may be noted in such facts as these : God reveals 
truth as man is able to receive it, as he is spiritually educated to understand it, as he 
is in a moral conrlition to profit by it, as changing circumstances may bring need for 
new stages in the development of it. 

II. The development of revelation is consistent with itself. 1. It does not set 
aside old truth. In the new roll all the contents of the old roll were rewritten, so that 
the fresh matter was not a substitute but an addition. Christ came to fulfil the Law 
and the prophets, not to destroy them (Matt. v. 17). The gospel exceeds but does not 
supersede the spiritual truth of the Old Testament. No now discovery can ever 
destroy what is once known to be real and true. 2. This development maintains an 
essential likeneu between its earliest and its latest stages. The added words of 
Jeremiah's roll were " like unto " those which were first written. All truth must 
ultimately harmonize. One great test of a new doctrine is its agreement with pre- 
viously established truth. All Christian truth must agree with the teachings of Christ 
and his apostles. That many so-called developments of truth we really perversions of 
truth may be proved by the application of this test. Thus to ns Protestants it seems 
clear that many Roman Catholic dogmas which profess to be developments of Chris- 
tianity we M utterly contrary to its spirit that they must be regarded either as pagar 



110 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxvi. 1— 32. 

additionB or as relapses towards Judaism. So there are " liberal " notions that ar« 
really negations of essential elements of the gospel. It is monstrous to call these 
developments. The oak is a development of the acorn ; but the hollow, blasted stump, 
(rhich is the last stage in the history of the tree, ia surely not a turther result of tb* 
same procesa. Decay is not development. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORSL 
Vera. 1—4.— {Vide ch. xxx. 1— 3.)— M. 

Vers. 5 — 8. — Vicarious ministry in holy things. The " vicar," an ecclesiastical officer 
of mediasval times, — explain the origin and nature of his duties. Show how large 
this question of vicarious service, and how universal its necessity, in business, society, 
the state, the Church, etc. This incident illustrates — 

I. Its essential natube. Not merely that one should do, be, or suffer instead 
of another, but as representative of him. More or less consciously, sympathetically, 
adequately. That one man and not another should do a given duty, for instance, may 
be but the chance of fortune ; but that he should do it for and in place of that other 
is for him to be that other's " vicar." TJhis essential character of the transaction is not 
altered by the fact of the superiority, equality, or inferiority of the substitute. 

II. Its bugqestive interest. An element of pathos and mystery. Perhaps the 
end better served in this than in the alternative way. Conceivable that the reading, 
the authoritative publication, and the supernatural interest, may have been enhanced 
rather than otherwise by the substitution. 1. The community of true service. How 
different in importance, etc., the function of the prophet in receiving the message and 
communicating it from that of the scribe I yet both are on this occasion indispensable. 
One man's service the condition of another's or its complement. All true service 
associated in relation to final ends and rewards (John iv. 37, 38 ; Heb. xi. 40). 2. An 
impression of urgency produced. This was the message it was absolutely important for 
Judah to bear at that time. God always speaks at the right time, even when that 
requires extraordinary efforts and unusual means. The latter on this occasion must 
hftve eloquently suggested that now was the "accepted time " and " the day of salva- 
tion." 3. 2%e earnestness of the prophet and his Jnspirer. Jeremiah was the true 
friend of the nation and the devoted servant of Jehovah, therefore he did not excuse 
himself from the task because of its difficulties, 4. How inevitable the message / It 
was not to be evaded or suppressed. From the prison or hiding-place the prophet will 
still be heard. 

III. Its ethics. Service of the kind here described was justifiable only on the supposi- 
tion that the original or principal in responsibility is unable to do his own proper work, 
or that it can be better done by being delegated to another. Jeremiah is careful to 
explain why he does not do it himself. Would that the reasons for non-attendance 
in the sanctuary, or inoccupation in Spiritual work, were as real and valid in the case of 
professing Christians! 1. On the part of the person instead of whom the service was 
rendered. He did not ask his substitute to do what he could do himself; and what 
he alone could do was done with the utmost care and diligence. It is calculated 
that the writing out of the roll from the prophet's dictation occupied nine months, 
and many delays and difficulties must have been experienced. His solicitude, too, on 
behalf of the proper delivery of the message by Baruch, is very instructive and 
inspiring. He sought (God's end in) the repentance of the people, and everything was 
to conspire to produce this. By example and moral influence he sought to fill Baruch 
with his own enthusiasm, and a sense of the importance of the task. The preacher is 
the vicar of the Church ; so with the Sunday school teacher, etc. By prayer, sympathy, 
ind loving co-operation Christians should encourage these. 2. On the part of the substi- 
tute. Baruch sought to do his part faithfully and with minute exactitude. His success 
in producing an impression proved how he exerted himself. A sense of responsibility 
should ever rest upon those who minister in the house of God. A certain measure ol 
boldness was also required to do such a thmg. The people or their princes might turn 
igainst him. Boldness is essential to the preaching of the gospel. But there cannot 



OH. XXXVI. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. Ill 

but occur to most readers the parallelism there is in all this to what Christ has under- 
taken for us. Another temple from whose service we are " shut up " by reason of 
personal unfitness, or that we remain in the flesh. Christ, our great Forerunner and 
Vicar, or Substitute, has entered into its holy of holies, with his own eternal sacrifice 
and intercession. Upon him all our hope must be placed ; we must follow him in 
spirit ; and we must imitate Jeremiah in the zeal and labour with which we execute 
our part of the great process of sairation. — ^M. 

Vers. 9 — 16.— Free course of the Word of God. The progress made hy the messages of 
Jeremiah when read aloud in the scribe's cell at the entrance of the higher court of the 
temple was very remarkable, and fully justified the great care and ingenuity with 
which it was efiected. 

I. A SANCTIFIED INOBNTnTT SHOULD BB SHOWN IN TAKING ADYANTAOB OF OB 
CKEATING SUITABLE OCCASIONS FOB MAKING KNOWN QtOV'» WoRD. . 

II. The Word of God is commended by its general and special human interest. 

III. When one instrumentality fails, God will baise up another, until hib 

HESBAOE ATTAINS ITS DESTINATION. — M. 

Vers. 16 — 18.—Th» mystery of inspiration. L The natubal desibb to solve it. 

1. This has its root in mere curiosity. A desire to know for the sake of knowing — 
laudable enough in itself, but in danger of passing into irreverence and idle speculation. 
Religious movements and supernatural phenomena have excited this wonder in all ages. 
Religion interests many as a problem, where it is refused attention or respect as a law. 

2. ITiis is increased hy the attraction of the forbidden and unlawful. An anticipation 
of the " profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science [the knowledge] falsely 
so called," against which Timothy is warned (1 Tim. vi. 20 ; cf. Col. ii. 8, 18, 19). 
The sin of Simon Magus was analogous. 3. It is also increased hy the natural mincPt 
intolerance of mystery. There are multitudes who would willingly inquire how a 
miracle may be wrought, who have no desire to learn why. It is humiliating to our 
natural pride to realize that there are so many things in the universe we cannot 
explain. The authority which the supernatural lends to the doctrines and ravelations 
of religion is resented. 

II. How it is satisfied. 1. The direction of their questioning. They asked 
concerning the mechanical process — the manner, etc., of the prophet, apparently 
unconscious that the real problem lay behind all that. "Did the prophet stammer 
whilst the inspiration was up<m him? Was his manner wild or strange?" Now, we 
know that the manner of the person receiving Divine inspiration may be perfectly 
indistinguishable from that of those who are under ordinary human conditions. But 
they fell into the error of supposing that, when that was determined, the solution of the 
problem would be advanced. 2. Where it ended. There is no further curiosity ; they 
remain at arm's length from the kernel of the whole question. The moral conditions 
of it are of no concern to them. Theirs is the radical carelessness with respect to 
religion as such which characterizes the carnal mind. Their inquiries ended just where 
they ought to have begun ; just as those of many nowadays — lingerers or loiterers in 
the porch, who never enter into the temple. Conscience could answer much that 
curiosity leaves untouched. The deep necessity of God-communion for every man 
and nation to which it witnesses, is what the whole process of revelation presupposes. 
God will not leave man alone. His su{ ernatural workings continually witness to hig 
presence and authority. And man cannot do without God and his Word. — M. 

Vers. 20 — 26. — " Jehoiakim's penknife."' This became ft proverbial phrase for 
religious indifference of the most callous description. Not that Jehoiakim actually cut 
the roll himself; but Jehudi, who did it, was evidently under his orders. It is a little 
imcertain as to whether the whole of the manuscript, or a part only, was read ; but as 
" had read " represents an imperfect tense, and the words " till all the roll was 
consumed " Imply a gradual process, it seems more probable that the former was the 
case. There is here the same unconquerable spirit of curiosity to know what the 
prophet said, utterly separated from religious earnestness or obedience. It is a fearfully 
impressive tableau which is presented, suggestive of— 



lia THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxvl 1—32 

I. The enhitt or the oabnal mind to Divine truth. The king cannot leare th» 
manuscript alone, but he strives to make up for that weakness by : 1. Contempt. A pag« 
or domestic scribe is employed to read, instead of the king reading for himself; whilst 
the chief ofiBcers sit with their royal master, ridiculing it. There are many who dare 
not part company with religion, who revenge themselves by making light of its 
warnings and ordinances. Their contempt is a little overdone, in proportion to the latent, 
unconfessed fear. 2. Destruction. Dislike of the truth itself transiers itself also to the 
vehicle by which it is conveyed. It is a sign of the indwelling of the evil one, who 
seeks to destroy the works of God. 3. Persecution. The servants of God who have 
communicated his Word are also hattd, and they are sought out with a view to their 
hurt. This is a characteristic of the confirmed sinner, which repeats itself over and 
over again in history. The world hates the servauts of Christ because it hates their 
Master, 

II. The hardness of heart produced bt continual bin. 1. Deliberate profanity. 
If the text is rightly interpreted, it describes a repeated action, performed with the 
greatest coolness and clearest intention. How different from that young king who rent 
his garments at the message from the book so mysteriously lost and found again ! 

2. Resolute disobedience. The treatment to which the roll was subjected showed how 
thoroughly the mind of the king was made up. And the remonstrances of his coun- 
cillors were unheeded. Evidently the messages of God would be wasted upon such a 
king, and consequently his doom would be forthwith pronounced (vers. 30, 31). 

III. The foolishness op those who fioht against God. This is revealed in their 
methods. Here the burning of the book and the persecution of its authors are all that 
occurs to the infatuated king to do. But the propliet and his scribe are nowhere to be 
found, for " God hid them ; " and the burnt manuscript ap[iears in a second and enlarged 
edition. Persecution and the Index Expurgatorius have been potent allies of the 
truth they have been used to suppress. It is an unequal warfare when God is on one 
side and man on the other. In such a case the truest wisdom is capitulation. God's 
indictment against us is unanswerable, and there is no escaping his judgments. Wbea 
such devices occur to the sinner, he may well fear for himself. Truly understood, these 
warnings are but the efforts of Divine love to awaken to repentance, and thus afford 
opportunity for its free and uninterrupted exercise. — M, 

Ver. 26. — " The Lord hid them.'' L To what straits the cause of God is sometihes 
reduced I Those in high position are opposed to it,-and its advocates and representa- 
tives have to seek concealment. No open ministry was, therefore, possible. Self- 
preservation had to be first attended to. There have been times when religion was 
tolerated, but as under apology ; this was an instance of utter exclusion. How good 
men must have despaired and bad men triumphed ! All that God could do for his 
servants seemed to be to hide them. At the same time, how easy it would be to mis- 
calculate the moral power of the Word I Is not persecution better than languid 
indifference ? 

II. How hopeless their efforts who contend with Gk>D 1 With seeming ease 
and yet mysterious skill, the secrets of nature are made to subserve his will. And even 
that which is, as it were, an extremity — a last resource — is so mysteriously effected as to 
convey the impression of infinite skill and endless resources. 1. They are baffled at 
the very outset. There seems to have been some interposition of the Divine in making 
the concealment of the prophet and his companion so inscrutable; and it impressed 
men. All the means at their disposal were exhausteil in their efforts to discover them, 
but in vain. It is : 2. With an apparent ease. It is but one move on the great chess- 
board, but it is effectual and sufficient. It is even conceivable that the pursued took 
no special pains to conceal themselves, but left it in the hand of him whom they served. 

3. And with significant gentleness. Some grander deliverance he might have effected, 
but this is enough. And it simply prevents the wicked king and his court from adding 
further to their guilt. How thanklul ought wicked men to be that they are not suffered 
to carry out all their evil designs I So God sometimes " prevents," that he may not have 
to pursue and destroy. 

nL How secure God's servants are when he undertakes for them I It ii 
merely wid he " hid them," that their concealment was effectual and inviolate being 



OH. xxxvL 1— 32.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPQET JEREMIAH. 113 

anderstood without further words. Elijah (1 Kings xvii. 2) and his succeasor (2 
Kings vi.) were so hidden. The Lord of the universe knows its every secret. 1. in 
temporal things. The children of God will not escape misfortune or sorrow. Persecu- 
tions are amongst the promises. But the true evil of evil will not reach them. They 
cannot know it. He hides them in his " secret place " until the storm and fiiry are 
overpast. Nay, in distress his tenderness will be the more conspicuous and manifest. 
" Hide me under the shadow of thy wm-^s " (Ps. xvii. 8) ; "I flee unto thee to hide me " 
(Ps. cxliii. 9). There is an inward, inaccessible peace, which is the gift of every true 
disciple (John xiv. 27). 2. In things spiritual. Isaiah spoke of the day when " a man 
shall be as an hiding-place from the wind," etc. (xxxii. 2). And we know that our 
"life is hid with Christ in God" ^Col. iii. 3). When the unpardoned shall call upon 
the rocks to fall on ihem, and the hills to cover them from his wrath, they that believe 
shall be safe in the keeping of their Lord. 3. And this is so because the saints are 
precious in his sight. He keeps them as the apple of his eye. Not a hair of their 
head shall fall to the ground without their Father. They are the firstfruits of his 
Son's agony and sacrifice, and bear his likeness. All the resources of his kingdom are 
held in readiness for their salvation. — M. 

Vers. 27 — S2.—The Word of Ood ; wherein it can and wherein it cannot he destroyed- 
I. Wherein it can be destroyed. 1. In its outward form and medium. The roll i 
inspired records; religious institutions and means of grace; individual believers aad 
Churches. 2. As a vehicle of blessing to a man's own soul. Jehoiakim deliberately cut 
off his own salvation, and, destroying the roll, he caused his name to be blotted ont of 
the book of life. To him it brought no blessing. We can destroy the Word of God in 
this wa,y for owrselves, by heedlessness, unbelief, disrespect, enmity. 

II. Wherein it cannot be destboteo. Even over the material embodiment and 
vehicle of the Word shall we not believe that Providence watches? God restores, 
enlarges, multiplies his Word. But : 1. The spiritual Word cannot be destroyed. It is 
independent of stone, or parchment, or paper ; is continually renewed by the Divine 
Spirit in its communications with the children of men. Even at the worst there is a 
" law written upon the heart." It cannot be too strongly impressed upon men's minds 
that, were all the Bibles and manuscripts in the world destroyed, God would restore his 
Word and continue to reveal himself ; like that temple which, destroyed, would be raised 
in three days again. 2. The consequences of God's Word, whether these be good or evil. 
What he willeth will be, and his Word stands sure. " Heaven and earth shall pass 
away, but my word shall not pass away," etc. ; i.e. what it foretells and declares will 
remain certain and will fulfil itself. It secures to the saint an indestructible life and 
inheritance, and to the sinner the reward of his traasgression. The true escape from 
the threatenings of the Divine Word is not to destroy it, but to obey its teachings and 
yield ourselves to the discipline and grace of Christ. — M. 

Vers. 1 — 32. — Heareri of Qod's Word. This chapter brings before vm an instructive 
variety of these hearers. 

I. Such as the peophbt. To him and such as he the Word of God came, and was 
received with reverent submission and diligently obeyed at all costs. They could say, 
" Speak, Lord ; for thy servant heareth." 

U. Such AS the people GENERALLY. (Ver. 10.) The mass seemed unaffected. We 
do not read of their being in any wise wrought upon by what they had heard. But 
there was an exception (ver. 11). Michaiah was really aroused, impressed, and alarmed. 
Often it is thus ; the general congregation unmoved, but one here, one there, touched 
and led to God. 

III. Such as Michaiah. We have seen how it affected him. He could not keep it 
to himself, but went to tell the princes of it (ver. 12). He unfeignedly believed. Now, 
he came of a godly house. It was his grandfather who, in King Josiah's day, had first 
received the book of the Law which had been found in the temple. Hilkiah the high 
priest gave it to him, knowing, no doubt, that it would be reverently dealt with. And 
BO it was ; for first he read it himself, and then read it aloud to the young king, and that 
led to the reformation which the king carried out. And the father of thia M ic'.-aiah was 
a man of a like spirit. From the balcony of his house Baruch had read his buok to the 

niBEULAH — U. I 



114 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHBT JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxvl 1—32. 

people ; Michaiah's father had lent him a pulpit. And it was this same man who, with 
two others, tried, but in vain, to stay the king's hand when about to bum the book (ver. 
26). Hence Micbaiah came of a godly stock. It is the training of such homes that 
more than aught else prepares and predisposes the heart to receive the Word of God. 

IV. Such as the princes. These are a very instructive group, (vers. 11—26). 
They listened patiently to the Word, and gave it much attention. They were much 
moved, and desired to hear it over again exactly as it had been given, and so they sent 
for Baruch, and listened in like manner to him. They seriously deliberate, and resolve to 
go and warn the king ; for that in all probability was their motive. They show affec- 
tion to God's servants, and desire to protect both them and the written Vyord. They go 
in to the king, notwithstanding they must have known the peril of so doing. And some 
of them endeavour to stay the king from his evil intent to destroy the book. But there 
they stop. The king's rage overpower them, and they keep silence when they ought to 
utter strong protest. They are an illustratio"n of " the fear of man which bringeth a 
snare." How often the like cause leads to like unfaithfulness still ! 

V. Such as the king. The words fix his attention, but they excite his rage and 
then they ensure his doom. He comes to hate both the Word and the writers of the 
Word, and he disregards the feeble remonstrances of its timid friends. Thus he seals 
his own destruction, as such ever do. We are hearers of the Word. To which class 
do we belong ? — 0. 

Ver. 2. — The written Word. "Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the 
words that I have spoken unto thee." " This is the first recorded instance of the for- 
mation of a canonical book, and of the special purpose of its formation." No doubt 
other prophets had committed to writing more or leiS of their teachings — the quotations 
of one prophet from another, the later from the earlier, prove this; but here is the fiist 
record of any such act, and hence it has especial interest. It is the forerunner of all 
those several Scriptures which together form now the depository of our religion, and 
justify the well-known saying of Chillingworth, " The Bible and the Bible only is the 
religion of Protestants." For note — 

I. One BELiQiON depends on the wbptten Wobd. Great contempt has been poured 
on the idea of a " book revelation." As if there were something even ridiculous in the idea 
of God revealing himself by means of a book. A recent missionary traveller (Gilmour) 
among the Mongols states that they feel the force of this objection very strongly, and 
that when the missionary holds up his little Bible as the revelation of God, it seems to 
them very absurd. But these people can claim distinguished companionship amongst 
our own countrymen. And in addition to the rejection of a book revelation at all, this 
particular book, the Bible, is objected to exceedingly. All manner of ridicule is poured 
on it, and there is scarce a single ground on which fault could be found with it which 
some one has not occupied. But in reply note — 

II. The written Wobd is, however, not the revelation but only the bkoobd 
or IT. It is not claimed for it to be more than this. God did not give to mankind a 
book, but he revealed himself to " holy men ot old," and especially through the Lord 
Jesus Christ. And this book is the record of that revelation. Hence the only question 
that concerns us is — Is it a faithful record ? 

IIL But such a record was absolutely neoessart. For if the existence of God 
be allowed, and that it is his desire to reclaim men from their sin and to bring them back 
to himself, it may be asked : 1. Eow could this be done accept hy his revealing himself 
to men f They must be enabled to know him, and to know him in such manner as 
would be likely to move them in the direction desired. 2. But if it be granted that a 
revelation was a necessity, how could that revelation he of use to mankind at large 
unless it were put on record t For all events are related to time and space ; they must 
have happened — God's revelation of himself amongst others — somewhen and somewhere. 
But how, except by a record, could those who dwelt in other generations and in other 
parts of the world know of this revelation? But for that it may as well not have been. 
8. And so long as the Divine ideas are conveyed to our mind, what does it matter alnmt 
the means employed f All the magnificence of nature — the Alpine heights, the starry 
universe, etc. — serve us only as they convey true and worthy ideas, as they wake up in 
OS fit and appropriate thoughts. If they faU in this, they migh t as well not be so far 



OH. XXXVI. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 115 

w we are concerned. But there are many who never have opportunities of beholding 
the magnificence of nature — ^their lives are one long round of sordid toil in scenes dark 
and squalid ; and others who have such opportunities are too little educated to learn from 
them what they assuredly have to tell. The road that leads from nature up to nature's 
God is a thinly travelled one ; few go that way. But now, if by the written Word, which 
can be carried everywhere, perpetuated, multiplied, and is everywhere and at all times 
accessible — if by this there can be conveyed to the mind fit, true, and heart-moving 
ideas about God, what an advantage this is I Instead of bein^; a cause of scorn, it should 
awaken our gratitude. 4^ And those features in this record which seem to some unworthy 
of its great mission, these really are of great service. No doubt there is much of home- 
liness and of trivial and seemingly insignificant detail in this record. It is a very 
plain, prosaic book in many parts. But is not this a great boon ? Had God's revelation 
of himself to us been accompanied by a blaze of splendour, with such manifestations 
of Divine power to the senses or to the intellect as some seem to desire, the revelation 
would have been lost in the record ; no one would look at the picture, their attention 
being so much occupied with the setting. Hence it is good for us that we live so long 
after the times of the Bible. It is expedient for us that Christ has gone away. For in 
proportion to men's nearness to those times " events having God in them took * more 
forcible hold upon their mind than God in the events." The atmosphere of time is 
needed in order to our right viewing of the marvellous &cts of the Bible. 

IV. Our one question ib — Is tee becobd faithful ? 1. As to the facts them- 
selvet—in their main substance and meaning. This question is quite apart from inspira- 
tion. Nothing but honesty and intelligence are asked for here. Of course, if any start 
with the assumption that the supernatural is not, and hence miracles are by their very 
nature impossible, and the belief of them absurd, such a one will refuse all credence 
to this record. But first let his assumption be proved ere doubt be thrown on either the 
honesty or the intelligence of the writers of the Bible. 2. As to the interpretation and 
meaning of the facts they record. " Just as on gazing at a picture of Raphael's we 
should rejoice to have at hand a companion who had familiarized himself with the 
spirit of the great artist and acquired an insight into his genius, to furnish us with such 
brief notices as might assist us to a comprehension of the profounder ideas expressed 
by the painting, for want of which it would lose very much of its intellectual mean- 
ing; so with the memoirs of Christ before us, as the spiritual revelation of God to 
our religious sense, we require, in order to adequate instruction and profit, the com- 
ments of . . . those who shall be qualified to point it out to our duller vision. 
What poets are to the natural exhibition of Qod in his works, these men will be to the 
moral exhibition of God in his Son." Kow, that the sacred writers answer to this 
need is shown by the fact that they " commend the truth to every man's conscience in 
the sight of God." In this commendation to our conscience is the evidence that they 
have read aright the facts they record. And to this we may fearlessly appeal. We do 
not assert this of men's theologies and divinity schemes — too many of them outrage 
the conscience and trouble the moral sense ; but we do assert it of the great Terities of 
the faith, as taught in the Scriptures, and of the doctrines which the Bible as a whole 
plunly teaches, 

"Within this ample volume lies 

The mystery of mysteries. 

Happiest they of human race 

To whom their God has given grace 

To read, to fear, to hope, to pray. 

To lift the latch aiid force the way ; 

And better had they ne'er been bom 

Than read to doubt or read to scorn.* 

Qt oa ihk whole sabject Miall's ' Bases ot Belie£'— a 

Yer. 8. — " It may he." We can understand the prophet thus speakfaig, Imt itow am 
there be anything uncertain or contingent with God? And yet it is he who here qieaks 
and says, " It may be." We are accustomed to say, "God knows all the past, and 
all ti^ present, and all the future " (cf. Isa. xlvi. 9 — 11). Reason and Scriptan alik* 



ll« THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxivi. 1— 32 

Beem to iay that there can be nothing prohable with God. But yet this is hi$ word 
Why does he thus speak ? Perhaps — 

I. Because there was no law, no decbee, against the people's eepentahok. He 
had made no such law, and man had not. There is no decree of reprobation. 

II. It mat be consistent, after all, with the truth op things fob God thus to 
SPEAK, though we CANNOT SEE HOW. We infer certain conclusions from what we read 
and learn about God, and these conclusions seem to deny the possibility of there being 
any " it may be " with him. But we may be wrong after all, and the fact that he does 
tlius speak lends to the suspicion that we are. 

III. Because it would be ill fob us were he to beyeal thk obbtaintibs of 
THINGS. If they were to be such as we would desire, we should cease to labour for 
them. If otherwise, we should sit down in despair. But God desires us to labour and 
pray, and therefore hides the future from our eyes. Presumption and despair are both 
great evils ; therefore to prevent them, God speaks after the manner of men, if not after 
the manner of God. 

IV. Because he intends his " mat bk " to become " shall be." He would have 
us fellow-workers with him, and therefore he encourages our efforts, but hides from us 
that which would lead us to think them unnecessary. And probably the " may be " will 
become " shall be," though not at the time nor in the manner we expect. Let us, 
therefore, be ever cheered forward when God says, " It may be." — C. 

Ver. 23. — The indestructible Word. The king's knife and fire did what they could 
to destroy the prophet's word, but with what result this chapter shows. The king was 
Jehoiakim ; the prophet, Jeremiah ; the word, his written prophecies. It was neces- 
sary that these should be written down. The army of Babylon was already in the 
land, and drawing near to the doomed city of Jerusalem, if they had not already cap- 
tured it for the first time. There was no hope of successful resistance. Therefore, for a 
testimony when all that had been foretold came to pass, and for a solace and warning 
to that and to all coming generations, it was necessary that the twenty-three years' 
witness which the prophet had borne against that guilty nation should be put on record. 
Jeremiah was " shut up," whether by his own will, or the word of the Lord, or for 
fear of his enemies, we cannot certainly say ; but Baruch, who seems to have been to 
Jeremiah as Timothy to Paul, was commanded to write these prophecies, and then, on 
the " fasting-day," to read them in the hearing of all the people. He did so. One of 
his hearers, alarmed and troubled, hastened away to the council of the princes, and 
told them what he had heard. Baruch was sent for, and declared again what he had 
before read to the people. The book was too terrible to show to the king; they there- 
fore commanded that it and its author should he concealed, whilst they went in to the 
king to announce its fearful contents. A third time these prophecies were recited, but 
the king demanded that the book itself should be read to him. But when brought and 
I he reading had begun, the angry king had no patience to listen beyond the first three 
or four leaves, but snatching it from the hand of the reader, he vented his rage upon it 
by cutting and hacking it with his knife, and then, to make short work of it, cast it, in 
spite of the horror-stricken entreaties of his princes, into the burning coals before him, 
where it was utterly consumed. Then he commands, but in vain, for " the Lord hid 
them," that Baruch and Jeremiah be arrested; but the Lord commands that these 
[iiophecies be written again, which was done, with the doom of the king added, and 
" beside them many like words." But this King Jehoiakim, in his dealing with the 
Word of God, and in its dealing with him, has had many successors. He is tlie 
type of — 

I. Those who abe impatient with the Wobd of God. Jehoiakim only heard three 
or four leaves read, when he put a stop to the reading altogether in the foolish way we 
have seen. He would not hear the whole. Did any man ever destroy the Bible who 
knew it wholly f Many have thrown it into the fire who have heard or read « part 
only. The difficulty is in the " three or four leaves." How many stumble because 
they won't read on I 

II. Those who become vert angbt with the Bible. To men of this king's stamp 
the Bible has not one word of comfort, commendation, or hope. It is all full of thunder 
apd storm. It is a dreadful book to the impenitent. No wonder that he snatches it 



3a.t»XVL]— 32.] Tllfi bOOK OF TllE PROPHElt jEKEMtAB. 117 

from tbe reader's hand, and hackB at it with his knife, and then flings it into the blazing 
fire. Yes ; be like this king, and you will do as he did, and he done unto as he. 

III. Those who strive to destroy the Bible. 1. Some would only partly do this. 
They admit a large amount of good in the hook ; they only desire to cut out what they 
think is otherwise. Theologians use their penltnives. They prncticiilly put out of the 
Bible what makes against their favourite ideas. Science seems to be for ever at this 
miserable cutting. Philosophy is equally guilty ; but sin is worst of all. It loves not 
the hard things the Bible will keep sa} ing against it ; therefore it would out them out 
— only it cannot. 2. 'ITiere are thosn who would destroy the book altogether. What 
Bible-burnings there have been! The histories of pagan and Eomish persecutions t«e 
full of them. Are there none now ? What is the difference between such burning and 
utter disregard of the book as too many are guilty of? If we trample it underfoot, in 
our hearts, our lips, our lives, how could burning it be any worse? 

IV. Those who find the Bible too strong fob them. " Galilsean, thou hast 
conquered!" said the Emi:eror Julian shortly before he dieil. And that has been the 
confession in rega'd to the Word of God on the part of all those who have tried t« 
destroy it (ver. 30). The Word of God can neither be bound nor burned. It has beea 
cut, cast into flames, proscribeil, branded, corrupted, and treated with every conceiv- 
able form of opprobrium; but here it is to-day, a living and mighty factor in the lives 
of the foremost men and nations throughout the whole world. And the ungodly who 
practically seek to destroy it for themselves, they will find they cannot do this. Its 
truths will come back, its teachings reassert themselves, and will add beside " many 
like words." — 0. 

Ver. 28. — The Lord'i hidden one*. " But the Lord hid them." He haa many such, 
and in all manner of unthought-of places. If we read the history of the world aright, 
how continually God is bringing forth his hidden ones to render service to their fellow- 
men ! " Oh how great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that fear 
thee 1 " Tliink of some of these hidden ones. 

L Such as the fbophet here told of. And how God has hidden his people from 
the rage of men ! " In the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me." Let the records 
of the martyr Churches in Rome, Switzerland, and wherever God's saints have been 
persecuted — let all these tell how he has often hidden his servants. Moses was hidden 
three mouths when an infant; then again with Jethro in Midian afterwards. How 
God hid David again and again from Saul! 

II. Those destined for great service. How often, when a Church seems to have 
been brought to its lowest, God raises up some one who is the means of reviving itl 
David amongst the shee|ifolds. Gideon and the judges. Our Lord at Nazareth. In 
all unlikeliest places God has his hidden ones, whom in due time h« will manifest to 
the surprise and joy of his Church. 

TTT Such as are not yet ra the visible Church. Amongst those whom we deem 
outside the Church, God has his chosen, whom one day he will call. Who, looking on 
the murderers of St. Stephen, would have thought that amongst them God had one of 
his choicest servants? This is the disjiensation, not of universal conversion — that is to 
come — but of calling out those who shall be the instruments of the universal ingather- 
ing. God is blessing his Church that " his way may be known upon earth." etc. We 
are then fure to despair of no nation, community, class, family, or neighbourhood. In 
all God has his hidden ones. 

"O grace, into nnlikeliest hearii 
It is thy wont to come." 

IV. The blessed dead. There is to be a manifestation of the sons of CM. Mean- 
while their " life is hid with Chii«t in God." " Wherefore comfort one another with 
these words." — C. 

Ver. 28. — Disaster not defeat. What dismay must have filled the minds of those whc 
saw the book destroyed, and of those who heard of it — Baruch, Jeremiah, and others 1 

L It was great disaster. The book was nmst precious. See its gracious intent 
See how it had already moved many for good. What might not be expected irom it? 



ild THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [ch. xxxVi. 1- -32 

n. Am IT SEEMED IRRETRIEVABLE. There was no copy of it kept. No human 
memory could reproduce it. The word had not sunk into the hearts of the people so 
as to render it no longer needed. 

III. But the disaster was not defeat. Qoi interposed, commanded the 
prophet to write again, enabled him to do so, supplied him with many more like 
words. 

rV. By means or n more good was wrought. What endorsement of the Word 
did its remarkable reprodiiotioii supply ! How it would show the vanity of all human 
rage against the Divine will ! How the faith of the godly would be strengthened, whilst 
the daring of the wicked would be rebuked I 

V. And this instance is but one out of myriads more. Read the history of tha 
Church, and see how perpetually out of seeming disaster God has brought real good 
and increased good. And so in our own personal histories, providential and spiritual 
alike. " lYust thou in the Lord at all times." — 0. 

Ver. 3. — God's eye to every possibility. I. The thing which God greatly debibes. 
That man may repent, thus enabling him to forgive. He ever has his eyes on the 
ways of evil men, noticing the slightest sign of their weariness in them and dispo- 
sition to leave them. This is always a thing to be suspected and prepared for. That 
any man should suddenly become uneasy and hesitating in the midst of evil courses is 
nothing wonderful when we consider that man was made for goodness and holiness. 
Thus what else should we look for than frequent expressions of desire on the part ot 
God that man should again be found in the right way ? 

II. God leaves nothing undone to bbing this about. There is something even 
touching about this word, " it may be." As if it were allowed that probabilities all 
|iointed in one unfavourable direction, but still not one of them was such a certainty 
that the contrary possibility should be excluded. As the common proverb says, 
" While there's life there's hope." Every instance of a rejected appeal and an abused 
I^rophet lessens the probability, but it does not destroy the possibility. God goes on 
bending his prophets. Each man comes with his own personality, his own peculiai 
emphasis, and thus with evermore the same message there is variety both in the 
messenger and the form of his message. And at last, when the messenger gets shut up, 
his words are written down and transmitted by another. We cannot get rid of the 
Word of God. There are a thousand channels to the heart of man, and the violent 
stoppage of some may only result in the enlargement and efficacy of others. 

III. Thebe IB AN EXAMPLE FOB US IN GOSPEL WORK. Scripture shows us God using 
many ways in trying to get at the human heart. Surely the great princi[ile in this 
matter is that every way is right if it be not wrong in itself. We must not do evil 
that good may come ; but we must be all things to all men that we may save some. 

IV. There mat be added guilt to those rejecting the gospel. It was one ol 
the worst elements in the guilt of Israel that it had been indifferent to so many appeals 
and such various ones. Giod did not send these people into exile upon one refusal or 
even upon a few. There was sufficient intimation of his demands and his desi<rus. 
And we may take it that there always is sufficient intimation. With the constant 
extension of gospel effort and the wider diffusion of Bibles, tracts, and all sorts of 
printed agencies, we may say that each generation gets more of light than the one 
before it. Indeed, we may lay it down as a general principle that when all the oppor- 
tunities of every human being are summed up, it will be found that he is without any 
excuse for pleading ignorance or doubt as to God's demands. — T. 

Ver. 6. — " Thingi new and old." I. The old. The message itself was old. It had 
been proclaimed before in parts and on different occasions. There was not, indeed 
opportunity for anything new. The audience also was to some extent old. But then 
let it always be understood that God speaks according to the necessities of the case not 
according to the itching ear of man ever clamouring for novelty and relief from ennui. 
" If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded though 
one rose from the dead." There may come a time in every man's life when it is not 
the new but the old and neglected or misunderstood that will prove the necessity of thi 
soaL 



OH. XXXYI. 1—32.] THE BOOR OP THE PROPHET JEEBMIAH. 119 

n. The new. 1. The messenger. Not Jeremiah, but Baruch ; not a prophet, but » 
prophet's deputy ; not a word spoken, but a word read ; not a part of Jeremiah's 
utterances, but the whole, so that people might have it brought home to them how 
much they had neglected. Old truth appears in new framework and new relations, so 
that it may arrest people who have become indifferent to the old associations. There 
was a time when Jeremiah's face was fresh, and curiosity would make people stop to 
hear what this babbler might say. But after hearing him often, they ceased to heed 
him. Then Baruch comes forwud, and words that were an exact repetition of words 
heard before got a flavour of novelty. 2. The occasion. The fasting-day. Read 
Isa. Iviii. carefully to discover the avowed purpose and yet utter uselessness of 
the fasting-day in Israel. The people met together to acknowledge their sins, to 
punish their bodies, to please God, to avert his displeasure. It might, therefore, be 
assumed that then, if ever, they were in a state prepared to listen to the volume of one 
great prophet's utterance. If anything was to be got out of seizing the best available 
occasion, then surely it was to be got here. Thus we learn how occasion adds responsi- 
bility to utterance ; responsibility both for him who speaks and those who hear. These 
people were not stopped in the street or the market ; their homes were not invaded by 
prophetic messages ; they had no pretence for saying they were interfered with. They 
put themselves in Baruch's way. His work, as reader of Jeremiah's prophecies, was in 
exact harmony with what ought to have been the feelings and desires of his audience. 
3. 2%e audience. That audience, as we have said above, was to some extent old, but 
to some extent also it would be new. A new message to some people in Jerusalem, and 
quite new doubtless to the bulk of those who came from the cities of Judah to Jerusa- 
lem. The whole proceeding helps us to see how valuable the public reading of the 
Scriptures may be. For old as they are, with so much in them that savours of vanished 
ages and customs, they have, nevertheless, to do with perennial wants, miseries, and 
possibilities. — Y. 

Ver. 23. — Burning the Word of the Lord. I. The kdjg's motives nr this act. 
Perhaps he was not conscious of any distinct set of motives. He was but a despot, and 
despots are in many thinc;s like spoiled children ; they act not from any clear reason, 
good or bad, so much as from the caprice of the moment. If this act had been a singu- 
larity of Jehoiakim's, there would have been less need to attend to it, but unhappily it 
only illustrates a whole series of acts by those occupying stations of power among 
men. Putting Jeremiah in prison, burning Baruch's roll, slaying the innocents at 
Bethlehem, patting apostles in prison, and all the long list of martyrdoms, — what are 
these but the same essential act all through? Jehoiakim would have been in full 
sympathy with Roman Catholic priests burning the Scriptures in translations under- 
stood of the common people. Jehoiakim was a man buttressed with privileges, pam- 
pered with privileges; and here he had a document forced upon his ears which contained 
assertions by no means compatible with the continuance of nis privileges. And there 
was one thing he could do — he could get rid of the offensive document. He stands 
before us a great example of those — and how many there arel — who, in their eagerness 
to get rid of an unpleasant subject, take the first means that comes to hand for getting 
rid of it. 

n. Look at the act in the lioht of history. Jehoiakim burnt Baruch's roll, but 
he did not destroy Jeremiah's prophecies ; nor did he nullify the truth of Jeremiah's 
predictions ; nor did he stop other prophetic utterances. If Jehoiakim can, he may 
burn, not only Baruch's roll, but Baruch and Jeremiah as well. Suppose this done ; 
yet Ezekiel, Daniel, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi, and probably many more, of whose 
words we know nothing, have to be reckoned with. 'This is the peculiar folly of men 
like Jehoiakim, that they perform acts monumental of their folly. Jehoiakim might 
have quietly said, " If these words are true, then we cannot make them false ; and if 
they be false, time will show their falsity, and bring to shame both the dictator and the 
writer of them." Instead of acting thus with dignified endurance, Jehoiakim, in 
burning the roll, challenged the attention not only of his own people but of all ages. 
He did what there was no sort of need for him to do. It may be said — Why not apply 
the same line of remark to Luther burning th" pope's bull ? To this the answer is 
obvious, that Luther's act was a message of renunciation, a summons of the papacy 'i 



120 



THE BOOK OF THE PKOPHET JEKEMlAll. [ch. xxxvu. 1—21 



bondslaves to freedom, an act of sublime trust in God. Looked at from the pointoi 
view given in the present, it is seen to have been an inspiration. But what did Jehoia- 
kim's act amount to? Only empty bravado. He had notliing to lear from men. 
Luther (iid something when he burnt the bull. Jehoiakim did nothing but proclaim 
his own shame, and advertise the glory of that God over against whose throne his 
paltry throne had been set up. — Y. 

Ver. 26. — Jehovah hiding hit tervantt. \. Thb need oir such nrrBBPOsinoN. 
Baruch and Jeremiah had already been told by the princes to hide (ver. 19); but what 
was any effort purely of their own likely to avail? Indeed, it is only as we appre- 
ciate the .usclessness of a purely huma* effort for this pnrpose that we shall see the 
need of a Divine intervention. God does not mean miracles and special providences to 
do the work of man's prudence. But when it is made evident that man can do little 
or nothing, then God's action appears manifest and admonitory. It may be too much 
to say that this action of God was intended as an answer to Jehoiakim's audacity in 
burning the roll ; bat it was an answer nevertheless. 

II. The manner of the interposition. This is left untold. Either Jeremiah could 
not explain the manner of his hiding, or it was purposely left unexplained to heighten 
the impressiveness of the fact. It may have been through a marvellous combination 
of human kindness and sympathy, such as showed a Divine directing hand ; or there 
may have been miracle. God is an etfectual hider. How much there is hidden away 
in the very things we see, so that knowledge may be kept from all but the humble and 
obedient 1 God could not be the revealer that he is, unless he were also an effectual 
hider. The great end was gained if people of the right sort in Jerusalem were made to 
feel that this hiding was in no sort the work ot man, and could only be explained by 
the intervention of a higher power. 

III. The result of the interposition. Jeremiah was hidden and preserved because 
his work was. cot yet done. His words had to be put down in writing ; and it is 
interesting to notice that the second copy was an improvement on the first. All that 
was in the first was also in the second, and many like words were added. God never 
does wonders for the mere sake of doing wonders. When he hides his servants, or 
delivers them from prison, it is soon made manifest that he had a purpose in view. 
We have to remember this in reading such a book as the Acts of the Apostles. Stephen 
is left to be stoned to death, while Peter has an angel to take him out of prison. The 
fact was Stephen had the greatest work of his life to do in the hour of his death. 
" Man is immortal till bis work is done." Whatsoever God has clearly given us to do, 
we must go on with it boldly, yet prudently, sure that he will take care of ui who hid 
Jeremiah in the hoiu oi his danger. — \. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEB XXXVn. 



Nothing worthy of relation appean to 
have happened to Jeremiah till the latter 
period of the reign of Zedekiah. The first 
two verses of this chapter form the transi- 
tion. The embassy to Jeremiah mentioned 
in ver. 3 took plaoe after the temporary 
withdrawal of the Chaldeans from Jeru- 
salem. 

Ver. 1. — Ooniah; i.t. Jehoiaobin (see on 
en. zxii. 24). Whom Nebuchadrezzar , . . 
made king. Zedekiah, not Jehoiachin, ii 
referred to (see 2 Kings xxiv. 17). 

Ver. 8. — And Zedekiah the king sent. 
This was Zedekiah's second embassy to 
Jeremiah. Uih request on the former 



occasion hsid been for a prophecy; on the 
present it was for an "efl'ectual fervent 
prayer," such as Hezekiah's embassy asked 
of Isaiah (Isa. xxxvii. 6). But the issue 
was to be very different from that in the 
case of Sennacherib's invasion I Jehucal. 
The same man appears in ch. xxxviii. 1, 
among those who brought about the im- 
prisonment of Jeremiah. Zephaniah. The 
high priest's deputy, mentioned again in oh. 
xxi. 1 ; xxix. 25 ; lii. 21. 

Ver. 4. — Now Jeremiah came in and went 
out, etc. Had he been a prisoner, an em- 
bassy of high officials could not, with pro- 
priety, have been sent to him (comp. ver. 17 • 
ch. xxxviii. 14). 

Ver. 5.— Then Pharaoh's army, etc.; 
rather, And Pliaraoh'i army had, etc. ; as a 
further description of the ciroumstanoes 



OH. xxxTii. 1— 2Lj THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



121 



nnder which the embaesy was sent. The 
withdrawal of the Chalrleans seemed to offer 
B gleam of hope. The Pharaoh referred to 
was the Hophra of the Jews, the Aprlcs of 
Herodotus, the Uah-ab-ra of the monuments. 
His interference was useless ; indeed, Ho- 
plira was one of the most unfortunate of the 
Egyptian kings (see oh. xliv. 30). 

Ver. 10. — Even if tlie Jews had defeated 
the whole Chaldean army, and there re- 
mained but a group of torely wounded men, 
these in their weakness would be enabled 
to carry out God's sure purpose. But 
wounded men hardly brings out the force 
of the Hebrew ; the word rendered " men " 
is emphatic, and expresses paucity of 
numbers, and that rendered " wounded " is, 
literally, pierced through. 

Ver. 11. — Fotfear of, etc. ; rather, hteame 
of. 

Ver. 12. — Ab Boon as communication with 
the outside world was possible, Jeremiah took 
the opportunity of going to his native coun- 
try, to obtain something or other which he 
coidd only obtain "thence." TheAutliorized 
Version says that his object was to separate 
himself thence. But (1) the rendering is 
linguistically untenable; and (2) the as- 
sumed object is incongruous with the cii- 
cumstances and character of Jeremiah, who 
was neither inclined to seek safety in isola- 
tion nor had any motive at present for 
doing so. The only safe rendering is, to 
claim hit thare thenee. Whether there was 
just then a teallotment of communal lands 
must be left undecided ; this would, how- 
ever, be the most plausible hypothesis, if 
we could be sure that the present was a 
sabbatical year. The additional words, in 
the midst of the people, would then acquire 
a special significance. The " people " would 
be the representatives of families who liad 
an equal right to allotments with Jeremiah. 

Ter. 13. — The gate of Benjamin ; i.e. the 
gate looking northwards towards Benjamin 
(comp. ch. XX. 2 ; xxxviii. 7 ; Zech. xiv. 10). 
It appears to be the same as the gate of 
Ephraim (2 Kings xiv. 13 ; Neh. viii. 16). 
ThonfaUest away, etc. Perhaps an allusion 
to Jeremiah's declaration (ch. xxi. 9) that 
" he that falleth away to the Chaldeans . . . 
he shall live." 

Ver. 15. — The prinoes were wroth with 
Jeremiah. Aa Graf has pointed out, the 



prinoes, who had evinced their respect foi 
Jeremiah on former occasions (oh. xxvi., 
xxxvi.), had prob Jily shared the captivity o) 
Jehoiachiii ; Zedekiah's "princes" would 
be of a lower origin and type, and ready 
(like the judges in the French "terror") to 
accept any charge against an unpopular 
person without proper examination. The 
honse of Jonathan the scribe. "Scribe," 
i.e. one of the secretaries of state. The 
house of Jonathan seems to have been 
specially adapted for a prison, as the next 
verse shows. Cliaidin, the old traveller, 
remarljs, "The Eastern prisons are not 

Eublic buildings erected for that purpose, 
ut a part of the house in which the- 
criminal judges dwell. As the governor and 
provost of a town, or the captain of the 
watcli, imprison such as are accused in their 
own houses, they set apart a canton of them 
for that purpose when tliey are put into 
these offices, and clionse for the jailor thi^ 
most proper person tliey can find of their 
domestics " (Ohardin). 

Ver. 16. — Into the dungeon, and into the 
cabins. The former word undoubtedly im- 
plies an undergriiund exenvaiion. The 
latter is of more uncertain signification. It 
most probably means " vaults; " but it may 
mean " curved posts "— sometliing analogous 
to stocks (see on ch. xx. 2). 

Ver. 17. — Meantime the Chaldean army 
has returned, and reinvested the city. 
Zedekiah, in his anxiety, sends for Jere- 
miah privately to his palace. Thou shalt 
be delivered, eto. (comp. oh. xxxii. 3, 4 ; 
xxxiv. 2, 3). 

Ver. 21. — Court of the prison; rather, 
eourt of the watch (as ch. xxxii. 2). A piece 
of bread ; literally, o circle (i.e. round cake) 
of bread. This is mentioned elsewhere in 
descriptions of poverty (1 Sam. ii. 36; Prov. 
vi. 26); but as the anciiiit Oriental bread 
was not our delicate white bread, it was a 
real "itaff of life." The Syrian peasants 
still eat cakes of coarse meal, of about the 
thickness of parchment, and equal in size 
to a large plate (Orelli's 'Travels'). The 
bakers' street. Probably the several trades 
were confined to special quarters and streets. 
In Cairo each trade has still its own bazaar 
(saddlers, carpets, hardware, goldsmiths, 
sweetmeats, etc.). 



HOMILETICS. 

"Vers, 1 — 3. — Prayer without obedience. Though Zedekiah will giye no heed to the 

message from Gorl to him through Jeremiah, he is not the less anxious to secure the 
prophet's intercession with God for deliverance from appri aching calamity. The king 
illustrates the too common case of those peo| le who will fly to the protection of religion 
in trouble, though they neglect all its obligations of holiness and of service. 
I. Remoion kequibes obedience to God's will. It is not all on one side. God speaks 



1^2 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxvii. 1—Zl 

to us, and speaks words of command as well as words of consolation. It is, therefor^ 
our duty to hear and obey. 1. Ignorance is no excuse, if we wilfully refuse to heai 
the truth. Zedekiah and his servants did not obey because they did not " hearken," 
i.e. would not hearken. We are not responsible for failing through not knowing our 
duty if we could not know it. But if we could, it was our duty to ascertain it. The 
soldier who puts aside the despatch of his commander unopened, and then acts contrary 
to the orders contained in it is, of course, as guilty as if he did so knowingly ; for it was his 
duty to read the orders he received before poing into action. 2. The e!Bamj:)?e of those who 
have done wrong before is no excuse. Zeitekiah followed the example of Jehoiakim, 
But he iinew it was wrong. He had seen the miserable end of his predecessor's reiin. 
He should have taken warning from this. But men are more inclined to imitate the 
crimes of the wicked than to learn the lesson of their fate. 3. High position does not 
liiitisate guilt, but, on the contrary, it aggravates it. Zedekiah led the people with 
liiiii in his rejection of Grud's message through Jeremiah. He knew what influence he 
exerted, and he ought to have been the more careful that it was not wrongly used. 

II. Pbateb without obedience is vain. Zedekiah seeks Jeremi.ih's prayers, but 
ill vain. It is not necessary, indeed, that our obedience should be faultless before Ood 
will hearken to a single prayer. If this were the case, no prayer of man's could be 
heard. But it is requisite that we should repent of our past disobedience, and should 
be unfeignedly desirous of obeying God iu the future. Fur otherwise our purely self- 
seeking religion is an insult to Gud. Besides, we cannot ijope to change the essential 
principles of God's action by' our prayer. If it is his will to chastise us for our sin, he 
cannot change his will so long as we remain unchanged in conduct. But when we 
turn from the sin which deserves the penalty, it may be possible for God to modify his 
treatment of us in answer to our prayer of submission. Therefore it is so necessary 
that we should pray through the intercession of Christ. Then, though our obedience 
is still most imperfect, if we desire to do better, Christ is our Representative and the 
promise of our future obedience, and therefore his good merits go to plead with Ood to 
answer our prayer offered in his Name. 

Ver. 9. — Self-deception. " Deceive not yonrselvea." 

I. The CHABACTEBISTI08 OF SELF-DECEPTION. As fallible beings, surrounded with 
mystery, and often beset by illusions we are likely to fall into unavoidable mistakes 
for which we cannot be held responsible. There are other errors which we might 
avoid if we took the right means for ascertaining the facts; but from indifference, or 
from indolence, or from unwillingness to see an unpleasant truth that is already halt 
suspected, we neglect these means, and thus land ourselves in a delusion. This is 
seif-deception, 1. It may he conscious and deliberate. The very notion is paradoxical. 
But we are not logical machines ; our belief is often most inconsistent. Our will and 
feelings have great influence over our convictions. We rarely contemplate things in the 
white light of truth. And in so far as we permit our visiou to be blinded by passion 
or distorted by prejudice, we may deceive ourselves. 2. This self-deception may be 
unconscious. Yet it is culpable if we voluntarily neglect the means of seeing things as 
they are. We may not know that we are deceiving ourselves. But we must know 
that we are not doing all we can to avoid delusions. 

II. The cocabioks of self-deception. 1. These may be found in the stiperficial 
appearance of events. The outward seeming does not corresp'^nd with the inward 
verity. The temptation is to rest satisfied with the mere appearance and assume 
that it is an index of the underlying fact. Thus when the Chaldean army retreated 
from before Jerusalem at the advance of Pharaoh-Hophra, Zedekiah was ready to 
believe that his revolt was successful. 2. Occasions may be found in our own indU 
nationt. Zedekiah wished to see no more of the Chaldean army, and " the wish was 
father to the thought." 3. They may be found in preconceived notion*. We expect the 
facts to verify our opinions, and we contrive to make them do so by ignoring what will 
not agree with them, and selecting for consideration only what is favourable. All 
this may be traced in the history of religious delusions. People blind themselves to 
the thought of future judgment because, on the surface of life and for the present, all 
goes well. They are too ready to form their creed according to their inclination, droppin" 
out uupleasaut ideal as though there were no dark truths in existence. They go to thg 



ott. iixvn. 1— 21.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 123 

Bible for confirmation of their own " views" rather than for instruction, and, if need 
be, correction of them, and of course they have eyes only to see those texts which 
make for this confirmation. Kote : Jeremiah tried to deliver the Jews fr m sclf-deceptioa 
A Divine revelation is necessary to save us from religious self-di.ception. The Bible 
aims at this result as well as at enlightening our ignurance. 

III. The evil of self-deception. 1. It is disloyal to truth. It is our dnty not 
to rest in a delusion. The obligation of truthfulness reaches to our thinking as well 
as to our speaking. 2. It is dangerous to our own souls. Facts remain unchanged 
wliatever fanciful notions we may weave about them till they are quite unrecognizable, 
and when the time for action comes, they will act as they are, not as we thinlc them. 
The careless, who decline to consider a future judgment, are not the less amenable to 
it. Those people who have sought refuge in the Roman Catholic Church from the 
torment of doubt have not done anything to settle the facts about which they were 
troubled ; like the ostrich, who hides his head in a bush, they have quieted their doubt 
by turning from it; but if it was well grounded originally, it must t>e ultimately 
confirmed to their undoing. 

Vm. 10. — The irresistible wiU of God. I. The fact. The Jews were ready to 
believe that Egypt was a match for Babylon, and to hope that, through the conflict of 
these two powers they might regain their liberty. Even if they were justified in 
thinking so from a calculation of the material resources of these great empires, Jeie- 
miah reminded them that there were other coiisidt rations to be taken into account 
before the result could be predicted. It was the will of God that Babylon should 
conquer Jerusalem. Therefore, if the Chaldean army were reduced to a disorganized 
group of wounded men, Jerusalem would still succumb. The Jews had found that, 
while they were faithful to God, they were strong against hordes of enemies. They 
were to learn that when they had put themselves against God, the position was 
reversed, and the weakest foe could overthrow them. So it was true against them, as 
it had been on their side, that " a liitle one should chase a thousand." it has been the 
mistake of kings and of peoples to leave out of their calculations the chief factor of 
their history — to forget that God is ever working out his will through their cross 
purposes. Do we not make the same mistake in our private lives ? 1( God is almighty, 
it follows beyond question that he must accomplish what he purposes, though to us 
there seems no means of doing so, and though he neither reveals the means nor in 
most cases the end, working them out "deepiu unfathomable mines." Still, we know 
some things concerning God's will and the way he works it out ; e.g. he always wills 
what is just and good ; material events are largely beyond our control and under the 
influence of providence ; moral influences count for much in history, and these are 
directly affected by the spiritual relations of God with the minds of men. 

II. The relation of this fact to fatalism and to necessarianism. 1. The 
relation of it to fatalism. It must be distinguished from mattrialiiitio fatalism, which 
denies all will in nature ; from pagan fatalism, which sets the decrees of the fates above 
the power of the gods; from Mohammedan fatalism, which .a.scribes every event to the 
will of God, but regards that will as the unfettered choice of an irresponsible despot. 
The irresistible power in providence as revealed in the Bible is a will, a Divine will, a 
holy will, that always works out purposes of justice, purity, and love. 2. The relation 
of this fact to necessarianism. If God's will is irresistible what room is there for 
our will ? Must not that be necessarily bound by his will ? This question arises from 
confusing two phases of the will of God. The phrase, " will of God," represents two 
things— (1) what God purposes to do himself, and (2) what he desires us to do. The 
first governs his actions, the second inspires his Law. Now, it is the first that is 
irresistible; the second is plainly resistible. All sin is nothing but man's rebellion 
against Gtod's will, i.e. God's will in the second sense — what he wishes us to do. 
This is really no contradiction to what we know of the first will of God — what he 
purposes to do himself — because in his almi.;hty will of action he chooses to give us 
free-will containing the power of resisting his Law. Still, God's will to act must 
harmonize with his will in his Law for our conduct. If we resist the second will, we 
riiall find ourselves in conflict with the first, against which all resistance is futile. 
TlMrefore true wisdom will lead us to do God's will where we are free in relation tc i^ 



124 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JERBMlAfl. [0=- xxxvn. 1—21 



that we may find ourselves in agreement with Ood's will where opposition means only 
failure and ruin. 

Vers. 11 — 21. — Jeremiah imprisoned as a traitor. L Thb oiboumbtances LBADHia 
TO THE IMPRISONMENT. Whatever interpretation we are to set on the ambiguous pas- 
sage which gives the reason for Jeremiah's attempt to leave Jerusalem (ver. 12) — 
whether it were to escape from the city, or to abandon a work that appeared to he 
fruitless for work in the country districts, or to take a possession at a redistribution 
of land in the sabbatical year, or to claim his share as a priest, — ^it is difficult to 
acquit him of all blame for allowing personal considerations to move him from what 
he ought to have known was his post. At the best, his conduct was open to mis- 
interpretation. Even when we mean no wrong it is our duty to avoid the appearancs 
of evil. Still, we must not be harsh in condemning the prophet. A servant of 
God has his natural human rights and the civil rights which he shares with his fellow- 
citizens. People are very unjust in charging good men with worldliness for exercising 
those ^l^hts, and in assuming that religious people are to be blamed for self-interested 
conduct which in itself is irreproachable and is acknowledged to be so amongst men 
under ordinary circumstances. We are not surprised, however, to find the prophet 
accused of treason. He had frequently advised submission to Babylon. It was now 
hastily assumed that he and his friends were about to secure their own escape from the 
horrors of a siege by basely deserting their fellow-citizens. The best men are liable to 
the vilest accusations. The world holds no man above suspicion. Christ was accused 
of a great crime. Therefore we should learn patience under similar inflictions, remem- 
bering that God knows all, and that it is far better to suffer imjustly than to be 
unpunished but guilty. We should also learn to avoid the mistake of the Jews. 
People are too much inclined to put the worst construction on a doubtful action. 
" Charity thinketh no evil." 

II. The circumstances pollowinq the imprisonment. Jeremiah had been harshly 
treated — struck by the courtiers of Zedekiah and thrust into a dungeon. There God 
met him (ver. 17), as God repeatedly visited him, in prison. His life's work was not 
stayed by outward restraints. That must have been some consolation to the prophet. 
A devoted servant of God is more concerned about his mission than about his personal 
comfort. Apprehending a return of danger from the Chaldean army, the weak 
Zedekiah sent and consulted Jeremiah secretly. The prophet's reply was bold and 
clear (ver. 17). Never had he been more definite or more concise. What courage and 
fidelity to truth for a prisoner thus to address a kingl Having delivered his message, 
Jeremiah proceeded to plead his own cause. How many of us reverse the order, 
putting self-interest first and crowding other interests into the background! Jeremiah 
was favunrably heard by the king, and his condition considerably ameliorated. He did 
not suirer this time for his fidelity. It is fair to note that faithfulness does not always 
lead to iiiartyrdom. In the end it is always safer to be brave and true than to pla^ the 
coward's yMt. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOEa 
Veri. 2, Z.—iVide ch. xxi, 1, 2.)— M. 

Vers. 6 — 10. — Hopes that betray. The king, continuing in Ws rebellion •gainst God 
as well as against Nebucliadnezzar, invoked the aid of Pharaoh-Necho. At the tidings 
of his advance the Chaldeans raised the siege, but only that they might defeat the 
Egyptians, and return again in greater force and fury. 

I. The NAT0RK OF thkse hopes. 1. Uiey are based upon human meani oJone. 
2. They arise from following the dictates of our own mil and wisdom. 

II. Uow THEY BETRAY. 1. They are full (^promise, and gain confidence. 2. Hiey 
must fail, (1) because they are inadequate to the real need, and (2) they are opposed to 
the will of God. 3. 2%ey spiritually ruin. They lead us first to ignore and then 
to resist the will of God. In this alone is our welfare secured. For although the first 
expression and demand of that will be gloomy and severe, the end of it to the obedient 
is peace and aaivation (1 Pet. L 3 — 9). — M. 



CH. mviL 1—21.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 125 

Ver. 10. — OotTi purpose independent of means. The declaration of the certainty Ot 
the judgments upon Judah is absolute. They are not to be avoided by any human 
effort or apparent success. The soldiers of Chalden, although they were to be wounded 

S" thrust through" equivalent to "dead"?), would still avail for the work they had to 
io, and would be raised again to do it. 

I. The lesson. A twofold one, viz. : 1. The inevitableness of (he Divine will, whether 
it be to destroy or to save. 2, Ood's independence of human means. He can save by 
"many or by few." He is declared able " of these stones to raise up children unto 
Abraham." It pleased him by "the foolishness of preaching" to save many, etc. 

(1) The sinner in rebellion against God, however great his outward success and how- 
ever feeble the opposition to him, has reason to fear. It is an easy thing for his Mnkei 
to crush him. It will not require a great instrumentality. Herod was eaten of worms. 

(2) The Christian worker should rejoice and be encouraged. Every true word or work 
will have its effect. He must succeed, however insiguificiint his company or his means. 

II. The type. The ghostly army that was to " Imm the city with fire" represents 
the mighty power of God to create his agents, and symbolizes the death and resurrec- 
tion of Christ. It is the dead Christ who is raised again to fulfil the will of God in 
judgment and salvation. — M. 

Vers. 11 — 16, — The servant of Ood accused of treason. This attempt of Jeremiah's to 
go out of Jerusalem, whatever its special purpose may have been (as to this there is 
great diversity of view), was at once suspected of being treasonable, or, at any rate, 
it was made an occasion of accusing and punishing him. His asseverations were not 
listened to, but quickly and with much anger be was consigned to a loathsome prison, 
where he languished for many days. This teaches that — 

I. Those who are faithful to God will fbequbntlt be sdspeotbd of the worst 
HOTITEB. The immediate purpose to be served by going out from Jerusalem was 
innocent enough, viz. mere resort to the country as safer than the city, or to take 
possession of his inheritance in Benjamin. No effort was made at concealment, it 
was done " in the midst of the people." Yet he was accused of being about to " fall 
away [desert] to the Chaldeans." It would appear as if the prophet's persistent decla- 
rations of the success of the Chaldean arms and the downfall of Judah were attributed 
to his sympathy with the enemy. Many of the greatest servants of God have had 
similar experiences. Christ himself wag accused of the worst intentions against the 
Jewish nation. 

II. How IB THIS? 1. Because the natural mind fails to understand the things of 
Ood. The motive power or central principle is so diverse, or the means employed 
are so peculiar, that the real benevolence of intention is not perceived. When Christians 
remember how hard it is for even themselves to justify God's ways, they ought to 
expect that others not expressly taught of him will fail thoroughly to apprehend 
their drift. The policy of the Divine life and service, even in its plainest duties and 
appointments, is surrounded with mystery ; its wisdom is not of this world. It is 
often hard for those who are condemned by Christ's ministers to realize that the 
denimciations to which they are subjected do not spring from personal enmity. The 
greatest efforts ought, therefore, to be made to prove how good and loving the spirit is 
in which words of Christian rebuke are uttered. And the whole conduct of believers 
should be careful and blameless. " Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as 
doves" (Matt. x. 16). 2. The naturoi mind is predisposed against truth and good- 
ness, — ^M. 

Yen. 2—4. — " Oive ut of your oU." Here we have King Zedekiah, bis servants, anu 
his people, asking the prayers of the prophet of God, whose word of counsel and warning 
they had all along despised. The verses remind us of the parable of the ten virgins ; 
for, as there, the foolish say unto the wise, " Give us of your oil ; for our lamps are gone 
out," so here the foolish king and people entreat the aid of the wise servant of God 
when, as the midnight cry came to those virgins, so the dread judgment of (Jod came 
to them. " Pray now imto the Lord our God for us," say they who had refused to 
listen when he spoke to them from the Lord their God. Note— 

I How OBIBVOUBLT WICKED THE PEOPLE HAD BEEN. (Cf. Vef. 2.) It WaS wlth them 



128 THE BOOK UJT' THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh xxxvu. 1— 21 

M with the family of the rich mnn told of in Luke xrl. He, being in tormentB, thought 
of his five brethren who were all of them livitig in sin. There, as here, there were none 
righteous. And so with Sodom and Gomorrah. 

IL Tkt how vert anxious they were for tub pkophkt'b pratkbs. Ver. 3, " Pray 
now," etc. Reasons of this were : 1. They had waked up to the conviction that the 
prophet's message was true. 2. They were in sore peril, and knew not liow to help 
themselves. 3. They knew that the prophet had power with God. 4. 'J'hey felt they 
could not go to God in prayer themselves. How much of the asking for the prayers oi 
God's ministers on the part of those who are on their death-bed is owing to like causes ! 

III. How USELESS SUCH PRAYERS ARE. Did the [irayer of Dives do any good? or of 
the five foolish virgins? or those of the prophet, for we may suppose that he did pray? 
Now, the reasons of their uselessness are such as these : 1. To have grauted them 
would have defeated God's purpose in regard to his people. That purpose was to 
purify them, to separate them from their sins. But they did not wish when they 
asked these prayers to be severed from sin, only to be relieved of trouble. But such 
desire could not be granted ; therefore God held them down to the consequences of 
their sin. 2. Their request was an insult to God. Such men are well described in 
Mrs. H. W. B. Stowe's book, ' Uncle Tom's Cabin,' where one of them, Haley, is thus 
spoken to by a comrade: "After all, what's the odds between me and you? Tain't 
that you care one bit more or have a bit more feeliu'; it's clean, sheer, dog meanness, 
wanting to cheat the devil and save your own skin. Don't I see through it ? And 
your ' gettin' religion,' as you call it, arter all, is too p'isin mean for any crittur ; run up 
a bill with the devil all your life, aud then sneak out when pay-time comes I Boh ! " 
Is there not a vast amount of this meanness? Its despicableness is only equalled by 
its uselessness. 3. It would make God the minister of sin. 

Conclusion. Learn, unless there be true repentance, neither onr own prayers nor 
those of other people, though they be the greatest saints of God, will avail us anything. 
Even coming to Christ apart from repentance will fail us. " The sacrifices of God we 
a broken spirit," etc. — G. 

Ver. 6. — Building on the sand. Such was the conduct of the people who encouraged 
themselves to hope from the withdrawal of the armies of Babylon from around Jeru- 
salem that now they were delivered for good and all, and had no further cause for fear. 
They misread facts, interpreting them according to their desires rather than according 
to the truth. It was true that the army of Egypt was advancing and that of Babylon 
retreating. But, as the onflux of the wave does not prove that the tide is coming in 
nor Its reflux that the tide is going out, so this temporary advance and retreat told of 
no permanent results or of what the real issue should be. But yet they thought it did. 
It was a case of building on the sands of unwarranted hope rather than on the rock of 
the Word of God. Hope ever tells a flattering tale, but never so much so as when she 
promises peace to those to whom God has said there shall be no peace. Now, con- 
cerning such building on the sand, note — 

I. The foundation. There are many such ; e.g. ; 1. Reasonings from the observed 
prosperity of the wicked. 2. The assertions or suggestions of the sin-loving heart : 
that there is no God ; if there be, he is too merciful to punish sin ; repentance at last 
will do ; the efficacy of sacraments, etc. These are all of them instances of 1, 3. The 
slow-footednpss of God's judgments. " Because sentence against an evil work is not 
executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the sons of men are steadfastly set in them to 
do evil." And God it long-suffering, not willing that any should perish. 

II. The btruotubbb raised thereupon. 'They are often characterized by much 
material comfort. Worldly prosperity is not too weighty for them. Great freedom 
from anxiety, " Not in trouble as other men are." They are very attractive, and seem 
to be the abodes of true happiness. Mirth, festivity, and song abound in them often 
far more than in those which are built upon the rock. 

III. The overthrow. This always comes. It came in the instance given here. The 
armies of Babylon did come back. It may come in this life. There are warnings oi 
it every day. But if not now, then in the great day of judgment. And this overthrow 
will make us full of sorrow according to the days wherein we have nerw been afflicted, 
•nd th« years wherein, as we have thought, we have seen no evlL 



OB. uixTU. 1— 21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEllEMIAH. 121 

CoNOLnsiON. Bead the events of God's providence, not by the light of thy sin-loving 
heart, but by the light of God's sure Word, of God's Spirit within thee, and of Ood's 
not partial but complete dealing with men, taking in the whole of life, and, if needs be, 
eternity also. " Be not deceived." — 0. 

Ter. 9.—" St not dectived." Thera am gronnd for thif axhortatioB, snd then b 

stilL Then as now — 

I. Yebt hant were SECErVBD. 

II. Appbabances were decbptivb. 

III. None could claim exemption fbom thk roBBiBiLiTT or BEnra DEorarm 

IV. There was a traitor within thb oamf. Their hearts wished that to b* 
true which they therefore thought to be true. 

v. To BE DECEIVED 18 TO BE PLUNQED IN THK UTTEBUOBT OF 80BB0W. 

YL We need not be. There is One who says, "I will guide the* with my 
counseL" — C. 

Yer. 13. — Falstiy accitsed. Our Lord Jesus said, " It is sufficient for the servant 
that he be as his Master." Now, as he was falsely accused, so here we find his servant 
likewise. Note — 

I. To BE falsely accused is the common lot or God's feofli. How many 
instances we have 1 — Abel, Joseph, Moses, David, etc. Because of such slanders the 
psalmist said, " All men are liars." And here the Prophet Jeremiah, having no thought 
of deserting his countrymen, is nevertheless accused of so doing. And to-day the world 
is ever ready with its slander. It avows that aU the godly are but hypocrites, knaves, 
or fools. With what eagerness does it fasten upon the faults of a good man] How 
ready to take up an accusation against him I 

II. How IB IT to BE ACCOUNTED FOB? We reply: I. Men of the world do not 
understand the principles on which the godly act. Hence what they do not understand 
they misrepresent. 2. They know their own motives, and attribute the like to the 
godly. They act from purely worldly motives, and hence they conclude godly men 
do the same. 3. They hate religion, and therefore are always ready to revile it. 4. It is " a 
comfort to Sodom" to think that the godly are no better than themselves after all. But- 
Ill. How IB IT TO BE DEALT WITH? 1. SometimeB by silence. Silence leaves 

opportunity for and suggests reflection. How often of our Lord is it said, " He answered 
not a word " (cf. John xiii.) I 2. Sometimes hy indignant denial. Thus the prophet 
acted here ; ver. 14, " It is false," etc. They might have known, and probably did 
know, bow false their accusation was. Where there is great and true indignation felt 
at being thought capable of a given crime, that feeling may often be shown ; often, 
indeed, it ought to be, as when (1) the honour of God is concerned ; (2) the good of 
his Church ; (3) what is shameful as well as sinful is charged ac;ainst us. 3. Sometime* 
hy showing the necessary untruthfulness of the accusation. This also our Lord did, as 
when they charged him with being in league with Beelzebub. 4. Sometimes by com- 
mitting it all to Ood. Of our Lord it is said, " When he was reviled, he reviled not again, 
. . . but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously." 5. Sometimes by showing 
the motive of the false accusation. As when our Lord likened those who found fault 
with him to petulant children playing in the market-place, who would be pleased with 
nothing. 6. Alieays by remembering that we are in the fellowship of Christ herein, 
and seeking hit Spirifi aid to rightly bear this trial. — C. 

Yers. 14, 16. — Characteristici of injttttioe. They may bo traced in the incident 
recorded in these verses. Unjust judges as were these — 

I. Will not heabken to the aooubbd. 

II. Abb biassed bt passion. 

III. Abb needlessly oeuel. 

IV. Seek not bisht, but BEVXHan. 

Lbabn. To be careful what manner of spirit we are of whenever we are called apon 
to judge one another. Let us be thankful that the Judge before whom we stand, and 
w« o surveys all our ways, is that gracious Lord to whom the Father has committed 
all judgment, and who judges not righteously only, but in all mercy as weU. — Q, 



128 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxvil 1— 21 

Ver. 20. — " Out of weakness made strong." This verse an utterance, not of • itnidy 

invincible soul, but one of a gentle, shrinking, and often timid nature. Note^ 

L The Prophet Jeremiah belonged to the company of those who, out of weakness, 
God has made strong. 1. By nature and temperament he wan the reverse of strong. 
Proof in this verse. Suffei ing was ever terrible to him. Hence he piteously pleads for 
the king's help. And passim we have indications of the gentleness of his nature (cf. 
ch. i. 6, " Ah, Lord, I cannot ; " and homily on ch. iv. 19—30, " The fellowship o/ 
ChrisCs sufferings," Yol. i. p. 100). But: 2. Notwithstanding this, see how strong he 
became. When it came to the test, how he endured (of. ch. i. 10, 17, 18) 1 Nothin<; 
would induce him to alter his word towards the king, the prophets, and the people 
generally. He softened not one line of his message, although it would have been so 
much to his advantage to have done so. Now — 

II. This is thb olort of God's grace always. There will be glory hy-and-by, 
an outward glory on every child of God. " Bye hath not seen," etc. But the present 
glory of God's grace is this, that out of weakness it makes its recipients strong. 
See what it did for the apostles, and especially for St. Peter — they the recreants and 
the denier of the Lord, but afterwards his valiant and undaunted witnesses. And 
grace has done the same for not a few in prospect of suffering and trial from which 
l)e;orehand they would have utterly shrunk away. Women and children were amongst 
the number of the martyrs; and in the moral inartyrdoras of this softer age they are 
so stilL God strengthens his servants " with might by his Spirit in the inner man." 
And this is the glory of his grace. Not the numbers of the Church, nor her wealth, 
rank, gifts, or aught of such sort, but the spiritual strength that characterizes her. 
" I can do all things," said St. Paul, " through Christ wliich streugtheneth me." And it 
will be $0 yonder in the letter world he lafbr. The glory of that day will not be the 
golden streets, the gates of pearl, the foundations of precious stones ; not the vast throng 
of the redeemed, nor aught that belongs only to their circumstances, happy as they 
will be ; but it will be the character of them all. And this will be their security also. 
The defences of that condition of the redeemed will not be outward, but inward. They, 
liaving been strengthened with miglit by the Spirit of God in the inner man, will have 
come to be rooted — like the giant oak, which no tempest can uproot from the ground— 
and grounded — like the deep-laid foundation of the temple, which naught can overthrow 
— in love, and so " Christ will dwell in " their " hearts." Yes, their glory wUl be their 
defence also. 

Conclusion. Seek, therefore, this grace of Divine strength. Bow your " knees to 
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ," tliat, " according to the riches of his 
glury," he would grant you this. Then, thoujrh weak and waveriiif; by nature, 
.steadiness and stren;;th shall be given to your will, your heart, and so God will make you 
as he did his prophet — aa " a defenced city, an iron pillar, a brazen wall " (ch. i. 18).— -C. 

Ver. 21. — The rough irind stayed in the day of the east wind. Very terrible to the 
prophet were the sufferings he had to bear. Hence he seeks for relief by petitioning 
the king for help, which the king is led to bestow (ver. 21), It is an illustration of 
how God stays his rough wind, etc. Note — 

I. Goo OFTEN LETS SORE TROUBLE COMB TO HU SERVANTS. 

II. But he appoints it accobding to thisib poweb op endubanoe. He is not 
a hard master, gathering where he has not strawed, nor reaping where he has not sown. 
He fits the back for the burden it has to bear. If staying in the dread dungeon was too 
great a trial for his prophet, he will have him taken out. The wave that would have 
sunk the boat in which our Lord was with his disciples was never permitted to beat 
into it. A great many others came, but not that one. And so it ever is. " As Uiy 
day, so thy strength." God will be our " arm every morning." 

III. Thebefore "takb no thought fob thb mobbow," etc— CL 

Ver, 3, — A request for intercession. A request of this kind has always to Iw kwked 

at througli the character of the man who prefers it. It makes all the difference whether 
it be the utterance of grovelling superstition or of enlightened piety. It is a long way 
I'rum this request of Zedekiah to the request of Paul : " Brethren, pray for ua." Let 
us try to estim;:Lte— 



OH. xxxvn. 1— 21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 129 

I. The notion Zedekiah had of God. A notion eridently altogether detached 
from any considerations of character; we are told in ver. 2 that Zedediah did aot 
hearken to the words of the Lord through his prophet Jeremiah, and we could infer as 
much from the request here addressed to the propliet. Zedekiah looked upon Jehovah 
pretty much as he did upon the deities of surrounding nations. The notion was that 
the immense power of these deities could be turned in any direction desired, if only they 
were sufficiently propitiated. Now, if Zedekiah had cared to attend to the volume of 
prophecy, he would have seen very clearly that he who comes to God must believe 
that he is a God who will not pass over the misgovernment, the cruelty, the injustice, 
of human kings. And so when we come to God our prayers will have reality just in 
proportion as they show a distinct understanding of the character of God. 

II. The notion Zedekiah had of prater. Had he indeed any notion at all ? 
Did he mean anything more than that Jeremiah should go and do whatever he though t 
necessary and effectual? Intercessory prayer can be of little use to those who do not 
pray for themselves. Zedekiah wanted a certain end, namely, that by help of Egypt 
he should repel the Chaldeans. And ho looked upon Jehovah as being a aort of 
heavenly Pharaoh. And just as he had sent, doubtless, one ambassador to ask for 
Pharaoh's help, so now he wants to make Jeremiah an ambassador to Jehovah. This 
was all very foolish, ignorant, and presumptuous on Zedekiah's part ; but what better 
are we when we make up our prayers of petitions for things that we desire without 
stopping to consider that no petition is worth anything unless it not merely accords 
with the wiU of God, but even springs from that will ? The use of prayer is that God 
may serve us according to his estimate of our needs, not according to our estimate. 

III. The notion Zedekiah had of the prophet. He had a superstitious feeling 
that Jeremiah could do something for him he could not do for himself. We see here 
the secret of the power of priestcraft. We see how it was that false prophets got such 
a hold. We see how it is that priestcraft and spiritual dictation still prevail. The 
great bulk of men will not do the right thing towards God, they will not repent and 
crucify self, but a deep necessity impels them to do something, and so they seek to 
otiier men. Zedekiah was making an altogether wrong use of the prophet. His duty 
was to obey the prophet's messages, then he would not have needed to ask Jeremiah 
to pray for him. And let all people understand with respect to ministers of religion, 
that they exist to teach and lielp in a brottierly way ; but that also they are frail and 
fallible, and possess no mystic virtue to make their prayers more elGcacious than the 
prayers of other people. Intercessory prayer is the duty, the jaivilege, the power, of 
every Christian. — Y. 

Vers. 9, 10. — Israel'/ delusion as to its enemy. L The dklubion entertained. 
That a great army is before Jerusalem is, of course, no delusion, and that it may effect 
a great deal of damage of a certain sort is no delusion. The delusion lies here, in 
supposing that the removal of the army would be the removal of the danger. And 
this delusion being strong in the minds of the people led them to seek the help of 
Egypt. A carnal foe was to be overcome by the help of a carnal friend. And similarly 
we are all led into most mistaken policies of life by seeing only our visible enemies. 
In our solicitude to guard against the seen enemy, and keep in safety our own visible 
possessions, we make too much of visible things altogether. It is very hard, of 
course,'to admit this; it is very hard for the natural mind to see its delusions; but 
then it is the very mark of delusions that they put on the semblance of fundamental 
and important truths. Again and again appeal is made to what is called common 
sense to testify to the validity of delusions. The common belief of the multitude is 
cited to stop the mouth of any one who ventures to proclaim what he is sure is true. 
Those who have got to the heights and advanced places of spiritual experience know 
full well that the maxims and rules of the natural man are little but a mass of pernici«us 
delusions. Thus men carefully preserve the shell of life, while the interior treasure 
for which the shell exists is utterly neglected. 

II. The delusion exposed. God makes plain who the real enemy of Jerusalem is, 

an enemy whom a thousand Pharaohs and a thousand Egypts would vainly contend 

against. In one sense Jehovah himself is enemy, but what he says amounts to thw, 

that Jerusalem itself is its own worst enemy. Wh'.le it is rebellious against him, and 

jebeuiah — n. K 



180 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxviii. 1— 28. 



fnD of all unrighteousness, he must work against it by all available instruments. To 
destroy the Chaldean army is only as it were to break the warrior's sword ; he can 
seize another and continue the conflict. It is of the greatest possible consequence that 
we should know in any conflict whether we are fighting simply against man, or 
whether behind the man who is in front of us there be the purpose and the strength ot 
God. How much of human energy has been wasted, how many have had failure 
stamped on all their efforts, simply because it has not been known that God has been 
behind human conflicts I God would have us make sure — and he gives us ample means 
for the attainment — that we are not fiifhting against him, 

III. The delusion maintained. This is made plain to us as we read on in the 
narrative. An example is given to us of how people often do not wake to the delusions oj 
life till too late. They walk contentedly in a vain show, and the realities flowinc; out of 
the ministry of Christ they reckon to be dreams. We may depend upon it that delusions 
will be maintained, most ingeniously, most tenaciously, until by the power of God oar 
eyes are opened to distinguish reality from appearance, and truth from falsehood. — ^Y. 

Vers, 17 — 19. — ITie secret question of a kivg and the lold answer o/a prophet. L Thb 
SEOBET QUESTION OF A EiNQ. 1. The secrecy. Why should a king with all his 
authority do a thing in secrecy ? Was it policy or fear that dictated this secret consul- 
tation with Jeremiah ? Fear, probably, was the largest element. He was afraid ot 
what the princes and courtiers around him would say. Note other secret interviews 
sought by men of rank and authority, Herod, a king, privily calls the wise men from 
the East. Nicodemus, a mier of the Jews, comes to Jesus by night. What men ot 
position do cannot be concealed easily. The very effort to conceal is often only a more 
effective publication. The lesson is that, however quietly and unobtrusively we may 
do a thing, we must do it so as not in the least fearing publicity. The very difficulty 
of keeping secrets is a divinely ordained difBculty to help in keeping men in the paths 
of righteousness. 2. The evident faith of the king in Jeremiah's office. The faith was 
superstitious and unpractical, but still, such as it was, it exerted a power over the king's 
conduct. This increases the king's responsibility, for it shows that he was not able to 
get Jeremiah and his message out of his mind. 3, The indication as to what sort of 
aniwer was expected. Not in words, of course, but we can guess what the tone of the 
inquiry was. Jeremiah came from a prison to prophesy, and doubtless the king 
thought that the privations of the past and the hopes of liberty might draw some 
flattering word from the prophet. Altogether, what a pitiable position this king was 
in — ^waiting eagerly, half in terror, half in threatening, upon the word of one of his 
humble subjects, and the same a prisoner! 

n. The bold answer of a prophet. What great things are required from a prophet I 
He must always be in close and living relation to truth. He must always be ready 
to meet the manifold temptations which beset a man who is specially sent forth to 
speak the truth. His first question must ever be, not — What is the safe path, or the easy 

giith ? but— What is God's path ? Here he was in close and private dealing with a king, 
erhaps, as he looked upon Zedekiah thus sending for him secretly, he compassionated 
him rather than feared him. It was such a revelation of the hollowness of human 
grandeur. Jeremiah here before Zedekiah is even somewhat of a type of Jesus before 
Pilate. Jesus will go on testifying to the truth. He will not make Pilate's task one 
whit easier by accommodating himself to Pilate's desires. Truth, eternal realities, 
fundamental duties, fidelity to the clear voice of God within the lieart, — these must 
prevail in every one who would follow in the path of Jesus or of prophets and apostles. 
There is neither real prudence nor real charity without these things. — X. 

EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEB xxxynL 

OONTINCATION. 

The objeot of the princes being frustrated 
[tat in the "court of the guard" Jeremiah 



had perfeot freedom and opportnnity oi 
speech), the princes resolve upon a more 
e£feotnal means of stopping the propbet^i 
month. He is thrown into a miry pit, with 
the object that he may die of starvation. 



OH. mvm. 1— 28.J IRH BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



131 



Ter. 1. — ^Two Paahnn appear to be men- 
tioned here : one probably the Bsme who 
put Jeremiah in the stoeka (ch. xx. 1, 
2); the other a member of the first of 
Zedekiah's two embasBiea to the prophet 
(ch. xxi. 1). On Jnoal, see ch. xxxvii. 3. 
Had spoken; rather, kept speaking. 

Vers. 2, 3. — He that remaineth, etc. 
Jeremiah repeats what he had said to 
Zedekiah's embassy in ch. xxi. 9, 10. 

Ver. 4. — For thus; literally, /or <ftere/or«; 
i.e. because he is left in impunity (comp. 
the use of the phrase in ch. xxix. 2S). He 
weakeneth the hands of the men of war ; 
i.e. he dispirits them. It is important to 
get this " outside view '' of the preaching of 
Jeremiah. There is evidently some excuse 
for the opponents of Jeremiah. It was a 
matter of life and death to resist the Chal- 
deans, and Jeremiah was, according to tlie 
politicians, playing into the hands of the 
enemy (see further in general Introduc- 
tion). The addition of the words, that re- 
main, shows that the bitter end of the 
resistance was fast approaching. 

Ver. 5. — He is in your band. The grow- 
ing power of the " princes " (see on oh. 
xxii. 4) seems to have confined the king to 
a merely secondary r6le. 

Ver. 6. — The dungeon ; more literally, the 
cistern. '• Every house in Jerusalem was sup- 
plied with a subterranean cistern, so well 
constructed tliat we never read of the city 
sufiering in a siege from want of water" 
(Dr. Payne Smith). A grotto bearing the 
name of Jeremiah has been shown at 
Jerusalem since the fifteenth century. 
Under its floor are vast cisterns, the deepest 
of which professes to be the prison into 
which the prophet was thrown. The objec- 
tion is that tlje sacred narrative proves that 
the prison was in the city, whereas " the 
present grotto was not included within the 
walls until the time of Herod Agrippa" 
(Thomson, ' The Land and the Book,' 
1881, p. 555). The son of Hammeleoh; 
rather, a royal prince (as ch. xxxvi. 26). 

Ver. 7. — llbed-melech the Ethiopian. The 
name means " the king's slave." Bbers re- 
marks that the euuuchs employed in the 
modern East are nearly all negroes, on 
whom the shameful operation has been per- 
formed by Copts in Upper Egypt. Zede- 
kiah's harem is referred to in vers. 22, 23. 

Ver. 9. — For there is no more bread in the 
city. It would almost seem as if the little 
remaining bread had been brought tog;ether 
by command of the magistrates, and that 
it was given out in rations by them (comp. 
ch. xxxvii. 21). 

Ver. 10.— Thirty men. Why so many 
wer« lent is not ol^r. Are we to suppose 
tb^t ibe princes wnnld resist Jeremiah's 



nlearc? But "the king is not he," eta, 
(ver. 5). Is it not a scribe's error fo( 
"three" (so Ewald, Hitzig, and GraQ? 

Ver. 11. — Under the treasury; rather, (• 
(o room) under the treaewry. Old cast olontl, 
eto. ; literally, rage of torn garment$ and 
rags of worn-out garments. 

Ver. 14.— The third entry. What this 
means exactly is not cli^ar; probably the 
" entry " led from the palace to the temple. 
It must have been a private place, else it 
would not have been chosen for this inter- 
view. I will ask thee a thing ; rather, I uiiU 
ask of thee a word ; i.e. a revelation from 
Jehovah (comp. oh. xxxvii. 17). 

Ver. 15. — Wilt thou not hearken ; lather, 
thou loilt not hearken, 

Ver. 16. — That made us this sonl. A very 
unusual formula (cump. Isa. Ivii. 16). 

Ver. 17. — The king of Babylon's princes. 
Kebuchadnezzar himself was in Biblah (oh. 
xxxix. 5). 

Ver. 22. — ^AIl the women that are left; 
i.e. probably the wives of Zedekiah's royal 

gredecessors, who liad passed into his own 
arem as concubines. Even Hezekiah, as 
Payne Smith well points out, had a numerous 
harem (' Becords of the Past,' i. S9, where 
" daughters " is equivalent to " girls "). 
Zeilekiah's own wives are spoken of in the 
next verse. Thy friends have set thee on, 
eto. The first half of this taunting song 
(tnashdl) reminds of Chad. 7 (for other points 
of contact with Obadiah, see on ch. xlix. 7 
— 22). The meaning is that, after urging 
the weak-minded Zedekiah on to a conflict 
with the Chaldeans, they have left him in- 
volved in hopeless difficulties. 

Ver. 23. — So they, etc. ; rather, and fhey, 
etc. The women spoken of are different 
from those in ver. 22. Thou shalt cansethis 
oity to be burned. The literal rendering (see 
margin) is. Thou shalt burn this eity ; but 
the Septuagint, Peshito, and Targnm have 
" As for this city it shall be burned," whioh 
snits the parallelism better. 

Ver. 27. — He told them according to all 
these words. A controversy has arisen as 
to whether Jeremiah was justified in con- 
cealing the truth. But is a man bound to 
confess the truth to a murderer ? 

Ver. 28. — And he was there when, eto. 
The words, of which this is an incorrect 
version, ought to begin the first verse of the 
next chapter. Bender (with Coverdale), 
And it came to pass when Jerusalem was 
teikea (in the ninth year of Zedekiah cams 
Nebuchadrezzar, eto. ; in the eleven^ year 
. . . the city was deft optn) that aU the 
princes, eto. The correctness of the read- 
ing is, however, open to some doubt (se« 
introduction to next chapter). 



132 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. Loh- xxxvin, 1—28 



HOMILETICS. 

VwB. 1 — 13. — Jeremiah in the pit. I. Jeeemiah pkbaohbs faithfullt. (Vers. 2, 5.) 
flis conduct is wise, brave, and noble. On the surface it savours of pusillanimity But 
io much the greater the wisdom and courage that inspire it. Personally Jeremiah is in 
greater danger from his fellow-citizens than from the invaders. To rouse the anger of 
the people amongst whom he is living by apparently favouring the plans of their enemies 
requires no little firmness of character. Moreover, strong moral courage is requisite 
for such a course as that of Jeremiah's. His patriotism is certain to be taken for 
treachery, his wisdom for cowardice. He stands alone with his unpopular advice, sure 
that it will not be followed, sure that his motives will be mbunderstood and his character 
maligned. To a sensitive man the situation would be exquisitely painfuL Fidelity 
under it reveals a noble courage. Thus we see how the bravest man may be he who 
apx>ears to be most weak, while the rash and boastful daring that rushes heedlessly with 
the multitude but shrinks from a course of unpopularity, is really feeble and cowardly, 

II. The frinoes are alarmed. (Ver. 4.) They have some reason to dread the effect 
of Jeremiah's preaching upon the defence of Jerusalem. If they are certain of the 
wisdom of the course they are pursuing, it is difBcult to see how they can regard the 
prophet with anything less than dismay. Every time his Cassandra notes are heard 
in the streets it seems as though disaffection were being urged upon the people. The 
mistake of the princes is in being so wedded to their policy as never to consider the 
advice of Jeremiah as of any weight and wisdom. Thus we judge and condemn men 
witk absolute certainty to our own mind, but often only because we assume, without 
reason, the infallibility of our own position. 

III. The kino wbaelt yields. (Yer. 6.) Zedekiah is helpless in the hands of hii 
courtiers. Like Pilate, he thinks to throw off all responsibility on the accusers whom 
he dare not oppose (John xviii. 31). But he cannot do this. His weakness is culpable. 
He is not like a constitutional monarch, legally fettered by a responsible ministry. He 
is by position a rcspunsible ruler. If he cannot discharge the functions of his position, 
he should abdicate. In no case is he jnstiSed in lending the weight of his name to 
a deed of which he does not approve. We cannot free ourselves from responsibility by 
declining to act when it is our duty to interfere and prevent a wrong from being done. 

IV. Jeremiah is oast into the pit. (Ver. 6.) 1. The action of the courtiers is 
cruel. They treat the prophet with needless indignity and evidently design for him 
the slow torture of a death by starvation. 2. It is also cowardly. They dare not 
execute him openly. The horrible fate is assigned to him because it is less dangerous 
to themselves. 3. The prophet is now in the lowest condition of wretchedness, down 
in the pit, sunk in the mire, left in that cold, dark solitude to the horrors of approaching 
starvation. Those of us who are ready to murmur at slighter trouble should remember 
how much better men than we have had to endure far greater suffering and humiliation 
than ours. What shame and agony were heaped upon Christ the Son of Gbd I 

V. The Ethiopian interoedes. (Vers. 7 — 9.) 1. This man was a heathen by 
nation, but a good man. Character, not profession, is the one thing of significance with 
all of us. 2. He was a man of an apparently inferior race. It is better to have a black 
skin and a humane heart than a white skin and a black heart. 3. He was regarded as 
an effeminate creatwre. True manliness belongs to our conduct, not to our appearance 
and manners. God raises up friends in the most unlikely quarters. One of the 
advantages of trouble Is that it reveals unknown friends. 

YL Jerkmiah is delivered. The weak king only wants the encouragement of Iiis 
chamberlain to do an act of justice which his own conscience must have urged him to 
•11 along. When the distress and danger of Jeremiah are vividly brought befoi« him, 
he rouses himself. Many people are too weak to do their duty till their imagination and 
feelings are wrought upon. "JPhey live in comfortable indifference to the wretchedness 
•f others simply because they have not been made to feel it. They are not to be 
•xcused on this account. But knowing the fact, we should do more to make the needi 
•f the poor, the sick, and the heathen felt by the indifferent who ought to help them. 
A higher providence leads to the deliverance of Jeremiah. Qod watches over him in 



OB. xxxTOi. 1— 28,] THE BOOK OF TflE tROPHET JEREMIAH. 133 

the dungeon, and God sees that he is saved from it. So Qod will save his people ttom 
all their troubles, though in some cases the minister of deliverance is that dark angel of 
death whow advent the miserable in Andrea Orcagna's picture at Pisa welcome with 
K>y. 

Ver. 6. — 2%e o^arent misanthropy of revelation. The political aspect of these words 
is evident; let us now consider their moral bearings. The inspired pruphet of God is 
taken for an enemy of his neighbours. The experience of Jeremiah is not without 
parallel, nor is it wanting in certain reasonable grounds of justification. 

L Thekb are things in bevelation which appear to indicate misanthboft. 
When God utters his voice he does not always speak in dulcet notes. We may hear 
harsh, grating thunders of Sinai. The message is not always pleasant. It makes us 
feel uncomfortable, exposes our worst characteristics, and has no pity on our little con- 
trivances for putting the best face on our conduct. It stays our hand in many a 
favourite occupation. It cries " vanity of vanities " to our pet schemes. It puts a veto 
on our proud ambition. It frowns at much of our pleasure. For the future it threatens 
judgment and bitter penalties. When we fancy we have found some neat plan of 
escape, it exposes the rottenness of our hope and plunges us for the moment into blank 
despair. Such is the work of certain parts of revelation, and being so, it is not 
unnaturally regarded by some as misanthropic. Bearing this fact in mind, we must not 
be surprised at the aversion that the irreligious feel to religion. Judging from this 
standpoint, they may regard their best frieml as their enemy, and imagine that the 
angry voice of God indicates nothing; but his settled wrath against them. 

11. This misanthropy is only apparent. Jeremiah was the best friend of Jerusalem, 
and the fanatical leaders of resistance her most fatal foes. His advice was really wise 
and patriotic. The Bible, which to some is a gloomy Book, darkening the aspect of 
human life, contains the secret of its true blessedness. The religion of the Bible may 
be sombre in the eyes of some when compared with the sunny religion of Greece. Bin 
the Hellenic faith could not save its followers from utter moral corruption and ruin. 
Through the sterner faith of the Jew and the Christian we are led to that one satisfying: 
brightness of life which comes from the rising upon ns of the Snn of rigliteousness. We 
must judge of words by their aim, not by their sound. The Bible contains threais oi 
terrible doom, but as we discover the purpose of them we see that they are not curses but 
warnings. God often opposes us, stays our course, puts up the red signal, only to save 
us from rushing to some fatal calamity. Elijah, Jereuiiah, John the Baptist, Savonarola, 
and John Knox were regarded by their contemporaries as misanthropic. Now we see that 
they were the salt of the earth, true saviours of society. Even Christ uttered words 
which might seem to indicate misanthropy, but all with the intention of leading men to 
escape from the evils he deplored and find salvation in his grace. 

Ver. 11.—" Old cast clouts and old rotten rags," L There is a use fob everything. 
These rags were possibly thrown aside as useless. Yet they were found to serve a 
distinct purpose. Amongst the wonderful combinations of invention and economy in 
the present day, noue are more remarkable than those which turn waste materials to 
serviceable ends. There is a mission for every life. No man is so low, so worn, so 
worthless, but that he may find some way in which to serve God and his fellows. If 
a rag has a mission, shall a soul find none ? 

II. If we cannot attain the highest object aimed at, we SHOaLD NOT NESLEOT 

THAT which is WITHIN OUR REACH. The rags may once have been prince's robes. Now 
they are only fit for the lowest uses. Then let them be so used. There is an 
impractical idealism which paralyzes all effort. Because a thing cannot be turned to the 
highest account we will not use it at all. So there are those who refuse to do anything 
because they can do nothing very great, or who, being compelled to give up a work of 
honour, are too proud to undertake a more lowly task. We should remember Goetlie"! 
maxim, " Do the thiug that lieth nearest thee." Thus a useful rag may he a rebuke tu 
a useless man. 

III. The GREATEST MAN MAY HAVE NKED OF THE MOST COMMONPLACE APPUANCE8. A 

prophet finds comfort from a rag. We are none of us emancipated from relation to the 
lowest things. This should humble those who make the dignity gf their natuie - 



184 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEllEMUH. [««• xxxViii. 1— 28. 

reason for despising the offices of lowly things and persons. It should encourage those 
who have but small means. They may be of material comfort to some far above them. 
Great and small, we are linked together for our mutual helpfulness. 

IV. Deeds op kindness should be performed in a kind manner. Carelessness 
and roughness of demeanour may spoil half the efiect of the most well-meant offices oi 
charity. There are philanthropists who would lift the prisoner from the pit, but with 
hard, coarse ropes, without any consideration for his sore and weary body. The purpose 
is gracious, but the manner is brutal. Christians should not be mere patrons, wounding 
the feelings of those whom they help in other respects, but the brethren of the dis- 
tressed, aiding them carefully, gently, courteously. This is the manner of God's great 
deliverance of mankind; it i.s by a Saviour who " shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause 
his voice to be heard in the street. A biuised reed shall he not break, and the smoking 
Qax shall he not quench " (Isa. zlii. 2, 3). 

Vers. 19 — 23. — The fear of ridicule. I. The pbab of ridicule is a oommoh failtng 
OF WEAK MEN. Zedeluah is a weak man. His first thought when he contemplates the 
possible effects of obedience to the Divine command is that it may result in his being 
delivered into the hands of the captives at Babylon to be mocked by them (ver. 17). 
This he dreads above all things. Many men who would stand up without flinching to 
be shot at cower before a laugh. Let them understand that their conduct is weak and 
foolish and wrong. 

II. The fear of eidiculb is a frequent cause of neglect of dutt. This is one 
of the chief weapons of persecution and temptation exercised in our own day. The 
rack and the stake are out of fashion ; the sneer and the gibe have taken their place. 
Milton's Satan has been superseded by Goethe's Mephistopheles. The young are 
specially sensitive to ridicule. They especially should seek grace from God to stand 
firm against it. 

III. The pear of bidiculb provokes ridicule. Jeremiah showed the king that 
■ disobedience coming out of his dreai of being mocked would result in worse mockery. 

Fearing the laughter of captive soldiers, he would be mocked by women ; dreading the 
contempt of strangers, he should meet with that of his own house (ver. 22). Face a 
laugh, and you foil its spiteful intention ; quail before it, and you give it the victory and 
furnish occasion for fresh contempt. The young man who sneaks away from his 
religious principles because his companions in business laugh at him for them is only 
despised for his contemptible weakness, while that young man who quietly holds his 
ground unmoved by senseless ridicule wins the secret respect of observers, and makes 
them inwardly ashamed of their folly. 

IV. The feab op ridicule mat end in fatal results. Jeremiah pointed this out 
to the king (ver. 23). The horrible charge of having brought about the burning of the 
city would be attached to his name, and the guilt of it to his soul. Here was a far 
greater cause of alarm than the danger of a langh. Weak men who are moved by such 
contemptible motives as those that influenced Zedikiah should be roused by a rude 
shock, if that is necessary, for them to see the dread and solemn issues of life and the 
fearful evils they may evoke while trifling with/duty in childish timidity. 

V. It is oue duty to conquer the pear of ridicule by faithful obedience to 
THE WILL OF GoD. Here lies the remedy (ver. 20). To some this fear is keen and 
almost irresistible. But it is wholly selfish. It is associated with morbid, self-regarding 
thoughts. If we realize the idea that God is speaking to us and watching us, all 
ideas of the thoughts of men about us should sink to the dust. With earnest convic- 
tions of duty and true efforts of obedience inspired by the grace of Christ, which is suffi- 
cient for us, we may brave this thorn in the flesh— the fear of man that bringeth a 
snare. 

Yer. 20. — 77ie hlessedneis of obedience. Jeremiah entreats Zedekiah to obey the ▼oice 
of God urging him with promises of deliverance. Note here — 

I. The ENTREATY. Jeremiah says, " I beseech thee." This is characteristic of the 
kindliness and earnestness of the prophet. It is also indicative of the character of God 
who inspired him. With St. Paul he might have said, " We are ambassadors therefore 
OB behalf of Christ, as though God were entreating you by us ; we beseech you od 



OH. xxxvm. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 135 

behalf of Chri8t, ... be ye reconciled to God " (2 Cor. t. 20). This Divine entreaty 
■ienifies (I) earnestness — God truly desires our good ; (2) kindliness cmd sympathy ; 
(3) condescension ; and (4) tlie greatness of the issues at stake. 

IL The duty. 1. This is obedience, the cardiaal duty of the Old Testament. The 
importance of this duty in the Kew Testament has been underrated. There, too, it 
takes a first place in the teaching of Christ (John xv. 14) and of his apostles — St. Paul 
(Rom. ii. 8), St. Peter (1 Pet. iii. 1), St. John (1 John iii. 24), and St. James (Jas. 
i. 22), Indeed, all religion consists in submission (passive faith) and obedience (active 
faith). 2. Such obedience must be implicit. Zedekiah did not understand the reason 
of the Divine command. To carry it out was unpalatable to him and his people. But 
once we know God's will, questions of mystery and of inclination should not affect ua. 
In the gospel dispensation obedience is more intelligent. We have spiritual principles 
in place of formal precepts. Yet here also there is often mystery and fear as to the 
results of obedience, and then our duty is the soldier's duty of unquestioning obedience. 

"Theirs not to reason why; 
Theirs but to do and die." 

III. Thb olaiu. 1. It rests on the will of Ood. The king Is to obey the voice of 
Gkid. The monkish dnty of obedience stayed with the ecclesiastical superior. But 
the spiritual Christian must feel that he owes his supreme alle>;iance directly to God. 
Our King and Father commands. We must obey his will. 2. It is determined by the 
rev9lati<m of the will of Ood. The obedience is to be given to the voice as it is made 
known by the prophet. " Which I speak unto thee." We are only responsible for 
obedience to God's will as far as he has revealed it to us. But we cannot plead total 
ignorance of his will. That has been declared by prophets and apostles, manifested in 
Christ, confirmed by the Spirit of God in our consciencei 

IV. The pbomise. 1. Whatever happens. " It shall be well " — a vague promise, 
but BufBcient. We cannot tell what is well for ns. The thing God sends may not 
seem good as it approaches. But in the result it shall be well. That is enough for 
faith. 2. lAfe ia tteured. " And thy soul shall live." What is the use of the preser- 
vation of our possessions if our life is taken? Men toil for earthly gain and forget that 
the one condition of enjoying it may go at any moment Life in the highest sense, 
eternal life, is the full reward for obedience. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Van. 4—13. — Foreshadowingi and ■cmaiogies of the cross. The pitiable fate of Jere- 
miah, BO uncalled for and unexpected both in its inflictions and deliverances, the light 
and shade so strongly contrasted, become charged as we proceed with a certain sugges- 
tiveness of something unspeakably greater yet to come. In other words, Jeremiah is 
perceived to be not only a prophet, but a type of Christ. The charge of treason, the 
defiance of legal safeguards and requirements by the princes, the wavering and help- 
lessness of the king, the living death in the miry dungeon, and the resurrection 
through the kind aid of Bbed-Melech, are types of the most unmistakable kind of the 
characteristic redemptive experiences of the Man of sorrows. And this is only one 
out of many proofs that humam history, especially sacred history, betrays a system <>/ 
correspondence in its events with those which constituted the earthly experience of the 
Messiah. 

I. They call attention to the manifestation of Chbist and hklp to fix and 
IDENTIFY IT. All along the line of Old Testament revelation there were these finger- 
posts or indicators of the coming struggle between righteousness and sin. The cross is 
closely associated with the very first pages of revelation, and gives meaning and con- 
nection to the loftiest, deepest, and most anomalous utterances and occurrences of the 
Old Testament. With its many anticipations, echoes, and secondaries, the cross o/ 
Christ asserts itself as the central and most commanding principle of human history. 

II. They reveal this same law operating throughout the woblb's hibtoby anu 
HUMAN EXPERIENCE. Prehistoric myths and heathen religions, aithoogh incapable ol 
attaining to such a Divine conception, yet presuppose and grope after u And in many 



136 TflE BUOK; Of TilE PEOPHET JiSREMlAfl. [on. xiivm. 1— 2& 

an illuBtrJous and obscure human consciousness had the cross made its impress ere the 
Redeemer of mankind was called upon to suffer. 1. They proved the necessity of ChrisVa 
sufferings. As the true character of the issue between good and evil declared itself 
more and more plainly, it became evident that some more decisive determination of it 
must take place. Bach previous or subsequent experience of the conflict is indecisive 
and incomplete apart from the Messianic sufferings. Christ must needs suffer, if only t» 
bring to a head and final settlement the long-pending question as to whether good or 
evil is the true law of human life and of the world. It was no accidental, abnormal 
series of occurrences that constituted our Saviour's experience, but the culmination ot 
ages of mutual development in the forces of righteousness and sin, and the true expo- 
nent of their respective characters and tendencies. 2. They helped to deepen and 
educate the spirittuil sense of men, and to prepare them for a true appreciation of the 
mystery of the cross. It is the cross in us that leads us to the cross without. The 
deep tribulation of the saints of the early Church led them to more profound concep- 
tions of moral action and spiritual requirement. Jeremiah was here a type of Judah, 
the feet of whose king were " in the mire " (ver. 22). Bach occasion like this of Jere- 
miah's condemnation and imprisonment was a loud warning of the possibilities of evil 
that were still in the womb of time, and showed the direction of the tendency of tha 
world-spirit. It showed, too, how closely related was the life of men with the unseen 
and the eternal. A moral order behind the chain of events was continually declaring 
itself. Its very peculiarities and anomalies demonstrated the existence of a higher law. 
The awful depths and heights yet to be attained by the moral nature of man were 
suggested, and the certainty jiradnally Induced that the kingdom of light would yet 
meet and overcome the force of the kingdom of darkness. The faith, obedience, and 
meekness of man would yet be vindicated by the invincible power and authority of 
God.— M. 

Vers. 7—13. — Ebed-Meleeh; or, unlooked-for sympathy and help, h Its OTBonM- 
BTANCES. These were such as to Impress the mind of the prophet. He was deliberately 
consigned by the princes of the people to the dungeon, and the king consented, so that 
there would appear to be no appeal. His heart must have failed him as he felt himself 
sinking in the mire. In a prison like that he was in imminent danger of being for- 
gotten and starved. Apparently it was intended as an effectual means of " putting out 
of the way." And all this was due to what? Doing his duty. The very persons 
wuom he sought to benefit either turned against or ignored him. The whole situation 
was desperate. It appeared as if no human help could save. It is just at such times 
that faith receives its confirming, ultimate lessons, 

II. Its chaeaotbb. 1. In itself. It was: (1) Thoughtful. It has been suggested 
that, as the dungeon was in the palace, " he came to the knowledge of it by hearing 
Jeremiah's moans." This may or may not have been ; but when he knew of the situa- 
tion of the prophet he was concerned and full of sympathy. It is this spirit which 
true religion, and especially the gospel of Christ, ever fosters, and the world has need 
of it. (2) Prompt. In a question like that of a few hours at the utmost, no delay 
had to be made if the prisoner was to be saved. As the king was " then sitting in the 
gate of Benjamin," he went out immediately and sought an audience. And he urged 
expedition. One of the finest recommendations of help is that it is given when it is 
needed. The case is taken up as if it were his own. How many philanthropies miss 
fire because they are kept too long without being carried into effect? Bis dat qui cito 
dot. (3) Courageous. He went straight to the king, by whose order he must have 
known the thing had been done, and spoke with quick, nervous fearlessness and con- 
demnation. There was not only feeling here, but principle. He was evidently careless 
as to the consequences to himself. (4) Practical. Ebed-Melech meant that the thing 
should be done, and so he took the requisite steps to carry it out. Everything is 
thought of and applied to the purpose. Even in the " old cast clouts " there is evidence 
of forethought and careful, if novel, application of means to ends. 2. In its origin. 
Ebed-Melech was : (1) An alien. A negro, and not a Jew, and one from his office dis- 
qualified from participating in the benefits of the covenant. It is the more remarkable 
that none of Jeremiah's countrymen interposed. f2) A servant of a vicious king. The 
establishments of such princes are usually btampud with the same character, and their 



9tt.:3u^tm. 1-28.] tfiE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JMBElOAB. 1S7 

members are but the creatures of their masters. There is something douUj onkxAed- 
for, therefore, in such an advocate and friend. It is like a salutation from one of 
" GsBsar's household." (3) It is also probable that he was one called out by the occa- 
rion. No mention of him is made either before or after. 

ILL What it teaches. 1. True religion does not depend upon eonmntional/ormi 
Not that these are therefore without yalue, but ihey are not of the essence of religion. 
It is Divine ftuth, with its outflowing charities and works, that alone can save man and 
glorify God. Bahab the harlot and Naaman the Syrian are but instances of many for- 
mally outside of the kingdom of God, but really within it. Let each ask, "Am I, 
who have received so much privilege, really a child of grace?" 2. The kingdom of 
Ood ii always stronger than it teems. As to Elijah the assurance, " Tet I have left me 
seven thousand in Israel," so to Jeremiah is this experience. We are never justified in 
despairing of human nature if God be in his world. 3. Implicit trust in Ood as the only 
Saviour. The raising up of such a deliverer was so unique and unexpected as to call 
attention to it as a work of God. It was supernatural and special, and spoke of gracious 
intervention. He would not abandon his servant, nor will he any who put their trust 
in him. — M. 

Yen. 11, 12. — " Old cast eHouts." This Incident is very vividly described ; tmi " the 
touch of human kindliness in the good negro's direction to Jeremiah to put under his 
armpits the soft rags thrown down to him, to prevent the chafing of the cords which 
drew him up, is inimitably natural." The sharp cords would otherwise have cut him so 
severely as to render his elevation exceedingly painful, if not practically impossible. To 
how many conflicting thoughts and feelings do these rags, brought from the king's 
house under the treasury, not give rise ? What vicissitudes must they have passed 
through 1 Now, after they have been cast aside as useless, a new, unthought-of use is 
suddenly ^scovered for them. Bags it may be of royal garments used in stately 
pageants ; was not even this a kingly service to which they were put ? 

I. Of how exquisite a syhfatht were thet the expression 1 The whole situa- 
tion of the prophet had been thoroughly entered into and grasped by his friend. He is 
not satisfied with merely drawing him up ; he will do this in the gentlest and most 
considerate way. It is thinking of these little things that shows the depth of our sym- 
pathy for others. They are specially remembered and sought out, and are brought 
forward with as much care as the thirty men. 1. Our good deeds should not he half 
conceived or hadly executed. " What is worth doing is worth doing well." 2. Where 
there is a real desire to be kind and helpftd, the means win he discovered. We scarcely 
know whether to admire the most the kindliness or the ingenuity of Ebed-Melech. 3. 
A true sentiment will dispose of/cUse scruples. Bags I Well, they were best fitted of 
anything at hand to effect the purpose in view. There was no time to settle the ques- 
tion of the niceties. Much loving and useful work is never done because of such 
scruples. The servants of God cannot often work in kid gloves. 4. Uie dignity of a 
thing cmisists in the use to which it is put. These rags served the best of purposes, and 
are worthy of all honour. There is nothing God has made but has some gracious use 
if we but seek for it. 

IL Terouoh what humiliationb abe God's bebyants delivebed 1 As if the miia 
and helplessness were not enough 1 To an unspiritual perception it would appear almost 
an uncalled-for indignity to inflict the rags upon the prophet of God. But they were 
necessary. And so is it with all the God-sent humiliations of life. They are intended 
to subdue pride, exercise faith, and reveal the hidden grace and power of God. 

IIL There abe Divdje uses for mean thinos and things cast aside. God, who 
made all things, can see a thousand adaptations and utilities for that which man sup- 
poses has been used up. Are there not weapons in the King's armoury that have been 
allowed to rust when they might have done good service ? talents that have been hid 
in a napkin when they should have been at usury ? There need be no idle members in 
the King's household. He takes out of his treasury things new and old, and calls 
upon the blind, the halt, the maimed, the aged, the poor, the ignorant, to do him 
honour and service. " But I have no talents in that direction," etc. Yet Ck>d can use 
you if you will ask him. He will regenerate you by using you; purity you of all the 
moral dross and filth that adhern to you ; and develop higher faculties and a divinet 



138 THE BOOK OF THE PftOPHET JEREMIAH, [oa. xixvm. 1— 2rf. 

serriceableness, if you will but let him. Thera were kingly robes in Judah that day 
that had not a tithe of the honour of these " old rotten rags ; " and there are great, 
wise, and noble who will have to give place in the day of judgment to the weak things, 
and things which have been despised (1 Cor. L 2&— 31). — M. 

Vers. 17 — 23. — Ood't termt rf salvation hard. I. In what thbt abb habd. 1. 
They attack our pride. Zedekiah was afraid of the mockery of " the Jews that are 
fallen to the Chaldeans." He did not like to acknowledge himself in error. There was 
no glory in surrender. Pride is one of the first hindrances to salvation. We want to 
be cur own saviours. 2. ITiey crush self-wiU. " Not as I will, but as thou wilt " — 
the first and last prayer of the true child of God. It was not Zedekiah's plan, and 
contradicted all the policy of his rebellion. It should be suflicieut to the sinner to 
know tliat God has appointed the way of escape. He has no right to choose. 3. Tliep 
require faith. How was the king to be certain that yielding himself into the hands ol 
the princes of the Chaldeans would secure the ends desired ? He hardly realized that 
it could be so. And similarly it is asked, " How can Jesus save ? " He is to the Jews 
a stumbling-block and to the Gentiles foolishness, but to them that believe the Power 
of God and the Wisdom of God. " Only believe," that is the hardest thing the unre- 
generate soul can do. Tet it is necessary. 

II. They do not admit of ooupbomise. 1. See how relentless the alternative. There 
is do middle way, no royal road to salvation. It was a step simple enough in itself, 
but it involved ererytliing, and could not, therefore, be qualified. Christ and his salva- 
tion are our only liope : " And in none other is there salvatiim : for neither is there any 
other Name under heaven, that is given among men, wherein we must be saved" (Acts 
17. 12 ; cf. Gal. i. 8). 2. Nor is the messenger of Qod at liberty to alter them. These 
are the terms for all, and they represent the infinite wisdom and love of God. It is 
not for man to attempt to improve upon them. To do so would l>e equivalent to 
creating a human gospel. Jeremiah, although he had reasons for ingratiating himself 
with the wicked king, yet presents an example of faithfulness to every minister of the 
truth. He might not suffer himself to corrupt the Word of G«d even for such con- 
siderations. 

III. Yet 18 THEiB HABDNEB8 MOBB APFABENT THAN BEAi.. 1. Belief and obedi&nct 
will remove every difficulty. The troubles of Zedekiah were almost wholly imaginary. 
Had he not been assureil that everything would be made sure by adopting the advice 
given ? One act of faith on the part of the sinner will save him. Henceforth it will 
be infinitely easier to do the things thnt remain, and to pass from faith to taith. 2, 
How mild are they compared with the consequences of disobedience I — M. 

Ver. 4. — Counted an enemy for speaking the truth. " Hast thou found me, mine 
enemy ? " said Ahab to Elijah. The Israelites were about to stone the two faithful 
spies. And here the prophet of God was, as in these other and in many more instances, 
counted an enemy for speaking the truth. - And a like alienation of mind and heart often 
takes place now for the same reason — the telling of unwelcome truth. Now, note — 

I. Whekbfoke DO MEN 80 DISLIKE TRUTH ? Somc of the reasous are : 1. Because 
truth must often say many things that are unpleasing. No matter by what voice the 
message comes — Scripture, conscience, or our fellow-men, — truth at times will become 
censure, and that hurts our self-love. 2. We are not really in earnest in our desire to he 
set right. We profess to be so, but we are not. " I have been a great sinner," said a 
sick man to his minister, who was sitting by his bedside. " Yes," eaid the minister, 
" you have." " Who told you, I should like lo know ? " angrily exclaimed the sick man, 
indignant that anything more special and personal than vague general confession should 
be thought to be noi'dud by liim. He had no desire for cure, but only for comfort. 3. 
Pride has much to do with this dislike of truth. Our reprover becomes for the time 
being our superior, siands above and over u.s, iuij we do not like this. 4. There may 
be real difference of opinion on the point in dispnte ; hence the censured has the further 
offence of being condemned on what he deems partial evidence. 5. Because of our 
suspicion of the motives of him who speaks the unwelcome truth. We are slow to credit 
8U«ii with purity and unselfishness of motive. We think not only of what is said, but 
of who says it. 



ca. MXYm. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, 139 



n. HeNOB it IB VERT DIFFICULT TO TELL DNPLEASANl TKUTHB. Most men aVoid it, 

will say nothing, will shirk the duty by every conceivable means. No one likes to act 
the part of the candid friend. None like to be the hearers of ill tidings. David's 
servants feared to tell him that his child was dead. How we admire, because of its 
rarity and difQculty, the fidelity of Nathan's " Thou art the man " 1 

III. But hetebtheless buch tbuth ought to be spoken when neoebbabt. It is 
not always necessary. Often not wise, " The chapter of accidents is the Bible of the 
fooL" To let hard facts speak is sometimes best. But not always. Hence when 
unwelcome truth has to be spoken, take care ; I. To be very certain of your ground. 
Do not go upon mere rumour. Let your proof be full, clear, and strong. 2. Let the 
purity of your motive in speaking, the unselfishness and the love for your brother 
which prompt you, be made manifest. 8. Choose fit times, tones, and words. Many 
reserve their telling of such truths for moments when they are in a passion ; then they 
will blurt it out, and, of course, only do more harm than good. 4. Be strengthened by 
the remembrance of the duty you owe your brother, and the accusation he will have 
against you of blood-guiltiness, if you fail to tell him the truth, unwelcome though it be. 

IV. SnoH tbuth 80 sfoeek, if bejeoted, is followed bt the condemnation of 
God on them who bejeot it. It is part of that condemnation that men take friends 
for foes, as Ahab did, and foes for friends. They love flattery and hate truth ; the blind 
lead the blind, and with the inevitable result. Therefore let our feeling be that of the 
psalmist, who said, " Let the righteous smite me ; it shall be kindness : and let him reprove 
me ; it shall be an excellent oU, which shall not break my head."— O. 

Ver. 6. — " Put not your trust in prineee." What a proof does this incident give of 

the wisdom of this counsel 1 Note — 

L All abe tempted to put trust in hen. To very many man is the highest 
being they know or believe in. Then, our fellow-men are near at hand ; we can imdor- 
stand them and they us; are of like nature — they can be touched with the feeling ul' 
our infirmities ; and they in whom we trust appear to us to possess that which we need 
but have not. 

II. Still mobe are wb pbone to put odb tbust in princes. We do this because : 1 
Of the law of honour which is supposed to bind them. The word of a king, where that is 
there is power. 2. ITiey have such vast capacity of Jtelp. Unlimited resources seem at 
their command, 3. They are independent of and superior to the influences which govern 
inferior men. 4. And very often they have rendered great help to men in need thereof. 

III. But there are many instances which show that this tbust should bk very 
LIMITED. Here is a case in point. How miserable this king's conduct! Now, where- 
fore did Zedekiah, and do such as he, disappoint men's expectations (cf. Shakespeare, 
' Henry VII I.,' Wolsey's dying speech) ? It is because they are governed, not by principle, 
but by expediency. A tree standing on the summit of a lofty hill needs to be more 
firmly rooted than trees in the sheltered valley, for it is exposed to every wind that blows. 
But if it be not so rooted, it will soon fall. So with exalted personages ; they are exposed 
to influences on all sides; all parties seek to gain them over to their views and to 
enlist them in their favour. Hence if a prince have not firm principles to guide him, he 
will sway from side to side and finally fall. So it was with this King Zedekiah. He 
was influenced now by one party and now by another (cf. homily on The woe of weakness, 
ch. xxxiv. 2). " Like a wave of the sea driven of the wind and tossed," And all this 
is true in measure and degree of all who fill high stations, and in whom men are apt 
to put great trust. But — 

IV. Unlimited tbust should be in God alonb. The prophet of God was doubtless 
less surprised than grieved, but he had long learned to commit his way unto the Lord. 
Let us do likewise, and then we may rest assured that, let men above ui favour or frown 
upon va, that whieh is best for u« and for all will assuredly be doasb 

*I11 that thou blessest turns to good. 
And unblest good is ill. 
And all is right that seems most wioa^ 
ICit b* thy sweet will," 



140 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, {m. txxym. 1—28. 



Ver». 6 — 13. — " Cast down, hut not formken." As we look on the prophet as hei« 
portrayed, these words of St. Piiul are brought to our mind. We have here, as there — 

I. A SERVANT or God oast down. See the prophel's allusions to his sad condition 
in Lam. iii. 52 — 57 ; and Ps. Ixix. can hardly be other than descriptive of Jeremiah at 
this time. And such seasons of depression and distress seem to be the appointed lot cj 
all God's servants. Nut one, from our Lord downwards, has been exempted. Manifold 
aro the reasons for such appointment. In this particular case of Jeremiah — 

II. The causes of his distress were : 1. The cruelty of his treatment acting on a 
nature such as his. 2. Its coming upon him after he had been led to hope that now he 
was secure from all such treatment. 3. His knowledge that he desired to be, and was, 
his foes' best friend, and yet they dealt with him thus. 4. The hopelessness of his con- 
dition. Such were the immediate causes ol his being cast down. 

III. Wherefore does God suffkb his servants to be subjected to such distress ? 
To deepen their hold upon God, as the storms cause the trees to take deeper root in the 
earth. To make them realize more than ever the help they have in God. To cultivate 
and foster those fruits of the Spirit, such as patience, humility, trust, etc., which will 
hardly grow in any other soil or by any other process. To make them mighty witnesse.-i 
before men of the salvation of God and of the present help he is in trouble. To qualify 
them to sympathize with and succour others in their distress. How such thougllts are 
calculated to sustain the soul in distress I And they do, for — 

IV. God'b bebvants abb, though cast down, not forsaken. Here was a stranger 
to the commonwealth of Israel and from the covenants of promise, one who least of all 
might have been expected to care for the prophet of God, and this stranger proves to 
be God's good an>rel of mercy. God raised up this helper in the hour of his servant's 
need. See what was done in connection with and by this noble-hearted Ethiopian. 
1. Qod caused intelligence ol the prophet's sufferings to reach him (ver. 7). 2. He 
touched his heart with compassion (vers. 7, 9, 11). 3. He led him to resolve to attempt 
the prophet's deliverance. 4. He gave him clearly to see the wickedness of the prophet's 
enemies, and the truth ol the prophet himself. 5. He filled his heart with courage. 
For courage was needed. He was alone. The consequences of his interference might 
have been fatal to himself. He had to reprove and condemn both the king and the 
king's counsellors. 6. He gave him good success. The king at once yielded, went right 
over to his side (contrast ver. 5), took all precaution that the deliverance should not 
be hindered. And he did all this at once. Further, he took oath that Jeremiah should 
not be 80 dealt with in the future. Now, all this proves the blessed truth for God's 
servants that, though they may be cast down, yet they shall not be forsaken. 

V. What abe we to learn from buoh a record ? Much every way. 1. Ooneeming 
Ood. He is never at a loss for messengers of mercy and help to his servants. 2. Con- 
cerning hit tried and troubled servants. Patiently wait. Trust at all times. Hope 
continually, till your eyes see his salvation, as they assuredly shall, 3. Concerning the 
enemies of the Lord. Their designs and purposes must fail, however certain of success 
they seem to be ; for God is against them. — C. 

Ver. 16. — T?ie value of an oath. The prophet of God evidently attributed such 
value, or he would not have asked of the king to make oath unto him. On the general 
subject note — 

I. The temptations to go from one's wobd are often vert numerous and 
very stbono. They were so in this case. Jeremiah knew what strong influence there 
was against him in the court of the king. He had suffered from this already. And he 
knew how weak and unstable the king was. Hence there was needed that which 
would steady and strengthen the wavering will. And there is often the like need now. 

II. But the value of an oath lies in the fact that it meets this need. 
It brings in the thought of Ood and of his displeasure. And does this in most solemn 
way. And it has around it human sanctions as well as Divine. And all this tends tc 
strengthen conscience and to resist the temptation to untruth. As a fact, it is found 
that men who are careless about truth in an orduiary way hesitate much before they 
will disregard an oath. " An oath for confirmation is an end of all strife." 

in. It is best, however, not to need such aid. Our Saviour has said, "Let 
your communication be, Yea, yea ; Nay, nay ; for whatsoever is more than thes* oometi 



OH. xixvm. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OF TUE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 141 

of eviL" The taking of oaths is allowed, as other practices, " for the hardness of men's 
hearts." But for the Christian his word ought to be as sacred as hit oath. He U no 
Christian if it be not. — 0. 

Vers. 17, 18. — The path ^ obedience the path of tafety. The circumstances here 
recorded show that — 

I. It hat be HUGH ELBE. It may be (1) a difficult path; (2) humiliating; (3) 
repellant to our whole disposition and will ; (4) seemiugly unlikely, arguing after the 
manner of men. 

IL But it will be safe. 1. It would have leen so in this case. For the king, his 
misery, exile, and degradation would have been escaped. The city of Jerusalem would 
not have been destroyed ; nor the temple. All that would have been needful was 
submission to the rule of Babylon, which would have been neither intolerably harsh nor 
of long duration. For the prophet knew the rapidly approaching doom of l)oth 
Babylon and her king. Hence he gave the counsel here told of. Whilst, on the other 
hand, he knew that if the wrath of the King of Babylon was aroused, all that now 
might be saved would then be utterly lost. Nebuchadnezzar was now like a sated 
lion, not desiring to destroy or devour. But let him be angered, and then woe to the 
weakling that had dared his rage ! Submission was, therefore, the prophet's perpetual 
and earnest coimsel. It was a case in which arguments were not merely to be counted, 
but weighed. 2. And it is so always. The path of obedience to God may have much 
urged against it, and truly urged, but it will ever be found to be the right and best my 
after alL 

III. And the beabon is : the path Gk>d commands is the path which pleases him 
who knows and who controls all events. All other paths are the self-chosen ways of 
men, who know but little and can control less. 

IV. This espbciallt true in reoabd to the bikneb'b eeoonciliation with God. 
That path is protested against by voices not a few from within and without. But it is 
the right way, cannot but be so. We, therefore, as ambassadors for God, beseech you 
" in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God." — 0. 

Ver. 24. — laying to etrve turn masters. Zedehiah was seeking to do tUs. He wanted 
to be on the prophet's side, and yet not to break with the princes who were the prophet's 
foes. We see the shifts to which he was driven, and we know the miserable outcome 
of his impossible attempt. We learn from it — 

L How DK8PI0ABLK BUOB ATTEHFTS HAKS A UAN IN HIB OWN XTEO. 

" To thine own self be true. 
And it shall follow, as the night the day. 
Thou canst not then be &lse to any maQ." 

But how far from this conscious rectitude he must be who seeks to serve two masters, 
who acts as Zedekiah did ! 

II. How otheb men despise them. 

III. How God condemns them. How do the instances of Balaam, Klate, Jndas, 
and others shine out as warning beacons I 

lY. How usELEBB, AFTEB ALL, SUCH ATTEMPTS ABE. No more miserable fatc 
could have befallen a man than that which came upon King Zedekiah. And in tlic 
highest matter of all, what are they who say, " Lord, Lord," but do not the things tlic 
Lord commando — what are they but would-be servers of two masters ? And to them 
the Lord will say, " I never knew you ; depart," etc. 

y. How MUCH FULL DECISION FOB GoD 18 NEEDED. This alous wiU keep us 
from such sad endeavour ; but this will. Therefore seek grace from God to make and 
abide by this choice ; and bring yourselves under the blessed attraction of Christ ; so 
shall you be drawn to him more and more, and made to abide in him. — 0. 

Ver. 27. — A question of easaisti-y. A deservedly esteemed commentator observes 
on this conduct of Jeremiah, " Though we must be so harmless as doves as never to tcil 
a wilful lie, yet we must be so wise as serpents as not needlessly to expose ourselves to 



142 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxvm. 1— 2a 

dangw by telling all we know." But many an not latisfied with this defence, and 
they hesitate not to apply the terms " equivocation," " subterfuge," and other Ilka 
censures to the prophet's reply to the princes. Note, therefore — 

I. What ib urged against such ooNonor. One says, "The plain meaning of 
such words is that Jeremiah hoodwinked them. He did not lie to them, certainly; but 
he did not tell the truth, and left them with a fiilse impression. It comes yery near to 
deception ; it was evasive, and certainly was not an honest act. It seems an obliqut lie." 
And this view of the case is supported on grounds such as these : 1. Had he not been 
afraid, he would have told the whole truth ; hut fear does not justify /cUsehood,tho\igjti 
it often occasions it. 2. What must the king have thought of a prophet of God so com- 
plaisant as this ? 3. What would the princes say of his vaunted righteousness when 
they learnt how he had denlt with them ? 4. Our Saviour and his apostles never did 
the like. 5. It had all the effect of a lie, since it left a false impression on the minds of 
those to whom be spoke. 6. The very fact that it needs laboured argument to justify 
it against our instinctive condemnation of it shows that it does not belong to the nobu 
family of truth, etc. But audi alteram partem. Therefore note — 

II. What hat be urged ik defence. 1. In reference to the foregoing argument$. 
The first assumes that there was no motive but fear. The second and third an 
assumptions also. The fourth is, to say the least, doubtful (cf. John vii. 8, 9 ; Acta 
XX. 20—26). Concerning the fifth, it is not true that aU the effect of a lie, nor its worst 
effect, is that stated. And as to the sixth, it may be said that instinctive condemna- 
tions may be unjust as well as just. 2. Other replies to the charge against the prophet 
arc : (1) He spoke no untruth. (2) Expediency, if not unlawful, is obligatory. (3) 
It has been ever recognized as lawful, under certain circumstances, to mislead an 
enemy ; cf. Bahab's conduct (Josh. ii. 1) and its commendation (Heb. xi. 31 ; Jas. iL 
25). The commonly supposed case of a murderer asking you which way your Mend 
has gone, in order that he may overtake and murder him ; in such case, not only 
might you mislead, but would you not be boimd to do so? 3. There are taered 
■principles on which such suppression of the truth as Jeremiah's is justified. (1) Th« 
right to truth may be forfeited, as the right to liberty and life may be forfeited, by 
wrong-doing. In the vast majority of cases men have a right to the truth, but 
in all the cases cited above they had no such right. (2) Truth is not an end in 
itself, but only a means to an end, which is the honour of God and the well-being of 
man ; and there are occasions, doubtless very rare, when the end can only be secured by 
the sacrifice of the ordinary means. Therefore let all who presume to condemn great 
saints of God as guilty of lying, because they had no mere superstitious idolatry of 
veracity, as some have, hesitate before they bring such charge. Who are we to sit in 
judgment on such? But, on the other hand, let none pervert these reasonings, as the 
Jesuits did and many yet do, into a justification for lying and departing from the truth 
whenever it may be found convenient. It needs a healthy conscience to decide when 
these reasonings are applicable — a conscience [enlightened by God's Spirit and animated 
by his love, and then such a one, and only such a one, may be left to do as he wills in 
cases like those we have considered.— 0, 

Ver. 4. — Prophecy and patriotism. I. Tna ethiob or patriotism. Here are four 
men who go to the king with a complaint against Jeremiah ; and in doing so they do 
not take low ground. Indeed, there are many people interested in affairs of state who 
would say they took very high ground. What sounds more plausible than to say that 
a whole country should never be more united than when the common enemy attacks it ? 
Should there not at such a time be mutual encouragement, the bold and brave men of a 
state striving to animate all the citizens with their own ardour and resolution ? Thus 
the whole question is opened up with respect to a man's allegiance to lus country. How 
far daes the claim extend of a country upon those who live under its laws, having their 
person and their property protected by these laws? That national history, great 
national events, patriotic feelings, have their place in the machinery of government, 
everyOunstian would allow ; but it may not be so easy to settle exactly what that place 
is. Everything turns on what should have the first place in a man's affection, duty, 
and service ; aiwl so we have the example o< Jeremiah hen to ^uide us. He. a Jewish 
prophet, teaches us — 



OH.xxxvni 1— 28.J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 143 

II. The first dutt of a Chbistiah. From this world's point of view Jeremiah 
did an eminently unpatriotic thing. Instead of uniting the people into resistance, he, 
as it were, divided them into two classes. He made it a time for individual and not for 
common action. But, after all, in every conflict there comes a time for yielding ; the 
^lUacking party must retire in failure, or the defending party submit in defeat. To 
Jeremiah it was given to see the certain result. He knew that not the Chaldeans but 
Jehovah himself had to be reckoned with. The first duty of a prophet was to Jehovah, 
and so for that matter was the first duty of every Israelite. Thus in the same way, the 
first duty of a Christian is to Christ. He who serves Christ most completely serves 
l<is country best. In such a service the Christian may be misrepresented, miscalled, 
stamped even as traitor, but that only means that he is called to pass through Jere- 
miah's experience here. Why, even a man of pagan Rome can teach us in this 
matter ; for Cicero, in the fourth book of his ' De OfBciis,' speaking of gradations of 
duty in the state, says that a citizen's first duty is to the immortal gods, and his second 
to his country. " Bender unto Cassar the things that are Caesar's, and to God th« 
things that are Gtod's." — Y. 

Vers. 7 — 13. — A friend in need. L Thi hationautt of Ebed-Meleoh. An 
Ethiopian. Jeremiah had asked in prophecy, " Can the Ethiopian change his skin ? " 
from which question we may assume that Ethiopians were well known in Israel. Une 
cannot but feel that here we have a sort of counterpart to that other Ethiopian eunuch 
sf whom we read in the New Testament. The Ethiopian Ebed-Melech helps Jeremiah 
in hi* temporal need ; Philip helps the servant of Queen Candace in his spiritual need. 
What a rebuke there is here to bigoted and frenzied patriotism ! — if, indeed, " patriotism " 
is the proper word to be used and not rather a spirit of blind nationality. Perhaps the 
very fact that Ebed-Melech was an eUien helped him to see needs and duties, cruelty 
ind injustice, which were hidden from the eyes of the natives. Even natives would 
be obliged to admit that Ebed-Melech could not be expected to look on the position 
with their traditionary eyes. Even so it was reserved for a Gentile to say at the 
Crucifixion, " Truly this was the Son of God." 

II. The huuanitt of Ebed-Melech. That the eunuch should have pitied the 
prophet sunk in the dungeon mire may not seem at first a matter to be singled out for 
special notice. Why should a man be' praised for humanity more than for honesty 1 
We must, however, recollect the difference of times. Those who put Jeremiah in the 
dungeon thought it served him quite right. And yet if there is nothing extraordinary 
in the humanity of Ebed-Melech, there must be something exceptionally fiendish in the 
conduct of those who put the prophet in the dungeon ; whereas, in point of fact, they 
were only doing a usual thing. What a long time it has taken to work the world up 
even to its present attainments in humanity and compassionate feeling! And still 
through all these cent<u-ies Ebed-Melech rebukes us fur our too often thoughtlessness 
and forgctfulness with respect to human pain. 

III. The oonBAOK of Ebed-Meleoh. He could not do a thing of this sort without 
making enemies and running into peril. The humane man has often to be a brave 
man, going into elements of danger for the sake of humanity, as a lifeboat crew must 
do, or a band of explorers in a colliery accident. But there are also exercises of 
humanity which demand rtoal courage — courage that will stand alone in protesting 
against cruelties and brutalities that have been accepted through long custom. If we 
are resolved to be consistent and thorough in our humanity, we must be prepared for 
ridicule and scorn. There are only too many who will check 08 in humane endeavours 
by calling them mere sentimentality and weakness. 

IV. 'J'he influence of Ebed-Meleoh. His ofSce telli us that he was a man abeut 
the court, and his action here tells us that he was a man who had influence with the 
king. What we see of his conduct here makes us feel that he bad won his influence in 
a perfectly legitimate way. Thus at last the opportunity comes for making good um of 
it. Here is an example of how good a thing it is to cultivate influence with those in 
authority, if it can be done in a right way without flattery and servility. Men like 
kinge ne^ some one near them to speak the truth plainly and effectually. 

V. The thouohtfdlness of Ebbd-Melbch. Something more is neeaed than the 
king's permission to get Jeremiah out of the dungeon. Probably hig stay in » miry. 



144 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxvm. 1— 28- 

pestilential hole had made him very feeble. Ebed-Melech was evidently » man who 
could take in all that needed to be done in any difBculty. Just the sort of man who 
could find usefulness in things that were cast away as worn out and useless. " Useless " 
is only our ignorant way of naming things we cannot use. The humane man moat 
be thoughtful as well as courageous. — ^Y. 

Ver. 20. — Obeying the voice of the Lord. I. God has A voice fob thobb nr doubt. 
Poor Zedekiah, king though he be, is in a state of great vacillation. Counsellors speak 
one thing, and a prophet speaks another. Counsellors proclaim continued and resolute 
resistance, though it is by no means plain that they believe in what they say, and froai 
ver. 19 it is clear that there were very considerable divisions in the city. Jeremiah, on 
the other hand, speaks like a man who is perfectly sure of his ground. He was often- 
times wretcheil and depressed in his own heart, but never did he speak the message ot 
Jehovah with a doubt as to whether it was a real message at all. The world abounds 
in doubters, coming continually to a place where two ways meet, and standing long in 
uncertainty and fear which way to take. And yet they are uncertain only because 
they do not see the direction which God has given. For even as at cross-roads finger- 
posts aie put up to direct strangers, so God has his finger-posts for every doubtful 
traveller in tlie ways of terrestrial life. Zedekiah seems to have had a feeling that he 
was seeking in the right direction when he sent again to Jeremiah. He seems to have 
made himself ready to listen, without hinting that he expected some particular answer. 
So to speak, it was Zedekiah 's last chance, and he gave the pmphet the opportunity of 
speaking with corresponding plainness. And as God's Word is here, so it is everywhere, 
bpoken with the utmost assiirance and from the whole nature of the messenger. 

II. The voice calls to immediate obedience. There is always some duty that lies 
nearest us. Part of the mischief of doubt is that, while we are doubting, some good 
thing is left undone, the opportuniiy for it pnssing away unused. There was just one 
thing for Zedekiah to do at this moment — go forth and surrender himself to the generals 
of the King of Babylon. Repentance and amendment of life — these were no longer 
available to avert the capture of Jerusalem. That was a thing settled on. But carnage 
and destruction might he averted by a tirpely surrender. Every day there is some- 
thing made plain for us to do that day. It may be difBcult, painful, in all ways hard 
to tlje flesh ; but if it is neglected, then we shall only meet something still more painful 
to-morrow. " Obey the voice of the Lord, and it shall be well with thee," is a word to 
US all. The voice of self or the voice of others may hint at procrastination or at some 
qualified obedience. Our only safety is in attending to the clear and urgent voice 
from heaven. Paradox as it seems, the most difficult way is really the easiest, and the 
easiest the most difficult. Zedekiah did not attend to the prophet's imperative utter- 
ance, and the next chapter tells the dreadful things which happened. The king really 
made things worse by going out of his way to seek for direction, and then, when he 
had got it, paying no attention to it. — Y. 

Ver. 23. — The end of Zedekiah'* irresolution. Irresolution it may he called rather 
than disobedience. There is nothing to show that he had definitely made up his mind 
not to obey the voice of the Lord. In spite of the clear announcement made to him, 
he seems to have gone on, lioping against hope that some decisive disaster would over- 
take the Chaldeans. Yet Jeremiah closes his address by this sentence, so well calcu- 
lated to bring even an iiresolute man to decision : " Thou shalt cause this city to be 
burned with fire." 

I. A DECi.AR\TiON OF PERSONAL BEBP0N8IBILITT. Already in ver. 18 there is the 
declaration that, the Chaldeans will burn the city with fire, and Zedekiah is well able 
to infer, if lie likes, that this is a calamity he may prevent. But he is not left to 
irilerence. The prophet's exhortation goes on, maintaining its cogency and directness, 
and then in the last word he individually is made responsible. The sting of the 
address is emphatically in the tail. Zedekiah is now brought face to face with his 
ohligatioHs as a king. Jeremi.'i could not have said to any one else, " Thou shalt 
cause this city to be burned with fire," because no one else could have set in train 
the course of events which would avert such a calamity. Here is an example to 
teach those who are tempted to envy the grandetir of kings and the fame of such ai 



ofc, xxxTin. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET JEREMIA.H. 145 

ftre ruling men !n a state. Zedekiah's decision affected not liimself only, or a few 
people, but a whole city. The responsibility was further increased by his having sent 
for the prophet who said this very thing. It is not every ruler who at a critical 
moment has his way made so clear as wag the way of Zedekiah here. How much in 
the way of preventing evil may depend on one single man I 

II. Matter is furnished to embitter the reflection's of the future. Whether 
Zedekiah saw the blazing city we cannut be sure. If he did, what a pang for his 
heart to think that the city where he was king, in which he and his ancestors had taken 
such pride, was burning, through his want of decision at a critical time ! He feared to 
do what looked unpatriotic, and in the end he virtually destroyed the city he might 
have saved. 

III. There was a limit to Zedekiah's power over the situation. Truly it was 
a great deal for one man to be able to do — either to save a city from the flames or 
hand it over to them. But this power only looks great according to the standard 
given by temporal and superficial relations. An almost boundless area for human 
powers and opportunities lay altogether outside of Zedekiah's reach. As man is unable 
purely by his own effort to confer the highest benefits on his fellow-man, so he is 
also unable to inflict the worst evil. The worst evils are ever self-originated. Zetlekiah 
did far more to hurt himself than any one else. Jeremiah had been charged to make 
it quite clear to every one that he who went forth to the Chaldeans should live. — Y. 

Vers. 24 — 28. — The unhwgly position of a king. I. The profession of a kinolt 
attribute. The king holds the power of life and death. He can pardon without giving 
a reason. And Zedekiah maintains the name of this kingly right, even upon the very 
heels of Jeremiah's awful words. Such is the power of long-accepted habit and privi- 
lege. Did he really think that if Jeremiah published the conversation he had power 
to put him to death ? Or did he think that such a suggestion would move the prophet 
in the least ? Possibly he did ; or more likely he was talking at random ; or it may be 
that in these last decaying days of diijnity he asserted, by a kind of instinct, all that 
was left him to assert. We know well that he had no real power over Jeremiah, for the 
Lord who had hidden his proiihet before could hide him again (ch. xxxvi. 26). Pilate 
followed in the train of Zedekiah when he said to Jesus, " Enowest thou not that I 
have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee?" (John xix. 10). 'J'his, 
then, is the first element in the unkingly position, that Zedekiah is professing what 
he cannot perform. 

II Hb is afraid of the leading men in the state. He will not rise independent 
of them, neither will he consult them. Instead of fearing Jehovah and trembling at 
the thought of what he has just heard, his soul is filled with the fear of men who 
probably derived their places from his own appointment. He shrinks from being forced 
to tell any of them that he has had to contemplate as a possibility a voluntary sur- 
render to the Chaldeans. Truly it was quite time for a new order of things to rise in 
Jerusalem, even if it meant the destruction ot a city. A true king would not have 
feared that his interview with a prophet of God should be known anywhere. Kings 
emong men, those who are kings by nature and by the grandeur of their acts, fear no 
one but God They act in the darkness just as if they were in the light ; in private 
relations just as if they were in public. They never need to go begging and entreating 
people to conceal thin-is. 

III. He is a suppliant to one of his subjects. In the same breath he tells 
Jeremiah he shall not die and begs Jerenniah to grant him a favour. All at once he 
sets before this prophet, so straightforward and nnri served, a nice question of casuistry. 
With the sugsjestion of burning Jerusalem before him, he is tliinkiug first on the present 
inconvenience to himself and providing a nice quibble to escape from it. Yet even here 
is a sign of God's bearing with him to the last. The request he makes, utidignified as 
it is, is nevertheless one within the power of the prophet to grant. If Zedekiah feels 
it to be consistent with his regal dignity, Jeremiah feels it not inconsistent with hie 
integrity. The impression we get from the whole couveisatiun is that the torches di 
the Chaldeans did not come at all too soon.— Y. 



jbbemiah— n. 



14« 



THK BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxn. 1— 18 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTBB XXXIX. 



This chapter is very confused as it stands. 
To restore order it is absolutely necessary 
to suppose that some passages (viz. vers. 1, 
2, and vers. 4 — 13) have been inserted by 
afterlhougbts. It is important to notice 
that the latter of these passages is omitted 
in the Septuagiut. We need not go so ha 
as to excise them altogether, but we must 
at any rate enclose them in par. niheses. 
The chapter then becomes a nariative of 
the solemn session held by thi Bn'iy miian 
officers in the " middle gate," and the charge 
which they gave to Gedaliuh to take Jere- 
miah under his protection. Vers. 1, 2 
appear to be taken from 2 Kings XXT. 1 — 4 
(= ch. lii. 4—7); vers. 4—10 to be 
shortened from 2 Kings xxv. 4 — 12 (= ch. 
lii. 7-16). It is difficult to believe that 
Jeremiah himself made these insertions, 
not merely because they interrupt the sense, 
but because they involve several liistoiical 
difficulties. According to oh. xxxviii. 28, 
Jeremiah " abode in the court of the watch 
till the day that Jerusalem was taken;" 
but the prima facie meaning of our ven. 
13, 14 is that Nebuzar-adan sent to 
liberate Jeremiah, and yet, according to 
2 Kings xxv 8 (=cli. lii. 12), this officer 
did not arrive at Jerusalem till a month 
after its capture. Another difficulty is that, 
according to ver. 14, Jeremiah was set 
free by order of Nebnzar-aclan, whereas ch. 
xl. 1—5 states distinctly that Jeremiah 
had been taken in fetters to Bamah, where 
he was liberated by Nebuzar-adan himself. 
Even if there should be some reasonable 
way of harmonizing theie various state- 
ments (see especially below on ver. 14), 
yet is it likely that Jeremiah himself used 
such inconsistent language? Still, the 
notice in vers. 1], 12 U in itself not im- 
probable, and the spelling " Nebuchad- 
rezzar" separates it from the rest of the 
passage (vers. 4 — 13) ; it it possible, 
therefore, that, in spite of its omission in 
the Septuagint (which wrongly retains vers. 
1, 2), they are the work of Jeremiah. 

Ver. 3— And all the prinoes, etc. ; rather, 
That all the princes, etc. (see on oh xxzviii. 



28). The fMt mentioned in thii Teiae ii 
not recorded in 2 Kings xxv.; ch. Hi.; 

and its preciaeness is a cnniiiderable pledge 
of its accuracy. The prinoes are four in 
number, and two of tliem have nffinial titles 
attached. Nergal-sharezer is the Hebraized 
form of Nirgal sarra-ujur, i.e. "Nirgal (or 
Nerf!;al), protect (or perliaps, has created) 
the king " — the name, as often, is a prayer. 
Samgar-nebo is probably a modification of 
Suiiigir-nabu, "Be gracious, Nebo;" but 
it has not yet been found in the inscriptions. 
Sarsechim has the appearance of being 
corrupt ; the first part, however, may, 
perliaps, be the Baljv Ionian for "king" 
("prince" in Hebrew). Eab-sarifl has a 
mean i n g in Hebrew— " chief of the eunuchs ; " 
but the analogies of " Bab-mag " and " Bab- 
sliakeli" suggest that it is merely the 
Hebraized form of aome Assyrian title. In 
auy case, it would be better to render " the 
Bab saris," and to attach it closely to tlie 
preceliiig name, Sarsechim beiag himself 
the official called Bab-saris (see, however, 
ver. 13). Eab-mag. This was " one of tlie 
highest titles in the state" (G. Smith) 
The etymology of the latter half of the 
phrase is uncertain; for the connection of 
"mag" with "Magi" is a mistake which 
has been exposed by Dr. Schrader, in his 
work, *Die Keilin»chriften und das Alte 
Testament ' (of which a translation is an- 
nounced). Tlie native form of the name 
may be rubu emga (Schrader) or ru6» 
mdlthe (Friedr. Delitzseh), and the whole 
title will mean "high priest" or "chief of 
the sorcerers " (comp. Delitzseh, " The 
Hebrew Language viewed in the Light ol 
Assyrian Besearch," Lond., 1883, p. 14). 
" The Bab-mag " would be more accurate, 
and the title ought to be attached to the 
prcCiUing name, Nergal-sharezer. As a 
matter of fact, a Nirgal-sarra-u^ur, who 
held the office of rubu emga, is mentioned in 
the cuneiform inscriptions, and we may 
plausibly conjecture that he is the per- 
son here mentioned among the "princes." 
He was afterwards raised to tlie throne by 
the eoDspiratom who murdered Evil-mero- 
daeh, the eon of Nebuchadnezzar (he is 
bi tter known as Neriglissar). It is singular 
th..t two Nergal-sharezers should be here 
mentioned; possibly the first mention is 
due to a mistake. The names are hardly 
recognizable in the Septuagint. The 
"princes" took up their station in the 
middle gate. The » breath " spoken of in 
ver. 2 enabled the Babylonians to occnpy 
the whole of the lower city to the north- 
east of Zion. The " middle gate " probably 
separated these two parts of Jerusalem, and 



CH. XXXIX. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



141 



those who were posted there commanded 
the temple and the citadel. 

Ver. 4. — Here begins the second paren- 
thesis, to be read apart from the principal, 
though shorter, narrative (see introiiuction 
to chapter). Observe elsewhere in the 
Book of Jeremiah events known from other 
sources are only briefly referred to (comp. 
ch. xxlx. 2 ; xxxii. 1 — 5 ; xxxiv. 1, 7 ; xxxv. 
U ; xxxvii. 5); see 2 Kings zxv. 4 — 12. 

Ver. 9. — ITebnzar-adan ; t'.e. Nabu-zira- 
iddina, " Nebo gave a seed." 

Ver. 13. — Nebushasban. The name occnra 
in a list of proper names, under the form 
Nabn-fizibanni, " Nebo, rescue me I " It ig 
remarkable that a different name is given 
to the Bab-saris in ver. B; and the con- 
jecture is not unreasonable that Sarsechim 
is a corruption of the latter part of the 
name Nebuahasban. In ver. 3 the Septua- 
ii;iiit has .Yaliusachar instead of Sarsechim 
(other copies read Nabusarseehim). 

Ver. 14. — Gedaliah, whose father had 
already befriended the prophet on a serious 
occasion (ch. xxvi. 24), and who, according 
to ch. zL 6, had been appointed (though 



himself a Jew) Babylonian " governor ovei 
the cities of Judah," is directed to carry him 
(Jeremiah) home, or rather, into the house ; 
obviously some house close by is meant — 
either Gedaliah's temporary dwelling or 
the royal palace. This statement conflicts 
(see introduction) with that in ch. xl. 1 — 5, 
but only as to the time when Jeremiah was 
liberated. The latter narrative being more 
explicit, deserves the preference. Thus 
Jeremiah dwelt among the people ; il.«. could 
go in and out at his pleasure. 

Vers. 15 — 18. — ^A prophecy to Bbed- 
melech is here introduced, which, though 
uttered previously (see ch. xxxviii.), could 
not have been mentioned before without 
breaking the sequence of eTents. For came, 
we might render had come. 

Ver. 16. — Go and speak, Ebed-melech 
must be supposed to come into the court of 
the watch, so that Jeremiah might com- 
municate with him. 

Ver. 18. — For a prey unto thee. The 
same remarkable phraie in oh. zxL 9 ; 
xxxviii a. 



HOMILETICS 
Vers. 1, 2.— (See homily on ch. lii. 4 — 7.) 

Vers. 4 — 7. — (See homily on ch. lit 8 — 11.) 

Vers. 8— 10.— (See homily on ch. lii. 8—16.) 

Vers. 11, 12. — A prophet hefriended by a heathen Mng, Bumoun of Jatemiah's 
efforts to induce the Jevys to submit to the Babylonian power must have reached the ears 
of Nebuchadnezzar, and have led him to regard the prophet with favour. If his fellow- 
countrymen considered Jeremiah to be a traitor, it was natural tliat the Chaldeans should 
think he vras on their side. Both parties were ignorant of the motives and aims of the 
prophet, which were as patriotic as they were prudent. But, though perhaps from an 
undue opinion of his friendliness to them, the invaders did a real service to Jeremiah, 
and that was good on its own accoimt. 

I. QOD BBINOB DELIVEBANCB TO HIS OBILOBBN IN THEIB OBEATEST DANQXB. Jere- 
miah was a prisoner. Jerusalem was given over to the rapine of a lawless soldiery. 
Then came the prophet's escape. 

II. God can use the most unlieelt means as instbumentb or bis sbaok. He 
does use means, delivering through the action of men overruled by his providence. 
Such is his wise and mighty control that fierce despots may he his angels and ministers 
of grace. 

ill. The scouBas of judgment fob the wicked mat be the abm of dxuveb- 
anob to God's people. Nebuchadnezzar was the fearful foe whose approach had been 
foreshadowed as the advent of doom and ruin to the guilty city of Jerusalem. This 
man was the friend and deliverer of Jeremiah. So the awful judgment at the end of 
the world wiU be, to the Christian, the occasion of the " salvation ready to be revealed 
in the last time." The greatest evils in the world are overruled to work the good of 
God's children. 

IV. A heathen mat be an example of humaneness to men who pbofebb the 
uiqhest BELiaioN. There is no cruelty so bitter as that of persons who call themselves 
enlightened and religious. This is the most refined and heartless cruelty. Corruptit 
>pliini pesaima. On the other hand, with all that U brutal and lawless, there may hi a 



14* THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xzxix. 1— 14 

genmne unsophisticated kindliness among men who are in great moral and religiouf 
darkness. Let us thank God that he has not left himself mthout a witness in the con- 
science even of a Kebuchadnezzar. 

V. If a heathen king's favour is valuaislb, how shall wb bstimati the 
BLESSEDNESS OF THE FAVODB OF THE DiviNE KiNO? If Jeremiah profited by the 
patronage of Nebucliadnezzar, what shall the grace of Christ be to us ? It the prophet 
found release and comfort at the approach of the Babylonian monarch, what greater 
good is in store for those who shall " beliuld the King in his beauty "? Jeremiah was 
protected by Nebuchadnezzar, but he did not put his trust in the human monarch. The 
one safe trust is in the one true Prince and Saviour. 

Vers. 15 — 18. — Spared on the ground o/faith. I. The man. 1. He is an Ethiopian. 
" God is no respecter of persons." This man, with his heathen nationality, his negro 
countenance, and his humiliated state, is selected for deliverance in the general destruc- 
tion, because in him is found the right spiritual condition, whilst men with the pure 
blood of Abraham in their veins perish. We have not to wait for St. Paul to teach us 
the breadth of God's grace and the spirituality of its requirements. 2. He is a court 
servant. Thure were Christians in Csesar's household. A king's favour is no substitute 
for the grace of God. Elied-Melech felt that he needed more than the protection of the 
royal guard, even when all was fair in the outside world. 3. He stands aione. He is 
alone in his faith. So much the more real and vital must his faith be. He is alone in 
his reward. A special message and a special promise are accorded to this man. God 
does not overlook any solitary servant of his. AU religion is individual — individual 
faith, individual grace. 

IL The faith. Ebed-Melech had befriended Jeremiah. Tet it is remarkable that 
this fact is not mentioned here. His act of kindliness by itself would not have been 
enough to have secured him a Divine promise of special safety. But the act evinced 
faith. It is implied that Ebed-Meleoh befriended Jeremiah because he had faith in God, 
and therefore acknowledged the Divine message of the prophet and accepted the truth 
of it. We are saved on account of our faith. Faith must show itself in deeds or it is 
dead and worthless. But the personal trust in God and in Christ is the sole and 
universal condition through wliioh God's mercy is bestowed. 

III. The bewabd. Ebed-Melech is to be spared in the general wreck of the Jewish 
state. His presence in the scene of destruction will enhance his sense of the providential 
character of his escape. We must all revolt from the heartless doctrine of Thomas 
Aquinas, that one of the elements of the joy of the redeemed in heaven will be the con- 
templation of the agonies of the lost. Nevertheless, to have escaped from a terrible fate 
that has been brought very near to us is a source of greater joy than never to have 
known danger. This is the Christian's condition. He can have only pain in witnessing 
the suffering of others. But he has large ground for thankfulness when he sees how 
uear he was to ruin, and how Gh>d has plucked him as a brand from the buining. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 9, 10. — The poor better off than the rich. L In what bensb thkt webb so. 
1. They were spared because of their insignificance. 2. Pitied because of their helpless- 
ness and privations, 3. Their condition could hai'dlj/ be altered otherwise than for the 
brtter. 

II. Of what these webb the type. 1. They represent the meek who inherit the 
t arth, and the poor in spirit whose is the kingdom of heaven. Christ the Conqueror will 
enrich them. 2. Their fortune represented the law of reversal in the kingdom of Ood. 
The first shall be last, and the last first ; but not universally. " Many that are first," etc. 
Christ's servants will be most numerous amongst the poor and the despised. They will 
be recognized and honoured by him, when others are put to shame. But it will not be 
their poverty, but tlie virtues of their poverty, which shall be rewaided. They who 
know themselves poor will receive all things at bis hands (cf. Rev. iiu 17, 18). — ^M. 

W»T% 11 — 14.— (ot oh. iX. I — 6). — Qod^s servant delivered fnm tht Judgment ^ 



oa. xsxa. 1— 18.j THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAa 149 

travsgresBort. The whole proceedings in connection with Jeremiah's deliverance are 
striking and noteworthy. It is a heathen prince to whose care and respect he owes his 
liberation, when his own people have treated him so cruelly. Very evident is the hand 
of God " disposing the hearts of princes," and making " sU things work together for 
good to tliem that love him." 

I. Jeremiah's exceptional case showed that, in the uidst of the most terbiblb 
OAiiAMiTiES, God is free to work out the peaceable ends and gracious rewards 
OF HIS KINGDOM. He was hut one out of the entire nation, and might easily have been 
overlooked. Indeed, his sympathetic brothcrliness haii all but des.royed the advantage 
BO specially designed for him. An interpositiun like this, so marked and resolute, had 
an evidently supernatural origin, and bore a moral or spiritual character. If his welfare 
could be so thoroughly and carefully attended to in the midst of such heart-rending 
and widely disastrous circumstances, the whole of the political changes then taking 
place must have been a portion of the moral order of the world, and under the direct 
superintendence of God. In the midst of judgment he remembers and pursues his 
merciful schemes. The darkest hour of a nation's or an individual's history is charged 
with ministries of light, and the most awful judgments do not interfere with the per- 
sistent will of God to save and to bless mankind. And how nicely adjusted and 
delicately balanced are the deserts of saints and transgressors I 

II. Some of the purposes to be served bt this providence. 1. It showed thett the 
ealamity did not arise from a mere necessity or accident of circumstances. Even the 
heathen Nebuchadnezzar learnt that. 2. Spiritual guidance and comfort were secured 
for those left behind, 3. Jeremiah learnt to perceive and obey the Divine will at 
respected his future. His sallies from Jerusalem proved how needful the lesson. 4. 
Qod commended his love to his servant in making gooi accrue to him in the general 
evil of the time. 6. The reverence to Oud and consideration towards his prophet shown 
h/ heathen princea put to shame the unbelief and disobedience of the chosen people. — M. 

Ver. 14. — " So h« dwelt among the people." In how many respects wm Jeremiah a 
type of Christ ! And just in these points was he an example to tlie spiritual worker 
and the Christian preacher. 

L The position of the true pastob. 1. How miserably anomalous—^ pastor 
without a flock, or living at a distance from them 1 There is something wrong with one 
or other when they remain apart. Oaly now and then, and for brief periods, can solitude 
be the place of duty. 2. The cure of souls can only be followed successfully by 
constant intercourse with them. The experience, sympathy, and moral influence 
acquired by the minister in the midst of his flock will stand him in good stead in 
directing him as to what to teach, and preparing for it a favourable reception. 

II. The spirit op the true pastob. 1. Absence of ambition. The promises 6f the 
Chaldeans were much more brilliant than the future that was likely to lie before him 
in Palestine. It was not comfort, worldly emolument, or personal advancement that 
he sought. Like Moses, he chose " rather to suffer afHietion with the people of God, than 
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season " (Heb. xi. 25). 2. Sympathy with the miseries 
and spiritual needs of men. The interests of the Divine kingdom would be better 
served by his remaining at home. Here was work ready to his hand, and he dare 
not leave it. The servant of God has " to preach as a dying man to dying men." 3. 
ZVwe patriotism. What intense affection he had for the land of his fathers 1 This was 
at the very core of the religion of the ancient Jew. All the promises (if God and realiza- 
tions of his kingdom on earth seemed to be associated with the Holy Land. This 
sentiment has been universalized and made more personal by the Spirit of Jesus. " Our 
kind " must have our constant care and prayers. " The enthusiasm for humanity" must 
support and inspire the spiritual worker. — ^M. 

Yen. 16 — 18. — Faith's reward. I. Ih being acknowledged. 1, The character of 
fts work recognized. Jeremiah is to speak in the Name of " the God of Israel," as if to 
■ay that henceforth Ebed-Melech is to be regarded as a true Israelite, having his destiny 
bound up with God's people. That which he did is attributed to no merely passing 
eompassion, but to faith : " Thou hast put thy trust in me, saith the Iiori" So God 
perceives the leoret motives of actions. 2. In being further and specially esereiietL 



166 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, l^h. xxxix. 1—18 

Definite direction is given to the attention of Ebed-Meleoh, and he is encouraged to loch 
forward to the fulfilment of the words spoken by Jeremiah. As a further confirmation 
of his siiare in the Divine events about to take place, he is assured of personal safety — an 
assurance as yet only a matter of faith and not of sight. One of the surest proofs oi 
true faith being acknowledged by God, is its being thus tested and exercised. Men 
without faith may be let alone; but the believer, even if his faith be as a grain ol 
mustard seed, will be taken hold of by the providence and grace of God, and led " from 
faith to faith." Those who trust in him he will reward with his confidence and the 
custody of his mysteries. " Lord, increase our faith." 

II. 1» BEINQ VBBIPIBD. 1. The htlitveT will see tfie fulfilment of what he has 
believed. He will be honoured by being made a witness of the truth of God. The 
moral tendencies and spiritual consummations that make up the kingdom of God in the 
world will be revealed. Experience will illustrate and confirm faith, and faith will 
interpret experience and render it spiritually profitable. 2. Se himself will he saved 
from ike destiny of the wicked. This is " the physical and palpable reward of faith ; " 
but it is also one which may open up the way to future spiritual blessedness. Ebed- 
Meleoh is obviously spared, not only from the suff'ering of the exile, but from the degrad- 
ing influences of it, and the rejection from covenant blessings it, in so many instances, 
involved. Those who " receive a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward." — M. 

Vers. 1—8. — 2%e retribution of God. What an accumulation of woe do the eight 
verses with which this chapter opens present I Let thought dwell on the several 
statements made here, and let imagination seek to realize what they must have meant 
to those upon whom the calamities they speak of came ; and it will be seen, in vivid 
lurid light., that the retribution of God upon sin and sinners has been in the past no 
mere empty threat, and it will lead to the salutary suggestion, so questioned now, that 
his like threatened retribution in the future is no empty threat either. How 
unreasonable, in the face of historic facts such as those told of here, and in the face ol 
actual facts of to-day in which dread sufi'ering and awful calamity are seen overtaking 
wicked doers, to doubt that God will do the like again should necessity arise 1 But yet 
many do dpubt and deny the teachings of God's Word on this matter. Note, therefore — 

I. The gboitndb on which this tbuth ib questioned. They are such as these: 

1. Death ends all. But who can prove this? Why is it less possible that we should 
live in another condition than that we should have been born into the one in wliich we 
now are ? Resurrection is not antecedently more incredible than crtation. 2. Ood too 
merciful. But is he? Does he not do or suffer to be done fearful things now? 
3. Retribution comes in this world. In part it does to some, but to others .sin seems 
one long success. 4, Christ's death atones for all. Yes, but in what sense ? Certainly 
not in the sense of saving from suflering now. Why, then, if the conditions of 
salvation be not fulfilled, should the atonement avail hereafter more than now ? 

II. Thk frobable hotiteb of this denial. Not irresistible conviction or any 
satisfactory knowledge of the falsity of what is denied, but such as these: 1. The 
desire that the doctrine denied should not be true. How often in questions like these 
the wish Is father to the thought ! Our opinions follow the line of our interest. 

2. The belief that the doctrine renders impossible men's love and trust in Ood. Without 
question there are and have been settings forth of this doctrine which to all thoughtlul 
minds must have this effect. The conception that God has created — of course, know- 
ingly — myriads of human souls to sin and suffer for ever is one that must darken the 
face of God to the thoughtful soul. Why, it will almost passionately be asked — " Why, 
if it were so much better that they should never have been horn, were they born '! " 
It ia " he, the Lord, that hath made us, and not we ourselves." But we are not shut 
up to such conception. God " will have all men to he saved ; " still through what 
fiery diioiplines may he not have to compel the perverse and unruly wills of sinful men 
to pass ere they shall come to themselves and say, "I will arise," etc.? 3. Atheistic, 
agnostic, or materialistic. They who come under such names alike will dislike such 
doctrine as this. They will not simply disbelieve, but protest against them. 

III. Thb success, such as it is, that these denials hate had. 1. They have 
dulled and sometimes deadened the &ar of the Lord in many souls. But : 2. They 
have never been able to convince any that there is no judgment to come. The dread 



;. 1—18.] THE BOOK OH' THE PHOPHET JBBEMIAH. 151 

(if it haunts them still, the evidence for it being too strong and clear. Hamlet's 
soliloquy, " To be or not to be, that is the question," etc., stll expresses men's fear of 
death. "For in that sleep of deiitli wlmt dreans may come!" 3. it is difficult to see 
aught of good tliat has ken do e— not. !■ g but more or less ill. Therefore note — 

iV. The warning that comes to us fbom these denials. Cherish a deep and 
holy fear of God. Judge each one ourselves, that we be not judged of the Lord.— %!. 

Vers. 4 — 7. — Too late. These verses tell of the flis;1it of Zedekiah and his miserable 
capture by the GhaMi an army. Picture the scene. Tlie breach made in the walL The 
dead hour of night. The rush upon the temiile. The slaiightei there. The alarm spreading 
to the palace. The attempted escape, bifoie dawn, of the king, his wives, and his children. 
See them muffled, disguiseii,laiien with such precious things as they could suatch up in 
the hurry of that awiul moment, stealihily mnl<ing their way along the narrow alley 
between the walls, sjeeding down the ravine, up over the slopes of Olivet, then down 
again to the plains of Jericho, where they were overtaken and m ide prisoners. Many 
an opportunity of escape had been given to Zedekiah during these last months and 
previously, but he had neglected them all. Fur a while his present attempt seemed 
successful, but he was soon in the cruel grasp of the Chaldeans, and then worse than 
all he had feared came upon him. He tried to escape, but too late. This history, 
unutterably sad as it is, has many parallels and much instiuction. Consider — 

I. Instances in which this verdict or "too late" is applicable. There are 
many. 1. Scriptural. No doubt that not a few, when the Lord had shut Noah in the 
ark, and they saw the lowering clouds, the overwhelming rain, and the rising waters, 
repeated and sought safety in the ark. But then, because they had been " sometime 
disobedient" (cf. 1 Pet. iii. 19), they were now too late. " Kemember Lot's wife." 
The Israelites after their repulse at Ai ; after their disbelief of the faithful spies (Numb. 
xiv. 44). Our Lord's words to Jerusalem, " But now they are hid from thine eyes.'' 
The foolish virgins (Matt. zxv.). Cf. also " When once the master of the house has 
risen up and shut to the door," etc. 2. Historic. Archias, magistrate of Greece, 
revelling and feasting. Plot formed to assassinate, A friend sends intelligence. 
Arrives as feast is going on. " Serious things to-morrow," said the senseless man. 
That night he was slain. The massacre of Glencoe would never have occurred but for 
the tardiness of the chief of the clan in giving in his submission to the government. 
A snowstorm hindered him when at last he did set out tor this purpose, and the last 
day of grace came and ended, and the chiefs submission, had not been made. The 
massacre followed (cf. Macaulay). 3. And in less notable events in common everyday 
life, how perpetually are we seeing like instances! School life wasted, no making it 
up again. Opportunities in business, in the home, in the Church, missed ; above all, in 
regard to the life eternal, — and not recoverable. The tide in the affairs of men not taken 
at the flood ; instead of fortune, the lew ships which men have launched lie wrecked or 
stranded on the shore. " Too late I '" With what disappointment and despair is this 
often said, and will it be said hereafter, and with what truth as well 1 Therefore note — 

II. The misery of him who is too late. This arises from ; 1. Shame before men. 
They will not pity, but despise and blame. 2. Sting of conscience. We know it might 
have been otherwise ; we nlight have secured what we have let go. 3. SigJU of the 
consequences brought on ourselves and others through our neglect. 4. The irn-- 
coverability of what is lost. It can never be all the same to any soul, no matiei 
what theory of the future we may hoi i, if he has thrown away opportunities of grace 
and squandered the days of salvation witii which he was blessed. This thought, thai 
he was " too late," was the "torment" of the rich man in the hell into which God sent 
his soul after death. 

III. How COME MEN TO BE TOO LATE ? Sometimes it is : 1. The opportunit]/ passes 
away. The tide which should have been taken at the flood has begun to ebb. 2. let 
more often, the power of the law of habit. Opportunities may be plentiful, but tha 
habit of resisting the call to use them has become fixed, and therefore it it really " tou 
late" tor the man, even when he might if he would seize upon them for Ua good 
W« ring— 

" And while the lamp holds out to ban 
The vilest sinner may return." 



152 THE BOOK OF THE PUOPHBT JEUEMIAH. [ch. xxxix. 1—18, 



Yes, no doubt ; but will he ? If he has got so into tlie habit of saying " No " to Ood 
will ht — is it likely?— at the last turn and say, "Yes"? Death-bed repentancesi — are 
there any such things ? That which determines a soul's destiny is not death, but this 
law of habit. Long before death it may have been settled whether that soul shall be 
saved or lost. And death may come, as it does to the young, and the matter be not 
seltlerf, the law of habit not having had time to declare itself whilst life in the body 
lasted. The law of habit, not the hour of death, is that from which we have most to 
hope and most to fear. 3. The gambling apirit that is in all men. The trusting to 
chance, the hope in good luck, in regard to things secular; the hope for a nioru 
convenient season in regard to the things of the soul. U'here is this spirit in us all. 
It has its uses, for there are " ventures of faith " as well as all too many ventures ol 
a very different kind. Read this history of King Zedekiah; and see how he gambled 
away his crown, his kingdom, his life, his all. 

IV. Safequards against this evil. Under God, this same law of habit of which 
we have spoken. Eesolve, and strengthen your resolve by prayer, that you will not 
put off till to-morrow what you should do to-day. Act on it, and to-morrow you shall 
act on it again, and, the next day, and so the blessed habit shall be formed of practically 
remembering that "now is the accepted time," and for you or by you the miserable 
verdict of " too late "' shall never have to be pronounced. — 0. 

Ver. 10. — " Blessed are ye poor," The Chaldean invasion, which wrought such niin 
on princes, nobles, and all tlie great in Judah and Jerusalem, had far other and happier 
effect on the poor. The stoiiu which tore dovm the lofty tree left the lowly flowers 
that nestled amid the herbage untouched. This veise recalls — 

I. OuB Lobd's words, " Blessed are te poor." The poor do not excite the wrath 
of the great. They are least affected by outward change. They are dealt kindly by 
when the rich and great are cast down. "He hath put down the mighty from their 
seat, and hath exalted," etc. But, chief of all, because they are "rich in faith." So said 
our Lord ; and it can only be that the poor have an undying conviction of the love of 
God, an unquenchable faith therein, that they so patiently endure the ills of their 
present lot. Let that faith die out, as it has in some places and generations, and 
murderous revolution and anarchy burst forth. Our Lord distinctly encouraged this 
belief in the love of God towards the poor. He said his misiiion was "to preach the 
gospel to the poor." In the parable of the rich man, Lazarus, for no other reason than 
that he was poor, receiving here, as is the lot of the poor so often, only " evil things," 
was "carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom." And we may well believe that 
they who here have been unable by reason of the misery of their condition to see that 
God is love— as Israel in Egypt could not believe in it by reason of the bitterness of 
spirit which their bondage caused them — shall in some blessed Abraham's bosom 
hereafter see it clearly, and then shall their hearts go out towards God in that faith and 
love which are the conditions of the kingdom of heaven, but which have been scarce 
possible to them here. Therefore are the poor blessed. But this verse teaches also the 
sure truth — 

II. " He that is down need fear no fall." Here it was lowliness of position 
which saved the poor of the land. But the proverb is yet more true where the lowliness is 
of the heart and mind — that yoke of Christ which, if we take, then rest, the undisturbed 
peace of the soul, is our reward. 

III. The common peovebb, " It ib an ill wihd that blows no one an¥ good." 
The prince's ruin was the poor man's riches ; the noble's downfall his uprising. There- 
fore in our own troubles let us remember that we are never as a target at which the 
arrows of God's judgments are aimed, and in the hittina of which their purpose is 
fulfilled ; but rather are we the channels of blessing, which by and through us shall 
flow on to do good to others, perhaps many others. Cf. Paul's allegory, the castin" 
out of the natural branch, the Jew, and the ingrafting of the wild branch, the Gentile° 
And illustrations are innuuiirable. 

IV. God's law of compensations. If he takes away on the one side, he gives on 
the other. These poor people were favoured. 

V. The first beatitude, " Blessed are the poob in spirit: fob,'' etc. These poor 
had lands in Judaea ; the poor Christ speaks of shall receive " the kingdom of heaveik'' 



OH. Sim. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JERBMIAa 153 

It ia not always trae that the literal poor are dealt with in the way told of here, but 
the recompeaae of the poor in spirit never faib. They hare an earnest of it in the rest 
and peace of Eioul it is theirs to enjoy now amid all the cares and distractions of thiti 
life. But no man makes himself poor ; he must he made so. God's providence sends 
the literal poverty, God's Spirit that spiritual condition to which is promised the 
kingdom of heaven. But if we place ourselves in the hands of Christ, surrendering 
ourselves to be dealt with as he sees fit, he will, by his Spirit, bring us to that blessed 
mind without which none enter the kingdom, but with which we assuredly shall. — C. 

Vers. 11 — 14. — Churchwardens. 1. These are generally chosen from the friends oj 
Che Church, as they who are to defend and guard the Church's interests should be. 
Who should care for the Church if not her friends ? 2. But sometimes men who are no 
friends of the Church have charge of her interests. 3. And not seldom they are wnwngst 
her best servants, and do their work diligently and well. 4. In these verses we have a 
signal instance of this. Here is the fierce, heathen, Israel-destroying Nebuchadnezzar, 
I'usying himself seriously about the safety of God's prophet Jeremiah. It is not 
simply a case of God shutting the lions' mouths, but constituting the lions his servant's 
sure though strange defence (cf. ver. 12). " Is Saul also among tlie prophets ? " — that was 
thought to be a marvel. But that the Chaldean monarch should be the faith's defender 
and the prophet's guard is no less strange. 5. And there have been otJier such instances 
before and since this. See what Egypt was to Joseph and Moses, the Philistines to David, 
the Persians to Daniel, Greece to Jews in Alexandria, Borne to Paul ; see also history ol 
the Lollards, Reformers, etc. And how often in the straits of God's people have they Ijad 
to confess that he has raised up lor them from most unlikely sources the helpers they 
have needed ! "The barbarous pc^ople showed us no little kindness " (Acts xzviii. 2), — 
as we have seen sometimes a weak, defenceless creature dwelling in the same cage with 
strong, cruel beasts, and not only unharmed, but jiroteoted by them. 6. How i§ all 
this to be explained f In this instance of Jeremiah the motives of Nebuchadnezzar are 
clear and comprehensible. Jeremiah had done his best to persuade his countrymen to 
submit to Babylon. His influence would be strong with the cnpiives in Babylon and 
serviceable to her monarch. The king would show that, whilst he punished his foes, he 
did not forget his friends. The reverence and awe which Jeremiah, so evidently God's 
prophet, aroused in the monarch's mind. But : 7. Be was yuaiUed of God. Jeremiah 
was no partisan of Babylon. The most terrible prophecies against her are his (cf. ch. 1.). 
No other explanation than that the care of God was over liim can account for theif 
favour to one who spoke so plainly and so evil concerning them. And their forbearance 
is the more remarkable when we remember the proud, cruel, and arrogant character ot 
the monarch whom Jeremiah thus, as it were, delied. 8. Many and most helpful art 
the lessons oj such facts as these. Enemies God can make our friends, perils oiv. 
protectors ; and because " the Lord's portion is his people," his will is ever to do theQ> 
<{ood. Such deliverances as these are designed to foreshadow our final and perfeo 
deliverance, and to deepen our confidence in regard thereto. — 0. 

Vers. 16 — 18. — " In that ye ministered to the saints." " God," says the writer of th< 
Epistle to the Hebrews, "is not unrighteous to forget" such ministry. It is a strong 
expression, and seems to imply that God would be unrighteous if he did forget. Here 
in the story of Ebed-Melech, we have an instance of God's rewarding ministry to hii 
saints. For what Ebed-Melech did, cf. ch. xxxviii. 7, etc. For his recompense, set 
these verses (15 — 18). Consider — 

L These eecompenses. They are : 1. A fact. How many instances there are 1— 
the widow of Sarepta; the Shunammite wonian ; Dorcas ; Paul's friends, Onesiphoruai 
etc. ; Jonathan ; Mary of Bethany ; Cyrus and the Persian nation, for their goodness t« 
Israel j the people of Malta (Acts xxviii.) ; our own country, for offering asylum t« 
persecuted Hollanders and Huguenots. And, besides such instances, there are repeated 
declarations to the same effect : " I will bless them thfit bless thee ; " " They shall 
prosper that love thee." The cup of cold water given in the name of a disciple " shah 
in no wise lose its reward." " Whoso shall receive one such little child in my Namt 
receiveth me." 2. Very great. (Cf. illiistratiuns given.) How comparatively slighi 
was the ministry I how cup of cold water-Uke ! yet how great the reward I Hew mucl 



154 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xxxu. 1—18, 



this country owes, in her commerce, her character, her fame, to her ministry to God « 
saints\ Many people denounce Cromwell for most things he did, but all applaud his 
interference with tlie bloody | apists on behalf of the persecuted Waldenses. Milton's 
grand lines, "Avenge, Lonl, thy slau;hteied saints," etc., have immortalized that 
deed as it deserved. No, indeed ; " God is not unrighteous to forget," rather is he most 
gracious to remember, all such ministries. 3. Varied. Sometimes the recompense is 
given at the time, in taiip;ible, material blessing. Sometimes such recompense is 
delayed, but comes afterwards in full measure. Sometimes it comes not here at all in 
outward recompense, but in .spiritual joy and peace — sunshine in the soul, approval 
of conscience, gladness of heart, conliruiation in good. But for all, and most of all, in 
eternity. " That is the great harvest-season of holy and benigUHnt deeds." " They 
shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just." But : 4. Ever sure. They shall 
be recompensed. None of that good seed shall fall on other than good ground, or yield 
other than bountiful and beneficent fruit. The little gift "shall by no means," saitb 
our Saviour, " lose its reward." And his many present recompenses all confirm our 
faith in the truth of that blessed Word. 

II. Theib REASONS. Sonie of them are probably such 88 these : 1. For the LorcPi own 
S'lke. Such ministries demonstrate the presence in the heart of that which he most ol 
all prizes — love. Tliey show " some good thing toward the Lord God." 'I hey delight 
the Father's heart, and his smile cannot be concealed nor his liand held back from 
blessing. 2. For the sake of those who thus minister, as Ebed-Melech did. God recom- 
penses them because they have thus cuniniitled themselves on the side of righteousness, 
and he would encourage tl em. 3. For tlie sake of those ministered to. God IJessins tlieir 
friends tends to raise up Friends for them, as they often need. "We will go with you, 
for we see that the I ord is with you." 4. For the sake o] truth and righteousness 
generally. Gud, by sucli recompenses, makes it evident on which side he is. Thus 
he cheers his people, dismays his adversaries, decides the waverer, and so advances the 
good cause in the world. 

III. Their admonition. Follow the Lord's example; do not you forget those who 
have stood up for truth and ri^ht. Sympntliize with, applaud, defend such. Be such 
yourselves. Would you have done :-is Eb.d-Melech did? Do you when the Christian 
lad or girl is jeered at by godless comraile.s, in the school, the counting-house, the shop, 
the kitchen ? " Stand up, stand up, for Jesus 1 " — C. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Siege and savagery. I. The uankeb in which thb oaptubb oi 
Jerusaleh is belated. Just enough is told to certify to us the complete aud exact 
fulfilment of prophecy. There is a long siege, a great destruction, and great hnmili«tion 
and suffering for the captured king. It is no part ot the province of Scripture writers to 
<lwell on war, battle, siege, and pillage for the sake ot making striking narratives But 
liehind this very brevity what room there is for imagination ! What suffering, gradually 
mounting to the climax of famine and thirst, during those eighteen months ol siege ! 
The very natural advantages of Jerusalem, enabling the people to resist longer, added 
to their calamities. Indeed, we may say that when a man employs his natural strength 
wrongly, his suffering in th6 end is not unlikely to be proportioned somewhat to his 
strength. A weaker man would not suffer so much or suffer so long. 

II, The savagery conneotbd with the capture. This savagery is a point to be 
studied as throwing a light on the ancient civilizations. Nobody thought, we may 
safely say, not even prophets themselves, that there was anything out of the way iu 
all this destruction. Savagery was the accepted consequence of a successful siege. 
Jehovah used these Chaldean soldiers as instruments, but they had to act according to 
their individuality. A Roman army would have behaved no better. Indeed, humanity 
in war is a Christian idea. Paradox as it seems, God was working through the very 
savagery of this war to destroy all war. Men will fight; they will loment discord 
and accumulate large armies ; but it is the glory of God to bring good out ot all the 
conflicts. When the reign of the Prince of peace is fully come, then we shall see, aa 
we cannot see now, the good that men have worked, unconsriottsly, by war. We are 
decMTed new ^)ecau8e we cannot get away from our thoughts physical destruction and 
suffering. 

HI. Thk fats op Zedbkiah. Brought on him by his ovm indecision as mucl as D) 



OH. xxxix. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 156 

the savage hands of Chaldeans. If these verses stood by themselves, we should not 
know this ; but we do know it from the record going before, of Jeremiah's dealings with 
him.— Y. 

Ver. 10. — " The poor of the people." I. How they had comb iwto this position. 
Poverty is, of course, a mischief, having many causes, and no fallacy is greater than 
that of singling out one cause for some particular reason, and then treating it as if it 
were the only cause. Still, there is need that in this place the injustice of the rich 
towards the poor should be remembered. The fact that there are proverbs bearing on 
this point shows that such oppression was not at all unfrequent. " He that oppresseth 
the poor to increase his riches, and he that giveth to the rich, shall surely come to 
want " (Prov. xxii. 16 ; xxviii. 15). And now these oppressors had attracted to them- 
selves the desiring eye of Babylon. Why were the rich men carried away and the 
poor left? The chief reason was that they heightened the triumph, for when despoiled 
they were just as poor as the poorest, and the contrast between their former and present 
state spoke for itself. Then, too, there is something in considering the rich men as 
themselves part of their riches. Thus the rich and poor are brought together in one 
great judicial act, and the rich are made to feel that in the end the poor are really 
better off than they are. 

II. The advantages op poverty. Poverty usually presents such disadvantages on 
the surface, and so demands sympathy and help, that it almost seems like irony ever 
to talk of its advantages. And yet, if there be such advantages, it is very necessary to 
consider them, in order to do something for the prevention of envy, repining, and per- 
plexity. As with the advantages of external wealth, so with the disadvantages of 
external poverty ; neither goes very deep. In the time of spoliation the poor man can look 
on with a light heart, so far as personal loss is concerned. Probably the poor people of 
Israel were now better off than they had been for years. Amid all the burning and 
pillage here is one good effect already perceptible in the benefit that is being worked 
lor the poor. Without contradiction, it may be afBrmed that the Jehovah of the Old 
Testament and the Father of Jesus Christ in the New are alike on the side of the poor. 
All oppression of the poor, all unlair treatment of them, all selfish employment of them, 
will show in the end that the poor need lose nothing of what is best. 

III. The employment op the pooe. They were employed in that which waa of 
greatest moment to them. Vineyards and fields were given to them — things they could 
all make use of; things which would repay their toil, and give them the chance of 
building up a really honourable wealth. If Nebuzar-Adan had given them something of 
the plunder, it would not have been near so useful as what he actually did give. Mao 
is nearest to the pure, untainted fulness of nature when he is cultivating the soiL— Y. 

Vers. 11 — 14. — The safety of Oo^s prophet. I. The manneb Df which it o 
ASSURED. There is no working of miracle, though miracle was available if it had been 
needed. But natural forces were carrying out Divine intentions in working the safety 
of the man who had been faithful to his duty. We have no exact information as to 
why Nebuchadnezzar was so interested in the prophet's safety, but we may well 
suppose that he had a sort of respect for a man who served his God so faithfully. The 
news of fidelity, courage, and endurance goes far, when only one here and there shows 
the qualities. Moreover, the King of Babylon was very likely to have heard of 
Jeremiah's predictions ; the very knowledge that such predictions existed would nerve 
him in his attwck ; and when the attack succeeded, the very fulfilment of the predictions 
would produce in him a superstitious fear lest the utterer of them should come to any 
harm. Thus we see how the course of human aftairs, without any special intervention, 
wurUs out fjood for the brave maintainers of right. 

II. Sa 1' El y IN SUCH CIRCUMSTANCES. This is of great importance to notice. Jehovah 
was not concerned to preserve the life of every prophet from a violent end. His 
prophets, at times, had to trust him even to death, and prophesy even when the 
proiihecy was sure to i e followed by a mortal blow. Jeremiah was preserved in safety 
at this tune, not so much for his own sake, as for the effect his preservation would have 
on the minds of others. His safety was specially piovided for at the time when 
uniestiained destruction was going on. Thus his very preservation was itself a prophecy 



15« 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. Lea. 3u- 1—16 



And it is all the more noticeable because Jeremiah himself had, in due course, to make 
predictions against Babylon. Why some of God's servants live long lives and some 
short ones is not a fortuitous matter ; there is always a reason, could we but see it, and 
sometimes, as in this instance, there is a glimmer of light upon the reason. 

III. The pbophet'b destination. Nebuchadnezzar's order was that he should be 
treated as ho desired. We read that in the end " he dwelt among tlie people." Hence we 
may conclude that this was his desire. And where could a prophet better be ? Especially 
if he went among the poor of the people, toiling away in their vineyards and fields, and 
tried to inspire them with thfl prnmises of better times. " Dwelling among the people " 
is a very suggestive expression when applied to a man like Jeremiah, his office, his 
character, his experience, being such as they were. The people knew that he lived 
among them by his own free choice, preferring to share their hardship and poverty. 
As far as we can see, he might have enjoyed the luxuries oi Babylon ; but wUAt were 
these to a man like him ?— X. 

Vers. 15 — 18. — Ebed-Meleeh'i lafety, mnd the secret of it. I. Ebed-Mblech's danger. 
He was a court ofQcial, and like all others connected with the court, in more danger 
than if he had been merely one of the multitude. He appears to have been in favour 
with the king, and all such would be put down by enemies as exciting the king to con- 
tinued resistance. That is, it would seem to Bbed-Melech so ; for why should he suppose 
that any one should be so specially interested in him as to describe his deeds exactly to 
the Chaldeans ? 

II. Ebed-Meusoh** safety. 1. The usefulness of Jeremiah even a$ a prismier. 
Jnremiah cannot get out among the people, but there is sufficient mitigation of Ma 
imprisonment to make him useful to one man. Even in prisons Gud's servants find 
opportunities of doing good work for him — so Bunyan writes his ' Pilgrim's Progress. 
With peculiar joy Jeremiah must have delivered such a message to one who had been 
80 kind to him. In this, too, we can trace a Divine arrangement. Surely God's delight 
is to give peculiar joys to such as are diligent in doing bis will. 2. Words of hope mrt 
always possible to individwds. There is no longer any chance for the nation ; as a 
nation it must be scattered and spoiled ; but every individual is treated according to 
his deserts. There is no reason to suppose that Jeremiah and nibed-Melech were the 
only individuals to whom God was spucially gracious, — it was necessary to mention 
them ; but in all ages there have been many special providences not mentioned. 

III. The becbet op Ebed-Mblbch's safety. He had put his trust in Jehovah. 
What does this mean, seeing he is also described as being afraid ? We take it that the 
reference is to his deliverance of the prophet from the dungeon. He really was 
exercising a faith in God more than he was aware of at the time. In stretching out 
his hand to rescue the prophet he had got upon the rock of his own safety. In other 
words, he had shown his fa th by his works. A voice from the unseen had spoken 
and told him to get Jeremiah ont of the dungeon, and his consequent action had in it the 
essence of faith ; for he obeyed this voice from the unseen. God sees faith where we, 
with OUT prepossessions, would only too often be unable to discern it. — X, 



EXPOS IT'lON. 



OHAPTEB XL. 



The first of a leries of chapters (xl. — zlv.) 
describing Jei«miah'i fortune* and ministry 
after the fall of Jerusalem. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The liberation of Jeremiah. 

Yer. 1. — The word that oame to Jeremiah. 
The formula seems to announce a prophecy ; 
but no prophecy follows. It is not allow- 
able to suppose, with Eeil and others, that 
•• the word " describes the entire body of pro- 
phetic utterance in eh. xl. — xlv. (in spite of 
the &ct that ch. xliv. and xlv. have special 



headings). The use would be unexampled ; 
and a prologue of forty verses (see oh. xlii 
7) is equally contrary to prophetic analogy. 
Apparently the "word," or prophecy, which 
originally followed the heading has been 
lost or removed to some other place. Had 
let Mm go firom Bamah. Here is an appa- 
rent discrepancy with the account in oh. 
xxxix. 14. The brevity of the latter seenu 
to account for it No doubt the more pre- 
cise statement in our passage is to be fol- 
lowed. After the capture of the city, a 
number of captives, including Jeremiah, 
were probably conducted to Eimiah (tee on 



w. XL. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEliEMIAH. 



157 



oh. zxzl. 15), where they had to wait for the 
royal decision as to tlieir fate. Jeremiah, 
however, had already been in custody in the 
"court of the watch," and the writer of ch. 
xxix. 14 simply omits the second stage of 
his captivity (ICeil). In chains. See ver. 4, 
" The chains wliich were upon thine hand." 

Ver. 3. The lord hath brought it, etc. 
The colouriog of the speech is tliat of a 
Jewish propliet (comp. Isa. xxxvi. 10). 

Ver. 5. — Now while he was not yet, etc. 
Tills rendering, however, seems against the 
Hebrew usage. Two renderings are open 
to us. 1. " But since one returneth not from 
Babylon, then go back to Gedaliah," etc. ; 
so Hitzig. 2. Taking ver. 5 as a continua- 
tion of " but if it secmeth ill to thee," etc., 
" forbear " (in ver. 4), and, supplying, " I 
have spoken the word," continue, " and it 
shall not be reverse^ ; yea, go back ; " so 
Graf, regarding tlie passage as an explana- 
tion ot the permiiiBJon to " forbear." A re- 
ward ; rather, a present. 

Ver. 6. — To Mizpah. A place in the tribe 
of Benjamin, where Samuel judged, and 
where Saul wai elected king (1 Sam. vii. 15, 
16; X. 17). 

Vers. 7 — 12. — ^The Jewish fugitives resort 
to Gedaliah, who promises them protection 
as long as they are loyal to Babylon. 

Ver. 7. — In the fields; rather, t» ihe field; 
i.e. in the open country, as opposed to the 
towns. Men, and women, and children. Old 
and worn-out men, helpless widows, and 
fatherless children. Koyal princesses were 
among them (ch. xli. 10). 

Ver. 8. — Jonathan, This name is omitted 
in the puallel passage (2 Kings xxt. 23), and 



by the Septuagint here. It may, of ooutm, 
be a corruption of Johanan, as Ewald sup- 
poses. If so, we must read " son " for " sons," 
with Septuagint. The Netophathite. Neto- 
phah was in the neighbourhood of Benja- 
min. The son of a Maachathite ; rutber, the 
Maachathite. Maachah was a Syrian dis- 
trict in the neighbourhood of Hermon 
(Deut. iii. 14; Josh. xii. 5). Jezaniahwas, 
therefore, a naturalized foreigner, like Doeg 
the Edoiiiite (Hitzig). 

Ver. 10. — To serve the Chaldeans ; rather, 
to itand before ihe Chaldean* (so literally) ; 
i.e. to mediate between you and them 
(comp. oh. XV. 1). Gather ye wine, etc. It 
was the fifth or sixth month (comp. oh. xli. 
1 ; 2 Kings xxv. 8), the end of July or the 
beginning of Au^^ugt, when grapes, flgs, and 
olives become ripe. Observe, "wine" is 
here the wine in the grape; the Hebrew 
yayin seems oiiginally to have meant a 
cluster of grape^, like the corresponding 
word {wain) in Arabic (comp. on ch. 
xlvlii. 33). That ye have taken ; rather, Oiat 
ye ehdU have taken. (The " captains " had 
up to this time been in the open country, 
ver. 7.) 

Vers. 13 — 16. — Gedaliah reeeivei • warn- 
ing of a plot against his life. 

Ver. 14.— Baalis the king of the Ammonites. 
Perhaps the same king referred to in oh. 
xxvii. 3 as seeking alliance with Zedekiah. 
He was naturally opposed to the Babylonian 
official, Gedaliah. Hath sent Ishma^ Ish- 
mael was connected with the royal family 
(ch. xli. 1), and mm probably jealous o^ 
Gedaliah. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Venu 1— B. — Jeremiah't release. L The innooent often enrFEB with thb 
GUILTY. It would seem that orders had been given in Jerusalem for the liberation of 
the prophet (ch. xxxix. 11 — 14), but that, in the confusion of the sack of the city, 
inferior officers had led off Jeremiah in chains with the rest of the captive.s. Thus he 
shared the indignities and haidships of companions who deserved a fate from which his 
innocence should have saved him. It is part of the discipline of life that we should 
suffer one with another. Amongst men justice is irregular; ignorance and mistakes 
ol'ten result in unintentional cruelty. Men are dealt with in masses, and the individual 
must suffer with the multitude. 

n. Justice will be ultimatelt effeoteo, Jeremiah is discovered at Bamah, 
and the mistake rectified. This does not always happen so soon. It is sad to think 
that, even with our enlightened system of justice, there may be innocent men suffering 
long years of penal servitude iu convict establishments, without a chance of clearing 
their character this side the grave. How much more often must such mistakes occur 
in more barbarous countries 1 But it is a consolation for all who are unjustly treated to 
know that this is but one of the trials of life, overruled to work wholesome discipline, and 
is but transitory. Ultimately God will visit each man individually with strict fairness 
and no possibility of error. There were mistakes made in the sack of Jerusalem ; 
there will be none in the judgiiieut of all men at the end of the world, AH will be 
judged, but in the vast crowd of cases there can then be no error, for "shall not the 
Judge uf all the earth do right ? " 



158 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEEEMIAH. [cH. xu 1— 1& 

III. A BECOONITION OF THE JUSTICE OP GoD TENDS TO MAKE MEN MOEBJUST, 

The captain of the guard had given sufficient attention to the teaching of Jeremiah to 
see that the destruction of Jerusalem was predicted by him as a punishment for tha 
Bins of the Jews. It may appear hypocritical for one of the soldiers, who had bem 
engaged in the cruel carnage, to reflect piously on the Divine justice of the fate of bis 
victiius. But is it not quite possible that the impressive words of an inspired prophet — 
of which his own are evidontly a literal repetition — may have led to his sincere adoption 
of this view ? Alaric seemed to have honestly believed in his mission as a scourge of 
God. Might not some such idea have taken possesssion of Nebuchadnezzar and his 
soldiers, if only as an after-thought ? Then it would raise their minda to the sense of 
the obli'iatinns of justice. 

IV. Liberty is one or the pikst of eaethlt blessings. This is now accorded 
to Jeremiah. Like health and wealth, it is not appreciated till it is lost. We who 
enjoy it, however, should remember to be more grateful, and to fulfil our noble mission 
of carrying it to others who are yet languishing under tyranny or in slavery. One of 
the first promises of the gospel is the gift of liberty to captives (Isa. Ixi. 1). Physical 
freedom is but the smaller half of the liberty we need. We may have this and yet be 
slaves. Jeremiah could enjoy it to the full, because he was also possessed of that higher, 
glorious liberty of the sons of God. 

Ver. 6. — 77ie choice of a residence. The captain of the guard gave to Jeremiah the 
choice between an honourable asylum in Babylon and a return to his own land. The 
prophet selected tlie latter course. Why did he do so ? Although the circumstances 
of the case were peculiar, the answer to this question may throw light on some of the 
considerations which should guide men generally in the selection of their places of 
abode. Several characteristics may be nntid in Jeremiah's decision, viz. : — 

L Fatriotish. Jeremiah had been accused of a treasonable friendship for Babylon. 
His conduct in deciding to remain in his native land, wrecked and deserted as it was 
after the war, in preference to enjoying the position of a privileged guest at Babylon, is 
an ample refutation of all such charges. Patriotism is more than a sense of duty, it is 
an affection. It does not speak much for the depth of a man's nature that he can 
leave his native country without a sigh of regret. If we find it necessary to emigrate, 
genuine patriotism will certainly incline us to settle in one of the colonies of the 
British Empire rather than in a foreign country. This point should be insisted on at> 
a duty, not merely treated as a question of sentiment. 

n. Consideration fob bei.igiocs associations. Babylon was a heathen city. 
Jeremiah preferred to remain in the Holy Land. Surely the religious advantages of a 
neighbourhood should be taken into account as of first importance. Yet many people 
seem to be stiangely blind to all such considerations. The soil, the scenery, the society, 
the convenience of the house, are duly considered ; but the Church accommodation is 
scarcely thought of. A gravel soil is most essential ; healthy religious influences are 
regarded as of very secondary interest, A beautiful view must be got, though the 
enjoyment of it means banishment from all heMlthy Church life. How strange thiit 
heads of families professing to be Christian should act like pagans in this matter, and 
care so little for the spiritual atmosphere in which their children are to be brought up I 

III. The sacrifice of personal convenience to the good op others. Ezekiel 
could minister to the cap' ives in Babylon. Jeremiah had his work in comforting the 
remnant in the land of Israel. If he had consulted his own convenience, he might 
have accepted the offer of a safe and probably honourable position in the land of exile. 
But he had his work to do at home, and he stayed to do it. Such conduct is a fine 
example to those of us who, in choosing a place of residence, think of our own plea- 
sure and profit rather than of the good we may do. More especially does this apply to 
t)hristian ministers. If the clinice lay between easy work in a beautiful place in 
Devonshire, and tlie toil of seivice amid all the squalor and ugliness and wretchedness 
of a densely populated district in the east end of London, should we be willing to 
choose the harder but more useful life ? 

IV. Contentment and simplicity. These are minor characteristics of the choice 
of Jeremiah, but they are not without their significance. Jeremiah was satisfied to 
stay in the old land with the poor, after the wealthy and great had been banished. To 



OH. zu 1—16.] THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET JEBEMIAH. Ifid 

the luxuries of court life at Babylon he preferred the homely ways of the peasants oi 
Israel. In ahandoning simplicity for display and excitement, the fashion of our age 
drives men and women to a life that is neither healthy nor happy. Even if the out- 
ward suri'oiindings of a quieter life are not so attractive, its true experience will give a 
restfulness and a satisfaction that cannot be found in the race of worldly pleasuiei. 

Yen. 7 — 12. — 3%e dutiet of mdversity and their reward, L Thb duties. 1. Btib- 
mission. We are not ruquired to yield before avoidable troubles ; but finding some to 
be irresi.stible, we are to learn the wisdom and obligation of bending to them without 
further demur. The captains were no cowards; they had fought and had lost. Their 
resiiitance against the inevitable was a mistake ; continued resistance after defeat would 
have been nothing but folly. Submission is much easier when we remember that the 
trouble is in accordance with the will of a God who is always wise, fair, and mercifiiL 
2. Industry. Gedaliah advised the people to set to work at their regular avocations. 
" But ye, gather ye wine, and summer fruits, and oil, and put them in your vessels," 
etc (ver. 10). It is difScult for a dispirited, humiliated, poverty-striken people to settle 
down to quiet, earnest work. Nevertheless, their duty aud their happiness lie in their 
doing so: (1) their duty, for adversity is no excuse for indolence ; and (2) their happi- 
ness, because (a) the fruits of their labour would be a beginning of a return to prospenty 
and wealth, and (b) in the very exercise of work they would fiud a solace and a 
refreshment. There is nothing so weak or so injurious as an idle brooding over 
trouble. Be up and doing I And though the work Is irksome at first, it will prove 
itself a great healer of distress. 

II. The bewabd. 1. A healthy influence over others. The example of the quiet 
condition of the remnant of Jews in their native country attracted fugitives to return 
from the neighbouring countries (ver. 11). Their action was a confirmation of the 
wisdom of their brethren. A man's behaviour under great trial is keenly observed. If 
he do well then, he may be the means of influencing others as he can never influence 
them under ordinary circumstances. Thus he may find consolation for his sorrow in 
the enlargement of his service to his fellow-men. 2. The successful issue of industry. 
The Jews reaped an unusually abundant grape and fruit harvest (ver. 12). " They that 
sow in tears shall reap in joy." If we complain and despair under distress, we have no 
right to expect a happy issue out of it. But patient endurance and diligent attention 
to duty may make us reasonably expect brighter days in the future. Borue with these 
accompaninicnts, trouble often reveals itself as less terrible than our fears. When 
distress comes, we imagine that it has blighted every tree in the orchard and every 
grape in the vineyard, and so we neglect what consolation we might have in those 
fruits of patient industry which might still be given to us. Let us remember that 
during the sad seventy years, and even just after the horrors of the Chaldean i&vuion, 
the Jews could gather " wine and sommei fruits very much." 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORSL 

Ver. IS — eh. xH. 4. — The murder of Gedaliah ; or, noble creduTtty, No sooner Has 
the new govtrnment in a fair way of being settled and prosperous, than untoward 
ciicumstances occurred. Ishmael, son of Nethaniah, son of EUsliama, a connection of 
the royal house, inspired, perhaps, with a jealous feeling towards Gedaliah, began to 
plot with the King of Ammon against him. Under cover of paying his respects to the 
new governor, he visited him at Mizpab, and partook of his hospitality. Although 
warned by Johanan the son of Kareah that Ishmael entertained hostile designs against 
him, Gedaliah refused to credit the information, and indignantly forbade his informant 
carrying out his proposal to assassinate Ishmael. The latter, finding thus a clear way 
for his 'chemes, took advantage of the trustfulness of Gedaliah to accomplish his 
murderous purpose and to deceive his leading supporters. This done, crime followed 
upon crime with startling rapidity, until Johanan overtook the miscreant at the " great 
waters that are in Gibeon," and delivered the prisoners whom he was carrying oflp. la 
this tragic incident we see — 

L How THE VIBTDB OF 0KB POSITION HAT BE THE VIOK 0¥ ANOTHEB. A trustin|b 



160 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ch. XL. 1—16. 

Ingenuous man like Gedaliab was out of place In more senses than one as governor <rf 
8uch=a people. In any circumstances it is necessary that the iitraost precaution should 
be taken with respect to the person of a ruler, as there are always evil-disposed persons 
who may take advantage of an opportunity, and accidents and misfortunes are con- 
tinually possible. The off-hand openness, therefore, which is so admirable in the 
private citizen. Upon whose life so little depends, is highly reprehensible in one occupying 
BO responsible a position. When it is remembered that the people over whom Gedahah 
ruled were wholly undisciplined, and had but recently been exposed to the most 
demoralizing influences, his rashness will be even more apparent. It is well when a 
ruler can combine the trustful ingenuousness of the private citizen with the sagacity 
and watchfulness his responsibilities impose upon him. Life is full of such misplaced 
virtues. The poor man open-handed and lavish as when he was wealthy ; the rich 
man meanly careful as when he had everything to acquire, etc. 

II. How uuoH IS REQUIRED TO JUSTIFY A WRONG ACTION It was a case, apparently, 
on Johanan's showing, of self-protection. Ishmael contemplated murder and treachery ; 
what more natural than that he should be killed? Yet this consideration had no 
weight with Gedaliah. His informant might be mistaken, and was, perhaps, interested. 
It was foreign to his disposition to be suspicious : and he could not brook the idea of 
assassination. If the governor was wrong in neglecting the most ordinary precautions, 
he was certainly right in this. The instinct of the true man is ever averse to under- 
hand actions, even although their object be to avert contingent or certain evils. It is 
never right to do evil that good may come or evil may be averted. The weapons 
which God's children have to wield are ever those of truth and honour ; and these are 
Buflicient if they be sagaciously handled. 

III. How GREAT A CRIME AND CALAMITY MAT BE DIVINELY PERMITTED. 1. Jeremiah, 

for the most part, resided with Gedaliah, and yet no warning appears to have been 
given him of the catastrophe. How was this? Had it not as profound a bearing on 
the future of God's people as the march of Nebuchadnezzar's armies ? It is a great 
mystery, and there are many like it. How appalling the wickedness of our Saviour's 
crucifixion I Yet are the fruits of it a world's salvation. 2. The dictates ot common 
sense and worldly experience, had they been attended to, might have proved sufficient. 
God's interpositions are not always to wait upon human folly. It is out duly to make 
the best of the means and information at our dispos il This is especially iiicum^nt 
with regard to the warnings and instructions of the gospel. The rich man, eager for an 
evangel from Hades to his careless, sinful brethren, is assured," If they hear not Moses 
and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead" 
(Luke xvi. 31). We may wait long if we expect to be converted by a miracle. The 
commandment is binding now : " Believo on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved." — M. 

Vers. 2, 8.— The blind seeing, the seeing Mind. This heathen captain, who could not 
be expected to know the truth, who was, as it were, born blind as to the truth of CSod, 
sees clearly that truth, and declares it ; whilst the people of Judah and Jerusalem, 
their kings, their priests, their nobles, all of whom regarded themselves as knowing 
the truth, who, as in John is. 41, said, " We sea," are found to be completely blind 
u to that truth. Note herein — 

I. How CLEAR WAS THE RECOGNITION OF GoD. He ascrlbcs allto " the Lord thy God." 
He recognizes the prophet as sent of God (ver. 3), " According as he hath said." He 
traces their calamities to their true cause — sin against God. He recuguizes that 
Babylon and her troops are but ministers of God to do his will. 

II. The PROBABLE SOURCES OF HIS KNOWLEDGE. Fci'haps : 1- The general belief 
that each nation had its own deity. 2. Yet more, the prophecies of Jeremiah. 3. 
Also the strength of Jerusalem. Never, apart from the people's sin, has such a fortress 
been overthrown. 4. The madness of the people. Quern deut vuU perdere prius 
dementat. Only a God-forsakeu people could have thrown away their well-being as 
these had done. 6. The judgments that came upon them. 

III. What such facts as these — the blind seeing, etc, — reveal. 1. How clear 
the light of truth which God has given I Were it not so clear, such as this heathen would 
not see it. 2. How dense the darkness which persistent sin spreads over the soul I 



CH. XL. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 161 

Hence the " seeing blind." 3. How awfnl the doom of those who seeing, see not ) 
Of. Matt. xL, " Woe unto thee, Chorazin," etc. !— 0. 

Vers. 4, 6. — "A strait hetwixt two." St. Paul tells how he was in such strait. 
He was willing to stay, but leady to depart home to his eternal rest, which would be 
far better. And ofti ntimes we are in perplexities as to choice in the common events 
and circumstances of our lives. It is so difficult to see wiiat we ought to do, what it 
would be best to do. Here we Viave an instance. The patriotic prophet had a per- 
plexing chuico put before him. Consider — 

L The al'ieunativbs proposed. 1. He might go to Babylon, where, no doubt, the 
same favour that bad shown him such consideration thus far would bring him to honour 
there. 2. He might utay amongst his own people. Amid their poverty, their dis- 
pleasure, their dis.^race. 3. Or he might go anywhere he pleasecl—to Tarshish, as 
Jonah tried, if so he pleased. 

II. The ARO0MENT8 FOB AUD AOAINST EACH. 1. For Babylon. Safety, wealth, 
honour, help to his countrymen there. 2. For staying in Israel. There he had been 
called ; there he was yet needed ; Ezekiel and Daniel were in Babylon. Against 
this, he had no command of God ; the peril in which he would be placed. 

III. The decision. He resolved to stay. This come to, not because the captain 
(ver. 5), who saw him lingering, bade him go back, but because tl^e hardness of the duty 
i-eemed to declare it was his duty. In such cases dwose what you lihe least. — 0. 

Vers. 7 — 12. — " That we may be godly and quietly governed." These verses are an 
illustration of men's desire for such government. In the disorder and confusion of the 
times, men were looking out for some settled rule. Comparii(js of armed men were 
camping about, only waiting for some sign to indicate to whose standard they should 
repair. That which they wanted seemed to be found in Gedaliah. Hence they go to 
him (ver. 8). The incident here recorded suggests, in regard to government generally — 

I. The common consent of men as to its necessity. It was not ruerely one 
company ol the scattered Jews that were on the look out /'or a Lader, but all the com- 
panies, and not the men only, but their officers also. And in every collection t. 
human beings, however tbey group themselves, however casually they may have been 
thrown together, if they have to dwell and to work together the choosing of a lead .. , 
jne who shall rule them, is a never disregarded need. 

II. The pbinciples on which this consent rests. They are such as these : 1. 
There can be no well-being — strength, peace, happiness — without order. 2. No order 
without law. 3. No law without a lawgiver, and a law-upholder, i.e. a government, 
ft may be monarchical, an oligarchy, a republic, a democracy, only in some way law 
must be expressed and ujjheld. Because men feel that this last is necessary to the first, 
men will ever seek after government, good, if possible, but any is felt to be better than 
none. Anarchy is so much misery. Thus do men reason in regard to their temporal 
affairs, 

HI. The bxobption which men make to this consent. It is strange that there 
should be exception, but there is. We find it when we look at men's spiritual affairs. 
Government there is as necessary as in that which is temporal — indeed, far more so, 
consideriijg the far greater value of the interests at stake. And yet men will not have 
it. Each seeks to do that which is right in his own eyes. What would be ruin in 
regard to their secular affairs they deem to be no great harm in things that are 
spirituaL We see this anarchy at times in the things of the Church. If the Church 
of Christ is to do her work and glorify her Lord, there must be unity, cohesion, 
subordination, obedience. But these words, and yet more the things they represent, 
are liateful to not a few. And so the paralysis that has come over large sections of the 
Church. The prince of this world knows the force and value of the maxim. Divide et 
impera, and he has sought all too successfully to do the one that he may attain to the 
otlier. And so in the individual sphere of the soul. The one rightful ruler is God, 
speaking by his vicegerent conscience. All our sin and misery is owing to our disregard 
of this rule. The world is so mournful a world because it is so sinful a world. Loyal 
obedience is our life and health and peace. And because we refuse this, we are weak 
and sad, as well as sinfuL 

JEBXIUAH n. ■ 



163 THE Book OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. XL. 1—16 

IV. The Divine methods of brinqino this exception to an end. For he will 
bring it to an end, glory be to his Name. Ho must rciga till he hath put all things 
under his feet. And he thus woiks to this end : 1. By powerful instr actors. Con- 
science. His providence, shown now in blessing, now in stern judgment. Hi.-s 
Word, in which his law is laid dnwn. 2. By bringing to hear the most mighty of 
motives. Love, which rises at the cross of Christ. Hope of his acceptance and 
reward. Fear of his awful displeasure and doom. 3. By his Spirit striving ever with 
men. — C. 

Ver. 13 — ch. xli. 11. — Misplactd charity. " Charity," says St. Paul, " thinketh no 
evil." But without question, there are times when it ought to think evil, and not to 
think so is evil. For else charity will he misplaced, thrown away, productive of hurt 
and harm and not of good. Now — 

I. There have been and are many instances op such misplaced charity. 1. The 
niiserable way by which Gedaliah came by his death, as told in the above section, is 
an illustration. He ought to have been on his guard. He was warned. He would not 
believe, but blamed severely the friend who warned him. And all because of his over 
confidence in Ishmael, who murdered him. 2. And there have been many other such 
instances. Perhaps the king who said, concerning the wicked husbandmen, " They 
will reverence my son." And Paul, who, though warned again and again, would go to 
Jerusalem. He thought that the loving gifts he bore from the Gentile Churches to the 
mother Church in Jerusalem would soften their hard hearts. But it was not so. The 
elder son — though he was quite wrong — thought that his father's treatment of his 
prodigal younger brother was as unwise as it was kind. We have known those who 
would never let themselves speak anything but good of others, and the result was that 
they often misled those who trusted to their over-lenient judgments. How often, after 
the most atrocious crimes, there will be found some who would try to prevent the 
criminal receiving the due reward of his deeds 1 What is it but charity in the wrong 
place? 3. But most of all are we guilty of this toward ourselves^ We so little like to 
think harshly of ourselves, and hence we make all manner of excuse for our faults. We 
tamper with temptation ; we spare ourselves when we ought to be most stern. 

it And much sorrow and trouble arise therefrom. Cf. above history ; the 
massacres that followed ; the ruin of the nation. Never did a seeming virtue work 
such ill. Charity to the evil is cruelty to the good. Choosing Barabbas means cruci- 
fying Christ. It discourages all virtue. Wherefore should I strive after excellence if 
the worthless are to be dealt with even as I ? This was the elder son's complaint 
(Luke XV.). And there seemed to be a good deal in it ; hence the father took care to 
point out to him how much preferable was his own lot : " Son, thou art ever with me," 
etc. Thy lot is ever so much the best, as the lot of him who never leaves the father's 
house is far better than that of him who comes back after a wretched leaving of it for 
the far country. But most of all the evil results are seen in our misplaced charity to 
ourselves. Temptation tampered with triumphs, and we who would not be stem with 
oursalyes perish. Hiding from ourselves the truth as to our real condition, we never go 
to him who alone can make us what we need to be, and so souls are lost. 

III. How EXCELLENT THE EXAMPLE AND TEACEINQ OF OUR LOBD ON THIS SUBJECT ! 

Full of charity as he was, tender and gentle as a mother to the weak and sinful, to 
the poor outcasts who came to him, yet he was never guilty of any spurious charity. 
He did not, nor does he, warm vipers in his bosom who should sting him at the last. 
(. f. John ii. at end, " Jesus did n6t commit himself unto them." " But " — so the Gospel 
goes on; the word is unfortunately rendered "and" in our Authoiized Version — 
" there was a man of the Pharisees," etc. (John iii. 1). 1. It means that our Lord did 
commit himself to this man — as we see he did — since he was very different from those 
whom our Lord could not and would not trust. His treatment of Judas was no excep- 
tion to his rule. He knew him from the beginning. Nor is his treatment of ourselves, 
poor, sad recompense as we make him. He has taken us in hand, and he will not put 
us out of his hand until he has wrought in us all that he designs. He exemplified his 
own word about being, whilst harmless as doves, wise as serpents also. He says (Matt. 
vii. 1), "Judge not." But almost the next verse bids us not cast pearls before swine! 
The intent is that, whilst we should not be censorious, we are not to be blind fools, who 



OH. XL. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 163 

will imagine in their false charity that pearls will be appreciated by pigs. Charity 
i$ to think evil when evil is palpably tliere. 

rv. What leads to this ebbob. Cf. the history. 1. Perhaps Geclaliah's conscious 
integrity ; his freedom from all intent of evil. 2. Or over-elation at the loyalty and trust 
that were being'displayed on all sides. 3. The accused man had himself (ver. 8) come 
to Gudaliah. 4. Or dislike to Johanan and liis pioposals. 5. Or reliance on his own 
capacity of taking all due care. And when we are wrongly charitable to what is evil, 
our motives are akin to these. We intend no evil; that which is said to be evil has 
wrought no harm in others. We intend to be on our guard, and deem ourselves to be 
quite able to take care of ourselves. We dislike the safeguards proposed. We do not 
believe in the peril against which we are warned. Wo are disposed to think well of 
and to like the evil. 

Y. OuB SAFEonABDS. 1. Seek the knowledge of man. 2. Seek the Spirit of 
Christ.— C. 

Vers. 2 — 6. — Jeremiah a free agent. We have here an expansion of Tew. 13 and 

14 of the previous chapter. 

I. One op the best thinqs a man can have is full individual libeett. The 
royal master of the captain of the guard was anxious to do the best he could for the 
prophet ; and he seems to have understood fully that only the prophet could decide on 
this best. The captain of the guard, in all he says, is but the mouthpiece of the king. 
Very likely the captain, if he had beeu left to decide, would have said, " What better 
thing can happen to this man thau go to Babylon with me ? " and so, meaning well 
enough, he might have done ill. Good intentions are not enough in providing foi 
others. We go rather by our notion of what they want than by what they really 
want ; and thus we are disappointed in our efforts. There never can be anything wrong 
in giving a man the largest scope to settle his path for himself. We may easily 
become cramped as a result of the ignorant kindness of others. 

II. Theee was an inceeased eesponsibilitt fob Jebemiah. For a long time he 
had been in pri.scn, and all he had to do was to endure captivity in a patient, trustful 
way. But now comes liberty, and in his case a peculiar responsibility. Few men, 
perhaps not even a single one, had the liberty enjoyed by him at this moment. Others 
had not been asked whether they would go to Babylon or stay. The conquerors 
settled all that. But Jeremiah has free choice, and he has to decide in very altered 
conditions of the land. Freedom brings human judgment into full strength and 
exercise. 

III. Jeremiah was sube to decide rightly. Why? Because the first thing he 
would look tu was the will of Jehovah. What lesson had he been learning all througii 
his prophetic life but this, that negligence of the will of Jehovah brought incalculable 
mischief ? Here is the necessity for us to keep in a state of discernment with respect 
to the wi i 1 of God. As a general rule, we do not need special intimations of the Divine 
will ; right is seen to be right and wrong to be wrong. But there are also times when, 
as we need such special intimations, they are sure to be given. — Y. 

Vers. 7 — 12. — Tlie difficulties of a governor. To govern a country is never an 
easy task; but how difficult it must be when the work is that of reconstruction I 
Gedaliah has to begin, as it were, at the be;;inning. One of his first difSculties is to 
know exactly what he has to deal with. There are turbulent as well as peaceful 
elements, bands of free-lance.s, who, now that the Chaldean has gone, make their 
appearance before the i;overnor to see what the prospect may be. Another difficulty is 
that of inspiring confidence. Those who have just been plundered may be excused for 
apprehensions lest they should soon be plundered again. On the other hand, Gedaliah 
was better off than the king who had just been dethroned. The latter vainly held on 
to a tottnring building, whose very foundations were going, while the former was free 
from the pernicious elements which so long had made all government in the land 
an abomination. With all his difficulties, Gedaliah had some encouragements. There 
appears to have beeu a general gathering to him as a centre. Most men generally tend 
to the point where there are the greatest prospects of social order, security, and 
stability. — f 



164 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. Hi 1—18 



Yer. 16. — Trusting a traitor. I. In st-ttb of cautions. Gedaliah was told that 
Ishmael meditated his death. Told, not by one man, but by all wlio had opportunity 
of knowing the traitor's designs. Was it, then, blameworthy in him to i ejjlect tht 
information? We cannot tell. It may have been that he knew of jealousies which 
made him think that the rest of the captains were slandering Ishmael. Slanderers, be 
it remembered, are quite as numerous as traitors. The fault of Gedaliah, if fault it 
was, was that of a generous heart. It is one of the weapons of a traitor to put on the 
semblance of a true man. Then probably Gedaliah was further influenced by the 
proposition to kill Ishmael. If the informers had merely urged him to guard himself, 
they might have been better attended to. But those were days when, if people wanted 
to get rid of a troublesome man, they had little scruple in taking the most effectual 
way. 

IL Ah lnstancb of babh jusaMENT. Gedaliah in one breath judged the traitor to 
be a true man and the speaker of truth to be a slanderer. In this world of uncer- 
tainties there is no need to refuse any accusation. Only let the accusation be accom- 
panied with evidence. Trumped-up evidence soon shows its faults and contradictions. 
If Gedaliah had bid Ishmael meet the accusation, he might have prevented the serious 
migration spoken of at the end of the next chapter. He had to take care of himseU 
not only for his own sake, but as the representative of Babylon. — Y. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAFTEB XliL 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Assassination of Ctedaliah 
and other Jews. 

Ver. 1. — In the seventh month ; te. two 
months after the destruction of Jerusalem 
and the appointment of Gedaliah. It seems 
strange, however, that the occurrences re- 
lated in oh. xl. and xli. should have taken so 
short a time. Gratz calls in qnestion the 
accnraoy of the chronological statement. 
He quotes Ezek. xxxiii. 24 — 29. which shows 
that at least six months (acccirding to his 
calculation) after the fall of Jerusalem 
Jewish fugitives still lingered on, and hoped 
to obtain possession of their fatherland, and 
points out that time was necessary for Geda- 
liah to erect a temple at Mizpah (see on ver. 
5), for cities to arise out of their ruins, and 
for oulti ration of the soil to be resumed 
(oh. xl. 10).' Besides, according to oh. lii. 
30, a third deportation of Jews is mentioned. 
How can this be accounted for, if, only two 
months after the fall of Jerusalem, the' rem- 
nant of the Jewish population emigrated 
under Johanan ben Kareah to Egypt? 
Gratz shows reason for thinking that this 
last deportation stands in close connection 
with Gedaliah's death, and that eonse- 
qnently the interval between this latter 
event and the fall of Jerusalem lasted, not 
two months, but five years. The son of 
EUshama. Perhaps the Elishama men- 
tioned in eh. xxxvi. 12 as a secretary of 
state; or perhaps a son of David of that 

* * Monatsschrift fUr Geschichte nnd Wis- 
■enschaft dM Jndeuthuma,' 1870, pp. 268— 
274. 



name (see 2 Sam. t. 16 ; 1 Cbron. ilL 8 ; 
xiv. 7 ; " son " being taken here in a wider 
sense). And the princes of the king; 
rather, and (one of) the princes of the king. 
Even ten men ; rather, and ten men. Eleven 
determined bravoes overpower a crowd ol 
nnprepaicd men. Sid eat bread together. 
Gediiliiih, then, had invited them to a 
friendly banquet. 

Ver. 2.— Smote Gedaliah. The day of the 
murder of Gedaliah (the third day of the 
seventh month) was kept as a fast-day by 
the post-Captivity Jews (see Zech. vii. 5 ; 
viii. 19). It was the day on which the hope 
of living a separate life in the promised 
land, for a time at least, vanished ; and tlie 
murder was avenged by a new captivity (see 
above). 

Ver. 3.— The Chaldeans. GtedaUah's ChaU 
dean body-guard. And the men of war; 
rather, even the men of war. Jewish as 
well as Oiialdean warriors are meant; the 
non-military Jews, including the prophet, 
were carried away captive (see vers. 10, 16). 
Vers. 4— 7.— The news of the deed of 
violence had not yet been spread, and Ish- 
mael seized the opportunity of imbruing his 
hands in fresh blood. He could have had 
no personal motive; but his employer, Baalis, 
desired that " the remnant in Judah mieht 
perish"(oh. xl. 15). 

Ver. 5.— There came certain from Shechem, 
ete. A number of pious pilgrims, descend- 
ants of the old ten tribes, passed by oa 
their way to the holy site of the temple at 
Jerusalem (?) (comp. 2 Chron. xxxiv. 9; 
XIX. 11). From Shiloh. The Vatican Codex 
of the Septuagint has a plausible reading, 
"from Salem," which it apparently lup 



OH. XLi. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



165 



ported by Gen. zxxiii. 18, " And Jacob came 
to Shalem, a city of Shecliem," and by ita 
improvement thus introduced into the geo- 
jirapliioal order (Shlloh is, in fact, nearer to 
Mizpah than Sheohem, . and ought to be 
mentioned first). But tliough there is now a 
village called 8&lim, to the east of Nablfts 
(Sheihem), we have no sufficient gronnd 
for assuming a city of that name in the Old 
Testament. The rendering of Grenesis, l.o. 
neeiis correction ("came in peace to the 
L'ity," eta) Their beards shaven, etc. They 
had, then, all the outward signs of mourn- 
ing (for the public calamities) ; oomp. ch. xvi. 
6 ; xlviii. 37. To bring them to the house 
of the Lord. Yet the temple at Jerusalem 
wag destroyed. Hence Thenius and Gratz 
have conjectured that Gedaliah had erected 
a provisional temple at Mizpuh, which was 
already hallowed by its association with the 
Prophet Samuel. This is confirmed b^ 1 
Maco. iii. 46, where it is said of the pious 
Jews in the Maccabean rising, that they 
"assembled themselves . . . and came to 
IMaspha, over against Jerusalem; for in 
Maspha was the place where they prayed 
aforetime in Israel." 

Ver. 6. — Weeping all along as he went. 
To testify his sympathy with their grief. 
But the reading of the Septuagint is more 
natural, "As they were going along and 
weeping." 

Ver. 7. — ^The pit (see on ver. 9). 

Ver. 8. — Slay ns not, etc. Bishop Calla- 
way refers to this passage in his 'Zulu 
Nursery Tales ' (i. 242), in illustration of a 
Zulu form of deprecating death on the 
ground of having some important work in 
hand which absolutely requires the life of the 
person in danger. But the "ten men" do 
not, as the bishop supposes, beg their lives 
on the ground that they had not yet har- 
vested, but rather offer a bribe. We have 
treasures (literally, hidden things) in the 
field. The allusion is to the " wells or cis- 
terns for grain," in wliich " the farmers store 
their crops of all kinds after the giain is 
threshed and winnowed. These cisterns are 
cool, perfectly dry, and tight. Tlie top is 
hermetioiilly sealed with plaster, and covered 
with a deep bed of earth ; and thus they 
keep out rats, mice, and even ants, the lutter 
by no means a contemptible enemy. . . . 



These ten men had doubtless thus hid their 
treasures to avoid being plundered in that 
timeot utter lawkssness" (Thomson, 'The 
Land and tlie Book,' p. SOD). Honey. Flo 
bably that obtained from wild hees. 

Ver. 9. — Now the pit . . . which Asa the 
king had made, etc. Nothing is said of this 
" pit " in the historical books, but only 
(1 Kings XV. 22 = 2 Ohron. xvi. 6) that Asa 
used the material with whicli Baasha had 
fortified Bamah to build 6eba and Mizpah. 
It would seem that this " pit " formed part 
of Asa's defensive works ; probably it was 
a cistern to supply the town with water 
during the siege. Because of Oedaliah, was 
it. The rendering " because of" must be 
abandoned. The Septuagint has, in this 
part of the verse, the very natural words, 
*' was a great pit," and this reading is 
adopted by Movers, Hitzig, and GraC 

Ver. 10. — The long's daughters; rather, 
the royal priiteesees (see on ch. xxzvi. 26). 

Vers. 11 — 18. — Bescue of the captives from 
Ishmael, and plan for taking flight to 
Egypt. 

Ver. 12. — ^Ihe great waters ... in Gibeon ; 
i.e. the pool mentioned in 2 Sam. ii. 13. Sr. 
Thomson (p. 670) speaks of a "pond or 
small lake " near El- Jib. Ishmael seems to 
be lingering over his journey to Ammon, in 
order to find the subterranean stores spoken 
of in ver. 8. 

Ver. 14. — Cast abont; i.e. turned about 
(an archaism). 

Ver. 17.— And dwelt in the habitation of 
Chimham. Chimham was the son of the 
rich Gileadite Barzillai (2 Sam. xix. 37 — 10), 
who probably founded this " habitation," or 
rather "hospice" ("khan," "caravanserai"), 
for the accommodation of travellers — a 
characteristic mark of public-spirited liber- 
ality. JosephuB and Aquila, however, 
appear to have read "by the hurdles of 
Chimham" — a very possible name for a 
locality in such a pastoral country. 

Ver. 18. — Because of the Chaldeans. They 
were afraid of being held responsible for the 
crime of Ishmael. And thev liad good reason 
for their alarm, as the Chaldeans would 
naturally look upon Ishmael as the repre- 
sentative of the Davidic dynasty, and the 
heir of that dynasty's olaiuut to the loyalty 
of the Jews. 



H0MILETI(3S. 

Yen. 1 — 3. — Hieassatsination of Oedaliah. I. High position bbinss obeat danoeb. 
Kings are little to be envied. The world sees their state and majesty. It does not see 
the apprehensions which would make some of them willingly exchange places with the 
humblest peasant. Nevertheless, it isas cowardly and selfish to refuee to occupy a 
high [losition when duty calls to it as it is to fail in fulfilling one's miesion in any <>( 
the lower walks of life. 



166 THE BOOK OJ" THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xu. 1—18, 

IL A GOOD MAN WILL PEEFBB TO SUFFEB DEATH BATHBB THAN TO DEFEND HIMSELJ 

BY DNKIGHTE0U8 MEANS. Gedaliah had been warned of his danger, but he had relused 
to accept the warning (ch. xl. 13 — 16). It is better for one's character, if not for one's 
earthly fate, to be ovei-generous than to be over-suspicious, 'i'hough we may think 
Gedaliah wanting in discernment, we must commeud his justice in refusing to con- 
sent to the assassination of Ishmael. When we are in doubt about the guilt of any 
one, it is our plain duty to give him the benefit of that doubt. In no case have we 
a riuht to defend ouiselves against a future wrong by anticipating the blow with an 
act of unlawful violence. 

III. Political oeimeb aeb the gbeatest ceimbs. Much vagueness exists as to the 
character of these crimes. If the assassin is successful, the world condones his offence, 
while, if he fails, his memory is execrated and he is condemned as a murderer. Many 
political acts are viewed as crimes by one party and as heroic deeds by another. But 
the moral character of a deed is not determined by such accidents as these. If it be 
really a crime, an offence against the eternal laws of right, its relation to public and 
national affairs aggravates its wickedness, inasmuch as it immensely enlarges the arena 
of its mischievous lesults (ver. 3). 

IV. Public intebest is no exousb fob political obimes. Ishmael might have 
contended that he was a patriot helping his people to throw off the yoke of Babylon. 
If he were acting that noble part, his method of carrying it out would still have been 
odious and unpardonable. Patriotism is no excuse for private treachery. Moreover, 
public interest is never truly advanced by crime. Ishmael's crime resulted in serious 
trouble to the Jews. It destroyed the hope of a quiet life in the land of Israel for tlie 
returned fugitives and the poor remnant of the nation. It probably led to a third 
deportation of exiles to Babylon. 

Vers. 4 — 8. — The slaughter of the pilgrimt. L A needless crime. Of course no 
crime is necessary, but some crimes have their plausible excuses. This had none. 
Ishmael had tasted blood, and murderous passions ur^e him to wanton violence. His 
only object in slaughtering quiet, inoffensive pilgrims must have been to please his 
master by the further depo|julation of the land. So great a crime with so poor a motive 
evidences bloodthirsty tyranny. The worst crime is crime held cheap till it is pursuti 
for no reason. All wickedness makes future wickedness more tempting. Done at first 
for some ulterior object, it becomes at length a passion and a delight in itself. This is 
the very devilry of crime. 

II. A tbbachbbous cbimb. Ishmael led the pilgrims to trust themselves in his 
hands, and then abused the sacred relations of hospitality. Such an act shows as 
much meanness as villainy. But all wickedness is essentially false, degrading, 
treacherous. 

lU. A bacbileoious cbimb. These men were pilgrims of relinioii, bearing incense in 
their hands. To us it may seem no more wicked tu murder a pilgrim than to murder 
an innocent man. In itself the acts are equally wicked. But guilt depends on the 
criminal's idea of his crime, as well as on the inherent character of the act. Kow, 
wherever sacred places are venerated and visited by pilgiims, the pilgrimage is regarded 
as a sacred work, a religious service. To slay a pilgrim is, therefore, held as a distinct 
insult to the service of God. This must have been the way in which Ishmael's act 
would have been regarded, and he must have known it. Therefore, judging him by the 
ideas and manners of the time, as it is only fair to judge him, we must acknowiedge 
that he was guilty of a wilful affront against the religion of his nation. In all sin we sin 
against Heaven as well as against man. In some ofi'ences the offence to Heaven is more 
palpable than in others. Then the sin is the more horrible in its guilt on the conscience 
of the criminal. 

IV. A coLD-BLOODED OBiME. The thing was done deliberately. The richer pilgrims 
were allowed to buy their lives for a ransom. The ten men who had treasure in the 
field purchased their escape (ver. 8). The rest, poorer men, were slain. Such a trans- 
action reveals the cool calculator as well as the liardened murderer. The passionate 
man is responsible for the evil done in his rage, because he ought to restrain himself; 
but the calmer man, who can and does restrain himself in certain respects with regard ^ 
Ms own interest, is &r more guilty for the ^^'.■'kedness he commits in clear aelf-pwsesaio^ 



OH. ZU. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JBREMIAa 167 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Devils incarnate. 1. If ever tliere was such a one, this Ishmael was 
of whom these verses tell. His atrocities remind us of the Indian Mutiny, its leader, 
and the well at Cawnpore (cf. ver. 9). Treachery, ingratitude, murder, massacre, greed, 
cowardice, — all are gathered in this detestable character (cf. Mr. Grove's article " Ishmael," 
Smith's ' Dictionary of the Bible '). 2. And such men are permitted to be. Si> clearly 
Been is this, that every drama has its villain; they are recognized as having definite 
place and function in this poor life of ours. History is full of them. But for them one 
might almost say there would be no history. 3. Can we explain this permission ? 
Wherefore are such men created and preserved? It is a part of the great question of 
moral evil, for the full solution of which we must wait. Like as was said to a lad 
of one of our public schools, who had heard his master say in a sermon in the school 
chapel that in mathematics there were lines in the same plane ever converging but 
which never met. The lad heard this, and as he knew something of mathonatics 
himself, he believed and said to a senior in the school that the master was wrong. The 
senior defended the master, and told tlie lad of the lines that mathematicians call 
asymptotes. "Bnt explain," said the astonished lad. "No, I can't," said the other. 
" Tou must wait till you get there." The lad had not read on so far in the science as 
that, and hence there was nothing for it but to believe that, though it was at present 
incomprehensible to him how such lines as those spoken of could be, nevertheless, when 
he had read on further, he would see it clearly enough. And so we have to hear and 
see things which, to fully reconcile with the existence and superintendence of an all- 
loving and all-powerful God, is beyond our power, and there is nothing for it but that 
we must " wait till we get there" — there where the reading of these problems will be 
ready and clear. But the existence of such men as this Ishmael is but one out of the 
many terrible facts in God's providence, such as plague, famine, earthquake, etc. In 
regard to such men, we can see some purposes that they subset ve. 

I. They make evident the hideous capacities of evil which are in our nature, and the 
need, therefore, for God's restraining grace. 

IL They are warnings to increased watchfulness on the part of those in whom the 
tendencies to like evil exist. 

III. They are God's scourges for men's sin (of. Attila, the Scourge of God). 

IV. They weld together the people they oppress in one common league against them, 
and thus out of scattered tribes a nation is formed. 

v. They clear out much that is evil (cf. French Revolution ; Napoleon). But some- 
times, as hero, we cannot see what good they do ; and then we can only wait. 

Conclusion. But we can get above these and all such afSictors of our lives. The 
fear of God will lift us up above their power. 

" Fear him, ye saints, and you will thea 
Have nothing else to fear." 

On the wings of the fear and love of God let us mount up ; and like as the little birds 
escape the hawk by keeping above it, so shall we escape all fear of fiercest human evils 
if we are upborne by the fear and love of God. — C. 

Ver. 8. — Bin hindered by sin. " So he forbare," etc. This was a case of blood thirsty 
cruelty versus greed. Ishmael would have killed these men but for his greed of the 
wealth they had. It is satisfactory to think he never gained possession of it. Never- 
theless, his greed made him guilty of one sin less. This story sujgosts that — 

I. God has many ways of hindeeinq sin. There is : 1. The best way of all. By 
granting a true repentance and his Holy Spirit, creating the clean heart and renewing 
the light spirit. 2. But there areother ways. By keeping the opportunity and the will 
apart. How much of our freedom from sin do we owe to this blessed providential 
ieverance ! By fear of present evil consequences of our sin. 3. And sometimes, as here, 
by one sin getting in the way of another. Thus pride holds back not a few ; not love 
of God, gratitude to Christ, love of holiness, but pride. And coveleousness checks the 
sinner in many sins he would be gu'lty of but for this. Anger, breaking up th« 



168 I'HE BOOK OP THE PROtHET JEREMIAH. [oh. xll 1— IS 

alliances of transgressors ; as when, in the days of Jehoshaphat, the Ammonites wh# 
were coming against him fell out one with the other (2 Chron. xx. 22). The old saying 
is, " When thieves fall out, honest men come by their rights." Sensual self-indidgence. 
The vilest Roman emperors were those who least persecuted the Church — Tiiierius, 
Com modus, etc. They were too absorbed in their own indulgences to trouble about the 
Christians. 

II. But these otheb ways leave men as obeat snntEBS as befobb. The queation 
is not as to your freedom from transgression so much, but — What kept you free ? Only 
the first and best way is accepted of God. 

III. Nevertheless, let us be thankful that sin is selp-destbuctivb ts its 
VEBT NATUBE. It is a blessed anarchy, for it protects many who would otherwise suffer. 

rV. But fob oubsbltes let us seek that sin mat be destroyed by Chbist. — C. 

Vers. 11 — 15. — The devil a lad paymaster. These verses record the pursuit and 
overthrow of Ishmael. He had sold himself to work all manner of wickedness. 
What had he not been guilty of? And now we hear the last of him. He is seen in 
flight to Ammon, whence he came out, escaping with his life, but stripped of all his 
captives and his plunder. He had taken a world of trouble, incurred a load of guilt, 
tilled his soul with evil, dishonoured his name for ever. And this was what came of 
it alL Every one of his purposes, plans, hopes, all his toil and villainy, all his apparent 
success, utterly lost and gone. He is one out of many more proofs of the miserable 
wages of sin. Now — 

I. It is eveb so. Men may go on in sin for a long time, and be undisturbed save 
by conscience ; may find their sin very pleasant and very gainful, and they may seem to 
escape with utter impunity ; but the visitation of God comes upon them, sometimes 
here in this life, certainly, if not here, hereafter. The Bible history, the world, are 
full of proofs of tills. 

II. But men oannot be got to believe this. Else why do they persist in evil ways ? 

III. Why is it that they will not believe? They do not wish to believe. 
Sentence against evil work is not executed speedily, sometimes not at all here in this 
world in any visible way. 

IV. Why, then, does not God deal diffebently with sin ? Because his purpose 
ie to foster trust and love, neither of which could find place in a system of prompt 
and visible punishments such as some would desire. 

V. Does God, then, do nothing to oheok the sinneb and to encoubage the 
obedient? Yes; much. 1. He causes the way of transgressors to be hard. Loss of 
peace, of hope, ol Divine favour, of purity, of strength, of sympathy with and from the 
good, often of present and visible good ; conscience is deadened, and the soul perishes. 
Besides this, there are frequent direct judgments sent. 2. On the other hand, he orders 
that in keeping of his commandments there is great reward. " His ways are ways of 
pleasantness, and all his patlis are peace." It is related how an aged couple in the 
vicinity of London, who in the early part of life were poor, but who by the blessing of 
God upon their industry enjoyed a comfortable independency in their old age, were 
called upon by a Cliristian minister, who solicited their contributions to a charity. 
The old lady was disposed to make out some excuse, and to answer in the negative 
both for her husband and for herself, and therefore replied, " Why, sir, we have lost 
a deal by religion since we began ; my husband knows that very well." And being 
wi.-'hful to obtain her husband's consent to the assertion, she said, " Have we not, 
Thomas ? " Thomas, after a long and solemn pause, rejiUed, " Yes, Mary, we have lost 
a deal by our religion ! I have lost a deal by my religion. Before I got religion 
Mary, I had got a water-pail in which I carried water ; and tliat, you know, I lost nmny 
years ago. And then I had an old slouched hat, a patched old coat, and mended shoes 
and stockings ; but I have lost them also long ago. And, Mary, you know that, poor 
as I was, I had a habit of getting drunk and quarrelling with you ; and that, you know 
I have lost. And then I had a burdened conscience and a wicked heart, and then I 
had ten thousand guilty feelings and fears ; but all are lost, completely lost, and like 
a millstone cast into the deep sea. Before we got religion, Mary, you had a washing- 
tray, in which you washed for hire, and God Almighty blessed your in lustry ■ Wt 
iiiace we got religion you have lost your washing-tray. And you had a gown and 



OB.iLtl— l».j iJUfi BOOK. OP THE tROtHfiT JEfiEMIAH. 169 

bonnet much the worse for wear, though they were all you had to wear ; but you have 
lost them long ago. And you had many an aching heart concerning me at times ; 
but those you happily have lost. And I could even wish that you had lost as much as 
I have lost, and even more ; for what we lose by our religion will be our eternal gain." 
We need not add that the preacher did not go away without substantial proof of the 
sincerity ot what had been said in his hearing. And to all those who like the rich 
man in the parable (Luke xvi.), who asked that one trom the dead might be sent to 
warn his five brethren, the same answer may be given, " They have Moses and the 
prophets," and we may add, in our day, far more than these ; " if they hear not them, 
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead." — C. 

Ver. 17. — Too near the edge. This is one of the reflections that come to us as we read 
of the place whither Johanan led his followers, and as we see the events that happened 
immediately after. This chapter is a record of disappointments. First the hopeful 
prospects ot Gedaliah's governorship, which seemed starting so fairly and happily for 
all, these are shattered and overthrown by the villainous conduct of IshmaeL Then it 
is a grievous disappointment that we do not hear of Ishmael's death, only of his escape. 
That such a wretch should escape with his life seems a reflection upon that justice 
which generally follows on the track of wrong-doers such as he was, and metes out to theui 
their due. Escape seems too lenient a dealing with him. And now here is another dis- 
appointment that Johanan, instead of seeking to follow in Credaliah's footsteps, should 
he for leading the people down into Egypt. " At the caravanserai of Chimham, in 
Bethlehem — ^the natural halting-place on the way to Egypt — Johanan held a council 
of war, and then, against the prophet's advice, finally determined to abandon their 
homes, and to make for the refuge, to which the worldly Israelite always had recourse, 
across the Egyptian border." It was a bad place to halt at ; it was too near that 
beguiling land, the witchery of which not a few of them had long been feeling and 
would now feel more than ever. Whenever Israel went thither, it was always a 
" going doiun into Egypt." This was more true morally and spiritually than even 
geographically, to which the word " down," of course, refers. And the present was no 
exception. Looking at them there at Chimham, we note— 

I. The resemblance the? offeb. Are they not like all those who tamper with 
temptation t They know, as Israel knew, that they are in a forbidden path, and yet 
they do not keep clear of it. Like moths fluttering around the flame, so men will 
dally with ain. They know that to yield would he both most wrong and ruinous, and 
yet they go close to the border. 

II. The seasons which ooyebned theh. The Jews came to Chimham because 
their will had already consented to go further— on and down into Egypt. For like 
reasons men come to such places. There has been already the secret yielding of the 
wilL There was no need of the Jews being at Chimham. It was not the way hack 
from Gibeon. It was a deliberate going into temptation. So those who act like them 
have, as they, already consented in heart. And the causes of that consent are akin 
They falsely' feared what the Chaldeans might do, though there was no ground for 
such fear ; and they falsely hoped for good — ^freedom from war and want — which they 
never realized. And such persons will ever magnify both the difficulties of the right 
path and the looked-for pleasures and advantages of the wrong. Ttius would they 
persuade themselves that the right is wrong and the wrong is right. 

IlL The resistance thet seemed to hake. The Jews did not yield all at once. 
They appeal to the prophet. They ask his prayers. They make repeated and loud 
— much too loud : " Methinks he doth protest too much " — professions. They wait 
patiently the prophet's message. And yet all the while (ver. 20) they were dissembling 
in their hearti, " regarding iniquity " there (cf. history of Balaam). They would have 
Ood on their side, not themselves on God's side. All this is most melancholy matter 
of fact with those who, of their own accord, go too near the edge. 

rV. Thb results that followed. Of course they went over the edge ; sBch pw^le 
•l^mys do. They showed the insincerity of their prayers by their anger when they 
were demed (cf. ch. sliii. 2, etc.). They escaped none of the evil they dreaded ; they gained 
none of the gDod they expected. " So disastrous did this step appear to the next and 
to all subsequent generations of Israel, that the day of Gedaliah's murder, which led to 



170 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlu. 1—2Z 



It, has been from that time forth and to this day observed as a nntional fast. It seemed 
to he the final revocation of the advantages of the Exodus. By this breach in their 
local-continuity a chasm was made in the history, which for good or evil was never 
filled up." Yes ; they who will go so near temptation will go into it, and be borne 
down by it to their sore hurt and harm. 

v. The remedy recommended. Jeremiah urged them to return to their own land 
and stay there (ch. xlii. 8, etc.), promising them the blessing of God if they obeyed, and 
threatening his sore anger if they did not. This counsel ever wise. Get away from the 
border-land back into safety. Think of what will follow on yonr conduct — tlie blestiing 
or the curse. " Stay not in all the plain, but escape for thy life." As " the angels 
hastened Lot," so would we hasten all those who have foolishly and wrongly chosen 
to go too near temptation's edge. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 18. — A great erime and its eonteqiience. L A great obiue. The slaying 
of Gedaliah was accompanied by circumstances making it peculiarly atrocious. 1. The 
breach of good fellowship. There had been professions of amity before. Gedaliah 
shows by deed his confidence in Ishmael, sitting down with him at a common meal. 
2. 2%e subsequent slaughter. The slaying of Gedaliah was not enough to serve the 
purpose. A man, once entered on the ways of crime, cannot say, " So far I will go, 
and no further." Ishmael had to go on killing to secure his own safety and mastery. 

II. The ooksequence. The chief consequence was the departure to a point nearer 
to Egypt, to escape if possible the vengeance of the Chaldeans. One man sins and 
other people suffer. The great lesson is to stop crime in its beginnings. Ishmael 
gained none of the ends he seems to have had in view, and was this much the worse, 
that he had deep stains of murder on him. — Y. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XLU 



Jeremiah receives a request to inquire of 
God oonoeming the proposed emigration, 
and a " word of the Lord " follows. 

Yer. 1. — Jezaniah the son of Eoshaiah. 
For " Jezaniah," the Septuagint has " Aza- 
riah," the name given in the Hebrew text of 
eh. xliii 2. 

Ver. 2. — Said nnto Jeremiah the prophet 
Jeremiah, we have been already told, was 
one of the refugees at Mizpfih (ch. xl. 6), and 
oonsequently was forced into the train of 
bbmael (ch. xli. 16). Fray for ns. This 
petition has been accused of hypocrisy, but 
the prophecy of Jeremiah assumes through- 
out that it was made in earnest (ver. 20 
proves nothing to the contrary). The 
"captains" never supposed it possible that 
Jeremiah could direct them to stay in 
Jndah ; the only question with them was 
as to the best direction for flight. 

Ver. S, — A true and faitlifnl witness 
between ns ; rather, against lu. If they 
broke their promise, Jehovah wns to " wit- 
ness against" them by puriisliing them. 

Ver. 7. — After ten days. Why this delny ? 
Eeil thinks it was for the sake of the 
people, who needed time to collect them- 
selves and listen calmly to the rcvcliitl^in. 
EzeMel once waited seven days (iii. 16); 
bat this was owing to his own distiirlicd 



state of mind. The answer of the Iiord 
extends to ver. 18, the last four verses being 
an epilogue enfnrcing the Divine declara- 
tion. It consists of the promise (vers. 
9—12) that, if the people will remain 
quietly in the land, they will be protected ; 
and of the threat (vers. 13—18) that, if they 
presume to migrate into Egypt, they will 
perish there by 8word,famine,and pestilence. 

Ver. 10.— Build you, and not puU you 
down, etc. Some of JeremiRh's favourite 
phrases (see on ch. xxiv. 6). I repent me. 
And yet in 1 Sam. xv. 29 we read that 
"Israel's Trust ... is not a man that he 
should repent." The key to the discrepancy 
may be found in Ps. xviil. 25, 26, " With 
the pious thou showest thyself pious, . . 
and with the iroward thou showest thyself 
froward." Tliere is no change in the nature 
or purpose of God, but only in his conduct 
towards man. The term " repent " is, there- 
fore, only used analogically. 

Ver. 12.— I will show mercies unto yon; 
rather, I will ■procure you mercy. And cause 
you to return to. As if the journey to 
Bethlehem were a virtual Exodus. But it 
is far more natural to read the consonants 
of the text in a slightly different manner, 
rendering, "and cause you to dwell in." 
So the Syriac, the Vulgate, and Aquila. 

Ver. 15. —And now therefore. Omit 
" and ; " the van simply marks the apodosis 
of the two previous verses. 



os.XLn.1— 2aj THE BOOK OF THE THOPHET JEliEMIAH. 



in 



Ver. 16.— The sword, which ya feared; 
rather, which ye fear. The calamities 
mentioued were precisely tliose of which 
the Jews were apprehensive in their own 
oonntiT. So afterwards, "whereof ye are 
afraid." Shall overtake you there. 'For » 
foithei explanation, see oh. xliii. 8—13. 



Ver. 20. — For ye dissembled in yoni hearts ; 
ratlier, for ye have gone astray (Jroim the righi 
path) at the risk of your lives; or, anothir 
possible rendering, /or ye have led yourselves 
astray. Hypocrisy is ceitainly not the 
accusation which Jeremiah brings against 
the people. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Talcing counsel with Ood. I. Teoublb drives men to fbatisii. In 
their trouble " all the peoiile, from the least even unto the greatest," sought help from 
God through the iirayers of Jeremiah. In deep distress there are common wants of 
humanity, which touch alike the ]irince and the peasant. Then one common cry will 
burst from all lips to the God of all flesh. The begjiar and the king in their agony 
utter the same moan, " My God ! " There was but " a remnant " of tlie Jews left in the 
land. All these united to seek counsel of God. United prayer is prevailing prayer. If 
we are few, the more reason we should be united, and the more reason that each of us 
should come forward and do his part. If a congregation is small, it can the less afford 
that any one member should be prayerless or idle. 

II. In perplexity we should seek light from God. His Spirit is a Spirit of light. 
We have a right to expect guidance because we have Divine assurances of this (Ps. 
xxxii. 8). God will guide us, however, through om- own thinking, and not by audible 
voices, nor should we look for the direction in mystic inward inipressioas, the origin and 
character of which we cannot test. God has given us eyes, and he expects us to use 
them. Hi8 guidance is the purging of our vision, that we may see the better with our 
own organs of sight ; the rectifying and strengthening of our intelligence and conscience, 
tkat we may use these as right instruments for discerning truth. 

III. Christian men siuuld pray fob others. Every Christian has now the privi- 
lege of being a propliet (Joel ii. 28) and a priest (Rev. i. 6). Every Christian, there- 
fore, has the responsibility which accompanies his privilege, and is required to act as 
the intercessor for others. Are we not too selfish in our prayers ? Nevertheless it must 
be remembered that men gain little good from the prayers of others unless they will 
also pray for themselves. The worst man is not left dependent on the intercession of 
good men. Through Christ he may approach the heavenly throne with his own cry 
for mercy. 

IV. It is the duty of those who ark consulted to give painful ab well as 
pleasant advice. Jeremiah warned the people that he would " keep nothing back." 
The seeming kindliness that restrains the utterance of uniileasant but important home- 
truths is really only a cloak for selfishness. The preacher must not shun to declare 
the whole counsel of God — the hard sayings of Scripiure, the unpopular doctrines of 
Christianity, the unflattering truths of human nature. 

V. If wb take counsel with God, we must consent to obey him. Otherwise our 
prayer is a mockery ; for God is not an Oracle, but an Authority. What lie reveals is 
not merely hidden mystery, but obligations of duty. He guides us to liis will. It 
U our place to follow the guidance and do what is thus not only declared, but 
oommanded. 

Ver. 3. — Divine guidance. I. The need of Divini suidanoe. 1. It arises out of 
our obligation to do the will of Ood. We are not left to carve out a career for ourselves, 
but to fulfil a Divine vocation. With this definite end before us, our life must fail 
unless we are directly making for it. A harmless life, following its own whims and 
fitncies, is a wasted life. But only God knows his own will. Therefore we need that 
he shall reveal this to ui, to show us, not only the path of safety, but the way he wills 
us to go. The most clear-sighted need this guidance. As servants, we wait for our 
Master's orders ; as soldiers, we are to follow our Captain's commands. Without these, 
how can we do the one thing needful? 2. It arises out of our own ignorance and 
WindncM. We do not know all the circumstances which surround us; we cannot 
pradiot the ezigendea of the future ; the ultimate issue of our actions is beyond oui 



172 THE BOOK OF THE PllOPHEl JEREMIAH, [ch. xlii. 1—22. 

reckoning; the limits of our powers are not kimwn to us; our future requirements and 
capacities cannot now be gauged. Yet we must decide and act at once in relation to all 
these unknown quantities. Therefore only a higher wisdom and a larger knowledge 
can secure us from fatal blunders. 

II. The method of Divine guidance. The Jews appealed to a prophet. We have 
no Jeremiah. Yet we have essentially the same means of guidance, now broken into 
two parts, for the higher education of our S[iiritual nature. 1. The revelation of Ood's 
will and truth in Scripture. Theje we have God's guidance in the words of the 
prophets, and in addition to that in the higher thought of the apostles of the New 
Testament and of Christianity. Above all, we have the great example, the speaking 
lessons, of the life and character of Christ, who is the "Light of the World." In all 
this we have larger, clearer views of God's will and of man's duty than were given to 
the Jews under the earlier dispensation. 2. 2'he light of the Spirit of Ood in our mind 
and conscience. It may be urged that, while the instructions of the prophets for the 
guidance of Israel were definite and particular, the lessons which we may gather from 
revelation are general ; and that, though the ideas of conduct thus communicated to us 
are higher and larger than those of the Jewish economy, they are nevertheless so 
abstract that we may make great mistakes in the practical application of them. This 
is true ; and therefore, with the less particular revelation, God gives to us more light 
for the interpretation of it. We live under that dispensation of the Spirit wherein all 
Christians are, in a measure, prophets, and God's Spirit is poured out upon all flesh 
(Acts ii. 17). By God's light in our souls, interpreting God's revelation in Christ, we 
may know God's will concerning our lives ; and, no longer slaves to the letter of unin- 
telligible precepts, we may carry out the broad principles of the spiritual life by a 
thoughtful and conscietitious application of them to the details of daily life. 

III. The use of Divikb guidance. God reveals the way ; we must walk therein. 
The direction may be so clear that he who reads may run, yet he must run. The 
sign-post is not a carriage to convey the indolent traveller to his journey's end. God 
reveals his will ; he leaves it to our free choice and effort to obey it. He does not guide 
us, like the horse or mule, with bit and bridle. We are not forced to follow the revela- 
tion, but we are bound in moral obligation to do so. The main object of the revelation 
of truth is to guide us in practice. God enlightens our darkness that we may gird up 
our loins and walk in his ways. 

Vers. 6, 6. — Implicit obedience. The people swear to obey the voice of Qoi before 
they know what injunctions it will lay upon them. They contemplate the possibility 
of receiving unpleasant commands ; but they leave the decision in the hands of God, 
undertaking to follow it, whatever form it may take. Thus they bind themselves to 
implicit obedience. Let us consider the obligation and the limitation of implicit 
obedience. 

I. The obligation of implicit obedience. This requires us to obey the voice of 
God when it calls us to do anything within the range of right and possibility ; i.e. any- 
thing which a wise and good God would ever command. It implies a possible conflict 
with our inclination, our opinion, or our worldly interest. Othenvise the obedience 
becomes a mere form. If we only obey when we like to do the thing required, we are 
not really obeying a higher will, but simply following out our own will in accidental 
coincidence with the will above us. True obedience only begins when it leads us to 
do what our own wisdom or desire would not have prompted. It must, therefore be 
prepared to run counter to these private tendencies. It must be the submission of our 
will and opinion to God's will and wisdom. Now, not only is this implicit obedience 
obligatory, but it is a certain fact that God will put it to the test. His higher will 
and larger wisdom must often conflict with our foolishness and self-will. Moreover, 
amid the trials of life, God will certainly sometimes require us to do what seems evil 
to us, ix. what is painful and contrary to our wish. Therefore faith is essential to 
obedience. In so far as we can trust God, we shall be able to obey his darker counsels. 

II. The limitation or implicit obedience. The highest obligation is to ao right. 
If, therefore, we could be required by a supreme being to do what we knew was wrong, 
it would be our plain duty to disobey his will. The being who laid such a mandate 
upon 08 could not be God. He would be an almighty demon. Were such a monster 



•H, xtn. 1— 22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEKEMIAH. 173 

to exist, it would bo the duty of all creatures to resist him, though they became martyrs 
for their fidelity to ris;hteousness. Our obligation to obey God rests on the fact that 
he is supremely good, and not merely on his infinite power and greatness. Let us 
suppose that we received a seemingly Divine mandate req 'liiing what we felt to be wrong 
— what should we do? Three courses would then be open to us. We might believe 
that it emanated from a supreme being who was wicked, and should therefore be 
disobeyed ; we might conclude that we were mistaken in supposing it to come from a 
supreme being — that we were suffering from a hallucination ; or we might feel convinced 
that it was sent by the holy God, and that we were wrong in our impression of its 
unrighteous character. To Christians who believe in a perfectly good God, only the two 
latter alternatives could present themselves. But here the choice lies between the inward 
and the outward voice. If, then, the inward voice is clear and unmistakable, we are 
bound to give the preference to this. The outward voice claims to come from God ; but 
so does the inward voice. If the two conflict, we must choose between them, and then 
we should feel that it is more likely we are suffering from a delusion in our external 
perceptions than that what we firmly believe in our conscience to be wrong is yet right. 
Loyalty to God will lead us to obey God's voice in the conscience above all things. At 
all events, so long as we believe — though even erroneously — that a thing is wrong to 
us, it is wrong, and no prophet's or angel's yratOM should lead us t* perform it without 
first convincing us that it is right. 

Ver. 7. — 2%e answer to prayer delayed. I. Thk vaot. Ten days elapsed before 
Jeremiah was able to give an answer to the people. When Christ was asked to give 
his aid at the wedding feast where the wine ran short, he refused to do anything 
immediately (John ii. 4) ; and when summoned to the sick-bed of Lazarus, " he abode 
at that time two days in the place where he was " (John xi. 6). We must, therefore, 
expect that a similar delay may sometimes attend the answer of our prayers. Perhaps 
the interval will he much longer. We have cast our bread upon the waters, and it will 
not appear till after many days. We should learn, therefore, that prayer does not fail 
because the response is not immediate. Whatever be the delay, we may be sure that to 
a true prayer in Christ's Name the right answer will come at the right time. God is 
not dilatory. He will never wait beyond the very best season for acting. 

n. The cause. Much of this is mysterious, and we must learn to accept the 
mysteries of Providence with faith in the unfailing love of God. But some grounds for 
the delay of God's answers to our prayers may be discerned and should be considered to 
check our impatience. 1. There is a seaion for everything. God will watch for the 
fitting opportunity, and send his blessing when it will be most profitable. 2. The 
fitness of God's answer to prayer depends on our condition. There are things which 
would injure us as we are. God waits to be gracious, waits till we are in a fit ftate to 
receive his grace. 3. Some things given as the answer to prayer require time for 
development. At the beginning of Daniel's prayer the angel was sent, but some time 
elapsed before the prophet received his message (Dan. ix. 23). God may set in train 
the actions which are in answer to our prayer immediately the prayer is made, and 
we may only be waiting for that result which could not come quicker. 4. Meanwhile 
God tests our faith by delaying the answer to our prayer. The time is not lost. It is 
profitably spent in the trial and culture of our own souls. So it is with the greatest 
blessing of the heavenly reward and with many lesser good things; God withholds them 
for a time that we may learn to walk by faith. 

Vers. 9^12. — The hlessedness of patient enduranee. In answer to the appeal of the 
people for guidance, Jeremiah has to tell them that good will attend them so long as 
they stay in their land, but curses if they flee to Egypt. Hardships crowd upon them 
at present, and dangers threaten for the future. But if they will but endui« these 
patiently, God will save and prosper them. 

I. Wht the people were eequired to remain in theib land. 1. It was the will of 
Ood. When we know his will, if we know nothing more, that alone should be a final 
answer to all questions. Because he is our King we are bound to obey, and because he 
w our Father his will must be for our good. 2. It was the course of faith. Flight to 
Egypt was always regarded as a sign of distrust in God and reliance upon the ana «f 



174 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ch. xlii. 1—22. 

flesh. Repeatedly had the people been warned not to trust " upon the staff of thit 
bruised reed, even upon Egypt, ou which if a man lean, it will go into his band, and 
pierce it : so is Pharaoh King of Egypt unto all that trust on him " (2 Kings zviii. 21). 
When Pharaoh takes the place of Jehovah, when any earthly judge is trusted rather 
than God, it will surely betray us. 3. It was a safeguard for purity. Egypt was a 
heathen power. An asylum in Egypt would bring temptations to immorality and 
unfaithfulness to the God of Israel. It is always unwise and wrong to run into tempta- 
tion in order to escape from trouble. 4. It was a sign of contentment. It is happiest 
for a man to do his duty in that state of life into which it has pleased God to 
call him, though if God calls him out of one state to a more prosperous one, he may 
enjoy the greater comfort thus gained. 

II. What peomises weeb given to those who remained in theib IiAnd. 1. 
Prosperity would he restored. The troubles of God's people are transitory. Patient 
endurance will see the end of all of them. Then God will bring, not bare deliverance, 
but happiness and prosperity. The Jew looked for thi-s in temporal concerns ; the 
Christian expects it in eternal things. 2. The people would he delivered from damje'-. 
God would save them from the King of Babylon. And if this salvation was possible, 
shall we not believe that all other deliverances are possible, and rest calmly assured tl.dt 
to those who patiently and obediently submit to God no real harm can come ? Nebu- 
chadnezzar may triumph insolently; but God can cast him down to the level of the 
brutes. The lions may roar, but they are chained, or God will send an angel to shut 
their mouths. 

III. What assubances the people had that it would be thus well with teem 
IF THEY EBMAIKED IN THEIB LAND. 1. They Were assurcd of the pres nee of God. " I 
am with you " (ver. 11). If God is with us, we can dispense with the patronage of a 
Pharaoh, even though a Nebuchadnezzar is thundering at our gates. 2. They were 
assured of the active hdp of Ood. " 1 am with you — to save you." The very object of 
God's presence is his people's good. When present he does not only observe ; he acts, 
saves, delivers. 3. They were assured of the continued mercy of Ood. " I will procure 
you mercy " (ver. 12). 4. They were assured that Ood would overrule their enemy 
and convert him into their friend. Nebuchadnezzar should be made to have mercy 
upon the people. Thus what we most fear is led by God to work our good when » e 
are obedient and submissive. 

Vpr, 19. — Contradictory requirements. The Jews were here required not to flee into 
Egypt. Joseph was warned by an angel in a dream to " arise, and take the young chil. 1 
and his mother, and flee into Egypt " (Matt. ii. 13). The Scriptures represent botli 
commands as coming from God. Yet they are contradictory. This is but one instance 
of a discrepancy often to be met with. Let us consider the meaning of it. 

I. Divine eequibements mat be outwabdlt contbadictobt and yet consistent 
IN PEINCIPLE. In general principle what is right once is right eternally ; what i^ 
right for one man is right for all men; what is right in one jilace is right every- 
where. The moral laws of God are eternal, immutable, universal. They are as true 
in Sirius as on the earth, to angels and to demons as to men. But the application of 
these principles necessarily varies. 1. The same act has a different character under 
different circumstances. Egypt was an imposing heathen power in the days of Jere- 
miah ; it was but a Bomiin province in the time of our Lord. Plight to Egypt at the 
earlier time meant distrust in God and reliance on the arm of flesh ; no such alternatives 
accompanied the decision of Joseph. Thus it often happens that consistency to prin- 
ciple will permit and require great variations of conduct according to the changing 
necessities and dangers of life. 2. Tlie same act may have a different duircKter with 
different persons. Identical general moral obligations apply to aU of us equally, liut 
men have different duties in the carrying out of those principles, accoidiug to their 
constitutional differences of capacity and disposition. One man can stand on the verge 
of a precipice without a tremor, another turns giddy as he approaches it. For the one 
to be there is harmless, but it is most dangerous for the other. The first man may do 
what is no risk to him, but the second will be foolish and wrong if ha lollow his 
example. So there are scenes which afford temptation to some tcmporauienis and none 
to others. The dutv to avoid them must vary with this -armtion of dange.i. 3 'I hi 



OH. XLn. 1—22.] TUE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 175 

same act may have a different character according as it is performed with a different 
motive. Fli-ht may doaote cowardice or prudent caution. Passive endurance may be 
determined by weakness and indolence, or it may result from submissive trustfulness. 

II. The outward contsadiotion of Divine requibements warns us to estimate 
ACTIONS SOLELY BY THEIR INNER CHARACTER. I. We should be Careful not to condemn 
others because their behaviour strikes us as superficially opposed to what is right from 
our own point of view. Their circumstances, character, and motives may be quite 
different from what we suspect. The man who is condemned as a miser may be wisely 
ihrifty. He who is regarded as a meddlesome busybody may be conscientiously dis- 
charging what to him is a public duty. The seeming devotee of pleasure may be 
generously laying himself out to brighten the sad world with ministries of happiness to 
others. The apparently ambitious despot may be an enthusiast for the regeneration of 
humanity. 2. Wemust bewa>e of the sZaw's/t imiVa^ion of the best examples. What 
was wise and right in them may be positively wrong in us. Even our imitation of 
Christ must be spiritual rather than external. Surely in calling us to foUow him, he 
does not require us, like St. Francis, to become homeless wanderers, because the Son 
of man had not where to lay his head. Because he drove out the desecrators of the 
temple with violence, it may not be right for us to use similur violence, when what 
was done by him from pure zeal might only be followed by us with angry pasaions. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Inquiring of Ood in great crises. I. The right and ddtt of it. 1. 
Because of his claim to respect and obedience. It was a traditional custom in Israel. 
Jehovah was their national God. He had delivered them, created them into a nation, 
and laid them under eternal obligations. (1) There is a general obligation upon all so 
to do. Even those who do not recognize any special relation existing between God 
and themselves have reason for drawing nigh to him. There are moments when the 
things of life assert their sacrednesis and awful mystery, when God besets them behind 
and before. His providence is a continual appeal. And the sense of sin, of helpless- 
ness, and of indefinite hope leads them to his footstool. (2) It is specially incumbent 
upon those who are related to him through grace. Judah represented ancient Israel, 
and, although now but a remnant, was still privileged with the presence of a true 
prophet of God. Christians should be eager and ready to call upon him, as they have 
the promises reaffirmed in Christ, and the witness of his Spirit in their hearts that they 
shall not ask in vain. Their whole position is due to his grace, and it is but right that 
this should be acknowle(l,g;cd. 2. Because of helplessness and dan<,er. The petitioners 
were " left but a few of many." They knew that it was through iheir own folly for 
the most part that they had been brought to such a pass. We know that in the great 
crises of life we are unable to guide ourselves. The future is dark and full of trouble. 
3. Because of God's wisdom, power, and love. He knows all things, and is able to 
deliver from all evil ; and he has assured us of his willingness to guide and protect. 
The larger, grander policy of life is only possible with his inspiration. 

II. The spirit in which it should be entered npON. 1. Humility. In external 
attitude and langnage they left little to criticize (ver. 2). Consciousness of our own 
need and weakness. 2. Confidence. We must believe that he is, and that he is a 
rewarder of all them that diligently seek him. Their requesting Jeremiah to pray to 
the Lord his Gd, and their expression of willingness to do as he should advise, showed 
a measure of iaith. 3. Oheditnce. This they professed (ver. 6). 4. Sincerity. (Ver. 6.) 

III. The dangers to which it is exposed. Notwithstanding all their profession, 
we can detect : 1. Signs of systematic neglect of Ood and religious ordinances. The 
expression " came near " suggests a previous habitual distance from Jehovah, They 
appear more anxious to conciliate the prophet tlian him whom he served. There is no 
confession of sin. Probably Jeremiah had been all but ignored up to that time. What 
a strange phrase, " the Lord thy God " 1 The prophet seeks gently to lead them to a 
better standing — " the Lord your God ; " which they seem to adopt. " To whom we 
send thee" still betrays the absence of filial love and intimacy. Their subsequent 
l)ohaviour showed that •' 2. They were unreal and hypocritical in their whole attitude. 



in THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [ioH. xui. 1—22. 

They had made up their mind as to what was best for them to do, as the resort to th« 
" habitation of Chimham " already proved. With one foot in Canaan, as it were, and 
another out of it, they pretended to inquire of God. This is a very cnmmon practice, 
but it is one which not only robs prayer of its meaning and efficacy, but also brings 
upon the head of those who are guilty of it a grievous curse, as in this instance. A 
portion of their prayer was answered, but in a way they little expected : " The Lord b« 
a true and faithful witness between us." — M. 

Vers. 19 — 22. — Carnal predispositiotis. I. Thbt are the great bources of 
UUREALITT m RELIGION. In Sending Jeremiah to God they did not mean what they 
said. There was no honest willingness to do as the prophet might reveal. The only 
hope /or them in their forlorn condition is thus tampered with and destroyfd. It is 
possible that at first they may have meant well, but as they proceeded with their 
inquiry through the propliet they must have known that they had only one intention, 
which they had not laid aside or even held in abeyance. Yet such is the subtlety of 
the hypocritical heart that it continues in its hypocrisy until it deceives itself. " They 
inquire not to learn what is right, but only to receive encouragement to do what thejr 
wish." 

II. Those who indulge them are their own worst enemies. 1. They deceive and 
injure themselves. "Tedissenibledin your hearts "(ver. 20); liteTaUy, deceived yourselves; 
" used deceit against your souls " (margin). Thinking they were taking counsel of God, 
they were really obeying their fears and lusts. Can a greater wrong be done to one's self 
than this — to think one's self religious and obedient to the heavenly will when one is only 
selfish and sinful? Safety nnd happiness lay in following simply the Divine guidance ; 
but this they could not do, for they knew not God's message when it came. " Thinking 
themselves wise, they became fools." Their spiritual nature is henceforth unreliable, 
and their greatest perils will be encountered in their most religious hours, and when 
they think themselves most in agreement with God's will. 2. The curse of Qod is 
denounced against them. What they choose will be their destruction. The very things 
they sought to avoid by going to Egypt are met there. And there is no niiliigation ; 
the position is one wholly wrong, and consequently the wrath of God is unceasing until 
they cease to occupy it. To remain in Egypt, with its idolatries and abominations, was 
Tirtually to annul the covenant. Soon every trace of true religion would disappear, 
and they would become like their neighbours, and be absorhed into the nations in whom 
God had no pleasure. He cannot tolerate falsehood, pretension, the form of godliness 
without the reality. And this severity is true mercy. Many a one " plucked as a 
brand from the burning " has had reason to thank his Saviour that " the way ot trans- 
gressors is hard." " Let a man examine himself." " Be not deceived : God is not 
mocked,"— M. 

Ver. 1— ch. xliii. 7.—D{ssemUing in prayer. This section may teach us much on 
this very seriou.s matter. 

_ I. What it is to dissemble in prater. It is: 1. To pray in a deliberatdv con- 
tinued wnregeneracy of heart. The hearts of not a few of those Jews who now 
Bought Jeremiah's prayers were deliberately held in a condition of di.-obudience They 
had never really repented. How many such pray, hut their prayer is a dissembling ' 
2. When allowing ourselves in forbidden, paths. The Jews had no business on that 
border-land. It was a yielding to temptation to go there. So when we come from sin 
to the throne of grace, and go thence to sin again, this is, etc. 3. When we are not 
setting ourselves to mortify our evil affections. The Jews here showed no real sincere 
intention to give up their own will and to obey God's. They would not have been on 
that border-land had such been the case. And so where there is no real striving against 
sin, this is, etc 4. When whilst we pray we regard iniquity in our heart. That is to 
purpose and intend it ; or to look upon it complacently and desiringly ' The Jews 
whilst praying t» know God's will, were all the while looking with strong desire after' 
what they knew was wrong. Like as when Balaam offered his many sacrifices his heart 
was all the while going after its covetousness. ' """'' 

II. What can lead men to be guilty or such dissembling? We should imafrinn 
they never could be; that the thing would be too outrageou*, wicked, and absuid for 



CH. XLn. 1— 22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 177 

any one to be guilty of. And yet there have been and are many such prayers. They 
may be pa: tly explained by : 1. The force of habit. The locomotive, illeft to itself, will 
run along the rails tor considerable time and distance, slowing and stopping only very 
gradually, though,the steam has been shut off the whole while. So those who have been 
wont to offer prayers will keep up the form and habit, though the heart be wanting. 2. 
They may be themselvet deceived. Their strong desire for God's sanction might lead them 
<o imagine they would gain it by their prayers. 3. l%ey would not break with Oo'l 
(^together, and they deem that they ean keep up their communications by such methods 
as these. 

III. How PRAYERS ABK PROVED TO HAVE BEEN OF THIS EVIL OHABACTEB. 1. By 

anger at their refusal. See how angry these Jews were. The state of mind witli 
which we come away from our prayers will show much the true nature of those 
prayers. 2. When we make them only through others. The Jews left it to Jeremiah. 
So now men leave to their ministers or friends the prayers they profess to value. 3. 
When they are followed by open and, defiant disobedience. So was it here (ch. zliii. 
1 — 7). Nothinj; could more plainly have shown how hollow and insincere were theii- 
prayers. And so now, when men pray, and rise up and go and do worse than before, 
what can their prayers have been? 

IV. What are the results ok bitoh pbaters? They grieve the Spirit of God. 
They harden the heart, and tend to make men of a reprobate mind. Cf. our Lord's 
words to tlie Pharisees — the pattern dissemblers of his day. They pave the way to 
" the damnation of hell." Therefore — thus let us conclude — be our prayer, " Search me, 
Gbd, and try my heart," etc. — 0. 

Vers. 7—18. — Man's utter dependence u^aon God. These verses plainly show this 
much-forgotten but never-failing truth. They tell how the land Of Judah, desolate, 
unprotected, and oppressed, could be and should be made a happy land fqr them. 
Whilst Egypt, the land they hoped so much fiom, should bring on them all the sorrows 
which they thought by going there to escape. Thus we are taught that it is according 
to God's favour our lives are blessed or unblessed, bright or dark. Mere circumstances 
are unable to ensure either the one or the other, but the presence or absence of God's 
favour alone. Now — 

I. Men do not thine this. See their frantic endeavours to make their circum- 
stances pleasant. And how they struggle against adversity, as if all evil were con- 
tained in thatl Their opinion is very clear. 

II. But yet it mcst be. For : 1. Our happiness or unhappiness depends entirely 
xm the way in which we regard these circumstances. That is to say, it depends upon our 
mind, upon that which is within us rather than that which is without. Hence what 
gives great pleasure to one yields none or even the reverse of pleasure to others. 
The merry laugh of children, e.g., to one in deep sadness, or irritable, or discontented. 
And vice versd. But: 2. Ood has constant access to the minds of us all, and he has 
made their satisfaction to depend upon him. " Nostrum cor inquietum est donee 
requiescat in te " (Augustine). He can flood them with joy in the darkest hour — Paul 
and Silas in the dungeon at Philippi ; and he can make the most favourable circum- 
tances powerless to render a man happy — Haman because of Murdecai ; the conscience- 
stricken, those from whom for any cause he hides his face, are illustrations. And 
abundant facts prove the powerlessness of mere circumstance over the minds of men. 

III. The influence that these considerations ought to have upon ub. 1. Not 
to lead us to despise circumstances, and so to be careless as to the outward lot of either 
ourselves or others. For though they have not all power over the mind, God has given 
them very much power — ^a power that they lose only when he pleases. 2. But to 
estimate tliem rightly. This we can only do as we bring into view the unseen and 
the eternal, which can only be as we live iu view of it by the habit of prayer, thought, 
and practical regard to Gud's will as expressed in conscience and his Word. So shall 
our balances be adjusted, and we shall rightly judge. There is a machine employed at 
the Mint of such perfect accuracy and finish that, when a number of sovereigns are 
tested by it, it will automatically and instautly and infallibly reject every one that 
fails in the least degree to come up to the proper standard of weight. So if we thus 
brini' into view the unseen and eternal, all the crowd of facts and events that come 

JEBSHIAH n. K 



178 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. Lch. xi-n. 1— <s2. 

befara ni day by day will each one spontaneously, promptly, and infallibly be judged, 
and we shall neither under nor over estimate them but as we ought. 3. To seek above 
all things the favour of God; for "in his favour is life, and his loving-kindness is 
better than life itselfl"— 0. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Waiting on the Divim ordinanoe. L The request of the feofle. 
1. The apparent unanimity of it. All the people come, from the least to the greatest. 
Certainly there were not very many of them. They were but a remnant to begin with, 
and now still further reduced. But such as they were, an outward unity obtained 
among them. Outward unity is often obtained with comparative ease, but it must not 
be forgotten that it may cloak indifference, discord, opposition, and may be followed by 
contradictory conduct, even on the part of those who make the largest professions of sub- 
mission. 2. The profession of submission to Jehovah. The request described a real 
want, whether the people meant aU they said or not. And there is no reason to suppose 
that they did not mean it at the present time of asking. Men ask sincerely enough for 
Divine guidance, not being able to see at the time how hard it will be to follow it up. 
They want to be shown a way in which to walk, and then, when the way is shown, it 
looks too hard and perplexed to be Ood's way. They want to be shown the thing to 
do, and, when it is shown, there appears to be no use in it, no obvious relation of means 
to ends. Here is a result of prophetic teaching. The people bad learnt from many 
prophetic utterances what they ought to ask for. 3. Their dependence on the prophet. 
Here ia man showing his need of mediation. The people had come to know at last that 
Jeremiah was the faithful and accepted servant of God. This is the best way of recog- 
nizing a good man — ^to ask him to help those in need. And they wished also to com- 
mend their desires to the prophet. They wished him to pray a prayer that should be 
his as well as theirs. 

II. The peophet's answeb. That he complies with the request is little to say. The 
prayer was one he could pray with all his heart. Well would it have been if he had 
been asked to offer it years before. That which taxed him was to tell them that he 
would faithfully report the answer. For he knew that God's message would go deep 
into the necessities of the case ; that God's answer could not be comprehended by the 
limits of man's desires. This is the temptation of messengers, to keep something back 
through fear, or expediency, or mistaken kindness. Now, Jeremiah was well assured 
from a long experience that Jehovah never said a word too many or too few. The 
genuine promptings of the Spirit of God are the very best guide as to what we should 
tell men in the hour ot their need. 

IIL The promise of the people. They seem to hint that they are ready for 
difficult and painful requirements. History is not lost upon them so far as their pro- 
fessions are concerned. They, hint how they have learnt that disobedience to God 
brings the worst of evils. One thing, however, they had not yet learnt, and that was 
the difference between knowledge and power. When men are in great straits they will 
make large promises in the hope ot deliverance ; not at all insincerely, but meaning all 
they say. It was with the people here as it is with people in dangerous illnesses — the 
way of restored health is to be the way ot obedience and piety. That people make such 
promises shows that the promises are right ; the wrong thing is that they lack in 
strength, persistency, and inward purpose to keep them. God has to make this lack 
plain before men will humble themselves to have it supplied. — 1. 

Vers. 7 — 12. — Divine cmnforte for those in doubt and fear. I. The meaning of 
THE nJTBEVAL. There are ten days to wait between the prayer of Jeremiah and the 
answer of Jehovah. Why.this waiting ? It must have been in some way for the sake 
of the people. They had said very emphatically they would be obedient ; would they 
be obedient to begin with, to the extent of waiting ten days for God's answer ? It had 
also to be seen whether they would continue in the spirit of obedience at all ; and 
would they all continue in the same spirit? 

IL EvEBYTHiNa depends on the disposition of the peopIjK. Glod will do great 
things for them if only they do uot destroy the effect of his anious by their self-will 
and instability. They were to show their trust in God by abiding in the land. Nothing 
could be done without this. Goa uses, to indicate hin work for them, two wordi^ 



OH. xuL 1— 22.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 178 

which imply fixity — building and planting. Let us also recollect the greatness of God's 
power to them that believe. If we take no trouble to furuish the occasion, we must 
not complaiii. 

III. The great wobk God is disposed to do. It is indicated by these two not 
infrequent figures of buildin gaud planting. God was willing to make these people his 
husbandry, his building (1 Cor. iii. 9). He had been lately engaged in a great pulling 
down and rooting up; and why ? Because his people bad been putting up the wrong 
buildings, planting the wrong plant. Every plant not planted by God must be rooted 
up. God is the Builder, not a mere helper in building. We may be said to be fellow- 
workers with God, but it can never describe him rightly to call him fellow-worker 
with us. The work and the glory are his of building up the holy character, the perfect 
manhood, the everlasting home. He it is who makes his people fruitful in every good 
word and work. And the way for all this building and planting was now clear so far 
as God himself was concerned. All the pulling down and rooting up was done. Only 
let the people give the needed opportunity and all else would prosper. 

IV. Caution against needless feab. The temptation here, as so often, was to 
fear man too much and God too little or even none at all. " The fear of man bringeth 
a suare." The people feared the King of B:ibyion, forgetting the limits of his power 
and the way in which he was controlled by Jehovah. — Y. 

Vers. 13 — 18. — A land to le avoided. How solemn and urgent this warning! Let 
us ask why it was needed, why God seemed thus to cast doubt on the power of the 
people to obey him, 

I. Thb perilous land was near. They were right in the way to Egypt, having, 
indeed, moved Egyptwards rather than in any other direction (ch. xli. 17). 

IL It had obvious attractions. 1. It seemed to he a land of peace. Egypt had 
been looked to as a friend and ally. The desolation of Jerusalem had come from the 
north. When people have been going through a time of war and siege, peace u 
naturally the blessing put in front of their thou;jht8. And is not this a good thing, it 
may be asked ? Yes, surely, if peace be desired on high grounds, and from a horror of 
discord among men. But men may seek it simply to escape from disturbance and 
from loss of life and property. Their seeking of peace may be a sign of cowardice and 
altogether grovelling aims. Danger may be escaped bj' the outer man, only to be 
concentrated more effictually on the man within. 2. It would he a land of bread. 
Another recommendation of a land which it was unquestionably right, for men to attend 
to. Egypt was one of the great granaries of the ancient world. But it did not there- 
fore follow that it was a land to live in. Israelites, in particular, needed to recollect 
how their fathers, beginning by going to Egypt for bread, ended by sinking into most 
oppr' ssive bondage. Besides, even the land of bread was at times a land of famine. 
3. It consequently looked a land to dwell in. God is the God of his people only 
when they are in their proper place. He was God of the exiles in Babylon, because 
their going into Baiylon was of his operation. But those who went to Egj pt in search 
of mere immnnity from toil and inglorious ease could not expect to have the Divine 
favotir. They wanted to get the great ends of life without discipline, sacrifice, and 
endurance. 

III. Thb vain purpose to escape from evil. God tries to make the people 
understand that they take the germs and principles of evil with them. What we find 
in any place depends on what we bring ; and what we bring we must, in process of 
time, inevitaMy find. What had there been to hinder the land of Israel from being a 
land of peace and a land of bread ? Nothing bnt the faithlessness and general w ieked- 
ness of the peo]>le. We cannot sow wickedness in one place, and then hope to go and 
reap only good things in some other place. God can turn any place, however fruitful, 
into a wildejness ; and, on the other hand, we know how Jesus made a wiMerness a place 
to feed five thousand tnen. Jehovah spoke with all this severity to these people to 
make them understand how hard a thing real obedience was. — Y. 

Vers. 19 — 22. — Searching the heart. There is here a very sudden and striking turn 
kway from the tone of the previous part of the message. God looks into the future, 
•nd, seeing what actually will happen, seeing that Egypt will maintain its attraction, 



180 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh, xliit. 1— 13- 



he warns the people they are going towards a certain doom. Their present state was 
one of undue, overweening self-confidence; and God will not allow people to remun 
under deceiition as to their own weakness, if a startling and abrupt message will serve to 
arouse them from it. Perhaps we shall not he far wrong in assuming that the chang- 
ing tone of the prophecy is occasioned by the changing mood of the audience. Whil« 
the prophet is speaking of the dangers of Egypt, their deep desire after Egypt is half 
revealed. The one gate into which they wished to enter is peremptorily closed agamst 
them. All at once there may have been a sort of awakening to the fact that God knew 
their hearts better than they did themselves. We must recollect, too, that Jeremiah 
spoke out of no short or impeifect experience. He saw that the people were disap- 
pointed ; that, instead of a word poiniing them towards Egypt, there was sentence upon 
sentence warning them against it. How hard it is to be sure of knowing the will of God I 
How easy to mistake for it the impulses of indulgent human prudence 1 God tells the 
(.eople plainly they are going to seek for things tliey will never find. Instead of living 
in peace, they are to die by the sword. Instead of getting abundance of bread, they are 
to die by famine and by the pestilence that accompanies lack of bread. Here altogethec 
is an example (A the need of that prayer in Fa. cxxxix. 23, 24. — Y, 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAFTEB XLIU. 



The flight to Egypt; Jeremiah's predic- 
tion of Nebnchadnezzar's conquest of Egypt, 

Ver. 2, — ^All the proud men. It would 
seem as if the " proud men " were dis- 
tinguished from others. Jeremiah had 
called the whole people together (oil. xliL 
8) ; but a few domineering men assumed to 
represent the rest. 

Ver. 3. — Baraoh the ion of Neriah setteth 
thee on. A singular lupposition — Jeremiah 
leaving the initiative to his secretary I It 
may be conjectured thatBaruch haiJ somehow 
made himself specially unpopular ; he may 
have been a more practical man (comp. oh. 
zlv. 6) than Jeremiah. 

Ver. 5. — All the remnant of Judah, that 
were returned from all nations. The speci- 
floation is peculiar, as it seems to leave out 
of sight tlie most important part of the 
gathering at Mizpab, viz. the "men, and 
women, and children, and those of the poor 
of the land" (ch. xl. 7) — the very persons 
who are mentioned just afterwards. Pos- 
sibly there is some confusion in the text 
" All nations " doubtless means especially 
Moab, Ammon, and P^dom. 

Yer. 7. — lahpanhes. An Egyptian fron- 
tier city (see Ezek. xxx. 18 and note on ch, 
ii. 16), where the fugitives had to wait till 
the views of the Egyptian government re- 
specting them were made known. The sup- 
posed site of the Pelusiao Daphne has not 
yet been explored ; a single inscribed frag- 
ment would reveal the Egyptian name, and 
probably ratify the identity of Daphnes with 
the Tahpanhes of the prophets (B. 8. Poole, 
' The Cities of Egypt,' p, 177). 

Var, 9.— lake great itouei, eH. A 



■trange lymbolio act of Jeremiah's (■ her* 
described. " We must not suppose, arguing 
from our Western and precise notions, that 
be would be at all necessarily interfered 
with. In fact, he would have a twofold 
security, as a prophet of God to those who 
acknowledged him as such, and in the 
opinion of others as insane, and, according 
to Eastern ideas, thus especially under 
Divine promptings in his acts" (Streane). 
He is directed to take great stones and 
embed the min the mortar (not " clay ") in 
the brick pavement at the entry of the 
palace. When the events predicted came to 
pass, these stones would testify that Jere- 
miah had predicted them. The word ren- 
dered " brick pavement " is of doubtful 
meaning. In Nab. iii 14 it signifies 
« brick-kiln." 

Yer. 10. — And will set his throne, eto.; 
Til. for the victorious king to hold judgment 
(comp. oh. L 15, 16; xlix. 88). He shall 
spread his royal pavilion ; rather, /ii> tapegtry 
(the root means "brilliance"); i.«. the 
bright-coloured covering of the throne. 

Ver. 11. — He shall smite the land ol 
Egypt. On the invasion of Egypt by Nebn* 
ohadnezzar, wrongly controverted by some, 
see note on oh. xlvi. 13. Such as are for 
death. 8uch as are destined for death (t.e. 
pestilence,asch. XV. 2; xviii.21). Tlie words, 
"and deliver," prefixed in the Authorized 
Version, are unnecessary; "Und" is ei^uiw 
lent to " population." 

Yer. 12. — Bum them; viz. the temple*. 
Egypt was full of gorgeous and imposing 
temples, which could not, however, always be 
burned, nor were the conquerors of Egypt 
anxious to display hostility to Egyptian re- 
ligion. Carry them away captives ; viz. the 
idol-g«di (comp. oh. xlviii. 7, ■'Ohemosk 



OH. XLiii. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



181 



shall KO forth into captivity;" and Isa. xlvL 
2, " Their soul [or, ' personality '] hath gone 
into captivity "). The prophet speaks from 
the point of vievr of a believer in the idol- 
gods. He shall array himself with the land of 
Egypt, etc. (For " array himself with " and 
"putteth on," read wrap himself in and 
wrappeth Kimaelf t'n.) Ewald vf ell explains 
this figure. " As easily as the shepherd in 
the open field wraps liimself in the cool 
night in his mantle, will he be able to grasp 
Egypt with his hand and fling it round him 
like an easily managed garment, in order 
then to leave the land as an absolute con- 
queror, clothed in this attire of booty, in 
peace, without an enemy." 
Vor. 18. — Ihe images a( Beth-shemesh ; 



rather, the pillan of Beth-shpinesh ; l.e. th« 
obelisks of the temple of En, the sun-god, 
from which Heliopolis derived its sacred 
name "Pe-Ra" "the abode of Ua." It 
was the custom to place olielisks in pairs 
at the entrance of thuir temples. Only one of 
those of Heliopolis is still standing, tliough 
that, indued, is the oldest in Kgypt, for it wa.-i 
"set up at least four thousand years ago" 
(R. S. Poole, ' The Cities of Ejrypt,' p. 131). 
That is in the land of Egypt. To distinguish 
it from the Beth-shi mesh in Palestine. 
But we may also reniler " which are," etc. ; 
comp. "the gods of Egypt" in the seooml 
verse-half. The Septnagint reads, " which 
ate in On." 



HOMILETICa. 

Ter. 2. — Moral causes of unielief. 1'he causes of unbelief may be either intellectual 
or moral. It is not just to assume that they are of the latter character. There is an 
honest doubt, and many a brave soul has been forced to fight its way over a wild deseri 
of difficulties before seeing the light of Divine revelation. Nevertheless, it is necessary 
for our own warning and in controversy with others to remember that there are moral 
causes for unbelief, and that in some cases these may be much more operative than 
any purely intellectual consideration. Azariah and his friends have discovered ne 
good ground for doubting the Divine authority of Jeremiah's message. They have seen 
nothing to detract from the claims of the prophet and nothing to conrradict what lie 
says. Yet they reject his message and charge him with falsehood. The palpable expla- 
nation of their conduct may serve to explain the ground of much unbelief in our own 
day. In the main this consists in two things. 

I. The DNFOPnLABiTY OF THE sooTBiNG. Jeremiah had run counter to the determi- 
nation of the leaders of the people. Instead of modifying their conduct In obedience 
to the Divine message, they preferred to reject the message and deny its authority. 
This was most irrational. Yet it is a sample of the commonest conduct. People test 
their creed by their will instead of their reason and conscience and its own evidences. 
They say they do not like certain ideas, as though truth were a matter of taste. But 
truth is the statement of facts, and facts are not altered by sentiments. In the present 
instance the question was as to Qod's will. Was it not possible from the first that this 
might contradict the opinions of the people ? Otherwise what was the use of the 
prayer for direction, that these very men had asked Jeremiah to offer, and the reply to 
which was his unpopular message? If God's will and truth always agreed with our 
private notions, what would be the good of revelation and commandment ? It is in 
the conflict of the two that the chief value of the Divine message is to be found. 

II. The pride of man. We are expressly told that they were " proud men " who 
rejected the prophet's message. The rest of the people seem to have been willing to 
acquiesce in it. There is nothing so blinding as pride. Your proud man is an inevit- 
able bigot. By undue assurance of knowledge he closes the avenues of fresh knowledge 
and limits his own possession of it Thus pride cuts away the ground beneath its own 
feet 

Yer. 8. The credulity of unhdief. I. Unbelief ikvoltes obedulitt. Johanan 

and his companions here bring before us a striking instance of the credulity of tmbelief. 
Refusing to admit that Jeremiah was divinely inspired, they asserted that he was insti- 
gated by Baruch the scribe. Now, we have seen Baruch acting solely as the amannenna 
and spokesman of the prophet — indeed, effacing himself with genuine humility and 
wisdom to serve the prophet the more faithfully ; could this man be the inspirer oi his 
■laater'smoit decided utterances? The idea is preposterous. It is an evidence of gro.'i< 



182 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEBEMIAH. [oh. xun. 1—14 



credulity — the credulity that believes in one's own inventions, though they are infinitely 
less reasonable than the opposite ideas they are set up to oppose. All unbelief is belief 
— it is belief in the negation of a propnsition, and it requires as much evidence as the 
proposition it denies. It also has its consequences in reason which should be followed 
lut remorselessly. Defemlers of the faith have been too apologetic. They would often 
liiive been wiser if they had turned the flank of opponents and exposed the weakness of 
their position. It miuht often be shown that, in accepting this position, the opponents 
were standing on less firm ground than that which they dispute. For something must 
be true. If we came down to absolute nihilism, and discovered that nothing existed, 
even that discovery would be a truth. The absolute rejection of one proposition 
involves the acceptance of its opposite. But this opposite may be beset with heavier 
difficulties or favoured with weaker evidences than those which accompany the rejected 
proposition. If so, to accept the opposite proposition is really a mark of greater cre- 
dulity than to admit that which presented the first claims. 

II. The OREDULITT of unbelief may be ILLnSTBATBD IN THE C0NTB0VBR8IE9 OF 

THE AOB. Consider it in relation to the main topics of these controversies, viz. : 1. The 
being of Ood. If there be no God, then the world must be eternal or self-created 
— conclusions which may be shown to leave more difficulties than the hypothesis of a 
Creator — and all the best thoughts of the highest orders of minds must \m misconcep- 
tions — a strange result for those who would regard the mind of man as the highest 
existence in the universe. 2. The immortality ^ the soul. Difficulties beset the theory 
of immortality. But what greater difficulties they have to face who, first believing in 
God (and we now have a right to start from that position), hold that the deepest appe- 
tite of man is destined never to be satisfied, that his highest aspirations are directed to 
an impossibility, and that his greatest powers are doomed to be blighted before they 
have grown to their full development ? What credulity is required to make us believe 
that a good God could create a Tantalus I 3. The itispiration of tJie Bible. If the 
Bible be not inspired of God, the first literature of the world, containing by far its 
deepest, wisest, purest thou-ihts, and exercisinij; unbounded influence for good, is founded 
on a delusion or a lie ; for the writers of the Bible plainly claim to be inspired. 4. The 
Divine origin of Christianity. Christianity is the greatest fact in history ; it revolu- 
tionized the decaying life of the old world, and gave a fresh upward movement to 
humanity ; it is now the leading factor in the highest life of the foremost races of man- 
kind ; and it claims to be Divine. It seems to some of us that to say this claim is false, 
and thus to force upon us the inevitable alternative that its founders were deluded, and 
that it is a mere growth of human thought and effort, requires a faith which is so 
irrational as to be justly characterized as credulity. 

Vers. 8 — 13. — Prophetie stones. Jeremiah planting stones at the entrance of 

Pharaoh's palace was prophesying by act. The stones were mute pro|ihecies inter- 
preted by the verbal prophecies which in turn they were to confirm in the future. 
These prophetic stones have their lessons for us. 

L Divine purposes are firm and permanent. They are like the great stones. 
Words are but air-waves ; to the incredulous the strongest words may be mere sound 
and fury, signifying nothing ; they melt as they fall. But in the stone we have weight, 
massiveness, persistence, something that cannot be blown aside with a breath, which 
will not fade with time, which may be handled, and which remains after it is forgotten, 
and can be exhumed after being buried. Such is a Divine purpose — thus solid and 
thus enduring. 

II. DiVMIE PURPOSES MAT BE HIDDEN UNTII, THE TIME FOB THE EXECUTION OF 

THEM. Jeremiah hides the stones. Tliere are prophecies which have been uttered once, 
and the method of executing them kept secret from us until they are fulfilled. But 
many Divine purposes are never known till they are accumplished. 

III. Earthly thrones abb set up on foundatioks op Divdib appointment. 
Jeremiah lays the foundation of a throne (ver. 10), and he does this as a servant of 
Ood executing his will. All earthly power rests ultimately upon a Divine sanction. 
Yet this fact does not diminish the hunian responsibility of those who exercise it. The 
prophet planted the stones ; he did not erect the throne. Nebuchadnezzar would be 
responsible for the throne he set up, the way he es'ahlished it, and the use he made of it. 



CH. XLiu. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 18a 

IV. God employs human instruments in the execution of his judgments. 
Nebuchadnezzar is Qjd's servant. There is a Divine economy in this. If evil cannot 
be stayed vfithout the withdravfal of those liberties tliat God sees it to be right to leave 
intact, the harm of it may bo mitigated by making it se-lf-counteractive, the wickedness 
of one hindering or punishing that of another. 

V. Plight trom the judgment op God is impossible. The Babylonian yoke 
was a Divine chastisement upon the Jews. They were urged by inspired prophets to 
submit to it as appointed by God. Some refused and fled to Egypt. But in Egypt 
they were neiiher out of the reach of God nor beyond the power of his instrument 
Nebuchadnezzar. There is no escape from God but by fleeing to God, no deliverance 
from the doom of sin but in submission to him ag;ainst whom we have sinned, 

VI. Companions in quilt will be companions in doom. The Jews who fled to 
Egypt were to share the punishment of that nation. The Egyptians who haiboured 
the Jews were to bring upon themselves the fate that followed the refugeaii 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOEa 

Vers. 8 — 13. — The stones of Tahpanhes. Great uncertainty as to the fulfilment of 
this prophetic parable. Are we bound to assume that it was actually carried out? It 
is possible, according to some critics (but see Exposition on ch. xlvi. 13), that the 
accomplishment of the prediction, as of many others, was only contingent. It is very 
vivid ami definite, but that is quite consistent with the intevmerliate occurrence of cir- 
cumstances in the spiritual state of the Jewish sojourners that enabled God to cancel 
it. Just as at this time their disposition may have been alarmingly idolatrous and 
worldlv, so at a later stage it may have changed. 

I. What the parable mat have suggested. 1. The contingent certainty of Divine 
judgment. The action may have represented, not only the sequence of events, but that 
of principles. If, then, the events riid not occur, it would still remain true that, in the 
kingdom of God, such a defieiidence of principles is eternal ; sin is ever nigh to cursing. 
So much is this the case, that it may be said to contain the elements of its own punish- 
ment, like the stones hidden in the clay. (1) The stones are hidden in the clay with 
which, although heterogeneous, they stand in a divinely appointed relation. (2) The 
interpretHtion j;iven by the prophet further strengthened this impression in the minds 
of the s])ectators. It was tlie same power, viz. the Chaldean, which had already 
scourged Judah, that was to follow the remnant into distant Egypt. The continuity 
of the judgment with those which preceded it is thus forcibly set forth. Nebuchad- 
nezzar, if or when he came, could not be mistaken for other than a divinely ordained 
instrument of vengeance. The advantage of such an understanding of the prophecy 
is obvious — it ceases to have a particular and transitory significance, and becomes 
at once necessary and universal. We need that lesson graven upon otir hearts to- 
day : " The soul that sinneth it shall die ; " "He that soweth to the flesh," etc. 
2. 2%o< dependence upon any earthly power m utterly vain. Egypt is dreamt of as 
a refuge from their woes. Its power, typified by the clay of the kiln or brick-field, only 
overlies the power of God, typified by the stones. They would be in his hands still, 
although they knew it not. Through the clay of worldly dependence they must needs 
fall upon the stones of Divine judgment. Man cannot flee from his Maker. There is 
no earthly security from the consequences of sin. If the remnant of Judah, pur- 
suing its tendency towards worldly mindedness and idolatry to the bitter end, should 
persist in putting its trust in the Egyptian power, to whose religion and life it was in 
such imminent danger of assimilating itself, woe to it! Through Pharaoh even will 
they be conlronted with Nebuchadnezzar yet again. God is the only true Helper and 
Saviour, and in the practice of holiness and the precepts of true religion is security alone 
to be found. What assurance comp.vny can shield the sinner from the consequences 
of his misdeeds ? And if God be for any man, who can be against him ? 

II. What the parable mat have effected. It has been conjectured (by Naegels- 
bach and others) that the symbolic action of Jeremiah and its interpretation so forcibly 
appealed to the imagination and conscience of the Jews as to change their hearts. 
That some such consequence as this was intended seems very probable. If it resulted 



184 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xun. 1— 18 

as they suppose, then the judgment was averted wliich depended upon their miscon- 
duct and worldliness. " God repented him of the evil." This is one of the great 
aims of such teaqhing — bo to affect the heart through the imagination as to subdu* 
its evil tendencies and lead it to the pursuit of righteousness and truth. The 
crowded Jewish colony of Alexandria may then he taken, not as a refutation of the 
words of Jeremiah, hut as a proof that these words produced their legitimate impres- 
sion, and brought about a deep and lasting refoimation. The lesson of all which is 
that the relation between sin and its punishment, and the futility of earthly securities 
and screens from Divine vengeance, cannot be too forcibly represented. God will 
bless the faithful preaching of his Word, and ia infinitely more willing to have mercy 
than to prove his predictions by allowing men to harden their hearts. — M. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — Hearts set to do evil. Such wer« the hearts of these Jews. They 
show concerning such — 

I. That affliction wili. not altbb teeh. It is not always true that affliction 
will make the heart better. It serves this blessed end with some— cf. " Before I was 
affiicted I went," etc. — ^but not with all. Did not in this case, but though "often 
reproved," they only " hardened their neck." 

II. Pbaters and profession of belioiok do not control them. They can go 
together. Alas ! that it should be so; but they will not rule. They are but so many 
cobwebs, which the. heart set to do evil will break through as easily as a man 
breaks through the gossamer filaments which stretch across the path on which he is 
walking. 

III. Pretexts and pretences are always ready to excuse theu. "Thou 
speakest falsely," they said to God's prophet. " Baruch . . . hath set thee on." Bo, 
so pitifully, they try to justify themselves. 

IV. God dobs not interfere to prevent them. We often wish he would, depriv- 
ing us of our liberty when it would only do us ill. But his method is to let us go 
our own ways, and if, as is so wretchedly often the case, they be evil ways, then, 
when we are filled with the fruit of them, we may come to a better mind, and so 
more firmly choose the good which we should have chosen at the first. How much 
happier a man for ever that younger son would have been if he had never previously 
left his father's home for that far country I 

V. Terrible judgments are sure to follow them. They did in this case ; they 
always do sooner or later. For the wili mtist tiend to God. 

' VI. God's faithful servants will not be dismayed by them. See how bold as 
a lion is the prophet of God ; how fearlessly he denounces his people's sin. Oh, for 
fidelity such as that in all the prophets of the Lord 1—0. 

Vers. 8 — 13. — Building on tht sand. The Jews trusted in the strength of Pharaoh. 
They had done this before, but to no purpose. The prophets of God always protested 
against such trust (cf. Isa. xxxi.). Here, in spite ot all warnin<:;, they are resolving 
upon such reliance a;{ain. But they were building on sand. The destruction came ; 
ttie very destruction they thought, by their acting as they had done, they had 
certainly escaped. Thus do and shall be done by all who are like them. Such are— 

I. They that think to establish themselves by wicked ways. 

II. Those that rely upon men and not on God. 

III. Those that trust to uncertain riches. 

IV. Those that think saying " Lord, Lord," whilst living ungodly lives, will aavt 
them. — C. 

Ver. 1. — The view of a prophefs complete work, I. A prophet ib onb who has 
to speak the wobds of Jehovah. Not his own words, not the words of other 
men. This applies to the substance of the message ; for it is plain that each prophet 
has his own style. The chief thing to be remembered is that a prophet never goes 
foith on his own impulse. Men in their zeal for right may go out to protest against 
wrong and fight against it, but this does not make them prophets. The prophet's 
strength and claim and responsibility lie in this, that he can ever preface his announce- 
ments by " Thus saith the Lord." And all preachers and teachers will approach the 



OH. XLiu. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 188 

prophet]s position just in proportion to the extent In which they can fill their addresses 
with Divine declarations. The essential elements of prophecy can never be out of 
place. 

II. _Hb has to speak aUi the wobds of Jehovah. The prophet b not to be an 
eclectic, picking out some of God's words as suitable and others as unsuitable. God's 
omniscience can alone judge what is suitable. If to him it seems suitable a word 
should he spoken, then it is suitable. God speaks not to apparent needs, but to real 
ones. God, always saying something for the present, makes his weightiest words to 
bear upon the future. The responsibility of the prophet is simply that of being a brave 
uid faithful messenger. 

III. He is bent to speak these wobds. He does not merely take np woids of 
Jehovah which he thinks suitable for the emergency. This is his work to act as a special 
messenger from Heaven. Others have to expound the Word already spoken, already 
written ; but the prophet hears a voice directly from the excellent glory, " Go and make 
known my vfill to men." And in all prophecy there is evidence, to one who will look for 
it, that the prophet is a sent man. 

IV. He has to speak words to those on whom God has a claim. Jehovah 
is not only the God of Jeremiah, he is the God of all the people. This was an historical 
fact of which they could not get rid. It was the glory, security, and blessing of the 
people, if only they could see it. And is not Jehovah also our God ? — God coming for 
• while more closely in contact with one nation, that ultimately he may be in contact 
with all. If we admit the claim of Jesus, we admit the claim of Jehovah also. He 
speaks through ancient prophets to us, because the essentials of their message have to 
do with the permanent life of men. 

v. He speaks to all the people. In this particular instance the request came 
from all the people, so the message was correspondingly to all. Prophets, of course, had 
often messages for particular men, but even these messages are so founded upon general 
principles as to become worthy the attention of all. Prophecy concerns man as man ; 
it meets the yoimg vrith dawning consciousness, and grasps the old till their latest hour. 

VI. The prophet must take oabe to make an end of his profheot. He does 
not simply cease speaking; he has to make people feel he has said all he has to say, and 
that the time has come for them to have their say, or rather for them to enter with 
promptitude and devotion upon corresponding deeds. They may not hear all they 
would like to know, and thus it must be made clear they have been told all that it is 
good for them to know. With God all things are for edifying, not to inform curiosity 
or comply with every actual desire. — Y. 

Vers. 8 — 13. — TTie visitation upon Egypt. Here again is one of the symbolio acts 
which the prophets were commanded at times to perform. So the hiding of the girdle 
by Euphrates (ch. xiii.), the commanded celibacy of the prophet (ch. xvi.), the 
dashing of the potter's bottle to pieces (ch. six.). But while these symbolic acts are 
described in terms which make them perfectly clear, the hiding of the great stones 
mentioned here needs more full explanation than we can reach to get the significance 
it. Still, this much of the drift of the action we perceive that Jehovah will make 
quite manliest, that Nebuchadnezzar's conquest of Egypt is one divinely ordained and 
sustained. Not, of course, that Egypt is to suffer simply because these men have gone 
there ; its idolatries are the deepest ground of its calamities. But the delusion of tiie 
men of Judah must be looked at in the light of the sufferings of Egypt. In all this 
experience of death and captivity and slaugliter, of temple-burning and image-breaking ; 
in all this entire appropriation of Egypt by the Babylonian king, these men of Judah 
must not expect to escape. There is no second land of Goshen for them — a place of 
immunity and peace. If only they had stayed where they thought there would be no 
safety, then they would have been safe ; and goinij where they made sure of safety, they 
found the worst of ruin. It reads as if Egypt was to com* under Babylon more •¥«■ 
tb>a Jerusalem bad done. — Y< 



186 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xliv. 1—30 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XLIV. 



Jeremiah's debate with the Jewish fngi- 
tives in Pathros ; his last prophecy. 

Vers. 1 — 14. — Accusation brought against 
the obstinately idolatrous peo|'le. 

Ver. 1. — Which dwell ; rather, wliirh 
dwelt. It appears from this vurse that the 
Jewish fugitives had separati d in Egypt, 
some going to the two northern frontier 
cities, Migdol (on which see K. S. Poole, 
' The Cities of Egypt,' ch. viii.) and Tah- 
panlies or Daphnse, others further soutli to 
Noph, i.e. Memphis, or, less probably, Napiita 
(see on ch. ii. 16), and Patliros (».e. Upper 
Egypt ; comp. Isa. xi. 11). 

Ver. 6. — Was kindled in ; rather, burned 
up. 

Ver. 7. — Against your Bonis ; i.e. against 
yourselves. The " soul " is the personality. 

Ver. 8. — That ye might cut yourselves off ; 
rather, that ye might cut (them) of from you. 
Who are meant is clear from ver. 7. 

Ver. 9. — Have ye forgotten, etc.? The 
prophet wonderingly asks if they have for- 
gotten the sins of their forefathers and the 
consequent calamities. No other ex|ilana- 
tion of this present idolatry seems possible ; 
and yet how passing strange is it I Their 
wives. The Hebrew has " his wives," i.e. 
according to Kimchi and Hitzi^', the wives 
of eacli of the kings (sometiincs great patrons 
of idolatry). But it is better to adopt, with 
Ewald, Giaf, iind Dr. Payne Smiih, the read- 
ing of the Soptuagint, "liis prinres." 

Ver. 10. — They are not humbled ; rather, 
not made civntrite (literally, not crushed, vis. 
by repentance). 

Ver. 1 1. — To ont oil all Jndab ; i.e. the 
Judah in Egypt, not that in Uabylon. 
Notice the qualitieation of this too absolute 
statement in vers. 14, 28. 

Ver. 14.— They have a aesire; literally, 
they lift up their sou! (lorap. eh. xxii. 27). 

Vers. 15 — 19. — The reply of tlie people. 
The special mention of the women su^'gi sts 
that the occasion of the gatliering was a 
festival ill honour of the Queen of Heaven. 

Ver. 1 5. — Had burned incense ; rather, wen 
burning incenm. The pr.Actice was still 
goiuK on. 



Ver. 17.— Whatsoever thing goeth forth ; 
rather, the whole word which hath gone forth. 
A particular vow to the divinity ia meant. 
The queen of heaven (see on ch. vil. 18). 
Then had we plenty of victuals, etc. An 
extremely important passage, as revealing 
the view takeu of their misfortunes by Jews 
of the average type. Jeremiah regarded 
the misfortunes of his country as proofs of the 
displeasure of Jehovah ; these Jews, on the 
other hand, of his impotence. 

Ver. 19. — This part of the reply belongs 
to the women, who declare that, their lius- 
bands' consent having been given to their 
vow, Jeremiah has no rif;ht to interfere (see 
Numb. XXX. 6, 7). Burned . . . poured, etc. ; 
r.ither, burn . . . pour. Did we, etc. ; rather, 
do we, etc. To worship her. The sense of 
the Hebrew is doubtful ; but the best read- 
ing seems that of Itashi, Graf, and Dr. 
Payne Smith, " to make her image." With- 
out our men ; rather, without our husbands. 

Vers. 20 — 30. — Jeremiah's rejoinder. 

Ver. 21. — Kemember them; i.e. the re- 
peated acts of idolatry. 

Ver. 25. —With your hand ; rather, with 
your hands. Ye will surely accomplish, etc. ; 
rather, ye shaU, etc., by aU means perform 
your vows, and tnke the consequence. The 
irony of the passage is lost by the " will " of 
the Authorized VLrsion. 

Ver. 26. — My Name shall no more he 
named. Because no Jews will be .left alive 
in Egypt. 

Ver. 28. — ^Tet a small number, etc. 
Isaiah's doctrine of the remnant. In the 
midst of judgment, God remembers mercy, 
and his ancient covenant. A remnant is 
saved as the nucleus of a regenerate people. 

Ver. 29. — A sign ; rather, the sign. 

Ver. 30. — I will give Pharaoh-hophra, etc. 
The sign consists in the capture of Huphra 
by his deadly enemies. Henceforth he will 
live in constant alarm, for he is in the 
hands of those " that seek his life." AU 
that we know of the fate of Hophra (Apries) 
is derived from Herodotus (ii. lyy), who 
states that Amasis "gave Apries over into 
the hands of his former subjects, to deal 
with as they chose. Then the Egyptians 
took him and strangled him " (see furtiier on 
ch. xlvi. 13> 



EOMILETICS. 



Vers. 1 — 10. — Warnings from tJiepast. History has its moral lessons. We who are 
heirs of the ages should learn wisdom from the mistakes as well as from the good 
exam])les of the past. Let us consider how this may be done. 

1. W'askinos fbom tee sin of ihe past. Jeremiah calls upon the Jews in Egypt 



OH. XLiv. 1— 30.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. ''*• 

to reflect on the wicked conduct of their nation, tracing it back from the piesent 
through successive generations of iniquitous court and private life. It is a gloomy 
task, but a wholesome one. Tacitus was, perhaps, the greatest moralist of his age, 
because he saw into the moral side of history, and ruthlessly exposed the vice and 
cruelty and treachery which underlay the splendour of Roman imperialism. Because 
we can read history with some measure of detachment from the passions and prejudices 
of the hour, we may learn to see therein the character of actions which are closely 
parallel to others nearer home. Thus the past may become a mirror of the present, 
and one that rectifies the images from the confusion which accompanies the direct 
vision of what is very closely connected with our own person. 

II. Warnings from the Divinb voice in the past. God had instructed and urged 
his people to forsake their sins. He had not left them in the dark or unchecked — 
" Howbeit I sent unto j'ou all my servants the prophets." This had been done with 
earnestness and emphisis — "rising early and senoing them." It was a revelation of 
the evil character of tlieir deeds — " this abominable thing ; " an appeal to them to cease 
from such wickedness — " Oh, do not this abominable thing I " and a declaration of the . 
Divine abhorrence of their conduct — " that I hate." All this has been said concern- 
ing the wiclcedness of the past ; but it is to be reflected upon for its apiJication to 
the present. We also may find profit in considering the ancient voices of heaven. The 
warnings of the Bible may be re-read and re-applied in our own day. If we see no new 
Jeremiah, we have the inspired words of the old Hebrew prophet, and they are as true 
now as ever. What God hates he hates eternally. What he forbids is always wrong. 
The object of his urgent appeal should command submission at all times. 

III. Warnings fkom the punishments of the past. The object of punishment is 
twofold. First, it concerns the guilty ; secondly, it has lessons for witnesses. It is 
chastisement to the offender, it is warning to others. No punishment would be just if 
it were simply given as a deterrent. But being deserved and needful on account of the 
conduct of the victim, it is then utilized in perfect justice for the general benefit of the 
community. We should be thankful for the fact that the fate of others is not alto- 
gether obscure, so that we may profit by the sad lessons of their experience. 

Ver. 16. — Open rebellion. L God leaves us febb to accept ob bejeot hib 
authohitt. Whatever may be urged from the standpoints of abstract philosophy 
and of speculative theohigy, in practice, as Butler says, we all act as though we were 
free. In the Bible, too, this practical freedom of the will is constantly i:iiplied and 
appealed to. Though we have no moral right to renounce the Law of God, though we 
shall suffer if we do so, the terrible power of rebellion is entrusted to us that our 
loyalty mny be proved and our service may remain free and willing. 

II. All evil centres in the will. The iddlatrous Jews will not hearken to the 
word' of Jeremiah. Herein lies the sum and substance of their offence. Depraved 
appetites and wicked passions are temptations to the evil will or products of its deeds. 
In themselves they are no more wicked than the external temiJtatioDS which appeal to 
the purest elements of our common human nature. Guilt consists in yielding to them 
— in the act of the will that consents, indulges, or urges. 

III. Wilful rejbc tion of truth is rebellion against God. Kct to hearken is to 
revolt We must be careful to distinguish pure intellectual doubt and unbelief from 
this revolt of the will against truth. The latter may not deny the correctness of 
what it rejects; it simply refuses to follow it. If it does fail to believe the truth, but 
throncrh only wilfully closing all avenues of evidence, the blame of an evil will must 

be attached to it. . i. ,i T^• • *v -j i » 

IV Self-will is an evil will. In rejecting the Divine message the idolatrous 
Jews insolently add, "We will certainly do the whole word which hath gone forth out 
of our own mouth" (see ver. 17). 1. Self-will even in r.gar.l to things innocent in 
themselves is nevertheless an evil will. For we are not our iwn masters. The servant is 
wrong if he disobey his master, though to do a harmless act. The soldier is guilty in 
disobeying orders, whatever otler course he may take. We are " un.ier authority." If 
our Captain says, " Go," we are not free to staml for the most innocent reason. 2. Self- 
will is too often directed to evil things. Those Jews who delib rately rejected the 
Divine message chose to perform acts of idolatry of thoir owu will. Our will is corrupt 



188 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. ilit. 1—301 

Left to itself it chooses much that is evil. To keep it pure we must lift it up to unioo 
with a higher will. When it breaks loose and defiantly chooses its own private course, 
its evil nature will incline it to a bad course. 

v. COUFANIONSHIP IN SIN BECOMES CONBPIBAOT IN OBEATEB SIN. The husbandg 

■support their wives in the evil practices of the women, and together they declare that 
for the future they will pursue these practices openly and deliberately. But the closest 
relationship and the WMrmeut affection are do reasons for defendirrg wicked conduct, 
much less for encouraging and shaving it. When the love of husband and wife con- 
flicts with the love of God, even that most near and sacred tie should yield to the 
highest of all obligations. Otherwise the marriage relation, which ia instituted for the 
blessings of mutual comfort and happiness, becomes a curse, 

Ver, 18, — Chastisement mMnterpreted, L It is possiblk to mistake ths oacsb 
AND FUBF08B OF God's fbovidenoe IN CHASTISEMENT. Instead of accepting their 
calamities as punishments for their sins against Jehovah, the Jews in Upper Egypt 
i\rgue from them to conclusions of unbelief in the power and goodness of the God of 
their fathers. They are not alone in their error. The problem of suffering and its 
source and aim is profoundly difficult. The glib repetition of old platitudes only mocks 
at the mystery it can never solve. Job's friends were good men, and two of them able 
men ; but " miserable comforters " were they all, because their explanation of the cause 
of the tragic agony before them was so utterly inadequate. Two reasons for error in 
the interpretation of chastisement may be detected in the case of Jeremiah's contem- 
poraries. 1, An evil disposition. These men had no desire to recognize the hand of 
the true God in their experience. They had followed their wives in favouring the 
immoral rites of a heathenish cult. Jeremiah's teaching was rejected with insult ; the 
idolatrous religion was grasped with obstinate self-will. Behaving in this way, the 
Jews in Upper Egypt were not in a fit state to judge fairly of the meaning of God's 
dealings with them. Our " views " of truth depend materially on our attitude towards 
it. Bad passions and a corrupt will prevent men at all times irom profiting by chastise- 
ment, 2, The delay (^chastisement. This was not conternporaneous with the sin. It 
would seem that the corruption which followed the reformation of Jo^iah was not so 
bad as that which preceded it. Yet it was after this that the blow fell. Now, a 
liimilar experience may often be noted. Charles II, was a worse king than James II., 
and Louis XV. than Louis XVI, The revolutions did not occur when things were at 
their worst. They took time to ripen. The chief causes of them were not their imme- 
diate antecedents. The same may be expected in private lives. Therefore it may 
require searching thought to trace the trouble down to its real root. 

XL It is possibi^ to fall into belioious eebob through misintebpbbtino Qob's 
PBOVIDENCB IN CHASTIBBMBNT. By a false inference drawn from the experience of 
trouble, the idolatrous Jews were led to fling off the last relic of their ancient faith, 
and to renew their allegiance to the heathen religion they had paitially renounced in 
outward act, though not, as it now appears, in the inclinations of their hearts. Con- 
sider the process by which this result was reached. 1. A delusion as to the nature of 
repentance and itt effects. The Jewish refugees had imagined that their abandonment 
of open idolatry would have warded off the impending doom. They were enraged at 
discovering their mistake, and they took the result as a reason for daring scepticism. 
Important lessons may be derived from their mistake, e.g. (1) that outward reforma- 
tion is useless before God without heartfelt repentance; (2) that there are necessary 
consequences of sin which no repentance can obviate— improvidence leading to poverty, 
intemperance to disease, crime to secular punishment, in spite of all the genuine tears 
of a Magdalene ; (3) that when God accepts repentance and forgives the penitent, it 
may still be necessary to chastise him for the good of his own soul. 2. Th» mistake oj 
judging vf the truth ef • religion by the worldly advantages that accrue from it. 
GocUinesi has "promise of the life that now is" (1 Tim, iv. 8), Under the Old 
Testameat economy this promise was emphasized. Nevertheless, even in the Jewish 
religion it was often recognized that suffering might fall upon the people of God 
(e,g. T*. zxii.). With our fuller light, we know that the temporal advantages of religion 
are iMit • smiul part of its blessings ; that under certain .ircumstances it may nring 
mora vwldly loas than gaia (e.g. to the martyn, etc) ; that there are Christiana wh« 



OH. xiJT. 1— 30.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEllEMIAH. 188 

reckon that if in this life only they have hoped in Christ, they •re of all men mosi 
pitiahle (1 Cor. xv. 19). Therefore we should settle it well in our minds that, as 
worldly injustice and calamities of all kinds may fall upon the devoted servants of 
Christ, the experience of these things should not shake our faith. This fact needs to he 
well considered and realized, because there is no more frequent cause of sudden and violent 
scepticism than a series of great and inexplicable troubles. 3. The sin of pursuing 
religion for iU worldly profit. Even if godliness is profitable for all things, it cannot he 
truly followed for the sake of gun. To choose our religion accnrding to the advantages 
it may give us, is to subordinate truth to convenience, and to degrade to the position ol 
a servant that which claims to rule as a master, or will have nothing to do with us. 

V«r. 22. — The limit of Go6P» forbearance. I. Gk>D'B roitBEABANoa n liuited. 
There is no limit to his love. His mercy " endureth for ever." There is no limit to 
bis patience, his endurance of the most provoking wickedness. But there is a limit to 
God's forbearance. Consider what determines this. \. Justice. There is a point where 
necessary justice must interfere to prevent further wrong and punish what is already 
done. 2. The good of the community. Mercy to the criminal may involve injustice 
to the victim. There are abandoned wretches whom the world would find inestimable 
advantage in caging up out of the power of doing further mischief. There must be a 
point where their rights cease and the rights of others step in. In the Divine govern- 
ment this must be noted and acted on. 3. The advantage of the offender. It is a 
curse to a man to leave him for ever unchecked and unpunished. He may be left for a 
season to give all necessary scope for the operation of milder measures and for his own 
free repentance. But when the gentleness has failed, the only chance lies in some 
drastic treatment. 

II. It is possible to beaoh the lihit of God's forbbabakce. It was reached by 
the antediluvians, by the cities of the pkun, by the Jews at the time of the Captivity, 
by the Jews when Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus, by many a nation and many a 
man since. It may be reached by ns. This subject, therefore, is not a question ol 
abstract theology, touching only the ideal relations of Divine attributes. It is tre- 
mendously practical. 1. The limit may be reached in our lifetime. Men presume 
on their prosperity till God providentially strikes them down in desolation, and they 
learn in their anguish the folly of their long abuse of God's long-suffering mercy. 
2. It will come to the impenitent in the next life. Death will bring it if it has been 
stayed during all the earthly life. The longer it is delayed the more fearful will be ita 
consequences to those who " treasure up to themselves wrath in the day of wrath." 

III. It must be mfSPEAKABLT TEREIBLB TO BEAOH THE LIMIT OF God'S FOE- 

BEABANCB. Then all the vials of wrath will be outpoured. The horror of the 
judgment ensuing can only be measured by the greatness of the forbearance which 
restrains it. If that were not very fearful, why should God hesitate so long in letting 
it loose ? Why should he use all other possible means to prevent the necessity of 
resorting to it? Why should he \irge and plead with us to hear his voice to-day and 
harden not our hearts? 



Ver. 25. — Sinfiil vow*. L SmruL rows abe ahono the most wicked of bins. 
Some sins are conunitted hastily and in passion, these with more deliberation ; some 
without strong dedre, these most earnestly. 

II. It is a sin to pebfobm sinful vows. If we were not at liberty to make the tows, 
we are not at liberty to perform them. We caimot be bound to do that which we have 
no right to do. If we have promised to do an unlawful act, we should not consider 
that promise binding upon us, since our word cannot abrogate the law that forbids the act. 

III. God liEAVES men fbee to bxecxttb theib evil intentions. The Jews in Upper 
Qgypt were to be left to the performance of their vows to the queen of heaven. This 
implied no sanction; it was only the withholding of forcible restraints. What a 
■olemn responsibility lies in the fact that we have this large liberty after we have 
chosen an evil way, and before we are called to judgment for it I 

IV. God sometimes ceases to warn men of the danqeb of theib wicked ooubses. 
They* are then left to themselves till their sin ripens. It is a terrible fate, but con- 
riateat with th« goodneif of God, m we may be sure that, if God deliberately oeases 



190 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlit. 1— 30i 

to warn • man, it is because warnings are lost on him or simply harden him. We 
may so sin as to Income "seared in our own conscience with a hot iron" (1 Tim. 
iv. 2). 

V. The fruit of the wicked courses which men have chosen fob themselykb 
WILL BE THE WORST PUKisHMENT OF THEM. They need no external penalties per- 
formed by executioners of justice. Sin is its own executioner, the natural effect of sin 
its own pimisliment. In the natural results that followed the performance of their 
wicked vows the idolatrous Jews will reap the bitterest harvest of retribution. "The 
sin, when it is full-grown, hringtth forth death " (Jas. L 16). 

Ver. 28. — The remnant of the remnant. Of the Jews who escaped the sword of 
Nebuchadnezzar in the invasion of their land, "a remnant" fled to Egypt; of this body 
of refugees " a remnant " was to survive the dangers that would destroy the greater 
part. Thus but a small number would return to Jerusalem in safety. For their folly 
in fleeing to Egypt the fugitives would suffer a second desolation, while the captives in 
Babylon and the patient poor people who remained in the land of their fathers would 
be spared. Tet even out of this further calamity some few would be brought in 
safety. 

I. Judgment is tempered with mercy. Many are spared at the first blow. Some 
of these are only hardened in wickedness. A second bluw falls. Still some are spared. 
God is reluctant to give bis people up. If he can find room for any mercy in the 
midst of the severest judgment, he will exerois^e it. 

II. God's judgment is discbimikatino. Even now it must be so ; for " shall not 
the Judge of all the earth do right ? " But we do not yet know its purposes and its 
methods, and therefore to us it looks as though it could not take note of individual 
deserts. Ultimately we shall see how Gk)d has overlooked no exceptional case. Noah 
is picked out of the drowning world. Lot is remembered in Sodom. Elijah is pro- 
vided for in the general drought. We can look for no such evidences of an interfering 
Providence in earthly things now, perliaps, but the truth they illustrate holds good, 
and must work its blessed results in the day of final account. Natural selection does 
not alwaj's result in the survival of the morally fittest on earth. On the contrary, 
the good may become martyrs, the bad triumphant tyrants. But we see only the 
openine; acts of the drama. The final catastrophe will reveal the justice that 
regulates. 

III. Left to themselves, no men could escape the doom of bin. In the eternal 
judgment there could not even be a remnant of a remnant. " All have sinned, and 
come short of the glory of Gi)d." All would, therefore, receive the wages of siu. 

IV. By THE REDEMPTION OF ChKIST ALL WHO HAVE SINNED MAT BE SAVED. This is 

large enough to deliver, not merely a remnant of a remnant, but eveky man who has 
fallen, however low be lies in the mire. 

V. At first but a remnant of a remnant abb saved bt Christ. The question 
whether few were to be saved was not to be answered for the satisfaction of idle 
curiosity (Luke xiii. 23). But that only a few sought the grace of Christ at first is a 
historical fact. The number has grown wonderfully, and yet how large a part of the 
world must be accounted still dark and dead in sin 1 But the few are saved that they 
may win the many. The first disciples became apostles. The small remnant laid the 
foundation of a great nation. The Church is called to evangelize the world. 



HOMILIES BT VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — ^14 (vide ch. xliii. 8 — 13). — The condition of hardened sinners desperate 
I. Why IS IT bo? 1. Because rejieatid warnings have leen rejected. (Vers. 4,5.) 
These have been insjiired and infallible. Had they believed ever so little they mit^ht 
have trusted implicitly what was spoken, accompanied as it was with such miraculous 
credentials. We, in these last times, have had the Lord himself. He has revealed 
the heart of the Father. (2) Tliey were sufficiently numerous and seasonable. Gkid 
" rose up early and sent them." He sent them all. No opportunity or peculiarity ol 
individual influence was omitted. Christ is greater than all the prophets put together. 



OH. XUT. 1— 30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, 191 

and his gospel is universally declared and nniversally authoritative over the consciences 
of men. God cannot send another messenger, nor would it avail if he could. 2. 
Because the lessons of experience have been ignored. (Vers. 9, 10.) How terrihiy severe 
had not these been i It was scarcely possible for greater temporal punishments to be 
inflicted. Yet it was in the discipline of these judgments they were to have been 
saved. The path of transgressions, as the sinner looks back upon it, is marked by 
ruin and death. Yet will he not repent. 3. Their persistent disobedience is an intoler- 
able offence to Ood, (Ver. 8.) God's judgments are not exhausted, but his patience 
may be. The history of ofifence and punishment will not repeat itself indefinitely. 
There are abysses of wrath. There is an eternal fire. Let them beware lest they be 
utterly consumed. 

II, What are the signs that it is so ? 1. The Word of Ood is wholly against 
ihem. The indictment has no redeeming feature. 2. The pathos and pitifulness of 
Ood's entreaty. (Vers. 4, 7.) Tiiere is compassion in the Divine mind because of the 
consequences that impend. Who so able to understand the sinner's circumstances as 
bis Father ? He who can see before and after, and who can fathom the mystery of 
iniquity, fears for his erring child. 

III. What element of hope, ip ant, is stili. left fob them ? 1. Ood still 
pleads. Silence would mean hopelessness. Whilst his servant is authorized to speak, 
there may remain a way of escape. 2. The fatherly compassion his voice betrays. 
There are tears in the entreaty : " Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate I " 
It is the birth-cry of an evangel ; a prophecy of Jesus. Mercy may move and melt 
where judgment has failed. "For the love of Christ constraiueth us," etc. (2 Cor. v. 
14) ; " But God commendeth his own love toward us, in that, while we were yet 
■inners, Christ died for us" (Rom, v, 8).— M. 

Vers. 15—23. — Credentials of rdigion. Very important to know why we prefer one 
religious system to another, and also why we ought to prefer it. A man is con- 
tinually in need of having to give a reason for the hope that is in him. The higher 
religions find the field already occupied by many great systems, and have to vindicate 
themselves. The arguments employed here are those most conmionly adduced, because 
most superficial. As appealing to the sensuous and material side of human nature, 
they are very influential. „ , , j , ^ i^ . 

I. Worldly arguments fob a bblioion. Here they are employed on behalf of • 
false religion, an idolatry; but they are often made use of in recommending true 
religion. Tl'iey are generally of two classes, viz. pertaining : 1. To authority. The 
Idolatry here defended was (1) general and fashionable ; (2) ancient ; (3) patronized by 
royalty ; (4) practised in the mother city ot God's people. 2, To tendency. It was 
alleged to have promoted prosperity and peace. 

li. Their inconolusivbness. 1, Authority ts only valuable as it helps to establish 
truth. Sin in its most flagrant forms, ignorance and inhumaniiy, have been more and 
longer prevalent than the greatest religions the world has seen. The most cruel and 
debasin" reliiiions are the most ancient in most countries. The only authority which 
can be admitted in such a connection is that of the best, i.e. tlie wisest and purest 
2 The tendency argument is open to similar objections. It is a great dtal to say in 
favour of a religion that it has promoted the welfare and happiness of its supporters; 
but it is not so "easy to prove it. Here the prophet alleges that it was their idolatry 
which lay at the root of all the misery of the people of Judab. It requires a very 
wide varied and lengthened induction of a people's circumstances ere such a statement 
is leir'itimate' either way. And even if it were made out to one's satisfaction that a 
relis'ious svstem had a beneficial effect upon the material condition of a people, it must 
still be remembered that man is a spiritual being, and that his moral and spiritual nature 
will sooner or later enter an imperious claim to attention and saiislaction. Only that 
which is right and true can meet the wants of the human spin! under all circumstances. 
And God is the one Being who can satisfy the spiritual aspirations and needs of his 
creatures If the best and the holiest of men cannot be content with material advan- 
ta-'es and comfort, but are ever yearning for something beyond, it is evident that 
ttttlitarianism must be interpreted in a very spiritual sense indeed ere it 04»n pass 
muster as a tolerable criterion of any religion. It is chiefly because Christianity has 



in THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlit. 1— 30 

revealed a Divine communion and a universal moral basis that it is destined to siip< 
plant all other creeds. But at the same time, it is also enforced by the test of utility 
in its more material aspect, ^o religion has so advanced the comfort, civilization, and 
peace of this world. — M. 

Vers. 26 — 28. — Hit danger of corrupting true religion. God has from the beginning 
been solicitous for the purity of his revelation and worship. He would never suffer 
his ordinances to be tampered with, or share his honour with other gods. " Thou shalt 
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve " (Deut. vi. 13 ; Luke iv. 8). 

L It has been guarded by awful sanctions. Frequently in Old Testament 
history the death-penalty was inflicted upon spiritual pretenders, false prophets, and 
idolatrous worshippers of Jehovah. The warning of the text is very significant; a 
time was to come when no Jew would any more swear by Jehovah in Egypt, for the 
very good reason that there would be none there. " In the form of asseveration the 
Name of Jehovah would he still retained, although they had long since been devoted 
to the service of other gods. But Jehovah, who is a jealous God, rejects honour and 
acknowledgment which he must share with others ; and so his Name shall no longer 
be heard from the mouth of any Jews in Egypt " (Hitzig). In the New Testament 
men are warned of making the Word of God " a cloke for lasciviousness ; " of " perishing 
in the gainsaying of Core ; " of tasting of the powers of the world to come, and falling 
back ; of making gain of godliness ; of handling the Word of God deceitfully, and 
wresting it to their own destruction ; or of adding aught to the revealed truth (Rev. 
xxiL 18, 19). 

II. Reasons fob this sevebitt. 1. Objective. (1) The slow advance of truth. 
(2) The costliness of the Divine relation. 2. Suljective. (1) Partly in the very 
nature of the case — moral simplicity being sacrificed in the self-consciousness of a cor- 
rupt worship. (2) The necessity of inspiration by the truth in order to the spiritual 
welfare and true immortality of man. — M. 

Vera. 1 — 30. — Jeremiah's last sermon. There are other prophecies of Jeremiah 
recorded in this hook in the chapters that remain, but this discourse is the last that 
we know of his delivering. And with it the curtain falls upon this great prophet of 
God ; upon Baruch, his beloved companion and helper ; and upon the wretched Jews for 
whose good he had laboured, but in vain. A long interval separates it from that in the 
previous chapter ; for we see the people not now at Tahpanhes, at the border of Egypt, 
but gathering from all parts of the land to Pathros, to a great heathen festival there. 
And a very awful discourse it is. There is not one word of gospel in it, but the boom 
of the heavy bell of doom is heard resounding all through it — not one sohtary chime of 
grace, or mercy, or hope anywhere. It is like the words of the Son of man when he 
comes to judge the world, and all nations are brought before him, to those on his left 
hand. They are told their sin and their doom. They make such defence as they can, 
which is rather a defiance than a defence ; they are answered, and their sentence is 
pronounced again. There is throughout both these discourses nought but "a fearful 
looking for of judgment and of fiery indignation." " There remaineth no more sacri- 
fice for sin." Such sermons might well have suggested these apostolic words. In this 
one note— 

I, Its coumenoehent — the indictment or thb condemned. The prophet 
reminds them that they had seen God's judgments upon their brethren and fathers, 
and they knew the cause, that it was their sin against God. They had heard warning 
after warning addressed to themselves against the same sin. And not only had these 
warnings been repeated, but many messengers had been sent, and these had given their 
message with all earnestness and zeal, in season and out of season, and God himself had 
deigned to entreat with them and plead with them, saying, "Oh, do not this abominable 
thing that I hate 1 " But they had disregarded, despised, disobeyed all, and they were 
not humbled (ver. 10) even now. Therefore was their judgment pronounced against 
them and their doom was fixed. 

II. Thk answeb of the people. They would not believe in their doom. The; 
reserved to persist in their sin. They declared they were every way bett«r off in 
serving idols than in serving God, 



OH. XLIT. 1—80.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 193 

in. The prophet's eeplt axtd beiteba.tion of G-on's judoment aoainst them. 

Conclusion. As we read and ponder this terribli' chapter, and remember that as its 
declarations concerning the past were true, so also weie thc^e that related to the future ; 
for the judgment came upon them to the uttermost, far more than fell on those in 
Babylon. What can our hearts say to this ? " Who would not fear thee, Lord ? " 
" Keep back thy servant . . . from presumptuous sins." — C. 

Vers. 1 — 30. — The end of Jeremiah; or, going dotvn in eJoitds. With this chapter 
Jeremiah disappears from view. The sadness which surrounded his iirst ministry 
accompanies it to the last and deepens at its close ; like a sunset in clouds, going 
down in darkness and storrn. The path along which he had been led had been a via 
crucis, a via dolorosa indeed ; a lifelong tragedy, an unceasing pain. We can only 
hope that death came soon to him after his recorded history closes. We have seen 
him torn from his native land and carried down to Egypt. We see him in the forty- 
tliird chapter at the border of the land ; in this, in the heart of Egypt, at Pathros, 
probably forced to witness the degrading idolatry of his people, and unable to do anght 
to prevent it. An idol festival, accompanied, doubtless, with all the wonted pollutions 
of such worship, is proceeding, and he lifts up his voice once more in stern protest. 
Gut in vain, as heretofore. He vanishes from our view at an hour when his country- 
men, so far from being less addicted to idols, were now open in their sin, vaunting it and 
di.claring their determination to adhere to it, and their regret that they had ever done 
otherwise. What a farewell between a minister of Grod and the people of his charge I 
There never was but one other like it — the farewell of him who said, as he wept over 
another doomed Jerusalem and a future Jewish people, " Behold, your house is left 
unto you desolate." What became of Jeremiah from this date we know not. " No 
man kccweth of his sepulchre unto this day." "' There is the Christian tradition rest- 
ing doubtless on some earlier belief, that the long tragedy of his life ended in actual 
martyrdom, and that the Jews at Tahpanhes, enraged by his rebukes, at last stoned him 
to death." The testimony to the martyrs at the close of the eleventh chapter of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews is thought to contain allusion to him : " They were stoned" — 
so we read. There is a Jewish tradition, however, which says that he made his escape 
to Babylon, but Josephus, like the Bible, is utterly silent as to the prophet's end. And 
it has been suggested that the tradition of the Jew and the silence of the historian are 
alike owing to a desire to gloss over some great crime. The suggestion is a probable 
one. " But he did not need a death by violence to make him a true martyr. To die 
with none to record the time or manner of his death was the right end for one who 
had spoken all along, not to win the praise of men, but because the Word of the Lord 
was in him as ' a burning fire.' The darkness and doubt that bruod over the last days 
of the prophet's life are more significant than either of the issues which present them- 
selves to men's imaginations as the winding np of his career." " But a csireful examina- 
tion of his writings show that, whilst the earlier ones are calmer, \uftier, more uniform 
in tone, the latter show marks of age and weariness and sorrov;, ii d are more strongly 
imbued with the language of individual suffering." How glad >e would have been 
had the clouds lifted ere he died, and a gleam of sunshine had irrudiated the hitherto 
almost unbroken gloom ! Some of the prophets were permitted to have a blessed onlook 
into the better days tliat were coming. He who wrote the cloi Jng portion of Isaiah's 
prophecies did so ; like Moses from Mount Pisgah. But it was not so to be with thic 
jirophet of God. His sun was to go down in clouds, and, though he had faithfully kept 
God's commandments, there was not for him in this life any " great reward." Though 
out of love for his countrymen ho had refused the offer of & peaceful and honoured 
home in Babylon, like Moses, " clioosiui^ rather to suffer affliction with the people of 
God," he yet failed to win their aflLCliou or obedience ; and they remained in the same 
evil mind to the last. He had walked in the fear of the Lord. But those ways had 
not been for him " ways of pleasautuess," nor its paths " paths of peace." The broken- 
hearted old man appeals to God and man, " Behold, and see if there be any sorrow 
like unto my sorrow." The twenty-second psalm — that which seems to tell so clearly 
of the sufferings of our Lord — is thought by many to have been written by him, and tc 
tell of his own deep distress. Priest, patriot, prophet, martyr, hero of the faith indeed, 
what a life «ras thine from beginning to end, from thy first call by God to thy last 
jxBEHiAH — ^a. 



lai THE BOOK OF THE PROPHE'i JEREMIAH, [ch. xliv. 1—30. 

rejection by men ! These lines, translated for our day, and sung by our comfortabla 
congregations — with what consistency they who sing them best linow— 

« If I find him, if I follow, 
What his guerdon here? 
Many a sorrow, many a laboiWi 
Many a tear ; " 

— ^are applicable enough to one like that great prophet of God, whose career began, con- 
tinued, and, most of all, ended, in sorrow, labour, and tears. But the review of such 
a ministry must assuredly have its lessons. As we think of it are we not reminded — 

I. Of " THE Man of sorrows," our Lord Jesus Christ ? (Of. homily on Jeremiah's 
ministry, vol. i. p. 9.) No doubt other great servants of God, whose ministry and 
especially whose end have been like that of Jeremiah, come into the mind. John the 
Baptist in Bible history, and Savonarola in later days. The parallel between this great 
Florentine prciioher and our prophet has often been noticed. The insistance upon 
spiritual religion, the sad and terrible close of his career, — these have led many to look 
upon Savonarola as the Jeremiah of the Middle Ages. But these resemblances are 
incidental and undesigned. That, however, between our Lord and his honoured servant 
who, in so many ways, preceded him, is not incidental, nor can it be called unde- 
signed. But whilst the prophet is hke our Lord in so many respects, yet, great as were 
his sorrows, those of the Man of sorrows were greater still. For our Lord knew more 
ot the evil of sin and hated it more intensely. He sacrificed more and endured more. 
And so the experience of the prophets, like that of all God's servants, only goes to show 
that Christ has sounded deeper depths of sorruw than any that his servants can aver 
know. 

" Christ leads tu thiongh no darker toom 
Than he's been through oefore." 

Hence always " underneath," however deep the depths out of which we cry, "ar* the 

everlasting arms " of his sympathy and love and help. 

II. Of the lightness of our burdens compared with those of many of the 
BEBVANTS OF GoD? How it shames us to think of the things we murmur about, when 
we contrast them with what such men as Jeremiah cimiinually endured ! Su'ely as we 
think of the severity of his cross, and especially that of our Saviour, we shall cease to 
complain of what ours may be. 

III. Of what the obace of God can do? Did the prophet of God endure and 
contend so nobly, and was he faithful unto death ? But is not " Jesus Christ the same 
yesterday," etc. ? Then he who so strengthened his servants in days gone by will do 
the same still. Let us, therefore, go forward without fear. 

IV. Of the necessity of counting the cost ere we enter upon the service 
OF God? We see in the career of Jeremiah what may be required of us. Our Lord 
said to one candidate for discipleship, " The foxes have holes, and," etc. He would 
have the man consider if he were prepared to bear a life like that. And as we read 
what has been demanded of the Lord's servants, and may be of us, it is well that we, 
too, should count the cost. But do not count it so as to decline it; no, but that you 
may hasten to the treasure store of Christ, to the riches of his grace who will make 
Ills strength perfect in our weakness. 

V. Of the great argument for a future life which such a career as that 
OF Jeremiah furnishes? We have seen how uninterruptedly sad his life was, ami 
how darkly it ended. Now, can any say that there is nothing more for such a man as 
that ; that he and all they " who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished " — that 
is, the noblest, the purest, the best ; those whose lives were beautiful, brave, God-like, 
— that these have perished f And yet, if death ends all, they have. It is incredible. 

VI. If bugh men deemed it wf.ll to sacrifice all their present for the 
FATouB OF God, are we wise who refuse to sacbifiob anything, who love the 
world and cling to it and make it our good? — 0. 

Ver. 4. — JTie mind of Ood towards stn and tinners. "Ofa, do not this abominable 
thing that I hatel" 'dniatry is the sin specially referrnd to here. And it was indeed 



OH. XLiv. 1— 30.J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 19j5 

an "abominable thin<;." Pollution, cruelty, degradation, were inseparably associated 
with it. But the words may be applied to all sin — should be so ap|)lied. For what ts 
sint It is the acting out of that e>il corrupt nature which we know to our cost lurks, 
within us all. It is the stream tliat naturally flows from an evil fountain, the fruit that 
is sure to grow on a corrupt tree. Now, this view declares the mind of God — 

I. T0WABD8 SIN. 1. He calls it " this abominable thing." Thus he brands it. See 
how justly. For what do we call abominable? Is wrong done to a benefactor ahomin- 
aVet Is not every sin such a wrong? God does not; command more than he deservis 
when he says, " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart," etc. What do 
we not owe to him? and how do we requite him? Is wrong done to one who has 
entrusted his goods to us that we may employ them for him, who has made us his 
stewards that we may em|/loy rightly that which he has committed to our care, — is 
faithlessness to duch abominable ? But is not sin precisely such a wrong ? Our mind, 
affections, will, our body with all its faculties and passions, — what are they aught else 
but our Maker's goods with which, as stewards, he has entrusted us? Let conscience 
declare the use we have made of them — that sin makes of them. Is tvrong done to 
the defenceless and innocent abominable t Do we not cry out loudly against such a 
one ? But is not sin such a wrong ? We sin not to ourselves. We entail the conse- 
quences of our actions on those who cannot defend themselves, who are utterly innocent, 
and who will surely suffer by what we do. So man dieth to himself. He drags down 
in the vortex in which he himself is engulfed children, friends, neighbours, com- 
panions, all whom he has influenced and helped to make sinful like himself. Is wrong 
done to vast numbers abominable, so that when we hear of how one has brought ruin 
upon multitudes our anger against him grows the more? Surely it is so. But where 
<lo the ever- widening circles ot sin's deadly influence stop? How wide an area do 
they enfold? "Jeroboam the son of Nebat . . . made Israel to sin." Is that which 
pollutes and defiles, which is sensual and unclean, abominable? But sin is guilty of 
all this. For all these reasons and others sin is an abominable thing. 2. He Jtates it. 
" Do not . . . that 1 hate i " God hates nothing that he has made. To ns some 
creatures are hateful and some persons. But not so to God. He does not hate even 
the sinner, but only his sin. It is not alone that it is abominable in its own nature 
that he hates it, but it works such ruin, spreads sorrow and desolation far and wide. 
It has opened and peoples the abodes of the lost. And it does despite and dishonortr 
to the Son of Ood. How, then, can God do otherwise than hate it? 

II. Towards the sinner. Note the pleading tone of this verse, " Oh, do not," etc. I 
\Vhat pity, wnat compassion, what yearning love, are all discernible in this beseeching 
entreaty which God addresses to the sinner ! " Hear, then, God say to you, ' Do it not I ' 
Now, what are you going to do? Do you mean to tell me that you will persist in it? 
Do you really mean that f Now, think ! Do you really mean to go on sinning in the 
face of such a messase as this? — with conscience smarting, and saying in its guilty 
smart, Do not that abominable thing I with memory weighted with the recollection of 
past transgressions, and saying by the leaden burden which it carries. Do not that 
abominable thing I With ail this, and much more, do you mean to say that you wil' 
continue in sin? With remorse, like spiritual tempest, already springing up within 
your soul, and threatening to destroy all your joy and peace ; with a tearful looking for 
of judgment and future indignation ; with your miserable convictions, and with your 
bitter fears; with your gloomy forebodings, and with your knowledge of the results 
and consequences of sin ;— do you mean to tell me that you are determined to continue ? 
Well, if you be determined to continue, when the offended Father comes down to you 
in his marvellous condescension, and cries, ' Oh, do not this abominable thing that i 
hate 1 ' then, we fear, there is but little hope ; and certainly, if this state of heart con- 
tinue, we cannot have much hope concerning you. It is probable that if some of you 
pass by many more seasons of conviction, God will say, ' He is joined to his idols ; l*t 
him alone ; ' and you will be, in this world, left alone. You will come here, perhaps, 
according to your custom, but you will be left alone. I shall never have a message to 
you ; I shall never have a prayer for you ; no warning from these lips will ever reach 
you ; you will be insensible as the very pews in which you sit, and nothing shall seem, in 
these ordininces, to be a voice from Heaven to your guilty and needy soul. Thus will 
you live until, with a seared conscience, you li» down on the bed of death, and there, 



196 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh xuv. 1— 30 

perhaps, when it is too late, all your old feara will be awakened. You may send to 
your minister upon that bed of death, and he may come, but by your bedside he may 
be speechless; his very power to pray may depart from him, and in trying to ask 
mercy for you all his utterances may be choked ; and you may go from that wretched 
dying bed to hell. And as you sink down into the pit, the millstone about your neck 
will be the abominable thing which Ood hates " (Rev. S. Martin). — 0. 

Vers. 17, 18. — The apparent profitableness of sin. This was what they asserted. 
And there seemed something in the assertion. All the great nations aronnd them, and 
of which they knew anything, were idolaters — Assyria, Tyre, Babylon, Egypt, and the 
powerful Philistine, desert and other tribes. But Israel was in great trouble and 
humiliation. But the argument would have been valid if at the time of their fidelity 
they had always suffered, and if in their disobedience they had always prospered. They 
knew, if they would speak the truth, that the very reverse was the fact. When faithful, 
a thousand fell at their side, etc., but it came not nigh them. But when disobedient — 
though Qod bore with them for a while, and this forbearance they perverted into an 
argument for their sin, as so many do still — then it was their troubles came. But, no 
doubt, ungodliness did and does at times seem to be the most profitable course. This 
is so because — 

I. If it were not so, then there could be no such thing as faith. 

II. Nor could there be holiness — no love of goodness and God for their own sake. 

III. The ungodly are held back by no scruples as the godly are. 

IV. And they have the advantage of concentration of energy. They care only for 
one world ; the believer cares for two, and most not for this but for the next. 

V. The long-suffering of God may lead them to repentance. 

VL Therefore, let us not grudge the wicked their prosperity, nor deem their ways 
better than the ways of God. — C. 

Ver. 17. — Wretched reasons /or a wrong resolve. When we come to a good reso- 
lution there can always be found good reasons for it. But when we come to a bad 
resolve the reasons for it do not always appear so bad as they are. They cau be 
plausibly nrged and maintained, and appear very valid until they are more closely 
examined and the lijiht of God's Word is brought to bear upon them. Then they 
appear what they really are. That Word is the Ithuriel's spear, which detects and 
declares what seemed to be something altogether different. Thus is it with the reasons 
urged here by the miserable exiles in Egypt for their persistB&ce in their idolatry. 
Note— 

I. Theib resolve. It was (1) that they would not hearken to the prophet of Qoi ; 
and (2) they would go on paying their vows, and burning their incense " unto the 
queen of heaven." Now, (3) this was a resolve proved to be wrong by the plain Word 
of God, the example of the noblest men of their race, the experience of their forefathers, 
and by the sorrows that had come and were yet to come upon themselves. But they 
urged— 

II. Theib reasons. These were : 1. Tlieir vows. As if a sinful vow could be made 
less sinful by keeping it ; of. Herod's vow to Herodias's daughter. Bad promises are ever 
better broken than kept. 2. Custom, which they said had in its favour : (1) Antiquity. 
Their fathers did so. Yes ; some of them had ; but nut all, nor the best. (2) Authority. 
Their kings, princes, etc. But this, also, largely false. (3) Unity. They all did it. 
But there were a faithful few still. (4) Universality. It was done everywhere. Not 
everywhere, but, no doubt, extensively and very much, it was true, in Jerusalem, the 
metropolis of their land. All this was but a portion of the truth. 3. They pleaded 
advantage. They were better off when they acted thus ; only trouble came when they 
worshipped God. No doubt sentence against their evil work was not executed 
speedily, and for a while their prospeiity was not interrupted. Hence they perverted 
this forbearance of God — as men do still — into a pretext for going on in their evil way 
Then when the judgments did come, and under the lash of them they gave up theii 
idols, it was only an outward abandonment, not a genuine repentance, and such con- 
duct did not bring back the forfeited favour of (ioA. Hence, they said, it had been 
better not to have forsaken their idols at all. 



CH. XLIT. 1— 30.J THE BOOK OF THE PKOPHET JEREMIAH. 197 

in. And these wretched beabons abb in force still. How many excuse and 
defend their idolatry of the world and self and sin on the ground of custom, of gain 
thereby, and of loss if thty act otherwise ! And the force of these so-called reasonings 
is great indeed with " men of this world." Where, tlien, can be found that reasoning 
which will beat back and beat down their fatal force ? In this alone — the Divine Spirit 
acting through a consistent, believing, happy Church. — G. 

Ver. 19. — The liusband's responsibility. " Did we make her cakes to worship her , . . 
without our men t " These women pleaded that they had their husbands' sanction for 
what they did. It could not have been otherwise considering the subordinate position 
women occupied in Oriental nations. No doubt, therefore, the husbands and the male 
heads of families generally not only permitted, but even prompted these things. 
Hence it was some sort of excuse and defence for these women thus engaged in 
idolatrous worship. Such defence is allowed in human law. For the husband, by 
Clirist's law as well as man's, is the head of the wife. If so, then the chief responsibility 
and the chief guiltiness on account of the sin of the household rest on the man at the 
head ot it. The especial blessing of Ood was pronounced on Abraham because, says 
Uod, " I know him, that he will command his household after him." The anger of God 
came on Eli because he failed to do this. To escape such guilt, let husbands : 1. Be in 
the Lord themselves. 2. Marry only in the Lord. 3. Be careful to maintain family 
religion. 4. Set themselves to seek the grace of God's regenerating Spirit for all their 
households. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — A severe lesson unlearned. L OrtoBTUNiTT to learn thb lesson. 
The suffering had not happened a long way off and to a people of strangers. Those 
who were to be taught had seen fur themselves. The suffering was the very cause 
that prompted them to seek a home in Egypt, and even at this moment it was no great 
distance that separated them from the land of desolation. And so also have we oppor- 
tunities, only too many, to learn from the sufferings of otbers. All suffering teaches 
something, if only we are willing to learn, and the suffering that comes through sin 
should have a peculiarly instructing power. Opportunity is also given, not only to 
learn ourselves, but to teach others. The daily newspaper, with its records of crime, 
folly, violent death, and lifelong disgrace, puts all who read it under a great responsi- 
bility for ordering their lives aright. 

II. The full explanation of the buffebino. The cause of it all is clearly stated. 
The unfaithfulness of a nation to their God. Even to have begun a departure from 
God was great wickedness, but persistency still further intensified the guilt. Other 
nations were faithful to their gods, though they were really no gods and had rendered 
no service, whereas Israel owed its growth, its position, its prosperity, its fiime, to 
Jehovah. We do not know the origin and moulding of any other people as we do 
those of the people of God. We canu' t think ot the great suffering connected with 
the desolated cities of Judah without thinking also of Jehovah's long-suffering, and of 
the continuous prophetic means he empluyed to set before his people their wickedness 
and peril. On tlie other hand, we have a lesson with respect to what seems unpunished 
iniquity. Suffering is surely being gathered up for it. Time is being given for repent- 
ance and amendment. 

III. The lesson is altogether unlearned. We say " unlearned," because it effected 
no change. Suffering; liy itself cannot change. Suffering, indeed, appears to have 
different effects with did'erent people, but the suffering is not really a cause. It but 
gives occasion to see whether men will yield to the new life and energy which comes 
from God. There had been a great upheaval in Judah, but so far as concerned the 
Jews dwelling in the land of Egypt the only change was one in the scene of their 
idolatries. They were the same men in Egypt as at Jerusalem. — T. 

Yen. 11— 14.— 2%« doom on those making sure of safety in Egypt. L A nxEo 
bebolution. The obstinate self-will of man brings into relief the inflexibility of the 
righteous judgments of God. The remnant of Judah set their faces to go into the laud 
of Egypt to sojourn there. What, then, is to be expected but that Jehovah should set 
\i*faet against them f The more self-will becomes a power in the life, the more nearly 



198 THE BOOK OF THE PKOPHET JEREMIAH. [oH. xliv. 1— 30. 

does it mnve in direct opposition to him who is the true Rovoreign and Disposer of every 
human lite. We can guess something of the thoughts of these Egypt-seekers. They 
say to themselves, " Henceforth we shall consult for our own safety." They speak aa 
if the peculiar perils hitlierto besi'tting them were the perils of one place rather than 
another. Perhaps even they reckoned that outside the land of Israel they were beyond 
Jehovah's reach. Here there is a lesson for us in our selfish aims and pursuits. All 
selfishness is bad, but even in selfishness a lesser badness is a degree of jioodijess, and 
it is well for a man it he gets frequently shaken in his selfisliness; for then, liis face 
not being steadily apainst God, he will find God looking on him encouragingly, to draw 
him out of his selfishne.'is altogether. 

II. A COMPLETE DESTRUCTION. Complete, that is, in the sense of peneral and final. 
There was but a remnant to begin witli, and of tliat a very small remnant miglit 
escape. The very smallness of the remnant, however, would but magnify the com- 
pleteness of the destruction. No place is .secure against the visitations of God's 
righteous wrath. Indeed, the greatc'r the appearance of natural security, the more 
n anifest will be the breaking in on this security of the Divine justice. Men must be 
tau'iht, even bv terrible lessons, that, as there is the best kind of safety under the 
shadow of God's wings, so there is the worst kind of dan;ier the further we go from 
God. To miilti])ly our own defences is really to multiply our own perils. 

III. A Nui.Lii'iEn puui'osE. This remnant, not fiiiding in Egypt the expected safety, 
thinks there is notiiing easier than to go back again to the land of Judah. Whereas 
they find too late that, while departure from their own proper place is easy enough, 
return to it may be impossible. Opening the door to get out was one thing ; opening it 
to get in again qii'te another. Seventy years was to pass before they of the Captivity 
should return IVum Babylon— indeed, it would really be another generation altogether; 
and should those who sought Egypt in contumacy and rebelliun expect to fare better? 
We must be wise in time. "To be wise too late gives sutii ring its keenest edge. So 
Judas brought back in vain the thirty pieces of silver, and Esau found no place ot 
repentance though he sought it cai'eful'}' with tears. This is why God is so earnest in 
promising wisdom and liglit to those who seek for them, that we may seek for them at 
the right time, at the beginning of the great.opportunity of life, and at the beginning 
of every smaller opportunity. — Y, 

Vers. 15 — 19. — Supposed and reed reasons for calamity. I. A supposed beason. 
What is the calamity V gword and famine. Ceitainly a calamity to be removed and 
as far as possible averted for the future. And casting about to discover a reason for 
the calamity, the men of Judah, or rather the women, for it is they who appear most 
prominently in this declaration, discover that the I'eason is to be found in the discon- 
tinuance ot their offerings to the queen of heaven. What a family matter this offering 
was is shown by ch. vii. 18. The women kneaded dough to make cakes to the queen 
of heaven. These offerings must have been very geneially given up when the migra- 
tion into Etrxpt took place, and then, on the coming of the sword and famine, what was 
more natural than for these women to connect the calamity with the discontinued 
offerings ? In one thing they were quite right ; theie was a supernatural reason for the 
calamity. Wrong as they were, it was well they did not rest in any mere natural 
reason. They were sure that a Divine Being of some sort or other had to do with their 
troubles. The directinn of iliou, ht is dillerent now. When calamity comes upon 
people, if they connect it with God at all, they very often do so in an arbitrary kind of 
way, as if nothing but a mere superior will, without reason or purpose of any sort, had 
sent calamity to tlu'm. It is easy to pity what we call the ignorance and superstition 
of this crowd of woinen, but always we can see the errors of other times far more 
easily than those of our own. The causes of suffering need to be inquired for very 
carelully, very patiently ; for wrong conclusions only bring more suffniing than ever. 

II. The REAL REASON. They l>ad forsaken J ehovah. Not that thei e is any necessary 
connection between the forsaking of Jehi vah and the sword and famine. Nothing but 
our faith in the reality of a | rophet's predictions can enable us to see this connection. 
There is oftentimes an utter forsaking of God, yet neither sword nor famine follow. 
The true and necessary result of {loing after something else than God is found in the 
consequent mi^e-y and emptiness of the life. Continually we suffer from our inability to 



OH. XLiv. 1— 30.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAt 



199 



•ee things in their right proportions. Bad as sword and famine may be, tlieie are things 
infinitely worse. The fact that this multitude was debasing itself by worshipping the 
quien of heaven pointed to a state of things far worse than any pliysical suffering 
could be. Physical suffering may at any time be removed, if desirable, by a miracle. 
But that darkness of the heart producing essential idolatry, a darkness so loved and 
cherished, who is to remove tliat ? Nay, the very fulness of temporal comforts may 
become a veil between God and the soul. The very thing which helped to deceive the 
people here as to tlie real causes of things lay in this, that at the time when they were 
woishipiiing the queen of heaven they had plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw 
no evil.— y. 

Ver. 27. — Watching over men for evil. I. This watching is never ibrespbcttv* oi 
CONDUCT. If God ever watches over any man for evil it is because the man's conduct 
deserves it. It is not so necessarily with our watching. We may watch over a man 
lor evil either from intensity of malice or intensity of selfishness. We may wish to 
do him ill Irom revenge or because his prosperity seems to mean our adversity. A word 
announcing watch over men fur evil is a very serious word to fall even Irom Divine 
lips ; and while God may speak it, perhaps we ought never to speak it. But at the 
same time, we cannot help watching over men for evil, and what we need esiiecially to 
guard ourselves a<:aitist is the doing of this from wrong motives. We must follow in 
the footsteps of God himself. When we Centura others, or oppose them, or make them 
suffer in any way, let it be clear to ourselves and as far as possible clear to the world 
that their conduct has demanded it. 

II. I'.vir, CONDUCT is nkveb separated from such watching. God says that ho is 
watching in this particular instance, but we know that he watches for evil against all 
evil-doers. We speak of evil-doing as being invariably followeil liy suffering, liut this is 
only one way of putting the matter. We may also say that when suffering follows 
our wickedness it is the proof that God is watching for evil over the evil-door. And in 
this matter we need zealously and boldly to do as God does, though, of course, we must 
do it according to the measure of human limits and intirinity. When any one is 
engaged with determination in any evil jjur-uit, it must be ours to show that we are by 
no means indifferent. God's watching over wicked men for evil is often done through 
the eyes of' his own people ; fcr if we have the Spirit of God in U8 there will be some- 
thing of Divine discernment. 

III. A connkcted truth that needs to be considered at the same time. If 
Odd watches over the wicked lor evil and not for good, it is equally true that he 
watches over the rijihteous lor pood and not for evil. Not one life, going on patiently 
and bravely in upriglitness, is unobserved by him. Whatever the appearances may be, 
the abiding realities of life are against the wicked and for the righteous. — Y. 

Ver. 28. — Human and Divine confidence. I. In what thet are alike. 1. In ifce 
assurance ■with which they are expressed. Here are men, in their worldly wisdom, 
perfectly certain that the course they have adopted will turn out right. It is always 
important to notice the assured unquestioning spirit in which m^en will set out on their 
enterprises. They do not seem to see the failures, disgraces, and humiliations of others ; 
such overwhelming troubles are not to come nigh them. And all this is great testimony 
to the use of faith to men. God means men to be confident. The confidence which he 
ever expresses himself is meant to find a correspondent confidence in us. We need 
never be dubious in matters of a spiritual kind, however dubious we have to be as to 
certain external results. If we only act in the right, divinely ordained way, then we 
can continually be confident thai all will come right. 2. In the time of waiting 
needful to Justify the confidence. God speaks words, the truth and profound sig- 
nificance of which it may take not merely generations but even millenniums to make 
manifest to the whole world. Everything immediately apparent to the outward eye 
may contradict what he says. And something of his own wisdom and insight into the 
future he gives to men of the right spirit, so that they may work for results which are 
to be developed through long perioils. He makes it possible for men to go on believing, 
hopeful and patient through all 'liscouragements, and even to die in the faith that what 
thsy have sown others will reap. Thus faith which God makes to stand ia the beginning 



200 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xur. 1—6. 



he itrengthens and establishea even to the end. And that faith which makes men 
themselves to utter confident dogmatic words will not be shakea all at once. Time 
is to try all things — the wisdom of the wise and the folly of the fools, the result ol 
that which is sown to the Spirit and that which is sown to the flesh. 

II. In what thet DiFFiSB. In respect of real and deep insight into th« future. 
The man who is confident in worldly wisdom is simply confident in the doctrine of 
chances. His chance of stability and success is equally good with that of others. 
iSome must fail, but some must succeed. But God would have us ever to imderstand 
that success of this sort is only a deferred failure. If men could only see far enough, 
success and honour and safety would be utterly transmuted into failure, disgrace, and 
ruin. But God's confidence is based on certain and complete Itnowledge. The end of 
all unsettlement and change must be something stable and continuous, and when God 
sees men reckoning themselves on a true foundation, which after all is miserably brief 
and frail, he can only assert the truth. If men will not believe, the only thing remain- 
ing is to wait. The utter downrall of the Jewish nation from such a height to such a 
depth was predicted even in the days of their outward glory. The Word of Qod stands 
because he can discern the certain exhaustion of purely human resources even when 
those resources show themselves in exuberant exercise and impressive acMevemeni.— Y> 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEK XLV. 
Fbomise to Babuoh. 

Ver. 1. — ^These words j i.e. the revelations 
which Baruch bad committed (or was com- 
mitting) to writing. 

Ver. 3. — Hath added grief to my sorrow. 
Baruoh felt " sorrow " or " pain " at the sin- 
fulness of the people ; "grief" or " anxiety " 
was added by Jeremiah's announcement of 
the judgment. I fainted in my sighing; 
rather, I am weary with my sighing} comp. 
Ps. Ti. 7 (Authorized Version, 6). 



Ver. 4. — ^That which I have bnilt(comp.ch- 
L 10 and parallel passages). Even this whole 
land ; rather, and that is the whole earth. 

Ver. 5. — Seekest thou great things, etc.? 
All around is passing through a sore crisis, 
and canst thou expect a better lot ? It is no 
time for personal ambition, when the very 
foundations of tlie state are crumbling. In 
all places whither thou goest. This seems to 
indicate that Baruch's time of exile would 
be a restless one ; it would nowhere be safe 
for him to take up a settled habitation. 



HOMILETICa 

Vert. 1 — S.^The grief of one soul, and its consolation. This chapter is devoted to 
one man. Among ihe large prophecies concerning whole nations, room is found for a 
prophecy to a single individual. The Bible is at once universal and individualistic in 
character. Its narratives alternate history with biography. God cares for the whole 
world, and truth is large as the universe ; yet God does not forget one soul in its private 
distress, and truth h:<s special applications to special cases. 

I. The gbiep. Baruch had a double distress — grief added to sorrow. 1. 27k« first 
sorrow. Probably this arose from a consideration of the wretched condition of the 
nation in its vice and decay. It is right and natural that good men should feel deep 
concern at the state of their country. The Christian should have the spirit of him who 
" when he beheld the city, wept over it." lloreover. if we see much of the wickedness 
of the world, we should not be satisfied with steadily condemning it, nor with congratu- 
lating ourselves on our own superior goodness. The sight should fill us with sorrow. 
'I'hey who go thus astray are our own brethren. And is not there much of the same sin 
in all of us ? Often the wickedness which shocks us in others ia only the full develop- 
ment of the very sin that lurks in our own hearts. 2. Tlie added grief. (1) This 
came from the prophecy. Baruch was commissioned to write and read. His privileged 
position, so near to the fountain of inspiration, only deepened his distress. High spiri- 
tual privilege may bring only sadness in this world's experience. Increase of kuowiedira 
may be increase of sorrcw. Revelation is sometimes a cause of distress. Ia ths present 



OH. XLT.I— 6.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 20J 

case the prophecy was a declaration of the approaching doom of Jerusfilem. We 
should contemplate the punishment of the impenitent wltli profound ^licf. Revenge- 
ful, triumphant, or self-complacent feelings in regard to this terrible subject are quite 
unchristian. (2) Bavuch had personal grounds for his distress. In the npiiroaching 
overthrow of his nation all his cherished hopes of personal ambition were shattered. 
The most sanguine too often suffer the bitterest disappointments. (3) Jerevdah's grief 
would add to that of Baruch. Sorrow is contagious. He who is much with " the Man 
of sorrows " will be likely to feel strange grief in contemplating the evil of the world. 
Baruch could find no rest in his grief. The greatest weariness is not the result of hard 
work ; it comes from distress of heart. It is trouble, not work, that breaks down the 
strong life to premature old age. The blessedness of the heavenly rest is that it is rest 
from sorrow as well as from toil. 

II. The consolation. Jeremiah has a prophecy for Baruch. God speaks to indivi 
dual souls. The preacher must be preached to. Has not he who would save others a soui 
of his own to be saved ? How sad that any preacher should declare the Divine messago 
to the people, but hear no voice speaking peace to his own troubled soul 1 If he were as 
faithful as Baruch, he might expect, like Baruch, to receive a Divine consolation. Note 
the characteristics of this consolation. It did not deny the cause of grief. Much com- 
fort is unreal and false in trying to do this. The consolation for Baruch consisted 
chiefly in furnishing him with advice regarding his views of God's action and his 6wn 
aims in life. 1. A lesson of acquiescence in the Divine tvill. God is acting within his 
rights. It is vain to rebel. Peace is found in submission. 2. A rebuke to ambition. 
Self-seeking brings distress. As we live out of self we gain Divine peace. 3. A promise 
of safety. After the lessons intended to lead Baruch into a right mood, God promises 
him his life — only this, but this is much for a humble man who knows he does not 
deserve it, and a good man who will,devote it to God's service. 

Ver. 4. — Divine destruction. I. God can destuot his own work. What he made 
he can unmake. People dogmatize about the indestructibility of matter, of atoms, of 
souls. How do .we know they are indestructible ? Is Go'i's omnipotence limited by 
the properties of his own works ? But apart from all metaphysics, the complex world, 
being constructed, is plainly subject to destruction. It is monstrous to think the 
universe is a huge Frankenstein, able to escape from the power of its Maker. 

II. God has a eight to destboy his own work. There is no property so clearly 
belonging to a person as the work of his own hands. All things that exist were made 
by God, and all belong to him. Wliat he gave us he has a right to withdraw. His 
gifts are loans, talents to be used for a season and then returned. No creature has a 
right to its own life bef 're God. He freely gave it ; he may withdraw it. Much less 
have we sinful creatures any such right. 

III. God will not destroy his own work without good reason. A power is not 
necessarily always put forth nor a right in perpetual exercise. God does not act 
capriciously nor cruelly. He is the Creator rather than the Destroyer. He delights 
in creatinji because he loves his creatures. He takes no pleasure in destroying, but will 
only do it under urgent necessity. 

IV. Nevertheless there are circumstances under which God will destroy his 
OWN WORK. All things were good when they came from their Maker's hands. But 
some have been corrupted. When a thing is hopelessly corrupt there is no reason for 
preserving it and much for destroying it. See this in earthly experience — the Flood, the 
destructiohof Jerusalem, and ingreaterjudgments— the wages of sin, death, and the final 
destruction of the world. Therefore let us not presuuie that any work or institution is 
eternal because it was established by the eternal God, that any possession of ours must 
be permanent because it came from him, or that our own life is safe because God 
breathed it into us. 

Ver. 6. — Self-seeking. Self-seeking is treated in the Bible, especially in the New 
Testament, as both wrong and not really profitable to the self-seeker, although it seems 
to be prompted by natural instincts and supported by good reasons. Let us consider 
the grounds of these representations. 

L Wht bblf-seekinq is wrong. God does not require absolute altruism ; we are 



208 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlt. 1— 6. 

only commanded to love our neighbours as ourselves. Natural self-regarding instinct! 
created by God can surely be innocently exercised. It cannot be necessary for all efforts 
of met! to rise in social position, etc., to be condemned. What, then is the self-seeking 
which is blameworthy? 1. That which offends against jusHcehy seeking selfish gain 
at the expense of others. What frightful injustice ambition must answer for, in liberty 
destroyed, lives sacrificed, confusion and misery sown broadcast! 2. That which 
offends against charity by disregarding the good of others. In the spirit of Cain it 
cries, "Am I my brother's keeper?" So long as it attains its own ends, it will 
not lift a finger to move another man's burden. But Christ teaches us that it is 
not enough that we do not injure others, we must also actively help them ; it is not 
enough that we do not steal, we must go further and " give to him that asketh." 3. 
That which offends against duty by sacrificing the vocation of life to private gain. 
We are not free to live to ourselves, because we are not our own masters. We are 
called to God's service. Our duty is to serve God, not self, so that whatsoever we do 
may be done '' unto the Lord." Self-seeking is rebellion against our Lord and Master 
In times of public distress self-seeking is peculiarly odious. Such were the times ii 
which Baruch lived. Then there are loud calls of duty and noble tasks to be done. 
The general grief makes the thought of one's own pleasure and profit out of place. To 
use that distress as a ladder by which to rise to greatness is indeed despicable. 

II. Wht self-seeking is not pbofitablb. In a worldly sense and for a time it may 
b«, but not really and ultimately. Even in the lower human relations, how often do the 
seeds of ambition bring a harvest of anxiety ! The self-seeker reaches the climax of his 
endeavours, his most brilliant dream is realized, he is a king — and he wears a hidden 
coat of mail, hides himself in a fortress-castle, has not the liberty of his meanest subject, 
ia driven near to madness by the fear of assassination. 

* He who ascendB to motmtain-tops shall find 
The loftiest peaks most wrapped in clouds and snow| 
He who surpasses or subdues mankind 
Must look down on the hate of those below," 

When extreme greatness and extreme disappointment are neither realized, lesser self- 
seeking brings its corresponding trouble. It narrows the heart and destroys the purest 
and best delights — the joys of human sympathy. Christ shows to us deeper grounds 
for regarding it as a vain pursuit. " Tlie first shall be last, and the last first." The 
reason he givt s is that " Whosoever would save his life shall lose it : and whosoever 
shall lose his life for my sake shall save it." Only in proportion as we live out of self 
can we enjoy a life worth living ; only then, indeed, do we truly live at all. By trying 
to make ourselves great, though we may reach a high external position, we fall to a low 
internal comiitiuu — we become mean and small ; while in forgetting self and sacrifioing 
self for God and for mankind we become unconsciously great. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Baruch's message ; or, Ood's consideration for his servant. It Is not 
always well to know more than others. Future thmgs are for the most part mercifully 
hidden from us. The prophecies of God's kingdom in the world, as they awaken new 
hopes, also occasion new anxieties ; and the latter will be the greater in proportion to our 
failure to comprehend and sympathize with the Divine purpose. Baruch was not in 
the same relation of spiritual sympathy and self-effacement with relation to the Word 
as Jeremiah was ; he did not share the same moral elevation, and therefore his per- 
plexities. In reward of his faithful, self-denying work as amanuensis to the prophet, a 
special communication is made to him with reference to his state of mind on heariniT 
the threaieniiigs of God against Israel and the nations. ° 

I. To RECEIVE SUCH A COMMUNICATION WAS A DISTINGUISHED HONOUR. In identifying 
bis name with the book he wrote it immortalized him. His work was a comparatively 
humble one, but it required its own virtues, and these are recognized. Nothing done for 
God in a right spirit is forgotten by him. Amidst imperial and world-wide changes the 
interest* of his servants are ever watched over with special care. When we see the 



0H.XI.Y.1— 6J THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 20^) 

Sovereign Disposer of events, when empires are as small dust in his balance, arranging 
for the welfare of a single individual, merely because of help given to one of his prophets, 
shall we not acknowledge how precious in his eyes is even the least of his servants? 
They are children of the great King. 

II. It ministered to his personal comfort and peaok of mutd. The anxiety and 
fear which weighed upon Baruch aie thereby dissipated. God loves to see bis cbildreu 
cheerful and in sympathy with his will. It is just from the " sorrow of the world that 
worketh death," he seeks to deliver us. The work of Baruch would be easier and less 
©ppressive when be was assured that his own safety would be secure' 1. But how fKJor 
is this )iromise com I Hired with the"life and immortality brought to light in the gospel " ! 
The childien of promise are not only delivered from the sorrows and disapi>ointments of 
this present evil world, but made sharers in the final triumphs of redenipiive love. 

III. It CORRECTED A SPIRITUAL fault. 1. Tht cauHon. "Andseekest thou great 
things for thyself? seek them not." Earthly ambition has often crept into the heart 
of God's servants. It is not consistent with faithful, single-eyed service. They that 
would further the kingdom of God in the world must seek it first. Baruch was 
reminded that this is not our rest. And when the powers of the world were being 
shaken was no time for self-advancement. His sighs were not pure. He mourned over 
opportunities lost, not of laying up treasure in heaven, but of accumulating it on earth. 
2. The promise, " 'Ihy life will 1 s;ive unto thee for a prey." It seems jioor, compared 
with his liopes. He parhaps anticipated a slight rebuke and obastisenient oi Israel, a 
few chiinges and adjustments, ami the carrying on of the Divine purposes to a speedy 
issue. This illusion is gently but firmly checked. The world has a severer ordeal to 
pa-iS through ere the ancient offence can be exyjiated, and the arena cleared for the 
Divine futnie. His hopes are, therefore, not wholly destroyed, but transferred. He will 
be spared to see the things beyond, and meanwhile it will be his privileije to help on 
that better time. Happy for him if, thus corrected, he attains to a diviner calm of 
spirit and a more thorough acceptance of the Divine terms and conditions. He too was 
but a sinner, whose deliverance wiu in itself a great and undeserved mercy (cf. Matt. 
xxiv.). — M. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — Baruch ; or, the young recruit reheartened. Baruch reminds of Mark 
(Acts xiii. 13). Both were good and fa tliful men; both became discouraged; both 
were reheartened ; both found profitable to the ministry and true to the end. Now, as 
we look on this Divine rehearlening of Baruch, we are taught much — 

I. Concerning God. 1. We see his grace. He does not overlook or forget his 
servants. He notes their distresses and devises means for their relief. "Like as a 
father pitietli," etc. 2. We see his methods with those who are as Baruch was. ( 1) Though 
animated by love, they were severe rather than southini;; stem rather than gentle and 
consolatory. We have many parallels to this. Ot. ch. xii., "If tbou hast run with 
the footmen," etc. How stern the dealing of GJod with Moses 1 No entreaty could 
procure the alteration of the sentence of exclusion from Canaan tb.it had gone out 
against him. See also our Lord's message to John the Baptist in prison : " Go, tell 
John," etc. No gentle message of syn pathy, but rather of rebuke for his failure of 
faith. So with Paul's thorn in the flesh, the Lord would not remove it. In all these 
cases there is rather the sharp, bracing, rousing summons to duty than words of 
soothing pity and tenderness. Far more like Paul's dealing with the recreant Mark — 
he virtually cashiered him — than that of Barnabas, who. Son of Consolation i hat he was, 
was all for comforting him and dealing gently with him. (2) God tells him that he 
has heard his complainings. When we talk to ourselves, we often forget that every 
word is audil'le to Goil. The people about our Lord were often talking to themselves 
concerning bim,aud, though they said nothing out loud, we constantly read how "Jesus 
answered and sail," showing that he had heard all they said. (3) He gives him to 
understand that his purpose is not to be set aside because of his complainings. " The 
Lord saith thus." If we cannot bring our circumstances to our mind, our wisdom is to 
bring our mind to our circumstances. Baruch was shown that he must do this. (4) 
He implies that a seeking after "high tilings" for himself had much to do with his 
complaining. He was of great ability, of uoblelineage (ch. IL 59; Josepb us, ' Ant.,' x, tL 2 ; 
X. 1), the grandson of Maasiah (2 Chron. xxxiv. 8), and this may w.il have animated 



204 THE BOOK OJ THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. Toh. xiv. 1—5 

him with hopes of high office in the state, such as his brother had held ; or his nearness to 
Jeremiiih may have led him to believe that he should be the prophet's successor. (5) 
He promises him that his life shall be spared, though with much difliculiy— " given to 
him as a prey." We cannot till what afterwards became of him. Tradition varies. 
There was not much comfort in all this, but rather a " What doest thou here, Elijah ? " 
(1 Kings xix.). 3. Sis motives. The leaders of an army must not be weaklings. 
Those who have stern work to do must themselves be stern. Luther, not Erasmus, 
must head the Reformation movement. Hence God disciplines his most trusted servants 
by very severe methods. Even our Lord, " He learned obedience by the things that he 
suffered ; " " He was made perfect through sufferings." 4. His success. That whiclf 
he purposes is ever done. Baruch here, as Mark afterwards, was rehearteued and did 
good service again. 

IL CoNCERNiNn THE PBOPHETio woEK. Demands self-denial, involves much suffering, 
and has much sorrow in it. No wonder that in ancient days men shrank from the 
pastoral ofiSce. " Nolo episcopari " meant something then. Are any thinking of it ? 
Count the cost. Are any in it? Let them, as they need, seek daily strength from 
God. 

** Chief Shepherd of thy chosen sheep^ 
From sin and death set free. 
May every undei-shepherd keep 
HiB eye intent on thee." 

Let those not m charged of the Lord pray tor those that an. 

IIL CoNOEBNiNO TOUKO SOLDIERS OF Jesub Christ. 1. There !■ much that U 
delightful in them. Their ardour, their zeal, their affection. Elisha to Elijah, Timo- 
theus to Paul, so here Baruch to Jeremiah. 2. But they are apt to be discouraged and 
desponding. They need enduring power. Melancthon thought he should soon convert 
men to the truth. But Luther tells how the old Adam was soon found to be too hard 
for the young Melancthon. 3. Let them submit cheerfully to the methods of discipline 
God has appointed for them, and be on their guard against all self-seeking ambition. 
4. And they are to remember that, though their life be given to them, it shall be " M 
a prey." They will have to watch, to toil, to contend, to struggle, even for that, 

** The Son of Ood goes forth to war ... 
Who follows in his train 7 " 

a 

▼•r. 6. — Amhition prohibited. " Seekest thou great things," etc. ? God searches the 
heart, and probably discovered that, lurking secretly there, there was somcwliat of an 
unhallowed ambition. Had he been other than one of God's chosen messengers, such 
ambition would have been natural and reasonable (cf. former homily). God does not 
directly charge him with this, but sets him on self-examination. This ever the Divine 
method. Are we seeking great things for ourselves? If we are, God says to us, " Seek 
them not." And the reasons are many. Some of them are such as these — 

I. We cannot tell whether they are designed for us. If they are not, they will bring 
us only misery ; cf. David in Saul's armour. If they are, they will come without our 
seeking. 

IL To make ourselves our supreme object is ever wrong, des)ncable, and in the end 
ruinous. The com of wheat must fall into the ground and die, give up its own life. 
If it do not, it abideth alone; if it do, it bringeth forth firuit " He that loveth his life 
shall lose it, but he," etc. (John zii.). 

III. Great things mean great responsibilities and terrible possibilities of great guilt 
and harm done to others and ourselves. 

lY. Whilst seeking them, we let go what is more precious than them alL " Whilst 
I was busy here and there, lo, he was gone." 

T. They tend to tie us down to earth and to fill our hearts with that loTe of the 
world which is death. " Ah 1 Davie, Davie," said Johnson to Crarrick, as they 
wandered through the beautiful demesne of a great nobleman, " these are the things 
that make it so hard for a man to die." A nmilar story is told of Cardinal Richelieu, 



OH. II.TI. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



206 



who caused himself, when near death, to be borne into his magnificent pictoM-gtllery, 
and there is reported to have made, to one near him, • like remark. — 0. 

Verg. 1 — 6.—Countel and comfort far the man overcome with had tidings. L Con- 

BtDER THE EFFECT ON BarUCH'S OWN HIND OF WHAT HE HAD HAD TO WRITE. BatUch 

came in simply to be a scribe and transmitter. Seemingly a friend of Jeremiah, ii 
must have been in considerable sympathy with the prophet in his purposes and predic 
tions. Doubtless he had made himself acquainted with each prophetic utterance as it 
same forth from Jehovah. But he had never had them all before his mind at one time, 
as now became necessary, through his having to write them down. Hence we have 
here an illustration of how more is required than the m^re utterance of a word of 
God in order to produce a deep effect from it. A man may think he understands and 
receives it, and yet the understanding and reception may be far from what they ought 
tu be. Not till Jeremiah's prophecies stand before Baruch in one mass does he fully 
discern the trouble coming on his people. Jehovah has spoken many times, and 
always in the same way, against the wicked and their wickedness. And so we see how 
important it is to get the impression, not only of successive parts of God's words, but of 
that Word as a whole. Moreover, if Baruch was oppressed by the consistent mass of 
threatening, it is equally possible for us to be uplifted and strengthened by a consistent 
mass of promises and encouragements. We shall ever find in the Scriptures that which 
we look for and prepare ourselves to find. 

II. Some indication of Baritch's own oharactbb. Baruch seems to have been, 
not exactly what we should call an ambitious man, but still one who wanted to get on 
in the world. Perhaps he had a position which made it reasonable for him to expect 
influence and authority. But what can a man of this sort look for in a state rapidly 
declining to its fall ? Baruch had to learn all at once that he must seek for such things 
as God would have him seek for. Thus we see God combining a lesson for the indi- 
vidual with the message for the nation. Baruch could hardly have been the :nly man 
competent to act as a scribe, but God, in taking him, took one who needed correction, 
needed to have his purposes turned into a more submissive way and a less self-seeking 
one. 

III. Temporal blessinos must depend upon circuhstanoeb. There had buen 
times in the Jewish state when Baruch might have been a very useful man in some 
high position. But every man must accept the conditions of the time in which he 
lives. At one lime the great temporal blessings may be those of attainment, at 
another those of escape. And so, to s^me extent, it is in spiritual things. There are 
times when what Christ does for us puts on the aspect of salvation; we are glad 
because of the great evils from which we are delivered. There aru other times when 
we are not contented with merely thinking of deliverance ; we want something positive — 
growth, fruitfulness, perfection. Then we are seeking great things spiritually — things 
which are always to be sought. And we may add they are always to be found, how- 
ever adverse temporal conditions may be. — ^Y. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 



This chapter, the first of a series, consists 
of two prophecies united, though it is pro- 
bable enough that the latter was intended 
to supplement the former, fur vers. 2 — 12 are 
clearly incomplete (from the point of view of 
this group of prophecieu) without a distinct 
and unmistakable predirtion of the conquest 
if Egypt. The earlier prophecy is, in fact, 
i.it itself a prediction, but a triumphal ode, 
itiiHlogoas to suph as we finrl in the Books of 



Isaiah and Ezekiel. It falls into three stim- 
zas : (1) Ters. »— 6 ; (2) vers. 7—9 ; (3) vers. 
10—12. In the first two the great event is de- 
scribed with poetical imagery ; in the third, ita 
cause is declared, and the irremediable coin 
pleteness of its eifects. The point of time 
assumed is immediately before the battle of 
Carchemish. The Egyptian army has taken 
up its position by the Euphrates, and Jere- 
miah, from his prophetic watch-tower, recog- 
nizes the importance of the step. He knows 
thnt » collision of the two great powers is 



206 



THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JEUEMIAH, [ch. xlvl 1—28. 



inevitable, and that the fortunes of Am world 
will be decided by the result. It is, in short, 
a "day of Jehovah" which he sees before 
him. As a prophet, he cannot doubt what 
t)ie iiiBuo will be. He tails into a lyrically 
deseiiptive mooil, and portrays the picture 
which unrolls itstlf before his imagnation. 

Ver. 1. — Against the Gentiles; rather, con- 
eeming the nalioru (nu distiiigiii^hed from 
Israel). This heading reUtus to all the 
seven prophecies in ch. xlvi. — xlix. 33. 

Ver. 2. — Against Egypt, against the 
army ; ruther, concerning h'gypt, concerning 
the army. Pharaoh-necho. Necho II., a mem- 
ber of the twenty-sixth Bsyptian dynasty, 
son of Psametik I. (PsMmraetichus), who had 
for a time revived the declining power of 
Egypt. Herodotus (ii. 15S) credits him 
with being the first to construct a canal to 
the Bed Sea, which seems an exaggeration 
(see Sir Gardner Wilkinson's note ap. Eaw- 
linson), also (iv. 42) with having caused the 
circumnavigation of Africa, after which the 
Phoenician seamen brought back the start- 
ling news that they had had ihe sun upon 
their right hand. This energetic monarch 
noticed the decline of Assyria, and, at the 
battle ofMegiddo(Heiodotus,ii.lo9, wrongly 
says Magdulus or Migdol), reattached Juilah 
to the Egyptian empire. Four years later, 
at ttie battle ot Oarchemish, he himselt sus- 
tained a crushing defeat at the hands oi the 
Babylonian king NebucUaduezzar (2 Chron. 
XXXV. 20). Carohemish. This was the 
great emporium ot Mesopotamia, Syria, and 
Palestine. Its true site was discovered by 
Mr. George Smith, in his last fatal journey, 
to be at Jerftbis or Jirb&s, on the right bank of 
the Euphrates. It was auoiently a city of ttie 
Khebi (equivalent to Khittim, " Hittites "), 
but passed to the Assyiiuus, under Sargon, 
under whom it attained the highest com- 
mercial pri)si)eiity,especially after the over- 
throw of Tyre by Sennacherib. The "mana," 
or mina, " ot Gargamis " is constantly re- 
ferred to as a standard weight in the cotn- 
mercialouneilormin.-criiitions. In the fourth 
year, etc. Marcus Nicbulir wishes to put a 
atop before these words, so as to make them 
K (leHnition of the date of the prophecy. He 
thinks the date of the battle of Oarchemish 
was the third and not the fourth year of 
Jehoiakim. This view, however, ia very 
uncertain (see Eeil), and it is exegetically 
very unnatural to detach the closing words 
of ver. 2 from those which precede. The 
obvious inference, moreover, from the pro- 
phecy (vers. 2 —12) is that it was written at 
or about the time of the battle ; a special date 
for the prophecy did not require to be given. 
Should Niebuhr's chronological combina- 
Mmu, kowvver, tarn out to be correc^t, the 
mMaka vouM probably not be tliat t>t .lure- 



miah, nor of his scribe, but of Mi editor, 
who may eiisily have fallen into error in the 
mere minutiie of clinmology. 

Ver. :>. — Order ye, etc. The leaders of the 
Egyptians are heard summoning their men 
to make ready their armour, and set them- 
selves in array (comp. ver. 9). The buckler 
(Hebrew, TOKjen) is the small shield; the 
shield (Hebrew, finuah) is the large one 
(scutum), which covered the whole body 
(oomp. 2 Chrnu. ix. 15, 16). 

Ver. 4. — Harne3s the horses ; viz. to the 
war-cliariiits, for which Egypt was famous 
(comp. Exod. xiv. 6, 9 ; 1 Kings x. 28, 29 ; 
Isa. xxxi. 1). Get up, ye horsemen. An 
equally possible rendering, and one which 
bettei' suits the parallelism, is, " mount the 
chargers." Put on the brigandines. " Bri- 
gand iue " is an archaic word (Hakluyt's 
' Voyages '), meaning the armour of a " bri- 
gand " or member of a " brigade," or "troop " 
(comp. Italian, brigata). The Hebrew word 
means " coats of mail." 

Ver. 5. — That so well-equipped an army 
should flee seems incredible. Hence the 
astonished question. Wherefore have I seen, 
etc. ? literally. Why do I see (that) they (are) 
dismayed, turning hack t And look not back. 
With the object of rallying the scattered 
forces. For fear was round about. It is a 
pity that the Authorized Version has not 
kept one uniform rendering for this favourite 
expression of Jer< raiah. In ch. vi. 25 (see 
note) it is translated, " fear is on every side " 
(Hebrew, mSgor missabib), 

Ver. 6. — let not the swift flee away. A 
strong way of expressing that even tne 
swiftest cannot expect to flee, just as, in Isa. 
ii. 9, " forgive them not " means " tliou canst 
not forgive them." Nothing seems to have 
struck the Jews so much astlie unparalleled 
swiftness of the Chaldean warriors (Hab. 
i. 6, 8 ; ch. iv. 13). They shall stumble ; 
literally, they have stumbled ; it is most pro- 
bably the prophetic perfect (" they shall 
certainly fall"), though Ewald denies this, 
and consequently maintains that the pro- 
phecy was written after the battle ot Oar- 
chemish. Toward tJie north ; t.e. " in the 
northern region," or, more loosely, " in the 
north " (oomp. ver. 10). Oarchemish was, ot 
course, far to the north of Jerusalem. 

Ver. 7.— Who is this, etc.? "Once more 
surprise at the [same] (jhenomenon recurs, 
and in a stronger form ; a moustrous, devas- 
tating river appears to roll itself wildly 
along, overwhelming all countries: who is 
it ? It is Egypt, which is now threatening 
to overrun the earth and to lay everything 
waste, whose various nationalities are advan- 
eing fully equipped " (Ewald). As a flood ; 
rather, a» the Nile (y'Sr, a word of Egyptian 
affinities, and only ouce used uf anotliei 
river than the Nile. Dan xii. 5, 6, 7) 



OH. XLTL 1— 28.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



207 



The naturalness of the figure in this con- 
text needs no exhibiting. It nminds us of 
Isa. viii. 7, 8, where (he Assyrian army is 
compared to the Euphratrs. Are moved as 
the rivers ; rather, toss tliemaelves as the rivers. 
By the "rivers " the pioplat means the 
branches of the Nile, which are described 
by the same word in Isa. xix. 8; Exod. 
vii. 19. 

Ver. 8. — Egypt riseth up, eto. The answer 
to the question in ver. 7. The city. The 
article is not expressed ; and there can be 
no doubt that the word is used culleotively 
of cities in general (comp. eh. xlvii. 2). 

Ver. 9. — A call to the army, particular- 
izing its two grand divisions, viz the war- 
riors in chariots, and the light and lieavy 
armed infantry. M. Pierret, of the Ej;yp- 
tian Museum at the Louvre, writes thus: 
" The array was composed (1) of infantry 
equipped with a cuirass, a buckler, a pike 
or an axe, and a sword ; they manoeuvred 
to the sound of the drum and tlie trumpet ; 
(2) of light troops (archers, slingeis, and 
other soldiers carrying the axe or the toma- 
hawk); (3) warriurs in chariots. Cavalry, 
properly so called, was not employed. . . . 
The Egyptians also enlisted auxiliaries, such 
as Mashawash, a tribe of Libyans, who, after 
the defeat of a confederation of northern 
peoples hostile to Menephtah, into which 
they had entered, refused to leave Eeypt, 
and entered the Egyptian army ; the Kalia- 
l<ag, another Libyan tribe ; the Shardanag 
(Sardinians) ; the Madjaiu, who, after having 
been in war with the Egyptians under the 
twelfth dynasty, enrolled themselves under 
the standard of their lonquerors, and con- 
stituted a sort of gendarme/ie," etc. (' Dio- 
tionnaire d'Archeolof:ie Egyptienne,' pp. 
61, 65). Among the mercenaries mentioned 
by Jeremiah, the Ludira deserve special men- 
tion. They are geiiei ally supposed to be a 
North African people (and so Ezck. xxx. 5). 
Professor Sayce, however, thinks they may 
bo the Lydian soldiers by whose help Psam- 
metichus made Kgypt indepeiident of Assy- 
ria, and his successors maintained their 
power (Chey'-.o's ' Prophecies of Isaiah,' ii. 
287). Come up, ye horses; rather, Immd (or, 
prance), ye horses. The verb is literally go 
up, and seems to be used in the same tense, 
only in the Hiphil or causative conjugation, 
in Nah. iii. 3 (which should begin, " Horse- 
men making (their hoises) to rear"). Ewald 
and others render, "Mount the horses," the 
phrase being substantially the same as in 
ver. 4 (see above). But the parallelism here 
is opposed to this: and the prophet has evi- 
dently been a reader of the prophecy of 
Nahum, as the very next clause shows. 
Kage, 76 chariots ; rather, rush madly, y» 
chariots (alluding to Nah. ii. .5). The Ethio- 
pians: Hebrew, Cush: often mentioned in 



connection with Egypt. The whole Nil* 
valley, as far as Aby^siliia, hud been reduced 
to an ligyptian province. At luotCush had 
its tui'U of revenge, and an Etii opian 
dymistv reiijned in the palaces of Thebes 
(B.C. 725— 66.5). The Libyans; Hebrew. Ptrf 
(which occurs in comb, nation with l.ud, as 
hero with Ludim,in Ezck. xxvii. 10; xxx. 5). 
This appears to be the E.:yptian Put (nasal- 
ized into Punt), i.e. tlio 8<>mali country on 
the east coast of Africa, opposite to Arabia 
(Biugoch). 

Ver. 10. — The contrast. And yet that day 
is (the daij) of Ike Lord^ .'ehnvuh SalidulU (tlie 
rendering of t.jc Autliorized Version, For 
this is the day, etc., is elu.nly a mistake). The 
" dayof Juliovah"is anex|iru.-8ion so rnmiliar 
to us that wo are in danger of losing a part 
of its sublime meauiug. It is, in brief, " tliat 
crisis in the history of the world when 
Jehovali will interpose to rectify the evils 
of the present, bringing joy and glory to 
the linmlile believer, and misery and shame 
to the prouii and disoliedient. . . . This 
great crisis is called a day, in antithesis to 
the ages of the Divine long-sutfering : it is 
Jehovah's day, because, without a special 
Divine iuteriiosition, there would be no issue 
out of the perplexities and miseries of 
human life." We may say, with equal 
truth, that there are many " days of the 
Lord," and that there is only one. Every 
great revolution is a fresh stage in the 
great judt;ment-day ; " die W eltgeschiehte 
ist das Weltgericht" (Schilh.T). The lad 
classici for the esj)ressioii in the prophets 
are Amos v. 18, 20; Zeph. i. 7, 14 ; Joel ii. 
1, 11; Isa. ii. 12; xiii. 6,9 (in Isa. ii. 12, 
the phraseology closely resembles that of 
our piisSiige — " for th. re is a day unto Je- 
hovah Sabauth;" Jehovali, t at is, hath it 
in reailiness in the supersensible world, 
where there is no time, and where all God's 
purposes have an ideal, but no less real 
existence. We might, in fact, render our 
passage, " but that day (is the day that be- 
longeth) unto the Lord," etc.). The Lord 
here, as generally elsewhere, is tliat ex- 
pressive form whieh intimates the universal 
lordship of the God who has revealed him 
self to Israel. The sword. A comparison 
with Isa. xxxiv. 6 suggests that it is " the 
Bword of the Lord " w hich is meant — a sym- 
bolic phrase for the Divine vengeanre, 
which meets us again in cli. xii. 12; xlvii. 
6; Deut. xxxii. 41, 42; Jmlg. vii. 20 (comp 
Josh. V. 13) ; Isa. xxvii. 1 ; xxxi. 8 ; xxxiv 
5, 6; Ixvi. 16; Zeoh. xiii. 7. If Jehovah 
can be spoken of as having an Arm, r 
Hand, and a Bow, why not also as having a 
sword i' Both expressions represent the 
self-revealing side of the Divine nature, and 
are not merely poetical ornaments, but coire 
spund to awful objective realities Divine 



208 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ch. xlti. 1— 28. 



vengeance exists, and must exercise itself 
on all who oppose the Divine will. Hath a 
sacrifice. Tlie same figurative expression 
occurs in Isa xxxiv. 6, and, developed at 
considerable length, in Ezek. xxxix. 17—20, 
where tlie slaughtered foes are described as 
fatted beasts, rams, lambs, he-goats, bullocks 
—animals employed in the Jewish sacrifices. 
This, then, is tlie purpose for which this 
immense host " rolls up from Africa " — it is 
that it may fall by the Euphrates, at once 
as a proiif of God's justice, and as a warning 
to transgressors. 

Ver. 11. — Go up into Oilead (see on eh. 
viii.22). In vain Bhalt then use, etc.; rather, 
in vain hast thou used, etc. ; a much more 
vigorous, pictorial expression. Thou shalt 
not be cured, Tlie literal rendering is more 
forcible, there is no plaster for thee ; i.e. no 
bandage will avail to heal the wound (oomp. 
eh. XXX. 13). 

Vei. 12.— Hath filled the land; rather, 
the earth, corresponding to " the nations." 

Ver. 13. — The word, etc. This verse is 
the heading of a new prophecy, which, 
however, for the reason already' mentioned 
(see introducticin to this chapter), is not to be 
regarded as entirely independent of the pre- 
ceding prophecy, but rather as a supplement 
(just as Isa. xviii., though not in strict se- 
quence to xvii. 12 — 14, is yet a supplement 
to it). The heading does not expressly 
state when the prophecy was written, but 
from the mention of Nebuchadnezzar, both 
in the heading and in the prophecy itself, 
we may assume a date Subsequent to the 
battle of Carchemish, for the earlier pro- 
phecies contain no reference to that redoubt- 
able name. An important question now 
arises — When did Nebuchadnezznr invade 
and conquer Egypt ? and what would be 
the consequences of admitting that a Baby- 
lonian subjugation of that country is his- 
torically not proven? There can be no 
doubt that Jeremiah did hold out such 
a prospect; for he not only says so here, 
but also in ch. xliii 8—13 and xliv. 30. 
In the latter prophecy it is not Neoho, but 
Hophrk, in whose reign the bluw is to 
fall. But no monumental evidence has as 
fet been found [see, however, postscript 
to this note] of anything approaching to 
an invasion of Egypt by NebuoljadnezzEu:; 
nor do the accounts of Herodotus (ii. 159, 
etc.) at all supply the deficiency (on this, 
however, see further at end of note). It is 
true that Josephus quotes passages from 
Berosus, the Babylonian historian, to the 
effect that Nabopolassar had set a Chaldean 
governor over Egypt, but that this gover- 
nor had revolted, and that Nabopolassar's 
■on, Nebuchadnezzar, crushed the rebellion 
and incorporated Egypt into hii empire. 
Bnt tkMa events happened, according in 



the quotation from Berosus, partly before, 
partly immediately after, the death of 
Nabopolassar, and was consequently earlier 
than the prophecy in this chapter. Another 
fact of importance must be mentioned in 
this connection, viz. that Ezekiel repeats 
the announcement of the Babylonian con- 
quest of Egypt, of which he speaks as if it 
were to happen at the close of tlie thirteen 
years of Nebuchadnezzar's siege of Tyre 
(Ezek, xxix. 17—21). Thus there is a 
gradual increase in the aefiniteness of the 
announcement. Looking at our chapter by 
itself, we might suppose that the conquest 
was to take place soon after the decisive 
battle at Carchemish. After the murder of 
Geilaliah, when Jeremiah had removed to 
Egypt, we find him foretelling the sore 
pnuisliment of Egypt in greater detail, and 
the name of Hophra (instead of Necho) is 
introduced as that of the deposed Mng. 
Finally, Ezekiel (as we have seen) specifies 
a dulinite time. Now, it is true that our 
knowledge of this period is somewhat in- 
complete. We have not the direct historical 
proof that could be wished as to the result 
of Nebuchadnezzar's siege of Tyre, though 
it would be fastidious to scruple at the 
evidence which satisfied so cool a judgment 
as that of George Grote. The great his- 
torian denies, however, that Tyre at this 
time suffered such a terrific desolation as 
is suggested by a literal interpretation of 
Ezek. xxvi., and continues in these remark- 
able terms : " Still less can it be believed 
that that king conquered Egypt and Libya, 
as M( gasthenes, and even Berosus so far as 
Egypt is concerned, would have us believe 
— the argument of Larcher, ' Ad Herodot.,' 
ii. 168, is anything but satisfactory. The 
defeat of the Egyptian king at CarcbemiBh, 
and the stripping him of his foreign pos- 
sessions in Judaea and Syria, have been ex- 
aggerated into a conquest of Egypt itself" 
(' Hist, of Greece,' vol. iii, p. H5, note 1), 
Supposing Mr. Grote's view of the facts of 
the siege of Tyre to be correct, it is clear 
that the prophet's reproduction of the Divine 
revelation made to him was defective ; that 
it presents traces of a stronger human ele- 
ment than we are accustomed to admit. 
Tyre had to suffer a fall ; but the fall was 
not as yet to be so complete a one as 
Ezekiel, reasoning upon his revelation, sup- 
posed. It is equally possible that Jeremiah 
and Ezekiel, reasoning upon the revelation 
of the inevitable fall of Egypt, mistook the 
time when, in its fulness, the Divine judg- 
ment was to take place. The case may, 
perhaps, turn out to be analogous to that of 
an apparently but not really unfulfilled 
prophecy in Isa. xliii, 3. A literal inter- 
pretation of thai passage would give the 
conquest of Kgypt to Ovrns; as a mattero 



CH. XLVi. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OP THE PBUl'HET JEREMIAH. 



203 



fact, we know that it was GambyBes, and 
not Cyrus, who fulfilled the prophecy. It 
Wduld not be surprising if we should have 
to admit that it was Oambyses, and not any 
earlier monarch, who fulfilled the prophecy 
of Jeremiah. Certain great principli-s of 
God's moral government had to be affirmed ; 
it was of no moment whatever whether 
Xebuehadnezzar, Cyrus, or Cambyses was 
the instrument of their affirmation. A 
parallel from Isaiah may again be adduced. 
The shameful captivity of Egypt, and per- 
haps Ethiopia, which Isaiah foresaw in the 
time of Sargon (Isa. xx. 3); was not realized 
in fact until Esar-haddon despoiled Tir- 
bakah. King of Egypt and Ethiopia, of the 
whole of TJpper Egypt. There are cases in 
which a literal fulfilment of prophecy may 
be abandoned without detriment to Divine 
revelation, and this seems to be one of 
them. And yet we must always remember 
that even the letter of the prophecy may 
some day turn out to be more nearly in 
harmony with facts than we have supposed, 
our knowledge of this period being in 
several respects so very imperfect. It has 
been acutely pointed out that the oracle 
given to Neoho (Herod., ii. 158), " that he 
was labonriDg for the barbarian," seems to 
imply a current expectation of an invasion 
of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar, and that the 
gradual conquest by that king of one neigh- 
bouring country after another suggests that 
the invasion of Egypt was at any rate the 
object at which he aimed. The silence of 
Herodotus as to a Chaldean invasion is, 
perhaps, not very important. He does not 
mention Necho's defeat by Nebuchadnezzar 
at Oarchemish, nor does he ever refer to 
the victories over Egypt of any King of 
Assyria. 

PoSTSOMPT. — The above note is left pre- 
cisely as it was written, February, 1881, in 
ignorance of Wiedemann's then recent dis- 
covery of a contemporary hieioglypbic in- 
scription which, as the report of the German 
Oriental Society expresses it, " ratifies the 
hitherto universally doubted fact of an in- 
vasion of Egypt by Nebueliadnezzar." The 
hieroglyphic narrative is supplemented and 
confirmed by two cuneiform reconls, and the 
combined results are as follows. In the 
thirty-seventh year of his reign, Hophra or 
Apries being King of Egypt, Nebuchad- 
nezcar undertook an expedition against 
Egypt, and penetrated as far as the island 
of Elephantine, and damaged the temple 
of Ohnum, which stood there. His army 
could not, however, pass the cataracts. 
At Syene the Egyptian troops, under Nes- 
hor, met and repelled the invaders. Two 
years later, however, the Babylonians came 
again, were victorious over the Egyptian 
host under Amasis, ard compelled the whole 

JEBEUIAH — II 



land to pay tribute. Thus we have a re- 
markable confirmation of Ezeklel's prophecy 
that Egypt should be " waste and desolate 
from Migilnl unto Syene, even unto the 
border of Ethiopia " (Ezek. xxix. 10). It 
should be mentioned that the Babylonians 
are not desciibcd in the hieroglyphics by 
their proper name, but as " the Syrians (?), 
the pBoples of the north, the Asiatics;" j* 
is from a terra-cotta cuneiform tablet thai 
we learn that, in Nobuoljadnczzar's thirty- 
seventh year (b.o. 5G8-7), a war arose bt- 
tween him and the King of Egypt, which 
ended with tlie payment nf tribute to tho 
former (Wiedemann, in 'jEgyptische Zeit- 
Bchrift,' 1878, pp. 2—6 and 87—89; 'Ge- 
BChichtp^gypteng,'lS80 pp.168— 170). Thf 
value of prophifoy dues not, happily, depend 
on the minuteness of its & irrespoudence with 
history, and the evidential value of the 
argument from such a correspondence is hut 
secondary. Still, as long as such a corre- 
spondence can be pioved, (.ven in part, hy 
facts such as Wiedejuann has discov. red, 
the apolou;iat is perfectly justified in using 
it in confirmation of the authority of Scrip- 
ture. 

The second prophecy falls into two parts 
— vers. 14 — 19 and 20 — 26 respectively. 

Vers. 14 — 19.— The cities of Egypt are 
called upon to prepare to meet the foe. 
But it is in vain; for all that is great and 
mighty in the land— Apis, the mercenary 
soldiers, and the Pharaoh — bows down 
before that terrible one who is comparable 
only to the must imposing objects in the 
inanimate worlJ. Pharaoh's time is over; 
and Egypt must go into captivity. 

Ver. 14. — Declare ye ; viz. the approach of 
the foe (comp. ch. iv. 5). The news is to bo 
told in the frontier towns Migilol and Tali- 
panhes, and in the northern capital Noph iir 
Memphis (see on ch. ii. 16; xliv. 1). The 
sword shall devour, etc. ; rather, the siooi-d 
hath devoured those round nhout thee. Thi 
neighbouring nations (the same phrase occurs 
in ch. xlviii. 17, 39) have one after another 
succumbed ; no ally is left there. 

Ver. 15. — Why are thy valiant men, etc.? 
The literal rendering of the received text 
is. Why is thy strong ones ((jlural) swept 
away (or, cast downi) ? He stood not, 
because Jehovah thrust him I It is true 
that the first half of the verse might, con- 
sistently with gramranr, be rendered, " Why 
are thy strong ones swtpt away ? " But the 
following singulars prove that the subject 
of the verb in the first verse- half must itself 
be a singular. We must, therefore, follow t!:e 
reading of the Sept\iagint, Vulgate, Aquila, 
Symmachus, and Theodotion, and many of 
the extant Hebrew manuscripts, and chanire 
the plural "strong ones" into the singular 



210 



IHE BOOK OF THE PKOPHBT JEREMlAti. [ch. xlvl 1—28. 



"strong one." The word so rendered ig 
elsewhere in Jeremiah one used (in the 
plural) of strong hurses (oh. Tiii. 16; xlvii. 
3 ; 1. 11) ; but there is no necessity to bind 
ourselves to this acceptation. Other pos- 
sible meanings are (1) strong man, e.g. 
Judg. v. 22 and Lam. i. 15 ; (2) steer, bull, 
e.g. Ps. xxii. 13 and 1. 13, and (metapliorically 
of princes) Ixviii. 31. It is a tenable view 
thii t " thy strong one " is to be understood dis- 
tiibutively as equivalent to "every strong 
one of thine." But it is certainly more 
plausible to regard the phrase as a synonym 
for Apis, the sacred bull in which the supreme 
god Osiris was believed by the Egyptians 
to be incarnate. This was a superstition 
(strange, no doubt, but not so ignoble as 
some have thought) as deeply ingrained in 
the Egyptian mind as any in their compli- 
cated religion. " In fact, tliey believed that 
the supreme Qod was with them when they 
possessed a bull bearing certain hieratic 
narks, the signs of the incarnation of the 
divinity" (Pierret). His death was the 
signal for a mourning as general as for a 
Pharaoh, and the funeral ceremonies (ac- 
counts of which are given in the inscrip- 
tions) were equally splendid. M. Mariette 
lias discovered, in the neighbourhood of 
Memphis, a necropolis in which the Apis- 
bulls were successively interred from the 
eighteenth dynasty to the close of the 
period of the Ptolemies. For the Apis to 
be " swept away " like ordinary plunder, 
or " cast down " in the slaughtering-trougli 
(comp. Isa. xxziv. 7), was indeed a token 
that the glory of Egypt had departed. It 
is a singular coincidence that the very word 
here employed by Jeremiah for " bull " 
{abblr) was adopted (like many other 
words) into the Egyptian language — it 
received the slightly modified form ciber. 
The Septuagint, it should be added, is in 
favour of the general view of the verse 
thus obtained, and the authority of the 
Egyptian-Jewish version in a prophecy rela- 
tive to Egypt is not slight. Its rendrring 
of the flist half is, " Why hath Apis, thy 
chosen oalf, fled?" But the probability is 
that it read the Hebrew differently, " Why 
hath Khaph ( = Apis), thy chosen one, fled ? " 
This merely involves grouping some letters 
otherwise, and reading one word » little 
differently. 

Ver. 16. — To foil ; rather, to ttumble. 
The fugitives are in such a wild confusion 
that they stumble over each other. The 
parallel passage in the earlier prophecy 
(ver. 12) suggests that the Egyptian 
warriors are here referred to, the most 
trustworthy portion of which, since the 
time of Psammetichus, was composed of 
mercenaries, the native troops having lost 
that military ardour for which they had 



been anciently renownea (see Herod., ii. 152, 
and Sir Gardner Wilkinson's note ap. Raw- 
linson). Being devoid of patriotic feeling, 
it was natural that these hired soldiers 
should hasten from the doomed country, 
exclaiming, as the prophet puts it, Arise, 
and let us go again to our own people. 
Greeks were probably among the speakers, 
at any rate, lonians and Oarians formed the 
mercenary troops of Psammetichus, according 
to Herodotus (ii. 152). 

Ver. 17. — They did cry there, etc. ; rather, 
they cry there, viz. the following words. 
But why should attention be called to the 
place where the cry is made ? and why 
should the mercenaries (the subject of the 
preceding verb, and theretbre presumably 
of this verb) have theilr exclamation re- 
corded? Alter the vowel-points (which 
merely represent an early but not infallible 
exegetical tradition), and all becomes clear. 
We then get a renewal of the summons in 
ver. 14 to make a proclamation respecting 
the war. The persons addressed are, not 
foreigners, but the children of the soil, and 
the summons runs thus : " Call ye the name 
of Pharaoh, King of Egypt, Desolation." 
No longer " Pharaoh," honoured by titles 
indicating that he, like Apis, is a Divine 
incarnation (neb, i.e. lord, and nuter, i.e. 
god), but Shaon, the Hebrew for Desolation, 
is the fittest name for the fallen monarch. 
The custom of changing names with a 
symbolic meaning is no strange one to 
readers of the prophecies. We have met 
with it in this very hook (see ch. xx. 8); 
and Isaiah contains a parallel as exact as 
could be desired, in the famous passage in 
which the prophetic name (itself sym- 
bolic) of Egypt (Bahab, i.e. boisterooa- 
ness, arrogance) is chansjed into "Bahab- 
hem-shebh^th " («.e. " Bahab I they are 
utter indolence "). In behalf of this view 
we may claim the authority of a tradition 
still oldur than that preserved in the vowel- 
points, for the Septuagint (followed sub- 
stantially by the Peshito and the Vulgate) 
has, KaAeVare rh tvo^a 4>apa^ Nexac>' ^(KTtKeas 
A-lyiiTTov, ^aiiv. He hath passed the time 
appointed. A difScult clause, and variously 
interpreted. One thing is clear, that 
" passed " cannot be ooireet, as the verb is 
in the Hifil or causative conjugation. We 
must, at any rate, render, "He hath let 
the time appointed, pass by." This is, in 
fact, the simplest and most natural expla- 
nation. There was a time within which 
repentance might have averted the judg- 
ment of God; but this "accepted time" 
has been foolishly let slip. 

Ver. 18. — The threat implied in ver. 17 ia 
set forth more fully; he who speaks is a 
very different " king " fifom the fallen 
Pharaon. As Tabor is among the monntaiiu. 



OH. XLVt 1— 28.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHBT JEREMIAH. 



211 



The Bense 1b deformed by the insertion of 
"is." The King of Babylon la compared to 
" Tabor among the mountains and Carmel 
by the sea." Moimt Tabor is a most promi- 
nent object, owing to the wide extent of the 
plain of Esdraelon, in which it is situated ; 
and a similar remark applies to Mount Car- 
mel. The view of Tabor differs considerably 
according to the point from which it is 
taken ; but " its true fi>{ure is an elongated 
oval " (Thomson). Carmel, so oalleJ from 
the rich orchards and vineyards with which 
it was anciently adorned, is not lufty (being 
only about six hundred feet above the sea), 
but the form in which it breaks off towards 
the sea has a beauty of its own. It is now 
deprived of its rich forest and garden cul- 
ture, but is still described as "a glorious 
mountain." 

Ver. 19. — thou daughter dwelling ia 
Egypt; literally, O inhabttresB-daughter of 
Egypt. The phrase is exactly parallel to 
" virgin daughter of Zion." Tlie " daughter 
of Egypt " means the population of Egypt, 
the laud being regarded as the mother of its 
people. Furnish thyself to go into captivity. 
The rendering of the margin is, however, 
more exact. The " vessels of captivity [or, 
'exile"]" are a pilgrim's staff and wallet, with 
the provisioDB and ntensils necessary for a 
journey (so in Ezek. xii. i). 

Vers. 20 — ^26.— A figurative description of 
the dark future of Egypt. 

Ver. 20.— Like a very fair heifer. (The 
insertion of "like" weakens the passage.) 
The well-nourished heifer reminds of the 
prosperity of the fruitful Nile valley. But 
destruction oometh; it oometh out of the 
north ; rather, a gadfly from the north hath 
come upon her (not, " hath come, hath come," 
as the received text has — a very slight 
shange in one letter is required, supported 
by the versions). The figure is precisely 
analogooB to that of the " bee in the land 
of Asayria " (Isa. viL 18). St. Chi^sostom 
renders " a gadfly " (see Field, ' Origen's 
Hexapla,' ii. 708) ; and so virtually Aqnila 
and Symmachus. 

Ver. 21. — ^Also her hired men are in the 
midst of her, etc. ; rather, alto her hirelingi 
in the midst of her are like, etc. These seem 
to be distinguished from the mercenaries 
mentioned in ver. 9, the Ethiopians, Libyans, 
and Arabs, who were never adopted into the 
midst of the Egyptian people. On the 
other hand, the description will exactly 
apply to the Oarians and lonians in the ser- 
vice of Fsammetiohns and Apries (Herod., 
ii. 152, 163), who were " for many years " 
aettled " a little below the city of Bubastis, 
on the Pelusiao mouth of the Nile." In this 
fertile country, itself comparable to " a very 
fair heifer" (ver. 20), these pampered and 
privileged mercenaries beoatn« " like calves 



of the stall." Iliey did not stand, ete. ; 
rather, they have not stood (firm'), for the day 
of their destruction is come upon them^ 

Ver. 22. — The voice thereof shall go like a 
Berpent ; rather, her voice is like (the sound 
of) a terpent gliding away. Egypt (like 
Jerusalem, in Isa. xxix. 4) is imagined as a 
maiden (comp. ver. 19) seated on the ground, 
and faintly sighing; and her feeble voice 
is likened to the rustling sound of a serpent 
in motion. Come against her with axes. 
A sudden change of figure. Egypt, or, more 
strictly, Egypt's grandeur — its rich and 
complex national life, its spk-ndid cities, its 
powerful army, all combined in one, is now 
compared to a forest (comp. ch. xxi. 14; 
xxii. 6, 7; Isa. ii. 13; x. 18, 19, 33, 34). It 
seems far-fetched to suppose, with Graf and 
Dr. Payne Smith, that the comparison of the 
Chaldean warriors to wood-outters arose 
trom their being armed with axes. It ia 
probably true that the Israelites did not nse 
the battle-axe, but the axe is merely an 
accident of the description. It is the forest 
which suggests the mention of the axe, not 
the axe tliat of the forest, and forests were 
familiar enough to the Israelites. 

Ver. 23.— They shaU cut down; better, 
they eut doum. The prophet is describing 
• picture which passes before his inner eye. 
Though it cannot he searched ; rather, for it 
cannot be tearehed out. The subject of the 
verb is uncertain. De Dieu's explanation 
is, " Because the forest is so dense, so intri- 
cate, it is necessary to clear a path by cutting 
down the trees." But this does not seem 
to suit the context. Surely no other reason 
was required for the destruction of the 
" forest " than the will of the wood-cutttrs. 
"Searching out" occurs in Job (v. 9; ix. 
10; xzxvi 26; comp. also 1 Kings vii. 47) 
in connection with numbering, and the 
second half of the verse expressly describes 
the foe as innumerable. The singular 
alternates with the plural, as in Isa. v. 28, a 
host being regarded sometimes as a whole, 
and sometimes as an aggregate of indi- 
viduals. Than the grasshoppers; rather, 
the locust. The name is one of nine which 
we find given to the various species of 
locusts in the Old Testament, and means 
" multitudinous." 

Ver. 24.— Shall be confonnded; rather, is 
brought to shame; the next verb too should 
rather be in the past tense. 

Ver. 25.— The multitude or Ho ; rather, 
Amon of No. Amon-Ba, or rather Amen- 
Ba, was the name adopted at Thebes 
(Homer's Thebes "of the hundred gate- 
ways," 'Iliad,' ix. 383, called here " No," and 
in Nah. iii. 8 " No [of] Amon ") from tlia 
time of the eleventh dynasty, for the sun- 
god Ka. Amon (Amen) signifies " hidden," 
for it is the mysterioiis, invisible daily who 



212 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlvl 1— 2B 



manifests himself in bodily form in the snu. 
From this name comes the classic desig- 
nation, Jupiter-Ammon. Their gods . . . 
their kings ; ratbpr, 'her godi . . . her Tiingt 
(viz. Egypt's). The " kings " are probably 
the high ofiScials of the state, not a few of 
whom were either by birth or marriage 
members of the Foyal family. Even 
Pharaoh, and all them that trust in him. 
With a suggestive aUusiou to the many in 
Judah who " trusted " in that " broken 
reed" (Isa. xxxvi. 6). 

Ver. 26.- Afterward it shall be inhabited, 
etc. After all these gloomy vaticinations, 
Jeremiah (as elsewhere in this group of 
prophecies ; see on. xlviii. 47 ; xlix. 6, 39) 
opens up a brighter prospect. " In the 
days of old," patriarchal and unmilitary, 
the fertile valley of the Nile offered a 
peaceful and a happy home to its teeming 
inhabitants; those times sliall yet come 
again. . To understand this, wu must assvune 
that during its period of depression Egypt 
ha£ been but sparsely peopled, owing to the 
large numbers of its inhabitants carried 
away captive. Another explanation, " after- 
wards Egypt shall stay at home [t.e. 'be 
qniet'y Uiough equally justiiiable from 



the point of view of the lexicon (oomp 
Judg. V. 17 ; Ps. Iv. 7), seems less natural 
Possibly Ezek. xxix, 13i — 16 is a develop- 
ment of our passage ; it contains a promise 
of future remission of punishment, though a 
promise qualified in such a Wixy as to be 
akin to a tijreat. The words, " And it shall 
no mure be the confidence of the house ol 
Israel" (Ezek. xxix, 16), seem like a com- 
ment on Jeremiah's threat to " Pharaoh, 
and them that trust in him," in the pre- 
ceding verse. 

Vers. 27, 28. — A word of comfort to 
Israel, obviously not written at the same 
time as the preceding prophecy. The pro- 
phet is suddenly transported in imagination 
into the period of the Babylonian exile. 
Egypt and its fortunes are far away ; the 
troubles of Israel entirely absorb his atten- 
tion. After tliinking sadly of the reverses 
of his people, he bursts out with an en- 
couraging exhortation not to fear, though, 
humanly speaking, there was everything to 
fear. Did Jeremiah write these verses here ? 
There is strong reason to doubt it ; for they 
occur, with insignificant variations, in ch, 
xxz. 10. 11, where they cohere far bettei 
with the oontext than heia. 



H0MILET1C8. 

Vers. 1 — 26. — The Judgment of Egypt. This is twofold, first in the defeat at Car- 

chemish (vers. 1 — 12), and then in a complete overthrow of the kingdom (vers. 13 26), 

which Jeremiah seems to have anticipated immediately after, just as the early Chris- 
tians connected the destruction of Jemsalem with the expected end of the world. 
Though this anticipation was not chronologically correct, the essence of the prophecy 
was ultimately fulfilled. The kingdom of the Pharaohs has passed away. 

L Egypt was a heathen countet. The two prophecies about Egypt occur first in 
a series of predictions concerning the Gentile nations. God is the Gtod of the Gentile 
as well as the Jew, of the heathen as well as the Christian, of the godless as well as the 
godly. In him all men live and move and have their being ; from him they receive 
every blessing of life ; to him they will have to give account of their deeds. Therefore 
God notes the conduct of heathen nations, and chastises them when needful • so he 
does with individual men who renounce his authority over them or are brought up in 
ignorance of it. The heathen will be judg( d by their heathenish light, and not by the 
high standards of Christian principles ; but there is enough in that light to allow of a 
genuine judgment and a just sentence (Rom. ii. 14, 15). The ' Book of the Dead ' con- 
tains a high and noble system of morality. With this in lus possession, the Egyptian 
was witbout excuse in his vice and cruelty. 

n. Egypt was an ancient nation. Her history dates hack long before the time 
of Abraham. But she found no immunity in age. If judgment is long delayed, it will 
come in God's appointed time. The mere continuance of peaceful circum'stances 
hitherto is not the slightest ground for crediting them with a special charm to ward of! 
the sentence of Divine justice. The hoary sinner will not be spared out of regard to 
his years. Age is not venerable in itself. It is only odious when it is the ripenine 
and rotting of a long life of sin. ° 

III. Egypt was a land of wealth asd bplbndodb. (For this point, see homilT cm 
ver. 20^ 

I V. Egypt wab a home of science and philosophy. There philosophy arose, and the 
knowisilge of nature was first systematically pursued. There strange mystic religions 



CH. XLVL 1— 28.J THE BOOK Of THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 213 

had their birth. If knowled'ie could save a people, Egypt of all lands should be safe, 
But though knowledge is power, there are foes against which it is impotent. The 
science of the encyclopedists was no protection against the horrors of the French Revo- 
lution. Modern science cannot find an antidote to sin, nor can modern inventiveness 
devise any armour that shall resist the piercing darts of Divine justice. Our religious 
speculation will not redeem our souls. 

V. Egypt was the ally of Israel. The alliance of the Church is no safeguard 
when the Church herself is eiTJng. Companionship in sin with men who have been 
accounted Christians will do nothing to lighten the weight of guilt. They will have to 
suffer for their share in the wickedness, and if their previous reputation cannot shield 
ttiem, it can have no protection to extend to others. 

VI. Egypt made a brave eesistanok. Jeremiah describes the battle array in 
stirring word.s. The army was imposing. Yet was defeated. It is vain to resist the 
decree of Divine judgment. He who fights against this is striking at Heaven. The 
blow can only recoil on his own head. 

VII. Egypt was to be inhabited again. God mingles mercy with judgment. He 
nas pity on the heathen. He seeks the ultimate recovery of those whom he first 
punishes. In later years Egypt became the home and centre of the most brilliant 
Christian life and thought. 

Ver. 11. — Incurdble diseases. I. What dibeabes abe naturally inoctbable ? 1, 
Sin. No man can root out his own evil nature. The wicked man, left to himself, will 
never grow into righteousness. Sin does not burn out ; it continually finds fresh fuel 
and kindles a greater fire. 2. !Z%e Judgment of sin. This cannot be resisted, for it 
comes from the hand of the Almighty. It cannot be bou<;ht off by compensating 
merits, for the most we can do is not to deserve more punishment in the future by new 
sin. When we have done our best we are " unprofitable servants ; we have done that 
which was our duty to do." 

IL How God cubes the natukallt incurable disease. Christ is the good Physi- 
cian, the great Healer. Where medicine fails miracle triumphs. She who "had suffereil 
many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing 
bettered, but rather grew worse," was made whole by a touch of the hem of the Saviour's 
garment. The cure may be impossible with man, but with God all things are possible. 
1. The cure for sin. This is in the new birth which makes the Christian a "new 
creation " in Christ Jesus, and the constant aid of the Spirit of God to cleanse ana 
purify the soul. 2. The cure for the Judgment of sin. This is in the free pardon 
offereid to the penitent who trust to Christ, and it is secured through his mediation, his 
one sacrifice for sin, and his perpetual intercession for sinners. 

Ver. 20. — ITie heifer and the gadfly. " Egypt is a very fair heifer, but a gadfly 
Cometh." 

I. Worldly advantages are no safeguards against trouble. The heifer is very 
fair, yet the gadfiy attacks her. Egypt, rich in her fertile Nile valley, the granary ni 
the East; splendid with vast and gorgeous temples, whose ruins are now the wonder o 
the world ; in the forefront of speculation and scii-nce ; hoary with antiquity, and proud 
of her aeons of history even in Jeremiah's age — twenty-five dynasties had already passed 
away; — this great Egypt is to suffer humiliation at the hand of the upstart Babylon. 
Her very magnificence attracts the greedy invader. Wealth and rank may ward off 
some distresses, but they will invite others which never condescend to attack the poor 
md obscure. 

II. Worldly advantages afford little consolation in trouble. If the heifer is 
very fair, her beauty is no antidote to the pain she feels when the probe of the gadfly is 
in her back. Egypt may have every advantage of wealth and science, and yet she 
finds no comfort in these things when her life-blood is flowing beneath the sword of 
the rude invader. The death of her firstborn is as heavy a blow to the queen as to 
the meanest slave in the laud. The rich man feels his gout at least as acutely as the 
poor man. Mental distress, anxiety, and care are not to be bought off with money. 

III. A SMALL OCCASION MAT PRODUCE GREAT TROUBLE. The gadfly is but half an 
inch long. Yet it can so irritate the heifer that she will rush madly about, with head 



214 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [cH. xlVi. 1— 28, 

thrust forward and tail stuck out, in the vsun hope of escaping from her tormentor 
Many • man has just one cause of trouble, looking to others quite insignificant, yet 
which is to him the fly spoiling the most precious ointment. How much of the dis- 
tress of life comes from the fret and worry of little things 1 It is a comfort that we 
are not only invited to cast our burden upon the Lord, but to cast all our " care upon 
him, for he careth for us." 

IV. We may be unable to pbevent the attack or the smallest occasion of 
TROUBLE. The horns, which would be good weapons for attacking a large animal, 
are useless against the gadfly. Many troubles come like this fly. We cannot touch 
them; they are swift to attack, and once they are upon us no defence is possible. In 
our own stn ngth we cannot throw off the smallest sin. Perhaps we are strong to resist 
great temptations, and fall victims to miserable little failings. The devil is not always 
a roaring lion ; sometimes he is more like a gadfly. We can drive off the lion ; we 
cannot resist the gadfly. Lying, theft, murder, etc., may be kept out, and yet our 
souls may lose all peace and Divine communion by yielding to hasty temper, discon- 
tent, cowardice, etc. But Chiist comes as the Saviour from all evil and all sin, includ- 
ing those meaner ging which may ruin our spiritual life even when greater sina ai« 
avoided. 

Yen. 27, 28.— <Se« homily on ch. xxs. 10, IL) 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOKa 

Ver. 1. — The judgment of the nations. I. Uttered bt the prophet •» rwt theo- 
OBAOT. 1. Because they are related to the theocracy. Even in antagonism ; but some- 
times in conscious or undesigned co-operation. The future of the kingdom of God is 
not, therefore, to evolve itself independently of these, but in close connection with 
them. It is this, and this alone, which gives them their importance. They are asso- 
ciated with the destinies of Gk)d's people. What mysterious necessity is it that ever 
blends God's kingdom with the main stream of history ? It is the dominant influence 
even when it seems to be temporarily overthrown. 2, The kingdom of Ood is to he 
fulfilled in the whole earth. Not only in Israel is it to come, but in the " uttermost 
parts of the earth." The kingdoms of this world are to " become the kingdoms of our 
Lord, and of his Christ " (Rev. xi. 15). For this reason their history, too, is sacred, 
and is to be read in the light of revelation if it is to be understood. The true history ol 
every nation and individual is determined by relation to the truth of God. 3. For the 
instruction and comfort of Ood's people. It is manifest that Divine providence can be 
explained worthily only upon such a scale. And the subjects of the Divine kingdom 
have to be tauL;ht the real character and destiny of the powers into relation with which 
they are brought. Gbd is seen as ruling, not only in • little comer, but in the whole 
earth. 

XL Uttered tooetheb at one time. There is a question as to which order ought 
to l»e observed in mentioning them. 1. But the selection is made upon an evident 
principle, viz. that of (nearly) contemporaneous relation to Israel. And whatever their 
relations amongst themselves or toward Israel at any given time, in general they are 
opposed to the kingdom of Qod, and represent the influences with which it has to do in 
its progress amongst men. They are " the world-powers " as opposed to the " powers 
of the world to come." 2. It is part of the scheme of Divine revelation to arraign from 
time to time the spirit of this world in its varying forms and phases. The world's life 
and history thus cease to be complex and involved, and are seen to resolve themselves 
into the principles of good and evil, darkness and light. The turmoil and movement 
are really those of « great duel — that of the kingdom of God against the kingdom of thi? 
world. 

TIL Uttebkd finally and absolutely. It is destruction that is predicted, and as 
real historic powers we do not hear of them again. There is something very grand and 
solemn in this arraying and dismissal of the nations. Their political influence, military 
power, or commercial supremacy avails not against this imperative Word of the Most 
High. What is it but an anticipation of the judgment of the earth by the Son of mas 



'JU. xtvi. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 215 

(Matt. XXV. 31) ? Has not our Saviour already ground for his claim, "I have OTercomt 
the world " ? The gospel of the kinG:dom of God is, therefore, no little thing done in 
a corner, but the economy of a world, and the law of life and death throughout all 
ages. — M. 

Van. 27, 28.— ( nde on ch. xxx. 10, 11.)— M. 

Vers. 1 — 28. — "Judgment" going on "from the house of Ood." The former chapters 
have shown judgment beginning at the house of God. This and the following chapters 
show that judgment going on. 

I. Judgment begins at the house of God. This whole life here is more or less a 
time of trial. God never suffers his Church to be long at ease. But there are especial 
times of trial, as in persecutions, bereavements, uprisings of the power of sin. And 
sometimes, as in the former chapters is told, God sends his actual judgments and chas- 
tisements upon his people. Now, concerning this, note : 1. It is just that Judgment 
should begin at, etc. For God has a right to the reverence and obedience of his own 
people. If a father be not obeyed in his own house, where else should he be? More of 
light, privilege, and grace are given to his Church, and more of ill follows from their 
Bin ; and hence no wonder that judgment begins, etc. 2. And it is Jit and suitable. 
Who cares for the household as the father ? I hear a child in the streets use profane 
or foul language, and I am shocked that any child should use language like that. But 
if it were my child, with what horror and indignation should I be filled! All the 
father's affection clusters round and centres in his home, and hence he will spare no 
pains nor refuse any methods — even judfjments when they are needed, as once and 
again they are — whereby the highest well-being of his children may be secured. 3. And 
it is merciful likewise. It was not judgment, but mercy also, that "drove out the man " 
from Paradise. Some discipline sterner than Paradise afforded was needed now for the 
subdual of that evil nature which had become dominant in man. And that nature 
must be subdued and the better nature formed in us, or the high and holy purpose of 
God cannot be fulfilled in us. 

II. But it dobs kot stop there. To show this is the purport of this and the fol- 
lowing chapters. 1. And how true this is generally I There is the sorrow of the world 
as well as that of the believer; and who would not rather have that ol' the believer than 
that of the world ? 2. And how much greater is the sorrow of the world J " If they do 
these things in the green tree, what," etc.? said our Saviour, "If the righteous scarcely 
be saved, v\here," etc.? said St. Peter. And that " their sorrows shall be multiplied" 
is inevitable. For they have no inward spring of consolation beneath them. There is 
so much more to be done in order to re-scue them froru their ways. The processes of agri- 
culture are sometimes severe; but what are they comiiared to the stern work needed 
for bringing the land into cultivation. The police of a well-ordered town cause some 
burden to the inhahitants; but what is that to martial law? They touch the all of the 
world, only the lesser good of the believer. And they stay so much longer time. There was 
no such restoration for the Gentile people told oi here as there was and especially will 
be for the Jewish race. The Church ol Christ has often been judged, but she has ever 
been restored, and will be yet more. But during her history, Rome, Venice, and poli- 
tical states within Christendom have risen, decayed, and disappeared. 3. How admoni- 
tory all this is 1 (1) To the child of the house of Ood. It bids him be thankful because 
he knows the motive, the measure, and the sure end of what he has to bear. Submis- 
sion that he may at once escape the heavy hand of Gnd and shelter in his heart. 
(2) To those not in the house uf Ood. It says, "Come in, that judgment may be turned 
into chastisement, wrath into fatherly corrrctiun, and that the gates of death when 
they close upon you may shut out the further approach of sorrow, and not, as if there 
be no repentance they will, shut you in with it and with innumerable other sorrows 
more than the first. ' Verily I say unto you,' saith our Lord, ' ye shall not come out 
thence until ye have paid the uttermost farthing.' " — 0. 

Ver. 8. — Premature glorying. In this verse and in others we have the vain vauntings 
of Egypt. Thus far the judgments of God have been declared against nis people. Now, 
having begun at the house of God, judgment g(ies on to the Gentile nations, oq« 



21« THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ch. xlvi. 1— 2a 



after another of whom are told of in the chapters that succeed this, and ending with 
the judgment on Babylon. Egypt and Babylon were the two great empires between 
which unhappy Judaea was " like a nut between the forceps," so that when these two 
drew together it went ill with the little kingdom that lay between. Now, in these 
chapters Egypt takes the lead and Babylon closes, the lesser nations occupying the 
central position. The invasion and conquest of Egypt is the subject of this forty-sixth 
chapter from the thirteenth verse. Its decisive defeat at Carchemish is told of in the 
previous portion. It was in anticipation of that disastrous battle that Egypt, per- 
suading herself that it would issue so differently, is heard uttering the proud boastings 
of this eighth verse. At first it seemed as if these boastings were not vain, for at 
Megiddo, where King Josiah was slain, the Egyptian army did obtain a victory ; but, 
three years after, when they had pushed on to the banks of the Euphrates, Nebuchad- 
nezzar fell upon them there and completely vanquished them. Crestfallen and crushed, 
they had to make their weary wny back to their own land; and shortly after we read 
(2 Kings xxiv. 7), "the King of Egypt came not again any more out of his land: for 
the King of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the river Euphrates all 
that pertained to the King of Egypt." That was what came of all their vauntings, and 
the history is a noticeable one on many grounds. Now, it recalls to our mind the wise 
exhortation, " Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth 
it off " (1 Kings xx. 11). Let us note — 

I. Some manifestations of this spikit of over-confidence. The Bible is full of faoti 
which illustrate this spirit. Pharaoh, in the days of Moses, asking, " Who is the Lord, 
that I should obey him ? " Goliath of Gath striding down the valley in furious pride 
to meet the stripling David. He swore by all his gods he would give those young 
limbs as a prey for the vultures to feed upon. Eabshakeh, again, general of the host 
of the King of Assyria, terrifying and dismaying the devout Hezekiah with his fearful 
threatenings. And we know how the distress lasted until Hezekiah took the letter of 
the haughty heathen and laid it before the Lord. Then, serene and strong, his spirit 
rose up, and he was able to make fit answer. And we know how Jehovah avenged 
Judah, her kini;, and her people upon the vast multitude of their foes who in battle 
array lay around them. For — 

"Like the leaves of the forest when autumn hath blom^ 

That host on tlie morrow lay withered and strewn ; 
For the angel of death spread his wiuRS on the bltiati 
And breathed in the face of the foe as he passed. 

•And the tents were all silent, the banners alone; 
The lanots unlifted, the trumpet unblown ; 
And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the 8W0ld« 
Had melted like snow in the glance of the Lord." 

And we think, too, of Haman in his rage at Mordecai, vowing vengeance, and iorely 
reckoning on wreaking it to the full. And Samson, imagining that nothing conld 
deprive him of his great strength, so confident that at any moment he could break 
through every barrier, but at lengih enticed, betrayed, overcome, and ruined. And 
passing to the region of spiritual things, we think of Israel pledging themselves, as 
they stood at the foot of Mount Sinai, to perfect obedience. Of that rich " fool " of 
whom our Lord tells, and who made so sure of many years to enjoy his " much goods " 
laid up in store. And of the many who were candidates for discipleship, avowing 
themselves ready to follow him everywhere. And of Peter, buasting that, though all 
men should forsake the Lord, yet would not he. And Judas, who trembled not to 
take the office of apostleship though so incapable of sustaining it. And in common 
life how often we see this same spirit! Our Afjjhan disasters in 1879 were largely 
owing to it. But in spiritual life there is the same peril. There may not be the 
uttered words of vain vaunting, but the spirit may be there notwithstanding. For 
how little there is of the trembling, the watchful, the prayerful spirit lest we should 
be overcome I How far too much tHmpering with temptation I How few " pass the 
time of their sojourning here in fear " lest they should " seem to come short " of eternal 
li£»i How many are like the foolish virgins, who, all careless as to the unsuppliad 



CH. xLvi. 1— 28.] THK BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 211 

condition of tbeir oil-vesseU, nevertheless contentedly lay down to sleep! How many 
are at ease in Zion, allowing themselves in a carnal security which too often is but the 
herald of a fearful awakening I 

II. Inquibe — What leads to this bpibit? Some are of a boastful disposition. 
These Egyptians evidently were. He concerning whom the cautionary words already 
quoted were used, " Let not him that girdeth on his harness," etc., was another such 
habitual boaster. And this is human nature. Our pride dies hard, but is puS'ed up 
with wonderful ease. Then : 2. False estimates have a great deal to do with it. Under- 
estimating our adversaries', over-estimating our own, resources and strength. Ilence 
BenhadaJ, who thouL;ht such scorn of Israel, on the very eve of battle was, we are tuld, 
drinking himself drunk in his tent. Hence many are found dallying with danger, 
fluttering, mothlike, round the flame by which they are sure soon to perish miserably, 
The jocular way in which the devil is so generally spoken of proves that we do but 
little believe in him ; for what men seriously believe they never joke about. And this 
false estimate is rendered more credihli; to us if we have obtiiiued auLiht of success 
heretofore. Egypt had at Megiddo; Benhadad had. Hence their estimates. 3. Per- 
version of Ood's truth. We encourage ourselves in this spirit of over-confidence by 
dwelling too exclusively on promises of protection to the ue^ilcct ol those which com- 
mand all watchfulness and prayer. Men will read ^jarts of the Bible only — those which 
please them most; and without doubt many have dwelt so much on the promises of 
God's upholding grace and his perfecting that which he begins, that they have laid 
aside their armour — that indispensable armour of God. But any reading of God's Word 
which leads us thus practically to disobey his command is thereby proved to be a wrong 
reading. For, just as the chemist's litmus paper, plunged into a solution contaiuiug 
acid, at once reveals by its turning red the presence of that acid, however invisible and 
imperceptible it may have been before, so any interpietatiuii of the Scriptures which 
leads to false security, premature and presumptuous coi.flilence, which makes us red 
with this sad sin, proves that that interpretation contains the acid of falsehood. It is 
a sure test. God help us to heed it as we should. 

III. Note what mischief it works. These are seen strewn over every pathway 
along which this spirit hath been ; like the bleached bones in the desert show the trikck 
of the caravan. 

IV. Consider, therefore, some sapequarus against it. God himself at times under- 
takes its cure. He did so with Peter. He let him go his way and fall, and in that 
crash the spirit of boastfulness was for ever crushed. But we shall he aided by 
remembering the words of Christ and his apostles and of all his most laithful servants. 
They all warn against this spirit, and urge the spirit of watchfulness and prayer. 
Bemember, too, that better men than ourselves have fallen. The very fact that 
armour is provided shows that we need it. And note that there are chinks in your 
armour ; and that some armour is of very worthless sort. 

Conclusion. Whilst bidding you boast not, with equal emphasis we say, " Despond 
not." " The gist of all this is, confide in God, but distrust yourselves. Have done 
with every glorying except glorying in the Lord. . . . There is nothing like full 
assurance for excellence, and nothing like presumption for worlhlessness. Never 
mistake the one for the other. You cannot trust God too much nor yourself too 
little. I read a book one day called ' Self-Made Men,' and in its own sphere it was 
excellent ; but spiritnally 1 shouhi not like to be a self-made man. I should think he 
would be an awful specimen of humanity. At any rate, a self-made Christian is one 
of a sort the devil very soon takes, as I have seen a child so take a bran doll and shake 
it all out. He likes to shake out self-made Christians till there is nothing left of 
them. But God-made men, — these are they that do exploits ; and God-made Cliristians, 
who fall back upon the eternal strength at all times and confide there, — these are the 
men to hold on their way and to wax stronger and stronger " (Spurgeon). — 0. 

Ver. 10. — The terror of sacrifice without its blessing. The ancient sacrifices had 
much about them that was very repulsive. The slaughtering and dismemberment of 
the vast herds of animals that were year by year brought to the altar must have 
involved in it very much that was of a revolting nature. No doubt their sensitiveness 
to luch scenes of blood was for less than ours ; but at the best it must have been a 



218 THE BOOK OF THE PllOPHET JEREMIAH. £oh. xlvl 1— 2a 



most pMufal spectacle. Hence scoffers have called it the religion of the shambles 
But the Balvation and blessinj; that came through the sacrifices divested them of all 
that was painful or repulsive to tlie offerer. But there may be all that is terrible 
about sacrifice — agony, blood, death, carnage — without any corresponding blessiug. 
Such is the meaning here. Slaughter, but no salvation. The same word for " sacrifice " 
is used as in those which were ull'ered according to the Law on the altar in the temple. 
And so in the parallel passages in Isn. xxxiv. 6 and Ezek. xxxiz. 17, which should be 
compared with this, and which are alluded to by St. John in the Revelation. In all 
these there is the terror of sacrifice, but none of its blessing. And there is that which 
corresponds to this now. Even Christ's sacrifice may be a terror and not a salvation, 
it is so to: 1. Those whore/use it. 2. Those who apostatize from it, who count the 
blood of the covenant an uniioly thing, trampling undtifoot the Son of God (Heb. x.). 
3. Those who make it the minister of sin. Who " turn the i^race of God into lasoivious- 
ness." There is, then, a twofold aspect of the Lord's sacriflce. Either it must be that 
by It we rise or fall. " This child is set for the fall and rising a.i^ain." The gospel is 
"a savour of life unto life, or," etc. Christ is a Rock on which we may build, or 
which, falliug on the impenitent, crushes him to powder. Which for ourselves 1 — 0. 

Ver. 15. — The real cause of the decline of empires. " Because the Lord did drive 
them." If we read ordinary histuries, the overthrow of any monarchy is traced to 
such an invasion or to the loss of such a battle, or to some other ordinary and well- 
known cause. And no doubt it is true that, through and by these things, the said 
results have been brought about. But there is ever a moral cause which lies behind, 
and it is to that must be traced up the series of events which have followed. The 
history of most ancient empires, in their origin, progress, decline, and fall, has been 
very much the same. A hardy, temperate, courageous people, driven by necessity or 
attracted by the hope of gain, fall upon some decrepit power, destroy it, and on its 
ruins build their own fortunes. For a while the same courage and virtue which 
enabled them to gain possession of their prize are manifested in consolidating their 
power and in building up their rule. But after the laptie of years, they have gained 
secure foothold and are able to live less on their guard as^ainst enemies. Wealth 
and luxury increase and exert their enervating power. In this soil the vices, what- 
ever they may be, to which as a people they are predisposed, grow rapidly and affect 
the national habit and character. Then their decay has begun. It hastens rapidly 
on until, in their turn, this once victorious people are vanquished, overthrown by a 
nation more bold and righteous and therefore more powerful than themselves. This 
law can be readily traced in the histories of Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Greece, 
Rome, and in more modern instances as well. Were there no moral causes at work in 
the overthrow of the French empire under Napoleon I. ? In all cases it will be seen 
that, in one form or another, God's love of righteousness has been outraged, and ven- 
geance has speedily, or surely if not speedily, come. What was the Reformation but 
the revolt of men's consciences against the abominable sins of the Catholic Church ? 
But how came that Church— once so fair, so beautiful, so glorious — to have sunk so 
low as to become hateful in men's eyes ? It was this same enervating influence of 
wealth, power, and other forms of earthly prosperity which sapped her spiritual 
strength until she became utterly unworthy of men's confidence, and sha was pun- 
ished, and is so to this day, by the loss of well-nigh all Northern Europe, the noblest 
half of her ancient domain. Therefore learn — 

L What abb not a oountbt's sapeouards, THOtroH often thought to bb. 
Not commerce, or Tyre would not have fallen. Not art, or Greece would never have 
perished. Not strong political organization, or Rome would have continued. Not 
reliyious profession, or Jerusalem and Catholic Rome would not have suffered the 
disasters that befell them. Not ancient renoton, or Egypt would have stood fast. 
All these things have been relied on, and especially vast armies, but they have 
one and all been tested and have proved ropes of sand, battlements taken away 
because they are not the Lord's. Therefore note — 

II. What is a oountby'b safeouabd ? There is but one answer, and that is 
righteousness. It, and it alone, exalteth a nation. The form of government, whether 
monarchical or republican, matters not, whether political power be in the hands of 



en. XLVi. 1— 28.J THE BOOK OF THE fKOPHUiX JEREMIAH. 219 

the many or the few, but the character of the people — their possession or not pos- 
session of the " fear of the Lord." Whilst Israel possessed this she was impregnable. 
" A thouiiand fell at her side, and," etc. 

III. What, thebbfore, is true patriotism? Not alone adding to the material 
wealth or the intellectual force of the nation, not alone philanthropy or political 
energy, — ^none of these things are to be held in light esteem ; but the truest patriotism, 
and it is one which all can exhibit, is the cultivation of godly character, that fear 
uf God which lies at the basis of all moral excellence whatsoever. Yes, not for our 
own salvation's sake alone, but for our country's sake, even as for Christ's sake, let us 
seek to resemble him, breathe his Spirit, manifest his character, copy his example, and 
spread abroad those true principles of national well-being wiiich, by bis life and death, 
he taught us. — 0. 

Ver. 26.— Punishment not destruction hut purification a/nd preservation. In ver. 28, 
in ch. xlviii. 21, and in ch. xlix. 6, 39, we have similar assurances that "after- 
wards," when God's judgments have done their work, the chastised and afflicted 
nations shall be restored. Such promise is here made to Egypt. It is repeated in 
Ezek. xxix. 8 — 14. And from this reiterated word conceruing, not one people only, 
but so many, we gather the intent and purpose of God in regard to all his punish- 
ments which he sends upon men — that they are not for men's destruction, -but for 
their purification and preservation. Note — 

I. Some of the bases of this belief. 1. Stteh Scriptures as these now referred 
to. 2. The salutary results that have followed so much of human suffering. That 
suffering has shamed indolence, roused energy, stimulated invention, and the results 
have been safeguards to life and health and general well-being, which would never 
have been thought of or sought after if sufTering had not goaded men on. Hence 
we conclude that such results were intended and ever are by like causes. 3. The 
fact that Ood created man. It is incredible that he should create beings whose destiny 
is an eternity of sin and suffering. If it had been really better for any men that 
they bad never been bom, as in this case it undoubtedly would, and as for far lesk 
and altogether inadequate reasons we sometimes say it would concerning ourselves ot 
others, then they never would have been born. Our Lord's word coDcerning JadaH 
is not to be literally pressed. It was a proverbial expression used concerning espe- 
cially unhappy or ungodly men. 4. The very name of " Saviour." Christ either is oi 
is not the ISaviour of the world. If he be not, but only fain would be, then the 
name of "Saviour" cannot be truly his. We do not give the names of "deliverer," 
" saviour," " benefactor," to those who only desire to be such but are not such. We are 
forced to believe — and with what thanklulness we would do so 1 — that lie who is called 
" the Lamb of God " does not merely in wish, but in fact, " take away the sins of the 
world." 6. The value of the great sacrifice. If it do not reconcile the woild unto 
God, as St. Paul affirms it dobs, then it is less precious than men have thought. 
But it is inconceivable that such a sacrifice should fail to accomplish that for which 
it was especially designed. 6. The express declaration that the Son of God was 
manifested to destroy the works of the devil. But are not sin and suffeiing his work ? 
If, then, they be eternal, how can they have been destroyed ? 7. The necessity involved 
in the first and great command, " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God," etc. Now, it 
is not in the power of the human heart to love any being that it does not conceive as 
lovable or worthy of love. But a God who created men, knowing that they would 
eternally sin and suffer, is not lovable by the human heart. What do we say of men 
who do deeds which they know can only issue in misery and wrong ? But is that 
righteous in God which we should denounce in men? Abkorremdumn sit. 

II. CoNOLnsioN. 1. Not that there is no such thing as God's punishment for sin. 
2. Nor that that punishment is hut a little thing. Ah, nol "It is a fearfiil thing" 
for an impenitent unbelieving man " to fall into the hands of the living God." He is a 
consuming fire to such, and the fire will burn on until all the dross and evil be burnt out. 
Wellington said, " There is only one thing worse than a great victory, and that is a great 
defeat." He knew at what cost victory is won. And so there may be only one thing 
worse than some men's salvation, and that is that they should be eternally lost. 3. But 
that «M should learn to " love and dread " Ood. Love him for his gracious purpo8« 



220 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET jEREMlAfl. t™- XLVt 1— 28. 



towards men, but dread lest we should compel him by our rejection of his gospel to lead 
us by sternei ways. For he v/ill have all mcD to be saved and to come to the knowledge 
of the truth. — C. 

Ver. 28. — Correction, but in measure. (Of. homily on Ood^t reterm of mtrey, 
ToL L p. 95.)— 0. 

Ver. 15. — Why fke valiant are noept away. 1. Thkt abb swept awat. Notice the 
host described in previous verses of the chapter — ^horsemen and chariots and archers ; 
the Ethiopian, the Libyan, the Lydian ; an imposing host, whose magnificence could 
not but strike the eye. It was meant that they should produce a feeling of being 
irresistible. And thus in due time, when they were .scattered and broken up, there 
came a complete contrast. The magnificence, the order, the force, were all somehow 
utterly vanished. The present overthrow became all the more noticeable because of 
the magnitude of what had been overthrown. And so God will ever make plain the 
sweeping away of all his foes. Their defeat is not left a doubtful thing. It may be 
very difficult to account for, but it cannot be questioned. 

n. The kbbd foe asking why they abb swept away. 1. Because of tJieir magnifi- 
cent appearance. They look strong, and according to a certain standard they are strong. 
This Egypiian army had been gathered together to do a certain work. It was known 
that they liad to meet no common and easily conquered foe. Therefore there were 
strong men on strong horses, with powerful weapons and well defended. Yet after all 
this preparation there came, not merely defeat, but what is called a sweeping away. 
Assuredly this wants explaining. 2. 'Beca.nse o! past victories. We cannot suppose they 
were an untried host. If they had won battles and campaigns before, why did they 
lose this ? And why were they so utterly and lastingly defeated ? 3. Because there 
is DO obvious explanation. It is not to be looked for in the strength of their human 
opponents. It is not to be found in some difiference between what they were in the 
hour of confusion and what they had been in previous hours of victory. There is 
no ground to say they were less brave, less disciplined, worse commanded. The reason 
for this sweeping away, whatever it be, passes ordinary human search. 

III. The sufficient reason is found in the action of Jehovah. Jehovah drove 
them. All forces that find expression in matter are completely at God's disposal. He 
can paralyze the mightiest army in a moment. The mighty man is not to glory in his 
might (ch. ix. 23). True it is that God lets the strong man do generally all his 
strength permits him to do. The success military men look for is on the side of the 
strongest battalions. But then all strength of this sort fails against spiritual strength. 
Not all the armies of Eome and not all the wild beasts of the amphitheatre could 
persuade a single true Christian to forsake Christ. The strength of this world achieves 
great things in its own field, but directly it goes beyond and tries to interfere with 
conscience and spiritual aspiratjons, its weakness is made manifest. — Y. 

Vers. 27, 28. — Ood's care of his own. I. The need op the fullest posbiblb asbur- 
ANCB. Jehovah, who has visited Israel with many and great sufferings, will also visit 
other peoples. Egypt is spoken of in this chapter ; and Philistia, Moab Ammon, and 
Habylon in following chapters. Hence the need of Divine words such as would keep 
tlie believing element in Israel calm and confident through all these disturbances, and 
HO it ever is meant to be with the true Israel of God. God ia ready with comfortino 
words amid the necessary turmoil of external conditions. 

II. The solid orounds of this assurance. They lie in Jehovah's continued con- 
nection with Israel, and his purposes for its safety, peace, and prosperity. We have no 
assurance in ourselves or our circumstances, but the moment we can feel that we are in 
God's hands, that he has plans with respect to us, and a future preparing for us, then 
assurance is possible. God never tells man to take courage and put away fear without 
giving good reason for the exhortation, and showing that fear is rather the unreasonable 
feeling to allow. The moment we can take in the full force of that wonderful word, 
" I am with thee," then we are freed from alarms and from dependence on the shifting 
phenomena of this present life. 

III. Tl'B DIFFKRRNIE GoD WILL MAKE BETWEEN ISRAEL AND OTHER NATIONS. A 



OH. XLVU. 1— 7 ] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



221 



full end is to be made of them. And a full end has been made of them. Here, of 
course, the (iistinction must be borne in mind between nations and the individuals 
composing them. A nation is but a cert.iin arrangement of human beings, and this 
arrangement may be productive of such wrong feelings and such danger to the world as 
to make it fitting that the naiion should cease. But the people composing the nation 
remain, and their descend. mts pass into new and butter combinations. So with regard 
to Israel ; the people who are to return and be in rest and without fear, the people who 
are not to be made a full end of, are those of whom literal Israel is but the type. There 
are really but two nations in the world — those who believe in God and in his Son, and 
show their faith by their works; and those who trust in themselves, in their power and 
their purposes. Of all these latter God must make a full end, if in no other way by 
bringmg them to see their folly, so that they may turn to the ways of faith. 

IV. Jehovah's chastisement of his own even while he protects them. There 
is a purpose in all suflfering, a real need for it. Mi n seem to be mixed up indis- 
criminately, and suffering looks as if it often fell irrespective of character, but this is 
only a seeming. The suffering of Israel, though it may look the same outwardly, is 
really as different as possible from the suffering of Egypt. There is a fire which ends 
in the destruction of what passes through it. It must be so, lor the thing is destructible 
and shows its nature when the fire tries it. 'I'he same fire attacking indestructible 
things only separates destructible accr. tions from them, and consumes these accreti ins 
away. God's intcntioa is that the believer may be able to say, " I cannot be destroyed 
in this furnace of trials ; I cannot go to pieces as others do. But still I must remain 
in it for a while ; I must submit to God's wise ordinances so that at last I may return 
to my true rest and tear no more for ever." — Y, 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XLVn. 

Pbophect ok the Philistines. 

It is clear from the contents of the prophecy 
(and the inference is thoroughly confirmed 
by its position) that it was written after the 
battle of Carohemish, with reference to the 
dreaded northern foe — Nebuchadnezzar, 
King of Babylon. The prophecy against 
Egypt precedes, because Egypt was by far 
the most important of the nations threatened 
by the advance of Nebuchadnezzar. But 
chronologically and geographically, it ought 
rather to have been placed at the end of the 
series, for Palestine had to be conquered 
before a design upon Egypt could have a 
reasonable chance of success. The com- 
mentators have given themselves much 
anuecessary trouble with the heading in 
ver. 1, which assigns the date of the prophecy 
to a period prior (as it would seem) to the 
battle of Ciarchemish. They forget that the 
heading* are not to be received without 
critioism as historical evidence for the date 
of the prophecies. Knowing, as we do, that 
the prophecies were edited, not only by the 
disciples of the prophets, but by students of 
the Scriptures long after their time, it is 



gratuitously embarrassing one's self to giv* 
as much historical weight to the statement 
of a heading ets to a clear inference from the 
contents of a prophecy. No doubt Provi- 
dence watched over the movements of the 
editors ; they must even be credited with a 
degree of inspiration, so far as moral and 
religious truths are concerned ; but they 
were not exempt from being dependent on 
the ordinary sources of iufoimatiou in 
matters of histoiy. It would seem, then, 
tliat, out of the various sieges of Gaza in the 
last century of the Jewish state, one in 
particular had fixed itself in the memory of 
the Jews; and it was not a siege by the 
Babylonians, but by the Egyptians. Seeing 
a reference to Gaza in vcr. 5, a late editor of 
Jeremiah appended to the heading already 
in existence the words, "before that Pharaoh 
smote Gaza." He was wrong in so doing, 
but he only carried out, like many favourite 
modem preachers, what has been calhd 
the atomistic method of exegesis, by which 
a single verse is isolated from its context, 
and Interpreted with total disregard of the 
rest of the passage. 

But which Pharaoh did this editor moan? 
and when did he lay siege to Gaza ? Th« 



222 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEEEMIAH. [oh. xlvii. 1—7. 



general view is that he means Pharaob- 
necho, who, according to Herodotus (ii. 159), 
first defeated "the Syrians at Magdoius," 
and then "made himself master of Gadytis, 
a large city of Syria." It is assumed that 
Mfigdolus is a mistake for Megiddo, and that 
Cadytis means Gaza ; and the former sup- 
position is probable enough (a similar con- 
fusion has been made by certain manuscripts 
at Matt. XV. 39 ; comp. the Authorized and 
Revised Versions) ; but the latter is rather 
doubtful. It is true- that in iii. 5 Herodotus 
speaks of" the country from Plioeaicia to the 
borders of the city Cadytis " as belonging to 
" the Palestine Syrians ; " but is it not more 
probable that Herodotus mistookthe position 
of Jerusalem (^Cadushta, " the holy (city)," in 
Aramaic) than that he called Oaza " a city 
almost as large as Sardis " P Gaza was 
never called " the holy city ;" Jerusalem was. 
Sir Gardner Wilkinson (ap. Eawlinson's 
* Herodotus ') takes a different view. Ac- 
cording to him (and to Bashi long before) 
it was Pharaoh-hophra or Apries who cap- 
tured Gaza. We know from Herodotus 
(ii. 161) that this king waged war with 
Fhtsniuia, which is, perhaps, to be taken 
in connection with the notice in oh, xxxvii. 
5, 1 1 , of the diversion created by an Egyptian 
ainiy during the siege of Jerusalem. This 
liypotnesis is to a certain extent confirmed 
by the mention of " Tyrus and Zidon " in 
ver. 4, but stands in much need of some direct 
historical confirmation. 

Ver. 1. — Against the Philistines ; rather, 
soncerning (as usual in sunilar cases). Be- 
fore that Pharaoh, etc. (see introduction to 
chapter). 

Vers. 2 — i. — Hostile bands advance from 
the north ; horror seizes the Philistines. 

Ver. 2. — Waters rise up. The prophets 
think in figures, and no figure is so familiar 
to them (alas for tlie unstable condition of 
thosH times I) as that of an overflowing 
torrent for an invading arjny (see on ch. xlvi. 
8, and add to the parallel passiiges Isa. 
xxviii. 18; Ezek. xxvi. 19; Dan. xi. 10). Out 
of the north. To suppose that tliis refers to 
Pliaraoh-necho returning from Carchemish 
seiiiHs forced and unnatural. If Neclio con- 
quered Gaza at the period supposed, it would 
be on his way to Carchemish, and not on his 
return. Besides, " the north " is the standing 
symbol for the home of the dreaded Assyrian 
and I'abylonian foes (see on ch. i. 14). 
Isaiah had uttered a very similfkr prediction 
when the Asayrian hosts ww« sweepiug 



through Palestine (xlv. 81). An over- 
flowing flood ; ratlier, torrent. The lame 
phrase occurs in Isa. xxx. 28, where the 
" breath " of the angry God ia described 
with this figurative expression. It is in 
autumn-time that the torrents of Palestine 
become dangerous, and water-courses, dry 
or almost dry in summer (comp. ch. xv. 
18), become filled with a furiously nulling 
stream. 

Ver. 3. — ^A fine spechnen of Hebrew word- 
painting. The rushing of his chariots. 
"Bushing" has the sense ot the German 
rauschen, to make a rustling, murmuring 
sound. It is used (but as the equivalent of 
a different Hebrew word) in the Authorized 
Version of Isa. xviii. 12, 13 of the confused 
sound made by an army in motion. In the 
present passage, the Hebrew word means 
something more definite than that in Isaiah, 
l.c. ; it is the " crashing " of an earthquake, 
or (as here) the " rattling " of chariots. The 
rumbling of his wheels. " Bumbling " is a 
happy equivalent. The Hebrew (hSmoa) is 
the word referred to in the preceding note 
as meaning an indefinite confused sound. 
The fathers shall not look back to their 
children, etc. An awful picture, and still 
more effective in the concise language of the 
original. Tlie Hebrew Scriptures excel 
(as still more strikingly, but with too great 
a want of moderation, does the Korin) in 
the sublime of terror. So overpowering shall 
the panic be that fathers will not even turn 
an eye to their helpless children. Observe, 
it is said "the fathers," not " the mothers." 
The picture is poetically finer than that in 
Dent, xxviii. 56, 57, because the shade of 
colouring is a degree softer. Feebleness ol 
hands. A common expression for the enerva- 
tion produced by extreme terror (see ch. vi. 
24 ; Isa. xiii. 7; Ezek. vii 17; Nah. it 11). 

Ver. 4.— The day that oometh ; rather, tht 
day that hath come (i.e. shall have come). It 
is " the day of the Lord " that is meant, that 
revolutionary " shaking of all things " (to use 
Haggai's expression, ii. 21), as to which see 
further in note on ch. xlvi. 10. To out ofl 
. . . every helper that remainetli ; t.e. every 
ally on whom they could still reckon. This 
passage favours the view that the judgment 
upon the Philistines took place at the same 
time as that upon Tyre. Nebuchadnezzar's 
object was to isolate Tyre and Sidon as com- 
pletely as possible. The remnant. Tiie 
Philistines had suffered so much from re- 
peated invasions as to be only a "remnant " o( 
the once powerful nation which oppressed 
Israel (see on ch. xxv. 20). The country ol 
Caphtor. Some would render "the coast- 
land of Caphtor," but the idea of " coast " 
seems to be a secondary one, derived in cer- 
tain passages from the oontext. Properly 
bpeaking, it ia » poetio aynonym for " land.' 



CH. u.vn. 1— 7.J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



223 



and ii generally applied to distant and 
(accidentally) maritime countries. " Caph- 
tor " was und^'i'-stood by the old versions to 
be Cappadocia. But as the remains of the 
Cappadooian language point to a Persian 
origin of the pi ipulation which spoke it, and 
as the Caphtorim originally came from 
Egypt, it is more plausible to i-uppose, with 
Ebers, that Caphtor was a coast district of 
North Egypt. Crete has also been thought 
of (comp. Amos ix. 7; Gen. z. 14; Deut. ii. 
23). 

Vera. 5 — 7. — ^The prophet changes his 
style. In ecstasy or imagination, he sees 
the calamity which he has foretold already 
come to pass. Philistia is not, indeed, alto- 
gether annihilated ; it was not the will of 
God to make a full end as yet with any of 
the nations round about. But it is reduced 
to extremities, and fears the worst. 

Ver. 5. — Baldness. A sign of the deepest 
sorrow (comp. on ch. zvi. G). Ashkelon is 
cut oft Ruins of Aslikelon are still visible. 
" It is evident that the walls of the old city 
were built on a semicircular range of rooky 
hills, which ended in perpendicular cliffs of 
various heights on the seashore. Wherever 
nature failed, the weak places were strength- 
ened by the help of earthworks or masonry. 
On the southern and south-eastern sides, the 
sand has penetrated the city by means of 
lireaches in the walls, and every day it 
covers the old fortifications more and more, 
both within and without. The ancient 
towns alone rise distinctly, like rocky 
islands, out of the sea of sand. The ruins 
ou the north are bordered by plantations of 
trees. They lie in such wild confusion that 
one might suppose that they were thrown 
down by an earthquake. There is no secure 
landing-place ; the strip of sand at the foot 
of the western wall is covered at high tide, 
when the waves beat against the cliffs. 
Still J. G. Kinnear, in 1841, found some 
remains of a mole, and this discovery is 
confirmed by Schick [the able Geiman archi- 
tect now at Jerusalem]." Thus writes Dr. 
Guthe, in the Journal of the German Pales- 
tine Exploration Society |]880), remarking 
further that, in a few generations, the ruins 
of Aslikelon will be buried under the drift- 
ing sand. It is partly the sand-hills, partly 
the singular fragmentariness of the ruins 
of Ashkelon, which gives such an air of 
desolation to the scene, though, where the 
deluge of sand has not invaded, the gardens 
and oiohards are luxuriant. Dr. W. M. 
Thomson, in the enlarged edition of ' The 



Land and the Book' (London, 1881, p. ITS), 

observes that "the walls and towen must 
have been blown to pieces by powder, for 
not even earthquakes could throw these 
gigantic masses of masonry into BOoh ex- 
traordinary attiiudes. No site in this coun- 
try hiis so deeply impressed my mind with 
sadness." With the remnant of their valley. 
" With " should rather be " even." « Their 
valley " means primarily the valley of 
A hkelon ; b it this was not different from 
the valley or low-lying plain (more commonly 
called the Shejelah) of the other Philistian 
towns ; and the whole phrase is an enigma- 
tical, poetic way of saying " the still sur- 
viving population of Philistia." But this 
addition certainly weakens the passage, and 
leaves the second half of the verse abnor- 
mally short. It is far better to violate the 
Massoretic tradition, and attach "the rem- 
nant," etc.. to the second verse-half But 
" their valley " is still a rather feeble expres- 
sion ; a proper name is what we look for to 
make this clause correspond to those whicli 
have gone before. The Septuagint reads 
differently, for it renders «o! t4 KoTi{\oiira 
'EvaKel/ji. We know from Josh. xi. 22 that 
some of the Anakim were left " in Gaza, in 
Gath, and in Ashdod ; " and in David's time 
the Philistines could still point to giants 
in their mid^t (1 Sam. xvii. 4 ; 2 Sam. xxi. 
16—22), who, like the Anakim (Dent ii 20), 
are called in the Hebrew, Rephaim. It may 
be objected, indeed (as it is by Keil), that the 
Anakim would not be traceable so late as 
Jeremiah's time ; but Jeremiah was pre- 
sumably a learned man, and was as likely In 
call the Philistines Anakim, as an English 
poet to call his countrymen Britons. No 
one who has given special attention to the 
phenomena of the Hebrew text elsewhere 
can doubt that " their valley " is a corrup- 
tion ; the choice lies between the " Anakim " 
of the Sepluagint and the plausible correction 
of a Jewish sclioliir (A. Krochmal), "Ekron " 
How long wilt thou cut thyself 1 Shall thy 
lamentation never cease ? (comp. on oh. 
xvi. ti). The question is in appearance 
addressed to " tlie remnant " (personified as 
a woman), but in reality the judicial Pro- 
vidence who sends the calamity. 

Ver. 6. —0 thou sword, etc ; rather, alas ! 
thou sword of the Lord. It is the mystic 
sword of which we have heard already (see 
on ch. xii. 10 ; xlvi. 10). 

Ver. 7. — The seashore. Su Ezekiel speaks 
of " the remnant of the seashore " (zxv. I6X 
referring to Philistia. 



HOMILETIOS. 

Vera. 1 — 7, — 2%e judgment of the Philistines. I. A jddombht on thb AiroiEm 
ENEMIES or THE PEOPLE OF GoD. They have long ceased to be a power; now they 



224 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlvii. 1— 7 

shall cease to have any national existence. They are but a remnant ; even this is to be 
cut off. Gradually the spiritual foes ol' the Christian are reduced in power and number 
Old sins and old temptations are slowly subdued. Some linger on till the end of life. 
But all shall be overthrown, even the last enemy, death. 

II. Ah ovebwhelmin^q judgment. It comes up like a flood ; i.e. it is swift, and it 
spreads far and wide. Such is a characteristic of Divine judgments. 1. They may be 
long delayed, but when they appear they rush down as a flood. 2. They penetrate to 
secret hiding-places and flow to the most remote quarters, reaching those who would fain 
separate themselves from their companions in sin when they are Ibrced to be also com- 
panions in suffering. 

III. A DiSTBBSsmQ JUDGMENT. The Philistines suffer grief — they cry and howl ; 
these people are also smitten with the paralysis of fear — " the fathers shall not look 
back to their children for feebleness of hands " (ver. 3). Some troubles can be endured 
and lived down by fortitude, by patient Eubmisslon, or by the comforting resources of 
the inner life. But this is not possible with the judgments of Heaven. They are too 
terrific to be calmly endured. The inner sources of consolation are withheld. The 
soul is punished as well as the body. There is the bitterest drop in the cup of anguish. 
The soul will be tortured with shame, with remorse, with horror. That is helL 

IV. A DESTBUCTIVE JUDGMENT. " Baldncss is come upon Gaza ; Ashkelon ia cut 
off." Chreat cities are overthrown, the ruins of them testifying to this day to the 
violence they have undergone. The end of the broad way is destruction, " The wages 
of sin is death." Whatever be the exact character of the destruction and death, the 
analogy of national judgment and the known deadening effects of sin upon the spiritual, 
the intellectual, and even the physical powers lead us to expect that the fearful fate of 
sin continued, unchecked, and unrepented of through all stages of chastisement will be 
some destroying process. 

V. An bhdubinq judgment. " Alas ! thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be 
ere thou be quiet?" (ver. 6). Philistia has never been restored. Some judgments 
appear to be irretrievable. All punishment must be sufSciently enduring to eli'ect its 
end. The punishment of the next world is always referred to as terribly enduring, as 
partaking of the awful duration of seoaa. How long such vague, vast ages will last 
none can say. May it not be the fate of any of us to make the experiment ! 

Vers. 6, 7. — 2%e tword of the Lord. I. The terror of man before the sword of 
THE Lord. (Ver. 6.) 1. Ood wields a sword. There are terrors in some of the doings 
of the Gk)d of love. "Our God is a consuming fire." It is foolish and wrong to blind 
ourselves to the stern side of God's government, and to represent him as almost soft and 
weak in his indulgence of his children. 2. God's sword may be seen in earthly calami- 
ties. It does not flash before us as when it was held by cherubim at the gates of Eden. 
It works in the form of natural calamities. It also makes use of human actions, wars, 
etc. Above the sword of man there flitters this terrible, irresistible sword. 'I'lius 
calamities in this world are sent by God or overruled by God. 3. God's sword may be 
restlessly active. It is not displayed for one fearful moment and then sheathed. Often 
there comes blow upon blow. Thus Job cries out beneath the wearjing strokes, 
" How long wilt thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my 
spittle ?" (Job vii. 19). 4. We cannot see the reason for the terrible work of the .sword 
of the Lora. We cry out in dismay before it. From a human point of view it may 
appear cruel and relentless. 5. We may naturally /eei/)% for those who suffer from this 
terrible sword. It is right, too, that we should intercede for them if it be possible for 
the judgment of Heaven to be stayed. 

IL lia DrviKK mission of the sword of the Lord. (Ver. 7.) 1. The wielding 
of the Bword is necessary. "How can it be quiet?" There are moral necessities 
which even the Almighty Ood freely accepts. Justice must be done. Right must be 
established. Evil must be suppressed. The process may be painful, and such as God 
would not choose on its own account and can take no delight in. Yet for these high 
requirements, though his children suffer and his own heart is wrung with commiseration, 
he cannot sheathe the sword till its work is done. 2. The wielding of the sword is lor 
a good purpose. The necessity is not blind and objectless. The sword has its mission. 
To us who are in the thick of the battle this may not be discernible. The dust anu 



OH. XLViL 1— 7J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEEBMIAH. 225 

heat, the rush and noise and confusion, the mingled cries of triumph and pain, are all we 
can observe ; the plan of the commander cannot be read through all the turmoil of the 
field. But he has a plan, and the whole battle is converging to it. 3. The sword 
cannot be sheathed fill its mission is accomplished. The mission is more important that 
the temporary comfort arising out of the immediate quieting of the sword. If this 
were to lie done before the end were obtained, where would be ithe use of all that was 
already suffered ? If the sword is stayed before victory is won, every drop of bloou spilt 
is wasted, every pang suflered is suffered in vain. If the discipline of life were to cease 
before its great purpose were accomplished, its earlier stages would be stultified. 4. 
When the mission of the sword is accomplished the sword will be sheathed. It is drawn 
for a definite object. " The Lord is a man of war " for a season and for a purpose, not 
by delight nor perpetually. He is essentially the God of peace. No one is more 
anxious to see the sword laidaside than he who wields it. His joy is in peace and 
in benediction. Judgment is temporary. The victory and rest that follow will be 
etemaL 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 5. — 27ie sorrow of the tmgodly. The allusion is to a fashion common to the 
Philistines and other idolatrous nations in appealing to their gods. We perceive a 
similar tendency in the natural mind in its first moral concerns and spiritual troubles. 
It is the sorrow ot the world to which, as to the Philippian jailor, the injunction has t< 
be addressed, "Do thyself no harm." Notice — 

I. The principle in human natubb. It is that self-inflicted suffering or depri- 
vation will be of spiritual advantage and secure Divine favour. This is the secret of 
penance, pilgrimages, monastic life, and asceticism in general. The saying, often uttered 
of losses or pains over which one has no control, " Ah, well 1 it will be set down to our 
credit!" witnesses to the same idea. Remorse is largely explained on the same 
principle. 

II. That it ib rouNDKD oh a misoonoeiption of the DrviNB nature. Baal was 
a cruel god — a huge abortion and monstrosity. Not less cruel are the ideas of God's cha- 
racter entertained by many reputedly religious persons. 1. We gospel declares that " Ood 
is Imie." Such self-inflictions are but folly, and have no religious value in view of this 
great truth. "Sacriflce and offering thou wouldest not . . . Lo, I come ... I delight 
to do thy will, my God " (Ps. xl. 6—8; Heb. x. 6 — 7) ; " I will have mercy, and not 
sacrifice " (Matt. ix. 13 ; cf. Hos. vL 6) ; and " Wherewithal shall I come before the 
Lord, ... he hath showed thee, man, what is good ; and what doth the Lord require 
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God ? " 
(Micah vi 6 — 8), — are the expressions of the spirit of true religion, which alone 
harmonizes with the doctrine of a loving God. 2. Ood himself in the person of his 
Son has "borne our griefi and carried our sorrows." The worship which is alone 
acceptable to the Father must begin with the recognition of this. There is a " godly 
sorrow," but its advantage consists in its moral influence on ourselves, making us hate 
sin and follow after righteousness, etc. 3. Everything which ignores the merit of 
Christ's sufferings and Ood's revelation of himself must needs be hateful to him, and 
bring upon its authors his wrath and curse. — ^M. 

Vers. 6, 7. — Uie sword of Jehovah. L A fersonifioation of Divine weath. 
" Sword of Jehovah ■"' is an expression that seems to suggest the Philistines as the 
speakers ; " for, though not bad Hebrew, it has a foreign sound, and makes the impres- 
sion that the speakers attribute the sword raging against them only unwillingly and 
hesitatingly to Jehovah " (Naegelsbach), Gk)d in his true character is still unknown, 
but conscience witnesses to him as a dimly realized agent of moral recompense. Such 
language tells : 1. How ceaseless and terrible i» the Judgment of the heathen world. 
Ezekiel uses the same figure in relation to thi Amorites (xxL 30). " There is no 
peace, saith my God, to the wicked ; " " Surely thou wilt slay the wicked, God " 
(Ps. czxxix. 19) ; " When they shall say. Peace and safety ; then sudden destruction 
Cometh upon them," etc. (1 Thess. v. 3). 2. Of ignorance and moral distance from 
Ood, He is only conceived of as a God of vengeance — ^an all but impersonal fate. 3. 
jebsuah — n. ■■I 



226 THE BOOK OJ? THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. XLvn. 1—7 

Of the helplessness and nuperstiiious dread of sinners. An imperfect knowledge is eked 
out and distorted by a diseased imagination. All moral strength seems to have gone 
out of them. 

IL Explained and justified as a Divine appointment. At first the answer 
of the prophet appears little oIIut than a repetition of the Philistines' thought; but it 
is far more. 1. This k nut blin:/ fate, hut jndfjinent stridly meted out and iJetermined. 
2. It dedares, in effect, that the wicked cnnnot be suffered to remain on the eart'i. They 
must be subjects of continual and exterminating judpjinent. There is no escape. Is 
this'so? Yis, so long as they remain impenitent and at a distance from him. Is it 
contradictory, then, for Zechaiiah to prophecy the conversion of the PliilistiuesV The 
rightful end of jiidj;ment is mercy. The sinner is driven into the arms of the Divin* 
love. Our helplessness prepares for the reception of his salvation. — M. 

Ver. 7. — The sword that cannot be quiet. This chapter tells of another of the Gentile 
nations on whom the judgment of God was to come. These nations all lay in the 
march of the Babylonian armies, and were one after another overthrown. Philistia is 
represented as asking of the sword of the Lord, wlien it will be quiet, and the answer 
is, "How can it be quiet, when," etc. ? (ver. 7). It reminds — 

I. Of the 8W0BD OF coNsciENOB. Tlie Lord hath given it a charge, and, though 
we may blunt it, we cannot perfectly quiet it (cf. Macbeth, Judas, and other conscience- 
haunted men). 

II. Of the sword of Scripture. " The Word of the Lord is not bound. How 
men have sought to sheathe it in tlie scabbard, to hide and hold it there, so that they 
may go on unchecked in their own ways! But it has leapt forth in spite of them ; and, 
in spite of pagan, Roman, and other persecutions, has asserted its supreme nii^ht." 

III. Of the swokd of the Divine judgment against sin. Sin and sorrow are 
eternally married, and can never be put asunder. Where one is the other is never fur 
off, and never will be in this world or the next. But for every believer Christ has offered 
his own heart as a sheath for it. For such that sword is sheathed therein, and will ba 
quiet there for ever. 

" When Christ gave up the ghost 
The Law was satisfied ; 
And now to its most rigorous claimi 
I answer, ' Jesus died.' " 

G 

Vers. 6, 7. — Apostrophe to the sword. I. What is meant by the bword of 
Jehovah. Any man, or army of men, or any inanimate thin^ even, may be as a sword 
in the hand of God. Men are restricted in their agents to injure and desirny, and wtll 
it is so, though in old and su] erstitii.us times some of them were believed to control 
the powers of nature so that they could raise winds and ttinpe-ts. But God, with his 
real and complete control over all naturnl f mccs, can turn them against rebellious man 
whenever and to whatever extent it may be necessary. It is not a case of a strong arm 
and a weak weapon, or a weak arm and a strong weapon beyond what the arm can 
wield. God smites, and not imperfectly ; nor does he need to smite twice. 

II. What is suggested by the ArosTiiOPHE. 1. The thought or' Ood's enemies. 
Here the Philistines are mentioned, so long the troublesome and jealous neighbours of 
fsrael. But they are only types. There are still enemies numerous enough and active 
enough to keep the sword of God from lyin-; qniet in its scabbard. Why were these 
Philistines reckoned enemies ? Simply because ol their wickedness. God is hostile to 
nothing but wickedness in man, and to that he is always hostile. There are Philistines 
still against whom a charge has to be given to the sword of God. And such must ever 
be deatroyed, that is, not the men themselves must be destroyed, but that in them 
which selfishly uptiolds evil and profits by it. And even they themselves, if they 
continue the foolish war against God, must perish in ihe end. 2. The thought of God's 
opposing activity to Ma enemies. Wherever there is emnity to God, Divine oppo- 
sition to it becomes manifest. Hard as it may be to fight for God, it is harder still to 
fight against him. In being on (iod's side against evil all the difficulties are at the 
beginning; in being on the evil side against God the difficulties, though they may 



CH. xL'-'ni. 1— 47.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



227 



look as nothing to start with, soon multiply and increase to the end. A cliarge is 
given to all God's servants to be resolute and uncompvomising in their opposition to all 
wickedness. 3. The thought of ultimate cessation of the sword^s activity. Surely the 
time is to come when the sword will lie quietly in the scabbard. He who came not to 
bring peace but a sword has peace for his ultimate aim. He will not say, " Peace, peace," 
when there is no peace ; and when at last he will say, " Peace," we may be sure of the 
reality corresponding with the word. — Y. 



BXP08ITI0N. 



CHAPTER XLTin. 



This prophecy is so full of repetitions that 
the question has naturally arisen wliether 
the most prominent of these may not be 
due to interpolation. For instance : 1. 
Vers. 29 — 38 recur in Isa. xvi. 6—10 ; xv. 
1, 5, 6 ; xvi. 12, 11 ; xy. 2, 3 ; not, indeed, 
without many peculiarities, and those pe- 
culiarities are so striking, and so little in 
harmony with Jeremiah's usual mode of 
using his predecessor's writings, that 
some have held that vers. 29 — 38 were 
inserted by one of Jeremiah's readers. 2. 
Vers. 13, 41 so closely resemble Isa. xziv. 
17, 18, and cohere so loosely with the con- 
text, that interpolation is a not unreasonable 
hypothesis. 3. Vers. 45, 46, which are 
omitted in the Septuagint, are evidently 
based on Xumb. xxi. 28, 29. 4. Vers. 40, 
41 closely resemble ch. xlix. 22 ; the portion 
corresponding to that passage is omitted in 
the Septuaglnt. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — The prophet foresees the 
calamity of Moab, and the attendant con- 
fusion and dismay. Yes ; flee, save your 
lives, if ye can; for your confidences have 
proved untrustworthy ; there is no hope left. 

Ver. 1. — Against Moab ; rather, concerning 
Moab. Nebo ! Kot, of course, the mountain 
range referred toinDeut.xxxii.49 andxxxiv. 
1 as that from which Moses viewed the land 
destined for Israel, but a town in the neigh- 
bourhood, deriving its name, not from the 
mountain,but from the same old Semitic (and 
not merely Babylonian) deity. Kiriathaim. 
"The double city." A place of uncertain 
situation, Imt probably in the same district 
as Nebo; mentioned in Gen. xiv. 5, as the 
abode of the " terrible " aboriginal tribe 
called the Emim. Is confounded; r.tther, 
is brought to shame (as ch. xlvi. 24). 
Misgab ; rather, the fortress. The con- 
nection shows that some definite fortress is 
intended, but it is difBoult to say which. 
Graf thinks of Kir-heres (vers. 31, 36) or 
Kir-tareseth (another form of the same 
name; oomp Isa xtI. 7; 2 Kings iii. 25), 



generally identified with Kir-Moab, the 

chief fortified town of (he Moabites. 

Ver. 2. — There shall be no more praise of 
Moab ; rather, MoaVs glory (or, glorying) ii 
no more (eomp. ver. 29). In Heshbon they 
have devised evil, etc. There is a word- 
play in the Hebrew, which may be repro- 
duced thus : " In Plot-house they plot evil 
against it" (so J. P. Smith's Ewald). 
Against it (literally, her) means "against 
Moab." Heshbon was at the time an 
Ammonitish town (it had in days gone by 
been Amoritish, Numb. xxi. 26) ; see ch. 
xlix. 3; but was on the border of Moab. 
Madmen. There seems to be again a 
word-play, which has been to some extent 
reproduced thus : " Thou sbalt become still, 
O Still-house." The name Madmen does 
not occur again, though an allusion to it 
has been fancied in Isa. xxv. 10, where the 
Hebrew for " dunghill " is madmenuh. 

Ver. 3. — Horonaim. Tiiis Moaiiite town 
was probably on the borders of Edom; 
hence, perhaps, " Sanbnllat the Horonite." 

Ver. 4. — Moab is destroyed. The men- 
tion of Moab in the midst of towns la 
certainly surprising. We sliould expect 
Ar-Moab. Her little ones. The received 
text, as it stands, is untranslatable, and our 
choice lies between the correction suggested 
by the vowel-points, and the reading of tije 
Septuagint and a few of the extant Hebrew 
manuscripts, " unto Zoar." In favour of 
the latter, which is adopted by Ewald and 
Graf, it may be urged tliat Zoar and 
Horonaim are mentioned together, not only 
in ver. 34, but also in Isa. xv. 5, which has 
evidently been imitated in the following 
verse. It is not quite clear wliat "her 
little ones " in the first-mentioned correc- 
tion mean. Some think, the children ; 
others, the poor ; Hitzig prefers the small 
towns of Moab. On the site of " Zoar," see 
Smith's ' Dictionary of the Bible,' but com- 
pare Canon Tiistram in 'The Laud uf 
Moab.' 

Ver. 5. — For in the going up of Luhith, 
etc. The verse is subsiantially taken from 
Isaiah (xv. 5), Ijut with variations peuuliar 
to tills chapter. The most peculiar of these 
is that in the first verse-half, which ia 
literally, weeping goeth uf (not, shcUl go up) 



228 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlviil 1—47. 



%t)i(h weeping, which is explained by Dr. 
Payne Smith to mean "one set of weeping 
fngitives pressing close upon another." To 
the present commen tator (as also to Delitzsch 
— see his note on Isn. xv. 5) there seems no 
reasonable doubt that b'ki, the word ren- 
dered "weeping," should rather he bo, 
" upon it," so that the passage will run, as 
in Isaiah, "for the going up of Luhith with 
weeping doth one go up it" Hitzij; (whom 
for once we find agreeing with Delitzsch) 
remarks that tiie miswriting b'ki for bo may 
be easily accounted for by the fact tliat ki, 
" for," is the word which follows next. We 
have no right to ascribe to Jeremiah such 
an artificial and un-Hebraic an expression 
as that of the received text. Small as the 
matter may be in itself, it is not unimpor- 
tant as suggesting to the Old Testament 
student a caution against the too unre- 
served adoption of the canon Lectioni faeili- 
ori prattat ardua. In the going down of 
Horonaim. An interesting variation from 
Isaiah. The older poet, less attentive to 
minutiffi, had said vaguely, " in the road to 
Horonaim ; " by a slight change of expres- 
sion, the younger and more reflective writer 
produces a striking antithesis between the 
ascent to the hill-town, and the descent to 
the hollow in wliich Horonaim ("double 
cavern") appears to have been situated. 
It is possible, however, that Jeremiah has 
preserved the original reading, and that "the 
road " in Isaiah, l.c., is due to the careless- 
ness of a scribe. The enemies have heard 
a cry of destruction. But why this reference 
to the enemies? The rendering, however, 
is ungrammatical. The text is, literally, 
the enemies of the cry of destruction have 
they heard. The prophecy in Isaiah omits 
" the enemies of," and has a ilifferent verb 
for " have they heard." Can the inserted 
words be an intrusion from the margin ? 
The later scribes were accustomed to insert 
glosses in the margin on occasions where we 
■hould have tliought them entirely un- 
necessary for the purpose of explanation. 
But then why " the enemies of"? It is an 
insoluble enigma. 

Ver. 6. — Flee, save youi lives ; literally, 
your souls. The prophet's human feeling 
prompts him to this counsel ; bnt he knows 
full well that a life of aliject misery is the 
utmost that can be hoped for. And be like 
the heath in the wilderness ; literally, and 
(your souU) shaU be like destitute ones in the 
wilderness. Imagine the case of one who 
has been robbed of everything, and left 
alone in the desert; not less miserable is 
that of the Hoabite fugitives. The word 
rendered "the heath" (lord'er) is either 
miswritten for 'ar'ar, \\liiih occurs in the 
sense of "destitute" in ch. xvii. 6 (see 
note), or alfo a rare plural form of the snme 



word. The sense remains the same. It it 

tempting to see an allnainn to one of the 
towns called Aroer (as in Isa xvii. 2). Bnt 
the only Aroer the prophet coiiM be think- 
ing of is that on the Arni)n (Deut. ii. 36), 
which could not be described aa "in the 
wilderness." 

Ver. 7. — In thy works ; i.e. either " in 
thy evil deeds" (comp. Isa. xxviii. 15) or 
"in thy idols" (frequently called "the 
work of men's hands," e.g. Deut. iv. 28, ami 
sometimes simply "works," e.g. Isa. xli. 
29 ; Ivii. 12 ; comp. Isa. i. 31). Chemosh. 
In Numb. xxi. 29 Moab is called "penple 
of ChSmdsh," the patron-god being the king 
and lord of his people. In accordance with 
the strictly localizing theory of the nature 
of deity, current among primitive nations, 
Chemosh is said to go into captivity together 
with his worshippers (comp. ch. xlix. 3; 
Amos i. 1.?). Tliis helps us to understand 
the idolatry into which the Jews fell during 
the Exile (Isa. xiii. 17); they imagined 
that Jehovah himself was "in captivity," 
and restrained from putting forth his power 
on behalf of his worshippers. Tho text- 
reading is not Chemosh, but Chemish ; the 
latter form does not occur elsewhere, but 
has been thought to illustrate the name 
of the Hittite city Carchemish (the Hittites 
or their predecessors may have been wor- 
shippers of this deity), i.e. "castle of 
Chemdsh." 

Ver. 8. — The valley ... the plain, The 
latter (Hebrew, mishor) is the upland region 
which extends from the Jordan eastward of 
Jericho into the Arabian desert ; in Nnmb. 
xxi. 20 it is called the " field " (i.e. " open 
country") of Moab. The former means 
that part of the Jordan valley which borders 
on this upland " plain " towards the west. 

Vers. 9 — 16. — So sudden is the blow that 
Moab stands in need of wings to make good 
his escape. Were the human instrument to 
delay, the curse meant for Moab would come 
upon himself. Is a reason demanded? It 
is that Moab has long been in » state of 
morally perilous security, and requires to 
be thoroughly shaken and aroused, in order 
that he may discover the inability of Che- 
mosh to help his worshippers. 

Ver. 9. — Give wings, etc. Comp. ver. 28 ; 
also Isa. xvi. 2, where the fugitive Moabites 
are likened to " wandering b rds." 

Ver. 10.— Deceitfully ; rather, daekly, 
negligently. , 

Ver. 11, — Moab hath been at ease from 
his youth. The "youth" cf Moab dates 
from its subjugation of the aboriginal 
Emim (Deut. ii. 10). Since that event, 
though often at war, sometimes tributary 
and sometimes expelled from a part of the 
territory claimed liy them (see the inscrip- 
tion on the Moabite Stone), yet they had 



OH. XLvm. 1—47.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAR 



never been disturbed in their anceBtral 
homes to the south of the river Amon. He 
hath settled on his lees. It was the custom to 
leave wine for a time on its lees or sedi- 
ment, in order to heighten its strength and 
flavour (comp. Isa. xxv. 6). Emptied from 
vessel to vessel. Thevenot, an old traveller 
in Persia, remarks of the Shiraz wine 
that, after it is separated from the lees, it is 
apt to grow sour. " The wine is put into 
large earthen jars, each holding from ten or 
twelve to fourteen carabtu ; but when a jar 
lias been opened, it must be emptied as 
soon as possible, and the wine put into 
bottles or earaias, otherwise it spoils and 
becomes sour" ('Voyages,' ii. 245, quoted 
by Lowth on Isa. xxv. 6). In the applica- 
tion of the figure, the "ta;8te" of Moab 
means obviously the national character. 

Ver. 12.— Wanderers, that shall cause 
him to wander ; rather, tiltere, and they shall 
tilt him. The earthen jars of which 
Thevenot speaks were doubtless similar to 
those of the Isra'elites. They would be 
tilted on one side, that the wine might run 
off clear from the dregs. Their bottles; 
rather, flagont or pitchers (of earthenware). 
The confusion of numbers and pronouns 
is remarkable. First, Moab collectively is 
spoken of as a wine-jar ; then the Moabites 
individually as Moab's jars ; last of all, the 
Moabites are sp"ken of as possessing " jars " 
(i.e. all the institutions, public and private, 
of the state and of society). 

Ver. 13. — Ashamed of Bethel ; t.e. of the 
golden calf or bull at Bethel, set up by 
Jeroboam I. as a symbol of the strong God, 
Jehovah. This idolatry was odious to the 
prophetic teachers of a nobler and more 
spiritual form of religion. They saw that 
the deity and the symbol were too much 
confounded, and that such a religion would 
u II save its adherents from captivity and 
ruin (oomp. Hos. x. 15 ; Amos iii. 14 ; t. 
5,6). 

Yer. 14. — We are mighty ; rather, tee are 
heron. The Hebrew is gibhorim, the name 
of David's select warriors (2 Sam. xxiii. 8). 
The exclamation is designed to represent 
vividly to the mind the sinful vain-glory 
specially characteristic of Moab. 

Ver. 15. — Moab is spoiled, and gone np 
out of her cities. The latter part of this 
clause in the Hebrew is extremely difScult ; 
the Authorized Version is indefensible. It 
is even doubtful whether it can be translated 
at all consistently with grammar, tliough 
Hitzig, » good grammarian, lias adopted 
the suggestion of Grotius, remlering, " and 
her cities have gone up," viz. in smoke, t.e. 
they have been burnt ; comp. Judg. xx. 40, 
ie end of which verse ought to run thus : 
" The whole city went up to lieaven." 
^ut even if the verb in third masc. sing. 



be allowable after the plural noun, it ii 
very harsh to give it such an interpreta- 
tion, when the context says nothing about 
fire or smoke. J. D. Micbaelis and Ewald, 
therefore, propose to change the vowel- 
points of the first word, rendering, "The 
spoiler of Moab and of her cities is gone 
np ; " and Ur. Payne ^mith inclines to 
follow them. We thus obtain a striking 
antithesis; the enemy has " gime np," and 
Moab's young men are gone down, i.e. are 
felled by murderous hands (comp, Isa. 
xxxiv. 7). 

Ver. 16. — The calamity of Uoab, etc. 
The form of the verse reminds ua of Deut. 
xxxii. 35 ; Isa. xiii. 22. 

Vers. 17 — 25. — How lamentable that such 
a glorious sceptre should be broken I But 
there is no remedy. Even Dibon, that 
highly honoured town, is disgraced. There 
is no hiding the sad fate of the Moabites ; 
the crowds of fugitives suifieiently proclaim 
it. Judgment lias been pas^sed upon all 
the cities of Moab, a long roll of whose 
names is recited. 

Ver. 17.— All ye that are about him; t.e. 
the neighbouring nations (comp. on oh. 
xlvi. 14). The invitation to condolence is 
not ironical, but in the deepest spirit of 
human sympathy, as in the parallel 
prophecy in Isaiah (see on Isa. xv. 5). 
The strong staff; %.e. the sceptre as an 
image of royal authority (comp. Ezek. zix. 
11—14). Eod; as in Ps. ex. 2. 

Ver. 18. — Dibon ; now Vihan, one of the 
chief towns of Moab, on two adjacent hills, 
now covered with ruins (Tiistram), in the 
plain of Medeba (Josli. xiii. 9), north of 
Aroer and the Amon. Here the famous 
Moabite Stone (on which see Dr. Gins- 
burg's exhaustive raonogMph), with the 
inscription of Kinj; Mesha (2 Kings iii. 4), 
was found, which, aft' r having been broken 
np and pieced together, has now found a 
resting-place in the 1 lonvre. It is difficult 
to say to which Israeltish tribe Dibon was, 
strictly speaking, attached; for while in 
Josh. xiii. 17 it is given to Reuben, in 
Numb, xxxii. 34 and in the Moabite 
Stone (line 10) it is assigned to Gad. 
Apparently the Israelitish population fluc- 
tuated. Sometimes Gad was the most 
adventurous in oc -upying Moabitish terri- 
tory, sometimes BeuLien. On the phrase, 
the daughter, etc., see note on ch. xlvi. 19. 
The form of the first verse-half is modelled 
on Isa. xlvii. 1. Sit in thirst. The expres- 
sion is uupxrimpled, anil it is possible that 
we should altir one of the vowel-pointa 
(which constitute no part of the Masso- 
retic text), rendering. " sit in thirsty 
(ground)," i.e. the dust (onmp. the paiallel 
passage, Isa. xlvii. 1), Or ihere may bn 
a less-used ooUateral foruk uf the Hebrew 



230 



THE BOOK OJB* TfiB tEOPlIET JEREMIAH, lob. XLvra. 1—47^ 



for "tbirsly" (fame). Canon Tristram 
speaks of the " waterless plain " of Dtb&n 
('Land of Moab,' p. 132). Thy strong 
holds. It appears from the Moabite Stone 
that Dibon was the centre of ,, district 
which was reckoned as belonging to it ; so 
at least we may account for the phraau, " all 
Dibon was submissive " (line 28 V Com pare 
the phrase in Numb. xxi. 25, " Heshbon, 
and all the villages thereof" (comp. on 
eh. zlix. 2). 

Ver. 19. — The inhabitants of Aroer will 
come out in eager expectation to meet the 
fugitives, and ask, What 1- - ;h happened 1 
(so the question should be reiulured). There 
were several Aroers (one belonged to the 
Ammonites, Josh. xiii. 25), but as tiie 
enemy is driving the Moabites 6outhwar<l, 
the Aroer here intended can only be the 
town by the Arnon, which separated Moab 
proper first of all from the kingdom of the 
Amorites (Deut. iv. 48 ; Josh. xii. 2), and 
afterwards from the territory of the Israel- 
ites (Deut. ii. 36; iii. 12). Thu [lieture 
diawn in this verse is singularly appropriate 
to the site of Arnon, "just by the edge of 
tho arterial highway of Moab," and com- 
manding a complete view of the pass of the 
Arnon (Tristram, ' Land of Moab,' p. 132). 
There is the same variety of statement as 
to the Israelifish tribe to which Aroer be- 
longed as in the case of Dibon (see ver. 18). 
Josh. xiii. 16 speaks in favour of Beuben ; 
Numb, xixii. 34 in favour of Gad. 

Ver. 20. — T5a3 answer of the fugitives 
begins in the latter part of this verse, and, 
continues to ver. 24. Confounded ought 
as usual, to be brought to slMme. The 
address, howl and cry, which is in the 
feminine, refers t» Moab, wliioh has just 
before been spoken of in the feminine ('It 
is broken down," or rather, " she is dis- 
mayed," refers to Moab, not to Dibon). In 
Arnon ; t.e. in the regioa of the Arnon ; 
butter, beside Arnon (comp. oh. xiii. 5, " by 
Euphrates"). 

Ver. 21.— The plain oonntiy. The mislior 
(see on ver. 8). Holon is not known 
I'rom other sources. Jahazah (calleil Jahaz 
in ver. 34), according to Euscbius, still 
existed in his days, and lay between 
Muduba and Dibon. Like Heshbun and 
Dibon, it was claimed by the Eeubenites 
(Josh. xiii. IS), and Mesha, in tlie famous 
inscription, states tbar the thon King of 
Isiacl (Jehoram) " fortified Jahaz and 
dwelt in it, when he fought against me " 
(lines 18, 19). This was a great but only 
a temporary success, for Mesha adds that 
"Churndsh drove him out before me" 
(line 19). Mephaath was appaieutly near 
Jahaz, since it is always mentioned with 
that town (Josh. xiii. 18 ; xxi. 37 ; 1 Ohron. 
Ti.79>. 



Ver. 22.— Dibon (see on ver. 18). Nebj 
(see on ver. 1). Beth-diblathaim. Men- 
tioned here only. There is an Almon- 
diblathaim in Numb, xxxiii. 46, mentionad 
in connection witli Dibon. 

Ver. 23. — Kiriathaim (see on ver. 1). Beth- 
gamul. Nowhere el»e mentioned. Beth- 
meon. Called Baal-moon, Numb, xxxii. 38 ; 
Beth-baalmeon, Josh. xiii. 17. The ex- 
tensive ruins of Ma'in are a short distance 
south of Ueshbon. 

Ver. 24. — Eerioth. Perhaps a synonym 
of Ar, the old capital of Moab (Isa. xv. 1). 
Hence in Amos ii. 2, "I will send a fire 
upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces 
of Kerioth." Bozrah. The capital at (me 
time of the Edomites (see ch. xlix. 13). 
The ownership of particular cities varied 
from time to time in this contested region. 
Far or near; i.e. towards the frontier or 
iuland. 

Vers. 26— 35.— And what is Moab's 
crime? At an earlier point the prophet 
said that it was the caUousness produced 
by long prosperity (ver. 11); but hire 
another sin is mentioned — Moab's haughty 
contempt of Jeliovah. " For this it deserves 
that its contempt should be thrown bick 
upon itself, by its being made, like a drunken 
man, the scorn of all" (Ewald). The 
figure is, no doubt, a coarse one, but not 
unnatural in tho oratory (we must put 
aside inspiration, which leaves the forms 
of speech untouched) of a rude [leople like 
the Jews. It occurs not unfrequeutly else- 
where; see especially Isa. xi.\. 14; Hab. ii. 
15, 16 ; and, for milder examples of the 
figure, oh. xiii. 13 and xxv. 

Ver. 26. — Make ye him drunken. The 
command is irssued to the agents of the 
Divine wrath (cnmp. vers. 10, 21). He 
magnified himself against the Lord. Otfenccs 
against Israel being also offences against 
Isr.iel's God (see Jephthah's striking words 
in Judg. xi. 28, 24). Shall wallow ; rather, 
thall fall heavily (literally, shall clap — a 
pregnant expre-sion) 

Ver. 27. — Was he toand among thieves^ 
for, etc. ; rather, . . . that, as often as thou 
spealtest of him, thou waggest thy head. 
Wliat giveth thee the right to show su'-h 
scorn and insolent triumph towards Israel, 
as if he were one who had been arrested in 
the very act of robbery (eomp. ch. ii. 26) ? 

Ver. 28. — ^Dwell in the rook. Jeremiah 
probably thinks of the rocky defiles of the 
Arnon, so splendidly adapted for fugitives 
(see Consul Wetzstein's excursus to the third 
edition of Delilzsch's ' Je^aja; ' he speaks of 
perpendicular walls of rook). Like the 
dove (t.e. the wild dove); oomp. 'Iliad,' 
xxi. 493; 'iEneid/ v. 213. 

Vers. 29, 30. — These verses are an ex- 
pansion of Isa. xvL 6. The boastfulness of 



OH, XLvm. 1— 47.] THE BOOK OF TSE PEOtHElT JEREMIAfl. 



23: 



Hoah eeoins to have much impressed its 
Igraelitish neighbours (comp. vers. 14, 27). 
It has been thought to be illustrated by 
the iiiftcriptioii on the Moabite Stone; but 
we must remember that all national monu- 
ments of this sort have a tendency to 
exaggeration. 

Ver. 29. — We have heard ; viz. the prophet 
and his countrymen. 

Ver. 30. — But it shall not be so, etc. This 
is a case in which the accentuation must most 
decidedly be deviated from; it implies a 
faulty view of the word rendered in the Autho- 
rized Version, " his lies." But the rendering 
of our version is neither in itself tenable nor 
is it that intended by the accentuation. The 
rendering suggested by the latter is " his 
praters " (i.e. soothsayers), as the word, no 
doubt, must be taken in ch. 1. 36 ; Isa. xliv. 
25. But it is much more natural to render 
thus: "And the untruth of his pratings 
[t.e. of his boastings] ; the untruth that they 
have wrought." In his words and in his 
works (and a word is equal to a work before 
the Divine Judge) Moab was essentially 
"untrue." Truth, in the Bil)lical sense, is 
to know and serve the true God. 

Ver. 31. — Based upon Isa. xvi. 7. There- 
fore. Moab cannot escape the catastrophe, 
for his moral basis is utterly insecure. 
"Therefore," etc. Will I howl. It is at 
first siglit strange that the prophet should 
speak thus sympathetically after the strong 
language in ver. 26. But the fact is that 
an inspired prophet has, as it were, a double 
personality. Sometimes his human feelings 
seem quite lost in the consciousness of his 
message; sometimes (and especinlly in Jere- 
miah) the natural, emotional life refuses to 
be thus restrained, and will have itself 
expressed. All Uoab ; i.e. Moab in all its 
districts, both north and south of the Amon, 
or, at any rate, the fugitive populations. 
Mine heart shall mourn. The Authorized 
Version effaces one of the points of dif- 
ference between Jeremiah and his original. 
The former leaves the subject indefinite — 
one shall mourn. For the men of Kir-heres. 
Isa. xvi. 7 has " for the raisin-cakes of Kir- 
heres " (i.e. for the cakes of pressed grapes, 
for which Kir-heres was specially famous) — 
a mucli more expressive phrase. Jeremiah, 
or his scribe, has changed ashJshe into dnshe, 
and the Targum and Septuagint have 
adopted this weak reading iu Isaiah, l.o. 

Ver. 32. — Shortened from Isa. xvi. 8, 9. 
With the weeping of Jazer ; rather, more than 
(he weeping of Jazer. This may mean eitlier 
"more than I weep for Jazer" (which is 
favoured by the insertion of " for thee ") or 
" more than Jazer weeps " (for the de- 
vastated vineyards of Silnnah); comp. Isaiah, 
I.e. The site of Jazer is placed by Seetzen 
between Bamoth (Salt) and Heshbon, whern 



some ruins called Sir are now found. " Bib- 
mah," according to St. Jerome, was no< 
more than liall' a mile from Heshbon. 
King Mesha is thought to refer to it under 
tlie form Seran, miswritten for Sebaii 
(Sebam — so the form should be read — is an 
Old Testament version of the name ; see 
Numb, xxxii. 3) ; see inscription on Moabite 
Stone, line 13. It appears to have been 
famous for its vineyards ; and Seetzen telld 
us that grapes and raisins of specially gooJ 
quality are still carried frum the neigh- 
bouring Salt to Jeiusalem. Thy plants are 
gone over the sea; rather, thy shoots passed 
over the sea. The prophet here describes 
the extensive range of these vines. The 
northern limit of their culture was Jazer. 
its southern or western the further shore • 'f 
" the sea," i.e. the Dead Sea. By a touch 
of poetic hyperbole the prophet traces the 
excellence of vines such as those of En-gedi 
(on the western bank of the Dead Sen) tu 
a Moabitish origin. The reference to the 
sea of Jazer throws the whole passage into 
confusion. There is no lake or large pool 
at present to be found at Jazer, and the 
simplest explanation is that a scribe re- 
peated the word "sea" by mistake. The 
true text will then be simply, " they reacheil 
unto Jazer." The spoiler. Isa. xvi. 9 has 
the more picturesque expression, "the 
sliouting," i.e. the wild battle-cry. 

Ver. 33. — Nearly identical with Isa. xvi. 
10. The plentiful field ; rather, the garden- 
land ; i.e. land planted with " noble " 
plants, especially vines and olives. Wine. 
Here clearly sweet and unfermented wine 
(comp. Amos ix. 13, 14). None shall tread 
with shouting. This involves a very harsh 
construction of the Hebrew, and it is better 
(considering the numerous other errors of 
the same kind in the received text) to 
correct in accordance with Isa. xvi 10, " the 
treader shall not tread." Their shouting 
sh all be no shouting. " Shouting " (Hebrew, 
heddd) may be taken in two senses : (1) the 
cheerful, musical cry with which "the 
treaders " pressed out the juice of the grapes 
(comp. ch. XXV. 30); (2) the wild cry (ch. 
li. 14) with which the enemy " fell upon the 
summer fruits and upon the vintage " (ver. 
32), reducing the inhabitants to abject 
misery. In Isa. xvi. 9, 10 an allusion is 
made to this double meaning, and so, per- 
haps, it may be here ("There shall be 
shouting, but not that of the peaceful 
vintagers at their work"). Or, as others, we 
may explain "no shouting" as equivalent 
to "the opposite of shouting," t.e. either 
silence or lamentation (comp. Isa. z. IS, 
"not-wood' equivalent to "that which is 
specifically different from wood ;" and xxxl. 
3, "not God," equivalent to "the Terj 
opposite of Divine ). 



23S 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [0=- JCLvin. 1—47. 



Ver. 34.— Based on Isa. xv. 4—6. The 
ory of one town echoes to another, and is 
taken up afresh liy its terrified inhabitnntB. 
HeshboTi and Blealeh lay on eminences but 
a short distance apart, so that the shrill cry 
of lamentation would be heard far away in 
the south-east at Jahaz. Znar and Horonaim 
both lay in tlie southern half of Moab (see 
on vers. 3, i). An heifer of three years old. 
If this is the right reuderi.ig, the phrase is 
descriptive of Horonaim, which may, in the 
time of Jeremiah, have been a " virgin for- 
tress." But the phrase, thus understood, 
comes in very oddly, and in the parallel pas- 
sage in Isaiah it stands, not after Horonaim, 
but after Zoar ; it hardly seems likely that 
there were two Gibraltars in Moab. Another 
rendering (Ewald, Keil) is, "(to) the third 
Eglath." This involves an allusion to the 
fact that there were other places in Moab 
called Eglath or Egl.ih, which has been 
rendered highly probable by Geseiiius. The 
waters also of Nimrim. Canon Tristram 
speaks of the " plenteous brooks gushing 
from the lofty hills into the Ghor-en-Nu- 
meira." Consul Wetzstein, however, says 
that nature appears there under so uu- 
speakiibly gloomy an aspect, that the iden- 
tification is impossible. He proposes a site 
in the Wady So'eb, about fourteen miles 
east of the Jordan, which with its luxuriant 
meadows, covered with the flocks of the 
Bedouin, is probably suitable to the passages 
in Isaiah and Jeremiah (Excursus ii. in 
Delitzsch's * Jesaja,' 4th edit., pp. 572, 573). 
60 also Seetzen, who remarks that the lower 
part of this w&iiy is still called Nuhr Nimrin. 
In Josh. xiii. 27 a place called Beth-nimrah 
is mentioned as situated in the valley (i.e. 
the Jordan valley); no doubt this was in 
the wftdy referred to by the prophets. " The 
valley " seems to have been sometimes used 
in a wider signification, so as to include 
lateral valleys like that of Nimrim. The 
antiquity of the name is shown by its 
occurrence in the Annals of Thothmes III., 
■who penetrated into the heart of Palestine, 
and, in the temple of Kainak, enumerates 
the cities which he conquered. From before 
ao. 1600 to nearly A. D. 1900 this secluded 
valley h;is borne precisely the same name I 

Ver. 35. — Him that offereth in the high 
plaoes ; rather, him that goelh up to a high 
place. Apparently a reminiscence of Isa. 
XV. 2 and xvi. 12. As Dr. Payne Smith 
well remarks, "The last stiige of natural 
ruin is reached, when thus the rites of 
religion entirely cease." 

Vers. 36— 42.— The description of Moab'« 
lamentations continued. 

Ver. 36.— Based on Isa. xvi. 11 ; xv. 7. 
Iiike pipes. Isaiah has, " like the harp [or, 
' lute ']." The pipe, or flute, was specially 
■ted at funeral ceremonies (Matt ix. 23; 



Luke vH. 32),'and therefore, perhaps, seemed 
to Jeremiah more appropriate. Because the 
riches, etc. This is, no doubt, what we should 
have expected, but this is not what Jere- 
miah wrote ; " because " should rather be 
therefore, jeremiali simply transferred a 
clause (substantially at least) from his 
original, Isa. xv. 7, but into a context where 
it stands rather less naturally. The mean- 
ing of the words in Isaiah is that, the 
desolation being so great, the Moabites shall 
carry away as much of their goods as they 
can. In this new context, however, we can 
only explain this unexpected " therefore" 
by referring to a habit of the Israelitish 
mind by which that which contributed to 
a result was regarded as worked purposely 
for that result. Good instances of this habit 
are Gen. zviii.5; Ps. xlv. 3; It 6; comp. 
Winer's ' New Testament Grammar ' 
(Clark), pp. 573, 574, especially note 1 on 
p. 574, though the idiom also occurs in Old 
Testament passa;;es in which the religious 
view of life is hardly traceable. 

Vers. 37, 38 (first part).— Based on Isa. 
XT. 2 (latter part), 3 (first part). On the 
primitive Arabic, Egyptian, and Hebrew 
custom of cutting off the hair, see on ch. 
xvi. 6, and oomp. Herod., ii. 36. Clipped. The 
difference from the word in Isaiah is so 
slight that it may easily have arisen from a 
copyist. The meaning is virtually the same. 
Cuttings. So of Philistia (oh. xlvii. 5); see 
on ch. xvi. 6. 

Ver. 38. — lamentation generally ; lite- 
rally, all of it it lamentation; i.e. nothing 
else is to be heard. Like a vessel, etc. For 
this figure, see on ch. xxii. 28 (Jeremiah 
repeats himself). 

Ver. 39.— They shall howl, saying, etc.; 
rather, How is it dismayed I (how) they viaU I 
How hath Moab tamed the hack ashamed/ 
Yea, Moab becometh, etc. 

Vers. 40, 41.— The Septuagint has a 
shorter form (see introduction to chapter). 

Ver. 40.— He shaU fly as an eagle ; rather, 
he shall swoop (same word and figure in Deut. 
xiviii. 49). The subject is not named, but 
(as in ch. xlvi. 18) is Nebuchadnezzar. 

Ver. 41.— Kerioth is taken. Kerioth has 
been already mentioned in ver. 24 (see note). 
Another possible lendering is. The cities are 
taJcen, and this certainly agrees better with 
the parallel line. But a plural of hiryah, 
a city, does not occur elsewhere. If the 
identification of Kerioth with Ar-moab, the 
capital of Moab, be accepted (see on ver. 2i\ 
the equalization of Kerioth and " the strong 
holds" seems to be a stumbling-block. 
Strong holds; or, mountain faetneuet Uti, 
Ii. 30). ^ 

VeTs._ 43 — 47.— Hence, as the final result 
escape is absolutely impossible, for one dan- 
ger succeeds another in an endless 



oa. iLvm. 1— 4t.] THE BOOK Ol- THE tROPflET JEBEMIAH. 



23? 



The last and greatest danger beeets those 
who seek refuge behiml Ihe strong fortifi- 
cations of Heslibon. It is from this very 
city that the hottest fire of the enemy 
brealcB forth. Chemdsh has not saved hia 
people ; and yet there is hope for Moab in 
the future. 

Ver. 4.S. — Fear, and the pit, and the snare. 
An alliteration in the Hebrew, which occurs 
again in Isa. xxiv. 17. In German it can be 
repreiiented better than in English — e.g. by 
Hitzig's " grauen, giaben, gam." All primi- 
tive poetry dellglits in such alliterations. 

Ver. 45. — Apparently quoted from memory 
from Numb. xxi. 28; xxiv. 17, except the 
first clause ; the application, however, is 
peculiar to this passnge. They that fled, etc. ; 
rather, The fugitives stand without strength 
in the shadow of Heshhon. There is a diffl- 
ciilty here, for, according to ver. 2, the hos- 
tile raid into Hoab started from Heslibon. 
Surely the fugitives would not think of 
esuauing northwards, much less would they 
be able to elude tlie vigilance of the foe imd 
reai'h Ileshbon. But it is not surprising 
that the autlior of so long a poem should 
ijow and then make a slip ; the author of tlie 
Book of Job i* sometimes inconsistent with 



the Prologue, and ver. 2 is as far away from 
the passage before us as the Prologue of Job 
is from Job xix. 1?. Nor can we be absolutely 
certain that our prophecy is exactly as Jere- 
miah wrote it. Shall come forth ; rather, hafh 
tome forth (or, cometh forth), Trom the midst 
of Sihon. Sihon being, perhaps, regarded 
as the leader and representative of his war- 
riors. The comer of Moab ; rather, the sides 
(literally, side, used collectively) of Moab. 
The tumultnous ones ; literally, sons of tu- 
mult, a poetical phrase for warriors. The 
prophet has substituted the more common 
word shaoii for its synonym sheth. 

Ver. 46 —Based on Numb. xxi. 29. The 
chief difference is in the secoml half of the 
verse, in which the bold expression of Che- 
mdsh " giving his sons and his daughters 
into captivity " is changed for a mere ordi- 
nary and prosaic phrase. 

Ver. 47. — On the phraseology of this 
verse (omitted in the Septuagiut), see on ch. 
zxix. 14; xxiii. 20, and ou the brighter pros- 
pect held out for Moab, see the analogies 
given in note on ch. xlvi 26. Thus far is 
the judgment of Moab is clearly an editor's 
note (comp. oh. li. 64). "Judgment" ■■ in 
vei. 21. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1—47. — JTie judgment of Moab. As the prophet's ** eye in • fine frenzy 
rolling " sees the flood of the Chaldean invasion sweeping over one after another of the 
nations, hia words flash out in pictures full of energy and fire. If this world's calamities 
are thus terrible, how shall the awful realities of eternity be contemplated? Why should 
some of us be so shocked at the strong language of preachers ? Strange and fanatical 
as it may appear, the fury of a Knox is more consonant with much of life and revelation 
than the complacent mildness of an Addison. Visions of judgment are no topics for 
graceful moral essays. Nevertheless, however hot the language may be, it must not 
descend to mere wild, whirling words ; it must be characteristic and truthful. The 
succession of pictures of approaching judgment which Jeremiah draws are not monoto- 
nous repetitions of the same description. They are definite aud distinctively applicable 
to the respective subjects of them. L^t us observe the special features of the judgment 
of Moab. 

I. The charactbb of the people. The grounds of the judgment are given in the 
revelation of the sins of Moab. The head and front of her ofience ia pride {e.g. ver. 29). 
Other characteristics are closely related, viz. : (I) trust in wealth and material resources 
(ver. 7) ; (2) self-indulgent ease (ver. 11) ; (3) boastfulness (ver. 14) ; (4) scorn (ver. 
27) ; (5) defiance of Heaven (ver. 26). Such a catalogue of offences is peculiarly hate- 
ful to God. Sins of apiietite and passion are partly the result of weakness. The 
culpability of them is less than that of the intellectual and spiritual sins by aU the 
weight of temptations which arise out of the natural constitution of man. For such 
sins as those of Moab there is no excuse. They are nearest to the most diabolical 
wickidi.ess. Adam fell by a sin of appetite ; Satan by a sin of spiritual pride. 

II. The nature of their doom. 1. Destruction. (Ver. 4.) The general doom of all 
the nations. This is the leading form of the evil fruits of sin. 2. Shame and kumiliof 
turn. (Ver. 13.) " Moab also shall wallow in his vomit " (ver. 26). What a terrible 
tnti-climsz from the pride and haughtiness which are the chief characteristics of this 
leople 1 3. Derision. Moab had mocked at Israel, now " he also shall be in derision " 
(ver. 26). Thus scorn is rebuked with scorn, and the mocker is mocked. 4. Gloom 
and grief . (Ver. 33.) The ease and self-comjilacency which had characterized Moab ar« 



234 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEEEMIaH. loa. xivm. 1—47 

exchanged for their opposites. 5. Poverty. " The riches that he hath gotten are perished" 
(ver. 36y Moah had trusted in wealth. His punishment will consist iu part in th« 
loss of this. Finally, to Moab, as to other nations, there is promised an ultimate restora- 
tion. « Yet will I restore the prosperity of Moab in the latter days, saith the Lord " 
(ver. 47). Most beautifully does this one verse close thetenib'e vision of judgment, 
like one ray of light breaking through the dense black thunder-clouds and promising 
the dawn of a new day of life and gladness. Even to a heathen people the promise is 
made, and by the mouth of a Hebrew prophet. Who, then, shall dare to set limits to 
the future restoring power of the grace of God? 

Ver. 7. — The dangers of riehea. Biches are not evil things in themselves. The gifts 
of God in nature, or the fruits of man's industry, they are valuable just because they 
have in them some serviceableness for human wants. Money is not the root of all evil, 
but the love of it (1 Tim. vi. 10). It is they who trust in riches who find it impossible 
to enter into the kingdom of God (Mark x. 24). But riches are snares, and the possessor 
of them had need beware of the dangers they necessarily bring. When the servant 
becomes a god the degraded worshipper is on the road to ruin. Let us consider some of 
the dangers of riches. 

L A DANGER OP DELUSIVE TBiTST. The Wealthy man is likely to think his riches 
will do more for him than it is in their power to do. He finds that money brin3;s a 
number and variety of comforts and helps him out of many a difBculty. He is in 
danger of looking upon it as omnipotent. But money will not buy the choicest bless- 
ings. It vrill not purchase friends, nor peace of mind, nor spiritual blessedness here, 
nor the heavenly inheritance hereafter. To trust to riches for these things is to miss 
them. Yet they are the truest treasures. The poor man who seeks them aright, not 
being allured by the rich man's peculiar temptations, may step in first ; and so Dives 
may come to envy Lazarus. 

IL A DANGEB OF woBLDLHirESB. Bich Moab lives at her ease (ver. 11). A wealthy 
man is tempted to be satisfied with his possessions. The earth is very fair to him. 
I'ossibly he is in the land of the lotus-eaters, "where it is always afternoon." He is 
thus in danger of caring only for this world, and making no provision for the better 
world. For he may value his earthly jewels so much as not to care to search after the 
I earl of great price, or to be unwilling to make any sacrifice in order to purchase it. He 
tends to become so engrossed with material things as to lose all appetite for and all per- 
ception of spiritual things. His treasure is on earth, and his heart is there also. Thus 
lie loses the solid, lasting possessions of eternity while grasping at the shadowy treasures 
-jf time. 

III. A DANOEB OF FBIDE. Bich Moab is proud. The wealthy man is tempted to 
transfer his high estimation of his possessions to himself. Because he has much he is 
induced to think that he is much, and the world too often urges him to this mistake 
by its despicable sycophancy to mere money. Wlien will people learn to value men by 
their characters and not by their purses? If pride has any valid excuse for existence, 
this must be found in the true nature of a man and his own personal ey^cellences. 
Before God we are judged solely by what we are. Our possessions will only aggravate 
our guilt if they have been abused, for they will be regardeii as talents to be accounted 
for, never as merits to secure us any reward. Therefore the pride of the rich man may 
be his ruin. 

Ver. 10. — Slack tervice. " Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord slackly." 
These words refer immediately to the terrible work of destruction. We shudder at 
hearing so fearlul a curse ; but we should remember that, if the slaughter were believed 
to be in accordance with God's will, and there ore also believed to be right and necessary, 
there could be no excuse for neglecting it. We may derive from this extreme instance 
a most forcible argument against slack service. If such slackness could appear cursed 
to the Jew under the most trying circumstances, when pity and all humane instincts 
cried out against the work, how much more guilty is it in the Christian work uf love 1 

L Indications OF SLACK SERVICE. 1. Negative yoodness. Great care to avoid .lU forms 
of impurity may he foiud together with a reluctance to make any sacrifice or put forth 
any extrtion. 2. Conventionalism. A man follows in the rut of hL predecessors, evincea 



CH. xLvm. 1—47.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 235 

no originality, has no device with which to meet an emergency, never inquires into 
the suitability of his work to its end, never thinks of improving it, sticks to old ways 
when the old objects of them are obsolete, cannot break up new ground though new 
requirements call him to it. 3. Working at half-power. What service is rendered 
does not come up to the level of requirement nor to the measure of ability. It is done 
in a slow, dreamy style. 4. Failure he/ore difficulty. The molehill is magnified into 
a mountain. The opposition, which is the spur to enthusiasm, puts a complete stop to 
slack service. 

n. Causes of black bebvice. 1. Worldlinees. The clay of selfishness is mingled 
with the strong metal of devotion. A man would serve God and mammon. He tries to 
do the work of God with one hand, while he advances his own interest with the other. 
But no work for God is acceptable which is not done with both hands. 2. Unh-lief. 
This paralyzes much of our work — ^more, I am persuaded, than we are ready to admit. 
The God served is a shadowy Being, and no wonder the service is faint and I'eeble. 
3. Want of devotion. The service of the hands is given without the love of the hiarr. 
This mechanical work is a poor, spiritless thing. It is love and love only that can 
inspire a service of unwearying energy. 4. Cowardice. There, is a fear to do diillcult 
and dangerous work. We pity this for its weakness. We should condemn it as wicked. 
Should not the servant of Christ be willing to suffer all torments and die for his Lord 
who suffered and died for him ? " Be thou faithful unto death." 6. Mere indolence. 
Indolence may be partly constitutional, as in persons of lethargic temperament. Some 
men are habitually tardy and dilatory. They should learn to resist these tendencies as 
temptations to fatal unfaithfulness. 

in. Evils of slack sebvice. It is no slight failure to be gently rebuked. The 
curse of God lies upon it. " Cwrsed be he," etc. 1. It is very wicked. We are God's 
servants, and bound by ties of nature and of gratitude. 2. It is likely to he fruitless. 
Negligence in work may imperil the whole results of it. If the ship is carelessly steered 
it may be wrecked. 3. It injtires the man who works negligently. Our manner of 
work reacts upon ourselves. Indifferent service produces a low tone of life^ coldness, 
lethargy, unspirituality. 

lY. Calls to betteb sebviob. L From the eurw of slack terviee. This curse is 
a solemn warning. The evils that necessitate it should teriify us from incurring it. 
2. From the obligations of duty. " We are not our own ; we are bought with a price." 
When we do our best we are unprofitable servants. Solemn voices of time and eternit; 
bid us " work while it is day." " Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy 
might." 3. Prom the need of the world. Our Christian service is no profitless treadmill 
drudgery. It is for the good of mankind. The call in the text was to execute wrath ; 
ours is to do deeds of mercy. The world in its darkness, its misery, its sin, cries luud 
for the Christian mission of consolation and redemption. Can we sleep while such calls 
pierce our ears? 4. From the constraining love of Christ. He died for us; he only 
asks that we shall live for him. But the least we can do is to live faithfully, earnestly, 
and devotedly, serving the Saviour with all earnest zeal. 6. From the heavenly reward 
(Heb. xii. 1, 2). 

Ver. 11. — " Wine oa the lees." This is a figure of a people left for ages in a condition 
of ease. They are like wine settled on its lees, unchanged and unpurified. 

I. It is bad fob a people to bemain long in a condition of ease. 1. Evil is not 
purged out. The wine is still on its lees. In times of quiet we settle down coutentt-d 
with otirselves as well as with our surroundings. We say — Why disturb the air with 
cries for change while all is still and calm and dreamy as a summer noun ? The old 
ruin stands unshaken in the faii' weather. But presently the tempest rises, the wind 
howls, and the broken walls tremble to their foundations. Then we see that repairs 
must be executed or a new building erected. 2. Progrest in good is stayed. Wine 
should improve with keeping. But of this wine it is said, " His taste remained in him, 
and his scent is not changed." Progress needs the stimulus of conflict. Trouble pro- 
motes reflection and urges to improved action in the future. " Woe unto you when all 
men shall speak well of you I " (Luke vi. 26). 3. Corruption and decay are induced. 
Ease means stagnation, and stagnation decomposition. If the vital functions are arrested, 
the body wiU not remain like a marble statue. Very soon other actions are set up, 



234 THE BOOK OP THE tBQPHET JEllEMIAH. [oh. xlviii. 1— 47 

aad the qniet of death gives place to a horrible scene of rapid corruption. The stagnant 
soul becomes the dead soul, and this a mass of moral rottenness. 

II. The etilb of a condition of base bulonq to all classes of life. 1. The 
nation, Moab had lived for ages amongst her hills and fertile fields beyond the surging 
tide of the world's restless changes which swept along the western side of the Jordan 
between Egypt and the northern nations. She was not the better for this isolation. 
Wan, iDTasions, ra*oIutioii8, turn out to be ultimately serviceable to the cause of human 
progress. 2. The Ghttrch. The Middle Ages, when the Church was all-powerful and at 
ease, were the dark ages of Christendom. The disturbance of the Reformation was a 
new birth to the Church, in the good of which even the Roman Cai holies shared by the 
stimulus it bruught to zeal and the check it put on the paganizing spirit prevalent in 
Italy in the fifteenth century. 3. The individual Christian. In times of ease we 
tend to become worldly, and our devotion cools. Trouble drives us to prayer and 
wakens the deeper instincts of the soul (Heb. xiL 11). 

Vor. 29. — Pride, With accumulated phrases emphasis is laid upon this leading sin 
of Moab, a sin which is condemned throughout Scripture as one of great wickedness. 

I. The natube of pbioe. Pride is a passion rising out of an inordinate opinion of 
our own worthiness. It is to be distinguished from vanity. Vanity is eager for the 
admiration of others, though, perhaps, in its own heart conscious of possessing but 
little to deserve it. But pride is inwardly elated with the feeling of self-importance, 
and may be quite indifferent to the opinion of the world. Indeed, the height of pride 
is to scorn the admiration as much as the hatred of other men, to look down upon the 
" dim multitude " as in all respects beneath contempt. Vanity craves social position ; 
pride is essentially lonely. (Nevertheless we must beware of the common injustice oi 
mistaking all reserve for pride ; this may arise from constitutional habit, &om sensi- 
tiveness, even from extreme humility.) Vanity smiles with the desire of pleasing; 
pride frowns in haughty independence. It is possible, however, for a man to have a very 
high opinion of his own powers, importance, etc., without much pride. For pride is not 
a mere conviction of the great worth of one's self, it is an emotion, a passion, a dispo- 
sition to dwell on one's own merits and make idols of them. 

n. The sinbttlness of pride. Why is this so strongly condemned in Scriptuis? so 
hateful to God ? Consider how it must appear in his sight. We are all his helpless 
1 hildren ; '' we have erred and strayed from his ways like lost sheep ; " before him 
we are foul with sin, humiliated with failure ; our best works are poor and imperfect ; 
in free grace he spares, endures, pardons. Where, then, is there ground for pride? 
Pride is the denial of guilt, the assumption that the good we receive from Qod is 
deserved ; it is, therefore, a gross presumption, an evidence of base ingratitude, a proof 
of self-will that refuses to humble itself before the good and holy Father. 

III. The injubioub effects of pride. 1. It blinds us to our oum danger. It 
assumes that all must be well. But the assumption does not alter facts. It only 
aggravates the danger by preventing us from taking precautions against it. Moab was 
not saved in the general overthrow of the nations for all her pride. Humility sees the 
stumbling-block in the path, but pride holds its head so high as never to observe it, 
and so falls over it (Prov. ivi. 18). 2. It prevents us from securing our oum highest 
good. This can only be given by the mercy of God, and he can only bestow it on the 
humble, the contrite, the submissive. The proud man bars his own heart against the 
incoming of the grace of God. 3. It hinders the good work of life. It is directly 
opposed to charity ; it is incongruous with that spirit of mutual concession and 
co-operation which is required in the service of life. Thus pride often wastes those 
very powers on the existence of which it stands. To conquer pride let us look at oui 
lives in the light of the life of the meek and humble Jesus of Nazareth. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 11 — 13. — The ease cf Moah. A figure: wine-casks long undisturbed, whose 
contents improve and mellow in their taste, at length tilted by the coopers so that tb« 
win* ii spilled. 



CH. XLViu. 1— 47.] THE BOOK Oif' THE PllOl'HET JEREMIAH. 23 J 

I. 'WOULDLT PROSPEEITY IB OFTEN VERT GREAT AND UMNTEBBUPTBD. 1. Frequency 

remarked. Heathen nations, whose very backwardness and barbariam have isolated 
them from the disturbing stream of the world's life ; and empires that seem to be based 
upon irreligion and wrong, and that are nevertheless in the van of civilization. The 
men who make the colossal fortunes of modern times are not, as a rule, distinguished 
for their religious virtues. Sins tliat immediately destroy some are committed witli 
impunity by others. Many of the most ancient and lucrative vested interests of the 
world are owned by persons without moral character, and are prostituted to the basest 
purposes. 2. The moral, perplexity of this. When wealth and influence almost 
phenomenally great are thus acquired and used, they cannot fail to trouble the minds 
of good men. The difSculLies of a moral and religious life are so great that such a 
spectacle tempts and saddens. Israel had been afflicted from her youth (Fs. cxxix. 
1 — 3), whilst Moab was at ease. David was envious when he saw the prosperity of 
the wicked (Ps. Ixxiii. 3). 

II. Sinners are thereby confirmed in their evil habits Ain> BKLixn. The 
material wealth and secular position of Moab were doubtless gre.itly advanced by this 
long security, and a kind of prestige attached to him amongst neighbouring nations. 
Uis customs gradually acquired a fixed and immovable authority. The national 
character, witli all its inherent vices, devel(j])ed a strong individuality: "His taste 
remained in him, and his scent is not changed." One trait of this character, for which 
Ml lab was notorious and intolerable, was his pride (ver. 29). His attachment to idolatry 
was also intense ; his inhabitants were the " pei pie of Chemosh " (ver. 46). To add to the 
cup of his transgression, he " magnified himself against the Lord" (ver. 42). All this is 
in strict analogy with what may be observed anywhere under similar circumstances. 
National pride grows with impunity and conquest; and prejudice strengthens itself in 
the apparent success of its policy of life and the blessing that seema to attach to its 
religious observances. Israel was a derision to Moab (ver. 27). 

III. But their position is insecure, and destruction, though delated, wnx be 
the more certain and complete. The uncertainty of worldly prosi)erity is represented 
frequently and under many figures in Holy Writ. It is " that which moth and rust 
corrupt, and thieves steal ; " it " lakes to itself wings and flies away ; " the whole life 
of which it is the material embodiojent, is "even as a vapour, which appeareth for a 
little time, and then vanisheth away " (Jas. iv. 14). Here the metaphor is that of a tilted 
vessel. There wdl come a day when the cup of a nation's or individual's iniquity will be 
full ; then will they be as Sodom and Gomorrah, whose cry was great and their sin very 
grievous (Gen. xix. 20). It is just this confido..oe, born of long impunity, that becomes 
intolerable to (}od and provokes his wrath. The rich fool (Luke xii. 16— 21)i — M. 

Ver. 13. — Betrayed by their gods. This statement, as it is more especially fron the 
religious standpoinv, is a generalization of the cause of MoaVs ruin, full of spiritual 
insight and sagacity. It is in such directions as these we ai-e to seek for the reasons of 
human success or failure; everythin^x else is but superficial. 

The true causes of human success or failure, happiness or mibebt, abk of a 
moral or spiritual kind. We do not know the exact nature of the Chemosh-wcrehip 
of Moab, but it is evident that, like other idolatries, it favoured materialism and tb" 
gratification of passion (ver. 7). The idol was the centre and representative of the 
whole life of tbe people. 1. Material circumstances are in themselves indifferent 
towards the achievement of national or individtml greatness, but trust in material 
circumstances is an invariable precursor of ruin. It is the virtues that are the true 
bulwarks of a people. " If all the historians who record the ultimate extinction 
of nations were inspired of God to give the true reasons of their fall, we should often 
meet this testimony: 'Perished of national pride, producing contempt of G"d and of 
fundamental morality '" (Cowles) ; Prov. xiv. 34. 2. The chief object of desire to any 
one is his ruler and destiny. The god is the embodiment of all the sentiments and 
passions associated with its worship ; the leading desire attracts towards itself and 
assimilates all others. It gradually but inevitably becomes his god. His whole life 
will henceforth take its complexion and direction from it. He conceives it to be the 
best and to be able to secure lor him all that is desirable. From this we see : (1) Th« 
peril of idolatry. Pandering to the worst and most selfish passions, it blinds and 



238 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xiviii. 1—47 

infatnateg its yotaries and leads them eventually to their ruin. (2) The importance of a 
true worship. It cultures the nature according to its essential principles, and secuies 
the supremacy of the mural and spiritutd. And all true guidance, help, and comfort 
are afforded in answer to believing prayer. — M. 

Ver. 6. — " The heath in the wilderness." Such will the sinner be ; for, like it, he 
will be : 1. Barren. No rich, strength-sustaining fruit does the heath bear. A mere 
hard berry. The camel and the ass may browse thereupon, but it is no food for man. 
" Can men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles ? " And thus barren of good 
is the sinner. 2. Unlovely. There is no form nor beauty about the heath; a stunted, 
misshapen shrub. Its wood can be used for no manufacture. It is fit only to be 
burned. And when our eyes are opened to see things as they are, sin and the sinnc 
will appear in all moral unloveliness ; all present outward charm gone, and only thei- 
evil deformity seen. 3. Alone. Surrounded by drear expanse of sand ; no companion 
trees to form it into a grove or a verdant mass of plant-life. And so will the sinner 
be one day. Christ goes with the believer down the dark vallej', but th? sinner goes 
forth alone. He stands at the bar of God with no advocate. IS'one of all his old com- 
panions can redeem his soul or give to God a ransom for him. Alone ; helploss. 
4. Z%e gracious influences of Heaven do him no good. The dew and tlie rain, the sun's 
warmth, come upon it ; but it remains the milovely, solitary, barren thing it ever was. 
So the impenitent man is visited by the influences of Heaven, the ] /leading of the 
Spirit, the varied means of grace ; but they avail him not. 5. Soon to perish. The 
driving sand, the scorching heat, the browsing camel, the encampment fire, all threaten 
its life, and by one or other of them it soon perishes. And they wlio are like to it are 
never safe. " How are they destroyed as in a moment 1 " Conclusion. But the godly 
a.-e not so. " He shall be like a tree planted by," etc. (Ps. i.). — C. 

Vet. 10. — Doing the work of the Lord deceitfully. We observe— 

I. Thk work of the Lord is of varied kinds. Htre it has reference to the 
vengeance to be taken on Moab, and denounces a curse on that soldier who failed to do 
his duty in the most thorough and terrible manner. No pity, no motive of any kind, 
was to lead them to spare the doomed nation. But whilst such dread work may be at 
limes the work of the Lord, the expression more commonly points to that which is 
spiritual, and tends to man's highest good. In the apostolic Epistles we have constant 
reference to the wojk of the Lord in this happier sense. 

n. But there is peril, whatever the work bb, of doiko it deceitfully 
Now, the work of the Lord is done deceitfully : 1. When it is not done thoroughly. 
When we shirk our work ; do no more than we can help ; get away from it as fast 
as we can. And how much of the " work " is thus done! Alas that it should be so! 
Evidently counted a drudgery rather than a delight. Do we not all know that there is 
danger of our thus working ? 2. Whet. H is not done sincerely. Huw varied and how 
questionable often the motive which leat». men to engage in the work of ihe Lord ! — 
custom, ostentation, fear of reproach, sting of conscience, hope of gain, fashion, etc. 
I'hese and such as these may crowd out the only right and sincere mntive — the love 
of Christ. All others make us more or less hypocrites, and can find no acceiitance of 
the Lord in the great day. But is there no peril from such motives ? We know thcie 
is. 3. When it is not done earnestly. When our heart is not in our work. When it 
is laid hold of not, as it should be, "with both hands earnestly," but, as it were, with 
one of the fingers. Some thus work ; others as with one hand ; other.s, in<'ec.l, with 
both hands, but slowly, loosely, not earnestly. " Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do 
do it with thy might." Only such as obey that Word are sincere workers. 4. When 
it is done hypocritically. In the days of sore persecution there was but little peril of 
this ; but when and where religion goes, as it is said, in silver slippers, there is real 
peril of men taking up with the Lord's work in order to further, not the work of the 
Lord, but their -own poor worldly well-being. What they do is all a pretence, a kind 
of deception. God keep us all therefrom I For note — 

III. The severity with which the Lord looks upon his work done deceit- 
fully. " Cursed be he," etc. (ver. 10). Now, wherefore this severity? 1. It is ar. 
itifultto Ood. h is as good fks saying to him that his work dnep n(>' .i«sRrvK trui 



OH, XLVui. 1— 47.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 23Sj 



labour; that it is of so little imioitance that anything will do for it — the parings ol 
your time, your energy, your thought, your means, your stiength. Wljat could be a 
greater affront to God ? 2. The work is so great and urgent that it is traitorous thua 
to engage in it. What do we say of the watchman skeping at his post (cf. Ezek. 
xxxiii.)? of all who betray their irust or neglect it? 3. Such deceit/ulness is con- 
tagious. How many a yiung servant of Christ is checked and chilled by tlie evil 
influence of professeH servants of Christ like himself, but older, less fervent, and who 
are guilty of that which is here denounced ! Such di moralize many in the aimy of 
the Lord. 4. It renders the work itself/ar more difficult. For the world sees clearly 
and judges keenly those who say they do the woik of the Lord. They know what 
that work is, what it professes to aim at, what the interests involved in it. But they 
who do that work deceitfully cause men to laugh at all such work, to disbelieve all its 
claims, and to decline more stoutly than ever to surrender their hearts to it. 6. buch 
deceivers harden their own hearts, and steep themselves in a fatal slumber, from which 
there is no waking. Never has Satan a firmer hold on a man than when he can get 
him to do the work of the Lord deceitfully. The man is fully persuaded that he is 
all right, and dies with a lie in his ri,>;ht hand, and is not undeceived till, to his awful 
amazement, he hears the Lord say to him and to all such, "I never knew you ; depart 
from me." That thus it may not be with us, not* — 

IV. Our bafbguaeds against such sin. 1. Solemn recollection and pondering of 
Gtod's severe anger against it. 2. And chiefly by continually seeking and cherishing in 
your. hearts that love of Christ which the Holy Spirit created and maintains there, 
and which alone, but ever, makes all our work sincere, acceptable, effectual, and 
true. — C. 

Ver. 11. — Much ease, much peril. " There is a reference here to wine, or to the pro- 
cess by which it is prepared and finished. It is first expressed from the grape, when it 
is a thick discoloured fluid or juice. It is then fermented, passing through a process 
that separates the impurities and settles them as lees at the bottom, Standing thus 
upon its lees or dregs in some large tun or vat, it is not further improved. A gross and 
coarse flavour remains, and the scent of the feculent matter stays by and becomes 
fastened, as it were, in the body of the wine itself. To separate this and so to soften or 
refine the quality, it is now decantered or drawn off into separate jars or skins. After 
a while this is done again and then a^ain ; and so, being emptied from vessel to vessel, 
the last remains of the lees or sediment are finally cleared, the crude flavours are 
reduced, the scent itself is refined by ventilation, and the perfect character is attained." 
Now, the prophet afSrms here that Moab had been at ease from his youth. It is 
dif&cult in the face of the somewhat checkered history of Muab to see the exact mean- 
ing of this. Probably he refers to the long lapse of time since their great and awful 
defeat told of in 2 Kings iii. 21. Some two centuries and a half had rolled away since 
that dread day, and in that interval Moab regained all, and more than all, of its former 
prosperity. For the land was beautiful and rich in the extreme. Its pastures were 
covered over with sheep and its valleys with corn. The very name " Moab" is thought 
to mean the land of desire, that is, the desirable land. Now, during these long periods, 
the description here given is applicable. They had enjoyed much ease, and the natural 
evils engendered by their cruel idolatrous system had become more fixed and settled ; 
"their scent had not changed." The truth, therefoie, which is here taught is that 
prolonged and abundant ease, however coveted by men, is full of peril to their higher 
nature, and tends continually to the deterioration of character and the haideuing of the 
habit of evil. Now, we note that — 

L God is kveb teachino us this teuth. 1. In his Word. Cf. Ps. Iv. 19, " Because 
they have no changes," etc. Cf. also Heb. xii., where the writer urges the acceptance 
of the Divine chastisements on the ground that no child of God is without them. 
" For what son is he whom the father chasteneth not ? " And as we go over the roll 
of names of patriarchs, prophets, apostles, saints, and above all the Son of God — ^aot 
one was without chastisement. Of Christ it is said, " The chastisement of our peace was 
upon him " (Isa. liii.). And so in the history of the chosen people. How they were 
moved from vessel to vessel ! What changes and adversities, what agitation and tossing 
ibout by wars, rebellions, invasions, captivities, etc., they had to endure 1 And so of the 



240 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlviii. 1— 47 

historv of the Church I What a checkered and often tumultuous and much-tried 
career was allotted to her I All these illustrations from God's Word, showing the 
determination of God that his people should not suffer the peril of overmuch ease and 
become as Mnab, and as they who because they have no changes, therefore, etc. 2. 
2. By analogy. God suffers nothing to be without change. Even the rocks and 
hills, the solid globe, all have experienced, and do and will experience, change. 
The seasons alternate in their orderly cliange. Storm and tempest cleanse the air 
which, as in the Swiss valleys, would otherwise become stagnant. The great sea 
one prophet describes aa " the troubled sea," because it can never be quiet. And yet 
more is this refusal of ease and quiet, this law of change, seen in all forms of life. 
(1) In vegetable life. " Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die," etc. 
And it springs up, " First the blade, then the ear, then," etc. All the varied and ever- 
acting processes of change in the whole plant-world are in proof. (2) In animal life. 
Change is ever procei ding there. Even when we are asleep the work still goes on. For 
it to be otherwise is dissolution and death. (3) In menkd life. Not to have that 
aroused, stirred by the study of fresh truth and the readjustment of old, would be to 
condemn to feebleness and semi-idiocy. (4) In social life. 

" The old crder changetb, giving place to new. , . . 
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world." 

(5) In ecdesiastical life. What was the Eeformation but the tempest-storm that mshed 
through the valleys of the Church life of that day, where the air had become stagnant and 
so corrupt and poisonous that men could not breathe it and live? But the wild storm 
came and the air was made pure, not in the reformed lands alone, though there chiefly, 
but in those also that cling to the old faith. Such corruption and abomioableness as 
characterized the ante- Reformation Church were not again possible. (6) In political life. 
Where that is healthy, overmuch ease is not possible. It has not been so with us. It 
has in the empires of the East, China, etc., and see the result. (7) In moral life. 
Virtue must be tried, there must be conflict and struggle if it is to continue and grow 
more truly itself. Hence, as in all other forms of life, we should conclude that the 
moral law would hold good in the spiritual life. And that this is so we learn also : 3. 
By experietice. We do not glide into heaven. We are not translated, whilst in a trance, 
out of the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of God. But the often severe 
spiritual conflicts of repentance and confession and striving against sin. " Yea, we 
must fight if we would win." And God's providence without us as well as his Spirit 
within is ever forbidding our being at ease continually. Sorrows and losses, temptations 
and trials, changes and adversities, — they are ever " moving us from vessel to vessel." 
God forces on us " changes," lest we fear not his Name. 

II. Bdt why is all this ? Because in our nature there are rooted evils which can 
only be got rid of by the action of this law of change. Such evils are : 1. Self-urill. 
You have seen a mountain stream come brawling along over its stony bed. But on it 
goes, heeding not until, right in mid-stream, there is a huge rook. Down comes the 
stream full tilt against it, as if it were saying, " Just you get out of my way." But 
that is precisely the thing the rock does not do, and so the stream comes right against 
it. And then what a fuss, and a froth, and a foam there arises ! but the rock does not 
move, and after a moment you will see the stream gliding softly, smoothly, quietly 
round the rock, and going more gently on its way. That is one of the ten thousand 
natural parables with which the world is full. That stream of our self-will, determined 
to go its own way, rushes on its course. The rock of God's law of change and adversity 
ijA trial stands in its way and will not move, and the stream of self-will is broken 
against it, as God intended it should be. Only by this law can this evil be cured. 2. 
Pride. Trial forces men to call on God. 3. Unbelief. This law of trouble and change 
shatters the materialism and atheism of the present day. They break down, and the 
soul in the day of its trouble calls upon God. 4. Sdfishness. Ease fosters this, as it 
fosters all those other evils named. But trial, adversity, teach men to be " touched 
with the feeling " of their brethren's infirmities. 5. Love of the world j and 6. Indolence. 
These which ease fosters, God's law of change does much to cure. 

in. How, THEN, BHOtTLD WE BBAB OUBSELVES TOWARDS THIS LAW OF OHABTEmNO 

OHAXai? Ct Heb. xli., which teaches: I. That wt do not despise it. By denying it, m 



«■. XLTm. 1-47.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET JEEEMIAH, 241 

hj defying it. Some do this and persevere in the sins which it was designed to 
amend. 2. That we do not "faint " under it. We are not to give up in despair, letting 
the hands hang down and the knees totler and become feeble. But we are to take 
this law as a spur and lash and ask, " Wherefore dost thou contend with me?" and 
see to it that we amend. But : 3. Svbmit ourselves unto Ood. " Sljall we not much 
ratlier be in subjection unto the Father," etc.? Let his will ba ours; let his way 
oui wajr. 

*He always wins who sides with thM| 
No chance by him is lost ; 
Tby will is sweetest to blm whea 
It triumphs at his cost" 

(Faber.) 

Then let ns welcome whatever God sends, trying though it be, remembering tie peril 
of ease and the sure profit of trial. — 0. 

Ver. 27. — Touching the apple of God?s eye. A father may chasten his bod, but will 
bo very wrotli if he sees another man so dealing with him. No one may punish the 
child but the child's father. Now, thus is it with the Lord and his people. He will, 
he does, punish them himself, but he allows none other to do so ; or, if they presume to 
touch them, as Moab had done to Israel, then sure, if not swift, venseanoe follows. 
Then is fulfilled the saying, " He that toucheth you toucheth the apple of mine eye " 
(Deut. xxxii. 10; Zech. ii. 8). Now, why is this? The case supi)(ised of the father 
who, though he chastens his own son, is yet angry if another touch him, may help us to 
answer this question. 1. The child is wider no obligation to the stranger. The father 
has right to claim all obedience from his child ; not so another. 2. ITie child is not 
beloved by a stranger. Anger and revenge can alone impel the stranger to do the child 
harm. But these are the last motives, are never the motives, of the chastisements the 
father inflicts. 3. The child is unknown to the stranger or but little known. Such a 
one, therefore, evun if he be not actuated by evil motives, cannot possibly deal wisely with 
one of whom and whose character, circumstances, and needs he is ignorant. 4. The 
child wUl get no guodfrom chastisement by a stranger. A father's chastisement, because 
of the father's love, cannot but have a mighty moral influence upon the child for his 
good. " What son is he whom the father ohasteneth not ? " But what good could come, 
or ever did come, to Israel and Judah from the cruelties inflicted upon them by such 
people as the Moabites, and of which the prophet here tells ? 6. The child will very 
likely be dealt cruelly and injuriously with by a stranger. A father will chasten for 
his child's profit ; wisdom and love will guide him. True, the writer of the Epistle to 
the Hebrews says, " We have had fathers of our flesh who verily chastened us after their 
own pleasure." But we trust that his experience was a limited one, and that there 
were, and yet more that there are, but few fathers who " for their own pleasure " would 
chastise their children. 6. And the child, with all its guilt — in the case of the Lord's 
children — deserves to suffer less than they who have presumed to punish him. Israel and 
Judah were guilty without doubt ; but were Moab and Ammon, Babylon and the rest, 
less guilty ? Had they nothing to answer for ? Had they not far more ? And so, 
whilst the sin of a child of God is sin indeed, yet it does not make him so heinous, so 
black, scf repulsive, as the persistent, high-handed, never-repented-of sin of the godless, 
the profane, and the unbeliever. To see one who is chargeable with great sin punishing 
one whose sin is comparatively trivial; the man who had incurred the debt of ten 
thousand talents taking by the throat him whose debt was but a hundred pence ; — that 
Is evidently a monstrous thing. 7. But chief of all, because Ood's people are God's 
children in Christ. We are identified with the well-beloved Son. " Members of his 
body, his flesh and his bones, one with him." It is so, but it is not so with those who 
have never yielded themselves to God. Such surrender, which is faith, vitalizes the 
connection between us and God, and he becomes our Father, in a sense that he never 
■was before. Conclusion. All history demonstrates the truth now insisted on, that " he 
that toucheth you," etc. Let us thank God that he will suffer none to chasten us but 
himself. Seek that such chastisement may be no longer necessary. Strive to do good 
to all, " especially to them that are of the household of faith," and tremble to do uem 

JEREMIAH — II. B 



242 THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. XLvm. 1—47 

harm. " Whosoever offendeth one of these little ones," said our Lord, " it were better 
for him that a millstone," etc. — 0. 

Ver. 29. — Concerning pride. The graces of God's Spirit are like choice flowers and 
fruits. They will not grow just anywhere, nor without cultivatiou and careful tending, 
and they are easily destroyed. Not so with moral evils like piide. They are as the ill 
weeds which grow apace. They will grow anywhere, and require no cultivation; the 
more you let them alone the more they will increase, and, do what you will, you can 
hardly destroy them. Now, concerning this ill weed, pride, note — 

L That it is very hateful in the sight of God. See here, in this verse, with 
what varied names it is branded. Evil names, all of them. And turn to the many 
utterances in Scripture concerning this same sin, and the condemnation of God upon it 
will be yet more clearly seen. " There never was a saint yet that grew proud of his 
fine feathers, but what the Lord plucked them out by-and-by ; there never yet was an 
angel that had pride in his heart, but he lost his wings, and fill into Gehenna, as Satan 
and those fallen angels did; and there shall never be a saint who indulges self-conceit 
and pride and self-confidence, but the Lord will spoil his glories, and trample his honours 
in the mire, and make him cry out yet again, ' Lord, have mercy upon me I ' less 
than the least of all saints, and the ' very chief of sinners,' The first Adam was for 
self-exaltation, and to be as gods ; the second bids us be as he was, ' meek and lowly 
in heart.' " 

IL Its signs and tokens. Sometimes it is so concealed and masked that only a very 
intimate acquaintance with the man enables you to detect it ; and sometimes the man 
himself may be imaware how proud he is, and may deem himself a very Moses for 
meekness, when he is just the reverse. But at other times it may be discerned in the 
countenance. There is " a proud look." The face is the dial-plate of the character, 
" the expression " of what lies silent in the mind. Conduct yet more betrays it. Note 
how a man acts towards those whom he deems superior or inferior to himself; he will 
fawn upon the former, and be disdainful towards the latter. He will " mind high 
things," but will not " condescend to them that are of low estate." Who does not 
know pride's hateful ways, and has not had to suffer from them ; and alsc^ alas I has 
made others suffer from them at one time or another ? But note — 

IIL Sous OF its occasions and excitements. 1. Birth is one of them ; as if a man 
chose his own father and mother. Men pride themselves that they come of a certain 
family, that they are "well bom." " We are Abraham's children; " what a multitude 
of sorrows did that notion originate 1 ' They who pride themselves on those who were 
their ancestors in generations gone by are, as one has quaintly said, " like those useful 
vegetables of which we are wont to eat — the best part of them is underground." 2. 
Physical strength. " It always seems to me to be a very insane thing for a man to glory 
in his animal force, for there can be no merit in it. In the strength of those brawny 
limbs of theirs and those powerful muscles, some vaunt themselves abundantly. Though 
' the Lord taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man,' yet some count it a very wonderful 
thing that they can outrun or outleap their fellows. athlete, though thou be strong as 
Samson or swift as Asahel, what hast thou that thou hast not received ? Hadst thou 
been bom with a tendency to consumption, or with some other hereditary weakness, 
conldst thou have prevented it? And now that thou art strong, art thou to be praised 
tat that, any more than a horse or a steam-engine ? " (Spurgeon). 3. Beauty, What a 
fountof pride this is 1 4. And talent — of intellect, power of application, artistic taste, and 
the like. 6. Acquirementi. " I have noticed of self-made men," says one, " that they 
generally have great respect for their Maker." And he who has acquired wealth is in 
sore peril of the pride which it is apt to beget. Position, influence, high office, and the 
like, — these, too, are acquirements won, it may be, by diligent toil, yet, when won, 
may do a man much harm by generating an unhallowed pride. And even God's grace 
to a man in giving him a name and a place amongst sincerely religious men, even this 
may be an occasion of pride. Our best works may be made fuel to the fire of pride. 
" The demon of pride was bom with us, and it will not die one hour before us. It is so 
woven into the very warp and woof of our nature that, till we are wrapt in our winding- 
sheet, we shall never be completely rid of it." 

IV. SoHE or its hast evils. They are such as these: 1. It leadt to the forgetting 



OH. xivra. 1— 47.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 243 

tf God. " What hast thtu that thou hast not received ? " (1 Cor. ix, 7). " Is not this 
great Babylon that I have bailt?" so spake the God-forgetting and therefore the God- 
forsaken Nebuchadnezzar " (Dan. iv. 30). 2. It sets but little value upon Qod. God 
dwindles in the proud man's esteem, whilst to himself he himself ever grows greater. 
The reverse of John the Baptist's thought is his. John said, " He must increase, but 
I must decrease." The proud man changes the place of the " he " and the " I." 3. It 
makes a man despise his fellows. He looks down upon them, and therefore is unjust 
to them. 4. It leads him to make had use of what gifts he has. He is so taken up 
with admiration of the machinery that he fails to apply it to those ends which it was 
designed to serve. 5. It is the prelude not seldom to some great fall. " Pride goeth before 
destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall." 6. It makes a man content with the 
irferior, when, instead of so admiring what he has, he should be aspiring after what is 
higher and better still. It is said of an artist that, when he had painted a picture 
which satisfied himself, he threw away his brushes ; for now, he said, " I never shall go 
beyond this." And so he who is self-satisfied will never rise to a higher degree. 7. It 
dishonours Christ and his cause. A proud Christian helps the devil, for be makes 
men hate Christianity and all belonging to it. 

V. SALtrtABTT SUGGESTIONS FOE ITS CDEB. 1. How entirely all our gifts are gifts ! 
Much as we may think of ourselves on account of them, we are excelled by very many. 
If we have many gifts, that does but mean much and solemn responsibility. How ill 
it would fare with us were we to be called now to account for the use we have made of 
our gifts in the past ! How but for the mercy of God in Christ, the most gifted is but 
a poor lost sinner, cast out from the presence of God for ever 1 — G. 

Ver. 2. — The departed praise of Moab. I. Not fob want of disposition to fbatse. 
If the things had still remained which people had been in the habit of praising, they 
would have gone on praising. But the God of righteousness takes them away, and 
then there is necessary silence. Instead of praise there is humiliation, astonishment at 
a change so complete, but no insight into the hollowness and instability of that which 
had been praised. If it had all come back again, it would have been praised as much as 
ever. Thus we see — 

II. A THING MAT BE PBAISED WITHOUT BEING PEAISEWOBTHT. This Can CasUy be 

understood from the experience of many who once praised things to which they are now 
indifferent, which they may even utterly condemn. Why this change ? It may be to 
some extent from change in the things, but it more frequently comes from growth 
and increase of lijiht and the reception of higher principles. We have ever to be on our 
guard against what is merely popular. Not in a cynical way, as if we gnidged any one 
success, but recollecting what power belongs to fashion and to the love of pleasure. 
Let our effort l)e to discern, measure, and profit by intrinsic excellence. 

III. Things not pbaisewobtht mat get the highest praise. Mere cleverness and 
astuteness, the exercise of power irrespective of ends, visible and material success on a 
large scale, — these attract the laudations of inconsiderate men. This is just what we may 
expect. If things the most praiseworthy, fullest of virtue and blessing, are yet neglected 
by the eyes of those who have opportunity to see them, then it is little wonder that the 
things most approved by the common multitude are those which God has branded as 
utterly bad. What changes need to be effected in human judgments, that we may be 
willing to bum what we adored and adore what we would have burned ! 

IV. God gives fresh topics of praise if there be a disposition to consideu 
THEM. Those whose tongues had been fuU of the praises of Moab needed not to be silent. 
The very overthrow of Moab would be a signal for praise and congratulation among the 
good. When the unhallowed praises of men are silenced by destruction of the things they 
pndsed, then angels begin to sing. And they who praise low, earthly things may have their 
thoughts introduced to heavenly ones, and then they wiU discover what man was made 
to praise. How the words that are exaggerated and altogether disproportioned when 
applied to the works of men, have in them an exquisite fitness when we speak of tlie 
works of God or of Christ, or of men properly engaged in Christian service 1— Y. 

Yer. 7. — The eonsequenee ^a wrong confldenee. I. The oaptube was thbib own 
WAOUC, Not idl captMM k w. Thiim may be a goii^ into durance for conscience' sake ; 



244 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. XLTm. 1— 47. 

there may be the necessary surrender to superior strength ; the captured one may be 
the victim for a time to the unscrupulous selfishness of others. We must be careful not 
to draw rash conclusions from suffering to sin ; for therein we may be adding suffering 
to suffering. As a rule, when suffering comes from sin, the sufferer is not lett without 
a witness in his own heart. But inasmuch as it is a whole people that is here suffering 
nationally, there needs to be a distinct mention of why they are suffering. We are also 
reminde(i how important it is to make the distinction between what comes through our 
own fault and what comes through other causes. 

II. Wrong objects of trust always involve bomb disasteb. It is but the form 
that differs ; the real, essential mischief is always there. God mentions here the best 
things a man can have outside of God himself. There is his own worth, that into which 
he puts his energy, skill, and experience ; where also he profits by the work of those 
who have gone before him. There are also the pleasures of life, all that a man, in his 
best judgment, reckons to be best. Moab would reckon among its pleasures its men of 
war, its chosen young men, its accumulation of wealth. But all these things, solid and 
extensive as they look, give no guarantee of abiding security and prosperity. They 
may, by the very falsehood of appearances, become the ministers of ruin. The case is 
as if a plant should seek root in its own substance, as if a man should try to maintain 
physical life from his own body. And to trust other people is an even more precarious 
ground of support than we find in ourselves. For in ourselves there is at all events the 
element of self-interest to help us. No doubt, by the work and the pleasures here men- 
tioned, there is a reference to the idol worshipped in Moab, which indeed is mentioned 
in the same verse. We can hardly understand the feeling ourselves, but great must 
have been the confidence of Moab in its god ; and this, of course, amounted to nothing 
else than its own imagination of deity. So we may be trusting in an apparent connection 
with God, in forms of religion, in works that look as if they were meant for God's glory 
and for our good. But nothing is of any use as a ground of confidence unless it has a 
living connection with the Infinite and the Eternal. — T. 

Ver. 10. — Doing the work of Jehovah deceitfully. I. The entbustino 9F Jehoyab's 
WORK TO THE HANDS OF MEN. Here is a great work of judgment, and Jehovah effects 
such works either through operations of his own or through agents to whom he makes 
the awful duty evident. What he has done himself is sufficiently illustrated in many 
terrible visitations recorded in the Old Testament ; nor is there entire absence of such a 
record in the New. But men have also been called to visit upon others their iniquity 
in a solemn and thorough way. That men have made the command of God a pretext 
for the greatest cruelties, and for indiscriminate slaughter on an extensive scale, does not 
in the least alter the fact that such commands have been given, given out of the greatest 
wisdom and with the best results. Every nation reckons that the temporal life of its 
subjects is at its disposal ; they must be ready to serve with life or in death, as may lie 
required. And shall not the God of all the earth dispose of temporal life according as 
his all-comprehending wisdom sees may be best for the whole world and for all ages ? 

II. The TEMPTATIONS TO DO THIS WORK DEOEiTPULliY. Not, perhaps, with an intention 
to deceive, but with sophistical evasions, with attempts to make something less than 
completeness seem complete. Such an act was that of Saul when he went out with a 
stei-n command ringing in his ears — ^the command of one proved to be a prophet, that 
he should utterly slay the Amalekites. He seemed to have reason in the pleas he urged 
for the imperfect execution of the command. And so it may often be. There looks to 
be needless severity, needless waste. Oftentimes there is an amount of suffering, 
suffering even of the innocent, which takes all will and vigour out of the arm that 
should strike God's blow. Besides, it needs to be always borne in mind that the Word 
of Qoi requiring severity and suffering is only a part of God's work. We shrink from 
it through mere sensitiveness to pain. But there is another large sphere of work where 
there is plain benefit, where we have to make no one suffer, where we are contributors 
to something positive. The husbandman is not for ever plucking up weeds; his main 
work is to sow good seed and reap it. " Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord 
deceitfully " is a word that has its correspondence in Paul's ejaculation, " Woe is me if 
I preach not the gospel." Jesus put his servants through an exacting discipline, • sdf- 
revealing ou«, in order that they might do his work thoroughly, uprooting ail evil, 



OT. XLvra. 1— 47.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 245 

getting down to proper foundations, making no compromises, ready for all persecutions. 
They who, after preparation and warning and putting iheir hands to the work, yet do 
that work with slack hands, cannot wonder if God should in due time make manifest 
his anger with them for their heedlessness. — Y. 

Vers. 11, 12. — Moab settled- on the lees. Here we find a not uncommon difficulty in 
the Old Testament, namely, that of an illustration which to us is by no means so clear 
as the thing to be illustrated. The words are spoken with regard to a wine country. 
This will be seen on looking at the references iu vers. 32, 33 to the wine of Sibniah, the 
spoiled vintage, the wine that has failed from the wine-presses, the silence where once 
was shouting of those who trod the grapes. An illustration drawn from the process of 
making wine perfect was, therefore, most appropriate. It would be imderstood and 
convey its lesson at once to those of the right disposition. We, however, must go to 
the underlying truth at once, without pretending to see the propriety of the illustration 
in all its parts. Moreover, we must look on Moab itself as representative of individuals. 
We have to look at individuals, at the possibilities of their life, at the experiences they 
ought to pass through, and the results which come from missing those experiences. 

I. The possibilities of lifb. " Moab hath settled on his lees." Moab is, therefore, 
compared to wine. There are sour grapes with which nothing can be done ; but there 
are also grapes of splendid natural quality, that have had the best culture of the vine- 
yard and have come to all due ripeness. That which is to become perfect wine starts 
from a fruit of which much is expected. The wine-producer knows that his wioe will 
be according to his grapes. Now, from Moab much was expected ; this truth being 
Involved in the very comparison to wine. There was something that had in it the 
making of an exquisite taste and an exquisite scent. 

II. How THE POSSIBILITIES ABE MISSED. There is the chance of ease, enjoyment, and 
self-indulgence, and this chance is ignobly accepted. Of some men the character is tried 
by difficulties and repeated discouragements ; the strength and worth that lie deep in 
them are manifested by their perseverance. Other men are tried by the absence of 
difficulties. They are born to a competency. As children they have whatever money 
can provide for in the way of instruction and pleasure. Everything external to them 
is made as easy as it can be made. Many voices, near to them every day and all day 
long, say, " Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years : take thine ease, eat, 
drink, and be merry." Everything depends on the way the young man, placed in such 
circumstances, looks. 

III. The result of neoleoted disoifliiie. Possessions give opportunities of service, 
opportunities denied to many, who see the needs of others, have the will to meet them, 
and lack the power. Is it not a righteous thing that God should deal severely with 
those whose circumstances give them the means and the time for doing great good, and 
yet who fill their lives with selfish pleasure ? Such lives will come out at last in 
pitiable contrast with what they might have lieen. To change the figure : " If the salt 
have lost its savour, wherewith shall it be salted ? henceforth it is good for nothing but 
to be cast out and trodden under foot of men." Note how the vessels that should have 
been used toward the perfection of the wine, and the buttles that should have held them, 
become at last usehss. If we will not use our opportunities for God's purpose, God will 
secure, in due time, that we should not use them for our own. — Y, 

Vers. 26, 27. — Moab exuUing over foMen Israel. Here is another allusion to a wine 
country. Moab knew well what it was to drink to excess. The drunkard with his 
silly talk and behaviour is a common object of ridicule everywhere. And Moab shall 
become to other nations abject and degraded as the drunkard. This is the end of its 
wrong excitement over the fall of Israel. Moab has seen Israel in its days of power 
and glory and pride, and, seeing, has feared. Could the days of Balak and the prophecies 
of Balaam be forgotten ? Nor is it likely that Israel would be without unseemly 
exultations and reciprocal jealousies. And now at last Israel falls. And all that Moab 
can take knowledge of is the fact of the fall. That it has been cauiied by disobedi- 
ence and rebellion, that Jehovah is the real Author of it and not the King of Babylon, 
who is but as Jehovah's sword, Moab cannot well have means for knowing;. All it can 
Ma is ft rival fallen, and as it seems permanently follen. Therefore Moab must be 



2-lG IHli; BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. XLvm. 1— 47 

taught a lesson. In exulting over Israel it is exulting against Jehovah. Indeed, there 
is no reason why we should reject the notion of some open and bold comparison between 
tlie weakness of Jeliovah, God of Israel, and the strength of Chemosh, god of Mnab. 
As if the people said, " See how strong Chemosh is ; for we are still here, though Baby- 
lonian armies have not been far from us ! and see how weak Jehovah is ; for the nation 
to whom he was God is gone into a distant captivity ! " To exult over the fall of those 
who have been avowedly the servants of Gud is a dangerous thing to do. The man 
who is tempted and falls should be an object of pity, one to be helped up and reinstated, 
even though the woik needed for this be one with some loss and risk to ourselves. And 
surely we should be especially careful not to rejoice over the calamities of those whose 
calamity seems to give us a better chance. Moab had now to drink to tlie dregs a cup 
of shame, because it had failed to comprehend the duty of rejoicing with those who 
rejoiced and weeping with those who wept. — Y. 

Ver. 38. — The broken vessel. I. Nor beoken bt accident. A vessel broken by 
accident would not have furnished the proper figure. Lives that are as real serviceable 
vessels in the hand of God never do get broken by accident. Earthen vessels though 
they often be, there is a providence and a watchfulness which preserves them till their 
work is done. They are kept through days of persecution ; they are restored from sick- 
ness ; they live on into a good old age, while men apparently stronger and of greater 
physical resource are stricken down. And when there seems sometimes a premature and 
unaccountable breaking, yet it is really to be regarded in another light, namely, as a 
change to higher and fuller service. 

II. Not broken by oapbicb. That which is not broken accidentally must have been 
iroken purposely. And if purposely, either with a reason or through mere recklessness. 

Men too often destroy things in a reckless, thoughtless way, from the first unconsidered 
impulse that comes into the mind. It is an action in which is expressed, by a sort of 
bravado, the sentiment that a man may do what he likes with his own. But God would 
ever have us feel that, though he lias made the world and all that therein is, his dis- 
position of these works is regulated by fixed laws, and our disposition of things under 
our control should be regulated in the same way. Never let it be said of us that we 
have destroyed or injured an} thing without sufScient reason. We should not eron pull 
a flower to pieces through mere thoughtlessness, mere vacuity of mind. 

III. Bboken for a sufficient reason. Moab is a vessel in which there is no 
pleasure. It is of no real use to God. Whether we shall be vessels of use to God or 
not depends upon whether we put ourselves as clay into his hands as Putter. { ^Moab was 
a nation which had loved to shape its own life, to hew its own designs. And just in 
proportion as it persevered in this path did it become useless to God. Appearance is 
only a small thing. The first consideration is use. The commonest earthenware pitcher, 
if without a flaw, is worth more than a cracked golden pitcher that will hold no water — 
worth more, that is, as a pitcher. Gold is a rare, glitteiing, fascinating thing compared 
with common earth, but alter all it is the common earth out of which vessels are made 
for daily use. The real value of a human life depends upon what God gets out of it. — Y. 

Vers, 43, 44. — No ultimate escape. I. There are temporary evasions of doom. 
As there are great varieties of wickedness, so there is also great variety in the conse- 
quences of it. Sometimes the visitation is sudden, quick, and terrible, as in the case of 
Ananias and Sapphira. But oftener men go on sinning with no bad consequences to 
themselves, so far as appearance goes. They do not lose health ; they do not seem to 
lose reputation ; there are no checks in their success ; and perhaps they even furnish 
an example whereby worldly wisdom hangs its maxim that it is not well to be too 
particular. The frequent prosperity of the wicked is indeed a fact not at all concealed or 
qualified in the Scriptures. A man of the world takes his own worldly way to keep peril 
at a distance, and he seems to fall into no pit, no snare. Let all this be allowed. Nothing 
is gained by trying to make out that the wicked have no advantages. It was an old- 
world legend that some men sold themselves to the devil, and that his protection secured 
to them their wonderful immunities and prosperity. 

II. There is no way of eboape from danger save God'b way. All that is 
gained is in the way of postponement. Wicked mpn travel in a narrowing path, and at 



CH. xLix. 1— 39.J THE iiOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



247 



last are shut up to face the judgments of &od. The moment of what seems to them 
complete success is quickly followed by the moment ot complete collapse. We have 
the crowning illustration of this in the death of Jesus. His enemies seemed to hare 
succeeded. All their efforts to bring his death about had been wonderfully faTOured. 
And what could they do but be jul'ilant when he was actually dead? The death of 
Jesus, however, was really a cond tion for the utter downfall of these en'-mies. The 
grave of Jesus, so to speak, was the snare in which spiritual evil was finally taken and 
overcome. It is one of the triumphs of faith to be well assured in our own hearts that 
there is no ultimate escape for wickedness. God has his own wise reasons in tolerating 
wicked men for a long time, and the evil they do to others is not so great in reality as 
it is in appearance. They cannot inflict more than outward suffering and inconvenience 
on God's people. Indeed, the mischief they mean to do can be wonderfully transmuted 
to good. — y. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XLIX. 



On Ammoii, Edom, Damascus, Kcdar and 
Hazor, autl El am. 

Vers. 1 — 3.— The violence of the Ammon- 
ites shall be severely punished. 

Ver. 1. — Hath Israel no sons? Tlie vio- 
lent seizure, peipetrated before his eyes, of 
parts of the sacred territory, forces the in- 
dignant question from the propliet, " How 
can these things be?" It was so on a 
former occasion (see oh. ii. 14), and it is so 
a.ituiQ, now that tlie Ammonites are occupy- 
ing the land of the Gadites. True, the pre- 
sent generation has lost its property, but 
the next is the heir to all its lights and 
privile{;eB. Their king ; rather, their King — 
tlieir Melech or Molech ; it is the heavenly, 
iiot the earthly king who is referred to (so 
in Amos i. 15 ; Zeph. i. 5). The Septuaglnt, 
ttie Syriac, and the Vulgate, however, read 
Milfam, which was the name of the Am- 
monite deity ; this is only a different vocal- 
izing of the consonants of the text. The 
aitual vowel-points give " maloam." This 
readingmaj/, of course, be interpreted of the 
earthly king of the Ammonites. But this 
view ignores the obvious pajallelism of oh. 
xlviii. 7, " ChSmdsh thall go forth into cap- 
tivity." Inherit. The primary meaning 
of the word is " to take possession of, espe- 
cially by force, 1 Kings xxi. 6 " (Gesenius, 
ad voe.), and this is Ihe sense evidently re- 
quired here (oonip. ch. viii. 10). 

Ver. 2.— Tlie punishment of Ammon. Its 
capital, Eabbali (see 2 Sam. xii. 26, 27), 
and ti.e "daugliler" cities (conip. Numb. 
xxi. 25, margin ; Josh. xv. 45 and xvii. 11 in 
■;he Hebrew), shall be laid waste. Ihe alarm 
of war ("alarm "equivaknt to "shout "),as in 
oh. iv. 19. A desolate heap. Fnitified towns 
were built on " heaps," or sliglit elevations 
(comp. on ch. xxx. 18), the Hebrew name 
tor which (in the singular) is tfl. The "heap" 
and the rninB of the tovin together are aptly 



called a " heap of desolation." Then ikall 
Israel be heir, etc. ; rather, tlten shall Itrael 
dispossess those who dispossessed him (comp. 
ver. 1). The form of tlie phrase reminds us 
of Isa. xiv. 2. 

Ver. 3. — Heshbon. Here mentioned as de 
jure a Gadite, but de facto an Ammonitish, 
town ; in Numb. xxi. 26 it appears as "the 
city of Sihon " the Amorite. In Isa. xv. 4 and 
xvi. 9 it is reckoned to the Moabites. There 
was a continual warfare between the neigh- 
bouring tribes of Reuben ami Gad on the one 
hand, and the Moabites and Ammonites on 
the other. Let Heshbon lament, because Ai 
is spoiled. The introduction of Ai, which 
is only known to us as a Canaanitish town, 
near Bethel, on the wrong side of the Jor- 
dan for Moab, is startling. It is replied 
that we have no list of the Ammonitish 
cities, and that there may have been another 
town named Ai. The reply is valid; but 
leaves a second difficulty untouched, viz. 
that the mention of a third place destroys 
the continuity of thought. First, we are 
made acquainted with the fall of Rabbah ; 
then Heshbon (probably the second place 
in the country) is called upon to wail be- 
cause X has bten taken by storm ; then the 
populations of the "daughter" cities are 
summoned to join in the lamentation over 
Rabbah ; — is it not reasonable to conclude 
that the subject of the mourning is one and 
the same? Now, it is well known that the 
received text abounds in small errors arising 
from the confusion of similar Hebrew letters, 
and that among the letters most easily con- 
founded are yod and resh. Is it not an 
obvious conclusion that fur Ai we should 
rather read Ar (" the city "), a name as suit- 
able for the capital of Ammon as for that of 
Moab ? It is true that we have no example 
elsewhere of Rabbah being called by the 
name of Ar; but in 2 Sam. x. 3, 14 it is 
described as " the city," and we have to be 
on our guard against the argument a siUntio 
— that favourite weapon of destructive cri. 



248 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. XLDt 1— 39. 



ticiam ! Since a conjecture must be made, it 
is more respectful to the prophet to olioose 
the one which is most suitable to the cou- 
text. Daughters of Babhah; t.«. nnwalled 
towns (as in ver. 2). Bun to and fro by the 
hedges ; rather, hy tlie enclosurei ; i.e. wander 
about in the open country, seeking a lodg- 
ing-place in the enclosures of the sheep- 
folds (so Numb, xxxii. 24, Hebrew) or the 
vineyards (so Numb. xxii. 24, Hebrew). 
Theii king ; or, Miloom (see on ver. 1). 

Ver. 4. — The valleys ; i.e. long-extended 
plains, such as were suitable for corn-fields 
(Isa. xvii. 5; Ps. Ixv. 14), and such as 
characterized the territory of the Ammonites. 
Thy flowing valley. " Flowing ; " that is, 
abounding with rich crops. The meaning 
of the phrase, however, is only probable. 

Ver. 5. — The Ammonitish community dis- 
solved ; every one caring for himself. Every 
man right forth ; i.e. straight before him, in 
a wild panic which expels every thought 
but that of self-preservation. Him that 
wandereth. (Jollectively for "the wan- 
derers," t.e. the fugitives. So it is said of 
the Babylonians, that they are " like aheep 
with none to gather them." 

Ver. 6. — Revival of the Ammonitei (iee 
on ch. zlviii. 47). 

Vers. 7 — 10. — A startling picture of the 
judgment Impending over Edom, the severify 
of which is to be inferred from the behaviour 
of the sufferers. Observe, no allusion is 
made by Jeremiah to any special bitter 
feeling of the Edomites towards the Israel- 
ites, such as is implied in Isa. xxxiv. ; Ezek. 
XXXV., and other passages. With regard to 
the fulfilment of the prophecy, we may 
fairly quote in the first place Mai. i. 2—4. 
The agents in the desolation there referred 
to (still fresh in Malachi's recollection) are 
probably the Nabathseans (an Arab race, 
though writing Aramaic), who, after occupy- 
ing Edom, dropped their nomad habits, de- 
voted themselves to commerce, and founded 
the kingdom of Arabia Petrsea. Meantime 
the Edomites maintained an independent ex- 
istence in the midst of the Jewish colonists, 
till John Hyroanus compelled them to accept 
circumcision about B.o. 130. In spite of 
this enforced religious and political union, 
the Edomites remained perfectly conscious 
of their nationality, and we find them men- 
tioned as a distinct factor in the community 
in Josephus's account of the great Jewish 
war. They pass away from history after 
the destruction of Jerusalem, a.d. 70. 

Yer. 7. — Temau was celebrated for its 
" wisdom," i.e. for a practical moral philo- 
sophy, similar to that which we find in the 
leas distinctly religions portions of tlie Book 
of Proverbs. It was this " wisdom " which 
formed the common element in the higher 
tultureof the Semitic peoples, and of which 



the sacred narrator speaks when he_ tajt 
that " Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom 
of all tlie children of the east country" (1 
Kings iv. 30). One of Job's friends, Eli- 
phaz, was a Temanite (Job ii. 11). From 
ver. 20, however, it appears that Teman is 
here used for Edom in general, of which it 
formed apart. "Wisdom" was doubtless 
cultivated thr{mghout Idumeea (Obad. 8), 
the "land of Uz," in which Job dwelt, was 
probably in the east of Edom (see on oh. 
XXV. 20). Is their wisdom vanished t The 
Hebrew, with its characteristic love for mate- 
rial symbols, has, " Is their wisdom poured 
out?" So in oh. xix. 7, " I will pour out 
[a different word, however, is used] the 
counsel of Judah." The body being re- 
garded as a vessel, it was natural to repre- 
sent the principle of life, both physical (Isa. 
liii. 12) and intellectual (as here), under the 
symbol of a liquid. 

Ver. 8. — Turn back. The grammatical 
form is peculiar (literally, be made to turn 
baelc). 6 the punctuation is not an over- 
sight, the object is to suggest the compulsive- 
ness of the change of route of the Uedanites. 
Swell deep ; i.e. tarry in the deepest recesses 
ye can find, so as to avoid the calamities of 
the Edomites. The Dedanites, it will be 
remembered, were a tribe devoted to com- 
merce (see on oh. xxv. 23). Isaiah had al- 
ready, on an earlier occasion, given the same 
advice as Jeremiah, viz. to leave the beaten 
track and take refuge in a less exposed part 
of the desert, where shrubs and thorn-bushes 
("the forest," or rather, "the thickete") 
would secure them to some extent from obser- 
vation (Isa. xxi. 13). See, however, ver. 10. 
Ver. 9. — If grape-gatherers, etc. Jere- 
miah modifies his original in Obad. 5 ; the 
interrogative clauses here become affirma- 
tive. Render, If vintagers come to thee, they 
viU not leave any gleanings; if thieves by 
night, thay destroy what i$ sufficient for 



Ver. 10. — But, etc.; rather, /or. Thevene 
gives the reason why the destruction is n 
complete. " It is I, Jehovahj who made 
Esau bare," etc. " Esau," i.e. Edom (Geu. 
xxv. 30). His seed ; {.e. the Edomites. His 
brethren, or kinsmen ; i.e. the Amalekites 
(Gen. xxxvi. 12). His neighbours ; t.e. the 
tribes of Dedan, Tema, and Bu2 (oh. xxv. 
23). 

Vers. 11—13. — ^A merciful mitigation of 
the prophet's stern threat. The true God 
will provide for the widows and orphans, if 
Edom will but commit them to him. And 
let not Edom think it strange that he is 
punished ; for even Israel, the chosen people, 
has drunk of the bitter cup. Yea, Jehovah 
has sworn "by himself" that all Edom's 
cities shall be laid waste. 

Ver. 11. — Leave thy fatherlen duldren, 



OH. XLix. 1— 39.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



249 



etc. The invitation meani moie than 
might be supposed. It is equivalent to a 
promise of the revival of the Bdomltish 
people (oomp. on oh. xlvi. 26 ; zlviii. 47). 

Ver. 12. — ^Whose judgment was not, eto. ; 
rather, to vihom it was not due, etc. Jehovah 
condeBcends to speak from a human point 
of view. So, in Isa. xxvili. 21, the punish- 
ment of Jerusalem is called bis " strange 
work. " Have assuredly drunken ; rather, 
thall surely drink. 

Ver. 13. — Bozrah. This seems to have 
been at one time the capital of Edom (see 
Amos i. 12 ; Isa. xxxiv. 6 ; Ixiii. 1). It 
was a hill city (comp. on ver. 16) ; a village 
called Busalra(i.e. little Bozi ah) now stands 
among its ruins. Perpetual vrastes. A 
phrase characteristic of Jeremiah (see also 
ch. XXV. 9) and of the second part of Isaiah 
(Iviii. 12 ; Ixi. 4). 

Vers. 14 — 18. — Based at first on the older 
prophecy (see Chad. 1 — 4) ; then follow two 
verses in Jeremiah's peculiar manner. As 
yet Edom feels himself secure in bis rocky 
home. But a Divine impulse already stirs 
the nation, through whom Jehovah wills to 
bumble the proud. Edom shall become a 
second Sodom. 

Ver. 14. — ^I have heard a mmonr. In 
Obadiah it is "we have heard," i.e. the 
company of prophets (comp. Isa. liii. 1, 
" Who hath believed our report? " accord- 
ing to one interpretiition). Jeremiah, to 
justify his adoption of the outward form of 
his prophecy, declares that he is personally 
responsible for its substance. " Kumour," 
or as the word is elsewhere rendered, " re- 
port," is a technical term for a prophetic 
revelation (Obad. 1 ; Isa. xxviii. 9, 19 ; liii. 
1 ; comp. Isa. xxi. 10 ; xxviii. 22) ; and it is 
from tills Old 'Ifstament usage that d/toi) 
acquires its special meaning in Bom. x. 16, 
17. In fact, oKo^, or bearing, is a more exact 
equivalent of the original. A propliet is 
one who has " listened in the council of 
God " (Job XV. 8, corrected version ; com ,-.. 
Amos ill. 7), and " when the Lord J. hovah 
h ath spoken, who can but prophesy ? " (Amos 
lii. 8). Prophetic perception of Divine truth 
is so exceptional a thing tliat it can only be 
expressed approximately in terms of every- 
day life. One while it may be cal ed a 
"hearing," • "report," another while a 
" vision," or " intuition." He who makes 
to hear or see is, of course, Jehovah, tluougli 
the objective influence of his Spirit. It is 
important to study the Biblical phraseoloL'y, 
which has a depth of meaning too olten 
overlooked, owing to the blunter ed^'e which 
time has given to our modern spc ech. An 
ambassador ; rather, a herald. Unto the 
heathen; rather, unto the nativni. Ti ere is 
no religious idea involved; the worl ijiriilm 
literally me*ni "nations," and tlieie is nn 



reason for deviating from the primary sense. 
In the next verse it is even more necessary 
to make this correction. 

Ver. 16. — Thy terribleness. This is cer- 
tainly the best rendering of this Sirof 
\ey6iievov. The " terribleness " of Edom 
consisted in the fact that the other nations 
shrank from disturlnng her in he- rocky 
fastness. In the olefi,s of the rock. Tro- 
bably with an aliuniou to therock-uily Sela 
or Petra ("rook"); as perhaps in "the 
height of the hill" to the bituation of 
Boziah ; see on ver. 13 (Graf). As the 
eagle. Not any eagle is meant, but tlie 
griffon {Gypifulvut), or great vulture (Tris- 
tram). 

Ver. 17. — ^A desolation; rather, an as- 
tonishment. The word is from the same 
root as the following verb. The phrase is 
characteristic of Jeremiah, who has no 
scruple in repeating a forcible expression, 
and so enforcing an important truth (comp. 
ch. XXV. 11, 38; 1. 23; li. 43). Wliat so 
"astonishing" as the reverses of once 
flourishing kingdoms I For the Bible 
knows nothing of the "necessity" of the 
decay and death of nations. The "cove- 
nant" which Jehovah offers contains the 
pledge of indestructibility. Every one 
that goeth by it, eto. Another self-remi- 
niscence (see ch. xix. 8). 

Ver. 18. — As in the overthrow, etc. ; 
oomp. Deut. xxix. 2, which explains the 
reference in " the neighbour cities " (Admah 
and Zebiiim). The verse is repeated in ch. 
1, 40. It does not, of course, mean that fire 
and brimstone should be the a.!>;ents of de- 
struction (nor is even Isa. xxxiv. 9 to be 
understood literally), but that the desolate 
appearance of Edom sbouM remind of that 
of the neighbourhood of the Dead Sea 
(comp. Isa. xiii. 19; Amos iv. 11). 

Vers. 19 — 22.— Figures descriptive of the 
unique physical qualities of the destined 
conqueror of Edom. Both figures have been 
used hi fore (see ch. iv. 7 ; xlviii. 40). 

Ver. 19. — He shall come. The subject is 
withheld, as in cb. xlvi. 1 8 (see note); xlviii. 
40. The swelling of Jordan ; rather, the 
pride of Jordan ; i.e. the luxuriant thickets 
on its banks. See on ch. xii. 5, where the 
plinise first occurs. Against the habitation 
of the strong ; rather, to the evergreen 
pasture. Tlie word rendered "evergreen" 
is one of those wliirh are the despair of 
interpreters, fiom their fulness of meaning. 
The root-meaning s simply " continuance," 
whether it beooniinuuuce of Btieuf;th(comp. 
Micah vi. 2, Hebrew) or of the flow of a 
stream (Deut. xxi. 4 ; Amos T. 24), or, as 
here, of the perennial verdure of a well- 
watered pasturage. But I wiU suddenly 
make him run away from her. Make whom ? 
The linn? Such is the natural iufereuce 



250 



THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlix. 1— 39. 



from the Authorized Veraion, bnt the con- 
text absolutely forbids it. It seems useless 
to mention the crowd of explanations which 
liave been offered of this " obscure and 
much-vexed passage," as old Matthew Poole 
calls it, since in ch. 1. 44 we have precisely 
the same phrase, but with another sufSx, 
which clears up (he meaning. We may, 
llicrelbrc, either read (with the Septuagint 
aiul the Syriiic Version), " For I will 
suddenly make th( m run away from it " 
(viz. the pnstun), or keep the old reading 
"him" for"thpni," and explain "him" as 
meaning the Ednmites. The expression 
used for "suddenly" is very furcible; we 
might render, with Ewald, " in the twin- 
ling of an eye." And who is a chosen man, 
etc. ? A still more dirticult clause. If the 
text is correct, which cannot be assumed as 
certain, we should probably render, with 
Ewald, "and will appoint over it [i.e. the 
land of Edom] him who is oliosen," viz. 
Nebuchadnezzar. Who will appointme the 
time 1 The same phrase is rendered in 
Job ix. 19, " Who shall set me a time to 
plead?" (comp. the Latin phrase dicur 
dicere). To drag a defendant before the 
tribunal implies equality of rank. One 
might venture to do this with Nebuchad- 
nezzar, if he were not the representative of 
One still mightier. Finally, Who is that 
shepherd that will stand before me? The 
land of Edom has been likened to a pasture ; 
It is natural that the ruler should be now 
described as a shepherd (comp. ch. xxix. 
34). 

Ver. 20. - The counsel of the lord. At first 
sight this appears to detract from the per- 
fection of Jehovah. But another prophet 
declares that the Divine "counsels" are 
" framed " from etertiity (Isa. xxii. 1 1 ; 
xxxvii. 26). Surely the least, etc. ; rather. 
Surely they shall drag them along, the weak 
ones of the floek ; turely their pasture shall 
be appalled at them. Such is the sad fate of 
the sheep, now that the resistance of their 
shepherd has been overpowered. " The 
weak ones of the flock " is a phrase quite 
ill Jeremiah's raaiiner ; its opposite is " the 
noble ones of the flock" (ch. ixv. 34). 

Ver. 21.— Is moved; rather, quaketh (as 
ch. viii. 16). It is a pity that the Authorized 
Version has not preserved the present tense 
througliout the verse. The prophet seems 
to see his prediction realized before him. 
In the Bed Sea ; rather, beside the Bed Sea ; 
comp. 1 Kings ix. 26, " Eloth, on the sliore 
of the Bed l:jea, in the land of Edom." 

Ver. 22.— Behold, he shall come up . . . 
Bozrah. Eepeated from ch. xlviii. 40, with 
the substitution of "Bozrah" for "Moab," 
and tlie adilitiou of " and he shall come up " 
from ver. 19. For " Bozrali," see on ver. 13. 
And at that day. Kepeated from oh. xlviii 



41 (latter half), with the exception that 

« Edom " stands for " Moab." 

Vers. 23—27. — The heading Concerning 
Damascus is too limited (like that of the 
partly parallel prophecy in Isa. xvii. 1 — 11); 
for the prophecy relates, not only to 
Damascus, the capital of tlie kingdom of 
south-eastern Aram (or Syria), but to Ha- 
math, the capital of the northern kingdom. 
(The third of the Aramsean kingdoms, that 
of Zobah, had ceased to exist.) Damascus 
had already been threatened by Amos (i. 3 
— 5), and by Isaiah (xvii. 1 — 11). We may 
infer from the prophecy that Damascus had 
provoked the hostility of Nebuoliadnezzar, 
but we have as yet no monumental evidence 
as to the facts. 

Ver. 23. — Hamath. Still an important 
city under the name of Hamab, situated to 
the north of Hums (Emesa), on the Orontes. 
It formed nominally the boundary of the 
kingdom of Israel (Numb, xxxiv. 8 ; Josh, 
xiii. 5), was actually a part of the empire 
of Solomon (2 Chron. viii. 4), and was con- 
quered for a short time by Jeroboam II. 
(2 Kings xiv. 25). Under Sargon it was 
fully incorporated into the Assyrian empire 
(comp. Isa. X. 9); rebellious populations 
were repeatedly transplanted into the terri- 
tory of Hamath. Arpad. Always men- 
tioned together with Hamath, whose fate 
it appears to have shared (Isa. x. 9). A 
tell, or hill, with ruins, about three (Ger- 
man) miles from Aleppo, still bears the 
name Erfad (Zeitschrift of the German 
Oriental Society, xxv. 655). There is sor- 
row on the sea, etc. ; i.e. even the sea par- 
ticipates in the agitation of that troublous 
time : somewhat as in Hab. iii. 10 the sea is 
represented as sympathizing in the terror 
produced by a Divine manifestation. But 
by the slightest possible emendation (viz. of 
eaph into beth) we obtain a more natural 
sense—" with an unrest a^ of the sea, which 
cannot be quiet." In Isa. Ivii. 20 we read, 
"For the ungodly are like the troubled sea, 
for it cannot be quiet ; " and it can hardly be 
doubted that Jeremiah is alluding to this 
passage. If lie altered it at all, it would 
be in the direction of greater smoothness 
rather than the reverse. Not a few manu- 
scripts of Jeremiah actually have this cor- 
rected reading, which should probably be 
adopted. 

Ver. 25, — How is the city of praise not left, 
etc. 1 A difficult passage. The construction, 
indeed, is plain. " How is not," etc. 1 can 
only mean " How is it that the city of praise 
is not," etc. ? (comp. 2 Sam. i. 14). The 
difBoulty lies in the nrord rendered " left." 
The ordinary meaning of the verb, when 
applied to pities, is certainly " to leave 
without inhabitants;" e.g. oh. iv. 29; Isa. 
vii. 16; \xxii. 14. ThiB, however, doe* 



CH. xi,ix. 1—39.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



253 



not Biilt the context, which shows that " the 
daughter of Damascua" personiSed is the 
speaker, so that ver. 25 ought rather to 
mean, "How is it that the city of praise m 
[not, ' <» not •] forsaken ? " Either, then, we 
must suppose that "not" has been inserted 
by mistake — a too arbitrary step, seeing 
that there is no negative in the context to 
account for the insertion (the case is different, 
therefore, from Job xxi. 30 ; xxvii. 15, where 
such an insertion is at any rate justifiable) ; 
or else we must give 'Szzehhdh the sense of 
"let go free" (comp. Exod. xxiii. 5; Deut. 
xxxii. 36 ; Job x. 1). It is the obstinate 
incredulity of love which refuses to admit 
the possibility of the destruction of the 
loved object. The eity qfpraUe. The city 
which is my « praise," or boast. Tew cities, 
in fact, have had so long and brilliant an 
existence as Damasons. 

_ Ver. 27. — ^And I will kindly, eto. A com- 
bination of clauses from Amos i. 14 and 
i. 4. Tlnee several kings of Damascus brre 
the name of Ben-hadad : one the contem- 
porary of King Baasha of Samaria ; another, 
of Ahab; a third, of Joash. (Ben-hadad, 
bow<)ver, should rather be Ben-hadar, agree- 
ably to the Assyrian inscriptions and the 
Septuagint.) 

Vers. 28 — 33. — ^Against the nomad and 
partly settled Arabs — the former described 
under the name Kedar (see on ch. ii. 10), the 
latter under that of Hazor (connected with 
hazer, an un walled village; comp. Lev. 
XXV. 81). This use of Hazor is remarkable ; 
elsewhere the name denotes towns in Pa- 
lestine (Josh. xi. 1; XV. 23; Neh. xi. 33). 
There are two plainly marked strophes, 
vers. 28—30 and 31—33, both beginning 
with a summons to the foe to take the field. 

Ver. 28. — Hazor (i.e. the settled Aral is) 
is said to have kingdoms. " King " is used 
in Hebrew in a wider sense than we are 
accustomed to (comp. oh. xxv. 24, " All the 
kings of Arabia "). The " kings " of Hazor 
would be mere sheikhs or emirs. Shall 
smite ; rather, smote. There is no justifica- 
tion whatever for the future. The statement 
is obviously a later addition, to show that 
the prophecy was fulfilled. On the form 
" Nebuchadrezzar," see on ch. xxL 2. The 
men of the east. A general designation of 
the inhabitants of all the countries in the 
east of Palestine (Gen. xxlx. 1 ; Judg. vi. 3 ; 
Job i. 3). 

Ver. 29. — All the possessions of the nomad 
are here mentioned — first his tents and his 
flocks ; then the hangings of which the tent 
is composed (ch. iv. 20; x. 20), and the 
vessels which it contains; and finally the 
camels which the Arab rides, not to mention 
their other uses. All this shall be ruth- 
lessly appropriated by the Chaldean in- 
vaden Fear is on every side. Again Jere- 



miah's motto recurs (see on ch. tL 25), 
It expresses here, not the war-cry itself, but 
the result produced by it. 

Ver. 30. — The prophet turns to the Arabs 
in villages who have still more to tempt 
the cupidity of plunderers, and urges them 
to flee while there is still time. Dwell deep 
(see on ver. 8). Against yon. This is the 
reading of the Septu&gint (Alex. HS.), the 
Targum, the Vulgate, and many extant 
Hebrew manuscripts. The received text, 
however, has "against them." Such al- 
ternations of person have met ns again and 
again, and there is no occasion to doubt the 
ordinary reading. 

Ver. 31. — How easy is the expedition to 
which the Chaldean army is invited I — it is 
a mere holiday march. Resistance is im- 
possible, for an enemy has never been 
dreamed of. The tribes of Hazur are not, 
indeed, a wealthy nation, for they have but 
little wealth to tempt either the conqueror 
or the merchant ; they " live alone ; " they 
are an uncommercial and unwarlike, but a 
profoundly " tranquil, nation, that dweUeth 
securely [or, 'confidently']" — a description 
remindin<r us of Judg. viii. 7 ; Ezek. xxxviii. 
II. In their idyllic, patriarchal state they 
feel no need of walls with their accompany- 
ing double gates (the gates of ancient cities 
were so large that they woje divided) and 
burs. Like Israel in the prophetic vision 
(Numb, xxiii. 9), " they dwell alone." 

Ver. 32. — Them that are in the utmost 
comers. Another of Jeremiah's character- 
istic phrases, which should rather be ren- 
dered, the eorner-cU/jped (i.e. having the 
hair cut off about the ears and temples; 
see on ch. ix. 26). From all sides. " Nebu- 
chadnezzar will so arrange his troops tliat 
the Bedaween [but the people of Hazor 
were not Bedaween, i.e. desert-Arabs] will 
be surrounded on all sides, and, being thus 
unable to escape in a body, will be scattered 
to 'all the winds,' to the four quarters of 
the earth " (Dr. Payne Smith). 

Ver. 33. — The same fate predicted for 
Hazor as for Edom (ver. 18). Sragons ; 
rather, jackals (see on ch. x. 22). 

Vers. 34— 39.— Concerning Elam. The 
title places this prophecy later than those 
in ch. xlviii. 1 — xlix. 33 ; viz. at the begin- 
ning of the reign of Zedekiah. From this 
fact, and from tlie absence of any referencu 
to Nebuchadnezzar as the instrument of 
Elam's humiliation, Ewuld conjectures that 
the Elamites had been concerned in the 
events which led to the dethronement and 
captivity of Jehoiachin. Dr. Payne Smith 
is inclined to accept tliis hypothesis, re- 
marking that the Elamites " appear per- 
petually as the allies of Merodach-baladan 
and his sons in their struggles for indepen- 
dence." We are not vet, however, in pos- 



252 



Tllli BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oa. xLix. 1— 39. 



sefision of InfomnaHon as to the rtliitions of 
Eliimto the great Babylonian em[iire which 
rose upon tlie ru nsof tlie Assyrian. EwaM's 
conjecture is u, possibility, and no more 
.\nd what was Elam? One of the most 
undent kingrlnnis in the worM (see Gen. 
xiv.). Geographically it was the tiaot of 
country, pnrtly mountainous, partly lowland, 
lying south of Assyria and east of Persia 
proper, to which Herodotus gives tlie name 
of Cissia, and the classical gengiaphers that 
of Tusis or Tusiaiia. This is cear, says 
Schrader, from the Persian text of the 
Beliistun inscription of Darius. It is fre- 
quently mentioned under tho name " Ham," 
or "Ilamti," in the Assyrian inscriptions, 
especially in those of Sargon, Sennacherib, 
and AsBiirbanipal. In b.o 721 Sargon 
states that he annexed a district or pro- 
vince of Elam (and hence, perhaps, we must 
explain the mention of the Elamites in the 
Assyrian army in Isa. xxii. 6), which was, 
doubtless, one cause of tlie embittered feel- 
ing towards Assyria of the portion which 
remained independent. The annals of the 
heroic struggle of r.Krod.ich-baladan con- 
tain ripeatod reference to the King of Elam. 
Assurbaiiipal made no less than three in- 
vasions of Elam, and the singular pretext 
for the third is, curiously enough, associated i 
with the remarkable fourteenth chiipter of 
Genesis. It was this— that the Elamite 
king had refused to d( liver up an image of 
the goddess Nana, which Kndur-nankhumli, 
an ancient Elamite monarch, had cajried 
oft, and which had remained 1635 or (per- 
haps) 1535 years in Elam.' This king hag 
been plausibly conjectured to be a member 
of the same dynasty as " Chedorlaomer 
[= Kudur-Laganiar] King of Elam." This 
time it was all over with Elam; Shushan 
itself was plunderid and destioyed, and far 
and wide the country was laid wa^te. That 
so restless and courageous a people should 
have become famous among the surrounding 
nations was only to be expected ; and it is 
a striking proof of this that Ezekiel, in 
describing the companions whom fallen 
Egypt would meet with in Hades, mentions 
"Elam and all her mnltitudi;"(Ezi k. xxxii. 
24). The fact that tliu Septuagiut has the 
heading twice over — flist very brieily (in oh. 

' George Smith, 'History of Awurbaui- 
pal,' pp. 222—251 



ixv. 14, where it is followed by thii pro- 
phecy), and then at full length (in ch. xxvi. 
1, at the end of the, prophecy of Elam)— has 
been variously e\ilained. It is, at any 
rate, clear that there is some confusion in 
the present text of this translation. In con- 
nection witli this prediction it is interesting 
to notice one of the resulis of a new cunei- 
tbriii discovery among some tablets acquired 
in 1878 by tho British Museum. At tho 
very time when Nebuchadiiezzar was taking 
an oatli of all' glance from Zedekiah, he waa 
also engaged in hostilities ngainst Elam. 
" We do not know," says Mr. Pinches, " what 
brought the Babylonians into hostilities with 
the Elamites, but the result of the expedition 
was to bring the whole kingdom of Elam 
within the boundaries of the Babylonian 
monarchy " ( Transaetions of the Society oj 
Biblical Archseulngy, vii. 214). 

Ver. 35. — The bow of Elam. So Isaiuh in 
prophetic vision, " And Klam bare the 
quiver " (xxii. b). 

Ver. 36. — An emblem of the utter hope- 
lessness of escape. The four winds (figu- 
ratively spoken of by Zeohariah (vi. 5) as 
"presenting themselves" Lielore God, to 
receive his commissions) shall combine 
their forces to scatter the doomed nation, 
The outcasts of Elam. This is the marginal 
reading in the Hebrew Hilile; the text has, 
"the perpetual outcasts." No philological 
eye can doubt that the coiTection should be 
admitted (a yod for a vai)). 

Ver. 38. — I will set my throne ; ».«. my 
tribunal as ch. xliii. 10). The king and the 
princes ; rather, king and princes The 
threat is nut merely that the reigning 
king shill be dethroned, but that Klam 
shall lose its native rulers altogether. 

Ver. 39.— But ... in the latter days ; 
t.e. presnmably in the Messianic age. Into 
the fulfilment of this promise we need not 
inquire in too prosaic a spirit. It is true 
that " Elamites" are mentioned among the 
persons present on the gn at " day of Pente- 
cost" (Acts ii. 9). But this would be a 
meagie fultilment indeed. The fact is that, 
both in the narrative in the Acts and in 
this prophecy, the Elamites are chiefly 
mentioned as representatives of the distant 
and less civilized Geutile nations, and tlie 
fulfilment is granted whenever a siujilar 
people to the Elamites is brought to the 
knowledge of the true religion. 



HOMILETIOS. 

Ver. l.—IgraePi hetr$. "Hath he no heir?" Most wonderful is the preseryatlon of 
the Jews as a distinct race amid the strangest vicissitudes of fortune and through 
centuries of exile — surviving the devastating deluge of the successive Oriental monarchies 
th« oaptiTity in Babylon, the cruelties of Antiochus Epiphaues, the sweep of Roman 



OH. XLii. 1— 39.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 253 

conquest, the peraecntion of the Middle Ages, and the cosmopolitan citizenship of 
our own day. Yet, mucii as Israel has contributed to the philosophy and trade of the 
modern world, and ureat as her future inssion may yet be, we cannot blind ouraelve- 
to the fact that her lonely glory of religious pre-emint-nce lias passed away. Other;* 
have entered into this proud inheritance. 

I. The inherits nob. 1. The knowledge of (he true Ood. This, and not the lan<l 
flowing with milk and honey, was tlie chief treasure of Israel's inheritance. When all 
neighbouring nations were following polytheism, idol-worship, and immoral rites, Israel 
was led by prophetic voices to look to one God — a spiritual presence who could only be 
worshipped " in the beauty of holiness." Thitt people, therefore, which has the highes' 
knowledge of God, and the purest religious life and worship, will be the true heir of this 
part of the ancient possession of the Jews. 2. The mission to enlighten the heathen. 
The Jew was not called to his privileged position wholly for his own sake. He 
was an elect people that he might be an apostle to the world; that in him there 
might be developed the revelation of truth which was for the healing of all the 
nations; that he might cultivate, preserve, transmit, and disseminate this abroad. 
His was the proud mission of the torch-bearer to the nations that sat in darkness, 
that through his light they might see their light and life. This mission was often 
ignored, and it waa never perfectly developed in Old Testament times ; but the work 
of Jonah and Daniel, and the prophecies of Isaiah and Jeremiah concerning the 
heathen, are partial accomplishments of it. It waited till Christ came for its fiill 
exercise. Then the Jew became the missionary of the gospel. The faith of the new 
age was given to the world by Jew-apostles. 

n. Thb heibb. If the Jew has lost his proud religious pre-eminence, who has 
become his heir? 1. The Christian is the heir of. the Jew's knowledge of the trne Ood. 
He and he alone, whether he be of the stock of Shem, of Ham, or of Japheth, is the 
true Israelite, the "royal priesthood," etc. For Christianity is the fulfilment and 
perfection of the Jewish faith (Matt. v. 17 — 20). In the New Testament we see a 
higher knowledge of God, a more spiritual worship, a more devoted service. If this be 
true, to reject it and rest contented with the lower faith of the Old Testament must be 
to give way in the race. 2. The most Christian missionary is the truest heir to 
IsraeVs mission to evangelise the world. If there be any one race upon whom the 
mantle of Israel has fallen, may we not think that this is the great English-speaking 
peoples of Britain and America? Such an inheritnnce is not to be made out by 
ingenious arguments about the fate of the lost ten tribes. If we were the descendants 
of those apostate Israelites, we should be none the better for the fact, nor are we \mder 
any disadvantage because the hypothesis of an Israelite origin proves to be groundless. 
To make much of such a point is to go back to the lower conceptions of Judaism, and 
to disregard the higher spiritual conditions of Christianity. The true heir of Israel is 
the possessor of Israel's faith in its full development. It is not our birth and descent, 
but our personal religion, that can secure the inheritance to us. 

Ver. 7. — The failure of wisdom. Bdom, the country of Job, the haunl of ancient 
lore, is to find that her learning and science will prove no safeguard against the deluge 
of destruction that is about to burst over the nations. The disaster which fell upon 
ancient" wise men" of the Bast may be a warning to the higher intelligences of all 
ages. The failure of wisdom is twofold — nenative and positive. 

I. Nboativb: there abb evils with which wisdom cannot cope. 1. Physical. 
Science can do much to avoid troubles into which ignorance falls, to mitigate inevitable 
disasters, and to devise means of escape from those which are already present. Sanitary 
science will help to prevent disease, and medical science to cure it. Military science 
will put a country in a certain state of security ; economical science will check dangers 
of poverty. But how many of the worst things in life are beyond the power of science ! 
The philosopher cannot arrest the hand of the invader. The most terrible diseases are 
the most fatal. Men have long since given up the vain search for the elixir of life. 
Science is powerless before death. 2. Moral. Still less can science " minister to the 
mind diseased." What consolation is a knowledge of the processes of a malady to 
the mourner, the light of whose eyes is darkened for ever by its fatal work ? What 
comfort can Bcience whisper to the widow and the orphan ? The Teat border of the 



264 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlix. 1— 39 

world's sorrow, and the weariness of the unceasing cares of life, it does not so much ai 
touch. The deeper evil of sin flows in a foul, black stream, unchecked by science. 
The mission of science is great and glorious, and we should be profoundly thankful 
that we liye in an age when its bright torch confers many a boon and relieves many a 
trouble. But we must not ignore the fact that the greatest ills that flesh is heir to ara 
just those winch it cannot cure. 

II. Positive: there are evils which wisdom intokeb upon its own head, 
Knowledge is good and Divine, and in itself a blessing of the first order. Tet it 
brings a snare, and the abuse of it terrible disasters. 1. The knowledge of inevitable 
evil only increases distress. " Where ignorance is bliss," etc. 2. Superior wisdom 
may engender pride. Hence arises a false sense of security which only increases 
danger. The wise man is slow to tread those lowly paths which lead to true rest. It 
is difficult for him to become as a little child, that he may enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. 3. Wisdom may come to be trusted to for help that it cannot afford. Men 
make an idol of science, as though it were a new evangel. The ultimate disappoint- 
ment must correspond to the grossness of the delusion. We most learn, therefore, 
while avoiding a foolish depreciation of science and philosophy, to look still for our 
safety and blessedness to that higher wisdom of God, that gospel of the Crucified, which 
is still to some as foolishness. 

Ver. 11. — A promise for orphans and widows. I. Gk>D brinos some mitioation to 
THE SEVEREST CALAMITY. The mcrciful assurance of care for the helpless sufferers 
occurs in the midst of a stern denunciation of doom upon Edom, as a strange and 
startling relief to the terrible words that follow and precede. Here is a rift in the 
cloud through which a sunbeam of Divine love falls upon the dark scene of judgment. 
The thunderstorm of God's wrath never so covers the whole heavens that no ray of 
mercy can penetrate to the wretched sufferers. Behind the stern frown there is 
always the melting heart of Divine pity. God's anger is the anger of love, not that 
of hatred. Wherever it is possible to give relief he will do so. 

IL When GkiD sends trouble he also sends a deliverance. Possibly the trouble 
is beyond escape ; for a season it must be endured ; but in the end there is a Divine 
salvation for those who will seek it aright. Repeatedly denunciations of woe against 
some gtulty nation are followed by the promise that " in the latter day " God " will 
bring again the captivity" of it (e.g. ch. xlvi. 26 ; xlviii. 47 ; ver. 39). The promise 
to Edom of the preservation of the children implies a future for the race. The widows 
and children are helpless sufferers, and it is for these alone that the deliverance is 
promised. God has peculiar pity on the most needy. 

III. Orphans and widows have special encoitraqeuents to look fob help fboh 
God. If such a merciful promise as that of our text is made to a heathen nation, how 
much more assurance may the people of God feel ! and it it is given to the families of 
the wicked and in the midst of the sentence of punishment, how much more must it 




numbers the hairs of our head, will he neglect our children ? If they who are desolate 
indeed cry unto him, can the All-merciful neglect their prayer? 

IV. God's promises fob orphans and widows should enooubaoe faith in wtm 
1. 1^ father should trust his children to Ood. That is a terrible moment when the 
strong man feels the sentence of death within him, and bows his head, knowing that 
he must leave his helpless ones behind. Yes, must leave them. Then let him leave 
them to God. Here is a call to resignation and to trust. The promise is in a measure 
conditioned by it. If the dying man would have his little ones cared for when they 
are set adrift on the cold, homeless world, let him entrust them to God. Such a trust 
will never be broken. But if he refuse to do this, he cannot complun should they 
suffer harm after he has gone. 2. The tuidow must trust for herself. " Let thy widows 
trust in me." The children may be too young to seek refuge in Qod. Their father 
must do this for them. But the widow must exercise her own faith. Her husband's 
faith will not avail for her. Let her trust, and then, but not till then, she ihall find 
her consolation in the great Comforter. 



CH. XLix. 1— 39.] THE BOOK OP TEE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 255 

Ver. 16. — A people deceived hy its own terribleness. L Thet who are a tebbob to 

ALL HUMAN FOBS MUST ULTIMATELY TREMBLE BEFORE SPIRITUAL FOBS. Edom WaS tO 

fall before Babylon, in spite of her terrible aspect. Much more must the fierce, proud 
sinner succumb to the unseen angel of Diviae judgment. The rocks that keep back an 
army cannot retard the onrush of the heavenly host. 

II. They who now stand hishbst in pbidb and power will fall lowest at thk 
FINAL JUDGMENT. Rank, social position, honour, influence, will then count for nothing. 
Pride may have sat high as the eagle in its eyrie, but "every one that exalteth himself 
shall be abased ;" "The first shall be last." 

III. They who possess earthly greatness are in danobb of deludins them- 
selves WITH AN UNWARRANTABLE TRUST IN IT. Suoh cities as the Tock-hewn Petra, 
and Bozrah seated on her lofty hill, would seem by natural position impregnable. 
Consequently their inhabitants would grow insolent and proud, and thus deserve the 
more that fate which their natural resources could not avert, and their self-confidence 
would prevent them from mitigating. Worldly resources are dangers when they lead 
us to forsake the true Refuge in order to trust in them. The rich and great are not the 
more secure for their privileges, and they will be the less safe if they lean upon them 
when without them they would seek help in God. 

Ver. 29. — " Fear on every sideJ" This is a sadly familiar phrase of Jeremiah's. It is 
frequently applicable. The causes of alarm are numerous ; so are the sufferers. 

I. Fear is an evil. It is not only the shadow of future calamity ; it is evil itself — 
evil even if it is not iustified by the event. 1. It is distresaing. 2. It is degrading — 
debasing the mind, crushing out all that is noble and unselfish. 3. It is paralyzing. 
Under the influence of fear we are confused and helpless ; all energy is gone. 

II. There are many occasions op fear. Jeremiah frequently exclaims, " Fear 
on every sidel" We know not how many dangers surround us— political, social, 
domestic, personal ; dangers to property, family, health, and life. The wonder is that 
they who have no refuge above themselves are so complacent. Such unwarrantable 
calmness must be traced to moral dulness rather than tc true courage. For how truly 
terrible is the condition of the sinner I The laws of the universe are against him. If 
he flees from this life new horrors await him in the dread unknown land. 

III. The deepest source of fear is our own sin. 1. This brings the greatest 
danger upon us — the penalty of outraged justice and broken law, 2. This awakens 
the feeling of terror. Conscience makes cowards of us all. 

IV. In God is the Refuge from fear. Men fear God in their guilt. Yet it is he 
who alone can deliver thum from fear, (1) by removing the eoil feared ; (2) or by 
strengthening them to endure it ; and aho (3) by calming the troubled soul as one whom 
his mother comforteth. It is well that we should feel fear on every side if it leads us 
to cry, "What must we do to be saved?" and then to hear and follow the gospel 
answer, " Trust to the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved." 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

VerB. 1, 2. — The paradox of Isrcu^s inheritance. The fittingness of this prediction 
is very striking. It is Ammon, the appropriator of Gad, who is the special subject of it. 

L Its unlikelihood. At the time the prediction was uttered appearances were 
completely against it. The original promise seemed doomed to failure. The flower and 
hope of Israel was in exile, and the land lay desolate. Interlopers reaped the benefit 
of their misfortunes, and seized upon portions of the unoccupied land. In the history 
of Christianity there may be perceived remarkable correspondences. Vast spaces of the 
civilized world have lost the spiritual traditions of the gospel in which once they 
gloried, and vaster regions still amongst the heathen are occupied by ancient faiths that 
offer s steady and powerful opposition to the missionary efforts of the Church. Yet the 
whole earth has been promised to the Church of Christ. The utmost zeal, devotion, 
and watchfulness are needed in order to prevent the inroads of worldliness and unbelief. 
At times the despairing cry may be heard, " Where is the hope of his coming? 

IL The method of its eeahzation. It is well to ponder these facts in the lighj 



266 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ca. xlix. 1—3* 

of God's Word, for it sujigests an escape from the perplexity they occasion. Whera 
the induction of the natural reason fails to render a hojieful explanation, the Spirit of 
God sheds an unthought-of liglit. Jeremiah's interpretation, viz. thai present dispos- 
stssion need not mean utter disinheritance, is full of spiritual light and comfort. This 
impression is deepened and confirmed when he seals it with prophetic certainty and 
declares that hrai.l shall he heir to his heirs. But still remains tiie mystery to he 
solved: 1. How this wilt take place. Israel seems all hut annihilated, or in danger of 
ahsorption into heathen nations, and his land is unoccupied. But according to promise 
(1) a seed stiall he preserved and shall be restored ; and (2) tlirou-h the " seed of 
David," viz. Christ, a new Israel will be created, in spiritual succession to the ancient 
people of God, and destined to redeem from heathenism not only Palestine but the 
whole earth. 2. What 'Mill this involve f It will involve (1) the j ad gment and over- 
throw of Israel's neighlwiirs, especially such as Ammon, the traditional " land-thief" 
of his border ; (2) the purification and discipline of Israel as the heir of the kingdom 
of God i and (3) the conversion of many " out of every kindred, and tongue, and 
people, and nation " (Rev. v. 9). In this sense also will God " brin^ again the cap- 
tivity " of Moab, of Elam, and even of Ammon. 3. The following leisons are clearly 
tau;iht by this proph'cy, viz.: — (1) A unity of purpose pervades the vicissitudes of 
Israel's and the world's history ; (2) human affairs are governed hy a strict and never- 
failing justice ; and (3) a happy future awaits the children of faith — the spirituallsrael 
— even, on earth. — M. 

Ver. 7 (of. Obad. 8 ; Tsa. xix. 11 ; xxxiii. 18). — " WTmre it the wise f " Edom, cele- 
brated for its wisdom from of old (Obad. 8 ; Job xi. 11 ; Barnch iii. 22, 23), had 
secured itself in inaccessible fastnesses of the mountains, dwellins in rock-hewn cities. 
Eliphaz was a Temanite. It was chiefly in international relations that the skill or 
subtlety of the Idumaeans displayed itself. Their diplomacy was full of craft and 
falsehnod, and could not be relied upon. Their wisdom was essentially of this world — 
cold, calculating, and unscrupulous. Of this it is predicted by Jeremiah that it shall 
be brought to nought. How did his prophecy fulfil itself? In relation to thekingdom 
of God. 

I. It failed to ovEBTtmN it. The Edomites watched the signs of the times, and 
sided with what promised to be the strongest power, and in the last resort trusted to 
their own inaccessible position. Their ambassadors were amongst those of neigh- 
bouring nations who came to Zedekiah to advise united resistance to Nebuchadnezzar 
(ch. xxvii. 3) ; yet they triumphed over the prostrate city when it was captured by the 
Chaldeans (Lam. iv. 2 ; Ezek. xxxv. 15 ; xxxvi. 5 ; Ps. cxxxvii. 7). Their country 
had been tributMry to Israel under David, but, taking advantage of the Chaldean inva- 
sion, they apiiropriated much of the territory of Israel proper, and extended their terri- 
tory to the Mediterranean. The same spirit seems to have actuated its remote 
descendants, the Idnmsean princes of the Herodian line. Herod the Great " slaughtered 
the innocents " in hope of destroying the Christ, but was circumvented by the provi- 
dence of God ; and his son Antipas was the Heroil before whom Christ appeared by 
arranaement with Pilate (Luke xxiii. 12). In the later years of Uhrist's ministry the 
Herodians were constantly opposed to him, and plotted with the Pharisees against him. 
So God has defeated the continual antagonisn* of worldly men, guanling the residue of 
his Church, and evolvins; new generations of faith and fresh conquests of truth from 
the apparent failures and ruins of the past. 

II. It failed to secure permanent advantage to itself. The prophet 
declares that it was to drink of the same cup as Israel, but it is not certain as to 
whether Nebuchadnezzar, or Alexander the Great, or other conquerors are alluded to. 
I. The movement westward of the Idumaean power, during the Bab\ Ionian exile, was 
the occasion of its overthrow. The Nabatha>an Arabs, ruling a large part of Arabia, 
seized upon Petrasa, and settled down as its occupants. These were in turn conquered 
by the Romans. In time the country fell under Mohammedan m!snil(% and lapsed into 
permanent desolation early in the Christian era. The rock-cities of Pttraja are amongst 
the most striking monuments of lul filled prophecy. 2. The same fate has overtaken 
all the empires that set themselves against the kingdom of Goo. Their history is « 
series of dissolving views. Failing to overthrow it, they have thembelves Deen over- 



OH. XLix. 1— 39.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 257 



thrown. And the wisdom which could not subvert has equally shown itself unable to 
assimilate the " wisdom that cometh from above." The reason for all this is contained 
in the crowning proof of its folly, viz. that — 

III. It has failed to tnrDERSTAin) it. Had the Idumasans known the might c f 
a spiritual religion, they would not have leagued against Israel. Had the HerodUns 
known the wisdom of God, " they would not have crucified the Lord of glory " (1 Cor. 
ii. 8 ; Acts iii. 17 ; vii. 51). Had Borne known the power of the truth, it would never 
have corrupted the religion of the cross, and thus prepared for its own disintegration 
and decay in the Middle Ages, and the manifold complications of worldly religion in 
modem times. The whole conception of God's kingdom — its spirituality, other-world- 
liness, and purity — is still a strange thing to the wise men of the world. But it con- 
tinues to grow and to realize itself amongst men ; and it is destined to fill the whole 
earth, absorbing and assimilating its ancient antagonists ; for " he must reign until he 
hath put all enemies under his feet " (1 Cor. xv. 25). — M. 

Ver. 12 (cf. ch. xxv. 29 ; Prov. xi. 31 ; 1 Pet. iv. 18 ; and, for ori^al, Obad. 16).— 
Israel's judgment an argument for Edom's. I. An illustration of the ohaeaoter ov 
God. 1. Proving his strict righteotisness. There is no respect of persons. His love foi 
righteousness and hatred of wrong are such that even his chosen people do not escape 
punishment. Salvation will not, therefore, be by favour or independent of character. 
The least sin will be judged. Individual saints shared in the general calamity. 2. Eis 
unfailing faithfulness. It was predicted particularly concerning Israel, and was declared 
as the law of his kingdom. Its fulfilment, therefore, vindicates the Divine veracity. 

II. An akoument based upon rr. If such a God reigns amongst men, can any 
transgressor escape ? To such sinners, then, as the Edomites, the heaDhen or worldly 
enemies of godliness and the truth : 1. Punishment would be certain. Their present 
immunity was only as the lull before the storm. Conscience gathers no comfort from 
apparent prosperity. Israel's punishment is a certain guarantee of Edom's. 2. Punish- 
ment will be proportional to the sin. In such cases as that of Edom — an open, flagrant, 
and conscious foe to the kingdom of God — it would be far more severe. There is no 
promise of " bringing again their captivity." It was to be " as if it had not been." 
Where the heathen, on the other hand, have not sinned so clearly against light, there 
will be condoning circumstances which will be taken into account. — M. 

Ver. 23. — The unrest of the wicked. Isaiah (xvii. 12, 13 ; cf. Ivii. 20, 21) uses the 
same figure of Damascus, and Jeremiah must, therefore, have either borrowed it from him 
or from some common source. It is possible that the figure was a common expression 
amongst the Jews of the time. The neighbourhood of Damascus and its associated 
cities was always a populous one, with a varied nationality and conflicting interests and 
aSinities. From its character there was no religious unity, and its position exposed it to 
dangers on every hand, especially Irom Babylon and Egypt. It was a motley people, with 
vast commercial relations and strong tendency to pleasure, but no religious earnestness 
or cajiacity of moral influence or initiation. This is another of those phases of the world- 
spirit which Jeremiah paints in his panorama of the nations' judgment. 

I. The unrest of world-life is likened to that of the sea. 1. Continual. 
2. Vast and tumultuous. 3. Not to be stilled. 4. Sad and ruinous in its effects. 

II. Because the worldly THEMSELVES are like THE SEA. 1. Unstable. How easily 
ruffled I Uncertain, irresolute (Jas. i. G), subject to sudden panics. This is moral and 
spiritual. 2. With no central controlling power. The very constitution of the sea renders 
Btorms sudden and terrible. So it is with the sinner's character. There is no central 
controlling influence ; no moral principle or spiritual power. True calm comes from 
within. He of the Gfalileau sea can alone tranquillize the troubled nation or the 
alarmed sinner. — M. 

Ver. 1. Might not right. Ammon had taken possession of the territory of Israel (cf 

chapter). Had done so as if it were his right, as if they were the lawful heirs of the land. 
Because of this judgment is denounced against them. They are to learn that might is 
not right. 

I. There may be rwht withoot might. It was so with Israel at this time. Is so 

JVRFIIIAH — 'n. • 



258 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, ten. xlix. 1—33, 

with the true Church of God. " All things are yours" — 80 we are told, but it is only di 
jure, not de facto. But — 

II. There MAY BE MIGHT WITHOUT RIGHT. In the casB here giveu. Audit is common 
enough. Perfect justice is not attainable in this life. Even in the little world of the 
home, the school, the Church, injustices will occur. And, painful as they are to witni'ss 
and to bear, they have to be borne. It is hard sometimgs to see the justice of the Divine 
ways ; how much more, then, of human ways ! Nevertheless — 

III. Might may be eight. " La carriere aux talents," said Napoleon — that was to be 
the law of his empire. " The tools to him who can use them " — such is our common 
maxim. The " king," the ruler, the lord paramount of the state, whiit is he but — if the 
etymology be correct — the "can "-ning man, the man who can, the able man? And so 
not seldom when we see mii^bt, we see right too. In the colonisation of lands inhal'itsd 
by savages who are letting the capabilities of glorious territories lie unimproved or 
running to waste, such colonization is not wrong. Might is right. "The lools," etc. 
It is a stern law to the incapable, but a just and beneficent one for the human race. 
" Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him that hath ten tnlents " 
(Matt. XXV. 28); what is this but the sanction of this combination? "To him that 
liath shall be ?iven." There we have it once more. But — 

IV. God's will is, and odrs should be, to give might to right. Eight one day 
shall be might as well as right. 1. Thisis theburden nf the promises of Ood in his Word. 
"Thy kingdom come ; thy will be done" — the will that is ever-rigliteous — "on earth," etc. 
2. Tlie constitutiun of human nature is in favour of it (cf: Butler's ' Analogy '). 3. Con- 
science ever takts the side of right, whatever our conduct may do or be. 4. And God's 
providence is slowly working to this end, 5. " Faith " is simply the giving ourselves up 
tt the righteous One, to be " his faithful servant and soldier, and to fight manfully under 
his banner until our lives shall end." 

Conclusion. Let us seek to be on the side of right always, let the cost be vhat it 
may. — C. 

Ver. 8. — Desirable habitationi: a new year's sermon. "Dwell deep, inhabitants 
of Dedan." The prophet is foretelling the calamities that are to come on the different 
heathen nations who dwelt around the land of God's peo|ile, and from whom they, at 
various times, had received sore wrong and harm. The Edomites — the descendants ol 
Ksau — were the traditional foes of Israel, and it is they who in all probability aie 
referred to. The country they inhabited was full of rocks, cliffs, deep gorges in the 
sides of which were many all but inaccessible caves. The rocky dwellings of Edom 
have been often told of — how they served as an almost impenetrable fortress for the 
robber bands which mostly inhabited them. But now vengeance was to come on these 
people, and the prophet is bidding them betake themselves in flight to the far-off desert, 
or to hide themselves in the deep recesses of their rocky caves, and there, if possiUe, 
safely dwell. " Dwell deep . . . Dedan " (cf. also ver. 30). For disaster was thieat- 
ening Hazor also. The ruthless King ol Babylon would fall on tlieni in his march west- 
wards to Egypt, and well would it be for them if the forests and caverns, the lofty 
rooks and the deep valleys of their rugged land slould provide them with secure retreat. 
It was in such hidden caves that David, during much of his fugitive life when hunted 
by Saul "like a partrid.;e upon the mountains," so often found refuge. And this fact 
he is for ever commemorating in his psalms by calling God his Rock, his Refuge, hij 
Hiding-place, his Fortress, his Secret Place. And tlie history of these lands tells once 
and again of the devices of military commanders to dislodge the inhabitants of these 
almost inaccessible retreats. Herod, so Jusephus tells, caused a, number of huge timber 
boxes to be made, in which stood armed soldiers, and these were lowered down the pre- 
cipitous sides of the cliffs in which the robber caverns were until they reached the 
cavern mouths. Then, rushing in, I hey would massacre the inhabitants, or else by huge 
hooks drag them forth and then hurl them down to the dread depths beneath. But 
generally these hidden habitations proved secure refuges for those who dwelt in them, 
and it is to this fact that the prophet refers. He is bidding them betake themselves 
thither, for danger was at hand — a relentless foe was threatening them. Now, the like 
exhortation may be addi essed to us ; for for us there are provided strong habitations unto 
which we may continually resort, sure refuges in wh.ch we may safely hide, Divins 



OH. XLix. 1— 39.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 259 

retreats in the deep recesses of which we may securely dwell. Therefore we would 
say — 

I. Dwell DEEP in the love or God. For the firm faith of the love that God hath 
toward us will be found to be a shelter, a solace, and a strength, such as nought else can 
render. St. John says concerning that love, " We know and have believed the love 
that God hath towards us." Yes ; sometimes we can clearly see it, we know and feel 
it. Gtod's providence, God's grace, God's Word, are all filled and flooded with it. But 
there are other times when we cannot say we know, but only that we helieve the love 
that, etc. — when providence seems adverse, when our path is rough and beset with 
thorns, when those yon trusted prove treacherous and your own friends turn against 
you, when your home is left desolate and dark clouds of anxiety gather heavy and thick 
over you. But those times are made far less fearful for us if we will but dwell, dwell 
deep, in the love of God. It was throngh this ever-cherished home of his soul that 
our Lord was able to endure so calmly and to meet with such meek majesty and Divine 
dignity the imspeakable sorrow of his earthly lot. Often did the tempter seek to drag 
liim forth from that secure retreat by his mocking sugsestion, " If thou he the Son of 
God," etc. But he tried in vain. Dwelling deep in the love of God, that inaccessible 
refuge, that siire retreat, he looked forth upon the path he had to tread and the cross 
he had to bear, and he could endure the one and despise the other in the might of that 
love in which he ever abode. And it is well that we should dwell where he dwelt, and 
so be blest as he was blest. And not a few of his people have done so — Abraham, 
David, Daniel, Paul, and myriads more, as GcA grant we may likewise. 

II. Dwell deep in the knowledge op Holt Scripture. For no surer aid to our 
obeying the former exhortation can be given than our obedience to this. And yet there 
are few books of importance that are neglected as the Scriptures are, notwithstanding 
the invaluable help which such knowledge has imparted and must ever impart. What 
is the hundred and nineteenth psalm but one long panegyrip on the blessedness of this 
knowledge of the Word of God? And he vho knows what ihe Word of God can do for 
his soul will deem no praise too extravagant, no admiration and love too enthusiastic. 
Oh to be mighty in the Scriptures ! for that is to be mighty through them, capable and 
ready for all God's will. The dark problems of life cease to dismay ; the mysteries which 
meet us on every side cannot shake our faith ; we become open-eyed to signs and 
tokens of God's love which otherwise we should not see. Integrity and uprightness 
preserve us, and we run the way of God's commandments, because God, by means of 
them, hath enlarged our heart. It is this prayerlul habitual study of God's Word 
which is dwelling deep therein, and which is so iruitful of good to all that will so 
dwell. 

III. Dwell deep in the fellowship op Christ. Cherish and guard with a 
holy care that communion with him which is the joy and strength of our souls. A sure 
test of the value of any spiiitual aid is given us in the intensity of the opposition 
which Satan offers to our use of such aid. Now, measured by this standard it is diffi- 
cult to over-estimate the value of this communion with Christ in which we say, " Dwell 
deep." This is not easy to do. For persistent indeed are the endeavours which Satan 
makes to destroy this communion. Who that kneels in prayer is ignorant of these 
endeavours ? — thoughts wandering ; desires earth-bound ; faith feeble ; love cold. Hence 
many neglect prayer, or they become formal in it. But there can be no real communion 
with Christ without this. Therefore we must rouse ourselves to earnestness. Pray that 
we may pray. Kneel down again and pray once more our as yet unprayed prayer. Let 
us resolve we will not be conquered. Encourage ourselves by remembering that the 
very diftioulties we meet are evidences of the truth of true prayer. And that such 
difficulties can be overcome; for they have been. And not only by prayer, but by 
walking with Christ in obedience and sympathy and love. — 0. 

Ver. 11. — Conmlation for afat'hei's dying bed. Perhaps there is no greater sorrow 
than is su-isested here — the husband and father leaving widow and helpless children 
apparently vithout a friend to support or aid them. If it were not for the beatific 
vision of God, the perfect persuasion of his wisdom and power and love, which the 
blessed dead enjoy, they would be entreating God piteous'y to allow them to return 
Dither once more, and to shelter their loved ones from the cruel hardships of this 



260 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. XLH. 1— 39. 

pitiless world. We wonder, sometimes, how it is possible for a loving mother who 
was wont to lavish her heart's deepest, tenderest affection upon her children, to find 
joy and to be happy in heaven, whither she has been suddenly translated, leaving her 
Qusband and children heart-broken at losing her. Here she could never be happy with- 
out her children. How can she be happy there and they yet here ? Because she is at 
the fountain of all love, from which all her love was but a rill; she is with God, who U 
lx)ve, and who she knows will deal only in the best of ways — ways far better than she 
herself covdd have devised, for those who are now weeping over her grave, and missing 
and mourning her every hour of the day. Now, of those told of in this verse we note— 

I. That to leave them to God is all we can do. We may and we ought to 
make provision for them to the best of our power. That is but a spurious and miser- 
able travesty of faith in God which would neglect aU such aids as life insurance and 
the like, on the ground that making such provision shows distrust and unbelief in God. 
Some speak thus, but they speak foolishly. Might we not as well refuse to work for our 
daily bread, on the ground that it is written, " My God shall supply all your need " ? 
But who does not know that God's way of supplying our need is by giving us strength 
to work and minds to think, enduing us with the means of gaining our bread ? And is 
it not so in this case also? Would not a man be most wiong who, because of what is 
here said, neglected to make all due provision in his power ? But having done this, like 
Jacob and Joseph, we may safely leave our children, as they did, to the care of God, 
confident that he will care for them according to his word. 

IL And God honours sdch tbust. As a fact, and a very interesting one it is, 
how wonderfully such bereaved children and widows are cared for 1 How God raises up 
one friend here and another there, and probably, if a comparison could be maHe, it would 
be found that such children have been as well cared for as any others ; life has been aa 
bright to them as for those whose earlier years were clouded over by no such sore 
bereavement. There may be exceptions, but the rule is surely for God to honour such 
trust. Can he who has said, " Ask, and ye sliall receive," refuse the prayer of a 
believing man at such a time ? 

HL And it is a reasonable trust. What would we desire more for our children 
than that they should be cared for by such a one who, so far as man can be, is like 
Q6d? — having the power and the will, the knowledge and wisdom, and, above all, the 
love, which are in God. Who would not crave for our dear ones a guardian like that ? 

IV. The conditions of the trust are that he who is about to leave behind 
widow and children should be himself one who trusts in God; that he have trained 
his children in the ways of the Lord, and sought to make his home a godly home. 
Verily such shall have their reward, yonder in heaven and here on earth, and especially 
at that supreme moment when he has to leave his loved ones and to lie down and die. 
Then for him shall the faith of this promise be precious indeed. — C. 

Ver. 16. — Vain confidences. "Thy terriblen ess hath deceived thee,*" etc. Taking 
the different expressions in this verse, we can see how such confidences are begotten in 
men's minds. 

I. Their fellow-men help to deceive them. " Thy terribleness," etc. All around 
them held them in terror, were afraid of them, deemed them too mighty to be over- 
come. And the consciousness of this kept in them a confidence whi^ now was to be 
shown to be but vain. 

II. Men's own pride. " The pride of thine heart." What myriads has not pride 
slain ! what woe hath it not brought upon mankind 1 " Pride goeth before destruction," 
etc. (Cl. homily on Pride, ch. xlviii. 29.) See Sennacherib's army (Isa. xxxvii.), 
Pharaoh's ovenhrow (Exod. xiv.); and " all the ages all along" pride has done the like 
and does so still. 

III. Men's ciRcnMSTANCES. No dwellings could seem more secure than were theirs ; 
their fortress seemed impregnable. Hence they "said in their hearts," " We shall 
■ever be moved." (Of. on these duellings, introduction to homily on Desirable habita- 
tion, suprn, ver. 8.) (,'f. the rich fool (Luke xii. 20). Prosperity and security do tend 
to beget these vain confiden(^es. 

IV. Past success. Not only did these Edomites dwell in the clefts of the rock, Irat 
they had held them fast hitherto against all invaders. A career of success, opponeuti 



OH. XLix. 1— 39.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. Ml 

vanquished, difficulties surmounted, wealth and honour won; who can persuade such 
a man to call himself a poor, lost sinner, dependent utterly on the mercy of God ? It 
is much easier to say, " Have mercy on us miserable sinners," than to feel and belier* 
we are so. 

Conclusion. There are two ways in which this spirit of false confidence may be got 
rid of or liept under. 1. By surrender of the soul to Christ. He makes us like himself, 
forms his Spirit in us, so that the truer the surrender the more we become " meek and 
lowly in heart " as he was. This the best way, the easy yoke, the light burden. 2. By 
the crushing fm-ce of Ood's judgments. Edom was to be humbled thus. And there are 
many wlio will only be humbled so. They will have their own way, and they have it 
for their woe, and then, afier a weary while, they come to themselves. They "made 
their bed in hell," and as they made it so they had to lie upon it, until even there God's 
hand shall find them, and they shall humble themselves beneath the mighty hand they 
had heretofore dared to defy. 3. And in some way this humility must be wrought in ub. 
For Gi d will have all men to be saved ; but without this lowly mind, this rejection of 
all vain confidences, we cannot be. Which way, then, shall it be — through Christ or 
through the fire of hell ? — 0. 

Ver. 23. — Lessons from the sea. "There is sorrow on the sea ; It cannot he quiet." 
We must remember that the sea to the Jew of old time was an object of almost 
unmixed terror. Nearly all the allusions in the Bible tell of its power and peril, never 
of its prcciousness and value to man. The Jews were a non-seafaiing people ; they 
dreaded it. In Deut. xxviii. 68 the being taken back to Egypt in ships is held out 
as a great threatening. They had no seaport worth mentioning. For centuries their 
seaboard was held by the Philistines. All their conceptions of it relate to its hurtful 
and destructive power (cf. Ps. cvii., " They that go down to the sea in ships," eta ; 
cf. also histories of the Deluge, Exodus, Jonah). The epithets applied to it are never 
pliasino;, but all more or less terrible. It is " raging," " roaring," " troubled," " breaking 
ships of Tarshish." Hezekiah failed to construct a navy. And hence St. John (Rev, 
xxi. 1), when telling of the beauty, the glory, and the joy of the new heavens and the new 
earth, is careful to add, "And there was no more sea." Now, this ver. 23 is an illustra- 
tion of this common Jewish feeling. But this Jewish feeling was a false one, though 
not so to them. For the sea is one of God's most blessed gifts to man., Life would be 
impossible without it. It has been justly called, "the life-blood of the land, as the 
blood is the life of the body. It is the vital fluid that animates our earth, and, should 
it disappear altogether, our fair green planet would become a heap of brown volcanic 
rocks and deserts, lifeless and worthless as the slag cast out from a furnace." We 
remember, too, how God said of the sea that it was " very good," and no mistaken Jewish 
ideas must be allowed to reverse that verdict. Think of: Its vapours. Each recurring 
harvest is really the harvest of the sea as much as of the land. For from the sea ascend 
those vapours which form the clouds and which descend in the feitilizing indispensable 
rain. Its currents, heaving along the sun-heated waters of sub-tropical climes, far away 
northward and southward, and giving to regions like our own that mild and on the whole 
beautiful clirriRte which we enjoy, whereas but for these warm waters of the sea our 
shores would be bleak, inhospitable, barren, and all but uninhabitable, like the shores of 
Labrador. Its breezes, so health-giving, imparting fresh life to the sick and feeble. It« 
beauty, ever presenting some fresh form of loveliness in colour, movements, outline, 
brilliancy. Its tides, sweeping up the mouths of our great rivers and estuaries, and all 
along our shores, washing; clean what else would be foul, stagnant, poisonous. Its salt- 
ness, ministering to the life of its inhabitants, retaining the warmth of the sun, and 80 
aiding in the transmission of those currents spoken of above, preserving from corrup- 
tion, etc. But these thoughts were not those of the Jew. To him the sea was a type 
of manifold ills, and he rejoiced to believe that in his eternal home there should be "no 
more sea," For it told of unrest, instability, painful mystery, afflictions, separation, and 
hence impossiliility of intercourse and death. For all these the sea serves in the Scrip- 
tures as 1 symbol, as reference to the passages which speak of the sea will show. But 
it has its brighter teachings also. Note — 

I. Its waves. See them in their blithe meny-heartedness, their buoyant spring 
and rush, coming in landwards from out the far distance, gleaming and sparkling aa thej 



262 THE BOOK OF THE PKOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlix. 1—39. 

roll along, " clapping their hands " as David would say, praising God as they leap 
and bound in their joy. How often we have seen them coming in such fashion, long 
tnes of them ! — nearer and nearer they approach, the sea-breeze filling them with vigour, 
and the sunshine gleaming on them and adorning them with the most exquisite colour- 
ing, until at length the shelving shore stops them, and they fall over, and in masses of- 
snow-white foam, with merry rush and roar, they dash up the beach, brightening every- 
thing they toucli ; and then, their strength all gone, they glide down the sands and hie 
away back to their ocean-home, to begin the same joyous career all over again. Now, 
surely this perpetual process suggests the joyful vigour of the sea. True, its waves lie 
broken on the beach, their spray scattered far and wide, and it would seem as if that 
were but a poor ending for such a career. But not heeding that at all, the waves just 
gather up their strength again, and, never knowing when they are beaten, return again 
and again to the charge. And does not this teach us how we should meet rdmff and 
disapimntment 1 Not lie down and moan, but hie back again to the source of our 
strength once more, and then again to the work God has given us to do. They seem 
to say to us, "Never be discouraged; see us as we begin again after each rebuff, how 
we sparkle all the more that we are scattered and broken, and then go back to come on 
again. So do you. Hope continually, and praise God more and more." 

II. Its mists and vapoubb — its clouds and exhalations — they also have their lessons. 
How common these mists are all who know the sea know well. But in and by them 
the sea renders up her strength, pays her tribute to the heavens. But how hountifully 
ihe is recompensed 1 How comes it that the sea abides wholesome, that it is not the 
soiu'ce of malaria, a deadly mass of waters, in which no plant or fish can live? And 
part of the leply is in the fact that those mists and vapours which ascend from the sea 
descend lo the earth in rain and showers, and fill the springs and fountains, which are the 
sources of the rivers, which are the carriers into the sea-depths of those varied salts and 
other prmlucts which serve as ministers of health to the innumerable forms of life with 
which the sea abounds. Thus is the sea repaid for the tribute she renders to the heavens. 
And so these sea-mists teach the blessedness of rendering up to God all he asks tor. 
Thy God comn landeth thy strength. The recompense of the sea assures us how abundantly 
God will recompense all who obey this command. And they suggest the sure way o 
deliverance from all inward evil. They ascend from the sea, but they leave all its 
saltness behind ; from the pools and lakes and from stagnant marsh, but they leave all 
their unhealthful, corrupting properties behind ; and when they come back again in form 
of rain, they are sweet and wholesome and precious, to quench the thirst of man and 
beast, and to gladden the whole face of the earth. And so with ourselves. In ascending 
to God, in spiritual drawing near to him, we leave all our evil behind. God says to the 
waters, " Come up hither," and they are cleansed in the coming. And so he says to us, 
" Come up hither," md we, too, are cleansed in the coming. And when we come back our 
hearts and lives, our whole influence, will be healthfiil and salutary, a blessing to all 
with whom we have to do. 

III. Its tides. They teach tJie power of the unseen. Their mighty movements 
are all governed by a force imperceptible to our senses. And it is the unseen, the 
intangible, that which the senses cannot perceive — thought, which governs the world. 
They teach also the gradualness of the religious life. It is often hard to say, on 
looking at the sea, whether the tide ebbs or flows. You must compare it after a while 
with its present position, and then you shall know. And so it is with the religious 
life. There are no leaps and bounds, no great starts and strides, but gradual, slow, step 
by step— such is the Divine ordering. Now, hence a lesson : 1. Of consolation. We 
•re not to write bitter things against ourselves because our advance is slow. 2. ZVianA;- 
ftdneu. No man can leap into hell any more than he can into fitness for heaven. QtoA 
holds us very fast, and only very slowly will he let us go. 3. CaiUion. Judge not that 
all is well because of no sudden great change in you. There may be the gradual ebbing 
away. Are there now large portions of your life which the fear of God does not 
gov«ni, though once it controlled them all ? If so the tide has ebbed. 

IV. The depths of the sea tell of that complete putting away of our sin which God 
promises to us (cf. Mioah vii. 19). God will utterly put them away, casting them, 
not near the shore, in the shallows, or in the tide-way, but in the depths, where they 
will ba wwak. out of sight and out of reach for ever 



OT. XLix. 1— 39.J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, 863 

V. Its bands. (Of. oh. v. 22.) They teach how Ood makei our weaknesi itrong. 
What more feeble than the sand? And yet by it the mighty sea is held in. "To 
them who have no might God inoreaseth strength." But what are we and the sur- 
roundings of our lives but weak, shifting, unstable as the sand? But God can so fill 
them with strength that they shall beat back the fierce waves which would overwhelm 
us. Then let us fear not. He who makes the weak sand a sure bar aj:ainst the ocean's 
rage can and will make our weakness strong to triumph over all that would harm us. 
Such are some of the lessons of the sea. — C. 

Ver, 24. — The fall of Damascus; or, the lovely and th» lovable lo»t. Here and in 
Isaiah and Amos we have predictions of the overthrow of Damascus. " The burden of 
Damascus," says Isaiah. " Behold ! Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it 
shall be a ruinous heap." Jeremiah likens the agitated minds of the multitude of her 
inhabitants to the unquiet sea — still not for one moment. And the cause of that 
unquietness is their sorrow at the desolations coming on them. And yet she was no 
mean city. No ; she was disti n guished ind eed. The hearts of men, in all ages of the world, 
have been drawn to her, and are so still. For she was and is surpassingly lovely. Beautiful 
for situation, the joy of the whole land around, compared to the Paradise in which our 
first father was placed by God, and celebrated by every writer, sacred and secular, that 
has had occasion to speak of her or her history. " It is the oldest city in the world. 
Its fame begins with tlie earliest patriarchs and continues to modern times. While other 
cities of the East h( ve risen and decayed, Damascus is still where and what it was. 
While Babylon is a heap in the desert, Nineveh buried beneath her mounds, and Tyre 
a ruin on the seashore, it remains what it is called in the prophecies of Isaiah, ' the 
head of Syria.' And ever since, down to our own days, its praise is celebrated. It was 
' a predestinated capital.' Nor is it difficult to explain why its freshness has never faded 
through all its series of vicissitudes and wars." Men have ever loved it and love it still. 
As the traveller from the west climbs up and up the steep passes of the great Lebanon 
range, and at length nears their eastern side, there, on the summit of a cliff, high up above 
the plain beneath, he looks down on the city of Damascus. " At the foot of the cliff on 
which the beholder stands, a river bursts forth from the mountain in which it has had 
birth. That river, as if in a moment, scatters over the plain, through a circle of thirty 
miles, the verdure which had hitherto been confined to its single channel. It is like 
the bursting of a shell, the eruption of a volcano — but an eruption, not of death, but of 
life. Far and wide extends in front the level plain, its horizon bare, its lines of sur- 
rounding hills bare, all bare, far away on the road to Palmyra and Bagdad, In the 
midst of this plain lies at your feet the vast island of deep verdure, waln\;its and apricots 
hanging above, corn and grass below." The river is its life. It is drawn out in water- 
courses and spread in all directions. For miles around it is a wilderness of gardens- 
gardens with roses among the tangled shrubberies, and with fruit on the branches 
overhead. Every v\ here among the trees the murmur of unseen rivulets is heard. Even 
in the city, which is in the midst of the garden, the clear rushing of the current is a 
perpetual refreshment. Every dwelling has its fountain; and at night, when the 
sun has set behind Mount Lebanon, the lights of the city are seen flashing on the 
water. All travellers in all ages have paused to feast their eyes on the loveliness of 
the city as they first behold it from the cliffs of Lebanon. Abana and Pharpar still 
flash and gleam as they flow along amid her fragrant gardens and by her dark olive 
"roves. Snow-capped Hermon and the rugged range of Lebanon still keep over her 
their wonted watch and ward. Hence she may well be taken as the symbol of all that is 
lovely and fair in outward life, all that is bright and beautiful in the moral nature of 
man. But yet she fell, and she has lost her place amongst the nations for ever. Thus she 
suggests to the thoughtful reader the heart-searching truth that the lovely and the lovable 
may yet he lost — those on whom Jesus, looking, loves them, because they are so lovable, 
MMy yet miss of the life that is eternal ; and he may say, as he did to one of them, 
" One thing thou lackest," Observe, then — 

I. Thebb have been souls characterized bt much that is lovely and 

LOVABLE AND TET HAVE NOT ENTERED INTO THE KINODOM OP GoD. Bead the 

history of Orpah. Then there was that young ruler to whom reference has already 
been made. And the many who flocked around our Saviour when he was here on 



264 THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlix 1—39. 

earth, and whom he likened to the itony-ground hearers. They all had much that wai 
excellent and good about them, but they failed to bring forth fruit unto life etemaL 

n. And there are many such now. Were our Lord amongst us now, he would 
love them as he did him of whom the Gospel tells. They may be young in years; in 
the morning of life, fair and comely to look upon, vigorous and strong, well educated, 
intelligent, bright and clever, cultured themselves and loving refinement and culture 
in others ; they may be possessed of very attractive moral qualities, amiable and kindly, 
ready to do a kind action and scorning to do a mean one, possessed of and deserving 
an honourable reputation, of unquestioned veracity, of high honour, modest and pure 
in word and deed, gentle and courteous in manner, unassuming, thoughtful of the 
feelings and wishes of others ; parents and friends, family and neighbours, all speak 
well of them, and those who know them best honour and love them most. Kow, there 
are thousands of such as these. They are loved and lovable ; they must be so. And 
as we picture them to ourselves we almost shrink from saying that such may never- 
theless miss of the kingdom of God ; like Damascus in all that is externally beautiful, 
and yet, like her, come under the condemnation of God. It seems scarce believable, 
and yet in the face of God's Word what can we say ? Nicodemus was one such, and 
yet our Lord told him, " Except a man be born again," etc. We would be as chari- 
table as the Word of God — and if we were that would make us far more charitable than 
the most of us are — ^but we would not be more so, for that would be to be uncharitable 
and unfaithful both to God and to the souls of men. And therefore we say that a man 
may be all that is externally fair and lovable, and yet, like bright beautiful Damascus, 
come under the condemnation of God ; lovely and lovable like him whom Jesus loved, 
and yet, because lacking the one thing, shut out — self shut out — ^from the kingdom ol 
God. And observe — 

III. This rule of God is not ABBiTRABr, but just and indispensable. For 
all that we have said may coexist along with the will alien from the will of God, the 
heart not yet trnly surrendered to him. It was so in that typical instance of this 
character to whom we have so often referred. For when brought to the test he refused 
the will of God. For the proof of our loyalty to God is seen, not in the many things 
that we are and do which are in keeping with our own inclinations, but in those that 
we are ready to do when they involve a real taking up of the cross and contradict 
those inclinations. A cultured, refined disposition may lead us, out of regard to our 
own self-interest, to do and be that which wins for us the applause and favour of our 
fellow-men. It would be a pain and grief to us to be otherwise. All the commands 
of the moral law we may have kept from our youth up, and hence conclude, and others 
—even Christ's disciples — may think also, that we lack nothing. And in fact we may 
lack nothing but that one thing without which all else is vain and useless for onr 
admission into the kingdom of God. But in that kingdom the mil of Ood must he 
paramount, or it ceases to be the kingdom of God. Suppose one of the heavenly bodies 
could choose, and did so, to swerve at times from its appointed orbit, and to take a course 
of its dwu ; the whole universe would be thrown out of order, and confusion and 
destruction must ensue. Suppose one string of harp, one pipe of organ, instead of 
giving its pioper note, were to resolve to ntter a sound difierent from that which was 
appointed for it ; what jariiiig discord must result! no true music could such harp or 
organ give. And so in God's kingdom, if there be one discordant will, how can the 
harmony and peace and blessedne.-s of heaven any longer exist? If in our homes 
the law of tlie house be violated by any one of its members, how little would such a 
household deserve the sweet name of home 1 For the good of all, therefore, and not for 
any aibitrary reason, one law, one will must be paramount. It is so in our earthly 
homes ; it must yet more be so in the home of God, the kingdom of heaven. The 
heart, the will, munt be surrendered to God if we are to be at last numbered amongst 
the inhabitants of God's eternal home. 

IV. What, then, shall wb say to such? Shall we bid you set light store by 
those varied qualities which draw forth the affection and esteem of your fellow- men ? 
Shall we say — Care nothing for that which, when Jesus looked upon, even he could not 
but love ? Still less shall we say that all these things are of the nature of sin. On 
the contrary, we would say — Oive Owl thanks for these things. For, indeed, it is of his 
great mercy that yo'i have been led to approve of them, and to turn away with disgust 



OH. XLDL 1— 39.J THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 265 

and abhorrence from that which is contrary thereto. Why were you made to hear 
God's voice ? — for it was his voice which called you, and his hand which led you to 
this good choice. Without doubt the parents of that young ruler gave God thanka 
again and again when they saw the character of their son unfolding and developing iii 
all such high-minded, pure, and amiable ways. And when we see the like in our 
children, do we not, ought we not to, give thanks likewise ? What, then, do we say 
to you but this ? — (1) Mender thanks to God that he has tlms inclined your heart ; and 
then (2) go on to ask him who has lieen so good to you thus far that he will be more 
gracious still, and giveyou that one thing which yet you lack — the new heart, the perfectly 
surrendered will, the faith in God of which such surrender is the chief expression. 
Remember that the merchantman who became the happy owner of the pearl of great price 
was not content with the many goodly pearls after which he had been seeking and which 
he had already attained. No; but when he saw that pure, all-precious, lusirous pearl, 
he resolved that that should be his, and hence all was surrendered that he might make 
it his own. Now, you resemble him in two out of the three great facts of his history. 
Like him, you have sought ar.d found many goodly pearls. The goodly pearls of moral 
excellence, virtue, amiability, many things lovely and of good report. You prize these 
things, as you ought to do. You have sought after them and have found them. And 
now, again, like that merchantman, there is shown and offered to you that pearl which 
is more precious than all — even the gift of God, which is Jesus Christ, the eternal 
salvation which comes to us alone through him. Yes, that t« offered to you — that gift 
of the regenerated nature, that new heart and right spirit, which they who come to 
Christ receive. But now, in the third and chief point of all, would that you resembled 
that merchantman. He was willing to part with all he had for the sake of the pearl 
of great price. Are you? To persuade hereto we add two words. 1. The first by way 
of encouragement. That merchant had to part with his goodly pearls for the sake of the 
one all-precious one. You not only will not have to do this, but they will become more 
goodly and more indisputably yours than ever if the all-precious one be yours. You 
will have to renounce none of them, nothing lovely and of good report, nothing wherein 
there is any virtue or any praise. On the contrary, they shall gain an added lustre 
from their association with that chief excellence which we would have you win. Like 
as there is so great difference between a iair landscape on a bright summer's morn, and 
that .same scene looked upon amid the mists of winter, so shall all that is virtuous and 
good in us attain to a higher beauty, a more perfect loveliness, by the briglit shining of 
the Sun of righteousness upon them. Apart from him they are cold, dim, vague, 
uncertain ; but in him and through him they become radiant and more beautiful than 
ever. And not only so, but they are more securely yours ; they are far less likely to 
be lost. 2. By way of warning, let me remind you that on the wedding- garment in 
which we must al! be clothed if we would enter in and share in the festivities of the 
marriage supper of the Lamb — on that garment there shines resplendent hut one jewel ; 
it is this pearl of great piice. If we have not that, no bedizening of ourselves with 
such goodly pearls as we may possess, or think we possess, will serve instead. Many 
will seek, do seek, so to adorn tliemselves. But all such righteousness is rejected, all 
such trust refused. Oh, then, to your virtues and other lovely ami lovable qualities 
add this — trust in the blessed Saviour's Name, which will include in it the heart 
perfectly surrendered, the will yielded up to him 1 — 0. 

Vers, 1, 2. — A usurper in the inheritance. I. Actual possessiok is not the only 
THING TO BE CONSIDERED. Ammou is the actual present possessor of the territory of 
Gad. But every paisessor must be ready upon occasion to show his title. With respect 
to the most trifling article the possessor must be able to make clear that it is his own, 
that he bought it, or inherited it, or had it given to him ; in short, that it came to him 
in some entirely lawful way. Ammou hal taken Gad by force, probably a very easy- 
thing to do in the depres-ed condition of Israel's fortunes. And if it be said in reply 
that Israel had originally taken this very territory of Gad by force, such a statement is, 
of course, quite correct. But then we have to keep in mind the typical character of 
Israel. Everything depends on the point of view from which we look. Certain rules 
of legal ownership are an indispensable necessity of present social order, but at intervals 
in the course of the woi Id revolutions come more or less "JLtensive, and existing legal 



266 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. xlix. 1— Sa 

ownerships get utterly swept away. The Maker of the world, who is also ihe Bringer- 
forth of the aLiuniiancs of the soil, is to be lookeil to as the real Disposer of what he had 
made. And therefore, with respect to every actual possession of man, we have the question 
to ask — Is it as the jiussession of Ammon, or as the possession of Israel ? And chiefly 
we should ask the question with respect to ourselves. Whatever it be, external goods, 
or office, or reputation, have we got it, proceeling on the very highest principles of 
action, those which God himself would liave us to eiuploy ? 

II. Abiding possession, and how it is to be gained. Ammon now holds Gad, 
as it seems, very firnjly. Whut can Israel now do to get the territory back ? That 
question Jehovah will answer in his own time, and Ammon will have to suffer for 
violently layiug hold of what was not its own. And yet, bear in mind that this very 
action came through Ammon's alienation from the true Lord and Guide of men. That 
alienation may manifest itself in different ways, but all siu and all chastisement of sin 
are traceable back to the alienation. Ammon was really trying to gratify a right desire 
in a wrong way. The desire for possession and for increase of possession, continuous 
and ever-expanding, is a rijiht desire. But it must be a possession assimilated to all that 
is best, all that is most enduring in our nature. Legal ownership is often in inverse 
proportion to actual enjoyment. The spiritual Israelite, the genuine, devout, habitual 
believer in Jesus Christ, is to be heir of all things. The things unseen and eternal are 
his, and they are his because a correspondence has been divinely produced between him 
and them (1 Cor. vi. 9 — 11 ; xv. 63). Inheritances gained after the natural fashion 
very soon turn out delusive. — Y. 

Ver. 16. — The pride of apparent security. I. Thb real extent of the sbodbitt. 
Not without some cause did Edom pride itself on its position. Security is a relative 
word. Mountain fastnesses are a sufEcicnt defence against such attacks as Edom can 
measure and understand. Mountain fastnesses have done much for the cause of national 
liberty and independence. They ought not to be the shelter and home of brigands ; but 
it is right to notice their glorious place in history as the shelter and home of struggling 
freemen. God would not have us undervalue any security so far as it is a real security. 
The mistake is when we live as if all precious things could be preserved by securities 
wliich Providence has only given for the preservation of certain outward things. So 
far from our overvaluing securities coming from our own strength and external resources, 
it may truly he said that we rather undervalue them. If we could only use them in the 
right way, with insight and without prejudice, we should find many dangers of the 
present life gieatly dimini.'^hed. 

II. The way in which a security may become a peril. Edom lives as it likes 
among its -great natural strongholds. Long experience has taught it exactly how to 
d' al with every attacking force, and it sees no danger with which it cannot effectually 
deal. Thus the dangers and deliverances which come out of the unseen alike escape 
attention. Men are protected outwardly ; they have all that heart can wish ; but mean- 
while the heart is left exposed to every tem| tntion. The tewer dangers there are 
outwardly, the more dangers there are inwardly ; and the more dangers there are 
outwardly, the fewer there may be inwardly. For when men live amid dangers and 
inconveniences to the outward life, then their eyes are open to the comparative super- 
ficiality of such dangers. They see how the deepest treasures of life, the most abiding 
ones, may remain perfectly safe while outward things are going to pieces. Better would 
it have been for Edom to live in the ex[)0sed plain, if thereby it had been brought t«> 
trust and know that God who is the only true Refuge. 

III. The fallacy of seeking security in a higher deqrbib of thb essentially 
INSEOURE. The eagle dwells iu inaccessible heights, and thus it may be reckoned a symbol 
of the greatest security attainable here below. But after all, the word " inaccessible" is 
only a synonym for what is exceedingly difficult of attainment Courage, patience, and 
perseverance may do much to blot out the word " inaccessible." And if this be so from 
the human point of view, how much plainer is it that all human securities, however 
high the degree they attain in our estimate, are in the sight of Gk>d as nothing I The 
great thing that sends us wrong in trying to make life rwlly secure is that, instead ol 
fixing our thoughts on an entirely different kind of danger, we allow ourselves to act 
as if the only thing needful was to guard against a higher degree of the danger already 



OH. xux, 1— 39.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 26'( 

perceived. To God dealing with the ungodly and the unrighteous, mountain and plaii^ 
are alike. — Y. 

Ver. 23. — The perils of the lea. I. The feelino pboduobd by mabituib danqeb. 
Sorrow is far too vague a word for the feeling here referred to. Pear, anxiety, constant 
watchfulness against close and sudden and increasins; danger, a sense that utter destruc- 
tion may come at any moment, — these are the leelings going to make up the complex 
state of mind with which Damascus is so profoundly disturbed. No discomposing effect 
produced by a laud danger was enough to serve the prophet's purpose. Not but what 
land perils taken in the sum of them are gieater tliau sea ones ; but they do not produce 
the same effect on the mind. Away out at sea one is so completely at the mercy of the 
waters. There is no clmnce to say, " Run for your life." There is nothing lelt for it 
but patience, submission, and hope trying to rise above opposed emotions. Those who 
have been in such circumstances will be bedt able to realize the force and peculiarity of 
the figure here employed. The Old Testament furnishes one illusti'ation in Jonah's 
disobedient voyage, and the New Testament another in the experiences connected with 
the shipwreck ol Paul. 

II. The way to prepare for such an hour. The hour in which human strength 
and wisdom can do nothing may come on us unawares, may come fated with terrible 
appearances beyond all previous imaginations, but it by no means follows that such an 
hour is to come unprepared for. Moie preparation is needed than simply that of count- 
ing on the clianci'S of escaping such an hour altogether. The horn: may be escaped, but all 
who go down to the sea in shiiis cannot escape it ; and therefore they do wisely to prepare 
for it, espcially as the preparation arises Irom a state of mind which brings the greatest 
positive blcssi Qgs. The peace that passeth all understanding is a peace that comprehends 
and subdues every possible disturbing cause. The att.iinment of this peace and the 
beiief.ts co7isequent upon it have been wonderfully proved in terrible cases of shipwreck. 
The true wisdom for us all in this world so full of perils, whether we have to face the 
dangers of sea or of land, is to have the real treasures of life in heaven. Then when we 
have done all that human resources can compass, we are sure that the most precious 
things remain safe beyond the reach of harm. — Y. 

Vers. 34 — 39. — The fate of Elam. I. The elements of doom. 1. Loss vf active 
strength. The breaking of the bow ought, perhaps, to be taken somewhat literally. 
Elam may have been a people where skill in aichery reckoned for much of its strength. 
Whatever our peculiar natural strength may be, God can break it to pieces. We should 
never pride ourselves on what is peculiar to us, for the really best things are those which 
may iiecome common to all men. 2. The loss of all union. The two ways in which 
nations perish. (1) They retain their corporate existence, remain in their coimtry, but 
lose their independence and enter into servitude. (2) They are scattered, and lose all 
the outward signs of a nation. Thus in this scattei ing we have a symbol of the way in 
which men who have been joined together for evil purposes may be disunited. Union 
itself is strength so long as it lasts, even if no actual step he taken. God can destroy 
the .schemes of men and at the same time throw them into new relations as individuals, 
so that they may be forced each one into a new scheme and plan for himself. When 
God scatters and humbles nations, there is pain to the individual for the time in his 
fieling of nationality, but for all that the scatteiiiig is a good thing for the individual 
and for the world. 3. The destruction of the ruling men in Elam. God will set up his 
throne, 'i'he visible power and glory of those who represented Elam is to pass away. 
In a monarchy the king and his nobles give a centre, around which the whole nation 
''athers. When this centre is taken away there is nothing to act &a a sufficient point 
of union for the scattered ones if they are so disposed. What God does he dues 
completely. 

II. Note that the reason of all this is nowhere distinctly expbessed in 
THE PBOPHBCY. And yet we know there is nothing capricions and arbitrary in all this 
severity. Elam must have done much wickedness in the sight of Jehovah. Wherever 
there is suffering there is sin; and, more than that, when God indicates his own 
s[)ecial interference we know that he has a sufficient reason for it in the wrong-doing oi 
those with whom he thus deals. 



268 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [ch. l. 1— 46- 



III. The ei.embnt of hope. The captivity of Elam, as it is called, is not to endure 
for ever. A brightt-r future is coming, spoken of very indefinitely, but not therefore 
uiiceitainly. Not, of course, that Elam was to be re-establi.^heii liieniUy in its oM 
possessions and filory. Such vtrsps as this must be taken spiritually. It is God's way 
of setting before us the truth that, whatever may be lost by a particular community or 
a particular generation, only vauishes to reappear in a far greater gain to every individual, 
npiritually considered. — Y. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTERS L. AND LI. 
On Babylon. 
CHAPTEB L. 

We have now reached a point at which 
some reference is necessary to the contro- 
versies of the so-called " higher criticism." 
An attempt must he made to put the reader 
in possession of the data wliich are so 
variously estimated by critics of different 
schools. Theological considerations need 
not, and therefore ought not, to be admitted ; 
like every other critical question, that which 
we are now approaching can be argued out 
on purely literary grounds. At first sight, 
indeed, it would appear not to require a 
lon>< debate, seeing that in eh. 1. 1 and li. 
60 the prophecy is expressly attributed to 
Jeremiah. But, on the other hand, it must 
be observed that the authorship of the 
heading in ch. 1. 1 is altogether obscure; 
very possibly, like those of so many of the 
psalms, the heading may be incorrect. 
And as to ch. li. 60, can we be absolutely 
certain that the expression, " all these 
words," was intended to refer to the prophecy 
which now precedes ch. U. 59 — 64? No 
doubt Jeremiah did write a prophecy 
against Babylon, and give it to Seraiah with 
the charge described in ch. li. 61 — 64. But 
how do we know that this prophecy has 
come down to us in the form in which it 
wag written ? 

This attitude of reserve it not assumed 
without substantial grounds, derived from 
two sources — the epilogue (ch. li. 59 — 64) 
and tlie prophecy itself. First, as to the 
epilogue. It is clear that the words, " and 
they shall be weary," are out of place in 
ver. 64, and that they are wrongly repeated 
from ver. 58. But how rame they to be 
repeated ? Because, originally, the declara- 



tion, " Thus far are the words of Jeremiah," 
stood at the end of ver. 58. When the short 
narrative in vers. 59 - 64 (ending at " I will 
bring upon her ") was combined with ch. 1. 
1 — li. 58, the declaration in question was 
removed from ver. 58 to ver. 64, and, by 
accident, the preceding word (in the He- 
brew) was removed with it. This leaves it 
open to us to doubt whether the present 
prophecy on Babylou is really the one re- 
ferred to in ver. 60, supposing, that is, there 
are other reasons, derived from the prophecy 
itself, for questioning its Jeremianio author- 
ship. 

The reasons which have been addi.oe I 
for doing so are analogous to those wlilc i 
lead so many students to doubt the Isaiai i ie 
authorship of Isa. xl. — xlvi. ' 

1. The author of the latter prophecy (or 
the greater part tliereof) writes as if he 
were living at the close of the Babylonian 
exile. So does the author of ch. 1. and li. 
"Yet a little while," he says (ch. li. 33), 
" and the time of her harvest sliall come " — 
the time, that is, of th..t juilicial inter- 
position which (comp. Isa. xvii. 5, 11 ; Matt, 
xiii. 39) is the heavenly antitype of harvest 
He urges his fellow-countrymen to flee, 
while there is still time, from the doomed 
city (ch. li. 6, 45). He mentions, as the 
instruments of the Divine vengeance, the 
Modes (oh. li. 11, 28), and, as it would 
seem, refers, though obscurely, to Cyrus 
(oh. li. 20—23). 

2. Although the above statement is lite- 
rally true of most of Isa. xl.— Ixvi., yet 
there are some passages which are much 
more suggestive of a Palestinian origin 
ttian of a Babylonian (see Clieyne's 'Pro- 
phecies of Isaiah,' ii. 202). Precisely so 
in ch. I. and li., at least according to one 

• 'Encyclopaedia Britannica,' ninth edition, 
article " Jeremiah." 



OH. u 1—46.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



2GS 



prevalent interpretation of oh. 1. 9 ; IL 50 
(which are thought to imply a residence 
in Jemsalem); 1. 28; li. 11, 35, 51 (sug- 
gestive, perhaps, of the continuance uf 
Jerusalem and the temple); 1. 17; li. 34 
(implying, as some think, that Nebuchad- 
nezzar was still alive). Still, there is so 
much doubt respecting the soundness of the 
i aferences, that it is hardly safe to rely too 
confidently upon them. The case of ch. I. 
and li.iE> therefore, in so far rather less favour- 
able tc Jeremiah's authorship than that of 
Isa. zl. — ^Ixvi. is tu that of Isaiah. 

3. Amongst much that is new and strange 
in the style of phraseology of Isa. xl. — ^Ixvi., 
there is not a little that reminds one 
forcibly ot the old Isaiah. Similarly with 
ch. 1. and li., as compared with Jeremiah, 
" Every impartial judge," says Kuenen(who 
will not be suspected of a prejudice for 
tradition), " must admit that the number of 
parallel passages is very large, and that the 
author of ch. 1. and li. agrees with no one 
more than with Jeremiah." For instance, 
tlie formula, " Thus ealth Jehovah Sabioth, 
the God of Israel" (ch. 1. 18; li. 33), also 
occurs in ch. vii. 3; is. 15, and some 
twenty-six otiier passages; comp. also ch. 
I 3 with ix. 9; 1. 5 with xxxii. 40; 1. 7 
with ii. 3, xiv. 18, xvii. 13; and see other 
passages referred to in the Exposition. 

The probability would, therefore, appear 
to be that, whatever solution we adopt for 
the literary problems of Isa. xl. — Ixvi., an 
analogous solution must be adopted for ch. 1. 
and li. The whole question is so large, and 
connects itself with so many other problems, 
that the present writer declines to pro- 
nounce upon it here Only it should be 
observed (1) that both subject and tone 
remind us of Isa. xl. — Ixvi. and the kindred 
prophecies scattered about in tlie first part 
of the Book of Isaiah, and more especially 
of Isa. xiii. and the closely related prophecy, 
Isa. xxxiv. ; (2) that these two chnpters, ch. 
1. and li., present some striking points of 
contact with Ezeldel, who, though contem- 
porary with Jeremiah, was still a later con- 
temporary, and allusions to whom (since 
Ezekiel was a literary rather than an ora- 
torical prophet) imply that his prophetic 
book was already in circulation — in other 
words, suggest a date well on in the Exile 
for the prophet who alludes to him ; (3) that, 



though there are many Jeremianio allu- 
sions in ch. 1. and li., there are also several 
passages copied almost verbally from pro- 
phecies of Jeremiah, and applied to Babylon 
and its assailants (it seems difficult to 
believe that Jeremiah should have been 
such a good economizer of his literary work). 
It deserves to be added (4) that, though 
Jeremiah is a great student of tlie earlier 
proph'^tic writings, and makes numerous 
allusions to them (see especially ch. xlvi. — 
zlix.), nothing approaching to the mosaic- 
work in ch. 1. and li. can be pointed to in 
the undoubted prophecies of 'Jeremiah. In 
fact, the Exposition will show that the 
author of these two chapters has borrowed 
almost the whole of their contents from other 
prophets — his own property, so to speak, 
being too insignificant to be worth men- 
tioning. 

Here, in justification of (1), is a list of 
points of contact between ch. 1. and li. and 
Isa. xiii. : — 

(o) " To consecrate [or, ' sanctify ']," used 
of persons, ch. li. 27; Isa. xiii. 3. Here 
only (elsewhere with " war " following). 

(6) "Lift ye up a banner," oh. L 2; li. 27; 
also Isa. xiii. 2. 

(e) Comp. ch. 1. 16 with Isa. xiii. 14; close 
phraseological agreement. 

(d) Comp. oil. 1. 6, 17 with first part of 
Isa. xiii. 14 ; agreement as to sense. 

(e) "Behold, I will stir up against 
Babylon," ch. li. 1 (comp. I. 9); so Isa xiii. 
17. Comp. also, however, Isa. xli. 25 ; Joel 
iii. (Hebrew, iv.) 7—9. 

(/) Comp. ch li. 3 (oh. 1. 14, 29) with 
Isa. xiii. 18 ; agreement as to sense. 

(3) Ciimp. ch. li. 11, 28 with Isa. xiii. 17 
(mention of the Medes). 

(h) Comp. ch. 1. 39, 40 with Isa. xiu. 19 
—22. 

This Inst parallel may, perhaps, be ques- 
tioned. At first sight it may appear that 
both ch. 1. 40 and Isa xiii. 19 are based 
upon ch. xlix. 18 («hich see), but when we 
inspect Isa. xiii. 19 h more closely in the 
Hebrew, we shall find reason to conclude 
that the original, both of this passage and 
of ch. 1. 40, is Amos iv. 11. We must, there- 
fore, put ch. xlix. 18 out of the question, and 
learn to be on our guard sgainst plausible 
inferences. The only point which remains 
to be decided vi the relation between ch. 1. 



270 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [ch. l. 1— 4 



(0 and Im, zili. 19 ; which passage is the 
nriginal? One important element in our 
leoision will be the naturalness in the mode 
nf refeience to Bodom and Gomorrah ; to the 
[>resent writer this seems to determine the 
ijuestion against ch. I. and li. and in favour 
i)f Isa. ziii. (The imitation is limited to Isa. 
xiii. because Iso. ziv. passes on to another 
though a related subject.) 

And here, in justification of (2), are points 
of contact between oh. L and li. and the 
Prophet Ezekiel. 

(o) Ideas and "motives." (o) Figure of 
scattered flock, ch. 1. 6, 7 (Ezek. xxxiv.). 
(j3) Effects of the avenging Sword of Jeho- 
vah, ch. L 35—38 (Ezek. zxi 30 ; zxxiii. 
1-6). 

(6) Word* and phrase*, (a) No word is 
more distinctly peculiar to Ezekiel than 
giUulim, idol-blocks, which occurs no less 
than thirty-nine times in his book, and else- 
where only once in Leviticus, once in Den- 
teronomy, six times in Kings, and once in 
Jeremiah (1. 2). (ff) 'Anaq, to groan, oc- 
curs thrice in Ezekiel, once in Jeremiah 
QL 52), and nowhere else. It is remarkable 
that in the latter passage we find not only a 
word but a phrase of Ezekiel's (see Ezek. 
xzvi. 13). (7) Fekod, the name of a Chal- 
dean district, occurs in oh. 1. 21 ; also Ezek. 
xxiii. 28. (B) The striking combination, 
pahhoth SsggJianim, occurs in ch. IL 28, 57 ; 
also Ezek. xxiii. 6, 12, 23. (e) Kasdim for 
■'Chaldea" (properly the Chaldeans), ch. 
1. 10 ; U. 24, 35 ; also Ezek. xvi. 29 ; xxiii. 16. 
(0 Ch. li. 25, 26 seems to allude to Ezek. 
XXXV. 8 — 5, 9 (see the Hebrew, and verify 
the statement by the Hebrew concordance). 

(0) General characteristics of style. Grant- 
ing that the style of ch. 1. and li. approaches 
nearest on the whole to that of Jeremiah, it 
must be admitted, in the words of the latest 
German critic, Budde, that it " frequently 
enough declines from the simple, plain, and 
rather loose style of Jeremiah, to the flowery 
and turgid manner of speech of Ezekid ;" 
also that the points of contact are such as 
imply the originality of Ezekiel and the 
dependence upon him of oh. 1. and li. 

Ver. 1. — Against; rather, concerainjf. 

Vers. 2— 10.— Babylon's fall and Israel's 
deliverance. 

Vers. 2, 3. — The prophet, with the eye 
qf fikith, sees his revelation accumplisbed. 



Babylon (like Moab) U taken ; her idols art 
destroyed. In his exuberant joy, he calls on 

the bystanders to proclaim the good news 

to thn svmpathetic nations, and to set up (or 
rather, lift up) a standard (as ch. iv. 6), to 
call the attention of those who might not 
be within hearing of the proclamation. The 
idols have been convicted of false preten- 
sions; they are ashamed and dismayed (so 
we should render rather than confounded 
nnd broken in pieces) at the terrible result 
to tlieir worshippers. Bel and Merodach are 
not different deities, but merely different 
names of one of the two principal gods of 
the later Babylonian empire. Bel, it is 
true, was originally distinct from Merodach, 
but ultimately identified with him. Mero- 
dach was the tutelary god of Babylon, and 
Nebuchadnezzar seems to have been speci- 
ally adicted to his worship, though, indeed, 
he mentions Nebo also with hardly less 
honour. This is the T)eginning of an in- 
scription of this king's, preserved at the 
India House: — "Nebuchadnezzar, King of 
Bnbylons glorious prince, worshipper of 
Marduk, adorer of the lofty one, glorifier 
of Nabu, the exalted, the possessor of in- 
telligence" (Mr. Bod well's translation, *Ee- 
cords of the Past,' v. 113). Elsewhere 
Nebuchadnezzar speaks of Marduk as " the 
god mymaker," "the chief of tlie gods," and 
of himself as " his (Marduk's) eldest son, the 
chosen of his heart." Her images. It is a 
very peeular word (gillUllm), specially fre- 
quent in Ezekiel, and also found in a chapter 
of Leviticus with which Ezekiel has affini- 
ties (Lev. xxvi. 30). It evidently involves 
a sore disparagement of idol-worship. The 
etymological meaning is "things rolled," 
wliich may be variously interpreted as " idol- 
blocks " (Gesenius), or " doll-images " 
(Ewald): 

Ver. 3.— Out of the north. There was • 
peculiar mystery attachingto the north in the 
Hebrew miml, as, in fact, the word very for 
"north " in Hebrew (literally, the hidden) in- 
dicates. The burnt offering was to be sacri- 
ficed on the north side of the altar(Lev. i. U), 
and the foiircherubim, in the vision of Ezekiel, 
are described as coming from the north 
(Ezek. i. 4). The horror with which Babylon 
was regarded was intensified, apparently, 
by its no. thern position (ch. i. 14), and now 
the "hidden" north ngain pours forth Its 
swarms of warriors against Babylon herself. 
They shall remove, they shall depart ; rather, 
they are fled, they are gone ; almost the same 
clause occurs in ch. ix. 10. The prediction 
is realized as past. 

_ Ver. 4.— In those days, etc. The destruc- 
tion of Babylon is immediately followed by 
the deliverance of Israel. But the desciip- 
tion of the latter is a remarkable one. We 
are by no means to regard it as an idealiied 



on. L. 1—46.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



27^ 



picture of the return of the Jews under 
Zerubbahel, any more than we can suppose 
the glowing promises in the second pait of 
Isaiah to have their sole fiilfilraeiit in thiit 
diaappointinz event. No ; it is the chariic- 
terislio of Messianic prophecy that, with 
"foreshortened persptctive," the prophets 
represent as equally near events which are 
really separnted by ages. In the Book of 
Isaiah, for instance, preliminary judgments 
are repeatedly described in terms which, 
properly speaking, only iipply to the great 
final judgment. In fact, each great political 
revolution is a stage in the Divine drama of 
judgment, which will reach its close in the 
final catiiclysm. And so too here (as well 
as in Isa. il. — Ixvi) the promise of mercy 
to Israel, which began to be fulfilled in the 
edict of Cyrus, is represented as if the still 
future conversion of the people of Israel 
were actually accomplished. The descrip- 
tion reminds us of oh. iii. 18 — 21. Notice 
the penitence of the returning exiles, and 
the reunion of Israel and Judah (see on ch. 
iii. 18). Going and weeping : they shall go ; 
rather, they ehall go, weeping at they go. 

Ver. 5. — Thitherward ; rather, hitherwarS, 
The prophet is eviilently writing from Jeru- 
salem (comp. ch. li. 50). let us join our- 
selves. A conjectural emendation (nilveh 
for nilvS, a difficult reading, meaning, per- 
haps, "join yourselves " ). A perpetual 
covenant. The same phrase occurs in ch. 
xxxii. 40. The addition, " that shall not be 
forgotten," reminds us of " the ark of the 
covenant," which was "not to be remem- 
bered " (ch. iii. 16). 

Ver. 6. — Lost sheep. Not merely with 
reference to the scattering of the Captivity 
(as In Isa. xxvii. 13, where the Authorized 
Version has " ready to perish "), but to the 
transgressions of the Law of God, of which 
the Jews had been constantly guilty (comp. 
Ps. cxix. 176 ; Isa. liii. 6). Their shepherds 
. . . mountains. This is the marginal cor- 
rection in the Hebrew Uible ; the text has, 
" Their shepherds have caused them to go 
astray upon the seducing mountains" — a 
strange expression, which is, however, de- 
fended by Na'gelsbach on the ground of 
oh. ii. 20 ; iii, 2, 23 ; xvil. 2. Their resting- 
place ; literally, their couchinrj-place ; i.e. 
their pasture, Jehovah, at once their Pasture 
(ver. 7) and their true Shepherd (Ps. 
zxiil. 1). 

Ver. 7. — ^We offend not ; rather, we incur 
no guilt. As long as Israel lived a life con- 
secrated to Jehovah, "all that devoured 
him Incurred guilt " (ch. ii. 3). But now 
that he had wandered from Jehovah, and so 
forfeited his protection, his adversaries 
denied that they could be brought to 
aooonnt. Habitation of justice ; strictly, 
poffora </ righteoueneu. The same title is 



applied in ch. xxxi. 23 to Jerusalem. But 

Jerusalem's spiritual efficacy is only deriva- 
tive; rest and life flow from Jehovah alone, 
who is, therefore, the true Pasture of his 
people. In the Hebrew, " Jehovah " is 
placed emphatically at the end of the verse. 
The hope of their fathers (comp. Ps. xxii. 4). 
To forsake Jehovah was an act of treason to 
the former generations. 

Ver. 8. — The prophet returns to the fate 
of Babylon. He exhorts the captive Israel- 
ites to flee in time, before the hostile army 
reaches the city (comp. Isa. xlviii. 20). Be 
as the he-gcats before the flocks; lather, a$ 
Ihe rams, whose example is followed nn- 
liwiitatingly by the flock. The " ilocks " in 
this case are the strangers in Babylon (ver. 
lU). 

Ver. 9. — I will raise ; literally, / will stir 
up (or, atoalcen) ; comp. eh. vi. 22; Isa. xiii. 
17. An assembly of great nations. So in 
a parallel propliecy, " the kingdoms of 
nations gatbeied together" (Isa. xiii. 4). 
Callias in Ebers' learned story, 'The 
Egyptian Princess,' speaks of " an empire 
10 casually heaped together, and consisting 
of seventy populations of different tongues 
and customs, as that of Persia." From 
thence ; t.«. from the head-quartera of the 
array of nations. As of a mighty expert man ; 
rather, 08 of an expert warrior (or, mighty 
man). The marginal rendering of the 
Authorized Version represents a various 
rending of the Hebrew found in three old 
editions, and presupposed in the Targum and 
Vulgate, "one making childless," ie. "a 
destroyer." The received reading, however, 
is telf-evidently right. None shall return in 
vain. It seems doubtful whether (his refers 
to the arrow or to the mighty man. The 
arrow may be said to " return [or, turn '] in 
vain " when it misses its aim or strikes 
the mark without piercing it (comp 2 Sam. 
i. 22, where, however, it is the sword which 
is thus spoken of) ; the mighty man when 
he retires from the tield defeated. Tiiis 
wider use of the phrase is <ianction('d by 
Isa. Iv. 11. 

Vers. 11 — 20. — Babylon's desolation and 
Israel's glorification. 

Vers. 11, 12.— Because ye were glad, etc.; 
rather, Truly ye mny he glad ; truly ye may 
rejoice, ye spoilers of mine heritage ; truly ye 
may leap as a heifer at grass, and neigh as 
iteeds; yet your mother, etc. Yimr triumph 
shall be of short duration ; disgrace follows 
closely upon its heels. " Your mother" is a 
term for the nation regarded as a whole 
(comp. Isa. 1. 1; Hos. ii. 2; iv. 5). "At 
grass " is the reading adopted by the Septua- 
gint and Vulgate; thepoiuted text has (the 
vowels alone are difiisrent), "(a heifer) that 
thresheth," i.e. allowed to eat its fill of corn, 
agreeably to the direction in Deut. sxv. 1. 



278 



THE BOOK OF THE PKOPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. u 1—46. 



It 1b not dear why the Authorized Version 
deserted the received pointing. Behold, the 
tiindermost of the nations shall be a wilder- 
ness; rather, Behold, the hindermost of the 
nations 1 a wilderness, etc. The subject 
understood in thw first part is obviously the 
people, in the second the bind, of Babylon. 

Ver. 13. — All but the first clause of this 
verse is taken from cli. xix. 8; xllx. 17. 

Ver. 14. — Put yourselves in array, etc. 
The Authorized Version, j'uided, perhaps, by 
considerations of rliytlmi, lias misplaced the 
first stop, which ouglit to be after " bow." 
The Modes are referred to in a parallel 
prophecy as great archers (Isa. xiii. 18). 

Ver. 15. — Shout against her; t'.e. raise the 
battle-cry (comp. Josh. vi. 16 ; Isa. xlii. 13). 
She hath given her hand. This action is 
generally mentioned as a pledge of friend- 
ship or a ratification of a promise (2 Kings 
X. LI ; Ezek. xvii. 18 ; Ezra x. 19) ; but the 
notion of surrender or submission would 
naturally follow (so in 1 Chron. xxix. 24 ; 2 
Chron. "xxx. 8). Dr. Payne Smith well 
quotes tlje words of Turnus, when begging 
his life of JSneas, " Vioisti, et victum ten- 
dere palmas Ausonii videre " (' iEneid,' xii. 
936). Her foundations. The word is difB- 
cult, but a comparison with the Syriac sug- 
gests the rendering, her walU. "Founda- 
tions " is obviously wrong. 

Ver. 16.— Cut off the sower, etc. " Babif- 
lon " here probably means Babylonia, for it 
is clear from ver. 12 that the curse belongs 
to the country as well as the city of Baby- 
lon ; indeed, " Babylon " in ver. 13 seems to 
bo used in the wider sense. Otlrers think 
ot the open spaces within the walls of 
Babylon, in which it is said that crops were 
raised to provision the city incase of a siege 
(see Eawlinfon, 'Ancient Monarchies,' ii. 
513); but this is less natural. They shall 
turn, etc. The subject is, not the husband- 
men, but the strangers in Babylonia ; comp. 
the parallel passage, Isa. xiii. 14, on which 
this passage is bused. JEschylus ('Pers.,' 
53) speaks of the Trd/jL/uKTos ux>^os in Ba- 
bylon. Win ther brought by force from tlieir 
homos, like the Jews, or voluntary residents 
for the sake of commerce, all should hurry 
from the doomed city. 

Ver. 17. — Israel is a scattered sheep, etc. 
Here a pause in the discourse occurs. The 
prophet returns to the present condition 
of Israel, who is likened to a sheep scared 
away from its fold by lions. The ruin 
wrought by the lions is described first as 
"devouring" and then as "breaking the 
bones " of I.^rael — in either cabe it is com- 
plete destruction, but the completeness is 
more emphasized by the second figure. In 
fact, when tlie "ten tribes" were carried 
captive, the elements of the theocracy still 
remained in the southern kinadom. 



Ver. 19.— The flock restored. Hia habi- 
tation is an unfortunate rendering, which 
obscures the beautiful figure; read, hit 
pasture (as in ver. 7). The places mentioned 
were all famous for their rich pasturage 
(oomp. cli. xxii. 6 ; Isa. xxxiii 9; Micah vii 
14 (especially); Ezek. zzxiv. 13. 14; Cant. 
iv. 1). 

Ver. 20. — ^In those days, etc. An evan- 
gelical promise, reminding us of ch. xxxi. 34 
and xxxiii. 8, and of the combination of 
spiritual with temporal blessings in the 
latter part of Isaiah. 

Vers. 21—28. — The punishment of Baby 
Ion, corresponding to her crimes. 

Ver. 21. — The land of Merathaim ; le. of 
double rebellion. Probably enough an 
actual geographical name may lie at the 
root of this singular expression ; but we are 
not able at present to say what it was. Tlie 
prophet has, at any rate, modified it in such 
a way as to convey a definite meaning, sym- 
bolic of the character of Babylon (comp. on 
ver. 31). What was this meaning? Accord- 
ing to Gesenius, tliere is an allusion to th» 
two great blows indicted on Israel and Judab 
by Assyria and Babylon respectively ; but 
as these two powers were but the instru- 
ments uf a higher Hand, this explanation 
would seem to be inconsistent with the pro- 
phetic teaching. Dahler, De Wette, and 
Keil take the two rebellions to be the 
spiritual ones of idolatry and pride; and 
there is no obvious objection to this. But 
the dual may be simply intended to express 
intensity ; comp. cb. xvii. 18, " Destroy them 
with double destmction " (see note). The 
inhabitants of Fekod ; i.e. of punishment 
But here too a geographical name very 
probably lies underneath. The Taylor 
cylinder-inscription of Sennacherib men 
tions a Pukudu (= Pekod), together with 
Havrann (Hauran) and Nabatu (Naba- 
theeans); but this was the name of a tribe. 
In Ezek. xxiii. 23 we read, "The Baby- 
lonians, and all the Chaldeans, Pekod, and 
Shoa, and Koa," etc. ; and in ' Becords of the 
Fast,' zi. 92, we find a town Pikudu 
mentioned, lying to the south of Babylon, 
which may, perhaps, have given its name to 
a district, and to this district the prophet 
not improbably alludes. M. Haldvy conjec- 
tures that the event which corresponds to 
the prophecy is the decisive battle which 
virtuidly teiminated the Babylonian empbe. 
According to the newly discovered Cyrus- 
inscriptioi.. this battle was fouglit near a 
place called Rutu, which appears to have 
been situated in the neighbourhood of 
Pukudu (' Records,' I.e.). About the sym- 
bolic meaning there can be no doubt : Pekod 
is a wortljy pendant to Merathaim. Sin and 
punishment are so closely connected in the 
pronlietio mind thiit one word sometimes 



OH. L. 1—46.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, 



273 



oovera both notions. It ia doubtful, for 
tnstanoe, whether the better rendering of 
Isa. T. 18 is " draw sin as with a cart-rope " 
or "draw punishment." 

Ver. 23. — The hammer of the whole earth. 
So in Isaiah (ziv. 5), " JehoTah hath broken 
the staff of the wicked, the rod of the 
rulers; which smote peoples in passion 
with an unceasing stroke." In the next 
chapter a similar title is conferred upon 
Israel, with the right to retaliate upon 
Babylon all the evil which Babylon bad 
done to Zion (ch. li, 20 — 21). Compare the 
epithet Martel, " The Hammer," given to 
Charles, Duke of the Franks, on aooount of 
his great victory over the Saracens at Tours ; 
it is tempting to add " Makkabi," the epi- 
thet of Judas (MaccabsBus), but the k is not 
the same letter as that in maqqab, hammer. 

Ver. 24. — I have laid a snare for thee. It 
was very natural, as long as Cyrus's own 
account of the capture of Babylon was un- 
known, to refer for a fulfilment to the strata- 
gem which, as Herodotus relates, that king 
employed, viz. diverting tlie waters of the 
Euphrates into an already existing reser- 
voir, and entering the city unexpectedly by 
the river-channel (Herod., i. 191). But the 
cylinder-inscription, translated by Sir H. 
Bawlinson in 1880, shows that Babylon 
opened its gates of its own accord, on hear- 
ing the defeat and capture of Nabonidua. 
There is no occasion to look for any further 
fulfilment of the prophecy than the surprise 
wliich must ever come upon the bystander 
when he sees a mighty empire suddenly 
pass into the hands of its enemies. The 
tenses in this verse are not very happily 
rendered. It would be better to translate, I 
laid a snare for thee, and tlu)u wast taken, 
Babylon, unawares ; thou wast found, 
etc., hecame thou hadst striven against the 
Lord. 

Ver. 25.— Hath opened his armoury. A 
truly grand figure. The north country 
(the " hidden " part of the eartli, as it was 
called in Hebrew) is regarded by the 
prophet as a storehouse of young and " in- 
exhaustible" nations, from which Jehovah 
can at any time " bring forth weapons of 
his indignation." The latter phriso occurs 
again in the parallel prnpheoy (Isa. xiii. 5), 
where it is evidently applied to the army of 
Medo-Persian invaders. For this is the 
work, etc. ; rather, For the Lord, Jehovah of 
halts, hath a work. 

Ver. 26. — Come against her ; rather. Come 
to her. Dr. Payne Smith infers that Baby- 
lon has already fallen, and that the persons 
addressed are not warriors only, but plun- 
derers of every kind. This is almost too 
subtle. The propositions "to" and 
" against" (literally, upon) are so frequently 
interchanged (corap. ch. xlvi. 22; xlix. 9). 

JEBEKIAH — n. 



From the utmost border; rather, aS to- 
gether} it ia an idiom expressing nniver- 
eality. Those who are spoken of are re- 
garded as a totality, " from the utmost end " 
of which its members come. Cast her up as, 
heaps ; rather. Cast it up as sheaves; i.e. 
ransack the repositories of Babylon's wealth, 
and heap it up like corn ; last of all, destroy 
her (rather, it) utterly. The verb ia « very 
emphatic one. Its primary meaning is 
" to cut off, or shut off." Hence kherem, 
a devoted thing, is applied in the Law to 
that which is " tubooi d," as it were, cut off 
from any but sacred uses. In Lev. xivii. 
21 it is used of a field wholly appi opiiated 
to the sanctuary, and in 1 Sam. xv. 21 and 
1 Kings XX. 42 to livinj beings doomed 
to de.^tniction. Destruction is generally a 
part of the meaning ; but it is not merely 
destruction, but an act of homage to tlie 
Divine justice. 

Ver. 27. — In this verse we are told that 
the kherem, i.e. the Divine ban, falls upon 
the entire male population, as in the Loly 
wars of Joshua (Josh. vi. 21 ; xi. 11, 20). 
All her bullocks. As in ch. li. 40 and Isa. 
xxxiv. 6, the doomed people ia likened to 
sacrificial victims (comp. ch. xlvi. 10). The 
same fact is described without figure in cli. 
xlviii. IS. Qo down to the slaughter ; i.e. 
be forceil down to the slaughtering-trough. 

Ver. 28. — The voice of them that flee, etc. ; 
rather, Bark ! those that flee, etc. A cor, 
fused murmur indicates the approach of 
the fugitives with their great tidings. The 
vengeance of his temple ; i.e. the punisi 
ment due to Babylon for burning the 
temple ; comp. next veise, also ver. 15, 
" The vengeance of the Lord," and ch. li. 
11. 

Vers. 29 — 40. — The completeness of Baby- 
lon's destruction. 

Ver. 29. — Call together the archers, etc. 
A dramatic way of indicating that the siege 
is about to begin. 

Ver. 30.— With the exception of " her " 
in the second clause, a repetition of ch. 
xlix. 26. 

Ver. 31. — thou most proud; rather, 
Pride! Just as in ver. 21 Babylon is 
called Mcralhaim, and as Egypt is, in 
Hebiew poetry, called Rahab, i.e. " boister- 
ousness " or " arrogance " (Isa. xxx. 7 ; li. 
9 ; Job xxvi. 12 ; Ps. Ixxxvii. 4 ; Ixxxix. 10). 

Ver. 32.— The most proud; rather. Pride. 
Eaise him up. For the sake of uniformity, 
"her" would be better; for it is Babylou 
who is spoken of. There is an inconsistency 
in the use of the persons in the original. 
Elsewhere in tliia description Babylon ia 
feminine ; here it is masculine, to agree with 
" Pride." 

Ver. 33.— At the end of ver. 32 a pause 
occurs in the discourse. Then the prophet 



274 



THE BOOK OF THE PBUPHET JEREMIAH. L™- 1- 1— '^6. 



take* up the theme again with renewed 
emphasis. Were oppressed; rather, are 
oppressed. BeciiuBe the oppression of Israel 
and Judah still ooiitiiiues, whereas Israel 
has by this time been amply punished (" re- 
ceived double," Isa. xl. 2) fur her transgres- 
Bions, Jehovali will himself interpose. He 
IS, in fact, Israel's Gael ('• Redeemer "), i e. 
cliarged, like the next of kin, with the duty 
of recovering thy rights and avenging thy 
wrongs (comp. Isa. xli. 11; zlTii. 1). On 
the Ooel, see Lev. xzt. 25; Buth iv. 6; 
Numh. XXX. 19. 

Ver. 34. — That ho may giye rest to the 
land ; rather, to the earth. Babylon was one 
of the great world-empires ; we can hardly 
dispense with this convenient Germanism. 
It was the wont of the Chaldeans, as Ha- 
bakkuk puts it (i. 6), " to walk through 
the breadth of the earth, to possess dwiUing- 
places that were not theirs." Observe tlie 
striking coutrast — "rest" to the world which 
has been too long deprived of it, and " dis- 
quiet " to those who have hitherto spread it 
far and wide (comp. Isa. xiv. 2, 3). 

Vers. 35 — 38. -No human aid avails 
against so terrible a foe ; therefore Jehovah 
calls npon his Sword (see on ch. xlvii. 6) 
to avenge the cause of his people. 

Ver. 35. — A sword is, etc., sliould rather 
be, Sword upon the Chaldeans ; it is an ex- 
clamation equivalent to " Let the Sword 
come upon the Chaldeans" — that sword 
which never "returns empty." The wise 
men are, partly the astronomers and astro- 
logers at the various observatories in Baby- 
lonia, whose duty it was to send la monthly 
reports of tlie appearances in the sky, which 
were regarded as having an occult political 
significance (comp. Isa. xlvii. 13). In the 
next verse thoy are called liars, or praters. 
In Isa. xliv. 25 this word stands parallel 
to "diviners." Possibly "liars" may be 
B wider term than "vise men," and in- 



cludes an inferior grade of pretenders tc 
" wisdom." 

Ver. 37. — The mingled people ; rather, the 
foreign peoples. Even if in ch. xxv. 20 the 
Hebiew 'erebh is an ethnograpliicai term re- 
minding us of the AsBvrian Urbi used ol 
Bedouin trilies,' it is clear that no such 
explanation will suit liere (see on oh.xxv.20;. 

Ver. 38.— A drought. The Massoretij 
critics, in their prosaic realism, were unable 
to see how a " sword " could be " upon the 
waters;" hence tliey altered k\ireb into 
hhoreh. But the sword is merely a symbol 
of the Divine vengeance, and may be in- 
terpreted differently according to the exi- 
gencies of the context. Bender, Sword 
upon the waters. They are mad upon their 
idols ; rather, through Terrors they befool 
themselves. " Terrors " is a synonym for 
the gods of the heathen, which inspired a 
feeling of awe rather than affection, unlike 
Jehovah as he revealed himself through 
the authors of the psalms and prophecies. 

Ver. 39. — Parallel passages : Isa. xxxiv. 
14; xiii. 20-22. The wUd beasts of the 
desert ; rather, wild cats (so Bochart, 
' Hierozoicon,' p. 862). Wild beasts of the 
islands ; rather, jackals. Owls ; rather, 
ostriches. 

Ver. 40. — A verbal copy of oh. xlix. 18. 

Ver. 41 — ch. li. 4. — The instruments ol 
the judgment. The section is partly a 
cento from other prophecies. Thus vers. 
41 — 43 aie a repetition of oh. vi. 22 — 24, 
except that what is there said of Jerusalem 
is here applied to Babylon ; and vers. 44 — 
46 of ch. xlix. 19 — 21, the reference, how- 
ever, being in the latter passage to Edom. 
In ver. 46 At the noise of the taking ol 
Babylon would be more literally rendered, 
At the cry, Saln/lon is taken. 

' Friedr. Delilzsch, ' Wo lag das Ban^ 
dies?' (Leipz., 1881), p. 806. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Ver. 2. — 3%« Judgment of Babylon. The position and history of Babylon give ■ 

peculiar significance to the judgment against her. 

I. Babtlon had been the obeatest power of heb tiue. 1. Earthly greatness 
is transitory. The supremacy of the world is an insecure position. Bivalries and 
hatreds inevitably spring up about it. 2. No might nor dignity can secure a people 
from the judgmi-vt of Heaven. The more talents are entrusted to a nation the heavier 
must its responsibility be. England will have to answer to God for her use of the vast 
resources on which she foolishly prides itself. The wealth and population of London 
are no defence against Divine judgments. 

II. BaBTLOM had BEBN the most VIOTOKIOnS KtNGDOH OV HEB TIHK. She had 

conquered in her wars with neighbouring nations. While they failed she had suc- 
ceeded ; fortune, frowning on them, had smiled upon her. Yet Babylon's time came. 
No sround of confidence is more delusive than previous success. If success induoei 
carelessness and self-indulgence, it is sure to prepare the wa> for future failure. Th< 



OH. L. 1—46.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 21i 

" fortunate man " has not the slightest reason for presuming that his good furtune will 
help him in the future life. If he can argue anything from it, he may conclude that, 
since he has had his good things in this Me, the evils that fall to his share must await 
him in the next. 

III. Babylon had tbidmphed ovbb thb people of God. Some might have 
thought that this was a victory of her patron god over the Jehovah of the Jews. But 
now "Bel Is confounded, Merodach is broken in |iieces." For a season the evil powers 
of the world may triumph over the Church of Christ. But ultimately they must 
succumb. Persecution cannot finally crush the truth. Unbelief, proud and insolent as 
it may be for a while, must ultimately bow before the power of faith. For truth is 
great and eternal, and God is fighting on its side. 

IV. Babylon had been an instrument in the hands of God. Jehovah speaks 
of Nebuchadnezzar as " my servant" (ch. xxvii. 6). Yet he must suffer. For he was 
not a deliberate, willing servant. If God overrules the actioa of a man for good, this 
result is no justification of his conduct. For he is judged by liis aims and motives, and 
not at all by the unintentional and unforeseen results of his actions. The only service 
of God which renders the servant acceptable in his sight is conscious, willing, obedient 
service. We may be used by God for other service, and then be cast off and suffer for 
our sinful deeds as much as if no Divine ends had been fulfilled in them. Thus the 
scourge is scourged. 

Vers. 4, 5. — Betuming penitentt. This picture of the restoration of Israel Is interest- 
ing for the prominence given to the spiritual reformation of the people. It would \m 
vain for them to return to their land unless they also returned to tlieir God. The 
spiritual recovery that thus forms the centre of the Messianic restoration is typical of 
the recovery of God's wandering children as returning penitents. Consider the leading 
points of it, 

I. Repentance fob the past. The two elements of repentance are here indicated. 
1. Sorrow far ain. The children of Israel are depicted as "weeping as they go." A 
due sense of sin will produce sorrow. The penitent will feel himself • "miserable 
sinner." But to be genuine the sorrow of penitence must rise directly out of the 
conviction of sin. If it were induced by sympathy, by sensational influences, etc., it 
would be a vain and useless thing. Moreover, grief arising out of the fear of the painful 
consequences of sin is not the grief of repentance. This must be a sorrow of conscience 
directly produced by regret for the sin itself. 2. Change of conduct. The penitents 
are to " come " and " go," etc. The prodigal arises and goes to his lather. Mere idle 
tears are not repentance. Real repentance is the turning round of the soul from dark- 
ness to light, the active desire to amend one's ways. It is true that repentance is not 
regeneration. It is not a renewal of nature nor is it the realization of a better life. 
But it is the first step towards this, and it must grow out of an honest desire to 
attain it. 

II. Awakened beligious devotion in the present. 1. Inquiry. They "geek 
the Lord ; " they " ask the way." The penitent becomes the seeker after light. Truth, 
which was once a matter of indifi'erence, or a subject of abstract questions, is now felt 
to be of great practical importance. 2. A return to Ood. The sinnsr had feared the 
visitation of God, but the per^Hent now voluntarily seeks to enter his presence. There 
is awakened a desire to be reconciled to God and to enjoy close communion with him. 
3. A revival of interest in pullic worship. The penitents are described with their faces 
turned Zionward. Love to God induces interest in the worship at his house, no doubt 
a far less important thing than the spiritual return to God, yet noteworthy as an 
evidence of this. One of the leading signs of a change ol heart is a renewed interest in 
the ordinances of religion. 4. Brotherly companionship. Tliechildrenof Israel and the 
children of Judah come together. The tears of repentance melt away the old barriers 
of jealousy and contention. When on our knees before God we are all brethren. The 
forgiveness of our sin by God is conditional on our mutual forgiveness of one another 
(Matt. vL 14, 16). Through anion with the common Saviour idl the redeemed hecom* 
one family. 

III. A NEW COVENANT FOB THE FUTUBE. Repentance is but a beginning. Th« 
wicket-gate is entered ; now the pUgrimage must be followed. The soldier is enlisted ( 



27« THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. u 1—46. 



the warfare lies before him. The Chri.stian must \iye In the future, not wasting hia 
remaining days in idle srief for the misspent past, but " forgetting those things which are 
behind, and reaching forth unto those which are before." It is dangerous to depend 
upon the new-born fervour of the hour of penitence. We need a solid conviction, a 
firm resolution, a covenant. He who becomes a Christian enters a covenant. He 
receives blessings from Christ, but he binds himself to the service of Christ. In the 
course of years he may be tem|)ted to forget it. He therefore needs constant prayer 
and watchfulness. God will not be satisfied with the fact that some one " great trans- 
action " is " done." The transaction is the forming of a perpetual covenant. It brings 
the obligation of lifelong fidelity — faithfulness " unto death." 



Ver. 6. — Lost sheep. L Men abe like God's bheep. In the Old Testament the 
.lews appear as the only flock, but Christ teaches us that all mankind is so regarded by 
God. 1. We are like sheep, because (1) we are foolish and prone to err ; (2) we are 
weak 'and defenceless ; and yet (3) of some value in the sight of God. 2. We are like 
OocTs sheep, because (1) we are not our own masters, we belong to God ; (2) he watches 
over us, guides, feeds, protects, and blesses us. 

II. Sin is like the stbayinq of lost sheep. 1. It is straying fi'om Ood. The 
shepherd goes first ; the way he chooses may be narrow, steep, rugged ; it may seem to 
lead to pastureless deserts or to dangerous forests ; but it is the duty of the flock simply 
to follow the shepherd wherever he goes. It is our one duty to follow God in Christ. 
To sin is to follow the devices and desires of our own heart instead of following his will. 
2. It is straying fi-om our own vocation. There is a path for the sheep. There is a path 
for every man — a way of life into which he is called to walk. When he knows this, if 
he turn from his duty to any other way, no matter how pleasant and profitable it may 
be, he is failing in his mission, wandering from the right way. 

III. Men are led astbat bt bad shepherds. It is terrible to think of the 
fatal work of men of great talents who have spent them in deluding or debasing their 
fellows. What vast harm has been done by the evil genius of great men ! Intellectual 
leaders, philosophers, religious teachers, poets, directly turn men astray when their 
teaching is false and corrupt. Political leaders bring nations into great criminal wars. 
Court influence is potent for evil when the court is corrupt. Nevertheless men cannot 
throw off their own guilt upon their leaders. For they act with their free-wilL 

IV. The result of STBAvma is houeless WANDERiNa. 1. It is to be homeless. 
The sheep are lost on the mountains. Ctod is the Home of his sheep. To be far from 
Gh)d is to be on the wild mountains, open to the tempest, at the mercy of the fiercest 
foes. 2. It is to be restless. The sheep "have forgotten their resting-place." The 
fascination of liberty to roam over the mountains tempts the sheep to wander from 
their shepherd. They soon find that this very liberty becomes a curse, and the wander- 
ing a doom of wretchedness. What the soul wants is rest, and it can find no rest but 
in God. 

V. Christ beoovxbs the wandering sheep. The sheep could not find their way 
back to the fold, neither could men find their way back to God. Christ came to seek 
as well as to save. As the good Shepherd, he gave his life for the sheep. They who 
have wandered furthest are not beyond recovery by Christ. If but one sheep be still 
straying, he will not be satisfied till that one is brought back. If, then, we have 
wandered, our safety will be found in hearkening to the voice of the good Shepherd and 
following him back to our home in God. 

Vet. 20. — Perfeet forgiveness, h In what it oonsists. When Gtod forgives a man 
he pardons him completely, as Christ thoroughly cured all the sick persons whom he 
healed in any way. There is no middle course here. Either the forgiveness is total or 
it is not accorded at all. 1. This is more than the remission of penalties. Some conse- 
quences of sin must still remain, though these are no longer indications of God's anger, 
but converted into merciful chastisements. But the essence of forgiveness lies deeper 
than anv manipulation of external experience. It is inward, in the relation of God to 
the lou. 2. This spiritnal forgiveness consists in the removal of all estremgemeni. 
between Ood and the sinner. It is perfect reconciliation with no shadow cast upon 
ih by old offences. Many men profess to forgive and yet bear a grudge, or say the; 



CH.U1— 46.J THfi BOOK Of THE PROPHET JEKEMIAS. 271 

will forgive but cannot forget, or foro;ive partially but retain a certain suspicion and 
zoolness. God's forgiveness goes further. He is said to remove our sin from us " as 
far as the east is from the west," to " cast it into the sea," to " remember it no more." 
He treats his guilty but penitent child as if the sin had never been committed. No 
record of guilt is preserved, none can be found, even if an enemy search for it. The 
proilig:il is not made a hired servant ; he is welcomed with joy. The Christian is not 
grudgingly received into the outer courts of God's house ; he is called to the presence of 
his Father and blessed with full jjrivileges of sonship. If he is justified he is also 
glorified. Hence we may learn (1) that, after genuine repentance and fa.th, a man need 
not remain in a state of fear and sadness ; he may rejoice with confidence. His sin is 
not to be found ; then he need think no more of it. If God has forgotten it he also may 
forget it. The typical Christian is not a weeping Magdalene, but a happy, lioiielul 
servant of Christ. We may also leain (2) to extend more charity and coufldence to 
other men in their penitence. If God has forgiven them, who are we that we should 
treat them with contempt or anger ? 

II. How rr is obtaiked. 1. Often after chastisemtni. The promise to Judah and 
Israel is forgiveness after the sufferings of the Captivity. This is not invariably the 
case ; for (1) chastisement may fail in its work upon the soul, and then the forgiveness 
will not follow ; or (2) God may bring the sinner to penitence by milder means. But it 
is the design of chastisement to lead us to the blessedness of reconciliation. 2. After 
repentance. The people are first depicted as " going, weeping as they go." Forgiveness 
is offered to the worst man who repents, but not to the mildest offender who .remains 
impenitent. 3. Through the mercy of God. This forgiveuess is part of the blessed- 
ness of the restoration which God promises to effect for his children. It is not earned 
by future good conduct nor by any sacrifice or penance. We now know that it is not 
cheap. The price ia no less than iixe life of the Son of God. But to us it is a free gift 
of God's love. 

Ver. 34. — The strong Redeemer, L The OHARAcn-SB and foweb of the Rbdeembb. 
1. Ood is the Redeemer. He is the Ooel, the Friend, Advocate, Avenger, and Saviour of 
his children. (1) The goM was the next of kin (Lev. xxv. 25). Ko man is so nearly 
related to us as God is. (2) The goel was bound by law to redeem or avenge the 
sufferer. Human laws, in so far as they are just and good, are shadows of the Divine 
laws, f.e. of the ways of Rod's procedure. If the Jewish law of redemption was inspired 
by (jod, it was made after the pattern of God's manner of acting. In the New Testa- 
ment we see this side of God's work brought into leading promiuence. Jesus Christ is 
the manifestation of God in the flesh, and Jesus Christ is pre-eminently " the Reileemer " 
(Eph. i. 7). 2. The almightiness of Ood is <mr assurance of redemption. '1 be massive 
strength of the rock makes it painful for us to fall upon it, and fearful and fatal for it 
to fall upon us ; but this very characteristic renders it a blessing if we rest under its 
shadow, build on its foundation, or cling to it for support in the driving tempest. Men 
may well shrink from the might of God when they are opposed to it, and tremble and 
despair when it rises up, awful and irresistible, to crush them ; but if they can turn to 
it with trust and know it is working their good, they will find in it a ground for solid 
assurance. How disastrous would it be for us to have a weak God, though he might 
have all other Divine perfections 1 His love might be infinite ; but if he could only pity, 
and not effectually save us, his grace would be of little use. But our Redeemer is the 
Lord of hosts. If a host encamp against us, the Lord of hosts is on our side. The strength 
of the Redeemer is of importance, because (1) our foes are great — earthly trouble, sin, 
death ; (2) our evil state is disastrous — we have fallen far into sin, some of us, perhaps, 
into deep wretchedness, only a strong hand can pull us out of so horrible a pit ; (3) our 
own strength is slight. We are not able to cope with the dangers that beset us. In 
face of the great forces of evil we are like withered leaves before the autumn blast. 
Hence to us weaklings amid the strange and awful powers of time and eternity, what 
grand comfort lies in the thought that "our Redeemer is strong "1 

II. The method and fecits of hib eedemption. 1. the method. "He shall 
throughly plead their cause." The case is intricate, many cross issues arise. The 
honour of God, justice, the maintenance of respect for law, the government of the 
aotrerse, the highest good of all creatures, are concerned in the sin r ( man and its effeut^ 



2T8 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [ch. l. 1— 46. 

and they must all be considered and fairly treated before redemption Is possible. But 
w« have^no weak Advocate, God has gone through the whole labour and sacrifice. He 
has paid" the price — even the gift of his Son to die for us. 2. The fruits. (1) Rut. 
" That he may give rest to the land." This was the greatest blessing to people who 
had been harried by invasions and wearied with exile. Best is what the world most 
wants in its war and confusion, its toil and its sorrow. " Peace on earth " is the gospel 
benediction. Rest is what the soul most needs — rest from sin, from self, from fear and 
doubt and wearing grief. Rest is the blessing Christ offers to those who will " come 
unto "him. Heaven is rest. (^) The overthrow of foes. Babylon, the troubler of the 
nations, will be disquieted. Christ, the Rock of salvation, is to his enemies " a stone of 
stumbling and a rock of offence." In the spiritual redemption of Christians the spiritual 
foes are vanquished ; sin and death, the last enemies, are slain. We can only have rest 
to our souls in proportion as our sins are conquered. So the Redeemer who brings 
baliu for our Mill's wounds brings a sword for its sina. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS 

Vers. 2 — 5. — IsraeVs ddiverance. This is described as twofold — the hlstorfcal cb" 

cumstances and the correlative spiritual experience. Apart from its verification in the 
case of ancient Israel, it is true to the actual process of many an individual conversion. 

L A PEOVIDBNTIAL EVENT. The outward circumstances of life are altered. External 
tyrannies are brought suddenly to an end, and the children of God are set free to serve 
God or not as they please. In every life there are some such occurrences. The spell 
of evil is broken and moral freedom rendered possible. And this is ofien brought 
about impressively, with the stamp of the supernatural upon it. Especially was it so 
with Israel's escape from Babvlon, because of the permanent iufluence that event was 
to have on the spiritual history of mankind. 1. It was of world-wide import. 
Babylon was the central world-power, holding in iron subjection many nations. As 
a universal empire it is to be broken in pieces, and its sentence is not only announced, 
but published abroad as an evangel to the nations. 2. Of evidently Divine authorship. 
The clear prophecies; the moral recompense involved in its fall, and so wonderfully 
corresponding to its deserts, and the vast spiritual consequences accruing therefrom, 
make this indubitable. And equally, we may be sure, was the hand of God visible 
to those who were the subjects of the deliverance (see Ps. cxxiv.). 

II. A SPIRITUAL BXPEEiBNOB. This corresponds to the external circumstances and 
gives them their real significance and effect. 1. Sorrow for pust offences. " Weeping * 
— ^tears of grief and shame. The marvellous grace of God has broken their hearts. 
Tears, too, of joy and gratitude. 2. Beturn to the true Ood. Idolatry was henceforth 
and for ever forsaken. The sublimity and spirituality of God have taken possession 
of imagination and heart. Each step of the way to Palestine is a further removal 
from the S3 which took them away. And it is not the carnal delights of the promised 
land which constitute its attraction. It is Zion they seek, the house of the liord, that 
they may rebuild her ruins and restore her worship. This proves repentance real. 
3. Rtnewal of the covenant. In this is repentance perfected. It is to be a new cove- 
nant — more spiritual, vital, and therefore eternaL The awful years of visitation have 
left an undying memory ; but the interposition and grace of God have written hii 
covenant upon their heart. — M. 

Vers. 4, 6. — " To Zion, with their facet thitherward." A picture of genuine repent 
ance. The action and attitude suit the profession. The point of attraction is Zion, 
not Carmel or Bashan. Keiientanoe is — 

I. Unreal. When the outward behaviour contradicts the profession, or the conduct 
exhibited is only conventional or intended to deceive. It is either : 1. Half-hearted, 
not having its root in deep conviction of sin, and unaccompanied by thorough separa- 
tion from carnal interests. The looks of the heart are alternately attracted towards 
Zion and towards the world, whilst the I'cet go to and fro or stand still. Or : 2. Hypih 
eriiical. When there is no conviction and the behaviour U a pretence. Whwi 
worldly aims are cloaked by religious professiun. 



aaul— 46.J THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHBT JEREMIAH. 878 

11. Real. " Their faces thitherward." The attitude and movement correspor/d with 
the profession. Every preparation is made to go away from " Babylon," and the 
journey is commenced at once. Grief and heavenly longing are the grand motives. 

1. Genuine sorrow. " Weeping " as they go. 2. Pttj-e aspiration. They seek Zion. 
" Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his rijihteousncss," etc. 3. Resolute endeavour. 
The return is at once made, notwithstanding its diHicultios and Hangers. Only in 
Palestine can the perfect theocracy, the spiritual future, be realizeil, i.e. in a true 
Church fellowship, which they hasten to realize. 4. Inward and eternal fidelity. 
Covenant relationship is renewed. A new spiritual covenant, whose provisions are 
written on tlieir hearts, is entered into. They are no longer tlieir own, but the servants 
of God, "bought with a price." 5. Perfect unanimity. Both Israel and Judah. A 
guarantee this of success and thoroughness. The lesson has been learnt by aU, and 
united Israel is " holiness to the Lord." — M. 

Vers. 6, 7, 17 — 20. — Israd as lost sheep. This ii a favourite theocratic title of 
Israel — the sheep of God's pasture. In itsilf an appeal to the traditional pastoral 
character of the nation, and to the marvellous guidance of their forefathers by Jehovah 
through the wilderness. He was the Shepherd of Israel. The extent of their apostaijf 
is here described. 

I. It was coupletk. 1, They had wandered. The allurements of idolatry had led 
them on and on, and they had at length yielded to them. They had sought other 
pastures and acquired preferences for other worship. It is an evil sign when men lose 
taste for the simple services of a spiritual religion. God should be sought alone and 
for his own sake. 2. They became alienated. A natural consequence. Step by step 
they went so far that they could not find their way back. Spiritual unfaithfulness 
produces confusion and spiritual darkness. They forgot their own fjld. 3. They became 
degraded and morally odious. They bore the sign of their spiritual fall upon them. 
Their history, too, was the record of their shame to the neighbouring peoples. The 
backslider can never erase the past. He will bear his Cain-mark to the end, and 
even the heathen and unbeliever will despise him. Their oppressors are so struck 
with the justice of their sentence that they justify themselves in even greater cruelties 
than were warranted. There is no corner of the world where the backslider can escape 
God's curse or hide his shame. Do what he may, he will not be as other men. 

II. Yet it did not baffle the shepherding of God. 1. To avenge. The over- 
done punishment is not lost sight of; it will be duly recompensed. And the sacred 
character of the exiles will add to the guilt of those who used it as an excuse for their 
cruelties. God is the Judge of his lost oops even to the end. He commits his authority 
to no other. He who causes a child of God to go further astray, and delights in hia 
degradation and ruin, will have to account terribly for this to his Father and Saviour. 

2. To bring hack. God's arm is strong to destroy the detaining influences, and out- 
stretched far enough to reach his wanderers, even to the extremities of transgression and 
ruin. And he ciin detect them in every hiding-place and covert. He is the good Shep- 
herd. No wilderness too wide, no mountain too high or rocky, for him to tra.' "^s 
will bring them back to righteousness and then to happiness and peace. — M. 

Ver. 20. — Divine forgivenesi an absolute oblivion. The attribute of completeness 
characterizes God's work of destruction (vers. 14 — 16) ; equally does it pertain to hit, 
work of salvatinn (vers. 19, 20). In both is manifested his rij^liteousaess in its elements 
of wrath and mercy. His forgiveness acts in ppi feet harmony with his severity. 

I. How IT MANIFESTS ITSELF. 1. Eetrospeclivelij. bins that are past are to he 
blotted out. A complete severance is to bd effected between the era of apostasy and 
the new one upon which they are to enter. The strictest justice, the most jealous 
hostility, will tail to make out a valid indictment. 2. Prospectively. (1) In the 
character. It will be purified and confirmed in the righteousness of God. (2) In the 
conduct. There will be no more lapses or infidelities. Israel will be "a peculiar 
people, zealous of good works." It is for the sake of this new future that the guilty 
past has been cancelled ; and it is the legitimate fruit of the experience of God's par- 
doning grace that tlie " reserved" ones shall give themselves " with a glad heart and 
free " to his service and glory 



•>,BQ THE BOOK Oi" THE PROPHET Jl.RBMIAH. [ch. l. 1— 4G 

II. To WHAT IT 18 DtTB. Not to Divine goodness in conflict with Divine lighteous- 
ness, but to tlie satisfaction of Divine righteoutness. 1. In atonement. The saciifice of 
Christ was aniicipated, and for its sake the national tribulation throu;:li which Israel 
had passed was accounted a satisfaction for guilt incurred. In itself that tribulation 
could never effect such an end, nor in any sense as supiilementary of the sufferings of 
Christ, but only symbolically and representatively, such as the lamb slain on the temple 
altar. The sinner is identified with the Saviour. 2. In making righteous. "Justice 
I'loking at the sinner, not simply as the fit subject of punisliment, but as existing in a 
moral condition of unrighteousness, and so its own opposite, must desire that the 
sinner should cease to be in that condition; should cease to be unrit;hteous — should 
become righteous; righteousness in God craving for rigiiteousness in man, with a crav- 
ing which the realization of righteousness in man alone can satisfy. So of holiness." 
(Macleod Campbell.) — M. 

Vers. 21 — ^23. — Z%e hammer broken. Babylon was to be crushed by Persia— one 
hammer by another. As univer.~al world-powers, the rise and fall of these had 
immense importance, and they illustrate the duties and responsibilities of power. 

I. All poweb is a stewardship fbom God. The vast extent and influence of those 
empires, and the special mission divinely appointed them, cannot but impress one with 
a sense of special responsibility. There seems something supernatural in their very 
origin and continuance. And yet it is equally true that the humblest power is a 
responsibility. It might be said that a great deal of the influence of great nations 
arises unconsciously, mechanically, and as it were as the result of their own momentum ; 
and also that the distribution of official duties divides, if it does not quite dissipate, 
individual responsibility. Yet each contributes his quota to the general result, and 
in the end each wiU have to account for his own influence. The nation as a whole will 
be judged, and in that judgment each will be apportioned his due share. How much 
more, therefore, may the individual be held responsible for the use of those powers 
belonging to his own nature and person, and which are under his own control or have 
been in great part created by his own cultivation. We are doubly responsible, viz. 
(1) for the acquisition, and (2) /or the use of power. 

II. It is possible to be the inbteument of Divnnt justice and yet be ociurT. 
Babylon was clearly and definitely " commanded " to perform its work of conqueit and 
destructinn. But it overdid its task through arrogance and unbelief. It was the 
land of " Double-defiance " (Merathaim), inasmuch as it had first illegitimately acquired 
its position by revolt against Assyria, and secondly it had triumphed in a cruel 
and unseemly manner over Israel (Naesielsbach). For this it was brought to account, 
and, therefore, is again named " Visitation." This self-sufficiency and unbelief ren- 
dered it guilty (" Against Jehovah hast thou striven," ver. 24), and yet the work it did, 
even in excess, was turned to account by God. We are responsible, not only for doing 
what God commands, but for doing it in the right spirit and manner. That Q-od 
should overrule our evil for the good of others does not alter its character, which 
depends upon motives and dispositions. Especially in judging or punishing others 
ought we to keep watch over ourselves and examine our own hearts. National and 
ofiicial action will entail moral responsibility as macb as personal, although, it may be, 
not so directly. 

III. The abuse of poweb will be terribly avenged. In the case of Babylon it 
involved it in complete destruction. The influence which had in part been a Divipe 
creation rapidly degenerated into a merely human and sinful one. 1. Because the con- 
sciousness of power tempts to greater arrogance and depravity} and: 2. Because all 
powtr has involved in it corresponding moral capacity, 3. It is tlte perversion and abuse 
of a gracious privilege, — M. 

Vers. 4, b.~Oodly sorrow. In these verses we have given ng not a few of the 
characteristics of real repentance — that repentance which never needs to be repented 
of. Note some of these as seen in Israel and Judah. 

I. They actually set out to seek the Lobd. The time of thinking abont it and 
talking of it was over. All indecision on the matter had ceased, and we see them 
•rising and going on this blessed journey. 



OH. u 1—46.1 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JKREMIAH. 2S1 

n. Tears. Had there not been tbe actual setting out, these tenrs might not havj 
counted for much. But it is said they were " going and weei ing." 'I'no immy are quite 
capable of the weeping, but the other and the far more imiiortnnt | art they fail in 
altogether. But when the fruits go along with the signs of g<">l)- si.noiv, then those 
signs are of real worth, telling as they do of the broken and cuntritu lipirit with which 
God is ever well pleased. 

nL Sinking op all diffebenoes and old eivalries. Unity taking the place o{ 
strife. The old rivals, Israel and Judah, were united now. And the giving up of former 
grudges and grievances is a real sign of a genuine work of grace in the soul. 

IV. Inquiby. This was an open and practical acknowledgment of their former 
wrong, a real confession like the " Father, I have sinned," of tiie returning prodigal. 

v. The Zionwabd face. Ver. 5 : " With their faces thitherwurd," it is said. Tliero 
are many who talk about religion, but with their faces all the while world-ward. 
What does our common talk, our every-day life, our ordinary spirit and conduct, 
declare? They show which way our face really is, no matter what our tears or inquiries 
have been. 

VI. Stibbino onb anotheb up towards the good way. " Come, and let us," etc. 
(ver. 6). When we see men trying to win others for God, to lead men not away from 
him, as heretofore, but to him, we conclude that that man's repentance is real. 

VII. Solemn covENANTDta with God. . The value of such vows and covenants is 
that they render going back from God more difficult. They help to steady the will 
and confirm the wavering purpose. They commit us to the right side. It is a kind of 
breaking down the bridges behind us, a burning of the boats, so that the soldieis 
started on the enterprise may not be able to recross the river. Hence we urge such 
open and solemn avowal, cunsecration and covenanting with God. It tends to make 
your adhesion to God " perpetual," and your holy purpose to serve him far less likely to 
" be forgotten." Thus was it with Israel and Judah — never since have they fallen into 
idolatry, and though yet " the veil is before their faces," they are far other than what 
they were. And in our own Churches such consecration has again and again been 
greatly blessed. — 0. 

Ver. 6. — Forgetting our BesUng-place. This chapter was written for the comfort of 
exiles in Babylon. They were told that their oppression was not to be for ever. " God 
giveth songs in the night." He will not utterly cast down. But before he gives comfort 
he clearly shows the people their sin. And one chief part of that sin was that they 
had forgotten their resting-places. So many generations had lived and died in the 
neglect of Goil, their Resting-place, that he had become forgotten by them. The habit 
of resorting to him was bioken ; other gods had been chosen instead. And now, in the 
sorrow of their exile, they knew not where to turn. Treating the subject generaiiy, we 
note — 

I. A PBBCious tbuth implied. There is a Resting-place provided for us. Weary we 
often are, by reason of conscience and temptation and earthly trouble and fear. But 
there is a resting-place for us. " We who have believed " in the Lord Jesus Christ 
" do enter into rest." His one sacrifice giv es rest as to the past, his intercession ensures 
grace sufficient for all the present and the future too, and his resurrection is the jJedge 
that "he will redeem " my " life from destruction, and crown" me " with loving-kind- 
ness and tender mercy." 

II. A SAD AOonsATlON MADE. That we "have forgotten," etc. Now, this is very 
grievous ; for : 1. It involves deep ingratitude. Think at what a cost our rest was pur- 
chased for us. Our panion, peace, sanctiflcation, and life eternal were not the result of 
a mere wish on the part of God, but they cost the life and death of the Son of God. 
Fonder that vast price paid for redemption, and think what must that heart be that for- 
gets all this — what Christ has done for us, is doing, and will do. " The ox knoweth 
his owner, and the ass," etc. (Isa. i. 3). 2. And it is such folly. For no more surely 
do we need the bread that piarisheth for our bodily life than we do " the Bread of life," 
which is Christ, for the sustenance of our spiritual life. And this not mere theory, but 
all who have ever known him as our Rest, know what a Best — how gracious, how peifect, 
how constant and sure I — he is. And to neglect, abandon, forget that ! — " Can,th« force 
»f folly further go ? " It is an exchange of Eden for the wilderness, of the father's hous# 



282 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [oa.L.1— 46. 



for the swine-feeding and the husks, light for darkness, life for death._ 8. Jt causes 
stick misery. See the picture in the verse. It is that of a hunteil, worried sheep. II 
that were the condition of such sheep, instead of heing led by the shepherd by green 
pastures and lying down there by the still waters, what would its life be worth? And 
10 with our souls ; their misery betrays itself in the haggard look or the flippant laugh, 
or the hideous attempt to stifle all thought and memory in the wild pursuit of pleasure, 
of business, or— worst of all — of sin. Conscience will rebuke ; memory will recall bitter 
times and moan, " Oh that it were with me as in times past!" Prayer and the means 
of grace seem unable to help ; we are powerless for good ; and the scorn of men of the 
world. Yes ; thus to forget is misery indeed. 4. And the danger is very great. For il 
we do not return, we are lost. The terrible words of the writer of the Epistle to the 
Hebrews (vi. 4—6) will be fulfilled in us, and then all hope is gone. " ye children 
of God, ye have a Resting-place; how is it that ye can forget it? Touch upon the 
things of nature, how they chide you I Bring to your remecabrance the birds of the 
air, the beasts of the forest, the dumb driven cattle accustomed to the yoke, and let them 
c' you ; for they fur.et not their resting-place. Carried away to tlie city the other 
d_j-; the dove was taken from its cage, and they let it loose, fastening to it the message 
that was to be sent. It mounted aloft, it whirled around awhile, that it might see where 
it was. It was far, fur away from the dove-cote ; it was found hundreds of miles away ; 
but whither did it fly ? Swift as an arrow from, the bow, it sought its resting-place 
with the infallibility of affection ; it found its nearest way to the cote where it had been 
reaied, and brought its message safely there. And even the dog which thou despisest, 
taken away from its master, carried many miles away, in darkness too, so that it might 
not know its way, has been known to swim rivers, cross byways it could not have 
iuiown, and then is found barking for admission at its master's door ; oh, so happy when 
it hears its master's voice again. It could not rest elsewhere. my heart, wilt thou 
let the pigeon outstrip thee in affection? art thou more doggish than a dog? Dost thou 
forget thy Lcird, when dogs remember well their masters? Let us learn from them and 
forget our Resting-place nevermore" (Spurgeon). 

III. Earnest IKQOIKY SUGGESTED. 1, As to t?ie source of exush toTgetbtiness. Some- 
times it arises from mere thoughtlessness. Cf. the seed that fell by the wayside (Matt, 
xiii.). Or from the unsubdued heart, which likes not to retain the memory of God. Or 
from tlie cares of this world. The children of Israel when in Egypt could not listen to 
Moses by reason of the bitterness of their bondage. And yet more often from wicked 
worldliness. The hurry and drive, the everlasting rush of business, and the setting aside 
of everything that stands in its way, the determination to be rich at all hazards. 
Unbelief is also another cause, the materialistic doubts, the questioning that arises as 
to the trutli of there being any such resting-place at all. And the bewilderment caused 
by sin. The soul is stunned, dazed, and has lost its powers. 2, Am to its curt, "Let 
the wicked fonsake," etc. (Isa. Iv. 7). — 0. 

Vers. 19, 20. — The forgiveness of God. These words are a beautiful setting forth 
of God's abundant pardon. Concerning it note how — 

I. It brings unspeakable jot. In the former part of this chapter (cf. ver. 6) the 
prophet has pictured Israel and Judah like to a driven, hunted flick of sheep, never 
allowed to rest in peace, worried by fierce dogs, and hence in perpetual distress. But 
here there is a complete contrast. The flock leeds on Carmel and Bashan, the richest 
pastures. The most perfect rest is theirs. The lot of the flock told of in Fs. xxiii. 2 i:- 
theirs. So full of peace and joy are they. And the forgiveness of God does bring deep joy 
to the soul. The sense of such forgiveness is very delightful — the realization that God 
doth no more remember our sin. And the manifestation* of that forgiveness are also 
very blessed. For very generally God causes his providence to be gracious and kindly 
to that man whom he has pardoned. And the fruits of it are {3bo blessed, in the 
character, the peace, the energy, the strength, it imparts. But — 

II. It IB CHALLENGED. " The iniquity of Israel shall besought for "(ver. 20). Thcrr 
are those who question very much the Divine forgiveness, who maintain that the sin 
is still where it was. Often the forgiven man himself does this. He cannot "read hi." 
title clear ; " he trembles at the future and cannot be persuaded that God has piit 
away his sin. He is filled with doubts and fears. But often the seeking after the 



OH. L, 1—46.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 281 



Iniquity of God's people is done malignanihj. The enemies of God rejoice when they 
can find a solitary blot or blemish in the character of God's children. What a yell of 
tnumph they raise when they light on such a discovery I Satan is " the accuser of 
the brethren." He is ever on the search for their iniquity. And they who are of him 
are ready with the charge of cant, hypocrisy, etc. ; refusing to believe that there can be 
any such person as a real saint of God. And pharisaically also Israel's iniquity is 
frequently " sought for." See that elder son in the parable (Luke xv.). How slow he 
was to believe in anything but the hardened iniquity of his younger brother I A grsat 
deal may be urged in favour of his view of things. Such kindly treatment did seem 
unjust, putting bad and good on one level. He would not have objected — as such men, 
and there have been and are myriads of them, do not object — to show some little favour 
to a repentant sinner, after a long course of testing him and proving whether Le was 
worthy of any further forgiveness ; but to give him all at once such complete par<!on, 
such elder song never believe in that. And by some the iniquity of those whom God 
has pardoned is sought for philosophically. " Plato, Plato," said Socrates, " I do not 
see how God can forgive sins." And when we see, as we do see, how in the whole 
realm of nature every force goes on until it has produced its full effect — there b no 
loss of force anywhere — how can sin be made an exception ? how can it be prevented 
from having its due and full effect, sad and terrible as that is? Philosophically 
speaking, there can be no forgiveness. What a man soweth, that must he also reap, in 
nature and measure, in kind and degree. Thus is God's forgiveness challenged. But- 
Ill. It is vindicated. Ver. 20, " The iniquity . . . shall be sought for, and there 
shall be none ; and the sins . . . and they shall not be found." The sacrifice and the 
Spirit of Christ are the vindication of God's forgiveness. The former by vindicating 
the Divine righteousness in such for;;ivenes8. For there are two ways of accomplishing 
this. One is the way of condign punishment. But God desires atonement, reconciliation, 
as well aa vindication, and therefore this way will not serve. The other the way of 
repentance, the accepting the contrite confession of sin, and prayer for its forgiveness 
And this is the way God has chosen. Cf. "I said I will confess . . . and thou for- 
gavest," etc. ; " The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit," eta Now, this way of 
dealing with sinners vindicates God's righteousness. For, though we cannot offer an 
adequate confession, repentance, and intercession, yet, in Christ, this has been done; 
and when, in sympathy with him, in " the fellowship of his sufferings," and " mode 
conformable to his death," we make our confessions and prayers, they are accepted 
for th6 sake of him who has offered perfectly the spiritual sacrifice which we can 
offer only imperfectly. Now, this way of dealing with sinners vindicates GK>d's 
righteousness ; yea, it causes sinners to be made " the rightsousness of God in him," 
that is, Christ (2 Cor, t. 21). Gk)d's righteousness is thus made illustrious, conspicuous, 
as by no other means whatsoever. For when it is clearly seen, as in the kingrlom of 
God it will be clearly seen, (1) the depths whence the sinner has been drawn, and (2) 
the glorious height of purity and excellence to which he has been by this ^r^ce of God 
upraised, that spectacle wiU silence all objections, and will prove that that way must 
have been a righteous way which has had such righteous results. And the Spirit of 
Ghrist, producing sanctity in the hearts and lives of believers, is the vindication of this 
way of grace to all elder sons, and, indeed, to all else who challenge what God has done. 
Conclusion. 1. Rejoice in such forgiveness, that you have it to proclaim, to think 
of, to rest your soul upon. 2. Adore. What else can we do but sing our " Magnificats ** 
to such a redeeming God ? 

"Who is a pardoning God like theef 
And who hath grace so rich and free?* 

3. Come away firom all self-trust, all reliance on your own deeds for Justification and 
forgiveness. 4. Tremble, unsaved one, to be found amongst those who have despised 
such grace. " How can we escape if we neglect so great salvation ? " — 0. 

Ver. 23. — Hammer versus hammer. Babylon was " the hammer of the whole earth" 
Id the days in which and of which Jeremiah wrote. Nineveh ha'l striven to resist, as 
had Tyre, Syria, and Egypt, but one by one they had been crushed beneath Babylon's 
{woderous blow. And now Judah and Jerusalem were crushed likewise. But God't 



284 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. LoH. l. 1— 46 

Word was thnt other liammer, against which even the force of the feammer of th« 
whole earth should be put forth in vain. " Is not my Word ... as a hammer, saith 
the Lord, which hreaketh the rock in pieces ? " (ch. xxiii. 29). And it did thus break 
the power of Babylon, and made her " a desolation among the nations." Now, all tliia 
18 a parable of what is and long has been i)i the spiritual world. Note — 

I. Thkke is a hammer-like foboe working against good in the world. See 
how it crushes joy, innocency, purposes of good, noble endeavours, life itself. It is the 
kingrlom of Satan ; such crushing of so much that is good is of those " works of tha 
devil " to destroy which the Son of God was manifested. 

II. But there is a God-like force which shall prove a mightieb hammeb still. 
The strong one shall be driven out by the stron<rer. For proof of this, see: 1. The 
progress of humanity. Surely he must be blind who will deny the improvement in 
the general condition, conduct, and character of men since Clirist lived and died on this 
earth. Most admit it, but ascribe it to merely secular, natural, and subordinate causes. 
2. The laws of civilized nations. How much more just, humane, and righteous they 
are than they once were 1 3. The philanthropic jnsii>ict amongst men. V\' hat abun- 
dance of objects there now are on which this instinct flings itself and toils for their 
good I Now, these things are, at least, " aids to faith," in a fuller and more complete 
deliverance of nian from all evil, which it is the glory of the gospel both to promise and 
to promote. But see this Divine power at work in the individual soul. The fear 
which hath torment is taken away. Tlie sin which tyrannizes is broken and subdued. 
The good which was weak is made strong, the evil which was strong is made weak. 
The sorrow which killed all joy is hushed. Death which destroyed is itself destroyed 
by the resurrection of Christ from the dead. These are some of the present trophies of 
the grace of God, and they are but an earnest of more and far better things to come. 
But in virtue of them we believe in the Son of God, who shall subdue all things unto 
himself. God's Word, God's providence, God's Siririt, all unite to testify to the 
existence and by-and-by the exercise of that triumphant power by which all the 
might of evil shall be crushed, shattered, and broken for ever. On which side, then, 
are we taking our place ? — 0. 

Ver. 34. — A strong Redeemer. " Their Eedeemer is strong." 

I. It was necessary that he should be so. 1. This is true of IsraeVs Sedeemer. 
See the power ranged against them. Physical, in the might of Babylon and the. many 
hostile nations. Spiritual, in the justice of the sentence under which they were 
suffering. Moral, in the enfeebling effects of tlieir disobedience, causing despondency, 
despair, timidity, giving power to evil habits, and making very difficult the acquire- 
ment of such as were good. But : 2. It is true of our Redeemer. The powers by 
which humanity is held in captivity are more terrible and unconquerable than were 
those by which Israel was held. These powers are commonly classified under the 
threefold division — a trinity of hell — of the world, the flesh, and the devil. Consider 
the power : (1) Of the world, in enslaving the soul of man. The seductiveness of its 
smile, the terror of its frown, the overpowering force of its rewards, the awfulness of 
its punishments. And yet all this miglit is against God and against the soul. (2) Of 
the flesh. Yes; it does beat against the spirit, it warreth against the souL If it once 
have gained dominion, is that dominion ever entirely destroyed while this life lasts ? 
And in some, yea, many, its dominion is allowed as something that cannot be broken. 
A moral despair comes over many in regard to it, and they cease to contend against a 
tyranny which they affirm they are powerless to escape from. (3) Of the devil. He 
is no mere imagination, or myth, or invention of a credulous and superstitious age, but 
a living reality, against whom our Saviour, who knew his strength and terror as none 
other did — for he had just come away from his encounter with him — bade us in our daily 
prayer say, "Deliver us from the evil one." Who but he is it that is ever plying us 
with unhallowed thought and suggestion, causing the will and opportunity to sin so 
fatally to combine? But who of us is or can be ignorant of his devices? And when 
the force of all these terrible foes is augmented, as it is by the force of habit, of example, 
of inherited tendency, of enfeebled power of resistance the result of past defeats,— dt, 
what need, indeed, is there that our Redeemer should be strong I But — 

IL Blessed be Goo, he is bo. In regard to larad, he did redeem them in putt ^'^ 



Oft. L. 1—46.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 285 



their more complete redemption is yit to come. In regard to humanity at large, he is 
strong likewise. See in pruof of this : I. His mighty 'power when here on earth. All 
those signs and wonders, those glorious miracles, were designed to confirm our faith 
in our Redeemer as One " mighty to save." Hence diseases fled, devils were cast out, 
nature obeyed. Death gave up her dead, at his word. All these things were, as St. 
John calls them, " signs." 2. His might displayed in his Church. " I will build 
my Church," he said ; and in spite of the feebleness in numbers, in influence, in 
intellectual or social power, in adaptation of methods, in selection of men ; in spite ol 
ill the force that numbers, wealth, power, rank, cruelty, hate, could bring to bear ; — 
still his word was accomplished and is yet being accomplished. Must we not confess, 
in view of facts like theses, that our Redeemer is strong? 3. His power over the indi- 
vidual soul. How he gives strength against the terror of a violated law, the might 
of an indwelling sin, the crushing power of earthly sorrow, the king of terrors, death 
itself 1 " Conversion is the standing miracle of the Church" — the transformations of 
character, condition, and conduct, which are perpetually being wrought by the power 
of Christ. All these compel the glad confession that Christ is "mighty to save." 
Now, note — 

III. That his stbenqtr bbcomgb oubs by means of cub faith. For faith in him 
brings to l)ear the power of : 1. The unseen. 2. Gratitude, 3. 2%« new Itfe, And 
so these marvels are wrought. 

'* Mighty Redeemer, set me (toe 
From my old state of sin." 

a 

▼er. 36. — ITie liar^ sword, L It is onb which thet wield. It cuts asnnder : 1. 
The ties which bind man to man. 2. Those which bind the soul to truth and virtue. 
3. Those which bind the heart to Ood. 4. Those which would lead the man to eternal life. 

II. It is one which thet febl. It pierces the soul with shame, with anguish, with 
a deadly wound. 

III. It is one bt which thet will sooneb ob lateb be destboted. 1. It is often 
so tit this life. Men will league themselves together against a liar as against a wild 
beast or serpent, to destroy it. In the hearts of all men there is a protest against lies. 
That protest cannot be stifled universally, or for long, or over wide reaches of the world. 
It will break forth. It did break forth, and down went the paganism of the Roman 
empire, the priestly lies of the Church of Rome in the days of the Reformation, the 
political lies of despots as in the French Revolution, the Jesuitical lies by which that 
order has been disgraced and on account of which it has once and again been driven 
forth in shame. And the like of all this is seen in the condemnation and punishment 
j( the convicted liars even now. 2. But yet more will it be so hereafter. See the awful 
doom that is pronounced against liars in the Word of Ood : " All liars shall have their 
part in the lake of fire, which is the second death." 

Conclusion. 1. Dread this sword. 2. Love and cherish truth, in thought, word, 
and deed. 3. Give yourself to him who is the Truth. — C. 

Ver. 46. — The fall ofhM, Babylon is continually taken in Scripture as the type of 
the kingdom of evil, that which our Saviour termed " the gates of hell." Her antiquity, 
her vast power, her wickedness and cruelty, her utter overthrow, all justify the simili- 
tude which St. John especially so frequently employs. But the kingdom of evil is to 
be destroyed. For this purpose " the Son of Ood was manifested, that he might 
destrOT the works of the devil." And as when the literal Babylon fell there was a 
" cry, so shall it be when that yet more dread power of which she was the type shall, 
in its turn, fall and perish. But that cry will be of a varied nature. On the part of all 
those who have trusted in and served it there will be — 

L A OBT OF tebbob. Their confidence, their pride, will be shattered, and they will 
quail at " the wrath of the Lamb " which they have provoked. But there will be many 
who will behold that overthrow and from them — 

II. A CRT OF wondeb will be heard. That kingdom of evil lo widespread, so ancient, 
su established, so seemingly undisputed in its possession inring all the long age? 



286 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. 1. 1—48 

hitberto^ now completely overthrown. How many valiant soldiers of the cross and 
faithful servants of God have in past ages hurled themselvas against her ramparts and 
tried to storm her citadel, and have, apparently, but thrown their lives away 1 There- 
fore, when at length it is proclaimed, " Babylon is fallen I " what wonder and astonish- 
ment will fill the minds of all beholders I But it will be also — ^ 

IIL A OBT OF JOT. It will be the day oi jubilee, the setting free of the oppressed, 
the opening of the prison doors, the giving of liberty to the captives. Hence the 
psalms perpetually bid us sing unto the Lora — sing a new song ; " for he cometh, he 
Cometh to judge the earth." We are accustomed to speak of the judgment day as one of 
terror only ; we forget that it will be a day of unspeakable joy to the multitudes of the 
oppressed, like as, when Israel saw the Egyptians dead oa the seashore, they sang their 
song of triumph. And it will be also — 

IV. A OBT OF THANKSGiviNO, of adoration and praise. How can it be otherwise ? 
" The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together " beneath hell's dread 
oppression. Shall there not be unspeakable gratitude felt when the Lord crushes this 
awful tyranny and destroys it for evermore ? 

Conclusion. 1. Remember that this overthrow mil take place. They who believe 
in this kingdom of evil say, " We shall never be moved." But they are deceived and 
will, one day, be terribly awakened. 2. Which cry shall be ours ? — 0. 

Vers. 4, 5. — Eeunited Israel seeking Jehovah. I. The voluntabiness of this 
QUEST. How it is exactly that Israel becomes master of its own choice is not indicated 
here. Nor need we stop to notice the indications elsewhere. The great thing to note 
is that Israel, being free to choose, chooses the right thing. Israel might have chosen 
to stop in Babylon. Thus a great difference is indicated between the circumstances in 
which the first covenant with Israel was made, and these circumstances of the second 
covenant. We search the Book of Exodus in vain for any evidence of such a free and 
profoimdly penitent spirit as we find here. God has shown by the history of Israel 
that a covenant made in constraint may be necessary, but also it can only be preparatory. 
All the elements here are of strong voluntary action. The people come ; they are not 
driven. They weep with the noble emotion of penitence. All the waste of past 
centuries stands before them, seen as it might have been seen before if only they had 
had eyes to see. Then there is the seeking, hoping spirit to be considered. The 
people are wiUing now to go to God, whom so long they had forsaken in idolatry and 
unrighteousness. 

II. Thb union of those who had been uhnatueallt sepabated. Why this 
distinction between the children of Israel and the children of Judah ? The very names 
indicate something wrong, something having its basis in self-will and jealousy. For the 
children of Judah were also children of Israel. Thus the common Christianity under- 
lies all sectarian names. These names originate in certain historical necessities, and the 
sects keep them because they are thinking of the different starting-points whence they 
have come rather than of the common goal whither they tend. In imitdng thus 
together, Israel and Judah were doing things meet for repentance. They were doing all 
they could do while they remained in exile. Past alienations and antipathies weru sub- 
merged in the rise of a strong feeling of desire after their God. When men want to be 
brothers and companions, most difficulties in the way can be easily pushed aside. 

III. A SUBORDINATE ELEMENT IN THB QUEST OF Jehotah. The people know they 
must turn their footsteps toward a certain place, even Zion. God is always to be sought 
in a certain appointed way. Seeking Zion, the people are doing a great deal towaids 
finding God. The people knew the way to look toward Zion, even from afar ; we have 
illustration of this in the praying attitude of Daniel, who bowed his knees three times 
a day, his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem. Whether we shall find 
God depends upon where we are disposed to seek him. We shall certainly never find 
him apart from Jesus Christ, tor anywhere else than as connected with the heavenly 
Zion, the city of the living God. The vague aspirations of natural human sentiment 
promise a great deal, hut they peiform nothing. They follow an ignis/ituus, and not 
the star that goes on till it stands over Bethlehem. God is to be found by those who 
will accept the guidance of his Spirit, making known to them the riches which are in 
Christ. — Y. 



OH.!.. 1—46.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 287 

Vera. 6, 7. — The wolf excusing himself. These verses remind us of the well-kuown 
fable of the wolf and the Iamb. The wolf, acting according to its vrolfish nature, 
devours the lamb, but first of all it mates a pretence of having some shjw of reason 
to go npon. So here the cruel spoilers of Israel try to make out that all their cruelty 
and rapacity were perfectly right, because Israel had done so much wrong. We have 
here^ 

I. A TBUB ACX3UBATI0N. Israel's wrong-doing is not at all overstated. They have 
sinned against Jehovah. Nor is this accusation left in all its wide generality. Note 
the rendering of Kaegelsbach : " Jehovah the true Pasturage and their fathers' Hope." 
Thus the figure begun in the previous verse is continued. For the sheep a true, ample, 
rich pasturage is provided and protected. The shepherd mal%es that pasturage with all 
its needs his peculiar charge. If the sheep will not have faith in their shepherd, sub- 
mission to hla ordinances, satisfaction with his provisions, and general content in all 
their appointed lot; if they prefer an erratic, self-providirjg, self-protecting lot; — then 
they must take the consequences. There was nothing wonderful in Israel having 
becoming a lost and miserable flock. The wroni^-iloing of a man does not excuse bad 
treatment of him by others, but it explains how bad treatment often becomes possible. 
If, overleaping the bounds and laws of Divine wisdom, we go of our own choice into the 
way of the adversary, we must not complain of consequent spoliation and suffering. 

IL A BAD BEABON. The adversaries of Israel made Israel's wickedness a plea for 
their own wickedness. We must distinu;uish between the conquerors of Israel as made 
useJ[of by Jehovah and the purposes and feelings of the conquerors themselves. It is 
evidently God's principle to make use of what already exists : these people were bent 
on attacking the land of Israel, and, when Israel had so utterly ajjostatized in heart 
from Jehovah, there was no reason why he should defend them. The wickedness of 
man often wonderfully serves a Divine purpose, but tliat does not make it wickedness 
any the leas. Wicked men are not necessary to God, however useful they may be in 
the present conditions of things. Vain will it be for any man to plead that, in the 
event, his wickedness has brought some good thing to light. The purposes of his heart 
were evil and only evil, and by those purposes he must be judged. 

III. Indication of the pbopeb treatment. The proper treatment of the sheep 
that have forgotten their resting-place is fully revealed in the Gospels. There the true 
Shepherd is set before us, no self-indulgent one, no self-seeker, n^ hireling; but he who 
came to seek out the lost sheep, and who dies for his own. We must never forget, in all 
comparisons between straying men and strayin? sheep, that God means us thereby to 
be deeply impressed with the need of his provisions and protections. He who remem- 
bers that we are dust, remembers also that at the best we are as sheep, needing fur 
the present to be watched very closely, and kept within a place of safety by all sorts of 
checks and constraints. — ^T. 

Ver. 11. — Ute punishment of those who rejoice wrongly. I. The bfibit nr wmoH 
Babylon should have done its dbstroting woek. Jehovah meant Babylon for 
the chastisement and the humiliation of his own people, that they might be enlightened 
and purified through the losses they thus sustained. They lost many things they 
loved, but at the same time they lost things which tempted and ensnared. The descrip- 
tion here, "Destroyers of mine heritage," indicates sufficiently the spirit in which 
Babylon acted. What God wanted was the thorough purification of his heritage, not at 
all its destruction. Babylon cared nothing as to whether Israel was better or worse for 
its afflictions. It could only rejoice over another nation conquered, another territory 
acquired, and a fresh degree of brightness added to its military glory. It is surely a 
terrible thing when men do good work unconsciously and not meaning it to be good 
work at all. When we have to engage in any work that inflicts suffering, shame, and 
loss on others, it ought to be under the sternest pressure of necessity and as the sorrow- 
in" ministers of violated law. There are times when we cannot escape being the agents 
of suffering to wicked and foolish men ; but if we only act in the right spirit, keeping 
our hearts free from all that is vengeful and exnling, we may even have some share in 
turning them from their wickedness. Everything that savours of our personal satis- 
faction and gain must be kept away when we have to make others suffer. 

n. Thk cbbtain betbirution on those who buotoc in the suffebinos of 



288 THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH. [oh. L. 1—48 

OTHEBS. A disposition to rejoice in tliis way indicates, of course, a general iniquity ol 
life which is sure to bring retribution. But retribution will take special forms according 
to the sin, and those who have gloated over the humiliations of others are taking a sure 
way to have others gloat over them in the day of their humiliation. Israel itself, which 
had been rejoiced over by Babylon, had first of all been rejoicing wheie it ought not to 
have rejoiced. If we exult and insult where we ought to pity, then nothing is more 
certain than that we shall meet with insult in turn. 

III. A DIBEOTION SUOOESTED IIT WHICH THERE HAT BE QBEAT BEJOICING. Man 

was made to rejoice ; the pity is that so often his rejoicing comes from individual and 
selfish considerations. When the right spirit is in our hearts, we too sliall rejoici) that 
» many are oast down, but it will be because of the opportunities given to lift them up. 
There should be the greatest of gladness in serving the lowly aud the needy. Thus 
while there never can be joy at suffering for its own sake, there can be much joy because 
of the opportunities given for glorifying Christ. — Y. 

Vers. 19, 20. — The feeding-places of the flock. Consider — 

I. What Jehovah had provided and the people had lost. Carmel and Bauhan, 
Ephraim and Gilead, were not something altogether new. They were memories of the 
past as well as hopes of the future. Israel had been a scattered sheep. Out of Christ 
not only are we ourselves lost, but we have lost the use of the appropriate possessi'>ns of 
humanity. Beally what God does in restoring his people is to bring them to something 
a great deal better than the places mentioned; but these places represent an actual," 
experienced good. And it is well that God should give us, as one aspect of the future, 
a restoration of all that was satisfying in the past. 

IL JeHOTAH 18 ABOUT TO BESTOBE : HOW WILL THE PEOPLE ITBE WHAT IB TO BE 

RE8T0UED? Bestoration by itself will do nothing. If the man comes back to his pos- 
sessions as he went away, then he can only misuse and squander as of old. The house 
swept and garnished only presented to the evil spirits a chance for greater riot and 
defilement than before. To the old land there comes back a new people. After tasting 
the bitterness of wanderings, they have tasted also the powers of the world to come — 
ol<1 carnal temptations no longer charm, new spiritual considerations stand full in view. 
Formerly, even on Carmel and Bashan, Mount Ephraim and GUead, there had been dis- 
content, because, with all the goodness in these places, there was not enough for the carnal 
heart. But now, when things are used spiritually, there is enough and more than 
enough. If only we follow where God leads there will be ample provision and ample 
blessedness. — T. 

Ver. 20. — A vain qiKst. I. In oontbabt with pbevioub quebts of the same 
KIND. Then hardly anything but iniquity and sin were to be found. The few righteous 
nnd godly men only called attention more emphatically to the general wickedness. God 
is ever seeking in the earth for all that is true and good, and whatever there be of it he 
is sure to find. He misses nothing, searching into every man according to the funda- 
mental thoughts of his heart. In former days sin and iniquity had been the great 
burden of prophetic deliverances, and the mention of them a continual exasperation to 
the people. 

II. The beabon why the quest bab beooub vain. All is pardoned. There has 
been deep and adequate repentance, adequate atonement, and consequently there is full 
forgivenuss. Iniquity and sin cannot be found, because they have vanished as disturb- 
ing elements in human consciousness. What an intensely evangelical verse this is, full 
as it can be of one of the great results of the gospel I God, who sends prophets into 
the midst of sinful men, calling attention to the universal presence of evil, works to 
remove that evil, so that it shall no longer be possible to find it. This inability to find 
evil is not the report of man merely ; if so, we might suspect the worth of the report as 
being nothing more than shallow optimism. When God says that evil cannot be found 
he means that it has ceased to exist. 

HI. This vain quest implies otheb quests equally vain. Ko consequences 
of sin shall be left. When the roots are gone, clean extirpated, vain will it be to seek 
lor the fruits. There can be no pain where there is no sin. There can be no death. 
Fulneas of life and health will succeed. There will be no seed but good seed, no 



OH. L. 1—46.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 289 

ground but good ground. And hence there will only he good fruit springing forth 
ahundantly. 

IV. Another quest that will be buocessful. The matter must be looked at 
positively as well as negatively. Iniquity is not to he found, i.e. complete conformity to 
Law is found everywhere ; sin is not founii, i.e. every man in his own nature is fully 
glorifying his Maker and his Redeemer. More and more we must seek to see the depth 
and reality of present iniquity and sin ; so shall we better understand the work whereby 
God will slowly remove— slowly, that is, to our apijrehension — all these evil things 
away — and cause harmony,'holiness, and happiness to rise enduringlyin their place. — Y. 

Vers. 35—37. — The sword everywhere. I. The destkoting agent. Not a deluge, 
not fire from heaven, but an ordinary human agent, working with enerjiy and thorougli- 
ness. The weapon which Babylon in its greed of conquest had used against Jerusalem 
is turned against itself. First of all, Babylon looks covetously on the land of Israel, and 
spoils it of its people and their possessions. And then, enriched, Babylon becomes in 
turn an object of desire. God has only to leave covetousness and graspint; alone, 
whether in nations or individuals. There will generally come in some human agency 
to dissipate ill-gotten gains. As Babylon became richer in external goods, it became 
weaker in manly resources. There was more to invite attack, more need of the best 
defences, and yet at the same time less ability to defend. The sword stands here as the 
great symbol of human physical force. We must not infer that God approves it : he 
simply points out how it must have free scope upon the surface of things. Babylon 
took the sword, and she in turn must perish by the sword ; and that same sword, suc- 
cessful against Babylon, points to the destruction of those who wielded it. Nothing 
abiding, nothing permanently satisfying, is to be achieved by the sword. 

II. The extent of the destruction. Physical force can make short work of all 
man's natural treasures ; all that is wanted is a sufficient amount of it. Skill compen- 
sates for force only up to a certain point. Vain was it for Babylon to count up its 
mighty men and parade its horses and chariots. If we would arrive at right conclusions 
in the matter of security we must know the strength of our enemies as well as our own. 
As to one element in its strength in particular, Babylon would be dreadfully deceived. 
It could not realize how, as the agent of a puuishinii Jehovah, there had been more than 
its wonted strength bestowed on it against sinning Israel. It plumed itself too much on 
conquered Israel, and thought itself stronger than it really was. — Y. 

Ver. 46. — Capital events in history. Capital events in history are of two kinds. 
1, Those which by the magnitude of them arrest attention and deeply impress the 
imagination of the world. Such was the taking of Babylon. It was like the fall of a 
mighty building ; when the fall came, it could not but shake the earth. The effects 
were of necessity far-reaching. The political centre of gravity got shifted. The fall 
of Babylon meant a new kind of government for a great many people. It meant a 
total change in temporal circumstances. Then the whole thing was to a large extent 
unexpected. Many such events have happened in history. Great struggles between 
nations and confederated nations, lasting for years, come to their consummation in some 
battle, and then for a while there is comparative equilibrium. 2. Those which excite 
little or no attention at the time. The death of Christ is the crowning instance of 
events of this kind. Locally and for a short time it did make a deep impression, but 
certainly the earth was not moved, nor was there a cry heard among the nations. The 
movement was in spiritual regions ; heaven it was that got moved ; and the cry was 
heard among the principalities and powers in the invisible world, whether they were 
good ones or bad ones. We need a divinely chosen standpoint from which to measure 
the magnitude of terrestrial events. We enlarge where we should diminish, and 
diminish where we should enlarge. It has truly been said that history is too full of wars 
and conquerors. These have been recorded, while other events dropped into oblivion, 
which now we should give a great deal to understand. We must guard against letting 
the deepest impression on us be produced by mere noise and bulk. As history is 
commonly written, critical, seminal events are to be luoked for in the quiet corners of 
it, and often they are treated in a very hasty way. If we would discover the fountains 
of what is really momentous in human affairs, we must he obedient to the guidance of 

JEBEICAH — ^n. II 



290 



THE BOOK OF THE PfiOPHET JEREMIAH. [oh. u. 1—64 



God's Spirit. We must be delivered from the snares of mere national prosperity and 
glory. Then, coaversely, in our own actions we must not be troubled if little attention 
is paid to them by others. A man may be sowing the seeds of immense, world-wide 
benefits, all unconsciously, knowing only this, that he is doing the thing, the evidently 
appointed work for him — lying nearest to his hand. — Y. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER Lt 



Ver. 1. — Against them that dwell in the 
midst of them that rise up against me. The 
Hebrew has leb-kamai, which is Kasdim, or 
Chaldea, written in the cypher called ,Ath- 
bash (see on ch. xxT. 26) ; just as Sheshach In 
ver. 41 is equivalent to Babel. TJie ques- 
tion arises whether the prophet himself is 
responsible for this covert way of writing, or 
a scribe in later times (so Ewald). In 
favour of the former view it may be urged 
that Babylon and Chaldea receive symbolic 
names (though not in Athbash) in the con- 
nected chapter (1. 21, 31, 32) ; in favour of 
the latter, that the Septuagint has Xa\5alovs 
in ver. 1, and does not express Sheshach in 
Ter. 41, also that the clause to which She- 
shach belongs in oh. xxv. 26 is of very 
dubious genuineness. A destroying wind; 
rather, the spirit (rHaJch') of a destroyer (or 
perhaps, of destruction). The verb rendered 
in this verse " raise up," when used in con- 
nection with rualch, always means " to excite 
the spirit of any one " (ver. 11 ; Hag. i. 14; 
1 Chron. v. 26). 

Ver. 2. — Fanners. This is supported by 
the Septuagint, Peshito, Targum, Vulgate, 
according to tiie Massoretic pointing, how- 
ever, we should render " enemies." Possibly 
the prophet intended to suggest both mean- 
ings, a and 6 being so nearly related. Shall 
empty her land. The original has a much 
more striking word, "shall pour out" (for 
the figures, comp. ch. xlviii. 12), which 
occurs again in similar contexts in Isa. zxiv. 
1 ; Nah. ii. S (Hebrew, 2). 

Ver. 3. — Against him that bendeth, eto. 
There are two readings in the Hebrew 
Bible — one that given by the Authorized 
Version; the other, "Against him that 
bendeth (let) him that bendeth his bow 
(come)." The difficulty, however, is in the 
first two words of the clause, which are the 
same in either reading. It would be much 
simpler to alter a single point, and render, 
" Let not the archer bend his bow ; aud let 
Ijim not lift himself up in his coat of mail " 
(for the old word " brigandine," see on ch. 
xlvi. 4) ; which might be explained of the 
Babylonians, on the analogy of oh. xlvi. 6, 
" Let him not bend his bow, for it will be 
useless ; " but then the second half of the 
verse ha'dly suits the first — the prohibitions 
leem clearly intended to run on iu a oon> 



nected order. On the other hand, the de- 
scriptions, "him til at bendeth," and "him 
that lifteth himself up in his brigandine," 
seem hardly a natural way of putting " the 
Chaldean army." 

Ver. 4.— In her streets ; i.e. in the streets 
of Babylon. 

Vers. 5 — 14. — The covenant between Jeho- 
vah and Israel is one reason why Babylon 
must fall; aud Babylon's own guilt is 
another. Hence pity is out of place. 

" Here liveth piety where pity ends ; 
Can any man be guilty more than he 
Whose bias with the doom of God ooa- 
teuds?" 
(Dante, 'Inferno,' ix. 28, Cayley.) 

Flee, therefore, lest ye be involved in 
Babylon's ruin. For Jehovah's purpose of 
vengeance cannot be reversed. 

Ver. 5. — Hath not been forsaken. The 
Hebrew is much more forcible, " is not 
widowed " — alluding to the fundamental 
Old Testament idea of a mystic marriage 
between God and his people (comp. Isa. L I ; 
liv. 4 — 6; Hob. ii.). Was fiUed with sin; 
rather, with guilt (Hebrew, asham). 

Xer. 7. — Babylon, as the instrument used 
by God for his judicial purposes, is likened 
to a wine-oup, which " made all the earth 
drunken " (comp. ch. xxv. 15, 16) ; and, more 
than this, to a golden oup, such was the 
impression made upon the Jewish prophets, 
by Babylon's unexampled splendour. 
(Golden cups were not unknown in I^e- 
stine ; Jehu sent some to Shalmaneser ; 
Smith, 'Assyrian Canon,' p. 114.) So, in 
Nebuchadnezzar's vision of the image, the 
head of the image is of gold (Dan. ii. 32, 
88). But neither her splendour nor her 
honourable positiun as God's minister oonld 
save her from merited destruction. 

Ver. 8. — Destroyed. Tiie Hebrew, more 
forcibly, has " is broken." The Authorized 
Version wished, perhaps, to avoid the ob- 
jection that a golden cup could not, properly 
speaking, be broken. But if we once begin 
to harmonize the language of Hebrew poetry, 
we shall have no end. It is not the cup 
which falls, but the state, considered as a 
house (the " breach " of God's people is con- 
stantly referred to; e.g. Ps. Ix. 2; Isa. zxx. 
26). Howl for her. Sympathetic bystanders 
t aie dramatically appealed to. From the next 



CH. U.1— 64.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 



29J 



vene it would leem that they are the varions 
foreigners who, whether by choice or force, 
have been resident in Babylon, and who 
haTeacqnired an interest in her &te. Hitzig 
thinks the foreign mercenaries (oh. 1. 37) or 
allies are specially referred to. Take balm 
for her pain (comp. oh. viiL 22; xItL 11). 
The images of fracture and wonnd are com- 
bined, as in Isa. xxx. 26. 

Ver.9.— We would have healed Babylon. 
Experience shows that it is useless to 
attempt to correct such inveterate evils. 
£vei7 one into his own country (as ch. 1. 16). 
Her judgment; t'.e. her punishment. Per- 
haps there is an allusion to the fate of 
Sodom and Gomorrah, burned by fire from 
heaven. But we might also render "her 
crime " (comp. Deut. six. 6, where " worthy 
of death " is more strictly " a capital crime "). 

Ver. 10. — Our righteousness ; literally, our 
righteousnesses ; not in the sense of " right- 
eous deeds " (as in Isa. Ixiv. 6 ; Judg. v. II), 
but "those things which prove ns to be 
righteous; i.e. by punishing Babylon he 
hath justified ns" (Payne Smith). 

Ver. 11. — ^Make bright; rather, poIt'sA, so 
that the arrows may penetrate easily (comp. 
Isa. zliz. 2, "a polished shaft"). Oather 
the shields ; rather, fill the shields (viz. with 
your arms) ; t'.e. take hold of them. Oomp. 
the phrase, " to fill the hand with the bow " 
(2 Kings ix. 24). The rendering " quivers " 
is wanting in philological authority, and 
seems to have been inferred from this pas- 
sage, where, however, it is unnecessary. 
The kings of the Uedes. The prophet speaks 
of the Medes and not the Persians (comp. 
Isa. xiii. 17). "The reason, probably, is 
twofold : (1) that the name Madai became 
known to the Jews at an earlier period than 
Parol, * Persia ; ' and (2) that the generals 
of Gyrus were apparently Medes {e.g. Ma- 
zares and Harpagns, Herod., i. 157, 162)" 
(Cheyne's 'Prophecies of Isaiah,' ii. 275, 
276). The new Cyrus-inscription throws 
light on the latter circumstance. 

Ver. 12. — TTpon the walls of Babylon; 
rather, toward the walls (as ch. It. 6). The 
" standard " was carried before the army, to 
show the direction of the march. Make the 
watch strong. Kot merely for the safety of 
the invaders, but to blockade the city. 
Comp. the phrase, " Watchers [a synonymous 
Hebrew word is used] came from a far 
country" (ch. iv. 16); •'.«. besiegers. Pre- 
pare the ambushes. To press into the city 
when the besieged have made a sally (as 
Josh. viii. 14—19 ; Judg. xx. 33, 37). 

Ver. 13. — Babylon is addressed as thou 
that dwellest upon many waters, with re- 
ference, not only to the Euphiatesj but to 
the canals, dykes, and marshes which sur- 
rounded the city. The measure of thy 
ooTetomness. A strange expression, even 



when W6 have supplied (and have wa a 
right to do BO?) a suitable verb, snch as 
"w full." "Measure" is, literally, eO; 
" covetousness " should rather be gain, or 
spoil. Another possible rendering is, "The 
ell-measure of thy cutting off." In foot, the 
loot-meaning of the word rendered " gain," 
or » covetousness," is " to out off ; " and the 
figure of cutting off a man's half-finished 
life, like a web horn the loom, is familiar to 
ns from the psalm of Hezekiah (Isa. xxzviii. 
12 ; comp. Job vi. 9). 

Ver. 14.— Surely I will fill thee, etc This 
is the rendering of Hitzig and Giaf ; the 
enemies are compared to locusts, as in ch. 
xlvi. 23. But the expression, " to fill a city 
with men," is more naturally taken of the 
increase of the population of the city ; and 
it is better to render, with Ewald and Keil, 
"Even though [or, 'Surely even though'] 
I have filled thee with men, as with locusts, 
they shall raise over thee the cheer of the 
vintage;" i.e. the millions of Babylon's 
population will not save her from the most 
utter ruin. For the vintage cheer, see on 
oh. XXV. 30; and for the figures, see es- 
pecially, Isa. Ixiii. 1 — 6. 

Vers. IS — 19. — ^Probably interpolated bom 
ch. X. 12—16 (the only verbal difference is 
in ver. 19, where " Israel " is left out before 
"the rod of his inheritance"). But may 
not Jeremiah have quoted himself? Con- 
ceivably, yes ; but he would surely not have 
quoted snch a passage here, where it spoils 
the context. For granting that a point of 
contact with ver. 14 may be found for vers. 
15, 16 (Jehovah who has^swom has also the 
power to accomplish), yet the passage on the 
idols stands quite by itself, and distracts 
the attention of the reader. 

Vers. 20 — 26. — Israel is now to be Je- 
hovah's hammer, striking down everything, 
even the Chaldean colossus. But though 
Babylon may be as great and as destrnctive 
as a volcanic mountun, it shall soon be quite 
burnt out. 

Ver. 20. — Uy battle-axe ; or, mj/ mace. 
The mace (for a picture of which, see 
Bawlinson, ' Ancient Monarchies,' i. 459) 
was a weapon constantly employed W the 
Assyrians and presumably by the Baby- 
lonian kings. The battle-axe was much 
less frequently used. But who is addressed 
by this terrible title? The commentators 
are divided, some inclining to Babylon, (1) 
because Babylon was the last person ad- 
dressed (see ver. 14), and (2) became a 
similar title was given to Babylon in ch. L 
23 : others to Israel, on the ground that tiie 
tenses are the same throughout the passage 
(vers. 20 — 24). The latter view is probably 
the best. How could Babylon be said tc 
shatter her own "governors " and " viceroys " 
(for the prophet deliberately ohonae* tli. 



292 



THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH. [cH. u. 1— 64. 



Babylonian ofBcial names)? The argument 
from the context is not very weighty ; for it 
la (dear that the connection of tlie parts of 
thia prophecy is very loose. We may assume, 
then, that ver. 20 begins a fresh paragraph, 
standing quite apart from that which pre- 
cedes. The objection of Graf and Keil, 
is that Israel could not himself be styled a 
"mace," it being Israel's destiny to be 
delivered by others. But is not a very 
similar statement made of Israel in Isa. xli. 
IS ; Pb. cxlix. 7 — 9 ? (Euenen offers a third 
explanation — Cyrus.) The nations . . . king- 
doms. First the great social organisms are 
mentioned ; next comes the military power ; 
next the population, according to sex, age, 
and class. 

Ver. 23. — Captains ; rather, governors. It 
is the Hebraized form (pelihah) of the ofBcial 
name of an Assyrian or Babylonian governor 
(fokhaf). Balers; rather, vieeroya; Hebrew, 
iegamin (plural). The singular, edgan, is 
Hebraized from the Assyrian takun, Baby- 
lonian sagun. 

Vers. 25, 26. — Another image for the 
destruction of Babylon. 

Ver. 25.— destroying mountain. The 
description evidently points to a volcano. 
(1) Jehovah says that he will roll the 
mountain down from the rooks, which can 
only be understood of the stones and lava 
harled down from the crater; (2) that he 
will make it a " mountain of biuraing," t.e. 
either to a burning, or, more forcibly, a 
burnt-out mountain ; and (3) that, as a con- 
sequence of this, its stones shall be unsoit- 
able for the purposes of the builder. Now, 
Palestine, it has been clearly made out, 
" Ues almost in the centre of one great vol- 
canic region of the earth's surface, that, 
namely, which includes the basin of the 
Mediterranean and the provinces of Western 
or Central Asia. Traces of that volcanic 
action are found in every direction. The 
black basaltic rock of the Haui&n, the hot 
springs of Tiberius and Emmaus and Gadara, 
the naphtha-fountains near the Dead Sea, 
the dykes of porphyry and other volcanio 
rocks that force their way through the lime- 
stone, the many caves in the limestone rocks 
themselves, — all these show that we are 
treading on ground where the forces of the 
hidden fires of earth have been in times past 
in active operation. We are, that is, in a 
zone of earthquakes" (Plnmptre, 'Biblical 
Studies,* p. 136; comp. Pusey's note on 
Amos iv. 11). There is a striking parallel 
to this prophetic description in Bev. viii. 8, 
where the destruction of a great empire is 
likened to the submersion in the sea of a 
great burning mountain, (Vitringa has 
noticed the parallel.) 

Ver. 26.— And they shall not take of thee, 
etc. "Of thee," ie. "of the Babylonian 



power" persotifled— not " of Babylon," 
which was built of brick, not of stone. The 
figure of the mountain is still preserved. 

Vers. 27 — 87. — A more detailed sketch of 
the conquest of Babylon; followed (some- 
what out of the natural order) by a com- 
plaint on the part of Israel, and a promise 
of championship on that of Jehovah. 

Ver. 27.— Prepare the nations ; literally, 
eonsecrate thenatione; viz. by religious rites. 
It is in an especial sense a religious war to 
which they are summoned (see on eh. vi. 
i, and comp. Isa. xiii. 3). Ararat. Ararat 
appears in the cuneiform Inscriptions under 
the form "Urartu," In Isa. xxxvii. 38 the 
Authorized Version renders correctly by 
"Armenia." The Assyrian kings, since 
Bhalmaneser, were constantly at war with 
the Armenians; Assurbanipal reduced them 
to pay tribute. WiTmi The Manual of the 
cuneiform inscriptions. The locality of this 
tribe has been hitherto wrongly given as 
the mouutain country about Lake Vau. 
But Professor Sayce has shown that they 
are rather to be looked for to the south-west 
of Lake Urumiyeh. A captain. The word 
(ti/sar) is singular, but is probably to be 
understood collectively as equivalent to 
" captains," like the word («»», " horse," 
equivalent to "horses") to which it is parallel. 
It is here used loosely of certain officials of 
the Aimeniana ; but properly it is an 
Assyrian word (adopted from we Accadian 
or proto-Babylonian), meaning " tablet- 
writer," and derived, according to Friedrich 
Delitzsch, from dip or dup, a tablet, and lar, 
to write (Accadian words). As the rough 
caterpillars. This is the third of the four 
kinds of locusts mentioned in Joel i. 4 ; or, to 
speak more precisely, it is the locust in its 
penultimate stage, when its wings are already 
visible, but enveloped in hom-like sheaths, 
which stand up upon its back. Hence the 
epithet "rough," or "bristling." Eeil's 
rendering, "as the dreadful (horrifying) 
locust," implies a faulty interpretation of 
Joel i. 4. It would be strange indeed if Joel 
had accumulated four synonymous terms fot 
locust in such a peculiar context. 

Ver. 28.— The captains ... the mlera; 
rather, the governore , , . the viceroyt (as 
ver. 23). Thereof refers to the land of 
Medea ; his dominion to the King of Medea, 
as the suzerain of the inferior chiefs. 

Ver. 29.— Shall tremble and sorrow. The 
Hebrew has " trembled and borrowed " (or, 
" quaked and writhed for pain ") ; and in the 
sequel, "have stood" (i.e. been ratified by 
the event, as oh. xliv. 28). The' prophet 
here, as to often, regards what is still future 
as past from the point of view of eternity, 

Ver, 30. — Despair of the Babylonian war- 
riors. Have forborne to fight should 
rather be have eeated io Hqht, In thni 



ca.ij.1— 64.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEBEMIAH. 



293 



bold*. The word fs used of hill or moun- 
tain fastnesses (comp, 1 Sam. xxiii. 14, 19 ; 
Judg. vi. 2 ; 1 Chron. xi. 7), and such pre- 
sumably are referred to here. Their might ; 
rather, their courage. They have burned, eto. 
The subject is " the enemies." Her bars ; 
viz. those with which the city gates were 
secured (comp. Isa. xlv. 2 ; Amos i. 5). 

Yer. 31. — One post shall run to meet 
another, eto. The wall being broken 
through at various points, couriers would 
meet eaoh other on their way to the royal 
palace. This was itself a fortress in the 
centre of the city, on the Euphrates. The 
newly discovered cylinder-inscription, how- 
ever, shows that Naboniilag, the last King of 
Babylon, was not actually in the city at the 
time of the capture. At one end ; rather, 
from end to end (see on ch. 1. 26). 

Yer. 32. — And that the passages are 
stopped; rather, are seized (aa ch. xlviii. 41). 
Babylon, it should be remembered, was 
divided nearly in half by the Euphrates. 
It was guarded, says Professor Bawlinson, 
" by two walls of brick, which skirted them 
along their whole lengtli. In each of these 
walls were twenty-five gates, corresponding 
to the number of the streets whicli gave 
upon the river; and outside each gate was 
a sloped landing-place, by which you could 
descend to the water's edge, if you had occa- 
sion to cross the river. Boats were kept 
ready at these landing-places to convey pas- 
sengers from side to side ; while for those 
who disliked this method of conveyance, a 
bridge was provided of a somewhat peculiar 
construction" ('Ancient Monarchies,' ii. 
514). The reeds they have homed with fire. 
This rendering is no doubt tenable, though 
it gives an unusual meaning to the first 
noun. The " reeds " would be those of the 
marshes in the neighbourhood of Babylon ; 
•nd Eimchi suggests that these would be out 
down to facilitate the entrance of the army 
into the city. Surely a very forced expla- 
nation. The natural meaning of the first 
noun is " pools " or " lakes," and, considering 
that Herodotus (i 185) speaks of a lake in 
connection with the defences of Babylon, 
it has been thought (e.g. by Yitringa) that 
the prophet may refer to something which 
was to happen to this and similar lakes ; 
" burned with fire " is then regarded as a 
hyperbolical expression equivalent to "dried 
up" (comp. ver. 36). This, however, is 
hardly less forced than the first interpreta- 
tion ; and we seem almost compelled to 
assume a corruption of the text, and to 
read (for 'agammin) 'armonim, palaces. 
If " palaces " («".«. lofty houses, for euoh is 
the etymological meaning) were not uncom- 
mon at Jerusalem (Isa. zxxii. 14), much 
more firequent must they have been at 
Babylon. Or perhaps the prophet refers to 



the two magnificent royal palaces, which, 
together with the temple of Bel, constituted 
the wonders of Babylon. _ They were on 
opposite sides of the river, and were 
guarded with triple enclosures, the dr- 
cumferenoe in the one case amounting to 
sixty stadia (nearly seven miles), and in 
the other to thirty (Eawlinson, ♦Ancient 
Monarchies,' ii. 514, etc.). 

Yer. 33. — It is time to thresh her ; rather, 
at {he time when it is trodden (i.e. made level 
by treading or trampling); oomp. laa. zxi. 
10 ; Micah iv. 13. 

Ver. 34. — The Jewish captives are intro- 
duced, describing the offences of Babylon. 
Hath devoured me ; rather, hath decoured m, 
and so on. "My delicates " (delights), how- 
ever, is correct. He hath made me ; rather, 
he hath set iw (doum) as. Swallowed me 
up like a dragon ; or, literally, like the dra- 
gon. Ckimparing this with ver. 44, it is 
difiScult not to see an allusion to the Baby- 
lonian myth of the Serpent, who in the 
fight with Marduk (Merodach) devoured 
the tempest, which rent asunder her belly. 
The cuneiform text is given in Trans- 
actions of Society of Biblical Arehseology, 
vol. iv. part 2, appendix plate 6. I'art of it 
runs thus — 

25. ip-te-va pi-i-sa Ti-amtu »-na 
Opened also her mouth liamto to 

la-h-a-h-sa 
swallow it 

26. ruhhu limna yut-te-ri-ha a^a 
The evil wind he caused to enter into 

la ea-par sap-ti-sa 
the nncovering of her lips [= into her 
lips before she could dose them] 

27. iz-zn-U ruJchi 

violent (were) the winds (which) 
ear-sa-sa i-taOf^mi-va 
her belly filled: and 

28. in-ni-ktid lib-ta-ta *a 
■he was pierced in hrr heart and 
pa-a-sa yus-pal-ki (?) 

her mouth it caused to divida.* 

Beaders of Smith's 'Chaldean CFenesis' 
will remember Tiamtn the dragon, and the 
representations thereof given from the gems. 
In line 27 the word rendered "her belly" 
contains the Babylonian analogue of the 
word rendered in this verse "his belly" 
(Ic'res). With mj delicates, he hath oast me 
out ; rather, . . . east us out ; or, from my 
delights he hath cast us out For the varia- 
tion of person, comp. Judg. xi. 19, " Let as 
pass, we pray thee, through thy land into 
my place ; " and on the whole phrase, Micah 
ii. 9, *♦ . . . ye have east out from thair 
pleasant homes." 



' From a private letter of Professor Sayc^* 



294 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [oh. u. 1—61 



Ver. 35. — And to my flesh ; rather, and my 
(eaten) flesh (comp. Micah iii. 3). Inhabitant; 
lather, inhoMtreei ; i.e. virgin inhabiting, 

Ver. 36. — Her sea ; t.«. the Euphrates 
(oomp. lea. xxi. 1), or perhaps the lake 
dug by Nitocris to receive the waters of the 
Euphrates, Herod., i. 185 (Payne Smith). 
Comp. on " the reeds," ver. 32. Her springs ; 
rather.Rer reservoirs. There are no "Bpiinga," 
remarks Dr. Payne Smith, in the flat 
alluvial soil of Babj Ionia. The Hebrew 
word makor is used here collectively for the 
whole system of canals and reservoirs for 
the storing of the water. 

Ver. 37.— Heaps. "Vast 'heaps,' or 
mounds, shapeless and unsightly, are 
scattered at intervals over the entire region 
where it is certain that Babylon anciently 
stood" (Eawlinson, 'Ancient Monarchies,' 
ii, 521). Dragons; taXher, jaclcaU. 

Vera. 38— 49.— FaU of Babylon; joy of 
the whole world. 

Vers. 88, 39. — They shall roar. ... In 
their heat ; rather, They may roar . . . (ye() 
when they wax warm (with lust) I will pre- 
pare. The banquet which Jehovah will 
prepare is the " cup of bewilderment " spoken 
of in Ps. Ix. 3; comp. Isa. U. 17 (<.e. a calami- 
tous judgment). 

Ver. 40. — I will bring them down, etc. 
(comp. Isa. xxxiv. 6 ; Ezek. xxxix. 18). 

Ver. 41. — How is Sheshach taken ! The 
Beptuagint omits " Sheshaih " (see, on the 
name, ch. zxT. 26), and very possibly 
rightly. 

Ver. 42. — The sea is come np, ete. It is 
not clear whether this is to be taken literally 
or metaphorirally (of the sea of nations, 
comp. ver. 55). Probably it is meant 
literally. It is said that the annual inun- 
dations of the Euphrates at present render 
many parts of the ruins of Babylon inacces- 
sible. 

Ver. 44. — Bel ; i.e. Merodach, the patron 
deity of Babylon (see on ch. 1. 2). Swallowed 
up. An allusion to the myth mentioned 
above (see ver. 34). That which Bel, i.e. 
Babylon, has " swallowed up " is not only 
the spoil of the conquered nations, but those 
nations themselves. Yea, the wall of Baby- 
lon shall fall ; literally, is fallen (is as good 
•s fallen). The famous wall of Babylon (oomp. 
ver. 58) is desciibed by Herodotus (i 179, 
181). From this clause down to tbe first 
half of ver. 49 is omiltcd in the Beptuagint. 

Ver. 46. — And lest your heart faint, etc. ; 
ratlier, and (beware) lest, etc A rumour 
shall both come ; rather, for a rumour shall 
tome. The war, then, will last some time, 
and all kinds of rumours will be in the air. 
Keil compares Matt. xxiv. 6. 

Ver. 48.— From the north. The same 
■tatement as in ch. 1. 3, 9, 41, 
Ver. 19. — As Babylon hath caused, etc. 



The verse Is very difficult, Ewald and 
others render thus : " Not only must Ba- 
bylon fall, O ye slain ones of Israel, but 
slain ones of the whole earth have fallen 
because of Babylon." But why this address 
to the slain ones of Israel ? Besides, the an- 
tithesis indicated in the Hebrew is thereby 
destroyed, Keil explains the antithesisthus: 
" Just as Babylon was intent on the fall of 
slain ones in Israel, so also there fall because 
of Babylon slain ones of all the earth," viz, 
because there are to be found, in the capital 
of tlie empire, people from all quarters of the 
world, who are slain when Babylon is con- 
quered, A better antithesis seems to be 
gained if we follow the Peshito, and read, at 
the end of the verse, " in the whole earth." 
It will then be asserted by the prophet that, 
just as Babylon was the cause of the slaying 
of Israelites, so (as a punishment) the Baby- 
lonian fugitives shall be slain wherever they 
may wander. 

Vers. 50 — 58. — C!onclnsion of the prophecy. 

Ver. 50. — Ye that have escaped the sword. 
Evidently Jews are the persons addressed. 
It is not, however, perfectly clear whether 
the escape is from the sword of Babylon or 
from that of Divine vengeance. The parallel 
of Isa. xxiv. 14 would suggest the latter ; but 
in the following verses the fall of Babylon is 
described as still to come. Stand not stUl. 
Lest ye be overtaken by the judgment, 

Ver. 51 . — We are confounded. A reflection 
of the exiles, expressing tbeir deep shame 
at the ignominy which has been their lot. 
Are come ; or, came. 

Ver. 53. — The height of her strength ; tit, 
her lofty walls and towers. 

Ver. 55,— The great voice ; rather, the loud 
sound ; i,e. the tumult of the city. When her 
waves ; rather, and her waves ; i.e, the con- 
quering hosts (comp. ch. xlvi. 7). 

Ver. 56. — The Lord Ood of reoompenset 
shall, etc. ; rather, TTie Lord it a God of ra> 
eompense ; he will, etc. 

Ver. 57.— Her oaptains, and her mlera (see 
on ver. 23). 

Ver. 58.— The' broad walls of Babylon . . . 
and her high gates, Bee Herod., i. 179, 
181, and the parallel accounts from other 
authors, cited by Duncker (' Hist, of Anti- 
quity,' iii. 373, etc.), who taxes fierodotua 
with exaggeration, but admits as probable 
that the walls were not less than forty feet 
broad. Utterly broken; rather, destroyed 
even to the ground (literally, made bare). 
The people ; rather, peoples. 

Vers. 59 — 64. — Epilogue. The word, eto. 
(see ver. 61). Seraiah. Apparently the 
brother of Baruch. With Zedekiah. The 
Beptuagint has "from Zedekiah," which 
is referred by Bleck and Gi atz. It ««uld 
thus be an embassy, ot which Seraiah was 
the head. According to the ordinary read- 



OH. u. 1—64.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JEKEMIAH. 



295 



ing, Zedekiah went himself. A quiet prince. 
Not BO. The Hebrew means probably, " in 
command over the resting-place," i.e. he 
took charge of the royal caravan, and 
arranged • the halting-places. But the 
Targum and the Septuagint have a more 
probable reading (not, however, one in- 
volving a change in the consonants of the 
text, " in command over the gifts," t'.e. the 
functionary who took charge of the presents 
made to the king. M. Lenormant speaks of 



•n official called "ma^ster largitionnm" 
(bel tabti) in the Assyrian court (' Syllabairei 
Cunfiformea,' par. 1877, p. 171). 

Ver. 61.- (Comp. 1. 3; li. 26.) And shalt 
see, and shalt read; rather, See that thou 
read. 

Ver. 64. — And they shall be weary. Acci- 
dentally repeated from ver. S9 (see intro- 
duction to ch. 1.). Thus far, etc. Proving 
that the Book of Jeremiah once ended with 
oh. li. 



HOMILETICa. 

Ver. 6. — " Sufferivg, lut not forsaken." Israel is not forsaken because she Is driven 
from her home. Babylon is not more favoured because she flourishes for a season as a 
" golden cup in the Lord's hand." For the land of the Chaldeans is filled with sin 
against the Holy One of Israel. Thus the truth is quite contrary to appearances. 

I. When God chastises his people he must not be THOuaHT to have forsaken 
THEM. The chastisement is for their own good. It is, therefore, a proof that God has 
not neglected them. Instead of being an indication of hatred or indifference, chastise- 
ment is a sign of God's love. Moreover, when his people suffer God is peculiarly 
near to them. Those' captives who hung their harps on the willows by the rivers of 
Babylon found God more present than he had been to the careless sinful Jews who 
assembled in the courts of his temple. It is to be remembered that Gud is near to us 
when we do not perceive him, and often nearest in those dark hours when bittemes* of 
soul prevents us from having any comforting hope in him. 

II. Though God will chastise his people he will never fobsakb them. This is a 
further step. JSfot only is the chastisement no proof of God's having forsaken his 
people, but in no case will he forsake them ; no such proof can ever be found. True, they 
may be separated fiom God and may become " castaways ; " but this is only because 
they forsake him. He is ever true to his side of the covenant. Let us, therefore, be 
prepared to expect the chastisement, but also be well settled in faith that the far worse 
trouble, the neglect of our souls by God, can never come. 

III. Outward circumstances are no indications of cub relations with God. 
The great contrast between Israel and Babylon furnishes a striking instance of this 
truth. It is strange. For one would have thought that the outward and inward life 
would harmonize. So they will ultimately. Then the " golden cup " will be broken 
and the suffering child of God exalted to honour. But now the world is in confusion, 
evil is allowed a certain liberty for the consequent discipline of good, and thus the 
sufferers may be near to God while ths fortunate and happy are far away in sin. 

Ver. 10. — Pvhlic thanksgiving. In the destruction of Babylon and the restoration 
of Israel the devout sufferers of the Captivity see the justification of their conduct which 
had lain under a shadow while they shared in the punishment of their guilty brethren. 
So happy an issue from their troubles calls for devout gratitude, and this finds its 
expression in hymns of praise and public thanksgiving. 

I. Praise is one of the most important elements of worship. Two faults 
may be observed in much of our worship — both arising from our centring it in 
ourselves. 1. It is too selfish. We are more earnest in prayer than in praise. In sore 
need we cry out with terrible anxiety ; but when the need is satisfied we return thanks 
in poor and faint tones. We are eager to obtain blessings for ourselves, but little 
desirous of glorifying God. Yet the essence of worship is self-surrender. We degrade 
it and contradict its spirit when we make it serve the ends of self-seeking, 2. It is foo 
lubjective. We dwell much on our own feelings instead of going out of self in the 
contemplation of God. Consequently our worship is pitched too much in the minor key. 
We wail out "Misereres" when we should be shouting "Magnificats." We have 
much to say about our low estate, but little concerning the way in which God has 
regarded it. But the highest worship is adoration — the going out of self in wonder, 



296 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. loh. ti. 1— 64 

love, and praise towarris the glory of God. It would be well if we made less mention 
of our own feelings and were more ready to " declare the work of the Lord our God." 

II. Pbaise must be definite IP IT IS TO BE EARNEST. Muoh of our wofshlp is vapid 
and senseless because it is expressed in big vague phrases which carry little thought to 
our minds. 1. We should praise God by declaring his works. It is his character that 
we adore. But we see and realize this as it is reflected in his works. We see the 
glory of the sun, not by gazing with eagle vision into its dazzling centre, but by looking 
abroad on the many hues that it casts on land and sea and sky. We cannot gee the 
glory of God by abstract speculations on divinity ; we must study his works in nature, 
providence, and redemption. 2. We should praise God by noting those particular works 
which affect our experience. This is the secret of eainest praise. The Jews declare the 
works they have witnessed ; i.e. the special blessings of the restoration. Each man can 
call to mind some of thie blessings he has personally enjoyed, and in the consideration ol 
these see good ground for glorifying God. 

III. The bxpbbssion of pbaise should be fublio. The people come together ; 
tliey assemble at Zion, the place of public worship ; they declare — ^make public — ^the 
works of God. This is fitting for many reasons. 1. It glorifies Ood. This is the only 
way in which we can glorify him. We cannot add to his glory, but we may reflect it. 
2. It increases our own thankfulness. Joy is sympathetic. By sharing it we increase 
it. 3. It leads others to see the same glory and goodness of God. A song of praise in 
the most efiectual sermon on the grace of God ; for it is (1) the language of experience, 
(2) an expression of feeling, and (3) a vivid representation of " the works of the Lord 
our God.'*^ 

Ver. 19. — (See homily on ch. x. 16.) 

Ver. 20, — Ood's battle-axe. I. God sometimes wobes DEBTBtrcrnoN. He doea not 
delight in destruction. It is not his chief work. But he has performed it and he may 
again. When a thing is absolutely evil it is best that it should cease to be. For the 
prevention of further evil it must be destroyed. The Creator then becomes the 
destroyer. 

II. God ttses hithan instbuments. He might have sent death, as he created life, 
with a word. But he chose to use a weapon, " a battle-axe," i.e. a human instrument. 
Thus (1) he honours good men by making them his servaiits, and (2) he counteracts 
the evil influence of bad men by overruling it for ends of Divine judgment. 

III. Thet who cannot serve God in the higher wobk mat yet bebve hiu m 
BOMB needful MISSION. The man who cannot become a prophet may act as " God's 
battle-axe." In God's great kingdom there is work for all classes and kinds of men. 
Hough and rude natures may find some misMon. Still the highest mission is not that 
of destruction. The most worthy servant of Otoi is he who follows Jesus Christ and 
" goes about doing good." 

Ver. 45. — Flight from the city of Destruction. As Christ advised his disciples to flee 
from Jerusalem when the judgment of heaven was about to fall, Jeremiah here calls 
upon the Hebrew residents in Babylon to escape from tiie doomed city. The parallel 
suggests that similar circumstances may render similar conduct again desirable. 

I. The sinful world is a city of Destbuotion. The world as God created it 
is good and safe. But man has made the world a dangerous place by his abuse of 
its lower properties. Thus the worldly spirit is an evil spirit, and the prince of this 
world is the supreme power of wickedness. Jesus Christ blended together his picture 
of the destruction of Jerusalem with a larger vision of the end of the world. In what 
way the wider and more distant fulfilment of his prophecy will come about we cannot 
tell ; the day of it is known to no man, not even to the " Son of man " (Matt xxiv. 
86). Meanwhile the world lies under a certain doom. It has been so corrupted and 
abused that to yield to its spirit, to follow its ways, to live nudnly for its advan- 
tages, is to court ruin. 

IL Tbe Chbistian is ubged to niBE FBOM this citt or DisnBuonoH. (2 Oor. vi. 
16 — vii. 1.) It would seem that the sharp line of separation between the world and the 
Churoh is melting away, Perhaps it was somewhat stiff and nrhitrary. Haay innos^ant 



OH. u. 1— 64,J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 297 

things were once put under the baa which most of us would not now think of con- 
demning, and an unhealthy sanctimoniousness was fostered by the idea that strictness 
was holiness. We are growing more free and more reasonable in some respects, 
learning that " every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, if it be 
received with thanksgiving : for it is sanctified through the Word of God and prayer." 
Moreover, we may hope that the Spirit of Christ has penetrated into the world beyond 
the boundaries of the Church, so that the very atmosphere of worldly society is more or 
less permeated by purifying Christian ideas. Nevertheless the approach of the world 
and the Church is mutual. If the world is coming nearer to the Church, the Church is 
in some respects approaching the world. A worldly spirit in business, in pleasure, even 
in religion, is too apparent. We forget that we are pilgrims and strangers here and seek 
another city. We live too much as if worldly prosperity were the goal of life. We need 
to be reminded that " this is not our rest," that in so far as we yield to the sinrit of 
worldliness we court the doom of the city of Destruction. 

III. The Christian's fliqht from the oitt of Destbitotiom uust bb BFiBTnTAL. 
Jews were to flee bodily from Babylon and Christians from Jerusalem. But the flight we 
need i^ wholly different in character. Monks and hermits thought to flee &om the world 
by hiding within still cloisters or far away among desert solitudes. But they made a 
double mistake. They neglected their duty to the world and yet they did not escape 
from the evil of it. We may carry the world into the wilderness, for it is in our hearts. 
While we have bodies and live on tlie earth no change of place will be an escape firom the 
world. Then we have a misdon to fulfil, and no pretence of care for our own souls can 
excuse us for shirking the work of life ; certain views of salvation are often put forth 
according to which Christianity is supreme selfishness — the saving of one's own soul even 
though others suffer. These are false. The great duty of the Christian is to live for the 
good of his fellow-men. To do this he must be in the world. Intercourse with the world 
for such a purpose is right. It is foolish to visit an infected locality for pleasure, but 
divinely charitable to do so to minister to the sick. The flight from the world must be 
escape from its spirit, its evil influence, its sinful delights. Christ prays, not that we shall 
be taken out of the world, but that we shall be saved from the evil of it. Through him 
we may have this deliverance, because he has " overcome the world." 

Ver. 60. — The duty and encouragement of the saved, I. The duty. " Stand not 
still." 1. Why the duty is requisite. Past deliverance is no security for the future. 
The first arrow missed the mark, but the second may strike. The tide advances ; though 
the waves have not yet reached us, they will overwhelm us if we remain where we are. 
(1) It is possible to avoid one earthly trouble and succumb to another — to escape the 
sword and fall a prey to the pestilence. (2) It is possible to escape much distress in this 
world and then to fall under a terrible doom in the next world. (3) It is possible to be 
safe now from the terrible effects of sin and to yield to future temptation and so bring 
upon our heads ruin in the future. 2. How the duty is to he performed. (1) We must 
be prayerfuL As the danger is ever renew^ so nmst the grace be. Therefore we 
need to be always seeking aid from heaven. (2) We must be watchfuL New dangers 
may arise at any moment. (3) We must be anxious to flee from evil. Our whole 
course must be with the back to the city of Destruction. (4) We must be diligent. 
The attainments of the past will not suffice. Forgetting those things which are 
behind, we must press forward. The Christian's safety is not in indolent reliance 
upon Christ, but in trustful obedience. 

II, The knooubaoement. " Remember the Lord from afar, and let Jerus&lem come 
into your mind." 1. God's grace in the past is an encouragement for the future. Past 
deliverances will not secure us against future danger, but they will furnish reasons for 
seeUng safety again in God. 2. The chief reason for pressing diligently and hopefully 
forward is to be found in the contemplation of God. His holiness should make us fear 
sin ; his love should make us trust in his helping grace. That we may not stand still, 
we should " remember the Lord." 3. Our very remoteness from God should urge us not 
to stand stiU. We may have wandered far from God in sin, or have forgotten him 
among the crowd of woildly distractions. But when we realize our condition, irhen 
we come to ourselves, we shall see that our only safety will be in arising and going 
to our Father. We can never be too far to return by Christ " the Way." Tho futhei 



298 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [ch. ll 1—64 

we are from God the greater is our danger, the nearer we approach liim the more of 
his grace and help shall we enjoy. 4. Thoughts of our mission and destiny should 
induce us not to stand still. The Jews are to remember Jerusalem, their ancient home, 
the seat of their future destinies. If there weru no such city they might despair in 
their exile. The tliought of Jerusalem suggests a centre of union and an aim for the 
future. If a man loses all hope, he loses himself. When we think of our possible 
future and of our mission, we are roused to take up the tangled threads and weave our 
life's work with patience according to the pattern of God's will. 

Vers. 52 — 64. — The book cast into the river, I, Men do not sdtfeb fob theib 
8IN8 WITHOUT WARNING FEOM GoD. Seraiah was to go to Babylon and see that he 
read there the words of the prophecy concerning the city. God has warned us of 
the doom of sin, and he has sent the warning to us. We have not to search for 
it. It sounds in our ears. It is written large in the Bible. It is repeated in the 
lessons of providence. 

II. If a Divine warnino is disregarded it is useless to the doomed. The 
prophecy seems to have had little or no effect on the people of Babylon. No doubt it 
was sent in mercy like Jonah's preaching against Nineveh, to lead the people to repent- 
ance. But if they failed to repent, the Divine message could afford no pretection. 
Unless we are influenced by the Bible, it will be useless for us to hold it in our hands. 
It can be then only a witness against us. Neither the mere possessor of Scripture, nor 
the reader, nor the student of it finds a way of safety in its teachings, but only he who 
follows its truths in practice. He who hears Christ's sayings and does them builds on 
the rock. 

III. When a Divdje warnino is proved to be iNBFFECTirAL, it mat be with- 
held. The book, no longer of use, is to be cast into the river and sunk with a stone 
attached to it. The voice of conscience grows silent from being long unheeded. While 
men neglect to obey the teachings of Scripture, they harden themselves against the 
reception of them. If there is no more warning, they may grow careless as though 
there were no more danger. They should rather take this silence as ominous of the 
approaching destruction which the warning has been ineffectual in urging them to 
eacapOi 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 6. — Divine love not to he severed from its ohfect. A marvellotis statementi A 
down-trodden, sinful remnant of his people, who had broken every engagement of his 
covenant, is still owned and cared for. 

I. A PROOF OP THE FAITHFULNESS AND LONO-SUFFEBING MERCT OF GoD. 1. Having 

entered into covenant relations with Israel, he will not withdraw from them, even 
although their portion of the agreement has not been kept. He remains faithful, 
notwithstanding human unfaithfulness. The awful guilt of the elect nation cannot 
invalidate the obligations God has imposed upon himself. He is ready, therefore, at 
any moment to fulfil these when the conditions are complied with. 2. But it is rather 
to be taken as illustrating Divine mercy. The purposes of his love are never laid aside. 
He devises schemes of salvation when we are yet sinners. 3. Though hidden from 
human eyes. Divine love works continually and through all things. It was hard for 
mere men to see the favour of Gud in such times. Many of the Israelites themselves 
doubtless, imagined themselves forsaken. Yet was redemption nearer to them in 
Babylon than when at Jerusalem they insulted and disobeyed him. " All things work 
together for good to them that love God," etc. ; " Though he slay me, yet will I trust 
in him " (Job xiii. 16). 

II. A EEVBLATION FULL OF WARNINO AND ENCOUBAGEMBNT. 1. The enemies </ tht 

Church are not to presume upon her misfortunes. 2. The Church itself, although cast 
down and feeble, is tale of good cowrage, for it is not cast off. Adversity is not for- 
sakenness. " Lo, I am with you alway." There is no room for presumption, for tha 
chastisements of love have greater severities in store for aggravated guilt. But, relying 
on the grace of God, it may arise and recommence the mission it has forsaken.—- M. 



OB. u. 1—61.] TEE BOOK OF THE PBOFHET JEBEMIAH. 289 

Vers. 6, 50. — The duty' of teparating from the world. I. In what sense oblioatobt 
UPON THE CHILDBEN OB GoD. 1. Spiritual detachment ii always the duty of taints. 
In heart and life they are to be separate unto the Lord. Their motives, ulterior aims, 
and dispositions are to be such as the Holy Spirit creates and fosters. They obey the 
law of the resurrection-life, and "seek those things which are above, where Christ 
sitteth on the right hand of God, setting their affectioa on things above, not on things 
on the earth ' (Col. iii. 1, 2). 2. Physical rejnoval may be requisite when (1) all 
hope of saving or benefiting sinful men is at end ; or (2) there is danger that we shall 
yield to the temptations of their society, or encourage them in their evil courses, and 
thus share their curse. The Jews were to seek the peace of Babylon so long as that 
was possible ; to share in civic life, business pursuits, and social intercourse, until tkis 
prophecy came to their knowledge. 

II. The motives and aims that abe to influenoe va nr doing this. They are 
not selfish. It is only when spiritual interests are at stake. There must be no idle- 
ness or lingering when the call of duty comes. The Jew was to arise and seek hii 
long-forsaken land at once. His motives were : 1. Allegiance to Ood. He was to 
" remember the Lord afar off." God was indeed near to him, even there in Babylon. 
He is to seek more closely to serve and honour him. And this ought ever to be the 
aim of Christians ; "a closer walk with God." And if he be spiritually minded, hs 
will feel the attraction of the Divine presence and the blessedness of the Divine 
communion, which far more than make up for temporal loss or sorrow incurred for 
conscience' sake. It is the special duty of Christians to call upon God and obey him 
when amongst those who do not know his Name. 2. The interests of the kingdom of 
Ood on earth. God sought to separate and sanctify to himself a peculiar people in 
olden time, that it might witness to his truth. He still seeks to gather a spiritual 
Church, whose communion consists of those who are redeemed by the blood of bis Son. 
Through its manifold ministries he is carrying out the salvation of the world. Every 
Christian is bound to connect himself with it in some form or other, and to take his 
part in its worship and work. The language of the ancient exile might well \t» adopted 
by every member of the new Israel— Pa. cxxii. ; cxxxviL 5, 6. — M. 

Ver. 10. — Praise the outcome <f saintly experience, Thiese are the words of Jeremiah, 
but there can be little doubt he is but instinctively interpreting the emotion that must 
uU the breasts of his countrymen when his predictions were accomplished. Asa repre- 
sentative Israelite, he expresses the deep-seated impulse that is felt when the greater 
providences and special spiritual deliverances of life are realized. 

I. Experiences of saving obaoe an occasion of thanesotvino akd fbaibb. We 
owe thankful recognition to God for our creation, preservation, and the recurring mercies 
of our temporal life ; but there are stronger emotions awakened by the experiences of 
grace in the spiritual nature. 1. Notice some of these. This deliverance from Babylon. 
Conversion, or the rescue of the soul from the spiritual Babylon. The triumphs of the 
gospel ; faithfulness of saints ; increase of spiritual power and influence ; preservation 
of Christian institutions in times of spiritual apathy or persecution; evangelization of 
heathen lands, etc. Special answers to prayer, or peace and comfort in private fellow- 
ship with our heavenly Father. 2. Their general character. " The Lord hath brought 
forth our righteoiMititts " (" righteousnesses "). This deliverance was a great act oi judg- 
ment. The cause of God's people was vindicated, and the guilt of Babylon avenged 
(cf. Ps. xxxvii. 6). The whole world was witness of the character and meaning of the 
event. And this is the element in all the experiences of grace that awakens special 
thanksgiving — they are manifestations of Divine righteousness in the life of men; 
triumphs of truth and holiness and love. 

II. The special ddty to which they oalIi ub. 1. Declaring and interpreting 
God's work to men, (1) by word; (2) by work. 2. Public celebration in God!s house. 
Zion was the most fitting and representative place for such a duty. Public worship 
should be linked with the experiences of private devotion and the spiritual life, f ublio 
and common praise is the privilege and delight of Christians.— M. 

Ver. Q.—" Escape for thy life!" "Flee out of the midst of Babylon," eta Thfa 
word was addressed to those who should be found in Babylon when the day of v«ii> 



800 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH. [oh. li. 1—64 

geance came upon her (cf. Gen. xSx. 15). And it seems to anticipate what wai 
afterwards the fact — that many of the Jews would not care to go away from Babylon. 
Note— 

I. Who ABE TO ESCAPE. This word was not addressed to all. Many of God's people 
did " let Jerusalem come into their mind," and, as soon as ever opportunity was given 
them, they returned to their own land. But there were many who chose to stay. 
They had long dwelt in Bahyldn. They had got to like her rule, for they had pros- 
pered in this world's wealth. The surrounding idolatries did not " vex " their souls. 
They felt secure in her ; they had become morally and spiritually enslaved. Hence they 
would not ruturn with their brethren when the opportunity came._ And how like is 
the position of men now ! They are in bondage and spiritual captivity under the power 
of " the prince of this world." Some have heard the word and have escaped, but othen 
care not to flee. They are content to be where and as they are. 

IL Whence they abb to escape. Babylon stands fur the kingdom of evil, which 
is ruled over by the spirit of evil. Now, that kingdom is fitly represented by Babylon. 
The power, the attractiveness, the fascination, the deceptiveness, the widespread and 
long-continued rule of the one find theii type and likeness in the other. And the 
unwillingness which was felt by the great majority of Jews to quit Babylon is 
paralleled by the more sad unwillingness to abandon that kingdom of evil which God is 
ever bidding us escape and. flee from. 

ni. Wet we abb to escape. It is " for our life." This cannot be taken literally 
of the Jews in Babylon. For, so far as this life was concerned, they prospered greatly 
under the Persian rule (cf. Book of Esther in proof). And their descendants lived on 
right down to the times of the apostles, and were those " of the dispersion " of whom we 
read in the New Testament. But for the most their national and spiritual life was lost 
by their disobedience to this command. They ceased to be Jews, and were absorbed in 
the heathen nations around. And, of course, their religious life perished at the same 
time (see histories of the Captivity). And so in regard to the spiritual analogies of these 
events. Men will not, do not, literally lose this life by refusing to come away from the 
kingdom of evil into the kingdom of God. On the contrary, they seem to flourish 
greatly. The prosperity of the ungodly has been a notorious and perplexing fact in all 
ages of the world. And it Is a sore temptation and trial to those who feel the drawings 
of the kingdom of God. And the temptation can only be overcome by remembering 
that the l^e of the soul depends upon our obedience to this word. It is when the unseen 
knd the eternal are seen by faith that the gloss and glamour of the world are seen at 
their real and poor value, and the solid worth of the kingdom of God is confessed and 
yielded to. The angels had to " hasten" even "just Lot," though the fire of the Lord 
was on the point of descending on " the cities of the plain." And how we need hasten- 
ing now I How slow to believe that judgment is nigh ! For with the advent of death 
that judgment begins to every soul that enters into eternity uuforgiven and unsaved. 

IV. How WE SHALL ESCAPE. The one all-essential question is — ^Do you really wish 
to? For if there be the genuine desire, the path of escajie will be soon revealed. No 
directions are of any use until this desire be awakened in the soul. But where it exists, 
it will express itself in what the Bible calls " seeking the Lord." And, as this is con- 
tinued, there will be deepened in the soul that hatred of sin and aspiration after holiness 
which lie at the root of all true religious life. Repentance will thus be formed within 
the soul, and will be fostered by careful obedience to the will of God as declared in 
his Word. But — 

V. Whitheb shall we escape ? There is but one answer to this. To the Lord 
Jesus Christ. It is as we look up to him in lowly, earnest trust, renouncing all self- 
reliance, that the new life is begotten in us, and we are grafted in him, and so become 
" new creatures," as St. Paul tells, and so are we »n the kingdom of God, and clean 
escaped from the kingdom of the evil one. We are pardoned, accepted, made possessors 
of the Holy Ghost and of eternal life.— 0. 

Ver. 10. — The response of the redeemed. " The Lord hath . . . come, and let tM," eta 

I. What the Lobd hath done. " Brought forth our righteousness." Now, by this 

we may understand : 1. The Lord hath brought forth, made known, revealed, him who 

it our Bighteousneas (fil. homilj on " The Lord ovr BighteousTiess," voL i. p, 627). Bjr 



0H.U.1— 64J THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JEEBMIAH. 801 

his representative character, what is done by hitn is as done by us. " We thug judge, 
that if one died for all, then were all dead " (2 Cor. t. 14). There is nothing unreason- 
able in this. We are perpetually imputing to others what is not in tliem or but very 
faintly in them. We do so when we treat strangers with all kindness for the sakis of 
those — some honoured and beloved ones — who commend them to us. We cause to flow 
over on them the worth and goodness of those by whom they are commended. They may 
not merely be strangers, but unworthy and evil, and yet, for the sake of otlieis, we deal 
with them, not as they are, but as those are from whom they come. So ig the Lord 
Jesus our Bighteousness, blessed be his Namel 2, The lard hath brought forth 
righteousness in us. But for him there would have been no righteousness at all. 
Some speak of " natural goodness." There is no such thing. All goodness, like all 
light, has but one source. Divines tell of ruined arches, stately pillars, etc., relics of 
the noble fabric that once was. But Scripture rather teaches that sin wrought death. 
If, then, there be aught that is beautiful and good, fair and righteous— and there is, and 
much — it is not a relic, but a new creation. It comes from him who is " the Light 
that lighteth every man that cometh into the world " (Juhn i. ; cf. Jas. i. 16). And' 
when a man yields up his soul to Christ, then — vitally grafted into him, the true Vine, 
and having become a living branch — he will more and more yield the fruit of righteous- 
ness, as he never did or could before. 3. 2hs Lord hath brought forth his covenant,' 
That is to say, he hath brought forth in his own mind, so as to remember, bis covenant 
that he made (cf. Fs. cv. 8 — 15 ; cxi., etc.). It is ever declared to be on the ground 
of this covenant that God dealt well with his people. Now, that covenant had been, as 
it were, put out of the Divine mind by the multitude of their sins. But now he brings 
it forth again. 4. The Lord hath vindicated us. The enemies of the Lord blasphemed 
his people. Counted them as having no worth or goodness at all ; as far inferior to all 
others. But, despised as his people were and condemned, now, by God's redemption of 
them, he was to bring forth their righteousness, vindicate them, on and before all (cf. 
Ps. xxxvii. 5 — 7). This, which he did for Israel, he will do for all his people — " will 
bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their judgment as the noonday." 

II. What, thebefobb, should we do ? " Come, and let us declare in Zion the 
work of the Lord our God." This is what we are to do. 1. Why should we do this t 
For the honour of G«d. It is his due. For our own soul's sake ; to keep silence on 
what he has done for us is not only dishonouiing to him, but disastrous to our own 
souls. For the encouragement of others, that they may be led to trust in him. 2. 
Sow should we do this t Openly : " Let us declare in Zion," etc. Not concealing our 
obligation, not refusing to confess him. Unitedly: "Come, and let its," etc. Join 
with them of a like mind. Heartily : calling on others to do the like, " Come," etc., 
In his Church : " In Zion.'' There taking our place, falling into rank in the army of 
the Lord. In the heavenly Zion the redeemed of the Lord never tire of thus declaring 
the work of the Lord. — 0. 

Vet. 19.— ''The Portion of Jacob " (cf. homily, vol. I. p. 277).— 0. 

Ver. 20.— Tfte Church Ood's battle-axe. God ever employs instruments to accom- 
plish bis purposes. He is a God that " hideth " himself. Hence many see nothing 
but instruments, and forget, or deny, the hand that uses them. " That does not seem 
much of a sword," said one, as he looked upon the treasured weapon of a great national 
hero and valiant soldier. " Ah 1 but you do not seo the hand that wielded it," was the 
just reply. So as we look on the agencies Gud employs, how feeble they seem to be ! 
But think of the force behind them, and then the works they accomplished are 
explained. Now, this is true of all God's- works. Especially is it true in all the great 
spiritual achievements which we have heard of or seen. This verse re»<;rs to Israel, in 
reference to the idolatrous nations around them, and to Babylon especially. Israel was 
the unseen cause that led to the overthrow and destruction of one nation after another. 
For the Church's sake God governs the world. "All things are yours." Now, note— 

I. The witness of bistort to the truth that God's people are his " battle-axe and 
weapons of war." " I came not to send peace upon earth, but a sword," said Jesus, and 
Id the same sense as this verse declares that word is true. " Magna est Veritas, et pre- 
valent," is another rendering oi the same fact. 1. Btfore the birth ^ Christ the para 



S02 THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET JBBEMIAa [oh. u. 1—64 

monotheistic faitli of Tsrael had, after their captivity, began its iconoclastic work. Orel 
large portions of the then civilized world that faith began to permeate and cleave its 
way. So that the old idolatries were in many places stricken with a mortal blow before 
even he was proclaimed who was to draw all men unto him. 2. The downfaU oj 
paganism. Notwitlistanding the many accretions of error and superstition with which 
the pure faith of Christ so soon became encumbered, there yet remained inherent in 
it and inseparable from it such vital and mighty energy that it smote as with a 
" battle-axe " one falsehood after another, until they were well-nigh all slain. The 
forces against her in that ancient world were simply tremeodous, but the Church went 
forth conquering and to conquer. In vain the scorn of the great, the fires of awful per- 
secution, the power of venerable superstition ; in vain the hindrances which she herself 
put in her own way ; the Church was still God's destroying power against the &l8e 
religions of that age, until at length the last emperor of Borne who endeavoured to revive 
paganism, Julian — whom a corrupt hierarchy malignantly branded as " the apostate," 
though, in fact, he tvas less apostate than themselves — confessed with his dying breath, 
" Galilsaan, thou bast conquered 1 " In all that long and heart-stirring conflict this 
declaration of the prophet was illustrated again and again. 3. In the BeformatUm. 
Not alone in those nations in which the Belbrmation principles took root, but in the 
Church of Borne herself, was the error and evil destroying power of the truth that dwelt 
in the hearts of God's people made manifest. See in such a book as Banke's ' History 
of the Popes' what vast difference and improvements were brought about in the 
Catholic Church itself by the awful discipline through which she liad then to pass. 
Whatever stern censures may have to be passed on that Church since tiie days of the 
Beformation — and they are neither few nor light — yet candour must admit that they 
are far fewer and far lighter than those which the outrac;ed conscience of Christendom 
heaped upon her in the generations before. 4. In all missionary and evangelistic 
triimtfhs over heathendom. 

IL The witness of iNravmnAL Chbistian exfebienok. We are wont to speak of 
the truth of Gud as " mighty to the pulling down of the strongholds of sin and Satan." 
This is a Christian commonplace. And is it not true ? What but this battle-axe dew 
the giant sins that ruled and oppressed in each soul? 

IIL The seobet or this fobce. What makes the Church Gh>d's battle-axe ? We 
answer: 1. The truth that sustains her. The truth concerning God and our relations to 
him — ^he our Father and we all his children. 2. The spirit that animates her ; not one 
of hate or disregard to man, as was common before Christ came, but love — love even 
towards the vilest for Christ's sake. 3. The rule that regulates her. The heathen 
looked on with amazement at the blamelessness of life and the sanctity of character 
which the faith of the Church produced, and they felt and owned its power. 4. The love 
that constrains her. She ever " bore about in the body the dying of the Lord Jeans," 
and, mindful of that, she shrank from no suffering and refused no service. 5. The hope 
that cheers her. She wrought, not for a corruptible crown, but an incorruptible ; and the 
hope, " that blessed hope," of her Lord's appearing to receive and reward his people, 
cheered them on amid the awful sufferings which they were called on to bear. And 
still it is in proportion as these mighty motives animate the Church in the individual 
soul that faithful and effectual service is done for Christ against the many and mighty 
adversaries of God with which the world abounds. — C. 

Ver. 25. — A fatal/act. " Behold, I am against thee." 

L Its tbdth confessed. When Jerusalem was taken the captain of Xebnchadnez- 
ziir's army avowed that what had happened was of God (cf. ch. xl. 2). So afterwards 
when, by the Boman army, Jerusalem was ag&n captured, as our Lord foretold it would 
be, then too we have it on record that a like avowal was made by the leader of the 
Roman armies. And so here in regard to Babylon, no other conclusion could be 
come ta So vast was the power of Babylon that only the Divine opposition could 
explain the calamities that came upon her. And so when we see nations, Churches, 
men, that have every worldly advantage nevertheless brought low, as Rome was by 
the Goths, we can account for it only by this fact — "I am against thee." 

II. Its fatality shown. If empires like Babylon cannot stand when God is against 
them, wlio else can stand ? " If these things be done in the green tree, what shall bt 



OH. u. 1—64.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEBEMIAH. 303 



done in the diy?" If the mightiest &11 beneath the DiTine opposition, who of lesser 
power can hope to endure ? " Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he 
fall." He is sure to if these do. 

III. Its oonolusioh evident. Send an embassage and seek conditions of peace 
(Luke xiv. 31). "Be ye reconciled unto God." " Acquaint thyself with God, and be 
at peace." — 0. 

Ver. 33. — Eairvests tf horror and threshings of wrath. The Bible continually makes 
use of the similitude of the harvest and its labours, but it is only by its qualifying 
words that we can know what kind of harvest is meant. Here we have the frequent 
metaphor, but it tells of no joy, of sorrow only. Similar language has been iised of Israel 
as is here used of Babylon (cf. Isa. xxL 10 ; xli. 15). Israel's sins had been the seed of 
that harvest, and it was a terrible one. All the sorrows of the invasion and destruction 
of their beloved land and city, their holy city, Jerusalem, and all those which were 
associated with and sprang out of their bitter exile in Babylon, were but parts of that 
harvest and strokes of " the bruising flails of Qod's corrections." But here it is Babylon 
that is spoken of (cf. Isa. xxi. for a yet earlier prediction of Babylon's fall). She had 
sown the seed; the cup of her iniquity was full ere the harvests and threshings told of 
here came upon her. " Dissolute and luxurious in their habits, the Babylonians hid 
under their soft luxurious exterior a fierceness, an insatiable lust for blood, such as 
marked many Eastern tribes — such, for instance, as we ourselves have found in ' the 
mild Hindoo.' The Hebrew prophets describe them as 'a bitter and hasty,' a 'terrible 
and dreadful ' people, ' fiercer than the evening wolves,' a people who ' made the earth 
tremble and did shake kingdoms.' " They conquered well-nigh all the kingdoms of the 
then known world; they pillaged every country they conquered, and often went far to 
depopulate the countries they pillaged. In Jud^a, for instance, the land became a mere 
haunt of wild beasts after the Babylonians had subdued it, and from Jerusalem they 
pillaged even the sacred vessels of the temple. Hence to Isaiah they appeared as " the 
spoiler spoiling, and the destroyer destroying." And besides all this, there seems to 
have been an inherent and ineradicable wickedness in the nation itself, or it could hardly 
have been selected, as it is, as the type of all that is abominable and hateful in the 
sight of God. For many a generation and century she had been spared. From the 
beginning to the end of the Bible we read of her. In her decayed greatness there was a 
little Christian Church there, of which St. Peter tells (1 Pet. v. 19). But up to the time 
of the Exile, and during far the greater portion of it, Babylon seemed only to advance in 
splendour, in wealth, and power. But at length the time of her harvest — an awful time, 
indeed — came, and in the sorrows connected with her capture and overthrow, and in the 
hard and hated rule of her Persian lords, there was the " threshing " of which both Isaiah 
and Jeremiah telL The contemplation of it filled the Prophet Isaiah with an unspeak- 
able horror : " My loins are filled with pain : pangs have taken hold on me " (Isa. xxi. 
8, 4). Jew as he was, he could not behold the dread vision of what wa? to come on 
Babylon without deep anguish. She " must have filled in his thoughts much the place 
which Rome held in the mind of a cultivated Spaniard or Carthaginian of the early 
Christian centuries. To him the Medes and Persians, plunging down from their 
unknown, mysterious mountain fastnesses upon the wealthy Babylonian plain, must 
have seemed much as the Goths and Vandals seemed to the more civilized races of 
Europe, when they came pouring down the Alps, to carry sword and fire through the 
storied plains of Italy. The whole Christian world shuddered when Rome fell ; and 
as her Tail to the modern so was the fall of Babylon to the ancient world." Harvest 
and threshing : these images of the bam commonly suggest that which is peaceful and 
joyous; but here they tell of the reverse of that — of horror and woe unspeakable. 
Learn, therefore — 

I. Sins are seeds which may have a late, but shall subelt have a laboe and 

TEBBIBLE, HARVEST. 

II. Reluctant as God may be to afflict the childben of men, he will noi 

SPABE a BINOLE BTBOKE 80 LONQ AS THBT OLINO TO THE EVILS WHICH DEQBADE A5D 
DESTEOT THEM. 

III. The judgments and punishments of God abb not vindictive and final, but 
THE " THBEBHiNQS OF THE coBN OF HIS FLooB " (Isa. xxL 10). The separation, thiat is, 



304 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [oh. ll 1—64. 

of the evil from the good, the worthless from that which is precious and shall be pre- 
served for evermore. — 0. 

Ver. 48. — Joy over judgment. I. The sinneb will wbbp and wail. This is the 
sonstant declaration of the Word of God. " There shall be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth." Would that the sinner would look steadily on to the end, and so consider his 
ways! 

II. Human natdbb, in sympathy with the sinner's woes, will sobbow. (Cf. 
Isa. xxi. 10.) We have need to be on our guard against this. In the present day our 
sympathy with the suffering leads us to forget the causes and the blessed results that 
come from the judgment of God. No criminal is ever condemned to die but at once 
there are those who strive to get his punishment remitted. It is a false sympathy and 
needs to be resisted. 

III. But heaven and eabth bejoioe. Cf. the many psalms in which we are called 
on to rejoice because the Lord " cometh to judge the earth." The grounds of this joy 
are : 1. Righteousness is vindicated. 2. The oppressed are delivered. 3. Men will 
learn righteousness. 4. They that are judged will be brought to a better mind. 6. 
The kingdom of God will more speedily come. — C. 

Yer. 60. — The charge to them that are spared. This charge, addressed to Israelites 
spared from Babylon, may be applied to all in Christ. For — 

L All in Christ are spared ones. Spared from: 1. The condemnation dne to 
sin. 2. The abiding tyranny of sin. 3. The crushing power of sorrow. 4. The misery 
of alienation from God. 6. The might of death. 

II. To SUCH THIS threefold chakqe is addressed. 1. They are to "go away, 
etand not atiU." As Israel from Babylon that had enslaved them, so these from the 
sins which QoA has forgiven them. " Let him that nameth the name of Christ depart 
from iniquity." Many Jews despised this charge, and stayed on in Babylon. Some 
not merely stayed in Babylon as Jews, but probably far more of them were " mingled 
with the heathen, and learned their ways." " Evil communications corrupt good man- 
ners." Even those who disobeyed only the letter of the command suffered, whilst those 
who disobeyed both the letter and the spirit were simply lost, cut off from the house of 
IsraeL And they who have received Christ, if they do not break away from their old 
sins and from all that wovdd hold them in bondage to such sins, will lose their 
religion and are in sore peril of apostatizing from Christ. Therefore let such put 
further and further distance between themselves and their former life, lest again they 
be entangled and overcome. 2. To " remember the Lord afar off." In their sin and 
misery God seemed afar o£r to Israel. " My way is hid from the Lord, and my judg- 
ment is passed over from my God" — .such was their grievous lament. But they were 
to remember him, turn their thoughts and prayers toward him, and believingly wait his 
promised answer. And to the believer now "it doth not yet appear what we shall be;' 
we are far off from that ; but we are to remember the Lord, though we be yet in con- 
dition and character so far off from him. Remember him in our meditations, prayers, 
purposes, and aims ; wait on him, and so renew our strength. 3. " Let Jerusalem come 
into your mind." How blessed to be there 1 how she demands our earnest service ! — her 
joys, her sanctity, her children, her employ ; our place there prepared for us, and our 
preparation for the place. So remember her, and so be delivered from bung wearied and 
faint in our minds. — 0. 

Ver. 68. — "The hroad vnH*," L Tmt empire of bus has such waua Those 
referred to here may be taken as a type of them. They were : 1. To separate. Have 
we not proof of this in the wide distance, the invincible barriers, which keep the ungodly 
from sympathizing, associating, or in any way uniting, with the people of God ? The 
kingdom of evil remains shut up from the kingdom of God. Mansoul cannot be 
entered by way of the gates ; the messengers of the King seek admission, but cannot 
obtain it. And hereafter the separation will continue (cf. Luke xvi., " Between us 
and you there is a great gulf fixed "). Separation, which is voluntary now, becomes 
iuvduntary then. 2. For leeurity. A terrible security it is. In vain do the ambas- 
■adcnra of Qod endeavour to penetrate within those walls. In vain do his soldiers seek 



CH. LI. 1—64,] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 305 

to scale them and his weapons of war to destroy them. The strong man armed keepeth 
his goods in peace. What minister of Christ has not again and agRin retired baffleri 
from before these broad walls, so high, so strong, so impregnable? 3. for enjoymenf. 
The broad walla of cities such as Babylon were places for pleasant walking for recrea- 
tion and enjoyment. So does the sinner's fancied security lull his soul to rest, make 
him cry, " Peace, peace ! " when there is no peace. But — 

II. Tt.E KINGDOM OP GoD HAS ITS BROAD WALLS. (Cf. Neh. ill. 8, where we read o( 
the broad walls of Jerusalem.) Let us see to it that we maintain and preserve those 
walls. 1. For separation. Let us not seek to come close to the world, in its habits, 
maxims, spirit, behaTiour. Keep the wall broad, strong, high. We cannot serve God 
and mammon. Let there be no attempt at compromise. And these walls are aiso 
2. For security. If we do not maintain them we run great risk for ourselves. Tamper- 
ing with sin is perilous work. And let us not think that we are more likely to win the 
world by such breaking down of the broad walls. The result is all the other way. Si'o 
how broad a wall Christ maintained between himself and the world. God has built 
these walls. His power, his wisdom, his love, his promise, are all portions of thesa 
walls by which his Church is guarded and against which the gates of hell, shall not pre- 
vail. 3, For enjoyment. What comfort there is in the thought of them, of the sure 
defence, the wall of fire, which God will be to his people 1 And on these walls, as we 
" walk about Zion, and go round her, and tell the towers thereof," what rest, what com- 
munion one with another, and what bright prospects are ours! The broad walls oi 
Babylon shall be " broken down ; " but these are eternal. Are we within them ? — C. 

Ver. 64. — The weariness of sin. " They shall be weary." With these sad words the 
Prophet Jeremiah closes his book. The shadows are over it all, nor are they in the 
least lifted where we most love to see them lifted — at the end. They are spoken of 
the inhabitants of Babylon, and repeat what was said in ver. 58. They suggest the 
theme — The weariness of sin. 

I. Wbarinbss is ALWAYS PAIN. It may be of the body, and then exhaustion and 
fatigue render exertion any longer only so much torture. Or of the mind. The br.iin 
becomes dazed, bewildered, incapable of effort. Or of the heart — that which is caused 
by disappointment, ingratitude, unfulfilled desire, hopelessness. Or that of the soul, 
which is the weariness told of here. But in all cases it is full of pain. 

II. Weakinbss is a ukiveesal expeeibnce. The child of God is often weary. 
Such are exhorted not to be "weary in well-doing," the exhortation implying the 
more than possibility of such weariness being experienced. And our Saviour knew this 
weariness — never of, but often in, his work. In a world like this there are causes 
enough for such weariness to lay hold on the servants of God. But if they know weari- 
ness, yet more do the children of this world ; for — 

III. The woebt weabiness is that of sin. For a while the enjoyment which 
springs from sin may so intoxicate and dazzle the wrong-doer that he will laugh at the 
idea of weariness, and declare that his is the alone path of pleasure and good. But 
after a while that ceases, and then comes satiety and weariness. 1. The causes of this 
are : (1) Negative. In serving sin we have not those great aids to endurance and restora- 
tion of strength which are ever present to the child of God. The servant of sin has 
no high and noble motive, no worthy motive at all, in what he does. The motives of 
affection, of duty, of gratitude, of love, which sustain so mightily the mind of the 
Christian, — these are all lacking in the servant of sin. Oood hope also cheers the child 
of God ; but what harvest can the sinner expect to reap ? It is such as he dares not, 
and therefore will not, contemplate. The communion of the Spirit of God — that 
Spirit who " giveth songs in the night," is present to the Christian, and in the deepest 
distress enables him to rejoice. But nought of this can the ungodly know in their hard 
work and lervioe. Drawing near to God is another aid of the child of Gk>d. For — 

"We may kneel and cast oar load, 
E'en while we pray, upon our God, 
Then rise with lightened cheer; 
Sure that the Father, who is nigh 
To hoar the famished ravens cry. 
Will hear in that we fear." 
JEBEHIAB — II X 



30« THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEIIBMIAH. [oH. u. 1— 64. 

This most real help the ungodly never know. (2) Bttt there aire positive causes of weari- 
ness in the service of sin. Jesus said, " Weep not for me, but weep for yourselves and 
for your children." His cup of woe was bitter, but theirs would be more bitter still. 
Now, the positive causes of the weariness of sin are such as these. The powerlessness 
of sin to minister pleasure continually. The goadings of conscience, which will not be 
silent. God's judgments— so full of pain, bo inevitable, so irremediable, as these on 
Babylon. The hopelessness of sin's outlook — nothing but a fearful looking for of judg- 
ment. 2. TTie effects of this weariness are seen in such as Saul and Judas, and in the 
myriad others who have sought, in self-destruction or by wild plunging into yet deeper 
sins, to escape that weariness which tracks their footsteps continually. Well might 
Paul ask, " What profit had ye in those things whereof ye are now ashamed ? " Who 
would begin a career that ends in such a way ? What an argument such facts furnish 
for seeking, if haply we may find it: 3. The cure of all such weariness I The child of 
God knows it well. The ungodly may know it too if they will. It consists in sub- 
mission to that Lord who says to all such, " Come nnto me all ye that are weary and 
heavy laden," etc. There alone is the cure. — C. 

Yer. 5. — Unforsaken Israel. L An afpabent FOBSAKnta. Israel looked forsaken. 
It was in exile, in captivity, and under the asserted judgment of Jehovah. We have 
always, to a certain extent, to accept the appearances of things. Gkid's presence had 
been manifested in outward favour aud prosperity, and what was more plausible than to 
say that the withdrawing of the favour and prosperity meant the withdrawing of God 
himself? But then it is forgotten that God's presence may be manifested in many ways. 
Outward prosperity is not essential to signify God's satisfaction with us. Nor must we 
infer that, because a backsliding Christian has fallen into trouble and misery, there- 
fore God has fur.saken him. The signs of man forsaking God are made very clear, so 
that there may be all possible incentives to repentance ; but if God ever does forsake a 
man, leaving him utterly to his own folly and recklessness, no sign of it is given to us. 
There is quite enough already in our own wild fancies to make us desponding and 
despairing. 

U. A PLAUSIBLE CAUSE FOB FORSAKiNO. The land of Israel was filled with sin 
against the Holy One of Israel. Men think of God as they do of themselves. The 
patience of the human master soon gets exhausted with the servant who disobeys many 
commandments and obeys others in the most perfunctory way. 

III. A BEAL CAUSE FOB CLOSE ADHERENCE. That Israel, chosen and beloved of 
God, fills his land with sin, so far from being a reason for forsaking, is a reason for closer 
adherence than ever. The shepherd leaves the ninety-nine sheep in safety and goes 
into the wilderness after the lust one. If only men, brought at IsCst to a sense of their 
wickedness and recklessness, could see how near God is to them, how ready and able to 
help, they would be filled with hope. " God is love," and therefore the greater our need 
the greater his nearness. The real difficulty is that we flee to the succours and solaces 
of self, and so the nearness of God, with all his suitable and ample supplies, is only too 
easily obscured. 

IV. A FBESB HANiFESTATtON OF THE HoLT Onb OF Ibbael. Never does Gh)d's 
holiness so appear as when he is dealing with sinners in the way of long-suffering, if 
perchance they will surrender at last and permit him to restore them to righteousness 
and peace. Surely God's holiness shines most in his greatest attribute, and that is love. 
God is marked ofi' from all created things by his power and his righteousness, but most 
of all by his transcendent love. Here is the most glorious aspect of his holiness, that, 
no matter how much men may sin against him, neglect his will, and abuse his world, yet, 
when they are ready to turn, he i* close at hand with everything prepared to receive 
them. — Y. 

Ver. 6. — Individual escape. Two whole chapters are taken up in enforcing the 
inevitaUe doom on Babylon. The city as a whole cannot possibly escape ; therefore so 
much the more necessary is it to point out escape for the individual and put hope into 
his heart. Observe — 

I. How THIS EXHORTATION TO THE INDITIDUAI. SETS BUOBK UB CLKABLI THS 

OENEBAL ihx>ii. Ail who Stay i» heedlessness and unbelief must perish. Particular 



OH. u. 1—64,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEUEillAH. 307 

inhabitants of Babylon have not to sin some special sin in ordei- to bring: rJestructiim on 
themselves. All they have to do is just to go on in their buying, selling, and getting 
gain. So the natural man everywhere has just to go on within the common worldly 
limits and according to the common worldly traditions. Going on quietly accepting 
the position of the unregenerate, he will assuredly come to the end of such. " Out of 
Christ we may perish" is not the word to be said, but "Out of Christ we must perish." 

II. God's constant considebation for the individual. Masses of men have to 
sufifer because the great bulk of them will ever be heedless of the signs of danger. But 
every wise, foreseeing individual, in whose heart there are steady inclinings to the right, 
may escape. Certainly we cannot escape always involvement in temporal calamities. 
It might even be cowardly and selfish to run away from them. To run away from a 
temporal calamity might be the very way to bring on ourselves the severest spiritual 
calamity. But with respect to spiritual peiils, in comparison with which temporal 
perils are mere trifles, every individual has his chance. He must have individuality of 
character in this matter, ability to see datiger when others see none, and courage to flee 
when others stand still and laugh at him. BecoUect that there may be flight in one 
sense, while in another sense things remain unchanged. We may remain in a com- 
munity, and yet flee firom all danger by avoiding its follies and its disobedience to God. 

III. The need of promptitude and decision. Not specified, promptitude is yet 
evidently implied. Flee at once ; for if you wait until you can see danger, it may be 
too late. — ^T. 

Ver. 10. — Btdwrvng in Zion the work of the Lord. L That which has to be 
deolaeed. The work of Jehovah, the God of Israel, that work being the bringing 
forth of what is described as " our righteousness." What, then, was this righteousness ? 
We can only conjecture, but probably it was that rii^hteousness, ever well-] ileasing to 
God, shown by those who believe in his promises and obey his directions. There was 
ample field for righteousness of thi.s kind on the part of the Israelites in captivity ; for 
had not God told them expressly, however unlikely tlie event might appear, that they 
would yet return to their former dwelling-place? In due time there was to be a vindi- 
cation of their faith. But out of that faith there is to be kept every element of self- 
glorification. It is man's blessedness, but not his praise, that he recognizes the certainty 
of what a promise-keeping, omnipotent One will do for him. Declaring the work of 
Gud is always a satisfactory thing, for the work of God itself is always satisfactory. 
Well-begun, thorough, completed, necessary work it is. 

II. Those who deolabb it. Those who are the materials of the work and for 
whom the work is done. They are not mere bystanders and spectators. The sign that 
real Divine work is being done in a human heart comes when praise and acknowledg- 
ment of the great Worker is expressed. We are God's workmanship. It is he who 
extricates us from our confusions, nullifies the vain doings of the merely natural man, 
and makes us capable of actions that will abide and glorify him. It is part of God's 
very work to put into us the spirit of declaration, so that we perceive the change 
wrought in us, the Worker of it, the continuity of it, in short, all the good connected 
with it. And perceiving all this, how should we do other than declare in one mingled 
utterance the glory of God and our gratitude to him ? 

III. The place of declabation. In Zion, with its memories of Jehovah's presence 
in the past. Zion was a name to humble Israel, in the thought of former apostasy and 
idolatry ; but Zion was nothing but glorious so far as Jehovah was concerned. Zion had 
been too long neglected, not indeed so far as a certain outward worship was concerned, 
but the worship of the heart was lacking. Now Zion would appear in an altogether new 
aspect. Instead of mere words, mere ritual routine, there was an acknowledgment of 
deeply felt benefit at the hands of God. The place of worship was the same, yet not 
the same, for the old scene had new associations. We may acknowledge God anywhere ; 
we must acknowledge him everywhere; but yet there is a suilability in making certain 
acknowledgments in certain places. What could be moru appropriate than to uttei 
forth words of true spiritual recogiiition on that sacred spot where God had been so long 
misunderstood and defied 7— Y. 

Ver. 13. — The dweller on many waters. I. The becoonttion or natural amftaaoKx 



308 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [ch. ll 1— 64, 

rhe great Datural advantages of Babylon are allowed to the fullest extent.' She stands 
on " the great river Euphrates." A great river for navigable purposes means prosperity 
to a city. There is iilso to be consideied the facility of getting water for all the other 
purposes of life. The abundance of Babylon's treasures was in part a result of her 
dwelling on many waters. The waters helped to set off the magnificence and splendour 
of her buildings. Nothing is gained by minimizing the treasures of this world. Let 
them be displayed and acknowledged to their fuUust extent (see Rev. xviii.). 

n. These; resources cannot avert doom. Tiie fact is that the abundance of 
these resources can only manifest itself in certain directions. There is abundance of 
that which ministers to carnal ambition and lust, abundance of that which feeds the 
pride of individuals and nations, abundance of that which gives merely human security 
against merely human attack. But when we come to consider the highest satisfactions 
and the greatest dangers, then we find scantiness instead of abundance. The many 
waters dry up into a shallow pool here and there. The characteristic of the abundance 
given by Christ is that it avails for all possible needs. Never can it be said to the 
Christian, livingly connected as he is with his heavenly treasures, that his end is come. 
Of his treasure, his blessedness, and his security, there shall be no end. 

III. An indication of what made these rebouhcbs so DECEiTFTTL. They were, 
largely at least, the accumulations of covetousness. We must not look too closely at 
the magnificent houses of a great city, with their contents, or else we shall be speedily 
undeceived as to their real glory. We shall see how much greed and unjust gain and 
the grinding of the poor had to do with such buildings. Grand buildings for some men 
to live in can have no charm to the Christian eye, if a necessary condition for their 
existence is that many others should live in niinous hovels. The just and loving God 
must look on splendid cities with a very different eye from the human one. And 
doing so, he must of necessity fix a limit to covetousness. Covetousness goes on adding 
to its treasures, until at last it excites the covetousness of others. And even apart 
from this, outward treasures, unduly esteemed, must in time corrupt the inward 
man. — Y, 

Ver. 15. — The retovrces of Jehovah. Here are the resources of Jehovah as over 
against the resources of Babylon. Note the differences between them. 

I. They are resources in Jehovah himself. It is from the very being of Jehovah 
that his works flow forth, whether those works be considered as illustrating his power, 
his wisdom, or his understanding. When a prophet of Jehovah has to speak of human 
resources, he speaks of things outside the man. Apart from the soil on which he stands, 
the world in which he lives, what can man do? His very body is derived from the soil, 
and to the soil returns. His chosen treasures, the things on which he leans, are 
treasures upon earth. But when a prophet comes to speak of Jehovah, he can think ol 
him separated from all the visible and tangible. He does not depend on these things, 
for they would have had no existence but for him. We may, in a certain qualified 
sense, speak of human power, wisdom, and understanding ; we must indeed use such 
terms, for some men are so weak that others must be spoken of as powerful, some so 
foolish that others must be spoken of as wise, some so shallow and ignorant that others 
must be spoken of as men of understanding. But the very power of a man reveals in 
time Ws essential weakness, his very wisdom his essential folly, his very understanding 
his essential ignorance. God alone is power, and in him is no weakness, at all ; God 
alone is wisdom, and in him no folly at all ; God alone is understanding, and in him 
nothing of the limited and erroneous knowledge which is so often a humiliation to 
human pride. 

II. Thbt abb BE80UR0E8 UNITED IN ONE Beino. Judged according to human stan- 
dards, some men are powerful, some men wise, and some are men of understanding ; 
but very seldom, even according to the human standard, are all three qualities united in 
one man ; and it is not very often that even two of them are found. Man may have 
power, mere muscular strength, the power of the athlete, the power of the ox, without 
anything worthy the name of wisdom. So there may be wisdom without power ; and 
there may be a very high degree of wisdom apart from large knowledge or a powerfiil 
understanding. Men are made so that what is defective in one may be supplied by 
another. The greatest human works are done when the power of one is joined with th< 



•H. U.1— 64.] THE BOOK Of THE PROPHET JEBBMIAH, 309 

wisdom of a aecond and the understanding of a third. But with Jehovah all these 
qualities, in their highest degree, are found united in One. The only account after all 
that man can give of the making of matter is that it has beea made by a God. And 
iheu his wisdom has reduced everything to order, arranged the world in all its grades, 
organisms, and mutual connections. The natural man comes nearest to God when he 
can combine the power of one, the wisdom of another, and the understanding of yet a 
third, to make as it were one new man for the doing of special work ; and the spiritual 
man comes nearest toGodwhen, siill preserving his iadividuality of action, he exchanges 
for his natural weakness the spiritual power of Christ, for his natural folly the spiritual 
wisdom of Christ, and for his often useless and deluding knowledge of the things of this 
world that knowledge which comes in the revelation of the glory of God in the face of 
Jesus Christ. — Y. 

Ver. 19. — Ute Portion of Jacob contrasted with the confidences of Babylon. L The 
NAME BT WHICH Jehovah IS HEBE iNDiOATED. The Portion of Jacob. So the psalmist 
says, " My flesh and my heart faileth . . . but God is my Portion for ever " (Ps. 
Ixxiii. 26 ; see also Ps. xvi. 5). Men had their appointed portions, and no doubt they 
varied in value. But few were those who could rise above mere external things and 
look on the invisible God as their real Portion. And yet these were the only ones who 
had a portion and inheritance in the fullest sense of the words. For only so were they 
lifted above all temptation to envy, and above all the consequences of terrestrial impair- 
ments and losses. True, we have an inheritance of invisible and everlasting things, of 
which the present visible possessions give the preparatory conditions ; but to possess 
these things we must possess God, must be sure of his interest, his spiritual providence, 
his sufSciency, for only in him can even spiritual possessions have their beginning aLd 
continuance. Nor must we fail to note what may be called the mutual character of this 
portion and inheritance. Jehovah being the Portion of Jacob, it is equally true that 
Jehovah's portion is his people (Deut. xxxiL 9). Even the best possessions of a natural 
man are not mere legal property, not mere intellectual knowledge, but those human 
beings whom he can call friends. Such a one is rich according to the quality of his 
friends, those on whom he has claims and who have claims on him. He is rich 
according to the opportunities he has of getting service from them ; richer still according; 
to his opportunities fur rendering service, on the principle that it is more blessed to give 
than to receive. And so God will be our Inheritance just in proportion as we are God's 
inheritance. We cannot get satisfaction out of God unless he is getting satisfaction out 
of us. Our faith, our obedience, our devotion, are the conditions of his peculiar and 
richest bounty. 

II. The contrast of Jacob's Poetion with the pobtion op othebs. They inherit a 
barren land. It may look promising ; it may yield the appearance of fruit ; but real 
and abiding fruit there is none. Babylon has taken Bel for its portion, and now the 
portion and the possessors are alike turned to confusion. Indeed, the portion has 
vanished into nothingness ; for never was it anything but a name, an imposing fiction, a 
proof both of man's need of a portion and how incompetent he is to make such a 
portion for himself. But Jehovah always remains a Portion. The typical Jacob, the 
typical people of God that is, were unable to keep Jehovah as their Portion ; they never 
had any real grasp of him, never more than the merest external acquaintance. But for 
those who can lay hold of him he is surely a Portion still. — Y. 

Vers. 26, 26. — The destroying mountain destroyed. I. The debtboyino UOVSTAJs. 
The mountain is a very fitting symbol of a people eminent among the nations and 
seeming easily to dominate over them. In such a symbol there is involved the undis- 
puted assertion of superiority. The mountain looks down on the plains, and the plains 
accept tlie position. But whereas, in nature, the mountain looks down upon the plains 
with a mingling of benefits and injuries, of which even the injuries are seen to be 
benefits when looked at more closely, here we have a destroying mountain spoken of — 
1, mountain that destroys the whole earth. Gud is against Babylon, not merely for the 
liurt it has inflicted on his own people, but because destruction is the very element 
I Q which it lives. Wheresoever Babylon name it brought spoliation, enslavement, and 
miiwn'. Man and nationn ar« uwHe ammeut that, like the mountains in the natura' 



i:.tt THE BOOK 08- THE PltOtHET JEREMIAH, [oh. u. 1— €4. 

world, tliey may communicate good everywhere. But if they form destroying purposes 
then their very eminence increases their destroying power. The mountain tljat by its 
very elevation helps to distribute pleasant and profitable waters over the face of the 
earth, when turned to a volcano is just as well placed for sending down the lava-torrents 
II. Its utter destruction. That which must be considered first of all is the safety 
of the whole earth. It is God's way to uproot all that menaces the security and peace 
of his universe. To Impair and enfeeble is not enough ; the evil thing must be 
destroyed. And this is possible because it is God who is against it. He can destroy 
and obliterate where men would not for a moment dream of such a possibility. Did 
not Jesus tell his disciples that great mountains could be plucked up and cast into the 
sea, great obstacles and great menaces to Christian progress be utterly removed ? And 
here the prophet signifies the completeness of the destruction by asserting that Babylon 
shall become as a mountain reduced as it were to mere ashes. To that mountain men 
have been in the habit of resorting to find comer-stones and foundation-stones, but such 
is their resort no longer. There is complete destruction of the enemies of God's 
people, and of course this implies complete safety of God's people themselves. (For a 
corresponding metaphor, see Isa. xxx, 14.) — Y. 

Ver. 30. — Effeminacy. Doubtless in this utterance there is something of the then 
customary scorn with respect to women. But this must not make us forget that one ot 
the worst things to be said of a man is that he has become as a woman, just as one oi 
the worst things to be said of a woman is that she has become as a man. 

I. This utterance does not betroach the woman, but the man. Woman has 
her natural limitations. Her usual place is not in the battle-field or on the walls of the 
attacked city. An army of women against an army of men would be an unnatural, a 
revolting spectacle. But this very difference between the proper place of women and 
the proper place of men intensifies the reproach against a man when it can truly lie 
said of him that he has become as a woman. Those qualities which in a woman are 
womanly in a man are only effeminate. 

II. The corresponding possible reproach upon women. A woman must not allow 
it to be said of her that she has become as a man. She must never forget the limita- 
tions and duties of her sex. Yet on the other hand, she must not be too ready lo 
accept common opinion in interpreting those limitations and duties. 

III. There are times when it mat be the greatest honoub to a man to 
BECOME AS A WOMAN. There are times when the strength of the man, without being 
lost, becomes unnoticed because of the presence of a woman-like tenderness. And of 
course there is the corresponding truth that woman may be honoured in becoming as the 
man, else where would be the fame of Joan of Arc and the Maid of Saragossa? Both 
men and women alike must have the courage to face mere external reproaches. 
Nothing is easier than to taunt a man with being unmanly and a woman with being 
unwomanly, but if only men and women alike persevere in what they feel to be right, 
they will in due time escape from the region of baseless taunts. After all, the humanity 
common to men and women alike is greater than peculiarities of lex. In Jesus Christ 
there ia neither male nor female. — Y. 

Ver. 86. — Making the iprings dry. L Man's effobt to supply his need. There 
are the springs breaking forth among the hills and inviting men freely to use them. 
But there are also the wells men dig for themselves. Men must have water, yet thef 
cannot always go and live by the natural springs, and so where they have to live thej 
dig wells, and wonderfully do they succeed oftentimes in getting what they want. 
Water comes apparently in exhaustless abundance. Thus it is with the natural 
resources which man strives to obtain for himself. They open out before him far 
larger than any present wants. And thus when man sees all tliis within his reach, he 
naturally devises great undertakings on the strength of such great resources. 

II. The selfish use or his bucoess. It not unfrequently happens that the man 
who digs a well for himself does it at the expense of others, making their wells to run 
dry. The thing may be done unintentionally, or almost on a commonly accepted prin- 
ciple of every one looking out for himself; still it is to be looked on as pure selfishness. 
The resources of Babylon were increased by diminishing the resources of other peoples. 



en. LI. 1—64.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 311 

This fei a point to be always locked at in estimating men of large resources, namely, 
how far those resources have been gained by leaving otiiers without resource at all or 
with but a scanty one. 

ni. God's removal of his rbsouboeb. "I will make her springs dry." God can 
dry up all humanly ])rovided wells. We must not boast ourselves of their number, 
their depth, or the ease with which they keep to a certain level in spite of all drains 
upon them. Powerful nations, proud of their history and their achievements, need to 
remember this Divine interference. Men, looking back on a long course of individual 
success, need to remember the same. One can imagine a city in a time of siege, 
thoroughly provisioned, knowing exactly how much it had for food, and not troubling 
itself at all about drink, seeing that it had a deep well, the waters of which showed 
hardly any difference even in the driest summer. Yet all at once that well may fail, 
and, however large the other supplies, thirst will compel surrender. QoA dries up all 
wells that have been dug in covetousness and injustice. 

IV. The implication of otheb bndueino besoukces. " With thee is the fountkin 
of life," says the psalmist (Ps. xxxvi. 9). We must look, not to the wells of our own 
digging, but to the springs from the everlasting hills. Especially we must catch the 
spirit of Ps. Ixxxvii. There the psalmist praises Zion, and finishes up by saying, 
" All my springs are in thee." Let our springs be in the holy and abiding mount of 
God (Heb. xii. 22).— Y. 

Ver. 60. — A timely recollection amd iti pracHeal effect. Jehovah is making his 
severest judgments to fall on Babylon. How severe they are is indicated by the 
fact that two long chapters are occupied with denunciations upon her. But all the 
time Israel is in her midst. Israelites are domiciled and settled down. How far they 
lived by themselves and how far they mingled with their captors we cannot tell. One 
thing, however, we are sure of, that in the midst of so much destruction to Babylon 
they, or at least the bulk of them, were preserved. It must have been a very discom- 
posing time for them, even though they had tolerable confidence that all would turn out 
right. There may be real safety where as yet there is not clear perception of it, and 
therefore no possibility of untroubled peace. But at last the danger is over, and what 
will the Israelite do then? He may elect, for reasons personal to himself, to stay in 
Babylon. He may be tempted to forget his duty as a part in a greater whole. Not 
for himself, however, not to further any aims of his own, was he thus preserved. He 
has escaped the sword only that he may the better serve Gud. Present ease, pleasant 
associations, may rise attractively in his mind. Not, of course, that these could be found 
in desolated Babylon, but they might surely be found somewhere else than in Jerusalem 
so far away. Against natural thoughts of this kind the prophet's word comes in here 
as a guard. It is a word for those Israelites living in Babylon at the time of Babylon's 
downfall. The things near to them, which their eyes see and their hands handle, are the 
least important. The really important considerations are those which may most easily 
be forgotten. Thus, so to speak, they must be pushed before the mind. Every right- 
hearted Israelite would keep the God and the city of his fathers in his heart. And so 
we should keep Jehovah and Jerusalem in mind. The greatest duties and hopes of our 
Ufe come from our connection with such recollections. — Y. 

Ver. 60. — EvU written in a book. L The fact that evil n wbitten as well 
AS SPOKEN. The evils that Jehovah denounced against Babylon were such as could be 
written in a book, because the denunciations were not those of selfish and hasty passion, 
but expressed the calm wrath of a righteous God. The judgment on Babylon ai-ose from 
the necessity of the position. A righteous God could not have acted otherwise. What 
a difference between his words in anger and our words 1 If all our angry, hasty, petulant 
words were perforce written in a book, what a record of shame there would be 1 Such 
a consequence of their utterance might make us a little more cautious, but still the 
words would come at times. If we are to understand what it is to be really angry and 
sin not, we must look at the deliberate records of Jehovah's wrath in the Scriptures. 
We are glad that our angry words should be forgotten ; God, so to speak, takes trouble 
that his words should be remembered. 

IL The necessity that these wobos should be wbitten. It ii not er.ough' 



312 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH, [oh. ui. 1—34 

that tl.e words might be written— there had to be a reason for the writing. This ia 
found in the necessity for doing all that could be done by way of warning and prepara- 
tion. What was written could be shown first to one and then another. There was 
a necessity that even people of Babylon themselves should have ample opportunity to 
profit by the words spoken against their city. A necessity too in history. The fall 
of Babylon is a remarkable event in history, altogether outside of Scripture records, but 
the real secret of its fall is only to be known when we read such solemn and sustained 
predictions as are found in these two chapters. 

III. God's denunciations abe not his only written words. God has to write 
down his threatenings, but we are bound to remember that they are only a part — anrl 
how small a part they are ! — of the total that he has caused to be written. How 
different he is in this respect from men ! Their threatenings and angry words would 
sometimes fill a goodly volume, but their words of kindness and long-suffering, oh, how 
few are they I God's delight is to cause words of grace and promises of reward to bu 
written. — ^Y. 

Vers. 63, 64. — A symbol of irretrievable loss. It was fitting that the exhibition and 
record of a symbol such as this should close the long denunciation of Babylon, Where 
God determines to destroy no man can either avert or recover. This stone, perhaps, stil' 
lies at the bottom of Euphrates, and possibly even there may be something to signify 
the book once attached to it. We know not what relics of Old Testament times might 
yet be disentombed, what confirmations and revelations are still in actual existence. 

L God's power of utter destruction, 'i'he impassibility of discovering this stone 
has to be considered relatively. Strictly speaking, it might perhaps have been recovered 
if it had been worth while. But for all practical purposes it was finally lost. Here is 
the difference between human destructions and the Divine destruction. Babylon is a 
wilderness stilL Where God has chosen to make special marks of his wrath with the 
unrighteousness of men there rests a blight which no human effort can overcome ; and 
generally speaking there is no disposition to overcome it. But where destruction comes 
simply through human passion and power there may be comparatively speedy recovery. 
This is a side of war on which we do well to reflect. Wars, with all their terrible 
accompaniments, may do something to get rid of some evils, and may thus be the 
condition of great good. Man cannot destroy where God wills to preserve. But where 
God destroys he destroys finally, and it is just this dreadful possibility of final ruin 
that should make men cautious in their estimate of the future, and prompt to turn 
from all evil and selfish paths. 

IL The oheerino bide of God's utteb DESTBUonoirs. With QoA destruction 
always means salvation. Destruction is never for its own sake, never an arbitrary, 
aimless thing. All Divine destruction must be looked on as part of the process of 
salvation. Nations are scattered, human institutions overthrown, the temporal life 
of individuals ended, but the individual man in his abiding relations to God remains. 
This stone lost in one sense was not lost in another. Nay, it was serving a higher 
purpose than any it could have served simply as a stono. It became a teacher, and it 
is a teacher still. Abel, being dead, yet sptakoth. And this stone from the bottom of 
Euphrates speaks still, warning all ambitious men aud all neglectera of the command- 
ments and predictions of Jehovah. — Y. 



EXPOSITION. 
CHAPTER LIL 



The opntents of this chapter prove that 
it is not an independent narrative, but the 
concluding part of a history of the kings 
of Judah. It agrees almost word for word 
with 2 Kings xxiv. 18 — xxv. 30, from which 
we are justified in inferring that it is taken 
bom the historical work which the editor 



of the Books of Kin^s closely followed. It 
is most improbable that Jerominh was the 
autlior. Would the prophet have coiitenteii 
himself with the meagre statement that 
Zetlekiah " did that which was evil in the 
eyes of the Lord" (ver. 2), or with suoli 
a summary description of the siege of 
Jerusalem ? Apparently the editor who 
attached oh. Ui. as an appendix to the 



OH. m. 1—34.] THE BOOK OP THE PllOtHET JEBEMIAH. 



S13 



Book of Jeremiah omitted the account of 
Qedaliah (preserved in 2 Kings xxv. 22 — 
26) because a fuller narrative had been 
already given in oh. xl. — xlii. App irently, 
too, either the same or some later editor 
inserted vers. 28 - 30 (not found in the Sep- 
tuagiiit) from another source ; the passage 
difiers in several respects from 2 Kings 
xxiv. The text of ch. lii. seems to be a 
nearer approach to the original document 
than that of 2 Kings xxiv. 18— xxv. 30 
(see Grafs commentary). Compare oh. 
xxxix. 

Yer. 3. — It oame to pass. The implied 
subject of the verb is Zedekiah's evil-doing. 
That Zedekiah rebelled. There ouglit to be 
a full stop before these words, and " that " 
should rather be " And." 

Ver. 6. — ^The famine was sore (see the 
pathetio descriptions in Lam. L 19, 20 ; ii. 
11,12,20; iv. 9, 10). 

Ver. 7. — Broken up; rather, broken into. 
The plain. The Hebrew has, " the Ar^bah," 
the name constantly given to the chalky de- 
pression in the midst of which the Jordan ran. 



Ver. 9. — Gave judgment (see on ch. i. 16)l 

Ver. 11. — ^In prison ; literally, in the home 
of custody. 

Yer. 22. — All of brass, eto. ; rather, all of 
hra%>: and like unto thete had the second 
pillar, and pomegranates. 

Yer. 23. — On a side ; rather, touiard$ the 
outside. 

Yer. 28. — In the seventh year. As 
Ewald and Keil agree, we should correct 
" seventh " into "seventeenth" (just as in 
2 Chron. xxxvi. 9, for " eight " we should 
read "eighteen"). On the small number 
of Jews ileported Ewald remarks, " Nothing 
so clearly shows the extent to which the 
best men from the upper classes had been 
already despntohed by the Chaldeans across 
the Euphrates, as the fact that in all the, 
years of the second, and, if it be insisted 
on, of the third revolt, put together, they 
found only 4600 men more whom tliev 
thought worth the trouble of transporting " 
('History of Israel,' iv. 265). As to the 
third deportation, see on ch. xli. 1. 

Yer. 31. — Lifted up the head Gf Jehoi- 
aohin. Ewald thinks tliat Jehoiachin was 
regarded by the Jews in exile as the legiti- 
mate king, and oompares Lam. iv. 20 ; ii. 9. 



HOMILETICa. 

Vers. 4 — 7.— 27le ti^e and capture of Jerusalem. L GBaiBEAL lessons of the siege. 
1. Ood vnll perform his threats. The capture of Jerusalem had been long and frequently 
predicteii. The accumulated prophecies were now fulfilled. 2, Delay of judgment ik 
no reason for expecting it to be permanently withheld. The fate of Jerusalem seennd 
to be long postponed. But at length it came. 3. Previous immunity is no security for 
the future. The Jews fondly Idolized Jerusalem as a charmed city. It seemed impossible 
that she should I'all into the hands of her foes. We grow careless and confident through a 
series of fortunate escapes. But our confidence is irrational unless it has any deeper ground. 
4. Thefavmtr of Ood is no protection against the punishment of sin. The Jev/s regardeo 
themselves as Divine favourites. They had received many peculiar privileges. Bnt 
these made the duty of fidelity only the more obligatory. For the most I'axoured people 
to be faithless was a great and toriible wickedness. Indeed, the tavour of God, instead 
of mitigating punishn^ent, makes a heavier penalty to be fitting for those who afe so 
ungrateful as to sin aiiainst it. 

II. Hpbcial features of the siege. 1. It was thorough. The great king Nebu- 
chadnezzat came in person and "all" his army, and pitched a camp and built forts. 
Every effort was made to secure the city. The instruments of Divine vengeance are 
terrible, earnest, and vigorous. 2. It was protracted. It lasted for eighteen months 
How wearily those days and weeks and months must have dragged themselves along, 
every hour increasing the agony I But what is this period to the vast, dim reaches of 
the "punishment of the ages," which awaits lost souls? 3. It produced horrible 
sufferings. In the madness of famine, women devoured their own children. Thus Goa 
punished (1) "satiation and disgust towards his holy Word and soul-food; (2) the 
terrible offering up of children to Moloch ; (3) the loose discipline of children" (Cramer, 
quoted by Naegelsbach). From a merely selfish position, who that knew and realized 
the frightful consequences of his sins would bring these upon his head for the sake of 
the pour pleasures of an hour ? 4. It was succesrfid. The siege ended in the capture 
of Jerusalem. The force of Nebuchadnezzar was great and terrible, but behind it was 
the judicial will of Heaven. To withstand this was certainly futile. All resistance to 



314 THE Book of the I'UOi'flET JEREMIAH, [ch. lil 1— 3i 

the decrees of Divine judgment must be vain. Our une hope is not in opposition, but 
in penitent cries for God's mercy and unresisting submistiiou to his wilL 

Vers. 8 — 11. — The fate of Zedekiah. I. The causes which led to the fate o» 
Zedekiah. 1. The general calamity of his nation. The king suffers with his people. 
Unfortunately it too often happens that an innocent people is punished for the fault of 
its sovereign. We must not be surprised if the converse is sometimes true. We are 
all meihbers one of another. Not only kings, but in a less degree private individuals, 
must expect to share the troubles of the con.munity, apart from the exact measure of 
private desert. In this life the execution of Divine justice is general ; in the next life 
it will be particular — then the judgment will be individualistic. 2. JJis own sin. 
Zedekiah did " evil in the eyes of tlie Lord " (ver. 2). Others may have done worse 
and escaped. But if we have no more severe a fate than we deserve, we can find no 
ground tor complaint in the fact that more wicked men receive (at present) a milder 
treatment. 3. His weakness. Zedekiah was more weak than wicked. It is often 
observable in history that tlie weak king suffers calamities which the bad king escapes. 
But weakness is a culpable defect in a sovereign. If he is not strong enough for his 
duties he should resign the reins of power. Mo one has a right to retain a post which 
be cannot efiBciently fuldl. Moral weakness is always wrong — to be blamed as much 
as to be pitied — for it can be overcome (Isa. xl. 29 — 31). 4. His erroneous policy. 
Zedekiah was set on the throne by Nebuchadnezzar ; he plotted with Pharaoh against 
his suzerain; and when his rebellion roused the vengeance of Babylon, he found 
Egypt to be only " a broken reed." In his case the vanity of trust in princes was 
illustrated. 5. The will of God. The fate of Zedekiah had been predicted by Jeremiah 
(xxxiv. 1 — 7). The prophecy implied a Divine decree. God has no hard, cruel decrei s 
irrespective of our conduct and will. But following our wrong-doing, God's fixed 
counsels of judgment make flight hopeless. 

IL The leadiko features of the fate of Zedekiah. 1. He was captwred in the 
agonies of flight. According to Josephus, this was not till he had reached the banks ol 
the Jordan. How terrible to be so nearly saved, and yet to fall a prey to vengeance at 
last I To be only almost saved is worse than never to have had a hope of deliverance. 
They who have been near to the kingdom of heaven and have not entered it will feel 
the more bitterly the doom that they wil 1 share with the city of Destruction. " Bemember 
Lot's wife." 2. He was carried to Babylon and tried before King Nebuchadnezzar. 
The triumph of the great monarch was tlie shame of his vassal. 3. Sis children were 
slain before his eyes. Parents suffer in the sufferings of their children more than in the 
pain of their own bodies. The action of Nebuchadnezzar was cruel, brutal, devilish. 
There are no such spiteful elements in God's punishment of the wicked. His is given 
in sorrow and with reluctance. 4. His eyes were put out. Here was the greatest refine- 
ment of cruelty. Zedekiah's sight was preserved till he had witnessed the death-agonies 
of his children. Then he was blinded, so that the last vision to dwell in his memory 
was the harrowing spectacle of his children's massacre. But after so terrible a sight 
would the wretched man care to look on the light of day ? 5. He was detained in prison 
till his death — a punishment worse than death. Dethroned, humiliated, in chains, in a 
dungeon, bereaved of his children, the poor blind king is left to the agony of his own 
bitter thoughts. May God deliver ua from a similar fate in the future world 1 

Ver, 13. — 27*e destruclion of the temple. I. The oreatebt babthlt splekdoub k 
destructible. Solomon's temple was the pride of the Jews. For centuries it had stood 
mellowing with age. But when the brutal Chaldeans flung their torches at it the 
magnificent pile of buildings was soon reduced to a mass of smouldering ruins. Bic 
transit gloria mundi. An invasion, a revolution, a conflagration, may destroy the work 
of years in a night. Splendid possessions are poor refuges. A palace is not necessarily 
a castle. 

II. 1'HEBE IB KG safety IK HOLT PLACES AND CONSECRATED THINGB. The temple 

was burnt, and its treasures and sacred vessels were carried to Babylon. The flames 
that leaped up on the private houses of Jerusalem found no charmed circle to keep them 
off from the temple. The building was holy only in so far as it was put to holy uses. 
But when it was desecrated by aiu no magicHi influence could prevent it from complete 



oa.Lii.1— 34.] THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET JEREMIAH. tl6 

destruction. And if the temple could not preserve itself, mnch less conld it protect its 
Buperstitious devotees. It was vain indeed for them to cry, " The temple of tiie Lord," 
as though the words were a spell to ward off trouble. Thus all who trust in holy sites, 
ceremonial services, etc., apart from spiritual devotion, will find their faith wrecked, 
even if the idol of their superstition is not destroyed. 

III. When the spirit of devotion has forsaken a temple the destbuotion of 
THE BUlLDiNa MAT BE A GOOD RATHEB THAN AN EVIL. The temple is then worse than 
useless ; it is a snare, tempting men to believe that all is well so long as it stands. So 
the ordinances of religion delude men into false confidence. While these are duly 
administered with imposing solemnity, it is difficult to believe that the spirit of religion 
has fled. Let these go too and men have their eyes open to their true condition. The 
temple without true worship is a mockery to God. When the soul has gone the body 
had better be put away as soon as possible. If the Christian has ceased to offer spiritual 
sacrifices in his body as in a temple of the Holy Ghost, his life is no longer of any true 
value. When this temple is destroyed the fate is striking and alarmiug, yet it is but 
little after its sad desecration through sin. 

IV. The only dubable wobk is spiritual and holt wobk. " Each man's work 
shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, becanse it is revealed in fire" 
(1 Cor. iii. 13). There will be a test to the work of life. This may be splendid as a 
temple, but if it is unholy and earthly in character it must pass away ultimately. How 
many temples, and cities, and kingdoms, " cloud-capped towers, and gorgeous palaces " 
have left " not a rack behind " 1 It is the spiritual work of a man that endures. Even 
this fails, fruitless, unless it is good in character. 

Ver. 16. — Sparing the poor. L The fact. Whilst the king, the nobles, the wealthy, 
and many others were carried into exile, certain of the poor were still left in the lami. 
We are accustomed to speak of the hanlships of poverty, but there are compensating 
advantages not a few. Many evils of the worst character only visit the rich. In times. 
of public trouble the houses of the rich are attacked and the persons of the great are 
threatened, while the poor are left in happy neglect. Great men are beset with anxieties 
such as are unknown to the simpler lives of the poor. Who would be a king now that 
kings are all marks for the assassin ? In those countries where the sovereign is com- 
pelled to take elaborate precautions for his safety, the poor citizen can move about the 
streets without fear. The one is a prisoner in his own palace, the other s bee man 
with liberty to roam over the whole kingdom. Ambition aims at distinction, but that 
is a poor crown to win. Distinguished men have peculiar vexations and dangers of 
their own. There is more happiness in obscurity. The wise man will say, " Give me 
nuither poverty nor riches;" and the Christian will add, " Not my will, but thine, be 
done," knowing well that for him that lot is best which his heavenly i<'ather assigns to 
him. 

II. 'iHE explanation. What was there in the condition of the poor to induce the 
Chaldeans to spare them? 1. 2'heir innocence. The peasants had not been plotting 
against Nebuchadnezzar, and the vengeance that the Babylonian monarch vented on 
the king and the seat of his government was naturally averted from the quiet country- 
lolk. These men were also more innocent in the sight of God. The leading people had 
shown their I'aithlessness in turning from Jehovah to Egypt ; tliey, too, had proiiably 
descended the lowest in the vices of the age, which brougut upon the nation the wrath 
of God. Poor men may be bad men. But there are sins to which they are less liable 
than great men. 2. Their weakness. While the great men were removed to Babylon, 
there would appear to be little danger of an insurrection among the poor people scattered 
over the farms, who had enougli to do to earn their daily bread. There is a protection 
in weakness. A little strength often courts danger. They who are weak in themselves 
may be strong in the protection of God's providence. 3. Their usefulness. These poor 
people were left to work as " vine-dressers and husbandmen." Nebuchadnezzar had no 
wish to see his newly acquired territory converted into a desert. It was for his advan- 
tage that some of the people should be spared, 'i here is uo protection like usefulness. 
Be serviceable and you will be safe. He who lives for the real good of his fellow-men 
and the glory of his great Master may be sure that no harm can touch him so long ■■ 
be is faithful to his task. 



81« THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. toH. ui. 1— 34. 

Vers. 81 — 34. — The deliverance of Jehoiachin. The new king signalized his accession 
to power by an act of clemency. Possibly he saw no reason to continue the cruelty of 
his predecessor liow that the Jews were quieted ; possibly he was influenced by Daniel. 
Whatever the cause of it may have been, it is pleasant to see how mercy " becomes 
the throned monarch better than his crown." 

I. Deliverance may come at length aftbb prolonobd suffbbino. Jehoiachin 
liad endured tliirty-seven years of imprisonment. He must have lost hope long before 
his liberation. Yet the longest night hns its end. If trouble outlast life, there is the 
blessed liberatdr, death, that ultimately Iroes the most wretched from his distresses. 
Then what will thirty-seven years of suffering be to the ages of eteruity ? It is a weary 
time to eiidnre, but, compared with the ,ifo beyond, it will seem both light and brief. 

II. The pbolonoed endueanoe of suffebino must make the return of the 
COMMON mercies OF LIFE A WONDERFUL BLEssDia. What n meaning there is in the 
word " liberty " in the ears of the captive 1 Only the sufferers from thirst know the 
sweetness of water. The sick, when restored, enjoy health as the strong never caa 
Jehoiachin would find his change of circumstances wonderful beyond all expression. 

III. No EARTHLY DELIVERANCE IS PERFECT. The old man had endured captivity 
so long that lie must have been bewildered and distracted by his release. For him, 
jnce a proud tyrant, now an aged, humiliated captive, crushed with the imprisonment 
01 more than a third of a century, the thoughtless merriment ot a court would scein 
like the life of another world or like a dream of childhood. His sufferings must have been 
too severe and too protracted for him to eater at once into the liberty and honour that 
were offered to him. One can scarcely think that he could ever feel at home with 
them. We know not what will be the first impressions of a new world when the soul 
escapes from its earthly captivity and enters the court of heaven. But there is an 
essential difference between Jehoiaohin's condition and this. Jehoiachin remained an 
old man, worn with suffering as well as with years. The Christian has the gift of eternal 
life. To him the liberation by death is more than a change of external circumstances. 
He looks for the renewal of the fresh vigour of youth. Jehoiachin was never restored 
tu his kingdom ; at best he was an honoured subject of Babylon. But the Christian 
is restored to more than the primitive rights of man — to glory and kingship. Finally, 
there is no indication that Jehoiachin was changed in character. His long, lonely 
sufferings and the many reflections of thirty-seven years of imprisonment may have 
humbled him to penitence. But the historian does not appear to know of any such 
change. Yet a man's greatest enemy is himself. Deliverance of the body from a 
dungeon is a small boon if the soul is still captive to sin. The salvation in Ghnst effects 
this complete deliverance. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 
Ver. 1. — Zedekidh. (Cf. former homily, ch. xxzviL 1.^—0. 

Ver. 8. — The Lord creating evil. This is one of the passages of Scripture the masning 
of which does not lie on the surface. It seems to represent God as instigating sin. For 
" through the anger of the Lord " it is said " that Zedekiah rebelled." But it was for 
that very rebellion he was so sorely punished, and yet it is said it was " throush the 
Lord." Note— 

I. Thbrk abb othkb pabsaobs like this. Of. "the Lord hardening Pharaoh's 
heart." The history of Judas. " None of them is lost, but the son of perdition ; that 
the Scripture might be fulfilled " (John xvii. 12). Again, " Is there evil in the city and 1 
have not done it?" (Amos iii. 6; Isa. xlv. 7). And St. Peter's word to the Jews on 
the day of Pentecost (Acts ii. 23). They wickedly did what nevertheless God had 
determined before to be done. And there are yet other Scriptures besides these. 

II. They give risb to great difficulty. It is not difficult to understand that men 
should do wrong, or even the particular wrong which is charged against them and for 
which they are punished; but the difficulty is that the sin should be seemingly ascribed 
to God. And tho Jews seem to have believed that God did prompt men to sin ; cf. Job n 
Ix, I , " Who did sui, this man or his parents tu m-dei- that (Iva) ha ahuuld be bom bl i nd ? 



oauLl^-M.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. 817 

The effect, the man's hlindness, they looked on as designed and intended by God, and hence 
the cause producing that effect must haye been designed also. As we read over Scriptun ;- 
like these, the question of Abram starts immediately to our lips, " Shall not the Jud c 
of all the earth do right?" (of. Rom. iii. 5 — 8). God "may and must transcend oni 
understanding. He will by the very nature of the case dazzle and confound our imagi- 
nation by the unsuspected riches and glory of his many mansions ; but he must nnt 
trouble our sense of right if he would retain our homage and our love." But it is th > 
sense of right that is troubled by what seems to be the teaching of Spriptures like thesi . 
Thty seem to teach that God prompts men to sin and then pimishes them for it. Sonn 
who reasoned with St. Paul appear to have suggested (cf. Kom. iii.) tliat in such cases 
God was "unrighteous" who took " vengeauce." The a|)ostle does not attempt fi' 
argue the matter, but treats the suggestion with a sort of " Get thee behind me, Satan," 
which is what his ju,^ yivono really amounts to. And where the suggestion is made fron. 
mere captious motives, or with the intent only to support a foregone conclusion and 
determination to disregard God, then such a reply is the proper one to make. But it can 
never be other than right to endeavour to meet the honest difficulties which some of the 
utterances of God's Word and some of the actings of his ]iiiividence do unquestionably 
give rise to. If the suggestion were true that God made men to sin and then damned 
them for it, nothing could be more horrible, and no possible force conld make men trust, 
Love, or sincerely worship a God who would act so. But the suggfstion is not true ; for — 

HI. The difficulty is appaeknt, not kbal. God is never the author of sin. " The 
Lord is holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his works." " Let no man say when 
he is tempted," etc. (cf. Jas. i. 13). But when sin I as been begotten in a man's soul 
by his own evil desires, then the special form in which that sin sliall manifest itself is 
very often ordered by God. This is how we understand all these passages. Tliat very 
Babylon in connection with which this ver. 3 is writttn may supply an apt illustration. 
Isaiah calls Babylon "the desert of the sea," for when, by reason of the melting of thi 
snows which fed the Euphnites and her many tributaries, the great river overflowed 
its banks, the f;reat plain on which Babylon stood became like a vast sea. But the 
great Assyrian lords cut their canals and constructed their massive dairis and reservoir^ 
so that the superabundant and otherwise destructive waters were directed into sale 
channels, and could do no further harm. Those monarchs were not the authors of the 
floods, but by their skill and wisdom they directed which way those floods should flow. 
On one of our great railways a little while ago, a signalman saw to his horror that an 
engine had somehow got away without its driver, and was rushing on with ever-increasing 
speed to its own destruction and that of the firvit unhappy passenger train — and one 
was nearly due — that it should meet. Quick as thought the signalman seized his levers 
and turned the runaway into a siding where it could harm no one but itself. In every 
large fire the firemen act in a similar way. And so Ood. When sin has broken out by 
no will of his, but altogether contrary to his will, he does not let it run riot, as it might, 
but he orders the way it shall take. Thence it came to pass " through the Lord " that 
" Zedekiah rebelled against the King of Babylon " (ver. 3). 

IV. This obdbeino of bin's way on the fast of God h a thing HtruH to bk 
BBMBMBEBED. 1. FoT OUT consolation and comfort. Mad and monstrous as sin is, it i • 
yet under God's control. Like as to the raging sea, he can say and does say to it 
" Thus far shalt thou go, and no further," etc., and cf. ch. v. 22. 2. For the wamiri. 
of the sinner. The flames of the eternal fire are lit within our own soul. Sin is eve 
twisting and knotting its own scourge. What a man soweth that shall he also reai . 
The seed of all our punishments was sown by our own hand, though we never intendcil 
the harvest. The way sin' shall take is utterly out of our power. If it does somewhat 
that we did intend, it does for men that we never dreamt of nor desired. 3. For instruc 
lion to all thoughtful readers of Qod's Word and beholders of his providence. G il 
" does " the evil that is in the city (Isa. xlv.), but he does not originate it, and that which 
he does 1* bat the ordering of its way. — 0. 

Yen. 4 — 84.— 27'e march of doom. These verses tell of the awful progress of the 
judgment of God on the doomed city of Jerusalem, her king, and people. To all whu 
imagine that God is too full of love and graciousness to sternly judge and punish men, 
the contemplation of the events told of here may be painful, but assuredly they will 



318 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEHEMIAH. [oH, 1*1-34 

be salutary also. We are shown the 6a>iylonian armies gathering round the city; the 
long and dreadful siege ; the gaunt famine that fastens upon the besieged ; the walla 
broken at last and the inrush of the infuriated foe ; the flight, capture, and tragedy of 
the king; the burning of the city and temple; and the carrying off into exile or slaughter 
of all but the poorest of the people. Ten weary years are covered by these events, and 
they were years full of lamentation, affliction, and woe. Now, all this teaches plainly — • 

I. That the judgmknts of God aee slow to beqiw. He is slow to anger. How 
long he bore with Judah and Jerusalem ere these tribulations came I 

II. But when beoxtn thet oo om. What a procession of one calamity after another 
it is! 

HI. TuET CANNOT BE ABRESTED OB TURNED ASIDE. All that endurance, courage, 
and skill could do was done in that memorable siege. Of. Ezek. vii. 6, " An evil, an only 
evil, behold, it is come," etc. 

IV. The distress and anguish deepen. (Gil Ezek. vii.; viii.; zL; Lam. ii. 11, 12 
19 ; iv. 4, etc.) 

Y. They are belentlebb and know no pitt. Prayers and entreaties an in vain 
(cf. Prov. i. 24—31). 

VI. They cease not till their work is done. See this history. The heart o' 
the deceived evil-doer protests that God cannot deal so. But he has dealt so with 
ungodly men, not once nor twice alone ; and when lie declares that he will again, of what 
avail is man's mere protest that he will not ? Cf. ths whole Book of the Revelation. 
How loudly, therefore, do facts like these cry out to the sinner, "Flee from the wrath to 
come'M— C. 

Vers. 4, 6, 12. — Dayi whose duties are indelible. Note the particularity of the dates 
given in each of these verses. Not the year only, but the month ; and not the month 
only, but the day ; and sometimes not the day only, but the hour, whether morning or 
evening, during the light or dark. Now — 

I. There are such datb. In the record of the Flood we have such exactness of 
date. And in the later history of Jerasalem, the story of its decline and fall under its 
last kings, we again and again, as in this chapter, meet with such careful giving of exact 
dates. And in our own experience, looking back over the record of our lives, how vividly 
I'ome dates stand out I We know the year, the month, the day, and hour, and it seems 
likely that we shall never forget them nor the events connected with them. 

II. But these days are nearly always days of fain and distress. It was 
so in the instances given in these verses. There are anniversaries which we keep, but 
these are for the most part joyous days, the memory of which we will not willingly let 
die. But the fact of our keejiing them shows that there is probability that such memory 
would die if we did not carefully keep it up. But the days whose dates are indelible 
need no anniversaries to remind us of them. We cannot forget them, though, perhaps, 
we would fain do so. They are burnt in upon our souls so deeply that they are written 
as on a rock for ever. And they are days, not of joy, but of sore distress ; as when first 
the fierce Babylonian forces beleagured the holy city, and as when after weary months 
of obstinate defence the awful famine at length broke them down ; and as when the 
firoud conqueror in his rage burned down the sanctuary of Gk)d. Days of judgment 
were they, never to be forgotten by Israel any more. And there were many such days. 
We read of the " fests " of the different months, many of which commemorated these 
sad events. 

IIL And theib dates abe indelibly written in oub souls. 1. Btcavtt of the 
contrast which they offer to well-nigh all other days. If any mark stands out con- 
spicuous—like the black marks on a white page, or white on black — it proves that the 
ground upon which such mark stands out so conspicuously is of an entirely opposite 
colour, a complete contrast. And so the very blackness of these indelible days proves 
that the days against which they stind out so conspicuously have been of a far other 
and happier kind. Our very trials, ty the vividness with which we remember them, 
prove tiie general goodness of our God, because they are such exception to his rule. 2. 
Btoause of their intensity. The mark is not merely dark, but deep. The sword pie:ces 
through the soul. It is the intensity of the pain that makes it so memorable. 8. 
Bt-mtise of the sltodow they cart. All our after life may be darkened — ^it often is so— by 



OH. ML 1—34.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. Sli* 

the effect of some awful blow, and the shadow ever starts from and guides our thoughts 
up to the terrible fact wliich has caused it. 

IV. But these dates abe not indelible fob eveb. Of. our Lord's illustration : 
" Pi. woman when she is ia travail hath sorrow, . . . but as soon as she is delivered . . . 
she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy." So it is oftentimes even in this world. 
Life would not be bearable were all sorrows indelible. But they are not. The lapse of 
time, the pressure of necessary work, the awakening of other interests, and, above all, the 
I estowment of new joys — all tend to scatter the gloom of the soul and to thrust into 
oblivion memories that could only give pain. And none of them shall follow us into 
our eternal home. We shall not — it does not appear possible — forget facts that have 
occuiTed, but we shall see them in such new lights and irradiated by such love of God 
that all the pain that belonged to them will depart an<i be seen no more. 

** Help, Lord, that we may come 
To thy saints' happy home. 
Where a thousaiid yean 
As one day appears ; 

Nor go 
Where one day appears 
Ab a thousand years 

For woe I" 

CL 

Ver. 6. — Famdne. One of the most frightful that ever befell any city is told of here. 
Its ghastly details may be traced out fi-oni this verse and difi'crent parts of the writings 
of Jeremiah and Ezekiel. This verse tells how the store of bread gradually failed; 
ch. xxxvii. 21 and xxxviii. 29 with what difificulty ever so little was gained (also Ezok. 
V. 16 ; v. 16 ; xii. 19), Then Lam. iv. 7 and v. 10 tell of the sufferin,j;s of the nobles ; 
Lam. iv. 5 and Ezek. iv. 12 — 15 of the degradation of the high-born ladies of Jerusalem, 
snatching morsels of bread from the dunghills, 'i he cries of the poor little children 
(Lam. ii. 11, 12, 19 ; iv. 4) ; the hard-heartcdness of their parents (Lam. iv. 3). Fathers 
ate the flesh of their own sons (Ezek. v, 10) ; mothers that of their new-bom babes 
(Lam. ii. 20 ; iv. 10). Thus frightful was this famine. And it is ever a fearful thing, 
let the cause be what it may. Note — 

I. Whebefobe they abe sent. 1. At punishment : (1) For violation of natural 
law. When men will crowd together in space too limited or on lands that will not 
yield sufficient, or will out of gieed or selfishne^8 refuse to cjiltivate aright the land 
they have, then sooner or later famine will come. (2) For violation of Divine laws. So 
in the case of famine told of here. But : 2. They are sent as prompters and promoters 
of repentance and amendment. In case of violated natural laws they have again and 
again performed this needed office. Men have spread themselves abroad, couiniunica- 
tions between one district and another have been o|iened up, improved methods of 
cultivation have been adopted, wiser and juster laws have been enacted, and men's 
energies and thoughts have been roused to devise remedies and safeguards ajjainst the 
recurrence of the evil. And when it is the Divine laws that have been violated, the 
Divine laws against sin — for natural laws are also Divine — famine has brought many a 
prodigal to himself, and led him to .say, " I will arise and go to my Father, and will say 
unto him, Father, I have sinned." It did so in the case of the Jews. 

II. But famine is an unneobssakt and unnatubal thojo. For in our Father's 
house there is bread enough and to spare, and none need perish with liimger. The world 
contains ample store; the resources of nature are in no degree exhausted, and therefore 
it can only be by negligence of God's laws in nature that famine can in ordinary cases 
occur. And why need any go away into the far country of sin, and so compel the 
righteous and loving Father to send such sore judgment after them in order to bring 
them back? " Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself! " It is not according to Gbd's will 
iu any case. 

in. And what is tbue of the litebal is true also of the spibitual famine. 1. 
ft is caused hy man's disobedience. So it was at the first. Sin thrust him forth from the 
feather's house, the happy home where he never knew what want was. And so it is 
still. Had those who knew of Christ and his redemption but obeyed the word, *' Ijet 



320 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET JEREMIAH. [oH. m. 1— 34 

him tlat heareth say, Come," long ere this the whole world would have been evangelized. 
And if the same comtnand were obeyed now, the like result would sjieedily follow. 
Christ has given a self-pro] agating power to his Church, which it has failed to use, and 
therefore spiritual famines are and will be until the Church obeys her Lord's commandg. 
But : 2. Such famine need not he. Christ is the " Bread of life" for all, and there is 
enough and to spare for all. 

Conclusion. Let not thy brother hunger if thou canst give him of this bread. 
Think of what famine means, and let thy churity bo aroused. Take care that thou 
eatesi— not merely talkest — of th^ Bread of life thyself. — C. 

Vers. 8 — 11. — The irony of a name. These verses tell of King Zedekiah — of the tragedy 
of Zedekiah, we might fay, for never was there a tragedy more terrible than that in 
which he bore the chief part. But think of his name — " Jehovah our Righteousness." 
"As the last note of Jeremiah's dirge over .lehoiachin died away, he had burst forth 
into one of those strains of hope, in which he had represented the future ruler of Israel 
as the righteousness or justice of Jehovah (cf. ch. xxiii. 5 — 7). It may be that, in allu- 
sion to this, the new king assumed that name Zedek-Jah on his accession to the throne. 
He was a mere youth, but not without noble feelings which, in a less critical moment, 
might have saved the state." And his very name attested the hope which was cherished 
concerning him. But read the history of bis career and his awful fate, and see if ever 
there could be sadder irony tlian in the name he bore. It was a glorious name, but 
how miserably belied ! Defeated, dethroned, disgraced, bereaved, tortured, blind, an 
exile, a slave, — so he dragged out the last weary years of his life. We know not how 
many they were, we can only hope they were but few. 

L Such ieont of names is frequent. The degenerate bearers of noble and hallowed 
names are many. The cliildren of Abraham were told by our Lord that they were children 
of the devil. A good name should be an inspiration ; it often is ; noblesse oblige. That 
it may he so is often the motive wherewith it is given by parents to their children. But, 
as with Zedekiah, their character and their names are in sad contrast. 

II. Note the cause of this bad irony in this case. It was not lack of right 
knowledge. For a while he was under the teaching and influence of Gk)d's prophet Jere- 
miah. And men rarely go wrong from lack of knowledge. Video meliora probo'jue, 
deteriora sequor. Nor for lack of right feeling. He had again and again good purposes 
and Bspirations. So with men like him. Nor were there wanting sundry endeavours 
to act according as God prompted him. He made one and another attempt. But the 
secret of his sad failure was his lach of strength, infirmity of will, weakness of resolve. 
And thus it perpetually is with men who turn out failures in life. There is no mori 
pitiful sight in this world than the spectacle of these ruined men. Jeremiah lamented 
bitterly over Zedekiah, as he well might. 

III. Let this ill-applied name lead us to think of him whose name was 
NOTHnio BUT BLESSED TRUTH — Jesus. He was Called Jesus because "he should save his 
people from their sins." For in him is the remedy for all such as Zedekiah was. Give 
up our will to him, come to be in him by a living faith, and his sti'ength shall be repro- 
duced in ua, and oiit of weakness we shall be made strong. — C. 

Verg. 1 — 3. — Zedekiah as king. I. The position of a touno man. He was 
twenty-one years old when he began to reign. Out of boyhood, looking round him at 
a time when he had become responsible for the conduct of his life. In England the 
age of twenty-one is full of significance to many young men, for then they become free 
from legal disabilities and restrictions. Any young man about the age of Zedekiah 
becomes thereby an object of special interest. 

II. A» UNEXPECTED POSITION. At Icast wc may fairly assume this from 2 Kings 
xxiv. 17. Zedekiah was not in the succession. Of course it is just possible there may 
have been aims and intrigues by which Zedekiah gained the crown. But that does nol 
make less noticeable the fact that young men often do find themselves in unexpected 
poattions. They have been making ready for one course, when all in a moment they 
are turned into • new course where they have to act without much time for con- 
sideratioB. 

TIT. A mwpONBiBLE POSITION. Ri^sponsible in any case »» that o/ a yann{ aaan ; 



OH. Ln. 1—34.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEBEMIAH. 821 

peculiarly responsible m being called to a throne. To be called to a' position of peculiar 
responsibility may sober a man if he is inclined to be reckless, may rouae him if inclined 
to be easy-going and self-indulgent. This point may be illustrated by the traditional 
belief in the change that came over Henry V, on his accesdon to the throne, espedallj 
as this view is brought out in Shakespeare. 

IV. A POSITION ususnALLT DIFFICULT. A king appointed by a foreign conqueror 
would be regarded with dislike by many. In such circumstances the best of personal 
qualities were needed, decision of character combined with the utmost circumspection. 

v. A POSITION IN WHICH ZeDEKIAH HAD A COMPETENT ADTISEB. Not any of his 

own courtiers, though there may have been men among them marked by prudence and 
insight. He has a prophet of Jehovah, a man with a keen sense of right and wrong, 
a man with revelations fi'om on high, to help him. Moreover, it is on record that he 
actually sought Jeremiah out Note the many references in the course of the book to 
the dealings between the king aud the prophet. By the plain speaking of such a man 
many doubts might be cleared and many errors corrected. It is the censure on 
Zedekiah (2 Ohron. xxxvL 12) that " he humbled not himself before Jeremiah the 
prophet speaking from the mouth of the Lord." — Y. 

Ver. 8. — Zedehiah'i army stxtttored, Zedekiah's aim was to keep his army together, 
for as long as be could do that there was a chance of averting the evil day, and perhaps 
in the end escaping it altogether. But without his army he was utterly helpless. He 
could not bring himself to heed Jeremiah's counsels, doing the right and putting his 
trust in Jehovah. And so when the army was gone everything was gone. Nothing 
remained but random, desperate attempts at flight, and the certainty of ultimate 
capture. We have to ask ourselves what we shall do when our army is scattered from 
us, when the resources of our own making are vanished. The chief battles of our life 
are not to be fought with external resources at all. In every warfare where the weapons 
are carnal the weapons must &i! at last. Only when we are engaged in truly spiritual 
warfare, and have the hosts of heaven on our side, can we be sore that our army will 
not be scattered from as. — Y. 

Ver. 11. — ZedekiaVi/txte. Here ia a triple l>ondage— the bondi^e of blindnecR, fetters, 
and imprisonment. Truly a dreadful doom I Look — 

L At ths cause or it. 1. The cause so/or as it ties in his cwn conduct. There was 
no need for him to accept a throne as viceroy for Babylon, but, having done so, he had 
entered Into an implied covenant. No wonder that the King of Babylon took special 
care to stamp such conduct in a peculiar way. 2. The cause so far as it lies in the notiont 
of the time. Zedekiah was treated, not only vindictively, but savagely. The meaning 
must have been to humiliate him, to make the iron enter into his very souL What 
a diffetence Christianity has made in the treatment of conquered foes 1 The change has 
come very slowly, but it is real and stable. One cannot imagine the time returning 
when a captured enemy would be deprived of his eyesight. 

TI, At a oontbast mMEDiATELT SUGGESTED. One canuot but think of Samson, 
whose external condition was exactly that of Zedekiah, blinded, fettered, and imprisoned. 
Reduced to this state the Philistines reckoned he was impotent. Zedekiah r^Ily was 
impotent ; he seems to have gone on to the day of his death in monotonous submission 
to what he felt necessity. But it was only necessity because he made it so. The 
worst limitations our fellow-men can put on us may become in certain conditions like 
an easily snapped thread. Zedekiah might have risen above all these insults and puns. 
Perhaps he md rise. It is well for us to recollect how GKhI has placed the essential 
liberty of every individual in his own hands. — ^T. 

Vers. 12, 1Z.—A great burning. L The BUSNiNa in oenbbal. The sum of the 
details amounts to a statement that the city was reduced to ashes. For this not 
Babylon is to be blamed, but Zedekiah and bis predecessors, together with their advisers. 
Babylon was only acting according to the fashion of the times. The hand of Jehovah 
was withdrawn, the hand that might have averted the torch ; and it was withdrawn 
because the destruction of Jerusalem had become a better thing for the world than its 
preservation. Still, it is not to be said in the fullest sense of the word that Jeh«vak 

TEBEUAH— H. T 



321 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEBEMIAH. [oh lil 1— 34^ 



destroyed Jerusalem say as he destroyed Babylon. In the course of a few generations 
Jerusalem rose from its ashes, temple included. The mere destruction of buildings, 
terrible as it is at the time, may soon be got 07er, as witness the rebuilding of London, 
and Chicago. The decay of national spirit and national resources is the thing to be 
feared. 

IL The BUBinNO or thb temple ik pabtiodlab. Babylon had no fear in destroy- 
ing the house of the Lord. Doubtless it was quite a common thiog in war to destroy 
the temples of gods, for tliey were looked upon merely as part of the resources of 
nations. We must distinguish between what is essentially sacred and what is sacred 
only by association and to serve a purpose. Whun the purpose is accomplished the 
sacred sinks back into the common. God dwelleth not in temples made with hands. 
He was none the poorer for all this burning. Babylon learned hereafter that, though his 
house had been burned, his power was not at all diminished. The chief value of the 
temple lay in tbie, that it had beeh an expression of the piety and devotion of David 
and Solomon. Kings and people alike had proved themselves onworthj of their great 
anceiton— T. 



HOMILETICAL INDEX 



TO 



THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET JEREMIAH. 



VOLUME n. 



CHAPTER XXX. 
rnmra taqu 

" Scripture— the Written WordofGod" 8 

"Fear not" ... ... ^ 4 

Divine Healing ... ... m 6 

Joys of Bedemption ... ... 5 

Written in a Book ; or, Words held 

over ... ... ... ... 6 

The Twofold Wonder of Israel's Sal- 

Vatiun... ... ... ... 7 

The Multitude of God's MeroieB ... 7 

The Ideal Buler m, 8 

CHAPTEB XXXI. 

The Close Eelations of God and hU 

People... ... ... ... 15 

The Everlasting Love of God 16, 32, 40 
Bachel weeping for her Children 17, 24 

Ephraim's Return ... ... 18 

Divine Satisfaction ... ... 19 

Heredity and Individual Besponsi- 

bility 19 

The New Covenant ... 20, 25, 37 

Guarantees of Perpetuity ... ... 21 

Grace preparing for Graee ... ... 22 

The Character of the Divine Law in- 
ferred from its History ... ... 23 

The Unity of the Ghurch ... ... 23 

The Redemption of Israel a Great and 

Notable Event ... ... ... 24 

Ephraim bemoaning himself; or the 

Penitent's Bestoratlon ... ... 25 

Ifiwiona put an End to m ... 26 



THEHE r^ex 

The New Jemsalem mi •.. 27 

The Bestoration of Israel ... ... 28 

The Steps of the Kingdom of God ... 29 

Trouble lessened by Increase m. 31 

God's Will done at Last ... ... 33 

The Scatterer the Gatherer ... 83, 42 

Strong, Stronger, Strongest m. 34 

Satisfied ... m. m. 35 

Strong Consolation m. ... 35 

Bemoaning Cue's Self .» ••. 86 
Conversion and Bepentanoe ... 37 
Great Encouragements for those re- 
turning to God ... ... ... 88 

God the Husband of his People ... 40 
Work yet to be found in the Vine- 
yard ... ... ... ,„ 41 

God the Gatherer of his People ... 42 
Praise waiting for God in Zion ... 43 
Sorrovring Mothers and their Conso- 
lation ... M. — ... 44 
Sweet Sleep ... ... ... 45 

Jehovah visiting the Individual for 

his Sins ... ... ... 45 

The New Covenant and the Old ... iC 
The Seed of Israel ; Signs of its Ever- 
lasting Duration ... ,„ 47 

CHAPTEB XXXIL 

Faith tested by Action ... m. 50 

The Prayer of a Perplexed Soul ... 51 

The Omnipotence of God ... n. 52 

Unity M. M 53 



INDEX. 



Qttd rejoicing m» an n» 53 

Sttencing a Prophet ». m* 51 

FRMthasing by Divine Oommand m. 55 

The FrayeT of Jeremiah ,., ... 55 

The Unities of the Divine Kingdom 56 

A Story of God's Sustaining Grace .m 56 

O Blessed Death I ... m. 5S 

A Parable of Bedemption ... m— 59 

Nothing hid from God ... m* 59 

Truth confessed, but not realized m< 60 

Loye's Labour apparently lost m. 61 

The Refiner's Fire ... m. 63 

The Batio of 8orro-<r and Joy ... 64 
Jeremiah showing his Faith by his 

Works ... ... ... 65 

Man's Neglect of God's Teaching ... 66 
The Bonda of Abiding Attachment to 

God ... ... ••« ••• 66 

Evil the Measure of Good .» «• 67 

CHAPTER XXXIIL 

An InTitation to Prayer ... mt 69 

Forgiveness and Cleansing ... 70 

The Church an Honour to God n. 71 

Town and Country Life ... m< 71 

■< The Branch of Bighteousnesa" .» 72 

Nature's Aids to Faith ... ... 73 

Bevelation of God's Purpose to him 

who performs his Will ... ... 74 

Perpetuation of tlw Kingly and 

Ftiestly Stock ... ... ... 74 

The Covenant of God permanent as 

the Laws of Nature ... „, 75 

The Reasonableness of Prayer ,m 76 

The Divine Treatment of Sin .m 78 

Frmts of Pardon ... ... m> 79 

Paradise lost and regained m «• 79 

The Prophet's Refrain ,„ m< 80 

"The Lord our Bighteonsnesi" m* 81 

Do the Prophets prophesy falsely ? ... 81 

The Abundance of Peace and Truth 83 
The Mournful Stillness of the Present, 

and the Gladsome Voices of the 

Future ... ... m« 83 

Betnming Flooks... ... m. 84 

The Bighteous Scion of David .m 84 

Kittf and Priest in Perpetuity «• 85 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 



A King's Doom ... 
Bn}>erficial Repentano* 



M. 87 



Liberal Punishment ftir Illiberal dm- 

duct ... .« ... ... 88 

False Obedience ... ... ... 89 

The Lord, the Prophet, and the King 90 

The Woe of Weakness ... ... 80 

Playing Fast and Loose with God ... 92 

Slavery ... ... ... ... 92 

A Bight Aet done in a Wrong Spirit 93 



CHAPTER XXXY. 

The Rechabites „. «• m 95 

Filial Obedience ... ... m« 96 

Temptation by Divine Command ... 97 
The Filial Obedience of the Be- 

chabites ... ... m« 97 

The Blessing of the Rechabites m. 98 

Fathers of Temperance ... „, 99 
The Children put to Shame by the 

Stranger ... ... ... 100 

The Divine Long-SufFering worn out 100 

Rewards of Filial Piety ... ... 101 

The Power of a Father's Command ... 101 
Renhabitea nnconsciously reproving 

Israelites ... ... ... 102 

God's Recognition of the Bechabita 

Obedience — —, mt 102 



CHAPTEB XXXVL 

The Writing of the Roll ^ ^ 105 

The Beading of the Roll ^ » 106 

The Burning of the Boll ... m« 107 

The Bewriting of the Roll ... 108 

The Development of Revelation m. 109 

Vicarious Ministry in Holy Things ... 110 

Free Course of the Word of God m« 111 

The Mystery of Inspiration m. Ill 

" Jehoiakim's Penknife " ... n. Ill 

" The Lord hid them " 112 

The Word of God: wherein it can 

and wherein it cannot be destroyed 113 

Hearers of God's Word ... ... 113 

The Written Word m* m. 114 

"It may be" ... «. «. 115 

The Indestmotible Word .m ... 116 
The Lord's Hidden Ones ^ 117,120 

Disaster not Defeat ... m. 117 

God's Eye to Every Possibility .m 118 

"Things New and Old" ... ^ 118 

Burning the Word of the LoiA m« 119 



INDEX. 



CHAPTER XXXVIL 

nttn TAoi 

Prayer withont Obedience ... m. 121 

Self-Deception ... ... m. 122 

The Irresistible Will of God ... 123 

Jeremiah imprisoned as a Traitor ... 121 

Hopes that betray ... ... 124 

God's Purpose independent of Means 125 

The Servant of Ood accused of 

Treason ... m. m. 125 

" Give ns of your Oil" m« .m 125 

Bnilding on the Sand m< m. 126 

"Be not deceived" m m. 127 

Falsely accused ... ,„ ... 127 

Characteristics of Injustice „, 127 

" Out of Weakness made Strong" ... 128 
The Bougli Wind stayed in the Day 

of the East Wind ... ... 128 

A Bequest for Intercession ... 128 

Israel's Delusion as to its Enemy ... 129 
The Secret Question of a King and 

the Bold Answer of a Prophet ... 130 

CHAPTEE XXXYIIL 

Jeremiah in the Pit ... ... IS2 

The Apparent Misanthropy of Beve- 

lation ... ... ... ... 133 

"Old Cast Clouts and Old Botten 

Bags" 133,137 

The Fear of Bidioule ... ». 134 

The Blessedness of Obedience ... 134 
Foreshadowings and Analogies of ths 

Cross ... ... ... ... 135 

Ebed-Meleoh ; or, Unlooked-for Sym- 
pathy and Help ... ... 136 

God's Terms of Salvation Hard ... 138 
Counted an Enemy for Speaking the 

Truth... ... ... ... 138 

" Put not your Trust in Princes " ... 139 

"Cast Down, but not Forsaken" „• 140 

The Value of an Oath ... ... 140 

The Path of Obedience the Path of 

Safety... ... ... m. 141 

Trying to serve Two MastenJ ,„ 141 

A Question of Casuistry „. „. 141 

Prophecy and Patriotism m. m. 142 

A Friend in Need ... ... 143 

Obeying the Voice of the Lord ... 144 

The End of Zedekiah's Irresolution... 144 

The Unkingly Position of a King ... 145 

CHAPTEE XXXIX. 

A Prophet befriended by • Heathen 



King 



147 



Spared on the Ground of Faith ... 148 
The Poor Better off than the Eich 

148, 152, 15ii 
God'i Servant delivered from the 

Judgment of Traasgressors ... 148 

"So he dwelt among the People" „. 149 

Faith's Reward ... .m (m 149 

The Retribution of God m« ... 1<')0 

Too Late ... m. ... 151 

Churchwardens ... ... ... 153 

" In that ye ministered to the Saints " 153 

Siege and Savagery ... ... 154 

The Safety of God's Prophet ... 154 
Ebed-Meleob's Safety, and the Secret 

of it M. ... ... M< 156 

CHAPTER Xli. 

Jeremiah's Eelease .m m. 157 

The Choice of a Eesidence ... ... 158 

The Duties of Adversity and their 

Reward ... ... ... 159 

The Murder of Gedaliah ; or. Noble 

Credulity ... ... ... 159 

The Blind seeing, the Seeing blind 160 

« A Strait betwixt Two " 161 

" That we may be Godly and quietly 

governed" ... ... ... 161 

Misplaced Charity ... ... 162 

Jeremiah a Free Agent ... ». 163 

The Difficulties of a Governor m. 163 

Trusting a Traitor ... m 164 

CHAPTEE XLL 

The Assassination of Gedaliah Ma 165 

The Slaughter of the Pilgrims ^ 166 

Devils Incarnate ... ... m. 167 

Sin hindered by Sin ... m. 167 

The Devil a Bad Paymaster m. 168 

Too near the Edge ... ... 169 

A Great Crime and its Consequences 170 

CHAPTEE XLIL 

Taking Counsel with Ghxi .m n* 171 

Divine Guidance ... ,„ m. 171 

Implicit Obedience ... m. 172 

The Answer to Prayer delayed ... 173 
The Blessedness of Patient Endur> 

anoe ... ... 173 

Contradictory Eequirements ... 174 

inquiring of God in Great Crises ... 175 

Carnal Predispositions ,m m. 176 

Dissembling in Prayer .m — 176 



INDEX. 



THEHB rAOB 

Man's Utter Dependence upon God ... 177 

Waiting on the Divine Ordinance ... 178 
Divine Comforts for those in Doubt 

and Fear ... ... ... 178 

A Land to be avoided „, m. 179 

Searching the Heart ... m. 179 

OHAPTBE XLm. 

Moral Causes of Unbelief ... 
The Credulity of Unbelief... 
Prophetic Stones ... m. 

The Stones of Tahpanheg .m 
Hearts set to do Evil »• 

Building on the Band 



m. 181 

« 181 

^ 182 

~. 183 

... 184 

... 181 

The View of a Prophet's Complete 

WorJs ... ... ... ... lo4 

The Tisitation upon Egypt... n. 185 

OHAPTEK XMV. 

Warnings from the Past ... m. 186 

Open BebuUion ... ... n. 187 

Chastisement misinterpreted ... 1 88 

The Limit of God's Forbearanott m. 189 

Sinful YowB ... ... ... 1S9 

The Bemnant of the Bemnant ... 190 
The Condition of Hardened Sinners 

Desperate ... ... ... 190 

Credentials of Beligion ... ... 191 

The Danger of eormptiag True Be- 
ligion ... ... ... ... 192 

Jeremiah's Last Sermon ... ... 192 

The End of Jeremiah ; or, GoiB|; Dowa 

in Clouds ... ... ... 193 

The Mind of Gad towards Sia and 

Sinners ... ... ... 194 

The Apparent Profitableness of Sin 196 

Wretched Beasons for a Wrong Resolve 196 

The Husband's Besponsibility ... 197 

A Severe Lesson unlearned ... 197 

The Doom of those making iom ot 

Safety in Egypt ... ... 197 

Supposed and Beal Beasons f«r Ca- 
lamity ... ... ... 198 

Watching over Men for Evil m. 199 

Human and Divine Confidence „, 199 

OHAPTEB XLV. 
The Grief of One 8oiil,and its Conio- 

lation ... ... ... ... 200 

Divine DestmetiiM „. m. 201 

Self-Seeking ... ... ^ 201 

Baruch's Message ; oi; God's Osaslder- 

ation for his Servant ... ... S02 



TMsm nsi 
Bamoh; or, the Young Beomit l^ 

heartened ... ... ... 203 

Ambition prohibited ... ... 204 

Counsel and Comfort for the Maa 

orercome with Bad Tidings m« SOS 

CHAPTEB XLVL 

The Judgment of Egypt .« .m 212 

Incurable Diseases ... .m 213 

The Heifer and the Gadfly]... ^ 213 

The Judgment of the Nations ... 214 

"Judgment" going on "from the 

House of God "... ... ... 215 

Premature Glorying ... ... 215 

The Terror of Sacrifice without its 

Blessing 217 

The Beal Caose of the Decline of 

Empires ... ... ... 218 

Punishment not Destruction but 

Purification and Preservatim ... 219 

Correction but in Measure ... „• 220 

Why the Valiant are swept away n. 220 

God's Care of his own ... ^ 220 

CHAPTEB XLVn. 

The Judgment of the Philistines ... 223 

The Sword of the Lord ... JB4, 225 

The Sorrow of the Ungodly ... 225 

The Sword that cannot be Quiet ... 226 

Apostrophe to the Sword ... ... 226 

CHAPTEB XLVm. 
The Judgment of Moab ... ... 233 

The Dangers of Biches m* m. 234 

Slack Service ... ,^ ,„ 234 

" Wine on the Lees" .^ „. 235 

Pride ^ 236,242 

The Ease of Moab .„ 236, 245 

Betrayed by their Gods ... ... 237 

" The Heath in the Wilderness " ... 238 
Doing the Work of the Lord deceit- 

Mly 238,244 

Much Ease, much Peril ... ... 239 

Touching the Apple of God's Eye ... 241 
The Departed Praise of Moab ... 243 

The Consequence of a Wrong Coafl- 

dence 248 

Moab exulting over Fallea Israel ... 245 
The Broken Vessel ... ^ 246 

No Ultimate Escape .^ ,^ 246 

CHAPTEB XUX. 
Israel's Heirs ... ... ,^ 252 

The Failure of Wisdom ... ^ 253 



INDEX. 



rmm faoi 

A PromlM for Orphans and Widows 251 
A People deoeived by its own Terrible- 

nosfl ... ... ... ... Z5o 

"Fear on Every Side" 255 

The Paradox of Israel's Inheritance... 255 

" Where is the Wise ? " 256 

Israel's Judgment an Argument for 

Edom'i ... ... ... 257 

The Unrest of the Wicked ... ... 257 



Might not Bight 



257 



Desirable Habitations : a New Tear's 

Sermon ... ... ... 258 

Consohition for a Father's Dying Bed 259 

Vain Confidences ... ... ... 260 

Lessons from the Sea ... 261, 267 

The Fall of Damascus ; or, the Lovely 

and the Lovable lost ... ... 263 

A Usurper in the Inheritance m. 265 

The Pride of Apparent Security m. 266 

The Fate of Qlam ... m. 367 



CHAPTER L. 




The Judgment of Babylon... 


«. 274 


EUttuming Penitents 


M. 


... 275 


Lost Sheep 


M. 


... 276 


Perfect Forgiveness 


•.. 


... 276 


The Strong Bedeemer 


M« 


277, 284 


Israel's Deliverance 


... 


... 278 



"To Zion, with their Faces thither- 
ward"... ... ... ... 278 

Israel as Lost Sheep ... ,„ 279 
Divine Forgiveness an Absolute Obli- 
vion ... ... .M ... 279 

The Hammer broken .m m. 280 

Godly Sorrow m. 280 

Forgetting onr Besting-Flaoe m. 281 

The Forgiveness of Ood .» m. 282 

Hammer versus Hammer ... •» 283 

The Liars' Sword... .^ ... 285 

The Fall of Hell ... 285 

Beunited Israel seeking JehoTah ... 286 

The Wolf excusing himself ... 287 
The Punishment of those wlio rejoice 

wrongly ... ... ... 287 

The Feeding-Places of the Flock ... 288 

A Vain Quest ... ... ... 288 

The Sword everywhere ... m. 289 

Capital Events ia History ... m. 289 

OHAPTEB LL 

" Suffering, bat not Forsaken ** u. 295 

Public Thanksgiving ... ... 295 



THEia nas 

God's Battle-Axe 296, 8W 

Flight from the City of Destruction 296 
The Duty and Encouragement of the 

Saved ... ... ... ... 297 

The Book oast into the Biver ... 298 
Divine Love not to be severed from 

its Object ... ... ... 298 

The Duty of Separating from Um 

World 299 

Praise the Outcome of Saintly Ex- 

perience ... ... ... 299 

"Escape for thy Life I" ... m. 299 

The Response of the Redeemed m. 800 

" The Portion of Jacob " ... m. 801 

A Fatal Fact ... ... ... 802 

Harvests of Horror and Threshings ef 

Wrath 303 

Joy over Judgment ... ... 804 

The Charge to them that are Spared 304 

"The Broad Walls" ... ... 804 

The Weariness of Sin ». m— 805 

Unforsaken Israel... — m. 806 

Individual Escape ... ... 306 

Declaring in Zion the Work of the 

Lord ... ... ... ... 307 

The Dwellers on Many Waters ... 807 

The Resources of Jehovah ... ... 308 

The Portion of Jacob contrasted with 

the Confidences of Babylon ... 309 

The Destroying Mountain destroyed 309 

Effeminacy ... ... ... 810 

Making the Springs Dry ... ... 810 

A Timely BecoUection and its Practi- 
cal Effect m. 811 

Evil written in a Book ... ... 811 

A Symbol of Irretrievable LoM mm 812 

OHAPTEB Ln. 

The Siege and Capture of Jerusalem 313 
The Fate of Zedekiah ... 814,816,821 

The Destruction of the Temple ... 814 

Sparing the Poor ... ... ... 315 

The Deliverance of Jehoiaohin ... 816 

The Lord creating Evil ... ... 816 

The March of Doom 817 

Days whose Duties are Indelible ... 818 

Famine ... ... ... m. 819 

The Irony of a Name ... «. S20 

Zedekiah as King... ... n. 320 

Zedekiah's Army scattered ••• 321 

A Great Burning ... ... m. S21 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 



EDITED BY THE 



REV. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, M.A., 

nCAE AND RURAL DEAN OF ST. PANCRAS, AND EXAMINING CHAPLAIN TO THE LOU> 
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER AND BRISTOL; 



AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



LAMENTATIOISrS. 

By rev. T. K. CHEYNE, M.A.,D.D., 

KBCTOR OF TENDRINO, AND LATE FELLOW OF BALLIOL COLLEGE, OZFOBB, 

i^omiktics : 
By rev. W. p. ADENEY, M.A. 

ilomilies bg tJarions <a,utl)ors: 

EEV. PROF. J. R. THOMSON, M.A. REV. D. YOUNG, KA. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New York and Toronto. 



THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEEEIIAH. 



INTRODUCTION. 



Thi Book of Lamentations luts no anthor'a name attacliecl to it in the 
Hebrew Bible, which, indeed, places it far away from Jeremiah in the bo> 
called K'thubhlm or Hagiographa, between Bath and Koheleth (Ecclesiastes). 
It is the Septnagint which, in some manuscripts, appends " of Jeremiah " 
to the descriptive title " Lamentations," at the same time grouping it with 
the prophecies of Jeremiah and the (apocryphal) Book of Barach. Bat 
before we can form an opinion as to the justice of this view of the author- 
ship, and the romantic tradition connected with it (see below), we must 
first of all take a general survey of the book and gather up all its internal 
evidence as to date and origin ; and also we mast illuminate this by the 
results of a critical study of the Old Testament. 

One of the most interesting of these results is the discovery of a great 
lyric movement among the conquered Jews, as well those in Babylon as 
those who remained in their much-loved home. " If I forget thee, O Jera> 
salem," was their dominant thought, even when surrounded by the wonders 
of Babylonian art ; and it naturally expressed itself in lyric verse. Ewald 
has done much to enable modem students to realize the vast debt which 
we owe to the Captivity and the subsequent period for much of the most 
precious part of the Psalms, and, by including his translation of the Lamen- 
tations in the same volume with the Psalter (he even inserts the former as 
a portion of the sacred hymn-book), he has brought vividly before us the 
essential unity of the great lyric movement referred to. We have spoken 
of these psalms and lamentations as expressions of a mood ; they are this 
most truly ; but they are something more. Nursed up on the writings of 
the prophets, the authors of these lyric poems were in a sense prophets, just 
as the prophetic writings addressed to the later Jews may to a certain extent 
be classed with the lyric literature. The truths which the lyric or elegiac 
poets had imbibed from the prophets gave a colour even to the expressions 
of grief, and so, monotonous as the Book of Lamentations may be, it has 
justly been admitted as a sacred Scripture into the Old Testament canon. 
The authorship of Jeremiah may be doubtful, and yet we cannot fail to 

IiAlUNTATIOXa, i 



INTRODUCTION TO 



recognize in this short elegiac book that peculiar qnality which, in all its 
degrees of manifestation, the Jewish doctors agree with as in describing as 
inspiration. 

The common theme of the Lamentations is the terrible fate which befell 
Jerusalem when the Chaldeans captured the city (b.O. 688) and carried 
away its inhabitants (less fortunate in one sense than those of the country 
districts) to Babylon, That they were all written at the same time is, 
however, to say the least, improbable ; the third, and in a still higher 
degree the fifth, will be found to present some striking points of dissimilarity 
to the rest. Let us first of aU endeavour to characterize the three which 
have most in common, and each of which begins with the word echah, how ! 
■via. the first, the second, and the fourth. Even in this narrower group, 
indeed, some divergences will strike the reader, but they are not sufficient 
to compel ns to assume a diversity of authorship. Each elegy is in the 
strictest sense alphabetical (which means that every verse or half-verse or 
every group of verses begins with one of the twenty-two letters of the 
Hebrew alphabet; comp. Ps. ix., x., xxv., xxxiv., xixvii., cxix., cxlv.), but 
with this difference — ^that whereas in the first the initial letters come in their 
usual order, in the second and fourth the letter Q (pe) precedes the letter y 
(ayin)} Another unimportant technical divergence is that the verses of ch. 
i. and ii. are in the original, as a rule, composed of three lines, and those of 
ch. iv. of four. It may seem strange, at first sight, that so artificial a form 
aa the alphabetic should have been selected for elegies. But further con- 
sideration wiU show that it was really both natural and appropriate. These 
elegies were probably not so much intended for private use as for a liturgical 
purpose, for which the alphabetic form, so convenient for the memory, 
would be a great recommendation. It has for ages been the custom to read 
the Lamentations in the synagogues on the ninth day of Ab, the anniversary 
of the burning of the temple, and, as this is a very ancient fast-day (Zech. vii. 
3), it is reasonable to conjecture that the Lamentations, or some of them, 
were from the first designed for this solemn occasion. The didactic element 
which now and then appears in the poems gives an additional appropriateness 
to the alphabetic form, as a reference to the alphabetic psalms will at once 
show. 

The contents of these three elegies, in spite of their monotony, indicate 
a certain difference in the point of view of the writer or writers. The first 
directs the attention to the sorrowrladen Mater Dolorosa (if the application 
suggested by a living poet may be allowed), the widowed city, Zion. The 
cause of the catastrophe is but lightly touched upon, and the description 

' This b in itself not more Bnrprising than other irTegularities of Hebrew poets in the 
handling of alphabetic versification. What is surprising is that the same violation of 
order ihould be found in one of the psalms which there is no ground for assigning to the 
author (or to any of the authors) of the Lamentations. For there can hardly be a doubt 
that Hitzig, Delitzsoh, and Biokell are right in transposing vers. 15 and 16 (Hebrew, 16| 
17) of Ps. xxxiv. Let any one try the two modes of reading these yetaea together with th« 
following vene^ and judge for lumsel^ 



THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 



cannot he said to maintain itself at the height of the opening Terse. The 
second points ont the true author of Zion's calamity ; it is Jehovah, who 
has fulfilled his threats of old, and turned against his people like an 
angry warrior. The fourth has more touches than the rest which 
reveal (so far as pictnresqueness of detail can be accepted as evidence) 
the hand of an eye-witness of the tragic events. The sufEerings of various 
classes, due to God's anger at their sins, are affectingly described, and the 
malignant joy of the Bdomites represented, not merely as a recollection (Ps. 
cxxxvii. 7), but as a present fact. The second and the fourth are generally 
considered the most striking of the elegies from a poetical point of view. 

Before introducing the question of authorship, we have still to examine 
briefly the two remaining poems — ^tbe third and the fifth. The former 
agrees with the three elegies already considered in the technical respect of 
its alphabetic structure, and more particularly with the second and fourth 
(in the order of the chapters), inasmuch as the same two initial letters are 
transposed. It is, again, connected with the first and second by the sub- 
division of each of its verses into three lines. It difPers, however, from all 
the other elegies in its peculiar exaggeration of the alphabetic form, since 
it not merely distinguishes a single verse by one of the Hebrew letters, but 
a whole triplet of verses. This evidently hampers the poet in the expression 
of his thoughts ; — the third is the least rhythmical and the least poetical 
of all the Lamentations. In contents, too, it differs to a remarkable degree 
from the other elegies. Instead of describing the calamities of the nation, 
the writer points, or seems to point, to himself. " I am the man that hath 
seen affliction," he begins, and he continues to speak of himself as the great 
sufferer except in vers. 22 — 47, where he passes into a description of the 
cironmstanoes of the nation, and only refers to himself as a member of the 
community ("Let us search and try our ways," etc.). His account of his 
own Bufferings reminds us, by its highly coloured phraseology, of certain of 
the psalms which purport to be the utterances of an individual, but which 
contain many phrases which are hyperbolical in the mouth of an individual 
Israelite. In the case of this third Lamentation, as well as in that of this 
important group of psalms, we seem irresistibly driven to the inference that 
the writer (whether Jeremiah or another) adopts the rdle of a poetical 
representative of the Israelitish people, or at any rate of the pious believers 
who formed the kernel of that people.* This accounts for the curious 
alternation in ch. iii. of expressions which point to an individual Israelite 
with those which distinctly refer to the people, and for the seemingly 
extravagant character of the former, and also for the fondness which the 
author betrays for the great poem of Job, the hero of which is, in the inten- 
tion of the writer (to be carefully distinguished from the intention of the 
traditional narrative), obviously a type of the righteous man in affliction.' 
Compare, for instance, ch. iii. 4 with Job xvi. 9, 10 ; ch. iii. 7, 9 with Job 

' ' The Prophecies of leaiah,' by the present writer, 2nd edit,, voL ii. pp. 188—190. 
• Ibid., pp. 245—247. 



INTKODUOTION TO 



zix. 8 ; oh. iii. 8 with Job zzx. 20 ; oh. iii. 10 with Job z. 16 ; oh. iii 12, 13 
with Job vii. 20 and xvi. 12, 13 ; oh. iii. 14, 63 with Job zzz. 9. 

And if the writer of cb. iii. at one point does fall ont of his assnmed r6le, 
this too has to some extent a parallel in Job, for both Job and his friends 
now and then " fall into langaage whioh implies that Job is not an indi- 
vidnal, but plurality of persons." Neither poet was able to keep np the 
personification, or representative symbol, with entire consistency. 

Before passing on to the second of the elegies reserved, we may, it wonld 
seem, draw one definite inference from the preceding data, viz. that the 
third chapter of Lamentations is not by the author of ch. i., ii., iv. A 
similar resnlt is obtained by an examination of the elegy which forms the 
fifth chapter. Taming to the Hebrew text, we are at once met by the fact 
that, nnlike the companion elegies, it is not alphabetical, i.e. it does not 
make each of its verses begin with one of the Hebrew letters. Still, there is 
an approximation to the alphabetic form ; the number of its verses (which 
are two-lined) is the same as that of the Hebrew letters, viz. twenty-two 
(comp. Ps. xxxiii., xxxviii., oiii.). It seems as if the close observance of 
the canons of alphabetic versification were too great a restriction for the 
writer of this elegy, jnst as some of the greatest English sonneteers have 
felt the laws of the Italian sonnet confine their freedom of thought and 
expression unduly. The treatment of the subject is slightly varied in this 
elegy, which is little more than an enumeration of the insults heaped upon 
the Jews by their enemies. The poet speaks near the end of the elegy (ver. 
20) as if this sad state of things had already continued a long time, from 
which it has generally been inferred that the poem was composed rather 
later than the rest of the collection. We must remember, bowerer, that, 
as J. H. Newman says — 

"... time is not a common property: 
But what is long is short, and swift is slow. 
And near is distant, as received and grasped 
By this mind and by tliat, and every one 
~t standard of his own ohionology." 

C The Dream of Geiontias,' p. S8.) 

To aztreme grief, a few years might appear an age, and the short, simple 
sentences of which the poem consists have the ring of such genuine feeling, 
neither diluted by reflection nor overlaid by rhetoric, that we may well 
be reluctant to assume a very late date. They may conceivably have been 
improvised in the midst of persecution by one of the scanty remnant which 
remained in Judah even after the third deportation of exiles. Some of 
the writer's friends have sought refuge in Egypt (i.e. on the north-east 
frontier of Egypt, whither Jeremiah himself was carried by force, see Jer. 
xlii., zliv.) ; others have submitted to Assyria (a conventional term for 
the great Meaopotamian empwe) ; the remainder of them are tyrannised 
over by upstarts of servile origin, such as many a modem Turkish pasha, 
placed over the land of Judah by the Babylonian suzerain. Yet so mnch 
relaxed are the bands of order, that savage, nomad tribes can ventnre to 



THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 



plunder them of their crusts of bread. Worse than all, Jerusalem is in 
ruins and uninhabited, and seems to have been so for an age, bj the 
" pathetic fallacy " explained above. 

We have seen that the fifth elegy in the collection can hardly be the 
work of the Prophet Jeremiah, who was probably already in Egypt when 
the poem was written. But we have also seen that, both in form and in 
contents, it differs from the other elegies, and we may now add that, lin- 
guistically, there is almost as little to connect it with its companions as with 
the Book of Jeremiah. The question, however, still remains whether at 
least some part of the Book of Lamentations (viz. either ch. i., iL, It., or oh 
iii. alone) may not be the composition of that gifted prophet. 

Let us first of all consider the internal evidence, and let ni test the 
theory of Jeremiah's authorship by its applicability to the third chapter of 
the book, as the part which, upon the face of it, can most easily be claimed 
as Jeremiah's. It will be readily admitted that, if we take the poem literally, 
it points to Jeremiah more distinctly than to any other known individual. 
The deep affection which the writer betrays for his people, his sensitive 
nature, and the bitter sufferings which he (apparently) describes himself 
to have undergone, correspond to peculiarities which we have already had 
to notice in the character and life of Jeremiah. Some of the characteristic 
expressions, thoughts, or images of Jeremiah's have also been pointed out 
in this chapter ; compare, for instance, ch. iii. 47, 48 with Jer. iv. 6, 20, vi. 
1, 14 ("breach" equivalent to "destruction "), ix. 1, xiii. 17, xiv. 17 (inces- 
sant tears) ; ch. iii. 64 — 66 with Jer. xi. 20 (appeal for vengeance). This 
oomparison of expressions and ideas, however, is of very little worth. The 
parallels are but few in number, and, so far as they are valid (the last- 
quoted breaks down on examination), are easily accounted for on the theory 
of the writer's acquaintance with Jeremiah's prophecies, and they are alto- 
gether outweighed by the numerous expressions never found in the Book 
of Jeremiah (such will be found in all but three verses of the third chapter 
of Lamentations). As to the general suitability of this prolonged monologue 
to the character and life of the prophet, we need only refer to what has 
been said already in the Introdaction to the Book of Jeremiah. Considering 
what a large body of literature there is, in which the spirit and even the 
expressions of Jeremiah may be recognized (e.g., besides Lamentations, 
Deuteronomy, Kings, Job, Isa. xl. — Ixvi., and certain of the psalms), it 
would be rash in the extreme to refer any part of it to that much-imitated 
prophet. There is certainly no direct statement in this elegy which compels 
OS to regard either Jeremiah or any other prophet as the author. 

The case for ascribing the remaining elegies to Jeremiah is proportionally 
weaker. There are, no doubt, expressions and ideas familiar to us in Jere- 
miah. Compare e.g. ch. i. 2, 19 with Jer. xxx. 14 ; oh. i. 11 with Jer. xv. 
19 ; ch. i. 16 and ii. 11 with Jer. ix. 1, etc. ; ch. i. 15 with Jer. xiv. 17 and 
xlvi. 11; ch. ii. 14 and iv. 13—15 with Jer. v. 30, 31 and xiv. 13, 14; elk 
iL 11, 13, iii. 47, 48, and iv. 10 with Jer. iv. 6, 20 and xiv. 17, eto. 



INTfiODUCTION TO 



But these, again, are far outweighed by the expressions unknown to 
Jeremiah, which occur in almost every verse of these elegies (see the lists 
in Naegelsbaoh's ' Jeremiah,' Introduction, § 3), and at least three passages 
militate rather strongly against the authorship of that prophet, viz. ch. ii. 9 
(where the writer regards the cessation of prophetic visions as a misfortune, 
contrast Jeremiah's denunciations in Jer. xxiii.) , iv. 17 (where the writer 
speaks of having formerly expected help from Egypt, contrast Jer. ii. 18, 
36) ; and iv. 20 (where Zedekiah is spoken of respectfully and hopefully as 
Jeremiah can hardly be supposed to have done). 

The external evidence for the authorship of Jeremiah consists of a tradi- 
tion, accepted, perhaps, by Josephus (' Antiquities,' x. 5, 1), and certainly by 
the Talmud (' Baba Bathra,' fol. 15, col. 1) and the later Jewish and Chris- 
tian scholars. The earliest authority for it is a statement prefixed to the 
Septnagint (and repeated with a few addition:^ words in the Vulgate) in 
the following terms : — " And it came to pass, after Israel was taken captive, 
and Jerusalem made desolate, that Jeremias sat weeping, and lamented with 
this lamentation over Jerusalem, and said." This cannot, however, have 
formed part of the Hebrew text of Lamentations, else the Massoretic editors 
of the text (who beyond reasonable doubt believed Jeremiah to be the author 
of the book) would certainly have handed it on to us. It has, indeed, been 
suggested that the compiler of Chronicles attributed the book to Jeremiah, 
because he reports that " Jeremiah lamented for Josiah," and that his words 
(apparently) " are written in the Lamentations " (2 Chron. xxxv. 25) If 
this view is correct, the compiler of Chronicles interpreted the words, " the 
breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord " (ch. iv. 20), which really 
refer to Zedekiah, of Josiah. The view is not to be hastily rejected, although 
it is also possible that the statement in the Septuagint is due to a misinter- 
pretation of the passage in Chronicles. In any case, the tradition cannot 
be traced up to the time of Jeremiah, and is too evidently fictitious — first, 
because Jeremiah was not an eye-witness of the sad circumstances described 
in the Lamentations ; and secondly, because, even if he had been so, such a 
tender-hearted man (whose prophetic utterance is almost stifled by tears) 
cannot be imagined as amusing himself, amid the ruins of Jerusalem, with 
inditing these highly artificial, not to say rhetorical, compositions in a style 
absolutely new to him. No ; poems like these cannot have been produced 
till the worst misery of conquest had been partly mitigated by time. They 
are (from a literary point of view) the efEorts of highly educated men to 
relieve their feelings by the help of art. They are more than this, no doubt ; 
they are an evidence of the working of the Spirit of God on the minda of 
the more spiritually minded Jews, leading them to contrition and repentance. 
But we must before all things adopt a purely literary point of view in 
an inquiry as to date and authorship, and then we cannot but recognize 
that the first four Lamentations (which are alone now in question) are too 
elaborately artificial to have been the work of " Jeremiah sitting amid the 
ntina of Jerusalem." There is genuine feeling in them, however, only it ha( 



THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH, tH 

already been softened by time. To assert, witb Dean Plumptre, tbat tbe 
bom poet " accepts tbe discipline of a self-imposed law just in proportion to 
tbe vehemence of his emotions," is incapable of proof from modern Euro- 
pean poetry, and, if possible, still more opposed to the facts of Hebrew 
literature Some of the examples which the dean addnces are merely the 
rhetorical exercises of poets learning their craft ; others merely concessions 
to the taste which every now and then prevails for superfine elaboration in 
every branch of art ; others, again (and these few examples are alone in 
point), the attempts of the artists to help Nature to recover her balance, 
when the recovery has already begun and emotion has already lost its over- 
whelming vehemence. Members of the much-sufEering Jewish race have 
many a time, since the Lamentations were written, had recourse for comfort 
to similar styles of composition, and verified the words of a great French 
critic, " When the passion is sincere, even the most artificial form assumes 
something of beauty." 

Before we conclude, let ns briefly review our position. The first, second, 
and fourth chapters of Lamentations may conceivably be by the same 
author; and though that author is certainly not Jeremiah, yet he is probably 
acquainted, whether by the ear or by the eye, with the prophecies of Jere- 
miah. He was contemporary with the fall of Jerusalem, and indited these 
elegies not long after for a liturgical purpose. It is, however, equally possible 
that they are the work of different authors, belonging to the same circle or 
school of literary craftsmen. About the same time, or a little later, the fifth 
and last seems to have been written, and very certainly not by the author 
of any of the foregoing Lamentations. The date of the third elegy may have 
been as early as that of the others, or it may have been written at some later 
time J — the personification of the people is thought by many critics to be a 
characteristic of those quif t literary men among the Jewish exiles in Babylon, 
to one of whom they attribute most if not all of the second part of the Book 
of Isaiah. In any case the author of the third Lamentation must have 
been acquainted with the other elegies (except the fifth), as there is a 
general similarity in the diction of the first four chapters of the book.' 
There seems, in fact, to have been a peculiar and fixed vocabulary, traditional 
in this school of elegiac poets, just as there has been in other schools of 
writers. Jeremiah was probably the favourite book of these poets (next 
to the Psalter, so far as this book was in existence) ; and so, if a title must 
be given by way of defining the authorship, we might, perhaps, style the 
entire book, on the analogy of a portion of the Pt>alter, "The Book of 
the Lamentations of tbe sons of Jeremiah." 

The elegies on which we have been engaged were the forerunners of 
a large body of synagogue poetry ; many of the kinoth (as one large class 
of the post- canonical as well as the five canonical elegies were called) were 
suggested by passages of the Book of Lamentations. Most of them, indeed, 

' Bee tbe third section of the Introduction to Naegelsbaoli's ' Ommentary on Lamenta- 
Uoni,' appended to the same writer's 'Jeremiah' in Lange's Old Testament scries (translated). 



nil IKTBODUCTION TO THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 

were speciallj written for that rerj fast-daj which we have already coii< 
jectnred to hare occasioned the composition of the canonical Lamentations. 
The most beantifnl of the ktnoth is probably that of Yehnda ben Samuel 
Halevi (twelfth century a.d.), which may be known even to some general 
readers by Heinrich Heine's poem in the ' Bomanzero,' and which has been 
critically illustrated by A. von Oettingen, ' Die synagogale Elegik des 
Volkes Israel u. 8. w.' (Dorpat, 1853), with which may be compared 
Delitzsch's delightful and instructive work, ' Zur Geschichte der judischen 
Poesie.' Lastly, for a comprehensive article on the Hebrew elegy (in its 
Biblical forms) see a paper by Professor 0. Bndde, of Bonn, which opens 
the second volume (1882) of Stade's Zeitschrift for Old Testament studies. 

For the exegetical and critical literature on Lamentations, we need only 
^dEer to the list of works on Jeremiah in Vol. I., adding, however, Bickell, 
' Carmina Veteris Testamenti Metrice,' Innsbruck, 1882 (a critically revised 
text of the chief poetical passages in the Old Testament, moie to be feasted 
in the Lamentations than in the Psalms) ; Plnmptre, 'Jeremiah and 
Lamentations,' in vol. iv. of Bishop Ellicott's ' Commentary,' London, 1884 
(• troly popular and interesting work bj • mftnj-iided 8cholar)i 



THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER L 



Veri. 1 — 11. — A Wail op Distbess pob 
/erdsalem. 

Vers. 1, 2. — The fate of Joruealcm is 
lescribed in language which resembles here 
ind there that used in Isaiah of fallen 
Babylon (Isa. xlvii. 1, 8). It is probably 
the finest passage in the whole bock, anil 
lias inspired some grand lines in Mr. Swin- 
burne's picture of the republican mater 
dolorosa — 

'* Who ii she that sits by the way, by the 
wild wayside. 
In a rust-stained garment, the robes of a 

oast-olf bride, 
In the dust, in the rainfall, sitting with 

soiled feet bare. 
With the night for a garment npon her, 
with torn, wet hair," etc. ? 

Ver. 1. — How. The characteristic introduc- 
tory word of an elegy (comp. Isa.i. 21 ; xiv. 4, 
12), and adopted by the early Jewish divines 
as the title of the Book of Lamentations. It 
Is repeated at the opening of ch. li. and ch. 
iv. Sit solitary. Jerusalem is poetically 
personified and distinguished from the per- 
sons who accidentally compose her popula- 
tion. She is " solitary," not as having 
retired into solitude, but as des(;rted by 
her inhabitants (same word as in first clause 
of Isa. xxvii. 10). How is she become as a 
widow ! etc. Bather, She it become a widow 
that was great among the nations ; a princess 
among the provinces, she is become a vassal. 
The alteration greatly conduces to the effect 
of the verse.jwhich consists of three parallel 
lines, like almost all the rest of the chapter. 
We are not to press the phrase, " a widow," 
as if some earthly or heavenly husband 
were alluded to ; it is a kind of symbol of 
desolation and misery (comp. Isa. xlvii. 8). 
" The provinces " at once suggests the period 
at the writer, who mu«t bav* been a gubject 

JtAMSSTAtlOSO. 



of the Babylonian empire. The term is also 
frequently used of the countries under the 
Persian rule(e.3. Esth.i. 1, 22), and in Ezra 
ii. 1 anil Neh. vii. 6 is used of Judah itself. 
Here, however, the " provinces," like the 
" nations," must be the countries formerly 
subject to David and Solomon (comp. Eccles. 
ii. 8). 

Ver. 2. — In the night. Notonlybyday, but 
even in the season of rest and unconscious- 
ness. Her lovers . . . her friends; i.e. the 
QeigWiourii»g peoples, with which Judah 
had fomed alliances, such as Egypt (Jer. 
ii. 36), Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre and 
Sidnn (Jer. xxvii. 3). This is a favourite 
■phrase of Jeremiah's (comp. Jer. iii. 1 ; iv. 
30; xxii. 20,22; xxx. 14), but also of Hosea 
(ii. 5, 7, 10, 12, 13 ; viu. 9) and Ezekiel 
fxvi. 33, 36, 37; xxiii. 5, 9, 22). The 
national God was conceived of as the 
Husband of the nation ; and the prophets 
retained this idea and elevated it, just as 
they did circumcision and many other 
Eastum tradiliond. 

Ver. 3. — Is gone into captivity beoaoi* 
of affliction ; rather, u gone into exile, etc 
The poet is not thinking of the deporta- 
tion of the captives, but of those Jews who 
sought refuge tor themselves in foreign lands 
(comp. Jer. xl. 1 1). An objection has been 
raised to this view that the number of fugi- 
tive Jews would not be large enough to 
warnint their being called "Judah." But 
we might almost as well object on a similar 
ground to the application of the term 
"Judah" to the Jews who were curried to 
Babylon. The truth may, perhaps, be that, 
after the fall of Jerusalem, the Jewish 
nation became split up into three parts : 
(1) the Jews who succeeded in escaping 
nto Egypt or elsewhere ; (2) those who were 
carried captive; (3) the mass of the com- 
mon people, who remained on their native 
soil. Keil, however, retains the view of 
the Authorized Version, only inbstituting 



THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 



[oh. l 1—22 



"out of" for "because of." "Out of 
the misery into which the Jews had been 
brought by the invasions of Necho and 
Nebuchiidnpzzar they passed into the new 
misery of captivity. Among the heathen; 
rather, among the nationt. Between the 
straits. Tlie phrase is peculiar, and reminds 
us of Ps. oxviii. 5, "Out of the strait I 
called unto thee." "A strait," or narrow 
place, clearly means adversity, just as " a 
liirge place" (Fs. oxviii. 5) means pros- 
perity. 

Ver. 4. — The ways of Zion do monm. 
The roads leading; to Jerusalem, nsually so 
thronged with pilgrims, are desolate and 
" mourn " (comp. ch. ii. 8 and Isa. iii. 26 ; 
xiv. 31). All her gates are desolate. No 
one goes in or out of Jerusalem, and there 
is no concourse of citizens in the shady re- 
cess of the gates. The virgins are afOicted. 
Bo Zeph. iii. 18. The sorrow was on account 
of tlie cessation of the febtival, in the music 
of wliich they took a leading part (comp. 
Pi. Ixviii. 25). 

Ver. 5. — Are the chief; ratliei, are become 
Ihe head. Comp. Deut. xxviii. 44, where, 
as a part of the curse of Israel's rebellion, 
it is foretold that " he [the stranger] shall 
become tlie head, and thou shalt become the 
tail." Before the enemy. Like a herd of 
cattle. 

Ver. 6. — Beauty; rather, ghry. like 
harts that find no pasture ; and therefore 
have no strength left to &;e. An allusion 
to the atlempttd flight of Zedekiah and his 
companions (Jer. xxxix, 4, 5). 

Ver. 7. — Remembered ; rather, remem- 
bereth. Miseries. The Hebrew is diffi- 
oult, and perhaps means wanderings. At 
her sabbaths; rather, at her extinguishment. 
The word has nothing to do with the sab- 
baths ; indeod, a reference to these would 
have been rather misplaced ; it was no sub- 
ject of wonder to the Babylonians that the 
Jews celebrated a weekly day of rest, as 
th^ had one of their own (labattu). 

ver. 8. — Therefore she is removed ; rather, 
the is become an abomination (literally, an 
impurity; comp. Lev. xv. 19). The poet 
leaves out the preliminary clause, " there- 
fore she is grievously punished." It was 
the humiliation of Jerusalem, rather than 
her sin, which broufjlit upon her tlie con- 
tempt of her neighljours. The destruction 
of a city is often compared to the ill treiit- 
ment of a defenceless woman (Iga. xlvii. 3 ; 
Nah. til 5). 

Ver. 9. — She rememhereth not, etc. ; 
rather, >he thoughl not upon, etc. An allu- 
■ion to Isa. xlvii. 7. Lord, behold, etc. 
This ii the language in which the '• sigh " 
(ver. 8) finds expression. 

Ver. 10. — Her pleasant things; or, her 
freeious things ; that i», the treasures of the 



palaces of Jerusalem (2 Chron. xxxvi. 19), 
and still more those of the temple (2 Chron. 
xxxvi. 10); comp. Isa. Ixiv. 11). For she 
hath seen ; rather, yea, she hath seen. The 
heathen entered, etc. In Deut. xxiii. 3 only 
the Ammonites and Moabites are excluded 
from religious privileges ; but in Ezek. xliv. 9 
the prohibition is extended to all foreigners. 

Ver. 11. — All her people sigh, etc. The 
sufferings of Jerusalem did not come to an 
end at the capture of the city. Some think 
that this verse relates solely to the miserable 
survivors. This is possible ; at any rate, it 
includes the contemporaries of the writer. 
" Sigh " and " seek " are participles in the 
Hebrew. To relieve the soul ; literally, to 
bring batik the soul. The "soul," i.e. the 
principle of life, is conceived of as having 
for a time deserted the fiiinting frame. See, 
Lord, etc. Another piteous cry of Jerusa- 
lem, preparing the way for the second half 
of the elexy. 

Vers. 12 — 22. — The same subject; JeroM- 
lem the speaker. 

Ver. 12. — Is it nothing to yont The 
Hebrew is very difficult, and the translation 
therefore insecure. Keil, however, adopts 
a rendering very near tliat of the Autho- 
rized Version " (Cometh it) not unto you ? " 
t.e. " Do ye not heed it ? " Ewald supposes 
the phrase to be abbreviated from " Do I not 
call unto you?" (comp. Prov. viii. 4); but 
this would be a very harsh construction. 
The Septua'^int has Ot wphs u/xas ; the 
Targum, " 1 adjure you ; " the Vulgate, 

vos ; — all apparently pronouncing 2u in- 
stead of lo. At any rate, the object of the 
words is to heighten the force of the appeal 
which follows. 

Ver. 13.— Three figures — fire, a net, siok- 
noss, for the calamities which have come 
upon Jerusalem. From above ; i.e. from 
heaven. Spread a net for my feet, as though 

1 were a wild beast (comp. Jer. xviii. 22). 
Turned me back. Tlie consequence of being 
eutangled in the net was that he couhl go 
no further, but fell into the hands of his 
pursuers. 

Ver. 14. — Is bound . . . are wreathed. 
Tlie transgressions of Jerusalem are likened 
to a heavy yoke. So numerous are they 
that they are said to be " wreathed," or 
twisted together, like ropes. Into their 
hands. The Hebrew has simply " into 
hands ; " following a suggestion of the Sep- 
tuagint. Budde would read, "Into the 
hands of adversaries." 

Ver. 15. — Hath trodden under foot , 
rattier, Iwih rejected; i.e. hath punished. 
Comp. Ps. oxix. 118, 119, where "thou re- 
jectest [same verb us here] all them that 
wander from thy statutes" is followed by 
"thou puttest away all the ungodly of the 
earth like dross." Hath called an assembly ; 



OH. 1. 1—22.] 



THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 



rather, Kath proclaimed a festival. When 
uehoTali Bummons the instruments of hia 
vengeance, the prophels dopcribe it as the 
" proclaiming a festival." The Persians oi' 
Chaldeans, as the case may be, obey tho 
summons with a holy glee, and destroy the 
enemies of the true God (comp. Isa, xiii. 3). 
Hath trodden, etc. ; rather, hath trodden the 
winepress for (i.e. to the ruin of) the virgin 
(laughter of Zion. The poet carries on the 
figure of the festival. It is a vintage which 
is to be celebrated, such a vintage as is de- 
scribed in Isa. Ixiii. 3 (comp. Joel iii. 13). 
The choicest youth of Judah are to be cut 
off like giapes from the vine. " Virgin 
daughter " is a frequent figure to express 
inviolate security (so Jer. xiv. 17). 

Ver. 16.— For these thinsrs, etc. After the 
reflections of vers. 13— 15, the poet gives 
vent anew to his bitter grief. Mine eye, 
mine eye. A repetition quite in Jeremiah's 
manner ; comp. Jer. iv. 19 ; vi. 14 (repeated 
viil. 11); xxii. 29; xxiii. 25. The Septua- 
gint and Vulgate, however, have "mine 
eye" only once. Relieve my sonl (see on 
ver. 11). 

Ver. 17. — Again the poet passes into the 
tone of reflection, thus relieving the strain 
upon the feelings of the reader. Spreadeth 
forth her hands. Tlie gesture of suppli- 
cation and entreaty (comp. Ps. xxviii. 2 ; 
Ixiii. i ; Isa. Ixv. 2). That his adversaries, 
etc. ; rather, those who are about him are 
his adversaries. Tlie neighbouring peoples, 
who ought to be sympathetic and friendly, 
gloat over the spectacle of his calamities. 
They both hate and (comp. ver. 8) despise 
thef fallen city. 

Yei. 18. — People ; tender, peoples. 



Ver. 19. — For my loTeis; render, (o mj 
lovers (see on ver. 2). 

Ver. 20. — My bowels. The vital parts, 
especially the heart, as the seat of the 
affi ctions, like (nTh.i.yxva. Are troubled ; 
literally, are made to boil. So Job xxx. 27, 
"My l)Owels boil" (a different word, how- 
ever). Is turned; or, turns itself ; i.e. palpi 
taten violently. At home there is as death 
So Jtr. ix. 21, " For death is come up into 
our windows, and is entered into our palaces." 
By "death," when distinguished, as here, 
from " the sword," pestilence is meant ; se 
e.g. in Jer. xv. 2 ; xliii. 11. But the poet 
says here, not that " there is death," but 
merely " as death," i.e. a mild form of pesti- 
lence, not the famine-typhus itself. Or, per- 
haps, he means "every form of death" 
(Virgil's "pluiima mortis imago"). 

Ver. 21. — Thon wUt bring. The Hebrew 
has, " 'J'hou hast brought ; " it is the perfect 
of prophetic certitude, which represents an 
event certainly foreseen as if it had already 
taken place. Ewald, however, takes this ti> 
be the precative, a variety of the perfect 
which certainly exists in Arabic, but has 
not been quite satisfactorily shown to exist 
in Hebrew (see Driver, ' Hebrew Tenses,' § 
20 [13]). The day that thou hast called; 
i.e. foretold by the prophets (comp. Jer. xxv 
17 — 26). But very probably we should 
read, with the Septuagint, " Thou wilt bring 
the day ; thou wilt call the fit time." 

Ver. 22. — For my sighs are many. This 
is not mentioned as the reason why God 
should punish Jerusalem's enemies ; we 
ought rather to understand, either from 
ver. 20, "Behold, my distress;" w simply, 
Deliver mo." 



HOMILBTICa. 

Ver. 1. The uHitary eiiy. The first elegy on the desolation of JemNlem opens 

with a lament over her solitariness, widowhood, and humiliation. 

I. The solitariness. 1. How it is to he measured. (1) By the natwe of the place. 
It is a city that is solitary. A deserted town strikes us as more lonely than the most 
dreary moor. We do not expect people in a wilderness ; we look for them in a city. 
Streets which never echo to a footfall, windows which never brighten vpith a face, doors 
which are never opened, houses, palaces, shops, factories, markets, all silent and empty, 
—this is indeed a picture of desolation. It is contrary to experience, expectation, and 
purpose. (2) By the former condition of the place. It used to be populous. Jerusalem 
was no sleepy old provincial town, but a busy capital. Crowds would throng the streets, 
little children play, and old men stand gossiping at the corners, and hucksters set up 
their stalls, where now no live creature is to be seen, save, perhaps, a few lean dogs 
prowling after their unclean food. The contrast of the past thus aggravates the distress 
of the present. 2. Why it is most sad. The loss of men is the great trouble. Fine build- 
ings have been thrown down, marble statues broken, gold and precious stones stolen. 
But these are not the worst evils. Had all remained untouched, still the trouble would 
have been heart-rending. The people are gone 1 Chicago rises out of her ashes in greater 
splendour because her people remain. Jerusalem is most desolate because her citizens 
have been carried into captivity. The strength of a city is its population. The power 



THE LAMENTATIOilS QW JBKEMIAH. [.oii- i- i— 2^-. 



of a nation is in its people. The vigour of a Ohnrch is in its membersliip. A splendid 
catliedral, witli a rich full service, but no con°;regation, fails in comparison with the 
humeliest mixsion, if the lattvr gathers the people. Doctrine may be sound and "meani 
uf ^race " abundant, yet we shall not advance except as we hold the people. 

II. Widowhood. Unintentinnally and perhaps unconsciously, the inspired poet aies 
un illnslraliuD to describe the desolate cundiiion of Jerusalem, which may serve as a 
hint of her deeper distress. " She is become as a widow." Who had been her husband ? 
The favoured city used to be regarded as the mystic bride of the Eternal. She had 
uftea been accused of unfaithfulness to her marriage vows. Kow the faithless wife is 
punished by becoming the miserable widow. Jerusal( m loses the presence and favour 
uf Qod. It is said that the Shechinah was seen there no more. The greatest loss is to 
be bereft of God. Tlioy who are unfaithful to God will find that he will forsake tham. 
Many would retain the privilege of blessings from God, while renouncing the obligation 
uf fidelity to God. The unfaithful wife is loth to lose the support and position con- 
tributed to her by her hnsliaml. But this inconsistency cannot be allowed. Christ the 
Bridegroom remains faiiliful. But if his bride, the Church, dishonours his Name, she 
will lose her Lord and become as a widow. 

IIL Humiliation. The city had been the princess among the provinces. She now 

not only loses her dependencies ; she loses her own independence; she becomes a vassal 

ti) a strange city. Humiliation will be the peculiar punishment of the great who abuse 

heir iBnk. The doom of pride will be shame. Few troubles are more galling than to 

I tve to come duwn openly in the sight of those over whom a certain superiority had 

leen maintained. 1. Loss of position and character results in loss of influence. When 

he Church falls, her power over the world will disappear. Christian elevation of 

haracter is essential to Christian influence among men. 2. Loss of power entails loss 

flibeirty. Jerusalem weakenid and conquered becomes a vassaL Only the strong can 

le free. Spiritual failings lead to the loss of spiritual liberty. 3. When the Church 

ease* to influence the world she will hecorrte subject to the world. The fallen suzerain 

l)ccomes a vassal. The Church can only retain her liberty by maintaining her supre- 

iiacy. This is the great truth the abuse of which has led to the monstrous pretensions 

■ it Kome. The lawful supremacy of the Church must be spiritual, and this may be lost 

md the Church suhject to the spirit of the world, even while she is greedily grasping 

after temporal power, perhaps just because she does hanker after this lower advautage, 

Ver. t. — Comfortless. In her distress Jerusalem looks for comfort to those neigh- 
bouring nations which flattered her during her prosperity and behaved then as " lovers ; " 
but she is disappointed in finding that they all desert her in the hour of her need. 

I. It is natural to seek for comfort in ADVEBSirV FROM THE FRIENDSHIPS OF 

PROSPEBmr. Jerusalem had her " lovers." This fact throws a significant light on the 
statement that she had " become as a widow " (ver. 1). What shame that she, the wife 
of the Eternal, should have to be spoken to of " lovers " ! But having them she must 
find her comfort in them. She dare not look to her husband for comfort. In plainer 
language, the Jews had adopted the idolatry of neighbouring nations as well as renounced 
the exclusive and retiring position which had been required of them by their Goi It 
'vas fitting that they should find their consolation from the Babylonian invasion in 
these foreign connections and religions. If we let our business, our pleasure, our 
umbition, or any other earthly thing usurp the place of God in our hearts, the time will 
come when we shall have to try what help we can get in trouble from our idoL 

II. Unworthy connkctjons wili. afford no comfort in times of trouble. The 
lovers are for pleasure ; adversity dismisses them. How bitter is the disappointment! how 
mortifying is the revelation I The true husband could have been depended on, but the 
bad lovers for whom he was forsaken coldly turn from the piteous pleading of the sufferer. 
Thus must it be with every one who forsakes the one Friend and Comforter. No other 
balm of Gilead will heal the broken heart. What can the pleasures of society say to 
one who has failed and disgraced himself? What consolation can a materialistic 
philosophy whi'<per in the ears of the mourner by the grave? How will the science cf 
the history of religion smooth ti e pillow uf the dying man? 

HI. 'J'he last drop of the bitter cup is to be comfortless. Mere formal consoling 
to • weariness when it is not an insult to grief. But the comfort of sympathy, the 



•H.1,1— 22.J THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. » 

•oothing of love, and the cheering of congenial companionship are Divine remedies foi 
sorrow. They are lights in the gloom, though they do not hring the day ; gentle hands 
to wiiie away the tears, the flowing of which they may not be able to stanch. The 
must desolate picture is that of one like Jerusalem in this elegy, weeping sore in the 
night, with no friendly ray to break the darkness, and no one to remove the tears that 
fall upon the cheeks unheeded and neglected, crying for comfort only to the pitiless 
silence. 1. Let us learn to dwell in faithfulness with God, that we may enjoy his 
unfailing sympathy. 2. Let us extend hands of brotherly compassion to the sorrowing, 
that, whatever be the grief, its last anguish may be spared ; and then, through human 
comfort, we may lead up to the Divine consolations. 

Ver. 4. — The abandoned /easts. Jerusalem was the religious centre of the nation. 
Thither the tribes came up to present themselves before the Lord. Great assemblies 
and joyous feasts were held there for the benefit of all the Jews. Bat after tha 
Babylonian destruction all this was suspended. None now came to the solemn feasts. 
The high-roads which were wont to be thronged with pilgrims mourn for the lack of 
travellers ; the gates through which they used to press are unused ; priests sigh with 
weariness and distress, having no glad offerings to present ; and the virgins who led th« 
song and dance in honour of God are smitten with afSiction. 

I. It IS A CALAMITY FOB PUBLIC woBSHip TO 0EA8B. Some regard public worship as 
an onerous duty and others as a superfluous infliction. But they who enter into the 
privileges of it heartily and spiritually know that it is a boon to the worshipper. As 
the sabbath is made for man, so also is the institution of worship. To be deprived of it 
is to suffer loss. 1. The lo3s of the joy of worship. There is a gladness in expressing love 
to earthly friends which should be found in the outpouring of our devotion to God. To 
mingle with the song of the angels is to taste the joy of the angels. 2. The loss of the 
eltvating influence of worship. The soul rises on the wings of its own prayer. Worship 
is aspiration, and aspiration elevates. If we never worship we stagnate in worldliness. 
True worship is spiritual and may be enjoyed most in private. But public worship 
greatly helps this spiritual worship with most people. 3. The loss of the social 
influence of worship. Public worship affords mutual help in worship. Numbers giv« 
warmth and life to it. ^ 

II. It IS A CALAMITY FOB JOYOUS FESTIVALS TO CEA8B. The loSS IS twofold. 1. The 

loss of the joy itself. The gladness <if worship is no small part of the brightness of • 
devout man's life. Rob him of this, and you darken his sky. There are clouds 
enough ; we cannot afford to lose the sunlight which pierces and sometimes illumines 
them. 2. The loss of the influence of the joy. (1) This joy purifies. It keeps out 
unholy pleasures by satisfying the soul with its own blessedness. (2) This joy 
strengthens. In gladness we can serve God most earnestly. If, then, the unavoidable 
loss of joyous exercises of religion is a calamity, how great is the error of those who 
voluntarily convert religion into a thing of gloom 1 

III. It is A CALAMITY FOB BBLIGI0U8 INTBBC0UE8E BETWEEN MEN TO CEASE. The 

festival was an occasion for the meeting of Jews from all quarters. Townsmen met 
countrymen. Herdsmen from the south met agriculturists from the north. When 
this assembly was interrupted, the people suffered in many respects. 1. The loss of 
brotherly association. We are tempted to forget our brethren if we cease to see them. 
Solitary Christians tend to become selfish Christians. Brotherly sympathy is fostered 
by brother-fellowship. 2. The loss of mutv<d stimulus. The strong would urge on 
the weak, and the more spiritual inspire the less spiritnal. There were prophets in 
these assemblies. 3. The loss of the breadth of variety. We become narrow by 
isolation. Intercourse broadens us. Christians should seek opportunities to meet 
with their fellow-Christians, to gain width and liberality of view. 

Ver. 6. — Btir beauty departed from Zion. L Zion had a beauty of heb own. The 
dwellings of Zion shone splendid in cedar and gold. A softer beauty was shed over 
her from old memories and tender associations. The spiritual Zion has her beauty. It 
is not the magnificence of marble columns and gilded decorations. The beauty of Zion 
is the beauty of her worship and life. 1. The beauty of holiness. Purity is beautiful 
as imparity is ugly. This high spiritual loveliness is like the glory of God. 2. Tk4 



« THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEEBMIAH. [oa 1. 1— 22 

htauty of love. Zion was the place where the tribes assembled. Here all jealouaiei 
were to be laid aside and all quarrels healed. What is more beautiful than cuncesiion 
and forgiveness ? This beauty should characterize the Church of Christ. " Behold, 
how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity 1 " etc. (Ps. 
cxxxiii.), 3. The beauty of joy. Zion was the centre of festive gatherings. The 
sacred hill used to echo with shouts of gladness ; it was jnlivened with the timbrel and 
song of happy maidens. The joy of Divine grace imparts a sweetness to the Tery 
countenance of the faithful servant of God. 

II. Zion lost heb beauty. The fine city was sacked by ruthless soldiers; the 
splendid edifices rifled or fired ; the pomp and pageantry dissipated by sword and axe. 
But the higher beauty of Zion was also lost, aud lost before she was robbed of her 
external grandeur. Her holiness was corrupted. Sin destroys the spiritual beauty of 
the Christian. His white priestly' garments are defiled when be descends into the 
mire of moral degradation. It is not only that sin will be visited with certain definite 
pains and penalties. Before that happens there is an indescribable loss in the tarnished 
character and marred beauty of the soul which, to one who is awake to the evil condition 
into which he has fallen, must be a shame and grief. 

III. The loss of the beauty of Zion was a mouenful calamity. This beauty is 
no idle ornament, to be put off and on at the caprice of the wearer and for objects of 
idle display. It is the pledge of her King's favour, the inspiration of her own best life, 
and the secret of her influence. 1. Health is lost. As when the sunlight which flashes 
on silvery lakes and mountain snows fades away, the chills and mists of night creep 
over the valley, so, when the glory of God departs from a soul, coldni'ss, darkness, and 
death take its place. 2. Influence is lost. Christians are to be the light of the world. 
Losing their brightness, they cease to draw others to Christ. The fair countenance of 
the bride of Christ wins many guests to the wedding feast. Let her see that it ia not 
marred, lest her Lord be dishonoured. 

Ver. 7. — Pleamnt things in the dayt of old. I. In times op tboublb we oau. w 
MIND THE pleasant thinos IN THE DAYS OF OLD. 1. 2%ere have been pleasant thingt 
in the days of old. Pew lives, if any, are wholly joyless from cradle to grave. There 
are rifts in the clouds of the darkest lot. Indeed, for most of us, the pleasant things 
far outnumber the painful. 2. These pleasant things are too often undervalued when 
in our possession. The fact that they may become subjects of fond and sad regret 
should lead us to take more account of them while they are with us. Let us not add 
to the lamentations of the loss of them remorse for an ungrateful and depreciatory 
treatment of them. 3. Trauhle calls up the recollection of these pleasant things. (1) It 
does this because it leads to reflection. We may observe a great contrast between the 
intellectual effects of joy and sorrow. Joy is usually thoughtless, sorrow meditative. 
When joy does stimulate the intellect, it urges it to look forward and inspires hope ; 
but sorrow turns its gaze backward and contemplates the past. 2. It does this by the 
foiee of contrast. One experience suggests the thought of its opposite. Darkness makes 
us dream of light, silence of music, pain of joy. 4. Such recollections are likely to 
exaggerate the pleasantness of the past. Memory is not an even mirror. It is warped 
by prejudice and emotion. When we regret the loss of past happiness, we exalt that 
happiness in memory above what it ever was in experience. Unconsciously we drop 
the vexations out of notice. We remember the fine view, and forget the weary climl. 
that preceded the enjoyment of it. The roses of a regretful memory have no thorns. 
The soft evening light's spread a glamour over the past which gilds its plain features 
and softens its rugged form and hides its ugly defects in a delicious haze of dreamy 
melancholy. 

II. BeOOLLEOTIONB of pleasant THINGS IN THE DAYS OF OLD CXAOOEBATS THB 

DISTRESS OF TIMES OF TROUBLE. On the whole, it may be, life is prosperous. The 
balance is in favour of the pleasant things. But we cannot take life in the lump. We 
consume it piecemeal ; and that portion which is with us at each moment is for us the 
life itself^the whole life. Our real living is in the present. It is true that " we look 
before and after," and hope may greatly lighten the burden of the present, bat only 
by coming :nto the present as the twilight of dawn enters the wurld before lanrise — a 
re*I light. L This fact helps us to «ee a more even equalizing qf loti than i§ tMmu fU 



oa. 1.1—22.4 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEI^EMIAH. T 

first. If man is born to trouble, he who seems at one time to have an unfair advantage 
will have to pay for it by the keener suffering of bis adversity when that comes. 
2. This fact should warn its against the folly of enjoying the present without prepctring 
for the future. The more heartily we enjoy earthly treasures the worse will be our 
distress if we have no treasure in heaven to inherit. 3. It is foolish to yield to fond 
regrets of the pleasant things in the days of old. The past cannot be recalled. Let it 
die. The future is ours. The west will not brighten again with a return of the fading 
glow of sunset, but a new day will break in the east. 4. We may call to mind the 
happy things in days of old, not to increase our present distress, hut to encourage hope. 
The sun did shine, then it may shine again. God is the same now as ever. If he 
blessed in the past he can bless in the futuie. Former mercies encourage us to hope 
for better things still to come. 

Ver. 12. — Sorrow unequalled, yet unheeded. Jerusalem sits alone in her unparalleled 
grief, and the bitterness of it is intensified by the pitiless disregard of spectators. 
Bedouins of the desert pitch their tents in sight of her ruined towers, and merchants 
passing north and south see her deserted streets, and yet all gaze unmoved at the 
heart-rending picture. 

I. The sorrow was unequalled. 1. Never was city more favoured than Jerusalem. 
She was the chosen seat of Divine grace. In her temple stood God's mercy-seat. High 
privileges of revelation and spiritual blessings descended on her sons and daughters. 
The loss of these privileges brought a distress that men who had never enjoyed them 
could not reel. They who have tasted of the heavenly gift will find the outer darkness 
more terrible than those who have had no anticipation of the joys of the wedding feast. 
Apostate Christians will suffer agonies which the heathen and godless will not have to 
endure. 2. Never was city more loved than Jerusalem. This city of sacred memories 
and tender associations was dear to the hearts of her inhabitants. Her overthrow 
brought a grief that was proportionate to this love. The most fatal wound is one 
aimed at the heart. We are pained most cruelly when we are wounded in affection. 
What grief can be greater than that of parents for ruined children, and especially when 
the parents' sin has been the children's temptation ? 3. Never was city more visited 
by Divine wrath than Jerusalem. Here is the secret of her deepest trouble. She is 
afflicted in the day of God's fierce anger. God is most angry with her because she has 
sinued against most light, most ungratefully, and most rebelliously. 

IL The sorrow was unheeded. It would be thought that such unequalled grief 
would arrest the attention of the most hasty and strike pity into the hardest. But no ; 
it seems that all will pass by with cold and stony indifference. 1. Note the causes of 
this indifference. (1) Callousness. Men look with the eye who do not feel with the 
heart. The very sight of misery often encountered hardens men's sensibilities. (2) 
Selfishness. People are self-absorbed. Sympathy requires effort, attention, self-renun- 
ciation. It costs more than the selfish will give. (3) Contempt. The worst trouble 
of Jerusalem was her humiliation. But humiliation leads to contempt. Now, it is 
hard to pity those who are despised. 2. Consider the exceptions to this indifference. 

(1) Oood Samaritans. Thank God, such exist, though no synagogue honours them. 
One such is worth scores of priests and Levites who "pass by on the other side." 

(2) Tlie Divine compassion. The sufferer looks down and looks around him and sees 
no pity. If he will look up, he will see that the very Being who smote in righteous 
wrath is waiting to heal in merciful forgiveness (Hosea vi. 1). 

In conclusion, a parallel may be drawn between the sorrow of Christ and that of 
Jerusalem. The text cannot be understood to be written of our Lord. But it may 
illustrate that sorrow which far surpassed all other human grief. To how many is it 
as nothing I They pass the cross as Arabs and Phoenicians passed Jerusalem in her 
ruin. Yet, is It nothing to them ? (1) Their sins caused Christ's sorrow. (2) Christ's 
sorrow can save their souls. ^") Christ'" sorrow calls, not for pity, but for gratitude 
and faith. 

Vers. 13, 14. — Fourfold trouble from Qod. I. The trouble is from God. This ii 
the characteristic of it that the writer dwells upon with most concern. 1. We should 
recognite the Divine origin of trouble. We miss the meaning and purpose of it if w« d« 



THE LAMENTATIONS Oi' JEREIUAH, Loh. 1 1— 22 



not see the hand that sends it. Earthly means may be used, as the King of Babylon 
was the agent for the destruction of Jerusalem. But all puuishmeut for sin is inflicted 
by the Judge of sin. 2. We should remember that trouble from Qod is most terrible 
trouble. It springs from that most fierce anger, the anger of outraged love. It is 
directed by almighty power and cannot be evaded or resisted. It stups the alleviation 
of the best consolations by flowing from the same source from which those consolations 
would come. 3. We should observe the purpose of trouble from Qod. He doth not 
willingly afdict. If he sends distress it is for an object. What is that object ? It may 
be to punish sin ; then let us search out the sin and repent of it. It may be to wean 
us from earth ; then let us cease from the idolatry of carnal things. It may be to 
teach us our weakness ; then let us learn humility in our trouble. It may be to train 
us in patience and faith and spirituality ; then let these graces have their perfect 
work. 

II. The TBonBLG is fourfold. It is various in form, touching one in one way and 
another most in a different way. But for each it is complex. \. Itbwnsasfire. At once 
it is felt to be fierce, poignant, and consumino;. Thus does Grod seek to bum the chaff out 
of us. 2. It catches our feet like a net. God arrests the headlong career of folly with 
the net of trouble. It flings the heedless man to the ground, entangles his feet, and 
vexes his feelings. But it saves him from rushing on to his ruin. We may thank 
God for the distresses which stop our course when that runs in a wrong; direction. 3. 
It gives us pain and faintness like a sickness. Thus are we humbled and subdued. 
The faintness of heart that sorrow brings is the best remedy for headstrong self-will 
and pride. 4. It burdens like a yoke. The transgressions bound and wreathed by the 
hand of God press upon the neck of the guilty. Several points in the image of a yoke 
may be obsei ved. (1) It is a weight oppressing and wearying ; (2) it is a constraint, 
hiudering free action and imposing irksome conditions of motion; (3) it is connectec 
with other impediments ; (4) it presses very close upon our person ; (5) it is carried 
about with us wherever we go, burdening us in all scenes and all circumstances ; and 
(6) it is so " bound" and " wreathed" that it cannot be shaken off. Nevertheless, this 
trouble is sent for our good. It will be removed in due time if we repent and seek the 
grace of God in Christ. After it has gone, the relief from the distress of it will heighten 
the enjoyment of forgiveness. 

Ver. 18. — The righteousness of Ood confessed. I. The eighteousness of God as a 
FACT. 1. What it is. In its fulness and breadth it is the goodness of God, his sinless- 
ness, his pure and holy character. But it has characteristics of more special impor- 
tance. Eighteousness in God is conformity with truth, justice, and honour. It means 
that God has no subtle double-dealing, but acts in perfect integrity. He moves in 
straight lines. Purtlier, it means that God is fair to all, doing, if not the same thing to 
each, which would often be unjust, that which is fitting for every one. It also includes 
God's regard for the standard of right in his government, his care to make his creatures 
righteous, and his determination to check all unrighteousness. 2. Why we are to 
believe in it. It is declared most forcibly by those who know Otoi best. Sceptical 
strangers may donbt it ; but they who have entered into the presence of God, whether 
in holiness or in inspiration, alike agree in tesiifying to the righteousness of God, The 
deeper our Christian experience the more shall we be brought to admit this great truth. 

II. The righteousness of God hidden under a cloud. There are times when it 
is hard to say from our hearts, " The Lord is righteous." Doubts and difficulties should 
be boldly faced, for God cares for no lip-service of unbelieving flatterers. 1, Trouble 
darkens our vision of the righteousness of Ood. We fail to see the object of the storm 
while the darkness of it lowers over us. It seems to be greater than it is, and more 
than just, because we cannot take a fair view of it. 2. Our own trouble seems to be out 
of proportion to that of other people. We feel the full weight of our own burden ; our 
neighbour's burden is seen at a distance, and then only seen, not felt In her grief Jeru- 
salem feels that she is visited with a strange pre-eminence of sorrow. Never was sorrow 
equal to hers (see ver. 12). This appears to be unjust. 8. Our trouble looks more than 
w deserve. So we think till we see our sin. To the impenitent God must often seem 
unjust. 4. Qod has many purposes in sorrow that are unknown to u$. Therefore we 
fail to see the justice of the blow. But part of the discipline of trouble depends on our 



CH.L1— 22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEBEMIAH. « 

ignoraace of its end. If we knew whither it was leading us we should not be led. 
Darkness is necessary for the training of faith. 

III. The BIQHTE0D8NESS OP GoD CONFESSED. This is grand ! In the midst of wailin<; 
and weeping Jerusalem confesses that the hand that dealt the blow was right. 1. 
Faith is requisite for this confession. The righteousness cannot be seen ; it is still 
shrouded in darkness. Bat faith holds to it. Thus we must use in the darkness the 
knowledge which we have won in the light. 2. Penitence is also necessary for this con- 
fession. When we confess our guilt we are ready to confess God's righteousness, but 
not till then. Even Job had to abhor himself and repent in dust and ashes in order to 
see the righteousness of God (Job xlii. 6). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES, 

Vers. 1, i.—Tht contrasts of adversity. The key-note of this strain of sorrow, this 
poetical and pathetic dirge, is struck in the opening words of the composition. The 
heart of the prophet laments over the captured and ruined city. How natural that the 
prtsent should recall the pastl Jerusalem, now in the hands of the Ctialdeans, was 
once, in the days of David and of Solomon, the scene of glory and the seat of empire, 
the joy of the whole earth. So much the sadder is the contrast, the deeper the fall, 
the bitterer the cup of woe. 

L The once populous city is solitaby. Not the walls, the streets, the palaces, the 
temples, but the inhabitauts, are the true strength and glory of a city. Formerly Jeru- 
salem was thronged with citizens who took pride in her majesty, of sojourners who 
came to gaze with wonder and admiration upon her splendours. Now her population 
has been reduced by famine, by exile, by war; and silence is in her streets. 

II. The city once a fbincess is tbibutary. The time was when other cities 
acknowledged her sway, paid her their tribute, sent her of their produce and of the 
labour of their sons. Now she is reduced to subjection, yields her treasure to the foe, 
and the toil of her children is for the profit of the alien. 

III. The city that once was joyful weeps. Mirth and music have given place to 
mourning, lamentation, find woe. No longer are the sound of the viol and the harp, the 
voice of the bridegroom and the bride, heard in her dwellings. They resound with the 
cries of grief and anguish. She weepeth in the night, and her tears are on her cheek. 

rV. The city once the spouse of the Lobd is widowed. To Jerusalem it had 
been said, " Thy Maker is thy Husband I " But because of her unfaithfulness and 
apostasy the Lord has forsaken her ; she is become as a widow, unprotected, deserted, 
solitary, and comfortless. 

v. liB city once kioh in allies and helpers 18 UNFRIENDED. Not Only is she 
fe«ble within, she is friendless without. In prosperous days neighbouring nations 
somght her good will and alliance, and were forward with their offers of friendship and 
of help. All this is of the past ; those who vowed faithfulness have proved treacherous, 
and have became the enemies of Judaea in the es.tremity of her desolation, forsaking, 
and woe. — ^T. 

Ver. 4. — The decline of national religion. Nowhere has the great truth of the close 
dependence of national prosperity upon national religion been more plainly and empha- 
tically taught than in the writings of the Hebrew prophets. Their spiritual insight 
detected the true cause of national degradation. Whoever looks below the surface may 
see that the decline and fall of nations may usually be traced to spiritual causes, to the 
loss of any hold upon eternal principles of righteousness and piety. 

I. The open symptoms of the decline of a ration's religion. Those here men- 
tioned are in circumstances and colour local and temporary ; they were determined, as a 
matter of course, by what was peculiar to the religion of the country and of the day. 
1. The roads of Zion are forsaken. There is no concourse upon the roads leading up to 
the metropolis, as was the case in the days of Judah's prosperity. 2. The gates are 
deserted and unentered. There was a time when the busy population passed to and fro, 
when the people gathered together at the gates to discuss the news of the iay, the 
•fibin of the city, when the royal processions passed in splendour througb the gates 



10 THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. [ch.i.1— 2a 

leading to the country. It is now so no longer. 3. The festivals are unfrequented. 
.''ormerly, when the great and sacred national feasts were being held, multitudes oi 
Israelites attended these holy and welcome assemblies to share in the pious mirth, the 
cheering reminiscences, the fraternal fellowship, distinctive of such solemn and joyous 
occasions. But now there are none to celebrate the mercies of Jehovah, none to fulfil 
the snored rites. To the religious heart the change is not only afflicting, it is crushing. 
4. The ministers of religion are left to mourn. The priests who are left, if permitted to 
fulfil their ofBce, do so under the most depressing influences ; and no longer are there 
virgins to rejoice in the dance. The picture is painted in the darkest, saddest colours. 
We feel, as we enter into the prophet's lamentations, how dreary and hopeless is the 
state of that nation which God gives over to its foes. 

II. The cause of the declinb: of a nation's beligion. This ever begins in spiritual 
unfaithfulness and defections. The external observances of religion may be kept up 
for a season, but this may be only from custom' and tradition. The body does not at 
once decay when the spirit has forsaken it. To forget God, to deny his Word, to 
break his laws, to forsake his mercy-seat, — such are the steps by which a nation's 
decline is most surely commenced, by which a nation's ruin is most surely anticipated. 

III. The eemedt fob the decline of a nation's eeliqion. 1. Confession. 2. 
Repentance, 3. Prayer for pardon and acceptance. 4. Resolution to obey the Lord, 
and again to reverence what is holy and to do what is right. 6. The xaaon of all 
classes, rulers and subjects, priests and people, old and young, in a national reforma- 
tion.— T. 

Ver. 7. — Mournful memories. The recollection of the past may be the occasion of 
the highest joy or of the profoundest sorrow. To remember former happiness is one of 
the great pleasures of human life, if that happiness did but lead on to its own con- 
tinuance and increase. The first beginnings of a delightful friendship, the first steps 
of a distinguished career, are remembered by the prosperous and happy with satisfaction 
and joy. It is otherwise with the memory of a morning of brightness which soon 
slouded, and which was followed by storms and darkness. In the text the anguish of 
Jerusalem is pictured as intensified by the recollection of bygone felicity. 

I. The pebsbnt calamity excites by contbast the becolleotion of fbosfebous 
TIMES. L Affliction, hom^lessness, and misery are the present lot of Jerusalem. The 
city is in the hands of the enemy. The people have no longer a home which they can 
cling to, but face the prospect of exile, destitution, and vagrancy. 2. Helplessness, In 
times of prosperity neighbours were eager to offer aid which was not needed ; in these 
times of adversity no friendly proffer of help is heard. 3. Mockery. The Jews are 
a people from the first separated from surrounding nations by their laws, their 
customs, their religious observances. As an intensely religious people, they have erer 
set then- hearts upon tlieir revelation, upon the God of their fathers and his ordinances. 
Consequently they are most easily and most deeply wounded in their religious suscepti- 
bilities. Strange that a nation condemned to defeat and capture for its unfaithfulness 
to Jehovah should yet observe the appointed salibaths, and keenly feel the ridicule and 
the contempt incurred by such observance I Her adversaries mocked her sabbaths. 

II. The becollection of prospeboub times enhances the anguish of fbesemt 
ADVEBSITY. Time has been when Jerusalem, her monarch, citizens, and surrounding 
population have enjoyed peace, plenty, respect from other nations, liberty of worship, 
and joyful solemnities. The force of contrast makes the memory of such time bitter 
and distressing. Their "crown of sorrow is remembering happier things." 

Application. Let present privileges and prosperity be so used that the memory M 
them may never occasion bitter regret and misery. — ^T. 

Ter. 10. — Spoliation and profanation. The presence of a foreign foe in its capital 
has always been regarded, and is still regarded, as among the heaviest calamities that 
can befall a nation. In our own times, a neighbouring nation has been required to 
endure this humiliation and indignity, shocking its patriotism and its pride. We can 
understand how bitter must have been the anguish of the Jews when the Chaldean 
hosts patrolled their city, quartered themselves upon its inhabitants, appropriated it« 
wealth, and violated the sanctity of its temple. 



OH. 1. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 11 

L Thb possebsionb or thb Jkws webb foboiblt afpbopbiatbd bt tbeib aster- 
babies. The greed of the conqueror has ever been the theme of satire and reproach. Va 
victit I " Woe to the conquered 1 " is an old proverb, founded upon an older propensity of 
human nature in its military condition. The pleasant and desirable things of a city ar( 
the spoil of the conqueror. It was so when the Chaldeans entered Jerudalem, sacked 
the city, and laid their hands upon whatever pleased their fancy. 

II. Thk holt house of Jerusalem was sacrileqiouslt abused bt the heathen 
JONQUXBOBS. The temples of their gods are always the object of a nation's reverence 
and sometimes of affection. But the Jews had especial reason for venerating their 
sanctuary; it was the scene of their sacrifices and offerings, the depository of their 
oracles, the spot where the Sheohinah-glory was displayed. The more sacred portion 
of the edifice was reserved for the priests ; even the devout Jews were not sufl"ered to 
enter these consecrated precincts. What, then, must have been the disgust, the horror, 
with which the pious contemporaries of Jeremiah, and especially the prophet himself, 
witnessed the profanation of the sanctuary, as the Chaldean soldiers polluted it with 
their heathen presence and speech I Their feelings were injured in the most susceptible 
part of their nature. 

Application. Retribution is not an accident ; neither is it the mere outworking of 
natural laws. There is Divine providence superintending it ; it has a meaning, for it 
witnesses to human responsibility and sin ; it has a purpose, for it summons to repent- 
ance and newness of life. — T. 

Ver. 12. — Unparalleled woe. The prophecy here rises into poetry. The captured and 
afflicted city is personified. Like a woman bereaved and desolate and lonely, bewail- 
ing her misfortunes, and pouring out the anguish of her heart, Jerusalem sits in her 
solitary desolation and contempt, and calls upon bystanders to remark her sad condition, 
and to offer their sympathy to unequalled anguish. 

L The consciousness of sorbow, desolation, and shams. How extreme ia the 
distress and humiliation here depicted is apparent from the fact that this language has 
been attributed to our Divine Saviour when hanging upon the cross of Calvary. If a 
city never endured sorrow like that of Jerusalem, certainly no human being ever 
experienced agonies so piercing as those which the Captain of our salvation wiSingly 
bore for our sake when he gave his life a ransom for many. 

** All ye that pass by. 

To the Saviour draw nigh ; 
To you is it nothing that Jesus should die,f 

For sins not his own 

He died to atone ; 
Was pain or was sorrow like his ever known ?" 

IL Thk admission that affliction is of Divine appointment, that n n 
CHA8TIBEMENT. When Jerusalem came to herself she could not fail to recognize a 
Divine hand in the miseries which befell her. The scourge was the army of the Chal- 
deans, but the hand was the righteous and retributive hand of the Eternal. It is too 
common for those who are in trouble to murmur agaiust Providence, to exclaim against 
the injustice of iirovidential appointments. Yet true wisdom points out that the path 
of submission and resignation is the right path. When once the mind is brought to 
acknowledge, " It is the Lord ! " there is a prospect of spiritual improvement. 

IIL The cbt for stmpatht. My a striking figure of speech, Jerusalem is repre- 
sented as calling upon surrounding nations for interest and compassion. " Is it nothing to 
you? . . . Behold, and see 1 " Human sympathy is welcome in seasons of sorrow. Yet 
true help and deliverance must be from God, and from God alone. It is better to call 
upon the Lord than to^call upon man ; for he is both ready to sympathize and mighty 
save.— T. 

Ver. 18.—" The Lord is righteous." In nothing is the distinction more marked between 
religions of human origin and devibe and the religion which is the revelation of infinits 
Wisdom and Truth, than in the views they respectively afford of the moral character 
and attributes of Deity. Whilst the heathen freely attribute to their gods qualitiei 



12 THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. lOH. 1. 1— 22 

which are detestable in man, the Scriptures represent the Supreme as perfectly right- 
eous. The acknowledgment here made by Jeremiah was made by Moses, by Kehemiah, 
by Danirl, and iadeei) is virtually, if not yerbally, made by the writer of every book 
of the Old Testament. And the new covenant is based upon the revelation of a 
righteous Ruler and Father. 

I. GJoD IS RIGHTEOUS IN HI8 OHARACTEB, It is Certainly no progress, but a retro- 
gression towards i^snorance and barbarism, to represent tlie supreme Intelligence as 
destitute of moral attributes, exercised in the fulfilment of wi-ic and benevolent pur- 
poses. Affliction and anguish sometimes obscure men's judgment of the character and 
the dealings of God. It was not so with Jeremiah, who, in lamenting the troubles of 
his nation and of himself, did not distort the representation he gave to his countrymen 
of the attributes of the Most High. 

II. God is righteous in ras Law. The theocratic government of the Hebrews 
wag based upon the just character and the holy Law of the eternal King. To some 
minds the reflection might have seemed inappropriate and unwelcome in the depth of 
disaster. But a true prophet, a true religious teacher, feels bound to set forth the fact 
that the rule under which men live as individuals and as communities is a righteous 
rule ; the justice of the Law abides although that Law be broken, and although its 
penalties be incurred and endured. 

in. God is righteous in his retribution. This is probably the thought most 
prominent in the text. The fate of Jerusalem was a hard fate, a lamentable fate, but 
it was not an unjust fate. The people reaped as they had sown.. An onlooker might 
readily have acknowledged this, but it was a merit in a sufferer so to do. For the 
chastened to confess the justice of their chastisement is • proof that already the chas- 
tening is not in vain. — T. 

Ver. 20. — The cry of the contrite. Trouble, when it leads to an inquiry into its 
cause, when it prompts to submission and to repentance, proves a means of grace. The 
cry of suffering and distress may have no moral significance ; the cry of contrition and 
of sup])Iication is a sign of spiritual impression, and is a step towards spiritual recovery. 

I. The occasion of affliction and contrition. This is here specified, and the 
reality and severity are manifest. Within, «.e. in the homes and streets of the city, 
there is dearth ; without, i.e. in the field, there is destruction by the sword. Thus in 
two strokes national calamity and disaster are depicted. 

II. The tokens of affliction and contrition. Man's bodily nature is expres- 
sive of his spiritual state. Severe suffering and distress display themselves in organic, 
physical disturbance The prophet feels in his bodily frame the disturbing effects of 
the trials he has undergone, the lively sympathy he has experienced. 

III. The confession to which affliction and contrition lxad. Identifying 
the nation with himself, the prophet exclaims, " I have grievously rebelled." There 
is candour and justice, there is submissiveness, there is spiritual discernment, in this 
outspoken acknowledgment. Ko excuse, no extenuation, no complaint, is here, but 
a plain confession of ill desert. Rebels against a rightful authority, against a just, for- 
bearing Sovereign, what could the Jews expect but such humiliation as they actually 
experienced ? " If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive." 

IV. The CRT of affliction and of contrition. 1. It is a cry unto the Lord. 
Juiiah had looked for earthly friends and helpers, and had learned by bitter experience 
the vanity of such expectations. And now Judah sought the Lord whom by sin and 
rebellion she had offended. 2. It is an entreaty /or Divine regard and consideration. 
What had happened was indeed by permission of Heaven. But the regard implored 
was one of sympathy, commiseration, and kindness. 3. It is a cry /or deliveranu. It 
is dictated by the assurance that he and only he who wounded can heal and comfort 
and restore. — T. 

Ver, 1. — Widowhood — the emblem of londinets. I. Thb force of the emblem. 
Another emblem mi^ht have been used. Or the statement as to loneliness might have 
been left in its simplicity without any comparison at all. Why, then, this particular 
emblem ? Because it sets forth the separation between two parties to a peculiar cuc- 
necl;ion — a connection intended ti> have all the permanence which anything in thii 



CIH.I.1— 22J THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 13 



earth can have. Of the hushand and wife it is to be said that " they twain have become 
one flesh," and when the wife becomes a widow she is left in a peculiar and irreroediablt 
loneliness, even though she he in the midst of kindred, neighbours, and friends. So 
also we may say that the inhabitants of Jerusalem, together with the place itself, its 
site, its houses, its streets, had become one great whole. The children of Israel 
wandered through the wilderness for forty years, but when at last they left it, it would 
not have been suitable to say that the wilderness had become as a widow. 

II. A VIEW THOS SUGQESTE.') AS TO THE CAUSE OF 8EFABATI0H. One Icind of lonoU- 

ness had come as a terrible visitation because another kind of loneliness had not been 
sought as an imperative condition of security. Had not Balaam said, " The people 
shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations" (Numb, xxiii. 9)? 
Israel was to dwell in safety alone. What could be expected if the people mixed as^ain 
so recklessly with those from whom they bad been se|i:irat«l by a course of Divine 
marvels? It may also be noticed that Jerusalem would uol have been left as a widow 
if the people of Jerusalem and the country altogether hail had in tliem the spirit whicl. 
promjiti'd to deal wisely and compassionately with every widow. The widow had been 
carefully provided for by Mosaic enactments, e.g. in the solemn feasts and in the time 
of harvest. Yet in the first chapter of Isaiah's prophecies we find him denouncing the 
princes of the once faithful city becanse the cause of the widow did not come unto 
them. 

III. A ORODND OF HOPB. Widowhood is evidently a state on which the loving God 
looks down with infinite tenderness and desire to help. Jerusalem became as a widow, 
yet the separation waf) not for ever. Her exiled inhabitants returned. Yet thii was 
a small matter compared with the greater truths taught alike by the separation and the 
restoration. Things nearest and dearest to us may have to be taken away for a time, 
but all that belongs to our real welfare and to our complete relation to even the whole 
universe will come back in due time. We must not mistake eclipse for destruction. — T, 

Ver. 2. — Nights of weeping explained. Nights of weeping and constant tears npon 
the cheeks. Thus the metaphor is kept up with which this first song of lamentation 
begins. The sensitiveness of the woman-nature helps to brinfc otit the prostration of 
Jerusalem. It is not only that her condition is lamentable, but she herself, in all the 
feelings of hev heart, is a prey to the keenest angnish. People do not always see their 
own sad state as others see it. There is either a shallowness of nature or something 
hM happened to deaden the sensibilities. But in this verse we have both the mention 
of tears and of most sufficient causes for tears. 

L FiBST cause: want of stmpatht and solace. Jerusalem has no eomforten. 
Not even Job's comforters. For, though Job's comforters were sufficiently irritating and 
mistook blisters for salves, yet comfort was their errand. Bad as Job's state was, it 
would have been worse still if in his time of sore trouble he had been left quite alone, 
especially if professed friends had not come near him. But here the widowed Jeru- 
salem has no comforter ; and yet she had had many lovers, many who had been drawn 
irresistibly by the charm of her attractions. Jerusalem was proud of these attractions, 
and yet they did not belong to the essence of her existence. The attractions perished, 
and with the perishing of them the lovers whom they drew became cold. The attrac- 
tions perished, but Jerusalem herself remained with all her needs, and yet with none 
to minister. Where do we mean to look for comforters when our hour of deepest 
trouble comes ? Many to whom we may look will be able to do nothing for us ; some 
to whom we may look will not try to do anything : happy then shall we be if we 
have reason to say, " In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts 
delight my soul " (Ps. xciv. 19). 

IL Second cause: fkiknds have become enemies. When the attractions of 
Jerusalem faded away, not only did the lovers depart, but they had to seek new satis- 
factions elsewhere, and for many selfish reasons they would act in sym|iathy with the 
conquerors of Jerusalem. When she was a strong city, it suited surrounding peoples to 
be friendly ; but when she became desolate and the whole land was lost, then it seemed 
the interest of these peoples to be hostile to Jerusalem. Indeed, their connection with 
Jerusalem was really hostile even when they meant friendship. Their open anc 
strenuous hostility from the first would have been a better thing. Professed friends 



14 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [CB. 1.1—22. 



without meaning it, may ao mislead as to do more harm than the bitterest enemy could 
ever do. The real friend is he who, for the Bake of truth and of the highest interests, 
is not afraid to he reckoned for the time an enemy. — T. 

Ver. ^.—Zion fortaken as a religious centre. I. The peouliab oiobt of Zion im 

THE PAST. The ways of Zion mourned now, but the very fact that such a thing should 
be said showed that they had once been filled with rejoicing. The gates had been 
crowded with worshippers from every district of the land. Zion was glorified as the site 
of the temple, and the temple was glorified as holding within its imposing walls the 
ark of the covenant. Zion was the city of soiemnities. Things were done there not 
according to will-worship or mere Immemorial tradition, but according to Jehovah's 
definite instructions given in the wilderness through Moses centuries before. Praise 
continually waited for God in Zion. Jehovah loved the gates of Zion more than all 
the dwellings of Jacob. There was no day without its morning and evening sacrifice, 
and every sabbath and new moon brought their peculiar additions. Nor must we 
forget the Feast of the Passover, of the firstfruits, of the Pentecost, and the great feast 
of the seventh month. If as nothing more than times of mirth and relaxation, these 
would play a large part in the life of the people, and true prophets and whosoever 
among the priests had deep reverence for Glod would get much strength out of these 
services, finding in them, according to the measure of their faith, zeal, and diligence, 
constant means of grace. 

II. The pecitllab humiliation or Zion in the peesbnt. The thought of Zion 
probably carried to the Israelite more associations than did the thought of any other 
place. The great periodic assemblies at Zion manifested the history, the privileges, the 
strength, the unity, of the nation. There may have been intervals of comparative 
neglect, but we know that in the time of Hezekiah there was a great keeping of the 
Passover. Thus, so far as outward observances were concerned, the machinery of 
Divine service must have been in good working order. But it is also very evident that 
the nation at large got no real good out of the numerous and elaborate rites which 
Jehovah had commanded. We may quote words of Hosea which, while they show the 
prominent position occupied by Zion in the national life, also explun the reason why 
God brought such desolation to Zion. " I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her 
feast-days, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts" (Hos. ii. 11). 
Religion had been turned into mere merry-making. The house of prayer became a 
house of revelling. Jehovah had declared emphatically by his prophets that offerings 
had no value detached from righteousness and mercy. What wonder, then, that from 
condemning words he should advance to condemning deeds ? Forsaken Zion itself 
spoke as if with a prophetic voice. It was when they remembered Zion that the exiles 
in Babylon wept, and when their masters wanted from them a song of Zion they could 
only reply that it was not possible to sing Jehuvah's song in a strange land. There is 
warning in all this desolation of Zion as to how great discernment is needed to make 
sure that the elements of our worship are acceptable to God, edifying to ourselves, 
and not merely for self-pleasure. 

III. We must not forget that bbiobteb days abe pbophebied fob Zion. The same 
old Zion was again crowded, but of this we must not make too much. Jesus himself 
had to say that the rebuilt house of his Father had become a house of merchandise 
aud even a den of thieves. There is the ideal Zion, part of the heavenly Jerusalem, 
where the holiest service will be the highest joy, where our religion will no longer be 
imperilled by formality, superstition, or superficiality. — Y. 

Ver. 11. — The real need of the soul made manifest. I, Real need oan oni,t bb 

made manifest by pbaotioal expebience. The greatest need of the natural life ip 
bread, taking the word "bread "as representative of all Ibod. Clothing and shelter, while 
they may indeed be reckoned as needs, are not needs after the same imperative fashion 
as food ; and every one, however easily his daily bread comes to him, will assent to this 
same general truth that food is the great need of natural life. But he will only really 
feel this in such circumstances as are indicated in this verse. For a long while these 
people of Jerusalem had found bread lying to their hands when they were hungry. 
They could buy it and have abundance of pleasant things beside. The feeling of theii 



OH. Li— 22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. 15 

hearts was that they could not do without these pleasant things, and when at last they 
gave them up to keep body and soul together, it must have been with terrible pain they 
made the surrender. And what is true of breaii for the natural life is also true of the 
Bread coming down from heaven for the spiritual life. Christians, living in the midst of 
all manner of pleasant things of this world, with no lack of money to buy them and 
faculty to enjoy them, try to feel at the same time that more than all pleasant things 
are the gi'ace, the life, the wisdom, the overflowing fulness of the Spirit, which come 
from Christ. But all the testimony of believers proves that the pleasant things need 
to be withdrawn before it can be apprehended that Christ is emphatically the Bread. 
It is when we lose relish of nature's best contributions to our happiness that CSirist 
comes forward, confident as ever in his power to satisfy us, 

II. ThB VAIUB OP TREASURES CAN ONLY BE KNOWN BY WHAT THE OWNBB 18 WHiUNQ 

TO DO TO EETAnf THEM. All the pleasant things belonging to the community were 
already gone. The sanctuary had been desecrated and pillaged. Much private property 
had doubtless gone. But some the owners would be able to hide — jewels and such-lika 
wealth as went into small compass. Among these pleasant things would be family heir- 
looms, loving gifts, possessions with respect to which the receiver had said to the giver, 
" I will keep this thing till I die." But now the great pressure comes, and one pleasant 
thing after another goes for a few handfuls of corn. The soul is threatening to depart 
from the body and it must be turned back ; " for what shall it profit a man, if he gain 
tha whole world and lose his own soul ? " And now notice that there are treasures of 
the heart, such treasures as come from faith in Christ and fidelity to him, which are not 
given up even to preserve natural life. Multitudes have gone willingly to death that 
thereby they might testify to the truth as it is in Jesus. They have laid firm hold of 
his own word, " Whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it " (Matt. xvi. 
25).— Y. 

Ver. 12. — The observation cf suffering. L A beeminqlt dnbbasonablb complaint. 
" Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by ? " So speaks Jerusalem, personified under 
the guise of the weeping widow, with the tears on her cheeks and the beauty faded, 
deprived of all her pleasant things, and left in solitude so far as her familiar supports 
and consolations are concerned. She sits, as it were, by the highway, and the crowd 
passes on, taking no notice. Why, indeed, should it take notice ? The spectacle of a 
conquered nation and a pillaged capital was not a rare thing. The nations asked to 
sympathize had been through the same experience themselves. We are all prompted 
to say, " Surely no trouble has been like our trouble ; " and yet, as our observation of 
human affairs enlarges, we see how human nature, in every individual instance, is made 
to know its extraordinary capacity for suffering. Nevertheless, the piteous appeal here 
is not a baseless one. The trouble of the children of Israel had not come upon them 
after the manner of a common nation. They were peculiar in constitution, privileges, 
and history. If only there had been eyes to see it, there was something very signifi- 
cant to demand attention. But the thing to be seen did not lie on the surface, nor was 
it to be discovered save by faculties specially illuminated. The downfall and the 
sufferings of Israel, as they are to be seen both in the Scriptures and subsequent history, 
belong to the things that are to be spiritually discerned. Therefore this complainl, 
while superficially it may be called unreasonable, is yet reasonable enough, if we only 
consider the position and mission of Israel, and the work which, even in her degrada- 
tion, she has done for the world. 

II. The need these is to mark Jehovah's sijbe visitations on the disobedient. 
This is the critical element in the appeal that widow-like Jerusalem makes to the 
passers-by : " Look at me as the greatest illustration of the certainty with which 
Jehovah punishes those who rebel against him." We must, of course, beware of the 
conclusion that suffering always means punishment ; but where we can see that it is 
punishment we must mark it as such, so that we ourselves may be admonished and 
111*7 also more effectually admonish others. Here was a nation that in obedience might 
have rested confidently and happily in Jehovah's promise. The power behind that 
promise was more than all the armies of the great empires round about. But when the 
power was withdrawn it meant not merely suffering ; the withdrawing had in it the 
nature of a judicial, solemn sentence from Jehovah himself. — ^Y. 



16 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [oh. 1. 1—22. 

Ver. 18. — The acknowledgment that suffering is deserved. L The clbab becoqnitiob 

ON THE PART OF THOSE VISITED THAT THE SDPFBRIKa WAS OP JeHOVAH'S BBINOINO. 

Secondary causes were proruiDent, but behind them was a Divine cause most important 
to be perceived in all the intensity of its working. Those who desolated Jerusalem 
did so from the worst of motives, motives always to be condemned; and these motives, 
keenly inspiring as tliey were, would have ended in nothing save for the weakness in 
which Israel had been left by its apostasy from God. When we are suffering for our 
sin and folly it is good if we can recognize that the suffering is of God's producing. 
Because that which God produces God can remove in the hour of repentance. Whereas 
what man produces he may not be able to put right again, even when he is so disposed. 

II. A SEASON IS GIVEN FOB DBCLABINO Jehovah BIGHTB0TJ8. He has doue righteoiisly 
to those who have rebelled against his commandments. God has made us so that we 
can distinguish between the ri^ht and the wrong. We need ever to be on our guard 
against saying that a thing is right because God does it. What is admitted here is 
that it is a right thing for God to inflict chastisement on the diso?>edient. The greater 
the disobedience the severer must be the chastisement. The commandment of God was 
always a rigbt thing in itself; and the prophets had again and again illustrated the 
righteousness of particular commandments and the evident miseries that flowed from 
neglecting them. Recollect that this great blow upon Israel came after many lesser 
ones. It was not as if Israel could plead that the commandments were dubious or the 
warnings scanty. 

III. It must not be forgotten that Jehovah's BianTEousNESS is equallt shown in 
HIS XBEATUENT OF THE OBEDIENT. It is of the greatest importance to recollect this, 
because unfortunately the disobedient are more noticeable than the obedient, and the 
treatment of the disobedient, by consequence, more noticeable than the treatment of the 
obedient. The spirit of our li'e determines, by a most fixed law, the way in which 
God will treat us. It is perfectly impossible for the disobedient to escape suffering. 
But it is equally impossible for tne obedient to lose their reward. Joy and blessedness, 
the exquisite peace and rapture of holiness, must come to them by the very nature oi 
things. — Y. 

Ver. 21. — A wicked gUtdneu. I. Thk weono feelino with beoabd to suFFEBiNa 
FOB BIN. People are here represented as rejoicing over the sufferings of others. Not 
that they take delight in suffering as suffering, but those who suffered were their 
enemies. Those now suffering had once inflicted suffering on others. They had been 
a source of danger, provoking jealousy, and producing humiliation. Hence, when Israel 
fell into all this solitude and misery, other peoples not only failed to pity, but even posi- 
tively rejoiced. This was just what might be expected, and even if some of the heathen 
nations said, " This serves Israel right for neglecting Jehovah," it was certainly nothing 
more than the simple truth. The wrong thing was the exultant feeling, the gladness of 
heart over all this sufftring. There is no fear but what we shall sympathize with the suf- 
fering of the innocent, tiie pain coming from some accident or disea.se ; but when it is an 
evil-doer who suffers, then we are only too easily betrayed into language expressing glad- 
ness of heart. And we should never be glad with respect to any suffering whatever. Let 
it be remembered, too, that gladness is only one out of several possible wrong attitudes 
with respect to suffering. If while others are suffering for their sins we allow ourselves 
to get into any of these wrong attitudes with respect to them, then our unchristian state 
of mind may prove a very serious obstacle in the way of their repentance and amend- 
ment. The censuring, lecturing spirit must be guarded agamst, aud also the spirit that 
looks down as from a position of superioi goodness. We must restore others in a 
spirit of meekness, considering ourselves, lest we also be tempted. 

II. The bioht feeling with kbgard to suffbkino fob sin. The absence of the 
wrong feeling can only be secured by the presence of the right one. If selflsh gladness, 
the gladness springing from envy and jealousy, is to be kept out. It must be by con- 
stantly cultivating pity for all suffering. Pity is to be the very first feeling with which 
all suffering is contemplated. I'ity must, indeed, be well under control, and never allowed 
to open the way for a greater suffering by taking away a lesser one, but it must always 
be the prevailing feeling. Then also we must take care to rejoice with the rejoicing. 
It iucreases the happiness of others to know that we are glad because of their happiness 



CH.n.1— 22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 



17 



Our work as Christians is only part done in removing the evil ; our thoughts are to ba 
chiefly fixed on producing and establishing the good with all its fruits so pleasant to the 
spiritual eye, so pleasant to the taste of the inner man. The enemies of Israel saw 
Israel fallen, and rejoiced that Jehovah had done this. When we see the fallen lifted 
up and walking along in the strength of Christ, let us rejoice exceedingly because of 
what the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ has Hone. It is worth, all our efforts to keep 
out of our hearts mean satisfaction because of the disappointments and confusion of 
others, — Y. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER n. 



Zion's Judgment is of God. Lamenta- 
tions AND Supplications. 

Ver. 1. — Hath the lord covered; rather, 
doth . . . cover. The daughter of Zion ; i.e. 
JeTuialem. Cast down from heaven. Here 
and in Matt. xi. 23 we have a parallel to 
Isa. XIV. 12, where the King of Babylon is 
compared to a bright star. "Oast down" 
whither? Into the "pit" or dungeon of 
Hades (Isa. xiv. 15). The beauty of Israel; 
i.e. Jerusalem, exactly as Babylon is called 
"the proud beauty [or, 'ornament'] of 
Chaldea" (Isa. xiii. 19). His footstool; 
I e. the ark (Fs. cxxxii. 7), or perhaps the 
temple as containing the ark (1 Chron. 
xxviii. 2; Ps. xcix. 5). 

Ver. 2. — Habitations; rather, pastures. 
The word properly means the settlements 
of shepherds in green, grassy spots, but here 
designates the country parts in general, dis- 
tinguished from the " strongholds " of Judah. 
Hath polluted. So Ps. Ixxxix. 39, "Thou 
hast profaned [same word as here] his 
crown [by casting it] to the ground." The 
wearer of a crown was regarded in the 
East as nearer to divinity than ordinary 
mortals ; in some countries, indeed, e.g. in 
Egypt, almost as an incarnation of the 
deity. To discrown him was to " pollute " 
or "profane" him. 

Ver. 3. — All the horn ; rather, every horn; 
i.e. all the means of defence, especially the 
fortresses. He hath drawn back his right 
hand ; t.e. be hath withdrawn his assistance 
in war. He burned against; rather, he 
burned up. 

Ver. 4. — The beginning of the verse 
seems slightly out of order (see the Septua- 
gint). And slew all that were pleasant, 
eto. The correct rendering is. And slew all 
that was pleasant to the eye : in the tent of 
the daughter of Zion he poured out his fury 
like jUre. The Authorized Version (follow- 
ing the Targum) seems to have thought 
that the youth of the population alone was 
intended. But, though Ewald also adopts 
this view, it seems to limit unduly the 
meaning of the poet. By " tent " we should 
probably understand "dwelling," as Jer. iv. 

LAMENTATIONS. 



5, and often ; lea. ztL 5, " the tent of David ; " 
Ps. Ixxviii. 67, " the tent of Joseph." 

Ver. 6. — Was as an enemy : he hath swal- 
lowed, etc The threefold division of the 
verse is, unfortunately, concealed in the 
Authorized Version, owing to the arbitrary 
stopping. The grouping suggested by the 
Massoretic text is — 

" The Lord is become an enemy, he hath 

swallowed up Israel ; 
He hath swallowed up all her palaces, 

be hath destroyed all his strongholds ; 
And hath increased in the daughter of 

Judah moaning and bemoaning." 

The change of gender in the second line is 
easily explicable. In the first case the poet 
is thinking of the city ; in the second, of the 
people of Israel. The rendering " moaning 
and bemoaning " is designed to reproduce, 
to some extent, the Hebrew phrase, in which 
two words, derived from the same root, and 
almost exactly the same, are placed side by 
side, to give a more intense expression to the 
idea. 

Ver. 6. — Violently taken away; rather, 
violently treated ; i.e. broken up. His taber- 
nacle; rather, his hooth. "Tent" and 
" dwelling " are interchangeable expressions 
(see ver. 4) ; and in the Psalms " booth " is 
used as a special poetic synonym for "tent" 
wlien God's earthly dwelling-place, the 
sanctuary of the temple, is spoken of (so 
Ps. xxvii. 5; xxxi. 20; Ixxvi. 2). The 
Authorized Version, indeed, presumes an 
allusion to the proper meaning of the 
Hebrew word, as if the poet compared the 
sanctuary of Jehovah to a pleasure-booth 
in a garden. It is, however, more natural 
to continue, as a garden, the sense of which 
will be clear from Ps. Ixxx. 12, 13. The 
Septuagint has, instead, "as a vine" — a 
reading which differs from the Massoretic 
by having one letter more {harjgefen instead 
olkaggan). This ancient reading is adopted 
by Ewald, and hurmonizes well with Isa. 
V. 1, eto. ; Jer. ii. 21 (comp. Ps. Ixxx. 8) ; 
but the received text gives a very good 
sense. "Garden" in the Bible means, of 
course, a plantation of trees rather than a 
flower-garden. His places of the assembly ; 
rather, hit plaee of meeting (juith (M). The 



18 



THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [ch. n. 1— 22. 



word occurs in the Bame sense in Ps. Ixxiv. 
3. It is tlie temple which is meant, and 
the term is borrowed from the famous 
phrase, ohel mo'edh (Exod. xxvii. 21 ; comp. 
XXV. 22). 

Ver. 7. — Her palaces; i.e. those of the 
daughter of Zion, espeeially "high build- 
ings" (this is the true meaning of 'armon) 
of the temple. They have made a noise, etc. 
Comp. Ps. Ixxiv. 3, " Thine enemies roar in 
the m^dst of thy place of meeting." The 
passages are parallel, though, whether the 
calamities reftrred to are the same in both, 
cannot a priori be determined. The shouts 
of triumph of the foe are likened to the 
festal sliouts of the temple- worshippers 
(ciimp. lea. xxx. 29 ; Amos v. 24). 

Ver. 8. — He hath stretched out a line. It 
is the "line of desolation" mentioned in 
Isaiah (xxxiv. 11 ; comp. Amos vii. 7 ; 
2 Kings xxi. 13). Such is the unsparing 
rigour of Jehovali's judgments. 

Ver. 9. — Are sunk Into the ground; t.e. 
are broken down and buried iu the dust. 
The Law is no more. The observanoe of 
the Law being rendered impossible by the 
destruction of the temple. Comp. this and 
the next clause with Ezek. vii. 26. 

Ver. 10. — They have cast up dust, etc. 
A sign of mourning (Josh. vii. 3; 2 Sam. 
xiii. 19; Jobii. 12). 

Ver. 11. — My bowels are troubled (see on 
ch. i. 20). My liver is poured upon the earth. 
A violent emotion being supposed to occa- 
sion a copious disci large of bUe. The 
daughter of my people. A poetic expression 
for Zion or Judah. 

Ver. 12. — Corn. Either in the sense of 
parched com (comp. Lev. xxiii. 14; 1 Sam. 
xvii. 17; Prov. xxvii. 22) or a poetic 
expression for " bread " (comp. Exod. xvi. 
4 ; Ps. ov. 40). 

Ver. 13. — What thing shall I take to wit- 
ness for thee ? rather, What shall I testify 
unto thee? The nature of the testifying 
may be gathered from the following words. 
It would be a comfort to Zion to know that 
her misfortune was not unparalleled : sola- 
men miieris soeioa habuisse malorum. The 
expression is odd, however, and, comparing 
lea. xl. 18, A. Krochmal has suggested, 
What shall I compare 1 The correction ig 
eusy. EcLual ; i.e. compare (comp. Isa. zlvi. 
5). 

Ver. 14. — Thy prophets. Jeremiah con- 
stantly inveighs against the fallacious, im- 
moral prtJMching of tlie great mass of his 
prophetic contemporaries (comp. Jer. vi. 13, 
14 ; xiv. 13 — 15 ; xxiii. 14 — 40). Have seen 
vain and foolish things ; t'.e. have announced 
" visions " (prophecies) of an unreal and 
irrational tenor. Comp. Jer. xxiii. 13, 
where the same word here paraphrased as 
"iriational" (literally, insipid) occurs. Dis- 



covered ; {.e. disclosed. To tnm away thy 

captivity. The Captivity, tlien, might have 
been " turned away," if the other prophets 
had, like Jeremiah, disclosed the true 
spiritual state of the people, and moved 
them to repentance. False burdens. Sug- 
gestive references to these false prophecies 
occur iu Jer. xiv, 13, 14; xxiii. 31, 32 (see 
the Exposition on these passages). Causes 
of banishment. So Jeremiah (xxvii. 10; 
comp. 15), " They propliesy a lie unto you, 
to remove you far from your land." 

Ver. 15.— Clap . . . hiss . . . wag theij 
heads. Gestures of malicious joy (Job xxvii. 
23) or contempt (Jer. xix. 8 ; Pb. xxii. 7). 
The perfection of beauty ; literally, the per- 
fect in beauty. The same phrase is used in 
Ezekiel (xxvii. 3 ; xxviii. 12) of Tyre, and 
a similar one in Ps. 1. 2 of Zion. 

Vers 16, 17. — On the transposition of the 
initial letters in these verses, see Intro- 
duction. 

Ver. 16. — Have opened their month against 
thee. As against the innocent sufferer of 
Ps. xxii. (ver. 13). Onash the teeth. In 
token of rage, as Ps. xxxv. 16 ; xxxvii. 12. 
We have seen it (comp. Ps. xxxv. 21). 

Ver. 17. — His word that he had com- 
manded, etc. " Commanded," I'.e. given in 
charge to. Comp. Zech. i. 6, "My words 
and my statutes, which I commanded my 
servants the prophets." Zechariah continues, 
in language which illustrates the foregoing 
words of this verse, " Did they not take hold 
of [overtake] your fatb ers ;" where the persons 
spoken of as " your fathers " are the same as 
those who are represented by the speaker of 
the elegy. " In the days of old ; " alluding, 
perhaps, to such passages as Dent, xxviii. 52, 
etc. The horn of thine adversaries. "Horn" 
has a twofold meaning — ^"strength" or "de- 
fence" (comp. ver. 3), and " honour" or 
" dignity " (comp. 1 Sam. ii. 1). The 
figure is too natural to need explanation. 

Ver. 18. — Their heart cried unto the Lord, 
etc. "Their heart" can only mean "the 
heart of the people of Jerusalem." For 
the expreseion, oorap- Ps. Ixxxiv. 2, " My 
heart and my flesh cry aloud to the living 
God." To avoid the rather startling proso- 
popoeia in the next clause, Thenius sup- 
poses a corruption in the group of letters 
rendered " wall," and attaches the corrected 
word to the first clause, rendering thus : 
" Their heart orieth unto the Lord in vain ; 
O daughter of Zion, let tears run down," 
etc. Another resource, which also involves 
an emendation, is that of Ewald, " Cry with 
all thy heart, O wall of the daughter of 
Zion." wall, etc. The prosopopoeia ia 
surprising, but is only a degree more striking 
than that of ver. 8 and ch. i. 4. In Isa, 
xiv. 31 we find an equally strong one, 
"Howl, O gate." Most probably, however, 



OH. u. 1—22.] THE LAMBKTATlONb OF JEEEMIAH. 



19 



there is Bomething wrong in the text ; ths 
fnllowlng verses seem to refer to the daughter 
of Zion. Bickell reads thus: " Ory aloud 
unto the Lord, O virgin daughter of Zion." 
Like a river ; rather, like a torrent. Give 
thyself no rest. The word rendered " rest " 
means properly the stiffness produced by 
cold. 

Yer. 19. — In the beginning of the watches. 
This would eeem to be moat naturally ex- 
plained as referring to the first watch of the 
night. When moat are wrapped in their first 
and sweetest sleep, the daughter of Zion is to 
" arise and ory." Others explain, " at the 
beginning of each of the night watches;" 
i.e. all the night through. Previously to 
the Roman times, the Jews had divided the 
night into three watches (comp. Judg. iii 
L9). Four out thine heart like water; {.a. 
give free course to thy complaint, shedding 
tears meanwhile. The expression is parallel 
partly to phrases like "I am poured out 
like water " (Ps. xxii. 14), partly to " Pour 
out youi beatt befoie blm" (Ps. Ixii. 8). 



In the top of every street ; rather, at «terf 
ttreet corner (and so oh. iv. 1). 

Ver. 20. — To whom thou hast done this ; viz. 
to Israel, the chosen people. And children; 
rather, (even) ehildren. The children are 
the " fruit " referred to. Comp. the warnings 
in Lev. xxvi. 26; Deut. xxviiL 56; and 
especially Jer. zix. 9; also the historical 
incident in 2 Kings vi 28, 29. Of a span 
long ; rather, borne in the hands. The word 
is derived from the verb rendered " to swad- 
dle" in ver. 22 (see note). 

Ver. 22. — Than hast called as in a solemn 
day. The passage is illustrated by oh. i. 
15, according to which the instruments of 
Jehovah's vengeance are "summoned" by 
him to a festival when starting for the holy 
war. Hy terrors round about. Almost 
identical with one of the oharacteristio 
phrases of Jeremiah's prophecies, " fear [w 
rather, ' terror'] on every side " (see on Jer. 
tL 25). Have swaddled ; lathar, bate bortu 
mpon the btuuU. 



HOMILETICa 

Yer. l.—Ood not remtmlbering hi$ footstool. The ark was regarded •> QoA'b foot- 
stool ; and the temple in which the ark was kept was also sometimes called the 
footstool, of God. When the temple was destroyed and the ark stolen, or broken, or 
lost, it looked as though God had forgotten his footstool. The symbolism of the ark 
and the ritual connected with it give a peculiar significance to this fact. 

I. GrOD NO LONOEB BEHEMBER3 THE FLACB WHEBB HIS PBESENOE WAS MOST FtlLLT 

MANIFESTED. The Holy Land, Jerusalem, the temple, the holy of holies, the ark, — these 
are the sacred places, of increasing sanctity as the circle narrows, till the very footstool 
where God touches earth is reached. 1. The presence of God in our midst is no 
guarantee against the natural consequences of our misdeeds. On the contrary, if he is 
with us to protect in times of simple distress, he is with us as Judge to condemn when 
we fall and contract guilt. 2. The presence of God at one time is no guarantee of its 
permanenee. The footstool may be God's no longer if it prove unworthy of him. 
The Church which was once the temple of the Holy Spirit may become deserted by its 
heavenly Guest. That we enjoy the communion of God now is no reason for being con- 
fident that we shall not lose that privilege through unbelief or other sin. 3. We cannot 
assume that Ood will never reject us because he has once made use of ut. The footstool 
may be supposed to have been used by God as of some service to him. Nevertheless it 
was discarded. If the servant of God proved unfaithful, his Master's livery will not 
save him. He will be discharged and disgraced. 

IL God no longer rembmbbbs his meroy-seat. The footstool of God's peculiarly 
manifested presence was also his mercy-seat. There the assurance of atonement was 
confirmed when the high priest entered with sacrificial blood and intercession. Yet 
even the mercy-seat can be forgotten in the day of God's anger. We trust that in 
wrath he will remember mercy. But there are clouds of anger too black for us to see 
the mercy that shines behind them. 1. The mercy which is in the heart of Ood is not 
to he regarded as nullifying his virath. It is so represented by some who take one- 
sided views of the Divine character. But the All-merciful can be a consuming fire. 2. 
If 0«d has once been mei-ciful to u$ we may not conclude that he can never be angry 
with iM. On the contrary, if we sin against light and love we provoke the greater 
wrath. The very fact that the footstool was priv ileged to be a mercy-seat will aggra- 
vate the wrath which must be poured upon it when it is disgraced. 

III. God no lonoeb behembbrs the place of pbateb. At the footstool of Ckx] 



20 THJS LAMBNTAllONS OF JEREMIAfl. laa. u. i—ii. 

the suppliant kneels pleading for deliverance. But his prayer is unheard. God may 
refuse to hearken to prayer. Where he is wont to stoop and listen to cry and sigh of 
burdened souls he may be regardless. 1. Impenitence will lead to God's disregarding 
our prayer. 2. When wrath is necessary, the mere cry for escape must be unheard. 3. 
When chastisement is for our good, mercy itself will refuse to listen to the prayer for 
deliverance. The surgeon must disregard the cries of bis patient. He must harden him- 
self to save the sufferer. 

Vers. 4, 5. — The Lord as an enemy. I. The Lobd mat beoohb to 0b as an 

ENEMY. We must not suppose the relations of God to those who forsake him to be 
purely negative. He cannot simply leave them to their own devices. He is a King 
who must neeils maintain order and resirain and punish rebellion, a Judge who cannot 
permit law to be trampled underfoot with impunity, a Father who cannot abandon his 
children, but must chastise them in their wrong-doing just because he is so closely 
related to them. Let it be well undeistood, then, that, in opposing ourselves to God, we 
run counter to a power, a will, an active authority. Wo provoke the anger of God. 
We do not simply strike ourselves against the stone, we cause the stone to fall upon us 
and grind us to powder. 

II. KoTHING CAN BE MOBE TEBBIBLE THAN FOB THE LOBD TO BECOME TO U0 AS AN 

ENEMY. The veiy thought of God as an enemy should strike terror into one who finds 
it is a feet. 1. God is almighty. It is at once apparent that the war must end in 
defeat for the rebfl. 2. God is just. Then he must be in the right with the great 
controversy. We must be fighting on the wrong side when we are fighting against 
God. 3. God is gracious. How fearful must be the wrong-doing that provokes so 
kind a God to enmity ! 4. God is our Father. Our Father become as our enemy I 
The unnatural situation proclaims its own horror. The nearness of God and his love to 
us make the fire of his wrath the more fierce. The wrath of the " Lamb " is more 
awful than the raging of him who goes about as a roaring lion seeking whom he may 
devour. 

HI. God does not become to us as an enemy until we have proved oubsblvbb 
TO BE enemies TO BIM. He has no wish to quarrel with us. He is changeless in 
his constancy of righteousness and love. It is we who break the peace. The declara- 
tion of war between heaven and earth is always issued by the lower world. It is not 
necessary, however, that our enmity should be overt in order that God may be seen as 
an enemy. Secret alienation of heart, quiet neglect of God's will, self-willed indiffer- 
ence to (jod, will constitute enmity. The fact that the enmity begins on our side will 
take away all excuse suggested by our feebleness in comparison with the greatness 
of God. 

IV. Though God mat become to us as an enemy, he will not ebally be an 
enemy. He may act like an enemy, but he will not act in enmity. He will never 
hate the creature that he has made. His apparent enmity is very fearful because it 
results in actions of anger and punishment. Still behind all is the pitying heart of 
Divine love. God pities most when he strikes hardest. 

V. Theouqh the atonement of Chbist God ceases to be to us as an enemy. 
Christ is our Propitiation. By the sacrifice of himself he makes peace. And he does 
not simply influence our hearts in reconciling us to God. There is a Godward aspect of 
the atonement. This is not to induce God to love us, since the love of God precedes 
and originates the very mission of Christ. But in the mysterious counsels of Divine 
wisdom the atonement of Christ is rendered necessary for the cessation of God's 
inimical action (1 John ii. 1, 2). 

Vers. 6, 7. — The rejected altar. In the first elegy we read how the feasts are 
neglected by the people (ch. i. 4). Now we see that God himself has broken them up 
and cast off his altar. Thus we advance a stage in understanding the deplorable con- 
dition of Jerusalem. At first the human side only is seen and the visible facts are 
lamented over. Then the Divine side is discerned and the terrible cause of the cessation 
of the solemn festivals revealed. It is not simply that the people cease to present them- 
selves before the altar. God has abandoned and rejected all the temple services. 

I. How God bbjbots the altab. We must bear iu mind that the altar bdongs t« 



OH. u. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 2] 

— ^ ^ . ■, 

Q-od and that all the ordinnnces of worship are his. Beligion is not merely human and 
subjective. It relates to Grod and it goes out of the humaa world reaching up to the 
Divine. There is scope, therefore, for God's action in it. He may refuse his action. 
He may not hear the prayers, nor accept the offerings, nor employ the services, nor 
succour the needs of the worshipper. Then he rejects the altar. This is represented as 
being done with Tiolence, destruction, and a Divine abhorrence. The desolation wrought 
by Babylon is traced up to the hand of God. So when our religious privileges are 
oroken up by earthly means we should inquire whether God's displeasure is behind the 
calamity. It is not necessarily. But it may be. 

n. Why God rejects the altab. 1. Because the wwthip i» insincere. If we 
practise the forms of devotion without the heart of it our hypocrisy will only insult 
God. 2. Because the worshipper is corrupt. Thus was it with the Jews in Isaiah's 
time. God says, " Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth . . . when 
ye make many prayers, I will not hear : your hands are full of blood " (Isa. i. 14, 16). So 
David says, " If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me " (Ps. Ixvi. 18). 
3. Because the ofering is unworthy. The Israelite was to bring his best to God. No 
blemished sacrifice would be accepted. If we give less than the best in our power we 
make an unworthy offering. If only spare time and superfluous money are offered to 
God, how can we expect him to receive such mean and niggardly service? He will 
have OUT brightest hours, our richest devotion, our hearts and lives and all, or he will 
take nothing. 

III. With what results Gk>s bejeots the altar. When once the altar is rejected 
by God all sacrilice and service are vain. It matters little that the enemy throw down 
the stones of it. If it remains intact it is worthless. We may have full assemblies of 
people and rich and elaborate services and all.the pomp and ceremony of worship ; and it 
will be for nothing if God reject the worship. We think too little of this Divine side of 
religion. We are too much inclined to rest in the decorum and grace of becoming human 
forms of worship. Let it be known that the one end of worship is to reach God. If he 
is met by the soul, it matters little what means be used in worship. If ha refuses to 
a«sept us, tke form of worship is a mockery and a delusion. 

Ver. 9 (last clause). — " No vision." I. The TEACHiNa ASB vision OF pbophetio 
TRUTH CONSTITUTE AN IMPORTANT ELEMENT IN RELIGIOUS LIFE. The writer laments the 
loss of teaching and vision as abnormal and disastrous. The vision of the prophets was 
not simply nor chiefly concerned with the distant future and recondite counsels of pro- 
vidence. It dealt with present facts and unveiled their true character. It guided in 
the present and with regard to the uncertainties of the very near future. The humbler 
office of teaching was assooiat&i with it. The prophet, a seer of visions in private and 
on special occasions, was a teacher among his fellow-men and under ordinary circum- 
stances. It is im|>ort!fnt to see how essential the knowledge of truth is to a healthy 
spiritual life. WithoiU it devotion becomes superstition. Beligion is based on revela- 
tion. The school precedes the workshop. Teaching must prepare the way for service. 

II. There are times when teaching and vision oease. The two may not fail 
exactly at the same time. But the stream will not flow long after the fountain is dried. 
The teaching that is continued after all inspiration has died out will be arid, formal, life- 
less, unreal. Ideas will take place of facts, and words of ideas. Now, the vision, which 
is the starting-point of all knowledge of truth, is intermittent. There have been ages 
fertile in prophecy and there have been barren ages. In the days preceding the 
ministry of Samuel " the Word of the Lord was rare, and there was no vision scattered 
abroad " (1 Sam. iiL 1). After the roll of the Old Testament was complete, prophecy 
ceased. It revived in the apostolic age. Spiritual insight and Divine knowledge have 
been intermittent since then, sleeping in the dark ages, flashing out in the days of St. 
Bernard, dried up by the dreariness of scholasticism, swelling out in fresh energy with 
the Reformation, withering again at the end of the seventeenth century, and brightening 
once more from the close of the eighteenth. What shall be the next turn ? 

m. The abuse of prophbtio vision and teaching leads to the cessation of 
THBH. The prophets prophesied falsely (ver. 14). They preached peace when there 
was no peace (Jer. xxiii. 17). As a penalty fur their treason to their sacred trust of 
truth they lost the gift of spiritual vision. Disloyalty to truth warps our pecceptiou!' 



22 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [<'n. n. 1—2Z. 

of truth. False living hinders true thinking. There is nothing which so deadens and 

blinds the spiritual fauulties as indifference to truth. Beginning with telling a conscious 
lie, a man comes at last to accept falseljood without knowing it. 

IV. The rejection op prophetic vision and teaching also leads to the cessa- 
tion OF THEM. The people were as guilty as their teachers. They refused to hear truth 
and asked for pleasant words. They declined to obey the truth which they had heard. 
The penalty of disobedience to Divine truth will be the loss of that truth. If we refuse 
to go as the vision of Goil in our souls directs, that vision will fade out, leaving us no 
light of heaven, but only gloom or false lights of earth. 

Ver. 14. — Tlie vision of falsehood and folly. Visions from the Lord have ceased 
(ver. 9). But the prophets continue to see visions of earthly limitation or even of 
diabolical delusion. These visions are false and foolish. Better have none than such. 

I. PpOPHBOY in its corruption sees THE FALSE AND FOOLISH IN PLACE OF THE TRUE 

AND WORTHY. 1. The mission of prophery is to see and declare wisdom and reality. 
The attractiveness ot the teaching is a snare if the matter of it is vain. People natur- 
ally favour the pleasant utterance of pleasant things. Doctrines are sonietiiues chosen 
because they are liked rather than because they are known to be sound, or the style and 
language of the preacher are more heeded than the sulstance of his message. But, if 
we were in earnest, ugly truths would always be accepted in preference to specious 
falsehoods. 2. The corruption of prophecy substitutes falsehood and folly for truth 
and wisdom. This may be experienced unconsciously. The teacher may not know 
that he has fallen. It is not only that his tongue utters lies, his eye sees no truth. 
His vision is distorted and he knows it not. He is not aware that he sees men as trees 
walking. Nor does he know that his folly is not wisdom. The failing of spiritual 
vision and decay of wisdom are the more calamitous because they are unconscious. 
They are a sort of spiiitual insanity. 3. The evil of the corruption of prophecy is in 
the widespread delusion and degradation that it produces. " Thy prophets have seeu 
vain and foolish things for thee." The prophet is a teacher as well as a seer. When 
the teacher errs the scholars are misled. 

II. The failure to discover iniquity is a proof that a prophet's yniON is 
FALSE AND FOOLISH. 1. A prophet is required to see human as well as Divine truth. 
It needs inspiration to read the secrets of the heart as much as to discover the mysteries 
of the unseen heavens or of the distant future. A prophet should be a discerner of 
spirits. If he cannot read the signs of the times he is a failure, 2. The failure to see 
iniquity is one especial evidence of perverted prophetic vision. The physician is first of 
all called upon to discover his patient's disease. If he cannot detect this the rest of 
his work is of little use. Prophets may dream of the millennium and discourse of the 
celestial spheres ; but so long as they are blind to the sins that men around them are 
perishing in, their primary mission must fail. Now, it needs a Divine inspiration 
rightly to see iniquity. Conventionality of thought leads to a complacent satisfaction 
with the normal state ot the world. We must be out of it and above it to observe how 
it has fallen. The preacher who cannot see the sins of his age is worse than useless. 
He is a deluding flatterer. The individual man who is blind to his own sin has not 
the first ray of spiritual light which may guide him aright. 

III. The FALSE AND FOOLISH VISION OF PROPHECY DOES NOT RESTORE PROSPERITY, 

BUT ON THE CONTRARY IT DIRECTLY LEADS TO RUIN. By vainly promising pleasant 
things it brings disastrous ones. The false prophets opposed Jeremiah and said the 
Captivity would not come. By that very falsehood they helped to hasten it. Had they 
preached repentance and warned of wrath, the doom might have been averted. None 
prepare souls lor ruin more certainly than smooth-speaking flattering optimists. When 
danger is near, the warning prophet may be the deliverer of his hearers. If the preacher 
fail to produce conviction of sin he cannot lead to salvation in Christ. So long as men 
do not see their lost condition they are in danger of their soul's ruin. To them a 
pleasant religion is a fatal religion. A Jeremiah, a John the Baptist, and a John Knox 
are the best friends of their generation, 

Ver. 16. — The triumph of the foe. I. The triumph of the fob over Jbrubalem. 
Strangers mock with scorn and derision, enem'^* veot their rage with hissiiag, gnashing 



0H.II.1— 22J XHJli LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 23 

of teeth, and a spiteful satisfaction that the day they have looked for has come. Why 
should these cruel feelings be roused against the prostrate city ? Her previous condition 
must have provoked them. 1. Great prosperity. This exciies envy in the less pros- 
perous, and envy souu sours into hatred. Jealous and seltish natures have a positive 
pleasure in seeing the loss of special privileges in the more favoured, although that loss 
may bring no advantage to themselves. 2. High pretensions. Jerusalem claimed to be 
especially favoured and blessed by God. She looked down with scorn on her neigh- 
bours. IJuch an attitude was galling to them and led to an outburst of delight when 
the proud city lay grovelling in the dust. Contempt provokes enmity. No calamity 
receives less pity than the downfall of pride. 3. Reserved isolation. Jerusalem kept 
herself apart from other cities. She felt that she had a peculiar vocation. Such exclusive- 
ness would excite dislike. The unsocial are unpitied. It may be that the separation 
is inevitable or conscientious. Still, it incurs not the least aversion. 

II. The teiumph op Ihe foe ovbb the Church. The fall of Jerusalem was the 
fall of the Church. The enemies of the Eternal rejoiced in the destruction of his 
temple and the scattering of his people. There are always adversaries on the look out 
for disaster in the Church of Christ. The evil spirit of the world is vexed and shamed 
by the standing rebuke of a pure Church. Corrupt men see in her an example con- 
trasting with their own conduct and thereby condemning it. Thus there arise dislike 
and enmity. The shame of the Church is a relief to this worldly opposition. There 
have been times when the Name of God has been insulted through this evil pleasure of 
the wicked in the shame that the sin and lailure of his people have brought upon his 
cause. Here is a motive for preserving the sanctity of the Christian Church. The loss 
of it will not merely involve suffering to the Church herself ; it will encourage the foes of 
Christ by giving xhem the elation of victory, and it will dishonour his Name by making 
his work appear to fail. 

in. The triumph of the fob over a soul. There are spiritual enemies watching 
for every slip that a soul may make, enemies that are confounded by its growing purity 
and faithfulness, but rendered insolent and jubilant by its fall. Whenever we sin we 
afford a triumph to the evil one. We think that we are pleasing ourselves. But there 
must be some mistake or our sin would not give so much satisfaction to our enemy. 
The laugh of Mephistopheles should have been a warning to Faust. Perhaps the most 
stinging smart of future retribution will be the devilish glee with which the miserable 
lost soul will be welcomed into the place of darkness. 

Ver. 17. — Buinfrom God. In the fifteenth and sixteenth verses we find strangers 
and enemies indulging in unseemly jubilation over the fall of Jerusalem. Now, we see 
— what they do not see — that the cause of that fall was the direct action of God. This 
fact aggravates the dismay and wretchedness of the suffering city, for it signifies that her 
own King and Friend has brought about her ruin — not outsiders and antagonists. God 
himself has handed her over to the contempt and derision of the world. At the same 
time, the sight of God's hand in the calamity reveals the folly of the world's triumph. 
How shallow and ignorant that appears to be directly the veil which covers the awful 
action of God is lifted I Man's spite and malice sink into insignificance before the awful 
wrath of God, as the growling of beasts of the forest is drowned in the dread roar of 
thunder. The triumph of man is also shown to be misplaced. Man has not done the 
deed. He is but a spectator. This is a dread work of God. Let human passion be 
hushed before the solemn sight. 

I. God bbinqs buin. This is a terrible statement. Looking at the particulars of 
the action itself, we see only the more of its horrors as we observe : 1. God does it 
deliberately. He devises it — plans, considers, and calmly executes the ruin. 2. God 
does it in fulfilment of his Word. " In the days of old " the ruin is threatened. The 
storm is long in brewing. An ancient promise makes the coming of it certain. 3. 
God does it by authority. He "had commanded" it. With all the authority and 
power of divinity over innumerable agents bending in perfect compliance to his will, 
QoA executes his solemn threat. 4. He does it destructively. He throws down. This 
shows violence and hurt. 6. He does it, to all human appearance, pitilessly. There is 
nothing visible that might mitigate the blow. No acts of mercy are seen to alle- 
viate the misery. 6. He does it to the satisfaction of enemies. " He hath caused 



24 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [oh. n. 1—22 

thine enemy to rejoice over thee," etc. This is the most sure sign that the rain it 

complete. 

II. The pact that Gob brings ecin is not inconsistent with his chabaotkb. II 
appears to be so, for it represents the Creator as a destroyer, and the God of love as a 
God of enmity. The diflBcuIty should be examined. Then some light may break upon it. 

1, The goodness of God makes him the enemy of all evil. He would cease to be good il 
he became universally complacent. As a righteous Judge he must condemn sin ; even the 
Son of man, the Saviour of the world, had a mission of destruction. He came with fan 
to winnow out the chaff, and fire to burn it ; he came to destroy the works of the devil. 

2, Ood malees external ruin that he may produce internal salvation. He destroys the 
city that he may save the citizens. Jerusalem is overthrown in order that the Jews, 
through this chastisement, may be delivered from the ruin of their souls. So God 
breaks up a man's home and wrecks his hopes and flings him on the ash-heap of misery, 
in a merciful design to urge him to repentance and so to save the man himself. 3. Ood 
is more concerned viith the goodness than, with the pleasure of his creatv/re. He cer- 
tainly does not show the mild benevolence that characterizes some sanguine philan- 
thropists. A safe house and abundance of bread are not the greatest things to be 
preserved, because pleasure and comfort are not the first requisites of the soul. Pain 
and loss may be blessings if they lead to purity and obedience. It is well for this life's 
pleasure to be ruined if thereby the soul is saved fur life eternal. 

Ver. 19. — A cry to Ood in the night watches. A fearful picture I Jenisalem is 
besieged. Famine is becoming fatal. Young children are seen fainting for hunger at 
the top of every street. The hearts of their parents are rent with anguish, as the little 
ones beg piteously of their mothers for food and drink (ver. 12), and none can be had, 
so that they swoon for very weakness. Suddenly a new turn is taken. The citizens 
have sunk down in sullen despair. Kight has come like a cloak to cover the scenes of 
misery and death. Then a voice rings through the darkness, " Arise, cry out" This 
voice bids all hearers pour out their hearts in prayer to God. 

I. The cry is to God. Hitherto we have had nothing but doleful lamentations. 
The language has been that of hopeless grief and bitter regret. No relief has been 
found or even sought. But there is one refuge in the direst trouble, and now that 
refuge is remembered. When we can do nothing else we can cry to God, for he is near 
though hidden from view, and merciful though striking in wrath, and able to save 
though no way of escape seems possible. It needs some rousing of the soul thus to 
seek God. We must " Arise." Spiritual lethargy is the worst consequence of sorrow. 
Let U8 beware lest our troubles paralyze our prayers. Prayer implies spiritual wake- 
fulness. 

II. The CRT is in the ntoht. 1. The time when trouble seens most hopeless. It is 
in the night that the mourner weeps his most bitter tears. 2. The time of reflection. In 
lonely night watches the troubled soul has time for thought, and thought is then pain, 

3, 2^e time of earthly darkness. Then, perhaps, the spirit may feel most closely the 
nearness of the Father of spirits. The cry is to be in the beginning of the watches — 
either at the first watch or at the opening of each of the three watches. Let prayer 
come first. Let us not waste time in lamenting before we seek relief from God. 

III. I'^E CRT IS heartfelt AND CONFIDENTIAL. " Pour out thine heart like water 
before the face of the Lord." 1. It comes from the heart. All real prayer must be the 
outcome of true and deep feelings. 2. It is a full and free confidence in Ood. The 
heart is poured out like water. This is in itself a relief. God expects our complete con- 
fidence and will hear prayer only when we give it to him. 3. It is no more than the 
pouring out of the heart hefore Ood. There is no definite request. Perhaps it is diffi- 
cult to know how to ask for relief. Perhaps the grief is too overwhelming for any such 
thoughts of aid to be entertained. But it is enough that the whole trouble is poured 
out before God and left with him. Prayer is too often a dictating to God. It should 
be more of a simple confidence in God. It would be better if there were more con- 
fession and confidence, and less exact petition and definition of what God is to do in 
order to please us. We are to pour out our hearts and leave all with him. Then he 
will do the best for us. 4. In deep trouble heartfelt prayer is v>rung out of the sufferer. 
Then he must be real. Sorrow melts the stony heart which has held itself in proud 



CH. II. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. 25 

reserve, and thus it pours out itself like water. We have the example of Christ, whose 
agony passed into prayer, to urge us to find the relief of confiding fully in Gkxl. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — The anger of the Lord. Men have fallen into two opposite extremes of 
opinion and of feeling with regard to the anger of the Lord. Theie liave been times 
when they have heeu wont to attribute to the Eternal the passions of imperfect men, 
when they have represented the holy God as muved by the storms of indignation, as 
subject to the impulses of caprice and the instigations of cruelty. But in our own days 
the tendency is the contrary to this ; men picture God as all amiability and forbearance, 
as regarding the sinful and guilty with indifference, or at all events without any emotion 
of displeasure. Soriptme warrants neither of these extremes. 

I. There are occasions when God ib anget with even the objects of his 
SPECIAL FAVOUR. Jerusalem was the " daughter of Zion;" the temple was " the beauty 
of Israel ; '' the ark was God's " footstool." But as even human love is not necessarily 
or justly blind to the faults of those beloved, so the Lord is displeased with those wht)m 
he has endowed with peculiar privileges and blessings, when they are unmindful of his 
mercies and disobedient to his laws. " As many as I love," says the Divine Head of 
the Church, " I rebuke and chasten." 

I. From the hearts op the disobedient God hides himself as » a oloud. 
When the sun is concealed behind a cloud, nature is chill, dull, and gloomy. The Lord 
is the Sun in whose light his people find joy and peace ; when he hides his face they 
are troubled, for no longer is it the case that " they look unto him and are lightened." 
The heart and conscience of those who have offended God are overcast with spiritual 
gloom and unhajipiness. So Israel found it ; and there are none who have known the 
blessedness of God's fellowship and favour who can bear without distress the withdrawal 
of the heavenly light. 

III. Upon the heads of tee rebellious God hubls ths bolt of his DisPLEAsnRE. 
The tempest long lowered over the doomed city ; at last it broke in fury, and Jerusalem 
becaoie a prey to the spoiler and was cast down to the ground. Tlie prophet clearly saw, 
what in an age of ease and luxury men are prone to forget, that there is a righteous 
Ruler from whose authority and retributive power no state and no soul can escape. 
• Gfd is angry with the wicked every day." Yet in the midst of wrath he remembers 
me cy, and the penalties he inflicts answer their purpose if they lead to submission and 
to sincere repentance. — T. 

Vers. 6, 7. — Retribution in Ohurch and state. There are occasions when it ia well to 
ponder seriously the calamities which befall a nation, to lay them to heart, to inquire 
into their causes, and to seek earnestly and prayerfully the way of deliverance, the 
means of remedy. " They that lack time to mourn lack time to mend." 

I. It 18 WELL TO LOOK THROUGH NATIONAL DISASTERS TO THE PROVIDENTIAIi BI7LB 

WHICH ALONE FULLY EXPLAINS THEM. The ruiu which Overtook Jerusalem and Jndah 
was wrought by the armies of the Chaldeans. But the inspired prophet saw in the 
Assyrian hosts the ministers of Divine justice. The sufferings of the Jews were not 
iccidental ; they were a chastening, a discipline, appointed by the Lord of hosts, the 
King of kings. The Eternal had a controversy with his people. They had not listened 
to his Word, and therefore he syoke to them in thunder. 

II. The POLITICAL and ecclesiastical AUTHORITIES OF A NATION AKB ALIKE 

RESPONSIBLE FOR NATIONAL SINS. The kings and chiefs had sought their own honour 
ind ease and prosperity. The priests and prophets had discharged their ofiSces in a 
manner perfunctory and formal. Under their natural and appointed leaders the nation 
had erred, had lapsed into idolatry, into sensuality, into practical unbelief. Rulers had 
not ruled in equity ; teachers had not taught with faithfulness and fearlessness. Like 
king, like subjects ; like priest, like people. All were to blame, but those were most 
:ulpable whose responsibility was greatest. 

III. ChUBOH AND STATE ALIKE ENDURE THE PENALTIES OF TRANSGRESSION AND 

DiaOBKPlBNOE 1. The picture of desolation, as regards the religious life of the people, 



26 THE LAMENT ATIOlJS 01* JEREMIAH. [ch. ii. 1—22, 

is a very dark and dreary picture. The religious celebrations and festivals fall into 
neglect; the very salibath is all but foryotten ; ihe sacrifices cease to be offered upon 
the altar ; the sanctuary is no longer the scene of sacred solemnities ; the priests are 
despised, ii. The case is equally distressing as regards the political situation. The 
walls of the palaces are either broken down, ur, instead of housiijg the princes of the 
land, afford quarters to the troops of the enemy. The royal family are consigned to 
humiliation and to scorn. And the temple and the city resound no longer with the 
praises of Jehovah, but with the brutal shouts of the Olialdean soldiery. — T. 

Ver. 9. — Law and prophecy suspended. Judah was professedly and actually a theo- 
cracy. The form of government was a monarchy, but the true Ruler was Jehovah, 
Spiritual disoliedience and rebellion were Judah's offences ; and it was the natural out- 
come of perseverance in these that the Lord should withdraw his favovu", and leave his 
people to eat of tlie bitter fruit of their owa misguided planting. And it was one 
consequence of the Divine displeasure that the highest privileges Jehovah had bestowed, 
the most sacred and precious tokens of his presence, should be for a season withdrawn. 
It is tlie climax, as Jeremiah conceives it, of Judah's misfortunes, that " the Law is no 
more ; her prophets also find no vision from the Lord." 

I. This temporary privation was of local and national privilbges. It was so 
far as the Law was Jewish, that it ceased to be observed in Jerusalem. When the city 
was in the possession of heathen troops, when the temple was in ruins, when the priest- 
hood was in disgrace, there was no possibility of observing the ordinances which the 
Law prescribed. The sacrifices and festivals came to an end. There were none to 
observe them and none to minister. And it was so far as the prophet was a functionary 
of the time and place, that he ceased to utter the mind of the Eternal. There were 
prophets of the Captivity ; but Jerusalem, the true home of this noble class of religious 
teachers, knew their voice no more. For them was no vision which they might see 
in the ecstasy of inspiration, and depict in glowing colours before the imagination of 
the attentive multitude. 

II. The eternal law of righteousness, the evee-living witness of bpikitual 
PROPHBCT, CAN NEVER CEASE. The words, the commandments and prohibitions, the 
outward ordinances, might pass away for a season of Divine displeasure, might be 
absorbed in the fuller revelation of the gospel. But the principles of the moral law, the 
obligations of unchanging righteousness, can never cease ; for they are the expression 
of the mind and will of him whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom. The vision 
may no longer be granted to the seer of Jerusalem ; the city may stone her prophets 
or the Lord himself remove them. But every purified eye shall through aU time behold 
God's glory, and the ear that is oxjen to truth and love shall not cease to recognize the 
still, small voice of Heaven. — T. 

Ver. 13. — Commiseration. The spirit of the prophet deserves our warm admiration. 
Jerusalem, its king and its citizens, had treated him with injustice and indignities. 
But in the day when his predictions were fulfilled and the city was overwhelmed by 
disaster and humiliaticjn, so far from boasting over her, Jeremiah regarded her state 
with profoundest pity. Observe in this verse — 

I. The affectionate and admiring LANOnAOB BY WHICH THE prophet DESIGNATES 

THE AFFLICTED CITY. Not a word of insult or of contempt, but, on the contrary, 
language evincing the deepest, the fondest interest. The population that had so 
despised his prophecy and had treated liim so ill is here iiersonified in language 
apparently more appropriate to times of prosperity. Jeremiah bewails the state of the 
daughter of Jerusalem, the virgin daughter of Zion. 

II. The tender commiseration of the prophet with the city's woes. 1. He 
pronounces the sorrows of Jerusalem unequalled. It is a common mode of expressing 
sympathy to assure the afflicted that others have the same griefs and trials to endure. 
No such consolation is offered here ; the prophet lool<s around in vain for a case bo 
distressing. The breach is " great like the sea." This is either a figure drawn from 
the vastness of the ocean, with which the great woe of Judah is compared ; or it depicts 
the enemy as rushing in upon Jerusalem, as the sea in its fury makes a breach in the 
wall of a low-lying territory, and, sweeping the defences away by irresistible forcev 



OH. u. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEBEMIAH. 17 

creates a desolation, so that a waste of waters is beheld where villages and fruitful fields 
once smiled in peace and plenty. 2. He pronounces the sorrows of Jerusalem irre- 
mediable. A mortal wound has been inflicted, which no leeohcraft can heal. If Jeru- 
salem is again to flourish it must be by a revival from the dead. For nothing now 
can save her. 

Apflioation. 1. The captive city is a picture of the desolation and misery to which 
(sooner or later) sin will surely bring all those who submit themselves to it. 2. The 
commiseration shown by the prophet is an example of the state of mind with which 
the pious should contemplate the ravages of sin and the wretchedness of sinful men. 
3. The gospel forbids despondency over even the most utter debasement and humiliation 
of man. " There is balm in Gilead ; there is a Physician there." — T. 

Yer. 16. — ITie glory and the shame of Jerusalem. Contrast with misery escaped 
heightens the joy of the rescued and the happy ; and, on the other hand, contrast 
with bygone prosperity adds to the wretchedness of those who are fallen from high 
estate, 

I. Thb beauty and benown oi' Jbbubaleh m its prosferitt. Into these many 
elements entered. 1. Its situation was superb. Nature pointed out the heights of Ziou 
for a metropolis. Especially when beheld from the brow of Olivet the city impresses 
every traveller with admiration. 2. Its history and memorable associations. Won by 
the valour of David, adorned by the magnificeuce of Solomon, the home of heroes and 
of saints, this city possessed a fascination with which few cities of the earth could 
compare. 3. Its sacred ed^ce ranked alone, far above all the temples of the ancient 
world. Not that its architecture was commanding or beautiful in the highest degree ; 
but that its erection, its dedication, the presence of the Eternal, all lent an interest 
and a sacredness to the peerless building. 4. Its sacrifices and festivals, which were 
attended by hundreds of thousands of worshippers, were altogether uniq^ue. 

II. The dibobaoe of Jebusalem. This appears : 1. From its ruinous and almost 
uninhabitable condition. 2. From the slaughter or dispersion of its citizens. 3. From 
its degradation from its proud position as the metropolis of a nation. 4. From the 
hatred, scorn, and insults of its triumphant enemies. 

Application. There is a day of visitation which it behoves every child of privilege 
and mercy to use aright. To neglect that day is surely to entail a bitter overtaking by 
the night of calamity and destruction.— T. 

Vers. 18, 19. — The entreaty of anguish. This surely is one of those passagen which 
justify the title of this book ; these utterances are " lamentations " indeed ; never did 
human sorrow make of language anything more resembling a wail than this. 

I. The souls feom which tearful entreaties arise. The true language of passion 
— this utterance is lacking in coherence. The heart of the people cries aloud ; the very 
walls of the city are invoked in their desolation to call upon the Lord. Clearly the 
distress is that of the inhabitants of the wretched city, of those survivors whose fate is 
sadder than that of those who fell by the sword. 

II. The circumstances that occasion the entreaty. 1. Personal want, suffering, 
and distress. 2. The spectacle of the woes of others, especially of children. Literature 
has no more agonizing picture than this of the young children fainting and dying of 
hunger in every street. 

in. The Being to whom the supplications of the anguished are addressed. 
in such circumstances vain is the help of man. Upon whom shall Jerusalem call but 
upon the Lord, the King of the city, the great Patron and Protector of the chosen 
nation, who has forsaken even his own people because they have forgotten him, and in 
whose favour alone is hope of salvation ? 

IV. The ohabaoteb of the entreaty ubged. 1. It is sorrowful, accompanied by 
many tears, flowing like a river and pausing not. 2. Earnest, as appears from the 
description — ^heart, eyes, and hands all uniting in the appeal with imploring prayer. 3. 
Continuous ; for not only by day, but through the night watches, supplications ascend 
unto heaven, invoking compassion and aid. — T. 

Ver. 20 1 — Consideration besought. How truly human is this language I How real 



28 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [oh. IL 1—22 

was the eternal Lord to him who could shape his entreaty thus I As if to mge a plea 
for pity, the prophet implores him who has been offended hy the nation's sins, who has 
suffered the nation's misery and apparent ruin, to consider ; to rememher who Judah 
is, and to hare mercy. 

I. The oiboumstakoes that call fob considbbation. 1. Famine and the inhuman 
conduct to which famine sometimes leads. 2. Death hy the sword. 3. The privation 
of those religious offices which are the centre and inspiration of the nation's life. 4. 
The common suffering of all classes ; prophet and priest, children and old men, virgins 
and youth, are alike overtaken by want, by wounds, by death. 

II. The grounds upon which considbbation is begged fob. 1. The main appeal 
is to Divine pity and benevolence. 2. The former mercies shown to Judah seem to he 
brought implicitly forward in this language. Israel has been chosen by God himself, 
favoured with privileges, delivered, protected, and hlessed in a thousand ways. Will 
God cast off those in whom be has taken an interest so deep, for whom he has done 
so great things V 

III. The hope with which consideration is asked. Hitherto the regard of God 
in recent events has been a regard of displeasure and of censure. But if the attitude 
of the stricken be no longer one of defiance, but of submission, it may be that the 
Lord will turn him again, will he favoural)le unto his afflicted people, will restore them 
to former prosperity, enriched with the precious lessons of their adverse experience. — T. 

Ver. 1. — The manifestation of Jehovah's wrath with Itrad. It will be noticed that 
the words " auger " and " wrath " occur again and again in these first three verses. 
Figure is heaped upon figure in order to bring out the practical effects of this anger. 
Wa need not pursue these figures into detail ; each of them speaks for itself. Let us 
rather notice — 

I. How THET moioATE THE EXTENT OF PAST FAVOUB. The Very fact that, la order 
to show the character of Jehovah's anger, such strong figuratlTe expressions are posKhla 
proves that in former days there had been many indications of his complacency with 
IsraeL Not that Israel had been really better in the past than in the present, but she 
had to he dealt with in a long-suffering way, and the long-suffering of Jehovah is a 
quality which shows itself by abundance of most positive favours. God looked upon 
Israel according to the bright possibilities of excellence that lie in human nature. Israel 
did sink very low, hut that was because she had the capacity of rising very high. Thus 
God heaped upon Israel favours, as if to show that he would not entertain any doubt as 
to her willingness to respond to his requests. And so the black anger-cloud resting 
on Israel's present looks blacker still when contrasted with the Divine brightness and 
clearness of Israel's past. God has cast down the beauty of Israel, and that casting is 
as from heaven to earth. That which God has not remembered in the day of his anger 
is something which he had reckoned useful to himself, even as the footstool is useful 
to the king seated on his throne. Thus the extent of present anger measuies the 
extent of past favour. 

II. How THESE FIGURES INDICATE THE EEALITT OF JeHOVAH'B WBATH. The Very 

heaping up of these strong figures should make us feel very deeply that God's wrath is 
not itself a fij^ure. God's anger is not to be reduced to a mere anthropomorphism. We 
are misled in this matter, because human anger is never seen without selfish and 
degrading elements. An angry man, in all his excitement and violence, is a pitiable 
sight, but nevertheless it is possible for a man to be angry and sin not. The man who 
cannot understand the reality of God's anger will never comprehend the ideal of 
humanity. The sensitive musician would laugh to scorn any one who told him that, 
while he was pleased with harmony, he should not be disturbed by discord. Again and 
again Jesus was really and righteously angry, showing in this, not least, how he was 
partaker of the Divine nature. When we are in wrong ways and God is consequently 
against us, his opposition and displeasure must l>e shown in ways that cannot be 
mistaken.— T. 

Ver. 6. — Jehovah reckoned as an enemy. 1. How fab was thebb bealitt undbb 
THIS afpeabance OF ENMITY ? God might look like an enemy, but it did not therefore 
follow that he was one. But even if Jehovah behaved himself like an enemy, it must 



OH. IL 1.^22.] THE LAMEi^TATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 2S 

also be asked whether there was not a necessity that he should do so. If Israel had to 
say, " Jehovah acts as an enemy towards us," Jehovah had to say, " My people act as 
an enemy towards me." These people had now for a long time heen travelling in the 
wrong way, and it was in the very nature of things that the more they advanced the 
more opposition should multiply and hecome intensified. God not only appeared to be 
an enemy, but in certain respects he really was an enemy. He hated tlie evil that had 
risen to such a height among those whom he had taken for his own. Our love for evil 
is ever the measure of his hate of it ; and the more determined we are to cling to it, 
the more his hostility will appear. God himself always keeps in the same path of law 
and righteousness and order. When we, according to our measure, follow in his foot- 
steps, then real opposition there cannot be ; but the moment we think fit to become 
a law to ourselves and do what is right in our own eyes, then inevitably he must 
oppose us. 

IL This ranurr was largely in appeabanoe only. When Israel said that 
Jehovah was as an enemy, they got their idea of enmity from the hostile proceedings of 
individuals and communities. But God cannot be the enemy of any man as men are 
enemies one to another. His motives are diiferent and so are the results of all his 
opposition. One man forming hostile plans against another acts from malicious motives, 
or at all events from selfish ones. There is no basis of reason in what be does. He 
is not hostile to the lower in order that he may show himself friendly to the higher. 
Besides, we must not look merely at outward manifestations of enmity. There may be 
the deepest enmity and greatest power of inflicting injury where outwardly all looks 
harmless. Those who profess to be our friends and whom we reckon to be our Mends 
may yet inflict worse injuries than all avowed enemies taken together. God is the true 
Friend of every man, however he may be thought at times to put on the appearance of 
an enemy. — ^Y. 

Ver. 9. — The prophetic office suspended. There is something of a climax about this 
statement that the prophets find no vision from Jehovah. Jeremiah has already spoken 
of God destroying the outward resources and defences of Jerusalem. Next, he mentions 
the exile of the king and the chief men, and then, as if to hint that it was a still greater 
calamity, he tells us how the prophet had no longer anything to see or to say. He did 
well to magnify his own o£Bce ; for no office could be more important than that of the 
man whom God chose to communicate needed messages to his fellow-men. Observe— 

L The NATtrEE of the prophetic office as here indicated, a prophet was one 
who had a vision from the Lord. He was no prophet unless tie could truly preface his 
address with " Thus saith the Lord." And mu»t there not be something of this kind 
still? With respect to Divine things, what can any of us say that shall have power and 
blessing in it unless as we speak of what Gk)d has made us see ? The prophetic office 
has ceased, but who can doubt that there must be some permanent reality corresponding 
with it? and therefore we should ever be on the look out for men who have had visions 
from the Lord. All advances in the interpretation of Scripture truth must come by 
revelation from on high. Otherwise the most diligent searching ends in nothing but 
pedantry and verbosity. 

II. Notice the depbivation hebe spoken of. What does it mean ? How is it 
to be looked upon as part of Jerusalem's punitive visitation ? The reply to this is that 
the institution of prophecy was part of the honour which Jehovah had put upon his 
people. The people could say that God was constantly raising up amongst them those 
whom he chose for a medium of communication. However unwilling they might be to 
listen to the real prophets, and however they persecuted them, still the fact remained 
that men like Jeremiah were rising again and again. For all we can tell, those whose 
written prophecies remain may have been a most minute portion numerically of the 
total company of the prophets. Now, if all at once the prophetic voice ceased or came 
at long intervals and with few words, this must have been most significant to those who 
had power to notice. It meant that God had little or nothing to say to the people. 
That he had communications with every individual willing to put himself in a right 
attitude there can be no doubt. Prophets who received nothing to give as a message 
would at the same time receive all they needed for their own edification and comfort, 
and now there is an abiding vision for all. God's communications to us are not aftei 



30 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [ch. ii. l.-2a 

the "sundry times and divers manners" mode referred to at the begiuning of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews. The Spirit of God revealing the uplifted Christ makes every 
one of us a prophet to himself. — Y. 

Ver. 10. — The silence of the elders. L Thbie fobmeb bfeeoh. They are said to keej 
silence now; this, of course, suggests that silence had not been their former habir. 
Old men have a peculiar right to speak, are often expected to speak, and can always 
plead that years have given them experience and many opportunities of observation, 
and with respect to these particular elders here it is not difficult to imagine what the 
topics and the manner of their former speech might be. For instance, imagine younger 
men going to them and asking what their opinion was as to the predictions of Jeremiah. 
They would not all have the same opinion, but many, it is to be feared, would make 
very light of what he said. Nor is it likely that they spoke of him in a very con- 
siderate way. The elders of Israel were, according to a national custom, largely the 
teachers of history. It was their business to tell their sous and their son's sons the 
great things that had been done in the days of old. And we know how easy it is to 
remember only success and forget disaster. Jeremiah coming in with his denunciations 
and threatenings would exasperate the elders not least. The chances are that again 
and again they had given advice at the foundation of which lay their unbelief in 
Jeremiah. Besides this, they would be advisers in general, and in particular matters 
would often be right enough. Thus when they cast discredit on a prophet of Jehovah 
others would take up their words as words of authority and soberness. 

IL Thbib present bilenob. They neither speak of their own accord nor do they 
answer when addressed. They keep silence. It is the silence of grief, humiliation, 
wounded pride, and shama. The only thing they could say, if they did speak, would 
be to confess in the amplest manner their sins, their blunders, their egregious self-con- 
fidence. But in truth their very silence spoke as if with loudest voice. It was as if 
they said, " We abdicate any right we have had to advise and lead. We admit to the 
full our responsibility in having done so much to bring disaster on the people." Old 
age is not necessary to bring wisdom and insight into the problems of life. Jeremiah, 
who had gone out to prophesy when little better than a lad, was right, and old mtn with 
an egotistical and absorbed confidence in their own opinions were wrong. If we would 
avoid being stricken with a shameful silence in our old age, it must be by listening 
obediently in earlier years to far other voices than those which come from the 
promptings of the natural man. — ^Y. 

Ver. 12. — The suffering of the children. It must be noticed how the mention of the 
children follows on the mention of the elders. There is suffering at each extreme of 
life, and hence we are to infer that there is suffering all between. The elders suffer in 
their way and the children and the sucklings suffer in theirs. The elders are bowed 
down with confusion, shame, and disappointment. The children know nothing of this, 
but they are tormented with the pangs of hunger; and what a pathetic touch is that 
which represents them as breathing out their little lives into the bosom of their 
mothers I The sins of the parents are being visited upon the children. It has often 
been represented as a monstrous iniquity that things should be put in such a light, 
but is it not an undeniable fact that the little ones suffer what tbey would not suffer 
if progenitors always did what was right ? These children were not clamouring for 
dainties and luxuries. Com and wine, the common food, the pleasant grape-juice, 
what they had been used to and what all at once they began to miss. What is here 
said is a strong admonition to us to consider how the innocent and unsuspecting may be 
affected by our unrighteousness. All our conduct must affect others, and it may affect 
those who cannot lift a hand to avert ill consequences. The sufferings of children and 
infants, the immense mortality among them, — these are things awful to contemplate ; 
and yet nothing can be more certain than that the clearing away of prejudice and igno- 
rance and hurtful habits founded on bare tradition would bring into child-life that 
abundance of joy which a loving Creator of human nature meant children to attain. 
But even with all the suffering there are compensations. These hungurstricken 
children cried for bread, and getting none they poured out their lives into their mothers' 
bosoms ; but they had no self-reproach. Bemorse did not add another degree of agonal 



OH. n. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. 31 

to starration. The suffering which touches the conscience is the worst, and the little 
ones escape it altogether. — Y. 

Ver. 14. — Hie share of the prophets in ruining Jerusalem. L Wkat the fbophet 
ODOHT TO BE. The prophet of those times was a man bound to say things having 
depth and substance in them. And though the prophet has ceased, so far as formal 
office is concerned, yet there are still Divine things to be seen, and, when seen, 
spoken about by those qualified to speak. There are the deep things of God to be 
penetrated and explored by those willing to receive the insight. The Holy Spirit of 
God, offered so abundantly through Christ, is a Spirit of prophecy to all who have it. 
They need no formal prophet, inasmuch as they have a word, living and piercing, to all 
who take a right relation towards it. God means us to be occupied with serious, sub- 
stantial matters, so large and deep and fruitful that we shall never outgrow our interest 
in them. The heart of man in its meditating power was made for great themes. 
The heart can never be filled with mere trifles. That is good advice given to 
preachers of the gospel to speak most on the greatest themes, such as are set forth 
again and again in the Scriptures, and, whether these things be preached about or 
not, every individual Christian should think about them. For while we cannot 
secure the topics of preachers, the topics of our own thoughts depend upon ourselves. 
It is just those who concern themselves a great deal about dogmas who are also 
most interested in the details of life and conduct. 

n. What the prophet mat sink to be. These prophets felt bound to magnify 
their office and say something. They ought to have spoken the truth ; but for this 
they lacked inclination and perhaps courage. The next best thing would have been 
to remain silent ; but then where would the prophet-reputation have been ? and, more 
serious question still with some, what would have become of the prophet-emoluments ? 
Hence we have here the double iniquity that the false was spoken and the true con- 
cealed. The prophets could only get credit for their falsehoods by a careful con- 
cealment of the truth. They had, as it were, to paste on truth a conspicuous label, 
proclaiming far and wide, "This is a lie." This verse suggests how they had the 
common experience of one lie leading on to another. The true prophet said that 
the burden Israel had to bear and the exile into which it had to go arose from its 
iniquities. Whereas the false, or rather the unfaithful prophet, having set iniquity 
as the cause of trouble altogether on one side, could only go on inventing explanations 
which explained nothing. Ezek. xiii. is a chapter which may very profitably be read 
in connection with this verse. The great lesson is to search fur truth no matter with 
what toil, and keep it no matter at what cost. — Y. 

Ver. 22, — The completeness of Jehovah's visitation. I. The comparison by which 
THK 18 BET FORTH. " Thou hast Called as in a solemn day." At certain periods there 
were vast commanded gatherings of the people to Jerusalem. They came from far and 
wide and from all parts of the compass, and so, as they converged upon Jerusalem, they 
might be justly said to encircle it. And encircling it, they did so with a definite purpose. 
They were as far as possible from being a mere promiscuous crowd, in which each one 
could come and go at his own sweet will. At the centre of the circle stood Jehovah, 
giving the commandment to each which brought them all together. And we may infer 
from the use of the comparison here that the commandment must have been generally 
complied with. It was, indeed, a commandment not very hard to obey, requiring as it 
did mere outwardness of obedience. People living in quiet country places would be 
glad of the reason for occasional visits to Jerusalem. Well would it have been if the 
people had tried to carry their obedience a little further 1 if, when the solemn assemblies 
had gathered together, there had been in them the light spirit 1 A gathering of bodies is 
not so hard, but a gathering of hearts in complete union and sympathy, perfectly 
responsive to the will of God, who shall secure that? 

IL Thb absemblt of terrors at God's command. God called together the people, 
and they came; but when they came, instead of attending to God's will, they pursued 
their own. But now God is represented as calling together all the agents tliat can inflict 
pain upon man and cause him terror ; and they come with one consent, folding Israel 
round with an environment which cannot be escaped. There is no ultimate escape for 



32 



THE LAMEKTATIONS UJr JJSKlSlilAU. [<■• l>^ 1— «6, 



the selfish, slnfiil man. He may get the evil day put off; he may find gate after gate 
opening, as he thinks, to let him away from trouble and pain ; but in truth he is only 
going deeper and deeper into the corner where he will be completely shut up. Qoi can 
surround us with providences and protections if we are willing to trust him. No other 
power can stirround us with causes of terror. Our own hearts may imagine a menacing 
circle, but it only exists in imagination. If we seek the Lord he will hear us and deliver 
us from all our fears (Ps. xxxiv. 4). But no one can deliver us from God's just wrath 
with all who are unrighteous. That God who breaks the circle with which his enemies 
seek to enclose his friends, also makes a circle in which those enemies must themaelves 
be effectually enclosed.^T. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTBB m. 



Veil. 1 — ^21, — MONOLOQUE SPOKEN BT AN 

iNcrviDUAL IIblieveb whose Fate is 

BODND UP WITH THAT OF THE NATION; 
OR PEBHAFS BT THE NATION PEBSOKIFIED 

(see Introduction). 

Ver. 1. — Seen. " To see " in Hebrew often 
means " to experience ; " e.g. Jer. v. 12 ; Ps. 
xvi. 10 ; Eccles. viii. 16. By the rod of his 
wrath. The idea is, not that Babylon has 
humbled Israel as Jehovah's instrument, 
but that Ood himself has brought these 
troubles upon his people. "He hath led 
me, hath hedged me about," eto. 

Ver. 3. —Is he turned ; he tometh ; rather, 
be turneth again and again. 

Ver. 4.— Hade old ; more literally, worn 
auiay, as a garment (oomp. Isa. 1. 9 ; li. 6). 
Broken my bones. So Job complains, " His 
wrath teareth and persecuteth me" (Job 
xvi. 9) ; and, a still closer parallel, Hezekiah, 
** As a lion, so will he break all my bones " 
(Isa. xxxvlii. 13). Comp. Ps. li. 8, "The 
bones which thou hast broken." 

Ver. 5. — ^He hath hnilded against me, and 
compassed me. A figure &om the siege of 
a town. Gall. For the true meaning of the 
word, see on Jer. viii. 14. We need not 
trouble ourselves about it here, for the word 
is evidently used as a kind of " ideograph " 
for bitterness. Travel ; literally, weariness. 

Ver. 6. — This verse is verbaUy reproduced 
in Ps. oxliiL 3. In dark places; i.e. in 
Hades (comp. Ps. Ixxxviii. 7). As tbey tliat 
be dead of old. A strange comparison ; for 
what difference can it make whether the 
dead are men of the ancient or the modern 
world? The rendering, however, though 
perfectly admissible, is less suitable to the 
context than as they that are far ever 
dead; who have entered "the land from 
which there is no return" (an Assyrian 
tiHe of Hades). Comp. " the everlasting 
house," «.e. the grave (Ecoles. xii. 5), " the 
everlasting sleep " (Jer. li. 39, 57). 

Vers. 7 — 9. — ^Three figures, interrupted 
by a literal statement of the ill success of 
prayer. A traveller who finds himself 
suddenly eaged up by • high thorn hedge 



(comp. Job ilL 23; Hm. U. 6)l A prlioner 

with a heavy chain. Again, a traveller 
suddenly shut up by soUd stone walls 
(comp. Hos. ii. 8). 

Ver. 7. — My chain; literally, my brass 
(comp. Judg. xvi. 21 ; 2 Kings xxv. 7). 

Ver. 8. — He shutteth out my prayer. 
There is a kind of barrier through which 
these futile prayers cannot penetrate (comp. 
on ver. 44). 

Ver. 9. — Inolosed ; or, vailed up ; the 
participle of this verb is rendered " masons " 
m the Authorized Version of 2 Kings xii. 12. 
Hade my paths crooked ; t.e. hath compelled 
me tu walls in byways (oomp. margin of the 
Authorized Version, Judg. v. 6). But this 
hardly seems appropriate to the context. 
The semitat meas subvertit of the Vulgate is 
preferable. Bender, therefore, turnei my 
path upside down (comp. Isa. xxiv. t). An 
analogous expression in Job xxz. 13 is 
rendered in the Authorized Version, "they 
mar my path." Tbenius thinks that the de- 
struction of a raised causeway is the figure 
intended; but the word is quite corrMtly 
rendered " paths ; " see the note of Delitnoh 
on Isa. llx. 8. 

Ver. 10. — Was; rather, is. As a hear 
... as a lion. The comparison of the 
enemy to • lion is not unconunon ; see e.g. 
Jer. iv. 7; v. 6 (see note); xlix. 19; 1. 44; 
Ps. X. 9; xvii. 12 ; Job x. 16. The bear is 
only once mentioned in such a context 
(Hos. xili. 8). The two latter passages 
may possibly have been in the mind of the 
writer, as Jehovah is in both the subject of 
the comparison. 

Ver. 11. — Hath turned aside my ways ; 
i.e. hath caused me to go astray. Comp. 
Ps. cxlvi. 9, " The way of the ungodly he 
maketh erooked," i.e. lie leadeth them to 
destruction. Made me desolate; or, mad4 
me stunned (" astonied," Ezra ix. 3 in om 
Bible). So ch. i. 13, 16. 

Ver. 12. — Set me as a mark. PreoiMly 
aa Job complains of Jehovah, " He hath Ht 
me up for his mark " (Job xvi. 13). 

Ver. 13. — This verse seems strangely 
short — it consists of only four vords in tiie 
Hebrew. Probably something Uke "his 



oa. III. 1—66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEliBMIAH. 



33 



weapona," or " the weapons of death " (Pi. 
Tii. 13), has fallen out. Restore them, and 
the veise becomes a two-membered one, like 
its oompanioQs. To enter into my reins. 
So Job (xvi. 12), " He cleaveth my reins 
asunder." "Kerns," equivalent to "inward 
parts," like " heart," with which it is often 
combined; e.g. Jer. xi. 20 ; xvii, 10 ; xx. 12. 

Ver. 14. — A derision to all my people. 
If the text-reading is correct, these are the 
words of Jeremiah (or one like Jeremiah), 
describing the ill return accorded to hi* 
friendly admonitions. But the Massora 
mention Ps. oxliv. 2 ; 2 Sam. xxil 41 ; uh. 
iii. 14, as passages in which "my people" 
it used, whereas we should expect " penples." 
The Syriao Version of our passage actually 
translates "to all peoples," and. the prefixed 
"all" certainly favours the plural, and so, 
in a far higher degree, does the view we 
have been led to aJdopt of the speaker of 
this Lamentation (see Introduction). The 
correction {'ammim for 'ammi) hns been 
received by Archbishop Seeker, by Ewald, 
and by J. Olshausen. Their song. A 
reminiscence of Job xxx. 9. 

Ver. 15. — With bitterness ; literally, teilk 
bittemeeses ; i.e. bitter troubles. A remi- 
niscence of Job is. 18. With wormwood; 
i.e. with a drink of wormwood (comp. Jer. ix. 
IS; xxiii. 15). We are slightly reminded 
of Pi. Ixix. 21, " They gave me gall for my 
o.eat." 

Ter, 16.— He hathalsobrokenmy teeth with 
gravel stones ; i.e. he hath (unnatural as it 
may seem in Israel's Father) given me stones 
instead of bread (oomp. Matt. vii. 9). 'i'lie 
Jewish rabbi commonly called Baahi 
thinks that a historical fact is preserved 
in these words, and that the Jewish exiles 
were really obliged to eat bread mixed with 
grit, because they had to bake in pits dug 
in the ground. So too many later com- 
mentators, e.g. Grotius, who compares • 
passage of Seneca ('De Beneflc.,' ii. 7), 
" Beneficium superb^ datum simile est pani 
lapidoso." He hath covered me vith ashes ; 
rather, Ae hath pressed mt down into ashes, 
A figurative expression for great humilia- 
tion. So in the Talmud the Jewish nation 
is described as " pressed down into ashes" 
(• Bereshith Eabba,' 75). 

Ver. 17. — Thou hast removed my soul; 
rather, thou hatt rejected my icul. The 
words look like a quotation from Ps. 
Ixxxviii. 14 (Hebrew, 15), where they are 
undoubtedly an address to Jehovah, liut 
there is another rendering, wliich gram- 
matically is equally tenable, and which 
Bvoids the strangely abrupt address to God, 
viz. My soul is r^ected (from peace). 

Vers, 19 — 21. — These verses prepare the 
way for a brief interval of calmness and 
resignation. 



Ver. 19. — Eememhering ; rather, re- 
member. It is the language of prayer. 

Ver. 20. — My soul, etc. This rendering 
is difficult. In the next verse we read, 
" This I recall to my mind, therefore I have 
hope," which seems inconsistent with ver. 
20 as given in the Authorized Version. 
/ 1 equally grammatical and still more 
obvious translation is. Thou (0 Godt) wilt 
turely remember, for my soul is bowed down 
within me. The latter part of the line is 
a reminiscence of Ps. xlii. 5, at least, if the 
text be correct, for the closing words do 
not cohere well with the opening ones. 
The Peshito (Syriac) has, " Remember, and 
revive [literally, 'cause to return'] my soul 
within me," which involves a slightly 
different reading of one word. But 
more tempting than any other view of the 
meaning is that of Bickell, though it in- 
volves a correction and an insertion, " My 
soul remembereth well and meditateth on 
thy faithfulness." 

Ver. 21. — This I recall to my mind, ete.; 
viz. that thou wilt remember me, or, thy 
faithfulness (ver. 20). Here again there 
appears to be a reminiscence of a passage 
in Ps. xlii. (ver. 4). Others suppose that 
" this " refers to the following verses ; but 
in this case a new section would begin in 
the middle of a triad (the triad of verses 
beginning with zayin), which is certainly 
improbable. 

Vers. 22 — 36. — Besionatioit and Hofb- 

rCLNESS. 

Ver. 22. — It is of the Lord's mercies, ete. ; 
literally, The Lord's mercies that we are not 
consumed. But the " we " is difficult, 
especially considering that in ver. 23 (which 
is ' clearly parallel) the subject of the 
sentence is, not "we," but "the Lord's 
mercies,'' Hence it is probable that the 
reading of the Targum and the Peshito 
(adopted by Thenius, Ewald, and Bickell) is 
correct, "The Lord's mercies, verily they 
cease not " (tammi for tamnS). 

Ver. 24. — The lord is my Portion. A 
reminiecenre of Ps. xvi. 5 (comp. Ps. iTriii 
26 ; cxix. 57 ; cxlii. 5). 

Ver. 26. — Should both hope and quietly 
wait ; rather, should wait in silence. " Si- 
lence" is an expression of the psalmist's 
(the Lamentations are psalms) for resigna- 
tion to the will of God ; comp. Ps. Ixii. 1 
(Hebrew, 2) ; Ixv. 1 (Hebrew, 2), and see 
Authorized Version, margin. The thought 
of the verse is that of Ps. xxxvii. 7. 

Ver. 27.— In his youth. The thought 
of this veise reminds us of Ps. cxix. 71. 
Youth is mentioned as the time when it is 
easier to adapt one's self to circumstanaai, 
and when discipline is most readily ae- 
oepted. The words do not prove that the 
writer is youug, any more than vers. 9 and 



31 



THE LAMEKTATIONS OF JEBEMIAH. [oh. in. 1— 6«. 



100 of Fs. cziz. pioTe that the psalmist was 
Ml aged man (against this view, see vers. 84 
— 87). There is no occasion, ttierefore, for 
the textual alteration (for as such I cannot 
help regarding it), " from his youth," found 
in some Hebrew manuscripts in Theoilo- 
tion, in the Aldine edition of the Septuagint, 
and in the Vulgate. The reading was pro- 
bably dictated by the unconscious endeavour 
to prop up the theory of Jeremiah's author- 
ship. The scribes and translators re- 
membered, inopportunely, that the trials ot 
Jeremiah began in early manhood. 

Vers. 28—30. — He sitteth alone, etc. ; 
rather, Let Mm lit alone . . . let him keep 
lilence (ver. 28) , , . let him put (ver. 29) 
, . let him give . . . let him be filled (ver. 
SO). The connection is — since it is good for 
• man to be afiSicted, let him sit still, when 
trouble is sent, and resign himself to bear it. 

Ver. 28. — Becaose he hath borne it ; rather, 
when he (viz. God) hath laid it. 

Ver. 29. — He putteth his mouth, etc. An 
Oriental manner of expressing submission 
(oomp. Micah vii. 17 ; Fs. Ixxii. 9). 

Ver. 30. — He giveth his cheek. Notice 
the striking affinity (which is hardly acci- 
dental) to Job ivi. 10 ; Isa. 1. 6. The ideal 
of the righteous man, according to these 
kindred books, contains, as one of its most 
prominent features, the patient endurance of 
affliction ; and so too does the same ideal, 
received and amplified by the greatest 
"Servant of Jehovah" (Matt. v. 39). 

Vers. 31 — 33. — Two grounds of comfort : 
(1) the trouble is only for a time, and God 
will have compassion again (vers. 31, 32); 
and (2) God does not afflict in a malicious 
spirit (ver. 83). 

Ver. 83.— Willingly; literally, /rom hi* 
heart. 

Vers. 34 — 39. — These two triads form a 
transition to the renewed complaints and 
appeals for help in the following verses. 
The first triad is probably an am[ilifl[cation 
of the statement that " the Lord doth not 
afflict willingly." This being the case, the 
injustice which darkens human life cannot 
be approved by him. 

Ver. 34. — To crush, etc With manifest 
reference to the cruelties of the Babylonian 
oonquerors of the Jews. 

Ver. 85. — Before the face of the Most 
High, In ancient phraseology, to bring a 
case before the judges was to bring it 
"unto the deity {'el hd-'eldhim), Exod. 
zzi. 6 ; comp. xxii. 8 ; or (as the Septuagint 
in one passage paraphrases it, " unto God's 
judgment-place," t.e. to a sacred spot where 
judges held their session. 

Ver. 86. — Approveth not. The sense is 
an excellent one, but it is very doubtful 
whether it can be obtained without altering 
•M of the letton of the word ia th« test 



(reading rdfah for rffSH). The text-reading 
is, " the Lord seeth not." This may be ex- 
plained eitlier as " the Lord regardeth not 
(such things)," or as a question, " Doth not 
the Lord regard (this) ? " 
Vers. 37 — 54. — Exhobtation to Bkpekt- 

AJtOB ; RENDBEED, LAMENTATION. 

Vers. 37, 38. — True, God Joes not desire 
our misfortunes. But equally true is it that 
they do not happen without his express 
permission (comp. Isa. xlv. 7 ; Amos iii. 6). 

Ver. 37. — That saith, and it oometh to 
pass (comp. Fs. xxxiii. 9 ; Gen. i. 3, etc.). 

Ver. 39. — Wherefore doth a living man 
complain, eto. ? The God of whom the poet 
speaks is the Searcher of hearts. Why, then, 
should a man complain when he knows that 
he deserves his punishment ? The close of 
the verse should run, (.Let) a man (rather 
ligh) over his liTtt. 

Vers. 40 — 51. — Confession of sin, followed 
by sighs and groans. 

Ver. 40 Let ns search. Our troubles 

being caused by our sins, let us search them 
out and correct them. 

Ver. 41. — Our heart with our hands. It 
is to be sincere prayer ; " spreading out the 
hands" is not enough by itself (Isa. i. 25). 

Ver. 42. —We . . . thou. Tlje prououns 
are expressed in the Hebrew, and are meant 
to be spoken with emphasis. 

Ver, 43. — Ihon hast, covered with anger. 
The clause seemg imperfect ; perhaps " thy- 
self " has fallen out of the text (see next 
verse). 

Ver. 44. — That onr prayer should not pass 
through. So Isa. Iviii. 4, " Ye do not so fast 
at this time as to make your voice to be 
heard on high ; " Fs. Iv. 1, " Hide not thy- 
self from my supplication." 

Vers. 46—48. — Here occurs a break in the 
alphabetic order, as these three verses begin, 
not, as they should, with ayin, but with pe 
(see Introduction), 

Ver. 46. — This verse is almost a verbal 
repetition of the first line of oh. ii. 16. 

Ver. 47. — Fear and a snare. An allitera- 
tion in the Hebrew, borrowed from Jer. 
xlviii. 43 (comp. Isa. xxiv. 17). 

Ver. 48. — Sunneth down, eto. (oomp. ch. i. 
16). 

Ver. 49. — Trickleth down ; rather, jwuretA 
dowH. Ceaseth not; literally, u not eUeni 
(oomp. Jer. xiv. 17). 

Ver. 51. — Affeoteth mine heart; rather, 
paincth me ; literally, painelh my soul, the 
soul being mentioned as the centre of the 
feelings and emotions. The daughters of 
my oity. The sad fate of the virgins of 
Jeiusalem oppressed the spirit of the writer 
(comp. ch. L 4, 18 ; ii. 10, 21). 

Vers. 52 — 66. — The Speakee's SuTras- 

INGS , AN EARNESTLY BeLIEVINO FBAYEB FOl 

Dblivebakob. HespeaksasarepresezitatiTt 



CH. in. 1—66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. 



86 



of the nation ; if we sliould not rather say 
that the nation itself, persouifierl, is the 
speaker. In the first triad some have sup- 
posed a reference to the persecution suffered 
by Jeremiah at the hands of his country- 
men. The "dungeon," or rather "pit," will 
in this case be the " dungeon " (" pit ") 
mentioned in Jer. xxxviii. 6. But a " pit " 
is a figure in ihe psalms for destruction 
(Ps. xl. 2 ; Ixix. 15), and there is nothing re- 
corded in Jeremiah as to the " princes " hav- 
ing cast stones at Jeremiah, or rolled a stone 
on to the top of the " pit." Besides, the 
" pit " into which the prophet was cast had 
" no vf ater, but mire." 

Ver. 52. — Mine enemies . . . without 
canse. Theso words ought to be connected, 
as in the Hebrew. 

Ver. 54. — I am out off. Some words have 
to be supplied, and Pb. xxxi. 22 suggests 
which these are : — " I am out off from be- 
fore thine eyes," i.e. from the region on 
which the eyes of God rest. 

Ver. 55. — I called. Bunsen renders, " Then 
I called." But there is no connection in- 
dicated in the Hebrew between this and the 
preceding triad. Out of the low dungeon ; 
literally, out of the pit of the lower parts 
(of the earth)— a phrase borrowed from Ps. 
Ixxxviii. 6 (Hebrew, 7). Sheol, or Hades, is 
signified. 

Ver. 56. — At my breathing ; rather, at my 
nghing ; literally, at my reliemng mytelf. 

Ver. 57. — Thou drewest near, etc. The 
■acred poet reminds Jehovah of bis former 
gracious interpositions. 

Ver. 58. — Thou hast pleaded, etc. The 
reference is still to a former state of things 



which came to an end. It would make this 
plainer if we were to alter the rendering, 
Thou didst plead . . , thou didst redeem. 
The speaker likens his case to that of a 
poor man who is opposed at law by a rich 
oppressor, and who, for want of an advocate, 
will, to all appearance, become his victim. 
Suddenly Jehovah appeared and supplied 
this want. Such are God's " wonders of 
old time." 

Ver. 59. — Thon hast seen my wrong. 
Here the speaker returns to the present. 
This is clear from the following words : 
Judge thou my cause. 

Ver. 62.— The lips stand here for "the 
fruit of the lips;" and the verb which 
governs the nouns is "thou hast heard," 
in the preceding verse. 

Ver. 63. — ^Their sitting down, and their 
rising up. Elsewhere the phrase is a com- 
prehensive expression for all a man's occu- 
pations (comp. Ps. cxxxix. 2; Isa. xxxvii. 
28). I am their music ; rather, their song ; 
i.e. the subject of their taunting songs, p. 
in the parallel passage, Jobxxx. 9; comaa 
Ps. Ixix. 12 (Hebrew, 13). 

Ver. 64. — ^Bender unto them, ete. The 
sacred poet is familiar with the psalms; 
here we have a condensation of Ps. xxviiL 
4. The tone of vers. 64 — 66 reminds wb of 
passages in the Book of Jeremiah (see Jer. 
xviii. 23 ; xx. 12). 

Ver. 65. — Sorrow of heart ; rather, a eater- 
ing of the heart; spiritual blindness, like 
the "veil upon tire heart " in 2 Cor. iii. 15. 
Thy curse unto them. This should rather 
form a separate interjectional clause, " Thy 
curse upon them 1 " 



HOMILBTICa 

Ver. 1. — "Iceman that has seen affliction.'' In the first and second cnapton of 
Lamentations the desolation of the city of Jerusalem is described and deplored. The 
third chapter brings the picture to a focus by giving us the plaint of a single individnal 
— either one typical or exceptionally distressed citizen, or the city regarded imaginatively 
as an afflicted man. Our sympathy is most moved by individual appeals. We are 
horrified by disasters that aSect thousands ; but we are more touched by the details of ■ 
the suffering of one person. Nearness is requisite for sympathy, a nearness of view, at 
least, that enables us to see the humanity of the sufferer. Stutistios of public distress do 
not so affect us as the sight of a few severe cases that are brought under our own eyes. 
We cannot pity "the masses;" we pity this mau and that woman. Therefore we 
should bring ourselves into contact with the sufferers of our own neighbourhood, and 
not be content to follow only such promptings of benevolence as may arise from a dis- 
tant survey of large fields of distress afforded by the formal reports of charitable 
institutions. 

I. The man that has seen affliction has claims upon the considbeation of 
HIS FELLOW-MBN. The Sufferer of Jerusalem arrests our attention. He has a right to 
do so. Great distress is by itself sufiiciently important to demand our notice. Moral 
merit will add to the force of the appeal of suffering. But even where the merit is 
lacking the sulfering itself still has claims upon us. We must not roughly shake ofl 
the <»bligaiious of sympathy by the observation that the client is ill deserving. If th* 



36 THE LAMENTATiOKS OS' JEBEMIAH. {m.in.1—66, 

ill desert mean that the complaint is false and the distress a sham, of course it is to be 
visited with contempt or punishment. But suppose, with evil character, there ia also 
real distress. In such a case we should take the distress into consideration. We may 
not help in the same way in which we would assist a deserving case, for perhaps 
similar assistance would be wasted, or abused, or in some way harmful. But we must 
remember that charity is not limited by merit. Like the mercy of God to sinners, it 
should flow out to those whose only claim upon it is their want and woe. Great 
sorrow does not atone for sin, especially where it leaves the sufferer impenitent. But 
it does call for pity. Whether she were innocent or guilty, we feel deep compassion for 
such a victim of torture as Beatrice Genci, and even imagine a certain sacredness about 
her solitary pre-eminence of distress that hushes all harsh judgments. 

n. The uak that has been affliction is in danqeb of reoabdino his suffeb- 
INOS AS WITHOUT FABAliLEL. He feels his own trouble more acutely than that of his 
neighbour. Thus he comes. to regard himself as exceptionally distressed. Pain is a 
good school in which to learn sympathy with others in similar trouble. But the 
sympathy is commonly attained after one's own agony is lulled. It comes with the 
ncoUection of It called up by the sight of the present distress outside us. But while 
pain is being endured, especially if it is very acute, it tends to make the sufferer selfish 
for the time being. At least It wraps him up in himself and makes him magnify 
the severity of his own lot in comparison with that of other people. Let us be on our 
guard against this illusion, and the unkindness to others and murmuring and despair of 
ourselves which may come out of it. 

III. The man that has seen affliction has sained knowledge of some of 
THE DEEPEST FAOTS OF LIFE. We do not know life till we have felt pain. Buddha, 
while kept from all suffering in bis palace, was ignorant of the world and of man. 
Suffering opens the eyes to the facts of life and breaks up many idle dreams. Mere 
skow and pretence are then felt to be vain and mocking. True friends are discrimi- 
nated from idle acquaintances. The value of inward things is discovered. 

IV. The KAN THAT HAS BEEN AFFLICTION HAS EXPERIENCED A TALUABLK DIBCI- 

FLINE. This is a useful " means of grace." It may be sent to punish sin and check 
the thoughtless sinner on his road to ruin. Or it may be to remind the sarelesa Chris- 
tian of his declension. Or it may be like the pruning of the fruitful branch, a stimulus 
to make the fruitful Christian more fruitful. Various ends may be served. But in all 
cases the suffering is meant for our good. Nevertheless, the enjoyment of the advan- 
tage aimed at in the providential arrangement depends on the use we make of our 
trouble. We may receive this grace in vain. If we harden our heart under it it will 
be useless to us. Such a result is doubly disappointing, for we do not escape the pain, 
yet we come out of the ordeal worse instead of better. 

T. The man that has seen affliction is a ttpe of Chbist. Like " the Servant 
of the Eternal," in the latter part of " Isaiah," this unnamed sufferer of the Lamen- 
tations seems to foreshadow the unique distress of the Man of sorrows. Christ claims 
our attention by his suffering, and the more that he suffered for us. He did not nmply 
imagine his distresses to be great. He never posed for pity. But never was sorrow 
hke unto his sorrow. He entered deeply into human experience by his sufferings, and 
became a High Priest touched with the feeling of our infirmities. Made perfect by 
suffering, he gives to us the fruits of his cross and passion as more than a " means of 
grace "—as bread of life and blood of redemption. 

Ver. 6.—" Dark placet." The sufferer feels as though he were in the dark places ol 
the dead, in the everlasting house which no tenant ever quits. 

I. God bometimbs bets his people in dark places. He permits the light of 
gladness to fade and the vision of truth to be dimmed and the conscious brightness of 
his presence to be lost, so that the soul is plunged in black depths of sorrow, doubt, 
and loneliness. Then the dismayed sufferer feels himself lost, well-nigh dead. But he 
is not dead, nor even deserted by God. The very fact that he admits that Ood has set 
him in the dark place is a confession that the hand of God has been with him. Beal 
death and utter desolation come from the desertion of the soul by God ; the chastiso- 
ment that he directly imposes evidences his presence and energy, and it therefon 
promisM M», 



M. 111. 1—66.] THE LAMENTATIONS JF JBBEMIAH. 



n. While in the light we should be pbepabed fob the dark places. W« 
stumble in the dark, ami are teirified and confounded by it because we do not know it 
and are not in readiness for it. Like Adam in ' Paradise Lost/ we are surprised at th« 
first coming on of light. Because we expect the night and know that a new day will 
follow, we can contemplate the deepening gloom of evening without apprehension. Th« 
miner, prepared for the darkness of his subterranean work, takes his lamp with him. 
Every soul should be warned that it is likely some day to be plunged into spiritual 
darkness. If ready with the quiet inward light of faith, it need fear nothing. While 
we know that God's rod and staff are with us to comfort us, we shall not be dismayed, 
though we shall be saddened, at being called to walk through the valley of the shadow 
of death. 

III. Souis leaen lessons of light in dark places. In s deep well the stars 
above are visible at noon. In deep humiliation heavenly light is seen that is lost in 
the garish show of earthly commonplace life as well as on tht; heights of pride and pro- 
sumption. Tears of sorrow purge the vision of the souL It is well sometimes to ba 
alone in the dark with God. 

IV. There are dark places or spiritual death that are more awful than 
THE ABODE OF DEPARTED SPIRITS. To the old-woild view Hades was a realm of 
sinless gloom. But worse than the darkness of this Hades is the darkness of those who 
are dead in trespasses and sin. Such men carry hell within their own breasts. The 
blackness of death broods over their spiritual natures so that they feel no qualms of 
conscience, and are awake to no voices from heaven. These darkest places are never 
assigned by God to his creatures. If they are found in them it ia because they bam 
plunged into them of their own will. 

Ver. 7. — Hedged about. I. Evert life is surrounded bt Divine liuitationb. 
God hedges all of us about. Some have a narrow fiaU of freedom and others a widei 
field. But every man's field is fenced in. Within certain limits we have scope for 
choice and will. Yet even there choice is fettered. For there is not only the hedge 
that bounds our area of action, there is the chain on our own person that hampers our 
movements. Free-will is far from being unlimited. Or, if the will is not fettered, th« 
txecution of it ii. Note some of the things that make up the hedge which God 
plants about us. L Physical limiiations, laws of nature, circumstances of our habi- 
tat, the measure of our bodily powers, special hindrances in external events that go con- 
trary to us, and, with some, disease, maiming, or other bodily impediment beyond our 
control. 2. Mental limitations. There is a limit to what we can think of, imagine, or 
desire. Our knowledge is limited— both knowledge of ends and knowledge of means. 
As one who finds himself a stranger in a mountainous country is shut in on all sides 
because he does not know the passes, our ignorance fetters us and hinders us. 3. MortU 
limitations. God fences our way with his Law. There are forbidden fields which no 
material barrier shuts off, yet from which the mysterious, invisible bands of righteous- 
ness keep us back. Thus the man whose conscience is awake is often aware of being 
hedged in and chained down where one of duller spirituality feels free to roam «t 
pleasure. 

II. These Divine limitations abe felt to be ieksomb to us when oub will 
IS IN conflict with God's will. All finite beings must be hedged about by their 
natural limits. Angels must be within the fence of their powers and rights. Pure 
spirits are under the law of God. But to these beings the barriers cannot be irksome. 
They must be submitted to with meek and happy complacency. No wistful gaze is 
cast beyond into forbidden pasture, no covetous greed vexes with longings for the 
unattainalile or the unlawful. But we men on earth live in frequent conflict with our 
heavenly Father's will. We find the walls to be hard because we fling ourselves upon 
them. Our chain galls us because we chafe and fret ourselves against it. The wander- 
ing sheep is torn by the hedge, while the quiet obidient sheep knows nothing of the 
briars. When we rebel against God we murmur at his restraints. But, it is said, ii 
not the bondage the same while unfelt? and is it not ignominious to be blivious of it? 
and is there not something noble even in th<8 hopeless blow that is struck for freedom f 
The most subtle spiritual temptation of the devil takes this form, and it tempts to the 
most wicked Bin— rebellion against God for its own sake. And it is a delusion. Foi 



38 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [ch. iu. 1—66 



the highest obedience is not the restraint of our will before God's will, but the assimi- 
lation of the two. We learn to will what God wills. Then we keep within the 
Divine limitations, and yet they cease to be limitations to us. They never touch us 
because we never attempt nor wish to cross them. Here lies the secret of peace as 
well as of holiness. So lofty an attainment can only be reached through that one- 
ness with Christ of which he speaks when he prays that his disciples may be one with 
him and the Father, as he is one with the Father (John xviL 21). 

Ver. 18. — Strength and hope perished. The sufferer feels as though his strength, or 
rather in the expressive word of the Hebrew, his " sap " were destroyed, and with it his 
hope also ; and he attributes this desperate condition to the action of God. It is a con- 
dition of spiritual afSiction the pathology of which demands careful investigation, for 
it is symptomatic of a great progress of inward trouble. 

I. It indicates that external calamities have produced INTBRNAL DISTBBSa. 

Every calamity assails tho soul. But for a while the citadel holds out. Without the 
storm beats furiously. Within there is security and comparative quiet. At length, 
after a certain force of trouble is attained, in the addition of wave upon wave as in 
Job's case, or in the access of some one overwhelming disaster as in the destruction of 
Jerusalem, the defence fails, the enemy enters the breach and pours in a flood over the 
whole fortress. Sorrow of heart follows the loss of wealth, sickness, or other trouble of 
outer life. 

II. It indicates that distress of boul has undermined the powers of 
ENDURANCE. The " Sap " perishes. For a time a man holds on bravely, though with 
bleeding heart. But as the grief grows upon him he " breaks down," he can stand it 
no more, he says he cannot bear it. In one sense he can bear any amount of trouble 
that does not extinguish his being. He can pass through it and come out of it alive. 
But to bear trouble in the sense of keeping self-possessed and calm under it may be no 
longer possible. Wild and reckless anguish takes the place of sober, patient grief. The 
strength of soul is gone. The spirit that bore up against the blast is broken. Crushed 
and helpless, the sufferer no longer contends with the storm, but permits himself to be 
tossed and dashed about at the sport of the cruel waves. 

III. It indicates that the loss of strength has ended in despair. Hope 
also perishes. A broad line must be drawn between sorrow that is lightened by hope 
and sorrow without hope. So long as the faintest ray still glimmers on the horizon the 
prospect is not utterly dark. W hen hope goes the soul is indeed abandoned to its dis- 
tresses. The most acute pain may be boine with comparative equanimity so long as 
there is prospect of relief. Directly that prospect is destroyed a much smaller trouble 
becomes unendurable. Now and again we meet with a soul that has lost hope ; we see 
it drifting on the wild sea of life without rudder or compass, a mere wreck of its 
former self. 

IV. It is an internal condition that should not be taken as indicative of 
corresponding external facts. We need not assume that there will be no bright 
future, for the desponding despair is not its own justification. It is often irrational, 
almost insane. It springs from grief that is big enough to hide all prospect of better 
things, but not to destroy the possibility of their ultimate arrival. The very fact that 
the trouble is traced to God — this trouble is " from the Eternal " — should help us to dis- 
trust the doleful prophecy of despair. If God our Father sends trouble, it is well. He 
will surely bring good out of it. For one who has faith in Christ no distress should be 
allowed to end in despair. 

Vers. 19 — 21. — Ood taking notice of man's affliction. In his distress the sufferer cries 
to God, calling upon his great Helper to note his condition and remember it. Then he 
is calmed by prayer, and rests in the assurance that God does not forget his trouble. 
Eecalling this thought to mind, he recovers hope. 

I. The oby for God's notice. 1. It is to Ood. At first it seems as though God had 
forgotten his afBicted child. The vision of the Divine countenance is clouded; no 
voice speaks out of the darkness. Desolate and despairing, in misery that is bitter as 
wormwood and gall, the troubled soul seems to be deserted of God in the hoar of gnatesc 
ue«d. Then tlie sufferer cries out to God. Here is instinctive wisdom. We may oi 



oa. III. 1—66.] TH£ LAMENTATIONS OF JEBEMIAB. 81 

we may not be observed by our fellow-men, and though human sympathy ia a conso- 
lation, and indifference an additional bitterness, still in the heaviest trouble man can do 
little. It is not his notice that we should be most anxious to attract. The clamour of 
the afflicted for ])ity is an indication of weakness. But we do need God's sympathy ; 
this is true healing balm. To him let the cry of trouble ascend. 2. It it for Qod'i 
notice. It is not for relief, but for remembrance by G-od. There is good reason to trust 
that the remembrance will result in the relief. Nevertheless, the first and chief necessity 
isthat God would take notice of us in trouble. If he do so we can leave the rest to 
him. It would be well if our prayers implied more simple reliance on the goodness of 
God, without perfect definitions of what we desire him to do for us. 

II. The assubancb of God's notice. No sooner is the cry out of his lips than the 
sufferer comforts himself with the assurance that God does remember his afiSiction. 
Thus speedily is the prayer answered, even in the very act of uttering it. Neverthe- 
less, it is not to be thought that God did not remember the affliction till he had been 
Implored to do so. We should rather understand that it was always under the pitying 
eye of God, only the Divine compassionate recognition of it was not discovered until 
prayed for. Thus we often pray to God to do for us what he is already doing, and 
receive an answer to our prayers in the opening of our eyes to see the Divine action 
that has been hitlierto unobserved. We pray that God will be merciful to us. He 
answers our prayer, not by beoomiug merciful, but by showing us that he is and has 
been merciful all along. This revelation comes to us in two ways. 1. We are able to 
believe more in the character of Qod, in his love amd mercy. Then we can apply this 
faith to our present circumstances, and infer with confidence that such a God must be 
remembering us even when we see no proof of his notice, as a cliild when lost at first 
despairs, but, after refiecting on the love of his father and mother, comforts himself with 
the assurance that they will surely never desert him. 2. We are able to see indication! 
of Ood?t notice. Sometimes we can see how God is working for our deliverance when 
we shift our standpoint and regard our life from the footstool of prayer. 

III. The hope that springs from God's notiob. This is enough. God obtervei 
us. Still the trouble is great and bitter. But we know that he will not permit us to 
perish. As the shipwrecked crew wave garments and make frantic efforts to attract 
the attention of a passing vessel, and recover hope directly they see indications that 
they are discovered, so troubled souls should lose all despair as soon as they learn that 
they are seen by God. It may still be impossible to see how God will save. But we 
can trust that to him. Now, that we may enjoy this hope, it is necessary for us to call 
to mind the fact that God is remembering our affliction. Much depends on the aspect 
of affairs on which we dwell. If we turn to the wormwood and gall our lot will seem 
to be bitter without mitigation. We must voluntarily direct our thoughts away to 
the unseen remembrance of God, that we may receive the comfort of hope. 

Vers. 22, 23. — The unceasing mercies of Qod. It would seem, according to the best 
authorities, that we ought to read the first of these two verses thus : " The Lord's 
mercies, verily they cease not, surely his compassions fail not." Thus we are assured 
of the enduring character of God's mercies. How striking is this assurance, coming 
where it does after monstrous dirges of despair I In the Lamentations we meet with 
one of the richest confessions of faith in the goodness of God. The black clouds are 
not universal ; even here there is a break, and the brightest sunlight streams through, 
all the more cheering for the darkness that precedes it. This is a remarkable testimony 
to the breadth and force of Divine grace. No scene is so terrible as absolutely to 
exclude all vision of it. Its penetrating rays find their way through chinks and 
crannies of the deepest dungeon. Were our eyes but open to see it, every one of us 
would have to confess to indications of its presence. Surely it is a great consolation 
for the dssponding that even the exceptional sufferer of the Lamentations sees the 
unceasing mercies of God 1 

I. God's mercies never obabi. 1. We have no claim upon their continuance. 
Mercies are to the undeserving. It is much that such as we receive any. We could 
have no right to complain if they all ceased. The least of them is beyond our merit. 
2. We have done much to provoke the cessation of them. (1) By ungratefully accepting 
them; (2) by eomplainingly ignoring them ; (3) by sinfully abusing them. %. They 



40 THE LAMENTATIONS OV JEREMIAH, [oa. m. 1— 66. 

tometimes appear to cease. They are not always equally Tisible. But as the moun 
which seems to wax and wane never changes in itself, the grace which appears to us to 
5uctuate, and even at times to be extinguished, is never lessened, much less is it 
destroyed. 4. They change their form. The morning light varies from the evening 
light. Yet both come frum the same sun. God's mercy is sometimes cheery, at other 
times it seems to frown upon us. But the wrath is mercy in disguise ; and not only 
so, but under the circumstances that make it necessary it is more merciful than gentle- 
ness would be. There may be more mercy in the surgeon's knife than in the bed of 
down. 

II. God's mercies are constantly renewed. The same mercies wi 1 not last 
for ever. They are gifts and acts for a definite time. What suits one age does not 
agree with another. God adapts his grace to the immediate needs of the hour. 
His mercies are not statuesque and immobile. They are living and suitable to need. 
Tliey are never anachronous. They are never stale. GKxi gives to each of us new 
mercies. He is living and acting in our midst every day and at each immediate 
momeut. We read of God's mercies in writings of David and St. John. But we have 
not to exhume the antique mercies tliat were bestowed on these men of the olden times. 
Our own mercies are fresh to-day. As God keeps the old world green by renewing it 
every spring, so be refreshes and invigorates his people by spring- times of grace. More- 
over, it is well to see how he does this daily, and to wake in the morning with a joyous 
thankfulness in prospect of the entirely new mercies of the new day. 

III. 1'ee oeaselessness of God's meroy is a proof of his FAiTHFtrLNESS. 1. It is 
the fulfilment of his promise that he will never leave nor forsake his people. 2. It is cUso 
a sign that he is still acting according to his ancient word. For the mercy, being not 
only continued, but also renewed, shows us that God is fulfilling his promise in the 
immediate present. The friend who builds us a house may be considered to be futhful 
to his promise to shelter us as long as the house stands. But he who promises daily 
bread gives an additional proof of faithfulness by visiting us every day. The manna 
showed that God was daily present to fulfil his purposes of grace. Daily merdes are 
recurrent reminders of the faithfulness of OtoA. 

Ver. 24. — ITie secret of hope. The reader of the psalms is familiar with the Btter- 
ancfi, " The Lord is my Portion." The characteristic peculiarity of the adoption of this 
confession of faith by the sufferer of the Lamentations is his taking it as a ground of 
hope. The present is so dark that he can have little joy even in God. Earthly things 
are so unpropitious that he can hope little from them. But with God for his Portion 
he can look forward from the troubles of the present and the threatenings of earthly 
calamities to an unearthly joy in the future. Let us endeavour to see how to have 
God for our Portion is the secret of hope. 

I. GoD IS the best Odjeot of hope. 1. Consider how Ood can he an Object of hope. 
We hope in God when we hope to enjoy his presence, to bask in the sunshine of his 
love, to enter into the life of communion with him. To know God is satisfaction to 
the intellect. To have fellowship with God through luve is to have rest and joy in the 
heart. To be reconciled to God is to have the trouble of conscience allayed. All the 
deepest longings of the soul find their end and satisfaction in Gk>d. 2. Consider 
how Ood is the one perfect Object of hope. The greatest disappointment of an earthly 
hope is when the thing anticipated is given to us and yet the joy expected from it is 
not forthcoming. We clasp our treasure and find it to be dross, or we see it to be gold 
and we find that it will not stay the hunger of our souls. We are larger than the biggest 
earthly hope. Our aspirations soar above the highest of them. But God is higher and 
deeper and greater than the largest desire of any soul. He is just what we all need 
for rest and gladness. He cmnot disappoint us. If money is our portion it may be 
lost, or it may not buy ease of heart, if power, pleasure, success, or any other common 
end be our portion, we may be most wearied when we have gained most. God is the 
Portion to satisfy hope, and he only. 

IL God is the best ground of hope. We have most assurance that our hope will 
not fail us when we trust in him. Why ? 1. Because he is good. Malignant beings 
take pleasure in frustrating hope ; cruel people do it with indifference; and selfish and 
thoughtless men unwittingly. But God, who is love itself and who erer regards th* 



oa.ui.1— 66.J THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. 41 

needs of his children with merciful consideration, is too gracious to disappoint the hope 
wehavein him. 2. Bec&use he h faithful. He has invited our confidence and promised 
his inheritance to his obedient and trustful children. Thus he has pled<{ed his word. 
His honour is involved. He will never prove false to his promise. 3. Because he is 
almighty. With the best intentions a man may be compelled to disappoint the confi- 
dence reposed upon him through simple inability to meet it. The bankrupt caunot pay 
his debts, however honest he may be. But as there is no limit to the power of God, so 
there will be no failure of hope in him. 4. Because hope in God is lawful and right. 
We need not fear that the strictest judgment will condemn it. It ia a holy hope, and 
it is therefore likely more and more to be satisfied, as the judgment of Qoi condemns 
and destroys unworthy objects of ambition. 

Vers. 25, 26. — Quiet waiting. We are here first reminded that God does not disregard 
those who seek him. Though his grace may be delayed, it will come in due time. 
Then we are told that this waiting for God's response to our prayers is for our good, 
provided it be patient. 

I. God visits with gkace those who seek him, though thet mat have to wait 
FOB him. 1. He expects to he sought after. To wait for God implies attention and 
watchfulness. But direct efibrt to find grace in God is involved in seeking him. There 
are who say that this is a sign of distrust ; that we should wait without seeking God ; 
that to go after him implies impatience at his tarrying; and, in short, that all prayer 
which is positive petition, shows self-will, impatience, and distrust. But this hyper- 
critical view of prayer is a delusion. For the act of seeking may develop a trustfulness 
and bring about a preparedness which would not be found without it. We have the 
invitation of Christ to " seek that we may find." 2. Be may delay his response to our 
appeal. He may make us wait. The reason for this cannot be any reluctance or 
indifference on God's part. But it may be that the time is not ripe for our receiving 
the response, or that we shall be disciplined into preparedness by waiting, or that, other 
interests beyond our own being concerned, the answer must tarry on account of them. 
Be the reason what it may, we must be warned to expect this delay, or we shall be 
grievously disappointed, perplexed, and even thrown into doubt and despondency. 
'A. He will surely respond in due time. God is good to all who truly wait for and seek 
him. He is not a capricious, partial, respecter of persons. Nor does he require a 
certain amount of merit in the petitioner. Our want is our sole claim, and the most 
unworthy are the most needy. But observe: (1) we must truly seek God himself, 
aud not merely pleasant things from God ; and (2) though God is good to all who thus 
seek him, his goodness does not take the same form to each. To some it is healing 
balm, to others purging hyssop. 

II. Waiting fob God's qbace is good fob those who seek him, pbovidbd that they 
wait quietlt. 1. God permits them to wait for their own profit. Whatever other 
ends may be served by the delay, the good of the petitioner is aimed at in the provi- 
dential arrangement. How ? (1) By testing faith. Thus it is seen whether faith be 
real, enduring, and constant, (i!) By requiring submission. One of the most essential 
conditions of profiting by Divine grace is willingness to submit to the will of God. 
(3) By exercising our own spiritual poivers. If the timid swimmer were succoured the 
moment he cried for help, he would never gain confidcDce and strength. (4) By afford- 
ing us opportunity for consideration. While we wait we can think. We may then 
measure our need and see what will supply it. Looking at the approaching salvation 
in the light of hope and imagination, we are better prepared to enjoy it. 2. In order 
that thii waiting may be profitable it must be quiet. Impatience wrecks faith and 
gubmissiveness and obedience, and all the graces that are necessary for a right reception 
of Kvine salvation. It is difficult to be quiet while waiting. We grow restless and 
fret ourselves as the weary hours drag past. It is harder to wait than to work, because 
work occupies us as waiting does not. Yet we lose much for lack of patience. We are 
not quiet enough to hear the still small voice that would bring salvation. In our 
patience we must possess our souls if we are to receive into them the richest gifts of the 
goodneu of God. 

Ver. i1. — Touth. I. Thb tof£ belongs to touth. It is common to beat youth 



43 THB LAMENTATIONS OF JEBEMIAH. [oh. m. 1— 6Si 

spoken of as s time of pleasure. Older people do their best to damp the joyousness ol 
the young by telling them that these are their hnppy days, soon will come the dark 
days of trouble, let them enjoy the bright time while it lasts. Even if such a view of 
life were correct, the wisdom of thrusting it forward is not easy to discover. Why spoil 
the feast by pointing to the sword of Damocles ? Why direct the walk on a fair spring 
day to the graveyard? Surely it were wiser to say, " SufHcient unto the day is the evil 
thereof." But this view is false. It arises from the disturbed imagination of later years. 
Grown morose with care, men look back on the earlier days of their life and imagine 
ihem to have been far brighter than those they now enjoy ; but they only do so by that 
common trick of memory that selects the plensant pictures and drops the unpleasant 
ones. L Youth is a time of restraint. With all their lightness of heart, children feel 
the bonds of authority and long for the time when they shall be their own masters. It 
is difficult for grown men who have the free command of their own actions U> under- 
stand tlie irksomeness of the necessary bonds of childhood. Bestrained in the nursery 
and in the schoolroom under law and supervision, liable to ignominious rebuke, many 
children feel themselves in slavery. Wiser treatment gives more liberty ; but still it 
necessarily continues many restraints. And in fuU-grown life, when the bondage is 
more galling, young men commonly have to obey and submit to direction more than 
older men. 2. Youth is a time of toU. Men generally have to work hard in their 
younger years. The hours of labour are longest; the tasks imposed are the most 
disagreeable ; the wages paid are the lowest. Most men as they advance in years work 
for shorter hours at more agreeable tasks and for greater rewards. 

II. The tokb is good fob yodth. We have seen that it is incorrect to regard youth 
as a time of exceptional pleasantness. For a normal life the day brightens as it lengthens, 
at least till the meridian is attained, and even later the soft light of evening is to many 
a source of deep, calm joy unknown in the feverish excitement of youth (see Words- 
worth's poem on the superiority of the quiet September songs of the birds to their wild, 
restless spring songs). Nevertheless, the very yoke of youth is good. 1. If it must be 
borne at all, the yoke can he best borne in youth. The mind is then most supple to shape 
itself to the unwonted burden and pressure of it. Then a man can yield to authority 
with most pliancy and face hard labour most confidently. 2. The yoke it necessary 
for youth. It is a good thing to bear it in youth. (1) Restraint is then necessary. 
Liberty would be abused. Until an independent conscience has been developed, 
instructed, and strengthened, the external conscience of authority is needed. (2) Work 
is also good for youth. Even the discipline of unpleasant tasks is wholesome. It con- 
quers self-will and the idle love of pleasure, and trains in self-denial. 3. Later years 
are benefited by the yoke of youth. Even if the years during which it is borne arc not so 
happy as they might be, the man himself is better in the whole of his life. He profits 
by the discipline. He learns habits of self-restraint and industry. He is able better to 
appreciate the privileges of advancing stages of life. 

VeM. 31 — 33. — Chastisement only for a season. L Tms fact that chastisement 
IB ONLY FOB a SEASON. God doos " cast off" and "cause grief." His love does not 
nullify his wrath. When grieved and disowned by God the soul feels utterly desolate. 
But the terrible judgment is only for a season. It will end in reconciliation and com- 
passion. This great truth gives an entirely new complexion to our views of life and 
providence. We see at times the severe side. But we misjudge if we take that as a 
sample of the whole. Indeed the very severity prepares the way for mercy ; for Qoi 
can show compassion afier chastisement to a degree that would not be good before the 
wholesome discipline. The sunshine, which would wither the plants before the storm, 
coming after it helps them to grow and flourish on the water it has brought to their 
roots. 1. This fact is no grou/nd for reckhss indifference. For (1) the wrath is terrible 
enough while it lasts ; (2) it must endure as long as impenitent guilt is persisted in ; 
and (3) sin that presumes on mercy is the most gross and culpable ingratitude. 2. This 
fact should be a consolation in trouble. Hope may buoy up the sufiferer. And resort 
may be had to prayer. It seems as though the soul were abandoned. But if God has 
aot cast it off for ever, he must still feel interest in it, and may therefore be appealed to 
ibr mercy. 3. This fact is an encouragement to repentance. Endless punishment dis- 
courages repentance. It acts in the opposite way from that of all useful puniahmeuti 



OH.in. 1— 66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 43 

It tends to confirm sin. It is the prospect of mercy that softens the heart and prompts 
feelings of peniteDce. 

11. The reason ■why chastisement is only fob a season. This reason is to be 
found in the character of God. " He doth not afflict willingly," or rather, " from his 
heart." There is an essential diiferenoo between chastisement and mercy. Chastise- 
ment is necessary and sent reluctantly, but mercy springs from the heart of God and 
is ^ven willingly. That is a false and libellous representation of God, according to 
which the theologian describes the outpouring of Divine wrath as though there were a 
real satisfaction to God in the process of causing pain to his creatures. The description 
of (iverlasting perdition as given to lost souls with a flood of wrath is more like the 
action of a malignant demon than that of a merciful God. It is sometimes so spoken 
of as though every attribute in God but mercy were eternal. Truth, justice, holiness, 
wrath, vengeance, are to endure for ever. Only mercy has its day. Only this one 
ftrace is short-lived and soon to be exhausted. The calumny is a direct contradiction to 
Scripture, which teaolies over and over again that the mercy of the Lord endureth for 
ever. This attribute at least is eternal. This one springs most directly from the heart 
of God ; for it is the fruit of love. While we say God is angry at times, we do not 
say God is anger, because anger is not of the essential nature of God. But we do say, 
not only God loves, but God is love. But it may be said, if God does not afflict " from 
his heart," why does he aflSict at all ? It must be because the circumstances of his 
children make it necessary. He does it not for his own sake. Then he must do it for 
their sakes. Seeing, however, that the chastisement is not agreeable to them, there 
must be some object in it, some result of it by which they are to profit. It must, there- 
fore, cease in due time, that it may give place to that happy result. 

Ver. 38. — How evil and good loth proceed from God, The Hebrew prophets shou-^ 
no inclination towards Persian dualism. They never attempt to solve the mystery of 
evil by the doctrine of two principles in nature, a good and an evil principle, in any 
respect co-ordinate one with another. On the contrary, they emphasize the monism 
of their creed by ascribing sole supremacy and originating power to "the Eternal." 
Nevertheless, they do not teach that moral evil is caused by God. This they regard 
as springing from the heart of man. In the verse before us we have no question of this 
darkest kind of evil. It is not sin, but suffering, that is referred to, as the context clearly 
shows. We have just been told that God will not cast off for ever because he does not 
afflict from his heart. We are now reminded that it is not the less true that Gk)d sends 
adverse as well as pleasant things. 

I. Thb whole op oub lifb-expebibnoe is undeb the direction of God. Our con- 
duct is in our own hands ; but what is not thus immediately dependent on our own 
will is directed by God. Other men influence us, but they are overruled by the Most 
High. Chance and accident seem to strike us, but chance and accident only exist to 
our ignorance. They are not really, for Providence excludes them. We sometimes 
speak of visitations of God, as though he came and went. But that only means that 
we perceive his action at one time more than at another. God is ever working in us. 
" In him we live, and move, and have our being." Things great and small, pleasant and 
painful, spiritual and physical, eternal and temporal, are under the hand of God and 
regulated by his will. 

II. God treats us in vabious ways. He sends both evil and good. He has not 
one unchanging method of action. He varies his treatment according to requirement. 
To one he sends more evil, to another more good. Yet to none does he send experience 
of one kind only. The hard lot has many mitigations. The pleasant places have their 
shadows. As we pass through life we see how God deals with us in wise suitableness, 
now sending most good, now most evil. 

III. We must not infer that if Gob is with us no trouble can befall. If evil 
as well as good proceeds from the mouth of the Most High, no assurance of the presence 
of the Author of both will jiistify us in disbelieving in the coming of either experience. 
We must be on our guard or we shall bo disappointed. We must be prepared to expect 
evil things even while we are under the care of God. 

IV. We must not infbb that if evil befall us God cannot bk with us. This 
iaference of unbelief is the natural consequence of disappointment in the presumptiou 



4* THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEKEMIAH. [oh. in. 1—66. 

that, if God is with us, we cannot suffer trouble. There is real comfort in the tboughl 
that evil is sent by God, if only by the removal of the common assumption that it 
indicates desertion by him. 

V. We may infbb that if evil fbooebds from God it is pbrmittbd fob the bake 
OF ULTIMATE GOOD. For Ood does not delight in sending evil. His heart is not in it. 
But his heart is in mercy. He may seem to send the two indifferently ; but he does 
not bestow them with equal pleasure nor with similar results, for the good is lent for 
its own sake, and the avil only that it may lead to higher good in the futuro. 

Ver. 40. — Belf-examtnatlon. It is interesting to watch the progress of the thoughts 
and feelings of the writer who addresses us as a sufferer in the overthrow of Jerusalem. 
At first he bewails his lot, then he calls to God for assistance. After doing so he 
regain! faith, and calls to mind the merciful kindness of God. This helps him to the 
assurance that the trouble is but temporary. He feels that since it comes from God it 
mart not be complained of. It is rather a call to reflection and self-examination. 

L Chastisement should lead to self-exauination. It does us little good until it 
maket us thoughtful. We must sit still under it and think. Then we should turn our 
thoughts in upon ourselves. We are inclined to look anywhere else, to discuss the 
justice of God, to complain of the conduct of men, to criticize the course of events. 
But tiie one tUng necessary is to look within. This is difUcult, as any one who has 
honestly tried it knows quite well. It is not necessary habitually. Too much intro- 
spection develops a morbid subjectivity. But there are special occasions for self- 
examination, and trouble is one of tbem. 

II. Self-examination should investioatb conduct. It la "our ways" that we 
are to inquire into. 1. The important question is as to what toe do and how we live. 
People examine their feelings. The examination Is delusive and unwholesome. They 

"examine their opinions. But opiniuns should not be matters of moral trial so much as 
questions for calm intellectual testing. The chief point is as to our behaviour. 2. The 
most important questions of conduct are those which concern our habitual actions. 
"Our ways " are not isolated deeds, but courses of action. We may be surprised into a 
fall or spurred into a good deed. More signiUcant is our normal, everyday conduct. 
This is what we should investigate most closely. 

III. The invbstioaton of conduct should bb bearchino and judicial. 1. It 
should be searching. Evil is subtle. Plausible excuses cover bad deeds. We must 
not be content with condemning conscious and confessed wickedness. The hidden evil 
of our heart must be searched out. The detective must do his part before the magis- 
trate does his. 2. It should he periodical. We must " try " our ways. It is unprofit- 
able and demoralizing to conscience to confess guilt which we do not feel and see. 
Until we are convinced of it we are dishonest in attempting to blame ourselves for it. 
Conviction must precede the sentence. We should also be just to ourselves. Whole- 
sale self-accusatioii is often dishonest and rarely profitable. We want point and specific 
charges in our judgment of ourselves — the Law of Ood, the voice of conscience, the 
example of Christian standards by which to try ourselves. If we find the process dilh- 
cuJt, we may pray that God will carry it on for us (Ps. cxxxix. 23, 24). 

IV. The conviction which follows the trial of oub own conduct should lead 
us TO bepentanoe. It is of no use unless it does this. The mere sense of guilt is 
depressing and, left to itself, may lead us to ruin through despair. Bepentance should 
follow. We are to know that we are in the wrong way only in order that we may turn 
from it to the, right way. We all sin, and therefore self-examination should lead all 
of us through conviction of sin to repentance. Then we can return to God. He waits 
only fur our confession of guilt. When we own to it he wiirpardon It. 

Ver. 44. — Ood covering himself with a doud. There are dark hours when God not 
only seems to be hidden from view, but to be so wrapped in thick clouds that even our 
prayers cannot penetrate to him. Let us consider when and how far this is really the 
case, 

I. Sometimes it ib only apparent. We lose heart and confidence. Discouraged 
and saddened, we cease to believe that God is listening to our cry. We can never 
see Ood nor bear any audible response to our cry and must always pray in faith, 



OH. in. 1— 1)6.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEEEMIAH. 4S 

•nd therefore when faith fails we are ready to my that God does not hear ni. We 
should rememher that God's attention is not confined to the evidences of it that he may 
afford to us. He may hear us without telling ua that he does, or he may simply delay 
the response for good and wise reasons. Let U8, therefore, heware of the folly of judging 
of God's actions by our own passing moods. 

IL Sometimes it is rbal, but merciful. God does not always accept our prayers 
even when he is regarding us favourably. 1. He may be trying our faith. It may be 
better for us that our faith should be tested and strengthened than that we should have 
the particular thing we desire. 2. We may be asking unwisdy. Perhaps the greatest 
unkindness would be to answer our foolish prayer according to our wish. The mother 
must turn a deaf ear to the cry of her child for a poisonous fruit. It is hard thus to 
refuse. Nothing tries love more severely. It is a proof of the great love of God that 
he is firm in thus apparently treating us with indifference when all the while his heart 
yearns to comfort us. 

III. Sometimes it is both beal and wrathful. God will not always hearken to 
prayer. There are circumstances that raise great banks of clouds between our souls and 
HeaTen such as the most vehement petition cannot pierce. 1. Unrepented sin. If 
we have sinned ever so heavily and confess our iniquity, heaven is open to hear the 
faintest sigh of penitence. But against impenitence it is firm as brass. 2. Self-will. 
So long as we are praying, rebelliously demanding our own way and not submitting 
to God's will, no prayer of ours can reach his throne in heaven. We may dare to 
lay our wish before God in humility, but yet in frank expression of it. Neverthe- 
less, it can only be entertained by God when we add in spirit, if not in words, " Not 
my will, but thine, be done." Thus may we cry to the void and have back only the 
mocking echo of our foolish prayer. We may send urgent requests towards heaven, 
and they will only lose themselves in the thick, black clouds of Divine disfavour which 
come between us and God. It is hopeful, however, for a soul to know this. When we 
see the cloud we are half-way towards the removal of it. 

IV. It is the work of Christ to dissipate the oloud that shuts oub prater 
OUT rBOM God. 1. He permits us to pray in his Name,-mth his authority, and pleading; 
his merit. 2. He teaches us to pray in the riyht spirit of penitence, submission, and 
faith. 

Vers. 49, 60. — Tears which only Ood can wipe away, I. Thebk abb tbajm which 
ONLY God can wife awat. Jerusalem is so desolate that one who mouma her sad 
estate weeps such tears. But in all ages there have been sufferers in similar grief. 
1. When sorrow is acute. The lighter troubles may be patiently endured, or resisted, 
or mitigated, or driven away by sympathy and brotherly aid. There are troubles 
which no man can touch, sores which no balm of Gilead can ease, a secret bitterness 
known only to the heart of the sufferer. In such agonies of distress comfort is a 
mockery, to attempt to console is only to intrude into the sanctuary of sorrow and to 
harrow the wounds we cannot heal. 2. When sorrow is chronic. The sudden flood of 
tears may be quickly stanched. There are people of mercurial temperament who seem 
to be in the depths of despair one moment and elated with pleasure the next. It is not 
difficult to stay the tears of these shallow natures. But when the tears flow on through 
the bright day as in the long night, this weeping without intermission passes the 
bounds of human aid. The broken heart, the ruined life, hopes shattered, and joys 
buried in the grave, open a fountain of grief that only God can stay. Now, it is 
important to recognize this fact. If we are only driven to see it by hard experience, 
we may lose ourselves in despair before we can find any consolation in God. It is well 
to know when we are in smooth water that storms are coming which our vessel cannot 
weather. Then we may be prepared to look for a haven. 

XL There are no teabs which God cannot wipe away. The sufferer weeps 
" till the Lord louk down, and behold from heaven." But when God looks the tears 
will be dried. Belief comes from God. It comes in a look from God. It comes when 
heaven is open to the troubled soul. One look from heaven is enough. How is this 1 
1. When God looks from heaven he manifests himself. He is always regarding us. 
But at times it seems to us that we are forgotten and deserted by him. Then again 
•re see that he is observing us. The newly manifested nearness of God is a consolation. 



46 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [ch. m. 1— 66, 

2. When God looks lie shows compassion. We express compassion by the eye more 
than by the voice. The look of pity is its surest, gentlest, most touching ezpTession. 
Tliis is the look of God when he beholds distress. 3. When Q-od looks at the sufferer 
he sends help to him. God is not one who can contemplate suffering and then "pasi 
by on the other side." With him to see want is to aid it. It is therefore enough that 
God regards us. The rest must follow. 4. When God looks from heaven he draws the 
sufferer up to himself. He attracts by his wonderful look of loving-kindness. The 
••evolation of heaven lifts the troubled spirit up to heaven. By communion with 
heaven earthly tears are wiped away. 

Ver. 57. — " Fear not I " The recollection of how God has forbidden one not to fear 
in the past is a plea in praying that he will remove the ground of fear in the present. 

I. Wb much need Divine encookagbments to overcome peab. 1. In real danger. 
It is not only the coward who fears. Indifference often gets the credit of courage. 
Many fear not simply because they are blind. To see would be to tremble. For the 
great powers of the universe, " the terror by night and the arrow that flieth by day," 
and the spiritual temptations that threaten our souls, are too strong for us. 2. In the 
threateniny aspect of the future. Heavy clouds will gather to windward. Storms are 
plainly brewing out at sea. Whether they will burst over our heads or not we cannot 
say. But the very uncertainty adds to ihe terror ; for fear feeds on vague alarms and 
may be conquered when the worst is known. 3. In the mystery of life. Even when 
w« see no threatening danger the awful unknown is peopled to our imagination with 
strange horrors. 4. In the fears of others. Nothing is so contagious as fear. Hence 
the madness of panics. It is hard to be brave among the timorous. 6. In hours of 
weakness. When we are weary courage flags. We can be brave at noon, but midnight 
awakens fear. Guilt is full of alarm. 

II. We have many Divine bnijoubaobments to overcome fbab. 1. In directly 
urging us not to fear. He has said, " Fear not!" He will not mock with empty words. 

2, Inpromises of help. The Scriptures teem with words of grace for troubled souls, as 
when they are bidden to cast their burden upon God because he will sustain them, to 
call upon him in the day of trouble and he will hear them, etc. By the veracity and 
honour of God we have enough assurance in any one of these promises to dispel fear. 

3. In the fatherly character of God. If we had no instruction not to fear and no 
pronaise of help, we might still know enough of God to rest confident that all must be 
well when we are in his hands. The child fears nothing when nestling on its mother's 
boiom. Who shall fear that leans upon the bosom of God ? 4. In our personal rela- 
tions with Ood. Let it be noted that everybody under all circumstances is not to be 
urged to cast fears to the wind. The guilty should fear. The impenitent have no 
excuse for abandoning fear. They who are at enmity with God should dwell in great 
trembling. It is when reconciled through Christ, forgiven and restored to our home, 
that as redeemed souls we can shake off fear. 

III. DlVI^E ASSURANCES AGAINST FEAR SHOULD INSPIRE OUR FBAYEBS FOE HELP I» 

DANGER. We are to remember how God has bidden us not to fear. Here is a grand 
source of confidence when we cry for help. For it is the very Word of God that has led 
us to stand facing the storm. His action must be true to his Word. Nevertheless, we 
do need to pray for help in danger. God's promises are conditional. When he dissuades 
us from fear it is on the understanding that we seek refuge beneath the covert of his 
wings. To the storm-tossed soul he says, " Pear not 1 " but he expects that soul to 
welcome him as its Pilot. Then the storm will be weathered. God's assurance of 
safety is for those who turn to his protection. It is those who are " in Christ Jesus " 
fur whom there is no condemnation, and who therefore need fear nothing. 

Vers. 59 — 66. — The great appeal. We can see the advantage to justice of appealing 
irum a lower to a higher court. Sometimes the process has to be repeated and the case 
tried again and again until the best attainable verdict is pot from the very highest 
tribunal. In the East, where justice was commonly neglected by indolence, outraged by 
violence, or prostituted by bribery, men felt strongly the value of an appeaL To ths 
believer in the supreme Judge it was a groat satisfaction that he couLl turn from the 
eorrupt and venal courts of human judicature to the high court of Heaven. It may 



OH. m. 1—66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMUH. 47 

aften be a relief to make this appeal. For absolate justice between man and man is 
rarely obtained. Three things are wanted to make the result satisfaotoiy— -clear 
evidence, a just verdict, and a firm execution of the sentence. 

L Cleab evidence. It is difficult to make one's condition rightly apprehended by 
men. Frequently there are facts that cannot be explained, or the whole transaction 
stands on a different ground from what people imagine, or its features are warped by 
the atmosphere of prejudice through which it is regarded. But God sees clearly and 
knows all. "Thou God seest me" is the comforting reflection of the vexed soul. 
" Thou hast seen my wrong," " Thou hast seen all," is the first consolation. But for this 
assurance to give comfort it is necessary that our cause should be just. God sees 
truly both the merit and the fault. It is useless to appeal to God with a bad case. 
There is no deceiving him. Let us see that our cause is always one which we can refer 
to the thorough investigation of the all-seeing God. 

n. A JUST VEBDIOT. The evidence may be clear, yet the decision may be unjust 
if the judge is partial or corrupt. It is the comfort of one who makes the highest 
appeal that God not only knows all, but will decide righteously. " Judge thou my 
cause," says the troubled soul. God will judge all causes at the great tribunal of the 
judgment-day. Injustice can only live till then. Should not the oppressed bear his 
brief wrongs with calmness when he knows that they will soon be righted ? It is 
interesting to see that " the day of the Eternal," which the Jews anticipated as the 
great judgment-day, was not regarded by them with terror, as it is often regarded by 
Christians. This fact may be, perhaps, partially due to a duller sense of personal sin. 
But surely it is chiefly owing to the grand Hebrew love of righteousness. We see 
strange mysteries of inequality and injustice that are at times perfectly bewildering. 
The judgment of Heaven will set all right. And even now God may do much for his 
children by his providence. 

m. A riBH EXECUTION. The sufferer prays that God will "render unto them a 
rwompense." A Christian spirit should deliver us from the thirst for vengeance that 
was too pronounced even in the most devout Hebrew. But we must beware of a weak 
quasi-himianitarianism that would sacrifice justice and wholesome retribution to a one- 
sided gentleness. 1. It is necessary that justice should be done in action as well as 
that a just sentence should be pronounced in word. 2. It is for the good of all con- 
oemsd — the victim, the public, and even the wrong-doer, that guilt should be chastised, 
S, It is well to transfer vengeful feelings which we cannot utterly destroy into a 
passive resignation of our case to God. We are not to avenge ourselves, if only because 
God iuts laul, " Vengeance is mine ; I will repay." 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Yw. 1. — AfflMed hy Ood. Every child of God, nay, every son of man, lias 
endurad aflSiction. Jeremiah and the city which he here personifies and represents 
may be said to have experienced affiiction in an extraordinary degree. A fact so uni- 
versal cannot be without special significance in human Ufe. But not all the afSicted 
discern this underlying and profitable meaning. 

L Affliotiom leads some to doubt the EXISTENCE OF GoD. It is not uncommon 
fw people to say in their hearts, what some even venture to say with their lips, " If 
there were a God, I should not be suffered to pass through misfortunes and sorrows so 
distressing and so undeserved." 

II. Affliction leads some to doubt God'o benbvolbnoe and kindly interest 
a HUMAN BEINGS. Not denying the existence of Deity, these afflicted ones question 
his moral attributes. They ask, "If God were a Being of boundless benevolence, would 
he suffer us to go through waters so deep, flames so fierce ? His kindness and com- 
passion — were such attributes part of his nature — would interpose on our behalf and 
deliver us." 

III. Sous WHO BELIEVE THAT GOD PERMITS AFFLICTION UISINTEBFEET IT AS A 

HON OF HIS WBATH. This it may be ; this it wets in the case of Jerusalem. Yet Ghtd 
in the midst of wrath remembers mercy ; he doth not keep his anger for ever. And 
tber* SM instances in which no greater misinterpretation conic' be possible than tha 



4B THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEBEMIAH. [ch. hi. 1—66, 

▼tew tliat sufTering is mere penalty, that thow who suffer moit are necessarily sinnerg 
above all their nfighbours. 

IV. Affliction shouu) be beoardbd bt tjm fious and submisstvb ab a pboof 
OF Divine merct and as meant fob theib oooo. Scripture represents suffering as 
the chastening of a Father's hand. The experience of many a Christian is summed up 
in the languapie of the psalmist : " It was good for me that I was afflicted." 

V. Affliction mat thus become, ih the experience of the pious, the occasion 
FOB DEVOUT THANKSGiviNO. How often havc mature and holy Christians been heard 
to say, " I wonld not, upon looking back, have been without the ruggedaess of the nwd, 
the bitterness of the cup " I — T. 

Vers. 7 — ^9. — TTie roay tf life Mged and hiUt up. The man who enjoys prosperity 
seems also to enjoy liberty; bis way lies straight and level and open before him. But 
it often happens in human life that liberty is changed into restraint, that every path 
that is smooth and peaceful is closed, that, in the figurative language of this passage, a 
hedge is planted, a fence is staked out, a wall is built across the traveller's way. 

I. Man's delight is natubai.lt in liberty and prospebitt. 

II. 'Fboyidential cibcumstanoeb sometimes completelt depritb hih or mroH 
UBBBTT AND PBOBPEBITT. 1. One may miss the object of his heart's earthly desire. 
He may have set his affection upon some object, he may have directed his aspiration 
towards some aim, he may have purposed some course in life ; and all these expectations 
and hopes may come to nothing ; circumstances may conspire against the fulfilment of 
such desires and intentions. 2. Another may find great delight in the service of God ; 
and suddenly health may fail and such service may consequently be forbidden, or 
powers of mind may be enfeebled, or means may be reduced, or fellow-labourers, 
apparently necessary, may be removed by death. 

III. ThBBB is DANQBE LEST IN SUCH A POSITION EVEN GOOD PEOPLE SHOULD BECOME 

IMPATIENT AND REBELLIOUS. Believing that the Almighty has power to remove every 
obstacle, and to make plain the roughest pnth, they are tempted to question the interest, 
the care, the benevolence of the Supreme, and to give way to fretful ness and mur- 
muring, and to ask " Why should not God make light my heavy chain, pluck up the 
cruel hedge, break down the impenetrable wall ? " 

rV. Yet IN SUCH oieoumstanobs the path which God has appointed should bs 
becognizeo as tee bight fate. Resignation to his will, waiting for his time of 
deliverance, confidence in his goodness, — such is the attitude of heart in which true 
consolation and ultimate prosperity will be found. — T. 

Ver. 8. — Unheard prayer. There were seasons when It seemed to the prophet that 
God not only refused to interpose in bis behalf, but refused even to listen to his 
prayer. In such faithless and yet not unnatural imaginations and fears many truly 
pious natures have participated. Complaints are made by the afflicted that they have 
prayed, but have prayed in vain ; that God has " shut out" their prayer. 

L There is fbayeb which God does shut out, t.e. the prates of selfishness 
AND SIN. Men ask and receive not, because they ask amiss. They ask for gifts which 
God has never promised to bestow and which he has never encouraged them unre- 
servedly to desire. There are bad things which men ask God for and which it would 
harm the supiiliants to receive. There are things not bad in themselves, the bestowal 
of which, however, upon certain persons and in certain circumstances would be 
spiritually harmful. Such gifts are withheld, not in malevolence, but in mercy. 

IL There is prater which is not unheard, but the answeb to which is not 
IHMBDIATB AND IS NOT JUST WHAT IS EXPECTED. Denial Is ODO thing, delay is 
another. Perhaps it may be said that every true prayer is both heard and answered. 
For every acceptable petition takes the tone of our Saviour's ever-memorable and incom- 
parable prayer, " Not my will, my Father, but thine, be done." Misinterpretation 
is to be avoided. The reason of delay, of seeming denial, is to be sought in ourselves. 
God often withholds for a season, in order to awaken our faith and submisaion, what be 
intends eventually to confer.— T. 

Tar. 1,1,—FrMptrity /orgettm. What a touching picture of extreme adverdty aad 



OH. ui. 1—66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEBBMIAH. 49 

distress do these words present : " I forgat prosperity " I Dayi of happiness are so 
distant that they have faded into oblivion ; their memory ii obliterated by recurring 
sorrows, by continuous misfortunes. 

I. Adtebsitt does not fulfil m intended fubfobk if rr leads to despaib. 
There are natures in which a reverse of circumstances induces depression, which 
gradually deepens into despondency. Where this is the case there is ground for fearing 
that thu affections and desires have been too much centred upon things earthly and 
perishable, that the gifts of a kind Providence have been regarded as possessions to 
which those who enjoy them liave a right, that the higher purposes of this earthly 
discipline called life have been neglected. 

II. Adversity should be beoabded bt the Chbistiah as tehfobabt, and as an 
APPOINTMENT OF DiviNE WISDOM AND LOVE. To forget prosperity in the past is to 
forget that, lor the devout, obedient, and submissive, there is prosperity in reserve in the 
future. Tlie cloud comes over the sky, but the sunshine of the morning will be 
followed in due time by the brightness which shall close in glorious sunset. The 
disciple of Christ cannot lose sight of the fact that his Master was " a Man of sorrows 
and acquainted with grief," and that he assured his followers that " in the world they 
should have tribulation." But the voice that foretold conflict promised victory. To 
the faithful favour shall be restored and pro3[ierity shall be renewed. " Weeping may 
endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning." — T. 

Vers. 19, 20. — Semembering affliction. As the prophet entreats the Lord to 
remember the afflictions he and his countrymen have passed through, he records his own 
vivid recollection of bygone misery and humiliation. Now, the counsel of the world 
would be— Forget your troubles; they are past;, why allow them to disturb and to 
distress the mind? There are, however, good reasons why this advice should be 
rejected, why the afQictions we have passed through should sometimes be recalled to 
mind, i 

I. This exercise sebves to bemind us of the unoebtaintt and vicosbitudkb of 
this life. It is well that in days of prosperity men should not forget how soon the 
sky n.ay be clouded, that in times of health liability to sickness and disease should be 
borne in mind, that the living and the active should hear a voice gently counselling 
them Memento mori I 

II. This exebcibe serves to pbbsbbvb ub fbou a disposition towabds wobld- 
LINESS. In prosperity it is very common for men to cling to this world, to over-esti- 
mate its wealth, its pleasures, its honours. Let them remember days of adversity ; let 
them consider how possible it is that such days may recur ; and thus preserve them- 
selves from the threatened sin of worldly miudedness. 

III. This bxeboise mat lead us to glorify the Divine Deliverer. Affliction 
is to many a thing of the past; they have lelt the tempestuous seas and are in the 
quiet haven. Let such consider by whose great mercy such deliverance has been 
effected, to whom their gratitude is due. Who interposed upon their behalf and 
brought them into safety ? Do they forget to sing, " This poor man cried, and the 
Lord heard him, and delivered him out of all his troubles " ? 

IV. This exercise mat suggest the expectation op heaven, and mat lend 
attractiveness to the fbospect. The past naturally suggests the future. In 
remembering the afflictions of earth we are reminded of that state where " the wicked 
cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest." — T. 

Ver. 21. — Hope reviving. At length the unmitigated angidgh and desolation 
expressed in the previous parts of this book seem relieved. A ray of light breaks 
through the dense mass of clouds. Despondency gives place to hope. 

I. Fbom what state this language betokens a ebvulsion, a reaction. 
Jeremiah has, not unnaturally, been plunged into distress, dismay, despondency. The 
terrible calamities which have befallen his nation are sufiScient to account for this. 
Yet, as a child of God and a believer in Divine providence, he could not remain in 
desolation, he could not abandon himself to despair. 

II. The origin op hope. How was the prophet lifted out of the discouragemant 
and despondency into which he had fallen ? it seems that here, as ao often, ttoj^ia 

lamentations, K 



60 THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. [ch. in. 1—66. 

aprang out of humility. When his heart was bowed and humbled within him, then 
he began to lift up his eyes unto the hills from whence alone his help could come. 

III. The obeat Object of hope. The prophet saw nothing in existing circum- 
stances which could afford a ground for anticipating better things and brighter days. 
But his hope was in the Lord, who listens to the lowly, the penitent, the contrite, and, 
in answer to their cry, delivers and exalts them in due time. 

IV. The expectations of hope. When within the prophet's heart the star of 
hope arose, to what did it point, with its enlivening, cheering rays? To consolation, to 
deliverance, to revival of natural life, to renewal of Divine favour. No hope, based 
upon God's faithfulness and compassion, is too bright for him to fulfil and realize. — T. 

Ver. 22. — Sparing compassion. At this point the meditations of the prophet take a 
turn. He looks away from his own and his fellow-countrymen's afflictions and directs 
his gaze heavenwards. The scene of his vision changes. No longer the calamities of 
Jerusalem, but the character and the purposes of the Mo.st High, absorb his attention. 
There is a rainbow which spans even the stormiest sky. Earth may be dark, but there 
is brightness above. Man may be cruel or miserable, but God has not forgotten to be 
gracious. 

L The Lord's sbacious attributes. These are described as (1) his mercies and 
(2) his compassions. It is the glory of revelation that it makes known a personal God, 
invested with the noblest moral attributes. The heathen saw in the calamities of cities 
and nations, either the caprice of angry deities or the working of inexorable fate. 
The Hebrews saw the presence, interest, and superintending providence of a God of 
righteousness, holiness, and grace. 

II. The unfailino exercise of these attributes fob the belief aud salva- 
tion OF MEN. If" we are not consumed," it is not through any excellence or merit of 
onrs, but because of the forbearance and pity of him who does not willingly afflict the 
children of men. We tempt the Lord by our ingratitude and rebellion to lay aside his 
compassion, but he is greater and better than our highest and purest thoughts of him : 
"His compassions fail not." 

III. The advantages men enjot through the exercise of these attbibuteb. 
There is (1) a negative advantage — we are not consumed ; and (2) a positive advan- 
tage—we are saved and blessed. The language of the prophet receives its highest 
illustration in the dispensation of the gospel. It is in Christ Jesus that the attributes 
here celebrated appear in their greatest glory, and secure the largest and most lasting 
results of good for men. Hence the privilege of listening to the glad tidings. And 
hence the obligation under which all Christians are laid to extol the mercies and com- 
passions of God, revealed in his Son, and practically securing for all who believe the 
blessings of forgiveness, acceptance, and eternal life. — ^T. 

Ver. 23. — " New every morning^ Human life abounds in novelties. It Is made up 
of experiences which combine novelty and repetition. But the mercies of the Eternal 
are ever new ; no day breaks which does not open up some new prospect of Divine 
faithfulness and loving-kindness towards the children of men. 

I. The same mebcies are repeated afresh. Because a gift of God resembles a 
previous gift, it does not, therefore, fail in being a new proof of Divine beneficence and 
favour. The most necessary blessings are those which are most frequently bestowed, 
and are those which we are most likely to receive without attention and to undervalue. 

n. New mercies are constantly bestowed. The successive stages of our earthly 
pilgrimage reveal fresh wants, call for fresh supplies from the bounty and benevolence 
of our God and Father. Wiih new needs come new lavours. Varying duties, fresh 
relationships, and changing circumstances are the occasion of ever-renewed manifesta- 
tions of Divine goodness. And our repeated errors and infirmities are the occasion of 
new manifestations of Divine forbearance and forgiveness. 

III. New claims are thus established upon human consecration and obedienob. 
If a human benefactor who has upon some one important occasion come to our assist- 
ance deserves lifelong gratitude, how can the claims of God be justly conceived and 
practically acknowledged, seeing that the hours of every day are laden with his favours? 
If a motive is needed to a new life, a life of devotion and holy service, where can a mort 



en. ill. 1— de.] tHi: lameKtaI'ions of jerEmiaH. si 

powerful motive be found than here? Often as we have partaken of Divine goodness, 
often as we have enjoyed the assurance of Divine forgiveness, we are called upon by the 
favours which are new every morning to renewed devotion of ourselves to the God of 
all grace and forgiveness. 

IV. New occasions are thus afforded fob renewed praises and thanksgivinos. 
With every new morning nature offers a new tribute of praise to Heaven. Shall man 
alone be silent and ungrateful ? Shall the Christian, who is the oliD.sen recipient of 
Divine favours, b« slow to acknowledge their heavenly source, to praise the heavenly 
Gtivert 

" New mercies each returning day," eto. 

T. 

Ver. 24. — 2%e Portion of the godly. When the land of promise was divided among 
the tribes of Israel, no inheritance was assigned to one of the number, viz. the tribe of 
Levi. It appeared good to Divine wisdom that the consecrated and sacerdotal tribe 
should be distributed among tlie population, and that a regular provision should be 
made for their maintenance. To reconcile the Levites to their lot, it was declared to 
them by Jehovah liimself that he was their Portion. The language here appropiiated 
by the prophet, as his faith and hope revive, is language which every true servant of 
God may take to himself. 

I. The Lord is an incomparable and unrivalled Portion. Without the Divine 
favoiir, the greatest, the wealthiest, the most prosperous, are poor ; with this favour, 
the lowliest and the penniless are rich. For that which pertains to the soul exceeds in 
value that which is external ; circumstances are not unimportant, but to the just and 
reflective mind they are inferior to what is spiritual. 

II. The Lord is a sufficient and satisfying Portion. With what jubilant, 
triumphant exultation did the psalmist exclaim, "The Lord is the Portion of mine 
inheritance, and my cup"! He who made and redeemed the soul can alone fully 
satisfy and supply it. Well might the apostle assure his Christian readers, "All things 
are yours ; " and well might he reason for their encouragement, " Shall not God with 
Christ also freely give you all things?" 

III. The Lord is an eternal Portion. Whilst " riches take to themselvei wings 
and fly away," whilst " the bubble reputation " bursts, whilst death levels the kings of 
the earth with the beggars, — the spiritual possessions of the pious remain undiminished 
in preciousness. In fact, the true value of the Portion of the godly can only be known 
in eternity. Here the estate is in reversion ; there it is fully possessed and everlast- 
ingly enjoyed. — T. 

Vers. 25, 26. — Waititig /or salvation. It is to most persons easier to work than to 
wait. Yet there are possessions, dignities, influence, which even here and now can 
only be attained by waiting. And religion, which is the highest discipline of the spirit, 
encourages this attitude and, indeed, in many instances demands it. 

I. The attitude of the pious soul. He who is graphically described in these 
verses : 1. Seeks God. For we are not called upon to be utterly passive ; we are not 
led to expect that blessings will come to us without any exertion upon our part. To 
seek God in our daily life, in the order of his providence, in the pages of his Word, is a 
reasonable and profitable exercise. 2. Hopes for his salvation. And why not ? Has 
not the Most High revealed himself as a Saviour? And is not salvation the blessing 
we most urgently need ? 3. Quietly waits for it. This beautiful expression implies 
that the word of promise is believed, and that without doubting the soul expects its 
fulfilment. A rebuke to those who think that seeking God is accompanied with noise 
and excitement. 

II. The reward of the pious soul. 1. There is what may be called the reflex 
influence of waiting. The expectant seeker and suppliant finds the very posture he 
is led to assume good and profitable. " In quietness and in confidence shall be your 
strength." 2. The Lord is actually good unto such as wait for him. He is pledged to 
this. Hi» servants have ever found this to be the case. For the expectation honours 
him from whom the blessing is expected. The patient are delivered from their 
troubles, and to those who seek the Lord his glory is unveiled. — T. 



52 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [o«. m. 1— 6« 

Ver. 27. — Theyohe in youth. This is not a welcome lesson. It is natural to all, and 
especially the young, to resist authority, to defy restraint, to resent punishment. A« 
the young ox lias to be brought under the yoke, as the young horse has to be accus- 
tomed to tlie bit and the bridle, the harness and the saddle, so the young must learn 
the practical and valuable lesson of endurance and submission. 

I. In human lipb a yoke is imposed upon au,. In some cases it is easier and 
in others move galling ; but there is no escape, no exception. Labour must be under- 
gone, the daily burden must be borne, restraints must be endured for the sake of the 
general sood, sacrifices must be made, patience must be called forth and cultivated. 

II. When fikst pelt in later life, the yoke is especially hard to bear. It 
sometimes happens that youth is sheltered from the storm of adversity, which beats 
fiercely upon the inexperienced and the undisciplined only in later years. It is well 
known how severely trouble is felt in such cases ; for the back is not fitted to the 
burden, the neck is not bent to the yoke. 

III. The discipline experienced in youth fits for the toil and suffering of 
after life. This is why it is "good" tlien to endure it. Many of the noblest 
characters have known trouble in early life, and have thus learned the wholesome 
lessons of adversity which have stood them in good stead in after years. They who 
are afflicted in their youth learn the limitation of their own powers, learn the inexor- 
able necessities of human life, and become apt scholars in the great school of Diyine 
providence. 

IV. Resistance to the yoke is wrong and foolish, submission is right and wise. 
It is hard to kick against the ^oads ; it is useless to resent the appointments of Divine 
wisdom. There are cases in which a rebellious spirit lasts all through life, and it is 
unquestionable that misery accompanies it. On the other hand, if the yoke be borue 
early and borne patiently, it becomes easier with custom. And those who are strong to 
su£Fer are also strong to serve. — T, 

Ver. 30. — 2%e cheek to the smiter. Probably these verses should be translated by 
imperatives. The prophet, profiting by his own experience and by that of his country- 
men, admonishes all to meekness and submission. In resistance is neither peace nor 
deliverance ; in patient subjection and waiting .is true wisdom, for such is the way to 
contentment and to final salvation, 

I. Such meekness is contrary to natural inclination, and is indicative of a 
chastened spirit. Be who is smitten naturally smites again. But to act upon this 
principle is to perpetuate a state of war and strife. Revenge is indeed often honoured in 
the world, yet the world's records are records of the wretchedness which this habit pro- 
duces. On the other hand, the Christian principle, commended by our Lord in language 
which seems borrowed from this passage, is a principle of forgiveness and meek sub- 
mission, the prevalence of which does much to mitigate asperity and to check wanton 
injuries. 

II. Such meekness is inculcated by the Lord Jebus both by precept and 
example. He was reviled, yet he reviled not again. And in taking without resent- 
ment or complaint the unjust stripes and blows and many indignities he endured, our 
Saviour has given the world the most glorious example of victory over self, of super- 
human meekness. 

III. Such meekness ib oonteibutive to the happiness of those who exhibit it 
AND to the edification OF THOSE WHO WITNESS IT. The meek and lowly in heart find 
rest unto their soul. And society is profited by every illustration of the power and 
beauty of self-government and self-control, of conciliation and patience. — T. 

Vers. 81 — 33. — Divine benignity, ii required great feith on the part of Jeremiah 
and his countrymen to thiuk and to speak thus of God. It was easy for them to believe 
in the justice and in the power of God ; their own affliction witnessed to these attributes. 
But it was a triumph ol faith for those so afflicted to acknowledge the kindness and 
compassion of the supreme Ruler. 

L It is not incompatible with God's goodness to afflict men. He "causes 
grief." His providence appoints that human life should be largely a discipline ol 
affliction, that human transgressions should be followed by chastisement. The Scrip- 



cH.m.1— 66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 63 

tures teach us that we may look all the stern and terrible facts of human life full in tha 
face, and yet retain our coiifldence in the infinite kindness of the Divine Buler. 

II. God obsebteb a limit in AFFLiCTiNa his people. His chastening is for a time. 
He will not always chide. He will not cast off for ever. For it is not implikcable 
revenge, it is fatherly discipline, which accounts for human griefs. 

III. Compassion and mekot are disoebniblb beneath Divine chastening. It is 
benignity which delivers the children of men from the waters, so that they are not 
overwhelmed ; from the flames, so that they are not consumed. I5ut it is benignity also 
(although this is a hard lesson for the aflSicted, and a hard lesson for the philosopher o( 
this world) which appoints affliction and chastening. God does not ailow our sufferings 
willingly, i.e. from his heart, as delighting in them. It is not for his pleasure, but for 
our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness. And herein we see, not only the 
highest wisdom, but the purest love. — T. 

Ter. 38. — The source of evil and of good. This passage may easily be ndsunderstood. 
Some have attributed moral evil as well as moral good to the great Buler of the 
universe, and by making Grod the author of sin have introduced confusion into the 
moral realm. The presence of sin in the world is by the permission of the Most High ; 
but, whilst we cannot understand the reasons for tlus permissidn, we are not at libwty 
to represent him as sanctioning evil. The good and evil of this passage are natural, 
not moral. 

I. There is here an assertion of mnvERSAL and pabtiodlab providence. The 
inequality of the human lot has ever been the theme of meditation, inquiry, and study. 
It has been attributed to chance, to men themselves, to the operation of law. But the 
enlightened and religious mind recognizes the voice and the hand of the Most High in 
human society, even when the immediate causes of what takes place are apparent. 
Nothing is so vast as to be above, and nothing is so minute as to be beneath. Providence. 
The afflictions and sufferings of life, as well as its joys and prosperity, are all allowed 
and all overruled for good to God's people. And all may become means of grace and 
blessing to such as receive them ia a teachable and submissive spirit. Accordingly — 

II. There is here an implicit buooestion of the manner in which good and 
evil should be beceived by men. This is not to be regarded as a speculative question 
merely, though it is a subject upon which thinking men must needs exercise their 
thoughts. But inasmuch as we all receive both good and evil in the course of our life, 
it cannot be other than a matter of supreme concern to us to decide in what spirit all that 
happens to us shall be accepted. 1. It will be well to remember that there is nothing 
purposeless ; that there is intention, meaning, in all providential arrangements. 2. The 
devout mind will recognize benevolence in the " dispensations " of providence, will see 
the movements of a Father's hand and hear the tones of a Father's voice. 3. The 
Christian cannot overlook the obvious fact that the real good can only be acquired by 
those who receive the happiness of life with gratitude and bear the afflictions of life 
with submission and cheerfulness. — T. 

Ver. 39. — Why murmv/r 1 The world is full of complaints and murmuring. It lome- 
times is observable that those whose lot is peculiarly fortunate, whose circumstances 
are peculiarly favourable, are foremost in complaint when anything occurs to them 
which does not fall in with their expectations, which does not correspond with their 
desires. On the other hand, we now and again meet with the poor, the suffering, the 
friendless, who display a cheerful, uncompliuning disposition. 

I. All punishment is deserved by those upon whom it is inflicted. Conscience 
testifies to this. God hath not " rewarded us according to our iniquities." No afflicted 
one can plead innocence, can justlj' affirm that he has been treated with undue severity. 
For this reason affliction should be endured in silence and with submission. 

II. When God chastises he dobs so in equity, and not in injustice or caprice. 
The heathen attribute to arbitrary and fickle deities, even to malevolent deities, many 
of their misfortunes. But to us God is " righteous in all his works." To rebel against 
him is to question the wisdom of the only Wise, the justice of the iunremely Bighteous. 
The afflicted should look through the chastisement to the hand which inflicts it. 

III. To REBEL AGAINST GOD IS TO RESIST HIS PURPOSES OF COMPAHMOS WHICH INTEND 



54 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEtiEMIAH. [ch. ui. 1— 66. 

OUB GOOD. Observe that murinuiing is not only wrong, it is most inexpedient, A 
complaining spirit is inconsistent with the disposition which alone can receire the 
wholesome lessons and discipline of sorrow and can turn them to highest and iMting 
profit.— T. 

Ver. 40. — Bepentanee. Sin and suffering are the topic of much thought and inquiry 
and speculation. But it is of supreme concern to the sinner and the sufferer to act 
aright. He may or may not be able to explain the mysteries of the human heart, of 
the Divine government. But it is most important that he should repent and turn unto 
the Lord. 

I. The condition of ebpentancb. The unreflecting and careless will not repent. 
There are two conditions necessary to such an attitude of mind. 1. Those aflBicted 
because of sin should searcli themselves. To take a favourable view of self is natural ; 
but truth and justice require tliat every man should look below the surface, should 
explore his inmost nature. Thus the springs of action, its hidden motives, will be 
brought to light. 2. They should consider against whom they have sinned. It was a 
profoundly just exclamation of David, " Against thee, thee only, have I sinned!" We 
may indeed wrong our fellow-men, but we sin against our Creator and Lord. Conduct 
must be looked at in this light, in order that it may lead to repentance. 

II. The nature of repentance. This exercise ot the heart is accompanied with 
sorrow for sin, but it consists mainly (1) in turning away from sin, and (2) in turning 
unto the Lord. This involves the seeking of pardon and acceptance, and the acceptance 
by faith of the Divine terms of mercy. 

III. The proof of repentance. This may be said to consist in : 1. The hatred 
and loathing of the evil in which the sinner in his impenitence took pleasure. 2. The 
love and pursuit of holiness as pleasing unto God. — T. 

Ver. 41. — " Suriwrn, corda I " Religion takes possession of the whole of our nature. A 
service professedly of the heart, and of the heart alone, is a hypocritical service, which 
because of its insincerity God cannot accept, inasmuch as it is contradicted by the life. 
On the other hand, how can the Searcher of all hearts be pleased with a service which 
is of the hands, the outward posture and actions only, in which the heart has no 
share ? The true worship and homage consists in the combination of the spirit and 
the body. 

I. Heart and hands are lifted in penitence and confession. It seems to 
this exercise that the prophet here admonishes and invites. The heart has been 
engrossed by earthly pursuits and pleasures ; and these it now quits, directing its 
contrite sighs to heaven, and lifting with it the clasped hands of penitence. 

II. Heart and hands are lifted in earnest entreaty. In its anguish, in its 
conscious helplessness, the heart seeks mercy and acceptance with God ; the hands are 
raised as in supplication, to give expression to the imploring petitions. 

III. Heart and hands are lifted in believing confidence. There is encourage- 
ment to trust in the Lurd. The repenting and confiding Church of the Redeemer is 
ever lifting holy hands to heaven, in expression of that sentiment which is the condition 
of all blessing. It is the attitude of hope. "I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills 
whence cometh my help." And as the eyes of faith behold the God of grace upon the 
throne ol' power, they draw the heart upwards ; the hands follow, and the posture of 
the spiritual nature is becoming to man and honouring to God. — ^T 

Vers. 48 — 51. — Sympathetic narrow. This passage is sufficient to justify the title 
pitofixed to this collection of sacred lyrics. It is indeed a " lamentation." And, what 
is Ueserving of special notice, the lament is not for personal afSiction, it is occasioned by 
the distress ami woe of the fellow-countrymen of the prophet. 

I. The occasion of this sympathetic sorrow. 1. The afiSiction of " the daughters 
of the city." Whether by this expression we are to understand dependent towns or 
literally the maidens of Jerusalem, in any case it is the calamities of his countrymen 
that awaken compassion. 2. This affliction is of the extremest kind, even " destruc- 
tion." Some of those whose woes call forth the prophet's commiseration are homeless, 
some are wounded, and some are slain. A hard heart can witness the distressae ol 



CH. in. 1—66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 65 

fellow-creatvires unmoved; but a sensitive nature views them with poignant sor- 
row. Our Lord wept over the same city when, at a later period, he foresaw a fate 
impending over Jerusalem even worse than that which occasioned the lamentation of 
Jeremiah. 

IL Thb OHABAOTERisncs OF THIS SYMPATHETIC 80BBOW. 1. It is cordial ; not the 
sympathy of words merely, but of the heart. Politeness may dissimulate ; sincere pity 
will feel. The sorrows of the soul because of human sin and woe are prompted by 
sympathy and consecrated by religion. 2. It is manifested. In the East and among 
simple nations grief displays itself in a more demonstrative way than amongst ourselves. 
There was nothing extravagant or unmanly in the pouring down of tears, in the running 
down of rivers of waters from the eyes, described in these verses. The manner in which 
sympathy is exhibited may vary, but this passage may suggest to us that the expression 
of compassion ought not to be withheld. 3. It is unintermltted ; it ceases not. Such 
sympathy is not a mere paroxysm of giief ; it is constant, enduring whilst the occasion 
of it endures. 

III. The POBPOSB and hope ACCOMPANYDfO THIS SYMPATHETIC 80EB0W. Men 

sometimes speak of the uselessness of tears, the vanity of grief, etc. The godly sorrow 
exhibited by the prophet was not of this order ; it had an aim, and that aim was the 
relief of those who were commiserated. Penitence and supplication were regarded as 
means to procure the regard, the interposition, the delivering mercy of Jehovah. Help, 
and help from above, — this is the practical design which blends with the anguish and 
the tears of the Christian. — ^T. 

Vers. 55, 56. — The cry from the dungeon. There seems every reason for believing 
that, in these words, the prophet is recording his own actual experience. Under the 
reign of Zedekiah, when the doom of Jerusalem was near at hand, the faithful Jeremiah 
prophesied to the people, and by his warnings and predictions so offended the princes 
who were in authority in the city that they cast him into the pit of the prison. By 
Divine goodness he was delivered from this misery by the agency of the eunuch Ebed- 
Melech. Like a truly godly man, he witnesses to that Ood who is ever the Hearer of his 
people's prayers. 

I. The cby from the depth. It was indeed de profundis that Jeremiah raised his 
voice and called upon the Lord. From sorrow, suffering, destitution, desertion, misery, 
helplessness, let men cry unto the Lord. The evil condition that impels them to 
such a cry is not all evil ; there is " the soul of goodness " in it. The dungeon of 
oppression, of persecution, thus becomes a church indeed. 

IL The witness of the bescued. The prophet testifies that his cry had not been 
unheeded. Even when immured in a pit so deep that his voice could not reach his 
fellow-men, his entreaty had reached the ear and roused the pity of the eternal Lord. 
And be who had heard had answered too, and had sent his messenger to deliver his 
servant. Where is there a child of God who has not experienced the compassionate 
interposition of the Most High ? The Church should be as one of those temples whose 
walls are covered with tablets and brasses testifying to mercies received at the hand of 
the All-gracious. 

III. The confident fbateb. All former troubles were as nothing compared to this 
disaster which now overtakes the city, the nation. Renewed calamity prompts to 
renewed entreaty, and the memory of compassionate interposition incites to faith and 
hope. " The Lord hath been mindful of us ; he will help us." — T. 

Vers. 57, 58. — Prayer heard and answered. How natural that the mind of a {dous 
man should, in seasons of distress and calamity, revert to the bygone days, remember 
the clouds by which they were overcast, and take encouragement at the vivid recollec- 
tion of gracious interposition and help ! 

L The day of delitebance. 1. This was a day of need and of distress, of sore need 
and of bitter distress. 2. It was a day of prayer, a day in which Divine aid had been 
zealously and urgently implored. 

II. The voice of the Deliverer. " Thou saidst. Fear not 1 " How often are 
these words represented hrr the prophets to have been spoken by Jehovah ! How often 
by the eTangelists to have been spoken by Christ 1 They seem to constitute a ' note" 



66 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [ch. ui. 1—66. 

of Divine utterance. They are as reassuring and consolatory to man as they arc appro* 
priate and becoming to Ood. 

III. The fact of deliverance. Comforting words are welcome ; how much more 
the exercise of mighty power ! This passage depicts (1) the approach of the mighty One, 
and (2) the redemption of the captive's life. What was literally true of Jeremiah's 
bodily condition is true of the spiritual state of sinful man ; and all temporal inter- 
positions are an emblem of the delivering, the redemptive grace of God in Jesus Christ. 

TV. The acknowledouent of delivebanoe. The testimony of the prophet is an 
example to all who have experienced the blessedness of Divine love and grace. Such 
acknowledgment should be grateful, cordial, public, and everlasting. — ^T. 

Vers. 59 — 63. — The Lord's knowledge of hispeopl^s sufferings and wrongs. The first 
thought which occurs to people when oppressed and afflicted is — The Lord takes no 
heed ; he has no compassion ; he will not help ; my judgment is passed over from my 
God. But it is afterwards felt that such language is language of impatience and 
injustice. And the pious soul comes to rest almost satisfied beneath the blows and 
contempt of men, because a conviction springs up— It is all known to the omniscient 
and sympathizing Lord. 

I. God, in his FBOVIDENOE, permits his people to buffer and endure OALUlINIEg, 

befroaoheb, and wbonqs. Their endurance of such, now and again, is an unquestion- 
able fact. And if there be a God, and such a God as revelation declares, it is certain 
that he suffers his people to pass tlirough much that is painful to flesh and bleed. 

II. God does not always and at once remedy the ills which befall his 
PEOPLE. The thought occurs to the oppressed and wronged — Can it be that he sees 
and hears all that is said and dune to us, unmerited as it is on our part ? If he does, 
how mysterious that he withholds his hands from avenging us, firom discomfiting onr 
cruel foes ! 

III. DiTINF DELAY IB NO PROOF OF DiVINE INDIFFERENCE. Christ StOod Upon the 

mountain-top, and "by the misty moonlight watched his disciples tossed upon the lake, 
toiling in rowing, and sorely harassed. But he loved them, and if he did not come 
forthwith to their relief there was a good i^eason for his delay. So oftentimes men think 
God careless because their probation is prolonged ; but in truth wisdom and love are the 
motives of all his acts and of even his apparent tardiness. 

IV. God thus tries his people's faiir and steadfastness and pkepareb them 
FOR HiB SALVATION. After the stormy tempest how grateful is the rainbow I After 
the black night how welcome is the dawn 1 The mere contrast, however it might 
heighten joy, would not account for God's action in testing his servants. But there 
are moral ends to be secured. And the furnace alone can separate the dross fix>m the 
gold. The storm alone can try, can elicit, can perfect, the faith of the mariner and his 
confidence in the Lord who seems to sleep. — ^T. 

Vers. 64 — 66. — Bighteous recompemse. Our conscience requires and approves of 
justice. Our weakness is too often in danger of cherishing resentment and malevolence. 
It is not safe, on most men's part, to hope for retribution upon their personal enemies. 
Perhaps the record of Jeremiah's feelings is not intended to be taken for an inculcation, 
or even a permission, of such imprecations upon our foes. 

I. The ground upon which Divine judgment is invoked. 1. It was not personal 
offence given which suggested such a cry for vengeance. 2. It was the overt, deliberate 
conduct of men who acted in disobedience and defiance towards God, and with 
inhumanity and barbarity towards their fellow-men. 

II. The tribunal to which the conduct of the wicked ib refebbed. 1. Not 
the fallible court of human justice or human requital. 2. But the court of Divine 
equity, in which none receives good for evil, in which every plea for mitigation of 
sentence is heard, and from which none can depart with a complaint upon the lips. 

m. The purpose fob which retbibution is implored. 1. Not for the gratifica- 
tion of vindictive feelings. 2. Not for the exaltation of the oppressed at the expenM 
of the oppressor. 3. But for the speedy deliverance of God's wronged and harassed 
people. 4. For the advancement of God's cause upon earth. For the honour of God'i 
glorions Name. " Shall not the Judgo of aU tbe earth do right ? "— T. 



cam, 1—66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 6T 

Yer. 18. — Z^ gum of a terrihle experienee. This chapter must doubtless be token 
as the utterance of Jeremiah's own feelings — feelings induced by the continual stress 
and difBculty of his life. Through the first seventeen verses he alludes to some opponent 
and tormentor continually thwarting his every purpose, not for a single moment leaving 
him free. Are we to suppose, then, that the prophet really believed all these untoward 
experiences to come from some one agent who had special designs against him? or was 
he thus only trying to make more forcible the story of his sufferings? However this is 
to be settled, some of our difficulty is taken away when we find, on coming to ver. 18, 
this clear reference to Jehovah : " My strength and my hope is perished from the 
Lord." These words we may take to mark about the lowest point in reckless and 
unadvised speaking. They give a sort of confession as to what a deadly member the 
tongue may become in hours of suffering. What we only fed to be the reality is taken 
to be the reality, whereas the reality may be immensely better. The prophet came to 
speak in a worthier way, and lived to admit that, in the very depths, he discovered 
what God's disposition to him really was. Note how the prophet made a double 
mistake. 

I. He said hib stbenoth and hope were febishid. Yet these things, even when 
composed of purely natural elements, are not so easily destroyed. Even with all the 
weakness that belongs to human nature, tliere is immense strength in it. After a long 
life men wonder to look back and see what they have actually achieved, and the strain 
they have undergone. While we may be alarmed in the midst of our troubles and vicissi- 
tudes, God looks on very differently, knowing how much strength there is to get over 
them. The resources of our own natures have to be developed, and the resources of 
grace connected with them. Then, when the strength is brought out, the hope naturally 
springs forth at the same time. There is hardly a greater penl in life than to act from 
the conclusions coming to us in gloomy moods. 

n. Bm said hu btbensth and hope webe pebished fbom Goo. From Qod. 
How came he to say such a thing, or even to think it for a moment ? Probably because 
he had not sufficiently recollected wherein it is that God's favour really appears. To 
that God who has all power nothing would have been easier than to have made the 
prophet's path outwardly pleasant and straightforward. But where would have been 
the gain in that? Tbs thing really wanted was that, when Jeremiah was left alone, 
bereft of earthly comfort and stays, he should be led into g state of mind where be eould 
say, " Though I seem alone, and in my solitude weak and hopeless, yet I am not alone ; 
for the God who made me a prophet is with me in ways which cannot be comprehended 
by my innumerable enemies." — ^Y. 

Ver. 21. — Haw hope rise$ from the deptht of despair. This utterance needs to be 
contrasted with that in ver. 18. There the prophet says that hope is perished. Here 
he has hope, grounded on a " therefore " and strengthened by a resolved attitude of 
mind. Thus we are helped to get an explanation of his past depression, or, as we might 
even call it, despair. We are helped to distinguish between abiding Divine realities and 
the way in which they are coloured or concealed by our moods. How is it, then, the 
prophet is here able to come to such an inspiring resolution ? Two things are to be 
noticed. 

I. This hope comes bt conbidebino the biort things. The prophet says, " This 
will I recall to my mind," or " take to heart." This, that is to say, such things as he goes 
on to mention later in the chapter. He said that he had been led into darkness and confine- 
ment. That he had been led was only his own way of putting the thing ; the important 
point to note is that he got into such confusion of mind, such preoccupation with mighty 
evils, as to be unable to see life in the whole. Darkness had covered gracious truth, or 
clouds had risen between it and his spiritual vinon. We can easily come to the most 
melancholy conclusions if only we determine to shut certain considerations from the 
mind. Let it also be noted that, as satisfying hope comes from considering the right 
things, so delusive hope comes from letting the mind dwell exclusively on the wrong 
ones. And what is true of the production of satisfying hope is true of other satisfying 
states of mind. So men may pass from unbelief to the firmest and most fruitful foith, 
and from selfishness to love. 

II. This bofi ooheb raou ooNsiDEBiNe the bioet THwaB in thi bioht bpibit. 



5S Tfi£ LAMBNTAMONS Ot* JEBEMiAil. [oh. ili. 1— 66 

As the expression may be rendered, there must be " a taking to heart." Loss of hop« 
comes from taking to heart the sad side of human life. The same things are, of course, 
before us all. There is enough mysterious misery in the world to oppress any human 
heart that thinks of nothing else, but then along with this we should ever have before 
us, as things to be searched into with all earnestness, the great facts of the loving 
revelation of God in Christ Jesus. The resurrection of Jesus, rightly considered, will 
give a hope rooted deep below the most discomposing powers of this world. It is not 
enough to place the great facts before us ; they must be dealt with as being very dear 
and necessary to the heart. — Y. 

Vers. 22, 23. — The unfailing compassions of Jehovah. Here indeed is a full retrac- 
tation of the reckless falsehooit recorded in ver. 18. He who had hinted that God was 
a Destroyer, that he delighted, as it were, in reducing his children.to despair, is now found 
glorying in the same God as the great Preserver, the one effectual Guardian of man's 
existence and peace. 

L Note the desteoting powbes that beset human life. Gkid's mercies are 
the only guarantee against our being consumed. How great, then, must be the perils of 
life 1 Jeremiah had nothing to do but look back on his own experience, and then he 
would be filled with wonder to think he had got so lar. Think of the vivid way in 
which Paul summed up the perils of his life. It is indeed true that we do well not ta 
think too much of such perils. All the comfort would be taken out of life if we thought 
of them too much. But there they are, and times do come when it is useful to pass 
them before the mind. And espeeially we should note those perils which are perils 
because they have temptation in them. One of the greatest perils of life is to make an 
inadequate estimate of perils. The greatest of all perils is to be false to truth and 
goodness for the sake of life or even of temporal prosperity. Our passions, our fears, 
and our pride are all ready to league with the great enemy of God and of mankind. 

II. Note the only adequate defence against these desteoying poweu. 
1. That defence is to ht found in Jehovah. With him alone is the might and the power 
requisite to make due provision. Man is ignorant and prejudiced, continually going into 
the way of death, under a firm conviction that it is the way of life. If Jeremiah had 
been left to himself, to his own prudence and his own notions of safety, the chances are 
he would have been a dead man in no long time after he had begun prophesying. The 
true wisdom is to put ourselves into the hands of God. Then the way of duty becomes 
the way of safety. We are no longer misled by appearances. We suffer from the 
lesser danger and escape the greater. We discover how true it is that a man may lose 
his life, and yet in the very losing find it. 2. The compassion and faithfulness of 
Jehovah are specially insisted on. We ask constantly why men do things, and what 
motives are at the bottom of their doings. And we must ask the same things with 
respect to God. From the thing done we may. rise to understand the heart of the doer. 
And then, knowing what his character is, we may confidently calculate what sort of 
things he will do in the future. God's mercies are new every murning — light after 
darkness, strength after sleep, conscious life with all its large endowments after hours 
of unconsciousness. And great is his faithfulness. The irregularities and forgettings 
of human procedure are not to be found in the dealings of God. And this is just the 
responsibility that comes to us from all the attainments of science, that the deeper we 
search into the constitution of the universe, the more we should be impressed with the 
greatness of God's iaithfulness. — Y, 

Ver. 24. — l^ose who have Jehovah for their Portion. I. Eveet mas hab his POB- 
TiON. That which is his capital, which constitutes his resources, and out of which he 
has to build up the results of his life. It was only natural that an Israelite should 
make a great deal of portions. Israel had a portion, divinely secured and wonderfully 
packed with the raw materials of wealth. Each tribe had its portion, given by lot, so 
that there was no ground of complaint, and so to each household in due time there 
came a portion. In Israel, as in every other nation, there were the rich and the poor — 
those with great possessions and those with none at all. Thus there are inequalities, 
and not the least of them are those which inhere in the constitution of the individual. 
Our portion depends, not on what we legally possess, but on what we have the energy 



CH. III. 1—66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 69 

»nd the skill to nse. The greatest of a man's natural resources are in himself. Other-> 
wise lie may sit among large possessions which are of no mora use to him than are 
his hoards to a miser. 

II. EVEBT HAN HAS IT IK HI8 OWN FOWKB TO BEMOTB THK nrBQUALTmSS OF HIS FOB- 

itON. Jeremiah shows us how. Whatever his natural portion may have heen, it had 
well-nigh vanished through the hatred of his people and even of his own acquaintance. 
Nor must we forget that he was speaking in the midst of a desolate land. Many por- 
tions had gone and left their owners not knowing which way to turn. But now Jere- 
miah both assures us of his own resources and advises us where to seek ourselves, by 
saying, " Jehovah is my Portion." Thus he turns away the mind from mere external 
property. It is the dreadful character of all mere external wealth that there is only 
so much of it, and therefore, just in proportion as some grow rich, others must become 
poor. Besides which there is to be considered that moment when riches will take to 
themselves wings and flee away, and that still more serious moment when flesh and 
heart will fail. Thus we see that the complaint about the inequalities of life has more 
plausibility than force. All purely natural portions are reduced to the same vanity at 
last, and the man who trusts in them has but wasted his time and procured for himself 
the deepest disappointments. Whatever we may lack, we need not lack that portion 
which consists in the promises of God made to them who truly trust in him. 

IIL The consbqubnoe of ha visa GrOD fob a Poetion. The life is filled with 
hope. A man can only hope according to his portion. If his portion is in this world, 
his hope will have a corresponding character ; whereas if his portion is really in God, 
his hope will partake of the necessary elevation and fulness of his portion. God takes 
care that those who are really his should have a feeling in their hearts which makes 
them look forward to a fixture always better than the present. We are saved by hope. 
The process is yet far from complete, but it is our right to rejoice that we are in the 
bands of One who will make salvation complete in his own time. — Y. 

Van. 25, 26. — Ood^s goodnesi to ttie hopeful and the patient. God's goodness is one 
thing ; that it should be made manifest to men so that they may get comfort out of it 
is quite another. Bad men will never see God to be good. Not being good themselves, 
not having kindly, generous, and unselfish feelings towards others, they can never come 
to look upon God from the point of view necessary to get a manifestation of his good- 
ness. Hence we notice — 

I. How God's ooodness appeabs to those behavino themseltes in a bight 
WAT. About the first thing that is required is to believe that God is good, however 
much his goodness is concealed, and however trying the experiences of life may be. We 
must not be contented to say, " Peradventure something good will come somehow." 
But rather let us say, " The manifestation of the goodness will depend on our making 
ready for it." We must wait. So to speak, we have to take our turn. When the seed 
is sown, the harvest must be waited for. God could give us certain good things 
immediately, but not the best things. The child cannot receive the things of the man. 
The servant can only get his reward when his service is completed, and that in a worthy 
manner. Then besides waiting there is seeking. There is no proper attitude towards 
God without a combination of the passive and the active. God has made excellence in 
true knowledge the result of strenuous, long-continued effort. 

II. The obeat attainment in all tiub of trouble is to have a due minolinq 
OF HOPE AND PATIENCE. Jehovah cau save, if only we have what may be called 
spiritual presence of mind. If we say, " I must get rid of my troubles now, or I 
shall straightway give up the struggle," then, indeed, the prospect of salvation retires 
to an immense distance. What is wanted is that we should put all our highest 
interests in the hand of God, and then go quietly about our daily opportunities of 
serving him. When the passenger goes on board ship at the beginning of a long 
voyage he puts complete confidence in the captain, and thus he hopes and quietly waits 
for the voyage to come to an end. Through all perils of the sea he can only hope and 
quietly wait, knowing that the master of the vessel is the only one who can guard 
against the perils. And so in the voyage of life; we cannot shorten it, we cannot 
determine what its circumstances will be ; but we can put ourselves in the hands of the 
great Guide. He will look after our safety, if we only take heed to our oart ia the 



•0 THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. Ioh, lu. 1— 66, 

doing of his work. Let silent waiting be our rule. We are very likelj to say foolisl 
things in our criticism of the Divine ways, and therefore it is well to keep silent. But 
while we are silent we may think a great deal. That is good advice of the psalmist, 
" Commune with your own heart . . . and be still." It is through inward question- 
ings and discontent with received traditions that we are to get at the comfortable truth 
at last. But if we go on talking we are very likely to discompose and mislead others. 
The moods in which we are doubting, fearful, and weary, we should do oar very best to 
keep to ourselves. — Y. 

Ver. 27. — The discipline of youth. Remember how early Jeremiah was called to 
prophesy. He says at the beginning, " Ah, Lord God ! behold, I cannot speak : for I 
am a child " (Jer. i. 6). He had to bear the yoke in his youth, and doubtless this did 
much to fit him for a useful and well-controlled life afterwards. The comparison, of 
course, is plain. An ox might be put under the yoke when quite young, and then, 
though the restraint would be irksome for a while, at last the sense of restraint would 
pass away, and the yoke become second nature ; whereas if an ox had never been 
tried with the yoke until full-grown, the chances were it would not accept it in a docile 
and serviceable way. There is this difference between the youthful ox and the youthful 
human being, that the youthful ox is entirely in the hands of his master, while the 
youthful human being has his own choice. For we do not take the yoke here to 
mean chiefly the external circumstances of life. The yoke is that which we take upon 
ourselves, seeing that it is the right and manly thing to do. Self-denial is a yoke. 
The effort needful in forming right habits is a yoke. The subordination of the present 
to the future, the lower to the higher, the human to the Divine, is a yoke. Not 
that we are to leave external circumstances altogether out of the question. Men 
who had hard times when young have come to be thankful, in after years, for those 
very hard times. It is better to be an orphan than to be the child of parents who 
have both the means and the disposition which make them lavishly indulgent. Onlj' 
bear in mind that external circumstances have not in themselves any disciplining 
power. The materials of a yoke might be used to make something else. The decision 
rests with us. One may make a yoke out of prosperity and favourable circumstances, 
while another so chafes and sulks under adversity as to become worse every day.— Y. 

Vers. 31 — 33. — QodCe good purposes in causing pain. All this is the language of 
hope and continues naturally what is said in vers. 21 and 24. The existence of 
present trouble presses upon the heart, but along with it there is the confident assur- 
ance of future deliverance. Observe, then, certain admissions, along with the cheering 
qualifications which accompany them. 

I. The Lobd oasts off. There is a discontinuance of the signs of his presence. 
Enemies get their own way, and, worst of all, the prophets find no vision from the Lord. 
He is not towards Israel as he used to be. But then, what a qualification comes in! 
Not for ever. Indeed, the casting off only emphasizes the bringing back. The casting 
off must not be taken too literally. God does not cast off as men do. They cast off 
and do not wish to bring back, or, if tliey so wish, they find they are not able. When 
God casts off, though there is a feeling of separation, and something is lost that is 
not to be gained by any effort, still the truth remains that in God even the castaway 
lives and moves and has his being. God casts men off, as it were, tliat they may 
realize their weakness and true state, and then, when they make the full discovery, 
God's hand is stretched out to restore. 

II. The Lord causes okibf. Great grief, pain of body and pain of heart, must 
have come from the casting off. And it is of no use to make nice distinctions 
between God causing pain and permitting pain. Really we do not know much about 
the causes of pain, and it may be that we attribute to God much that we ourselves 
produce. The one clear thing is that God shows forth a multitude of mercies. To 
most of us a multitude of mercies came before there were any pains at all, and the 
mercies remain through the pains, even though at times they be greatly eclipsed. We 
may be wrong in attributing the infliction of pain to God, hampered as we too often 
are by the conceptions of earlier ages. But we can never be wrong in glorifying 
God for the multitude of his mercies. We may spoil and misuse the mercira and thui 



Oh. m. 1—66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEEEMIAH. 61 

make pain, but the merciea we could not get for ourselves. Our very wrong-doing 
makes fresh mercies to arise in view. They are many, and each one of them is a great 
deep of love and wisdom. 

III. The Lobd afflicts the children of men. This is but laying what is 
already said. The new thing is the qualification. He does not do it wttlingly. The 
distinction is plain between injury inflicted with malice and injury inflicted with 
reluctance. There have been, and, alas I there still are, too many who put all their 
heart into the hurting of others. Their very end is to cause pain ; whereas the end 
God has in view is to remove the causes of pain. The surgeon does not inflict 
pain willingly — he inflicts it because he cannot help it; and tlms he welcomes and 
utilizes to the full the agent which brings unconsciousness while be performs his 
operation. — Y, 

Ven. 40 — 42. — Approaching Ood in linceritg, I. 'Jhe asoertaimino op ocb TEtrs 
STATE. Such is the exhortation of ver. 40. The talk of complaining people is generally 
the hasty outbreak of superficial thought — if, indeed, such loose operations of the mind 
are worthy to be called thought at all. Searching is above all things needful. Beneath 
the surface with which we are only too easily contented there are deep possibilities of 
good and eviL Note the figure here employed. We are in a way — further advanced 
to-day than we were yesterday. There is no standing still. This way we are urged to 
search and try — asking whither it goes, who are our predecessors, our leaders, our com- 
panions. Then note the result of all our searching and testing. The way is one in ' 
which God is not. He walks in quite another way, and therefore we must turn to him. 
Only one result of a real searching is deemed possible. The man without God who 
yet concludes that all is right, has ia truth left the most important matters unexplored. 

II. The retubn to God must be a beai> bbtubn. There had, perhaps, been 
abundant lifting up of the hands on the part of many, with no lifting of the heart. 
But many more had not even lifted up the hands. We must not say that posture and 
gesture are mere trifles. To God, of course, the mere gesture in itself can matter 
nothing, but from its associations it may matter a great deal. Prayer to the unseen 
and spiritual One is such a difficult thing that we may welcome every aid. Still, the 
great matter is to lift up the heart. Lift it up — filled with gratitude, humility, repent- 
ance, submissireness. 

III. A suggestion of the obeat diffioultt tet to bb overcome. Ood has 
not pardoned. On one side there is transgression and rebellion ; on the other side, God 
angry with all this. And what is. wanted is that Israel should see transgression as 
transgression, rebellion as rebellion. Here we are amid the confusion of life, and we do 
not see that for all the worst way in which that confusion affects us we are ourselves 
responsible. With a humble and repentant heart, taking continual cognizance of God's 
righteous will, we could ride as in an ark over that deluge which overwhelms others. 
Bat with pride and selfishness in our hearts we are strong against all ameliorating 
forces. We will not come to God that in him we may have first pardon and then 
safety, peace, and blessing. — Y. 

Ver. 61. — TO« eye and the life. " Mine eye aflfecteth mine heart." . ore correctly, 
" Mine eye paineth my soul, or my life ; " that is, what I see, so melancholy is it, that 
it preys on my mind and undermines my health. Note — 

I. The effect of the senses on the life. The eye is more than an optical 
instrument. The effect produced by the image on the retina depends upon who it is 
that sees and what it is that he sees. A<ie, education, peculiarities of experience, will 
make all the difference. The very exercising of the senses was evidently intended to 
give pleasure. There is correspondence between the eye and the beautiful and sublime 
in nature ; between the ear and melodious and harmonious sounds ; and yet some 
peculiar experience may interpose, so that there shall no longer be beauty in the 
beautiful, melody in the melodious. What we get from the exercise of our senses will 
depend upon what we Jyrvng. The prophet saw desolation all around him where once 
there had been crowded and prosperous life. What could he do but feel as if a broken 
heart would be the end of his thoughts ? But the spoilers would look at ttie s«eut 
differentljr, for to them it was the place of enrichment and triumph. 



62 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH, [oh. m. 1—66. 

n. Compensations for the loss of benbe. Loss of vision is a serious matter to oiw 
whose intellect is full of life and activity. So Milton seems to have felt, judging from 
his touchini; references to his blindness in his poetry. But this makes it all the more 
needful to recollect the other side. The blind have exemptions from some pains. 
They do not see the painful sights of the streets : the drunkard, the ragged beggars, 
the weary faces— weary with incessant struggling for a position or a livelihood. They 
can guess much of the trouble of the world, but many of the manifestations of that 
trouble they only know when they are told. Wo do well to keep in mind and rightly 
estimate the compensations for natural losses. 

in. Responsibility fob the eight use op oitb natubal powebb. The expresdon 
of the projihet here indicates that he was in the right way. To have looked on such a 
scene with indifference or only mild regret would have argued a very wrong state of 
mind indeed. Surely in the judgment the question to many will be, " What use did 
you make of your eyesight ? Did you gather up impressions which made you feel 
how deep is the spiritual sickness of the world, how certain it is that only Christ can 
make the world better ? And further, did you lend practical help to bring men 
within reach of the saving power of Christ? " To this extent it will be better in the 
day of judgment for many blind than for those who have gone through the smitten 
world with both eyes open and yet as if they did not see. — Y. 

Yer. 65. — Jeremiah calling ovt of the dungeon. This is no mere figure for a great 
extremity, as we are made to feel when we read ch. xxxviii. of the prophecies. It was 
not from amid mere restraint that the prophet cried, but firom miry depths, most 
perilous, painful, and disgusting. Note — 

I. The putting into the dungeon. God does not stretch forth his hand to prevent 
his servants from being put into such dreadful circumstances. He looks on whUe they 
are haled to prison and even to death. For a lesson has to be taught with regard to 
the limitations of human power. Jeremiah's enemies might say to him, while down 
in the miry pit, " Where is now thy God ? " but this was because they estimated 
God's favour to men according to the presence or absence of certain outward things. 
God's favour is not shown by preserving us in certain external possessions. Even life 
may have to be yielded for his sake. God does not interfere miraculously, even with 
the conduct of wicked men, unless there is some very special reason. What he says is, 
" You shall really be safe whatever men may do." He who allowed his Son to be put 
to death, did then open wide, so that no man can shut it, the gate that leads to eternal 
life. 

n. The taking out of the dungeon. This was in answer to prayer. And the 
prayer came from a spirit of trust that no gloom and discomfort of the pit could destroy. 
If Jeremiah had allowed himself to say that his conjunction with Jehovah had been a 
mere delusion, then he might have been left in the pit. And even with all his faith 
he might have been left in the pit. But then there would have been a clear assurance 
that death was better than life. And, indeed, it is probable that, if God had allowed 
his servant to go out of the world at the hands of his enemies, he might have been spared 
a great deal of pain and sorrow. What is to be looked to in these matters is, not the 
present ease of the individual, but the best way in which his life can be used for the 
good of men and the glory of God. Prisons are no prisons, pits are no pits, if God 
chooses to give to his servants liberty and continue to them tiieir natural life. In one 
way or another he brings his servants out of the horrible pit and out of the miry 
clay. — Y. 

Vers. 80 — 66. — Jeremiah and his enemies. I. TifK prooebdinob op thebb ekeiiieb. 
The spirit of vengeance is in their hearts. Jeremiah has spoken steadily against them 
what Jehovah had laid on him to say. They know the language in which they have 
been described. It was, of course, just the thing to be expected that bad men should 
cherish vengeful purposes. And Jeremiah had to bear the consciousness of this— the 
very painful consciousness that he was the cause, however innocent, of showing up the 
worst passions in the hearts of others. This spirit of vengeance manifested itsuf in 
two ways. 1. Beproach. He was called all sorts of names, held up to derision and 
execration. He indeed had to reproach, but then there was a measure and dignitgr is 



CH. 111. 1—66.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 6S 

the words he employed. His reproaches were meant to call the reproached odm to 
repentance. But the reproaches from his enemies meant immediate danger to Ww - 
danger from the populace on the one hand, and the authorities on the other. 2, 
Plotting. Society was just in the state when plots could be carried out with raeeess. 
Jeremiah did not make one enemy or a few enemies, but many. They were wicked 
men, and doubtless had subordinates ready to hand for any knavery that was going on. 

n. Jeremiah's belief that God'b ete was upon these enemies. " Thou hast 
seen." It is a great matter to feel that God has his eye upon all human wickedness. 
We may suffer greatly from it, and yet see only a very small part of what he sees. We 
are for ever running into extremes, exaggerating or palliating, magnifying the reality 
or else diminishing it. We look at things too much in reference to our individual selves, 
and as they concern us. But QoA sees things as they truly are, in all their relations 
and possibilities. Some things are worse than we think them, others better. And so 
we are enabled to feel that all wickedness is kept within comparatively innocuous 
limits. The mischief only reaches the outside of what is attacked, for the same God 
who watches the wicUed watches the good at the same time. 

III. The pbateb or Jebemiah. (Vers. 64 — 66.) The vehemence, the almost 
savageness of these words sta<^gers us. But then, we are not to expect the gentleness 
of a Christian from an old Jewish prophet. We are not required to justify every 
petition of God's servants. We have to distinguish between the prophet taken out of 
himself by inspiration and the man of like passions with ourselves, who has to pass 
through a long discipline before he can pray as he ought to pray. We may feel here 
that a silent waiting upon God would have been better than any imprecations of ven- 
geance, and yet, at the same time, we must acquit Jeremiah of anything like personal 
malice. He wished that the wicked might be recompensed according to the work of 
their hands. The wicked wished Jeremiah to be treated according to the ferocity oi 
their own hearts. — Y, 

Ysr. 63. — 2%e musie o/theivieked. L The fleasubes or bad men. Musical tastes 
•le, of course, irrespective of moral character. There are certain oiiginal qualities both 
in eye and ear which remain and demand satisfaction, whatever the moral character 
may become. If a person of musical tastes becomes a Chrlsriau, than his Christianity 
may be the better for his music, or possibly, if he is not careful, it may become worse. 
On the other hand, if a person of musical tastes becomes an utterly selfish and self- 
indulgent man, then music will become the instrument of all that is bad. And so we 
find that great excellence in arts has been found intermingled with the grossest pro- 
fligacy. Men are not necessarily better because intellect and tastes have been cultivated. 
The only power which, allowed to work, must make men better is the Holy Spirit of 
God, and where he is working, such things as music and pictures may be welcomed to 
give additional beauty. 

II. A malignant tendenot in the pleasures of bad men. Bad men must ever 
be hindered and thwarted by the good, and when the bad get any sort of temporary 
triumph over the good, they will make it a cause of exultation. To some degraded and 
embittered hearts great is the pleasure of giving pain. This is the peril of satirists. 
Great intellectual gifts and powers of literary expression are concentrated on a few 
polished verses, which pain the subject of them all his life. There is no diviner 
instrument than pain as a means to an end, but surely that heart is set on fire of hel^ 
that can make pain an end in itself. — Y. 

Ver. 64. — T?ie principle of retribution. Whatever the feelings in the prophet's heart 
may have been, at all events he lays down something like a principle on which he 
expects God will act in dealing with the wicked. It is not because he hates them^ or 
because they have hurt him, that he wants them to suffer, but because they have done 
wrong. Further, he wants to see them dealt with according to the wrong they have 
done. Perhaps we ought to look at this question of recompense apart from its being 
made a matter of prayer. One would not like to think of it as a desirable petition in 
any prayer, that the wicked mi°;ht be dealt with according to their wickedness. God's 
law will secure all that is necessary, and we may trust the working of that law. Men 
will he recompensed according to the work of their hand, only this expression, " the 



64 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JBEEMIAH. [oh. it. 1—22, 

work of their hand," must be taken with a very liberal meaning. What the heart of 
the wicked purposes, his hand generally carries out to some extent, and yet many 
qualifications must be made. To go literally according to the work of Ihe hand would 
be to deal too severely in some instances, too leniently in others. We have to infer the 
heart from the hand, and our calculation of motives is a very rough-and-ready one. 
Human law, trying to be just and adequate, is not unfrequently unjust and cruel. We 
are so under the influence of things seen and temporal that a punishment only looks 
real when we can see it in operation, manifest to all. Our confidence should rather be 
that God has so made things by their very nature that a wicked heart becomes a 
miserable one. Whatsoever a man sows, he reaps. But then there is also another 
thing to be considered, and that is that God makes room for repentance. He who sows 
repentance will reap forgiveness and renewal of heart. We cannot undo the works 
of our hands, but God can bring good out of eviL — Y. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER IV. 
Thr Sujtebings op Jerusalem ; so Class 

IS EXEMPT. EdOm'S TbIUMPHINO. 

Yer. 1. — How is the gold become dim! . . , 
the stones of the sanctaary, etc. " Alas for 
the sad sights of the capture of Jerusalem I 
Tlie most fine gold has lost its brilliance now 
that the fire of Nebuzar-adan (2 Kings xxv. 9) 
lias passed over it, and the precious stones, 
consecrated to Jehovah, liave been cast out 
into the open street 1 " Not that the latter 
part of this description can have corre- 
sponded to literal fact. None of the hal- 
lowed jewels would have been treated with 
such indiiference. The expression must be 
as figurative as tlie parallel one, " to cast 
pearls before swine," in Matt. vli. 6. The 
precious atones are the " sons of Zion," who 
are compared to " fine gold " in ver. 2, pre- 
cisely as they are in Zeoh. ix. 16 (comp. ver. 
13, " Thy sons, O Ziuu ") to " the stones of a 
crown." They are called " stones of the sanc- 
tuary," in allusion, perhaps, to the precious 
stones empluyed in the decoration of the 
temple according to 1 Ohron. xxix. 2 and 
2 Chron. iii. 6. But we may also translate 
hallowed stones, which better suits the figu- 
rative use of the phrase. Those, however, 
who adopt the literal interpretation, ex- 
plain " the stones of the sanctuary " of the 
hewn stones of the fabric of the temple, 
which are described as " costly " in 1 Kings 
v. 17. But how can even a poet have repre- 
sented the enemy as carrying these stones 
out and throwing them down in the street ? 
On the other hand, in an earlier lamenta- 
tion we are expressly told that the young 
children " fainted for hunger in the top of 
every street " (ch. ii. 19). 

Ver. 2. — The precious sons of Zion; f«. 
not merely the nobility, but the people of 
Judah in general. It is needless (as the 
literal interpreters of ver. 1 are compelled 
to do^ to alter b'ni (sons) into baite (houses) 



or 'dbni (stonei). The comparison of men 
to potters' vessels is familiar to the Hebrew 
writers (comp. Isa xxii. 24; xlv. 9). 

Ver. 3. — The sea-monsters ; rather, the 
jackals (tannin, the Aramaic form of the 
plural for tannim). Crnel, like the ostriches 

in the wilderness. So in Job (xxxix. 14 

16) it is said of the ostrich that she " leaveth 
her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in 
dust, and forgetteth that the foot may crush 
them, or that the wild beast may break 
them. She is hardened against her yonng 
ones, as though they were not hers." The 
description is literally true, if we add ■ 
detail not mentioned by the sacred poet. 
The eggs destined for hatching are depo- 
sited in a nest-hole scratched in the sand, 
but tliere are other eggs laid, not in the 
sand, but near it, to all appearance forsaken. 
These eggs, however, are not exposed in 
simple stupidity, though they do often fall 
victims to violence. " They are intended 
for the nourishment of the newly hatched 
young ones, which in barren districts would 
at first find difficulty in procuring food" 
(Houghton, 'Natural History of the An- 
cients,' p. 198). 

Ver. 4.— Breaketh -'it unto them. The 
Jewish bread, consisting of round or oval 
cakes (comp. ] Kings xii. 6). 

Ver. 5.— They that did feed delicately, etc. 
i.e. luxuriously. The rendering has been dis- 
puted, but without sufficient ground. " They 
that did eat at dainties," i.e. pick at their 
dainty food, is forced. The Aramaic mark 
of the accusative need not surprise ua in 
Larnentations (comp. Jer. xl. 2). Brought 
up in scarlet; rather, borne upon scarlet; 
i.e. r. sting upon scarlet-covered couches. 
The poet speaks of adults, not of children. 

Ver.6.— The punishment of the iniquity, . . 
the punishment of the sin. This is a possible 
rendering (see Gen. iv. 13 ; Zech. xiv. 19) 
but the renderings, « the iniquity," " the sin," 
are preferable, and yield a finer meaning, 
via. that the punishment having been »o 



OH.rv. 1— 22.J THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEEEMIAH. 



65 



severe, the guilt must have been in propor- 
tion. And no hands stayed on her. To 
make the picture of sudden destruction 
more vivid, the poet alludes to the ordinary 
circumstances of the capture of a city, the 
"hands" of a fierce soldiery ever " whirling " 
a destroyiuK sword. Comp. " the swinging 
of the hand of Jehovah Sab£oth, which he 
swingeth against it " (Isa. xix. 16). 

Yer. 7. — Her Nazarites ; rather, her emi- 
nent ones (just as Joseph is called n'zir 
elehctv, "eminent among his brethren"). The 
rendering of the Autliorized Version is lexi- 
cally possible, but is intrinsically impio- 
bable. The Nazarites constituted too small a 
portion of the Jewish people to receive so pro- 
minent a place in the elegy. Bubies ; rather, 
coraU. Their polishing was of sapphire ; 
literally, their shape was (jUit) a sapphire. 
But the point iu which the sapphire is 
compared to the bodies of the princes is 
evidently not the outline of its form, but its 
gleaming brilliant appearance ; so that the 
Authorized Version is substantially correct. 

Ver. 8. — Their visage is blacker than a 
coal; rather, their appearance is darher 
than hlaehness — one of the hyperboles wliich 
seem to indicate that the poem was not 
written at the very moment of the calamity 
described (comp. Job xxx. 30). Not known 
in the streets. Another point of contact 
with the Book of Job (iL 12). Their skin, 
etc. Again we must compare the lamen- 
tations of Job ,(xix. 20 ; ixx. 30). Ps. 
cii. 5 may also be quoted; for tlie second 
half of the verse is too short unless we insert 
" to my skin " before " to my flesh." 

Ver. 9. — The miserable condition just now 
described maintains a sad pre-eminence 
even when compared with the fute of the 
slain in battle. And why % For these pine 
away (literally, melt away), stricken through 
(with the pangs of hunger). The Authorized 
Version takes the subject of the second half 
of the verse to be the famished. But it is, 
perhaps, more natural to take it to be those 
wounded in a battle, to whom the expression, 
" stricken through," is actually applied in 
ch. xxxvii. 10 ; li. 4. In this case the line 
had better be rendered thus : For those pine 
moay, stricken through, leaving the fruits of 
the field (which they no longer need) The 
word rendered " pine away " would be par- 
ticularly applicable to those who perished 
from loss of blood. 

Ver. 10.— The pitiful women. Strange 
contrast between the compassionate nature 
of woman (comp. Isa. xlix. 15) and the dread 
horrors of this moral as well as physical 
catastrophe (comp. note on ch. ii. 20). 

Ver. 11. — Hath accomplished means here, 

not " hath finished," but " hath poured out 

iu full measure," as in the song of Moses 

Jehovah declare* that he will "spend his 

LAJCEKTATIONS. 



arrows upon them " — the Hebrew Terb is 
the same as here (Deut. xxxii. 23). To 
show the completeness of Zion's ruin it is 
compared to a fire which ha^h devoured the 
(very) foundations thereof. 

Ver. 12. — The kings of the earth, etc. 
And yet Jerusalem had been taken twice 
before its capture by Nebuchadnezzar (see 
1 Kings xiv. 26; 2 Kings xiv. 13). Hon 
is the language of the second part to be 
accounted for? It will help us to an 
answer if we observe that the later Jews 
seem to have acquired an exorbitant 
confidence in their national future ever 
since the Book of Deuteronomy had be- 
come as it were canonical in the reign 
of Josiah. " The temple of Jehovah " was 
ever iu their mouths (Jer. vii. 9), and the 
strong outward regard paid to the di- 
rections of the Law seemed to them to 
justify their believing in the fulfilment 
of its promises. And, in fact, the grand 
deliverance of Jerusalem in the reign of He- 
zekiah might, even without this misunder- 
staniling of Deuteronomy, have inspired a 
firm faith in the security of Jerusalem. A 
sacred poet had already, on the occasion of 
that deliverance, declared of the holy city 
that "God upholdeth the same for ever" 
(Ps. xlviii. 8), and also (in vers. 4, 5) used the 
same hyperbole as the author of this lamen- 
tation to express the wide-reiiching interest 
felt in the fortunes of Jerusalem. 

Ver, 13. — For the sins of her prophets, 
etc. Instead of connecting this verse by a 
comma with the following, we should rather 
view it as a unit in itself and understand 
at the beginning, " All this hath happened." 
The sins of the prophets and priests are 
mentioned together by Jeremiah (vi. 13; 
xxiii. 11), as well as by Isaiah (xxviii. 7). 
But we are nowhere else told that the 
spiritual leaders of the people, in these 
closing years of the Jewish state, were 
guilty of shedding inuncent blood, unless 
this is to be inferred from the incident re- 
lated in Jer. xxvi. 7, etc. 

Ver. 14.— They; i.e. the prophet* and 
priests. Wandered as blind men. The 
leaders of the people are blinded by igno- 
rance, for they know not the only true way 
of averting calamity, and by passion, for 
they have not that " eye " of the soul (Matt, 
vi. 22, 23) which alone enables a man to Bee 
the good and the right course for himself 
individually, The " wandering," or, rather, 
"staggering" (comp. Ps. cvii. 27, Autho- 
rized Version), however, may also refer to 
the panic-stricken comlition of those self- 
deceived deceivers when overtaken by God's 
punishment ; comp. " wine of reeling " 
(Authorized Version, " astonishment "), Ps. 
Ix. 3; also the prophecies in Dent, xxviii 
28, 29 ; Jer. zziu. 12L The doubt ia whethei 



«6 



THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. [oh. nr, 1— 2a 



"have wandered" refers to gome period 
before the final catastrophe, or to the con- 
eternation produced by that awful surprise. 
The latter view seems the more probable. 
They have polluted themselves, etc. Their 
acts of violence have been continued to the 
very end of their term of power. Their 
garments are still stained with blood when 
the smnmons to depart into exile reaches 
them. 

Vet. 15. — ^They oried unto them, ete. As 
they leave the city they are pursued by the 
maledictions of those whom they have op- 
pressed. It is unolean. The cry with 
which tlie leper was directed to warn off 
passengers, lest they should become in- 
fected (Lev. xiii. 45). There may be an 
allusion to this, but, tliough commonly ac- 
cepted, tlie view is not certain, as the " leper " 
in the present case is not the person who 
raises the cry, but those who meet him. 
When they fled away and wandered. The 
clause is difficult. If the text is correct, 
Eeil's explanation may perhaps pass, 
" When they fled away, (there) also they 
wandered," alluding ta the " wandering " 
ascribed to them with a somewhat different 
shade of meaning in the preceding verse. 
In any case there ought to be a fuller stop 
than a comma after " touch not," which 
words close the first of the two parallel 
lines of which the verse consists. But very 
probably "when" (Hebrew, kt) is an in- 
trusion, and we should begin the second line 
thus : " They fled, they also wandered about." 
They said among the heathen, etc. Even in 
their plaoe of exile they found no rest 
(comp. Deut. xxviii. 65)! This is better 
than understanding " the heathen " (liter- 
ally, the nations) to mean "the Chalilean 
army," and the place of sojourn prohibited 
to be Jerusalem. 

Ver. 16. — Hath divided them ; i.e. hath 
scattered them, like " I will divide them in 
Jacob" (Gen. xlix. 7). 

Ver. 17. — As for us, onr eyes, etc. ; rather 
(correcting the reading of the first word), 
Our eyes were still watting uway (as we 
looked) /or our help in vain. To the very 
last the Jews leaned on " that broken reed," 
Egypt (Isa. xxxvi. 6) ; how vain that hope 
would be Jeremiah had already told them 
(Jer. xxxvii. 7, 8). In our watching ; i.e. 
earnestly and continually ; or, on our watch- 
tower. 

Ver. 18.— They hunt onr steps, etc. Eeal- 
istic attempts to explain this line have not 
been wanting, but seem nnsuocessful. The 
Chaldeans were either witljin the city or 
withont. If within, they would not need 
literally to " hunt t>ie steps " of the Jews ; 
if withoat, th«j had not war-engine* 



adequate to shootino^ the Inhabitants at 
some distance. Probably the expresaionsi 
are metaphorical ; they ure similar to these 
used in ch. iii. 52, immediately after which 
we meet with such a purely poetical phrase 
as, " They have out off my life in the pit 
[Authorized Version, ' dungeon '], and cast a 
stone upon me " (see note on ch. iii 52 — 56). 

Ver. 19, — Swifter than the eagles of the 
heaven. Jeremiah, or his imitator, repeats 
the figure which occurs in Jer. iv. 13. There 
is probably no special reference to the cir- 
cumstances of the capture ot Zedekiah 
(Jer. xxxix. 4, 5); the escape of many fugi- 
tives would be similarly cut off. 

Ver. 20. — The breath of onr nostrils. 
The theocratic king was the direct repre- 
sentative of the people with Jehovah, and to 
him the promises of 2 Sam. vii. were con- 
veyed. He was also, in a sense, the repre- 
sentative of Jehovah with the people. His 
throne was "the throne of Jehovah" (1 
Chron. xxix. 23). A similar conception of 
the king was generally prevalent in an- 
tiquity. Most of all among the Egyptians ; 
but, even in imperial Rome, wc find Seneca 
(' De Clementift,' i. 4, quoted by Archbishop 
Seeker, in Blayney) declaring;, " Ille (Prin- 
ceps) est spiritus vitalls, quem heeo tut 
niillia (civium) trahunt." For the Jewish, 
or Old Testanvtit, conception, see Ps. 
xxviii. 8, where (as the Septuagint shows) 
" his people" and " his Bnointed " are used 
almost synonymously. Was taken in their 
pits. A figure from bunting (comp. ch. i. 
13 : Fs. vii. 15). The fate of Zedekiah is 
referred to. Among the heathen; better, 
among the nations. The rendering of the 
Authorized Version suggests that the Jews 
hoped to preserve at least a qualilied inde- 
pendence under their own king, even after 
their captivity. 

Ver. 21. — Bejoioe and be glad. An ironi- 
cal address to Eilom, who is bidden to enjoy 
her malicious triumph, but warned that it 
will be but short-lived. How unjienerously 
the Edomites behaved at the fall of Jerusa- 
lem we are repeatedly told (see on Jer. xlix. 
7). I. the land of Uz. As to the situation 
of Uz, see on Jer. xxv.20. The cap; one of 
Jeremiah's images (see Jer. xxv. 15). 

Ver. 22. — The punishment of thine 
iniquity or, thy guilt (see on ver. 6). The 
prophet speaks with the confidence of faith, 
and sees the guilt wiped away, and the 
danper of a future captivity rimoved by the 
purification which the Jewish national cha- 
racter has undergone. He will discover thy 
sins. Qod is said to " cover over " sins 
when he remits their punishment, and to 
"discover" them when Iw punishes them 
(cnmp. Job XX. 27. 28). 



CH. IT. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. 6^ 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Fine gold dimmed. Gold is a precious metal, partly because it is less 
liable to corrode than other metals. It will not rust like iron nor oven taruisli like silver. 
For fine gold to be dimmed is for it to undergo exceptionally severe treatment. Such 
was the treatment of the gold of the temple after the Chaldean siege of Jerusalem. 
Josephus describes how the gold glittered on the temple walls in his day; and doubtless 
the effect of the earlier temple's splendour must have been similarly dazzling. But 
when covered with the dust of a ruined city, smol^ed with its fires, neglected and defiled, 
this fine gold would lose its brilliancy. In the dimming of the brighliiiess of the temple 
mourning patriots saw an illustration of the shame that had come over the nation, and 
especially of the degradation of the noblest of the citizens of Jerusalem. But whenever 
rich ^fts and graces of God are coiTupted we may echo the same lament, " How is the 
gold become dim 1 " 

I. Fink gold is DIMUBD wren noble OIFTS of NATtTBB ABE Pnr TO BASE USES. 

Nature is wealthy with precious things that in themselves and in the eye of God are 
purely good. The beauty of earth and sea, the wonder of natural forces, the delicate 
organizations of plant and animal, all things created by the hand of God, are fine and 
fair and worthy. And these things are given us as our heritage. Science opens to our 
use many a secret treasure-house. Art and manufactures result from the appropriation 
of natuial resources. But how often are they degraded by being turned to the service 
of evil, in constructing instruments of war, in ministering to luxurious self-indulgence, 
in pampering intemperate appetites, etc. 1 

IL Fine gold is dimmed when bare talents abe wasted ob abused. Intellectual 
ability, artistic taste, gifts for music, philosophy or science, stored knowledge, refined 
culture, natural genius, and educational acquisitions are like fine gold. Yet this gold may 
be dimmed : 1. When the gifts and acquirements are idly Tieglected. Noble promises 
disappoint the beholder with a miserable failure. Even so coarse a sin as drunkenness 
has ite victims among the sons of genius. When sensuality, sordid love of money, self- 
satisfied conventionality, feverish worldly ambition, or any other low pursuit draws 
the soul away from the high vocation marked out for it by its ovra peculiar gifts, the 
fine gold is dimmed. 2. When the talents are prostituted to low ends. The gold may 
be used, but, instead of adorning a temple, it decorates a voluptuary's banquet-hall. The 
evil use of it degrades the precious metal. Great endowments are too often similarly 
degraded. They are used for iU. The painter, unlike Pra Angelico, who, working on 
his knees and for God, made the exercise of his art an act of worship, forsakes his ideal 
to please the low tastes of his patrons. The writer neglects truth to fiatter the popular 
cries of the day. The philosophic genius absorbs his mental gifts in mercenary calcula- 
tions. Thus the fine gold is dimmed. 

III. Fine gold is dimmed when youth is ill speht. J!oi jo ' '^o golden age 
(if life. If not in liberty and ease, for the yoke must then be fitted to the shoulders, 
.still, in freshness, vigour, and opportunity, it is like the morning going forth in its 
strength, bright as gold. But when the promise of childhood is belied by the performance 
of manhood, how is the fine gold become dim! Young men who have not yet lost the 
bloom of first innocence should beware of the fatal temptations which threaten to cast 
the beauty and purity of their souls into the mire. We all have an opportunity to 
begin life well. Some fine gold is then bestowed upon every soid. Let us see to it in 
these early years that the treasure of a good conscience before God and man is not lost. 

IV. Pine gold ib dimmed when a Christian falls into sin. The graces of the 
spiritual life are as finest gold. God counts his people as his jewels (Mai. iii. 17). 
Rare, and bright, and beautiful, glorious and golden in the sunlight of God's love, is the 
character of true saintliness. There is no beauty comparable to the beauty of holiness. 
But alas 1 when the saint trails his white robe in the foul ways of sin and casts the 
pearls that adorn him to the swine, how is all the glory and beauty degraded 1 Nothing 
looks more repulsive than a fine garment besmirched with filth ; it is far worse than 
the beggar's rags, to which dirt seems natural. The fallen Christian defi'i's himself and 
dims his gold and brings shame on the Name of Christ by his sin 



fle THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. [<«• !▼• 1— 2a 

V, Pine oold is dimmed when the Church is couruptbd. Like Jerusalem of old, 
the bride of the Lamb should be all-glorious with yrace and goodness. The golden 
perfection of humanity should characterize this society and make it a worthy kingdom 
of heaven upon earth. But how often has the fine gold been dimmed, in pagan additions 
to primitive Christianity, in superstitions of the dark ages, in cruelties and immoralilies of 
the Middle Ages, in Catholic prejudice and Protestant biiterness, in the arid rationalism 
of Germany and the worldly conventionalism of England 1 

Vers. 3, 4. — The violation of maternal instincU. I. Maternai. instincts abb 

AMOKO THE MOST WIDESPREAD AND DEEP-SEATED ORDINANCES OF PROVIDENCE. 1. 

Widespread. They are shared by the lower animals as well as by human beings. 
The fierce.st monsters are careful of their cubs. The most stupid know how to tend and 
rear their offspring. Beaming jackals of the desert have their lairs where they give 
suck to their little ones. The varied fields of animal life all bear evidence to this 
wonderful instinct. It is seen among all races of men. Brutal de^iraded classes, 
untrained savages, fierce warlike people, all possess it. 2. Deep-seated, These instincts 
are far deeper than any merely social tendency. They are strong and vital as appetites. 
The mother feels for her child as for part of herself. Many desires and habits will be 
abandoned befure these instincts will iaiL They outlive virtue and principle and dwell 
still in the vicious. 

II. The VIOLATION of maternal instincts is ONE OF THE MOST HORRIBLE EVENTS. 

1. In proportion to the profound and almost universal character of these instincts is the 
outrage on nature itself that the violation of thcni involves. We judge of an influence 
by the forces it has to overcome. It must be very strong if it can conquer great resist- 
ance. To conquer such resistance as that offered by the maternal instincts the evil 
influence must be powerful indeed. Therefore the violation of these instincts must he 
a proof of a most exceptionally energetic force of evil. Lady Macbeth must have sold 
herself to a very demon of ambition before she could unsex herself enough to say— 

" I have given suok, and know 
How tender 'tie to love the babe that milks me : 
I would, while it was smiling in ray face, 
Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gumi^ 
And dash'd the brains out, had I so sworn, etc" 

2. Moreover, tbe/ateZ effuct of the violation of maternal instincts is another proof of the 
terrible evils of the corruption that can make it possible. These instincts are essential 
to the very continnance of life on our globe. Creatures that come into the world with 
so much feebleness as is the case with human beings would perish were they not pro- 
tected in infancy by the wonderful passionate care of maternity. 

III. That must be a frightful calamity which can lead to the violation of 
UATEBNAL INSTINCTS. Such was the Calamity of the siege of Jerusalem. Then hunger 
and despair led parents to neglect their children. The worst mad violation of maternal 
instincts had been anticipated in a siege of Samaria, when a mother devoured her own 
child (2 Kings vi. 24 — 29). Such things have been done since. They force us to 

•ealize the barbarous cruelty of war whicli some would hide beneath its foolish pomp 
and pageantry. They also make us see the evil of extreme misery. There is a point 
beyond which suffering ceases to be beneficial. It then becomes a positive curse. It 
tears up the very roots of the most precious growths of nature. It drives to worse 
moral degradation than luxury tempts to, though in the eyes of a merciful God the guilt 
cannot be regarded witli so much wrath where the misery that urges to it is so pitiable. 
Therefore it should be the work of the Christian philanthropist to remove physical 
wretchedness, not only for its own sake, but also as one of the first means tor preventing 
crime and vice. 

Ver. 5. — Severset of fortune, I. Reverses of fortune abb not UNOOMMOir. It li 

not only in the rare case of a protracted siege, when at last rich and poor both suffer 
from the severities of famine, that we may see some who once fed delicately wandering 
desolate in the street. All who have gone down into the haunts of the very poor and 
have investigated the severest cases of wretchedness know how many of the most abject 



OH.IV. 1— 22.J THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. 6S 

paupere have enjoyed wealth and Inzniy in former years. Even in an orderly society 
snob as our own the number of these violent reverses of fortune is appalling. Let no 
one boast of his assured comfort. 

XL Bevbrbeb of fortune abb most PAmFUL. We rarely miss what we have never 
known. There is, therefore, much mitigation to the hardness of the lot of those v> ho are 
bora in the most miserable circumstances, arising from the fact that they have never 
experienced anything better. But the greatest distress is in coming down from af9uence, 
comfort, and honour to poverty, distress, and shame. 

in. Beveeses or fortune are frequently merited. We must beware of the error 
of Job's friends. The innocent may and often do suffer from a most grievous succession 
of calamities. Still, those three men had much to say tor their view. Their mistake 
was in making it universal in its application. It is rarely that the seed of the righteous 
man has to beg for bread. Good men may have a humble lot and sometimes may have 
to suffer considerable loss. But usually the greatest degradation and misery follows 
the folly or sin of the sufferer. Probably the one vice of intemperance is the cause of 
more than half the cases of the very worst reverses of fortune. 

IV. Reverses of fobtxtne should exoite peculiar oommiseratiom. The happy 
and prosperous should look out for such cases. The most sad among them are often 
the hardest to find. They hide in shame and misery. Especially when the degradation 
is moral it becomes a Christian work to seek to restore the fallen. The Son of man 
came, not so much to preserve the prosperous nor to raise those who had never known 
bettmr things, as to seek and to save the lost sheep of the house of Israel, i.e, those who 
had once been piivileged and had fallen from their first estate. 

V. Reverses of fortune do not justify loss of faith in God. They tempt men 
that way. " Curse God, and die," a voice whispers into the ear of the despairing man. 
But it is the voice of folly as well as of sin. For : 1. We must expect to be governed in 
many viysteries by the great and all-wise God. It may be rational to disbelieve in the 
existence of God ; bat it cannot be rational to believe that he is, and yet to doubt his 
wisdom or goodness. 2. The reverie ia often due to the fault of the sufferer. 3. It may 
he ovmtruledfor hit good. 

YI. Reverses of fortune uay be revebsed. So was it in Job's case ; the end of 
the patriarch's life was even brighter than the beginning of it. 1. This may happen 
on e*rth. In suffering we are too ready to lose heart. We paint the future in diark 
shades manufactured solely from present experiences. But there are more resources in 
the world than we dream of. 2. It will surely come in the next world to all who trust 
in Ood. Then the second reverse will be as joyous as the first was miserable. For the 
same principle will'apply in both cases, and the great change will heighten the sense 
of (be new condition. Happy are they who, in Christ, though suffering and despised, 
are looking forward to this glorious reverse of their present dark fortunes. 

Yer. 12. — Incredible calamities. Not only had Jerusalem believed herself invincible, 
but she had been so long preserved in safety and so signally delivered in extreme 
danger, as in the Assyrian invasion when Hezekiah was king, that neighbouring nations 
had come to look upon her as secure from harm, and to regard such calamities as those 
which came in the wake of the Chaldean invasion as incredible. There are men whoso 
condition in the eyes of the world is as safe as that of Jerusalem was to the kings of 
the earth, and who nevertheless may fall into a greater ruin than the overthrow of 
Jerusalem. 

L The causes of fofulab disbelief in appboaohing calamities. 1. Self-eonfidence. 
Jerusalem believed herself to be safe. Proud in the favour of Heaven, she scorned to 
fear danger. This attitude of assurance impressed her neighbours. They thought there 
must be good ground for such loud bravado, or they did not think but simply acquiesced 
in the opinion of herself which the boastful city published abroad. Thus does the 
world often take men at their own estimates of themselves, not troubling to test these 
partial verdicts. 2. Previous security. Jerusalem seemed to bear a charmed life. She 
had braved many a fierce storm. The enemy had swept up to her very gates. But 
there they had been flung back by mysterious interventions of Providence. So the 
world believes in the prosperity of the prosperous. She indolently takes for granted 
that what has been will be. 



70 THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. [oh. iv. 1—22 

II. The folly op popdlab disbelief in approachinq calamities. 1. Insufficient 
evidence. The grounds of this notion are irrational. It is foolish to take people at 
their self-valuation; hut it is more foolish for the people thus accepted to take the 
popular voice, which is only the echo of their own vanity, as a justification for it. And 
when the past security engenders confidence, they who do not know what subsequent 
changes of circumstances have taken place cannot reasonably give security fqr its con- 
tinuance. 2. Ignorance of the real sources of prosperity and danger. The heathen 
kings knew not the God of Israel. They knew nothing of the secret of Jerusalem's 
safety in the days of her prosperity, nor did they see the sure presages of her ruin. 
Worldly men, who do not understand wherein the safety of a soul cunsists, are pooi 
judges of that soul's prospects. 

III. The danqeb of popular disbelief in affboaohing oalauitt. Though it n 
foolish it is influential, because it is readily accepted as an agreeable solace to fear. 
Thus Jerusalem was deluded by the flattery of her neighbours. When there is a 
general opinion that all is well it is hard for individual souls to see and feel their 
danger. In a condition of worldly ease the prophet of repentance is opposed by the 
mocking indifference of popular opinion, and souls are lulled to sleep with a hollow 
security that says, " Peace, peace," when there is no peace. The antidote to this 
dangerous anodyne of conscience must be sought in the Word of God, which speaks of 
judgment, and warns us to flee from the wrath to come for refuge where only safety 
can be found, not in the flattery of our neighbours, but at the cross of Christ. 

Ver. 14. — Blindness. The prophets and priests are so dismayed that they wander 
through the streets of Jerusalem like blind men. No doubt the confused movement o( 
these men as they run to and fro, not knowing whither to turn, is the chief idea in the 
mind of the poet. But the image of blindness by which he illustrates it is suggestive 
of the secret of their confusion. They were, indeed, as blind men because spiritual 
blindness had seized on them. 

I. The mek who were blinded. Priests and prophets. 1. Blindness would be 
least excusable in tluse men. They were not like the illiterate, nor even like the mass 
of the laity. Priests were trained in traditional lore, and prophets had access to new 
fountains of truth. 2. Blindness would be most dangerous in these men. They 
assumed the position of " men of light and leading." The world was made to believe 
that whoever else might be in darkness these teachers were fully illuminated. Their 
blindness was most fatal because they were " blind leaders of the blind." 

II. The chabaoteb of their blindness. It was spiritual. These teachers had all 
their senses and faculties. They could see the standards and chariots and hosts of the 
invader. They could measure his forces and calculate his movements. They had 
intellectual as well as physical eyesight. But they could not see the hand of God in 
the whole transaction. They failed to discern that moral condition of the nation which 
had called thu judument of Heaven down upon its head. They were quite at sea as to 
the future. They di(i not understand the Divine purpose of the chastisement ; and they 
were helpless when called upon to guide their followers in the great emergency. When 
the wolf broke into the fuLl the shepherds were hopelessly confounded. So must it be 
with all unworthy guides. The moment of need will discover their worthlessness. 

III. The causk of this blindness. Sin (see ver. 13). Priests and prophets had 
shed the blood of the just. Gri>ss ribuse of power and tyrannous violenee were iniquities 
enough to blunt the spiritual vision of the most gifted. This is one of the most teixible 
fruits of sin; It always tends to deaden conscience and darken the eye of the soul. 
We must do right if we would see truth. It is not only sensuality, passion, and gross 
worldliness that debase the soul beyond the power of perceiving higher things, but 
more spiritual sins — pride, bigotry, self-will, etc. — also blind it. Purity of heart is 
essential to clearness of vision. 

IV. The effect of this blindness. "They wandered as blind men in the streets." 
Darkness of vision leads to confusion in action. We must see clearly that we may walk 
straightly. A confused conscience will make an uncertain will. Practical truth is not 
merely a subject for discussion in the seclusion of the study. It is a,necessary chait to 
guide our course by. When the seeing and teaching of this is at fault all life u thrown 
into helpless disorder. 



oil. IV. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEuEMlAH, 71 

V. Thb onEB FOR THIS BLINDNESS. This is not suggested here. It is not the 
function of Lamentations to console and heal. But there is a remedy. For Christ c«me 
to " open the blind eyes " (Isa. xlii. 7). He is " the Light of the world," and all who fol- 
low him " shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life " (JohDviii. 12). 

Ver. 15. — Gontamination, So horrible is the condition of Jerusalem after the siege 
that men regard the holy city as an unclean place, like a haunt of lepers or an abode of 
the dead. They cry, " Go aside I Unclean ! Go aside ! go aside I " as they would to 
one who incautiously approached too near to one of these banned spots. 'I'he dread of 
contamination is a natural testimony to the instinct for purity ; but it is often sadly 
perverted, lor while no feeling should be more related to truth and fact, it happens that 
no feeling is more subject to artificial, conventional regulations. We need to inquire 
what are the true causes of contamination and how real contamination may be avoided. 

L What abb the true causes of contamination ? It is uncleanness that defiles. 
The primitive notion of uncleanness is connected with material things — the dirt that soils 
a garment, etc. Then disease which is loathsome and offensive, and death with its 
attendant corruption, are felt to be defiling. But to the soul true defilement can only 
come from what is morally impure. As Christ teaches, it is internal not external (Luke 
xi. 38 — 10), Jerusalem, when in her prosperity she abandoned herself to idolatry and 
immorality, was more unclean than when she lay in ashes a charnel-house of slaughtered 
citizens. Yet no man cried, " Unclean I" in the prosperous times. The degradation 
was thought to be defiling, while the sin which led to it was connived at. This mistake 
is common in various forms. The criminal with the brand of punishment upon him 
is shunned, while the far more vicious man who has contrived to keep himself safe is 
courted. Parents fear the corruption of manners which their children may contract by 
mingling with social inferiors, and yet permit them to mix with far more corrupt society 
if only the rank of it be higher than their own. Many people look with contemi)t on 
certain kinds of honest business, who will engage in pursuits of very questionable 
morality without compunction. Thus some regard trade as degrading and betting as 
gentlemanly. They would be ashamed to be connected with a shop ; they have no 
shame in their connection with the turf We want a healthier conscience, that will 
declare no honest pursuit to be dishonourable and no immoral one to be respectable 
simply because patronized by rank and fashion. 

II. How IB REAL contamination TO BE AVOIDED ? Granted that we know what 
things are defiling and can distinguish them from the objects of conventional ostracism ; 
how are we to behave ourselves in regard to the unclean things? We are to avoid 
contact with them. But here a difficult question arises. As Christians we are to be 
the salt of the earth. It is our mission to purify the impure. But if we shun it, how 
can we change it? If we neglect politics because we see politicians to be acting 
dishonourably, and business because we wish to avoid tricks of trade, and society 
because we must escape the corrupting influences of unwholesome amusements and 
scandalous conversation, shall we not be handing over politics, business, and society to 
the unchecked influence of evil ? The answer to this question seems to be that the 
departure must be in spirit and from the spirit of those things that are degrading. 
We are not to flee bodily. We may do so in vain. For the corruption of the world 
may pursue the hermit to his cell and torment his mind with evil imagmations in the 
desert. But if we forsake all sympathy with the unclean our soul cannot be touched 
by it. Thus Christ ate and drank with publicans and sinners and passed through their 
foul atmosphere without defilement. Especially if the object is to do good we may be 
sure that the consciousness of a mission and the cleansin>>; influence of Christian charity 
will prevent contamination. Thus a pure-minded Christian woman is able to go into 
the haunts of vice on an errand of mercy and return scatheless as the snowdrop that 
lifts its head from the impure soiL 

Yer. 22, — Z%e end of punishment. Here is a gleam of prophetic hope. From doleful 
lamentations the poet is able to look forward and see the end of the sad desolation of 
Jerusalem, 

I. PuNiBHUENT HAS AN END. Nothing is everlasting but God, and the life which 

God gives and the goodness of that life. Evil, darkness, pain, and death are teraporal 



72 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [oh. nr. 1—22 

phaaes of being. This may seem to many an unjustifiably dogmatic statement. Text 
for text we may find passages of Scripture to support it and to contradict it. It is 
when we take into account the drift of the whole Word of God, the character of 
QoA therein revealed and the purposes of punishment and of all dark facts of pro- 
vidence as far as these purposes are made known to us, that we are led more and 
more to believe in the victory and duration of the blessed and the overthrow and 
cessation of the evil phases of experience. 

II. The end of punishment is determined by its object. What is the object 
of punishment ? This may be manifulil. 1. It is not the satis/action of vengeance 
in, One who is wronged, For (1) such a satisfaction could only be required by sinful 
human passion, never by the good will of God ; and (2) if such a satisfaction were 
required, it would not be punishment, which is quite another thing. 2. It is partly 
the deterring of possible offenders. In so far as law must be vindicated for the sake 
of its future observance the punishment must be severe, but not beyond that point. 
3. It is chiefly for the restoration of the offender. This was the reason given for 
the terrible calamities that overwhelmed the guilty city of Jerusalem. Human 
punishment under criminal laws is so far a failure that the primary end of it is 
rarely achieved. But with God's all-wise government it is held in view and mainly 
aimed at. Therefore the punishment is called " chastisement." What is required 
of chastisement is that it sliould be sufficient. For it to be endless would be to 
defeat its object. Moreover, it does not require to be measured by the ofience alone. 
Even if it were so measured it need not be everlasting, since no finite being can 
commit an infinite sin. But it is measured by the change required to be wrouglit 
in the guilty person. 

III. The pbospect up the knd of punishment should help us to bbab it. 
God sends chastisement on earth. And he does not except any from it — at all 
events he does not except Christians, for "whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." 
If there were no hope to the chastised, and punishment were a sign of being cast off 
for ever by God, we might well sit down in sullen despair. But there is encourage- 
ment in the thought that it is temporary, is working our good, and may be lightened 
and shortened by prompt repentance and patient submission. 

IV. The guiltt agents of punishment will be punished. Edom had triumphed 
over Jerusalem. Edom was to have her sin discovered and punished when Jerusalem 
was restored. So Babylon's doom was promised (Isa. xiii.). Satan, the great enemy of 
souls, may be used as an instrument for our chastisement. But his day of doom is 
drawing near. Then he can torment us no more. 

v. Christ puts an end to punishment. It is not necessary that we should 
endure our punishment to the end. If we had to do so where would the end be ? 
The awful prospect would shut out all view of any end, whatever we might reason 
about its far-off certainty. But Christ has accomplished for us by his suffering and 
sacrifice a work of redemption which will save with full, free, and immediate pardon all 
who repent and trust iu hisa. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — 77ie gold dimmed. Present adversity brings to mind, by force of contrast, 
the prosjjerity of bygone days. The Hebrew prophet of sorrow might well recall the 
golden days oi old. 

" A poet's crown of sorrow is remembering happier tliingg." 

His touching and poetic language affords — 

I. A LESSON OF human MUTABILITY. The exclamatiou reminds us of those oft- 
quoted words. Ilium fuitl Troy was, but is no morel The proudest cities have 
crumbled into ruins, the most splendid palices have mouldered into dust. 

II. A LESSON that pbeoious THINGS MAY TURN TO viLK. The homes of kings, 
priests, and prophets, were possessed by the brutal soldiery ; the city of David and 
Solomon resounded with the ferocious cry of the Chaldeans. Sin can bring the brightest 
and the most glorious of human societies aud iustiiutiuns into decay and contempt. 



OH. nr. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. 73 

IIL A LBBSON THAT SACRED THIN08 MAT BE PROFANED. " The stoDes o( the sanotuary " 
were flung about. The very temple of Jehuvah became a ruin, the sacred solemnitiei 
came to an end, and the voice of the priests and the Levites ceased in the precincts. 
Sin can rust even the fine gold. 

IV. A LESSON OF THE UNSPARING ENMITY OF MAN. The Chaldeans were not deterred 
by any consideration from carrying out their wiath to the bitterest extremity. The 
tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. r« victis I is an old cry. 

v. A LESSON AS TO THE EXACTING NATURE OF DiVINE RETRIBUTION. The hand 

was the hand of the Chaldean, but the judgment was the judgment of God. When 
men rebel against him, no human power or splendour can preserve them from his 
righteous indignation and just retribution.— T. 

Ver. 2. — " Precious sons . . . fine gold," . . . become " earthen pttehert.'' The prophet's 
appreciation of the proper dignity and value of his nation was naturally very exalted ; 
in proportion were his sorrows and humiliation when his country rebelled against the 
Lord, and became, in consequence, a prey to the despised and hated foreigner. The 
reflections are applicable, not to Judah only, but to all the sinful and rebellious among 
men ; for there is no escape from the action of the moral law, from the chastisement 
of the righteous Judge. 

I. The true value and proper dionitt of man. Comparable to " fine gold " in 
beauty, preciousness, and use, is our humanity when in the state designed by the 
Creator, free from the corroding rust of sin, and minted and stamped with the image 
and superscription of the Most High. 

II. Sin nrvoLVEB chastisement, and chastisement brings disgrace. The 
striking contrast between gold, fine and solid, on the one hand, and " earthen pitchers " 
on the other hand, is a pictorial and effective representation of the change which took 
place in Judah. A holy nation, a kingdom of priests, the chosen of the Eternal, was 
reduced to the level of the poorest, meanest tribe vanquished and despoiled by an 
unsparing enemy. Here, as so often, the chosen nation was an emblem of humanity. 
For though man be by nature the sunlimest of God's creatures, when he is abandoned 
to sin and all its consequences he sinks below the level of the brutes. 

Application. Only Divine grace and power can restore the beauty and dignity of 
which sin has robbed humanity. The gospel of Christ transforma the earthen pitcher 
into the fine gold of the sanctuary. — T. 

Vers. 3 — 5. — The horrors of famine. A more graphic, a more terrible picture than 
this of the misery of a captured, starved, and desolated city, no pencil could paint. If 
the circumstances of the famine-stricken population of Jerusalem are portrayed with 
too literal a skill and with too sickening an effect, it must be borne in mind that the 
description is not that of an artist, but of a prophet, and that the aim is not merely to 
horrify, but to instruct, and e.specially to represent the frightful consequences involved 
in a nation's sin and apostasy. 

I. Physical sufferings ark described. If the condition of the wretched citizens 
be examined, they are seen to be afQicted with all physical evils, e,g. with hunger and 
want, with emaciation and feebleness of body, with homelessness, squalor, and filth, 
with pestilence and death. 

II. Moral degradation is dbnounobd. A siege, the sack of a city, have sometimes 
called out exalted self-sacriflce and heroism ; but they have sometimes been the occasion 
of the bursting forth into flame of the vilest passions — of avarice, cruelty, selfishness, 
and lust. In this passage we observe an atrocious exliibition of selfish indifference to 
the pains and necessities of others, and especially a display of cruelty towards children 
which contrasts with the parental instincts and tenderness of the brutes. To so low a 
level does sin bring human nature. 

Pbacmcal lessons. 1. In plenty and peace let men cherish gratitude. 2. Let those 
who are prosperous commiserate the famine-stricken and the victims of war. 8, Let 
generous provision be made for the wants of the destitute. — ^T. 

Ver. 12. — The impregnalile taken. The natural position of Jerusalem was such as ta 
mark it out for a stronghold, as to inrita its possessors to fortify it and to deem them- 



74 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEKEMIAH. [ch. it. 1—22 

selves invincible. When David conquered it by daring and valour, he made it tha 
metropolis ol' the nation. Siicceeciing kings strengthened the walls and completed tha 
fortifications, so that Jeiiisaleiu became one of the strongest fortresses of the ancient 
world. And at this time Nebuchadnezzar had only taken the city after a siege extending 
through a year and a half. 

I. The impressive contrast. 1. One such contrast was upon the surface and 
obvious to every eye. The mighty and apparently invincible was vanquished and deso- 
lated. 2. Another contrast was apparent to the mind of the observing and reflecting : 
the city favoured by God himself was abandoned, spoiled, and desolated. If Jehovah 
had not gone out of the gates, the Chaldeans could not have entered in. 3. The con- 
trast was one universally amazing and astounding. " The kings of the earth, and all 
the iuhabiiants of tlie world, would not have believed it." 

II. The inspired explanation op this contrast. It was not chance, it was not 
" the fortune of war," it was not the consequence of some political machinations, some 
military strategy, that the proud city of Zion fell into the hands of the foreisjn conqueror 
Unfaithfulness and rebellion against God were the. true explanation. The Lord only 
forsakes those who forsake him. All men, all nations, endure chastisement for sin. 
Blessed be God 1 in the midst of wrath he remembers mercy. — T. 

Vers. 13, 14. — The degradation of the prophets and the priests. There is a somewhat 
obscure reference in this passage to some incidents which took place during and after 
the siege of Jerusalem. The book of Jeremiah's prophecies casts some light upon 
the language of his lamentations. It is evident that the offices of priest and prophet 
were vilely abused at this period of Judah's degradation, that the prophets prophesied 
in false and flattering words, that the priests burned incense to idols, that both 
professions were debased to selfish ends, and that both were accountable to a very 
large extent for the calamines of the nation. No wonder that prophets and priests 
became the objects of national detestation, that Jew and alien alike shunned and hated 
them. 

L Thk noblest omoKS, when misused, become the obeatest oubse. The priests 
were "holy unto Jehovah ;" the prophets were the commissioned ministers of the All- 
wise, and they spake his words to men. But when they retained their name, but 
lost the spirit and the moral authority attaching to their position, they misled and 
oppressed their countrymen. Alas for the nation whose leaders in Church and state 
are selfish and corrupt I they who should be an honour and a blessing become then a 
disgrace and a curse. Let the great and the consecrated take warning, and watch and 
pray. 

U. When spiBiTnAL and intblleotual leaders are debased theib influence 
UPON A NATION IS MOST DBLETBBI0U8 AND DISASTROUS. " Like priest, like people," says 
the old proverb. In modern communities it is observable that the journalists and the 
clergy have amazing power in giving a tone to public life. Where these are corrupt the 
very springs of a nation's life are poisoned ; all classes are affected ,by the influences 
which are potent for harm as they had otherwise been for highest good. 

IIL The unfaithfulness of the leaders brinos penalties and calamities upon 
the feoflb. The constitution of human society is such that one must needs suffer for 
another. As the sins of the prophets and the Iniquities of the priests had no small 
share in bringing about the ruin of Jerusalem, so a corrupt literature and a selfish clergy 
will bring any nation, however powerful, into misery and contempt. — T. 

Ver. 17. — Vain help and hope. When Jerusalem was besieged by the Chaldeans its 
inhabitants seem to have looked for assistance fron their Egyptian neighbours. This 
was a policy and an expectation displeasing to Jehovah, who ever taught his people to 
rely, not upon an arm of flesh, but upon the eternal King of righteousness. In verse 
the prophtt pictures the attitude of the Jews as day after day they strained their weary 
eyes to catch some glimpse of an approaching deliverer. How striking a piotnre of the 
folly and vanity of those hopes which man fixes upon his fellow-man 1 

I. The distressed and harassed naturally have recourse to hitman aib. As 
the Jews looked now to Assyria and again to Egypt for allies and helpan, m the 
children of men have recourse to himan counsellors, philosophers, and savloan f 



OH. n. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 75 

deliver tliem from the perplexities and sorrows and fears to which human nature is 
always subject. 

II. It is pbovidbntiallt appointed that experience should convinok hbw oj 
THE vanity of alIj HUMAN HELP. When application after application fails to bring 
relief, when hope after hope is disappointed, then, and perhaps not until then, men 
learn how vain is the help of man, and perceive the wisdom of the advice, " Put not 
your trust in man, or in the son of man, in whom is no help." 

III. God INTENDS BY SUCH DISCIPLINARY EXPERIENCE TO DRAW HIS PEOPLE TO HIM- 

seiIjF. When the eyes are dim and weary with looking earthward for deliverance, then 
they may he lifted heavenward. And when the help of man is sincerely acknowledged 
to be vain, then the help of God is at hand. — T. 

Ver. 18. — The end is come I The progress of the enemy's works, the approach of the 
enemy's forces, the frequency of the enemy's assaults, all tended to dishearten the 
citizens of the besieged Jerusalem. The prophet represents the discouraged and dis- 
mayed citizens as gazing with terror upon the assailants and their strategy, and exclaim- 
ing in despair, " Our end is come ! " The dealing and the discipline of God with the 
souls of the disobedient and rebellious .may well awaken the same conviction and elicit 
the same cry. 

I. The end of cub own besouboes. It is sometimes only when men have tried what 
is in their power, have done their best to solve their spiritual difficulties and to make 
their way secure, that, convinced of their own insufBciency, they admit themselves to 
be altogether in the wrong. 

n. The end of oub besistance to oub foes. Men strive to carry on the conflict in 
their own strength, and they strive in vain. " Wearied in the greatness of their way," 
convinced that tjiey are no match for the spiritual enemy, they may confess that, left 
to themselTes, they cannot conquer, they cannot withstand. 

III. The end of all our hopes of deliverance. Those hopes may have buoyed 
up foi days and years ; but when they have issued only in disappointment how can the 
discouiaged do other than at last for ever abandon them ? 

IV. The end of our rebellion against God. If this be the effect produced by 
long experience of the wretchedness and the futility of such hostility, there will be 
reason for gratitude. They who lay down the weapons of rebellion shall receive mercy 
and experience deliverance. — T. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Fallen reputation. I. The weight of this reputation. The position 
of the people was comparable to gold in its glitter and attraction. Gold has its use 
and iron has its use, and we may be glad we have both ; but if one of these two had to 
be given up, it would certainly be the gold. Iron means immensely more in modern 
civilization than gold. But if frequency of mention is to count for anything, gold was 
much more valued among the Israelites than iron, and being so, it had a large place 
in the symbolisms of the tabernacle service and in the splendours of Solomon's temple. 
Hence any one with a high reputation might very well be compared to gold. People 
run after such a one even as they do after gold. There is a time when the crowd are 
not contented to speak well of a man ; they must praise him extravagantly, using the 
language of superlatives, and showing that their standard, if standard it can truly be 
called, is far from an ideal one. 

II. The oharactek of the beputation. Had Israel ever been worthy of this com- 
parison with fine gold ? On what was the comparison based ? It is to he feared that it 
rested very much on mere appearance. Kemember the saying, "All that glitters is not 
gold." Jehovah had made Israel to glitter by taking it out from among the nations and 
making it the object of great demonstrations of his power. But, so to speak, this was 
only gilding over the impure and incoherent mass of common humanity with a coating 
of pure gold for a certain purpose. The men and women who made up Israel were at 
heart like men and women elsewhere. But by giving them a certain outward splen- 
dour God furnished a symbol of that true gulden nation which is made up from 
individual believers in him. 

III. The destruction of the reputation. The gold becomes dim. The com- 
parison was once to gold out of which vessels for honour are made, beautifully shaped 



76 THK LAMENTATION? OF JEREMIAH. [ch. rv. 1— 22 

and decorated. But now the comparison is to the common clay out of which the pottei 
makes his cheap and fragile ware. And yet, after all, if gold be a standard of precious- 
ness, these sons of Zion were indeed comparable to it ; only the gold is in the unpurified 
state, mixed very intimately with baser elements that talce away the use and glory 
of the gold. Man in his best natural state may have his reputation liftei! too high ; 
in his worst natural state that reputation may sink too low ; but when God takes the 
natural man in hand and renews, purifies, and disciplines him, then it will be seen that 
the most splendid and pleasing of visible objects is only a feeble hint of that glory 
wherewith God has chosen to glorify his own children. — Y. 

Vers. 3, 4. — Natural affection gone. I. Note an unfavodbablb (X>ntbabt with 
THE LOWER CREATION. Everything is to be estimated according to its nature. It 
matters little what the sea-monster here stands for. It is sufiScieut to know that some 
fierce destructive creature is thought of. Truly there is a vast difference between the 
brutes whose very nature it is to destroy in order that they may live, and man who never 
looks more worthy of his position in the scale of being than when he is doing his very 
best to preserve life, risking even his own life for this end. And yet even in the most 
savage brutes there is natural affection. To stoop to a very common sight, what is 
more suggestive of some of the deep mysteries of existence than to see a cat one moment 
patiently suckling its own young, and the next moment stealthily and silently making 
its way to spring on some defenceless bird? If, then, it is put into the nature of these 
fierce creatures thus to care for their young, what care is it not right to expect irom 
man, the highest creature whom we know ? There is hardly any limit to what he can 
do for his offspring in the way of guarding its weakness and developing its power; and 
yet how negligent he can laecome I The lower creation puts him to shame. Jeremiah 
here speaks of cruelty, but we do well to remember that there is a thoughtlessness, an 
indolence, and a selfishness which are productive of as bad effects as any cruelty can 
produce. More evil, it has been truly said, is wrought from want of thought than from 
want of heart. 

II. What it ib that froduces this contradiction to nature? Generally 
stated, it is the stress of circumstances that does it. "The daughter of my people" 
would not have become cruel if her life had gone on in its ordinary way. But all at 
once the supplies that have been so regular become uncertain, and at last virtually stop. 
The cruelty, if in such circumstances it may be truly called so, is an involuntary one. 
And yet it is not involuntary in this sense, that the state of things was altogether 
unpreventable. The famine came from disobedience to God. We are not left to make 
a superstitious inference as to this connection. It is stated on authority. It were 
presuming far too much to trace a connection between particular suffering and particular 
wrong-doing, but where the connection between particular wrong-doing and particular 
suffering is made perfectly plain, we shall be very foolish if we do not take heed to it. 
Whatever wrong thing we do will have some evil consequences, and we know not how 
soon they may come, how widely they may spread, and how much suffering and 
difficulty they may bring to the innocent. — Y. 

Ver. 6. — Soeial revolution. I. An illustration op the instability or human 
socncTT. We may consider it either as the instability of wealth or the instability of 
rank. It shows how no class of the community is able to say that, whatever happens 
in the way of stress or destitution, it will keep right. Men build up societies in which 
rank comes from the accumulation of wealth or the exercise of power that is in a man 
by nature. But these human societies thus built up cannot reckon on permanence. 
Greed is excited on the part of others, and the higher a man has risen the lower be 
may fall. 

II. The illustration here should make us considerate of those in hioh 
POSITION. The high are of necessity the few. Their position is seen from the outside 
and from a distance. What we do see is very likely tn mislead us, for our eye lights 
on outward splendour and the appearance of much leisure and the ability to do very 
much what one likes. But the many journals and memoirs that have been published 
revealing the inner life of courts and titled circles show that human beings may be 
none the less miserable because the misery is gilded over. Our pity may be needed at 



•H. IT. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEBEMIAH. 77 

any moment for the man of rank and privilege. Whatever the outward differences 
may. be, the inward heart is the same, and that must have its sorrows, its disappoint- 
ments, and its perils. 

in. We ABE TAUOHT THE NEED OF CAUTION DT SLOBIFTINO HUMAN CTVILIZATION. 

What many people reckon to be the bighest civilization needs material wealth in great 
profusion to keep it up. There must be classes to paint pictures, carve statuary, and 
give long periods of time to the elaboration of artistic conceptions, whatever they may 
be. And what a satire on all this it is to recollect how fragile and fading some of these 
art treasures have proved ! The ignorant and narrow-minded imder-value these things, 
but then it is also possible to over-value them, to get so occupied with them as to forget 
the deepest things of humanity, the things that endure. The civilized, refined, natural 
man may be good, but how much better is the spiritual man, even thoxigh he be rude 
in speech and full of eiTor in his tastes 1 Truly we may say, he that is least among 
spiritual men is greater than the highest of attainments among natural men. — T. 

Yer. 6. — 3%« i^n of Sodom. God was doing nothing new or indefensible in allowing 
Jerusalem thus to be wasted and humiliated. The Israelites had in their possession 
illustrations more than one of how great sin had been followed by great suffering. 
Jeremiah quotes Sodom, and he might have said sometbmg about Egypt when God 
visited it with the plagues. We must not, of course, press too literally the statement 
that the sin of Jemsalem was greater than that of Sodom. The prophet's aim is simply 
to insist that no sin could have been greater than that of Jerusalem. If it was a right 
.ind a necessary thing that Sodom should be so suddenly visited, so completelj over- 
whelmed, then assuredly no complaint could be made against the severe treatment 
experienced by Jerusalem. Indeed, relatively, Jerusalem might think itself very well off. 
If the height on which Jerusalem stood had sunk in another Dead Sea, there would 
have been no ground for complaint. No impartial Israelite, looking at the privileges 
of Israel, con.sidering how much it had been instructed and warned, and how patiently 
it had been dealt with, could do anything but confess that on the whole it had been 
mildly visited. We must, however, be careful here not to attribute anything arbitrary 
to Otod. We shall naturally be very much perplexed if we allow ourselves to think that, 
though Sodom's sin was less than Jerusalem's, yet it received a greater pimishment. 
It is only by a figure that we talk of communities being punished. Punishment is 
strictly an individual thing. Communities may suffer, and the suffering will be accord- 
ing to the needs of God's government at the time. The cities of the plain were utterly 
swept away, that the rest of the world might not become as bad as they were. These 
visitations have to be looked on somewhat in the light of surgical operations. One 
patient in the hospital needs to have a limb amputated that the whole budy may be 
saved. Another can have his body saved without the loss of a part of it, — ^T. 

Ver. 9. — Sword and hunger. I. Worse things than war. Better, says the 
prophet, to be swiftly slain in battle than have the slow and gnawing death of hunger. 
None worthy the name of Christian can but appreciate and admire the zeal, devotion, 
and self-abnegation of those who toil incessantly in the things tbat make for peace. 
War is so dieadful an evil that liardly too strong things can be said against it. And 
one of the stiong things said is with respect to the immense sutfering produced by war. 
Yet after all there is a great deal that deceives imagination here. Suffering is crowded 
into a small space, and puts on a horrible aspect, and thus it looks huger than it is, and 
so when we are appalled at the continuance in the world of great wars full of carnage, 
we shall do well to recollect that war is by no means the worst of things so far as 
power of inflicting suffering is concerned. Evidently the prophet saw starvation as a 
more horrible thing than war. It may, of course, be said the war was the cause of the 
famine, and very likely it was, but then, what was the cause of the war? Gkiod men in 
their enthusiasm come in with all sorts of ready remedies for great evils, not sufficiently 
considering hpw one evil is connected with another, and how the stopping up of one 
channel may only fill other channels all the more. Who can dry up the fountain of all 
evil? — that is the question. 

IL The dreadful accompaniments of famine. Is there anything worse than the 
carnage of a battle-field ? Yes ; the pangs of a multitude slowly dying of starvation. 



78 THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. [oh. it. 1—22. 

There ii death from disease, death from decay, death of the strong man in full health 
from violence ; but worse than any surely is this slow torment of hunger. What an 
instance of the rigid way in which law binds us down, unless there be some Divine 
reason for interfering with the operations perceptible to us ! He who intervened to feed 
the five thousand and the four thousand could have intervened to keep these wretched 
women from laying their hands on their own children for food. What necessity was 
there in the one case which there was not in the other? Some there must have been, 
though we may fail to grasp it as a whole. Doubtless if we could only see clearly it 
would then become manifest that there is no lack in the giving of food, but that it is 
we who lack wisdom in developing and distributing what is given. — Y. 

Ver. 12. — A seeming impossibility achieved. I. The value or A befctation. 
Jerusalem had a far-spread reputation for security. It was a reputation, too, which 
prevailed among those with whom it was desirable it should prevail, namely, the kings 
of the earth. A reputation for security is to a certain extent an element in security, 
and what we have to do is to let it have its just value. For instance, in a world where 
solicitations to evil abound it is well if those who have all the inclination to tempt us 
nevertheless say in their hearts that we are beyond such temptations, and therefore it 
would be mere waste of time to attack us. Jerusalem had probably escaped many 
sieges through this far-spread feeling. 

XL The causes of this befutation. Here is the value of history. A tradition 
springs up that Jerusalem is impregnable. Failures in attacking it are contrasted with 
successes in attacking other places. It is nut that any particular invader fails, but 
different nations and different commanders. Furthermore, the people of Jerusalem 
come to accept what seems an unquestionable privilege. If it has come to be a foregone 
conclusion among their enemies that their city is impregnable, how much more may 
they themselves rest in such a conclusion ! But what bad made this conclusion possible ? 
Was it the position of Jerusalem ? No doubt this counted for something, for other 
walled places beside Jerusalem have had the reputation of being able to defy all attack. 
The great thin^, Ijowever, was the purpose of Ood that Jerusalem should stand against 
its enemies. To him must be laid the origin of this wide and deep feeling. He who 
had been as a shield to the individual warrior became as a high and fenced wall to 
the city. Jerusalem is the contrast to Jericho. Well-defended Jericho can be made 
to fall without any visible force, and Jerusalem can be made to stand against the 
most furious accumulations of the heathen. 

IIL The worthlessnebb or here reputatioic. Reputation by itself is always to 
be looked upon with caution. If we would have reputation to be a valuable element 
in judgment, it must be by asking in whose voice the reputation lies. The voice of 
the multitude, the voice that takes up a cry and as it were transmits an echo, what is 
it worth ? The people of Jerusalem had come to rest in the comfortable feeling that 
their city was reckoned impregnable. Do not let our safety rest in what other people 
think about us. If our safety is not of God, if it does not rest in trusting him and 
obeying him, then sooner or later that will happen to us in our life which happened to 
Jerusalem, The walls of our life will be broken down, our most precious treasures 
taken away, our hearts made desolate. — Y. 

Ver. 13. — Shedding the hlood of thejutt. Consider — 

I. The thing that is done. It is not merely that life is taken away ; nor is it even 
that murder is committed. It would be bad enough if even the most wicked of men were 
maliciously slain — slain, not because of his wickedness, but because of some evil motive on 
the part of the slayer. But here those who are slain are just men, and slain because they 
are just. All they needed in order to live on was to fall in with prevailing and popular 
iniquities. Instead of this, they set their faces against the multitude that are doing evil. 
They must, as a matter of necessity to their own consciences, say and do things which ai« 
a continual exasperation to the wicked. They do not mean to exasperate, they may be in 
the spirit of their life most meek, gentle, and unaffected ; but all thu will avail nothing — 
the wicked are bound to pick a quarrel with them, even as the wolf in the fable picked 
a quarrel with the lamb. And let it be observed that shedding the blood of the just ii 
oaly the climax of the persecuting treatment which the just must be ready to experi«no« 



OOL T. 1—22.] 



THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 



79 



The wicked are often quite willing to stop short of the climax if they can gain their 
ends hy something less. Not all at once do they proceed to the shedding of blood. It 
is well for those who, if they be indeed Christians, are assuredly to be reckoned among 
the just to remember what they have to number among the possibilities of their 
endeavour to live a truly righteons life. No mere human civilization will ever secure 
the just man from the risk of having to lose his life for his righteousness. 

li. Those who do it. Once again, as so often, the prophet and priest stand forth 
in a shameful revelation. Their life is so contrary to their office. The prophet whose 
force should have come from the strong ri;;hteousness of his heart within and be directed 
■traight against all evil-doers, is found ranging himself with the wicked and making 
evil put on the semblance of good. And as lor the priest, he does holy things with his 
hands and offers sacrifices for sin, while those whose lives are a continual protest against 
sin he hates and strives to slay. Not that we must reduce the prophet and the priest 
Here spoken of to the level of vulgar murderers. Doubtless, in many instances, they 
persuaded themselves they were right and doing God service. Fanaticism and class 
leeling, where each one blows the flame of his neighbour's zeal, will urge men on to the 
greatest atrocities. There may be no danger, most likely there will be no opportunity, 
that we should go as far as these prophets and priests, but we need to guard against 
having their narrow spirits in our hearts. We may not shed the blood of the justi but 
nevertiieless we may do much to hinder and trouble them.— T. 

Ver. 20. — A diiappointed eonjidenee and a desecrated lanetittf. There seems to 1m 
indicated in these words a great attachment to the kingly office and a great confidence 
in it. It is the same spirit continuing and probably intensified which caused the people 
ages before to demand a king. And is it not thus suggested to us what a deep feeling 
there is in the human heart to have some one individual to look up to as having rule 
over us? " The right Divine of kings " is a principle which more than once in history has 
been seen pushing itself to disastrous issues, but that is no reason for asserting that "the 
right Divine of kings " is an absurdity. It is only an absurdity when a weak fallible 
mortal holds himself, by virtue of his ancestry and kinship, to have little less than 
absolute control over multitudes of his fellow-men. The question is not whether king- 
ship is right, but who shall be the king. And especially does this need to be recollected 
among the changing forms of government so perceptible In modern times. Now that 
despotisms are tending to limited mouRrcViies, and limited monarchies becoming more 
limited, and extensions being made of republican territory, it is more than ever important 
to insist on the kingdom of God, the kingdom of heaven. Not without deep reason does 
the proper government for man stand before us in the New Testament as a kingdom. The 
collective wisdom of mankind can only be at best a puzzling mixture of knowledge and 
ignorance, prudence and rashness. Blessed is he who feels tl;at the real Anointed of the 
Lord is the proper Being to guide. Under his shadow we can live the true life in that 
safety of the spirit which is of far more moment than that mere external safety from 
Uie Gentiles, which counted for so much in the esteem of the Israelite of old, b m 
i)its baa tha Lord Jesus Christ ever been taken. — ^Y. 



IXPOSITJON. 



CHAPTER V. 
Ten. I— 18.— Insult upon tseovf has 

BEEN HEAPED UPON JeKCSALEH. 

Yei. 2. — Onr inheritance. The land had 
been "given "to Abraham (Gen. xiii. 25; 
xvli. 8), and was consequently inherited by 
Abraham's posterity. Onr houses. Not as it' 
the Chaldeans had actually taken up their 
abode in some of the houses of Jerusalim. 
The expressions are forcible, but inexact. 
The land wu seized; the houses were de- 
stroyed (Jet. Ui. 1S> 



Ver. 8.— We are orphans and fatherless ; 
t.«. "We are like the most desolate of 
beings," as the Targum already explains it. 
Hence in the next clause the mothers of 
Israel ere likened to widows. 

Ver. 4. — We have drtmken our water, ele. 
The Jews were not yet carried away to 
Babjlonia when this was written, but had 
to pay a dear price to the new lords of the 
soil tor the commonest necessaries of life. 

Ver. 5. — Our necks are under persecution. 
Pertecution is here compared to • yoke. 
But this rendering and expIanatio« hardly 



80 



TKE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 



LCH. T. 1—22 



suit the phrase, which rather means, " We 
are pursued close upon our necks." The 
harassing conduct of the Babylonian con- 
querors is compared tn the piusuit of a foe 
fast gaining upon a fugitive. 

Ver. 6. — We have given the hand, etc. 
StarvatioB awaits the Jews unless they suh- 
mit to one or the other of their hereditary 
foea. Some escape to Egypt and " give the 
hand" (i.e. surrender, Jer. 1. 1.5) to the lords 
of the fertile Nile valley; others acquiesce 
in the fate of the mpjority, and sue for the 
alms of the Babylonians. 

Ver. 7. — We have borne their iniquities. 
The fathers died before the iniquity was 
fully ripe for punishment, and their descend- 
ants have the feeling that the accumulated 
Bins of the nation are visited upon them. 
This view of national troubles is very 
clearly endorsed by one important class of 
passages (Exod. xx. 5 ; xxxiv. 7 : Numb. xiv. 
18 ; Jer. xxxii. 18). The objection to it is 
forcibly expressed by Job (xxi. 19), " God 
[it is said] layeth up his iniquity for hia 
children : [but] let him requite it to him- 
self, that he may feel it I " Hence Jeremiah 
(xxxi. 30) and Ezekiel (xviii. 1, etc.) insist 
on the truth that every man is punished 
for his own sins. Of course the two views 
of punishment are reconcilable. The Jews 
were not only punished, according to Jer. 
xvi. 11, 12, for their fathers' sins, but for 
their own still more flagrant offences. 

Ver. 8. — Servants have ruled ; rather, 
ilave$. The Babylonians in general might 
be called slaves, by comparison with the 
" kingdom of priests " (Exod. xix. 6), and 
the " gone " of Jehovah (Isa. xlv. 11 ; Hos. i. 
10). Or the expression may mean (hat even 
basebom hangers-on of the conquering host 
assumed the right to command the defeuce- 
less captives. 

Ver. 9. — ^We gat our bread ; rather, uje 
get our bread. The allusion in the follow- 
ing words is perhaps to murderous attacks 
of Bedawins (as we should cull the Ishmael- 
ites) on the Jews who attempted to gather 
in the scanty harvest. 

Ver. 10. — Was blaok like an oven. The 
translation is misleading ; there is no real 
parallel to ch. iv. 8. Render, gloweth. It 
is the feverish glow produced by gnawing 
hunger which is meant. The terrible 
famine ; rather, tlie burning heat of hunger. 
Hariri, the humoristio author of the cycle 
of stories in rhymed Arabic prose and verse, 
Culled 'Makamat,' puts into the mouth of 
his ne'er-do-well Abu Seid very similar 
words to describe a famished man — 

" Deas Eingeweide brennend naoh Erquick- 
ung sohrein, 
Der nichta gegessen leit zwei Tagen oder 

drein." 
(Rtiokert's adaptation, third Makama.) 



Ver. 12. — Princes are hanged up by theii 
hand ; i.e. by the band of the enemy. Im- 
palement after death was a common punish- 
ment with the Assyrians and Babylonians. 
Thus Sennacherib says that, after capturing 
rebellious Ekron, he hung the bodies of the 
chief men on stakes all round the city 
(' Eecords of the Past,' i. 38). Bnnomi gives 
a picture of such an impalement from ojie 
of the plates in Botta's gnat work (' Nine- 
veh and its Palaces,' p. 192). 

Ver. 13. — They took the young men to 
grind ; rather, the young men have borne the 
mill. The lower millistone seems to have 
been specially hard, and therefore heavy 
(see Job xli. 24), and to carry it about 
must have required a more severe exertion 
even than (he constant turning of the mill- 
handle. Dr. Thomson " cannot recall an 
instance in which men were grinding at the 
mill" ('The Land and the Book,' edit. 
1881, p. 108), and both Exod. xi. 5 and 
Matt. xxiv. 41 presuppose that it was 
women's work. The conquered Jewish 
youths, however, share the fate of Samson — 

" Eyeless, in Gaza, at the miil with slaves." 
(' Samson Agonistes,' 41.) 

"Eyeless," indeed, they may some of them 
have been, as putting out the eyes was a 
common Oriental punishment (comp. Jer. 
xxxix. 7). The children. This is, perhaps 
too strong. The Hebrew na'-ar is applic- 
able, not only to children, but to youths at 
the age for marriage (Gen. xxxiv. 19) or war 
(1 Kin;;s XX. 15). The wood; not the 
wooden hauille of the mill, but the wood 
required for fuel. 

Ver. 14. — From the gate. The place 
where the elders, technically so called, as- 
sembled for legal proceedings, and where 
the citizens in general met together for 
social concourse (comp. Gen. xi.^;. 1; Kuth 
iv. 11 ; Ps. Ixix. 12 ; Amos v. 12, 15 ; Dan. 
ii. 49). From their music (como. Jer. vii. 
34 : xvi. 9). 

Ver. 16. — The crown is fallen, etc. ; rathei, 
the crown of our head is fallen. The Jewish 
people is compared to a rich man at a ban- 
quet, crowned with a diailein (comp. Isa. 
xxviii. 1). Jeremiah has a similar phrase 
in his prophecies (xiii. 18). It evidently 
expiesdes figur.itively the prosiierity and 
honoirr formerly enjoyed by the now van- 
quished people 

Vers. 17, 18. — These verses form a transi- 
tion to the final appeal. The thought ol 
the desolation of Zion overwhelms the spirit 
of the poet. But he will soon be able to 
lift hiiiisi-lf up again when he recalls t!ie 
sublime truth of the inviolable security ol 
Israel's God. Foxes ; rather, joohib. 

Vers. 19 — 22. — Final Appisal to God fou 
THE Reversal of the Judgment. 



CH. V. i— 22.] 



THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 



81 



Ver. 19.— Bemalnest; better, art enthroned. 

Vet. 20. — Wherefore dost thou forget us, 
etc. ? The poet does not say, " Wherefore 
hast then forgotten us 7 " One of the 
psalmistB, indeed, does go so far (Ps. Ixxir. 
1) ; but the poet of this lamentation, with 
a more tender and trustful reserve, adopts 
the tense of feeling (the imperfect) in pre- 
ference to that of fact (the perfect), and 
asks, " Wherefore dost thou [to ray feeling] 
forget us? Wherefore, if Jehovah's power 
is still unbroken, does he allow Israel to 
feel herself forsaken ? " The fact is certain , 
V z. that the land of Israel is desolate, and 
(the poet seems to imply) desolate for some 
time already. The interpretation is hypo- 
thetical, and, as the last verse will show, 
the poet cannot bring himself to believe that 
it can be accurate. 

Ver. 21. — Turn thou us, etc. Not " bring 
us back to thee," i.e. to the sacred land (as 
Thenius), for it is not a speech of the exiles, 
but of the Jews left behind, at least fur the 
present, in Judsea. " Turn thou us " means 
" Bring us into a state of reconciliation with 
thee." The next petition, Eenew our days as 
of old, means, " Restore the old happy mode 
of life, each man with his own vine and his 
own fig tree, undisturbed by the fear of 



invasion, and rejoicing in the tenie of the 
favour of Jehovah." The first petition has 
the priority because only on repentance and 
recovered purity of heart and life can 
Jerusalem rise from her ashes. Isaisb had 
said this long ago (i. 26, 27), and the elegiae 
poet repeats it (comp. Jer. zxxi. 18). 

Ver. 22.— But ; rather, unlesi. The poet 
wishes to sugiceBt that the idea seems to him 
inconsistent .vith the covenant relationship 
of Jehovah tow.irds Israel. May we not 
compare a striking passage in Isaiah which 
should probably be rendered thus : " A wife 
of one's youth, can she be rejected ? saith thy 
God " (isa. liv. 6) ? Both passages express, 
in a most delicate way, the incredulity of 
the writers with regard to the absolute re- 
jection of Israel. And thus this melancholy 
Book of Lamentations concludes with a hope, 
" faint, yet pursuing," of the final realiza- 
tion of the promises to Israel. The inter- 
pretation adopted admits of no reasonable 
doubt, in spitu of the fact that ancient 
doctors of the synagogue thought otherwise 
when they established the custom of repeat- 
ing ver. 21 after ver. 22 had been read, in 
order to soften the supposed gloomy impres- 
sion of ver. 22. 



HOMILETIC& 

Ver. L — A prayer of distreat. I. It is offered to God. The whole of this last 
elegy is in the form of a prayer. Other laments are interspersed with cries to Heaven. 
This poem is one continuous address to God. We see here true wisdom ; for mere 
complaining is useless. To wail to the winds is foolish and vain. To make our 
troubles known to our fellow-men often avails little, for we may only weary them 
instead of eliciting their pity, or, if we do succeed in gaining commiseration, that may 
be of little real use to us. But God is the great Comforter. His ear is ever open to 
the cry of his distressed children. His heart is always tender to feel compassion for 
their woes. His hand is strong and willing to work substantial deeds of helpfulness. 

II. It describes the mournful condition of the suppliant. The polt refers to 
"what has come upon us" and "our reproach." Subsequent verses describe the 
miserable condition of the Jews in more detail. It is much that we can unbosom oui 
souls before God. The mere relief of confiding in him is a comfort. Moreover, if we 
desire his help we must make this confidence. Reserve on our part nec«ssitates apparent 
indifference on his part. We need not fear of wearying him with our plaints. Indeed, 
if we were more open-hearted in confiding our troubles to God we should com* to have 
fewer troubles to concern ourselves with. 

III. It asks fob Divine notice. 1. " Memember." It seems as though God must have 
forgotten and deserted his children when he has permitted them to fall into grievous 
distresses. 2. " Consider." We need God's thought for us. Our case is such that the 
wisdom of God as well as his grace is necessary for our salvation. The great work of 
Christ is a proof of Divine thought, study, consideration. 3. " Behold." Here is a 
nearer attention. God is not only asked to remember and think of our case, but to 
mspect it himself. And when he looks he heals. When once we are assured that God 
remembers, considers, and beholds our trouble, we can leave it with him, well knowing 
that he will not mock our cries by listening without answering. 

Ver. 2. — The lost inheritance. L The earthly inheritance of Isbael was tubred 
TO flTBANOEBS. Canaan, the land promised to Abraham and his seed, was always 
IiAhbntations. a 



82 THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. [oh. T. 1—21 

regarded as more than a mere possession. It was considered to be received &om God 
as an inheritance, and held by a Divine right. Yet even this sacred soil was taken 
away from the people. Strange races from the East settled down upon it, and the 
rightful owners were driven into captivity or compelled to pay for water from the wells 
their fathers had dug, and for fuel from their own woods (ver. 4). A second time the 
people have been driven from their inheritance, and Turkish mosques now desecrate 
the city of the Jews. 

II. The spiritual iNHEitiTANOE OF Israel was turned to btrakoebb. The Jews 
were more than possessors of one little favoured land. To them were entrusted the 
oracles of God. Prophets and priests gave them peculiar privileges in spiritual things. 
They were a people of God's own possession. The blessings of the Jews were to culmi- 
nate in the advent of the Messiah. The Messiah came. He came to his own inheri- 
tance, and his own people received him not ; for Christ first ofTered himself to Jews, 
and Christ was first refused by Jews. In rejecting Christ the house of Israel rejected 
its true inheritance. Gentiles took up the privileges which Jews despised. We and 
other nations of Gentile Christendom are the strangers to whom their inheritance is 
turned over. 

in. The Christiait inhebitanob mat be turned to strangers. There have been 
Christian lands, such as North Africa and Asia Minor, which have lost their Chris- 
tianity and have passed into the possession of the bitterest foes of the Crucified. Within 
the pale of Christendom the inheritance may be lost. If we permit unbelief to lay hold 
of people who once enjoyed full faith in Christ, this result will take place. When 
men who are unbelievers at heart get possession of Christian pulpits aad undermine 
the very faith they are supposed to be preaching, is not this a terrible instance of the 
inheritance passing to strangers ? 

IV. The inheritance is turned to btbanoers because the conditionb on which 
it IB HELD ARE VIOLATED. This truth applies to all three cases just described — to 
IshmI's earthly inheritance and her spiritual inheritance and to the Christian inheri- 
tance. The land was not given to strangers till after strange gods had been admitted 
into the land. It was always designed by God that the privileges of the gospel should 
be given to Gentiles as well as to Jews (e.^. Isa. Ix. 3). But it was owing to their 
refusal of these privileges that the Jews lost their own share in them. The inheritance 
was to have been widened to admit new citizens ; the old citizens cast themselves out 
of it, and so gave place to the new. In like manner Christ never takes the candlestick 
from any portion of his Church till bis people have faithlessly cast him out of their 
hearts. 

T. The lost inheritance is to be restored. Whether Israel will return to 
Palestine is only a question for the curious, and of no great practical interest. For so 
long as the people are restored to Gud and truly prosperous it cannot much matter on 
what spot of the globe they reside. In their palmy days many of them were in the 
habit of wandering far from their native land. But the true restoration, restoration 
to the spiritual inheritance in God, is promised to all who will return to him (Isa. 
Izi. 1—3). 

Ver. 8. — Orphanage and widowhood. In the desolation of Jerusalem the inhabitants 
felt like orphans and widows, bereaved of the stay and comfort of life, uncared for and 
homeless. Many would be literally orphaned and widowed after the great slaughter 
of the siege. The sad condition of these greatest sufferers brings before our notice the 
similar trouble of those who are similarly situated in our own day. 

I. Orphanaqb and widowhood involve overwhelming borrow. The mournful 
condition of the sufferers is the first thi ng to strike us. Their sorrow is keen because 
it concerns a nearest and dearest relative, and it ia the more dreadful because it strikes 
a whole family. Moreover, the trouiUe is not simply one of affection. The bread- 
winner is lost. The prop and strengtii of the household is cut down. The protector 
of the helpless is removed. The guide and counsellor of the young is no more. 

II. Orphanage and widowhood show us the broken oharactee op human life. 
There is a oneness iu a true family. All the members together constitute a unit. 
But when death claims the head the family is broken and its completeness destroyed. 
Then part is on earth and part in the other world. The widow and her children tiius 



OH. V. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OP JEREMIAH. 83 

bear testimony to the imperfection of earth, to the transitoriness of what once seemed 
perfect, and to the need of a future life wherein the severed threads may be reunited 
and the Divine idea of the family realized. 

m. Obphanage and widowhood abb undeb the especial cabe of Qod. He is the 
"Father of the fatherless and the Judge of the widow" (Ps. Ixviii. 5). If God sends 
exceptional trouble, he also feels exceptional compassion and gives exceptional aid. 
Helplessness is the greatest claim on the Divine pity. The heavier the need of any 
sufferers the more likely is it that God will come to their deliverance. It is true that 
he may not restore lost comforts. A shadow, long and dark, may long lie across the 
path of orphans and widows. But unseen hands will be tending them, if not for their 
wealth and pleasure, yet for their peace and blessedness. God sometimes helps by 
raising up friends. He may also aid by rousing the faculties of the sufferers. Under 
the pressure of necessity a widow, left with the care of a family, may develop capacities 
that slumbered in neglect so long as they were not called for. 

IV. Obphanage and widowhood have a fiest claiu on Chbistian ohabity. 
Where God's compassion is strongest ours should be also. If the trouble is great and 
the sufferers have not brought it upon themselves by their own folly or fault, the sym- 
pathy should be particularly large and active. The care of widows and orphans was 
one of the first characteristics of the Church, distinguishing it from the selfish indif- 
ference of paganism. With all our desire for the spiritual welfare of men, and all our 
zeal in preaching the gospel, this elementary duty of Christianity must have a first 
place in our energies if we would not be justly accounted hypocrites. 

Ver. 7. — Children suffering /or the sins of their parents. I. It is A. vaot that 
OHTiiDBEN DO BUFFEB FOB THE SINS OF THEiB PABENTS. It was apparent in the times of 
the Captivity; for owing to Josiah's reformation the moral condition of the nation then 
was better than it had been a generation or so before ; yet the blow, which was caused 
by the greater guilt of the fathers, fell upon the children. It may often be observed in 
history that the greatest catastrophes do not fall on the most guilty, but on their 
successors, who are often better men. Thus James II. was a better man than Charles II., 
though the Stuart dynasty ended in the younger brother ; and Louis XVI. was com- 
paratively innocent, and yet he had to suffer for the vices of Louis XIV. and Louis XV. 
In private life, poverty, disease, and disgrace are inherited by children from their parents. 
Now, it is a sign of the robust truthfulness of the Bible that this dark fact is distinctly 
recognized. There is no attempt to shun it because it is mysterious. We have in the 
Bible an honest, brave confronting of the evils of life, and not a system which is only 
beautiful to contemplate in idea and which cannot be squared with facts. 

II. Tms FACT IB A WABNINQ TO PABENTS. The sclfishness that incurs disastrous 
consequences on a man's family is too often ignored if those consequences are not 
immediately apparent. But it should be exposed and reprobated. Thus the intem- 
perate man is sometimes regarded as a kind and good-natured man because he displays 
no malice of temper. Surely his cruelty in impoverishing his household and risking 
the health of his children should be considered a gross sin. If a man will not hold his 
hand for his own soul's sake, let him consider how he will wreck his family and ruin 
innocent sons and daughters before he yields to temptation. 

IIL This fact should not shake our faith in G(od. 1. Men in all ages have 
faced it clearly and yet have retained their trust in Providence, e.g. the writers of the 
Bible. 2. The very idea of faith implies that we must confide and wait in the darkness 
where we cannot understand. 3. The necessary greatness of the scheme of the govern- 
ment of a world should lead us to expect mysteries in it. ~ 

IV. This fact should help us to understand part of the Divine idea of life. 
It is a sorrowful sight — innocent little children plunged into poverty and distress 
through no fault of their own, solely on account of the sins of those who should be 
their greatest benefactors! But it shows us that God does not treat us as isolated 
units. He takes notice of families as such. There is a " solidarity " of mankind. 
Everywhere we see the innocent suffering with the guilty. Social and domestic life are 
under providential care. And it may be best for the world as a whole that the several 
societies and collective bodies of which it consists should be governed with blessing 
and discipline than that each individual should receive only his own private grace and 



«4 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. Coh. v. 1— 22i 



judgment. Moreover, if this is the case, inasmuch as the individuals profit by th« 
corporate life and prosperity, this treatment by families and cities aJ»d nations may 
turn out in the long run to be the best for the separate persona. 

Ver. 19. — Contolation in the supremacy of Ood. The Divine supremacy is oflen 
regarded as a topic of dread rather than as one of comfort. The awful throne towers 
•bove poor humanity, sublime and majestic, and men turn from it to seek refuge at 
the humbler footstool of mercy. But the writer of this elegy finds deep satisfaction in 
contemplating the supreme and eternal government of God. 

L There ib consolation in the fact that God is enthboned. Above the 
tumnlt, above the darkness, stands the throne of God. God is King over all, not only 
reigning in majesty, but also ruling in rnight. 1. Evil is not sv^eme. It rears its 
head in boasts and threats. It dwells in high places. But it does not reach to the 
highest. 2. Evil is under government. Not only is it not supreme, but in the lower 
domain where it seems to rove at will it is not really free. It is chained, checked, and 
overruled. The kingdom of God extends over the rebellious haunts of iniquity. 
8. Justice is ahove all. Wrong must give place to righteousness. Law must triumph 
over disorder. The fair order that is the image of God's equitable and righteous will 
la ultimately to supersede the hideous confusion of man's lawlessness. Even now God 
5s reigning and working through the chaos to the development of life and beauty. 
i. Goodness controls everything. He who is enthroned supreme is our Father, the 
kind and merciful God. His rule must reflect his character. For such a Lord to b* 
supreme is for all the law and government of his kingdom to be inspired with leva. 

II. Theke 18 consolation in the fact that God's throne ib eternal. The 
eternal is always of first moment. Whatever be the force, or size, or character of any 
temporal thing, its transitoriness makes it as an unsubstantial dream compared with 
the solid endurance of what is eternal. God's eternal throne renders the petty thrones 
of evil, so hastily set up and so swiftly cast down, like mere passing shadows. 
1. Nothing can overthrow the throne of Ood. We see good causes frustrated, good 
men crushed and bad powers apparently victorious ; but they cannot take the citadel. 
The throne above looks down upon their petty victories with scorn. 2. Goodness uriU 
outlive evil. The temporary phase of darkness cannot endure like the everlasting 
kingdom of light. Generation after generation comes and goes ; still the grand old 
throne stands above all, immovable. In one age, wild dreams of new religions possess 
the minds of men. In another, lethargy and degeneration of character are prevalent. 
But all these shadows pass, and the throne still abides. Like the rock about which the 
surf fumes and frets, the throne of God dwells firm and calm in the midst of all earthly 
changes. 3. Evil will he made to work for good. The everlasting throne will draw all 
transitory things into subjection to itself. We can endure our passing troubles if we 
are children of God and citizens of the kingdom of heaven, because these very troubles 
most do the will of our gracious Lord. 

Ver. 20. — Questioning Ood. I. It ib katurai. that we bhocld wish to kkow 
the purpose op God's dealings with db. There is no subject for inquiry that 
touches us more nearly or that affects us in such important matters. God's treatment 
of us concerns our highest welfare ibr time and eternity. It is in all the experience of 
life — our many blessings, our varied trials, our greatest prosperity, and our heaviest 
trouble. Surely it is natural that we should ask whither are all these waves driving 
us, and why do they sometimes beat so strangely and severely. 

II. There is much in God's dealings with us that we cannot understand. 
It seems that he has forgotten us when we are permitted to fall into great and lasting 
trouble. Short, sharp aiiiiction may be faced. But long-enduring distress wears out 
hope and faith, and makes it appear more and more as though the lonely sufferer had 
been deserted by God. The purpose of this is not easy to discover. The whole 
diapensation is just inexplicable. 

III. The right wat to discover the purpose of God'b dealings with us ib to 
abk him. We often discuss vainly when we have no data to start with. But specu- 
lation is sure to fail if it goes beyond all evidence and clear reason. Prayer is the one 
safe Naourc*. It would be well if we had enough faith in God to confide our donbta to 



OH. V. 1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 85 

him. For it is too often only unbelief that makes us silence doubt. If we truly 
trusted God we should more bravely confess to him all that troubled and perplexed oui 
minds. In response to such confidence God may reveal to us a new way of looking at 
our experience that shall help us to understand something of its object ; or he may 
simply reconcile our minds to the mystery — perhaps an equally beneficial result. 

IV. We mat rest assdrkd that God has a pttrposb in his dealings with us. 
It is there, though we cannot see it. We may say, " Wherefore dost thou forget us? " 
and we may not be able to receive an answer to our question. Yet we should nnt 
doubt that there is a " wherefore." God does nothing aimlessly. He certainly 
cannot be putting his children to pain without an object, nor without one that is 
adequate to the cost. The knowledge of this fact should quiet fear and restless doubt, 
even if the object itself remains hidden in mystery. 

V. We must beware of questioning God queruloitslt. We have no right to 
demand an explanation from God. To couch complaints in the form of inquiries is 
.insulting to God. Let the questioning be humble and submissive, and the answers are 
sure to come in peace, if not always in light. 

Ver. 21. — Renewal. When they do not lead to improvement lamentations are 
profitless, though they may be unavoidable. It is vain to mourn the past if our grief 
does not help us to make the future better. Sorrow for sin is good only when it leads 
to an active repentance. It is therefore necessary that a true consideration of the 
miserable conditinn into which evil living has brought us should rouse an earnest 
desire for a new and better life. 

I. Renewal must be the work of God. The writer does not simply resolve to 
do better, nor hope that a happier state of affairs will come about of its own accord. 
He prays. And the object of his prayer is to plead with God to produce the great 
change which is so much needed. 1. We cannot accomplish the renewal. (1) We 
cannot change our own hearts ; they are too corrupt and too hard. (2) We cannot 
bring back the old days. The past is lost for ever. If it is to be equalled or surpassed 
by the future, a Divine providence alone can accomplish the great work. 2. Ood does 
hring about renewal. He renews the face of the earth. He sends spring-tima into 
wintry lives. No soul is so corrupt that God cannot renew it ; no life is so desolate 
that God cannot brighten it. We try vainly to turn ourselves. But God is strong as 
well as gracious. If only he turn us we shall be surely turned. 

II. Renewal must be in our experjbncb. The mistake is to suppose that God 
must change to us. But there is no need for him to turn. He is always good and 
always willing to be favourable to his children as soon as they submit and obey. Till 
then nothing can induce him to do so unrighteous an act as to turn from wrath to 
pleasant treatment. The necessary change lies all on our side. Men used to think 
that night was the desertion of the earth by the sun, and day the enjoyment of his 
return. They were wrong. They now know that the sun is not thus fickle. So it is 
with the soul's night and day. A primitive and narrow theology says that God 
changes — now going, now returning. Larger knowledge shows that he abides the 
same, and that as our distress is in turning from him, so our redemption must be in 
returning to him. 

in. Renewal must begin with our inner life. The writer wisely prays to be 
turned back to God before he prays for the renewal of the old days. It is a common 
mistake to seek ibr the external fruits of forgiveness before the internal. The first 
thing is to bring the soul badk to God. Other happy consequences will follow. 
It is vain to pray for the brightness of noon before our part of the earth has 
revolved towards the sun. It is to be noted that the great change in the soul is 
a taming to God. God draws us to himself. Redemption is reconciliation to Ckid. 
To be near him, to trust and love and obey him, to seek more and more of his 
light and life, — this is the renewed health and blessedness of the soul that is 
restored from the wretchedness and ruin of sin. 

IV. Renewal will affect our whole experienob. After the interior life is 
renewed the exterior also undergoes a happy transformation. The Jew yearned for 
the old happy days of peace and prosperity. We inevitably clothe the joyous past 
with a glamour of aifeotion. Many a lost joy seems inconceivably bright now it 



88 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEIIEMIAH. [oh. v. 1—22. 

has gone. Yet God may bring it back, if not in the old form, for the exact past 
is irretrievable, yet in even richer sweetness. The penitent muses sadly over the 
innocent days of old in the dear home now -long since broken up. He would give 
worlds to bring back that peaceful time before all his sin and shame. It cannot 
return. But far off, at last, there may be reunions in the better world and njoicingi 
that will outdo the brightness even of tiiose happy days. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — Tht LorcPs remembrance hesought. The inhabitants of Judali and Jerusalem 
had looked, now to Egypt and now to Assyria, for help and deliverance. Events bad 
shown upon how broken a reed they had leaned. Their experience was now leading 
the best among them to another and a surer, higher, Bef uge. As the spoltesman of his 
repenting fellow-countrymen, Jeremiah entreats the remembrance and the regard of 
Jehovah. 

L AOVERSITT SOMETIMES LEADS MEN TO SEEK THE BEOAltD USD FAVOITB OF THE 

QoD WHOM IN PBOSPBEiTT THEY HAVE FORGOTTEN. That troublc may foster self- 
control and patience is a commonplace of moral teaching. But it only answers its 
highest end when it leads the afSicted to seek and call upon their God. In the noon- 
day of happiness, the healthy, busy, and joyous too often forget him to whom they are 
indebted for alL Providence is forgotten when the sun shines ; clouds and darkness 
seem to have a natural tendency to remind the soul of God. 

II. The Lord's remembrance and consideration are an assurance of help ahd 
DELIVERANCE. That the Omniscient is not perfectly aware of all that happens to man 
is not for a moment to be supposed. The language of the prophet is human language, 
adapted to our ignorance and infirmity. The Lord will be entreated ; he summons his 
children to think of him ; and he promises to draw near to those who draw near to 
him. The sinner may well dread the all-including gaze of the righteous Judge ; but 
the lowly and believing penitent may well take courage when be learns that the Loi<d 
has not forgotten to be gracious. — T. 

Ver. 7. — The moral continuity of nations. Man is naturally not merely gregarions, 
but social. The powers that be, an apostle teaches us, are ordained by GK)d — from 
which we learn that political and social life have a Divine sanction. Accordingly, 
the Judge of all deals with men, not only as individuals, but as communities. This 
fact was present to the mind of the prophet when he wrote these words. 

L The fact of national accountability to the moral Governor. The history 
of the Jews is the history of a theocracy ; but it embodied lessons which are adapted to 
all mankind. Nations have national privileges, national responsibilities, national proba- 
tions, national rewards and punishments. 

II. National retribution is sometimes deferred for a season. The prophet* 
appear to have had a clear view of this law. Wrong-doing in one generation was seen 
to be followed by punishment in a succeeding age. Jeremiah is the author of the well- 
known proverb, " The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set 
on edge." The seed (to change the figure) is sown by one generation ; a following 
generation reaps the harvest. 

III. The certainty that penalties will bb inflicted upon the impenitent. 
There is indeed a sense in which even the repenting and reformed suffer for the sins of 
those who have gone before them. But for the impenitent and unrefurroed there is no 
exception, no esoaiie. We, says the prophet, speaking of himself and of his rebellious 
and ungodly contemporaries — " w« have borne the iniquities of our fathers." The 
apostasy and rebellion of the former generations were visited upon those who endured 
the horiurs of the siege and the degradation of the Captivity. There is mystery in the 
providential appointment that, not only shall every man bear his own burden, but that 
some shall bear the burden of those also who have gone before them. But the fact 
remains, and it gives solemnity to the life of families and of nations. 

IV. The lesson is thus impressed upon all men — how serious and real a 
rmasn la vatiokal pbobationI The teaching which was profitable for Israel is equally 



OB. ▼.1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. 81 

adapted to England, and indeed to all the nations of mankind. The Lord is King, and 
from his government and authority none of the earth's inhabitants is free.— T. 

Yer. 8.— None to deliver. Bitterness was added to the misery of the Jem when 
Chaldean slaves — advanced to eminence and power on account of their ability — ^were 
placed in authority over them. But there was no choice; resistance was impossible anil 
deliverer there was none. In this respect the condition of the inhabitants ot Jenualem 
may represent that of sinful, helpless men. 

L A OBTTBL BONDAGE. Sinuers have yielded themselves up to obey the enemy of 
their souls, the foe of God. This is (1) a usurper, who has no right to rule over men , 
(22) a tyrant, who with \mjust and unreasonable exercise of authority oppresses those 
beneath his power ; (3) a cruel master, whose ser vice is slavery, whose stripes an many, 
whose wages are death and destruction. 

II. A BEEMiNQLT iiiiEViTABLE FATE. The conquered Judseans had loolied hither and 
thither, in the crisis of their fate, for some friend and helper, but they had looked in 
vain. Similarly the captive of sin can find no earthly deliverer ; his fellow-men arc 
his fellow-sinners and fellow-captives ; there is no eye to pity and no hand to save. 

III. A SOLITARY BUT SUFFICIENT CONSOLATION AND Befuqe. The restlesB waves 
answer their purpose when they toss the imperilled mariner towards the haven of refuge. 
AiHiction and adversity, chains and dungeons, oppressors and torturers, may make the 
one only Deliverer welcome. The Lord God has revealed himself to us as the Saviour 
of all men. There is no prison from which he cannot set the captive free ; there are no 
gyves and fetters he cannot strike off; there ace ao foes from whose hands he oumo*^ 
rescue and deliver. — ^T. 

Ver. 15.— TOe cessation of Joy. This fate had been foretold. " Then will I Oknse to 
cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, 
and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride : for 
the land shall be desolate." Well is it for those who take the warning which is given 
beforehand, and do not wait, as Jerusalem waited, for the stem lessons of ft retributive 
Providence. 

I. Theee is oessatiok of jot which is not punitivb. The health, the elasticity 
of spirits, the pleasures of youth, cannot be protracted to old age. " Earth's joys grow 
dim, its glories fade away." Days of sickness, of poverty, of bereavement, of sorrow, 
are appointed by the Lord of the human lot, to follow days of brightness. The wail 
of sorrow will replace the song of gladsome joy. Yet all this experience mav be 
.spiritually disciplinary and helpful ; there may he in it nothing of punishment, nothing 
of Divine displeasure. 

II. There is cessation of jot which is the sign of Divine anoeb and thc 
FULFILMENT OF DiviNE thbbatenino. Such was the case with Judah, upon whom 
the siege and the Captivity came, not without warning, not without space for repentance. 
In fact, sin puts an end to the joy which it promises to increase and perpetuate, and 
brings about the mourning and distress against which it pretends to ensure us. The 
retrospect of those whose joy has ceased becomes in such cases a retrospect of human 
rebellion and Divine forbearance. Conscience awakes and admits that soriow is merited. 

Application. Yet there is a way of repentance. God will renew the days of his 
people as of old. This is the cry and the hope of the penitent : " Bestore unto me the 
joy <rf tiby salvation."- T. 

Vers. 16, 17. — The degradation of tin. The promise of sin is something very different 
from this ; no flattery is untried, no prospect withheld, which may induce men to rebel 
against God. But, as with our first parents, as with the dwellers in Jerusalem, eo is it 
in the experience of all men ; the promises which sin makes are unfulfilled ; the wages of 
cin are death. 

L The piotubb of degbadation. It is highly figurative language which the pro- 
phet here employs ; but it is not exaggerated, it is not unjust. 1. The head is uncrowned. 
Jndah's independence and freedom was as a crown to the head ; but the Chaldeans tore 
it off and flung it away. They who defy God must lose in so doing all that is most 
honourable^ most sacred, most precious. 2. The heart is faint. Judah's joy WM tiumd 



88 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [oh. ▼. 1—22. 



into mourning, her hopes were dashed to the ground ; how could the heart bo other than 
faint? The ways of sin are ways of disappointment, weariness, and distress. The 
heart of the transgressor sinlts within him when he sees the fruit of his doings. 3. The 
eyes are dim with watching for deliverance, with tears of woe. 

II. The cause op deobauation. Judah may have been unwilling to admit the 
truth, and may have been disposed to attribute calamities to second causes. But the 
prophet was just, and laid his hand upon the true explanation when he confessed on 
behalf of his countrymen, " We have sinned 1 " Trace up human misery and national 
disaster to the source, and this is to be reached only when we come to defection and 
departure from the righteous Lord. 

III. The conscioubness op deobadation. " Woe unto us ! " is the ciy of the 
prophet. When men sin and suffer but fail to acknowledge their own ill desert, 
the intentions of Providence are as yet unfulfilled. The sin must be taken home ; 
the punishment must be acknowledged just ; the confession must be penitent, sincere, 
and frank. 

IT. The lessonb op deobadation. 1. Let the virtuous and obedient abjure self- 
confidence and cherish trust in God. 2. Let the tempted beware of the foe, and watch 
and pray lest they sin and come into this torment. 3. Let the smitten sinner repent 
and turn unto the Lord and seek pardon and renewal.— T. 

Ver. 19. — The eternal throne. The believer in God has this great advantage over the 
atheist and the agnostic — ^he has a firm conviction that all things are under the control 
and rule of a wise, righteous, and benevolent King, who reigns both in heaven and on 
earth. Afflictions, personal and relative, may distress his mind ; calamities may over- 
whelm his imagination and baffle his reason ; but he has this consolation — he knows 
that the Lord remains for ever on his throne. 

L God'b etebnal tbbone contrasts with the perishino thboneb op babth. The 
King of Judah, defeated and carried captive, was torn by a foreign hand from the throne 
of his power and glory. All earthly monarchies are transitory and all earthly monarchs 
are mortal. They perish, but God endureth. 

II. The stability op God'b throne bests cfon the RiaHTEOusNESs op his dominion. 
"A sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom." Injustice and oppression 
may prevail for a season, but only right is indestructible and immortal. Even in his 
mercy the Supreme has regard to the claims of justice and to the maintenance of 
rightful authority. 

III. Tee defeat of God's enemies is assured. They may rage and they may 
take counsel together, but the Lord has them in derision. All their assaults upon 
his kingdom must fail, and those who lead those assaults must come to shame and 
misery. No weapon that is formed against God and his people shall prosper. 

IV. The victory op God's cause is certain. Kingdoms rise and fall, princes are 
elevated and dethroned ; bat the King of kings goes conquering and to conquer. All his 
foes are put beneath his feet, and on his head are many crowns. — T. 

Ver. 21. — " Turn us again I" The Scriptures are the volume of hope ; they lend no 
countenance to despondency ; they rebuke despair. Deep as was the degradation of the 
Jews, far as they had wandered from God's ways, inexcusably as they had defied his 
authority, there was for them a place of repentance. And Jeremiah closes this Book 
of Lamentations with language of confident supplication and well-grounded hope of 
better times. 

I. The need of turning. The whole of the book thus closed witnesses to this 
necessity. Judah had gone wrong, had wilfully taken the path of rebellion and defiance. 
In this respect her case represents that of every culpable transgressor. The end of the 
way of sin is death, is destruction without remedy. It is a stem truth, but it is a 
truth, and a truth which mercy reveals. 

II. To whom the tubnino must bk. " Turn us unto thee I " Away f^om the sin 
which has misled, away from the human counsellors and helpers in whom is no wise 
counsel and no sufficient help, away from self, to Gk>d against whom the sinner has 
transgressed and to whom he needs to be reconciled. The old phrase, " conversion unto 
God," ia one full of truth, meaning, and appropriateness. 



OH.V. 1— 22.] THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEBKMIAH. 89 

ni. By whom the tttrnino must be effeotbd. The prayer is unto the Lord ; for 
he alone can turn the wanderer unto himself. By the authority of his Law, by the 
winning, melting power of his gospel, by the sweet constraint of his Spirit, he alone 
can transform the heart, reverse the steps, and renew the olden days of those who have 
transgressed but have now at length sought his favour and forgiveness. — T. 

Ver. 2. — Tilt fate of inheritance and houies. The Israelite reckoned a great deal on 
his inheritance, that which came to him as an Israelite; and in this he did quite right, 
seeing how he was bound to dwell on the promises made to Abraham. There was the 
national territory, sanctified and made a peculiarly valuable thing by the manner in 
whiph it first came into Israel's hand. Then there were the tribal inheritances and the 
family inheritances. So that altogether inheritance was continually before the Israelite 
mind ; inheritance' became almost a part of sell Doubtless many tracts of land had run 
down in the same families for generations. And now the foreigner comes in to reap the 
riches of these lands and dwell m the houses built on them. What the Israelites failed 
to recollect was that the inheritance they esteemed so much was not the real inheri- 
tance in the eyes of God. The visible land, out of which comes the corn, the wine, the 
oil, is only the type of that deeper, that truly exhaustless spiritual land, where we are 
to sow plentifully, assured that a harvest cannot faU. There is the inheritance, cor- 
ruptible, defiled, that doth fade away. There is the house made with hands, temporal, 
an the earth. And then, all unconscious of the pains we are preparing for ourselves, we 
let our heart's best affections get round these things. The loss of the inheritance, the 
loss of the houses, was the way to gain, if only the loser could see it. Doubtless what 
we may fail to possess of temporal things some one else gets hold of ; but his getting 
is not with a firm, abiding grasp. These lamenting Israelites would reckon that the 
loss of inheritance and houses, which made them so miserable, would make the new 
possessors correspondingly happy ; and such would be the case for a time, but only 
so long as the brightness of the first delusion lasted. God does not mean that we 
should ever say of any really good thing that our inheritance is turned to strangers, our 
houses to aliens. Of the really good things there is enough and to spare for alL Christ 
sends out his apostles to urge every one towards the inheritance of the saints in light ; 
and in the house of him who is Father of Jesus and of all that believe in Jesus there 
are many mansions, many abiding-places, a place for every one wishing to dismiss the 
restless, craving spirit, and abide in such a place.— Y. 

Ver. 7. — The sin of the fathers and the suffering of the children. This chapter is the 
complaint of those who suffer. " We," " us," " our," — these are the prominent wends. 
The complainers are those who have lost inheritance and houses, become fatherless, and 
entered into a galling servitude. And now what do they give as the reason of all this 
terrible experience ? This — that " our fathers have sinned." 

I. The MEA8UBE OF TBUTH IN THIS. The fathers had sinned. That was an historical 
fact. The utterances of former prophets, recorded, perhaps, in far greater abundance than 
we have any idea of, attested the iniquities of past generations. No generation of which 
there was any record had been without its disobedience. And had it not also been said 
that the sins of the fathers should bo visited on the children ? Hence there is plain 
logic in these words, "Our fathers have sinned, . . . and we have borne their iniquities." 
Great is the suffering in bodily pain, in privation, and in emotion, of every generation ; 
and each generation has a right to say that some, at all events, of this suffering would 
have been escaped if only preceding generations had lived according to the fall law 
of righteousness. Hence the appeal to us, when self-indulgence presses with all its 
energieis, to consider others. Indulging self, we have to make ready for after-pains; Vmt 
those pains cannot be kept within the limit of our own lives. 

II. True as this statement is, there is a measubb of defect in it. Note exactly 
how the point is put : " Our fathers have sinned, and are not ; " that is, " they cannot suffei 
any more, and now the suffering comes on to us." In such an aspect of the situation 
there is great pathos, but we need to travel round to the other aspects also. There is a 
difference between retribution and suffering. Some kinds of pain and injury may be 
inherited to the third and fourth generation, but a guilty conscience belongs to the indi- 
viduaL The worst pains, the worst consequences, and those on which the Saviour looks 



90 THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH. [oh, t. 1—22. 

with the most pity, are surely those coming out of our own wrong-doing ; and searching 
into the connection between the sins of past generations and the suffering of the pre- 
sent one will do harm rather than good, if such a searching tends to obscure our own 
lawlessness, our own want of attention to the requirements of God. There is, indeed, a 
great difference in kind between the suffering coming on us from the vickednesa of 
others and that which comes from our own. — Y. 

Yer. 14. — 77ie occupation of the elders gone. L The plage of old men in a 
COMMUNITY. As men grow old they may get past certain kinds of work, but they 
need not cease to be useful, nor need age become, unless from bodily frailty, a burden 
and a wearinesa. There is much for an old man to tell from the stores of his exp'rience 
and observation. He may show what ought to be avoided, even if he cannot always 
tell what ought to be done. The elders sat in the gate, where the throng passed in and 
out, aiid where tliey could see more people probably than anywhere else. An old man 
should endeavour to be useful and to mingle with the life of the world as long as he 
can. It is right that he should be in the way of all the respect and veneration he can 
receive, not because these things are necessary to his happiness, but because those who 
give them are the better for their giving. A society without its troops of children at 
one end, full of life and eagerness, and its sprinkling of hoary heads crowned with glory 
at the other, would soon feel that very important elements were lacking. Elders sitting in 
the gate bore testimony to a certain stability and continuity in the social life of Jerusalem. 

II. The PEonLiAB aspect op the calamity fubnished by the fact that the old 
MEN HAVE F0B8AKEN THE GATE. There is no longer anything to take them to the 
gate. Where of old they had many pleasures, now they will have nothing but pain. 
The place of honour would onlj' become a place of insult, and in all likelihood only too 
many of these elders had been advisers of the wrong sort, men with a serene and firmly 
rooted confidence in their own opinion. To the warnings of a prophet old men can 
often reply that such things have been said over and over again without coming true ; 
and then, when all at once the threatening takes effect, what can they do but retire 
into as much obscurity as possible ? These same old men, many of them, must have had 
much to do with the state of affairs that made all these calamities a Divine necessity.— T. 

Ver. 16.— Discrowned Jerusalem. I. The past honour op Jerusalem. The crown 
has fallen from the head ; a crown, therefore, has been upon the head. The lament 
is not over something striven for and not attained, but over something, as it seems, 
securely possessed and now irretrievably lost. Notice how Ezekiel is instructed to put 
the matter (xvi. 12). In making Jerusalem to know her abominations there is a 
contrast with former privileges. Jehovah says, "I put a beautiful crown upon thine 
head . . . and thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty." Unques- 
tionably Jerusalem and the land of which she was the radiant centre shone forth 
gloriously among the Gentiles. The great example of this is that queen of the south 
who came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon. God 
for his own purposes, inscrutable, and yet, as we must believe, beneficent, constituted 
it so that Jerusalem was like a fair woman crowned with a crown of pure gold. Other 
cities had their strength, glory, peculiarities, but Jerusalem was uniquely glorious. And 
so human individuals may have most attractive natural endowments. There may be 
physical beauty, or genius, or some ineffable charm of character, or great intellectual 
capacity, something that lifts man or woman above the common crowd, and thus puts 
upon them a bright and manifest natural crown. The same great secret power that 
glorified Israel glorifies men still, not for what they do, nor for any claim they have, but 
that in their glory they may stimulate and inspire others, and multiply the happiness 
of every life coming within their sway. It was for the sake of the nations that Jehovah 
glorified Jernsalem and made her beautiful. 

XL Hbb present humiliation. The crown has fallen from the head, but the mark 
of paet and lost regality remains. It cannot be obliterated. The higher a nation 
climbs, the further it can fall and the more terrible becomes the spectacle of its fall, 
It neaded all the slow and majestic ascent of Rome to greatness to make Gibbon's 
great book possible. Thus, looking from such a height, he had pathetic struggles and 
contrasts to depict, which would else have been impossible. So, also, we contemplate 



OH. ▼.1—22.] THE LAMENTATIONS Oe JEBiailAH. 9i 

the aberrations and miseries, the cynicism and misanthropy coming out in the Utcs oi 
geniuses who have missed their way, men of richest endowments who, from the depths 
of self-indulgence and debauchery, mitsht well cry, " The crown is fallen from my head." 
And so we see that the great crown to be desired is, not that which comes througl 
natural differences or differences in social position, but that which comes through 
the divinely inspired quality of one's living. "The hoary head is a crown of glory, 
if it be found in the way of righteousness" (FhiL iv. 1; 2 Tim. It. 8: Jas. L 12: 
1 Pel. V. 4).— y. 

Ver. 17. — The faint heart and the dim et/e$, I. The PENETBATiKa ekfeot of the 
Divine oha8tisembnt8. Jerusalem had been satisfied with outward things. Wherever 
it turned, there had been enough to satisfy its pride and its pleasure. And now 
Jehovah, by efiScient agents, had taken these outward things away. The difference 
that had been made in Jerusalem was perceptible to any eye. But another difference 
could only be known when it was confessed, namely, the difference made in the hearts 
of the people when their outward circumstances were so completely changed. Proud, 
resolute men, full of joy in their selfish purposes, found the interest of life completely 
goneu It would have availed nothing if all these chastisements had ended in leaving 
the people real Stoics, able to say that it was all the same whether tiiey kept their 
temporal possessions or lost them. God did not desolate Jerusalem for any delight that 
he took in this ; it was to find away to humble hearts that were unsubdued after every 
prophetic appeal. When men are delightedly occupied with the things of sense, then 
it is a great end gained i^ through losses and changes, their hearts become f^nt and 
their eyes dim. For then they may accept the ministry of Christ to put into their 
hearts an energy which will tend for righteousness and direct their eyes to look on the 
world in tke ri^ht way. 

IL The cause hgbe bpeouult hentioneo. The hill of Zion has become a desola- 
tes ; it has become again a mere height in the wilderness, such as doubtless it had 
been at some time before in the immemorial past. That Zion is here specified seems to 
point te tke sorrow and despair caused by the overthrow of religious ordinances. The 
vety fact that Jehovah had allowed the place devoted to him to become thus desolated 
made his displeasure with the people to become a much more vivid thing. It seemed 
as if he needed no more a habitation in their midst.— Y. 

Yen. 19—22. — The only resowce acknowledged to ht in God. It will lie felt that 
this prayer is a fitting conclusion to the book. What could be more proper than that 
these people, having looked all around with an ever-deepening sense of loss and 
humiliation, should now look above t Upon earth, in strength or skill of man, there is 
nothing to be looked for ; if anything is to be got, it is by looking to heaven. 

L Ajud all these changes the continuance of Jehovah is perceived. Zion 
has become desolate, but the true throne of God is not there. That God lives, unchange- 
able, unaffected by our lapses and losses, is the last safeguard of hope, and it is an 
impregnable one. Much is it to be desired that, amid all the vicissitudes of life, we 
should have this sense of something imchanging. 

IL The sense of bepabation frou God. This was the crown of troubles to some 
of the people, that God seemed to have forgotten them and forsaken them. But whei. 
God remembered them and manifested his presence, all that the people in general did 
was to take his gifts and think nothing of the Giver's will and purpose. God, of 
course, had neither forgotten nor forsaken. What the people called forgetting was only a 
different kind of remembering. What they called forsaking was only a closer presence. 

IIL The unqdenchable hope of those who take the bight view of God. This 
chapter has had in it the tones of penitence and contrition. It is admitted that the 
cause of all this desolation is the people's turning away from God. And now there is 
the petition which results from a full self-discovery. Inward weakness is discovered. 
The last cry of the book indicates that the turning of men to God is the great thing to 
be desired. Not a restoration to external possessions and comforts, but a turning to God 
consequent on his turning to us. The results that come from our being turned to Qod 
bjr his power will one d«y be seen to justify all the loss and pain needed M bring them 
about.— T. 



EOMILETICAL INDEX 



10 



THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEEEMIAE 



CHAPTER L 




THEHI 




rA«i 




rAOB 


"No Vision" Zr. «. 


••• 


21 


The Solitary City ... « », 


8 


The Vision of Falsehood and Folly 


... 


22 


Comfortless ... nt — 


4 


The Triumph of the Foe ... 


... 


22 


The Abandoned Feasts ... „ 


S 


Ruin from God 


... 


23 


Her Beanty departed from Zion ... 


6 


A Cry to God in the Night Watches... 


24 


Pleasant Things in the Days of Old ... 


6 


The Anger of the Lord 


... 


25 


Sorrow nneqaalled, yet nnheeded ... 


7 


Retribution in Church and Stat* 


... 


25 


Fonrfold Trouble from God... 


7 


Law and Prophecy suspended 


M. 


26 


The Eighteonsness of God confessed... 


8 


Commiseration 


... 


26 


The Contrasts of Adversity... ... 


9 


The Glory and Shame of Jerusalem 


... 


87 


The Decline of National Beligion 


9 


The Entreaty of Anguish ... 


... 


27 


Monmfal Memories .„ ... 


10 


Consideration besought 




87 


Spoliation and Profanation ... ^ 


10 


The Manifestation of Jehovah's Wrath 




Unparalleled Woe ... m ... 


11 


against Israel ... 


... 


28 


"TheLordisRighteoiiB" ,„ ... 


11 


Jehovah reckoned as an Enemy 


M. 


28 


The Cry of the Contrite 


12 


The Prophetio Office suspended 


M. 


29 


Widowhood . . . the Emblem of Loneli- 




The Silence of the Elders ... 


M. 


80 


ness 


12 


The Suffeiing of the Children 


... 


80 


Nights of Weeping explained 


13 


The Share of the Prophets in mining 




Zion forsaken as a Beligious Centre ... 


14 


Jerusalem 


... 


U 


The Eeal Need of the Soul made 




The Completeness of Jehovah's Visita- 




manifest 


14 


tion M* Ma .M 


tM 


SI 


The Observation of Sntfering 


IS 








The Acknowledgment that Bnfiering 










is deserved ... ... ... 


16 


CHAPTER m. 






A Wicked Qladnesi m — 


16 


"The Man that has seen Af3iotion" 


•H 


85 






" Dark Places " ... 


— 


86 


CHAPTER IL 




Hedged about ... ... 


.M 


37 






Strength and Hope perished 


... 


88 


God not remembering his Footstool ... 


19 


God taking Notice of Man's Affliction 


88 


The Lord as an Enemy 


20 


The Unceasing Mercies of God 


M. 


39 


The Rejected Altar m m. 


SO 


The Secret of Hop* m 


»• 


M 



INDEX. 



ftmm MOB 

Quiet Waiting m m ... *1 

Tonth ... ... ... „. 41 

Chastisement only for a Season ... 42 
How Evil and Good both proceed from 

God ... ,., M. ... 43 

Self-Examination ... ... ... 44 

God corering himself with a Olond ... 44 

Tears which only God con wipe away 45 

"Fear not I" ... ... ... 46 

The Great Appeal... »• ... 46 

Afflicted by God ... ... ... 47 

The Way of Life hedged and boilt 

np ... ... ... ... 48 

TTnheard Prayer ,., ^ ... 48 

Prosperity forgotten ... m. 48 

Remembering ASiiotion ,., m. 49 

Hope reviving ... m ». 49 

Sparing Compassion m« m. SO 

"New every Morning" „, m. 60 

The Portion of the Godly ... „. 51 

Waiting for Salvation .n ... 51 

The Yoke in Tonth ... „. 52 

The Cheek to the Smiter ... ... 62 

Divine Benignity ... ... ». 62 

The Sonrce of Evil and of Good ... 53 

Why mnrmnr t ^ ... ... 53 

Bepentanoe m* .m ... 64 

"SnrsnmOordal* «. m. 64 

Sympathetic Sorrow »• m. 64 

The Cry from the Dnngeon... ... 55 

n»yer heard and answered] ... 65 
The Lord's Knowledge of his People's 

Sufferings and Wrongs ... ... 66 

Bighteoos Becompense ... ... 56 

The Snm of a Terrible Experience ... 67 
How Hope rises from the Depths of 

Despair ... ... .„ 67 

The Unfailing Compassions of Jehovah 68 
Those who have Jehovah for their 

PoitioB ... ... ... 58 

flod's Goodness to the Hopefnl and 

the Patient ... ... ... 69 

The Discipline of Tonth ... ... 60 

Qod's Good Pnrposes in canaing Pais 60 

Approaching God in Sincerity ... 61 

The Eye and the Life ... ... 61 

Jeremiah calling ont of the Dnngeon... 62 

Jeremiah and his Enemies ... ... 62 

The Hoaio of the Wicked ... ^ 63 

Tka Frinoipla of Betribntioa «• 63 



CHAPTER IV. 

THBIn FAOI 

Fine Gold dimmed ... 67,72 

The Violation of Maternal Instincts ., 68 

Reverses of Fortnne ... :.. 68 

Incredible Calamities „, w 69 

Blindness ... m« m. 70 

Contamination ... ,m m. 71 

The End of Punishment ... ... 71 

" Preciona Sons . . . Fine Gold . . . be- 
come Earthen Pitchers" ... ... 78 

The Horrors of Famine ... ... 78 

The Impregnable taken ... ... 73 

The Degradation of the Prophets and 

the Priests ... ... ... 74 

Vain Help and Hope m* m. 74 

The End is come I ... »• m. 75 

Fallen Reputation ... «. 76 

Natural Affection gone Mt m. 76 

Social Revolution ... »• w. 76 

The Sin of Sodom... «. m. 77 

Sword and Hunger ... m. 77 

A Seeming Impossibility achieved ... 78 

Shedding the Blood of the Just ... 78 
A Disappointed Confidence and aDese- 

ocated Sanctity ... ... m 99 



CHAPTEE y. 



m, 81 
... 81 



A Prayer of Distress m 

The Lost Inheritance ... 

Orphanage and Widowhood ... ... 82 

Children suffering for the Sins of their 

Parents ... ... ... 83 

Consolation in the Supremacy of God 84 

Questioning God ... ... ... 84 

Renewal ... ... ... ... 85 

The Lord's Bemembrance besonjht ... 86 

The Moral Continuity of Nations ... 86 

None to Deliver ... ... m. 87 

The Cesaation of Joy «• n. 87 

The Degradation of Sin «• w. 87 

The Eternal Throne m. m. 88 

"Turn ns again!" ... ... 88 

The Fate of Inheritance and Honses... 89 
The Sin of the Fathers and the Suffer- 
ing of the Children ... ... 89 

The Occupation of the Elders gone ... 90 

Discrowned Jerusalem ... ... 90 

The Faint Heart and the Dim Eyes ... 91 
The Only Resource acknowledged to 

be in God m «• n> 91 



