TWt   LIBRARY 

BRIGHAI..  YOUNG  Ur  IVERSITY 

PROVO,  UTAH 


THE   PREACHEE'S   COMMENTAET 


ON 


THE  COEINTHIAI^S 


THE 


IPitac^tr's  Complete  Jamtlettcnl 

COMMENTARY 


ON    THE 


NEW    TESTAMEINT 

fON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN) 

\i\  Critical  anir  explanatory  ^oics,  Jtitrras,  '&t.,  i^c 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
London  and  Toronto 
1896 


r^. 


? 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON   THE 


EPISTLES  or  ST.  PAUL  THE  APOSTLE  TO  THE 

COKINTHIANS 


BY 

REV.   HENRY   J.   FOSTER 


Printed  in  the  U.S.A. 


f(15etD  gorfe 

FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

London  and  Toeonto 

1896 


T  h  £     f    »  ri  •. 


THE 

PEEACHER'S  HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY. 


I.  AND  II.  CORINTHIANS. 


INTEODUCTION. 

I.  The  Homilist  should  keep  in  his  mind  something  like  the  following  Synopsis 
of  the  story  in  the  Acts,  relating  to  Paul's  movements  and  labours  at  the  period 
during  which  our  Epistles  were  written  : — 

(a)  Acts  xviii.   1.     After  preaching  at  Athens,  Paul  enters  Corinth  for  the 

first  time  (1  Cor.  ii.  1).  [Second  missionary  journey.]  Silas  and 
Timothy  had  been  left  behind  at  Beroea,  with  orders  from  Athens  to 
join  him  as  early  as  possible,  he  waiting  at  Athens  for  them  (xvii.  15). 

(b)  2-4.     Lives   and  works  with  Aquila   and  Priscilla,   themselves  recently 

come  to  Corinth  from  Rome. 

(c)  5.     Silas  and  Timothy  rejoin  him. 

(d)  6-8.     After  giving  the  Jews  the  first  of  his  (specially  earnest,  ver.  5  ;  note 

the  var.  led.)  labour,  he  removes  from  the  synagogue  to  the  house  of 
Justus  close  by,  taking  with  him  Crispus  (1  Cor.  i.  14)  ;  many  Corinthians, 
baptized  (1  Cor.  i.  14,  not  by  him  as  a  rule),  reward  his  labour  in  the 
new  place. 

(e)  9-11.     Special  vision   of   Christ   to  encourage   him   (1  Cor.    ii.    3).     An 

eighteen  months'  stay,  during  which  (allowing  **  a  good  while  "  after  it, 
ver.  18)  occurred  the  riot  and  PauVs  appearance  before  Oallio  [Sosthenes] 
(12-17). 

B  1 


INTRODUCTION.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  I.  AND  II.  CORINTHIANS. 

(/)  18-21.     With  Priscilla  and  Aquila  he  crossed  to  Ephesus  ;   himself  en 

route  for  Jerusalem,  they  remaining  in  Ephesus  (1  Cor.  xvi.   19). 
(g)  22,  23.     Csesarea,    Jerusalem;    "some  time"  in  Antioch ;   then  Galatia 

and  Phrygia,  "  in  order." 
(h)  [24-28.     ApoUos  comes  to  Ephesus.     After  his  instruction  by  Aquila  and 

Priscilla,   the  brethren  commend  him  to  Achaia,  where  he  "  waters " 

what  Paul  had  '< planted"  (1  Cor.  iii.  6).] 
(j)  Acts  xix.   1-7.    During  (h)  Paul  completes  (g)  and  reaches  Ephesus. 

John  the  Baptist's  disciples,  (of  whom  Apollos  had  been  one). 
(k)  8-12.     Three  months  of  discussion  in  the  Ephesian  synagogue.     Then  two 

years  in  the  school  of  Tyrannus,  hired  or  lent.     "All  Asia"  hear  the 

word.     Handkerchief  and  apron  miracles. 
(J)  13-20.     Ephesian  magic  vanquished.    '^  Word  grows  mightily  and  prevails.'" 
(m)  21,  22.     After  these  things  (making  "three  years,"  Acts  xx.  31)  Paul 

plans  a  journey  to  Jerusalem,  vid  Macedonia  and  Achaia.     Timothy  and 

Erastus  sent  into  Macedonia  before  him. 
{n)  23-41.  While  Paul  lingers  in  Ephesus,  the  riot  of  Demetrius  occurs, 
(o)  Acts  XX.  1.     Paul  "goes  over"   [vid  Troas  (2  Cor.  ii.   12)]  Macedonia, 

"  giving  them  much  exhortation." 
(j))  2,  3.     Three  months  in  Greece,  i.e.  (probably  chiefly)  in  Corinth.    Intended 

to  sail  for  Syria,  but  a  plot  of  the  Jews  made  him  go  first  to  Macedonia 

(Beroea,    Thessalonica,    Philippi) ;    thence    to    Troas,    Miletus,    etc.,    to 

Jerusalem  ;   thence,  ultimately,  to  Pome. 

II.  1.  Two  visits,  therefore,  are  recorded  in  the  Acts  [(a) — (/)  and  (p)], 
separated  by  the  interval  occupied  by  the  journey  to  Jerusalem,  "  some  time  "  in 
Antioch,  the  visit  to  Galatia  and  Phrygia  "  in  order  "  [(g)],  and  three  years  in 
Ephesus  [(j ) — (w)].  The  first  appears  by  reminiscent  allusion  several  times 
in  the  First  Epistle,  particularly  in  chaps,  i.-iv.  The  second  is  subsequent  to 
both  letters,  being,  however,  before  Paul's  mind  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  1-7,  though  his 
plans  were  subsequently  modified  in  detail. 

2.  An  intermediate  visit,  not  mentioned  in  the  Acts,  is  argued  by  many  from 
2  Cor.  ii.  1  ["I  would  not  come  again  to  you  in  heaviness  "] ;  xii.  14,  21  ["the 
third  time  I  am  ready  to  come"];  xiii.  1,  2  ["this  is  the  third  time  I  am 
coming  "].  Those  who,  like  (e.g.)  Stanley,  "  assume  that  there  were  no  visits 
of  St.  Paul  to  Corinth  besides  those  mentioned"  as  above  (II.  1),  join  "  again" 
in  2  Cor.  ii.  1  rather  with  "  come "  than  with  "  heaviness "  [i.e.  "  When  I 
should  come  again — a  second  time — it  should  not  be  with  heaviness,  after  my 
first  long  and  not  unhappy  stay  of  labour  and  of  success "  ;  and  not,  "  When 
I  should  come,  it  should  not  again  be  with  heaviness,  a  second  sad  visit"]. 
Also  they  minimise  the  force  of  "third,"  in  xii.  14,  by  emphasising  "I  am 
ready  to  come"  [i.e.  counting  (1)  Acts  xviii.,  when  he  was  ready,  and  did 
actually  come  ;  (2)  when  he  was  ready,  but  he  did  not  come  ("  according  to  the 
plan  mentioned  in  2  Cor.  i.  15,  16");  (3)  when  he  was  now  again  ready,  and 
did  actually  come  as  in  (p)].  On  the  other  side,  if  "  again  in  heaviness  "  be  very 
closely  connected  together,  it  is  urged  that  the  visit  of  Acts  xviii.  1  [(a) — (/)] 
by  no  means  satisfies  the  frequent  expressions  of  its  grief  and  deep  humiliation 
2 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  L  AND  II.  CORINTHIANS,  introduction 

to  himself,  ["  Are  these  my  converts  ?  Is  this  the  kind  of  work  which  after 
all  I  have  alone  been  able  to  accomplish  ?  "] ;  that  the  reading  in  all  the  Uncials 
(as  R.V.  Greek  text)  does  so  join  "come"  with  **  in  heaviness";  that 
2  Cor.  xiii.  2  (where  "  I  write  "  disappears  in  all  best  manuscripts)  requires 
the  translation  (R.V.)  "when  I  was,"  and  not  (A.V.)  "as  if  I  were."  Paley 
discredits  a  second,  intermediate  visit ;  Oonybeare  and  Howson  maintain  it. 
Waite  (in  Speaker^  2  Cor.,  Introd.)  claims  that  the  intermediate  visit  "is  now 
generally  admitted."  The  better  critical  texts  of  to-day  perhaps  tell  more 
in  favour  of  it ;  but  certainty  is  unattainable,  and  the  matter  is  rather  of 
interest  for  the  Bible- class  than  for  the  pulpit.  Certainly  constant  inter- 
course by  sea,  comparable  (C.  and  H.)  to  that  between  New  York  and  Liverpool, 
was  going  on  between  the  two  flourishing  commercial  centres  of  Corinth  and 
Ephesus. 

3.  A  visit  intended  and  announced  by  Paul,  but  not  paid,  is  implied  in 
2  Cor.  i.  23.  The  change  of  plan  occasioned  the  malicious  suggestions  as  to  his 
whole  character  and  his  motives  in  the  change,  against  which  he  protests  in 
chap.  i.  What  the  change  was  is  incidentally  explained  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  7. 
Earlier  than  the  writing  of  the  First  Epistle  he  had  intended  (and  announced 
to  them  somehow  [query  in  a  lost  epistle  ?  See  below])  that  he  would  visit 
Corinth  on  his  way  (v.  7)  from  Ephesus  to  Macedoida  \i.e.  to  have  left 
Ephesus  earlier  than  he  actually  did,  in  (o),  and  to  have  gone  to  Macedonia 
vid  Corinth].  In  point  of  fact,  as  he  tells  them,  by  the  time  the  First  Epistle 
was  ready,  he  had  made  up  his  mind  not  thus  to  see  them  "  by  the  way  "  and  in 
passing,  but  rather  to  come  to  them  later  on.  His  work  in  Ephesus  urgently 
demanded  him  ;  he  could  not  leave  it ;  and  therefore  he  would  not  come  until, 
having  first  been  to  Macedonia,  he  could  stay  longer  with  them,  and  perhaps 
even  "winter"  with  them;  as,  in  fact,  he  did  in  (p).  This  longer  visit  he 
had  all  along  purposed  to  make  in  any  case;  he  would  have  returned  from 
Macedonia  to  Corinth  for  it ;  it  would  have  been,  counting  the  (omitted)  flying 
visit,  "  a  second  benefit  "  (2  Cor.  i.  15,  16).  It  is  the  visit  {p)  in  the  Synopsis. 
The  intended  but  omitted  visit,  therefore,  falls  of  course  into  the  three  years 
at  Ephesus,  {j) — (m). 

The  preacher  may  notice  how  many  reasons  concurred  in  inducing  Paul  to 
forego  this  intermediate  brief  visit  to  Corinth  on  the  way  to  Macedonia.  In  the 
First  Epistle,  as  was  said  above,  he  speaks  of  the  need  of  remaining  longer 
in  Ephesus  because  of  the  "  open  door  "  and  the  "  many  adversaries  "  (1  Cor.  xvi.). 
But  in  2  Cor.  i.  23  he  solemnly  declares  that  his  deepest  reason  was  that 
he  might  not  "  as  yet "  be  obliged  to  take  in  hand  the  grave  wrong-doing 
at  Corinth,  and  use  his  Apostolic  authority  in  sharp,  severe  punishment.  That 
Ephesus  needed  the  time  which  a  visit  to  Corinth  would  have  occupied  was  true, 
and  was  all  he  needed  to  say  in  his  First  Epistle.  Such  "  policy  "  was  "  honesty." 
He  does  not  say  outright  all  that  is  true ;  there  was  no  need  to  do  so.  All  that 
he  says,  however,  is  true,  and  the  suppression  of  the  deeper,  concurrent  reason 
had  in  it  no  attempt  to  mislead.  Then,  further,  the  change  of  his  plan  of  route, 
by  leaving  open  at  least  a  few  weeks'  margin  for  an  improvement  at  Corinth, 
promised  to  spare  himself  a  visit  of  distress,  whether  a  second  of  that  character 
or  not  (2  Cor.  ii.  1).     And,  once  more,  "  to  this  end  also  did  I  write,"  rather 

3 


INTRODUCTION.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  I.   AND  11.  CORINTHIANS. 

than  carry  out  his  original  purpose  to  come  en  route  to  Macedonia,  that  he 
might  see  whether,  not  so  much  his  Apostolic  authority  over  them,  but  their 
grateful  love  to  him,  would  secure  submission  to  his  directions  in  the  First 
Epistle  (^6.,  ver.  9).  There  was  no  ''lightness,"  no  fickleness  or  infirmity  of  purpose, 
in  the  change  of  plan  (2  Cor.  i.  17).  Still  less  was  there  any  insincerity  in  it; 
as  he  protests,  God  knew  him  better  than  that,  and  surely  they  also  knew  him 
better  (2  Cor.  i.  12-14).  And  we  may  add  that  in  adducing  now  one  reason  and 
now  another,  all  perfectly  consistent,  and  each  one  perfectly  good  and  sufficient, 
there  is  nothing  inconsistent  with  the  most  transparent  simplicity  of  Christian 
trust.  Says  Jeremy  Taylor,  not  remotely  from  such  a  question  of  Christian 
morals  :  "In  every  more  solemn  action  of  Religion  join  together  many  good 
ends  that  .  .  .  when  any  one  ceases,  the  purity  of  your  intention  may  be  sup- 
ported by  another  purpose,"  though  we  may  hardly  go  so  far  as  to  say  with  him 
that,  *'  Certain  it  is,  the  more  good  ends  are  designed  by  an  action,  the  more 
degrees  of  excellency  the  man  obtains."  {Holy  Living,  Chap.  I.,  §  ii.,  rule  6.) 
Paul's  action  was  misconstrued,  perhaps  in  part  wilfully,  and  was  misrepre- 
sented. Said  the  disloyal  to  the  loyal  ones  "  of  Paul,"  "  See  your  valorous 
apostle.  There  is  no  dependence  upon  his  word.  He  cries  '  Yes '  and  '  No  ' 
in  a  breath.  He  knew  what  a  storm  his  letter  would  arouse,  and  he  dared  not 
face  it.  So  he  puts  forth  some  fine  story  about  his  work  at  Ephesus  being  so 
urgent  that  he  cannot  now  come  to  us  until  he  comes  to  winter  with  us  ! " 
Says  Taylor  again  :  "  It  is  likely  our  hearts  are  pure  and  our  intentions  spotless, 
when  we  are  not  solicitous  of  the  opinion  and  censures  of  men  ;  but  only  that 
we  do  our  duty  and  be  accepted  of  God.  For  our  eyes  will  certainly  be  fixed 
there  from  whence  we  expect  our  reward  ;  and  if  we  desire  that  God  should 
approve  us,  it  is  a  sign  that  we  do  His  work  and  expect  Him  our  paymaster." 
All  which  assurance  Paul  claims  to  have  had  (2  Cor.  i.  12,  ii.  17,  v.  9-12; 
1  Cor.  iv.  3). 

III.  1.  Was  there  an  epistle  now  lost? — Stanley,  in  continuation  of  the 
sentence  quoted  above,  II.  2,  adds,  "  [It  is  assumed  throughout  these  pages  that 
there  were]  no  Epistles  except  the  two  now  extant  in  the  New  Testament."  Many, 
on  the  other  hand  (e.g.  Conybeare  and  Howson),  read  1  Cor.  v.  9,  compared  with 
ver.  11,  as  speaking  of  an  epistle  earlier  than  the  extant  "First,"  of  which  in 
this  particular  point  a  sentence  had  been  misunderstood,  and  is  now  in  ver.  1 1 
explained  and  made  more  definitely  clear.  This  letter  is  generally,  if  accepted 
at  all,  placed  shortly  after  Paul's  return  to  Ephesus  from  the  (inferred)  brief 
visit,  discussed  above,  II.  2.  It  is  urged  that  just  as  2  Cor.  vii.  8  manifestly 
refers  to  our  "  First  "  Epistle,  and  just  as  2  Cor.  ii.  2,  9  also  plainly  refer  to  it, 
and  are  not — cannot  be — instances  of  the  epistolary  aorist,  so  it  is  most 
natural  to  take  1  Cor.  v.  9  to  refer  to  an  earlier  letter ;  and  that  indeed  there  is 
hardly  anything  in  i.  1 — v.  8  to  which  the  sense  will,  mth  any  naturalness, 
allow  Paul  to  be  making  any  back  reference.  Even  Stanley  only  suggests  that 
Paul  intended  his  directions,  given  in  v.  1-8,  about  "  purging  out  the  old 
leaven,"  to  carry  the  sense  which  ver.  9  puts  into  plain  words ;  and  supposes  a 
possible  pause  in  the  writing  of  the  letter  at  ver.  8,  so  that  either  a  new  amanu- 
ensis, or  the  old  one  resuming  his  work,  begins,  "  I  have  written  in  the  epistle,"  etc. 
4 


BOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  I.  AND  11.  CORINTHIANS  introduction. 

A  letter  not  now  extant,  and  possibly  shorter,  seems  most  natural.  Its  loss 
need  not  surprise,  or  cause  any  difficulty.  The  matter  of  the  extant  Bible  is 
confessedly  based  in  many  places  upon  a  larger  mass  of  material  which  has  not 
been  preserved.  For  example,  the  regal  histories  in  the  Old  Testament  are  dis- 
tinctly extracted  from  the  larger,  official,  perhaps  daily,  recoids  of  the  kings  of 
Judah  and  Israel.  John's  Gospel,  in  an  easily  understood  hyperbole,  confesses  that 
*'  the  world  could  not  contain  "  a  complete  and  exhaustive  record  of  the  sayings 
and  doings  of  Christ  (John  xx.  30,  31).  But  the  extant  Bible  is  not  a  chance 
survival,  a  collection  of  the  relics  of  a  lost  literature.  John's  concluding  words 
carry  a  key-principle :  *'  These  things — selected  from  so  many  more — are 
written  that  ye  might  believe,"  etc.  The  Bible  is  an  ordered,  orderly  selection, 
with  a  purpose.  The  Book  is  a  Divinely  authentic  account  of  the  revelation  of 
God's  redemption  in  Christ  for  fallen  mankind,  and  of  its  historical  unfolding. 
Biography  and  history  are  written  with  that  purpose  in  view.  What  shall  be 
included,  what  shall  be  omitted,  is  all  regulated  by  the  requirements  of  that 
purpose  ;  the  scale  on  which  what  is  included  shall  be  treated,  whether  dismissed 
in  a  "  verse  "  or  expanded  into  a  chapter,  depends  on  that.  Men  and  events  are 
important  or  unimportant,  according  to  the  measure  of  their  serviceableness  to 
the  work  of  bringing  onward  God's  redemption.  What  is  here  is  all  wanted  for 
that ;  what  is  not  here  might  have  been  very  interesting  in  many  other  points 
of  view,  but  it  was  not  wanted  for  this ;  for  God's  purpose  it  did  not  matter. 
[Duplicate,  parallel  books,  such  as  Kings  and  Chronicles,  chapters  of  names  like 
Romans  xvi.,  every  smallest  *'  minor  "  prophet,  have  valuable  bearing  upon  at  least 
the  credentials  of  a  revelation  which  is  historical  in  fact  and  in  form.]  So  too  the 
lost  epistle  does  not  leave  us  really  *'  losers,"  except  in  the  sense  that  a  curious 
piece  of  ancient  epistolary  literature  has  perished ;  it  contained  nothing  which  is 
not  permanently  and  fully  preserved  for  us  in  the  extant  Epistles.  Moreover, 
Paul  is  quite  conscious  of  the  value  of  anything  he  writes  (1  Cor.  xiv.  37; 
1  Thess.  V.  27,  etc.),  and  would  almost  certainly  guide  a  Church  in  such  close 
connection  with  himself  as  Corinth  was,  in  regard  to  the  preservation  and  the 
relative  worth  of  his  letters. 

2.  The  two  extant  Epistles  can  be  located  in  the  history  within  very  narrow 
limits ;  the  Second,  indeed,  very  precisely.     As  to  the  First : — 

(1)  Paul  is  in  "Asia"  (xvi.  19),  in  Ephesus  (xvi.  8;  with  the  highest  degree  of 
probability).     Therefore  it  falls  within  {j) — {jt). 

(2)  Apollos  is  back  again  in  Ephesus  (xvi.  12),  after  a  visit  to  Corinth,  which 
Acts  xviii.  27,  28  and  xix.  1  give  the  impression  was  a  fairly  long  one.  Not 
earlier,  then,  than  {k), 

(3)  Nor  later  than  (m),  where,  as  in  the  First  Epistle,  Paul  is  planning  his 
Macedonian  visit.  Indeed,  if  the  sending  of  Timothy,  mentioned  in  the  Epistle 
(iv.  17,  xvi.  10),  be  identical  with  that  of  Acts  xix.  22,  we  almost  certainly 
locate  the  First  Epistle  at  the  point  of  time  in  this  last  verse. 

(Note :  Timothy  and  Erastus  are  said  to  be  sent  forward  only  "  into  Mace- 
donia," and  in  the  Epistle  (xvi.  10)  Paul  expresses  doubt  whether  Timothy  will 
come  so  far  as  Corinth.)  Working  backward  from  one  of  the  two  fixed  points 
in  the  chronology  of  the  Acts,  the  removal  of  Felix  from  the  governorship, 
A.D.     60,    we    are    brought    to    57    or    58    as    the    year ;    before   Pentecost 


mTRODUCTiON.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  I.  AND  11.  CORINTHIANS. 

(1  Cor.  xvi.  8);   possibly   (1    Cor.   v.    17,   but   this   is   very  precarious)  about 
Passover-tide. 

As  to  the  Second  : — Plainly  Paul  is  in  Macedonia,  having  quitted  EphesuS; 
and  even  Troas,  in  his  anxiety  to  meet  Titus  at  the  earliest  possible  moment,  and 
to  hear  his  news  from  Corinth  as  to  the  reception  and  effect  of  the  First  Epistle. 
This  latter,  then,  belongs  to  (o),  Acts  xx.  i. 

IV.  The  occasion  of  the  First  Epistle  lies  upon  the  very  surface  of  the  letter. 
From  members  of  the  household  of  Chloe — whether  residents  in  Corinth  or  in 
Ephesus  is  entirely  uncertain,  but  in  all  probability  having  just  come  across  from 
Corinth — he  has  heard  of  the  factions,  and  perhaps  of  the  shameful  sin  (v.  1). 
Also  Stephanas,  Fortunatus,  and  Achaicus  have  recently  arrived  from  Corinth, 
[perhaps  bringing  gifts  toward  his  support,  but  at  all  events]  by  their  coming 
and  their  attentions  to  Paul,  doing  the  Corinthian  Church  the  service,  and  giving 
Paul  the  comfort,  of  a  personal  kindness  which  the  Church  could  only  thus  show 
by  its  representatives  (xvi.  17).  They  probably  have  brought  a  letter  of  inquiry 
upon  several  specific  topics  (vii.  1).  They  perhaps  returned  with  Titus,  when  he 
bore  the  First  Epistle  to  Corinth. 

The  occasion  of  the  Second  is  also  manifest.  In  Macedonia  [during  (o)  of  the 
Synopsis]  Paul  has  met  Titus  with  news  from  Corinth,  of  mingled  character, 
though  on  the  whole  good.  For  the  most  part  the  Church  has  obeyed  the 
directions  of  the  First  Epistle.  The  incestuous  man  is  penitent,  and  may  well 
be  restored  to  fellowship.  But  a  perverse  party  still  holds  out  in  Corinth,  who 
misconstrue  his  change  of  route  and  misrepresent  himself.  Personal  vindication, 
mingled  with  overflowings  of  thankful  relief,  together  with  fuller  and  additional 
directions  upon  sundry  matters,  particularly  the  Jerusalem  Poor  Relief  Fund 
Collection,  which  he  just  now  is  pushing  wherever  he  goes,  make  up  this  letter, 
the  most  vividly  personal  of  all  his  extant  ones,  revealing  the  man  Paul  as  no 
other  does. 

[The  verb  "  to  boast  "  occurs  twenty-nine  times  (Conybeare  and  Howson)  in  the 
Second  Epistle,  and  only  twenty-six  times  in  all  his  other  Epistles  together — an 
incidental  touch  of  the  fulness  of  personal  feeling  manifested  in  it.  Nowhere  more 
clearly  than  here  does  the  human  element  in  an  inspired  writing  meet  us.  Yet  the 
teaching  bears  repeated  and,  so  to  speak,  microscopic  examination  age  after  age, 
and  age  after  age  it  bears  applying  to  the  new  needs  and  questions  of  the  life 
of  the  Church  and  the  individual.  Paul  claims  for  what  he  writes  a  value  and 
authority  higher  than  any  which  any  holiest  or  wisest  man  could  naturally 
claim  (1  Cor.  xiv.  37) ;  he  claims  to  speak  and  write  like  an  ancient  prophet 
(1  Thess.  iv.  15).] 

[In  the  First  Epistle  the  Church,  in  the  Second  Epistle  the  Apostle,  give  a 
distinctive  character  to  these  two  vividly  personal  and  unchallenged  Epistles.  The 
question  as  to  the  integrity  of  the  Second,  raised  in  connection  with  the  change 
of  tone  at  X.  1 ,  is,  so  far  as  the  preacher  needs,  discussed  at  that  place.] 

V.  Too  much  should  not  be  made  of  the  well-known  proverbial  character  of  , 
Corinth  for  elaborate,  costly  licentiousness.     (Horace's  rendering  of  the  Greek 
saying :  ''It  is  not  given  to  every  man  to  take  his  pleasure  at  Corinth " ;  the 
6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  AND  II.  CORINTHIANS,    introduction. 

verb  '*  to  Oorinthianise.")  Strictly  this  belonged  to  the  old  Greek  city,  which 
was  so  completely  destroyed  by  fire  at  the  Komaii  capture  by  Memmius,  B.C.  146, 
that  (to  borrow  from  Bishop  Ellicott)  ''  for  a  hundred  years  it  lay  in  utter  ruins, 
[like  Chester  and  some  other  Roman  towns  in  Britain  until  reoccupied  by  the 
Saxon  invaders]  ;  all  the  works  of  art  which  could  be  moved  were  carried  away, 
and  the  greater  part  even  of  the  temples  overthrown  and  destroyed.  Thus  it 
remained  till  the  year  B.C.  46,  when,  for  political  reasons,  Julius  Caesar  deter- 
mined to  rebuild  the  ruined  city.  A  large  number  of  Roman  colonists,  princi- 
pally veteran  soldiers  and  freedmen(l  Cor.  vii.  22),  were  sent  there.  Inhabitants 
from  the  neighbouring  territories,  heretofore  forbidden  to  settle  there,  speedily 
flocked  in ;  the  relics  of  the  ancient  city  were  conserved ;  Avhat  remained  of  the 
pubKc  buildings  were  restored  ;  and  [as  was  sooner  or  later  inevitable  with  a  city 
so  favourably  situated  between  two  busy  seas],  Roman  Corinth,  the  Corinth  of 
this  [First]  Epistle,  rapidly  rose  to  eminence  and  prosperity,  and  by  the  time  Paul 
visited  it  was  probably  a  busy  city  of  a  hundred  thousand  souls.  The  institutions 
were  Roman,  and,  according  to  some  writers,  the  language  also;  but  however  this 
may  have  been  in  the  courts  or  in  public  documents,  it  is  not  very  easily  conceivable 
that  the  current  language  of  the  city  was  other  than  that  in  which  St.  Paul 
addressed  his  Christian  converts.  Indeed,  it  may  probably  be  correctly  said 
that  Greek  art,  Greek  culture,  and,  alas,  Greek  license  and  sensuality,  were  now 
predominant  in  the  restored  city,  and  that  Roman  Corinth  had  in  many  things 
reverted  to  the  usages  of  the  Corinth  of  the  past.  Though  all  the  revolting 
immorality  to  which  Strabo  alludes  must  have  belonged  to  an  earlier  period,  yet 
it  is  perfectly  clear  from  this  Epistle  that  much  of  it  had  revived,  and  that  the 
worship  of  Aphrodite,  to  whom  the  whole  mountain  against  which  the  city 
rested  was  dedicated,  was  among  the  most  baneful  of  the  idolatries  of  the 
restored  city."  It  had  all  the  customary  vice  which  unhappily  belongs  every- 
where to  great  seaports,  to  which  resort  a  constantly  fresh  succession  of  sailors, 
merchants,  visitors,  from  every  part  of  the  world.  One  may  suppose,  too,  that 
all  the  secularity  of  tone  and  temper  which  is  so  commonly  intensified  by  the 
keen  struggle  of  business  in  such  great  commercial  centres,  was  also  prevalent, 
with  its  accompanying  feverish,  restless  activity  of  a  life,  dulled  in  its  finer 
sensitiveness  to  wrong  and  right,  easily  satisfied  with  an  average,  conventional 
standard,  and  yet  more  easily  satisfied,  not  to  say  enslaved,  with  the  immediate 
good  of  the  passing  time  (2  Cor.  iv.  18 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  29-31).  [Robertson's 
Introductory  Lecture  very  fine  on  these  points.]  "  The  study  of  philosophy  " 
(to  quote  Bishop  Ellicott  further)  "had  also  obviously  revived.  It  was  in  no 
way  likely  that  the  now  prosperous  Corinth  would  not,  to  ^ome  considerable 
extent,  have  sought  to  maintain  that  culture  which  still  kept  up  the  neighbour- 
ing city  of  Athens  as  a  sort  of  University  of  the  ancient  world."  [On  these 
points,  see  Homilies  on  1  Cor.  ii.  4,  iii.  11  sqq.,  etc.] 

YI.  To  those  who  use  this  Book.— This  is  designed  to  be  a  book  of  material, 
and  that  for  homiletic  purposes.  Everything  has  been  dealt  with  subject  to 
that  one  consideration.  The  "  Critical  Notes  "  are  simply  and  only  such  notes, 
gathered  from  all  available  sources,  as  I  judge  a  preacher  would  make  when 
laying  the  foundation  of  a  sermon,  or  in  preparing  for  a  Bible-class  or  week- 

7 


INTRODUCTION.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  L  AND  II.  CORINTHIANS. 

night  lecture.  No  topic  is  discussed  or  followed  out  any  further  than  seemed 
likely  to  be  serviceable  for  a  preacher's  purposes.  The  plan  of  the  Series  requires 
that  the  material  of  the  book  should  have  something  of  homiletical  form.  But 
for  the  most  part  it  is  homiletic  material ;  a  quarry  where  nearly  everything 
wants  "  getting  "  and  working,  though,  no  doubt,  with  a  little  skill,  the  quarry- 
man  who  knows  his  business  may  easily  detach  blocks  which  will  want  very 
little  shaping.  It  will  be  a  very  legitimate  and  happy  serviceableness  for 
the  book,  if,  to  an  overworked  preacher,  whose  mind  seems  effete  and  past 
originating  anything,  or  to  a  hurried  Sunday-school  worker  driven  into  a 
corner  on  a  Saturday  night,  it  should  chance  to  do  the  turn  of  such  a 
conversation  or  discussion  with  a  friend  as  often  starts  the  sluggard  mind  into 
activity  again  ;  or  if  now  and  again  somebody,  blamelessly  pressed  for  time, 
finds  his  steel  strike  from  one  of  these  flints  a  spark  which  kindles  his  dull 
tinder  into  a  cheerful  and  useful  blaze.  If  some  of  the  material  seems  fetched 
from  very  far — particularly  what  is  thus  marked  [  ] — let  it  be  remembered 

how  variously  men's  minds  work,  in  what  different  ways  suggestions  arise,  at 
what  unexpected  places — for  example,  in  a  conversation — different  listeners  will 
"  take  hold."  One  man's  steel  will  strike  fire  from  a  flint  which  will  be  of 
no  use  to  his  neighbour.  There  are  therefore  plenty  of  flints  provided,  and 
some  tinder — very  slight  stuff* !     Each  man  brings  his  own  steel. 

N.B. — The  Homiletical  Suggestions  marked  [J.  L.]  are  from  a  little  volume  of 
similar  hints,  by  John  Lyth,  D.D.  (Elliot  Stock). 

H.  J.  FOSTER. 


8 


L  CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER  I. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Called  (to  be)  an  apostle.— Only  here  and  in  Kom.  i.  1.  For  exact  force  choose 
between,  (a)  one  of  Christ's  "  called  "  ones,  who  am  also,  in  point  of  fact,  an  apostle  ;  and 
(&)  called  specially  to  this,-that  1  might  be  one  of  Christ's  apostles  \_q.d.  perhaps,  "Though 
at  Corinth  there  are  some  who  say  that  I  was  not  so  called"].  Both  are  true  ;  the  latter 
here  more  likely.  The  external  call  and  ordination  of  the  Church  (Acts  xiii.  1,  2)  coinciding 
with,  and  following  upon,  the  internal  and  primary  call  of  Christ  Himself  (Acts  xxii,  17-21). 
By  the  will  of  God.— Shutting  out,  {a)  man's  authority,  (Z>)  any  personal  merit  in  Paul. 
Sosthenes. — Not  certainly  he  of  Acts  xviii.  17,  though  Bengel  believes  the  beating  had  the 
happy  effect  of  making  him  a  Christian  ;  as,  similarly,  the  impressment  of  Simon  of  Cyrene 
may  have  made  him  and  his  wife  and  sons  Christians  (Mark  xv.  21  ;  Rom.  xvi.  13). 

Ver.  2.  Church  of  God. — So  he  calls  it  (but  query  the  reading  ?)  a  little  later  (Acts  xx.  28). 
New  Testament  equivalent  of  Old  Testament  "  congregation  of  Jehovah "  {e.g.  Num. 
xvi.  3 ;  Deut.  xxiii.  2),  In  Corinth. — In  Corinth,  of  all  unlikely  places  !  (see  Homily). 
Sanctified. — Note  the  perfect  tense.  A  sanctification  of  relation  to  God  (as  vii.  14), 
established  at  a  definite  date  in  the  past,  continuing  into  the  present.  Called  (to  be)  saints. 
— Parallel  to  Paul's  call  to  office  (ver.  1).  Call  upon  the  name. — As  Ananias  bade  Paul  do,  when 
he  was  becoming  a  Christian  (Acts  xxii.  16)  [N.B.  readmg'].  As  Paul  had  heard  Stephen  do 
(Acts  vii.  59)  [cf.  Paul's  "  I  appeal  (same  rvord)  unto  Csesar"  (Acts  xxv.  11).  But  this  only 
illustrates  a  special  case  of  the  "  calling  upon."  Word  covers  whole  range  of  Prayer,  as  in 
the  Old  Testament  equivalent  andLXX.  parallels].  With  all,  etc,  —  Q.d.  "I  am  not  writing 
to  you  only,  though  to  you  primarily  and  immediately,  i.e.  my  letter  to  you  is  also  for  all 
who  invoke  Christ  in  their  prayers,  everywhere  and  in  all  ages  "  [cf .  Rev.  ii.  7,  where  what 
Christ  says  to  Ephesus  the  Spirit  says  to  the  Churches].  Theirs  and  ours. — Most  probably, 
"  Their  (Lord)  and  ours." 

Ver.  3. — Claudius  Lysias  (Acts  xxiii.  26),  and  even  James  (i.  1)  and  the  Council  at  Jerusalem 
(Acts  XV.  23),  begin  with  "  Greeting,"  the  ordinary  secular  phrase.  Here  enlarged  and 
ennobled  by  the  Gospel  into  "grace,"  joined  with  the  Old  Testament  "peace."  Note  how, 
as  matter  of  course,  Paul  makes  Christ  a  concurrent  and  co-ordinate  source  of  grace  with 
the  Father. 

Ver.  4. — Dean  Howson  (Hulsean  Lectures,  Character  o/ xS'^,  P(«^Z,  i v.)  remarks  upon  this 
and  many  similar  incidental  indications  of  Paul's  tendency  to  break  out  into  praise  or 
prayer.  "  Pray  without  ceasing  ;  in  everything  [even  for  the  good  in  a  Church  so  full  of  evils 
as  the  Corinthian']  give  thanks." 

Ver.  4.  My  God "  My,"  q.d.  not  only,  **  Whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve  "  (Acts  xxvii.  23), 

but  also,  "Whom  I  know,    and  call,  and  claim  Mine!"  (Phil.  iv.  19).     "We  belong  to 
each  other!     I  am  His;  He  is  mine.     Note,  ''was  given,"  '■'•were  enriched"  (R.V.). 

Ver.  5. — "  The  grace,"  namely  this,  that  "  ye  were  enriched."  Note,  in  Him "  (R.V.). 
Cf,  Col,  ii.  9,  "  In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness,  .  .  .  and  in  Him  ye  are  made  full." 
All  utterance,  all  knowledge. — How  glorious  and  serviceable,  but  rare,  a  combination  of 
gifts !  How  "  enriched "  the  man,  the  Church,  who  can  speak  in  all  needed  modes  of 
expression,  all  needed,  or  possible,  phases  of  divine  knowledge  ! 

Ver.  6.  Even  as. — Q.d.  your  enrichment  is  after  the  glorious  measure  and  fulness  of  the 
confirmation.  The  testimony. — Whose  great,  central  subject  and  burden  is  Christ.  Was 
confirmed. — A  special  instance  of  Mark  xvi.  20.  Other  cases:  Acts  ii.  4  (tongues),  43 
(wonders  and  signs),  x.  44,  46  (Cornelius),  xix.  1-6  (Baptist's  converts  at  Ephesus). 

Ver.  7. — Q.d.  "Whilst  ve  are,  as  the  normal  attitude  of  the  Christia/n  ^i/J?,  waiting  for" 
(cf.  2  Pet.  iii.  12  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  8  ;  Heb.  ix.  28). 


CHAP.  I.      110  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  8. — It  was  confirmed  ;  you  shall  be.  Everybody  and  everything  connected  with  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  'Hn power"  (iv.  20).     Note,  " unreproveable "  (E.V.). 

*'  Bold  shall  I  stand  in  Thy  great  day  ; 
For  who  aught  to  my  charge  shall  lay  1 " 

(Rom.  viii.  33).     "  Shall  not  come  into  condemnation  "  (John  v.  24). 

Ver.  9. — Same  connection  of  thought  as  1  Thess.  v,  24,  viz,  "  Because  He  is  faithful,  He 
cannot  but  finish,  by  confirming  you  unto  the  end,  what  He  began  when  He  called  you  into 
the  fellowship."  Fellowship  of. — Your  common  sharing  in  and  with  (Rom.  viii.  17)  Him. 
So  of  and  with  are  both  in  Heb.  iii.  14.  Note  the  solemn  enumeration,  at  full  length,  of  the 
names  and  titles  of  Christ.  Paul  a  herald  proclaiming  the  names  and  style  of  the  King 
his  Master. 

Ver.  10.  "Fellowship?" — Then  what  is  this  I  hear  about  "divisions"?  Divisions. — 
Schisms.  Not  yet  four  mountains  ;  as  yet  one  mountain  with  four  summits  (Evans). 
Joined  together. — Medical  word  ("  restore,"  Gal.  vi.  1),  as  if  suggesting,  Not  yet  cut  off 
from  the  body,  but  dislocated  in  the  body.  "  Let  the  displacement  be  reduced,  and  all 
brought  back  to  ease  and  peace." 

Ver.  11. — "I  hear ;  for,  though  you  have  written  me  about  many  things  (vii.  1),  yet  you 
said  nothing  about  this  1  "  Them  of  .  .  .  Chloe. — The  bearers  of  the  Corinthian  letter  ? 
Or  residents  in  Ephesus,  who  had  heard  from  Corinth  ?     Cannot  be  decided. 

Ver.  12. — "  To  speak  plainly,  I  say  that,"  etc.  Every  one  of  you. — "  You  are  all  involved, 
all  to  blame." 

Ver.  13. — Retain  the  question,  "  Is  Christ  [the  personal  Christ,  not  the  mystical] 
divided  ? "  For  the  exact  meaning,  choose  between,  («)  did  each  party  claim  the  whole, 
and  sole,  possession  of  Christ  ?  or  (b)  did  they,  less  uncharitably,  so  rend  Him  in  pieces 
among  them  [cf .  the  connected  word  used  of  His  garment.  Matt,  xxvii.  35]  as  to  allow  that 
all  did  possess  a  share,  but  proclaiming  their  own  to  be  largest  and  chief  ?  We  may  hope 
the  latter.  But  the  figure  should  not  be  overpressed.  Paul  crucified  ? — Contrast  the  holy 
horror  here  with  the  grateful  recognition  in  Gal.  iv.  4,  "  Ye  received  me  ...  as  Christ 
Jesus,"  i.e.  "  You  could  hardly  have  made  more  of  me  if  I  had  been  Christ  Himself."  Paul 
too  popular  with  one  party  ! 

Ver.  14. — "  It  so  happened  that,"  etc.  "  God  so  ordered  it  that,"  etc.  "  I  see  now  why. 
Thank  God,  only  two  of  you — yes  1  [Stephanas  and]  his  family  also — can  say,  "  Paul  baptized 
me  !  "  Crispus. — Acts  xviii.  8.  Gains. — I.e.  Caius  (Rom.  xvi.  23),  from  whose  house  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans  was  written  and  sent.  Two  men  whose  conversion  was  of  exceptional 
importance  in  the  history  of  the  work  in  Corinth,  and  so  Paul  baptized  them. 

Ver.  16.  The  household  of  Stephanas. — The  first  souls  he  won  in  Corinth  ;  the  first  handful 
of  his  harvest  in  that  field,  as  he  gratefully  remembers  that  "  Epasnetus  my  beloved  "  was  in 
that  of  Asia  Minor  (Rom.  xvi.  5).  No  happier  memory  for  a  minister  than  that  of  his  first 
soul  !  No  wonder  that  Paul  did  baptize  Stephanas  !  [i.e.  presuming  that  he  did ;  he  does  not 
say  so  expressly]. 

Ver.  17,  Words. — Connect  or  compare  with  "  utterance  "  (ver.  5)  and  "  word  "  (ver.  18) ; 
same  word,  in  singular  number,  in  all  three.  Of  none  effect. — Void  (R.V.) ;  **  emptied  " 
of  its  power.  If  the  words  overlay  the  cross  and  hide  it,  if  it  be  wrapped  in,  as  it 
were,  a  non-conducting  envelope  of  "wise"  putting  and  rhetorical  expression,  the  only 
real  power  in  the  message  is  nullified.  (See  the  Homily  for  this,  and  more.)  Note,  Are 
being  saved  (R.V.). 

Vers.  19,  20. — Isa.  xxix.  14  (nearly  as  LXX.),  and  a  free  imitation  of  Tsa.  xxx.  18.  For, — 
Sustains  the  general  drift  of  vers.  17,  18,  not  any  particular  clause.  "  The  cessation  of 
Rabbinical  wisdom  was  to  be  one  of  the  signs  of  Messiah's  coming ;  and  that  this  was  foretold 
in  Isa,  xxxiii.  18  was  believed  among  the  Rabbis,  (So  Stanley.)  Also,  "The  heathen  oracles 
are  dumb,"  silenced  since  Christ  came.  Remark,  "  age  "  and  "  world  "  used  together  here 
(in  the  Greek). 

Ver.  21. — Difficult ;  but  probably,  "  In  God's  wise  ordering  of  the  history  of  the  world  and 
of  human  thought,  the  result  of  all  their  experiment  and  inquiry  is  this :  '  An  unknown 
God.'"  Paul  came  fresh  from  his  address  at  Athens  (Acts  xvii,  23)  to  Corinth.  Still,  worth 
considering  this  reading:  "By  means  of  and  from  the  wisdom  of  God  displayed  in  'the 
things  that  are  made'  (Rom.  i.  20)  the  world  did  not  arrive  at  knowledge  of  Him ;  He  now 
therefore  will  propose  what  the  world  thinks  the  folly  of  His  Gospel  of  the  Cross.  Will 
they  know  Him  through  that  ?  They  who  believe  will,  and  do,  and  the  knowledge  is 
salvation." 

Ver.  22.— Notice  R.V.,  "  Jews,"  "  Greeks,"  q.d.  men  of  the  Jew-type  of  mind  and 
heart,  and  of  the  Greek-type.  There  are  such  in  all  races,  religions,  ages.  Signs  (from 
heaven)  suit  the  Oriental,  the  childlike,  emotional  type ;  wisdom  the  Western,  harder, 
manlike,  logical  type.  The  Jew  wanted  to  see  the  finger  of  God;  the  Greek  wanted  to 
explain  all  by  philosophic  theory. 

10  


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :    I,    CORINTHIANS,      chap.  I. 


Ver.  24:.— Power  for  the  Roman  ;  wisdom  for  the  Greek.  Porcer  and  wisdom,  meeting  the 
moral  weakness  and  moral  darkness  of  the  fallen  humanity.  The  age-long  experiment 
of  the  Jew  ended  in  the  knowledge  of  man's  moral  helplessness  ;  that  of  the  Greek  race,  his 
moral  ignorance. 

Ver.  26.  Your  calling.— Choose  between,  (a)  "  they  who  called  you,"  and  (b)  "  those  who 
are  called."  Probably  the  latter.  Bat  both  are  true,  and  both  are  included,  as  particular 
embodiments  of  it,  in  the  great  fundamental  rule  which  God  has  followed  "  in  His  manner  of 
calling  you,"  viz.  "not  many,"  etc.  Not  many. — Always  a  few,  as  Crispus.  Can  almost 
count,  however,  the  exceptions  in  the  New  Testament  on  one's  fingers,  and  hardly  any  of 
them  counting  for  much  in  the  world's  estimation. 

Ver.  28.  Base.— Of  no  special  honour  of  birth.  Are  not  .  .  .  are. — "  Nonentities," 
"entities"  (Evans). 

Ver. 30.  Are  ye.—Q.d.  "Now  were,  and  still  are,  nothing  and  nobody,  in  the  eyes  of  the 
world.  But  before  God,  and  in  Christ,  you  are  indeed  something  and  somebody,  with  a  life 
of  important,  eternal  reality."     (See  Homily). 

Ver.  31.— Jer.  ix.  23. 


HOMILETIC   ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—3. 

Observe  (I.)  The  Twofold  Call:  (A)  Paul's  to  Apostleship  ;  (B)  theirs  to 
Saintship. 

Observe  (II.)  The  Twofold  Holiness:  (A)  a.  Ideal,  h.  Relative;  (B)  Real. 

Observe  (III.)  The  Twofold  Bond  of  Fellowship:  (A)  *' Our  Brother"; 
(B)  "  That  call  upon  .   .  .   theirs  and  ours." 

Observe  (IV.)  The  Twofold  Blessing,  with  a  Twofold  Source:  (A)  ''Grace 
and  Peace " ;  (B)  Father ;  Jesus  Christ. 

Vers.  1-3.  Observe  (I.)  The  twofold  call:  (A)  Paul's  to  Apostleship;  (B) 
Theirs  to  Saintship. — A.  1.  He  was  "  separated,  even  from  his  mother's  womb, 
and  called  through  God's  grace"  (Gal.  i.  15).  "No  man  taketh,"  wisely,  ^^  this 
honour  unto  himself,"  any  more  than  did  even  the  Great  Apostle  of  our  pro- 
fession His  Priesthood  (Heb.  v.  4).  How  should  he  run,  to  any  purpose,  unless 
he  be  sent  ?  2  As  we  speak,  conceiving  of  God's  thoughts  and  purposes  and  work 
with  "before"  and  "after"  and  "after  the  manner  of  men,"  this  call  to  take 
up  and  fulfil  Office  is  a  thing  more  nearly  depending  upon  "  the  will  of  God  " 
alone  than  is  the  other  call  to  assume  and  realize  and  exhibit  Character.  He 
seems  to  give  no  account  of  His  ways,  e.g.,  in  an  analogous  case,  in  selecting, 
using,  blessing,  and  perhaps  thus  setting  aside,  one  Nation  rather  than  another 
for  some  special  purpose  in  His  government  of  the  world ;  or  {e.g.  Rom.  ix.)  in 
choosing  to  make  the  Life  of  the  world  depend  upon  the  line  of  Isaac  rather  than 
of  Ishmael,  or  of  Jacob  rather  than  of  the  elder  Esau;  or  why,  of  all  the  fishermen 
in  Galilee,  Peter,  of  all  the  publicans,  Matthew,  or  of  all  Saul's  family  circle, 
himself,  should  have  been  selected  for  pre-eminent  apostolate.  It  often  looks 
as  if  such  call  were  precedent  to  all  qualification  or  grace.  3.  And  yet,  not 
irrespective  of  natural  qualification  or  grace.  (But  the  "  natural "  is  the  order- 
ing of  the  Author  of  Nature  and  the  Creator  of  the  individual  Man.)  Paul  was 
a  suitable  vessel,  as  well  as  "  a  chosen  vessel."  Are  we  to  say  "  chosen"  because 
"  suitable  "  ?  In  natural  endowment,  as  well  as  by  providential  training,  he  was 
the  very  man  to  carry  the  "  grace"  (Rom.  i.  5),  and  to  do  the  work  of  an  apostle. 
A  thorough  Israelite,  in  mind,  and  education,  and  sympathy ;  and  yet  from 
Tarsus,  a  Gentile  city,  where  he  escaped  something  of  the  rigidity  and  narrowness 
of  Palestinian  Judaism,  such  as  would  have  entirely  disqualified  him  for  approach- 
ing the  Gentile  mind  and  heart;  a  noble  personal  character  even  before  his 
conversion ;  he  was  made  for  the  work,  and  was  only  waiting  the  conversion  and 
the  call  and  the  qualifying  Holy  Spirit.  4.  A  call  to  the  ministry  always 
presupposes  :  (a)  Gifts.  Without  these  natural  points  of  fitness,  not  even  grace 
can  make  the  best  man  a  successful  minister.     Given  these,  the  rest  is  a  question 

11 


CHAP.  I.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


of  prayer  and  hard  work.  Grace  may  always  be  had  for  the  asking  (Jas.  i.  5  : 
"  If  any  man  lack,  ...  let  him  ask,"  etc.).  Conversely,  the  possession  of  the 
gifts  may  set  up  a  fair  presumption  that  their  possessor  is  designed  for  their 
complementary  work.  He  should  hold  himself  in  readiness  for  the  definite  "  call." 
(b)  Grace.  Grace  may  fail  to  get  married  to  gifts ;  they  may  be  divorced  through 
unfaithfulness,  sloth,  or  sin.  May  not  even  an  apostle  fall  from  his  grace  ? 
Is  there  only  one  Judas,  an  apostle  who  never  fairly  began  his  special  work  ? 
The  unfathomable  mystery  of  the  twin  problems  of  Evil  and  of  Free-will  of  course 
lies  all  around  and  beneath.  But  as  matter  of  practical  conduct,  are  there  no 
men  designed  by  natural  equipment  for  apostleship,  for  the  ministry,  for  honour- 
able and  blessed  Church  office  who  have  turned  aside  from  the  "  call,"  or  by  early 
giving  up  self  to  sin  or  the  world  have  barred  the  call  which  might  else  have 
come?  Or,  short  of  this,  are  there  none  in  the  Church  designed  for  higher 
service  than  what  they  actually  fulfil ;  who  are  blessed  in  their  business,  but 
were  meant  for  the  ministry;  who  honour  God,  and  are  honoured  by  Him,  but 
who  hold  only  a  second-best  place,  and  receive  only  a  second-best  blessing  ?  (c) 
Fruit.  Have  they,  upon  experiment  made,  found  the  natural  equipment  and  the 
added  grace  fruitful  in  "turning  (Acts  xxvi.  18)  some  from  darkness  to  light"? 
If  this  never  follows — though  "  fruit "  is  hard  to  judge  of,  it  is  so  many-sided, 
and  sometimes  so  obscure  a  thing — then  there  has  been  a  mistake  somewhere. 
A  physician  of  souls,  who  never  heals  anybody — however  he  may  be  diplomaed — 
has  missed  his  "  calling."  (d)  Happy  for  the  "apostle"  if  there  be  the  concomi- 
tant, complementary,  independent,  clear  calls,  within  from  the  Master,  and 
without  from  the  God-directed  Church.  (See  Critical  Notes,  ver.  1,  supra.) 
Happy,  if  he  can  say  to  many,  "  The  seal  of  my  apostleship  are  ye  "  (chap.  ix.  2). 
Happy,  if  the  "  call  "  never  become  to  an  unfaithful  steward  of  it  (chap.  iv.  2)  a 
condemnation  and  a  torturing  memory. 

B.  1.  Every  call  involves  in  the  response  to  it  both  Responsibility  and  Blessing. 
The  call  to  Ofl&ce  throws  up  most  prominently  the  Besponsibility ;  the  call 
to  Saintship  the  Blessing.  It  is  a  perpetual  invitation.  Observe  in  1  Thess. 
v.  24,  "  Faithful  is  He  that — not  called,  but — calleth  you,  who  also  will  do  it," 
viz.  "  will  sanctify  you  wholly,"  etc.  2.  The  call  to  take  up  the  life  of  the 
Christian  has  always  this  at  the  heart  of  it :  "  Be  ye  holy "  ["  Ye  shall  be 
holy"].  But  it  comes  in  many  shapes,  according  as  the  ear  and  heart  are 
ready,  or  not,  to  catch  and  respond  to  this,  its  truest  meaning  and  purpose. 
To  the  weary,  sin-sick,  world-sick,  unsatisfied  life  :  "  Come  to  Me ;  I  will  give 
you  Best !  "  To  many  a  God-fearing  Israelite,  bound  under  a  yoke  of  multi- 
plied and  vexatious  prescriptions,  ''a  yoke  which  neither  he  nor  his  fathers  were 
able  to  bear"  (Acts  xv.  10),  the  Gospel  came  as  a  call  "to  liberty  "  (Gal.  v.  13). 
And  such  have  their  sympathising  analogues  in  every  generation.  To  souls 
at  lower  levels  and  of  duller  ear  the  call  has  to  come,  thundering,  "  Escape 
for  thy  life  !  There  is  '  wrath  to  come.'  "  3.  And,  as  many  forms,  so  many 
methods,  of  the  call.  A  friend  stricken  down  by  the  side  of  a  Luther  "  calls." 
The  invisible  seems  suddenly  to  break  in  upon  a  sense-bound,  world-narrowed 
man,  he  hardly  knows  how  or  why.  He  is  looking  into  an  open  grave,  and  finds 
himself  gazing  into  eternity  ;  he  is  gazing  blankly,  stunned,  at  a  letter  lying  upon 
his  oflSce  desk,  telling  him  of  a  great  loss,  and  even  the  letter  and  the  immediate 
loss  fade  away  and  disappear;  he  finds  himself,  '*  very  inconsequently,"  pondering, 
"  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  ?"  etc.  He  is  having  one  of  many,  oft-repeated  calls. 
As  before  a  worldling,  man  or  woman,  in  the  very  whirl  of  the  world's  life,  there 
suddenly  rises  up  a  fair  and  lovely  Ideal  of  a  holy  life  ;  strangely  the  heart  goes 
out,  approvingly,  longingly,  toward  it.  Not  always  responded  to,  but  there  is  the 
call.  And  even  the  man  who  responds  only  to  the  call  of  his  fears  of  wrath  and 
hell,  finds  when  he  enters  upon  the  new   life  [and  there  is  no  ^^ seeing"  the 

12 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  i. 


kingdom  of  God  "  without  "  entering  "  it,  John  iii.  3,  compared  with  5]  that  he 

has  begun  to  "  follow  "  not  chiefly  after  safety  and  heaven,  but  "  after  hoUiaess  " 

(Heb.  xii.  14).     4.  Everyman  "had  his  calling"  (chap.  vii.  20).     The  secular 

station  and  business  is  by  the  call  of  God,  and  therefore  holy.     And  conversely, 

holiness  is  the  calling,  the  business,  of  the  spiritual  life.     "  A  Christian  ?     Yes ; 

but  he  is  not  working  much  at  it,"  is  the  reason  of  so  many  ineffective,  unsatisfied 

Christian  lives.     They  "  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  "  who  calls  them,  and  would  help 

them,  to  holiness.     It  is  an  interest  of  their  lives,  but  should  be  the  main  interest 

and  business.     They  are  called  to  be  saints ;  but  being  saints  wants  attending  to, 

seriously  and  diligently,  as  a  holy  "  vocation."     [The  preacher  may  notice  and 

use  :  {a)  The  distinction  between  K€KXr}ixevos,  e.g.  Matt.  xxii.  3,  4,  8,  the  Supper 

parable,  and  the  kXtjtol,  here  and  in  the  similar  passage,  Kom.  i.,  ad  init.     The 

kX7)tol  are  the  new  people  of  God,  the  new  Israel ;  their  calling  being  ideally 

complete.     In  KeKXr][x€vos  (perf.  part.)  we  see   the  actual,  historical   calling  of 

individuals  being  carried  on.     (b)  The  calling  is  in  the  root  of  €KKA.7;orta  =  Church.] 

Observe  (II.)  The  twofold  holiness :  (A)  a.  Ideal,  h.  Eelative ;  (B)  Real. — 

(A)    They   are   sanctified   in  Christ  Jesus-,    (B)    They   are   called   to   he   saints. 

A.  1.   Every  great,  leading  Idea  of  Revelation,  that  of  Holiness,  like  the  rest, 

was  revealed   "in  divers  portions  and  in  divers  manners."     [So  God,  in  the 

ordering  of   the   historical,   physical  unfolding  of    His   mind  and   purpose   in 

creation,  led  up  to  Man  by  preluding  hints  and  anticipatory  forms,  revealing 

Man  "in  divers  portions  and  in  divers  manners,"  until  at  last  Adam  stood  forth 

the  complete  utterance  of  His  thought,  toward  which  He  had  been  working  all 

through  the  ages.     Yet  He  had  a  still  grander  Word  to  speak  forth,  which  is 

heard,  seen,  in  His  Incarnate  Son.      Perfect,  ideal  human  nature  and  human 

life  are  there  (Heb.  ii.  8,  9) ;  a  sinless  Humanity  in  perfect  fellowship  with  the 

Divine.    All  such  subsidiary,  partial  revelations  of  God's  thoughts,  as  that  about 

Holiness,  follow  on  the  same  lines,  obey  the  same  law  of  disclosure,  because  they 

are  really  sub-sections  of  the  greater  disclosure.     Their  progressive  unfolding  is 

part  of  the  greater  progression  and  unfolding.]     He  began  with  a  holiness  of 

relation  to  Himself.     "  Holy "  days,  not  physically  in  any  way  different  from 

common  days ;    "  holy "   ground,    not   distinguishable   from  the  adjacent  soil ; 

"  holy "    garments,    neither    finer   nor   more    costly    than    ordinary    ones ;    a 

"  holiness  "  which  might  belong  to  the  firstborn  produce  of  a  flock,  or  a  field, 

or   a    family,    and   even    to   the    "  brass "    of   the   censers  of    Korah    and   his 

associates ; — in   all   these   the  "  holiness  "  was  only  separation,  from  common 

use   and    human    ownership,    that    they    might    be    devoted  to   the  exclusive 

use   and   worship   of  Jehovah.      [So,  in  the  Polynesian  groups,  the  order   of 

a    chief    might   make   food,  or  property,  or  persons,  tabu,  and  exclusively  for 

himself.]    In  the  Mosaic  code  such  embodiments  and  presentations  of  "  holiness  " 

abounded.     But  this  was  only  an  elementary  lesson,  given  to  a  nation  which 

had  barely  passed  childhood  in  spiritual  knowledge.     In  the  mind  of  God,  to 

speak  humanly,  all   these  looked  forward  to,  were  the  first  steps  in  a   path 

leading   human  thought  and  practice  toward  a  real  holiness.     Separateness  is 

by  no  means  the  only,  and  the  final,  meaning  of  "  holiness,"  in  either  the  Old 

Testament,  or  (certainly)  in  the  New  Testament.     "  Separation  is  here  [story  of 

Balaam  :  '  The  people  dwelt  alone '],  as  throughovit  the  Old  Testament,  the  symbol 

of  sanctity,  the  outward  and  visible  sign  of  an  inward«and  invisible  grace,  the 

grace  which  impels  men  and  women  to  the  pursuit  of  a  pure  and  unworldly  life, 

and  makes  righteousness  .  .  .  their  chief  end  and  highest  good  "  (S.  Cox,  Expos. ^ 

1883,  p.  205).     [The  separateness  is  the  first,  and  for  some  time  the  only,  thing 

our  children  can  see  or  appreciate  about,  e.g.,  the  holiness  of  the  Sabbath.     The 

intrinsic  value  and  the  deep  meaning  of  the  day  comes  long  after,  and  only  fully 

through  the  perceptions  and  experiences  of  the  regenerate  life.     They,  in  fact, 

13 


CHAP.  I.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS. 


begin,  each  of  them,  where  Israel  began  centuries  ago,  and  rapidly  run  through 
and  summarise  in  their  own  learning  the  lessons  and  the  process  distributed  over 
centuries  in  the  education  of  mankind.]  "  We  may  be  made  partakers  of  His 
holiness"  (Heb.  xii.  10)  shows  that  separateness  of  a  relation  to  God  is  not  the 
only  or  the  chief  idea,  but  a  personal  quality.  Historically  this  is  the  final 
point  reached  in  the  Revelation  of  Holiness  ;  really,  if  we  may  so  speak,  it  is 
the  first,  the  full,  the  originating  point,  as  mapped  out  in  God's  purpose.  Look- 
ing back  over  the  completed  series  of  Divine  teachings,  we  can  now  see  that, 
starting  from  the  idea  of  character,  a  holiness  of  quality  which  is  like  God's  own 
holiness,  will,  in  a  fallen  world,  whose  life  is  affected  at  every  point  by  sin, 
inevitably  work  out  in  a  separateness  of  conduct  and  of  relation  to  God.  [In 
what  God's  holiness  consists  is  a  profound  question.  Is  the  One  Absolute  Right, 
right  for  all  worlds,  and  ages,  and  ci'eatures,  and  for  their  Creator — Truth ;  the 
One  Absolute  Wrong,  for  Him  and  them,  Falsehood,  or  as  John  says,  "  A  Lie  "  ? 
Can  we  be  made  *'  partakers  of  His  holiness,"  in  any  sense  in  which  He  will  be 
a  partaker  with  us,  except  that  of  Love,  Life,  Truth  ?]  2.  Israel  was  ideally 
a  people  both  personally  holy  and  relatively  holy.  In  point  of  fact,  the 
personally  holy  individuals  were  very  few  in  any  age,  and  their  holiness  was 
often  extremely  imperfect.  Yet  the  whole  nation  was  "  separated  "  in  a  hundred 
ways  from  all  other  peoples.  It  was  the  "  people  of  "  Jehovah's  "  possession," 
peculiarly  His  in  a  world  where  all  peoples  are  His.  Their  King  repeatedly  saw 
in  them,  and  in  them  dealt  with,  an  ideal  people,  rather  than  with  the  actually 
fickle,  rebellious,  faithless,  idolatry-loving  nation.  Honours,  protection,  know- 
ledge, a  distinguished  regard  showing  itself  in  many  ways,  were  given  to  the 
real  Israel  for  the  sake  of  the  Ideal,  and  not  withdrawn,  even  in  days  of 
deep  or  widespread  national  unfaithfulness  ;  not  until  the  time  had  come  for  a 
new  Israel,  a  new  "  peculiar  people,"  a  new  "  Church  "  [for  the  old,  hear  Stephen, 
Acts  vii.  38],  indeed  for  a  new  Race  to  spring  from  a  new,  a  second  Adam. 
The  localisation  in  one  special  land  was  to  pass  away ;  the  restriction  to  one 
special  nation  was  to  be  abolished;  not  national  birth  (John  i.  13),  but  "new 
birth,"  birth  "  of  God  "  \ih.\  was  to  be  the  principle  of  succession  and  evolution, 
as  between  generation  and  generation.  The  new  Israel  has  stepped  into  the 
separated  position  of  the  old,  and  stands  in  the  old  speciality  of  relationship. 
At  its  most  unworthy,  worldly,  depressed  point  the  Church  of  Christ  is  still  the 
separated  people  of  God,  "  sanctified  "  as  the  old  was.  3.  "  In  Christ  Jesus."  As 
Abraham  and  his  vseed  through  Isaac  and  Jacob  are  for  many  purposes  to  be 
regarded  and  dealt  with  as  a  great  Unit  of  reckoning  [e.g.  Heb.  vii.  5,  10 ;  Gal. 
iii.  16-18;  and  N.B.  how  Isaiah  goes  back  to  this,  li.  2],  and  are  "Abraham" 
in  the  transaction ;  so  "  Christ "  stands,  a  great  Unit  of  reckoning,  for  Christ 
and  His  people,  God's  new  people,  sprung  from  Him,  their  new  ancestor.  He 
and  they  are  taken  together  (Gal.  iii.  16  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  12).  His  clients  are  in 
favour,  for  His  sake,  and  along  with  Him.  Indeed,  they  "  are  not^''  do  not  count 
as  existing,  until  they  believe  ^^ into  Him"  and  live  "m  Him."  There  is  no 
"sanctified"  Israel  to-day  except  the  persons  who  are  "in  Christ."  [The 
relation  of  Christian  baptism  to  this  relative  sanctification  will  come  up  later, 
chap.  vii.  14.] 

B.  1.  This  is  great  honour  and  great  responsibility.  Each  member  of  it  is 
called  to  realise  in  himself  the  separateness,  the  relative  holiness  of  the  whole  ; 
and  to  realise  in  his  character  the  likeness  to  God  which  underlies  the  separate- 
ness, and  without  which,  indeed,  the  separateness  becomes  a  mere  empty 
conformity  to  certain  codified  restrictions  and  observances,  mostly  worthless, 
unless  as  expressing  or  assisting  a  life  within,  a  conformity  which  will  not  long 
survive  the  extinction  of  the  life  within.  "  They  will  go  out  from  us,"  and 
merge  themselves  in  the  general  mass  of  mankind,  laying  aside  their  separateness 

14 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    1.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  r. 


and  "  sanctification,"  that  they  may  be  manifest  that  they  "  were  not,"  or  had 
ceased  to  be,  *'  of  us  "  (1  John  ii.  19).  2.  The  separateness/or  God,  and  so  from 
any  use  which  cannot  conceivably  be  included  in  life  for  Him,  will  be  the 
only  sanctification  of  which  theii'  body  is  capable.  It  is  matter,  morally  neutral ; 
its  powers  and  appetites,  necessarily  in  themselves  morally  neutral,  may  equally 
well  be  made  the  "  instruments  of  righteousness "  or  "  of  unrighteousness " 
(Rom.  vi.  13).  It  is  for  them  to  see  that  tongue,  or  hand,  or  foot,  or  eye,  or  ear, 
are  always  ready  for  use  by  God,  and  are  never  employed  for  anything  incongruous 
with  His  mind  and  law ;  always  held  at  His  service  and  disposal ;  always  denied 
to  the  use  of  Sin  in  every  shape.  The  body  can  only  be  holy  as  the  brass  of  the 
censers  was  holy.  3.  So,  too,  imagination,  curiosity,  judgment,  reasoning  powers, 
^vill,  etc.,  may  be  lent  to  sin,  or  may  be  kept  for  God.  "  May," — they  must. 
"  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  "  must  be  written  across  them  all,  in  all  their  exercise. 
4.  And  all  this  not  merely  by  means  of  regulations  imposed  from  without,  but 
in  obedience  to  a  new  law  of  life  within.  The  indwelling  Holy  Spirit  will  be  a 
new  life,  and  a  new  power  to  the  will.  Love  to  God  will  exert  "  the  expulsive 
power  of  a  new  affection,"  and  cast  out  with  growing  completeness  every 
opposing  motive.  The  same  love  will  carry  with  it  in  willing  subjection  all  the 
exercise  of  every  faculty,  and  make  all  tend  toward  God ;  the  self-centering  of 
life,  which  is  the  highest  form  of  Idolatry  [the  "  Man  of  Sin  "  exhibits  his 
culminating  wickedness  in  this  :  "  Himself  set  forth  as  God,"  2  Thess.  ii.  4],  will 
be  exchanged  for  a  convergence  of  every  line  of  feeling  and  action  upon  God  as 
Centre  and  Object  and  End.  "  Separated  for  God  "  will  be  the  instinctive, 
inevitable,  happy  expression  of  life  within.  5.  This  will  be  perfect  spiritual 
health,  *'life  which  is  life  indeed,"  man's  life  as  in  the  original  conception 
and  intention  of  God  in  creating  Man ;  and  there  will  be  the  perfect  correspond- 
ence between  ideal  and  fact,  the  perfect  self -consistency  and  internal  harmony, 
which  in  its  highest  exemplification  is  the  Truth  of  God's  own  Character  and 
Nature.  6.  The  very  fact,  then,  that  a  man  is  of  the  Church,  and  "  in  Christ 
Jesus  "  is  "  sanctified,"  speaks  to  him,  "  calls  "  to  him,  reminding  Him  of  God's 
purpose,  and  of  God's  claim  upon  him.  The  Spirit,  if  he  will  keep  an  open  ear, 
will  be  continually  reminding  him  of  the  significance  of  his  place  in  the  new 
Israel,  and  be  offering  His  own  instruction,  and  leading  up  to  a  higher  and  ever 
higher  type  of  Christian  life.  [The  very  world,  in  a  way,  calls  him  to  holiness  ; 
for  no  one  is  more  exacting,  more  just,  in  its  expectation  that  Christians  should 
be  holy  men  than  they,  or  has  a  higher  standard  of  Christian  separateness  and 
holiness  than  the  men  *'  of  the  world."] 

Observe  (III.)  A  twofold  bond  of  fellowship :  (A)  "  Our  brother''  {the  brother, 
Gr.)  ;  (B)  ^'  That  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  every  place,  their 
{Lord)  and  ours.^' — A.  1.  *'  Liberty,  Equality,  Fraternity,"  were  to  our  fathers'  ears 
associated  with  Unbelief  and  Revolution.  Yet  they  are  all,  especially  the  last, 
ideas  derived  from  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  They  are  not  natural  to  the  human 
heart ;  when  its  tendencies  reveal  themselves  in  simple  openness,  they  emphasise 
Self  and  Class  and  Pride.  The  long  experiment  of  antiquity  showed  that  even 
a  common  manhood  in  the  race  was  no  native  idea  to  the  human  heart ;  brother- 
hood was  unheard  of.  The  stranger  in  old  times  was,  even  as  a  point  of  vocabulary, 
also  the  enemy ;  Pascal  remarks  sadly  on  the  persistency  of  the  feeling,  making 
this  slope  of  the  Pyrenees  to  be  the  home  of  "  friends,"  and  the  further  slope  the 
home  of  "enemies."  Shame  that  the  preachers  of  Unbelief  should  have  seemed 
often  the  louder,  bolder  preachers  of  "  Fraternity,''  whilst  the  Church  of  Christ, 
in  some  temporary,  local  embodiment,  seemed  to  stand  by  the  class  distinction,  the 
iniquitous  privilege,  the  wealth  as  against  poverty.  If  the  Church  hold  its  peace, 
the  stones  must  needs  cry  out  and  preach  the  gospel  of  "  brotherhood."  2. 
"  Barbarian,  Scythian,  bond,  free,  circumcision,  uncircumcision,  male,  female,  all 

15 


CHAP.  I.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


one  in  Christ  Jesus,"  was  the  keynote  of  the  new  social  system  of  Christianity. 
Neither  sex,  nor  race,  nor  religion,  nor  station,  carried  privilege  or  prejudice  as 
to  status  before  God  and  access  to  His  saving  favour.  In  the  early  Church  the 
slave  and  the  master  would  sit  at  the  same  Lord's  Supper ;  it  might  even  happen 
that  the  office-bearer  was  a  slave,  the  private  member  the  freeman.  See  how 
honourably  prominent  women  are  in  the  Roman  Church,  or  the  Philippian.  Paul's 
letter  to  Philemon,  for  the  slave  Onesimus,  "  the  brother  beloved  "  of  his  master 
Philemon,  has  always  been  significantly  compared  with  a  letter  of  Pliny  the 
Younger  to  Sabinianus  his  friend,  on  behalf  of  an  offending  freed  man,  as 
revealing  the  utterly  diverse  conceptions  of  the  relation  between  man  and  man  on 
which  the  pagan  and  the  Christian  writers  rest  their  pleading.  In  Philemon  all 
hinges  upon  "  brother."  Paul  addresses  his  "  brother  "  Philemon  (ver.  20),  for 
his  slave  "brother"  Onesimus  (ver.  16).  Given  that  a  man  were  a  Christian, 
early  Christian  literature  lets  us  see  him  passing  from  Church  to  Church,  from 
city  to  city,  with  his  "letters  of  commendation"  (2  Cor.  iii.  1),  receiving 
hospitality,  finding  every  fellow -Christian  ready  to  be  his  "host,"  asking  and 
receiving  assistance  in  the  business  on  which  he  was  travelling  (Rom.  xvi.  1,3; 
3  John  5-8).  3.  That  Church  is  losing  one  of  its  crowning  honours,  and  losing  sight 
of  one  of  the  main  points  of  that  Magna  Charta  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  upon 
which  its  existence  and  policy  rest,  which  does  not  practically  work  out  "  a 
brotherhood  "  in  its  membership.  Church  life  must  be  a  Family  life,  and  every 
member  must  feel  at  hoine.  However  men  may  be  estimated  outside,  even  as 
between  Christian  and  Christian,  within  there  should  be  no  such  invidious 
recognition  of  rank  or  wealth  or  education  as  shall  prevent  worth  carrying  a 
man  to  his  true  place  in  the  brotherhood  and  its  work  and  offices  and  honour. 
At  the  Table  of  the  Elder  Brother,  above  all,  must  all  be  forgotten  but  this, 
"Brother." 

B.  1.  The  physical,  and  mental  unity  of  the  race  lies  deeper  than  the  surface 
divergencies  which  a  century  ago  were  made  to  argue  multiplicity  of  origin — 
many  "  Adams "  for  as  many  great,  originally  distinct  races  of  mankind. 
Indeed,  the  evolutionary  drift  of  most  modern  science  so  far  sustains  Scripture 
teaching  as  to  insist  strongly  upon  the  unity  which  is  the  natural  basis  of 
"  brotherhood."  Paul's  argument  on  Areopagus  is  cogent  still  (Acts  xviii.  26). 
2.  The  moral  unity,  the  oneness  of  heart  and  conscience,  of  sin  and  moral  defect, 
of  aspiration  after  God,  is  a  yet  stronger  ground  for  claiming  and  according 
"  brotherhood."  The  same  sinful  heart  in  similar  conditions  brings  forth  the 
same  crop  of  sins.  The  Bible  is  a  universal  book ;  every  age  and  race  finds 
it  describe  their  case  with  equally  correct  fidelity.  The  same  Gospel  and  its 
remedy  awaken  the  same  response,  and  exhibit  the  same  happy  results,  in  all 
hearts  which  give  it  fair  trial.  The  operation  of  the  soul-medicine  is  constant  in 
every  case.  Peter's  unanswerable  argument  justifies  still  the  broadest  brotherli- 
ness:  "God  gave  them  the  like  gift,  as  He  did  unto  us"  (Acts  xi.  17).  3.  The 
"  Alliance"  and  Unity  is  ^'Evangelical,'^  not  merely  natural.  They  come  to  the 
same  God,  using  the  name  of  the  same  Christ.  All  have  their  access  (Eph.  ii.  18) 
through  the  same  door,  by  the  same  "  new  and  living  Way."  A  grand  unity  ! 
On  both  sides  of  "  the  Pyrenees,"  in  the  tents  of  two  opposing  armies,  in  the 
council -chambers  of  opposite  political  factions,  in  races  as  widely  apart  as 
Esquimaux  and  Fijian,  as  Englishman  and  native  Australian,  are  found  men 
closer  together  than  ever  blood-relationship  made  kindred  by  nature.  Throughout 
all  ages,  and  races,  and  countries,  and  churches,  and  ranks  are  distributed  men, 
women,  children,  with  this  one  mark  in  common — they  use  "  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  "  in  prayer.  Indeed,  they  agree  in  this,  and  hardly  in  more  than 
this,  that  they  pray  to  this  one  and  the  same  God-man,  who  died  equally  for 
them  all,  and  who  lives  on  the  throne  of  government  for  not  man  only,  but  for 

16 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,      chap.  i. 


the  universe,  wearing  the  nature  which  belongs  to  them  all.  Every  man  of 
them  feels  that  his  Head  is  Christ.  [Two  Christian  natives,  of  different  tribes 
and  language,  once  met  at  a  South  African  mission  station,  and  found  the 
linguistic  barrier  insuperable,  until  one  with  a  bright  thought  looked  up  and  said, 
*'  Jehovah  !  "  The  other  "  caught  on,"  and  responded  "  Jesus  !  "  "  Hallelujah  !  " 
said  the  first ;  "  Amen,"  the  other.  They  had  then  exhausted  their  stock  of 
Christian  language,  but  "  Jesus  "  had  proved  their  bi-otherhood.]  The  world  is 
every  day  girdled  by  a  succession  of  praying  hearts,  who  join  the  Mahometan, 
the  Jew,  the  Theist,  in  drawing  near  to  the  same  God  as  they,  but  who  are 
differentiated  from  even  these  fellow- worshippers  by  this,  that  they  "  call  on  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  One  Baptism,  one  Supper,  one  Prayer,  one 
Mediator,  one  Object  of  prayer  and  worship — Christ.  [The  hymnologies  of  the 
Churches,  largely  common  to  them  all,  the  identical  experiences  of  all  the 
hearts  in  them  all,  who  love  Christ,  vindicate  the  Church-wide  brotherhood.  Let 
them  begin  to  worship,  let  them  begin  to  talk  of  the  inner  life,  and  they  under- 
stand each  other.  Their  common  bond  is  "  the  Name."]  "  One  Christ  died  for 
us  all.  We  all  live  *  in '  the  one  and  the  same  Christ.  We  all  rely  on  the  same 
Saviour.  We  all  pray  to  the  same  God-man.  We  are  diverse  enough,  to  say  that 
we  are  all  '  Christians '  j  we  are  not  too  friendly  with  each  other;  but  our  common 
convergence  upon  Him,  our  common  use  of  His  name  in  prayer,  stamps  us  one ; 
we  are  '  brethren  '  of  that  Brother,  '  theirs  and  ours.' " 

Observe  (IV.)  The  twofold  blessing,  with  a  twofold  source. — A.  ^^  Grace  and 
Peace J" — 1.  "Grace"  is  the  Greek,  Gentile,  secular  word,  originally.  "Peace" 
is  the  Hebrew,  sacred.  Biblical  word.  2.  The  free  and  spontaneous  and 
entirely  voluntary  chaiacter  of  the  bounty  lay  in  the  secular  use  of  the  Greek 
word,  and  fitted  it  to  be  a  vessel  capable  of  receiving  new.  Gospel  contents  and 
meaning.  [Might  not  God  almost  have  said  to  the  Greek  language,  "  Thou 
art  a  chosen  vessel  unto  Me,  to  bear  My  Name,"  etc.  ?]  .  Gospel  "  grace  " 
originates  with  God,  in  the  mere  self -suggesting  love  of  His  heart.  There 
must  be  no  claim  upon  God,  and  no  merit  belonging  to  man,  "  otherwise 
grace  is  no  more  grace "  (Bom.  ix.  6).  3.  The  whole  bounty  of  God  to 
Mankind  is  Grace.  The  distinction  between  Providence  and  Grace  often 
drawn,  is  too  sharp  and  at  bottom  unreal;  at  least  there  is  no  actual 
separation  in  their  practical  working.  God  is  gracious  in  His  Providence — it 
is  mere  undeserved  bounty  for  Christ's  sake  to  a  lost  race.  The  purpose  of  His 
Providence  in  our  life  is  not  merely  or  chiefly  temporal,  immediate  relief, 
convenience,  profit,  happiness,  for  even  His  children  ;  but  all  these  as  part  of  a 
great  scheme  of  a  gracious  education  in  holiness  and  "  conformity  to  the  image 
of  His  Son."  Every  incident  of  "  secular  "  life  is  in  God's  view  ethical,  in  ours 
is  giacious.  4.  Thus  "  grace  "  is  one  of  the  correlatives  of  "  sin,"  in  language 
and  in  the  facts  of  our  life.  It  is  more  than  bounty  to  need ;  it  is  free, 
undeserved  bounty  to  sinners.  5.  The  Gift  is  one  whole  bounty ;  but  we 
approach  it  on  different  sides,  we  draw  upon  its  contents  for  the  special  supply 
of  special  needs  of  our  fallen  or  of  our  regenerate  life ;  at  different  stages  we 
appreciate  different  bearings  of  its  provisions  upon  our  case ;  we  therefore 
distinguish  between  grace  which  freely  forgives,  and  grace  which  sanctifies, 
and  grace  which  enlightens  or  delivers.  But  really  the  gift  was  given  at  one 
giving,  when  Christ  was  given.  In  a  sense  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  grace 
par  excellence  of  the  New  Covenant ;  yet  the  gift  of  Christ  carried  this  further 
gift  within  it.  To  give  the  One  Comforter  involved  and  carried  with  it  as 
certain,  necessary  consequence,  eajsequence,  the  gift  and  coming  and  indwelling 
of  the  Other  Comforter.  Every  operation  of  this  gift  upon  a  sinful  heart, 
first  and  last,  is  grace.  Every  fruit  of  His  redemption  and  of  the  indwelling  of 
That  Other,  grace.     All  good,  all  Godward  movement  within  us,  from  the  first 

0  17 


CHAP.  I.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


and  faintest  to  the  fullest  and  deepest  going  out  of  a  saint's  heart  after  God,  all 
grace.  The  '^  natural "  goodness  of  so  many  children,  the  "  natural  "  goodness 
in  a  few  heathen,  the  early  tenderness  of  conscience  in  those,  the  more  or  less 
of  light  and  moral  sense  in  these,  all  grace,  the  first  workings  of  the  universal 
gift  of  the  Spirit  for  the  sake  of  a  universal  Redeemer.  6.  To  the  fallen  race 
the  grace  is  Redemption  ;  to  the  individual  sinner  it  may  become  Salvation  ;  to  the 
Church,  at  Corinth  for  example,  what  1  One  form  of  the  answer  will  be  "  Peace." 
No  Peace,  if  there  had  been  no  grace ;  no  Peace  for  a  soul  or  a  Church,  if  grace 
were  sinned  away  and  forfeited.  The  "God  of  all  [=  all  forms  of]  grace"  is 
for  one  thiDg  the  "  God  of  peace"  (1  PeL  v.  10  ;  1  Tiiess.  v.  23,  etc.  [where  the 
relation  between  corporate  perfectness  and  peace  is  very  close]).  Peace  and  Grace 
are  "a  twofold  blessing,"  but,  more  profoundly,  one. — 1.  What  is  "Peace" 
to  a  Church  ?  When  we  "  pray  for  the  peace  of  Corinth,"  what  do  we  ask  ? 
A  very  pregnant  word.  Two  Orientals  to  this  day  meet  and  greet  each  other 
with,  "  Peace  be  with  thee."  The  "  Salaam,^^  universal  in  the  East,  becomes 
a  word  of  customary  compliment,  like  that  of  our  own  which  once  was  "  God  be 
by  you."  Peace  meant  all  possible  well-being  to  the  man  saluted.  The  Saviour 
bade  His  disciples  cross  a  house-threshold  with  the  salutation,  "  Peace  be  to  this 
house  " ;  and  the  peace  was  all  possible  family  good,  and  all  possible  personal 
good  to  every  inmate.  Hardly  needs  saying  that  "  peace  "  to  a  Church  is  much 
more  than  rest  from  foes  outside  and  factions  within.  2.  Peace  without 
sometimes  a  doubtful  blessing.  Peace  within  there  must  be,  or  a  Church  cannot 
prosper.  Zion  is  always  a  besieged  city.  The  siege  is  not  always  prosecuted 
with  equal  vigour,  but  it  is  always  proceeding.  The  enemy,  never  far  from 
the  gate,  finds  his  opportunity  when  the  garrison  quarrel  among  themselves. 
Nothing  so  much  weakened  Nebemiah's  hands  as  the  traitors  within  the  walls. 
In  the  last  terrible  overthrow  of  Jerusalem,  from  the  moment  that  faction  and 
strife  amongst  the  defenders  were  added  to  the  awful  list  of  horrors  which  pressed 
upon  the  guilty  city,  capture  by  the  Romans  became  a  certainty.  "  As  much  as 
lieth  in  you  live  peaceably  with  all,"  is  counsel  more  urgent  in  regard  to  our 
dealings  with  the  Church  than  even  with  the  world  outside.  Peace  within 
[cf.  the  factions  at  Corinth]  indispensable.  3.  Shall  ask  for  jt^eace  outside^  with 
some  reserve.  The  infant  Church  of  Palestine  "  had  peace,  and  was  built  up  " 
(Acts  ix.  31).  The  chief  persecutor  was  converted.  The  active  enmity  and 
attention  of  other  Jews  was  diverted  by  some  mad  doings  of  Caligula.  The  Lord 
of  the  Church  chose  outward  peace,  in  view  of  their  weakness,  so  that  in  the 
lull  of  the  storm  the  new-made  converts  were  instructed  and  grew  strong.  Yet 
when  He  has  chosen  to  permit  persecution  and  pressure,  it  has  not  been 
unqualified  evil.  A  common  danger  has  drawn  men  closer  together.  At  such 
times  the  unity  is  more  felt  after,  and  made  more  evident  than  the  diversities. 
The    testing-time    sifts  out  unfaithful   members.      Faithful  ones  become  more 


thorough,  as  a  necessity  of  their  own  safety.  The  walls  are  often  built  most 
diligently  and  securely  in  "troublous  times"  (Dan.  ix.  5).  The  Church  may 
not  pray  for  it,  but  many  a  worse  thing  for  the  real  peace  of  a  Church  may 
happen  than  unpopularity  or  even  persecution.  There  is  no  peace  when  the 
World  and  the  Devil  leave  the  Church  alone,  and  cart  afford  to  do  it.  4.  A 
slumbering  city  by  night  is  at  peace.  There  is  peace  of  the  most  profound 
in  the  streets  swept  by  plague  till  not  a  living  soul  is  left.  "  Peace  "  to  Corinth 
must  not  be  slumber  or  death,  but  wakeful  health  and  life.  A  Church  may 
have  a  peace  imaged  by  the  decorous  quiet  of  an  English  town,  once  foremost 
in  the  country's  history  and  commerce,  but  now  a  stranded  vessel  forsaken  by  the 
changed  course  of  the  current  of  modern  business  or  trade ;  the  sluggard  peace 
of  honourable  history  and  inheiited  traditions,  of  exceeding  present-day 
respectability,  but  of  slow  decay.     The  true  peace  of  a  Church  is  rather  the 

18 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  I. 


tumult  and  throng  of  busy  thoroughfares ;  of  an  increasing  roll  of  citizenship ; 
of    an    eager,   active  population  and   a   vigorous,   honourable  record  of  to-day. 

5.  The  peace  of  a  Church,  as  of  a  city,  means  citizens  who  have  this  "  peace  " 
at  heart ;  of  broad  view,  of  great  public  spirit,  of  large  heart ;  ready  to  put 
the  corporate  interest  of  the  Church  before  their  own  comfort  or  convenience  or 
preferences ;  all,  in  diverse  ways,  self-denyingly  seeking  the  good  of  the  whole. 

6.  Most  deeply  of  all,  Peace  to  a  Church  means  Holiness.  Its  people  are  a 
holy  people.  Its  well-being  is  the  sum  total  of  the  well-being  of  them  all.  Sin 
is  its,  and  their,  weakness ;  holiness  its,  and  their,  well-being  and  peace.  Wealth 
may  pour  into  the  treasury;  influence,  of  a  sort,  may  be  increasingly  wielded; 
even  numbers  may  multiply  ;  and  yet  upon  a  Church,  as  upon  a  man,  God's 
verdict  may  be  :  "  There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked."  For  a  sleeping,  dead, 
indolent,  apathetic,  unholy  Church  there  is  always  the  peril  that  "  the  things 
which  belong  unto  its  peace  should  be "  for  ever  "  hid  from  its  eyes " 
(Luke  xix.  42). 

B.  The  "  Father^''  and  "  Christ^ — As  the  twofold  blessing  is  fundamentally 
one  blessing,  so  the  twofold  source  is  fundamentally  one  Divine  Source.     1.  In 
the  fullest  form  of  the  Pauline  salutation  we  have  "  grace,  mercy,  and  peace " 
(1  Tim.  i.  2).     In  the  earliest  we  have  "grace  and  peace"  only,  without  even 
the  indication  of  their  source  (1  Thess.  i.  1.)     An  interesting  piece  of  doctrinal 
development  for    our  study ;  as   though,    with  ripening   years,  and  ever  fuller 
knowledge  and  clearer  insight — the    Spirit  of  God  presiding  over  the  process 
of  mind  and  heart,  guiding  into  real,  if  partial,  truth  at  every  stage,  adding 
detail,  filling  up  the  earlier  outline,  completing  the  revelation  in  its  historical 
disclosure,  as  the  letters  of  the  apostle's  last  days  are  written — Paul  had  at  last 
found  a  formula  which  was  adequate  to  contain  all  he  could  ask,  all  God  could 
give  in  Christ,  to   His  beloved    "  children "  and  converts.     Perhaps,  also,  one 
may  see  the  Spirit  of  God  making  the  ripe,  final,  fullest  form  of  a   Christian 
wish,   or  prayer,  a  not  uncertain   echo  of  the  threefold    high-priestly  formula 
of  benediction  (Num.  vi.  24-26),  and  impressing  upon  it — as  in  some  Epistles, 
notably  the  Ephesian,  it  is  impressed  upon  the  very  form  of  whole  paragraphs 
and  their  underlying    thought— the    significant  threefold  form,  so  wonderfully 
persistent  all  along  the  course  of  Revelation,  and  belonging  to  the  worship  of  the 
angels  and  the  Church  in  heaven  also,  as  well  as  to  the  experience  and  theology 
of  the  Church  on  earth.      2.  Yet  it  would  be  overpressing  the  words  of  Scripture 
to  allot  Grace  to  the  Father,  Mercy  to    the  Son,  Peace  to  the   Spirit.     And 
here  the  two  members  of  the  one  clause  do  not  so  correspond  to  the  members  of 
the  other  clause,  as  that  Grace   should  come  through  the   Father  and  Peace 
through  Christ,  exclusively  in  either  instance.     The  "  Grace  of  God  "  and  the 
"  Peace  of  God  "  are,  equally.  Scriptural,  guiding,  terms.     The  Son  is  invoked  as 
the  source  of  Grace  in  the  concluding  benediction  of  our  two  Corinthian  letters. 
3.  The   old    theologies    spoke    of    an     "  Economical,"    or    a    "  Eedemptional," 
Trinity.     They  were  endeavouring  to   express  the   all-important,  much-solving 
truth  that  we  see  Father  and  Son  [and  Spirit]  not  in  their  absolute,  internal, 
relationships — a  veil   scarcely  ever  lifted  lies  upon  those — but  in  their  united 
working,  and  distinctly  apportioned  departments,  so  to  speak,  in  effectuating  the 
Redeeming  purpose  of  the  Grace  of  God  toward  a  lost  world.     The  Son  is  carrying 
out   the  will  of  Him  that  sent   Him   "about    His  Father's  business";    He  is 
humbling  Himself  to  be  the  channel,  the  essential  condition,  through  which  alone 
the  grace  of  God  can  take  blessed  effect  upon  a  sinner's  heart.     Communication 
between  God  and  man  is  opened  up  in  Christ,  and  in  Him  only.     [This  the  true 
point  of  the  *'  So  "  in  John  iii.  16,  which  is  not  "  so  much,"  "  so  greatly,"  but "  thus," 
in  this  manner  :  "  God  loved  the  world,  and  loved  it  thus,  viz.  that  He  gave  .  .   .  , 
in   order   that   the   love   might  mean   eternal    life   to  every  man  believing  in 

J9 


CHAP.  I.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


Him."  All  God's  communication  with  mankind  has  presupposed  His  grace,  His 
loving,  spontaneous,  active  goodwill  to  them.  It  is  in  the  background  of  every 
approach  towards  man  from  His  side.  And  the  grace  has  reached  us,  can  only 
reach  us,  through  one  conduit  and  channel — Christ.  All  starts  and  originates  in 
grace.  Peace,  like  every  other  expression  of  this  basal  grace,  has  reached  us 
through  Christ.  4.  If  a  man  therefore  refuse  Christ,  or  neglect  Him,  he  can  never 
see  peace.  This  not  as  any  arbitrary,  isolated  decision  of  God  in  his  particular 
case,  but  because  he  puts  away  the  Indispensable  Condition  of  communication 
between  God  and  man.  He  breaks  down  or  refuses  the  only  bridge  over  the 
gulf  between  them.  He  shuts  the  only  door  against  himself,  or  seeks  to  find  or 
make  some  other  rather  than  this.  We  hardly  know  how  to  say  that  the  Son 
conveys  to  a  soul,  or  a  Church,  grace  which  is  the  bounty  of  the  Father. 
The  very  co-ordination  here,  the  two  biacketed,  as  it  wei'e,  under  one  "  from," 
forbids  that.  5.  Consider  the  place  which  Jesus  of  Nazareth  has  come  to  take, 
by  this  early  date,  in  Christian  language,  thought,  life.  Could  we  conceivably 
associate  thus  any  creature,  were  he  never  so  exalted,  as  in  any  sense  the  giver 
of  grace  and  peace  concurrently  with  the  Father,  Jehovah  ? 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—10. 

A.  "To  me  to"  write  "is  Christ." — So  we  might  make  Paul  say,  almost  on 
the  strength  of  this  paragraph.  George  Whitefield  once  said,  toward  the  end 
of  a  letter  to  some  correspondent,  on  some  indifferent  oi*  business  topic,  "  I 
must  have  something  of  Christ  in  all  my  letters,"  and  thereupon  proceeded 
to  subjoin  some  religious  talk.  How  these  verses  bristle  with  "The  Name" 
(3  John  7,  R.y.).  The  lines  are  embroidered,  wrought  throughout,  emblazoned, 
with  the  name.  The  Epistle  closes  in  a  white-heat  of  passionate,  intolerant 
devotion  to  Christ  (xvi.  22).  Here  we  might  not  have  supposed  that  Paul 
had  yet  "  warmed  to  his  subject."  But  he  never  needs  "  warming "  to  this 
subject.  He  is  ready  at  a  moment's  notice,  not  only  to  break  out  into 
thanksgiving  (ver.  4),  but  to  mention  his  Master's  name.  Or  without  notice, 
for  it  is  the  instinct  and  habit  of  his  thought.  The  page  is  emblazoned  with 
'•  The  Name,"  and  indeed  with  the  names.  Paul  is  an  ambassador  (2  Cor.  v.  20) 
introducing  his  business  with  a  proudly  solemn  and  stately  announcement,  in  all 
due  and  ceremonious  form,  of  the  style  and  titles  of  the  King  who  sends  him. 
Paul  is  the  bearer  of  the  mind  and  will  of  a  Son — God's  Son, — a  Son  unique 
of  this  sort, — whose  full  name  and  style  is,  "  Jesus — Christ — His  Son — His  Only 
Son — Our  Lord."  "  Take  notice  of  my  Master's  name  ! "  ["  My  God,"  in  com- 
parison with  the  stately  array  of  names  and  titles  of  his  Master,  seems  quite 
homely,  and  touchingly,  trustfully,  familiar.]  No  wonder  that  the  clever  wit- 
mongers,  the  Antiochians,  hit  off  so  happily  in  their  nickname  the  characteristic 
of  these  Nazarenes.  Their  preachers  were  ever  talking  of  some  one  known 
amongst  themselves  and  their  hearers  as  "  Christ " ;  you  could  not  listen  long 
to  their  utterances  before  His  name  occurred  in  their  discourses.  Did  men  over- 
hear two  of  these  strange  people  conversing  together  in  the  street,  or  anywhere 
else,  they  were  sure  before  very  long  to  bring  in  His  name.  [Cf.  the  Rabbinical 
rule  :  "  Let  not  two  Israelites  meet  and  separate  without  a  word  about  the 
Law."]  He  seemed  always  a  topic  welcome  to  their  lips.  What  should  they 
be  called?  The  Antiochians  would  surely  not  let  them  go  long  without  a 
sobriquet ;  it  would  be  a  reflection  on  the  reputation  of  their  city  to  let  these 
people  slip  by  unnamed.  *'  Call  them  '  Christmn^ ' ! "  Here  Christ  is  in  all  | 
touches  all;  the  whole  Church,  each  individual  member;  every  gift;  all  the 
fellowship;  and  gathers  up  to  Himself  all  hope  and  desire.  Past,  Present, 
Future,  all  are  linked  with  Christ. 

20 


MOMlLEflC  COMMENTARY :   t.    CORINTHIANS,      chap.  1. 


B.  I.  The  Past  was  full  of  Him. — As  they  look  backward  along  the  per- 
spective of  the  Past  they  see  that  with  Him  all  the  lines  of  present  life  and 
blessing  have  originated.  He  is  their  radiant  point.  From  the  first,  all  the 
"  grace  "  and  gifts  which  now  so  enrich  them,  that  they  "  corns  behind  in  no  gift^^ 
were  all  long  ago  given  "  in  Him  "  (ver.  4).  Potentially  every  gift  was  in  that 
first  Unspeakable  Gift "  (see  under  2  Cor.  i.  20). 

II.  The  Present  is  full  of  Him. — 1.  He  is  the  basis  and  bond  of  their  fellow- 
ship.— Besides  the  great,  deep  cleft  yawning  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  there 
were  divisions  of  race  dividing  Gentile  from  Gentile ;  divisions  of  sex ;  divisions 
of  station,  slave  from  master,  poor  from  rich  :  but  out  of  this  medley  material 
a  new  Unity  was  being  created,  a  new  Communion,  "  The  Fellowship  of  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Outside  of  Him  they  may  either  be  separate  and 
independent  units,  or  may  group  themselves  on  other  lines  or  round  other 
nuclei  of  opinion  or  object  in  life.  Their  common  relation  to  Him  gives  them 
a  relation  to  each  other.  "Friends  of  the  same  Friend  are  friends  of  one 
another  "  here,  though  on  all  other  grounds  they  be  strangers  from  the  ends  of 
the  earth.  Only  in  the  One  whose  manhood  was,  in  the  truest  sense,  of  no 
nationality,  though  He  sprung  from  one  special  branch  of  the  great  human 
family — only  in  the  One  who  was  so  entirely  "  The  Son  of  Man  "  that  no  race, 
no  sex,  no  rank,  no  age,  has  ever  felt  Him  a  Jew,  or  alien  from  itself — could 
there  be  a  basis  for  a  world-wide  fellowship.  Only  such  a  Brother  and  Redeemer 
of  all  men  alike,  could  draw  together  and  hold  together  the  diverse  elements 
which  were  included  within  the  sacred  circle  and  family  bond  of  the  ^''fellow- 
ship." Take  the  Second  Adam  away,  the  new  Race,  the  new  Humanity,  the 
Church,  resolves  itself  into  its  units  again,  with  their  isolation  and  perhaps 
their  antagonisms.  Their  fellowship  is  realised  as  they  worship.  The  world 
over,  prayer  and  praise  are  going  up  to  God,  the  Great  Object  of  worship ; 
but  Christian  worship  converges  to  the  throne  through  one  Door  and  Avenue 
of  approach — Christ.  The  differentia  of  Christian  worship,  its  "note"  of  unity 
amidst  all  its  diversity,  is  that  "  all  in  every  place  call  upon  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord."  Christian  worship,  all  Christian  intercourse  with  God,  passes 
through  Him.     He  has  made  it  possible. 

2.  He  is  the  beginning  and  the  continuance  of  their  holiness. — They  were 
sanctified  "  in  Him"  with  a  relative  holiness,  from  the  beginning,  and  all 
realisation  of  this  ideal,  all  their  "  confirmation  "  in  their  holy  status^  is  distinctly 
His  work  (ver.  8).  And  this  stands  closely  connected  in  fact  with  another 
"  confirmation"  that  of  "  the  testimony  of  Christ"  The  strength  is  from  no 
outward  support  merely  or  chiefly,  but  from  within.  [The  weak  spine  may 
be  "  confirmed  "  by  the  iron  supports  strapped  on  outside  the  patient's  body. 
The  best  "  confirmation  "  would  be  that  within,  the  strengthening  of  the  ^pine 
itself.]  They  stand  strong,  four-square  to  all  blasts,  firm  amidst  all  assaults, 
until  "  the  End "  (xv.  24,  perhaps),  not  alone,  nor  most  of  all,  because  He 
directly  and  from  without  upholds  them,  but  because  within  them  "  the 
testimony  is  confirmed."  Every  point  of  the  witness,  both  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
and  of  Apostles,  concerning  Christ  is  verified  in  their  experience.  They  know 
that  He  is  a  Saviour,  and  Divine,  for  He  is  that  to  them.  There  is  no  promise, 
implied  or  expressed,  whose  root  is  in  Him,  which  they  may  not  prove,  and 
are  not  proving,  to  be  true.  They  stand  "  confirmed "  because  they  take  Him 
to  be  "  Wisdom,  Righteousness,  Sanctification,  Redemption  "  (ver.  30).  In  the 
fullest  sense  they  find  the  pledges  of  His  very  Name,  "Jesus,"  abundantly 
redeemed,  and  are  kept  with  a  continuous  Salvation.  The  external  testimony 
answers  point  by  point  to  the  internal  experiences.  It  is  "  confirmed  in  "  them 
by  the  very  same  facts  of  grace  which  together  make  up  their  "  confirmation  " 
also.     There  is  no   believer  in  Christianity  like  the  man  in  whom  its  great 

21 


CHAP.  I.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


facts  have  become  experiences.  Ought  we  to  say  that  there  is  no  real  believer 
in  Christianity  except  such  a  man  ?     And  the  testimony  is  "  of  Christ '^ 

3.  What  Paul  and  his  fellow- workers  had  to  o^ffer  to  Corinth  and  the  world 
was  a  "  testimony  ."—They  were  witnesses,  not  philosophers ;  reporters,  not 
authors ;  they  handed  on  what  was  first  given  to  them,  and  did  not  propose  for 
acceptance  what  they  had  themselves  in  any  sense  devised.  It  is  true  that 
the  testimony  has  passed  through  their  own  mind ;  each  of  them  puts  his  own 
individuality  upon  the  form  of  delivery ;  each  of  them  is  entrusted  with  only 
part ;  to  some  is  given  more  than  to  others,  but  to  each  probably  just  that 
which  he  could  naturally  best  appreciate.  [The  burner  gives  its  own  size  and 
shape  to  the  jet  of  burning  gas  which  it  passes.  The  jet  of  the  fountain 
also  gives  shape  to  the  stream  of  water  issuing  from  it.  A  group  of  burners, 
passing  out  the  gas  from  one  common  supply-pipe,  will  give  each  its  own  shape 
and  size  of  flame,  whilst  contributing  to  the  one  light.  (Such  illustrations  are  of 
course  not  to  be  pressed  far).]  Yet  they  are  witnesses,  and  no  more.  As  to  the 
great  fundamental,  historical  facts  in  which  Christianity  rests,  they  speak  as 
bearing  testimony.  When  they  preach  doctrines  which  are  the  superstructure 
upon  or  the  consequences  of,  the  facts,  these  are  not  their  own  inferences,  or 
deductions,  or  speculations.  They  are  reporters  of  what  the  Spirit  of  God  has  told 
them.  This  narrowed  range  of  work  and  function — simply  witness -bearing — was 
their  strength ;  as  it  is  still  the  strength  of  the  preacher  and  worker.  Every 
great  religious  awakening  affords  many  examples  of  the  power  of  testimony, 
even  when  that  testimony  is  nothing  more  than  the  story  of  the  speaker's 
conversion  and  his  "  present  experience."  It  has  often  been  from  rude  lips  a 
mighty  power  with  cultured  people.  The  facts  of  the  Gospel  story,  told  with 
fieshness  and  reality,  and  with  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  have,  from 
Pentecost  onwards,  been  very  effective  preaching, — the  most  effective.  Christian 
speculation  has  its  time,  and  place,  and  value.  There  is  a  philosophy  of 
Christianity.  But  the  working  force,  the  real  lever-power,  of  it  lies  in  its 
^^  testimony."  That  ^^  confirmed  ^^  ^'- confirms'^  Christians.  Noteworthy  is  the 
summary  of  all  Apostolic  messages  :  "the  testimony  of  Christ  ^  Comparing  this 
with  ii.  1,  "the  testimony  of  God,''  we  are  guided  to  the  conclusion  that  in  the 
latter  case  God  is  regarded  as  the  Propiietor  and  Source,  in  the  former  Christ 
is  regarded  as  the  great  Subject.  Indeed,  as  the  One  Subject ;  for  He  sum- 
marises the  Gospel.  All  its  topics  are  "broken  lights"  of  Him.  He  is  the 
Topic.  A  scheme  of  doctrine,  a  sermon  from  a  Christian  pulpit,  which  does 
not  clearly  show  the  relation  of  any  and  every  topic  to  Christ,  is  not  a 
Christian  scheme  or  a  Christian  sermon.  [That  is  no  Christian  religious  life 
in  which  He  is  not  central.]  As  a  matter  of  notorious,  and  often  verified, 
result  a  "  Christianity  "  (if  it  borrow  the  name)  whose  Christ  is  not  Divine, 
and  therefore  not  the  dominating  Name  and  influence  a  Divine  Person  must 
of  necessity  be,  is  not  a  Christianity  that  moves  the  world,  though  for  a  time 
it  may  give  satisfaction  to  a  few.  The  men  who  move  the  masses  and  "  confirm  " 
the  Church  are  "  witnesses,"  and  witnesses  who  report  what  they  see  and  know 
in  Christ.  They  exhibit  Him,.  He  is  the  great  Subject  of  all  that  preaching 
which  is  the  instrument  of  strengthening  the  religious  life. 

III.  The  future  is  full  of  Christ. — 1.  He  is  the  convergent  point  of  all  the 
perspective  of  the  years  to  come. — At  the  end  of  the  vista  of  the  personal  life,  His 
people  see  Christ.  They  "  depart  and  are  with  Christ."  And  the  end  of  the 
vista  of  history  is  to  them  the  blaze  of  the  glory  of  His  "  revelation,"  and  the 
dread  solemnities  of  His  "  Day."  The  "  call "  of  the  Past  was  into  fellowship 
in  Him.  The  ^'- coifirmation"  of  the  Present  is  in  Him.  The  ^^  waiting  "  ior 
the  Future  turns  toward  Him.  [Is  the  "Revelation"  for  His  people,  His 
*'  Day  "  for  His  enemies  ?]     The  '*  Daj  of  Christ "  is,  most  broadly  stated,  a 

22 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  i. 


period  with  its  historical  contents,  extending  from  His  first  Coming  to  His 
second.  Within  it  are  several  subsidiary  "  days  of  Christ,"  each  of  which 
reproduces  in  miniature  the  features  of  "the  Day"  on  the  largest  scale.  Hence 
what  is  true  of  the  whole  "  Day  of  Christ," — which  is  also  a  continuous 
"  Revelation " — was  true  of  the  historical  Advent  and  its  day,  which  began 
the  larger  "  Day " ;  and  will  be  true  of  the  "  Day,"  specially  so  called,  which 
closes  the  period.  In  the  course  of  it  are  episodes,  special  incidents  or  events, 
each  of  which  is  a  real  "coming"  and  "revelation"  of  Christ,  and  marks  a 
"  day  of  the  Son  of  Man."  His  "revelations"  and  "days"  have  all  of  them 
three  characteristics:  Scrutiny  ["The  thoughts  of  many  hearts  shall  be  re- 
vealed," (Luke  ii.  35)] ;  Judgment,  i.e.  judicial  discrimination  of,  and  verdict 
on,  character  and  conduct,  inevitable  in,  and  from,  the  moment  that  men,  or 
churches,  or  nations,  or  systems,  come  into  contact  with  Christ,  their  touchstone 
[John  ix.  39] ;  Sentence,  a  feature  only  slightly  emphasised  as  yet,  but  to  be  the 
prominent  one  of  the  latest  "  Day  of  Christ." 

2.  To  His  people  His  "  revelation  "  is  a  Dawn. — There  are  mysterious,  per- 
plexing hints  of  a  darkest  hour  before  that  dawn.  \^E.g.  Luke  xviii.  8  ;  2  Thess. 
ii.  3.]  It  is  confessedly  difficult  to  arrange  the  scattered  intimations  in  Scrip- 
ture as  to  the  sub-final  days  of  the  present  Age,  into  any  coherent,  consistent 
programme ;  as  difficult  as  it  would  have  been  for  even  the  prophets  of  fullest 
knowledge  and  largest  illumination  in  Old  Testament  days  to  have  drawn  up 
from  the  body  of  Old  Testament  intimations  any  programme  of  the  First  Advent 
of  Christ.  We  are  in  their  position  :  "  Searching  what  or  what  manner  of 
times  the  Spirit  .  .  .  did  signify  "  when  He  gave  the  New  Testament  prophetic 
indication  as  to  the  future,  the  "  Revelation "  and  the  "  Day."  The  relation 
between  even  these  two  great  facts  is  obscure.  If  the  problem  had  not  been 
as  yet  insoluble,  the  pains  and  learning  spent  upon  it  would  long  ago  have 
resulted  in  some  solution  in  which  all,  or  most,  expositors  would  have  been 
agreed.  Practically  the  Church  has,  age  after  age,  "  waited  for  the  revelation" 
as  the  individual  waits  day  by  day  for  death.  It  is  an  event  certain,  but  the 
time  of  it  unknown.  A  constant  preparedness  for  it  is  cultivated,  and,  this  made 
sure,  the  man — and  the  Church— go  steadily  on  with  the  daily  tasks,  "  doing 
what  the  hand  finds  to  do,"  and  doing  it  "  with  their  might."  The  end,  whether 
to  the  man  or  the  Church,  must  be  reckoned  with  as  of  urgent  present  import- 
ance, even  though  in  fact  it  may  only  come  after  long  delay.  It  is  ever  im- 
pending, though  it  may  be  long  before  it  falls ;  and  this  not  only  keeps  a  helpful 
fear  awake,  but  keeps  hope  and  expectation  and  desire  in  active  exercise.  The 
"  waiting  "  has  all  these  elements  in  it.  The  sinner  may  well  stand  in  dread  at 
the  resistless,  untarrying,  sure  approach  of  "  the  Day  "  ;  like  the  wretch  in  the 
condemned  cell  "  waiting  for  "  the  day  of  the  executed  sentence.  The  Christian 
man  "  loves  the  Appearing "  of  his  Lord.  His  eye  is  ever  turning  to  the 
quarter  from  which  his  help  shall  come ;  he  is  ever — as  the  Church  also  has 
been  doing  for  ages — looking  with  eager  gaze  for  the  first  sign  of  the  breaking 
of  that  day,  when  the  glory  of  His  revealing  shall  burst  in  upon  the  unbelieving, 
persecuting,  daringly  blasphemous,  world  [2  Thess.  ii.  8],  and  the  Lord  and  His 
people  shall  together  stand  revealed  in  their  true  and  native  glory  as  "  sons  of 
God."  All  his  highest  aims  and  work  will  then  enter  upon  their  eternal  fulfil- 
ment ;  all  his  best  hopes  will  then  begin  their  eternal  realisation.  No  wonder 
they  "  wait." 

3.  No  wonder  that  "  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  is  PauVs  strong  ground 
of  appeal. — The  common  hope,  the  common  Lord,  make  them  more  closely  one 
than  does  any  other  bond  which  holds  men  together.  They  understand  each 
other  with  a  deep,  quick  instinct,  such  as  no  other,  no  natural,  community  of 
sympathy  and  interests  creates.     There  is  no  rallying  point  like  this  ;  none  like 

23 


CHAP.  I.     HOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY :   I.    CORINTHIANS. 


Him.  Speak  His  name,  and  it  should  awaken  the  harmonious  response  of 
heart  to  heart,  where  all  are  first  tuned  to  respond  to  It.  ^'  Brethren,  do  you 
split  into  your  parties?  Do  you  cherish  and  foment  your  antagonisms? 
Brethren  !  Brethren  !  Do  you  forget  that  you  are  all  His  together,  that  you 
are  all  together  pledged  to  Him ;  that  you  are  looking  forward  together  to 
His  *  revelation  '  1  You  to  be  divided,  who  are  redeemed  by  the  same  blood  of 
the  same  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  You,  who  are  together  '"sanctified  in'  the  same 
Christ,  ^enriched  in'  Him;  who  ^  call' — as  none  others  do — ^  upon  His  name ' ; 
you,  whose  whole  life,  through  and  through,  is  '  Chinst '  ? "  Surely  to  mention 
"  The  Name  "  ought  to  hush  all  party  clamour,  ought  to  make  them  close  up  all 
party  rents  and  schisms,  and  ^^join  them  perfectly  together  in  the  same  mind 
and  the  same  judgment."  If  the  spell  of  The  Name  do  not  act,  nothing  will. 
If  it  be  the  uplifted  banner,  then  round  it  should  gather  a  compactly  united 
host;  too  earnest,  too  thoroughly  one,  for  even  partisan  *'  sparring  in  the  ranks." 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  10—17. 

I.  There  may  be  an  over-valuation  of  men  [ministers]. 

II.  There  may  be  an  over-valuation  of  baptism  [representative  in  this,, 
perhaps,  of  Christian  ordinances  generally]. 

1.  Men  over-valued. — 1.  All  these  deserved  much  esteem  and  consideration  and 
affection  at  the  hands  of  the  Corinthians.  Certainly  Paul  did,  and  his  successor 
Apollos.  To  these,  particularly  to  Paul,  very  many  of  the  Corinthians  "  owed 
their  own  selves  also"  (Philem.  19).  No  other  man  can  ever  take  quite  the 
same  place  in  a  Christian's  memory  and  affection  as  does  he  who  led  him  to 
the  light,  and  to  Christ.  It  is  no  wonder  that  the  man  who  finds  the  ministra- 
tions of  an  Apollos — "  eloquent,  and  mighty  in  the  Scriptures,"  and  greatly 
filled  with  the  Spirit — to  be  very  effectual  in  the  sustaining  and  education  of 
his  religious  life,  should  set  his  Apollos  on  a  high  place  in  his  thought  and 
prayers  and  love.  The  grateful,  intelligent  love  of  those  to  whom  a  ministry 
is  a  perpetual  grace  and  assistance,  is  a  help  to  the  minister  himself,  and  a 
reward  not  to  be  despised,  next  to  the  smile  of  his  Master.  Even  Cephas  did 
a  real  and  glorious  work  for  the  Church ;  in  many  respects  complementary 
to  that  of  Paul.  No  need  to  exalt  Paul  by  disparaging  Peter.  All  this 
affectionate,  loyal  bonding  of  ministry  and  people  is  a  great  blessing  and  a 
great  help  to  both  preacher  and  people.  Paul  very  gratefully  remembers  in 
Galatia,  with  a  remembrance  not  without  a  pang  as  he  thought  of  the  manifest 
and  rapid  change,  "Ye  received  me  ...  as  Christ  Jesus"  (Gal.  iv.  14). 
If,  that  is,  he  had  been  the  Master  instead  of  the  servant,  he  could  scarcely 
have  had  a  warmer  welcome.  [This  loyalty  and  affectionate  devotion  may, 
similarly,  and  within  the  same  limits,  rightly  be  extended  to  the  special  branch 
of  the  Christian  Church  to  which  a  man  owes  the  awakening  and  the  cultivation 
of  his  spiritual  life.  And,  by  a  very  natural  application  of  the  same  principle, 
the  special  form  of  "  Gospel,"  or  the  special  type  of  Truth,  "  under  "  which  a 
Christian  man  has  grown  up  to  his  present  knowledge  and  strength  of  Christian 
character,  may  well  call  forth  and  gather  to  itself  a  devotion  of  grateful  support, 
until  a  man  proudly  and  affectionately  ranges  himself  under  the  denominational 
banner  of  Calvin  or  of  Wesley,  of  Cephas  or  of  Paul.] 

2.  But  they  were  receiving  more  than  their  due  ;  though  probably  Cephas  was 
as  blameless  as  were  Paul  and  Apollos,  and  not  more  responsible  for  the  sinful 
partisanship  which  chose  his  name  for  its  banner,  than  were  they  for  the  use 
made  of  their  own.  Certainly  not  even  Gal.  ii.  gives  any  warrant  for  supposing 
any  sort  of  personal  feeling  between  the  two  men.     That  the  Galatians  should 

24 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I   CORINTHIANS.     cfiAt>.  1. 


have  welcomed  Paul  almost  as  if  he  had  been  Paul's  Lord,  was  one  thing ;  that 
the  Corinthians  should  exalt  and  fight  for  him  or  for  any  other  human  teacher 
as  if  it  were  for  the  very  Lord  Himself,  was  quite  a  different  matter.  It  had 
been  innocent  and  natural  affection  which,  with  a  stretch  of  language  easily 
understood,  he  had  recalled  so  gratefully  when  writing  to  the  Galatians.  The 
partisan  devotion  which  he  so  strongly  rebukes  at  Corinth  was  such  as  could 
hardly  have  been  greater  if  {horrescit  ref evens)  Paul  himself  were  their  crucified 
Saviour,  or  if  their  baptism  had  pledged  them  to  him  in  covenant  bond. 

3.  It  was  idolatrous. — No,  there  is  but  one  Head  and  King,  ruling  over  all 
alike ;  "  Christ  is  not  divided.''  There  is  but  one  Priest,  He  who  is  Priest 
and  Victim,  Ambassador  and  Intercessor,  in  unapproachable,  incommunicable, 
dignity  ;  "  Paul  is  not  crucified  for  themP  There  is  but  one  Teacher,  into 
obedience  to  whom  they  were  baptized ;  Paul  and  the  rest  are  only  teachers 
at  secondhand,  witnesses,  reporters,  of  what  they  have  first  heard  from  Him. 
The  special  theological  system  of  one's  Church,  the  favourite,  or  distinguishing, 
doctrine  of  one's  best-loved  teacher,  must  not  be  exalted  into  unchallengeable, 
Divinely  authoritative,  dogma.  It  must  always  be  held  subject  to  its  accord- 
ance with  the  teaching  of  the  Highest  Authority.  Neither  over  the  intellect 
nor  over  the  conscience  has  any  man  the  final  authority  which  belongs  to  Christ 
alone,  speaking  in  the  Word  and  through  the  Spirit.  And  if  belonging  to 
any  particular  Church,  or  accepting  its  creed,  and  "  sitting  under  "  its  orthodox 
ministry,  should  subtilely  become  to  the  soul  almost  a  ground  of  hope  or  even 
of  assurance  of  salvation,  it  would  go  perilously  near  to  trusting  in  a  "  Faul 
crucified.''  A  faithful  and  wise  minister  of  Christ  will  point  his  people  to 
Christ  and  away  from  himself;  he  will  stand  clear  of  everything  like  strife 
and  partisanship,  even  though  he  be  innocently  the  cause  of  it,  and  an  exag- 
gerated desire  to  honour  him  be  the  occasion ;  he  will  keep  the  great  object  of 
his  calling  steadily  in  view,  and  not  even  "  ha2ytize,"  if  that  be  made  to  mean 
too  much  by  over-zealous  and  very  ill-advised  friends  (vers.  13-17).  [One's 
Church  and  one's  creed  in  like  manner  must  be  helps  to  Christ,  and  may  not 
arrest  on  the  way,  and  detain  for  themselves,  devotion  and  allegiance  which 
belong  of  right  to  Christ  alone.]  [Note  how  the  Baptist  was  content  to  be 
nobody — only  "  a  Voice."  *'  Listen  to  me,  but  look  at  Him ;  go  to  Him. 
Behold  the  Lamb  "  (John  i.  23,  36).  ''  We  preach  Christ  Jesus  as  the  Lord ; 
ourselves  as  your  servants"  (2  Cor.  iv.  5).]  [Note  also  that  there  may  be  a 
partisanship  '*ybr  Christ,"  forsooth,  which  is  as  narrow  and  unholy  as  that  for 
Paul  or  Apollos.]  [Allegiance  to  Christ  unites  the  Church  (ver.  10) ;  allegiance 
to  man  divides  it.^ 

II.  Baptism  over-valued. — The  possibihty  of  this  is  a  matter  of  inference 
from  what  Paul  states  had  been  his  own  line  of  action.  That  man  may  be 
over- valued  is  matter  of  direct  assertion.  But  it  may  be  fairly  gathered  from 
his  own  declaration  that  he  very  rarely  baptized  a  convert,  that  to  him  the 
ordinance  did  not  occupy  the  place  which  some  would  give  it — a  thing  necessary 
to  salvation,  and  only  to  be  administered  by  a  man  belonging  to  a  special 
order.  [Peter  did  not  himself  baptize  the  souls  he  had  gathered  in  the  house 
of  Cornelius.  "  He  commanded  them  to  be  baptized  "  (Acts  x.  48).  Indeed, 
they  were  hardly  of  his  ingathering  at  all ;  the  Spirit  fell  upon  them  and  did 
His  work,  before  Peter  had  scarcely  more  than  begun  his  address  (ver.  41).]  For 
an  incidental  and  purely  personal  reason,  indeed,  Paul  actually  "  thanks  God  " 
that  not  many  at  Corinth  could  say  that  his  hands  had  administered  baptism 
to  them.  It  must  not  he  under-valued.  Paul  would  not  have  left  his  converts 
unbaptized  altogether.  From  no  New  Testament  writer  do  we  learn  better  and 
more  fully  the  covenant  theology  which  underlies  baptism,  and  especially  that 
of  the  children.     It  must  neither  be  exalted  into  a  necessary  means  of  a  real 

2d 


CHAP.  I.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


salvation,  nor  emptied  of  all  significance  except  that  of  a  mere  dedicatory  service 
with  an  element  of  thanksgiving.  "  Baptized  into  the  name  of  Paul "  (like 
''  baptized  unto  Moses,"  x.  2)  would,  if  such  a  thing  had  been  possible,  have 
meant  much  more  than  that.  The  startling  suggestion  of  such  a  parallel  case 
may  serve  to  expound  what  "  baptized  in  the  name  of  Christ"  would  mean  to 
Paul.  Every  Jewish,  or  Mahometan,  or  heathen,  father  understands  very  well 
that  to  allow  his  child  to  be  baptized  means  more  than  a  simple  dedication  to 
the  God  of  the  Christian  worship.  Between  the  Lord  of  the  Covenant  and  the 
subject  of  the  ordinance  it  sets  up  a  covenant  bond,  binding  on  both  sides, 
officially  recognising  the  rights,  and  (so  to  speak)  registering  the  claim,  of  the 
baptized  one  to  all  the  grace  of  the  Christian  scheme.  The  Master  had  said, 
"  Go  ye  and  make  disciples  .  .  .  baptizing  them  .  .  .  teaching  them,"  etc. 
Both  are  obligatory.  But  at  least  Paul  clearly  ranked  the  teaching  before  the 
ordinance,  if  for  any  reason  (as  was,  in  fact,  the  case  at  Corinth)  choice  must 
needs  be  made.  He  relied  for  tho  fulfilment  of  the  ''  marching  orders  "  of  the 
Church,  for  the  execution  of  his  own  part  of  the  work,  rather  upon  securing 
the  response  of  the  intelligence  and  heart  to  the  instruction  and  appeal  of  the 
preacher.  A  ')nere  baptism  of  the  unconscious  infant  or  the  indifferent  adult, 
and  much  more  the  wholesale  baptism  of  Saxons  or  Indians,  are  no  fulfilment  of 
the  Church's  commission.  No  ordinance,  however  binding,  or  significant,  or 
precious  and  really  helpful,  can  take  the  place  of  such  a  '"''preaching  of  the 
Gospel " — in  all  the  round  of  that  by  no  means  "  simple  "  function  ! — as  secures 
the  attention,  and  wins  the  assent,  and  conquers  the  heart. 


HOMILETIC   ANALYSIS.— Verses  18—31. 

Grouping  the  topics  of  the  paragraph  around  ver.  29,  we  have  : — 
I.  A  great  principle  of  God's  government  consistently  carried  out.  God 
alone  must  be  exalted. — 1.  In  threefold  reiteration  here.  "  That  no  flesh  should 
glory  ^ — or  literally,  "  that  all  flesh  should  not  glory,''^ — "  in  His  presence  "  ("  before 
God,"  better  reading,  ver.  29);  '''■He  that  glorieth  .  .  .  in  the  Lord^^  (ver.  31); 
and  the  triumphant  laugh  in  the  face  of  the  world's  wisest  ones,  *^  Where  is  the 
wise  ?  "  etc.  (ver.  20).  Paul  stands  by  the  cross  of  "  the  Lord  of  Glory,"  and 
casts  his  exultant  glance  around.  The  Cross  of  Christ  has  been  planted,  like 
God's  Boyal  Standard,  in  the  midst  of  the  battle-field.  ISTow  the  field  is  clear. 
Beaten,  discomfited,  discredited,  by  God's  ^'•foolish "  method,  the  competing 
"  ivisdoms  of  the  ivorld  "  have  vanished,  or  are  vanishing,  leaving  the  cross  of  Christ 
in  possession  !  [So  in  the  Day  of  Questions,  the  last  day  of  the  Lord's  public 
ministry,  every  typical  world's-wise-man  assailed  Him.  But  He  held  His  own, 
and  one  after  another  slunk  away  beaten,  uTitil  at  last  He  Himself  completed  the 
rout  by  turning  questioner,  and  finally  silencing  every  opponent  with  His  problem 
about  David's  Lord  and  David's  Son  (Matt,  xxii.).]  2.  The  Old  Testament  origin 
of  Paul's  quotation,  here  and  in  2  Cor.  x.  17  (from  Jer.  ix.  23,  24),  carries  back 
the  principle  into  the  earlier  dispensation,  and  shows  that  the  Spirit  guided  him 
with  a  sure  and  right  instinct  to  lay  his  hand  upon  a  great  and  perennially 
valid  principle  of  all  God's  rule  and  administration  of  His  government;  one 
that  must  obtain  wherever  there  are  creatures  capable  of  knowing  Him.  In  no 
world  can  it  be  conceived  that  this  great  law  should  not  be  in  force.  He  is 
the  One  and  Only  Being  who  can  make  Himself  the  centre  and  object  of  all 
intention  and  activity,  and  who  can  claim  that  all  other  life  than  His  own  should 
converge  upon  Him  as  its  Object  and  End  and  Goal.  In  us  such  self-centering 
is  of  the  very  essence  of  Sin ;  it  is  our  root-rebellion  against  our  God.  It  is  a 
prime  and  simple  necessity  of  His  position  and  character  and  very  Being,     To 

26 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,      chap.  i. 


ask  less,  to  permit  less,  to  man  or  to  any  other  creature,  were  to  abdicate  His 
position  as  God.  The  Bible  sets  Him  forth  abundantly  full,  full  to  the  over- 
flow, of  love  ;  His  mercy  is  eagerly  ready  and  "  forward  "  to  bless ;  the  first 
advance  to  union  between  Himself  and  sinners  has  always  come  from  His  side. 
His  ear  is  always  open  to  the  cry  of  the  feeblest,  bowing  Himself  to  the  man 
of  contrite  and  trembling  heart ;  indeed,  loving  to  "  dwell  with  "  such  a  man 
(Isa.  Ivii.  15,  Ixvi.  2).  Yet  the  condescension  is  never  exhibited  at  the 
expense  of  the  majesty.  "  He  is  God  and  none  else.  His  honour  will  He  not 
give  to  another."  To  compare  great  and  small,  and  with  all  reverence  :  men 
hear  from  time  to  time  of  our  Queen  performing  acts  of  kindly  condescension 
and  of  simple  womanly  kindness,  to  the  sick  and  poor  and  aged.  But  if  any 
presumed  upon  this  to  exercise  undue  familiarity  as  to  an  equal,  she  would  be 
the  first  to  draw  back.  To  allow  another  on  some  state  occasion  to  occupy 
the  throne  in  her  presence,  would  not  be  condescension,  but  abdication.  The 
Creator  and  the  creature  can  never  with  His  consent  even  seem  to  change 
places.  The  world's  "  wisdom  "  is  rooted  in  the  pride  of  human  nature  in  itself 
and  its  powers  of  discovery.  No  field  can  be  suppo:  ed  beyond  its  exploration ; 
no  height,  or  depth,  or  vastest  extension  of  truth,  but  it  can  take  in  all.  If  God 
hide  Himself,  then  there  is  no  God  ;  this  wisdom  can  find  none.  If  His  ways 
pass  its  systematisation,  or  do  not  commend  themselves  to  the  world's  judgment 
or  "  moral  sense,"  they  are  evil  or  folly.  Over  all  that  piide  of  intellect  He 
must  win  a  victory.  To  men  the  perpetually  attractive  temptation  is,  "  Ye 
shall  be  as  God,  knowing  .  .  .  ."  Human  intellect  must  lower  its  high-borne 
pennon  in  the  presence  of  the  Boyal  Standaid  of  God's  wisdom.  The  proud 
intellect  which  will  acknowledge  neither  limitation  nor  error,  the  proud  heart 
which  will  own  no  weakness  or  sin,  must  alike  bow  in  the  presence  of  God. 
It  is  true  of  the  whole  arrangements  for  the  spread  of  the  Gospel ;  it  is  true  of 
the  provisions  in  the  Gospel  for  the  salvation  of  the  individual  siiwer. 

II.  Seen  in  the  arrangements  for  the  spread  of  the  Gospel. — 1.  Hardly 
necessary  to  point  out  the  once  current,  customary  misconception  of  Paul's  words, 
"  the  foolishness  of  pieaching."  Even  an  English  reader  of  the  R.V.,  with 
its  margin,  may  now  see  that  the  ^^  folly  "  lay  in  the  matter  of  the  preacher's 
message,  and  not  at  all  in  that  paiticular  method  of  delivering  it  (ver.  21). 
Vild  voce  instruction  and  appeal  is  one  of  the  aptest  methods  of  winning 
attention  and  securing  conviction.  For  appeal,  whose  aim  is  to  secure  immediate 
results,  whether  of  conviction  or  action,  the  living  voice  of  the  man  speaking 
face  to  face  with  his  fellow  has  better  prospect  than  the  writer,  whose  written 
or  printed  page  lies  cold  and  silent  before,  perhaps,  a  listless  eye.  Every  true 
preacher  is,  first  of  all,  a  public  speaker ;  the  natural  basis  upon  which  is  super- 
induced his  special  grace,  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  speaker  upon  any  secular 
theme,  the  lecturer,  the  parliamentary  orator,  the  very  demagogue.  He  will 
cultivate  it,  as  part  of  its  consecration,  and  will  learn  his  very  art  in  order  that 
he  may  the  better  win  the  ear  of  his  listeners,  and  thus  find  for  his  Master  a  way 
to  their  hearts.  God  has  often  glorified  Himself  by  using  "  very  poor  speakers  " 
to  deliver  His  message.  Wisdom  of  '*  words,"  if  made  by  preacher  or  hearers 
a  thing  aimed  at  for  its  own  sake,  or  for  the  applause  it  may  bring  and  the 
pleasure  it  may  give,  may  "make  the  Cross  of  none  effect"  (ver.  17).  Yet 
'foolish  preaching  is  no  thing  to  praise  or  value,  or  (as  it  were)  to  cultivate.  The 
speaker  will  seek  to  be  at  his  best,  for  God.  But  all  this  is  quite  away  fi  om 
any  thought  of  Paul  here.  Any  supposed  "  poor  preaching  "  is  not,  in  itself, 
one  of  the  illustrations  of  God's  method  which  he  adduces. 

2.  The  message  itself  seemed  foolish. — "Jews"  and  "Greeks"  (ver.  22)  are 
not  only  historical  names,  but  generic  and  typical.  There  are  always  "Jews" 
and  "  Greeks  "  amongst  the  men  to  whom  any  Paul  addresses  himself,  in  every 

27 


CHAP.  L     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   t.   CORINTHIANS. 


age,  in  any  country.  They  are  two  variants  of  the  natural  mind,  under  the 
influence  of  the  natural  heart.  And  we  "  who  are  called  "  (ver.  24),  and  have 
made  the  "call"  a  reality  [see  the  tense,  as  compared  with  that  in  ver.  2], 
both  from  our  memory  of  the  old  days  in  our  own  life,  and  from  the  very 
nature  of  the  case,  can  see  how  ^^  foolish "  the  "  preaching  of  the  Cross  "  must 
seem  to  such.  Here  is  proposed  for  man's  acceptance  a  system  of  "  truth  " 
whose  Teacher  is  a  man  hanged  publicly  on  a  gibbet,  on  a  thing  whose  whole 
associations  were  those  of  our  gallows,  but  aggravated  in  their  painfulness  and 
shame.  "  We  are  being  saved"  by  it  (ver.  18),  and  know  its  ^^  wisdom"  and  its 
'•''  'power r  To  us  they  are  worthy  of  God  ;  they  carry  their  own  credentials.  But 
''  to  those  who  are  perishing  "  such  a  story  may  well  seem  ''^  foolish^iess."  Apart 
from  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  it  (ii.  4),  it  would  be  a  message  with  which 
to  send  men  only  on  a  fool's  errand.  To  tell  the  Roman  masters  that  the  hope 
of  the  world  was  in  a  Jew,  rejected  by  His  own  people,  hanged  publicly  on  a 
gallows  by  a  Roman  quaternion  and  their  centurion,  at  the  instigation  of  Jewish 
religious  authorities, — Gallio  well  reflected  the  temper  with  which  the  best  of 
them  would  receive  such  a  tale.  He  cared  nothing  indeed  for  the  rioting ;  he 
could  aftbrd  to  ignore  a  petty  Jewish  squabble,  though  under  his  very  eyes. 
But  the  same  lofty,  "  gentlemanly,"  if  not  supercilious,  contempt  would  have 
been  his  answer — a  Roman  answer — if  the  ''^preaching  of  the  Cross"  had  been 
fairly  submitted  to  him  for  his  judgment.  The  Jew  was  stung  to  the  quick 
when  Pilate's  "  title  "  seemed  to  offer  to  the  nation  a  crucified  peasant  of  Galilee 
as  its  King  and  Messiah.  The  "Jew?"  of  all  ages  who  wants  ^^ signs,"  who 
demands,  in  order  to  belief,  unmistakeable  self -disclosures  of  the  Unseen,  Super- 
natural, Order,  who  wants  to  see  his  God,  will  hardly  bear  to  be  pointed  to  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  crucified.  "  Such  foolishness  !  "  The  "  Greek,"  looking  for  his 
Ideal  Man,  feeling  after  God,  requiring  of  everything  proposed  to  him  for 
acceptance  that  it  shall  fit  into  some  beautifully  ordered,  symmetrical,  closely 
articulated  scheme  of  philosophic  thought,  was  hardly  to  be  won  to  attention 
by  this  story  of  a  Divine  Man  dying  on  a  gallows.  That  the  supreme  revelation 
of"  God  ?  That  the  supreme  form  of  the  Beautiful,  the  True,  the  Good  ?  On 
Mars'  Hill  attention  ended  in  an  explosion  of  mocking  laughter  (Acts  xvii.  32). 
^'"Foolishness!"  Sensible  men,  not  to  say  philosophers,  to  give  serious  attention 
to  such  a  story  !  Not  even  the  learning  of  Paul,  or  the  eloquence  of  an  A  polios, 
could  make  such  a  story  anything  else  but  a  "folly"  and  a  stumbling-block. 
If  it  kept  the  field,  then,  and  drove  out  all  competitors,  there  must  be  some- 
thing in  it  not  of  man.  The  most  successful  preacher  ^^  may  not  glory  in  His 
presence.^^     "  This  is  the  finger  of  God." 

3.  Look  at  the  men  ivho  bore  it. — (For  they  are  fairly  included  in  the  un- 
finished sentence  of  ver.  26.  R.V.  margin  is  not  too  broadly  comprehensive. 
What  was  true  of  the  first  converts  was  true  also  of  the  first  preachers.) 
They  were  not  reclaimed  reprobates,  indeed ;  nor  by  any  means  wanting  in 
native  common  sense  or  shrewdness.  Their  "  baseness  "  (ver.  25)  only  means  that 
they  had  no  advantage  from  what  with  men  gives  pi'estige.  Yet  manifestly  they 
were  not  the  men  whom  human  wisdom  would  have  chosen  to  confront  the 
"  scribe "  of  the  Jew,  or  the  "  disputer "  of  the  Greek  market-place  (Acts 
xvii.  18).  Men  would  not  have  chosen  the  equivalent  of  a  little  company  of 
Whitby  or  Peterhead  fishermen,  with  a  farm  labourer  or  two,  and  a  subordinate 
collector  of  Customs,  even  though  joined  afterwards  by  a  graduate  of  the 
theological  school  of  a  small  and  uninfluential  sect,  to  be  the  men  to  clear  away 
religions  deeply  rooted  in  the  popular  life,  or  consecrated  by  hoar  antiquity. 
Paul  was  the  best  educated  of  them  all,  yet  his  strictly  "  Hebrew  "  home  (Phil, 
iii.  5),  though  in  the  Greek  city  of  Tarsus,  would  not  permit  to  him  much 
acquaintance  with  any  ordinary   secular  literary  knowledge,  and  his  learning 

2S 


HOMILETLC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  i. 


was  mainly  in  that  Rabbinic  lore  which  seems  to  us,  as  it  would  to  his  Gentile 
contemporaries,  so  largely  trivial,  and  indeed  often  contemptible.  Humanly 
speaking,  he  was  by  no  means  the  man  to  put  forward  as  the  best  repre- 
sentative of  the  new  faith,  to  discuss  it  on  Mars'  Hill,  or  in  the  Agora  of  Athens, 
with  the  heirs  of  the  philosophy  of  Socrates  and  Plato  and  Aristotle.  From  the 
standpoint  of  human  prudence,  it  would  have  seemed  to  be  the  very  best 
method  of  handicapping  the  message  and  lessening  its  chances  of  reception,  to 
commit  it  to  such  men  as  its  apostles  and  promulgators.  Precisely.  But  God's 
foolishness  was  God's  way.  Such  "  weak  "  and  "  base  things  "  put  the  world's 
wisdom  and  strength  and  prestige  to  shame.  The  success  justified  the  method, 
and  justified  the  use  of  such  messengers  of  the  cross.  And  the  method  obviously 
secured  this  end,  that  '-'' no flesh^^ — certainly  not  the  successful  messengers  them- 
selves— "  should  glory  before  God.'^ 

4.  Look  at  the  first  converts. — In  Corinth  even  the  *'  chief  ruler  of  the 
synagogue,"  the  Crispus  whom  Paul  had  the  joy  of  receiving  as  a  Christian,  soon 
after  he  had  transferred  his  labours  to  the  house  of  Titus  Justus,  was  a  man 
of  no  account  except  amongst  the  Jewish  community.  The  Gentile  mob  dragged 
before  Gallio  his  successor  in  office,  Sosthenes,  with  very  scant  respect.  A  few 
converts  may  have  been  won  from  the  descendants  of  the  Roman  colonists  with 
whom  the  city  had  been  repeopled.  But,  as  usual,  the  artisan  and  the  slave, 
the  small  trader  and  the  sailor,  would  form  the  bulk  of  the  Corinthian  Church. 
It  is  just  one  of  the  touches  of  ''^foolishness  "  in  God's  plan  that,  though  the 
'•  noble,  the  mighty,  the  wise  after  the  flesh  "  need  the  Gospel  of  the  Cross  as 
much  as  do  the  ''^foolish,  and  weak,  and  base,''  its  reception  has  seemed  to  be 
made  distinctly  more  difficult  for  them  than  for  others.  The  exceptions  in  the 
New  Testament  to  Paul's  statement  are  few.  In  Philippi  the  first  to  be  won  for 
Christ  were  a  purple-seller  and  a  gaoler,  not  the  magistrates.  Jerome  boasted 
in  after  years  (on  Gal.  iii.  3),  "  Ecclesia  Christi  non  de  Academia,  et  Lycseo, 
sed  de  vili  plebecula  congregata  est"  (Farrar  Z.  of  Chr.,  i.  197).  But  it  was 
long  a  standing  matter  of  scorn  that  the  adherents  of  the  new  faith  were  almost 
exclusively  from  lower  grades  of  society.  Not  that  the  Gospel  has  any  republican 
prejudice  against,  or  dislike  for,  the  rich  or  the  aristocratic.  [^^Not  many,"  but 
always  some.  *'  How  I  thank  God,"  Lady  Huntingdon  used  to  say,  "  for  the 
letter  ml  If  it  had  been  '  not  any '  !  "]  The  exceptions  to  Paul's  statement  in 
the  New  Testament  can  almost  be  counted  upon  one's  ten  fingers.  But  the 
exceptions  are  there.  [And  possibly  the  'percentage  of  the  ''''wise  and  noble"  has 
been  as  great  as  that  of  the  far  more  numerous  lower  classes.]  The  Gospel  met  the 
case  of  Nicodemus ;  of  Sergius  Paulus,  the  proconsul  of  Cyprus  ;  of  Dionysius, 
a  judge  of  the  sacred  court  on  Areopagus  ;  of  Erastus,  the  city-treasurer  of 
Corinth  itself  (Rom.  xvi.  23) ;  and  these  were  but  the  precursors  of  a  noble  few, 
who  are  nobler  because  position  or  wealth  or  learning  were  consecrated  to  the 
service  of  the  Gospel  of  a  crucified  Jesus.  But  these  were  not  saved  because  of 
their  social  standing  ;  as  it  was  no  prejudice  to  them,  so  it  gave  no  advantage  ; 
and  they  joined  a  company  of  people,  humble  and  often  rude,  who  could  impart 
no  social  consideration,  and  in  company  with  whom  they  lost  that  which  they 
already  had. 

5.  And  yet  these  arrangements  of  God's  plan  have  been  crowned  with  success. — 
The  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men ;  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger 
than  men."  Here  is  plain  matter  of  historical  fact.  Such  preachers,  bearing  such 
a  message,  winning  mainly  such  converts,  "have  turned  the  world  upside  down." 
Such  messengers  have  evidently  no  ground  to  glory  in  their  success,  as  if  it  arose 
out  of  their  own  qualifications  or  abilities.  To  win  such  converts  brought  no 
glory  in  the  eye  of  the  world.  The  converts  themselves  could  not  suppose  that 
anything  in  themselves  drew  out  any  special  mercy  of  God  towards  them.      To 

29 


CHAP.  I.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


join  the  "sect  everywhere  spoken  against"  brought  no  credit.  Looked  at  on  any- 
side,  the  arrangements  for  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  were  such  as  to  debar  all 
pretence  of  ^^Jlesh"  glorying  in  the  presence  of  God. 

[5.  All  this  not  only  historically,  hut  generally,  true. — All  Christian  workers 
- — and  by  no  means  preachers  alone — need  to  remember  that  God  proceeds  on 
the  same  lines  still.  The  "  mse  "  and  the  '^scribe"  are  not  extinct.  Their 
judgment  is  that  of  the  natural  heart  always.  They  would  say  :  "  Coavert  the 
men  of  influence  among  the  Roman  masters  of  Corinth.  Catch  Gallio,  and 
the  whole  city  will  go  with  him."  [It  was  a  bad  day  for  the  world  when,  not 
of  Christ,  but  of  Constantino,  it  could  be  said  :  "  The  world  is  gone  after  him  !  " 
(They  who  said  this  so  bitterly  of  Christ,  knew  not  of  the  glorious  fulfilment  of 
their  words  symbolised  in  the  very  next  verse,  when  "  the  Greeks  " — the  first 
"ears"  of  the  harvest  of  the  Gentiles — came  to  "see  Jesus,"  John  xii.  19,  20).] 
"  Convert  a  philosopher  or  two,  or  a  rhetorician,  amongst  the  Greeks  ;  these  will 
carry  their  disciples  with  them."  The  critic  will  dishearten  the  Christian  Church 
as  he  points  out  that,  in  the  mission-fields  of  the  world,  or,  indeed,  in  the 
Churches  at  home,  the  bulk  of  the  converts  and  membership  belong  to  the 
middle  or  the  working  and  lower  classes.  The  divorce  between  Culture  and 
Christianity  is  distressing,  but  it  is  not  novel.  It  is  nothing  new  or  surprising 
if  a  Church  reaps  a  more  abundant  harvest  amongst  the  pariahs  or  the 
aborigines  of  India  than  amongst  the  Brahmins.  God  always  has  lighted  His 
fire  from  the  bottom,  [and  first  ignites  the  slight  material!]  He  began  with 
the  fisherman,  and  the  fallen  woman,  and  the  publican,  and  the  slave.  Often 
does  He  begin  with  the  servant  maid  or  the  child  to-day,  when  He  saves  a 
family.  "  The  poor  have  the  Gospel  preached  to  them,"  whilst  it  does  reach 
and  save  culture  and  birth  and  wealth.  These  need  "  to  become  fools  that 
they  may  be  wise"  (1  Cor.  iii.  18).     "  That  nojlesh  should  glory. ''^ 

6.  No  man  may  he  a  successful  winner  of  souls  who  disregards  this  rule  of  God's 
procedure. — If  God  have  "  given  the  tongue  of  the  learned,"  that  he  may  know 
how  to  speak  "  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  is  weary  "  (Isa.  1.  4) ;  if  to  natural 
gifts  have  been  added  opportunities  of  culture  ;  if  the  ready  tongue  and  warm 
heart  are  used  to  win  many  to  the  story  of  the  Cross  ;  if  the  Spirit  of  God  make 
his  gifts  nobly  auxiliary  to  the  work  of  pulling  down  strongholds,  and  bringing 
hearts  to  the  obedience  of  Christ ;  then  he  needs  to  remember  that  these  are 
gifts,  and  that  he  is  only  an  instrument.  The  axe  may  not  complacently  dwell 
upon  its  temper  or  edge,  nor  count  up  proudly  the  stout  trees  it  has  been  used 
to  fell.  Every  victoiy  must  be  laid  simply  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord  of  the  battle. 
In  the  day  that  God^s  labourers  begin  to  "  glory  in  His  presence,^'  in  that  day  will 
they  be  laid  aside.  "  Things  that  are  notj^  they  will  revert  to  their  original 
nothingness. 

7.  The  humble  may  hear  hereof  and  be  glad. — The  "  weak  "  and  the  ^^ foolish  " 
are  the  very  instruments  God  can  best  employ.  He  will  have  no  joint  saviours 
of  "  them  that  are  perishing.'^  He  wants  men  and  women  who  will  be  content  to 
ofier  themselves,  and  all  the  glory  of  any  success,  to  Him. 

8.  So  also  the  message  must  not  be  tampered  with.  The  Gospel  is  significantly 
summai'ised  as  "  the  py^eaching  {the  word)  of  the  Cross  "  (ver.  18). — To  conciliate 
the  pride  of  unsanctified  intellect,  the  Sufierer  on  the  cross  must  not  be  hidden 
behind  the  Babe  in  the  manger,  and  still  less  behind  the  gentle,  tender  Healer 
of  disease,  and  of  the  Teacher  who — account  for  it,  and  for  Him,  as  we  can 
— spake  as  never  man  spake.  [Calvary,  and  not  even  Bethlehem,  is  the  true 
Kiblah  of  the  Mecca  of  the  pilgrimage  of  a  sinful  world,  in  search  of  rest  to 
heart  and  conscience.  Even  on  Christmas  morning,  the  Christian  preacher  will 
also  say,  "Let  us  go  even  unto  Calvary."]  The  message  must  be  character- 
istically, whatever  else  it  includes,  the  word  of  "  Christ,  and  Him,"  too,  "  (as) 

30 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  i. 


crucified."  As  a  simple  matter  of  often  verified  experiment,  ^'foolishness " 
though  this  be,  it  has  satisfied  the  needs  of  human  hearts  better  than  any  "  other 
Gospel"  (Gal.  i.  9).  All  great  revivals  of  the  life  and  vigour  and  progress  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  in  the  world,  have  been  in  the  closest  association  with  this  .specific 
type  of  teaching  ;  they  have  demanded  it,  and  have  produced  it.  It  may  be  '^  a 
stumbling  block  "  (silso  in  Gal.  v.  11);  but  it  may  not  be  dispensed  with.  As 
matter  of  experiment  it  has  been  the  foundation  stone,  of  "  God's  own  power  and 
wisdom,"  on  which  effectual  teaching  and  practical  holiness  of  life  have  age  after 
age  been  securely  built.  Try  anything  else,  whether  upon  the  world's  "  wisdom" 
or  upon  its  sin  and  niiseiy ;  the  result  will  only  be  another  verification  of 
ver.  20  ;  if  the  Church  will  confront  the  world's  wisdom  with  the  like  worldly 
wisdom,  God  will  make  even  His  own  people's  effort  to  end  in  manifest  ''foolish- 
ness.'' The  "  argument  of  the  Cross  "  [so  Evans,  bringing  into  close  connection 
with  the  same  woi  d  in  ver.  1 7]  best  secures  that  "  no  flesh  should  glory  before 
God,''  and  it  therefore  best  succeeds.] 

III.  Seen  in  the  provisions  of  the  Gospel  for  the  salvation  of  the  individual 
sinner  (vers.  30,  31). — (See  also  Separate  Homily.)  i.  For  the  overthrew  and 
shaming  of  the  imposing  "  entities "  of  the  world,  God  has  chosen  to  take  and 
use  "  Tiow-entities,"  "  things  that  are  7iot,"  have  no  existence  [making  His  new 
creation  out  of  "  nothings "].  And,  as  truly,  for  their  own  salvation  He  has 
taken  care  that,  if  "  they  now  are  "  at  all,  and  are  anything,  or  have  anything — 
"  wisdom,  righteousness,  holiness,  redemption,"  every  man  shall  "  glory  only  in  the 
Lord."  Only  "  in  Christ  Jesus  "  have  they,  or  are  they,  anything.  "  He  is 
made  "  all  these  things  to  them.  Apart  from  Him  they  are  foolish,  guilty, 
unholy,  lost — nothing  !  2.  In  this  fact,  that  the  Gospel  does  nothing  to  con- 
ciliate either  the  intellect  or  the  proud  heart  of  man,  does  it  stand  very  sharply 
distinguished  from  all  other  religions.  In  varying  form,  but  with  substantial 
unity,  these  exalt  human  nature,  not  abase  it ;  if  in  any  degree  it  needs  elevation 
or  recovery,  the  sufficient  force  is  said  to  be  within  the  man  himself.  In  Stoicism 
man  could  be  his  own  saviour ;  he  must  be  self-reliant,  and  independent  of  all  men 
and  all  things  in  his  struggle  after  good  ;  pride  was  indulged  on  principle.  And 
in  this  it  was  but  a  special  and  philosophic  formulating  of  the  thought  and  feeling 
of  human  nature,  even  at  its  best,  everywhere.  That  Gospel  can  hardly  be  of 
human  origin,  which  even  conceives  of  attaining  success  in  a  totally  different 
direction.  It  tells  a  man  that  of  himself  he  has  nothing  to  recommend  him 
to  God  ;  that  he  can  do  nothing  to  win  His  favour  ;  that,  whether  "  by  wisdom  " 
(ver.  21),  or  by  works,  he  can  attain  to  no  knowledge  of  God;  that  all  he  gets 
is  "  of  God,"  purely  and  simply,  and  for  the  sake  of  Christ ;  that  even  in  the 
faith  which  lays  bold  of  all,  there  is  no  merit  — it  is  exercised  in  the  strength 
of  grace.  As  the  Gospel  has  been  seen  above  to  be  "a  stumbling-block "  to  the 
natural  understanding,  so  it  is  also  an  offence  to  the  natural  heart.  All  is  of 
grace.  Men,  even  the  "  Jew,"  the  "  Greek,"  the  "  wise,"  the  "  scribe,"  the 
"  mighty,"  are  "  perishing "  together.  There  is  now  only  one  fundamental 
classification  :  "them  that  are  perishing,"  "us  who  are  being  saved"  No  matter 
how  high  may  rise  the  edifice  of  a  Christian's  life  and  holiness,  at  the 
foundation  of  all,  lies  the  fact  that  the  grace  "  of  God  "  "  in  Christ  "  has  in  the 
first  instance  made  him  who  "was  not"  into  a  saint.  After  long  ages  of 
heaven's  perfected  "  redemption,"  it  will  still  remain  true  that  Christ  Jesus  is 
"  made  redemption  "  to  him.  He  is  in  that  world  only  as  a  man  "  redeemed  " 
"of  God"  "in  Christ" 


31 


CHAP.  I,      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS. 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 

Ver.  2.  A  Church  in  Corinth :  A  of  much  more  behind,  a  fact  with  an 
Wonder. — 1.  (a)  John  once  gazed  in  Argument  in  it.  Frederick  the  Great's 
astonishment  upon  a  "  Wonder  in  chaplain  gave  a  compendious  argument 
heaven "  (Rev.  xii.  1 ).  The  "Woman"  for  the  truth  of  Revelation:  *'The 
was  the  Church  of  God,  in  its  external  Jews,  your  Majesty."  The  origin  and 
aspect  as  an  historical  fact,  a  com-  kistory  and  work  of  the  Christian 
munity,  out  of  which,  midway  in  its  Church  are  a  similarly  compendious 
continuous  (Jewish  and  Christian)  argument  for,  e.g.^  the  verity  of  the 
existence,  arose  the  Man-Child  (ih.,  Resurrection  of  Christ  and  His  actual 
ver.  5).  (6)  That  Church — in  the  pre-  life  to-day  in  Heaven.  The  Church  on 
incarnation  preparation  for  its  Chris-  Earth  is  a  Wonder.  2.  A  Church  in 
tian  stage ;  in  the  fitness  and  the  Corinth  is  a  Wonder.  In  Corinth,  of 
*'  fulness  of  the  time  "  (Gal.  iv.  4)  at  all  places  !  Remember  (a)  Its  Sur- 
which  its  Incarnate  Head  intervened  roundings.  This  was  Roman,  rather 
in  the  earthly  history  of  its  growth  ;  in  than  Grecian,  Corinth,  which  latter 
the  "manifold  wisdom"  (Eph.  iii.  10)  had  been,  even  in  the  ancient  world, 
displayed  in  all  the  arrangements  of  a  proverb  of  costly,  highly  organized, 
God  for  creating  a  new  Human  Race,  luxurious  vice,  but  which,  like  the 
redeemed,  saved,  drawn  without  dis-  polluted  Whitehall  of  Restoration  days 
tinction  from  amongst  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  England,  had,  a  hundred  years  or 
alike,  and  all  finally  gathered  as  a  so  before,  perished  in  the  flames  of 
Church,  a  Family,  into  the  House  of  nationaloverthrowandof  Divine  wrath, 
its  God  and  Father,  every  member  of  Memmius,  the  Roman  conqueror,  like 
it  a  replica,  even  in  their  "  bodies  of  Titus  afterwards  at  Jerusalem,  being 
glory "  (Phil.  iii.  2),  of  the  Head  and  the  unconscious  avenger  of  God's  out- 
Elder  Brother — is  all  through  the  ages  raged  holiness.  But  Roman  Corinth 
a  Wonder  proposed  for  the  instruction  was  corrupt  enough  ;  it  had  all  the  vice 
and  adoring  contemplation  of  "  princi-  of  a  seaport  town,  the  convergent  point 
palities  and  powers  in  the  heavenly  of  the  traffic  and  the  traders  of  half 
places"  (Eph.,  ubi  supr.).  (c)  That  the  world.  Heathenism,  too,  tends  to 
Church  is  the  standing  wonder  of  corruption  everywhere ;  where  it  does 
grace,  of  historical  origin  and  preser-  not  directly  make  vice  into  worship  and 
vation,  of  effect  upon  the  world's  life  a  source  of  revenue  to  idolatry,  it  has 
and  thought,  in  all  ages.  The  Re-  no  power  or  motive  for  restraining  the 
deemer,  its  Head,  stands,  not  only  crude  naturalism,  the  animalism,  to 
before  the  throne  of  His  Father,  in  which  human  nature  gravitates  always, 
the  day  of  the  thankful  consummation  In  almost  every  epistle  Paul  had  to 
of  His  triumph  (as  in  Heb.  ii.  13),  but  speak  plainly  and  strongly  against  every- 
before  the  gaze  of  the  successive  gene-  day,  open,  customary,  "  fleshly  "  sin. 
rations  of  mankind,  and  at  the  bar  of  The  very  phrase,  "  the  flesh,"  is  more 
their  judgment,  and  borrows  the  words  historical  than  ethical  in  its  first  force 
of  the  ancient  prophet  (Isa.  viii.  18) :  and  use  by  him.  The  city  specially  of 
"  Behold,  I  and  the  children  whom  God  Venus  (Aphrodite)  was  a  strange  setting 
hath  given  me  are  for  signs  and  for  for  the  jewel  of  a  Christian  Church, 
wonders  .  .  .  from  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  ^ememher  [b)  Its  Difficulties.  For  the 
In  the  occasional,  temporary,  embodi-  members  every-day  life  bristled  with 
mentof  the  principle  of  "  miracle,"  the  them.  The  most  elementary  Christianity 
age  of  miracles  has  ceased.  But,  in  a  meant  a  sharp  disseverance  from  many 
deeper  sense,  it  has  never  ceased,  for  most  ordinary  practices  of  heathen, 
the  Church  of  Christ  is  a  continuous  and  even  Jewish,  life.  Municipal^ 
Miracle.  It  is  a  Sign  (John's  word,  family,  social,  mental,  artistic,  life — men 
ttbi  supr.),  i.e.  it  is  a  fact  significant  touched  Heathenism,  Idolatry,  in  them 

32 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  i. 


all.  E.g.  "  Meat  offered  to  idols"  was 
a  large  part  of  the  provisions  at  every 
public,  civic  banquet ;  creating  many 
a  difficulty  for  a  Christian  citizen. 
Men  could  hardly  touch  anything  with- 
out handling  the  "  defiling  pitch  "  ; 
every  step  was  near  a  pitfall.  "  Con- 
formity to  the  world  "  was  obviously 
incongruous  with  any  inward  "  trans- 
figuration by  the  renewing  of  their 
mind."  Yet,  the  wonder  of  it  !  a 
Church  arose  and  grew  and  throve 
amidst  such  difficulties.  Eemember 
(c)  Its  Work  and  Purpose.  Christ 
proposed  by  this  little  Chvuch  to  re- 
generate Corinth,  its  morals,  its  faith, 
its  life.  It  is  a  lump  of  the  "  salt," 
which  is  to  arrest  further  corruption, 
and  to  impregnate  the  whole  life  of 
the  city  with  something  of  its  own 
gracious  savour.  It  is  the  housewife's 
mass  of  leavened  dough,  which  is  to 
assimilate  to  its  own  condition  and 
characteristics  the  whole  larger  mass 
around  it.  Like  similar  Churches  which 
were  beginning  to  dot  the  map  of  the 
empire  here  and  there,  this  was  the 
first  appearance  of  a  ce/itre  of  holy  ^er- 
mentation,  which,  with  the  chemistry 
and  life-processes  of  grace,  was  to  break 
up  and  rearrange  in  healthy,  renewed, 
order,  the  corrupting  mateiial  around 
it.  And  yet,  wonder  of  wonders  ! 
remember  (d)  Its  own  Mate^'ial.  (1) 
Socially  J  hardly  anybody  of  any  status ; 
slaves,  artisans,  more  women  probably 
than  men,  Roman  colonists,  Corinthian 
Greeks,  and  Corinthian  Jews.  "  Not 
many  noble,  not  many  wise,"  etc. 
(vers.  26,  sqq.).  A  Habbi  like  Paul,  or 
the  great  Gamaliel,  was  an  important 
personage  amongst  his  fellow- Jews ; 
but  neither  he  nor  his  learning  counted 
for  anything  with  even  the  second-rate 
representatives  of  that  aristocracy  of 
mind  which  had  been  the  glory  of 
Greek  philosophy.  A  luler  of  the 
synagogue  could  be  beaten  by  the 
Greek  mob  before  the  very  tribunal  of 
the  proconsul  (Acts  xviii.  17),  without 
the  courteous  Roman  gentleman  think- 
ing him  worth  rescue  or  notice. 
Gaius,  able  to  act  "  the  host "  to  the 
Church,  or  (perhaps)  Stephanas,  whose 


household  "  addicted  themselves  "  to 
the  service  of  the  saints,  may  have 
been  a  little  wealthier  than,  their 
brethren.  But  such  occasional,  and 
comparative,  eminence  within  the 
Church  was  lost  in  a  dead  level  of 
social  insignificance  when  looked  upon 
by  the  great  people  outside  and  above 
them.  (2)  Then,  personally,  factious, 
proud,  boastful,  suspicious ;  the  Greeks 
among  them  intellectually  vain,  with- 
out real  knowledge  to  support  their  pre- 
tentions to  be  philosophically  minded, 
and  worst  of  all,  hard  to  wean  from  the 
heathen  evil  of  their  old  lives  and  of  the 
surrounding  world.  Of  such  a  people 
God  is  about  to  make  a  Church,  and 
with  such  Churches  to  save  the  dying, 
or  dead  and  corrupting,  ancient  world  ! 
3.  The  Coming  Wonder  is  the  success 
of  God's  method.  Such  Churches  did 
save  the  world,  and  infuse  into  it 
a  new  life.  It  has  never  been  God's 
method,  nor  must  it  be  ours,  to  wait 
vainly  wishing  for  material  and  systems 
and  workers,  such  as  are  ideally  neces- 
sary or  desirable,  before  attempting 
anything  for  Him ;  still  less  to  do 
nothing  unless  our  personnel,  and  doc- 
trine, and  methods  commend  themselves 
to  human  reason  or  the  natural  human 
heart.  "  The  best  "  may  in  that  way  be 
"  the  enemy  of  the  good."  "  Imperfect  " 
characters,  "  imperfect  "  work,  "  un- 
reasonable "  doctrine, — we  will  find  the 
best  we  may, — with  such  much  real 
work  for  God  may  be  done,  and  has  been 
done.  The  difficulty  was,  not  the  sur- 
roundings of  the  Church,  nor  the  con- 
ditions of  society,  but  the  evil  within 
the  Church.  "  If  the  salt  lose  its 
savour,  wherewith  shall  '  the  world  '  be 
salted  ?  "  4.  A  Church,  a  Christian, 
could  live  in  Corinth,  and  might  be  a 
"  saint  "  there ;  was  "  called  to  be  a 
saint  "  there,  and  nowhere  else.  Oba- 
diah  can  live  in  the  court  of  Ahab,  if 
need  be.  "  Saints  "  may  live  saints 
in  even  Nero's  household.  In  fact,  in 
greater  or  less  degree,  every  steady, 
consistent,  persistent.  Christian  is  "  a 
sign  unto  his  generation."  He  is 
sometimes  a  very  Jonah  kept  alive  in 
the  dark  •'  belly  of  hell."     If  there  is 

33 


CHAP.  I.      HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


an  Apology  for  Christianity  in  the 
eon  tin  lied  existence  and  success  of  the 
Christian  Church,  there  is  as  true  an 
Apology  for  it  in  the  life  and  faithful- 
ness of  the  individual  Christian,  in 
Corinth,  or  elsewhere.  He  also  is  "  a  fact 
with  an  argument  in  it."  Of  the  same 
flesh  and  blood,  of  like  passions,  with  the 
same  liabilities  and  dangers, — what  is 
it  makes  him  so  different,  calm  under 
trial,  patient  under  persecution,  able 
to  forgive  his  enemies,  fearless  in  the 
presence  of  death,  and,  not  least, 
"  keeping  himself  unspotted  from  the 
world," — what  is  this  Ileligion,  what  is 
there  in  it,  that  it  can  work  this  con- 
tinuous miracle  of  fifty,  sixty,  seventy 
years  of  a  holy  life  ?  Christians  are 
"  men  greatly  wondered  at "  (Zech. 
iii.  8). 

Ver.  17.  The  Kenosis  of  the  Cross. — 
[Literally,  "  should  be  made  empty  "  ; 
same  verb  as  in  the  important  Pbil. 
ii.  7,  "  He  emptied  Himself  "  (in  con- 
nection with  which  see  how  Paul,  foi' 
his  own  salvation's  sake,  "  emptied 
himself,"  Phil.  iii.  4-10).  See  also 
the  thought  of  this  second  member  of 
ver.  10  expanded  and  homiletically 
dealt  with  under  chap.  ii.  1-5.]  Paul 
felt  the  danger  of — 

I.  Scholastic  preaching. — [Which 
met  the  demand  of  "  Greek  "  type  of 
mind  for  "  wisdom."^  1.  Such  as  aims 
at  the  intellect  rather  than  the  heart ; 
and  gives  no  satisfaction  to  the  man 
who  wants  practical  direction  and  help 
how  to  live  righteously ;  and  deals  with 
speculations  and  discussions  *'  which 
minister"  [provide  and  excite  further 
^^  questioiis''  and  discussions  in  endless 
evolutionary  succession]  "  questionings, 
rather  than  a  dispensation"  [var.  lect, 
for  "edification"]  "of  God  which  is 
in  faith  "  [1  Tim.  i.  4].  2.  Such  dis- 
cussions of  "the  Cross"  and  Christianity 
have  their  time  and  place  and  value. 
As  things  are,  Apologetics  are  a  neces- 
sity, and  the  apologists  need  to  be 
furnished  with  all  wisdom  of  words 
and  thought.  As  men's  minds  are, 
even  "  the  saved "  will  speculate  in 
reverent  pondering  upon  themes  w^hich 

34 


indeed  touch  them  most  closely  where 
the  Christian  system  tells  of,  and 
brings  to  them,  immediate  safety, 
peace,  holiness  for  a  guilty,  unholy 
man,  but  which  also  in  other  directions 
broaden  out  and  reach  away  into 
regions  of  almost  illimitable  vastness. 
At  one  end  the  Gospel  answ^ers  promptly 
and  distinctly  the  urgent  question^ 
"  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ? "  At 
the  other  it  touches  questions  wide  as 
the  whole  created  universe.  [E.g.  What 
is  the  relation  of  the  Incarnation  and 
of  the  Cross  to  the  principalities  and 
powers  in  the  heavenly  places,  to  the 
unnamed  and  unknown  (possible, 
probable)  inhabitants  of  other  worlds 
than  ours?  (Eph.  iii.  10).  How  widely 
has  Sin  diffused  its  effect  ?  ("  Peace 
in  heaven,"  Luke  xix.  38,  may  only 
have  been  a  not  very  intelligent  or 
significant  cry  of  the  populace.  But 
Col.  i.  20  speaks  expressly  of  "  recon- 
ciliation "  of  "  things  in  heaven.)^ 
3.  The  urgent  matter  is  salvation. 
To  the  preacher  and  to  the  sinner  this 
must  stand  first.  The  wisdom  of 
scholastic  preaching  "  makes  void  the 
Cross  "  when  it  takes  the  first  place, 
or  is  the  only  thing  offered  by  the 
preacher,  or  desired  and  welcomed  by 
the  man.  [Illustration, — A  company  of 
Israelites  in  danger,  or  actually  bitten 
by  serpents,  though  not  j^et  feeling 
much  of  the  effect  of  the  deadly  bite, 
are  standing  around  the  serpent  up- 
lifted by  Moses  in  the  wilderness 
(John  iii.  14).  They  ask,  "Tell  us, 
Moses,  what  is  the  exact  connection 
between  that  brazen  thing  up  there 
and  these  serpents  down  here,  and 
between  it  and  the  poison  in  our 
system,  which  is  to  be  healed  by  looking 
at  it.  Tell  us,  analyse  for  us,  the 
modus  operandi  of  our  looking  and  of 
the  curative  action  of  that  up  yonder." 
(They  want  "  a  theory  of  the  Atone- 
ment," and  an  exposition  of  "  the  con- 
nection between  faith  and  pardon  or 
holiness.")  "  Tell  us  something  about 
this  poisonous  substance  which  has 
been  injected  into  our  veins.  What 
is  its  action  ?  How  did  the  serpents 
secrete  it?      Where  did  the  serpents 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  i. 


come  from  ?  Why  did  the  Creator 
make  or  tolerate  such  creatures  ? " 
(They  want  **  a  Doctrine  of  Sin,"  and 
to  hear  something  about  "  the  Origin 
and  Permission  of  Evil.")  If  Moses 
had  gratified  this  intellectual  curiosity, 
and  engaged  in  long,  subtle  discussion 
in  the  direction  of  their  desire,  there 
would  have  been  the  danger  that  his 
hearers  should  have  dropped  one  by 
one  and  died,  at  the  very  foot  of  "  the 
pole,"  died  in  sight  of  God's  symbol, 
and  pledge,  and  means,  of  Victory  over 
death,  and  of  Healing  for  the  poison. 
Thus  they  and  Moses  together  would 
have  made  "  the  Uplifting  of  the 
Serpent  of  none  effect ^  (Cf.  the 
related  thought,  not  word,  in  Gal.  ii.  21, 
"  then  Christ  is  dead  in  vain,"  gratui- 
tously.)] ''Look  to  the  Cross  first, 
and  be  saved ;  then  speculate  to  your 
heart's  content,  if  only  it  do  not  divert 
your  attention  from  the  Cross."  4.  For 
the  danger  is  not  at  an  end  when  the 
soul  has  been  to  the  Cross  and  found 
salvation.  The  natural  heart  loves 
the  discussion  and  the  speculation. 
[See  how  the  Samaritan  woman  at 
Sychar  was  no  sooner  closely  pressed 
about  the  sins  of  her  past  life,  than 
she  turned  off  the  conversation  to  a 
speculative  topic,  an  interesting  matter 
of  discussion,  which  this  "  prophet " 
could  perhaps  resolve  for  her.  "  Ought 
men  to  worship  on  Gerizim,  or  ought 
we  all  to  go  to  Jerusalem  ?  "  (John  iv. 
18-20) ;  anything  rather  than  sin,  her 
own  sin,  its  guilt,  its  peril  !]  And 
whilst  the  work  of  faith  and  of  the 
Cross  is  only  begun  when  the  soul 
has  first  found  it  "  the  power  of  God 
unto  salvation  "  ;  whilst  "  salvation  " 
is  a  continuous  thing,  needing  a 
continuously  renewed  efficacy  of  the 
Cross  and  its  atonement ;  there  is  ever 
the  danger  lest  the  heart  should  fly  off 
to  speculations  and  inquiries  which 
please  the  intellect,  and  do  not  offend 
the  pride  of  the  sinful  heart,  or  disturb 
its  peace.  The  professor  of  apologetics, 
the  student  of  that  Christianity  which 
is  the  grandest  of  all  philosophies,  "  the 
widsorn  of  God,^  may  do  their  work, 
and  may  lay  it  under  noble  contribu- 


tion for  the  service  of  the  Gospel.  But 
the  preacher  has  in  hand  a  narrower, 
more  immediate  and  urgent,  affair. 
He  dares  not  ordinarily  deal  with  such 
"  wisdom  of  words, ^^  lest  he  keep  his 
dying  sinner  speculating,  instead  of 
believing,  as  he  stands  at  the  Cross, 
and  so  the  Cross  and  its  Ofi'ering  for  sin 
have  been  for  that  man  "  emptied  ^^  of 
all  efficacy.  Bishop  Butler,  with  his 
Analogy  and  even  his  Sermons,  are 
wanted.  They  strengthen  the  faith 
of  those  who  do  believe,  and  turn  aside 
for  them  many  an  intellectual  assault, 
giving  them  the  helpful  knowledge, 
moreover,  that  they  are  not  believing  in 
some  scheme  of  teaching  unworthy  of 
the  mind  of  man,  not  to  say,  of  God. 
But  Bishop  Butler  must  not  arrest  the 
sinner  on  his  way  to  the  Cross,  nor 
steal  away  his  attention  and  interest 
in  it,  after  he  has  found  his  way  there. 
[It  is  hardly  within  any  fair  extension 
of  Paul's  thought,  to  take  in  the  very 
real  case  where  the  Cross  is  "  emptied  " 
of  its  meaning  as  a  reconciliation,  or  a 
propitiation,  or  a  vicarious  sacrifice.] 

II.  Rhetorical  preaching. — [Such  as 
meets  the  demand  of  the  "  Jews  "  type 
of  mind  for  a  "  sign."]  1.  Paul  knew 
his  Corinthians  ;  he  knew  man's  heart. 
There  is  something  not  unworthy  about 
the  Intellectual,  Scholastic  preaching, 
though  it  may  ensnare  souls  and  hold 
them  back  from  making  the  most  urgent 
use  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  It  does  at 
least  bear  witness  to  a  Godlike  capacity, 
which  is  the  honour  of  man,  and  to 
which  it  endeavours  to  make  response. 
But  the  preaching  that  is  only  words, 
words,  words,  beautiful  words,  words 
which  please  the  love  of  beautiful 
sound,  words  which  are  the  lovely  cloth- 
ing of  perhaps  a  meagre  or  imperfect 
Gospel,  or  even  that  clothe  very 
beautifully  nothing ;  the  craving  for 
beauty  of  presentation  first,  and  at  all 
events,  whether  the  thought  be  true,  or 
poor,  or  perilous;  both  are  distinctly 
on  a  lower  level.  He  is  snared  by  the 
very  nobility  of  human  nature  whom 
"  wisdom  of  thought "  turns  away,  or 
keeps  back,  from  the  cross  of  Christ. 
But  he  is  of  smaller  calibre  to  whom 

35 


CHAP.  I.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


little  or  nothing  matters  if  only  the 
preaching  be  "well  put."  Never  mind 
what  the  song  is  all  about,  if  only  the 
preacher  "have  a  pleasant  voice,  and 
can  play  well  on  his  instrument,  and 
the  song  be  lovely  "  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  32). 
They  have  no  serious  purpose  to  "  do 
the  words."  Woe  to  the  preacher  of  the 
Cross,  who  to  please  them,  or  to  please 
himself,  makes  more  of  the  manner 
than  the  matter ;  who  never  presses 
home  the  lessons  of  the  hearers'  sinful- 
ness, but  is  content  if  he  can  engage 
their  attention,  and  please  their  fancy. 
He  may  even  so  "  preach  the  Cross  " 
— not  by  any  means  leaving  it  out  al- 
together— as  that  the  one  thing  which 
makes  impression  upon  his  hearers 
is  the  beauty  of  his  preaching.  [So 
Louis  XIV.  shrewdly  discriminated 
between  his  two  great  palpit  orators, 
one  of  whom  made  him  think  of  the 
preacher,  whilst  the  other  made  him 
think  of  himself.]  Few  preachers  will 
deliberately  lay  themselves  out  thus  to 
win  applause  for  their  sermons.  But 
all  should  keep  in  view  the  danger  to 
their  unsaved  hearers.  And  the  danger 
to  themselves  also ;  for  the  preacher's  own 
heart  would  naturally  love  the  reward 
of  human  applause  ;  it  is  more  pleasant 
to  have  men's  good  word  and  goodwill, 
than  to  hear  that  they  say  :  "  He  is  too 
good,  too  earnest,  too  strict  for  me. 
He  is  always  preaching  about  sin.  *  I 
hate  him,  for  he  doth  not  prophesy 
good  concerning  me,  but  evil'  (Ahab, 
of  Micaiah,  1  Kings  xxii.  8)."  Every 
man  will  use  his  own  gift ;  but  an 
Apollos  will  need  to  take  care  that 
himself  never  stands  before  and  ob- 
scures Christ,  or  arrests  on  the  way  to 
Christ  the  soul  which  urgently  needs 
"  the  Cross"  and  its  salvation.  Intellect 
and  oratorical  gifts,  both  may  indeed 
be  gloriously  used  as  consecrated  means 
to  a  sacred  end.  But  the  human  heart 
tends,  in  preacher  and  hearers,  to  make 
them  the  end,  and  to  ask  for  no  more, 
but  to  rest  in  these.  ["  The  wisdom  of 
which  St.  Paul  speaks  appears  to  have 
been  of  two  kinds  :  speculative  philo- 
sophy, and  wisdom  of  words — eloquence. 
Men  bow  before  talent,  even  if  unas- 

36 


sociated  with  goodness ;  but  between 
the  two  we  must  make  an  everlasting 
distinction.  When  once  the  idolatry  of 
talent  enters,  then  farewell  to  spirituality ; 
when  men  ask  their  teachers  not  for 
that  which  *  will  make  them  more 
humble  and  Godlike,  but  for  the 
excitement  of  an  intellectual  banquet, 
then  farewell  to  Christian  progress. 
...  St.  Paul  might  have  complied 
with  the  requirements  of  his  converts, 
and  then  he  would  have  gained  admira- 
tion and  love — he  would  have  been  the 
leader  of  a  party,  but  he  would  have  been 
false  to  his  Master — he  would  have  been 
preferring  self  to  Christ  "  (Robertson).] 
[This  is  no  new  danger  :  "In  an  age 
of  decadence  the  form  of  the  idea  is 
esteemed  far  more  highly  than  the  idea 
itself.  The  surfeited  soul,  like  the 
surfeited  palate,  craves  the  piquant, 
the  highly  dressed.  .  .  .  The  noblest 
thoughts  pass  unheeded,  unless  sur- 
charged with  ornament.  The  Fathers 
of  the  Church  have  repeatedly  pointed 
out  this  intellectual  epicurism  as  one 
of  the  great  obstacles  to  the  progress 
of  Christianity.  The  noble  language  of 
the  pagan  philosophers  seemed  to  Justin 
Martyr  a  bait  which  would  decoy  many 
souls  to  death.  Celsus  .  .  .  heaps  hi» 
most  biting  sarcasms  on  the  vulgarity 
of  the  form  by  which,  according  to 
him,  truth  is  degraded  in  the  Gospel, 
on  the  incorrectness  and  barbarisms  of 
the  style  of  the  Sacred  Writings,  and 
on  their  want  of  logical  force.  He 
exaggerates,  .  .  .  yet  he  represents 
the  repugnance  of  the  '  Greek '  to  a 
book,  which,  like  the  lowly  Redeemer 
whom  it  revealed  to  the  world,  made 
no  pretence  to  the  glory  or  excellency 
of  human  wisdom.  Greece  had  drunk 
draughts  too  intoxicating  to  appreciate 
the  purity  of  the  living  water.  Those 
only  who  were  thirsting  for  pardon  and 
peace  drew  near  to  the  Divine  fountain. 
It  had  no  charms  for  the  epicureans 
of  philosophy  and  art "  (Pressense, 
Early  Years.  The  Martyrs,  7,  8).] 
Christ  emptied  Himself  that  He  might 
save.  Paul  emptied  Himself  that  he 
might  be  saved.  Scholastic  preaching 
may  so  empty  the  Cross  of  meaning, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    /.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  i. 


or  divert  attention  from  its  meaning ; 
rhetorical  preaching  may  so  deaden 
all  the  force  of  its  appeal ;  that  the 
Cross  cannot  save. 

Yer.  18.  The  Preaching  [the  Word] 
of  the  Cross. — Observe  the  connection 
between  this  and  the  preceding  verse. 
Paul  is  jealous  over  himself  as  a 
preacher,  and  over  his  hearers,  lest  he 
should  lay  himself  out  to  use,  and  they 
should  desire  to  hear,  "  the  wisdom  of 
words  "  \  he  is  jealous  lest  "  The  Cross 
should  he  made  void:'  For  "  the  Cross  " 
is  the  summary,  and  the  very  heart, 
of  another  "  word "  which  God  has 
spoken ;  the  very  strength  of  it,  and 
the  secret  of  its  effectiveness,  are  there. 
It  is  God's  "  argument,''  set  over  against 
man's  *'  arguments."  [So  Evans.]  Its 
whole  force  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  is 
not  a  theory,  or  a  philosophy,  but  a 
fact ;  and  that  fact  a  "  Cross."  Chris- 
tianity, the  Gospel,  God's  latest  revela- 
tion of  Himself,  all  gather  themselves 
up  around  this  startling  sight,  a  Cross 
and  a  Crucified  One.  The  effectiveness 
of  this  "  Word "  must  be  guarded  at 
all  costs ;  therefore  the  "  wisdom  of 
words  "  must  be  watched  or  banished 
altogether.     Observe  then — 

I.  A  wonderful  fact  about  Chris- 
tianity :  the  prominent  place  given  in 
it  to  ''the  cross  of  Christ."  1.  The 
Russian  painter  Verestchagin  a  few 
years  ago  in  his  exhibition  of  paintings 
hung  side  by  side  three  pictures  :  A 
Russian  Nihilist  being  executed  by 
hanging,  in  a  thick-falling  snowstorm ; 
Several  wretched  sepoys  of  the  Mutiny 
of  1857,  writhing  helplessly,  and  in 
terror,  as  they  stood  bound  to  the 
muzzle  of  the  guns  whose  discharge 
was  to  execute  the  sentence  upon  their 
revolt  or  treachery  ;  The  crucifixion  of 
Christ.  Three  executions  I  The  realism 
of  this  last  was  exceedingly  great. 
No  doubt  it  was  very  true  to  what 
was  to  be  seen  outside  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem  on  a  certain  Friday  morning 
of  April,  in  the  year  30,  by  one  of  the 
visitors  come  from  foreign  lands  to  keep 
the  Passover.  No  doubt  an  execution, 
the   execution   of   a   strange   man    of 


Nazareth,  of  whom  there  had  been  a 
good  deal  of  talk  in  the  country  for 
some  three  years  past,  was  what  was 
discussed    at  the    gatherings   for   the 
Supper  in  upper  rooms  in  Jerusalem 
that  evening.      If  there   were,  as  an 
early    Christian  apologist   asserts,    an 
official  report  from  Pilate  to  Rome,  it 
would  be  the  matter-of-fact  report  of 
an  execution.     How  comes  *'  an  execu- 
tion "  to  be  the  central  argument  of 
God's  message  to  mankind?     Why  is 
this  crucifixion  of  the  Author  of  the 
new  religion  so  vital  to  it  ?     One  of  the 
preachers  of  the  new  faith,  Peter,  was 
himself  crucified,  like  the  Master  whom 
he  served.     But  the  cross  of  Peter  has 
never  affected  the  world's  religion  and 
civilisation  and  history  like  the  cross 
of  Christ.      Why  not?      Of  the  hun- 
dreds and  hundreds  of  Jews  who  were 
crucified  by  Roman  hands  outside  and 
upon  the  walls  of  the  city  in  the  day  of 
its  capture  and  destruction,  not  one  has 
left  his  name,  or  by  his  death  made  any 
such  perceptible  mark  on  the  world's  life 
and   thought,    as  this   other  crucified 
Jew  has  done.     Nobody  would  die  for 
Peter    because    Peter     was    crucified. 
Thousands  of  spectators  are  year  by 
year  profoundly  stirred  by  the  pathos 
of  the  Oberammergau  dramatisation  of 
the  scenes  of  Calvary  ;  yet  the  emotion 
stirred  by  the  intense  realism  of  the 
death   of  Josef  Meyer  is   of   another 
order    altogether    to    the    stirring    of 
hearts  all  over    the  world  caused  by 
even  the  mental  contemplation  of  the 
dying  of  Jesus  upon  His  cross.     Why  ? 
If  any  heart  is  really   "■  blessed "    at 
Oberammergau,  if  by  chance  any  life  is 
changed  by  a  real  conversion  in  conse- 
quence of  what  is  seen  and  felt  theie, 
manifestly  it  is  not  the  crucifixion  of 
the  man  Meyer  which  has  effected  the 
change,    but   the    cross    and   death  of 
Christ,  which  perhaps  then  was  made 
for  the  first  time  to  have  any  reality, 
and  so  any  power    of    appeal,  to   the 
spectator's  heart. 

2.  The  relation  of  the  death  of  Christ 
to  His  Gospel  is  close,  and  uniquely  close. 
— The  death  of  Peter  might  have  been, 
like  Paul's,  by  decapitation,  for  all  that 

3  7 


CHAP.  I.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    /.    CORINTHIANS. 


it  would  have  mattered  to  the  sub- 
stance of  his  teaching  and  to  the  issue 
of  his  life's  work.  It  is  an  accident  of 
history  merely  that  Socrates  died  by 
the  poison-cup,  rather  than  by  any 
other  method  of  execution.  Neither 
the  fact  nor  the  mode  of  the  death  of 
Buddha  or  Confucius  is  of  any  impor- 
tance to  their  system  of  doctrine. 
Pascal  lays  his  satirical  finger  upon  the 
fact  that,  whereas  the  plan  and  the 
success  of  Mahomet  meant  the  death 
of  others,  to  the  plan  and  success  of 
Christ  His  own  death  was  essential. 
[So  Talleyrand's  well-known  reply  to 
Le  Reveilliere  Lepeaux,  who  had  read 
before  the  Institute  in  1797  an  essay 
upon  the  re-establishment  of  Theo- 
philanthropy.  "  I  have  but  one 
observation  to  make.  In  order  to 
found  His  religion,  Jesus  Christ 
was  crucified  and  rose  again.  You 
ought  to  attempt  as  much "  (Guizot, 
Meditations^  pp.  1,  2).]  It  would  be 
impossible  to  exhibit  Christianity, 
except  in  a  mutilated  form  whose 
identity  had  become  doubtful,  if  no 
stress  were  laid  upon  the  fact  that 
Christ  was  crucified,  or,  above  all,  if 
that  fact  were  left  out  altogether.  As 
Christ  identifies  Himself  with  His 
Gospel,  and  with  Truth,  so  here  Paul 
brings  into  solitary  prominence  this  one 
fact,  "  the  Cross,^'  as  practically  the  sum 
and  substance  of  Christianity.  With- 
out the  story  of  the  crucifixion  of 
Christ,  or  with  it,  if  that  be  only  an 
accidental  fact  of  the  history ;  if  that 
death  were  only  an  unfortunate,  unin- 
tended, premature  conclusion  of  the 
ministry  of  Christ — of  Jesus;  then 
His  work  and  His  works  would 
perhaps  long  ago  have  faded  into  indis- 
tinct history  or  myth.  At  any  rate. 
His  teaching  would  at  the  utmost  have 
been  a  beautiful  code  of  ethics,  the 
most  beautiful  the  world  possesses,  but 
hanging,  as  it  were,  in  mid -air,  and 
weak,  just  as  all  the  noblest  systems 
of  morals  are  all  weak,  in  having  no 
adequately  efficacious  working  power. 
He  would  have  been  just  one  among 
the  world's  greatest  and  choicest 
names ;    the   best  loved  of   them   all. 


perhaps,  but  not  the  present-day 
personal  power  He  is,  not  only  to  a  few 
cultured  people  who  can  realise  the 
past  and  be  influenced  by  it,  but  to 
the  masses  who  must  live,  and  must 
be  raised,  and  must  be  saved,  in  the 
present. 

3.  The  guilty  conscience  and  the  bur- 
dened heart  feel  and  know  why  Chris- 
tianity meets  them  with  a  unique 
helpfulness  and  sufficiency. — Whatever 
be  the  reason,  the  fact  is  certain  that 
it  is  the  Cross  which  makes  Christianity 
the  rehgion  of  every  heart.  John 
Bunyan  was  not  merely  casting  Puritan 
or  any  temporary  phase  of  theology 
into  the  form  of  a  story ;  he  was  not 
merely  generalising  from  his  own  ex- 
perience ;  he  was  summarising  universal 
experience  ;  when  he  takes  his  Christian 
to  the  Cross,  and  there,  and  not  till 
then,  makes  his  burden  fall  off,  and 
the  man  set  forth  with  a  new  freedom 
and  lightness  of  heart.  The  sight  of 
the  Cross  made  the  burden  fall.  So 
say  all  guilty  souls.  They  push  on 
past  the  manger  of  Bethlehem ;  they 
have  no  ear  for  the  name  "  Immanuel " 
until  they  have  been  to  Calvary. 
When  their  heart  has  there  been  dis- 
burdened of  its  load,  then  first  is. 
that  heart  at  leisure  to  come  back  to 
Bethlehem  and  learn  the  lesson  of  the 
holy  manger.  But  the  profundities 
and  mysteries  of  condescension  and  love 
in  the  Incarnate  Babe  need  a  heart  to 
understand  them  which  has  first  seen 
the  Crucified  One  "  made  sin  for  us." 
No  New  Testament  writer,  not  even 
John,  contributes  more  than  does  Paul 
to  what  light  we  have  on  the  Incarnate 
Son ;  but  the  centre  of  gravity  of  Paul's 
scheme  of  the  Gospel,  "  my  Gospel,"  as 
he  calls  it  often,  will  be  shifted,  if  the 
Incarnation  and  the  Birth  become, 
more  than  the  Death  and  its  Atone- 
ment, the  objects  of  attention,  the 
subjects  of  preaching.  It  is  a  glorious 
Gospel,  truly,  which  lies  in  the  very 
name  *'  Immanuel,"  God  with,  instead 
of  against,  us ;  it  has  in  it  all  the 
possibilities  of  life  (Rom.  viii.  31). 
The  race  now  is  made  up  of  "  men 
of  God's  goodwill."     But  how  ?     Why  ? 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  i. 


How  is  the  individual,  conscious  of 
guilt  in  the  past  record,  and  more 
deeply  conscious  still  of  an  inward, 
deep-seated  heart  aversion  from  God 
and  from  good,  to  enter  into  the  Name 
"  Immanuel  "  ?  Has  the  word  reached 
him  too  late,  since  he  has  sinned,  and 
is  a  sinner?  The  answer  is  at  the 
Cross,  or  it  is  nowhere.  It  would  not 
be  fair  to  make  the  Incarnation  merely 
one  step  in  a  chain  of  arrangements 
leading  up  to  the  Cross,  and  existing 
for  its  sake.  Really  each  is  in  some 
points  for  the  sake  of  the  other.  It 
is  plain  that  if  the  Incarnate  Babe 
exhibits  and  proclaims  the  reconcilia- 
tion, the  Crobs  makes  it.  "  He  hath 
reconciled  us  ...  by  the  death  of  His 
Son"  (Rom.  v.  10).  We  can  date  the 
death  on  Calvary  within  narrow  limits. 
We  cannot  date  the  true  Reconcilia- 
tion ;  we  read  mysterious  things  of 
"a  Lamb  slain  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world  "  (1  Pet.  i.  20).  But  when 
God  would  make  plain  His  heart  to 
guilty,  lost  mail,  He  chooses  to  empha- 
sise the  word  of  the  Cross,  not  "  the 
word  of  the  Manger.''  Reconciliation 
is  the  first  step  back  to  peace. 
Christian  speculation  on  the  meaning 
of  the  Incarnation,  and  its  possible 
relations  to  the  whole  creaturely 
universe,  has  been  fruitful  in  noble 
thinking.  But  Christian  preaching 
which  is  to  touch  even  ^Hhe  base  things,'' 
in  the  most  unworthy  sense  of  "  base," 
has  always,  as  matter  of  experiment, 
found  in  the  Cross  a  better  help  for 
souls,  and  the  best  appeal  for  the  use 
of  the  winner  of  souls.  At  the  Cross 
he  has  found  his  ttov  o-tio,  from  which 
to  lift  the  world. 

II.  ''The  Cross"  is  a  summary  of 
Gospel  preaching. — Of  course  the  in- 
terpretation of  this  phrase  of  Paul  will 
depend  on  our  whole  reading  of  the 
entire  New  Testament.  It  is  one  of 
those  single  words  into  which  is  con- 
densed, and  in  which  is  assumed,  all 
the  customary  belief  and  teaching  of 
a  man's  lifetime.  "  How  much  do  you 
mean  by  '  the  Cross,'  Paul  ?  "  "  How 
much?  Ask  them  which  hear  me 
constantly,   ask   them   who    read    me 


most  closely ;  behold,  they  know  what 
I  mean  !  "  But  at  least  it  is  manifest 
that  Christ  Himself  made  it  central  to 
His  Gospel.  The  Gospel  lies  within  an 
ellipse,  of  which  these  are  the  two  foci 
(and  the  two  are  fundamentally  one,  the 
central  Truth  of  a  circle)  :  1 .  ^  cross  for 
the  Master ;  2.  A  cross  for  each  of  His 
disciples.  Midway,  or  thereabout,  in 
the  course  of  His  three  years'  ministry, 
in  the  few  days  of  retirement  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  Csesarea  Philippi 
(Mark  viii.  27-38),  for  the  first  time 
did  Christ  speak  definitely  to  His  dis- 
ciples about  death  as  the  issue  of  His 
ministry,  though  not  as  yet  precisely 
specifying  that  this  should  be  by 
crucifixion.  The  news,  so  startling  to 
a  Jew,  that  this  should  be  at  the 
hands  of  the  revered  and  representative 
men  of  his  nation,  and  so  saddening 
to  a  loving  disciple,  Peter  was  for 
hushing  back,  and,  indeed,  would  have 
had  His  Master  entertain  no  such 
gloomy  thoughts :  *'  Be  propitious  to 
Thyself,  Lord  (Matt.  xvi.  22,  literally); 
be  kinder  to  Thyself  than  that  ! " 
Quick  and  sharp  the  cry  broke  forth 
from  Jesus,  "  Behind  Me,  Satan  ! " 
Had  the  Adversary  himself  retained 
Peter  on  his  side,  the  disciple  could 
have  said  nothing  more  thoroughly 
according  to  his  mind.  Such  a  sug- 
gestion— to  delete  the  cross  from  the 
programme  of  the  Saviour's  earthly 
sojourn  and  its  work — was  the  very 
desire  of  the  Devil.  [It  had  been 
his  proposition  long  before  that  the 
King  should  make  a  "  short  cut  "  to 
His  kingdom,  avoiding  the  cross, 
Matt.  iv.  8-10].  The  voice  was 
Peter's  voice ;  the  thought  was  the 
thought  of  Satan.  There  must  be  a 
cross  for  the  Master,  or  His  work 
would  go  undone  ;  there  would  be  no 
Gospel  of  redemption.  A  few  days 
after,  as  the  little  company,  Jesus 
leading  the  way,  the  twelve  "  coming 
after  Him,"  were  slowly  moving  through 
some  village  of  the  neighbourhood,  the 
villagers  stood  gazing  at  the  little  com- 
pany of  strangers,  and  Jesus  stopped, 
and  calling  them  to  Him,  said  "  unto 
them  all "  (Mark  viii.  24  ;  Luke  ix.  23), 

39 


CHAP.  1.      HOMILETIC  COMMENIARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


what  Peter  was  not  for  hearing  even 
for  his  Master,  *'  Every  man  must 
take  up  his  own  cross  " — as  I  do  Mine  ; 
"  daily  " — as  from  the  first  I  have  done 
Mine.  What  Peter  would  not  hear  of 
for  his  Master,  he  and  every  disciple 
must  hear  of  for  himself,  else  there 
can  be  no  discipleship.  The  whole 
Christian  host,  the  Captain  and  the 
rank  and  file,  all  carry  their  cross. 
There  is  no  Christian  who  does  not. 
To  himself  and  to  his  Lord  the  Gospel 
is  "  the  word  of  the  Cross." 

Ver.   21.  Seeking  and  finding  God. 

Introduction. — Some  striking  and 
suggestive  turns  of  phraseology  here : 
1.  ''^  The  world"  is  seeking  "  ^o  know 
God."  Of  the  '^  believers "  who  are 
brought  to  the  goal  which  "  the  world  " 
misses,  it  is  not  said  that  they  '*  know 
God"  but,  what  at  first  seems  a  very 
much  smaller  thing,  that  they  are 
*'  saved."  "  Is  that  all  ?  "  "  Yes ;  and  a 
very  glorious  attainment  too.  It  is,  in 
fact,  the  reward  and  goal  of  the  world's 
search."  ''  To  know  God  "  and  "  to  he 
saved  "  were  long  before  closely  linked 
(John  xvii.  3).  "  In  knowledge  of 
whom  standeth  [consisteth]  our  eternal 
life."  {I.e.  as  in  the  ancient  collect, 
"  Quem  nosse  vivere  est.")  2.  The 
world  seeks  for  God  hy  the  way 
of  "  wisdom."  They  who  find  this 
salvation  which  is  the  knowledge  of 
God,  find  Him  by  the  path  of  '■''believ- 
ing " ;  another  path  altogether,  which 
nevertheless  justifies  itself  as  the 
highest  wisdom  (ii.  6)  to  those  who  are 
brought  by  it  to  the  goal.  3.  Are 
we  to  press  the  distinction  betwef  n 
*'  in  the  ivisdom  of  God  "  [taking  the 
customarily  accepted  turn  of  thought 
as  that  of  Paul]  and  "  it  pleased 
God"1  Perhaps  not  too  strongly  or 
too  far.  Yet  it  is  true  that  it  is  no 
"^ good  pleasure"  of  God  to  see  His 
world  groping  after  the  knowledge  of 
Ilimself  in  vain.  [Acts  xvii.  26-28  is 
very  explicit :  "  He  hath  made  .  .  . 
that  they  should  seek  ...  if  haply 
they  might  find  Him."]  It  may  be  His 
"  wisdom  "  that  they  should  not  "  by 
wisdom,     find     Him    out " ;     but     He 

40 


loves   to   be   found   and    known    and 
loved.     We  have,  then, 
I.  The  world's  inquiry. 
II.  God's  answer. 

1.  1.  The  heart  and  the  intellect  of 
man  do  inquire  after  the  knowledge 
of  God. — Man's  mind  and  heart  will 
not  be  forbidden  to  inquii'O  after  God. 
Of  no  avail  to  throw  doors  open — in- 
vitingly open — and  to  solicit  exploration , 
in  directions  to  which  admittance  is 
given  by  gates  inscribed  "  To  Science," 
"  To  Music,"  "  To  Philanthropy,"  *'  To 
Truth  and  Pight,"  and  to  shut  up 
Peligion-gate,  or  to  build  up  the  door 
leading  out  towards  the  road  "  To  God." 
This  fact  in  itself  goes  some  way  to- 
wards, and  has  some  worth  as,  an  answer 
to  the  question,  *'  Is  God  knowable  ?  "  It 
were  strange  if  the  instinctive,  or  at 
least  the  ever-recurrent,  inquiry  of 
mind  and  heart,  "  O  that  I  knew 
where  I  might  find  Him  !  "  were  a  mere 
lying,  deluding  impulse,  driving  men 
to  search  endlessly  after  what  could 
not  be  found,  or  after  One  who  did 
not  choose  to  be  found ;  or  if  the  idea 
of  a  God  were  only  an  ignis  fatuus 
leading  into  mere  bottomless  bog  and 
darkness.  There  can  be  no  demon- 
stration of  Him,  as  there  can  be  no 
demonstration  that  there  is  no  God. 
But  if  the  very  constitution  of  man's 
mind  be  not  a  contradiction  and  a  lie, 
then  the  unceasing  quest  after  God 
Vv^itnesses  to  a  possibility  of  a  real 
knowledge  of  Him.  Not  a  complete 
one — that  is  out  of  the  question,  by 
universal  consent ;  but  a  real,  if  incom- 
plete, knowledge,  sulficient,  moreover, 
for  regulative  [though  not  merely  regu- 
lative] purposes.  [The  child  "  knows  " 
the  father,  even  though  the  man's 
life,  and  the  particular  character  of  its 
own  parent,  be  in  their  whole  round  far 
beyond  its  present  comprehension. 

2.  Man  is  morally  a  strange  contra- 
diction in  this  matter. — The  natural 
heart  is  averse  from  God,  "  and  desires 
not  the  knowledge  of  His  ways" 
(Job  xxi.  14) ;  yet  the  famous  sentence 
of  Augustine  is  the  summary  of  the 
universal  human  experience :  "  Tu 
excitas,  ut   laudare  te   delectet ;    quia 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   L    CORINTHIANS,      chap.  i. 


fecisti  nos  ad  te,  et  inquietum  est  cor 
nostrum  donee  requiescat  in  te." 
{Conf.,  I.  i.  1.)  "  The  fool  says  in  his 
heart  '  No  God,' "  but,  as  Bacon 
quaintly  puts  it :  "  It  is  not  said, 
*  The  fool  hath  thought  in  his  heart,' 
so  as  he  rather  saith  it  by  rote  to 
himself,  as  that  he  would  have,  than 
that  he  can  thoroughly  believe  it,  and 
be  persuaded  of  it ;  for  none  deny  that 
there  is  a  God,  but  those  for  whom 
it  maketh  that  there  were  no  God " 
(Essays,  "  Atheism  ").  It  is  a  lesson 
which  the  "  fool "  must  say  over  and 
over  to  himself,  to  be  quite  sure  :  "  No 
God,  No  God,  No  God."  David  never 
heard  of  an  atheist  by  professed  creed. 
[Another  David,  David  Hume,  avowed 
at  the  table  of  Baron  d'Holbach,  that 
he  had  never  met  with  an  atheist. 
"  Allow  me,"  said  his  host,  "  to  intro- 
duce you  to  thirteen,"  indicating  his 
guests.]  Long  ago  Cicero  pointed  out 
that  no  nation  of  atheists  had  ever 
been  found  (De  Nat.  Deor.,  i.  16). 
It  is  another  thir^g,  and  capable  of 
ready  explanation,  that  now  and  again 
peoples  have  been  found,  few  in 
number  and  low  down  in  the  scale  of 
civilisation,  in  whom  the  very  idea  of 
worship  seemed  almost  or  quite  ex- 
tinct, and  their  life  and  thinking 
reduced  to  the  narrowness  of  the 
animal  existence.  Yet  the  vague 
sense  of  a  supernatural  is  hardly  ever 
absent,  and  the  idea  of  a  God  can 
always  be  called  out  again  in  even  the 
most  imbruted  and  degraded.  Every 
man  is  capable  of  it,  as  no  noblest 
animal  is.  As  matter  of  history, 
belief  has  ever  been  before  disbelief ; 
belief  has  seemed  natural,  disbelief  and 
denial  have  been  induced,  and  matters 
of  education.  Man  ''cries  out  after 
God,  after  the  living  God"  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  2). 
*'  This  inquiry  and  search  after  God 
is  the  origin  of  all  religion,  and  the 
truth  even  of  heathenism"  (Luthardt). 
And  yet  man  is  a  prodigal  who 
"  goeth  into  a  far  country,"  where  his 
Father  may  be  out  of  sight  and  out  of 
mind.  It  is  the  dislocation  of  God's 
order  seen  everywhere  in  His  creation  ; 
man,  like  the  rest,  is  *'  out  of  joint,"  as 


the  result  of  a  moral  confusion  in 
God's  "  very  good "  world  and  its 
order. 

3.  The  intellect  starts  on  its  quest 
on  some  /our  great  lines  of  argument, 
four  great  highways,  as  it  hopes,  to  the 
assurance  that  there  is  a  God  and  to 
some  knowledge  of  Him.  A  few, 
capable  of  such  thinking,  have  argued 
that,  because  man  can  have  the  con- 
ception of  a  Perfect  Being,  there  must 
be  somewhere  a  reality  corresponding 
to  the  conception ;  that  there  must  be 
an  Infinite  Substance,  of  whom  [or 
which]  Time  and  Space  must  be 
"  accidents  "  ;  that  the  ideas  of  the 
Infinite,  the  Absolute,  the  Eternal, 
must  have  their  root  and  basis  some- 
where ;  "  the  thought  of  God  im- 
plies the  existence  of  God."  Often 
discredited,  argued  out  of  court, 
criticised  or  refined  away,  dismissed, 
buried,  but  with  a  wonderful  resur- 
rection power  about  it,  the  "  No  effect 
without  a  cause  "  argument  has  been 
a  path  along  which  a  far  larger  class 
of  minds — "  practical  people  " — has  set 
out  to  find  God.  Wider  still  in  the 
field  of  its  appeal,  a  broad  way  at 
which  many — most — have  gone  in 
in  their  search,  is  the  argument  from 
Design,  which  is  not  really  affected 
even  if  modern  "  evolutionary  "  science 
makes  good  all  its  claims,  and  turns 
every  hypothesis  into  certainty ;  it 
would  only  be  a  revolutionising  of  our 
knowledge  of  the  method  by  which  the 
Creator  had  effectuated  and  carried 
out  His  design ;  however  the  result 
has  been  brought  about.  He  is  still 
there,  directing  the  piocesses,  guiding 
the  whole,  from  inception  to  conclusion. 
[Said  Newton  :  *'  Hsecce  compages 
solis,  planetarum,  et  cometarum  et 
stellarum,  non  nisi  consilio  et  dominio 
entis  cujusdam  potentis  et  intelligentis 
oriri  potuit."]  "  Every  science  without 
exception  shows  that  the  order  and 
[concurrent]  adaptation  and  har- 
monies of  nature  are  such  as  to  make 
the  chances  no  less  than  infinite 
against  the  supposition  of  Chaos,  or 
the  absence  of  the  designing  intelli- 
gence."     Said    Bonaparte   in    Egypt, 

41 


CHAP.  L      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


after  listening  to  the  atheistic  talk  of  ment.  *'  The  same  heart  in  man  which 
a  group  of  officers  and  savans,  gathered  trembles  before  an  Authority  above  him 
at  his  tent  door  under  the  lustrous  yearns  to  be  able  to  trust  in  Him." 
stars  of  a  sub-tropical  night,  "  All  And  the  inquiry  of  the  heart  after 
very  well,  gentlemen  ;  but  who  made  God  is  the  more  earnest  when  the 
all  these  1 "  [There  is  even  in  the  sense  of  guilt,  so  strange,  so  unreason- 
Sublime  and  the  Beautiful  in  Nature,  able,  so  inexplicable,  and  yet  so  com- 
secured  as  so  much  of  it  is  by  the  very  pletely  justifying  itself  to  the  man  who 
same  prc/peities  of  matter — mechani-  passes  through  its  experiences,  presses 
cal,  chemical,  or  other — and  their  home  the  question  :  "  How  may  I  find 
combinations,  as  secure  the  more  God?  If  I  find  Him,  what  kind  of 
utilitarian  results  of  Design,  a  con-  God  shall  I  meet  ?  Will  there  be  any 
current  "  design  argument,"  which  pity,  any  mercy,  any  pardon,  any  love  ? 
leads  maay  minds  towards  the  Mind,  Can  there  be?  Can  He  show  any?" 
towards  God.  (See  this  popularly  Man  can  give  no  satisfying  peace.  The 
accessible  in  Pies.  Day  Tracts,  sinner  has  no  authority  to  speak  peace 
No.  20,  K.T.S.]  The  common  agree-  to  himself.  Nature  is  not  without 
ment  of  the  vast  majority  of  the  race,  analogies  which  may  suggest  forgive- 
account  for  it  how  men  may,  has  ness ;  she  has  healing  herbs  for  wounds 
always  been  to  some  a  promising  line  and  diseases,  occasioned  by  violations  of 
of  quest  after  God.  "  Where  all  the  her  own  laws.  But  the  guilty  heart 
world  have  turned  their  steps,  surely  wants  to  know  the  Lawgiver,  and  His 
in  that  direction  He  is  to  be  found."  mind  towards  itself  and  its  sin. 
Somen  have  said,  nor  without  justifi-  5.  Abundantly  clear  from  the  history 
cation.  of  human  thought,  philosophical  or  theo- 
4.  The  heart  and  the  moral  nature  logical,  that  by  any  of  these  roads,  or 
have  contributed  to  all  the  inquiry.  by  all  combined,  the  race  has  never  come 
The  heart,  as  well  as  the  intellect,  has  to  any  satisfying  certainty  about  God. 
had  its  own  ^^ wisdom''  by  which  it  has  "  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead  " 
sought  ^Uo  knoiv  God."  And  its  wisdom  have  not  always  been  understood  by 
has  been  the  wisest.  It  has,  indeed,  the  things  that  are  made  (Rom.  i.  20). 
affected  the  search  after  Him,  in  every  All  these  arguments  have  always  been 
line  of  quest.  Very  much  according  open  to  all,  to  study  and  use.  They 
as  their  heart  and  moral  condition  have  none  of  them  depend  upon  Revelation, 
been,  so  have  the  inquirers  valued  or  dis-  The  wisest  wisdom  of  this  world  has 
paraged  the  paths  by  which  the  reason  exercised  itself  upon  them.  Yet  there 
sought  after  Him  ;  so  have  they  hoped  is  not  one  of  them  which  is  so  demon- 
or  feared  that  the  path  might  lead  them  strati ve  in  its  force  as  to  compel  assent 
to  His  throne  ;  so  have  they  been  or  to  give  certainty.  [There  is  not  one 
urged  onward  by  desire  or  dragged  which  may  not  be  frittered  away  by 
forward  with  reluctance,  towards  the  over-subtle  criticism ;  not  one  from 
place  where  perchance  He  might  re-  which  the  intellect  cannot  find  a  way 
veal  Himself  to  the  searchers.  But  of  escape,  if  sore  pressed  by  it  in  contro- 
the  moral  nature  of  man  reaches  versy.]  There  is  not  one  which  brings 
out  groping  hands  after  Him.  The  absolutely  and  infallibly  to  God.  Phe- 
sense  of  wrong  and  right  has  looked  nomena  and  the  Finite  have  not  neces- 
eagerly  if  it  might  see  a  Supreme  Law-  sarily  suggested  an  Infinite  Subsistence, 
giver  somewhere  behind  "Bight"  and  The  unity  of  design  is  as  consistent  with 
"  Wrong."  Conscience  has  intimated  the  operation  of  one  of  two,  or  of  one  of 
a  moral  world  and  its  Euler.  The  many,  workers  left  to  do  as  he  wills, 
personal  manhood  has  given  supreme  as  with  the  operation  of  One  Only 
testimony  to  a  Person  with  whom  it  Worker.  He  must  be  very  and  suf- 
may  have  fellowship,  and  the  sense  of  ficiently  wise  and  powerful,  but  not  of 
dependence  has   reinforced   the   argu-  logical  necessity  all-wise,  all-powerful. 

4.2 


HO  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  L 


"  Is  number  finite  or  infinite? "  asked  a 
believing  French  savant  of  .some  athe- 
istic men  of  science.  "  Finite."  "  Then 
the  universe  had  a  beginning."  But  the 
'argument  does  not  of  necessity  shut  men 
up  to  a  Creator.  Men  of  ''  wisdom"  have, 
in  fact,  held  an  Eternal  Matter,  or  a 
self -originated  Universe.  Endless  have 
been  the  ancient  and  modern,  Oriental 
and  Western,  variations  upon  the  Pan- 
theistic theory  of  God  and  the  world. 
A  personal  God,  who  is  Creator,  has  not 
always  been  a  God  of  providential  rule 
over,  and  care  for,  His  creation.  Poly- 
theism has  been  the  belief  of  large 
sections  of  the  race  in  all  ages.  The 
inquiry  of  mere  wisdom  has  always, 
in  point  of  fact,  left  men  with- 
out just  views  or  settled  convictions. 
'*  The  various  apprehensions  of  wise 
men,"  said  Cicero  long  ago,  "justify 
the  doubtings  of  sceptics,  and  it  will  be 
time  enough  to  blame  these  when  others 
agree,  or  any  one  has  found  the  truth  " 
(He  Nat.  Heor.,  i.  10,  11.  See  Note  at 
end  of  Homily).  "  (The  wisdom  of  this 
world)  does  not  deny  Divine  existence, 
though  a  good  many  persons  are  coldly 
doubtful  and  '  agnostic '  on  the  subject. 
But  as  in  the  first  century  any  effective 
conception  of  God  was  wearing  out  of 
thoughtful  minds  [Emperors,  not  only 
like  Augustus,  but  like  Tiberius  and 
Nero,  were  deified.  On  the  other  hand, 
all  the  vilest,  meanest.  Oriental  or 
African  gods  and  cults  were  being 
welcomed  at  Home],  ...  so  now  there 
are  mere  vague  and  high-sounding 
phrases  about  the  Almighty  current 
among  the  worldly-wise.  He  is  a  force 
— personal  or  impersonal,  no  one  knows; 
where  seated,  why  operative,  how 
directed,  none  can  tell.  Or,  He  is  a 
dream  of^Ineffable  Beauty,  and  a  foun- 
tain of  Ineffable  Pity ;  but  how  to 
reconcile  this  with  the  more  severe 
aspects  of  nature  and  life  baffles  all  the 
wisdom  of  the  world.  The  sages  are 
puzzled  ;  the  multitude  know  not  what 
to  think  ;  and  so  '  the  world  by  wisdom 
knows  not  God'  "  (Dr.  Donald  Eraser). 
'*  Anima  naturaliter  Christiana,"  cried 
the  old  apologist ;  but  his  word  is  both 
true  and  untrue.    The  anima  Christiana 


truly  finds  reason  enough  to  believe  that 
in  the  design  of  its  Maker  it  would 
"  naturally  "  have  known  God.      But 
there  has  been  a  blinding  of  the  eye 
that  looks  for  His  traces ;   it   cannot 
read   aright    the    teachings    of    (say) 
nature.      [It  is  "  the  pure  in  heart " 
now  that  alone  "  see  God."     The  Sir 
Galahads,  not   the    Lancelots,  see  the 
Holy  Grail.]     In  some  lines  of  argu- 
ment the  evidence  also  has   got  con- 
fused ;  it  cannot  be  read  with  absolute 
confidence ;    [the  pieces  of   the  puzzle 
have  got  jostled,  and  some  perhaps  are 
lost ;    it   is   not   easy  to   discover   the 
design  which  would  lead  to  a  Designer]. 
The  altar  "  to  an  unknown  God  "  in 
Athens  is  confessedly  a  symbolical  fact 
in  a  representative  city  ;  man's  wisdom 
with  all  possible  advantages  avowing  a 
result  so  incomplete  as  to  be  a  defeat  of 
any  search  "by  wisdom''  only.     The 
wisest  minds  need  God's  pilotage  if  they 
are  to  reach  Himself.    Science  does  not 
find  man   in   man's  body,  nor  God  in 
God's  world.     The  most  modern  thing 
is  to  take  the  confession  of  failure  and 
wear  it  as  the  badge   of  superiority : 
"  Agnostic,  we  !  " 

6.  And  this  was  "  in  the  wisdom  oj 
God." — The  whole  moral  history  of 
earth  and  mankind  may  probably  be  a 
great  object-hsson  in  sin,  its  meaning, 
its  mischief,  its  misery,  and  in  grace, 
its  manifold  wisdom,  and  infinite  ful- 
ness, for  the  teaching  of  other  worlds 
and  other  races.  The  failure  of  mere 
fallen,  darkened  reason,  even  in  its 
wisest,  mightiest,  most  industrious  ex- 
amples, to  "  come  at "  God,  "  though 
He  be  not  far  from  any  one  of  us,"  may 
not  be  the  least  instructive  detail  in  this 
great  Didactic  of  the  story  of  our  race. 
However  that  may  be,  with  regard  to 
"  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly 
places,"  and  however  the  question  may 
be  decided  whether,  if  sin  had  not 
darkened  man's  reason  and  perverted  his 
heart,  and  confused  and  blurred  some 
of  the  clearest  evidence  for  a  God,  man 
might  then  "  b^/  wisdom  "  have  known 
God,  [if,  indeed,  he  would  then  have 
had  any  need  to  search ;  man  is  seek- 
ing now  a  lost  vision  and  knowledge] ; 

43 


CHAP.  I.      HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    I:  CORINTHIANS. 


as  things  are,  this  world-wide,  age-long 
result  all  falls  in  with  the  great  prin- 
ciple of  vers.  29,  31,  that  all  pride  of 
human  intellect  should  be  utterly  ex- 
cluded, made  impossible  by  its  utter 
failure  to  "  find  out  God  "  (Job  xi.  7). 
The  knowledge,  when  it  comes,  is  to 
be  through  a  "  Salvation,"  and  salva- 
tion is  for  '*  those  who  believe." 

II.  God's  answer. — 1.  "  As  Moses 
lifted  up  the  serpent  in  "  the  midst  of 
Israel,  so  God  has  "  lifted  up "  His 
Son  upon  a  cross  in  the  midst  of 
mankind,  groping  with  blind  eyes,  and 
outstretched  hands,  and  yearning  heart 
after  Himself.  The  central  Figure  of 
history  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  Christ 
of  God.  The  central  Fact  of  the 
history  of  the  Christ  is  the  Cross. 
[The  wise  men  from  the  East  asked, 
"  Where  is  He  that  is  born  King  of 
the  Jews  ?  "  Thirty  years  after  Pilate 
gave  the  answer,  putting  upon  the 
cross,  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  King 
of  the  Jews."]  The  world  for  ages  had 
been  asking,  "  How,  where,  may  we 
find  and  know  God  ?  Is  there  a  God 
to  know  and  find  ? "  The  answer 
given  by  the  "  preaching  "  of  Paul  and 
his  fellows  and  their  successors  is, 
"  Look  at  Jesus  Christ,  and  above  all 
at  Him  crucified,  and  see  and  know 
God."  2.  All  we  need  to  know, 
perhaps  all  we  can  be  made  to  know, 
about  God,  we  hear  from  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  ;  indeed,  more  truly  still,  we 
see  it  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  "  He  that 
hath  seen  Him  hath  seen  the  Father." 
[As  we  say  of  a  boy  whose  father  is 
unknown  to  an  inquirer  who,  never- 
theless, is  acquainted  with  the  lad, 
"  Well,  he  is  his  father  over  again."] 
What  He  said  and  did,  and,  above  all, 
the  reasons,  the  principles  of  judgment 
and  action,  which  underlie  all  He  said 
and  did, — we  may  transfer  them  all  to 
God,  and  say,  "  Thus  and  thus  does 
He  act  and  judge."  His  relation,  e.g. 
to  prayer  and  to  sin,  is  exhibited 
in  Christ.  His  requirement  of  faith 
in  Himself  in  order  to  sight  and  health 
and  blessing,  is  a  revelation  of  God 
in  this  respect.  We  have  a  record, 
attested   by   historical  evidence,  suffi- 

44 


cient  when  the  nature  of  the  case  is 
taken  into  full  account,  of  a  Person 
and  His  character  and  teaching,  start- 
ing with  which  we  gain,  at  the  least, 
a  crucial  and  probative  instance  that 
there  is  a  "  supernatural  "  Order,  which 
in  that  one  case  at  least  has  broken  in 
upon,  and  manifested  itself  in  the  midst 
of,  the  natural.  The  world  of  God  and  of 
things  spiritual  disclosed  itself  in  Him, 
His  life  and  work.  It  is  an  ascertained 
fact,  and  level  to  the  apprehension  of 
the  simplest.  And  when,  moreover,  it 
is  understood  that  the  whole  Written 
Word  is  the  word  of  Christ  the 
Pevealer,  then  all  its  teachings  about 
God  become  those  of  Christ.  And,  as 
matter  of  fact,  the  only  certain  and 
satisfying  knowledge  of  God  has  been 
that  which  is  given  in  the  Word  of 
God ;  the  Written  and  the  Incarnate 
are  for  this  purpose  one.  3.  But  Paul 
singles  out  again  and  again  the  Cross 
as  the  central  point  of  the  revelation. 
A  knowledge  of  God  is,  in  his  view, 
given  there  which  does  not  even  come 
through  the  three  years'  ministry. 
[When  Moses  pleaded,  "  Show  me  Thy 
glory,"  and  God  made  His  goodrtess  to 
pass  before  His  servant,  it  was  not 
even  a  partial  refusal  of  his  request. 
His  "  goodness,"  "  pardoning  iniquity, 
transgression,  and  sin,"  is  His  "  glory  " 
to  sinners'  hearts  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18 — 
xxxiv.  7).]  It  is  interesting  in  the 
last  degree  to  hear  the  confession  of 
even  secular  students  of  history  that 
the  cross  of  Christ  is  the  end  of  the 
ancient  world  and  the  beginning  of 
the  modern  ;  that  all  ancient  history, 
Egyptian,  Assyrian,  Babylonian,  Per- 
sian, Greek,  Roman,  all  led  up  to  it 
and  converged  upon  it,  whilst  all  the 
life  of  the  modern  world  radices  from 
it ;  interesting  to  see  how  typical  was 
the  simple  fact  that  in  the  very  in- 
scription on  the  cross  were  gathered  up 
all  the  best  histoiy  of  preceding  ages, 
— Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin — Religion, 
Wisdom,  Law — Worship,  Speculation, 
Government ;  profoundly  interesting  to 
see  how  Christianity  meets  the  "Jew  "-_ 
type,  "  requh'ing  a  sign  "  of  the  near- 
ness of  the  Supernatural  ["for  outward, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  i. 


visible  wonders  "],  and  of  the  "  Greek  "- 
type,  asking  for  the  True  and  Beauti- 
ful and  Good  ["for  inward  complete- 
ness of  system  "]  ;  meeting  the  one  in 
the  failure  of  his  moral  quest,  and  the 
other  in  the  failure  of  his  intellectual 
inquiry.  But  the  ' '  base  "  and  ' '  despised  " 
and  guilty  want  first  and  most  urgently 
an  answer  for  the  conscience.  And, 
once  more  it  may  be  said,  that  the 
Cross  has,  age  after  age,  given  a 
satisfaction  on  this  point  found  no- 
where else.  "Theories  of  the  Atone- 
ment "  have  not  always  been  consistent 
or  wise,  or  duly  considerate  of  all  the 
facts ;  the  analysis  of  the  way  in  which 
the  holy  Justice  of  God  was  displayed 
at  Calvary,  as  well  as  the  Mercy,  may 
sometimes  have  been  mechanical  and 
overdone.  Much  of  all  this  has, 
moreover,  been  beyond  the  mass  of 
seeking  souls.  And,  apart  from  it  all, 
by  " believing"  they  have  at  the  Cross 
come  into  a  "  salvation "  which  has 
meant  "  knowledge  of  God."  Their 
faith  in  Christ  has  been  crowned  by 
a  gift  of  the  Spirit,  whose  indwelling 
has  restored  more  and  more  perfectly 
spiritual  vision  and  judgment  and 
power.  They  have  been  put  by  Him 
en  rapport  with  spiritual  things.  There 
has  come  a  "  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit,"  which  has  given  evidence  and 
proof  and  certainty.  God  reveals 
Himself  to  their  "  spirit."  They 
understand  the  reason  of  the  failure 
of  the  search  "  by  way  of  wisdom" 
"  Wise  "  or  ^^  foolish  "  after  the  mere 
intellectual  standard  of  "  the  world" 
the  "  saved "  "  know"  and  they  are 
saved  at  the  Cross  by  "  believing," 

Note. — Plato  complains  how  hard 
it  is  to  discover  the  Father  of  the 
universe.  Socrates  held  it  to  be  the 
greatest  possible  happiness  to  know 
the  will  of  the  gods,  but  did  not 
believe  this  discoverable  by  principles 
of  reason,  and  recommended  divina- 
tion [Christlieb,  Mod.  Doubt  and  Chr. 
Belief  pp.  78,  79.  He,  with  others, 
says  further  :]  Men  never  found  God 
as  personal,  as  holy,  as  Creator. 
Plato's  God  oscillates  between  Nature 
and   a    Divine   Idea.     Aristotle  made 


Him  personal,  but  limited  by  pri- 
mordial matter,  and  only  a  Demiourgos. 
The  utmost  attained  to  by  the  race  was 
an  intermittently  shining,  half-obscure 
presentiment,  but  not  that  God  is  and 
can  only  be  One. 

Ver.  30.  Christ  our  Wisdom,  Righ- 
teousness, Sanctif  cation,  Redemption. 

I.  Wisdom. — In  two  senses.  Not 
even  in  Paul's,  or  in  God's,  could  we 
be  "  wise "  if  there  were  no  Christ 
to  know,  and  unless  He  helped  us  to 
know  Himself.  He  is  the  great  Fact 
to  know  which  is  Wisdom.  He  gives 
the  faculty  for  knowing,  and  the  Spirit 
who  exhibits  Him  to  our  awakened 
perception.  He  is  Himself  the  Re- 
veal er,  the  Sum  of  all  Revelation,  and 
the  giver  of  the  "  Spirit  of  wisdom  and 
revelation"  (Eph.  i.  12).  Like  the 
"world"  at  Corinth,  the  "world" 
to-day  makes  no  account  of  such 
"wisdom."  But  "knowledge"  and  I 
"  ignorance,"  "  wisdom  "  and  "  folly," 
are  all  relative  terms.  Measured  by 
one  standard,  placed  in  one  set  of 
circumstances,  judged  by  one  purpose, 
a  man  may  be  wise.  With  no  change 
in  himself,  but  with  another  set  of 
conditions,  in  other  circumstances,  for 
another  purpose,  he  may  be  a  fool.  To 
be  really  wise  he  must  have  the  know- 
ledge just  then  required  and  must 
know  how  to  apply  it.  On  a  certain 
voyage,  for  example,  so  long  as  all 
went  well,  the  ship's  sin;geon  was  the 
wise  man  of  the  company.  Besides 
his  medical  skill,  he  knew  everything 
which  could  make  the  tedium  of  life 
on  shipboard  pass  agreeably  away,  i  ^^^^. 
He  easily  carried  the  palm  for  popu-^^sjn^^^ 
larity,  and  for  being  the  universally 
clever  man.  The  ship  was  v>^recked  on 
a  desolate  island.  It  became  a  question 
of  finding  shelter,  of  finding  and  cooking 
food,  and  here  the  many-sided  man  was 
utterly  at  fault.  The  common  sailors, 
with  their  experimental  knowledge  of 
a  thou  sand -and -one  odds  and  ends  of 
practical  convenience,  despised  the 
doctor  as  a  helpless  hindrance.  There 
was  a  curious  reversal  of  the  position. 
He  had  been  a  hero,  a  little  god,  on 


C^^^P^i^cM^  -M^iWiV^. 


45 


tHAF.  I.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    /.    CORINTHIANS. 


board  ;  now  he  was  a  fool  who  wanted  any  way  of  peace  with  myself  and  with 
feeding  and  could  find  no  food.     The  God?      Is  He  good?      But  that  only 
only  wisdom   known  to  the   Book   of  makes  me  the  more  sadly  wrong.     Do 
God  is  Divine  knowledge,  and  that  is  not  tell  me  what  you  hope,  or  think, 
all  bound  up  in  Christ.     No  Christian  Has    He    spoken  ?      What    are    His 
will   wisely  undervalue  mere  natural  ^  terms  of  restoration  ?  "     Up  to  Paul's 
wisdom  or  culture.   The  wide  knowledge  '  day  the  wisest  man  of  this  world  never 
of /the  facts  of  the  universe  and  their  answered    such    questions    with    any 
laws — Science ;    the    wide   mastery  of  finality  of   satisfaction.      The  world's 
the  facts  of   the   past  and   the   great  wisdom   has   no   final   answer   to-day. 
principles  underlying  them — History ;  The   very   simplest    Christian   has  an 
the     full-stored     knowledge     of     the  answer — an     answer    which,    in    ten 
human     mind,     and     of     its     laws —  thousand  instances,  has "  worked "  well 
Philosophy ;    literary    lore ;    the    ac-  in  practical  life.     He  believes  he  has 
cumulations  of  the  linguist ;  all  these  reached    certainty,    where    the    wisest 
are   noble  and   ennobling   possessions,  thinkers  who  disdain  the  help  of  Bevela- 
elevating,  widening,  as  well  as  furnish-  tion  go,  groping  and  guessing,  over  the 
ing   the  mind   which    is   enriched   by  same    wearisome    ground    of    human 
them.      All  di(^e  honour   even    to   the  ignorance  ;  he  certainly  has  learned  to 
"wise    man    after    the    flesh."       All  solve  moral  questions  in  practical  hving, 
highest  honour  to  such  Wisdom  when  as   they   are   never   solved   elsewhere^ 
she  becomes  the  handmaid  of  Divine  lie  bas   learned   a   wisdom    on   these 
truth.     ^\xt  Si\\t\ns,\^oxi\y  fair-weather  topics  which  will    have  abiding  value 
knowledge.     The  storm  is  coming,  the  in    the   dissolution    and   vanishing   of 
wreck  of  the  present  order  of  things ;  all  other  knowledge  besides,  and  will 
the  day  of  peril  and  of  judgment,  when  avail  even  at  the  bar  of  God.      The 
the  great  question  will  be  Eternal  Life  Christian    man's    theory   of    life   and 
or  Eternal  Death.     Even  now  all  mere  morals,    his   doctrine    of    God   and   of 
human    knowledge    is  of    things    that  creaturely    existence,    are    in    fact    a 
"  vanish  away."     Knowledge  and  the  complete  philosophy,  which  centres  for 
objects    of     knowledge    both    are    in  him    in    Christ.     All    we    can   know, 
ceaseless  flux ;  a  shifting,  ever-changing  certainly  all  that  we  need  to  know,  of 
knowledge  of  a  shifting,  ever-changing  God,  for  regulative  ends,  is  exhibited 
world,  a  partial  knowledge  perpetually  in  Christ.      We  hear   from    His   lips 
under  revision,  correction,  or  enlarge-  a  revelation  of   God ;    but  we  do  not 
ment.      The  one  unchanging   Fact  is  only  listen,  we  look  and  see  what  God 
God  in  Christ.      When,  in  "  the  new  is,  in  His  ow^n  holiness.     Every  great 
heavens  and  the  new  earth,"  our  science,  principle  of  His  dealing  with  petitioners 
history,  literature,  language,  art,  shall  and  with  sin  may  be  traced  out  in,  and 
have    been    made    obsolete,    or    shall  often   lies   upon  the  very   surface  of, 
have  become  mere  curious  memories,  the  works  of  Christ.     Said  Augustine : 
the  knowledge  of  God  will  abide,  true  *'  The  works  of  Christ  are  themselves 
as   ever,    important   as   ever.       "  Can  words  of   The  Word."      The  Bible  is 
you  tell  me  about  God  ?  "  is  a  question  through  the  Spirit  the  revelation  of 
which  somehow  the  human  mind  cannot  Jesus   Christ ;    and  thus   again  He  is 
let  alone.     "  Tell  me  about  man,  about  "  made  to  us  wisdom  "   on   the   great 
myself.     What  is  the  meaning  of  the  topics  of  the  inward  moral  schism,  its 
strange  conflict  always  going  on  within  meaning  and  origin  and  remedy.     At 
me,  between  a  higher  and  a  lower  self  ?  His    cross   is   the   only    definite   word 
What  is  the  voice  I  sometimes  seem  to  anywhere  found  about  the  pardon  of 
hear  within  me  ?  and  why  is  it  so  often  guilt.     And  all  the  "  wisdom  "  is  one 
a  voice  of  self-reproach  ?  "     And  then,  into  which  they  have  lived  their  way.     It 
when  sin  is  understood,  come  the  great  is  verified  knowledge ;  it  is  the  know- 
questions  :  "  Tell  me  whether  there  is  ledge  of  Life.      God   and   Conscience 

46 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  I. 


and   Sin — they   understand    these    by  is  the  result  of  an  act  of  pardon ;  the 

the  teaching  of   the    Spirit  of  Christ.  sanctification  is  the  result  of  a  pi^ocess. 

The  way  of  peace  with  God,  they  know  It  is  one  thing,  and  a  simple  one,  to 

it,  they  have  availed  themselves  of  it  "justify"  a  man  from,  his  past  debts; 

— it  is    Christ's  work.      Peace  within  it    is   another   and    a    longer,    greater 

themselves   instead   of   the   old  moral  matter   to   cure   him  of   thriftless   or 

discord — they  have  learned  the  secret  extravagant  habits  ;  yet  both  combine, 

of  that  also.      And  everything  which  and  are  needed,  for  complete  help  for 

is  really  wisdom,  before  God,  and  in  the  debtor.     Something  must  be  done 

the  presence  of  eternity,  they  are  being  for  men,   very   much    in  men,   if   the 

taught  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ.     The  work  of  redemption   is  to    be  accom- 

Revealer  is  Christ,  the  great  Prophet  plished.     [The  "  Jews  "  were  not  only 

of  God.  delivered     from     their     captivity     in 

II.  This  passes  over  into  Righteous-  Babylon  ;  they  were  cured  by  it  of  the 

ness  and   Sanctification. — We  sliould  love  of  ielolatry  which  had  brought  the 

once  more  have  expected  '■^ power  "  to  captivity  upon  them.    In  the  unvarying 

be  linked   with   "  wisdom"      But   no,  symbolism  of    Scripture  the   "  blood  " 

something  better — ^'■righteousness."  deals   with   guilt,    the    "water"    with 

1.  These  to  he  taken  together. — They  impurity.     The  "water  and  the  blood" 

go  together,  in  fact,  as  closely  as  in  the  are    the    credentials    of     a    complete 

grammar  of  the  text.    To  a  heart  which  Saviour  (1   John  v.  8).]     A  man  who 

learns  Paul's  dialect  they  become  almost  is  "  safe  "  in  regai  d  to  the  guilt  of  the 

a  familiar  two-worded  unit  of  his  custo-  past  is  "  saved,"  but  in  a  very  elemen- 

mary  thinking,  as  they  are  used  in  the  tary  sense  only.     That  does  but  clear 

vocabulary   of    Paul.       Righteousness  the  way  for  a  "  salvation "   which   is 

and    Sanctification   cover    the    whole  larger,  and  complete:  "  Sanctification." 

career  of  the  Christian  life  from  pardon  The  man  who  is  forgiven  must  go  on 

to  glory.      They  are   one   work ;    one  to  be  holy. 

salvation  ;  one  glorious  life.  [Rom.  2.  Christ  is  our  sanctification. — Not 
viii.  30,  "them  He  glorified,"  began  at  alias  though  there  were  in  the  Gospel 
to  be  true  from  the  moment  of  "  them  any  vicarious  holiness  belonging  to  His 
He  justified."]  Not  the  same  thing  :  work,  such  as  will  excuse  the  man  who 
the  one  the  first  step  ;  the  other  the  believes  in  Christ  from  seeking  and 
whole  subsequent  course.  [In  the  working  out  a  very  real  personal 
illustrative  language  of  Ps.  xl.  2,  the  holiness.  There  was  truth  in  the  out- 
Righteousness  is  located  at  the  point  of-fashion  and  discredited  phrase 
where  the  foot  is  first  set  firmly  upon  "  Imputed  Righteousness  "  (meaning 
the  rocky  brink  of  the  "  horrible  pit "  ;  "  imputed  holiness  ").  But  it  was 
Sanctification  is  the  progressive  depar-  only  true  to  those  who  ai'e  aiming  at 
ture  farther  and  farther  from  the  pit,  realising  their  holiest  in  practice  and 
with  "goings"  which  are  more  and  Diore  attainment.  Imperfection  will  cling 
"established."]  Th  '  one  the  work  of  where  it  brings  no  guilt.  In  Christ 
pardoning,  the  other  of  the  purifying,  they  are  judged  "holy"  by  a  law  which 
grace  of  God  ;  in  modern  phraseology,  for  Plis  sake  is  interpreted  in  evangelical 
blessings  respectively  objective  and  grace,  and  is  reckoned  as  fulfilled  by 
subjective ;  in  old  theological  language,  love.  But  God  desires  to  have  His 
relative  and  real ;  imputed,  imparted.  "  righteous  "  ones  really  "  sanctified." 
The  one  restores  His  favour,  the  other  And  the  grace  which  sanctifies  is  secured 
His  image.  Apart  from  all  technical  for  them,  as  pardon  was,  by  the  work  of 
phraseology,  the  fashion  of  which  may  Christ.  With  Him  was  freely  given 
change  from  teacher  to  teacher,  from  the  Spirit  who  makes  them  holy — 
Church  to  Church,  from  century  to  Christ  is  the  model  and  the  means 
century,  the  distinction  is  a  real  one  and  of  their  sanctification.  It  is  the  work 
an  inevitable  one.    The  righteousness  of  the  Great  Priest  of  the  Gospel  order. 

47 


CHAP.  I.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    1,   CORINTHIANS. 


III.  Redemption  is  the  crown  of 
the  work  of  Christ. — The  word  is 
here  used  in  its  highest  and  noblest 
sense.  In  a  lower,  narrower  use  it 
is  the  foundation  of  salvation ;  men 
could  not  be  "  saved,"  if  they  had  not 
been  first  "  redeemed."  The  redemp- 
tion of  the  race  is  the  basis  and 
background  of  the  salvation  of  the 
individual.  But,  looking  forward,  we 
see  salvation  fulfilled,  culminating  in 
redemption.  Man  is  not  only  soul 
and  spirit,  "  but  body,  soul,  and 
spirit."  The  body  was  redeemed  by 
Christ  [not  Eph.  v.  23,  but  1  Cor.  vi.  20]; 
and  as  it  has  shared  in  the  ruin  and 
curse  wrought  by  sin,  so  it  will  share 
in  the  deliverance  wrought  by  Christ. 
[It  is  part  of  the  "  creature," 
Rom.  viii.  21,  22.]  It  must  wait 
longest  for,  and  must  receive  latest 
of  all,  its  part  in  the  redemption  of 
our  complete  manhood  by  Christ ;  but 
He  wore  it  Himself,  and  still  wears 
it,  in  a  glory  which  is  an  earnest  and 
pledge  to  the  very  body  that  He  will 
not  reckon  His  redemption  complete 
until  His  people  stand  by  His  side 
before  His  Father  ["  Behold,  I  and 
children  which  God  hath  given  Me  " 
Isa.  viii.  18 ;  Heb.  ii.  13],  the  last 
trace  of  the  fell  work  of  sin  gone 
from  every  part,  even  the  humblest, 
of  their  nature.  The  body  will  rise 
because  He  has  risen,  body  and  all. 
It  will  appear  in  glory,  as,  and  because, 
He  appears  in  glory.  The  vista  of 
New  Testament  revelation  leads  up  to 


a  House  in  whose  courts  there  move 
about,  as  if  "  to  the  manner  born " 
[they  have  been  "  new-horn  "  to  it],  a 
glorious  Family,  every  one  of  whom 
is  "  conformed  to  the  image  of  God's 
Son,"  "the  firstborn  amongst  many 
brethren  "  (Bom.  viii.  29).  He  is  the 
pattern  whose  reproduction  in  them 
accounts  for  the  strong  "  family-like- 
ness "  in  them  all.  This  is  their 
"good"  (Bom.  viii.  28),  up  to  which 
"  ail  things  have  been  working  to- 
gether " — Grace,  Providence,  even 
History  in  its  worldwide,  age-long 
course.  The  "  redemption  of  the 
body"  (Bom.  viii.  23)  will  be  the 
latest  element  in  a  redemptive  process 
which  at  last  puts  every  man  who  is 
in  the  new  Bace,  whose  Head  is  the 
Second  Adam,  beyond  the  reach  of  sin 
or  death.  As  an  Idea  in  the  mind 
and  heart  of  God — to  speak  humanly 
— the  beginning  of  this  whole  Bedemp- 
tion  is  dateless,  "  before  the  world 
was."  Historically,  its  unfolding 
anticipated  Calvary.  But  in  a  true 
sense  the  initial  moment  was  wlien 
He  cried  in  death,  "It  is  finished  !  " 
And  its  completion  will  date  from 
the  moment  when  the  Divine-human 
Bedeemer  looks  for  the  first  time 
upon  the  gathered,  completed  company 
of  His  own,  and  sees  His  own  victory 
over  Sin  and  its  work,  Death,  realised  in 
His  people.  The  King  and  Deliverer 
will  then  cry  once  more,  "  Finished  ! " 
His  people  will  say,  "  Thou  art  made 
unto  us  Bedemption  !  " 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  9.  God  is  Faithful. 

I.  God's  character. — To  use  a 
homely  word,  "  reliable."  Like  His 
"  faithful  sayings,"  in  the  Pastoral 
Epistles ;  as  He  is,  so  is  "  every  word 
that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of 
God."  "  By  every  (such)  word  doth 
man  live"  (Deut.  viii.  3).  Here  His 
character  is  the  great  basal  fact  on 
which  rests  the  fulfilment  of  "  shall 
confirm  "  (ver.  8).  The  '*  confirmation  " 
of    "  the   testimony "   (ver.  6)  was   but 

48 


the  means  employed  by  this  ^'•faithful 
Godr  It  is  an  admirably  suitable  and 
efficient  instrumentality,  but  chiefly 
because  it  is  in  His  hand.  [Cf.  the 
same  link  of  thought  in  a  Fijian's  boast 
to  a  missionary  (known  to  H.  J.  F.), 
"  This  is  a  good  gun,  hut  I'  carry 
ii."]  Promises,  the  arrangement  of 
the  *'  plan  of  salvation,"  everything 
in  Gospel  and  in  grace,  for  all  worth 
to  us,  ultimately  come  to  this,  thatv 
behind  them,  directing  them,  employ- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  i. 


ing  them,  is  the  ^'■faithful  God^  All 
faith  ultimately  finds  its  way  to  Him. 
*'  Have  faith  in  God.''  He  is  reliable, 
and  may  be  counted  on,  to  an  utter 
certainty. 

II.  An  argument  for  our  heart, 
resting  upon  it.  1.  His  character  is 
pledged  to  us.  "  He  cannot  deny  Him- 
self." He  cannot  turn  His  back  upon 
the  Self  whom  His  people  have  always 
known.  He  cannot  do  anything  which 
is  incongruous  with  His  past  character 
and  dealings.  He  will  never  "begin 
again,"  on  some  new  and  unexampled 
line  of  conduct.  We  may  plead  *'  For 
Thy  Name's  sake,"  and  feel  that  we 
there  have  a  strong  hold  upon  Him. 
His  "  Name  "  is  involved. 

2.  When  He  called  us,  He  promised, 
so  far  as  depended  on  Him,  to  finish 
His  work  by  bringing  us  "  unreprove- 
able  "  to  "  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  The 
beginning  was,  qud  His  intention  and 
desire,  a  promise  to  finish.  It  com- 
mitted Him  to  finish  His  work,  if  we 
will  not  thwart  His  purpose.  He 
desires  to  redeem  the  pledge  of  His 
"  calling. '' 

Vers.  20,  21.  Human  Wisdom. 
I.  Challenged, 
II.  Confounded, 
III.  Superseded,    by    the    Gospel. — 

[J.  Z.] 

Ver.  20.  "  Where,"  indeed  ! 
I.  What  have  they  not  attempted  ? 
II.  What  have  they  not  promised  ? 

III.  What  have  they  achieved  ? 

IV.  How     are     they    brought     to 
nought?— [/.Z.] 

Ver.  30.  Christ  is  made  [cf.  John  i. 
14  (another  tense  of  same  verb),  the 
great  primal  wonder,  of  which  this  is 
one  purpose  and  outcome.  See  Ap- 
pended Note]  Wisdom  to  us. 

The  true  culture  is  the  conforming 
of  our  manhood  to  the  ideal  in  Christ. 
"  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  a  certain  super- 
ficial refinement  of  manners,  some 
acquaintance   with  the  forms  of  good 


society,  a  little  stock  of  ordinary 
phrases,  and  the  fact  of  having  seen 
or  heard  something  of  the  best  known 
products  of  literature,  together  with  a 
fashionable  style  of  dress,  is,  in  the 
opinion  of  most,  a  sufficient  claim  to  the 

possession  of  culture Only  look  at 

the  simple-minded  man,  not  possessing 
much  outward  culture,  but  animated  by 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  by  sound  piety  ; 
what  a  sense  of  moral  fitness,  what 
correct  tact,  what  sound  judgment, 
especially  as  to  the  ethical  value  of  any 
person  or  action,  do  we  find  gradually 
produced  in  him.  In  such  a  case  the 
educating  influence  of  Christianity  is 
frequently  shown  in  a  most  surprising 
way."  (Christlieb,  Mod.  Doubt  arid 
Christian  Belief,  pp.  40,  43.) 

Ver.  30.  Christ  is  inade  unto  us  Re- 
demption. 

I.  By  an  atoning  sacrifice  (Gal  iii. 
13). 

II.  By  infusing  the  spirit  of  a  new 
life. 

III.  By  abolishing  death  as  the 
penalty  of  sin.  There  was  evidently 
death,  violent  death,  in  the  pre-Adamic 
geological  ages.  But  the  "  violent " 
death  may  have  been  painless,  for 
aught  we  know.  If  not,  it  may  have 
been  that  there  would  have  been  no 
death  for  the  crown  of  creation,  man. 
Or  if  there  had  been  death  for  him, 
it  would  have  been  only  dissolution, 
natural,  happy.  Sin,  indeed,  turned 
dying  into  Death.  It  is  Death  be- 
cause it  is  not  only  the  penalty  of  sin, 

.  but  it  is  the  physical  anticipation  and 
adumbration  of  the  true  Death — 
"  death  that  is  death  indeed  " — the 
abandonment  of  the  soul  by  God  Who 
is  its  Life.  Sin  links  fear  v>7ith  the 
thought  of  death,  for  to  an  innocent 
moral  nature,  one  might  as  reasonably 
hope  as  fear,  before  the  presence 
of  the  unknown  future.  Now  in 
Christ  death  is  once  more  only  dying ; 
decease,  departure,  falling  asleep.  The 
one  thing  which  now  the  dying  of  a 
Christian  is  never  called  is  "  death." 
He  hath  abolished  death ;  it  practically 
counts  for  nothing  to  His  people.     He 

E  49 


ciivp.  I.      IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


has    abolished     its    bondage     of   fear 
(Heb.  ii.  15). 

Ver.  30.  Christ  made  to  us  .  .  . 
Righteousness,  Sanctijication,  Redemp- 
tion, 


Stanley  brings   out   three   pairs  of 
correlatives. 

I.  Subjective.       1.     Righteousness. 
2.  Holiness.     3.  Freedom. 

II.  Objective.      1.    Acquittal.       2. 
Consecration.     3.  Deliverance. 


APPENDED  NOTES. 


Ver.  21.  Seeking  God. — To  be  blessed  by 
God,  to  know  Him,  and  what  He  is,  that 
is  the  battle  of  Jacob's  soul  from  sunset  till 
the  dawn  of  day.  And  this  is  our  struggle — 
the  struggle.  Let  any  true  man  go  down 
into  the  deeps  of  his  own  being,  and  answer 
us,  what  is  the  cry  that  comes  from  the 
most  real  part  of  his  nature  ?  Is  it  the  cry 
for  daily  bread  ?  Jacob  asked  for  that  in 
\)\^jir8t  communion  with  God — preservation, 
safety.  Is  it  even  this,  to  be  forgiven  our 
sins  ?  Jacob  bad  a  sin  to  be  forgiven,  and 
in  that  mo.st  solemn  moment  of  his  existence 
he  did  not  say  a  syllable  about  it.  Or  is  it 
this,  "  Hallowed  be  Thy  name  "  ?  No  1  Out 
of  our  frail  and  yet  sublime  humanity,  the 
demand  that  rises  in  the  earthlier  hours  of 
our  religion  may  be  this,  "  Save  my  soul"  ; 
but  in  the  most  unearthly  moments  it  is  this, 
'*  Tell  me  Thy  Name."  We  move  through 
a  world  of  mystery ;  and  the  deepest  ques- 
tion is,  "  What  is  the  being  that  is  ever  near, 
sometimes  felt,  never  seen  ?  That  which  has 
haunted  us  from  childhood,  with  a  dream  of 
something  surpassingly  fair,  which  has  never 
yet  been  realised  ?  That  wLich  sweeps 
through  the  soul  at  times  as  a  desolation, 
like  the  blast  from  the  wings  of  the  Angel 
of  Death,  leaving  us  stricken  and  silent  in 
our  loneliness  ?  That  which  has  touched  us 
in  our  tenderest  point,  and  the  flesh  has 
quivered  with  agony,  and  our  mortal  affec- 
tions have  shrivelled  up  with  pain  ?  That 
which  comes  to  us  in  aspirations  of  nobleness, 
and  conceptions  of  superhuman  excellence. 
Shall  we  say  It  or  He  ?  What  is  It  ?  Who 
is  He  ?  Those  anticipations  of  Immortality 
and  God,  what  are  they  ?  Are  they  the  mere 
throbbings  of  my  own  heart,  lieard  and 
mistaken  for  a  living  something  beside  me  ? 
Are  they  the  sound  of  my  own  wishes, 
echoing  through  the  vast  void  of  Nothing- 
ness ?  Or  shall  I  still  call  them  God,  Father, 
Spirit,  Love  ?  A  living  Being  within  me  or 
outside  me  ?  Tell  me  Thy  Name,  thou  awful 
mystery  of  Loveliness  !  This  is  the  struggle 
of  all  earnest  life." — F.  W.  Robertson,  *'  Ser- 
mo7is,"  i.  45,  46,  "  JacoVs  Wrestling:'  Of.  "  In 
Memoriam"  cxxiv.,  ••  The  heart's  refusal  of 
Atheism." 

Ver.  21.  The  Foolishness  of  the  Preaching. — 
If  Christianity  had  been  an  *'  idyll "  or  a 
'*  pastoral,"  the  product  of  the  simple  peasant 
life  and  of  the  bright  sky  of  Galilee,  there 

50 


is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  have  attracted 
a  momentary  interest  in  literary  circles, 
although  it  certainly  would  have  escaped 
from  any  more  serious  trial  at  the  hands  of 
statesmen  than  an  unaffected  indifference 
to  its  popularity.  But  what  was  the  Gospel, 
as  it  met  the  eye  and  fell  upon  the  ear  of 
Roman  Paganism  ?  1  Cor.  i.  23,  ii.  2.  Here 
was  a  truth  inextricably  linked  with  other 
truths  equally  •'  foolish  "  in  the  apprehension 
of  Pagan  intellect,  equally  condemnatory  of 
the  moral  degradation  of  Pagan  life.  In  the 
preaching  of  the  Apostles,  Jesus  Crucified 
confronted  the  intellectual  cynicism,  the 
social  selfishness,  and  the  sensualist  degrada- 
tion of  the  Pagan  world.  To  its  intellect 
He  said,  "  I  am  the  Truth " ;  He  bade  its 
proud  self-confidence  bow  before  His  in- 
tellectual Royalty.  To  its  selfish,  heartless 
society,  careful  only  for  bread  and  amuse- 
ment, careless  of  the  agonies  which  gave 
interest  to  the  amphitheatre.  He  said,  "  A 
new  commandment,"  etc.  (John  xiii.  34). 
Disinterested  love  of  slaves,  of  barbarians, 
of  political  enemies,  of  social  rivals,  love  of 
man  as  man,  was  to  be  a  test  of  true  dis- 
cipleship.  And  to  the  sensuality,  so  gross, 
and  yet  often  so  polished,  which  was  the 
very  law  of  individual  Pagan  life,  He  said, 
"  If  any  man  will  ccme  after  Me,"  etc.  (Matt, 
xvi.  24)  ;  "  If  thine  eye  offend  thee,"  etc. 
(Matt,  xviii.  9).  Sensuality  was  to  be 
dethroned,  not  by  the  negative  action  of  a 
prudential  abstinence  from  indulgence,  but 
by  the  strong  positive  force  of  self-mortifica- 
tion. Was  such  a  doctrine  likely,  of  its  own 
weight  and  without  any  assistance  from  on 
high,  to  win  its  way  to  acceptance?  Is  it 
not  certain  that  debased  souls  are  so  far 
from  aspiring  naturally  toward  that  which  is 
holy,  elevated,  and  pure,  that  they  feel  toward 
it  only  hatred  and  repulsion?  Certainl}^, 
Rome  was  unsatisfied  with  her  old  national 
idolatries  ;  but  if  she  turned  her  eyes  toward 
the  East,  it  was  not  to  welcome  the  religion 
of  Jesus,  but  the  impure  rites  of  Isis  and 
Serapis,  of  Mithra  and  Astarte.  The  Gospel 
came  to  her  unbidden,  in  obedience  to  no 
assignable  attraction  in  Roman  society,  but 
simply  in  virtue  of  its  own  expansive,  world- 
entrancing  force.  Certainly,  Christianity 
answered  to  the  moral  wants  of  the  world, 
as  it  really  answers  at  this  moment  to  the 
true  moral  wants  of  all  human  beings,  how- 
ever unbelieving  or  immoral  the;y'  may  be. 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  I. 


The  question  is,  wiiether  the  world  so  clearly 
recognised  its  real   wants  as   forthwith    to 
embrace  Christianity?     The   Physician   was 
there  ;  but  did  the  patient  know  the  nature 
of  his  own  malady  sufficiently  well  not  to 
view  the  presence  of   the  Physician  as  an 
intrusion  ?    Was  it  likely  that  the  old  Roman 
society,  with  its  intellectual  pride,  its  social 
heartlessness,  and   its   unbounded   personal 
self-indulgence,   should   be    enthusiastically 
in   love    with   a  religion    which    made  in- 
tellectual   submission,   social   unselfishness, 
and  personal  mortification,  its  very  funda- 
mental law^s  ?     The  history  of  the  three  first 
centuries   is  the   answer   to   that   question. 
The  kingdom  of  God  was  no  sooner  set  up 
.  .  .  than  it  found  itself  surrounded  by  all 
that  combines  to  make  the  progress  of  a 
doctrine  or  of  a  system   impossible.      The 
thinkers  were  opposed  to  it ;  they  denounced 
it  as  a  dream  of  folly.     [He  quotes  Tacit., 
Ann.,    XV.    44,    *'  Exitiabilis    superstitio  "  ; 
Suetonius,  Nero,  xvi.,  '•  Superstitio  nova  et 
malefica  "  ;  Celsus'  comparison  of  the  worship 
of  Christ  with  the  Egyptian  worship  of  cats, 
crocodiles,  etc.]     The  habits  and  passions  of 
the  people  were  opposed  to  it ;  it  threatened 
somewhat  rudely  to   interfere   with   them. 
There  were  venerable   institutions,   coming 
down  from  a  distant  antiquity,  and  gathering 
round     them     the    stable    and    thoughtful 
elements  of  society  ;  these  were  opposed  to 
it,  as  to  an  audacious  innovation,  as  well  as 
from  an  instinctive  perception  that  it  might 
modify   or   destroy    themselves.      National 
feeling  was   opposed   to   it ;  it  flattered  no 
national  self-love ;  it  was  to  be  the  home  of 
human  kind  ;  it  was  to  embrace  the  world  ; 
and  as  yet  the  nation  was  the  highest  con- 
ception of  associated  life  to  which  humanity 
had  reached.      Nay,  religious  feeling  itself 
was    opposed    to    it ;    for  religious   feeling 
had  been  enslaved   by  ancient   falsehoods. 
There   were    worships,   priesthoods,  beliefs, 
in    long-established    possession;    and    they 
were  not  likely  to  yield  without  a  struggle 
...  It  was  a  time  when  the  whole  adminis- 
trative power   of   the   empiie  was  steadily 
concentrated   upon  the    extinction    of    the 
Name   of   Christ.      What   were   then,   to   a 
human  eye,  the  prospects  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God  ?     It  had  no  allies,  like  the  sword   of 
the   Mohammedan,   or    like    the    congenial 
mysticism  which  welcomed  the  Buddhist,  or 
like  the  politicians  who  strove  to  uphold  the 
falling   Paganism   of   Eome.      It  found   no 
countenance   even  in   the   Stoic   moralists ; 
they  were  indeed  amongst  its  fiercest  enemies. 
[In  foot-note  he  adds,  "  Who  can  marvel  at 
its  instinctive   hatred   of  a  religion,  which 
proclaimed  a  higher  code  of  Ethics  than  its 
own,  and   which,   moreover,   possessed   the 
secret  of  teaching  that  code  practically  to 
all  classes  of  mankind  ?    (See  next  Appended 
Note,  a.y]     If  .  .  .  it  ever  was  identified  by 
Pagan  opinion   with  the  copfus  ilUciti,  the 


collegia  illicita,  with  the  moral  clubs  of  the 
imperial  epoch,  this  would  only  have  rendered 
it  more  than  ever  an  object  of  suspicion  to 
the  government.  Between  the  new  doctrine 
and  the  old  Paganism  there  was  a  deadly 
feud." — lAddon,  "  Bampton  Lectures,"  III. 
iii.  3  (^). 

a.  Appended  Note  to  above :  "  Most  men, 
being  incapable  of  understanding  logical 
arguments  concerning  truth,  need  instruction 
through  parables ;  thus  those  who  are 
called  Christians  derive  their  faith  from  the 
parables  of  their  Master.  They  sometimes 
act,  however,  like  those  who  follow  true 
philosophy.  There  are  some  among  them 
who,  in  their  zeal  to  control  themselves,  and 
to  live  honourably,  have  succeeded  in  becom- 
ing in  nothing  inferior  to  true  philosophers." 
—  Galen  {the  physician^  ;  from  a  lost  work  on 
Plato.     Quoted  in  Luthardt. 

Ver.  23.  The  Cross  and  its  Victory. — To  the 
ancient  world  the  cross  was  the  symbol  of 
shame  ;  to  us  it  is  our  joy,  our  comfort,  and 
our  boast.  There  is  nothing  which  can  pos- 
sibly be  more  opposed  to  all  our  natural  ideas 
than  the  cross.  We  can  understand  a  God 
of  majesty;  we  can  comprehend  a  mani- 
festation of  God  in  the  great  interests  of 
humanity ;  but  nothing  could  be  more 
directly  opposed  to  our  every  notion  than 
that  the  death  on  the  cross  should  be  His 
supreme  manifestation.  "  To  the  Jews  a 
stumbling-block,  to  the  Greeks  foolishness  " 
(1  Cor.  i.  23).  And  so  it  is  still.  And  yet 
it  was  just  the  preaching  of  the  Cross  that 
conquered  the  world.  In  proportion  as  con- 
cessions are  made  to  the  repugnance  of  the 
natural  reason  to  the  cross  is  Christianity 
weakened  and  its  efficacy  lessened.  It  is 
only  the  Christianity  of  the  cross  which  is 
the  victory  over  the  world.  And  it  has 
conquered.  A  few  years  since  a  drawing 
representing  the  Crucified  was  found  upon 
the  walls  of  the  ancient  palace  of  the  Caesars 
in  Pvome.  The  rude  sketch  speaks  to  us 
from  the  midst  of  the  times  of  the  struggle 
between  Christianity  and  heathenism,  and 
is  a  memorial  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
minds  of  men  were  then  stirred.  Some 
heathen  servant  of  the  emperor  is  taunting 
his  Christian  fellow-servant  with  this  con- 
temptuous sign.  The  relic  belongs  to  about 
the  year  200,  and  is  by  far  the  most  ancient 
crucifix  we  know  of.  But  this  ...  is  an 
ironical  one.  It  is  a  caricature  of  Christ, 
before  which  a  Christian  stands  worshipping, 
and  it  bears  the  inscription,  "  Alexamenos  " 
— the  name  of  the  derided  Christian — 
"  worshipping  his  God."  We  see  that  the 
Crucified  Saviour  and  the  preaching  of  the 
cross  were  the  scorn  of  the  world ;  and  yet 
this  conquered  the  v^'orld.  In  the  great 
struggle  between  heathenism  and  Chris- 
tianity the  cross  was  the  sign  of  victory. 
Whether  the  story  is  true  or  not  that  Con- 

51 


CHAP.  I.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


stantine,  before  his  decisive  battle  with 
Maxentius,  saw  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  the 
appearance  of  a  cross,  with  the  inscription, 
"  By  this  sbalt  thou  conquer,"  even  if  it  is 
a  fiction,  it  is  yet  truth  in  the  form  of  fiction, 
for  the  cross  was  the  victorious  power,  and 
such  it  will  remain.  If  Christianity  is  to 
conquer  the  world,  it  will  only  do  so  as  the 
preaching  of  the  Cross,  and  not  by  conces- 
sions to  the  natural  reason.  It  is  contrary 
to  all  natural  logic  that  God  should  humble 
Himself  to  such  an  extremity.  That  death 
upon  the  tree  of  shame  should  be  His 
supreme  revelation  is  contrary  to  all  the 
logic  of  the  natural  reason.  But  it  is  the 
logic  of  love ;  and  love  can  hold  its  own 
against  the  logic  of  the  mere  understanding, 
for  it  has  on  its  side  the  higher  logic  of 
tiViiK—Luthardt,  "  Saving  Truths,''  136-8. 

[The  caricature  referred  to,  known  as  the 
Graffito,  was  on  the  plaster  of  the  wall  of 
one  of  the  guard-rooms  of  the  Pretorians, 
the  body-guard,  the  household  troops,  of  the 
Emperor,  in  the  ruins  of  the  Imperial  Palace 
on  the  Palatine.  The  head  of  the  Crucified 
One  is  probably  that  of  an  ass.  (It  was 
a  common  popular  slander  that  the  Chris- 
tians worshipped  an  ass.)  The  worshipper 
is  most  likely  a  Protorian,  like  the  draughts- 
man of  the  caricature.  A  readily  accessible 
engraving  and  description  of  the  Graffito 
may  be  found  in  "  Italian  Pictures  "  (p.  55), 
Religious  Tract  Society,  Pen-and- Pencil 
Series^ 

Ver.  23.  The  Victory  of  the  Cross. — Every- 
thing seemed  to  conspire  to  render  its  vict  ory 
utterly  impossible.  Its  origin  was  against 
it ;  it  seemed  but  a  Jewish  sect.  Its  ad- 
vocates and  followers  had  nothing  attractive 
about  them,  and  belonged  for  the  most  part 
to  the  lower  and  uneducated  classes.  Its 
doctrine  was  a  *' stumbling-block" ;  it  ap- 
peared a  most  vexatious  "  foolishness."  Its 
reverence  for  God,  too,  was  suspected,  for 
the  Christians,  using  no  images  of  the  gods, 
were  taken  for  atheists.  The  worst  and 
most  immoral  things  were  said  of  its  mys- 
terious rites.  Public  opinion  was  prejudiced 
against  them,  philosophy  assailed  Chris- 
tianity with  intellectual  weapons,  whilst  the 
authorities  opposed  it  with  brute  force. 
And  yet  it  triumphed.  So  early  as  the  reign 
of  Nero  it  was,  as  Tacitus  indignantly 
asserts,  very  widely  diffused.  {Multitude 
ingens,  Ann.,  xv.  44.)  Nor  did  it  avail  to 
arrest  its  progress,  that  Nero,  in  order  to 
divert  from  himself  the  guilt  of  the  great 
conflagration  of  Rome,  executed  vast  num- 
bers of  Christians  ;  not  so  much,  as  Tacitus 
says,  because  they  were  guilty  of  this  crime, 
as  because  they  were  hated  by  the  whole 
human  race.  (Tac,  ut  supra.')  Nevertheless, 
Christianity  continued  to  spread.  An  in- 
teresting letter  of  the  younger  Pliny, 
governor    of    Bithynia,    to  his    friend    the 

5§ 


Emperor  Trajan,  written  about  seventy  years 
after  the  death  of  Christ,  is  still  extant, 
distinctly  pourtraying  the  state  of  the 
Christian  cause  at  that  time  in  the  places 
which  had  been  the  scenes  of  St.  Paul's  and 
St.  John's  ministries.  "  This  superstition," 
writes  Pliny  {Epp.  v.  97),  "  has  spread  on  all 
sides,  in  towns,  in  villages,  and  in  the 
country;  the  temples  of  our  gods  stand 
deserted,  and  sacrifices  have  now  for  a  long 
time  ceased  to  be  offered.  I  arrested  a  few 
girls  called  deaconesses,  and  put  them  to 
the  torture,  but  discovered  nothing  besides 
excessive  and  pernicious  superstition,"  .  .  . 
And  a  century  later,  Tertullian,  in  his 
Apology  (c.  37),  could  say  to  the  heathen, 
'*  We  are  but  of  yesterday,  and  yet  we  have 
taken  possession  of  your  whole  country — 
towns,  islands,  the  camp,  the  palace,  the 
senate,  the  forum ;  we  have  left  you  only 
the  temples  1 "  Nor  could  the  great  persecu- 
tions— of  which  ten  may  be  enumerated — 
ever  hanging  over  the  Christians  arrest  the 
triumphs  of  Christianity.  No  age,  no  sex, 
was  spared ;  all  the  strength  of  the  empire 
was  put  into  requisition ;  certain  of  the 
most  energetic  of  the  emperors,  such  as 
Decius  and  Diocletian,  considered  it  their 
special  duty  to  root  out  Christianity  from 
the  world,  because  the  very  existence  of  the 
Roman  Empire  depended  upon  its  extirpa- 
tion. But  the  arm  of  the  executioner  failed 
before  the  fidelity  of  the  Christians. 
Diocletian  was  obliged  to  give  up  his  work  ; 
he  retired  from  the  stage,  but  Christianity 
remained,  and  in  the  person  of  Constantine 
ascended  the  imperial  throne,  and  has  since 
governed,  even  externally,  the  Roman  world. 
— Luthardt,  '■^Fundamental  Truths,"  267-9. 

Ver.  23.  The  Victory  of  the  Cross  over  Hea- 
thenism.— "  As  Heine  puts  it,  while  the  gods 
of  Greece  were  assembled  at  the  feast  of  the 
immortals,  and  Hebe  tripped  round  with  her 
goblets  of  pleasantest  nectar,  and  infinite 
laughter  rang  round  the  happy  banqueting 
board,  and  the  feast  was  at  its  fullest,  the 
music  at  its  sweetest,  suddenly  there  came 
gasping  towards  them  a  pale  Jew,  dripping 
with  blood  ;  a  crown  of  thorns  on  His  head, 
bearing  a  great  cross  of  wood  on  His  shoulder  ; 
and  He  cast  the  cross  on  the  high  table  of 
the  gods,  so  that  the  golden  goblets  trembled 
and  fell,  and  the  gods  grew  dumb  and  pale, 
and  ever  paler,  till  they  melted  in  utter 
mist." — From  "  A  Lay  Sermon  "  hy  Gerald 
Massey. 

Ver.  30.  Christ . . .  Wisdom  to  us. — *'  Verse  30, 
viewed  apart  from  its  connection,  is  a  great 
text,  and  great  in  the  greatness  of  its  mystery. 
Became,  not  was  made.  This  verb  denotes  a 
transition  from  one  state  or  mode  of  subsis- 
tence to  another,  e.g.  'the  Word  became^ 
flesh,'  i.e.  being  God,  the  Word  passed  into  a 
mode  of  subsistence  in  which  He  was  man  as 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    1.   CORINTHIAN^,     chap.  I. 


well  as  God.  Similarly  we  are  said  (2  Cor. 
V.  21)  to  '  become  the  righteousness  of  God  in 
Christ,'  i.e.  to  pass  from  our  low  estate  of 
sinful  humiliation  to  the  high  level  of  God's 
perfect  righteousness.  Thus,  according  to 
ver.  80,  the  Son  of  God,  when  He  entered 
into  human  nature,  entered  also  into  the 
Divine  scheme  of  wisdom,  and  translated  it 
into  life.  For  unquestionably  the  substance 
of  that  scheme  of  wisdom  was  the  union  of 
the  two  natures  in  the  Person  of  God's  Son, 
together  with  the  manifold  benefits  flowing 
from  that  union.  Of  this  hidden  counsel  of 
redemption,  which  was  willed  and  planned 
before  Creation  itself,  Jesus  Christ  was  in 
His  Person  the  embodiment,  and  in  all  that 
He  wrought  and  suffered,  the  historical 
manifestation  and  pleroma.  Thus  He  became 
wisdom  from  God  ;  not  '  became  from  God ' ; 
the  order  of  the  Greek  is  against  that  view. 
Again,  as  the  Father  in  heaven  was  the  first 
cause  or  fountain  of  this  wisdom,  ...  so 
Christ  on  earth  may  be  regarded  in  His  work 
as  a  cistern  gradually  filling  with  this  wisdom, 
and  after  His  ascension  overflowing  with  it 
from  heaven  into  the  larger  cistern  of  His 
Church  below.  This  overflow  commenced  on 
the  Day  of  Pentecost.  Thus  He  became  wis- 
dom to  us  from  God,  i.e.  wisdom  from  God  for 
us  to  receive.  But  this  abstract  counsel  or 
wisdom  of  the  Father,  which  was  planned  by 
Him  before  the  ages  were  made,  and  which 
in  the  sphere  of  time  became  concrete  in  the 


Incarnate  Son,  what  was  it  ?  What  it  more 
precisely  was,  both  in  its  embodiment  in 
Christ  and  in  its  relation  to  us  men,  is  further 
defined  in  three  heads.  The  eternal  purpose 
is  drawn  out  of  its  secret  depths,  so  to  speak, 
like  a  telescope  of  three  lenses,  in  three  evo- 
lutions, each  in  its  own  place :  1.  Righteous- 
ness ;  2.  Sanctification  ;  3.  Kedemption.  1. 
Righteousness  of  God  the  leather  imputed, 
not  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  for  that  is 
nowhere  in  the  New  Testament  said  to  be 
imputed.  It  is  the  proper  fruit  of  Christ's 
obedience  unto  death,  and  the  imjjutation  of 
it  to  believers  on  earth  approaches  by  degrees 
to  assimilation  precisely  as  progress  is  made 
in  the  inner  life  of  sanctification.  Indeed, 
the  *'  both  and  "  indicates  this  mutual  cor- 
relation. Of  the  absolute  Righteousness  God 
is  the  giver  because  of  Christ's  meritorious 
Passion,  and  in  it  the  saints,  after  the  Resur- 
rection, are  set  indefectible.  The  last  link  in 
this  threefold  chain  of  wisdom  is  redemption^ 
i.e.  of  the  body  together  with  the  soul  and 
spirit  in  the  resurrection  of  the  saints  at  the 
Parousia.  In  brief,  the  whole  means  this: 
God — He  alone  is  the  first  and  efficient  cause 
of  your  union  and  fellowship  with  Him  who 
became  flesh  and  translated  into  life  and 
made  actual  in  time  the  ideal  plan  of 
eternity,  mediating  for  us  the  threefold 
benefit  of  that  Divine  counsel,  righteousness 
imputed,  holiness  imparted,  redemption  con- 
summated.— Evans,  *'  Speaker^ 


53 


CHAP.  II.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER  II. 

CRITICAL  NOTES, 

{For  many  points,  see  Homiletic  Analysis.') 

Ver.  1.  I. — Slightly  emphatic;  q.d.  "  I  was  myself  also  in  complete  harmony  of  spirit  and 
method  with  the  lines  of  God's  procedure  "  (as  set  out  in  i.  17-31),  This  verse  takes  up  the 
personal  thread  from  i.  17.  Speech. — Lit.  '^  word.''  Compare  with  i.  18,  iv.  20,  inter  alia. 
Proclaiming. — No  more  ;  that  is  his  function,  simple  and  restricted.  Testimony. — Notice  the 
striking  and  iiifluentially  supported  reading  "  mystery,"  which,  if  accepted,  is  a  thoroughly 
Pauline  thought.  Retaining  "  testimony,'"  then  preaching  is  not  theorising,  speculation, 
imagination ;  not  what  we  fancy,  or  our  heart  says  "  must  he  "  ;  but  the  '*  testimony  of  God." 
Not  even  our  systematised  deductions  from  the  Word,  unless  these  can  be  shown  to  be  the 
"  testimony  of  God.''''     To  this  the  heart  responds  ;  cf.  1  Thess.  i.  5. 

Ver.  2.  "  And  that  Jesus  Christ  as  crucified ;  "  an  additional  restriction  imposed  upon  him- 
self, knowing  well  all  the  while  that  it  would  be  an  additional  difficulty  to  the  reason  and 
heart  of  man.     (In  strict  grammar  the  "  not  "  belongs  to  "  determined,"  and  not  to  "  know.'') 

Ver.  3. — Not  to  be  illustrated  by  the  A.V.  of  Acts  xviii.  5,  which,  with  the  true  reading, 
means  "was  under  a  sacred  pressure  that  made  him  give  himself  more  earnestly  than 
ever  to  the  preaching  of  the  Word.''  The  weakness  "was  ethical,  not  physical"  (Evans). 
So  Ellicott.  But  Beet,  "  Any  kind  of  inability,  including  bodily  weakness  caused  by  sick- 
ness," He  adds,  however,  "  This  sense  is  suggested  in  Gal.  iv.  13.  But  there  is  no  hint  of  it 
here."  This  is  too  strong.  Stanley  sees  allusion  to  2  Cor.  x.  10,  xi.  30,  xii.  5,  9,  10.  Should 
we  not  add  2  Cor.  xii.  7-9  ?  Also,  does  it  do  honour  to  the  promise  of  Matt.  x.  19 — which 
surely  extends  beyond  any  mere  case  of  forensic  apology — to  speak  as  if  the  address  at 
Athens  were  a  mistake  in  topic  and  form,  and  had  sent  Paul  to  Corinth  burdened  with  a 
sense  of  "failure"?  "The  Apostle  preached  Jesus  at  Athens,  as  well  as  at  Corinth, 
Acts  xvii,  18"  (Ellicott).  Certainly  in  preaching  there  the  Resurrection  he  had  not  sought 
to  conciliate  human  reason.  It  is  not  suggesting  anything  unworthy  of  Paul  to  notice  that  the 
special  vision  vouchsafed  to  him  by  Christ  (Acts.xviii.  9, 10)  was  the  Lord's  assistance  of  His 
servant  in  the  face  of  such  '•  blasphemy"  and  "  opposition,"  as  might  well  fill  him  with  "  fear 
and  trembling  "  whether  he  should  be  adequate  to  the  demand  of  the  work  in  Corinth,  in 
the  face  of  all  its  difiiculties.     Cf.  2  Cor.  vii.  5. 

Ver.  4.  Preaching. — The  matter,  not  the  act,  of  preaching,  as  in  i.  21,  which  means  not  the 
method,  "preaching,"  but  the  matter,  the  thing  preached.  Enticing. — "  Persuasive,''  seeking 
by  argument  to  gain  the  assent  of  the  intellect,  and  by  rhetoric  the  suffrages  of  the  heart. 
Demonstration  of  the  Spirit. — See  Separate  Homily.  The  Holy  Spirit.  Choose  between, 
(a)  "The  miracles  wrought  by  the  power  of  God  through  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit  "  (e.g. 
Beet,  with  Origen)  ;  and  (Z>)  "  The  conviction  of  the  truth,  wrought  through  my  plain  preach- 
ing of  the  Cross  in  the  hearts  of  my  hearers,  whose  spirit  was  touched  by  the  Holy  Spirit " 
{e.g.  Evans  or  Ellicott).  Choose  (h),  and  compare  the  words  of  Longinus,  that  "  Paul  of 
Tarsus  was  the  first  who  maintained  positive  assertion  without  elaborate  proof."  See  how 
the  method  of  mere  ^^ positive  assertion,"  accompanied  by  the  ^^  power  "  of  the  Spirit,  carried 
conviction  at  Pentecost  [well  expounding  John  xvi.  8-11].  (a)  narrows  down  to  the  special 
method  for  a  few  Churches  in  one  century,  a  Divine  method  applicable,  and  exemplified,  and 
vindicated,  universally. 

Ver.  5. — God's  "  wisdom  "  and  "power  "  are  together  in  i.  24. 

Ver.  6.  Perfect. — In  (the  customary  Pauline)  opposition  to  *'  babes  "  (iii.  1).  Evans  says  : 
"  No  contrast  here  at  all  between  Reason  and  Revelation,  as  some  think,  but  between  .  .  . 
the  philosophy  of  God  and  the  philosophy  of  the  world,  [But  this  runs  up  into  that  between 
Reason  and  Revelation.]  It  is  not  true  that  Christianity,  in  setting  forth  the  bare  argument 
of  the  Cross  unto  the  salvation  of  believers,  has  no  interior  philosophy  of  its  own  for  the  few 
receptive  of  it.  But  observe  that  a  contrast  ...  is  [also]  indicated  .  .  .  between  the  deeper 
truths  or  higher  wisdom  of  Christianity  and  the  rudimentary  lessons  of  it.  This  second  con- 
trast .  .  .  brings  to  view  two  corresponding  classes  of  believers,  the  full-grown  and  the  infants  ; 
and,  in  addition  to  this,  two  corresponding  modes  of  instruction.  In  fact,  the  Apostle  had 
hitherto  preached  to  his  hearers  in  Corinth  such  broad  facts  of  the  scheme  of  Redemption  as 
were  level  to  their  low  apprehension ;  he  had  not  dared  to  spread  before  them  the  treasures 
of  the  higher  '  wisdom '  meet  only  for  the  '  perfect ' ;  to  such  pearls  they  in  their  crude 
state  would  have  been  swine,"    [But  this  latter  part  is  rather  exegetical  of  iii.  1  than  of  our 

54 


TtOMILETTC  COMMENTABY :    T.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  li. 


verse.]  Princes  of  this  world. — Evans  :  "  The  leading  men  of  the  Jews  and  of  the  Greeks,  the 
Gentile  potentates,  including  Hellenic  philosophers  and  Hebrew  doctors.  Such  *  come  to 
nought ' ;  these  luminaries  with  their  vain  lamps  pale  and  go  out  before  the  day-star  of  Truth 
when  it  dawns  from  on  high."  "  That  gradual  nullification  of  all  real  and  enduring  potency 
on  their  part  which  was  brought  about  by  the  Gospel "  (Ellicott).  Any  reference  to  Eph.  vi.  12 
can  only  be  remote;  these  "rwier,s"  did  not,  in  any  sense  germane  to  Paul's  argument, 
*'  crucify  "  Christ  (ver.  8). 

Ver,  7. — Connect,  not  "  we  speak  .  .  .  in  a  mystery,"  but  "  God^s  wisdom  in  (couched  in 
[Evans])  a  mystery.''  Our  glory. — '*  All  have  come  short  of  "  (Rom.  iii.  23),  bat  in  Christ  we 
now  "  rejoice  "  again  "  in  hope  of,  the  glory  of  God  "  (Rom.  v.  2).  Christ  is  "  the  Lord  of  the 
glory  "  in  ver.  7.  It  is  His  to  give  to  all  for  whom  it  is  prepared  (Matt.  xx.  23).  "  Christ  in 
us  "  is  "  the  hope  of  glory  "  (Col.  i.  27).  See  His  prayer  (John  xvii.  22,  24).  "  Our  glory" 
then,  is  our  whole  recovered  estate,  as  redeemed  and  saved  through  Christ ;  seen  in  a  life  of 
grace,  and  of  holy  fellowship  with  God  here  as  His  children  (1  John  iii.  1)  ;  broadening  into 
tae  life  of  glory  in  heaven.  The  recovered  image  of  God  is  the  glory  of  human  nature,  as 
God  meant  manhood  to  be. 

Ver.  9.  — Note  the  more  exact  rendering  in  R.V.  Quoted,  somewhat  ad  sensum,  from  LXX.  of 
Isa.  Ixiv.  4,  with  perhaps  some  influence  of  Iii.  15  and  Ixv.  17.  What  God  does  for  His  people 
in  such  national  and  temporal  deliverances  as  were  in  the  view  of  the  prophet,  is  done  on  the 
same  lines  as  all  His  dealings  of  every  kind  with  and  for  them.  They  are  always  beyond 
their  expectation  and  hope.  He  shames  their  faith  as  often  as  their  fears.  The  "  waiting  " 
is  the  "  waiting "  of  "  love  " ;  full,  therefore,  of  faith  and  patient  trust.  Also  the  unloving 
heart  ^^  waits"  in  vain,  if  it  wait  at  all.  It  can  see  and  know  and  receive  nothing  of  all 
these  ^'jjrepared"  things.  Note  '^prepared"  (R.V.),  carrying  back  thought  to  the  original 
plan  of  God. 

Ver.  10.  (Hath)  revealed  them  to  us  by  His  Spirit. — Makes  it  quite  certain  that,  how- 
ever true  in  such  a  connection  the  mere  words  may  be,  Paul  is  not  thinking  in  ver.  9  of 
"heaven."  "Heaven,"  moreover,  is  not  one  of  those  things  internal,  so  to  speak,  to  the 
being  of  God  which  "  the  Spirit  searches." 

Ver.  11. — The  analogy  is  not  a  perfect  one ;  but  notice  how  like  God  man  is  :  made  in  the 
image  of  God's  self-conscious  personality. 

Ver,  12.  World. — Here  Kdcr/xos  ;  in  vers.  6,  7,  8,  alujv.  Liddon,  Bampton  Lectures,  v.,  note,  as 
to  Kdafios,  quotes  from  Bisbop  Martensen  :  "  If  we  consider  the  effect  of  the  Fall  upon  the 
course  of  historical  development,  not  only  in  the  case  of  individuals  but  of  the  race  collect- 
ively, the  term  '  world  '  bears  a  special  meaning  different  from  that  which  it  would  have 
were  the  development  of  humanity  normal.  The  cosmical  principle  having  been  emancipated 
by  the  Fall  from  its  due  subjection  to  the  Spirit,  and  invested  with  a  false  independence, 
and  the  universe  of  creation  having  obtained  with  man  a  higher  importance  than  really 
attaches  to  it,  the  historical  development  of  the  world  has  become  one  in  which  the  advance 
of  the  kingdom  of  God  is  retarded  and  hindered.  The  created  universe  has,  in  a  relative 
sense,  life  in  itself,  including,  as  it  does,  a  system  of  powers,  ideas,  aiid  aims  which  possess  a 
relative  power.  Tins  relative  independence,  which  ought  to  be  subservient  to  the  kingdom  of 
God,  has  become  a  fallen  '  world- autonomy.'  Hence  arises  the  Scriptural  expression  '  this 
world.'  By  this  expression  the  Bible  conveys  the  idea  that  it  regards  the  world  not  only 
ontologically,  but  in  its  definite  and  actual  state,  the  state  in  which  it  has  been  since  the 
Fall.  '  This  world  '  means  the  world  content  with  itself,  in  its  own  independence,  its  own 
glory  ;  the  world  which  disowns  its  dependence  on  God  as  its  Creator.  *  This  world  '  regards 
itself  not  as  the  creature  {ktIcl^^,  but  only  as  the  Kdcr/xo^,  as  a  system  of  glory  and  beauty 
which  has  life  in  itself,  and  can  give  life.  The  historical  embodiment  of  '  this  world  '  is 
heathendom,  which  honoureth  not  God  as  God."  [For  the  distinction  between  ti  world  "  and 
"  age"  see  chap,  v.,  §  D,  of  Homiletic  Analysis,  Appended  Note.]  In  the  prevalent  reading 
two  words  are  used  for  ^'  knoweth  "  here,  perhaps  "slightly  distinguished "  (Stanley),  as  in 
Johnxxi.  16, 17.  See  2  Cor.  v.  16.  Freely  given. — One  word  ;  germ  of  the  thought  afterward 
expanded  so  largely  in  Rom.  v.  15  sqq.  Note  in  vers.  10-13  the  order :  The  Spirit  searches 
in  God,  what  then  He  brings  and  imparts,  along  with  Himself,  to  us ;  and  then  next  speaks 
out  to  others  through  us  ;  again  finding  acceptance  for  them  in  their  case  by  His  own 
demonstration  and  power.  First  and  last,  and  at  each  intermediate,  point  it  is  all  the 
Spirit !     God's  thoughts,  as  the  Spirit  discloses  them,  spoken  in  the  Spirit's  words  1 

Ver.  13.  Spiritual  with  spiritual. — Exposition,  not  Grammar,  must  decide  here  between, 
(a)  "Comparing  ["combining"  (R.V.  margin),  "  matching  "  (Evans)]  spiritual  things  with 
spiritual  things,"  and  (Z>)  "  l7iterpreting  spiritual  things  by  spiritual  things,"  or  (<?)  "  Inter- 
preting spiritual  things  to  spiritual  men."  {a)  and  (&)  approximate.  Stanley  supports 
"interpreting"  by  the  usage  of  the  LXX.  in  Gen.  xl.  8,  16,  xli.  15;  Dan.  v.  12,  15,  26. 
Evans  supports  "  matching  "  by  2  Cor.  x.  12 ;  and  also  prefers  "  matching  spiritual  truths 
with  spiritual  minds,"  which  suits  well  vers.  6, 14.  In  reality  the  sentence  is  almost  gnomic 
in  form  and  fulness  of  application,     (c)  is  only  a  special  case  of  (a) ;  the  "  comparing  "  of 

55 


CHAP.  II.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


(a)  may  be  for  the  purpose  of  the  "  interpreting  "  in  (h).  [We  are  reminded  of  the  loud 
exclamation  of  the  minister  in  the  early  Church,  just  previous  to  the  "  consecration  "  of 
the  bread  and  wine  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  "  Ta  a7ia  rots  ayloL^.''  "  Holy  (things)  to  holy 
(persons)!"  In  like  manner  there  are  "■spiritual  things''  which  can  only  congruously  go 
with  "  spiritual  words,'"  or  "  things,''  or  ^'persons."'] 

Ver.  U.  Discerned. — Lit.  "  examined "  ;  same  word  as  in  ix.  3  ;  as  if  the  *'  natural  " 
man  questioned  the  "  spiritual "  thing  ;  but  it  would  not  yield  up  to  him  its  secret 
(Gen.  xxxii.  29  ;  Judg.  xiii.  18;  Isa.  ix.  6).  So  in  ver.  15  and  iv.  3,  4.  Cognate  word  also 
with  that  for  ^'comparing,"  ver.  13. 

Ver.  15. — Ellicott  gives,  as  examples  of  these  spiritual  judgments,  the  wise,  clear,  far-reach- 
ing'decisions  in  vi.  1-4,  vii.  1  sqq.,  vii.  20  sq.,  xi.  3  sq.,  xiv.  34  sq.,  xiv.  6  sq. 

Ver.  16.  -  LXX.  in  Isa.  xl.  13,  here  quoted,  uses  "  nmid  "  {vovs)  for  "  Spirit "  {ruach  in  Heb.). 
Paul  follows  what  serves  his  purpose,  with  perfect  fidelity  to  the  truth  of  the  matter 
discussed.  Mind. — Not  at  all  in  the  vague,  loose  sense  of  "  character,"  or  "  temper,"  or 
"  disposition."  "  We  know,  the  knowledge  is  in  our  possession,  what  God  in  Christ  designs  and 
desires  for  His  people  ;  we  are  taken  by  the  Spirit  into  the  deeps  of  His  redeeming  thought 
toward  our  race."  [In  the  same  way  "  spirit "  is  never  in  New  Testament  used  for  character- 
istic temper,  or  style,  or  prevailing  idea.  Ver.  12,  e.g.,  means  almost  certainly  a  personal 
spirit.] 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS,— Whole  Chapter. 

A  contrast  runs  throughout.  I.  There  are  two  types  of  men. — *'  Natural" 
'■''spiritual."     And  so — 

II.  There  are  two  worlds  of  facts;  one  being  ''the  things  of  God."  Corre- 
spondent to  these  there  are — 

III.  Two  ways  of  getting  to  know  ;  one  being  by  the  "  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit."     And  further  there  are  in  close  parallel — 

IV.  Two  ways  of  preaching  the  Gospel. 

1.  Natural  men  and  spiritual  men. — 1.  The  former  word  is  suitably,  truly, 
descriptive.  In  any  extreme  development  of  the  type,  they  are  men  as  men  are 
by  nature ;  they  are  what  men  might  have  been,  what  men  do  again  become, 
apart  from  the  "  free  gift  "  of  the  grace  of  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ "  (Rom.  viii.  9). 
The  unregenerate  life,  and  the  backslider's  life  after  regeneration,  tend  to 
revert  to  type.  In  fallen  human  nature,  per  se,  "  dwelled  no  good  thing " 
(Rom.  vii.  18).  There  is  not  actually  found  the  unrelieved  blackness  and 
darkness  of  mere  human  nature,  but  all  modifying  goodness  and  light  are  grace, 
not  nature.     Perhaps  noble  men,  bnt  "  natural" 

2.  Bat  "natural"  is  not  the  equivalent  of  Paul's  word.  Nor  is  "carnal"  in, 
e.g. J  iii.  1,  though  it  is  with  equal  truth  descriptive,  and  is  set  in  equally  strong 
contrast  with  "  spiritual  "  men. 

3.  His  word  is  Jude's  word,  where  we  have  "sensual"  (Jude  19),  expounded 
as  equivalent  to,  or  at  least  consequent  upon,  their  "  not  having  the  Spirit." 
James,  too,  designates  by  it  the  wisdom  of  the  "natural  man"  (Jas.  iii.  15; 
*'  sensual "). 

4.  The  word,  like  that  for  " spiritual"  is  one  of  a  pair  of  correlates  of  "  soul " 
and  "  spirit."  [1  Thess.  v.  23 ;  but  also  consistently  distinguished  by  Paul 
throughout  his  terminology  of  human  nature ;  and,  whatever  be  the  nature  and 
value  of  the  distinction — a  very  difficult  question — it  is  one  preserved  and 
observed  in  Old  Testament  Hebrew  as  consistently  as  in  New  Testament  Greek.] 
As  Paul  observed  men,  a  deep  cleavage  separates  them  into  two  sharply  definite 
■classes.  The  cleavage  begins  with  the  opposition  between  "  soul"  and  "  spirit" 
but  runs  through  all  the  life  of  men.  [It  is  coincident  with  the  line  which 
parts  "  them  that  are  perishing  "  from  "  them  that  are  being  saved  "  (e.g.  2  Cor. 
ii.  15).  The  line  lies  between  those  out  of  Christ  and  those  "in  Christ" y 
between  those  who  are  "  the  world  "  in  John,  and  in  his  Master's  terminology, 
and  those  "horn  again."     "Soulish"  has  been  proposed  as  an  equivalent  for 

5G  .  . 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY i    /.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  il. 


Paul's  description  ;  or  ''  animal,"  but  this  is  in  many  cases  misleading  ;  "  animal- 
souled  "  is  a  compromise,  fairly  acceptable  and  useful.]  It  should  be  noted  that 
the  underlying  opposition  is  not  between  the  Spirit  of  God  and  the  ''  soul "  in 
man,  but  between  the  human  "  spirit  "  and  the  "  soul  "  in  man.  [Though  the 
'^  spirit "  of  man  is  so  constantly  dealt  with  as  under  the  gracious  influences 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the  two  are  so  nearly  allied,  that  in  fact,  and  in  the 
exegesis  of  particular  passages,  it  is  often  hard  to  keep  them  apart.] 

5.  Some  ''  natural  men "  live  a  really  "  animal  "  life.  To  satisfy  the  body's 
need  of  food  and  sleep,  to  gratify  its  passions,  seems  all  their  life.  "  What  they 
know  naturally  as  brute  beasts,  in  these  things  they  corrupt  themselves  "  (Jude  10). 
There  are  many  of  a  higher  type,  in  whom  is  much  that  is  loving  and  lovable  ; 
they  are  tender,  affectionate  parents,  firm  friends,  faithful  seivants,  good  masters ; 
in  business  diligent,  honest,  honourable.  In  many  the  powers  of  mind  are  cultured 
to  a  high  degree,  [though  it  is  the  witness  of  fact,  in  ancient  and  modern  culture, 
how  the  highest  cultivation  of  the  intellect  and  the  tastes  may  coexist  with 
utter  selfishness,  and  even  with  the  crudest  sensuality] ;  the  mind  is  well 
furnished,  and  the  tastes  are  refined  to  an  extreme  of  delicacy.  Yet  there 
might  almost  be  no  God  and  no  God  ward  side  to  their  own  nature,  for  anything 
that  appears  in  life,  or  motive,  or  principle.  At  their  best  they  are  highly 
developed  types  of  the  uttermost  of  which  "  body  "  plus  "  soul  "  is  capable,  save 
that  personality  still  remains,  a  trait  of  God's  image  not  altogether  lost. 

6.  The  "  spiritual  man  "  may  be  of  very  humble  origin  and  station,  he  may 
be  only  scantily  educated,  but  in  Plim  the  "  spirit  "  is  awakened  and  dominant. 
[Language  cannot  be  very  exact  on  this  topic,  but]  it  is  as  though  there  were 
a  something  in  him  akin  to  God  who  is  a  Spirit,  a  something  capable  of  looking 
Gcd  in  the  face,  and  knowing  and  being'  known ;  susceptible  of,  responsive  to, 
the  activities  of  the  personal  Spirit  of  God;  and  this  no  longer,  as  it  were, 
dormant,  overlaid,  buried,  or  only  awake  to  struggle  in  vain  against  the  domi- 
nance of  the  "soul."  The  quickened  "spirit"  and  its  powers  are  now  the  potent 
factor  in  a  life  which  is  thus  made  "  new."  Take  all  of  which  man  is  capable 
apart  from  the  distinctive  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  develop  it  to  the 
highest  degree,  the  man  remains  a  "  natural  man."  Awaken  the  "  spirit" 
ennoble  it,  enthrone  it  as  supreme,  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and — 
culture  or  no  culture  in  the  ordinary  sense — you  have  the  life,  higher  or  lower, 
of  the  "  spiritual  nnan"  often  with  a  very  real  culture  due  to  the  supremacy 
of  his  Godward  life.     [Of.  pp.  49,  51,  antea.^ 

7.  On  one  side  of  his  line  of  cleavage  Paul  ranges  ^''princes  of  this  world" 
on  the  other  ^'"perfect"  men  in  the  Church.  ^^  Princes ;  "  for  an  early  current 
understanding  of  Ps.  ii.  saw  it  fulfilled  when  "  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate," 
and  their  helpers,  "  gathered  themselves  together  against  the  Anointed"  One  of 
God,  the  ^^ Lord  of  glory"  (Acts  iv.  24-27).  Yet  these  are  only  representatives 
of  other  ^^  princes"  intellectual,  social,  financial,  literary,  the  leaders  of  fashions  of 
thought  and  speech  and  opinions  and  morals ;  often  more  really  than  the  titular 
and  hereditary  ones  the  rulers  of  the  life  of  "  this  world  "  of  "  natural  men  "  ;  the 
men  who  make  their  "  age"  just  because  they  are  of  the  age,  neither  behind  it, 
nor  too  violently  and  extremely  in  advance  of  it  to  make  it  march  with  their 
step  and  dance  while  they  pipe.  Great  men  ;  and  yet  less  than  the  men  whose 
measure  and  whose  outlook  is  adjusted  to  the  scale  of  a  larger  ^on,  the  eternal, 
already  ever  around  and  with  us,  and  yet  "to  come."  They  are  "  of  the  age" 
and  according  to  its  pattern,  and  measure,  and  mind,  only.  They,  and  it,  and 
their  "  wisdom,^^  all  vanish  and  "  come  to  nought "  together. 

8.  The  '"'' perfect"  men  are  the  large  men;  the  men — no  longer  babes,  but 
arrived  at,  or  fast  approaching,  the  prime  of  moral  manhood,  in  its  stature  and 
its  trained  and  experienced  capacities.     The  very  '^princes"  have  but  a  maimed 

57 


CHAP.  II.     HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


humanity  ;  the  dormant,  dead,  forgotten  '*  spirit  "  is  an  integral  part  of  human 
nature.  Human  nature  is  an  incomplete,  "  lop-sided  "  thing  if  the  spirit  be 
undeveloped.  These  "  princes  "  may,  Saul-like,  overtop  by  a  head  or  more,  the 
average  of  their  "  world^^  but  their  feet  stand  on  its  level. 

9.  The  ^'"perfect  "  are  only  comparatively  so.  There  is  no  absolute  perfection 
save  in  God,  and  to  it  He  does  not  make  progress ;  He  has  never  had  less  than 
perfection  in  its  absolute  measure.  The  perfection  of  the  creature,  and  even 
of  the  "  nPAD  creation'^  (2  Cor.  v.  17),  is  relative,  always  becoming,  never  reaching 
finality.  To  a  creaturely  perfection  which  could  not  grow  into  a  higher  perfection 
the  next  stage  would  be  Death.  Still,  the  contrast  is  so  great  and  so  definite, 
between  the  childhood  of  the  ^^ spiritual  man""  and  his  adult  manhood,  that  this 
latter  is  regarded  as  a  distmct  perfection,  already  reached  by  the  men  of  whom  Paul 
thinks.  The  man  who  has  reached  his  physical  majority  does  not,  in  many  senses, 
cease  to  grow  still,  to  the  last.  In  the  spiritual  life  there  is  no  "  last "  ;  the  growth 
of  the  ^''perfect'"  goes  on  in  glory.  The  ^^ princes"  are  all  ^^ natural  men,"  some 
of  them  being  the  best  specimens  of  these.  The  "  perfect "  are  all  "  spiritual 
men,"  with  a  new  life  and  its  equipment  of  new  faculties,  and  with  the  know- 
ledge of  a  new  world  correlative  to  these. 

II.  Two  worlds  of  facts  corresponding  to  the  two  types  of  men. — "  Spirituals 
match  with  spirituals,"  as  Evans  renders  ver.  13.  (See  Critical  Notes.)  "  Natural 
men  "  in  like  manner  match  with,  and  are  themselves  examples  of,  the  things 
of  a  "■  natural "  world.  The  cleavage  extends  here  also.  The  one  world  is  that 
of  "  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God"  (ver  14).  [Note  how  these  are  not  exactly 
the  same  as  "  the  things  of  God,"  "  the  deep  things  of  God"  These  are  mainly 
the  purposes  and  designs  and  the  facts  of  the  very  Being  of  God.  They  are 
paralleled  with  "  the  things  of  a  man."  If  the  thing  may  be  said,  they  are  the 
world  within  the  Self  of  God ;  in  some  degree  analogous  to  the  world  within 
the  self  of  a  man,  which  unless  the  man  please  to  disclose  it,  no  other  man 
can  "  know."  As  a  man  can,  so  God  can  keep  Himself  a  Secret,  unknown, 
unknowable,  except  to  His  own  Spirit,  which  "  searcheth  all  things,  even  the  deep 
things  of  God  "  (vers.  10,  11) ;  His  inscrutable  Being,  the  counsels  and  purposes  of 
the  Divine  mind  and  heart.]  These  "  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  "  are  a  world 
revealable  and  knowable.  They  are,  in  part,  knowledge  and  blessedness  ^^  prepared 
for  those  that  love  God."  [So  Paul  gives  the  sense,  gladly  availing  himself  of  the 
words  of  the  LXX.  in  Isa.  Ixiv.  4.]  They  have  been — even  Gospel  privileges  and  a 
hope  for  Gentiles — a  "  mystery"  (ver.  7).  They  had  been  the  secrets  of  God's  mind 
and  heart  towards  mankind  ;  long  concealed,  or  only  revealed  gradually,  as  God 
had  spoken  "  in  many  portions  and  many  manners  to  the  fathers  "  (Heb.  i.  1)  : 
but  now  the  time  has  come  for  the  veil  fully  to  be  drawn  back.  The  secret  may 
at  last  be  told,  the  '■^mystery"  be  a  mystery  no  longer;  the  blessings  may  be 
given  and  may  be  enjoyed.  God  designs  that  they  shall ;  they  have  been  all 
along,  "  before  the  world,"  "  ordained  unto  the  glory "  of  the  initiated  ones,  the 
illuminati  (?  Heb.  vi.  4),  the  ^^  perfect,"  that  ^^love"  God.  They  now  cry, 
"  O  how  great  is  Thy  goodness  which  Thou  hast  laid  up  for  them  that  fear 
Thee  !"  (Ps.  xxxi.  19).  And  it  is  not  only  goodness  but  ^^  wisdom"  which 
moves  their  adoring,  grateful  wonder  to  a  praise  that  becomes  more  and  more 
fervent,  with  the  growing  disclosures  and  the  larger  impartations  and  enjoyments 
of  this  new  world  of  the  "  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  And  when  at  last  the 
correspondence  between  the  "  spiritual  m,an  "  and  his  "  spiritual "  environment 
is  complete;  when  his  body  is  "  a  spiritual  bod^y"  (1  Cor.  xv.  44),  lending  itself 
as  a  perfect  organ  and  vehicle  to  a  life  ruled  by  the  "  spirit "  in  him  ;  when  his 
world  is  wholly  that  of  God  and  spiritual  things — Heaven  ;  then  his  word  will 
be,  "  0  the  depth  of  the  riches  of  the  wisdom  .  .  .  of  God  !  "  [Bom.  xi.  33  ;  where 
note,  too,  the  quotation  of  Isa.  xl.  13,  which  also  appears,  in  the  same  connection, 

58 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    T.   COBTXTTITANF^.     cttap.  it. 


in  our  chapter  (ver.  16).  We  are  on  one  of  the  familiar  heart-tracks  of  Paul's 
meditations,  and  pass  the  same  landmarks  of  Scripture  quotation  and  of  inspired 
speculation.]  There  is  "a  vnsdom  of  this  world,''  bat  it  is  of  no  avail  here. 
These  things  are  reserved  for  those  that  "  love  "  God.  It  is  not,  either  here  or 
in  Rom.  viii.  28,  any  "  favouritism "  towards  His  children,  which  reserves 
exclusively  to  them  the  knowledge  and  enjoyment  of  the  world  of  "  things 
spiritual"  If  "all  things  work  together  for  those  "  only  "  who  love  God,"  and 
if  the  things  unseen  by  natural  eye,  unheard  by  natural  organ,  unthought  of  and 
undesired  by  the  natural  "  heart,''  are  also  the  heritage  of  these  alone,  it  is  no 
arbitrary  narrowing  of  the  range  of  availableness  and  privilege.  Just  as  in  the 
closely  connected  declaration  of  John  (1  John  iii.  2),  "It  doth  not  yet  appear 
what  we  shall  be,"  there  is  no  arbitrary  concealment.  In  that  case  it  is  simple 
impossibility  which  bars  the  way  to  disclosure  and  knowledge  ;  the  earthly  life 
presents  so  few  analogies  to  the  heavenly,  that  it  gives  no  terms  into  which  to 
translate  the  heavenly  into  earthly  language  or  thought,  or  intelligibly  to  express 
to  us  any  but  the  barest  information  about  that  life.  [The  Father,  like  the  Son, 
had  rather  tell  than  conceal  all  that  may  help  His  children  (John  xiv.  2).]  In  this 
case  it  is  because  only  love  is  capable  of  knowing ;  such  "  love  in  the  Spirit  " 
(Col.  i.  8)  as  binds  God  and  His  "  spiritual "  ones  together.  Even  the  "  little 
children  know  the  Father  (1  John  ii.  13).  But  the  fulness  of  the  "  wisdom  "  is 
only  for  the  ears,  or  the  knowledge  and  experience,  of  the  up-grown  children — 
"  the  perfect''  Two  great  facts  of  this  spiritual  world,  thus  sealed  to  the  natural 
man  and  his  best-trained  faculties,  are  "  the  Lord  of  glory  "  and  "  the  spiritual 
man."  In  John's  words  again,  "  The  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew 
Him  not"  (1  John  iii.  1).  The  inability  to  "know"  us  is  not  only  parallel 
to  the  inability  to  know  Him  ;  it  is  the  consequence  of  that  inability.  God 
"  reveals  His  Son"  in  the  soul  (Gal.  i.  16) ;  He  is  the  central  Fact  of  the  new 
world,  and.  He  once  known,  all  eL>e  becomes  clear.  In  an  ignorance  that  was 
condemning,  but  still  in  ignorance,  they  ^'- slew"  as  Paul  had  himself  once 
persecuted,  the  ^^ Lord  of  glory"  (Acts  iii.  17;  1  Tim.  i.  13).  How  shall  any 
man  "call  Jesus  Lord  but  hy  the  Spirit"  ?  (1  Cor.  xii.  3).  He  is  unknown  even 
to  those  "  natural  men "  who  write,  some  of  them.  Lives  of  Jesus,  and  very 
confidently  estimate  His  position  in  the  history  of  mankind,  and  amongst 
the  religious  teachers  of  the  race ;  or  His  personal  character  ;  or  the  "  originality  " 
of  His  teaching  ;  and  the  like  ;  pronouncing  the  most  confident  verdicts,  to  which 
nobody  listens  with  more  amusement  than  does  the  man  who  really  knows  "  the 
Lord  of  glory  "  as  his  Saviour  and  Friend  and  Life.  [The  friend,  the  brother, 
who  has  lived  with  a  man  for  years,  smiles  at  the  biography  and  portrait  done  by 
a  stranger.]  "  The  spiritual  man"  himself  also  is  a  fact  outside  the  knowledge 
of  ^Hhe  natural  man."  They  may  live  together  in  every-day,  close,  intercourse, 
but  impervious  spirit  to  spirit,  the  spiritual  man  quite  an  inexplicable  person  to 
the  natural ;  they  may  have  many  topics  and  interests  in  common,  yet  they  are 
in  different  worlds.  "  The  spiritual  man  knows  all  things" — "  the  natural  man  " 
amongst  the  rest ;  but  "  no  man  "  naturally  "  knows  "  him.  The  analogies  of  the 
natural  world  are  true  in  their  suggestions  here, — the  higher  always  understands 
the  lower,  but  the  lower  cannot  know  the  higher.  The  poet  understands  what 
it  must  be  to  have  no  poetry,  but  the  man  devoid  of  a  sense  for  poetry  does  not 
understand  the  poet.  The  educated  man  can  understand  the  uneducated,  but 
the  uneducated  cannot  understand  him.  Breadth  understands  narrowness,  but 
narrowness  cannot  comprehend  what  it  is  to  be  "  broad."  [In  the  railway-cars 
there  is  passage  from  first-class  to  third-class,  but  not  from  third  into  first.]  The 
father  understands  the  child  ;  the  child  does  not  understand  the  man.  The  man 
understands  how  many  limitations  narrow  the  life  of  the  brutes  ;  they  do  not 
even  know  how  many  possibilities  the  man  has.     The  "  spiritual  man  "  under- 

59 


CHAP.  II.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I   CORINTHIANS. 


stands  the  world  he  has  quitted,  the  ''  natural "  Hfe  he  has  left  behind — he  was 
*' natural"  himself  once;  the  '"''natural  man"  cannot  read  him  in  return. 
The  sources  of  his  life  ;  his  enjoyments ;  his  motives,  even  when  doing  what  is 
outwardly  what  they  themselves  do, — all  these  are  a  life  hid,  as  Christ  is  hidden, 
hidden  in  God  (Col.  iii.  3),  from  the  "  natural  many  Different  ivorlds ! 
Hence — 

III.  Two  kinds  of  knowledge. — 1.  He  who  is  of  the  world  may  know  its 
*'  wisdom.^'  If  he  be  one  of  its  ^'princes,"  then  his  cultivated  talents,  his 
advantages  of  position,  his  friendships,  his  hbrary,  his  industry,  his  money,  may 
enable  him  to  master  it  all  fully.  There  are  practical  limitations  to  encyclo- 
paedic knowledge ;  but  there  is  no  necessary  and  inevitable  barrier  between  a 
"  j^rmce  of  this  world  ^'  and  all  the  "  wisdom  of  this  world."  Indeed,  are  we  to  go 
farther  ?  To  do  so  is  not  in  the  direction  or  temper  of  our  time  and  its  thought ; 
even  the  religious  thought  of  our  age  tends  to  minimise  the  amount  of  the  super- 
natural which  it  postulates,  or  admits  and  reckons  with.  Yet  men  may  "  receive 
the  spirit  of  the  world^^  and  so  arrive  at  knowledge.  2.  Are  we  to  connect  this 
with  the  fragments  of  knowledge  given  to  us  by  pure  revelation  on  this  theme, 
which  speaks  of  one  who  is  "the  prince  of  this  world"  (John  xii.  31,  xiv.  30, 
xvi.  11),  who  is  indeed  its  '•'■god"  (2  Cor.  iv.  4),  a  "spirit  that  now  worketh 
in  the  children  of  disobedience  "  (Eph.  ii.  2)  ?  Must  we  carry  out  the  principle, 
which  everywhere  holds  throughout  Scripture,  of  a  parallel,  a  counterfeit, 
a  parody,  of  the  facts  of  the  kingdom  of  light  by  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  and 
so  see  suggested  a  personal  "  spirit  of  the  world  "  set  over  against  the  personal 
"  Spirit  which  is  of  God "  ?  The  strongly  definite  opposition  is  at  any  rate 
here  in  Paul's  inspired  language,  and  strongly  suggests  that  behind  the  world's 
maxims  and  principles  and  habits  of  thinking  and  life,  the  "  spirit  of  the  world  " 
in  the  modern,  vague,  but  not  Scriptural  sense,  there  is  a  personal  source  of  its 
activity  and  predominant  character.  3.  The  spiritual  man  certainly  "  receives  the 
Spirit  which  is  of  God."  Natural  powers  and  their  use,  *'  the  eye,  ear,  heart" 
may  make  a  man  know  the  natural  world ;  it  is  his  appropriate  and  natural 
setting  and  environment ;  there  he  is  at  home.  He  is  part  of  it.  **  The  spiritual 
man  "  is  part  of  the  spiritual  world,  and  gets  to  know  of  it  as  one  detail  of  the 
consequences  of  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  in  awakening  his  "  spirit,"  and  quickening 
its  faculties  into  ability  and  activity.  In  the  new  world  of  Divine  things  Life 
brings  in  its  train  Knowledge.  Born  into  it,  the  spiritual  man  is  at  home  there. 
4.  That  Spirit  of  God  is  "  at  home  "  amongst  "  the  deep  things  of  God."  The  whole 
meaning  of  that  "  mystery  of  God  " — that  secret  purpose  of  the  Divine  mind  and 
heart  which,  in  summary,  in  aim,  in  goal,  "zs  Christ"  [Col.  ii.  2,  in  most  critical 
editions  of  the  New  Testament] — has  now  become,  so  to  speak,  His  property, — 
"  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  He  only  could  know ;  He  only  can  reveal 
and  impart.  He  mediates  between  the  mind  of  God  and  the  mind  of  man. 
What  He  ''  searches"  out  and  knows  there,  He  discloses  and  imparts  here.  He 
has  these  truths  and  blessings  that  they  may  "  he  freely  given  to  us"  as  if  ^^hy 
God  "  Himself.  He  knows,  and  by  His  intermediary  office  and  teaching  we  have, 
the  whole  "  mind  of  the  Lord."  "  The  Lord  ?  "  Why  not  go  further  and  say 
"  the  mind  of  Christ"  for  "  in  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  " 
(Col.  i.  9,  19)  ?  [5.  Very  profound  and  far-reaching  are  the  suggestions  of  this 
interchangeableness  of  language  :  "  the  deep  things  of  God  "  passes  over  into  "  the 
mind  of  the  Lord"  and  this  again  becomes  next  "  the  mind  of  Christ."  Father  and 
Son  have  no  counsels  or  desires  for  man  which  are  not  shared  by  both  ;  never  do 
They  work  or  think  for  man  on  any  independent,  or  possibly  divergent,  plan. 
And  then,  again,  when  these  "deep  things"  of  "  the  mind  of  the  Lord"  pass,  as 
it  were,  through  the  hands  of  the  Spirit  as  gracious  gifts  to  our  spirit,  they 
become  His  own  "  things. "'[     6.  The  man  of  the  world  peremptorily,  or  even 

60 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,    chap,  il 


superciliously,  dismisses  all  we  profess  that  we  have  and  know,  as  '''foolish- 
ness^^ (ver.  14).  To  him  it  is  ;  to  us  it  is  *•'  wisdom"  "  hidden  {wisdom)  "  (ver.  7), 
wisdom  that  shall  abide  when  all  his  "  comes  to  nought."  No  wonder  !  He 
knocks  in  vain  at  the  door  of  the  shrine  into  which  we  are  led,  that  we  may  be 
initiated  into  these  Divine  secrets.  When  he  finds  entrance  impossible,  he  turns 
away  and  declares  that  within,  from  all  he  can  hear,  or  see,  or  make  out  from 
these  " spiritual  men"  there  is  nothing  but  ''^ foolishness."  7.  We  do  not  come 
at  our  knowledge  in  virtue  of  any  conquest  of  the  spiritual  world.  We  had  no 
eyes,  nor  ear.^,  nor  heart  for  it,  any  more  than  the  "  natural  man "  has.  But 
we  "  received  the  Spirit"  we  "  received  the  things  of  the  Spirit " ;  we  know  just 
as  much  as  was  '"' freely  given"  and  as  we  took  (vers.  12,  14)  He  gave  us 
eyes,  ears,  hearts,  new  powers  for  the  new  world  of  our  new  life. 

lY.  Hence  two  ways  of  teaching  may  be  conceived  of  and  attempted. — 
1.  How  will  you  approach  and  convert  these  "  natural  men  "  1  Speak  "  spiritual 
things "  to  "  natural  men  "  ?  Try  it,  and  fail.  They  do  not  comprehend  you. 
Speak  "  natural "  knowledge  to  them.  Certainly  they  will  understand  that. 
But  that  is  not  the  office  of  a  Christian  teacher.  No  doubt,  if  he  speak  of  the 
things  of  their  world  in  terms  of  their  thought,  and  with  human  artifice  of 
language,  he  may  win  himself  audience  and  reputation.  2.  But  Paul  is  a 
model,  who  *'  determined "  that  he  would  ''  know  nothing "  of  *'  the  world's 
wisdom"  vfhQici  he  came  to  Corinth.  Let  the  *"' natural  men"  teach  '^  natural 
men"  '^ natural"  thoughts  !  Paul  will  begin,  and  will  end — but  that  there  is  no 
end  to  the  Theme — with  *'  Jesus  Christ"  !  Of  all  "  the  deep  things  of  God"  of 
all  the  now  revealed  secrets,  the  "  mysteries  of  God"  He  is  the  chief  and  the  Sum. 
Inexhaustible  as  a  subject,  inexhaustible  as  a  possession  of  the  soul !  Paul  did 
not  on  Mars'  Hill,  a  few  weeks  before,  begin  with  Him — perhaps  prudently  and 
rightly,  remembering  his  audience.  But,  at  any  rate,  when  he  came  to  speak  of 
Jesus  Christ  and  judgment  '*  some  mocked."  Now,  in  beginning  work  at  Corinth, 
he  had  settled  beforehand  upon  this  plan  of  operations,  and  ''Jesus  Christ" 
was  both  to  be  central  to  it  and  to  fill  up  all  the  circle  to  its  uttermost  circum- 
ference. He  would  be  deaf,  blind,  dumb,  in  every  direction  but  Christ !  Would 
see  nothing,  hear  nothing,  speak  nothing  else.  The  Jew  would  be  staggered, 
offended,  perhaps  turned  aside.  What  if  the  fish  would  not  look  at  his  bait  at 
all  1  These  would-be  philosophic  Greeks  of  Corinth ;  these  busy,  wealthy, 
mercantile  men ;  these  artisans  and  sailors  and  slaves, — what  of  them,  if  he 
preached  the  Godhead  and  Resurrection  of  a  man  hanged  on  a  Roman  gallows, 
outside  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  ?  Suppose  these,  too,  should  refuse  even  to 
listen  to  the  "  foolishness  of"  such  "  a  preaching  "  (i.  23)  ?  "  If  the  people  will 
not  listen,  the  preacher  is  a  failure  at  the  outset."  So  "  human  wisdom  "  would 
suggest  to  him,  as  it  does  to  the  teacher  now.  And  had  he  not  better  be 
prudent,  and  catch  the  attention  and  tickle  the  fancy  with  "  words  of  riian^s 
wisdom  "  ?  Plenty  of  teachers  of  rhetoric  in  a  Greek  city  (Acts  xix.  9),  if  he 
needed  teaching.  No  !  But  at  least  would  it  not  be  the  right  and  sensible 
thing  to  cast  his  "  testimony  "  [according  to  the  old  reading  in  ver.  2]  into  some 
quasi-philosophic  shape,  or  to  use  "persuasive  words"  (ver.  4,  R.V.)  ?  No  !  He 
would  not  decorate  his  "speech"  ,  he  would  not  adapt  his  "preaching."  He 
dares  not.  His  function  is  only  to  "proclaim  "  (ver.  1).  He  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  matter  of  the  message,  but  to  speak  it  out,  as  he  is  first  told  it. 
Whether  it  seem  "  wisdom  "  or  "folly"  that  is  not  his  responsibility.  He  is 
only  the  messenger;  let  the  Sender  and  Author  of  the  message  see  to  the 
rest.  "You  have  it  as  I  get  it,  unmixed,  uncorrupted."  The  "  thing  preached  " 
(margin)  should  be  in  its  plainest  form ;  the  "  speech  "  should  be  a  dress  as  simple 
for  the  simple  thought.  To  do  otherwise — to  wreathe  the  cross  with  flowers  of 
thought  and  rhetoric,  till  men  could  find  no  Cross,  no  Sacrifice,  and  no  Blood  ; 

61 


CHAP.  Ti.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS. 


to  take  an  atoning  sufferer  from  off  it,  and  nail  to  it  an  amiable,  noble,  pure, 
wise,  unselfishly  loving  sufferer — would  not  be  faithful  to  his  Master,  or  do 
honour  to  the  Spirit.  Who  was  Paul  that  he  should  even  leave  the  way  open, 
supposing  such  methods  to  have  succeeded,  for  any  man  to  say,  "  Paul's 
preaching  attracted  me  ;  Paul's  way  of  putting  his  Gospel  convinced  me.  I  am 
of  Paul"?  No  man  should  think,  or  say,  if  he  arrived  at  belief,  that  his  ^^ faith 
stood  in  the  ivisdom  of  mwnJ'  God  forbid  !  3.  It  would  be  unfaithful  to  Christ, 
dishonouring  to  the  Spirit,  and,  moreover,  it  would  be  useless.  Corinth  is  not 
to  be  taken  by  that  method  of  attack  !  No  way  into  the  human  heart  by  that 
road  1  The  simplest  form  of  the  message,  in  the  simplest  language, — "  Jesus 
Christ,^'  and  ''''  He  a  crucified  Jesus  "  in  addition  ;  this,  if  only  it  were  full  of  the 
"  power  of  God^'  should  come  "  with  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit.'^  The  Spirit 
should  make  even  the  "  natural  man  "  see  and  "  know  "  and  accept  this  Jesus. 
He  should  furnish  an  evidence  peculiarly  His  own,  which  should  carry  with  it  a 
force  of  proof  and  of  conviction  that  should  sweep  away  before  it  ignorance, 
pride,  prepossessions,  prejudice,  and  carry  "  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ^^  into 
the  world  of  the  "  natural  man's "  understanding  and  heart  ancl  life.  The 
Higher  should,  with  a  holy  violence,  make  for  itself  an  entrance  into  the  Lower. 
Let  other  teachers  try  ^^  pe7'suasive  words,"  arguments  of  the  most  cogent,  if  they 
will,  and  endeavour  to  win  from  the  proud  intellect  and  the  prouder  heart,  the 
patronage  of  an  acceptance  of  their  "  Gospel,"  such  as  it  is  !  The  Spirit  of  God 
will  Himself  use  the  ^'foolish  "  matter,  put  in  no  ^^ persuasive  "  way,  but  in  blunt, 
repellant  nakedness  of  "speech,"  and  will  '•'•  demonstrate''  the  truth  and  the 
method  as  the  "  wisdom  of  God."  Even  a  preacher  who  is  hampered  with 
physical  ''  weakness"  of  poor  health  or  fatigue,  to  say  nothing  of  "  «  tho7'n  in 
the  flesh " ;  who,  moreover,  is  burdened  and  anxious  about  his  ^  ork  and  his 
companions ;  who  is  full  of  '"'•fear  "  as  he  thinks  of  what  is  before  him  ;  if  only 
he  be  content  to  speak  in  ^^  words  which  the  Spirit  teacheth"  (ver,  13),  can 
succeed,  even  in  Corinth  !  By  such  methods  of  teaching  even  the  natural  man 
may  come  to  saving  knowledge  of  spiritual  things. 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS. -Verses  1—5. 

A  Model  Preacher. 

I.  The  man.     IL  The  message.     III.  The  method. 

I.  We  naturally  and  rightly  conceive  of  Paul  as  one  of  the  greatest  moral 
forces  of  his  day,  a  man  more  important  to  the  life  of  his  age  and  to  that  of 
all  future  ages,  than  any  man  then  living.  But  he  did  not  so  stand  out  to  his 
contemporaries.  The  leading  Jews  in  Rome  (Acts  xxviii.  21),  though  inter- 
course between  the  capital  and  every  part  of  the  empire  was  frequent  and  fairly 
easy,  knew,  they  seem  to  say,  a  good  deal  about  the  stir  which  the  Nazarene 
faith  was  everywhere  making,  but  very  little  about  Paul  himself,  even  as  a 
"  ringleader  of  the  sect."  At  all  events,  from  even  Judiea  there  had  not  come 
letters  such  as  would  have  indicated  that  the  authorities  there  attached  pre- 
eminent importance  to  the  prisoner  remitted  by  Festus  to  Nero.  Out  of  their 
sight,  out  of  their  way,  out  of  their  mind.  Plainly  at  Corinth,  and  probably 
elsewhere,  the  very  Christian  Church  did  not,  as  we  do,  see  Paul  overtopping — 
a  Saul  amongst  them — the  rest  of  the  Apostolic  band.  He  came  and  went,  "  one 
of  these  Jews,"  somehow  not  much  in  favour  with  his  fellow-Israelites  ;  and  except 
for  an  occasional  tumult,  the  work  he  was  doing  went  quietly  on,  unknown 
to  the  cultured,  fashionable,  busy  world.  "  The  world  knew  not"  (1  John  iii.  1) 
Paul  or  his  Churches.  "  Gallio  cared  for  none  of  these  things  ; "  the  exalte^i 
Roman  gentleman  attached  very  little  importance  to  such  canaille  and  their 
squabbles  !     We  must  not  read  back  our  present  knowledge  into  the  look  of 

62 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ii. 


things  then';  and,  above  all,  must  not  unduly  magnify  the  man  by  looking  at 
him  through  the  spectacles  of  the  results  of  his  labours.  What  the  Corinthians 
saw  was  a  man  of  no  striking  appearance,  perhaps  in  physical  weakness, 
perhaps  betraying  his  ^^/ear  and  much  trembling."  He  was  not  deficient  in 
moral  courage,  as  many  an  incident  shows,  and  repeatedly  met  danger  with 
calmness.  But  he  was  not  a  "fighting"  character,  and  may  even  have  been 
constitutionally  timid.  [So  Howson  thinks,  Hulsean  Lectures,  Charactei^  of  St. 
PaulJ^  lect.  ii.  He  refers  to  Monod's  sermon  on  the  "  Tears  of  St.  Paul  " 
(Acts  XX.  18,  19,  etc.).  2  Cor.  ii.  4 ;  Phil.  iii.  18.  He  points  out  the  three 
reassuring  visions,  Acts  xviii.  19,  xxiii.  11,  xxvii.  24,  and  compares  2  Cor.  vii.  5. 
See  farther  the  depression  of  spirits  in  anticipation  of  the  issue  of  his  third 
missionary  journey,  at  Miletus  and  Tyre  and  Csesarea.  We  see  a  strong 
craving  for  personal  sympathy,  almost  to  the  point  of  dependence,  "^fowe," 
1  Thess.  iii.  1,  10,  11;  2  Cor.  ii.  13;  Philem.  11,  14;  2  Tim.  i.  15,  iv.  9,  10. 
See  also  in  Critical  Notes.]  No  preacher  or  worker  should  feel  Paul  far  away  from 
him,  knowing  nothing  of  his  feelings,  exempt  from  his  anxieties  about  his  work 
and  his  qualifications  for  it,  and  his  little  likelihood  of  success.  Very  human, 
often  very  much  "  down,"  commanding  no  world-wide  reputation  or  respect ; 
little  known,  and  less  loved,  except  by  his  converts,  and  not  always  by  them  ; 
but  '^made  able  as  a  minister,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  iii.  6).  The  "earthen  vessel"  very 
"  earthen,"  to  the  eyes  of  his  contemporaries  (2  Cor.  iv.  7)  The  "  meek  man  has 
inherited  the  earth." 

II.  The  message. — One  topic,  only  one — "  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified.''^ 
1.  Let  a  modern  instance  illustrate  this.  ^^  Ned  Wright,  a  well-known  South 
London  evangelist,  said  [coram  me,  H.  J.  F.]  that  when  he  was  once  preaching 
on  or  near  London  Bridge  a  half -tipsy  man  thrust  himself  into  the  crowd 
gathered  round,  and  cried  out,  "  Look  here,  Ned  !  I  am  Jesus  Christ  ! "  "  Come 
here,  then ;  "  and  the  crowd  made  way.  "  Let  me  look  at  your  hands.  Hold 
them  up  ! "  Ned  made  a  show  of  examining  one,  and  then  flung  it  away  from 
him  with  a  contemptuous  gesture :  "  You  are  not  Jesus  Christ.  You  are  not 
m^y  Jesus  Christ.  My  Jesus  Christ  has  nail-holes  in  His  hands.  Be  off  with 
you  ! "  And  the  poor  fellow  slunk  away  ashamed,  amidst  the  laughter  of  the 
crowd,  who  did  not  the  less  intelligently  listen  whilst  Wright  took  advantage  of 
the  incident  to  drive  home  the  lesson  that  the  sinful  and  guilty  heart  wants  a 
Jesus  Christ  that  is  crucified.  2.  It  is  a  true  instinct  which  has  made  preaching 
"  popular  "  in  the  best  sense  to  centre  in  the  cross  of  Christ.  Or,  better,  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  thus  rightly  guided  the  successful  "  popular "  preacher. 
Christian  speculation,  the  philosophical  study  of  the  Christian  system,  may 
rightly  bring  the  Incarnation  into  greater  prominence  than  has  often  been  given 
to  it.  But  in  every  time  of  Evangelical  revival  in  the  Church,  in  every  time 
of  personal  concern  because  of  conviction  of  sin,,  it  is  seen  that  the  centre  of 
gravity  of  an  eflective  Gospel  for  a  guilty,  unholy  soul  is  at  the  Cross,  not 
first  at  the  Manger.  Bunyan  was  sketching  his  allegory  on  the  lines  of  often- 
repeated  and  self -justifying  experiment,  when  he  made  the  pilgrim's  burden  fall 
from  his  shoulders  at  the  Cross.  The  old  experience  of  the  early  missionaries  of 
the  Moravian  Church  in  Greenland  is  repeated  in  every  successful  mission-field : 
the  best  place  to  begin  at  in  teaching  Christian  doctrine  is  the  Cross.  When 
the  heart  has  found  rest  at  the  Cross,  it  can  then  return  to  the  Manger,  and  the 
Babe,  and  the  Incarnation,  and  the  perfect  Manhood  and  the  perfect  Example 
of  an  ideal  human  life.  But  the  Cross  meets  the  first  and  most  urgent  need  of 
an  awakened  soul.  2.  Nor  is  it  sufficient  to  make  the  Cross  merely  an  incident 
in  the  Example,  even  though  perhaps  the  crowning,  culminating  point  of  its 
self-sacrifice,  and  of  its  appeal  to  the  human  heart.  It  is  all  this ;  but  to  make 
it,  and  offer  it  as,  no  more  than  this,  fails  to  give  due  weight  to  the  teaching  of 

63 


CHAP.  II.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS.  ^ 


experience,  or  to  acknowledge  the  perpetually  recurring  demand  of  the  awakened 
conscience  and  the  troubled  heart  for  some  such  satisfaction  as  has  always 
been,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  given  when  the  Cross  has  been  an  Altar  bearing  a 
Sacrifice  for  Sin.  The  evangelist  finds  the  Cross,  with  a  vicarious,  expiatory, 
reconciling  Ofiering,  his  best  lever  for  lifting  the  lowest,  whilst  it  meets  the 
universal  heart  as  found  in  the  highest.  It  is  his  true  cure-all  for  all  cases 
of  spiritual  distress.  It  has  been  a  despised  sling  and  stone  only ;  but  it  has 
brought  down  the  giant !  The  pathetic  crucifixion  of  Josef  Meyer  at  Ober- 
ammergau  does  not,  with  all  its  dramatic  vividness,  so  prove  a  revolutionary 
moral  force.  Nor  did  the  real  crucifixion  of  Peter,  or  of  thousands  of  Jews  by 
Titus,  so  move  mankind.  Was  Paul  crucified  for  you  ?  For  that  is  the  very 
centre  and  heart  of  what  Christ  is  to  you.  3.  In  giving  this  narrower  promi- 
nence to  "  Jesus  Christ  .  .  .  crucified ^^  Paul  is  following  the  lead  of  even  the 
Gospel  history.  [Cf.  Dale,  Atonement^  lect.  ii.,  who  says  :]  "All  the  four  Evan- 
gelists are  agreed  about  the  exceptional  importance  of  our  Lord's  last  sufferings. 
Only  two  of  them  relate  the  circumstances  of  His  Birth,  which  we  might  have 
supposed  none  of  them  would  have  omitted.  Only  two  tell  the  story  of  the 
Temptation.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  appears  neither  in  the  second  Gospel 
nor  the  fourth.  St.  John  says  nothing  about  the  Transfiguration,  the  agony  in 
the  Garden,  or  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  story  of  the  Resur- 
rection and  of  the  appearance  of  the  Risen  Christ  to  His  Disciples  occupies 
only  twenty  verses  in  St.  Matthew's  narrative  ;  only  twenty — perhaps  only  nine 
— in  St.  Mark's;  and  St.  John  appears  to  have  said  in  thirty  verses  all  he 
intended  to  say,  and  to  have  added  another  five-and-twenty  at  the  request 
of  his  friends.  St.  Matthew  tells  us  nothing  of  our  Lord's  Ascension  into 
heaven,  nor  does  St.  John  ;  and  even  if  the  closing  verses  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel 
came  from  his  own  hand,  he  tells  us  nothing  more  than  the  bare  fact.  .  .  . 
Time  and  place  are  left  indefinite,  and  our  Lord's  parting  words  to  His  Disciples 
and  the  vision  of  angels  are  passed  over  in  silence.  But  the  Betrayal,  the 
Arrest,  the  appearance  before  Caiaphas,  Peter's  denial,  the  cry  of  the  people  for 
the  release  of  Barabbas,  and  the  Crucifixion  of  our  Lord,  Pilate's  judgment,  the 
inscription  ...  on  the  cross,  are  ...  in  all  the  four  Gospels  ;  and  they  all  bring 
the  story  to  a  close  with  words  which  indicate  that  at  the  very  moment  of  our 
Lord's  Death  there  was  no  loss  of  consciousness  or  exhaustion  of  strength."  He 
proceeds  to  show  that  in  the  deaths  of  the  Old  Testament  there  is  no  precedent 
for  this  elaborate  detail,  and  in  those  of  the  New  Testament  no  true  parallel. 
He  discusses  the  suggestion  that  all  this  was  only  the  lingering  of  love  over  the 
particulars  of  last  hours,  or  to  give  the  clearest  demonstration  of  the  evil  heart 
of  the  Jewish  rulers,  and  concludes :  "A  careful  examination  of  the  Gospels  will 
lead  us  to  (decide  that)  in  the  importance  which  they  attach  to  the  Death  of  our 
Lord,  they  are  but  following  ^he  line  of  His  own  thought.  To  Him  His  Death  was 
distinctly  present  from  the  very  commencement  of  His  ministry,"  After  Pente- 
cost, indeed,  Peter  and  his  fellow-apostles  "  gave  witness,  with  great  power,  of 
the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  "  (Acts  iv.  33).  But  the  Resurrection  is  an 
integral  part  of  the  "  Doctrine  of  the  Cross."  The  actual  crucifying  needed  no 
emphasising  in  Jerusalem ;  the  complementary  fact,  which  gave  the  death  any 
meaning  and  value  and  power,  needed  clear  and  vigorous  proclamation.  Without 
the  resurrection  and  intercession,  the  Cross  is  no  Gospel  of  an  atonement ;  it 
is  a  mere  death  upon  a  gibbet.  When  Peter  declared  the  resurrection,  he  was 
"  preaching  CAWsi  crucified"  in  the  full  significance  of  the  Messiah's  name  and  work. 
III.  His  method. — '■^Proclaiming  the  testimony^  the  mystery,  of  God"  Asser- 
tion, not  argument.  Announcing  a  fact,  not  propounding  any  theory,  the 
result  of  his  own  study  or  excogitation.  He  had  been  taken  behind  the  veil  and 
shown  one  of  God's  secrets ;  now  he  came  forth  commissioned  to  impart  it  to 

64 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ii. 


others.  But  only  to  tell  it  out ;  not  to  add  to  it,  or  mutilate  it,  or  refine  upon 
it.  *'  Put  in  trust  with  the  Gospel "  (1  Thess.  ii.  4),  he  had  simply  to  pass  it  on, 
to  offer  it,  in  its  entirety.  He  had  only  to  stand  up  as  a  witness,  bearing  "  a 
testimony."  A  method  widely  different  from  that  of  the  discussions  of  the  Porch, 
the  Grove,  the  Academy,  where  everything  might  be  challenged  by  the  learner, 
and  the  teacher  must  support  with  reasons.  A  very  narrow  function,  a  very 
restricted  office  and  work.  But  it  is  the  preacher's  right  place,  and  the  limit 
of  his  sphere.  He  should  first  go  in  and  learn  the  secret  of  the  Lord,  and  then 
come  forth  simply  to  tell  and  testify  of  "  what  he  has  seen  and  heard."  [John 
iii.  11,  "  We  "  =  Christ  and  all  His  representatives  pursue  the  same  method. 
1  John  i.  3.]  [It  is  a  principle  which  may  be  illustrated  by  a  modern  case, 
closely  analogous.  When  Dr.  Duff  first  sailed  for  India  in  1830,  the  Lady 
Holland  was  wrecked  on  Dassen  Island,  a  sandbank  off  Capetown.  All  eventually 
found  safe  landing  on  a  higher  point,  a  penguin  haunt.  A  sailor,  walking  along 
the  shore  looking  for  eggs,  found  Duff's  Bagster's  Bible  and  Scottish  Psalm 
Book,  given  him  at  his  ordination,  both  safe  because  of  the  chamois-leather  case. 
He  had  taken  out  eight  hundred  volumes  in  every  branch  of  human  knowledge — 
journals,  notes,  memoranda,  essays,  ''  as  dear  to  a  student  as  his  own  flesh  "  ;  all 
were  lost.  In  the  first  flush  of  his  student  success,  he  *'  had  only  half  parted 
with  them,"  when  he  became  a  missionary.  He  could  never  lose  the  culture 
they  gave  him.  But  the  loss  seemed  to  him  didactic,  a  speaking  incident,  that 
all  save  these  two  perished,  or  were  reduced  to  pulp.  "  The  memory  of  Dassen 
Island  was  never  absent  from  what  he  regarded  as  temptations  to  literary  self- 
indulgence  "  (Dr.  Smith's  Duff,  i.  258).  God's  Word  was  the  only  book  for  the 
missionary,  and  for  the  minister  of  the  Gospel.  More  exactly  parallel  to  Paul's 
determination  is  this  :]  Dr.  McAll,  of  Paris,  recently  deceased,  said  that  many 
a  time,  when  his  father,  the  still  more  famous  Dr.  McAll,  one  of  the  brilliant 
galaxy  of  pulpit  orators  of  the  early  half  of  the  century,  was  at  the  zenith  of  his 
fame,  and  was  being  followed  everywhere  by  admiring  and  deeply  affected 
crowds  of  hearers,  he  has  seen  him  come  home  and  sit  down,  bursting  into  a  flood  of 
tears,  distressed  that  all  the  popular  favour  and  all  the  effect  of  his  preaching 
seemed  to  mean  so  little  of  real  conversions  to  God.  His  son  read  the  fact  in  the 
light  of  this  text,  and  feared  that  the  "  excellency  of  speech  "  had  really  been  an 
obstacle  to  the  success  of  his  father's  ministry,  and  therefore  deliberately 
adopted  a  simpler  style  for  his  own.  Paul  bore  his  witness  in  the  plainest  and  in 
entirely  inartificial  language,  lest  he  should  so  wreathe  and  overlay  the  Cross 
with  the  flowers  of  human  thinking  or  rhetoric  that  the  Cross  itself  could  not, 
as  it  were,  be  seen.  Is  there,  then,  no  place  in  preaching  "  Christ  crucified  "  for 
the  faculty  of  moving  speech,  of  wit,  of  clear  reasoning,  or  of  any  other  gift  of 
God's  bestowal?  (See  on  ix.  16)  Yes.  Apollos  might  quite  lawfully  employ 
his  special  talents.  There  is  no  cast  of  mind,  no  one  mould  of  man,  from  which 
God  has  not  raised  up  successful  witnesses  of  His  truth  ;  no  faculty,  no  know- 
ledge, on  which  contribution  cannot  be  levied  for  the  service  of  Christ.  There  is 
an  "  excellency  "  of  popular  address  which  is  the  very  equipment  of  an  out-of-doors 
evangelist.  There  is  an  eloquence  born,  and  inevitable  as  certainly  as  the  man 
opens  his  lips.  But  there  is  an  eloquence  which  is  taught  and  acquired  and 
laboured  after,  the  mere  artificial  rhetoric  of  the  schools  and  their  fashions  of 
oratory,  which,  in  Paul's  view,  is  no  thing  for  the  minister  of  Christ  to  seek  after 
or  employ.  In  any  case  the  faculty  of  attractive,  persuasive  speech  must  be  kept 
a  means  to  an  end,  never  a  thing  desirable,  an  end  in  itself.  Where  it  is 
a  native,  necessary,  inborn,  unconscious  eloquence  and  excellence,  it  must  rigidly 
be  kept  consecrated  to  the  service  and  glory  of  Christ  alone.  But  the  speaker 
will  find  it  hard  not  to  create  a  difficulty  for  his  own  heart,  and  not  to 
arrest  the  attention  and  heart  of  his  hearers  at  himself.     Any  art  associated 


CHAP.  11.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


with  the  delivery  of  the  message  may  assume  undue  importance.  If  it  succeed, 
it  may  get  the  credit  due  only  to  the  '•'"power  of  God. ^^  Probably  Paul  would  not 
censure  his  friend  ApoUos,  who,  eloquent  and  philosophical  as  he  perhaps  was, 
might  nevertheless  [or  therefore?]  do  good,  and  who  certainly  would,  if  his  aim  and 
heart  were  kept  right.  Yet  he  plainly  believed  that  his  own  mere  "  testimony,'' 
in  simpler  language,  would  do  greater  good,  and  that  it  ran  less  risk  of  obscuring 
in  any  degree  the  glory  of  the  ^^ power  of  God.''  The  anxiety  to  justify  the  Gospel 
to  the  intellect  of  the  unrenewed  man,  or  to  cast  it  in  some  such  mould  as  would 
be  less  likely  to  be  repellent  at  its  first  hearing,  would  to  him  be  a  putting  on  of 
the  hampering  armour  of  Saul,  instead  of  relying  upon  the  sling,  and  stone —  and 
God  !  It  might  even  issue  in  so  modifying  some  essential  feature  of  the  Gospel 
that  it  should  no  longer  be  simply  God's  "  testimony."  The  intellect  of  the  world 
had,  in  Greece  above  all,  been  fed  upon  the  noblest  philosophies,  and  was  sick 
of  them  all,  and  unsatisfied.  Teacher  after  teacher  was  more  critical  of  his 
predecessors,  than  constructive  of  anything  satisfying.  Should  Paul  attempt  to 
give  the  weary  world  another  philosophy  ?  No  !  He  would  tell  them  a  history, 
and  the  heart  of  the  history  should  be  a  Person — "  Jesus  Christ,"  and  that  Jesus 
Christ  "  crucified."  The  "  princes  of  this  world "  knew  everything  but  this. 
Paul  knew  nothing  but  this ;  but  such  a  man,  with  such  a  message,  working  on 
such  a  method,  succeeded. 

SEPARATE   HOMILIES. 

Ver.  2.  Paul's  One  Topic. — [Cf .  this  only  in  a  person,  A  well-known  charac- 
resolution  of  Paul  the  p-eacher,  with  teristic  of  Christianity  that  Christ 
the  resolution  and  life-habit  of  Paul  identifies  His  religion  with  Himself, 
the  sinner,  "  This  one  thing  (I  do).  .  .  .  Faith  does  not  only,  or  chiefly,  lay 
I  counted  all  .  .  .  loss.  Yea,  I  count  hold  of  a  series  of  propositions  about 
all . .  .  loss"  (Phil.  iii.  13,  7,  8).]  ["  The  Him,  whether  historical  or  theological, 
man  of  one  book  "  is  a  proverb  of  but  of  Himself.  "  If  I  say  Christianity, 
narrowness  of  knowledge  and  of  view.  I  thereby  say  Jesus  Christ.  Chris - 
"  Fiddling  ever  upon  one  string  "  is  tianity  appeared  in  the  world,  not  as  a 
usually  a  reproach  to  any  public  system  of  philosophy,  not  as  a  code  of 
speaker.  But  a  Paul  could  outmatch  morality,  but  as  an  actual  fact,  the 
a  Paganini  in  educing  from  his  "  one  fact  of  the  person  Christ  Jesus.  All 
string"  an  endless  variety  of  soul-  depends  on  Him.  With  Him,  Chris- 
winning  music.  Pather,  Paul's  one  tianity  stands  or  falls.  It  cannot  be 
string  will  give  endless  variety  to  the  separated  from  Him.  It  was  not  His 
preaching  of  a  man  of  far  less  ability  precepts,  but  His  person  and  His  tes- 
than  Paul.  The  theme,  not  the  player,  timony  concerning  Himself,  which 
is  inexhaustible.]  brought    about   the   crisis    in    Israel. 

I.  Christ  Jesus,  not  Paul  (cf.  2  Cor.  He  Himself  made  His  whole  cause 
iv.  5).  In  the  analogous  case  of  depend  upon  His  person.  We  cannot 
Galatia,  the  rival  teachers  really  at  separate  it  from  Him.  Rationalism 
bottom  only  cared  to  boast  how  many  has  attempted  to  separate  Christianity 
converts  they  could  make  to  their  Juda-  from  Christ,  and  to  reduce  it  to  a  mere 
ising  form  of  the  Gospel  (Gal.  vi.  13).  morality.  But  experience  has  proved 
Beally  a  subtle  glorification  of  them-  the  attempt  impossible.  Jesus  Christ 
selves  and  their  ministry ;  before  even  does  not  bear  the  same  relation  to 
the  Circumcision,  for  which  they  pro-  Christianity  as  Mahomet  does  to 
fassed  such  anxiety.  Mahometanism,     or     as     any     other 

II.  A  Person,  not  a  philosophy  or  founder  of  a  religion  to  the  religion 
a  set  of  doctrines. — Men's  hearts  can-  he  has  founded  ;  but  He  is  Himself 
not  rest  in  a  system.     There  is  rest      Christianity.    To  speak  of  Christianity, 

^6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  ti. 


is  to  speak,  not  of  doctrines  and  pre- 
cepts, but  of  Jesus  Christ.  Chris- 
tianity is  indeed  a  summary  of  truths, 
a  new  doctrine,  a  philosophy  if  you 
will,  a  new  view  of  the  world,  a  new 
explanation  of  history,  a  new  mode  of 
worship,  a  new  morality,  a  new  rule  of 
life,  etc.  It  is  all  these,  because  it  is  a 
fact  universal  in  its  nature.  But  all 
these  depend  upon  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ,  are  given  with  Him,  and  in- 
cluded in  Him — stand  and  fall  with 
Him  "  (Luthardt,  Fundamental  Truths, 
lect.  viii.  256).  Part  of  its  universal 
adaptation,  this.  The  child,  the  igno- 
rant, the  heathen,  at  once  are  led  to 
the  very  heart  of  Christianity  when 
they  are  taught  to  know  Him.  They 
believe  in  Him,  they  learn  to  love  Him, 
life  is  summarised  and  simplified  into 
living  for  Him.  They  can  die  for  Him. 
They  say  as  Paul  did,  "  To  me  to  live 
is  Christ."  So  the  little  child  can  be 
a  Christian.  The  heathen,  whether 
in  lands  nominally  Christian  or  really 
heathen,  simply,  readily  learn  the  secret 
of  becoming  saints. 

III.  "  Not  to  know  anything  save," 
etc.  What  was  the  alternative  in  Paul's 
mind  ?  What  was  the  alternative  in 
the  practice  of  the  rival  teachers  at 
Corinth  ? — If  we  are  to  find  any  sug- 
gestion in  the  use  of  the  name  "  Cephas" 
and  with  that  may  couple  what  we 
gather  from  the  Galatian  Epistle  about 
Peter's  connection  with  the  Judaising 
controversy  which  just  at  this  period 
evidently  occupied  so  much  of  Paul's 
life  and  thoughts,  our  answer  may 
be  "Circumcision."  In  contrast  with 
some  other  teachers  at  Corinth,  Paul 
made  his  topic  "Jesus  Christ,  not 
circumcision."  In  Acts  xv.  1  is  sum- 
marised the  thesis,  so  to  speak,  which 
the  side  of  the  Christian  community 
whose  associations  and  affinities  were 
with  the  Judaism  from  which  they  had 
been  recruited,  nailed  up  on  the  door 
of  the  Antiochian  Church,  and  which 
became  for  many  years  the  centre  of 
fierce  strife  within  the  new  brother- 
hood :  "  Except  ye  be  circumcised  after 
the  manner  of  Moses,  ye  cannot  be 
saved."  ,    Paul    saw    from    the    first 


that  this  proposition  struck  direct  at 
the  honour  of  his  Divine  Master. 
What  was  to  save  a  man  ?  Was 
not  Jesus  Christ  a  sufficient  Saviour? 
What  did  they  propose — "Christ  and 
Circumcision  "  1  Or  was  it  "  Circum- 
cision before,  or  even  instead  of,  Christ"? 
Either  way  he  would  "  know  nothing  " 
of  the  kind.  Should  he  preach  some 
necessary  supplement  to  the  work  of 
his  crucified  Master,  without  which 
what  He  did  was  not  complete  and  sure 
foundation  for  a  sinner's  hope  ?  "  God 
forbid  "  (Gal.  vi.  14).  Could  it  be  that 
they  even  meant  Christ  to  be  the  sup- 
plement to  the  efficacy  of  the  now 
mere  dead  ceremonial?  "God  forbid!" 
Could  it  be  that,  not  Christ  at  all,  but 
the  ceremonial  was  to  save  1  Yet  the 
ceremonial  was  now  ejffete,  evacuated  of 
all  meaning  or  virtue;  it  had,  indeed, 
become  a  mere  "  concision  "  (Phil.  iii.  2), 
a  mere  piece  of  surgery,  a  mere  cutting 
of  the  flesh.  Whatever  these  later 
comers  might  do,  or  teach,  when  he 
entered  Corinth  his  own  resolve  was 
clear  and  definite,  and  to  it  he  had 
rigorously  confined  himself :  "  Jesus 
Christ  .  .  .  crucified." 

IV.  Moreover,  he  had  from  the  first 
been  at  the  uttermost  pole  removed 
from  the  motives  of  such  teachers,  as 
well  as  from  their  teaching  [to  borrow 
light  again  from  the  Galatian  Epistle, 
as  above:  vi.  14].  Their  motives  were 
of  "the  world,"  not  of  Christ.  The 
religion  of  circumcision  was  becoming 
almost  fashionable  in  some  quarters. 
The  weary  heart  of  many  in  the  upper 
classes  were  seeking,  some  of  them  a 
new  sensation,  some  of  them  real  rest, 
in  becoming  Jewish  proselytes.  A  few 
years  later  a  proselyte  Jewess,  Poppsea, 
sat  by  Nero's  side  on  the  throne  of  the 
empire.  But  the  man  who  made  any 
profession  of  "  Christ,  the  crucified " 
Jew  of  Nazareth,  had  to  lay  his  ac- 
count with  social  exclusion,  and  to  have 
for  his  friends  for  the  most  part  the 
artisan,  the  slave,  certainly  "  not  many 
noble,  mighty,"  etc.  It  was  human 
nature ;  therefore  it  was  the  spirit 
of  "  the  world "  getting  a  footing  in 
Christian    hearts    again,    when    some 

67 


CHAP.  II.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


of  these  were  putting  to  the  front 
the  side  of  Christianity  on  which  it 
had  relations  with  the  Old  Religion, 
with  its  prestige  of  a  sort,  and  were 
keeping  in  the  background  the  Cross, 
with  all  its  associations  of  shame  and 
suffering  and  social  inferiority.  The 
crucifying  of  Christ  had  so  entered 
into  Paul's  life  that  he  himself  was 
"  crucified  with  Him,"  and  a  crucifixion 
was  between  him  and  such  "  worldly  " 
motives  in  teaching  and  thought.  He 
was  crucified  to  the  world,  and  was  quite 
content  that  it  should  care  no  more 
about  him  than  it  did  for  a  poor  fellow 
hanging  dead  upon  a  cross.  The  world 
was  crucified  to  him ;  he  cared  no  more 
for  its  good  opinion  or  its  bad  opinion, 
for  its  favour  or  its  frown,  than  did 
the  dying  man  for  the  passing  show 
beneath  him,  on  which  his  glazing  eyes 
looked  down  from  the  elevation  of  his 
cross.  *'  I  am  nothing  to  the  world ; 
the  world  is  nothing  to  me.  In  any 
personal  life  I  know  nothing  save  Jesus 
Christ  and  Him  crucified."  "  Weakness 
and  folly  be  it !  A  weak  fool  I  was 
prepared  to  be  reckoned,  when  I  came  to 
you  wise  and  mighty  people  in  Corinth." 
All  which  has  its  present-day  analogies 
for  the  man  who  is  determined,  in  the 
world — not  to  say  also  in  the  Church — 
to  know,  to  have  but  the  one  theme, 
sovereign  in  all  his  theology,  his  ethics, 
his  teaching,  his  service  — "  Jesus 
Christ  crucified." 

Ver.  4.  The  Demonstration  of  the 
Sph'it. — A  pivot- word  of  the  chapter ; 
a  pivot-fact  in  the  story  of  the  Gospel. 

I.  The  secret  of  Paul's  success  at 
Corinth. — 1.  Consider  the  conditions 
under  which  Paul  sought  to  win  Corinth 
for  Christ.  Morally,  a  city  of  the 
vilest.  A  seaport,  with  all  the  difficul- 
ties of  a  shifting  population,  of  medley 
composition,  given  eagerly  to  the  pursuit 
of  wealth.  Sufficiently  a  Greek  city 
for  the  Corinthian  to  pique  himself 
upon  his  intellectual  acuteness.  And 
a  large  Jewish  community — as  every- 
where, proud,  narrow,  intolerant.  See 
Paul  enter  Corinth,  an  unnoticed  man 
amongst    the  throng ;    of   no  striking 

68* 


appearance,     in     poor     health;     one 
Jew    more,    where    there    were     too 
many  already ;  a  working  tent  maker, 
taking  lodgings  with  a  Pontian  Jew 
and    his  wife,  fugitives    from    Rome. 
He  is  alone;  his  host  and  hostess  are 
not  Christians  yet.     He  begins  his  at- 
tack on  Corinth  singlehanded.     More- 
over,   he   has    "  handicapped  "  himself 
by  a  resolution  that   he  will  concede 
nothing  to  the  intellectualism   of  the 
city  or  the  fashion  of  rhetorical  address. 
He  has  a  "ridiculous"  topic — a  crucified 
Jew,  who,  forsooth,  has  risen  from  the 
grave,  and  gone  to  heaven ;    and   he 
will  conciliate   no   opposition,    he  will 
bid  for  no  success,  by  any  economy  or 
reserve  as  to  the  matter  of  his  teach- 
ing, or  by  any  artifice  of  human  school - 
rhetoric  in  its  presentation.      Succeed 
or  fail — he  will  not !     He  succeeded ! 
After  a  stay  of  a  year  and  a  half,  he  left 
behind  him  a  Church  in  Corinth.    Poor 
specimens  of  Christians;  but  remember 
their  training,  their  surroundings,  and 
that  the  most  elementary  Christianity 
was    a    whole   heaven   removed   from 
much  of  the  most  ordinary  heathen,  not 
to  say  Jewish,  life.     Jews  had  bowed 
before  a  Crucified  Messiah.      Gentiles 
had  trusted  in  a  Son  of  God  who  was 
a  man,  and  unlearned.     What  did  it  ? 
2.  What    did  it  at    Thessalonica   two 
years  before?  (1  Thess.  ii.  1,  i.  4).     The 
Holy  Ghost  did  it.     Greek  intellectual- 
ism and  sensuality  and  Jewish  pride, 
bowed  before  the  Demonstration  of  the 
Spirit.       His  peculiar,  proper   proof 
wrought  Conviction.     3.  So  anywhere, 
amongst  all  classes ;  amongst  nominal 
Christians    or     real     heathens.       Re- 
member that  Paul  often  tried  his  form 
of  the  Gospel  upon  simple,  virgin,  adult 
heathenism.      The    problems    of    our 
mission-fields  were  his  problems.     The 
mission-fields  of  the  Churches  have  a 
high    value    in    the    very    fact    that 
they   repeatedly   afford  new  examples 
and  verifications  of  the  method  :  "  The 
demonstration     of    the     Spirit."       A 
"  consecrated  cobbler  "  tried  it  in  India, 
as  a  "  consecrated  tentmaker  "  tried  it 
in  Corinth.     It  seems  irrational,  and 
even  impertinent,  that  a  stranger  should 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  ii. 


make  his  appearance  amongst  a  heathen 
people,  bringing  with  him  a  book,  and 
that  much  of  his  method  should  be  a 
number  of  bold,  bare  assertions.  Their 
gods  false — no  gods  at  all ;  his  the  only- 
True.  Their  religions — whether  child- 
ish in  their  barbarous  simplicity,  or 
hoary  with  antiquity,  the  fruit  of  ages 
of  subtle  thought — all  fraud  or  delusion; 
the  True  is  an  elaborate  and  mysterious 
system  of  teachings,  gathering  around 
a  Peison  mentioned  in  his  Book.  It 
is  with  very  real  peril,  he  says,  that 
they  reject  this  Person.  Some  of  the 
commonest  practices  of  themselves  and 
their  ancestors — sins,  which  make  his 
God  angry.  And  so  on ;  a  series  of 
startling  assertions.  The  world  laughs 
or  grows  angry  at  the  man  and  the 
method,  but  the  man  succeeds.  Some- 
thing awakens  within  his  hearers;  Some 
One  works  with  him  within  their  hearts. 
They  accept  his  teaching ;  many  be- 
come really  "  saints."  Nothing  more 
illogical,  coolly,  irritatingly  presump- 
tuous, than  his  procedure  ;  yet  heart, 
will,  understanding  bow,  and  the  men 
are  "  new  creatures."  The  "  demon- 
stration of  the  Spirit "  makes  it  suc- 
cessful.    Because 

II.  The  Spirit  (1)  reveals  a  new 
world,  (2)  gives  a  new  sense,  (3)  affords 
a  new  kind  of  evidence. — (1)  Five 
senses  are  our  outfit  for  living  in  the 
natural  world ;  five  gateways  of  know- 
ledge. Take  these  away,  and  all 
knowledge  of  the  world  round  us  is 
gone.  We  can  also  awaken  and  train 
another  eyesight,  another  hearing,  for 
a  world  of  facts  for  the  intellect,  grow- 
ing wider  as  we  train.  "  Taste  "  opens 
up  the  world  of  aesthetics.  The  heart 
again  has  its  world,  that  of  the  affec- 
tions. Are  these  all  ?  "  Yes,"  says 
the  natural  man  ;  ''  there  is  nothing 
else.  We  have  explored ;  our  world 
grows  larger  every  day ;  but  we  find 
no  new  world.  Every  new  inquirer 
brings  in  his  new  gathering  of  facts  into 
the  common  stock.  Our  methods  grow 
more  perfect ;  the  observing  faculty 
more  highly  trained.  But  we  find 
only  this  natural  world."  The  Bible 
agrees  with  them  exactly  (1  Cor.  ii.  9). 


The  very  meaning  of  Agnostic,  Agnos- 
ticism. Huxley  coined  the  word  thirty 
years  ago.  Spectator  popularised  it; 
made  it  the  chosen  name  of  many  of  the 
most  famous  and  most  influential  men 
and  women  of  our  time.  Metaphysi- 
cians, theologians,  affirm  and  deny  con- 
fidently ;  the  Agnostic  will  neither 
affirm  nor  deny,  has  no  scientific 
ground  for  professing  to  know.  As  a 
'* natural"  man,  he  is  right ;  wiser  than 
the  "  infidel "  of  the  last  century.  Did 
he  call  himself  a  Deist?  Then  Chris- 
tian controversialists  pressed  him  that 
he  must  logically  believe  much  more. 
The  Christian  was  plainly  right.  Or 
was  he  an  Atheist,  and  denied  a  God  ? 
Christian  apologists  said :  "  You  cannot 
demonstrate,  do  not  know,  that.  To 
demonstrate  that,  you  must  be  omni- 
scient and  omnipresent."  He  is  now 
seen  to  have  been  right  again.  *'  Eye 
hath  not  seen,"  etc.  (A.V.,  B.V.  not 
materially  different).  But  finish  the 
quotation :  "  God  hath  revealed,"  etc. 
The  spiritual  man  says  another  world 
has  opened  around  him.  He  can  look 
back  to  the  day  when  it  first  broke  in 
upon  his  eyesight,  when  his  ears  were* 
first  opened  to  its  voices  and  harmonies, 
when  his  dead  heart  started  into 
life,  sympathy,  receptivity,  enjoyment. 
How  was  it  done  ? 

(2)  The  Spirit  gave  new  senses. — 
For  a  deaf  man,  open  an  ear  !  For  a 
blind,  an  eye  !  Yet  not  that  only.  Put 
many  a  man  before  a  beautiful  land- 
scape or  painting.  He  sees  it,  but  sees 
nothing  in  it.  You  must  open  an  inner 
eye.  Many  men  hear  sound,  but  not 
music.  You  must  give  or  awaken  a 
faculty.  A  corpse  lies  blind,  dumb,  deaf, 
without  sensation,  responsiveness;  life 
all  around,  but  cut  off  from  all.  Give 
life,  and  you  give  not  one  sense,  but 
all,  and  a  new  world.  ["  The  Life  is 
the  Light  of  men."]  So  for  the  spiritual 
world,  the  "  things  of  the  Spirit  of 
God "  (ver.  14)  want  a  new  faculty, 
corresponding.  The  "  natural  man " 
must  be  "  agnostic  "  to  these ;  "  spiritu- 
ally discerned."  E.g.  Sin.  Spiritual 
men  understand  failure  because  of 
weakness ;  the  fall  of  a  tottering  child 

69 


CHAP,  II.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


learning  to  walk ;  the  defect  of  a  finite 
creature.  The  *'  natural "  man  sees  no 
more.  But  the  spiritual  man  sees  more. 
Guilt ;  he  is  himself  guilty ;  feels  guilty 
fear;  discovers  that  he  was  not  only 
blind,  but  blinded;  helpless,  not  with 
weakness,  but  with  disease.  A  dis- 
covery all  this,  a  revelation,  when  it 
comes.  Think  of  the  burst  of  a  new 
world  on  the  blind  man  (John  ix.)  when 
he  had  washed  away  the  clay,  and  for 
the  first  time  saw,  and  understood 
what  sight  meant,  and  what  blindness 
meant.  A  natural  man  is  "  agnostic  " 
in  regard  to  himself  until  that  moment; 
Christ,  and  spiritual  men,  have  under- 
stood him  all  the  while.  That  blind 
man  said,  "  You  know  not  .  .  .  He  hath 
opened  my  eyes  !  "  To  every  man  thus 
made  to  understand  the  fact — Sin,  Christ 
has  Divine  credentials.  "  Proofs  "  of  His 
Divinity  have  their  place ;  the  natural 
man  may  discuss  them,  but  the  spiritual 
man  knows.  The  Spirit  brings  the 
sinner,  Thomas-like,  into  the  presence 
of  Christ.  Doubts  melt  away.  Ques- 
tions to  be  asked,  tests,  to  be  proposed, 
difficulties  often  raised — all  are  for- 
gotten. He  looks,  falls,  adores :  *'  My 
Lord,  and  my  God."  Only  the  new 
sense  will  do  this.  Without  that  men 
will  go  on  *'  C7'ucifying  the  Lord  of  glory." 
Sin  and  a  Divine  Saviour  are  two 
facts  by  which  to  mark  out  a  spiritual 
world ;  twin  stars  in  the  firmament  of 
truth — "tests  of  sight"  for  spiritual 
things. 

(3)  This  brings  thus  a  new  kind  of 
evidence. — He  who  says,  "  One  thing 
I  know,"  etc.  (John  ix.  25),  knows 
much  besides.  One  man  with  opened 
eyes  is  secure  against  the  arguments 
of  a  thousand  blind.  A  spiritual  man 
is  safe,  walking  in  light,  and  knows 
it.  The  natural  man  is  in  darkness 
and  danger,  but  only  the  spiritual 
man  knows  it.  He  understands  the 
natural  man ;  the  natural  does  not 
know,  nor  can  criticise,  the  spiritual 
(ver.  15).  ["  Pure  in  heart  see  God."] 
Value  of  all  this  to  day,  amidst  revo- 
lutionary changes  in  knowledge  and  the 
very  foundation  principles  of  knowledge 
and   inquiry.       Yery   few   capable  of 

70 


mastering  the  evidence  for  or  against  all 
these  changes ;  most  must  believe,  or 
disbelieve,  upon  authority.  Children, 
heathen,  cannot  by  discussion  or  in- 
vestigation arrive  at  knowledge  on 
such  matters.  Yet  there  is  a  world 
which  they  know,  where  they  are  at 
home ;  they  tread  confidently ;  they 
give  a  lifetime  to  the  study  of  such  of  its 
facts  as  sin,  pardon,  providence,  prayer, 
an  inspired  Bible,  a  Divine  Christ. 
These  things  they  know  by  ''the 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit."  Natural 
systems  of  things  must  find  room  for 
these  spiritual  facts,  or  they  give  no 
true,  complete  account  of  man,  life, 
the  world.     (Cf.  1  John  v.  18-20.) 

["  He  knows  nothing,"  they  say, 
when  they  have  heard  the  new  minister. 
"  He  is  a  poor,  narrow  fellow  !  "  "  He 
is  no  preacher  !  "  But  sometimes  the 
narrowness  gives  force.  In  that  may 
be  his  power.  Narrowness  may  be  to 
shut  up  the  force  of  your  powder  in  a 
gun-barrel,  rather  than  to  let  it  simply 
burn  away  uselessly  in  space  and 
"  freedom " ;  to  load  with  a  bullet 
instead  of  with  a  pellet  of  lead-foil.] 

Yer.  6.  Wisdom  justified  amongst  the 
Perfect. 

I.  Facts,  such  as  '<  the  perfect " 
appreciate,  set  up  a  presumption  that 
it  is  wisdom. — The  world  says :  "A 
poor  thing,  this  Gospel  of  yours  !  Your 
preachers  boast  that  they  have  only  One 
Topic,  only  one  theme,  only  one  tune, 
in  their  repertory.  Fit  for  the  maid- 
servants, for  children,  and  for  fools  !  " 
[Voltaire's  well-known  sneer,  "  Philo- 
sophy was  never  meant  for  the  people. 
The  canaille  of  to-day  resembles  in 
everything  the  canaille  of  the  last 
four  thousand  years.  We  have  never 
cared  to  enlighten  cobblers  and  maid- 
servants. That  is  the  work  of 
apostles."]  Certainly  *'the  poor  have 
the  Gospel  preached  to  them  "  !  That 
is  its  glory.  It  is  the  climax  of  the 
series  of  Messiah-tokens  which  Christ 
offered  in  reply  to  John  Baptist's 
question  (Matt.  xi.  4).  It  can  hardly 
be  an  entirely  ^^  foolish "  system  of 
truth  which  has  repeatedly  approved 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  il. 


itself  as  a  very  effectual  "  Culture  for 
the  Million."  Culture  as  ordinarily 
understood  is  to  the  vast  majority  not 
available  at  all.  They  have  no  pre- 
paration for  it ;  their  average  powers, 
the  engrossing,  enslaving,  nature  of 
their  necessary  engagements  in  pro- 
viding for  the  wants  of  the  physical 
life,  the  surroundings  in  the  midst  of 
which  the  majority  of  mankind  must 
always  live,  forbid  that  it  should 
have  any  message  and  help  for  them. 
Is  that  the  wiser  instrument  for 
developing  the  best  in  mankind,  which 
avowedly,  and  in  the  nature  of  the 
case,  must  miss  the  bulk  of  mankind 
altogether;  or  that  which,  true  or 
false,  has  given  a  very  real  enlarge- 
ment of  life  and  outlook  and  ideas  and 
character  to  the  labouring  class  in  all 
lands  and  ages,  to  the  young,  to  the 
heathen,  to  the  sunken  and  degraded 
and  hopeless,  to  even  the  profligate  and 
debased  ?  In  English  agricultural  dis- 
tricts, for  example,  how  frequently  is 
there  found  an  old  labourer,  hard- 
handed,  of  heavy  gait,  bowed  in  knee 
and  shoulder,  of  scanty  education,  with 
no  literature  but  a  Bible,  and  a  devout 
book  or  two  beside,  living  in  narrow 
circumstances,  and  yet  refined  in 
thought  by  long  years  of  habitual 
pondering  over  such  large  conceptions 
as  the  love  of  God  and  of  His  Son 
toward  him  ;  his  mind  really  enlarged 
by  the  habitual  extension  of  the  horizon 
of  Life  until  it  takes  in  the  Eternal 
and  the  Unseen ;  the  man  perpetually 
dwelling  in  the  presence  of  '*  Him  who 
is  invisible"  [Heb.  xi.  27.  No  man's 
life  can  be  narrow,  or  mean,  or  animal, 
who  does  that !  If  we  only  knew  that 
one  fact  about  Moses,  we  should  be  sure 
that  he  had  learned  the  secret  of  living 
a  life,  large  and  elevated  and  noble. 
We  see  how  "  the  Invisible "  was  an 
anchor  which  held  him  to  the  right, 
when  otherwise  the  storm  of  fear  might 
have  swept  him  away  before  it  into  a 
return  to  Egypt  and  an  abandonment 
of  his  mission.]  Indeed,  the  spirit  of 
*'  Christ  Crucified  "  has  so  far  moulded 
many  such  a  labourer's  spirit  into 
conformity  with  the  Pattern  that,  in 


unselfish  readiness  to  serve  others,  in 
fine  sensibility  to  the  feelings  of  others, 
in  a  real  tact  and  consideration  for 
others,  the  "  clod-hopper,"  as  some 
would  call  him,  has  become,  in  all  the 
essentials  of  the  character,  a  ''  gentle- 
man." He  has  learned  it  from  the 
Bible,  whose  heart  and  raison  (Tetre  is 
Christ— Paul's  ''  Christ  crucified."  The 
system  which  can  do  this,  in  those  very 
ranks  of  social  life,  of  which  philo- 
sophers or  Jewish  Rabbis  (John  vii.  49, 
*'  Ham-ha-aretz  ")  despaired,  or  took 
no  practical  account,  is  not  to  be  dis- 
missed as  folly.  *'  Perfect "  men  justify 
the  "  wisdom^ 

II.  Paul  found,  and  the  ^*  perfect " 
find,  how  perfectly  this  system  meets 
the  need  of  actual  human  nature. — 
"  Wisdom "  or  ^'  folly "  is  often  a 
question  of  suiting  means  to  ends. 
The  means  may  be  ludicrously  in- 
adequate or  the  end  entirely  unworthy. 
Here  the  end  is  noble,  and  the  means 
are  of  proved  sufficiency.  For  the 
many-sided  need  of  human  nature  the 
"  manifold  "  —  many-sided,  many-col- 
oured— "wisdom  of  God"  (Eph.  iii.  10) 
has  provided  the  "  manifold  "  (cognate 
word,  1  Pet.  iv.  10)  "  grace  of  God." 
Like  the  flaming  sword  of  the  gate 
of  Eden,  it  "  turns  every  way  "  ;  but 
offering  a  very  different  reception  to 
the  approach  of  needy  human  nature, 
drawing  it  near,  not  keeping  it  off.  No 
matter  from  what  side  human  need 
approaches  it,  the  grace  of  God  re- 
vealed in  the  Gospel  of  "  Jesus  Christ 
.  .  .  crucified  "  has  an  aspect  exactly, 
"  squarely,"  meeting  it.  It  reveals 
first  of  all  that  Sin  is  the  root  trouble 
of  humanity,  and  it  then  offers  its 
remedy  for  Sin  in  its  threefold  curse 
of  Guilty  Fear,  of  Innate  Impurity, 
and  of  Fear  of  Death.  [Thus,  es- 
pecially in  the  last  particular,  does  it 
"  destroy  .  .  .  the  face  of  the  covering 
cast  over  all  people,  and  the  veil  that 
is  spread  over  all  nations  "  (Isa.  xxv.  7 ; 
which  proceeds  :)  "  He  will  swallow  up 
death  in  victory."]  Coming  as  a  Jew 
into  a  city  where  much  of  his  work 
would  be  concerned  with  a  numerous 
Jewish    element    in    the    population, 

71 


CHAP.  11.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Paul  appreciated  the  "  wisdom  and  fear  of  past  sin  and  its  penalty.  The 
the  power  of  God "  in  the  message  of  divided  heart,  the  consequent  moral 
the  Cross.  He  knew — none  better —  weakness,  which  are  the  shame  and  the 
the  utmost  of  moral  help  which  could  despair  of  all  noble  natures — hating 
come  from  the  system  whose  seal  and  themselves  that  they  do  not,  and 
symbol  was  Circumcision.  It  *'  could  cannot,  attain  to  even  their  own  ideal 
never  make  the  comers  thereunto  per-  of  Goodness  or  Hohness — these  find 
feet"  (Heb.  x.  1);  it  could  not  bring  their  remedy  in  the  "salvation  to  the 
them  to  spiritual  and  moral  manhood,  uttermost  "  which  is  made  available  in 
[It  was  only  a  "  school-slave,"  a  the  work  of  Christ  crucified.  Rom.  vi. 
pedagogue,  for  children  under  age  or  Gal.  ii.  15-21  are  samples  of  the 
(Gal.  iii.  24).]  It  could  not,  even  with  message  Paul  could  take  to  Corinth, 
its  culminating  sacrifice  on  the  Day  the  good  news  of  God's  "  wise  "  remedy 
of  Atonement,  give  a  lasting,  perfect  for  heart-sin.  The  crucifixion  of  his 
peace  to  a  guilty  conscience  (Heb.  x.  2).  Lord  was  to  Paul  no  mere  fact  of  the 
It  spoke  sternly  of  duty,  but  of  itself  past,  however  significant  in  its  objective 
law  offers  no  help  to  obedience  ;  that  relief  to  a  guilty  soul.  It  was  a  trans- 
is  not  its  office.  And,  indeed,  the  action  re-enacted — or  which  had  its 
provision  for  pardon  through  the  counterpart — within  the  soul  of  every 
elaborate  system  of  sacrifice  scarcely  believer  in  Christ.  *'  Christ  died  to 
reached  beyond  transgressions  of  the  sin  once ;""  death "  from  that  moment 
ritual  system.  For  graver  moral  *'  had  no  more  dominion  over  Him  " ; 
delinquencies  and  offences  it  had  hardly  "  He  "  there  "  spoiled  principalities 
a  word  of  help  or  hope.  Paul's  Epistles  and  powers  "  ; — all  these  significancies 
are  full  of  a  larger,  satisfying  help,  all  in  the  fact  of  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus 
centering  in  the  work  of  the  Cross.  Christ,  Paul  knew  were  to  be  realised 
He  had  himself  "  found  sanctuary  "  over  again  in  the  man  whom  a  living 
there.  The  very  writ  of  God's  own  and  life-bringing  faith  united  to  Christ, 
righteous  law  does  not  "run"  within  As  a  matter  of  fact,  ten  thousands  of 
the  precincts  of  the  Cross.  The  sinner  all  ranks,  ages,  countries,  churches, 
taking  refuge  there  says,  "  No  con-  "  crucified  with  Christ,"  have  found  in 
demnation  !  "  [A  passing  analogy  may  the  Cross  and  its  power,  effectuated  by 
be  found  in  the  trial  of  Marcus  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  solution  of  the 
Manlius,  the  hero  of  old  Roman  history,  problem  of  a  Holy  Life.  And  the 
whose  glory  it  was  to  have  saved  the  death  of  Christ  has  transformed  all 
Capitol  from  the  Gauls.  Becoming  the  habitual  thought  and  feeling  of 
the  friend  of  the  distressed  plebeian  the  Christian  world  in  regard  to  death, 
classes,  the  patricians  accused  him  of  [Illustrate  by  the  triumph  with  which 
aiming  at  "  the  tyranny,"  and  put  him  the  main  body  of  an  attacking  force 
on  trial  before  the  Comitia  in  the  sees  the  advance  party  raise  the  flag 
Campus  Martins.  But  there  in  full  upon  the  captured  battery.  So  when 
view  was  the  Capitol,  and  he  pointed  the  centurion  and  his  quaternion  of 
to  it  as  his  only  defence.  After  men,  "told  off*  for  duty"  at  "the 
such  an  appeal  his  condemnation  was  execution  "  upon  Calvary,  raised  up 
impossible,  and  his  prosecutors  broke  and  dropped  into  the  hole  they  had 
up  the  assembly.  He  was  again  tried,  dug  for  it,  the  cross  of  rough  carpentry 
and  in  the  end  put  to  death  ;  but  the  with  its  precious  Burden,  they  "  knew 
second  trial  took  place  in  the  Peteline  not  indeed  what  they  did,"  but  they 
Grove,  where  the  Capitol  could  not  he  were  really  raising  the  banner  of  a 
seen.  "  No  condemnation  "  where  the  world's  victory  over  that  Death  in  which 
Capitol — or  the  Cross — can  be  seen  the  curse  of  sin  had  entrenched  itself 
and  appealed  to.]  Nor  does  the  work  in  its  most  terrifying  form.]  Death 
of  the  Crucified  Saviour  end  with  the  has  never  been  the  same  thing  since 
relief  to  a  guilty  conscience,  from  all  He  died,  at  least  to  His  people.     They 

72 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  It. 


who  else  "  were  all  their  lifetime  sub- 
ject to  bondage "  through  "  the  fear 
of  death"  (Heb.  ii.  15),  now  welcome 
it  as  advancing  their  hopes,  and 
their  best  purposes,  and  their  spiritual 
growth,  a  stage  onward  toward  realisa- 
tion. Many  of  His  people,  even  tender 
women  and  young  children,  have  met 
death  with  far  less  of  dread  and 
distress  than  He  Himself  seemed  to 
manifest.  He  met  it  in  its  full 
strength ;  to  them  it  comes  as  a 
conquered  thing,  a  foe  whose  "  sting  " 
is  drawn.  The  Gospel  which  thus — as 
is  proved  by  multiplied  experiment — 
provides  a  practically  operative  remedy 
for  the  torturing  of  guilt,  for  the  hope- 
less moral  division  and  weakness  within 
the  nature,  and  for  deliverance  from  the 
fear  of  death,  is  certainly  a  "  wisdom  " 
which  approves  itself  to  the  ^^  perfect  ^^ 
who  are  experiencing  its  advantages. 

III.  The  simplicity  of  the  methods 
of  the  Gospel  is  a  mark  of  its  wisdom. 
— All  adaptations  of  means  to  ends,  e.g. 
mechanical    inventions,    gain    by  sim- 
plicity.    The  inventor  who  can  at  the 
outset,  or  by  subsequent  improvements, 
reduce  the  number  of  the  parts  of  the 
mechanism,  or  who  can  simplify  their 
arrangement      and      working,      shows 
"  wisdom."     In    the    plan    of     moral 
recovery   and   renewal,  God's   wisdom 
appears  in  the  fewness  and  simplicity 
of  the  essential  parts  of  His  scheme. 
For  example.  He  has  "  utilised  "  what 
Chalmers  called  "  The  Expulsive  Power 
of  a  New  Affection "  to  work  a  moral 
revolution    in    the     nature    of    every 
Christian  man.     The  principle  is  one  of 
common  and  obvious  effectiveness  ;  its 
working  is  on  the  lines  of  the  ordinary 
laws   of    human   nature.     It   is   most 
strictly    analogous     to     many     often 
verified  facts  of  every -day  life.     The 
one    "  supernatural "    element   in  the 
case  is  the  Holy  Spirit's  assurance  to 
the  penitent  sinner  that  he  has  found 
acceptance  with  God  for  Christ's  sake, 
and  he  now  stands  in  the  favour  of  God. 
Because    he   is   now   a   son,  accepted, 
accounted,    welcomed,    as    such,    God 
"  sends  forth  the  Spirit  of  [His]  Son 
into  His  heart,  crying  '  Abba,  Father  ' " 


(Gal.  iv.  6).  The  "love  of  God"— 
God's  forgiving,  adopting  love  to  him 
the  sinner — "  is  shed  abroad  in  his 
heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost  given  unto 
him  "  (Rom.  v.  5).  All  these  are  varied 
forms  of  statement  of  one  fact,  that 
the  Spirit  of  God,  by  a  particular 
instance  of  His  "  demonstration  "  (ii.  4), 
that  special,  direct,  supernatural 
evidence  and  conviction,  which  He 
alone  can  give,  bears  in  upon  the  soul, 
with  full  clearness  and  with  over- 
whelming foj'ce  of  assured  knowledge, 
the  new  idea,  the  new  fact :  "  God  in 
Christ  loves,  forgives,  accepts,  adopts, 
me,  the  sinner  !  "  How  this  is  com- 
municated, where  the  Holy  Spirit 
meets  man's  mind  and  heart,  is  past 
our  analysis.  [How  does  man's  mind 
meet  and  act  upon  man's  mind  ?]  But 
the  fact  is  sure  to  the  man  who  receives 
it  upon  the  Spirit's  *'  testimony " 
(Rom.  viii.  16).  And  after  that  first, 
supernatural  step,  all  proceeds  in 
accordance  with  the  ordinary  laws  of 
human  thought  and  life.  ''We  love 
Him  because  He  first  loved  us " 
(1  John  iv.  19)  is  a  simple  sequence 
which  finds  ag  many  illustrations  as 
we  find  hearts  capable  of  knowing  and 
returning  love.  And  the  elevating, 
transforming  force  of  a  new  love  thus 
awakened  is  a  fact  of  every-day  obser- 
vation and  knowledge.  [The  indolent, 
selfish,  and  withal  weak,  nature  finds 
in  the  loving  interest  of  some  friend, 
a  new  motive  and  a  new  power  to 
arouse  itself  and  to  go  out  of  self,  and 
to  struggle  after  and  up  to  a  nobler, 
larger  life  and  character.  Poor 
drunkards,  men  or  women,  are  thus 
lifted  out  of  the  slough  in  which  they 
sink  helpless  and  hopeless,  by  the 
persistent  love  of  some  pitying  heart 
that  will  not  be  shaken  off,  and  will 
not  give  them  up,  spite  of  repeated 
and  ungrateful  failures.  The  young 
fellow  turns  away  from  evil  com- 
panionship, gives  up  some  evil  resort 
or  indulgence,  sets  himself  resolutely 
to  struggle  against  long-established 
habits  of  evil,  all  because,  "  She  will 
not  like  it ;  she  loves  me,  if  nobody 
else  does,   and  wants  me   better  and 

73 


CHAP.  11.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


purer."  Every  mother  knows  how 
she  can  direct  and  mould  her  child's 
life,  if  only  she  have  her  child's  love.] 
"  I  live,"  exclaims  Paul,  "  by  the  faith 
of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me." 
That  fact,  "  The  Son  of  God  loves  me, 
me,  me,  Paul,"  grasped  hj  faith,  and 
made  knoioledge  by  the  "  demonstration 
of  the  Spirit,"  explains,  summarises, 
Paul's  new,  altered  life  and  career.  A 
new  "  ruling  passion "  has  taken 
possession  of  him,  and  the  transforming, 
revolutionary,  power  of  a  new  passion 
for  good  or  for  evil  is  an  ordinaiy  fact 
of  human  nature.  So  a  "  new  idea " 
taking  possession  of  a  life  may  trans- 
form it  in  character  and  direction. 
[The  story  once  told  of  Correggio  may 
not  be  true  in  fact,  but  it  is  true  to 
human  nature,  how  that  he  was  a  dull, 
heavy  youth,  developing  no  special 
ability,  until  one  day  he  found  himself 
before  a  painting  by  an  earlier  artist, 
which  awoke  the  painter  in  him,  and 
he  turned  away  saying,  "  And  I  too 
am  a  painter."]  In  all  God's  works 
there  is  a  "  law  of  parsimony" — parsi- 
mony of  the  miraculous,  of  "  con- 
trivance," of  "  effort."  It  was  an  old 
argument  for  the  Copernican  as  against 
the  Ptolemaic  arrangement  of  the 
solar  system,  that  it  was  more  agree- 
able to  the  analogy  of  God's  whole 
procedure  that  the  earth  should  go 
round  the  sun  rather  than  that  the  sun 
should  go  round  the  earth ;  it  meant  a 
"  less  expenditure  of  force."  The 
argument  is  worth  little  to-day,  and  is 
not  needed ;  but  it  rightly  appreciated 
a  point  of  God's  wise  ordering  of 
Nature.  And  so  the  simplicity  of  the 
means  used  under  the  Gospel  is  a  mark 
of  the  ^'"wisdom^^  of  that  Gospel  which 
seems  folly  to  those  outside  the  number 
of  those  who  believe  its  truths  and 
experience  its  blessings.  A  new  affec- 
tion, a  new  idea,  a  new  ruling  passion, 
is  implanted — "  God  loves  me  "  ;  and 
from  this,  with  its  sequel,  "  I  love 
Him  because,"  etc.,  grow  all  the  new 
direction,  the  new  aspirations,  the  new 
sympathy  with  God's  love  of  holiness, 
all  the  new  activities  of  the  Christian 
life ;  a   new   character,    a   new   man. 

74 


Love  to  God  is  the  simple  seed  from 
which  may  spring  all  holiness.  It  is 
the  single  force  which  secures  such 
complex  and  far-reaching  results.  The 
whole  of  Keligion  is  implicitly  in  the 
sentence,  "We  love  Him  because  He 
first  loved  us."  So  again,  remember- 
ing the  constituency  to  which  it  is  to 
be  applicable,  the  "  perfect "  see  the 
wisdom  of  the  form  given  to  the  Ethical 
Standard  of  the  Gospel ;  not  an  elabo- 
rated Code,  but  a  Person,  conformity  to 
Whom  in  character  and  act  and  motive 
is  a  "  law,"  a  rule,  applicable  to  every 
conceivable  case,  and  apprehensible, 
as  experiment  shows,  by  the  simplest 
mind,  and  yet  a  perfect  directory  for 
life  and  practice  and  character,  for  the 
wisest. 

Vers.    12-14.    The   Causes  of  Igno- 
rance ;  the  Way  to  Knowledge. 

I.  The  causes  of  ignorance. — 1.  There 
is,  amongst  all  the  fields  of  human  in- 
quiry and  their  contents,  one  special 
field — '*  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God^ 
It  stands  apart  from  the  rest ;  the 
knowledge  of  it,  and  the  way  to  that 
knowledge,  stand  apart  from  all  other 
knowledge.  Not  that  there  are  no 
analogies  with  the  processes  and  con- 
ditions of  knowledge  in  other  fields. 
It  would  be  unlike  God's  method  in 
everything  else,  if  this  particular  group 
of  facts,  and  this  particular  path  into 
the  knowledge  of  them,  were  without 
their  natural  analogies — were  abnormal 
in  that  universal  order  which  includes 
the  spiritual  as  well  as  the  natural. 
There  are  "  laws  "  which  hold  good  in 
the  "  natural "  and  the  "  spiritual  " 
world,  both.  The  respective  classes  of 
facts  are  analogous  ;  the  laws  observed 
to  hold  good  amongst  them  are  iden- 
tical, can  be  stated  in  identical  terms. 
Life,  for  example,  in  the  natural  world 
is  so  far  analogous  to  life  in  the 
spiritual,  that  of  both  it  can  be  said, 
*'  No  life  originates  except  from  life 
precedent."  Similarly  the  broad  prin- 
ciple is  found  to  be  as  true  of  spiritual 
things  as  of  natural :  "  No  know- 
ledge in  either  world  is  possible  to  a 
man   who    does    not    belong  to   that 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    /.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ii. 


world."     The  old  illustrations,  always 
valid,   are   the   blind  man's   necessary- 
ignorance  of  the  world  of  light  and  its 
facts ;  the  necessary  incapacity  of  the 
man   born  deaf   for  the  very  idea  of 
sound  or  music ;  the  utter  ignorance 
of   art,    the  entire  incapacity  for  ap- 
preciation   or   criticism  of   everything 
aesthetic,  inevitable  in  the  case  of  the 
man  with  no  sympathy  with,  no  love 
for,  Art.     2.  The   ^'' 7iatm^aV^  man  is, 
in  close  analogy  with  all  this,  a  mere 
outsider   in   regard   to   the    world    of 
*'  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God"     And 
there  is  no  true  knowledge  except  to 
those  within.    Significantly  enough,  the 
phrase  of  Christ  to  Nicodemus  changes 
from    "  see   the   kingdom   of  God "  to 
"  enter    into    the    kingdom    of    God " 
(John   iii.    3,   5).      The    barrier    wall 
engirdling  the  world  of  things  spiritual 
is  too  high  and  too  utterly  impenetrable 
for  one  who  does  not  "  enter  "  to  "  see  " 
anything.     The  Great  E-evealer  "  who 
came  down  from  heaven  "  (John  iii.  13), 
who  came    from    within  the    wall    to 
tell  of  glorious  things  within,  and  that 
company  of  His  people  whom  He  joins 
to   Himself   as  He   says,  "  We  speak 
that  we  do  know,  .  .  .  and  ye  receive 
not  our  witness," — these  may    tell  of 
what  is  within,  but  it  conveys  little  or 
no  knowledge,  little  or  no  idea,  to  those 
without.     "  Ye   receive   not   our   wit- 
ness."    Every  religious  teacher,  every 
Christian  man  or  woman  who  has  tried 
to  win  to  religion  those  who  are  outside 
"  the  wall,"  has  been  baffled  with  the 
initial  difficulty  of  conveying  any  con- 
ception of  (say)  the  joys  and  experiences 
and  knowledge  of  the  life  of  those  who 
have  entered  into  the  kingdom.     They 
speak  of  an  unknown  world  in  an  un- 
known tongue.     What  they  want  to 
tell  does  not  need  explaining  to  those 
who  experience  it,  and  cannot  be  ex- 
plained  to   those  who   do   not.     Con- 
version   at    once    puts    a    man    into 
possession   of   the   key  to  knowledge. 
How  frequent   the   experience  of   the 
new  convert :  '*  I  seemed  never  to  have 
understood  the  Bible  until  now.     Ser- 
mons seemed  suddenly  plain  to  me  and 
interesting  now."     "I  was  blind;  now 


I  see  !  "     In  Bishop  Hannington's  Life 
his  biographer  tells  how  he  called  with 
Hannington  at  Datley  House,  Derby, 
and  found   with    Miss   Evans,    whose 
residence  it  was,  several  friends  seated 
round   the  fire,  engaged  in  a  conver- 
sation  which   soon    turned    on    some 
point     of     religious    experience.       As 
Hannington   and   his   friend   left   the 
house,  the  former  said,  "  '  Do  you  know, 
old  fellow,  that  I  think  I  must  really 
be   a   Christian  ! '      'I  hope  so ;    but 
what   makes   you  think   so   just   now 
especially  ? '     *  Well^  what  an  unutter- 
able bore  I  should  have  thought  these 
people  and  their  talk  on  such  a  subject 
a  short  time  ago.     But,  do  you  know, 
I  positively  enjoyed  it'"  (Life,  p.  102). 
3.  It  is  merely  reversing  the  illustra- 
tion,   without   affecting   the    essential 
fact,    to   say  that   the   barrier  is  not 
around  the  spiritual  world  so  much  as 
in  the  man  himself.     [As  in  2  Cor.  iii. 
12,  15,  the  veil  is  first  upon  the  Law, 
and  next  upon  the  heart  of  the  reader.] 
The  kingdom  of  God  is  to  be  entered 
by  the  man,  but  also  the  kingdom  of 
God  enters   into   the  man.     He   "re- 
ceives the   kingdom   of   God "    (Mark 
X.  15),  which  is  in  close  conformity  to 
the  phrase  here  (ver.    14),  "receiveth 
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God." 
His  five  senses  and  his  intelligence  are 
avenues  through   which  the  world  of 
things  natural  enters  into  the  man  ; 
through  them  he  receives  it.     He  has 
a  "  spirit "  which  has  its  adits  of  know- 
ledge, but  they  are  sealed  up — sealed 
up  in  death.     Life  only  can  understand 
life.     It  "  is  life  eternal  to  know,"  etc. 
(John  xvii.   3).     The   knowledge   pre- 
supposes life,  it  evidences  it,  it  alone 
makes   living    "life   indeed"    (1   Tim. 
vi.   19).      The    spiritual    man    knows 
spiritual  things,  not   only  because  he 
has  found  access  into  the  world  of  things 
spiritual,    and    habitually    lives    and 
moves   amongst    them,    the    constant 
environment  of  his  life  ;  but  they  have 
entered  into  him,  they  have  translated 
themselves  into  facts   which  are  part 
of  his  very  self  ;  he  knows  them  simply 
and  directly,  as  he  knows  himself.     The 
natural   man's   incapacity  lies   in   the 

75 


CHAP.  II.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


fact  that  he  does  not  open  the  avenues  or  to  accept  anything  on  trust.     There 

of   his  heart  to   the  entrance   of  this  is    a  pride  that  will  not  allow  a  man 

spiritual  world.     4.  *'  Does  not  open,"  to  recede  from  a  position  he  has  once 

for,  after  all,  the  practically  operative  openly  taken  up,  and,  above  all,  that 

incapacity  and  ignorance  are  in  large  will  not  allow  him  to  do  or  say  any- 

part  of  his  own  creating.     Two  things  thing  which  confesses  or  implies  that 

must  be  carefully   kept  apart    in  our  he  has  been  all  along  a  sinner,   and 

thought  about  human    nature.     It  is  morally  wrong.     This  may  be  cherished 

fallen  ;  it  is  redeemed.     The  fall  must  until   it   becomes   resolute    not   to   be 

never  be,  in  point  of  fact  and  experi-  satisfied  and  to  believe ;  "no  evidence 

ence  can  never  be,  dealt  with    apart  will  ever  satisfy  me."     And  subtle  in 

from   the   redemption.      The   natural,  the  extreme  is  the  temper  which  makes 

native  incapacity  for  spiritual  things,  the  man  turn  away,  half  unconsciously, 

the  absolute  incapacity  of  "  death,"  is  from  fully  and  fairly  looking  at  truths 

true  only  of  a   Manhood   which  is   a  which    he    knows,    if    accepted,   must 

necessarily  theological  conception,  but  revolutionise   his   life.       He   does   not 

no  more.     No  man  is  actually  found  want  to  go  in  their  direction,  and  he 

who,   to  begin  with,  has  an  utter  and  averts  his  gaze ;  he  will  not  look  that 

absolute   ignorance   or   incapacity  for  way.     The  ^^ spirit  of  the  world^^  has 

knowledge.     The  grace  of  the  redemp-  been  *'  received,^^  and  allowed  to  enter 

tion  of  the  race  by  its  Second  Adam  into  occupation  and  control.     So  long 

has  so  far  modified  the  actual  condition  as  this  is  in  any  degree  his  attitude, 

that  there  is  very  much  of   light  in  the    "  natural  man    cannot   know   the 

many,  some  in  all.     But  this  may  be  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God^     He  will 

quenched,  the  knowledge  may  be  lost.  not  receive  them.     The  little  children 

The  eyes  which  were  at  least  in  part  have  little  or  none  of  this   pride   or 

opened  may  be  closed  again.     By  plain  subtlety  of  heart ;  they  readily  enter 

sin,  indulged   in    any  form,   by   even  into   the   kingdom.     To  *'  receive  the 

utter   worldliness,  many   a   man    has  kingdom  as  a  little  child "  is  the  only 

been  led  back  to,  has  reverted  to,  what  way  of  knowledge  for  the  man. 
must   have   been,    and  ideally   is,   the  II.  The  way  to  knowledge. — 1.  Be- 

utter  darkness  and  death  of  the  natural  fore,  however,  the  man  can  receive  the 

heart,  with  its  insusceptibility  and  its  things  of  the  Spirit,  there  must  be  an 

sealed  adits  of  knowledge.     [The  pro-  earlier  step  taken.     He  must  "  receive 

digal  has  "  spent  all."]     He  has  flung  the  Spirit  v)hich  is  of  God^'  and  then  he 

away    the    beginnings    of    light    and  can  ^'receive  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of 

knowledge  and  capacity.     Natural  con-  God^      The   Spirit   is   the   first    gift ; 

ditions  would  account  for  the  innate  then  He  enables  the  man  to  receive  and 

and  necessary  incapacity ;    but   when  know  all  else  so  freely  "  given  to  us  of 

that  has  been  in  some  degree  removed,  God.''^     The  gifts  will  only  be  received 

then  moral  causes  lie  at  the   basis  of  by  a  receiver  brought  into  sympathy 

much  of  the  actual  ignorance.     [In  so  and     receptiveness.       "  Spirituals     to 

far,  a  man  can  "  help  not  believing."]  spiritual."      All   faculty   for   knowing 

There  may  in  some  be  a  moral  levity  and   receiving  is   grace ;  it   is  a  gift, 

which  refuses  to  give  any  serious  atten-  The  Spirit  gives  Himself  ;  men  who  get 

tion  to  themes  which  demand  it,  or  will  to  know  have  first  received  Him.     He, 

not  else  yield  up  their  secret.     There  too,    stands   at   the  door  and  knocks, 

may  be  more  of  conceit,  pride,  in  the  "  May     I    come   in  1 "      He    breathes 

position  of  some  doubters  or  ignorant  around,  His  light  shines  upon  us.     Men 

ones,  of  the  man  who  knows  nothing  must  open  the  shutters  and  throw  wide 

of  spiritual  things,  than  they  are  them-  doors  and   windows    to    the    rushing 

selves  aware  of.     It  seems    "nobler"  mighty  Wind,   that   He  may  fill  the 

to  be  somewhat  independent,  and  not  house  of  the  heart.     "  But  I  cannot 

quite  content  to  follow  in  the  old  line,  open  ! "     "  Yes,  you  can  open  !     He  is 

76 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  ii. 


Himself  with  you  to  help  you  to  open, 
and  to  receive  Him.  [Or  at  least  you 
are  not  weaker  than  the  bed-ridden 
invalid,  who  cannot  rise  to  open  in 
answer  to  the  knock  of  the  Visitor,  but 
can  at  least  lie  and  say  *  Come  in.'  " 
He  is  in  that  word  "  Come  in  "  ;  this 
Visitant  will,  if  the  man  will,  open  the 
door  for  Himself  and  enter.  The  "  re- 
ceiving "  is  in  the  will ;  and  the  very 
will  itself  is  not  without  something 
of  His  grace.]  It  is  helpful  to  realise 
that  men  aie  dealing  with  no  mere 
vague  Abstraction,  or  a  half -poetical, 
idealised  Energy  or  Force,  but  with  a 
Personal  Friend  and  Teacher.  It  is  a 
Comforter  who  "leads  into  all  truth." 
He  is  One  who  can  be  a  Kevealer 
because  He  has  an  original  knowledge 
of  the  things  of  God  ah  intra,  so  to 
speak ;  He  knows  them,  because  He 
knows  God  as  it  were  from  within  the 
very  self  of  God.  To  give  Him  wel- 
come is  then  the  first  step  to  know- 
ledge. The  native  incapacity  is  gone 
if  He  is  come  in.  The  susceptibility  is 
restored  if  He  dwell  within.  The  eyes, 
the  ears,  all  the  senses  of  the  human 
"  spm^,"  are  awakened  from  their 
death  into  receptiveness  and  activity. 

2.  He  will  communicate  much 
knowledge  directly.  Man  must  make 
his  mind  touch  the  mind  of  another 
man  through  a  chain  of  physical  organs 
and  their  operations,  but  the  Spirit  can 
go  direct  to  the  spirit  in  man,  in  im- 
mediate communication.  But  He  will 
also  use  means — words  spoken,  words 
written,  by  men  who  are  taught 
them,  not  by  man's  wisdom,  but  by 
Himself.  Paul  and  his  brethren  stand 
apart  in  their  gift.  The  Spirit  used 
them  to  make  known  to  the  Church 
*'  the  things  which  are  freely  given"  the 
"  heritage  of  those  who  fear  God's 
name,"  as  first-hand  authorities  to  con- 
vey new  truth.  Things  such  as  these 
had  never  "  entered  into  the  heart  of 
men."  To  these  very  apostles  these 
were  novelties.  He  conveys  no  new 
truth  to-day  in  the  sense  of  adding 
anything  absolutely  new  to  the  com- 
pleted body  of  revealed  disclosures  ;  he 
expounds  the  old  truth  already  given. 


But  this  with  a  wonderful  novelty. 
The  inheritance  has  long  ago  in  its 
completeness  been  made  over  in  its 
entirety;  He  leads  the  heir  over  his 
estate,  and  continually  discovers  in  it 
for  him  new  beauties,  new  wealth,  new 
views,  "  the  length,  and  breadth,  and 
depth,  and  height."  The  Word  is  His 
great  instrument  of  disclosure.  Let  a 
man  use  it,  read  it,  explore  it,  with  the 
Spirit  of  God  "received"  to  be  His 
Guide,  and  it  is  marvellous  how  some 
simple  souls  grow  fast  in  the  know- 
ledge and  in  the  experience  of  the 
things  "  given  to  us  of  God."  Many 
simple  hearts  make  good  theologians ; 
no  man  can  be  an  expert  in  Divine 
things  who  is  not  spiritual.  Spirit- 
taught.  Bishop  Andrews  said  that  he 
learnt  far  more  upon  his  knees  than 
from  his  books. 

3.  He  is  the  one  and  only  Teacher  of 
the  first  and  fundamental  truth  of  all 
religion.  Sin  and  the  need  of  a  Saviour, 
of  help  from  outside  a  man's  self. 
Until  that  is  learned  the  very  ABC 
of  Divine  things  is  unknown,  and  all 
after-teaching  is  simply  incomprehen- 
sible. But  He  comes  ;  reaching  hearts 
inaccessible  to  human  appeal,  and  that 
will  even  tolerate  no  human  approach  ; 
hearts  fenced  round  with  convention- 
alisms and  pride,  hard  as  if  in  the 
grip  of  a  hard,  frost-bound  winter  of 
worldly  life.  He  comes  and  overleaps 
all  barriers  and  gets  at  the  inmost 
citadel  direct ;  He  throws  down  all  the 
defences  of  pride,  all  lifelong  sophis- 
tries with  which  the  soul  has  deluded 
itself ;  tears  away  all  the  veils  so  long 
and  diligently  and  densely  woven 
which  have  hidden  the  real  man  from 
even  himself.  The  proud,  reserved, 
self-satisfied  soul  carries  about  with  it 
a  new  conviction,  driven  home,  burnt 
in,  "I  am  a  sinner  ! "  j  carries  it  until 
it  can  keep  silence  no  longer,  "  the 
bones  wax  old  through  the  inward 
roaring  all  the  day  long  "  ;  and  at  last 
shame,  fear,  pride,  are  all  overborne  by 
the  masterful  might  of  the  new  truth, 
*'  I  am  a  sinner  !  "  So  too  He  bears  in, 
burns  in,  with  happy  force  of  convic- 
tion the  truth,  "  I  am  a  child  of  God, 

77 


CHAP.  II.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY .    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


and  not  a  servant  any  longer " 
(Kom.  viii.  15,  16).  In  the  fulness  of 
the  new  discovery  he  utters,  by  a  new 
instinct,  and  for  the  first  time,  a  child's 
name  for  God,  *'  Abba,  Abba  !  "  God 
Himself  ''  is  given  "  to  him  as  he  never 
knew  or  expected  was  possible  before. 
In  like  manner  point  after  point  of 
the  experiences  of  the  Christian  life, 
its  possibilities,  its  privileges,  reveal 
themselves  to  the  spiritual  man,  and 
all  of  them  '''•freely  given^^  to  be  "re- 
ceived!," therefore,  into  the  embrace 
of  the  quickened  understanding,  but 
above  all  into  the  inmost  life  of  the 
heart.  Strictly  speaking  there  is  to  the 
spiritual  man  no  merely  "doctrinal" 
truth,  as  distinguished  from  "  experi- 
mental." The  theology  of  his  creed  is 
merely  the  formal,  scientific  statement 
of  truths  that  are  his  life.  But  if  the 
conventional  and  convenient  distinction 
is  to  be  maintained,  then  again  is  the 
Spirit  the  Guide  into  all  truth.  There 
is  discovered  an  orderly,  harmonious 
scheme  of  doctrine,  every  point  of 
which  has  its  relations  with  every 
other.  As  between  Church  and  Church, 


man  and  man,  the  parts,  the  points, 
may  receive  different  degrees  of  appre- 
ciation, and  so  may  be  taught  with 
varying  prominence  and  emphasis. 
But  spiritual  men  understand  each 
other,  and  understand  the  wisdom  of 
God,  which  is  to  the  natural  mind  a 
hidden  thing,  a  "  mystery,"  a  secret 
which  they  have  no  ear  to  receive, 
even  if  it  were  spoke  to  them.  The 
man  whose  Teacher  is  the  Spirit  of 
God  understands.  As  the  solar  system 
was  a  problem  of  growing  perplexity 
to  the  astronomers  of  the  past,  who 
adopted  earth  as  their  centre,  but 
resolved  itself  and  its  motions  and  laws 
into  perfect  harmony  and  order  when  a 
heliocentric  standpoint  was  adopted ; 
so  the  Spirit  of  God  puts  even  the 
least  cultured  or  trained  spiritual  men 
at  the  ^Aeocentric,  CAris^ocentric,  view 
point ;  and  if  all  perplexity  and  difficulty 
do  not  pass  away,  at  least  he  occupies 
the  only  standpoint  from  which  know- 
ledge is  possible,  and  the  beauty  and 
order  and  harmony  of  Christian 
Truth  can  be  in  any  degree  understood 
and  received. 


HOMILETIC    SUGGESTIONS, 


Ver.  16.  The  Mind  of  Christ.— 1. 
As  explained  in  the  Critical  Notes, 
nothing  said  here  of  the  *'  character  " 
or  "  distinguishing  spirit "  of  Christ. 
It  is  true  that  in  that  sense  "  we 
have,"  as  the  natural  man  has  not,  the 
mind  of  Christ,  in  varying  degree  of 
apprehension  of  it,  in  varying  clearness 
of  exhibition  of  it.  The  Christian  is 
normally  a  reproduction,  a  repetition, 
of  Christ,  in  tempers,  conduct,  judg- 
ments, holiness  But  obviously  what 
is  meant  is  the  "  mind  "  which  can  be 
made  a  matter  of  information  and  in- 
struction, the  thought  of  God,  and  of 
His  Christ,  about  and  towards  His 
people.  2.  Very  noteworthy  the  inter- 
change between  "  Lord  "  and  "  Christ." 
[True  there  are  variant  readings,  but 
not  so  strongly  attested  in  any  case  as 
to  disturb  the  Received  Text.]  Com- 
parably with  the  position  ascribed  to 

78 


the  Spirit  in  vers.  10,  11,  as  it  were, 
internal  to  God,  with  a  relation  which 
may  be  paralleled  with  that  of  the 
human  spirit  to  the  man ;  so  here 
Christ  occupies  such  a  position  in 
Paul's  theology  [the  Holy  Ghost's 
theology,  they  say  who  believe  in 
Paul's  inspiration]  as  that  His  name 
may  be  quietly  substituted  for  the 
"Jehovah"  of  the  Old  Testament 
prophet.  The  particular  case  is  but 
a  sample  of  others  in  which  an  Old 
Testament  text  is  so  transfigured, 
that,  whilst  the  verbal  body  remains 
the  same,  another  soul,  another  person- 
ality has  entered  into  it,  and  we  see 
not  Jehovah,  but  Jesus  the  Christ, 
looking  through  its  eyes,  speaking 
through  its  lips,  informing  with  Him- 
self its  whole  countenance  and  aspect. 
Who  must  He  be  whom  the  vesture 
of  Old  Testament  Jehovah -phraseology 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  ii. 


thus  fits  so  perfectly  that  it  was  plainly 
made  for  His  use  \  The  new  wine  of 
N.T.  doctrine  can  he  put  into  the  old 
bottles  of  O.T.  language.  3.  Note  that 
Kevealed  Truth,  both  in  its  doctrinal 
and  its  experimental  aspects  (to  use 
the  convenient  distinction),  is  the  dis- 
closure of  the  thought,  the  will,  the 
*'  mind  "  of  Christ.  He  is  the  Fountain 
of  our  knowledge  on  such  topics.  If 
He  be  not,  in  the  economy  of  the 
Redemptional  Trinity,  exactly  and 
accurately  the  great  Fountain-head  of 
it,  at  least  He  is  the  only  and  only- 
accessible  Fountain  to  whom  the 
Father  has  been  pleased  that  men 
[and  perhaps  all  creaturely  life]  should 
come  to  draw,  and  "  at "  whom  alone 
they  may  obtain  any  knowledge.  [For 
knowledge,  as  well  as  for  the  good 
offices  which  a  sinful  creature  needs 
One  to  do  for  him  with  a  holy  God, 
"  no  man  cometh  to  the  Father  " — or 
gets  at  the  Father,  even  to  know 
Him — "  but  by  Christ."]  Accordingly 
it  is  the  "  word  of  Christ "  which  is 
to  "  dwell  richly  "  in  the  Colossians. 
[Col.  iii.  16,  again  with  its  variants, 
"  God  "  and  "  Lord  " ;  which  have  this 
incidental  significance  for  historical 
theology  that  they  show  the  belief  in 
the  Godhead  of  Jesus  to  have  been  so 
thoroughly  the  conviction  of  the  early 
transcribers  (and  of  the  early  Church) 
that  they  could  designedly  substitute 
— if  they  did  so  designedly — one  phrase 
for  the  other  with  no  sense  of  impro- 
priety, or  could  inadvertently  do  so 
with  a  perfect  and  unconscious  facility 
only  to  be  explained  by  the  customary 
equipollence  of  the  expressions.]     "  The 


Spirit  of  Christ "  was  in  the  ancient 
prophets  (1  Pet.  i.  11) ;  the  Old  Testa- 
ment was  but  the  earlier  stage  of  the 
utterance  of  the  one  abiding  "  word  of 
the  Lord"  which  is  the  "Gospel" 
(1  Pet.  i.  25).  4.  "  We  have  "  is  more 
than  *'  we  know  the  mind  of  Christ." 
We  is  only  spoken  of  the  Apostolic  com- 
pany as  the  culminating  embodiment 
of  the  general  idea  of  "Christians." 
[These  say,  moreover,  as  they  read 
these  Epistles,  "  We  have  the  mind," 
not  only  of  Paul,  but  "of  Christ."  The 
more  vividly  realised  natural,  literary, 
historical,  personal  side  of  these  Epistles 
is  nowaday  making  it  difficult  to  be 
just  to  the  old  view  that,  whoever  was 
the  writer,  the  real  Author  was  the 
Spirit  of  God;  that  though  the  thoughts 
passed  through  the  mind  of  men  and 
took  a  personal,  individual  stamp  from 
each,  yet  they  were  thoughts  for  which 
the  Spirit  of  God  held  Himself  respon- 
sible.] "  We  have;"  they  have  become 
part,  not  only  of  our  habitual  beliefs, 
our  stock  of  credenda,  but  part  of  our 
life,  of  ourselves.  We  carry  within  us 
the  law  of  Christ,  we  carry  within  us 
the  Gospel.  5.  How  this  settles  many 
a  question,  sufficiently  at  any  rate,  for 
practical  life,  such  as  the  objective 
efficacy  of  prayer,  providence,  and  the 
like.  6.  And  these  topics  may,  if 
we  will,  be  studied  by  us  with  the 
Author's  own  help.  We  may  ask 
Him  what  He  meant  by  this  or  that. 
The  Spirit  who  searches  the  ^^deejj  things 
of  God "  also  knows  the  "  mind  of 
Christ,"  even  its  deep  things  of  teaching 
and  saving  grace. 


I    1     I     .  — « 


79 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER  III. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  And  I. — Q.d.  "  As  any  other  'spiritual'  teacher  would  have  to  do."  So  Ellicott  ; 
but  perhaps  laying  undue  stress  upon  the  "  and,""  which,  if  more  than  merely  a  half- 
colloquial  redundance,  may  rather  be  parallel  with  ii.  1;  q.d.  "Accordingly  I,"  etc., 
i.e.  in  agreement  with  the  broad  lines  of  necessary  procedure  laid  down  in  ii.  6-16. 
Spiritual. — In  the  precise  and  quasi- technical  sense  of  chap.  ii.  [or  inter  alios,  Gal.  vi.  1]. 
Carnal. — We  should  have  expected  "natural"  (=  "psychical,  animal-souled  ").  But  this 
would  have  denied  to  them  any  participation  in  the  grace  and  awakening  and  renewal  of  the 
Spirit.  They  are  Christians  of  a  low  type,  but  not  so  low  as  that.  They  are  "  in  Christ,"" 
but  only  as  "  babes.'''  Note  the  reading  :  only  appearing  in  the  Received  Text  in  2  Cor.  iii.  3, 
but  now  here  also  and  in  Rom.  vii.  14,  Heb.  vii.  16.  Some  deny  any  distinction  between 
the  old  form  and  the  new,  except  of  literary  rank.  Trench  would  (§  Ixxii.)  distinguish  as 
between  '■'■jieslily''''  (=  the  displaced  reading)  and  "■fleshy''  or  ^'' Jiesheii,''  parallel  to 
"  woode^i "  (  =  the  new  reading,  and  in  2  Cor.  iii.  3)  ;  as  if  distinguishing  between  men  in 
whom  "  the  flesh  "  was  indeed  predominant,  but  with  many  gracious  checks  and  restraints, 
and  men  in  whom  the  one  apparent  feature  in  life  was  so  much  the  literal  "  flesh  "  that  they 
were  "  not  «7i/i-spiritual,  but  ww-spiritual,  .  .  .  flesh  and  little  more,  when  they  might 
have  been  much  more."  Yet  he  regards  the  word  as  conveying  a  less  grave  accusation  than 
the  ordinary  word  for  "  carnal  "  ("  fleshly  ")  does.  The  varying  judgments  of  the  authorities 
show  how  slight  at  best  is  the  distinction. 

Ver.  2. — Cf.  Heb.  v.  11 — vi.  4,  where  note  that  the  doctrine  of  1  Cor.  xv.  is  amongst  the 
"  elements^''  the  "  milk  "  for  babes.  Also  Paul  "  preached  the  Resurrection  "  to  the  merely 
"  natural  "  men  of  Athens  (Acts  xvii.  18).  Cf.  "  New  wine  in  old  bottles  " ;  "  new  cloth  on 
old  garment."  So  Christ  only  spoke  plainly  to  the  disciples  about  His  death,  when,  e.g.^ 
Peter's  faith  in  His  Godhead  had  first  risen  into  a  bold  confession ;  and  then  also  the 
announcement,  so  perplexing  to  a  Jew,  and  so  distressing  to  a  friend  like  Peter,  was  followed 
up  by  a  view  of  his  Master  in  His  true,  native  glory  (Matt.  xvi.  20,  21).  Cf.  ""Neither  yet 
now  are  ye  able "  with  "  Ye  cannot  bear  them  now "  (John  xvi.  12).  Also  cf.  "  earthly 
things  "  and  "  heavenly  things  "  (John  iii.  12). 

Ver.  3. — Helps  to  a  definition  of  "  thejlesh  "  ;  as  does  Gal.  v.  19,  20,  by  no  means  a  catalogue 
of  bodily  sins  alone.  See  life  in  the  flesh  plainly  differentiated  from  life  in  the  material 
body  (Rom.  viii.  9),  "  Y'e  are  not  in  the  flesh."  Note  the  changes  of  translation  in  R.V. 
After  the  manner  of  men.—  So  in  xv.  32.  But  the  special  colouring  of  the  phrase,  whether 
neutral  or  condemnatory,  varies  from  instance  to  instance  of  its  use. 

Ver.  4. — Less  complete  enumeration  than  in  i.  12.  Perhaps  for  the  reason  explained  in 
iv.  6.  Also  he  and  Apollos  were  more  closely  connected  than  any  others  with  the  origin  and 
growth  of  the  Corinthian  Church. 

Ver.  5.— Better  reading  ''what?"  not  ''who?"  Also  "through."  Not,  "As  the  Lord 
gave  to  every  man  of  you  the  type  of  teacher  he  needed  "  ;  but,  "  As  the  Lord  allotted  to  each 
teacher  "  the  divided  labour.  Stanley  suggests  that  Paul  takes  up,  and  with  his  own  mean- 
ing adopts,  their  depreciatory  distinction  :  "  Yes,  you  did  but  plant.  It  was  Apollos  who 
watered,  and  so  brought  your  work  to  anything  like  what  could  be  called  a  successful 
issue  !"  Note  here,  as  in  2  Cor.  vi.  4,  they  are  working  under  God's  orders,  at  God's  work. 
[In  Mark  xvi.  20,  ''the  Lord  {CliriKf)  works  rvith  them."]  [Cf.  the  inscription  on  the 
University  >  "  Louvain  planted,  Mechlin  watered,  Caesar  gave  the  increase."] 

Ver.  8.  One. — Our  status,  tpid  the  work,  the  increase,  the  Great  Employer,  is  precisely  the 
same.     No  parallel  to  John  x.  30. 

Ver.  9.— Notice  the  R.V.  Q.d.  "  All  of  us  together  belong  to  God,  the  field,  the  building,  the 
company  of  workers  in  the  field,  or  on  the  building.  The  fellowship  only  between  man  and 
man,  God  being  above  them  all."  But  A.V.  is  supported  by  Rom.  xvi.  3,  9,  21 ;  2  Cor.  i.  24, 
viii.  23,  also  vi.  1  (but  note  the  reading).  "  Husbandry  "  speaks  of  growth  from  within ; 
"  building  "  of  growth  by  additions  from  without. 

Ver.  10.— Was   given  ...  I  laid,   q.d.   "  when  I   was    at   Corinth."      "  A  foundation," 
"which  I  subjectively  laid  in  my  teaching  at  Corinth,  because  God  had  already  laid  the 
same  objectively  in  heaven  "  (Evans).     "  Laid  objectively  for  the  whole  Church  in  the  Great 
Facts  [by  God],  .  .  .  laid  subjectively  in  the  hearts  of  the  Christians  at  Corinth  as  the  firm- 
ground  of  their  personal  hopes  by  Paul  "  (Beet). 

Vers.   11-15.— See  Homiletic   Analysis;    also    Appended  Note.      No  valid  analogy   to 

80 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  hi. 


warrant  the  application  of  this  to  the  doctrine  of  Purgatory.  '  This  rests  upon  (a)  the  dis- 
tinction drawn  between  veiiial  and  mortal  sins  with  temporal  and  eternal  penalties  attached, 
and  (5)  the  doctrine  of  merit.  The  temporal  penalty  of  sins  not  "  paid  off  "  at  the  date  of 
death  must  be  "  paid  up  "  in  Purgatory  fire.  The  accumulated  stock  oi  merit,  of  Christ  and 
the  saints — a  surplus  beyond  their  own  requirements — may  be  drawn  upon  by  an  indulgence, 
and  the  amount  be  applied  to  reducing  the  purgatorial  term. 

Ver.  16. — A  temple  (R.V.)  misses,  or  denies,  the  typology  binding  Old  Testament  and  New 
Testament  together  here.  A  case  where,  as  often  {e.g.  xi.  20),  one  of  the  great  leading  facts 
of  the  Old  Covenant  is  divested  of  its  temporary,  local  robing  and  embodiment,  and  brought 
forward  into  the  new  world  of  the  New  Testament,  to  find  a  new  embodiment  in  the  Church. 
The  old  building  has  gone  ;  the  new  shrine  where  God  dwells  on  earth  is  growing,  rising, 
every  day.  A  local  Church,  and  still  more  the  aggregate  Church,  is  the  New  Testament  form 
of  the  old  Temple  idea.  It  is  the  Temple  to-day.  This  a  collective  Temple  ;  in  vi.  19,  20  an 
individual  application  of  the  same  idea  is  found.  The  word  here  is  that  which  signifies,  not 
the  whole  structure  inclusive  of  the  surrounding  courtyard,  but  only  the  actual  Temple 
building  itself.  "  In  "  is  here  practically  "  among  "  ;  as  distinguished  from  the  indwelling 
in  the  man,  vi.  19  (see  Appended  Note  from.  Evans). 

Ver.  17. — Defile  and  destroy,  same  word  ;  combining  "impair,"  "  mar,"  "  ruin,"  "  destroy." 

Ver.  18. — Cf.  xv.  33  for  the  thought  (not  for  the  mord')  ;  men  seem  to  persuade  themselves 
that  they  shall  somehow  evade  the  penalty  of  sin,  although  others  do  not  escape.  Thinks. — 
As  viii.  2 ;  not  with  any  hesitation,  but  with  much  confidence.  Among  you. — And  yet 
taking  his  place,  and  holding  his  own,  as  a  wise  man  of  the  world  •'  in  the  world."  "  Can't 
be  done  !  Incompatible  things  altogether  !  "  The  connection  between  inflated  self-esteem 
and  a  slavish  submission  to  party  leaders  is  exposed  in  iv.  6.  Surely  no  implied  caution  to, 
or  censure  on,  Apollos  1 

Ver.  19. — Note  the  small  change  of  translation.  Quotation  of  words  of  Eliphaz,  from  Job 
v.  13.  [On  the  general  principle  of  such  a  quotation  being  taken  as  part  of  what  "  is  written" 
see  Homily  on  xv.  33,  §  1.] 

Ver.  20.—  Ps.  xciv.  11.     "  Reasonings  "  (R.V.). 

Vers.  21-23. — See  Homiletic  Analysis.  Note  the  unexpected  turn  of  phrase  ;  not  "  Christ 
is  yours."  "  Else  to  the  plane  of  His  life  and  your  relations  to  Him,  then  you  are  a  possession, 
not  owners.  You  are  feudal  holders  of  your  estate,  but  the  baron  himself  was  the  '  king's 
man.' " 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—4. 

"  Babes  in  Christ." — (Read  Critical  Notes,  on  *'  carnal.") 

I.  The  Creator  has  stamped  His  own  unity  upon  His  many-sectioned  creation 

in  the  many  homologies  which  Hnk  together  part  and  part,  and,  above  all,  natural 
things  and  spiritual  things,  physical  facts  and  the  facts  of  the  world  of  morals  and 
religion.  Just  because  Christ  knew  these  links  of  idea  and  these  correspondences 
most  perfectly,  He  spake  parables  as  never  man  spake.  He  saw  Nature  parabolic 
as  never  man  saw  it.  He  stood  at  the  central  point  of  God's  Idea,  and  saw  its 
radiating  lines  of  expression  touching,  traversing,  connecting,  the  concentric 
[and,  as  the  geometer  says,  "similar"]  areas  of  diverse  classes  of  facts.  The 
physical  history  of  the  human  body,  the  natural,  morally  neutral  history  of  the 
development  of  the  human  mind,  is  a  Parable  in  Nature,  easily,  early,  always 
read.  [1  John  ii.  12-14  is  a  good  example  of  this  way  of  reading.  \a)  There 
are  the  "  little  children  "  who  barely  know  more,  but  who  do  know  this,  that 
they  *'  know  their  Father,"  and  that  because  of  forgiven  sin  there  is  nothing 
but  love  between  them.  Loving,  happy,  living  childhood,  content  to  be  alive 
and  know  Him  and  His  favour,  {h)  There  are  the  "young  men,"  victorious 
over  the  Wicked  One,  with  well-knit  body,  and  the  firm  tread  of  vigorous  early 
manhood,  to  which  the  indwelling  Word  is  bread  and  life,  (c)  There  are  the 
*'  fathers,"  of  whom  only  one  thing  is  said — "  they  know  Him  that  is  from  the 
beginning."  The  strength,  elan,  enterprise,  of  manhood  is  perhaps  gone ;  in  a 
sense,  the  life  has  returned  to  its  starting-point — as  "  children  "  they  "  knew 
Him  "  ;  but  now  with  a  deeper  insight,  with  the  experience  of  an  intercourse  of 

a  81 


CHAP.  III.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


long  years'  standing ;  as  an  adult,  mature  man  who  is  a  father,  for  the  first 
time  "  knows  "  his  father.]  In  St.  Paul  "  habes  "  is  never  a  word  of  praise.  He 
hurries  forward  to,  and  hurries  forward  his  converts  to,  "  perfection  "  ;  the  adult 
manhood,  with  its  perfection ;  of  harmonious  development  of  every  power  and 
faculty  and  grace ;  of  "  knowledge  of  the  world  "  of  spiritual  things  with  which 
for  years  the  man  "  in  Christ "  has  been  conversant ;  of  ripeness  of  character 
without  any  first  touch  of  senile  failure  or  weakness  or  decay.  These  are 
"  hahes  "  at  Corinth. 

II.  Babes  and  carnal. — 1.  ^^  NaturaV  (chap,  ii.)  would  hardly  have  been  too 
strong  for  the  fact.  *' Envying J^  " strifej^  "  schisms,^  and  these  ruling  and 
raging,  are  incompatible  with  the  "  spirituaV^  man's  life.  These  are  "  works  of 
the  flesh."  In  fact,  the  discrepancy,  as  to  area  and  included  human  contents, 
between  the  Ideal  Church  and  its  actual,  historical,  disciplinary  expression  and 
embodiment  and  enumeration,  had  already  begun  to  appear.  The  Church,  as 
its  Lord  reckons  its  census,  may  here  and  there  overpass  the  bounds  of  the 
Church,  as  our  humanly  designed  and  most  faithfully  administered  methods 
mark  it  off  from  "the  world."  But  much  oftener  it  shrinks  far  within  the 
boundary -line  of  our  survey,  and  leaves  the  Church,  of  any  real,  effective, 
sanctified  life,  a  central  area  of  occupation  within  a  much  larger  one  which  is 
hardly  more  than  in  name  and  claim  and  ownership  still  Christ's.  These  men 
are  still  within  the  bound  of  the  external  organisation ;  the  branch  most  utterly 
dormant,  if  not  utterly  dead,  is  still  in  mechanical  connection  with  the  Vine,  as 
Paul  cultivates  and  cares  for  it.  He  had  not  cut  these  off,  as  he  bade  them 
without  pity  or  delay  do  with  incestuous  man  (v.  5).  Indeed,  in  the  hopeful- 
ness of  charity,  he  goes  further  than  logically  would  be  possible,  and  speaks  of 
these  men  over  whom  "  sin  has  "  such  clear  "  dominion  "  (Rom.  vi.  14),  as  "  in 
Christ,'^  though  "babes."  [Does  he?  Has  he  really  given  to  those  who  had 
lapsed  from  any  but  the  external,  mechanical  connection  with  Christ,  the 
elementary  lessons  which,  elementary  as  they  are,  belonged  really  to  a  stage  in 
advance  of  them?]  But  it  is  at  most  the  tender  judgment  which  without  any 
tampering  with,  or  disloyalty  to,  the  inevitable  distinction  between  "  natural " 
and  "  spiritual,^'  is  willing  for  the  moment  to  look  no  deeper  than  the  outward 
profession  and  the  still  maintained  connection  wath  the  Church.  None  but  a 
reckless  hand  will  lightly  disturb  even  the  outward  connection,  if  it  has  at  one 
time  meant  life,  and  is  not  manifestly  declared  unreal  by  flagrant  sin  or  long- 
continued  indifference.  So  long  as  it  continues,  there  is  always  the  happy 
possibility  that  the  branch  may  again  fill  and  thrill  and  throb  with  life ; 
it  will  not  lightly  be  disturbed.  The  claim  of  the  Church  is  paramount  that 
it  should  be  kept  pure ;  the  claim  of  the  Head  of  the  Church  demands 
that  all  dead  or  unworthy  membership  be  cut  oft;  but  the  claim  of  the 
redeemed  soul  demands  that  the  membership,  once  admitted,  shall  be  tenderly 
dealt  with,  and  rated  at  its  most  hopeful  value.  "  Envying,  strifes,  partisan- 
ship,^' and  the  like ;  yet  Paul  will  concede  to  them  a  place  "  in  Christ"  if  it  be 
only  as  "  habes,"  and  will  "  speak  to  them  "  accordingly. 

2.  How  many  members  never  get  beyond  the  stage  of  "  babes  in  Christ." — There 
is  a  beauty  about  infancy,  in  nature  and  in  grace.  Nothing  more  charming 
than  the  simple,  unaffected,  direct  love  of  God's  "  little  children  "  towards  Him 
and  towards  each  other.  Happy  manhood,  both  in  nature  and  grace,  which 
never  loses  the  affectionate,  childlike  heart ;  keeping  it  fresh  under,  and  along 
with,  all  the  manly  gains  in  knowledge  and  experience.  A  beauty  about  the 
simple  directness  of  a  child's  trust  in  all  that  is  told  to  it ;  it  maybe  deceived  and 
misled,  but  the  faith  of  a  little  child  is  more  beautiful  and  more  receptive  of 
grace  than  the  cynical  scepticism  of  the  man  who  always  begins  by  suspecting, 
and  presumes  the  worst.     A  beauty  about  the  loving  obedience  which  belongs  to 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :  I.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  hi. 


at  least  the  ideal  of  childhood,  and  is  one  of  the  first,  most  tender  fruits  of  the 
Spirit's  new  birth.  What  music  in  God's  ear,  and  how  delightful  to  a  "  perfect 
man  "  in  the  life  of  God,  the  first,  unschooled,  open,  spontaneous,  unconventional 
utterances  of  their  thoughts  and  experiences,  from  the  lips  of  God's  little  children ! 
But  this  beauty  is  no  beauty  when  it  becomes  permanent.  Fifteen,  or  fifty, 
with  the  face  and  mind  and  powers  of  five  years  of  age,  would  be  a  calamity  to 
the  grown  child,  an  agony  to  ^ parents,  a  subject  of  mockery  or  of  pity  to 
outsiders.  She  sees  of  the  travail  of  her  soul  and  is  satisfied, — ^that  mother  into 
whose  arms  is  laid  the  helpless  babe,  that  does  not  yet  know  her,  or  know  itself, 
but  simply  lives,  and  is  perfectly  formed  and  healthy.  To  Him  who  died  that 
His  people  "  might  have  life,"  that  He  might  Himself  "  see  His  seed,"  life  is 
better  than  death ;  life  is  full  of  all  possibilities ;  death  has  no  possibilities,  no 
future,  but  corruption.  It  is  some  measure  of  reward  for  His  "  pangs,"  some 
measure  of  "satisfaction,"  when  His  people  begin  to  live,  even  as  ^^  babes  in" 
Him.  In  a  human  home,  in  Christian  lands  at  any  rate,  the  child  that  grows 
weakling,  puny,  sickly,  deformed,  often  calls  out  a  love  that  seems  intensified  by 
the  very  need  of  love  in  the  dependent  creature;  the  tenderer  the  child,  the  tenderer 
the  love.  But  the  *'  satisfaction "  is  in  the  children  who  grow  hearty  and 
strong,  who  develop  girlish  beauty  and  youthful  strength,  until  at  last  womanhood 
and  manhood  fill  the  parents'  heart  with  satisfying  joy.  What  a  disappointment 
to  Paul  [may  the  same  human  word  be  attributed  to  Christ  also  ?]  that  after 
these  years,  since  he  first  went  to  Corinth,  these  members  of  the  Church  there, 
"  enriched  in  "  everything  for  the  sustenance  and  training  of  the  new-born  life 
(i.  5-7),  were  still,  at  the  most  favourable  estimate,  only  "  babes  in  Christ "  ! 
There  was  no  beauty  or  satisfaction  or  honour  in  such  a  standstill  life.  There 
are  such  in  every  Church.  Always  learning  to  stand,  to  walk,  to  do ;  never 
accomplishing  much  at  either ;  indeed,  spiritually  always  learning  to  live.  To 
them  the  Church  is  hardly  yet  a  school ;  certainly  not  a  workshop ;  more  truly 
a  nursery.  Every  pastor  has  many  such,  who  must  not  only  be  '*  looked  after  " 
incessantly,  lest,  like  naughty  or  heedless  children,  they  stray  away  into  the 
world,  but  who  must  be  nursed  lest  the  feeble  flicker  of  life  be  extinguished 
in  death.  How  large  a  part  of  the  work  of  the  Churches,  how  large  a  part  of 
the  care  of  the  ministry,  must  be  absorbed  in  the  working  of  keeping  up  to  the 
level  of  even  "  babes  in  Christ,^^  some  who  have  been  in  outward  membership  for 
years  !     [The  coincidence  of  our  paragraph  with  Heb.  v.  11-14  is  noteworthy.] 

3.  Paul  refers  to  their  food:  ^^  Milk,  not  meat." — No  humble  child  of  God's 
family  but  acknowledges  how  often,  in  some  of  the  lessons  of  God's  school,  he  has 
never  seemed  to  get  beyond  the  A  B  C  of  teaching.  The  same  discipline  year 
after  year,  the  same  trials,  because  the  one  lesson  has  never  been  perfectly 
learned  yet.  To  promote  His  scholar  into  the  work  of  the  next  higher  "  form," 
whilst  yet  the  lessons  of  the  lower  have  never  been  mastered,  would  only  be  to 
ensure  bad  work,  to  attempt  to  "  rush  up  "  a  building  upon  a  badly  laid  founda- 
tion. The  Jerusalem  scoffers  in  Isaiah's  day  cried  half  in  scorn,  half  in  anger, 
"  Whom  shall  he  [the  prophet]  teach  knowledge  ?  .  .  .  weaned  babes  ?  Does  he 
take  us  for  such,  with  his  precept  upon  precept,  .  .  .  here  a  little,  there  a  little  ? " 
(Isa.  -xxviii.  9-13).  The  words  are  read  by  some,  and  are  as  true,  if  they  be 
seriously  spoken,  perhaps  by  the  prophet  himself.  What  they  said  in  scorn  was 
a  simple,  sad  necessity.  They  were  fit  only  for  such  lessons.  There  are  truths 
which  alone  the  children  can  take  in.  There  are  truths  which  are  of  "  the  secret 
of  the  Lord,"  only  revealable  to  the  grown  men.  There  must  not  be  on  the 
part  of  the  human  teachers — from  any  mistaken  policy,  or  from  any  fear  of  being 
misunderstood  by  their  youngest  pupil — any  such  keeping  back  of  truth  as 
makes  what  is  taught  all  but  falsehood.  Economy,  reserve,  are  not  for  man, 
for  ecclesiastics,  to  practise.     If  the  Spirit  of  God  has  only  gradually  (Heb.  i.  1) 

63 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS, 


brought  out  the  full  round  of  truth,  it  has  been  from  no  desire  to  conceal  any- 
thing ;  the  disclosure  has  been  conditioned  by  the  receptiveness  of  the  scholars, 
and  by  that  only.  To  Nicodemus  the  Master  Himself  distinguished  between 
*' earthly  things  "  and  "heavenly  things"  (John  iii.  12),  as  being  of  different 
grades  of  comprehensibleness.  Human  teaching  will  adapt ;  it  will  not  for  the 
teacher's  sake  resei^ve  anything  which  is  needful  and  can  be  communicated.  The 
human  difficulty  is  to  teach  elementary  truth  without  so  far  distorting  it  that 
before  anything  more  can  be  added,  something  must  be  unlearned;  we  must 
often  pull  down  a  little  before  we  can  "  graft "  the  new  work  upon  the  old. 
The  model  should  be  the  teaching  of  the  Revealing  Spirit ;  all  absolutely  true, 
so  far  as  it  goes ;  no  need  for  unlearning  in  order  to  new  learning ;  from  milk 
to  meat  in  His  teaching  is  one  orderly,  harmonious  progress  and  growth  of 
truth.  But  how  long  He  has  to  say,  "  Ye  were  not  able  to  bear  it;  neither 
yet  7iow"  etc. 

4.  Note  the  special  token  of  carnality,  of  infancy. — They  are  children  with  their 
favourites,  over  whom  they  boast  and  wrangle  and  quarrel.  No  sign  of 
*'  manhood  in  Christ,"  to  be  so  devoted  to  one  man,  or  one  type  of  minister,  as  to 
appreciate  and  be  helped  by  no  other. 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  5—9. 

Paul;  Apollos ;  God. — "Co-workers,"  Paul  ventures  to  say  (2  Cor.  vi.  1). 
Not  only  are  Paul  who  plants  and  Apollos  who  waters  "  one "  (ver.  8),  but 
these  "three  agree  in  one"  purpose  and  result. 

I.  Three  ways  of  reading — three  heart-inflections  of  tone  in  reading — this 
verse. — 1.  "A  Paul  may  plant,  an  Apollos  may  water;  but  God  alone  can 
give  the  increase  !  "  The  despondent,  despairing  tone  of  the  physical  and  mental 
reaction  of  an  earnest  worker,  after  a  day  of  effort  and  "  failure  ";  said  as  if  God 
gave  charily  and  grudgingly  the  increase,  and  the  chances  were  to  be  taken  as 
against  His  giving.  Or  said  by  a  worker  who  goes  out  mechanically,  without 
much  heart  in  his  work,  to  discount  apologetically  beforehand  the  failure  which 
he  expects,  and  deserves;  or  his  wonderfully  wise  "explanation"  of  his  failure 
when  the  day  is  over  :  "  Ah  !  you  see,  a  Paul  may  plant,"  etc.  Very  pious,  but 
dishonouring  to  God.  2.  "  Paul  must,  .  .  .  Apollos  must,  .  .  .  God  must,"  etc. 
The  formal,  sometimes  useful,  summation  of  the  conditions  of  success.  One  of 
the  "  Rules  "  hung  up  at  the  gate  of  the  field,  to  be  considered  and  compHed 
with  by  every  worker.  On  these  conditions  only  can  the  work  be  done,  on  these 
only  can  success  be  claimed.  Usually  God  will  not  do  the  work  of  Paul  or 
Apollos,  will  do  nothing  without  them.  They  must  remember  that  they  can 
effect  nothing  without  His  co-operation.  Paul  ?  Nothing  !  Apollos  ?  Nothing  ! 
God?  All  in  all  !  (ver.  7).  Yet  there  is  a  better  reading  of  the  verse  still. 
3.  "  Paul  planted,  Apollos  watered,  God  did  give  the  increase."  The  historical 
rendering  and  reading.  Always,  in  invariable  sequence,  the  history  of  any  true 
labour  for  God.  So  certainly  as  the  first  two  terms  of  the  series  are  found,  so 
certainly  does  the  third  follow  to  complete  it.  If  Paul  has  done  his  part,  if 
Apollos  has  done  his  part,  God  may  be  reckoned  upon.  God  always  does  give 
the  increase.  The  historical  view  is  the  healthy  view,  warranted  by  the  history 
of  the  universal,  working  Church. 

II.  The  human  workers. —Are  human.  Macmillan  (Bible  Teachings  in  Nature, 
p.  101)  points  out  that  corn  never  grows  spontaneously,  is  never  self-sown,  self- 
diffused ;  [this  not  true  of  Divine  Truth,  of  the  Bible,  without  limitation]  ;  depends, 
as  the  seed  of  "  life  "  does  ordinarily,  upon  being  sown  by  man's  hand.  [The 
Greatest  of  the  workers  was  human ;  Who  might  say  to  His  Church,  "  I  have 

84  ' 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  m. 


planted,  ye  have  watered  "  ;  Who  said,  "  Others  laboured,  ye  have  entered  into 
their  labours.]  With  all  human  variety.  Many  and  many-fashioned  tools  are 
needed  to  do  the  work  of  God.  The  material  is  many-fashioned.  Each  worker 
is  made  to  be  a  specialist  in  some  particular  kind  of  material.  Every  kind  of 
material,  every  type  of  mind  and  heart,  is  somebody's  speciality.  The  worker 
and  the  work,  the  minister  and  the  man  he  is  made  to  help,  are  both  to  be 
found ;  if  only  they  find  each  other,  all  is  well.  The  Great  Director  of  the 
work  knows  where  to  lay  His  hand  on  the  Paul,  where  to  find  the  Apollos, 
the  very  man  to  do  the  work  which  wants  doing.  With  all  human  limitations. 
Paul  need  not  be  distressed  because  he  cannot  do  the  work  of  Apollos.  Nobody 
need  blame  Apollos  because  he  cannot  pioneer  and  "  plant "  like  Paul.  No 
man  is  made  to  do  everything.  Let  a  man  frankly  accept  the  limitation ;  let 
him  consecrate  to  the  Work  and  the  Worker  his  ability  thus  bounded ;  then 
let  him  set  himself  to  he  at  his  ovjn  best  for  Christ.  Paul  is  not  to  chafe  against 
the  fact  that  he  is  not  an  Apollos  ;  still  less  is  an  Apollos  to  be  thinking  how 
much  better  he  would  have  done  the  work,  and  how  much  more  faithfully,  than 
Paul,  if  only  he  had  been  set  to  Paul's  task  with  Paul's  talent.  Depreciating 
criticism  of  others,  disheartened  views  of  oneself,  are  equally  mischievous  and 
needless.  The  work  has  always  been  done,  and  was  intended  to  be  done,  by  a 
division  of  work  amongst  workers,  each  of  whom  has  a  limitation  of  ability. 
Neither  Paul  nor  Apollos  was  an  ''  all-round "  man,  a  monstrosity  of  all  per- 
fection. [It  does  not  appear  here ;  there  was  nothing  in  the  facts  of  the  case 
to  suggest  it,  but  ordinarily  one  must  add,  With  all  human  infirmities.  Ideally 
perfect  work,  even  in  a  man's  own  special  "  line,"  never  gets  done.  Nor  does 
any  most  perfect  plan  ever  get  worked  with  ideal  intelligence,  or  even  with 
ideal  faithfulness.  "  The  Best  is  the  enemy  of  the  Good,"  says  a  German 
proverb.  Practical  wisdom  in  the  Church  will  not  indeed  be  supinely  indifferent 
to  any  chance  of  improvement  of  workers  or  methods,  yet  it  will  accept,  and 
make  the  very  most  of,  the  workers  who  are  "  to  hand,"  with  all  their  humanity. 
No  organisation,  no  reorganisation,  will  ever  eliminate  from  the  conditions  under 
which  God's  work  has  to  be  done,  the  blameless,  natural  imperfections  of  the 
workers,  or  even  their  moral  imperfections.  See  the  men  with  whom  God  in 
Old  Testament  and  New  Testament  alike  did  His  work.  We  see  the  glorious 
results  of  the  past  ;  we  see  the  best  points  of  the  conspicuous  workers  who 
contributed  to  them.  But  a  nearer  view,  a  more  intimate  acquaintance,  would 
have  shown  them  veiy  human,  most  of  them  average,  not  only  in  ability,  but  in 
goodness ;  only  a  few  of  first  rank  in  power  and  sainthood.  But  the  glorious 
result  is  due  to  the  great  worker,  God,  who  accomplished  it  by  using  the  tools 
which  were  to  His  hand.] 

III.  The  work. — Is  of  many  forms.  "  Planting"  "  watering.^^  No  "  reaping" 
is  mentioned.  A  good  case  showing  how  such  illu^^trative  language  does  not  bear 
insisting  on  beyond  the  one  point  of  analogy  which  it  is  used  to  illustrate.  Paul's 
''^ planting ^^  of  a  Church  was  a  very  real  ''reaping"  of  individual  souls.  The 
illustration  here  used  is  valid  thus  far — that  many  labourers,  and  many  successive 
"  layers  "  of  faithful  toil,  contribute  to  the  great  Result.  One  man  can  in  the 
deepest  sense  rarely  claim  to  be  the  instrument  (say)  of  a  conversion.  Ordinarily 
he  has  had  the  native  ability,  sanctified,  to  bring  to  a  "  head  "  what  has  been 
working  in  a  soul  pervasively,  as  the  result  of  many  a  preceding  labourer's  toil  and 
prayers.  How  ^''planting  "  and  "  watering  "  are  both  needed  to  lead  to  full,  ripe 
growth,  is  well  seen  in  the  case  of  the  Master  Himself.  Any  day  of  His  three 
years'  ministry  might  be  summarised  in  the  sentence  :  "■  A  Sower  went  forth 
(that  morning)  to  sow."  He  might  have  said,  "  I  only  planted."  The  very 
parables  of  Matt.  xiii.  illustrate  His  words.  How  few  moments  it  occupies  to 
read  the  Sower ;  how  much  time  has  been  spent  in  expounding  it.     In  how  few 

85 


CHAP.  m.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


words  contained ;  how  many  myriads  of  words,  how  many  acres  of  paper,  spent  in 
its  enforcement.  Rightly  so.  That  morning  He  had  gone  out  to  sow  ;  He  was 
sowing  from  the  boat  that  day  seed  truths,  packed  in  small  compass,  but  with 
living  germs  in  them,  which  might  be,  and  were  meant  to  be,  developed  in  many- 
branching  expositions  and  applications  of  truth.  His  three  years'  work  was  a 
seminal  one,  almost  entirely ;  acts,  works.  Himself,  in  historical  record, — the  seed 
of  a  Gospel.  But  the  Spirit  of  Pentecost  " watered"  and,  with  a  leap,  that  seed 
started  into  life  and  immediate  blossom  and  fruitful  harvest.  "These  things 
understood  not  His  disciples  at  the  first,  but,"  etc.,  (John  xii.  16).  Perhaps  not  too 
much  to  say  that  without  the  watering  of  the  Spirit  the  words  of  Christ  must 
still  remain  seeds  only,  undeveloped  potentialities,  to  some  who  read  and  even 
expound  them.  [Peter  at  Pentecost  has  got  hold  of  all  essential  Christian  truth, 
yet  there  is  a  development  in  some  small  degree  to  be  traced  in  the  clearness 
with  which  he  and  otliers  apprehended  Divine  truth,  particularly  in  regard  to 
the  Personality  of  their  Master.]  The  work  is  to  bring  men  to  "  believed  It 
aims  at  making  and  building  up  "  believers^  This  certainly  is  a  seminal, 
germinant  work.  When  a  sinner  is  brought  to  saving  faith  in  Christ,  a  work 
is  begun,  and  only  begun,  which  may  fruitfully  fill  eternity.  How  happy  the 
selection  and  the  succession  of  Pastors  and  Ministers  with  which  the  Great 
Head  of  His  Church  has  often  provided  both  its  Churches  and  individual  souls  ! 
How  constantly  the  very  man  who  can  "  water  "  is  sent  to  follow  up  the  man 
who  can  ^^  plant "  !  How  one  man's  appeal  follows  up  another  man's  sermon ! 
Would  it  not  be  oftener  so,  if  in  simple  faith  the  choice  and  order  were  left  to 
Him? 

III.  The  increase  and  success. — *'  As  the  Lord  gave  to  every  man"  "  Success  " 
is  as  complex  a  thing  as  the  labour  which  Jeads  up  to  it ;  as  many-sided  as  the 
work  and  the  men.  Again  (as  in  I.  1),  let  it  be  said  that  there  is  always 
a  real  and  true  *^  success  "  and  "  increase  "  so  surely  as  there  has  been  the  prayer- 
ful, faithful  "  planting  "  and  "  watering^  [N.B. — In  the  Sower  (Matt,  xiii.),  if 
there  are  three  causes  of  failure,  there  are  also  three  degrees  of  success  (in  one 
case  exceedingly  abundant),  as  certainly  as  "  a  sower  goes  forth  to  sow."]  It 
may  be  a  "  success "  whose  full  measure  only  begins  to  be  seen  at  a  second  or 
third  remove  from  the  man  whose  work  it  really  crowns.  He  is,  e.g.,  a  minister 
who  only  knows  of  the  salvation  of  one  man  or  one  boy  ;  but  that  boy  becomes 
the  evangelist  who  gathers  in  his  sheaves  by  the  hundred  wherever  he  works. 
From  heaven  perhaps  the  original  labourer  sees  for  the  first  time  his  true  success. 
Paul's  "success"  and  "increase"  were  not  least  when  his  words  saved  Luther, 
and  when  Luther's  comment  on  Paul  saved  John  Wesley.  [Eadie  {Paul  the 
Preacher,  pp.  94,  95)  gives  a  good  case  of  germinant  "  increase."  There  lived 
in  last  century  in  England  an  obscure  woman  with  an  only  son.  When  he  was 
but  seven  years  old  she  died.  But  her  image  and  her  prayers  haunted  him  by  land 
and  sea,  in  the  ports  of  Britain,  on  the  beach  of  Africa,  when  shipping  manacled 
negroes,  or  carousing  on  shore  with  a  seaman's  zest.  His  heart  was  touched  ; 
he  became  a  minister  renowned  for  his  impressive  conversation  and  correspondence. 
His  words  reached  Claudius  Buchanan,  and  sent  him  to  India.  The  recital  of  his 
labours  so  attracted  Judson  that  it  drew  him  to  Burmah.  The  same  gift  to  a 
mother's  prayers  threw  light  on  the  soul  of  Scott,  the  commentator.  It  also 
strengthened  Cowper,  and  gave  birth  to  the  Olney  Hymns.  Wilberforce  was 
greatly  indebted  to  the  same  source,  and  his  Practical  View  brought  the  truth 
home  to  the  mind  of  Legh  Richmond.  Thus  John  Newton's  mother's  prayers 
gave  birth  to  his  preaching  and  correspondence,  to  two  missionaries,  a  commen- 
tary, a  Christian  statesman,  and  a  pastor.  Yet  her  grave  and  her  name  are 
unknown.] 

IV.  The  reward  of  the  workers. — Over-subtle  exegesis  to  say,  "  According  to 

66 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS.    CHAf.  liL 


his  labour,  not  according  to  his  success."  Formally  true,  as  a  matter  of  lexical 
interpretation  of  "  labour  "  ;  but  too  narrow  for  the  thought  of  Paul,  and  for  the 
fact.  The  Saviour  has  summarised  the  Divine  Method  of  reward  in  the  twin 
parables  of  the  Pounds  and  the  Talents  [Luke  xix.  ;  Matt.  xxv.  As  alike  as 
twins,  and  as  different.  As  alike  as  two  faces,  or  twenty  ;  built  up  on  the  same 
general  plan,  made  up  of  the  same  basal  facts  (N.B.  in  the  Pounds,  however,  two 
sets  of  facts  are  interwoven ;  there  are  subject-citizens  who  become  rebels,  as  well 
as  subject-servants) ;  yet  perfectly  distinct  and  individual,  in  their  occasion,  in 
their  construction,  and  in  their  teaching ;  each  exactly  congruous  to  its  occasion 
and  its  audience  ;  each,  in  even  small  details,  internally  harmonious  and  self- 
consistent.]  In  their  contrast  they  exhibit  complementary  truths.  Servants  of 
Christ,  with  equal  endowments  [each  of  the  ten  a  pound],  may  be  in  very  diverse 
degree  "  successful."  One  may  be  tenfold  more  diligent  or  devoted  than  another ; 
with  opportunities  fairly  equal  the  issues  of  their  life's  "  labour  "  may  vary  in  the 
widest  degrees.  Some  barely  bring  "  one  pound  "  of  increase  from  their  pound. 
Some  of  the  same  "  pound "  make  ten.  And  the  reward  is  proportionate. 
"  Heaven  "  is  no  indiscriminate  prize  to  every  servant  of  God.  There  are  many 
heavens  in  Heaven  ;  as  many  heavens  as  men.  Happy  the  man  of  a  "  ten  cities  " 
heaven.  But  on  the  other  hand  servants  of  God  with  widely  different  endow- 
ments may  be  equally  faithful.  It  means  as  much  for  some  to  bring  one 
"  talent "  for  one,  as  for  another  to  bring  two  talents  where  two  were  given. 
The  man  who  adds  five  to  five  is  no  more  "  good  and  faithful  a  servant "  than 
the  man  who  should  add  one  to  one.  The  same  words  of  praise,  the  same  "  joy 
of  the  Lord,"  await  the  "  labour "  of  those  whose  fidelity  in  labour  has  been 
equal.  Success  and  results  are  not  overlooked.  Only  God  can  appraise  them 
truly.  His  servants  may  carve  out  for  themselves  the  measure  of  their  reward, 
whilst  it  is  all  of  grace  that  there  is  a  reward  at  all.  But  He  does  not  overlook 
faithfulness.  A  Paul's  "  labour "  and  the  spirit  of  it ;  the  "  labour "  of  an 
Apollos  and  the  fruit  of  it, — all  is  noted,  and  noted  for  exactly  just  " reward'^ 

V.  The  Great  Worker  is  God. — "  Ministers  by  whom"  instrumentally,  God 
brings  men  to  faith.  They  are  only  efficient  when  in  His  hands.  The  strength, 
the  wisdom,  for  labour  come  from  Him.  The  wisest  "  labourer  "  works  where, 
and  for  so  long  as.  He  appoints  him  in  the  field,  the  vineyard.  **  God  is  all,  in 
all "  the  work  and  "  in  all  "  the  workers.  That  it  is  "  God's  husbandry ^^  not 
Paul's;  that  the  real  Worker,  the  real  Author,  of  the  "  increase  "  is  God,  needs 
to  be  remembered  by  the  human  "  co-workers"  on  two  occasions  :  (1)  when  they 
seem  to  have  "  succeeded  " ;  (2)  and,  more  urgently,  when  they  seem  to  have 
"  failed." 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.-^Verses  10—15. 

Work  tried  by  Fire. 

I.  The  imagery  employed. — Ancient  cities,  and  some  modern  ones  {e.g. 
St.  Petersburg),  not  so  sharply  divided  into  rich  quarters  and.  poor  quarters 
as  often  the  case  with  us.  Houses  of  highest  and  humblest  much  more 
closely  associated  and  intermingled.  Palace  and  hovel  might  literally  jostle. 
Buildings  adorned  with  costly  marbles  [=  ''^precious  stones"],  perhaps  made 
priceless  by  the  lavished  art  of  the  sculptor,  stood  surrounded  with  (sometimes 
literal  *'  lean-to ")  houses  of  stucco,  of  wood,  or  even  of  clay,  thatched  with 
hay  and  stubble,  the  houses  of  the  artisan,  the  poor,  the  slave.  St.  Paul 
sees  the  work  of  a  great  fire,  such  as  that  which  under  Nero  was  made  the 
occasion  of  a  great  persecution  of  the  Christians,  or  that  which  a  century  before, 
on  the  capture  of  Corinth  itself  by  Memmius,  had  laid  the  city  in  ruin.  [Not 
to  be  made  too  precise,  but  may  be  conceived  of  thus  :]  The  fire  breaks  out  (say) 

87 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


at  midnight,  in  some  obscure  dwelling,  and  quickly  reduces  to  a  heap  of  ashes  the 
frail  tenement  of  "  wood,  hay,  stubble."     It  catches  adjoining  houses;  the  winds 
fan  and  spread  the  flames,  till  a  whole  quarter  of  the  city  is  wrapped  in  a  confla- 
gration which  seems  to  Paul  a  fit  emblem  of  the  fires  of  "  The  Bay  "  of  all  days, 
God's  Day  of  testing  and  doom.    In  the  morning  little  knots  of  curious  spectators 
and  of  sufferers  wander  about  the  ruins,  discussing  the  work  of  the  night.     The 
slave  is  looking  for  his  house  of  wood,  hay,  stubble.     It  stood  there  where  that 
heap  of  ashes  lies.     He  stirs  them  with  his  foot,  and  lays  bare  the  stone  founda- 
tions still  unconsumed.     The  fire  conld  not  touch  those.     And,  like  many  more,  the 
homeless  man  recounts  to  any  sympathetic  listeners  how  his  own  life  and  that  of 
his  family  are  all  they  could  save  out  of  the  wreck  and  loss  of  all.     They  were 
awakened,  perhaps,  and  saved  at  the  very  last  moment,  "  saved  through  the  fire.'' 
Another  little  group  gathers  round  the  stronger-built  and  still-standing  stone 
walls  of  a  better  class  of  house.     Stucco,  woodwork,  ornament  have  perished  • 
but  the  man  who  built  it  ''  has  his  reward  "  for  the  money  and  pains  spent  over 
his  substantial  walls.    There  is  something,  more  or  less,  to  begin  with,  in  restoring 
his  ruined  house.    Close  by  stands  a  temple  or  a  palace,as  if  almost  contemptuous 
of  its  ruined  neighbours,  as  it  stands  in  the  isolation  of  its  survival.     It  has 
passed  through  the  ordeal  almost  unscathed.       Contents   uninjured;   cunning 
works  of  the  goldsmith  ;  spoils  of  conquered  nations, — all  untouched  by  the  fire. 
Its   costly  marbles   and   statues  within   have   not   felt   it.      Its   strong  walls 
besmirched  with  smoke  indeed,  have  defied  the  flames.     That  builder,  too,  has 
his  reward.     He  built  with  good  material ;  it  stands  the  fire. 

II.  Paul's  use  of  the  imagery.— 1.  In  the   course  of   a  somewhat  lengthy 
stay  in  the  city,  Paul  had  founded  the  Church  of  Corinth.      No  man  could 
pretend  to  dispute  or  share  with  him  the  honour  of  being  the  "  master-builder,'' 
the  first  to  preach  Christ  in  the  city.      Some  little  time  after  his  departure,  he 
sent  over  from  Ephesus  his  friend  Apollos  to  carry  on  the  work.     Apollos'  an 
Alexandrian  Jew,  worked  in  perfect  harmony  of  heart  and  aim  after  Paul ; 
but  perhaps  felt  himself  more  free  than  Paul  had  done  to  use  the  Alexandrian 
rhetoric  and  human  learning  in  setting  forth  the  Gospel.     Every  Greek  was  a 
born  '*  politician,"  or  at  least  a  born  party  man ;  the  Corinthian  Church  early 
showed  the  effects  of  this  partisan  spirit  within  its  membership.     Parties  sprang 
up  with  men's  names   for  their  badges.     [Little  "  schisms "  Paul  calls  them, 
dissidences  within  the  body,  not  yet  grown  to  separations /rom  it.]     Whether  we 
have  the  exact  names  iv.  6  perhaps  makes  a  little  doubtful,  nor  is  it  clear  that 
Paul's  list  is  exhaustive.     Yet  the  characteristics  and  tendencies  of  the  parties 
may   be   easily   gathered.     2.    There   was   an    "  Apollos "   party.     They   liked 
such   rhetoric   as   Apollos   gave   them,    and   chose   to   think   their  intelligence 
flattered  by  what  of  philosophy  he  may  have  employed  in  the  shaping  of  the 
truth.     Their  danger  was  perhaps   {e.g.  in  1  Cor.   xv.)  to  exalt  reason  at  the 
expense  of  faith ;  we  may  not  unreasonably  think  that  in  trying  to  be  philo- 
sophical Christians  they  were  denying  or  refining  away  the  facts  and  doctrines  of 
the  Gospel,  frittering  away  their  power,  or  rejecting  them  as  contrary  to  reason. 
It  might  not  to  be  an  unwarrantable  borrowing  of  a  modern  name  to  call  them 
the    ''rationalising"   party   at   Corinth.      3.    There   was   a    "Cephas"   party, 
belonging  to  that  "  wing  "  of  the  Christian  Church  who  had  been  Jews,  and 
whom  at  this  period  of  Paul's  life  we  everywhere  find  dogging  his  footsteps, 
denying  his  ApostoHc  standing,  often  defaming  his  character.     These  at  Corinth 
glorified  Peter,— no,    "  Cephas."     "  Call    him  by  his  honest   Hebrew  name !  " 
Old  school  men,  who  could  not  so  rapidly  or  readily  unlearn  as  Paul  had  done 
the  habits  and  training  and  teaching  of  years ;  who  mistrusted  him  as  "  sadly 
radical";    who,  though  Christians,  sought   to   enforce   upon  the  Gentiles  the 
worn-out   ritual   of   Moses'  law  and   the   now  meaningless  circumcision.     Old 
88  , 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  m. 


style,  conservative  men,  with  a  leaning  to  ceremonialism.     The  **  ritual "  party. 

4.  '*  No,"  said  another  party.  "  We  stand  by  Paul.  He  will  have  none  of  your 
Law  for  Christians.  We  will  have  none  of  it.  He  is  a  *  liberty '  man.  We 
are  '  liberty '  men  too."  Only,  where  he  meant  the  formal  law  of  Moses,  they 
meant  the  very  principle  of  law  itself.  When  he  taught  '^  liberty,"  they  inter- 
preted "  licence,"  and  some  lived  *'  licentiousness."  The  Christian  Church  from 
the  beginning  has  always  had  some  too  '*  liberal  "  in  thought  and  in  practice. 

5.  Yet  one  party  more.  They  owned  no  human  teacher,  indeed.  They  had 
climbed  to  a  sublime,  serene  height  far  above  where  their  poor,  misguided 
brethren  were  rallying  round,  and  fighting  over,  this  man  or  that,  Paul,  or 
Apollos,  or  Cephas.  Possibly  hyper-conservatives,  fresh  from  the  Lord's  brother, 
James,  in  Jerusalem  j  at  all  events,  they  said,  "  We  are  of  Christ  ! "  A 
beautiful  party-cry ;  very  attractive  to  the  unwary  and  simple-hearted.  But 
when  it  means  "Christ  as  we  understand  Him"  it  is  not  quite  so  beautiful. 

6.  So,  then,  to  the  Church  at  Corinth  had  happened  on  a  small  scale  what 
has  been  happening  in  the  Church  of  Christ  ever  since.  These  were  all 
Christians  as  yet.  The  differences  between  them  and  their  heathen  or  Jewish 
neighbours  were  far  greater  than  those  which  distinguished  them  from  each 
other.  All  acknowledged  one  Divine  Head,  and  had  some  great  doctrines 
connected  with  Him  as  a  bond  of  union.  But  some  of  them  were  building  up 
the  Church  [and  Christian  lives]  with  doctrine  and  practice  which  Paul 
regarded  as  "  wood,  hay^  stubble " ;  useless  at  best,  and  sure  to  perish  in 
"  The  Day"  when  God's  judgment  should  "  try  every  maris  work,  of  what  sort 
it  is."  Some  there  were,  he  knew,  who  happily  were  building  after  his  own 
heart  and  judgment,  *'  gold,  silver,  p7'ecious  stone."  Great  should  be  their 
reward  !  Some  also  there  were  whose  work  gave  him  only  mingled  satisfaction. 
"  Every  man  shall  receive  his  own  reward  according  to  his  own  labour,"  partly 
according  to  how  much  he  has  done,  but  still  more  according  to  tuhat  kind  of 
work  he  has  done.  Of  those  for  whom  he  feared  that  they  should  find  the 
labour  of  their  life  wasted,  yet  he  hoped  they  should  at  least  " save  themselves" 
if  even  like  men  snatched  out  of  the  flames  which  left  them  nothing  but  "  their 
foundation^^  and  *'  their  lives."  [The  opening  words  of  the  paragraph  suggest :] 
"  Woe  to  any  builders  whose  work  should  really  be  a  disturbing  of  the  very 
Foundation  itself,  other  than  which  none  may  lay  a  basis  for  faith,  or  life,  or 
hope."  7.  These  Church  parties  at  Corinth  were  our  modern  "Churches"  and 
"  sects  "  in  miniature.  The  causes  at  work  at  Corinth  have  never  ceased  to 
work  wherever  we  have  Christian  men,  until  we  have  a  Christianity  not  even 
outwardly  at  one.  Yet  we  need  to  give  Paul's  recognition  that  they  are  nearer 
to  each  other  than  to  the  world  outside.  Their  unity  is  a  more  striking 
and  deep  thing  than  their  diversities.  They  are  one  Church  still.  The  broadest 
and  deepest  diversities  at  Corinth  were  still  within  the  Church,  insomuch  as  they 
were  only  surface  cleavages  ;  they  did  not  run  down  into  the  foundation.  That 
was  one.  Men  weep  because  there  is  not  external  unity  of  all  the  Churches  in 
one  communion.  As  well  weep  that  the  sapling,  which  a  thousand  years  ago 
was  one  simple  undivided  stem,  has  branched  out  into  the  oak  with  its  hundred 
arms,  many  of  them  really  big  trees  themselves.  The  branching  is  an  inevitable 
consequence  of  life.  And  the  tree  is  one  at  stock  and  root.  Minds  will  always 
difier  in  cast  and  capacity.  Training  is  of  endless  diversity.  Bace  will  make  a 
difference.  No  one  man  ever  sees  the  whole  round  of  a  truth;  hardly  any 
one  Church  or  age  does ;  no  two  ever  see  the  same  phase  of  presentation  of  it. 
There  will  always  be  men  liable  to  pay  too  great  honour  to  Beason ;  always 
some  too  ready  to  insist  upon  and  overvalue  Ceremonial.  Beasons  convincing  to 
one  do  not  appeal  to  another.  An  order  of  service  not  to  the  taste  of  one  suits 
another  and  helps  him.     And  so  on,  in  endless  diversity.     What  then  ?     Becog- 

89 


CHAP.  III.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I    CORINTHIANS. 


nise  the  fact  that  the  diversity  is  a  necessity.  It  has  often  become  an  evil ;  it 
need  not  be,  and  will  not  be,  when  men  become  broad  as  Paul,  and  recognise  other 
patterns  of  doctrine  and  life  and  church  order  as  all  fairly  to  be  included  in  the 
One  Church.  8.  It  were  a  good  thing  for  some  to  be  as  narrow  as  Paul  about 
the  "  One  Foundation^  It  is  unreal  "  liberality  "  to  attempt  to  include  within 
the  "  Christian  "  Church  both  those  whose  Christ  is  God-man,  the  Father's  equal 
and  man's  fellow,  Messiah  of  the  Jews,  Mediator  for  the  Race,  and,  on  the  other 
side,  those  whose  Jesus  is  at  the  highest  a  creature  whom  His  Creator  could 
annihilate,  and  who  was  perhaps  a  mere  man,  who  might  or  even  did  make 
mistakes,  a  man  not  superior  to  Paul,  and  to  whom  Christianity  owes  not  more 
than  it  does  to  Paul.  Their  status  and  acceptance  before  God  depend  on  other 
considerations,  but  they  are  not  on  the  Foundation  in  Paul's  sense.  The  lesson 
of  the  paragraph  is  not  indiflerence  to  what  a  man  believes,  or  what  his  neighbour 
believes,  or  how  he  works  or  worships.  Each  should  be  honest  and  earnest  in 
accepting  and  living  and  defending  that  special  aspect  or  portion  of  The 
Truth,  which  he  or  his  Church  sees.  Experience  shows  that,  as  a  rule,  they  do 
most  for  the  broad  work  of  Christ  who  work  with  a  fixed  creed  and  with  a 
definite  Church  attachment.  Each  should  give  and  claim  equal  recognition.  The 
paragraph  teaches  charity,  since  experience  also  teaches  that  perfectly  honest 
church-  and  creed-builders  have  built  in  what  others  saw  clearly  was  "  wood,  hay, 
stubble,''^  and  have  rejected  what  some  saw  was  ^^ precious  stone,^^  if  not  ''^ gold" 
or  ^''silver,"  of  system  and  doctrine.  Probably  no  uoinspired  teacher  ever  built 
upon  the  One  Foundation  nothing  but  what  would  endure  the  fire. 

III.  A  personal  application  of  the  words  lies  not  far  from  this. — 1.  If  a  man 
is  to  be  saved  in  "  The  Day  "  of  God's  judgment,  Christ  must  be  the  foundation  of 
his  life.  '*  Saved"  and  ^^ perishing"  (2  Cor.  ii.  15)  mingle  together  it  the  closest 
intercourse  of  life,  with  closest  similarity  of  outward  course  and  bearing. 
Indeed,  sometimes  the  balance  of  amiability  or  of  strict  probity  seems  to  be  on 
the  side  of  the  "  perishing."  What  is  there  to  make  Paul's  classification  so 
sharply  definite  ? 

2.  Dig  down  to  the  foundations  of  the  two  lives. — In  the  man  really  "  being 
saved "  this  is  the  starting-point :  Time  was  w^hen  he  felt  himself  a  sinner, 
guilty  before  God,  and  his  heart  full  of  sin.  He  cast  himself  on  God's  mercy  in 
Christ ;  he  was  forgiven  ;  ever  since,  the  Spirit  has  dwelt  in  him,  doing  some- 
thing towards  cleansing  the  heart,  and  putting  there  a  new  motive  for  all  he 
does  and  feels — love  to  God  who  gave  him  Christ.  If  not,  he  is  not  a  Christian. 
Others  are  ^^ perishing  "  because,  go  back  far  as  we  will,  dig  down  deeply  as  we 
may,  we  cannot  find  that.  There  never  was  the  fundamental  experience  of 
"sm"  and  of  ^^ faith  in  Christ"  as  the  ^^ spiritual  man  "understands  them. 
Reform  may  only  be  throwing  the  arch  of  a  culvert  over  the  sin  of  the  past  and 
the  sin  of  the  heart ;  the  man  covered  up  his  past  and  began  to  build  the  new 
life  over  it.  But  there,  lowest  of  all,  are  the  past  and  the  sin,  not  Christ  and 
His  atonement.  The  other  foundation  and  beginning  of  all  life-building  is 
Rock  !  [Turning  over  a  new  leaf  is  a  good  thing  if  it  do  not  mean  simply  fasten- 
ing down  the  old,  without  having  first  the  record  "  blotted  out."]  The  super- 
structure of  Eddystone  Lighthouse  was  good  enough  when  it  was  removed  a  few 
years  ago ;  but  the  sea  was  undermining  the  foundation.  A  good  superstructure 
upon  a  good  foundation  :  lesson  the  first. 

3.  Then  build  somethi^ig  upon  the  foundation. — See  in  the  suburbs  of  growing 
towns  unfinished  property.  Walls  of  a  certain  height,  but  left  unfinished ;  perhaps 
hardly  more  than  the  foundations  got  in  when  the  money  failed.  Ground  lies 
waste ;  weeds  grow,  rubbish  accumulates,  till  it  becomes  difficult  to  see  without^ 
some  search  whether  there  are  any  foundations  at  all.  Like  some  lives.  The 
true  foundation  was  made  right  some  years  ago,  but  scarcely  anything  has  been 

90 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ill. 


put  upon  it  since.  The  accumulations  of  a  worldly  life  have  gathered,  until  an 
observer — and  perhaps  the  man  himself — hardly  knows  whether  the  foundations 
are  still  there.  Rear  a  Christian  character ;  build  a  superstructure  of  work 
for  Christ.  No  better  evidence  that  the  foundation  is  there,  and  is  sound,  than 
the  growing,  fair  superstructure.  Build  somethiug.  Some  builders  never  get 
very  far.  What  they  build  is  good — stone,  if  not  gold  or  silver,  but  it  never 
amounts  to  much.  A  day's  unfaithfulness  pulls  down  a  week's  building.  "Sin- 
ning and  repenting."  "  Ever  learning,  never  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth." 

4.  Build  something  every  day. — "  How  did  Michael  Angelo  accomplish  so 
much  ?  "  "  Nidla  dies  sine  linea !  "  he  replied.  No  day  without  something 
which  will  endure  the  testing  fire  :  this  will  be  the  secret  of  some  very  unob- 
trusive, little-noticed  lives  which  by-and-by  are  crowned  with  large  reward 
when  the  reward  is  according  to  the  work — in  amount  as  well  as  quality  (cf. 
supra). 

5.  Test  all  employments  hy  this. — *'  Will  they  stand  *  the  fire  '  1  Do  they  now 
help  towards  an  abiding,  thorough  Christian  character  ?  Or  are  the  things  I 
have  done  to-day  mere  '  wood,  hay,  stubble,''  sure  to  perish  ?  " 

6.  Build  something  to-day  ;  at  least,  find  the  foundation  to-day. — If  to  lay  the 
one  and  only  foundation  [so  far  as  we  can  be  said  to  lay  it  at  all]  were  the  last 
act  of  a  wasted  life,  the  builder  should  escape  ^^  saved  as  by  fire."  But  it  would 
be  a  very  unworthy  use  to  make  of  Christ  and  His  salvation.     *'  To-day." 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  16—20. 

The  Temple  of  God. — Very  little  in  this  paragraph  which  is  not  dealt  with 
elsewhere.  For  vers.  16,  17  see,  e.g.,  vi.  18-20  ;  for  vers.  18-20  see,  e.g.,  i.  18  sqq. 
Note,  however,  that  the  Temple  is  here  collective,  the  whole  Church  ;  in  vi.  18-20 
it  is  individual — indeed,  the  very  body  of  the  Christian  man. 

I.  Note  how,  from  paragraph  to  paragraph,  the  illustrations  change. — In  1-4 
Paul  is  the  "  nursing  father  "  (Isa.  xlix.  23)  ;  the  Church  is  the  house  where  "  the 
holy  seed  "  is  growing  up,  or  ought  to  be,  into  strength  and  ripeness  of  godli- 
ness. In  ver.  5  figure  is  dropped,  unless  "  ministers  "  be  a  figure.  Paul  and 
his  friend  and  successor  Apollos  are  employes  of  God,  enrolled  in  His  service,  to 
bring  men  to  Christ  and  to  faith  in  Him  ;  John  Baptist-like,  to  bring  Bride- 
groom and  Bride  together.  There  has  been  "  a  division  of  labour,"  and  the 
thought  is  made  pictorial  in  ver.  6.  Paul  and  his  fellow- worker  are  seen  toiling 
each  at  his  task  in  God's  field  or  in  God's  vineyard — "labourers  in  the  vineyard," 
each  of  whom  is  to  receive  "  whatsoever  is  right  "  according  to  his  work.  [There 
is  more  in  the  Scripture  than  was  in  the  Scribe.  The  mind  of  the  Spirit  is  often 
fuller  than  any  thought  in  the  mind  of  the  human  writer.  Yet  the  use  of  the  illus- 
tration goes  so  little  beyond  the  division  of  tasks  amongst  the  qualified  workers, 
and  the  payment  according  to  results  and  fidelity,  that  an  expositor  may  hesitate 
to  fill  out  these  two  hints  with  the  typology  of  the  Vine  and  the  Vineyard  of 
God,  found,  e.g.,  in  Ps.  Ixxx.  ;  Isa.  v.  2  ;  Ezek.  xv.,  xvii. ;  Matt.  xxi.  28,  33,  sqq. ; 
Luke  xiii.  6  (where  the  two  figures  for  Israel  are  conjoined) ;  and,  with  most 
profound  significance,  John  xv.  1,  and  Matt.  xxvi.  20  (adding,  perhaps,  1  Cor. 
ix.  7).]  Then  again  the  picture  changes ;  as  the  *'  dissolving-view  picture  " 
fades  out  when  another  is  superposed  upon  it,  so  the  busy  "  labourers  "  at  their 
"  husbandry  "  have  scarcely  been  shown  to  us  ■  before  the  field  has  faded  and  a 
"  building  "  is  rising  as  we  watch.  There  is  no  doubt  who  is  the  Architect ; 
whose  is  the  great,  leading,  essential  Idea  of  such  a  house.  It  is  a  busy  scene. 
Not  Paul  or  Apollos  only  are  *'  workers  together  with  God  "  this  time.     Every 

91 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Corinthian  teacher,  every  Corinthian  believer,  is  a  co-worker  too.  Paul  has 
done  his  part  of  the  work  ;  "  well  and  truly  laid  "  does  this  Masterrmason  declare 
his  foundation  to  be.  Yet  more  truly  the  ^'■foundation  "  is  bed-rock ;  of  God's 
''  laying,"  in  the  prehistoric  ages  of  a  wider  than  earthly  history  (Rev.  xiii  8  * 
1  Pet.  i.  20).  *     ' 

"  The  Church's  one  Foundation 
Is  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord." 

What  Paul  or  Cephas  may  lay  is  rather  the  lowest  courses  of  the  masonry,  which, 
in  their  turn,  rest  upon  this  "  Rock  of  Ages  "  (Isa.  xxvi.  4,  margin).  It  is  mercy 
and  blessing  to  man  that  he  is  permitted,  privileged,  to  be  a  worker  *'  together 
with  God  "  ;  but  we  touch  the  fringe  of  The  Great  Problem  in  all  human  thinking 
— the  problem  of  Evil — when  we  see  how  this  has  entailed  the  invariable  con- 
sequence that  the  design  of  the  Great  Architect  never  g6ts  fairly  carried  out. 
Nor  is  it  only  that  the  workers  blunder  or  are  innocently  incompetent ;  the 
deviation  from  the  design  of  the  Great  Builder  has  a  moral  character.  The 
material  is  bad  ;  the  building  is  careless ;  the  work  will  be  fit  for  nothing  but 
the  fire — very  much  of  it.  In  our  paragraph  the  building  is  specialised  in  its 
character.  What  we  saw  as  a  great  house  rising  is  now  the  Temple  of  God. 
And  then  the  figure  drops  once  more.  Upon  the  screen  are  portraits ;  Corin- 
thians strutting  themselves  in  their  fancied  "  wisdom  " ;  He  who  knoweth  men 
pronouncing  His  verdict :  "Fools  !  You  are  only  setting  a  trap  for  your  own 
feet  ! "  And  the  chapter  leads  up  to  the  last  solemn  sentences  in  which  is 
recited  God's  "grant"  of  all  men,  all  things,  to  His  Church,  to  the  individual 
Christian.  A  party  said  at  Corinth,  "  We  are  of  Christ."  The  truth  is  far 
wider  than  that.  They  all  ^^  are  Christ's";  He  is  not  "divided"  (i.  13);  He 
belongs  to  no  one  party ;  all  the  parties  belong  to  Him ;  as  yet,  all  the  "  schisms  " 
at  Corinth  have  not  cut  off  any  of  them  from  Him.  The  seemingly  so  humble 
"  We  are  of  Christ "  too  easily  passes  over  into  the  miserably  exclusive  "  We  are 
of  Christ."  "  Ye  are  all  Christ's ;  all  that  is  His  is  yours ;  all  things  are  yours." 
II.  The  Church  is  the  Temple  of  God.— [N.B.  the,  not  a.]  Fulfilling  the 
age-long  truth  that  God  loves  to  dwell  amongst  men.  **  God  with  us "  is  the 
keynote  in  which,  if  Sin  had  not  put  all  things  out  of  tune,  the  story  of 
the  relations  of  God  and  man  would  have  run  on  in  one  lovely  strain  of  most 
perfect  mu^c.  He  planted  His  Tent  in  the  midst  of  the  tents  of  Israel  in  the 
wilderness ;  He  accepted  the  Royal  Palace  built  for  Him  in  His  capital, 
Jerusalem,  by  His  viceroy  Solomon.  Men  looked  from  their  housetops  in  the 
city  across  to  the  Temple ;  they  hushed  their  thought  as  they  passed  beneath  the 
boundary  walls  of  its  outer  court — "  The  King,  Jehovah,  is  within  there  !  "  And 
when  their  sin  had  cost  them  the  presence  of  the  occupying  Shekinah-cloud,  the 
Palace  stood  still,  a  witness  to  the  desire  of  the  heart  of  God  to  dwell  amongst  men. 
[All  this  is  carried  out  in  chap,  vi.,  where  see.]  The  word  used  is  that  for  the 
actual  Temple  building,  the  Naos  or  Shrine.  Around  this  lay  broad  outer  courts, 
the  outermost  and  largest  being  open  to  the  world,  the  Court  of  (even)  the 
Gentiles.  It  was  an  ill  day  for  the  Church  when  it  added  a  great  outer  court, 
the  Court  of  the  World.  In  a  true  sense,  perhaps,  like  the  Court  of  the  Gentiles, 
it  may  be  included  in  the  Hieron.  The  outer  Court  of  the  World  does  stand  in 
a  true  relation  to  God.  But  the  ill-day  is  when  the  court  of  the  baptized,  or 
unbaptized,  world  is  counted  part  of  the  Naos ;  when  the  sacred  name  which 
belongs  to  the  Shrine  only  is  extended  to  the  outer  court,  to  the  great  confusion 
of  thought  and  discipline  and  practice.  "  Ye  are  the  Naos.'^  The  Church  with 
the  "  indwelling "  of  the  "  Spirit  of  God "  is  the  present-day  embodiment  and 
exhibition  of  God's  Thought.  [Not  the  last ;  the  last  but  one.  The  last  and 
most  perfect  is  in  Rev.  xxi.  3.  And  in  heaven  to-day  is  another,  concurrent, 
exhibition  of  it,  where   He  sits  who  is,  and  will  eternally  be,  the  God-man. 

92 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,     char  iit. 


(The  two  are  one  :  Eph.  i.  23).]  The  individual  and  the  collective  modifications 
of  Paul's  illustrations  are  combined  in  1  Pet.  ii.  5.  The  whole  building  is  instinct 
with  Life,  because  every  single  stone  is  "  living."  Peter's  figure  hardly  bears, 
even  in  a  reader's  mind,  to  be  put  into  visible  shape.  The  truth  is  clear.  The 
Temple  is  built  up  of  temples.  Men  whose  body  is  a  temple,  and  they  alone, 
build  up  the  Temple  of  God.  But  there  is  a  presence  of  God  which  specially 
belongs  to  the  Church  as  such. 

III.  "  Defile  "  and  ♦'  destroy  "  are  the  same  word. — A  vox  media,  for  which 
Evans  suggests  "  mar."  Sin,  as  so  often  is  repaid  in  kind.  It  shapes,  as  well  as 
earns,  its  own  punishment.  [In  part,  a  sinner  makes  his  own  kind  of  hell.] 
The  man  who  does  anything  in  the  corporate  life  of  the  Church,  which  is  a  ''grief" 
and  an  offence  to  the  Divine  Tenant  of  the  Temple  of  to-day,  shall  find  that  he 
has  grieved  the  Spirit  of  his  personal  life.  It  is  the  One  Spirit  of  Holiness  who 
everywhere,  in  church  or  soul,  makes  its  most  grievous  penalty  His  own  with- 
drawal. Let  the  life  of  the  body  depart,  and  from  that  moment  it  begins  to  be 
"  marred  "  and  "  destroyed  "  by  disintegrating  moral  corruption.  In  this  parti- 
cular instance  the  "  defiling  "  is  done  by  the  introduction  of  party  spirit,  and 
by  the  introduction  of  the  "  wood,  hay,  stubble^''  into  the  structure,  whether  of 
Church  order  or  Christian  doctrine,  or  personal  character  and  life ;  not  to  add  by 
the  envying  and  strife  which  proved  the  Corinthians  "  yet  carnal^  Let  every  man 
in  Corinth  watch  not  only  lest  he  offend  against  the  holiness  of  his  personal 
Christian  life,  but  be  jealous  of  anything  which  might  impinge  upon  the  corporate 
holiness  of  The  Church  of  Christ.  Let  every  Corinthian  enrol  himself  in  the 
honourable  Guild  of  the  Temple-guardians  [lit.  "  Temple-sweepers,"  Acts  xix.  35] 
of  the  shrine  of  the  great  God  and  His  Spirit. 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  21—23. 

Our  Estate  and  our  Title  :  "  All  things  yours" 

I.  Incidental  illustration  of  this  in  the  occasion  of  the  paragraph. — 1.  "All 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  Corinthian  Church  a 
saddening  spectacle  to  an  observer,  especially  to  one  having  Paul's  close  personal 
interest  in  its  welfare.  Sad  even  at  this  distance  of  time  to  see  the  state  of 
things  in  a  Church  hardly  more  than  two  or  three  years  old,  and  endowed  with 
gifts — many  of  them  miraculous — beyond  any  other  of  that  age.  Members  split 
into  factions,  party  spirit  running  high.  Some  living  in  immorality  "  not  even 
named  amongst  the  heathen"  around  them  (v.  1);  some  defending  such  sin; 
others  suffering  "rationalising"  scepticism  to  sap  the  foundations  of  their  faith, 
and,  which  always  follows,  to  eat  away  the  vitality  of  their  Christian  life.  One 
is  sick  at  heart  at  the  meanness  and  virulence  of  their  personal  feeling  against 
Paul,  the  man  to  whom  they  owed  their  Church  existence,  who  had  ^^  spent 
himself"  for  them,  only  to  find  that  "  the  more  he  loved  them  the  less  he  was 
loved"  (2  Cor.  xii.  15).  Yet  to  this  condition  of  things  we  owe  these  two  letters 
to  Corinth ;  of  all  his  longer  Epistles  the  most  human  in  their  interest,  and  com- 
ing nearest  to  the  every-day  life  of  house,  market,  citizen,  church.  2.  Especially 
do  we  owe  to  this  the  many  passages,  of  which  this  is  a  specimen,  of  greatest 
weight  and  importance.  How  again  and  again,  in  the  midst  of  passages  of 
rebuke  or  direction  concerning  the  temporary  and  sometimes  trivial  points 
submitted  by  the  Corinthians  to  Paul  for  his  decision,  do  we  find  his  pen  guided 
to  such  passages  of  solemn  or  glorious  truth  as,  e.g.,  1  Cor.  vii.  29-31,  or  as  this 
paragraph.  As  the  casual  blow  of  the  pick  of  the  lucky  miner  strikes  upon  the 
precious  nugget  embedded  in  the  rock  of  quartz,  or  as  many  a  fair  flower  grows 
so  strong  and  so  fair  out  of,  and  because  of,  the  very  corruption  with  which  its 
roots  are  fed  j  so  out  of  the  foolish  and  wicked  party  spirit  of  the  Corinthian 


CHAP.  III.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Church  grows  this  glorious  title-deed  to  the  Universe  and  its  contents,  the  estate 
of  the  Christian.     The  very  parties  in  Corinth  are  "  ours " !     [How  is  the 
preacher  to  put  all  the  estate,  " all  things"  into  one  homily  ?     He  and  his  people 
can  but  walk  over  a  part  of  it,  noting  the  things  which  lie  next  the  path  on 
either  hand,  or  can  be  seen  afar  off  in  large  outline.     No  matter  in  what  direction 
they  strike  out  together  a  path  over  such  an  extent  of  possession,  new  *'  views  " 
open  on  this  side  and  that,  new  "  finds  "  of  pleasure  and  profit  lie  close  to  their 
way  !     Before  starting  across  in  even  one  direction,  let  them  look  over  their 
Title.    ''  All  is  God's ;  all  is  Christ's,  His  Son ;  all  He  has  is  yours.  His  brethren."] 
II.  The  title  by  which  the  estate  is  held  by  the  Church  and  the  Christian. — 
At  each  link  in  the  above  chain  of  successive  "  conveyance,"  from  God  to  Christ, 
from  Christ  to  His  people,  the  ground  of  possession,  the  nature  of  the  ownership, 
varies.     1.  "Of,  through,  unto,  God  are  all  things"  (Rom.  xi.  36).     They  have 
being  because  He  willed  it ;  they  are  what  they  are,  and  as  they  are,  and  they 
continue,  at  His  will.     All  the  creatures,  and  pre-eminently  Man,  find  in  His 
glory  the  aim  and  end  of  their  being.     Sin  would  destroy  this  order.     The  germ, 
not  only  of  heathenism  but  of   all  sin,  is  that  "  they  worshipped  and  served 
the  creature  more  than  the  Creator"  (Rom.  i.  25).     The  members  of  the  Church 
have  come  again  into  harmony  with  the  Creator's  design,  and  glory  with  David 
as  he  stood  amidst  his  people's  offerings  to  God's  Temple  on  earth,  bowing  at  our 
Creator's  feet  with  the  homage,  "All  that  is  in  the  heaven,"  etc.  (1  Chron. 
xxix.  11).     All  the  voices  of  the  universe  were  meant  to  be  and  ought  to  be  in 
harmony  with  the  cry  of  the  four  "  living  ones  "  and  the  four-and-twenty  elders 
who,  self-discrowned,   bow   before   the  Lord  God  Almighty   in  the  temple  of 
heaven,  saying,  "  Thou  hast  created,"  etc.  (Rev.  iv.  11).     He  is  Lawgiver  to  His 
universe.     The   "  laws "    which    we   laboriously   make    out,   are   nothing   but 
expressions  of  His  will,  the  ordinary,  orderly  methods  according  to  which  He  is 
pleased  to  govern  His  great  Kingdom.     All  is  His,  in  virtue  of  His  Creatorship ; 
all  is  subject  to  Him ;  all  at  His  disposal.     2.  But  there  comes  in  between  Him 
and  His  Created  Universe  His  Son ;  between,   not  as  a  separation,  but  as  a 
link ;  as  a  Mediator,  not  only  between  God  and  man  in  Redemption,  but  as 
between  Creator  and  Creature   in   Creation   and   in   Providence   (John   i.    1  ; 
Col.  i.  16).     Even  in  the  days  of  His  veiled  glory  He  once  said:  "All  things 
that  the  Father  hath  are  Mine  "  ;  and  the  writer  of  the  Hebrews  (i.  1-3)  allows 
us  to  see  this  "  Son  appointed  Heir  of  all  things,  .  .  .  sitting  down  on  the  right 
hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."     And  "  oil  things  "  are  His,  subject  to  His  power 
and  at  His  disposal.     3.  Then  comes  in  the  astounding  revelation  that  He  is  all 
this,  and  has  all  this,  for  the  sake  of  the  redeemed  race  of  man.    [Note  the  force 
of  Heb.  i.  3,  4,  "  Being  the  brightness,  etc.,    .    .    .  sat  down    .  .  .  when  He, 
who  was  all  the  while  this,  had  by  Himself  purged  our  sins."     The  "purging" 
of  our  sins  and  the  after-session  "on  the  right  hand,"  etc.,  are  "projected,"  as 
it   were,   on   the   background   of    His    abiding,    continuous   dignity    as    "  the 
Brightness"  and  "  the  Image."]     Whilst  He  thus  has  all  things  for  Himself,  He 
has  linked  Himself  with  man,  has  taken  flesh   and   come   down  to  us,  that 
He   might  lift  us  up  with  Himself  to  Gcd,  and  join  us  with  Himself  in  a 
possession  as  wide  as  His  own  ownership.     The  very  heart  of  the  argument 
of  Heb.  ii.  is  here.     Yonder  sits  One  Man  in  whom  all  the  dominion  of  Ps.  viii. 
4-6,  ascribed  to  man,  is  actually  fulfilled;  the  only  one  wearing  our  nature  in 
whom  that  dominion  is  as  yet  realised.     But  His  enthronement  and  dominion 
carry  the  principle  of  Man's  restored  dominion.     His  royalty  is  representative 
as  well  as  personal.     His  people  are  so  "  partakers  with  Him  "  that  they  already 
enter  into  a  life  of  rule  rather  than  of  subjection,  and  their  ultimate  and  complete 
glory  is  sure.     "  Ye  are  Christ's  "  carries  with  it  an  answer  to  the  old  question, 
"  What  is  man?"  such  as  was  never  dreamed  of  by  him  who  asked  it,     The 

94 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  hi. 


creature  physically  lost  in  the  vastness  of  the  universe,  dwarfed  into  a  point  by 
the  heavens,  the  work  of  God's  fingers,  doomed  to  suffering  and  to  death,  in 
bondage  all  his  life  to  the  fear  of  death,  and  in  that  respect  lower  than  the 
"  cattle  "  and  the  humbler  animated  creation  (Ps.  viii.),  is  already  beginning, 
so  our  paragraph  says,  to  realise  that  along  with  and  like  the  Representative 
Man  "  he  is  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  "  ;  all  things  are  put  under  his  feet, 
and  serve  him ;  he  is  to  become  conqueror  of  death ;  angels  are  his  servitors. 
Indeed,  there  is  nothing,  there  is  no  being,  in  the  whole  contents  of  God's 
creation-realm,  that  is  not  at  His  orders  to  serve  the  interests,  and  advance  to  its 
perfection  the  life,  of  those  whom  Christ  has  made  His  clients  and  His  brethren. 
"  He  is  head  over  all  things  to  His  Church  "  (Eph.  i.  22  [a  paragraph  thoroughly 
parallel  to  the  thought  of  our  present  section]).  Each  member  of  His  body — 
of  His  very  Self — may  say,  "  All  things  that  the  Son  hath  are  mine."  The 
Lord  of  all  that  is  or  that  begins  to  be,  of  all  that  happens  in  the  unfolding 
of  events,  of  all  the  forces  and  contents  of  the  universe  in  all  their  capabilities 
and  combinations,  is  making  all  ceaselessly  contribute  to  and  converge  upon  the 
interests  of  His  people  and  of  each  single  individual  of  their  number.  [May 
illustrate  in  homely  fashion  thus :  The  mere  caller  at  a  house  is  shown  into 
one  room  ;  there  stays,  and  only  stays ;  takes  nothing,  uses  nothing,  of  what  is 
in  it.  The  visitor  in  the  family  has  the  use,  the  "  run,"  of  all  in  common  use  by 
the  family,  and  of  those  set  apart  specially  for  him  ;  but  he  feels  that  many  are 
closed  against  him.  In  a  very  restricted  way  does  he  feel  free  to  use  what 
is  at  his  disposal  and  service.  But  the  child  of  the  house  has  the  free  "  run  " 
of  the  house.  Nothing  is  shut  against  him  ;  in  submission  to  his  father's 
wishes,  all  it  contains  may  be  called  into  requisition  for  his  use  and  comfort  and 
welfare.]  The  home  belongs  to  the  brethren  of  Christ.  The  estate  is  His ;  but, 
we  may  almost  venture  to  say,  not  its  smallest  value  to  Him  is  that  He  can 
make  His  brethren  sharers  with  Him  in  its  possibilities  of  blessing. 

III.  The  estate  and  its  contents  of  good. — In  a  word,  "  everything."  There 
is  nothing  in  the  physical  or  the  spiritual  world  ;  in  the  present,  in  the  future  ; 
persons,  circumstances,  changes  of  condition, — nothing  of  which  the  Christian 
is  not  master  instead  of  servant,  and  which  cannot  be  made  to  issue  in  and 
contribute  to  the  service  and  advancement  of  all  his  best  interests.  1.  The 
matter  immediately  in  hand  is  the  ministers  and  order  of  the  Church  :  "  Paul, 
Apollos,  Cephas"  With  fervid,  slavish,  personal  devotion  the  Corinthians 
were  ranging  themselves  very  obediently  as  the  adherents  of  this  man  and  that. 
Indeed,  they  were  fiercely  contending  for  their  favourite,  under  whose  yoke 
they  were  eager  to  put  the  neck  of  their  judgment  and  will  and  heart,  almost 
as  if  their  party-head  had  been  crucified  for  them,  or  they  had  been  baptized 
into  his  name  and  not  Christ's.  No  man  contended  more  stoutly  than  did 
Paul  (e.g.  chap,  ix.)  for  his  Apostolic  rights  and  all  due  recognition  of  his 
status.  But  the  place  which  some  at  Corinth  would  have  given  to  him  or  to 
other  apostles,  was  one  which  belonged  to  Christ  (i.  13).  Such  exaltation  of  an 
apostle  into  lordship  over  their  own  head  and  heart,  was  an  inversion  of  the  true 
order.  As  he  looks  at  the  humblest  man  in  Corinth,  ennobled  by  his  brother- 
hood to  Christ,  he  says  :  "  Remember,  the  apostle  is  for  your  sake,  not  for  his 
own  glorification.  The  Church ;  its  arrangements ;  its  officers  and  their  quali- 
fications, exist  for  your  salvation  and  sanctification,  and  not  at  all  for  their  own 
advancement  or  glory.  You  are  not  theirs,  not  mine.  Paul,  A  polios,  Cephas, 
we  are  yours ! "  There  is  no  one  pattern  of  "  excellence "  in  the  ministry,  as 
there  is  no  one  pattern  of  need  or  character  in  the  people.  Every  man  is 
the  "  excellent "  minister  to  somebody  !  The  expositor  of  the  Word,  or  the 
declaimer  of  theses  on  the  topics  of  the  day ;  the  man  who  excels  in  pathos,  or 
in  historical  word-painting,  or  in  satire  and  shrewd  analysis  of  character  and 

95 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


its  foibles  ;  the  man  who  "  cannot  preach,"  and  the  man  who  can  preach  but 
who  cannot  organise  ;  the  man  who  is  at  his  best  in  a  sick-room,  or  that  other 
who  is  a  born  ruler  of  men ; — through  all  their  infinite  variety  of  gifts,  there  is 
no  faithful  minister  of  Christ  who  is  not  and  has  not  something  which  some- 
body wants,  or  at  some  time  will  want.  Each  man  will  have  his  own  aspect  of 
truth  to  present  and  teach,  the  aspect  which  he  sees  most  clearly,  into  which  he 
enters  most  fully ;  and  all  are  wanted,  Paul  and  James,  Cephas  and  John,  Jude 
and  Apollos,  to  give  the  whole  round  of  truth.  A  many-sided,  many-gifted 
ministry  is  not  the  smallest  part  of  the  wealth  and  rich  heritage  of  the  Church. 
Let  the  Christian  man  see  what  he  can  find  for  himself  in  each  type  of  man. 
There  is  something.  Let  him  not  be  so  wedded  to  any  one  type,  that  he 
cannot  enjoy,  or  find  help  from,  or  even  think  kindly  of,  a  man  who  is  not 
after  the  pattern  of  his  own  "  best,"  the  style  of  minister  who  most  helps 
him.  And,  similarly,  first  stands  the  interest  of  the  individual  soul,  and  next 
the  form  of  Church  organisation  and  administration.  No  form  is  worth 
anything  which  never  was,  or  is  no  longer,  of  use  towards  helping  those 
who  belong  to  Christ.  Any  form,  as  any  man,  who  does  this,  is  to  be 
recognised  and  to  be  utilised  as  part  of  the  endowment  of  the  people  of 
God.  2.  Then  Paul's  view  widens.  His  words  grow  broad  in  their  range, 
even  to  indefiniteness.  "  World  yours  !  Life  yours  !  Death  yours  !  "  Then 
^Hhe  world^^ — and  its  predominantly  ethical  and  evil  significance  need  not  be 
excluded  from  it — is  no  mere  necessary  evil,  which  must  be  endured  and 
perhaps  survived.  There  is  no  "must  be"  which  ordains  that  life,  with  its 
business,  its  sorrows,  its  trials  and  conflicts,  its  unfriendly  or  uncongenial  men 
and  women,  its  strange  perplexities  and  obstacles  of  circumstance,  shall  be  of 
necessity  a  hindrance  to  growth  in  grace ;  putting  the  break  on,  even  if  it  can- 
not quite  stop  all  progress,  as  if  a  Christian  could  not  hope  to  be  thorough  in 
service  or  enjoyment  so  long  as  life  in  *'  the  world  "  lasts,  and  as  if  the  one 
thing  most  to  be  desired  was  to  ''  shuffle  off  this  mortal  coil "  and  be  done  with  it 
all.  Paul's  words  in  our  paragraph  say  rather  :  "  You  are  not  to  succumb 
beneath  life's  burdens  like  that.  You  are  not  to  acquiesce  in  a  low  type  of 
spiritual  life,  because  your  circumstances  and  whole  location  in  the  world  are  not 
favourable  to  growth.  The  world  is  not  to  be  master  like  that.  Evil  as  it  is, 
its  evil  is  under  the  rule  of  your  Christ.  '  God  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your 
feet  shortly '  (Rom.  xvi.  20),  and  you  may  begin  to  enter  into  your  victory  and 
have  your  foot  even  now  upon  the  power  of  evil ;  and  then  all  the  good  there  is 
in  life  and  in  the  world  may  be  set  in  motion  and  utilised  for  your  enjoyment 
and  help.  The  trials,  the  difficulties,  the  very  temptations,  are  not  to  be  met 
simply  as  the  bulrush  bows  its  head  before  the  storm,  praying  that  the  storm 
may  soon  be  over,  and  that  you  may  not  be  uprooted  utterly  by  its  passing 
violence.  Kather,  like  your  Master,  ride  the  storm,  in  His  strength.  Every 
hurricane  obeys  laws — His  laws — and  blows  as  He  listeth,  towards  His  goal  and 
for  His  purpose  towards  you.  The  water  outside  will  carry  the  well-found  ship ; 
admitted  within,  it  will  sink  it.  Keep  the  world  outside  your  heart,  and  the 
world  is  yours,  to  use  and  rule  and  lay  under  contribution  to  your  growth  in 
grace."  Trials  may  teach.  Crosses  may  lift  nearer.  [" Even  so"  and  in  no 
other  way,  "  uriust "  every  "  son  of  man  he  lifted  up  !  "J  The  very  necessity  of  the 
strife  and  of  unremitting  watchfulness  against  evil  will  drive  a  man  so  often  and 
so  near  to  Christ  his  Source  of  strength,  that  he  emerges  from  every  specially 
severe  testing-time  with  new  knowledge  and  a  new  power  in  prayer.  The  very 
weight  of  life's  burdens  will  have  forced  him  to  find  a  Friend  in  Christ,  whose 
strength  and  faithfulness  the  world  has  forced  him  to  test  and  experience,  as  he 
would  never  otherwise  have  had  occasion  to  do.  He  is  a  fine  specimen  of  manhood, 
who  has  taken  his  place  in  the  world,  and  felt  its  storm,  and  fought  it  when  it 

96 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  ill. 


assailed  him,  and  after  all  is  not  hardened  or  "secularised"  or  soured,  but  is 
trained  to  patience  and  sympathy  with  others,  and  to  a  more  perfect  reliance 
upon  his  God.  The  fire  will  brighten  and  purify  what  it  cannot  burn.  In  "  the 
world  "  it  is  true  that  the  soldier  is  in  an  unfriendly  country ;  but  even  the  enemy's 
country  can  be  requisitioned  for  what  will  enable  him  to  carry  on  the  campaign. 
[The  darkest  days  of  life  have  often  been  the  most  fruitful  in  permanent 
advancement  to  the  soul.  The  cross  has  had  a  jewel  hidden  beneath  it  which 
has  repaid  for  lifting  the  cross.  A  true  parable  in  a  German  Legend :  A 
famous  egg  of  iron  was  given  by  a  prince  to  his  bride,  who  flung  down  in  dis- 
pleasure so  unworthy  a  gift.  The  concussion  started  a  spring  in  the  iron  case, 
and  revealed  a  silver  "  white  "  to  the  Qgg.  Curiosity  examined  this,  and  found 
again  within  a  ''yolk"  of  gold.  In  this  lay  hidden  a  tiny  ruby-set  crown, 
whose  circlet  concealed  a  marriage-ring  for  the  union  of  bridegroom  and  bride  ! 
So,  at  the  very  heart  of  the  most  forbidding  experiences  of  "  the  world  "  and  ''  life^^* 
the  soul  has  many  a  time  found  the  pledge  of  new  love  and  a  closer  union  with  the 
Christ  who  rules  "  the  world  "  and  "  /^/e,"  and  who  gave  the  painful  and  hard  ex- 
perience, etc.]  3.  Nothing  seems  more  utterly  master  than  "  Deaths  The  natural 
heart  often  stoically  looked  life  in  the  face  and  defied  it ;  or  sometimes  sullenly, 
doggedly,  went  onwaid  to  meet  its  changing  fortunes  and  crushing  sorrows  as 
the  Inevitable.  But  reckon  death  a  possession,  part  of  one's  wealth  ?  No ;  it 
must  be  submitted  to  !  In  all  literature,  except  what  is  Christian,  or  at  least 
Christianised,  Death  is  the  great  Conqueror  ;  knocking  impartially  at  the  door 
of  palace  and  hovel,  callirg  as  imperiously  the  king  from  his  throne  as  the 
beggar  from  his  rags  and  wretchedness,  and  calling  them  at  his  own  caprice ; 
playing  havoc  with  all  men's  plans  and  work,  breaking  these  off  at  most 
unlooked-for  and  unfortunate  times ;  mocking  the  tears  of  affection  over 
sundered  bonds ;  defying  all  efforts  to  arrest  his  progress  or  stay  his  hand.  On 
the  contrary,  they  who  are  Christ's  see  that  He  has  conquered  death,  and  they 
share  in  His  victory.  They  already  ''^  have  everlasting  life."  Death  has 
become  dying  only,  simply  an  incident — no  more — in  the  course  of  an  "  eternal 
life"  which  began  when  faith  united  to  Christ,  and  which  stretches  on  in 
victorious  continuity  through  the  important,  but  still  accidental,  change  of  sur- 
roundings and  abode  and  conditions  which  dissolution  occasions.  They  do  not 
tremble  at  any  capricious  shooting  of  His  arrows.  The  Lord  of  Life  makes 
every  arrow  of  Death  to  carry  His  message  attached  to  it.  He  "has  the  keys 
of  Hell  and  of  Death  "  (Eev.  i.  17).  The  realm  of  the  "  departed  "  is  part  of  His 
dominion.  His  people  enter  it  as  possessors,  not  as  prisoners.  They  are  only 
advancing  into  another  section  of  a  life  which  is  all  theirs.  Its  doors  are 
opened  by  Death  when  He  wills,  and  at  His  bidding.  And  so  far  from  putting 
an  abrupt  and  inopportune  end  to  the  execution  of  their  life's  purposes,  or 
thwarting  them,  they  are  only  by  death  advanced  a  stage  nearer  to  their  com- 
pletion. Salvation  is  put  out  of  peril;  for  the  first  time  do  the  majority  of  His 
people  then  see  their  Lord.  To  wake  up  into  the  blessedness  of  that  first  moment, 
when  their  eyes  at  last  see  the  Christ  they  have  heard  of,  and  trusted,  and  loved, 
and  have  tried  to  serve — Death  which  brings  that  is  no  dread,  no  enemy ;  it  is  a 
hope,  it  is  their  own.  4.  Nor  does  anything  seem  less  their  own  than  the  future. 
"  Things  to  come"  may  unfold  in  such  terrible  possibilities,  and  may  involve  such 
unforeseen  contingencies,  as  may  set  at  nought  all  their  wisest  planning  and 
bhght  all  their  brightest  prospects.  No  dawn  so  clear  but  the  noonday  may  be 
shadowed  over  with  clouds  which  never  lift  again  long  as  life's  day  lasts.  Men 
seem  working  life's  problem  with  a  quantity  unknown,  incommensurable,  when 
they  must  needs  take  the  future  into  their  reckoning.  Masters  of  the  future  ? 
No,  not  even  its  prophets  !  Kather  its  sport !  "  Things  to  come  are  yours" 
What  these  shall  be,  He  is  deciding.     They  lie  within  the  domain  which  is  being 

H  97 


CHAP.  III.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


ruled  by  the  Son,  and  ruled  by  Him  for  His  Church  and  for  the  individual 
Christian  man.  Even  here  He  used  to  speak  of  the  unseen  world  and  its 
facts  as  one  to  whose  foot  the  other  side  of  the  veil  was  as  familiar  ground  as 
this  side  is  to  us.  In  like  manner  the  future  lies  mapped  out  to  His  eye  as 
clearly  as,  more  clearly  than,  the  past  is  to  ours.  For  instance,  some  man  will 
one  day  cross  my  path  who  will  materially  affect  my  whole  after-life.  Christ, 
the  Ruler  of  the  future,  has  His  eye  upon  the  point  of  convergence ;  and  upon 
the  path  which  that  man,  perhaps  as  yet  altogether  unknown  to  me,  or  far  from 
me,  in  perhaps  another  hemisphere,  is  traversing,  and  which  will  bring  him  to 
the  meeting-point  by-and-by.  When  the  moment  arrives  there  is  the  man,  just 
when,  and  just  such  as,  my  life  needs.  The  present  is  being  so  guided  into 
the  future,  and  the  future  is  being  so  fitted  on  to  the  present,  as  that  the  life  of 
a  man  who  is  Christ's,  is  in  its  whole  stretch  and  extent  one  perfect  harmonious 
whole  (see  Homily  on  2  Cor.  i.  10).  Somewhere  in  the  whole  round  of  His 
universal  possession  there  is  the  very  help  and  deliverance  he  will  someday  want ; 
it  will  be  brought  out  and  forthcoming  at  the  proper  time,  "  in  His  times " 
(cf.  1  Tim.  vi.  15).  As  each  stage  of  the  earthly  series  of  ^Hhings  to  come"  is 
reached,  relays  of  help  [like  the  relays  of  fresh  horses  awaiting  the  travellers 
at  each  successive  posting-station  in  the  old  "  posting "  days]  will  always  be 
awaiting  him.     "  My  times  are  in  "  Christ's  "  hand." 


HOMILETIC   SUGGESTIONS  FOR  A   COURSE  ON   VERSE  22. 


The  World  is  Yours. 
I.  To  lodge  in. 
II.  To  study. 
III.  To  use. 
TV.  To  enjoy. 
V.  To  conquer. — [/.  Z.] 

Life  is  Yours. 
I.  As  a  daily  gift  of  God. 
II.  As  a  period   of   discipline  and 
instruction. 

III.  As  a  season  of  enjoyment. 

IV.  As  an  earnest  of  a  more  glorious 
life.— [/.  L.] 

Death  is  Yours. 
I.  To  consider. 
II.  To  terminate  your  sorrows. 

III.  To  effect  an  important  change. 

IV.  To    unfold    the    mysteries    of 
eternity. 


V.  To    introduce    you    to    eternal 
happiness. — [/.  Z.] 

Things  Present  are  Yours. 

I.  The  dispensations  of  providence. 

II.  The    provisions   and    arrange- 
ments of  the  Gospel. 

III.  All  the  supplies,  agencies,  and 
experiences  of  time. — [J,  Z.] 

Things  to  Come  are  Yours. 
I.  The  future  of  time. 

II.  The  coming  of  Christ. 

III.  The  resurrection  of  the  body. 

IV.  The  day  of  judgment. 
V.  Heaven. 


VI. 


Everlasting  Hfe. 


VII.  God,  who  was,  and  is,  and  is  to 

come. — \J.  Z.] 


APPENDED  NOTES. 


Ver.  11  sqq.  Since  it  was  by  preaching  and 
teaching  that  Paul  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  Church  of  Corinth,  the  builders  must  be 
different  kinds  of  teachers.  Since  the  matter 
taught  is  the  material  the  teacher  uses,  this 
must  be  the  gold,  silver,  wood,  straw,  etc.  The 
results  produced  by  the  teacher  in  the  hearts 
and  lives  of  his  hearer  are  the  building  he 
erects.  He  may  produce  good  results  which 
will  last  for  ever  and  be  to  him  an  eternal  joy 

98 


and  glory.  Since  these  results  are  altogether 
the  work  of  God,  and  are  revealed  in  their 
grandeur  only  in  the  great  day,  they  are  a 
"  reward  "  given  by  God  in  that  day  for  work 
done  on  earth.  But  a  teacher  may  produce 
results  which  now  appear  great  and  sub- 
stantial, but  which  will  then  be  found  utterly 
worthless.  He  may  gather  round  him  a 
large  number  of  hearers,  may  interest  them, 
and  teach  them  much   that  is  elegant  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iii. 


for  this  life  useful,  and  yet  fail  to  produce 
in  or  through  them  results  which  will  abide 
for  ever.  If  so,  the  great  day  will  destroy 
his  work  and  proclaim  its  worthlessness. 
But  he  may  be  said  to  build  upon  the  one 
foundation,  Jesus  Christ.  For  he  is  a  pro- 
fessed Christian  teacher,  and  people  go  to 
hear  him  as  such.  He  may  be  a  sincere, 
though  mistaken  Christian  believer,  and 
therefore  be  himself  saved.  But  his  work, 
as  a  teacher,  is  a  failure.  Now  the  per- 
manence of  a  teacher's  work  depends  upon 
the  matter  taught.  The  soul-saving  truths 
of  the  Gospel  enter  into  men's  hearts  and 
lives,  and  produce  abiding  results.  All  other 
teaching  will  produce  only  temporary  results. 
We  understand,  therefore,  by  the  wood  and 
straw  whatever  teaching  does  not  impart  or 
nourish  spiritual  life.  The  three  terms  sug- 
gest the  various  kinds  of  such  teaching.  It 
may  be  clever  or  foolish,  new  or  old,  true  or 
false;  but  not  subversive  of  the  "founda- 
tion," or  it  would  come  under  the  severer 
censure  of  ver.  IQ  sq.  .  .  ,  We  have  Christian 
examples  in  many  of  the  trifling  and  specu- 
lative discussions  which  have  been  frequent 
in  all  ages.  We  also  learn  that  even  of  the 
teaching  which  produces  abiding  results 
there  are  different  degrees  of  worth  ;  in  pro- 
portion, no  doubt,  to  the  fulness  and  purity 
with  which  the  teaching  of  Christ  is  repro- 
duced. In  both  cases  the  results  are  the 
results,  lasting  or  transitory,  produced  in 
the  hearers'  hearts  by  the  use  of  these 
materials ;  results  which  are  in  some  sense 
a  standing  embodiment  of  the  teaching. — 
Dr.  Beet. 

'^  By  Mrer — 1.  It  may  be  homiletically 
useful  to  cast  into  orderly  shape  the  Bible 
use  of  "  Fire."  Needless  to  say  that  the 
Bible  is  not  pledged  to  any  such  unscientific 
piece  of  obsolete  antiquity  as  that  Fire  is 
an  Element — one  of  four.  It  is  content  to 
take  the  visible  fact,  and  its  palpable  effects, 
as  a  serviceable  illustration,  apprehended 
readily  by  the  child  or  the  heathen,  and 
perfectly  good  as  an  illustration,  whatever 
be  the  scientific  revision  of  our  knowledge 
of  the  state  of  the  case.  For  teaching 
purposes  Fire  is  Heat  and,  still  more,  Flame. 
Flame  is  now  understood  to  be  gas  so  highly 
heated  as  to  become  in  some  degree  luminous, 
and  generally  made  more  luminous  by  being 
loaded  with  incandescent  particles,  whether 
of  carbon  or  other  matter.  That  is  nothing 
new  to  the  Divine  Author  of  Scripture  and 
of  Nature  ;  nor  was  it  unworthy  of  Him,  or 
untrue,  that  what  was  to  be  the  popularly 
apprehensible  phenomenon  should  in  the 
original  planning  of  Nature  be  so  adjusted 
and  adapted  as  to  lend  itself  well  to  teach 
moral  truth.  Indeed,  the  devout  students 
of  Nature  find  that  both  the  superficial, 
phenomenal  facts  and  the  deep  scientific 
"laws"  are    alike  parabolic  and    didactic. 


Nature  is  full  of  man,  and  of  truth  which 
man  wants.  Creation  is  didactic.  "  Creation 
is  redemptive." 

2.  A  convenient  starting-point  is  Heb. 
xii.  29  :  "  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire." 
Closely  connected  with  "  God  is  Light." 
The  difference  is  here:  Light  is  what  God 
is  in  Himself;  fire  what  He  is  in  relation 
to  (sinful)  mankind.  Hence  frequently 
the  chosen  symbol  of  His  self-manifesta- 
tion :  the  Bush,  Exod.  iii.  2 ;  the  Pillar, 
Exod.  xl.  38 ;  Tongues  of  Pentecost,  Acts 
ii.  3 ;  Sinai,  Exod.  xix,  8,  xxiv.  17,  Deut. 
iv.  36;  Vision  of  God's  glory,  Ezek.  i.  4, 
Exod.  xxiv.  9-11  (N.B.  Nadab  and  Abihu), 
Dan.  vii.  9,  Rev.  iv.  2.  In  Isa.  iv.  5  we  have 
three  manifesting  symbols  of  God  combined 
— light.,  radiant  splendo^ir,  hurdling  fire.  Still 
more  frequently  the  accompaniment  of  His 
self-manifestation :  e.g.  "  After  the  earth- 
quake a  fire,"  1  Kings  xix.  24 ;  "  fire  goeth 
before  Him,"  Ps.  xcvii.  8.  Loosely  connected 
with  all  this  are  the  fiery  Chariot  and  Horses 
sent  for  Elijah,  2  Kings  ii.  11 ;  fiery 
Chariots  round  about  Elisha,  2  Kings  vi.  17. 
This  last  and  the  Pillar  over  Israel,  or  the 
Shekinah  in  its  midst,  are  gathered  up  in 
Zech,  ii.  5. 

3.  Hence  when  He  accepted,  "  took," 
"  ate,"  appropriated,  a  sacrifice,  it  was 
by  a  fiery  manifestation.  E.g.  at  the 
Ordination  of  Aaron  and  the  Inauguration 
of  the  priestly  system  and  ritual,  Lev.  ix.  24, 
So  at  the  Dedication  of  Solomon's  Temple, 
2  Chron.  vii.  1-3,  And  in  less  important 
instances :  Carmel,  1  Kings  xviii. ;  on 
Araunah's  threshing  floor,  1  Chron.  xxi.  26 ; 
Gideon's  sacrifice,  Judg.  vi.  21.  The  Burnt 
Offering,  as  distinguished  from  the  Sin  and 
Peace  Offerings,  and  as  symbol  of  an 
entire  surrender  on  man's  part  and  an  enti/re 
appropriation  on  God's  part,  was  (as  its 
name  says)  burnt  with  fire.  And  this  links 
on  the  foregoing  to  the  twofold  employment 
of  the  symbol  as  exhibiting  the  active 
relation  of  a.  Holy  God  to  sinful  man. 

4.  All  tha.,  could,  so  to  say,  be  volatilised 
went  up  purified  and  in  perfect  acceptance  ; 
all  that  was  gross  and  earthly  was  left  behind, 
to  be  cast  out.  Hence,  "  Baptized  with  .  .  . 
fire,"  Matt.  iii.  11.  Mai,  iii.  2  brings  out  the 
action  of  the  refiner's  fire  upon  metals.  So 
Isa,  iv.  4,  "  Purged  Jerusalem  by  the  Spirit 
of  Judgment  and  the  Spirit  of  Burning " ; 
"  in  that  day,"  primarily  the  return  of  a 
purified  remnant  from  Babylon,  then  the 
setting  up  of  a  Christian  Zion,  perhaps,  by- 
and-by,  a  restored  and  purified  Israel  once 
more.  Isa,  xxx.  23,  and  more  remotely  still 
Isa,  xxix,  6,  perhaps  may  better  come  in 
later  on.  The  same  Holiness  which  is 
purifying  to  the  man  who  desires  to  be 
purified,  burns  as  a  consuming  fire  against 
sin  and  the  sinner  who  will  not  be  parted 
from  his  sin.  Hence  fire  frequently  sets 
forth  the  holy,  active  antagonism  to  evil  and 

99 


CHAP.  III.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


evil  men,  in  defence  of  His  people.  Isa. 
XXX.  27,  "His  tongue  a  devouring  fire;  lips 
full  of  indignation."  "Fury  like  a  fire," 
Jer.  iv.  4  (against  unfaithful  Judah  and 
Jerusalem),  xxi.  2.  So  it  proved,  Lam.  iii.  3. 
So  against  the  heathen  and  Idumjea,  Ezek. 
xxxvi.  5;  against  Gog,  xxxviii.  18,  19. 
[Ps.  Ixxxiii.  14,  cxl.  10;  Ezek.  xxiv.  9; 
Amos  V.  6.]  God  and  His  people  are  so 
identified  that  tbey  hecome  a  Jire  too, 
Obad.  18;  Zech.  xii.  6.  So  in  Isa.  xxx.  27-33 
we  have  it  again.  Fire  purging  the  faithful 
from  the  unfaithful,  sifting  the  nations, 
then  burning  up  the  pile  of  Tophet.  [But 
"the  King"  may  (as  Talmud)  be  the  Eternal 
King,  and  Tophet  the  burning-place  outside 
the  purified,  ideal  Jerusalem,  where  all  the 
refuse  is  to  be  cast  (Matt.  xiii.  50).]  Cer- 
tainly the  twofold  action  is  seen  in  Isa, 
xxxi.  9,  "Fire  in  Zion;  furnace  in  Jerusalem"; 
xxxiii,  14.  As  the  Assyrian  invasion  ap- 
proached, and  the  denunciations  of  holy 
wrath  against  sinners  in  and  enemies  of 
Zion,  "  sinners  in  Zion  are  afraid."  "  Who 
can  dwell  with  devouring  fire  ? "  cry 
they,  "...  with  everlasting  burnings  ? " 
i.e.  with  a  God  whose  holy  antagonism  to 
sin  never  relaxes,  never  spares,  never  ends. 
Ver.  15  is  the  answer.  But  the  principle 
is  here  which  has  occasioned  and  justified  a 
very  frequent  use  made  of  this  text.  God's 
fierce,  fiery  antagonism  to  sin  cannot  cease 
unless  sin  cease — must  last  everlastingly  if 
sinners  live  on  everlastingly  sinners  still. 
Same  connection  appears  in  Nah.  i.  6.  Indeed, 
the  whole  cycle  of  events  connected  with 
the  Assyrian  invasion  seems  the  foundation 
of  much  Bible  language  concerning  the 
punishment  of  wicked.  Not  only  such  as 
Ps.  xlvi.  9  (usually  [not  in  Speaker]  connected 
with  these  events),  but  Isa.  ix.  5,  bring  up  the 
fires  with  which  the  dead  bodies  and  the  wreck 
of  the  host  were  cleared  away  (ix.  5  =  no 
fighting,  no  blood,  but  simply  burning  of  the 
litter  and  refuse  and  the  dead),  with,  by 
the  usual  analogy,  a  future  fulfilment.  Isa. 
Ixvi.  24  (foundation  of  Mark  ix.  44-46 
[cf.  Stier,  Words  of  L.  J.,  i.  156]  ;  rather  the 
figure  of  a  holy  Jerusalem  with  its  Gehenna, 
its  burning-place  for  all  the  refuse  of  the 
city  [Matt.  xiii.  50]) ;  here  also  the  fires  on 
the  battle-field  after  Sennacherib's  defeat  are 
evidently  in  the  mind  of  the  writer.  The 
battle-field  is  one  vast  Gehinnom  outside  the 
city  walls. 

5.  Many  actual  examples  of  God's  ven- 
geance in  which  fire  is  the  agent  of  punish- 
ment. N.B.  these  are  all  examples  of 
sins  very  directly  against  His  holiness  and 
unique  position  and  claims.  Nadab  and 
Abihu,  Lev.  x.  2;  Taberah,  Num.  xi.  2; 
Achan,  Josh.  vii.  25 ;  Korah,  Num.  xvi. 
35  ;  Elijah  and  the  captains,  2  Kings  i.  10 
(unless,  indeed,  this  be,  first  and  chiefly, 
God's  manifestation  of  Himself,  appealing 
both  to   Elijah  and  to  the  witnesses  and 

100 


hearers  of  the  event).  Above  all  Sodom, 
Gen.  xix.  24 ;  referred  to  in  Luke  xvii.  29  ; 
and  at  least  shaping  tlie  language  of 
Ps.  xi.  6,  Ezek.  xxxviii.  22,  Rev.  xxi.  18. 
[Imagery  of  Mai.  iv.  1-2  is  anticipated  by 
Gen.  xix.  24,  23.] 

6.  So,  coming  to  the  Nerc  Testament,  we 
find  three  great  cycles  of  type  :  {a)  Sodom, 
(^)  Gehinnom,  (c)  Assyrian  invasion. 

New  Testament. 

1.  General. — God's  vengeance  against  sin 
is  fiery,  Matt.  iii.  10  (?  primarily  the  Jewish 
nation),  "  Tree  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the 
fire  " ;  Heb.  vi.  8,  the  doom  of  the  persistently 
barren  ground.  Also  of  individuals,  Matt, 
vii.  19,  Luke  iii.  9 ;  Heb.  x.  27,  "  Judgment 
and  fiery  indignation ;  2  Thess.  i,  8,  "  In 
flaming  fire  taking  vengeance." 

2.  God's  holiness  is  testing. — 1  Cor.  iii.  13 
[though  tl  ere  is  here  very  little  of  all  this 
typology  ;  hardly  more  than  the  commonly 
observed  action  of  fire]  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  7  (Luke 
xii.  49-52  is  connected). 

3.  Sodom. — Jude  7,  "  Suffering  the 
vengeance  of  eternal  fire."  Eev.  xix.  20 
XX.  10,  "  Lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,  where 
the  Beast  and  the  False  Prophet  are " 
[Rev.  xviii.  9,  Babylon ;  cf.  Abraham  be- 
holding the  ascending  smoke  of  Sodom]  ; 
the  Devil;  Gog  and  Magog  deceived  by  him 
(obvious  ref.  to  Ezek.  xxxviii.  22) ;  who- 
soever "  not  found  written  in  the  book  of 
life."  Rev.  xiv.  10,  worshippers  of  the  beast 
and  his  image,  who  have  received  his  mark. 

4.  Gehenna. — Matt,  xviii.  9,  "  Worm 
dieth  not,"  etc. ;  Mark  ix.  44-46,  referring  to 
Isa.  Ixvi,  "  Furnace  of  fire,"  Matt.  xiii.  42, 
50,  where  the  latter  verse,  having  nothing 
in  the  parable  connected  with  it  to  suggest 
it — the  fish  are  cast  into  the  water — shows 
that  the  pLrase  had  become,  or  was  now 
first  made  by  Christ,  a  customary  equivalent 
for  the  doom  of  the  wicked. 

5.  The  hattle- field. — Linked  with  Mark  ix., 
as  above,  but  originating  the  phrase  "  ever- 
lasting burnings."  In  Matt.  xxv.  41 ;  figure 
(almost  ?)  lost.  So  completely  the  revelation 
of  the  future  that  we  must  say  :  "  Whatever 
be  the  nature  of  the  punishment  of  a  lost, 
embodied  spirit,  if  we  might  ask  him  what 
he  suffered,  he  would  say,  '  Fire,'  as  the  only 
earthly  analogy  available.'' 

6.  Mark  ix.  47.  A  difficult  verse.  Every 
man  shall — must — come  into  contact  with 
the  holiness  of  God.  Will  a  man  let  it 
(Him)  burn  away  all  impurity,  and  himself 
thus  become  a  sacrifice  salted  with  grace, 
and  so  accepted  ?  Or,  refusing  this,  will  he 
simply  meet  and  feel  the  fire  which  never 
burns  itself  out  ? 

Vers.  16, 17.  There  were  Hebrew  converts  in 
Corinth,  and  such  would  easily  catch  St.  Paul's 
allusion  ...  to  the  national  Temple.  This 
national  Temple  in  the  Apostle's  mind  clearly 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  IV. 


enlarges  and  transfigures  itself  into  a  Temple  in  brief,  a  unity  of  many  contained  unities, 

spiritual.    This  living  Temple  of  the  Catholic  Each     several    Church,    therefore,     of    the 

Church  is  one  Temple ;  it  is  one,  yet  elastic  ;  Catholic  Church  is  the  Catholic  Church  in 

it  grows  and  expands,  associating  to  itself  miniature,  so  that  of  the  whole  all  the  several 

and  assimilating,  so  to  speak,  many  lateral  parts  are  themselves  wholes;  each  branch  of 

chapels.    It  is,  in  fact,  an  organic  unity  of  the  Tree  is  a  tree  planted  in  Christ. — Eva7is, 

several  organs,  each  it  itself  a  unity  ;  it  is,  in  "  Speaker, ^^ 


CHAPTER  IV. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  So. — Choose  between  {a)  a  forward  reference  to  "  as  "  (e.g.  with  Stanley),  and  (J) 
a  backward  reference  (with,  e.g.,  Evans,  in  Speaker,  and  Beet)  to  iii.  21,  22 ;  meaning  :  "  Let 
a  man  account  of  us  as  Christ's  servants,  having  moreover  the  greater  thought  also  present 
in  his  thinking,  and  governing  his  estimate  of  us,  that  we  are  thus  the  house  stewards  in 
Christ's  household  for  the  very  purpose  of  dispensing  to  him  and  his  brethren  these  '  all 
things^  which  belong  to  him,  because  he  belongs  to  Christ."  Servants.— Good  note  in 
Trench,  Syn.,  §  ix.,  on  the  four  New  Testament  words  for  "  servant."  Bee  dtdKovos  and 
8ov\os  together  in  Matt.  xx.  26-28.  [Matt.  xxii.  2-14,  where  Trench  points  out  that  the 
"servants"  who  bring  in  the  guests  are  7ne7i,  and  can  be  dovXoc,  but  the  executioners  of  the 
sentence  of  the  Host  are  aTigels,  who  are  only  8idKovoi.]  See  SovXos  and  virrjp^T'ns  (the  word 
here)  together  in  John  xviii.  18.  The  doOXos  [slave,  bondservant]  is  hound  to  a  person ;  the 
depdircov  does  some  service  to  a  person,  whether  as  his  slave  or  a  freeman,  whether  for  the 
once,  or  frequently  and  customarily  ;  the  diaKovos  is  a  man  charged  with  a  special  task,  and 
to  the  task,  rather  than  to  the  person  who  enjoins  it,  the  word  points  ;  the  vTryjpeT-qs  is,  so 
to  speak,  an  attendant  charged  with  the  duty  d  an  office.  Our  word  may  be  studied  in 
Acts  xiii.  5 ;  Matt.  v.  25  ;  Luke  iv.  20  ;  John  vii.  32,  xviii.  18  ;  Acts  v.  22.  Must  not  overpress 
the  derivational  sense — the  "  under-rower  in  a  galley'"  ;  the  ship  being  the  Church,  Christ 
sitting  at  the  helm,  the  passengers  being  the  members  of  the  Church.  Stewards.— Might  be 
slaves,  though  in  positions  of  important  trust.  Joseph,  e.g.  was  so.  Here  the  thought  is 
only  that  their  business  is  to  administer  the  household  of  their  Master,  and  particularly  to 
deal  out  the  stores  of  soul-feeding  "  mysteries"  to  their  fellow- servants  of  other  offices  and 
orders  (Tit.  i.  7 ;  well  expounded  in  1  Pet.  iv.  1,  and  1  Cor.  ii,  1 ;  Eph.  iii.  2).  For 
*' mysteries,"  see  ii.  1  ;  certainly  not  the  sacramenta,  which  word  in  ecclesiastical  Latin, 
through  the  Vulgate,  has  become  the  equivalent  of  "  mysteries.'' 

Ver.  2. — Notice  "  here,"  by  a  change  of  reading.  Stanley  (alone)  joins  the  word  with  the 
preceding  sentence.    A  maxim  true  of  all  stewardships  in  ordinary  human  affairs. 

Ver.  3.  Judge. — Examine,  as  if  dealing  with  a  man  on  his  defence  in  a  court  of  justice. 
So  ix.  3.  Judgment. — Lit.  "  day  "  ;  parallel  to  the  "  day  "  of  God's  judgment  in  iii.  13. 
(See  Separate  Homily  on  that  passage  for  general  treatment  of  the  subject.) 

Ver.  4.  Know  nothing  by  myself. — Not  at  all  to  be  taken  as  :  "I  have  no  knowledge  of 
Divine  things  but  such  as  is  a  gift  of  the  grace  of  God."  Simply  a  piece  of  old-fashioned 
English,  still  lingering  in  the  provincialisms  of  some  counties.  A  Lincolnshire  peasant,  eg., 
will  say,  "  What  do  you  think  by  it  ? "  instead  of  "  think  of  it,"  or  "  think  about  it."  Paul 
only  means,  of  course,  "  I  am  not  conscious  to  myself  of  anything."  He  does  not  say  "  evil  " ; 
that  is  so  generally,  however,  the  issue  of  any  examination  and  judgment  of  oneself  that 
almost  of  necessity  it  is  suggested  by  his  language.  Cf.  1  John  iii.  20.  The  Lord. — Paul's 
largely  predominant  usage  makes  this  almost  certainly  "  Christ."  This  is  confirmed  by 
ver.  5.  It  is  always  Christ  who  "  comes,"  and  who  will  act  as  Judge.  Yet  ultimately,  and 
supremely,  though  the  judgment  and  sentence  is  Christ's,  the  reward  is  "  God's  praise." 
Note  *^  his  praise"  (giving  the  force  of  the  article)  in  R.V. 

Ver.  6. — From  iii.  5  he  has  discussed  what  applied  to  all  the  factions  and  their  leaders,  and 
even  more  to  the  othert  than  to  the  so-called  Pauline  and  Apollonian  factions,  in  connection 
with  himself  and  Apollos  alone.  "  Eor  their  sakes "  he  has  done  so,  to  avoid  arousing 
personal  feeling  or  giving  avoidable  pain,  content  if,  "  in  himself  and  Apollos  "  as  sample 
cases,  the  question  might  be  more  calmly  discussed  and  its  conclusion  more  dispassionately 
arrived  at.  And  the  one  lesson  emerging  from  the  discussion  is.  Not  to  think  of  thernselves, 
or  of  teachers  they  were  tempted  to  idolise,  without  taking  account  of  what  is  written  in  such 
Scriptures  as,  e.g.,  he  had  quoted  in  i.  19,  31,  iii.  19  ;  and  therefore  not  to  be,  in  any  overween- 

101 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    COIUNTIIIAJStS. 


ing  conceit  of  themselves  or  their  own  judgment,  such  strong  partisans  for  one  teacher  as 
against  another  teacher.     Puffed  up. — Vers.  18,  19,  v.  2  ;  yiii.  1,  xiii.  4. 

Ver.  7. — Transition  to  the  seZ/'-esteem  which  really  underlay  their  party  zeal  for  this  or 
that  leader.     Who  1 — Certainly  not  yourself,  nor  the  man  to  whom  you  attach  yourself. 

Ver.  8. — Note  the  tenses  in  R.V.  Sharply — not  bitterly,  but  sadly — ironical.  As  if  the 
Master's  ^'judgment "  (ver.  4)  were  over,  the  rewards  distributed,  and  they  were  already  on 
their  thrones  (Luke  xxii.  29,  30 ;  Rev.  iii.  21,  i.  6,  v.  10).  Apart  from  Paul  and  ApoUos ! 
And  yet  to  them,  if  to  anybody,  the  Corinthian  Church  owed  its  very  existence  (iii.  6). 
"  Would  that  the  day  for  your  thrones  had  really  come  !  We  should  then  be  on  our  thrones 
too,  and  all  this  weary  life  of  labour,  suffering,  obloquy,  would  be  done  with  1  But  it  is  not 
done  with  yet !  " 

Ver.  9. — The  last  batch  of  criminals  doomed  (say)  to  the  lions,  kept  back  as  the  climax  of 
the  show  in  the  amphitheatre,  where  the  Corinthians  sit  in  comfort  and  royal  state  as 
spectators.  As  to  the  angel  spectators,  see  Eph.  iii,  10.  The  whole  story  of  God's  revelation 
in  Christ  had  been  through  the  ages  unfolding  itself  before  the  eagerly  interested  gaze  of 
the  watching,  studying  "  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places,"  Paul's  career  was 
a  small  incident  in  the  history  which  was  being  wrought  out  under  their  eyes ;  and  they 
studied  him  and  his  fortunes,  like  everything  else,  with  closest  attention.  [Like  his 
Master,  he  was  "  seen  of  angels."  Cf.  "  set  forth,"  Rom.  iii.  25,  as  if  uplifted  and  exhibited 
upon  the  cross,  "  appointed  to  death,'''  to  the  gaze  of  heaven,  and  earth,  and  (perhaps)  hell.] 
Apostles. — Whole  reference  is  so  vague,  whilst  mainly  starting  from  himself  and  his  career, 
that  this  does  not  necessarily  include  Apollos,  or  make  him  "  an  apostle."  Paul  is 
"  numbering  himself  with  the  eleven  apostles."     (See  also  ix,  1.) 

Ver.  10. — Note  the  ascending  climax.  All  ironical,  except  that  perhaps  "  Ye  are  wise 
in  Christ "  may  not  only  be  "  You  think  you  are,"  but  also  "  You  really  are ;  and  do  not 
forget  that  you  owe  that  indirectly  to  us  who  by  the  derided  '  message  of  the  Cross ' — 
'such  folly V—\Qdi  you  to  Christ."  (The  "folly,"  i.  18,  21,  23;  ii.  1-5.  Their  very  real 
"  wisdom,"  i,  5.) 

Ver.  11.  This  present  hour. — Paul  in  Ephesus  was  still  sustaining  himself  by  manual 
labour  (Acts  xx.  33,  34),  which  often  left  him  (as  it  did  in  Corinth,  2  Cor.  xi,  9)  in  real 
want.  We. — True  of  apostles  in  general.  Yet  these,  and  Paul  pre-eminently,  were,  of  all 
men  then  living,  of  greatest  worth  to  and  importance  for  the  world's  interests  and  life. 
They  were  the  little  lump  of  leaven  with  which  God  was  revolutionising  the  world !  What 
a  picture  of  Apostolic  life  is  suggested  !  Naked. — Insufficiently  clad  (cf.  2  Tim.  iv.  13). 
Buffeted. — His  Master  was,  literally  (Matt.  xxvi.  67) ;  perhaps  he  himself  may  have  been 
(2  Cor.  xi.  7-12  [1  Pet.  ii,  20;  2  Cor,  xii.  7]).  No  .  .  .  dwelling-place.— Partakers  with 
Christ  again  (Matt,  viii.  20),  and  with  the  Old  Testament  saints  (Heb.  xi.  37).  "  A  peculiar 
grief  in  the  ancient  world  "  (Stanley). 

Ver.  12. — "  We  use  only  the  Christian  weapons  of  resistance  "  (Matt.  v.  44 ;  Luke  xxvii.). 
Paul's  is  "  the  earliest  instance  of  such  language  being  used  "  (Stanley), 

Ver,  13.  Entreat. — Usually  men  who  have  been  in  the  wrong  do  this,  and  who  deprecate 
punishment.  Or  perhaps,  more  generally,  *'  We  give  good  words  back  in  exchange  for 
calumny."  Offscouring. — E.g.  Acts  xxii.  22.  [So  they  cried  of  his  Lord,  "  Away  with  Him  1 "] 
Not  only  did  Israel  cast  him  out,  but  the  very  Corinthians  seemed  to  have  less  than  no 
esteem  for  him ;  and  the  world  outside,  of  course,  counted  him  as  vile  and  offensive. 
There  seems  to  be  some  evidence  that  at  Athens  human  sacrifices  were  cast  into  the  sea  as 
offerings  to  Neptune,  with  the  words,  "  Be  thou  our  '  offscouring ' "  [the  same  word  as  the 
second  here]  ;  as  procuring  "  salvation  "  or  "  redemption"  in  times  of  famine  or  plague. 

Ver.  14. — Irony  dropped.  Even  in  ver.  6  it  was  "  Brothers  !  "  Now,  "  Beloved  children  ! " 
Yet  surely  he  did  desire  to  make  them  ashamed  of  their  bearing  towards  and  estimate  of 
himself  1  Yes.  But  not  vindictively,  nor  so  as  to  humiliate  them  before  others.  It  was 
only  such  fatherly  use  of  "  shame,''  as  if  in  private  between  him  and  his  erring  children,  as 
is  really  a  most  effectual  "  admonition  "  and  educating  force. 

Ver.  15,  Instructors, — More  accurately  "  tutors  " ;  an  illustration  of  his  in  Gal.  iii.  24,  25> 
with  a  different  application.  The  slaves  to  whom  the  boy  was  intrusted  during  his  school- 
life  and  minority,  to  look  after  him  generally,  [As  the  Master  says,  "  I  am  the  Shepherd  to 
whom  the  sheep  belong  ;  others  are  but  *  hirelings,' "  However  faithful  servants  they  may  be, 
the  sheep  are  "  not  their  own.''^  (Stanley  thinks  of  the  (often)  *'  harsh  and  despotic  sway  "  of 
these  pedagogues,  and  compares  2  Cor.  xi.  20.)  I  begat  you. — Not  claiming  any  larger  share 
in  the  origin  of  their  spiritual  life  than  in  Gal.  iv.  19 ;  Philem.  10 ;  Phil.  ii.  22 ;  1  Tim. 
i.  2,  18.  All  he  had  done  was  "  in  Christ  Jesus " ;  no  independent  work  or  glory.  "  An 
approach  to  the  doctrine  of  the  new  birth.  .  .  .  Paul's  only  direct  reference  to  this 
doctrine  is  Tit.  iii.  5  "  (Beet).     [  Jas.  i.  18  approaches  Paul's  "  through  the  Gospel "  here.] 

Ver,  16.  Followers. — "  Imitators,"  as  in  Phil.  iii.  17 ;  1  Thess.  i.  6,  which  again  joins  on 
to  Eph.  V.  1.  Says  Pressense  :  "  Paul  has  attained  to  svch  a  stripping  off  of  self  that  he  can 
without  egotism  propose  himself  as  a  model." 

102 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


Ver.  17. — To  his  "  beloved  children  "  he  sends  his  "  beloved  child.''  [As  the  Great  House- 
holder sent  His  Son  to  the  unfaithful,  rebellious  husbandmen,  Matt.  xxi.  35.]  As  in 
xvi.  10,  there  is  the  always  recurrent  strain  of  appeal  for  a  kindly  reception  of  Timothy. 
For  this  cause.— Zt-.  in  order  that  you  may  imitate  me.  Timothy  will  remind  you  of  **my 
ways  in  Christ." 

Vers.  18,  19. —"Timothy  instead  of  himself  I  He  dares  not  come  himself  I  Or,  at  best, 
he  does  not  know  his  own  mind,  or  stick  to  his  purpose  long  together  !  "  Cf .  2  Cor.  i.  15-17. 
Thus  would  revive  suspicions  of  vacillation  or  duplicity  already  awakened.  Note  the  tense, 
which  is  exactly,  "  Some  got  puffed  up"  previously.  The  Lord.— Most  probably  Christ,  as 
in  vers.  4,  5. 

Ver.  20.  Word  .  .  .  power. — Be  ye  prepared  to  match  with  facta  non  verba  my  own 
coming  with  facta  non  verba  (cf.  i.  18).  [How  irresistible  Stephen  was  (Acts  vi.  10). 
Cf.  Acts  viii.  6,  x.  44,  xvii.  11,  12,  xix.  20,  xiv.  1.  If  the  preacher  stands  firing,  and 
never  hits  anything  or  anybody,  he  must  aim  badly,  or  must  have  got  the  wrong  sort  of 
ammunition.    The  Truth,  the  Kingdom,  are  always  "  in  power  "'\ 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS— Verses  1—5. 

Theme :  Judgment. 
I.  The  minister's  own  judgment  of  himself. 

II.  Other  men's  judgment  of  him. 
III.  The  master's  judgment. 

I.  The  preceding  sentences  of  the  letter  (chap.  iii.  i8-23)  have  been  concerned 
with   the   Corinthian   habit   of  over-valuing   themselves,  and   with  the  party- 
idolatry    of   their  (eponymic)   leaders.       As  for    Paul    he    wishes    neither    to 
be  over-estimated  nor  to  be  under-estimated.     [There  is  no  virtue  in  under- 
valuation of  oneself;  such  over-depreciation  is  not  infrequently  not  humility 
at  all,  but  pride — a  subtle  pride  which  is  hungry  to  be  told  that  it  is  too 
humble  and  that   the   self-asserted  value  is   too   low.      For   the   sake   of   the 
Master's  work,  a  man  may  well  desire  to  know  what  he  is  worth,  and  what  he 
is  fit  for,  and  to  what  he  is  adequate.]     Paul  would  be  judged  "  according  to 
truth"  (Rom.  ii.  2).     To  wl  at  court  shall  he  go  for  Justice  and  for  Truth? 
To  the  court  of  Conscience,  perpetually  "  sitting  "  within  his  own  spirit  ?     This 
has  its  value,  and  its  supporting  power  to  him,  as  he  avows  (2  Cor.  i.  17,  where 
see).     A  man  walking  in  the  favour  of  God,  his  spirit  continually  illumined 
with  the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  may  know  himself.     He  will  guard  against 
self-deception.     The  grace  which  is  in  him  will  keep  him  awake  to  the  danger  of 
such  self-deception.     And  whilst  there  will  always  be  ministers  [and  workers  of 
every  order]  whose  danger  will  be  an  undue,  morbid  self-depreciation  and  self-con- 
demnation j  just  as  there  will  also  always  be  those  whose  danger  lies  quite  at  the 
opposite  pole ;  in  many  more  the  healthy  conscience  will  give  them  the  sustaining 
force  of  the  knowledge  that  their  aim  is  as  right  as  they  know  how  to  keep  it, 
and  their  discharge  of  duty  faithful,  at  any  rate  up  to  the  measure  of  their 
abihty  and  knowledge.     Woe  to  the  man  who  goes  about  his  work  without  the 
approval  of  even  his  own  conscience  !     Who  is  unfaithful,  and  knows  that  he  is  ! 
Man's  judgment  may  not  condemn  him.     He  may  hit  exactly  the  taste,  he  may 
meet  exactly  the  desire,  of  those  to  whom  he  ministers ;  he  may  give   them 
exactly  the  only  teaching  they  will  welcome,  and  do  neither  less  nor  more  in  his 
ruling   of   the   flock   than  is   agreeable  to  the  sheep ;    he  may  be  personally 
popular,  therefore ;  he  may  have  the  applause  of  the  public  as  a  "  successful 
man,"  the  pastor  of  "  a  successful  Church."    Yet,  if  all  the  while  the  Spirit  of  God 
will  not  suffer  him  to  approve  himself,  but  will  keep  his  sense  of  right  so  far  alive 
that  not  only  can  he  not  forget  the  meaning  of  the  ministry  as  a  "  stewardship," 
or  the  high  ideal  of  faithfulness  to  God  with  which  he  began  his  work,  but  that 
a  voice  and  verdict  within  him  will  ever  persistently  condemn,  he  is  of  all  men 

103 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTABY:    I   CORIATHIANS. 


most  miserable.     Wretched  he  who  cannot  even  stand  the  judgment  of  himself 
upon  himself. 

II.  It  were  folly  to  pretend  to  be  literally  indifferent  to  the  judgment  of 
.others.  Sometimes,  when  a  conscience  has  been  lulled,  or  drugged  to  sleep,  or 
silenced  by  long  neglect ;  when  a  man  without  the  guard,  or  the  goad,  within 
him  has  sunk,  not  only  far  beneath  the  Master's  standard  of  requirement  as  to 
faithfulness  in  His  stewards,  but  even  beneath  what  was  once  his  own  ;  then  the 
rebuke  and  condemnation  of  outsiders  may  do  the  man  a  service.  It  may  make 
for  him  an  objective  conscience,  and  compel  him  to  hear  again  from  others  what 
he  used  to  hear  from  himself.  He  has  broken  or  made  dull  the  mirror  within 
him  ;  then  the  condemnation  of  "  man^s  judgment "  may  confront  him  wtih  his 
own  image  in  the  mirror  of  Truth  in  their  hand.  It  would  be  both  foolish  and 
false  to  pretend  to  be  indifferent  to  the  good  opinion  of  others.  If  the  faithful- 
ness of  the  steward  chance  to  secure  the  approval  and  esteem  of  other  men,  he 
will  take  it  as  a  grace  and  a  gift  from  his  Lord,  to  be  used,  in  its  turn,  like  any 
and  every  other  gift,  for  the  advantage  of  his  Lord's  work.  The  goodwill  and 
esteem  of  his  people  are  a  help  to  the  minister  towards  doing  the  people  good. 
Wise  and  loving  fidelity  may  accomplish  something — it  must — even  where  its 
sharp  rebuke  or  unwelcome  dealing  puts  a  sti'ain  upon  the  pleasant  relation- 
ships between  man  and  man ;  it  will  not  utterly  fail  to  do  good,  even  when 
it  does  its  work  in  the  face  of  indiffei-ence  or  dislike.  But  where  goodwill  and 
afiection,  and  a  true  estimate  of  the  meaning  of  the  minister's  work  and  ofiice, 
prepare  for,  and  co-operate  with,  his  fidelity,  there  it  will  "  have  free  course." 
The  design  of  the  whole  Divine  ordinance  of  '^  stevjaQ'dships  "  for  the  dispensing 
of  "  the  ttiysteries  of  God "  will  be  then  most  perfectly  fulfilled.  However 
indifierent  Paul  may  have  been  to  the  judgment  of  men,  his  sympathetic, 
affectionate  nature  prized  highly  the  love  of  those  for  whom  he  "  spent  himself  " 
even  to  the  '^  spending  "  of  himself  "  out "  (2  Cor.  xii.  15). 

III.  Yet  none  of  these  "  courts "  is  that  of  Final  Appeal.  No  absolute  and 
unchallengeable  acquittal  [or  condemnation]  can  be  given  even  from  the  bench 
where  Judge  Conscience  sits,  and  still  less  from  that  other  tribunal  where  "  Man  " 
holds  the  "  day  "  of  his  assize.  Says  Paul :  "  I  desire  greatly  the  approval  of  my 
own  conscience  ;  I  believe  I  have  it ;  as  to  my  stewardship  and  my  fidelity  as  a 
steward,  I  cannot  charge  myself  with  any  wrong.  I  do  not  forget  a  legitimate 
regard  for  the  '  manifestation  of  myself  in  your  consciences '  (2  Cor.  v.  11).  As 
a  matter  of  fact,  I  know  that  many  of  you  do  not  give  me  a  very  approving 
verdict.  Yet  I  dare  not  trim  my  sails  to  catch  the  breeze  of  your  applause.  I 
hold  it,  indeed,  a  matter  of  the  smallest  moment  that  you  should  approve  or 
condemn,  in  comparison  of  the  one  greater,  final,  absolutely  true  and  just  verdict 
of  the  Lord."  Man  is  so  often  to  himself  a  problem  utterly  perplexing,  that  he 
knows  not  how  to  hold  a  just  balance  in  his  estimate  of  himself ;  he  fears  to 
approve  too  easily,  he  fears  to  acquit  too  readily,  whilst,  rightly  enough,  he  does 
not  desire  to  harass  himself  by  condemning  without  reason.  A  Christian  man 
is  so  conscious  of  the  blinding  effect  of  a  biassed  heart  upon  the  clear  vision  of  his 
judgment,  that  even  if  in  the  court  within  he  be  held  clear,  he  will  still  report 
the  verdict  to  the  Higher  Judge  for  His  endorsement  or  revision.  A  faithful, 
honest  worker  will  be  so  sensitive  to  the  ensnaring  power  of  too  nice  a 
consideration  of  man's  favour  or  man's  frown ;  he  will  be  so  conscious  of  the 
deflecting  power  of  an  anxiety  what  man  will  think  or  say  or  do,  upon  the 
compass-needle  of  his  conscience  ;  that  he  will  never  trust  the  steering  of  his 
course  to  anything  lower  than  the  judgment  of  his  Lord.  Up  above  earthly 
influences  and  bias,  stable  amidst  all  the  revolutions  and  vagaries  of  man's 
opinions  and  judgments,  there  it  shows,  the  Divine  Pole  Star  of  his  direction. 
He  will  not  disregard,  as  we  have  seen,  the  commendation  of  his  fellows,  but  he 

104 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  iv. 


will  not  *'  lay  himself  out "  to  win  it.  If  they  give  him  condemnation,  then  he 
"will  appeal  unto"  the  Greater  than  Caesar.  Against  man's  judgment,  and 
Vom  man's  "  day  " ;  whatever  also  be  the  judgment  of  his  conscience  in  its  "  day  " 
t)f  inquiry  and  sentence ;  the  matter  is  carried  up  to  the  Great  Judge  and 
forward  to  His  "  day "  and  its  "  Great  Assize."  For  that,  amongst  other 
reasons,  do  Christ's  people  "  love  His  appearing  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  1,  8).  It  was  said 
of  Dr.  Pusey  that  the  deepest  note  of  thankfulness  in  all  his  Te  Deum  was 
this,  "  We  believe  that  Thou  shalt  come  to  be  our  Judge.  .  .  .  We  praise  Thee, 
O  Christ ! "  In  that  day  all  the  clamour  and  conflict  of  the  varying  and  uncertain 
verdicts  of  man  will  be  hushed  into  silence,  whilst  He  speaks.  Even  now  it  is 
no  small  comfort  to  a  true-hearted  "  steward  "  to  remember  that  He  knows  all 
about  him  and  his  work.  All  that  under-life  of  motive  and  aim,  which  works 
its  way  to  the  surface  and  becomes  obnoxious  to  man's  judgment,  only  after 
struggling,  as  it  were,  through  an  overlying  medium  of  imperfect  knowledge 
and  of  many  another  limiting  disability,  is  always,  and  altogether,  in  His  clear 
view.  It  may  be  that  He  knows  the  man  even  better  that  the  man  knows 
himself ;  that  He  may  judge  him  now  and  again  more  favourably  than  he  judges 
himself.  In  any  case.  He  will  always  be  profoundly  reasonable  in  what  He 
expects  from  the  *'  steward  of  the  mysteries  "  ;  no  prejudice,  or  favour,  with  Him  ; 
profoundly  reasonable,  and  utterly  and  simply  just.  "  Let  me " — for  the 
sentence  as  well  as  for  its  execution — "  fall  into  the  hands  of,"  not  "  man,"  but 
"  Christ."  Moreover,  the  full  and  final  verdict  can  only  be  pronounced  when 
the  coming  of  the  "  Day  of  the  Lord  "  shall  have  completed  the  facts  and  evidence 
on  which  it  most  justly  rest.  So,  then,  Paul  will  pronounce  no  final  verdict  upon 
his  own  fidelity  in  the  discharge  of  his  office.  "  Let  it  stand  over  until  He 
comes."  The  passing,  temporary,  human  judgment  may  well  go  for  little  with 
him  in  the  expectation  of  that  other  judgment.  Indeed,  he  suggests  not  obscurely 
that  his  opponents  and  detractors  at  Corinth  may  have  moie  reason  for 
apprehension  in  view  of  it  than  he  has.  When  '^  hidden  things  of  darkness  and 
the  counsels  of  the  hearts  are  dragged  forth,"  some  men,  some  apostles,  may 

"have  praise  of  God,"  but  some  may  have [How  nearly  without  exception 

are  all  our  judgments  of  men  and  conduct  judgments  before  the  light  time  ! 
How  often  have  even  the  lapse  of  a  few  years  or  months  and  the  addition  of  even 
a  single  new  fact  caused  an  entire  revision  of  some  unfavourable  judgment  on 
men  and  actions,  till  we  have  stood  ashamed  at  the  bar  of  our  own  conscience 
that  we  judged  so  hastily,  on  such  imperfect  data,  and  so  harshly,  and  perhaps 
gave  in  our  words  or  bearing  such  unfair  and  unchristian  effect  to  our  hasty 
prejudice  !     "  Wait  till  the  Lord  comes  !  '     "  Grudge  not  one  against  another, 
brethren,  lest  ye  be  condemned  :  behold,  the  Judge  standeth  at  the  door  "  (Jas. 
V.  9).     How  often  a  little  more  knowledge  has  shown  us  that  the  very  confident 
verdicts  of  our  "  righteous  "  indignation  were  after  all  at  the  best  wasted  words, 
and  at  the  worst  were  so  hasty  and  uncharitable,  as  to  have  been  sins  against 
the  Spirit  of  Christ !    "  Therefore  judge  nothhig  before  the  time."^   And  how  precious 
and  glorious  a  compensation  for  all  the  unfair,  hasty,  or  even  evil-hearted  judg- 
ments of  men  will  be  His  praise  !     In  a  moment,  all  the  past  swallowed  up  and 
forgotten,  all  the  pain  gone,  all  the  temporary  disadvantages  past.     Nor  is  it 
anything   but   a   laudable   motive   that   a    man   should  make  the  winning  of 
" jyraise"  in  that  day  an  object  for  which  he  cultivates  "  fidelity"  to  his  trust. 
If  He  says,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful,"  he  surely  does  not  intend,  or  expect, 
that  we  should  be  faithful  for  bare  fidelity's  sake.     His   *'  Well  done "  is  in 
itself  an  object  to  be  worked  for.     Finally,  if  praise  is  not  for  ability  only,  or 
chiefly,  or  for  success,  but  for  faithfulness,  all  may  win  that !      [The  Pounds, 
Luke  xix.,  exhibits  graduated  reward  according  to  graduated  results  from  equal 
ability  and  endowment.       The  Talents,  Matt,  xxv.,  exhibits  equal  praise  for 

105 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


unequal  ability  and  endowment,  because  of  equal  fidelity.  Both  are  true 
principles  of  the  judgment.]  [Said  Bishop  Thirlvvall,  writing  to  a  friend,  *'  The 
law  of  God's  kingdom  is  '  He  that  is  faithful  in  a  few  things  shall  be  made  ruler 
over  many  things.'  But  how  little  it  matters  whether  there  are  many  or  few, 
so  long  as  there  is  the  faithfulness  which  makes  the  most  of  the  few,  and  can  do 
no  more  with  the  many."]  [Robertson,  Expos.  Lectures,  in  loco,  says  :  "  Learn  not 
to  judge,  for  we  do  not  know  the  heart's  secrets.  We  judge  men  by  gifts,  or 
by  a  correspondence  with  our  own  peculiarities;  but  God  judges  by  fidelity. 
Many  a  dull  sermon  is  the  result  of  humble  powers,  honestly  cultivated,  whilst 
many  a  brilliant  discourse  arises  merely  from  a  love  of  display.  Many  a  diligent 
and  active  ministry  proceeds  from  the  love  of  power.  Learn  to  be  neither 
depressed  unduly  by  blame,  nor,  on  the  other  side,  to  be  too  much  exalted  by 
praise.  Life's  experience  should  teach  us  this.  .  .  .  And  our  own  individual 
experience  should  teach  us  how  little  men  know  us  !  How  often,  when  we  have 
been  most  praised  and  loved,  have  we  been  conscious  of  another  motive  actuating 
than  that  which  the  world  has  given  us  credit  for ;  and  we  have  been  blamed, 
perhaps  disgraced,  when  if  all  the  circumstances  were  known  we  should  have 
been  covered  with  honour.  Therefore  let  us  strive  ...  to  be  tranquil ;  smile 
when  men  sneer ;  be  humble  when  they  praise,  patient  when  they  blame. 
Their  judgment  will  not  last;  '  man's  day'  is  only  for  a  time,  but  God's  is  for 
Eternity."] 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  6—13. 

Kings  ;  Real  and  False. 

1.  Where  to  look  for  the  true  kings. — "  How  it  strikes  a  stranger "  used 
to   be   the   title   of   a   pleasant   bit   of   thinly  veiled   satire   on   many   of   the 
commonest  facts  and   customs   of   our   daily  life,   familiarity  with  which   has 
dulled  in  us  the  perception  of  their  absurdity  or  their  unrighteousness.      Had 
one  of  the  "  principalities  and  powers  "  from  "  the  heavenly  places  "  been  told 
off,  in  the  days  of  our  Epistle,  to  guide  through  the  Roman  world  a  "  stranger  " 
from  some  other  planet,  and  had  been  asked  to  show  his  planetary  charge  the 
men  of  that  age  who  were  destined  to  stand  forth  in  all  future  ages  as  its 
greatest,  and  to  leave  their  work  most  deeply  on  the  centuries  "  after  Christ,"  he 
would  have  conducted  him  to  no  philosophers  or  statesmen,  but  to  a  scattered 
dozen  or  so  of  Galilean  country-people,  who  were  beginning  to  be  distinguished 
in  their  own  obscure  circle  of  friends  as  "  the  apostles'' !     "  Find  me,  let  me  see," 
says  the  visitant  from  the  distant  sphere,  "  the  greatest  man  of  the  time,  the  man 
who  will  be  seen  by-and-by  to  count  for  most  in  the  story  of  your  race,  the  man 
whose  influence  and  example  and  teaching  are  going  to  live  and  grow  and  govern 
your  world's  life  after  he  is  gone.     Where  is  the  king  of  the  world  ?  "     Certainly 
not  within  any  then  recent,   or  any  then  coming  years,   upon  the  throne  of 
the  Caesars.      The  Stoics  said  more  worthily,  "  The  wise  man  is  king "  ;  but 
could  hardly  just  then  have  found  our  inquirer  a  wise  man  of  the  first  rank.    As 
the  verdict  of  the  ages  has  pronounced,  as  the  eliminating  process  of  the  oblivion 
of  history  has  left  names  emergent  from  the  general  obscurity  and  forgetfulness 
of  the  remote  past,  our  visitor  would  have  needed  conducting  to  a  humble  lodging 
in  the  city  of  Ephesus,  to  see  a  by  no  means  striking-looking  Jew  sitting  at  work, 
with  roughened,  dirty  hands,  making  goat-hair  tent-cloth  ;  perhaps,  as  he  does  so, 
dictating  a  letter  to  a  friendly  amanuensis  who  sits  beside  him,  taking  down  from 
his  lips,  in  only  moderately  good  Greek,  thoughts  which  are  often  sadly  broken  in 
their  grammatical  expression — sentences  which,  what  with  the  pauses  to  allow  for 
the  writing  down  and  with  the  impetuousness  of  the  thinker's  heart,  not  seldom  get 
very  disjointed  in  their  logical  form.     Or  they  might  happen  to  find  him  on  the 

106 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  tv. 


Jewish  Sabbath,  a  private  person  in  some  synagogue,  taking  what  opportunity  he 
can  get  of  discussing  the  story  and  the  claims  of  one  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  to  whom  he 
seems  greatly  devoted.  And  he  has  a  strangely  unroyal  story  of  persecution  from 
his  own  friends  and  countrymen,  of  repeated  scourgings  from  Roman  lictor  and 
Jewish  synagogue  officers,  of  shipwrecks  and  hunger  and  cold,  and  want  of 
necessary  clothing  Yet  that  man's  name  is  going  to  stand  foith  as  the  foremost 
name  of  the  age,  as  the  most  influential  ruler  of  the  thoughts  and  morals  and 
activities  and  destinies  of  that  and  all  after-ages.  Our  visitor  might  well  wonder 
at  the  topsy-turveydom  of  the  world  where  such  things  can  be ;  where  the  kings 
are  ^^  fools'''  and  ^^  weak,^'  ^^  despised, '^  ^^  hungry, '^  ^^  naked,''  ^^  buffeted,"  the 
^'"refuse"  of  the  world,  and  where  the  ^'' puffed- up"  Corinthians,  '''■  fuU"  of 
nothing  but  self-esteem,  are  kings  and  ^'"judges,"  forsooth,  of  apostles ;  where  "the 
world  knows  nothing  of  its  greatest  man."  [1.  A  commonplace  of  the  cynical 
moralist  in  all  ages.  The  age  is  past,  the  men  are  dead,  before  the  sorting-out 
process  of  history  relegates  to  their  real  obscurity  many  who  lived  loudest  to  the 
public  ear  and  most  obtrusive  to  the  public  eye  in  their  own  generation,  and 
leaves  the  really  great  and  strong  and  good  and  helpful  to  stand  forth,  like  the 
temples  of  some  ancient  city  amidst  the  wreck  of  the  common  buildings  or  the 
waste  from  which  the  very  traces  of  other  slighter  edifices  have  disappeared. 
2.  The  men  of  thought  are  really  the  kings  of  the  race.  Man  is,  in  the  last 
analysis  of  things,  ruled  by  Mind  ;  and,  still  more,  by  Mind  plus  Character.  The 
royalty  of  Mind  apart  from  principle  has  indeed  the  golden  head,  but  the  feet 
are  of  clay,  and  it  cannot  permanently  stand  the  shocks  and  tests  of  time.  3.  Paul 
would  have  said — and  it  is  after  all  the  Truth — "Jesus  Christ  is  King ;  I  am  only 
king  ^  in  Him.'  "  And  if  in  the  year  27  a.d.  our  visitor  from  some  other  sphere 
had  sought  for  the  Man,  the  Name,  the  Kuler  of  the  world,  he  must  indeed  have 
seen  a  Tiberius  on  the  Imperial  throne,  the  absolute  ruler  of  the  lives  of  millions 
of  men,  a  monster  of  cruelty  and  vice,  surfeited  to  utter  nausea  with  the  banquet 
of  his  own  vicious  pleasures,  but  must  have  turned  away  from  him  to  far-away 
Judaea,  to  a  desolate  district  amongst  its  most  rugged  mountain  region,  to  find  a 
peasant  Carpenter,  alone,  hungry,  tempted  to  help  Himself  to  miraculous  bread, 
seeing  that  His  Father  in  heaven  seemed  to  have  left  Him  in  a  wilderness  to 
starve.  And  yet  earlier,  though  Magi  from  the  East  aimed  more  nearly  true, 
when  they  sought  the  King,  not  in  Rome  or  Athens,  but  in  Jerusalem,  yet  even 
they  missed  the  mark.  The  King  was  a  Babe  in  a  manger  in  a  village  khan  in 
Bethlehem.  And  later  they  would  have  found  Him  on  a  cross.  4.  The  law 
of  disturbed,  topsy-turveyed  order  holds  good  of  the  King,  and  of  His  apostles, 
and  of  His  people.  The  "  meek  are  the  heirs  of  the  earth  "  (Matt.  v.  5).  The 
world  is  "  out  of  joint."  The  Problem  of  Evil  faces  us,  sooner  or  later,  in  every 
path  of  thought  and  inquiry  we  pursue,  no  matter  what  direction  we  take.  For 
"  God  hath  appointed  "  (ver.  9).  5.  One  thing,  then,  and  one  only,  is  clear  :  that 
Paul,  or  any  other  servant  of  God,  should,  and  can  afford  to,  go  simply,  directly 
forward  day  by  day,  doing  duty,  doing  right,  speaking  all  the  message  of  God 
which  is  given  him,  bearing  to  be  called  a  ^^fool "  and  "  weak,"  to  be  buffeted 
whilst  he  only  ^^  entreats,"  to  be  '^  j^ersecuted,"  etc.  (as  vers.  10-13),  and  leaving 
all  question  of  the  effect  of  his  life,  and  of  the  estimate  man  forms  of  him  (ver.  3 
above),  and  of  the  rank  he  will  by-and-by  take  before  God  and  man.  It  will 
take  care  of  itself.  God  will  take  care  of  it  and  of  him.  Once  Paul  stood  at  the 
bar  of  Felix.  Soon  after,  Felix  sat  trembling  before  the  arraignment  of  the  man 
of  conscience  (Acts  xxiv.  16-25).  And  which  to-day  does  all  the  world  count  the 
greater,  nobler  man?     But  meanwhile  :] 

II.  What  a  "royal"  life  !  (vers.  10-13). — 1.  The  greatest  man  of  the  time  is 
the  ^^ filth"  and  "  offscouring"  of  the  world  !  The  World— and  even  the  Church 
of  Corinth — are  holding  continually  their  "  day  "  of  judgment  (ver.  3).     And,  as 

107 


CHAP.  IV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


though  in  petty  mimicry  of  that  greater  " Day"  the  sequel  of  whose  sentence 
shall  be  that  out  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  Man  shall  be  gathered  "  all  things 
that  offend  "  (Matt.  xiii.  41),  they  are  sweeping  out  into  the  Gehenna  of  their 
condemnation  and  rejection  Paul  and  his  fellow-apcstles.  2.  Yet  the  kings, 
God's  true  kings,  do  come  to  their  kingdom  (ver.  8).  Their  Lord  has  received 
His  throne.  He  was  cast  out  and  rejected  as  though  He  had  been  the  "  off- 
scouring  "  of  all  kings.  But  His  vindication  and  glory  have  come.  And  it  is 
the  pledge  and  foretaste  of  their  vindication  and  glory  and  enthronement  in  the 
day  when  "  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father  " 
(Matt.  xiii.  43).  When  their  Lord  comes  in  His  glory,  they  come  into  theirs. 
3.  A  "  royal "  life !  Why,  it  is  hardly  the  life  of  common,  peaceable,  happy 
citizens  !  Rather  call  it  the  death-in-life  of  gladiators  or  criminals.  Year 
after  year  it  is  one  battle  with  forces  and  men,  wholly  evil,  before  which  it  seems 
certain  they  must  succumb.  [Yet  they  conquer  by  dying ;  as  did  their  Lord. 
"  It  is  finished  !  "  is  the  cry  of  a  Conqueror.  Every  one  "that  falleth  on  this 
stone  shall  be  broken."  Let  the  hard-pressed,  persecuted  Christian  be  patient. 
The  victory  is  with  the  dying  ones  of  the  amphitheatre.  How  often  has  a  dying 
Stephen  pricked  deeply  the  conscience  of  a  Paul !  And  not  only  are  the  "  angels  " 
looking  on.  The  Lord  Himself  is  amongst  the  deeply  interested  spectators.] 
The  world's  kings  are  in  the  arena,  gazed  at,  scoffed  at,  buffeted,  slain.  But 
one  touch  transforms  it  all !  God  has  appointed  it,  has  thus  exhibited  them  in 
the  woild's  great  amphitheatre  ;  and  as  they  fall  one  after  another,  by  the  sword, 
the  cross,  the  scourge,  the  fire,  they  cry,  dying,  "/^  is  for  Christ's  sake  .^" 

III.  "We  apostles,  doomed  to  die,  salute  you!"  Who  are  these  human 
spectators  whom  the  Apostolic  band  salutes  from  the  arena  ?  Those  who  sit 
complacently  there  criticising  this  Paul  so  confidently,  as  good  judges  might 
appraise  the  points  of  a  good  gladiator  or  a  criminal  down  there  in  the  sand ; 
setting  up,  playing  off  one  against  another,  of  the  dying  band  exhibited  there ; 
with  lofty  superiority  of  wisdom  and  strength  shouting  at  them  their  taunts  of 
"  Weak  !  "  and  "  Fools  !  "  Who  are  these  who  are  so  ^^full  "  of  knowledge  that 
a  Paul  can  teach  them  nothing  more  ?  Such  judges  of  an  apostle  that  they  can 
weigh  up  and  measure  off  and  ticket  with  the  exact  bulk  and  size  and  value  they 
have  determined,  a  Paul,  or  a  Cephas,  or  an  Apollos  %  Why,  one  would  think  that 
they  were  '''full "  and  needed  hardly  any  more  of  God  and  His  bounty ;  or,  at 
lea&t,  that  the  Judgment  was  indeed  over,  and  that  they  had  already  entered 
into  the  glory  and  the  triumph  of  the  "  Kingdom  of  God,"  in  its  eternal  and 
supreme  form  !  These  sit  and  talk  and  judge  like  kings  !  Yet  every  rag  of  their 
royal  robe  of  wisdom  and  strength  and  Christian  standing  they  owe  to  another. 
What  is  their  own  ?  And  how  nearly  all  do  they,  under  Christ,  owe  to  those 
very  men,  Paul  and  Apollos  !  To  whom,  moreover,  do  they  owe  it  that  there 
ever  came  a  Paul  into  their  city  to  bring  the  "  glad  tidings  "  of  the  King  and  the 
Kingdom  ?  The  premier  Church  in  European  Christianity  ?  Perhaps ;  but 
if  they  sit  upon  the  spectators'  benches,  in  quasi-royal  state,  whilst  apostles 
struggle  and  suffer  and  die  down  below,  observed  of  angels  and  scorned  of  men, 
who  seated  them  there  1  Yes,  one  thing  is  their  own.  God  who,  mediately  or 
immediately,  gave  them  all  besides,  never  gave  them  the  self-conceit  which  puffs 
them  up.  And,  little  as  they  suspect  it,  their  inflated  notion  of  their  ability 
to  judge  between  teacher  and  teacher,  and  their  overweening,  swelling  self- 
centering  of  thought,  make  them  the  easy,  willing  bondmen  of  any  party 
leader  who  will  flatter  their  judgment  and  say  "  Yes  "  to  their  opinions.  These 
inflated,  "  windbag"  "  kings"  of  Corinth  are  really  subjects  after  all;  but  they 
have  made  their  own  yoke,  and,  in  the  vain  wisdom  of  their  foolish  heart,  have 
chosen  their  party-leaders  for  their  lords.  The  servant  of  his  own  vain,  darkened 
heart  (Rom.  i.  21)  readily  becomes  the  "servant  of  man"  (vii.  23).     If  only  a 

108 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  iv. 


man  may  be  honoured  and  flattered  in  the  choosing  of  his  own  tyrant,  he 
will  wear  any  yoke.  The  sham  king  easily  becomes  the  real  slave  !  [Much 
of  the  revolt  of  unbelief  against  "  orthodoxy  "  means  only  a  change  of  masters, 
i^ree-thought  is  often  entirely  under  the  yoke  of  great  names.  Much  in  the 
same  way  as  some  nations  have  thrown  off  the  yoke  of  an  ancient,  native 
dynasty  of  kings,  only  to  put  themselves  under  the  yoke  of  a  dictator  or  a 
despot,  perhaps  an  alien.  But  then  it  is  something  to  have  chosen  your  own 
despot  and  your  own  bondage  !  "  Heresy  "  originally  meant  only  "  choice  "  ;  but 
moral  conditions  and  evil  so  constantly  mingle  with  and  colour  and  direct  choice, 
that  the  evil  connotation  early  attached  itself  to  the  word  (beginning  to  appear 
even  in  Tit.  iii.  10).  There  are  schools  of  unbelief  as  well  as  of  belief,  where 
learners  obediently  take  in  the  master's  principles.  Self-will  doubts  on  authority 
as  certainly  as  many  Christians  must  needs  believe  on  authority.^ 

[Note  on  ver.  13. — Eeaders  of  this  Commentary,  on  both  sides  of  the 
Atlantic,  who  are  interested  in  the  Evangelical  Revival  in  England  in  the 
eighteenth  century,  may  find  an  apposite  and  helpful  parallel  to  this  ^^erse  in 
the  following  words  of  a  prominent  helper  of  John  Wesley  in  the  early  days 
of  the  movement  :  "  There  was  law  for  us,  but  we  could  not  find  a  magistrate 
who  had  courage  or  honesty  enough  to  put  it  in  force.  [No  Gallio  to  drive  the 
persecutors  from  the  judgment  seat.]  Men  of  all  ranks  used  their  power  and 
influence  to  stop  the  blessed  work  of  God.  They  spoke  all  manner  of  evil 
against  the  work  and  the  instruments  employed  therein.  They  dispensed  with 
two  or  three  awakened  clergymen  tolerably  well ;  these  were  regularly  ordained, 
men  of  learning,  gentlemen,  and  divines ;  but  to  see  a  ploughman  or  an  honest 
mechanic  stand  out  to  preach  the  Gospel,  it  was  insufferable.  Hell  was  roused 
from  beneath.  .  .  .  Layman  and  ecclesiastic  joined  heart  and  hand  to  suppress 
these  pestilent  fellows ;  not  with  acts  of  kindness.  Scripture,  or  reason,  but  with 
invectives  and  lies.  Dirt,  rotten  eggs,  brickbats,  stones,  cudgels — these  were 
Satan's  arguments  in  vindication  of  his  own  cause.  It  was  the  common  cry 
in  town  and  country  :  '  Press  them  for  soldiers,  send  them  on  board  a  man  of  war, 
transport  them,  beat  them,  stone  them,  send  them  to  prison,  or  knock  out  their 
brains,  and  despatch  them  at  once,  for  there  is  no  law  for  them.' "  (Christopher 
Hopper,  Lives  of  Early  Methodist  Preachers,  i.  191  sq.).  The  early  history  of 
the  Friends  in  England  abounds  in  many  parallel  stories  of  sufferings.  In  fact, 
such  persecution  is  the  opprobrium  of  no  one  Church,  nor  of  "  The  Church  "  in 
any  true  sense.  The  persecutors  may  in  name  be  Christians,  but  it  is  the  work 
of  the  evil  heart  in  man,  in  every  age  and  Church,  expressing  in  the  like 
violence  its  hatred  of  good.  Paul  should  be  pictured,  not  as  a  prince-apostle, 
but  as  a  working,  tent-maker  evangelist,  and  a  Jew  to  boot ;  often  roughly 
handled ;  and  always,  by  the  educated  and  high-placed  of  his  day,  when  they 
happened  to  hear  of  such  an  obscure  person,  taken  at  the  world's  valuation  of 
an  early  Methodist  lay  evangelist  or  a  Quaker  preacher.] 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  14—21. 

Fatherly  Appeals  ;  Fatherly  Discipline. 

I.  The  tender  relationship. — Paul  was  a  gardener  (iii.  9),  then  a  *'  master 
builder  "  (iii.  10),  then  a  "  minister  of  Christ "  (iv.  1),  then  a  *'  steward  "  in  God's 
household,  the  Church  (iv.  1).  Now  he  is  a  '^  father,"  even  to  such  thankless 
sons  as  these  Corinthians.  His  heart  cannot  keep  up  the  satire  and  rebuke  and 
self -vindication  against  them ;  to  think  of  them,  and  to  recall  their  past,  even 
that  he  might  rebuke,  melts  him  down.  The  tears  are  in  his  voice,  '*  my  beloved 
sons."  No  tie  more  tender — no  tie  so  tender — as  that  which  binds  together  the 
minister  and  his  spiritual  children.     No  love  deeper  than  that  of  the  man  who 

109 


CHAP.  IV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   CORINTHIANS. 


has  seen  in  some  souls  the  satisfaction  of  the  sore  travail  of  his  own  (Gal.  iv.  19). 
No  pain  more  acute  than  for  the  father  to  lose  the  love  of  his  sons,  or  to  see 
their  life  a  flagrant  contradiction  to  all  he  tried  to  teach  and  to  be  before  them. 
They  will  not  be  his  "  imitators.'^  That  minister  has  not  yet  tasted  the  chief  joy 
of  the  ministry  who  cannot  say  to  any  one  soul,  "  In  Chmst  Jesus  have  I  begotten 
you  in  the  Gospel''  Ts  he  after  all  noticing  but  their  "  instructor^'  their  "  tutor" 
their  ''^  pedagogue ^^  fulfilling  indeed  a  very  useful  function  as  he  brings  them  to 
the  school  of  some  better  teacher,  and  guards  and  shields  and  trains  the  young 
life  committed  to  his  care  ?  The  man  who  takes  refuge  in  this,  that  he  does  not 
indeed  **  see  conversions,"  but  he  "  builds  up  the  Church,"  certainly  is  not  doing 
nothing,  but  is  doing  only  that  half  of  a  minister's  work  which  presupposes  the 
new  life  to  have  begun.  The  "  instructor  "  is  needed,  but  the  complete  minister 
is  the  ^'father  "  also.  And  to  his  spiritual  children  that  man  will  be  like  no  other 
man.     If  they  will  hear  "  admonition  "  from  any  lips,  surely  it  will  be  from  his. 

II.  And  the  father  is  a  model  for  his  children. — "  Be  imitators  of  me."  All 
reproach  of  egotism  or  vanity  is  beside  the  mark,  when  it  is  remembered  that  the 
father  is  talking  thus,  in  that  familiar  love  of  family  life  which  expects  to  be 
understood  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  father  is  not  on  his  guard  against  being 
mistaken  when  he  talks  to  his  children.  (See  also,  for  another  turn  to  the 
thought,  in  Critical  Notes.)  One  of  the  brothers,  Timothy,  shall  tell  them  again, 
if  they  have  forgotten  them,  their  spiritual  father's  rules  for  "behaviour  in  the 
House  of  God  "  (as  he  afterwards  himself  gave  them  to  this  same  Timothy, 
1  Tim.  iii.  15);  Paul's  little  household  code  for  the  training  up  of  the  children's 
life  and  the  ordering  of  their  activities,  which  he  was  accustomed  to  enjoin 
wherever  a  new  family  circle — call  it  "a  Church" — sprang  up.  How  Paul's 
dear  children  would  treasure  up  every  word  which  their  spiritual  father  had  left 
behind  him  !  How  our  boys  remember  "what  father  used  to  say  "  !  How  the 
girls  copy  "  what  mother  used  to  do  "  !  "  Remember  7ny  ways  which  he  in  Christ ;  " 
it  is  a  charming  ideal.  He  is  himself  a  man  "  in  Christ"  The  formative 
principle,  that  which  governs  all  his  own  life,  and  gives  its  distinctive  tone  to  his 
judgments,  and  preferences,  and  dislikes,  and  volitions,  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
dwelling  in  him.  It  is  really  Christ  expressing  and  exhibiting  Himself  through 
Paul.  If  then  he  says,  "  Copy  me,  children,"  it  is  after  all,  "  Copy  Christ, 
children."  It  will  be  a  task  to  distress  and  daant  the  minister  if  he  approach  it 
from  this  side :  "  I  must  so  bear  myself,  and  so  be,  that  my  people  may  safely  be 
imitators  of  me,  even  when  I  am  least  adverting  to  the  effect  of  my  very  life 
upon  them."  But  let  him  rather  approach  it  from  this  side,  "  I  must  be  in 
Christ,"  all  the  problem  then  falls  into  ordered  simplicity  of  solution.  All  that 
springs  out  of  the  life  "  in  Christ "  may  safely  be  followed.  Be  "  in  Christ" 
and  leave  the  rest  to  take  care  of  itself. 

III.  Yet  the  father  must  needs  sometimes  speak  sharply,  and  even  use  "  the 
rod." — Nothing  but  "  love  "  and  the  "  S2nrit  of  meekness  "  would  be  defective  family 
government  where  the  children  are  ^''puffed  up."  Even  as  '''the  rod"  and  the 
rebuke  alone  would  be  imperfect  family  government  too.  The  "  words  "  need  the 
''power  "  behind  them ;  but  the  "power"  should  be  held,  if  it  may  be,  in  reserve. 
And  (as  in  2  Cor.  i.  18-20)  if  Paul  seems  self-assertive,  it  is  simply  that  the  man 
lives  so  thoroughly  in  his  message  and  work,  the  Gospel  he  preaches  has  put  its 
own  stamp  so  deeply  upon  the  man,  that  what  is  true  of  it  is  true  of  him  ;  and, 
conversely,  as  is  the  man  so  are  the  Gospel  and  the  kingdom  he  preacl.es.  [The 
man  preaches  no  "  Yes  "  and  "  No  "  Gospel ;  he  is  no  "  Yes  "  and  "  No  ''  man 
(2  Cor.  as  above).  So  here  :]  He  comes  on  no  errand  of  personal  vindication ; 
he  comes  to  vindicate  the  *'  kingdom  of  God"  which  has  been  endangered  and 
endamaged  at  Corinth.  It  is  not  only  or  chiefly  that  he  will  show  himself  to 
have  both  ''words"  and  "  power"  \  and  his  thunder  [says  Jerome:  "As  often 

110 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


as  I  read  Paul,  I  seem  to  myself  to  hear,  not  words,  but  thunder-claps  "]  to  be 
wedded  to  swift-striking  lightning.  He  comes  only  as  the  embodiment  of  a 
Gospel  order  of  things  in  which  indeed  are  words,  tender  or  stein,  as  need  may 
require,  but  where  every  word  can  be  translated  into  a  deed  of  blessing  or  of 
chastening  wrath. 

[lY.  1.  This  unconscious  conformity  of  Paul  to  the  Gospel  he  preaches  is  a 
real  parallel  to  the,  not  conformity  with  but,  identification  of  Christ  and  His 
Gospel.  He  and  His  religion,  the  Gospel  of  His  Kingdom,  are  alike  "  the  Way  " 
(Acts  ix.  2,  xix.  9,  23) ;  "  the  Truth  "  (not  so  precisely,  but  see,  e.g.^  2  Cor.  xiii.  8, 
2  Thess.  ii.  13,  1  Tim.  iii.  15);  "the  Life"  (Acts  v.  20).  2.  The  same  funda- 
mental unity  of  character  and  form  makes  the  paragraph  under  consideration 
so  curiously  and  closely  parallel  to  the  case  of  God  and  His  erring  and  wayward 
children,  that,  without  any  violence  to  sense  or  to  essential  Truth,  it  becomes 
almost  a  parable.  Thus  (1)  In  all  His  dealings  with  sinful  men  in  these  days 
of  His  grace,  God  designs  their  amendment.  Like  Paul  here.  He  desires  to 
touch  their  heart  into  sorrow  and  into  a  reformatory  love  toward  Himself.  Even 
in  their  waywardness  He  does  not  deny  them  the  name  "  children "  or  the 
epithet  *'  beloved.^'  For  His  Son's  sake  the  race,  even  in  their  fall,  are  ''  the  men 
of  His  goodwill.^^  If  they  will  not  be  "  admonished, ^^  then  there  must  come, 
even  for  these,  the  "  shame  and  everlasting  contempt"  (Dan.  xii.  2).  (2)  '*  One  is 
your  Father^^  said  the  Great  Teacher,  the  Eldest  Son  of  the  Family  (Matt,  xxiii.  9). 
"Your  Father  \^^  it  is  the  new  name  for  God  which  leaps  instinctively  to  the 
lips  of  the  pardoned  and  adopted  sinner,  when  "  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  "  is  "  sent 
forth  into  his  heart "  (Gal.  iv.  6).  It  was  unknown  to  the  Old  Testament 
saints  [Ps.  ciii.  13,  Ixviii.  5  are  no  real  exceptions;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  26  is  theo- 
cratic rather  than  personal;  Jer.  iii.  4  is  put  into  the  lips  of  the  nation, 
and  is  not  personal] ;  no  Old  Testament  saint  got  beyond  "  Friend,"  and 
ordinarily  were  only  "  servants,"  trusted  and  beloved  and  honoured  indeed,  but 
never,  as  does  every  New  Testament  saint,  saying  ^^  Abba,  Father,"  as  the 
customary,  instinctive  word  of  address  to  God.  Nor  does  a  man  in  the  Old 
Testament  stage  of  his  spiritual  life — for  every  man's  spiritual  history  recapitu- 
lates in  brief  summary  the  history  of  "the  dispensations" — say  ^^  Abba."  (3) 
And  the  "  Fatherhood "  and  the  "  Sonship "  depend  on  a  n&w-born  life ;  the 
children  have  "  been  begotten  again"  (1  Pet.  i.  3),  and  this  "  through  the  Gospel" 
the  living,  "  incorruptible  seed  "  of  a  new  life  (1  Pet.  i.  23).  (4)  He  says — as 
Paul,  with  a  special  reference,  once  says  for  Him  (Eph.  v.  i) — "  Be  ye  imitators 
of  Me"  Indeed,  their  new-created  life  is  ^^  after  God"  the  Pattern  (Col.  iii.  10; 
Eph.  iv.  24).  (5)  And  has  He  not  sent  a  '•'■beloved  Son"  '■'■faithful" 
(Heb.  iii.  2)  to  His  Father's  commission  and  errand,  who  brings  into  men's 
remembrance  God's  "  ways "  ?  What  He  desires,  what  He  is — the  verbal 
pattern  and  the  character-pattern  to  which  God  would  have  His  children 
conform — where  are  they  so  spoken,  where  are  they  so  seen,  as  by  and  in  the  Son 
who  has  been  sent  to  men  in  their  forgetful,  wayward,  rebellious  mood  of  mind 
and  heart?  (6)  But  men  are  '■^puffed  up"  as  though  God  were  afar  off,  and 
never  could  or  would  draw  nigh,  to  any  practical  purpose.  The  natural  heart  is 
epicurean  in  the  God  it  imagines  and  desires.  Deism,  which  recognised  a  God, 
and  even  a  Creator,  but  relegated  Him  to  a  distant  aloofness  of  p:ace  and  heart 
and  relation  towards  His  world,  and  towards  the  life  of  the  individual  man,  was 
only  a  quasi-philosophical  expression  of  the  thought  of  the  natural  heart  every- 
where. "  Don't  bring  God  too  near  me !  Let  me  get  into  some  far  country 
away  from  Him  ! "  Even  believing  science  and  history  and  politics  do  not 
escape  the  infection  and  tendency  of  the  time,  but  are  apt  to  minimise  the 
supernatural.  The  scoffers  of  the  last  days  cry,  sometimes  with  a  heart  which 
feels  a  sinking  misgiving  underneath  the  loud  mockery,  "  Where  is  the  promise 

111 


CHAP.  IV.     HO  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIAN 


of  His  coming  ? "  (2  Pet.  iii.  4).  (As  they  said  it  of  Paul  at  Corinth.)  Paul 
himself,  in  veiled  language,  has  reminded  us  how  The  Coming  (the  Parousia)  will 
burst  in  upon  a  world  in  which  lawless  revolt  in  voice  and  act  will  have  risen  to 
its  climax  of  daring  against  God  and  His  Christ  (2  Thess.  ii.  8).  [It  is  no  mere 
accidental  parallel  that,  only  a  moment  or  two  before  the  Life-giver  would  raise 
from  the  dead  the  ruler's  child,  the  neighbours  and  hired  mourners  "  laughed 
to  scorn  "  the  words,  "  Not  dead  hut  sleeping  "  (Matt.  ix.  24).  Their  mockery 
is  a  prelusive,  anticipatory  suggestion  and  hint  of  the  loud,  mocking  naturalism 
of  unbelief  which  shall  be  never  more  scornful  and  daiing  than  on  the  very  eve 
of  the  Parousia  and  the  Resurrection.]  Corinthian  Church  members  who  say, 
"  Paul  will  never  come  here  again — not  he  ! "  are  but  exhibiting  the  unbelieving 
habit  of  the  natural  heart  in  all  men.  [The  parallel  is  not  to  be  forced,  but, 
until  Paul  arrive,  Timothy  will  so  be  Paul's  representative  at  Corinth  that  he 
who  saw  and  heard  Timothy  would  see  and  hear  Paul  (cf.  then  John  xiv.  9).]  (7) 
When  He  says,  "  Behold  I  come  quickly,  ...  to  give  every  man  according  as 
his  work  shall  be"  (Rev.  xxii.  12),  it  is  as  though  we  had  Paul's  words  in  our 
paragraph  *'writ  large,"  written  out  on  the  Divine  scale.  In  that  day  pre- 
eminently will  the  ^^  kingdom"  come  "m  power"  \  The  Son,  the  ^^  Minister" 
and  Representative  of  God  in  that  day  of  visitation,  will  bear  the  "  7'od  " — of 
iron  (Ps.  ii.  9).  The  "  spirit  oj  meekness  "  (Matt.  xi.  29),  on  which  men  have 
been  presuming  too  far,  will  give  place  to  the  "  wrath  of  the  Lamb"  (Rev.  vi.  16). 
Mutatis  mutandis,  one  might  have  said  to  the  refractory,  rebellious  Church  at 
Corinth,  in  regard  to  the  Advent  of  Paul,  *'  Be  wise  now  therefore,  O  ye 
Corinthians,"  etc.  (as  Ps.  ii.  10-12).  Such  flexibility  and  ready  adaptability  of 
Scripture  language  to  such  varying  purpose ;  the  fact  that  the  same  vessel 
of  language  will  so  readily  hold  such  varying  contents ;  such  often  minuteness  of 
coincident  particulars  as  between  the  contents — events  or  seri(  s  of  events,  trivial 
and  tremendous, — are  not  to  be  dismissed  off-hand  as  fanciful  or  accidental.  Is  it 
not  part  of  the  organic  interdependence  and  intercoherence  of  the  One  Book  which 
has  been,  on  the  human  side,  the  gradual,  and  largely  unconcerted,  accumulation 
of  hooks,  in  process  through  many  widely  separated  centuries  ?] 


SEPARATE   HOMILIES. 


Vers.  1,  2.  The  Stewardship  of  the 
Minister. 

I.  The  office.— 1.  No  great  Fact 
in  God's  order  is  simple.  It  is  only 
in  the  "  elementary "  stages  of  His 
work  that  we  find  what  is  not  com- 
plex, many-sided  in  its  aspects  and 
relationships.  The  permanent,  de- 
veloped "ministry"  of  the  Church  was 
in  even  Apostolic  times  becoming  a 
many-sided  fact,  needing  many  ana- 
logies to  set  it  forth.  Each  one  [as  in 
all  cases  of  teaching  by  analogy]  has 
its  strong  point  of  teaching  and  appli- 
cability ;  often  with  its  many  weaker, 
where  it  does  not  bear  pressing,  or 
using  at  all.  There  it  is  supple- 
mented by  another,  strong  where  it  is 
weak,  but  needing  in  its  turn  the 
strength  of  the  first  to  be  its  comple- 

112 


ment  in  exhibiting  the  whole  round  of 
the  truth.  The  men  are  here  called 
"  ministers  "  (see  Critical  Notes) ;  they 
are  "  Shepherds  "  (Eph.  iv.  11,  etc.)  who 
*'  bear  rule  "  (Heb.  xiii.  17)  with  what- 
ever of  authority  a  Shepherd  must  of 
necessity  have  over  the  Flock.  They 
are  "Teachers"  (Eph.  as  above,  etc.). 
They  are  "  Presbyters  "  or  "  Elders  " 
{e.g.  Acts  xx.  28),  and  indeed,  like 
those  of  Ephesus,  are  "  Overseers "  or 
"  Bishops."  They  claim  whatever  re- 
spect and  weight  of  influence  is  needful 
to  enable  them  "  to  watch  over  souls 
(cf.  Ezek.  iii.,  xxxiii.)  as  they  that  must 
give  account  "  (Heb.  as  above).  This 
last  clause  completes  the  circle  of  ideas 
by  inserting  into  its  round  the  link 
of  the  thought  found  in  the  word 
"  Stewards." 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  iv. 


2.  Stewards,  not  pnests. — This  name  and  honour  to  the  undying,  holy  One — 
is  never  given  to  any  order  of  men  The  Son,  '^  consecrated  for  evermore " 
selected  out  of  the  general  body  of  the  (Heb.  vi.  23-28).  And  if  indeed  any- 
Christian  community.  [Even  as  they  thing  of  the  hierophantic  office  of  the 
are  "  ministers "  of  the  Mediator,  and  priesthoods  of  the  Gentiles  seem  to 
not  themselves  mediators.]  The  priest-  cling  to  the  work  of  the  man  who  has 
hood  of  the  Old  Covenant  order  is,  like  to  deal  with  the  *'  mysteries  of  God^^^  yet 
every  other  essential,  fundamental,  there  is  manifest  and  vital  difference, 
basic  idea  of  that  order,  brought  The  hierophant  took  in — into  the 
forward  into  the  new.  There  is  a  penetralia  of  the  building  as  well  as  of 
"  priesthood  "  still.  The  essential  lines  the  doctrines — the  few  favoured  ones, 
which  govern  the  representation  of  the  the  esoteric  circle,  the  illnmiiiandi  ; 
office  and  function  are  still  there,  plain  took  them  in  as  a  favour  from  himself, 
enough  to  establish  the  identity,  the  which  he  had  the  right  to  withhold,  as 
continuity.  But  they  are  modified  ;  well  as  to  confer.  The  "  steward  "  does 
touched  here,  filled  up  in  more  detail  impart  *'  mysteries "  indeed.  But  he 
there,  emphasised  in  a  third  point ;  and,  has  no  right  to  withhold  them  ;  he  has 
above  all,  are  now  found  in  complete  no  right  to  make  them  the  possession 
exposition  in  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  and  of  a  favoured  few  ;  their  disclosure 
only  in  Him.  [Moses  spoke  of  the  com-  is  his  duty,  he  must  bring  them  out 
ing  Prophetic  Order  in  Deut.  xviii.  15;  to  all.  *'  Must  bring  them  out"  also, 
the  prophets,  every  one,  in  anticipa-  The  figure  must  not  be  overpressed ; 
tory,  suggestive,  partial  presentation  but  he  is  not  the  priest  leading  some 
embodied  God's  Idea,  which  was  by-and-  into  an  inner  darkness  and  secrecy  ;  he 
by  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  One  Prophet.  is  a  steward  bringing  out  from  the 
Of  Him  pre-eminently  did  Moses  speak  store-chamber  what  is  to  be  given 
(Acts  iii.  22,  vii.  37).  Similarly  he  freely  to  all  waiting  outside  who  need 
might  have  said,  "  A  Priest  shall  the  what  he  brings. 

Lord  your  God  raise  up,"  etc.     Indeed,  3.  Stewards,  not  proprietors. — They 

the  fulfilment  of  such  a  saying  would  have   no   controlling   rights  over    the 

already   have    begun   in   the   Priestly  disclosure    of    the    truth.      They   are 

Order    which    had    been    established,  only  the  *'  ministers "  of  Christ  in  the 

Also  remember  how  the  Idea  of  Priest-  matter,   passing  on,  giving  round,  to 

hood  in  its  highest  function  more  and  the  hungry   multitudes  what  He  has 

more  clearly  stood  out  to  men's  appre-  blessed,  and  what  has  only  been  given 

hension,  until  the  very  phrase  *'  High  into  their  hands  that  it  may  be  given 

Priest,"  unknown    at   first,   became  a  away  widely  by  their  hand.      [*'  So " 

necessity  of  religious  thought  and  ex-  exactly     means,      "  All      things     are 

pression.]      The     complete,    two-sided  yours,"  iii.     22;    cf.    2    Cor.    iv.    15.] 

significance  of  Mediatorship  is  exhibited  They  are  not  to  indulge  in  the  selfish 

in  Him  who  is  "  the  Apostle  " — sent  out  indolence    of    the   man    who    sits    in 

from  God    to    man — and   the  '*  High  his   study,   reading,  reading,   reading, 

Priest  " — going  in  from  man  to  God —  thinking,  learning,  acquiring,  but  only 

"  of  our  profession  "  (Heb.  iii.  1).     And  slightly  if  at  all  attempting  to  enrich 

the  offering  of  a  sacrifice  which  made  his  people  with  the  fruit  of  his  growing 

atonement   for    sin,    the    culminating  knowledge  of  the  ^^  mysteries. ^^      They 

point  of   the   priest's  office,   to  which  have  it,  they  are  entrusted  with  it,  to 

everything  else  was  only  sequential  and  pass  it   on.     The  apostles,    no  doubt, 

subsidiary,  is  now  restricted  to  Him.  might  and  did  satisfy  their  own  hun- 

In  that  sense  Christianity  knows  only  ger  with  the  marvellous  bread,  but  the 

the  one  "priest."      The   ^^ steward^'  is  fainting  five  thousand  had  the  prior 

no     "priest."       The     many,     mortal  claim.     Etymologically  ^^ steivardship" 

priests,    themselves     sinners    needing  is   "economy."     But   the  ecclesiastical 

atonement,  have  yielded  up  their  office  "  economy  "  in  the  disclosure  Qf  truth 

I  113 


CHAP.  IV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


has  travelled  a  long  and  aberrant  way 
from  the  idea  of  "  stewardship."  It  is 
one  thing  to  see  to  it  that  the  "  babes  " 
have  only  their  "  milk,"  whilst  the  men 
of  full  age  are  fed  with  their  "  meat " 
(Heb.  V.  12,  13) ;  it  is  another  thing  in 
fear,  or  with  dishonest  tact,  to  suppress 
or  modify  truth,  in  the  presumed 
interests  of  "  truth,"  or  in  the  interests 
of  a  Church  or  an  order  of  men,  or  for 
the  security  of  some  conciliar  or  per- 
sonal dogma.  Whatever  is  the  truth  of 
God  should  all  be  told  to  all.  He  can 
be  trusted  to  take  care  that  its  widest 
disclosure  works  no  real,  no  lasting 
mischief.  Better  the  risk  of  mischief 
than  of  manipulation  by  not  too  honest 
stewards.  The  Bible  Society  is  an 
organised  expression  of  the  steward- 
ship of  the  mysteries  entiusted  to  the 
Church  of  Christ  in  the  gift  of  the 
Word  of  God.  It  is  given  to  the  Church 
to  be  given  by  the  "stewards"  with 
world-wide  liberality  of  distribution. 
They  may  not  even  detain  it  in  the 
store  cupboard  ! 

4.  Stewards,  not  discoverers. — God  is 
the  Fountain  of  all  the  knowledge  they 
impart.  The  Son  is  the  Bevealer  of  it 
all ;  He  has  drawn  back,  so  far  as  it  is 
drawn  back  at  all,  the  veil  under  which 
lay  hidden  what  the  time  has  now  come 
to  disclose.  [Cf.  "  Has  brought  to 
light  Life  and  Immortality"  (2  Tim. 
i.  10).  They  are  not  new  things  j  they 
were  facts  before  ;  they  were  there  all 
along  ;  but  they  were  under  a  covering 
(?  Isa.  XXV.  7).]  His  stewards  do 
but  publish  widely  what  He  has  been 
Himself  taught,  and  is  commissioned 
to  disclose.  [He  may  take  as  bis  own 
the  words  of  Balaam,  Num.  xxiv.  13.] 
Nothing  else  lies  within  the  four 
corners  of  a  steward's  commission  ;  any- 
thing else  is  ultra  vires.  He  may  not 
devise  a  Gospel,  he  may  not  add  to  the 
Gospel  speculations  of  his  own,  not 
fairly  deducible,  or  to  be  proved,  from 
the  definite  instructions  and  disclosures 
given  to  him  (Gal.  i.  8,  9).  An  "original 
thinker  "  in  the  ministrj^  of  the  Church 
has  properly  his  only  "  originality " 
in  the  analysis,  and  the  fresher  or 
clearer    or  more    profitable   presenta- 

114 


tion  of  the  original  corpus  of  *'  mys- 
teries,'' and  in  the  skill  and  fulness 
of  knowledge  with  which  he  is  able  to 
bring  from  all  quarters  what  may  be 
laid  under  contribution  for  the  illus- 
tration of  their  meaning  and  their 
message  to  men.  He  stands  before 
his  people  as  simply,  by  natural 
gifts,  by  special  study,  and  by  special 
training,  "  an  expert "  in  their  ex- 
position. 

["  The  mysteries "  are  dealt  with 
under  ii.  1^  xv.  51.] 

II.  The  fidelity  expected  of  the 
steward. — There  is  (1)  fidelity,  with 
responsibility,  to  the  Lord  Himself; 
and  (2)  fidelity  to  the  matter  of  the 
mystery  and  to  the  persons  designed 
to  be  benefited  by  its  disclosure ;  in 
these  senses,  partly  accommodations  of 
the  idea  of  ''  fidelity,"  the  responsibility 
is  still,  and  only,  to  the  Lord  Himself. 
Beginning  with  (2).  Paul  has  his  own 
illustration,  from  the  innkeeper  who 
adulterates  his  wine  (2  Cor.  ii.  17). 
[The  converse  is  suggested,  under  the 
connotation  of  another  figure  (1  Pet. 
ii.  2).]  Thei'e  7nust  be  no  tamjyering 
with  the  mysteries.  The  fashion  in 
such  "  wine  "  may  change  ;  the  public 
palate  may  be  perverted  ;  it  may  de- 
mand the  produce  of  another  vineyard  ; 
but  he  at  least  will  only  supply  this, 
of  the  best  and  purest  he  knows  how  to 
procure.  He  will  spare  no  cost  of  pains 
and  prayer  to  get  this,  that  he  may 
have  it  to  offer.  But  he  dares  not — he 
desires  not— to  offer  anything  else. 
He  may  have  the  pain,  and  be  put  to 
the  test  of  fidelity,  of  seeing  those 
w^hom  he  desires  to  supply,  leave  him, 
to  tarn  aside  to  the  man  who  will  give 
them  a  more  popular  vintage.  But, 
for  one  thing,  that  old  Gospel  [not  to 
press  the  figure  too  far]  saved  him, 
and  still  comforts  and  sustains  him. 
In  '*  faithfulness  "  to  the  mystery  whose 
revelation  has  blessed  him,  and  many 
ten  thousands  more,  he  will  still  dis- 
pense that.  It  is  his  presumed  function 
and  office  to  preach  and  present  the 
*'  mysteries  of  God  "  in  their  Divine, 
un mingled  simplicity.  He  is  a  living 
falsehood  if,  whilst  he  is  presumed  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  iv. 


do  that,  and  whilst  the  people  expect  the  face  of  angry  people,  offended  at 
that  of  him,  he  offers  something  of  the  whole  truth;  by  a  sense  of  the 
merely  human  devising  or  imagining;  approval  of  Christ,  vouchsafed  to  him 
or  the  "  mystery,"  indeed,  but  so  by  One  who  knows  how  pure  and 
overlaid  with  rhetoric,  or  the  specu-  direct  his  aim  has  been,  how  reverent 
lative  supplements  of  undisciplined  or  and  careful  his  handling  of  the  dis- 
uncurbed  reasoning,  that  it  is  hidden  closure  of  "  the  master ies.^']  *'  The 
and  neutralised,  put  in  such  a  form  Master  praises ;  what  are  men  ? "  But 
as  never  fed  or  saved  anybody.  He  does  the  Master  praise  ?  That  is  ever 
owes  some  ^^ fidelity "  to  this  very  his  main  question.  His  every  day's 
message,  to  the  matter  which  has  been  duty  will  be  planned  under  his  Great 
disclosed  by  God,  and  of  which  he  is  a  Taskmaster's  eye,  and  will  be  dis- 
steward.  Also,  he  must  be  faithful  to  charged  with  constant  reference  to  His 
his  people.  Indeed,  if  they  are  wise,  judgment.  Motives  are  so  intermingled 
they  will  wish  him,  and  help  him,  to  in  our  life,  the  tangle  so  often  passes 
be  faithful.  If  fidelity  in  a  steward  all  our  own  power  of  unravelling,  that 
be  needful  anywhere,  it  is  in  dealing  he  will  not  spend  overmuch  time  upon 
with  Divine  truth.  *'  By  these "  self-analysis.  His  mingled  aims — right 
mysteries  "  men  live  "  (Isa.  xxxviii.  16).  after  all  in  their  main  drift  and  object 
These  are  not  merely  gains  to  know-  — will  be  simply  laid  before  his  Master 
ledge,  however  accurate,  enlarging,  en  bloc,  for  His  analysis  and  judgment 
ennobling.  They  are  men's  life.  It  is  and  smile  of  reward.  If  He  is  satisfied, 
of  urgent  necessity  to  them  to  possess  the  rest  matter  little  ! 
in  its  unadulterated  purity  and  in  III.  The  people's  estimate  of  the 
unstinted  quantity  the  truth  in  the  office  and  of  the  minister. — Twodangers 
mysteries.  It  is  Bread  of  Life  for  dying  threaten  :  an  undue  exaltation,  or  an 
souls.  They  are  a  foolish  people  who  under-valuing  of  the  office ;  or,  in 
will  only  ask  for,  and  will  only  tolerate,  another  alternative,  a  party  worship 
what  truth  is  pleasant  or  convention-  of  the  man,  as  at  Corinth,  or  a  super- 
ally  correct ;  ybr  ^Aezr  oivn  sakes  they  stitious  estimate  of  the  office.  1.  The 
will  covet,  and  will  honour,  and  will  under-valuing  of  the  office  is  a  very 
thank  and  love  the  man  who  will  only  real  danger.  The  "  minister  "  must 
deal  honestly  with  them  as  a  faithful  not  be  simply  the  chief,  and  perhaps 
steward,  who  will  give  them  the  whole  the  only  paid,  officer  of  an  organisation 
message  of  God,  and  will  not  in  fear  called  ''a  Church,"  which  "keeps  a 
or  in  wicked  complaisance  spare  them-  minister,"  as  some  in  the  congregation 
selves.  He  is  not  accountable  to  keep  a  clerk  or  a  manager  in  their 
them  (ver.  3)  indeed ;  yet  his  relation  business.  He  must  not  simply  be  the 
to  them  is  one  which  demands  of  him  chairman  of  their  meetings ;  or  the 
fidelity  as  the  truest  kindness.  [Such  president  of  their  social  gatherings ; 
"  kindness "  to  them  as  that  of  the  or  the  intellectual  leader  of  their  specu- 
Dishonest  Steward  (Luke  xvi.  1-8)  may  lations,  or  of  the  literary  or  artistic 
serve  his  dishonest  turn  for  a  moment,  activity  of  the  young  life  of  the  Church ; 
but  will  not  carry  him  or  them  very  or  their  deputy  on  whom  they  devolve 
far!]  But,  above  all,  (1)  he  will  be  all  the  initiative  of  religious  and  philan- 
faithful  as  a  matter  of  responsibility  thropic  agencies  which  the  public  expect 
to  his  Master,  and  to  God  whose  from  them.  He  may,  happily  and 
mysteries  he  holds  in  trust  for  distri-  usefully,  be  all  these.  But  these  are 
bution  "  as  every  man  has  need."  the  secondary  things  of  his  office.  His 
[The  following  verses,  separately  dealt  first  and  essential  duty — the  "  Hamlet - 
with,  give  the  noble  portrait  of  a  part "  in  the  play,  without  which  all 
"  steward "  who  is  sustained  under  is  miserably  incomplete — is  to  be  a 
misconception,  misrepresentation,  de-  steward,  blessedly  made  familiar  with 
traction,  malicious  depreciation ;  or  in  the  mysteries  of  God,  by  close  inter- 

115 


CHAP.  IV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


course  with  God,  their  Giver,  and 
coming  forth  from  the  holy  intercourse 
to  dispense  them  with  a  wisdom  of 
adaptation  to  the  needs  of  his  people 
which  is  itself  not  a  small  gift  and 
honour  from  God.  If  he  only  bring 
to  his  people — if  his  people  only  expect 
from  him — spoken  "leading  articles" 
on  topics  of  the  week  or  of  the  time, 
perfect  in  literary  finish  ;  if  they  are 
satisfied  with  brief  theses  on  half- 
secular  themes,  full  of  satirical,  or 
sympathetic,  or  poetic  power ;  if  they 
are  content  with  brief,  admirable,  but 
*'  natural,"  ethical  prelections  which 
do  not  lift  up  duty  into  any  organic 
connection  with  religion,  its  motives, 
its  power,  its  sanctions ;  if  he  never 
bring  to  their  ears,  and  to  their  hunger, 
any  of  the  revealed  secrets  of  the  heart 
and  will  of  God, — he  is  not  "  fulfilling 
his  ministry,"  nor  discharging  his 
**  stewardship."  If  they  have  no 
hunger  of  heart,  and  do  not  definitely 
desire  to  be  fed ;  and  even  resent  the 
earnestness  of  the  man  who  would 
gladly  be  to  them  a  steward  of  God's 
mysteries,  bringing  them  forth  for  the 
supply  of  their  heart  and  conscience  ; 
they  misunderstand  and  under-value 
the  office.  Desire  him  to  be,  pray  for 
him  that  he  may  be,  by  sympathy 
with  his  aims  and  by  grateful  recog- 
nition of  his  work,  help  him  to  be,  a 
steward  and  a  faithful  one  !  Not  less 
than  a  steward  !  2.  On  the  other  hand, 
not  more  than  a  steward.  Do  not 
think  of  him,  do  not  accept  of  him,  as 
a  priest  or  an  exclusive  mediator  with 
God.  If  he  boast  never  so  loudly  of 
ordination  by  any  special  order  of 
ministers,  and  claim  to  be  of  any  special 
order  himself ;  if  he  will  thrust  himself 
between  God  and  the  soul,  as  in  any 
sense  a  necessary  and  indispensable 
intermediary ;  if  he  will  claim  over  the 
judgment  and  conscience  an  authority 
which  of  old  belonged  to  a  prophet, 
and  now  belongs  only  to  Christ,  as 
represented  by  His  Spirit,  in  the  ad- 
ministration of  redemption ;  if  he  will 
claim,  in  any  sense,  to  ofier  a  sacrifice 
which  stands  in  any  recessary  relation 
to  the  forgiveness  of  sins  or  the  main- 

116 


tenance  of  the  spiritual  life ;  if  he 
claim  priesthood  in  any  sense  which 
belongs  exclusively  to  Christ,  or  in  any 
sense  which  does  not  belong  equally  to 
every  member  of  the  *'  holy  priesthood  " 
(1  Pet.  ii.  5), — then  to  acquiesce  in 
such  pretensions  is  to  over-exalt  the 
man  and  his  office.  Allow  no  priest- 
hood ;  hear  of  nothing,  think  of  nothing, 
but  of  "  Ministry  "  and  "  Steward- 
ship." Pray  for  him,  listen  to  him, 
use  him,  as  a  steward,  not  less  nor 
more.  And  if  a  man,  credentialled  no 
matter  by  whom,  assume  to  be  the  way 
to  God,  say  to  him  :  "  Thou  art  in  the 
way  !  Stand  out  of  my  way  !  Christ 
is  my  Way.  Let  me  come  direct 
through  Him  to  God."  ^^  Let  a  mem 
so  account  of  us^  A  true  "  minister  " 
asks  no  more. 

Ver.  2.  Faithful  Stewardship. 

I.  If  in  the  ordinary  transactions  of 
time  it  is  imperative  that  those  who  are 
concerned  in  the  management  of  tem- 
poral concerns  should  be  faithful, 
how  much  more,  in  matters  which 
relate  to  the  soul  and  eternity,  is 
it  imperative  that  the  stewards  of 
God's  mysteries  should  be  faithful ! 
The  consequences  of  infidelity  or  dis- 
honesty in  the  charge  of  the  affairs  of 
this  life  may  be  disastrous;  but  who 
can  measure  the  ruin  which  follows 
when  there  is  a  want  of  fidelity  in 
dealing  with  the  things  of  the  next 
life?  In  such  case  the  ruin  is  irre- 
trievable, the  loss  of  the  soul  will  stand 
no  comparison  with  even  the  gain  of 
the  world. 

II.  Easy  to  perceive  the  fidelity 
required  of  the  minister  of  Christ. 
1.  Personal  fidelity.  If  a  man  has 
not  experienced  for  himself  the  grace 
of  God  in  convincing,  converting,  and 
sanctifying  his  own  heart,  how  can  he 
tell  others  of  the  change  which  is 
implied  in  all  these  workings  of  the 
Spirit?  2.  Consistency  of  life  and  con- 
versation. Even  supposing  that  the 
doctrine  preached  is  in  accordance  with 
God's  Word,'  an  inconsistent  life  will 
wither  the  power  of  the  message  ancl 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


frustrate  the  ends  of  its  delivery. 
Not  only  this ;  but  3.  There  must  be 
fidelity  in  the  declaration  of  the  whole 
revealed  truth  of  inspiration.  It  is  not 
allowed  to  the  ambassador  to  deliver 
only  a  part  of  his  message ;  he  must 
proclaim  the  whole  revealed  counsel  of 
God.  He  is  to  preach  the  truth  in 
all  its  integrity,  keeping  back  nothing 
which  is  plainly  revealed ;  but  as  a  wise 
householder  he  must  bring  forth  things 
new  and  old,  in  order  that  he  may  be 
faithful  to  Him  who  hath  called  him 
and  invested  him  with  such  lofty 
responsibilities.  [*'  It  is  written."  "  It 
is  written  again r\ 

III.  There  are  lessons  which  all 
professing  Christians  may  derive. — 
1.  "Of  all  our  earthly  possessions  we 
are  stevjardsy  not  p^^ojyrietors.  There 
is  in  the  ordinary  arrangements  of 
Divine  providence  a  vast  employment 
of  second  causes,  and  many  of  the 
things  we  acquire  appear  to  come  in 
the  course  of  our  own  efforts  and  as 
the  effect  of  our  own  industry  or  skill ; 
hence  arises  the  idea  of  ownership,  and 
forgetfulness  that  all  things  come  of 
God,  and  that  we  have  not  a  fraction 
to  which  we  can  lay  claim  as  an 
independent  possession,  which  we  have 
a  right  to  employ  without  reference 
to  Him  who  gave  it.  But  in  truth 
all  the  secondary  means  .  .  .  are  gifts 
from  God,  and  derive  their  efficacy 
from  His  imparted  power  or  bene- 
ficence. So  that,  in  the  most  literal 
sense,  all  things  come  of  Him,  e.g., 
gifts  of  intellect  which  qualify  for 
conspicuous  usefulness  to  others,  gifts 
of  wealth  or  power  for  influencing 
largely  our  fellow-creatures.  The 
point  to  be  remembered  is  that  all 
these  bestowments  are  entrusted  to  the 
keeping  of  those  who  possess  them  to 
be  employed  by  them  as  stewards  in 
trust  .  .  .  for  God's  service.  Have  you, 
then,  consecrated  large  possessions  and 
the  gain  of  them  to  the  Lord,  and  your 
substance  to  the  Lord  of  the  whole 
earth  1  Is  the  talent  which  belongs 
to  authority  over  others  employed  for 
God,  for  upholding  God's  honour,  for 
promoting  the  temporal  and  spiritual 


well-being  of  all  within  the  range  of 
your  influence  ? " 

2.  Our  fidelity  must  originate  in 
personal  piety. — "  (1)  The  root  of  Scrip- 
tural obedience  consists  in  a  right 
apprehension  of  the  relationship  in 
which  we  stand  to  God.  We  are  His 
creatures,  every  faculty  we  possess  is 
His  gift,  and  we  are  bound  to  conse- 
crate all  we  have  and  are  to  His  glory. 
(2)  More  than  this,  God  has  yet  a 
stronger  claim.  If  we  constantly 
remembered  the  wonderful  love  of  God 
in  the  gift  of  His  Son,  we  should  never 
lose  sight  of  the  obligations  under  which 
we  lie,  to  consecrate  our  souls  and 
bodies  to  His  service,  to  act  as  stewards 
who  are  bound  to  be  faithful  in  His 
sight.  (3)  And  what  a  motive  for 
fidelity  is  supplied  when  we-  call  to 
mind  the  shortness  of  our  allotted 
period  of  service,  and  the  near  ap- 
proach of  the  time  when  Christ  will 
reappear  to  reckon  with  all  His  pro- 
fessing servants.  Stewardship  always 
implies  a  time  of  reckoning.  It  may 
be  near  or  distant,  but  then  there  will 
be  no  escape  or  evasion.  With  what 
joy  will  Christ's  true  and  faithful 
servants  hear  the  welcome,  *  Ye  have 
been  faithful  over  a  few  things,'  etc. 
How  terrible,  then,  the  condition  of 
those  who,  though  they  were  stewards, 
have  not  been  found  faithful ;  the 
measure  of  their  privileges  will  be  the 
measure  of  their  fearful  condemnation. 
(4)  Let  us  then  bear  in  mind  the 
lesson  which  this  day's  Epistle  [Third 
Sunday  in  Advent]  delivers  for  our 
direction.  Knowing  beforehand  the 
strictness  of  the  account  which  we 
must  each  one  render,  let  us  aim  at 
dependence  upon  Divine  grace  to  over- 
come every  temptation,  to  conquer 
every  difficulty,  which  opposes  our 
progress  in  sanctification,  and  so  to 
abound  unto  every  good  work  that  in 
the  end  we  may  attain  to  the  recom- 
pense and  the  reward  which  in  the 
last  day  awaits  every  one  who  shall 
be  found  to  have  been  faithful  to  the 
stewardship  confided  to  his  keeping." — 
AWidged  from  Bishop  Bickersteth, 
''Clerical  World;' i.  172. 

117 


CHAP.  IV.     IIOMILETIC  C03IMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  7.  Human  Differences ;  their 
Origin  and  Design. 

I.  Some  modern  scientific  thought  is 
tending  to  an  over-emphatic  assertion  of 
the  principle  of  Paul's  appeal.  Accord- 
ing to  it,  there  is  nothing — not  even  con- 
science— which  is  not  simply  the  special 
and  most  recent  result  in  the  individual 
of  processes,  or  of  a  conflict  of  processes, 
and,  so  to  speak,  of  interests,  acting 
and  interacting  and  reacting  through 
long  ages  and  issuing  in  man.  Think- 
ing, willing,  desiring,  even  the  moral 
judgments — all  are  the  necessary  and 
quasi-mechanical  outcome  of  the  un- 
brokenly  continuous  past  of  man's 
natural  antecedents.  Nothing  is  his 
own;  he  has  so  utterly  ^'received'' 
everything  he  has  and  is,  that  nothing 
is  ever  really  begun  de  novo  in  his  life ; 
nothing  is  ever  in  any  real  sense 
originated  ^vithin  the  man  himself ; 
there  is  no  true  independence,  nor 
creative  power  in  the  will,  no  freedom. 
The  natural  heart  over-does  its  protest, 
and  in  the  opposite  direction  would 
tend  to  claim  everything,  except  of 
course  the  obviously  derived  physical 
part  of  manhood  and  some  features 
and  degrees  of  capacity  and  inclina- 
tion which  are  part  of  the  original 
draught  of  that  "  character  "  in  which 
plainly  the  individual  has  no  choice. 
Man  feels  that  he  is  not  the  meo^e 
creature  of,  at  any  rate,  his  present- 
day  and  personal  environment.  He 
is  made  by  circumstances,  but  he  is 
the  master  of  circumstances ;  indeed, 
he  is  often  first,  and  intentionally,  the 
maker  of  the  circumstances  and  con- 
ditions which  then  make  him.  He 
will  not  believe  that  it  is  only  an 
illusion  when  he  seems  to  find  an 
independent  power  of  origination  and 
creation  in  his  will.  The  man  made 
by  "  self-help  "  is  apt  indeed  to  be  so 
much  his  ideal;  any  help  from  the 
outside,  and  above  all  from  God,  is  so 
apt  to  be,  to  all  intents  and  purposes, 
out  of  his  calculations  and  thanks ; 
that  he  is  his  own  maker,  his  own 
god.  The  little  street  Arab,  in  the 
mission  school  belonging  to  a  London 
chapel,   whose  minister   gave   me   the 

118 


fact,  refused  point-blank  to  say, 
*'  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread." 
'*  I  shan't  ask  nobody;  I  can  get  my 
own  bread"  (H.  J.  F.,  from  W.  J.  H.). 
He  is  typical  of  the  natural  heart. 
The  Corinthian  heart  is  ^'rich"  is 
^'"full"  and  ^^  reigns ^^  royally,  not 
only  without  Paul,  but  without  God. 
It  is  the  danger  of  wealth ;  of  high 
intellectual  endowment,  conscious  of  its 
own  nobility  of  powers  and  exulting  in 
every  conquest  of  a  new  field;  of  all 
strong  character,  which  cannot  help 
but  know  its  own  force,  finding  its 
judgment  sound,  its  business  instincts 
sure  and  correct,  other  men's  will 
obedient  and  plastic  before  its  voli- 
tions. "  Our  lips  are  our  own  ;  who  is 
Lord  over  us  ? "  (Ps.  xii.  4)  is  no 
abnormal  or  isolated  independence.  It 
is  the  very  antithesis  of  "  the  little 
child,"  in  his  readiness  to  believe  aud 
to  do  what  he  is  told,  and  in  his 
simple  and  natural  and  acknowledged 
dependence  upon  "  father  "  for  all  he 
has  and  wants.  But  because  it  is  so 
hard  for  the  man — the  manlier  the 
harder — to  "  show  himself  the  man 
amongst  men "  (1  Kings  ii.  2)  and  to 
be  notwithstanding  only  "  a  little  child 
before  God,"  it  is  therefore  reputed 
"  easier  "  for  women  and  children  to 
be  religious  than  for  men  to  be.  Man's 
nobility,  his  Godlikeness,  is  his  snare. 
He  tends  to  deny  any  higher,  any 
God,  but  himself.  Paul  appeals  to 
such  :  "  What  hast  thou  that  thou  . 
didst  not  receive  ? "  etc. 

II.  1.  Natural  character  and  con- 
stitution. —  "  From  my  parents?  " 
Yes.  "  From  my  physical  tempering 
together  and  make  1  "  Yes.  But  all 
these  only  spell:  "  G-O-D."  To  a 
Christian  man  of  science  what  is  or 
may  be  proved  of  (popularly  so-called) 
Evolution  is  only  so  much  more  ascer- 
tained detail  about  the  method  of  God 
in  creation,  the  processes  and  instru- 
mentalities He  has  employed.  We  are 
continually  putting  more  and  more 
numerous  links  into  the  chain  of 
physical  antecedents  and  consequents 
which  links  the  will  of  God  to  the 
finished  product ;  we  find  links  almost 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


innumerable  where  our  fathers  neither 
knew  nor  suspected  any.  But  to  the 
Christian  thinker  the  chain  still  begins 
at  God,  and  God  is  still  as  really  in 
every  link  as  when  they  were  fewer. 
Our  fathers  believed  God  in  immediate 
and  direct  contact  with  the  created 
thing.  If  we  are  to  be  compelled  to 
interpose  a  complex  physical  process 
between  the  Creator  and,  e.g.^  the 
finished  individual  man,  yet  He  will 
be  as  really  the  Creator  as  ever. 
[The  little  child  says,  "  God  made 
me."  The  parent,  or  the  physician, 
or  the  modern  physiologist,  armed  with 
all  microscopic  and  other  implements 
of  the  minutest  observation  and  re- 
search, if  he  be  a  Christian,  still  says 
as  simply  as  the  little  child,  "  God 
made  me " ;  although,  where  the 
ignorance  of  the  child  or  the  unin- 
structed  adult  knows  and  dreams  of 
nothing,  he  has  watched  a  curious  and 
highly  complex  physical  process.  To 
reconcile  all  that  may  emerge  as  proved 
fact  in  the  evolutionary  sketch  of  the 
history  of  creation,  with  a  belief  in  a  per- 
sonal Creator,  is  only  the  "  God  made 
me  "  example  on  a  larger  scale.]  "  Tell 
me  what  your  natural  constitution  is, 
what  your  inherited  mental  charac- 
teristics are.  Tell  me  how  the  most 
recent  scientific  men  settle  questions 
of  heredity  and  the  like.  I  say  God 
made  you  all  that,  and  just  that  and 
no  other  sort  of  man.  They  are  only 
ascertaining  and  exhibiting  better 
than  could  ever  be  done  before  how 
He  made  you.  You  have  nothing  but 
what  He  put  into  you  :  your  capacities 
and  faculties  are  His  gifts."  "  But 
I  have  worked  hard  for  my  bit  of 
money;  I  was  up  whilst  other  lazy 
people  were  lying  in  bed ;  I  kept  my 
eyes  open,  whilst  other  men  were 
dreaming  and  let  the  chances  slip,  or 
never  saw  chances  which  I  seized." 
And  so  on.  "  True  ;  and  much  of  it — 
all  the  patient  industry,  the  un- 
grudging labour,  the  diligent  cultiva- 
tion of  natural  powers,  the  honest 
thrift  that  watched  every  penny — all 
these  and  more  are  credit  to  the 
successful  man.      But  remember  that 


the  original  force  of  sense  and 
business  sagacity,  the  robust  physical 
basis  which  made  all  this  successful 
activity  possible,  where  so  many  others 
were  handicapped  by  sickness  or  other 
physical  disability,  are  in  the  last 
analysis  of  all  thought,  God.  He  gave 
these  as  your  capital,  and  in  a  score 
of  ways  He  might  have  spoiled  your 
returns  from  it,  if  He  had  pleased.'' 
' '  Thou  receivedst. ' ' 

2.  The  original  surroundings  and 
home. — No  man  chooses  his  own 
parents  or  birthplace,  important 
factors  as  these  are  in  all  his  after- 
career.  "  Chance  I "  is  meaningless  ;  it 
is  no  account  of  the  matter  at  all ;  it 
is  only  a  way  of  avoiding  giving  an 
account  of  it.  It  is  only  the  baflled 
mind  making  its  escape  from  the 
problem,  covering  its  retreat — cuttle- 
fish fashion^with  a  dense  wordy 
cloud.  The  sovereignty  of  God  in 
election  had  in  it  this  much  of  truth, 
evident  in  both  Scripture  and  ex- 
perience, that  a  thousand  circum- 
stances and  conditions  of  life,  all  of 
which  had  some  connection  with,  and 
influence  upon,  a  man's  final  salvation, 
nearly  or  more  remotely,  were  beyond 
his  control,  and  from  the  first  were 
settled,  quite  outside  his  own  choice. 
Whether  he  should  see  the  light  in  a 
heathen  or  in  a  Christian  land,  for 
example,  is  in  vitally  close  connection 
with  the  question  of  a  man's  ultimate 
salvation,  and,  meanwhile,  with  his 
degree  of  moral  responsibility,  his 
standing  and  career  and  the  influence 
of  his  life ;  this  and  numberless  other 
elements  in  the  case  are  ordered  by 
rules  which  lie  quite  out  of  our  sight, 
and  are  ordered  by  God.  "  Election  " 
doctrine  did  not  take  sufiicient  account 
of  a  grace  which  held  every  man 
accountable  for  only  the  light  and 
advantages  he  actually  enjoyed,  and 
which,  on  the  other  hand,  made  it 
possible  for  a  man  to  be  saved  in  any 
circumstances  and  with  even  a  very 
limited  measure  of  light.  But,  plainly, 
these  things  men  "  received.'^  Men 
should  be  thankful  for,  not  vulgarly 
or    proudly    boastful    of,    the    social 

119 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


advantages  of  birth  and  station.  These 
are  no  mean  elements,  when  conse- 
crated, in  conspicuous  success  for  God. 
The  "  gentleman  "  horn,  or  the  man  of 
inherited  wealth,  is  so  much  the  more 
debtor  to  God  to  use  these  for  the 
glory  of  Him  who  gave  them,  apart 
from  all  choice  or  merit  in  their 
possessor. 

3.  All  ^^  natural  ^^  goodness  is  grace, 
the  gift  of  God. — All  points  of 
"  natural  "  beauty  of  character — un- 
selfishness, generosity,  truthfulness ; 
and,  much  more,  all  early  tenderness 
of  conscience,  all  early  disposition 
towards  good  and  towards  God  ;  such 
early  "goodness"  as  makes  some  say, 
"  They  were  naturally  religious  from 
their  childhood," — all  are  of  God. 
The  "  natural  "  is  all  grace  ;  the  pre- 
liminary gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
*'  Man  received  it."  [The  old  theo- 
logians who  drew  stern  pictures  of 
human  nature  in  its  "  total  depravity  " 
and  its  utter  ruin  and  its  entireness  of 
evil,  were  deaHng  rather  with  a  necessary 
conception  of  clear  theological  thought 
than  with  actual  human  nature.  It 
was  needful  to  state,  as  precisely  and 
exactly  as  Scripture  language,  inter- 
preted and  verified  by  observation  and 
experience — these  being  in  their  turn 
lighted  up  and  explained  by  Scripture 
statements — would  make  it  possible 
and  would  require,  what  human  nature 
would  have  been,  and  would  be  again, 
without  the  grace  of  God.  And  no 
man,  who  knows  his  own  heart,  can 
doubt  that,  if  that  grace  were  wholly 
withdrawn,  and  himself  were  simply 
left  to  temptation,  there  is  no  depth  to 
which  he  might  not  sink,  no  length  to 
which  he  might  not  depart  from  God. 
But  the  old  sketch  of  human  nature 
wanted  its  hard,  true  outlines  softening, 
and  the  whole  picture  transfusing,  with 
the  glow  and  life  and  tenderness  of  the 
grace  of  God  shown  in  Christ  to  every 
man.  Mere  human  nature,  wholly 
evil,  unrelieved  by  grace,  has  never  been 
anything  but  a  theological  conception. 
In  fact,  there  is  good  in  every  man ; 
very  much,  and  very  early,  good  in  very 
many.    "  But '  thou  hast  received '  it.    It 

120  ,      .  . 


is  not  thyself,  but  God,  not  nature,  but 
grace,  even  before  any  conversion,  or 
the  desire  to  be  converted.  *  Why  dost 
thou  glory  ? '  etc." 

4.  Never  will  right  hearts  fells  this 
more  deeply  and  wholly  true  than 
when  they  stand,  ^'  saved,''  in  heaven's 
eternal  security.  All  their  crowns  of 
holiness,  happiness,  earthly  sainthood, 
heavenly  service,  all  will  be  cast  before 
Him  who  gave  them  all.  There  at 
last  "  No  flesh  will  glory  in  His 
presence  !  " 

Ver.  20.   Word  and  Power. 

I.  True  of  Christianity  in  contrast 
with  other  ethical  systems. — As  to 
their  excellence  "  in  word  "  they  many 
of  them  deserve  high  praise.  The 
religion  of  Jesus  Christ  gains  nothing 
by  an  advocacy  which  does  not  do 
justice  to  the  elements  of  truth  in 
other  religions — particularly  moral 
truth.  [As,  for  instance,  the  strong 
filial  piety  of  Chinese  life.  Yet  justice 
should  be  done  to  Christianity.  Ex- 
aggerated praise  is  sometimes  given  to 
non-Christian  systems.  E.g.  Confucius 
several  times  gave  the  rule,  "  What 
ye  would  not  that  men  should  do  to 
you,  do  ye  not  do  to  them."  There 
is  a  surface  similarity  in  this  to  the 
"  golden  rule  "  of  Christ.  But  no  such 
similarity  (nor  any  ground  in  history) 
as  to  warrant  the  supposition  that 
Christianity  has  incorporated  an  article 
of  Chinese  morality.  As  a  matter  of 
historical  and  chronological  possibility 
or  probability,  it  would  have  been  more 
reasonable  to  assert  that  it  should  have 
"  incorporated  "  the  equivalent  saying 
of  Shammai :  *'  What  is  unpleasing  to 
thee  do  not  to  thy  neighbour."  These 
two  sayings  may  show  the  high -water 
mark  of,  natural  altruism ;  yet,  as  is 
easily  seen,  and  often  pointed  out,  these 
are  negative ;  they  restrain  the  hand 
from  evil-doing  ;  Christ's  saying,  "  Do 
unto  others,"  etc.,  sets  the  hand  to  busy, 
active  benevolence  and  well-doing.] 
Hardly  any  considerable  system  of 
morals,  ancient  or  modern,  but  enun- 
ciates some  noble  sentiments  and  pre- 
cepts ;  the  "  Light  that  lighteth  every 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   1.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iV. 


man  coming  into  the  world  "  (John  i.  9) 
has  not  left  Himself  without  a  witness 
in  heathen  minds  and  hearts  in  any 
country  or  age.  Yet  two  facts  are 
acknowledged  by  general  consent.  First 
that  there  was  never  any  general 
agreement  as  to  a  moral  standard  or 
code  of  rules  for  conduct ;  and  next, 
that,  however  admirable  and  noble  the 
"  word "  of  moral  teaching  might  be, 
the  systems  never  gave,  or  taught,  the 
power  to  carry  out  the  teaching  and 
fulfil  the  code.  All  fail  there.  They 
have  offered  a  marvellously  com- 
plete analysis  of  human  nature, 
but  they  are  altogether  wanting  in 
motive  power,  and  in  practice  the 
machinery  of  such  morality  was  found 
to  stand  still.  "  Words"  plenty  of 
them,  and  beautiful  and  noble ;  but 
no  ^'' power ."  The  result  of  man's 
unaided  moral  experiment,  as  tried  in 
its  most  highly  developed  form, — that 
of  classical  antiquity, — and  with  the 
greatest  advantages,  with  philosophers 
for  teachers  whose  names  stand 
highest,  beyond  all  comparison  or 
competition,  is  exactly  gathered  up 
in  Ovid's  well-known  confession :  "  I  see 
and  approve  the  Better ;  I  follow  the 
Worse."  And  this  because  power  to 
follow  the  Better  with  any  steady  and 
persistent  steps  was  not  forthcoming. 
[Not  only  was  the  standard  varying 
and  uncertain,  from  teacher  to  teacher, 
no  finality  being  attained,  progress  in 
ethical  inquiry  being  "progress  on  a 
treadmill "  ;  but  no  adequate  motives 
were  supplied  for  obedience  to  any  one 
truth  taught,  no  sanctions  for  the  laws 
laid  down ;  it  was  open  to  the  indi- 
vidual to  deny  the  cogency  of  any 
political  or  personal  prudential 
"  reasons,"  and  the  authority  of  even 
the  power  and  loftier  dictates  of  his 
own  nature,  when  it  was  at  its  best. 
Cicero  long  ago  mockingly  pointed  out 
how  seldom  their  moralisings  produced 
much  efiect  upon  the  lives  of  the  very 
teachers  themselves  {Tusc.  Qucest,  2). 
And,  above  all,  nobody  himself  knew, 
or  could  teach  others,  how  to  fulfil 
his  own  ideals.]  "  Now  as  a  matter 
pf    fact,    Christianity   has   introduced 


into  humanity  a  moral  power,  un- 
known apart  from  the  presence  of 
Christian  faith  and  knowledge.  This 
power  has  proved  itself  adequate  to 
the  vanquishing  of  the  natural  enmity 
of  the  heart  to  self-control  and  self- 
denial.  The  Christian  religion  has 
found  and  revealed  a  way  of  rendering 
virtue — which  is  admittedly  admir- 
able and  desirable — actually  attain- 
able ;  has  made  the  path  of  obedience 
progressively  congenial,  attractive,  and 
delightful.  There  is  a  general  agree- 
ment that  this  is  the  distinguishing 
characteristic  of  Christianity.  First, 
in  point  of  time,  comes  the  provision 
for  pardon  ;  but  first  in  point  of  real 
importance  comes  the  provision  of  a 
spiritual  power,  which  secures  the  love 
and  practice  of  holiness."  [Professor 
J.  Badford  Thomson,  whose  words  may 
stand  for  many  more.  But  the  fact 
is  undisputed.] 

II.  True  of  Christianity  as  com- 
pared with  Judaism.— This  had  a 
code,  higher  and  most  perfect  in  its 
comprehensive  and  adequate  range  of 
directions.  And,  further,  it  rooted  its 
most  thoroughly  symmetrical  and 
perfect  code  in  the  personal  relation 
to  God :  '  !  am  the  Lord  thy  God ; 
thou  shalt  have,"  etc.  [A  sceptical 
lawyer  began  to  read  the  Bible  in 
order  from  the  beginning,  and  '*  pulled 
up "  at  last  at  the  Decalogue,  with 
the  pregnant  exclamation,  "  Where 
did  Moses  get  that  law?"]  Further, 
and  more  remarkably  still,  it  stated 
the  true  secret  of  all  law-keeping, 
in  its  most  condensed  form :  *'  Love 
the  Lord  thy  God ;  love  thy  neigh- 
bour as  thyself."  [Though  note  how 
little  prominent  is  this  latter  (Lev. 
xix.  18),  a  mere  sentence  among  a 
series,  until,  so  to  speak,  disinterred 
by  Christ,  and  exhibited  in  all  its 
significance  as  one.  of  the  two  cardinal 
enactments  of  the  whole  Law.]  Yet, 
though  it  was  a  Divine  directory  of 
life,  it  was  annulled  "  for  the  weakness 
and  unprofitableness  thereof"  (Heb. 
vii.  18).  The  Law  "  could  not  make  " 
the  comers  to  its  sacrifices  and  other 
ordinances  ^'perfect"  (Heb.  x.  1).    God 

12] 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMtLETIC  COMMENTARY:    I   CORINTHIANS. 


erected    this   fingerpost   of   duty ;   the  is  "  power  "  to  secure  obedience  and  to 

highway  of    righteous  life  was  in  no  elevate   and  purify ;   the   real   power 

sort  of  doubt.     But  the  Law  was  only  is  in  the  man  himself,  in  his  own  will, 

a  fingerpost ;  it  showed  the  way,  but  Even  a  motive  is  not  power.     Love  for 

gave  no  help  to  walk  in  it.     It  con-  Christ  is  a  "  power "  only  in  the  same 

demned  trespass    swiftly  and  sternly,  quasi-poetic  sense  as  Example  is.     The 

but  it  gave  no  direct  aid  to  obedience.  real    spiritual    dynamic   that   enables 

"  By  the   Law   was   the  "   clearer  and  the  will,  and  brings  men  at  last  to  the 

clearer     ''  hnowledge    of    sin "    (Rom.  secret  of  ^' power,"  is  in  the  working 

iii.   20).     But  in   the  Law  itself  was  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon,  with,  in  the 

nothing  more.     [Under  the  Old  Ttsta-  will  of  man.     "  The  law  of  the  Spirit 

ment  order  there  was   no   doubt  not  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus "  makes  a  man 

only   knowledge,    but    obedience,   and  "  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death  " 

obedience   which    meant   victory   over  (Rom.   viii.   2).     All  this  is  experience 

opposing     evil     within     and     around  in   the   man   who   has   "  entered  into 

the    man.       Yet    this    was    not     in  the  kingdom  of  God"  (Matt,  xviii.  3) ; 

the    Law,    but     was    an    anticipation  or  as,   with  a  significant  reversal   of 

and   foretaste   of    the    grace    of    the  the    polarity    of    the    thought,   it    is 

Gospel.]     Jewish   seekers   after  a  life  sometimes  put,  who  has  "  received  the 

of    moral    perfectness    found   all   the  kingdom,"  and  let  it  enter  into  him 

inner    moral    division   and    weakness  (Mark  x.    15).     The   philosophers   do 

which  the  heathen  felt  and  mourned  but   analyse   more   clearly    and   fully 

over ;      they     understood     it     better  and   cast    into   accurate   and   orderly 

than   the   best   of    heathen    moralists  language  what  all  human  hearts  more 

could.     But  all  their   struggle   ended  vaguely    think    and    feel    on    moral 

in  the  moral  breakdown  and  confessed  qviestions.     No  representative  question 

failure  of  Rom.  vii.   12-24.     The  Law  is  ever  raised  by  them  and  discussed 

said,  "  Do  and  live,"  "  Do  or  die";  but  which    earnest   men   somewhere   have 

of   itself   it   could    not    show   how   to  not  at  some  time  less  definitely  reccg- 

"  Do."     It  was  in  word  only,  not  ^^  in  nised  and  dealt  with.     [The  problems 

power r  and     solutions    of    Job,    e.g.,    or    of 

III.  The  kingdom  of  God  has,  and  Ecclesiastes  are  not  so  definitely  those 

brings,  power. — In  its  clearer  revela-  of    any    special    age    or    country    or 

tion  as  to  Rewards  and  Punishments  philosophy,  as  to  yield  any  basis  for 

in    the    future    life   it    has    supplied  locating  date  or  authorship.     They  are 

sanctions  such  as  even  Judaism  could  the  questions  and  answers  of  serious 

not  furnish.     In   its   Central   Person,  men     everywhere,     always.]        Every 

Jesus  Christ,  it  has  supplied  a  perfect  man's  spiritual   life,  as   he    is  led  up 

Pattern,    a    living    Summary    of    all  to  and  into  the    "  Kingdom  of   God," 

perfect  human  nobility  and  righteous-  recapitulates  the  moral  history  of  the 

ness  of  life  and  character.     In  its  love  race.     He  has  his  patriarchal  age  and 

to  that  Personal  Saviour  it  has  supplied  his  Mosaic  dispensation,  before  he  comes 

a    perfect,    a    self-acting    motive    to  into  the  Christian  era  of  his  life  and 

obedience  ;  a  motive  which,  as  matter  experience.     [Hence  such  passages  and 

of  fact,  has  produced  results  which  no  descriptions  as  in  Gal.  iv.  3-7  are  true, 

other  power  could  effect,  and  has  done  as  between  Judaism'  and  Christianity 

this  in  some  drawn  from  the  lowest  and  men  living  on  the  border- time  of 

types  and  grades  of  human  life.    [That  both,  and  as  between  the  days  during 

love  for  Christ,  moreover,  supplies  the  which    the    individual    is    being    led 

most  perfect  legislation  for  the  indi-  '*  wti^o  CAn's^"  and  those  during  which 

vidual,  prompting  a  very  ms^mc^/or  Zai(;  he  lives    "m   Christ^     In   Paul   and 

where  there  is  no  express  command.]  many  of  his  Christian  contemporaries 

Yet  even  in  the  most  perfect  Example  the    dispensational   contrast   and   the 

it  is  only  in  a  figurative  sense  that  there  personal  were  coincident.     They  lived, 

122 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   L   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  iv. 


historically  as  well  as  experimentally, 
through  the  transition  from  the  one  age 
to  the  other.]  The  Law  showed  the 
way;  the  Gospel  accompanies  and  directs 
and  upholds  the  traveller.  Conscience 
is  light,  not  force ;  knowledge,  not  help 
or  power.  The  bitterest  of  the  bitter 
cup  of  true  repentance  is  the  experience, 
"When  I  would  do  good,  evil  is 
present  with  me" — present,  and  so 
much  master  that,  ''  The  evil  that 
I  would  not,  that  do  I."  "  Our  moral 
nature  is  disordered,  and  one  of  the 
chief  evidences  of  the  disorder  is  the 
conflict  between  duty  and  inclination. 
Conscience  and  the  will  are  not  at  one. 
We  may  form  beautiful  ideals,  but 
we  cannot  realise  them.  Desires  which 
are  known  to  be  mean  and  poor  often 
prevail  in  us  against  the  voice  of 
conscience  and  even  the  protests  of 
reason.  And  often  the  state  of  things 
is  worse  than  that  of  a  conflict 
in  which  the  bad  usually  gets  the 
better  of  the  good.  In  many  the 
result  is  a  state  of  helpless  captivity. 
In  these  cases  lusts  of  the  body  rise 
to  sovereign  power  and  crush  down  in 
ignominious  bondage  every  good  and 
wholesome  desire.  Men  and  women 
are  degraded  far  below  the  level  of 
brutes.  In  the  grip  of  imperious  lusts 
they  are  powerless,*  struggle  as  they 
may.  When  the  outward  evil  is  not 
so  great,  the  triumph  of  evil  is  not 
so  conspicuous ;  but  that  evil  reigns 
is  often  lamentably  apparent,  even  to 
the  persons  themselves.  Often  their 
lives  are  governed  by  a  selfishness 
that,  regardless  of  others,  seeks  to 
secure  everything  for  themselves. 
[Culture,  with  its  tendency  to  fas- 
tidiousness of  liking  and  judgment,  is 
often  exceedingly  selfish.  Of  itself  it 
certainly  has  no  redemption  from  self  in 
it.]  The  will  of  God,  which  they  know 
to  be  the  true  sovereign  authority  of 
the  world,  is  little  regarded  except  in 
so  far  as  the  ordinary  usages  of  society 
may  happen  to  agree  with  it.  These 
lives  do  not  conform  to  any  noble 
standard.  And  even  at  their  very  best 
there  is  such  a  discord  between  what 
they  are  inclined  to  do  and  what  they 


ought  to  do,  that  their  highest  achieve- 
ments in  duty  are  but  the  result  of  a 
hard  struggle,  not  the  free,  spontaneous 
movements  of  souls  delighting  in  the 
ways  of  truth  and  righteousness." 
(Dr.  W.  G.  Blaikie.) 

IV.  But  the  Gospel  scheme  provides 
**  power." — It  has  been  a  power  work- 
ing with  the  preacher  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  With  what  sledge-hammer 
force  does  the  Gospel  word,  when  full 
of  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  break 
open  the  door  of  the  most  utterly  evil 
heart,  and  find  admittance  for  conviction 
and  for  Christ  !  How  this  power  has 
again  and  again  borne  down  before  it, 
and  swept  away  in  its  victorious  rush, 
all  the  barriers  of  social  pride,  of 
personal  reserve  or  timidity,  bringing 
to  open  concern  the  most  unlikely 
hearts !  The  man  also  who  receives 
into  himself  the  Spirit  of  God  as  a 
Spirit  testifying  to  his  adoption  into 
the  family  of  God  (Rom  viii.  15-17) 
finds  he  has  received  the  "  Spirit  of 
power "  as  well  as  ''of  love  and  a 
sound  mind"  (2  Tim.  i.  7).  As  a 
matter  of  mental  and  moral  scientific 
analysis,  no  question  is  more  per- 
plexing, or  seems  more  nearly  insoluble, 
than  that  of  the  enabling  effect  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  upon  the  human  will. 
But  the  simplest  child  of  God  finds 
that  the  same  Spirit  whose  inwelling 
brings  him  peace  and  joy  and  hope 
brings  power  also.  Old  habits  seem 
like  Samson's  bonds  of  new  rope 
when  touched  with  His  fire.  The  old 
struggle  with  the  heart  and  its  inclina- 
tions still  may  many  times  be  a  severe 
one;  but  it  ends,  not  as  in  Rom.  vii., 
in  defeat,  but  in  victory.  Evil  may 
be  "  present,"  but  it  rules  no  longer. 
The  "  new  creature  "  is  but  "  new  " 
with  the  strength  of  the  child,  but 
that  strength  may  be  increased  until 
the  walk  is  with  the  firm  and  victorious 
tread  of  the  man  in  Christ.  Self-con- 
trol, though  in  no  strength  of  Self,  is 
enjoyed  and  exhibited ;  patience  and 
forgiveness  of  injuries — an  impossible 
task  to  the  natural  heart — become 
possibilities  and  facts.  Every  mission - 
field,  every  Christian  congregation,  has 

123 


CHAP.  V.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


its  "  modern  miracles,"  its  moral  heart  and  corrupt,  hastening  to  poli- 
miracles  :  degraded  ones  lifted  out  of  tical  and  social  ruin  and  disintegration, 
the  slough  of  gross  or  cruel  sin  :  the  when  Christianity  came  and  put  a  new- 
utter,  hard,  proud,  cold  worldling-life  force  into  man  and  society.  The  world 
melted  away,  and  giving  place  to  took  a  new  start,  and  began  a  new 
humility,  unselfishness,  tenderness,  sym-  life,  at  the  era  of  the  advent  of  the 
pathy,  self-sacrificing  benevolence,  and  "  kingdom  of  God."  And  if  it  has 
so  on.  Facts  prove  Paul's  words  true,  seemed  to  fail  in  persons  or  in  societies 
And  only  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom  since,  it  is  when  it  has  degenerated 
of  God  has  ever  thus  solved  the  moral  into  a  thing  of  *'  wo7'ds "  only,  in 
problems  which  were  the  despair  of  creeds  and  pulpits  and  life;  and, 
the  noblest  ancient  philosophers  and  indeed,  has  reverted  to  the  ethics  of 
ethics.  The  privilege  of  the  regenerate  cultured  heathen  naturalism  in  its 
life,  moreover,  should  not  be  taken  to  doctrine  of  human  nature ;  still  bear- 
stop  short  of  this  possession  of  moral  ing  the  Christian  name,  wearing  the 
'power.  The  Gospel  gives  the  moral  Christian  mask,  but  heathen — natural 
leverage  and  the  fulcrum — both — with  — at  heart,  and  in  all  essential  prin- 
which  the  world  may  be  lifted.  And  ciples  and  motives,  and  in  the  force 
this  is  no  mere  Christian  boasting,  but  which  is  appealed  to  for  recovering  man 
an  assertion  whose  truth  is  verified  in  from  degradation  and  moral  failure 
the  whole  history  of  the  modern  world.  and  ruin. 
The  representative  world  was  sick  at 


CHAPTER  V. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 

The   Case    op    Shameful   Sin. 
(Also  in  2  Cor.  ii.  5-11,  vii.  8-12.) 


Ver.  1.  Commonly. — ♦'  Actually  "  (R.V. ;  widely  accepted).  Among  you. — Join  with  "  there 
is"  not  with  '■'' reported."  News  not  only  brought  by  Chloe's  people  (i.  11);  more  widely 
spread,  reaching  Paul  from  other  quarters  also.  "  Such  cases  not  unknown  in  Roman 
society,  but  regarded  with  horror.  Cic,  Pro  Cluentio,  5,  6,  '  O  mulieris  scelus  incredibile,  et 
praeter  hanc  unam  in  vita  omni  inauditum ' "  (Stanley  and  Farrar,  aptly).  This  agrees 
with  the  true  reading ;  "  named  "  omitted.  Father's  wife. — A  living,  injured  husband 
(2  Cor.  vii.  12)  ;  probably  {not  certainly^  the  father.  Hath. — Euphemistic  for  actual, 
married  possession. 

Ver.  2. — Prefer  affirmative  to  interrogative  form  (Ellicott,  with  Auth.,  R.V.,  against  many 
moderns).  Puffed  up. — Not  about  this,  but  as  in  iv.  6.  Q.d.  •'  Even  this  has  not  pricked 
the  bladder  of  your  inflation,  of  which  I  have  been  speaking  to  you  1  Spite  of  the  occurrence 
of  this  in  your  midst,  ye  are  still,"  etc.  Observe  spiritual  and  intellectual  pretensions  of 
highest  order,  not  acco  mpanied  by  any  sufficient,  even  elementary,  moral  sensibility  !  (See 
Appended  Note,  from   Farrar.)     Observe  "  Did  .  .  .  liad  done." 

Ver.  3.  Absent. — At  Ephesus.  Present  in  spirit. — Not  the  Holy  Spirit.  Evans  puts  very 
strong  meaning  into  phrase :  "  It  appears  from  this  and  from  other  texts  that  Paul's  own 
spirit,  illumined  .  .  .  and  vivified  by  the  Divine,  must  have  been  endowed  on  certain 
occasions  with  a  more  than  ordinary  insight  into  the  state  of  a  Church  at  a  distance." 
He  lays  (too  much  ?)  stress  on  Col.  ii.  5.  *'  We  may  infer,  then,  that  St.  Paul  could  on 
occasions  exercise  this  spiritual  gift  of  supernatural  immediate  intuition  even  as  our  Lord 
on  earth  in  His  own  greater  measure  did  when  He  saw  Nathanael,  etc.  (John  1.  51). 
Elisha  :  '  Went  not  my  heart  with  thee  ? '  If  Elisha,  why  not  St,  Paul  ? "  Judged.— 
Word  in  itself  neutral  ="  have  given  my  decision."  Sentence  held — as  if  unwilling  to  let 
fall— till  ver.  5. 

124  .        _ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  v. 


Ver.  4. — See  Homiletic  Analysis. 

Ver.  5. — 1.  A  physical  penalty  (viz,  sickness  supernaturally,  directly,  inflicted  by  Paul; 
which  might  have  been  fatal,  but  as  directly,  supernaturally,  was  remitted  on  the  repentance 
of  the  offender).  So  Ananias  and  Sappbira.  Bar- Jesus  (Acts  xii.).  Such  visitation  Simon  at 
Samaria  feared  (Acts  viii.  24).  Paul  exercised  the  power  much  later  on  (1  Tim.  i.  20)  on 
Hymenaeus  and  Alexander.  2.  Consequences  more  than  mere  exclusion  from  Eucharist  or 
the  Church.  3.  "  Many  sickly  "  at  Corinth,  "  many  sleep  "  (xi.  30)  ;  i.e.  other  cases  of  this 
form  of  physical,  Divine,  chastisement,  even  of  death.  4.  See  homiletic  treatment,  further. 
N.B.  "  spirit;'  not  "  souir 

Ver.  6. — Evans  :  "  Is  this  a  time  to  parade  your  lofty  privileges  of  saintly  kingship,  or  to 
flaunt  and  flourish  your  Christian  wisdom  embroidered  with  worldly  philosophy,  when  this 
scandal  of  the  Church  stares  you  in  the  face  ?  Theological  pomp  ...  a  moral  plague 
begun."  Leaven. — Proverbial,  as  in  Gal.  v.  9.  Leaven  (except  in  Matt.  xiii.  33),  an  illus- 
tration of  the  pervasive  working  of  evil.  The  man,  and  the  principle  of  his  action,  both 
included  in  the  "  leaven," 

Ver.  7. — In  Exod,  xii.  15  sqq.  are  found  two  ideas  :  "  iVo  leaven;"*  ^' cut  off"  an  offender. 
Hence  the  connection  of  thought.  Perhaps  emphasised  by  an  actual  or  recent  Passover 
celebration  (letter  written  soon  before  Pentecost,  xvi.  8)  ;  but  too  precarious  to  make  these 
allusions  give  a  very  definite  date.  "  Te  are  unleavened  "  does  not  necessarily  mean  more 
than,  "Ideally  ye  are,  as  being  a  Christian  Church  at  all."  Purge  out. — "On  the  evening  [of 
the  13th]  commenced  the  14th  of  Nisan,  when  a  solemn  search  was  made  with  lighted  candle 
through  each  house  for  any  leaven  that  might  be  hidden  or  have  fallen  aside  by  accident. 
Such  was  put  by  in  a  safe  place,  and  afterwards  destroyed  with  the  rest "  (Edersheim,  Life 
of  Jesus,  ii.  480 ;  and  he  adds  in  a  note  :)  "  The  Jerusalem  Talmud  gives  the  most  minute 
details  of  the  places  in  which  search  is  to  be  made.  One  Rabbi  proposed  that  the  search 
should  be  repeated  at  three  different  times  I  "  Our  passover. — '*  Our  " ;  cf.  "  We  (also)  have 
an  altar"  (Heb.  xiii.  10).  Omit  ^'for  us."  Sacrificed. — True  idea;  word,  however,  does  not 
necessarily  mean  more  than  '^  slain."  "Vers.  6-8  suggest  the  practical,  use  and  probable 
design  of  the  Mosaic  ritual  "  (Beet). 

Ver.  8.  Malice. — Not  in  modern,  narrow,  sense  of  mischievous,  personal  animosity. 
Broader;  '^ vitiositas;'  evil-heartedness  ;  opposed  to  "  sincerity,"  the  transparent-heartedness 
in  which  is  "  no  darkness  at  all."  Truth. — A  word  (opposed  to  wickedness)  of  the  Johannean 
dialect ;  but  Paul  and  John  *'  agree  in  one." 

Ver.  9.  In  a  [lost]  epistle. — [No  theological  difficulty  here.  A  vast  amount  of  literary 
material  (e.g.  Chronicles  of  Kings  of  Judah  and  Israel ;  or  the  incompletely  compiled  material 
for  Gospels  of  which  Luke  speaks — not  necessarily  unreliahle  accounts)  connected  with  the 
facts  of  Eevelation  has  perished.  All  has  been  preserved  which  was  needful  to  serve,  or 
perhaps  could  serve,  the  purpose  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  conveying  an  "  official,"  Divine, 
account  of  the  history  and  meaning  and  future  of  God's  Redemption-scheme.  These  two 
letters  to  Corinth,  wnder  Him,  written  for  preservation.  Any  other,  having  answered  its 
temporary  purpose,  could  be  left  to  the  fate  of  ordinary  private  letters.  All  of  any  per- 
manent value  in  the  lost  material  is  in  these  preserved.]  For  a  lost  epistle,  (1)  vers.  2,  6 
are  not  specific  enough  to  be  the  injunction  referred  to ;  (2)  same  words  in  2  Cor.  vii.  8 
refer  to  a  previous  (this  first)  letter ;  (3)  "  now  "  contrasts  with  something  written  before 
(but  query  this ?).  Against,  (1)  no  trace  of  it,  unless  here ;  (2)  " I  wrote"  explained  as 
epistolary  aorist  ;  (3)  doctrinal  presumption  against  the  loss  of  anything  from  an 
inspired  pen.     (More  fully  discussed  in  the  Introduction.) 

Ver.  10.  Covetous. — Paul's  severe  estimate  of  this  sin.  In  Rom.  vii.  regarded  as  in  some 
sort  the  typical  sin.  "  The  accursed  desire  of  having.''^  A  craving  for  more,  particularly 
that  "  more  "  which  is  possession  of  others.  (Yet  not  necessarily  this.  Cf,  Luke  xii.  16, 
which  shows  that  covetousness  may  as  well  be  displayed  in  the  spirit  in  which  a  man  seeks, 
and  holds,  his  own.)  A  cuttle-fish  sin  with  many  tentacles  ;  in  the  case  at  Corinth  reaching 
out  for,  not  money,  but  another  man's  wife.  Idolater. — Earliest-known  use  of  the  Greek 
word  here  employed. 

Ver.  11.  Brother. — In  the  technical  sense,  meaning  "a Christian."  Presumably,  therefore, 
such  a  man's  "  idolatry  "  only  extended  to  joining  in  the  heathen  public  banquets.  Cf . 
"  covetousness  which  is  idolatry "  (Col.  iii.  5).  To  eat. — Not  merely  at  the  Lord's 
Supper,  but  in  any  voluntary  intercourse  in  private  life. 

Ver.  12,  Judging. — In  the  sense  of  exercising  a  right  to  pronounce  and  execute  a  sentence. 

Ver.  13. — "  Let  Mm  be  unto  you  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  publican."     Relegate  him  to  the 
"  world  "  "  without;^  to  which  he  really  belongs.     Yet  there  God  will  ^^ judge  "  him,  as  one 
of  '■'■those  without,"  by  my  sentence  (ver.  5),  which  will  still  operate  on  him  "m  the  world" 
if  so  be  that  he  may  repent  and,  at  least  " in  spirit,"  be  found  amongst  those  '^within "  once 
more,  "  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 


125 


CHAP.  V.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Whole  Chapter. 

I.  The  dishonour  of  the  Church  (vers.  1,  2). 
II.  The  discipline  of  the  Church  (vers.  3-5). 
III.  The  duty  of  the  Church  towards  its  Lord  (vers.  6-8). 
TV.  The  duty  of  the  Church  towards  the  outside  world  (vers.  9-13). 

I.   1.  How  early  manifested  the  impossibility  of  making  the  Church,  as  men 
reckon  its  census,  comprise  exactly  the  same  persons,  neither  more  nor  fewer,  as 
does  the  Church  whose  census  Christ  takes  !     The  distinction  between  the  Keal 
and  the  Nominal ;  between  the  Church  which  is  by  spiritual  union  His  Body 
and  the  Church  which  is  only  a   baptized  Community  holding,  generally,  the 
same  Creed.     As  if  the  very  Church  institution  itself  were  "  made  subject  to 
vanity"  (Rom.  viii.  20),  like  all  other  creaturely,  earthly  life;  "vanity"  being, 
for  the  creature,  "  thwarted  development,  stunted  growth,  subjection  to  some- 
thing worse   than   perishableness,    bondage    to   something  worse   than  decay" 
(Ellicott,  Dest.  of  the  Creature^  lect.  i.) ;    or  as  the  word  radically  suggests,   "A 
yearning  after  an  ideal,  often  nearly  attaining,  yet  somehow  doomed  always  to 
miss."     The  Master  foretold  it :  the  tares  spring  up  amongst  the  wheat ;  the  bad 
fish  are  caught  in  the  sweep  of  the  drag-net  of  the  Gospel  invitation ;  at  least 
one  guest  without  a  wedding  garment  sits  down  at  table  with  the  rest,  hoping 
to  enjoy  the  feast.     It  is  a  long  way  from  the  Church  of  (say)  Eph.  ii.  1-10  to  the 
Church  in  Corinth,  amongst  whose  members  was  this  flagrant  sinner.     He  will 
never  join  a  Church  who  waits  for  a  perfect  one.     2.  Hoiv  serious  the  dishonour 
to  the  Church  itself !     No  grave  looks  so  black  as  that  which  yawns  dark,  with 
new-fallen,  untrodden  snow  around  its  mouth.     Sin  is  never  so  black  as  when  its 
darkness  and  corruption  open  dark  in  the  midst  of  a  Church.     It  is  high  honour 
to  belor^g  to  Christ ;  but  the  honour  brings  commensurate  responsibility.     God's 
appeal  is :  *'  Ye  shall  he  holy,  for  /  am  holy"  (Lev.  xi.  44 ;  1  Pet.  i.  16).     ["For  " 
means :  (1)  Vindicate  your  relationship  to  Me  ;  show  the  "family  likeness,"  which 
is  holiness  ;   for  your  own  sake,   that  your  "  evidence "  may  be  strengthened. 
(2)  Remember  the  honour  of  being  Mine.    Your  character  involves  Mine ;  the  world 
will  judge  of  Me  and  of  religion  by  you.     I  am  holy  ;  take  care  therefore  that 
you  are  holy,  in  friendships,  pleasures,  bearing,  character,  all.     (3)  Make  possible 
the  communion  I  desire  and  design  for  you.     But  you  must  needs,  then,  be  holy, 
for  I  am  holy.]     Here  is  a  Church  involved  by  one  of  its  members  in  sin  almost 
unheard  of,  and  always  abhorred,  in  the  world.     The  Church  sinks  lower  than 
the  world  I     Often  its  reproach  still.     Business  men  complain  that  "  if  they  find 
a  shabby  thing  done,  a  Church  does  it,"  etc.     They  are  not  always  too  just  to 
the  Church.     Yet  more  is  rightly  expected  than  from  the  world.     But  too  much 
is  sometimes  expected  ;  no  fair  allowance  is  made  for  fallible  judgments,  and  for 
the  almost  inevitable  complication  arising  from  corporate,  committee  action,  rather 
than  personal.     Often  difficult  to  bring  evidence  sufficient  for  action  in  a  Church 
court.     Yet  the  Church  should  pique  herself  upon  her  honour ;  should  make  a 
point  of  being  extra  careful,  especially  in  dealing  with  finance,  or  with  sin  within 
its  own  membership.     "  You  carry  Caesar  and  his  fortunes;  "  "  You  carry  Christ 
and  His  character."     3.  And  if  the  Church  conriive  at  or,  [as  some  here  understand] 
defend  and  glory  in,  the  wrong,  how  much  greater  the  dishonour.     It  is  a  sign  of 
bad  health  when  evil  is  tolerated ;  it  means  that  zeal,  watchfulness,  love,  purity, 
all,  are  low.     May  mean,  in  some  cases,  a  wicked  regard  for  a  "respectable," 
"  important  "  ofiender.     Health  shows  always  in  a  sensitive  repugnance  to,  recoil 
from,  resistance  of,  evil.     Flings  it  off,  as  a  hand  tosses  off  the  burning  coal. 
Instinctively  shrinks  with  pain  from  even  mental  touch  with  it.     A  healthy  body 
has  no  rest  until  it  has  expelled  the  very  last  piece  of  diseased  bone.     "  Canst  not 

126 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  v. 


bear  them  that  are  evil,"  is  put  by  Christ  in  the  forefront  of  the  good  things  He 
says  (and  ssijsfa'st)  about,  and  to,  Ephesus  (Rev.  ii.  2).  Happy  when  some  voice, 
friendly,  like  Paul's,  becomes  a  kind  of  objective  conscience,  saying  from  without 
what  the  subjective  conscience  ought  to  be  saying  from  within.  Shame  when  the 
reproach  of  the  unfriendly  world  has  to  awaken  or  educate  the  conscience  of  the 
Church !  4,  A  real  difficulty,  often  felt,  was  not  existent  here.  There  was  no 
room  to  doubt  about  the  fact,  or  about  the  character  of  the  fact.  "  Such  a 
thing,  ought  absolutely  never  to  be  heard  of  in  connection  with  the  Church  ; 
and  absolutely  nothing  else  is  heard  of "  [so  Stanley ;  but  perhaps  rather, 
"  This  is  absolutely  heard  of  everywhere "].  Many  blemished  in  Christian 
character,  or  strongly,  though  not  with  too  much  discrimination,  animadverted 
upon  by  the  world,  can  scarcely  be  touched  by  Church  discipline.  Very  ele- 
mentary organizations,  in  their  early  days  of  small  numbers  and  intimate 
mutual  knowledge,  can  keep  closer  watch  over  each  other,  and  can  prudently 
suspend  or  cast  out,  for  causes  not  wisely  to  be  touched,  or  clearly  to  be 
judged  upon,  by  larger,  complex  communities.  Sin  is  a  subtle  thing,  and 
the  measure  of  responsibility  is  not  always  easy  to  gauge,  for  admonition  or 
formal  sentence.  Tares  and  wheat  are  at  some  stages  not  easy  to  distinguish. 
This  is  not  to  condone  criminal  negligence,  or  weakness,  or  unfaithfulness 
to  the  Holy  Ideal  of  a  Church.  The  obligation  lies  to  carry  the  practicable 
to  the  furthest  reach  of  exactitude.  Whenever  a  fair  chance  offers,  as  at 
Corinth — case  clear,  evidence  abundant — not  a  moment's  hesitation  should  be 
permitted.  To  act,  promptly,  definitely,  is  due  to  the  world,  and  to  GJwist. 
Wherever  possible  the  Church  should  avowedly  stand  clear  of  all  complicity 
with  sin.  Could  here  proceed  safely,  even  upon  "  common  report."  5.  A  Church 
should  ''  mourn  "  over  sin.  No  amount  of  gifts,  wealth,  knowledge,  numerical 
importance,  prestige,  can  outweigh  the  dishonour.  No  room,  no  time,  for  com- 
placent dwelling  upon  these,  whilst  sin  remains  uncondemned.  Evil  entering, 
spreading,  infecting  within,  outweighs  in  seriousness  of  importance  any  material, 
social,  numerical  advantage.  The  first  question  should  be,  "Are  we  a  holy 
people  1 "  In  days  of  weakness  or  decline,  the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  look  for, 
confess,  cast  out.  Church  or  personal  sin.  Joshua  learned  that  there  were  times 
when  it  is  of  no  avail  to  pray  over  defeat  (Josh.  vii.  10).  "Get  thee  up  (from 
the  attitude  of  prayer) ;  wherefore  liest  thou  upon  thy  face  ?  .  .  .  Up  ;  sanctify 
the  people."  First  purification,  then  prayer,  then  success.  The  Church  must 
purge  itself  from  its  dishonour.     How  to  proceed  ?     As  in  II. 

II.  The  discipline  of  the  Church. — The  constitution  and  procedure  of  a  Church 
court.  Admirably  expository  of  Matt,  xviii.  19,  20,  with  its  significant  "  i^or." 
[Twice,  twice  only,  did  Christ  use  His  own  new  name.  His  "Church"  (Matt, 
xvi.  18,  xviii.  17).  In  first  case  referring  to  dangers  from  without ;  in  second  to 
difficulties  arising  within.  Matt,  xviii.  19  true,  and  fully  applicable  to  a/^  Church 
gatherings,  but  primarily  deals  with  disciplinary  gatherings  {e.g.  about  an 
"  offending  brother  ").]     Notice  : — 

1.  The  fundamental  thing  :  "  in  the  mtme  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.''  [In 
Matthew  {ubi  sup\)  lit.  "  unto  the  name''  Here,  "  in."  "  Unto  "  pictorially  sets 
forth  the  gathering  together  toward  it,  as  the  central  point  and  ral lying-place 
and  object  of  their  assembling.  Here  the  movement  towards  is  over ;  the  Church 
is  assembled  "m  the  name."]  This  differentiates  the  gathering  from  all  other 
meetings  of  Christian  men.  Two  meet  in  street ;  talk  of  business,  family,  etc. ; 
no  difference  between  such  a  meeting  and  that  of  many  worldly  men  round 
them.  They  meet  in  Parliament,  or  on  boards  of  societies,  even  philanthropic ; 
but  their  meeting  even  thus  is  not  a  gathering  of  the  Church.  But,  so  soon  as 
they  meet  "  unto  His  name,"  and  as  long  as  they  meet  "  in  His  name,"  then  a 
distinctively  Church  assembly  is  constituted, — if   even   of   "  two   or   three," — 

127 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


having  all  the  character,  privileges,  prerogatives,  which  belong  to'  the  Church. 
Worship,  or  business,  begins  when  "  His  name  "  is  made  definitely  the  object  of 
the  gathering.  [Cf.  the  ways  of  formally  opening  courts  of  judicature.  In 
Russia  a  small,  crowned  baton  lies  by  the  magistrate,  who  sits  under  a  portrait 
of  the  Czar.  He  sets  this  baton  on  end,  by  his  side.  That  is  the  emperor  come 
to  judgment  :  *'  The  court  is  sitting."]  That  Head  of  the  Church,  who  is 
revealed  by  "  His  name,"  is  the  fountain  of  authority  and  wisdom  in  action. 
"  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered,  .  .  .  there  am  I ;  (and  therefore)  what  they 
agree  on  earth  to  ask  shall  be  done  of  My  Father." 

2.  This  carries  with  it  authority  to  judge,  and  '"'"power "  (ver.  3)  to  execute 
sentence. — The  ^^  power  ^^  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  is  there,  li  ^' he  that  haih 
done  this  thing  "  is  visited  with  judicial  sickness  by  Paul  and  the  assembled 
Church  (for  the  *'  spirit "  of  Paul  is  assembled  with  those  who  are  gathered 
together  [in  counting  those  present  dont  leave  out  Paul  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
both  are  really  there]),  it  is  **  this  name,  through  faith  in  His  name,  hath  made 
this  man  "  sick  (cf.  the  reversed  parallel  of  Acts  iii.  16.  Paul  might  have  said, 
**  Why  look  ye  on  us,  as  though  by  our  own  power  or  holiness  we  had  made  this 
man  to  "  sicken  ?)  [All  this  is  normal,  except  the  presence  of  Paul  "  in  spirit," 
presumably  in  order,  by  his  special  Apostolic,  miracle-working  gift,  to  inflict 
the  extraordinary,  abnormal  sentence.  The  rest  is  essential  to  every  true 
gathering,  in  due  Church  meeting  assembled.  The  "  Name  of  their  Lord "  is 
their  "  objective."  Around  It  they  gather.  It  gives  the  meeting  special 
character,  cohesion,  unity,  for  Himself  is  there  amongst  them.  How  often  loj^al 
hearts  go  homeward  saying,  "  We  have  been  very  near  to  our  Lord  there "  !] 
[Any  questions  as  to  the  seat  of  authority  to  excommunicate,  are  not  to  be 
discussed  or  decided,  with  any  fairness,  upon  the  facts  of  an  elementary  time 
like  this.  As  the  structure  of  the  Church  grew  more  complex,  by  similar  specialisa- 
tion of  organ  and  function  to  that  seen  in  nature,  the  meeting  for  discipline 
conveniently  became,  in  principle,  a  disciplinary  "  committee "  of  the  Church, 
variously  constituted,  either  advisory  to  the  whole  Church,  or  the  depository  of  its 
power  and  the  executive  on  its  behalf.  All  these  are  matters  of  prudential, 
variable  regulation.  The  only  appearance  of  vital  principle  is  in  the  fact  that 
Paul  makes  the  sentence  his  own:  "/  have  judged^  The  beginning  of  the 
pastoral  office,  and  prerogative  of  admitting  to,  and  excluding  from,  the  visible 
fold.  Yet  not  without  the  Church,  as  at  least  assessors.  Perhaps  rather  as  a 
jury,  the  pastor  being  a  judge  contributing  to,  and  acting  upon,  their  verdict  as 
to  the  facts.  In  ultimate  analysis,  there  is  no  ''^ power  ^^  except  that  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  present  in  the  gathering.] 

3.  The  sentence  was  exclusion,  with  physical  acconipaninients. — (1)  The  very 
fact  of  sinning  thus  flagrantly,  revealed  a  real  self-exclusion  to  have  taken  place 
before  Church  action  was  taken.  Such  a  man  is  no  real  member  of  the  Church, 
though  still  on  the  roll  and  meeting  with  brethren,  even  at  the  Lord's  Table. 
[May  have  been  really  a  member  at  first,  but  fallen  through  unwatchfulness  and 
temptation.  May  have  been  a  name  too  hastily  enrolled ;  an  unfit,  not  living, 
stone,  in  error  or  ignorance  built  into  the  ''house"  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  Or,  the 
**  living  stone,"  more  likely,  may  have  ceased  to  grow  and  live,  and  so  falls  out  of 
its  place  in  the  living,  growing  fabric]  (2)  So  then  {a)  excommunication  here  is 
the  ascertaining,  the  public  recognition,  and  the  official  registration,  of  a  separa- 
tion which  has  been  already  made  by  the  man's  own  sin,  entailing  the  withdrawal 
of  the  "grieved  Spirit  of  God"  (Eph.  iv.  30).  [As,  similarly,  divorce  is  only 
permissible  where  it  recognises  and  registers  a  real  dissolution  of  the  marriage 
bond  by  the  sin  of  one  of  the  parties.]  Outside  the  fold  the  man  is  exposed — 
more  directly,  and  without  the  help  and  safeguard  of  the  means  of  grace,  and  of 
the  prayers  and  fellowship  of  his  brethren — to  the  working  of  the  ''  lion  going 

128 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


about,"  apparently  able  to  inflict  physical  harm.  The  demonology  of  Job  i.,  ii. 
is  not  lightly  to  be  rejected,  harmonising,  as  it  does,  with  this  inspired  statement 
of  Paul.  Yet  here,  as  there,  Satan  is  but  the  servant  of  God,  with  limited 
power ;  and  here  God's  minister  to  mark  His  displeasure.  If  we  had  known 
this  man,  we  should  probably  have  seen,  or  suspected,  nothing  but  a  quite  natural 
illness,  which  we  might,  or  might  not,  have  noticed  was  coincident  with  his 
exchision  from  the  Church.  The  Corinthians  themselves  seem  to  have  had  no 
idea  of  the  moral  causes  behind  the  epidemic  sickness,  and  the  numerous  deaths 
just  now  occurring  amongst  them  (xi.  30).  (The  spiritual,  whether  good  or  evil, 
behind  the  natural  is  a  pure  matter  of  revelation ;  but,  when  revealed,  is  not  an 
incredible,  or  unreasonable,  explanation  of  the  facts  [cf.  Trench,  Miracles,  in 
initio].  In  fact,  Bible  histories  stand  distinguished  from  secular  accounts  of  the 
same  facts — whether  actual,  or  such  as  might  be  written — in  this,  that  we  are 
in  them  taken  ^'  behiDd  the  scenes  "  and  permitted  to  see  God  and  the  spiritual 
world  actively  influencing  what  in  all  ordinary  cases  we  only  see  from  the  natural 
side.  Bible  history  is  a  specimen  history,  analysed  and  dissected,  so  that  in  other, 
ordinary,  cases  we  may  see  where  to  look  for,  and  how  to  find,  the  spiritual 
behind  the  natural.)  It  is  contemplated  by  Paul  that  this  man  may  die,  or  even 
would  die.  The  ''''flesh  "  (more  than  the  body  ?),  the  seat  and  instrument  of  his 
sin,  is  to  be  destroyed  [an  inexact  word,  never  to  be  pressed  too  much].  But 
the  "  spirit,^'  the  part  of  manhood  capable  of  God,  and  once  in  fact  illumined  and 
indwelt  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  is  to  be  saved.  The  man,  it  is  presumed,  will  be 
brought  to  consideration  and  repentance  in  his  illness  :  "  It  was  good  for  me  that  I 
was  afflicted."  "  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray,  but  now,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxix.  67). 
"  In  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "he  will  be  found  amongst  the  "  saved 
of  Jesus  Christ."  [Cf.  2  Cor.  i.  U ;  1  Cor.  i.  8;  Phil.  ii.  16,  i.  6  {''until"); 
2  Tim.  i.  12  {''against");  1  Thess.  v.  23  {"in  the  coming").]  {b)  The  object  of 
excommunication  is,  qua  the  Church,  the  public  clearing  of  it  from  all  suspicion 
of  comphcity  with,  or  toleration  of,  sin,  and  the  securing  from  dishonour  the  very 
name  of  Christ ;  qua  the  ofiender,  to  make  his  conscience  see  the  gravity  of  sin,  to 
arouse  to  repentance  and  to  amendment  (where  opportunity  offers),  and  thus  to 
make  possible  the  way  for  restored  communion  with  God  and  man.  Must  not 
be  vindictive,  but  judicial,  and  (if  possible)  reformatory :  hence  (c)  The  method, 
extends  only  to  exclusion  from  formal  connection  and  from  privileges  of 
membership ;  but  not  to  any  attempt  to  follow  a  man  outside  with  any  direct 
infliction  of  temporal,  or  social,  or  personal  penalties  (vers.  12,  13  apply  also  to 
an  excluded  "  brother  ").  Any  consequences  that  follow  exclusion  should  only  be 
of  God's  own  infliction,  generally  in  the  ordinary  course  of  His  chastening 
providence.  [Paul's  action  in  this  case  was  rather  the  action  of  God,  by  His 
specially  accredited  and  empowered  messenger,  than  anything  analogous  to  the 
ordinary  action  of  the  Church.  No  precedent  in  it  for  ecclesiastical  power 
attempting  to  pursue  into  the  secular  sphere  the  Hfe,  goods,  family,  of  an  offender ; 
least  of  all,  of  an  offender  against  "  doctrine  "  only.]  This  is  a  good  case  of 
"  binding  "  ;  as  2  Cor.  ii.  7  is  of  "  loosing." 

III.  Duty  of  the  Church  towards  its  Lord. — 1.  The  exodus  of  the  new  Israel 
is  now  in  progress. — In  transit  from  Egypt  to  Canaan.  A  very  real  deliverance 
has  been  accomplished.  The  old  bondage  has  been  broken  (Rom  vi.  14,  "  Sin 
shall  not  have  dominion  over  you  ").  We  have  had  our  song  of  deliverance  by 
the  Red  Sea.  We  have  had  our  Sinai,  only  now  the  law  is  written  within, 
on  our  own  hearts.  We  shall  have  our  Canaan  (Heb.  iv.  9).  A  day  of 
redemption  lies  behind  us;  another,  more  complete,  "day  of  redemption  "  before 
us  (Eph.  iv.  30).  [Divine  history  repeats  itself ;  or,  reversing  order  of  thought, 
anticipates  itself.  The  history  of  Redemption,  extending  through  the  ages,  has 
special  points  at  which  it  summarises  itself,  on  a  small  scale  gathering  up  all 

K  ^     1J9 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


the  essential  features  of  the  whole  process.  The  Author,  both  of  the  Facts  and 
of  the  Record  of  them,  traced  the  earlier  stages  or  embodiments  of  Redemption 
on  lines  which  are  the  basal  lines  of  the  later,  more  fully  detailed,  perfect  stage 
and  embodiment  in  the  historical  Work  of  Christ  and  the  founding  and  history 
of  His  Church.  This  is  not  a  mere  happy  adaptation  of  a  piece  of  ancient  history 
(or  of  a  pretty  myth  of  the  past).  It  is  one  of  the  thousand  illustrations,  which 
gather  year  by  year  with  cumulative  force  of  evidence  to  every  student  of  the 
Bible,  of  the  profound  internal  harmony,  arising  from  the  organic  unity,  of  the 
Redemption  record.  This  is  a  case  of  the  authentic  discovery  and  development  of 
the  full  meaning  of  the  old  story  and  Deliverance.  We  are  thus  told,  on  His  own 
authority,  what  God  "had  in  His  view  "  in  the  earlier  incidents.  The  Passover 
and  Exodus  (like  all  in  Creation,  Col.  i.  16)  were  "created  in  Christ.^^  His  own 
warrant  for  this  is  abundant :  "  The  blood  of  the  new  covenant "  (the  blood  of 
the  old,  Exod.  xxiv.  8) ;  His  cross  is  the  uplifting  of  the  serpent  (John  iii.  14) ;  He 
is  the  manna  {ih.  vi.  32,  33) ;  a  pillar  of  fire  to  His  people  ("  followeth  Me  shall 
not  walk  in  darkness,"  ih.  viii.  12);  the  water  from  the  rock  (ih.  vii.  38);  [as 
He  is  also  Jacob's  ladder,  ih.  i.  51  ;  and  John  finds  Him  in  a  trivial  regulation 
about  the  integrity  of  the  body  of  the  Paschal  Lamb,  xix.  36  ;  Exod.  xii.  46  ; 
Ps.  xxxiv.  20].  [Not  in  pre-resurrection  days,  but  afterwards,  when  all  time  or 
occasion  for  (alleged)  ad  homines  arguments  from,  and  use  of,  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  had  passed  away,  and  He  spoke  as  having  already  begun  the  eternal 
life  of  the  Incarnate  Son,  He  found  Himself  in  all  the  Scriptures  (Luke  xxiv.  27, 
43-47)].]  All  the  points  of  prerogative,  distinction,  privilege,  of  the  Old  Israel 
reappear  in  the  New,  purified  from  their  tempoiary,  pedagogic  accompaniments. 
We  have  a  sanctuary  and  a  Shekinah  (John  i.  14,  ii.  21.  N.B.  when  its  fleshly 
veil  was  rent,  the  accompanying  type  had  its  veil  rent  too) ;  we  have  a 
Sabbath  ;  we  have  the  "  circumcision  of  Christ "  (Col.  ii.  11);  we  have  our  "  altar  " 
(Heb.  xiii.  10).  So  we  have  a  Passover  lamb  and  a  Passover  supper,  the 
birthday  '''•feast "  of  the  New  Israel.  (See  Appended  Note  from  Fairbairn.) 
[Fairbairn,  Typology,  ii.  442  sqq.,  very  full  here.  The  Passover  lamb  must  not 
be  denied  to  be  a  real  sacrifice  in  any  fear  of  giving  support  to  "  high  "  doctiine 
re  the  Lord's  Supper.  Twice  God  calls  it  "  sacrifice  "  (Exod.  xxiii.  18,  xxxiv.  25).] 
In  its  combination  of  sacrifice  for  release  from  bondage,  of  atoning  sacrifice  for 
sin,  and  of  feast  for  sustenance  on  pilgrimage,  it  best  (better  than  even  the 
ordinary  peace  offering)  exhibits  the  whole  truth  about  the  Passover  character  of 
Christ  and  His  work.  The  Cross  and  the  Supper  combine  to  exhibit  the  same 
whole  truth  for  us.  "  Is  slain J^  Then  why  remain  in  bondage,  with  the  door 
open  to  go  out  ? 

2.  One  emphatic  law  of  the  old  ordinance  is  in  principle  continued  unrepealed. 
— "  No  leaven  with  the  FassoverT  The  sprinkling  of  the  blood  was  not  certainly 
continued  in  the  post-Exodus  celebrations.  The  bitter  herbs  and  the  rigorous 
search  for  leaven  were  essential,  and  continued,  with  increased  stringency  of 
observance,  to  the  last.  [Good  reason  for  thinking  that,  like  the  modern 
Samaritan  Passover  lamb,  that  of  Paul's  day  was  roasted  on  a  cruciform  spit  of 
wood.  But  no  Divine  ordaining  in  this,  so  far  as  we  know.]  The  Passover  must 
not  be  killed  "  upon  leaven  "  (so  Exod.  xxxiv.  25,  literally).  "  The  putting  away 
of  the  leaven,  that  there  might  be  the  use  only  of  unleavened  bread,  may  also  be 
regarded  as  carr3ring  some  respect  to  the  circumstances  of  the  people  at  the  first 
institution  of  the  feast.  .  .  .  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  mainly  pointed, 
as  already  shown  in  connection  with  the  meat  offering,  to  holiness  in  heart  and 
conduct,  which  became  the  ransomed  people  of  the  Lord — the  incorrupt  sincerity 
and  truth  that  should  appear  in  all  their  behaviour.  Hence,  while  the  bitter 
herbs  were  only  to  be  eaten  with  the  lamb  itself  [as  the  tears  of  repentance 
belong  only  to  the  first  stage  of  the  spiritual  life,  the  first  appropriation  of  Christ 

130 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  v. 


as  the  soul's  deliverer  from  bondage  and  from  guilt],  the  unleavened  bread  was 
to  be  used  through  the  whole  seven  days  of  the  feast — the  primary  sabbatical 
circle — as  a  sign  that  the  religious  and  moral  purity  which  it  imaged  was  to 
be  their  abiding  and  settled  character.     It  taught  in  symbol  what  is  now  directly 
revealed,  when  it  is  declared  that  the  end  for  which  Christ  died  is  that  He  might 
redeem  to  Himself  a  people  who  must  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  evil  deeds, 
and  be  created  anew  after  the  image  of  God  "  (Fairbairn).     "  Sin  is  a  malignant 
leaven — (1)  In  its  nature  ;  corrupting,  spreading,  assimilating  ;  (2)  In  its  effects 
upon   communities,   upon   individuals.      It   works — {a)  constantly ;  (6)  imper- 
ceptibly ;  (c)  powerfully ;  {d)  perniciously "   (J.  L.,  adapted).     Preparation  for 
partaking  of  Christ's  salvation  at  all  involves  this.     No  saving  faith  is  possible 
where  sincere  repentance,  and  (as  opportunity  serves)  "  works  meet  for  repentance," 
are  not  found.     Many  a  seeker  looks  for  peace  in  vain.     He  has  not  put  away 
sin.     He  may  not  share  in  the  Passover  deliverance.     The  true  preparation  for 
approaching  the  Lord's  Table  is  a  careful  examination  of  heart  and  life,  carrying 
with  us  the  ''  candle  of  the  Lord,"  searching  into  every  suspected,  dark  place. 
To  turn  away  from  what  might  possibly  lead  to  an  unwelcome  discovery,  lest^ 
seeing  something  too  clearly,   conscience  should  constrain  us   to   yield  it   up, 
whereas  we  do  not  wish  to  see  that  obligation,  is  moral  dishonesty;  there  is 
something  of  the  "  leaven  "  in  it;  everything  should  be  ''  faced  out,"  swept  out, 
renounced,  before  we  sit  down  at  Table  with  our  Lord  in  His  Supper  \e.g.  any 
unforgiving  temper  towards  some  fellow-communicant].     We  have  here  a  rule  of 
our  habitual  Christian  life.     Our  Exodus  is  always  in  progress.     We  live  in  a 
continuous  Passover -tide  and  a  continuous  Pentecost,  as  hereafter  we  shall  cele- 
brate a  continuous  Feast  of  Tabernacles.     [See  the  symbolism  of  Tabernacles  in 
Eev.  vii.  9.]     We  belong  to  a  people  of  whose  whole  life  this  is  one  "  note,"  "  Ye 
are  nnleavened.^^     Our  whole  life  is  a  perpetual  ^^  keeping  of  the  feast. ''^     To  retain 
the  initial  deliverance  of  our  life,  to  enjoy  a  perpetual  communion  with  our  Lord, 
to  have  His  Supper  continually  celebrated  with  our  heart  (Rev.  iii.  20),  there 
must  be  a  perpetual  self -cleansing  from  the  leaven,  a  self-examination  for  it, 
an  unsparing  outsweeping  of  all.     Holiness,  perfected  holiness  (2  Cor.  vii.  1),  is 
the  n<yrm  of  the  life  of  deliverance  by,  and  of  communion  with,  the  dying,  living, 
atoning,  life-sustaining,  Passover  Lamb  of  our  age,  *'  even  Christ ^     We  have 
here  a  rule  of  the  habitual  Church  life.     **  No  leaven  tolerated."     Seek  it  out ; 
watch  for  it ;  cast  it,  cast  persons,  out  with  unsparing  strictness  of  discipline.     If 
the  Church  is  to  be  an  Israel  at  all,  a  covenant  people  of  God  to-day ;  if  it  is 
not  to  return  in  fact  to  the  world,  out  of  whose  Egypt  God  *'  has  called  "  both 
**  His  Son  "  and  His  Church  (Matt.  ii.  15) ;  if  there  is  to  be  a  Table  in  the  midst 
of  its  gatherings  at  which  the  Head  will  join  His  members  at  the  Supper ;  if 
they  are  to  have  Him  present  in  their  assemblies  for  discipline  or  worship, — let 
them  purge  away  Sin,  personal  or  corporate.     (Heart-^\n  above  ail,  ver.  8.) 

3.  Happy  consequences  of  such  purification. — (1)  "  We  keep  the  Feast ^ — the 
Feast !  A  festival  life  ours,  if  we  will.  Our  slain  Lamb  is,  between  us  and  God, 
a  perpetually  renewed  pledge  of  a  life  of  liberty,  larger  and  larger,  from  all 
bondage,  and  fear,  and  guilt,  and  danger,  and  sin.  (2)  "  We  are  a  new  lump.'' 
[Figure  changes  as  between  this  and  ver.  7.  Rather  here,  as  in  Matt.  xiii.  33, 
the  pervasive,  assimilating  effect  of  leaven,  without  the  evil  connotation.]  The 
Church  can  then  leaven  the  world.  Modern  science  has  shown  this  side  of  the 
fermentative  process ;  not  only  a  token  or  accompaniment  of  "  corruption,"  the 
break-up  of  old  combinations  of  matter  when  "  death  "  has  taken  place,  but  also 
such  a  break-up  by  means  of  a  host  of  minute  organisms  working  towards  new 
combinations,  suitable  for  the  sustenance,  or  to  be  the  vehicle,  of  new  life.  For 
this,  in  part,  does  the  Lord  of  the  Church  put  It  into  the  midst  of  the  World. 
The  world  is  to  be  saved  mediately,  through  the  Church  [which  actually  fastened 

131 


CHAP.  V.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


upon  the  corrupting,  dissolving  elements  of  society  in  the  Roman  Empire,  and 
rearranged  and  reorganised  them,  to  be  the  abode  of  the  new  Christianised  life]. 
Every  sinful  member,  every  sinful  practice,  tolerated,  robs  the  "  new  lump  "  of 
its  efficiency  for  the  Lord's  purpose.  To  purge  out  the  old  leaven  [e.g.  by  excom- 
munication] is  Duty  towards  the  Church's  Lord,  who  is  the  slain  Passover  Lamb 
always  in  its  midst. 

IV.  The  duty  of  the  Church  towards  the  outside  world. — 1.  Observe  the 
sharp  distinction,  "  within^^  ^'  without"  and  this  not  as  a  mere  accident  of 
attachment  to  a  society  or  community  or  non-attachment ;  goes  deeper — 
"  brethren,'^  "  the  world."  It  lies  in  the  very  word  eKKXrjo-La,  they  who  are  of 
the  Church  are  not  only  "  called,"  but  "  called  out."  [Admirably  analogous 
to  the  classical,  political  use  of  the  word :  "  The  lawful  assembly  in  a  free 
Greek  city  of  all  .  .  .  possessed  of  the  rights  of  citizenship,  for  the  transaction 
of  public  affairs,  .  .  .  summoned  out  of  the  whole  population ;  a  large,  but  at  the 
same  time  a  select,  portion  of  it,  including  neither  the  populace,  nor  strangers, 
nor  yet  those  who  had  forfeited  their  civic  rights"  (Trench,  Syn.,  §  1).]  In 
a  world  where  all  nations  are  God's,  one  nation  was  called  to  His  side  to  be 
His  "peculiar  people"  (Tit.  ii.  14;  from  Deut.  vii.  6,  etc.;  cf.  1  Pet.  ii.  9; 
Isa.  xli.  9).  "  His  very  own  "  where  all  are  "  His  own."  Children,  where  the 
rest  are  at  best  only  servants,  though  all  are  of  His  household,  and  all  regarded 
with  real  interest  and  care.  An  inner  circle  of  love  and  favour  and  blessing. 
2.  The  boundary,  dividing,  inclusive,  exclusive,  line  is  not  always  easy  to  locate. 
The  general  direction  of  it,  the  principles  upon  which  it  is  laid  down,  are  obvious 
and  clear,  but  it  is  difficult  to  allot  individuals  as  "  without "  or  '*  within."  The 
line  is  by  no  means  coincident  with  that  traced  by  Church  enrolment  and  discipline. 
All  methods  of  Church  membership,  actual  or  proposed,  are  obnoxious  to  the 
criticism  that  they  exclude  some  who  are  really  "  within,"  and,  far  more  frequently, 
include,  admit,  retain,  many  of  those  "  without."  To  eye  of  Son  of  Man  "  sheep" 
and  "  goats  "  are  definitely  distinguishable.  None  belongs  to  neither.  ["  Yes ; 
I  know  about  the  *  sheep '  and  the  '  goats.'  But  what  about  the  '  alpacas '  ? 
These  are  my  difficulty,"  said  half -jestingly,  half-seriously,  a  man  of  the  world.] 
As  a  rule,  the  true  line  lies  within  the  mapped  line  of  the  ecclesiastical 
geography,  sometimes  far  within.  [As  the  map-makers  say,  there  is  an 
"  Ecclesia  Proper  "  and  an  "  Ecclesian  World  "  ;  cf .  "  China  Proper  "  and  "  Chinese 
Empire,"  half  attached,  loosely  held,  slightly  ruled;  "Russia  Proper"  a,rid  the 
vague  "Russia  in  Asia"  or  "Russian  Empire."]  3.  Tests  nevertheless  are  very 
definite,  many-sided.  (a)  E.g.  put  experimentally ;  take  two  men,  closely 
parallel  in  life ;  difficult  to  lay  finger  on  anything  "  wrong  "  in  the  man  "  of  the 
world  " ;  admirable,  amiable,  excellent  in  many  ways ;  "  comparing  (so  it  is  said) 
favourably  with  some  of  the  Church,"  "  better  man  than  your  '  converted '  man." 
Unhappily  true  sometimes  ;  yet  go  back,  dig  down  to  the  foundation  of  both  lives. 
The  less  admirable  (pity  !)  has  behind  him  a  time  when  he  first  felt  "  conviction 
of  sin"  [the  introduction  to  a  new  world,  of  "  things  spiritual,"  to  which  the  (best 
type  of)  "  natural "  man  is  a  stranger]  ;  knows  himself  "  a  sinner  "  ;  did  then,  and 
still  does,  make  Christ  and  His  work  the  basis  of  all  life  and  hope  before  God.  The 
more  admirable,  building  a  far  better  superstructure,  has  no  such  event,  no  such 
moral  crisis,  no  such  beginning  of  new.  Spirit-taught  knowledge ;  does  not  under- 
stand "  sin,"  nor  himself  "  a  sinner  " ;  underneath  the  life-building  there  is  no 
Christ  for  a  sole  reliance.  (6)  Illustrate  by  this  :  Before  the  knowledge  of  the 
mechanism  of  (the  newly  invented)  clocks  had  travelled  from  Germany  into 
Italy,  the  advantages  of  a  public,  far-visible  dial  with  hands  was  so  obvious,  that 
many  Italian  cities  set  these  up ;  the  hands  were  kept  right,  by  constant  adjust- 
ment, by  an  attendant  provided  with  a  water-clock  or  sand-glass.  Such  "  correct 
time "  is  the  ideal  and  method  of  the  righteousness  of  those  "  without."     [Was 

132 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  V. 


very  much  the  righteousness  of  an  Israelite.  Was  exactly  the  '^  righteousness  of 
scribes  and  Pharisees."]  [It  is  possible  to  secure  any  number  of  right  acts  by 
right  regulation  from  without,  according  to  an  external  code,  which  must  be  very 
detailed,  a  code  of  "  cases  of  conscience,"  with  new  rules  for  every  case  that  arises.] 
Italy  very  soon  learned  to  keep  the  hands  right  by  mechanism  within,  in  much 
more  exact  and  perfect  fashion,  as  right  at  the  seconds  as  at  the  hours.  God 
secures  from  within  "correct  time,"  righteousness  of  life,  in  those  ^^  within"  ^  a 
new  law  and  a  new  force  are  put  into  the  heart.  Sometimes  a  less  perfect 
*'  time  "  is  kept  (pity  !),  but  at  least  the  true  method  is  being  made  the  basis  of 
life.  [Or,  changing  figure  a  little,  in  a  man  "  within  "  the  hands  go,  not  too 
regularly,  but  at  least  in  right  direction  now,  and  in  obedience  to  a  new  law 
and  power  within.]  (c)  Most  absolutely  :  What  is  the  end  of  life  1  What  is  its 
relation  to  Christ  ?  To  the  man  "  within"  "  To  live  is  (more  or  less  definitely 
and  faithfully)  Christ."  The  real,  deep,  fundamental  test  is  there  :  what  is  the 
relation  of  the  heart  and  the  activities  to  Christ  ?  Even  when  both  men  do 
what  appears  identically  same  thing,  a  *'  great  gulf  fixed  "  of  distinction  opens 
up  underneath,  in  reply  to  that  question. 

2,  Intercourse  between  ^^  withiii"  and  ^^  without"  how  regulated. — (1)  Sad 
that  it  should  need  "  regulation."  A  sad  tone  rings  through  the  Scripture 
use  of  "  world."  A  sadness  as  of  a  father  who  must  forbid  intercourse 
between  some  of  his  children  and  the  rest ;  the  tone  in  which,  if  mentioned 
at  all,  one  is  spoken  of  whose  picture  hangs  with  its  face  to  the  wall,  in  the 
home.  Why  cannot  ''  church "  and  '*  world,"  "  within,"  "  without,"  mingle 
freely,  fraternise  without  "  regulation  "  and  "  restriction  "  ?  "  What  is  wrong 
with  the  world  ?  Is  it  not  God's  world  ?  Surely  it  is  not  the  devil's  ? " 
True;  and  all  the  beauty,  etc.,  is  for  the  children  of  God:  *'all  yours" 
(see  iii.  22).  The  history  of  the  world  [both  as  koo-/xos  and  aiwi/]  is  flowing  in 
a  channel  of  God's  digging,  and  towards  God's  destination  for  it.  Yet  the 
word  is  ethical;  the  "  world"  is  not  friendly,  or  neutral,  but  alienated,  inimical, 
dangerous.  The  "  world "  is  the  worldly  world,  in  the  New  Testament,  and 
in  fact.  (See  Appended  Note  from  Trench.)  (2)  Some  intercourse  is  necessary. 
The  division-line  parts  "  chief  friends,"  husband  and  wife  ;  runs  through  the  midst 
of  homes,  friendly  circles,  groups  of  relatives  ;  through  ofiices,  schools,  woi-ktihops, 
markets;  parting,  sorting  out,  individuals  "right"  and  "left."  Christianity 
does  not  command  any  forced  or  unnatural  breaking  of  these  bonds ;  "  then  must 
ye  needs  go  out  of  the  world.^"*  [N.B.  this  said  as  though  monastic,  eremitic, 
celibate  segregation  were  not  at  all  a  thing  to  be  contemplated  for  Christians. 
To  argue  this  from  his  words  were  a  reductio  ad  ahsurdum ;  so  Paul  feels.]  The 
world  wants,  God  wants,  the  Church  in  the  world,  the  Christian  in  the  home,  in 
the  market,  on  the  bench,  on  the  board,  in  the  seat  in  Parliament.  Is  there  not 
a  danger  to  the  man  "  within  "  ?  Yet  it  may  be  a  training  and  a  blessing  ;  is 
meant  to  be  a  blessing  to  those  "  without."  Even  Christian  benevolence  will  mean 
much  intercourse.  (3)  Much  more  is  voluntary,  and  should  be  modelled  after 
the  pattern  of  Christ's  own.  ["  Ye  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  {i.e.  in  the  same 
way  as,  and  with  the  same  absoluteness  of  negation)  /  am  not"  (John  xvii.  19). 
Examine  His  "  unworldliness."]  (a)  John  Baptist  was  Elijah  in  his  ascetic 
aloofness  from  men ;  Christ  was  Elisha  in  His  free  intercourse  with  men. 
Christ  accepted  invitations  fi-om,  ate  at  table  of,  Pharisee,  publican,  sinner 
(though  He  was  most  "  at  home  "  at  Bethany).  But  always  went  in  and  bore 
Himself  there  as  the  Physician.  When  the  Christian  man  finds  he  can  do  no  good, 
and  may  himself  suffer  harm  (Christ  could  not  suffer  any),  he  must  abstain 
altogether  or  withdraw.  (6)  Deep  separateness  of  origin  ("q/*  the  world,"  "not 
of")  is  the  true  safeguard  for  the  Christian,  the  true  source  of  any  power  for 
good,  in  any  voluntary  intercourse,  a  There  should  be  no  sympathy  of  aim,  or 

133 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I   CORINTHIANS. 


community  of  judgment ;  no  participation,  in  business  or  pleasure,  which 
indicates,  or  minister's  to,  worldliness  of  temper,  spirit,  heart.  [E-om.  xii.  1-3, 
**  conformity  "  may  indicate,  or  assist,  an  evil  metamorphosis.  A  holy  metamorphosis 
within  will  save  from  any  wrong  "  conformity "  without.]  (c)  This  affects 
intimacies,  friendships,  amusements,  marriage. 

3.  Duty  of  Church  towards  world. — (1)  To  endeavour  to  fulfil  all  the  purposes 
for  which  God  calls  out  a  Church,  and  yet  leaves  it  in  the  world.  The  very 
separateness  is  a  witness  for  God  ;  instrumentally  it  may  "  convict  the  world  of 
sin."  [As  a  straight-edge  convicts  a  hand-drawn  line,  when  laid  down  beside  it.] 
Hence  (2)  Should  "jW^e  "  those  *' ^^^7^m  "  with  unsparing  faithfulness.  Sin  in 
the  world  must  often  be  left  alone,  though  condemned  by  testimony  and  practice. 
Sin  in  the  Church  must  be  vigorously,  promptly,  dealt  with.  (3)  Should  not 
attempt  to  judge  those  without.  [No  question  of  passing  mental  or  conscientious 
*' judgment."  Cannot  help  having  an  opinion,  passing  a  judgment,  upon  the 
right  or  wrong  of  the  life  or  character  of  those  without.  Folly  to  say,  "  You 
should  not  judge  so  strictly,  should  not  judge  at  all."  The  awakened  sense  of 
"  righteousness  "  and  of  "  sin  "  makes  a  mental,  moral  verdict  a  necessity.  Bad 
sign  of  the  Church's  own  life  if  it  did  not  ^^  Judge  "  and  "  condemn  "  the  world's 
lite  and  principles.  All  such  "  judgments  "  are  of  course  fallible,  on  (necessarily) 
imperfect  data ;  a  Christian  man  will  be  modest,  self-diffident,  only  condemning 
severely  under  the  strongest  compulsion  of  evident  fact.  Not  this,  but]  the 
Church  should  not  attempt  any  sort  of  punitive  discipline  upon  the  outside 
community.  [As  the  *'  wm^ld "  should  have  no  disciplinary  power  within  the 
Church.]  The  sphere  of  **  the  State "  is  crime  in  the  citizen — Christian  or 
non-Christian ;  the  sphere  of  the  Church  is  sin  in  the  member.  The  attempt 
in  Puritan  England  and  Puritan  New  England  to  use  Church  machinery,  or 
Church  methods  and  code,  to  enforce  a  Church  discipline  upon  the  morals  and 
liberties  of  even  those  ''  without,"  broke  down.  As  things  are  we  must 
leave  sin  in  those  ^iwithout^^  to  the  "judgment "  and  chastisement  of  God.  The 
world  cannot  yet  be  made  a  theocracy.  It  is  a  difficult,  delicate  question, 
needing  all  the  sense  and  grace  a  Christian  father  and  mother  possess  and  can 
obtain,  how  far  the  home  may  be  made  a  little  theocracy,  how  far  the  Christian 
should  enforce  upon  non- Christian  children  or  servants,  the  Christian  rule  of 
life  and  its  sanctions,  so  "  judging  those  without." 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  7.  "  Christ  our  Passover," 
etc.  I.  The  Victim.  II.  The  Sacri- 
fice. III.  Its  efficacy.  IV.  Its  appro- 
priation.— \J.  Z.] 

Vers.  7-9.  Observe  the  necessity 
of:  I.  Repentance.  II.  Faith  in 
Christ.     III.  A  holy  life.— [J.  L.] 

Vers.  7-9.  Our  Christian  Life  a  Per- 
petual Passover-Tceeping. — A  continuous 
entering  into  liberty  from  Egyptian 
bondage,  into  a  journey  homewards 
with  God  for  our  Guide.  Three 
features  always  stamped  upon  it : — 

I.  The  cleansing  of  the  heart. — 
Must  "  make  ready  the  upper  room," 

134 


if  Christ  is  to  enter  and  sup  with  us, 
as  the  perpetual  benediction  of  our  life. 
Not  done  once  for  all  in  the  repentance 
which  inaugurated  our  new  life.  New 
discoveries  as  we  carry  the  candle  into 
the  darker  corners.  We  get  a  keener 
eye  to  see  "  leaven,"  as  years  go  on. 

II.  Slaying  the  lamb. — This  done 
once  for  all,  but  not  then  done  with. 
The  Atonement  a  perpetually  new 
basis  of  each  new  day's  life  of  grace. 
However  high  we  raise  the  super- 
structure, yet  this  the  foundation  al- 
ways. Even  in  heaven  we  shall  be 
only  sinners  whose  ground  of  acceptance 
is  the  merit  of  the  slain  Lamb. 
[Too  often  there  is  a  long  parenthesis 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


in  the  midst  of  life's  journey — as  in 
the  wilderness  sojourn  of  Israel — 
during  which  no  Passover  is  celebiated. 
All  the  sense  of  believing  rest  in  the 
work  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  all  the 
practical  efficacy  of  it  in  our  life,  is 
gathered  up  around  the  start  on  the 
journey  and  the  eve  of  entering 
Canaan ;  a  long,  barren,  unbelieving, 
unfaithful  tract  stretches  between.] 

III.  Eating  the  supper.  —  This 
characteristic  also  to  be  stamped  upon 
the  whole  Christian  course.  Not  only 
a  continuous  resting  upon  an  atone- 
ment which  brings  deliverance  from 
bondage,  but  a  continuous  "  peace- 
offering"  feast,  a  continuous  commu- 
nion with  Him  who  is  the  Victim,  the 


Supper,   the   Host    at   the   table — all 
in  one. 

Ver.  13.  The  judgment  of  the 
Church  and  the  judgment  of  God. 
I.  One  limited  ;  other  universal.  II. 
Partial ;  absolute.  III.  Disciplinary  ] 
judicial.  IV.  May  err ;  infallible. 
V.  Provisional;  final.  VI.  Temporary 
in  efiects ;  eternal. — [J.  L.] 

Vers.  9-13.  (a)  I.  In  the  Church; 
not  of  the  Church.  II.  In  the  world  ; 
not  of  the  world. 

Or  (b)  I.  Separation  from  the 
Church.  II.  Separateness  from  the 
world. 


APPENDED   NOTES, 


Ver.  2. — Farrar  thinks  that  they  were 
*^  puffed  up  "  and  "  toasted  "  about  this  very 
matter.  "  Though  the  very  Pagans  execrated 
this  atrocity,  yet  he  had  not  been  expelled 
from  the  Christian  communion,  nor  even 
made  to  do  penance  in  it,  but  had  found 
brethren  ready,  not  merely  to  palliate  his 
offence,  but  actually  to  plume  themselves 
upon  leaving  it  unpunished.  This  man 
seems  to  have  been  a  person  of  distinction 
and  influence,  whom  it  was  advantageous  to 
a  Church,  largely  composed  of  slaves  and 
women,  to  count  among  them."  {Query,  all 
this  ?)  "  Doubtless  (?)  this  had  facilitated 
his  condonation,  which  may  have  been 
founded  on  some  Antinomian  plea  of 
Christian  liberty ;  or  on  some  Rabbinic 
notion  that  old  ties  were  rendered  non-ex- 
istent by  the  new  conditions  of  a  proselyte  " 
(^something  in  this) ;  "  or  by  peculiarities  of 
circumstance  unknown  to  us.  But  though 
this  person  was  the  most  notorious,  he  was 
by  no  means  the  only  offender,  and  there 
were  Corinthian  Christians — even  many  of 
them— who  were  impenitently  guilty  of  un- 
cleanness,  fornication,  and  lasciviousness " 
(1  Cor.  v.  11,  vi.  15-18,  x.  8,  xv.  33,  34). 
(Farrar,  St.  Paul,  in  loe.) 

Ver.  7. — "  Another  and  still  higher  element 
of  prophetical  import  mixed  with  that  sin- 
gular work  of  God,  which  gave  rise  to  the 
institution  of  the  Passover.  For  the  earthly 
relations  then  existing,  and  the  operations  of 
God  in  connection  with  them,  were  framed  on 
purpose  to  represent  and  foreshadow  cor- 
responding but  increasingly  superior  ones 
connected  with  the  work  and  kingdom  of 
Christ.  And  as  all  adverse  power,  though 
rising  here  to  its  most  desperate  and  malig- 


nant working,  was  destined  to  be  put  down 
by  Christ,  that  the  salvation  of  His  Church 
might  be  finally  and  for  ever  accomplished, 
so  the  redemption  from  the  land  of  Egypt, 
with  its  ever-recurring  memorial,  necessarily 
contained  the  germ  and  promise  of  what  was 
to  come  ;  the  lamb  perpetually  offered  to 
commemorate  the  past  pointed  the  expecting 
eye  of  faith  to  the  Lamb  of  God,  one  day 
to  be  slain  for  the  yet  unatoned  sins  of  the 
world  ;  and  only  when  it  could  be  said, 
'  Christ,  our  passover  has  been  sacrificed,' 
did  the  purpose  of  God,  which  lay  enclosed 
as  an  embryo  in  the  Paschal  institution, 
reach  its  proper  culmination." — Fairhairn, 
"  Typology;'  ii.  445. 

Ver.  10.  The  Ti^WZ^f.—"  (There  are  no 
[passages]  which  speak  of  the  end  of  the 
Kda/xos).  .  .  .  From  the  signification  of 
k6<t/xos  as  the  material  world,  which  is 
not  uncommon  in  Scripture  (Matt.  xiii. 
35 ;  John  xxi.  25 ;  Rom.  i.  20),  follow 
that  of  Kdfffjios  as  the  sum  total  of  the 
men  living  in  the  world  (John  i,  29, 
iv.  42  ;  2  Cor.  v.  19) ;  and  then  upon  this, 
and  ethically,  those  out  of  the  eKKXrjaia,  the 
alienated  from  the  life  of  God  (John  i.  10  ; 
1  Cor.  i.  20,  21;  Jas.  iv.  4;  1  John  iii.  13). 
.  .  .  Ai(J}v,  .  .  .  signifying  time,  comes  pre- 
sently to  signify  all  which  exists  in  the 
world  under  conditions  of  time  ;  and  then, 
more  ethically,  the  course  and  current  of 
this  world's  affairs.  But  this  course  and 
current  being  full  of  sin,  it  is  nothing 
wonderful  that  '  this  world '  (alibv)  like 
k6<7iuos,  acquires  presently  in  Scripture  an 
evil  significance.  .  .  .  All  that  floating  mass 
of  thoughts,  opinions,  maxims,  speculations, 
hopes,   impulses,   aims,   at    any  time    cur- 

135 


CHAP.  VI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


rent  in  the  world,  which  it  is  impossible 
to  seize  and  accurately  define,  but  which 
constitute  a  most  real  and  efiEective  power, 
being  the  moral,  or  immoral,  atmosphere 
which  at  every  moment  of  our  lives  we 
inhale,  again  inevitably  to  exhale,  — all  this 
is  included  in  the  anhv,  which  is,  as  Bengel 
has  expressed  it,  the  subtle  informing  spirit 


of  the  KdcTfjios,  or  world  of  men  who  are  living 
alienated  and  apart  from  God."  Both  words 
united  in  Eph.  ii.  2  :  "  the  age  of  this  world.'''' 
"  The  God  of  this  world,"'  2  Cor,  iv.  4  ;  its 
anti-God.  The  "  age  "  is  the  rule  of  the  life 
of  the  men  of  the  "  world  "  (Eph.  ii.  2,  Kara). 
They  are  ♦'  men  of  the  time,"  that  and 
nothing  more. — Trench,  "  Syn.,''  §  lix. 


CHAPTER    YI. 


CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Two  Sections;  Two  Topics.— Vers.  1-8,  9-20. 

Vers.  1-8. — Canon  Evans  {Sjjeaker^s  Commentary)  thus  exhibits  the  verbal  connection : 
"  Deigneth  any  one  of  you  {you  emphatic),  having  a  matter  anent  the  other  (party),  to  seek 
for  judgment  before  the  wrong-doers  and  not  before  the  saints  ?  (Are  ye  so  besotted),  or  do 
ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  ?  And  if  in  your  presence  the  world  is  to 
be  judged,  unmeet  are  ye  to  hold  judge-courts  of  the  lowest  sort?  Do  ye  not  know  that 
angels  we  shall  judge — angels!  Speak  not  of  secular  things!  Nay,  rather  (that  I  may 
unmask  your  folly  by  a  redactio  ad  ahsurdtmi),  if  secular  judge-courts  ye  should  perchance 
hold  (a  measure  how  unworthy  of  your  kingly  calling  and  of  your  future  judicial  status  1), 
take  men  of  utterly  no  account  in  the  Church  and  set  them  on  the  bench  I  {Them,  I  say,  for 
such  nonentities  are  equal  to  the  settlement  of  such  trivialities.)  To  put  yoa  to  shame  I 
speak  it  (this  last  sentence  serious,  not  satirical).  So  1  is  there  not  among  you  (wise 
men  as  you  flaunt  yourselves)  not  even  one  wise  man  who  shall  be  competent  to  arbitrate 
(give  a  decision)  on  the  part  of  his  brother  ?  But  brother  with  brother  goes  to  law  (which 
is  a  breach  of  charity)  and  sues  for  judgment  at  the  bar  of  unbelievers  (which  is  pre- 
posterous). Nay,  verily  (let  alone  the  absurd  length  of  appealing  to  heathen  men),  it  is 
so  far  quite  a  defeat  to  you  that  you  have  cause  for  legal  judgments  between  yourselves.  .  .  . 
Why  do  ye  not  rather  take  wrong  (than  allow  or  give  cause  for  this  ratio  ultima  of  legal 
judgment)  ?  Why  not  submit  to  being  defrauded  1  Nay,  but  (the  very  reverse,  so  far  from 
taking  wrong  dealt)  you  deal  wrong  yourselves,  and  (what  makes  it  worse)  deal  wrong  to 
brethren  !  (Is  this  possible  ?)  or  do  ye  (with  all  your  boasted  knowledge)  not  know  that 
wrong-doers  (of  any  sort)  shall  not  inherit  God's  kingdom  ?  "     To  this  may  be  added  : — 

Ver.  1.  Dare.— ^.^.  "What  is  this  that  I  hear  of  you?  Is  it  really  possible?" 
Bengel :  "  Grandi  verbo  notatur  Icesa  majestas  Christianorum."  Connect  with  the  "  judging  " 
at  end  of  chap,  v.:  "I  do  not  yet,  as  a  Christian,  judge  the  world;  I  shall  do  some  day, 
and  even  judge  angels.  I  understand  a  Christian,  and  can  judge  him  (ver.  12)  ;  I  do  not  yet 
always  understand  the  man  of  the  world ;  God  does,  and  shall  judge  him."  Unjust. — Not 
necessarily  meaning  doing  injustice  on  the  bench.  (Cf.  the  fair  character  of  Gallic.)  I'erhaps 
not  more  than  unrighteous,  as  opposed  to  "  saints  "  (in  a  half -technical  sense,  like  "  sinners 
of  the  Gentiles,"  Gal.  ii.  15). 

Ver.  2. — Observe  the  estimate  of  secular  things  :  "  the  smallest  matters.'^  Cf.  "  that 
which  is  least  "  (Luke  xvi.  10,  expounded  by  vers.  8  and  ll)  =  w^orldly  wealth  and  honour,  in 
many  cases.     By  you. — Lit.  in  you  ;  as,  "  in  that  Man  "  (Acts  xvii.  31). 

Ver.  3.  (Evil)  angels. — No  hint  that  the  good  need  to  submit  to  a  "  judgment."  (See 
Jude  6,  7,  8  ;  also  the  saints  glorifying  God's  judgments,  Kev.  xix.  3.) 

Ver.  4. — Choose  between  («)  ^'set"  (imperative)  and  {b)  '^ye  sef''  (indicative).  Also 
between  two  meanings  of  "  them  .  .  .  least  esteemed  in  the  Church  "  ;  (<?)  "the  'nobodies  '  of 
your  membership  "  ;  or  (</)  "  the  secular  judges,  who,  beicg  secular,  men  of  the  world,  are,  in 
the  eyes  of  the  members  of  the  Church,  and  in  comparison  with  themselves,  of  no  account." 
{d)  Highly  improbable.     Adopt  («)  and  {c')  ;  half-ironical  counsel. 

Ver.  5. — As  usual  meaning  "to  your  shaming,"  "that  I  may  arouse  your  sense  of  shame." 

Ver.  7.  Fault. — A  falling  away  from  the  ideal  of  the  dignity  of  being  Christians,  and 
from  the  ideal  of  brotherly  love,  essential  to  the  character. 

136 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vl. 


Transitional  Section.— Yers,  9-11. 

Ver.  9.— Query,  is  the  particular  '* wrong  "  and  ''defrauding  "  in  vers.  8,  9  connected  with 
2  Cor.  vii.  12,  the  case  of  "  the  incestuous  person  "  ?  Had  the  father  been  ready  to  appeal 
to  a  secular  court  for  redress  ?  Some  such  connection  would  explain  the  transition  in  this 
verse  from  "litigation"  to  "fornication."  [In  2  Cor.  vii.  2  Paul  uses  in  "negatived  con- 
nection with  himself  "wrong"  and  "defraud."]  N.B.,  like  Eom.  i.  24  usque  ad  finem,  this 
chapter  gives  a  significant  glimpse  of  the  every-day  corruption  of  the  heathen  world,  with  all 
the  civilization  of  Greece  and  Rome.     Effeminate.— Euphemistic. 

Ver.  10. — Note  in  what  company  we  find  **  covetousness."  Stanley  suggests  a  connection 
between  "  thieves  "  and  the  lawsuits  (but  query  ?).  Revilers. —  Vii^ulent.foui  abuse  ;  generally, 
not  always.  John  ix.  28  ;  Acts  xxiii.  4 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  12  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  13 ;  1  Tim.  v.  14 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  9  ; 
1  Cor.  V.  11  ;  and  here.     Inherit. — Cf.  Matt.  xxv.  34  ;  Jas.  ii.  5,  "  heirs  of  the  kingdom." 

Ver.  11. — Observe  ''were  .  .  .  were  .  .  .  were."  Partly  historical,  partly  ideal.  In  ideal, 
Faith,  Baptism,  Renewal,  Separation  from  sins  of  old  character  and  life,  coincide  in  time  ; 
in  fact,  Baptism  may  be  pre-  or  post-dated  in  regard  to  Faith  and  Renewal ;  Separation  may 
very  imperfectly  accompany  the  rest.  Justified. — Protestantism  rightly  lays  stress  upon  the 
relative  change  involved  in  pardon  of  sin ;  makes  this  its  definition  of  Justification  (Acts 
xiii.  38,  39).  Yet  {e.g.  Wesley,  Sermons')  "  some  rare  instances  may  he  found  wherein 
the  terms  '  justified '  and  *  justification '  are  used  in  so  wide  a  sense  as  to  include 
sanctification  also ;  yet  in  general  use  they  are  sufficiently  distinguished  from  each  other 
both  by  St.  Paul  and  the  other  inspired  writers."  Also,  cf.  Rom.  viii.  30,  where  attention 
is  not  so  much  fixed  upon  the  initial  act  of  God  as  upon  the  continuously  accorded  and 
maintained  status  of  the  justified  man,  covering  the  whole  interval  from  pardon  to  glory. 
Also,  no  careful  adherence  here  to  the  ordo  salutis  (Calvin,  in  Ellicott).  Observe  "  m  .  .  . 
in."    Observe  "  our  God." 

Second  Main  Topic— Yers.  12-20. 

Yer.  12.  Lawful.  —Here,  and  in  x.  23.  To  be  put  in  quotation  marks,  "  All  .  .  .  lawful." 
His  own  words,  or  something  like  them,  quoted  and  misused  by  the  Antinomian  party.  [Cf. 
the  misuse  of  Christ's  actual  words,  Mark  xiv.  58,  from  John  ii,  19.]  Expedient. — Study 
Paul's  "  expediency  "  ;  here,  x.  23 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  10,  xii.  1  ;  Rom.  xiv.  13  sq.  Compare  "  All 
things  to  all  men,  that  I  may  .  .  .  save,"  ix.  22.     (See  Appended  Homilie:>,  more  fullv.) 

Yer.  13. — Christ  ate  broiled  fish  and  honeycomb  (Luke  xxiv.  42)  after  His  resurrecnon,  but 
only  to  help  affrighted,  bewildered  disciples  to  realise  that  He  was  not  simply  a  jjhantasm, 
but  a  substantial- reality. 

Yer.  15.  Take. — "Take  "away,'"  q.d.  from  Christ  to  whom  t];iey  belong  and  are  joined 
(Evans). 

Yer.  16.  Saith  he. — Adam  ;  or  "  saith  i#,"  viz.  Genesis.  In  either  case  notice  that  the  word 
is  regarded  as  a  fundamental,  inspired  word  of  God. 

Yer.  18.  Flee. — "  When  a  temptation  of  lust  assaults  thee,  do  not  resist  it  by  heaping  up 
arguments  against  it  and  disputing  with  it,  considering  its  offers  and  its  danger ;  but  fly 
from  it,  that  is,  think  not  at  all  of  it ;  lay  aside  all  consideration  concerning  it,  and  turn 
away  from  it  by  any  severe  and  laudable  thought  of  business.  St.  Hierome  very  wittily 
reproves  the  Gentile  superstition,  who  pictured  the  Yirgin  Deities  armed  with  a  shield  and 
lance,  as  if  chastity  could  not  be  defended  without  war  and  direct  contention.  No  ;  this 
enemy  is  to  be  treated  otherwise.  If  you  hear  it  speak,  though  but  to  dispute  with  it,  it 
ruins  you,  and  the  very  arguments  you  go  about  to  answer  leave  a  relish  upon  the  tongue. 
A  man  may  be  burned  if  he  goes  near  the  fire,  though  but  to  quench  his  house ;  and  by 
handling  pitch,  though  but  to  draw  it  from  your  clothes,  you  defile  your  fingers  "  (Jeremy 
Taylor,  Holy  Living,  sect.  iii.).  He  also  quotes  Augustine  :  "  Contra  lihidinis  impetum 
apprehende  fiigam,  si  vis  ohtinere  victoriam"  Observe  imperfect  tense,  q.d.  "  Flee,  and  flee" 
(Evans).  Every  sin. — Natural  to  supply,  and  read,  "  Every  other  sin."  But  query  ?  Does 
he  rather  put  fornication  into  a  category,  a  genus,  with  but  one  species,  and  that  having 
but  one,  unique,  abnormal,  abhorrent  example  1  "  Sins  "  may  suf^ciently  classify  and  con- 
demn other  evil  acts.  But  this  ?  We  want  another,  blacker,  more  terrible  name  with  which 
to  head  its  category.  Difficulty  oftener  with  "every."  "Common  view  .  .  .  that  Apostle 
.  .  .  speaking  in  general  form,  that  exact  words  not  to  be  pressed  ('  tales  sententice  morales 
non  morose  urgendce,'  Beng.),  there  being  some  sins,  e.g.  intemperance,  which  can  hardly  be 
said  to  be  completely  without  the  body.  The  true  force  of  what  .  .  .  already  said  .  .  . 
thus  seriously  weakened :  there  is  no  sin  which  is  within  the  body  in  the  frightful  form  in 
vj\\\Qh.  fornication  is.  By  it  the  whole  body,  inwardly  as  well  as  outwardly,  is  made  over  to 
another,  and  is  utterly  separated  from  Christ.  .  .  .  Intemperance  and  self-mnrder  involve 
acts  injuriously  affecting  the  body,  yet  done  .  .  .  from  without ;  but  the  sin  oi  the  fornicator 
.  .  .  is,  so  to  say,  within  tbe  body,  and  using  it  as  a  direct  agent  and  implement.  .  .  . 
Fornication  is  a  sin  against  the  personality,  in  a  form  and  to  an  extent  far  beyond  that  of 
any  other  sin  of  sensuality  "  (slightly  condensed  from  Ellicott).     Without  the  body.—"  They 

137 


CHAP.  VI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIAN^. 


require  some  motive  or  weapon  other  than  the  body.  But  this  sin  stands  alone  in  making 
the  human  body,  the  chosen  medium  of  Christ's  self-manifestation  to  the  world,  to  be  itself 
a  sufficient  motive  and  instrument  of  sin  "  (Beet).  Observe  not  "  without  .  .  .  within,^'  but 
'^without  .  .  .  against";  as  if  others  missed,  though  aimed  at;  this  hits,  the  body.  (So 
Evans.) 

Ver.  19. — This  more  than  "Ye  are  (collectively)  the  Temple"  (iii.  16). 

Ver.  20. — It  is  an  over-subtle,  over-pressing,  use  of  idea  of  ransom  to  endeavour  to  fix  pre- 
cisely to  wJiom  price  paid.  Analogy  of  ransom  only  fits  serviceably  the  two  ideas, — bought  by 
the  new  owner,  to  deliver  from  an  old,  to  keep  for  himself,  whose  new  service  is  (practically) 
liberty,  and  is  (absolutely)  deliverance  from  old  bondage.  1  Pet.  i.  19,  ^^  Precious  blood, 
(even  the  blood)  of  Christ."  Note  particularly  the  true  reading  here.  Last  words  to  be 
omitted. 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—8. 

The  Christian  and  Litigation. 

I.  Some  limitations  to  an  absolute  prohibition  of  Christian  appeal  to  secular 
courts  to  be  noted. — 1.  The  State  and  the  Law  were  not  then  Christian,  but 
heathen.  Case  of  Corinthian  Church  not  to  be  compared  with  condition  of  things 
where  government,  legislation,  justice,  are  affected  by,  or  based  on,  great  prin- 
ciples of  Christianity.  The  parallel  case  is  rather  that  of  two  Christians  at 
issue,  of  whom  one,  or  both,  is  inclined  to  drag  the  matter  before  a  mocking 
Mahometan  kadi,  or  before  an  idolatrous,  perhaps  persecuting,  Hindoo  prince. 
In  Christendom,  at  its  lowest  worth,  the  "  secular "  court  is,  in  a  sense,  an 
outer  Court  of  the  Church,  or  at  least  an  annexe.  Persecuted  English  Non- 
conformists have  appealed  to  English  judges,  often  Christian  men.  2.  The 
matter  in  dispute  is  supposed  to  be  one  wholly  between  Christian  parties.  *'  A 
family  business;"  the  family's  "dirty  linen,  to  he  washed  at  homeT  Paul 
himself  carried  the  case,  between  him  and  the  Sanhedrin,  before  the  court  of 
the  Emperor  ISTero.  "  I  ought  to  be  judged  ...  at  Caesar's  judgment  seat," 
viz.  before  Festus,  Caesar's  representative  (Acts  xxv.  10).  The  wrong  suffered 
by  a  Christian  at  the  hands  of  a  non-Christian  may  not  be  merely  a  personal 
hardship,  beginning  and  ending  with  the  man  and  the  particular  case.  [In 
this  latter  case  the  Christian  had  better  suffer,  especially  if  the  wrong  be 
put  upon  him  because  he  is  a  Christian.  1  Pet.  iv.  19  then  applies:  "Commit* 
.  .  ,  unto  a  faithful  Creator."  "  The  Lord  is  at  hand."  Also  Matt.  v.  38-45  : 
"Resist  not  evil."  "Turn  other  cheek."  "Let  .  .  .  have  cloke  also."]  But 
Christians  may  happen  to  represent  society.  Vindication  of  his  own  purely  civil 
right  may  be  needful  for  sake  of  social  order.  [This  rule  is  to  be  very  reluctantly 
applied,  with  earnest  prayer  and  great  watchfulness  over  his  spirit,  lest  self,  or 
anger,  or  pride,  or  revenge,  insinuate  themselves  into  the  public  spirit  of  his 
appeal  to  law.  Matt.  v.  44  very  earnestly  then  to  be  remembered  :  "  Love  .  .  . 
enemies.  Pray  for  them  that  despitefully  use  you."]  3.  Matt.  v.  34-37  ("  Swear 
not  at  all.  .  .  .  Your  communication  be  Yea,  yea ;  Nay,  nay  ")  applies  to  an  ideal 
society  within  an  ideal  kingdom  of  God.  In  practice,  in  the  real,  complex,  actual 
social  order,  Christ  (silent  before,  Matt.  xxvi.  63)  and  Paul  (2  Cor.  i.  23)  did  speak 
upon  a  confirmatory  oath.  One  general  rule  explains  and  justifies  :  "  Whatsoever 
is  more  than  these  comeih  of  evil " ;  Christians  have  to  do  with  fallen  men  and  an 
evil  world.  In  dealing  with  these,  abatement  from  the  ideal  is  forced  upon  them 
in  use  of  litigation  in  secular  courts.  But,  within  the  Church,  keep  to  the  ideal. 
So  here,  in  this  section. 

II.  Between  Christian  and  Christian,  and  in  "  hiotics  "  merely  (ver.  4),  litiga- 
tion before  secular  tribunals  is  to  be  discouraged  [unless  as  last  resort]. 

1.  It  is  an  insult  to  the  dignity  of  the  Church  arid  its  Lord.  "  Dare  you  ?  " — The 
thing  is  treasonable  [as  when,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  English  law  forbade  causes  to  be 
taken  from  the  King's  courts  to  that  of  the  Pope].     What  jurisdiction  have  the 

138 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vi. 


"  unjust "  and  their  courts  within  the  kingdom  of  Christ  1  And  shall  it  be  a 
Christian  who  seeks  to  introduce  the  foreign  jurisdiction  ?  Does  Christ's  law 
need  confirming  or  superseding,  that  you  appeal  to  secular  ?  He  has  given 
directions  for  procedure  (Matt,  xviii.  15-20).  First,  "  thee  and  him  aloneJ'  That 
failing,  a  court  of  first  instance ;  ''  two  or  three  u)itnesses.''  That  failing,  the  supreme 
court,  the  Full  "  Church,"  presided  over  by  the  Lord  Himself  :  "  there  am  I  in 
the  midst."  They  "  agree  to  ask  "  His  guidance  ;  their  decisions — *'  binding  "  or 
"  loosing  " — are  His,  "  bound  "  or  "  loosed  "  "  in  heaven." 

2.  It  is  unworthy  of  your  own  dignity  who  are  resorting  to  the  secular  judge. — 
You  seek,  and  bow  to,  his  decisions,  who  shall  one  day  stand  before  you  and 
have  to  bow  to  your  judgment?  [An  obscure  topic  as  yet.  See  Beet's  note 
appended.  (1)  Generally  it  is  the  last  link  of  a  series  of  identifications  of  the 
saints  with  their  Lord.  They  "shall  be  glorified  together"  (Rom.  viii.  17). 
Crucified,  buried,  risen,  ascended,  hid  (as  He  is)  in  God,  enthroned  already  with 
Him  (Col.  iii.  3 ;  Eph.  ii.  6),  in  like  manner  they  are  to  be  brought  forth  with 
Him  (1  Thess.  iv.  14),  and  to  be  assessors  with  Him  in  judgment.  (2)  Further, 
as  impossible  yet  to  draw  up  a  coherent,  consistent  programme  of  the  sub-final 
Age  preceding  the  Parousia  and  the  General  Judgment  (and  even  to  adjust  all  the 
relations  between  these  two  last),  as  it  would  have  been  in  Old  Testament  days 
to  draw  up  a  programme  of  the  First  Advent  of  Christ.  Y'et  collate,  tentatively 
(Dan.  vii.  22-27),  "Judgment  was  given  to  the  saints";  Matt.  xix.  28 
(Luke  xxii.  30),  "  Ye  shall  sit  .  .  .  judging  the  twelve  tribes."  In  Matt.  xxv. 
the  faithful  servant  is  made  "ruler";  in  Luke  xix.  12  sqq.  (Pounds,  not 
Talents)  the  faithful  servant  has  "authority  over  .  .  .  cities."  Pev.  xxi.  24-26 
distinguishes  between  the  nations  and  their  kings  (outside)  and  the  New 
Jerusalem  and  its  citizens  (within).  Also  in  Matt.  xxv.  it  is  expressly  "  all  the 
nations  "  that  are  arrayed  before  the  Son  of  Man,  and  even  those  set  on  the  right 
hand  are  distinguished  from  "  these "  to  whom  their  good  offices  have  been 
rendered.  Are  ^^  these"  the  assessm^-sahits  sitting  in  judgment  with  their  Lord ?^ 
Whatever  may  be  behind  all  these  mysterious  intimations,  this  is  clear :  The 
little  Church  in  Corinth  is  invested  with  a  dignity  elevating  it  above  all  earthly 
greatness.  As  seen  from  heaven,  the  little  nuclei  here  and  there  in  the  Poman 
world,  of  artisans,  slaves,  Jews,  "  not  many  noble,"  etc.,  are  the  distinguished 
factors  in  human  society.  Heaven's  eye  singles  out  the  Churches  as  the  all- 
important  facts  of  earth.  The  Christian  man  is  to  disdain  outside  help  and 
vindication.  What  can  he  want  higher,  better,  more  authoritative,  than  a 
Church  tribunal  1  Moreover,  why  should  he,  a  peer  of  the  kingdom,  submit 
himself  to  the  nobody,  the  commoner,  outside  its  pale  and  honour — perhaps  its 
enemy  ?  Cannot  a  Christian  trust  the  competency,  or  at  least  the  brotherly 
fairness  or  love,  of  his  brethren  ?  Do  not  say  you  cannot  have  a  Church  court ; 
nobody  to  constitute  one.  [Extreme  case  on  record :  an  Independent  Church 
died  down  to  three  members ;  two  of  them,  women,  expelled  for  drunkenness, 
the  third,  a  man.]  Brother  and  brother  should  submit  to  brethren.  Not 
secular  litigation,  but  Church  arbitration,  the  first,  the  favourite,  method  when- 
ever possible.  Respect  the  brethren,  respect  yourselves,  ye  judges  of  angels  ! 
["  All  that  statesmen,  as  such,  have  to  do  with  religion  is  to  be  themselves 
under  its  power ;  all  that  Christians,  as  such,  have  to  do  with  the  State  is  to  be 
good  citizens"  (Dr.  Brown,  Horce  Subs.,  Second  Series,  p.  52).] 

3.  It  is  to  degrade  the  Church  and  the  brother  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  "  Before 
the  unbelievers  !  " — Bad  enough  that  brother  sues  brother  at  all.  Even  the  world 
has  its  proverb,  "Dog  does  not  eat  dog"  (cf.  Gal.  v.  15).  It  is  a  sad  ^^  co7ne 
down"  (ver.  6)  from  what  your  spirit  ought  to  be.  But  it  is  a  sadder,  deeper 
descent  when  the  brotherhood,  showing  its  worst  side,  is  dragged  into  the  eye  of 
an  unfriendly,  cold  world  ;  when  passions  which  ought  not  to  be  known  within 

139 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  I.   CORINTHIANS. 


the  Body  are  obtruded  upon  the  notice  of  the  world, — selfishness  defending  itself 
against,  or  overreaching,  selfishness;  jealousy,  covetousness,  partisan  feeling,  a 
too  eager  grasp  at  the  things  of  a  temporal  world,  and  the  like.  Have  no  such 
feelings  at  all ;  but  if  ye  do  have  cases  arising  (ver.  4),  at  least,  for  shame,  keep 
them  from  the  men  of  the  world. 

4.  It  is  an  exaggeration  of  the  importance  of  the  matters  at  issue. — Mere 
"things  pertaining  to  this  life,"  "the  smallest  matters,"  are  they  worth  dividing 
the  brotherhood  over,  and,  much  more,  of  dishonouring  it  before  the  outside 
world?  If  you  will  have  the  matter  out,  I  had  almost  said,  find  some  poor, 
humble,  simple  members,  and  let  them  judge ;  they  are  good  enough  judges  for 
such  business !  But  there  is  a  better  thing  still :  do  not  insist  on  "  having  it 
out"  !  Let  it  go.  [This  the  meaning  of  Phil.  iv.  5  :  "  Your  moderation."  "Do 
not  stand  too  stifBy  upon  your  rights.  Yield  something  of  what,  in  the  abstract, 
is  really  your  due.  If  there  cannot  be  '  give  and  take,'  better  that  you  do  all 
the  'giving,'  than  hurt,  by  an  insistence  which  may  become  obstinacy,  and  may 
lead  to  estrangement,  strife,  and  division,  the  peace  of  the  Church."]  Take 
wrong ;  be  defrauded.  The  Lord  will  see  your  interests  safe.  "  The  meek  shall 
inherit  the  earth."     Why,  you  are  the  wrong-doers,  the  defrauders — brethren ! 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  9—11. 

I.  The  kingdom  of  God. — 1.  Observe  how  the  phrase  and  idea  had  got 
cleared  in  Paul's  mind  from  all  the  fooHsh  and  ridiculous  Habbinical  accretions 
and  anticipations  of  a  great  temporal  monarchy  under  Messiah,  in  which,  freed 
from  the  Roman  or  other  yoke,  Israel  should  be  the  nation,  and  the  Gentile 
world  exist  for  the  sake  of  the  Jew.  2.  We  have  here  a  case  of  the  true  Evolu- 
tion. (1)  Israel  had  been  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth.  As  Babylon  was 
Nebuchadnezzar's,  or  Egypt  was  Pharaoh's,  or  Damascus  Bezin's  or  Hazael's. 
Jehovah  was  the  only,  the  real,  King  of  the  realm.  David,  Solomon,  etc.,  were 
understood  to  be  only  viceroys  under  Jehovah.  Jehovah's  law  was  State  law. 
Idolatry  was  treason.  Citizens  were  born  into  the  citizenship  [cf.  in  contrast, 
John  i.  13] ;  Israel,  in  the  midst  of  the  nations,  stood  distinguished  as  the 
nation  of  God  in  the  land  of  God.  But  it  never  perfectly  realised  the  idea.  The 
land  never  was  cleared  of  enemies  for  Jehovah.  The  people  never  did  perfectly 
keep  Jehovah's  law.  They  were  not  satisfied  with,  or  mindful  of,  the  true  King 
Jehovah.  At  last,  when  the  mob  howled  wildly  around  Pilate's  judgment  seat, 
"  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar,"  came  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  even  this 
imperfect  embodiment  of  God's  idea.  (2)  Next,  the  Church  of  Christ  is  made 
to  exhibit  "  God's  kingdom."  Again  there  is  a  separate  people,  God's  "  peculiar 
people,"  but  of  no  one  nation,  located  in  no  one  land.  The  kingdom  is  wherever 
a  heart  is  in  which  Christ  is  accepted  as  God's  anointed  King  of  His  new 
Israel.  "  Kingdom  of  God  within  you."  Every  heart  won  is  a  new  piece  of 
territory  added  to  God's  realm  on  earth.  God's  "  royal,"  "  perfect,  law  of 
libei'ty  "  (Jas.  i.  25,  ii.  8)  is  the  State  law,  and  rules  the  hearts  of  the  citizens 
of  this  better  setting  forth  of  the  "  kingdom  of  God."  (3)  "  Better,"  but  not 
perfect,  or  ideal.  For  that  we  look  to  Eternity.  Heaven  is  at  last  the  idea 
of  God  realised.  A  people  all  holy,  all  happy,  in  a  land  without  sin  or 
curse ;  every  heart  beating  pulse  and  pulse  in  communion  with  the  King ;  love 
to  the  King  the  one  sufficient,  all-embracing  law  for  every  subject,  written  in 
the  heart ;  God  ruling  over  a  race,  all  His  people,  dwelling  in  a  world  [perhaps 
"  a  new  earth  "]  undisputedly  His  dominion.  Thus,  as  Israel,  the  Church,  the 
inner  Experience  of  believers.  Heaven — God's  recovered  idea  of  a  "  kingdom  of 
God  "  has  progressively  been  exhibited  "  in  many  parts  and  in  many  manners  " 

140 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  vi. 


(Heb.  i.  1) ;  each  "  illustration  "  traced  on  the  same  lines  as  its  predecessor, 
with  additions,  modifications,  added  detail. 

II.  Its  citizens. — Not  ^''the  unrighteous."  1.  Only  an  absolute  exclusion 
when  the  kingdom  of  God  is  Heaven.  Separation  made  (Matt.  xxv.  33,  46). 
Impossible  to  conceive  of  the  Holy  City  admitting  "  what  defileth,"  etc.  (Rev.  xxi. 
27,  xxii.  15)  ;  cannot  pass  the  gates.  2.  Very  imperfectly  attempted  in  Israel. 
Levitical  law  had  many  enactments  whose  sanction  was,  "  That  soul  shall  be 
cut  off  from  among  the  People."  But  those — never  actually  enforced  to  any 
great  extent — missed  nearly  all  forms  of  "  unrighteousness  "  which  did  not 
culminate  in  overt  action.  3.  Only  partially  to  be  accomplished  in  the  Christian 
Church.  In  the  sub-Pentecostal,  almost  ideal,  days  of  the  Church,  the  King 
vindicated  the  principle  by  the  cutting  off  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  [the  New 
Testament  analogue  of  the  death  of  Achan].  But  God  is  not  perpetually 
stepping  forth  in  acts  of  holy  self -vindication  against  sin  in  His  world  or  in  the 
Church  of  His  Son.  All  Church  discipline,  and  forms  (or  tests)  of  Church 
membership,  are  so  many  humanly  devised,  often  God  honoured,  methods  of 
endeavouring  to  keep  out  the  ''  unrighteous,"  or  to  exclude  them  when  in.  But 
they  never  can  secure  more  than  an  approximation  to  the  idea  of  a  kingdom  in 
which  no  ''  unrighteous  "  are  found.  No  method,  actual  or  proposed,  ever  gets 
worked  with  perfect  intelligence,  or  perfect  faithfulness  ;  no  method  of  human 
administration  can  deal  with  heart-unrighteousness.  4.  There  is  a  perfect,  self- 
acting,  discipline  of  exclusion  ;  a  Divine  excommunication.  Sin  means  real  in- 
capacity for  understanding,  seeing,  entering,  the  kingdom  here  ;  an  utter  unfitness 
for  heaven,  a  moral  impossibility,  hereafter.  Sin  forfeits  justification;  the  "blood" 
no  longer  "  cleanses  "  (1  John  i.  7);  it  negatives  the  possession  of  the  holiness 
without  some  degree  of  which  no  man  is  really  regenerate  or  sanctified,  nor  can 
be  a  child  in  the  family  or  a  citizen  of  the  kingdom.  "  Every  branch  in  Me 
that  beareth  not  fruit  He  taketh  away  " ;  the  Vine- dresser's  knife  executes  its 
sentence  of  excommunication.  The  Church  must  often  leave  the  dead  branch 
still  attached  to  the  Vine  ;  or  must  be  ignorant  of  the  fulness  of  its  death.  "  Be 
not  deceived." 

III.  Candidates  for  citizenship. — 1.  Who  but  the  ^^  unrighteous"  1  What  a 
catalogue  !  "  Thieves"  "  effeminate"  "  drunkards"  cannibals,  murderers,  sinners 
of  every  type,  degree,  age,  race  !  From  such  the  citizens  are  recruited  !  No 
citizen  who  was  not  an  alien  once.  [No  quarry  from  which  stones  cannot  be 
got  fit  for  Christ's  building.  No  stone  which  cannot  be  utilised  by  Him.  There 
is  really  no  other  stone  than  such  as  this  in  the  building.]  (Eph.  ii.  1-3,  11-13.) 
The  life-history  of  every  citizen  follows  the  formula,  "  Such  were  you,  hut  ye  were 
washed.  .  .  .  Ye  are  citizens."  2.  To  such  the  kingdom  comes  by  "  inheritance." 
(True  now,  and  true  *'  when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  His  glory,"  ut  supra.) 
Such  became  "  joint-heirs  with  Christ "  in  the  possession  of  the  kingdom.  By 
inheritance ;  a  concomitant  of  the  new  status,  the  new  life  ;  so  certainly  as  they 
are  "  washed"  etc.,  do  they  inherit.  The  "  washing"  etc.,  brings  with  it,  ipso 
facto,  an  entering  into  possession.  And  as  certainly  by-and-by,  with  an 
unbroken  sequence,  does  the  "  washing,"  etc.,  go  with  the  "  inhe7nting."  There 
is  no  other  final  goal  and  resting-place  congruous  with,  and  possible  for,  the 
lenewed  citizen  life.  No  entering  without  a  change  preceding  ;  no  change 
without  the  inheritance  following. 

IV.  The  initiation. — "  Washing,  "  sanctifying,"  justifying."  (See  Critical 
Notes,  above.)  Paul  not  speaking  with  any  theological  precision  of  order.  Yet 
if  sanctification  be  only  the  relative  holiness,  completed  by  a  "  separating  "  act 
(cf.  i.  2),  no  necessary  difficulty  to  find  it  followed  by  ''  justification  "  in  the 
ordinary  sense  of  pardon, — the  (forensic)  discharge  from  all  liability  to  penalty 
on  account  of  a  broken  law  j  the  two  acts  of  God's  grace,  separable  in  thought. 

141 


CHAP.  VI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L    CORINTHIANS. 


coincide  in  time.  Or,  better,  remember  that  the  status  of  a  justified  man  is  a 
perpetually  renewed  grace  ;  underlying  all  after-developments  of  the  gracious  life  ; 
assumed  as  the  foundation  on  which  all  the  superstructure  of  holiness  is  reared. 
Even  in  heaven,  the  saint  will  be  there,  and  will  remain  there,  only  as  a  sinner 
justified,  accepted,  for  the  sake  of  that  "  Lamb  "  in  whose  '*  blood "  he  has 
trusted  for  salvation.  The  basis  of  all  is  the  objective  work  of  that  Christ,  who 
is  revealed  in  His  name  as  exactly  what  He  is  to,  and  for,  us.  On  this  rests, 
and  rises,  the  {subjective)  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  As  the  eruption  of  the 
leprosy  falls  off  when  the  new  health  courses  through  the  system,  so  these  old, 
foul  sins  fall  away  from  the  life,  when  the  spiritual  health  is  renewed  and 
becomes  full,  by  the  entering  and  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.^Verses  12—20. 

[Direct,  public,  homiletic  use  of  whole  paragraph  plainly  possible  only  under 
exceptional  circumstances  and  within  narrow  limits.  Particular  clauses  very 
available  and  fruitful.     May  suggest :] 

I.  A  great  principle  (ver.  12).     Its  limitations. 
II.  A  great  sin  (vers.  18,  15). 

III.  A  great  honour  (vers.  17,  13,  14,  15,  19),  of  even  the  body. 

IV.  A  great  ransom  (ver.  20). 
V.  A  great  obligation  (ver.  20). 

I.  A.  Christianity  is  liberty. — 1.  From  old  Jewish  law,  as  such;  from 
external  law,  as  the  prime  principle  of  action  or  guide  of  life.  Not  a  religion  of 
restrictions,  external  prescriptions  ;  its  "  law  "  is  the  love  of  the  renewed  heart. 
If  this  were  perfect — in  proportion  as  this  love  advances  to  being  "  made 
perfect"  (1  John  iv.  17,  18) — so  far,  and  then,  obedience  is  perfect.  "  Love  God 
with  all  the  heart,"  "  love  neighbour  as  oneself  " — these  mean,  worked  out  in 
detail,  all  piety,  all  benevolence,  taught  by  the  instinct  of  a  renewed  heart, 
needing  therefore  no  command  (Rom.  xiii.  8,  10).  Hence  Augustine's  bold 
word,  "  Hilige,  et  quod  vis  /ac."  2.  In  practice,  even  the  growing  love  still 
needs  the  guidance  of  external  command  ;  to  guard  from  mistakes  arising  from 
ignorance,  and  from  the  half -enlightened  instinct ;  to  defend  itself  against  the 
blinding  and  bias  of  indolence,  indifference,  self-interest,  pressure  of  example  or 
fear.  The  Jewish  law  embodied,  in  temporary  forms  and  in  particular  instances, 
principles,  permanent  and  perfectly  general,  still  binding  upon  Christians; 
^^  U7ider  (ewen  that)  law  to  Christ^^  (ix.  21).  The  "heart  runs  in  the  way  of 
the  commandment."  Law  and  liberty,  love  and  life,  coincide.  3.  Paul  had 
probably  said  this ;  but  it  had  been  repeated  as,  "  Do  what  you  like."  True, 
as  a  theory  of  life,  but  not  as  working  basis  of  action.  "  What  you  like  "  will  be 
God's  law — not  less  nor  more — when  perfect  love  and  perfect  judgment  are 
found,  and  in  a  perfect  world.  But  so  long  as,  in  this  complex  social  order, 
light  is  scanty,  judgment  imperfectly  cleared,  love  only  variable  or  feeble,  *'  what 
you  like  "  is  the  true  centre  indeed  from  which  to  strike  the  circle  of  Christian 
liberty,  but  the  radius  varies  in  length  from  age  to  age,  country  to  country, 
person  to  person,  and  may  widen  or  narrow  the  sphere  of  Christian  liberty. 

B.  Three  limitations  formulated  by  Paul. — 1.  Not  expedient ;  [a)  because  tending 
to  mastery ;  {b)  because  unedifying.  2.  Distinctly  sinful.  (See  Separate 
Homily.)  "  Expediency,"  on  Paul's  lips,  is  a  solemnly  weighed  rule  of  life, 
limiting  his  liberty  in  even  things  indifferent ;  the  world's  "  expediency  "  extends 
liberty,  even  to  things  doubtful  or  wrong,  depending  as  it  does  upon  no  higher 
considerations  than  of  prudence  and  interest,  or  even  profit.  A  Christian  is  lord 
of  this  world  and  its  life.     His  lordship  is  part  of  another  Lordship,  that  of 

142 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  vi. 


Christ  (Heb.  ii.  5-10;  Mark  ii.  28).  "All  things  are  His"  (iii.  21).  But  all 
do  not,  or  do  not  equally,  help  his  true,  eternal  life;  many  things  tend  to 
establish  a  sway  over  his  will,  fatal  to  his  freedom  to  serve  his  Lord  ;  these  it  is 
"  expedient "  for  him  to  let  alone.  "  Some  actions  {e.g.  the  use  of  stimulants) 
tend  to  create  in  some  persons  an  irresistible  habit.  Now  whatever  deprives  us 
of  self-control  does  us  harm,  and  must  therefore  be  avoided,  even  though  in 
itself  lawful "  (Beet).  Master  of  all  things,  he  must  first,  and  at  all  costs,  be 
master  of  himself.  Otherwise  in  the  individual  is  repeated  that  bondage  of  the 
designed  Master  and  Lord  to  that  Nature  and  that  World  which  were  designed 
to  serve  him  ;  a  bondage  from  which  The  Man,  Jesus,  has  recovered  Man  ;  that 
He  may  then  recover  the  individual  man,  and  reinstate  him  with  Himself  in 
Man's  rightful  dominion.  (The  far-reaching  teaching  of  Hebrews,  ubi  supra.) 
The  Christian  must  be  a  co-worker  with  his  Liberator,  Christ,  in  seeing  that  no 
new,  needless  bondage  is  imposed  by  his  own  inadvertence,  or  by  his  ill-judged 
use  of  an  abstract  liberty. 

II.  A.  Fornication  not  a  thing  indifferent. — [Best  classical,  heathen  ethics  put 
it  perfectly  on  a  level  with  the  desire  for,  and  indulgence  in,  food  and  drink. 
Physical  purity  was  a  thing  hardly  known  outside  the  Jewish  and  Christian  pale. 
They  hardly  regarded  the  body  as  part  of  the  true  man.  Its  acts  and  appetites 
seemed,  in  a  sense,  external  to  the  man  himself,  and  therefore  indifferent.] 
1.  In  the  animals  the  three  bodily  appetites  do  stand  upon  same  level;  in  them 
each  is  quite  neutral,  non-moral ;  needful  to  sustain,  or  to  hand  on,  animal  life. 
In  man  they  do  not  occupy  same  level.  [Jeremy  Taylor  points  out  thus  one 
plain  distinction  :  "  If  a  man  be  hungry  he  must  eat,  and  if  he  be  thirsty  he 
must  drink  in  some  convenient  time,  or  else  he  dies;  but  if  the  body  be 
rebellious,  so  the  mind  be  chaste,  let  it  do  its  worst,  if  you  resolve  perfectly  not 
to  satisfy  it,  you  can  receive  no  great  evil  by  it."]  2.  We  cannot  state  an  equality 
of  ratios  thus :  As  "  Belly  "  to  "  Meats "  so  is  "  Body "  to  "  Fornication." 
[Probably,  so  baldly  stated  as  that,  not  even  a  Corinthian  Christian  would 
have  defended  the  principle  which  seemed  to  underlie  the  arguments  (?  and 
the  practice)  of  the  Antinomian  party.]  Not  even  in  the  case  of  the  "  Belly  " 
was  the  physical  pleasure  the  design  of  its  creation  and  co-adaptation  to 
*'  Meats."  Certainly,  in  the  parallel  case,  the  body  was  not  created  for  the 
pleasure.  3.  Belly  and  Food  have  a  mutual  adaptation  for  the  sake  of  the 
body's  support ;  yet  they  have  only  in  view  the  support  of  a  life  which  must 
end  at  the  same  time  as  they  are  "  destroyed  "  together.  So  far  as  the  body,  in 
its  formation  and  endowment  with  the  third  appetite,  has  reference  to  man's  life, 
it  is  to  that  whole  complete  life  which  has  a  capacity  for  God  and  Eternity. 
Food  and  the  food  organs  co-operate  to  keep  the  mere  physical  and  dying  part  of 
the  man  in  temporary  repair.  Man  and  woman  are  co-workers  with  God  in  re- 
producing or  handing  on  manhood  in  its  entirety,  with  a  future,  eternal,  destiny 
for  the  body  as  well  as  for  the  soul  and  spirit.  "  Belly  "  has  no  higher  end  than 
^^  meats."  The  body  is  **/or  the  Lord."  ^' Belly  "  said  ^'  Meats"  'perish  together 
when  their  work  is  done  ;  *'  God  will  raise  (not  body,  but)  us."  That  is  the  end 
and  future  of  the  body.  The  cases  are  quite  distinct.  Again,  4.  Fornication  is 
paralleled  by  no  other  physical  sin  in  its  relation  to  the  body.  Beyond  any 
other,  it  finds  within  the  body  itself  what  it  makes  the  means  of  pleasure.  The 
man  makes  his  very  self  the  instrument  of  his  sin. 

B.  Further  reasons  arise  out  of  the  fact  that  this  sin  runs  most  utterly 
counter  to  III.     (See  also  under  V.  1). 

III.  A  great  honour,  and  that  for  even  the  body  of  man. — A.  A  most  intimate 
oneness  with  Christ.  *'  One  spirit." — 1.  Compare  with  this  the  closest  friend- 
ship based  upon  similarity  of  tastes,  pursuits,  interests,  long  association  from 
childhood;    however    closely    these    may    approximate    two   hearts  and  lives, 

145 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


yet  there  are  diversities,  which  may  widen  into  divergencies  and  divisions. 
Change  on  either  side — if  even  only  as  the  result  of  individual  growth, 
which  cannot  be  enforced  to  a  pattern,  and  made  to  proceed  in  duplicate 
— may  make  a  very  choice,  close,  intimate  association  "  drop  through."  Much 
more  may  a  wrongly  spoken  or  wrongly  understood  word,  break  it  up. 
2.  Compare  the  bond  set  up  by  blood-relationship,  as  between  sisters,  or  sisters 
and  brothers  in  same  family,  with  many  sympathies  in  common,  and  all  the  bond 
of  "  clannishness "  to  hold  them  together,  and  even  to  make  external  attack 
draw  the  bond  only  tighter.  Yet  a  brother  may  become  a  stranger ;  there  are 
friends  that  ''  stick  closer  "  than  brethren.  [Prov.  xviii.  24  is  a  general  observa- 
tion on  human  life ;  though  faiily  to  be  applied,  as  the  highest  exemplification, 
to  Christ.]  The  bond  between  Christian  and  Christian  is  often  stronger  than 
between  a  man  and  his  (non-Christian)  kith-and-kin ;  the  common  understanding 
of  each  other's  aims  and  feelings  and  experiences  is  deeper  and  truer  than  that 
which  natural  kinship  gives;  Christian  affinity  is  often  more  than  brotherly, 
sisterly  affinity.  3.  Nearest  to  it  approaches — and  that  for  a  very  real  and 
profound  reason — the  union  between  a  Christian  husband  and  wife,  where  to 
all  the  natural  basis  of  an  ideal  marriage  there  is  added  the  common  shaiing 
in  the  life  of  grace.  (See  chap,  vii.,  passim.)  4.  Yet  in  these  there  is  associa- 
tion, approximation,  assimilation,  union,  communion — no  more.  In  this  other 
there  is  unity.  In  those  there  is  individual  life,  with  its  self-contained  indepen- 
dence, its  possibilities  of  divergence,  its  peril  of  developing  antagonism.  *'  The 
soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  to  soul  of  David  "  ( 1  Sam.  xviii.  1 )  comes  very  near. 
Yet  each  heart  even  then  has  its  penetralia,  its  Holy  of  Holies,  of  privacy,  into 
which  no  most  trusted  and  beloved  foot  must  intrude,  or  can  be  admitted. 
5.  Here  is  unity,  almost  identification.  *'  I  live  no  longer ;  Christ  liveth  in  me." 
As  if  in  the  believer  the  man  came  into  contact  and  relation  with  an  "  extension  " 
of  his  Lord.  Not  only  two  parallel  lives,  however  perfectly  conformed  to  each 
other,  echoing,  reflecting,  each  other — as  in  the  ordinary  human  unions;  but 
one  life.  Because  of  one  life  principle.  [One  yStos  because  of  one  ^corj.]  [Dare 
we  illustrate  by  seal  and  impression  (Heb.  i.  3),  resting  on  a  deeper  oneness — the 
unity  of  the  Godhead  ?  Distinction,  with  likeness  and  oneness.  Note,  '■'■As  the 
Father  hath  loved  me,  so  (  =  thus,  in  that  way)  have  I  loved  you"  (John  xv.  9).] 
As  if,  in  a  body,  intelligence  and  affection  were  distributed  as  life  is,  so  that,  e.g., 
the  hand  or  foot  could  know  each  other,  or  either  could  know  and  understand  the 
head,  as  the  head  knows  and  understands  them.  Not  only  a  similar,  or  the  same, 
kind  of  life,  but  one  and  the  same  life,  distributes  itself  throughout  both  and  all. 
[Not  be  overpressed  :  these  are  all  serviceable  analogies,  no  more ;  to  be  criticised 
and  checked  each  one  by  the  others.  No  Mystic  extreme  of  a  literal  merging  of 
the  believer  and  his  life  into  Christ  and  His  life  till  the  man  is  lost.  The 
individuality,  the  personality,  the  Ego,  remains  unimpaired.  "  I  am  I,  and  He 
is  He  ;  even  when  I  become  one  spirit  with  Him."]  6.  To  be  remembered  that 
the  unity  rests  upon,  and  is  effected  and  maintained  by,  the  Work  and  Indwelling 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  (ver.  19,  and  Separate  Homily).  See  how  interchangeably — 
though  not  without  a  reason  for,  and  a  propriety  in,  each  chosen  expression — are 
employed  the  phrases,  "  The  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  you,"  and  "  Christ  be  in  you  " 
(Rom.  viii.  9,  10) ;  the  Spirit  dwelling  in  a  man,  and  yet  so  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  that  He  becomes  the  "  common  element "  of  life  between  the  believer 
and  his  Lord.  7.  And  thus,  further,  the  Unity  was  set  up  in  the  moment  of 
our  faith  in  ("  into  ")  Christ,  and  is  maintained  so  long,  and  only  so  long,  as 
nothing  impairs  or  hinders,  or  negatives  and  interrupts,  a  continuous  believing. 
8.  What  suggestions  in  all  these,  avowedly  imperfect,  and  soon  misleading, 
analogies  !  They  help  us  to  chmb  to  a  height  from  which  we  see  rather  than 
reach  possibilities  that  stretch  away  in  length,  breadth,  depth,  height,— a  Canaan 

144 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  VI. 


of  blessing  spread  out  before  our  eyes  in  fair  extent,  and  One  by  us — no  tempter 
— saying,  "  All  may  be  thine,  soul ! "  They  guide,  not  actually  leading  very  far, 
but  sufficiently  far  to  show  us  the  direction  in  which  our  thought  and  heart  may 
prayerfully,  hopefully,  belie vingly,  venture  to  go  forward  and  explore.  *'  Par- 
takers of  the  Divine  nature"  (2  Pet.  i.  4)  opens  a  wonderful  vista  before  the 
eyes.  9.  What  a  profound  understanding  of  Christ  is  suggested.  "  We  have 
the  mind  of  Christ"  (ii.  16 ;  where  mind  is  not  "  characteristics,"  or  "  the  mind 
which  was  in  Christ,"  but  a  knowledge  of  His  "  mind  ").  Love  is  a  good  master- 
key,  unlocking  one  mind  to  the  entrance  of  another  into  its  movements  and 
workings.  "  He  who  loves  me  understands  me."  (Conversely  :  *'  He  will  never 
understand  or  know  me;  he  does  not  like  me.")  But  to  be  partaker  of  His 
life  !  Sharing,  as  well  as  understanding.  His  sympathies  [e.g.  how  Paul  *'  longs 
after  "  his  people  "  in  the  bowels  of  Christ  "  (Phil.  i.  8)] ;  making  plans,  and  yet 
these  not  a  man's  own,  but  Christ's  in  him  [Paul  lays  his  plans  "  in  Christ," 
of.  2  Cor.  i.  17].  [Paul  "speaks  in  Christ"  repeatedly,  as  if  his  were  no  inde- 
pendent voice.]  10.  What  a  conformity  of  thought  and  will  and  practice  to 
those  of  Christ  Himself  is  suggested.  ["  Grow  up  into  Him  in  all  things  " 
(Eph.  iv.  15,  etc.).]  Beginning  with  inward  likeness,  the  outward  expression  of 
my  life  and  His  will  more  and  more  coincide.  The  two  wills  both  there  [as 
against  Mysticism],  but  the  free-will  of  man  using  its  freedom  to  choose  to 
choose  what  He  chooses,  and  working  in  coincident  movement  with  His  will. 

B.  In  all  (his  the  body  has  its  part — The  inner  union  carries  the  body  with  it. 
1.  It  has  now  an  object  and  a  destiny;  it  is  not  a  mere  separable  accident  of  the 
man.  It  belongs  to  Christ ;  it  lives  "  for  the  Lord."  The  Lord  does  not  disdain 
it ;  He  once  made  it  the  vehicle  of  His  self -manifestation.  He  died  ^^for  the 
body  "  which  He  once  deigned  to  wear,  in  that  He  died  for  the  whole  man ;  and 
when  the  man  is  raised.  His  body  will  not  be  forgotten.  As  when  God  "  raised 
up  by  His  own  power  "  the  whole  humanity  of  the  Incarnate  Redeemer,  so  will 
He  raise  up  the  whole  of  our  redeemed  humanity  too.  In  human  thought  the 
body  had  been  the  slave,  the  outcast,  the  Pariah-part,  of  man's  complex  nature. 
Now  it  was  elevated  and  set  by  the  side  of  its  companions,  soul  and  spirit,  with 
an  outlook  and  a  hope.  2.  If,  in  any  sense,  believers  are  so  "  o')ie  spirit "  with 
Christ  that  they  can  be  said  to  be  "  extensions  of  Him,"  "  part  of  His  enlarged 
Self,"  then  the  body's  "  members  are  His  "  ;  He  appropriates  them  for  His  own. 
3.  This  more  definitely,  because,  not  only  is  the  Church,  in  its  totality  and 
aggregate,  a  Temple  within  whose  precincts  dwells  the  Spirit  of  God,  but  also  the 
very  body  of  the  individual  believer  has  its  own  special,  peculiar  indwelling,  and 
is  a  veritable  shrine  of  the  Spirit  upon  earth.     (See  Separate  Homily.) 

IV.  A  great  ransom  price. — A.  A  true  and  beautiful  distinction  may  be  drawn 
between  redemption  by  price  and  by  2wwer  :  here  by  price.  Not  the  redemption 
of  (say)  Lot  and  his  fellow-captives  by  victorious  Abraham,  but  the  ransom  of  a 
slave  by  the  payment  of  the  price  fixed  by  his  owner.    Measu7*e  the  greatness  by  : — 

1.  ''^  Blood." — The  last,  greatest,  most  sacred  thing  a  man  can  give  for  his 
fellow-man  (John  xv.  13  ;  1  John  iii.  16).  "The  fountain  of  life  ;  the  first  to  live, 
and  the  last  to  die,  and  the  primary  seat  of  the  animal  soul ;  it  lives  and  is 
nourished  of  itself,  and  by  no  other  part  of  the  human  body  "  (Harvey,  in 
Speaker's  Commentary).  Shedding  the  blood  is  the  most  solemn  method  of  self- 
surrender  of  life. 

2.  "  Blood  of  Christ."—''  Of  Christ !  "  Do  men  hear  that  ?  "  Of  Christ ! " 
"  Silver  and  gold  ?  "  Not  to  be  put  into  comparison.  The  very  blood  of  the  old 
sacrifices  only  serves  by  comparison  to  bring  out  this  as  more  gloriously  excellent 
(Heb.  ix.  12,  13).  When  it  became  a  question  of  redeeming  man,  it  must  be  by 
the  blood-shedding  of  none  other,  none  less,  than  Christ ! 

3.  The  great  deliverance  it  has  wrought. — Said  the  Roman,  "  With  a  great  sum, 

h  H5 


CHAP.  VI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


obtained  I  this  freedom."  So  such  a  liberty  as  ours,  liberty,  that  we  might  have 
conferred  on  us  the  citizenship  (Phil.  iii.  20  true  reading) — could  be  purchased  at 
no  cheaper  rate.  Perfect,  "  eternal  redemption  "  (Heb.  ix.  12).  Liberty,  and 
power,  to  be  holy. 

4.  God^s  noblest  creature  has  been  redeemed  by  it. — "  What  will  a  man  give  in 
exchange  for  his — a  man's — soul  ? "  God  gave  this  price  in  exchange  for  each 
soul. 

B.  1.  It  has  redeemed  yrom  curse,  bondage,  death,  into  blessing  and  privilege, 
viz.  liberty,  peace,  life.  Fundamentally  it  is  the  price  of  release  fro'm  Sin  as  a 
condemnation  and  as  a  power.  Satan  and  death  are  real,  but  subordinate, 
accidental,  representatives  of  the  power  of  evil ;  evil  might  have  had  its 
dominion  in  a  world  where  were  no  Satan  and  no  death.  2.  Complementary 
truth  to  the  release,  whether  from  penalty  or  power,  is  the  buying  for  the 
Redeemer's  purposes  and  use  and  glory.  3.  Also,  by  payment  of  price,  debt 
cancelled,  bond  cancelled,  liability  and  fear  gone.  [Illustrate  to  children  by 
Gregory  and  slave-boys  in  the  market  at  Rome.  Buying  them  from  the  slave- 
dealer,  by  putting  down  so  much  money.  Yet  buying  for  his  own  purpose. 
They  are  not  free,  but  are  his  slaves  now;  to  be  set  free  by  him,  indeed,  so  that 
they  might  study,  and  serve,  under  Gregory,  from  love  and  gratitude,  and  that 
they  might  in  turn  go  to  Angle-land  to  preach  to  their  fellow-countrymen  the 
Gospel  and  its  greater  ransom  and  deliverance.]     All  this  brings  : 

V.  A  great  obligation.     [Notice  the  true  reading,  ver.  20.]      The  Religion  of 
the  Body. — 1.    Non-Christian   view   of   body   branches  into  (1)   asceticism,    or 
(2)  licentiousness.      Suicide  was  Stoicism  confessing  itself  defeated,  confessing 
that  it  could  not  change  man,  or  the  world  ;  nothing  for  it  but  to  get  out  of  it 
"  nobly."     So  Asceticism  is  Christianity  confessing  itself  defeated,  and  thinking 
only  of  self-preservation.    [''  Are  suicides  intense  egotists  ?  "  (Paxton  Hood).    Dis- 
avowing, or  in  their  self -absorption  forgetting,  that  others  have  claims  upon  their 
life  and  service.     Are  asceticism,  monasticism,  simply  egotism  thinking  chiefly  of 
saving  itself?]     At  least  this  has  been  the  practical  issue  of  the  monastic  life, 
though  this  began  in  a  nobler  ideal,  and  with  a  fair  justification  of  celibacy  in  the 
special  circumstances  of  the  time.     [Was  good  even  for  civil  society  that  there 
should  not  be  a  powerful,  hereditary^  sacred  caste.]     Asceticism  proclaims  that 
one  whole  province  of  human  life,  one  whole  side  of  human  nature,  can  be  done 
nothing  with  except  (like  slaves  shut  down  beneath  deck  of  a  slave-ship,  or  like 
the  Devil  in  Rev.  xx.  3)  to  suppress  it,  keep  it  under  hatches,  under  lock  and 
key  and  chained  up.     [Licentiousness  is  an  acknowledged  defeat  in  another  way. 
Religion,  and  even  temporal  motives,  cannot  control  the  physical  ;  it  must  be 
left  to  do  its  will ;  even  the  nobler  part  of  man  must  submit  to  its  imperious 
demands.]     Christianity  assumes,  and  shows,  that  there  is  no  part  of  man's 
redeemed  nature  which  ought  not  to,  and  cannot  be  made  to,  ^^ glorify"   its 
Redeemer.     It  is  the  one,  only  religion  which  has  ever  taken  full  account  of  the 
body,  and  laid  it  under  contribution  to  accomplish  any  holy  end.    [In  heathenism, 
ancient  and  modern,  only  too  common  for  devotees  to  "  present  their  bodies  a 
living  sacrifice  " ;  which  indeed — remembering  how  sins  of  the  body  had  played 
large  part  in  the  lives  of  Roman  converts — gives  the  form  to  that  exhortation 
(Rom.  xii.  1).]    Sensual,  impure  sin  is  really  heathen,  even  when  decked  out  with 
all  the  beauty  that  culture  and  poetry  can  lay  upon  it.     It  gives  the  lie  to  one 
of  the  profoundest  ideas  of  God  in  creation.     The  merely  physical  uuions  of  the 
sexes  in  plants  and  animals  are  the  beginning  of  the  disclosure  of  a  thought  of 
God,  which  passes  on  through  the  physical  side  of  marriage,  and  through  the 
mating  of  two  perfectly  suited  partners  (above  all,  if  these  be  both  Christians),  up 
to  the  final,  full  exhibition  of  it, — the  union  between  Christ  and  His  Church.    Sins 
of  impurity  empty  this  grand  idea  of  its  contents,  till  nothing  but  an  appetite 

146 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  vi. 


and  its  gratification  remains ;  a  reversion  to  the  crude,  elementary  beginnings 
of  God's  order  in  creation.  Christianity  with  firm,  yet  kind,  hand  traces  out 
limits  of  lawful  exercise  of  appetites,  denying  anything  beyond,  "  for  our  good 
alway  "  (Deut.  vi.  24,  a  far-reaching  truth). 

2.  Glorify  Him  hy  keeping  the  body  in  health  for  His  service.  Noble  service  is 
done  by  invalids  and  sick  persons.  But  the  bulk  of  work  of  Christ  must  be  done 
by  those  who  are  in  health.  Other  things  being  equal,  the  best  body  makes  the 
best  worker.  (1)  Cleanliiiess  is  therefore  pm^t  q/*  godliness.  It  is  Christian  duty 
to  give  body,  brain,  eye,  hands,  etc.,  sufficient  s^ee/?  to  make  it  morning  by  morning 
at  its  best  for  Christ's  service.  Holidays  find  their  chiefest  benefit,  and  honour, 
when  they  send  a  *'  run-down  "  Christian  back  to  office,  or  shop,  or  church,  with 
physical  powers  reinvigorated  by  rest  and  change.  It  is  more  than  folly  not  to 
take  sufficient,  regular  meals  of  good  food,  even  under  pressure  of  the  "  claims  " 
of  God's  work.  Some  spiritual  phenomena,  visions,  trances,  or  the  like,  have 
sometimes  found  basis  and  explanation  in  a  mistaken,  overdone  fasting.  (2) 
Every  hahit  or  indulgence  which  exhausts  the  bodily  powers,  or  destroys  their 
health,  is  sin  against  Christ's  lordship  of  the  body.  Too  much  pleasure,  in  any 
form  which  leaves  body  or  brain  unfit  for  prayer  or  thought,  or  even  for  that  honest 
work  of  the  daily  calling  which  is  really  a  most  important  sphere  for  glorifying 
Christ,  is  condemned.  There  are  "  sports  that  kill "  the  sportsmen  soul  and  body. 
All  intemperance  or  excess  in  gratifying  any  physical  desire,  eating,  drinking, 
is  condemned.  There  are  prudential  reasons  against  such  pleasures  or  sins ; 
such  reasons  are  God's  danger-signals  at  the  entrance  of  "  roads  to  ruin."  But 
only  two  reasons  have  very  much  practical  force  against  passion  :  to  the  ungodly, 
hell-fire ;  to  the  godly,  the  love  of  God  and  the  twin  truths,  "  Your  body  is  the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  this—"  The  body  for  the  Lord  (Christ)." 

3.  Even  the  dress  of  a  Christian  will  fiod  a  regulating  principle  here.  The 
body  needs  covering  for  comfort  and  decency.  The  instinct  of  taste  is  implanted, 
and  may  have  its  rightful  gratification.  No  Christian  man  or  woman  is  required 
to  dress  in  an  ugly,  or  ridiculous,  or  eccentric  fashion.  One  supreme  question — 
having  taken  account  of  station,  means,  proportion  of  expenditure  upon  dress, 
claims  of  Christ's  poor  and  Christ's  work — settles  everything  :  "  Do  I — I — not 
somebody  else  dressing  as  I  do — glorify  God  in  my  body  ?  "  [Early  Christian 
women  very  noteworthy  in  this  respect.] 

4.  As  said  above,  the  consecrated  service  of  the  body  to  the  glory  of  Christ  may 
be  wrought  out — may  be  asked  for  by  Him — in  its  sickness  and  weakness  rather 
than  its  health  and  vigour.  The  man  may  not  only  be  employed  for  Chiist ;  he 
may  also  be  laid  aside  for  Christ.  It  may  glorify  Christ  that  he  should  be  a 
concrete  example  of  the  patience,  peace,  resignation,  triumph,  which  grace  can 
work  in  ordinary  human  nature.  The  testimony  of  sickness  is  sometimes  a 
powerful  argument  and  appeal.  [Faith-healing  exaggerates  a  true  principle,  of 
particular  application,  into  an  entirely  general  rule  ;  teaching  that  Christ  is  as 
certainly,  and  to  as  full  extent,  the  present  Saviour  of  the  body  as  of  the  soul ; 
that  it  dishonours  Him  for  a  believer  to  lie  under  the  burden  of  sickness  as  really 
as  to  lie  under  the  burden  of  sin  ;  that  faith  in  Him  would  now  and  in  all  cases 
remove  both.]  [We  dare  hardly  censure  those  holy  spendthrifts  of  the  powers 
of  the  body  which  belongs  to  Christ,  who  "  kill  themselves  "  by  excessive  labours, 
and,  still  often er,  by  taking  no  proper  care  of  their  general  health,  or  of  the 
body  when  exhausted  after  labour;  who  "  kill  themselves  "  because  they  cannot 
stand  and  see  men  unsaved,  or  work  undone.  Yet,  for  most  servants  of  God, 
more  moderate  labour,  making  the  body  last  longer  for  Christ,  is  better  consecra- 
tion of  the  body.] 


147 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    T.   CORINTHIANS. 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 

Ver.  1 1 .  Perpetual  Miracles,  compendious    evidence,    and    striking, 

I.  Changed  men  a  patent  evidence  appealing  to  all. 

of   the    supernatural.  —  1.    Age    of  II.  Vindication  of  universality  of 

miracles  past  ?    Yes,  in  the  technical  power  and  applicability  of  Gospel. — 

sense.     Miracles    [and  Inspiration]  by  No   case   it  cannot  touch,  etc.    (as  in 

definition    coterminous,    in    time   and  Homiletic   Analysis).      Workers  need 

extent   of  distribution,   with    the  pro-  this.       Temptation    in      mission-fields, 

gressive    impartation    of     Eevelation.  and  at  home,  when  evangelistic  woik  is 

Outside   that    process    they    are    not  at  a  discount  and  conversions  are  few, 

found  ;      Hevelation     complete,     they  to  look  at  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of 

cease.    Eevelation  and  Christ  its  Centre  producing  conviction,  and  of  inducing 

and    Subject   are   a  standing  miracle,  open  confession  even  where  conviction 

[The  miracles  were  credentials  of  the  is  secured;    to  adjust   expectations  to 

agents    and  messengers  and  message;  one's  narrower  success ;  to  acquiesce  in 

but,    still    more,    themselves  parts  of  meagre  success   with   the   cultured  or 

the  Revelation.]      2.  In   lower   sense,  rich ;"  our  hope  is  with  the  poor  "  [and 

No.     God    always   (and    not    only   in  much  Scripture  can  be   quoted  !] ;   to 

"  miracles  ")  was  in  closest  touch  with  give  up   hope  of  the    adults:    "must 

the  visible,  material,  "  natural  "  order  ;  not  expect  much  from  the  generation  of 

is  still.    The  converted  man,  at  Corinth  to-day,  brought  up  in  heathenism,  with 

or  anywhere  else,  knows  that  a  power  habits,  training,  etc.,  set;  our  hope  is 

has  come  upon  him  from  without,  and  in  the   children  ;  educate  them  Chris- 

that  not    human,   or    creaturely,    but  tianly."     [Good  work,  but  not  to  leave 

Divine.     Conversion   meant  the  point  other  undone.]     Every  now  and  again, 

when   the  unseen  broke  in  effectively  at  home  and  in  mission-fields,  God  does 

upon  him  and  changed  whole  current  of  some  such  wonders  as  these  at  Corinth, 

thought  and  will  and  life.    The  process  and  rebukes  little  faith,  and  too  ready 

has  its '*  natural  analogies."    "I  live  by  acquiescence  in  the  "hopelessness"  of 

the  faith  of    [this  truth,   and  in  this  the   adult   generation.     Paul's  success 

Person]    a    Son   of   God,    who    loved  everywhere    was    mainly   with    adult 

me,"  etc.   (Gal.    ii.   20).      I.e.   a    new  heathen,  adult  Jews.    The  Evangelical 

ruling  idea   has   taken  possession  and  revival     of    eighteenth      century      in 

revolutionised  life.       A  new  affection  England  began  amongst  adults,  thieves, 

is  expelling  all  old  evil  affections.     And  pugilists,  unclean,  worldlings,  fashion- 

this  new  idea,  the  new  affection,  has  ables,    every   type.     Every   such    case 

come  with  the  "  demonstration  of  the  rebukes      unfaithful      thinkers     and 

Spirit "  ( 1  Cor.   ii.  4 ;    cf .   1  Thess.   i.  workers,  and  reassures  and  heartens  all 

5-7).     "  No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  faithful  but  despondent  ones.     Again 

Lord    [nor    "my  Lord"]   but    by  the  and  again   the   Gospel  matches  itself 

Spirit"  (1  Cor.   xii.   3).     3.  The  man  against  adult   heathenism,    adult   sin, 

is  an  evidence  to  himself,  and  to  others  and   wins.     "  Such  were  some  of  you, 

also.     Men   look    at,  observe,   wonder  hutJ^     It  can  touch  and  save  all  ages, 

at,   the   man   whom    they  knew,  who  classes,  types. 

was    yesteiday  "  such  "  as  they  are ;  III.  Happy   Paul,  happy    anybody 

who  is  now  pure,  "  washed,  sanctified,"  who  can  appeal  to  such  personal  veri- 

who  has  evidently  laid  hold  of  a  power  fications  of  the  truth  of  the  message 

to  do,  and  be,  right  which  they  do  not  he   preaches  ! — How    confidently    he 

possess;    and  of   the  secret  of   a  life,  makes     his    next    appeal,    when    he 

for  which  no  interest,  or  force  of  will,  or  can   recall    a   dozen  instances    where 

ordinary  human  motives,  can  account.  his  formula  of   the  spiritual  life  was 

♦'  God    has  touched  that    man  ! "     A  verified.     How  conclusive  his  appeals 

148 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  Vi. 


and  arguments,  to  the  men  whom  he 
'Can  claim  as  evidences  of  the  truth  of 
what  he  advances.  "  I  know — you  know 
— how  true  is  all  I  say.  Ye  were  .  .  . 
ye  are,"  etc.  Happy  the  man  who 
"  has  his  quiver  full "  of  such  spiritual 
children  (Ps.  cxxvii.  5).  With  such 
arrows  he  can  meet  "  in  the  gate  "  his 
own  doubts  about  his  "  call "  or  the 
denial  of  it  by  others.  Good  "  letters 
of  ordination "  are  such  plain  and 
unmistakable  converts  as  these.  The 
healed  sick  are  the  best  diploma  of  a 
true  physician. 

Yer.  12.  Christian  Expediency. — 
[Combine  also  for  study  of  this  text 
chaps,  viii.,  x.,  and  Rom.  xiv.] 

I.  A  Christian  man's  rule  in  regard 
to  *Hhings  indiflferent."  ^^  All  things 
are  lawful  to  me  "  seems  strong ;  it 
had  been  made  to  carry  a  stronger 
and  broader  meaning  than  Paul  in- 
tended. Verbally,  he  is  correctly 
repoi'ted ;  actually,  he  is  misrepre- 
sented. Three  specimen  cases  of  what 
he  had  in  mind  found  here  :  1.  The 
observance  of  ''  days "  by  Christian 
converts — the  fasts  and  festivals  of 
the  law  of  Moses.  2.  Circumcision. 
3.  Eating  of  flesh,  especially  such  as 
had  been  offered  to  an  idol.  Intrin- 
sically "  indifferent "  all  these.  No 
natural  mark  of  distinction  upon  any 
"  day."  Flesh- meat  or  vegetables 
equally  *'  creatures  of  God,  nothing  to 
be  refused  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  4).  An  "  idol 
nothing  in  the  world "  (viii.  4),  and 
never  made  any  real  difference  to  any 
healthy  food.  God  had  been  pleased 
for  a  time  to  make  some  days  "  holy  " ; 
to  have  disregarded  them  would  have 
been  sin  ;  but  the  Jewish  system  was 
now  done  away  in  Christ,  and  the  old 
schedule  of  fasts  and  festivals  with  it. 
Circumcision  had  become  a  mere  piece 
of  surgery.  "All  such  things  are 
lawful  to  me ;  I  may  do  or  forbear 
according  to  circumstances  and  ex- 
pediency." Evident  that  before 
expediency  can  settle  a  point  of  con- 
duct for  a  Christian,  it  must  be  quite 
clear  that  essential  wrong  and  right 
are  not  involved.     The  business  prac- 


tice, the  amusement,  the  pleasure, 
must  be  morally  indifferent,  before  a 
Christian  can  permit  himself  to  con- 
form to  it.  He  will  remember,  too,  how 
much  keener  his  sense  of  sin  should 
be,  how  much  higher,  and  stricter, 
his  standard.  Not  only  nothing  that 
violates  the  letter,  but  nothing  that 
touches  the  spirit,  of  the  moral  law, 
is  "  lawful^^  or  "  indifferent,^^  to 
him.  There  is,  then,  no  question  of 
"  expediency .^^ 

As  to  really  ^^indifferent"  things, 
Paul  gives  four  cases  of  " inexpedient" 
things. 

II.  (Chap,  viii.)  Paul  could  with 
a  clear  conscience  eat  any  whole- 
some food  ;  ceremonially  "  clean  "  or 
"  unclean,"  "  offered  to  an  idol"  or  not. 
The  kind  of  food  he  ate  did  not  affect 
his  standing  before  God  (ver.  8). 
Many  Jewish  converts  could  not  so 
rapidly  unlearn  the  teaching  of  years, 
or  get  rid  of  the  habit  [reading  as,  e.g., 
K.Y.]  of  thinking  of  some  things  as 
"  unclean,"  and  so  not  allowable  to  eat. 
Many  Gentile  converts  could  not  get 
rid  of  old  ideas  and  associations,  but 
still  ate  ^^  with  conscience  of  the  idol" 
[displaced  reading  of,  e.^.,  A.Y.;  true 
in  fact].  Idol  to  them  not  nothing, 
but  a  ''devil"  (x.  20,  21  ;  Si'' demon" 
to  Paul  also).  The  unreasoning,  need- 
lessly tender,  habit  of  their  mind  made 
them  attach  some  importance  to  it. 
Moreover,  public  heathen  banquets 
were  so  full  of  sin  and  sinful  asso- 
ciations, that  to  join  in  them  was 
likely  to  be  ensnaiing  (vi.  12,  "  N'ot  be 
mastered  by  any"),  and  a  source  of  weak- 
ness. "  Call  it  prejudice,  if  you  will " 
(Rom.  xiv.  14  sqq.),  "he  is  a  weak 
brother.  But  if  he  cannot  do  these 
thi7igs  with  a  clear  conscience,  or  with- 
out danger  to  himself,  he  may  not  do 
them  at  all.  Doubteth  .  .  .  is  con- 
demned. Not  of  faith  .  .  .  sin." 
Conscience,  even  half  enlightened,  must 
be  respected  and  obeyed.  Let  a  man 
seek  for  light ;  but  until  he  gain  more, 
let  him  follow  conscience  with  the 
light  it  has.  (Better  a  faithful  judge, 
doing  his  best  with  an  imperfect  law, 
than  a   more  perfect  law  with  a  less 

149 


CHAP.  vi.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTABY :   I   CORINTHIANS. 


faithful  judge.  Help  conscience,  train 
it,  to  be  faithful,  by  obeying  it,  whilst 
it  acts  up  to  all  light  it  has.)  Prin- 
ciple touching  (notably)  amusements. 
Whole  territory  of  our  life  ought  to  be 
wholly  subject  to  God.  In  point  of 
fact,  Sin  and  Satan  have  entered,  and 
in  the  pleasures  of  life  notoriously 
been  enthroned,  and  around  their  seat 
is  a  wide  area  of  occupations  mani- 
festly belonging  to  the  territory  of 
evil.  A  group  of  pleasures  still  left 
manifestly  good.  Between  lies  a 
debatable  ground  of  things  indifferent, 
to  be  apportioned  by  "  Christian  ex- 
pediency." The  boundary  of  evil  tends 
to  widen,  "  Expedient "  readily  be- 
comes "  inexpedient  " ;  seldom  or  never 
the  reverse.  Christian  men  must  have 
relaxations.  They  may  only  have  su^h 
as  abide  these  first  tests  :  "  Can  /  take 
them  with  a  clear  conscience  ?  Can  / 
take  them  without  being  mastered  by 
them  ? "  Training  may  have  been 
(like  Jewish)  in  a  "narrow"  school. 
Or  (as  with  Gentiles)  associations  of 
the  things  may  be  full  of  sins  of  past 
life,  and  they  seem  sinful  to  me,  or 
are  really  snares.  These  at  any 
rate  not  "  expedient, ^^  probably  not 
"  lawful r  A  young  convert  just 
rescued  from  the  maelstrom  of  wordli- 
ness  must  say  :  "  ^  thing  doubtful  to 
my  conscience  or  dangerous  to  my  soul 
is  not  a  thing  lawful  for  me." 

III.  The  weaker  brother  may  still 
further  narrow  the  range  of  my 
liberty  (Rom.  xiv.  1  sqq.).  I  am  not 
to  harass  him  with  stronger  views,  on 
these  " doubtful  disputations"  when  he 
first  enters  the  Church.  The  clever 
pupils  in  the  school  of  Christ  must 
not  force  such  a  man  on  too  fast 
in  his  learning.  Be  tender  of  his 
conscience ;  try  to  enlighten  it,  and 
so  establish  his  principles ;  help  him 
to  strength  of  Christian  character. 
But  to  force  him  to  build  himself  up 
in  knowledge  before  the  foundation  is 
settled,  is  to  "  edify  "  him  to  his  ruin 
(vers.  19,  15).  May  not  with  sneer, 
or  contempt,  taunt  him  about  "  weak- 
ness," old  *'  prejudices,"  or  the  like. 
Granted  that  his  is  not  the  highest  type 

150 


of  Christian  manhood,  neither  teaching 
nor  practice  of  stronger  ones  must  urge 
trifling  with  his  conscience.     "  Destroy 
not   with   thy   meat"   etc. ;    "  //*  meat 
make  .  .  .  stumble,  I  will  eat  no  meat" 
etc.     (Or,    again,    chap.   viii.    8   sqq.). 
*'  To  see  you  eat  meat  from  the  idol- 
altar  will  make  him  bold  to  swallow 
down   his    scruples   and    violate    con- 
science by   sitting   down   to  eat  with 
you  ?     Your  greater  strength  of  prin- 
ciple or  greater  knowledge  will  make 
him  harden  his  conscience  to  do  what 
he  cannot  yet  see  clearly  right,   and 
what  also  exposes  him  to  the  tempta- 
tions of  his  old  life,  perhaps  leading  him 
into  greater  sin  than  before  ?     Then 
^^walk  in  love,"  abstain.    It  is  no  longer 
indifferent,   or   "  expedient "   for   you. 
I.e.  If  associations  or  real  danger  make 
these   things    matters   of   danger   to    a 
*'  weaker  "  Christian,  they  may  so  become 
matters  of  conscience  to  the  '"''stronger  " 
also.       1.    Can   hardly   determine    by 
general  rule  how  far  such  association 
with  *'  weaker  "  ones  is  to  be  regarded 
as   extending.      Older   Christian    and 
newly  converted  friend  ;  Sunday-school 
teacher  and  class  j  father  and  children 
— is   that    all  ?      Or   (as,    e.g.,    total 
abstainer     in    England    or    America 
thinks)   when    the    ''  brotherhood "     is 
that  of  the  same  nationality  or   social 
system,    or    wide    as     manhood.       2. 
Nothing   intrinsically    wrong    in   the 
dramatic  way  of  telling  a  story,  or  in 
setting   horses   to   race    against    each 
other.  But  such  an  accretion  of  vice  and 
villainy  gather  around  the  theatre  and 
the  turf,  that  for  sake  of  others  (if  not 
for  his  own  sake)  a  Christian  gives  up 
any  participation  in  them.  He  can  stop 
at  any  point  on  the  inclined  plane,  can 
walk  on   very   verge   of   danger.      If 
weaker  ones  follow  him,  they  cannot. 
He   is   then    in   part   responsible   for 
their  ruin.     "  Bondage  to  weakness  !  " 
No ;  but  to  Christlike  love  for  souls. 
We   shall  do  anything,   abstain  from 
anything,  rather  than  by  going  the  full 
length  of  the  tether  of  our  own  liberty, 
even  contribute   to  ruin  one  soul  for 
whom  Christ  died. 

IV.  (1  Cor.  X.  25  sqq.)  Feast  going 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vi. 

on.      Strong    brother   eating    quietly  H.  J.  F.,  "  Wesleyan  Magazine^^  1878 

whatever  set  before  him,  "  asking  no  (abridged). 

questions    for   conscience'   sake,"    but  Ver.  12.   Worldly  Expediency.      {To 

thanking   the   bountiful   God  for  His  Young  Men.) — 1.   Days  of  expediency 

good  gifts  (ver.  30).     To  see  what  he  rather  than  of  principle  ;  in  politics,  in 

will  say  or  do,  a  weaker  Christian,  or  business ;  even  in  Church,  the  question 

a   heathen   guest,  says  :    "  That  .  .  .  mooted  :  "  How  much  of  new  teaching 

offered  to  an  idol."      In  a  moment  it  is  it  expedient   to  give  as  yet  to  the 

acquires    new  character.       If   it  is  to  popular  ear  ? "     Need  not  exaggerate 

cause  difficulty  to  the  conscience  of  the  danger,    as   if    of    these    times    only. 

Christian    guest    (ver.     29),     or    the  Expediency  always  gains  strength  as 

heathen  makes  it  a  test  of  his  Chris-  God    is    less     completely    or    vividly 

tianity,    then   let   him    put   that  dish  realised.     [Cf.  Heb.  xi.  27,  "  Endured, 

aside.      I,e.  If  a  thing  has  become   a  as  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible."     *'  So 

test  as  between  religion  and  the  world,  did  not   I,  because   of   fear   of   God" 

and   will  be   so   regarded  by  servants,  (Neh.    v.     15).     *'  Set,    Lord,    always 

children,  neighbours,  then  it  is  no  longer  before   me  .  .  .  not   be   moved  "   (Ps. 

lawful,  or  at  least  no  longer  expedient.  xvi.   8).]      2.  Expediency    may    never 

May  be  unreasonably  so  regarded,  but  be  a  rule  of  Christian  action  in  case 

cannot  afford  to  dispute.     World  will  of  intrinsic,  absolute  right  or  wrong; 

have  rough-and-ready  tests.      Its  in-  and   in   cases   of    relative,    accidental 

stinct  as  to  what  is  "  worldly  "  is  as  a  wrong  or  right  will  alwaj^s  operate  in 

rule  very  true.     Many  Christians  will  direction  of  narrowing  area  of  ''  right," 

abstain  altogether  for  this  reason  (or  and  adding  to  area  of  "  wrong."     Of 

for  others)  from  cards  or  ballroom,  who  things  lawful,  some,  to  Christians,  not 

will   still   play  at  billiards.     Or  they  expedient ;  never  true  that,  of  things  not 

distinguish  between  billiards  and  baga-  lawful,  some  are  expedient.     Matthew 

telle,  or  between  playing  where  all  are  Henry     suggests      (commenting      on 

Christians  in  a  private  house,  and  before  Dan.   iii.)  several  "  expediency  "  pleas 

a  mixed  company  in  public.     One  all-  often  addressed  to  young  men.     World 

embracing  rule  :  "  Do  all  to  the  glory  tempts,  asks,  would  compel,  to  fall  down 

of  God"  (ver.  31).  to  its  fashions  and   ways  of  thinking 

V.  Circumcision.        (See       Critical  and  practice ;  gives  "  reasons "  :— 

Notes,    and    Homily    on    vii.     19.) —  I.  "  Do   not    ask   you  to   renounce 

Jewish  controversialists  gave  a  revived,  your  own  God  ;  only  ask  a  recognition 

accidental  importance  to  circumcision,  of  that  of  Nebuchadnezzar  also.     Do 

which  made  it  still  "wo^"  even  "^ai(^?^^"  not  be  narrow;  think  and  let  think, 

to   Paul  (Gal.    vi.  14  sqq.).      Modern  All  truth  is  '  relative.'     Be  charitable, 

parallelism    in    Ritualism.     In    itself  tolerant,  broad.      Perhaps  idolatry  is 

matters  nothing,  except  to  taste  and  not  after  all  merely  the  crude  worship 

cost  and   convenience,  what  architec-  of  the  thing  seen ;  originally,  and  was 

ture  or  music  shall  be  associated  with  to  nobler  minds,  only  the  use  of  this  to 

Christian  worship.    "  Vestments  "  mere  assist  to  realise  the  unseen  behind,  or 

matter     of     interesting     archaeology,  within  it.     Some  truth  in  all  religions. 

Might  smile  at  the  fancy  for  wearing  you     know  ;    even    in    all     Christian 

or  using   a  Roman  gallows,   and  the  heresies."     Christianity  is  intolerant ; 

instrument     of      sore     pain     to     our  truth  is  intolerant  of  error ;  such  love 

Redeemer.        But     when     all     these  for  Christ  as  Paul's  (1   Cor.  xvi.  22), 

things    are    made   to   mean   doctrine,  or  John's   (2  John  10),    is   intolerant 

then,  to   those  whom  the  doctrine  is  of   doctrine,    or    practice,   or    persons, 

not    true,    and    even    seems    to    dis-  that  "  deny "  Him.      The  Samaritans 

honour    the    priesthood    and    sacrifice  "  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  own 

of  Christ,   these  things    become  ^^ not  gods"  (2   Kings  vii.   33).      Alexander 

expedient"   or   even    "  not    lav)fid." —  Severus     proposed    to    put    statue    of 

151 


CHAP.  VI.    BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   CORINTBIANS. 


JesQS  Christ  in  his  private  Pantheon,  forcible,  to  those  hot  too  confident  in 

amongst  the  other  greatest  and  wisest  their  own  judgment, 
of  the  race.     Christian  heart  will  have  VI.  "  By  one    act   you    may  save 

no   such   compromise.      World    really  your  lives  and  be  of  immense  service 

intolerant.     "  Think  yourselves  right ;  to  brethren   and   against   idolatry   in 

but  must  not  condemn  us  as  wrong.  future.       Did   not    Knox   and   others 

Tolerate  us ;  we  cannot  tolerate  that  flee  to  Geneva  until  storm  was  over  ? 

you  should  not  see  it  right  to  tolerate  He  who   fights  and  runs  away,"  etc. 

us."  Let  God  take  care  of  the  consequences : 

II.  "  Only  this  once " ;  just  the  one  we  must  do  right.  Let  Him  see  to 
prostration.  Young  Christian  girl,  or  His  work  and  His  people.  If  we 
wife,  "  will  comply  this  once,"  to  win  perish  in  the  flames,  He  can  do  without 
her  husband  by  her  outstanding  fidelity  us.  No  man  is  ''indispensable"  to 
afterwards.  Young  Christian  man  of  God.  "  But  we  want  such  as  you 
business  "in  tight  place";  just  for  in  the  world;  reasonable  Christians,  no 
this  time  tempted  to  do  the  doubtful  fanatics.  What  good  can  you  do  if 
(but  not  obviously  wrong)  thing ;  and  you  make  the  world  cut  you,  or  drop 
then  no  more  "  tight  places,"  all  plain,  you,  from  its  acquaintance  ?  Very 
sure,  right  doing  and  easy,  afterwards.  beautiful    ideal   of    yours,    no   doubt ! 

But  the  "once"  gives  up  the  principle.  B-u-t,  you  know "     No  !     Second 

No  reason  for  doing  once  which  will  Commandment   forbids   it.     Not  law- 

not  sanction  doing  habitually.     Do  it  ful ;  cannot  be  expedient. 

once,  and  then    how   the  very   world  [In  matter  of  sensual  sin,  the  only 

that  tempted  triumphs  !    "Did  you  not  effectual  barrier  against  the  rush    of 

see    Shadrach,    Meshach,    Abed-nego,  the  tide  of  passion  is  the  command  of 

bow  down  ? "  God   and   its   sanction   hell-fire.       No 

III.  "  Absolute  power  of  king  would  other  motives  are  strong  enough  in  the 
excuse  them."  They  really  only  his  moment  of  the  inrush  of  appetite, 
subjects.  Besides,  what  a  benefactor  The  animalism  of  it,  the  wrong  done 
he  had  been  to  them  !  Very  hard  to  the  other  party,  the  moral  degrada- 
when  sense  of  obligation  seems  to  tion  and  the  physical  consequences  of 
plead  against  duty.  "  Surely  you  will  excess  and  irregularity — none  is  strong 
strain  a  point  for  So-and-so's  sake.  enough  to  hold  back.  All  are  like 
Bemember  your  many  obligations  to  Samson's  bonds,  when  the  spirit  (in 
him.  Think  how  you  will  grieve  him.  this  case  evil)  enters  in.  (Or,  better. 
Think  how  you  will  condemn  him  by  like  the  chains  and  fetters  snapped 
your  action."  Very  hard  this  last  to  a  by  the  demoniac.)  The  moment  the 
sensitive,  diffident,  modest  spirit.  Hard  religious  sanction  is  relaxed,  the  gate 
to  seem  to  set  up  oneself  as  right,  to  the  is  open  to  all  excess  of  riot.  Expedi- 
implied  condemnation  of  older,  wiser,  ency,  reason,  conventionalities  of  life, 
and  not  less  admirable  people.  Yet  reputation — all  are  too  easily  over- 
nobody  can  answer  for  another  in  borne.  But  the  waves  of  passion  beat 
matter  of  conscience.  "  Every  man  vainly  against  the  breakwater  of  God's 
...  his  own  burden "  (Gal.  vi.  5).  law    and   its    utmost     sanction.      At 

IV.  "  At  Bome  do  as  Bome  does."  least,  if  that  do  not  resist,  nothing 
At  Babylon,  as   Babylon.     Ungentle-  will.] 

manly  to    be    singular.       Carry    this 

far     enough,    and    you     will     reach:  Ver.    19.    ^^  Temples  of  God." — The- 

"Amongst    devils   do   as    devils  do"  Spirit   is  in  the  Church   (iii.   16,    17). 

(Beecher).  He  is  in  the  individual  Christian  too. 

V.  "  Have  not  your  forefathers,  and  All  Christians  together,  with  their 
the  very  priests,  complied  with  idola-  Lord,  form  the  true  temple  of  our 
trous  times  and  monarchs  1  Are  you  so  spiritual  dispensation.  But  each 
much  wiser  than  your  fathers  ?  "   Very  Christian   is   a    temple     too.       [Both 

152  ... 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vi. 


combined  in  1  Pet.  ii.  5.  Every  stone 
is  alive ;  the  temple  is  a  living  temple 
too.  That  figure,  however,  cannot 
bear  the  weight  of  the  truth  ;  hardly  a 
possible  conception — a  living  building, 
built  of  living  stones;  other  figures 
must  help  it,  e.g.  in  a  body,  e very- 
member,  part,  particle,  is  instinct  with 
the  life  of  the  whole.  In  a  vine  every 
branch  is  (botanically)  a  complete  little 
vine  ;  less  accurately  we  say  that  every 
member  in  the  Body  has  a  life  com- 
plete in  himself,  lived  by  himself. 
Every  "stone"  of  the  Temple  is  a 
temple,  with  its  Divine  Tenant.  True, 
*'Ye  are  the  temple."  True  also, 
*'  Your  body  is  the  temple." 

I.  Appreciate  the  assertion. — 1. 
"  Whither  ...  go  from  Thy  Spirit  ?  " 
If  Divine,  then  omnipresent,  and  as 
really  without  as  within  the  body;  and 
conversely,  however  little  we  understand 
it,  as  perfectly  within  it  as  around  it. 
But,  for  the  sake  of  the  worshipper,  the 
temple  localises  the  god.  Aphrodite 
was  everywhere,  but  a  Corinthian 
sought  her  in  her  temple.  Jehovah 
was  everywhere,  but  the  Shekinah- 
cloud  over  the  mercy-seat,  for  the  sake 
of  the  worshipper  localised,  emphasised. 
His  presence  within  that  sacred  en- 
closure. [All  words  on  this  topic  halt 
sadly.  But  the  wise  man  uses  them 
as  unhesitatingly  as  the  humblest 
reader  of  the  Book  which  teaches  him 
to  employ  them  :  with  this  difference — 
he  knows  how  imperfectly  they  ex- 
hibit the  truth.  Figurative  language 
is  not  necessarily  misleading.  So]  if 
the  figure  here  be  not  wholly  a  false- 
hood, we  are  to  think  of  a  localised, 
emphasised,  specialised  manifestation 
of  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  within  a 
Christian  man's  bodily  frame.  We  do 
not  know  how.  Nor  do  we  know  how 
or  where  our  own  spirit  dwells  within 
it.  The  mystery  is  not  greater  in  the 
one  case  than  in  the  other.  Both  full 
of  mystery,  but  both  may  be,  for  all 
th&t,  facts.  2.  May  illustrate  this  fact 
by  another;  men  were  once  possessed  by 
a  demon,  or  even  by  seven ;  in  one  case 
a  legion  of  such  had  taken  up  their 
abode  within  the  man.     [The  facts  of 


demoniacal  possession  never  to  be 
criticised  as  mere  isolated  phenomena. 
They  give,  and  they  get,  probability  if 
they  are  found  to  be  part  of  a 
harmonious  system  of  spiritual  facts, 
and  to  have  analogies  and  relations 
to  others.  An  undesigned,  piecemeal 
self -consistency  gives  argument  for  a 
system,  and  credibility  to  its  several 
parts.]  I.e.  within  the  one  human 
frame  dwelt  two  or  many  spirits — two 
or  many  persons — the  man  himself 
and  the  demon  himself,  side  by  side 
in  mysterious  joint  occupancy.  Jesus 
constantly  distinguished  between  the 
spirit  and  the  man :  "  Come  out  of 
the  man,  thou  .  .  .  spirit ! "  The 
demon  sat  within,  enthroned  within 
the  debased  form,  lording  it  over  the 
manhood  of  his  victim,  leaving  him  a 
man  no  longer,  stripped  as  he  was  of 
self-control  and  freedom  of  will.  At 
the  very  centre  and  "  core "  of  the 
man's  being,  the  evil  spirit  had  en- 
trenched himself,  thence  directing  the 
life,  and  controlling  the  very  acts  and 
speech.  Indeed,  more  than  once  the 
man  was  so  completely  overborne  that, 
though  the  man's  organs  of  speech 
are  employed,  it  is  the  demon  who 
uses  them  to  converse  with  Christ. 
[£J.g.  the  "  Legion  "  :  "  PTe  are  many."] 
The  man  seems  lost.  Will,  thought, 
body — all  are  become  scarcely  more  than 
the  instruments  of  the  evil  spirit  within. 
The  possessed  man^s  body  is  a  temple  in 
which  the  demon  is  the  god.  Putting 
"  good "  for  "  evil,"  all  this  closely 
parallels  the  "  possession"  of  believers' 
bodies  by  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God. 
The  ordinary  temptations  of  the  Evil 
One  come  from  "without"  (so  to 
speak).  The  Good  Spirit  also  works 
upon  the  unsaved  man  "  from  with- 
out "  (in  the  same  sense).  On  the 
believer — as  in  the  analogous  "  evil  " 
case — He  works  "  from  within."  3. 
Compare  the  asserted  fact  with  another. 
Jesus  "  spake  of  the  temple  of  His 
body."  But  our  Brother  is  not  our 
brother  in  this.  His  frame  "  had  no  " 
special  '•^form  or  comeliness "  beyond 
that  of  many  of  those  amongst  whom 
He  moved ;  yet  God  dwelt  within  it, 

153 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORIJVTHIANS. 


But  God  dwells  not  in  Christians  as  in  wonderful  human  body  He  has  builded 
Christ.  Indwelling  in  them  ;  Incarna-  and  compacted  together,  He  consents, 
tion  in  Him.  Within  His  body  were  delights,  to  dwell. 
two  natures— the  human,  the  Divine;  II.  Three  results  from  this. — 1.  This 
within  the  possessed  man  also  were  indwelling  is  the  test  of  our  being  Chris- 
two — the  human,  the  demoniacal ;  tians. — "  Examine  yourselves  "  (2  Cor. 
within  us — if  the  words  here  do  not  xiii.  5).  "Christ  is  in  you  except 
entirely  mislead — are  the  human,  and  .  .  .  reprobates."  ["  Reprobate  "  is 
the  Divine  also.  But  within  us,  and  not,  rejected  without  testing,  but  re- 
within  the  possessed,  are  two  persons.  jected  after  testing.  "  Approbate  " 
In  the  Saviour  only  the  one — the  God  metal  will  stand  test,  and  gets  hall- 
Man.  He  was  the  Son.  The  believer  marked  ;  "  reprobate  "  metal  will  not. 
is  a  man,  but  ''  possessed  by "  the  The  hall-mark  of  approbate  souls  is 
Spirit.  [Imperfect,  and  of  necessity  "  Christ  in  you."]  In  the  unity  of  the 
inexact,  language ;  readily  obvious  to  Undivided  Trinity  this  practically  is 
criticism,  but  useful  as  marking  dis-  *'  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  me."  Not  an  ex- 
tinctions, which  have  their  basis  in  ceptionally  strict  test ;  Paul's  ordinary 
differences  of  fact.]  4.  A  blessed  one.  [Perfectly  general,  Rom.  viii.  9.] 
"  possession."  Within  the  man  is  an  "  If  a  man  love  Me  .  .  .  abode  with 
*'  inward  man  "  ;  yet  more  intimately  Him  "  (John  xiv.  23).  This  indwelling 
within  is  the  Spirit  of  God.  At  the  in  the  temple  is  the  life  in  the  Vine, 
root  and  source  of  thought  and  judg-  "  Christ  liveth  in  me."  "  Did  ye 
ment,  making  them  "spiritual."  At  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  when  ye  believed?" 
the  fount  and  origin  of  will,  at  the  very  By  that  test  he  learned  the  exact 
seat  of  government  of  manhood,  sits  position  of  the  little  group  of  anoma- 
enthroned  the  directing  Spirit.  At  lous  Ephesian  disciples  (Acts  xix.  1-7). 
the  source  of  affection  He  has  His  seat.  Will  a  man  know  ?  When  "  the  Spirit 
making  every  throb  and  vibration  to  of  a  Son  "  —  "  of  His  Son  "  —  first 
have  its  centre  and  origin  with  Him-  enters  and  tells  him  that  he  is  now 
self.  Holy  impulses  and  desires ;  holy  a  son,  who  has  believed  in  Christ 
love  for  God  and  for  men ;  strength  (Gal.  iv.  6),  will  the  entrance  of 
for  good,  power  over  evil ;  judgment  God  bring  no  self-evidence  1  Did  the 
illuminated  and  brought  into  agree-  man  know  of  the  entering  of  the  demon 
ment  with  the  mind  of  God ;  conscience  into  his  temple  ?  God  took  possession 
sensitive  and  voiceful,  speaking  the  of  Solomon's  Temple  in  a  cloud  of 
mind  and  verdict  of  God  ;  will  brought  blinding  glory,  before  which  even 
into  ever  more  complete  and  glad  sub-  the  priests  had  to  retire.  If  God 
mission  to,  and  harmony  with,  the  will  accept  the  temple  of  a  man's  heart  and 
of  God, — all  because  the  Spirit  of  God  being  and  body,  it  may  not  always  be 
has  taken  possession  of  the  temple  of  with  the  same  overwhelming  glory — 
the  body  in  the  name  of  the  Three-  though  it  often  has  been — but  it  will 
One.  5.  "  Will  God  in  very  deed  hardly  be  unknown  and  unknowable, 
dwell  with  men  on  the  earth  ? "  cried  2.  The  honour  of  the  body  (as  above). 
Solomon,  offering  his  superb  Temple  to  3.  Sin  grows  in  gravity.  Enter  a 
be  God's  palace  in  His  capital,  temple.  Divinity  there  high-throned ; 
Jerusalem  (2  Cor.  vii.  18).  Here  is  an  altar  not  without  offerings ;  but 
answer  Solomon  could  not  anticipate,  spiders  weave  festoons  of  web  from 
*'  With  man  ?  "  ^^  In  man  !  "  "  Your  pillar  to  pillar  ;  walls  are  hanging  with 
body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  thick  mildew  and  mould  ;  every  corner 
Paul  on  Mars'  Hill,  the  Acropolis  of  holds  accumulated  dust  and  filth ; 
Athens  with  its  temples  in  near  sight,  rubbish  heaps  gather  outside  against 
cried,  "  God  dwelleth  not  in  temples  the  walls.  A  loaded  altar  does  not 
made  with  hands."  True,  but  in  atone  for  such  dishonour  to  the  god. 
temples  made  by  His  own  hands,  the  So   in   the   human  temple,   what   dis-  ( 

154 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vr. 


honour  is  done  by  the  woven  web  of 
worldliness,  by  thick  fungoid  growths 
of  sloth  everywhere,  by  envy,  pride, 
uncleanness  of  imagination,  accumu- 
lating undisturbed  in  many  a  dark 
corner !  Happy  if  outside,  in  open  day, 
there  do  not  gather  even  Corinthian 
sins  !  *'  Ilim  that  defileth  temple  of  God  " 
— the  personal  as  the  collective — "  shall 
God  defile.'*  Dishonour  the  glorious 
Tenant;  the  tenement  may  be  left 
to  ruin  and  dishonour.  How  many 
things  this  principle  makes  unlawful 
to  a  Christian  !  Like  the  altars  and 
saints  in  Romanist  side-chapels,  divert- 
ing from  the  Christ  upon  the  high- 
altar,  so  do  many  things  divide  and 
divert  from  the  supreme  honour  due 
to  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Vers.  19,  20.  The  Christianas  Obliga- 
tion to  a  Holy  Life. — Three  facts  in 
context  deserve  attention  :  1.  Sinners 
of  every  class  are  excluded  from  heaven  ; 
2.  Sinne7's  of  every  class  have  been 
changed;  3.  Those  changed  are  under 
immense  obligations  to  a  holy  life.  Text 
contains  three  facts : — 

I.  Christian's  body  the  temple  of 
God. — Three  ideas  suggested  :  1.  Special 
connectioji  with  God.  As  with  Temple 
of  old,  as  with  a  good  man  {^'  Thus 
saith  high  and  lofty  One,"  etc.,  Isa. 
Ivii.  15).  2.  Special  consecration  to  God. 
Body  dedicated  to  God,  with  all  its 
powers  and  functions.  3.  Special  mani- 
festation of  God.     In  good  man's  body 


God  specially  displayed  ;  more  of  God 
seen  in  good  man's  life  than  elsewhere 
throughout  the  world. 

II.  Christian's  being  the  property 
of  God. — "  Not  your  own  J'  Does  not 
mean — 1.  Your  personality  not  J^our 
own.  You  will  never  be  absorbed  in 
God.  2.  Your  character  not  your  own. 
Character  the  creation  of  moral  being, 
an  untransferable  thing.  It  does  mean 
our  existence  absolutely  at  His  com- 
mand. He  has  a  sovereign  right  to 
do  with  us  whatever  is  pleasing  in  His 
sight.  Christ  has  laid  on  us  the 
strongest  conceivable  obligation  to  a 
holy  life  (Rev.  xiv.  5). 

III.  Christian's  duty  to  glorify 
God.— 1.  What  is  that?  To  make 
Him  more  glorious  than  He  is,  im- 
possible. To  fulfil  the  end  of  our 
being.  A  holy  mind  is  glorified  in 
realisation  of  its  ideals.  [Sir  C.  Wren  is 
glorified  in  the  realisation  of  his  idea.] 
God  glorified  in  man  when  man  realises 
in  his  life  God's  ideal  of  a  man. 
2.  Will  include  two  things — (a)  That 
the  human  body  be  under  absolute 
government  of  soul.  The  crime  and 
curse  of  humanity,  that  matter  governs 
mind,  body  rules  soul,  {b)  That  the 
human  soul  be  under  the  government 
of  supreme  love  to  God.  Love  ( 1 )  always 
seeks  to  please  the  object ;  (2)  always 
reflects  the  object ;  (3)  always  lives  in 
the  object. — "  Homilist^'  New  Series,  iii. 
370  (condensed).  (See  Appended  Note 
also,  following  below. ^ 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  9-11. 

I.  Delusion. — Its  danger.  Its  folly. 
Its  source — ignorance,  from  a  blinded 
heart :  *'  the  deceitfulness  of  sin."  All 
in  danger.  The  worst  hope  for  im- 
punity. 

II.  Inclusion. — Even  for  such  sin- 
ners. All  may  hope  for  mercy.  Its 
method:  "  ye  were  washed," etc.  Into 
a  kingdom,  and  that  of  God. 

III.  Exclusion. — The  real  excom- 
munication. What?  Who?  Why? 
How? 


Vers.  9-11.  "  Soul,  reme7nber." 

I.  What  thou  wert,  with  a  gracious 
sadness. 

II.  What  thou  art,  with  a  sober 
gladness. 

III.  How  the  change  was  wrought, 
with  a  hallowed  thankfulness. 

Ver.  11.  The  Great  Contrast. — 1. 
With  skill  of  an  artist,  Paul  repre- 
sents two  portraits  of  same  persons : 
Corinthians, — wretched,  polluted,  in 
rags,  enslaved  by  sin; — then,  morally 

155 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS. 


changed,  cleansed,  robed  in  righteous- 
ness, enjoying  high  Christian  privileges. 
2.  Not  to  discourage,  to  wound  feelings  ; 
to  impress  two  thoughts — (a)  impossi- 
bility for  impure  man  to  partake  the 
blessings  of  .  .  .  kingdom ;  (6)  obHga- 
tion  laid  on  them  to  renounce  sin,  live 
holy  life.  3.  Therefore,  "  examine 
both  portraits  ;  mark  contrast." 

I.  Past  state  of  redeemed. — Appli- 
cable to  all  redeemed,  everywhere ; 
all  sinners,  by  nature  governed  and 
influenced  by  same  principles.  Heart 
impure.  Four  things  true  of  their 
past  unregenerate  state :  1.  Void  of 
moral  rectitude.  Conscience  burdened 
with  guilt.  Heart's  throne  occupied 
by  intruder;    they    enslaved    by   sin. 

2.  Subject  to  impure  influences. 
Affections  defiled.  If  conscience  loses 
authority,  nothing  to  prevent  most 
debasing  slavery.  Love  of  self,  of 
pleasure,  of  the  world — three  mighty 
powers  control  soul.  Every  thought, 
emotion,  feeling,  under  power  of  one 
of  these.  In  us — in  appearance  better 
than  Corinthians — these  more  success- 
fully checked  in  outward  development. 

3.  Slaves  of  wrong  habits.  Deeds 
evil.  Conscience  and  affections  wrong, 
deeds  must  be  inconsistent  with  truth 
and  righteousness.  4.  Incapable  of 
spiritual  enjoyment.  No  capacity,  no 
taste,  no  fitness,  for  the  exalted  plea- 
sures of  religion,  the  pure  joys  of  the 
heavenly  world.  "  New  creatures " 
alone  adapted  to  "  new  heaven."  A 
foul,  old  portrait. 

II.  The  present  state  of  the  re- 


deemed. —  1.  The  change.  (1)  An 
initiatory  act.  *'  Washed  ;"  allusion  to 
baptism,  striking  emblem  of  moral 
cleansing.  But  evidently  also  refer- 
ence to  another  washing,  which  alone 
can  take  away  sin, — work  of  Holy 
Spirit  on  heart.  "  The  commencement 
of  wonderful  change  in  believer's  soul : 
opening  of  understanding,  impressing 
of  heart,  moving  of  affections,  en- 
kindling of  new  thoughts  and  desires. 
Separation  from  world,  conversion  to 
God."  (2)  Progressive  development. 
"  Sanctified."  No  faultless  perfection. 
A  process  of  spiritual  cleansing.  An 
ascent  by  slow,  gradual,  continued 
progress.  (3)  Beautiful  completion. 
*'  Justified."  Mentioned  last,  con- 
sidered first.  Three  great  causes  at 
work  in  Justification.  Illustrate  by 
drowning  man  saved  by  rope;  the 
friend  who  throws  the  rope,  the  grasp 
of  the  hand,  parallel  to  the  Spirit's 
exhibition  of  Christ,  Saviour's  work, 
penitent's  own  faith.  2.  The  means. 
"  The  name,"  etc.  No  other  could 
have  moved  depraved  hearts  of  Corin- 
thians ;  no  other  can  change  a  heart 
3.  The  agency.  *'The  Spirit,"  etc. 
Giving  efiect  to  the  word  preached; 
appealing  to  conscience,  subduing 
enmity,  gaining  heart. 

Application. — Need  of  calm  and 
solemn  reflection.  Will  produce 
humility,  gratitude,  deep,  lively  sense 
of  mercy  of  God.  Also,  evidently  no 
sinner  need  despair. — Condensed  from 
J.  H.  Hughes,  "  Homilist^^  New  Series, 
i.  125. 


APPENDED  NOTES 


Ver.  2. — "  ...  In  the  great  Day  the  saints 
will  intelligently  and  cordially  approve  and 
endorse  the  sentence  pronounced  by  ChrislTon 
the  millions  of  earth.  Possibly  this  approval 
may  be  a  divinely  appointed  and  essential 
condition,  without  which  sentence  would  not 
be  pronounced.  For  it  may  enter  into  God's 
plan  that  sentence  be  pronounced  not  only 
by  Man  upon  men,  but  by  men,  themselves 
redeemed  from  their  own  sins,  upon  those 
who  have  chosen  death  rather  than  life.  .  .  . 
It  may  be  that  final  sentence  cannot,  ac- 
cording to  the  principles  of  the  Divine 
Government  of  the  Universe,  be  pronounced 

156 


upon  the  lost  without  the  concurrence  of  the 
saved,  i.e.  without  a  revelation  of  the  justice 
of  the  sentence  so  clear  as  to  secure  the  full 
approbation  of  the  saved.  If  so,  the  con- 
currence of  the  saved  is  an  essential  element 
in  the  final  judgment ;  and  they  may  truly 
be  said  to  judge  both  men  and  angels.  That 
the  sentence  which  the  saints  will  pronounce 
is  put  into  their  lips  by  Christ  does  not 
make  their  part  in  the  judgment  less  real ; 
for  even  the  Son  says  (John  v.  30),  '  I  cannot 
of  Myself  do  anything;  as  I  hear  I  judge.'" 
Also,  further,  on  ver.  3  :  "  Thus  man  and 
men    will    pronounce    sentence    on    thoso 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  vi. 


mighty  powers  which  have  seduced  men,  but 
from  whose  grasp  the  saints  have  been  saved. 
.  .  .  All  this  reveals  a  mysterious  and 
wonderful  connection  (cf.  Col.  i.  20)  between 
the  moral  destiny  of  our  race  and  that  of 
other  races." — Beet,  in  loc. 

Vers.  17,  19.  '^Temple"  religion.  —  Paul 
nevei  forgets  the  ancient  Temple.  His  words 
[viz.  Rom,  i.  1]  give  us  a  glimpse,  and  a  most 
beautiful  one,  into  the  secret  sanctuary  of  the 
Apostle's  devotion.  He  does  not,  indeed,  say, 
"  in  the  temple  of  my  spirit,"  but  we  may 
say  it  for  him,  and  then  appropriate  it  to 
ourselves.  The  regenerate  soul  is  regenerate 
because  inhabited  by  God,  the  Triune  God, 
through  the  Holy  Ghost.  Where  He  dwells 
must  be  a  temple ;  and  all  the  glorious 
things  spoken  of  the  ancient  dwelling- 
place  of  Jehovah  may  be  transferred  to 
the  spirit  of  the  regenerate  believer  in  Christ. 
The  Lord  has  entered,  and  with  the  peaceful 
majesty  of  His  grace  has  said  to  the  former 
usurper,  "  Go  out  of  him,  and  enter  no  more 
into  him  I  "  Concerning  all  that  pertained 
to  the  former  unholy  service — for  the  heart 
was  still  a  temple,  even  in  its  defilement — 
he  cries,  "  Take  these  things  hence  !  "  But 
it  is  the  spirit  of  the  new  worshipper  himself 
that  hears  the  command,  who  is  both  temple 
and  priest ;  rather  the  Christian  man,  spirit 
and  body,  for  our  whole  nature  is  the  temple 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  is  no  more  impres- 
sive view  of  personal  religion  than  that 
contained  in  the  injunction,  "  Sanctify  the 
Lord — the  Lord  Christ — in  your  hearts  !  " 
It  means  that  the  great  concern  of  our  life 
must  be  to  preserve  our  spirit  inviolate  for 
the  Sacred  Indweller,  to  suffer  no  abomina- 
tion of  desolation  to  enter  the  holy  place ; 
to  take  the  Saviour's  whip  of  small  cords 
from  His  hand,  as  it  were,  and  use  it  effect- 
ually in  cleansing  for  Him  His  temple. 
Nor  is  there  any  more  terrible  threatening 
than  that  which  says,  "  If  any  man  shall 
defile  the  temple  of  God " — that  is,  by  any 
impurity  of  thought  or  act  pollute  the  body, 
which  is  the  framework  of  the  Divine  sanc- 
tuary, or  by  any  filthiness  of  spirit  desecrate 


it — "him  shall  God  destroy."  The  Apostle 
lived  in  the  flesh  of  his  bodily  life  as  in  a 
temple  ;  "  an  earthly  house,"  indeed,  which 
should  be  dissolved,  but  then  be  built  again. 
He  lived  in  his  spirit,  however,  as  in  a 
temple  which  should  never  be  dissolved,  and 
from  which  his  God  should  never  for  a 
moment  depart.  And  he  lived  in  hope  of 
a  better  day  and  a  more  glorious  service, 
when  spirit  and  body  should  be  reunited 
and  glorified  as  the  eternal  dwelling-place  of 
God  in  Christ.  .  .  .  Your  body  is  part  of  that 
temple ;  let  every  act  and  office  of  your 
physical  nature  be  offered  in  your  priestly 
ministration.  .  .  .  You  shall  become  a  man 
in  God  as  well  as  a  man  of  God  ;  a  man  in 
Christ  as  well  as  a  servant  of  Christ.  Joined 
to  Him  you  will  be  one  Spirit  with  Him,  and 
your  advance  to  perfection  will  be  rapid  and 
sure. — Br.  Po^e,  "  Sermons,''  pp.  181,  183. 

Ver.  19.  TheSac7'ednessoftheBody. — About 
forty-five  years  ago,  a  funeral  was  passing 
through  the  streets  of  Carlisle,  Penn.  It  was 
the  burial  procession  of  John  Hall  Mason,  the 
son  of  the  eminent  Dr.  Mason,  President  of 
Dickinson  College,  one  of  the  most  powerful 
and  eloquent  preachers  in  America.  The  son 
was  distinguished  for  his  piety  and  talents, 
and  his  death  had  cast  a  gloom  over  many 
hearts.  Many  gathered  to  the  funeral,  from 
far  and  near,  and  especially  young  men. 
After  the  services  at  the  house  had  been 
performed,  and  the  pall-bearers  had  taken 
up  the  bier,  a  great  concourse  obstructed  the 
entrance,  and  great  confusion  and  noise 
ensued.  The  bereaved  Doctor,  observing  the 
difficulty,  and  following  closely  the  pall- 
bearers, exclaimed  in  solemn,  sepulchral 
tones :  "  Tread  lightly,  young  men !  tread 
lightly  I  You  bear  the  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost."  These  sentiments,  as  though  indited 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  acted  like  an  electric 
shock :  the  crowd  fell  back  and  made  the 
passageway  clear.  Through  the  influence 
of  these  words  a  most  powerful  revival  of 
religion  sprang  up  and  swept  through  the 
college,  and  extended  over  the  town. 


157 


CHAP.  VII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 

A.  1.  Observe :  With  this  chapter  commences  a  new  section  of  the  Epistle ;  the  topics, 
and  perhaps  their  order,  suggested  by  a  letter  of  formal  inquiry  brought  from  Corinth: 
vii.  Marriage  ;  viii.  Things  ofEered  to  Idols  ;  ix.  Support  of  Ministry  ;  x.  Lord's  Supper  and 
Love-feast ;  xi.  Women  in  Public  Services,  Lord's  Supper ;  [x.,  xi.  Public  Worship,  sundry 
topics  connected  with ;]  xii.  Spiritual  Gifts ;  (xiii.  parenthetic,  "  Charity  " ;)  xiv.  Spiritual 
Gifts  resumed  ;  xv.  The  Resurrection. 

2.  Observe  also  :  Stanley  thinks  the  questions  were  proposed  by  the  loyal  party,  and,  on 
the  whole,  most  likely  by  the  Gentile  element  in  the  Church.  "  The  tendency  to  celibacy 
was  at  this  period  .  .  .  strong "  "in  the  Gentile  world  generally."  [But  celibacy  by  no 
means  meant  personal  purity.]  Others  rather  see  the  motive  in  the  Gentile,  quasi-philo- 
sophic idea  that  matter  was  evil,  and  a  celibate's  life  nobler,  as  being  "  spiritual,"  in 
comparison  with  marriage. 

3.  Observe  further :  In  all  these  chapters  are  good  instances  of  one  mode  and  method  of 
divinely  inspired  teaching.  Particular  cases  (even  of  quite  temporary  importance,  and 
now  mainly  interesting  to  us  historically,  as,  e.g.,  much  in  chap,  xi.)  are  examined  with 
constant  reference  to,  and  are  decided  upon,  great  and  abiding  principles  of  Divine 
order  for  the  Church  of  Christ.  [Just  as  elsewhere  the  biographies  and  character  portraits, 
the  histories,  and  their  course  and  consequences,  are  an  integral  part  of  the  Kevelation. 
In  them  God  is  declaring  His  will  in  concrete  instances,  rather  than  in  general,  didactic 
language] 

B.  Ver.  1.  Good. — Not  exactly  *•  morally  good,"  as  if  the  opposite  were  sinfiil.  Plainly 
so,  from  drift  of  chapter,  and  particularly  vers.  35,  40.  Relatively  good  ;  "  an  excellent  thing," 
in  many  circumstances,  and  for  many  reasons,  "  hut,''  etc.  Touch.— Euphemistic,  for  a 
more  significant  word. 

Ver.  2.  (The)  fornications  (R.V.,  accurately). —  Q.d.  which  notoriously  abound  in  your 
heathen,  social  surroundings.  [Perhaps  not  specially  at  Corinth,  beyond  any  other  great 
centre  of  Gentile  life.  See  Introduction.]  Own. — "  Christianity  allows  no  polygamy." 
"  Own  .  .  .  own  "  are  interestingly  different  in  Greek,  having  a  slight  trace  of  the  different 
conception,  even  in  Judaism,  of  the  respective  propriety  of  husband  and  wife  in  each  other. 
On  his  side  is  something  of  ownership  ;  on  hers  of  exclusive  relation.  Have. — Like  "  touch,'' 
is  euphemistic ;  expanded  in  ver.  3. 

Ver.  3. — R.V.  follows  the  ancient,  correct,  expressive  reading  :  "  Let  not  married  persons 
fancy  [as,  e.g.,  Edward  the  Confessor]  that  there  is  any  perfection  in  living  with  each  other 
as  if  they  were  unmarried." 

Ver.  4.  Power. — Obviously  is  the  sense  of  '•^authority."  N.B.  the  perfect  equality  of  the 
sexes  ;  a  particular  case  of  a  great  principle  asserted  for  the  woman  by  Christianity. 

Ver.  5.  Fasting.— Omit,  as  Acts  x.  30  ("  certainly ")  ;  Matt.  xvii.  21  ("  probably ")  ; 
Mark  ix.  29  ("  not  unlikely  ").  *•  These  various  readings  affect  materially  the  teaching  of 
Scripture  about  fasting  "  (Beet).  Question  of  textual  criticism,  basing  itself  on  diplomatic 
evidence ;  as  likely  to  have  been  dropped  in  a  lax  age,  as  to  have  been  inserted  by  an 
ascetic  one.  N.B.  Ascetic  counsels  and  practice  might  create  new  occasions  for  the 
Tempter's  attack.  N.B.  also  how  abstinence  is  valued,  not  for  prudential  or  selfish  reasons, 
but  according  as  it  afEects  the  spiritual  life  and  its  exercises.  Everything  dealt  with  here 
with  delicacy  of  thought  and  language,  and  every  topic  lifted  up  into,  and  judged  in,  the 
light  of  great  spiritual  verities.     Be  together  [not  "  come  "],  again  euphemistic. 

Ver.  6. — See  Bible-class  Talk,  infra. 

Ver.  7. — Paul  evidently  now  unmarried,  or  at  least  wifeless  ;  was  he  a  widower  1  Only 
facts  are  :  The  prevalent  Jewish  judgment  that  a  man  of  twenty  sinned  in  remaining 
unmarried  even  so  long ;  that  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrin  must  be  married.  Inferences 
from  ix.  5  and  ver.  8  are  very  precarious.  Phil.  iv.  3  is  now  never  understood  as  referring 
to  any  possible  wife  of  Paul.  Not  quite  certain  that  Paul  was  formally  a  member  of  the 
Council ;  the  one  fact  is,  *'  I  gave  my  vote  "  (Acts  xxvi.  10,  if  the  word  means  quite  so  much). 
His  .  .  .  gift. — His  charism-,  the  word  used  of  the  ^' gifts"  of  chap.  xii.  Great  rule;  in 
arrest  of  hard  judgments  of  other  people  (Matt.  xix.  11). 

Ver.  8. — How  "  relative  "  all  these  judgments  are  is  evident  from,  e.g.,  1  Tim.  v.  9-16. 

Ver.  10.— See  Bible-class  Talk,  infra.  Matt.  v.  32,  xix.  3-9  ;  Mark  x.  2-12  [a  chapter  full 
of  suggestive  side-lights  upon  Christ's  attitude  towards  home,  family,  wife,  children]. 

158 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vii. 


Ver.  11.  If  she  depart. — Under  such  a  supposed  necessity  as  seems  to  her  to  overbear  all 
other  considerations  [local,  not  legal,  separation  or  divorce  being  supposed],  at  any  rate 

let  her  not  be  led  to  go  further  and [A  Greek  or  Eoman  wife   could  divorce  her 

husband.] 

Ver.  12.  The  rest. — Viz.  to  the  unmarried,  the  widows,  [and  widowers]  ("of  whom  I  just 
made  mention  ")  ;  and  now,  further,  to  those  involved  in  a  marriage  which  has  become,  by 
the  conversion  of  one  party,  a  mixed  one. 

Vers.  12-17.  Sanctified,  holy.  —  Plainly  not  with  a  real,  only  with  a  relational, 
holiness.  So  "  unclean,"  as  in  Acts  x.  14.  Husband  and  children  stand  in  a  different,  and 
nearer,  relation  to  Christ,  if  the  wife  and  mother  be  a  Christian.  N.B.  the  children  are 
holy :  a  great  dictum,  with  the  authority  of  vers.  17,  40  behind  it.  Let  him  depart. — The 
Christian  is  never  to  initiate  the  separation  ;  but  needs  not  absolutely  resist  it,  if  the  step  be 
taken  from  the  other  side.  In  (not  "^o")  peace. — Therefore  the  believer  needs  not  enforce 
union  upon  a  reluctant  unbeliever,  or  one  determined  to  separate  ;  to  acquiesce  in  the 
inevitable  isjjeace  for  both,  and  the  way  is  open  for  resuming  the  old  relation,  if  good  may 
(ver.  16)  result  from  it,  Shalt  save. — Perhaps  hardly  so  much  as,  "  If  you  remain  with  the 
unconverted  one,  is  it  not  the  sure  way  to  save  ?  "  Nor  so  little  as,  "  How  do  you  know — 
how  can  you  think — that  you  will,  if  even  you  persist  ?  "  Lies  between.  "  Who  can  tell  ? 
Perhaps  you  may.  There  is  at  least  a  chance."  (He  is  reverting  to  12-14.)  But 
(ver.  17). — ''Only,"  R.V.  Difficult  to  translate,  very  elliptical.  "Indeed,  I  give  hardly 
any  fixed  rule,  only  let  this  be  the  great  guiding  principle."  So  ordain  I. — Word  of  full 
Apostolic  authority,  [xiv.  37  very  definite  and  important  upon  this  point.]  Distributed. — 
Not  as  ver.  7  ;  but  only  of  station  in  life. 

Ver.  19. — Join  this  with  Gal.  v.  6,  vi.  15. 

Ver.  20.  Calling. — From  this  verse,  very  largely,  rose  our  common  use  of  the  phrase  for 
a  man's  occupation  or  pursuit  in  life.  True  we  really  are  appointed  to,  guided  into,  this  by 
God.  Yet  in  the  word  here  is  only  the  "  sacred  "  sense  :  the  calling  into  fellowship  of  His 
people.  (Was  any  man  ever  "  called  of  "  God  to  he  a  slave  ?)  "Whatever  you  were  when  the 
call  reached  you  and  saved  you,  in  that,  as  a  rule,  abide."     Cf.  vers.  17,  18,  21,  24  also. 

Ver,  21.  Servant. — "  A  slave."  Care  not. — "Do  not  anxiously  seek  liberty."  Use  it. — Use 
what  ?  (1)  The  condition  of  slavery,  or  (2)  the  opportunity  of  liberty  ?  Curiously 
ambiguous.  Both  senses  defended  from  very  early  times.  For  (1)  is  the  general  drift  of 
Paul's  advice,  "  Incline  on  the  whole  to  make  no  change."  And  this,  it  is  suggested,  with  the 
idea  in  the  background,  "  It  will  not  matter  long;  the  Lord  will  soon  be  here."  Also  Paul 
sent  Onesimus  back  to  Philemon  to  be  received  "  as  a  servant."  For  (2)  is  the  asserted 
unnaturalness  of  the  other  counsel,  and,  as  things  were,  its  cruel  requirement  that  a  slave 
should  remain  at  the  mercy  of  such  masters  as  were  many  of  those  days.  It  is  pointed  out 
that  Paul  sent  Onesimus  back  to  a  Christian  master,  and  at  least  suggested  his  manumission. 
Also  that,  though  certainly  the  Christian  religion  has  usually  wrought  great  revolutions  by 
the  "  inoculation  "  of  great  principles  into  the  social  system,  rather  than  by  change  imposed 
ah  extra,  yet  that  from  the  beginning  it  has  favoured,  and  worked  for,  manumission  where- 
ever  possible. 

Ver.  24.— Contrast  "  Of  men  .  .  .  with  God:' 

Ver.  25.  Virgins. — Might  include  both  sexes  (Rev.  xiv.  4).  In  point  of  fact  (except 
perhaps  in  vers.  26,  27)  young  women  are  in  his  thought.  Origin  here  of  distinction  between 
consilia  amd  prcscej?ta.     (See  again  infra,  Bible-class  Talk.) 

Ver.  26. — A  perplexing  verse  again.  R.V.  well  presents  the  again  curiously  ambiguous 
original.  On  the  whole  *^ present  "  is  preferable  to  '^pressing  "  (qjd.  "  the  pressing  cares  of 
the  married  state  ") ;  "  distress  "  being  then  the  uncertainties  and  dangers  involved  or  risked 
by  being  Christians  in  such  times  of  change  and,  always  possible,  persecution.  So  to 
be. — How?  (1)  As  he  is;  (2)  As  I  am;  (3)  Unmarried;  (4)  As  I  go  on  to  say  in  detail. 
Probably  (1). 

Ver.  28.  I  spare  you. — Choose  between  (1)  "I  speak  as  little  and  as  tenderly  as 
possible  " ;  (2)  "  I  want  to  save  you  from  such  risks  and  cares  and  dangers,  as,  just  now, 
must  come  upon  married  people." 

Ver.  29  sqq.—iiee  Separate  Homily. 

Ver.  32.  Carefulness. — Favours  ver.  28,  (2)  ;  as  does  ver.  35,  latter  half.  But  ver.  35  also 
favours  (1).  Both  are  true  and  good  reasons  for  cautious  pronouncements.  "Without 
any  avoidable  anxieties  to  burden  your  thoughts."  R.V.  gives  all  needful  indication  of 
the  efEect  of  the  difEerent  punctuations  here,  and  of  the  different  translations  of  "  Thei^e  is 
differe7ice." 

Ver.  34. — The  ideal  of  "  unmarried  "  life.     Would  that  they  all  did  ! 

Ver.  35.  Attend  upon. — Stanley  finds  apt  illustration  of  the  three  leading  words  of  this 
clause  in  Luke  x.  39-42. 

Ver.  36.  Uncomely. — "  Unhandsomely  "  (Evans).  Spoken  of  the  parent  or  guardian,  not  of 
the  possible  husband.    He  is  presumed  to  wish  to  do  what  the  need  of  the  case  requires. 

159 


CHAP.  VII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


'*  Very  good ;  the  way  is  quite  clear ;  he  may  consent  to  her  marrying  her  betrothed." 
Also,  probably,  '•  unhandsomely  toward  her  "  ;  not  "  unhandsomely  as  regards  public  opinion 
about  keeping  virgin  daughters  at  home."     This  only  true  of  Jewish  opinion. 

Ver.  37. — Conybeare  and  Howson,  and  Stanley,  remark  that  no  other  statement  of  a 
daughter's  position  was  then  conceived  or  then  practicable  ;  she  was  absolutely  under  her 
father's  power.  See,  for  the  fearful  extent  of  this  power,  Pressense,  Early  Years,  Life  and 
Practice,  p.  363.  As  in  the  case  of  slavery,  or  the  position  of  woman,  Christianity  did  not 
change  the  social  order  ah  extra,  but  ah  intra.  It  attacked  the  sinful  thing,  polygamy 
(ver.  2),  directly,  by  definite  prohibition  ;  it  left  this,  not  intrinsically  sinful,  relation 
between  father  and  daughter  to  be  changed  by  the  working  of  the  principle  of  the  equal 
dignity  of  redeemed  human  nature  in  all  races,  ages,  conditions,  and  in  both  sexes.  He 
speaks  here  of  a  father  who  is  7iot  swayed  by  any  external  opinion,  and  who  has  no  necessity 
arising  from  any  circumstances  of  his  daughter  or  her  betrothed  ;  in  the  then  "  present 
distress  "  he  might  do  the  excellent  thing  in  marrying  her,  but  the  more  excellent  in  keeping 
her  at  home. 

Ver.  39.  In  the  Lord.— Christian  must  only  wed  Christian. 

Ver.  40.  I. — Emphatic.     Perhaps,  g^.d.,  "  As  well  as  your  Cephas  and  the  rest." 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Whole  Chapter, 

[An  indirect  treatment  is  suggested ;  thus  :]     Observe — 

I.  How  purely  Paul  deals  with  such  matters. 
II.  How  wisely. 

III.  How  authoritatively. 

IV.  How  spiritually. 

I.  How  purely. — 1.  His  language  is  euphemistic.  '^  Touch"  {ver.  1);  ^^  have" 
(ver.  2) ;  "  the  debt "  (ver.  3) ;  "  be  together "  (ver.  5).  [So  the  true  reading, 
as,  e.g.,  R.V.]  Yet  only  with  the  euphemism  which  provides  a  seemly  covering 
of  what,  though  in  itself  neutral,  has  been  debased,  and  has  now  no  native, 
unshamed,  simplicity  in  which  it  may  present  itself  to  the  mind.  Nothing  of 
the  wrong  euphemism  which  robes  sin  with  a  vesture  of  innocence  and  even 
poetry  and  beauty,  till  it  flaunts  itself  before  us  in  what  should  only  have  been 
a  necessary  covering  of  its  repulsive  evil.  Paul's  language  rather  indicates  than 
mentions ;  there  is  no  unhealthy  suggestiveness  of  more  than  he  dares  unveil. 
His  thought  touches  as  lightly  as  may  be  ;  his  mind  and  heart  look  with  half- 
averted  gaze.  Model  for  all  who  must,  on  occasion,  speak.  So  the  Lord 
Himself  dealt  with  sin  and  sinners.  "  Some  (poets)  will  tune  their  harps  to 
sensual  pleasures,  and  by  the  enchantment  of  their  genius  well-nigh  commend 
their  unholy  theme  to  the  imagination  of  saints  "  (Edw.  Irving,  Divine  Oracles j 
Oration  I.).  2.  The  topic  must  be  touched,  or  the  Bible  were  not  a  complete 
directory  for  life.  The  young  need  pure,  but  plain,  words.  Every  missionary 
in  heathen  lands  finds  the  value  of  such  definite,  holy,  wise,  authoritative 
pronouncement  upon  what  are  questions  arising  every  day  in  heathen  life, 
or  in  the  nascent  stage  of  a  Christianised  society.  Such  passages  as  these  lifted 
up  the  whole  relation  between  man  and  woman  to  the  Christian  level  in  the 
early  Christian  centuries.  Such  chapters  as  these,  privately  read,  still  keep  the 
conscience  sensitive  and  the  standard  true.  3.  May  be  thankful  that  Bible  has 
such  pages,  so  healthy  and  pure.  The  tendency — not  to  say  the  aim — of  ''natural " 
thinking  and  writing  is  always  to  minimise  the  sinfulness  of  sin.  Happy  for  the 
world  that  one  Book  in  the  world  is  unaffected  by  the  fashions  or  the  passions  of 
an  age,  and  stands  forth  unvaryingly  the  "testimony"  of  God;  an  objective 
standard  by  which  the  perverted  judgment  or  conscience  may  be  regulated,  an 
objectivised  conscience,  to  arouse  or  embolden  the  conscience  within  to  resume  its 
old,  instinctive  testimony,  when  dulled,  or  drugged,  or  hardened  into  silence. 
4.  Paul  and  the  Bible  might  say,  with  Jeremy  Taylor :  "  I  have  used  all  the 
care  I  could,  in  the  following  periods,  that  I  might  neither  be  wanting  to  assist 

100 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vii. 


those  that  need  it,  nor  yet  minister  any  occasion  of  fancy  or  vainer  thoughts  to 
those  who  need  them  not.  If  any  man  will  snatch  the  pure  taper  from  my 
hand,  and  hold  it  to  the  Devil,  he  will  only  burn  his  own  fingers,  but  shall  not 
rob  me  of  the  reward  of  my  care  and  good  intention  ;  since  I  have  taken  heed 
how  to  express  the  following  duties,  and  given  him  caution  how  to  read  them  " 
(Holy  Living,  sect.  iii.).  Paul  speaks  of  them  as  under  the  physician^ s 
necessity,  and  with  the  physician's  abstinence  from  needless  words.  The  Bible 
supplies  abundant  material  for  a  holy  estimate  of  sensual  sin,  even  though 
existent  only  in  thought. 

II.  How  wisely. — 1.  Recognises  that  the  question  arises  out  of  a  necessity  of 
human  nature,  as  God  has  made  it.  All  men  not  alike  (ver.  7)  by  their  very 
God-given  constitution.  To  have  nothing  to  say  on  the  topic  would  have  been 
for  the  Bible  to  make  the  same  mistake  as  the  philosophies,  which  disregarded 
the  matter  as  altogether  beneath  their  exalted  notice.  Satan  (ver.  5),  or  surround- 
ing conditions  (ver.  2),  may  make  the  very  faculty  and  desire,  which  are  per  se 
neutral,  and  have  their  useful  part  to  play,  the  occasion  of  temptation.  God  has 
therefore  ordained  the  marriage  institution  (ver.  9) ;  and,  given  marriage,  there 
follow  reciprocal  obligations  perfectly  legitimate  in  their  fulfilment  (vers.  3-5). 

2.  Yet  the  freedom  and  the  self-mastery,  the  self-sufficient  continence,  of  the 
unmarried  have  their  excellence  (vers.  1,  8,  32,  34),  and  especially  in  times  of 
difficulty  and  possible  persecution  (ver.  26).  [Paul  should  have  full  weight  given 
to  Kev.  xiv.  4  on  the  side  of  his  slight  *'  preference  "  for  the  unmarried  condition.] 

3.  He  sees  that  the  order  of  the  world  is  not  ideal  in  its  simplicity,  and  the 
complex  conditions  of  life  do  not  permit,  in  some  instances,  of  hard-and-fast  rules. 
E.g.  the  very  success  of  the  Gospel,  finding  its  way  into  heathen  (or  Jewish) 
homes,  would  create  a  difficulty  and  add  a  new  element  of  complication  to  a 
Christian  life.  Husband  or  wife  might  become  Christian,  whilst  the  other 
remained  an  obstinate,  perhaps  persecuting,  heathen  (vers.  12-16).  [Where  both 
are  Christians,  and  indeed  as  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  marriage  institu- 
tion, there  are  to  be  no  separations.  The  rule  is  plain.  Divorce,  only  permissible 
in  one  case,  even  then  simply  recognises  a  union  already  broken  by  the  wrong- 
doer. Nothing  else  must  break  it  (vers.  10,  11).]  The  Christian  must  not  move 
in  the  direction  of  separation ;  there  is  already  a  blessing  to  the  other  party,  and 
to  the  children,  in  the  fact  that  one  member  of  the  house  is  Christ's  (ver.  14), 
and — who  can  tell  ? — there  may  arise  a  greater  blessing  yet  (ver.  16).  Still,  the 
Christian  need  not,  without  exception  and  in  all  cases,  resist  separation  forced  on 
from  the  other  side.  It  may  be  best  to  acquiesce  in  the  parting ;  it  may  do  more 
harm  to  seek  to  enforce  the  continued  association  ;  and  God  is  tender  of  His 
children,  and  does  not  desire  what  may  conduce  to  strife  and  misery,  and  almost 
make  impossible  peaceful  service  to  Him  (ver.  15).  4.  Indeed,  the  general  rule, 
applying  not  only  to  such  cases  as  those  particularly  under  discussion,  is  :  "  Make 
as  little  change  as  possible.  Where,  and  what,  the  call  of  God  which  led  you  to 
Christ,  found  you,  there,  and  that,  remain ;  provided  always  that  (as,  e.g.,  with  the 
now  neutral  circumcision)  there  is  no  wrong  or  right  involved."  "  Seek  to  abide 
therein  with  God.  '  Do  all  things  as  unto  God,  and  as  in  His  immediate  presence ' 
(Bengel)  (vers.  17-24).  Circumcision  is  now  become  a  mere  piece  of  surgery; 
never  mind  it,  either  way.  As  to  slavery;  be  not  restlessly  anxious  for  freedom 
(ver.  21);  above  all,  do  not,  voluntarily,  become  any  man's  slave  (ver.  23) ;  it 
will  be  a  harder  thing  there  than  anywhere  to  be  the  freeman  of  Christ  (ver.  22). 
You  are  not  to  choose  to  give  the  slave's  absolute  subjection  of  your  life,  your 
will,  your  self,  to  any  but  to  Christ ;  to  Him  you  ought  to  give  it ;  you  are  the 
bondservant  of  Jesus  Christ  (ver.  22 ;  cf.  Paul's  frequent  description  of  himself  in 
these  terms).  And  if  He  open  the  door  for  freedom,  be  free,  the  better  to  serve 
Him."    5.  Shall  the  unmarried  "  make  no  change  "  ?   "  There  is  no  unvarying  rule. 

M  161 


CHAP.  VII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    /.    CORINTHIANS. 


The  Lord  has  given  none.  I  must  not  create  difliculties  for  any  of  you  by  laying 
down  one  myself  (vers.  25,  28).  Case  by  case,  each  must  be  dealt  with  by  itself. 
Though  I  do  judge  that,  for  the  piesent,  as  things  are,  and  are  likely  to  be,  the 
fewer  new  obligations  man  or  woman  assumes  the  better  (ver.  26)."  [And  so,  in 
effect,  vers.  32-35.]  6.  Shall  a  father  consent  to,  and  even  promote,  or  shall  he 
refuse,  the  marriage  of  his  daughters  ?  Given,  as  before,  that  marriage  is  not 
per  se  sinful,  but  recognised  and  ordained  by  God;  given  also  that,  in  the  particular 
instance,  there  is  no  sin, — (e.g.  given  that  both  parties  are  "  in  the  Lord"  (ver.  39) 
— this  is  obligatory  ;  to  disregard  this  were  sin), — let  him  give  consent,  if  there  be 
any  apparent  desirableness  or  necessity  in  it.  He  may  promote  the  marriage; 
the  course  is  quite  clear.  Still,  if  he  do  not  desiie  it,  nor  the  daughter  herself 
desire  and  require  it,  he  is  at  liberty  to  say  that  she  must  remain  at  home  with 
him.  "  Make  no  change,"  Paul  said ;  but  he  makes  no  absolute  rule  ;  only  saying 
that,  as  things  are,  she  is  better  free  (vers.  36-38).  7.  Lastly,  the  bond 
between  husband  and  wife  is  lifelong,  but  not  longer.  Death  gives  liberty  for 
remarriage,  subject  always  to  this — "  In  the  Lord  "  (ver.  39).  8.  A  perfect  code  all 
this  for  the  regulation  of  home  and  family  life,  of  marital  and  parental  authority. 
Removed,  on  one  hand,  from  undue  freedom,  such  as  might  become  licence ;  on 
the  other  from  unnatural,  and  perhaps  impracticable,  restriction.  Absolute  veto, 
in  any  direction  where  the  express  command  of  Christ  or  the  original  law  of 
marriage  plants  a  barrier.  Freedom,  where  no  considerations  of  moral  wrong 
intervene ;  but  limited  by  considerations  of  temporary  fitness  or  of  general 
expediency,  variable,  modifiable,  dispensable,  from  age  to  age,  from  case  to  case. 
The  inviolable,  indissoluble,  sacredness  of  the  marriage  bond  is  safeguarded  ;  the 
mere  comfort  (vers.  3,  9,  15,  39)  of  the  parties,  or  of  one  of  them,  is  not  deemed 
unworthy  of  consideration.  [The  possible  wider  application  of  these  principles 
to  similar  cases  is  suggested  by  their  employment  in  vers.  17,  24.]  [They  not 
only  apply  in  heathen  lands  reached  by  Christian  missions  to-day,  but  have 
analogues  at  home.  E.g.  wife  with  drunkard  or  adulterous  husband,  inquiring 
her  duty  in  regard  to  him ;  a  wife  [or  son]  converted  in,  and  bound  to  reside  with 
husband  [or  father]  at,  low  public-house ;  man  converted  in  some,  not  exactly 
sinful,  but  exceedingly  difficult,  position  for  maintaining  a  Christian  walk.] 

III.  How  authoritatively. — 1.  Any  word  of  Christ  is  absolute  legislation  for 
His  Church  (ver.  10).  2.  Paul  also  can,  on  occasion,  claim  that  his  own  pro- 
nouncements are  in  effect  Christ's,  and  carry  Christ's  authority  with  them 
(2  Cor.  xiii.  3,  xiv.  37).  3.  If  here  he  gives  "  permissions,"  not  "  injunctions," 
the  permissions  are  authoritative  (vers.  25,  40).  The  alternation,  "  oscillation  " 
— not  between  "yes"  and  "no"(cf.  2  Cor.  i.  18),  but  between  ''good"  and 
"  better,"  between  counsel  in  a  negative  sense  and  consent  in  an  opposite 
direction — do  not  indicate  any  misgiving  as  to  his  power  to  speak,  or  as  to  his 
own  soundness  of  judgment.  The  absence  of  positiveness  is  itself,  in  these  cases, 
sound  judgment.  The  nature  of  the  case  forbids  anything  further.  Even  the 
Lord  would  have  said,  would  say,  no  more,  in  cases  where  Paul  does  not ;  Paul 
will  go  no  further  than  his  Lord  has  done  or  would  do  (ver.  25).  4.  The  contrast 
between  Paul  and  Christ  is  only  as  between  supplementary  and  earlier-given 
dicta,  between  complementary  and  primary,  but  both  equally  authentative. 
[The  relation  of  Paul  to  Christ  in  this  chapter  is  more  nearly  analogous  to  that 
of  the  prophets  to  the  Law  of  Sinai.  The  one  leading,  fundamental.  Divine 
utterance  having  been  once  given,  the  prophets  and  the  Apostle  deal  with  the 
applications  of  it  to  the  ramifying,  multiplying,  cases  which  are  ever  arising ; 
but  not  with  less  Divine  authority  of  utterance.] 

IV.  How  spiritually. — Next  to  this,  "  Christ  says  so,"  which  is  the  final  appeal, 
thti  test  is  the  bearing  of  the  matter  upon  the  religious  life  of  the  individual. 
1.  Even  the  one  duty  and  mutual  obligation  which  differentiates  marriage  from 

162 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vii. 


all  other  unions  between  man  and  woman,  may,  with  consent,  be  subordinated 
to  a  higher  duty  :  from  time  to  time  to  have  special  seasons  for  prayer,  and  the 
cultivation  of  the  spiritual  life  (ver.  5).  When  its  fulfilment  is  resumed,  it  is  as 
a  safeguaid  for  the  spiritual  life  against  fleshly,  devilish,  temptation.  2.  The 
inconvenience,  and  perhaps  opposition  and  suffering,  which  a  Christian  may 
suffer  from-  a  heathen  partner  are  not  indeed  to  be  borne  as  if  of  unalterable 
obligation.  "  Peace  "  may  sometimes  best  be  secured  by  acquiescence  in  the 
departure  of  the  heathen  one  (ver.  15).  Yet  very  much  should  be  borne,  very 
long  and  patiently,  for  the  sake  of  the  blessed  effect  upon  the  position,  and 
perhaps  hereafter  on  the  heart,  of  the  heathen  one  (vers.  14,  16).  "  What 
if  that  one  may  be  saved  ?  "  3.  Circumcision,  uncircumcision  ;  slavery,  freedom, — 
the  Lord's  apportionment  was  as  truly  in  them  all  as  it  was  in  the  "  call "  (ver.  17). 
Keeping  the  commandments  is  "the  whole  of  man  "  (Eccles.  xii.  13)>;  the  rest  is 
accident  (ver.  19).  Tl  e  slave  has  a  freedom,  the  freeman  a  bondage,  to  Christ, 
which  should  not  be  forgotten  (ver.  22).  Let  him  bear  himself  as  a  man  "  bought 
with  a  price"  and  in  any,  every,  station  and  condition  as  having  God  with  him 
for  his  aid  and  defence  (ver.  24).  [4.  The  outburst  of  ver.  29  sqq.  is  dealt  with 
separately.]  5.  On  all  grounds  it  is  worth  something  to  be  "  without  carefulness" 
— undue,  distracting,  anxiety.  But  it  is  chiefly  worth,  as  the  leisure  of  mind 
and  heart  are  leisure  for  Christ  and  His  service  (vers.  32,  34).  A  single  life  finds 
its  glory  and  its  best  justification  in  becoming  a  consecrated  leisure  for  Him,  with 
the  opportunity,  Mary-like,  of  oftener  sitting  at  His  feet,  "  attending  upon  the 
Lord  Christ  (ver.  35)  without"  Martha's  '''' distraction^  6.  The  father  who 
marries  his  daughter  to  a  Christian  man  "  sinneth  not"  for  the  highest 
question  is  not  one  of  prudence,  but  of  sin.  7.  And  the  one  primary,  all- 
embracing,  all-qualifying  condition  of  any  liberty  of  action  for  those  who  are 
Christ's  is  "  Oiily  in  the  Loo^d.'^  The  member  of  the  Body  must  not  go  beyond 
the  Body  for  its  fellowships.  Everything  is  thus  judged  in  the  light  of  its  bearing 
upon  the  life  in  Christ.  Next  to  the  fundamental  wrong,  which  bars  anything, 
comes  Christian  expediency,  and  this  must  mainly  be  estimated  by  those  who  are 
*'  in  Christ,'^  and  who  judge  by  His  Spirit's  grace  of  how  their  life  in  Him  will  be 
afiected. 

Whole  chapter  may  also  be  organised  homiletically  thus,  as — 
A  Christian  Directory  of  Relative  Duties  in  Household  Life. — A  Christian  home 
begins  with  marriage.     First  therefore  come  : 

I.  Husband  and  wife. — Celibacy  has  its  advantages  in  its  freedom  from 
responsibility  (ver.  32  sqq.),  its  opportunity  for  choosing  one's  place  and  one's 
work  for  God,  with  no  obligatory  reference  to  any  will  but  His.  [Except  that 
the  Christian  daughter  will  pay  right  deference  to  her  father's  judgment  and 
command  (vers.  36-38)].  Where  it  does  not  occasion  difficulty  and  become  a 
point  of  assault  for  the  Evil  One,  a  man  or  woman  may  choose  it,  if  they  will. 
Yet  married  life  is  as  honourable  a  condition.  The  foundations  of  a  home  may 
be  laid  with  every  hope  of  the  blessing  of  God.  It  is  a  ^^  doctrine  of  devils  "  to 
say  otherwise  (1  Tim.  iv.  3).  It  is  the  safest  condition  for  some  natures  and 
physical  temperaments.  It  has  its  own  special  helps  and  endearments.  It  is 
traced  on  the  lines  of  a  higher,  closer,  mystical  union.  "  One  flesh"  may  be  all ; 
or  the  Christian  man  and  wife  may  make  this  lead  them  up  to  "  one  spirit  with 
Christ''  (vi.  17).  See  them  ''heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life"  (1  Pet.  iii.  7), 
joint-heirs  in  the  same  ""  great  expectations,"  with  a  parallel  share  in  the 
reversionary  estate,  Life.  See  them  kneeling  together,  night  and  morning, 
"  giving  themselves  to  prayer."  Or  with  special,  consentaneous,  self-denial, 
making  way  for  some  longer,  more  emphatic  time  of  joint  waiting  upon  God 
(ver.  5).      Neither  wronging  the  other  ;  each   belonging  wholly  to  the  other ; 

163 


CHAP.  VII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


gladly  giving  all  that  may  help  the  other  to  all  purity  and  holiness  of  thought 
and  life.  And  over  all  the  union  there  is  inscribed  the  Lord's  own  law,  **  No 
separation."  They  were  joined  for  absolute,  entire,  exclusive,  lifelong,  property 
in  each  other  (ver.  10).  If  unhappily  some  fatal  disagreement  should  arise,  or 
even  the  wrong-doing  of  the  husband  should  seem  to  compel  the  wife  to  quit  her 
husband's  roof,  still  she  belongs  to  him.  She  may  not  give  herself  to  another 
whilst  he  lives.  [And  if  his  death  release  her,  let  her  only  look  at  a  Christian 
husband  again  (ver.  39).]  Let  her  heart  be  open  to  a  reconciliation  and  to  a 
return,  if  a  repentant  man  desire  it  (ver.  11).    Suppose  God  sends 

II.  Children,  then  these  are  ''  holy."  They  are  not  the  Devil's  children,  not 
nobody's  [not  Jewish,  nor  Mahometan,  nor  heathen]  ;  from  their  very  coming 
into  a  home  which  belongs  to  Christ,  they  belong  to  Him.  Born  of  a  redeemed 
human  stock,  every  child  born  into  a  home  enters  it  a  redeemed  child.  Paul 
himself  baptized  (at  Philippi,  and  Corinth,  certainly)  "  households!^  and — 
whether  or  not  these  happened  to  include  very  young  children  or  infants 
matters  little — his  act  recognised  that  the  baptism  and  faith  of  the  responsible 
head  of  the  house  carried  with  it  the  principle  of  the  baptism  of  the  house. 
Father,  or  even  mother,  becoming  converted,  the  whole  household  becomes  one 
on  which  Christ  has  a  larger  claim.  It  is  *'  holiness  to  the  Lord  "  Christ,  from 
that  moment.  If  the  father  or  the  mother  stand  alone,  without  sympathy  or 
support,  perhaps  indeed  distinctly  persecuted,  as  a  Christian,  that  one  need  not 
despond,  nor  hastily  think  of  quitting  the  home.  The  presence  of  the  one 
Christian  sanctifies  the  children,  and  even  the  opposing  partner.  And  if  so  in  a 
divided  home,  how  much  more  are  the  children  "  holy  "  where  both  parents  are 
agreed,  and  are  one  in  Christ  !  They  may,  with  abundant  confidence — they  will, 
with  no  less  assurance  than  if,  as  proselytes,  they  had  even  entered  into  the 
Jewish  fold — bring  them  to  that  baptism  which,  at  its  lowest  of  significance, 
includes  them  all  in  the  Christian  community,  that  Christian  "  Church  "  whose 
census  man  can  take.  With  no  less  boldness  than  did  a  Jewish  father,  they 
will  claim  for  their  "  holy "  children,  under  the  sign  and  seal  of  the  Grace 
itself,  that  Holy  Spirit  who  is  the  gift  and  grace  and  privilege  of  the  Christian 
form  of  the  "  covenant  before  confirmed  of  God  in  Christ,"  which  runs  on  in 
unbroken  continuity  from  the  day  of  God's  *'  promise  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  " 
(Gal.  iii.  14-18).  Nor  will  that  Lord  refuse  them  Who  once  and  again  made  the 
child's  spirit  of  docility  and  of  simple,  direct  inclination  to  believe,  the  model  of 
the  spirit  which  alone  can  find  its  way  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  or  be  greatest 
when  it  is  in  (Matt,  xviii.  3,  4).  And  with  how  many  prayers,  and  with  what 
thankfulness,  will  these  Christian  ones  seek  to  train  and  lead  these,  relatively^ 
"  holy  "  children  to  appreciate  and  seek  a  real  holiness,  by  a  personal  choice  of, 
and  trust  in,  and  life  for,  Christ  !  If  that  mother,  busy  within  her  home,  not 
able  to  do  outside  work  for  Christ,  only  helps  a  Christian  husband  and  Christian 
children  to  be  holy,  she  may  lie  down  to  die  feeling  that  she  has  not  been  an 
inconsiderable  worker  for  Christ  and  His  Church. 

III.  When  the  children  are  old  enough  to  be  married,  what  then?— 1.  That 
Christian  father  is  not  to  put  frivolous,  selfish,  tyrannous  obstacles  in  the  way 
of  his  children's  marriage.  If  the  Lord  have  found  for  the  maiden  daughter 
a  Christian  man  to  be  her  mate,  the  father  should  not  lightly  say  they  must 
not  marry.  He  is  to  remember  that  all  the  same  reasons  which  made  it 
better,  safer,  holier,  helpful,  needful  (ver.  36),  for  himself  and  her  mother  to 
marry,  may  point  to  the  right  of  the  girl's  happy,  holy  union  too,  for  her  sake 
and  her  suitor's.  Fulfil  God's  order  once  again  and  lay  the  foundation  of  another 
Christian  home  :  "  let  them  marry '^  2.  He  needs  be  swayed  by  no  undue  regard 
for  outside  opinion.  If  he  think  indeed  that  there  is  anything  in  it  worth  his 
regard,  and  that  it  were  an  unhandsome  thing  to  compel  girl  and  suitor  to  wait 

164 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,    chap.  VII. 


and  wait,  whilst  her  best  life  is  slipping  away,  let  him  follow  his  judgment,  and 
further  their  marriage  [with  dowry  and  outfit  perhaps,  but  certainly]  with  his 
consent  and  blessing  (ver.  22).  3.  It  may  be  that  she  has  not  any  strong  reason 
or  claim  upon  her  to  leave  his  side ;  a  widower  father  then  may  keep  his  one 
child  to  be  his  comfort.  Two  parents  grown  old  may  lovingly  require  her 
attendance  and  the  ministrations  of  love  and  duty,  so  it  be  not  with  tyrannous  and 
unfair  control  over  her  liberty,  but  with  her  free  consent.  "  He  may  keep  his 
virgin  "  daughter  (ver.  23)  till  she  close  his  eyes  in  death.  If  like  Lydia's  or  the 
gaoler's  or  Philemon's,  the  home  has  its  servants,  or  even  its  slaves,  then  as  to 

IV.  The  servant  in  the  house. — 1.  The  foundation  of  all  is  that  the  Lord 
put  him  or  found  him  in  a  slave's  condition.  That  is  his  post ;  there  he  must 
stay  until  the  Commander  relieves  him.  2.  The  Gospel  and  its  Lord,  the  God 
who  is  its  Author,  does  not  forget  him,  has  indeed  deigned  to  ennoble  him,  lifting 
him  up  to  the  honour  of  being  a  freeman  in  the  citizenship  of  Christ's  kingdom. 
[The  slave  might  hold  office  in  the  Church.]  He  is  a  man ;  a  man  for  whom 
Christ  died.  The  same  redeemed  human  nature  in  him  as  in  his  master,  saves 
him  from  any  ignoble  condition,  and  gives  him  rights  never  conceded  before  to 
slaves.  He  need  not  therefore  fear  but  that  even  as  a  slave  he  shall  have  God 
continually  near  him.  3.  He  goes  about  his  work  cheerful,  content,  with  an 
eye  in  every  duty  to  his  Master  Christ.  Servility,  slavish  fear,  unlawful  sub- 
mission— these  are  chased  out  of  his  life  ;  the  servility  is  out  of  his  heart. 
4.  As  belonging  to  Christ  he  is  not  to  be  indolent,  untruthful,  impure,  a  centre 
of  intrigue  and  moral  corruption,  as  slaves  proverbially  were  in  antiquity.  With 
new  rights,  owed  to  Christ,  come  new  responsibilities  to  Him,  and  the  slave  may 
be,  should  be,  holy,  even  in  an  unholy  household.  And  how  transformed  will 
the  home  life  be  in  the  one  fact  that  master,  mistress,  children,  servants,  all  are 
equally  in  Christ,  and  are  only  apportioned  to  different  stations  by  Him,  for 
His  glory  and  their  mutual  help  ! 

SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 

Ver.   14.    ^^  Sanctified   hy   the  wife;  servant  or  clerk  ?     How  much  blessing 

sanctified    hy   the  hushand.^^  —  Query,  on  "  unholy  "  children  because  of  their 

wife  named  first   here  (not  above  in  connection     with     a     godly,    praying 

vers.    12,    13)   as   the   case  of  greater  parent?     How   many  a  safe  journey 

hardship  for  the  one  Christian,  more  or  voyage  because  of  the  presence  of 

affecting  to  consider,  more  hopeful  for  one  of  God's  "  peculiar  "  ones  amongst 

the  conversion  of   the    other  ?      Wife  the  company  ?      2.  The  woild  blessed 

will    sooner    convert    husband,    than  for    Christ's    sake,    though     ignorant 

husband  wife?  of    Him,    or   rejecting    Him.     3.  The 

I.  Great   principle   of    God's   deal-  Christian   Church  —  this  one  isolated 

ings.  —  1.    Noah's    sons    saved    with,  Christian  —  "W?/"    because    of    the 

and  for   sake    of,    their   father.       Lot  connection  with  Christ, 

blessed     for    Abraham's    sake    (Gen.  II.  Natural  to  expect  that  the  one 

xix.   29) ;    Lot's    wife  and   daughters  Christian   will   lead  the   rest   into  a 

brought   out   for  their  father's  sake;  real,  saving,  holy  relation   to  Christ. 

Potiphar's   house  blessed   for  Joseph's  — 1.  By  example.     Great  responsibility 

sake  (Gen.  xxxix.  5) ;  the  crew  of  the  to  be  the  first  Christian  in  a  family. 

Castor  and  Pollux  all  saved  for  Paul's  or   family    circle  ;    great    grace    given 

sake  (Acts  xxvii.   4)  —  all    "  given  to  to    meet  it.     Did    the    conversion    of 

Aim."      How    much    blessing    on    an  Andronicus  and  Junias  (Eom.  xvi.  7), 

ungodly  man's  house  or  business  is  ac-  Paul's  "  kinsmen^  in  Christ  before  him" 

counted  for  by  the  presence  and  prayers  prove  the  first  ^^  prick  "  of   the  goad 

of  the  godly  wife,  or  even   the  godly  which  he   really  felt  ?     "  Who  is  thi* 

165 


CHAP.  VII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Nazarene — what  is  there  in  his  'religion' 
— ^that  even  our  own  family  cannot  be 
kept  pure  from  the  taint  of  heresy  ?  " 
The  one  light  shining  amidst  the  dark- 
ness reveals  the  darkness  to  itself,  and 
convicts  it  (Eph.  v.  13) ;  the  first  step 
towards  its  rtmoval.  "  Believe,  .  .  . 
thou  shall  he  saved,  and  thy  house " 
(Actsxvi.  31);  not  indeed  without  their 
own  repentance  and  faith,  but  yet  the 
more  probably,  now  that  the  head  of 
the  house  has  believed.  2.  By  praying. 
3.  By  direct  effort.  Part  of  the  pur- 
pose of  the  family  institution,  that  by 
the  training  of  Christian  parents  a 
succession  of  godly  offspring  may  be 
secured.  Large  principle  in  Luke 
xxii.  31,  32.  Satan  desired  all 
(  "  you  "  )  ;  Christ  prayed  for  one, 
Peter  ("  thee ") ;  and  saved  the  rest 
mediately,  though  Peter.  ("  When 
thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy 
brethren.")  God  saves  one  in  a  house, 
a  circle,  not  that  that  one  may  simply 
concentrate  thought  and  effort  on 
self-preservation,  self-cultivation,  but 
that,  through  that  one,  appeal,  con- 
version, holiness,  may  come  to  the  rest. 

Yer.  19.  The  Indifference  of  Circum- 
cision and  Uncircumcision. 

1.  "  Circumcision,  uncircumcision — 
nothing."  (Connect  with  Gal.  v.  6, 
vi.  15.)  1.  "These  [three  passages] 
describe  the  same  threefold  aspect  of 
Christianity  with  regard  to  man,  which, 
in  speaking  of  God,  is  described  under 
the  names  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Spirit.  In  this  passage  .  .  .  man 
is  viewed  chiefly  in  his  relation  to  the 
natural  order  of  the  world.  ...  In 
the  two  ...  in  the  .  .  .  Galatians, 
the  more  distinct  reference  to  faith 
in  Christ,  and  to  the  new  creation 
wrought  by  His  Spirit,  is  brought 
out."  (Stanley,  in  loco.)  2.  (1  Cor. 
vii.  19.)  Circumcision  or  Uncircum- 
cision nothing  for  a  Christian  to  he 
distressed  ahout  or  hindered  hy.  They 
do  not  prejudice  his  status  before  God  ; 
such  external  accidents  cannot  hinder 
living  for  God.  (Gal.  v.  6.)  Circum- 
cision [or  Uncircumcision]  nothing  for 
him  to  trust  to  as  a  sinner  for  accept- 

166 


ance  with  God.  Faith  the  one  con- 
dition, if  evidenced  as  living,  saving 
faith  by  its  work  in  love  to  God  and 
to  man.  (Gal.  vi.  15.)  Circumcision  or 
Uncircumcision  nothing  for  Churches  to 
wrangle  about,  to  compete  in  propa- 
gating, to  press  upon  their  members 
as  necessities  of  salvation.  Can  they 
show,  do  their  work  and  teaching 
produce,  or  help  and  train,  ^^new 
creatures"  in  Christ  Jesus?  That  is 
the  aim  ;  all  else  subsidiary  ;  worthless, 
or  even  mischievous,  unless  it  con- 
tributes to  that.  JSTothing  !  Then 
why  insist  upon  it  ?  Nothing  !  Then 
why  quarrel  over  it?  3.  Then,  don't 
tell  me  what  are  a  man's  accidents  of 
birth  or  station ;  does  he  there  walk 
in  all  practical  commandment-keeping? 
He  may  find  grace  to  do  it.  The  level 
of  the  supply  of  grace  will  rise  and  fall 
as  the  difiiculty  or  disadvantage  does. 
Don't  tell  me — don't  let  a  man  tell  him- 
self— that  he  has  been  baptized  ;  that 
he  belongs  to  a  covenant.  Christian 
stock.  Is  he  a  believer,  whose  faith  is 
plainly  rooted  in,  and  is  renewing,  his 
heart  ?  Don't  tell  me  how  a  Church 
is  winning  adherents  to  its  ceremonial, 
its  creed,  or  confession ;  don't  let  it,  on 
the  other  hand,  boast  how  it  is  getting 
rid  of  ritual  or  dogma ;  don't  let  the 
member  boast  of  his  orthodoxy,  or'  of 
his  liberalism.  Does  this  mean  a  mem- 
bership of  renewed  men  and  women  ? 
That  only  is  vital.     Yet — 

II.  Circumcision,  uncircumcision, 
may  come  to  be  something.  —  1. 
Controversy  made  it  such  to  Paul, 
(1)  He  circumcised  Timothy,  to  give 
him  greater  freedom  of  access  to 
Jewish  work  (Acts  xvi.  3),  and  this 
even  after  (xv.  1)  the  circumcision  con- 
troversy had  begun.  Had  to  him 
become  merely  "  concision  "  (Phil 
iii.  2),  a  mere  piece  of  surgery.  Old 
meaning  had  evaporated,  leaving  as 
residuum  a  mere  cutting  of  flesh.  If 
it  might  facilitate  work  of  Christ 
amongst  Jews,  it  was  an  innocent, 
expedient  concession  to  prejudice  and 
training.  (2)  He  refused  to  circum- 
cise Titus  (Gal.  ii.  3),  [or,  at  the  least, 
if  he  were  circumcised,  made  it  clear 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vii. 


that  it  was  not   by    "  compulsion "  or 
"  by  subjection  "].     Others  were  making 
circumcision  a  co-ordinate,  or  supple- 
mentary,   ground    of    salvation,    in    a 
conjunction    with    faith    which    really 
involved  disloyalty  to  Christ,  as  alone 
and  in    Himself   a   sufficient   Saviour. 
[So    baptism     at     the    hands    of    an 
episcopally   ordained    minister    in   an 
exclusive     line     of     succession     may 
in  some    circumstances   not  be  worth 
a  word  of  controversy,  but  in  others 
may     become     a      matter     involving 
deepest    issues,   and     requiring    most 
thorough,     strenuous    discussion.      So 
"  ritual "  may  be   merely  question  of 
the  style  and  taste  of  the  conduct  of 
public  worship ;    or  may  become  full 
of  significance  as  to  the  priesthood  of 
Christ,  the  sufficiency  of  the  sacrifice 
of  Calvary,  the  ground  and  means  of 
the   regenerate    life  ;    deserving   then 
most  earnest  discussion.      So  a  creed 
may    become    a    test     of    loyalty    to 
Christ      and     to     Truth.]        2.     God 
had     made      circumcision     m>uch     to 
His  people. — The    symbol   of    a    com- 
plete  sanctification   of    human   life — 
even    bodily,    animal    (Deut.    x.     16, 
XXX.  6).     The  seal  between  Him  and 
them  of  a  blessing  not  only  promised 
to  them,   but    thus  pledged   to  them. 
[As   baptism   may  in  parents  and  in 
children  help  faith  to  claim  what  God 
has  not  only  promised,  but  covenanted 
to   give — Christ    and   the   Spirit.]    3. 
Should  be   remembered   how  the   im- 
portance of    such  things   varies    with 
God's  appointment  or  repeal,  with  the 
knowledge  or  the  needs  of  a  Church, 
an   age,  a   generation,    an  individual. 
Value  relative,  not  absolute. 

Ver.  21.  *'  Use  it  rather. ^^ — It  is  sur- 
prisingly ambiguous  to  us.  [Was  it 
also  so  to  Paul  ?  Did  he  mean  it  to 
read  ambiguously,  lest  the  letter  should 
fall  into  hands  of  heathen  masters, 
and  cause  trouble  to  Christian  slaves  ? 
(As  some  assume  the  number  666 
in  Rev.  xiii.  18  to  be  a  cipher,  in- 
telligible to  Christians  through  orally 
given  and  transmitted  explanation, 
but,   prudently,   left   unintelligible   to 


any  chance  heathen  reader.)  Would 
this  be  "  the  simplicity  which  is  in 
Christ''^  (2  Cor.  xi.  3.)]  Like  ''so  to 
be "  (in  ver.  26),  can  be  read  in  more 
than  one  way  ;  like  some  well-known 
oracles  of  Delphi  (to  Croesus  and  others). 
Said  to  be  unnatural,  cruel,  to  counsel 
a  slave  to  refuse  liberty  if  ofiered. 
Probably  so ;  and  this  is  then  parallel 
to  the  permission  given  to  a  Christian 
wife  to  accept  her  "  freedom  "  from  a 
determined,  troublesome,  heathen 
husband,  who  himself  leaves  her,  with- 
out provocation  on  her  part,  except 
that  she  is  Christian.  Spirit  of  para- 
graph (vers.  17-24)  may  be  summed 
up  thus  : — 

I.  Do  not  force  change ;  do  not  be 
anxiously  concerned  to  make  a  change  ; 
where  "  the  call  "  found  a  man,  "  there 
let  him  walk."  "  Care  not."  1.  Very 
natural  to  Christians  whose  providen- 
tial (ver.  17)  place  presents  difficulties 
in  being  godly,  to  wish  themselves 
somewhere  else.  The  saint-slaves  in 
Caesar's  household  (Phil.  iv.  22) 
naturally  look  wistfully,  in  some  day  of 
special  hardship,  toward  the  position 
of  the  poorest  Koman  free  citizen  in 
the  Church.  A  modern  Obadiah — 
finding  every  day  in  some  Ahab's  house, 
with  a  Jezebel  for  a  mistress,  that  he 
walks  constantly  as  between  red-hot 
ploughshares,  every  step  an  ordeal  and 
a  peril — wishes  he  were  something 
else  than  Ahab's  steward.  2.  Feeling 
shapes  itself,  "  Ah,  now  !  if  I  were  only 
in  So-and-so's  position"  ;  or,  "If  I  had 
only  So-and-so's  husband  "  ;  or,  "  If, 
instead  of  what  I  am,  I  could  only  be 
such-and-such  a  thing  ; — then  I  would 
serve  Christ !  If  I  only  had  that  man's 
opportunities,  would  I  not  be  a  saint 
and  a  worker  !  "  And  a  step  farther 
is  common,  and  easy  to  take :  to 
assume  that  no  thorough -going  service, 
no  fulness  of  happy  Christian  life,  is 
possible  in  our  actual  providential 
position,  and  to  give  up  effort  and 
hope,  acquiescing  in  being  an  average, 
a  minimum,  Christian ;  just  holding 
on ;  not  quite  giving  up  Christ,  but 
no  more.  And  then  a  step  farther  : 
to    be    fretful    under    and    rebellious 

167 


CHAP.  VII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


against  the  appointment  of  the  Father, 
Who  guided  us  to  the  position,  or  con- 
verted us  in  it,  and  has  not  yet  seen 
fit  to  open  a  way  out.  3.  No.  First, 
is  there  any  sin  in  remaining  in  the 
present  position  ?  If  there  is,  then  duty 
is  plain  :  at  all  costs  get  out  of  it.  But 
if  not, — as  seems  likely  from  the  fact 
that  God  does  not  open  a  way  out, — 
until  He  does,  that  is  a  man's  place,  as 
before  God.  Christ,  the  Lord  of  his 
life,  wants  him  there  for  the  present — 
there  and  nowhere  else.  To  be  the 
light  there,  the  salt,  the  leaven.  For 
the  testing,  the  moral  probation, 
perhaps  the  salvation,  of  some  set  over 
him,  or  in  daily  association  with  him. 
Where  He  puts  a  man,  converts  him, 
keeps  him,  there  it  is  possible  to  live 
near  to  God  (ver.  24),  and  to  exemplify 
and  honour  the  Christian  profession. 
[Said  a  wise  mother  to  her  boy,  smitten 
with  some  boyish  longing  to  be  some- 
thing (other  than  his  apprenticed 
trade)  which  had  smitten  his  fancy, 
and  who  urged,  "  I  shall  never  do  any 

good  at  ;  if  I  were  only  put  to 

,  then  I  should  do  well.'     "  Thou 


has  nothing  to  do  but  to  be  what  thou 
is."— Known  to  H.  J.  F.]  If  it  be 
only  difficulty,  not  sin,  that  is  involved, 
there  is  no  insuperable  barrier  to  being 
very  holy  under  any  conditions.  Con- 
version in  them,  no  providential  way 
out  of  them  offering  itself,  set  up  fair 
presumption  that  God  says,  "  Stay  there 
as  My  witness.  I  am  with  thee  always. 
Abide  there  with  Me."  The  slave,  the 
circumcised  man,  the  uncircumcised 
man,  the  Christian  wife  of  a  heathen 
husband,  can  glorify,  and  enjoy,  God 
where  they  are. 

II.  Accept  thankfully  God's  provi- 
dential relief.—"  Use  it."  1.  The 
moment  He  sees  that  the  sevenfold 
heat  of  the  furnace  can,  and  need,  no 
longer  be  borne.  He  will,  depend  upon 
it,  open  the  door.  Then  Shadrach, 
Meshach,  Abed-nego,  should  "  use " 
their  opportunity.  Their  work  for  God 
in  the  furnace  is  done ;  now  they  are 
called  to  continue  their  work  for  Him 
outside.  Paul  had  "  learned  " —  he  wrote 
from  a  Roman    dungeon — "in  what- 

168 


ever  state  therewith" — with  dungeon 
and  daily  peril  from  Nero's  capricious, 
cruel  "  justice  " — "  to  be  content " 
(Phil.  iv.  11).  Yet  when  the  prison 
doors  were  opened,  there  would  have 
been  no  "  contentment "  in  not  coming 
out  to  the  wider  field,  larger  oppor- 
tunities, greater  comfort,  outside. 
2.  W^hilst  under  the  pressure  of  the 
difficulty,  nothing  forbids  earnest, 
childlike,  submissive  prayer  that  a  way 
out  may,  if  it  please  God,  be  found  or 
shown ;  especially  if  the  difficulty  verge 
upon  sinful  conditions,  and  an  impos- 
sibility of  retaining  the  favour  of  God 
or  being  holy. 

III.  The  relief,  the  release,  is  to  be 
used,  not  for  our  own  comfort,  but  for 
Christ. — The  free  man,  or  the  liberated, 
is  not  his  own  master.  He  belongs  to 
Christ  (ver.  22).  His  liberty  gives  the 
opportunity  of  a  self-devotion  to  Christ, 
unfettered  by  conditions  or  the  rule  of 
another.  If  God  take  off*  the  pressure 
from  the  Christian  employe,  or  wife ; 
if  His  providence  "  set  the  feet  in  a 
large  place  "  after  long  "  straitness  "  ; 
grace  will  be  needed  to  keep  in  the  new 
conditions  as  really  as  in  the  old.  The 
change  means  that  He  desires  him  to 
go  on  with  his  work  for  Christ  some- 
where else,  which  He  chooses  shall  be 
more  favourable.  [Same  principle  as 
in  the  case  of  the  freedom  of  the 
unmarried.  Miss  Havergal  is  a  very 
ready-tohand  illustration  of  the  con- 
secrated leisure  of  an  unmarried  life 
(ver.  34).]  With  none  of  the  spirit  of 
bondage,  he  must  use  his  new  position 
— perhaps  its  wealth  after  poverty — 
with  as  strict  a  sense  of  obligation  to 
his  Master,  as  a  slave  is  forced  to 
recognise  towards  his.  Every  added 
privilege — liberty  from  persecution, 
from  care,  from  a  trying  association, 
from  an  unhappy  marriage, — all  is  so 
much  the  more  facility  for  serving  the 
Lord  Christ.  "  Use  it  rather"  but  for 
Christ  in  all  things. 

IV.  Be  careful  not  to  create  bond- 
age or  difficulty  for  oneself. — The  free 
man  is  not  voluntarily  to  become  the 
slave  of  man  [whether  literally,  or  in ' 
a  sense  perhaps  obliquely  glancing  at 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vii. 


the  Corinthian  subjection  to  their  party  French  captured  Madrid  in  1808,  and 
leaders]  (ver.  23).  In  self-created,  overhauled  the  Palace  of  the  Inquisi- 
self-incurred,  difficulty  or  trial,  there  tion.  Its  walls  iron  plates,  removable ; 
is  still  blessing  and  help,  indeed;  God  each  night  one  taken  out,  and  the 
never  takes  the  attitude  :  "  There,  I  opening  closed  up,  till  at  last  three 
told  you  so.  Now  you  must  take  the  only  left ;  then  one  removed ;  two  left, 
consequences."  But  there  is  no  such  which  closed  fatally  upon  the  prisoner, 
claim  to  it  as  where  the  "  call "  finds  So  Paul  reminds  us  how  the  end  is 
and  saves  a  man  in  the  bondage.  The  being  made  to  close  in  upon  us  ;  nor 
young  girl  who  does  not  marry  "  in  the  have  we  the  power  to  stay  this  con- 
Lord  "  may  lose  her  religion,  or,  at  the  stant  narrowing  in  of  our  opportunity 
best,  has  created  for  herself  a  bondage  for  making  ready  to  meet  our  Lord, 
or  a  cross,  perhaps  for  life.  Let  the  Every  night,  and  another  "  wall "  has 
Christian  remember  the  dignity  of  the  been  removed ;  our  space  by  that  much 
freedom  which  belongs  to  his  status  in  the  narrower,  our  time  shortened  by 
Christ.  He  will  not  go  into  a  partner-  a  day.  (3)  That  prisoner  might  count 
ship,  or  take  up  a  calling  or  business,  his  days,  and,  if  that  were  his  tempera- 
which  will  fetter  him,  and  limit  or  ment,  might  give  himself  up  to  some 
destroy  his  freedom  to  serve  Christ  employment,  reckoning  with  all  human 
and  be  holy.  Keep  and  "  use  "  liberty  certainty  upon  such-and-such  a  margin 
'''' rather r  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  of  time,  and  regarding  the  inevitable 
Your  life — yourself — too  precious  to  end  lightly  until  it  was  actually  upon 
play  into  Devil's  hands,  or  to  assume  him.  Our  danger  is  that,  knowing 
man's  fetters  in  any  sense.  nothing  whether  one  day  or  a  thousand 

be  ours,  and  believing  (with  more  or 

Yers.  29-32.  ^' As  not  abusing  it." —  less  of  reality  of  faith)  that  any  mis- 

An  eruptive  burst  of  solemnly  intense  take  will  be  irreparable,  we  should  so 

feeling.       On    a     higher    level     than  give  up  ourselves  to  home  (ver.   29), 

the   preceding    and    following   verses,  pleasure  (ver.  30),  business  (ib.),  as  to 

As    if    all    such    discussion   of    small  find  the  end   upon    us,  and  ourselves 

points   of  prudential  regulation   were  unprepared    for  the   Lord.     (4)  Time 

uncongenial.     *' Brethren,  I  answer  the  never  seems  "  short "  until  gone,  and  too 

questions   of   your   letter.      But  why  late  to  repair  an  error.     True  of  some 

do  I  spend — why  do  ye — so  much  time  temperaments  more  than  others.     The 

and  thought  upon  matters  which  if  the  special  danger  of  young  hearts.     Time 

Lord  came,  or  life  ended,  would  in  an  stretches   away  in   such  a  long,   long 

instant  cease  to  have  any  importance  vista  that  no  end  is  seen  at  all.     Sir 

for  us.     I  answer  you,  but,  above  all,  Philip   Sidney   hits    off    that    charac- 

this  I  say,"  etc.  teristic  in  a  well-known  description  of 

I.  Two  great  considerations.— 1.  a  pastoral  landscape  in  his  "  Arcadia," 
^^  The  time  is  short."  (1)  The  time  has  book  i.  [Describes  proudly  high  hills 
lengthened  out  to  nearly  twenty  cen-  with  stately  trees  ;  humble  valleys  with 
turies !  Yet  there  should  be  no  haste  silver  rivers  ;  meadows  enamelled  with 
to  assume  Paul  to  have  been  mistaken  flowers;  thickets  full  of  well-tuned  birds; 
in  expecting  the  Parousia  during  his  and  concludes  :]  "  Here  a  shepherd's 
own  lifetime.  Remember  how  closely  boy  piping,  as  though  he  should  never  be 
Christ  had  associated  His  coming  with  old."  (5)  Yet  not  the  danger  of  young 
the  fall  of  Jerusalem;  remember  how,  people  only  and  of  inexperienced  ages 
practically,  the  Lord  does  come  to  of  life.  The  danger  of  every  eager, 
every  man  in  his  death -hour.  Prac-  active  nature.  Older  men,  with  their 
tically  we  are  ever  in  the  presence  of  half -century  or  more  behind  them,  are 
His  Coming.  (2)  "  Short  "  and  "  has  found  planning  and  working  and  hop- 
been  shortened  "  (so  the  Greek).  Illus-  ing,  on  a  scale  and  with  an  intensity 
trate  by  the  cell  discovered  when  the  which  seems  to  count  on  staying  here  for 

169 


CHAP.  vii.    BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   CORINTHIAN^. 


ever.  It  is  the  "  secular"  temper  always. 
A  worthy,  noble  side  to  it.  The  rest- 
less, untiring,  hopeful,  inventive  energy, 
to  the  last  planning  something  new  or 
larger,  is  a  witness  to  a  nature  in  man 
made  for  a  larger  life  than  the  earthly. 
Such  men  vindicate  for  man  a  nature 
which  can  only  in  an  eternity  find 
room  for  its  development  and  activity. 
[True,  there  is  eternity  for  a  harvest, 
but  the  sowing-time  has  each  day  been 
shortened,  with  solemn  inevitableness.] 
2.  ^'' The  fashion  .  .  .  'passethawayT — 
(1)  Paul's  word  suggests  all  the  inces- 
sant change  of  men  and  circumstances  in 
our  busy  life,  as  the  change  of  scenes  and 
action  and  "  business  "  in  a  great  stage- 
play.  The  Christian  is  as  much  an  actor 
in  the  ever- shifting  scene  as  any  other. 
But  Paul  asks  men  to  moderate  their 
eagerness  by  doing  what  is  so  hard  to  do : 
"  Come  off  the  stage  for  a  few  moments. 
Be  a  spectator,  a  critic,  instead  of  an 
actor.  /See  how  things  change,  and  how 
fast  they  change !  See  how  little  they 
all  mean  when  the  play  is  over  I  ^^  (2)  [Of 
course  his  word  only  slightly  connected 
with  fashion  in  dress.  Yet  illustrate 
by  it.]  Take  up  book  of  old  fashion- 
plates  !  How  you  laugh  !  How  gro- 
tesque !  Yet  those  odd,  absurd  dresses 
were  to  many  objects  of  life-absorbing, 
soul -destroying,  interest  once.  "  Odd 
that  the  actors  should  lose  life  over  the 
dress  in  which  they  play  their  parts." 
You  think  so  ?  Look,  then — laugh, 
leaim !  In  an  old  library,  you  come 
across  dusty  bundle  of  old  political 
pamphlets  and  election  literature. 
"  Dry  as  dust  !  "  Yet  all  England  once 
rang  from  end  to  end  with  that  strife. 
"  Never  heard  of  many  of  these  names." 
Yet  they  once  were  on  every  lip;  around 
them  raged  the  fiercest  party  feeling. 
Yourselves  remember  some  old  political 
contest  j  to-day  you  wonder,  laugh,  at 
the  eagerness  you  felt.  Learn,  then,  to 
measure  the  real  importance  of  the  pre- 
sent-day Act  of  the  Drama.  Men  are 
losing  their  souls  over  it.  Yet  it  is  the 
merest  stage-play  passion  and  "  busi- 
ness," passing  away.  Or,  remove  from 
a  town,  long  your  place  of  residence. 
How  soon  the  newspaper  becomes  un- 

170 


interesting.  How  small  the  play  they 
are  acting  there,  the  little  personages, 
of  whom  fewer  and  fewer  are  known 
to  you  !  Difficult  to  keep  up  corre- 
spondence with  a  friend  there ;  you 
soon  drift  into  different  worlds.  As  to 
all  the  drama  of  the  town's  life,  its 
busy  woild  of  buying,  selling,  marrying, 
burying,  weeping,  lejoicing, — you  soon 
find  yourself  very  much  "off  the 
stage."  It  seems  "  thin  "  ;  but  to  the 
actors  on  those  boards  there  is  danger 
lest  they  be  so  swallowed  up  in  it  as  to 
forget  the  end.  (3)  In  truth,  we  cannot 
be  only  spectators.  Whether  we  will 
or  not,  we  change  with  the  changing 
scene.  Loves,  friendship,  habits, — all 
change.  We  ought  to  take  our  part. 
The  passages  and  personages  in  the 
daily  drama  have  their  importance. 
They  are  our  work.  The  stage  is  our 
place,  for  the  time.  (4)  But  we  are 
not  to  forget,  amidst  the  bustle  of  the 
acting  and  the  shifting  of  the  scenery, 
or  the  interest  of  the  drama,  that  all 
is  passing — the  play  and  the  actors — 
and  the  coming  of  the  Lord  is  drawing 
near.  Not  to  let  this  stage-play  of  a 
life  make  us  forget  that  the  world  of 
eternity  is  the  world  of  reahty,  and 
that  its  first  fact  is  the  Coming  and 
Assize  of  the  Lord  and  Judge. 

II.  A  great  rule  for  conduct. — \. 
^'  Not  abusing  it,"  or,  more  exactly, 
"not  using  it  to  the  full."  [Illustrate 
by  child  with  hand  thrust  into  narrow- 
necked  jar  of  filberts.  Hand  too  full 
to  allow  of  its  being  drawn  out  again. 
Child  too  greedy  to  take  smaller 
handful.]  Others  besides  children 
make  the  mistake,  and  need  the  lesson. 
Use  the  world ;  you  must,  you  shall ; 
its  work  is  duty.  Home  has  legitimate 
claims.  No  reason  in  religion  why  a 
man  should  feel  no  natuial  sorrow  or 
joy.  God  gave  the  heart  that  feels, 
and  the  dear  ones  who  give  the  joy,  or, 
in  their  removal,  cause  the  anguish. 
Be  the  good  businessman  God  made  you. 
Some  things  indeed  are  out  of  all  ques- 
tion ;  no  place  possible  for  them  in  a 
Christian  life  at  all.  But  for  the  rest, 
take  care  !  Do  not  fill  your  hand  too 
full!      Not   quite  as   full    as   in  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAHY :   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  viI. 


abstract  perhaps  you  might,  lest  the 
world  get  grip  upon  your  heart  till 
you  cannot  get  release  at  will.  Do, 
enjoy,  a  little  less  than  is  lawful. 
Keep  well  within  the  limit;  keep 
yourself  free.  Not  to  the  full  !  [Paul 
saw  how  the  comforts,  pleasures,  cares, 
responsibilities,  of  home  might  so  steal 
away,  or  swallow  up,  the  whole  man, 
as  to  leave  little  time,  and  less  and  less 
energy,  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  Men 
are  paralysed  with  sorrow  or  stupefied 
into  useiessness ;  or  nurse  grief  till  it 
becomes  a  reason  for  doing  less,  or 
nothing,  for  the  Lord,  if,  indeed,  they 
are  not  soured  and  made  lebellious 
towards  Him.  The  very  joy  in  the 
abundance  of  God's  gifts  may  ensnare 
hearts,  until  the  outlook,  the  future, 
the  Coming,  is  forgotten.  Danger  in 
buying  and  selling,  whether  successfully 
or  unsuccessfully.]  [E-.  Cecil  said,  *'  I 
want  to  see  no  more  sea,  hills,  fields, 
valleys,  abbeys,  castles ;  I  feel  vanity 
pervading  everything  but  eternity  and 
its  concerns,  and  perceive  these  things 
to  be  suited  to  children."  The  weak- 
ness and  the  strength  of  the  Evan- 
gelical school  there.  The  weakness', 
repellant,  e.g.,  to  such  as  Kingsley 
(compare,  in  Wesley's  Journal,  his  vivid 
interest  in  everything).  The  strength ; 
"This  one  thing  I  do."]  When  first 
go  to  stay  by  seaside  one  sound  always 
in  one's  ears.  Amidst  the  merry  play 
of  the  children,  behind  the  music  of  the 
shore,  in  the  background  of  conversa- 
tion, or  reading,  or  dreamy  thought- — 
the  roar  of  the  waves.  By-and-by  we  get 
accustomed  to  it,  and  forget  it.  The 
spirit  of  Paul's  outburst  is  :  "  Don't 
be  unpractical.  Don't  be  unhealthily 
ascetic.  No  need  to  wish,  or  to  try, 
not  to  take  part  in  life.  But  behind 
all  do  not  lose  out  of  your  ears  and 
thoughts  the  ocean  of  Eternity,  and 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  which  launches 
you  upon  it." 

Ver.  6.     (Connect  with  vers.  12,  25, 
and  2  Cor.  viii.  8-10.) 
Peirmission  and  Commandment,     A 

Bible- class  Talk. 
"Does   not    Paul    say   plainly   that 


he  writes  some  things  without  the 
help  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  simply 
on  his  own  responsibility?"  "For 
example?"  "'I  speak  this  by  permis- 
sion, not  of  commandment';  and,  more 
plainly  (ver.  12),  '  to  the  rest  speak  /, 
not  the  Lord' ;  and  further  (ver.  25),  'I 
have  no  commandment  of  the  Lord, 
yet  I  give  my  judgment,'  etc."  "  As 
to  ver.  6,  the  difficulty  only  lies  in 
the  English  phrase  employed.  [B.V. 
makes  this  perfectly  plain.]  2  Cor. 
viii.  8,  10  also  uses  [what  are  really 
in  Greek]  the  same  phrases,  and  where 
the  meaning,  even  in  English,  is  clear  er. 
Paul  is  making  a  great  Belief  collection 
for  poor  Christians  at  Jerusalem.  The 
Corinthians  are  not  too  well  disposed 
towards  him,  and  (ver.  20)  peihaps  a 
little  suspicious  about  all  this  money- 
getting.  He  had  foregone  his  right 
to  maintenance  amoDgst  them,  lest 
there  should  be  any  chance  for  any 
one  to  say  that  he  made  a  gain  of 
them  or  of  the  Gospel  (chap.  ix.).  So 
here  he  will  not  '  command  '  them  to 
finish  up  the  collection,  but  gives  his 
deliberately  formed  '  advice,'  guided  by 
the  Spirit  of  God;  [for  when  he  says 
(ver.  40),  '  I  think  that  I  also  have  the 
Spirit  of  God,'  there  is  no  doubt  in  '  I 
think,'  but  only  a  modestly  restrained 
expression  of  perfect  assurance.]  Ex- 
plain similarly  ver.  6  and  its  para- 
graph. *  In  this  whole  matter  of 
marrying,  I  do  not  speak  by  way  of 
commandment.  I  do  not  say  "  Marry," 
for  it  seems  to  me  just  now  expedient, 
because  of  the  present  and  impending 
evils  of  the  Church,  that  a  man  should 
have  as  few  ties  and  responsibilities  as 
possible.  But  I  do  not  say,  "  Do  not 
marry  "  ;  as  an  a  pestle  I  give  you  full 
permission  to  marry  if  you  wish.'  Is 
that  clear  ?  "  "  Yes  ;  but  go  on  to 
ver.  10."  "Well,  next  he  forbids 
frivolous,  capricious  separation  between 
husband  and  wife,  such  as  w^as  a 
common  scandal  in  Greece  and  Borne. 
'  I  command  that  there  be  none  of 
this,'  he  says.  And  then,  to  make 
this  important  point  more  emphatic, 
he  backs  up  his  own  Apostolic  judg- 
ment with  the  express  words  of   the 

171 


CHAP.  vm.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    /.   CORINTHIANS. 


Lord  Jesus  Christ  on  this  very  matter 
(Mark  x.  11,  12).  He  adds,  therefore, 
*But  here  the  Lord  commands  as 
well  as  I.'  There  is  no  hope  that 
disobedience  will  be  blameless.  *  But 
(ver.  12)  to  the  rest — the  unmarried 
and  the  widows — I  only  say  that  they 
are  prayerfully  and  soberly  to  follow 
their  own  judgment  of  what  is  prudent 
or  necessary.  There  is  no  express 
word  of  Christ  on  record  as  to  this 
particular  point.'  Now  ver.  25  will 
present  no  difficulty."  "Does  he  mean 
to  say  that,  as  to  the  marriage  of 
their  young  women,  he  has  no  express 
command  of  Christ  on  record,  or  in  the 
Apostolic  oral  report  of  the  life  of 
Jesus  to  fall  back  upon,  but  that  he 
once  more  gives  his  decision  as  one 
found  worthy  to  be  entrusted  with  an 
apostle's  commission  and  grace  ?  " — 
H.  J.  F.,  Wesley  an  Methodist  Sunday- 
School  Magazine,  1876,  p.  131  {con- 
densed). 


[Farrar,  in  loc,  reflects  another 
type  of  estimate  of  Paul :  *'  In  the 
abstract,  somewhat  hesitatingly,  and 
with  the  confession  that  he  is  not 
sure  of  his  ground,  and  is  therefore 
offering  no  authoritative  decision,  St. 
Paul  on  the  whole  agrees  with  "  those 
who  "  regarded  celibacy  as  the  only 
perfect  form  of  life."  In  a  footnote 
he  adds :  "  The  chapter  is  the  best 
manual  for  the  ductor  dubitantium, 
because  it  teaches  him  '  that  he 
must  not  give  himself  airs  of  cer- 
tainty on  points  where  certainty  is 
not  to  be  had'  (Maurice,  Unity, 
p.  429)."] 

[Bearing  on  this  point  are  vers. 
10,  12,  17,  25,  39;  1  Cor.  iv.  1,  17, 
X.  15,  xi.  23  (xii.  3,  xi.  3),  xiv. 
37  ("  my  words  are  the  words  of 
Christ"),  XV.  3  (2  Cor.  i.  24),  (x.  8, 
9);  also  1  Thess.  iv.  2,  v.  27;  Col. 
iv.  16.] 


CHAPTER  YIII. 


CRITICAL  NOTES, 


N.B.  1.— Seethe  question  discussed  in  this  chapter  homiletically  treated  under  vi.  12. 

N.B.  2. — Note  how  Paul  here  (as  in  Rom.  xiv.,  xv.)  bases  nothing  of  his  reply  to  the 
Corinthian  questions  upon  the  decree  of  Acts  xv.,  though  dealing  so  directly  in  this  Epistle 
with  two  of  its  points — fornication  and  things  offered  to  idols.  H^  is  dealing — as  Stanley 
points  out — not  with  the  Cephas,  the  Jewish  party  in  the  Church,  but  with  the  (self-styled) 
party  of  Paul  and  Apollos  ;  i.e.  not  with  the  scrupulous,  conservative  section,  but  with  the 
too  progressive,  too  much  emancipated  section ;  and  these  would  not  be  likely  to  pay  very 
much  heed  to  the  decree  of  a  Church  council  in  Jerusalem.  Moreover,  the  Epistle  is  to 
become  part  of  the  permanent  revelation  of  God  to  universal  mankind.  Its  very  method  of 
dealing  with  questions  and  problems  of  practical  ethics  is  not  a  small  part  of  its  revelation. 
This  question,  therefore,  is  here  discussed  and  determined,  not  on  the  basis  of  submission 
to  an  external  ordinance,  however  authoritative,  but  by  reference  and  appeal  to  abidingly, 
universally,  valid  principles  of  right  reason  and  right  heart.  Authority  will  always  have  its 
function  and  place  and  use;  but  the  best  legislation  and  its  sanctions  will  be  such  as  are 
also  rooted  in  the  intelligent,  moral  conviction  of  a  spiritual  mind  and  heart. 

N.B.  3. — Good  note  in  Stanley  as  to  the  "eating  meat  offered  to  idols."  *' The  act  of 
sacrifice  amongst  all  ancient  nations  was  an  act,  not  merely  of  religious  worship,  but  of 
social  life.  In  most  cases,  only  a  part  of  the  victim  was  consumed  as  an  offering  to  the  god  " 
[as  with  the  Hebrew  **  peace  offerings,"  Lev.  vii.  15-18,  20,  xvii.  2-6.  Cf.  1  Sam.  xiv.  32 
sqq.^  especially  34];  "the  rest  fell  to  the  portion  of  the  priests,  or  was  given  as  a  banquet 
to  the  poor,  or  was  sold  again  in  the  markets  for  common  food,  either  by  the  priests,  or  by 
such  sacrificers  as  could  not  afford  or  did  not  wish  to  undergo  the  expense  of  the  whole  victim. 
Hence  most  public  entertainments,  and  many  private  meals,  were  more  or  less  remotely  the 
accompaniments  of  sacrifice  ;  most  animals  killed  for  butcher's  meat  had  fallen  by  the  hand 
of  the  sacrificer."     [Hence,  he  points  out,  the  close  connection,  occasioning  some  ambiguity 

172 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  viii. 


in  the  use  of  the  word  for  *'  kill"  (e.g.  Acts  x.  13),  bot'veen  killing  for  sacrifice  and  killing 
for  ordinary  purposes.]  "''Sacrifices'  are  enumerated  by  Aristotle  and  by  Thucydides 
amongst  the  chief  means  of  social  enjoyment.  ...  At  Corinth  the  conquerors  in  the 
Isthmian  games  used  to  give  a  banquet  to  the  people,  immediately  after  the  sacrifices,  in  the 
temple  itself  of  Poseidon.  That  these  banquets  often  took  place  in  temples  appears  from  the 
stories  which  relate  how  Claudius  and  Vitellius,  in  their  ungovernable  greediness,  rushed  in 
from  the  streets  to  partake  of  the  feasts  round  the  altar."  [So  in  1  Sam,  ix.  23  the  cook 
brings  up  a  shoulder  which  has  remained  over  from  the  sacrifice  and  banquet  of  vers.  11-14. 
Cf.  also  1  Sam.  ii.  13-17.]  "Closely  as  the  whole  social  life  of  the  ancient  world  was 
interwoven  with  its  religious  worship  "  [see  how  revolutionary  for  that  reason  Christianity 
was  socially  in,  e.g.,  England  :  Green,  Conquest  of  England,  i.  8,  9],  **the  decision  of  this 
question  affected  the  whole  relations  of  the  Christian  society  with  its  heathen  neighbours  ; 
and,  in  fact,  involved  all  the  similar,  though  more  complicated,  questions  discussed  in  the 
first  four  centuries  of  the  Christian  Church,  respecting  the  lawfulness  of  attending  on  the 
spectacles,  or  receiving  the  honours,  of  the  ^Roman  Empire."  (Stanley,  in  loco.)  E.g. 
N.B.  4. — "  The  council  of  Ancyra  condemned  them  to  a  two  years'  suspension  from  the 
Sacrament  who  sat  down  with  their  heathen  friends  n^on  their  solemn  Festivals  in  their  Idol 
Temples,  although  they  brought  their  own  Provisions  along  with  them,  and  touched  not  one 
bit  of  what  had  been  offered  to  the  Idol"  (Cave,  Prim,  Chr.,  Part  I.,  chap  v.). 

Ver.  1. — New  topic,  in  reply  to  an  inquiry  from  Corinth,  restimed  in  chap,  x,,  after  a  digres- 
sion, the  resumption  growing  out  of  ix,  19-21,  and  out  of  the  discussion  of  the,  in  some  respects, 
analogous  Love-feasts  and  Lord's  Supper.  We  know  .  .  .  knowledge. — Spoken  ironically  ; 
q.d.  "'We  all  have  knowledge.'  Oh  yesl  I  quite  understand  that.  I  said  so  in  the  first 
sentences  of  my  letter  (i.  5).  No  doubt  you  are  really  a  very  understanding  people" 
(Deut.  iv.  6).  Then  with  sudden  change  of  tone,  almost  bitterly :  "  Well,  well ;  you  with 
your  '  knowledge '  I  Take  care  !  It  may  be  a  danger,  instead  of  a  glory  or  a  help." 
N.B,  5. — The  R.V.  margin ;  also  same  word  in  ver.  10  (margin). 

Ver.  2.  Thinketh. — Like  "  I  thi7Lk  so,"  in  Anglican  Ordination  Service  ;  i.e.  not  with  any 
doubt,  but  with  all — as  he  believes,  reasonable — certainty.  So  x.  12  ;  Phil.  iii.  4  ;  (Gal.  ii.  9). 
Ought. — In  the  fitness  of  things  in  the  Divine  life  of  the  soul.  But  Beet  says  "  must  needs 
know,"  for  all  salvation  and  spiritual  life  come  through  the  intelligence  (John  xvii.  3). 
N.B.  6. — '■'Know  .  .  .  knorcledge"  have  different  roots  in  Greek. 

Ver.  3. — N.B.  7.  Evans  (in  Sjjeaker)  makes  last  clause  of  ver.  3  mean,  "  He  (viz.  God)  is 
known  of  him  "  (viz.  the  *'  know  something  "  of  ver.  2).  Observe  rather  how  (as  in  Gal.  iv.  9) 
Paul  shrinks  from  saying  outright,  "  He  knows  God  "  (Matt.  xi.  27).  Observe  also  how  Paul 
speaks  almost  as  if  in  the  dialect  of  John. 

Ver.  4.  Nothing  in  the  world. — Not  to  be  joined  in  the  colloquial  sense,  "  nothing  in  the 
world."  But,  "  In  the  world  there  is  no  reality  as  of  a  divinity,  behind,  and  corresponding  to, 
the  idol."    Observe  the  slightly  variant  translation  in.  R.V.     Cf.  x.  19. 

Ver.  5. — The  (so-called)  Olympian  gods,  and  the  crowd  of  inferior  earth-dwelling 
divinities.  No  stronger  sense  to  be  attached  to  "  there  are "  than  to  "  there  he  that  are 
called^''  as  if  allowing  any  reality  to  the  gods  ;  emphasis  is  upon  "  many,'^  not  upon  "  are  "; 
q.d.  "As,  in  fact,  in  current  belief  and  speech,  there  are  indeed  many  such  so-called 
'  gods.' " 

Ver.  6. — As  usual,  the  ^^ Father**  is  called  "  God,"  yet  not  so  as  to  exclude  the  Son  from 
Godhead,  any  more  than  to  call  the  Son  "Lord"  excludes  the  Father  from  Lordship. 
N.B.  8. — The  term  [the  unity  of  God]  is  used  only  by  analogy.  Though  there  is  one  "  Divine 
nature,  the  unity  of  God  is  not  a  unity  of  kind,  because  there  are  not  individuals  of 
the  same  species,  and  therefore,  as  for  other  reasons,  the  word  is  inapplicable  to  the  Divinity. 
Of  all  other  objects  of  thought  we  can  imagine  fellows  or  reproductions.  But  in  God  there 
is  absolute  soleness — Soleitas  ;  though  what  lies  hidden  in  the  mystery  of  this  essential 
Oneness  we  know  but  partially.  It  is  wrong  to  dogmatise  upon  the  nature  of  a  unity  to 
which  we  have  no  parallel,  and  which  we  cannot  define  by  comparison  or  illustration  "  (Pope, 
Compend.  Theol.,  i.  258).  This  unity  not  to  be  so  emphasised  as  to  reduce  the  Unity  to  three 
manifestations  of  the  One  God,  successive  but  in  different  modes — Sabellianism.  Paul  is  still 
so  far  a  Jew  that,  speaking  in  the  presence  of  heathen  idolatries  and  of  Jewish  sensitiveness, 
his  language  is  coloured  by  the  Monotheism  in  which  he  had  been  trained  from  early  boy- 
hood. Yet  ^^Lord"  is  the  New  Testament  appropriation  of  the  LXX.  equivalent  for  Jehovah, 
and  he,  above  all  others,  makes  it  the  customary  designation  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  his  risen 
Master.  [See,  as  to  the  practical  usefulness  of  the  Unity  of  God,  Rom.  iii.  20  (therefore 
one  way  of  justification  before  Him,  for  Jew  and  Gentile) ;  1  Tim.  ii.  5,  6  (therefore  prayer 
should  be  offered  for  all  men)  ;  Gal.  iii.  20  (most  obscure  introduction  of  the  thought ; 
perhaps  the  meaning  is — therefore  a  Promise  from  Him  Who  is  one  and  alone  in  giving  it,  is 
a  transaction  of  a  different  nature  to  a  Covenant,  which  implies  two  or  many  parties)  ; 
Acts  xvii.  26,  Eph.  iv.  6,  Mark  xii,  29,  33  (one  object  of  worship,  therefore  one  undivided  heart- 
allegiance).]      N.B.  9. — Observe  the  carefully  distinguished  prepositions,  indicating  origin, 

173 


CHAP.  VIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  CORINTHIANS. 


end,  midway  condition,  respectively.  The  rivers  of  being  came  from  and  return  vnto  God, 
the  Sea,  their  Source  and  Good  (cf .  Eccles.  i.  7).  Their  midway  course  is  conditioned  at  every 
point  by  Christ ;  all  is  through  Him.  [N.B.  9. — Look  at  John  i,  3,  Heb.  i.  2,  3 ;  in  Col.  i.  16 
notice  how  Christ  is,  like  the  Father  here,  made  the  goal  and  end ;  in  Rom.  xi.  36  the 
'■'■  through""  here  connected  with  Christ,  is  associated  with  God.  Tlus  interchangeableness  of 
God  and  Clirist  iti  such  relations,  speaks  significant  things  as  to  Paul's  inspired  estimate  of 
the  Jesus  whom  Peter  and  many  still  living  had  known  in  the  flesh  and  "after  the  flesh."] 
We. — Amongst  the  '■^ all  things'' 

Ver.  7.  Important  new  reading  (as  in  R.V.  text)  now  in  great  favour.  Choose  between 
(the  old,  which  meant)  "  still  finding  a  moral  difficulty  for  conscience  in  the  idol,"  and  (the 
new,  which  means)  "  still  under  the  influence  of  inveterately  habitual  association  of  ideas." 
Both,  no  doubt,  true  difficulties  to  all  converts.  Robertson  {Lectures)  aptly  parallels  a  modern 
instance :  "  Science  has  banished  an  express  faith  in  the  existence  [of  apparitions],  yet  .  .  . 
much  credulity  on  the  subject  remains.  The  statute  book  is  purged  from  sentences  on 
witchcraft,  yet  a  lingering  feeling  remains  that  it  may  still  exist  in  power."  So,  he  con- 
tinues, the  heathen  deities  "  were  dethroned  as  gods,  but  they  still  existed,  to  the  imagina- 
tion,  as  beings  of  a  lower  order, — as  demons  who  were  malicious  to  men  and  enemies  to  God." 
[But  does  this  last  satisfy  x.  20  ?] 

Ver.  8.  Meat. — Wider,  of  course,  than  merely  "  flesh-meat  " ;  distinction  drawn  in  ver.  13. 
Equivalent  to  "  what  is  eaten."  Commend. — For  the  figure  see,  e.g.,  Rom.  v.  8,  or  2  Cor.  iv.  2. 
Notice  the  reversed  order  of  clauses,  as  in  the  new,  better  reading.  The  diffident,  morbidly 
scrupulous,  are  first  reassured ;  then  the  too  confident,  inconsiderately  "  broad,"  "  liberal " 
people  are  cautioned.  Notice  the  marginal  literal  rendering  in  the  R.V.  Rom.  xiv.  17  is 
parallel. 

Ver.  9.  Liberty. — Reallj'-  "jyozoer";  connected  with  '^  are  lawful^'"  vi.  12;  not  supposed  by 
Paul  to  be  any  unauthorised  "  liberty,''  thus  taken  by  the  Corinthian  who  eats.  Right 
enough,  in  the  light  of  clear,  abstract  knowledge. 

Ver.  10.  Emboldened. — Literally  *'  huilt  up,"  a  new  turn  given  to  the  word  of  ver.  1. 
*'  Huinosa  (Fdljicatio,"  Calvin. 

Ver.  11.  Perisheth. — Note  this  present,  not  future,  tense  in  the  best  reading.  As  always, 
"  salvation  "  and  "  perdition  "are  continuous  conditions,  begun  already  and  simply  continued, 
though  intensified,  into  eternity  (so  Acts  ii.  47 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  15).  Also  note  the  theological 
deduction  drawn  from  this  ;  with  a  force  the  stronger,  just  because  the  point  occurs 
incidentally,  an  understood  and  accepted  truth,  both  to  Paul  and  to  the  Christian,  in  dealing 
with  whom  he  makes  it  a  sure  basis  of  appeal ; — a  man  may  be  even  now  perishing  for  whom 
Christ  as  much  and  as  really  died  as  for  those  who  are  now  being  saved. 

Ver.  12. — How  Paul  had  learned  the  lesson  of  Acts  ix.  4.  (See  the  homiletic  treatment  of 
"  The  Body  of  Christ,"  xii.  27.) 

Ver,  13. — Different  word  for  "stumble  "  here  from  that  in  ver.  9,  That  really  is  '^stumbling- 
block  " ;  this  is  (always)  rather  a  trap  or  snare,  which  catches,  by  entangling,  the  feet. 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Whole  Chapter. 

"Whole  chapter  may  be  grouped  around  the  two  clauses  of  the  concluding 
sentence  of  ver.  1. 

A.  The  teachings  of  knowledge  (vers.  1-8). 

B.  The  teachings  of  love  (vers.  9-13). 

A.  I.  The  great  central  truth  is  the  existence  and  unity  of  God.— This  has 

been  the  peculiar  work  of  Israel,  to  preserve  and  exhibit  the  truth  about  Him. 
Others  might  speculate  about  an  Eternal  Matter,  a  self-originated,  self-sustained. 
Creation,  eternal  a  parte  ante\  I'^rael  knew  only  an  Eternal  Creator,  ''of  Whom  . .  . 
to  Whom,"  etc.  Others  might  confuse  Him  with  His  work ;  Israel  knew — and 
the  Church  knows — of  a  personal  Creator  distinct  from  His  Creation.  Others 
might  "  solve  "  the  problem  of  the  presence  of  evil,  physical  and  moral,  by  a 
Dualism  which  conceived  of  a  co-ordinate,  independent  author  and  worker  of 
the  evil,  side  by  side  with  the  Author  and  Worker  of  good  ;  Israel,  and  the 
Church,  testify  to  a  personal  worker  and  author  of  evil,  indeed,  but  one  who  is 
the  creature  of  God,  working  in  strictest,  though  enforced,  subjection  to  the 
limitations  of  the  will  of  the  one  only  God,  and  mysteriously  subservient  to  the 
purposes  and  glory  of  that  ONE  Only  GOD.     "  Unto  Whom." 

II.  The  new  stage,  just  then  being  reached  by  the  world  in  the  unfolding  of 

174 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,   chap.  viii. 


God's  revelation  of  Himself,  discovered  this  God  in  relation  to  another  "personal" 
existence  within  His  own  essence.  A  "  Father,"  loving  and  loved  by  a  "  Son," 
Who  had  stepped  forth  from  the  unseen,  within  then  very  recent  years,  and  in 
human  form  had  taken  His  part  and  place  in  the  history  of  the  race,  the  histori- 
cal "  Jesus"  the  "  Christ "  for  whom  Israel  had  been  for  ages  waiting,  the 
^^ Lord"  in  the  life  and  worship  and  thought  of  Christians,  Jew  and  Gentile 
alike.  And  a  yet  more  profound  and  mysterious  truth  connected  with  this  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Lord,  was  coming  into  view.  He  is  seen  standing  a  Midway  Term, 
a  Mediating  Condition,  making  possible,  actual,  the  (intellectually  difficult) 
passage  between  Creator  and  Creation  :  "  apart  from  Him  nothing  made  that 
was  made  "  ;  "  the  worlds  framed  by  the  (Personal)  Word  of  God  "  (John  i.  3  ; 
Heb.  xi.  3).  Further,  as  for  their  origin,  so  for  their  continuous  maintenance  in 
order,  beauty,  life,  all  created  things  depend  mediately,  not  directly,  upon  God, 
"  through  "  Christ ;  the  God  of  Providence,  as  of  Creation,  is  God  in  Christ.  [To 
a  Christian,  therefore,  Providence  is  no  mere  bare,  hard,  perfect,  governmental 
system,  but  the  rule  of  a  God  with  a  heart ;  a  God  Whose  heart  has  been  seen  and 
known  in  Christ.  To  a  Christian,  Providence  is  not  only  wisdom,  but  love  ;  not 
only  power,  but  grace.] 

III.  There  is,  further,  another  Creation,  another  world,  with  its  order  and 
beauty  and  life  and  government, — the  spiritual ;  a  glorious  Sub-section,  a  grand 
Episode,  in  the  larger  Whole  of  God-originated,  God-sustained  Being ;  taking 
shape  in  a  Church ;  repeated,  too,  in  all  its  essential  characteristics,  but  on  a  smaller 
scale,  in  the  new  order,  beauty,  happiness,  rule,  within  the  individual  life  of  the 
Christian.  Nowhere  is  it  more  true  than  of  the  Church  and  of  the  Christian, 
"  we  are  through  Him"  viz.  Christ.  The  Church,  the  individual  believer,  is 
nothing,  has  nothing,  becomes  nothing,  could  retain  nothing,  except  through 
Christ.  He  and  His  work  and  grace  are  the  great  underlying,  foundation. 
Condition,  assumed  in  all  God's  dealing  with  them ;  presupposed  in  all  the  new 
creation  from  first  to  last.  Remove  Him  from  the  facts  of  the  case  as  between 
God  and  man,  and  all  disappears, — Redemption,  Pardon,  the  Grace  of  the  Spirit ; 
all  life,  knowledge,  good ;  all  hope,  all  heaven.  ["  Things  which  are  not  "  have 
become  and,  moment  by  moment,  subsist — "  we  are  " — through  Christ  (i.  28,  30).] 

IV.  This  once  apprehended  and  made  the  working  basis  of  thought  and 
practice,  "  An  idol  is  nothing."  [God  and  Providence  once  fully  believed  in  and 
trusted,  all  Luck,  Chance,  Evil-eye,  Omens,  Astrology,  and  a  host  of  heathenish 
fears  and  superstitions  and  sinful  traffickings  with  demons  and  the  dead,  dis- 
appear from  Christian  life.]  The  image  may  have  meant  in  better,  earlier,  [very 
occasional]  instances  an  attempt  to  assist  the  worshipping  instinct  and  craving  in 
man  to  realise  and  approach  some  Presence  vaguely  apprehended  and  believed 
in,  in  Nature.  But  there  could  be  no  real  correspondence  between  the  idols  and 
the  true  God.  [Paul  on  Mars'  Hill  pointed  across  to  the  Acropolis  of  Athens, 
with  its  temples  and  statues.  ''  God — God  that  made  the  world — dwells  not 
even  in  such  glorious  shrines  as  those.  God,  whose  offspring  Men  are,  is  no  thing 
of  stone  or  ivory  or  gold  like  even  those."]  There  were — could  be — no  beir:gs 
to  be  represented  by  the  crowds  of  idols,  ^^ gods  many,  lords  many"  in  every 
heathen  pantheon.  The  one  Divine  Presence  and  Power  and  Ruler  "  in  the 
world  "  is  the  God  Whom  we  know ;  the  idol  stands  for  nothing,  represents  and 
makes  visible  no  reality,  signifies  nothing — is  a  mere  piece  of  carved  or  molten 
matter,  a  work  of  art  perhaps,  but  nothing  to  be  worshipped  or  feared,  and  has  no 
meaning  to  the  religious  instinct.  [Except  in  the  indirect  sense  that  the  Adver- 
sary of  God  and  of  all  good  avails  himself  of  the  idol,  to  divert  to  himself  and  his 
**  demons  "  the  homage  of  the  worshipping  heart  in  men,  and  perverts  into  the 
occasion  of  gross  sin  the  very  ceremonial  of  the  worship  of  heathen  systems 
(X.  20).] 

175 


CHAP.  VIII.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


V.  Hence  follows  a  complete  emancipation  of  the  use  and  enjoyment  of  the 
creature  from  any  superstitious  restrictions. — All  the  creation  of  God  is  free  to 
man,  God's  designated  lord  of  creation.  [Woods,  streams,  mountains  are  no 
longer  haunted  by,  possessed  by,  a  host  of  divinities.]  JSTo  regard  need  any 
longer  be  had  to  any  connection  between  a  "  divinity  "  supposed  in  the  idol,  and 
the  thing  useful  or  needful  for  man.  The  food  which  has  been  upon  an  idol 
altar  has  lost  nothing  nor  gained  anything  in  that  fact.  It  was  morally  neutral 
before  ;  intrinsically  it  is  non-moral  still  to  partake  of  it.  [Hard  for  any  except 
those  to-day  living  or  working  in  countries  and  societies  beginning  to  be  affected 
by  Christianity,  to  realise  what  an  emancipation  it  brings  to  mind  and  heart  and 
practice  to  find  the  heathen  pantheon,  whether  poetically  beautiful  or  fearsomely 
dreadful,  benignant  or  malevolent,  swept  away,  and  the  world  seen  to  be  a  great 
temple  filled  with  God,  and  that  God  known  in,  ruling  by,  to  be  worshipped  in, 
Christ.  It  is  a  revolutionising  emancipation.  The  dread  is  gone,  which  perpetu- 
ally overhung  life  ;  the  shadow  disappears  from  nature  and  from  the  future  ; 
there  is  a  new  sense  of  security  and  freedom.  Men  breathe  freely,  walk  with  a 
new  buoyancy,  move  and  work  and  enjoy,,  in  a  world  whose  atmosphere  is  filled 
with  the  presence  of  God  in  Christ.] 

VI.  One  other  fact  is  assumed  as  between  Paul  and  his  correspondents : 
"  Christ  died  even  for  a  man  who  perishes." — Redemption  is  no  fatalism ;  no 
hard  compulsion  which  necessitates  ultimate  salvation.  Redemption  has  brought 
a  grace  to  every  man,  which  is  the  basis  on  which  the  Spirit  and  the  man  himself 
may  co-operate  to  build  up  a  saved  life.  All  "  natural  "  goodness,  all  the  so-called 
*'  innate  "  knowledge  of  what  is  "  right "  and  what  "  wrong,"  all  "  freedom  "  and 
"  power  "  of  will  toward  God  and  good,  all  the  (often  very  strong)  drawings  toward 
God,  and  the  (often  very  strong)  holdings  back  from  sin ;  all  ability  to  respond 
to  God's  "  command  "  that  men  should  repent  (Acts  xvii.  30) ;  all  ability  to 
believe  with  a  saving  faith ;  all  knowledge  of,  sensibility  to,  love  for,  Divine 
things ;  all  the  light  given  even  to  the  heathen  ; — all  are  fruits  of  the  redemptive 
work  of  Christ,  availing  literally  for  all  men.  This  may  be  followed  up  or  sinned 
away.  It  is  always  enough  to  make  condemnation  just,  if  a  man  be  unfaithful  to 
it ;  whilst  out  of  it  may  grow  a  true  salvation.  This  makes  Christ  the  "  light 
which  lighteth  every  man  coming  into  the  world  "  (John  i.  5).  Every  man  is 
born  of  a  redeemed  stock  ;  because  of  a  Redeemer's  grace,  every  man  may  be 
saved.  Whatever  be  the  eternal  issue  of  the  life  of  the  individual,  or  his  present 
moral  condition — however  sunk  or  degraded  or  dark — the  great  facts  of  the 
Redeemer's  work  remain  unalterably  facts,  independently  of  any  use  or  neglect 
of  them  by  the  man  himself.  They  are  the  foundation  of  all  hope  for  the 
Christian  worker,  as  he  seeks  to  lift  and  save  others ;  they  are  the  basis  of  all 
work ;  they  are  the  warrant  for  prayer  for  the  salvation  of  souls. 

YII.  Knowledge  has  its  perils. — 1.  Such  knowledge  is  no  achievement  to  be 
boasted  of ;  it  is  a  privilege,  a  mercy,  a  favour,  a  grace.  The  wisdom  of  the 
world  does  not  "  know  "  all  this.  It  is  to-day  avowedly  ''  Agnostic  "  in  regard  to 
all  such  questions.  It  will  afiS.rm  nothing,  will  deny  nothing  ;  it  has  no  scientific 
basis  or  right  to  say  "  we  know.''  The  ancient  philosophies  never  reached  any 
certain  conclusions  on  such  topics.  Each  teacher  was  successful  rather  in 
criticising  his  predecessor's  system  and  logic  than  in  constructing  his  own,  or  in 
bringing  to  any  restful  certainty  the  mind  and  heart.  God  was  not,  is  not,  found 
by  searching.  The  Fatherhood,  with  its  correlative  Sonships,  Divine  and  human, 
was  never  so  much  as  guessed  or  suspected.  The  history  of  speculation  and 
nquiry,  ancient  and  modern,  conclusively  establishes  this,  that  upon  this  last 
point  we  have  to  choose  between  believing  a  revelation  and  complete  ignorance  ; 
and,  further,  that  as  to  the  existence,  nature,  unity,  creative  work,  and  provi- 
dential government  of  God,  nothing  beyond  guesses,  which  may  ripen  into  hope, 

176 


I 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  vm. 


are  attainable  by  unassisted  reason.  2.  So,  then,  knowledge  should  he,  (a)  grateful, 
{h)  humble,  and  (c)  patient  towards  ignorance  or  less-advanced  knowledge.  There 
is  a  delight  in  the  winning  of  knowledge  which  is  intoxicating;  there  is  a 
glorious  sense  of  mastery  when  new  ground  has  been  occupied,  when  new  worlds 
of  facts  have  been  possessed;  the  sense  of  enlargement  reveals  to  a  man  how 
glorious  a  thing  is  his  manhood,  with  its  capacity  for  apprehending  and  appro- 
priating such  great  truths.  But  the  wise  man  should  remember  that  all  he 
knows  is  all  a  gift,  a  grace.  He  should  be  grateful.  He  should  remember  how 
limited,  after  all,  is  his  knowledge  at  its  widest,  and  be  humble.  "  There 
remaineth  yet  much  land  to  be  possessed."  He  has  only  yet  made  and  occupied 
a  small  clearing  in  a  boundless  forest  of  dark  recesses  and  intricate  growths. 
Above  all,  he  needs  to  be  patient  to  those  who  have  not  yet  reached  his  point  of 
advance  and  clear  vision.  [The  sixth-form  scholar  is  impatient  with  the  first- 
form  boy,  that  he  cannot  at  once  see  what  is  to  himself  so  obvious.]  He  must 
not  forget  the  days  when  he  was  himself  toilsomely  climbing  the  hill  whose  top, 
with  its  broad  horizon  of  knowledge,  he  has  now  reached.  He  must  keep  his 
sympathy  for  those  whose  knowledge  is  yet  only  in  process  towards  the  relative 
completeness  which  is,  after  all,  all  he  has  himself  even  now  attained.  Self- 
sufficiency,  self-conceit,  unsympathetic  impatience  with  imperfefct  enlightenment, 
are  some  of  the  moral  perils  of  the  man  "  puffed  up "  with  his  "  knowledge." 
[Even  in  merely  secular,  natural  knowledge  also,  error  is  not  far  off  when  this 
is  the  temper  of  an  inquirer ;  the  student  who  would  still  go  on  to  "  know," 
must  be  humble,  simple,  docile  to  Nature  and  its  facts.  Carelessness  and 
inaccuracy  of  methods,  or  their  appHcation,  are  also  perils  not  far  away  from 
such  students,] 

•B.  The  teachings  of  love. — 1.  Knowledge  and  love  are  in  no  necessary  opposition. 
They  are  made  for  each  other.     Their  union  produces  the  perfect  life.     They  are 
both  found  in  closest  alliance,  each  perfect,  in  God.     No  need  to  exalt  love  at  the 
expense  of  knowledge.     Knowledge  is  not  sinful,  or  godless,  per  se.     (See  Paul's 
prayer  for  his  beloved  Philippians,  i.  9.)     The  Godlike  life  needs,  embodies,  com- 
bines, both.    Indeed,  in  the  highest  sense,  and  in  regard  to  the  highest  things,  love 
is  the  condition  of  knowledge.     Only  the  man  who  "  loves  God,"  knows  God  ;  or 
(let  us  say)  can  have  that  life  of  fellowship  with  God  whose  not  least  precious 
privilege  it  is  to  rejoice  to  lie  all  open  and  "  known  "  to  the  scrutiny  of  the  eye 
of  God.     2.  Love  without  knowledge  is  liable  to  become  fanatical,  and  easily  led 
into  mischievous  error.     Knowledge  without  love  is  apt  to  become,  as  we  have 
seen,  impatient  of  weakness,  cold,  hard,  repellent,  pitiless ;  in  its  self-contained, 
self-satisfied  exaltation  following  out  its  conclusions  to   their  rigorous,  logical 
issues,  regardless  of  the  consequences  in  other  lives.     Apt  to  be  lifted  up  to 
a  mountain-top  of  self-glorification,   and    to  forget  or   despise  the  struggling, 
troubled,  tempted,  weaker  multitudes  on  the  lower  levels  of  common  life.    In  the 
region  of  the  clear,  cold  light  of  its  definite  convictions  and  assured  conclusions, 
it  walks  confidently,  securely,  and  does  not  understand  or  allow  for  the  difiiculties 
and  perils  of  the  lives  which  walk  in  the  mists  and  darkness  of  weakness  or 
half-enlightenment.      The  knowledge  of  the  logical  mind  is  specially  liable  to 
be  cruelly  reckless  of  what  pressing  perfectly  warranted  conclusions  to  their 
full  length  may  cost  to   the  men  and  women  who  cannot  live  by  logic ;  who 
largely   follow  "  custom,"  and  with  difficulty  find  their  way  into  new  paths, 
whether  of  belief  or  practice ;    who  do  not  readily  emancipate  mind  or  "  con- 
science "  from  long-established  ideas,  or  prepossessions  or  prejudices  ;  who  find  it 
harder  than  do  the  men  of  *'  knowledge,''  to  unlearn  the  mental  and  moral  habits 
and  training  of  a  lifetime.     To  such,  for  example,  a  public  banquet  in  a  heathen 
temple  was  not  yet  a  thing  simply  of  social  and  civil  life.      The  place  itself  was 
not  neutral  ground,  and  the  fact  that  some  of  the  provisions  had  been  offered 

N  177 


CHAP,  viii;  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


upon  idol  altars  gave  the  very  food  upon  the  table  a  moral  taint.  Let  the  man 
of  knowledge  press  them  upon  the  point ;  they  can  give  him — can  give  them- 
selves— little  or  no  satisfying  reason  for  their  instinctive  shrinking  from 
participation.  "  But  you  believe  that  there  are  no  such  gods  as  the  idols 
represent?  "  "  Yes."  "  And  you  believe,  too,  that  the  temple  floor  is  part  of 
the  world  which  all  belongs  to  your  God?"  "Yes."  "And  you  surely  see 
that  a  heathen  divinity  which  is  really  non-existent  cannot  have  affected  the 

food  put  upon  its  altar  ?  "     "  Yes.     Y-e-s.     But "     "  And  you  understand 

that  God  takes  no  account  of  you,  favourable  or  unfavourable,  merely  because  of 
what  you  eat  or  don't  eat,  or  drink?  "  "  Yes."  And  yet  the  habit  of  regarding 
the  banquet  and  the  food  as  affected  by  its  consecration  to  a  god  is  not  readily 
to  be  uprooted  ;  conscience  cannot  see  clearly  yet  that,  because  the  idol  is 
nothing,  the  effect  upon  the  food  is  morally  nothing.  3.  Whilst,  then.  Knowledge 
lives  too  readily  in  an  unreal  world  [almost  in  a  moral  vacuuTn],  and  takes  too 
little  account  of  the  complexity  of  moral  questions  in  the  concrete  of  daily  life, 
Love  says  to  Knowledge  :  "  Do  not  disregard  the  prejudice  born  of  habit,  and  the 
difficulty  born  of  half -enlightenment  of  conscience.  Do  not  by  your  action  force  on 
too  fast  in  his  mental  development,  and  in  his  moral  growth,  the  less-advanced  man 
next  you  in  the  Church.  Do  not  stand  too  stiffly  upon,  nor  exact  for  yourself  too 
rigorously,  the  fullest  liberty  which  in  the  abstract  you  might  claim.  His  founda- 
tion will  not  carry  your  building  as  yours  can.  Remember  he  is  likely  to  emulate 
you,  disliking  perhaps  to  be  thought  weak,  fearing  perhaps  the  scornful  verdict 
implied  in  the  very  contrast  with  you  ;  he  will  try  to  build  as  fast  and  as  high 
as  you ;  he  will  try  to  go  as  far.  That  respect  for  conscience  and  its  teaching 
which  is  a  primary  principle  of  all  moral  life  will  be  injured.  It  is  part  of  the 
foundation  of  his  character;  you  help  him  to  disturb  it.  And  then,  with  a  shaken 
foundation,  and  a  building  too  high  for  it,  if  even  it  were  in  unimpaired  strength, 
no  grc  at  wonder  if  he  "^erz'.sA" ;  beginning  with  violence  done  to  his  moral  sensitive- 
ness, he  will  go  on  to  some  more  positive  transgression,  tempted  by  the  scenes  and 
company  into  which  you  embolden  him  to  thrust  himself.  What  wonder  if  all 
his  ideas,  his  moral  convictions,  his  practice,  come  toppling  down  in  soul-destroy- 
ing ruin  !  And  if  he  ^^ perish J^  what  follower  are  you  of  that  Christ  "  who  died^^ 
to  redeem  and  save  him  ?  "  Knowledge  ?  "  "  I  see  as  clearly  as  any  of  you  how 
absolutely  nothing  in  intrinsic  significance  are  all  such  accidents  of  the  food  I  eat. 
They  are  nothing  to  it,  or  to  me ;  they  in  no  way  affect  my  standing  before  God. 
But  rather  than  even  contribute  to  the  moral  wreck  of  even  one  soul,  rather  than 
spread  a  snare  for  an  unwary  or  unsteady  and  uncertain  foot,  I  will  abstain 
always  and  in  all  circumstances  from  anything  which  creates  difficulty  or  danger 
to  my  brother's  soul."  Hardly  necessary  to  think  that  Paul  in  actual  practice 
abstained  from  flesh-meat,  except  in  the  particular  case  here  under  discussion. 
The  "  I  "  is  somewhat  rhetorical.  He  is,  in  part,  indirectly  suggesting  to  a 
Corinthian  what  his  heart  ought  to  make  him  say. 

HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1-3.  Knowledge  weighed  in  the  True  knowledge  will  only  be  arrived  at 

Balances  against  Love. — The  verdict  is  :  by  the  man  who  is  a  patient  inquirer; 

"  Found  wanting.^'  ,  recognising    himself    the   servant,    not 

I.  The  reference  is  special — to  know-  the  master  or  the  maker,  of  Facts;  ac- 

ledge   in    relation    to    Divine    things.  knowledging  that  truth  is  paramount, 

This  is  due  to  the  special  occasion  out  and   before   any   question  of  his   own 

of    which    Paul's    words    have    arisen.  reputation  or  consistency  as  a  theorist 

But  ver.  2  is  true  of  knowledge  on  all  or  a  teacher.     He  must  never,  in  his 

subjects,  in  any  field  of  inquiry^     1.  confidence    that    "  ^e    knows J^   be    so 

178 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  viii. 


wedded  to  his  own  first  conclusions  as  to  the  man  who  is  not  first  morally 
not  to  admit  their  modification  or  receptive.]  He  may  be  a  very  scantily 
complete  setting  aside, if  new  light  and  educated,  a  very  little  cultured,  man; 
new  facts  be  forthcoming,  especially  but  on  these  topics  he  says,  with  much 
when  these  are  the  result  of  the  inquiry  pity  and  some  amusement,  "  Ah,  my 
and  the  work  of  others.  He  will  be  wise  friend,  you  know  nothiiig  yet  as 
humble,  recognising  the  limitations  you  ought  to  hnowy 
of  his  powers,  of  his  field;  that  his  II.  Of  knowledge  and  love  in  con - 
results  are  often  only  provisionally  trast  we  say  :  1.  Knowledge  jowj^  the 
and  relatively  true,  and  that  when  man  up ;  love  builds  him  up.  Love 
absolutely  true  they  are  only  part  of  is  the  basis  of  the  noblest  character; 
the  whole  Truth.  Nature — Natural  above  all,  of  the  distinctively  Christian 
Science — has  little  or  nothing  to  reveal  character.  This  begins  in  the  love  of 
to  the  man  full  of  prepossessions  or  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart;  this 
prejudices;  who  will  not  always  have  awakens  an  answering  love  to  God, 
the  spirit  of  a  learner ;  who,  confident  "  because  He  first  loved  us."  Love 
in  his  own  results,  too  promptly  closes  lays  all  new  knowledge  under  contribu- 
doors,  and  refuses  to  allow  to  himself  tion  for  practical  life;  it  is  the  supreme, 
further  inquiry,  or  to  new  truth  any  the  summarised.  Law  of  life ;  it  is 
entrance,  in  any  particular  direction.  the  one  adequate,  self-acting,  reliable. 
One  of  the  surest  results  of  the  widest  motive  power,  as  well  as  the  director  of 
knowledge  is  the  knowledge  how  much  all  Christian  activity.  Love  and  know- 
there  is  to  know,  and  how  Httle  any  one  ledge  need  each  other.  The  sentence 
man  can  or  does  know.  (Of.  Homily  is  antithetically  strong  in  its  form ; 
on  "  We  know  in  part"  xiii.  9.)  2.  The  but  facts,  and  the  reason  of  the  thing, 
humble,  teachable,  patient  temper  is  agree  to  make  it  clear  that  love  alone 
still  more  emphatically  a  sirw  qud  non  cannot  build  up  a  strong  character, 
of  all  knowledge  in  relation  to  Divine  Love  without  knowledge  tends  to  be- 
things.  *'The  little  child  is  the  greatest  come  mere  feeble  sentimentalism ;  a 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Indeed,  mere  impulsive,  impressionable  thing, 
"  the  Httle  child  alone  enters  into,"  and  at  the  mercy  of  the  latest  influence 
so  arrives  at  any  true  knowledge  of,  brought  to  bear.  Knowledge  ought  to 
"  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  The  man  of  give  "  bone,"  rigidity,  resistant  power, 
prepossessions — against  Revelation  or  to  the  spiritual  *'  constitution."  But 
any  part  of  its  contents,  or  for  Reason,  knowledge  alone  can  make  no  constitu- 
making  it  the  one,  supreme  organon  tion ;  love  is  the  health  of  the  soul, 
of  knowledge,  and  the  sole  test  of  truth  ;  without  which  all  the  food  which  know- 
who  will  insist  that  everything,  indeed,  ledge  brings,  only  ^^  puffs  up,"  not  feeds, 
shall  satisfy  his  reason — will  arrive  at  Thus  increase  of  knowledge  may  become 
no  true  knowledge  of  God.  The  man,  a  real  danger  to  the  soul,  unless  it  be 
in  spiritual  things  "  wise  in  his  own  turned  to  practical  account,  as  a  new 
conceits"  is  not  really  wise.  To  a  ability  to  serve  God  and  man  better, 
"  spiritual "  man  whom  **  love "  has  in  loving  devotion  to  both.  Turn  all 
"  built  up "  in  real  knowledge,  it  is  new  light  into  new  activity.  Light 
amusing  to  hear  the  dogmatically  should  be  force.  "  If  ye  know,  happy 
confident  pronouncements  upon  points  are  ye  if  ye  do."  2.  Knowledge  puffs 
of  theology  and  the  experimental  life.  the  man  himself  up ;  love  seeks  to  build 
[These  two  stand  in  the  most  intimate  others  up.  Paul's  point  here.  The 
association.  The  heart  makes  the  clear,  confident,  instructed  man,  to 
theologian.  The  knowledge  of  God  whom  all  the  idolatry  of  his  old  life 
and  things  Divine  is  a  grace  of  the  was  now  a  transparent  sham,  by  the 
same  Spirit  Who  awakens  and  sustains  keen  vision  of  his  knowh  dge,  seen 
the  experimental  life  of  God  within  the  through  and  through  in  all  its  empty 
soul.     He  will,  He  can,  teach  nothing  unreality,    was    apt    to  be  a    selfish 

179 


CHAP.  VIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


man.  Proud  in  his  superiority  to  the 
vulgar,  unreasoning  prejudices  of  the 
common  run  of  his  fellow-Christians ; 
puffed  up  with  a  sense  of  mental  grasp 
and  large  view  ;  his  danger  was  to  live 
for  himself,  to  pursue  his  own  course, 
reckless  what  souls  he  ran  down  and 
wrecked  in  the  unfaltering,  unswerving, 
severely  logical,  adherence  to  his  own 
clearly  traced  path,  followed  out  to  its 
utmost  logical  consequences.  The  peril 
of  knowledge  is  fastidiousness,  intoler- 
ance, and  lack  of  sympathy  for  other 
and  less  perfect  views,  a  cruel  insistence 
upon  its  own  rights  and  liberty ;  sum- 
mum  jus  working  summam  injuriam. 
Love  in  its  very  nature  goes  outside 
itself  ;  looks  at  others,  tries  to  under- 
stand their  ignorance,  the  difficulties 
of  their  half -enlightenment,  both  of 
understanding  and  conscience;  is  patient 
with  their  slower  progress,  accommo- 
dates its  own  pace  to  their  slower 
advancement.  Mere  knowledge  pushes 
ignorance  impatiently  aside,  and  holds 
on  its  own  way;  love  stops  to  help 
and  encourage,  and  carry  forward  in 
its  company  to  its  own  goal.  Know- 
ledge alone  is  apt  to  be  the  intellectual 
priest  or  Levite ;  Love  stops  to  be  the 
Samaritan,  seeking  to  save  and  build 
up  again  the  soul  in  peril,  or  per- 
plexity, or  ignorance.  Knowledge  says, 
"  This  people  that  knoweth  not  the  law 
are  cursed."  Love  says,  *'  Come  unto 
me,  ye  that  are  burdened  and  heavy 
laden  ;  I  will  give  you  rest." 

III.  Love,  and  not  mere  knowledge, 
brings  into  fellowship  with  God. — 
The  Devil  knows — none  better — how 
true  is  everything  Paul  asserts  in  this 
chapter.  Conceivable  that  a  man  may 
acquire  and  retain  a  full,  accurate, 
trained  knowledge  of  the  didactic  and 
controversial  literature  of  divinity  in 
all  its  topics,  whilst  losing  the  love 
which  brought  him  into  union  with 
God.  But,  the  love  gone,  the  life  is 
gone ;  the  link  between  God  and  the 
soul  is  sundered.  If  he  do  not  love 
God,  he  cannot  know  God.  [How 
constantly  we  say,  "  So-and-so  will 
never  know  or  understand  me ;  he 
does   not   like  me."]     God  will  know 

180 


him,  indeed,  as  He  knows  all  His 
works  (Acts  xv.  18).  But  He  will 
"  know  the  proud"  man  of  knowledge 
"afar  off"  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  6).  There 
will  be  no  love  in  God's  knowledge. 
No  affectionate,  complacent  regard,  as 
a  father  knows  his  child,  or  a  friend 
his  friend.  The  man  who  loves  knows 
God.  They  look  into  each  other's 
heart,  and  know  each  other. 

Yer.  6.  Christian  Monotheism. — The 
Jew  was  the  monotheist  of  the  ancient 
world.  [Modern  inquiry  and  fuller 
knowledge  are  making  it  clear  that 
Cyrus  was  no  such  strict  monotheist 
as  until  recently  was  supposed.  More- 
over, the  Persian  religion  recognised  as 
secondary,  but  independent,  Being,  the 
Author  and  Worker  of  evil.  It  was 
really  Dualism,  not  Monotheism.] 
The  Christian,  as  well  as  the  Jew  and 
the  Mahometan,  is  a  modern  mono- 
theist. ^^  To  us  there  is  hut  one  God.^^ 
The  name  "  Unitarian  "  is  now  under- 
stood, and  has  become  a  convenience ; 
but  every  Christian  Trinitarian  claims 
to  be  also  in  the  true  sense  "  unitarian  "  : 
a  monotheist  in  the  strictest  sense. 
(See  also  further  in  the  Critical  Notes.) 
This  Christian  belief  in  the  unity  of 
God  by  no  means  denies  Godhead  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  [or  to  the  Spirit]. 
[It  is  understood  that  all  language  on 
this  topic  is  negative  of  error,  rather 
than  positive  assertion  of  truth,  and 
must  be  accepted  and  used  with  that 
proviso.  It  walks  on  a  narrow,  edge- 
like path,  with  pitfalls  of  error,  of 
overstatement,  or  deficient  statement, 
on  either  hand.]  With  sufficient 
frequency  to  make  belief  in  His  God- 
head secure,  are  Divine  names  given 
to  Him,  and  a  Divio e  position,  in  the 
language,  affections,  life,  work,  of  the 
men  of  the  New  Testament.  Yet,  pre- 
valently, the  name  "  God"  is  given  to  the 
"  Father."  This  verse  is  typical  in  its 
style  of  language  in  regard  to  Christ. 
1.  Something  may  be  due  to  the 
"  local  colouring "  of  the  men,  their 
Jewish  race  and  upbringing,  their 
idolatrous  age  and  surroundings.  The 
unity  of  God  still  needed  emphasising 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  viii. 


in  the  presence  of  a  polytheistic  world. 
Also  they  had  themselves  known,  or 
knew  well  those  who  had  known,  the 
Son  of  God, — had  eaten  with,  lived 
with,  seen,  heard,  handled,  the  Son  in 
the  familiar  guise  of  the  Man,  Jesus, 
of  Nazareth.  Perhaps  peimissible, 
and  in  accoi-dance  with  the  analogy 
of  all  God's  dealings,  to  say  that  they 
were  not  yet  so  far  emancipated  from 
their  old  monotheistic  predispositions, 
as  that  their  habitual  language  should 
yet  fully  expiess  their  actual  belief  in 
the  Godhead  of  their  Master.  The 
heart  did,  but  not  yet  fully  their 
tongue.  2.  More  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  from  (say)  Acts  ii.  22  to  (say) 
1  John  V.  20  the  Spirit  is,  with  in- 
creasing clearness,  revealing  the  Divine 
Son.  In  this  verse  the  language  is 
still  transitional.  3.  But,  after  all, 
there  is  not  only  that  degi'ee  of  relative 
truth  in  the  restricted  attribute  of  the 
name  "  God  "  to  the  "  Father  " ;  there 
is  also  the  absolute  truth  which  has 
sometimes  been  called  the  "  Pri7ici- 
patus  "  of  the  Father.  [Neither  this, 
nor  "subordination"  in  legard  to  the 
Son,  may  be  overpressed.  They  are 
working  conventionalisms  of  lan- 
guage, rather  than  exact  statements 
of  the  whole  truth ;  these  latter  are, 
indeed,  impossible  to  us.  In  Pearson's 
well  known,  cautious  words  {Creed^ 
article  i.),  ^^  Some  kind  of  priority  we 
must  ascril^e  unto  Him  Whom  we  call 
the  first,  in  respect  of  HimWhom  we  call 
the  second.  .  .  .  Now  this  privilege  or 
priority  consisteth  not  in  this,  that  the 
essence  or  attributes  of  the  one  are 
greater  than  the  essence  or  the  at- 
tributes of  the  other,  .  .  .  but  only  in 
this,  that  the  Father  hath  that  essence 
of  Himself,  the  Son  by  communication 
from  the  Father."  Above  all,  add  to 
this,  that  New  Testament  language 
ordinarily  has  regard  to  the  Father 
and  the  Son,  as  they  are  seen  related, 
and  active,  in  the  working  out  of 
Redemption.  4.  Multiplied,  often 
verified,  experiment  in  all  ages,  in 
all  lands,  in  persons  of  all  ages  and 
types,  has  shown  that,  with  the  smallest 
exception,  the  Godhead  of  the  *'  Lord 


Jesus  Christ "  has  not  only  created  no 
difficulty  in  regard  to  the  Oneness  of 
the  Godhead,  but  has  proved  to  be  the 
truth  which  has  satisfied  alike  the  most 
cultured  intellects  and  the  simplest 
hearts.  For  the  child,  or  the  heathen, 
or  the  untrained  adult  mind  at  home, 
"Jesus"  is  the  "God"  with  Whom 
their  heart  has  practically  to  do. 
[A  thing  this,  quite  distinct  from  the 
formal,  theologically  precise  Sweden- 
borgian  assertion  that  tbe  One  God  is 
He  Whom  we  know  as  the  Son,  Jesus 
Christ.]  History  and  the  reason  of 
the  thing  show  that 

I.  Christian,  Trinitarian  Mono- 
theism is  the  one  form  of  teaching 
about  God  which  has  for  any  long 
period  preserved  unimpaired  the 
doctrine  of  the  unity  of  God. — "  The 
mere  abstract  unity  of  the  Godhead, 
which  does  not  include  a  multiplicity, 
soon  leads  to  a  cold  and  lifeless  Deism ; 
and  as  soon  as  it  has  reached  this 
point,  is  forced  to  seek  refreshment 
from  the  pantheistic  religions  of  nature. 
After  the  Jews  and  Mahometans  had 
rejected  the  idea  of  a  Son  who  is  of 
the  same  Divine  essence  with  His  Father, 
as  idolatry,  they  were  fated  to  find 
their  absolutely  monotheistic  conceptions 
of  God  utterly  empty  and  lifeless,  so  that 
they  yearned  alter  the  warm  vitality 
of  Pantheism.  This  is  a  phenomenon 
which  is  clearly  evident  from  the 
history  of  the  Jewish  philosophers 
(especially  Spinoza)  as  well  as  of  the 
Indian  and  Persian  Pantheists.  And 
so,  too,  it  could  not  but  happen  that 
philosophical  Pantheism  should  tread 
on  the  heels  of  German  Deism  and 
nationalism.  As  long  as  Theism  dis- 
tinguishes only  between  God  and  the 
world,  and  not  between  God  and  God, 
it  will  always  have  a  tendency  to  Pan- 
theism, or  some  other  denial  of  absolute 
Being.  .  .  .  (The)  One  has  taken  to 
Himself  all  life,  and  neutralises  all  the 
vital  fulness  of  nature.  We  no  longer 
feel  love  or  joy.  There  is  but  One 
around  whom  all  things  move,  and  He  is 
a  cold,  mathematical  quantity,  a  point 
of  pure  abstraction.  Abstract  Mono- 
theism has  too  little  life-blood  to  offer 

181 


CHAP.  viiL   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   CORINTHIANS. 


an    enduring   resistance   to    the   pan- 
theistic deification  of  nature.  ...  In 
[the  Trinity]   we  have  a  Unity ;  not, 
however,  unloving  and  Hfeless,  a  cold 
numerical  One,  but  a  complex  of  living 
and   loving   energies — a   living  Unity 
embracing   a    Plurality,   and    bearing 
the  sacred  name  of  Father,  Son,  and 
Spirit."    [Christlieb,  Modern  Doubt  and 
Christian    Belief,    pp.  266,    267.      To 
similar  effect,  and  very  nobly,  Hunt- 
ington, Christian  Believing  and  Living, 
pp.  343,  344,  who  says  :]  "  Two  errors 
divide   the  unchristianised    world   be- 
tween them.    Either  the  personality  of 
God  is  sacrificed  to  the  infinity,  or  the 
infinity  is  sacrificed  to  the  personality. 
In  the  former  case  men  may  imagine  that 
they  recognise  an  Infinite  Being ;  but 
it  is  only  an  abstraction,  or  a  principle, 
or  a  bundle  of  laws,  or  a  loose  mass  of 
sequences  and  phenomena,  from  which 
the  attribute  of  infinity  itself  as  well 
as   of   personal    consciousness   is   soon 
found  to  have  ebbed   away.      In  the 
latter  case  the  innate    longing  for  a 
veritable  Divine  Person,  with  personal 
traits  answering  to  ours,  may  be  met ; 
but  it  will  soon  begin  to  appear  that, 
though  a  Person  remains,  the  Eternal 
and  Uncreated  and  Almighty  God  of 
glory  is    gone.  .  .  .  Both    the    errors 
spring  from  desires   and   demands   of 
man's  nature  which  in  themselves  are 
right.  .  .  .  Despairing  to  conceive   of 
personality  without  limitation,  some  men 
rush  over  to  Pantheism.     Others,  de- 
spairing of  retaining  a  Deity  near  enough 
for  love  and  sympathy  who  is  literally 
infinite,  stop  short  with  a  Deity  who 
is  not  God.  .  .  .  [And  he  adds  :]  These 
implanted  wants  are  wonderfully  satis- 
fied in  the   Divine   Trinity.      In  the 
Absolute   and  one  only  Godhead,  all 
man's    highest,    purest,    largest,    most 
far-reaching     conceptions,     stretching 
away  into  the   regions  of  Infinitude, 
Eternity,  Almightiness,  have  their  full 
and    complete   exercise.      In   the   In- 
carnate Christ,  taking  up  our  humanity, 
the  longing  for  a  personal,  sympathis- 
ing, companionable,  Deity  is  blessedly 
answered — and  yet  God  is  there :  there 
is  no  loss  of  the  essential  and  veritable 

182 


Deity.  In  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  natural 
desire  of  the  devout  mind  to  connect 
God  with  all  the  operations  of  the 
present  world,  the  processes  of  Creation, 
the  welfare,  renewal,  revolutions, 
sanctification  of  the  Human  Family, 
finds  its  lawful  verification."  *'  I  have 
long  thought  that  without  an  eternal 
Logos  you  must  have  an  eternal  cosmos ; 
and  I  therefore  suspect  that  a  mono- 
personal  Theism  is  impotent  against  the 
Pantheist.  So  that  since  the  contro- 
versy has  passed  from  its  old  atheistic  . 
phases,  I  doubt  if  either  Deist,  or 
Socinian,  or  Mahometan,  will  be  able 
to  cope  with  the  Pantheist.  In  short, 
I  doubt  if  any  but  a  Trinitarian  can 
do  so  adequately."  (Dr.  Duncan,  in 
Colloquia  Feripatetica,  p.  96.) 

II.  "  The  conception  of  the  triune 
God  furnishes  us  with  the  sole  bridge 
that  can  fill  up  the  breach  between  God 
and   the  world,  ...  the    void    which 
separates   the   transcendent   unity    of 
God    from    the    rich     and     manifold 
organisation  of  natural  life.  .  .  .  The 
Word    which    becomes    incarnate,    in 
order  to    do  and  suffer  for  mankind, 
and  the    Spirit   who    by    His    power 
begets  fresh  Hfe,  both  stand  between 
God  and  the  world  as  mediate  causes 
which   not  only   render   the    creation 
of  the    world    a  possibility,    but    also 
guarantee  the  Divine  presence  in   it, 
and  its  return  to  God.     Here  we  have 
all  the  fulness  and  freshness  of  Pan- 
theism   combined   with   the   truth    of 
Monotheism,    whilst    the    element   in 
which  the  latter  is  wanting,  viz.  a  real 
connecting  link  between  God  and  the 
world,  is  here  supplied.  .  .  .  [So  par- 
ticularly by  the  Incarnation  and  the 
Atonement.]      We    have    a    connect- 
ing link  between  God  and  man  in  the 
person  of  the  Incarnate  Logos,  who  is 
the  eternal  Archetype  of    the    whole 
creation,  and  especially  of  man,  and  who 
for    all  future  aeons  will  be  the  head 
of  the  whole  body.  .  .  .  The  spiritual 
chasm    which    yawns  between   sinful 
man  and  the  absolutely  sinless  God- 
man  is  filled   up  by  the  regenerating 
and  sanctifying  influences  of  the  Holy       ( 
Spirit.     Hence    the  doctrine    of    the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS,   chap.  Viil. 


Trinity  affords  the  most  important  aids 
in  determining  our  practical  relation  to 
God."     (Ohristlieb,  p.  270.) 

(For  the  relations  of  this  Doctrine 
to  the  spiritual  life,  see  in  the  Critical 
Notes.) 

Vers.  10-13.  The  Rights  of  Con- 
science.— N.B.  of  even  an  ill-instructed, 
half-enlightened,  needlessly  sensitive, 
conscience. 

I.  It  has  rights  (1)  as  against 
the  man  himself.  It  claims  to  be 
listened  to,  and  obeyed,  especially 
when  restricting  liberty  and  condemn- 
ing action.  •  The  man  may  grow  more 
enlightened  by-and-by,  better  in- 
structed, clearer  in  view,  and  stronger 
in  character.  But,  until  he  does,  let 
him  rigorously  compel  himself  to  obey 
conscience.  The  eye  will  so  be  kept 
healthy,  and  ready  to  receive  new  light ; 
the  ear  will  be  kept  sensitive,  and 
ready  to  receive  new  direction  from 
God.  More  hope,  more  possibilities, 
for  a  conscientious  heathen  than  for  a 
well- instructed  Christian  who  at  every 
step  is  doing  violence  to  his  clear 
knowledge  of  wrong  and  right.  "  To 
him  that  hath,  (and  is  faithful  to,  even 
one  talent  of  knowledge  and  light) 
shall  be  given  (more  light)."  God  is 
honoured.  Whose  gifts  both  the  faculty 
and  any  degree  of  enlightenment  it 
possesses  are.  Obedience  to  conscience 
is  the  germ  out  of  which  all  true 
morality  must  grow.  A  man  must  not 
do  what  his  conscience  forbids.  (2)  As 
against  the  better  instructed,  fully 
enlightened  Christian.  Such«  a  one 
must  deal  gently  with  the  "  weaker  " 
brother.  Especially  may  he  need  to 
abridge  his  own  liberty  for  his  sake. 
"  No  doubt,  to  the  large,  free,  en- 
lightened mind  of  Paul,  all  these 
scruples  and  superstitions  must  have 
seemed  mean,  trivial,  and  small  indeed. 
It  was  a  matter  to  him  of  far  less  im- 
portance that  truth  should  be  estab- 
lished, than  that  it  should  be  arrived 
at  truly — a  matter  of  far  less  import- 
ance, even  that  right  should  be  done, 
than  that  right  should  be  done  rightly. 
Conscience  was  far  more  sacred  to  him 


than  even  liberty.  .  .  .  The  scruple  may 
be  small  and  foolish,  but  it  may  be  im- 
possible to  uproot  it,  without  tearing  up 
the  feeling  of  the  sanctity  of  conscience, 
and  of  reverence  for  the  law  of  God, 
associated  with  the  scruple.  Therefore 
.  .  .  Paul  counsels  ...  to  abridge  their 
.  .  .  liberty.  .  .  .  For  two  reasons  : 
the  first,  one  of  Christian  feeling.  It 
might  cause  exquisite  pain  to  sensitive 
minds  to  see  those  things  which 
appeared  to  them  to  be  wrong  done  by 
Christian  brethren.  .  .  .  Further,  if 
any  man,  overborne  by  authority  or 
interest  were  [to  eat],  not  according  to 
conscience,  but  against  it,  there  would 
be  a  distinct  and  direct  act  of  dis- 
obedience— a  conflict  between  the  sense 
of  right,  and  the  gratification  of  his 
appetites  or  the  power  of  influence  ; 
and  then  his  compliance  would  as  much 
damage  his  conscience  and  moral  sense 
as  if  the  act  had  been  wrong  in  itself." 
(Robertson,  Expos.  Lectures,  in  loco.) 

II.  Yet  conscience  has  no  absolute 
right  of  acquittal. — 1.  Look,  e.g.,  at  1 
Cor.  iv.  4  :  "I  know  nothing  against 
myself,  yet,"  etc.  Conscience  holds 
barely  a  "  court  of  first  instance." 
Every  verdict  must  be  reported  to  the 
Great  Judge.  He  alone  knows  abso- 
lute wrong  and  right.  Conscience  is  no 
independently  authoritative  fountain 
of  law.  It  does  good,  though  only 
provisional,  service  if  (as  here)  a  man  is 
led  to  use  what  is  perhaps  an  excess  of 
caution.  It  cannot  blamelessly  enlarge 
libertv,  if  the  enlargement  mean  sin. 
Conscientious  ignorance  can  only  be 
"  excused  "  when  it  has  led  to  "  sin,"  if 
the  man  be,  as  the  foundation  of  all 
his  status  before  God,  a  sinner  trusting 
in  Christ,  and  if  he  have  also  sought  for 
light  with  all  simplicity  and  earnest- 
ness, and  have  followed,  as  before 
God,  all  the  light  he  has.  2.  Also  no 
regard  for  another  man's  scruples  or 
ignorance  may  require  a  Christian  to 
suppress  or  conceal  truth,  or  to  do 
what  to  himself  is  wrong.  His  con- 
science in  its  turn  has  its  rights,  and 
must  be  obeyed.  [Indeed,  obviously, 
the  whole  field  within  which  Paul's 
counsel   and   its    underlying  principle 

183 


CHAP.  IX.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  COMlNTHIANS. 


are  binding  or  operative,  is  a  narrow  to    defend    their   vanity   or   waste   in 

one,  limited  to  questions  not  of  absolute^  dress  1     What  friend  will  not  give  up 

abiding,    universal,   wrong    and   right,  his  cards,  or  his  novel,  or  his  opera,  if 

but   only   to    the    relative    wrong   and  his  practice  is  a  stumbling-block,  or  a 

right  which  may  vary  according  to  the  real  temptation,  to  his  friend — though 

circumstances  of  the  man  or  the  time,  to  perhaps   very  illogically   and  unfairly 

expediency,  or  the  demand  of  brotherly  so  ?     It   would   not   be   the   Spirit   of 

forbearance.]    [^^  Christ  died"  ior  such.  \  Christ   which  says:    "Why   should  I 

How  much  will  you  deny  yourself  of  give   up   my   novel,  my   billiards,  my 

to  save  a  soul  from  difficulty  or  tempta-  opera,  my  alcohol,  my  cards,  for  the 

tion  ?      What  father  will  not  banish  sake  of  these  poor  creatures  who  cannot 

drink  from  his  table,  if  his  boy  is  in  use  without  abusing  1     For  the  sake, 

danger  ?     What  teacher  will  not  dress  e.g.,     of    these     children,     these     new 

more  quietly,  if  her   Sunday  scholars  converts,  these  narrow  and  prejudiced 

are  in  danger  of  pleading  her  example  '  evangelicals'  !  "] 


CHAPTER  IX. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1. — Notice  the  reversed  order  of  clauses  in  the  better-attested  reading.  Free. — I.e.  qua 
man  ;  he  is  always  Christ's  "  bondservant " ;  it  is  of  his  own  choice  that  he  submits  to  such 
limitations  (vers.  19-22)  upon  his  liberty  as,  e.g..,  in  viii.  13 ;  or  as  this  in  question,  that  he 
should  maintain  himself  by  his  manual  labour,  whereas  he  was  also  "/r<?e  "  to  demand 
Church  maintenance  for  himself  if  he  had  chosen.  Apostle. — He  had  once  been  the 
Apostle  (Sheliach,  the  Talmudic  equivalent)  of  the  Jewish  authorities  at  Jerusalem  to  the 
synagogue  in  Damascus.  [In  this,  etymological,  sense  and  employment  of  the  word 
Barnabas  is  called  an  apostle  (Acts  xiv.  14).  So  the  same  popular,  freer  use  derived  from 
the  Jewish  practice  lingers  in  2  Cor.  viii.  23  (of  Luke  and  the  bearers  of  the  "  collection ''), 
in  Phil.  ii.  25  (of  Epaphroditus),  The  sense  of  "  among  the  apostles "  as  including 
Andronicus  and  Junias  (Rom.  xvi.  7)  is  very  disputable,  especially  if  the  latter  name  be  a 
woman's,  "  Junia."]  Now  a  greater  High  Priest  had  sent  him  forth  as  His  messenger  and 
representative.  For  this  the  two  needful  qualifications  were,  to  have  had  his  commission 
direct  from  Christ's  own  lips  ["  I  send  thee  "  (Acts  xxvi.  17),  putting  him  on  an  equality  with 
those  who  heard  Him  say,  "  Go  ye  therefore,"  etc.  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20)],  and  to  be  able,  at 
first  hand,  and  not  merely  by  hearsay  or  report  of  others,  to  assert  as  a  fact  within  his  own 
knowledge  that  the  Crucified  Christ  was  risen  again  and  was  then  really  living  [putting  Paul 
on  the  footing  of  Peter  and  the  rest,  who  could  say,  Acts  v.  32  ;  cf.  Acts  i.  22  (very  explicit) ; 
cf.  1  John  i.  1],  Important /(9r  us  that  the  first  link  of 'the  chain  of  historical  evidence  and 
testimony  should  be  sound.  [If  indeed  the  uniqueness  of  the  position  of  the  apostles  in 
their  special  selection,  commission,  and  qualification  for  this  testimony,  out  of  the  witnesses 
of  XV.  6,  does  not  make  them,  not  merely  the  first  link,  but  the  strong  staple,  holding  the 
first  link,  and  itself  driven  into  the  solid  rock  of  the  facts.  The  Apostolic  company  medi- 
ated between  the  Great  Fact— the  Living,  Risen  Christ— and  the  long  succession  of  Christian 
teachers  who  must  needs  receive  the  truth  on  evidence  of  others  (supported,  indeed,  by 
the  subjective  evidence  of  their  experience  of  His  working).  My  ...  in  the  Lord. — 
Observe  how  the  second  phrase  guards,  almost  corrects,  the  first.  [Cf.  1  Cor.  xvi.  23,  24 : 
Christ's  grace ;  my  love.]  No  independent  work  ;  no  success  of  his  own.  He  has  no 
wisdom,  strength,  success,  except  as  his  whole  life  is  "m  Christ''' ;  and  thus  Christ  wins  the 
success  and  does  the  work  through  him.  It  is  Christ's  working  and  power;  it  is  only  a 
question  which  of  the  members  of  the  Body  He  shall  employ  for  any  particular  part  of  the 
great  task,  and  to  which  shall  be  "  credited  "  the  particular  share  of  the  great  total  result. 

Ver.  2.  To  others. —  Q.d.  in  their  opinion,  and  by  their  recognition,  "7  am  not''  Notice 
'■'■at  least,"  R.V.  Seal. — As  by-and-by  his  "crown"  (Phil.  iv.  1),  and,  then  and  now,  his 
"joy  "  (ib.).  "At  Corinth,  at  all  events,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  original  validity  of 
my  commission,  or  whether  it  be  still  running  and  valid." 

184 


HOMILEtIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  iX. 


Ver.  3.  Answer.— ^^o%m,  as,  e.g..  Acts  xxii.  1 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  16.  A  forensic  word,  like 
"  examine,''  as,  e.g.,  in  Acts  iv.  9,  xxiv.  8,  xxviii.  18 ;  (1  Cor.  iv.  3-5). 

Ver.  4.  Power. — In  the  sense  of  "  i-ight " ;  so  in  ver.  12,  "  to  eat  and  to  drink,'"  q.d.  at  the 
expense  of  the  Church. 

Ver.  5.  Sister. — In  the  Christian  sense,  parallel  to  *'brot7ier"  (1  Cor.  v.  11,  etc.);  "«  wife" 
who  is  also  a  Christian  "  mif^r."  The  brethren  of  the  Lord.— Three  long-discussed,  in- 
fluentially  sustained,  theories:  (1)  Children  of  Mary  and  Joseph,  born  after  Jesus  (the 
Helvidian  theory)  ;  (2)  Children  of  Joseph  by  a  former  wife  (the  Epiphanian)  ;  (3)  Cousins 
of  Christ,  children  of  Mary  the  sister  of  the  Virgin,  assumed  also  to  be  the  wife  of  Alphaeus 
{Jerome's  theory).  Probably  the  data  are  insujficient  for  a  sure  conclusion,  agreement  in 
which  would  otherwise  long  ago  have  been  arrived  at.  (1)  is  unquestionably  the  most 
natural  impression  to  be  gathered  from  the  Gospel  history  and  from  the  word  "  brethren." 
(2),  and  in  a  degree  (3),  no  doubt  originated,  or  found  a  very  strong  motive  for  their  propa- 
gation and  acceptance,  in  a  desire  to  save  the  "  perpetual  virginity  "  of  Mary.  (1)  accounts 
best  for  the  prominence  in  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  of  the  James  of  Acts  xv.  and  of  Paul's 
Epistles.  Cephas. — Matt.  viii.  14.  [Very  precarious  speculation  has  seen  another  touch  of 
Peter's  domestic  life  in  1  Pet.  v.  13,  and  yet  more  precariously  has  made  his  wife  the  "elect 
lady"  of  2  John,  because  of  1  Pet.  v.  13,  which  is  only  "the  elected  one  (fem.)  at  Babylon."] 

Ver.  6. — Barnabas  was  a  rich  landowner  in  Cyprus  (Acts  iv.),  and  needed  neither  to  work 
for  his  living  nor  to  ask  the  Church  to  maintain  him.  If  (with  Bishop  Lightfoot,  Gal.  ii.  11) 
we  make  Paul's  rebuke  of  Barnabas's  vacillation  occur  during  Acts  xv.  30-40,  they  may  have 
started  together  with  a  "  soreness  "  which  made  Barnabas  (or  both  of  them)  tenderly  irritable, 
and  helped  to  the  "  quarrel "  (so-called)  about  John  Mark.  This  the  earliest  mention  of 
Barnabas  by  Paul  after  the  separation.  [The  spirit  of  even  this  passing  mention  may  be 
paralleled  by  John  Wesley's  persistent  kindness  of  thought  and  speech  to  and  about 
Whitefield,  after  their  separation  over  the  Calvinist  controversy.] 

Ver.  7. — Matters  little  whether  the  master  or  the  employ^  in  the  vineyard,  the  owner  or 
only  the  hired  shepherd,  be  intended.    Probably  the  former.   As  to  the  soldier,  note  the  R.V. 

Ver.  8.  As  a  man. — Found  in  Rom.  iii.  5  (cf.  vi.  19);  1  Cor.  iii.  3,  ix.  8,  xv.  32  (Gal.  i.  11, 
plur.),  iii.  15 ;  "  after  man,''  as  a  pattern  or  norm,  but  with  varying  shades  of  meaning.  Here : 
"According  to  the  sense  of  what  is  right,  customary  amongst  men."  Not  only  does  the 
common  judgment  of  mankind  bear  him  out  in  his  contention,  but  God  has  delivered  His 
mind  also. 

Ver.  9. — "Deut.  xxv.  4,  quoted  also  in  1  Tim.  v.  8,  is  very  conspicuous  for  its  unexpected, 
sudden,  and  momentary  reference  to  cattle  amid  matter  quite  different  "  (Beet).  [But  the 
whole  chapter  looks  like  a  succession  of  legislative  dicta,  "entered  up  "  in  the  statute-book 
with  no  order  or  connection  beyond  that  of  their  succession  of  actual  enactment  as  the 
occasion  arose.]  An  instance  carrying  a  far-reaching  principle  in  regard  to  the  interpretation 
of  the  Old  Testament.  If  some  enactments  seem  vague,  impracticable,  trivial,  or  even 
minutely  vexatious,  "  unworthy  of  the  attention  of  such  a  Book  and  of  God,"  we  may  say : 
1.  A  trivial  case  may  carry  a  great  principle.  2.  Some  simple  precepts  have  large  analogical 
meanings  when  transferred  to  spiritual  things.  3.  The  gy  pres  principle  applies  here,  as  in 
all  legislation  which  is  affected  by  changing  circumstances.  4.  Only  fair  to  the  Bible  to 
bring  in  common  sense,  to  explain  or  apply,  as  in  ordinary  life.  True  order  of  thought,  in 
this  and  all  similar  instances,  is  not  up  from  the  temporary,  "  trivial "  case  to  the  higher 
spiritual  analogy,  but  down  from  this  to  the  lower  and  lesser.  In  this  small  enactment  we 
are  touching  a  widely  applicable  principle  of  the  Divine  order,  in  a  very  lowly,  temporary 
embodiment.     N.B. — This  "  law  of  Moses  "  is  also  what  "  God  saith." 

Ver.  10.  Our  sakes'  altogether. — Not  denying  the  early,  lower  intention  of  God,  who  does, 
in  this  passage,  '■'take  care  for  oxen"  Similar  to  "I  have  loved  Jacob,  and  hated  Esau"; 
or  rather  to  "  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice  " ;  where  evidently  the  negation  is  not 
absolute,  but  comparative,  in  its  force.  Our. — Hardly  to  be  narrowed  to  mean  only  Christian 
ministers.  Note  the  change  of  reading,  and  of  consequent  rendering.  '■'Partaker  of  his 
hope"  meant,  "Enjoying  the  reward  he  hoped  for  as  he  laboured."  This  also  a  general 
principle,  not  specialised  until  vers.  11  and  14,  but  a  point  of  Divine  "  political  economy," 
which  should  be  embodied  in  (say)  the  relations  between  capital  and  labour. 

Ver.  12.— Cf.  2  Cor.  xi.  12. 

Ver.  13. — Stanley  sees  in  this  resumed  argumentation,  and  in  the  reiteration  in  ver.  14  of 
what  had  been  said  in  ver.  11,  the  probable  sign  of  a  resumption  of  the  letter  after  some  pause. 
[As  perhaps  a  change  of  amanuensis,  or  a  new  morning's  work.  Cf,  2  Cor.  x.  1.  He  presses 
also  "7  wrote,"  in  ver.  15.]  Lev.  vi.  16,  26;  Num.  xviii.  8-19.  See  in  connection  with 
viii.  1. 

Ver.  14.  The  Lord  Christ  hath  ordained. — Matt.  x.  9  sq.,  Luke  x.  7  are  quoted  [not  neces- 
sarily from  written  Gospels]  as  in  vii.  10. 

Ver.  15.  Used. — As  in  ver.  12.  "  Have  not  availed  myself  of  my  right,  nor  urged  upon  you 
the  Law  of  Moses  and  the  Lord  Christ's  command."    For  Paul's  sensitiveness  about  being 

185 


CHAP.  IX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L  CORINTHIANS. 


misunderstood,  see  Phil.  iv.  11,  17.  Glorying. — "Boasting."  Twenty-nine  times  occurring 
in  a  few  chapters  of  these  two  Epistles  (especially  in  2  Cor.  x.,  xi,,  xii.),  and  only  twenty-six 
times  in  all  his  other  writings.  (Farrar;  who  compares  the  "  puffed  up"  of  1  Qoi. passiiriy 
elsewhere  only  Col.  ii.  18.) 

Ver.  16.  Though.— Better  "i/"  (R.V.). 

Ver.  17. — Choose  between  two  slightly  divergent  lines  of  interpretation:  (1)  In  so  far  as  I 
act  voluntarily  in  foregoing  my  right  to  maintenance,  I  have  my  reward  ;  in  so  far  as  I  act 
without  my  choice,  but  under  compulsion  of  the  "  wo^,"  I  am  only  His  servant,  His  steward 
but  His  bondslave,  whose  whole  service  is  duty,  and  needs  no  thanks  ;  and  what  then  is  my 
reward,  that  I  should  thus  preach  gratuitously  ?  Why,  the  ability  to  appeal  to  men  with 
the  more  effect,  because  I  am  independent  (as  in  vers.  19,  20).  My  concessions  to  them 
have  greater  force  of  appeal.  (2)  More  usually,  the  "reward"  is  taken  simply  to  mean 
(as  ver.  18)  the  privilege,  and  the  satisfaction  to  himself,  of  preaching  gratuitously.  But 
this  would  have  no  self-centering  value  to  Paul,  and  only  would  be  to  him  desirable  as 
giving  him  the  vantage-ground  for  vers.  19,  20.  Evans  (in  Speaher)  thinks  that  vers.  19,  20 
formally  specify  the  "  reward  "  ;  most  find  it  in  ver.  18.  The  '*  reward  "  is  hardly  one  given 
by  God.  If  it  be,  yet  the  act  rewarded  is  done  in  strength  which  is  entirely  grace.  I'here 
is  no  such  independent  worthiness  in  the  man  as  to  claim  reward  as  a  right ;  yet  it  is  fitting 
that  the  right  act  should  have  its  recognition  from  God.  Stanley,  Lappily ,  says :  "  This  contra- 
diction \i.e.  of  ver.  16  to  ver.  15]  is  .  .  .  specially  characteristic  of  the  Apostle's  style  when  he 
speaks,  as  here,  of  '  boasting.'  He  can  hardly  mention  a  '  boast '  without  instantly  recalling 
it."  He  adds :  "  In  one  sense  he  clings  to  his  boast,  in  another  sense  the  necessity  of  preach- 
ing the  Gospel  sweeps  it  away.  And  thus  the  construction  of  ver.  17  was  probably  meant 
to  be,  '  Whether  willingly  or  unwillingly,  I  have  a  stewardship  entrusted  to  me.'"  But  (he 
proceeds  to  suggest)  probably  as  in  2  Cor.  v.  13,  with  a  sudden  change  of  conception 
(cf.  viii,  3)  an  intrusive  thought  gets  into  the  former  clause. 

Ver.  19. — Well  expounded  in  Gal.  v.  13,  compared  with  ver.  1. 

Ver.  20. — Keeping  the  great  feasts  and  observing  vows,  circumcising  Timothy,  [but  not 
Titus]. 

Ver.  21. — "  Tinder  law  "  in  both  cases.  Too  absolute  to  say  that  without  the  article  "  Zaw" 
in  general^  and  with  the  article,  the  Mosaic  law^  are  meant.  Truer  statement  in  Cremer, 
Lexicon  :  '•  The  article  is  usually  wanting  where  stress  is  laid  not  upon  its  historical  impress 
and  outward  form,  but  upon  the  conception  itself ;  not  upon  the  law  which  God  gave,  but 
upon  law  as  given  by  God,  and  as,  therefore,  the  only  one  that  is  or  can  be.  So  especially 
in  passages  where  the  article  is  alternately  found  and  omitted,  Rom.  ii.  14,  15,  etc.  But 
that  vdfxos  without  the  article  also  means  the  law  which  was  given  to  Israel,  is  clear  most 
manifestly  from  Rom.  v.  13"  (pp.  430,  431).  Augustine's  "law"  for  a  Christian  life, 
"  Dilige,  et  quod  vis  fac,"  is  not  ^practically  enough.  Christian  liberty  is  within  the  bounds 
of  the  will  of  another — Christ  "  the  Lord."  And  this  is  now  the  great  law  of  "  God  "  :  "  Be 
ye  under  the  law  and  will  of  The  Son,  Christ."     (Cf.  John  vi.  29.) 

Ver.  22.  All  .  .  .  all,  .  .  .  all  .  .  .  some.  —  If  only  he  could  have  said  ^^all"  in  the 
fourth  instance  !  But  some  will  "  perish  for  whom  Christ  died  "  (viii.  11);  no  great  wonder, 
then,  if  some  are  not  saved  for  whom  Paul  preached,  and  used  this  holy,  self-sacrificing 
versatility,  but  all  in  vain  1  Obviously  '*  all  things  "  has  its  limits.  "  To  do  wrong  can  save 
no  one  "  (Beet). 

Ver.  23. — "  That  I  may  obtain,  in  company  with  these  whom  I  hope  to  save,  the  blessings 
promised  in  the  Gospel  "  (Beet).     Good  exposition  in  1  Tim.  iv.  16. 

Ver.  24. — His  own  salvation  is  at  stake  as  well  as  that  of  his  hearers.  He  must  do  all  these 
things,  not  only  as  expedients  which  for  his  hearers'  sakes  may  make  him  a  successful  soul- 
winner,  but  because  to  do  everything  he  can  to  ensure  success  is  to  discharge  faithfully  his 
"  stewardsJiij)  "  (ver.  17),  and  is  thus  one  condition  of  his  final  acceptance  when  he  comes  to 
the  goal.  The  comma  after  "  run  "  in  the  A.V.,  and,  still  more,  the  "  even  so  run  "  in  the 
R.  v.,  makes  it  clear  that  the  reading  should  not  be  carelessly  taken  to  be,  "  Run  so  that  ye 
may,"  nor,  "  So  run  as  that  ye  may."  "  So  "  looks  not  forward  to  "  that  ye  may  oMain^'"'  but 
backward,  to  the  way  racers  run  who  know  that  they  are  competitors,  the  success  of  one  of 
whom  means  the  failure  of  all  the  others.  This  is  not  a  maxim  standing  alone  and  meaning, 
"  Do  you  run  your  Christian  course  in  such  a  manner  as  to  ensure  that  you  will  win  the  prize." 
It  is  a  picture  gathering  up  the  scene  on  which  Paul  and  his  hearers  are  gazing.  "  See  the, 
sustained  straining,  and  the  concentration  of  energy  ;  see  how  nothing  diverts  attention 
from  the  Prize  ;  see  the  fierce  eagerness  of  competition ;  remember  the  long,  self-denying 
training  for  that  moment  of  supreme  effort.  That  is  the  way  to  win  your  Crown.  Run  your  j 
course  like  that — so — thus — if  you  mean  to  attain." 

Ver.  25, — Racing,  boxing,  wrestling,  all  kinds  of  athletic  contests  "/<??•  the  mastery T  See 
the  R.V.  rendering.  The  Olympic  games  were  in  Paul's  time  still  celebrated,  and  survived 
the  Isthmian,  which,  however,  were  more  familiar  to  the  Corinthians,  and  at  the  time  were 
more  important.     Nero  contended  in  them,  with  "an  agony  to  succeed"  (Stanley).     Ten 

186 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTBIANS.     chap.  iX 


months'  preliminary  training— dieting,  etc. — was  obligatory  on  every  competitor.  [The 
metaphor  of  the  foot  race  is  found  not  only  in  Phil.  iii.  12,  14 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8  (Heb.  xii.  1) ; 
but  in  briefer  phrases — Acts  xii.  25,  xx.  24 ;  Gal.  ii.  2  ;  Phil.  ii.  16  ;  Gal.  v.  2  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  1  ; 
perhaps  Rom.  ix.  15,  16.  (See  Dean  Howson,  Metaphors  of  St.  Paul.)]  A  corruptible 
crown. — At  the  Isthmus  this  was  of  Grecian  pine  leaves ;  because  these  were  so  valueless 
intrinsically,  the  more  to  be  admired  was  the  eagerness  of  the  competitors. 

Ver,  26.  Uncertainly. — With  no  definite  goal,  keeping  to  no  particular  track.  Beating  the 
air. — As  if  fighting  a  shadow,  or  merely  "  lunging  about  "  for  practice  to  the  muscles.  "  It 
is  no  'practice,'  but  the  serious  contest,  I  am  engaged  in." 

Ver.  27. — See  Homiletic  Suggestions.  Buffet  for  '*  keep  under."  Lit.,  by  derivation,  "  Give 
it  a-blowJthat-^jises  it  under  the  eye — to  keep  it  in  its  place,  as  servant,  not  master. 


HOMILETIC   ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—14. 

The  Supp(yrt  of  a  Stipendiary  Ministry, 

I.  What  the  minister  has  a  right  (vers.  4-6)  to  expect  from  his  people. — 

Maintenance  (ver.  14).  This  right  rests  upon  :  (1)  The  natural  fitness  and 
"right  "  of  the  case  (vers.  7,  11,  12) ;  (2)  The  Old  Testament  legislation  (vers. 
8-10),  definitely  endorsed  and  adopted  in  (3)  The  words  of  Christ  (ver.  14). 

II.  What  the  people  have  a  claim  to  expect  from  the  minister. — (1)  That 
he  have  all  needful  credentials  (vers.  1,2);  (2)  That  he  do  his  work ;  he 
actually  "preaches  the  Gospel "  (ver.  14). 

III.  What  Christ  has  a  right  to  expect  from  His  servant. — That  in  claiming, 
or  enforcing,  or  using  his  "  right  "  he  shall  not  "  hinder  "  his  Master's  Gospel. 

I.  The  central  verse  of  this  section  is  ver.  14.  All  turns  around  this.  1.  To 
some  ears  the  "  rights  of  the  ministry "  has  an  ugly  sound.  The  minister  is 
often  expected  to  be  above  such  considerations,  and  to  let  nothing  be  heard  from 
himself  but  how  he  feels  the  call  of  his  "  duties  "  press  upon  him.  So  he  does, 
if  he  be  a  minister  worthy  the  name.  He  comes  into  the  ministry  with  a 
"  woe  "  in  his  ears,  as  the  penalty  of  any  alternative  course.  He  preaches  to  his 
people — rich  and  poor — that  Rights  mean  Duties.  The  poor  need  to  have  this 
preached  to  them  as  certainly  as  the  rich.  But  Duties  also  mean  Rights.  If 
the  "  call "  of  Christ  and  His  Church  be  such  as  to  indicate  that  he  must  make 
the  ministry  the  one  business  of  his  life,  then  he  must  be  maintained  whilst  he 
is  fulfilling  his  "  calling."  2.  Paul  is  discussing  the  case  of  the  Apostolate.  It 
was  no  doubt  a  unique  order  of  men,  charged  with  a  function  for  the  Church 
of  their  own  time,  and  for  the  Church  of  all  time,  which  cannot  be  repeated  by 
any  other  set  of  men,  and  never  needs  to  be  repeated.  Once  for  all  they  have 
set  Christian  dogma  upon  the  firm  basis  of  History.  (See  Critical  Kotes.)  But 
the  analogy  holds  good,  in  this  particular  matter,  between  the  case  of  these 
unique  and  extraordinary  servants  of  Christ  and  of  the  Churches  and  the 
ordinary  ministry.  The  inspired  and  authoritative  declaration  of  ver.  14 — 
whether  paraphrased  from,  e.g.,  Matt.  x.  9,  or  a  divinely  guaranteed  report  of 
an  unwritten  word  of  Christ  (similar  to  the  case  of  Acts  xx.  35) — generalises 
the  application  of  the  principle.  3.  The  "  m^dinance  "  of  Christ  foresaw,  took 
account  of,  provided  against,  a  separated  ministry.  The  Body  of  Christ  has 
simply,  and  from  the  necessity  of  the  case, — a  necessity  recurring  in  connec- 
tion with  every  growing,  enlarging,  organisation  whatsoever, — followed  the 
analogy — "  the  law  " — of  all  organised  structures  in  Nature.  As  complexity 
increases,  as  the  demands  of  the  organisation  multiply  and  are  differentiated,  so 
the  organs  which  meet  the  demands  are  multiplied,  and  become  specialised  in 
their  function  and  faculty.  The  specialisation  of  work  and  of  officials  in  the 
Body  began  in  Acts  vi.,  when  the  apostles  ceased  to  attempt  to  do  everything 
in  the  Church,  and  "  Deacons "  (so-called)  were  told  off  to  a  special  portion 
of  what  had  been   included  in  their  work.     A  simple  Church,  independent  of 

187 


CHAP.  IX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS. 


organised  fellowship,  of  small  numbers,  of  simple  requirement,  may  reproduce 
the  early  simplicity  of  pastoral  and  ofl&cial  organisation.  But  as  it  grows,  and, 
above  all,  if  a  system  of  grouped,  affiliated,  connexionalised,  organised  Churches 
comes  to  form  a  new  Chui-ch,  it  becomes  a  matter  of  expedient  division  of 
labour  to  set  apart  a  pastorate,  who  will  need,  and  should  give,  a  whole  and 
undivided  attention  to  the  teaching  and  "  ruling"  needed  by  the  enlarged  work 
and  community.  4.  "  A  paid  ministry  "  is  a  theory  and  a  practice  which  may 
reasonably  be  criticised  and  objected  to  ;  but  a  "  sustained,  supported  ministry  " 
is  a  necessity  of  the  case.  The  man  must  "  live  "  of  the  Gospel ;  not  "  starve  " 
or  "  struggle "  upon  it.  Plis  "  flock  "  should  do  their  utmost  to  see  that  the 
shepherd  is  not  the  worst  fed  of  them  all ;  they  should  set  him  free  from  need 
and  care.  And  ver.  5  enlarges  the  lange  of  this  principle  of  necessary,  suitable 
support.  "  Life  "  is  not  merely  food,  clothes,  house,  bed,  books,  cut  down  to  a 
minimum  of  possibility.  A  "living"  is  not  merely  what  will  keep  the  man 
himself  out  of  want.  The  apostle,  or  his  ministerial  successor,  is  a  man,  for  all 
he  has  been  called  into,  thrust  into,  office.  In  all  ordinary  conditions  full,  all- 
round  Tnanhood  means  marriage,  a  "  wife^''  a  home,  perhaps  children.  Celibacy 
like  Paul's,  should  always  be  the  exceptional  thing,  and  never  compulsory.  It 
has  cut  off  the  ministry  from  the  manhood  of  the  Church,  in  regard  to  the 
sympathy  which  comes  from,  and  only  by,  experience.  It  has  morally  been  a 
snare  to  the  ministry  itself,  and  often  a  curse  to  the  community.  The  "ybr^" 
of  rigid  ecclesiastical  legislation  cannot  '•'■expel  Nature'^  from  the  man,  merely 
because  his  work  becomes  specialised,  and  he  himself  is  separated  in  order  to 
do  it  the  more  effectively.  The  "  recurrence  "  and  the  revolt  of  outraged  Nature 
have  often  been  disastrous,  and  full  of  disgrace,  to  the  Christian,  and  the 
ministerial,  name.  The  man,  though  made  a  minister  by  the  expediency  and 
the  necessity  of  circumstances,  has  the  "  right  to  lead  about  a  wife  "  ;  to  have 
his  own  home,  with  its  solace  and  its  support.  And  the  '^ living'^  covers  the 
needful,  suitable  provision  for  this  also.  His  "  right "  is  "  authority."  His  Lord 
authorises  him  to  requisition  his  support  from  his  people.  This  "right"  is  mani- 
festly in  accord  with:  (1)  The  fitness  of  things,  and  the  analogy  of  ordinary 
human  affairs.  Whether  he  be  master  or  servant,  the  vine-dresser  may  reason- 
ably expect  that  his  virieyard  shall  at  least  sustain  him  whilst  he  cultivates  it ; 
the  shepherd,  be  he  sheep-master  or  shepherd-man,  may  haidly  be  expected  to 
render  all  his  service  gratuitously,  or  to  be  content  that  all  the  produce  and 
advantage  shall  go  to  others,  who  have  done  nothing,  whilst  he  goes  unsupplied. 
[Cf .  the  (perhaps)  Virgilian  protest : — 

"  Sic  vos  non  vobis  nidificatis  aves, 
Sic  vos  non  vobis  vellera  fertis  oves, 
Sic  vos  non  vobis  mellificatis  apes, 
Sic  vos  non  vobis  fertis  aratra  boves. 
His  ego  versiculos  feci ;  tulit  alter  honores."] 

The  minister  can  indeed  never  urge  the  claim  of  the  Owner  of  the  Vineyard 
(Isa.  v.  2) ;  "  the  Great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep"  (Heb.  xiii,  20),  "  Whose  own  the 
sheep  are"  (John  x.  12),  has  a  claim  which  no  under-shepherd  can  advance ; 
but,  though  the  "  wages "  theory  is  no  satisfactory  or  suitable  one  for  the 
money-relations  between  minister  and  people,  the  workman  might  ever  claim 
his  "  wages,"  the  under-shepherd  his  *'  pay,"  his  "  keep."  Paul  and  his  follow- 
er successor-ministers  are  soldiers  on  campaign.  The  war  is  urgent;  there  is 
no  respite  in  the  campaign.  Discipline  and  duty,  under  ordinary  circumstances, 
both  forbid  that  the  soldier  should  need  to  go  foraging  for  his  rations,  or  should 
need  to  combine  with  his  soldering  some  other  means  of  support.  He  must  not 
be  "  entangled  with  the  affairs  of  this  life  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  4).  The  side-occupations, 
the  by -employments,  to  which  he  might  have  to  resort,  might  easily  impair  his 

188 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


own    spirituality,  and   so   his   efficiency ;  indeed,  in   them  he  might  easily  be 
tempted  to  do  some  business  with  the  Enemy.     The  Enemy  will  be  his  provider 
readily  enough,  if  only  he  can  so  divert  him  from  his  campaigning  and  soldierly 
duty.     He  looks  to  his  Captain  for  his  support,  and  his  Captain  bids  him  draw 
upon  the  Church.     They  must  "  honour  "  the  Captain's  draft,  and  find   the 
soldier's  "  salt-money ^     And  are  they  not,  moreover,  themselves  in  debt  to  the 
minister?     They  owe  to  him  their  ''^spiritual  ^Am^s,"  "  their  own  selves  also " 
(Philem.   19).     It  is  not  repayment,  it  is  only  due  acknowledgment  of   their 
indebtedness,  that  they  should  give   him   such    ^^  carnal  things"   as   his   need 
requires.     Indeed,  it  is  '*  sowing  "  and  "  reaping."     Will  they  begrudge,  or  deny, 
him  a  handful,  and  that  of  the  less  valuable  produce,  of  the  harvest  in  their  lives, 
springing,  too,  from  his  sowing  ?     Heligion  means  to  many,  new  habits,  a  new 
character,  God's  blessing,  which  are  very  directly  and  obviously  productive,  even 
in  their  business  career  (Matt.   vi.   33 ;  1   Tim.   iv.   8).     Many   a    man   thus 
indirectly  owes  wealth  and  position — "  carnal  things  " — to  the  minister  whose 
labours  first  sowed  the  seed  of  eternal  life  in  his  heart.    *'  How  much  owest  thou 
unto  thy  Lord  ?  "     "  How  much  owest  thou  to  thy  Paul,  thy  minister?  "    If  any 
man  should  see  to  it  that  the  ministry  is  supported,  it  is  that  man  who  owes 
to  the  faithful,  sympathetic  pastor  and  friend  his  conversion  ;  his  Sabbaths  of 
blesssing,  which  mean  new  inspiration  for  his  best  life,  and  multiplying,  propa- 
gating, reproductive,  spiritual  help  for  the  work  of  the  weekdays ;  the  spiritual 
influences  in  his  home  ;  the  conversion  of  his  children.     Corinth  at  least  should 
have  felt  the  obligation  to  see  to  it  that  Paul  wanted  for  no  *'  carnal  things."   All 
this  is  embodied  in  (2)  The  Old  Testament  legislation.    (See  Critical  Notes.)    He  will 
take  the  Jews  on  their  own  familiar  ground.     They  did  ''  hear  the  Law  "  (Gal.  iv. 
21).     Then  to  the  Law  they  shall  go.     [No  need  to  disparage  such  a  style  of  argu- 
ment, because  the  Rabbis  to  an  absurd  extent  so  "  targumed "  Old  Testament 
passages.    Their  "  targum  "  often  employs  a  perfectly  legitimate  method,  and  lays 
bare  a  true,  Divine,  and  abiding  significance  in  the  temporary  or  "  trivial  "  enact- 
ment or  story.     The  question  is  in  any  case  one  of   evidence,  and  is  not  to 
be  dismissed  with  a  sweeping,  preliminary  dictum  condemning  all.     Does  Paul's 
"  targum "  approve  itself   to   the  spiritual  judgment  of   the  profoundest — not 
always,  or  of  necessity,  technically  the  most  "  learned  " — students  of  the  Word 
of  God  ?     An  interpretation  of  an  Old  Testament  passage  occurring,  employed, 
in  the  New  Testament,  is  adopted,  sanctioned,  guided,  by  the  Inspiring  Spirit.] 
The  great  principle  in  the  mind  of  the  Lawgiver  is  found  in  Deut.  xxv.  4,  in  a 
miniature,  temporary,  special,  concrete  form.     De  minimis  curat  hcec  lex,  and  for 
greater  matters  also.     The  oxen  are  not  deemed  unworthy  of  His  "  care"  indeed  ; 
but  they  are  part  of  man's  world,  and  God  is   caring  for  man,  is  caring  for 
apostles ;  for  workmen  of  every  order  and  degree,  but  with  not  least  solicitude 
for  the  ^*  workmen"  in  the  Church  (ver.  1).     The  temporary  colour  washes  out 
of  this,  as  out  of  so  many  more.  Mosaic  ordinances,  and  leaves  us  with  perhaps 
a  little,  but  a  real,  piece  of  a  stuff  made  for  everlasting  wear.     Your  Apostolic, 
ministerial  "  occ  "  plods  his  way,  and  hauls  along,  his  heavy  drag  week  after  week, 
year  in,   year  out.     Do  not  muzzle   his  mouth,  or  grudge  him  his  mouthful  ! 
Such  enactments  are  part  of  the   whole   Revelation  of   God's  mind  and  will. 
(3)  "  The  Lord  "  knew  His  Father's  mind  in  this,  as  in  all  else,  and  has  put  upon 
the  old  principle  His  own  universal,  generalised  shape — the  Teacher  and  Legis- 
lator as  He  is,  for  a  Race  and  for  all  Time — and  has  put  it  on  the  Statute-book 
of  His  kingdom,  *'  that  they  who  preach  .  .  .  shall  live,"  etc.     His  word  is  final. 
Beyond  it  no  Church  can  go,  nor  behind,  nor  beside  it.     The  minister's  "  right " 
is  formally  enacted  by  the  King  Himself. 

II.  But  the  Church  has  its  claim  in  the  matter  also. — If  a  man — though  he  be 
a  **  minister  " — work,  he  has  a  right  to  eat.     If  a  man  will  not  work — minister 

m 


CHAP.  IX.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


or  any  man — neither  shall  he  eat.     And  the  man  whom  the  Church  is  asked  to 
sustain  should  be  unchallengeably  a  "  minister,"  who — 

1.  Can  produce  his  credentials. — Paul  could.  Point  by  point  he  could  match 
the  *'  letters  of  ordination  "  produced  by  Cephas  or  "  the  brethren  of  the  Lord,''  or 
by  any  other  teacher  whatsoever.  Once  more  (as  shown  in  Critical  Notes)  it  is 
to  be  remembered  how  exceptional  were  the  case  and  the  credentials  of  an 
"  apostle  "  [in  the  strict,  narrow  sense  of  the  title].  But  as  in  the  natural  so  in 
the  spiritual  world,  no  work  of  God  is  isolated.  Every  fact  has  its  relations, 
generally  its  analogies,  to  many  adjacent  facts.  Evolutionary  science  has  that 
much  of  right,  in  its  teaching  that  a  deep,  close-drawn  unity  of  idea  runs  through 
all  the  works  of  God.  Earliest  and  latest,  simplest  and  most  complex,  lowliest 
and  highest,  are  all  bound  together  into  One  Work  of  God.  The  Miracle  has  its 
relations  to  the  Ordinary  ;  it  is  not  a  mere  isolated  marvel.  The  Apostolic  office 
was  the  exceptional,  the  extraordinary ;  but  it  was  traced  upon  lines  which  are 
also  the  foundation  lines  of  the  draft  of  the  Ministerial  Office.  So  far  as  the 
diversity  of  facts  allows,  the  analogy  holds  good  between  both  the  apostolate  and 
the  ministry.  The  credentials  of  both  are  analogous.  The  minister  of  Christ 
who  holds  a  valid  commission,  and  who  may  claim  support  from  the  Church,  has 
(a)  ^^  seen  theLord^'  and  he  so  preaches  with  *'the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit" 
(ii.  4)  that  he  can  appeal  to  a  people  who  are  his  work  "  in  the  LordP  (On  this 
last  point,  see  the  Critical  Notes.)  He  must  himself  have  come  into  real,  personal 
relations  with  Christ,  and  in  the  indwelling  strength  and  wisdom  of  Christ  he 
must  have  been  successful  in  bringing  some  others  into  real,  personal  relations  with 
Christ  too.  The  two  things  hang  together  very  closely.  No  man  who  has  really 
received  his  commission  from  Christ,  and  has  by  a  holy  watchfulness  kept  himself 
from  all  which  would  sever  the  living,  life-giving,  strength-imparting  connection 
with  Christ  implied  in  being  "  in  Him,''  will  ever  be  long  together  without 
his  accrediting,  manifest  "  work."  On  the  other  hand,  no  man  will  ever  accom- 
plish such  *'  work  "  who  has  not  first  ^^  seen  the  Lord."  He  must  "  know  Christ  " 
— and  that  in  the  widest  sense,  and  to  the  fullest  content  of  the  idea  of  "  know- 
ing" Him — at  first  hand  ;  hearsay  will  not  do.  He  will  be  a  theoriser,  a  speculator, 
a  critic,  but  not  a  witness.  Like  Thomas,  like  Paul,  he  must  have  stood  in  the 
presence  of  the  Risen,  Glorified  Christ,  and  seen,  as  by  a  fiash  of  holy  intuition 
(or  rather  by  the  demonstration  of  the  Great  Preacher  of  Christ,  the  Holy 
Ghost)  One  before  Whom  intellect  and  heart  have  bowed  down  in  trustful, 
reverent,  loving  adoration,  recognising,  *'  My  Lord  and  my  God  !  "  And  he  must 
often  have  renewed  the  holy  vision;  must  often  ''stand  in  the  Presence"  of  his 
Lord,  like  an  ancient  prophet  [e.g.  Jonah  i.  3  ;  or  like  a  very  angel,  Luke  i.  19]. 
And  his  people  will  know  it.  (And  they  ivill  know  it  if  he  has  not  I)  He  will  speak 
with  a  power  which  their  heart  and  conscience  will  recognise  and  will  respond 
to.  In  his  bearing,  his  words,  perhaps  his  very  face,  they  will  see  as  they  gather 
before  him  what  will  make  them  say,  "  He  has  seen  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  !  "  He 
will  be  unhappy,  and  a  failure,  if  his  ministry  lack  this  qualification.  This  will 
give  it  a  perpetual  freshness ;  every  other  source  of  suggestion,  every  other  class 
of  topic,  will  soon  be  exhausted,  and  will  soon  cease  to  satisfy  hungry  souls  in  his 
flock.  The  mere  graces  of  diction,  the  mental  furnishing  of  mere  literary  or 
educational  acquirements,  will  in  the  long-run  do  no  "  work"  certainly  none  such 
as  is  "  in  the  Lord"  A  real  Church  recognises  such  a  man  as  a  true  "  minister." 
His  credentials  are  ^^read  and  known  of  all"  (2  Cor.  iii.  2).  They  will  sustain 
such  a  man,  especially  will  they  who  are  "  his  work."  (h)  No  tie  so  tender,  no 
gratitude  so  deep,  as  that  between  the  convert  and  the  man  who  led  him  to 
Christ,  between  the  sheep  who  is  in  himself  a  token  of  the  seeking,  patient, 
watchful,  helpful  love  and  work  of  a  real  Shepherd.  Unhappy  the  man  who 
year  after  year  can  show  no  "  work  "  1 

190 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


2.  He  should  he  a  man  who  does  his  work^  that  for  which  he  was  *'  called  "  by  his 
Master.  (For  an  examination  of  the  phrase  ^'preach  the  Gospel,''  see  Homiletic 
Suggestion  on  ver.  14.)  The  idler  has  no  ^^  right.''  The  Church  has  a  claim 
against  the  man  that  he  shall  show  cause  for  his  *'  wages"  if  his  idleness  bring 
down  the  question  so  low  as  to  become  one  of  work  and  pay.  The  work  of  the 
true  minister  of  Christ  is  many-sided,  of  many  types ;  hardly  any  line  of  study 
but  may  be  made  contributory  to  the  cause  of  the  Gospel.  Some  are  set  for  the 
defence  of  the  Gospel.  The  ministerial  scholar,  or  editor,  or  botanist,  or  historical 
student,  or  tutor,  or  antiquary,  may,  if  he  will,  consecrate  his  work  and  make  it 
subservient  to  the  cause  of  Christ's  Gospel.  "  If  he  will," — hut  he  must.  It 
must  converge,  of  his  set  purpose,  upon  Christ.  It  is  a  grave  question,  to 
be  decided  as  the  several  cases  arise,  how  far  subsidiary  occupations  of  time  and 
strength  should  be  allowed  or  pursued  by  the  man  who,  to  the  necessary  basis  of 
natural  qualifications  for  the  preacher  and  pastor,  has  also  the  two  essential 
marks  above  analysed  (1.  and  2.).  In  the  widest  sense  he  should  "  wait  on  his 
ministering."     The  Church  has  that  claim. 

III.  Abstract  right  may  be  carried  to  a  very  mischievous  length  of  practical 
exposition  and  enforcement. — The  Gospel  is  not  made  for  the  apostle,  but  the 
apostle  for  the  Gospel.  If  the  claims  of  these  should  seem  to  clash  or  compete, 
the  claim  and  need  of  the  Gospel  must  stand  first.  Nothing,  not  even  the 
abstract  "  right "  of  a  Paul,  must  be  allowed  to  "  hinder  the  Gospel  of  Christ.^' 
The  very  ^^ right"  is  only  given,  indeed,  for  the  sal^e  of  the  furtherance  of  the 
Gospel ;  it  is  for  the  advantage  of  the  Gospel,  under  all  ordinary  circumstances, 
that  the  ministry  should  be  maintained  by  the  Churches.  But  in  Paul's  case, 
as  he  believed,  circumstance  made  it  for  the  advantage  of  the  Gospel,  or  at 
least  for  the  obviating  of  disadvantage  and  detriment,  that  his  right,  the  very 
"  ordinance "  of  his  Lord  should  be  waived  and  should  stand  aside.  To  him 
"  to  live  "  was  "  Christ," — that  dear  Name  gathered  up  to  itself  all  Paul's 
activities,  all  his  devotion ;  every  motive  received  its  impulse  and  its  direction 
from  that  Christ.  Of  his  own  eager  self-devotion,  therefore,  he  readily  chose 
to  set  his  right  aside.  His  heart  and  reason,  the  heart  and  reason  of  the 
true  minister,  would  say  that  the  Lord  had  the  claim  upon  him  that  he 
should.  Such  a  man  will,  e.g.,  uphold,  or  waive,  his  pastoral  prerogatives  in  a 
meeting ;  he  will  defend  himself,  or  let  judgment  go  against  him  in  silence,  when 
he  is  misjudged  or  misrepresented ;  he  will  resist,  or  yield  to,  the  opposition  of 
"  unreasonable  and  wicked  men  " ;  as,  from  one  case  to  another,  the  inteiests  of 
the  Gospel  of  Christ  may  seem  to  require.  In  any  case  of  doubtful  character 
the  balance  will  perhaps  always  be  more  readily  given  against  himself.  It  is  his 
debt  to  his  Master  that  it  should  be.  The  Gospel  of  the  Master  deserves 
that  consideration  ! 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  15—23. 

Suhject :  The  Independence  of  the  Minister.  The  central  word  of  this  section 
is ''Free"  (ver.  19). 

I.  Free  from  all  men. 
II.  Free,  yet  under  compulsion  to  preach. 
III.  Free,  yet  under  willing  bondage  to  men's  weakness  and  ignorance. 

I.  [Sufficient  said,  in  Critical  Notes  and  in  Analysis  of  preceding  section,  as  to 
the  literal,  special  sense  in  which  Paul  used  the  word  and  asserted  his  ''freedom." 
But  the  freedom,  and  the  independence  it  gave  him,  as  well  as  the  ground  of 
appeal  with  which  it  ^^ rewarded"  him  in  his  approach  to  men  of  all  classes, 
coming  to  them,  as  he  did,  a  man  uiider  obligation  to  no  man, — all  these  points 

191 


CHAP.  IX.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


have  their  widely  applicable  analogies  in  the  relations  between  minister  and 
people  still.]  1.  If  he  is  to  he  faithful,  he  must  he  free.  His  people,  if  they  know 
their  own  interests,  need  that  he  shall  be  faithful ;  they  should  therefore  care- 
fully, for  their  own  sakes,  if  for  nothing  else,  guard  against  anything  which 
would  even  appear  to  put  constraint  upon  him,  or  limit  his  freedom  of  judgment 
or  action.  [E.g.  the  rich  man  should,  with  even  "  gentlemanly "  feeling,  and 
much  more  with  a  fine  sense  of  Christian  propriety,  carefully  abstain  from  doing 
or  saying  what  might  seem  to  "  put  the  screw  on,"  and  the  more  so  if  the 
minister  lives  very  much  upon  supplies  drawn  from  his  pocket.  The  strong 
politicians  in  the  Church  should  let  the  minister's  politics  alone.  And  so  on.] 
If  they  want  a  "  man  of  God  "  amongst  them,  who  will  lift  them  out  of  the  secular 
round  to  a  higher  level  with  its  larger  life,  let  them  give  him  all  freedom  to  say 
out  all  that  God  gives  him  to  speak.  [A  Homiletical  Commentary  of  the 
character  of  this  is  not  the  place  in  which  to  deal  with  the  question  of  the 
degree  of  liberty  in  doctrinal  teaching  a  Church  should  permit  or  prescribe  to 
their  minister.]  Let  the  congregation,  or  the  meeting,  or  the  council  which  may 
be  its  official  representative,  for  their  own  good  jealously  guard  their  minister's 
fullest  liberty  for  feeding  and  ruling  the  flock  as  their  pastor.  2.  His 
independence  will  not  be  a  thing  to  be  obtruded  in  every  face,  or  a  banner  to 
be  flung  out  ostentatiously  in  every  petty  skirmish  or  bit  of  friction.  There  are 
boasters  of  their  "  independence "  who  are  simply  ofiensively  discourteous  in 
speech  ;  their  "  freedom  "  of  tongue  is  only  the  expression  of  coarseness  of  feeling 
and  of  mere  vulgar  pride  and  self-assertion,  in  season  and  out  of  season.  [So 
Robertson,  Expos.  Lectures,  in  loco  :  "  Even  the  bold  unpopularity  that  cares  not 
whom  it  ofiends  may  be,  and  often  is,  merely  the  result  of  a  contentious, 
warlike  spirit,  defiant  of  all  around,  and  proud  in  a  fancied  superiority."]  This 
*'yree"  Paul  can  say,  "Ourselves  your  servants, — your  bondservants,  your 
slaves, — for  Jesus'  sake  "  ;  and  that  to  these  very  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  iv.  5).  The 
verbal,  surface  discrepancy  runs  down  to  a  very  real  agreement  and  unity  of 
conception  and  feeling  beneath.  The  ^^  freest  "  and  most  "  independent  "  man  is 
the  one  who  can  best  concede  something,  and  abridge  bis  liberty  ^''for  the  GospeVs 
sake  "  (ver.  23).  He  may  give  up  something  of  his  liberty  (say)  for  peace'  sake ; 
but  the  Church  should  not  ask  it ;  they  have  no  right  to  demand  it.  The 
loving,  wise,  patient,  diligent,  faithful  minister  in  the  Church  will  usually  get 
all  the  honour  he  can  wisely  desire,  and  all  the  ^'•freedom"  he  can  wisely  use. 

II.  Free,  looking  man  ward,  Paul  is  yet  under  most  urgent  compulsion,  look- 
ing Christward.  (See  ''''  constraineth^'  in  the  Kotes  on  2  Cor.  v.  14.)  1.  No 
worthy  heart  can  look  unmoved  upon  need  or  misery,  and  know  and  possess  the 
remedy ;  no  worthy  heart  can  refuse  the  "  constraint "  so  put  upon  it.  The 
beggars  of  the  street  stand  silent,  simply  exhibiting  their  sightless  eyes,  or 
crippled  hands,  or  mutilated  members ;  they  know  they  need  say  nothing  to 
move  really  compassionate  hearts ;  their  needs  have  '^  poor  dumb  mouths  "  which 
"  speak  for  them  "  ;  their  very  necessity  is  a  plea  which  the  tender-hearted  patron 
will  not,  cannot,  resist.  [So  may  we  say  that,  if  in  our  ignorance  or  weakness  we 
"  cannot  pray,"  if  we  are  brought  so  low,  physically,  mentally,  spiritually ;  then 
if  we  can  only  lie  helpless  before  God,  exhibiting  ourselves  in  our  need,  to  Him, 
it  will  be  a  most  effectual  appeal  to  His  heart,  a  prayer  He  cannot  but  hear.  He 
cannot  sit  upon  His  throne,  and  see,  and  know,  and  do  nothing  (Exod.  iii.  7,  8).] 
2.  The  man,  who  is  himself  saved,  and  then  for  the  first  time,  by  contrast  and  by 
new  insight,  understands  in  any  real  sense  what  peril  and  misery  it  is  to  be  "  lost," 
who  is  daily  walking  in  the  blessedness  of  "  salvation  "  and  of  fellowship  with 
God  in  Christ,  cannot  selfishly  keep  locked  up  within  his  own  bosom  the  news, 
the  secret,  of  the  new  possibilities  for  sinners  through  the  Gospel.  He  must 
be  an  evangelist,  telling  out  the  good  news ;  he  must  be  missionary  in  instinc- 

192 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


tive  impulse,  in  motive  and  activity.  "  Necessity  is  laid  upon  him.^^  And  no 
man  will  ever  be  of  use  as  a  minister  of  Christ  in  whose  soul  this  inward,  urgent 
necessity  is  not  continually  present.  He  should  jealously  watch  against  the  first 
beginnings  of  its  decline  j  he  should  mourn  before  Christ  over  its  absence  ;  he 
should  guard  it  as  a  most  precious  possession.  3.  But  Paul  lies  under  the 
(almost)  coercion  of  a  more  mighty  impulse  still.  ^'  Woe  is  unto  him  if  he  preach 
noty  (See  Separate  Homily,  ver  16.)  The  first,  original  "  call  to  the  ministry  " 
is  the  Master's  call.  And  that  call  is  a  "  claim  "  which  it  were  rebellion — sin — 
to  ignore,  or  refuse,  or  resist.  The  Church  in  its  "  calling  "  is  only  the  organ 
of  the  Spirit  of  the  Master,  and  has  no  power,  or  function,  beyond  that  of 
ascertaining,  so  far  as  man  may,  who  are  the  men  called  by  Christ. 
Above  all : 

III.  This  ''''free  "  Apostle  is  under  willing  bondage  to  the  prejudices,  the  im- 
perfectly enlightened  conscience,  the  liabilities  consequent  on  weakness  of  principle 
or  character  in  those  whom  he  approaches.  1.  His  Divine  Master,  to  save  him, 
"  humbled  Himself,"  "  emptied  Himself,"  and,  Lord  of  all  as  He  was, ''  became 
obedient,"  the  servant  of  His  Father's  will,  and  that  even  to  the  length  of  ^'' dying !^ 
and  that  dying  a  death  upon  a  cross  (Phil.  ii.  8).  His  Master  had  ''  stuck  at 
nothing,"  of  self- surrender  and  self-sacrifice,  when  it  was  a  question  of  saving 
him  and  his  fellow-sinners.  Nothing  was  too  much  to  do,  to  sufier,  to  give  up, 
if  only  men  might  be  saved.  And  Paul  is  His  Master  over  again  in  this.  The 
Jew  found  him  ready  to  concede  all  that  involved  no  unfaithfulness  to  Christ, 
and  was  not  inconsistent  with  the  very  meaning  and  raison  d'etre  of  the  Gospel, — 
ready  to  accommodate  himself  in  all  really  indifierent  points  to  the  prejudices  of  a 
Jew's  education  and  lifelong  habits  of  feeling  and  practice.  Within  the  same — 
happily  broad — limits  the  Gentile,  "  without  the  law  J''  found  this  Jew,  "  born, 
made,  under  the  law"  (Gal.  iv.  4),  ready  to  meet  him,  to  lay  aside  any  Jewish 
habit  or  practice,  which  would  stand  in  the  way  of  their  getting  perfectly  into 
that  touch  and  that  sympathetic  understanding  of  each  other  without  which  Paul 
could  do  nothing  to  help  him;  indeed,  a  Gentile  found  no  more  resolute  and  stead- 
fast champion  of  Gentile  freedom  from  the  Mosaic  ritual  law  than  this  ex- 
Pharisee  Paul.  Paul  would  walk  with  shortened  steps  by  the  side  of  the  weakest, 
that  he  might  lead  them  to  his  Christ ;  keeping  to  their  pace  "  with  equal 
steps,"  lest,  by  insisting  on  their  moving  onward  at  his  own  pace,  he  should  leave 
them  behind,  fallen  out,  unable  to  follow,  to  become  a  prey  to  the  Enemy  of  souls. 
Anything  of  innocent  concession,  of  innocent  accommodation,  to  any  man,  if  by 
any  means  he  might  save  him.  2.  What  a  model  of  method  and  of  aim  for  a 
minister  !  Anybody  can  drive  away  or  cut  off  a  troublesome,  obstinate,  stupid, 
prejudiced  member  from  a  Church.  The  business  of  a  shepherd  is  to  keep  all 
his  sheep.  His  aim  is  to  save  them, — all.  It  is  too  much  the  inclination  of  the 
natural  heart  to  grow  impatient  with  the  slow-paced,  the  mentally  sluggish  or 
warped;  the  men  tied  hand  and  foot  with  what  we  see  to  be  needless,  morbid 
scrupulosities  about  trivial  points  of  teaching  or  practice ;  too  easy  to  say, 
*'  Let  them  go.  We  cannot  be  troubled  with  such  weaklings.  We  cannot 
narrow  our  action,  or  check  our  advance  in  the  development  of  the  congrega- 
tional life,  by  waiting  till  these  get  to  see  what  every  man  of  sense  sees  already." 
But  the  Church  and  the  minister  exist  to  save  even  the  "  weak  "  ;  the  prejudiced, 
narrow  Jew,  the  half -instructed,  ^^  lawless"  Gentile.  ^'  If  by  any  means  I  may 
save  some"  Even  one  soul  is  too  precious  to  be  neglected,  or  left  behind,  or  cast 
over.  3.  No  pains  are  too  great  to  find  out  how  to  approach  a  soul,  in  order  to 
save  it.  Sympathy  means  "  feeling  with."  It  means  laying  oneself  alongside  of 
the  man ;  projecting  ourselves  into  his  position ;  getting  to  his  standpoint ;  trying 
to  understand  and  see  what  he  sees,  as  if  with  his  eyes ;  contracting  ourselves 
to  his  measure,  that  we  may  understand  his  deepest  life ;  endeavouring  to  make 

o  193 


CHAP.  IX.     IJOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


onr  heart  beat  pulse  and  pulse  with  his,  that  then  we  may  understand  his 
difficulties  and  remove  them,  and  may  lead  him  up  and  out  with  us  into  our 
higher  and  larger  knowledge  and  enjoyment  and  life.  [See  how  Elisha  (2  Kings 
iv.  34)  applied  himself  to  the  body  of  the  child  of  the  Shunamniite,  mouth  and 
mouth,  eyes  and  eyes,  hands  and  hands,  till  his  own  warm  life  made  the  cold 
body  beneath  him  warm  again  into  readiness  for  life.  How  every  teacher,  even 
on  secular  subjects,  especially  in  dealing  with  the  young,  finds  the  urgent  necessity 
of  sympathetically  understanding  the  pupil's  mind,  and  entering  into  his  position, 
if  he  is  to  teach,  and  to  give  what  himself  knows.]  He  who  would  teach  and 
help  and  save  must  begin  by  serving.  4.  The  unsympathetic  observer  cries, 
"  Mr.  Pliable  !  "  The  honestly  narrow  Jew  says,  "  "What  shocking  lawlessness  ! 
Why,  the  man  makes  into  matters  indifferent  some  of  the  most  explicit  and  long- 
binding  laws  of  Moses  !  Rank  Antinomianism  !  Hank  infidelity  !  "  "  No,"  Paul 
would  reply,  ''  I  am  not  lawless.  /  am  under  law,  [and  in  a  very  real  sense 
"  under  The  Law  "]  to  my  Master,  Christ."  If  principle  were  touched,  or  any  point 
which  concerned  the  honour  of  His  Lord,  then  no  one  could  be  more  rigidly 
uncompromising  than  Paul.  Circumcise  Titus?  When  that  meant,  either  that 
the  Christ  was  no  Saviour,  and  that  the  Circumcision  must  save,  or  at  least 
that  salvation  depended  upon  Christ  and  Circumcision,  Christ  being  no  complete 
Saviour ;  then,  "  No,  not  for  an  hour  ! "  (Gal.  ii.  5).  Concede  to  a  Gentile 
inquirer,  or  Gentile  convert,  any  liberty  in  (say)  the  matter  of  sexual  license  ? 
No  ;  such  a  one  "  shall  God  destroy  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  7).  Paul  is  "/ree  "  again  in  an 
instant,  and  with  all  the  independence  of  his  freedom — he  is  no  man's  servant 
to  say  "  yes  "  and  "  no  "  as  his  master  calls  for  "  yes  "  and  *'  no  " — he  speaks  his 
mind.  Nay,  he  is  the  minister  of  Christ,  and  independent,  first  to  be  loyal  to  his 
Master,  and  next  "  to  save,  hy  all  means,  some  "  souls. 

HOMILETIG  ANALYSIS.— Verses  n— 21. 

The  Minister's  Care  for  his  Own  Salvation. — We  see  him : 

I.  In  Conflict.     Then 
II.  Crowned.     Or 
III.  Castaway. 

I.  In  conflict. — 1.  Yer.  23  is  transitional.  A  new  thought  is  introduced,  out  of 
which  this  paragraph  grows.  The  preacher  of  the  Gospel  hopes  to  be,  needs  to  be, 
a  ^''partaker  of  the  Gosjjel  along  with  "  those  to  whom  he  preaches  it.  He  is  himself 
vitally  interested  in  its  truth  and  its  success.  He  may  be  an  apostle  ;  but  he  is 
first  a  sinner,  lost  and  in  bondage,  and  himself  needing  to  hear  the  "  joyful  sound  " 
of  release  and  recovery.  The  trumpet  of  Jubilee  which  he  is  set  to  sound,  pro- 
claims an  "  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,"  in  whose  happy  issues  he  too  hopes  to 
share.  He  has  heard  the  Gospel,  and  is  rejoicing  in  its  salvation  ;  but  if  he  is  to 
retain  his  status,  he  must  be  faithful  to  his  duty  as  a  preacher,  set  to  "  save  as 
many  souls  as  he  can."  If  he  fail  personally,  he  will  be  a  failure  officially ;  no 
man  will  succeed  in  the  ministry  who  does  not  keep  his  personal  life  right.  Con- 
versely, if  he  fail  officially,  thorough  neglect  or  unfaithfulness,  he  will  fail  personally. 
His  unfaithfulness  is  sin.  (See  this  and  some  after  points  expounded  in  Separate 
Homily,  "  An  Apostle's  Peril,"  ver.  27.)  2.  A  racer,  putting  all  his  energies 
into  the  race  ;  making  no  play  of  his  ministry,  but  most  serious  and  arduous 
and  even  exhausting  labour.  A  boxer,  matched  with  a  busy,  active,  dangerous 
antagonist  in  his  very  "  body  "  ;  finding  here  again  that  it  is  no  play  to  deal  with 
himself.  His  nature  every  moment  waits  to  render  him  secure,  and  then  in  his 
security  to  gain  an  advantage  over  him.  Indolence,  love  of  ease  and  comfort, 
and  even  natural  weariness,  need  to  be  watched,  lest  they  deal  deadly  blows  at 

194 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT ATtY:   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


his  life.  He  must  be  ready  to  return  rebuke  for  suggestion,  blow  for  blow.  ["  Get 
thee  behind  Me,  Satan  ! "  said  Christ  to  Peter,  who  had  revolted  against  the 
idea  of  the  shame  and  the  bodily  suffering  of  the  cross.  "  Do  not  think  of  such  a 
thing,  Lord  !  That  be  far  from  Thee  !  Be  propitious  to  Thyself  (lit.  Greek) ; 
be  kinder  to  Thyself  than  that !  "  Had  the  Master  just  passed  through  conflict 
in  anticipatory  presence  of  the  cross  ?  And  now,  with  mistaken  kindness,  His 
friend,  Peter,  makes  the  very  suggestion,  which,  quite  innoceutly.  His  own  holy 
body  may  have  been  making.  "  Shun  the  pain  !  "  (Matt.  xvi.  22).]  There  are 
dangers  of  the  couch,  the  arm-chair,  the  hospitable  table,  the  glass,  the  pipe,  the 
cycle,  many  (literal)  body-dangers  besetting,  buffeting,  the  Christian  *'  boxer." 
[Make  the  very  body  come  obediently  "  to  heel."]  [As  there  are  also  dangers  in  the 
study, — of  dilettante  reading  and  work,  known  to,  condemned  by,  nobody  outside  ; 
dangers  of  success  ;  dangers  in  days  of  what  seems  "  failure  ";  dangers  of  the  infec- 
tion of  the  "  secular  "  temper — for  the  minister  may  do  his  work  in  as  thoroughly 
"secular  "  a  spirit  as  any  business  man  in  the  market  or  the  shop.]  3.  He  is  in 
constant  training  for  his  running.  He  must  never  suffer  himself  to  get  "  out  of 
condition."  Things  allowable  if  he  were  not  running  a  race,  or  if  he  were  not 
in  the  ministry,  and  bound  to ''  fulfil  it "  [Col.  iv.  17  ;  cf.  the  R.V.  in  Kev.  iii.  2  : 
"iV^o  works  of  thine  fulfilled  before  God;  many  things  purposed,  begun,  half 
done,  nearly  finished,  but  "  not  fulfilled  "],  are  not  permissible  to  him.  He  must 
keep  himself  free,  pure,  not  entangled  nor  self -ensnared,  in  the  best  order  of 
body,  mind,  heart,  to  do  his  work  and  accomplish  his  "  course."  ["  Temperate  in 
all  thingsT     See  Separate  Homily.] 

II.  Crowned. — [Rev.  iii.  11  is  a  warning  to  an  ofiicial  life  that  its  official 
*'  crown  "  may  be  given  over  to,  passed  on  to,  worn  by,  some  other  who  has  done 
more  faithfully  and  effectually  work  which  was  allotted  to  the  uncrowned  man. 
Pev.  ii.  10  is  the  personal  reward  of  the  personal  life.  And  notice]  the  ^^ crown''^ 
of  a  successful,  faithful  life  is  ''  Life."  *'  Uncorruptness  "  in  teaching  (Tit.  ii.  7, 
where  notice  the  displaced  reading,  which  was  significant  in  its  reiteration  of 
idea),  and  in  that  love  (Eph.  vi.  24)  which  is  the  very  element  of  the  Christian 
walk,  thus  leads  up  to  "life  and  incorruption  "  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  The  purifying 
of  the  nature  from  all  that  belongs  to  "  death  "  at  last  made  complete ;  the  life 
which  sprang  here  from  "  incorruptible  seed "  at  last  developed  into  eternal, 
indefectible  perfection  of  all  its  features  and  capacities ;  whatever  of  added 
happiness  "Heaven  "  may  include, — happiness  ah  extra,  dependent  upon  surround- 
ings, companionships,  appointed  employments ;  all  this  in  perfection,  with  nothing 
of  transitoriness  to  dim,  even  as  a  possibility,  the  enjoyment  of  the  present ;  with 
no  remotest  possibility  of  an  end,  to  cloud  over  as  with  the  gradual  closing  in  of 
an  eternal  Night,  the  Divine  glory  of  the  etci-nal  Day  of  that  world's  life  ; — this 
"Life"  is  Paul's  ''''crown."  The  spiritual  life  here  was  all  the  work  of  Christ 
in  the  soul ;  and  to  His  heart  also  that  after-life  which  is  the  expansion,  the 
fulness,  the  sequel  as  well  as  the  successor  of  this,  is  the  crown  of  this.  Finis 
coronat  opus  Christi,  et  Pauli.  [What  crown  is  there  of  all  for  which  men  in 
the  "  natural "  realm  "  strive  for  the  mastery,"  which  is  incorruptible  ?  E.g. 
how  much  of  the  knowlenlge  acquired  by  a  lifetime  of  study  and  self-denying, 
enslaving  labour  is  merely  relative  !  It  is  modified,  supplemented,  made  obsolete, 
almost  before  the  man  who  won  it  and  wore  it  is  cold  in  his  grave.  Or,  how 
distance  of  time  dwindles  and  "  corrupts  "  away  the  mere  crown  of  fame  and 
honour  given  by  contemporaries,  and  not  unworthily,  to  the  majority  of  the 
famous  people  of  any  one  century  or  nation  !  How  unsatisfying  the  best  reward 
of  mere  secular  labours  !  How  many  a  hot-browed  athlete  has  found  his  crown 
begin  to  wither  and  perish  almost  as  soon  as  it  has  been  placed  upon  his  head  !] 
Or,  unhappy  alternative  : 

III.  Castaway. — (See,  again,  below.)    Of  all  the  "  lost,"  is  the  rejection  of  any 

195 


CHAP.  IX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


man  more  pathetically  painful  to  imagine  than  that  of  the  preacher,  who  has 
set  others  to  run,  who  has  directed  their  training  and  their  running,  who  has 
enheartened  them  in  their  days  of  faintness  or  discouragement,  who  has  seen 
them  take  the  one  last  step  which  bears  them  in  death  over  the  line  that  marks 
the  goal  attained;  and  then  himself  presents  himself  to  the  Judge  for  "  approval" 
and  for  crowning,  only  to  be  thrust  away  "  reprobate,"  "  castaway  "  ? 


SEPARATE    HOMILIES. 


Ver.  10.  Hope  cheering  Labour. — 
[The  verse  may  be  made  the  occasion 
of  a  sermon  on  the  Rewards  of  Labour 
and  the  Returns  of  Capital.] 

1.  Diversity  of  contributors  to  the 
ultimate  harvest. — Some  ^^ plough"  do 
the  preliminary,  rough,  necessary  toil, 
in  manufacturing  processes,  in  all 
engineering  and  mechanical  trades,  in 
commerce  and  trade  ;  the  "  ploughmen  " 
may  stand  for  the  unskilled  labourers. 
Some  "  thresh"  and  bring  to  finished 
readiness  for  the  consumers'  use  all  the 
product  of  a  succession  of  workers  and 
of  the  chemistry  of  nature  [i.e.  of 
God  in  His  laboratory  within  the 
soil,  where  the  seed  is  buried  and 
dies,  to  live  again].  The  "  threshers  " 
may  stand  for  the  capitalist,  or  any 
(supposed)  higher-grade  contributors 
to  the  final  result.  Many  must  co- 
operate ;  each  beginning  upon  the  basis 
of  the  work  of  another  order  of 
workers ;  and  at  some  point  in  the 
chain  of  production,  the  blessing  and 
work  of  God  coming  in  indispensably  ; 
if  the  hungry  world  is  to  have  its 
"  bread." 

2.  There  is  interdependence  of  pro- 
ducers.— The  ploughman's  work  is  a 
necessary  preliminary  to  that  of  the 
thresher.  The  thresher  completes  the 
otherwise  unfruitful  work  of  the 
ploughman.  Each  man  is  needed.  The 
much-abused  "  middleman  "  has  arisen 
out  of  a  need ;  his  work,  however 
selfishly  or  extortionately  or  tyranni- 
cally it  has  been  used,  is  in  itself  only 
an  instance  of  division  of  labour,  necessi- 
tated by  the  complexity  of  modern  life 
and  business.  The  man  who  is  not 
wanted,  who  does  not  justify  his  own 
place  and  support,  will  not  long  be 
supported.  But  the  ploughman  must 
not  grudge  the  reward  of  the  thresher, 

196 


nor  must  the  thresher  forget  what  he 
owes  to  the  ploughman.  And  must  not 
forget  to  give  it  to  him,  either. 

3.  No  man  should  labour,  whether 
ploughman  or  thresher,  without  a  fair 
reward  for  his  labour,  or  without  hope 
of  being  partaker  of  the  fruits  of  his 
toil.  The  right  apportionment  of  the 
profits,  the  fruits,  of  labour  is  a  grow- 
ingly  difficult  problem,  [and  one  on 
which  Christian  men  may  honestly 
differ  as  to  guiding  principles  and 
results ;  not  to  be  discussed  in  a 
neutral  Commentary  like  this].  Labour 
may  be  as  thoroughly  selfish  and 
tyrannical  in  the  matter,  as  it  charges 
Capital  with  being.  Some  of  the 
complexity,  the  perplexity,  of  the 
problem  is  removed  whenever  on  either 
side  an  honest,  earnest,  sympathetic, 
painstaking  endeavour  is  made  to 
appreciate  the  view  and  the  demand  of 
the  other.  Each  side  also  would  need 
to  cease  to  insist  upon  absolute,  me- 
chanical, doctrinaire,  "right."  [In  this 
noblesse  oblige ;  whether  it  be  the 
noblesse  of  "  superior "  station,  or  of 
better  education  and  wider  views  of 
the  complex  problem ;  or  of  greater 
ability,  financial  or  other,  to  go  back 
from  the  full  limit  of  "  rights  " ;  above 
all,  if  it  be  the  noblesse  of  the  Christian 
profession  and  character.  Noblesse 
should  lead  the  way  in  concession  to 
prejudice,  in  patience  with  ignorance. 
The  Christian  spirit  should  be  foremost 
in  softening  the  rigour  of  the  mere 
mechanical  "  political  economics,"  with 
their  formulation  of  self  -  interest 
working  against  self-interest.]  Logic, 
"  wages,"  are  not  the  last  words  of  dis- 
cussions in  times  of  strained  relations 
and  class-conflict.  The  heart  is  often 
illogical,  and  traverses  all  theories  and 
formulas;   but  it    rules.      The   heart 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.    CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


understands,  if  the  thresher  gets  close  previously  won  for  Christianity.  No 
to  the  ploughman,  and  the  plough-  soul  will  ever  be  lost,  simply  and  only 
man  tries  to  understand  the  thresher.  because  a  Church  or  an  individual 
Labour  without  hope  of  properly  pro-  Christian  was  inconsistent,  a  stumbling- 
portioned  '■'•  partaking ^^^  is  the  labour  block,  or  in  apathetic  worldliness  did 
of  slaves.  Such  labour,  without  hope  not  do  its  duty  to  that  soul.  Yet 
to  cheer  weariness,  to  incite  to  effort,  are  there  none  lost  who  might  have 
to  reward  diligence  and  real  work,  been  saved  if  the  Church  or  the  Chris- 
begets  the  slavish  temper — sullen,  tian  had  been  faithful  ?  What  a  power, 
rebellious,  dangerous.  There  should  to  be  able  to  narrow,  or  to  divert  from 
be  no  rigidly  mechanical  adherence  those  dying  for  it,  the  river  of  the 
to  *'  rights "  on  either  side ;  so  much  water  of  life — to  make  the  wheels  of 
time,  to  a  half-minute ;  so  much  Christ's  chariot  drive  heavily,  plunged 
labour,  to  a  single  hand's-turn ;  in  the  sand  or  the  bog  of  a  Church's 
so  much  wages,  to  a  half -farthing.  indolence  or  un  spirituality  or  unbelief  ! 
Brotherliness  should  "  rub  down  "  the  [The  unbelief  of  the  healthy  people  in 
hard  lines  of  such  a  plan  of  the  rela-  Nazareth  prevented  Jesus  doing  all 
tions  between  man  and  man.  [The  He  desired  for  the  need  of  the  sick  in 
"  lord  "  in  the  Saviour's  story  who  said,  Nazareth.  How  one  man,  Achan,  and 
"  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  he  no  chief  or  prince,  but  only  a 
will  with  my  own  ? "  is  nevertheless  common  man,  could  hold  all  Israel  in 
a  master  who  gave  to  some  a  whole  check,  and  really  slay  the  six-and- 
day's  "  penny  "  for  one  hour's  labour.]  thirty  Israelites  who  lay  dead  in  the 
To  say,  "  There  is  no  friendship  and  valley  before  Ai !  Perhaps,  on  the 
no  religion  in  business,"  is  not  to  other  hand,  2  Pet.  iii.  12  may  mean 
utter  Gospel,  Christian,  economics.  Let  ^^  hastening  the  day  of  God."]  [Illus- 
capital  leave  the  door  of  hope  open  trate  thus  :  Holland  is  a  country  for 
for  the  labourer ;  let  not  the  labourer  the  most  part  lying  below  the  level  of 
grudge  or  make  impossible  the  hope  the  sea ;  it  would  naturally  be  covered 
of  the  employer.  All  the  political  by  the  waters.  But  with  long  years  of 
economies  must  adjust  themselves  patient,  watchful  industry  the  inhabit- 
according  to  this  fixed,  divinely  sane-  ants  have  built  and  kept  up,  around 
tioned  principle.  [Wherever  God  is  their  coasts  and  along  their  canals, 
the  Employer,  He  will  see  to  it  that  huge  dykes,  and  these,  with  a  system 
His  ploughman  or  thresher  does  realise  of  gates  and  locks,  keep  out  the  waters, 
the  **^ope"  in  which  he  laboured.]  All  this  is  the  salvation  of   Holland. 

But  unbelief  can  build  its  walls  and 

Ver.  12.  Note  three  important  things  barriers  around  itself,    and  around   a 

as  assumed  here.  Church,  and  shut  out  the  tide  of  bless- 

I.   Men  may  hinder  the  Gospel. —  ing  which  God  desires  to  send  upon 

The  end  of  human  history  is,  no  doubt,  the  "  thirsty  ground."] 

a  victory  for  God  and  for  Goodness,  for  11.  Even  good  men  may  be  in  danger 

Christ  and  His  Gospel,  and,  along  with  of  hindering  the  Gospel. — If,  e.g.,  Paul 

this,   a  vindication  of  all  the  perplex-  had  insisted  too  stubbornly  on  his  right 

ing  facts  connected  with  God's  method  to  be  maintained  by  the  Church,  or  law- 

in  leading  on  the  course  of  history  to  fully  to  enjoy  the  company  of  a  wife 

the  goal.     Yet  one  aspect  of  the  ever-  and  the  comforts  of  domestic  happiness 

present   problem  of   Evil    is  that  the  at  the  cost  of  the  Church, 

rate  and  extent  of  the  progress  of  the  III.    To   hinder   the    Gospel   is   so 

Gospel  is  made  dependent  upon  man's  great  an  evil  that  to  avoid  it,  or  even 

faithfulness  and  activity.     There  have  the  danger  of  it,  is  worth  any  sacrifice, 

seemed  ages  of  the  Church  when  the  except  of  principle ;   to  help  forward 

Church    did   nothing   to   extend,    and  the  Gospel  is  worth  any  cost.     Every- 

hardly   seemed   to   keep,   the    ground  thing  which  will  arouse  conflict  and  bad 

197 


CHAP.  IX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


feeling,  everything  which  may,  even 
incidentally  and  unjustifiably,  cause 
offence,  everything  which  is  found  to 
"  give  place "  to  the  ever-watchful 
Adversary,  and  so  to  pu.t  the  brake  on 
to  the  wheels  of  progress,  the  Christian 
man  will  forego,  "  lest  he  hinderj"  etc. 
He  will  give  up  his  liberty  in  the 
matter  of  amusements,  or  recreation, 
lest  though  remotely  he  check  the  work 
of  the  Gospel  in  even  one  soul ;  above 
all,  lest  he  should  cripple  his  own  use- 
fulness, or  dull  the  €dge  of  his  own 
spirituality,  and  so  "  hinder, ^^  etc.  If 
the  work  of  God  seems  to  lag,  to  drag, 
to  be  hindered,  then  Churches  and 
individuals  should  begin  anxiously,  and 
with  unsparing  fidelity,  to  inquire  the 
cause.  [See  the  inquiry  when  Achan's 
sin  blocked  the  way  of  Israel's  conquest. 
No  use  for  Joshua  to  be  humbled  on 
the  ground  in  prayer :  "  Get  up !  Search 
out  the  sin  ! "  (Josh.  vii.  10).  The  say- 
ing of  the  disciples  at  the  supper-table : 
"  Is  it  I  ?  Is  it  I  ? "  was  better  than 
their  earlier  saying,   "  Who  is  it  ?  "] 

Ver.  12.  The  Gospel  hindered. 

I.  The  progress  of  the  Gospel  in  the 
world  seems,  and  surely  is,  slower 
than  the  purpose  of  God,  the  desire  of 
Christ,  the  aim  of  the  Spirit's  work, 
would  lead  us  to  expect. — Faithful 
hearts  yearn  for  greater,  wider,  more 
rapid  and  sweeping  conquests  than  are 
actually  won.  They  cannot  acquiesce 
in  the  actual  condition  of  the  matter ; 
they  cannot  adjust  their  hope,  or 
activity,  to  the  actual  rate  of  progress. 
They  have  a  heart,  an  instinct,  within 
them,  which  rebels  against  any  such 
acquiescence  and  adjustment.  They 
ask,  "  Why  is  it  ?  What  doth  hinder  ?  " 
The  man  who  is  content  that  the 
Church—or  his  own  particular,  sec- 
tional or  local  Church — should  do  no 
more  than  work  on  the  programme, 
"  As  last  year, — only  more  so  ! "  has 
lost  one  of  the  first,  simplest  tokens 
of  being  "in  Christ,"  and  therefore  of 
being  in  the  communion  of  sympathy 
with  his  Lord. 

II.  Replies  which  are  not  answers. 
— 1    "It  is  of  no  use  to  fret  or   be 

198 


anxious.  God  is  sovereign  ;  things  are 
going  as  He  wills,  and  as  fast  as  He 
just  now  wills  they  should."  The  spirit 
of  the  reply  of  a  Baptist  pastor  to  the 
offer  of  Carey  for  India.  JSTot  often 
heard  now ;  ytt,  if  not  explicitly  taught, 
it  is  implicitly  embodied  in  the  practice 
of  the  Church,  There  is,  always  has 
been,  a  sovereignty  in  the  measure  and 
time  of  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit. 
The  Church  has  actually  progressed 
spasmodically,  by  Revivals  after  times 
of  inertia  or  unfaithfulness ;  and  these 
have  not  always  seemed  given  in  re- 
sponse to  a  specially  pleading  Church. 
They  have  sometimes  come  upon  a 
sleeping  Church.  Yet,  whilst  the 
Church  says  to  God,  "  Awake,  awake," 
He  says  in  reply  to  the  Church,  "Awake, 
awake."  (See  Dr.  Maclaren,  Sermons, 
2nd  series,  p.  19  sqq.,  Isa.  Ixii.  1,  6,  7.) 
God  is  covenanted  to  hear,  and  to  give, 
and  to  bless  the  world  and  the  work 
of  the  Church,  whenever  the  condi- 
tions are  fulfilled  by  It.  At  all  events, 
sovereignty  or  no  sovereignty.  He  is 
in  fact  waiting,  eager,  forward,  to  give 
the  success  which  seems  hindered.  We 
may  count  upon  Him.  2.  The  seeming 
failures  cannot  mean  that  the  Gospel 
has  found  a  soil,  a  race,  a  heart,  for 
which  it  has  no  message,  or  to  whose 
needs  it  has  no  adaptation.  That  were 
to  charge  Him  Who  has  made  both 
heart  and  Gospel  with  something  less 
than  the  perfection  of  Divine  wisdom. 
History  and  age-long  experiment  give 
no  support  to  such  a  supposition.  On 
the  contiary,  the  Gospel  has  con- 
quered, saved,  satisfied,  sample  cases  in 
every  land,  century,  race,  temperament, 
social  grade,  mental  cast,  young,  old, 
ignorant,  learned,  etc.  3.  Nor  that  it 
has  found  a  race  or  a  heart  which  does 
not  need  it.  No  other  religion  as  yet 
has  so  satisfied  and  possessed  its  votaries 
as  that  some — sample  cases  again — 
have  not  found  a  longing  for  some- 
thing else,  and  better,  which  the 
Christian  faith  has  supplied.  If  not 
before,  in  the  very  presentation  of  this 
supply  the  heart  learns  to  know  its 
need.  4.  "  But  the  superstitions  are 
so    inveterate,  the    habits    of    a   life- 


nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


time  so  hopelessly  deep-rooted,  the 
depravity  and  degradation  of  heart 
and  conscience  and  life  are  such  in  the 
the  adults,  that  we  must  let  them  go — 
leaving  them  to  God — and  depend  upon 
the  young,  the  coming  generation." 
But  Paul's  Gospel  won  its  triumphs 
amongst  adults,  and  from  inveterate, 
degraded,  deeply  depraved  heathenism. 
His  Gospel  solved  the  same  problems 
which  we  face  to-day  at  home  or  in 
foreign  lands.  The  Gospel  is  meant, 
not  only  for  those  who  need  it,  but  for 
those  also  who  need  it  most.  5.  "  The 
Gospel  is  only  to  be  preached  for  a 
testimony  to  all  nations ;  the  actual 
inbringing  of  the  nations  on  any  wide 
scale  must  come  with  the  Thousand 
Years."  [A  large  question.  Matt.  xxiv. 
14  is  appealed  to.  To  many  this  reply 
seems  like  invoking  something  to  supply 
a  lacking  effectiveness  in  the  Gospel ; 
like  calling  upon  Christ  to  come  and 
do  what  the  Spirit  and  Word  of 
God  have  failed  in  accomplishing.] 
6.  "We  want  more  money,  more 
organisations,  a  new  Society,  or  Com- 
mittee, for  this  or  that."  All  good ;  all 
needed,  perhaps.  But  the  Gospel  won 
its  first  triumphs,  and  has  often 
triumphed  since,  with  few  or  none  of 
these  helps.  Evidently,  historically, 
these  are  not  all,  or  the  essentials.  [One- 
man  power,  consecrated,  is  better  than 
all  Committees  and  organisations, 
though  most  productive  when  working 
under  control  and  with  organisation. 
Money  must  be  made  no  substitute  for 
the  Spirit  of  God.] 

II.  [As  above,  "Men  may  hinder 
the  Gospel."]  Generally,  want  of  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  underneath 
all  slow  progress.  He  does  what  is 
done,  much  or  little.  He  would  do 
more,  if  the  conditions  on  which  He 
co-operates  with  His  Church  were 
better  fulfilled  by  it.  [As  with 
Christ  at  Nazareth,  above.]  A  spirit- 
ually low  condition  of  His  Church, 
showing  itself  in  little  prayer  for  the 
progress  of  the  Gospel,  in  lack  of  the 
spirit  of  consecration,  and  issuing  in  the 
withholding  for  self  of  money,  time, 
family,  or  anything  else  needed  to  the 


progress  and  extension  of  the  work,  is 
the  great  hindrance;  it  "grieves  the 
Spirit."  Little  appreciation  of  the 
Gospel  at  home ;  therefore  little  zeal 
for  its  propagation,  no  real  faith  in,  or 
concern  about,  its  saving  power  and 
success;  are  sometimes  ^^ hindrances  " 
Of  secondary  importance,  but  yet  real 
causes,  may  be,  defective  representa- 
tions of  the  Gospel  in  the  preaching,  or 
in  the  life  of  individuals  and  Churches ; 
it  may  be  overlaid  with  ritual,  or  hidden 
beneath  intellectual  speculation ;  it 
may  be  made  too  much  a  question  of 
philanthropic  benefit  rather  than  of 
redemptive  purpose ;  may  now  and 
then  be  proclaimed  in  a  shape  too 
specially  that  of  a  Church  or  nation. 
[E.g.  must  not  expect  some  English 
modes  of  working  and  effort  to  suit 
equally  well  France,  or  India,  or 
China ;  only  an  encumbrance  to  pro- 
gress to  attempt  to  transplant  methods 
or  some  peculiar  ecclesiastical  constitu- 
tion into  another  type  of  nation  and 
life.] — Suggested  in  part  hy  remarks 
in  "  Homilist"  v.,  vi. 

Yer.  21.  The  Principle  of  Law  under 
the  Gospel  Order. 

I.  "Under  law"  or  "under  the 
Law,"  which  ? — (For  a  lexical  decision, 
see  extract  from  Cremer  in  Critical 
Notes.)  A  "  burning  question  "  to  the 
Hebrew  Christian  community,  the 
members  of  which  stood,  historically 
and  personally,  on  the  line  of  the 
"  meeting-place  of  the  ages "  (Heb. 
ix.  26).  The  fire  of  that  day  is 
for  all  practical  purposes  extinct  in 
ours.  [The  council  of  Acts  xv.  met  on 
account  of  this  difiiculty  of  practical 
action.  The  conflict  of  Paul's  middle 
life  with  the  Judaisers  shows  the 
urgency  then  of  a  decision.]  We, 
standing  clear  of  the  temporary  con- 
troversy, can  see  that  the  Law  of  God  is 
one  and  continuous  through  all  the 
dispensations,  and  as  truly  extant  and 
binding  outside  Judaism  as  within  it. 
If  God  once  speak.  His  word  is  man's 
law.  By  His  expressed  will  every  man, 
of  every  age  and  race,  is  bound  to 
shape  his  life.     For  a  special  purpose, 

199 


CHAP.  IX.     HOMlLEflC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


arising  out  of  local  and  national  emer- 
gency, "  The  Law  "  was  a  thing  inter- 
jected [between  Abraham  and  Christ], 
a  remarkable    historical  incident   and 
episode  in    God's     whole    government 
and   ordering  of    the   religious  history 
of  the  world,  and  particularly  of  the 
covenant  people,  one  in  Abraham  and 
Christ.     [Two  passages  are  the  key  to 
this :  Gal.  iii.  19  ;  Rom.  v.  20.]     But  it 
was  only  a  passing,  temporary  embodi- 
ment  of  permanent  principles.      Even 
the  Decalogue   has   local   colouring  in 
four  of  its  enactments.     Part  of  God's 
expressed  will  toward  mankind  is   His 
judgment  of  and  against  sin,  and  the 
plan  on  which  alone  He  will  be  ap- 
proached  by  a  sinner.      These  had  a 
local,  temporary   expression   given   to 
them  in  the  ritual  law,  with  its  defile- 
ments and  purifications,  and  with  its 
sacrifices  of  atonement,  of  consecration, 
of  fellowship   [sin,   burnt,  peace  offer- 
ings   respectively].       Detached     from 
[do  not  say  *'  purified  "  from]  the  tem- 
porary, national,  theocratic  accompani- 
ment ;   stripped  of  the  dispensational, 
and  {e.g.  ver.    9)  very  temporary  en- 
swathement ;    all  local,  Jewish  colour 
washed  out ;  the  "  law  "  in  "  The  Law  " 
has   come   forward   into   Christianity, 
which  is  the  newer,  world-wide,  race- 
suiting   form  of    the    one    continuous 
government  of  the  world  by  the  God  of 
Redemption.     Every  principle  of  man's 
relation  to  God,  or  to  man,  which  can 
be  proved  to  underlie  the  enactments 
— even    the    "  trivial    ones  " — of    the 
Mosaic    code    and    ritual,    is   in   full 
validity  under  Christianity.      *'  God  is 
one"  (Gal.  iii.   19)  in  all  the  dispen- 
sations, and  His  law  is  one.    The  Chris- 
tian is,    e.g.,    "  under  the    law "  about 
"  not  muzzling  the  ox,"  "  unto  Christ" 
as  a  matter  of  loyal  obedience  to  God 
in  Christ.     The  "  law  "  in  "•  the  Law  " 
of  the  Passover  is  still  a  fully  valid  part 
of  the  Christian  scheme  (1  Cor.  v.  8). 
"  The  eternal  morals  of  the  old  economy 
are  rewritten  in  the  pages  of  the  New 
Testament,  as  the  standard  of  require- 
ment, the  condition  of  the  charter  of 
privileges,  and  a  testimony  against  those 
who  offend"  (Pope,  Theol,  iii.  173). 

200 


II.  The   Gospel  still  employs   the 
principle  of  a  law  external  to  the  man. 


-No  doubt  an  ideal  Christian 


per- 


fection "  requires  no  code.  All  the 
old  statute-book  is  consolidated  and 
codified  into  one  law,  "  Love."  All 
obedience  lies  in  germ  in  the  service 
of  Love.  A  perfectly  instructed  Love 
would  enact,  from  instance  to  in- 
stance, a  perfect  law/br  the  individual. 
On  the  basis  of  the  grace  of  the  Gospel, 
the  man  whose  status  before  God  is  that 
of  a  sinner  accepted  for  the  sake  of,  and 
in,  Christ,  finds  the  law  and  the  obedi- 
ence prescribed  and  secured  by  even  an 
imperfectly  instructed  Love,  accepted 
by  God.  Love  is  the  ideally  sufficient 
motive  and  force  for  all  obedience. 
Ideally  the  life  springing  from  a  per- 
fect and  perfectly  instructed  Love 
coincides  with  the  whole  requirement 
of  a  perfect  Law.  The  external 
code  says  no  more,  asks  no  more, 
than  Love  teaches  and  enacts  and 
secures.  Very  gloiious  approxima- 
tion to  all  this  is  the  privilege  of  all  in 
Christ,  and  very  glorious  embodiments 
of  the  possibility  and  privilege  are 
found  in  every  Church,  in  every  cen- 
tury. But  "  no  code,  no  law,  but  that 
of  love,"  can  only  be  acted  upon  sim 
pliciter  as  between  one  soul  and  its 
God,  alone  together.  God's  law  and 
His  government  need  not  only  adapting 
to  an  individual  case,  but  to  men  in 
associated  life.  The  enlightenment  of 
conscience  and  of  love  varies  as 
between  individual  and  individual,  and 
between  stage  and  stage  of  the  spiritual 
growth  of  the  same  man.  A  merely 
subjective  law  would  be  one  of  con- 
tinually varying  interpretation,  and  of 
often  mistaken  interpretation.  Even 
the  greatly  advanced  Christian  man  is 
often  in  need  of  an  external,  objec- 
tive, absolute,  standard.  His  new- 
born instinct  of  love  will  often  be  the 
best,  or  only,  expositor  to  himself  of 
the  external  commandment ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  he  will  often  need  this  to 
interpret  and  correct  the  dim,  or  hesi- 
tant, or  biassed  verdict  or  direction 
given  by  Love  within.  "  The  best 
Christians  need  a  remembrancer :  they 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  IX. 


obey  the  law  within,  but  are  not  always  one  absolute  all-comprising  standard 
independent  of  the  teaching  of  the  law  of  human  life  in  its  perfectness.  His 
without."  The  law  without  is  the  teachings — and  not  least  those  em- 
safeguard,  and  the  trainer,  and  the  bodied  in  His  acts — are  abiding  Law 
instructor,  of  the  instinct  of  obedience  for  His  people.  All  the  express  direc- 
within.  [So  an  inborn  taste  for  music,  tions  of  the  Epistles  are  the  legislation 
or  drawing,  or  poetry,  needs  the  dis-  of  Christ  for  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven," 
cipline,  and  the  check,  and  the  help  of  given  by  the  Inspiring  Spirit  through 
a  constant  reference  to  the  best  models.  the  Apostolic  writers.  The  Inner 
A  Mozart  makes  laws  in  music  for  Light  needs  interpreting  by,  whilst  in 
others,  not  without  first  giving  a  turn  it  flashes  its  own  illuminative 
thorough  study  and  obedience  to  the  interpretation  upon,  the  Word  without, 
laws  of  his  predecessors,]  And  much  Under  the  Gospel  Love  fulfils  the  Law, 
more  does  the  man  who  has  not  yet  — in  principle,  perfectly,  from  the  first, 
even  the  new  directing  principle  of  the  — but  it  needs  the  support,  the  defence 
new,  and  specifically  Christian,  life  of  itself  against  its  own  weakness  or 
within  him,  need  the  external  law.  It  ignorance,  the  education,  of  an  ex- 
is  the  straight-edge  which  convicts  of  ternal  standard  and  Law.  Gospel 
sad  irregularity  the  best  line  traced  by  Ethics  ought  to  be  the  noblest  and 
his  life.  [Kingsley,  At  Last,  chap,  i.,  most  perfect  in  practical  embodiment, 
says  all  this  well,  with  special  reference  as  the  result  of  this  co-operation  of  the 
to  the  Fourth  Commandment :  "  It  internal  and  the  external  methods  of 
would  be  wiser  to  consider  whether  the  regulation  of  a  Christian  life, 
first  step  in  religious  training  must  not  III.  The  text  holds  the  safe  middle 
be  obedience  to  some  such  external  between  two  extremes  found  prac- 
positive  law  ;  whether  the  savage  must  tically  perilous.  —  A  sentence  of 
not  be  taught  that  there  are  certain  "  Kabbi "  Duncan  (Colloquia  Perip.y 
things  he  ought  not  to  do,  by  being  109)  thus  states  them :  "  Ethics  with- 
taught  that  there  is  one  day  at  least  on  out  law  is  as  bad  in  theology  as 
which  he  shall  not  do  them.  How  else  is  law  without  ethics."  (He  has  some 
man  to  learn  that  the  laws  of  Right  and  pregnant  sentences  re  the  former  peril 
Wrong,  like  the  laws  of  the  physical  (pp.  42-44).]  In  the  one  direction 
world,  are  entirely  independent  of  him,  tends  [or  from  that  quarter  comes] 
his  likes  or  dislikes,  knowledge  or  all  theology  which  minimises  the  ex- 
ignorance  of  them ;  that  by  Law  he  is  piatory,  reconciling,  atoning  element  in 
environed  from  his  cradle  to  his  grave,  the  death  of  Christ ;  which  eviscerates 
and  that  it  is  at  his  own  peril  that  he  the  force  of  the  phrases,  "  forgiveness  of 
disobeys  the  Law  ?  A  higher  religion  sins,"  or  "the  wrath  of  God,"  or  which 
may,  and  ought  to,  follow;  one  in  which  practically  leaves  out  of  its  scheme 
the  Law  becomes  a  Law  of  Liberty,  any  true  *' anger"  in  Him;  which 
and  a  Gospel,  because  it  is  loved  and  makes  the  death  only  the  culminating 
obeyed  for  its  own  sake ;  but  even  he  point  of  the  example,  or  of  the  appeal 
who  has  attained  to  this  must  be  of  the  love  of  God  to  the  alienated 
reminded  again  and  again,  alas  !  that  heart  of  man.  In  the  revolt  from 
the  Law  which  he  loves  does  not  depend  (say)  the  hard,  formal  "governmental 
for  its  sanction  upon  his  love  of  it,  on  expedient  "  theory,  and  of  the  "com- 
his  passing  fancies  and  feelings  ;  but  is  pact "  scheme  between  an  angry  Father 
as  awfully  independent  of  him  as  it  is  and  a  loving  Son ;  in  the  desire  to  find 
of  the  veriest  heathen.  .  .  ."  And  the  in  theology  a  worthier  and  truer  place 
supreme  Lawgiver  is  not  even  the  and  expression  for  the  love  of  God  to- 
tenderest  and  most  enlightened  Con-  ward  even  those  who  are  alienated  from 
science,  but  Christ.  Indeed,  the  tender-  Him  and  from  goodness  ;  there  would 
nessand  the  enlightenment  are  all  His  seem  a  real  danger  lest  due  recognition 
grace  at  work.    His  own  Pattern  is  the  should  not  be  given  to  the  universal 

201 


CHAP.  IX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


sense  of  guilt,  nor  to  the  way  in  which 
even  the  crudest  and    least  carefully 
stated  formulations  of  the  principle  of 
*'  satisfaction  to   Divine  justice "  have 
always  met  and  satisfied  the  demands 
of  the  awakened  heart  and  conscience. 
And  this  means  a  defective  recognition 
of  the  element  of  law  in  the  relations 
of   God   in   Christ    towards    redeemed 
man.    The  liability  is  towards  a  pattern 
of  life  marked  by  a  sentimental  good- 
ness   rather    than    Sanctification,   and 
towards  a  view  of  Sin  which  makes  it 
only  the  fall  of  the  weak  child  who 
has    not    yet    learned   to    walk;    or 
ignorance  which  misunderstands  God ; 
or  the  limitation  of  the  finite  creature. 
[Teachers  and  taught,  needless  to  say, 
are   nearly   always   better,    and   their 
lives  nobler,  than  their  theory.] 

The  other  peril  is  Ayitinomianism, 
"  the  Heresy  of  the  Christian  Church," 
the  peril  of  all  communities ;  the  shame 
of  all  Churches,  and  creeds,  and  con- 
fessions. It  may  be  the  coarse  type  of 
Gal.  V.  13,  or  Rom.  vi.  1,  which  took 
advantage  of  the  freeness  with  which 
pardon  may  be,  even  repeatedly, 
sought  and  found  through  Christ,  and 
which  dared  to  live  in  sin,  even  gross 
and  sensual  sin,  presuming  on  the 
abounding  grace  of  God.  More 
often — though  constantly  tendiig  to 
this  uttermost  practical  licence — it  has 
based  itself  upon  theologies  which 
stated  unguardedly  such  truths  as 
"  dead  to  the  law  through  the  body  of 
Christ"  (Rom.  vii.  4),  ''Christ  is"the 
end  of  the  law  for  righteousness,"  etc. 
(Rom.  X.  4),  "  Ye  are  not  under  law, 
but  under  grace"  (Gal.  v.  18);  theologies 
of  "  imputation  of  the  righteousness  of 
Christ  to  the  believer."  ["Putting  a 
surplice  over  a  sweep,  without  first 
washing  him,"  was  hardly  a  caricature 
of  some  extreme  forms  of  this.]  The 
"Antinomian"  regards  the  requirement 
of  perfect  holiness  as  so  fully  met  by 
Christ  that  he  needs  not  measure  his 
conduct  by  any  law.  Obedience  is  to 
him  expedient,  proper,  perhaps  reward- 
able  ;  disobedience  may  be  chastened 
by  a  Father,  not  eternally  punished 
by  a  Judge.     Obedience  is  to  him  not 

202 


a  condition  of  acceptance  as  to  the 
past  or  negative  salvation,  neither  is 
it  a  condition  of  acceptance  as  to  the 
future  or  positive  salvation.  But  the 
whole  and  balanced  Gospel  knows  of 
no  salvation  which  does  not  mean 
hoHness  of  heart  and  life.  It  knows 
of  no  faith  which  does  not  work  by 
love,  in  all  its  practical  exhibition 
towards  God  and  man.  [The  old 
Jewish  desire  of  a  "  glorious  kingdom 
of  God  "  for  all  Israelites,  apart  from 
any  question  of  their  personal  cha- 
racter, reappears  in  the  tendency  of 
every  heart  to  desire  heaven,  without 
the  trouble  of  holiness ;  to  make  Christ 
and  His  cross  a  convenient  help  from 
a  deathbed  into  heaven,  although  the 
life  may  have  been  spent  over  self, 
the  world,  or  in  plain  sin.]  The  most 
conspicuous  honour  ever  done  to  the 
supiemacy  of  moral  law  was  seen 
where  Christ  hung  upon  the  cross  of 
Calvary.  Law  is  so  sacred  a  thing, 
Sin  that  violates  it  is  so  terrible  a 
thing,  that  He  who  is  no  sinner,  but 
only  the  representative  of  the  race  of 
sinners,  died,  not  merely  an  example, 
but  a  "  curse"  under  "  the  curse  of  the 
fow;."]  [It  were  strange,  if  in  days 
when  "  law  "  is  more  completely  than 
ever  seen  to  hold  in  its  grip  Crea- 
tion and  God's  order  in  it,  the  New 
Creation  should  not  be  thought  to  run 
on  analogous  lines.  There  is  no  possi- 
bility of  trifling  with  natural  law  with 
impunity.  In  the  moral  world  we 
should  expect  it  to  be  as  certain  that 
punishment  must  light — the  curse 
must  "  come  to  roost  " — somewhere, 
where  law  has  been  broken.] 

Ver.  16.  "  Woe  .  .  .  if  I  preach  not 
the  Gospel." — Do  not  think  the  minis- 
try "  an  honourable  profession "  for 
your  sons  before  whom  nothing  else 
seems  definitely  to  open,  or  for  your- 
self— perhaps  not  exactly  successful  at 
anything  else ;  "  good  pay,  good  social 
status,  not  too  much  work."  Think  of 
its  responsibility ;  you  understand  in 
business  what  it  is  to  pay  for  respon- 
sibility as  well  as  for  ability  in 
employes:    for  how  much  pay  will  a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


man  undertake  to  answer  for  immortal 
souls  ? 

I.  A  great  task — "  to  preach  the 
Gospel." — Not  to  be  too  narrowly  con- 
ceived and  interpreted.  [Even  John 
Wesley  complains  (]\^orks,  xii.  130)  : 
"  Of  all  preaching,  what  is  usually 
called  Gospel  preaching  is  the  most 
useless,  if  not  the  most  mischievous : 
A  dull,  yea,  or  lively,  harangue,  on  the 
sufferings  of  Christ,  or  salvation  by 
faith,  without  strongly  inculcating 
holiness.  I  see,  more  and  more,  that 
this  naturally  tends  to  drive  holiness 
out  of  the  world.']  1.  A  complete 
Gospel  should  be  preached.  (1)  The 
sanctions  of  the  Law  of  God,  the 
threatenings  of  the  Word  of  God, 
are  an  integral  part  of  the  Gospel. 
[No  teacher  speaks,  e.g.,  of  "  fire " 
so  often  or  so  explicitly  as  Christ.] 
It  is  ''  good  news  "  to  know  the 
dangers  of  disobedience  or  neglect,  as 
certainly  as  to  know  the  possibilities 
of  forgiveness  and  of  help  toward 
obedience.  A  complete  human  nature 
includes  fear.  The  whole  message  of 
God  to  men  does  not  disregard  this 
motive.  Men  nted  awakening,  as 
well  as  directing  to  Christ.  "  Mere 
promise -mongers  are  no  Gospel  minis- 
ters "  (Wesley).  (2)  The  Ethics  of 
the  Gospel  should  be  preached.  To 
preach  a  crude,  hard,  unguarded 
"  Election  "  led  to  Antinomianism 
(''What  does  it  matter  how  we  live, 
if  we  are  elect  1  ").  So  to  preach 
an  unguarded  "  free  grace  "  leads 
to  Antinomianism  ("  Let  us  continue 
in  sin  ;  grace  will  abound ;  pardon 
may  always  be  had  !  ").  "  The 
Gospel "  is  good  living  as  well  as 
good  news.  St.  James's  teaching  is  as 
really  a  part  of  God's  whole  revealed 
will  as  is  St.  Paul's.  Holiness  on 
earth,  as  well  as  heaven  after  earth, 
is  contemplated  by  the  Gospel.  It 
knows  of  no  peace  which  is  not  con- 
nected with  righteousness.  *'  We  are 
created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good 
works"  (Eph.  ii.  10).  [For  a  young 
tradesman  to  go  on  year  by  year  con- 
tentedly losing  money,  because  his 
kind,    wealthy   father    year    by   year 


clears  off  his  balance  for  him,  "  is  not 
business."  So  for  a  "  Christian  "  to  be 
less  careful  about  falling  into  sin 
because  the  forgiving  mercy  of  God 
is  so  free,  and  so  constantly  cancels 
''  the  debt,"  "  is  not  Gospel."  2.  Yet 
the  Ethics  should  be  Gospel  ethics, 
distinctively.  Christian  morals  all  con- 
verge upon  Christ.  Love  to  Him  is 
the  summary  of  all  motive,  the  one 
master-impulse.  What  He  would  have 
done,  or  been,  in  our  circumstances  is 
often  a  compendious,  but  sufficient, 
rule  of  action  and  standard  of 
character.  He  is  Himself  the  Mercy 
and  the  Morality  of  the  Gospel,  em- 
bodied. Natural  systems  of  morals 
appeal  to  the  sinner's  own  force  of 
character,  to  his  own  strength  of  will, 
to  his  self-respect,  his  self-interest,  to 
some  recuperative  force  within  the  man 
himself.  In  Sin  they  see  only  failure 
because  of  inexperience  or  weakness; 
or  the  finite,  because  of  its  limita- 
tions, missing,  coming  short  of  ideal 
obedience;  they  know  nothing  of 
guilt,  guilty  shame,  guilty  fears.  The 
motives  and  the  power  of  obedience, 
of  moral  elevation,  of  growth,  are  all 
posited  within  the  man,  and  are  his 
own.  Gospel  Morals  transfer  the 
centre  to  God.  The  whole  power  is 
that  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  man  cannot 
raise  himself,  or  obey  of  himself.  All 
moral  power  is  grace,  a  gift,  is  ah 
extra.,  and  gratuitous  mercy  for  Christ's 
sake.  [Every  topic  of  the  "  Gospel 
preacher"  should  be  exhibited  in  its 
close,  direct  relation  to  Christ  and  to 
God's  purpose  in  Christ.]  3.  Thus 
treated—  exhibited  in  relation  to  Christ 
— every  style  of  preaching,  the  utter- 
ance of  every  cast  of  mind,  may  he 
mada  really  ^'■preaching  of  the  GospelT 
The  prf.acher  of  doctrine,  dogma,  theo- 
logy, may  be  of  course  only  an  utterer 
of  theses,  mere  scientific,  profes- 
sional prelections  or  disquisitions  on 
Scripture  topics*;  but  he  may  be  as 
really  a  Gospel  preacher — laying  the 
foundation  of  correct,  clear  thought, 
and  of  intelligent  experience,  in  his 
hearers — as  the  fervent  evangelist, 
full  of  illustration,  poetry,  wit,  pathos, 

203 


CHAP.  IX.     EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


and  appealing  mainly  to  the  emotioDS. 
Theology  is  the  Science  underlying  the 
preacher's  Art.  The  Old  Testament 
may  yield  np  Gospel  teaching  to  a 
student  as  really,  if  not  as  clearly,  as 
the  New.  Some  men  will  preach  from 
the  Proverbs;  others  from  St.  John's 
writings.  But  no  style  of  talent,  no 
method  of  treating  Scripture  topics, 
no  special  class  of  topic,  must  be 
narrowly  excluded  as  not  compatible 
with    *'  preaching  the    Gospel." 

II.  No  matter  of  self-glorification 
to  or  by  the  preacher. — 1.  As  Christ  is 
cential  in  the  matter  of  the  Gospel,  so 
He  must  be  in  the  preacher's  manner 
and  thought  about,  and  during,  and 
after,  his  work.  Christ  must  be  to  the 
front,  the  preacher  hidden  behind  Him. 
Attention  must  be  made  to  centre 
upon  the  theme,  not  upon  the  speaker. 
["  He  shall  glorify  Me  "  (John  xvi.  14  ; 
but  not  ^^  of  Himself,"  ver.  13;  quite 
another  thought).  The  Holy  Spirit  is 
the  model  preacher  of  Christ  and  His 
Gospel.  How,  in  vers.  9-11,  all  His 
"  convincing  "  work  moves  toward  and 
centres  in  Christ  !]  2.  All  success  is 
traced  up  to  His  power,  and  must  be 
laid  at  His  feet.  [1  Cor.  ii.  5  ;  Phil, 
ii.  17,  a  believing  people  is  brought  by 
Paul  and  laid  upon  the  altar  before 
Christ,  and  then  his  own  life  is  poured 
out  as  a  libation  over  the  offering.] 
3.  The  preacher  is  not  the  discoverer 
of  the  Gospel  he  preaches.  It  is  no 
credit  to  him  to  have  such  a  message 
to  deliver.  He  can  claim  none  of  the 
deserved  plaudits  which  greet  and 
reward  a  scientific  discoverer  or  a 
successful  inventor  on  announcing  his 
*  new  thing.  He  is  barely,  only,  a 
reporter.  '*  Ye  shall  be  witnesses — no 
more — unto  Me  "  (Acts  i.  8).  4.  He 
is  himself  only  a  sinner  whom  the 
Gospel  has  saved.  His  whole  status 
before  God  rests,  and  will  eternally 
rest,  upon  God's  mercy  to  him  for  the 
sake  of  another — Christ.  It  is  an 
honour  which  is  mercy,  as  well  as 
responsibility,  that  he  is  "  put  in  trust 
with  the  Gospel "  (1  Thess.  ii.  4).  He 
is  only  the  "  earthen  vessel " — the 
crock  of  common  pottery — that  holds 

204 


the  golden  treasure  (2  Cor.  iv.  7). 
An  ambassador  who  was  once  an 
enemy,  sent  to  his  fellow-rebels.  Not 
a  source,  but  a  channel,  for  the  water 
of  life.  The  honour  of  his  office  is  not 
personal,  but  is  refiected  from  his 
King.  5.  He  is  unworthy  to  fulfil  such 
an  honourable  function ;  he  is,  in  him- 
self, quite  unable  to  fulfil  it  aright, 
or  worthily  of  its  tremendous  issues. 
6.  Do  not  praise  the  preacher,  or  con- 
gratulate him  on  his  success.  His 
zeal,  his  skill,  his  success,  are  all  from 
the  outside,  from  Christ.     Above  all : 

III.  He  has  no  choice ;  he  dare  not 
but  preach. — [Yet  this  is  constraint, 
not  compulsion.  Like  Jonah  or  Balaam, 
men    may    refuse    the   commission   of 
God,  or  only   half   discharge  it;   and 
must   take   the    ^^woe"   which   is   the 
consequence.     The  model  of  the  spirit 
of    the    preacher,    called    to    be    the 
servant   of    Christ    in    this    work,  is, 
in   its   culminating    example    (cf.  Ps. 
xl.  6-8,  not  merely  "  targumed, "  but 
authoritatively    applied    to,    and    ex- 
pounded of,  Christ,  Heb.  x.  5-7),  Christ 
Himself,  in  His  voluntary,  self -devoting 
(John  xvii.  19,  *' I  sanctify  Myself  ") 
acceptance  of  the  call.]     He  feels  the 
compulsion  of  (a)  gratitude ;  (b)  com- 
passion for  men's  need,  and  considera- 
tion  of   their   danger   (perhaps,  here, 
"  knowing    the    terror    of    the    Lord," 
2  Cor.  V.    11  ;    but  this  not  certain); 
(c)  a  sense  of  right ;  he  ought  to  tell 
what  has  been  such  a  blessing  to  him- 
self ;  (d)  above  all,  and  this  here,   he 
dares  do  nothing  else.  "  Free  "  as  re- 
gards man's  power  and  payment  (ver.l), 
but  bound  as  to  God's  call.     [An  old 
missionary,  in  his  journal  [penes  me), 
speaking  of  his  "  call "  to  the  ministry, 
writes :    "  When    I    am   at   my   best 
religiously,  the  impression  is  the  most 
powerful   and   persistent.      The   ever- 
lasting  salvation   of    my    soul   is   in- 
timately, if  not  inseparably,  connected 
with  my  obedience  in  this  respect."] 
No  question  whether  he  shall  "  choose 
the  ministry."     He  is  "  called  "  to  it. 
God   designed   him   for  it  "  from    his 
mother's  womb."     Pity  the  man  who 
gets   into  the  work  without  this  call 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


and  commission,  and  who  finds  it  out 
in  later  life,  when  perhaps  too  late  to 
retrace  his  steps  and  undo  the  past. 
But  "  woe "  to  the  man  who,  being 
called,  will  not  hear ;  who  ought  to 
preach  the  Gospel,  but  who  chooses 
some  easier,  or  more  lucrative,  or  more 
congenial,  line  of  life  !  What  sin  is 
there  like  it,  to  refuse  the  honour  of 
being  an  ambassador  who  may  save 
souls '?  [Yet  how  patient  God  is  with 
reluctant  Moses,  who  is  almost  petu- 
lant and  rebellious  in  his  urgent  pro- 
test against  going  to  Egypt  (Exod.  iii. 
11,  13,  iv.  1,  10),  excuse  after  excuse, 
until  finally,  ver.  13,  "  Here  am  I, 
but  do  not  send  me ;  choose,  and  send 
somebody  else."]  Do  not  envy  the 
*'  preacher  of  the  Gospel,"  even  if  he 
be  very  successful.  "  Brethren,  pray 
for  us." 

Yers.  24-27.  ^^  Temperate  in  all  things" 
— (May  be  made  the  basis  of  a  Temper- 
ance Sermon.) 

I.  Christian  religion  honours  the 
body. — Only  one  that  really  does. 
Such  religion  as  Corinthians  knew^ 
took  no  account  of  it ;  bodily  sins  and 
lusts  were  reckoned  things  indifferent. 

1.  Some  to-day  make  almost  a  religion 
of  bodily  exercise.  Athletics  the  god 
which  gets  their  best  devotion.  Read 
nothing  else  in  the  paper  ;  can  talk  on 
no  other  topics.  That  an  exaggeration. 
[Body  not  everything.  Some  giants  very 
poor  creatures  in  mind.  Dwarfs  have 
done  great  things.  Two  most  wonder- 
ful figures  in  Europe  at  end  of  seven- 
teenth century  were  two  commanders  of 
large  armies  :  William  III.,  an  "  asth- 
matic skeleton";  Luxembourg,  **the 
princely      hunchback"     (Macaulay).] 

2.  As  real  an  exaggeration  to  make 
teetotalism  the  only  devotion,  the  only 
religion,  the  only  remedy  for  human 
ill.  [Easy  to  understand  the  *'  intem- 
perance of  temperance  people " ;  not 
difficult  to  excuse,  or  even  justify,  it. 
Man  who  sees  most  of  the  wide  extent, 
and  dire  results,  of  intemperance ;  lives 
in  midst  of  its  woe  and  wreck;  finds 
all  efforts,  hopes,  prayers,  defeated  by 
it ;  finds  the  thick  moral  induration  of 


the  drunkard -habit  turn  edge  of  keen- 
est sword,  or  most  pointed  arrow ; 
finds  the  work  of  years  of  painful 
recovery  blighted  by  outburst  of  old, 
mad  passion  again ;  may  be  excused 
if  he  feel  or  speak  with  "  undue " 
strength.  May  be  forgiven  his  "  mad- 
ness "  when  he  sees  wife,  child,  friend, 
minister,  dragged  down  to  the  slough 
of  the  sin  and  shame  of  drunkard-life. 
No  doubt,  too,  if  we  could  make  drunken 
England  into  part  of  sober  England, 
we  should  cut  tap-root  of  nine-tenths 
of  English  ills,  and  solve  many  a  social 
and  economic  problem.  No  doubt 
total  abstinence  the  only  remedy  for 
large  percentage  of  misery  and  sin ; 
the  most  practical  remedy,  as  things 
are  to-day.  Yet  it  is  exaggeration.] 
It  is  not  all.  Some  appeals  to  the 
intemperate  are  only  less  liable  to 
become  mischievous  than  drink  itself. 
E.g.  appeal  too  strongly  to  the  saving 
of  money  effected ;  may  cast  out  devil 
of  drink  by  putting  in  covetousness. 
Appeal  too  exclusively  to  self-respect 
or  strength  of  will ;  may  make  reclaimed 
drunkard  a  Pharisee  in  pride  of  self. 
May  sometimes  only  have  cured 
physical  mischief  by  inoculating  with 
moral  poison — Be  temperate  even  in 
your  remedy  for  intemperance.  True 
way  of  regarding  question  is  to  make 
it  part  of  the  Christian  honour  of  the 
body,  as  an  instrument  through  which 
Christ  is  to  be  served.  Highest  pur- 
pose of  education  is  to  make  mind  a  fit 
instrument  for  serving  Christ.  And 
so  too  the  body  is  His ;  He  bought  it ; 
bought  all  of  the  man — body  and  soul. 
It  is  to  be  kept  in  best  possible  order 
for  Him,  and  His  use.  Therefore,  in 
mind  and  body, — temperate  m  all  things. 
II.  What  is  temperance  ? — 1.  See 
driver  of  ancient  chariot,  or  modern 
four-in-hand  ;  his  strong  bit ;  still  more, 
his  firm,  skilled  hand.  That  perfect 
control  of  his  team  is  temperance. 
Man,  boy,  drives  team  of  three  bodily 
appetites  ;  mettlesome  horses,  powerful, 
sometimes  turbulent,  in  their  strength  ; 
but  they  have  their  work  to  do.  Tem- 
perance is  having  the  team  well  in  hand, 
making  them  do   their   work,  but  no 

205 


CHAP.  IX.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


more  ;  do  it,  at  the  inan^s  will ;  or  leave 
it  alone,  at  his  will.      Horses  must  not 
be  allowed   to   run  away  with  chariot, 
with  man.      "  Be   temperate,  lest  team 
carry  you   over    the   precipice   of  ruin 
here   and   hereafter."       2.    See  chorus 
on  the  orchestra,  how  built  up  of  four 
classes,   masses,    of     voice.     Conductor 
makes  each  do  its  part,    but  no  more. 
Too    much     bass,    too     much     treble, 
equally  spoil  the  music.      If  tenors  (or 
even  one  voice)  over- assert  themselves, 
they  spoil  balance  and  harmony.     Con- 
ductor makes  each  do    its    part,  loud, 
soft,    everything,    as    he    will.      Mind, 
body,  pleasure,  work,   intellect,    heart, 
will, — in  the  perfect  harmony  of   Life, 
all  take  their  part ;  no  more,  no  less ; 
nothing  dwarfed  or  stunted  ;   nothing 
exaggerated  or   over-grown.      Be    the 
conductor  in  full  authority  over  3"our 
choir  of  gifts,  powers,  passions ;  make  all 
temper  to  a  happy  balance  and  whole- 
ness.      Drunkard   lets   one  voice  out- 
shout   the    rest   and    ruin    the    music 
of   the   life.       3.  Intemperance  means 
not  having  oneself  perfectly  in  hand, 
having   something  a   man   cannot   say 
^^  no"  to.     ["  Never  so  let  yourself  go 
that  you  cannot  'pull  up*  at  will.    Find 
cannot  say  '  no  '  easily/  ?    Then  put  foot 
down,    say    '  no '     absolutely.       Body 
wants  to  be  master  ?     Give  it  a  buffet 
under  the  eye — that  is  Paul's  word — 
to  keep  it  tender.     lVI;ike  it  know  you 
will  be  master,  the  grace  of  God  helping 
you.     Body  and  mind  are  partners  in 
business    of    life ;   neither    is    a  sleep- 
ing partner ;  but  not  equal  partners ; 
body  has  some  stake   in   concern,  but 
must    not    have  the  management,   es- 
pecially  in    drinking.        Mind — you — 
must  be  master.    That  is  temperance."] 
^^  In    all   things."       Kule    for   ancient 
athletes,  and  for    Christians  now,    for 
everybody  who  wants  even  to  win  the 
prizes  of  life.      Nothing  really  worthy 
in  being  a  teetotaler,  and  yet  an  impure 
man  ;  a  hard    worker,  yet  intemperate 
in  relaxation  after  hard  work.    Not  too 
much  reading,  music,  sleep,  anything. 
Every  single  thing  in  measure,  all  in 
balance. 

III.   In  many  things — not  drinking 

206 


only — this  may  mean  total  abstinence. 

As  to  drinking  :  1.  For  every  drunk- 
ard, or  man  or  woman  in  danger,  a 
necessity.  Such  must  abstain,  or  they 
cannot  be  Christ's.  2.  For  Christians 
it  may  become  expedient  (see  Homily 
on  viii.  9-13).  In  England,  in  last 
century,  may  not  have  been.  May  not 
be  on  Continent  to-day.  Are  things, 
however,  coming,  or  are  they  come,  to 
such  a  pass  in  England,  that  Christian 
people  must  stand  clear  of  what  is 
cursing  England  as  never  before? 
3.  Fur  young  people,  safety.  No 
guarantee  "  worth  a  rush  "  except  con- 
version; even  that  sometimes  over- 
borne No  strength  but  God's  in  them 
absolutely  to  be  trusted ;  but  total 
abstinence  a  safeguard. 

IV.  If  not,  will  not  win  the  prize. — 
Happily  public  opinion  is  beginning  to 
say  intemperate  people  (in  every  sense) 
shall  not.  Also  inevitable  working  of 
"  natural  law "  forbids.  Boys  and 
men  handicap  themselves  physically 
by  any  exaggerated  or  sinful  excess. 
Success  even  in  business  means  clear 
head,  sober  hand,  healthy  body. 
Highest  work  demands  body  and  mind 
at  their  best.  So  Christ's  work  de- 
mands it.  Also  if  some  intemperate 
men  seem  to  "  win,"  they  lose  them- 
selves and  are  cast  away  (cf.  Luke  ix. 
25  ;  1  Cor.  ix.  27).  [Our  forefathers 
bore  with  intemperate  Pitt,  and  too- 
convivial  Scott,  and  the  sinner  Nelson. 
But,  a  little  later,  they  would  not  give 
Byron  his  place  in  Westminster  Abbey. 
To-day  not  all  the  witchery  of  their 
Shelley  or  our  Swinburne  must 
pel  mit  them  to  take  first  rank  in  our 
national  devotion.  Day  coming  when 
Christianised  society  will  refuse,  and  say 
that  neither  an  intemperate  man  nor 
an  impure  man  shall  lead  the  national 
life  :  *'  We  won't  have  it !  "] 

Ver.  26.  Christian  Progress. — Com- 
pare the  progress  suggested  by  {a) 
Running  with  that  suggested  by 
[h)  Growth.     Four  Contrasts. 

I.  (a)  Progress,  in  the  outward 
aspects  of  it :  the  life  of  action  and 
of  conflict,  of  speech,  of  work. — Every 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


detail  of  life  a  step  forward  towards  the 
goal  or  backward  towards  the  starting- 
point,  or  out  of  the  prescribed  course  alto- 
gether. (6)  Progress  in  the  inner  life  ; 
in  strength  of  character  and  of  prin- 
ciple, greater  simplicity  and  directness 
of  motive  ;  greater  abundance  in  the 
fruits  of  grace,  in  loveliness  and  Christ- 
likeness.  "  Every  detail  a  step."  Then 
how  important  every  smallest  detail. 
There  is  nothing  which  "  does  not 
matter."  Everything  "  matters."  And, 
further,  why  fear  dying?  It  is  but 
one  more  step,  to  be  taken  in  the  same 
strength  as  that  next  preceding  and 
all  preceding ;  the  one  step  which 
carries  the  runner  over  the  line  which 
marks  the  goal  attained ;  but,  except 
for  that,  perhaps  not  intrinsically  so 
difficult  or  so  important  as  many 
another  preceding.  Let  every  detail 
of  life  have  its  right  direction,  and 
carry  us  forward. 

II.  (a)  Progress  in  a  definitely 
marked-out  course. — The  runner  is 
kept  right  by  rules  and  bounds  im- 
posed from  without.  (6)  The  thing 
that  grows  is  kept  right  in  its  pro- 
gressive development  from  within, 
according  to  the  "  law "  of  its  very 
life.  The  plant  or  the  body  obeys  the 
ideal  of  its  kind  or  order.  The  oak, 
the  moss,  unfold  themselves  and  assi- 
milate and  dispose  into  their  structure 
new  material,  in  obedience  to  the  life 
within  them.  No  need  to  watch  or 
take  pains  that  in  pattern  or  kind  the 
leaves  shall  grow  those  of  the  moss  or 
the  oak.  So  the  new  life  in  the  soul 
has  its  ideal  and  its  laws.  It  will 
naturally  show  a  developing  progress, 
the  features  characteristic  of  the  Christ- 
life  appearing  of  themselves.  But 
the  Racer  is  only  kept  right  as  he 
keeps  within  bounds  prescribed;  he 
may  go  wrong  at  any  point.  On  this 
side  stand  God's  *'  Thou  shalts  "  ;  on 
the  other  His  "Thou  shalt  nots." 
Within  these  lies  the  one,  only  path 
to  the  goal  and  the  prize.  If  in  his 
advance  the  racer  has  not  submitted  to 
the  direction  or  the  restraint  of  these,  he 
runs  "  unlawfully  "  and  "  uncertainly." 
He   may   not  be  surprised  if  he  find 


himself,  after  all,  "  cast  away  "  as  the 
result  of  the  Judge's  verdict.  If  all 
other  indications  of  the  course  fail,  the 
steps  of  Christ  are  the  supreme  sum- 
mary of  all  direction.  What  He  did, 
and,  above  all,  the  principles  of  His 
words  and  acts — these  are  His  '*  steps." 
They  show  the  path  in  which  alone 
progress  can  be  made. 

III.  The  progress  of  growth  is 
solitary ;  that  of  running  is  in  com- 
pany.— The  one  palm  will  grow  as 
well  solitary  in  an  oasis  as  in  a  grove 
of  palms.  No  tree  helps  the  next  to 
grow.  The  children  in  a  family  grow 
hearty  or  weakly  independently  of  each 
other.  As  there  is  a  spiritual  life  which 
must  be  lived,  and  progress  which  must 
be  made,  alone.  A  man  might  be,  if 
need  were,  a  great  saint  in  a  great 
solitude.  It  would  be  one-sided  saint- 
hood. No  Christian  fellowship  or  united 
worship  can  do  the  work  of  the  closet 
and  the  searched  Word.  But  the 
progress  of  Running  is  progress  in 
company ;  all  the  helpfulness  of  com- 
panionship and  sympathy  is  brought 
into  use.  The  runners  in  training  for 
athletic  contests  will  secure  a  friend  to 
run  by  their  side  during  the  last  "  lap  " 
of  the  course ;  by  the  fresh  and  un- 
exhausted vigour  of  the  fiiend  to  help 
themselves  over  the  strain  of  the  last 
portion  of  their  path.  The  sloth  or 
eagerness  of  one  Christian's  progress 
will  affect  the  pace  of  a  fellow-runner. 
His  steady  pursuit  of  the  prize  may 
decide  some  feebler,  wavering  soul 
just  feeling  the  first  strain  after  the 
eagerness  of  the  start  is  over,  and 
beginning  to  wonder  whether,  after 
all,  the  prize  is  worth  such  an  efibrt 
to  win. 

IV.  Growth  speaks  of  a  steady, 
quiet  progress;  not  to  be  measured 
from  moment  to  moment,  but  palpable 
enough  in  accumulated  results.  We 
see  that  the  plant  has  grown,  or  the 
body,  but  not  the  actual  growing. 
Racing  puts  forward  the  continuous, 
eager,  straining  effort,  and  the  concen- 
tration of  it  upon  the  one  thing — the 
crown.  Our  life  is  no  '*  walk- over  "  the 
course ;    no   lounging   parade  towards 

207 


CHAP.  IX.   HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :  I.   CORINTHIANS, 


the  goal;  but  "racing,"  with  all  the  cleansing   it;    but   the   indolent   man 

eagerness    of    competition,   where   the  must   be   content   to  forego  the  "  in- 

racers  are    companions,  but  not  com-  crease   which   is   by  the    strength    of 

petitors.     There  is  no  turning  aside  to  the  ox." 
examine   the  beautiful  sculptures  and 

altars  by  the  side  of  the  course;  no  Yer.  27.  An  Apostle's  Peril. — Both 
stopping  to  exchange  greetings  with  words,  that  for  "  preach  "  and  that  for 
the  friends  amongst  the  spectators.  "  castaway,"  are,  themselves  or  their 
["This  one  thing  I  do"  (Phil.  iii.  13)  cognates,  so  common  in  St.  Paul  that 
is  well  illustrated  by  the  last  words  we  need  not  overpress  the  derivational 
shouted  by  the  "  coach  "  to  the  men  in  meaning  of  even  the  former,  or  neces- 
the  trial  eights  on  the  river:  "Now  sarily  regard  them  as  saturated  with 
then,  keep  your  eyes  in  the  boat ;  look  suggestion  springing  from  the  imagery 
at  the  shoulder  of  the  man  in  front  of  of  a  racer.  The  herald  who  has  called 
you ;  don't  think  of  anything  but  the  others  and  induced  them  to  enter  for 
time  and  the  stroke."]  The  racer's  pro-  the  prize,  who  has  announced  the  con- 
gress is  possessed  by  one  idea :  "  The  ditions  of  the  competition  and  even 
prize,"  "  the  crown."  He  sees  nothing  seemed  to  be  joining  in  the  race  him- 
but  that.  From  head  to  foot,  from  the  self,  comes  to  the  judge's  seat  for  the 
finger-tip  of  his  outstretched  hand  to  crown.  "No  crown  for  you;  you 
the  extremity  of  the  foot,  which  barely  have  not  yourself  submitted  to  the 
touches  the  ground  from  one  step  to  rules,  have  not  contended  '  lawfully ' " 
another  as  he  strains  along,  and  flies  (2  Tim.  ii.  5),  And  he  turns  away 
rather  than  runs — every  inch  of  him,  from  the  judge's  seat  filled  with  the 
ever  muscle  in  his  frame,  says,  "  The  beginnings  of  the  disappointment  of 
Crown  !  "  Everything  is  made  to  bend  an  eternal  failure.  Probable ;  suitable 
to  that ;  everything  in  life  which  will  to  the  context ;  true  ;  but  not  certainly 
not  help  progress  is  discounted  or  dis-  to  be  got  out  of  the  words, 
missed ;  all  must  help  to  win  the  goal  I.  An  official  application  of  the 
and  the  Judge's  award.  The  Christian  words. — Paul's  peril  is  from  his  body. 
man  knows  what  he  wants,  and  makes  — He  "  keeps  his  body  under."  Must 
that  the  serious,  ruling  business  of  his  take  this  precisely  for  what  he  says  : 
life.  [In  Heb.  xii.  1  are  the  added  not  the  "  flesh,"  but  the  "  body," — a 
ideas  of  training  away  all  superfluous  narrower  and  very  definite  source  of 
"  weight,"  every  ounce  which  is  not  bone  danger.  Sin  in  Gentile  life  ran  most 
or  muscle,  which  will  help  in  running,  frequently  into  physical  excess.  All 
and  of  stripping  off  all  encumbering,  heathenism,  all  natural  human  life, 
"  clinging  "  (  =  "  easily  besetting  ")  gravitates  sooner  or  later  into  indul- 
garments.]  Look  at  the  runners.  So  gence  of  the  three  physical  appetites, 
run,  as  they  do,  that  ye  may  obtain.  Mere  human  wisdom  and  morals  have 
It  is  not  never-ending  progress  leading  no  sure  reason  why  these  should  not 
to  no  definite  issue ;  an  endless  seek-  be  indulged ;  the  tendency  is  always 
ing  and  never  finding ;  an  unending  to  treat  bodily  sins  as  venial,  or  even 
effort  which  attains  to  no  prize,  indifierent  actions.  Strangely  enough, 
[Edward  Irving  exclaims,  "  Probation  also,  the  same  temperament  which 
does  not  lead  to  probation,  but  to  makes  some  men,  some  ministers, 
issues  ! "  {Divine  Judgments,  vii.)  ;  to  seem  highly  receptive  of  the  Spirit's 
"  crowning  "  or  "  cast- away."]  "  A  enduement  of  power,  appears  to  expose 
great  deal  of  trouble  to  make  Chris-  them  to  the  assault  of  physical  tempta- 
tian  progress  ! "  Certainly.  But  see  tion.  From  high  spiritual  exaltation 
Prov.  xiv.  4  :  "  Where  no  oxen  are,  to  bodily  excess  is  not  an  uncommon 
the  crib  is  clean ;  but,"  etc.  Nothing  fall.  Paul  seems  to  have  been  by 
is  easier  than  have  a  clean  stable,  temperament  and  by  special  grace  in 
and     to    escape     the     "  trouble "    of  little  peril  in  one  particular  direction. 

208 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I,   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  ix. 


[1  Cor.  vii.  7,  as  usually  interpreted,  But  not  apart  from  personal  unfaith- 

but  the  inference  is  by  no  means  so  fulness   and    failure,    and    a    personal 

certain  as  is  generally  assumed].     And  rejection.       [He   regards   it    as    quite 

he  may  be  in  some  degree  identifying  possible  for  a  teacher  to  lose  his  life's 

himself  with  his  readers,  and  the  "  1 "  superstructure    and    building,    whilst 

not  be   entirely  personal,  but   rather  himself  being  saved  because  on  the  one 

representative.      A   real  danger   to  a  foundation  (1  Cor.  iii.  14,  15).]     Per- 

minister  arises  from  the  frequent  asso-  sonal  unfaithfulness  is  by  far  the  com- 

ciation  with  women  in  the  work  of  his  monest  cause  of  ministerial  and  official 

life,  whether  as  grateful  and  attached  failure.      Not    the    apostle    only,    but 

hearers,  or  busy  helpers,  or  the  objects  the  man^  has  to  take  account  of  the 

of  his  labours.     There  are  dangers  at  liability  to  be  at  the  last  a  "castaway." 

the  hospitable  tables  of  his  congrega-  So  then : 

tion.     Dangers   of   indolence   fostered  II.  An  application  of  the  principle 

by  the  sedentary  nature  of  his  work  to  the  personal  life. — 1.  Every  Chris- 

in  the  study.      Nowadays  ministerial  tion  may  become  a  "castaway,"  and 

athletics   may  become  a   peril.     Paul  miss   the   crown.     [The   thought,    but 

is   in    danger    from    his    body ;    and,  not   the  same   (original  Greek)   word, 

further,    in    two    particulars    in    this  in  Luke  ix.  25.]    All  safety  is  of  God's 

very  chapter   does   he  give  the   body  grace,     with     which    the    man    must 

a  check.     "  Paul's  refusal  of  mainten-  co-operate  ;  [and  the  co-operation  is  in 

ance,   and    the    bodily    toil    resulting  the  strength  of  grace  also].     The  grace 

thereupon,  and  his  refusal  to  eat  meat  must  go  all  the  way,  for  the  peril  goes 

which  might   injure  a  weak  brother,  all  the  way.     [To  the  last  the  Christian 

were  blows  against  the  spiritual  power  soldier  is  not  on  the  parade-ground, 

of  bis  own  body,  and  tended  to  make  but  on  the  battle-field.     He  must  hold 

the   body    more  and   more   a   servant  himself  ready  for  fighting  or  sudden 

of   the   spirit   within"    [Beet,  in  loco,  attack  at  any  moment.     No  "  standing 

We  may  add  also]:  All  the  physical  at  ease"!     Danger  never  far  away.] 

dangers   and   suffering   which    he  not  2.  No  man  is  exempt  because  of  high 

only  submitted  to,  but  accepted   and  honour,  long  service,  or  great  success 

gloried    in    (2     Cor.     iv.     10,    vi.    5,  in    the   work   of   God;  Paul   had    all 

xi.  23-27),  as  the  accompaniments  of  these.     Nor  because  of  great  gifts  or 

his    work    for    his    Master,    became,  grace  at  one  time  enjoyed ;  Paul  had 

thrQugh      his     persistent,     voluntary  these.      Through   these,   indeed,    fatal 

pursuit  of  a  career  which  made  him  temptation    may  reach   the   soul ;  e.g. 

run   the  gauntlet   of   so   many  blows  if  a  man  thus  honoured  and  endowed 

upon  his  body,  really  in  effect  his  own  become  proud,  self-satisfied,  self-reliant 

buffetings  of   his   body.     All    the  ex-  to  the  exclusion  of   dependence  upon 

hausting  physical  toil  of   the  modern  God's    grace.       3.  Each    man    should 

ministry ;  long  walks,  wearying  pastor-  know  his  own  liability,  his  own  vul- 

ising ;   the   contact,    so   repugnant   to  nerable   point.      Perhaps,    safe  every- 

all    the    training    and    instincts   of   a  where  else,   he  may,  like  Achilles,  be 

gentleman,  with  physical  squalor,  dirt,  in  danger  at  the  heel ;  the  lowest  part  of 

disorder,  and  disease  in  the  fulfilment  his  nature,  that  wherein   he   touches 

of    his   labours ;   unwelcome   exposure  the  earthly  most  nearly,  may  be  the 

to   all   weathers ; — all    may   be   sane-  point  of  attack,  rather  than  the  heart 

tified    into    blows    which    "  keep    the  or  the  exalted  intellect.     4.  Each  man 

body  under."     Asceticism,  ingeniously,  should  "  exercise  "  himself  [Acts  xxiv. 

gratuitously,  inventively  prescribed,  is  16  ;  the  physical  training  of  the  com- 

uncalled  for.     In  the  direct  application  batant  in  the  games].     Keeping  him- 

of  the  possible  figure  (above),  official  se{/*  well  in  hand ;  taking  care  that  the 

defect,  and  condemnation  of  his  official  spiritual  is  always  the  dominant  ele- 

life  and   work,   are   most   prominent,  ment  in  his  life.     Yet  the  self -distrust, 

p  209 


CHAP.  IX.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   CORINTHIANS. 


the  watchfulness  over  oneself,  the  fear 
of  the  sad  possibility  of  after  all  miss- 
ing the  prize,  must  not  be  so  dwelt 
upon  as  to  become  a  morbid  dread, 
01*  a  haunting  terror,  overshadowing 
with  gloomy  clouds  the  "joy  of  the 
Lord."  The  case  of  a  "  castaway " 
is  by  God's  grace  a  very  rare  one, 
though  a  possible  one.  Moreover, 
dwell  also  upon  the  grace  for  the 
faithful,  patient,  successful  running  of 
the  course  until  we  say,  "  I  have 
finished  my  course "  (2  Tim.  iv.  7). 
[There  is  yet  a  Greater  Runner  than 
Paul  Who  is  proposed  for  our  con- 
templation (Heb.  xii.  1,  2)  :  "Looking 


at  (as  well  as  unto)  Jesus,"  who  has 
won  His  prize.  Did  He,  may  we  not 
say,  "  keep  under  His  "  very  "  body  "  ?] 
Leading  up  to  the  temple  of  ISTeptune 
at  Corinth,  close  by  the  Isthmian  race- 
ground,  Pausanias  the  traveller  saw  two 
hundred  statues  of  victors  in  the  games, 
ranged  in  honourable  array  on  either 
side  of  the  path.  What  an  inspiration 
to  after-competitors  !  We,  too,  have 
our  array  of  victors.  Amongst  the 
most  distinguished  stands  the  figure 
of  Paul.  No  "castaway"  after  all! 
And  the  grace  which  kept  him  and 
crowned  him  may  keep  and  crown 
any  of  us  ! 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  8-10.  The  Law  of  God  is — 
I.  Reasonable. 

II.  Humane. 
III.  Comprehensive. 

lY.  Just.— [/.  X.] 

Or  thus  : — 

Vers.  8-10.  Principles  of  Equity. 
I.  Commend  themselves  to  reason. 
II.  Are  enforced  by   the    Law   of 
God. 

III.  Are  of  universal  application. 
IV.  Contribute  by  their  operation 

to  the  best  interests  of  all. — \J.  L.] 

Vers.  15,  23.  Paul  an  Example  of — 
I.  Self-denial. 
II.  Humility. 
III.  Disinterestedness. 

IV.  Affability. 

V.  High  motive. — [J.  Z.] 

Ver.  16. 

I.  What  to  preach  :  "  The  Gospel." 

II.  How     to     preach :      "  Without 
glory  to  self  in  any  way." 

III.  Why  preach?  "  Woe."— [/.  L.] 

Ver.  24.  Six  Earnest  Counsels  on  the 

Race  of  Life.    {A  Sermon  to  the  Young.) 

I.  Trifle  not ;  the  buisiness  is  earnest. 

["  Each  word  we  speak  hath  infinite  effect ; 
Each  soul  we  pass  must  go  to  heaven  or 
hell; 


And  this  our  one  chance  through  eter- 
nity ;— 

To  drop  and  die  like  dead  leaves  on  the 
brake, 

Or  like  the  meteor-stone  .  ,  . 

Kindle  the  dry  moors  into  a  fruitful  blaze. 

Be  earnest,  earnest,  earnest, — mad,  if  thou 
wilt  1 

Do  what  thou  dost  as  if  the  stake  were 
heaven 

And  that  thy  last  deed  ere  the  judgment 
day."     (Kingsley,  Sainfs  Tragedy.)] 

II.  Delay  not;  the  opportunity  is 
short. 

III.  Err  not ;  the  path  is  narrow. 
[''  Narrow  !  "  Yes  ;  as  the  railway  lines 
make  a  "  narrow  "  track  for  the  engine 
and  its  train.  But  the  "  narrow  "  yrip 
of  the  rails  upon  the  wheels  is  safety 
for  the  travellers.  "  Liberty "  from 
their  compulsion  to  keep  the  track 
is  danger,  disaster,  ruin.  Plenty  of 
liberty  to  run  forward,  in  the  only  safe 
direction,  with  all  prudent  speed.] 

IV.  Divide  not  your  attention ;  the 
work  is  difficult.  ["The  children  of 
this  world  are,  in  (for  the  aims  and 
purposes  of)  their  generation,  wiser 
than  the  children  of  light."  The 
"  Jack -of -all- trades  "  danger  of  some 
characters.] 

V.  Relax  not  your  efforts  ;  he  only 
that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved. 

VI.  Faint  not ;  the  prize  is  glorious. 
— \J.  L,,  in  part ^ 


210 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,      char  x. 


CHAPTER  X. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1. — Notice  "for,^*  true  reading,  connecting  closely  with  ix.  ult.  Q.d.  "I  am  not  secure 
from  becoming  a  '  castaway' ;  you  are  not  yet  sure  of  the  prize  ;  for  it  is  ever  a  law  of  God's 
people  and  their  life,"  etc.  I  would  not  .  .  .  ignorant. — Found  (with  slight  variation) 
in  Kom.  i.  13,  xi.  25  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  i.  8  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  13.  Add  (for  the  thought) 
2  Cor.  viii.  1.  He  is  a  ^'steward  of  the  mystery"  and  is  anxious  to  get  what  is  entrusted  to 
him  dispensed.  Our  fathers. — Evidently  the  sin  animadverted  upon  in  this  chapter  is  the 
liability  and  temptation  of  the  Gentile  section  of  the  Church.  But  he  is  a  Christian  who 
still  claims  '*  the  fathers"  as  his  own;  (perhaps  some  of  the  Gentiles  had  been  proselytes 
before  conversion  to  Christianity).  The  Church  is  the  real  Israel ;  the  continuity  of  the 
dispensations  and  of  the  covenant  of  God  (cf.  Gal.  iii.  7-9,  14,  29)  is  maintained  in  the  deep 
unity  of  One  Covenant  People,  whether  for  some  centuries  accidentally  Israelite,  or  now 
Gentile  and  Israelite  indifferently.  As  in  the  parallel  fact  that  he  appeals  to  the  Old 
Testament  when  dealing  with  Gentile  Christians  as  well  as  with  Jewish,  the  whole  Past 
belongs  to  the  new  Church, — its  Scriptures,  its  ^'■fathers"  its  God.  Or,  conversely,  as  here, 
"the  Church  in  the  wilderness"  (Acts  vii.  38)  had  our  Sacraments  and  our  Christ — "whom 
they  tempted"  (ver.  9) — before  us.  Under  .  .  .  through. — Literal,  historical,  but  "m" 
(ver.  2)  passes  over  to  the  underlying  significance.  Quite  worthless  as  bearing  upon 
the  question  of  the  mode  of  baptism,  unless  perhaps  as  an  ad  hominem  argument  against  a 
certain  type  of  disputant,  thus :  •*  The  cloud  sprinkled  them,  the  sea  splashed  them  with  its 
spray;  the  only  immersion  was  that  of  the  doomed  Egyptians  1"  But  the  question  how 
much  water  should  be  used  is  parallel  with  the  question  how  much  bread  should  be  eaten, 
how  much  wine  drunk,  in  order  to  a  valid  participation  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  [The  question 
of  the  subjects  of  baptism  is  of  vital  significance.] 

Ver.  3.  Spiritual. — Not  to  be  discussed  apart  from  the  specialised  meaning  of 
"  spiritual"  in  chaps,  ii.,  iii.  "Belonging  to  the  realm  of  facts  in  which  God  the  Spirit  and 
the  awakened  '  spirit '  in  man,  and  these  in  communion  by  the  gracious  action  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  upon  the  latter,  are  the  leading  and  typical  facts. "  Very  pertinent  is  Rev.  xi.  8 : 
•'which  spiritually  is  called  Sodom."  Also  Gal.  iv.  24.  The  Manna  (Exod.  xvi.  14,  15, 
xvii.  6),  with  Christ's  comment,  John  vi.  31,  32  (and  Ps.  Ixxviii.  24).  Twice  a  rock  was 
smitten — a  "rock  "  itzur')  at  Rephidim,  under  Sinai,  and  at  Kadesh  a  "cliff"  (selaK)  ;  in  the 
first  year  of  the  Exodus,  and  in  the  last,  just  before  the  new  start  to  Canaan,  respectively. 
These  are  quite  suflScient  basis  for  Paul's  use  of  the  Old  Testament  narrative,  without 
supposing  him  to  sanction  or  adopt  the  foolish  Rabbinical  fables  of  the  rock  in  Rephidim 
being  an  isolated  mass  which,  with  its  spring  of  water,  gathered  itself  into  a  quasi-globular 
form,  *'like  a  swarm  of  bees,"  and,  rolling  along  by  itself,  or  even  "carried  by  Miriam  [!]," 
accompanied  the  host  through  their  wilderness  wanderings.  This  can  scarcely  liave  been 
anything  but  an  allegory  to  the  Rabbis  themselves ;  and  even  if  it  be  as  old  as  Paul's  time — 
which  is  not  certain  about  anything  in  the  mass  of  material  vaguely  called  the  Talmud, 
whose  earliest  written  form  dates  many  years  later — the  utmost  that  can  be  said  is  well  put 
by  Dr.  Driver  :  "  The  particular  expression  chosen  by  the  Apostle  may  have  been  svggested 
to  him  by  his  acquaintance  with  the  legend  current  among  the  Jews  ;  but  it  is  evident  that 
he  gives  it  an  entirely  different  application,  and  that  he  uses  it,  not  in  a  literal  sense,  but 
figuratively"  {Expositor^  January  1889).  Stanley  also  points  out  that  "the  cloud  "and 
"  the  sea  "  are  not  called  "  spiritual "  ;  the  manna  and  the  water  from  the  rock  were  already 
Messianically  expounded  by  the  Jewish  teachers  ;  whilst,  until  Christian  baptism  had 
been  instituted,  no  use  of  the  cloud  and  sea  would  be  suggested,  and  would  only  occur  to  a 
Christian  Rabbi  like  Paul. 

Ver.  5. — Cf.  Heb.  iii.  7— iv.  13  for  the  general  strain  of  this  paragraph.  Also  cf.  "  All  .  .  . 
all  ...  all  ...  all  ..  .  many"  here  with  ""All  .  .  .  all  .  .  .  all  .  .  .  some"  in  ix.  22. 
Q.d.  "  I  may  do  all  I  can  do,  God  may  do  all  He  can  do,  yet  some  will  not  be  saved.  See 
to  it  that  ye  are  saved."  [Cf.  Christ's  reply:  "Few  or  many,  strive  yourself  to  enter" 
(Luke  xiii.  23).] 

Ver.  6.  Examples  for  us,  or  "  examples  of  us,"  which  ?  Grammatically  each  finds 
supporters.  Both  are  true ;  the  former  because  the  latter  is  true  ;  on  the  general  principle 
of  the  paragraph,  that  the  "  History  of  the  Church  "  may  be  extended  backward  into  even 
wilderness  days.  Evil  things. — Quite  general  in  reference  ;  and  "  Ivst "  must  not  be  confined 
to  the  sin  of  ver.  8.    (Cf.  Rom.  vii.  7  ;  Jas.  i.  15 ;  1  John  ii.  16.) 

311 


CHAP.  X.     HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  7.  Idolaters.— In  the  same  sense  as  in  ver.  14.  No  sudden  and  complete  lapse  is 
contemplated,  but  the  complicity  with,  and  countenance  of,  idolatry  involved  in  eating  at 
the  public  heathen  banquets,  which  of  course  might  prove  the  first  step  to  a  complete 
relapse.  For  the  history,  see  Exod.  xxxii.  6.  Play  was  in  fact,  but  by  no  necessary  im- 
plication in  the  word,  lascivious  "^lay''  or  "sport."  At  Corinth  notoriously,  but  in 
heathenism  everywhere,  idolatry  was  linked  with,  degenerated  into,  sensuality ;  and  even 
made  sensuality  service  to  the  gods,  and  a  means  of  enrichment  of  the  Temple  treasuries. 
[Men  and  women  "  presented  their  bodies  a  living  sacrifice  "  (Rom.  xii.  1).] 

Ver,  8.— Num.  xxv,  1-9  (and  Josephus)  say  24,000,  not  23,000.  "  Paul  follows  a  Jewish 
tradition  which  deducted  1,000  as  being  the  number  of  those  who  were  hanged  by  the 
judges,  so  that  only  23,000  would  be  killed  by  the  plague "  (Evans).  Most  modern 
commentators  dismiss  as  valueless  all  attempts  at  removing  the  apparent  discrepancy,  and 
would  account  the  discrepancy  itself  of  small  importance,  as  "  a  slip  of  Paul's  memory,"  or 
"  a  slip  of  the  pen  of  Paul's  amanuensis  " ;  either  way  obviously  regarding  his  inspiration  and 
that  of  the  Epistle  as  not  absolutely  requiring  "inerrancy  in  the  original  autographs." 
Certainly  "  in  one  day  "  is  not  so  emphatic  as  to  imply  "  and  a  thousand  more,  the  balance, 
on  another." 

Ver.  9. — Note  " Lord"  not  "  Christ,^'  is  now  the  widely  supported  reading.  Yet  *'  *  Lord ' 
and  *  Christ '  equally  refer  to  Christ's  presence  in  the  Old  Testament,  as  implied  in  ver.  4 ; 
Jude  5  ;  Heb.  xi,  26  "  (Stanley).  Moreover,  something  is  due  to  the  form  of  the  sentence ; 
it  is  not  expressly  said  that  Israel  tempted  Christ ;  Tve  do  ^'  tempt  Christ."  [For  similar 
Gospel  turns  given  to  Old  Testament  phrases  and  facts,  see,  besides  Heb.  xi.  26,  Heb.  xi.  7  ; 
Eom.  iv.  13 :  cf.  again  this  with  Matt.  v.  5  (Ps.  xxxvii.  11),  ib.  3.]  Tempted. — Num.  xxi.  4,  6. 
See  homiletic  material  on  ver.  13.  Here  '•  put  God's  patience  to  the  te^t."  The  word  is 
strengthened  here  with  a  prefix  which  intensifies  its  meaning:  "put  Him  to  iitterniost 
proof  "  ;  "  unbelief,  impatience,  presumptuousness  "  being  elements  in  their  sin  ;  suggesting 
a  "  longing  for  the  sensual  gratifications  of  their  old  heathen  life,  and  a  desire  to  shake  off 
the  restraints  of  Christianity  "  (Ellicott). 

Ver.  10. — Num.  xvi,  41-50,  The  murmuring  against  Moses  and  Aaron  being  perhaps 
covertly  intended  as  a  suggestive  parallel  to  the  Corinthian  murmuring  against  Paul's 
Apostolic  authority.  Yet  it  of  course  aims  higher  than  at  any  human  authority.  The 
destroyer.— ^.^.  "the  destrojdng  angel,"  whose  physical  instrument  of  chastisement  was  "a 
plague,"  As  in  2  Sam.  xxiv,  16  ;  Isa.  xxxvii.  36,  So  Paul  discloses  a  personal.  Divine  wrath 
behind  the  prevalent  sickness  and  the  deaths  at  Corinth  (xi,  30). 

Ver,  11,  Happened  .  .  .  were  written. — There  was  a  purpose  moulding  ihQfacts\  t\\Q  written 
record  was  also  the  expression  of  a  purpose.  If  we  may  use  the  human  analogue :  just  as 
the  writer  of  *'a  novel  with  a  purpose'"  first  constructs  his  characters  and  his  story,  and  then 
publishes  his  teaching  through  the  vehicle  of  his  narrative,  by  writing  and  printing  it.  The 
vehicle  of  instruction  is  here  not  a  fiction,  but  a  history  ("  these  things  happened^'),  in  which 
the  sovereign  "  authorship  "  of  God  and  the  absolutely  free  activity  and  "  authorship  "  of  man 
are  found,  as  always,  in  "  collaboration."  Ends  of  the  ages. — The  great  dispensational 
periods  in  God's  whole  Redemption  history  :  Antediluvian,  Patriarchal,  Mosaic.  In  a  sense 
these  are  successive,  the  Christian  age  being  the  last ;  after  Christianity,  Eternity.  Yet  the 
truer  view  sees  what  is  essential  in  each  running  on  side  by  side  with  the  next  later  to  arise, 
so  that  all  "  arrive  "  together  at  the  beginning  of  the  "  age  to  come''  (Matt,  xii,  32  ;  cf.  signi- 
ficantly, Mark  x.  30).  For  ensamples. — "  Typically"  as  ver.  6.  So  Rom.  v.  14  (strengthened 
by  1  Cor,  xv,  45),  The  serviceableness  of  the  Old  Testament  for  teaching  New  Testament 
truth  is  not  a  happy  accident,  but  the  result  of  the  intention  of  Him  Who  is  the  Author  of 
History. 

Ver.  13. — "  Take  warning.     But  also  take  courage  1 "     See  homiletic  treatment. 

Ver.  15. — "  I  take  you  at  your  own  valuation ;  the  more  reason,  if  you  are  such  wise  men, 
that  you  should  see  how  my  warning  is  warranted." 

Ver.  16,  Cup  of  blessing. — The  name  given  to  the  third  [or  fourth, — authorities  differ  hope- 
lessly] cup  of  wine  solemnl}^  drunk  at  a  Passover  Supper,  over  which  the  master  of  the 
feast  said,  "  Blessed  be  Thou,  0  Lord  our  God,  the  King  of  the  World,  who  hast  created  the 
fruit  of  the  vine."  [This  is  the  starting-point  of  the  Saviour's  thought  (John  x v.  1).  ]  But  the 
name  was  alieady  associating  itself  with  the  Christian  custom  of  pronouncing  a  blessing  or 
thanksgiving  in  connection  with  "  the  cup  "  at  the  Lord's  Supper.  "  After  the  same  manner''' 
(xi.  25)  implies  that  He  gave  thanks  over  His  cup  (ver.  21)  as  well  as  over  His  bread ;  and 
the  first  giving  of  thanks,  that  over  the  bread,  is  called  "  'blessing  "  in  Matt,  xxvi,  26.  (On 
the  general  subject,  see  Separate  Homily  on  xi.  20.)  Note  that  "  communion  "  here,  '■^par- 
tahers'"  (ver.  18),  and  '■'■fellowahij)'"  (ver.  20)  are  cognate  words,  as  shown  in  the  R.V.  Vers. 
18,  20  are  thus  exegetical  of  the  "  communion  "  of  this  verse.  ("  Partakers  with  Christ  "  or 
"partakers  of  Christ,"  in  Heb.  iii.  14,  has,  as  matter  of  mere  verbal  exegesis,  the  same 
ambiguity  as  here  between  "Common  participation  with  each  other  m,"  and  "Communion 
with,  the  blood  of  Christ  (i.e.  ultimately  with  Himself).     The  exact  meaning  will  be  for  each 


^1^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  x. 


man  determined  by  his  reading  of  the  whole  teaching  of  the  New  Testament  upon  the  subject. 
We  .  .  .  we. — No  definite,  or  decisive,  pronouncement  as  to  the  persons  whff  did.  or  who 
rightly  should,  "administer."  Paul's  "we  "is  the  French  '*  on"  q.d.  "Which  is  broken  in 
our  Churches  in  our  custom  and  manner  of  having  amongst  us  *  the  Lord's  Supper.'  "  "  We 
Christians,  as  a  new  religious  community." 

Ver.  18.  After  the  flesh.— Showing  that  lie  has  been  all  along  writing  in  the  presence  of 
the  thought  of  a  continuous  "spiritual"  "Israel."  The  custom  of  making  a  sacred  meal  of 
the  greater  part  of  the  flesh  of  the  peace  offerings  is  in  Lev.  viii.  31  ;  Deut.  xii.  18,  xvi.  11  ; 
1  Sam.  ix.  23,  24,  etc.  This  gave  Paul  an  argument  appealing  to  the  Jewish-Christian 
section  of  the  Church.  With  the  altar. — Not,  as  the  parallels  would  suggest,  Tvith  God,  as 
though  that  were  too  solemn  to  say  in  such  a  connection. 

Ver.  19. — "  Do  I  contradict  what  I  said  in  viii.  4,  or  in  Eom.  xiv.  14  ?  "  [1  Tim.  iv.  4  his 
still  unchanged  conviction.]  "  For  Chiistians  I  said  indeed  that  these  thiijgs  have  no  real 
significance ;  to  the  heathen  around  you  they  have  a  very  real  significance  ;  and  the  powers 
of  the  world  of  evil  take  good  care  that  they  shall  have  to  themselves  a  very  real  significance 
also." 

Ver.  20.  Jievil^.—^' Damons  ;"  quoted  from  Deut.  xxxii.  17.  In  the  New  Testament  there 
is  only  one  "  devil "  ;  the  "  demons"  are  many  (Gospels  j!;«.ssi??i),  Stanley  would  soften  down 
the  meaning  here  to  "  divinities,"  and  "  more  especially  to  those  heroes  and  inferior  divinities 
to  whom  alone  (according  to  the  belief  of  this  later  age),  and  not  to  the  supreme  rulers  of  the 
universe,  sacrifices  as  sucLi  were  due."  But  this  enfeebles  the  strong  antithesis  which  under- 
lies Paul's  argument  and  remonstrance,  ver,  21  ;  it  is  also  against  the  New  Testament  usage 
of  the  word,  which  is  e\ery  where  (except  Acts  xvii.  18,  where  the  speakers  are  heathens)  evil 
spirits,  spiritual  beings,  who  form  part  of  the  Satanic  order  and  realm  (Eph.  vi.  12  for 
example,  is  definite,  and  of  decisive  autl  ority).  "  It  is  assumed  everywhere  in  the  New 
Testament  that  the  abstract  power  and  rule  of  sin  have  taken  concrete  form  in  superhuman 
beings,  acting  under  one  personal  head,  and  bringing  evil  influences  to  bear  on  the  human 
face.  .  .  .  Therefore  every  act  of  sin  is  obedience  (Rom.  vi,  16)  to  these  superhuman  enemies, 
and  tends  to  carry  out  their  purposes  of  death.  For  idolatry  is  the  ritual  of  sin.  It  is  there- 
fore the  ceremonial  of  the  rule  of  evil  spirits  over  men.  Consequently,  though  the  heathen 
neither  intend  nor  know  it,  every  act  of  idolatry,  and  whatever  tends  to  support  it,  is  a 
sacrifice  laid  on  the  altar  of  demons  "  (Beet),  Very  significant  how  far  Paul  is  from  any 
apologetic  recognition  of  the  (perhaps)  original  purpose  of  an  idol, — to  assist  the  worshipper 
to  fix  attention  in  worship,  and  its  tribute  to  the  necessity  of  human  nature  to  worship 
something.  There  are  fragments,  instincts,  of  truth  in  all  idolatry  ;  but  practically  it  is  evil, 
only  evil,  sensual,  demoniac. 

Ver.  22. — A  very  good  illustration  of  the  meaning  of  "  tempting  God.^^ 

Ver.  23. — See  Separate  Homily  on  vi,  12, 

Ver,  24. — Note  the  significant  "  also "  in  the  second  member  of  the  similar  saying  in 
Phil,  ii.  4. 

Ver.  25.  For  conscience' sake, — This  does  not  mean  "  Let  sleeping  dogs  lie!  Shut  your 
eyes  and  go  on.  Do  not  raise  the  question  !  "  but  "  There  is,  before  God,  no  reason  to  raise 
any  question  ;  there  is  really  no  question  to  raise, /(9r,"  etc.  So  in  ver.  27,  But,  accidentally, 
a  question  of  conscience  becomes  involved  in  the  matter  under  the  circumstances  of  ver,  28  ; 
yet  even  then  only  for  the  hrother's  conscience'  sake,  directly.  Indirectly,  any  want  of  con- 
sideration for  him  which  ends  in  spiritual  harm  to  him,  will  mean  '■'■  judgment"  and  condem- 
nation^ of  the  first  man's  "■  iiherty." 

Ver,  27. — Will  of  course  be,  not  a  public  heathen  festival  banquet  —there  he  must  not  go 
at  all ;  but  one  in  a  private  house,  and  that  also  a  mere  friendly  banquet, 

Ver,  28, — ''  Don't  hurk  difficulties  of  conscience  ; "  as  ver.  25  means,  "  Don't  make 
difficulties," 

Ver.  30. — "I  don't  blame  him  for  his  not  unnatural  condemnation  of  me;  nor  is  God's 
condemnation  of  such  a  use  of  my  liberty  unjust ;  I  only  blame  myself.  Why  should  I  per- 
sist in  doing  what  brings  even  this  indirect  condemnation  ?  It  would  have  been  better  to 
abstain,  although  I  could,  having  regard  only  to  myself,  eat  with  tliankfulness  "  [="Jy 
grace  "] ,  Perhaps  with  a  reminiscence  of  the  "  blessing  "  of  the  cup  and  the  bread  in  the  most 
sacred  meal  of  all. 

N.B,  xi.  1  really  concludes  this  chapter,  ^'■Imitators  of  me,''  iv.  16  ;  Eph,  v.  1 ;  1  Thess.  i,  6, 
ii.  14  ;  Heb.  vi.  12 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  13  ;  (and  for  the  thought)  Heb.  xii.  1,  2. 


213 


CHAP.  X.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   L   CORINTHIANS. 


HOMILETIG  ANALYSIS.— Whole  Chapter. 

I.  An  ancient  piece  of  history ;  lighting  up 
II.  A  modern  question  of  conduct. 

I.  1.  Corinth  may  borrow  light  and  teaching  from  the  Wilderness  of  Sinai. 
The  ordinary,  every-day  type  of  man  in  a  busy,  wicked  centre  of  ti-ade  and  com- 
merce may  go  back  for  teaching  to  a  singular,  isolated  people,  in  special,  unpre- 
cedented, unparalleled  conditions  of  national,  social,  rehgious,  personal  life.  The 
Gentile  Christian  in  Corinth  may,  must,  listen  to  the  teachings  of  the  story  of 
Ancient  Israel.  Israel,  like  Another,  is  "  given  for  a  witness  to  the  peoples  " 
(Isa.  Iv.  4) ;  a  standing  embodiment,  in  its  history  and  its  Scriptures,  of  some  great 
Truths  of  God.  The  facts  "  hapjjened  " — were  made  to  happen,  such  of  them  as 
depended  on  the  sole  will  of  God — to  be  a  Revelation  ;  they  were  also  "  written  " 
down  to  be  a  Eevelation  (ver.  11).  The  ^^  ends  of  the  ages"  were  come  upon  these 
men  in  Corinth.  The  last  ^^  age"  of  the  Redemption  history  was  begun.  No 
preceding  age  had  really  passed  away.  Beginning  successively,  they  had  run  on 
concurrently,  and  now  were  mingling  their  course  with  this  newest -arisen  con- 
tributory to  the  stream  of  history.  They  were  all  still  needed.  No  one  of  them 
had  really  ever  become  obsolete.  Each  had  contributed  much  to  its  next 
successor ;  but  it  had  also  within  it  principles,  examples,  methods,  of  God's 
government,  always  needed  somewhere,  by  some  nation  or  individual,  and 
essentially  applicable  universally.  And  for  these  ^^  wise,"  Jin  de  siecle  Corinthians 
(one  might  almost  call  them),  at  their  own  valuation  of  themselves,  there  was 
teaching,  admonitory  teaching.  Nothing  that  is  of  God's  essential  truth  ever 
passes  away.  It  may  clothe  itself.  He  who  makes  history  may  clothe  it,  in  new 
forms,  of  longer  or  shorter  persistence  ;  but  when  the  form  perishes,  the  spirit  and 
the  essential  principles  remain.  Very  notably  all  true  of  the  last  of  the  bygone 
*'  ages," — that  of  "  Mosaism  "  (ver.  2)  and  its  history  and  institutions.  So  closely 
did  this  mimic  or  suggest  the  coming  final  age ;  so  wonderfully  parallel  were  the 
historic  Israel  of  the  wilderness,  and  the  new  Israel  of  faith,  just  then  beginning 
to  be  gathered  out  of  many  cities  and  peoples  and  tongues  and  religions  ;  with 
such  an  entirety  of  transfer  of  all  that  was  of  abiding  significance  was  the  old 
"  age  "  passing  over,  passing  on,  under  the  new  forms  of  the  last  '*  age  "  of  all ; 
that  the  division  line  was,  to  the  men  who,  like  Paul  himself,  had  lived  in  both, 
scarcely  more  than  the  formal  break  between  two  chapters  of  the  written  record 
of  a  history  that  never  pauses  in  its  course,  and  does  not  show  any  abrupt 
cleavage  between  old  and  new.  Not  only  was  human  nature  at  Sinai,  or  Kadesh, 
or  in  the  weary  waste  of  the  Arabah,  the  same  human  nature  as  at  Corinth  ;  not 
only  were  the  great,  broad  outlines  and  principles  of  God's  dealing  with  the  sins 
and  the  needs  of  a  chosen  people  those  on  which  His  unchangeableness  still  must 
needs  run,  in  dealing  with  a  Church  cnosen  out  of  the  Corinthian  world  ;  but, 
more,  it  really  was  one  continuous  history  of  one  continuous  Church.  There  really 
never  had  been,  nor  could  be,  but  one  "  seed  of  Abraham,"  one  people  on  whom 
were  incumbent  the  responsibilities,  in  whom  were  vested  the  privileges,  of  the 
covenant  with  Jehovah's  "  friend."  Every  Gentile  may  read  the  Jewish  Scrip- 
tures as  his  Scriptures ;  the  Jews  were  not  authors  or  exclusive  proprietors,  but 
"  librarians  "  for  the  world's  sake  ;  the  Gentile  Christian  may  claim  the  ^^  fathers  " 
as  his  too  (ver.  1),  The  historic  form  was  just  then  changing  under  men's  eyes, 
and  in  men's  personal  knowledge ;  but  one  Corporation,  one  Church,  embraced 
Sinai  and  Corinth,  and  will  include  every  local  Church  and  every  century  until 
literally  "  The  End  "  of  the  earthly  ages  comes  (xv.  24).  The  men  of  old  were 
biTt  ^^ patterns  of"  the  new  men  come  or  to  come.  And  because  they  were 
patterns  of  them  they  were  *'  examples  for  "  them  (ver.  6).  Without  essential 
resemblances  history  could  teach  nothing.     If,  so  to  speak,  the  body  corporate 

214 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


had  no  personal  identity  under  all  changes  of  growth  and  development,  it  might 
as  well  have  no  memory ;  the  Past  would  mean  nothing  to  the  Present  or  the 
Future.  The  teaching  value  of  all  History  depends  upon  the  unity  of  Man. 
The  teaching  value  of  eacred  ancient  history  depends  upon  the  oneness  of  man, 
and  sin,  in  God's  purpose  and  work  of  Redemption.  2.  So,  then,  we  see  really 
one  Church,  Jewish  and  Christian,  in  historical  sub-division.  (1)  They  had  our 
privileges  (vers.  1-4);  (2)  we  have  their  perils  (vers.  5-10);  but  (3)  they  did 
reach,  or  might  have  reached,  Canaan,  as  our  Exodus,  too,  may  be  completed ; 
we  may  have  their  "  way  of  escape  "  (vers.  11-13).  (1)  We  have  not  copied  theiis  ; 
theirs  preluded  ours.  The  Church  may  now  read  the  significance  of  its  very 
sacraments  in — not  read  it  back  into — the  Cloud  and  the  Sea  and  the  IVJanna. 
The  child  in  Christian  ideas  may  now  read  the  riddle  of  the  smitten  Pock  and 
the  outflowing  water.  The  word  of  the  enigma  is  "  Christ."  "  That  rock  was 
Christ^  Indeed,  to  borrow  the  fantastic  figure  or  fable  of  the  Pabbis,  a  grace 
flcjwed  forth  from  Him  which  accompanied  their  journey — the  Spirit  (cf. 
John  vii.  37-39),  given  forth  from  Christ,  though  not  in  the  abundance,  nor  in 
the  special  ''adoption  grace"  (Pom.  viii.  15-17),  which  are  the  glory  of  the 
Church  of  Christ,  given  forth  jfrom  Christ  '*  before  Christ."  [Noteworthy  how 
the  two  strikings  of  rocks  to  bring  forth  water,  occurred,  the  one  in  the  first  year 
of  the  wanderings,  the  other  at  Kadesh,  after  the  long  thirty-eight  years'  paren- 
thesiSf  the  "  suspension "  of  the  covenant  history ;  as  though,  when  the  new 
generation  is  to  begin  from  Kadesh  its  march  to  Canaan,  it  is  to  have  its  Pock 
and  Water,  just  as  the  old  had  at  their  outsetting.]  The  camp  was  full  of  God ; 
the  history  was  full  of  miracle,  which  is  only  the  world  of  God  and  of  "  spiritual " 
things,  breaking  through  the  accustomed  veil  behind  which  He  ordinarily  chooses 
that  it  shall  lie  concealed,  and  that  He  shall  do  His  work.  The  world  of  things 
*•  spiritual "  extended  itself,  and  included  within  its  circle  the  "  Rock,"  the 
'*  drink,"  the  "  meat "  (vers.  3,  4).  They  were  all  for  the  time  lifted  up  and 
became  "  spiritual,'^  tokens  and  material  instruments  of  the  manifested  presence 
and  blessing  of  God.  [Indeed,  may  we  go  further  and  say  that  these  were  to 
Israel  as  true  "  sacraments  "  as  are  those  of  the  Christian  Church  ?  Did  they 
receive  the  same  grace  as  we,  though  in  connection  with  another  covenant  token  ? 
John  vi.  would  almost  carry  the  weight  of  an  inference  that,  as  to  a  Christian, 
believing  partaker  the  bread  is,  between  him  and  his  Lord  Christ,  the  pledge 
and  seal,  and  is  also  the  symbol,  of  all  the  grace  of  ''  the  New  Covenant " 
(xi.  25,  also  Heb.  viii.  8-13),  so  to  a  believing,  obedient  Israelite  the  Manna,  for 
example,  might  be  a  sign  and  seal  of  "old  covenant "  grace,  which  is  but  "  new 
covenant"  grace  in  its  beginnings  and  in  scantier  measure.  [Gal.  iii,  8,  14;  it 
was  "  the  Gospel "  of  justification  by  faith  which  was  preached  to  Abraham ; 
it  is  "the  blessing  of  Abraham  "  which  "comes  upon  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus 
Christ."]  The  men  of  the  ancient  order  had  their  "  baptism,"  when  the  cloud 
and  the  sea,  with  its  waters,  put  the  same  obvious,  visible  demarcation  between 
the  old  life  of  bondage  and  the  new  life  of  liberty  as  baptism  puts  in  our  case ; 
[it  is  ^'burial''  (Pom.  vi.  4;  Col.  ii.  12),  the  express,  formal,  visible  token  of  a 
real  "  death  "  to  the  old  life.  A  man  who  is  carried  to  his  burial  is  obviously 
by  everybody  accounted  dead  ;  he  presumably  is  dead] ;  and  when,  moreover,  just 
as  we  were  by  our  baptism  bound  to  Christ,  the  Pepresentative  of  our  God,  to 
accept  Him  as  our  Lawgiver  and  Mediator,  and  to  render  all  obedience  to  all  God's 
words  spoken  by  His  mouth,  they  were  in  parallel  manner  bound  to  God's  earlier 
Pepresentative  and  Lawgiver  and  Mediator,  to  accept  him  and  obey, — "  baptized 
unto  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea."  As  we  sit  at  the  Table  of  our  Lord 
Christ,  so  they  had  spread  daily  for  them  God's  "  table  in  the  wilderness " 
(Ps.  Ixxviii.  19),  and  ate  and  drank  with  [and  o/(John  vi.  53-58)]  Christ.  Even 
so  do  we  sit  down  at  a  peace-offering  banquet  (ver.  18)  where  the  Host  Whose 

215 


CHAP.  X.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


guests  we  are  is  also  the  Sacrifice  once  put  upon  "  the  altar ^^^  and  Who  is  now  also 
the  Provision  upon  the  table.  We  and  they  share  in  commoii  privileges  and 
in  a  common  grace.  But  (2)  we  share  their  perils,  their  one  great  danger,  and 
the  subordinate  dangers  that  contribute  to  it.  "  Let  him  that  thinheth^  .  .  . 
take  heed  lest  he  fall''  (ver.  12).  They  fell, — '•'"many  of  them"  most  of  them. 
All  with  their  (Mosaic)  ^'■baptism")  all  with  their  (wilderness)  Table  and  its 
{^'■spiritual")  viands-  all  safely  out  of  Egypt  and  safely  commencing  their 
Exodus  under  Moses'  hand  and  care :  but  not  all  retaining  the  "  good  pleasure  " 
of  Jehovah  so  as  to  enter  Canaan.  And  you,  too,  of  Corinth,  who  have  begun 
your  Christian  course,  all  of  you ;  who  have  partaken  of  the  Baptism  and  the 
Table,  all  of  you ;  who  have  all  shared  abundantly  in  the  full-flowing  tide  of  the 
Spirit's  grace,  springing  from  Him  who  is  our  pierced,  smitten  Rock,  [who  "  came 
by  water  and  blood  "  (1  John  v.  6) ;  see  how  John  turns  aside  from  the  simplicity 
of  narrative  to  clench  his  statement  of  fact  with,  so  to  say,  an  affidavit 
(John  xix.  34)] ;  have  a  care  that  you  also  be  not  *'  overthrown  in  the  wilderness" 
No  most  abundant  ordinances  and  "  sacraments  "  will  save  you  ;  no  most  assured 
and  definite  commencement  of  your  Christian  course,  no  most  real  and  blessed 
past  participation  in  the  Grace  of  this  new  ^^ age"  of  the  world,  will  avail  to  give 
you  absolute  security  of  completing  your  course.  ^^  All"  ends  in  ^^ some"  (ix.  22), 
with  all  man's  effort;  ^^ all"  may  be  diminished  by  the  loss  of  ''  many"  (ver.  5), 
with  all  God's  grace  and  the  Church's  fellowship.  Watch  !  Take  heed  !  Guard 
your  heart ;  the  mischief  will  begin  there.  Its  "  lust  "  (ver.  6)  within  and  "  evil 
things  "  without — your  danger  lies  there,  as  did  the  danger  of  "  our  "  common 
^^  fathers."  Your  heathen  friends  and  neighbours  spread  you  another  Table ; 
nay,  the  "  demons  "  themselves  do  it,  with  a  "  demon  "  cup.  Idolatry  slew  our 
fathers ;  in  the  banquet  to  which  you  are  bidden  as  guests  there  is  idolatry  which 
may  slay  you, — ^^ idolatry"  with  its  riotous,  drunken,  lascivious  ''^ play"  (ver.  7) 
for  the  sequel  to  its  feast.  Your  city  is  infamous  for  the  ^'•fornication  "  which 
cut  off  three-and-twenty  thousand,  who  quitted  Egypt,  but  never  saw  Canaan. 
[Call  it  by  its  plain  name ;  let  its  undisguised  shame  and  sin  stand  clear  in  your 
thought,  a  thing  in  all  ages  accursed  of  God  and  His  holy  Law.  Lend  no  ear  to 
your  philosophers  who  tell  you  that  it  is  a  thing  outside  the  man,  and  ''  indif- 
ferent " ;  to  the  young  man's  natural  appetite,  which  pleads  that  either  God 
should  not  have  made  him  so,  or  that  it  is  '*  necessary  "  and  "  natural  "  to  indulge 
it ;  to  the  poetry  which  calls  it  "  love,"  and  weaves  around  it  bewitching  verse, 
till  the  sin  gleams  and  glows  a  very  virtue,  a  jewel  "  set "  and  enshrined  in  some 
of  the  masterpieces  of  human  genius.  God's  handling  of  fornication  is  with  the 
plague  and  the  sword  !]  Think  how  they  daringly,  wickedly,  put  to  the  test 
the  love  and  patience  of  "  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  "  in  their  midst,  tempting  Him, 
as  if  to  see  how  far  they  might  go  before  vengeance  should  fall.  Do  not  ye  so 
put  Christ  to  the  test  by  complicity  with  surrounding  heathen  sin ;  there  is  a 
"  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  which  may  be  awakened  ;  God  can  still  find  "  serpents  "  to 
avenge  His  holiness,  outraged  by  His  very  people ;  He  will  never  lack  instru- 
ments, servants,  to  execute  His  judgments.  [Perhaps  not  too  far  away  to  illus- 
trate by  the  wretched  man  in  Southey's  Thalaba,  from  whose  shoulders  grew 
two  serpents,  which  unceasingly  gnawed  at  his  face.  A  sinner  is  often  punished 
by  the  ''  serpents  "  born  of  the  sin  of  his  own  heart  or  life  ;  and  most  commonly 
and  terribly  in  case  of  "  fornication,"  when  the  ruined  body  and  the  polluted 
mind  become  the  man's  worst  scourge.]  Take  heed  lest,  if  your  heart  "  lust " 
after  the  "  evil  things  "  you  left  behind  when  you  came  out  from  heathenism, 
your  lips  begin  to  "  murmur  "  rebelliously  against  the  "  narrow  "  and  "  restricted  " 
life  your  religion  imposes.  The  journey  hard  ?  Yes.  No  delicacies  of  Egypt  ? 
No.  But  there  is  still  a  ^^  Destroyer  "  of  sharp  sword  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  16,  etc.)  and 
mighty  power.     He  can  execute  wrath  upon  the  Egypt  you  have  left..   He  can 

216 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


wield  His  sword  against  the  very  Church  which  has  quitted  Egypt.  "  Flee  frorn 
idolatry"  Yet  (3)  some  did  find  their  journey's  end  in  Canaan  ;  with  some  the 
Exodus  was  complete ;  it  might  have  been  for  all.  You  need  not  fall ;  there  is 
"  access  by  faith  into  grace  whereby  you  stand  "  (Rom.  v.  2).  It  was  not  God's 
fault  if  they  found  that  the  "  way  of  escape  "  from  Egypt  led  them  nowhere  but, 
after  all,  to  death.  He  "  is  faithful "  to  you  and  to  them  ;  the  breakdown  will  be 
on  your  side,  not  on  His.  He  knows  your  strength,  your  weakness.  It  is  hard 
for  you  to  stand  in  Corinth ;  neighbours  tempting,  wife  or  husband  an  unbeliever, 
perhaps  obstinate  and  persecuting  (vii.  12, 13) ;  impossible  to  move  about  in  your 
city  or  to  take  part  in  public  life,  without  being  confronted  with  the  signs  and 
breathing  the  atmosphere  of  idolatry — attractive,  sensual,  filthy.  But  your  God 
knows  how  hard  it  is,  and  He  will  in  a  thousand  ways  shelter  you  from  an  over- 
whelming pressure.     Take  care  !     Take  heart  !     But  again,  take  care,  for 

II.  This  devil-parody  of  the  peace-offering  feast  in  the  Temple  of  Jehovah,  and 
of  the  supper  of  the  Ijord  which  **  we  "  spread,  with  its  *'  Bread  which  we  hreak^^ 
and  its  Cup  "  which  we  Christians  bless"  in  the  midst  of  the  Church  assembl}^ 
was  more  true  to  the  original  than  many  a  Corinthian  pleader  for  "  liberty  " 
and  "  breadth  "  remembered  or  appreciated.  Whatever  the  heathen  worshipper 
intended  or  understood,  however  the  Christian  partaker  in  the  feast  might  fine 
down  and  minimise  the  meaning  of  his  action,  it  was  really  a  devil  communion  ! 
Nothing  less.  Will  not  the  Corinthians  hear,  think,  ^^  judge  "  (ver.  16)1  To  sit 
at  "^Ae  Lord's  Table"  is  to  enter  into  a  very  blessed  ^^participation"  with  it,  and 
indeed  with  the  Lord,  Whose  table  it  is.  (Even  as  the  Israelite,  who  sits  down 
at  the  peace-offering  banquet,  entei-s  into  a  happy  participation  with  the  Altar, 
with  the  Religion  of  which  it  is  the  very  central  Symbol,  and  indeed  with  the 
Jehovah  whose  Altar  it  is.  He  is  Jehovah's  man  who  eats  there ;  he  is 
an  Israelite.)  He  is  Christ's  man  who  eats  there ;  he  is  a  Christian.  He  who 
eats  at  the  table,  or  who  drinks  the  cup,  of  Aphrodite — nay,  of  the  demon- 
master  of  the  Feast — whose  man  then  is  he  1  Can  he  be  Christ's,  and  sit  to 
eat  there  1  Can  he  be  a  guest  at  Christ's  table,  and  go  thence  to  become  guest 
at  a  demon's  table  1  What  congruity  is  there  in  his  resorting  to  this  table 
and  to  that  ?  If  the  partakers  of  the  old,  wilderness  "  sacraments  "  brought  on 
themselves  the  holy  wrath  of  Jehovah  by  their  murmuring  and  longing  for  the 
old  life  of  Egypt,  and  by  their  shameless,  flagrant,  heathen  impurity  under  the 
very  shadow  of  Sinai  itself,  will  Christians  escape  with  impunity  if  their  heart 
also  lusts,  and  the  lips  murmur,  and  the  body  lends  itself  to  vilest  sin  ?  For  what 
else  is  indicated  by  this  desire  to  make  idol  feasts  compatible  with  a  Christian 
profession  1  What  but  a  heart  like  theirs  ?  What  less  is  meant  by  partaking  of 
"  the  table  of  devils"  ?  The  new  Christian  Church  Order  lights  up  the  meaning  of 
the  Church  Order  of  the  wilderness,  and  of  its  institutions.  So  the  new  Christian 
fellowship  of  the  Table,  once  understood,  lights  up  the  fearful  significance  of  the 
fellowship  of  the  idol  table.  Who  then  will  tempt  the  might  (ver.  22)  of  that 
God  Whose  ''  jealous  "  holiness  would  not  of  old,  and  cannot  now,  tolerate  that 
one  of  His  people  should  be  married  to  evil  ?  Stand  clear  !  Take  heed  !  "  But 
you  are  making  too  much  of  this,  Paul !  There  is  no  '  demon '  behind  the  idol, 
or  its  festival.  There  is  nothing  behind  the  idol — nothing  at  all ;  yourself  said 
so.  Then  why  make  scruple  about  what  is  intrinsically  nothing  1 "  Well, 
but  the  conscience  of  another  may  not  only  make  scruple  for  himself,  but, 
indirectly,  for  the  querist.  And  even  if  no  "judgment"  (ver.  29)  come  upon  his 
conscience  for  his  own  act,  let  him  see  to  it  that  his  Uberty  is  not  condemned  of  God 
for  the  wound  it  gives,  the  snare  it  spreads,  to  the  hurt  of  a  brother's  soul.  The 
questioner's  conscience  has  its  rights ;  and  the  conscience  of  his  less  stable  or  less 
instructed  fellow -Christian,  and  even  that  of  his  heathen  neighbour  in  whose 
house  he  sits  as  a  guest,  have  their  rights  also  (vers.  28,  29).     Their  weakness 

217 


Chap.  X.     BOMILETIC  C0M3IENTARY :    L  COEINTHIANS. 


and  needless  scrupulousness  have  a  right  to  tenderest  consideration  from  a  Chris- 
tian man.  If  he  violate  their  right  by  his  inconsiderate  liberty,  he  may  "  give 
thanks"  loudly  enough  over  his  ^^  meat  offered  to  idols"  and  ^^ bought  in  the 
shambles"  ;  he  may  insistently  urge  that  "  the  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness 
the7Xof.''  But  if  he  eat,  and  so  make  the  doubting  Christian,  or  the  inquiring 
heathen,  or  (still  more)  the  scoffing  heathen,  "  speak  evil "  of  him,  he  is  ^^ judged" 
and  condemned.  *'  The  earth  is  the  Lord's  ;  "  and  so  is  the  man  of  too  tender  con- 
science ;  very  precious  to  the  Lord  and  Owner  of  all  things  !  The  Lord  seeks 
"  that  man's  wealth  "  (ver.  24) ;  the  strong,  "  wise  "  (ver.  15)  Christian  will  do  so 
too.  As  Paul  does  (ver.  33).  Lift  up  everything,  as  the  Lord's  Table  with  its 
simple,  holy  bread  and  wine  does  even  eating  and  drinking,  to  that  high  level 
of  which  happily  all  our  natural  life  is  capable ;  lift  it  all  up  till  it  become  a 
continual  praise :  "  To  the  glory  of  God." 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES, 


Ver.  9.  (May  be  made  the  occasion 
of  a  sermon  or  sermons  upon  Tempta- 
tion.) 

I.  Neutral  sense  of  word. — 1.  Text, 
whether  we  read  "  Christ  "  or  "  Lord," 
reminds  us  that  the  "  temptations  "  of 
the  Devil  are  not  the  only  ones  we 
meet  with  in  Scripture.  Experience 
teaches  by  many  sharp  lessons  that 
man  also  can  tempt  man.  This  verse 
reminds  us  that  man  can  ''  tempt " 
God.  More  than  interesting — often 
very  helpful — to  get  back  to  the  one 
common  meaning  from  which  all  these 
uses  of  the  word  have  grown  ;  the  one 
which  satisfies  them  all ;  the  only 
necessary,  and  exact,  meaning  of  the 
word  in  Scripture  (unless  perhaps  in 
Jas.  i.  13,  14).  2.  We  customarily 
distinguish  between  "trials"  and 
*'  temptations."  Easy  for  a  reader  of 
even  an  English  Bible  to  see  that  our 
forefathers  did  not  so  sharply  divide 
the  words.  They  could  not  help  dis- 
tinguishing between  the  things  !  But 
the  word  was  as  often  neutral,  or 
good,  as  evil,  in  its  suggested  idea. 
3.  This  is  not  only  a  question  of  the 
use  of  English  words.  Very  remark- 
able and  clear  case  of  the  intrinsic 
neutrality  of  the  very  idea  of  putting 
to  the  test  in  Mai.  iii.  In  ver.  15 
*'  they  that  tempt  God  "  and  yet  "  are 
delivered"  are  manifestly  daringly 
evil  men.  But  in  ver.  10  "  prove  Me 
now  herewith  "  employs  the  same  word 
when,  so  to  speak,   inviting   men  by 

218 


their  consecration  of  their  goods  to  see 
whether  God  will  not  meet  their  fair 
dealing  with  Him  with  liberal  dealing 
to  them.  In  both  cases  men  tempt, 
prove,  put  God  to  the  test,  but  with  a 
purpose  that  gives  the  quite  neutral 
word  a  widely  differing  colouring  in  the 
two  cases.  "  Trying  God"  may  be  an 
act  of  God-honouring  faith  or  of  God- 
daring  impiety.  The  word,  the  thing, 
the  "  testing,"  was  big  with  twin  possi- 
bilities. It  bore  within  its  womb  a 
temptation  born  of  an  evil  heart 
whether  of  man  or  devil,  and  a  temp- 
tation born  of  God's  good  purpose  or 
of  man's  God-honouring  faith.  4.  It 
is  of  great  practical  use  in  our  exegesis 
of  Scripture  to  keep  this,  the  only 
proper  meaning  of  the  word,  quite  clear 
from  all  the  accidental  associations  of 
evil  purpose  and  result.  These  are 
really  accidents.  In  our  experience, 
the  temptation  is  so  commonly  designed 
to  arouse,  or  lead  to,  evil,  and  so  com- 
monly finds  its  most  potent  instrument 
in  the  evil  within  the  heart,  that  we 
make  the  purpose  of  evil  in  him  who 
tempts,  and  the  presence  of  evil  in  him 
who  is  tempted,  essential  to  "  tempta- 
tion." But,  in  fact,  even  when  the 
purpose  of  the  testing  is  evil,  the 
presence  of  evil  to  be  appealed  to  and 
awakened  does  not  constitute  the 
temptation.  It  makes  it  strong,  not 
real.  The  intention  to  put  to  the  test 
makes  the  reality  of  the  temptation. 
5.  [Obviously   so,   or    men   could   not 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


"  tempt  God."  Thus,  too,  is  removed 
some  of  the  difficulty  connected  with 
the  "  temptation  "  of  Christ ; — some, 
not  all.  We  say,  naturally,  *'  This 
was  no  temptation  to  me,"  meaning 
that  the  tempter,  human  or  diabolic, 
found  no  response  within,  nothing 
within  the  heart's  citadel  to  make 
resistance  difficult;  [as  Nehemiah 
found  added  danger  and  difficulty  in 
the  fact  that  there  were  men  within 
Jerusalem,  by  marriage  or  otherwise 
allied  to  the  Samaritan  and  Ammonite 
enemies  outside].  In  such  a  case  we 
almost  use  His  words,  as  to  that 
particular  instance  (John  xiv.  30). 
But,  speaking  accurately,  it  was  a 
temptation,  a  real  putting  of  us  to  the 
test  by  somebody  or  some  group  of 
circumstances.  It  is  then  only  popular, 
and  inexact,  thought  which  makes 
us  say  of  Christ,  "  How  could  He 
be  tempted  ?  How  could  anything 
be  a  temptation  to  Him  ? "  The 
Adversary  was  doing  on  a  larger 
scale,  and  with  a  greater  intensity  of 
evil,  what  the  *'  lawyer "  did  with 
scarcely  any  evil  intent  (Luke  x.  25) ; 
or  His  successive  questioners,  on  the 
"  Day  of  Questions  "  (Matt,  xxii.) ;  all 
alike  were  putting  Him  to  the  proof 
to  know  what  He  would  say  and  do. 
The  Tempter,  par  excellence^  has  a 
wide  knowledge  of  human  nature,  and 
a  wider  experience,  derived  from  years 
of  practice  and  observation.  But  he 
has  no  certainty  beforehand  that  he 
will  succeed  with  even  a  man.  From 
wide  experience  he  knows  the  heart, 
but  not  the  individual ;  he  knows  man, 
but  not  the  man — not  me,  Christ  in 
the  wilderness  was  a  problem  to  him. 
Only  once  before  had  he  seen  on  earth 
a  sinless  man,  and  he  had  tried  and 
found  him  plastic  to  his  evil  will  and 
purpose.  Now  again,  after  so  many 
centuries,  he  saw  a  sinless  man.  [Per- 
haps he  knew  Him  "  a  second  Adam  "  ?] 
Would  this  One  also  prove  plastic  to 
bis  will  %  He  tried  ;  he  tempted  Him. 
The  reality  of  the  temptation  of  Christ 
is  posited  there.  It  is  altogether 
another  question  how  far  the  fact  that 
He  was  secure,  whilst  the  utmost  we 


can  by  grace  attain  to  is  to  be  kept 
safe,  affects  His  community  and  sym- 
pathy with  us.  And  another  and 
profoundly  mysterious  question,  what 
part  the  forty  days'  testing,  with  its 
culminating  threefold  attack,  played 
in  the  personal  life  of  the  Saviour 
Himself ;  whether  He  were  simply 
and  wholly  representative  of  our 
Humanity  as  it  was  in  God's  original 
conception  and  intention.  It  is  to  be 
remembered  that  the  Personality, 
tempted  through  one  part  of  His  two- 
fold nature,  was  the  Son,  "  the  second 
Person  of  the  Trinity."] 

II.  The  evil  sense. — 1.  Men  so  tempt 
m,en.  No  more  emphatic  testimony  to 
the  innate  evil  of  man's  heart  than  that 
man  should,  often  quite  gratuitously, 
try  to  lead  others  astray ;  should 
put  stumbling-blocks  in  the  paths  of 
spiritual  childhood  and  weakness. 
[Like  putting,  morally,  a  ''chair"  on 
the  rail,  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  seeing 
the  ruin  wrought  to  the  train.]  Why 
will  men  stand  in  the  way  of  the 
drunkard,  etc.,  who  wants  to  climb  out 
of  the  slough  and  shame  of  his  old 
life — stand  proffering  the  old  allure- 
ments ?  Why  will  they  beset  the  path 
of  the  prodigal  who  wants  to  ^'  arise 
and  go  to  his  Father "  ?  [TTtilia. — 
(1)  You  tempted,  and  must  come  within 
near  range  of  the  temptation  ?  Hurry 
by  the  faster,  as  a  planet  or  a  comet 
does  when  nearest  to  the  attracting 
Sun.  (2)  You  tempted  ?  Stand  fast ! 
You  may  save  your  tempter  as  well  as 
yourself.  Perhaps  he  is  fighting  with 
his  conscience,  whilst  he  is  trying  to  get 
you  to  silence  yours.  (3)  The  sin  of  the 
man  who  tempts  you  does  not  take 
away  the  sin  of  your  yielding.  Jacob 
is  guilty  as  well  as  Esau.  (4)  "  They 
who  ought  to  have  helped  me  gave  me 
no  help  and  sympathy."  No  matter. 
Y''ou  may  not  be  so  guilty ;  but  you  are 
guilty.  Farrar  remarks  on  :  ^'  Cast 
thyself  down  !  "  (5)  Never  talk  away 
a  man's  "  too  nice  "  scruples  ;  they  may 
be  his  only  security  against  a  terrible 
fall  (1  Cor.  viii.,  ix. ;  Bom.  xiv.).]  How 
low  that  man  has  sunk  who  lends  him- 
self,   for   no  personal  advantage,    but 

219 


CHAP.  X.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS. 


simply  for  the  pleasure  of  seeing  evil 
ruin  good,  to  be  the  decoy  to  lead  his 
fellows  into  the  Devil's  trap  !  [One  of 
the  saddest  glimpses  into  the  fallen 
condition  of  even  the  world  beneath 
man,  that  the  animals  can  be  trained 
to  do  this  for  their  fellows.]  Men 
must  needs  say  to  men,  sometimes, 
"  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan ! "  as 
Christ  did  to  Peter.  It  would  seem 
that  in  those  weeks  the  thought  of 
His  passion  and  all  its  accompaniments 
of  agony  was  present  with  Christ  in 
unusual  vividness.  Perhaps  Calvary 
had  never  so  vividly  stood  in  His  view 
until  that  time.  May  we  say  that  He 
had  wrestled  with  His  natural  and 
innocent  shrinking  from  the  sufFi>!iing 
[as  afterwards  in  Gethsemane],  and 
conquered  with  an  utter  submission  to 
the  will  of  His  Father  ?  And  now 
Peter,  His  friend,  proposes  to  Him  to 
choose  some  easier  path  than  that  of 
the  cross.  "  Do  not  say  that,  Peter  ! 
That  is  what  Satan  would  like,  and 
has  been  saying  [as,  in  effect,  in  Matt, 
iv.  9,  proposing  a  short  and  easy 
*'  cut  "  to  the  throne  and  the  kingdom] ; 
Satan  speaks  through  thy  proposal, 
Peter  !  Away  with  the  thought ! 
Away  with  thee,  Peter  !  "  Uninten- 
tionally they  tempt  men,  and  do  the 
work  of  the  Devil,  who  tempt  them 
to  seek  an  easier  path  to  heaven  than 
that  via  Calvary. 

2.  Men  so  tempt  God. — See  Synopsis 
appended.  (1)  By  acting  as  if  daring 
Him  to  punish  (ver.  22),  e.g.  Korah 
and  his  company  of  censer-bearers ;  as 
if  putting  Him  to  the  proof  to  see  how 
long  His  patience  will  endure,  how  far 
they  dare  go  in  open,  defiant  sin. 
"  Let  us  see  whether  He  will  punish, 
as  He  says."  Or  (2)  As  really,  if  not 
so  defiantly,  by  "trading  upon"  His 
loiigsuffering  mercy.  His  readiness 
to  pardon,  even  at  the  eleventh  hour ; 
continuing  in  sin,  taking  little  or 
no  care  to  avoid  sin,  making  little  or 
no  effort  to  cultivate  holiness,  and  yet 
hoping  to  retain  His  favour  and  their 
status  as  His  children,  as  if  trying  how 
much  His  holiness  will  bear  of  sin's 
offensiveness.     (3)    By   expecting   sal- 

220 


vation  on  some  other  terms  than  God's 
or  without  regarding  the  published 
terms  of  the  Gospel  at  all.  "  God  SO 
loved  the  world,"  etc.,  where  "so"  is 
not  "so  much"  but  '^  thus"  ;  the  one 
manner  and  the  channel  of  the  avail- 
ableness  of  the  love  of  God  for  the 
world ;  not  the  measure  of  it,  which 
lies  rather  in  the  fact  that  it  was  this 
"  Son  "  who  was  "  given  "  ;  men  should 
seek,  expect,  get,  the  love  through 
that  one  Channel,  on  that  one  Con- 
dition. The  man  who  will  trust  to  some- 
thing or  some  one  else,  as,  e.g.,  to  him- 
self and  what  he  had  been  and  done, 
or,  quite  as  often,  has  not  been  and  has 
not  done,  and  yet  who  will  hope  to  be 
saved,  is  tempting  God.  (4)  The  man 
who,  on  no  call  of  duty  or  of  service  to 
souls,  thrusts  himself  into  company,  or 
into  a  business  position,  or  a  place  of 
amusement,  manifestly  unfavourable 
to  his  religious  life,  and  yet  hopes  to 
escape, — "  We  shall  suffer  no  harm ; 
God  keeps  His  children  anywhere," — 
is  as  really  tempting  God  as  Christ 
would  have  been  if  He  had  flung 
Himself  from  the  Temple  pinnacle 
hoping  to  alight  unhurt.  (5)  Ananias 
and  Sapphira  are  a  typical  case  of  the 
many  wherein  men  almost  seem  as  if 
experimenting  whether  God  can  find 
them  out  and  punish  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  11). 

III.  The  good  sense.— God  temptt 
men  ;  "  suffers  them  to  he  tempted  "  (ver, 
13),  ^^  leads  them  into  temptation^'  (as 
implied  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  Matt.  vi. 
13).  1.  Our  moral  instinct  assures  us 
that  God's  testing  stands  apart  from 
the  rest  in  this  :  He  never  designs  or 
desires  that,  under  His  tests,  men  should, 
give  way  or  fall,  and  be  either  overborne 
by  trial  or  borne  down  by  sin.  "  God 
cannot  be  tempted  of  evil,"  we  all  say 
with  James  (i.  13,  14).  Let  men's  evil 
heart,  or  the  devil's,  do  their  worst, 
they  cannot  disturb  His  peace  or  sully 
His  awful  holiness.  Indeed,  that  holi- 
ness of  His  very  being  casts,  as  it  were, 
around  Him  an  awful  seclusion  of 
sanctity,  within  whose  sacred  precinct 
He  dwells  unassailable,  unapproachable, 
by  the  shafts  of  temptation.  With 
how  much  stronger  reason  do  we  say, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  x. 


"  Neither  tempteth  He  any  man."     If 
evil   cannot   enter   within   the    awful 
barrier  cf  His  holiness,  how  much  less 
can  we  conceive  of  it  as  originating 
within  its  circle,  or  that  from  within 
that  Holy  of  Holies  of  burning,  blinding 
sanctity  there  should  issue  a  volition,  a 
message,  a  Providence,  whose  purpose 
should  be  to  lead  a  man  to  sin  !    What- 
ever  it   may   mean   that   God  should 
"  lead  into  temptation,"  it  can  never 
mean   that.     He  never  did,  nor  can, 
design  to   awaken,   or   strengthen,  or 
bring  forth  into  expression  or  execution, 
the  evil  of  man's  heart.     He  can  only 
design     to     bring    forth,    strengthen, 
discipline,   good.      The   engineer   does 
not    desire   to   break   down,   when  he 
tests  severely,  the  newly  built  bridge. 
He  does  not  even  desire  to  find  flaws 
or  weakness,  except  that  they  may  be 
remedied.    On  the  other  hand,  when  the 
enemy  tests  a  city  by  assault,  or  by 
planning  to  secure  the  help  of  treachery 
within,  he  hopes  the  place  may  prove 
pregnable.       He   hopes   he    may   find 
weakness  or  treason,  which  may  give 
him  entrance,  possession,  mastery.    As 
the  engineer  tries  his  bridge,  so  God 
tempts   men — and   only   so.      As  the 
enemy  tests  the  city,  so  the  Devil  or 
evil  men  tempt  men — and  always  so. 
2.  God  leads  into  temptation — tempts 
men — when  He  puts  them  into  circum- 
stances of  (as  w^e  distinguish  the  word) 
Trial ;    the  Adversary  endeavours   to 
turn  them  to  his  own  evil  account  of 
Temptation.     E.g.  God  asks  a  modern 
Abraham  to  give  up  his  Isaac.     It  is 
to  be  a  blessing  to  him  ;  to  perfect  his 
consecration ;  to  complete  the  education 
of  a  finished  trust,  besides  making  him 
to  others  a  more  glorious  example  of 
grace.     The  diligent  Adversary  is  on 
the  watch,  to  turn  it  into  an  occasion 
of  bitter,  or  rebellious,  thoughts,  sour- 
ing or  sanctifying   the  tempted  man. 
Or  God's  test  may  be  some  great  measure 
of  temporal  good — a  very  sharp  test  of 
character.      It  may  reveal   to  a  man 
how  little  he  can  bear  of  advancement, 
how  liable  he  is  to  pride,  how  easily  he 
might  grow  independent   of  God.     It 
ma^  leave  him  humbler,  and  drive  him 


to  prayer,  and  make  him  hold  all  only  as 
the  gift  of  God.    It  may  reveal  the  man 
to  himself.     He  may  come  out  of  the 
testing,  and  go  in  and  out  before  men 
an  example  of  enlarged,  enriched,  en- 
nobled  nature,  and  of   humbly  borne 
honour   and  consecrated  wealth.      On 
the  other  hand,  the  Devil's  endeavour 
will  be  to  bring  out  all  the  evil  that 
lies  so  near  the  surface.     The   pride, 
the    ostentation,  the   independence   of 
God,   may   become   predominant;    the 
man  may  be  enriched,    but  narrowed 
into  a  mere  w^orldling,  "  who  has  his 
portion  in  this  life."    3.  If  this  liability 
is  always   so   near,    and   men    are   so 
often  ruined,  not  raised,   soured,    not 
sanctified,    by  the   perverted   issue   of 
His    own    providential   arrangements, 
why  does  God  *'  run  the  risk  "  ]     Why 
does    He    "  lead    into    temptation  "  ? 
or,    at   the   least,    "suffer   men  to  be 
tempted,"   by   devils  or    men]      Full 
answer  has  within  it  whole  Problem  of 
Evil.     We  may  suggest:  (1)  ^  human 
analogy.      A  country  lad  thrust   into 
the  life  of  large  city;    pleasant,  but 
evil,  things  all  around;  men,  friendly 
but   evil,   ready    with    their    offer    of 
guidance  to  "  see  life  "  ;  temptations  of 
the  streets,  the  vacant  evenings,  the 
absence    of     restraining    observation. 
And  his  Christian  father  knew  all  the 
peril,  all  the  boy's  weaknesses,  when  he 
sent  him  up  to  the  City,  and  away  from 
home.      With  more  trepidation  sends 
out  his  daughter  too  ;  "  cannot  afford 
to  keep  them  at  home ;  would  not  be 
good  for  my  boy  if  I  could — he  will 
never  become   a   man   unless   tested ; 
he  must  learn  to  stand  alone,  by  being 
left  alone,  even  at  the  risk  of  many  a 
stumble  or  even  a  ruinous  fall ;    will 
introduce   him   to   friends,   will  write 
him    frequently ;    will    help    him    to 
stand."     When  he  leads  him,  thrusts 
him  into  the  trial  of   a  City  life,  he 
leads  him  into  temptation  in  the  only 
sense  in  which  God  does  it.     [Or  we 
may  say  :    God's  ships   are   not   built 
only  to  lie  safe  and  snug  within  the 
shelter  of  the  breakwater.     There  are 
storms  outside  ;  they  may  be  wrecked ; 
but  the  risk  must  be  taken,  or  they 

m 


CHAP.  X.      HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS, 


will  do  no  business  and  carry  no  cargo 
of  blessing.]  Also  (2)  we  ee  that  not 
even  the  Son  was  exempt  (Matt.  iv.  1); 
He  was  "  led  up  into  the  wilderness — 
led  of  the  Spirit — to  be  tempted." 
[Another  word  in  Matt.  vi.  13.]  Mark 
(i.  12)  is  very  express :  "  Driveth, 
thrusteth  Him  out"  into  the  wilder- 
ness, where,  of  course,  His  Father  knew 
that  the  Evil  One  would  find  His  Son 
and  tempt  Him.  We  dare  not  say 
(see  above)  that  the  Son  of  God  needed 
it  personally.  Officially  He  did  ;  His 
work  did  j  we  did.  Part  of  His  work 
for  us,  part  of  His  sharing  with  us  in  all 
things  that  He  must  meet,  and  wrestle 
with,  and  overthrow,  the  same  Tempter 
with  whom  we  must  meet  and  wrestle. 
[Parallel  so  far  to  the  death  which  He 
must  representatively  die,  though  no 
personal  necessity  lay  upon  Him  (2  Cor. 
V.  21).]  We  see  just  how  much  His 
Father  did.  The  place,  the  hunger, 
the  destiny,  which  gave  the  Adversary 
his  opportunity,  and  became  the 
occasions  of  his  attack,  were  part  of 
His  permitted  course.  Indeed,  they 
were  in  the  course  of  the  providential 
ariangements  of  His  Father,  made  for 
another,  an  altogether  wise  and  holy, 
purpose.  So  we  shall  say :  *'  My 
Father  led  me  into  circumstances  which 
put  me  on  my  trial.  As  it  proved, 
and  not  without  His  foreseeing  it,  my 
evil  heart,  my  diligent  Adversary,  the 
closely  surrounding  world,  turned  all 
into  temptation.  My  Father  so  suffered 
me  to  be  tempted,  led  me  into  tempta- 
tion, tempted  me." 

Ver.  13.  "  Thus  far,  no  farther  !  " — 
(Of  temptation.) 

I.  View  of  God  here  suggested. — 
1.  Surely  an  unwarranted  turn  is  given 
to  the  thought  when  this  is  read : 
"  Take  heed,  for  though  you  have 
hitherto  had  only  such  trial  as  man  can 
bear,  there  is  worse  to  come  ! "  The  true 
connection  of  thought  in  Paul's  words 
conveys  a  twofold  message :  "  Take 
heed ;  take  courage  !  "  It  would  be 
strange  enheartenment  to  say  :  "  Look 
out !  You  will  soon  have  trials  such 
as  no  man  can  bear."     But  the  heart  of 

222 


*'  the  God  of  all  comfort "  (Trapa/cXT^o-ts, 
2  Cor.  i.  3)  loves  to  hearten  His  people. 
"  A  devotional  writer,  replying  to  the 
question,  *  How  are  we  to  overcome 
temptations  1 '  says,  *  Cheerfulness  is 
the  first  thing,  cheerfulness  is  the 
second,  and  cheerfulness  is  the  third.' 
It  is  very  true.  Faint  heart  never  won 
anything,  least  of  all  a  spiritual  battle. 
.  .  .  Lightness  and  brightness  of  heart, 
an  unfailing  elasticity  of  spirit,  must 
characterise  the  good  soldier  of  Jesus 
Christ,  if  he  is  to  break  his  way  to  the 
heavenly  country  through  the  serried 
ranks  of  his  spiritual  foes  "  (Goulburn, 
Pers.  Bel.,  III.  vi.).  It  is  not  part  of 
a  healthy  religion  to  anticipate  trial, 
whether  worse  or  lighter  than  has 
hitherto  been  known.  [Yet  if  worse 
come,  *'  2i  fiery  trial,"  Peter  would  say, 
''  Think  it  not  strange,"  etc.  (1  Pet. 
iv.  12).  Q.d.  "  When  it  comes  your 
way,  and  knocks  at  your  door  with  its 
urgent  hand,  do  not  treat  it  as  a 
stranger,  or  an  enemy,  or  refuse  it 
admission  into  your  life,  or  even  grudg- 
ingly submit  to  its  intrusion.  It  is 
a  friend,  however  strange  and  rude  it 
may  appear  ;  it  brings  you  a  blessing  ; 
w^elcome  it  as  from  God  ;  do  not  refuse 
it."]  As  to  the  possibilities  of  the 
future,  rather  rest  in — (1)  God^ s  relation 
to  the  trial,  and  (2)  God^s  relation  to 
you.  (1)  "  Will  not  suffer.''  Then,  if 
it  do  not  directly  originate  with  Him, 
it  does  not  come  upon  you  apart  from 
Him.  All  things,  even  the  course  of 
trials,  serve  His  might.  The  flood 
may  creep  up  to,  or  come  rolling  in 
upon,  your  standing  place ;  but  He 
sitteth  above  even  such  waterfloods, 
and  can  stay  their  proud  waves  when 
He  will — certainly  before  they  swallow 
up  you  and  your  place  of  foothold  upon 
His  faithfulness  and  love.  The  free 
and  evil  wills  of  devils  and  men  have 
their  limit,  and  are  subordinated  to 
His  will.  Except  within  the  limits  of 
His  sovereign  rule  in  your  life,  they 
can  neither  themselves  create  for  you, 
nor  modify  what  He  has  created,  of 
arrangements  of  events,  or  associations 
with  persons,  such  as  put  character  and 
the  strength  of  principle  to  the  test  in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,     chap.  x. 


you.  The  roaring  lion  himself  cannot 
go  beyond  his  chain ;  and  the  end  of 
the  chain  is  in  the  hand  of  your  ''^  faith- 
ful "  God.  Whatever  be  our  estimate 
of  the  literary  form  of  the  revelation 
in  Job  i.  2 — simply  literal,  or  allegoric, 
symbolic — no  question  of  form  involves 
falsehood  in  the  view  there  disclosed 
of  Grod  and  His  relation  to  evil.  It— 
not  to  say  "  he " — must  solicit  His 
permit  to  assail  a  Job ;  it  can  only  do 
it  so  far  as  may  serve  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  and  the  moral  education 
of  His  servant.  We  are  on  surer 
ground  in  regard  to  the  strain  of 
teaching — some  would  regard  them- 
selves on  surer  ground  as  to  the  actual 
shape  of  the  facts — when  we  hear 
Jesus  communicate  to  Peter — a  later 
Job  in  this — a  colloquy  which,  behind 
the  veil,  and  within  the  real,  but  to 
us  unseen,  world,  where  He  and  His 
Father  and  the  Evil  One  mysteriously 
move  and  meet,  had  recently  taken 
place  in  regard  to  the  man  Peter.  "  I 
have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith 
fail  not"  (Luke  xxii.  31,  32).  "I 
cannot  tell,  now  that  1  look  back," 
says  a  man  of  God,  "how  I  got  through. 
If  I  had  known  beforehand,  I  should 
have  said  it  would  have  been  impossible 
for  me  to  come  out  of  it  unharmed,  con- 
queror, more  than  conqueror."  There 
had  been  the  colloquy  behind  the  veil. 
There  had  been  the  controlling  hand  of 
Him  who  "  would  not  suffer, ^^  etc.  Do 
not  look  out  for  worse.  Take  the  days 
in  successive  detail,  as  the  trial  unfolds 
itself,  and  meet  each  new  point  in  the 
confidence  that  His  hand  will  "  suffer  " 
or  "  not  suffer"  as  He  knows  right. 
Also  (2)  "  He  is  faithful"  If  you  can 
see,  or  can  say,  that  His  character  is 
in  any  case  involved,  then  your  faith, 
or  your  appeal  for  help,  has  a  hold 
upon  Him  such  as  hardly  anything 
else  will  give  you.  He  regards  His 
people  warmly ;  He  regards  His  own 
honour  '*  jealously."  He  is  pledged  to 
them.  What  less  is  implied  in  His 
name  "Shepherd"?  (Ps.  xxiii.).  For 
the  sake  of  His  name  "  Shepherd  "  He 
will  see  that  "  no  temptation"  etc.  No 
matter  if  you  rather,  with  Paul,  con- 


ceive of  yourself  a  precious  "  deposit " 
lodged  with  Christ  for  safe  keeping 
"in  that  day"  (1  Tim.  i.  12).  It  is 
the  faithfulness  of  God  revealed,  em- 
bodied, in  Him.  In  this,  as  in  all  else, 
"  he  that  hath  seen  Him  hath  seen  the 
Father."  He  is  the  faithful  Father 
"  over  again."     So  then — 

II.  Temptation  is,  1.  Wisely  adapted, 
suited  to  men  (and  to  the  man) ; 
2.  Graciously  proportioned  ;  3.  Mer- 
cifully limited  [J.  L.,  who  also  sug- 
gests :]  Many  suppose  that  their 
temptations  are  :  1.  Singular,  but  they 
are  common  ;  2.  Intolerable,  but  they 
are  proportioned  to  ability  ;  3.  Invin- 
cible, but  there  is  a  way  of  escape. 
Illustrate,  1.  By  the  trucks  upon  the 
railways.  Look  at  them  ;  see  figures 
painted  upon  their  side  or  the  framing, 
"5-3-0,"  or  the  like.  Their  *' load 
limit."  So  much,  no  more,  must  be 
put  upon  that  build  of  truck ;  that 
heavier  build  of  truck  marked  yonder 
"  10-2-0 "  can  carry  twice  as  much. 
What  the  temptation  suited  to  angelic 
nature  or  strength  may  be  we  do 
not  know.  He  knows  what  is  suited 
to  human  nature  and  its  strength 
of  grace.  The  human  build  of  truck 
has  its  load  limit.  It  will  never  be 
overpassed.  He  will  not  suffer  it. 
"  Against  regulations,"  under  His 
mangement.  Illustrate,  2.  By  the 
prison  surgeon  standing  by,  as  even 
the  hardest  criminal  receives  his  quota 
of  lashes.  He  watches  the  eflfect  of 
every  stroke.  If  the  full  tale  of 
punishment  has  not  yet  been  adminis- 
tered, but  the  prisoner  can  bear  no 
more,  he  says,  "  Stop  !  "  The  sentence 
is  incomplete,  but  not  another  lash 
may  be  laid  on.  Incongruous  in  many 
a  point,  the  illustration  may  serve  to 
make  Him  real  Who  sits  watching  the 
efiect  of  every  stroke  which  He  Him- 
self causes,  or  else  permits,  to  descend. 
Not  one  heavier,  not  one  more,  than 
you  can  wisely,  profitably,  graciously 
be  made  to  endure.  3.  (1)  It  was  a 
true  parable  when  on  the  top  of  hill 
above  Nazareth  the  Pattern  Son  was 
hemmed  in  on  all  sides  by  a  crowd  of 
angry,  murderously  angry,  Nazarenes  ; 

223 


CHAP.  X.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


and  yet  a  way  out  opened  through  the 
crowd  ;  a  Power  was  upon  them  which 
held  every  Nazarene  hand  in  its  re- 
straining grasp  ;  *'  passing  through  the 
midst  of  them,  He  went  His  way" 
(Luke  iv.  30).  As  you  will  thiough 
the  most  urgently  pressing  besetment 
of  encircling  "  trials ^  (2)  How  often 
in  such  intricate  channels  as  the  Kyles 
of  Bute  does  it  seem  from  the  deck  as 
though  there  were  at  last  a  perfect 
cul  de  saCf  and  as  if  to  go  forward 
must  be  to  run  upon  the  enclosing 
shore  or  cliff.  But  at  the  last  moment 
there  is  the  "  way  of  escape,"  and  a 
new,  often  a  more  beautiful,  bit  of 
clear  course  opens  up  by  an  unex- 
pected turn ;  like  the  unexpected 
*'  turns  "  in  trying  circumstances  which 
have  suddenly  opened  up  perhaps  years 
of  clear  and  happy  "  run."  He  has 
made  the  channel,  and  has  the  map 
of  it  under  His  eye.  And  His  hand, 
if  we  will,  may  be  on  the  helm. 
(3)  How  men  rightly  glorified  Captain 
Kennedy,  who  brought  his  steamer 
safely  out  of  the  so  fatal  hurricane  in 
the  harbour  of  Apia,  Samoa.  The 
enclosing  barrier  reef  had  its  one 
narrow  opening — difficult,  perilous,  but 
a  practicable  "  way  of  escape."  Our 
Captain  has  "  consummate  seaman- 
ship," and  will  never  fail  to  hit  the 
exact  outlet  from  the  barrier  reef  of 
closely  encircling  trials.  (4)  To  His 
knowledge,  power,  heart,  there  are  no 
insoluble  problems  of  trial  or  tempta- 
tion. Wherever  He  puts  you,  or  suffers 
you  to  go  on  His  errand.  He  can  keep 
you  until  you  reach  *'  the  way  of 
escape."  Possibly  the  article  in  Greek 
may  almost  be  equivalent  to  "  its  own 
way  of  escape,"  i.e.  the  particular  deli- 
verance belonging  to,  and  best  for,  that 
particular  trial,  God  thus  "  giving  His 
attention  "  to  each  case  that  arises. 

Ver.  14.  Flee  from  Idolatry. 

I.  The  general  principles  under- 
lying Paul's  advice  in  this  particular 
instance. — 1.  (1)  "  You  cannot  touch 
even  these  idol  feasts  without  more  or 
less  of  complicity  with,  and  counte- 
nance   given    to,    the   whole    system 

224 


of  idolatry."  (2)  "  You  cannot  give 
any  degree  of  countenance  and  sup- 
port to  idolatry,  without  in  that  degree 
disavowing  your  Lord."  Sin  '*  hangs 
together."  No  sin  is  an  isolated  act. 
It  manifests  a  tendency  of  heart ;  or 
it  carries  a  principle  of  action;  or 
belongs  to  a  system  of  evil,  a  coherent, 
organic  whole.  It  might  seem  a  small 
thing  to  join  in  a  public  banquet, 
where  the  viands  on  the  table  were 
largely  "  meats  offered  to  idols " ; 
especially  remembering  that  such  par- 
ticipation was  regarded  as  a  matter 
of  good  citizenship,  "  religion "  being 
very  much  more  an  affair  of  a  man's 
civic  life  than  of  the  individual  life. 
Moreover,  "  was  it  not  now  abundantly 
clear  to  every  enlightened,  thinking 
Christian  in  Corinth  that  an  *idol 
was  nothing  in  the  world,'  that  these 
viands  were  not  intrinsically  affected 
in  the  least  by  the  fact  that  part  of 
(say)  the  carcass  or  of  the  basket  of 
fruit  had  been  put  upon  the  altar  of  a 
so-called  '  god '  ?  Could  not  every  man 
of  sense  see  that  in  regard  to  any 
healthy  food  there  need  be  raised  no 
question  of  conscience  about  eating  it  ? 
Such  entire  abstinence  as  our  Jewish 
friends  counselled— was  it  not  narrow, 
and  needlessly  repellent  to  possibly  well- 
disposed  people  amongst  our  Gentile 
neighbours  ? "  Well,  but  why  this 
hankering  after  these  old  ways,  this 
heathen  company,  these  perhaps 
dangerous  festivities,  which  not  seldom 
ended  in  a  drunken  orgie,  or  in  indul- 
gence of  gross  sensuality  ?  Was  the 
"  Christian  "  heart  half  idolatrous  yet  ? 
Was  the  ploughman  looking  back  from 
his  plough  ?  (Luke  ix.  62).  Was 
*'  Lot's  wife "  in  heart  going  back  to 
the  Corinthian  "  Sodom, 'i  as  she  thus 
looked  back  ?  Were  the  Christian 
Israelites  '"^murmuring"  that  "the 
fleshpots  of  Egypt "  might  not  be 
enjoyed  in  the  camp  of  God  in  the 
wilderness?  (vers.  6-10).  [Why,  in  the 
modern  Corinths,  all  this  eagerness  to 
show  how  compatible  with  a  "  broad," 
"  fair-minded,"  *'  attractive  "  Christian 
life  are  places  and  pleasures  which,  in 
the  current  opinion  of   the  *'  stricter 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


sort,"    and  in  the  current   opinion   of  cipation  is,  by  necessity  of  experience 

*'^Ae  i^oWc?,"  are  accounted  "worldly  "  ?  and   fact,   taken   to   cover    the  whole 

Is  the  heart  losing  its  satisfaction  in  Thing.     The  Christian  man  picks  up  a 

the  joys  of  the  life  in  Christ ;  beginning  very  filthy  cloth,  with  dainty  thumb 

to  murmur  against  its   restrictions —  and  finger  taking  hold  very  "  gingerly " 

they  used  only  to  be  the  instinctively  at  the  cleanest  place  he  can  find,  and 

imposed  and  necessary  limitations  upon  then  lays  it  down,  exclaiming,  "  There  ! 

Christian   action ;    beginning   to   look  Who  says    a    Christian   cannot  touch 

towards,  to  move  towards,  the  world  it  without  being  defiled  ?  "     He  takes 

again?]     But,  be  that  as  it  might,  it  hold  of  the   approximately  clean  end 

perhaps  seemed,  and  might  be  pleaded,  of  a  stick  ;  the  young  man,  wavering 

that  the  connection  of  the  feast  with  between  the  world  and  Christ,  hears 

idolatry  was  of  the  very  slightest,  that  him  say,  *'  There  !    I  have  not  defiled 

to  touch  idolatry  there  was  to  touch  my  fiugers  !  "   and   takes  hold  of  the 

it   at     its    purest,    brightest,    or,    at  end  bedaubed  with  the  foulest "  pitch." 

worst,  at  its  least  defiled  and  defiling  Even  to  the  man's  own  conscience  the 

point.     No  !     To    touch    it    anywhere  logic  is  dishonest.     Paul's  principle  is : 

was    to    sanction  it    everywhere  !     It  "  Touch  idolatry  anywhere,  you  touch 

might    be    but    the    borderland    and  it  as  a  whole.     Flee  from  idolatry." 

farthest  outskirts  of  the  area  of  the  2.  *'  In  the  Church  you  have  a  Table, 

evil  thing,  but  it  was  idolatry's  ground.  and  its  feast ;  your  Lord  Christ's  table  ; 

The  most  strictly  limited  participation  your  Lord  Christ's  Supper.     He  pre- 

in  anything  belonging  to  the  system,  sides ;    you  partake   with   Him ;    you 

"exp;ained"tothe  man's  own  conscience  partake  0/ Him,  He  graciously  says; 

in    the    most   "  satisfactory "   fashion,  you  avow  yourself  there  to  belong  to 

would  really  be,  and  would  be  regarded  His  brotherhood  ;  you  covenant  your- 

by   the   idolater   as,  a  patronage  and  self  there  to  belong  to  Him.     At  the 

sanction  given  to  the  whole.     [Not  to  table  and  the  feast  in  the  temple  of  Zeus 

say   that,  if   the   Christian  "  did   but  or  Apollo  or  Aphrodite,  you  partake 

touch  the  border  of  the  garment "  of  with — Demons !     You  are  gone  in  to 

the  Accursed  System,  an  evil  **  virtue  supper,  not  with  a  no-god,  but  with  a 

would  go  forth  "  and  pervade  with  its  demon  !     If  you  do  not  mean  that  by 

power  the  new  life  of  the  soul.]     So,  the   feast,    the   heathen   do,    and    the 

in   modern   Corinths,   the    *'  broader  "  demons  do.     Can  you  sit  there  and  sit 

mind  pleads  for  the  theatre,  sometimes  at    Christ's    supper — both  1      Choose  ; 

for  "  the  theatre  as  it  might  be  if  only  you  must  choose.     Christ  will  choose  if 

Christian  people  would  not  hold  aloof  you  do  not.     He  will  choose  to  refuse 

from  it " ;  sometimes  by  carefully  choos-  your  allegiance,  to  refuse  His  follower 

ing  the  place  and  the  play,  and  with  who  will,  forsooth,  *  serve  two  masters.' 

great  circumspection  going  and  coming  To  partake  of  the  feast  is  to  disavow 

away  "  unharmed."     But  "  harm "  is  your  Lord."     So,   again,  the    founda- 

a  subtle  thing,  not  always  immediately  tion  principles  of  life  "  in  the  world  " 

to  be  perceived.     And  that  apart,  the  [*'  in  the  Wicked  One,"  1   John  v.  19] 

Theatre    "  hangs    together " ;    it  is   a  are   so   entirely    other  than   those   of 

coherent   thing,  touching    on  the  one  life   *'  in   Christ,"  that   no  fusion,  no 

hand — at  least  dramatic  literature  does  alliance,  no  truce,  between  the  two  is 

— the  sublimest  reaches  of  poetry  and  possible.     To  partake  with  the  world 

of    creative  art,   but    spreading    and  is  to  break  with  Christ.      Flee  from 

broadening     downwards      from     that  idolatry.     Comparative   Eeligion,  the 

highest  point   to  depths  ;    at  best  of  wider  knowledge  of  heathen  faiths  and 

inane   and    vapid    folly    of    language  their  history,  tend  to  a  temper  which 

and   art,   at  worst   of    suggestive    or  would   make   idolatry   no   such    "  ter- 

overt  sensualism  and  crime.     The  most  rible  sin."      [Even  as  the  spirit  ever 

guarded,  most  strictly  limited,  parti-  and  again  rises  which  would  minimise 

Q  225 


CHAP.  X.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   COEINTHIANS. 


the  differ  entice  between  the  Church  and 
the  world  ]  *'  It  is  but  the  perversion 
of  the  worshipping  instinct ;  men  must 
worship  something.  It  is  but  the  abuse 
of  the  dramatic  instinct ;  men  are  some 
of  them  born  dramatic,"  and  the  Hke. 
"  Flee  from  idolatry.  "  *'  Ye  cannot 
drink  the  cup,"  etc.  (ver.  21). 

II.    Paul's    counsel.— "/<7ee   /rom." 
1.  As  there   are    temptations    against 
which    the    best    defence    is    ''flight" 
["  Flee  youthful  lusts,"  2  Tim.  ii.  22. 
Jeremy      Taylor,     Holy      Living,     Of 
Chastity,  §   iii.,    *'  Remedies,"  1] ;    so, 
better    than     parley,    argument,    en- 
deavour after  a  modus  vivendi  between 
the  two  types  of   life — better  for  the 
rescued   but   imperilled   man   himself, 
and  better  for  " the  w^orld"  that  is  to 
be  saved   out   of   its   ''idolatries" — is 
open,  emphatic   aloofness    and   avoid- 
ance.    "  Flee ;     put    the   utmost   dis- 
tance   between    thee    and    the    evil  ; 
put    it     eagerly    between    thee    and 
it.     Touch  the  evil,  in  the  endeavour 
to  purify  and  elevate ;   touch  it,  even 
mentally,  to  battle  with  it ;  and  you 
will    often    suffer,    and    perhaps     be 
overcome.     Mee  from  idolatry.    Flee  I 
FLEE!      [Cf.   Exod.    xxiii.    13:   "Be 
circumspect ;    and    make    no   mention 
of  the  name  of  other  gods,  neither  let 
it  be  heard  out  of  thy  mouth."     Not 
even  a  quasi-antiquarian  and  historical 
curiosity   about   the   old   idolatries   of 
their  Canaanite  predecessors  was  to  be 
encouraged  ;    Deut.    xii.    30,    "  Take 
heed    to    thyself    that    thou    be    not 
snared  ;    .  .  .  and  that  thou   inquire 
not    after    their    gods,    saying.     How 
did   these   nations  serve  their  gods  1 " 
(The  next   step  was  apt  to  be)  "  So 
will  I    do   likewise."     "  Let   him    that 
thinketh  he   standethj^  etc.  (ver.    12).] 
2.  For  the  personal  life,  the  aloofness 
and  distinction  of   utter  and  pointed 
abstinence    may    often    be    the    only 
needed  form  of  "  flight."     But  public 
and  ofiicial  "  flight  "  may  need  to  be  a 
much  rougher -seeming  and  iconoclastic 
procedure.       The    architect    and    the 
man  of  taste  look  upon  the  fair  ruins 
of  monastic  establishments  and  their 
churches,    and    bewail     the     ruthless 

226 


spoliation  and  destruction  of  exquisite 
architecture  and  sculpture  ;    the  anti- 
quary  laments   the   lo^s   of   countless 
treasures    of    religious    art,    priceless 
to-day  for  their    historic    value    and 
their  intrinsic  beauty  and  interest.  No 
doubt  there   was  much  purely  selfish 
destruction,  and   some   malicious ;  but 
some  of  the  iconoclasm  was  a  necessary 
violence,    as   things  were,   if  the  evil 
was    to    be     reformed     or     uprooted. 
What  relic  so  precious,  historically  or 
religiously,   as   "  the  serpent  of  brass 
which  Moses  had  made  "  ?    Were  there 
no  regrets,  none  to  plead  that  it  might 
be  spared,    "  purified  from   the  abuses 
which  had  sprung  up  around  it "  %  Were 
there  no  really  good  men  who  "  could 
not  see  thai  such  '  ruthless '  destruction 
was  necessary,"  when  Hezekiah  broke 
up  the  Nehushtan  ?  (2  Kings  xviii.  4). 
Doubtless ;    but  there  are  times  when 
the   peril   of   "  idolatry "   requites  the 
sacrifice     of     the     most     honourable, 
ancient,      venerable      institution,     or 
opinion,    or   system ;    when   it   is   im- 
possible   to    divorce    the    thing   from 
its  danger  and  abuse.     Such  times  can 
afford    no   nice   distinction,  no  subtle 
pleading     about    "  underlying    good,'* 
or    "  original    blamelessness,"   possible 
"  recoverableness  "  to  good  use.    When 
the    figure   of   Jesus   cannot   be   kept 
simply   as   an   exquisite  work  of   the 
sculptor's  art,  but  becomes,  in  its  asso- 
ciations and  use,  an  immoral,  Jehovah- 
rivalling,    Christ  dethroning    idol ;    it 
must   be  destroyed,  rather  than  that 
moral   peril   shall   be   incurred.      The 
early   Church    had    perforce   to   part 
company  for   a    century  or  two  with 
the  noblest   of    ancient    art.      It  was 
self-preservation  to  "  flee  from  idola- 
try "    in    sternest    iconoclasm.      [The 
rough    surgery  of   the  sword,   slaying 
its   three  thousand  idolaters,  was  the 
first  "cure"   for  the  moral  plague  of 
Israel  in   the   matter   of   the   Golden 
Calf   (Exod.  xxxii.   27,   28).]     Stately 
ritual  may  become  idolatrous,  when  it 
becomes  an  end  instead  of  a  means  : 

"  'Tis  mad  idolatry 
To  make  the  service  greater  than  tlie  God." 

— Shakcsijeare^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


"  Sweep  it  away,"  perhaps.  ^*  Flee 
from  idolatry."  [Other  cases  will 
suggest  themselves.]  "  Flee  from  ; "  the 
ship — the  Church,  the  soul — is  in  peril 
anywhere  near  her  old  moorings.  She 
is  only  safe  in  the  open  sea. 

III.  Some  familiar  idolatries.— 1. 
"  A  calf  of  GoUr  [We  hear  the  plea, 
"  There  came  out  this  calf  !  "  "  Keally, 
I  seem  to  touch  nothing  that  does  not 
prosper ;  I  don't  quite  know  how  it  is. 
You  religious  people  say  God  made  me 
so  rich.  Then  He  is  more  than  half  in 
fault  in  that  I  have  the  calf  to  tempt 
me  to  idolatry  !  "]  2.  Human  teachers 
and  current  ideas,  whether  theological 
or  other.  The  majority  must  inevitably 
be  dependent  upon  authority  for  beliefs 
and  opinions,  new  or  old,  orthodox  or 
heterodox.  The  scientific  specialist 
righteously  has  claims  to  be  listened 
to ;  his  work  must  come  before  that 
of  the  populariser  and  propagator,  aud 
he  and  his  fellow-workers  must  in  the 
nature  of  the  case  find  very  few  who 
can  challenge,  or  criticise,  or  verify  the 
facts  they  announce,  and  only  a  slightly 
larger  number  who  can  give  a  verdict 
of  independent  value  upon  the  conclu- 
sions they  formulate  as  resulting  from 
other  facts.  The  theologian  is  a 
specialist  in  his  own  line ;  and  as 
having  given  special  attention,  with 
special  training,  to  a  particular  group 
of  facts,  may  claim  to  be  listened  to  and 
to  have  a  presumption  set  up  in  favour 
of  his  conclusions.  But  no  servile 
deference  should  be  paid  to  either.  No 
man  may  claim  that  his  ipse  dixi  should 
be  of  necessity  "  truth."  The  "  idola- 
try "  of  great  names  and  of  current 
opinions,  and  even  of  long-established 
ones,  oftener  arises  within  the  popular 
mind  than  with  the  specialist.  He 
generally  knows  he  is  no  "  god  " ;  and 
says  (ver.  15),  "  /  speak  as  to  wise  men  ; 
judge  ye  what  I  sayT  The  deification 
is  oftener  the  undiscriminating  act  of 
the  worshipping  crowd ;  every  kind  of 
sect — not  theological  only,  by  any 
means — is  in  danger  of  setting  up  its 
divinity,  whose  words  are  an  oracle 
of  final  authority.  Great  names  tend 
always  to  become  fetishes.     Current, 


scientific,  or  theological,  or  anti-theo- 
logical theories  8.re  apt  to  become 
"idols,"  before  which  men  dare  not 
but  bow.  Needless  scepticism  in  re- 
gard to  any  new  teacher  ;  dogged,  un- 
enlightened clinging  to  and  worship 
of  the  old;  are  indefensible.  But 
there  is  also  a  hasty,  unreasoning, 
superstitious  acceptance  and  worship 
of  the  new — of  the  newest — quite  as 
indefensible.  Men  need  to  keep  their 
head  cool,  their  heart  calm,  and  when 
all  the  plain  is  covered  with  the  pro- 
strate forms  of  the  worshippers  of  the 
latest,  or  the  most  venerable,  image 
of  gold  set  up  by  some  Nebuchadnezzar 
of  to-day,  or  of  the  past,  Shadrach, 
Meshach,  and  Abed-nego  must  stand 
erect>,  and  perilously  singular.  In 
some  circles  the  theological  furnace 
perhaps,  certainly  in  many  the  scien- 
tific fires,  will  be  lighted,  for  the  man 
who  dares  to  '•'•flee  from  idolatry ^ 
[The  charge  of  "  Bibliolatry "  is  one 
which  will  be  advanced  or  repudiated 
according  to  men's  estimate  of  the 
Bible.  It  is  only  fair  to  those  who 
are  charged  with  undue  deference  to 
any  dictuvi  of  the  Book,  or  to  any 
plain  and  fair  consequence  which  may 
be  drawn  from  such  dicta,  to  say  that, 
however  much  they  may  differ  in  their 
conception  and  statement  of  the  degree 
and  mode  of  God's  activity  in  the 
production  of  the  Bible,  they  agree 
in  their  aim  to  formulate  and  secure 
the  absolute  and  final  authority  of 
God  for  its  declarations  and  teachings. 
If  they  refuse  to  go  behind  the  Book, 
it  is  only  because  they  regard  the  Bible 
as  in  every  part  invested  with  the 
authority  due  to  the  mind  and  will  of 
God  Himself.  They  believe  Him  to 
have  adopted,  and  to  have  made  Him- 
self responsible  for,  the  whole  Book, 
whatever  be  the  literary,  the  historical, 
the  mental,  or  moral  processes  by 
which  the  work  of  the  human  writers 
has  reached  its  completed  form.  On 
their  hypothesis,  at  all  events,  they 
cannot  be  charged  with  idolatry  when 
they  bow  their  own  intellect,  heart, 
will  before  the  whole  Word  of  God. 
They  are  worshippers,  they  would  say^ 

227 


CHAF.  X.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  CORINTHIANS. 


not  of  the  Book,  but  of  its  Author.] 

3.  The  idolatries  of  the  house,  of  the 
family  ;  the  "  worship  "  of  the  husband 
or  the  child.  Not  all  Abrahams  [or 
all  Sarahs]  can  put  their  Isaacs  upon 
God's  altar,  or  give  them  back  into 
God's  hands,  without  there  being  any 
subtle  "idolatry"  of  the  creature  to 
stand  discovered  in,  and  by,  the  sharp 
trial  to  the  parental  heart.  "Flee 
from  " — be  on  the  watch  against — the 
idolatry  which  makes  these  in  any 
degree  or  manner  nearer  than,  higher 
than,  God.  No  need  not  to  love, 
warmly,  devotedly ;  no  need  to  reproach 
himself  when,  e.g.,  the  husband's  heart 
feels  keenly  the  severance  from  the 
wife.  God  gave  the  wife  and  the 
mutual  love,  and  does  not  expect  him 
not  to  feel,  as  he  did  not  expect  them 
not  to  love.  Only  the  allegiance  to 
God,  and  the  interests  of  the  spiritual 
life,  must  stand  paramount. 

"  Have  I  with  all  my  full  affections 
Still    met    the    King  1    loved    him    next 

heaven  ?  obeyed  him  ? 
Been,  out  of  fondness,  superstitious  to  him  ? 
Almost  forgot  my  prayers  to  content  him  ? " 
—  Queen  Katharine  of  Aragon^ 

in  '•'•  Henry  VIII.,''  Act  iii.,  scene  1. 

4.  Heart  sins,  so  "secret"  (Ps.  xix.  12) 
that  the  very  soul  itself  hardly  sees 
them  "idols."  "  Flee  "—cultivate  a 
sensitiveness  to  the  danger — "from 
idolatry."  Sometimes  an  "  idol "  in  the 
heart  keeps  the  seeking  soul  from 
finding  God's  grace.  There  is  an 
ostrich -policy  that  tries  not  to  see,  and 
then  to  think  that,  nothing  seen,  all 
is  right.  Not  honest  with  itself,  the 
soul  turns  away  from  even  looking  in 
the  direction  of  the  sin  it  means  to 
keep,  and,  trying  to  forget  it,  offers  to 
God  the  rest  as  "  all."  But  the  last 
and  least  idol  must  be  sought  out,  and 
cast  out !  Men  will  keep  the  idol,  but 
make  compensation  by  giving,  by 
charity,  by  church- building,  or  the  like. 
Like  Jonah's  sailors,  they  will  cast  out 
their  goods ;  anything,  in  fact,  but 
their  gods.  The  seeking  soul  must  be 
sternly  iconoclast  in  the  temple  within. 

[Utilia: 

(«)  "  Father,  Thy  will  be  done  I 
We  know  it  is  most  loving,  and  most  wise, 

228 


And  yet  we  tremble  lest  Thou  say,  <  Arise, 

That  idol  leave  and  come.' 

Oh,  should  we  then  obey  ? 
Or  should  we  cling  unto  our  shrine  of  dust  ? 
Or  should  we  follow  but  because  we  must  ? 

Not  loving  Thy  pure  way  1  " 

— Sunday  Magazine,  1867,  p.  428. 

(ft)  "  Ah,  we  are  slow  to  learn,  dull  children 
all; 
We  see  not  and  we  hear  not  what  we 
might, 
We  start  and  tremble  when  loud  voices  call, 
When  low  ones  whisper  we  neglect  them 
quite. 
Terror  and  love,  all,  all,  are  tried  in  vain, 

And  pass  away  like  visions  of  the  night ; 
We  disregard  the  warning  and  the  pain, 
And   clasp  our    hearts'   poor    idols  with 
delight." 

— Dove  on  the  Cross.'] 

Ver.  15.  *'  Judge  ye  what  I  say.^^ 
I.  An  inspired  man  here  asks  in- 
telligent, candid  examination  of  his 
words. —  1.  Paul  is  quite  dear  as  to  their 
absolute,  "  objective  "  authoritativeness, 
as  in  xiv.  37  :  "If  any  man  think 
himself  ...  a  prophet,  or  spiritual,  let 
him  acknowledge  that  the  things  that  I 
write  unto  you  are  the  commandments 
of  the  Lord''  Yet  they  make  this 
appeal  to  the  judgment  for  examina- 
tion and  reception.  They  were  not  to 
be  challenged,  indeed,  or  set  aside, 
or  even  revised;  yet  they  ask,  claim, 
no  acceptance  resting  on  mere 
authority.  They  commend  them- 
selves to  the  truly  ^^ wise"  man,  as 
truth.  The  instinctive,  revolting  con- 
demnation of  the  healthy  moral  sense 
that  cries  "  God  forbid  I "  is  repeatedly 
Paul's  only  possible,  or  worthy,  or  neces- 
sary answer  to  opponents  and  their 
teachings.  Dr.  Martineau's  purpose 
in,  and  use  of,  his  words  may  not 
commend  itself,  but  it  is  only  an  ex- 
aggeration of  a  truth  when  he  says  : 
"  Second-hand  belief,  assented  to  at  the 
dictation  of  an  interested  expert  [N.B. 
this]  without  personal  response  of 
thought  and  reverence  in  myself,  has 
no  more  tincture  of  religion  in  it  than 
any  other  lesson  learned  by  rote." 
He  proceeds,  however  :  "  We  never 
acknowledge  [authority]  till  that  which 
speaks  to  us  from  ...  a  higher 
strikes  home  and  wakens  the   echoes 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,      chap.  X. 


in  ourselves,  and  is  thereby  instantly  3.  The  external  authority  must  he  kej)t 
transferred  from  external  attestation  first. — In  its  most  peremptory  demand 
to  self-evidence.  And  this  response  it  for  acceptance  and  obedience  Kevela- 
is  which  makes  the  moral  intuitions,  tion  never  asks  the  acceptance  of  mere 
started  by  outward  appeal,  reflected  credulity.  Miracles  come  primarily 
back  by  inward  veneration,  more  than  as  facts  of  history,  to  be  verified  like 
egoistic  phenomena,  and  turning  them  any  other  fact  of  history.  Yet  there 
into  correspondency  between  the  uni-  is  a  moral  fitness  about  them;  they 
versal  and  the  individual  mind,  invests  are  not  mere  marvels,  to  be  *'  gulped 
them  with  true  authority "  (Seat  of  down "  with  open  mouth  and  closed 
Authority,  Preface).  One  whose  atti-  eyes ;  they  are  parts  of  a  coherent  and 
tude  towards  an  external  revelation  is  self-consistent  scheme.  They  are  per- 
far  other  than  that  of  Dr.  Martineau,  fectly  congruous  with  the  assumed 
Dr.  South,  says:  *'  The  surest  ground  conditions  of  a  Fall  and  a  Redemptive 
that  a  man  can  have  for  believing  History.  Of  this  moral  congruity  the 
anything  is  that  he  feels  it  in  himself."  moral  sense  may  judge,  and  it  will 
The  authoritativeness  must  in  the  take  it  as  one  of  the  necessary  cre- 
first  instance  be  external  to  the  man ;  dentials  of  even  the  most  abnormally 
but  the  authority  presents  its  ere-  ''supernatural"  fact.  Even  the  Bible 
dentials.  These  have  several  lines  of  says,  ^^  Judge  ye  what  I  say  J''  and 
verification,  one  being  the  correspond-  awaits  with  even  more  than  Paul's 
ence  of  the  teaching  or  the  fact  with  confidence  the  verdict.  The  Spirit  in 
demands  of  the  moral  sense.  the  Book,  and  the  Spirit  which  en- 
2.  The  moral  sense  must  he  kept  in  lightens  and  guides  the  judgment  in 
full  health  by  communion  with  God,  or  the  man,  is  One  ;  the  external  and 
its  "  wisdom "  is  darkened,  perverted,  internal  must  coincide.  Yet  it  does 
into  folly.  Obedience  to  known  truth  not  tolerate  challenge,  revision,  re- 
is  a  prime  condition  of  further  truth  jection.  The  closer  investigation  of 
being  given  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  If  the  historical  and  literary  phenomena 
any  man  willeth  to  do  His  will.  He  of  the  process  by  which  the  Bible  has 
shall  know,"  etc.  (John  vii.  17,  R.V.).  come  to  be  the  One  Book  it  is,  must 
The  very  credentials  of  Christ  Himself  not,  in  announcing  its  resultant  theories 
would  only  appeal  to  the  right  heart :  of  "  inspiration,"  leave  out  of  account 
"  He  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  My  the  age-long  and  accumulated  suffrages 
voice  "  (John  xviii.  37),  which  is  closely  of  the  verifying  ''^  judgments  "  of  the 
coincident  in  thought  with  Paul's  most  spiritual  of  every  Church  and 
words  in  the  text.  John  viii.  43  century.  In  the  reaction  from  an 
means :  *'  Ye  do  not  understand  this  extreme,  crudely  stated  theory  of  a 
particular  teaching  which  I  am  now  quasi-mechanical  dictation,  extending  in 
uttering,  because  there  is  a  deep,  all-  precisely  similar  manner  and  degree  to 
affecting  ignorance  in  your  heart ;  ye  every  syllable  and  letter  of  the  written 
do  not  at  all  understand  the  dialect  text,  the  authoritativeness  in,  and  the 
itself  in  which  I  always  speak.  Ye  Divine  responsibility  for,  every  part 
cannot  judge  what  I  say ;  ye  do  not  must  not  be  cast  aside.  "  Judge  ye 
possess  the  preliminary  equipment  for  what  I  say "  cannot  mean  such  a 
judgment,  in  an  acquaintance  with  my  criticism  as  would  accept  one  thing 
language.  I  speak  as  to  wise  men."  as  Divine,  authoritative,  inspired,  and 
"  Wisdom  is  justified  by  her  children  "  dismiss  another  as  merely  human,  a 
(Matt.  xi.  19  [N.B.  var.  reading],  mistake,  a  fiction,  if  not  a  fraud.  The 
Luke  vii.  35),  and  justifies  herself  to  effect  is  felt  to  be — and  hence  the  pre- 
them.  Coleridge  :  '*  In  order  to  an  vailing  unrest  about  the  discussion — to 
efficient  belief  in  [and  knowledge  of]  change  men's  whole  mental  and  prac- 
Christianity,  a  man  must  be  a  Chris-  tical  attitude  towards  the  Bible.  It 
tian."  loses  all   authority.      No   book   could 

229 


CHAP.  X.     nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   CORINTHIANS. 


rule  conscience  or  life,  of  which  no  man 
could  be  certain,  or  no  two  "  moral 
judgments"  agreed,  as  to  what  did  or 
did  not  with  authority  express  the 
Divine  will.  [If  the  captain  follows 
the  advice  of  the  pilot  only  when  he 
chooses,  because  he  thinks  it  right  or 
wise,  unhappy  the  passengers  !] 

II.  The  uninspired  man  ought  to 
welcome  and  to  urge  this  examination. 
The  "  wise "  man  will  exercise  his 
**  right  of  private  judgment."  1.  No 
Church  may  require  of  any  man  that 
anything  should  be  believed  as  an  article 
of  the  Faith,  or  be  thought  requisite 
or  necessary  to  salvation,  which  is  not 
read  in  Holy  Scripture,  nor  may  be 
proved  thereby  (Ch.  of  Eng.,  Art.  YI.). 
The  experiment  of  pre-reformation 
ages,  as  of  post-reformation  ages,  re- 
sulted in  the  conviction  that  the  practic- 
able, practical  standard  of  appeal  must 
be  looked  for  outside  all  the  varying 
human  conditions  of  thought  or  vary- 
ing moral  enlightenment,  or  Church 
pronouncement.  Everything — Church 
creeds,  subjective  moral  pronounce- 
ments, the  world's  current  maxims — 
all  need  to  be  checked  by  *'  what  is 
written "  (iv.  6).  [Particularly  when 
inferences  are  being  drawn  from  per- 
haps scanty  Scriptural  data,  and 
again  inferences  from  those  inferences, 
should  these  be  frequently  brought 
into  comparison  with  the  Scriptural 
standard.  As  the  workman  tests  the 
rising  building  with  repeated  use  of 
line  and  square ;  or  as  he  repeatedly 
compares  his  more  and  more  elabor- 
ated work  with  the  pattern  to  which  it 
is  to  be  made  conformable.]  Better, 
safer,  the  aberrancies  of  private  judg- 
ment than  the  slavery  to  human 
authority. 

2.  "  Come  and  see "  (John  i.  39)  is 
typical  of  a  great  principle.  So  He  deals 
with  seeking  souls ;  so  Philips  should 
deal  with  the  difficulties  of  Nathanaels 
(ver.  46) ;  John  in  effect  says  to  his 
disciples  :  "  Go  and  see  the  Lamb  of 
God  for  yourselves "  (ver.  36).  No 
man,  uninspired,  is  to  take  away  the 
telescope  from  the  disciple  and  bid  him 
believe  what  he  says  he  himself  sees 

230 


with  it  ;  nor  to  permit  the  use  of  the 
telescope,  on  the  one  condition  that  the 
disciple  only  '^  sees  "  what  his  teacher 
tells  him  he  ought  to  see.  Rather  he 
will  give  him  free  use  of  the  tele- 
scope, and  of  his  eyes,  but  will  teach 
him  to  use  it  [as  every  astronomer 
knows,  men  learn  to  "  see  "  better  and 
better,  with  even  the  same  instru- 
ment], and  offer  his  own  trained,  ex- 
pert knowledge  for  his  assistance. 
When  Paul,  or  Christ,  or  the  Book, 
claims  absolute  unchallengeable  author- 
ity, and  we  give  it,  we  give  it  to  God 
in  them.  [In  Christ  in  a  higher  sense 
than  in  the  others,  of  course.]  Yet 
even  God  does  not  disdain  to  say, 
"  Judge  ye  what  I  sayT  [Cf.  "  Judge 
as  to  what  I  have  done  to  My  vine- 
yard "  (tsa.  V.  3)'.] 

3.  The  preacher  invites  such  spiritual 
judgment  from  the  hearer. — Dr.  John 
Brown's  father's  preaching  and  re- 
ligious life  grew  mellowed  by  the 
sudden  sorrow  of  his  wife's  death. 
He  preached  at  Galashiels  before  that 
change,  when  one  "  wife "  said  to  her 
''neebor":  "Jean,  what  think  ye  o' 
the  lad  ?  "  "  It's  maist  oH  tinsel-warhj^ 
said  Jean.  After  it,  Brown  preached 
again  at  Galashiels.  Jean,  running 
to  her  friend,  took  the  first  word : 
"  lis  Ob  gowd  noo."  (Horoe  Suhsecivce, 
Second  Series,  p.  11,  note.) 

Yer.  27.  ''^  If  ye  he  disposed  to  go 
.  .  .  ea^." — Manifestly,  from  the  whole 
drift  of  the  chapter,  this  will  be  not  to 
an  idol  feast,  or  even  to  a  heathen  civic 
banquet,  but  to  a  meal  in  a  private 
house. 

I.  Some  intercourse  with  the  world 
could  not  be  absolutely  prohibited. — 
The  Christian  belongs  to  the  world  in 
many  ways,  and  cannot  choose  but  to 
take  his  part  in  social  life.  Many  a 
family  is  itself  traversed  by  the  line 
of  severance  between  *'  Church "  and 
''world."  It  would  be  difficult  to 
decide  in  many  instances  between  the 
two.  One  of  the  best  means  of  cultiva- 
ting personal  piety  would  be  removed 
from  the  training  of  the  Christian  life; 
or,  which  is  really  the  principal  con- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


'^deration,  one  of  the  main  elements 
^f  hope  for  the  world  would  be  gone, — 
the  presence  in  it  of  the  "salt,"  the 
■'  leaven,"  the  "  light ";  the  world  needs 
intercourse  with  the  Christian.  More- 
over, Christ  went  to  be  a  guest  with  a 
Pharisee,  whose  motive  in  inviting  Him 
was  scarcely  friendly.  He  was  Elisha, 
not  Elijah,  in  this.  He  began  His 
miracles  at  a  wedding  feast.  Oddity  is 
not  necessarily  holiness,  nor  singularity 
sanctity.  "  Eat;"  i.e.  if  no  principle  be 
involved,  do  simply  and  naturally  what 
others  are  doing.     But  take — 

II.  Some  cautions  for  such  inter- 
course.— 1.  Do  not  give  occasion  there 
for  your  religion  to  he  evil  spoken  of. 
An  unguarded  word  or  look  may 
make  some  younger  guest  to  stumble. 
An  inconsiderate  use  of  one's  abstract 
hberty  [e.g.  (in  some  circles)  in  taking 
wine,  (in  some),  playing  billiards]  may 
create  a  difficulty  to  some  "  worldling  " 
present,  or  be  the  occasion  of  a  snare 
to  a  beginner  in  the  new  life.  A  wise 
circumspection  will  "  take  stock "  of 
its  company  before  indulging  in  a 
"  throw  off"  which  might  be  misrepre- 
sented or  misunderstood.  "  Let  your 
speech — even  your  fun — be  always  with 
grace,  '  seasoned  with  salt.' "  As  the 
Christian  profession  becomes  empha- 
sised by  (say)  the  holding  of  Church 
office,  or  by  the  ministerial  character, 
so  does  responsibility  increase  and 
"  liberty "  become  narrowed.  The 
"  representative  "  Christian  should  be 
most  jealous  over  himself.  Let  him 
remember  about  the  ^^  idle  word" — 
vapid,  powerless,  purposeless,  at  the 
best.  The  poor  wine  of  such  talk 
soonest  turns  sour  ! 

2.  Remember,  Christ  went  into  such 
company  as  its  Saviour. — The  physician 
may  go,  and  may  take  risk,  where  an 
ordinary,  "  lay "  person  dare  not  and 
should  not  go.  ''  What  doest  thou  here, 
Elijah  ?  "  is  as  apposite  a  query  for  some 
Christians  in  the  world,  as  for  him, 
who  vvas  flying  from  "  the  world  "  at 


Samaria.  Christ  went  as  the  physician 
into  the  house  of  the  Pharisee,  and  did 
the  work  of  a  physician  of  souls  there. 
Do  you,  when  you  get  into  unspiritual 
society^  Do  you  even  try?  Ask, 
sometimes,  when  coming  from  such  a 
"  feast "  :  "  How  did  I  entertain  my 
companions  ?  A  whole  evening  ;  I  a 
Christian  ;  they  unsaved.  Not  a  word 
for  God  ?  Not  a  word  of  Him  ? 
Won't  bear  looking  at  in  the  light  of 
my  Master's  example." 

3.  Keep  your  ovjn  piety  strong j 
healthy. — You  are  in  real  danger  there 
yourself.  Further,  it  will  give  a  reality 
and  a  power  to  any  word  you  endeavour 
to  speak  for  Christ  in  that  circle.  Live 
near  to  God,  in  fellowship  with  Christ, 
under  the  indwelling  guidance  of  the 
Spirit;  the  Spirit  will  then  give  you  the 
best  guidance  when  to  speak  and  what 
to  say,  and  also  when  not  to  speak — when 
not  to  speak  even  for  Christ.  No  general 
rule  can  be  laid  down  in  advance.  He 
will,  from  one  case  to  another,  from 
one  house  to  another,  from  one  hour  to 
another,  save  you  from  a  "  stiffness " 
which  might  repel,  or  a  "  lightness  " 
which  takes  away  all  force  from  the 
words  spoken ;  His  indwelling  will  be 
the  best  Law  and  Guide  in  all  sudden 
emergCEcies  which  may  arise.  Cha- 
racter, spirituality,  will  also  automatic- 
ally govern  the  lips  and  their  least 
guarded  utterances;  spirituality  of 
habitual  tone,  a  devotional  habit  of 
soul,  will  "  transpire  "  at  many  a  trivial 
point,  and  will  make  even  the  protest 
of  quiet  separateness  as  lovable  as 
the  nature  of  the  case  will  admit. 
Goodness  will  inevitably  be  singular 
and  alone,  sooner  or  later.  But  an 
unconscious  goodness  will  have  great 
power  of  winning  appeal  even  to  the 
unsaved. 

4.  Yet  why  do  you  wa/nt  to  " go" 
or  to  "  eat  "  ? — What  does  your  being 
"  disposed  to  go  "  reveal  1  Are  you 
quite  sure  that  it  is  a  healthy  disposi- 
tion of  heart  or  judgment  ? 


231 


CHAP.  X.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


EOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


Yer.  11.  ''^  The  ends  of  the  ages" 

1.  The  Divine  superintendence  of 
the  ages. — 1.  God  is  in  the  history  of 
them  all. — "  No  accidents  in  history ;  " 
no  age,  year,  moment,  event,  dissoci- 
ated from  God.  He  is  in  all,  origina- 
ting the  good,  controUing  the  evil. 
[^'  The  King  of  the  ages''  (1  Tim.  i.  17), 
Greek.] 

2.  God  employs  one  age  to  benefit 
another. — Nothing  takes  place  for  its 
own  sake.  The  events  that  transpired 
in  Arabia  during  forty  short  years, 
thousands  of  years  ago,  were  to  tell  on 
the  boundless  future.  [(1)  We  are 
heirs  of  all  the  ages.]  (2)  We  are  very 
incompetent  judges  of  God's  plan  and 
action  in  the  present  age.  (3)  How- 
serious  life  is.  All  full  of  God.  All 
things  flowing  to  the  Eternal.  Christ 
taught  us  that  all  the  events  of  His 
providence  are  His  advents.  "Be  ye 
therefore  ready." 

II.  The  growing  responsibility  of 
the  ages. — Nothing  to  succeed  this 
dispensation.  In  this  age  we  have  the 
advantage  of  the  experiences  and  dis- 
coveries of  past  ages,  in  two  ways : 
(1)  Through  literature;  history  gives 
us  the  intellect  and  wealth  of  the 
chosen  people ;  the  intellectual  wealth 
and  experience  of  all  past  ages  meet 
in  this.  Consequently  our  responsi- 
bility is  great.  (2)  Through  influence ; 
the  mental  influence  streaming  down 
regularly  from  sire  to  son.  The  Jews 
lived  under  moonlight ;  the  first  Chris- 
tian, under  the  clear  dawn  of  morning  ; 
it  is  high  noon  with  us.  We  ought  to 
be  higher  than  the  men  of  the  past ; 
we  stand  upon  their  life's  work. — Ex- 
tracted and  abridged  from  a  sermon 
in  ''Homilist"  vii.  188. 

[TJtilia. — 1.  When  the  Wesley  monu- 
ment in  Westminster  Abbey  was  un- 
covered, Dean  Stanley  thus  used  the 
fact  of  Wesley  standing  on  his  father's 
grave  to  preach  :  His  work  was  not 
to  be  regarded  as  a  new  beginning ;  he 
stood  upon  the  past  of  England  and 
the    English   Church.       2.    All  stable 

232 


progress  holds  to,  and  brings  forward 
with  it,  the  best  in  the  old.] 

Vers.  26,  28.  Observe  the  diver- 
gent applications  of  the  same  great 
truth  :  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and 
the  fulness  thereof." 

I.  Eat ;  raising  no  needless  difficulty 
for  your  own  conscience.  "  What  God 
hath  cleansed,  that  call  not  thou 
common." 

II.  Eat  not ;  creating  no  avoid- 
able difficulty  for  another  conscience. 
A  "  two-edged  sword,"  cutting  the 
Gordian  knot  of  this  case  of  con- 
science. 

Also :  The  Great  Proprietor. 

I.  How  indefeasible  His  right :  He 
created,  sustains,  renews,  blesses  all. 

II.  How  rich  and  diversified  His 
property :  the  earth  and  its  fulness 
[i.e.  its  contents]. 

III.  How  liberal  and  kind  His  use 
of  it :  He  gives  us  all  things,  richly 
to  enjoy. — \J.  L.]  [There  is  another 
"  fulness  "  which  is  also  at  the  service, 
and  for  the  appropriation,  of  the  Church 
(Col.  i.  19,  ii.  9,  10  ;  John  i.  14,  16)  ] 

Ver.  31.  "  All  to  the  glory  of  God."— 
[Couple  with  this  Col.  iii.  17:  "Do 
all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."] 

I.  "  What  is  the  chief  end  of  man  ? 
To  glorify  God,  and  to  enjoy  Him  for 
ever."  What  a  noble  type  of  life,  if 
sometimes  rugged  and  stern,  has  grown 
up  on  this  spiritual  food  !  It  has  been 
the  moral  oatmeal,  putting  bone  and 
resistant  strength  into  the  character. 

II.  1.  How  many  things  this  ex- 
cludes from  a  Christian  life ;  2.  How 
many  things  this  makes  a  Christian 
life  include. — 1.  Nothing  may  find 
place  within  the  holy  circle  of  a  life 
"  in  Christ "  which  may  not  endure  this 
test.  Bring  every  proposal  to  this 
touchstone.  Many  a  most  tempting, 
most  plausible,  proposal  will  say,  "  Sib- 
boleth,"  and  must  be  cut  ofi"  and  slain, 
there  and  then !  (Judg.  xii.  6).  A 
compendious  rule,    a    "  pocket "   code. 


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  •/.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


for  thousands  of  cases  of  every -day 
Christian  morahty.  [If  you  suspect 
the  draught  of  milk  which  the  world 
or  Satan  proffers,  drop  this  lactometer 
into  it  !]  In  Paul's  present  instance 
it  means :  *'  Try  to  avoid  hurting  a 
soul.  Please  men,  if  you  can,  even 
the  heathen  friend  who  invites  you 
to  his  feast.  But  glorify  God  !  "  On 
the  other  hand,  2.  (1)  Aiming  to 
glorify  God,  how  much  else  you  may 
glorify  !  Everything  which,  passing 
the  examination  of  1,  may  be  rightly 
admitted  into  a  Christian  life,  will 
receive  a  new  touch  of  beauty  and 
perfectness  from  this  aim  of  the  Chris- 
tian heart.  (2)  Earth  may  thus  anti- 
cipate heaven,  where  John  "saw  no 
Temple"  (Rev.  xxi.  22).  Why?  The 
Jerusalem  he  had  known  on  earth 
boasted  its  Temple  as  its  chief  glory. 
The  Heavenly  Jerusalem  has  no  such 
apparatus  of  a  sinner's  approach  to 
God,  and,  moreover,  no  special,  re- 
stricted, "  sacred  "  area.  As  once  the 
whole  Temple  court  was  hallowed,  all 
made  one  vast  altar,  on  any  part  of 
which  sacrifice  might  be  offered 
(1  Kings  viii.  64),  so  now  the  city  is 
all  hallowed,  the  whole  "  new  Jeru- 
salem "  is  Temple  floor.  Its  inhabitants 
in  every  detail  of  their  life  "live  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever" 
(Ps.  xxiii.  6).  (3)  The  day  is  come  in 
the  Christian  man's  life  when  *'  Holi- 
7iess  unto  the  Lord "  is  on  the  very 
"bells  of  the  horses";  when  not  only 
is  every  ^^pot'^  in  every  housewife's 
kitchen  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem  a 
holy  thing,  in  which  she  may  bring 
her  offering,  or  receive  her  portion  of 
peace  offering  meat  from  the  altar; 
but  the  bells  on  the  trappings  of  the 
chariot -horse  may  be  as  really  holy  as 
the  golden  frontlet -pi  ate  of  the  high 
priest's  mitre.  The  bells  do  not  draw 
the  load,  but  they  inspirit  the  horses 
and  help  them  to  draw ;  even  as 
pleasure  is  distinct  from  the  serious 
work  of  life,  and  yet  finds  a  worthy 
function  in  helping  men  to  bear  the 
burdens  and  draw  the  loads  of  life. 
The  sanctification  of  the  bells  is  the 
sanctification  of  pleasure   (Ze(;h.    xiv. 


20,  21).  (4)  "  The /orm  of  consecrating 
all  human  acts  to  God  was  already  in 
use  amongst  the  Jews,  by  whom,  as 
now  amongst  Mussulmans,  every  act 
was  performed  '  in  the  name  of  God  ' " 
(Stanley).  Cf.  the  old  formula  at  the 
commencement  of  wills  :  "  /w  the  name 
of  God.  Amen.  I,  A.  B.,"  etc.  The 
earliest-known  bill  of  exchange  begins  : 
"  In  the  name  of  God.  Amen,"  and  ends 
"  May  Christ  protect  you."  Mabillon, 
the  French  Benedictine  and  the 
historian  of  the  Order,  had  special 
forms  of  prayer  for  entering  on  any 
new  literary  work,  for  use  on  receiv- 
ing the  first  proof-sheet  from  the  press, 
for  the  commencement  of  each  day's 
studies.  (Stephen,  Eccl.  Biog.,  one  vol. 
ed.,  266.)  In  his  later  years  Haydn's 
sheets  of  score  were  each  headed,  as  he 
began  to  write  a  new  one,  "  I)eo  Soli 
gloria."  (5)  The  very  physical  life,  in 
all  its  exercises,  may  be  thus  sanctified. 
The  very  eating  and  drinking  may  be 
hallowed.  Significant  that  the  central 
ordinance  of  Christianity,  one  of  its 
two  pieces  of  original,  simple,  authorita- 
tive ceremonial,  should  be  a  Meal,  a 
Supper.  The  very  physical  life  finds 
its  highest  use  at  the  Table  of  the 
Lord.  [But  this  must  not  be  ex- 
aggerated, as  though  the  Supper  were 
m^erely  the  highest  example  of  the 
fellowship  of  a  feast ;  or  m^erely  the 
sanctification  of  our  common  life.] 
All  the  "  secular,"  natural  life  may  as 
by  a  gracious  upheaval  of  spiritual 
force  be  a  land  all  uplifted  to  a 
higher  level,  and  withal  "  tilted  up  "  so 
that  it  lies  ever  toward  its  Sun — God 
Himself.  And  the  eating  and  drinking 
at  the  Table  of  Christ  the  Lord  are 
but  a  culminating  peak  where  all 
life  is  now  a  high  tableland.  [George 
Herbert's  poem  The  Elixir  is  all 
apposite :  e.g. 

"  A  servant  with  this  clause 
Makes  drudgery  Divine  ; 
Who  sweeps  a  room  as  for  Thy  laws 
Makes  that  and  th'  action  fine."] 

[Synopsis    of    Useful    Passages     re 
Temptation. 
I.  God  tempts  man. — Gen.   xi.  1, 

233 


ciiAP.  XI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  CORINTHIANS. 


Abraham;  Deut.  iv.  34,  vii.  19, 
xxix.  3,  the  plagues,  etc.,  connected 
with  the  Exodus. 

II.  Temptation  neutral  or  innocent. 
— ?Matt.  vi.  13  (Luke  xi.  4);  Luke 
viii.  13,  making  the  seed  "  fall  away  "; 
Gal.  iv.  14,  "  my  temptation  which 
was  in  my  flesh  "  ;  Jas.  i.  1 2,  "  en- 
dureth  temptation " ;  Luke  xxii.  28, 
"  continued  with  Me  in  My  tempta- 
tion," i.e.  the  time  of  His  active  minis- 
try ;  Acts  XX.  19,  "  ser^dng  God  with 
many  temptations,"  Paul ;  Jas.  i.  2, 
^'  all  joy  "  ;  1  Pet.  i.  6,  ^'  heaviness 
through  manifold  temptations  "  ;  2  Pet. 
ii.  9,  "  deliver  the  godly  out  of  tempta- 
tion." 

III.  Men  tempt  God.— Exod.  xvii.  2; 
Deut.  vi.  16  (Ps.  xcv.  8;  Heb.  iii.  9) ; 
Isa.  vii.  12,  "I  will  not  tempt  God " ; 


Mai.  iii.  13,  15;  1  Cor.  x.  19 ;  Num. 
xiv.  22,  **  tempted  Me  these  ten 
times";  Acts  xv.  10,  "  why  tempt  ye 
God  ? "  Jerusalem  council ;  Acts  v.  9, 
Ananias  and  Sapphira. 

IV,  Special  phrases. — *' Enter  not 
into "  [evidently  meaning  more  than 
"  not  be  tempted  "],  Matt.  xxvi.  41  and 
parallels ;  "  rich  fall  into  temptation," 
1  Tim.  vi.  9  ;  "  endureth  "  [emphasis  on 
this ;  more  than  merely  "  suffers  " ;  = 
"  passes  patiently  and  safely  through"], 
Jas.  i.  12  (1  Cor.  x.  13) ;  "  led  up  of  the 
Spirit  into,"  etc..  Matt.  iv.  1  (cf.  for 
thought,  not  word,  "  lead  us  not  into 
temptation  "). 

V.  Inquirers  tempting  Christ. — 
Matt.  xvi.  1,  xix.  3,  xxii.  35,  etc. ;  Mark 
X.  2 ;  Luke  x.  25 ;  John  viii.  6.] 


CHAPTER    XI. 


CRITICAL  NOTES. 


[v^er.  1  belongs  to  chap,  x.,  where  see.  Evans  (in  Speaker),  Stanley,  and  others  divide 
this  chapter  at  ver.  16,  not  ver.  17,  making  ver.  16  introduce  the  new  topic] 

Ver.  2,  I  praise  you  ...  all  things. — Not  qualified  or  limited  by  ver.  17,  which  refers  to 
a  new  point,  wliich  bad  arisen  in  practice,  outside  the  '■^  all  things  already  delivered^''  whether 
orally,  when  Paul  was  at  Corinth,  or  by  the  (possible)  lost  letter.  Courteous,  and  no  doubt 
true  of  the  Church  as  a  whole,  though  there  were  factious  and  rebellious  exceptions.  Cer- 
tainly they  deferred  to  his  authority,  when  they  submitted  for  his  decision  the  questions  the 
answers  to  which  occupy  so  much  of  this  letter.  See  also  how  this  loyal  feeling  asserted 
itself  in  consequence  of  this  letter  (2  Cor.  vii.  11  5^^.).  Ordinances. — '■'■  Traditions"  {'R.Y. 
and  all  Commentaries).  "  The  delivered  instructions,  .  .  .  directions  in  matters  of  discipline 
as  well  as  of  doctrine  "  (Evans).  Bllicott  suggests  such  {esoteric)  topics  as  vi.  2 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  5. 
Beet  adds  a  new  idea  :  "  Probably  the  more  or  less  definite  instructions  given  hy  Christ  to  the 
apostles  for  the  Church.  Samples  in  ver.  23,  xv.  3."  Important  to  note  (as  Stanley): 
"Always  delivered,  not  'traditionally'  through  many  links,  but  direct  from  the  teacher  to 
the  taught,"  Hence  entirely  without  analogy  to  the  technical  traditions  of,  e.g.,  the  Romish 
ecclesiastical  theology :  "  Not  merely  such  acts  and  words  as  were  supposed  to  have  descended 
from  Christ  and  His  apostles,  although  orally  transmitted  instead  of  recorded  in  writing ; 
but  also  the  whole  circle  of  dogmas  and  practices  which  had  been  instituted  by  Church 
councils  and  recognised  by  the  Church "  (Luthardt,  Saving  Truths,  lect.  viii.) ;  which 
became  an  authority  concurrent  with  Scripture.  All  verbal  or  written  Apostolic  directions 
which  are  needed  in  order  to  a  statement  of  God's  will,  complete  for  the  purposes  of  Christian 
practice,  have  been  put  on  permanent  record  in  Scripture. 

Ver.  3. — As  to  husband  and  wife  and  the  illustrative  force  of  their  relationship,  cf.  through- 
out Eph,  V.  22-33.  There  the  stress  lies  upon  their  intimateness,  their  unity  of  relationship, 
and  the  obligation  of  mutual  helpfulness  and  sympathy.  In  ver.  33  her  subordination  to 
him  is  introduced,  and  is  here  the  prominent  point  dealt  with.  Head. — Above  the  Body 
(Col.  i.  18),  though,  in  a  true  sense,  belonging  to  it ;  in  close,  living,  life-giving  union ;  direct- 
ing it,  and  so  every  particular  "  7n,a7i "  in  it.  Man  is  woman's  "  immediate  head  "  (Beet),  for 
Christ  is  her  head  too  ;  in  the  Body  there  is  "  no  male  nor  female."  Also  distinguish  between 
her  equality  and  parallelism  with  man  in  her  relation  to  Christ  in  regard  to  her  personal 

234 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  XL 


spiritual  life  (ver.  11),  and  her  social  subordination  to  man  (of.  xv.  27,  iii.  23).  "  The  mean- 
ing of  '  head '  must  not  be  unduly  limited  or  unduly  extended.  The  general  idea  is  that  of 
supremacy  or  pre-cminericey  but  the  particular  character  of  that  supremacy  or  pre-eminence 
must  in  each  case  be  determined  by  the  context  and  by  the  nature  of  the  things  specified. 
Thus,  in  the  first  member,  [it]  is  in  regard  of  nature  and  of  headship  of  the  whole  human 
family ;  in  the  second,  in  regard  of  divinely  appointed  order  and  authority  (Gen.  ii.  22,  23, 
iii.  16  ;  see  below,  vers.  8,  9)  ;  in  the  third,  in  regard  of  priority  and  office, — the  pre-eminence 
of  the  Father,  as  Bishop  Pearson  says,  '  undeniably  consisting  in  this,  that  He  is  God  not  of 
any  other  but  Himself,  and  that  there  is  no  other  person  who  is  God  but  is  God  of  Him  '  " 
(Ellicott). 

Ver.  4. — The  Eomans  and  Jews  prayed  with  covered  heads,  the  Greeks  with  uncovered. 
Hence  no  suggestion  that  the  men  ait  Corinth  did  draw  over  their  heads  any  sort  of  covering, 
e.g.  the  loose  lap  or  fold  of  the  outer  "wrap,"  like  a  Moorish  haik.  The  Greek  Christian 
would  do  by  mere  habit  what  profound  Christian  truth  declared  to  be  right  for  Jew  or 
Gentile  me7i.  To  cover  his  head  was  to  assume  openly  the  woman's  condition  of  subordination, 
and  to  disavow  his  manly  right  to  stand  with  unveiled  face  before  Christ.  He  thus  dis- 
honours his  head  (i.e.  his  manly  self,  culminating  there),  and  dishonours  also  that  other 
Head  in  Whom  he  has,  and  to  Whose  work  he  owes,  his  own  honour  as  a  man. 

Ver.  5.  Prayeth  or  prophesieth. — Acts  ii.  18,  xxi.  9.  In  apparent  contrast  see  xiv.  33. 
Sanctified  good  sense  would  draw  a  distinction  between  (say)  a  full,  formal  meeting  of  the 
whole  Church  for  worship,  where  propriety  dictated  that  she  should  ordinarily  be  silent,  and 
smaller,  half-social  gatherings  of  Christian  people  in  "  prayer  meetings  "  ;  or  between  her 
liberty  at  the  family  altar  or  in  a  gathering  of  women,  and  her  seemly  restriction  in  mixed 
or  public  gatherings.  [Observe  the  antithesis,  "  the  men  .  .  .  the  wov^en"  in  1  Tim.  ii.  8,  9.] 
In  any  case,  whenever  her  praying  is  in  any  degree  in  public,  let  her  not  be  "  unveiled" 
unsexing  herself  and  making  herself  "  masculine"  bearing  herself  like  a  short-haired  man  ; 
she  might  as  well  go  the  whole  length  and  be  "  crojjped  "  [shorn]  like  a  man.  "  Modesty  is 
the  conscience  of  the  body."  A  Corinthian  woman's  veil  would  be  the  peplum,  worn  over  the 
shoulders  in  the  house,  drawn  over  the  face  in  public.  [At  Corinth  a  "  shorn  "  woman  would 
be  a  harlot.] 

Ver.  7. — Note,  not  merely  "  made  in  the  image  "  ;  he  "  is  the  image  and  glory  of  God."  Note 
also,."  woman  is  "  [not  "  the  image,"  but  only]  "  the  glory  of  man  "  She  also — but  the  thought 
is  outside  of  Paul's  view  here — is  "  man  made  in  the  image  of  God."  "  The  male  sex,  as  hold- 
ing the  highest  power  on  earth  and  exercising  undisputed  sway  over  all  else,  is  a  visible 
pattern  of  God  and  a  shining  forth  of  His  splendour"  (Beet).  Being  what  he  is,  man 
glorifies  God  Who  made  him  thus ;  being  what  she  is,  woman  glorifies  man,  to  whom  God  has 
given  her  for  a  help-meet.  The  dependence  found  in  both  cases,  of  origin  and  relation, 
exalts  and  brings  dignity  to  God  and  man  respectively. 

Ver.  10. — Very  difficult  text;  a  crvx  interpretum.  (1)  Pretty  general  agreement  that 
'■'■power  "  means  her  "  veil"  the  sign  of  man's  authority  over  woman.  [Perhaps  also  :  "  It  is 
apiece  of  natural  fitness  tiiat  nature  herself  should  have  put  on  the  woman,  in  her  long  hair, 
a  natural  sign  of  subordination  " ;  though  this  fits  with  still  greater  difficulty  into  the  next 
clause.]  (2)  Because  of  the  angels. — Choose  between  («)  '■^Good  angels,"  present  in  the 
Christian  assemblies,  who  will  be  grieved  by  anything  disorderly  or  unseemly.  In  favour  of 
this  are:  the  far-fetched,  obscure,  precariously  based,  character  of  the  argument  involved  in  (J) 
below ;  the  general  use  of  Scripture,  where  "  angels  "  means  "  good  angels,"  unless  the  con- 
trary is  made  clear  in  some  way ;  the  wide  concurrence  of  the  Greek  Fathers  in  this  inter- 
pretation ;  the  constant  assertion  in  the  New  Testament  of  the  vivid  interest  which  these 
take  in  all  that  belongs  to  man  and  his  redemption.  Also,  the  worshipping  heavenly  company, 
of  which  good  angels  form  a  large  part,  and  the  companies  of  earthly  worshippers,  are  really 
one  great  body  of  worshippers  at  the  same  throne  of  the  same  God,  though  locally  divided 
or  distributed — part  here,  part  yonder ;  the  human  worshippers  must  do  notldng  unworthy  of 
the  angelic  part  of  the  great  adoring  company.  (&)  '■^Evil  angels  ;  "  as  many,  fi-om  Tertullian 
to  Farrar,  who  suppose  Paul  to  refer  to  [and  believe  in  !]  the  Rabbinic  interpretation  of 
Gen.  vi.  2.  In  favour  of  this  are  many  Rabbinic  sayings,  and  some  fantastic  Mahometan 
stories  ;  against  it,  the  consideration  that  a  veil  could  hide  nothing  from  spiritual  beings, 
even  though  evil  ones,  and  would  neither  defend  the  woman  from  their  gaze  nor  shield  them 
from  temptation  to  which  they  might  again  at  least  desire  to  yield.  To  suppose  that  the 
veil  is  to  defend  the  good  angels  [or  the  "  angels  of  the  Churches"  (Rev.  ii.,  iii.)]  from  temp- 
tation (!)  is  to  suppose  them  "  weaker,  in  the  matter  of  sensual  desire,  than  average  English- 
men now"  (Beet).     [The  matter  is  of  very  little  homiletic  use  in  any  detail.] 

Ver.  12. —  God's  glory  is  His  creature,  man  ;  man's  glory  ishis  companion,  woman  ;  woman's 
glory  is  her  covering,  her  hair  and  its  symbolised  modesty  of  subordination. 

Ver.  16.  Seemeth. — Not  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  frequent  translation  of  the  Greek  word, 
^*thinheth  that  he  is";  but,  "is  so  pertinacious  in  disputing  upon  this  point  that,  to  put  it 
kindly,  he  appeari  to  others  to  contend,  for  the  mere  love  of  being  in  opposition.     It  would 

235 


CHAP.  XI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


be  true  to  observed  facts  of  human  nature  to  translate  and  expound  "  thinks  that  he  is,  and 
is  rather  proud  of  being."  We. — As  distinguished  from  "  the  Churches  of  God"  will  mean 
"  we  ajpostles'''     Custom. — Viz.  "  of  women  praying  with  unveiled  heads." 

New  Topic  :  The  Loed's  Suppee  and  the  Love-feasts. 

Ver.  17. — Backward  reference  :  the  directions  just  given,  and  the  general  praise  of  ver.  2, 
are  not  to  be  taken  to  carry  with  them  '^ praise  "  in  regard  to  this  further  matter.  Indeed, 
ver.  16  precludes  it,  for  in  this  they  are  out  of  line  with  the  holier  manner  and 
^^ custom''  of  other  Churches.  Better  .  .  .  worse. — "Not  for  edification  and  spiritual 
improvement,  but  the  reverse." 

Ver.  18.  First  of  all. — Not  formally  completed  by  any  "second"  topic;  perhaps  ver.  34, 
'*  the  rest''  covers  all  Paul  had  in  his  mind  when  he  here  says  '■^  first  of  all."  In  the  Church. 
— Of  course  not  any  building  so  called;  only  in  '■'■due  and  formal  Church  assevibly." 
Divistons  are  again  ''schisms,"  as  in  i.  10  [though  not  necessarily  here  the  Church 
parties ;  perhaps  only  divisions  of  feeling  arising  from  diversity  of  wealth  and  social 
position],  xii.  25.     Partly. — Courteous,  but  serious  ;  "charity  hopeth  all  things." 

Ver.  19.  Must. — Not  stronger  than  in  (say)  Matt,  xviii.  7.  "  Fallen  human  nature  being 
what  it  is,  it  is  certain  and  inevitable  that,"  etc.  So,  whether  we  shall  say,  "  with  the 
result  that "  or  "  in  order  that,"  goes  down  to  the  roots  of  things,  as  to  the  co-working  of 
the  free  wills  of  God  and  of  man.  No  doubt  the  Hebrew  mind  saw  all  history  so  full  of 
God  that  it  connected  His  will  very  closely  indeed  with  the  course  of  events,  inclining 
always  to  "  in  order  that  " ;  to  ordaiiiing  rather  than  merely  overruling.  A  close  parallel 
is  in  Matt.  x.  34,  35.     "  /  am  come  .  .  .  to  send  a  sword,"  "  to  set  .  .  .  at  variance,"  etc. 

Ver.  19.  Heresies. — Not  yet  in  the  technical  sense  ;  only  divisions  arising  out  of  the  choice 
of  self-willed  hearts,  showing  itself  in  open  unbrotherliness,  dissension,  division.  Approved. 
— As  usual  (e.g.  Rom.  xvi.  10)  those  whom  the  testing  shows  to  be  the  pure  metal,  genuine, 
true,  loyal,  to  Paul,  to  the  Church,  to  Christ.     (2  Cor.  x.  18,  xiii.  7  ;  Jas.  i.  12.) 

Ver.  20. — Cf.  xiv.  23  ;  Acts  i.  15,  ii.  44,  iii.  1  ;  quite  general,  perhaps  including  not  only 
''place,"  but  time  and  purpose.  Choose  between :  (1)  "  Your  way  of  doing  things  may  be 
'  eating  a  supper,'  but  it  is  no  *  Lord's  supper'  ";  and  (2)  "  Such  love-feast  suppers  as  yours, 
conducted  as  they  are,  cannot  suitably  lead  up  to  the  *  Lord's  Supper.'  Decision  turns  upon 
the  historical  question  whether  the  Lord's  Supper  itself  was  made  a  meal  capable  of  (more 
than)  satisfying  hunger  and  including  (even  excessive  and  intoxicating,  ver.  21)  use  of 
wine  ;  or  whether  it  was  associated  with  (preceded  by)  such  a  substantial  meal.     Further — 

Ver.  21. — Note,  "  other  "  is  an  insertion,  depending  in  part  for  its  warrant  upon  the 
decision  as  to  the  historical  question.  Choose  between  (1)  "  Tahes  beforehand,  with  a  greedy 
eagerness  which  will  not  even  wait  for  the  whole  company  to  be  gathered  and  the  proper 
Church  ordinance  to  begin,  but  '  falls  to  '  forthwith,  so  soon  as  the  place  is  entered,  upon 
'  its  own  supper,'  brought  to  the  feast "  ;  and  (2)  "  Takes  first  with  selfish  preference  its 
own  (rich  man's)  supper ;  whilst  the  poor  man,  with  his  poor  and  scanty  supper,  must  wait 
the  rich  men's  convenience  and  pleasure  before  partaking  of  anything  they  had  professed  to 
bring  towards  a  communion  meal." 

Ver,  22, — Either  way,  the  communion  idea  is  sinned  against  and  lost.  "  Hungry  "  and 
"  drunken  "  sit  side  by  side  at  the  Lord's  table  !  Private  meals  should  be  eaten  in  private 
houses  ;  natural  hunger  and  thirst  should  be  satisfied  at  home.  [The  historical  questions 
involved  are  most  variously  decided  upon,  sometimes  under  (unconscious)  theological  bias. 
The  facts  are  few ;  their  interpretation  is  often  still  sub  lite.  {E.g.  some  would  make  the 
edict  of  Trajan  [112,  or  earlier]  occasioned  by  the  well-known  letter  of  Pliny  the  Younger, — 
that  the  "  simple  and  harmless  "  meal  of  the  Bithynian  Christians,  taken  in  the  evening  of 
the  Lord's  Day,  should  cease, — the  occasion  of  the  disuse  of  the  Love-feast,  and  of  a  morning 
use  of  the  [distinctive]  Lord's  Supper.  But  it  is  not  agreed  that  the  meal  which  he  forbade 
was  really  taken  in  the  evening,  at  a  second  meeting,  in  addition  to  the  morning  one  which 
he  so  fully  describes,)  For  homiletical  purposes  one  important  point  is  clear :  the  ordinance 
is  to  every  participant's  thought  and  apprehension  a  Supper  set  out  upon  a  Table,  Whatever 
other  meanings  might  lie  latent— or  even  then  be  understood — in  the  eating  of  bread  and 
wine  together  at  Christ's  supper  table,  it  was  certainly  a  Meal,  not  without  analogies  to  the 
feats  in  heathen  temples,  or  to  the  Jewish  peace-offering  banquets,  or  (more  appositely) 
to  the  actual  "  last  supper  "  of  Christ,  The  analogy  of  this  last  may  lend  some  support  to 
the  frequent  exposition  of  vers.  17-20,  that  an  ordinary  meal  (in  part  also  reminiscent  of  the 
early  community  in  Jerusalem,  Acts  ii,,  iv.,  \\.^  preceded  the  more  definite  **  Supper,"  as  in 
Christ's  own  instance.  Without  insisting  too  strongly  upon  "  we  break  "(x.  16)  or  "  every  one 
taketh  "  (ver.  21),  it  is  also  clear  that  this,  like  many  more  things  in  the  Church,  has  not 
yet  attained  to  much  definiteness  of  form  and  manner  of  observance ;  there  is  little  or  no 
•'rubric"  as  yet;  differentiation  of  officials,  and  between  Love-feast  and  Supper,  is  only 
in  an  inchoate  stage.] 

Ver.  23.  Beceived. — Two  interpretations :  (1)  "  Hearsay  "  theory ;  (2)  "  Inspiration  "  theory. 

236 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


(1)  supposes  from,  e.g.^  Peter  during  the  fortnight  of  Gal.  i.  18,  and  asks  where  the  necessity 
was  of  any  independent  narrative,  straight  from  the  risen  Christ  to  Paul ;  (2)  Evans 
'  {in  opposition  to  Meyer)  insists  upon  the  meaning  of  the  Greek  for  "  of,"  though  this  again 
need  not  necessarily  imply  oral  communication  from  Christ  to  Paul.  At  all  events,  (2) 
is  preferable,  and  gives  an  independent,  original  account  (which  may  have  influenced  the 
closely  similar  one  in  Luke  xxii.  19  sqq.)  of  the  institution  of  the  Supper.  I  also  delivered. 
— The  two  links  in  the  chain,  '^received,"  *^ delivered,''  solemnly  certified  and  vouched  for 
as  being  duly  in  order.  Note,  *'  I  delivered  .  .  .  rvas  being  delivered."  Bread. — A  cake  of 
bread,  a  loaf ;  one  of  those  lying  on  the  table,  so  far  as  appears. 

Ver.  24. — Note  the  shortened,  correct  reading  (seen  in  R.V.).  Therefore  "  hrohen,''  though 
true  and  suggested  by  the  facts,  does  not  exhaust  the  significance  for  His  people's  life  and 
salvation  of  the  fact  that  He  had  a  real  human  body.  Still,  this  "  broken  "  is  the  pre- 
eminent serviceableness  "/or  you  "  of  His  having  become  an  incarnate  Saviour,  This  do. — 
Viz.  *'  Take,  give  thanks,  break,  [take,  eat,']  as  I  have  done,  in  remembrance  of  Me."  Himself, 
in  all  the  developing  discoveries  of  their  reverent,  Spirit-guided  inquiry,  is  to  be  the  object 
of  thought  and  faith. 

Ver.  25.  In  like  manner. — Viz.  Taking,  giving  thanks,  and  giving  to  them.  Observe  this 
was  '■'after  supper";  the  bread  apparently  \ie\n% '"'' during  supper."  The  "Last  Supper," 
then,  would  not  set  a  very  close  precedent  for  any  (assumed)  sequence  of  definitely  dis- 
tinguished Agapae  meal  and  Lord's  Supper.  Is. — Spoken  of  "the  cup";  the  Cup  IS  the 
Covenant ;  exegetical  of  "  is "  in  ver.  24.  This  do  ye. — As  in  ver.  24.  Peculiar  to  this 
narrative,  in  connection  with  the  cup.  As  oft  as. — Contemplates  the  continuance  of  the 
ordinance.  [Are  we  to  prefer,  as  verbally  more  exact,  this  particular  record  of  Christ's 
words  over  the  bread  and  over  the  cup  ?] 

Ver.  26. — Communion  (x.  14-21);  Covenant  (ver.  25);  now  also  Commemoration.  (For 
this  and  other  points,  see  Separate  Homily  on  ver.  20.)  Until  He  come  "to  be  Executor  as 
well  as  Testator  "  (Evans). 

Ver.  27. — With  no  ** worthy"  appreciation  of  its  meaning,  or,  this  appreciated,  with  no 
care  to  behave  in  a  manner  '*  worthy "  of  what  he  believes,  and  of  what  the  Supper  is. 
Guilty  of. — A  fourfold  use  of  the  Greek  word  in  New  Testament;  see  (1)  Heb.  ii.  15. 
^* subject  to  bondage  ";  (2)  Mark  iii.  29,  '^ guilty  of  eternal  sin  "  ;  (3)  Matt.  xxvi.  11,  ''guilty 
of  death  " ;  (4)  here,  approximating  to  (2).  Held  bound  to  the  responsibility  for  the  act, 
and  to  pay  the  penalty  of  it ;  in  this  case,  of  dishonour  done  to  Christ,  almost  in  the  manner 
of  the  apostates  in  Heb.  x.  29 — "  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant  ...  a  (merely) 
common  thing."  If  the  Corinthians  evacuated  the  ordinance  of  its  high  and  holy  meaning, 
they  made  the  bread  and  wine  only  the  historical  reminders  of  a  malefactor  who  once  was 
(perhaps  justly)  crucified  outside  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  What  was  this  but  to  assent  to 
His  crucifixion — in  fact,  to  "  crucify  Him  afresh  "  ;  as  He  deserved,  if  He  be  not  a  Saviour 
Whose  Supper  has  the  full  significance  which  Paul  has  expounded. 

Ver.  28.  So. — I.e.  having  examined  [''proved,"  cognate  with  "approved"  (ver.  19)]  his 
heart,  and  his  intention  in  partaking  of  the  Supper ;  then,  with  all  the  personal  unworthiness 
Le  no  doubt  discovers,  but  with  a  real  desire  to  use  the  Supper  as  the  Lord  intended,  *'  let 
him  eat." 

Ver.  29.  Damnation.—"  Judgment,"  "  condemnation  " ;  but  these  also  include,  not  only  the 
verdict  upon  the  sinner,  but  the  penalty.  At  Corinth  this  last  was  sickness,  and  in  many 
cases  death  (ver.  30).     (Cf.  Acts  v.  5,  xiii.  11.) 

Ver.  31. — R.V.  shows  the  verbal  connection  with  ver.  29.  When  will  we  choose  to  have 
ourselves  appraised,  and. our  true  position  and  character  estimated  ?  Now,  or  at  "  the  Day  "  ? 
And  by  whom — ourselves,  or  the  Judge  ?  Punishment  now  is  chastisement,  which  may 
chasten  the  "  worldliness  "  out  of  our  heart  and  thought,  so  that  we  shall  not  come  into  the 
world's  irreversible  condemnation.     ["  He  (Noah)  condemned  the  world,"  Heb.  xi.  7.] 

Ver.  33. — Coming  back  to,  as  it  might  seem,  the  trivial  piece  of  unseemly  disorder  out  of 
which  all  this  solemn  profanity  arose,  with  its  sad  sequel  of  punishment ;  disorder  which 
also  was  symptomatic  of  their  moral  blindness  to  the  meaning  of  the  Supper. 

EOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  2—16. 

The  Women^s  Veils. 

T.  "  Solemn  trifling,"  cries  somebody,  "  to  think  of  putting  these  nugce 
Paulince  on  permanent  record  as  a  piece  of  God's  revelation!''  But  in  God's 
works,  and  in  God's  words,  we  are  no  competent  judges  of  what  are  nugce. 
This  a  sample  case  of  how  to  deal  with  and  decide  the  many  small  points  of 
Church  order  and  worship  ;  e.g.  such  as,  in  mission-fields,  or  in  communities  for 
the  first  time  becoming  organised  and  civilised  on  Christian  lines,  often  get  an 

237 


CHAP.  XI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


accidental  significance  and  importance.  As  the  same  "  laws "  give  shape  to 
a  globe  and  a  rain -drop,  so  the  same  great  principles  apply  to  and  regulate  the 
gravest  or  the  most  trivial  matters  of  Christian  practice.  There  is  no  limit, 
upward,  or  downward^  to  the  concern  God  takes  in  whatever  bears  upon  His 
redeeming  work  for  the  race  of  mankind.  Everything  connected  with  His 
Church  may  be  brought  to  some  of  the  tests  sug^gested  here. 

TI.  1.  Customary  observance  and  Church  rule. — There  is  a  power  in  the  very 
idea  of  a  Great,  Whole  Community  feeling  its  oneness,  and  showing  it,  by  some 
observance  which  is  its  universal  badge  and  token.  E.g.  the  eating  of  bread 
and  the  drinking  of  wine  at  a  supper  in  connection  with  the  death  of  Christ  and 
the  Christian  covenant,  and  in  faith  and  hope  of  His  second  coming,  is  every- 
where— amidst  all  the  varieties  of  ritual  and  interpretation — a  differentiating 
custom,  as  between  Christian  and  non-Christian ;  a  uniting  custom,  as  between 
Christian  and  Christian  of  all  types,  and  creeds,  and  ages,  and  lands.  The 
Church  sees  its  oneness  at  the  Table.  This  indeed  is  no  custom  of  optional 
observance.  But,  to  take  another,  not  thus  binding :  For  centuries,  almost  as 
far  back  as  the  very  beginning  of  the  Church,  there  has  never  been  a  day  on 
which,  somewhere,  Christian  voices  have  not  uplifted  Psalm  xcv.  to  God  in 
public  worship.  The  sections  of  the  Christian  Church  are  far  enough  removed 
from  each  other ;  in  doctrine,  in  practice,  very  often  in  spirit  also,  they  have 
been  as  widely  sundered  as  they  could  well  be,  to  belong  to  the  same  Body  at 
all.  Yet  in  the  use  of  this  psalm  one  common  life  thrills  through  from  Church 
to  Church.  The  diversities  and  divisions  are  real  and  deep,  but  they  do  not 
destroy  the  unity,  deepest  when  all  are  at  worship.  Thus,  then,  when  Churches 
which  as  separate  communions  are  but  of  yesterday,  sing  this  psalm,  which 
has  been  interwoven  for  ages  with  the  prayers  and  praises  of  the  Churches  of,  at 
all  events,  all  Western  lands,  hoary  some  of  them  with  the  associations  of  ages, 
the  gulf  of  time  is  bridged  over  by  the  "  custom "  ;  the  Church  of  the  present 
avows  its  oneness  vdth  the  Church  of  the  past,  and  each  Church  claims  its  place 
in  the  great  company  of  the  Christian  worshippers  of  the  One  God  and  Father. 
[The  unity  of  worship  even  goes  further.  The  Jew  in  his  Friday  evening 
synagogue  service  begins  his  Sabbath  worship  with  this  same  psalm.]  This  is 
poetry,  sentiment ;  but  any  thing  which  manifests,  and  makes  real,  the  sense 
of  unity  is  not  lightly  to  be  regarded.  That  woman,  that  Church,  would  be 
ill-advised  who  went  in  the  face  of  the  "  custoin  "  of  all  the  Churches  of  Christ. 
If  the  uncovered  head  for  the  man,  and  the  veiled  head  for  the  woman,  be  the 
universal  Christian  custom,  that  is  worth  something  as  a  test  by  which  to  decide 
such  a  question  as  had  been  raised  at  Corinth.  [So  Burial — not  necessarily 
Interment — v.  Cremation.]  Christian  custom  should  prevail,  as  against  personal 
"  fad  "  or  the  freak  of  undisciplined  individuality.  If  there  be  no  good  reason 
against,  "fall  into  line"  with  the  universal  Church.  And  this  the  more  when 
there  is  reason  as  well  as  custom  in  the  practice. 

2.  Universal  instinct  of  propriety  as  against  any  unnatural,  perverted, 
temporary  fashion,  or  the  "  crank  "  of  some  "  contentious  man"  fond  of,  glorying 
in,  being  "  on  the  other  side,"  and  in  a  minority — himself  against  the  world. 
"  Proprifty,"  indeed,  may  in  regard  to  some  points  be  read  in  the  most  opposite 
senses.  To  the  Jew  it  means  that  a  man  cover  his  head  with  his  hat,  or  turban, 
or  tallith^  when  he  prays.  And  that  Jew  would  be  censurable  who  in  the 
synagogue,  in  mere  freak  or  self -willed  preference  of  his  own  course  [=  "Aeres?/," 
ver.  19],  should  go  against  the  recaived  proprieties  of  the  place  and  of  his 
co-religionists  by  praying  with  bared  head.  ['*In  your  prayers,  in  Churches 
and  places  of  Peligion,  use  reverent  postures,  great  attention,  grave  ceremony,  the 
lowest  postures  of  humility ;  remembering  that  we  speak  to  God,  in  our  reverence 
to  whom  we  cannot  possibly  exceed  ;  but  that  the  expression  of  this  reverence 

238 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


be  according  to  the  law  or  cu>tom,  and  the  example  of  the  most  prudent  and 
pious  persons ;  that  is,  let  it  be  the  best  of  its  kind  to  the  best  of  essences  " 
(Jeremy  Taylor,  *'  Holy  Living,''  ii.,  §  5).]  But  there  are  "  proprieties  "  which 
are  universal.  The  modesty  which  is  the  body's  conscience  may,  like  the  sense 
of  sin  which  belongs  to  the  soul's  conscience,  be  so  violated  and  sinned  against 
that  it  seems  gone ;  but  it  is  there,  ineradicably  deep  in  human  nature,  and  can 
be  awakened  and  appealed  to  in  all.  Nature  has  a  voice,  and  can  be  heard 
speaking  in  her  very  physical  differencing  of  the  sexes.  Long  hair  for  the 
woman,  shorter  for  the  man  ;  this  is  not  fashion,  it  is  of  no  one  age  or  nation. 
*'  Fall  then  into  line  with  "  Nature  in  your  rule  for  Church  order.  "  Your  Jew 
and  your  Roman  covers  his  head  when  he  worships.  He  does  not  understand, 
as  you  Christians  do,  the  headship  of  man  in  and  with  Christ.  But  even  he 
does  not  tolerate  that  his  women  should  worship  with  uncovered  head."  Paul's 
principle  appeals  to  the  universal  womanly  instincts  and  fine  perceptions.  In 
extraordinary  circumstances  a  woman,  like  Philip's  daughters,  may  ^^  prophesy" , 
the  gift  brings  with  it  its  own  call  for  exercise,  and  overrules  many  prudential 
or  conventional  considerations.  In  quasi-domestic  life  she  may  '■^ pray  "  (ver.  5) 
openly  and  as  the  leader  of  the  devotions  of  others.  But  the  proprieties  as  well 
as  the  custom  of  the  Churches  will  make  this  the  exception  (xiv.  33),  only  to  be 
departed  from  under  the  clearest  necessity.  Woman's  place  and  work  and 
open  participation  in  the  conduct  of  worship  are  all  to  be  decided  and  adjusted 
in  coiiformity  with  this  second  test.  A  local  impropriety  at  Corinth  made 
a  "  shorn  "  head,  or  uncovered,  "  a  shame  "  to  a  woman.  Even  this  local  con- 
ventionalism must  not  needlessly  be  offended  against  by  a  Christian  woman 
anxious  to  assert  her  equality  with  the  men  as  before  Christ.  Even  the  Gentiles 
must  be  ^''pleased,''  if  possible  (x.  32).  And  in  many  another  small  detail  of 
Church  order,  an  instinct  which  works  for  fitness  and  propriety  is  a  criterion  not 
to  be  left  unused.  The  ''  angels"  too,  have  their  sense  of  fitness  which  should 
have  consideration.     But  this  belongs  rather  to  the  next  criterion. 

3.  Revealed  truth  is,  however,  the  supreme  standard  of  appeal.  Where  there 
are  no  express  directions  there  may  be  exemplar  facts.  There  may  be  "  leading 
cases,"  each  of  them  carrying  a  principle.  Yet  example,  even  Apostolic  example 
and  practice,  if  certainly  established,  is  not  necessarily  Church  law,  unless  the 
apostles  have  made  it  so,  [An  argument  often  urged  in  the  controversy  re 
Episcopal  V.  Presbyterian  system  of  government.]  The  Apostolic  example  may 
sometimes  be  more  honoured  in  forsaking  the  literal  and  exact  and  mechanical 
copying  of  it,  whilst  seizing  the  essential  principle  and  adapting  its  form  and 
embodiment  to  the  changed  environment  and  necessities  of  a  new  time  or  a 
new  world.  The  true  law  may  lie  deeper  than  the  letter  of  their  practice.  But 
any  practice  of  theirs  put  on  permanent  record  in  the  Scripture  is,  with  this 
proviso,  legislation  and  Divine  direction  for  the  Churches  (ver.  16,  "we  have 
no  such  custom ").  The  histories  of  the  Bible  are  didactic  ;  they  may  be 
legislatory  also  ;  they  are  parts  of  the  revelation,  one  of  the  methods  of  the 
revelation,  of  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  Nature,  with  its  long  and  short  hair 
for  the  two  sexes — how  comes  it  thus  ?  Who  made  "  Nature  "  ?  Who  made 
such  a  detail  of  "  her  "  arrangements  so  significant  ?  How  has  it  happened 
that  "  a  mere  resultant  of  the  processes  which  have  evolved  sex  "  is  ethical,  and 
finds  something  innate  in  man  and  woman  responsive  to  its  dictate?  ^^  All 
things  of  God"  (ver.  12).  Go  back  to  Eden  and  the  Creation  story.  Seethe 
finished  work  of  the  creative  "  week  "  (vers.  7-11) : — 

"  Two  of  far  nobler  shape,  erect  and  tall, 
Godlike  erect,  with  native  honour  clad, 
In  naked  majesty,  seemed  lords  of  all, 
And  worthy  seemed  ;  for  in  their  looks  divine 

239 


CHAP.  XI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   COBTNTHIANS. 


The  image  of  their  glorious  Maker  shone, 
Truth,  wisdom,  sanctitude,  severe  and  pure, 
Whence  true  authority  in  men  ;  though  both 
Not  equal,  as  their  sex  not  equal  seemed  ; 
For  contemplation  he  and  valour  formed  ; 
For  softness  she  and  sweet  attractive  grace ; 
He  for  God  only,  she  for  God  in  him : 
His  fair  large  front  and  eye  sublime  declared 
Absolute  rule  ;  and  hyacinthine  locks 
Round  from  his  parted  forelock  manly  hung 
Clustering,  but  not  beneath  his  shoulders  broad  ; 
She,  as  a  veil,  down  to  the  slender  waist 
Her  unadorned  golden  tresses  wore 
Dishevelled,  but  in  wanton  ringlets  waved, 
As  the  vine  curls  her  tendrils,  which  implied 
Subjection,  but  required  with  gentle  sway,    . 
And  by  her  yielded,  by  him  best  received, 
Yielded  with  coy  submission,  modest  pride. 
And  sweet,  reluctant,  amiable  delay." 

— Paradise  Lost,  iv.  288-311. 

Not  in  this  particular  case  only,  but  in  all,  let  men  get  back  to  God's  facts ;  let 
them  dig  down  beneath  the  accretions  of  speculation,  or  fashion,  or  error,  until 
in  God's  own  utterance  of  His  will,  above  all  in  Revelation,  they  get  to  rock.  In 
everything,  not,  "  What  thinkest  thou  ?  "  but,  '*  What  seest,  hearest,  readest,  thou 
of  the  works  of  God  ?  "  That  only  is  final ;  the  supreme  arbiter  of  all,  whether 
in  actual  use  or  only  proposed,  in  connection  with  the  order  of  the  Church  or  the 
life  of  His  people.  [Revelation  and  propriety  combine  in  the  appeal  'made  by 
Paul  to  the  presence  of  angelic  spectators,  who  are  also,  as  is  suggested  in 
Critical  Notes,  co-worshippers  in  the  great  company  of  adoring  ones  to  which 
believers  "are  come"  already  (Heb.  xii.  22),  and  with  which  in  a  glorious  reality 
they  are  already  associated  in  the  one  joint  homage  of  Heaven  and  Earth.  But 
so  obscure  is  the  whole  matter,  so  small  a  corner  of  the  veil  is  drawn  back,  so 
momentary  and  partial  is  the  glimpse  we  get  of  these  angelic  critics  of  the  pro- 
prieties of  Christian  observance  and  worship,  that  very  little  practical  use  can 
be  made  of  the  motive  Paul  appeals  to.  We  dare  take  in  the  obscurity  no  step, 
except  the  one  we  here  take  with  our  inspired  guide,  in  the  unfamiliar  world 
within  the  veil,  where  we  have,  indeed,  planted  our  foot,  but  we  hardly  know 
what  it  is  we  see.  Yet  more  thought  and  honour  might  perhaps  be  paid  to  the 
"  big  brothers  "  told  off,  "sent  forth,"  to  take  charge  of  us  (Heb.  i.  14),  without 
our  running  into  all  the  fanciful,  Rabbinic,  and  apocryphal  poetising  about 
each  man's  "  guardian  angel,"  and  the  like.] 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS,— Verses  17—34. 

[The  specific  subject  of  the  section  is  dealt  with  under  ver.  20.  A  general 
grouping  of  the  many  topics  may  be  made  around  three  nuclei  of  arrangement. 
Thus :— ] 

I.  Evil  mingling  with  good. 
II.  Good  arising  out  of  evil. 

III.  A  good  thing — only,  and  of  many-sided  good. 

I.  Their  assembling  for  public  worship,  and  even  their  "  coming  together  "  for 
"  the  Supper  of  the  Lord,'^  issues  in  evil,  not  in  help  to  man  or  glory  to  God, — 
*^  not  for  the  better,  but  for  the  worse."  The  fires  of  party  ^^  divisions  "  always 
smouldering  in  the  hearts  of  fellow -Corinthians,  and  fellow-Christians,  are 
stirred  into  a  fierce  blaze  so  soon  as  they  find  themselves  together  within  the 
same  place  of  assembly,  and  are  made  to  burn  intensely  by  the  behaviour  of 
some  of  the  rich  towards  the  poor,  as  they  sit  down  for  the  holy  feast.     Thus 

240 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


the  place  and  the  worship  and  its  central  ordinance — that  which  above  all  should 
be  the  sign  and  the  bond  of  "  communion" — are  profaned,  and  the  crucified  Lord, 
Whose  broken  body  and  Whose  poured- out  blood  they  profess  thankfully  to 
remember  as  the  foundation  of  all  their  common  hope,  is  dishonoured.  Can 
there  be  no  '*  truce  of  God  "  from  their  "  divisions  "  there,  where  of  all  other 
places  should  be  peace  ?  Is  the  distinction  between  rich  and  poor  to  be 
offensively  obtruded,  and  their  poverty  flung  in  •  the  faces  of  the  poorer  saints 
[?  even  "houseless  "  ones  (ver.  22)]  at  that  table  where  one  ["  wedding  garment  " 
of]  undistinguishing  redeeming  love  invests  every  guest  alike,  and  covers  and 
hides  all  such  social  rank  and  distinction  ?  If  there  be  one  occasion  in  which 
should  stand  out  conspicuous  that  glory  of  the  Church  of  Christ  as  the  home  of 
all  comers,  of  all  races,  ranks,  ages,  of  both  sexes,  all  sinners,  all  adopted 
children  of  God,  alike, — it  should  be  at  the  Table  of  their  common  Elder  Brother. 
To  accentuate  there  the  inevitable  social  distinctions  of  the  secular  life  outside — 
there,  of  all  places — is  the  offence  against  the  brotherhood  the  grossest;  there,  of  all 
places,  is  the  "  worldliness  "  of  such  hearts  shown  up  most  staringly  as  sin  against 
the  Lord  and  Host  of  the  Feast.  How  utterly  "  unworthy  "  is  such  "  eating 
and  drinking "  !  Do  they,  no  better  than  that,  ^'  discern "  and  discriminate 
and  judge  between  the  covenant  supper,  where  the  Lord  Himself  is  the  true 
Passover  Lamb,  and  the  common  meal  in  their  own  houses  ?  Or,  indeed,  are 
thej^  as  heathenish  still  as  those  who  eat  at  the  table  ^^  of  idols,"  '^  of  devils"  1  If 
their  partisanship  thus  sins  against  the  veiy  idea  of  the  unity  ;  if  their  offensive 
flouting  of  the  hungry  poor  of  Christ's  flock  by  their  greedy,  selfish  haste  to 
demolish  the  heap  of  provisions  they  have  brought  to  the  common  table,  thus 
sins  against  the  brotherhood  ;  if  such  utter  un preparedness  of  heart  and  thought 
thus  sins  against  the  very  Lord  Himself,  around  whom  they  '*  come  together," — 
is  it  any  wonder  that  His  ^^ judgments"  are  abroad  amongst  them?  Any 
wonder  that  their  very  eating  and  drinking  thus  only  brings  "  condemnation  " 
upon  them  ?  Any  wonder  that  sickness  is  abroad,  and  that  even  the  "  sleep  " 
of  death  has  fallen  upon  some  most  conspicuous  offenders'?  They  did  not  connect 
the  disorder  and  the  deaths  ?  They  did  not  trace  any  connection  between  the 
prevalent  sickness  and  the  "  undiscerniiig ,"  "  unworthy  "  communicating  ?  Very 
likely  not.  "  The  world  "  never  does.  It  stops  at  natural  causes  ;  had  perhaps 
its  (crude)  sanitary  theory  of  the  epidemic  sickness  at  Corinth ;  could  perfectly 
account  for  every  death  in  the  membership ;  knew  exactly  what  had  carried  off" 
each  particular  man  or  woman.  If  they  shared  in  the  ignorance  of  the 
undiscerning  "  world  "  which  does  not  see  God  in  such  things,  and  in  the  practical 
heathenism  which  made  the  gathering  nothing  but  "  a  guild  supper,"  such  as 
abounded  around  them,  was  it  any  wonder  that  they  were  "  condemned  with  the 
world  "  ?  (ver.  32).  "  They  come  together,"  indeed,  '*  for  the  worse"  A  Church 
in  Corinth  not  three  years  old,  a  Church  of  Christ  not  fifty  years  old,  and  its 
most  solemn  assemblings  have  here  come  to  this  !  Evil  springing  up  amidst  the 
good  !     "  The  world  is  out  of  joint !  " 

II.  Good  springing  out  of  evil, — L  Just  as  these  two  consummately  important 
and  valuable  Epistles  have  found  their  occasion,  if  not  their  cause,  in  these 
miserable  factions  and  these  shocking  disorders  in  the  Corinthian  Church. 
*'  All  things  have  indeed  thus  worked  together  for  good,"  for  the  Church  of  all 
lands  and  of  all  ages.  The  apologist  of  to-day  comes  to  these  two  Epistles  for  his 
weapons  of  defence,  for  his  facts  of  cogent  significance  and  value  {e.g.  chap.  xv.). 
The  theologian  comes  to  them  for  full  and  explicit  and  far-leading  revelations 
of  truth  upon  some  of  the  deepest  themes  of  the  Christian  faith.  The  humble 
believer  finds  every  line  in  some  pages  full  of  "  meat  to  eat "  that  the  world,  and 
even  some  of  the  apologists  and  theologues,  **know  not  of."  How  great  is  the 
worth  to  the  Church  of  this  earliest-written  account  of  the  Lord's  last  supper,  of 

R  241 


CHAP.  XL    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


His  own  solemn  expository  words  of  institution,  and  those  derived  from  the  Lord 
Himself.     And  yet  Paul  rises  to  this  universally  precious,  monumental,  declara- 
tion and  testimony,  from  the  temporary  and  local  and  personal.      Dictated  to 
his   amanuensis    as  he    sat    working  at   his  trade  in  some  humble  lodging  in 
Ephesus,  there  falls  from  his  pen  a   palmary  document  of  the  Christian  faith  : 
"  received  of  the  Lord,  delivered  unto  "  the  truly  Catholic  Church  !     "  Surely  the 
wrath  of  man  shall  praise  Him  !  "  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).     "  The  world  is  out  of  joint" 
indeed  ;  God's  fair  order  is  sadly  disturbed  and  marred.     But  every  man  can  see, 
and  can  say,  "  He  meant  it  not  so ;  He  Who  did  so  much  that  was  manifestly 
intended  to  work  for  good,  never  left  His  work  so  nearly  finished  and  yet  so 
mischievously  incomplete,  so  admirably   designed   and   yet   so    imperfect  in  its 
actual  working."     And  the  wondering,  grateful  heart  of  His  Church  sees  in  a 
thousand  instances  God's  self-vindication  for  those  who  have  hearts  to  feel  its 
force  and  open  eyes  to  see  its  facts  ;  how  He  makes  evil  the  seed-plot  from 
whose   very  bosom   good  springs  up ;    how    not    only    parallel    with    evil,    but 
occasioned  by  it,  and  helped  forward  by  it,  there  arises  the  good.      It  is  God 
working  toward  the  restored  order,  the  "  restitution  of  all  things  "  (Acts  iii.  21), 
towards  which  the  most  potently  effectual  contribution  are  the  Redemption  and 
the  Church  in  whose  midst  is  the  significant  Supper  so  profaned  at  Corinth.     In 
ver.  19  is  a  particular  example  of  the  working  of  this  ceaseless  drift  and  move- 
ment of  the  Divine  government  of  the  world  towards  "  restitution  "  of  the  dis- 
turbed original  order.     It  reads  strongly  :  "  There  must  he  heresies  ...  in  order 
that."     How  and  where  do  the  Human  and  the  Divine  meet  and  work  together? 
"Who  can  tell  ?    There  is  a  Holy  of  Holies  of  secrecy  within  which  the  most  adven- 
turous human  inquiry  or  analysis  or  speculation  have  never  yet  been  able  to  set 
foot.     [Kindred  with  the  question  :   "  How  and  where  do  the  Material  and  the 
Spiritual  meet  in  Creation ;  e.g.  in  the  chemistry,  and  the  mechanics,  and  the 
mathematics,    which  are   inwrought    into    the    very   structure  of    the    natural 
world  ?  "]     In  the  Incarnation,  for  example  ?     In  Inspiration,  for  example  ?     In 
the  Answer  of  Prayer  1      And,  as  here,  in  the  Providential  rule  of   the  will  of 
God  over,  and  in,  and  through,  creaturely  wills,  created  by  Himself    as  free  as 
His  own  ?     It  is  one  and  the  same  problem,  worked  with  many   sets  of  data, 
and  insoluble  for  the  same  reason  in  each  particular  case.     Approach    the  meet- 
ing, the  midway,  reconciling  point  from  one   side,   and  all  is   Man,    his   free 
activity,   his  passions,  his  plans,  his  limitations,  his  sins ;  so  much    Man  that 
there  seems  no  room — naturally,  intellectually,  morally — for  God.      Approach 
from  the  other,  and  all  is  God ;  so  entirely  God  that  it  is  difficult   to  find  room 
for  man's  freedom  of  thought  and  action,  and  for  his    responsibility  or   guilt. 
Yv  t  it  is  noteworthy  how  seldom  the  heart  raises  or  feels  the  difficulty.     To  the, 
not  all  unintelligent,  bulk  of  God's  people,  the  everyday  working  hypothesis  of 
lif '  includes  both  :   "  Much  is  of  man  ;  all  is  of  God."     The  speculative  difficulty 
i^  felt  now  and  again,  but  the  combination  of  man  and  God  which  defies  intel- 
lectual analysis  is  a  working  principle  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  does  serve  for 
the   practical  need   of  life.     [How   many  readers,  for   example,  or  how   many 
Jerusalem  Christians  in  (say)  a.d.  67  or  68,  ever  stopped  to  find  any  speculative 
difficulty  in  their  Lord's  command,   "  Pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the 
winter"?     And  yet  how  many  lines  of   military,   and   political,  and  domestic 
plan  and  arrangement  must  converge;  how  many  "accidents"  of  the  weather, 
of  the  year,  of  the  month,  of  the  week  ;   of  the  longer  or  briefer  resistance  of  an 
army  or  a  city,  advancing  or  retarding  the  march  of  a  general,  and  opening  or 
closing  the  ^a<-ps  of  a  city  ;  must  co-  cur — with  chances  simply  infinite,  mathe- 
matically c>lcula<-ed,  against  all  the  n' ed^d  elements  of  a  secure  flig:ht,  in  mild 
wenth^r,   to  an   open    P' 11a   of  refng-e,   being   found  in    combination — in   order 
that  the  prayer  might  be  answered.]     "/w  order  thaV  is  for  the  understand - 

242 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap  xi. 


ing  a  problem  of  bottomless  darkness,  here  and  in  all  similar  cases.  But  we  do 
see  a  little  way  down.  If  we  cannot  always  dissect  out  and  exhibit  in  their 
distinctness  Purpose  and  Result,  we  are  oftentimes  moved  to  deep  and  thankful 
wonder  as  we  see  Good  resulting  from  Evil.     For  example  : 

2.  Open  evil  keeps  good  on  the  alert. — If  only  the  Adversary  were  absolutely 
wise,  he  would  oftener  see  that  the  game  to  play  if  he  would  win,  is  that  of  the 
subtle  veiling  of  evil.  The  man,  or  the  Church,  that  can,  and  does,  "  withstand  " 
and  struggle  nobly  and  victoriously  "in  the  evil  day  "  (Eph.  vi.  13),  often  needs 
the  emphatic  caution,  ^^  And  having  done  all^  to  stand."  When  Evil  has  drawn 
off  its  beaten  forces  from  the  field,  and  the  hard-pressed  victor  for  faith,  or 
principle,  or  public  morality  is  breathing  hard  but  freely,  now  that  there  seems 
a  moment's  leisure,  then  is  the  need  that  watchfulness  shall  not  be  relaxed  the 
greatest.  It  is  not  the  evil  which  stands  revealed  as  a  "  heresy,"  from  which  a 
Church  has  most  to  fear,  but  that  which  puts  on  the  guise  of  the  most  perfect 
coijgruity  with  the  highest  aspirations  and  work  of  a  Church,  or  which  robes  itself 
in  some  innocent  oi  friendly  phraseology.  Troy  is  still  captured  by  the  harmless 
horse  of  wood,  which  forsooth  *'  is  really  a  thing  devoted  to  the  patron  god 
of  Troy  !  "  The  world  and  its  mischief  are  often  hidden  away  in  the  harmless, 
innocent  piece  of  "  politic  concession  "  to  the  needs  of  the  age,  or  to  the  neces- 
sities of  the  young  people  ''  whom  we  must  keep  with  us,  you  know  " ;  in  the 
offered  assistance  to  the  activities  of  the  Church,  which  though  not  exactly 
claiming  to  be  "  Christian,"  really  '*  is  working,  you  see,  towards  the  same  end  as 
yourselves."  "  Let  us  help  you,"  said  the  enemies  of  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of 
Zerubbabel,  "  to  build  your  temple ;  we  seek  your  God  as  ye  do  "  (Ezra  iv.  2). 
Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua  would  have  no  such  "  help "  !  The  alliance,  not  the 
"  heresy, ^^  is  to  be  feared.  The  "  heresy "  means  that  the  uniforms  of  the 
opposing  ranks  are  become  more  distinctive.  When  Confederate  and  Eedeial 
troops  could  hardly  tell  by  speech  or  uniform  whether  friend  or  foe  was  stealing 
upon  them  and  emerging  from  the  mist,  then  was  the  peril  of  surprise  and 
snatch-defeats.     So  again  : 

3.  Defections  and  desertions  have  benefited  the  Church. — Such  defections  stiffen 
faithfulness ;  not  by  provoking  any  mere  dogged  "  other-side-ishnessj'  but  by 
leading  to  heart -searching  as  to  personal  loyalty  or  unfaithfulness,  to  truth  and 
Christ,  by  inducing  new  consecration  on  the  part  of  the  ^* approved"  ones,  by 
occasioning  new  inquiry  into  the  meaning  and  worth  of  what  is  being  assailed 
and  defended.  The  diminished  numbers  close  up  their  ranks  and  feel  themselves 
the  fitter  for  the  fight.  [See  how,  at  the  supper  table,  Christ  Himself 
"  opened  up  "  to  the  ''  approved  "  eleven  after  Judas  had  withdrawn,  as  if  even 
He  breathed  more  freely  where  now  all  were  faithful.  "  A^ow  is  the  Son  of 
Man  glorified,"  etc.  (John  xiii.  31).  The  underlying  idea  of  "  apj^roved"  is  well 
expounded  e  converso  in  1  John  ii.  19  :  "  [The  many  antichrists]  went  out  from 
us  that  they  might  be  made  manifest  that  they  were  not  of  us."  The  deep 
essential  cleavage  which  all  along  had  divided  the  Church  stood  revealed.  It 
was  seen  that  they  who  were  not  for  Christ  were  against  Him.  They  stood  out 
ttSoKtjUot,  ^''reprobate,"  sifted  out  from  the  ^'"approved,"  the  8oKt/xot.  In  this 
instance  the  separation  is  made  manifest  by  the  secession  of  the  antichrist 
party.  In  2  Tim.  ii.  19,  21  the  secession  is  to  be  the  action  of  the  faithful  party. 
Two  "  heretics  " — where  the  word  is  beginning  to  take  on  its  later  ecclesiastical 
colour  and  associations — are  specified,  Hymenseus  and  Philetus.  They  had  gone 
greatly  wrong  in  doctrine  (ver.  18),  and  perhaps  also  in  morals  (ver.  16);  they 
were  heretics  who  at  least  tended  to  become  "  ungodly,"  immoral,  heretics. 
They  had  gone  out  from  the  Church,  or  had  been  cast  out ;  or,  if  not  so  much  of 
separation  had  yet  taken  place,  their  "  error  "  (ver.  18)  ranged  them  as  not 
really  belonging  to  the  Great  House.     They  had  never  really  belonged  to  it,  or 

243 


CHAP.  XL    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   CORINTHIANS, 


had  ceased  to  do  so.  It  was  only  a  human  reckoning,  which  was  originally 
imperfect,  or  which  had  become  so  by  their  falling  away  in  doctrine  and  heart, 
that  had  accounted  them  so.  Either  man's  hasty  work  had  built  in  stones  which 
never  were  "  living  stones,"  or  they  had  ceased  to  "  live,"  and  so  fell  out  from 
their  place  in  the  living  temple,  the  "  spiritual  House,"  to  which  they  had  ceased 
in  any  true  sense  to  belong  (1  Pet.  ii.  4,  5).  So  far  as  they  had  any  connection 
with  the  Great  House,  it  was  that  of  '*  vessels  unto  dishonour  " — [not  made  to  he 
hroken  in  pieces ;  what  house  has  any  such  ?], — the  "  vessels  "  which  are  needed 
to  carry  away  from  the  house  its  sweepings  and  gathered  impurities.  [The 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  like  the  earthly ;  the  Church,  like  the  literal  city ;  have 
their  Gehenna  outside  the  walls  (Matt,  xiii,  41).  In  the  history  of  Churches, 
and  of  The  Church,  it  is  simple  matter  of  observation  that  from  time  to  time 
evil,  error,  disorder,  and  wilful,  self-pleasing  teaching  seem  to  have  gathered 
and  gravitated  toward  some  "  vessel  unto  dishonour."  In  some  secessions — 
"  heretical  "  or  other — it  has  seemed  as  if  the  leaders  have  carried  away  with 
them  the  elements  of  turbulence  and  scandal.  They  have  done  good,  indirectly. 
The  vessel  which  carries  away  what  cannot  longer,  for  health  or  happiness,  be 
suffered  in  the  house,  serves  a  useful  turn.  The  Church  has  been  left  united, 
cleared  in  doctrine  and  life,  purer  and  at  peace,  its  "  approved  "  ones  *'  appearing  " 
such  to  all. 

4.  It  is  an  extension  of  the  same  principle  to  say  that  heresies  (in  the 
technical  sense,  not  in  Paul's  sense  here)  have  served  the  good  end  that  what  is 
*'  approved  "  truth  has  stood  out  in  clearer  light  and  appreciation.  The  early 
Church  found  itself  occupying  its  heritage  of  Truth,  much  as  some  pioneer 
settlers  in  a  new  land  may  plant  themselves  in  the  midst  of  a  vast,  vague 
territory  whose  limits  are  not  easy  to  define ;  nor  for  a  little  while  does  any 
necessity  to  define  them  seem  to  press  upon  them.  But  as  neighbours  come 
and  plant  themselves  in  the  same  region,  *'  Mine  and  Thine  "  must  needs  be 
ascertained  and  marked  off.  Sometimes  claim  is  set  up  or  occupation  attempted 
where  the  first  comer  believes  that  he  has  already  exclusive  right.  With  much 
discussion,  perhaps  with  more  than  a  little  of  heat  and  temper,  the  matter  is 
threshed  out,  and  at  last  a  boundary-mark  is  planted  where  the  verdict 
determines  that  rightful  Occupancy  and  wrongful  Claim  are  parted.  In  the 
end  the  process  has  been  repeated  on  all  sides,  until  the  original  seat  of  our 
settlers  is  girdled  with  a  series  of  boundary-posts,  which  have  become  a  complete 
definition  of  their  holding.  So,  beginning  with  a  body  of  truth  rather  held 
experimentally  than  formulated  for  the  intellect,  the  Christian  Church  had 
from  time  to  time  to  investigate  the  claim,  the  pretension,  of  this  teaching  or 
that  to  be  part  of  the  Truth ;  and  so,  very  often  with  heat  and  struggle,  it 
became  clear  that  thus  far  was  Truth,  beyond  was  Error ;  on  this  side  and  on 
that,  in  this  direction  and  in  that,  the  boundary-marks  got  planted,  until  a 
definition  of  doctrine  more  or  less  complete  was  arrived  at.  [^E.g.  truly  God, 
perfectly  man,  without  confusion  two  natures,  without  division  one  person,  are 
four  such  boundary-posts,  marking  the  limits  within  which  the  truth  that 
takes  in  all  the  facts  and  declarations  of  Scripture  has  been  ascertained  to  lie, 
and  beyond  which  lie  "  heresies  "  in  the  ecclesiastical  sense  ;  sometimes  imperfect 
or  crude  attempts  after  truth,  which  have  overstated  one  aspect  of  the  whole,  or 
have  omitted  some  of  the  data  for  determining  the  whole.]  Heterodoxy  has 
cleared  Orthodoxy.  The  "  heresies  "  have  necessitated  the  Creeds.  *'  That  they 
which  are  approved" — the  truths  which  have  endured  the  scrutiny  and  the 
test  and  the  fire  of  discussion  and  controversy — "  may  he  made  manifest  among 
you,"  An  accommodation  of  Paul's  word,  ^^  heresy"  of  course;  but  a  legitimate 
application  of  the  principle  of  the  sentence. 

III.  Good,  and  only  good. — 1.  How  restful  the  atmosphere  of  these  verses 

244 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   l   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


(23-25).     We  are  escaped  where  God  "  hides  His  people  in  a  pavilion  from  the 
strife  of  tongues  "  (Ps.  xxxi.  20) ;  escaped  from  the  noisy  factions  of  Corinth  into 
the  calm  of  the  upper  room  in  Jerusalem,  where  every  word  of  the  Master  of  the 
Feast  seems  to  come  from  within  the  penumbra  of  that  Shadow  which  is  creeping 
over  His  path,  and  into  whose  inmost  darkness   He  will  enter  on  the  following 
day.     Sitting  at  table  in  full  health,  He  talks  to  His  fellows  at  the  table  of  His 
blood,  the  price,  the  pledge,  of  a  *'  'y^e^o,"  better  "  covenant"     Still  with  them, 
He  speaks  of  the  days  when  it  shall  be  '*  remembrance"  not  "  enjoyment,"  of  His 
presence,  of  Himself  ;  as  if  with  the  accent  of  a  dying  parent  or  friend,  giving  last 
injunctions,  and  making,  with  a  calmness  hardly  shared  by  any  who  stand  around 
the  bed,  the  little  final  arrangements  for  the  days  when  all  is  over  and  he  is 
gone.    Still  living,  still  the  Teacher  and  Friend  in  their  midst,  yet  His  own  hands 
give  out  and  distribute  ^^ His  body"  the  body  of  a  true  Passover  Lamb, — a 
Sacrifice  of   redemption   and   deliverance,   the    Provision   of   a    Supper   whose 
strength  shall  be  for  the  pilgrimage  of  God's  new,  ransomed  Israel.     To  these 
men,  who  had  once  heard  Him  declare    Himself   the  true,  the   original,  the 
archetypal  "Bread  from  Heaven"  (John  vi.)j  and  who  had  seen,  and  shared 
in,  the  hushed  perplexity  with  which  men  that  morning  listened  in  the  synagogue 
of  Capernaum,  and  at  last  said,  "  How  can  this  man  give  us  His  flesh  to  eat  1 " — 
to  these  He  says,  "  Take,  eat."     2.  "  As  oft  as  ye  shall  drink  it "  ;  His  words 
look  forward  through  the  long  vista  of  years  before  His  Church,  as,  each  time 
they  sit  down  at  His  table,  they  look  backward  down  the  years.     "  He  is  with 
them  always, — all  the  days."     The  Supper  board  is  never  spread  but  He  takes 
His  place  as  the  Head  of  the  table.     [As  He  who  sat  quietly  eating,  the  invited 
guest  in  the  inn  at  Emmaus,  suddenly,  significantly,  took  their  bread  into  His 
hands,  and  did  the  host's  part,  blessing  and  breaking,  and  vanishing  !  (Luke 
xxiv.  30,  31).      See    Appended    Note.]       3.  And  they   are   not   to   allow   the 
simple   feast   to  be   dissevered    from    Himself,    and    their    grateful,    believing 
"  remembrance  "  of  His  whole  work.    ^''  As  oft  as  ye  do  this,  do  it  in  remembrance." 
No   other  meaning  is  to   be   attached   to,   to    be   accreted   round,    the   simple 
arrangement ;    Himself,  their  *'  communion "  in  Him,  "  the  covenant   in  His 
blood," — these  are  to  be  "  remembe^'ed"  not  repeated,  nor  extended,  nor  forgotten. 
They  may  institute,  may  disuse,  [like  Moravians  and  Methodists]  may  restore, 
love-feast  suppers  in  the  Churches,  as  matters  of  prudential,  profitable  arrange- 
ment  and   order ;    simple   fellowship   meals.      But   only  He   can   institute   in 
**  remembrance  " — in  this  fullest  sense — a  supper ;  and  so  long,  so  often,  as  they 
profess  to  continue  His  supper,  they  must  always  take  care  that  this  significance 
is  attached  to  it.     It  must  not  be  so  stripped  of  meaning  that  it  becomes  only 
the   simple   love-feast,  or  the   sub- Pentecostal  common  table  of  the  Christian 
brotherhood.     4.  Only  He  could  institute  it,  and  only  He  can  abolish  it.     There 
will  be  a  last  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  somewhere,  somewhen.     How 
happy  that  company  "  eating  and  drinking  "  when  the  Son  of  Man  comes, — by 
His  lightning-sudden  appearing  breaking  in  with  startling  abruptness  upon  all 
the  medley  of  human  employment  (Matt.  xxiv.  38), — if  they  are  "  eating  and 
drinking "  at  His  table ;  a  celebration  of  "  the  Lord's  Supper "  interrupted  by 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  !     And  even  then  the  fit  word  will  hardly  be  "  abolish." 
The  analogy  of  the  creation  history,  and  of  the  redemption  history,  in  the  past 
will  again  be  followed,  and  the  only  abolition  will  be  that  of  the  temporary, 
accidental  clothing  of  the  Idea.     The  ''Lord's  Supper  "  is  but  one  form  of,  one 
testimony  to,  the  Communion  between  God  and  man  in  Christ,  towards  which 
^^  the  ages"   (x.   11)  have  all  been  converg^tly  working.     All  the  persistently 
repeated  supper-imagery  of  the  Gospel  parables  concerning  the  future  bliss  of  the 
saved  will  be  fulfilled  when,  and  where,  ''  the  Lord's  Supper  "  has  given  place  to 
His  "  drinking  of  the  new  wine  with  us  in  the  kingdom  of  God "  (Matt.  xxvi. 

245 


CHAP.  XI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


29,  etc.).  The  words  will  have  had  their  suggestive,  anticipatory  fulfilments 
all  along  ;  these  may  suffice  "  until  He  come"  (ver.  26).  5.  When  He  comes,  the 
Lord  of  the  feast  will  declare  the  feast  ended ;  the  Heavenly  Supper  begins. 
The  witness  of  the  Supper  to  the  faith  of  His  Church,  that  the  Unseen  Lord  is 
only  unseen,  not  dead,  and  that  He  will  one  day  again  step  out  from  behind  the 
veil  and  appear  with  a  visible  intervention  in  human  affairs,  will  be  crowned 
with  its  triumphant  vindication.  It  will  need  the  vindication.  Christ  shall 
step  forth  just  when  Antichrist  is  lording  it  over  men  with  fullest-blown 
blasphemy  ;  when  the  love  of  many  shall  have  waxed  cold  ;  when  faith  shall  be 
hard  to  find  in  the  earth,  a  few  poor  embers  of  its  old  fire  almost  smothered 
beneath  the  heap  of  ashes  of  men's  dead  beliefs  (2  Thess.  ii.  8  ;  Matt.  xxiv.  12  ; 
Luke  xviii.  8).  "  Till  He  come."  Happy  the  dwindling  band  who  still  spread 
the  table,  and  eat  the  supper,  "  preparing  it  in  the  midst  of  their  enemies  " 
(Ps.  xxiii.  5),  with  dogged  faith  looking  out  for  Him  who  is  "  their  hope " 
(1  Tim.  i.  1);  "waiting  for  the  Lord,  as  they  that  watch  for  the  morning," — 
not  only  as  eagerly,  but  in  as  assured  certainty  that  the  morning  whose  breaking 
delays  longest  nevertheless  will  dawn  (Ps.  cxxx.  6).  6.  "  In  the  midst  of^  and  in 
spite  of,  evil."  And  how  the  repeated  celebration  of  the  little  supper  will  have 
sustained  faith.  [The  old  argument  of  Leslie  in  his  Short  and  Easy  Method 
with  the  Deists  is  essentially  sound  wherever  there  are:  (1)  A  fact  of  the 
past,  near  or  remote,  e.g.  the  Exodus  of  Israel ;  (2)  An  ordinance,  repeatedly 
celebrated,  in  professed  commemoration  of  the  fact,  e.g.  the  Passover;  (3)  the 
connection  between  the  fact  and  the  ordinance,  asserted  and  embodied  in  a  record, 
written  or  other,  whose  repetition  is  part  of  the  commemorative  rite ;  and  (4) 
this  lepetition  resting  upon  a  command  to  that  effect  which  professes  to  go  back 
to  the  time  of  the  original  institution,  e.g.  Exod.  xii.  26.  He  shows  how  impossible 
it  is  to  conceive  of  a  nation  accepting  the  fact  on  the  joint  evidence  of  (2)  and 
(3),  unless  on  the  supposition  of  its  truth,  seeing  that  (4)  guards  against  the 
subsequent  attachment  of  a  pretended  significant  connection  with  (1) — whether 
this  also  be  pretended  or  be  real — to  an  existing  ordinance  of  a  different 
or  unknown  origin.  Could  a  newly-devised  Passover  feast  have  been,  at  any 
but  the  contemporary  date,  offered  to,  or  accepted  by,  a  nation  as  an  original  and 
ancient  memorial  of  the  events  connected  with  an  Exodus  itself  perhaps  a  myth  ? 
Or,  supposing  that  the  only  new  thing  was  the  asserted  memorial  significance, 
then  with  w^hat  success  could  those  who  propagated  this,  hope  to  attempt  to 
attach  it  to  a  really  ancient  feast,  when  part  of  their  assertion  was  also  that 
the  feast  always  had  been  celebrated  with  this  commemorative  meaning ;  and 
that,  from  the  first,  at  least  the  instructions  for  celebrating  it  had  included  a 
prescribed  question  and  answer  expressly  connecting  the  events  and  the  festival  ? 
Presuming,  that  is,  that  this  direction  had  always  been  obeyed,  and  that  there 
had  been  no  considerable  periods  during  which  the  observance  had  not  been 
kept  up,  Leslie's  argument  was  strong,  and  has  close  correspondence  with  the 
argument  often  built  up  upon  the  fact  and  manner  of  the  observance  of  the 
Supper  in  the  Christian  Church.]  This  undisputed  letter  of  St.  Paul  is  the  first 
of  a  long  series  of  testimonies,  patristic  and  other,  that  from  the  first  the  Church 
of  Christ  has  celebrated  a  supper  with  this  significance.  Moreover,  in  the  four 
great  families  of  Liturgies,  the  Oriental,  the  Alexandrian,  the  Koman,  the 
Galilean  and  Spanish,  can  be  found  evidence  mounting  up  to  the  fourth  century, 
and  almost  to  the  third,  that  the  bread  has  always  been  broken  and  the  wine 
poured  out  in  connection  with  a  memoiial  use  of  the  original  words  of  institution. 
Very  strong  historical  evidence  this  that,  even  though  in  this  last  particular  we 
cannot  make  the  ascending  chain  of  evidence  demonstrably  link  itself  to  the  use  of 
the  institutory  formula  by  Christ  Himself,  yet  the  lines  so  manifestly  converge, 
that  they  must  have  a  meeting-place  in  a  fact,  which — reversing  the  direction  of 

246 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap,  xi 


thought — is  also  their  common  point  of  origin.  [For  a  brief,  popular,  accurate 
sketch  of  this  argument  and  its  foundation  facts,  see  Present  Day  Tracts,  No.  36, 
by  Sir  William  Muir.]  7.  Indeed,  the  solemn  tone  of  the  opening  words  of  the 
account  in  ver.  23,  it  is  suggested,  betrays  an  already  fixed  "  monumental "  form 
of  the  ttacliing  as  to  the  origin  and  meaning  of  the  supper.  It  is  suffused  with 
a  tender  solemnity,  as  it  recalls  in  briefest  suggestiveness  the  origin  of  the  simple 
acts.  Every  stroke  tells  :  "  The  Lord  Jesus  "  ;  ^^  In  the  same  night  that  He  was 
betrayed.''  Jesus  is  in  the  foreground  of  the  picture ;  but  Judas  is  also  there  in 
the  gloom  of  the  background.  "  Took  up  a  loaf,"  and  afterwards  "  a  cup."  We 
can  see  His  uplifted  eyes ;  His  as  yet  un pierced  hands  ;  we  can  hear  His  voice, 
"  giving  thanks,"  even  then,  and  the  *'  betrayal"  so  nigh  !  "  In  the  same  night," 
when  selfishness  touched  the  lowest  depth  it  ever  reached,  and  treachery  sold  the 
Lord  t  f  heaven  for  a  slave's  paltry  price,  in  that  night  and  no  other,  did  unse'fi^h, 
atoning,  redeeming  Love  solemnly  devote  itself  to  death  for  the  lost  objects  oi 
its  benevolence.  On  that  night,  when  death  was  so  nigh,  and  the  toils  of  the 
hunt^-rs  were  every  moment  being  drawn  closer  round  the  Object  of  human 
and  devilish  hatred,  was  His  heart  "  at  leisure  from  itself,"  not  only  to  speak 
words  of  comfort  and  instruction  to  a  sorrowing  company  in  an  upper  room  in 
Jerusalem,  but  also  to  take  care  for  a  Church  in  all  ages  and  places  and 
peoples,  and  to  institute  His  tenderest,  simplest  memorial  to  the  understanding 
and  the  heart,  of  Himself.  Good  uplifting  itself  in  undimmed,  immaculate, 
undefilable  beauty  in  the  midst  of  Evil.  Light  shining  in  the  very  midnight 
of  black,  defiling  darkness.  We  who  read  will  at  least  '■'give  thanks  .  .  .  in 
remembrance  of"  Him  and  of  His  Supper  table  and  its  grace  and  love. 

SEPARATE  HOMILIES, 

Ver.  IL  Man  and  Woman. — How  all  and  quiet  retirement;  to  fight  in  the 

the  arguments,  vers.  2-15,  assume  the  battles  of  life,  to  heal  the  wounds  of  the 

historic  truth  of  the  story  of  Gen.  i.,  ii.  combatants ;    the    stronger    mind,    the 

Paul,  it  is  admitted,  does  so ;  to  him  better-disposed  heart ;  men  arriving  at 

the  relation    of    the  sexes,   the    order  truth  by  slow  reasoning,  women  by  quick 

of  the  family  life,  originated    in   the  intuitions ;  men  consequently  gaining 

history,  and  rest  upon  it.     Possible  to  more  by  the  way,  but  oftener  missing 

admit   the   truth   of   all  the  teaching  their  way  altogether  (Luthardt);  hence 

here  about  the   relative    positions   of  men  oftener  sceptical,  women  "  natu- 

man   and  woman,  and  to  regard  the  rally  "  more  religious ;  ["  an  irreligious 

history  as  myth.     But  in  that  case  the  woman  is  a  man  spoilt,  and  doubly  cor- 

truth  stands  without  known  basis,  or  rupting  to  those  men  over  whom  she  ac- 

without  any  unchallengeable  basis.     A  quires  influence  "(Luthardt);]  man's  the 

mere  *'  happy  "  use  of  an  old  myth  will  initiative,  generative,  originating  mind, 

hardly  afford  an  argument  such  as —  woman's  the  receptive  and  reproductive 

not     Paul    only,    but — the     inspiring  mind.    Broadly  true,  and  correspondent 

Spirit    might    employ.       The    creation  to,  and  founded  in,  physical  differences  ; 

facts,  and  the  physical  facts  of  every-  but  with  many  exceptions  in  detail, 

day  knowledge,  say  that,  subordinate  as  2.  The  distinction  and  the  unification 

she  is,  the  man  needs  the  woman  ;  and  mount  higher. — God  is  both  Father  and 

that,  though  he  has  headship,  the  man  Mother  in  His  love.     No  woman  ever 

is  made  for  the  woman,  and  not  alone  misses  anything  in  Him  because  He  is 

for  himself  or  his  God.  "  Father."      He  is   ideal   Parenthood. 

I.  L  Man  and  woman  both  are  So,  too,  the  painters  are  guided  by  a 
needed,  to  exhibit  manhood  in  its  perfee-  right  instinct  when  they  give  to  the 
tion  of  idea ;  neither  without  the  other,  face  of  their  ideals  of  Christ  a  some- 
Fitted  respectively  for  restless  activity  what   feminine   (not   effeminate)  man- 

247 


CHAP.  XL    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


hood.  He  is  Man  and  Woman ;  in 
Him  neither  is  without  the  other.  No 
girl  ever  feels  that  Christ  does  not 
understand  her  because  He  was  ''only 
a  boy  "  ;  no  woman  ever  feels  that  He 
is  not  for  her  because  He  is  a  man. 
His  "  sex  "  never  occurs  to  the  mind 
or  heart.  He  is  man  and  woman, 
strength  and  tenderness ;  the  wisdom 
of  both  types  of  mind  and  heart  are 
in  Him  ;  perfect  Manhood. 

3.  The  perfectly  rounded  Christian 
character  combines  and  exhibits  the  best 
characteristics  of  both.  If  women  are 
"  more  religious "  than  men,  it  is  be- 
cause it  is  easier  for  them  to  enter  by 
"  Little-children  Gate  "  into  the  King- 
dom. Dependence,  docility,  belief  in 
what  comes  on  authority, — all  that 
makes  the  little  child  typical  of  the 
character  which  alone  can  enter,  all 
these  are  nearer  akin  to  the  woman's 
character  and  habit  than  to  the  man's. 
The  man  enters  the  kingdom  "  not 
without  the  woman,"  developed,  or 
submitted  to,  in  him.  The  perfect 
manhood  of  grace  needs,  however,  to 
add  to  faith  "  virtue "  (perhaps  = 
*'  courage ").  As  between  man  and 
God  there  is  no  room  in  man  for  self- 
reliance,  but,  as  between  man  and 
man,  and  in  doing  the  work  of  God 
in  the  world,  there  is  room  and  need 
for  "  the  man." 

III.  Christianity,  the  Church,  the 
work  of  God,  each  needs,  and  has 
availed  itself  of,  both  "  man "  and 
*'  woman." — It  would  never  have  suc- 
ceeded, it  will  never  succeed,  so  far  as 
human  conditions  of  success  are  con- 
cerned, unless  by  the  employment 
of  both.  The  presence  and  interaction 
of  the  sexes  is  a  valuable  element  in  the 
educational  effect  of  the  Church  upon 
its  members.  Sanctified  family  life, 
with  the  reciprocal,  incessant,  little- 
adverted-to,  training  of  husband  and 
wife,  brothers  and  sisters,  is  the  seminal 
instance  and  example  of  the  training 
given  by,  and  gained  from,  the  brother- 
hood and  sisterhood  in  the  Church  of 
Christ.  Each  sex  has  its  gifts  and 
capabilities  complementary  to,  lacking 
in,  those  of  the  other.      Woman  can 

248 


reach  where  man  is  excluded;  man 
can  dare  where  woman  may  not  go. 
Wisest  Church  organisers  utilise  both 
to  the  utmost  of  possibility.  Rom.  xvi. 
is  a  picture  of  an  early  Church,  and  is 
full  of  women  who,  like  the  men,  are 
"  in  the  Lord."  Nor  are  they  simply 
receivers  of  blessing ;  they  "  labour," 
and  even  "  labour  much  in  the  Lord  "  ; 
they  can  with  their  husbands  lay  down 
their  own  necks  in  running  risks  and 
daring  death  to  save  an  apostle's  life. 
Indeed,  Priscilla  may  precede  Aquila  ; 
possibly  just  as  in  a  Church  to-day 
there  are  godly  women  who,  without 
unwomanly  obtrusiveness,  have  so  much 
more  of  initiative  than  their  equally 
godly  and  devoted,  but  quieter,  hus- 
bands, that  every  one  says,  or  thinks, 

"  Mrs.  and  Mr. ."     "  In  the  Lord;' 

in  the  sphere  and  realm  where  He  is 
supreme,  and  where  everything  bears 
the  stamp  of  His  lordship  and  owner- 
ship, "  Woman  "  and  "  Man  "  are  both 
required.  Neither  is  without  the  other. 
In  the  new  creation  in  the  soul,  in 
that  other  new  creation,  the  "  kingdom 
of  God  "  on  earth,  the  original,  natural 
order  of  the  Creator's  idea  is  being 
perfectly  restored. 

Ver.  20.  ^^  The  Lord^s  supper. '^ 
I.  Supper. — 1.  The  proper,  Scriptural 
name  of  the  ordinance.  Jewish  Chris- 
tians familiar  with  the  idea.  Judaism 
had  its  supper.  The  birthday  supper 
of  their  nation  and  "  Church."  The 
Supper,  the  Sabbath,  the  Holy  Place, 
the  Circumcision -rite  [with  exactly  the 
same  continuity  of  "  development " 
which  obtains  between  successive  stages 
of  God's  creative  work — neither  less  nor 
more  close],  have  been  brought  forward 
into  Christianity,  but  modified — pre- 
serving the  basal  principle,  their  raison 
d'etre — and  stamped  with-  the  seal  of 
Christ,  "  the  Lord."  In  these  '*  days  of 
the  Son  of  Man  "  everything  has  become 
"  the  Lord's,"  implicitly  or  expressly. 
We  have  "  the  Lord's  Day  " ;  *'  Church  " 
is  [etymologically  (see  Skeat,  Diet.)  and 
in  fact]  "  the  Lord's  House  " ;  Baptism 
is  (at  least  closely  connected  with)  the 
"  Circumcision  of  Christ "  (Col.  ii.  11)  ; 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  XI. 


in  our  chapter  occur  "  the  Lord's 
Table,  Cup,  and  Supper."  He  had 
taken  one  of  the  many  cups  drunk  at 
the  Passover  supper;  and  of  it,  with 
a  simple  loaf  from  the  table,  had  made 
His  own  new  Supper,  belonging  to  a 
new  order  of  things  in  which  "  the 
Lord  Christ "  is  all,  and  in  all. 

2.  Not  a  sacrifice. — (1)  A  very  large, 
historically  important  section  of  the 
Church  affirms  it  is.  *'  Body  and  blood, 
soul  and  divinity,  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  bread  and  wine  no  longer  remain- 
ing." (Cone.  Trid.,  Can.,  §  13,  1.)  A 
transformation  the  more  marvellous  be- 
cause not  cognisable  or  verifiable  by  any 
of  the  senses.  Men  who  alone  can  effect 
it  are  of  a  special  order — "  priests  "  ; 
the  service  they  conduct  is  a  "  sacrifice  " 
of  this  "  body,"  etc., — a  real  sacrifice, 
making  expiation  for  the  sins  of  the 
living,  and  (if  they  please)  of  the 
dead ;  in  connection  with  it  and  with 
auricular  confession  of  sins,  they  claim 
the  power  to  remit  (and,  by  conse- 
quence, to  withhold)  the  "  temporal " 
penalty  of  sin.  (2)  Basis  of  all  this  is, 
"This  is  My  body."  But  cf.  ''This 
cup^^ — not  even  the  wine  in  it — "is 
the  New  Testament  in  My  blood" 
(Luke  xxii.  20).  Rigid  literalism  of 
interpretation  carried  consistently 
through  ends  in  absurdity  of  inter- 
pretation. (3)  The  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  negatives  all  this.  In  it 
Christianity  knows  only  one  altar 
(xiii.  10),  one  sacrifice  for  sins  (x.  12), 
one  Priest  to  offer  it  (x.  21).  Many 
priests,  repeated  sacrifices,  belonged 
only  to  the  imperfection  of  the  type. 
But  even  the  type  was  right  in  this : 
one  only  place  for  offering  this  atoning 
sacrifice.  Synagogues  (in  later  days) 
were  everywhere ;  but  in  Damascus, 
or  Tarsus,  or  Home,  or  (the  later) 
Babylon,  for  an  altar  and  a  priest  and 
an  atoning  sacrifice,  a  devout  Jew 
must  look  toward,  or  visit,  Jerusalem. 
On  that  one  spot  only  might  such  a 
sacrifice  be  found.  So  in  every  place 
the  Christian  worshipper  must  turn  to 
the  Heavenly  Sanctuary  only,  trusting 
that  there  the  One  High  Priest,  long 
ago  "  entered  within  the  veil,"  is  pre- 


senting His  one  perfect  and  sufl&cient 
sacrifice,  oblation,  and  satisfaction  for 
sins.  No  priest,  then,  at  an  altar,  but 
a  fellow-guest, — representing,  perhaps, 
the  great  Host  Himself, — at  a  supper 
table  : — the  minister. 

II.  Three  words  gather  up  the 
teaching  of  the  New  Testament  as  to 
the  ordinance:  1.  Commemoration;  2. 
Communion;  3.  Covenant. — 1.  Com- 
memoration.  (1)  Luke  xxii.  19  :  "This 
do,  in  remembrance "  (spoken  when 
distributing  the  bread) ;  revealed  to 
Paul,  "  Do  this,  as  oft  as  ye  drink 
it,  in  remembrance "  (as  He  gave 
the  cup).  Paul  adds  the  inspired 
comment :  "As  often  as  ye  eat  ...  ye 
do  show  the  Lord's  death  until  He 
come."  The  act  looks  backward  to 
Calvary  [as  well  as  forward  to  the 
Second  Coming.  In  the  face  of  denials 
of  the  resurrection — and  of  His  re- 
surrection— or  the  scoffer  who  asks, 
"  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming  ? " 
the  Church  at  the  Table  proclaims, 
"  We  look  for  Him  to  appear  the 
second  time,"  etc.  (Heb.  ix.  28) ;  and 
we  purpose  to  proclaim  our  hope  and 
confident  expectation  "  until  He  come"]. 
The  Church  at  the  Supper  says  :  "We 
believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  .  .  .  Who 
suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  .  .  . 
crucified,  dead,  and  buried,  .  .  .  rose 
again,  .  .  .  ascended,  .  .  .  sitteth."  The 
Creed,  with  its  facts  of  History,  is  im- 
plied in  the  celebration  of  the  Supper. 
(2)  The  very  fact  of  the  observance  of 
such  a  Supper  does  something  to  prove 
our  faith  reasonable.  [And,  given  the 
past  facts,  the  hope  for  the  future  is 
reasonable  too.]  Impossible,  travelling 
backward,  to  find  an  age  when  the 
Church  did  not  meet  to  break  bread 
together,  and  that  as  a  token  of  faith 
in  the  Cross  and  its  Atonement ;  all 
but  impossible  to  account  for  their 
doing  it — above  all  with  this  meaning 
— unless  on  the  supposition  that  the 
events  commemorated  are  really  histo- 
rical. These  are  reasons  of  no  slight 
force  on  which  may  rest  the  faith  of  the 
heart  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  (3)  "  The 
heart " ;  for  this  no  mere  commemora- 
tion of  a  fact  of  history.     Conceivable 

249 


CHAP.  XI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


that  an  annual  public  reading  of  the 
narratives,  perhaps  with  some  suitable 
cer  monial  accompaniment,  might  have 
sufficed  for  that.  The  Lord  made  the 
commemoration  one  for  the  heart,  as 
well  as  for  the  understanding,  when 
He  made  the  celebration  itself  sym- 
bolise the  truths  to  be  kept  in  view 
and  enshrined  in  the  history.  The 
broken  bread,  the  poured-out  wine, 
lift  the  heart's  eyes  to  the  body  broken 
with  scourge,  thorn,  nail,  spear ;  to 
the  blood  poured  forth  to  secure  re- 
mission of  sins.  "  The  Lord's  death  " 
is  not  merely  the  crucifying  of  one 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  at  a  particular  date, 
outside  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  but 
"  God  setting  forth  Christ  Jesus  a 
propitiation,"  etc.  (Rom.  iii.  25,  26) ; 
"  setting  Him  forth  "  in  full  view  of 
three  worlds — angelic,  infernal,  human ; 
in  full  view  of  the  heart  of  the  guest 
at  the  Supper.  So  from  age  to  age 
the  Church  hands  on  the  deposit  of 
testimony — to  the  history  and  to  the 
meaning  of  it — which  each  generation 
receives  from  its  preceding  one  ;  [each 
generation  receives  the  torch  of  Hope 
from  its  predecessor,  and  in  turn  hands 
it  on  to  the  waiting  next  one ;  only  to 
be  quenched  when  He  comes]. 

2.  Communion. — (1)  Paul's  comment 
in  X.  16.  Significant  in  the  East,  and 
not  without  meaning  in  the  colder,  pro- 
saic West,  to  eat  food  together  ;  it  very 
early  meant  to  establish  a  compact  of 
peace,  friendship,  mutual  defence.  The 
persecuted  Church  of  early  ages  felt 
vividly  how  sitting  side  by  side  at 
a  common  meal  was  an  avowal  of 
their  unity  in  the  face  of  heathen 
neighbours  and  kindred,  and  a  pledg- 
ing of  themselves  to  love  and  fidelity 
each  to  other.  The  little  Christian 
host,  warring  in  an  enemy's  country, 
at  the  Supper  table  join  hands,  and 
go  forth  again  to  fight  ["  strength- 
ened as  with  bread  of  life "],  to 
stand  shoulder  to  shoulder,  back  to 
back,  fouisquare  to  the  assault  of  the 
world  and  sin.  "  The  club-feavst  of  the 
Christian  society "  {Ecce  Homo) ;  this, 
though  more.  A  periodical  reunion  of 
all    believers   in    Christ,    which    may 

250 


remind  them  of  their  separateness  from 
the  world,  and  of  their  close-drawn 
brotherhood  and  association  for  common 
aims,  work,  help,  and  in  a  common 
hope.  [Here  the  close  resemblance  to 
the  Love-feast,  which  was  the  "  club- 
feast"  and  no  more.  Hence  their 
conjoint,  confluent  celebration  in  early 
times ;  especially  remembering  how  the 
first  Lord's  Supper  was  the  emphasising 
of  a  paiticular  point  in  the  course  of  a 
prolonged  meal]  (2)  This  satisfies, 
lawfully,  the  craving  for  some  con- 
tinuous linking  with  the  Early  Church, 
and  for  some  visible  linking  with  the 
world-wide  Church  of  to-day,  or  of 
any  one  century.  The  gulf  of  nearly 
nineteen  centuries  is  bridged  over  by  an 
unbroken  succession  of  little  companies, 
who — kneeling,  sitting,  with  gorgeous 
ritual,  or  with  none  at  all — have 
broken  bread  and  drunk  wine  together 
in  memory  of  their  common  Lord  and 
Eounder.  At  the  Supper  table  the 
humblest  Christian  joins  hands  with 
apostles  and  martyrs ;  with  the  living, 
fighting,  working  Church,  in  all 
Churches  and  lands  to-day;  with  the 
living,  resting,  glorified  Church  of 
those  ''  who  have  departed  this  life 
in  His  faith  and  fear."  The  front 
ranks  of  God's  great  sacramental  host 
— one  in  every  time  and  place — have 
long  ago,  or  recently,  passed  into  the 
skies ;  rear  ranks  are  not  yet  come 
into  view ;  midway  at  the  Supper 
the  Christian  of  to-day  vindicates  and 
confesses  his  place  in  the  host.  [No 
rank,  or  social  distinction,  known  at 
the  Table.  Master,  servant,  children, 
all  there.]  "Ye  being  many,"  etc. 
(x.  17).  (3)  ^'Partakers  of  that 
one  body."  This  to  be  noted.  Not 
only  association,  brotherhood,  fellow- 
ship, but  all  these  resting  upon,  rooted 
in,  a  '*  communion,"  a  common  sharing 
in  the  One  Lord.  He  called  the 
personal  appropriation  of  Himself,  so 
as  to  make  Him  the  strength  and  sus- 
tenance of  our  spiritual  life,  "eating  His 
flesh,"  "  drinking  His  blood  "  (John  vi.), 
"  living  by  eating  Him."  The  same 
Holy  Ghost— the  Life  of  the  Body,  Who 
dwelt  in  a  Corinthian  Christian,  dwells 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


in  a  Christian  in  a  foreign  land  to-day, 
dwells  in  the  English  Christian  who 
sits  at  the  "Communion"  Supper. 

3.  Covenant. — (1)  The  Covenant  sig- 
nificance, announced  in  Christ's  words 
of  institution,  and  in  Paul's  report  upon 
the  matter,  makes  the  Supper  a  Sacra- 
ment. [In  old  Church  Latin,  a  symbol 
of  some  hidden  truth.]  Conceivably, 
as  matter  of  expedient  ceremonial  and 
teaching,  a  man  might  have  insti- 
tuted a  custom  of  a  united  supper  as 
a  memorial  and  communion  ordinance. 
But  only  Christ  could  say  Luke  xxii. 
20,  or  Matt.  xxvi.  28  (2)  The  writer 
of  the  Hebrews  (ix.  19,  20)  carries  back 
exegesis  and  thought  to  Exod.  xxiv. 
6-8.  Under  shadow  of  Sinai,  newly 
given  law  read  in  hearing  of  Israel; 
that  done,  the  book,  with  its  precepts 
inwritten,  the  altar,  the  people,  were 
sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  their  [own 
provision  of]  peace  offerings.  Moses 
cried,  "  The  blood  of  the  covenant." 
etc.  "The  blood  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment " ;  "  the  blood  of  the  New 
Testament."  The  people  provided  the 
offerings;  Moses,  on  behalf  of  God, 
ordained,  accepted,  used,  the  shed 
blood.  God  and  Israel  entered  into 
covenant.  They  were  pledged  to 
obedience ;  God  was  pledged  to  faithful- 
ness in  blessing.  As  it  means  the 
Creed ;  so  the  Supper  involves  on 
man's  side  the  Commandments  ;  and, 
on  God's  side  their  preface,  "  I  am 
the  Lord  thy  God,"  interpreted  as 
in  Luke  xx.  38.  (3)  So,  though  we 
provide  the  materials  for  the  meal, 
it  is  "  the  Lord's  Supper."  We  pro- 
cure,— He  directs  that  we  shall,  and 
accepts  and  uses, — the  bread  and  the 
wine;  and  He,  as  really  as  we  are, 
is  covenanted.  Hence  1  Cor.  xi.  28  : 
"  So  let  him  eat " ;  i.e.  having 
examined  himself ;  having  renounced 
the  sin  he  finds;  purposing  to  avoid 
it  by  the  covenanted  help  of  Christ. 
(4)  No  special  appropriateness  then 
for  this  Supper  to  a  dying  hour  or  a 
sick-chamber.  Certainly  no  passport 
thence  to  a  surer  heaven  ;  the  bread 
is  no  heathenish  oholus  on  the  tongue, 
to  fee  some  other -world  ferryman  or 


doorkeeper.  Also,  no  special  privilege 
of  "  good  people  "  as  such.  All  living 
in  covenant  communion  with  God  in 
Christ,  or  seeking  to  do  so ;  all  sincere 
penitents  "trying"  to  cast  themselves 
with  all  reliance  upon  Christ ;  may 
come,  guests  welcome  to  the  Supper,  and 
may  there  learn  to  know,  or  to  know 
better,  the  Lord  Whose  guests  they  are. 

Ver.  31.  Self-judgment. 

I.  "  If    we    would." — Why  do   we 

not  ? 

1 .  We  are  too  indolent. — It  is  trouble- 
some to  go  thoroughly  into  an 
incessant  analysis  of  motives  and  incli- 
nations and  desires.  These  are  often 
not  single  and  undivided,  but  exceed- 
ingly complex.  "  A  motive "  is  the 
resultant  of  the  interaction  of  a  whole 
set  of  motives.  It  is  easier,  it  disturbs 
our  comfortable  adjustment  of  our- 
selves to  our  social  environment  less, 
it  involves  no  inconvenient,  "  ungentle- 
manly  "  necessity  of  condemning  what 
our  "  good  sort  "  of  neighbours  are  and 
do,  to  accept  some  ready-made,  external, 
customary  standard  of  character  and 
behaviour,  and  to  be  content,  in  our 
own  case  at  all  events,  with  a  tolerably 
close  approximation  to  even  this — so 
close  that  we  pass  muster  with,  it  may 
be,  not  a  little  credit  amongst  our 
fellows.  Yet  such  a  standard  must 
needs  be  concerned  only  with  the 
outside  of  the  man ;  the  judgments  of 
which  it  is  the  instrument  must  needs 
be  somewhat  "rough  estimates."  It 
convicts  only  the  few  specially  promi- 
nent points  which  it  touches.  All  the 
detail  of  the  outer  life,  and  all  the 
inner  life,  it  ignores.  So  long  as  we  are 
content  to  live  outside  our  true  self, 
and  to  be  only  on  terms  of  acquaint- 
ance and  not  intimacy  with  ourself, 
the  average  or  irnininnuin  character 
which  passes  muster  in  our  "  set," 
whether  Christian  or  "  worldly,"  may 
satisfy  us.  But  we  do  not  know  the 
man  whom  that  other  Judge  knows. 

2.  We  are  too  proud. — Such  experi- 
ment as  men  do  sometimes  make, 
under  the  constraint  of  that  "  moral 
honesty"  which  is  really  part  of  the 

251 


CHAP.  XL    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS. 


Holy  Spirit's  preliminary  work  in  the 
human  soul,  so  constantly  ends  in  very 
uncomfortable,  disquieting,  unsatis- 
factory discoveries,  that  they  will  go 
no  further.  Now  and  then  some 
unusually  marked  incident  of  moral 
failure  forces  upon  them  what  is 
to  them  an  amazing  revelation ;  for 
a  moment  there  yawns  within  them, 
and  they  must  look  down  into,  a 
moral  abyss  of  darkness  and  defiling 
sin,  such  as  they  never  suspected  or 
believed  was  possible.  Their  new 
discovery  may  issue  in  a  penitent, 
self-loathing  prostration  of  the  man 
at  the  feet  of  Him  who  can  "  create 
a  clean  heart "  within ;  or  it  may  be 
followed  by  a  refusal  to  look  any 
longer,  or  to  learn  any  more ;  by  a 
resolute  endeavour  to  forget  what  has 
been  seen  and  to  avert  the  mind's 
glance  altogether  from  the  direction  in 
which  such  unwelcome  discoveries  may 
again  by  possibility  lie.  The  natural 
heart  rebels  against  the  accusation, 
and  still  more  against  the  conviction, 
of  sin.  Pride  will  not  let  men  "  judge 
themselves." 

3.  Moralinability. — Not  any  original 
inability.  "If  we  would""  assumes 
that,  normally,  men  may.  There  is, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  no  total  blindness, 
no  total  ignorance  of  God's  moral 
standard,  no  utter  want  of  spiritual 
power;  the  grace  of  a  Redeemer  has 
secured  some  measure  of  these  for 
every  man — enough  to  "begin  upon." 
And  this  restored,  gracious  power  of 
perception  and  judgment  may  grow 
by  exercise;  it  will  be  increased  on 
every  act  of  obedience  to  its  decisions  ; 
but  it  may  also  be  disregarded  and 
disobeyed  until  it  is  lost.  The  inner 
standards  of  right  and  wrong  may  be 
depraved,  and  the  power  to  apply 
them  be  lost  altogether.  Blind  man 
could  not  have  given  himself  again  an 
eye  to  see,  or  light  to  see  by ;  but 
these  given,  he  can  create  darkness 
for  himself  and  renew  his  blindness. 
Too  many  cannot  ^^ judge  themselves" 
because  the  standard  is  lost  and  the 
faculty  for  applying  it  gone.  But, 
short  of   that,  there  are,  in   varying 

252 


degrees,  the  obscuration,  the  deadening, 
the  blunting  of  the  moral  sensibility 
or  sensitiveness,  till,  even  with  the 
objective  standard  in  the  Word  of  God 
still  clearly  legible,  and  comparison 
with  it  inevitable  and  constant,  many 
men  are,  in  popular  phrase,  "  no  judges 
of  themselves."  They  are  in  David's 
case,  who  for  more  than  nine  months 
after  the  murder  of  Uriah  the  Hittite 
seems  to  have  lived  in  happy  enjoy- 
ment of  his  shameful  possession  of  the 
murdered  man's  wife,  and  to  have 
occupied  himself  with  the  ordinary 
round  of  royal  duty  and  pleasure, 
without  any  sense  of  remorse  or  of 
sin  at  all ;  conscience  silent  [or  forcibly 
silenced :  cf .  Ps.  xxxii.  3,  4,  and  5, 
which  usually  are  connected  with  this 
episode  in  David's  career] ;  fear  of 
God's  wrath  hardly,  if  at  all,  felt. 
Such  sensuality  as  that  of  Corinth,  if 
even  only  allowed  to  enter  and  con- 
taminate the  imagination,  thus  dulls 
the  moral  sensibility  and  weakens  the 
moral  '"'' judgment,"  with  fearfully 
cumulative  effect.  "7/"  we  would" 
means  living  with  such  a  guard  upon 
ourselves,  that  nothing  is  tolerated, 
encouraged,  cultivated,  which  will 
interfere  with  the  instant  leadiness  of 
conscience  to  judge,  with  a  growing 
fineness  of  perception,  our  actions,  and 
our  whole  position  before  God. 

II.  What  if  we  will  not?— Then 
we  come  before  another  Judge,  Whose 
decision  goes  a  stage  further  than  our 
own  would  do.  Ours  is  the  judgment  of 
the  jury — the  verdict ;  His  is  the  judg- 
ment both  of  the  jury  and  of  the  judge 
— verdict  and  sentence  and  penalty. 
At  Corinth  it  came  as  physical  evil — 
sickness,  and  even  death  in  many 
cases.  But  His  penalties  on  this  side 
the  grave  are  not  irrevocable  nor 
merely  penal ;  they  may  be  corrective, 
reformatory,  if  with  them  a  man  will 
seek  to  have  and  to  use  the  grace  of 
God ;  the  chastenings  of  a  Father,  not 
the  punishments  of  a  King,  "  con- 
demning the  world"  Three  stages  are 
marked  out :  (1)  Come  into  condemna- 
tion at  your  own  court  of  first  instance 
within,  and  then  it  may  be  you  will 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  L   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


not  need  to  come  into  God's  eondem-  to   rebuke,    convict,  reform,  then   (3) 

nation.     (2)  Come  under  the  temporal,  You   come    into   condemnation,    to    a 

reformatory  chastisements  of  a  Divine  judgment   which  knows   no  issue  but 

Father.     If  these  are  tried  and  fail,  if  the   doom   of   "  the   world"     (Cf.   the 

neither  He  nor  your  heart  is  suffered  obscure  passage,  v.  5.) 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.    30.  The    connection    between 
moral  and  physical  evil  is  : — 
I.  Clearly  revealed. 
II.  Daily  exemplified. 

III.  In  accordance  with  true  philo- 
sophy. 

IV.  Should    be    an    incentive    to 
holiness. — [J.  Z.] 


Vers.  30-32.  Temporal  judgments 
are : — 

I.  Usually  occasioned  by  sin  ;  yet 
the  absence  of  them  is  no  proof  of 
innocence  (Luke  xiii.  1-5). 

II.  Mercifully  designed  to  save  us 
from  final  condemnation. 

III.  May  possibly  be  averted  by 
faithful  dealing  with  ourselves. — [J.  L.] 


APPENDED  NOTE. 


Note  the  suggestion  of  some  uponx.  31,  that 
the  Lord's  Supper  is  [only]  the  highest  instance 
of  the  sanctification  of  even  the  lowliest, 
most  material,  most  nearly  animal,  part  of  our 
common  life.  Note  also  how  at  Emmausthe 
ordinary  supper  which  is  in  progress  is  in  a 
moment  glorified  into,  at  any  rate,  a  sugges- 
tion of  the  "Last  Supper."  Note  how, 
similarly,  in  ver.  25,  the  express  statement 
of  time  makes  the  blessing,  etc.,  of  the  bread 
to  have  taken  place  during  supper,  and  the 
differentiating  of  the  meal  from  the  sacra- 
ment to  have  only  become  patent  in  connec- 
tion with  the  sanctification  of  the  cup  to  its 
new  use.  Well  illustrated  by  the  incident 
told  of  Fletcher  of  Madeley  by  James 
Rogers,  the  husband  of  the  well-known 
Hester  Ann  Rogers  :  "  I  had  long  desired  to 
converse  with  .  .  .  Mr.  Fletcher,  and  now 
an  opportunity  offered  itself.  Stopping  at 
Bristol  for  a  few  days  to  rest  myself  and 
horse,  I  heard  of  his  being  at  Mr.  Ireland's, 
about  three  miles  off,  in  a  poor  state  of 
health,  and,  with  two  of  my  brethren,  took 
a  ride  to  see  him.  When  we  came  there,  he 
was  returning  from  a  ride.  .  .  ,  Dismounting 
from  his  horse,  he  came  towards  us  with 
arms  spread  open  and  eyes  lifted  up  to 
heaven.     His  apostolic  appearance,  with  the 


whole  of  his  deportment,  amazingly  affected 
us."  [Then,  after  a  brief  conversation,  ail 
in  keeping  with  his  habitual  spirituality  of 
mind],  "  We  were  about  to  take  our  leave, 
when  Mr.  Ireland  sent  his  footman  into  the 
yard  with  a  bottle  of  red  wine  and  some 
slices  of  bread  upon  a  waiter ;  we  all 
uncovered  our  heads,  whilst  Mr.  Fletcher 
craved  a  blessing  upon  the  same  ;  which  he 
had  no  sooner  done,  than  he  handed  first  the 
bread  to  each,  and  then,  lifting  up  his  eyes  to 
heaven,  pronounced  these  words  :  'The body 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  was  given  for 
thee,  preserve  thy  body  and  soul  unto  ever- 
lasting life.'  Afterwards,  handing  the  wine, 
he  repeated  in  like  manner,  *  The  blood  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,'  etc.  But  such  a  sacra- 
ment I  never  had  before.  A  sense  of  the 
Divine  presence  rested  upon  us  all ;  and  we 
were  melted  into  floods  of  tears.  His  worthy 
friend,  Mr.  Ireland,  grieved  to  see  him 
exhaust  his  little  strength  by  so  much  speak- 
ing, took  him  by  the  arm,  and  almost  forced 
him  into  the  house ;  while  he  kept  looking 
wishfully,  and  speaking  to  us,  as  long  as  we 
could  see  him.  We  then  mounted  our  horses 
and  rode  away." — Early  Methodist  Preachers, 
iv.  801-303. 


253 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER    XII. 
CRITICAL   NOTES. 

Ver.  1. — Gifts  is  a  translators'  supplement ;  right  in  fact,  as  vers.  4-11  show ;  slightly  too 
precise  in  word.  Almost  certainly  neuter,  and  so  very  general,  *^  spiritual  thingsy  Another 
of  the  topics  laid  before  Paul  for  his  discussion  and  guiding  instructions. 

Ver.  2.  Dumb. — In  contrast  with  the  "  tongues,''  which  were,  in  the  mind  of  the  Corin- 
thians, the  most  striking  and  choice  charism  of  the  Spirit;  denying  also  to  the  idol,  and 
attributing  implicitly  to  the  "demon"  (x.  19,20)  the  "oracles"  of  heathenism  [possibly 
the  diabolic  correlatives  of  the  "  tongues  "  and  of  "  inspiration'"],  Hab.  ii.  19  ;  "  dumb  "  also 
standing  for  the  whole  impotence  and  nothingness  of  the  heathen  idolatries,  Isa.  xliv.  9-17, 
xlvi.  5-7  ;  and  particularly  Ps.  cxv.  4-7  ;  in  brief.  Led. — K personal  leading;  as  in  x.  19,  20  ; 
Eph.  ii.  2  sq.,  etc.  And,  in  a  lower  degree,  by  priestly  or  governmental  authority,  or  by 
national  and  ancestral  custom.  Contrast  the  "  leading  "  of  the  Spirit,  Rom.  viii.  14, 
Gal.  V.  18,  and  the  intelligent,  personal  choice  of  Christ  required  and  supposed  in 
Christianity. 

Ver.  3. — "  So  then  you  may  distinguish  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  from  the  voice  of  the 
evil  spirit — the  mere  idol  has  no  voice — by  this  test."  Observe  *'  anathema.'"  In  the 
synagogue  this  would  be  heard,  **  Jesus  "  being  the  simple  personal  name  of  the  "  Man  of 
Nazareth  "  naturally  employed  by  Jews.  The  Gentile  denials  of  their  Lord  at  the  bidding 
or  leading  of  demons  took  another  form,  that  of  participating  in  the  heathen  feasts  (x.  14-22). 
This  test  under  another  aspect  appears  in  1  John  iv.  2,  3.  But  beyond  this  was  a  special 
'"gift"  of  ^'discerning  of  spirits''^  (ver.  10).  Lord. — "  Verhicm  solenne  in  LXX.  for  Hebrew 
Jehovah "  (Evans).  So,  in  effect,  but  in  reverse  order,  1  John  v.  1.  Also  Matt.  xvi.  17 
(Peter's  confession). 

Ver.  4. — Subject  to  this  one  unvarying  characteristic  and  test  of  the  Spirit's  presence  and 
work  in  a  man,  there  is  ^^ variety  and  distribution^^  of  '^ gifts"  ''■  manifestations'^  which 
reveal  the  presence  of  '-'the  same  Spirit'''  of  God.  1.  Observe  (as  R.V.)  "■diversities''  in 
each  case  ;  same  word.  2.  Observe  the  Trinitarian  form  of  the  passage  ;  the  "  practical  and 
experimental,"  as  always,  moulded  over,  and  clothing,  a  skeleton  of  Trinitarian  theologj^, 

Ver.  5.  Administrations. — Human  "  mini.strations,"  "  forms  of  service  "  (not  official  only), 
under  the  same  Captain  of  the  Army,  the  same  Head  of  the  House,  the  same  King  over  the 
Redemption-realm. 

Ver.  6. — "Workings'''  iox  '^  operations.''''  "The  effects,  results,  outward  manifestations  of 
the  same  inworkiug  power.  .  .  .    The  practical  exhibitions  of  that  power  "  (Ellicott). 

Ver.  7. — Not  his  personal  profit,  only  or  chiefly. 

Vers.  8-10. — Note  1.  More  accurately,  the  changing  prepositions  **thi'Ough,"  "according 
to,"  "in."  The  Spirit  "is  the  channel  through  which  they  come,  the  standard  with  which 
they  agree,  the  element  in  which  they  are  possessed  and  used  "  (Beet).  Also  "  three  series, — 
intellectual  gifts  (ver.  8),  gifts  conspicuously  miraculous  (vers.  9,  10  a),  gifts  connected  with 
*  tongues  '  (ver.  10  b)  "  (Beet).  Note  2.  Wisdom,  more  general,  practical,  discursive  and  argu- 
mentative ;  Knowledge,  more  restricted,  theoretic  or  scientific,  something  more  intuitive, 
e.g.  as  in  Paul  and  John  respectively  (Stanley).  Note  3.  The  "  uwrd  "  characterised  by 
and  specially  the  vehicle  of,  "wisdom"  or  "knowledge."  Note  4.  Faith. — For  miracle- 
working,  as  xiii.  2.  Good  case  in  Acts  iii.  16:  "His  Name,  throngh  faith  in  His  Name, 
hath  made  this  man  strong."  Note  5.  Prophecy. — See  Appended  Note.  So  also  for 
"  tongues." 

Ver.  11. — Observe  the  activity  and  will  here  attributed  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the 
"  sovereignty  "  with  which  He  apportions  His  "  gifts." 

The  Body  Parable. 

Ver.  12.  Christ. — The  Great  Unit  in  all  God's  thought  and  purpose  in  the  history  of 
Redemption.     So  Gal.  iii.  16.     Not  the  personal  Christ,  but  the  "Christ  mystical." 

Ver.  13. — Observe  again  the  prepositions  "in,"  "into."  ["of;"  querj^  recalling,  x.  4  ? 
Also  Evans  would  translate,  "  were  drenched  with,"  denying  any  reference,  in  this  third 
clause,  to  baptism].  ''Into"  might,  grammatically,  only  mean  ''unto"  or  "for,"  i.e.  of 
the  aim  or  purpose  of  baptism  ;  whether  more  is  found  in  the  word  depeads  upon  a  man's 
whole  reading  and  interpretation  of  New  Testament  teaching  upon  the  topic.  Cf.  Gal. 
iii.  27,  28. 

Vers.  14-17.  —Beet  points  out  that  the  members— not  merely  the  lowest,  but  those  next  to 

254 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xii. 


the  highest — compare  themselves,  as  men  do,  with  others  resembling,  though  superior  toy 
themselves.  "  I  am  not  of  the  body "  is  said  in  the  spirit  of  wounded  vanity  which 
fancies  it  has  a  grievance,  and  exaggerates  it  :  "  By  the  look  of  things  I  am  not  reckoned 
in  the  body,"  and  then  flings  itself  out  of  fellowship  :  "  Well  then,  I  won't  be  !  "  One  (kind 
of)  member,  ver.  14,  and  so  vers.  19,  20, 

E  Ver.  18. — Cf.  with  ver.  11 ;  here  the  sovereign  will  is  that  of  "  GodP  [Different  words  for 
will ;  this  the  fundamental,  original  determination  underlying  all  the  order  of  the  world.] 

Ver.  22. — Many  "  necessary  "  members  are  incapable  of  self-defence  (Beet).  "  Those  more 
delicate  portions  of  our  bodily  structure,  external  or  internal,  which,  compared  with  the 
more  obviously  active  and  energetic  members  of  the  body,  might  seem  to  be  somewhat  feeble  " 
(Ellicott).     But  Paul  is  desig^iedly  indejinite  in  his  reference. 

Ver.  23.  -"  Alluding  to  the  almost  universal  instinct  of  fitness  or  of  decency  which  has 
dictated,  on  the  one  hand,  the  use  of  ornaments,  on  the  other  band,  the  necessity  of 
clothing"  (Stanley). 

Ver.  25. — Expository  again  of  the  simple,  original  meaning  of  ^'schism"  (i.  10,  xi.  18). 
There  is  a  conveyance  of  working  inward  upon  the  Body  and  its  welfare,  as  well  as  upward 
upon  the  Head  and  His  honour  and  will. 

Ver.  27. — Not  merely  "  a  body,"  but  "  the  body  of  Christ "  ;  organic  to  Him  as  a  man's 
body  is  organic  to  him.  (See  Separate  Homily.)  In  particular, — Rare  expression,  only  here 
and  in  xiii.  9,  10,  12.  Choose  between  (1)  "  Members  of  this  imperfect  earthly  half  of  the 
one  earthly-heavenly  Church  "  (Evans)  ;  and,  as  most,  (2)  "  Each  one  of  you  made  a  member 
with  his  several  part  and  function."  I.e.  "  Collectively  the  body;  individually,  the  limbs  " 
(Stanley). 

Ver.  28. — "  First,'''  "  secondarily,"  etc,  order  not  merely  of  enumeration,  but  of  dignity ; 
great '^  droj?"  Sit  ^^  then"  Two  exceptional  "orders"  respectively  begin  and  close  the  list: 
"  apostles,"  "  tongues."  "  Teachers,"  who  spoke  without  the  exceptional  and  direct  impulse 
of  the  '^proj)het"  [moreover,  the  prophet  declares  new  truth;  the  teacher  expounds  and 
applies  truth  already  given],  and  without  the  ecstasy  of  the  ^^tmigue" -gifted,  men,  ^^  Helps," 
vague,  but  perhaps  doing  such  service  as  visiting  the  sick,  etc.;  ^^governments,"  perhaps 
practical  tact  and  faculty  for  administration  of  affairs  and  the  management  and  direction  of 
men,  whilst  not  excelling  as  "  teachers"  or  "  miracle-n'orkers" 

Vers.  29,  30. — Notice  the  insertion  of  '■'■  rvorkers  of."  Interpret.— ^.<^.  the  ^^  tongues"  in 
which  the  others  *■* spoke"  "  Tongues"  laat,  not  to  indicate  Paul's  estimate  of  the  gift  as 
distinctly  opposite  to  that  of  the  Corinthians,  but  as  being,  as  it  were,  an  exceptional  gift 
appended  to  the  ordinary  list. 

Ver,  31.  Best. — "■Greater"  (R.V. ;  new  reading);  i.e.  the  more  noble  and  useful  amongst 
the  foregoing  list  (xiv.  1).  But  there  is  something  better  than  the  best,  and  this  too,  as  the 
gifts  were  not,  even  in  richly  endowed  Corinth,  for  all.  More  excellent. — Found  also  in 
Rom.  vii.  13 ;  2  Cor.  i.  8,  iv.  17  (strengthened) ;  Gal.  i.  13 ;  cf .  iv.  7,  xii.  7. 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Whole  Chapter. 

The  topics  here  may  be  grouped  around  four  words : — 

A.  The  Diversity  of  gifts  and  offices. 

B.  The  Unity  of  the  body. 

C.  The  Dependence  of  member  upon  member.  ^ 

D.  The  Serviceableness  of  each  member  to  the  whole  body. 

A.  Diversity. — 1.  The  abundance  of  the  gifts  bestowed  upon  the  Corinthian 
Church  was  matter  of  thankful  wonder  even  to  Paul  (i.  5).  But  the  variety 
is  as  wonderful.  It  may  be  that  in  this  chapter  we  have  a  generalised  descrip- 
tion of  The  Church  and  its  endowments,  rather  than  an  exact  sketch  of  this 
Church  in  particular.  Yet  with  all  abatements,  the  impression  does  remain  that 
beyond  most  of  the  early  Churches  Corinth  was  a  miniature  of  the  greater 
Body  in  the  completeness  with  which  it  exhibited  in  its  midst  every  type  of 
gift  and  character.  Gifts  distributed  over  many  other  Churches  are  all  at 
least  "  sampled  "  in  Corinth.  "  The  body  is  not  one  kind  of  member,  but  many  " 
(ver.  14).  2.  There  is  no  mechanical  reproduction  of  any  one  type  of  member; 
they  are  not  made  and  endowed  to  do  one  thing  only,  and  all  the  same  one 
thing.  That  is  not  God's  method  ;  that  is  not  the  habit  of  Life.  Wherever  He 
works^  wherever  It  is,  there  is  variety.    *'  As  like  as  two  peas  in  a  pod ;  "  but  two 

"  255 


CHAP.  xii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS, 


peas  lying  side  by  side  in  their  narrow  green  bed  are  not  mechanical  copies  of  each 
other.  They  are  individual,  even  though  the  differences  may  be  minute.  There 
are  no  duplicate  faces ;  no  absolutely  correspondent  sides  of  the  same  f ac3  ; 
no  exactly  symmetrical  halves  and  lobes  of  bodies  or  of  organs ;  no  pair  of  leaves 
exactly  balance  each  other  as  a  "  pair."  Ruskin,  in  his  Modern  Painters,  has 
engraved  a  diagrammatic  drawing  of  the  scheme  of  ramification  of  a  forest  tree. 
It  has  a  beauty ;  there  is  a  beauty  about  the  careful  and  exact  work  of  a  machine, 
and  about  the  logically  consequential  correspondence  of  part  with  part,  and  the 
development  of  part  from  part.  But  no  tree  ever  grew  with  such  mechanically 
exact  bifurcation  of  branches,  or  with  such  rigorous  completeness  and  balance 
of  parts.  It  is,  as  he  calls  it,  a  tree  "  drawn  by  a  Clerk  of  the  Works."  It  is 
not  the  artist's  tree,  nor  the  Creator's  tree,  nor  the  living  tree.  However  it  may 
be,  there  is  always  diversity  touching  even  the  nearest  correspondence.  In  the 
diversity  of  organ,  and  office,  and  function,  in  a  body,  and  of  member,  and  office, 
and  function,  in  "  The  Body  of  Christ,"  we  have  only  a  particular  instance  of  the 
working  out  of  one  of  God's  ruling  "  ideas  "  in  nature.  It  is  "  a  law  "  which 
holds  good  "  in  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  world,"  both.  In  the  Body,  men 
and  women  are  "  members  in  particular  "  (ver.  27)  ;  each  having  his  own  work, 
each  made  on  his  own  pattern.  ^'' Gifts;"  the  ^^ministrations"  of  this  man  or 
that;  the  ^''workings"  of  the  same  underlying  power  of  God  in  this  or  that 
Christian; — ^^ diversity"  is  stamped  on  them  all  (vers.  4-6).  Nor  does  the 
application  of  the  principle  end  as  between  class  and  class.  Within  the  same 
class,  all  ^^  apostles"  or  all  ''^prophets"  or  all  '^  helps"  or  ^^governments"  or 
"  tongues"  vary.  No  two  apostles  ever  do  the  same  work.  [No  two  evangelists 
have  given  us  the  same  gospel ;  each  is  individualised  very  strongly.]  No  two 
"  teachers  "  ever  caught  and  presented  identically  the  same  aspect  of  the  whole 
round  of  truth.  3.  There  is  order  in  the  diversity,  ^'' first"  "  second"  "  thirdly" 
"  after  that"  *'  then."  The  apostle's  office  was  unique ;  the  prophet's  office  was 
passing  away  while  men  heard  Paul  speak  of  it ;  the  tongues  are  silent ;  the 
miracle  is  done.  But  in  the  shorter  list  that  remains  the  ranking  is  significant. 
"  Teaching  "  heads  the  diminished  enumeration  ;  and  yet  what  more  necessary 
gift  does  the  God  Who  "  sets  every  man  in  the  Church  as  it  hath  pleased  Him," 
and  Whose  Spirit  in  like  manner  "  divides  to  every  man  severally  as  He  will" 
ever  bestow  upon  a  Church,  than  the  men  who  have  "  helps,  governments  "  ?  So 
long  as  human  hearts  are  perverse,  and  their  judgments  fallible,  and  that  too 
In  different  directions ;  the  more  the  growth  of  the  work  of  the  Church  forces 
"  division  of  labour  "  upon  those  who  are  responsible  for  its  welfare  and  its 
success;  so  long  and  the  more  will  the  man  be  in  demand  who  can  organise 
Work,  who  can  hit  the  right  time  for  doing  or  beginning  it,  who  is  both  master 
of  broad  schemes  and  is  not  overwhelmed  with  the  small  details  of  execution,  who 
can  rightly  judge  of  character,  and  lay  his  hand  exactly  on  the  suitable  human 
instrument,  who  can  lead  or  govern  men  with  all  their  variety,  their  touchiness, 
their  vanity,  their  smallness  of  temper.  *'  Helps"  "  governments" — these  may 
tank  after  the  supreme  necessity  of  *'  teaching"  but  in  order  they  do  not  march 
far  behind  !  And,  most  of  all,  the  primacy  of  order  is  accorded  to  the  " best  gifts" 
the  most  useful  to  the  Church,  the  most  honouring  to  the  Master.  4.  Nothing 
is  more  necessary  to  recognise  than  that  the  diversity  is  a  limitation.  It  is  of  no 
use  to  be  disappointed,  or  vexed,  that  the  human  instrument  cannot  always  do 
every  kind  of  work.  It  is  of  no  use  to  blame,  or  to  rate  as  if  of  lower  value  or 
fidelity,  the  man  who  is  "  very  willing  to  do  anything  he  is  asked  to  do,"  but  who 
now  and  again  is  a  disappointing,  troublesome  failure  in  some  things  he  under- 
takes. Perhaps  he  was  set  to  work  he  was  not  made  for ;  he  was  not  "  set  in  the 
Body  "  to  do  that.  Better  to  be  thankful  for  his  willing  mind,  and  for  his  not 
infrequent  usefulness  or  success.      There  are  few,  or  no,  really  "all-round" 

256 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xii. 


men.  There  are  no  "all-round"  members  in  a  body.  Also,  the  man  himself 
will  be  saved  from  a  morbid  sensitiveness  of  self-reproach,  by  remembering 
that  the  differentiation  of  organ  and  function  and  power  which  is  more  and 
more  the  characteristic  of  more  highly  organised  life,  is  a  limitation  in  many 
directions,  a  real  disqualification  for  many  forms  of  service.  His  zeal  for 
good  may  be  as  great,  his  consecration  of  himself  to  Christ  as  full  and  perfect 
and  entire,  his  spirituality  as  deep  and  intense,  as  that  of  some  more  obviously 
and  attractively  successful  member,  with  whom  he  is  tempted  to  compare  his 
own  smaller,  less  obvious  "  results "  and  work.  "  Not  one  (kind  of)  member. ^^ 
His  concern  is  only  with  the  whole-hearted  devotion  of  himself,  just  for  what 
he  is,  and  for  what  he  is  not,  just  for  what  he  can,  and  cannot,  do,  to  the  glory 
of  Christ  and  the  good  of  the  Body.  The  Lord  of  the  Church  knows  exactly 
where  to  put  and  use  him  ;  just  where  his  special,  if  narrow,  or  humble  qualifica- 
tion will  be  of.  most  service,  and  where  his  limitations  will  be  least  detrimental,  or 
not  detrimental  at  all,  to  the  growth  of  the  Body  and  the  work  of  Christ  through 
It  in  the  world.  Consecration,  intensity  of  spirituality,  are  in  themselves  an 
equipment  for  usefulness ;  but  they  will  not  make  a  foot  do  the  work  of  a  hand, 
or  an  ear,  or  an  eye.  5.  To  remember  that  specialisation  is  limitation  as  well 
as  qualification,  will  also  save  a  man  from  the  feeling  which  finds  expression  in 
vers.  15-17.  It  begins,  be  it  noted,  in  a  comparison  of  oneself  with  a  ^'"member" 
higher  or  more  honourable ;  whether  really  so,  or  according  to  customary 
estimation.  Possibly  the  comparison  may  at  first  have  been  the  self -depreciating, 
needlessly  condemning  one  just  suggested  in  4.  But  it  is  very  apt  to  pass  over 
into  a  fretful  discontent  that  one  is  limited,  and  cannot  do  what  the  "  hand"  or 
"  eye  "  can  do,  or  win  the  credit  they  gain.  The  ^^foot  "  that  begins  by  wishing 
it  could  do  what  the  "  hand  "  does,  soon  ends  by  mu:fmuring  that  it  cannot.  And 
it  is  not  a  long  step,  it  is  one  easily  taken,  when  this  disheartened  disappointment 
lends  itself  to  the  leading  of  wounded  vanity,  to  a  pique  which  will  do  nothing, 
not  even  its  own  characteristic  and  intended  office.  "  I  am  not  the  hand  ;  I 
cannot  do  this  or  that  which  the  hand  does.  Am  I  of  any  use  in  the  Body  ?  Am 
I  really  in  it  ?  "  very  readily  is  transformed  into,  "  I  am  not  the  hand ;  I  am  no 
longer — I  will  not  be — of  the  body." 

B.  Unity. — *'  E  pluribus  unum."  All  such  judgments  as  have  been  suggested, 
even  those  which  are  honestly,  humbly  meant,  are  so  many  forms  of  self- 
centering.  The  safeguard  against  them,  and  their  remedy,  is  to  go  deeper  than 
the  diversity,  and  see  the  profound,  glorious  unity. 

I.  What  is  it  that  is  one? — 1.  ''The  Body'')  and,  more  wonderfully, 
"  Christ.'^  The  wife  takes  the  husband's  name  ;  Adam  and  Eve  are  *'  Adam" ; 
the  branches  are,  and  can  do,  so  utterly  '*  nothing  apart  from  Him,"  Who  is  the 
very  basis  and  source  of  their  life,  that  He  appropriates  to  Himself  the  name 
which  ordinarily  covers  stock  and  branches :  "  I  am  the  Vine."  Conversely,  here 
the  Head  is  so  pre-eminent  in  importance  amongst  the  components  of  a  body — 
though  it  is  no  "  head "  apart  from  "  the  members "  ;  cut  off  from  it,  they 
are  so  entirely  without  power,  or  will,  or  Ufe;  the  head,  moreover,  so  nearly 
completely  expresses  the  man,  that,  for  example,  the  picture  of  the  head  is 
taken  as  the  picture  of  the  man  ["  That  is  Mr.  So-and-so,"  men  say,  when 
looking  only  at  a  bust] ;  that,  in  this  Body,  *'  Christ "  covers  Christ  and  His 
people."  [In  Gal.  v.  16  His  name  stands  alone  in  the  covenant  promise  :  *' to 
thy  seed — which  is  Christ."  But  it  is  manifestly  no  boon  to  Him  personally 
which  is  thus  conveyed  and  assured  to  "  Christ."  To  Him  indeed,  but  to  Him 
only  for  the  sake  of  the  wider  "  seed,"  who,  with  Him,  and  in  their  union  with 
Him,  are  "heirs"  also  "according  to  (the  tenor  of)  the  promise,"  ib.  v.  29).] 
2.  That  Body,  that  "Christ,"  "The  Church"  when  so  defined  and  vindicated, 
is  always  "  otic."     It  is  only  the  imperfect  human  expression  of,  and  approxi- 

s  257 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


mation  to,  this    *'  one   hody^^  which  is  outwardly  divided,  and  even  rent  into 
antagonistic  confession,  and  "communions" — (save  the  mark  !) 

II.  How  is  it  one?— 1.  "One,"  "Holy,"  "  Catholic,"  "  Apostolic,"  are  foui 
"  notes  "  of  the  Church,  found  in  the  earlier  Christian  creeds.  The  confessional 
and  ecclesiastical  definitions  of  the  first  have  been  very  various,  ranging  between 
widely  removed  extremes  of  theory  and  teaching.  At  the  one  is  the  theory 
which  sees  no  unity  where  there  is  not  connection  with  an  historically  con- 
tinuous organisation,  of  which  an  essential  factor  is  a  succession  of  orders 
inherent  in  one  special  line  of  ministry,  ordained  in  one  special  manner,  and 
presumed  to  stand  in  direct  and  authorising  connection  with  the  apostles  them- 
selves. At  the  other  stands  the  theory  which,  beyond  the  unity  of  the  particular 
congregation,  sees  no  oneness  but  that  of  voluntary  aggregation.  Midway  is  a 
compromise  attempted  by  those  who — Anglican  with  diocesan  episcopacy  or 
Lutheran  without  it — only  hope  for  or  believe  in  the  unity  of  national  Churches. 
[Governmental,  Gregarious,  Geographical.]  2.  But,  as  a  matter  of  exposition, 
a  point  of  outward,  manifest,  historical  oneness  so  universal  as  baptism  with  (more 
or  less  of)  water  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity,  is  very  subordinate  even  in  ver.  13, 
where  the  "  baptism "  on  which  the  stress  is  laid  is  that  "  in  the  one  Spirit.''* 
The  unifying  Headship  of  Christ  itself  is  not  in  our  passage  so  prominent  as 
the  unifying  presence,  and  "  workj^  and  "  manifestation,^*  and  endowments  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  Uhi  Spiritus  ihi  Ecclesia.  We  customarily  distinguish  between 
"gifts "and  "graces";  here  they  are  alike  ^''spiritual  (things)"  (so,  literally, 
ver.  1).  All,  and  each  several  one,  of  them  bespeak  the  presence  of  the  in- 
dwelling Holy  Ghost.  Whether  "  through,'*  or  "  according  to,**  or  "  in  **  be  Paul's 
carefully  chosen  and  varied  word,  i.e.  whether  He  be  the  channel,  or  the 
regulating  and  testing  norm,  or  the  very  life  element  in  which  they  are  enjoyed ; 
every  charism,  ordinary  and  permanent,  or  extraordinary,  and  passing  with  the 
Apostolic  age,  brilliant,  or  useful  merely — every  one  leads  upward  and  backward 
to  a  common  Original, — One  Holy  Ghost.  These  are  all  evidences  of  His  presence 
Who  is  the  life — not  which,  but — hy  which  the  Body  lives.  If  each  member  lives, 
it  is  because  it  shares  in  Him  the  life  of  the  whole.  He  "  divides  "  not  only  His 
gifts,  but  Himself,  "  to  every  man.**  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
he  is  none  of  His  "  (Bom.  viii.  9).  This  Vine  feels,  in  every  tiniest  twig  and 
to  the  farmost  tip  of  every  finest  tendril ;  this  Body  feels,  in  every  most  humble 
member,  and  most  remote  from  the  head,  and  to  the  very  extremity  of  the  last 
thread  of  each  many-branching  nerve ;  one  common  Life, — the  Spirit  of  that 
special  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  (Bom.  viii.  2).  The  Unity  is  a  unity  of 
the  life-element  in  the  body,  a  life-element  which  not  only  holds  together  all  the 
components  of  the  living  organism,  but  which  by  its  presence  holds  in  check  the 
forces  of  disintegration  and  decay,  the  forces  which  make  for  "  Death."  3.  Thi 
"  gifts  "  speak  of  a  unity  of  Source  aiid  Giver.  The  "  cloven  tongues  "  of  Pentecost, 
rightly  appreciated,  exhibited  this,  at  the  very  outset  of  the  new  order,  the  dis- 
pensation of  the  Spirit.  The  painters  of  uncritical  centuries,  often  deriving 
their  traditional  conception  from  ill-instructed  ecclesiastics,  have  generally  given 
us  a  seated  company  of  men  and  women,  on  the  head  of  each  of  whom  rests  a 
split,  pointed  flame  like  that  of  a  lamp.  Every  tongue  is  pretty  much  a  copy  of 
every  other, — in  utter  antithesis  to  the  diversity  in  unity  of  vers.  8-11.  Each 
head  has  its  own  tongue.  Almost  if  it  had  been  a  Holy  Ghost  to  each,  working 
in  each  an  almost  precisely  similar  gift  and  manifestation  !  Whereas  the  truer 
reading  exactly  expresses  the  fact ;  which  the  real  appearance  also  exhibited. 
Over  the  head  of  the  one  company  hung  the  one  flame-like  appearance  [a 
Shekinah-cloud  ?]  darting  "  disparted  tongues  as  of  fire,"  out  and  down,  one  to 
each  several  head.  [With  guarded  use  the  (very)  material  illustration  may 
serve :   The  unity  of  the  source  of  the  supply  of  gas  and  water   through   the 

258 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   L   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xii. 


thousand  homes  of  a  modern  municipality.     The  light  which  cheers  in  a  sick- 
room in  some  artisan's  cottage  at  the  poorer  end,  is  no  separate  and  independent 
— candle-like,  lamp-like — illumination ;  it  is  being  every  moment  fed  from  the 
same  source,  and  out  of  the  same  common  body  of  illuminating  material,  as 
are  the  lights  which  are  at  that  moment  blazing  in  the  drawing-rooms  of  the 
wealthiest  of  the  "West  End"  homes.    Every  house  in  the  place  ^^ drinks  into"  one 
and  the  same  common  central  water-store.    The  water  is  not  "  mine  "  or  "  yours  "  ; 
it  is  "  ours."]    4.  The  highest  evidence  of  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  is  the  common  confes- 
sion of  the  "  Lordship  "  of  "  Jesus."    Even  in  Corinth,  amongst  "  spiritual "  men, 
though  they  be  only  of  a  "  carnal "  grade,  there  is  agreement  here.     Here  there 
is  indeed  "  no  schism  in  the  body."     Every  partisan  of  Paul  or  Apollos  or  Cephas 
joins  heart  and  confession  here  :  "  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord."     That  shall  one  day  be 
the  confession  of  the  whole  sentient  universe,  in  its  every  order  of  life  and  intelH- 
gence  (Phil.  ii.  11 ;  cf.  Isa.  xlv.  23  ;   Deut.  v.  8).     Some  shall  pay  it  even  then 
with    an   enforced   submission   and   homage.     Now   many  hearts  will  neither 
render  the  submission  nor  accord  the  homage.      In  the  days  of  His  humbled 
estate  and  veiled  glory,  the  evil  spirits  now  and  again  would  cry  out,  as  He  drew 
near  to  them  or  to  their  human  "  temples,"  "  We  know  Thee  who  Thou  art,  the 
Holy  One  of  God "  (Mark  i.  24;  cf.   "Jesus  I  recognise,"  Acts  xix.  15).     But 
the  full   force  of  the  statement  may  well  amount  to  something  less  than  a 
proclamation  of  His  Godhead.     Kate  its  value  high  as  we  may,  it  was  an  admis- 
sion rather  than  a  confession.     It  was  wrung  out  from  fear,  and  from  the  unholy 
recoil  of  evil  at  the  very  touch  and  presence  of  goodness  ;  and  it  may  be  that 
it  had  often  not  a  little  malice  in  it,  as  an  attempt  to  force  on  a  premature  avowal 
of  Himself  on  the  part  of  Jesus.      He  at  least  refused  such  testimony  to  Him- 
self.    (Cf.  Peter's  "  Depart  from  me,  for,"  etc.,  Luke  v.  8.)     A  confession  bursts 
irrepressibly  forth   from   the  reverent,  trusting,  adoring   heart  of  a   believer 
taught  by  the  Spirit.      The  admission  of  the  Galilsean  demons  had  in  the  heart 
of  it  a  curse.     The  lips  said,  "  Thou  art  the  Holy  One  of  God  " ;  the  heart  said, 
"  Anathema  he  this  Jesus  !  "     The  words  here  used  suggest  a  strange  scene  in  the 
little  meeting-place  of  the  Church  at  Corinth.     "  The  prophets  are  prophesying  " 
together  (cf.  1  Sam.  xix.  20  sqq.)  ;  "  a  spirit "  comes  upon  or  enters  into  another 
worshipper,  and  he  too  shows  all  the  outward  accompaniments  of  the  illapse  of 
the  prophetic  Spirit.     The  "  disceimers  of  spirits"  with  their  intuitive  percep- 
tion [the  Holy  Ghost  in  one  gift  recognises  Himself  in  every  other],  are  perhaps 
absent.      The  new  ^^ prophet"  is  not  at  once  to  be  "  discerned"  by  the  character 
of  his  utterances ;  they  seem  harmless,  if  not  very  profitable.     But  some  hearts 
are  not  satisfied,  and  they  inquire,  "  Wilt  thou  say,  *  Jesus  is  Lord '  ?  "      And 
the  mask  is  dropped  ;  "  Lord  ?     No  !     Anathema  !  "     Or,  the  Christian  hymn  is 
being  uplifted  ;  the  men  endowed  with  "  tongues  "  are  glorifying  in  ecstatic  praise 
God  and  His  Christ ;  when  suddenly  a  discord  in  the  music  !     A  scream  of  hate 
and  rage  cuts  athwart  the  praise  :  "  Jesus  is  Anathema  !  "     That  is  no  prophet 
whose  gift  is   of  the  Spirit !     It   needs   no   special  charism   to    "  discern  the 
spirit "  in  such  a  man.     Less  aggravated  forms  of  this  Jesus-hate  were  found 
then,  and  might  be  found  now,  in  the  Jewish  synagogue.     Here  is  a  poor  young 
girl  who  is  denounced,  or  suspected,  as  a  Nazarene.     She  is  brought  before  the 
rulers  of  the  synagogue.     The  test  is  short  and  simple  :  "  Call  this  Jesus  the 
Nazarene  *  Absalom  ' ;  call  Him  '  The  Hanged-one '  [Gallows-bird  !]  ;  call  Him 
*  the  Bastard  Branch ' ;  curse  Him  ;  say  that  He  is  anathema  !  "     Happy  if, 
by  some  miracle  of  holy  courage,  the  young  heart  does  not  quail,  or  if,  while  the 
lips  blench  with  the  strain  of  excitement,  they  will  shape  none  of  the  accursed 
words.     See  her  stand   there,   and  at   last   break  her   silence   in  response  to 
threatening,  or  warning,  or  appeal,  with  the  cry  of  passionate  devotion  :  "  Jesus 
is  Jehovah  !  "     [How  they  would  have  got  their  answer,  clear  and  sudden,  from 

259 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Paul  of  Tarsus,  if  conceivably  they  had  put  him  to  their  test.  "Call  him 
'  Anathema  '  !  "  Not  anger,  but  conviction  and  love,  make  his  voice  ring  out : 
*'  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him — not  Jesus — be 
anathema  !  "  Speaking  of  the  stories  of  Jesus  in  the  Talmud,  Dr.  Geikie  says : 
"  Against  (Him)  no  slander  is  too  gross  to  be  retailed  by  the  E-abbis  "  {Life  of 
Christy  ii.  624).]  And  yet  more  subtilly  does  the  presence  of  the  same  aversion 
which  may  deepen  into  antipathy  to  Christ,  betray  itself  in  ordinary,  decent 
men  and  women  of  to-day.  No  man  who  knows  himself  but  remembers 
the  averting  of  heart  from  Christ  which  made  His  name  unwelcome,  and 
aroused  a  real  resentment,  when  His  claims  on  heart  and  life  were  pressed 
with  more  earnestness  than  usual.  What  spirit  is  that?  It  is  the  fashion 
to  exalt  the  character  of  the  Man,  the  Teacher,  the  Universal  Brother 
and  Pattern,  Jesus.  But  to  accept  and  own  practically  His  *'  Lordship " 
— that  is  another  matter.  To  own  that  as  a  creed,  indeed,  did  once  become 
almost  an  epidemic  fashion  in  stormy  days  in  Constantinople,  till  one  could 
hardly  ask  a  carpenter  or  a  shoemaker  the  simplest  question  about  his  trade 
and  work  without  drawing  forth  by  way  of  reply  some  fierce  "Athanasian" 
sentence  about  the  Trinity  and  the  Godhead  of  the  Son.  But  give  the  natural 
heart  time  and  room  to  *'  grow  "  its  tendencies  to  full  blossom  and  fruit,  remove 
the  restraints  of  education  and  of  conventional  propriety  or  fear  ;  men  may  then 
come  to  the  rabid,  destructive  hate  of  Christianity  and  things  Christian  which 
not  only  disfigures  the  pages  of  some  who  ought  to  be  calmly  scientific  writers, 
but  which,  in  some  times  of  Continental  upheaval,  has  dared  bitter  words,  and 
done  black  deeds,  against  everything  of  God  and  His  Christ.  How  the  natural 
heart  will  tolerate  any  religion  which  is  content  to  be  a  mere  set  of  opinions 
with  no  practical  bearing  upon  life.  English  "  good  society "  will  play  at 
Mahometanism,  or  at  Buddhism — "  esoteric  "  or  other — or  at  Romanism  or  at 
*^  being  High  Church."  But  as  to  taking  up  Christianity  as  a  "  craze  "  !  Why, 
the  thing  insists  on  being  lived  out  \  Insufierable  !  Nor  is  it  enough  to  say 
that  this  a  revolt  against  any  one  particular  presentation  of  Christianity  and 
against  its  priesthood.  It  has  in  it  the  germ  of  that  hatred  of  good  as  good, 
that  hatred  of  God  Incarnate  which  went  at  least  near  to  ripening  into  the 
unpardonable  "  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  "  [Matt.  xii.  30,  31 ;  so  closely 
connected  with  His  sharply  divisive  word  :  "  He  that  is  not  with  Me  is  against 
Me  ! "]  So,  by  a  converse  but  analogous  process,  there  is  a  Spirit — the  Holy 
One — behind  every  real  confession  of  the  Lordship  of  Christ.  "  Flesh  and  blood  " 
do  not  reveal  this  doctrine,  nor  reveal  Him,  to  men.  There  is  a  knowledge  of 
Christ  which  is  part  of  the  new  world  into  which  that  man  has  passed  who  is 
himself  made  ^^ayiew  creature''^  (2  Cor.  v.  16,  17).  The  burst  of  revelation 
which  came  to  Peter — or  rather  the  sudden  flash  of  insight  which  showed  in 
Peter — near  Csesarea  Philippi  (Matt.  xvi.  16,  17);  the  sudden,  overwhelming 
access  of  knowledge  which  silenced  all  the  tests  and  requirements  that  Thomas 
was  going  to  propose  and  insist  upon,  and  left  him  with  only  one  thing  to  do, 
only  one  thing  to  say — to  fall  prostrate  and  cry,  ''  My  Lord  and  my  God  !  " 
[which  is  the  manifest,  (and  if  the  word  be  permissible)  the  artistic,  climax  to 
the  Gospel  of  John ; — the  confession  of  John  the  Baptist  and  of  Nathanael,  in 
chap,  i.,  lead  up,  through  a  succession  of  confessions,  to  this  of  Thomas,  the  last, 
most  definite,  most  full,  in  its  recognition  of  Christ  as  Lord] ; — these  are  distinctly 
grace^ — '•^spiritual  things"  (ver.  1).  The  ^^ faith"  of  ver.  9  is  indeed  pretty 
certainly  shown  by  its  companion  "  gifts  "  to  be  miracle-working  faith  (cf .  under 
Critical  Notes).  Yet  it  is  only  one  phase,  one  operative  presentation,  of  a  larger 
"/a^^^,"  of  which  in  every  sense  it  is  true  that  it  is  "  by  the  same  Spirit" 
In  ver.  9  it  is  a  Hand  thrust  into  the  unseen,  "  spiritual "  world  and  grasping 
there  the  God  from  Whom  it  draws  power  for  mighty  works.     But  it  is  also, 

260 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xll. 


and  more  widely,  true  that  it  is  an  Eye  to  whose  gaze  all  that  world  stands 
unveiled,  "  naked  and  open  "  as  we  are  to  the  gaze  of  God.  It  begins  already 
**  to  know  even  as  we  are  known  "  (xiii.  11 ).  And  the  opened  Eye  is  one  of  the 
gifts  of  the  Spirit  through  Whose  quickening  men  already  *'  pass  from  Death 
unto  Life."  Life  has  come  into  Death ;  the  dead  eye  now  lives  and  can  see. 
Hence  John's  close  association  of  being  "  born  of  God  "  with  "  believing 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ."  Or,  as  he  gives  it  in  varying  statements  :  **  Who  is 
he  that  overcometh  the  world  but  he  that  belie veth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son 
of  God  1 "  Or,  again  :  '*  Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God, 
God  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in  God"  (1  John  v.  1,  5,  iv.  15).  No  merely 
doctrinal  *'  confession  "  or  "  faith  "  satisfies  such  statements.  The  stoutest  and 
most  orthodox  champion  of  the  Godhead  of  Jesus,  whether  against  old  Socinian, 
or  later  Unitarian,  or  modern  Naturalistic,  may,  nevertheless,  be  no  man  "  born 
of  God  "  Orthodoxy  and  Regeneration  in  such  vital  association  make  "ortho- 
doxy" something  far  higher,  deeper,  than  a  matter  of  creed.  The  only  man 
who  knows  a  Divine  Christ  is  the  man  who  is  "  in  Christ."  Other  men  may 
master  the  sections  in  the  "  Handbooks  of  Theology,"  the  "  Institutes,"  or  the 
like,  headed  *'  Divinity  of  Christ "  ;  they  may  become  past- masters  in  the  con- 
troversial literature  of  the  topic ;  they  may  know  completely  the  accustomed 
collection  and  formulation  of  the  scattered  and  often  inferential  data,  which, 
when  marshalled  in  due  order,  are  the  basis  of  the  doctrine ;  they  may  be  expert 
of  fence  in  dealing  with  the  difficulties  and  the  criticisms  of  the  objector; 
weighing  Scripture  statements  for,  and  the  passages  which  in  Scripture  itself 
seem  to  be  against ;  they  may  come  up  to  the  assured  intellectual  position  that 
Revelation  makes  "  Jesus  Lord"  But  even  then  they  do  not  know  Him  ;  the 
belief  which  intellect  has  built  up,  intellect  may  destroy ;  the  argumentative 
balance  may  by  new  considerations  be  made  to  turn  against  the  doctrine ;  the 
Lordship  of  Jesus  is  only  rooted  in  the  surface  stratum  of  their  manhood;  a 
storm  of  sceptical  attack  may  uproot  it.  The  spiritual  man  does  not  under- 
value the  arguments ;  they  are  most  likely  the  ladder  by  which  he  climbed  to 
the  level  of  a  true  faith.  They  made  him  ready  to  believe.  But  he  has  now  a 
direct  intuition  of  Jesus  as  Lord,  which  he  shares  with  ten  thousand  others,  most 
of  whom  know  nothing,  nor  can  know,  of  the  arguments.  The  same  Spirit 
Whose  indwelling  in  Him  makes  him  live,  makes  the  regenerate  man  know 
Christ  and  His  Lordship.  [Cf.  another  case  of  apparent  connection  of 
*'  salvation  "  with  tlie  acceptance  of  an  historical  proposition  :  "  God  raised  Him 
from  the  dead ; "  and  of  a  theological  dogma  :  "  I  confess  Jesus  as  Lord  " 
(Rom.  X.  9).  Of  course  "with  the  heart"  makes  all  the  difference.  As  here] 
the  truth  accepted  into  the  creed  also  passes  into,  and  is  assimilated  and  repro- 
duced in,  the  experience.  The  inward,  spiritual  life  echoes  and  reproduces  the 
outward,  historical,  Christian  verity.  Christ's  development  of  God's  word  "in 
the  Bush  "  (Matt.  xxii.  32)  brought  out  the  profoundly  fundamental  truth  that 
for  God  to  say  "  I  am  Abraham's  God,"  involved  a  natural  capability  of  such  a 
relation  which  is  unshared  by  the  brute  creation,  and  which  argued  a  soul  not 
"  dead  and  done  with  "  ;  and  further  implied  an  actual,  spiritual  covenant  relation- 
ship between  God  and  the  man.  So  for  a  man  to  say  in  any  real  sense,  "  Jesus 
is  Jehovah,"  he  must  have  come  a  long  way  to  have  reached  that  point,  and  the 
truth  must  now  carry  him  a  long  way  further.  To  him  "  to  live  "  must  be,  in  fact, 
"  Christ."  It  will  mean  such  a  trust,  such  an  habitual  dependence,  such  a  new 
principle  of  covenanted,  faithful  obedience,  as  the  heart  only  renders  to  God 
when  it  has  become  "  a  new  heart."  And  it  comes  as  a  new  revelation,  (to 
speak  inexactly)  a  fresh  disclosure,  to  each  man  who  comes  to  the  saving  know- 
ledge of  the  truth.  The  man  who  knows  Jesus  his  "  Lord  "  knows  also  that  he 
never  said  it  or  believed  it  to  any  practical  intent  until  he  learned  it  as  a  sinner 

261 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


"  hy  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  God.^'  The  Spirit's  work  is  to  testify  of  Christ. 
He  is  the  great  Preacher  of  Christ.  He  has  but  the  one  theme — Christ.  And  He 
has  wrought  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  in  all  the  ages  and  races  and  communions, 
a  wonderful  unity  in  the  testimony,  "  Jesus  is  Lord  "  !  The  voice  of  the  much- 
divided  Church  is  one  here  !  5.  Theology,  more  theology,  always  theology,  under- 
neath all  the  facts  and  teachings  about  the  spiritual  life  !  The  theology  may  be  pre- 
sented by  itself,  as  the  skeleton  may  be  dissected  out  from  the  body,  and  exhibited 
alone.  But  it  is  a  hard,  ugly  thing  ;  as  the  theology  which  is  the  "  bony  "  frame 
giving  shape  and  strength  to  vers.  4-6,  may  be  made  to  seem.  Underneath  the  most 
noble  form,  underneath  the  most  beautiful  face,  are  a  skeleton  and  a  grinning 
skull.  So  we  may  not  have  the  verses  and  their  teaching,  we  may  not  have  the 
experimental  unity,  without  the  Trinity.  [Good  example  this  of  Pauline  passages 
which  assume  the  "  Dogma,"  and  are  Trinitarian  in  underlying,  essential  structure. 
Usually  the  Trinity  is  barely  seen  in  the  New  Testament  except  in  connection  with 
Pedemption.]  "  The  Spirit"  'Hhe  Lord"  ^^God."  Here  again  there  is  order  in  the 
equality  ;  there  is  diversity  in  the  unity.  It  is  not  overpressing  the  suggestion  of 
analogy  between  the  Unity  of  the  Godhead  and  the  Unity  of  the  Body  :  "  That  they 
may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  one  "  (John  xvii.  22).  "  All  the  capacities  come  from 
one  Spirit;  the  different  kinds  of  service  are  for  the  same  Master ;  and  the  different 
results  are  produced  by  the  same  First  Cause "  (Beet).  From  one  Source ; 
under  one  Puler ;  all,  ultimately,  through  one  God.  It  is  the  unity  of  streams 
which  all  derive  precisely  similar  waters  from  the  one  fountain ;  of  troops  of 
different  arms  and  training,  fitted  for  different  service,  under  the  orders  and 
fulfilling  the  plan  of  the  same  Captain  ;  or  of  many  classes  of  servants  under  the 
same  great  Master  of  the  house ;  of  living  ones  whose  life  and  all  its  activities 
come  from  the  vivifying,  in  working  hand  of  the  one  Living  God.  At  how  many 
points  are  the  many  units  summed  up ;  at  how  many  points  of  rapport  do  the 
diversified  hosts  of  the  Christian  army  find  themselves  in  contact,  one  host.  The 
unity  goes  down  to  the  springs  of  the  very  principle  of  Life,  for  the  Body  and  for 
the  individual  member;  it  mounts  up  to  the  One  Lord  Christ,  towards  Whom  every 
heart,  every  face,  every  life,  converges,  with  adoration  paid  to  Him  **  as  to  God  " 
[said  Pliny's  letter] ;  it  broadens  out  until  it  takes  into  its  holy  compass  and 
round  all  who  in  grace  and  gifts  manifest  the  presence  of  the  same  Holy  Ghost, 
all  who  serve  for  the  love  of  the  same  Lord,  all  in  whom  stirs  the  same  life  of 
God.  Blind  they  who  *'  cannot  see  the  wood  for  the  trees,"  who  cannot  see  The 
Church  for  looking  at  the  Churches  !  Can  they  not  verify  the  *'  Tuanifestations  " 
of  the  same  Spirit  ?  or  ascertain  that  the  "  ministrations  "  are  for  and  under 
the  same  Christ  ?  Can  they  question  whether  the  energy,  in  this  and  that 
Church  or  man  so  absolutely  identical  in  all  its  effects,  is  of  the  same  God  ? 

C.  Dependence. — /^^ez-dependence — "  No  need  of  thee  I"  (ver.  21).  That  is  not 
the  voice  of  any  component  of  the  Body ;  it  is  not  the  intelligent  voice  of  any 
member  of  a  body.  It  sins  against  the  very  idea  of  an  organism.  And  the 
Church  is  not  an  aggregation  merely,  like  some  chance  heap  of  stones.  It  is  not 
even  an  orderly  structure  merely,  like  a  temple.  The  aggregation  and  order  are 
those  of  an  organic  structure,  those  of  a  living  organism.  Put  the  statue  of  a 
man  and  a  living  man  side  by  side,  the  very  man  (say)  whose  features  and 
form  and  stature  are  copied,  to  the  last  degree  of  accurate  correspondence. 
The  one  is  made  up  of  crystals,  the  other  of  living  cells.  How  great  the  differ- 
ence in  the  unity  thus  in  each  case  set  up.  It  may  be  mechanically  an  easier 
task  to  rend  asunder  cell  from  cell  than  crystal  from  crystal ;  more  easy  to 
damage  the  union  and  the  unity  of  Hfe  than  that  of  mere  aggregation,  though  of 
the  closest.  [Against  outward  assault,  the  highly  developed  ecclesiastical,  historic 
Church  system  is  no  doubt  stronger  in  resisting  power  than  the  Church  unity, 
whose  one  bond  is  an  inner,  vital  one.     The  always  dead,  marble  form  persists 

262 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xii. 


unaltered  for  ever  j  the  dead,  cell -built  form,  which  once  was  living,  disintegrates 
with  accelerating  rapidity,  from  the  moment  the  life  departs.]  But  notice  how 
the  unity  ends,  as  it  began,  with  the  mere  contact  of  neighbour  with  neighbour. 
Each  crystal  of  the  statue-form  is  self-contained  and  perfect  in  itself :  "/  have  no 
need  of  thee"  It  receives  nothing  from,  it  gives  nothing  to,  the  next  crystal  on 
every  side  of  it.  It  is  nothing  to  the  next,  except  that  it  happens  to  be-  next. 
As  there  are  "  Churches  "  whose  unity  has  shrunk  to  little  more  than  this,  a 
unity  of  aggregation  within  the  same  four  walls,  for  worship  or  for  the  enjoyment 
of  some  one  preacher  who  happens  to  catch  the  ear  of  them  all ;  or  to  a  still  more 
attenuated  unity  of  bare  registration  upon  the  same  Church  roll.  Paul's  frequent 
illustration  of  a  temple  is  a  little  better.  Upper  stones  are  borne  by  those 
beneath  them,  and  in  their  turn  help  to  keep  these  in  place,  whilst  also  support- 
ing others  above  themselves.  Stone  may  lean  against  stone,  and  be  upheld. 
But  this  *^  give  and  take  "  of  support  is  mechanical,  and  it  is  all.  It  falls  far 
short  of  that  interchange  of  sympathy  and  help  between  the  parts  of  a  body,  and 
between  adjacent  cells  in  the  same  organism,  which  makes  the  figure  of  "a  body" 
so  nearly  perfect  for  the  purpose  of  the  Spirit's  teaching  about  the  interdepen- 
dence of  the  members  of  The  Body.  "  God  hath  set  the  members  in  the  body"  and 
in  The  Body,  that  member  may  help,  and  be  helped  by,  member.  An  indepen- 
dence which  should  refuse  to  give  anything  to  another,  or  should  attempt  to 
hold  itself  aloof  in  self -centered,  self-contained,  self-sufficing  fulness  of  life,  is 
utterly  alien  from  His  idea.  Such  "  Christians "  could  never  make  a  Church. 
[A  selfish  absorbency  which  will  take  all  that  the  Church,  or  any  member,  can 
give,  and  yet  forgets,  or  indolently  neglects,  to  give  to  any  in  return,  is  equally 
aHen  to  the  idea.]  Independency  and  selfish,  parasitic  dependency,  stand  equally 
condemned  by  the  very  principle  of  a  body.  Every  single  member  has  something 
to  give  me,  which  I  need  from  him  ;  every  single  member  may  demand  from  me  all 
I  have  which  can  serve  him.  The  debt  of  member  to  member  is  often  very  closely 
brought  home  to  the  heart,  by  some  relation  of  circumstances  which  binds  together 
a  couple  such  as  would  have  been  supposed  to  be  hopelessly  incongruous  opposites, 
in  age,  in  social  standing,  or  education,  or  mental  calibre.  Every  Church  can 
show  its  happy  examples  of  the  gladly  acknowledged  obligation  of  the  rich  master 
to  his  godly  servant's  prayers  and  character ;  of  the  educated  man's  manifold 
debt  to  the  unlettered  but  saintly,  Christian  neighbour,  with  whom  some  "  happy 
accident  "  in  the  providence  of  God  has  somewhat  closely  associated  him.  On  the 
other  hand,  there  are  found  not  a  few  homely  men  and  women,  with  good  sense 
enough  very  thankfully  to  draw  inspiration  and  help  from  the  evident  firmness 
of  belief  and  from  the  cultured  godliness  of  some  educated  Christian  whom  they 
know.  It  is  pride,  not  gratitude,  which  is  restless  under  this  sense  of  indebtedness. 
The  grateful,  cheerful  acknowledgment,  "  /  have  need  of  thee"  is  politically, 
socially,  as  well  as  in  the  Church,  the  saving  law  of  all  happy  corporate, 
organised  life.  The  association  and  the  reciprocal  helpfulness  are  indeed  much 
wider  than  the  simple  couplet  *'  /  .  .  .  thee."  Member  does  often  help 
member,  in  charming  examples  of  direct  and  close  personal  association.  There 
is  often  a  tenderness  and  a  beauty,  which  are  in  themselves  a  strength  and  a 
help,  about  this  more  easily  and  vividly  realised  help  of  individual  to  individual, 
which,  when  the  relation  is  rather  that  of  one  to  a  great  Whole,  is  lost,  or 
is  hardly  so  powerful  a  motive  or  bond.  When,  man  to  man,  "  the  members 
have  the  same  care  one  for  another "  ;  when  the  Christian  is  drawn  to,  and 
helps,  some  particular  fellow-Christian ;  it  is  gloriously,  and  very  practically, 
true  that  he  is  helping  the  whole  Church.  Few  hearts  can  embrace  "  The 
Church  " ;  but  we  can  "  love  the  brother  whom  we  have  seen."  Yet  each  may 
remember  that  the  Whole  does  depend  in  some  degree  upon  the  One.  "No 
member  but  really  puts  something  of  value  into  the  grand  common   stock, 

263 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  CORINTHIANS. 


whilst  in  turn  it  is  helped  from  the  common  store.     Thus  Dependence  passes 
over  into — 

D.  Serviceableness. — Indeed,  it  has  been  difficult  under  C.  not  to  anticipate  D. 

1.  A  man's  gift  is  not  his  own,  alone  or  chiefly.  He  is  graced  and  gifted  most 
of  all  for  the  sake  of  the  common  good  and  the  common  growth.  The  ideal  of 
the  Body's  increase  is  not  the  independent  and  isolated  growth  of  member  and 
member,  however  perfect,  each  by  itself  working  out  its  own  development.  Con- 
ceivably a  hand  might  grow  whilst  its  fellow-hand,  or  the  foot,  might  linger  at 
infantile  strength  or  weakness.  But  such  irregularly  distributed  growth  might 
really  disturb,  not  only  the  harmony,  but  the  very  unity  of  the  body.  No ;  the 
ideal  is,  "Till  we  all  come — pari  passu — to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the 
fulness  of  Christ " ;  i.e.  each  member  sharing  in,  keeping  pace  with,  the  develop- 
ment of  the  whole,  till  Head  and  Members  stand  forth  one  Body,  one  "  perfect 
Man,"  every  part  harmoniously  and  completely  developed  to  manhood's  scale  of  size 
and  strength  (Eph.  iv.  13).  Toward  this  tends  all  the  variety  and  distribution 
of  the  '■^spiritual  (things) "  of  ver.  1.  It  is  designed  for  this.  What  one  member 
is  or  has,  or  can  do  or  be,  or,  under  the  training  and  discipline  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  can  develop  and  can  become, — all  that  is  for  the  sake  of  all  the  rest. 
We  may  be  sure  it  was  pure  instinct,  however  guided  and  organised,  which 
originated  the  brief -lived  community  of  goods  in  the  sub- Pentecostal  days  in 
Jerusalem.  The  right  heart  of  the  "  member  "  does  not  need  schooling  into  this 
sharing  of  all  the  "  good  things  "  with  which  he  himself  is  endowed.  The  very 
possession  of  any  ability  or  faculty  which  can  be  laid  under  contribution  for 
the  welfare  of  a  fellow-Christian  or  the  Church,  is  in  itself  a  claim  for  its  use. 
The  fitness  for  office  is  a  call  to  undertake  office.  A  hand  ought  to  be  doing 
a  hand's  work.  "  To  profit  withal "  must  not  be  misunderstood  (ver.  7).  As 
matter  of  exegesis  the  "  profit "  thought  of  by  St.  Paul  is  the  profit  of  the  whole, 
not  of  the  man  himself.  This  latter  is  true,  and  is  closely  linked  with  tho 
former.  (God  always  does  make  duty  to  others  and  to  Himself  to  go  hand  in 
hand  with  blessing  to  the  man  himself.)  For  his  own  sake,  certainly,  should  a 
man  strive  to  be  at  his  best,  his  best,  the  fullest  development  of  which  he  is 
capable, — eye,  hand,  foot,  whatever  be  his  place  and  capacity  in  the  body.  The 
men  in  the  Parable  of  the  Talents  profit,  with  equal  fidelity  and  with  pro- 
portionate success,  by  the  talents  entrusted  to  them.  But  they  are  simply  salient 
instances  sufficient  to  illustrate  the  Lord's  principle.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there 
will  be  many  varying  arrangements  and  gradations  of  faithfulness  and  increase. 
Five  talents  will  sometimes  only  bring  two,  or  even  one,  to  the  Master.  Or,  as  in 
the  complementary  Parable  of  the  Pounds,  one  talent  may  win  two  or  even 
five.  Each  "  member  "  should  be  growing  to  his  best.  He  should  be  at  his  best 
for  his  own  life's  sake.  But  what  Paul  here  says,  is  that  he  should  he  at  his  best 
for  Christ  and  for  the  body.  Talent,  faculty,  unimproved  or  only  half  cultivated, 
is  a  sin  against  that  law  of  serviceableness  which  lies  at  the  very  root  of  the 
idea  of  "  His  Body,  the  Church."  "  Stir  up  the  gift  of  God  that  is  in  thee,"  is 
not  an  advice  for  Timothy  only  (2  Tim.  i.  6).  A  gift  is  a  fire  which  needs 
feeding  and  "  poking  "  ;  God  kindles  it,  but  the  man  must  guard  and  stir  up  the 
holy  fire ;  not  merely  or  most  that  his  own  life  may  be  warmed  and  cheered  by 
the  blaze,  but  that  "  the  Body "  may  be  blessed  by  the  gift  that  is  in  him. 
The  possession  is  obligation.  A  Christian  man  may  not  deliberate  or  choose 
whether  he  will  or  will  not  give  himself  to  serve  his  Lord  and  the  Church. 
In  what  way  he  can,  in  that  way  he  ought.  He  was  made  what  he  is,  that  he 
may  be  serviceable.  He  will  receive  his  reward.  The  health  of  each  several 
member  is  but  a  particular  instance  of  the  healthy  life-condition  of  the  whole 
body.  If  the  whole  man  be  in  poor  health,  the  hand  is  feeble,  the  foot  begins 
to  fail.     As  the  man  recovers,  so  under  all  ordinary  conditions  the  foot  or  hand 

264 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xti. 


or  eye  renews  its  vigour.  The  most  frequent  form  of  the  interdependence,  as 
was  shown  above,  is  that  which  is  mediate,  through  the  body's  well-being  as  a 
whole ;  to  which  the  part  contributes,  and  out  of  which  it  receives  its  supply 
of  blessing.  So  then,  he  that  is  at  his  best  for  the  sake  of  the  Body  has  his 
reward ;  he  is  at  his  best  for  himself.  If,  therefore,  a  man  would  get  the  utmost 
of  advantage  from  the  Divine  institute,  a  Church,  let  him  do  his  utmost  of 
service,  and  be  at  his  best  of  spiritual  health,  ybr  the  Church.  But,  once  more, 
it  is  not  merely  interest ;  it  is  obligation.  The  body  lives  and  grows  by  the 
active  serviceableness  of  every  member,  whatever  some  aberrant  member  may 
do.  The  body  never  says  to  a  member,  "  /  have  no  need  of  thee  "  "  What  am  1  ? 
Hand,  or  eye,  or  foot,  or  ear,  or  what?  What  can  I  do  for  the  Body?  ^Nothing?' 
No ;  I  am  '  set  in  the  body '  with  my  own  small  capacity  for  something  ;  I  am  not 
'  of  no  use.'  Let  the  body,  let  the  Head  Himself,  command  me,  and  claim  me, 
even  me."  '•^ Even  me;"  this  leads  up  to  vers.  22-25.  Buskin  has  written  his 
"  Unto  this  last."  These  verses  are,  in  the  political  economy  of  the  Church's  own 
life  and  social  order,  the  Spirit's  "  TTnto  this  last."     We  have — 

2.  The  law  of  the  least  honourable  ;  their  real  honour  and  their  real  obligation. 
— (1)  "  Less  honourable  "  is  only  by  comparison  true,  and  by  accommodation.  In 
the  holy  innocence  of  Eden  all  the  body's  life  was  honourable  and  holy.  In  the 
holy  fellowship  of  "  the  Body  of  Christ "  there  is  no  member  who  is  not 
honourable.  Holiness  and  helpfulness,  to  the  full  of  the  capacity  and  opportunity 
— these  are  real  honour.  Poverty,  or  ignorance,  or  humble  capabilities  are 
no  dishonour ;  these  may  set  some  lower  in  the  scale,  but  they  are  degrees  of 
nobility,  all  of  them.  The  honour  upon  the  Head  runs  down  to  the  skirts 
of  His  raiment.  One  needs  not  to  force  Paul's  analogy  into  minute  and  even 
unseemly  detail,  but  his  general  drift  is  clear.  The  face  may  be  left  bare  in  its 
beauty  or  its  rugged  strength  ;  it  can  take  care  for  itself.  But  many  another 
part  needs  defence  and  covering.  There  are  men  conspicuous  in  the  Body,  of 
conspicuous  gifts ;  they  show  full  in  every  eye.  No  fear  but  that  they  will 
be  known  and  honoured.  There,  in  them,  the  Body  has  its  outlook  upon  the 
world ;  through  them  it  communicates  with  the  world.  But  for  one,  two,  ten, 
such,  there  are  the  score,  the  hundred,  the  mass,  of  less-obtrusive  gifts  and 
position,  never  likely  to  attract  much  attention,  or  to  win  much  applause,  even 
from  their  fellows  in  the  Body  ;  and  there  are  passive  and  quasi -internal, 
normally  hidden,  "  organs  "  in  the  Body  Itself.  Delicate,  sensitive,  easily  hurt, 
incapable  of  self-defence,  they  need  the  shield  of  the  stronger  membership. 
There  are  feet  and  hands  which  must  oft  do  rougher,  laborious  offices  in  the 
many-sided  work  of  the  Church,  or  even  the  drudgery  of  the  carrying  of  the 
rest  to  the  field  of  their  "  more  honourable  "  toil.  They  can  do  no  thinking,  or 
organising,  or  governing ;  they  must  do  the  obeying  and  the  executing  of  the 
orders  of  the  "corned?/"  and  '"'■  honourable'^  parts.  Or,  like  ear  and  eye,  they 
can  utter  nothing,  can  originate  nothing,  they  are  silent  and  receptive ;  they  can 
''^  do  nothing,"  they  are  apt  to  say,  nothing  but  receive  light  and  sound  for  the 
guidance,  the  warning,  the  comfort  of  the  rest.  "  Less  honourable^'  perhaps, 
but  still  "  honourable.''  They  are  of  the  body ;  they  are  in  the  body  for  its 
service.  That  is  their  honour.  The  body  needs  them.  (2)  They  are  necessary. 
Indeed,  perhaps  one  might  push  the  figure  so  far  as  to  say  ^''indispensably 
necessary.''^  Certainly,  in  the  actual  physical  structure,  there  are  some  small 
organs  whose  use  is  obscure ;  but  he  would  be  a  bold,  rash  physiologist  who 
should  pronounce  them  superfluous,  any  smallest  of  them.  Whilst  we  have 
been  slowly  and  laboriously  learning  the  function  of  this  organ  and  the  use  of 
that  part,  they  have  been  quietly  doing  their  work  and  fulfilling  their  function, 
vindicating  themselves  as  "  wanted  "  in  the  whole  economy  of  life.  As  certainly 
in  the  Body  of  Christ  there  are  no  dispensable  members.     The  Body  might  live 

265 


CHAP.  xii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


and  grow,  of  course,  without  any  one  of  them.  But  it  would,  pro  tanto,  be  with 
an  impoverished  life.  Ko  member  "  of  least  account  "  (vi.  4)  in  the  Church  can 
withdraw  his  help  and  contribution,  without  making  the  Church  the  poorer. 
Happy  that  Church  and  its  officers  who  know  how  to  prize  the  service  and  worth 
of  those  "  least  honourable  "  !  They  cannot  fill  the  pulpit,  but  they  can  sustain 
the  preacher  with  sympathy  and  prayer.  They  cannot  do  much  towards 
replenishing  the  treasury,  but  their  devotion,  their  steady,  y  ear-in -year-out 
attention  to  their  own  little  bit  of  work  is  an  inspiration,  or  perhaps  a  rebuke, 
to  the  large  givers  and  the  prominent  office-holders.  They  can  create  "  an 
atmosphere"  in  whose  sweet  and  healthy  peace  pastors  and  leaders  and 
"  workers  "  can  pursue  their  tasks  with  hope  and  vigour.  How  much  does 
"  The  Church,"  in  the  largest  sense,  owe  to  its  poor,  to  its  pensioners,  to  the  sick 
who  can  only  suffer  and  pray,  to  the  veterans  who  linger — not  "  lag  superfluous  " 
— upon  the  busy  stage,  where  they  can  no  longer  play  their  active  part,  but 
where  their  very  "  style  "  is  a  formative  tradition  for  the  younger  generation  ? 
These  "  less  honourable  "  cannot  do  the  fighting ;  they  make  no  contribution  to 
Apologetics.  But  they  have  been  an  "  Apology  for  the  Christian  Religion  " 
not  easily  ignored,  less  easily  gainsaid  or  silenced.  Written  in  no  book,  but 
exhibited  in  humble,  "  humdrum  "  lives.  Without  them  the  apologist  defends 
Christianity  in  vain  !  How  often  life  seems  to  have  retreated  to  these 
hidden  and  humble  members  of  the  body,  its  last  stronghold  and  safe 
asylum  through  days  of  widespread  sickness  or  of  epidemic  worldliness  !  How 
often  the  quick  spiritual  "  ears  "  have  detected  approaching  mischief,  which  the 
bold,  clear  "  eyes  "  ignored  or  disbelieved  !  There  are  a  great  host  of  members  in 
the  body  who  give  it  its  sympathies,  its  sensibility,  its  heart ;  as  there  are  many 
more  who  give,  or  who  conduct  and  execute  its  plans  and  work.  It  were  a  hard, 
perhaps  cruel,  mighty  machine  without  those ;  it  were  a  weak,  ineffectual  thing 
without  these.  All  are  necessary ;  but  the  '*  least  honourable  "  who  are  and  who  do 
that  which  brings  little  notice,  and  less  pubHc  thanks  and  honour,  are  not  "  least 
necessary."  Happy  and  wise  the  Church  which  takes  care  not  only  for  the 
defence  and  sustenance  of  such,  but  which  puts  upon  retiring  worth,  upon  humble 
godliness,  upon  sanctified  routine  workers,  '•^  more  abundant  honour."  On  the 
whole  topic  it  may  be  noted  that  when  Menenius  Agrippa  availed  himself  of  the 
figure  of  the  Belly  and  the  Members,  to  bring  the  Plebeians  who  had  seceded  to 
Mons  Sacer  (b.c.  494)  into  a  humour  to  treat  with  the  Patricians  of  the  little 
Boman  State  ;  and  when  Plato  illustrates  a  thought  akin  to  that  of  our  ver.  26 
by  the  community  of  the  whole  body  in  the  pain  of  the  wound  given  to  a  finger ; 
they  are  on  the  track  of  one  of  the  great  thoughts — the  archetypal  ideas — of  God 
in  His  ordering  of  Creation.  Nor  have  these  two,  or  St.  Paul,  any  claim  to  have 
"  discovered  "  the  significant  serviceableness  of  the  figure  of  a  human  body  to 
teach  the  laws  of  all  "  social  life."  There  would  be  as  many  such  "  discoveries," 
as  in  any  age,  or  race,  or  school  there  were  thinking  men.  It  is  a  particular  case 
of  the  great  principle,  that  the  ultimate  reason  why  things  are  what  they  are,  and 
as  they  are,  and  not  other  and  otherwise,  is  revealed  to  us  as, — "  Christ."  *'  All 
things  were  created  in  Him."  All  the  great  thoughts  of  God  have  been  perfectly 
spoken  from  the  first  in  that  "  Word  of  God."  But  these  so  aptly  parabolic 
physical  facts  of  the  natural  world,  are  partial,  prelusive,  and,  so  to  speak, 
stammering  utterances  of  these  same  ideas.  The  great  trunk  lines  of  idea  and 
purpose  in  Creation  all  converge  upon,  all  lead  up  to,  all  meet  in,  Christ.  They 
are  but  returning  to  their  point  of  origin  :  "  Of  Him,"  originally,  they  are  "  unto 
Him"  finally.  Creation  is  full  of  Man  from  its  earliest,  geological  antiquity 
onwards,  upwards;  and  full  of  the  Man  (Heb.  ii.)  in  Whom  the  ideal  and  history 
and  destiny  of  Mankind  are  alone  perfectly  exhibited.  The  body's  highest  function 
and  purpose  is  to  **  speak  concerning  Christ  and  His  Church  "  (Eph.  v.  32). 

266 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xM. 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 


Ver.  3.  Jesus  the  Lord. 

I.  This  singular  declaration  as  to 
the  essential  evidence  upon  which 
Christianity  rests  belongs  to  the 
earliest  records  of  our  faith. — It  was 
delivered  at  a  time  when  the  religion 
of  Jesus  was  making  its  first  attempts 
to  convert  men.  Humanly  speaking, 
it  could  not  have  been  pronounced  a 
success  or  a  failure.  Its  Author  had 
disappeared  from  earth  about  thirty- 
three  years ;  and  notwithstanding  its 
swift  propagation,  and  the  unusual 
fervency  and  faithfulness  of  its  dis- 
ciples, the  annals  of  sects  would  have 
cautioned  a  mere  historian  not  too 
confidently  to  pronounce  upon  the 
ascending  fortunes  and  future  reign 
even  of  a  religion  so  vastly  superior  to 
all  other  schools  of  theology  and  morals. 
Suppose  Christianity,  during  the  first 
two  or  three  centuries,  had  failed.  .  .  . 
/  can  then  imagine  that  its  champions, 
perceiving  that  their  system  could 
never  be  sustained  by  ordinary  historic 
canons,  would  affect  to  despise  such 
literal  standards,  and  appeal  to  the 
convenient  authorities  of  the  super- 
natural. This,  indeed,  has  been  the 
course  of  several  false  religions;  they 
have  begun  in  myths,  when  life  was 
simple  and  reason  imperfect  and 
credulous ;  but  as  the  age  became 
educated  they  evaded  historic  scrutiny 
by  disclaiming  history,  and  rested  their 
claims  for  acceptance  upon  inspiration 
and  revelation.  The  realm  of  the 
supernatural  has  been  the  inaccessible 
retreat  of  the  priesthood.  But  the  doc- 
trines of  our  faith  are  not  the  accumu- 
lations of  after  thoughts,  for  the  relief 
of  priestly  exigency.  They  were  laid 
down  once  for  all  in  the  beginning  of 
the  Church,  when  that  Church  was  an 
untried  institute ;  and  first  and  fore- 
most among  them  was  the  Godhead  of 
Jesus  as  a  dogma  based  upon  the  evi- 
dence of  inspiration. 

II.  The  man  Jesus,  the  Son  of  Mary, 
who  lived  in  Palestine  for  thirty-three 
years;  who  acted  as  a  man  in  connection 
with  men,  as  a  brother  in  the  family 


of  a  house,  as  a  human  being  in  the 
functions  of  need  and  in  the  exigencies 
of  distress ;  who  at  last  died  from  the 
violence  of  murderous  men ;  ...  is  the 
Lord.  .  .  .  [Paul]  meant  all  that  was 
included  in  the  Jehovah  of  the  Old 
Testament.  .  .  . 

III.  This  tremendous  truth  .  .  . 
cannot  be  accepted  without  Divine 
help. — No  man  .  .  .  can  state  it  as 
the  natural  conviction  of  his  judgment. 
The  truth  has  a  history,  and  yet  his- 
tory is  not  sufiicient  to  demonstrate  it. 
If  it  were  clearly  historic,  it  would 
never  be  disputed.  When  you  tell  me 
that  Jesus  Christ  was  born  and  lived 
in  Palestine,  and  taught  disciples,  and 
died,  I  understand  you ;  for  you  have 
narrated  what  appears  to  be  a  natural 
event.  But  when  you  tell  me  that 
Jesus  is  the  Great  God,  .  .  .  [and  the 
Creator  of  all  He  saw  and  ate  and 
used],  .  .  .  you  transport  me  out  from 
the  sphere  of  intelligible  statement  and 
testimony  into  wonderland.  I  hear,  but 
I  understand  not.  ...  I  do  not  mean 
that  the  Godhead  of  Christ  is  naturally 
inconceivable,  or  that  the  dogma  itself 
shocks  or  violates  my  sense  of  what  is 
possible,  but  simply  that  the  doctrine 
is  above  me.  I  cannot  reconcile  it 
with  the  laws  and  impressions  of  nature 
as  I  know  them.  Say  that  Jesus  was 
a  man  ;  .  .  .  I  will  go  to  greater  lengths 
of  admiration  than  any  other  man  ever 
commanded,  for  the  greatest  power  earth 
has  ever  known  or  will  know ;  but  it 
must  be  human  power.  I  can  say  he 
shall  fill  the  domain  alike  of  genius, 
science,  empire  ;  but  I  cannot  say  that 
Jesus  is  God  unless  you  add  some  other 
power  to  my  mind,  or  stimulate  to 
unnatural  intensity  the  powers  I  have. 
St.  Paul  affirms  that  no  man  can.  .  .  . 
The  history  of  controversy  has  repeated 
it  in  every  age.  It  is  echoed  in  every 
treatise  of  modern  theological  discussion. 
The  intellectual  spirit  of  the  day  is 
plainly  in  sympathy  with  it.  No  man 
in  the  merely  natural  circle  of  his 
attainments  and  convictions  can  say 
that  Jesus  is  the  Lord.     Modern  philo- 

267 


CHAP.  xii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


sophers  maintain  this  ...  as  if  it  had 
been  left  to  them  to  discover ;  whereas 
Paul  asserted  it  from  the  first.     They 
tell  us  that  the  Incarnation  is  to  the 
last    degree    unintelligible ;   that  they 
prefer  holding  fast  to  what  they  know, 
to  floating  about  in  depths  of  mystic 
speculation.     This  jealous  adherence  to 
fact   and   distrust    of    faith,   which   is 
sometimes    put    forth    as    the    latest 
scientific  judgment  upon  the  claims  of 
Christianity,  dates  as  far   back  as  St. 
Paul ;  and  he  has  described  this  temper 
of  mind  with  as  much    candour   and 
accuracy  as  if  he  had  been  a  philosopher 
himself :    "  The     natural    man,"    etc, 
(ii.  14). 

IV.  The  evidence  by  which  this 
grand  truth  is  affirmed  ...  is  the 
internal  persuasion  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
— Here  we  speak  in  parables  to  them 
that  are  without.  The  first  step  to- 
wards this  confession  is  the  conviction 
of  sin  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  do  not 
mean  ...  of  evil,  wickedness,  wrong. 
A  man  may  be  assured  of  these  with- 
out any  supernatural  influence  what- 
ever ;  but  a  conviction  of  sin,  of 
transgression  against  God's  law,  of 
liability  to  eternal  death — no  man  can 
feel  this  unless  the  personal  presence 
of  God  is  brought  home  to  him; 
and  this  cannot  be  except  through  the 
revelation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
misery  following  such  a  conviction  will 
make  a  man  strive  against  it,  and 
learn  by  bitter  failures  his  perfect 
helplessness.  He  seeks  rest,  a  place  of 
firmness  for  his  feet ;  but  the  ground 
gives  way ;  he  "  sinks  in  deep  mire." 
Preach  Jesus  to  a  man,  with  his  guilt 
arrayed  in  terrors  and  his  fears  alarmed, 
with  his  self -despair  and  his  eager  cries 
for  help,  he  not  only  sees  no  difficulty 
in  accepting  the  Godhead  of  Christ,  but 
he  grasps  it  as  the  only  truth  that  can 
give  him  comfort.  A  teacher  of  God 
can  instruct  him  ;  a  servant  of  God  can 
intercede  for  him  ;  an  angel  of  God  may 
minister  with  him  :  but  the  Son  of  God 
must  save  him.  An  inferior  Christ 
would  be  nearer  to  him  in  rank,  but  a 
man  Christ  or  an  angel  Christ  would 
not   be   so   near  in   sympathy  as  the 

268 


Jehovah  Christ.  The  soul  bereaved  of 
human  help  [finds]  this  the  promise 
which  lightens  up  her  widowhood : 
"Thy  Maker  is  thy  husband."  That 
which  makes  Jesus  our  final  resting- 
place  is  His  Godhead ;  it  is  His  equality 
with  the  Father  which  gives  His  blood 
an  omnipotent  potency  as  an  atone- 
ment, which  makes  His  priesthood 
irresistible  and  eternal,  His  presence 
illimitable. 

V.  How  easy  for  those  whom  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  convinced  of  sin,  who 
under  the  tyranny  of  its  power  have 
imagined  what  a  counter-power  that 
must  be  which  could  redeem  us  from  it, 
to  admit  that  Jesus  is  God.  ...  It  is 
still  all  mystery  to  us ;  and  yet  it  seems 
natural,  as  if  it  could  not  but  have 
been.  It  wears  a  familiar  face.  Like 
the  mysterious  world  of  nature  around 
us,  which,  because  we  are  part  of  it, 
looks  very  homely  to  us.  .  .  .  With 
our  eyes  open  and  our  hearts  touched 
by  the  revealing  Spirit,  we  feel  that  we 
belong  to  the  Gospel  world ;  we  are  the 
active  and  intelligent  recipients  of  its 
laws  and  blessings.  Its  stupendous 
wonders,  although  far  distant  from  our 
comprehension,  seem  almost  close  to  us 
in  the  clear  atmosphere  of  a  fellow- 
sympathy.  They  are  ours,  and  we  are 
theirs.  The  incarnation  of  God  is  the 
inscrutable  event  of  the  universe.  And 
yet  we  have  seen  it  with  our  eyes ;  we 
have  looked  upon,  and  our  hands  have 
handled  it;  our  very  children  sing 
about  it  as  if  they  understood  it 
perfectly. — Abridged  from  report  of  a 
sermon  hy  E.  E.  Jenkins,  M.A. 

Ver.  27.  The  Body  of  Christ. 

Observe,  not  merely,  '*  Ye  are  a 
body";  though  that  has  been  the  burden 
of  the  chapter.  The  give  and  take  of 
support,  and  sympathy,  and  service, 
between  part  and  part;  the  interde- 
pendence of  part  and  part  for  Hfe  and 
growth ;  the  diversity  of  capacity  and 
function,  all  contributing  to  the  welfare 
of  the  whole  and  of  each  part ;  all  have 
been  dwelt  upon  fully.  All  are  as  true 
of  any  organised  society,  any  corporate 
life,  as  of  the  Church  of  Christ.     But 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xii. 


this  is  only  what  the  members  are  to  each 
other.  Here  Paul  goes  further.  "  Ye 
are  a  body ;  ye  are  Christ's  body ;  ye 
are  a  Body  united  to  Him  ;  ye  are  a 
body  for  Him ;  ye  furnish  Him  with 
an  instrument  analogous  to  your  own. 
What  your  body  is  to,  and  for,  you; 
that  ye  are  to,  and  for,  Christ."  Most 
simply,  then — 

I.  To  us  a  body  is  the  link  between 
us  and  the  outer  world. — It  mediates 
between  the  immaterial  part  in  us  and 
the  material  existences  outside  us. 
The  immaterial  in  one  man  communi- 
cates with  the  immaterial  in  another 
through  their  two  bodies.  [If  there  be 
a  "  trans-  or  ecc^ra-corporeity  of  mind," 
it  is  so  obscure  a  fact  as  not  yet  to 
serve  much  in  even  an  analogical  way 
of  imparting  truth.]  Such  analogies 
may  not  be  pressed  far,  but  hold  good 
thus  far  :  We  influence  the  outer  world 
through  the  instrumentality  of  our 
bodily  part ;  the  outer  world  is  known 
to  us  and  affects  us  largely  through  the 
organs  and  sensations  of  our  body.  In 
somewhat  similar  fashion  is  Christ 
pleased  that  His  Church  should  be  a 
Body  for  Him,  mediating  between  Him 
and  the  World.  In  one  particular  also 
the  World  reaches  Him  through  His 
Body.  Take  this  latter  first.  (1) 
"  Why  persecutest  thou  Me  1 " — not 
"  My  people."  Saul  reaches  further, 
deeper,  than  he  thought,  as  he  "  hales 
men  and  women  to  prison,"  or  "  con- 
sents to "  the  stoning  of  Stephen, 
"  persecuting  the  Way  unto  the  death." 
Not  the  hand  or  foot  alone  is  touched 
or  wounded ;  the  Head  is  hurt ;  Christ 
feels  the  pain.  The  sufferings  of  the 
martyrs  are  the  "  afflictions  of  Christ  " 
in  a  remarkable  passage  (Col.  i.  24 ; 
cf .  1  Pet.  iv.  13);  as  though  [in 
opposition  to  "  began  to  do  and  to 
teach,"  if  that  be  the  accepted  mean- 
ing, Acts  i.  1]  Christ  not  only  con- 
tinued to  do  and  to  teach,  but  also  to 
suffer,  after  "the  day  in  which  He  was 
taken  up."  As  though  His  earthly  Kfe 
of  a  few  years  and  His  Church's  life  of 
many  centuries  were  one  life,  and  one 
history,  both  of  work  and  persecution  ; 
the  centuries  a  continuation,  an  exten- 


sion, of  the  thirty  years ;  He  assuming 
to  Himself  all  the  pain,  as  well  as  the 
toil  and  the  success,  of  the  Church's 
life.  The  first  Adam  and  his  race  fell 
as  one  ;  the  second  Adam  and  the  new 
race  of  those  who  are  "  in  Him  "  rise  as 
one ;  they  suffer  as  one.  The  old  doc- 
trine of  (so-called)  federal  headship,  or 
(in  the  modern  phrase)  the  solidarity  of 
successive  generations,  is  an  attempt  to 
express  particular  phases  of  the  great 
principles  underlying  this :  "  Touch  a 
Christian,  burn  him,  wrong  him,  perse- 
cute or  hate  him,  you  touch,  burn, 
wrong,  persecute,  hate,  Christ."  Let 
persecutor  and  persecuted  remember 
that  He  is  to  be  taken  into  the  account. 
(2)  With  freer  use  of  the  analogy,  it 
may  be  said  Christ  reaches  the  world 
through  His  Body,  through  the  activi- 
ties of  His  Church.  Whether  man  can 
act  upon  man  and  upon  matter  other- 
wise than  though  the  body's  powers 
and  organs,  may  be  open  to  discussion 
upon  carefully  gathered  evidence. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  Christ  can,  and 
does.  There  is  a  sovereignty  about 
times  of  visitation  to  Churches  and 
to  nations  and  generations ;  Christ 
sends  forth  wide  influence,  when  the 
Church  has  asked  little,  done  less,  or 
herself  been  a  Body  out  of  health,  too 
feeble  to  effect,  or  to  initiate,  anything. 
He  is  independent  of  His  Body,  as  we 
are  not  of  ours.  Yet  He  does  not  only 
make  large  use  of  this  His  organ  and 
instrument,  but  was  largely  pleased  to 
make  His  work  depend  upon,  and  be 
conditioned  by,  and  executed  through, 
the  activities  of  His  people.  As  the 
body  is  organic  to  the  man,  so  the 
Church  is  organic  to  Christ.  Every 
member  of  a  body  is  under  the  control 
of  the  will  of  the  man.  So  the  in- 
dwelling Christ  rules  in,  as  well  as 
over,  every  member  of  His  body. 
Humanly  speakiog,  if  the  Church  is 
not  active,  the  world  goes  unreached, 
unsaved.  Its  activities  are  His,  and 
are  the  usual  and  ordinary  ones  through 
which  He  expresses  and  effects  His 
will  and  purpose  in  the  salvation  of 
the  world. 

II.    Hence   1.    The    responsibility 

269 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    CORINTHIANS. 


lyings  upon  the  Church  always  to  be  at 
its  best  of  spiritual  force  and  health,  a 
fitting,  serviceable  instrument  always 
ready  to  the  will  of  the  Head.  2.  A 
ready  test  is  provided,  distinguishing 
between  right  and  wrong  activities 
of  His  Church.  In  what  enterprises 
should  it  engage, — and  in  what  not  1 
What  work  should  it,  or  should  it  not, 
undertake  or  be  led  into?  Can  the 
enterprise,  the  work,  the  activity, 
whether  in  fact  or  in  proposal, 
be  conceivably  attributed  to  Christ 
Himself,  and  identified  with  Him  ? 
Could  it  be  His  activity  ?  Within  the 
limit  thus  to  be  traced  out,  activities 
and  work  are  permissible.  It  may  be 
a  matter  for  further  temporary  or 
prudential  limitation,  whether  the 
whole  liberty  shall  be  availed  of ; 
whether,  e.g.^  all  such  social,  humani- 
tarian, philanthropic  forms  of  service 
to  man,  as  are  perfectly  conceivable  as 
Christ's  own,  shall  be  formally  under- 
taken as  part  of  the  organised  activities 
of  a  particular  Church,  or  of  The 
Church.  There  may  be  reasons  rooted 
in  the  facts  of  fallen  human  nature, 
it  may  be  part  of  the  inevitable  defect 
of  the  reahty  from  an  ideal  condition 
of  things,  why,  e.g.,  a  Church  "can- 
not," without  injury  to  its  distinctively 
"spiritual"  life  or  work,  embark  in 
any  extended  plan  for  the  better  hous- 
ing of  the  poor,  or  in  a  great  effort 
to  purify  the  popular  amusements,  or 
itself  to  purvey  purer  ones.  [If  Chris- 
tian men  and  women  undertake  such 
work,  outside  the  machinery  and  orga- 
nisations of  their  own  particular 
Church  or  congregation,  "  The  Church 
which  is  His  Body "  is  really  doing 
it.]  It  is  palpably  incongruous  that 
some  forms  of  amusement  and  of 
money-raising  should  be  attached  to  the 
Church  and  its  enterprises ;  they  could 
not  conceivably  be  attributed  to  Christ ; 
they  cannot  be  the  action  of  His  Body. 
3.  On  the  other  hand,  the  principle 
makes  some  forms  of  activity  obliga- 
tory upon  the  Church,  and  upon  the 
Churches.  E.g.  can  anything  else  be 
supposed  but  that  Christ  should  desire 
His  Gospel  carried  to  the  heathen,  and 

270 


to  all  lands  where,  if  in  name  it  is  pro- 
claimed, it  has  no  real  regenerating 
power  upon  society  or  upon  individuals  ? 
The  obligation  of  Missions,  "  Home 
and  Foreign,"  upon  the  Church  of 
Christ  can  never  be  an  open  question. 
He  must  desire  it;  His  Body  is  not 
revealing,  or  expressing,  Him  if  it  is 
not  actively,  aggressively  "  missionary." 
4.  No  doubt  some  deep  connection 
between  character  and  bodily  form. 
Between  character  and  face  there  is 
obviously  often  no  little  relation.  An 
artist  knows — without  accepting  the 
follies  of  palmistry — that  there  is 
character,  the  character,  individuality, 
in  the  hands.  By  no  means  unimport- 
ant in  his  portrait.  Perhaps  an  ideal 
corporeity  would  with  perfect  correspon- 
dence express  the  man,  and  men  might 
know  each  other  by  their  form.  [Note, 
the  "  form  of  God  "  ;  and  the  old  philo- 
sophic meaning  and  use  of  "  form."] 
However  that  be,  it  is  no  speculation 
that  Christ's  Body,  and  every  part  of 
it,  should  express  Him.  There  are, 
happily.  Christian  men  and  women  in 
whom  every  one,  who  comes  into  con- 
tact with  them,  feels  he'  has  come 
into  close  contact  with,  has  seen, 
Christ.  The  obligation  not  to  mis- 
represent Him,  the  obligation  to  re- 
present Him,  lies  upon  the  Church, 
because  it  is  His  Body.  Hearts  are 
asking,  the  world  is  asking,  "  We 
would  see  Jesus."  It  ought  to  be 
possible  to  say,  "  Look  at  His  Body." 

III.  This  relation  to  Christ  differ- 
entiates the  Church  from  all  other 
corporations. — 1.  It  is  not  merely  one 
amongst  many  societies  and  organised 
associations  of  the  same  order.  No 
doubt  He  Who  is  the  Ruler  of  human 
society  and  its  every  movement,  takes 
care  that  no  form  of  association 
between  man  and  man  but  has  the 
control  of  His  hand.  It  subserves 
His  purposes.  It  has  a  real  relation  to 
Him.  But  this  corporation  is  unique. 
It  has  a  unique  relation  to  Him.  He 
has  assumed  it  into  union  with  Him- 
self. He  is  "  Head  over  all  things  "  for 
His  body's  sake.  "  He  is  the  Head  of 
the  Church."     Himself  dwells  in  every 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xii. 


member,  as  (to  speak  with  caution)  the 
man  dwells  in  every  organ,  part,  cell, 
of  his  body.  It  is  a  spiritual  corpora- 
tion. 2.  An  available  test  is  in  this 
provided,  as  to  the  legitimacy  or  other- 
wise, of  methods  for  securing  its  growth 
and  increase.  "  Can  Christ  and  His 
Body,  Christ  in  His  Body,  be  conceived 
of  as  securing,  e.g.,  numerical  increase 
by  the  method  actually  practised,  or  pro- 


posed ?  "  Growth  in  numbers,  wealth, 
social  status^  political  influence,  may 
or  may  not  be  matters  of  rejoic- 
ing. They,  and  their  causes,  and 
methods,  need  bringing  to  the  bar  of 
a  fine  "  spiritual ''  instinct,  and  trying 
there.  They  may  be  the  very  methods 
for  a  purely  human  society  or  enter- 
prise ;  but  can  they  be  the  methods  of 
Christ  and  His  Body  ? 


HOMILETIC    SUGGESTIONS, 


Vev.  20.  ^  Living  Unity  requires: — 

I.  The  combination  of  many  mem- 
bers. 

II.  The  harmonious  arrangement  of 
parts. 

III.  The  inspiration  of  one  Spirit. 

IV.  Co-operation  for  one  common 
end.— [/.  Z.] 

Vers.  22-25.  Observe  :— 

I.  Life  in  its  many  forms  is  a  system 
of  compensations. 

II.  These  compensations  are  wisely 
and  equitably  balanced. 

III.  Are  designed  to  promote  con- 
tentment, harmony,  mutual  care. — 
[J.  L.] 

Ver.  31.  ^'■Something  better  than 
'  Best:  " 

[I^ot  very  accurate  :  "  best  "  is  really 
^^  greater:^  So  ^^  covet"  is  ^^  desire 
earnestly."  See  this  word  in  noteworthy 
contrast  with  "  love"  in  xiii.  4,  its  bad 
side  there  being  put  foremost.  It  may 
be  studied  in  Acts  vii.  9  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  1, 
39 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  2 ;  Gal.  iv.  17,  18  (with 
a   playing    upon    its    Janus-like   am- 


biguity of  meaning) ;  Jas.  iv.  2 ; 
Rev.  iii.  19.]  The  whole  verse  is  well 
paraphrased  in  the  resuming  verse, 
xiv.  1.     Two  contrasts  : — 

I.  "  Gifts  "  and  ''  way" — Respec- 
tively accidents  of  life,  these ;  excep- 
tional ;  given  to  the  few.  The  "  way  " 
is  for  all,  for  all  time ;  it  is  the  very 
path  of  life.  Love,  even  in  the  natural 
sense,  is  the  one  thing  which  makes 
life  worth  living.  It  is  the  life  of  life. 
A  loveless  life,  with  all  natural  endow- 
ments  highly  cultivated  with  all  social 
accessories  which  are  usually  accounted 
desirable,  to  the  true,  whole,  healthy 
manhood,  is  Death. 

II.  "  Covet  "  and  ''follow  after  " 
(xiv.  1). — A  passionate  wooing;  a  quiet, 
persistently  faithful  wooing.  The  one 
is  apt  to  be  *'  jealous "  as  well  as 
"  zealous " ;  envious  rather  than 
emulous  of  the  gifts  of  others.  The 
other  welcomes  all,  and  makes  room 
for  all. 

III.  Love,  without  gifts,  will,  in  the 
long-run,  do  more  than  gifts  without 
love. 


APPENDED  NOTES. 


It  may  be  convenient  for  the  Bible-class 
to  have  the  Eew  Testament  material  about 
Prophets  and  Prophecy  at  one  view. 

{a)  Spoken  of  in  Eph.  ii.  20,  iv.  11 ;  1  Cor. 
xii.  28. 

(&)  John  and  Christ  ante-Pentecostal 
"  prophets."  After  Pentecost  given  to  many 
(Acts  ii.  17, 18,  viii.  17,  xix.  6,  x.  44-46,  xi.  45). 
Individual  cases  are  :  [Barnabas  (Acts  iv.  36, 
connecting  Trapd/cXi^cts  with  *^ paraclete'')  \ 
Stephen  (vi.  5,  10,  55)  ;]  Agabus  (xi.  28, 
xxi.  10);  Silas  and  Judas  (xv.  32);  Manaen 


and  Lucius  of  Cyrene  (xiii.  1);  [Timothy, 
"a  man  of  God"  (1  Tim.  vi.  11);]  Philip's 
daughters  (xxi.  8)  ;  Saul  (xiii.  1,  though  some 
in  this  list  may  only  be  "  teachers  ").  Met 
with  in  Churches. — Thessalonica  (1  Ep.  v.  20; 
where  the  gift  was  perhaps  at  a  discount  and 
"  despised  "  as  not  so  striking  and  showy  as, 
say,  ''tongues'');  Corinth  (xii.,  xiv.);  Rome, 
as  yet  unvisited  by  any  apostle  (xii.  6) ; 
Ephesus  (iv.  11). 

(c)  Nature  of  gift  exemplified  in  New  Tes- 
tament.— A  predictive  power :    famine    in 

271 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    1.   CUUINTHIANS. 


days  of  Claudius  (Acts  xi.  27-30),  [xx.  23] ; 
xxi.  4  [disciples  elevated  into  prophets  for 
the  occasion,  like  so  many  in  the  regal  period 
in  the  Old  Testament]  ;  xxi.  10-14 ;  [1  Tim. 
iv.  1].  Knowledge  of  distant  future  to  en- 
courage the  Church  under  present  trial : 
2  Pet.  i.  16,  etc.  ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  9-12 ;  ii.  9,  10 
is  a  quasi-prophetic  utterance  founded  on 
Isa.  Ixiv.  4,  etc. 

(d)  Indicated  in  Luke  xi.  49  ("prophets 
and  apostles  ")  ;  Matt,  xxiii.  34,  37 ;  (1  Thess. 
ii.  15  ;  Jas.  v.  10  ;  Rev.  xx.  9). 

(e)  Suggested  in  Rom.  xvi.  25 ;  Eph.  iii.  5. 
(/)    False     prophets      speaking      under 

demoniac  agency :  1  Cor.  xii.  3 ;  Col.  ii.  18 ; 
1  Tim.  iv.  1 ;  1  John  iv.  1-3. 

{g)  To  be  tested  by  the  "  analogy  of  faith  " 
(Rom.  xii.  6)  ;  or  as  in  1  Cor.  xii.  3,  or  1  John 
iv.  1,  2  ;  prophets  may  ^^  judge "  prophets 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  29)  ;  the  true  gift  is  under  a 
prophet's  control,  and  is  no  mere  uncon- 
trollable maniac  possession, 

(Ji)  Add  to  (c),  which  in  itself  would  give 
a  very  incomplete  view  of  prophecy  : — 

Prediction  was  only  an  accident  of  Pro- 
phecy ;  it  might  be  there,  or  it  might  not,  as 
it  happened.  Some  prophetic  books  of  the 
Bible  manifestly  contain  many  prophecies 
— many  more  predict  but  seldom.  The 
prophecy  which,  for  example,  in  these 
Corinthian  Epistles  we  see  in  lingering  sur- 
vival in  the  Christian  Church,  is  hardly  pre- 
diction at  all.  More  often  it  would  be  better 
described  as  specially  inspired  preaching. 
What  Christians  in  Corinth  needed  was  not 
so  much  an  unveiling  of  the  future,  though 
this  had  its  helpfulness,  and  is  exemplified 
in  many  cases  noticed  in  the  list  above  given, 
but  rather  an  authoritative  statement  of  the 
mind  and  will  of  God  for  their  guidance  in 
the  present.  They  needed  Preachers  rather 
than  Seers  of  the  Future.  So,  in  fact,  all  the 
prophets.  Old  Testament  and  New  Testament 
alike,  were  first  of  all,  and  most  of  all, 
preachers  declaring  "present  truth"  to  the 
men  of  their  own  time.  It  might  happen, 
and  in  point  of  fact  generally  did  happen, 
that  this  present  truth  was  also  eternal 
truth.  Their  message  was  then  one  for  every 
age,  and  was  put  upon  permanent  record, 
especially  when  the  word  of  the  prophet  was 
part  of  the  ever-growing  disclosure  of  and 
preparation  for  the  Advent  of  a  Redeemer. 
Then,  further,  their  teaching  was  often 
illustrated  by  or  conveyed  in  significant 
Facts.  These  might  be  facts  of  their  own 
day,  in  which  case  the  prophets  became  in- 
spired chroniclers  and  historians,  recording, 
and  often  commenting  upon,  what  was  even 
then  becoming  the  Past.  But  they  wrote 
history  didactically  ;  they  delivered  a  mes- 
sage from  God  through  the  vehicle  of  history. 
Sometimes,  and  particularly  when  they  were 
contributing  to  the  divinely  authentic  ac- 
count of  Redemption,  its  purpose  and  his- 
torical development,   their    message    could 

272 


not  be  completely  illustrated   or  delivered 
without  bringing  in  the  facts  of  the  Future, 
and  then  they  uttered  predictions.     But  the 
prediction  was  also  didactic  in  its  purpose. 
When    fulfilled,    the     predictions    become 
credentials   of   the   men   and    of   the   Book 
which  contained  their  utterances.     But  the 
crowning  utility   of   predicted  facts  is  for 
teaching,    and    pre-eminently   for  teaching 
something   new  about  Christ  and   His   Re- 
demption work.     It  was  teaching  by  divinely 
anticipated  History.    Silas,  e.g.,  as  a  prophet 
has  his  Old  Testament  counterparts  in  the 
many  in  the  "  schools  of  the  prophets  "  who 
did  their  work  and  delivered  their  message 
of  God's  truth  without  predicting  at  all.     In 
Acts  xxi.  4  are  simple  disciples  elevated,  for 
the   occasion,   into   prophets,  in   close   cor- 
respondence with   the    not    few  examples, 
particularly  frequent  in  the  books  of  Kings 
and  Chronicles,  of  men  on  whom  once,  and 
once  only,  in  their  life  there  came  down  the 
Spirit  of  prophecy, — predictive  prophets  for 
the  occasion,  and  for  that  only.    In  fact,  the 
"  prophets  "  and  the  '*  prophecy  "  of  the  New 
Testament  must  not  be  studied  apart  from 
those  of  the  Old  Testament ;  they  are  one 
continuous  fact.     But  as  we  see  it  in  the 
later  pages  of  the  Bible,  it  is  a  good  illus- 
tration of  the  "  law "  that,  however  great 
may    be   the    dispensation    change    at   any 
point,  God    does  not  pass   from  "  age "  to 
"  age "  in  history  per  saltum  and  abruptly. 
Between  one  "  age  "  and  the  next,  however 
revolutionary  may  be  the  change  made,  there 
are  overlapping,  persistent,  lingering  facts, 
for  a  time  surviving  the  "  age  "  of  which  they 
were  specially  characteristic.      We  see  the 
line  and  the  date  of  demarcation  between 
Judaism  and  Christianity ;  the  day  of  Pen- 
tecost   is    the    definite    beginning    of    the 
Christian  Church.     But  this  stands  prefaced 
on  the   one   side   by  the  transitional  three 
years'  ministry  of  Christ,  and  followed  on 
the  other  by  a  few  years  during  which  the 
Jewish  Temple  and  ritual  linger  on,  dying 
and  effete  it  is  true,  but  hiding  from  the 
eyes    of  the   contemporaries   of    the   great 
change  of  "  ages "  the  full  significance   of 
much  that  was  taking  place  around  them. 
In  like  manner  Old  Testament  prophecy  for 
a  time  lingers  on,  overlapping  into  Christ- 
ianity, with  its  fuller  gift  of  the  Spirit.     As 
the    corpus    of    redemption    facts    and     of 
redemption  doctrine  hastens  to  its  comple- 
tion, the  office  of  the  prophet  [and  Inspiration 
and  Miracle  also,  in  their  proper  definition 
and  limitation  as  parts  of  and  accompani- 
ments of  the  Revelation  of  Redemption]  is 
ceasing  to  be  required.      The  *'  teacher  "  is 
more  and  more  being  left  in  possession  of 
the  field.     "  The  apostles  and  prophets  "  are 
made  the  foundation  of  the  Church,  or  its 
lowest  courses   of  masonry  resting   on   the 
Foundation,  because  the  "  prophets "  were 
the  one  feature  of  the  new  order  which  most 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xii. 


conspicuously  linked  it  with  the  old  to 
which  the  Jewish  converts  had  belonged 
(Eph.  ii.  20).] 

1.  ^5  to  the  Gift  of  Tongues,  ow  chief 
data  are :  {a)  Mark  xvi.  17,  "  They  shall 
speak  with  [new ;  ?  the  reading]  tongues." 
(&)  Acts  ii.  1-13.  {c)  Acts  x.  46,  "They  of 
the  circumcision  .  .  .  with  Peter  .  .  .  heard 
them  (i.e.  Cornelius  and  the  rest)  speak  with 
tongues,  and  magnify  God."  (<Z)  Acts  xix.  6, 
When  Paul  laid  his  hands  on  the  Johannean 
disciples  at  Ephesus,  "they  spake  with 
tongues  and  prophesied."    (e)  1  Cor.  xii.,  xiv. 

2.  If  in  (a)  "  new  "  be  retained,  then  there 
would  appear  to  be  some,  but  not  much,  sup- 
port given  to  the  idea  of  the  Greek  fathers 
that  the  gift  was  one  of  new  linguistic 
powers.  The  Old  Testament  quotation  in 
1  Cor.  xiv,  21  may  look  in  the  same  direction 
(but  see  Critical  Notes  there).  In  (&)  there 
is  clearly  a  distinction  between  the  first  out- 
burst of  '^ other  (N.B.  this)  tongv£s'^  (ver.  4), 
and  the  address  of  Peter,  which  may  well 
have  been  in  Aramaic.  After  (&)  there  is  no 
semblance  of  evidence  of  any  added  linguistic 
powers  being  given  or  needed.  Greek  and 
Aramaic  would  carry  the  Christian  teachers 
almost  anywhere.  In  Acts  xiv.  11  Paul  seems 
not  to  have  used  the  " speech  of  Lycaonia" 
nor  perhaps  to  have  understood  the  people 
until  their  acts  showed  their  meaning. 

3.  The  work,  not  of  instruction,  but  of 
adoration,  prayer,  praise,  seems  in  every  case 
to  have  been  the  employment  of  the  gift. 
Paul  evidently  relied  on  ^'prophesyiTig'' 
(xiv.  1)  and  '■'teaching^''  as  means  of  pro- 
ducing conviction.  "  Tongues "  were  only 
for  "«  sign,''  to  attract,  and  impress,  the 
attention  of  the  unbelieving  world  (xiv.  22). 

4.  ^''Interpretation  of  the  tongues"  was, 
perhaps,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  in 
Acts  ii.  no  "  spiritual  gift."  At  Corinth  it 
ordinarily  required  to  be  so,  whether  they 
were  "  tongues  of  men,''  which  happened  to 
be  unknown  to  the  Corinthians,  or  "  tongues 
of  angels,"  sounding  like  (incoherent  ?)  noises, 
and  belonging  to  no  earthly  dialect. 

6.  The  rcord  "  tongue  "  (yXuTTo)  decides 
nothing  as  to  the  nature  of  the  gift,  though 
in  Acts  ii.  8  it  does  seem  equivalent  to 
"  language  "  (SidXe^ros).  Also  the  same  word 
is  used  (Acts  ii.  4,  14)  both  of  the  speech  of 
the  gifted  ones  and  of  the  address  of  Peter, 
In  the  LXX.  it  is  used  (in  1  Chron.  xxv.  1 ; 
Ezek,  xiii.  9)  for  "  a  musical,  oracular  intona- 
tion" (Smith,  JBible  Diet.).  Some  of  the 
external  accompaniments  of  the  gift  are  sug- 
gested by  the  word  ''mad"  (1  Cor.  xiv.  23); 
and  by  a  comparison  of  Acts  ii.  13,  "filled 
with  new  wine,"  with  Eph.  v.  18.] 

[Stanley  thus  well  combines  the  particulars 


contained  in  xii.,  xiv.,  etc. :  "  It  was  a  trance 
or  ecstasy,  which,  in  moments  of  great 
religious  fervour,  especially  at  the  moment 
of  conversion,  seized  the  early  believers ;  and 
this  fervour  vented  itself  in  expressions  of 
thanksgiving,  in  fragments  of  psalmody  or 
hymnody  (?  this)  or  prayer,  which  to  the 
speaker  himself  conveyed  an  irresistible 
sense  of  communion  with  God,  and  to  the 
bystander  an  impression  of  some  extra- 
ordinary manifestation  of  power,  but  not 
necessarily  any  instruction  or  teaching,  and 
sometimes  even  having  the  appearance  of 
wild  excitement,  like  that  of  madness  or 
intoxication.  It  was  a  most  emphatic  sign 
to  each  individual  believer  that  a  power 
mightier  than  his  own  was  come  into  the 
world  "  (Stanley,  p.  257).] 

"Schism"  and  ''Heresy." — "There  are 
some  important  principles  which  are  now 
generally  accepted.  These  two  violations  of 
unity  generally  go  together  :  the  "  heresy  " 
being  self-willed  choice  of  private  interpre- 
tation in  opposition  to  Scripture,  and  the 
"  schism  "  the  following  of  a  party.  Few 
schisms  can  be  named  which  have  not  been 
the  result  of  doctrinal  error ;  few  leading 
heresies  which  have  not  issued  in  schisms. 
Here,  however,  there  is  a  distinction.  Heresy 
can  never  be  perpetuated  ;  but  the  result  of 
schisms  may.  Ecclesiastical  schism  may  be 
taken  up  by  Divine  wisdom  into  the  develop- 
ment of  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  having  been 
in  fact  not  schism  in  the  sight  of  God,  or 
soon  losing  the  taint.  Apparent  schism  may 
be  the  only  cure  of  heresy.  Many  minor 
heresies  may  co-exist  with  holding  the  Head. 
But  where,  on  the  one  hand,  there  is  such 
infidel  subtraction  from  the  truth,  or,  on  the 
other,  such  superstitious  addition  to  it,  as 
neutralise  the  fundamentals,  separation  may 
be  inevitable  and  lawful.  .  .  .  Schism  may 
be  the  sin  of  the  community  left  as  well  as 
of  the  community  leaving.  But  all  this  rises 
to  the  higher  principle  that  the  Spirit  is  the 
Giver  of  life  corporate  as  well  as  individual. 
He  quickeneth  whom  He  will.  The  body  is 
more  than  its  raiment.  Any  such  act  of 
the  sovereign  Spirit  must  aim  at  the  more 
effectual  growth  of  the  Church.  He  thus 
prevents  unity  from  degenerating  into  stag- 
nant uniformity.  .  .  .  Lastly,  whenever  the 
Spirit  thus  goes  out  of  His  way  to  divide 
existing  Churches,  He  never  fails  to  authen- 
ticate His  own  act ;  as  Paul  among  the 
apostles  was  able  to  authenticate  his  vocation 
and  work.  As  to  heresy  or  self-willed  and 
needless  schism  it  is  still  one  of  the  works 
ofthejlesh  (Gal.  v.  19),  condemned  of  itself." 
(Pope.)] 


273 


CHAP.  XIII.    HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 
CRITICAL  NOTES, 

1.  These  need  be  very  few ;  the  language  of  the  chapter  is  of  the  simplest,  the  thought 
inexhaustibly  full.  2.  Note,  Paul,  not  John,  writes  this  chapter  on  Love.  3.  The  "  I "  is  not 
so  much  personal,  as  the  ideal  of  a  Christian  life  personified.  4.  Connect  closely  with, 
begin  reading  at,  xii.  31.  Also,  go  on  from  ver.  13  to  xiv.  1.  Thus,  then,  the  whole  scheme 
of  thought  is  :  "  Desire  earnestly  the  greater  gifts.  Yet  I  show  you  something  still  greater, 
better.  Look  at  Love  !  Love  It.  Covet  It.  Follow  after  It.  Yet,  as  I  was  just  now 
saying,  desire  earnestly  the  greater  gifts,  but  Prophecy  more  than  they."  The  Order  of 
Preference  will  therefore  be  :  (1)  Prophecy  rather  than  Tongues  or  the  like  Charisms ; 
(2)  Love  rather  than  even  Prophecy,  and  much  more  than  Charisms.  6.  "Love,"  of  course, 
throughout.  "  Charity  "  is  the  Vulgate,  and  quasi-ecclesiastical,  word  ;  used  in  systems  of 
Morals  with  a  nearly  technical  sense.  Our  "  charity  "  is  in  ver.  3 ;  and,  less  exactly,  in 
ver.  5, — "  not  provoked,"  "  thinketh  no  evil." 

Ver.  1.  Tongues.— Connect  with  the  "tongues"  of,  e.g.,  chap.  xiv.  Tinkling. —  Clanging 
(R.V.) ;  q.d.  incoherent  noise,  as  opposed  to  the  ordered,  significant  "  speech  "  of  real  music. 
Tongues,  prophecy,  knowledge,  faith, — most  nearly  to  be  desired  as  permanent  endowments 
of  the  Church,  but — nothing  without  love. 

Ver.  2.  Perhaps  Prophecy  an  occasional  gift  only  ;  Knowledge  a  permanent  one.  Know- 
ledge. -As  in  i.  5,  etc.  Faith.— Not  saving  faith — that  always  works  by  love  (Gal.  v.  6) ;  but 
such  faith  as  Samson's  or  Gideon's ;  such  as  in  Mark  xi.  22,  23.  All. — As  usual  with 
St.  Paul  (e.g.  1  Tim.  i.  16),  "  all  kinds,  and  all  degrees  of  every  kind."  Remove  mountains. — 
Familiar  phrase  to  Paul,  Rabbinically  trained,  as  used  of  Rabbis  eminent  for  acute  or  subtle 
judgment,  enabling  them  to  clear  up  difficult  questions  or  solve  the  knotty  points  of 
Rabbinical  disputations.  But  here,  with  the  larger  sense  of  Christ's  use  of  the  words, 
Matt.  xvii.  20,  xxi.  21.  Nothing. — I  become  before  God,  and  in  reality,  what  I  was  once  in 
the  judgment  of  the  world  (i.  28). 

Ver.  3.  Give  my  body. — Very  expression  in  Dan.  iii.  28,  LXX.  Cases  in  2  Mace.  vii.  5 ; 
Jos.,  Wars,  VII.  8,  7.  There  had  not  at  this  date  been  any  Christian  martyrdoms  by  fire. 
Note  the  variant  reading. 

Ver.  4.  Suffereth  long. — "  Longanimity  "  rather  than  "  Magnanimity."  Look  at  Jas.  v.  7 
(same  word  as  here,  twice)  ;  Luke  xviii.  7.  Puffed  up. — As  you  Corinthians  are  (iv.  6,  18,  19, 
V.  2,  viii,  1). 

Ver.  5.  Seeketh  not  its  own. — Phil.  ii.  21 ;  also  x.  23,  34.  Easily. — Omit  this ;  as,  in 
similar  case,  "  without  a  cause  "  (Matt.  v.  22).  Looks  as  if  the  simple  statement  of  Scripture 
were  too  strong  meat  for  some  early  transcribers  1  Thinketh. — Reckons,  and  reckons  with  ; 
keeps  no  account  of  evil  actually  done  or  said ;  never  assumes,  or  supposes,  or  infers,  or 
expects  evil,  as  a  factor  in  reckoning  or  judging  of  men  and  conduct.  [Perhaps  also 
actively,  as  in  Homily  below.] 

Ver.  6. — Notice  (R.V.)  in  unrighteousness,  rcith  the  truth.  More  accurate.  Love  stands 
by  the  side  of,  and  has  fellowship  with,  truth.  If  it  were  {per  imposs.')  to  rejoice  in  un- 
righteousness, it  would  stand  apart  from  it,  even  in  its  joy. 

Ver.  7.  Beareth. — Better  than  "  covereth  "  ;  well  illustrated  in  Paul  himself  (ix.  12).  En- 
dureth. — Same  root  as  in  word  for  "  patience  " ;  in  New  Testament  always  more  than 
"  submits  to,"  even  if  silently  ;  "  pressing  on,  and  bearing  up  "  (T.  T.  Lynch).  Faith,  Hope, 
Patience,  in  this  sentence. 

Ver.  8. — No  verbal  contrast  (such  as  in  A.V.),  "  faileth  .  .  .  shall  fail."  Words  different. 
"  Faileth  .  .  .  shall  be  done  away,"  So  at  end  of  verse,  and  in  ver.  10.  Favourite  word  of 
Paul's  (almost  exclusively).  Worth  while  looking  at  Rom.  iii.  3,  31,  iv.  14,  vi.  6,  vii.  2,  6 ; 
1  Cor.  i.  28,  ii.  6,  vi.  13,  xiii.  as  above,  xv.  24,  26 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  7,  11,  13,  14 ;  Gal.  iii.  17,  v.  4.  11 ; 
Eph.  ii.  15;  2  Thess.  ii.  8  ;  2  Tim.  i.  10;  to  make  meaningless,  powerless,  or  at  least  in- 
operative and  valueless,  in  regard  to  some  special  purpose ;  so  that  it  need  no  longer  be 
taken  into  any  account.  Faileth. — Cf.  Rom.  ix.  6.  Also  cf.  how  Peter  and  James  contrast 
the  "  falling  "  of  the  flower  and  the  grass,  with  the  "  abiding  word  "  of  God.  Love  has  the 
permanence  of  the  "  kingdom  which  cannot  be  shaken  "  (Heb.  xii.  28). 

Ver.  9.  In  part. — Lit.  "■from  a  part."  Evans  graphically  says :  "  As  we  know  the  moon, 
deriving  our  knowledge  of  her  from  the  one,  only,  side  we  ever  see."  [May  we  add,  seeing 
slightly  round  the  edge  of  the  known  part,  owing  to  the  "  libration  "  ?] 

Ver.  10. — Stanley  notes :  Not  when  we  come  to  it,  but  when  it  comes  to  us. 

274 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xiii. 


Ver.  11. — "Perfect"  with  Paul,  e.g.ii.  6,  iii.  1,  commonly  suggests  the  manhood  of  the 
Christian  life,  as  opposed  to  its  childhood.  Hence  the  transition  to  the  similar  contrast  of 
"  manhood"  and  "  childhood"  here. 

Ver.  12. — "  In  a  (metal)  mirror,"  more  accurate.  Yet  we  seem  to  see  the  images  through 
the  mirror.  Also,  "  in  an  enigma,"  for  "  darkly  " ;  yet  we  must  suppose  that  we  have  some 
clue,  and  can  half  solve  it,  or  we  should  have  no  knowledge  at  all,  not  even  "  in  part." 
"  Face  to  face  "  and  "  in  an  enigma"  are  borrowed  from  LXX.  of  Num.  xii.  8.  Also  "  know 
fully  "  ;  such  generally  is  the  force  of  noun  and  verb  with  Paul.  (See  how,  e.g.,  2  Cor.  vi.  9  ; 
Col.  i.  6  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  3 ;  Eph.  iv.  13  ;  Col.  ii.  2,  gain  in  force.) 

Ver.  13.  Abideth. — Singular.  Each  passes  as  it  were  in  review.  What  shall  be  the  verdict? 
Faith  ?  "  It  abideth."  Hope  ?  "  It  abideth."  Love  ?  "  It  abideth  !  Yes,  and  is  greatest !  " 
See  this  same  triad  in  Col.  i.  '^  sq.;  1  Thess.  i.  13,  v.  8 ;  Tit.  ii.  2,  etc.  The  ''  theological 
virtues,''  as  distinguished  from  the  ^' philosojjhical "  or  "  cardinal,'"  wisdom,  justice,  valour, 
prudence. 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Whole  Chapter. 

The  whole  chapter  breaks  up  into  three  paragraphs,  grouping  themselves 
around  three  central  words  : — 

I.  All-important,  and  Indispensable  (vers.  1-3). 
II.  All-enduring,  and  Invincible  (vers.  4-7). 
III.  All-outlasting,  and  Immortal  (vers.  8-13). 

So,  then,  we  have  A  Sermon  to  the  Church  at  Corinth,  and  to  all  other 
Churches  whom  it  may  concern.  How  truly  Paul  might  have  said,  "  I  speak 
this  to  move  you  to  shame."  He  has  shown  them  themselves,  in  their  factions, 
their  jealousies,  their  vanity,  their  "  carnality  "  in  its  many-sided  manifestations. 
And  he  has  a  good  deal  more  to  say  yet.  But,  as  if  for  relief  to  himself,  he 
turns  aside  from  the  direct  counsels  and  rebukes  of  the  letter  to  look  at  and  to 
show  to  them  an  ideal  Christian  life,  which  is  pretty  much  everything  that 
theirs  is  not.  He  is  like  Bunyan's  Interpreter,  taking  these  Christians  into  "  a 
little  room  "  where  sat  "  the  two  children.  Passion  and  Patience,  and  Passion 
seemed  to  be  much  discontent,  but  Patience  was  very  quiet."  "  Passion " 
indeed,  in  their  very  gathering  at  the  Lord's  Table ;  but  what  an  atmosphere 
of  peace  here.  **  Corinthians,  I  have  shown  you  yourselves.  Look  on  that 
picture, — and  on  this  !  Do  you  not  love  Love  ?  Will  you  not  conform  your- 
selves to  this  ? "  He  is  working  on  Divine  lines,  with  Divine  wisdom.  Thus  does 
the  Paraclete  convict  (John  xvi.  8)  the  world  oip  Sin ;  by  exhibiting  Christ  in  the 
shaip  and  condemning  contrast  of  His  righteousness,  that  they  may  sit  in 
judgment  upon  themselves  and  be  saved. 

I.  You  boast  of  your  "  tongues." — In  your  Church  gatherings  here  one, 
there  another,  starts  up,  all  over  the  assembly,  and  utters  his  ecstatic,  unintelli- 
gible words.  Those  less  fortunate,  as  they  think  themselves,  who  have  neither 
the  tongue  gift,  nor  the  humbler  but  very  useful  gift  of  the  interpreter,  covet 
the  showy,  startling  endowment.  Well,  give  any  one  of  you  the  Charism  in  its 
largest  range  and  measure ;  add  whatever  vehicle  of  language,  in  any  land,  or 
race,  or  age,  man's  thought  may  use  for  its  expression ;  add,  if  you  will — if  God 
will — the  speech  of  angels,  and  of  beings  belonging  to  orders  unknown  and 
unnamed  by  man  ;  and  then  let  him  talk  away  !  If  there  be  no  love  in  his  life, 
none  in  his  heart,  he  will  have  no  real,  no  worthy,  message  !  Clang !  clang  ! 
goes  the  cymbal ;  loud,  empty,  meaningless.  What  is  it  worth  1  Let  some  plain 
.  man  get  up  instead,  and  speak,  as  it  were  some  simple,  sweet  strain  of  love's 
coherent  music,  full  of  help  and  comfort  for  his  tempted  neighbour.  That  poor 
devil-driven  Saul  sitting  next  you  wants  David's  harping,  not  your  brazen  clanging. 
But  IB  there  no  help  in  the  next  man  there  1  He  is  "  a  prophet."  Pentecost 
has  come ;  the  very  "  servants  and  handmaidens "  now  share  the  gift  of  the 
grand  men  of  the  Old  Covenant  days.     The  written  Word  is  not  yet  completed, 

275 


CHAP.  XIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   CORINTHIANS. 


to  be  God's  abiding  Message  and  Messenger  to  men.  We  want  the  prophet  as 
yet.  Yes,  there  is  help  in  him ;  he  has  from  time  to  time  a  message  from  God 
for  the  congregation.  (But  so  had  Balaam,  and  so  had  Caiaphas,  a  message 
from  God  on  their  lips !)  He  has  even  been  taken  into  long-hidden  secrets  of 
the  counsels  of  God,  and  he  comes  forth  a  man  to  whom  they  are  "mysteries" 
no  longer.  He  is  initiated ;  he  has  esoteric  knowledge ;  and  he  is  authorised  to 
make  them  now  the  common  property  of  you  all.  Indeed,  "  the  deep  things  of 
God  "  are  not  wholly  unsounded  by  the  man  of  "  knowledge."  Yes,  there  is  help 
in  him  ;  but  is  there  Love  in  him  ?  No  ?  Then  he  has  much,  and  can  give  you 
much,  but  he  is — nothing.  A  mere  conduit-pipe,  a  mere  vessel,  to  be  thrown 
aside,  when  by  him  God  has  brought  you  blessing,  and  with  no  real  part  in  it  all 
whilst  he  conveys  it.  But  try  this  other  man.  Subtler  of  intellect  than  any 
Babbi  of  the  schools  of  my  youth,  he  can  outdo  them  in  "  removing  mountains." 
Let  him  lead  the  company  of  scholars,  and  the  mountain  difficulties  vanish  and 
fall ;  there  is  a  plain  highway  for  the  simplest  learner  who  follows  in  his  footsteps. 
And  has,  then,  this  man  of  acute  intellect  Love  ?  He  could  even  with  strong 
faith,  if  need  weie,  bow  Nature  to  him,  and  make  the  very  mountains  to  be 
moved,  almost  as  if  their  Maker  bade  them  be  uprooted.  (Let  the  thought  be 
pardoned  !)  Yes  ?  But  has  he  Love  ?  Is  there  Love  for  God  and  man  behind 
all  this  miracle-working  might  ?  No  %  Then  the  Master  will  say,  "  Miracle- 
worker,  but  worker  of  iniquity,  I  never  knew  you  !  Depart  ! "  It  profiteth 
him  nothing !  The  preacher  himself,  the  office-bearer,  the  richly  endowed 
worker,  needs  to  beware.  There  are  the  gifts,  these  or  those,  more  or  fewer ; 
but  is  there  the  Life,  whose  Spring  of  strength,  whose  Law,  whose  formative, 
governing  Principle  is.  Love  ?  If  not,  Paul's  verdict,  God's  verdict,  is — "  nothing" ! 
Love  is  all-important  and  indispensable. 

11.  But  now  what  manner  of  men  and  women  are  the  rank  and  file  of  the 
membership  ? — Fifteen  marks  are  here  of  the  Life  which  is  Christian  life  indeed  ! 
Parade  the  members ;  bring  them  up  to  these  official  standards  of  requirement. 
This  first  cannot  long  bear  to  be  unfairly  rated  and  dealt  with.  He  is  soon  on 
fire  at  a  slight  put  upon  him.  He  will  not  long  be  kept  out  of  his  rights.  And 
as  to  those  who  thus  give  him  less  than  his  due,  you  will  not  find  him  putting 
himself  out  of  the  way  to  do  them  the  least  service  ;  indeed,  he  has  hardly  time 
to  be  kind  to  anybody,  even  when  the  kindness  is  readily  in  his  way,  so  eagerly 
busy  is  he  speedily  to  right  himself.  This  next  has  no  good  word,  no  kind 
thought,  no  thankful  thought,  for  his  neighbour  who  is  doing  better  than  himself 
in  the  world,  and  whose  gifts  are  making  his  mark  for  him  in  the  Church.  He 
is  eaten  up  with  envy.  The  object  of  his  envy  is  also  in  danger.  See  him 
come  into  the  assembly  of  the  Church,  for  business  or  for  worship.  It  is  almost 
with  a  swagger.  You  can  almost  see  the  insignia  of  his  every  office  blazing  upon 
his  puffed-up  bosom  and  en  wreathed  about  his  upUf  ted  neck.  He  is  highly  gifted 
and  able,  and  he  knows  it.  He  is  inflated  with  the  knowledge  !  Hear  him  speak, 
watch  him  at  the  business  of  the  Church ;  it  is  a  perpetual  offence  against  all 
Christlike  seemliness  of  word  and  spirit  and  behaviour.  "  Seeketh  his  own  ; " 
offices  might  be  made  for  him ;  he  accumulates  them  all,  and  himself  is  the 
centre  to  which  all  must  converge.  Try  another.  Those  are  not  his  faults  ;  but 
take  care  how  you  vex  him  :  he  is  "  touchy,"  and  readily  suspects  an  evil  motive. 
Moreover,  his  memory  keeps  most  accurate  account  of  all  wrong  done  to  him.  If 
an  adversary  of  his  makes  a  slip  likely  to  damage  fatally  his  case  or  his  reputation, 
how  he  chuckles  and  "  rejoices  in  the  iniquity  "  !  You  hardly  stir  him  to  such  joy 
when,  perhaps  at  the  price  of  no  small  struggle.  Truth  of  principle,  or  character, 
or  life,  is  gloriously  exhibited.  Try  yet  one  more.  He — or  is  it  she  ? — ^Dears 
everything  with  long  patience  and  multiplied  forgiveness;  insists,  as  long  as 
possible,  on  believing  the  best  conceivable  construction  to  be  the  true  one,  even 

270 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   L   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xm. 


though  getting  laughed  at  as  "  simple  "  for  her  pains ;  when  her  Belief  is  staggered 
by  what  seem  stubborn  facts,  and  can  hardly  persist  longer  in  its  *'  loving  " 
estimate  and  judgment,  then  Hope  steps  in,  and  pleads  that  perhaps  even  yet 
things  may  be  found  to  be  different,  or,  if  not,  that  perhaps  the  offender  may 
some  day  repent ;  and  if,  driven  out  at  last  from  even  the  refuge  of  her  Hope, 
she  can  no  longer  help  but  know  the  simple,  bad  truth,  then  her  Love  will 
bear,  and  bear  on,  and  bear  up  and  onward  with  the  brave  endurance  of  the 
Patience  of  Love  !  Those  others,  the  standard  condemns  them.  This  one  will 
alone  pass  muster.  And  happily,  these  last  are  the  staple  of  which  Church 
life  is  woven.  However  it  may  have  been  in  Corinth,  the  gifted  ones  and  the 
great  are  not  many  in  the  Churches.  There  are  always  more  of  these  plainer 
stones  and  common  bricks  in  the  building,  than  of  the  sculptured  headstones  and 
pillars  and  of  the  costly  marbles.  Happy  the  Church  "  enriched  "  with  these  long- 
suffering,  kind,  non -obtrusive,  humble  ones ;  of  fair  and  seemly  behaviour  in 
every  detail  of  speech  and  conduct ;  unselfish,  hard  to  kindle  with  wrath,  slow  to 
remember  wrong,  and  loth  to  suspect  it ;  whose  joy  is  the  discovery  and  the  triumph 
of  the  Right;  incredulous  of  evil  intent  in  anything,  doggedly  hopeful,  even  against 
"  facts  "  ;  strongly  patient  of  the  inevitable  worst.  A  Church  composed  of  only 
such  would  conquer  the  world.  Such  Love  is  conquering  all,  even  when  it  seems 
only  to  be  enduring  all.  "  The  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth."  Such  Love  wins ; 
it  is  invincible ! 

III.  But  now  as  to  these  "  gifts,"  God's  gifts. — Is  there  not  something  better? 
Has  He  no  greater  thing  than  these  to  give  ?  You  look  around  you,  and  see 
His  distribution  of  temporal  good.  Evidently  He  does  not  appraise  it  very 
highly,  or  He  would  not  give  it  so  freely  to  men  who  do  not  love  Him,  or  thank 
Him,  or  glorify  Him  in  the  use  of  it.  Certainly,  if  it  counted  for  as  much  with 
Him  as  it  does  with  the  men  of  the  world.  His  children  would  never  be  left 
without  it.  He  not  only  "  knows  how  to  give,"  but  gives,  "  good  things  to  His 
children."  Look  within  your  Church,  and  see  how  He  gives  these  Charisms,  to 
you  factious,  envious,  impure  Corinthians,  rather  than  (say)  to  my  dear,  loving, 
blameless  Philippian  friends;  to  you,  indeed,  beyond  any  other  Church.  They 
are  His  endowments ;  not  to  be  despised ;  each  in  its  order  and  sphere  and 
measure  to  be  used  for  His  work  and  glory.  But  beyond  such  gifts  He  values 
Character.  It  is  the  one  eternally  abiding  enrichment  of  your  life.  You  boast  of 
your  wide  and  deep  "  knowledge  "  ;  but  it  is  accompanied  by  a  wider  and  deeper 
ignorance.  What  is  right  is  only  outline,  and  very  much  will  need  revising  or 
unlearning  when  the  Perfect  has  come.  Not  a  little  of  it  will  have  lost  all 
meaning  and  value  in  the  new  world  of  eternity ;  it  was  so  entirely  knowledge  of, 
and  adjusted  to,  this  world  of  temporary  things.  You  see  only  one  aspect  of  any 
fact  at  once ;  from  this  partial  view  you  gain  only  partial  knowledge,  relatively  true. 
(Do  not  be  dogmatic,  and  intolerant  of  the  man  who  gets  his  own  partial  view 
exactly  as  you  do  yours.  Let  love  remind  you  of  that  !)  See  all  around  things, 
as  you  will  some  day,  and  the  knowledge  of  to-day  will  seem  the  mere  A  B  C  of 
the  schooldays  of  God's  little  children  ;  your  most  confident  judgments  will  seem 
the  half-knowledge  and  often  erroneous  opinions  of  the  boy.  In  the  manhood 
of  that  life  you  shall  " know,"  as  even  now  God  "knows"  you,  and  appraises  you 
accordingly.  You  have  deep  insight  into  things  ?  Why,  you  never  get  face  ta 
face  with  things  themselves.  You  see,  not  realities,  but  their  dim  reflections  in 
a  mirror ;  and  what  you  see  is  a  very  enigma,  baflQing  you  as  you  try  to 
**  know  "  it.  You  may  call  it  "  knowing  "  when  in  that  world  you  learn  without 
error,  effort,  hindrance.  The  "  tongues "  will  hardly  outlast  your  own  age. 
"  Prophecy  "  will  more  and  more  rapidly  pass  out  of  use  as  the  Great  Prophet 
begins  more  frequently  and  clearly  and  sufficiently  to  speak  to  His  Church  by 
His  Word  and  His  Spirit.    Yourselves  change  and  pass;   and  those  things 

277 


CHAP.  xiii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I,   CORINTHIANS, 


change  and  pass  with  you.  Get  hold  of  the  one  abiding  wealth,  Character,  whose 
foundation  is  Love.  Love  is  eternal  as  God  Himself.  Character  will  go  forward 
when  your  unchanging  Self  goes  forward,  with  a  continuity  of  existence 
unbroken  even  in  Death.  Seek  to  have  it  God's  own  "  Character,"  Love.  The 
Life  of  Love  finds  its  sphere  as  simply  and  naturally  there  as  here.  Love  is  the. 
one  grace  which  needs  no  modification  to  adjust  it  to  the  new  conditions  of  life 
and  employment  in  that  world.  Faith,  "  abiding  "  till  then,  will  have  perished 
in  the  moment  of  its  consummation,  dying  as  it  sees  what  it  believed  for.  Hope 
— our  Christian  hope,  "  abiding "  till  then — will  have  merged  in  enjoyment. 
Love  "  abides,"  even  then,  All- outlasting  and  Immortal. 

SEPARATE  HOMILIES, 

[Strictly  belongs  to  xii.  31,  "-4  more  "the  Way,"  and  "the    Rule"  which 

excellent  way."]  marks  out  "  the  way."      Love  is   the 

Love's  "  Way"  of  Life, — [I.e.  "Life"  one  all-embracing  Christian  Halachah, 
as  y8io5,  not  as  ^wr/,  the  life  which  is  a  Christian  preceptive  Talmud  con- 
lived,  not  hy  which  man  lives ;  the  life  densed  into  a  word.]  In  both  senses  a 
that  makes  the  matter  of  a  biography,  novelty. 

not  that  which  animates  the  creatures  I.  A     life. — 1.  Striking     that    not 

of  zoology.]  wisdom^   nor  intellect,  nor  strength  of 

Introduction. — Observe  the  sobriety  of  character,    is    made   the   starting-point 

PauVs  judgment.      In    reaction   from  of  the  Gospel  conception  of  life.     No ; 

the    excesses,    the    irregularities,    the  but  the  one  universally  possible  cha- 

vauntings    of    the    men    gifted    with  racteristic.     The  child,  therefore,  and 

"  tongues,"  some  would  have  gone  to  the  humble  poor,  the  simple  and  un- 

an  extreme  in  the  other  direction,  and  lettered,  the  scarce-recovered  heathen, 

would   have  suppressed   their  exercise  can  live  it.     It  is  a  "  way  "  smooth  for 

altogether,  or,  if  that  were  impossible,  the    feeblest    foot,    and    level   to  the 

would    have    discredited    and   decried  entrance  and  use  of  the  lowliest.     How 

them    (as    perhaps,    1    Thess.    v.    19).  few  could  hope  to  live  the  life  of  the 

Paul,    "  speaking   with   tongues   more  philosopher   or  the   ruler.       All  may 

than  they  all,"  could  hardly  do  this ;  live   the    life   whose   characteristic   is 

yet    his    estimate   of   the    "tongues"  love.       The   very   conception    of   any 

might    well   have    been    affected,    ad-  other  life  must  be  to  most  a  hidden 

versely,  by  their  abuse  at  Corinth,  or,  secret.     The  conception  of  this  style  of 

too  favourably,  by  the  fact  of  his  own  life  stands  open  to  the  thought  and 

sense  of  the  value  of  gifts.     Some  can  heart  of  all.     All  other  ideals  which 

praise  no  gift  but  their  own,  can  value  teachers  have   sketched  out  and  held 

nothing  but   it,    can   do  nothing   but  up  are  for   the   few ;  this  is  for  the 

overpraise   it ;    or   can  keep  no   clear  many — for  all.      2.  [Cf.    the   descrip- 

vision  and  calm  balance  of  judgment  tion  of  the  high-souled  man  in  Aris- 

when  a  good  thing  is  abused.     Paul :  totle,    Ethics,     vi.    3    (as    quoted    in 

"  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts,"  viz.  Luthardt,  Moral  Truths,  p.  292).     "  It 

knowledge,  prophecy,  tongues.     "  They  is    also    characteristic    of    him    that 

are    all    good ;     prefer     prophecy    to  he  does  not  rush  to  places  and  oppor- 

tongues;     but     there     is     something  tunities    which   are   highly   esteemed, 

better   yet — Love."     And  this  love  is  and  where  others  have  already  played 

not   so   much    a   gift    or   a    point    of  the  first  part ',  that  he  is  in  general  but 

character ;   it  is  a  "  way,''  a  path,  in  slowly   roused   except   where   a   great 

which  all  gifts  are  to  be  sought  and  honour  or  a  great  work  is  concerned," 

employed.  etc.     "  He  is  candid,  because  he  looks 

It  is  I.  A  life ;  II.  A  rule  of  life,  upon  men  with  contempt ;  hence  he  is 

\I,e.  like  the  Jewish  Halachah,   it  is  always  inclined  to  speak  the  truth, 

278 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xiil. 


except  in  cases  when  he  ironically  re- 
serves his  real  opinion,  a  part  which 
he  may  well  play  with  respect  to  the 
multitude."  "  Nothing  can  easily 
astonish  him,  because  nothing  is  great 
in  his  eyes."  "  Even  in  externals  it 
is  generally  admitted  that  the  gait  of 
the  high-souled  man  is  slow,  his  voice 
deep  and  emphatic,  his  words  few. 
For  a  man  to  whom  few  things  are 
important  is  not  inclined  to  haste,  and 
he  who  regards  nothing  as  great  does 
not  exert  his  voice."  All  of  which, 
when  brought  into  the  light  of  the 
New  Testament,  and  judged  in  the 
presence  of  ideal  human  life  as  seen 
in  The  Man  Christ  Jesus,  is  simply 
Pride.  As  Luthardt  adds  :  "So  too 
the  wise  man,  the  Stoic  ideal,  is  the 
representative  of  indifference  towards 
men,  and  his  morality  is  nothing 
more  than  cold  resignation."]  3.  This 
is  an  ideal  of  life,  moreover,  which 
can  be  true  for  both  onan  and  God. 
Divine  love  translating  itself  into 
human  expression,  and  exhibiting  it- 
self within  the  limits  of  human  con- 
ditions, is  seen  in  the  God-Man,  Who 
is  in  this,  as  in  all  else,  the  Mediator 
between,  the  Unifier  of,  God  and  man. 
4.  What  a  perplexity  to  reason  that 
such  a  lovely  ideal  should  have  to  suffer, 
to  "  endure  "  !  5.  Moreover,  it  will 
not  be  content  to  exist  as  a  mere 
passive  virtue.  It  is  very  character- 
istic of  Christianity  throughout,  that 
the  strain  of  vers.  4-7  should  seem  to 
be  one  of  endurance  and  self-contained 
goodness  and  peace.  The  points  of 
character  lie  within  the  circle  of  the 
man's  own  personal  life,  and  that  rather 
as  he  is  acted  upon  by,  than  as  he  is  an 
actor  in,  or  himself  affecting,  other 
lives.  Yet,  as  matter  of  experiment,  it 
is  clearly  certain  that  neither  in  man 
nor  God  can  a  life  whose  germinant 
principle  is  Love,  be  merely  passive, 
or  patient ;  it  will  be  active,  going  out 
all  around  in  search  of  objects  on 
which  it  may  spend  its  force.  The 
love  of  God  has  sought  man  out ;  it  has 
always  made  the  first  approaches  in 
view  of  reconciliation  and  fellowship. 
Though  God's  love  is  not  (in  Butler's 


words)  "  a  bare  and  singular  disposition 
to  bestow  happiness,"  this  is  its  inevit- 
ably prevalent  characteristic.  And  in 
man,  where  it  is,  it  acts.  It  is  as  busy 
as  it  is  patient.  It  discovers  reasons  for 
doing  good,  and  develops  a  wonderful 
ingenuity  in  discovering  methods  of 
accomplishing  good.  Love  gives  won- 
derful wisdom,  and  there  is  no  other 
spring  of  persevering  activity  which 
will  not  at  times,  or  altogether,  find 
its  force  outmatched  or  outwraried 
and  exhausted.     "  Love  never  failethr 

II.  A  rule  of  life. — 1.  All  external 
directions  and  legislation  must  needs 
fail  somewhere.  Many  cases  will 
*'  crop  up  "  which  have  not  been,  in  so 
TYiany  words,  provided  against.  Many 
rules  will  cease  to  be  needed,  or  to  be 
applicable.  New  rules  are  needed,  often 
upon  the  instant,  when  there  is  no 
time  for  reference  to  authority,  or 
indeed  for  any  lengthy  deliberation  of 
the  judgment.  The  one  perfect  legis- 
lator is  a  fully  enlightened  Love.  No 
case  can  arise,  so  unexpectedly  or  so 
completely  without  precedent,  but  that 
a  healthy  heart,  filled  with  that  love 
which  is  the  grace  of  the  Spirit,  will 
be  equal  to  giving  direction.  Love 
will  keep  the  moral  sense  active,  the 
"  touch  "  sensitive.  It  will  need  train- 
ing, enlightening,  informing,  but  it  has 
in  it  an  instinctive,  native,  legislative 
faculty.  "  What  does  God  command? 
What  does  the  Bible  say  ?  "  "  There 
is  no  express  decision  at  all."  "  What 
is  customary  ? "  "  There  has  been  no 
precedent  within  my  knowledge." 
"  What  does  So-and  so  advise  ?  " 
"  There  is  no  time  to  consult  him." 
*'  What  does  Love  say  ?  What  would 
Incarnate  Love  have  done?  What 
would  God's  love  do  ?  "  A  "  law  "  for 
the  occasion,  which  will  not  be  far  from 
the  maik,  will  not  be  hard  by  that  test 
to  discover.  2.  The  niceties  of  justice, 
of  courtesy,  of  kindness,  between  man 
and  man  can  only  be  regulated  by 
some  such  inner  guiding  "  Law."  The 
finer  points  of  personal  bearing  towards 
others,  such  as  are  expanded  by  Paul 
in  vers.  4-7,  need  inculcating  upon 
the     child.        For     self-assertion      is 

279 


CHAP.  Xiil.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   CORINTHIANS. 


natural  to  man,  however  much  society 
"  manners  " — which  are,  in  this  par- 
ticular, cut- flowers  that  once  grew 
upon  the  root  of  Christian  love — may 
repress  or  refine  its  manifestations 
(see  Fragments  from  Robertson).  [No 
more  perfect  "  gentleman "  than 
Cicero;  but  the  natural  heart  shows 
in  such  a  sentence  from  a  letter  to  his 
intimate  friend  Atticus  (i.  14,  as  given 
in  Farrar),  "  Heavens  !  how  I  showed 
off  "(cognate  word  to  Paul's  ^^vaunteth") 
"  before  my  new  auditor,  Pompeius  !  "] 
But  the  only  absolutely  effectual  edu- 
cation or  repression  will  be  that  of  the 
instinct  of  Love  acting  from  within. 
"As  the  man  thinketh  in  his  heart, 
so  is  he"  (Prov.  xxiii.  7);  most  simply 
and  truly,  in  that  the  real  man  is  in 
the  purposes  of  the  heart,  whether  they 
come  to  the  surface  in  expression  or 
not ;  but  also  in  the  equally  true  sense 
that  what  the  man  is  within  that  he 
will,  in  many  points,  certainly  when 
"  off  his  guard,"  appear.  "  The  man 
maketh  the  manners"  (Evans,  in 
Speaker),  when  the  very  germ  and  the 
summary  also  of  the  character  is  Love. 
3.  This  is  an  atmosphere,  an  aroma, 
hanging  about,  given  off  by,  a  Christian 
life  in  every  detail.  It  will  control  the 
desire  for  "  gifts  "  ;  only  those  will  be 
cared  about  which  Love  can  use.  It 
will  control  their  exercise ;  they  will 
only  be  employed  for  the  purposes,  and 
within  the  limits,  which  Love  will 
allow.  It  is  an  inward  "  ointment 
which  bewrayeth  itself"  [Prov.  xxvii. 
16,  borrowing  the  illustration,  though 
not  the  thought].  As  the  thought  of 
a  man  is  found  by  the  "thought- 
reader  "  to  betray  itself  in  unconscious 
muscular  action;  so  will  the  thought 
whose  summing  up  is,  most  compre- 
hensively, "  Love,"  betray  itself  in 
action,  even  when  not  directly  in- 
tended by  the  man,  or  not  distinctly 
adverted  to  by  him.  It  makes,  and 
marks,  the  "  good  man,"  as  distin- 
guished from  the  "  righteous  man,"  of 
Rom.  V.  7.  4.  Give  rules  enough, 
and  you  may  secure  any  required 
number  of  right  acts;  but  you  must 
get  a  right  heart  if  you  desire  righteous- 

280 


ness.  Put  love  in,  and  you  may  get, 
by  outgrowth  from  within  a  Christlike 
life. 

Vers.  1-3.   Without  Love — Nothing! 

I.  Applicable  to  the  Church. — This 
goes  hack  to  an  earlier  thought  in  this 
letter  to  Corinth  (chap.  i.).  Over 
against  the  great,  swelling,  proud 
entities  of  the  world,  Paul  there  sets 
the  non-entities  of  the  Gospel.  God  had 
already  set  them  in  array  over  against 
each  other.  Forces  intellectual,  social, 
political,  the  inclinations  of  the  natural 
heart,  its  judgments,  its  desires,  its 
passions,  were  all  against  the  early 
Chvirch.  But  it  "  brought  to  nought 
things  that  areP  The  "  power  and  the 
wisdom  "  of  God  in  Christ  brought  to 
nought  "  the  power  and  the  wisdom  " 
of  the  princes  of  this  "  world."  The 
thing  that  was  "  despised,"  and  was 
"  set  at  nought "  in  the  valuation  of 
the  world  [as  the  Stone  Himself  had 
been  "  set  at  nought  "],  "  overcame  the 
world."  The  nothings  conquered  the 
somethings.  And  what  was  true  of 
the  Church  was  true  of  the  individual 
Christian.  The  woman,  the  child,  the 
slave,  often  won  the  master,  the  house. 
The  Decian  persecution  seemed  to  bring 
the  hopes  and  prospects  and  numbers 
and  strength  of  the  Church  to  their 
lowest.  But  many  a  sufferer  in  the 
Decian  troubles  lived  to  see,  after  no 
loDg  interval,  a  Christian  emperor 
upon  the  Imperial  throne.  It  is  true 
simply  to  say  that  God  "  saw  to  it "  that 
His  work  triumphed.  The  power  of  God 
was  in  the  victory.  But  His  power 
works  by  means,  and  uses  instru- 
mentalities ;  it  accomplishes  its  purposes 
through  and  by  means  of  the  conditions 
and  elements  of  ordinary  human  nature 
and  life.  Regarding  the  matter  from 
this  point,  one  might,  must,  say  that 
the  secret  of  the  victory  was  "  Lover 
"  Charity  "  conquered.  Force  might 
have  crushed  force.  ["  They  that 
take  the  sword,"  in  defending  or  ex- 
tending the  kingdom  of  Christ,  "  shall 
perish  by  the  sword."]  But  force 
broke  itself  upon  Love.  The  waves 
found  Love  an  immovable  rock  against 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  COHINTHIANS.  chap.  xiii. 


which  their  power  was   dissipated  in  permanently    progressive,    intelligent, 

vain  spray.     The  "  meek  inherited  the  world-affecting,  race-leading  civilisation 

earth  "  ("  wielded  the  world,"  as  the  of  the  centuries,  ever  since  the  victory 

Wycliffe  gospel  has  it)  because  of  their  over  the  empire.     The  miraculous  gifts, 

"  meekness."     The  reed-sceptre  ruled,  for  example,  were,  like  the  bell  tolled 

where  the  rod  of  iron  could  only  have  to  announce  that  the  worship  is  going 

coerced.     Love  was  the  secret  of  resist-  to  begin,  arresting  attention,  awaking 

ance  and  of  conquest.     The  meekness,  interest,  inviting  to  participation,  but 

the  patience,  the  forgiveness  of  injuries,  ceasing  after  their  brief,  initial  work 

the  kindness  which  laid  itself  out  to  was  done.     Not  without  these  things, 

compass  the  good  of  their  very  perse-  perhaps ;    the   martyrdoms    were    an 

cutors,  [protesting  [e.g.  in  Tertullian,  exceedingly    impressive    argument    to 

ApoL,    c.    39)    that    it   was   loyal   to  every   heathen    spectator.      But   even 

the   government   and   prayed  for  the  given  these  things,  not  without  Love. 

emperor], — these   were   all  aspects   of  Gifts;   eloquence  in  the  literature  or 

Love,   the  love  which  was  as  new  a  the   press   of   the   Church ;    deep   and 

thing  to  the  world,  in  language   and  broad   philosophy    in    the    exponents 

thought,  as  it  was  in  life  and  facts,  and    defenders    of    Christianity;    the 

Without  this,  for  the  conquest  of  the  almost  miraculous  power  of  enthusiasm 

world,  the  Church  had  been  "  nothing."  and  of  strong  faith  in  the  doctrines,  the 

A  lesson  for  all  time.     It  is  "  a  uni-  fortunes,   the  future,  of   Christianity, 

versal  law "  of   the  extension  of   the  or    of    a    special    creed    or    Church ; 

kingdom  of  Christ.     If  all  the  Church  charities  ;  martyrdoms   of    ascetic,    or 

had  been  "  enriched  "  with  gifts  as  the  laborious,  spending  of  life, — these  alone 

Corinthians  were  (i.  4-7) ;  if  literally  are  but  the  body ;   Love  is  the   soul, 

all    the    Church     had    spoken    with  These  may  be  the  instruments ;  Love 

"  tongues " ;  if  Moses'  wish  had  been  wields  them,  and  the  victory  is  hers, 

literally  realised,  "  and  all  the  Lord's  All   these   have   been    divorced    from 

people  had  been  prophets  "  (Num.  xi.  Love  many  a  time.     The  learning  and 

29),  and  had  had  "knowledge"  to  which  acuteness  of   apologetics  and  polemics 

no   thought   of   God   in  His  purposes  and  didactics  have  undergone  a  trans- 

toward     man    was    any    longer     "  a  figuration  as  fearful  as  when  a  demon 

mystery";    if    miracle-working    faith,  entered  into  and  looked  out  from  the 

instead  of   being   confined   to   narrow  eyes,  and  uttered  himself  through  the 

limits  of  place  and  age,  had  been  the  lips,  of  perhaps  some  tender  father  or 

every-day,    mountain-moving,   mighty  affectionate  son;  love   has   been   cast 

power,  always  at  the  command  of  the  out   by    a    stronger    spirit,    of    evil. 

Church  ;  if  every  Christian  had  been  Almsgiving  has  become  bribery  to  buy 

as   wealthy   as   a    Barnabas,    and    as  adherents  to  a  sect,  or   a   method   of 

liberal,  so   that   the   charities   of   the  earning  merit  for  one's  own  salvation. 

Church,    not   only    towards    its    own  or  even  of  winning  applause  of  men. 

"jooor,"  but  towards  the  poor  outside  its  At   one   period   there   was   almost  an 

membership,  had   been  a  hundredfold  epidemic  of  madness  for   volunteered 

greater  than  they   have  ever  by  any  martyrdom,    which   did   not   wait   for 

possibility  been  ;  if  a  whole  Church  had  the   informer,  but  thrust    itself   upon 

stood  before  the  world    "  ready  to  be  the  notice  of  the  heathen  magistrates, 

offered,"  or  actually  offered,  to  death,  men  and  women  claiming  to  be  noticed 

and  that  byjlre, — yet  the  world  would  as  Christians  ;  the  motive  being,  in  fact, 

not   have   been   conquered.     By   such  not  Love's  witness,  unto  death,  for  the 

means  it  never  will  be.     These  things  Master,  but  the  same  winning  of  merit, 

have   their   meaning   and    their    use ;  The  asceticisms  of  nearly  every  section 

they  have  been  factors  in  the   great  of  the  Church  have  been  martyrdoms 

result,  which  meant  the  empire  won,  whose  whole  character  is  altered,  whose 

and  a  Christianity  associated  with  the  value    is    gone,    because    they    have 

2Sl 


CHAP.  Xili.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


become  voluntary  sufferings,  inflicted 
as  the  purchase-price  of  merit ;  self-love, 
not  love,  thus  being,  with  more  or  less 
subtilty,  their  motive.  To  God  these 
are  nothing.  As  giving  to  the  Church 
any  real  hold  of,  or  victory  over,  the 
world,  though  they  may  seem  to 
achieve  a  temporary  and  limited 
admiration  and  success,  if  these  be  her 
armour  or  her  weapons,  the  Church  is 
nothing.  God  cannot  work  through  a 
loveless  Church. 

II.  Applied  to  the  Christian  man. — 
If  the  individual  Christian  have  not, 
or  lose,  this  characteristic  and  essential 
mark  of  life,  he  too  has  reverted  to  his 
old  and  true  and  native  valuation 
before  God,  He  is  one  of  the  "  things 
that  are  not''  (i.  28),— "  nothing  ! " 
"  Of  Him  are  ye."  All  standing  and 
life  are  of  God  and  His  grace.  "  Christ 
is  made  unto  him "  all  that  he  is  or 
has  (i.  29).  "  If  he  have  not  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His  "  (Rom. 
viii.  9).  And  the  "  fruit  of  the  Spirit " 
is  "  love."  ''  By  this  do  all  men  know 
that  he  is  a  disciple,  that  he  has  love  " 
(John  xiii.  35).  The  charity  of  this 
chapter  is  the  *'  love "  of  the  Second 
Table  (so-called)  of  the  Law.  But  it 
has  arisen  out  of  "  the  love  of  God  " — 
His  to  us — first  "  shed  abroad  in  our 
heart "  (Rom.  v.  5) ;  with  so  close  a 
connection  that  if  the  love  of  the 
brotherhood  be  wanting,  it  argues  the 
absence  of  the  love  of  the  Father, 
and  this,  that  the  Father's  forgiving, 
adopting  love  (Rom.  viii.  15,  16)  has 
never  been  known,  or  has  been  for- 
feited. Status,  life,  love — aU  with  Paul 
are  linked  in  vitally  close  association. 
A  man  may  therefore  test  himself  by 
this  paragraph.  *'  What  must  I  do 
to  be  saved  ? "  is  one  earlier  form  of 
the  question.  But  afterwards,  and 
frequently,  "■  What  must  I  be  to  reckon 
myself  a  Christian  ?  "  He  may  cast 
Paul's  inventory  into  analogous, 
modern  forms,  and  say,  *'  What  have 
I?" 

1.  '^Profession?" — It  is  something 
that  a  man  can  speak  the  "  tongue " 
of  God's  modern  Israel — "  the  language 
of  Canaan  "  (Isa.  xix.  18).    The  dialect 

282 


does  not  come  naturally  to,  or  sit  with 
facility  upon,  the  lips  of  a  foreigner. 
It  is  the  man  who  has  "entered  into 
the  kingdom  of  God  "  by  being  "  new- 
born "  into  it  (John  iii.  3,  5),  and  who 
has  spoken  it  from  his  "  new-birth " 
onward,  who  talks  it  "  like  a  native." 
He  can  detect  the  accent  of  a  stranger 
who  has  merely  "  picked  it  up."  Yet  the 
native  citizen  may  lose  his  citizen  heart 
without  losing  the  old  trick  of  speech. 
The  prodigal  among  the  swine  will 
speak  there  with  the  gentleman's 
accent  he  learnt  at  home  from  the 
father.  *'  If  a  man  say,"  etc.  (1  John 
iv.  20).  He  may  "  say,"  but  lip 
evidence  is  not  enough  even  for  him- 
self.    Is  that  all  ?     "  Nothing  ! " 

2.  "  Intellect  ?  "—There  may  be, 
happily,  the  closest  alliance  between 
intellect,  naturally  of  the  highest  and 
most  highly  trained,  and  Christian  re- 
velation. Its  believers  and  defenders 
and  exponents  have  by  no  means  been 
fools  or  unversed  in  learning.  Au- 
gustine, Pascal,  Butler,  would  have 
been  intellectual  giants,  whatever  their 
creed  or  their  theme.  Yet  whilst  great 
gifts  have  been  consecrated  in  all  their 
abundance  to  the  service  of  Christ, 
again  and  again  have  the  great  thinkers 
been  also  simple  believers.  Indeed, 
they  may  "  play  the  man  "  in  the  fight 
for  Truth ;  but  they  must,  each  of 
them,  be  "  the  little  child  "  in  order  to 
be  Christians  in  any  real,  personally 
beneficial,  saving  sense.  Intellectual 
appreciation  of  Christianity ;  hearty 
approval  of  its  ethics  and  laws ;  and 
mastery  both  of  its  difficulties  and  its 
supports ;  intense  vehemence  in  its 
defence  against  opponents, — all  these 
may  be  divorced  from  the  distinctive 
love  for  Christ  or  for  redeemed  man. 
"  Nothing ! "  The  noblest  intellect  is  a 
noble  gift  to  offer  upon  the  altar  of  con- 
secration. It  finds  no  small  acceptance 
with  God.  But  if  only  the  intellect  has 
grasped  Christianity,  the  man  is  not 
yet  a  Christian.  Indeed,  he  only  as  yet 
knows  the  externals  of  Christianity, 
as  he  might  know,  and  defend  Buddhism 
or  Mahometanism.  The  loving  heart 
of    the    pardoned,    regenerate    sinner 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   COBlNTHlAm,  chap.  xiii. 


alone  knows  Christianity.  The  intellect 
may  give  allegiance  to  the  system  of 
Truth ;  the  loving  heart  alone  gives 
union  with  Christ.  That  makes  the 
Christian.  Without  it,  the  adherent 
of  one  amongst  many  creeds  of  the 
world,—"  Nothing ! " 

3.  "  Enthusiasm  ?  " — A  great  power, 
which,  when  joined  with  the  grip  upon, 
and  the  allegiance  of  the  intellect  to, 
the  Truth,  makes  a  man  a  mighty 
worker.  It  may  give  "  driving " 
power  to  the  organiser  and  the  ruler 
in  the  Church's  offices ;  it  will  to 
himself  be  a  "  staying  "  power.  He 
may  rouse  others  with  his  gift,  a  born 
leader  of  men.  He  may  *'  pull  things 
through  "  to  a  victory  snatched  out  of 
the  very  jaws  of  defeat,  when  all  but 
himself  were  despondent,  or  ready  to 
yield.  With  enthusiasm  and  natural 
energy  a  man  may  "  work "  a  Church 
as  he  would  "  work  "  a  business,  or  some 
secular  society,  and  may  do  it  very  suc- 
cessfully. But  there  come  moments 
of  self -revelation  to  men,  when,  under 
the  searching  light  of  the  teaching 
Spirit,  they  discover  that  a  passionate 
devotion  to  a  particular  Church,  or 
to  some  special  department  of  Christian 
work,  with  an  enthusiasm  and  success 
which  have  made  them  bulk  in  the 
public  eye  as  forefront  ''Christians" 
in  labour  and  fruit,  has  been  un- 
accompanied with  the  deep  devotion  of 
Christ  Himself,  without  which  men 
may  "  push "  the  business  or  the 
agencies  of  the  Church  as  successfully, 
and  in  as  secular  a  spirit,  as  they  do 
their  own  business,  or  may  be  as 
devoted  to  the  fortunes  and  interests 
of  their  Church  or  sect  as  they  are, 
— and  with  precisely  the  same  kind 
of  devotion, — to  their  political  party. 
"Nothing!" 

4.  "  Good  works  and  charities  ? " — 
[God's  estimate  of  "  good  works,"  let 
it  be  remembered,  is  qualitative,  not 
quantitative.  Further :]  These  may 
have  many  meanings  besides  love. 
[There  was  more  than  a  child's  fun 
in  the  definition,  "  *  Charity '  is  giving 
poor  folks    old    stuff    you    can't    use 


yourself."]  (1)  Mere  weakness  which 
cannot  say,  "  No " ;  (2)  A  self-in- 
dulgence which  gives,  to  get  as  quickly 
as  may  be  out  of  sight  and  mind  the  lui- 
pleasantly  painful  object  of  "  charity  " ; 

(3)  An   attempt   to  quiet  conscience; 

(4)  An  indolence  which  cannot  bear 
the  trouble  of  inquiring  into  the  truth 
of  the  applicant's  case,  and  still  less  of 
undertaking  the  often  extremely  diffi- 
cult task  of  discovering  how  really  to 
help  the  case ;  (5)  A  mere  compliance 
with  surrounding  example  or  custom, 
from  fear  of  singularity ;  (6)  Self- 
glory.  Indeed,  no  "religious"  action 
needs  watching  by  the  actor  more 
closely  than  does  charity ;  none  more 
readily  misleads  the  man  himself ; 
nothing  more  readily  than  almsgiving 
can  be  accomplished  without  **  love." 
The  motive  which  prompts  almsgiving 
may  indeed  be  a  very  real  and  genuine 
benevolence  of  heart.  But  if  it  be 
benevolence  which  has  no  eye  set  upon 
Christ,  nor  draws  inspiration  from  His 
love  shed  abroad  within,  it  is  not  yet 
enough.  "  Dole  "  away  !  "  Dole  "  until 
you  are  yourself  a  beggar  !  Is  that  all  ? 
"  Nothing ! " 

5.  "  Devotion  to  self,  self -denial^  of 
the  most  rigorous,  even  to  death  ?  " — But 
whilst  "death  "  may  mean  strength  of 
principle,  and  of  faith,  it  has  meant» 
and  may  mean,  stubbornness  and 
obstinacy  which  would  not  go  back  o^ 
jaeld  when  once  a  position  had  been 
taken  up  and  the  man  was  publicly 
pledged  to  it ;  i.e.  Pride.  Labours  or 
austerities  that  ruin  health,  or  even 
end  in  death,  may  be  the  merest  caput 
mortuum  of  a  religious  life,  from  which 
all  that  once  gave  them  such  imperfect 
meaning  and  value  as  they  had,  has 
evaporated.  They  may  become  the 
merest  mechanics  of  a  religious  pro- 
fession, from  which  all  soul  and  love 
have  departed.  All  these  ?  Yet  perhaps 
"  Nothing ! " 

6.  Happy,  then,  if  by  the  gift  and 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit — whether  with 
or  without  some,  or  all,  of  these — the 
man's  self-examination  says,  "  Yet  I 
do  love  !  "  (of.  John  xxi.  17). 


283 


CHAP.  xiii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  2.  Man-worth. 

I.  The  greatest  thing  in  the  universe 
is  Mind.  The  greatest  thing  in  Mind 
is  Love. — Whatever  a  human  intelU- 
gence  may  be,  have,  or  do,  if  destitute  of 
love,  it  is  nothing.  1.  Not  the  gregarious 
sentiment  which  Hnks  us  to  our  fellow- 
creatures.  That  is  an  instinct  common 
to  aninial  existence ;  in  some  men. 
stronger  than  others,  making  those 
who  possess  it  in  the  highest  degree 
"  amiahle,  good-natured."  Much 
domestic  love  and  social  benevolence  is 
nothing  but  a  development  of  this.  It 
is  a  blessing,  but  not  a  virtue.  There 
is  no  morality  in  it.  It  can  feed  the 
upas  tree  as  well  as  nourish  a  tree  of 
life.  2.  Not  theological  love  for  one's  own 
faith  and  sect,  which  pours  forth  tender 
and  pathetic  benedictions  upon  all  with- 
in the  limits  of  one's  own  creed,  but 
fulminates  anathemas  upon  all  besides. 
This  is  not  love  ;  it  is  a  demon  working 
under  the  mask  of  the  angel  ''  Love." 

3.  Nor  sacerdotal  love^  "  which  speaks 
eloquently  about  the  cure  of  souls  and 
Church  extension,  but  little  about  the 
physical  and  social  woes  of  the  race." 
Priestly   selfishness,   not    manly    love. 

4.  We  may  describe,  we  cannot  define, 
*1  it  as  a  generous  moral  sympathy  for 
/  the  race  springing  from  love  to  the 
'      Creator.     All   real    philanthropy   will 

have  its  Source  in  piety.  Such  love  is 
no  spasmodic  emotion ;  it  is  an  all- 
pervading  element,  the  underground  of 
character,  the  heart  of  the  heart,  the 
soul  of  the  soul.  It  places  man's  entire 
being  in  a  right  relation  to  God  and 
the  universe.  It  was  incarnate  in 
Jesus.  This  love  alone  can  confer  real 
worth  on  humanity,  "  What  is  he 
worth  ? "  means  not,  "  How  much 
native  force,  spiritual  attainment,  or 
divine  soul  has  he  %  "  but,  "  How  much 
money  ?  "  Gold  outweighs  soul  in  the 
social  balance.  Fill  your  purse,  and 
though  your  soul  be  empty,  you  are 
great.  *'  Wealth  is  the  one  thirg 
needful ;  Mammon  is  God  ;  love  of  the 
world  is  inspiration," — such  is  the 
Gospel  of  the  age  ! 

II.  Without  this  love,  man  is  nothing 
spiritually — 

284 


1.  In  relation  to  Nature. — What- 
ever does  not  minister  to  the  spiritual 
in  man  does  not  minister  to  him- 
self. Nature  gives  sensuous  pleasures, 
measured  in  variety  and  extent  by 
the  senses.  To  a  sensuous  man  "  the 
world  is  a  larder  to  feed  him,  a 
wardrobe  to  clothe  him,  a  market  to 
enrich  him;  or,  at  most,  a  riddle  to 
amuse  his  intellect."  She  gives  in- 
tellectual pleasures,  but  thinking  is 
necessary  to  their  participation;  they 
flow  from  nature  only  when  it  is  turned 
into  a  science ;  the  fountains  of  mental 
pleasure  are  concealed  until  by  the 
Moses-rod  of  philosophic  thought  the 
outward  crust  of  the  flinty  rock  is  ] 
broken  through.  But  the  spiritual  V 
pleasures  she  gives  are  the  highest,  i 
Nature  is  then  looked  at  through  the 
heart,  the  self.  "It  is  not  merely  a 
table  for  the  animal,  or  a  problem  for 
the  thinker;  but  a  loving  home  for  the 
child,  a  temple  for  the  adoring  saint.  • 
To  impart  these  highest  joys  of  nature 

is  Nature's  highest  function."  Love 
entering  into  the  heart  of  a  sensuous, 
selfish,  or  merely  intellectual  man, 
touches  all  nature  into  a  new  form, 
burns  up  his  old  world,  causes  its 
elements  to  melt  with  fervent  heat, 
its  heavens  to  pass  away,  till  he 
rapturously  exclaims,  "  A  new  heavens 
and  a  new  earth  !  The  former  things 
are  passed  away ! "  To  the  sensual, 
nature  is  gratification  ;  to  the  thinker, 
it  is  theory  ;  to  the  loving,  it  is  heaven  ! 
Without  love  "  I  am  nothing  "  in  rela- 
tion to  the  spiritual  enjoyments  of 
nature. 

2.  In  relation  to  Providence.  — 
Providence  is  only  absolutely  good 
when  it  is  realised  that  its  grand 
design  is  moral  goodness ;  "  not  to 
make  a  Dives  in  time,  but  a  Lazarus  in 
eternity."  If  Providence  only  raises  a 
man  to  fortune,  enriches  him  with  know- 
ledge, or  lifts  him  to  fame,  and  does  not 
refine  and  purify  his  sympathies,  ex- 
pand and  elevate  his  soul,  it  has  been 
a  bane  rather  than  a  boon.  Material 
blessings  to  a  bad,  unloving  heart  are 
spiritual  curses.  The  ten  thousand 
influences  of  Providence— its  sun,  its 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xiii. 


rains,  its  gracious  breezes — make  the 
healthy  germ  rooted  in  the  soil  of  love 
rise  every  day  into  new  forms  of  beauty 
and  life;  but  the  tree  with  no  such 
rooting  is  by  them  all  only  stripped  of 
its  remaining  verdure,  and  hastened 
to  its  dissolution  and  decay.  As  the 
mortally  diseased  may  say,  "I  am 
nothing  to  the  health-giving  economy 
of  nature,"  so  the  unloving  may  say,  "  I 
am  nothing  in  relation  to  the  spiritual 
blessings  of  Providence."  Rom.  v.  3  sqq. 
links  the  series  Tribulation,  Patience, 
Experience,  Hope,  Confidence  that 
fears  no  Shame,  *'  because  the  love  of 
God,"  etc.  "  All  things  work  together 
for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  The 
very  God  of  Providence  can  make 
them  so  work  together  for  none 
others. 

3.  In  relation  to  Christianity. — 
Love  alone  can  interpret  love ;  none 
but  the  loving  can  rise  to  the  meaning 
of  such  a  revelation  of  love  as  Chris- 
tianity. Power  in  philosophic  analysis, 
accuracy  in  dialectics,  skill  in  criticism, 
will  be  incapable  of  understanding  its 
essence  and  genius.  They  may  under- 
stand Theology,  but  not  Christianity. 
The  one  is  for  the  intellect,  the  other 
for  the  heart ;  and  only  the  heart  of 
love  can  reach  it.  It  is  a  real  unction 
from  the  Holy  One,  [a  charism  of  the 
Spirit]  by  which,  alone,  we  know  all 
things  in  Christianity.  Still  more, 
that  which  renders  us  incapable  of 
entering  into  its  meaning,  unfits  also 
for  applying  its  "  exceeding  great  and 
precious  promises."  They  are  for  the 
children  of  love,  and  for  them  only. 
Its  sublime  disclosures  and  its 
quickening  spirit,  its  promises  of  mercy 
and  its  radiant  glories, — without  love 
to  them  **  I  am  nothing." 

4.  In  relation  to  the  community  of 
the  good.—ThQ  "city,"  the  "church," 
the  "  family,"  wherever  they  exist,  have 
the  same  bond  of  union,  the  same 
condition  of  friendship,  the  same 
justifying  principle,  the  same  standard 
of  work.  Not  wealth,  learning,  talent, 
birth.  In  corrupt  "  society  "  especially 
does  the  first  make  a  man  a  respectable 
member  of  it,  however  callous  or  evil 


his  heart.  But  in  the  great  community 
of  the  good,  love  is  everything.  What- 
ever else  a  man  may  have,  if  he  have 
not  this,  he  is  not  admitted  into  their 
circle,  he  is  excluded  from  their  fellow- 
ship. To  this  glorious  community, 
without  love  "I  am  nothing." — 
Adapted  from  "  Homilist,"  New  Series, 
i.  433. 

Yer.  5.  "  Thinketh  no  evil." — 
*'  Does  not  reckon,  or  reckon  with,  evil, 
does  not  take  evil  into  the  account." 
Such  is  the  full  meaning  of  the  word, 
which  is  thus  a  very  far  wider  grace 
than  merely  an  absence  of  suspicious- 
ness of  spirit  and  judgment.  "  Sus- 
pects no  evil  "  is  included ;  but  there  is 
much  more.  It  suspects  none,  and 
imputes  none ;  it  entertains  no  thought 
of  resentment,  and  devises  no  evil. 

I.  Attributes  no  evil  to  others,  nor 
thinks  of  such  a  thing. 

II.  Contrives  no  evil  against  others, 
nor  thinks  of  such  a  thing. 

I.  1.  There  are  problems  in  life,  of 
exceeding  complexity,  questions  for  our 
judgment  and  foresight,  which  must  be 
solved.  Not  the  smallest  element  in 
the  complexity  is  introduced  in  the 
very  fact  that  the  character  and  con- 
duct of  men  and  women  are  involved  ; 
and  character  and  conduct  are  problems 
in  themselves,  problems  within  the  pro- 
blem, often  of  yet  greater  complexity. 
We  do  not  understand  ourselves,  of 
whom  we  know  the  elements  of  the 
problem  more  fully  than  we  can  ever 
hope  to  do  in  the  case  of  any  one 
else.  Yet  who  has  not  found  the  dis- 
entangling of  motive,  for  example,  of 
worthy  from  unworthy,  of  blamable 
from  laudable,  and  the  resulting  judg- 
ment upon  the  moral  quality  of  his  own 
conduct,  a  thing  past  his  own  wisdom 
and  skill  ?  Who  has  not,  therefore,  had 
to  cast  himself  wholly  upon  the  mercy 
of  the  one  judgment  that  is  built 
upon  all  the  facts,  and  those  read 
with  Absolute  Wisdom  and  Absolute 
Justice?  Not  yet  do  we  know  even 
ourselves  "  as  we  are  known."  And 
how  much  less  others  ?  2.  Yet  we 
must  form  an  estimate.     The  Master 

285 


CHAP.  xiiL   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


said,  "  Judge  not,"  yet  directly  after  judgments  were  unfounded  and  un- 
bade  His  disciples  "  cast  not  pearls  fair ;  that,  indeed,  all  our  thinking 
before  swine."  They  must,  then,  be  and  talking  has  been  waste  of  time 
able  to  judge  who  are  the  swinish  and  words,  all  our  virtuous  indignation 
men.  Officially,  at  any  rate,  men  must  was  quite  gratuitous,  and  our  disturbed 
often  "judge"  others,  and  must  speak  feelings  were  nothing  but  needless  dis- 
out  at  all  cost  their  judgment,  who-  tress  !  We  had  been  pronouncing  a 
ever  may  be  condemned  or  ruined,  judgment  where  we  had  not  all  the 
No  man  with  a  moral  sense  awake  facts.  No  doubt  bitter  experience  will 
can  help  forming,  swiftly  and  instinct-  show  the  most  guileless  and  unsuspect- 
ively,  a  judgment,  favourable  or  un-  ing  that  all  men  are  not  worthy  of 
favourable,  upon  a  thousand  things  he  trust ;  but  some  are  thus  worthy  in 
sees  in  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  highest  degree,  some  are  so  in  an 
men  around  him,  or  even  upon  what  unexpected  degree,  and  the  average  of 
he  hears — suspending,  in  this  case,  his  even  the  world  is  high.  "  Be  wise  as 
judgment  upon  the  man,  until  he  serpents,  harmless  as  doves."  5.  In 
learns  whether  the  facts  be  as  reported,  even  the  graver  matters  of  moral 
3.  There  is  a  blind,  foolish  confidence  conduct  there  is  room  for  the  mode- 
which  will  not  hear,  or  see,  or  be  told  ;  rating  hand  of  experience  to  restrain 
a  simplicity  which  is  the  sport  and  hasty  judgment.  We  have  seen  a  man 
the  prey  of  every  rogue ;  a  simplicity  sin — there  was  no  room  for  question ; 
which  "  passes  on  and  is  punished."  have  heard  him  speak  unadvisedly. 
Carried  to  that  extent,  it  is  folly,  not  But  fuller  knowledge  of  his  educa- 
honour ;  childishness,  not  childlikeness.  tion  and  training,  consideration  of 
But  it  is  an  error  in  an  honourable  the  subtle  influences  of  inherited 
direction.  There  is  no  type  of  man  physical  conditions,  have  not  indeed 
less  noble  or  exalted  than  the  man  of  destroyed  his  responsibility,  but  have 
preternatural  shrewdness,  whose  boast  lightened  his  blameworthiness  a  little, 
it  is  that  he  can  always  see  through  and  have  modified  what  must  needs  be 
the  millstone,  that  he  is  never  deceived,  our  condemnation.  Only  One  Eye  can 
and  that  nobody  ever  can  blind  him,  take  in — where  there  has  been  mani- 
who  *'  numbers,  weighs,  and  measures  "  festly  a  poor  performance  of  duty,  or 
everybody  in  scales  of  unfailing  accuracy,  a  very  clear  failure — all  the  struggle 
and  who  has  no  misgivings  about  his  that  went  on  before,  and  the  repentr 
skill  or  his  method,  even  though  some-  ance  that  came  after ;  all  the  fight 
how  those  weighed  by  him  are  always  in  which  the  poor  fallen  fellow  for  a 
"  found,"  at  least  a  little,  "  wanting."  long  time  held  his  own,  and  conquered, 
That  is  a  hateful  type  of  man  whose  until  the  one  fatal  moment  when  he 
cardinal  maxims  are  that  he  "  never  failed  and  fell.  When  the  wrong, 
trusts  any  man  any  further  than  he  supposed  or  real,  impinges  upon  one- 
can  see  him,"  and  *' never  believes  a  self,  it  is  doubly  hard  to  be  fair.  Yet 
man  honest  until  he  cannot  any  longer  experience  ought  to  contribute  to  teach 
believe  him  a  rogue."  In  solving  the  a  Christian  man  to  "  think  no  evil,"  or 
problem  of  men,  their  characters  and  at  least  as  the  first  stage  to  "  believe 
conduct,  his  rough-and-ready  method  all  things  "  to  be  the  best,  and  to  hope 
always  is  to  "  think  evil "  first ;  he  will  for  some  extenuation  and  abatements, 
always  first  assume  that  "  evil "  is  one  when  there  is  no  longer  room  for 
of  the  elements  of  the  problem ;  he  simple  acquittal  of  all  blame.  Yet 
"  reckons  with "  that.  4.  One  would  not  experience,  nothing  but  a  Love, 
have  thought  that  experience  would  which  is  not  an  easy-going  tempera- 
abate  the  self-confidence  of  such  a  ment,  too  indolent  to  be  severe  or  to 
habit  of  judgment.  How  often  has  be  angry,  but  a  grace,  will  cast  out  the 
fuller,  later  knowledge  of  the  persons  habit  of  *'  taking  evil  into  account." 
and  the  facts  shown  that  all  the  harsh  To  Love,  the  first  presumption  will  be* 

286 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,  chap,  xiil 


in   favour  of   something   better  than 
appears.      It  will  not  readily  believe 
evil   of   any,  nor,  except  with   much 
reluctance,   review   a   favourable  esti- 
mate long  ago  formed.     When  Love 
is   judge,  it    will    always   be   on    the 
prisoner's   side.      An   evil   solution   is 
the  last  thing  it  will  look  for  in  the 
problem.     It  will  take  precaution,  but 
not  entertain  suspicion.     It  will  first 
put  the  best  construction  upon  what  is 
confessedly   staggering    to   confidence, 
or    difficult    to    understand.      It   will 
begin  by  believing  the  best  it  can  about 
any  man ;  it  will  first  credit  him  with 
all    the    best    intentions    which    can 
reasonably  be  supposed, — believes  whUst 
it  can  ;  hopes  when  it  hardly  can  hope ; 
endures  when  it  really  cannot  believe 
the  best.     The  shrewd  man  "  rejoices 
in  iniquity  "  ;  chuckles  that  his  harsh 
judgment  was  verified  and  his  acute- 
ness   vindicated.      The   man    of    love 
**  rejoices  in  the  truth  " ;  and  that,  even 
when   the   ''^  truth"   of  the   man   sus- 
pected   or    blamed,    has    proved    his 
*'  shrewd "    suspicions    to    have    been 
groundless.     Love,  like  God,  hates  sin, 
but  loves  to  "  cover  "  sin  with  a  veil  of 
forgiveness.     It  does  not  love  to  carry 
even  the  memory  of  evil.     7.  Such  an 
indisposition  "to  think  evil,"  in  our  com- 
mon   phraseology    often    appropriates 
to  itself,  in  a  special  application,  the 
name    "  charity. "      But    charity    in 
judgment   needs    to    be    kept   clearly 
distinct    from     laxity.     Laxity    plays 
fast   and    loose    with    the    standard ; 
charity  is  cautious  in  applying  it  to 
an   individual   man.      "  Toleration   in 
some  men's  mouths  means  liberty  to  be 
as  careless  about  religion  as  they  are 
themselves"  (Guesses  at  Truth).    Kind- 
ness  before    truth    is   no    "  Charity." 
There     are    broad     lines     of     wrong 
and   right   which   no   man   who   is   a 
Christian  can  leave  open  to  challenge, 
and  by  them  it  is  inevitable  that  con- 
duct  [and,  on   similar  lines,  opinions 
or    doctrines    held]     should    be    con- 
demned.    But  he  hesitates  to  condemn 
the   man.     The   history   of   the   word 
"heresy"  shows  how  close,  as  matter 
"of  observation,   is  the  connection  be- 


tween the  state  of  the  heart  and  will, 
and  the  results  arrived  at  by  the 
intellect.  Yet  whilst  general  prin- 
ciples of  responsibiHty  are  clearly 
insisted  upon,  they  are  only  with  much 
reservation  applied  by  "  charity  "  to  any 
particular  man.  The  Divine  Judge 
may  exempt  some  when  man's  charity 
cannot,  and  indeed,  with  its  know- 
ledge of  the  facts,  ought  not  to  acquit. 
Man  may,  with  the  purest  heart  and 
from  the  very  intensity  of  loyalty  to 
Christ  and  truth,  condemn  in  error. 
And,  at  all  events,  love  "  thinketh  no 
evil."  Especially  in  theological  con- 
troversy, whilst  each  must  "  contend 
earnestly  "  for  the  aspect  of  the  whole 
Truth  which  is  given  to  him  and  to  his 
Church  to  teach  and  defend,  motives 
should  not  be  lightly  imputed ;  and  it 
should  not  readily  be  supposed  that 
the  holder  of  what  seems  a  mischievous 
doctrine  will  follow  it  to  its  logical 
consequences.  He  may ;  Facts  may  be 
too  strong  for  Love  ;  but  at  any  rate 
Love  does  not  begin  "  reckoning  up " 
the  man  and  his  doctrine  by  "  taking 
evil  into  account." 

11.  Love  plans  no  evil.  —  Here 
again  Love  is  Godlike.  1.  Need 
hardly  nowadays  take  into  any  practical 
account  positive  religious  persecu- 
tion of  any  physical  type.  But  there 
is  need  that  a  Christian  man  watch 
his  own  heart  lest  anything  akin  to 
revenge  linger  within.  There  may 
have  been  more  than  they  know  of 
personal  feeling  in  some  of  the  strong 
measures  taken  by  professedly  Chris- 
tian men — who  not  infrequently  were 
really  such  —  against  those  who 
differed  from  them  in  theological 
opinion,  or  in  some  points  of  Christian 
or  civil  regulation  or  moi-ality.  The 
petty  persecution,  or  annoyance,  in  an 
English  village,  which  one  form  of 
religious  faith  may,  with  many  a 
strange  excuse  and  disguise  to  itself, 
devise  against  another,  is  something 
less  than  the  love  which  ^^  plans  no 
evil."  In  all  opposition,  whether  of 
doctrinal  controversy  or  practice,  to 
condemn  the  opinion  without  bitter- 
ness, or  distrust,  or  contempt,  towards 

287 


CHAP.  XIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


the  man,  is  difficult.      But  love  har- 
bours no  such  evil,  nor  dreams  of  it ; 
and  casts  it  out,  if  it  be  found  lurking 
within.     ISTo  Christian  man  would  ever 
deliberately  plan    harm  gratuitously; 
nor  even  as  a  part  of  a  revenge  which 
calls  itself  "  punishment  " — no  matter 
how  greatly  he  has  been  wronged.     To 
do  so  would  be  so  utterly  incongruous 
with  the  very  life  of  God — the  life  of 
Love — as  to   argue   either  that  there 
never  bad  been  any  Christianity  which 
was   more  than    nominal,    or   that   a 
real    Christianity    had     declined    and 
died.     "  Good  for  evil  is  Godlike  ;  good 
for  good  is   manlike  ;  evil  for  evil  is 
beastlike ;   evil  for  good  is  devil-like," 
says  old  Mason.    But  what  honest  heart 
has   not   hated   itself   to   find,  if   not 
exactly  no  unwillingness  to  see  others 
*'  paying  ofi*  his  score  "  for  him,  yet  at 
least   a   half -pleasure  and  satisfaction 
when  some  ill,  which  he  would  himself 
never  have    devised,    falls    upon    the 
offender  from  some  other  source.     The 
world's  wisdom  checks  the  feeling  so  far 
as  this  (in   the  words  of   a  Baralong 
proverb)  :     "  Do     not     rejoice     when 
your  enemy  falls  in  the  path  ;    there 
are    more    slippery  places    in   front." 
A   half-coward    fear   reminds   a   man 
tempted  to  ill-will  that  "  curses,  like 
chickens,  come  home  to  roost."      But 
this  chapter  lifts  up  the  whole  matter  to 
a  higher  level,  when  it  says,  "  Thinketh 
no  evil"  towards,  as  well  as  of,  another. 
Then  the  very  wish  to  harm  is  gone. 
The   thought  of    the    offender   suffer- 
ing  is   foreign    to   the    very   instinct 
of  the  loving  heart.     It  is  a  real  pain 
to  love  to  hear  or  see  the  wrong- doer 
suffer.     Love  cherishes  no  evil  thought 
towards    the   offender.      Godlike  love 
has  entirely  and  heartily  cancelled  the 
offence  as  well  as  foregone  a  penalty. 
["Godlike."     Yet   in    the   Parable   of 
The  Unmerciful  Servant  (Matt,  xviii. 
23-35)  it  is  to  be  noted  that  while,  as 
between  servant  and  fellow -servant,  there 
is  to  be  no  limit  to  mercy  and  forgive- 
ness, yet,  as  between  royal-master  and 
servant- subject,  there  may,  with  perfect 
righteousness,  be  a  final  limit  to  both.] 
Kor  indeed  is  this  the  whole  work  of 

288 


love  when  this  is  made  perfect.  A 
mere  negative  abstinence  from  in- 
dulged evil  in  act  or  feeling  may  mean 
a  great  triumph  for  love  over  nature. 
It  is  grace,  sometimes  much  grace. 
But  more  grace,  perfect  grace,  goes 
further.  Not  without  the  grace  of  the 
enlightening  Spirit — we  may  gladly 
admit  it — ^have  Babbis  and  heathen 
philosophers  arrived  at  their  maxim  : 
"  Do  not  unto  others  what  you  would 
not  have  them  do  to  you."  And  "  do  " 
includes  "  think,"  "  desire,"  "  plan." 
But  Love  which  is  Christ's,  which  is 
God's,  which  is  "  a  gift,"  goes  beyond 
the  negative  precept,  and  says,  "  Do 
what  you,"  etc.  On  the  surface,  in- 
deed, Paul  goes  no  further  in  Bom. 
xiii.  10 :  *'  Love  worketh  no  ill  to 
his  neighbour,  therefore  Love  is  the 
fulfilling  of  the  law."  But  he  means 
more  The  work  of  love  is  not  perfect 
until  the  man  "  thinketh  no  evil"  be- 
cause he  is  so  busy  thinking  some  new 
good  towards  his  fellow-man,  *'  even 
towards  the  unthankful  and  the  evil." 
Even  to  such  God  is  ever  "thinking 
good."  Whether  in  God  or  man  there 
is  no  room  for  thinking  evil  in  a  heart 
full  of  love. 

Ver.  8.  Lovers  Immortality. — It  will 
never  fail — 
I.  As  an  element  of  moral  power. — 

It  is  the  strongest  force  in  the  soul. 
1.  The  strongest  sustaining  power.  In 
every  trial  and  sorrow,  under  every 
burden.  It  is  the  only  power  which 
can  appropriate  the  upholding  promises 
of  God.  These  are  all  made  to  the 
loving.  2.  The  strongest  resisting 
power.  We  have  not  only  burdens, 
but  enemies.  If  love  preoccupies  the 
soul,  temptation  will  be  powerless.  No 
one  can  draw  us  astray  unless  in  some 
degree  he  enlists  our  affections,  and 
if  love  be  centered  on  God  we  are 
immovable.  Love  builds  around  the 
soul  an  impregnable  rampart  against 
which  the  attacks  of  the  enemy  strike 
only  to  rebound.  3.  The  strongest 
aggressive  power.  We  have  burdens 
and  enemies  and  battles,  and  victories 
to  win,     There  is  nothing  in  the  moraj 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xiii. 


world  so  aggressive  as  love ;  a  fire  that 
encompasses  with  its  spreading  flames 
all  within  its  sphere.  Man  can  stand 
before  anything  sooner  than  love  ;  the 
heart  opens  to  generosity,  kindness, 
love,  when  it  closes  utterly,  with  bolted 
door,  against  selfishness  or  sternness  or 
wrath.  4.  All  the  energies  of  the  soul 
grow  under  the  influence  of  love  as 
nature  under  the  sky  of  spring.  It 
is  the  atmosphere  of  an  undying  life. 
It  "  never  faileth." 

II.  As  a  principle  of  moral  unity. — 
Isolation  and  division  are  repugnant 
to  man's  nature.  But  in  confederations 
based  on  political  sympathy,  or  material 
interests,  or  theological  dogmas,  or 
mere  carnal  afiinities,  there  is  no  soul 
union ^  no  coalition  of  hearts.  Love 
alone  can  secure  this.  But  we  can 
only  love  the  lovable ;  but  this  is 
Love,  that  it  invests  another  soul  with 
beauty,  and  makes  him  worthy  of 
the  love  of  his  fellows.  Love  is  the 
gravitation  of  the  moral  realm.  By  it 
Christ  binds  His  people  into  one.  As  a 
principle  of  social  unity,  between  class 
and  class,  between  high  and  low,  all  sorts 
and  conditions  of  men,  it  never  faileth ; 
it  is  the  only  bond  which  does  not. 

III.  As  a  source  of  spiritual  happi- 
ness.— Love  is  joy.  It  casts  out  from 
the  heart  all  that  is  inimical  to  happiness. 
The  passions  of  men  are  the  real 
miseries  of  their  life ;  hatred,  malice, 
anger,  pride,  revenge,  covetousness 
ever  unsatisfied,  like  "  fear,"  "  have 
torment,"  the  torment  of  hell  begun 
on  earth.  Love  slays  or  is  slain  by 
all  these.  It  creates  all  the  elements 
of  spiritual  joy.  "  Love  sets  all  the 
strings  of  life's  lyre  to  music,  it  brings 
the  soul  like  a  wandered  orb  from 
chaos,  it  links  it  to  its  own  centre, 
and  fills  it  with  the  light  and  life  of 
heaven."  As  a  source  of  all  spiritual 
happiness  and  joy  it  never  faileth. 
Remember,  this  love  is  a  grace,  a  gift, 
a  spiritual  thing,  not  native  to  the 
heart ;  it  is  the  first  in  order  and  beauty 
of  the  cluster,  one  and  manifold,  "  the 
fruit  (not  fruits)  of  the  Spirit " 
(Gal.  v.  16-24). — Adapted  from  ^'-  Homi- 
lis't:'  Third  Series,  iv.  165. 


Yer.  9.   We  Know  in  Part. 

I.  This  is  true  of  mere  secular 
knowledge. — 1.  Hitherto  hardly  more 
than  two  men  have  arisen  who  seemed 
to  know  everything  about  everything 
comprised  within  the  learning  of  their 
age :  Aristotle  in  the  ancient  world ; 
Lord  Bacon  in  the  modern.  For  the 
most  part  men  are  satisfied  with  the 
study  and  mastery  of  one  or  two 
branches  of  learning.  The  tendency 
in  our  time  is  more  and  more  to 
specialisation  of  study,  to  sub-division 
of  the  field.  An  Adam  Clarke  will 
hardly  again,  singlehanded,  write  an 
extended  commentary  on  the  whole 
Bible.  A  Hume  will  hardly  again 
write  a  "History  of  England."  A 
single  book  of  the  Bible,  a  single  period 
or  reign  or  life — and  that  dealt  with 
exhaustively — modern  work  tends  in 
that  direction.  If  men  used  to  study 
a  square  mile  with  the  naked  eye,  they 
now  scrutinise  a  square  inch  with  a 
microscope.  2.  The  man  who  most 
thoroughly  knows  his  own  section  of 
a  subject  feels  most  fully  how  paitial 
is  his  knowledge.  The  wisest  student 
knows  best  how  much  is  unknown. 
The  beginner  is  the  only  man  who 
thinks  he  knows  much,  or  knows 
anything  completely.  As  Burke  said, 
the  man  who  thinks  he  has  got  a  clear 
idea  may  be  quite  sure  he  has  got  a 
little  idea.  Every  student  finds  the 
little  stream  of  inquiry  on  which  he 
embarked  in  youth  widening  fast  as 
the  years  pass  on,  till  the  very  banks 
disappear,  and  just  as  he  dies  he  finds 
himself  launched  out  on  a  boundless 
ocean.  Needless  to  tell  the  story  of 
Sir  Isaac  Newton  and  his  pebbles  by 
the  shore.  3.  Then,  putting  together 
all  the  results  of  all  the  studies  of  all 
the  wisest  in  all  the  ages,  we  still 
know  only  "  in  part."  In  our  own 
days,  more  than  ever,  the  range  of 
knowledge  is  widening  fast ;  the  firm 
conclusions  of  former  days,  and  even  of 
a  few  years  ago,  are  sometimes  rudely 
overthrown  ;  they  always  need  revising, 
and  are  always  being  added  to  and 
enlarged.  He  would  simply  be  ri- 
diculous   who    should    say   that    this 

289 


CHAP.  XIII.   HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY',:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


nineteenth  century  knows  all  about 
even  the  physical  universe,  or  that  no 
new  applications  of  what  has  long 
been  known  will  be  discovered.  We 
have  unlocked  the  secrets  of  the  light, 
and  have  made  the  rays  which  started 
from  the  stars  thousands  of  years  ago 
tell  what  those  stars  are  made  of. 
Yet  no  man  knows  why  moving  a 
needle  at  one  end  of  a  wire  which  is 
being  traversed  by  an  *'  electric  cur- 
rent " — that  also  a  mere  verbal  symbol 
standing  for  an  unknown  fact — makes 
a  similarly  placed  needle  at  the  other 
end  follow  every  movement  of  the  first. 
Underneath  all  our  boasted  knowledge 
of  the  physical  world  lies  the  most 
profound  ignorance  of  what  in  reality 
this  Matter  is,  of  whose  forces  and 
forms  and  properties  we  speak  so 
confidently.  We  do  not  know  what 
is  the  basis  of  phenomena.  The  meta- 
physics which  underlie  physics  are  a 
bottomless  depth.  Of  what  Spirit  is, 
except  that  we  judge  by  its  manifesta- 
tions that  it  must  be  totally  opposite 
in  nature  to  Matter,  we  are  just  as 
ignorant.  4.  Obvious  as  all  this  is, 
it  needs  to  be  remembered,  when  bold 
voices  claim  and  timid  hearts  fear, 
that  this  partial  knowledge  possessed 
by  our  century,  and  even  that  some 
particular  scientist's  (comparatively) 
thorough  knowledge  of  his  small  part  of 
the  whole  field  of  research,  has  some- 
how affected  the  certainties  of  the 
Bible  and  Revelation.  "  We  know  in 
part"  means,  ^^ Do  not  he  in  a  hurry  to 
triumph.  Do  not  he  in  a  hurry  to  fear." 
5.  But  what  really  has  happened  is 
only  this  :  The  lifelong  student  of  the 
square  inch  becomes  an  authority  on 
all  matters  of  fact  lying  within  it. 
Nobody  more  eagerly  welcomes  his 
facts  than  the  intelligent  Christian. 
Yet  others  can  often  make  better 
use  of,  and  more  justly  value,  the  facts 
than  the  discoverer  himself ;  can  better 
co-ordinate  them  with,  and  measure 
their  bearing  upon,  the  results  of 
other  students  in  other  similarly  nar- 
row fields.  There  is  a  penalty  to  be 
paid  by  the  specialist ;  and  however 
well  he  may  know  his  part,  he  does 

290 


know  only  in  part.  He  is  often 
ignorant  of,  or  little  qualified  to  judge 
of,  facts  outside  his  own  subject, 
because  of  his  devotion  to  his  own. 
6.  Simple,  if  not  exactly  ignorant, 
believers  may  remind  themselves  that 
they  too  know  a  great  deal  about  the 
facts  of  the  spiritual  world  and  its  life. 
The  Bible  and  the  Spiritual  World 
have  been  their  field,  and  they  know  it 
as  well  as  the  scientific  inquirer  knows 
his.  Many  an  unlearned  Christian  is 
a  specialist  here,  and  can  speak  with 
authority.  Many  Christian  men  of 
fair  culture  know  more  of  the  facts 
of  physical  science  than  do  some 
— happily,  not  all  scientists — of  the 
Bible  and  its  Life.  Moreover,  any 
man  may  by  industry  and  natural 
intelligence  judge  of  the  facts  of  the 
natural  world ;  whilst  the  mightiest 
intellect  without  the  opened  eyes  for 
spiritual  things  is  utterly  incompetent 
to  judge  of  them.  7.  The  past  has 
its  lessons,  e.g.  Galileo.  We  see  that 
the  early  defenders  of  Genesis  as 
against  Geology  were  defending  with 
quite  untenable  arguments  a  crude 
Geology  at  which  even  unbelieving 
science  laughs  to-day.  Defenders  and 
assailants  alike  knew  only  in  part. 
As  they  do  to-day.  Triumph  and 
Fear  are  equally  premature  and  un- 
warranted. 

II.  This  is  true  of  our  knowledge  of 
revealed  things. — 1.  Bible  mainly  con- 
cerned to  reveal  things  not  otherwise 
discoverable  by  us,  and  these  only  so 
far,  and  in  such  a  manner,  as  required 
by  its  special  purpose.  We  may 
almost  press  the  phrase,  "  A  lamp  to 
our  feet,  and  a  light  to  our  path." 
See  how  a  lantern  held  low  gives  light 
to  a  traveller.  On  a  small,  inner 
circle  it  sheds  bright  light ;  all  within 
that  circle  is  fairly  clear,  clear  enough 
to  walk  hy.  On  the  edge  of  this  is  a 
penumbra  of  fainter  illumination ; 
and  beyond,  entire  darkness.  The 
landscape  around,  the  heaven  above, 
are  left  unillumined.  And  the  bearer 
of  the  lantern  is  himself  not  seen  at 
all,  or  only  dimly  by  a  few  stray  beams 
reflected  from  the  inner  circle  of  clear 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xiii. 


light.      2.    What    I    am — a    sinner ;  maker  knows  best  that  he  knows  only 

what    I    may    be — a    child    of    God,  in  part.    6.  Text,  then,  becomes  a  word 

redeemed  and  saved ;  how  the  change  of  caution  in  all  thinkings  and  specu- 

from  one   to   other   condition  may  be  lations  upon  the   subjects  included  in 

wrought — by  repentance  and  faith  ; —  revealed   knowledge.      The   powers  of 

all  these  are  within  the  circle  of  greatest  our  mind  are  limited.     We  shall  get 

light,    though     even     it     only     gives  no  more  facts :  the  Book  is  complete, 

sufficient  knowledge  of  them  to  walk  hy.  All  we  can  hope  to  do  is  reverently  and 

Just  a  little  light  as  to  how  I  came  to  patiently  to  study  the  narrow  field  of 

be  a  sinner ;    but   so   little   upon  the  clearest   illumination ;    the   good  men 

question,  e.g.,  how  the  death  of  Christ  and  the  great  minds  have  been  rewarded, 

makes  pardon  available  for  me  upon  age  after  age,  with  a  better  knowledge 

my  believing,  that  some  of  the  greatest  of  the  old  material,     7.  A  man,  just 

minds  have  given  up  hope  of  discover-  beginning    to    think,     just     knowing 

ing  any  nexus.  [Perhaps  the  nexus  most  enough  to  appreciate  difficulties,  and 

nearly  indicated  in  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.]  half  feeling  the  force  of  objections,  the 

3.  Many  another  question,  interesting,  answers  to  which,  so  far  as  any  can  be 
but  not  so  urgent  for  solution,  lies  in  given  at  all,  are  as  yet  beyond  him 
the  penumbra — half  in  light,  half  in  altogether,  may  remember  with  ad- 
shadow.  E.g.  if  I  am  saved — what  vantage  that  he  knows,  and  never  will 
heaven  is  like  ;  if  I  perish — what  hell  get  beyond  knowing,  in  part.  He  may 
is ;  where  both  are  ;  how  spirits  live  thus  be  saved  from  casting  away — in 
disembodied ;  what  the  angels  are  and  haste  of  pride  of  newly  awakened 
do ;  the  nature  of  the  resurrection  body ;  power,  or  in  perplexity  because  of  the 
— how  we  know  these  things  "  in  part."  fringing  shadow  around  a  by  no  means 

4.  Then  how  many  questions  lie  in  the  perfectly  lighted  inner  circle — truth 
unrelieved  darkness  beyond.  Whence  which  he  will  afterwards  find  has 
came  evil  ?  Why  did  God  permit  it  moral  certainty,  probability  of  the  very 
to  enter?  to  continue?  Why  did  He  highest,  sufficient  at  least  for  its  rea- 
not — if  He  did  not — redeem  fallen  sonable  acceptance  as  "a  light  to  his 
angels,  as  well  as  fallen  man?  Are  feet."  8.  Also,  it  will  save  him  from  the 
there  any  other  worlds,  moral,  sinning,  unwisdom  of  refusing  to  order  his  life  by 
redeemed  ?  Or  has  God  worked  out  the  moral  precepts  of  the  Bible,  because 
this  supreme  specimen  case  of  His  all  around  them  are  unsolved  and 
•' manifold  wisdom  "  (Eph.  iii.  10)  on  our  insoluble  moral  perplexities,  lying  in 
little  Earth  alone  ?  Hardly  a  word  !  the  penumbra  or  the  outer  darkness. 
Hardly  a  ray !  5.  Then  how  little  light  Text  says  :  "  Do  not  lose  your  head,  nor 
on  Him  Who  holds  the  light  to  our  in  panic  cast  away  difficult  doctrines; 
feet.  Just  a  little  reflected  upon  Him  he  more  modest  than  to  suppose  that  you 
from  His  creation,  and  from  the  few  have  settled  all  questions.  Wait  awhile, 
revealed  facts.  E.g.  we  find,  {a)  One  and,  above  all,  do  not  reject  the  moral 
God,  one  only,  clearly  insisted  upon  help  of  the  Bible  because  there  are  '■''The 
everywhere  ;  but  also  (6)  Three  Names,  Moral  Difficulties  of  the  Bible'' 

s  t  side  by  side, — not  more,  nor  fewer, —  III.  True  of  the  providences  of  life. 

each  spoken  of  as  we  speak  of  persons,  — 1.  Personal  or  domestic  trial  of  many 

and  as  we  speak  of  God.     Or  we  find  kinds  staggers  faith.      To  see  a  good 

two  sets  of  statements — one  leading  up  man  repeatedly  and  sorely  smitten,  or 

to  the  assertion,  *'  Perfect  Man  "  ;  the  an  "  indispensable  "  man  removed  from 

other  to  the  conviction,  '-'■  The  True  God  the  Work  of  God,  when  there  seems 

and  Eternal  Life."     We  put  what  we  no  successor  to  arise.     2.  God's  remedy 

know    into   orderly,    scientific    shape,  is  generally  not  explanation,  but  faith, 

and   announce   our   doctrines    of    the  "  Let   not   your   hearts    be    troubled ; 

Trinity  and  of  the  Incarnation.     But  believe  !  "     "  What  I  do  thou  knowest 

the  best-instructed  theological  system-  not   now,"   etc.     3.  Sometimes  we  do 

291 


CHAP.  xiii.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


know  His  reasons  ''  in  part."     Years  of  the  spiritual  world.     So  we  speak, 
after,  we  see  why  He  dashed  our  idol  because    in    that    order    we   become 
in  pieces  before  our  eyes.     The  greatly  acquainted  with  them.     But  probably 
afflicted,    godly   man,    e.g.,  could   tell  we  approach  nearer  to  the  order  of  the 
you,  if  you  won  his  confidence,  of  secret  Creator's  thought  when  we  think  back- 
tendencies  to  pride,  to  love  of  the  world,  wards  or  downwards  from  the  spiritual 
to  neglect  of  God,  which  were  thus  con-  to  the  natural.     The  analogies  which 
tinually  kept  in  check  ;  perhaps  he  sees  we  discover  rest  upon  the  fact  that  the 
that  they  could  only  thus  be  kept  in  natural  has  been   modelled    upon  the 
check.    4.  Suppose  the  story  of  Martha  lines  of  the  spiritual.     As  this  life  is 
and   Mary   unfinished,   broken   off  at  to    the  life  hereafter,  so  is  childhood 
the  return  of  their  messenger  bringing  to  manhood.     [Cf.  the  use  of  this  same 
no  Jesus   and  no  message  from  Him.  illustration    in     1    John    ii.     12-14.1 
Suppose  the  story  of  Joseph  recovered  in  Yet  the   practical   order   for  thought 
an  incomplete  papyrus  manuscript  from  reverses    this,    and    begins    with    the 
an  Egyptian  tomb,  and  breaking  off  at  natural.     The  part  of  ^^  prophecy  "  was 
the  point  where,  in  spite  of  the  assur-  soon  fulfilled  ;  the  completed  Word  and 
ance  that  "  Jehovah  was  with  him,"  it  the   teaching   Spirit   have    superseded 
seems  as  if  every  new  step,  and  even  it.    "  Tongues  "  soon  ^^  failed  "  ;  sooner 
every  refusal  of  temptation,  has  only  perhaps     than      prophecy.       "  Know- 
helped  him  towards  a  prison,  to  lie  there  ledge"  in   the  special  sense  in  which 
hopelessly  under  an  unfounded  accusa-  used  in  this  letter  from  i.  5  onward, 
tion.     How   perplexing  would  be  our  perhaps  may  be  said  to  have  remained, 
knowledge  of  Jehovah  and  His  ways,  or  "  abiding  "  until  the  eternal  life  comes, 
of  Jesus  and  His  action  !     Because  it  with  its  larger,    fuller  facts,   and    its 
would  be  knowledge  derived  only  "/rom  ^^  face-to-face  "  vision  of  them.     Yet  if 
a  part "  (so  the  Greek,  exactly  rendered)  it  has  long  persistence,  it  has  no  eternal 
of  the  facts.     In  our  perplexed  days  let  permanence   such   as   '*  CJiarity  "  has, 
us  understand  that  we  are  only  midway  which  "  never  faileth."     The  character 
in  the  story.     Our  wisdom,  our  peace,  of  this  cannot  be  altered  by  the  passage 
is  to  let  the  Divine  Author  finish  the  from  time  into  eternity, — as  we  divide 
remaining  chapters,    and   then  let  us  the  one  unbroken  duration; — its  mission 
justify     Him.       5.     So    the     common  andwork  will  never  be  ended.    But  as  to 
soldier,     and    even    the    subordinate  knowledge,We  are  now  in  the  childhood 
commander,  is  learning  the  general's  stage  of  powers  and  knowledge.     In 
plan  of  campaign  only  whilst  he  is  help-  the  expression  of  what  we  do  know  (*'  / 
ing  to  work  it  out.     It  is  too  soon  to  spake  "),  in  the  reception  of  new  know- 
doubt  or  criticise  it ;    foolish  to  refuse  ledge  ("  I  understood  "),  in  the  reason- 
to    obey    because     the     whole     great  ing   to   new  knowledge  from  what  is 
scheme  of  operations  is  only  known  to  already    given    us  ("  /  thought  "),  our 
the  Head  which  has  conceived  it.  limitations  and  language  and  methods 
IV.  Chap.    ii.    9.      Yer.    10    shows  are    those    of    children.       How     our 
that  Heaven  is  not  meant :  "  God  hath  cousins — the  angels ;  how  our  grown- 
revealed  them  to  us  by  His  Spirit."    Yet  up  {^^ perfect ")  brothers  and  sisters  who 
of  the  highest,  richest,  ripest,  Christian  have  left  school — the  glorified  ones  in 
experience  and  knowledge  it  is  to  the  heaven ;  must   smile   at   such  boasted 
last  true :  What  we  know,  we  only  know  knowledge  and  such  wise  talk  of  the 
in  part,  because  vje  know  only  from  a  Corinthians  !     "  Listen  to  the   pretty 
part   of  the  fulness   of  possibility  for  prattle  of    those  children  down   yon- 
us  in  Christ.     We  never  shall   know  der ! "      "  With   what   schoolboy   cer- 
otherwise  than  in  part,  even  in  this.  tainty  of  brand-new  knowledge  of  the 

elements  of  a  subject  do  these  clever 

Ver.  11.  Childhood  and  Manhood.  Corinthian  men  pronounce  down  there 

Introduction. — The  natural  a  parable  upon  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth! 

292 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    1.   CORINTHIANS,    chap,  xilt 


And  they  are  as  proud  of  the  little  bit  "  crown,"  "  thrones,"  and  the  like  ;  and 
they  have  learned  as  a  child  is  of  his  to  some  extent  the  terminology  of 
first,  juvenile  recitation  which  he  has  experience — '*  election,"  "  adoption," 
got  by  heart."  There  is  nothing  to  '*  redemption,"  "  reconciliation,"  and  so 
despise  about  the  child's  lesson  and  forth.]  The  analogical  term  is  true 
learning.  It  is  the  pride  which  spoils  so  far  as  it  is  intended  to  hold  good, 
all  !  true  for  the  point  it  is  intended  to 
I.  Language.  —  1.  Mathematical  illustrate;  but  term  needs  checking 
science  alone  has  a  perfect  language  with  term,  analogy  with  analogy,  the 
adequate  to  express  its  truth.  [Yet  strength  of  one  supplementing  the 
axioms  and  postulates,  preliminaries  weakness  of  another,  the  truth  of  one 
to  all  knowledge,  which  must  be  complementing  the  defect  or  (what 
gi  anted  though  they  cannot  be  proved,  soon  becomes)  the  falsehood  of  another ; 
confess  limitation  to  lie  at  the  very  and  even  thus  the  whole  round  of 
basis  of  all  mathematical  knowledge.]  truth  is  only  approximately  expressed. 
Because  being  only  concerned  with  3.  Controversy  has  oftener  arisen  from 
matter  and  its  relations  its  medium  the  defective  vehicle  on  both  sides  with 
of  communication  is  homogeneous  with  which  thought  has  to  be  expressed, 
the  matter  to  be  conveyed.  Shall  we  than  from  any  other  one  cause.  For 
have  by-and-by  an  equally  adequate  this  reason  also  is  controversy,  whether 
"  mental  "  vocabulary,  and  be  able  written  or  oral, — but  especially  oral, — 
without  ambiguity  or  doubt  to  arrive  of  sq  little  value  in  ascertaining  or  vin- 
at  an  absolute  philosophy?  (So queries  dicating  truth,  even  when  prejudice,  or 
Lsa,SicTsiylor,  Fhi/sical  Theory.)  "Ab-  passion,  or  interest  do  not  interfere, 
stract  intellectual  philosophy  (putting  Words  mean  so  very  diverse  things 
out  of  question  the  general  rectification  to  different  ears,  and  on  different  lips, 
of  sentiments  and  notions  accruing  Quite  fortuitous  suggestions  are  started 
from  the  influence  of  Christianity)  in  the  mind  of  both  by  the  words 
remains  where  and  what  it  was  in  the  of  the  opponent,  and  these  again  give 
bright  times  of  Grecian  intelligence.  a  colouring  to  the  words  employed ; 
The  preliminary  work  of  fixing  the  till  at  last  men  get  weary  of  bringing 
sense  of  terms  and  of  advancing  axioms  each  other  back  to  the  point  or  of 
has  still  to  be  done  anew  by  every  settling  the  meaning  of  terms,  and  they 
professor  of  these  studies ;  and  his  fight  for  victory,  and  not  for  truth, 
labour  is  scarcely  completed  before  it  Or,  as  one  mind  wearies  sooner  than  the 
is  broken  up  and  cast  away  by  his  other,  and,  to  cover  weakness  or  defeat, 
successors.  This  incertitude  appears  to  resorts  to  sophistry,  the  imperfection 
admit  of  no  remedy."  (Taylor,  p.  1 1 6. )  of  the  vehicle  is  again  in  evidence. 
2.  With  what  imperfect  a  vehicle  of  4.  To  the  dwellers  in  the  world  of 
language  are  we  furnished  for  the  " manhood"  and  to  our  own  *'  man- 
expression  of  the  thoughts  and  facts  of  hood  "  some  day,  how  amusing,  and 
the  spirituxil  world  here  and  hereafter.  perhaps  even  grotesque,  are  the  views 
They  are  almost  entirely  represented  to  of  the  future  state  which  men  have 
us,  and  spoken  of  by  us,  in  words  which  imagined  for  themselves,  and  have 
arecondensed  illustrations,  whose  appro-  preached  to  others;  arriving  at  their 
priateness  and  serviceableness  depend  strange  result  by  insisting  too  precisely 
upon  some  real  analogy  between  the  on  the  analogical  and  symbolic 
spiritual  fact  and  the  natural  illus-  phrases  which  alone  are  given  to  us  to 
tration.  [E.g.  all  the  terminology  of  use.  Men  have  pressed  the  words  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity — **  Father-  childhood  until  their  heaven  has  been 
hood,"  '*  Sonship,"  "  Spirit  " ;  the  as  fantastic  as  their  hell.  They  have 
descriptive  terminology  customary  in  built  up  a  future  upon  words  derived 
the  matter  of  the  rewards  and  penal-  from  the  present.  They  are  the  best 
ties    of    the    eternal     world — "  fire,"  words  which  could  be  given  us ;  per- 

293 


CHAP.  XIII.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


haps  the  only  language  our  childhood  cipient  all  over,  and  percipient  of  new 
can  be  taught  to  employ.  But  the  properties  ? "  There  will  then  at  least 
children  should  not  be  too  positive  about  be  no  distraction  for  thought  arising 
the  things  behind  the  words.  They  are  from  the  need  of  attending  to  the 
not  falsehoods  because  they  are  only  body's  wants.  Nor  any  hindrance 
imperfect  vehicles  of  expression,  but  the  from  the  varying  degrees  of  bodily 
more  men  outgrow  their  childhood  the  disorder  or  sickness.  We  need  be  no 
more  carefully  will  they  employ  even  materialists  to  understand  the  suggcs- 
the  terminology  of  things  spiritual.  tion  that  perhaps  a  perfect  bodily 
5.  The  "  tongues  "  point  out,  rather  organisation  might  permit  of  a  plenary 
than  lead  us  in,  a  way  for  thought  memory.  Now,  not  only  are  the  past 
and  inquiry,  as  we  see  how  the  higher  leaves  never  wholly  open  before  us, 
reaches  of  Divine  knowledge  beggar  but  also  *'the  paper  is  frail  and  the 
all  the  human  vocabulary  and  create  ink  fades,  so  that  a  complete  record  is 
a  new  one  of  their  own,  intelligible  never  kept,  and  old  or  hasty  or  care- 
enough  to  another  man  who  also  is  less  records  become  easily  illegible" 
exalted  to  the  level  of  the  world  of  (Taylor,  p.  75).  2.  Even  the  mental 
which  it  is  the  *'  tongice,'^ — whether  as  capacity  is  manifestly  as  yet  only  that 
Paul  was,  who  heard  and  understood  of  childhood.  [Story  of  Augustine, 
the  "  unutterable "  tongue  of  "  Para-  pondering  his  work  on  the  Trinity, 
dise "  in  the  time  of  his  ecstasy,  or  as  watching  the  child  digging  a  hole  in 
every  "  interpreter  of  tongues  "  became  the  sand  of  the  seashore.  "  What  for, 
competent.  So,  again,  the"  groanings"  child?"  "To  put  the  sea  in!" 
of  human  spirits,  led  out  by  the  Divine  "  What  else  am  I  doing,  to  try  to 
Spirit,  after  the  future  estate  of  the  apprehend  the  being  and  the  manner 
"  glorified  "  children  of  God,  become  and  existence  of  God  ?  "]  "  Plunge 
"  unutterable"  (Rom.  viii.  28).  All  the  the  gill-pot  into  the  ocean,  and  it  will 
highest  experiences  of  the  spirit  soon  only  hold  a  gill-potful  "  (Maclaren; 
pass  language,  and  tend  to  incoherency,  coram  me,  H.  J.  F.).  Because  of 
or  to  impossibility,  of  expression ;  even  our  natural  limitations,  as  often  as 
to  the  man  himself  they  become  because  of  our  moral  unreadiness, 
vast  even  to  vagueness,  passing  even  must  He  say  to  us :  "I  have  many 
the  grasp  of  thought.  Even  our  child-  things  to  say  to  you,  but  ye  cannot 
hood — in  both  nature  and  grace —  bear  them  now"  (John  xvi.  12).  If 
thinks  and  feels  and  knows  more  it  "  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we 
than  it  can  say.  6.  But  when  at  last  shall  be,"  it  is  no  desire  for  reticence 
we  move  amongst  the  things  them-  or  concealment  which  hides  our  future 
selves,  we  may  hope  for  a  language  estate  and  its  "  manhood "  from  our 
as  "  manlike  "  as  our  knowledge  of  the  "  childhood's  "  knowledge.  It  is  in 
facts,  not  as  the  occasional  experi-  great  part  the  impossibility  which 
ence  of  an  ecstasy  or  of  some  special  confronts  and  baffles  the  teacher  of 
exaltation.  the  child,  when  he  attempts  to 
II.  Perception  and  reception  of  convey  some  idea  or  fact  to  which 
knowledge. — 1.  Much,  not  all,  of  our  there  has  been  nothing  analogous  in 
knowledge  comes  to  us  conditioned  by  the  experience  or  acquired  knowledge 
the  possibilities  of  the  five  physical  of  the  pupil.  The  child  cannot  corn- 
senses.  The  physical  organ  is  as  much  prehend  the  man.  "  You  will  under- 
a  barrier  to,  as  an  avenue  of,  know-  stand  when  you  get  older.  I  cannot 
ledge.  We  may  (with  Taylor  again)  explain  to  you  yet."  When,  e.g.,  be- 
speculate  upon  the  possibly  great  en-  reaved  hearts  go  out  into  the  obscure 
largement  of  our  perceptive  faculties,  hereafter,  with  yearning  arms  out- 
which  now  are  thus  rather  limited  stretched  following  the  dear  one,  and 
than  helped  by  our  five  adits  of  asking  the  always  recurrent  round  of 
sensation.      "  What    of   a   body  per-  questions  about  the  other  life — "  what 

294 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xiii. 


they  are  like  there,"  "  how  we  shall 
meet  them  next,"  "  where  they  are," 
and  so  on — may  we  not  believe  that 
the  sympathetic  Elder  Brother  Who 
has  done  so  much  to  bring  life  and 
immortahty  into  clear  light,  would 
gladly  comfort  these  hearts  by  tell- 
ing more,  if  only  it  could  be  told  ? 
"What  is  heaven  like?"  "I  will 
tell  you  when  we  meet  there."  The 
child  must  stop  there.  We  can 
only  grow  past  that  barrier  to  know- 
ledge. 

III.  Reasoning  to  and  search  after 
new  facts. — 1.  Will  there  ever  be  an 
immediate  knowledge  of  facts,  an 
intuitive  perception  of  truth  ?  It  was 
said  of  Clerk  Maxwell  that  it  seemed 
almost  impossible  for  him  to  reason 
wrongly  on  a  problem  of  mathematics 
applied  to  physical  inquiry.  Can  we 
conceive  that  power,  exceptional,  and 
even  in  him  limited  to  its  one  topic, 
extended  to  all  topics,  and  that  in  all 
men  ?  Some  men  seem  to  possess  a 
power  of  "  shorthand  thinkirg  "  which  is 
suggestive  of  a  world  where  the  power 
may  be  enlarged  and  the  process  be 
abbreviated.  [True,  to  us  the  process  of 
inquiry  has  a  charm ;  but  that  is  a 
means,  not  an  end,  an  arrangement  to 
make  the  scholar  more  willing  to  take 
the  trouble  over  "  childhood's  "  lessons.] 
2.  "A  considerable  portion  of  abstract 
science  stands  under  this  condition, 
and  is  assented  to  rather  because  the 
denial  of  it  involves  some  impossibility 
than  because  the  truth  itself  can  be 
brought  to  stand  out  clearly  to  view  " 
(Taylor,  p.  101).  Redtictio  ad  ahsurdum 
is  a  confession  of  our  "  childhood  "  and 
its  limitation  of  thought.  3.  There  is 
the  danger  of  specialisation  in  study, 
though  this  is  a  necessity,  and  on  the 
whole  a  good  thing.  [See  Homily  on 
"  We  know  in  part."  See  again  Taylor, 
p.  94  :]  "  This  division  of  labour  in  the 
world  of  mind  ...  is  peculiarly  dis- 
advantageous in  its  bearing  on  the 
elevated  themes  of  theology,  which,  be- 
cause they  are  in  the  most  absolute  sense 
universal,  are  not  to  be  apprehended 
by  any  single  faculty  of  the  mind,  but 
stand  in  such  a  manner  related  to  our 


entire  intellectual  and  moral  consti- 
tution, as  that  it  is  only  when  every 
faculty  in  harmonious  and  simultaneous 
exercise  is  actively  engaged  upon  them 
that  they  can  be  readily  embraced." 
But  this  is  "  childhood "  passed  and 
*'  manhood "  come.  4.  How  we  are 
beset  with  prejudices  and  fallacies  at 
every  step  !  How  easily  deceived  by 
self-interest  !  How  we  blunder  and 
stumble  on  our  way  to  truth  !  How 
much  we  owe  to  accident !  And  how 
much  to  Revelation  pure  and  simple  ! 
[E.g.  the  bulk  of  chap.  xv.  is  bare 
revelation.]  And  yet  the  Bible  itself 
is  only  a  book  *'  written  for  schools," 
for  the  scholars  in  the  elementary,  the 
lower,  forms  here.  How  seldom  we 
see  all  round  a  truth  !  If  we  ever  do  ! 
We  know  and  argue  '' m  part''  [lit. 
^^from  a  part "].  We  are  reading  an 
"  enigma,''  of  which  we  have  not  yet 
got  all  the  key.  Like  Tennyson's 
Lady  of  Shalott,  we  are  doomed  to 
see,  not  things  themselves,  but  their 
images  in  a  mirror,  and  that  only  of 
poor  material.  When  manhood  comes, 
the  key  to  the  riddle  will  be  ours. 
We  shall  see  into  the  very  heart  of 
things,  as  even  now  we  ourselves  "  are 
known."  We  shall  see  things,  realities, 
"/ace  to  face."  [Cf.  Num.  xii.  8,  and 
suggest]  every  full-grown  man  in 
Christ  shall,  with  Christ,  be  a  high 
priest  who  may  go  direct  intoi;  the 
Presence,  and  "  pure  in  heart  " — adult 
in  holiness  as  in  powers — "  shall  see  " 
and  know  God  ! 

Ver.  13.  Greatest  because  Godlike. — 
All  three — Faith,  Hope,  Charity — are 
of  God ;  but  Charity  alone  is  in  God. 
He  implants  Faith  and  Hope  in  us ; 
He  shares  Love  with  us.  He  cannot 
believe  anything,  or  hope  for  anything  ; 
absolute  knowledge  shuts  out  faith  and 
hope.  We  believe  and  hope,  in  our 
partial  ignorance;  He  can  only  know. 
There  is  a  degree  of  pain  in  Faith  and 
Hope  which  is  incompatible  with  the 
absolute  rest  and  fulness  of  happy 
satisfaction  of  His  nature.  Faith 
often  brings  strain  upon  heart  and 
mind  ;  Hope  is  itself  really  a  disquiet, 

295 


CHAP.  XIII.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


something  lower  than  rest,  even  though 
there  be  an  element  of  pleasure  in  it 
[which  distinguishes  it  from  the  antici- 
pation of  Eear]. 

I.  Love  brings  the  rest  of  God 
into  the  life. — "  He  will  rest  in  His 
love"  (Zeph.  iii.  17)  is  an  incidental 
illustration  of  the  perfect  Rest  of  the 
nature  of  God  who  is  Love.  Just  as 
the  one  absolute  Wrong,  the  one 
absolute  Sin,  under  all  conditions  of 
life — human,  angelic,  diabolic,  crea- 
turely — is  "  a  Lie  "  with  its  *'  Dark- 
ness " ;  as  the  one  absolute  Holiness, 
common  to  God  and  to  His  creatures, 
is  "  Truth,"  "  Light  "  ;  so  the  one  abso- 
lute Happiness,  common  to  God  and 
to  His  intelligent  creatures,  is  Love. 
Truth  and  Love  are  the  two  facts 
which,  without  modification  of  defini- 
tion, can  be  lifted  up  from  the  crea- 
turely  life  and  associated  with  and 
attributed  to  the  Divine.  They  are 
"  true  in  Him  and  in  us."  They  have 
come  down  from  Him  to  us.  How 
much  of  the  pain  of  life  is  created  by 
man's  own  passionate,  evil  heart  ! 
Circumstances  are  not  men's  curse, 
except  when  their  heart  makes  them 
such.  How  happy,  e.g.,  would  many 
a  man  be — with  abundant  reason  to 
be  happy — if  it  were  not  for  "  envy  " 
(ver.  4)  of  some  other  who  started 
with  him  in  the  race  of  life,  and  who 
seems  to  have  outstripped  him  in 
wealth  or  position  and  social  considera- 
tion !  All  the  good  he  has  is  spoiled 
because  he  has  not  that  other  man's 
"good."  Love  would  help  him  to 
enjoy  his  own,  and  would  give  him  an 
added  joy  in  the  happiness  of  his  com- 
panion who  is  no  longer  his  competitor. 
Is  any  life  more  uneasy,  more  full  of 
unrest,  than  that  of  the  "  unseemly," 
"  self-vaunting,"  "  puffed-up  "  man 
who  is  ever  "  seeking  his  own  "  ?  The 
simplest  word  is  a  "  provocation,"  where 
none  was  intended;  the  diseased  sen- 
sitiveness of  vanity  "  thinks  evil  of  " 
and  construes  into  a  slight,  or  an  insult, 
the  most  utterly  innocent  act.  There 
is  a  horse-leech  hunger  for  praise  ever 
craving  "  more  "  and  "  more  "  ;  even 
flattery   is  better  than   nothing;   yet 

296 


lingering  good  sense  will  often  pene- 
trate its  disguise,  and  shrewdly  enough, 
but  to  the  bitter  disappointment  of  the 
vain  heart,  discern  its  worthlessness  or 
perhaps  even  its  intention  covertly  to 
mock  or  to  sting.  Everybody  is  suspected 
of  an  intention  to  give  less  than  due 
consideration  ;  nobody  is  quite  trusted 
to  be   simply,  sincerely,  directly  kind 
in  anything  said  or  done  or  intended. 
A  wretched  life  is  often  that  of  the 
man  or  woman  of  "  society,"  the  very 
breath  of  whose  nostrils  is  the  homage 
of  others,  whose  life  is  a  loi  g  struggle 
for   social    precedence ;    *'  first    in     a 
village  rather  than  second  at  Rome  ! " 
How   great   the   deliverance   wrought 
by  the  love  of  vers.  4,  5 !    How  great 
the   rest !      And  where  evil  has  been 
intended,  it  may  be  dealt  with  in  either 
of  two  ways.     It  may  be  taken  at  the 
worst  construction   and  valuation;   it 
may   be   pondered    and  brooded  over, 
with  a  creative  power  in  the  brooding 
which  can  create  a  world  of  ordered  and 
intended  evil  intention  out  of  nothing  ! 
It  may  be  talked  of,  growing  more  and 
more  disquieting  as  each  word  uncon- 
sciously gives  it  an  exaggerating  touch, 
until  it  blots  out  all  the  brightness  of 
life,  and  is  a  cloud  of  blackness  over- 
hanging all.     The  love  that  "  covers," 
that     "  hopes "    against     facts,     that 
*'  suffers   long  "  and  "  endures,"  that, 
above  all,  is  actively  kind  to  even  the 
wrong-doer, — that    brings    rest.      No 
lubricator  for  the  inevitable  frictions 
and  irritations  of  life  like  Love  !     The 
proud    man,   the    boastful    man,    the 
passionate,    angry   man,   the    envious 
man,  the  suspicious  man,  the  covetous 
man, — they  are   perpetually   creating 
for  themselves  occasions  of  pain  and 
disquiet.      They   "rub   everybody  the 
wrong  way";   everybody  "rubs  them 
the  wrong    way."     Life  is  not  God's, 
but  the  devil's;  not  heaven,  but  hell. 
Life  is  torment,  not  rest.     But  God's 
life  is  rest.     Love  sets  the  "  grain  "  of 
life  another  way ;  it  grudges  no  man 
what  he  has ;  it  is  thankful  for  what 
itself  is ;  it  keeps  a  deaf  ear  and  a  blind 
eye  for  much  that  could  only  give  pain 
if  it  were  attended  to,  or  admitted  into 


tlOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xtii. 


the  heart ;  hoping  much ;  judiciously,  "  is  not  provoked"  to  read  the  sequel 
forbearingly,  patiently,  ignoring  a  (Matt.  xii.  9-21)  of  the  story  of  the 
great  deal.  Life  grows  brighter;  healing  of  the  withered  hand.  The 
things  run  more  smoothly.  Even  Pharisees  were  provoked  to  a  plot  of 
as  a  point  of  practical  prudence,  and  murderous  malice.  How  shall  Jesus 
of  personal  peace  and  happiness,  love  is  reply  to  it  ?  The  same  power  which 
the  better  w^orking  principle,  and  in  had  restored  the  man's  hand  might 
its  self-contained,  satisfied  resourceful-  well  *'  wither  "  all  theirs  into  helpless- 
ness would  give  peace — a  peace  not  ness.  Indeed,  He  w^ho  could  so  heal 
unworthy  to  be  a  far-off,  yet  true,  could  kill.  What  will  He  do  to  such 
adumbration  of  His  peace  Who  within  men  ?  What  He  actually  did  was  to 
Himself  has  an  all-sufficient,  all-  "  withdraw  Himself  from  them " ;  in 
satisfying  fulness  and  perfect  peace.  kindness  to  them  simply  putting  it  out 
And  this  must  needs  be  so  entirely  the  of  their  power  as  yet  to  compass  His 
fruit  of  a  new  heart,  renewed  by  grace  death,  by  getting  out  of  their  way  and 
in  the  image  of  God,  that  on  this  going  quietly  somewhere  else.  What 
account  also  love  brings  contentment,  were  they  as  against  Him  but  "  bruised 
rest,  peace.  reeds"  which  a  touch  would  have 
II.  Love  imitates  God. — The  word  broken  1  What  to  His  holiness  but 
is  Paul's.  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God  as  the  oflfensive,  smoking  lamp- wick 
beloved  children,  and  walk  in  love,  which  prompts  every  man  who  smells 
even  as  Christ  loved  you,"  etc.  (Eph.  it,  to  make  an  end  of  the  offence  by 
V.  1,  2) ;  which  again  stands  in  the  extinguishing  the  remains  of  fire  1 
closest  relation  to  iv.  31,  32,  that  bids  But  no  ;  "  He  shall  not  strive  nor  cry." 
Christian  men  to  put  away  "  wi-ath  and  [Shall  we  say  "  shall  not  behave  Him- 
bitterness,"  and  a  train  of  other  evil  self  unseemly  "  ;  or  that  "  Divine  Power 
passions,  and,  above  all,  to  *'  forgive,"  shall  not  "  ?]  Such  "  bruised  reeds  He 
with  a  *'  tenderhearted  kindness,"  not  will  not  break  .  .  .  until"  etc.  Love 
unworthy  to  be  compared  with  the  brings  the  judgment  to  an  issue,  either 
love  of  "  God  in  Christ  "  which  forgave  in  a  victory  of  coercive  power,  which 
them.  The  paragraph  here,  vers.  4-7,  constrains  outward  submission,  or  of 
obviously  contains  some  particulars  inwardly  subjecting  force,  which  wins 
\e.g.  "  beHeveth,"  "  hopeth  "]  which  a  victory  over  a  willing  captive,  who 
can  find  no  parallel  or  precedent  in  is  conquered  by,  and  assimilated  to,  the 
God.  But  it  may  well  be  studied  in  Love  that  conquers.  With  how  much 
the  light  of  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  human  hearts  must  Divine  love 
Whose  love  to  sinners  may  have  been  needs  *'  put  up  "  (to  use  the  human, 
the  germ  of  the  revelation  to  Paul  homely  word)  often  through  long 
of  this  noble  grace.  Charity,  and  years !  What  an  ofifence  to  the  very 
of  its  Divine  pre-eminence.  In  the  nature  of  God  Himself  must  the 
only  passage  where  Christ  speaks  of  heart  and  words  and  whole  bearing 
His  "  heart "  (Matt.  xi.  29)  He  is  be,  of  the  man  whom  love's  absence 
*'  meek," — a  trait  which  is  not  less  leaves  to  develop  the  self-assertion,  the 
precious  that  it  is  so  human  in  its  con-  impatience  of  injury,  the  suspicious 
ception  and  presentation  of  Him.  If  temper,  the  self-seeking,  which  are 
He  were  not  "  meek,"  what  hope  had  suggested  by  vers.  4-7  !  And  how 
there  often  been  for  sinful  men,  re-  wholly  like  Christ  is  the  love  which 
fusing  His  appeals,  ignoring  His  claims  "  vaunteth  not  itself,  seeketh  not  its 
to  their  allegiance,  repaying  with  rebuflf  own "  !  The  **  mind  that  was  in 
His  loving  appeal  to  them  ?  That  Christ  Jesus "  is  in  point  of  exact  and 
He  is  the  embodiment  of  a  Divine  Love  precise  exposition  (in  Phil.  ii.  4,  5)  the 
vfYiich.  ^'' suffereth  long"  and  '"'•  endureth  spirit  which  makes  every  man  "look 
all  things"  is  the  very  hope  of  men.  also  on  the  things  of  others."  "  Equal- 
It  is   an    instructive   comment    upon  ity  with  God "  was  "  His  own  "  ;  but 

297 


CHAP.  XIII.   BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS. 


He  forewent  its  glorious  manifesta-  must  have  been  to  Paul,  after  the  loiig 
tion  and  accompaniments  for  our  sake,  discussions  of  such  questions  as  meats 
and  "emptied  Himself."  The  man  offered  to  idols,  the  pitiable  disorders 
who  loves  rather  to  stand  aside,  if  and  sad  misapprehensions  in  connec- 
so  he  may  give  another  pleasure  or  tion  with  the  meaning  and  the  celebra- 
honour  ;  who,  instead  of  fussing  and  tion  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  the  use 
fuming  if  he  is  not  ever  to  the  front,  is  and  abuse  of  miraculous  gifts  !  *'  We 
content  to  go  his  way  and  do  his  work  can  imagine  a  new  glow  coming  into 
faithfully  and  steadily,  day  after  day,  his  face,  as  he  is  lifted  out  of  the  murky 
whether  it  brings  much  recognition,  or  fog  of  controversy  into  the  light  of 
little,  or  none ;  who  is  content,  if  no  heaven  itself ;  and  although  it  is  need- 
principle  is  involved,  nor  any  public  f ul  for  him,  on  account  of  the  weak- 
interest,  to  "  pocket "  a  good  deal  of  ness  of  those  for  whom  he  is  writing, 
opposition,  injury,  unfair  or  even  mis-  to  descend  into  the  pettiness  of  their 
chievous  comment  and  conduct ;  who  is  disputes  once  again,  for  a  while  be 
willing  to  yield  perhaps  more  than  a  forgets  everything  save  the  vision  of 
little  of  his  absolute  and  abstract  right  perfect  love  presented  to  him  as  a 
and  due,  for  peace'  sake  and  for  reward  for  his  own  reflection  of  it.  In 
Christ's  sake  ("  moderation,"  Phil.  a  still  rapture  he  sees  behind  the  veil, 
iv.  5),  rather  than  be  for  ever  "  fighting  almost  as  he  knows  that  he  one  day 
for  his  right,"  or  "  standing  upon  his  shall  see,  face  to  face,  and  in  words 
offended  dignity,"  perhaps  with  a  that  can  never  die,  he  reveals  to  us 
nervous  apprehension  of  its  being  this  perfect  ideal  of  love,  which  would 
infringed  upon  which  betrays  his  be  man's  could  he  but  know  even  as 
insecure  tenure  of  his  position ;    such  he  is  known." 

a  man  is  bringing  down  to  the  level  II.  What  is  this  best  of  all  pos- 
of  the  trivialities  of  common  life  the  sessions  ? — Certainly  not  giving  money 
same  "  mind,"  the  same  "  love,"  which,  to  the  poor  (see  ver.  3).  "  Nora  weak 
far  up  amongst  the  spiritualities  and  the  concession  to  the  opinions  of  others,  or 
eternities,  showed  out  consummately  a  blind  eye  to  their  failings.  St.  Paul 
glorious  in  Christ.  And  ''  he  that  knew  nothing  of  that  spurious  form 
hath  seen  Christ  hath  seen  the  Father."  of  charity  which  refuses  to  find  fault 
Love  that  is  Christlike  is  Godlike  too.  with  opinions  however  erroneous,  or 
Somebody  has  proposed  to  borrow  the  with  conduct  however  sinful.  'Love' 
painter's  title,  and  to  write  over  this  gives  a  truer  representation  of  Paul's 
chapter  the  words,  "  Portrait  of  a  meaning  ;  but  even  this  is  open  to  mis- 
gentleman."  It  would  be  absolutely  representation,  since  it  is  frequently 
true  to  say,  *'  Portrait  of  a  Christian."  used  to  describe  a  love  which,  however 
And  our  verses  (4-7),  though  not  the  pure,  has  in  it  much  of  exclusiveness 
whole  chapter,  in  many  points — not  all  and  of  self.  Perhaps  we  best  get  at 
— might  be  made  to  serve  as  a  portrait  the  true  meaning  of  the  idea  by  defin- 
of  Christ.  The  love  which  assimilates  ing  it  as  that  particular  kind  of  love 
us  thus  closely  to  Him  may  well  be  which  God  has  for  us.  It  is  that  desire 
greatest.  to  give  and  to  bless  which  is  ready  to 

bestow  itself  even  where  it  meets  with  no 

Ver.  13.  Love  Greatest.  response.     This  is  the  Divine  Charity." 

I.  Remarkable  that  the  three  great  III.  Why  this    greater    than    all 

doctrinal  writers  of  the  New  Testament  gifts  ?    Why  the  greatest  of  Christian 

— Paul,  John,  Peter — all  agree  that  the  graces  ?    In  what  sense  greater  than 

highest  of  Christian  graces  is  charity,  faith  and  hope  ? — 1 .  It  is  most  like  God 

or  love.     Peter  the  man  of  humility,  Himself.      In   creation,    God  is    love. 

Paul  the  man  of  faith,  agree  with  John  In  grace,  God  is  love.     **  In  glory,  God 

(1    Pet.    V.  5,  iv.  8 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  4,  8).  is  love.     He  can  receive  nothing  that 

What  a  rehef  such  a  digression  as  this  can  add  to   His  greatness.     All  that 

298 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  XilL 


He  does  is  a  pouring  forth  of  love.  .  .  .  seeketh  not  ber  own  and  is  not  easily 

God  is  just,  is  true,  patient,  unchang-  provoked.     Had  not  the  Lord  to  bear 

ing,  all-powerful.     These  are  all  parts  with  men's  littlenesses   and  vanities  % 

of  His  love.     Without  these  He  would  Must  not  the  disciple  learn  from  Him 

not  be  perfect  love."  to  bear  all  things,  to  believe  all  things 

2.  It  is  eternal. — Gifts,  however  use-  \%  this ;  cf.  John  ii.  24,  25],  to  hope 
ful  or  attractive,  fail.  "  They  are  con-  all  things  [?],  to  endure  all  things 
cerned  with  temporal  things,  and  are  [yes]  ?  "  Useful  to  note  down  in  the 
in  their  nature  temporal.  The  know-  life  of  Jesus  incidents  which  illustrate 
ledge  of  art,  of  science,  of  law,  must  Paul's  words.  By  such  close  and 
one  day  become  obsolete  ;  although  the  intimate  study  of  Him — as  an  artist 
lessons  learned  and  the  habits  acquired  has  some  great  work  of  art  continually 
in  gaining  such  knowledge  will  be  end-  in  his  presence,  that  he  may  be  filled 
less,  the  knowledge  itself  must  cease  with  its  influence,  even  when  not  con- 
when  the  subject-matter  ceases.  [But  is  sciously  studying  it — we  learn,  and  are 
there  not  a  "  knowledge  "  of  Memory  ?]  enabled,  to  imitate  Him.  At  stated 
So  long  as  there  are  our  fellow-  times  set  ourselves  diligently  to  meditate 
creatures  in  existence,  so  long  is  there  upon  Him ;  but  always  we  may  have 
scope  for  love.  Even  of  those  spiritual  the  sweet  influence  of  His  presence, 
graces  which  will  outlast  all  material  and  may  learn  and  win  His  Own 
things,  charity  is  greatest.     Faith  and  *'  Charity." 

hope   also    '  abide '    and    are  eternal.  2.  Do  the  things  which  love  demands. 

Faith  is  that  confidence  in  God  which  — There    is    nothing     of    the    Divine 

can  never  be  out  of  place  even  in  the  Charity  in  loving   those  to  whom  we 

heavenly    habitations ;     hope     is    the  feel  drawn.     Bom.    v.  8 — "  whilst  we 

yearning  after  the  wider  future  which  were  yet  sinners^  God  loved  us  " — points 

we    believe    will  never    cease    to    be  us  to  some  one   who  has  injured  us, 

gratified    fully    and    endlessly.      But  or  made  himself  disagreeable,  who  is  a 

Charity  is  greater,  an  emanation  from  successful  rival,  who  has  an  unpleasant 

God   Himself,  reflecting  itself  in  His  name.     "  Have  you  any  unkind  feeling 

creatures,  and   shining  through  them  toward  such  1     Should  you  be  secretly 

upon  each  other ;  the  very  atmosphere  pleased  to  hear  that  something  ill  had 

of  heaven.     In   such  an   element   we  befallen  them?     God  has  given  them 

shall  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,  to  you  as  an  opportunity  of  cultivating 

By  such  a  perfect  law  shall  we  all  be  charity.     Seek  opportunities  of  doing 

governed."  kindness     to     such     persons !     Speak 

IV.  How  to  be  obtained  ? — "  Follow  kindly  about  them  when  their  acts  or 

after. ^^    *'  Have  fervent   charity."      A  characters  are  discussed.     If  it  is  in 

command  of  God  can  be  obeyed.  your   power,   promote   their  interests. 

1.  Ask  for  it. — This  fire  can  only  be  If  not,  pray  for  them';  you  cannot  long 
kindled  from  Heaven.  "  To  God  we  dislike  a  person  whose  name  is  daily  in 
must  turn  to  learn  what  *  love '  is.  your  prayers.  Persevere  in  such  a 
Only  in  His  hght  can  we  see  light ;  course  ;  you  will  find  your  mind  under- 
only  because  He  first  loved  us  can  going  a  change,  even  a  renewal, 
we  learn  to  love  Him  and  our  neigh-  Think,  when  tempted  to  be  uncharit 
hours  in  Him."  "  The  life  of  Jesus  is  a  able,  how  the  Master  would  have  acted 
picture  of  the  perfect  love  of  God.  He  in  your  place.  If  you  learn  no  more, 
was  the  Charity  that  suffereth  long  you  will  at  least  learn  this — "  Charitt/ 
and  is  kind,  that  is  not  pufied  up  and  never  faileth  " — Canon  Vernon  Hutton, 
doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly,  that  abridged  from  "  Clerical  World,"  i.  371. 


29S 


CHAP.  XIII.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


[The  whole  chapter  may  be  surveyed 
thus : — ]  .         • 

Love 

I.  Sanctifies  every  gift, 
II.  Sweetens  every  duty, 
III.  Is  the  one  bond  between  time 
and  eternity,  the  earthly  life  and  the 
heavenly.  — \J.  L.'\ 

Yer.  10.  The  Perfect  State. 

I.  What  hope  we  have  of  it. — 
Founded  in  human  instinct.  Con- 
firmed by  revelation.     Secured  by  faith. 

II.  What  relief  it  will  bring. — 
The  removal  of  all  defect.  Conse- 
quently of  all  sorrow. 

III.  What  happiness  does  it 
promise  ?  —  The  perfection  of  our 
physical,  intellectual,  moral,  social 
condition. — \J.  Z.] 

Yer.  1 1 .  Human  Development. 

I.  Man  in  the  infancy  of  his  being. 
— His  speech  imperfect,  childish.  His 
understanding  weak,  limited,  easily 
deceived.  His  thought  and  reasoning 
trifling,  foolish,  erring. 

II.  Man  in  course  of  development. 
— Under  instruction  and  discipline. 
Accumulating  experience.  Looking 
forward  in  hope. 

III.  Man  in  his  maturity. — Fully 
developed  in  heaven.  Bids  farewell  to 
the  toys  of  earth.  Has  clearer  percep- 
tions, grander  views,  nobler  objects. — 

[/.  i.] 

Yers.  4,  5.  "  Envieth  not,'^  etc. — (For 
a  Bible-reading.) 

1.  "  Envy  "  one  of  the  last  things  to 
die.  A  great  victory  of  grace  to  be 
able  to  see  another  preferred  at  our 
expense,  or  with  a  comparison  for  us 
disadvantageous,  and  simply  to  rejoice 
in  his  prosperity. 

2.  *'  Vaunteth  wo^."— With  the  real 
modesty  which  means  humility.  Not 
inviting  compliments  on  one's  modesty. 
An  outward  modesty  which  is  just 
transparent,  transp^rent  humility. 

3.  ^'' Not  .  .  .  unseemly y — Acts  with 
a  fine  sense  of  propriety;  no  conven- 
tional polish  merely,   or  code-etiquette 


of  drawing-rooms,  but  a  fine  sense  of 
what  is  essentially  polite. 

4.  "  Seeketh  not  her  own" — Thinks  of 
others,  sympathises  with  others;  puts 
them  first  (Phil.  ii.  4).  Yet  wonderful 
to  see  how  if  a  man — to  be  Christlike — 
postpones  his  own  interests  and  wants, 
God  takes  care  for  these.  Love  will 
keep  our  spirit,  remembering  that  others 
have  interests  and  claims.  The  true 
happiness  of  family  life  is  the  resultant 
of  competing,  conflicting  claims  adjusted 
by  love  and  mutual  surrender. 

5.  "  Not  provoked." — Most  frequently 
by  our  plans  being  set  aside.  The  man 
who  always  goes  straight  to  his  goal  is 
apt  to  be  impatient  if  others  will  neither 
lead,  *'  nor  yield,"  *'  nor  follow,"  nor 
stand  aside.  Little  interruptions  of  our 
plans  the  hardest  to  bear  unruffled. 

6.  "  Thinketh  no  evil." — Lose  the  spirit 
of  love,  and  you  begin  to  suspect.  The 
worst  is  then  the  first  verdict  upon  conduct 
which  occurs  to  us.  (Then  as  in  Homily. ) 

Yer.  12.  Now  and  Then  — The  child 
and  the  man — this  describes  the  difler- 
ence  between  Now  in  this  world  and 
Then  in  the  world  of  light. 

I.  Now  we  see  all  things  in  the 
"mirror"  of  our  own  experience. — 
Impossible  for  child  or  man  to  travel 
beyond  the  stage  of  knowledge  or  ex- 
perience to  which  he  has  reached  in  his 
ideas  and  judgments  of  things.  The 
uncivilised  barbarian  of  the  wilds 
cannot  be  made  to  realise  by  description 
the  wonders  of  a  great  modern  city. 
Thus  through  an  imperfect  mirror  of 
knowledge  and  feeling  we  now  see : 
1.  God]  2.  The  Saviour',  3.  Heaven. 

II.  Then  we  see  all  things  by  actual 
presence  and  contact. — ''Face  to  face." 
1.  The  glory  of  God ;  2.  The  love  of  the 
Saviour  \  3.  The  wonders  of  heaven. 
So  shall  *'  we  know  even  as  we  are 
known."  The  child  becomes  a  man. 
Imperfection  of  knowledge  and  expe- 
rience give  way  to  the  perfection  of 
both.  Then,  like  the  Queen  of  Sheba, 
we  shall  feel  that  ''not  the  half  has 
been  told  us." — Clerical  World,  ii.  361. 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xiii. 


APPENDED   NOTES. 


Fragments  from  F.  W.  Robertson  on 
chap.  xiii. — "No  man  can  conquer  the 
world  except  by  Faith  (1  John  v.  5)  ;  no 
man  can  resemble  God  but  by  Love."  "  There 
is  a  thing  which  we  call  high-breeding 
or  courtesy ;  its  name  proclaims  that  it  is 
the  manners  of  the  Court,  and  it  is  sup- 
posed to  belong  exclusively  to  persons  highly 
born.  There  is  another  thing  which  we  call 
Christian  courtesy.  The  difference  between 
the  two  is,  that  high- breeding  gracefully  in- 
sists upon  its  own  rights ;  Christian  courtesy 
gracefully  remembers  the  rights  of  others." 
"The  Spirit  of  Christ  does  really  what 
high-breeding  only  does  outwardly.  A  high- 
bred man  never  forgets  himself,  controls  his 
temper,  does  nothing  in  excess,  is  urbane, 
dignified,  and  that  even  to  persons  whom  he 
is  inwardly  cursing  in  his  heart  or  wishing 
far  away.  But  a  Christian  is  what  the  world 
seems  to  be.  Love  gives  him  a  delicate  tact 
which  never  offends,  because  it  is  full  of 
sympathy.  It  discerns  far  off  what  would 
hurt  fastidious  feelings,  feels  with  others, 
and  is  ever  on  the  v/atch  to  anticipate  their 
thoughts.  And  hence  the  only  true  refine- 
ment— that  which  lies  not  on  the  surface, 
but  goes  deep  down  into  the  character — 
comes  from  Christian  love."  [Assuming  that 
"  tongues "  meant  a  faculty  of  speaking 
"  foreign  "  languages  only  miraculously,  and 
pro  hac  vice,  known  to  tne  speaker,  he  says :] 
"It  is  remarked  that  this  faculty  gives  more 
cause  for  vanity  than  any  other.  .  .  .  We  see. 
that  the  expert  linguist  is  generally  found 
more  proud  of  his  gifts,  and  more  vain,  than 
the  deep  thinker  and  knower :  so  with  the 
Corinthians,  this  gift  produced  more  vanity 
than  the  more  useful  ones  of  prophecy  and 
teaching." 

The  word  ayain^. — The  word  is,  in  this 
sense,  altogether  peculiar  to  the  New  Testa- 
ment. The  word,  as  a  substantive,  is 
entirely  unknown  to  classical  Greek.  The 
only  passage  supposed  to  be  exceptional,  one 
in  Plutarch's  Symposium,  is  a  misreading. 
"  The  [corresponding]  verb,  indeed,  is  used  in 
classical  Greek,  but  in  the  lower  sense  of 
acquiescence,  esteem,  or  caressing.  It  is  in 
the  LXX.  we  first  find  it  employed  to  desig- 
nate what  we  call  'love,'  and  it  is  there 
introduced  to  represent  [the  Hebrew]  ahah 
and  ayah,  both  words  expressive  of  passion- 
ate affection,  drawn  from  the  idea  of  panting, 
aspiring  after  a  desired  object.  The  sub- 
stantive is  almost  entirely  used  for  sexual 
love  [Jer.  ii.  2  ;  2  Sam.  xiii.  15  ;  Canticles 
throughout].  It  only  occurs  besides,  in  a 
more  general  sense,  in  Eccles.  ix.  1,  6.  .  ,  . 
In  the  New  Testament,  on  the  other  hand, 
when  used  simply,  and  unexplained,  it  is 
equivalent  to  benevolence  based  on  religious 


motives.  The  Old  Testament  (in  the  word 
ahah)  exhibited  the  virtues  both  of  conjugal 
affection  and  of  friendship  'passing  the 
love  of  women ' ;  it  exhibited  also,  through- 
out the  Psalms,  the  same  passionate  devo- 
tion transferred  from  man  to  God ;  it 
exhibited,  lastly,  the  same  feeling  emanat- 
ing from  God  Himself  towards  His  peculiar 
people,  the  spouse  of  His  choice,  the  daughter 
of  Zion.  The  Greek  world  exhibited  in  a 
high  degree  the  virtue  of  personal  friend- 
ship, which  was,  indeed,  so  highly  esteemed, 
as  to  give  its  name  (0tXia)  to  affection 
generally.  Domestic  and  conjugal  affec- 
tion, strictly  speaking,  there  was  not.  The 
word  which  most  nearly  approaches  the 
modern  idea  of  love  (^/jws)  expressed  either 
a  merely  sensual  admiration  of  physical 
beauty  or  ...  an  intellectual  admiration 
of  ideal  beauty.  ...  At  Alexandria  .  .  . 
benevolence  to  man  as  man,  expressed  in  the 
word  '  philanthropy,'  occupies  a  very  promi- 
nent position  in  the  writings  of  Philo.  But 
whilst  this  quality  breaks  through  the 
narrow  limits  in  which  the  passionate  yearn- 
ing of  the  Hebrew  dispensation  was  confined, 
it  loses  its  intensity.  It  becomes  an  abstiac- 
tion  to  be  panegyrised,  not  a  powerful 
motive  to  be  acted  upon.  In  contradistinc- 
tion to  all  these,  and  yet  the  crown  and 
completion  of  all,  is  the  Love  of  the  New 
Testament.  While  it  retains  all  the  fervour 
of  the  Hebrew  aspiration  and  desire,  and  of 
the  personal  affection  of  the  Greek,  it  ranges 
through  as  wide  a  sphere  as  the  comprehen- 
sive benevolence  of  Alexandria.  Whilst  it 
retains  the  religious  element  that  raised  the 
affections  of  the  Hebrew  Psalmist  to  the 
presence  of  God,  it  agrees  with  the  classi- 
cal and  Alexandrian  feelings  in  making  its 
chief  object  the  welfare  of  man.  It  is  not 
Religion  evaporated  into  Benevolence,  but 
Benevolence  taken  up  into  Eeligion.  It  is 
the  practical  exemplification  or  the  two 
great  characteristics  of  Christianity — the 
union  of  God  with  man,  the  union  of  religion 
with  morality ;  Love  to  Man  for  the  sake  of 
Love  to  God  ;  Love  to  God  showing  itself  in 
Love  to  Man."  [Stanley,  Corinthians^  in 
chap,  xiii.,  who  proceeds  :]  "  It  is,  perhaps, 
vain  to  ask  by  what  immediate  means  the 
new  idea  was  introduced  to  the  Apostle's 
mind,  .  .  .  perhaps  not  too  much  to  say  that 
this  is  one  of  the  ideas  derived  expressly 
from  what  he  calls  *the  revelations  of  the 
Lord.'  It  is,  in  all  probability,  from  the 
great  example  of  self-sacrificing  love  shown 
in  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  the 
Apostle,  and  through  him  the  Christian 
world,  has  received  the  truth  that  love  to 
man  for  the  sake  of  God  is  the  one  great  end 
of  human  existence.  .  .  .  Until  Christ  had 
lived  and  died,  the  virtue  was  almost  im- 

301 


CHAP.  XIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


possible.  .  .  .  We  can  hardly  doubt  that,  as  in 
the  case  of  St.  John,  it  was  drawn  from  the 
example  or  the  teaching  of  Christ  Himself." 

Ver.  13.  Love  and  Hope  and  Faith. — Love 
and  Jiope  are  united  with,-  and  included  in, 
this  faith.  For  faith's  appropriation  does 
not  take  place  without  love's  surrender.  All 
hearty  appropriation  requires  surrender  to 
that  which  we  appropriate,  whether  such  ap- 
propriation result  from  faith  or  knowledge. 
All  true  knowledge  requires  that  we  should 
both  love  and  be  engrossed  by  the  object  to  be 
known.  I  cannot  fully  believe  in  and  accept 
'  the  love  of  another,  unless  there  is  the  sur- 
render of  love  within  my  own  heart.  So 
neither  is  religious  faith  unaccompanied  by 
love.  Love  is  the  present  life  of  religion. 
And  this  present  life  is  accompanied  by 
hope's  assurance  of  the  future,  for  God  is  a 
God  of  the  future,  and  I  cannot  rejoice  in 
present  communion  with  Him  without  being 
happily  certain  of  enjoying  it  in  the  future. 
Love  and  hope  combine  with  faith  in  the 
one  harmonious  whole  which  we  designate 
the  religious  life. — Luthardt,^'  Fundamental 
Truths:'  155. 

Ver.  13.  Charity. — In  the  New  Testament 
this  is  reserved  for  man's  widest  obligation  to 
his  neighbour ;  it  is  the  one  term  which  is 
common  to  heaven  and  earth  in  this  sense.    It 
is  more  than  the  limited  love  of  the  brethren 
which    in  us    answers    to    God's  favour  to 
His  own  ;  St.  Peter  makes  the  distinction  very 
clear,  "  a7id  to  hrotherly  kindness,  charity  " 
(2  Pet.  i.  7).     This  noblest  of  all  the  graces 
belongs  by  prescriptive  right  to  all  depart- 
ments of  ethics.     As  appointed  to  regulate 
the  universal  relations  of  mankind,  it  has  a 
very  wide  family  of  virtues  under  it,  which 
may    be   subdivided   as  in  a  certain   sense 
active  and  passive,  or  rather  positive    and 
negative.     1.  It  is  Philanthropy  in  the  con- 
ventional use  of  the  word  to  signify  practical 
care   for  the  well-being  of  the  race  which 
knows  no  limits,   but  extends,   whether  as 
Benevolence  or  Beneficence,  to  man  as  such. 
The  word  (piXavOpoiwia,  however,  is  used  only 
of  God ;  it  is  not  used  expressly  of  the  God- 
man,  though  the  only  passage  in  which  it 
occurs  attributes  this  sentiment  to  God  our 
Saviour.      Kindness    is    natural    regard    to 
our  kind  ;  therefore  not  employed  to  denote 
the   Divine  regard,  for  which  the   word   is 
Lovingkindness,  though  this  is  extended  to 
all  the  works  of  the  Divine  hand.     Charity, 
or  love,  as  the  duty  which  every  man  owes  to 
his  fellow-man,  presides  over  a  wide  range 
of  obligations,  from  the  supreme  Self-sacri- 
fice which  is  ready  *'  to  lay  down  our  lives  "  in 
imitation  of  Him  who  "  laid  down  His  life  for 
us"  (1  John  iii.  16),  down   to  the  gentlest 
act  of  Courtesy  which  sheds  its  charm  upon 
common  life,  blending  love  and  justice  into 
one.     2.  But  its  most  impressive  exhibitions 

302 


are  such  as  are  called  forth  in  imitation  of 
the  Divine  charity.     Such  is  Mercy  ;  strictly 
speaking  God  alone  can  be  merciful ;  but  in 
the  same  sense  as  man  may  "  sin  "  against 
man  he  is  bound   to  be  "merciful"  to  the 
offender,   and   to   forgive   him,   if  need  be, 
seven  times  in  a  day. .  .  .  Longsuffering  be- 
longs to  God  alone ;  we,  following  the  Divine 
example,  are  required  to   practise  Forbear- 
ance, which  is  the  disposition  not  to  press 
to  the  uttermost  our  claims  against  a  fellow- 
creature.     This  is  by  the  Lord  called  Com- 
passion, and  Pity,  and  Forgiveness  :  "  Should- 
est  thou  not  have  had  compassion  .  .  .  as  I  had 
pity  ?  "  etc.  (Matt,  xviii.  3;^).     All  these  affec- 
tions towards  universal  man  are  required  of 
those  who  bear  the  Divine  image  as  restored 
in  Christ.     Throughout  the  New  Testament 
this  unlimited  charity,  meditating  the  most 
unbounded  forbearance,   is  inculcated  as  a 
grace  taught  of  God  to  those  who  in  union 
with  Christ  partake  of  His  Spirit.     Our  Lord 
denounces   the  vice  that   seems  to   honour 
love   while   it  robs   it   of  its  perfection  as 
absolutely  universal. .  .  .  ^'•Love  thy  neighbour, 
but  hate  thine  enemy.     Rut  I  say  unto  you,'* 
etc.  (Matt.  V.  43,  48).      St.  John,  in  his  last 
Epistle,the  supplement  and  complement  of  all 
Scripture,  gives  this  its  strongest  expression. 
He,  like  all  the  writers  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment,  but   more   directly   than    any   other, 
makes  the  charity  of  redemption  the  stan- 
dard of  universal  duty  :  "  Hereby  perceive  we 
love. .  . .  He  laid  down  His  life.  . . .  We  ought ^^ 
etc.  (1  John  iii.  16).     Not  for  the  brethren 
only,  however ;    these  words  must  be  con- 
formed to  the  precept  of  the  Saviour,  who 
commends    to    us    the     perfection    of    the 
Father's  impartial   love  as    our    standard. 
And  if   the  love  of  God  in  the  Atonement 
is  made  the  example,  it  is  made  the  source 
of  our  strength  to  copy  it.     '•'•If  we  love  one 
another,  God  dwelleth  in  us,  and  His  love  is 
perfected  in  us.     Hereby  we   know  .  .  .  He 
hath  given  us  of  His  Spirit"  (1  John  iv.  12, 
13).— i>r.  Pope,  "  Comj).  of  Theol.;'  iii.  233. 

Faith  and  Hope. — Faith  differs  from 
hope  in  the  extension  of  its  object,  and  in  the 
intension  of  degree.  St.  Austin  [Fnchirid., 
c.  8]  thus  accounts  their  differences.  Faith 
is  of  all  things  revealed ;  good  and  bad, 
rewards  and  punishments  ;  of  things  past, 
present,  and  to  come ;  of  things  that  con- 
cern us,  and  of  things  that  concern  us  not : 
but  Hope  hath  for  its  object  things  only  that 
are  good  and  fit  to  be  hoped  for,  future,  and 
concerning  ourselves :  and  because  these 
things  are  offered  to  us  upon  conditions  of 
which  we  may  so  fail  as  we  change  our  will, 
therefore  our  certainty  is  less  than  the 
adherence  of  Faith ;  which  (because  Faith 
relies  only  upon  one  proposition,  that  is,  the 
truth  of  the  Word  of  God)  cannot  be  made 
uncertain  to  themselves,  though  the  object 
of  our  Hope  may  become  uncertain  to  us,  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xiv. 


to  our  possession.     For  it  is  infallibly  certain  of  my  Hope,  not  of  my  Faith  [?] ;  and  is  so 

that  there  is  heaven  for  all  the  godly,  and  for  sure,  as  it  is  certain  I  shall  persevere  in  the 

me  amongst  them  all,  if  I  do  my  duty.     But  ways  of  God. — Jereviy  Taylor ^  ^^ Holy  Living t' 

that  I  shall  enter  into  Heaven,  is  the  object  iv.,  §  2. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Follow  after. — Taking  up  the  thought  of  a  "way,"xii.  31;  as  this  whole  verse 
resumes  the  theme  of  xii.,  after  the  digression  or  episode  of  xiii.  "  Pursue  "  love  ;  righteous- 
ness (Rom.  ix.  30,  etc.  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  11  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  22  ;  cf.  Phil.  iii.  14)  ;  peace  with  all  men 
(Heb.  xii.  14  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  11 ;  Bom.  xiv.  19)  ;  good  (1  Thess.  v.  15)  ;  hospitality  (Rom.  xii.  13). 
♦*  We  pursue  love  by  watching  against  and  resisting  everything  contrary  to  it,  by  prayer  and 
by  the  effort  to  believe  that  what  we  ask  God  will  give,  by  pondering  God's  love  as  mani- 
fested on  the  cross  of  Christ  that  thus  we  may  experience  its  transforming  power,  and  by 
endeavouring  to  (Rom.  xiv.  15)  '  walk  according  to  love'"  (Beet).  Note,  '■'•  gifts'"  is  (as  in 
xii.  1)  supplementary,  but  rightly  so.  Also  note  '''•  yeV  (R.V.) ;  there  should  be  no 
exaggeration,  even  of  love,  at  the  expense  of  other  things  in  the  spiritual  life.  "  '  Follow  ' 
marks  the  persistence, '  desire  earnestly '  the  energy  and  earnestness  of  the  search  "  (Ellicott). 
Rather. — **  Seek  any  gift,  all  gifts,  only  in  the  path  of  love ;  and,  in  so  seeking  them,  seek 
the  useful  rather  than  the  showy." 

Ver.  2. — Observe  throughout  that  "  unknown "  (A.V.)  is  inserted  erroneously  ;  it  is  no 
question  merely  of  foreign  languages.  To  God. — As  in  Acts  ii.  11,  x.  46,  13-16,  the  matter 
spoken  "m  a  tongue''''  was  ecstatic  [praj'er  (ver.  14)  ox\ praise.  The  man  was,  so  to  speak, 
closeted  with  God  in  the  shrine  of  his  spirit  [regarded  as  influenced  and  filled  by  the 
Spirit]  ;  his  experience  is  analogous  to  that  of  2  Cor.  xii.  1-4,  only  here  he  speaks,  not  hears, 
•'  unspeakable  things,"  and  no  quasi-local  transference  is  suggested.  He  is  speaking 
"  mysteries"  i.e.  things  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  are  concealed,  but,  given  the  qualified 
interpreter,  may  be  readily  communicated  to  the  listeners  around.  But  the  '■'■interpreter'''' 
must  also  be  a  man  with  a  charism,  himself  therefore,  for  the  time  being,  moving  in,  or  at 
least  in  communication  with,  that  inmost  world  of  spiritual  things  where  his  fellow- 
worshipper  is  thus  ecstatically  holding  converse  with  God.  Without  such  a  helper  the 
listeners  "  ?iear"  yet  "  do  not  hear."    (See  margin,  and  cf.  Acts  ix.  7,  xxii.  9.) 

Ver.  3. — Notice  the  more  exact  R.V.,  " speaheth  edification"  etc.  " He  builds  up  the 
inward  life,  .  .  .  gives  counsel  to  the  mind,  and  comfort  to  the  heart "  (Ellicott).  Good 
verse  as  casting  light  upon  "  comfort,"  •'  comforter,"  etc.  Here  are  Tra/od/cXr/o-ts  and  "  comforV 
together,  in  clear,  if  not  wide,  distinction.  Stanley  notes  that  "  Barnabas,"  lit.  "  Son  of 
Prophecy,"  is  in  Acts  iv.  36  rendered  "  Son  of  Trapd/cXT/o-ts."  Beet  (like  Ellicott  and  Evans) 
keeps  ''''exhortation"  words  prompting  "  to  action"  (Rom.  xii.  1). 

Ver.  5.  All. — Then  the  gift  was  a  desirable  thing  to  possess.  He  interpret. — I.e.  the  speaker 
in  a  tongue  himself.     The  same  person  might  enjoy  both  gifts. 

Ver.  6. — Notice  the  "  hut"  i.e.  "  since  there  is  no  edification  without  interpretation." 
Also  "  hy  may  of"  as  in  vii.  6,  etc.  Evidently,  too,  the  sense  is  "  unless  I  also  speak,"  etc. 
'■''Revelation"  and  '■''prophesying"  are  extraordinary,  '^knowledge"  and  ^'■teaching"  are 
ordinary,  methods  of  gaining  and  of  communicating  knowledge  respectively. 

Ver.  8.  Uncertain. — Not  making  distinguishable  the  special  "  bugle-call "  intended. 

Ver,  9. — The  physical  organ,  the  tongue,  is  here  meant,  as  shown  by  the  analogy  with 
musical  instruments  here  traced  out,  and  by  the  grammatical  form  of  the  phrase,  "  hy  the 
tongue  "  ;  there  is  really  no  "  with  "  in,  e.g.,  ver.  6.     The  air. — Cf .  ix.  26. 

Ver.  10.  So  many. — "  Fill  up  the  number  according  as  you  think,  or  as  you  may  know 
the  fact  happens  to  be.  No  matter  exactly  how  many."  The  "  tongue  "  was  a  true  language, 
but  not  spoken  or  understood  in  this  world  of  men.  From  the  inarticulate  though  significant 
sounds  of  instruments,  which  all  convey  their  meaning,  he  now  passes  to  all  articulate 
sounds  of  human  languages,  not  one  of  which  is  of  course  really  meaningless.  Yet  it  can 
say  nothing  to  the  man  who  does  not  happen  to  understand  it  or  use  it  as  his  native  dialect. 
Qua  that  particular  language  he  is  a  "  harharian." 

Ver.  13. — Choose  between  (1)  '*  that  he  may  interpret"  during  his  ecstasy,  or  (2)  after  his 
ecstatic  condition.  Both  find  support.  [Both  cases  might  surely  be  actually  exemplified ; 
why  "  choose  "  ?] 

303 


CHAP.  XIV.    HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  14. — "  Take  prayer  as  a  particular  case,  illustrating  my  general  principle."  "  Sing  " 
another  (ver.  15),  "  bless  "  (ver.  16). 

Ver.  15.  Spirit  .  .  .  understanding. — The  latter  word,  with  its  strong  contrast  to  the 
former,  and  both  read  in  the  light  of  the  chapter,  fix  "spirit''  as  meaning  the  human 
"  spirit,'  though  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  nearly  always  with  Paul.  Observe 
"  spirits,"  the  literal,  marginal  rendering  in  ver.  12.  The  "  I "  is  not  necessarily  so  precisely 
personal,  as  that  this  should  express  '*  Paul's  resolve."  As  to  singing,  see  Eph.  v.  19  ; 
Jas.  V.  13. 

Ver.  16.  Bless. — Not  to  be  restricted  to  the  special  "  hlesmig  "  or  "  thanksgiving  "  ["  but  little 
distinction  can  here  be  drawn  "  (Ellicott)]  at  the  Bucharistic  Supper.  (But  see  Appended 
Note.)  Filleth  the  .  .  .  unlearned — Dean  Alford  amusingly  protests  that  this  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  parish  clerk  of  the  old  order  in  English  Churches !  Obviously  is  meant : 
Any  person  in  the  congregation  who  has  no  "  gift,"  or  not  these  special  gifts ;  who  is,  in 
regard  to  those  who  are  exercising  them,  an  outsider  and  "  vnlearned."  ["  Unlearned "  in 
the  old  sense,  now  become  a  vulgarism  for  "  untaught '''\  No  distinction  suggested  between 
officials  and  private  members.  Such  "  sharply  marked  distinctions  ...  do  not  seem  to 
belong  to  this  period"  (Ellicott). 

Ver.  19.  In  the  Church. — "  Whatever  I  do  in  private." 

Ver.  20.  Understanding. — Not  the  word  used  in,  e.g.,  ver.  15.  See  R.V.  Men. — Lit.  "per- 
fect," as  ii.  6,  well  expounding  that  frequently  used  word.  Malice. — Wider  in  meaning  then 
than  now. 

Ver.  21. — Quoted  (freely)  from  the  LXX.  of  Isa.  xxviii.  9-12,  so  freely  that  it  is  scarcely 
more,  as  Paul  uses  it,  than  a  happy  parallel  case  ;  for  his  purpose  "happy"  in  two  particulars 
above  all:  (1)  the  barbarian  language  of  the  Assyrian  invaders  was,  like  the  "tongue"  in 
Corinth,  unintelligible  jargon  to  the  ordinary  listener  ;  (2)  and  of  more  importance,  each  was 
a  sign,  not  a  mere  wonder,  but  a  significant  wonder,  to  "  an  unbelieving  "  age.  The  presence 
of  men  who  should  speak  strange  talk  in  the  land  of  Israel  would  in  itself  be  a  token,  a  real 
message,  of  the  will,  the  displeasure,  of  God  to  His  unbelieving  people,  who  had  scoffed  at 
the  simple,  plain  talk  of  Israel  to  them  ["line  upon  line,"  etc.,  "as  if  he  were  talking  to 
little  children  " ;  cf.  ver.  20].  So  the  unintelligibleness  of  the  "  tongues  was  a  mark  rather  of 
the  aloofness  than  of  the  nearness  of  God;  rather  of  their  low  spiritual  tone  than  of  His  full 
favour.  Good  as  it  was  (ver.  39),  "  tongues  "  was  a  gift  lower  than  the  best.  Ellicott  would  not 
supply  in  the  case  of  prophecy  the  italicised  words  of  the  R.V.,  preferring  the  A.V.     Rightly. 

Ver.  23.  All. — Supposing  an  extreme  case.  Unlearned. — As  above,  "  outsiders,"  though 
more  literally  still  here;  persons,  casually  or  from  curiosity,  "dropping  in";  whether  simply 
"outsiders  "  or  distinct  and  pronounced  ^^unbelievers." 

Ver.  24.  Convinced. — Add  the  R.V.  and  its  margin.  [So  John  xvi.  8,  which  is  well 
expounded  by  the  facts  of  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  the  first,  earliest  example  of  this  particular 
operation  of  the  Spirit,]  All. — As  each  prophet  in  turn  speaks.  Judged. — Cf.  ii.  14,  15, 
ix.  3,  X.  25,  27.  The  familiar  experience  :  "  That  preacher  knows  all  about  me."  See  this 
graphically  given  in  Heb.  iv.  13.  See  also  how  Saul  fell  prostrate  before  Samuel's  prophesying 
(1  Sam.  xix.  24). 

Ver.  25.  God. — Not  Christ.  The  more  natural  first  step  for  a  Jew  or  a  heathen  would  be 
to  "  worship  God." 

Ver.  27.  By  course. — I.e.  in  turn,  not  all  springing  to  their  feet  at  once.  And  if  not  on 
that  particular  occasion,  then  he  may  get  his  "turn"  at  another  time. 

Ver.  29.  Judge. — Different  word,  of  the  same  family,  to  that  in  ver.  23.  Here  meaning, 
using  the  gift  of  "  disceriiing  of  spirits  "  (xii.  10) ;  and  judging  whether  the  "prophecy  " 
be  really  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  not  the  Devil's  counterfeit  (xii.  3). 

Ver.  30. — Not  necessarily  breaking  off  abruptly,  but  finishing,  and  then  giving  "  silent " 
hearing  to  the  next. 

Ver.  31.  Comforted. — With  the  fuller  meaning,  as  before  in  ver.  8. 

Ver.  32.  Subject. — To  their  own  control.  No  man  was  so  "  carried  away  "  by  the  Spirit 
(2  Pet.  i.  21)  as  to  lose  the  power  to  stop  himself  and  be  silent  when  "  order"  required  it. 
[Evans  sees  an  implied,  contrasted  thought, — that  the  spirits  of  the  men  "  speaking  with 
tongues"  were  not  thus  under  their  control.] 

Ver.  33. — General,  governing  principle  derived  from  the  very  nature  of  God  Himself. 
Seen,  e.g.,  in  Nature,  where  the  judgment,  equally  with  the  moral  sense,  says  that  the 
disorder,  the  dislocation  of  a  manifestly  designed  order,  is  certainly  not  from  the  Creator. 
The  governing  principle  is  one  recognised,  and  its  practical  application  urged  in  this  chapter 
is  acted  upon,  in  "all  the  Churches.'" 

Ver.  34. — In  chap,  xi.,  re  the  laying  aside  of  their  veil,  there  seems  another  trace  of  the 
tendency  of  the  Corinthian  women  to  over-use  the  equality  with  man  which  was  so  novel 
and  important  a  point  in  their  Charter,  the  Gospel,  which  said  "neither  male  nor  female" 
(Gal.  iii.  28).  The  Law. — Used  for  "  the  Old  Testament,"  as  in  ver.  21.  "  In  the  larger  and 
public  assemblies  of  the  Church,  which  alone  are  under  consideration  in  this  chapter.  ...  It 

304 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xiv. 

is  probable  that  the  Apostle  had  here  especially  in  his  thoughts  the  ofl&ce  of  teaching  in  public, 
1  Tim.  ii.  12"  (Ellicott).  *'  And  as  to  merely  asking  for  information  or  instruction,  let  them 
do  that  at  home."  And  Beet,  very  wisely  :  "  It  may  be  questioned  whether  Paul's  absolute 
prohibition  to  women  to  speak  in  a  Church  meeting  is  binding  now.  It  may  be  said  that  it 
was  based  on  a  position  of  women  in  the  ancient  world  which  has  passed  away  ;  and  that 
the  commands  of  the  Apostle,  binding  upon  his  original  readers,  are  binding  now  only  so  far 
as  the  original  circumstances  remain,  or  as  the  commands  are  expressions  of  great  universal 
principles.  Bat  the  solemn  emphasis  and  the  assertion  of  Apostolic  authority  (so  unusual  to 
Paul),  and  the  appeal  to  the  parents  of  our  race  with  which  in  two  Epistles  the  same  pro- 
hibition is  supported,  seem  to  imply  that  the  prohibition  sets  forth  a  principle  of  universal 
and  perpetual  validity,  and  one  resting  upon  the  unchanging  relation  of  the  sexes.  But 
this  prohibition  in  no  way  touches  the  ministrations  of  women  to  women ;  and  [N.B.]  the 
gift  in  Paul's  day  of  the  prophetic  spirit  to  women  proved  plainly  that  there  was  evangelical 
work  for  them  to  do.    And  there  is  abundance  of  such  work  now." 

Ver.  36. — Same  appeal  as  in  ver.  33,  xi.  16.  "  Word  of  God"  the  Old  Testament  phrase  so 
frequently  connected  with  the  gift  of  prophecy :  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  us,"  etc. 
"Are  you  Corinthians  the  fountain  of  all  law  or  custom  for  the  Churches?  Or  have  you 
been  exclusively  favoured  with  the  communication  of  the  Divine  will.  I  also — to  go  no 
further — claim  the  inspired  authority  to  speak  and  determine  "  (cf.  1  Thess.  v.  27).  Another 
test  of  the  nature  and  origin  of  the  Spirit  at  work  in  a  man,  in  far-off  parallelism  to  that  of 
xii.  3.  Almost :  "  Let  any  man  who  is  really  a  prophet  not  only  say,  *  Jesus  I  acknowledge,* 
but  let  him  also  say,  '  Paul  I  know '; "  like  the  evil  spirits  which  just  about  this  time  were  so 
confessing  both  in  Ephesus  (Acts  xix.  16). 

Ver.  37. — "  The  Lord  "  Christ,  to  whom  Paul  stands  in  this  matter  in  the  relation  of  Aaron 
to  Moses,  and  (higher)  Moses  to  God  (Exod.  iv.  15,  and,  particularly,  16).  This  and  ver.  28 
have  many  various  readings,  important,  but  not  greatly  affecting  the  homiletic  use  of  the 
verses. 

Ver.  38. — Moral  causes  are  supposed  under  the  ^*  ignorance '^  Cf.  the  tone  of  Rev.  xxii.  11. 
If  the  marginal  R.V.  be  adopted,  then  cf.  Gal.  iv.  9 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  12 ;  .and  the  solemn 
Matt.  XXV.  12. 

Ver.  39. — Resumes  verbally  ver.  1,  but  with  still  further  abatement  of  value  set  upon 
"  tongues.'^ 

Ver.  40.  Decently. — Cognate  forms  of  the  word  are  in  vii.  35;  Rom.  xiii.  13; 
1  Thess.  iv.  12,  etc. 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS,— Whole  Chapter, 

Public  Worship  in  the  Christian  Church. 

1.  Public,  united  worship  is  an  instinct  in  the  devout  heart. — The  Church 
at  Corinth  assembled  for  worship  (ver.  26).  There  may  be  a  ^^  Church  in  a 
house"  many  such.  The  worship  there  may  be  of  the  most  spiritual,  precious, 
acceptable ;  it  is  the  prerogative,  the  honour,  of  a  father  to  be  the  priest  in  his 
home  ;  the  patriarchal  order  lives  on  in  the  household  Hfe  of  the  people  of  God. 
Two  or  three  met  in  Christ's  name  form  a  quorum  for  constituting  a  true 
assembly  having  the  prerogatives  and  privileges — particularly  "  There  am  I  in 
the  midst " — of  the  largest  Church  (Matt,  xviii.  20).  Many  a  solitary  soul, 
cut  off  from  fellowship  and  the  sanctuary,  offers  a  true  worship  in  the  sanctuary 
of  the  heart.  But  "  the  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion  " — the  place  of  public 
resort,  the  very  centre  and  focus  of  all  the  city's  life — '*more  than  "  even  *'  the 
dwellings  of  Jacob  "  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  2),  dear  as  every  one  of  these  and  its  little 
"  Church  "  is  to  Him.  And  the  people  of  God  so  love  them  too.  The  *'  citizen  " 
(Phil.  iii.  20)  of  the  new  Zion,  where  Christ  is  "  Lord,"  should  need  a  very  good 
reason  for  being  absent  when  his  fellow-citizens  "  come  together  "  (ver.  23)  "  unto 
one  place."  [Or  **  unto  the  same  thing"  i.e.  with  the  same  object  of  central 
purpose.  E.g.  in  very  exact  translation,  "  unto  the  name  of  Christ "  (Matt, 
xviii.  20).]  2.  The  Christian  "sanctifies  Christ  as  Lord"  in  the  temple  and 
worship  01  his  heart  (1  Pet.  iii.  15,  correct  reading).  Yet  Christian  worship  is 
the  "  worship  of  God  "  (ver.  25),  differentiated,  indeed,  from  Jewish,  or  Maho- 
metan, or  "  Theistic "  worship  of  that  same  God  by  its  founding  upon  the 
intermediation  of  Christ.     The  "  convicted  "  outsider,  who  falls  prostrate  in  the 

X  305 


CHAP.  XIV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS. 


assembly  under  the  power  of  the  ^^  prophetic  ^^  word  (vers.  24,  25),  naturally  does 
not  go  definitely  beyond  the  general  recognition  that  *' God"  as  a  Supernatural 
Power  and  Presence,  is  "  amongst  them.''  The  Christian  worshipper  also,  whilst 
taking  his  "  Lo7'd  "  into  direct  account,  is  "  worshipping  God  "  too.  His  appear- 
ance in  the  place  of  assembly  for  common  worship  is  in  itself  "  worship."  It  is 
a  confession  of  God ;  in  the  face  of  the  world  which  says,  "  No  God  "  (Ps.  xiv.  1), 
lie  openly  professes  his  belief  in  a  God  and  his  sense  of  grateful  dependence  upon 
Him.  All  public  worship  means  this ;  it  is  of  the  very  essence  of  the  act. 
Christian  worship  has  specially  its  grateful  recognition  of  the  One  Supreme 
Mercy,  the  '*  Unspeakable  Gift."  3.  In  this  chapter  also  is  manifest  the  very 
early  and  very  natural  use  of  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  presence  of  so 
l.irge  a  company,  to  *'  edify  "  the  new  or  elementary  life  by  instruction ;  in  the 
case  before  us  by  ^^ prophecy  "  which  should  embody  a  ^'"revelation"  given  to  the 
a  prophet"  or  by  a  "  doctrine  "  which  should  be  the  "  teacher's  "  exposition  of  what 
he  had  learned  by  his  special  "  charism  "  of  "  knowledge"  an  unusually  direct 
and  deep,  Spirit-guided,  insight  into  the  new  disclosures  of  truth  belonging  to  the 
stage  of  Revelation  reached  in  the  Gospel  days  (ver.  6).  This  may  be — ought  to 
be — on  the  part  both  of  the  speaker  and  hearers  an  act  of  most  real  "  worship." 
It  is  such,  when  the  act  of  teaching  and  that  of  listening  are,  in  the  intention  of 
each,  distinctly  directed  to  the  glory  of  Christ.  There  is  no  more  really  Godward 
act  of  the  spiritual  life  than  to  listen,  waiting  to  hear  "  the  word  of  God  "  (ver.  36). 
4.  If  in  ver.  16  we  find  at  the  least  a  reminiscence  of  the  Eucharistic  blessing 
and  the  popular  response,  we  have  the  cycle  of  the  elements  of  Christian  worship 
— praise  (ver.  15),  prayer  (ih.),  teaching  (ver.  6),  Lord's  Supper  (ver.  16) — 
completed.  5.  And  the  chapter  is  an  instructive,  typical  case  of  the  regulative, 
legislative  method  of  "  the  Lord "  of  the  Church.  " The  things  which"  Paul  here 
"  writes  are  the  commandments  of  the  Lord"  in  regard  to  the  public  worship,  not 
only  of  Corinth,  but  of  "  all  the  Churches  of  the  saints."  It  is  conceivable  that  He 
might  have  "  drawn  up  "  a  code  of  rules  and  regulations  for  the  Worship  of  His 
Church,  which,  unlike  human  legislation,  should  in  no  part  have,  sooner  or  later, 
become  inapplicable,  or  impracticable,  or  obsolete,  by  reason  of  altered  circum- 
stances or  change  of  age,  or  of  personal  or  national  peculiarities  or  needs. 
Conceivable,  inasmuch  as  to  Him  nothing  is  impossible.  But  it  would  be  unlike 
His  method.  This  chapter  is,  informally  but  very  really,  a  code  of  reisrulations, 
or  rather  of  principles,  embodied  in  the  special  facts  of  Corinth  and  the  comments 
of  St.  Paul.  "  Within  the  four  corners "  of  these  leading  instances  in  this 
chapter  must  the  arrangements  of  Christian  worship  be  found,  or  be  made,  to 
lie.  Four  points  fix  the  lines  which  limit  the  area  of  liberty.  Nothing  must 
violate  or  sin  against:  1.  Salutary  Christian  custom;  2.  Seemly  "order"; 
3.  The  demand  for  intelligent  worship  ;  4.  Above  all,  "  edification." 

I.  Salutary  Christian  custom,  particularly  such  as  is  based  on  Apostolic 
injunction  (vers.  33,  37).  (Cf.  on  this  topic  the  material  supplied  under  xi.  16.) 
There  is  a  comity  amongst  Christian  Churches  which  should  not  lightly  be  set 
aside.  None  knew  so  surely  as  did  the  Head  of  His  Church  how  hopeless  was 
uniformity  of  ritual  or  even  of  creed.  It  is  only  by  speaking  and  acting  in  very 
broad  generalities  that  agreement  can  be  supposed  feasible  or  be  realised.  Yet 
there  will  be  a  family  likeness  in  the  types  of  worship  in  the  various  sections  of 
the  Church,  national  and  confessional.  Distinctively  "  Christian  "  worship  will 
everywhere  be  one  in  type.  The  diversities  will  be  family  diversities  only.  One 
such  distinguishing  line  is  the  exclusion  of  women  from  the  ofiice  of  public 
teaching  (vers.  34,  35).  Such  points  of  family  likeness  can  be  very  few,  but 
they  should  in  all  ordinary  cases  be  respected.  Paramount  demands  of  ^^edifica- 
tion "  may  override  everything  else.  But  no  one  Church  should  set  itself  up  as 
an  independent  source  of  authority,  and  least  of  all  as  having  over  other  Churches 

306 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xiv. 


(ver.  38)  any  prescriptive  power  to  insist  upon  its  local  speciality,  or  its  ^*  fad " 
of  exaggerated  individualism,  as  if  it  were  a  sine  qud  non  of  Church  order. 

II.  Seemly  order. — The  Church  has  a  character  which  is  at  stake  before  angels 
(chap,  xi.)  and  the  world.  Each  Church,  each  member,  is  responsible  for  the 
keeping  of  its  character. 

1.  What  is  reverent  and  orderly  in  Divine  worship  is  a  matter  incapable  of 
any  rigid,  of  any  a  priori,  absolute  and  universally  applicable,  definition. 
Demonstrative  races,  as,  for  example,  the  negro  in  the  States  or  the  West 
Indian  Islands,  will  feel  no  impropriety  or  extravagance  in  what  the  self- 
repression  of  culture  would  revolt  against  as  even  socially  "bad  form,"  not 
to  say  religious  irreverence.  The  Salvation  Army  congregation  is  not  to 
be  judged  of  by  the  same  standard  as  the  elite  gathered  in  the  choir  of 
an  ancient  English  cathedral,  nor  will  they  appreciate  "reverence"  and 
*'  irreverence  "  at  the  same  estimation.  Both  sides  need  to  be  broad  in  sympathy 
in  the  matter.  The  peril  of  all  culture  in  any  direction  is  fastidiousness  ;  whilst 
the  less-cultured  '*  heart "  is  not  infrequently  unfair  to,  and  impatient  with,  the 
less-demonstrative  character,  and  the  form  of  service  in  Christian  worship  which 
it  demands.  Our  section  reminds  us  that  where  a  fulness  of  the  new  life  of  the 
Spirit  is  suddenly  given,  there  is  often  the  appearance,  and  always  the  danger,  of 
disorder.  In  the  first  outburst  of  the  "  tongues  "  at  Pentecost,  there  seemed 
disorder  enough.  Peter's  voice  soon  subdued  all  into  listening  attention,  no 
doubt;  yet  during  his  "  many  words"  of  "testimony  and  exhortation  "  [Acts  ii.  40, 
a  very  notable  summation  of  Pentecostal  preaching  in  all  time],  occupying  as 
they  did  many  hours  of  the  day,  his  congregation  would  be  continually  changing, 
**  many  coming  and  going,"  the  courtyard  of  the  house  filled  over  and  over  again 
with  new  faces  ;  surely  not  without  confusion.  And  when  the  appeals  "  cut  to 
the  heart,"  Eastern  demon strativeness  and  outcry  would  certainly  beget  no  small 
tumult,  as  the  inquirers  eagerly  ask  from  this  apostle  or  that  believer,  "  What 
must  we  do  1 "  There  is  a  disorder  which  is  unseemly  and  may  grieve  the  Spirit; 
there  is  a  criticism  of  the  "disorder,"  which  grieves  Him  too.  A  modern 
analogue  is  often  found  in  some  time  of  revival,  such  as  thirty  years  ago  swept 
over  the  north  of  Ireland.  A  self -repressed  observer,  a  keen  critic  of  his  own 
emotional  tendencies,  might  stand  in  the  midst  of  some  large  hall  or  sanctuary,  in 
every  part  of  which  were  little  groups,  in  perfect  independence  of  those  nearest 
them,  engaged  in  prayer,  or  conversation,  or  now  and  again  stirred  by  fervent 
exclamations  of  thanksgiving  or  even  a  snatch  of  song.  The  place  full  of  sound  ; 
now  and  again  "  a  Babel"  of  tumult.  No  central  conduct  of  the  proceedings  at 
all.  Yet  a  little  inquiry  would  discover  that  it  was  an  orderly  disorder.  The 
"  penitent "  who  would  be  the  centre  of  one  group  knew  well  v  hat  he  needed 
and  was  pleading  for  with  God ;  they  who  helptd  him  by  their  prayers  or 
instruction  were  intelligently  enough  endeavouring  to  supply  his  need.  The 
outburst  of  song  or  thanksgiving  from  another  little  knot  was  not  an  incoherent 
disturbance  of  the  quiet  or  a  meaningless  addition  to  the  sounds  which  filled  the 
place.  There  was  no  "  confusion"  except  such  as  in  a  soul  or  in  a  Church  over* 
which  the  life-giving  Holy  Ghost  has  been  "  brooding  "  (Gen.  i.  2),  will  always 
mark  the  transition  from  chaos  and  darkness  and  death,  to  cosmos  and  light 
and  life. 

2.  Yet  such  scenes  and  conditions  must  always  be  exceptional,  and  the  accom- 
paniments of  the  creative  crises  of  the  life,  whether  of  the  Church  or  the 
soul.  They  are  for  the  sovereignty  of  the  Spirit  to  originate  and  to  rule.  Their 
permanent  and  abundant  fruitfulness  will  justify  them.  They  are  not  to  be 
cultivated  or  "worked  up."  There  is  no  necessary  "heartiness"  in  disorder 
or  noise,  or  in  leaving  the  conduct  of  religious  worship  to  the  impulse  of  the 
moment  or  the  (not  always  too  wise  or  spiritual)  man ;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  a 

307 


CHAP.  XIV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


fixed  order  of  worship,  and  quiet,  undemonstrative,  self -repressed  bearing  in  the 
assembly  of  the  Church  at  worship,  need  not  be  "  formality  "  or  "  stiffness,"  or 
check  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit's  grace  in  the  approach  of  each  heart  to  God,  or 
in  the  communication  of  blessing  to  each.  Usually  the  "  New  Wine "  is  best 
put  into  the  "  bottles "  of  order  and  seemly  arrangement.  The  exaggeration 
of  orderliness  is  when  the  "  bottles  "  are  regarded — whether  "  new  "  or  "  old  " — as 
too  sacred  for  even  the  "  New  Wine  "  Himself  to  be  allowed  to  stretch  or  burst. 

3.  Especially  is  this  true  of  the  "  teaching  "  element  in  Christian  worship. — Paul 
is  not  contemplating  what  in  modern  phrase  would  be  called  a  "testimony 
meeting,"  or  a  prayer  meeting.  (Especially  is  this  true  in  regard  to  the  silence 
of  women.)  The  raising  of  the  deadfioul  is  a  sovereign  exercise  of  Divine  power, 
which  may  well  be  allowed  to  choose  its  own  methods,  and  to  have  its  accom- 
paniments exempt  from  unspiritual  criticism,  if  not  from  "  spiritual  men's " 
control.  But  next  follows  "  giving  something  to  the  raised  one  to  eat " 
(Mark  v.  43),  which  lies  within  the  fair  range  of  human  ordering,  according 
to  the  best  available  judgment,  though  this  of  course  not  apart  from  the  prayer- 
fully sought  aid  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  Corinth  the  teachers — the  very 
^^ prophets" — were  found  starting  up,  several  at  once.  Each  man  had  come  full 
of  his  ^^  psalm  "  or  his  "  doctrine  "  or  his  *'  revelation"  or  these  seemed  given  him  at 
the  time  with  an  overmastering  fulness  of  urgency  of  importance.  Neither  will 
the  *^ prophet"  who  starts  up  whilst  another  is  yet  speaking  wait,  nor  will  the 
other  give  way  to  him  and  draw  his  own  ^^prophesying  "  to  a  close  (vers.  29,  30). 
The  very  purpose  of  the  Inspiring  Spirit  was  frustrated  by  such  an  overlapping 
of  teachers,  two  or  three  delivering  their  message  together.  *'  One  by  one," 
says  Paul,  with  Apostolic  authority.  Even  the  very  "  tongues  "  are  to  be  "  by 
course"  i.e.  in  orderly  turn.  "  Two  or  three  tongues"  "  two  or  three  prophecies" 
in  each  assembly — no  more — are  sufiicient  for  each  *'  diet  "  of  worship.  "  Let 
that  prophet  sit  down ;  this  other  wants  to  speak "  (ver.  30).  "  But  you  are 
sinning  against  the  liberty  of  the  Spirit.  You  with  your  stiff,  formal  propriety, 
you  are  grieving  Him  !  Who  are  you  to  close  the  mouth  of  a  *  prophet,'  so 
long  as  he  believes  that  the  Spirit  has  something  to  communicate  or  reveal 
through  him  1  If  you  cut  him  short  like  that,  or  give  '  only  two  or  three ' 
opportunity  to  deliver  themselves,  whilst  the  rest,  as  much  ''prophets^  as  they 
are,  must  '  bottle  up '  their  prophecy  and  carry  it  home  again,  you  are  restrain- 
ing the  Holy  Ghost ;  the  hearers  will  lose  some  truth,  perhaps  some  truth  they 
needed ! "  There  is  sufficient  approximation  to  truth  in  this  ever-recurring 
protest,  to  keep  the  "  orderly  "  temper  on  its  guard  against  the  dangers  of  its 
very  excellence.  The  *'  prophetic  "  grace  which  made  Paul  able,  with  inspired 
authority  and  wisdom  (ver.  37),  to  "put  his  foot  down"  and  definitely  and  finally 
to  repress  or  regulate  a  gift  as  extraordinary  as  his  own,  belongs  to  an  order 
which  is  past.  But  the  whole  matter  is  lifted  up  to  and  set  upon  a  permanent 
basis,  when  Paul  appeals  to  the  very  character  and  known  manner  of  the  "  God 
not  of  confusion,  hut  of  peace "  (ver.  33).  The  teaching  work  of  the  Church 
demands,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  order,  propriety,  attention,  quiet. 

4.  In  the  ordering  of  the  programme  of  public.  Christian  worship,  nothing  should 
he  admitted,  nothing  forbidden,  but  as  subject  to  His  sanction  or  revision,  Who,  in 
every  sense  and  in  every  way,  works  for  ^'^  peace."  This  will  not  lead  to  any 
uniformity  of  practice,  it  never  has  done,  never  can  do  j  but  it  will  be  the  guiding, 
testing  principle  to  which  practice  should  be  ever  adjusted.  Nor  is  the  truth  of 
practice  hard  in  that  way  to  arrive  at — particularly  in  the  way  of  loye  (xii.  31) 
— in  any  given  type  of  local  or  national  Church.  Especially  when  3.  and  4.  are 
kept  paramount. 

III.  The  demand  for  intelligent  worship  and  teaching  (vers.  ]  5, 19). — 1.  PauVs 
Example.      "I  speak  with  tongues  more  than  ye  all; — I  thank  God  for  it" 

308 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xiv. 


gives  us  an  interesting,  seldom -regarded,  side-light  upon  Paul's  character  and 
work  ;  it  is  a  touch  in  the  portrait  of  him  too  often  omitted.  But  it  is  a 
perpetually  recurring  trait  in  his  self-revelation  in  his  letters,  that  he  should 
go  on  to  say,  "  I  had  rather,  in  the  Church,  speak,"  etc.  It  might  be  his 
**  glory "  (2  Cor.  xii.)  to  hear  the  language  of  "the  third  heaven."  But  he 
lived  very  much  and  very  practically  on  earth.  He  might  draw  support  under 
his  *'  thorn "  from  such  "  revelations  of  the  Lord,"  and  in  the  ecstasy  of 
the  '■'■  tongue^^  with  its  deep  communings  of  his  adoring  '•'' spirit^^  with  God,  he 
no  doubt  found  strength  and  (in  our  looser  modern  sense)  "  inspiration  "  for  his 
work  ;  but  to  men  he  spoke  with  the  "  tongue  of  men  "  (xiii.  1).  [True,  by  a  not 
unfair  accommodation,  of  all  men  of  spiritual  power.  Jacob  has  "  power  with 
God  "  first,  and  then  "  power  with  men  "  (Gen.  xxxii.  28).  Of  Richard  Lynch 
Cotton  it  was  said,  "  His  mind  was  always  engaged  in  prayer."  The  Rev. 
R.  Wright  said  of  him,  "  I  was  much  impressed  by  his  standing  up  in  the 
carriage  and  offering  up  silent  prayer  before  we  started."  His  servant  found 
that  he  must  needs  pause  before  entering  his  master's  library ;  he  might  very 
probably  otherwise  find  him  upon  his  knees  (Burgon,  Twelve  Good  Men).  A 
Sheffield  woman,  speaking  the  vernacular,  described  Rev.  Joseph  Entwisle, 
"  Yon  mon's  thick  wi'  God."  Of  S.  H.  Smith,  a  Sheffield  manufacturer,  it  was 
said  (Memoir,  by  W.  H.  Tindall)  that  whoever  heard  him  speak  in  any  meeting 
of  Christian  people  felt  that  he  dwelt  habitually  with  God,  and  came  forth  on 
such  occasions  to  speak  to  men.] 

2.  A  contrast  and  a  combination. — The  true  meaning  of  ver.  15  sets  aside  a 
good  deal  of  the  customary  and  very  devout  exposition  of  the  force  of  the  contrast, 
"  with  the  spirit  and  with  the  understanding  also."  There  can  hardly  now  be  any 
doubt  that  the  "  spirit "  is  the  human  "  spirit,"  and  that  here,  as  usual,  Paul's 
vocabulary  is  moulded  upon  the  trichotomic  scheme  of  1  Thess.  v.  23.  (For 
homiletic  purposes  it  will  be  sufficient,  and  all  that  is  practicable,  to  make 
pictorial  the  relation  between  the  "  spirit"  and  the  ^''understanding.")  Regard 
redeemed  manhood  as  a  grand  Temple,  one  of  God's  own  building,  in  whose 
"inner  man  God  in  Christ  may  dwell"  (Eph.  iii.  17).  The  body  and  the  lower 
faculties,  the  sensuous  ones,  of  the  natural  life  are  its  outer  court,  its  Court  of 
the  Gentiles.  Then  within,  court  within  court,  lie  successively  the  nobler 
and  yet  nobler  ranges  of  faculties,  which  more  and  more  differentiate  man 
from  the  noblest  of  the  creatures  round  him.  At  last  is  reached  the  Holy 
Place,  the  "  Understanding"  the  intellectual  part,  perhaps  the  personal,  where 
— grace  apart — man  most  closely  images,  and  approaches  to,  God.  If  the  very 
animal  creation  share  with  him,  and  may  tread,  the  great  outer  court  of  man's 
complex  nature,  they  go  no  further ;  and  at  the  inmost,  within  even  the  holy 
place  of  the  "  understanding"  there  is  another,  most  sacred,  spot,  where  not 
even  the  natural  man,  of  understanding  and  intellect  cultured  to  their  highest 
of  capacity,  may  tread.  It  is  the  Holy  of  Holies  of  manhood,  the  "  spirit " ; 
the  inmost  shrine,  where  God  Who  "  is  a  Spirit "  dwells  and  reveals  Himself  in 
glory,  and  where  the  spiritual  man  holds  a  fellowship  with  God,  of  worship  on 
the  one  side,  and  of  revelation  and  blessing  on  the  other,  which  is  a  holy  secret 
between  them. 

3.  In  that  innermost  secrecy,  in  the  holy  privacy  of  this  Holy  of  Holies,  the 
man  "  speaking  in  a  tongue "  is  for  the  time  closeted  with  God.  In  a  holy 
outpouring  of  prayer  and  praise,  and  even  of  song,  he  is  a  high  priest  standing 
before  God  within  the  central  shrine  of  His  personality.  The  bystanders  in  the 
assembly  may  hear  his  voice,  as  it  were  through  the  thick,  dulling  veil  of  the 
physical  organs,  but  their  ear  catches  nothing  of  the  sense  of  the  ecstatic 
words  of  holy  communion  between  him  and  God.  The  man  with  the  gift  of 
"  i/nterpretation  of  tongues "  can  hear,  and  can  even  report  to  his  fellows ;  but 

309 


CHAP.  XIV.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


without  that  gift  he  and  they  are  only  in  some  outer  court  of  their  fellow- 
worshipper's  manhood. 

4.  The  man  so  favoured  of  God  may  well  ''  covet "  to  enjoy  "  tongues  " ;  he 
may  well  hesitate  to  ^^  forbid  "  any  man  to  make  use  of  His  gift ;  [to  the  cautious, 
cooler  temperaments  at  Thessaloniea,  inclined  to  regulate  very  strictly,  to  dis- 
courage or  suppress,  the  "  tongues,"  because  of  the  disorder  and  extravagance 
which  were  their  ever-present  danger,  Paul  says:  "  Do  not  *  throw  cold  water, 
upon,'  quench  not,  the  Spirit,  in  any  manifestation  of  His  firelike  presence  and 
work."  To  the  men  who  had  "  tongues "  or  coveted  them,  who  were  liable  to 
depreciate  such  a  gift  as  ^^  prophecy," — "  only  the  intelligible  utterance  of  Divine 
truth  in  plain  language!  " — he  says,  "Despise  not  prophesyings "  (1  Thess.  v. 
19,  20) ;]  in  the  fulness  of  his  own  blessing  and  privilege  he  may  well  desire  that 
^^  all  might  speak  with  tongues''  (ver.  5).  Yet  it  is  a  grace  for  the  man  himself 
alone;  a  gift  for  the  man  only;  his  face  is  set  Godward  in  its  exercise;  he 
speaks  "to  himself  and  to  God"  (ver.  28). 

5.  True  it  has  an  indirect  use. — It  is  "  a  sign  "  to  the  outside  world  (ver.  22). 
The  "  unbelief"  of  the  world  is  something  far  deeper  and  more  subtle  than  mere 
disbelief  of  any  primal  propositions  about  God  or  the  things  of  God.  It  is  a  habit, 
not  an  act,  of  the  mind  and  will  and  heart.  As  truly  as  it  is  said  of  "  faith  "  or  of 
"  religion,"  so  unbelief  is  "  not  merely  a  set  of  opinions,  but  a  life."  It  becomes  a 
dull,  crass  ignorance  of,  or  a  dead-set,  apathetic  indifference  to,  the  unseen  and 
the  spiritual,  which  goes  its  way,  and  seeks  its  aims,  leaving  altogether  out  of 
the  reckoning — and  not  desiring  to  include — anything  higher  than  man,  or 
beyond  the  narrow  horizon  of  man's  earthly  sojourn,  with  its  interests  and 
consequences.  The  first,  greatest  difficulty  in  the  recovery  of  lost  man — le 
premier  pas  qui  coUte — is  the  awakening  of  the  soul  from  its  indifference  and 
death.  In  conviction  of  sin,  the  unseen  and  spiritual  for  the  first  time  to  any 
practical  effect  breaks  in  upon,  and  through,  the  hard,  narrowing,  incrusting 
"  unbelief"  ;  this  high-raised  and  all  but  impassable  barrier  built  around  the 
understanding  and  the  heart.  God  has  many  "  signs  "  which  should  arouse 
attention,  and  waken  the  drowsy  sense,  to  the  fact  and  near  presence  of  this 
environing,  real  world  of  spiritual  things — God,  the  soul,  sin,  eternity,  judgment ; 
He  has  many  occasions  and  instrumentalities  and  methods,  of  thus  bringing 
close  to  the  mind  and  heart  in  their  unbelieving  insensibility.  Himself  and  the 
works  of  the  Eternal  and  the  Spiritual.  Sometimes  a  Paul  in  his  course  meets 
a  Felix  in  the  course  of  a  life  of  successful,  high-placed,  wicked  worldliness, 
and  for  once  Felix  hears  of  "  righteousness  and  temperance  and  judgment," 
and  is  aroused  and  trembles ;  strange  providences — earthquakes  that  shake 
jailers  of  Philippi  out  of  their  sleep — do  it ;  miracle  did  it  ["  If  I  .  .  .  then 
the  kingdom  of  God  has  come  upon  you  "  (Matt.  xii.  28)]  ;  the  "  tongues  "  did  it 
in  Corinth.  A  Jewish  or  heathen  passer-by  turns  in  to  the  little  gathering,  the 
former  perhaps  definitely  hostile  in  his  "  unbelief"  the  latter  simply  "  unlearned," 
with  a  quasi-neutral  unacquaintance  with  all  these  matters  (ver.  23).  It  may 
happen  that  such  a  visitor  turns  in  at  a  very  disorderly  time,  when  many  are 
uttering  the  strange  "  tongues,"  and  all  at  once.  It  is  a  Babel  of  sound.  There 
is  a  strange  language  being  talked — ^if  indeed  it  be  a  language  at  all,  and  not 
mere  incoherent  raving,  which  he  hears.  It  may  be  that  he  turns  away  with  a 
contemptuous  laugh  as  he  leaves  the  room :  "  They  are  a  pack  of  madmen 
together  in  there  ! "  But  if  it  be  a  seemly  and  orderly  occasion,  when  only  "  two 
or  three"  are  exercising  their  gift,  and  those  "m  turn,"  first  one  and  then 
another  rising,  and  delivering  themselves  of  what — though  he  can  ^^ hear"  no 
speech — fills  every  hearer  with  awe ;  his  unaccustomed  heart  is  filled  with  awe  too, 
as  though  the  room  were  filled  with  a  Presence,  and  as  though  another  world, 
ordinarily  a  *'  mystery,"  were  suddenly  unveiled.     If  that  be  all,  he  may  not 

310 


tlOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xiv. 


become  a  believer,  but  at  least  indifference  is  gone;  the  ^' sign"  has  spoken 
to  his  understanding  ;  indifference  is  stirred  by  the  new  fear.  The  way  of  the 
Lord  is  perhaps  prepared.  A  breach  is  made  in  the  high  wall  of  utter,  careless 
secularity,  and  through  it  something  more  may  enter,  to  the  saving  of  the  man. 
[To  the  children  growing  up  in  the  congregation,  to  the  heathen  just  coming 
within  the  range  of  the  message  of  the  Christian  Gospel,  the  very  ritual  of  the 
service  may  sometimes  be  in  its  degree  a  "  sign,"  appealing  to  the  attention 
through  eye  or  ear,  and  impressing  the  thought  with  the  idea  of  a  supersensuous 
world.] 

6.  But  more,  much  more,  is  needed.  For  the  man's  own  worship  this  inner, 
God  directed  communing  may  be  enough,  but  for  common  worship  intelligent 
speech  is  required.  And,  above  all,  if  worship  is  to  be  a  ^^ fruitful"  thing 
(ver.  14),  if  the  Church  are  all  to  "  learn"  or  to  be  ^'  comforted  "  (ver.  31),  and 
if  the  unbeliever  is  to  be  '•''judged  "  and  "  convinced  "  (ver.  24),  then  the  "  under- 
standing "  must  be  joined  with  "  the  spirit"  or  even  a  Paul  will  do  little  or  no 
good.  The  high  priest  must  come  out  from  the  holy  of  holies  of  the  "  spirit "  ; 
what  he  has  seen  and  heard  and  gained  he  must  bring  out  through  the  course 
of  the  "  understanding  " ;  there  he  may  meet  his  fellows  on  more  equal  terms. 
And,  lastly,  his  very  physical  organs  must  translate  what  is  pubhshed  in  the 
understanding. 

7.  He  who  is  to  be  of  use  to  his  fellows,  the  leader  of  their  worship,  the 
instructor  of  their  Hfe,  the  awakener  of  their  conscience,  must  be  a  real  mediator 
going  in  for  men  to  God,  coming  forth  from  God,  and  for  God,  to  men.  He 
who  has  not  first  learned  something  in  the  secret  place  of  the  communing  of 
the  *•  spii^it"  he  who  has  himself  gone  no  further  within  than  the  *'  under- 
standing" will  be  only  an  imperfect  instructor  of  men.  He  will  never  lead 
their  worship  any  further  inward,  any  nearer  to  God,  than  he  has  gone  himself. 
Above  all,  he  will  never  carry  the  supreme  credential  of  a  ^^ prophet" — that 
his  words  reveal  men  to  themselves,  in  all  their  sin  and  guilt  aiid  spii-itual  need 
(vers.  24,  25).  Yet  many  a  man's  work  is  marred  because,  ''^ pyrophet"  as  he  is, 
his  understanding  does  not  tianslate  his  message  into  clearly  stated  truth,  nor 
does  he  find  a  way  for  it  to  the  understanding,  or  commend  it  to  the  judgment, 
of  his  fellow-worshippers.  There  is  "  an  art  of  preaching  "  which  needs  to  be 
learnt.  A  native  "gift "  of  formal  speech,  of  public  address,  underlies  all  pulpit 
success ;  it  is  the  natural  basis  of  fitness  upon  which  grace  does  its  work  in 
equipping  a  preacher.  But  this  needs  cultivation  and  training.  The  greatest 
natural  powers  need  furnishing ;  and  whilst  it  is  in  the  inner,  secret  place  alone 
that  a  true  message  for  God  may  be  gained,  yet  the  "  understanding"  at  its  very 
best  of  training  and  fulness  of  acquired  knowledge,  must  pass  the  message  through 
its  own  mint,  and  put  its  own  form  and  stamp  upon  it.  He  who,  under  ordinary 
circumstances,  cries  down  the  ofiice,  or  practically  disregards  the  use,  of  the 
"  understanding"  in  the  man  who  leads  the  worship  of  the  congregation,  or  is  its 
*'  prophet "  for  instruction  or  conviction,  is  repeating  the  mistake  of  the  Thessa- 
lonian  or  Corinthian  who  valued  and  gloried  in  the  unintelligible  '"^tongue"  and, 
in  comparison,  rated  low  the  less  showy  gift  of  '"^prophecy." 

8.  Worship  in  an  unknown  tongue. — Naturally,  and  properly,  the  Reformers 
of  the  sixteenth  century  strengthened  their  protest  against  the  conduct  of 
worship  for  (sometimes  unlettered)  German  or  English  people  in  Latin,  by 
appeal  to  this  passage  of  St.  Paul.  Borne  is  not  alone  in  having  clung 
to  a  language  which  once  was  the  vulgar  tongue,  but  which  has  become 
unintelligible  through  change  of  circumstance.  In  the  Syrian  Churches  the 
language  of  the  Liturgy  is  the  once  ordinary,  but  now  antiquated,  Syriac.  The 
very  Brahmin  does  not  now  understand  the  language  of  the  mantras  he  chants 
through  life.     The  Parsee  priest  cannot  translate  the  old  Zend  of  the  invocations- 

311 


CHAP.  XIV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


he  uses.  It  is  the  vice  of  heathen  worship  to  be  veiled,  to  the  point  of  being 
unintelligible  to  the  people.  All  ordered  worship  should  be  on  a  level  with  the 
understanding  of  those  of  whose  devotions  it  professes  to  be  the  vehicle,  or 
to  whom  it  professes  to  offer  a  message  of  instruction.  The  devotional  part  of 
the  order  of  worship  should  at  least  be  intelligible  to  the  worshipper,  "  else  how 
shall  he  say  Amen  ?  "  (ver.  16).  So  the  very  music  should  help  the  intelligence  of  the 
worship.  The  didactic,  or  hortatory,  or  convincing  should  be  intelligent  in  matter 
and  in  form,  on  its  human  side,  as  fit  as  ^^understanding  "  can  make  it,  to  accom- 
plish its  work  with  the  heart  and  will,  and  to  commend  the  message  to  the 
intelligence,  of  the  hearer.  It  may  be — it  must  be,  or  it  is  *'  unfrvAtful"  and 
useless — "  plain  preaching  "  The  great  themes  of  the  Gospel  are  worthy  that  the 
highest  intelligence  should  match  and  measure  itself  against  them.  "Wisdom  is 
plain  to  him  that  understandeth."  But  it  is  the  noblest  function  of  the  noblest 
mind  to  bring  these  themes  into  a  shape  apprehensible  by  the  humblest  and 
narrowest.  "  Unfruitful "  preaching  is  either  (1)  passing  the  understanding  of  the 
hearer,  or  (2)  indefinite  in  statement,  or  (3)  pointless  and  unimpressive  in  appli- 
cation [J.  L.]. 

9.  Interpreters  sometimes  needed. — There  are  true  seers  who  get  real  messages 
from  God,  hut  cannot  "  interpret'^  them  (ver.  18).  They  may  print  their  message, 
or  may  speak  to  a  select  few  who  can  understand  them.  But  there  are  many,  a 
much  larger  company,  whose  gift,  and  whose  call  and  function,  it  is  to  popu- 
larise the  truth  given  to  the  inner  circle  of  these  illuminated  ones.  The  *'  interpre- 
tation of  tongues  "  has  its  modern  analogue  to-day,  as  also  has  the  ofiice  of  the 
"  prophet."  When  the  man  who  dwells  in  the  holy  of  holies  is  also  the  man  who 
comes  out  into  the  outer  court  direct  from  God's  presence,  and  is  the  interpreter 
or  the  forthteller  of  the  things  he  has  seen  and  heard  within,  then  the  wor- 
shippers are  led  nearest  to  God,  and  the  whole  order  of  the  service  fulfils  Paul's 
fourth  requii'ement : — 

IV.  Edification  (vers.  1,  2,  3,  6,  12). — 1.  The  reiterated  emphasis  upon  this 
point  shows  how  predominant  in  importance  this  ranked  in  the  thought  of  St.  Paul. 
It  manifestly  takes  precedence  of  every  other  consideration.  [Love  is  not  so 
much  a  *'  gift "  as  the  very  life  in  which  the  "  gifts  "  should  root  themselves,  and 
from  which  they  should  draw  an  all-pervasive  character.  Everything  should  be 
full  of  love.  But  next  to  love]  Paul  ranks  prophecy  above  every  gift.  It 
"  edifies  "  as  does  no  other,  and  what  will  do  this  is  his  primary  care.  No  doubt 
this  plea  has  sometimes  been  made  to  cover  some  very  wide  departures  from 
Christian  reverence  and  sobriety,  to  say  nothing  of  the  comity  of  Christian 
custom.  It  has  been  said  in  their  defence,  "But  you  see  that  good  is  being 
done  ! "  What  has  only  roused  the  emotions  and  even  the  senses,  unintelligent 
appeal  to  the  feelings,  a  religious  life  built  only  upon  the  foundation  of  those 
feelings,  have  sheltered  themselves  under  the  same  plea.  The  feelings  have  their 
place ;  "  disorder "  is  sometimes  an  accompaniment  of  a  true  Pentecost,  and 
justifies  itself  in  its  issues ;  but,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  prudent  order, 
seemly  custom,  intelligent  devotions  and  instructions,  best  promote  edification. 

2.  None  of  them  is  worth  anything  if  it  do  not. — Better,  e.g.,  that  customary, 
beautiful  order  be  swept  away  before  the  "  rushing  wind  "  of  a  real  Pentecost, 
than  that  "  the  breath  "  of  the  Spirit  should  never  breathe  upon  dead  souls. 
Order  must  not  become  a  fetish,  a  tyranny.  Any  innovation  upon  the  established 
order  in  a  Christian  Church  will  need  good  vindication ;  but  it  can,  and  does, 
vindicate  itself,  if  it  bring  men  to  the  Foundation  and  build  them  up  upon  it. 
Paul  reminds  his  readers  (ii.  1-5,  etc.)  how  the  intellectual  gifts  and  the  graces 
of  oratory  may  become  a  snare  to  the  preachers  and  a  difiiculty  to  the  hearers. 
In  neither  order  nor  custom  is  there  anything  so  sacred  but  that  real  "  edification  " 
may  justify  anything. 

312  r  ,      ,  . 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  Xiv. 


3.  Edification  demands  a  clea/r^  defimite,  intelligible  message. — "  If  the  trumpet" 
etc.  Most  hearers  want  from  the  ^''  propheV^  who  stands  in  their  midst,  what  is 
profitable,  helpful,  true.  But  often  the  week  has  been  a  time  of  ceaseless 
conflict,  and  in  weariness  they  are  ready  to  give  all  up.  Just  then  does  the 
speaker  in  the  public  service  need  to  be  "a  leader  and  a  commander  to  the 
people  "  (Isa.  Iv.  4).  They  want  a  man  who  can  order  their  life  for  them. 
They  will  follow  his  "  ^rw^mpe^-call "  if  they  find  that  he  knows  his  own  mind  and 
gives  no  "  uncertain  sound"  He  may  put  heart  into  the  faint  by  his  "  certain  " 
sound,  e.g.,  of  confident  proclamation  of  an  Almighty  Helper  and  Friend  by  their 
side  in  the  conflict.  [If  it  be  the  "  joyful  sound "  of  the  Jubilee  trumpet  pro- 
claiming that  the  lost  heritage  is  to  be  had  once  more  by  its  rightful  owner,  then 
also  does  its  blast  need  to  accompany  a  clear,  plain,  heartening  declaration  of 
the  Atonement  and  its  redeeming  effect,  and  of  the  conditions  on  which  this 
effect  becomes  available.  An  "  uncertain  sound  "  on  this  point  may  mean  an 
eternally  lost  heritage,  to  some  soul  that  hears  and  yet  hears  nothing.]  The 
man  who  has  nothing,  or  nothing  definite,  to  blow  upon  his  trumpet,  had 
better  stand  aside  for  some  other  leader. 

4.  Paul  suggests  one  remarkable  piece  of  ^^edification" — the  sudden  arrest 
and  conviction  of  a  casual  hearer  (vers.  24,  25).  He  is  the  Jew  or  the 
heathen  who  came  in  during  the  "madness"  of  the  ''tongues"  (ver.  23). 
This  time  the  prophets  are  exercising  their  gift — "  all  are  prophesying."  Their 
words  are  "  with  the  understanding."  They  are  a  message  to  his  conscience. 
There  is  the  "  sign "  once  more,  but  there  is  sense  too.  He  is  laid  bare 
to  himself.  Sin  which  he  never  saw  and  never  suspected ;  a  self  which  he  never 
knew  and  never  suspected  ;  are  disclosed  to  him.  [The  man  known  least  to 
many  a  man  is  himself. '\  "  The  secrets  of  his  heart  are  made  manifest  "  to  himself, 
and  perhaps  by  open  confession  are  made  manifest  to  the  assembled  congre- 
gation also.  ["  The  word  cleaves  asunder  the  soul  and  spirit,  and  discerns  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart"  (Heb.  iv.  12).]  In  the  presence  of  God  he 
^'' falls  prostrate  "  in  awe  and  guilty  shame.  *'  The  speaker  might  know  all  about 
me,"  many  a  modern  hearer  has  said,  in  the  presence  of  the  searching  Spirit  of 
God.  He  confesses  that  of  a  truth  he  has  found  God  amongst  this  people.  If 
the  Supper  be  the  embodiment  par  excellence  of  the  element  of  orderly,  seemly, 
sacred,  formal  arrangement  in  worship,  so  also  is  such  a  ^^ conviction"  the  chief 
glory  of  the  teaching.  No  prophet  should  long  exercise  his  gift  without  this 
conviction  following  the  word  he  utters.  If  it  be  really  the  word  of  the  Spirit 
through  his  lips,  then  awakening  will  be  one  of  its  constant  credentials.  In- 
telligent, plain,  profitable,  edifying  words  for  the  believer ;  arousing,  alarming, 
convincing  words  for  the  "ignorant  "  and  the  "unbeliever."  There  are  preachers 
who  will  not  learn  ;  as  there  are  hearers  who  will  not  listen.  Paul  might,  but 
we  dare  not,  anticipate  the  final  judgment,  and  say,  "  If  he  be  ignorant,  let  him 
be  ignorant." 


SEPARATE  HOMILY, 


Vers.    34,    35.   Woman^s  Place   and 
Woman! s  Work. 
I.  How  far  Paul's  words  are  binding. 

— 1.  PauVs  pronouncements  upon  the 
position  of  womanin  Christendom  and  her 
relation  to  man  are  not  to  be  reckoned 
as  simply  remainders  of  "  Oriental "  or 
"  Israelite  "  preconceptions,  from  which 
even  he,  who  wrote  Gal.  iii.   28,  had 


not  worked  himself  free.  Nor  are  they 
to  be  regarded  as  merely  intended  to 
apply  to  a  temporary  phase  of  social 
life  which  found  its  typical  exempli- 
fications in  Corinth  or  Ephesus  in 
Paul's  day;  and  as  therefore  without 
force  for  English  or  American  life  to- 
day. As  to  the  former  point, — whilst 
the  human  element  in  Revelation  is  to 

313 


CHAP.  XIV.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


be  recognised,  the  Divine  is  not  to  be 
minimised.       The    abundant    literary 
and  historical  material  in  whose  light 
(say)  the  Epistles  of  Paul  can  to-day 
be  studied,  and  that  development  of  the 
historic   sense   in  the   students,   which 
they    share    with     the    writers     and 
readers  of  all  history    to-day,  tend  to 
obscure    the   fact, — ascertainable   and 
verifiable  on  other  lines  of   approach 
to   and    examination   of  the  topic  of 
Inspiration, — that  the    Spirit   of   God 
makes  Himself  responsible  for  the  Book 
which  is  the  pioduct  of  the  historical, 
or  epistolary,  or  other  activity  of  Paul 
and  the  other  contributors  to  it.     The 
judgments  on   this   topic   are   Paul's ; 
but   not   those  of   a  Jew,   only  half- 
emancipated   from    the    prejudices   of 
his  early  education  and  training,  on 
whom  more   enlightened  or  advanced 
readers  may  sit  in  judgment  in  their 
turn,  and  with  fresher  light  review  or 
revise  his  pronouncements.     To  assume 
this    takes  all  finality,  all  authority, 
from  Revelation  on  this  topic  or  any 
other.     As  does  the   alternative   sug- 
gestion.      Is     anything    merely    and 
only  temporary  put  upon  permanent 
record  in  the  Bible  at  all  ?     Bather, 
everything  is  of  permanent  value  and 
authority,  if   even  indirectly.     If  the 
temporary    and    "  accidental  "    is   put 
upon    record,   it   is    because   in    it   is 
embodied  some  truth  of  abiding  value. 
The    temporary   and   accidental   form 
carries  a  principle  which  is  part  of  the 
universally     applicable     and     binding 
Bevelation   of   the  mind  and   will   of 
God.     2.  Here  Paul,  in  point  of  fact, 
does  most  pointedly  claim  for  his  dicta 
on    our    topic    an     absolute.    Divine 
authority.     He  claims  to  speak  as  a 
prophet.       Every    true    prophet    will 
recognise  the  prophet  in  him.     ''  The 
word  of  the  Lord  has  come  "  to  him  ; 
the  words  which  he  utters  and  bids  his 
amanuensis  write   are  "  the  command- 
ments of  the  Lordy     [The  assertion  is 
made  in  regard  to  this  one  topic,  indeed, 
or  to  the  group  of  topics  dealt  with  in 
this  chapter.     But  it  would  hardly  be  ■ 
denied  that  this  is  a  test  case,  a  sample 
case,  and,  that  when  coupled  with  Col. 

314 


iv.  16  and  1  Thess.  v.  27,  it  extends 
its  applicability  to  all  his  Epistles  and 
their  instructions.]     He  also  lifts  the 
case,  both  here  and  in  the  two  other 
places  where  the  topic  is  formerly  dealt 
with  (chap,  xi.,  and  1  Tim.  ii.),  above 
the  level  of  the  temporary  and  local. 
He  traces  the  relation    of  woman    to 
man    up    to    the   primal    ordering   of 
Creation.     It  is  no  novelty ;  it  is  no 
Oriental   peculiarity ;    it  is  no  wrong 
done  to    women    by   the   men    of   the 
ancient  world.     Abused   the  principle 
may     have      been, — shamefully     and 
cruelly, — until  woman  has  become  the 
slave,  or  at  best  the  plaything,  of  man, 
the  drudge  of  his  idle,  selfish,  masterful 
will,  or  the  vehicle  of  his  sensuality. 
But  the  relation  of  subordination   of 
woman  to  man  is  shown  to  be  rooted 
in  the  physical  characteristics  and  the 
creation-history   of    both.       3.  Hence, 
then,    the  only    "  dispensing    power " 
which  can  relax  these  positive  injunc- 
tions  and   modify   the   force   of  these 
pronouncements,  is  His  Who  through 
Paul  uttered  them.     He  is  Lord  of  His 
Revelation.       In  His    sovereignty  He 
may  manifestly'-  overrule,  override,  set 
aside.  His  usual,  and  to  us  peremptory, 
command.         But     the      *'  dispensing 
power"  should  never    be   assumed   by 
man,    and    very    assured    credentials 
should  be  presented   by  the  "  viioman 
suffered   to    teach.'^      [So   conservative 
a   man  as    John  Wesley,   e.g.,   wrote 
to  a  Mrs.   Crosby,  who  had  been  led 
into   a   modified    public   activity :    "I 
think  the  strength  of  the  cause  rests 
...  on  your  having  an  extraordinary 
call.  ...  It  is  plain  to  me  that  the 
whole  work  of  God  termed  Methodism 
is   an    extraordinary   dispensation    of 
His  providence.     Therefore   I   do  not 
wonder  if  several  things  occur  therein 
which  do  not  fall  under  ordinary  rules 
of  discipline.     St.  Paul's  ordinary  rule 
was  :  *  I  permit  not  a  woman  to  speak 
in  the  congregation.'     Yet,  in  extra- 
ordinary cases,  he  made  a  few  excep- 
tions ;  at  Corinth  in  particular."     (For 
this   he    offers  no  proof.      See  xi.  5.) 
Works,  xii.  339,  Anno  1771.1 
II.  What  the  Gospel  did  for  woman. 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  CORINTHIANS,   chap.  Xvf. 


— Every  woman  who  sits  by  her 
husband  "  in  the  Church  "  is  a  standing 
witness  to  its  elevating,  vindicating 
work  on  behalf  of  her  sex.  The 
Mahometan  woman  practically  never 
goes  to  public  worship  at  all.  In  ancient 
and  modern  synagogues  of  Judaism 
the  Jewess  is  always  present  indeed, 
but  in  the  women's  galley,  and  takes 
no  open  part  in  the  worship.  [She  is 
not  permitted  to  adapt  to  her  sex,  as 
in  other  cases,  the  thanksgiving  :  "  I 
thank  Thee  who  hast  made  me  a  man." 
For  her  it  must  be :  "I  thank  Thee  who 
hast  made  me  according  to  Thy  will."] 
Woman  is  prominent  enough  in  re- 
ligious ceremonial  and  worship  in  some 
well-known  Asiatic  and  even  in  African 
forms  of  idolatry.  But  it  is  matter  of 
common  knowledge  that  outside  Chris- 
tendom, even  at  its  most  nearly 
nominal,  woman  has  no  such  position 
as  is  the  natural  and  necessary  con- 
sequence of  the  teaching  of  the  New 
Testament.  She  is  at  man's  side  in 
the  home,  an  equal  sharer  of  its  re- 
sponsibilities, its  happiness,  its  honours. 
Chivalry  caught  the  inspiration  of 
its  Ideal  of  Womanhood — confined  in 
practice  as  this  often  was  to  women 
of  gentle  birth — from  the  Church. 
The  Gospel  began  by  declaring  that  in 
the  new,  the  Christian,  form  of  the 
Abrahamic  covenant  (Gal.  iii.  15-18) 
the  woman  had  an  equal  status  before 
God.  In  contradistinction  to  the 
old  practice  of  Judaism,  the  woman 
was  baptized  as  the  men  were.  [That 
she  might  have  her  share  thus  publicly 
acknowledged  and  ratified  was  a  reason, 
subsidiary  but  real,  for  the  change  in 
the  sign  and  seal  of  the  covenant.] 
She  drew  near  to  God  with  equal  right 
of  approach  through  Christ.  Every 
woman  in  the  Churches  of  Corinth,  or 
Rome,  or  Ephesus,  or  elsewhere,  knew 
by  many  daily  proofs  that  the  Gospel 
of  Christ  was  on  her  side.  See  how 
Luke  notes,  "  with  the  women  "  (Acts  i. 
14) ;  their  equal  presence  in  the  prayer 
of  the  upper  room  was  a  revolutionary 
novelty.  Let  the  prohibition  of  these 
verses  be  as  stern  as  it  may,  and  be 
pressed  as  absolutely  as  it  may,  it  is  a 


very  small  abatement  from  a  freedom 
such  as  never  was  hers  until  the  Gospel 
became  the  Great  Charter  of  woman- 
hood and  its  rights.  Let  her  be  pro- 
hibited most  absolutely  from  eating 
the — not  always  pleasant — "  fruit  "  of 
the  office  of  public  teacher,  yet  she 
dwells  in  an  assured  possession  and 
enjoyment  of  a  garden  of  happiness 
and  of  abundant  "  fruit,"  such  as  never 
was  nor  is  hers  until  the  Gospel  of 
Christ  has  borne  its  message  and  done 
its  work.  Women  owe  much  to  the 
Gospel. 

III.  It  has  opened  to  them  many 
forms  of  activity. — 1.  It  may  well  be 
questioned  whether  Rom.  xvi.  1  calls 
Phoebe  a  "  deaconess "  in  any  precise 
or  quasi-official  sense.  Almost  cer- 
tainly not ;  the  date  is  too  early.  In 
the  Pastoral  Epistles  there  is  more 
appearance  of  a  definite  "  order,"  that 
of  "  widows.^'  Pliny's  letter  to  Trajan 
speaks  of  some  "  ministrce "  whom  he 
had  put  to  the  question.  Lucian's 
keen  wit  is  directed  against  some  aged 
Christian  women  who  carried  food  to 
their  co-religionists  in  prison.  Organ- 
ised, systematic  work  for  the  poor  was 
very  early  part  of  the  duty  of  the 
deaconess.  Rom.  xvi.  is  a  very  early 
documentary  evidence  of  the  many- 
sided  activities  of  Christian  women. 
They  could  '*  labour,"  and  "  labour 
much  "  j  they  could  "  succour  "  Paul  and 
"  many  besides,"  and  *'  bestow  much 
labour "  on  him.  Priscilla,  equally 
with  her  husband,  could  risk  her  life — 
"  lay  down  her  neck  " — to  save  Paul's 
life.  All  the  martyrologies  of  the 
Churches  give  evidence  of  the  noble 
share  the  women  took  in  the  work  of 
witnessing  for  Christ  even  to  death. 
2.  It  is  manifest  in  how  many  ways 
the  woman  is  better  adapted  than 
man  for  much  work  which  needs  doing 
to-day  at  home  and  abroad.  There  is 
much  work  for  women — "  rescue  work," 
for  example — which  women  can  do 
best.  The  woman's  heart  and  sympa- 
thetic nature  often  give  her  a  power 
over  degraded  men  which  men  can  never 
wield.  The  children  are  naturally  the 
woman's   care,    and,   more  than  even 

315 


CHAP.  XIV.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  CORINTHIANS. 


woman  herself,  does  the  child  owe  much 
to  the  Gospel  of  that  Christ  Who  was 
once  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem.     Temper- 
ance work  lies  as  fitly  to  their  hand  as 
it  Hes  near  to  the  heart  of  many  of  the 
noblest  of  the  sex.     "  It  is  little  grief 
to  the    Christian  woman   that  she   is 
excluded  from  the  great  offices  in  the 
Church,  since  it  is  hers  to  exercise  the 
most    glorious    and    effectual    of     all 
ministries,"    that    of  love    (Pressense, 
Life  and  Practice,  73).    Woman  hasher 
primacy  in  the  Church  in  all  works  of 
charity  and  beneficence.     3.  The  Spirit 
of  "  prophecy  "  made  no  distinction  of 
sex.     Pentecost   began  to  fulfil  Joel's 
word  in  a  point  which  perhaps  even 
Peter  hardly  appreciated  as  he  quoted 
it  [Acts  ii.  17,  18  (Joel  ii.  28-32)]  ;  the 
"  daughters  "  should  prophesy  as  well 
as  the  "  sons";  the  very  ''handmaidens" 
[i.e.    be   it   noted,   the   female  slaves ; 
station  should  matter  as  little  as  sex] 
should  share  with  the  "  servants  "  the 
outpouring    of   the   Spirit.      If  xi.    5 
stood   alone,    it   might   be   unfair     to 
make   it   evidence   of    anything   more 
than    that    some   Corinthian     women 
were     actually     "  prophesying "     and 
"  praying  "  in  the  assembly,  and  that 
Paul   for   the    moment   expresses     no 
opinion  as  to  the  right  or  wrong  of  the 
practice,  but  passes  on  to  the  immedi- 
ately  urgent   matter  that   they   were 
doing  it  with  unveiled  heads.     But  he 
says  here,  "  Ye  may  siW prophesy,"  which, 
coupled    with    the    equal     treatment 
accorded   to   women   by  the  endowing 
Spirit,  seems  still  further  to  narrow  his 
absolute    prohibition,    to    "  teaching " 
(1  Tim.  ii.  12),  an  office  which  once  at 
least  he  distinguishes  from  "  prophesy- 
ing" (Eph.  iv.  11;  cf.  Acts  xiii.  1).     As 
was     said     above,    the    extraordinary 
charisni  was  above  ordinary  prudential 
regulations ;    the    Spirit    is    sovereign. 
Very  early  in  the  Church,  accordingly, 
we  find  the  deaconess  occasionally  "  in 
apt   and   holy   speech "    teaching    the 
women  who  were  preparing  for  baptism. 
(Quoted  in  Pressense,  Life  and  Practice, 
72,  note.)    The  "  apt"  speech  can  hardly 
be  forbidden  to  exercise  itself  amongst 
women  in  almost  every  possible  or  need- 

316 


f ul  way,  whether  in  the  cottage-meeting 
handful,  or  the  [cottage-meeting  hand- 
fuls  aggregated  into  the  great]   *'  con- 
gregation."      The     line     of     division 
between  the  public   "speaking  in  the 
Church  "  which  is  forbidden,  and  the 
"  Bible  lesson  "  given  by  a  lady  to  a 
class  of  big  lads  or  men  in  a  Sunday 
school,     which     everybody    sanctions, 
becomes  a  very  fine  one,  and  is  indeed 
nearly  at   the  vanishing-point.     If  it 
do  not  altogether  disappear,  it  is  mani- 
festly rather  retained,  and,  by  Apos- 
tolic authority,  absolutely  retained,  lest 
the  sex   should    be  unsexed,  and  be- 
cause also  of  a  primacy  of  man  which  is 
part  of  the  original  and  abiding  order 
of  the  God  "  not  of  confusion,  hut  of^^ 
order    and    "jpeace."     As   always,  the 
"  commandment     of     God "     has     the 
woman's  interest  at  heart.     It  is  for 
her   sex's   sake.      [John    Wesley  may 
again  be  quoted  as  typical  of  a  Scrip- 
tural   conservatism     and    caution    in 
dealing    with    this     matter.       He    is 
writing  two  years  earlier,  to  the  same 
correspondent    as    above :     "  I    advise 
you,  as  I  did  Grace   Walton   formerly, 
1.  Pray  in  private  or  public,  as  much 
as   you  can ;    2.  Even    in  public,  you 
may  properly  enough   intermix   short 
exhortations  with  prayer,  but  keep  as 
far  from  what  is   called   preaching  as 
you  can  :  Therefore,  never  take  a  text ; 
never  speak  in  a  continued  discourse, 
without  some  break,  about  four  or  five 
minutes"  (PFor^s,  xiii.  339).]    There  are 
also  traces  in  the   early  Church  of  a 
distinct  duty  laid  upon  the  "  widows  " 
to   keep   up    a   perpetual    intercession 
on  behalf  of  the  active,  busy,  younger 
Church.     The  prayer  meeting  is  a  field 
for  a  grand  activity  for  woman  which 
none  will  rebuke.     Her  testimony  in  a 
meeting  for  witness-bearing  or  piaise 
is  help  which  must  not  be  refused ;  nor 
should  she  withhold  it,  if,  as  part  of 
her  consecration  of  herself  to  Christ,  she 
may,  by  doing  violence  to  her  tempera- 
ment and  her  modest  reticence,  honour 
Him,  or  may  help  seeking  or  battling 
and  oppressed  souls,  in  telling  "how 
great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  " 
her.     [Note    how    Christ    would   not 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xv. 


allow  the  woman  with  *'  the  issue  "  to 
steal  away  in  silence  with  her  bless- 
ing, but  will  have  her  testimony  borne, 
there  in  the  street,  before  all  the  crowd 
(Luke  viii.  45-47).]  Women  who  often 
enter  into  the  Holy  of  Holies  of  the 
*'  spirit,"  and  there  commune  with  God, 
are  not  idlers  in  the  Church. 

TV.  The  one  reserved  thing  is 
"  teaching."  —  [Woman  has  never 
publicly  given  the  bread  and  the  wine 
of  the  Supper.     There  is  no  masculine 


"  priestism "  in  this,  however,  or  in 
the  restraining  of  the  woman  from  the 
office  of  the  public  teacher.]  "But 
they  are  often  better  qualified  to  teach 
than  the  man  who  stands  up  to  teach 
them."  Perbaps,  but  such  "  hard 
cases  "  make  "  bad  law."  The  salutary, 
seemly,  general,  binding  rule  gives  the 
man  the  conduct  of  the  worship  in  the 
congregation,  [and,  as  shown  in  the 
Homiletic  Analysis,  the  **  worship  " 
includes  the  teaching  and  the  Supper]. 


APPENDED  NOTE. 


"  The  Amen  "  of  ver.  16.  From  Stanley. — 
"After  the  prayers,"  says  Justin  {Apol.,  c. 
65,  67),  "bread  is  ofEered,  and  wine  and 
water,  and  the  president  offers  up  according 
to  his  power  prayers  and  thanksgivings  at 
once,  and  the  people  shout  the  Amen.  .  .  . 
The  president  offers  praise  and  glory  to  the 
Father  of  all,  and  through  the  name  of  His 
Son  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  at  length 
returns  thanks  to  God  for  having  vouchsafed 
us  to  partake  of  these  things.  When  he  has 
finished  the  prayers  and  thanksgivings,  all 


the  people  present  shout,  saying,  '  Amen,* 
which  is  the  Hebrew  for  *  So  be  it.' "  The 
"  Amen  "  thus  used  was  borrowed  from  the 
worship  of  the  synagogue,  and  hence  pro- 
bably the  article  is  prefixed  as  to  a  well- 
known  form.  It  was  there  regarded  as  the 
necessary  ratification  of  the  prayer  or  bless- 
ing (cf.  2  Cor.  i.  20).  .  .  .  Compare  the  use 
of  the  word  as  uttered  by  the  vast  assembly 
of  pilgrims  at  Mecca,  to  express  their  assent 
to  the  great  sermon  at  the  Kaaba  (Burton's 
Pilgrimage,  iii.  314). 


CHAPTER  XV. 

CRITICAL   NOTES, 

Note  :  1.  The  main  teaching  of  chapter  is  almost  pure  dogma.  It  is  for  the  most  part  matter 
of  simple  revelation  and  belief.  2.  The  earliest  extant  rcritten  account  of  the  appearances 
of  the  Risen  Lord.  The  earliest  Gospel  is  not  so  early  as  this.  This  account  written  not 
more  than  thirty  years  after  the  asserted  Resurrection  of  Christ.  [Important  in  its 
bearing  upon  ver.  6.] 

Ver.  1.  I  declare. — With  some  shade  of  reproach  that  they  required  it.  See  the  same  phrase, 
xii.  3;  2  Cor.  viii.  1  ;  Eph.  vi.  21 ;  Col.  iv.  7;  2  Pet.  i.  16.  1.  Note,  Christ's  resurrection  is  an 
integral  part  of  "  the  Gospel  "  ;  which  is  here  both  the  historical  facts,  and  the  good  news 
founded  upon,  rooted  in,  the  facts.  (Cf.  Gal.  i.  6-9.)  2.  Note  the  cumulative  ^' also,  also^ 
also^^  Q.d.  "  You  have  as  great  a  stake  in  the  matter  of  its  falsehood  or  truth  as  I  have. 
True,  I  preached  it ;  but  so  did  you  accept  it,  and  it  is  your  basis  of  life."  3.  Note 
"  which  .  .  .  in  which  .  .  .  by  (means  of)  which."    (Cf.  "  we  stand  "  in  Rom.  v.  2,  xi.  20.) 

Ver.  2. — Note  the  punctuation  and  supplied  words  of  the  R.V.  Ye  are  (being)  saved. — 
Continuously  ;  present  part.,  as  usual.  In  what  word. — Literally;  so  then  "  the  word  of  the 
Cross"  (i.  18)  includes  much  more  than  merely  the  Crucifixion;  there  would  be  no  Atone- 
ment without  a  Resurrection.  In  vain. — Choose  between  (1)  R.V.  margin,  and  (2)  "so  as 
to  end  after  all  in  no  saving  result"  (Gal.  iii.  4,  iv.  11).  (1)  would  imply  a  baseless  belief; 
(2)  a  fruitless  belief.  (For  the  thought  of  (2)  Heb.  ii.  11.)  Evans  prefers  "  rashly,  without 
due  reflection." 

Ver.  3.  I  received,  ...  I  delivered.  ...  Ye  received  (ver.  1). — Three  first  links  in  tradition. 
A  typical  preacher  :  (1)  A  witness  ;  of  (2)  what  he  heard  at  first-hand  and  himself  had 
seen  ;  (3)  not  creator  of  message  ;  it  is  objective,  not  subjective.  First  of  all. — Not  (1)  in 
order  of  time  in  the  history  of  his  preaching  at  Corinth,  nor  (2)  in  the  order  of  doctrine  in 
their  Christian  instruction,  but  (3)  as  of  first-rate  importance.  Died  .  .  .  buried  .  .  .  rose. — ■ 
These  are  all  included  in  the  "  word  of  The  Cross  "  (i.  18).  For  our  sins. — Evidently,  then, 
the  vicarious  character  of  the  death  of  Christ  must  not  be  made  to  rest,  in  (say)  2  Cor.  v.  16, 
upon  the  mere  lexical  force  of  the  preposition  ;  it  is  abundantly  to  be  gathered  from  the  sense 
of  (say)  John  xi.  60,    See  other  prepositions  in  Rom.  iv,  25 ;  Gal.i.  4;  1  Pet.  iii.  18.  According 

317 


CHAP.  XV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   CORINTHIANS. 


to  tlie  Scriptures. — E.g.  Isa.  liii.  5,  8;  (Dan.  ix.  26);  Ps.  xxii. ;  Zech.  xii.  10;  the  Paschal 
Lamb.  See  how  authoritatively  the  Risen  Lord  put  His  disciples  into  this  Christian  way  of 
reading  the  Old  Testament  (Luke  xxiv.  25-27,  44-46).  [Everything  He  did  and  said  on  that 
first  Christian  "  Sunday "  was  carefully  chosen  and  significant — typical — carrying  a  large 
principle  with  it.]  So  before  His  death  (Luke  xxii.  37).  Peter,  at  Pentecost,  at  once  began 
using  this  Christian  method  of  exposition  ;  N.B.,  at  Pentecost,  another  day  which  carried 
ruling  precedents  with  it  (Acts  ii.  25-31).  [Peter  kept  to  this  principle  (1  Pet.  i.  11,  ii.  24).  As 
to  New  Testament  in  Old  Testament,  cf.  also  Acts  viii.  35,  xiii.  33-35,  xvii.  3,  xxvi.  22,  23 ; 
John  ii.  22,  xx.  9.]  "  These  words  carry  us  back  to  a  time  when  the  events  of  Christianity 
required  not  only  to  be  illustrated  or  confirmed,  but  to  be  justified  by  reference  to 
Judaism"  (Stanley). 

Ver.  4.  Buried. — Not  an  unimportant  link  in  the  chain  of  Christian  evidences.  Looks, 
moreover,  Uke  a  touch  of  the  oral  detail  with  which  the  story  was  by  the  first  preachers 
communicated.  Emphasised  also  in  each  of  the  four  Gospels,  Yet  did  not  need  the 
emphatic  clenching  "  According  to  the  Scriptures'"'  "Earth  sacred  above  all  planets  as  the 
burial-place  of  the  Redeemer"  (Beecher).  Was  raised. — Not  ^'rose"  :  cf.  Ps.  ii.  7  ;  Isa.  Iv.  3 
(Hos.  vi  2)  ;   Ps.  xvi.  10. 

Ver.  5.  Cephas,  -The  first  man  to.  see  the  Risen  Christ.  A  very  important  coincidence 
with  apparently  casual  words  in  Mark  xvi.  7  (and  Luke  xxiv.  34,  which  most  probably  has  this 
force).  Cephas  too  [*'  Cephas,"  as  they  said  at  Corinth]  was  an  authority  at  Corinth  ;  an 
ad  homines  touch,  this.  Twelve. — Already  "  officially  "  equivalent  to  "  the  Apostolic  college  "; 
in  fact  ten  (Luke,  as  above),  and  then  eleven  (John  xx.  26). 

Ver.  6.  Five  hundred  ...  at  once. — Probably  in  Matt,  xxviii.  16  (perhaps  confirmed  by 
John  xxi.  1).  The  one  hundred  and  twenty  of  Acts  i.  were  only  those  in  Jerusalem.  Paul's 
word,  so  obviously  open  to  challenge,  and,  if  false  or  mistaken,  to  refutation,  is  authority 
for  this  fact.  [Not  to  insist  upon  his  inspiration.]  The  omission  of  this  in  the  Gospels 
agrees  with  John  xx.  30.  Fallen  asleep. — (Ver.  18;  cf.  vii.  39,  xi.  30.)  After  the  death  of 
Christ,  dying  is  never  in  the  New  Testament  called  ''death"  in  connection  with  Christians. 
Was  the  phrase  born  of  the  words  of  Christ,  Matt.  ix.  24  ?  "  The  Church  never  dies  or  thinks 
of  death,  though  she  buries  her  dead  "  (Pope).    Remain. — John  xxi.  22,  23  ;  1  Tbess.  iv.  15. 

Ver.  7.  James. — Unrecorded.  The  James  of  Acts  xv.,  and  of  the  Epistle.  Tradition  (in 
"Gospel  of  the  Hebrews")  that  (from  Matt.  xxvi.  29)  James  (unbelieving  in  John  vii.  5) 
had  vowed  neither  to  eat,  from  the  Last  Supper  onward,  until  he  had  seen  the  Risen  Lord. 
Jesus  appeared  to  Him.  "  Bring  a  table  and  bread.  My  brother,  eat  thy  bread  because 
the  Son  of  Man  is  risen  from  the  dead."  See  the  prominence  of  Cephas  and  James  in  Gal.  i.,  ii. 
All  the  apostles. — Choose  between  John  xx.  26  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  16  ;  and  Acts  i.  4.  [Evans  would 
emphasise  "  apostles  "  rather  than  ''all."] 

Ver.  8.  Due  time. — Rather  lay  stress  on  the  physical  inferiority  of  the  abortive-born  than 
upon  the  comparative  time  of  birth.  [Paul  was  born  long  after  time,  not  before  time.] 
Stanley  gives  Suet.,  Octarius,  xxxv.  2,  as  authority  for  magistrates  appointed  irregularly 
being  called  ahortivi.  To  me. — A  necessary  credential  to  put  him  on  equality  with  Cephas 
and  the  rest.  See  ix.  1 ;  Acts  ix.  17  (where  Ananias  is  presumably  reporting  what  he  has 
learned  from  Christ  Himself),  xxvi.  16  (read  in  connection  with  Gal.  i.  16,  which  must  not 
be  forced  into  mechanically  restricted  coincidence  with  this  "  appearance  "  alone).  Last  of 
(them)  all. 

Ver.  9. — "  I  am  nothing ; "  ver.  10,  "  I  am  greater  than  any  of  them."  Cf.  another 
Pharisee  (Luke  xviii.   10). 

Ver.  10.  In  vain. — Cf.  2  Cor.  vi.  1.  [Like  the  stony-ground,  or  thorny-ground,  hearers.] 
Cf.  also  Eph.  iii.  8  ;  1  Tim.  i.  12-16. 

Ver.  12. — Cf.  the  strain  of  1  Thess.  iv.  14,  or  Rom.  viii.  11,  Also  see  that  it  is  "  Christ  " 
[and  not  first  of  all  facts  about  Him]  who  is  the  burden  and  substance  of  the  preaching. 
Cf.  2  Cor.  iv.  5,  "  We  preach  Christ  Jesus,  as  Lord."  Perhaps  "denying"  a  resurrection  in 
fact,  whilst  claiming  still  to  "  believe  in  it "  in  the  (non-natural)  sense  of  2  Tim.  ii.  18. 
[Epicureans  were  practically  Materialists  ;  Stoics  taught  (a  Nirvana-Wke  or  Pantheist) 
return  of  the  individual  into  the  Great,  Central  Being.  So  they  laughed  with  polite  contempt 
at  Athens.  "  A  new  god  and  goddess  :  Jesus  and  Anastasis  "  (Acts  xvii.  18).  Common  people 
believed  that  death  was  either  extinction  of  the  soul  or  a  worthless  shadow  life,  and  this 
most  likely  the  form  of  disbelief  which  would  be  prevalent  in  the  Church  at  Corinth.  (After 
all,  in  this,  as  in  many  similar  cases,  the  philosophers  only  state  more  explicitly  what 
common  people  with  native  shrewdness  feel.  E.g.  the  difficulties  raised  in  ver.  35  are 
recurrent  perpetually  amongst  plain  people  who  never  heard  of  even  the  names  of  the  philo- 
sophers.) Very  important  to  notice  in  this  discussion  how  the  resurrection  of  the  body  is 
made  to  stand  or  fall  with  the  after-life  of  the  man.  As  in  Mark  xii.  18  sqq.  Christ 
enlarges  the  scope  of  the  discussion  from  one  merely  concerning  the  resurrection,  to  an 
argument  for  the  immortality  of  the  man  in  covenant  with  God,  and  hence  for  his  body 
also,  as  an  integral  part  of  his  redeemed  and  covenanted  manhood.] 

318 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xv. 


Ver.  VI.— ''  If  one,  then  ally 

Ver.  13. — "  All,  or  none  at  all." 

Ver.  14. — Not  this  time  "  vain  "  through  any  fault  or  failure  on  their  part,  but  because  the 
very  basis  of  faith  and  life  has  been  an  unreality. 

Ver.  15. — "  We  were  chosen  to  be  His  witnesses  of  this  very  fact  (Acts  x.  41,  ii.  32,  iii.  15, 
xiii.  31) ;  it  would  turn  out  that  we  were  God's  false  witnesses  !  "  Of  God  (second  time)  is 
"  as  to  God,  and  what  He  has  done." 

Ver.  18.  In  Christ. — As  Rev.  xiv.  13;  1  Thess.  iv.  16.  [But  not  ver.  14,  which  is  "  through 
Jesus,"  rendering  the  connection  more  probable  "  will  God  bring  through  Jesus  with  Him  " 
(viz.  Jesus).] 

Ver.  19. — Do  not  connect  "  hoped  in  Christ"  [Of.  for  this,  1  John  iii.  3  (no  longer 
ambiguous  in  R.V.).  Yet  see  Eph.  i.  12.]  Our  whole  life  is  "in  Christ"  ;  our  ''hojje"  is 
the  hope  of  men  who  are  "  in  Christ."  Miserable. — In  the  old  sense  (cf.  "  miserable  sinners  " 
in  the  Anglican  Liturgy)  "  to  be  pitied,  or  compassionated,  unhappy  that  we  are  ! " 

Ver.  20.  Hath. — Empi^asis  here,  not  on  "  now  "  or  "  Christ."  Over  against  their  doubts, 
and  speculations,  and  "  impossibilities,"  Paul  sets  the  one  conclusive /ac^.  Firstfruits. — Read 
in  the  light  of  Rom.  xi.  16 ;  Jas.  i.  18 ;  Rev.  xiv.  4  ;  Matt,  xxvii  52,  53.  With  a  variant 
figure  the  thought  is  in  Col.  i.  18 ;  Rev.  i.  5. 

Vers  20-23.  By  man  ...  by  man. — Resurrection  actually  comes  "by  man";  we  may 
almost  say  must  so  come,  and  so  He  became  man.  He  the  Judge  also  because  "  the  Son  of 
Man  "  (John  V.  27).  AH  .  .  .  All.- How  wide  is  the  second  "«W"?  Is  the  verse  to  read,  (1) 
'•'All  (nie7i)  .  .  .  (we  believers)  all  "1  Not  exegetically  very  natural.  Is  it  (2)  "(  We  believers) 
all  .  .  .  (we  believers)  all"  1  True ;  but  the  first  member  of  the  sentence  is  narrower  than 
the  fact,  and  scarcely  worthy  of  the  race- wide  view  here  taken  of  the  two  Adams  and  their 
connected  "posterities."  Urged,  from  Augustine  downwards,  that  Paul's  argument  throughout 
Las  only  those  "  in  Christ "  in  view  [true] ;  that  the  Resurrection  existence  of  these  out  of  Him 
is  never  called  "  life"  [true]  ;  also  that  ver.  23  limits  the  argumei^t  to  believers.  The  Greek 
fathers  [Ellicott]  read  ver.  22  of  2>hysical  quickening,  and  make  the  verse,  (3)  ''All  (7uen)  .  .  . 
all  (men)";  and  bring  in  the  limitation  of  the  scope  at  ver,  23.  [One  obvious  qualification 
of  "all  die"  is  found  in  1  Thess.  iv.  17.]  ["The  great  resurrection  chapter  is,  as  it  were,  an 
expansion  of  the  Lord's  own  word, '  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also ' "  (Pope).]  See  Homiletic 
Analysis.  The  resurrection  of  the  unsaved  is  asserted,  on  the  highest  authority,  in 
John  V.  28,  29. 

Ver.  23.  Order. — Quite  another  detail  as  to  "order"  in  the  Resurrection  is  revealed  in 
1  Thess.  iv  16,  17  :  ''first  .  .  .  then."  Order  here  is  "  troop."  The  race  defiles  before  us,  an 
army  in  three  divisions:  First  Division — The  Lord  (Heb.  xii.  2);  Second  Division— The 
Church  of  the  Redeemed,  some  following  Him  already  nearly  two  millenniums  in  the 
rear;  Third  Division — The  rest  of  mankind  (Evans).  At  His  coming. — Note  the  (exegetical) 
comma.     See  Appended  Note. 

Ver.  24.  The  end. — Derived  perhaps  from  Christ's  words,  reported  in  Matt.  xxiv.  13. 
"  Wh.at  [this]  may  signify  cannot  be  determined  ;  alii  alia  ;  in  all  likelihood  '  the  end '  is  its 
own  [and  only]  interpreter."  So,  wisely,  Evans,  who  adds,  with  most:  "It  seems  probable 
that  the  kingship  will  be  handed  over  by  the  Incarnate  Son  to  Him  who  is  God  and  Father; 
but  the  kingdom  of  His  own  founding,  in  its  contents  of  citizens,  .  .  .  Phil.  iii.  10,  will 
continue  ;  so  that '  His  kingdom  shall  have  no  end'  (Dan.  vii.  13,  14)."  "The  only  expression 
about  which  there  may  reasonably  be  some  doubt  is  kingdom.  That  it  is  more  inclusive  than 
the  'regnum  gratice'  in  its  ordinary  acceptance,  and  that  it  may  have  some  reference  to  the 
millennial  kingdom,  is  probably  to  be  inferred  from  the  wide  horizon  of  this  holy  revelation. 
This  kingdom  the  Eternal  Son  .  .  .  delivers  up  to  the  Eternal  Fat!  er,  not  as  though  He 
were  Himself  thereby  divested  of  the  kingdom,  but  as  a  sharer  in  it  for  evermore."  (Ellicott.) 
"  Then,"  viz.  "  when,  .  .  .  (or,  again)  when."  All  the  consecrated  words  re  the  Second 
Advent  are  found  in  2  Thess.  i.  7,  ii.  18  :  Parousia,  Epiphany,  Apocalypse.  The  kingdom. — 
Rev.  xix.  15,  16.  Put  down.— R.V.,  "  abolished,"  as  in  2  Tim.  i.  10  (A.V.).  "  Not  total 
destruction,  but  absolute  subjugation."  Favourite  word  of  Paul's;  nine  times  in  this 
Epistle,  with  various  shades  of  the  one  meaning :  "  to  reduce  to  such  practical  unimportance, 
or  non-importance,  that  it  may  be  left  out  of  the  account  altogether."  Eule,  authority, 
power.— Abstract,  for  personal  concretes,  as  in  Eph.  i.  25,  iii.  10,  vi.  13 ;  Col.  i.  16 ; 
Rom.  viii.  38.     He.— Viz.  Christ. 

Ver.  25.  He  .  .  .  Kq.— Christ  .  .  .  the  Father  (ver.  27,  end). 

Ver.  26. — Observe  the  present  tense  of  a  dateless  event  that  is,  as  it  were,  seen  to  be 
happening. 

Ver.  27.— Combine  in  exposition  Ps.  ii.  6-9 ;  Ps.  viii.  6  ;  (Heb.  ii.  8)  ;  Ps.  ex.  1. ;  (Heb.  i.  13)  ; 
Matt.  xxii.  44 ;  Acts  ii.  34,  35  ;  (Ps.  xiv.  6).  Observe  the  R.V.  margin,  "  shall  have  said," — a 
solemn  announcement  to  the  listening  world,  by  God  Himself,  parallel  to  that  of  Ps.  ii.  7,  8, 
the  "decree"  of  the  Son's  investiture  with  His  mediatorial  royalty. 

Ver.  28.  AU  in  a,U.— Cf.  Col.  iii.  11,  an  anticipatory,  suggestive  fulfilment  of  the  idea. 

319 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  29. — Very  obscure  to  us;  obviously  well  known  to,  and  understood  by,  the  Corinthians. 
An  ad  homines  argument  entirely.  Q.d.  "  You  deny  or  question  the  resurrection ;  I  take  you, 
then,  on  the  ground  of  your  own  practice :  why,  then,  do  you  baptize  ? "  etc.  There  is  some 
patristic  tradition,  but  of  uncertain  value  even  to  the  Fathers  who  report  it,  of  a  practice  of 
baptizing  a  "  representative  "  of  a  man  who,  as  yet  only  a  catechumen,  had  died  without 
baptism,  lest  he  should  for  want  of  it  be  lost.  [8ome  say  putting  the  living  man  under  the 
bed,  and  letting  him  give  answers  to  the  usual  questions,  addressed  to  the  corpse  1]  A 
question  is  raised  whether  this  very  expression  of  Paul's  did  not  in  some  cases  occasion  such 
a  practice.  [Certainly  no  fair  homiletic  use  is  to  be  made  of  these  words  in  any  sense  of 
appealing  to  the  survivors  in  a  Church  to  come  forward  and  seek  a  new  baptism  of  the  Spirit, 
that  they  may  fill  the  place,  and  do  the  work,  of  some  who  have  died.] 

Ver.  30. — Another  ad  hoitiinem  (or  ah  homine)  argument,  but  this  time  of  abiding,  real 
value.  We. — Primarily  the  apostles  (2  Cor.  i.  8-10,  iv.  10,  etc.) ;  but  all  Christians,  sooner 
or  later,  had  a  taste  of  peril. 

Ver.  31.  Your  rejoicing. — As  K.V.  text.  Q.d.  "I  say  emphatically,  brethren — and  to  you 
of  whom  I  so  constantly  make  my  boast,  should  I  be  likely  to  say  anything  but  what  is  the 
simple  fact  ?     You  will  believe  me — I  die  daily." 

Ver.  32.  After  the  manner  of  men. — I.e.  "With  no  better  hopes  or  prospect  of  the 
future,  than  '  natural '  men,  and  men  without  even  the  Gospel  revelation,  have  when  they 
endure  risk,  and  face  conflict  and  danger."  The  coriverse  case  is  put  in  ver.  58,  "  Wherefore," 
i.e.  "  Seeing  you  have  such  hopes,"  etc.  Fought  with  beasts.— Cf.  the  unrecorded,  perhaps 
identical,  peril  of  2  Cor.  i.  8.  All  OTie  word  in  Greek ;  no  specialising  of  literal  " beasts" 
such  as  the  English  suggests :  "  I  was  like  a  beast-fighting  gladiator  in  an  amphitheatre." 
[Precisely  similar  idealising  of  the  fact  in  Ps.  xxii.  11-13.  Also,  Ignatius  writes  of  his 
guards  ("leopards,"  he  calls  them):  "All  the  way  from  Syria  to  Eome  (on  his  way  to 
martyrdom)  did  I  beast-fight  by  land  and  sea."]  Observe  the  varying  connection  by 
punctuation  in  A.V.  and  K.V. ;  either  good,  A.V.  better.  Quotation  from  Isa.  xxii.  13,  of 
Jerusalem  profligacy  when  Sennacherib  was  at  hand. 

Ver.  33.— Perhaps  the  fall  into  immorality  in  the  Church  at  Corinth  had  been  facilitated 
by  a  weakened  faith  in  the  Resurrection. 

Ver.  34.  "Arouse  yourselves,"  as  if  from  the  sleep  after  the  orgies  of  Isa.  xxii.  13,  "and 
show  yourselves,  and  bear  yourselves,  righteously."  Well  expounded  by  1  Thess.  v.  2-8.  "  / 
speak  this,  in  order  to  your  shaming."    (So  vi.  5.) 

Ver.  35.— (1)  Emphasis  on  "  the  dead,—t\\e  Dead  !— the  DEAD !  "  (2)  "  With  what  (kind 
of)  hody  ?  "    See  Homiletic  Analysis. 

Ver.  36. — Emphasis  on  "  thou  "  (so  R.V.)  ;  answers  (1).     (John  xii.  24") 

Ver.  37. — (2)  is  answered  in  vers.  37-54.  Not  the  body  that  shall  be. — I.e.,  as  the  argument 
requires,  qua  its  physical  constitution ;  "  not  the  (kind  of)  hody  that"  etc.  Bare. — I.e. 
"  naked  " ;  "a  grain  not  yet  clothed  with  that  body  that  shall  be  "  (Ellicott),  2  Cor.  v.  3 ; 
"  the  resurrection  body  shall  be  clothed  with  glory"  (Evans). 

Ver.  38. — "  The  Apostle  .  .  .  uses  the  argument  of  analogy,  not  to  solve  what  he  leaves  a 
mystery,  but  to  obviate  objection.  The  present  world  furnishes  abundant  analogies,  but  no 
resemblances  of  the  future  resurrection.  Nothing  in  the  buried  flesh  germinates  as  the  life 
in  a  seed-corn  ;  the  new  life  is  a  direct  creation.  '  God  giveth,^  etc.  Not  that  the  dis- 
embodied spirit  will  form  for  itself  a  new  vehicle,  but  that  in  the  resurrection  the  spirit  will 
have  a  spiritual — psychical — organism  given  to  it,  which  in  the  wonder  of  Divine  power  will 
be  to  it  the  same  organ  it  had  in  time."  (Pope,  Com/pend.  of  Theol.,  iii.  408.)  "  A  body  of  its 
own  (kind)  ; "  query,  any  more  than  this,  here  1 

Ver.  39. — There  is  room,  then,  for  another  kind  of  body  than  that  which  makes  the  diflaculty 
of  ver.  35. 

Ver.  40.— Nothing  to  do  in  this  verse  with  the  astronomical  "  celestial  bodies."  See  Homi- 
letic Analysis  (Whole  Chapter). 

Ver.  41. — Here,  indeed,  these  come  in,  but  only  for  a  comparison  in  point  of  '^^  glory,"  not  of 
physical  constitution. 

Ver.  42.  So. — Wide  diversity  between  old  and  new,  boundless  possibilities  of  variety,  in 
kind  and  in  degree  of  glory.  It. — Must  not  be  -made  too  emphatic,  so  as  to  carry  the 
weight  of  the  Identity  of  the  body.  The  nearest  to  a  nominative  to  the  verb  is  "  the  resur- 
rection "  (ver.  42). 

Ver.  43.  Dishonour.  — "  Funeral  pomp  is  but  a  mask  hiding  the  truth  that  the  body  carried 
to  the  grave  has  lost  the  rights  of  humanity.  Instead  of  the  kind  attentions  rendered  to  it  a 
few  days  ago,  it  is  left  alone  in  the  dark  and  silent  grave,  as  the  meanest  living  body  would  not 
be."  (Beet.)   In  power.— All  "  bodily  "  faculties  intensified,  perhaps  with  new  faculties  added. 

Ver.  44.  Natural  .  .  .  spiritual. — As  throughout,  e.g.,  chap.  ii.  If  there  is  a  body  for  the 
TTPevfm,  as  in  fact  there  is,  then  the  presumption  is  also  that  there  will  be  a  body  for  the 
i/vx-^i.  A  body  in  both  cases  adapted  (1)  to  its  tenant,  and  (2)  to  its  world  and  enviroa- 
ment ;  and  further — 

320 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xv. 


Ver.  45. — Congruous  with  (1)  The  living  soul,  Adam,  and  (2)  the  life-giving  spirit,  the  Last 
[not  the  Second]  Adam  (Gen.  ii.  7 ;  John  v.  21,  vi.  63,  xi.  25,  xiv.  6).  Distinguish  between 
the  Old  Testament  historic  quotation  here  and  the  New  Testament  prophetic  supplement. 

Ver.  46. — A  principle,  perhaps  as  broad  as  creation,  holding  good  in,  e.g.,  ver.  47. 

Ver.  47. — Note  the  true  reading  (B.V.).  Of  heaven. — As  in  the  Litany :  "  0  God  the  Father, 
of  heaven,"  where  notice  the  comma. 

Ver.  48. — "  The  earthy  (Adam,  or  man)  ;  the  heavenly  (Adam,  or  man)."    {Sing,  masc.) 

Ver.  49. — Rom.  viii.  29  ;  Phil.  iii.  21 ;  1  John  iii.  2  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18,  iv.  11.  Notice  the  margin 
(R.V.),  but  prefer  the  text.     Paul  is  not  dealing  with  ethics,  but  with  physiology  (Evans). 

Ver.  50.  This. — Viz.  what  follows.  Flesh  and  blood. — Cf.  "  flesh  and  bone,"  Luke  xxiv.  .89 
(but  very  little  beyond  the  historical  fact  can  safely  be  made  out  from  that  verse).  Doth 
not. — Present  tense,  another  (cf.  ver.  46)  broad,  general  principle,  fixed  and  enduring, 
as  true  morally  as  physically. 

Ver.  51.  Tell,  rather  than  '*  shorv^  A  mystery. — A  fact  hitherto  kept  a  secret,  but  not 
necessarily  inapprehensible  when,  as  now  in  this  case,  it  is  disclosed. 

Ver.  52. — "  By  a  process  not  hke  the  slow  corruption  and  decay  of  death,  but  sudden,  rapid, 
Divine  "  (Stanley).  "  In  the  midst  of  this  world's  busy  life,  and  without  any  previous  warn- 
ing, Christ  will  lay  His  hand  upon  the  wheels  of  time,  and  they  will  stop  at  once  and  for 
ever"  (Beet).  Trumpet. — Cf.  Exod.  xix.  16;  Ps.  xlvii.  5;  Zech.  ix.  14;  Isa.  xxvii.  13.  Also 
1  Thess.  iv.  16  ;  Matt.  xxiv.  31  (Rev.  viii.-xi.),  (Stanley).  Or,  perhaps,  "  He  shall  sound  the 
trumpets 

Ver.  53.  Put  on. — 2  Cor.  v.  4.     Isa.  xxv.  8  quoted. 

Ver.  55. — Hosea  xiii.  14  quoted,  or,  more  correctly,  forms  the  mental  starting-point  of  an 
(imitated)  outburst  of  triumph.  Hosea  suggests,  Paul  sees  (as  it  were)  in  prophetic  prevision, 
a  day  of  deliverance  of  the  race  from  the  power  of  death  and  Hades. 

Ver.  56. — As  Rom.  v.  12-21  is  a  parallel  in  the  experimental  life  to  vers.  12-19  and  vers.  45-49 
in  the  physical,  so  Rom.  vii.  7,  viii.  4  is  expository  of  this  ver.  56.  [N.B. — This  the  earlier- 
written  passage.]     Sting. — Same  word  as  goad  (Acts  [ix.  5]  xxvi.  14), 

Ver.  58. — Observe  "«?«m"  again,  and  how  '■'in  the  Lord""  ["in  Christ"]  runs  through  the 
chapter.     ["  We  look,  not  as  theorists,  but  as  believers,  for  a  future  life  "  (Isaac  Taylor).] 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS. 

The  whole  chapter  may  be  reviewed  as  ^7^  Easter  Bible  EeadiTig  on  1  Cor.  xv, 

I.  A  piece  of  history. 
II.  A  piece  of  revelation. 
III.  A  piece  of  exhortation. 

1.  History. — 1.  Keen-witted  Corinthians  fond  of  speculation.  Too  "wise" 
(2  Ep.  xi.  19,  etc.)  to  take  any  doctrine  simply  on  trust,  even  from  most 
thoroughly  accredited  teacher.  They  must  understand  the  Kesurrection.  They 
must  get  it  into  a  form  that  could  be  understood.  If  that  not  the  original  form, 
or  "  orthodox,"  so  much  the  worse  for  the  original.  "  Yes  ;  we  understand  '  the 
Resurrection.'  There  is  no  mystery  about  it.  In  fact,  in  the  only  true  sense,  it 
is  'past  already'  (probably,  as  2  Tim.  ii.  18).  IMerely  a  rhetorical  expression 
for  the  experience  of  the  New  Birth.  We  all  have  had  our  Resurrection — all 
the  Resurrection  we  ever  shall  have.  There  is  in  the  literal,  physical  sense  no 
resurrection  of  tho  dead." 

2.  This  the  exaggeration  of  a  glorious  truth.  The  new,  eternal  life  did  begin  at 
"  conversion."  That  was  the  event,  the  date,  of  all  others  in  our  history ;  the  real 
dividing-line  was  there,  between  Old  and  New,  between  Death  and  Life.  There 
is  a  dividing-line  at  death  and  another  at  the  resurrection.  But  these  are  only 
between  newer  and  newer  stages  of  the  new  life.  In  death  the  body  drops  away ; 
the  full  Life,  in  which  the  parting  of  the  spiritual  nature  from  its  old  companion 
of  many  years  is  a  mere  momentary  incident,  goes  on  to  become  fuller  and  larger. 
At  the  resurrection  it  will  go  on  from  fuller  to  fullest.  But  we  did  rise  out  of 
Death  into  Life  at  conversion.    Corinthians  so  far  held  truth,  but  exaggerated  it. 

3.  They  did  not  do  justice  to  the  place  of  the  body  in  the  Man.  It  is  as 
essentially  part  of  him  as  the  spirit  or  the  soul.     ]Man  is  not  soul  only,  any  more 

Y  321 


CHAP.  XV.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


than  he  is  body  only.  He  is  body,  soul,  spirit ;  these  three  are  one  man.  By 
the  Redeemer's  grace  the  body  has  its  future.  He  died  for  the  whole  manhood ; 
the  body  therefore  is  to  have  its  redemption  and  after-life. 

4.  *'  Cannot  have  !  "  these  said  ;  "  cannot  he  !  How  are  the  dead — the  Dead  ! 
— the  Dead  !  Look  at  them  ;  think  of  them  after  a  month's  interment !  The 
DEAD  !  don't  you  see  them  ? — raised  up  1  With  what  (sort  of  a)  body  do  these  dead 
come  (forth)  ?  "  "  Well,"  replies  Paul,  *'  you  must  not  say  '  Cannot  be.'  It  has 
heenr  [So  neither  has  a  modern  scientist  or  unbeliever  any  right  to  sweep  away 
miracle  with  a  preliminary  and  all-excluding  flourish  of  denials.  Have  miracles 
been  ?  It  is  not  speculation  or  theory,  but  evidence  and  history,  which  come  first 
in  the  discussion.]  "  Deny  all  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  you  fight  against 
History.  History  will  win  ;  and,  meanwhile,  remember  that  if  there  cannot  be 
a  resurrection  of  the  body,  then  your  Lord  lies  still  in  death  in  Joseph's  grave — 
or  at  least  is  only  so  alive  as  any  other  ordinary  departed  friend  or  teacher  is. 
No  Resurrection  %     Then  there  is  no  Risen  Lord  ! " 

5.  Christianity  is  historical.  Its  doctrines  are  rooted  in  facts  of  history. 
The  Incarnation  is  bound  up  with — stands  or  falls  with — the  historical  fact  that 
Jesus  Christ  was  born  by  the  Holy  Ghost  of  a  pure  Virgin.  If  Jesus  Christ  did 
not  actually,  historically  die  on  a  certain  day  [in  probably  April,  a.d.  30]  there 
has  been  no  Atonement.  If  He  did  so  die,  but  did  not  actually  rise  again  on  the 
following  Sunday  morning,  and  a  few  weeks  after  return  to  heaven  and  take  His 
place  in  that  world  once  more,  then  the  death  was  nothing  to  the  purpose  of  an 
Atonement,  and  there  is  no  living,  incarnate  Representative  of  humanity  to  be  its 
Intercessor  with  God.  If  assailants  can  do  anything,  they  can  disprove  "  facts  " 
alleged,  or  show  the  "  evidence "  for  them  valueless.  If  the  facts  are  gone,  or 
not  verifiable  and  as  good  as  gone,  Christianity  is  really  as  good  as  gone — Salva- 
tion is  gone.  Prove  that  the  Resurrection  of  Christ  is  not  history, — that  is  their 
task ;  then  His  death  is  vain,  "  your  faith  vain  "  too. 

6.  But  the  history  has  all  the  verification  possible — not  to  speak  of  the  prophetic 
intimations  of  it — and  that  very  strong.  "  The  eleven  saw  Him.  Peter  saw 
Him.  I  saw  Him.  *  Hallucination  ?  Enthusiasm  ? '  Five  hundred  saw  Him  at 
once.  A  crowd  does  not  all  see  visions,  nor  do  all  see  the  same  visions.  All  that 
is  subjective  is  eliminated  by  the  multiplication  of  the  witnesses.  The  larger  half, 
more  than  two  hundred  and  fifty  at  least,  are  alive ;  you  can  examine  them. 
*  Fraud  ? '  You  do  not  get  five  hundred,  or  two  hundred  and  fifty,  conspirators 
all  to  keep  the  secret  of  a  fraud,  or  not  for  long."  If  any  fact  of  ancient  history 
can  be  established  by  sober  testimony,  this  can.  Christ's  resurrection  is  a  Piece 
of  History,  the  sure  historical  foundation  of  our  faith  and  hope.  ^' Now  is 
Christ  risen  from  the  dead  !  And  become  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept." 
But  this  last  truth,  further,  is — 

II.  A  piece  of  revelation. — 1.  Of  this,  at  present^  ive  can  only  say  we  believe  it. 
The  fact  is  mere  revelation  ;  unascertainable  by  us  beforehand  ;  and  now  that  it 
is  asserted,  we  can  barely  do  more  than  tell  what  the  words  mean.  We  can 
hardly  conceive  what  the  fact  may  prove  to  be  in  the  historical  working  out  and 
fulfilment.  There  is  to  be  a  resurrection  of  All  (see  Critical  Notes) ;  an  ordered, 
orderly  gathering  of  all  Christ's  then  living  and  raised  ones.  Christ  has  already, 
as  the  firstfruits  of  the  harvest  for  the  heavenly  garner,  led  the  way.  "  At  His 
Coming."     "  The  End." 

2.  The  relations,  even  of  time,  between  these  revealed  facts  of  the  future  are 
involved  in  great  obscurity.  The  interpretation  of  what  is  here  said  in  con- 
nection with  "  the  End  "  is  full  of  mystery.  But  the  symbolic  language  gives 
an  impressive  picture.  We  see  heaven's  Crown  Prince,  the  Colleague  in  the 
Father's  throne,  to  Whom  has  been  apportioned  the  government  of  our 
redeemed  race,  and  the  task  of  bringing  this  rebel  world  into  subjection  by  the 

322 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xv. 


power  of  His  cross,  or  by  the  arm  of  His  might.  There  He  stands.  His  task  is 
finished.  He  stands  Victor  over  the  last  Enemy  to  be  destroyed  ;  His  foot  is 
upon  Death !  His  fellow-conquerors  stand  with  Him  in  triumphant  array,  in 
their  risen  bodies,  fashioned  like  His.  Then  (may  we  say  it  1)  He  lowers  His 
sword,  and  bends  His  head,  and  bows  His  knee,  and  gives  back  to  the  Father  the 
kingdom — the  Mediator's  kingdom — which  was  committed  to  Him  long  ago,  in 
the  morning  of  His  own  resurrection  (Ps.  ii. ;  Rom.  xiv.  9,  etc.).  What  a 
history  that  of  redemption  has  been !  What  a  history  that  of  His  kingdom  ! 
And  that  is  *'  the  end  "  of  it  ! 

3.  But  those  bodies  of  His  fellow-conquerors  ?  "  How  are  the  Dead  raised  1 
How  raised  ?  How  raised  1  W^here  do  they  get  a  body  ?  [For  they  cannot  be 
men  without  a  body  ;  a  mere  unclothed  human  spirit  is  not  a  man.]  What 
kind  of  body  have  they  found  given  them  ?  "  How  ?  Revelation  does  not  help  us 
much.  But  at  least  (1)  "  Death  is  per  se  no  barrier.  In  nature  the  seed  which 
yourselves  sow  must  die  if  it  is  to  live  again.  Death  is,  for  it,  the  way  to  life. 
*  God  gives  it  a  body  ; '  for  the  present  that  is  the  best  answer.  And  so  God  is 
pledged  to  clothe  the  immaterial  in  man."  (2)  "  W^ith  what  kind  of  body  ? 
Do  not  know ;  and  what  matter  ?  Even  now,  amongst  these  material,  fleshly  en- 
wrappings  of  the  Life-principle,  animal,  aviar,  piscine,  there  is  infinite  variety, 
suggesting  infinite  possibilities  of  new  kinds.  There  may  easily  be  another  kind 
of  a  body  for  a  risen  man.  These  are  all  "^esA,"  in  their  infinite  varieties,  as 
his  may  he  in  its  kind ;  and  all  are  real  bodies.  All  glory,  again,  is  glory,  but  with 
differences ;  sun,  moon,  star  as  compared  with  star,  varying  in  kind  as  well  as 
degree,  of  glory.  That  we  cannot  conceive  of  so  new,  so  novel,  a  condition  and 
glory  of  the  body  does  not  carry  us  very  far  in  the  direction  of  disbelief, 
nor  hinder  faith  very  much.  We  do  not  understand,  we  can  hardly  conceive  of, 
the  real,  material,  angelic  "  bodies  celestial."  If  there  are  Jovians,  or  Satur- 
nians,  or  Mercurials  in  yonder  planets,  what  are  Jovian,  Saturnian,  Martial 
*' celestial  bodies"  like?  As  was  said  (ii.  14),  between  the  "natural"  and 
the  "  spiritual  "  is  a  great  gulf,  in  fact  and  knowledge.  The  "  natural  "  body 
can  give  very  scanty  suggestion  as  to  the  "  spiritual  "  body.  This  will  be  *'  my 
own  "  (kind  of)  "  body,"  and  "  God  gives  it  me  "  ;  a  body  which  makes  me — the 
"  spiritual  man "  who  used  to  wear  a  '*  natural "  body — even  in  body  a 
**  spiritual "  man  complete,  redeemed  in  hody^  soul,  spirit.  My  life  repeats  the 
old  order  of  history :  first  the  "  natural "  Adam,  the  earth-born ;  next  the 
"  spiritual,"  life-giving  Adam,  the  Lord,  heaven-born.  "  Flesh  and  blood 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  %  "  Of  course  not.  If  that  be  your  difficulty,  we  are 
agreed.  I  also  say  "  Flesh  and  blood  cannot."  ''  This  corruptible  ?  "  No,  no  ! 
Incorruption.  "  This  mortal  ?  "  No  !  Immortality.  "  This  weakness  and 
frailty  and  liability  to  suffering  ? "  Away  with  the  thought  !  Thank  God, 
No  !  We  shall  have  done  with  these.  I  do  not  know  much,  but  I  know, 
**  raised  in  power,"  in  all  the  light  and  strength  and  glory  of  an  eternal  Life. 
I  do  not  know  how ;  it  has  not  been  told  me  how.  All  is  Revelation ;  even 
that  does  not  go  far. 

III.  Exhortation. — Does  the  belief  in  the  resurrection  matter  so  much  ?  Cannot 
a  man  be  "  steadfast,  unmovable,"  and  the  rest,  without  it  1  The  holding  of  the 
doctrine  involves :  L  Without  it  the  man's  creed  is  no  longer  Christian.  And 
the  connection  between  creed  and  life  is  close.  In  the  discussion  in  this  chapter 
it  is  assumed  that  the  question  is  not  merely  one  of  the  Resurrection  and  future 
of  the  Body,  but  of  the  future  and  immortality  of  the  Man.  And  if  in  the  man's 
creed  Immortahty  be  not  found,  it  will  affect  his  life,  sooner  or  later,  radically. 
At  all  events,  to  disbelieve  the  doctrine  is  to  disbelieve  the  resurrection  of  Christ, 
with  all  the  serious  issues  connected  therewith.  "  And  why  do  you  baptize  for  the 
dead  ? "     2.  "  Then  are  we  of  all  men  the  most  miserable  !  "     Die  like  the  brutes, 

323 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


and  yet  be  doomed  to  live  without  their  insouciance,  their  freedom  from  responsibi- 
lity and  from  fear  of  the  future,  from  the  sting  of  conscience  and  the  sense  and  shame 
of  failure  1  Sacrifice  the  pleasure — such  as  it  is — of  the  men  to  whom  this  life  is 
all,  and  afterwards  find  that  we  have  no  more  to  hope  for  than  they  ?  *'  Let  us 
eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die."  Why  risk  everything — anything  at  all — for 
Christ  ?  Why  "  fight  with  beasts  at  Ephesus,"  or  "  die  daily,"  if  it  be  only  "  after 
the  manner  of  men  " — with  ordinary  men's  hopes  and  no  more  1  3.  "  Do  not  listen 
to  such  things,  lest  you  come  to  think  such  things  !  "  "  Evil  communications  corrupt 
good  manners."     We  shall  sufier  hurt  in  even  mental  contact  with  such  teaching. 

4.  "Do  not  listen  ;  labour  ;  abound  in  the  work."  Work  is  the  best  antidote  to 
[sinful  desires  and  to]  vain  speculations.  An  idle  life  leaves  open  the  door  to 
temptation,  to  unbelief,  or  to  a  sensuous  or  sensual  life — perhaps  to  both.  A 
Christian  may  be  too  busy  to  doubt  ;  never  too  busy  to  enjoy  and  love  and  live. 

5.  "  You  are  in  the  Lord;  your  hope  is  that  of  men  *  in  Him^  (ver.  19) ;  your 
activities  are  His,  wrought  through  you.  Can  His  life  and  work  be  in  vain, 
ending  unworthily,  or  in  a  complete  failure  ?  "  If  He  had  no  resurrection,  His 
own  work  was  in  vain ;  if  you  have  none,  yours  will  be.  But  stand  fast  in  your 
faith  in  His  resurrection  and  your  own.  (Many  of  these  points,  and  some 
omitted  ones,  fully  stated  in  Separate  Homilies.)  "  Take  the  objective  facts  away 
from  Christianity,"  you  lose  the  "  definiteness  and  outward  reality,"  the  more 
"  strong  and  definite  service."  You  get "  endless  and  useless  introspection  upon 
the  mysteries  of  our  nature,  the  rehearsal  of  which  comes  to  be  regarded  as  the 
fulfilment  of  righteousness," — "  a  very  tiresome  thing,  and  so  dropped,  or 
exchanged  for  .  .  .  Atheism."     (See  Hunger,  Freedom  of  Faith,  p.  195.) 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—11. 

Paul  and  the  Gospel. 

I.  Paul  himself. — 1.  The  evangelist. — Note  this  :  (1)  He  is  preaching  the 
Gospel  whilst  he  is  teaching  such  many-sided  facts  as  these  of  our  paragraph, 
and  whilst  rising  to  such  an  exalted  strain  of  prophecy  as  follows  in  the  chapter. 
He  is  **the  Prophet  Paul."  He  claims  in  1  Thess.  iv.  15  to  speak  "  in  the  word 
of  the  Lord,"  like  a  prophet  of  the  old  dispensation  (cf.,  e.g.,  1  Kings  xx.  35,  36). 
In  this  very  chapter  he  soon  leaves  behind  him  Old  Testament  Scripture  and 
Contemporary  Testimony,  and  soars  away  to  a  height  and  into  a  glory  of 
Revelation  as  to  the  future,  where  our  eye  can  scarcely  see  anything  distinctly 
for  very  brightness,  and  where  we  hear  his  words  indeed,  but  can  hardly  interpret 
some  of  them.  Yet  he  never  ceases  to  be  practical.  The  lark  at  her  highest 
flight,  and  lost  in  a  blaze  of  glory  where  her  song  is  indistinct  for  very  distance, 
belongs  to  earth.  Paul's  sudden,  swift  return  to  theology  in  vers.  56,  57,  and 
to  the  practical,  prosaic  round  of  daily  duty  and  service  in  ver.  58,  is  very  like 
her  sudden  drop  to  her  nest,  and  to  her  motherly  duty  to  her  young  ones,  when 
her  song  is  done.  None  of  these  exalted  themes  are  revealed  merely  for  the  sake 
of  giving,  even  accurate,  information  about  the  future.  What  is  revealed  is  for 
the  sake  of  its  bearing  upon  practical  life ;  so  much  only  is  revealed  as  may  serve 
this  purpose.  \{a)  "  What  is  that  to  thee  ?  Follow  thou  Me  "  (John  xxi.  22). 
{b)  *'  Are  there  few  that  be  saved  ? "  "  Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate,"  i.e. 
"  Few  or  many,  see  that  you  make  one  "  (Luke  xiii.  23).  (c)  "  Lord,  who  did 
sin,  this  man  or  his  parents  1  ...  We  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent 
Me  while  it  is  day  "  (John  ix.  2,  4).  (d)  These  may  illustrate  a  Bible  reading 
on  2  Tim.  ii.  23.]  (2)  All  this  sheds  useful  light  on  his  words  in  ii.  2  :  "  Christ, 
and  Him  crucified,"  is  no  narrow  theme.  ''The  Cross"  touches  everything  in 
the  history  of  a  fallen,  redeemed   race.     But  "  the  Cross "  here  includes  the 

324 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  XV. 


Resurrection.  "  So  we  preached"  when  he  came  to  Corinth.  No  scorn  should 
be  poured  on  the  Evangelical  preachers  of  the  Georgian  Eevival  that  with  them 
it  was  all  "  the  Cross,"  "  the  blood."  These  themes  were  greatly  prominent;  the 
men  were  physicians  for  souls,  who  had  found  by  observation  and  comparison  of 
many  thousands  of  "  cases,"  of  all  types,  ages,  ranks,  what  was  the  mischief  of 
the  human  heart,  and,  by  as  wide  experiment,  what  form  of  presentation  of  the 
truth,  and  what  particular  detail  of  the  whole  round  of  Truth,  best  cured  their 
"  sick."  Certainly  results  justified  them.  But  they  did  not,  in  point  of  fact, 
confine  themselves  so  literally  to  the  Cross.  They  quite  understood,  "  saved  by 
His  life"  (Rom.  v.  10),  and  preached  the  Resurrection  and  the  high-priestly 
Intercession  as  the  necessary  complements  of  Calvary.  A  *' Gospel"  preacher 
will  roam  far  and  wide  in  the  field  of  revealed  knowledge ;  he  will  explore  in 
many  directions,  but  he  will  always  start  from  the  Cross ;  he  will  account  himself 
to  have  lost  his  bearings  when  he  can  no  longer  see  it ;  he  will  account  himself 
"  lost  "  when  he  has  wandered  so  far  that  the  Cross  has  sunk  beneath  his  mental 
horizon ;  he  will  keep  open,  however  far  afield,  his  communications  with  this 
Sacred  Base  of  operations.  Every  theme  will  be  traced  up  to,  and  treated  as  it 
is  related  to,  the  Cross  and  its  atonement ;  subject  to  that  condition,  every  theme 
of  Revelation  and  its  suggestions  is  open  to  him.  Such  themes  as  the  Resur- 
rection of  the  Lord,  of  the  saints,  of  the  sinner ;  the  victory  of  the  Lord  over  all 
opposing  evil ;  the  mysterious  "  End  " ; — so  dealt  with,  these  are  all  part  of  "  the 
Gfospel."     His  prime  qualification  is  that  he  is — 

2.  Paul  the  witness. — (1)  To  have  seen  Christ  Jesus  as  the  Risen  Lord  was  a 
necessary  credential  of  apostleship,  in  the  narrowest  sense  of  that  title.  It  made 
Paul,  perhaps,  rather  than  Matthias  (Acts  i.  26),  the  twelfth  of  these  patriarchs 
of  the  new  Israel.  [The  Benjamite  was  the  youngest-born,  the  Benjamin, 
amongst  them.]  Peter  may  have  been  too  forward  [Pentecost  had  not  yet  given 
the  fulness  of  the  Spirit]  in  choosing  the  man,  but  at  least  he  was  right  as  to  the 
requisite  credential :  "  One  must  be  ordained  to  be  a  witness  with  us  of  His 
resurrection."  The  Resurrection  gives  an  adequate  account  of  the  origin  of  the 
Christian  Church ;  thus  actually  to  have  seen  Christ  gives  an  adequate  account  of 
the  transformation  of  Saul  into  Paul ;  taking  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case 
into  the  reckoning,  nothing  else  does.  To  see  the  glorious  Form,  and  to  hear 
the  voice  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  speaking  as  from  heaven  to  him,  years  after  He 
had  been  accounted  dead,  buried,  and  finally  disposed  of,  like  any  other  dead 
man, — this  was  a  fact  which  at  one  blow  brought  down  in  ruins  all  the  creed  and 
all  the  personal  righteousness  of  Saul  of  Tarsus.  "  These  Nazarenes,  then, 
whom  I  have  been  imprisoning  because  they  said  that  the  Crucified  One  was 
living  again,  and  even  bringing  to  the  death  when  I  could  not  get  them  to 
apostatise, — they  were  right;  I  have  been  wrong.  My  orthodox  Judaism  has 
no  room  for  this  fact ;  I  must  needs  recast  it.  And  who  is  He  Whom  I  have 
despised,  hated,  calling  Him  a  *  blasphemer,'  who  deserved  to  be  crucified  ?  I 
have  been  mistaken.  I  have  been  the  blasphemer.  I  am  the  sinner^^chief  of 
sinners  !  "  The  one  fact  revolutionised  Paul's  life.  [No  man's  life  is  ever  the 
same,  he  cannot  himself  be  again  the  same,  when  once  he  has  intelligently, 
distinctly,  come  face  to  face  with  the  Risen  Christ  and  His  claims.  The  meeting 
may  lead  to  salvation ;  it  may  intensify  rebellion  :  but  life  can  never  after  be 
the  same.]  He  also  would  have  been  the  most  earnest  in  saying  that  his  capacity 
to  be  a  witness  to  the  Resurrection  was  no  mere  eyewitness  capacity  for  testifying 
to  a  bare  historical  fact,  however  important  and  however  far-reaching  in  its 
consequences.  He  knows  of  a  belief  in  and  a  confession  of  a  Risen  Christ  which 
only  coexists  with,  which  indeed  is,  salvation  (Rom.  x.  9,  10).  The  aim  of  his 
personal  life  is  to  have  a  knowledge,  which  is  a  sharing,  of  the  resurrection  of 
his  Lord  (Phil.  iii.  10,  11).     The  Christian  apologist  of  to-day,  rightly  enough, 

32.5 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


only  appeals  to  the  eyewitnesses  of  the  historic  fact ;  but  Paul  would  have  made 
the  appeal  of  his  "  testimony "  to  lie  here, — not  that,  so  many  years  ago,  God 
revealed  His  (risen)  Son  to  him — a  fact  to  grow  more  and  more  dim,  perhaps,  as 
it  receded  into  the  perspective  of  the  past,  and  to  become  every  year  more  and 
more  a  memory,  open  to  challenge  and  to  critical  doubt  as  to  its  validity, — but 
that  God,  then  and  ever  after,  "revealed  His  (risen)  Son  in  him"  (Gal.  i.  16); 
the  historical  fact  became  an  experienced  one  ;  the  objective  having  a  subjective 
which  was  its  counterpart,  and  its  continuously  new  verification.  (2)  Still, 
here  Paul  is  the  historic  witness,  "  delivering  what "  he  has  ^^  first  received."  For 
apologetic  or  evidential  purposes,  the  "  simpler  "  the  witness,  so  he  be  manifestly 
honest,  the  stronger  the  evidence  he  gives.  The  man  who  has  evidently  no 
arriere  pensee,  who  in  all  transparent  directness  does  nothing  but  repeat  what  he 
knows  at  first-hand,  is  the  best  purveyor  of  facts  for  a  verdict.  Paul,  like  his 
brother  apostles,  was  "  put  in  trust  with  the  Gospel"  (1  Thess.  ii.  4) ;  they  were 
simply  *'  stewards  of  the  mysteries,"  not  creators  or  proprietors  (iv.  1) ;  it  is  "a 
deposit"  (2  Tim.  i.  14);  as  with  every  true  preacher,  there  is  with  him  no 
"feigning  these  things  out  of  his  own  mind."  [He  had,  moreover,  '^received" 
it  just  as  the  Corinthians  had  received  it  in  their  turn  from  him.  In  them  it 
had  been  a  "  believing  "  which  made  them,  who  were  once  "  without  strength," 
to  ^^  stand  "  Si-nd  hsid  ^' saved"  them.]  The  old  argument  is  of  perpetual  force, 
that  the  very  inartificiality  of  the  Gospel  accounts  of  the  Resurrection,  the  very 
"  discrepancies"  which  testify  to  independence  and  to  absence  of  collusive  design, 
are  guarantees  of  the  truthfulness  of  the  witnesses,  and  so  inferentially  to  the 
truth  of  their  story.  [So,  again,  the  only  effective  preacher  of  the  Gospel  is  one 
who  "  delivers  what  "  he  has  "  received."  Hence  his  knowledge  of  the  facts  and 
»f  the  dogmas  depending  upon  them,  here  passes  over  into  his  personal  character. 
He  is—] 

3.  Paul  the  sinner  saved. — (1)  How  diverse  his  tone :  in  ver.  9  he  labours, 
he  accumulates  language  of  depreciation,  to  make  out  that  he  is  nothing  before 
God  and  in  comparison  with  the  rest  of  the  Apostolic  company ;  in  ver.  10  he 
Mdly  claims  equality  with  the  best  of  men,  and  to  be  more  than  they  all.  *'  Is 
that  honest  and  consistent  with  Christian  sincerity  ?  Particularly,  is  it  true 
when  he  says  '  least  of  air  [and  '  chief  of  sinners  ']?  (1  Tim.  i.  15).  Would  you 
not  rather  call  him  chief  of  apostles,  chief  of  saints  ?  "  Natural  questions.  Yet 
all  he  says  is  true.  [2  Cor.  ii.  17  should  apply  most  strictly  to  a  man's  statement 
of  his  Christian  experience,  particularly  to  his  relation  of  his  ante-conversion 
experience.  There  is  no  use,  and  no  honour  done  to  God,  in  forgetting,  or  under- 
valuing, or  denying,  the  good  wrought  in  a  man  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  even  before 
by  regeneration  he  became  definitely  a  Christian.]  For  "  I  persecuted  the  Church 
ojf  God."  (a)  Sin  once  committed,  not  even  God  can  undo  it.  Pardon  of  the 
past  cannot  alter  the  past.  It  may  be  forgiven,  but  it  abides  a  fact.  Paul  did 
stand  by,  "  consenting,"  when  Stephen  was  stoned,  as  certainly  as  he  did  study 
in  the  school  of  Gamaliel.  The  veil  of  Divine  mercy  may  "  cover  "  the  sin,  but 
the  thing  is  there  Sins  fade  from  our  memory,  or  the  remembrance  may  lose 
its  poignancy  by  time  [it  evidently  did  not  with  Paul]  ;  God's  anger  on  account 
of  them  is  turned  away,  from  the  moment  that  the  sinner  trusts  in  Christ ;  from 
that  moment  there  is  no  hell  to  fear  on  their  account :  but  they  are  there.  The 
prodigal  sits  forgiven  and  happy  at  his  father's  table,  but  the  riot  of  a  far 
country  is  a  fact  and  the  inheritance  is  wasted.  The  bankrupt  gets  his  order 
of  discharge,  but  his  debts  are  facts  nevertheless.  And  he  owes  them  still. 
Legally  they  no  longer  concern  him ;  he  is  "  justified "  from  them.  He  may 
prosper,  and  his  new  gains  are  safe ;  but  he  is  in  debt  still.  The  law  and  the- 
favour  of  his  creditors  make  him  safe  ;  but  an  honest  man  feels  that  morally  and 
in  fact  he  is  a  debtor  still.     So  Paul,  the  chief  apostle,  is  God's  debtor  still.     In 

326 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xv. 


the  moment  fixed  precisely  for  his  readers  in  Phil.  iii.  7,  a  line  was  graciously 
drawn  across  the  record  of  his  life ;  nothing  beyond  it  would  again  come  up  to 
his  condemnation.     But  the  line  was  drawn  by  grace,  by  mere  favour  for  the 
sake  of  Another.     The  persecutor  might  and  did  build  high  in  holy  attainment, 
but  the  foundation  was  an  act  of  favour,  grace,  and  only  grace.     "  By  the  grace 
of  God  I  ain"  etc.,  is  as  continuously  true  of  his  standing  before  God  as  of  his 
abundant  and  fruitful  life-activity.      In  himself  and  his  own  status^  this  chief 
apostle  is  "  not  meet  to  he  called  an  apostle,  hecause^^  etc.     The  guilt  of  his  persecu- 
tion is  not  now  upon  him ;  he  is  being  sanctified  from  his  love  of  sin ;  it  has  no 
dominion  over  him,  we  may  well  believe  ;  he  is  pardoned,  rejoicing,  God-honoured, 
holy.     But  there  is  the  fact,  unalterable  to  all  eternity, — ^''  I  persecuted."     And 
the  remembrance  of  all  this  will  make  such  words  as  ver.  9  always  natural  and 
always  true.     (6)  How  does  that  father   [e.g.  John  Tregenoweth  :    His  Mark, 
M.  G.  Pearse]  in  after-years  look  upon  that  child  whom  years  ago  he  injured  or 
blinded  in  the  utter  ignorance  of  deep  intoxication  ?     How  does  that  man  look 
upon  his  friend,  when  he  finds  that  in  an  hour  of  passion,  though  in  perfect  good 
faith  [the  good  faith  of  a  madman],  he  said  and  did  what  proves  to  have  been 
utterly  false  and  to  have  done  a  lifelong  wrong  to  his  friend,  at  least  with  some 
who  have  not  come,  or  will  not,  to  know  his  friend  as  he  now  knows  him  ?     How 
does  he  feel,  who  in  the  dark  has  struck  his  very  brother,  supposing  the  while 
that  he  was  resisting  an  enemy  1     With  all  the  energy  of  a  grand  native  capacity 
and  all  the  force  of  intense  conviction,  Paul  had  flung  himself  against  ["  fallen 
upon  "  (Matt.  xxi.  44)]  his  Brother,  his  Best  Friend,  the  Bedeemer  of  his  soul, 
his  Divine  Messiah.     True  he  "  did  it  ignorantly,"  but  he  did  it.     Oh,  the  horror 
of  it !     Oh,  the  shame  of  it !     Oh,  the  wrong,  the  sin,  of  it  !     "  Chief  of  sinners  !" 
*'  Least  of  the  apostles  !     Not  worthy  to  he  called  an  apostle  !  "     The  words  are 
natural,  honest,  true.     All  this,  then,   being  remembered,  he  is  free  to  say — 
(2)  "  More  than  they  all."     But  "  hy  the  grace  of  God."     [Some  poor,  wretched, 
lost  souls  on  earth  have  to  say,  and  in  hell  will  have  to  say  eternally,  "  In  spite 
of  the  grace  of  God,  I  am  what  I  am  !  "     Men  may  "  receive  the  grace  of  God 
in  vain,"  making  it  to  end  in  no  such  saving  result  as  it  was  designed  to  accom- 
pHsh.     There  are  some  lives  of  which  one  has  to  say,  reversing  Rom.  v.  20,  "  Where 
grace  abounded,  sin  did  much  more  abound."      In  many  senses  true,  "  What 
maketh   heaven,   that   maketh    hell."     Paul  is  a  ''good  steward  of   the  grace 
of  God  "  (1  Pet.  iv.   10).]     He  is  not  here  thinking  only  or  principally  of  his 
standing   with   God,  but   of   himself   as   measured  by  what  he  has  been  able 
to  accomplish  for  his  Master's  work.     Not  merely  "  by  the  favour  of  God "  ; 
"  grace  "  seldom  means  so  little  as  that  in  the  New  Testament.     It  is  rather  the 
actual  power  which  has  quickened  and  enlightened  the  mind,  and  energised  the 
will,   and  aroused  the  devotion  of  the  heart ;  a  power  and  force  which,  when 
pursued  to  its  last  analysis,  is  revealed  as  the  indwelling,  personal  Spirit  of  God. 
[John  Hunt,  one  of  the  early  missionaries  to  the  Fiji  islands,  desiring  to  impress 
this  practical  interchangeableness  of  the  thoughts,  "  grace  "  and  "  Holy  Spirit," 
in  a  preliminary  and  confessedly  tentative  rendering  of  some  of  the  Epistles  into 
the  Bau  dialect,  several  times  deliberately  translated  "  grace  "  by  "  Holy  Spirit  " 
(told  to  H.  J.   F.  by  Hunt's  colleague,  R.  B.   Lyth).]     (3)  The  meaning  and 
practical  value  of  such  self-assertion  as  is  here  found  in  Paul's  letters,  is  dealt  with 
in  many  other  places  of  these  Epistles,  particularly  chap.  ix.  and  2  Cor.  x.  sqq. 
It  is  never  the  gratuitous  parading  of  himself  which  is  natural  to  the  vain  man, 
who  cannot  be  happy  unless  he  is  the  centre  of  attention  ;  nor  the  masterful  self- 
assertion  of  the  consciously  strong  man.     It  is  always  forced  upon  him  by  others 
(2  Cor.  xii.  11,  "  Ye  have  compelled  me") ;  it  is  forced  out  from  him  by  others. 
It  is  here  a  question  of  safeguarding  and  vindicating  an  Apostolic  status  and 
consequent  authority,  whose  primary  purpose  and  main  worth  were  the  service 

327 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS. 


of  the  Churches  and  the  **  edification "  of  the  Corinthians  themselves 
(2  Cor.  X.  8).  And,  moreover,  with  the  more  reason,  that  he  found  his  action  in 
declining  the  maintenance  by  the  Church  which  other  teachers  accepted,  was 
misconstrued  into  a  confession  of  conscious  inferiority  of  status.  A  Christian 
man  cannot  be  too  utterly  humble  as  before  God ;  his  sense  of  abundant  and 
entire  indebtedness  to  the  grace  of  God  for  all  he  is,  and  for  all  he  has  been  able 
to  accomplish,  cannot  be  kept  too  keen.  After  every  new  success  [and  at  every 
new  "  failure "]  he  will  do  wisely  to  present  himself  before  God,  with  fullest 
acknowledgment  that  in  it  all  he  is  only  the  organon  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
[There  are  two  moments  when  Self  is  very  near  and  when  self-centering  thought 
is  a  very  real  peril  to  the  spiritual  life ;  the  moment  of  "  mo7^e  abundant " 
success,  and  the  moment  of  more  abundant  failure.]  Comparison  with  his 
fellow -workers  is  a  dangerous  occupation  of  thought  for  any  man,  and,  as  here, 
needs  instantly  and  constantly  guarding  with  the  fullest  acknowledgment,  "  Yet 
not  I,  hut  .  .  .  God.^^  [Cf .  another,  "  Yet  not  I,  but,"  etc.  (Gal.  ii.  20),  where  the 
thought  is  substantially  unaffected  by  the  important  various  reading.]  It  will 
be  the  rarest  occupation  of  his  meditation,  and  still  more  rarely  will  such  words 
of  self-assertion  come  to  his  lips.  The  facts  of  his  life  and  work  best  speak  for 
him.  Yet,  like  Paul,  he  may  thankfully  appear  before  his  Master, — like  the 
servant  in  the  Parable  of  the  Pounds  [not,  of  course,  the  Talents,  the  structure 
and  teaching  of  which  illustrate  a  distinctly  difierent  point], — whose  pound  has 
gained  ten  pounds,  whilst  the  same  original  "  capital "  in  the  case  of  his  fellow- 
servants  has  only  produced  five  or  none  (Luke  xix.  16-20) ;  and  may  remember 
how  greater  native  capacity  and  more  abundant  work  have  co-operated  with  the 
grace  of  God,  to  give  him  a  real  pre-eminence  in  toil  and  fruit.  And  he  may  bear 
himself  amongst  his  fellows  as  one  in  whom  the  grace  of  God  has  found  a 
conspicuous  and  instructive  example  of  what  it  can  do  in  human  nature.  But 
all  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  for  the  advancement  of  the  work  committed  to 
his  hands. 

We  have  also  in  this  paragraph  : — 

II.  An  early  account  of  "the  Gospel"  as,  1.  Besting  on  facts;  2.  Rooted  in 
Old  Testament  Scriptm^e ;  3.  Received  hy  faith. 

1.  Resting  on  facts. — (1)  If  any  facts  of  ancient  history  can  be  attested  at  all, 
such  main  outlines  at  the  least  of  the  Gospel  story  as  are  given  here  may  be. 
Naturally  such  facts,  particularly  that  of  Christ's  resurrection  fiom  a  real  death, 
need  more  evidence  than  do  facts  against  which  no  presumption  arises  from  their 
being  unlike  those  of  ordinary  experience.  "  Need,"  for  producing  conviction  in 
ordinary  minds ;  for  one  "  proof,"  if  it  were  irrefragable  and  gave  demonstration, 
may  establish  a  certainty  ;  anything  beyond  siva^ly  facilitates  h^Meii,  by  eliminat- 
ing the  chances  of  error  which  may  lurk  behind  a  single  proof,  and  by  giving  the 
(not  simply  added,  but)  multiple  certainty  of  convergent  proofs,  and  by  reducing 
to  a  minimum  the  force  of  any  preliminary  presumption  against.  When  a  writer 
says,  "  Early  Christianity  was,  in  all  its  essentials,  a  special  development  of  the 
common  religious  ideas  of  Asia  Minor  and  Syria.  It  was  the  creed  of  Adonis, 
the  creed  of  Attis,  dressed  up  afresh  and  applied  with  minor  differences  to  a 
certain  historical  or  mythical  personage,  said  to  have  lived  in  Galilee  about  the 
beginning  of  the  Christian  era.  Of  this  personage  himself  we  know  really 
nothing  but  the  name  or  names  ;  every  supposed  fact  or  incident  related  of  him 
is  merely  one  of  the  common  and  universal  incidents  related  of  all  the  other 
gods"  (Grant  Allen,  Fortnightly  Review,  September  1893), — he  is  not  only 
asserting  what  few  responsible  historical  students  would  affirm,  but  is  displaying 
a  scepticism  which  would  make  any  certainty  about  all  ancient  history,  or  about 
any  facts  not  actually  within  a  man's  direct  personal  knowledge,  impossible. 
Historical  evidence  is  probable  evidence;  but  sufficient  testimony  may  make 

328 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xV. 


probability  practical  certainty.     (2)  These  verses  are  a  piece  of  documentary 
evidence  acknowledged  on  all  hands  to  be  of  the  highest  value.     There  is  no 
important  disbelief  that  they  are  part  of  a  letter  of  a  man  practically  a  con- 
temporary of  the  events  he  chronicles,  writing  not  more  than  twenty-eight  or 
thirty  years  after  the  date  assumed  for  them.     They  are  of   a  good  class  of 
testimony ;  epistolary,  incidentally,  stated,  not  formally  proved  ;  asserted  to  be 
accepted  by  the  readers  of  the  letters  as  well  as  by  the  writer ;  and  that,  more- 
over, by  readers  many  of  whom  were  at  most  not  favourably  disposed  towards 
the  writer,  whilst  some  of  them  would  have  been  glad  to  discredit  anything  he 
was  or  said ;  especially  when  also  he  is  here  using  what  he  claims  to  be  their 
belief,  to  rebuke  and  refute  what  he  asserts  to  be  their  inexcusable,  unreasonable, 
mischievous  error.      The  fact  of  a  resurrection  of  a  dead  Christ  is  not  one  hard 
to   be   brought  to  the  test ;    it  is  not  easy,   or  a  thing  easily  credible  as  an 
explanatory  theory,  to  mistake  for  a  Divine  man  risen  from  the  dead  in  full 
vigour  and  glory  a  crucified  sufferer,  never  really  dead,  reviving  from  a  swoon, 
creeping  feebly  out  of  a  grave  (and  this  especially  guarded)  to  an  obscure  life 
where  no  most  interested  enemy  ever  suspected  His  presence,  or  succeeded  in 
discovering  Him.      The   death  was  officially  secured   and  acknowledged ;    the 
burial   was    conducted   by   friends,    but   with   the   cognisance   and   under   the 
surveillance  of  enemies;  a  real  resurrection  was  not  difficult  of  verification  or 
disproof.       Fraud  or  conscious  deception  on  the  part  of  the  early  witnesses  is 
not  now  seriously  alleged.      (3)  Yery  marked  and  warranted  attention  has  of 
late  been  drawn  to  the  evidence  of  ver.  6.     Its  force  was  long  ago  perceived,  but 
it  has  come  into  prominence  as  meeting  the  suggestion  of  some  hallucination  of 
a  woman,  infecting  other  women,  and  working  with  a  predisposition  to  believe 
[a  thing  entirely  without  evidence,  and  against  all  such  evidence  as  is  extant, 
whatever  be  its  value],  to  make  a  company  of  disheartened  men  believe  that,  not 
only  was  Jesus  risen,  but  that  they  had  seen  Him  so  risen.     *'  The  greater  part'^  of 
five  hundred  simultaneous  spectators  and  auditors  of  the  Risen  Lord  remained 
for  testimony  and  examination.     I.e.  not  fewer  than  two  hundred  and  fifty-one, 
and  perhaps  three  or  four  hundred,  persons  are  asserted  by  Paul  to  be  still  living, 
not  later  than  thirty  years  (at  the  outside)  after  the  fact  in  question, — a  fact  about 
which  thoi'e  could  be  little  room  for  mistake, — and  all  of  them  most  thoroughly 
assured  that  they  all  saw  the  Crucified  Christ  at  one  and  the  same  time.     The 
history  of  conspiracies  does  not  make  it  likely  that  in  this  one  case  only  there 
should  never  have  been  either  a  penitent,  or  a  traitor,  to  reveal  a  concerted 
deception,  if  even  so  many  could  have  been  brought  to  agree  to  it  in  the  first 
instance.      One  person  may  be  under  an  illusion,  but  hardly  twelve,  or  two 
hundred  and  fifty-one,  or  five  hundred ;  and  certainly  no  two  or  twelve  or  five 
hundred  would  be  under  the  same  illusion,  and  all  under  the  same  at  once. 
The  number  of  the  simultaneous  witnesses  eliminates  everything  subjective, — 
predisposition,  illusion,  temperament,  fraud.     [Myths,  it  is  also  urged,  take  longer 
time  to  grow  than  did  this  "  myth  "  of  Christ's  miracles  and  resurrection,  which 
(N.B.)  had  plainly  already  "  grown,"  some  years  earlier  than  this  Corinthian 
date.     Myth,  or  subjective  persuasion,  does  not  account  for  the  holy  character 
and  effects  of  the  story.     A  myth,  or  a  story  whose  basis  was  a  predisposition  or 
a  temperament  or  a  mistake,  does  not  afford  adequate  foundation  for  the  Christian 
Church,  or  account  for  the  character  and  the  steadfastness  of  the  first  Christians, 
who,  against  all  their  interests,  against  all  the  tendencies  of  the  sinful  human 
heart,  and  at  severe  and  deadly  cost,  persisted  in  their  creed  and  succeeded  in 
spreading  it.     Nor  do  they  account  for  the  perennial  vitality  of  the  belief  age 
after  age,  or  for  its  renewing  power  in  all  races,  Churches,  social  ranks,  ages, 
both  sexes,  etc. 

2.  Rooted  in  Old  Testament  Scripture. — (1)  Christianity  and  its  several  basal  facts 

329 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS, 


are  never  fairly  judged  if  brought  to  the  bar  standing  alone.  Its  most  startlingly 
miraculous  fact  loses  much  presumptive  improbability,  gains  some  presumptive 
probability,  if  it  is  seen  to  be  part  of  a  coherent  scheme  of  facts  and  doctrines, 
in  which  each  lends  meaning  and  support  to  every  other,  and  which  gives  an 
adequate  reason  for  the  divergence  from  the  ''  natural  "  order  and  ordinary  human 
experience.  The  whole  company  of  facts  must  be  brought  to  trial  in  their  com- 
bination. [E.g.  on  the  Christian  theory  of  the  nature  and  work  of  Christ,  it  is  not 
improbable  that  His  entrance  into  the  world  should  be  exceptional,  or  that  His 
departure  from  it  should  be  exceptional ;  that  such  a  person  tor  such  a  purpose 
should  work  miracles,  or  rise  from  the  dead.  Christianity,  on  its  own  suppositions, 
gives  an  adequate  reason  for  all  the  "  miraculous  "  in  it.]  (2)  Christianity  must  be 
read  in  the  light  of  this  fact  amongst  others,  that  it  was  preceded  by  a  collection 
of  books,* held  sacred  by  its  Jewish  opponents,  of  wliich  it  claims  to  be  the  con- 
tinuation, the  expansion,  the  complement,  the  fulfilment  (Heb.  i.  1).  The  very 
claim  is  noteworthy,  in  face  of  the  notoriously  unfriendly  attitude  of  Judaism  to 
Christianity  from  the  very  first  ;  let  the  reasons  for  making  such  a  claim  be 
considered.  However  to  be  accounted  for,  the  fact  remains  that  the  Old 
Testament  from  beginning  to  end  contains  many  things,  many  passages,  which 
exhibit  a  wonderful  coincidence  with,  and  suitableness  to,  the  history  and  the 
Christian  account  of  the  work  of  Christ.  The  Founder  of  Christianity  Himself 
put  His  followers  upon  the  track  of  discovery  of  such  correspondences.  (See 
Critical  Notes.)  Christianity  and  the  Resurrection  of  its  Christ  are  no 
isolated  facts,  sprung  full-grown  into  a  void  place  in  the  history  of  religions. 
The  theory  of  the  creation  of  a  Christ  by  His  followers  out  of  presuppositions 
and  expectations  gathered  from  their  reading  of  the  Old  Testament,  disregards  the 
only  available  or  colourable  historic  evidence,  that  their  reading  and  training  in 
the  Old  Testament  led  them,  as  it  led  their  Jewish  enemies,  into  quite  another  line 
of  conception  and  expectation  of  the  Christ.  Old  Testament  and  New  Testament 
are  two  parts  of  one  Revelation.  The  Mosaic  system  is  not  the  main  stream 
of  the  Old  Testament.  It  "  came  in  "  by  the  way  ;  "  it  was  added  "  for  a  special 
purpose  (Rom.  v.  20;  Gal.  iii.  19);  it  flows  alongside  of  the  main  stream.  It 
is  abundantly  rich  in  teaching  about  Christ  and  the  Gospel,  the  very  arrange- 
ments of  the  Tabernacle  being  an  object  lesson  in  Divine  truth  (Heb.  ix.  8,  11). 
But  •'  the  Scriptui^es  "  are  larger  than  "  the  Law"  and  some  are  older,  or  contain 
a  record  of  an  older  revelation,  than  "  the  Law."  Christ,  and  the  Resurrection 
which  sets  the  seal  of  completeness  upon  His  redeeming  work,  are  the  fulfilment 
of,  not  the  hope  of  Israel  only,  but  of  man.  In  Christ  are  the  pledge  and  the 
contents  of  a  covenant  as  old  as  Abraham  (Gal.  iii.  14,  16,  29).  Christ  is  a  new 
Adam,  over  against  the  first  Adam.  The  importance  of  rooting  the  new  Gospel 
thus  firmly  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  lay  in  this,  that  it  was  not  Israelite 
only  in  its  scope  and  redemption  grace,  but  wide  as  mankind.  And  amongst  its 
cogent  "  evidences  "  is  this,  that  it  fulfils  previsions,  predictions,  promises,  hopes, 
put  on  record  long  before— fulfils  them  where  only  One  Mind,  the  Divine, 
could  have  arranged  the  coincidences,  the  correspondences,  the  paired  anticipa- 
tions and  realisations  (see  Appended  Note). 

3.  Received  by  faith. — "  Ye  believed  ;  "  "  unless  ye  believed  in  vain."  How 
vital  was  the  connection  between  the  truth  of  the  history  and  their  personal 
Christian  Hfe  will  be  seen  subsequently  in  the  chapter  (vers.  12-19).  But  it  is 
there  discussed  with  regard  rather  to  the  theory  of  the  Christian  life.  Practically 
the  connection  is  very  close.  John  often  connects  faith  in  the  Incarnation  with 
regeneration  (1  Ep.  iv.  15,  v.  5,  10-12,  etc.).  Paul  himself  very  closely  connects 
salvation  with  faith  in  the  Resurrection  of  Christ  [Rom.  x.  9  ;  observe  also  how 
this  is  rooted  in  Old  Testament  Scripture,  Deut.  xxx.  14].  The  Lord  and  Teacher 
of  both  had  connected  '*  eternal  life  "  with  "  knowing  the  Only  True  God " 

330 


HOMlLEflC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS     chap.  XV. 


(John  xvii.  3).  In  fact,  no  doctrine  is  believed  in  until  it  has  become  a  truth  into 
which  living  experience  has  admitted  a  man.  He  may  indeed  fall  away,  fearfully, 
from  such  knowledge  as  is  even  thus  gained  (Heb.  x.  26,  vi.  4-6).  But  it  is  a 
remote  possibility.  The  people  of  Christ  are  "  sanctified  by  the  truth."  They 
have  within  themselves  a  Faith  deeper  than  a  mere  Creed,  however  intelligently 
accepted  and  held.  Without  being  a  theologian  a  man  may  be  a  believer,  and  one 
also  who  can  give  a  good  account  of  his  ^^  faith."  A  new  environment,  where 
unbelief  is  customary ;  a  crop  of  difficulties  and  objections,  not  known  or 
appreciated  earlier  ;  above  all,  a  moral  deterioration ;  may  sever  the  merely 
**  othcdox  man "  from  his  creed.  The  believer  "  stowc^s "  by  his  faith;  it  givts 
him  status  before  God — his  only  status  ;  it  brings  him  a  real  strength  in  which  he 
*' sto^cZs  "  against  trial,  persecution,  doubt.  The  martyrs  were  drawn  from  this 
class  of  believers.  They  died  for  truths  which  had  become  part  of  their  very 
selves,  for  truths  which  had  made  them  what  they  were.  [Might  it  be  said  by 
way  of  illustration,  that  the  merely  orthodox  man,  like  the  crustacean^  carries  his 
skeleton  and  shield  and  strength  outside  him,  and  so  can  easily  "  cast  "  it,  as  the 
crustaceans  do  ;  whilst  the  believer  has  his  supporting,  strengthening  "  truth  " 
within,  where  vertebrates  have  their  skeleton  ?  The  skeleton  within  the  man  is 
belief ;  the  skeleton  outside  the  man  is  orthodoxy.] 

HOMILETIG  ANALYSIS.— Verses  12—19. 

1.  "Does  death  end  all?"  Well,  answer  another  question:  *' Did  His 
death  end  all  ? "  A  popular  illustrated  edition  of  Renan's  Vie  de  Jesus  has,  as 
its  last  page,  inserted  even  after  the  "  i^m,"  which  closes  the  text,  a  woodcut  of 
the  Crucified.  It  is  simply  and  only  a  crucified  peasant,  one  before  whose  cross  a 
man  might  pass  with  half -contemptuous  pity,  and  cry  in  modern  slang,  '*  Poor 
beggar  !  Pauvre  diahle  !  "  He  is  alone  as  he  hangs  in  the  picture  ;  not  even 
the  raven  of  the  classical  quotation  is  yet  wheeling  around  the  gibbet ;  the  sky 
behind  is  cloudy  and  angry ;  the  head  hangs  slouched  in  death's  relaxation ;  the 
hair  is  the  uncombed,  matted  mass  of  a  wretched  peasant  who  for  twenty-four 
hours  has  been  in  the  hands  of  enemies.  The  title  of  the  picture  might  have 
been  "  Fin  "  too.  The  realistic  page,  the  execution  of  a  Jewish  fanatic,  is  the 
last  in  Renan's  book.  When  He  says,  "  It  is  finished,"  Renan  thinks  it  is 
finished  too.  The  Vie  de  Jesus  goes  no  further.  Forsaken,  a  failure,  finished, — 
so  He  hangs  in  the  illustration.  If  that  were  all,  if  the  life  of  Jesus  did  end 
there,  what  a  difference  !  But  is  that  the  end  of  the  story  of  the  Incarnate 
Son  ?  No.  His  life  did  not  begin  at  Bethlehem  ;  nor  did  it  finish  at  Calvary. 
Yet  such  talk  as  was  rife  at  Corinth,  at  least  in  some  quarters,  could  only 
have  one  logical  consequence,  viz.  that  it  did  there  finish,  that  Christ,  like 
any  other  dear  or  great  name  of  the  past,  is  nothing  but  a  memory.  2.  Doubt- 
less a  good  deal  of  such  talk  was  the  informal,  loose,  "  liberal,"  "  intellectual " 
theologising  on  this  particular  topic,  of  which  the  first  and  last  and  only  speci- 
men was  by  no  means  that  in  Corinth.  Some  caught  up,  parrot-fashion,  the 
current  novelty  of  their  circle  :  "  No  intelligent  man,  you  know,  believes  in  any 
resurrection  of  literally  dead  men.  Nobody,  you  know,  denies  the  Resurrection. 
Oh  no;  but  of  course  it  is  agreed  that  nothing  was  ever  meant  but  a  moral 
rising  again.  *  Awake  to  righteousness,'  for  example."  Or  a  superficial, 
natural  sharpness,  in  danger  of  making  that  native  shrewdness  which  so  generally 
proves  right  in  common  things,  the  arbiter  of  judgment  in  every  sort  of  case 
which  comes  under  its  review,  pronounces  off-hand  :  "  Cannot  be,  you  know  ! 
The  dead  rise  again  ?  The  dead  ?  Why,  look  at  them  !  Is  not  that  enough  % " 
(ver.  35).     Or  another  of  these  exceedingly  clever,  reasonable  people,  with  great 

331 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


wisdom  propounds  their  pet  difficulty  :  "  Well,  you  see,  our  point  is  here.  We 
cannot  see  where  they  are  to  get  a  body.  What  sort  of  body  is  conceivable  for 
them  ?  No,  no ;  such  a  doctrine  cannot  pass  muster  with  us."  Human  nature 
is  the  same  in  all  ages  and  Churches  and  lands.  It  likes  to  pose  as  the 
philosopher ;  it  likes  to  be  amongst  the  people  "  not  quite  so  easily  satisfied  as 
some  folks,  you  know  !  "  And  there  may  have  been  some  in  their  hearts  really 
half  afraid  of  the  doctrine ;  hardly  caring  to  face  the  thought  of  having  some  day 
to  confront  in  a  restored  life  the  past  and  its  account.  3.  By-and-by  (ver.  36  sqq.) 
Paul  deals  fully  with  the  objections  raised  by  such  "sharp,"  "'cute" 
people,  rather  vain  of  their  wisdom,  and  of  their  emancipation  from  old  and 
foolish  beliefs.  Here  he  drives  home  at  their  Christianity.  He  gives  them 
credit  for  being  sincerely  Christian,  so  far  as  they  understood  it.  In  ver.  36  he 
is  bitingly  satirical :  "  Yes,  you  are  exceedingly  clever,  no  doubt,  to  perceive 
such  difficulties.  But  you  are  really  fools,  with  all  your  wisdom."  Here  he 
takes  the  most  favourable  estimate  :  They  do  really  care  to  be  Christians ;  they 
do  really  prize  their  Christian  hope ;  they  would  be  distressed,  he  is  willing  to 
believe,  if  all  ended  in  vanity  and  mocking  emptiness.  Then  let  them  look 
where  they  are  being  led,  before  they  commit  themselves  to  such  rash  pro- 
nouncements. Are  they  prepared  to  go  all  the  length  of  the  path  into  which, 
with  such  a  light  heart  and  confident,  they  have  begun  to  enter?  4.  "  iW) 
resurrection  of  dead  persons  "  at  all  ?  Then  take  a  choice  ;  read  the  alternative 
in  two  directions  :  "All,  or  none  at  all."  All,  or  no  risen  Christ !  (vers.  13,  16). 
"  One  and  all."  A  risen  Christ,  and  therefore  all  !  If  no  risen  Christ,  then 
all  distinctively  "  Christian"  preaching  is  folly  (ver.  14),  or  falsehood  (ver.  15), 
whether  intentionally  so  or  not.  To  recast,  reconstruct,  the  Christian  scheme,  so 
as  to  leave  out  a  Risen  Christ,  is  to  produce  what  is  not  Christianity  at  all.  For 
what  underlies  this  elimination  of  His  rising  again  in  the  proposed  scheme  of 
doctrine  ?  Naturalism  ;  which  presumes  always  against  the  breaking-in  of  the 
supernatural,  and  even  the  exceptional,  upon  the  natural  and  ordinary  in  the 
world's  course.  ["  Are  we  then,  by  assuming  this  one  event,  to  abandon 
the  entire  modern  view  of  the  world  1 "  (A.  Schweizer,  quoted  by  Delitzsch). 
"  So  soon  as  I  can  convince  myself  of  the  reality  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ, 
this  absolute  miracle,  as  Paul  seems  to  declare  it,  I  shatter  the  modern 
conception  of  the  word.  This  breach  in  the  order  of  nature,  which  I  regard  as 
inviolable,  would  be  an  irreparable  breach  in  my  system,  in  my  whole  world  of 
thought"  (H.  Lang,  ajowcZ  Delitzsch,  Expositor,  January  1889).]  And  that  is 
no  "Christianity"  which  is  not  full  of  God's  present-day,  active,  wise,  loving 
opei'ativeness  in  His  world,  especially  as  incessantly  "  elaborating "  its  Re- 
demption by  His  Son,  Christ.  As  well,  moreover,  delete  the  Cross  as  the 
Besuriection,  and  hope  to  call  the  expurgated  story  the  story  of  Christ.  It 
may  be  an  imitation  of  the  story ;  like  some  clever  historical  novels,  making 
use  of  known  facts,  and  keeping  in  many  parts  fairly  parallel  with  them.  But 
though  it  may  borrow  the  name,  and  try  to  pass  as  "  a  Gospel,"  though  with 
difierences ;  it  is  a  "  different  Gospel "  ;  another  there  cannot  be  (Gal.  i.  6,  7). 
The  old  ^^ preaching  is  vainj^  if  this  be  true.  A  vexatiously  restrictive  code  of 
ethics  is  left,  without  adequate  motive  or  power,  and  encumbered  with  a  good 
deal  else  besides  the  Resurrection  which  is  "  top-hamper,"  some  day  to  be  thrown 
overboard  to  lighten  the  ship.  5.  Nor  has  it  only  theological  consequences. 
The  practical  consequences  are  many  and  serious.  Faith  in  good  testimony  is 
seriously  shaken  (ver.  15) ;  but  of  more  consequence  is  it  that  Faith  has  been 
groping  after,  laying  hold  of,  a  shadow,  a  memory,  a  name,  a  vanished  Christ. 
There  may  have  been  an  offering  of  the  Lamb  of  God  on  Calvary,  but  we  have 
no  token  by  which  to  differentiate  that  death  from  any  other  crucifixion.  The 
offering  may  have  been  accepted,  but  we  have  no  evidence  of  the  fact.     Behind 

332 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xv. 


the  veil  there  is  for  a  guilty  soul  no  real,  living,  interceding  High  Priest 
drawing  near  to  God  with  its  burden  of  ^^  sins"  (ver.  17).  Long  ago  that 
"  High  Priest's "  body  was  left  to  corrupt  in  its  new  grave  in  a  garden  near 
Jerusalem.  Jesus  is  no  more  than  the  Lazarus  now  finally  dead ;  He  is  only 
living  as  Paul  is  still  living.  The  death  on  the  cross  may  then  well  have  been 
only  the  abortive  end,  unfortunately  premature,  of  a  life  which  might  have  done 
much  more  for  its  generation  if  it  had  been  longer  spared.  But  everything 
distinctive  of  the  Christian  hope,  everything  of  a  real  Atonement  on  which  a 
guilty  conscience  may  stay  itself,  is  gone.  Christ  is  one  of  the  world's  great 
names — perhaps  the  greatest.  But  "^7^  Christ"!  As  well  say  "m  Paul"  "i 
6.  "  In  Christ"  It  is  a  restricted  life.  It  has  its  joys  and  its  compensations, 
whatever  its  value,  or  truth,  or  falsehood.  But  it  has  its  restrictions,  its 
sacrifices,  its  self-denial ;  it  goes  entirely  against  the  "  grain  "  of  human  nature  ; 
it  entails  heavy  penalties,  social  and  other.  And  if,  after  all,  its  eternal 
compensation  is  a  delusion  ;  if,  above  all,  the  guilty  soul  must  pass  into  eternity 
without  a  Saviour  and  an  Atonement,  left  eternally  "  in  the  lurch,"  *'  made 
ashamed  by  our  hope  "  (Rom.  v.  5) ;  then  Christians  have  lived  in  a  fool's 
paradise,  and  made  a  fool's  bargain.  In  the  arena  as  they  are,  before  a  gazing 
world  (iv.  9),  they  may  well  expect  the  laughter  of  the  spectators,  unless 
indeed  these  accord  them  pity.  They  are  of  "  all  vnen  most  pitiable."  "  Nos 
perituri  salutamus."  [And  this  is  not  much  mitigated,  if — seeing  that  the 
argument  of  the  chapter  assumes  that  no  resurrection  means  no  after-life  at 
all,  and  so  no  judgment  or  (perhaps)  hell — it  be  the  earthly  bargain  of  which 
account  is  alone  taken  by  Paul.] 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  20—34. 

The  Divine  Goal  of  Creation  History. 

I.  Contrasts. — This  section  divides  at  ver.  29.  In  the  one  half  and  in  the 
other  we  are  at  two  levels,  in  two  worlds.  [Cf.  Raphael's  "  Transfiguration," 
where  literal  truth  is  sacrificed  to  the  higher  truth  of  the  nearness  and 
close  relation  between  the  upper,  mountain-top  world  of  calm,  light,  heaven, 
glory,  and  the  lower  world  of  scoffing  Pharisees,  bewildered  disciples,  and 
demon -possessed  humanity.].  In  vers.  20-28  we  are  amongst  the  most  sublime 
disclosures  of  all  the  Christian  Scriptures — disclosures  which  with  their  very 
excess  of  glory  almost  cease  to  disclose  anything.  They  are  sublime  almost  to 
being  obscure.  The  horizon  is  so  bright,  and  the  facts  are  so  far  away  and  so 
low  down  towards  it,  that  we  can  scarcely  make  out  anything.  We  hear  such 
words  as  ver.  28  ;  we  repeat  the  words  ;  but  we  can  scarcely  do  more  than  let 
our  hearts  ponder,  and  reverently  and  soberly  imagine;  we  can  make  nothing 
precise.  Paul  is  borne  up  and  along  in  soaring  flights  of  confident  strength, 
where  we  can  hardly  follow,  even  with  our  eyes.  On  the  other  hand,  in 
vers.  29-34,  we  are  on  a  very  earthly  level  indeed.  There  is  mystery  here,  but 
only  such  as  wraps  around  an  obscure,  superstitious  practice  of  a  few  half- 
Christianised  Corinthians.  The  rest  is  plain  enough  !  A  Paul  in  the  midst  of 
men  who  are  like  the  very  ^^ beasts"  of  the  amphitheatre.  Corinthians  sinking 
into  a  drunken  sleep  of  unrighteousness,  from  which  he  seeks  to  ^^  awaken  "  them 
to  "  righteousness"  or,  at  the  least,  to  "  shame."  [Such  revelations  to  be  first  given 
to  the  world  in  a  letter  to  such  "  Christians  "  !  "  Kind  to  the  unthankful  and 
to  the  evil  "  indeed  (Luke  vi.  35).]  So  near,  also,  are  the  two  worlds  always. 
The  evil  closely  enfolds  the  holy.  Or  is  it  the  holy  which  enfolds  the  evil  ?  The  salt 
is — just  where  it  is  wanted — in  the  midst  of  what  but  for  it  would  be  corrup- 
tion. We  live  in  both  worlds.  In  the  seclusion  of  the  mountain-top  sometimes ; 
oftener  at  the  mountain-foot  amongst  the  enemies  and  the  demons,  or  in  th« 

333 


CHAP.  XV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


arena  amongst  the  beasts.  Happy  if  the  memories  of  the  upper  level  are  our 
strength  down  on  the  lower.  Happy  if  such  truths  as  are  in  vers.  20-28  may 
keep  our  souls  from  the  infection  of  "  evil  communications,^^  or  from  the  *'  sleep  " 
of  the  intoxication  of  scepticism  or  sin.  So,  again,  are  the  two  worlds  near 
together,  the  two  levels  not  very  remote,  in  the  inner  life  of  the  soul.  Glorious 
revelations  ;  miserable  superstitions.  Soaring  hopes  of  victories ;  battles  for  very 
life  with  the  "  beast "  within  our  nature.  Standing  by  the  side  of  our  Lord, 
with  our  foot  placed  where  His  has  first  been,  on  the  neck  of  some  foe  of  our 
souFs  Life ;  sinking  into  the  perilous,  criminal  sloth  or  torpor  induced  by  an 
atmosphere  of  "  evil  communications r  And  thus  we  knit  together  the  two  ends 
of  the  paragraph.  "  Now  is  Christ  7Hsen"  Spite  of  all  the  theorisers  and 
speculators  and  keen  creators  of  "  insuperable "  difficulties,  the  fact  is  sure. 
Paul  stands  by  the  slothful,  sleeping,  drunken -souled  Corinthians,  and  shouts  his 
cry  into  the  drowsy  ear  :  "  Christ  is  risen  !  Do  ye  arise  ;  awake ;  shake  ofT  your 
sleep  ;  arouse  yourselves  and  be  righteous  !  E,ighteo\is !  Why  you  are  past 
shaming.  You  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God."  I.e.  they  are  back  again  in, 
and  of,  the  "world  which  knew  not  God"  (i.  21).  If  Regeneration  was  an 
upward  development,  there  has  now  been  Degeneration ;  these  men  who  "  knew 
God  "  were  only  a  variation  wrought  and  sustained  by  Grace.  They  have  now 
sinned  against  grace  ;  in  them  nature  has  "  reverted  to  type."  "  You  have  not 
the  knowledge  of  God."  [Observe  the  close  connection  between  unrighteousness 
and  the  loss  of  the  knowledge  of  God.     Cf.  Rom.  i.  18,  19,  20-23.] 

II.  Christ. — Like  the  Russians  and  Greeks  on  Easter  morning,  Paul  is  ready 
to  go  up  and  down,  saying  with  a  holy  cheerfulness  of  salutation  to  every  fellow- 
Christian,  "  Brother,  now  is  Christ  risen ! "  This  is  a  perpetual  Easter- 
morning  age  for  the  Church  of  the  Risen  Christ.  Every  Christian  may  look 
every  other  in  the  face  with  the  glad  cry,  "  He  is  risen."  But  why  should  not  He 
he  simply  treated  as  an  isolated  case  ?  Why  should  we  not  believe  in  His  rising, 
whilst  disbelieving  or  doubting  any  other,  or  our  own  ? 

1.  Because  He  is  another  "  Adam.^^ — The  race  is  not  made  up  of  aggregated 
units.  There  is  a  solidarity  in  the  history  and  fortunes  of  mankind.  Contrast 
the  angels.  So  far  as  we  know,  they  are  each  one  an  independent  creation  ;  pro- 
bably they  have  been  contemporaries  in  age  from  the  first ;  each  living  a  natural 
life  complete  within  itself,  dependent  only  upon  God.  But  any  one  generation  of 
mankind  owes  life  to  the  preceding,  and  these  to  another  preceding  them,  and  so 
on  till  "  Adam  "  [=  Adam  4-  Eve]  is  reached.  The  angels  are  an  aggregate  of 
individuals  only.  Each  might  stand  or  fall  alone.  The  human  race  is  a  unity  ; 
it  is  a  tree,  where  branch  springs  out  of  branch  in  periodic  succession.  [It  is  a 
Vine,  a  wild  vine.]  The  old  theologians  called  this  Si  federal  principle.  There  is 
a  law  of  dealing  with  great  Unities  in  God's  administration  of  His  rule  over  our 
race.  "  Abraham "  means  for  some  purposes  Abraham  and  his  descendants ; 
"  Christ "  means  Christ  and  His  people ;  Adam  stood  for  himself  and  mankind. 
And  so  the  authorised,  official,  inspired,  "  prophetic  "  exposition  of  history  here 
given  makes  it  clear  that  the  human  race  may  be  summarised  in  two 
"Adams."  Or,  to  change  the  aspect  of  the  truth,  without  affecting  its  sub- 
stance, there  are  two  Mankinds,  each  with  its  Adam,  each  with  its  close-knit 
unity  and  continuity  of  life,  each  with  its  solidarity  of  history  and  fortunes. 
But  the  link  which  forms  the  unity  is  in  the  one  case  a  physical  derivation 
and  succession,  in  the  other  a  spiritual  unity  and  succession.  [A  real  sense 
in  which  the  Christians  of  any  one  age  are  the  descendants  of,  and  owe 
their  life  to,  those  of  the  next,  and  all,  preceding.]  The  first,  dying  Adam 
involved  a  race  of  natural  descendants  in  his  death — in  all  its  senses.  The  Risen 
Adam  includes  in  His  resurrection  victory  another  race  in  whom  His  Spirit  is  the 
link  of  continuous,  corporate  life,  quickening  even  their  "  mortal  bodies."     No 

334 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xv. 


man  stands  or  falls  alone ;  isolation,  independence,  is  not  the  "  law  "  of  the  history 
of  Humanity.  The  Christ  did  not  die  or  rise  alone ;  that  is  not  the  law  of  the 
new  Humanity,  of  which  he  is  the  new  "Adam."     To  change  the  figure  again, 

2.  Because  He  is  the  Firstfruits  of  the  harvest  of  rising  humanity. — "  Sown  " 
through  long  ages,  in  all  nooks  and  corners  of  earth's  field.  The  field  is  full 
of  its  human  seed.  The  seed  is  waiting  for  the  touch  of  the  Eternal  Spring- 
tide. The  call  of  Spring  yearly  awakens  sleeping  Nature  into  bud,  and  flower, 
and  fruit,  and  harvest.     That  other  Spring  shall  come  with  a  "  trumpet "  call, — 

['*  Tuba  mirum  spargens  sonum, 
Per  sepulchra  regionum"], — 

and  every  buried  seed  shall  start  forth  into  perfect  and  eternally  mature  life. 
The  '■^firstfruits  "  says  that  there  is  a  harvest  behind ;  it  promises  a  harvest ;  it 
pledges  a  harvest ;  it  "  samples  "  the  following  harvest ;  the  offering  of  the  first- 
fruits  consecrates  the  coming  harvest.  [As  in  another  application,  the  firstfruits 
of  the  week,  the  Sunday,  is  no  quittance  paid  to  God  that  then  we  may  claim 
and  use  the  six  remaining  for  ourselves,  as  if  our  own.  The  firstfruits  of  the 
week  thus  given  to  Him  acknowledge  that  all  the  days  are  His,  all  to  be  spent 
as  He  will  approve,  whilst  He  lends  us  six  and  keeps  only  one  exclusively  for 
Himself.] 

3.  Captain  of  a  host. — (1)  Heb.  ii.  10  [which  is  in  closest  connection  with 
the  quotation  here  given  ol:  Ps.  viii.  6]  makes  the  "  perfection  "  of  our  "  Captain  " 
to  lie  just  here,  that  He  is  not  isolated  as  He  leads  the  host,  but  has  been 
partaker  with  them  of  *' flesh  and  blood"  and  "sufierings."  Else  would 
they  who  follow  look  forward  "  where  their  Chief  precedes  them  "  with  a  feeling 
that  the  Captain  knew  nothing  of  the  life  of  the  common  soldier,  that  He  alone 
of  all  the  great  "  sacramental  host "  had  never  known  the  fighting  and  the 
"roughing  "  of  their  lot.  Here  the  "partaking"  looks  forward  into  the  future. 
The  great  host  defiles  in  glorious  resurrection  review ;  each  company  and  rank 
passes  in  its  "  order  "  before  the  throne  of  God.  (See  the  review  illustration 
followed  somewhat  further  in  the  Homiletic  Analysis  of  whole  chapter.)  (2)  If 
no  resurrection,  it  has  been  seen  (vers.  16-19)  that,  hoping  to  h^  partakers  with 
Christ,  we  wake  up  to  find  ourselves  partakers  of  nothing  !  No.  "  Now  is  Christ 
risen"  and  we  are  partakers  of  His  victory.  Our  resurrection  is  part  of  our  victory. 
We  rise,  that  so  in  that  fact  the  finishing  stroke  may  be  given  to  the  dominion 
of  death  over  our  redeemed  human  nature.  A  moital  body  was  the  last  fetter 
of  death,  the  last  token  of  our  sometime  bondage.  We  rise,  that  so  the  last 
fetter  may  be  stricken  ofl".  No  part  of  our  nature,  spirit,  soul,  hody,  that  is  not 
delivered  It  is  part  of  His  victory.  We  now  dare,  every  one  of  us,  to  put  our 
foot  on  the  neck  of  Goliath,  when  our  David  has  first  brought  him  down,  and 
planted  His  victorious  foot  upon  our  foe  and  His.  This  particular  victory  is 
part  of  a  larger  victory,  by  which  is  regained  a  lost  lordship  belonging  to 
mankind.  In  Ps.  viii.  6  the  opened  eye  of  the  prophet  sees  into  the  heart  of 
things — into  the  inner  secret  of  the  order  of  Creation  as  it  existed  in  the  mind 
of  the  Creator.  The  geological  history  of  the  earth  leads  up  to  an  earth  fitted 
to  be  man's  home.  A  palseontological  history  can  be  made  out,  whether  it  be 
an  ideal  sequence  only,  or  an  historical  and  physical  one,  leading  up  to  man.  And 
when  the  home  was  ready,  and  the  tenant  was  ready,  the  investiture  of 
occupancy  ran,  "  Let  them  have  dominion,"  etc.  (Gen.  i.  8).  Thus  he  who  was 
the  goal  of  all  the  earliest  history,  the  climax  (and  indeed  the  summation)  of  all 
the  series  of  animate  creaturely  structures,  the  crown  of  creation,  was  also  its 
King.  [Perhaps  also  its  High  Priest,  voicing  the  praise,  the  thanksgiving,  the 
prayers,  of  the  mute,  unintelligent  creation,  which  found  in  Him  a  brain  and 
a  heart  and  a  voice.]     Yet  even  this  royalty  is  not  the  thought  of  God  in  its 

335 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


furthest  reach.  We  speak  of  ascending  from  this  to  a  higher.  Yet  it  would  be  the 
truer  order  to  work  backwards  and  downwards,  from  the  higher  to  this ;  as  God  did. 
We  ascend  from  the  earHest  creature-life  to  man,  the  ruler  of  all ;  nor  do  we  stop 
there,  but  go  forward  and  upward  to  the  Son  of  Man.  But  though  we  reverently 
so  shape  our  thought,  God  began  there,  began  with  Him.  He  is  the  mediation 
between  God  and  the  creature,  between  Spirit  and  Matter.  He  is  the  Link. 
"  In  Him  all  things  were  created."  Man's  original  royalty  was  but  the 
adumbration  of  His.  As  the  lower  creatures  had  shadowed  Man  forth,  so  did 
he  shadow  the  Son  forth.  After  all,  he  was  not  the  last  link,  but  the  last  but 
one,  in  the  chain  which  led  up  from  some  quasi-eozoic  form  to  the  Incarnate  Son. 
[The  Gospel  is  Creation's  order  over  again.  "  All  things  man's.  Man  is  Christ's. 
Christ  is  God's."]  But  sin  entered.  Creation's  course  had  so  far  gone  true 
and  straight  to  man ;  now,  when  it  should  have  gone  true  and  straight 
through  him  to  God,  it  swerved  aside  and  was  sinfully  deflected.  The  race 
*' missed  its  mark."  The  race  no  longer  rose  to  the  Son;  the  Son's  garment  of 
royalty  no  longer  descended  on  man.  But,  ever  since,  slowly,  piecemeal,  has 
the  lost  dominion,  the  forfeited  position,  iDeen  recovered  by  all  those  who  are 
"  in "  the  Second  Adam.  The  first  note  of  the  recovered  victory  is  in  the 
Protevangelion  (Gen.  iii.  15);  fulfilled  most  gloriously  in  the  Wilderness  and 
the  Garden  and  at  Calvary,  no  doubt ;  yet  even  there  only  anticipating  the  last 
crowning  triumph  of  a  long  series  of  triumphs  for  our  Captain.  And  with  a 
heel  sore  wounded,  very  often  does  each  Christian  soldier  step  upon  his  foe  and 
go  on  to  conquer,  with  the  heartening  word  ringing  in  his  ears,  "  God  shall 
bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly"  (Rom.  xvi.  20).  There  is  an  enemy 
within  him,  whose  dominion  is  broken  [in  closest  connection  with  his  Lord's 
resurrection  once  more  (Rom.  vi.  10,  11)] :  *'  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over 
you "  {ih.  V.  14).  The  very  world  with  all  its  trials,  difficulties,  opposition, 
is  a  subject  thing  to  them  who  are  in  the  Man  Who  has  never  lost,  who  has 
more  abundantly  fulfilled,  the  Royalty  of  Man.  "  In  jeopardy  every  hour  ;  " 
"  dying  daily,"  yet  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  "  to  men.  The  world  is 
"  under  their  feet."  [Nor  need  there  be  hesitation  in  seeing  more  than  merely  the 
relics  of  the  original  dominion,  but  a  real  media torially-recovered  dominion,  in 
the  growing  mastery  wielded  by  man  over  the  physical  forces  of  the  natural 
world,  subjecting  all  to  his  daily  service.  Certainly  in  the  power  of  Christ  over 
even  His  pre-resurrection  body,  making  it  vanish  from  amongst  His  foes  or  walk 
upon  the  waters, — a  power  which  was  once  even  communicated  to  Peter, — we  get 
a  little  opening,  giving  us  largest  views  into  a  world  of  vast,  dim  possibilities  of 
the  power  of  man's  spirit,  itself  enfranchised  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  over  even 
the  material  world.]  There  is  a  "  last  enemy  "  for  him,  as  for  the  race, — Death. 
"  Death  is  his  "  (iii.  22)  already ;  it  comes  to  him  conquered  by  his  Captain,  and 
made  to  run  on  his  Captain's  errand,  and  bear  his  Captain's  summons  to  him  to  a 
more  glorious  life.  He  is  delivered  from  the  bondage  to  its  fear  :  the  fear  is 
^^  put  under  his  feet "  ;  when  at  last  he  meets  it,  he  finds  that  he  has  but  to  deal 
with  a  '^  stingless^'  serpent,  on  whose  head  he  can  ^^  put  his  foot  ^'  boldly.  He  is 
meeting  nothing  but  the  Shadow  of  a  great  Name,  the  Shadow  of  a  great 
Dread,  a  thing  whose  substantial  power  is  "  abolished,"  "  destroyed."  And  this 
detailed  victory  of  His  dying  people,  in  succession,  is  part  of  His  own  (cf.  Luke 
X.  18),  which  by-and-by  shall  be  consummated  in  one  grand  public  demonstration 
of  His  triumph,  in  the  day  when  even  the  very  bodies  of  His  people  have  death's 
yoke  struck  ofi"  and  death  itself  underfoot.     ^'  All  things  under  His  feet" 

III.  Consummation.— What  is  this  "end"  and  the  subjection  of  even  the 
"  Son  Himself  "  ?  Answer  as  one  did  who  was  asked,  '*  What  is  heaven  like?  " 
"  I  will  tell  you  when  we  meet  there." 

336 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS,    chap,  x v. 


HOMILETIG  ANALYSIS.— Verses   35—58. 

I.  Two  categories  appear : — 

1.  The  First  Adam —  The  last  Adam — 
The  first  man.  The  second  Man. 
Of  the  earth.  From  heaven. 

Earthy.  [The  Lord  (but  note  the  better  text).] 

A  soul.  A  spirit. 

A  living  soul.  A  quickening  Spirit. 

Natural.  Spiritual. 

2.  His  race — 

Bear  the  image  of  the  earthy.  Bear  ...  of  the  Heavenly. 

Wear  natural  bodies.  Wear  spiritual  bodies. 

3.  Their  bodies  are  correspondingly — 

Sown  Raised 

Corruptible.  Incorruptible. 

Dishonoured.  Glorified  [glorious]. 

In  weakness.  In  power. 

Natural  [psychic].  Spiritual. 

II.  The  second  of  these  is  not  inconceivable,  for  1.  Death  and  dissolution 
form  no  "  insuperable  "  barrier. — "  You  clever  objectors — wonderfully  clever  ! — 
how  is  it  when  you  (emphatic)  sow  your  seed  ?  Are  its  death  and  dissolution  an 
*  insuperable '  barrier  to  the  springing  of  the  grain  you  hope  to  reap  ?  This  does 
not  *  prove '  the  resurrection  ;  but  it  is  good  enough  to  turn  the  edge  of  your 
objection.  A  reply  as  good  as  your  difficulty.  A  reply  just  of  the  calibre  of 
your  thought,  and  of  yourself." 

2.  '' '  What  kind  of  bodies  ? '  How  do  I  know  ?  How  can  I  tell  ?  Can  He 
Himself  tell  me,  until  I  wear  one,  and  my  spirit  finds  its  *  spiritual  body '  a 
vehicle  congruous  to  its  nature,  flexible  to  its  will,  an  instrument  fitted  for  its 
every  purpose  %  *  Cannot  conceive  of  such  a  body  ? '  What  of  that  ?  If  you 
were  an  intelligent  fish,  could  you  understand,  think  you,  the  body,  the  flesh,  of 
a  bird,  or  of  a  beast?  Your  experience  and  your  imagination  are  not  the 
measure  of  the  possibilities,  or  even  of  the  facts.  Why  not  one  more,  one  new, 
kind  of  material,  where  there  are  already  so  many  used  to  make  bodies  I  Do 
you  really  sweep  the  field,  and  know  all  that  God  can  invent  in  variety  of  bodily 
organisations  ?  See  glory  differing  in  kind  from  glory — celestial  from  terrestrial. 
See  glory  differing  in  degree  from  glory,  as  between  star  and  star.  *  Cannot 
conceive  with  what  kind  of  body  ? '  Perhaps  the  Maker  of  them  all  can, 
nevertheless.  Better  to  wait  and  see  what  reserve  of  resource  He  has  by  Him. 
Cannot  conceive  does  not  equal  Cannot  be." 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  50—54. 

" This  corruptible"  "  this  mortal^ — These  words  raise  the  question  of  The 
Identity  of  the  Resurrection  Body. 

Introduction. — The  one  point  which  is  most  distinctly  the  peculiarity  of 
Christian  teaching  as  to  the  future  state  is  the  Resurrection  of  the  Body.  The 
Identity  the  one  question  perpetually  interesting  to  the  great  mass  of  hearers 
and  readers  of  Christian  doctrine  in  regard  to  the  Resurrection.  [Some  oldest 
creeds  said  expressly,  "  Of  the  Flesh."  Christianity  the  only  religion  which 
takes  serious  account  of  the  body,  or  does  it  any  honour,  or  regards  holiness 
as  possible  in  connection  with  it.]  All  is  pure  matter  of  revelation.  Pure 
question  of  faith:    "we  believe  in  the  Resurrection  of  the  Body."    Now  that 

z  337 


CHAP.  XV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS. 


the  truth  has  been  announced,  various  natural  analogies  may  be  imagined  and 
pressed  into  the  service  of  it.  But  certainly  they  never  suggested  it ;  the 
chrysalis-butterfly  fact,  for  example,  barely  gave  an  uncertain  suggestion  of 
another  after-life  for  man,  but  not  for  his  body.  Reason  never  dreamed  of 
this  unaided ;  now  that  it  is  revealed,  it  puts  a  tax  upon  faith  beyond  what  is 
demanded  by  most  truths  of  Christianity.  At  the  mention  of  it  the  Athenian 
gentlemen  and  scholars  on  Areopagus  burst  out  laughing,  and  would  give  no 
serious  attention  to  anything  further. 

I.  Wherein  the  identity  consists. — A  very  difficult  question  to  determine. 
1.  Study  the  identity  of  the  body  with  which  we  a/re  familiar.  Spite  of  all 
incessant  and  manifold  physical  changes,  every  man  would  say  that  he  has  ^^ the 
same  body^^  to-day  which  he  had  as  a  boy  twenty,  fifty,  years  ago.  For 
(1)  There  has  been  an  unbroken  continuity  between  stage  and  stage  of  its  growth 
and  change.  The  successive  stages  have  overlapped  ;  there  has  been  what  in 
brickwork  is  called  "  a  bonding "  of  the  successive  stages ;  old  material  has 
always  co-existed  with  new.  At  no  point  has  the  soul's  house  been  pulled  down 
entirely  and  entirely  rebuilt  de  novo.  The  cottage  of  boyhood  has  been  altered 
and  enlarged  piecemeal  into  the  mansion-sized  house  of  manhood.  Even  if  the 
material  of  the  early  stages  has  all  disappeared,  yet  at  no  point  has  there  ever 
been  a  distinctly  "  new  house."  "  Same  house  "  all  along.  And  (2)  The  home  of 
the  same  tenant  all  along.  The  organism  has  been  in  unbroken  connection  with 
the  same  indwelling  Man.  The  continuous  instrument  of  the  same  immaterial 
part.  (3)  There  has  been  a  persistent  form  impressed  upon  it.  Age,  disease, 
accident,  natural  decay  and  recuperation,  incessantly  going  on,  have  made  great 
changes  in  size,  height,  etc.  Yet  many  early  marks,  whether  from  birth  or 
accident,  have  persisted  through  all  stages.  Something  has  remained  unaltered 
or  merely  modified,  which  is  peculiarly  the  man's  own.  Like  the  man's 
signature,  the  body  has  an  individuality  which  perhaps,  like  it,  expresses  the 
man.  Both  change  as  the  man  changes,  with  years,  and,  to  some  extent  visibly, 
in  character.  Seen  most,  this  last,  in  the  face.  But  the  man  has  often  had 
from  the  first  a  gait,  a  carriage,  which  has  always  been  his  own,  individual  and 
recognisable.  [(4)  Analogies  to  these  changes,  and  to  the  incessant  motion  and 
flux  amongst  constituent  parts,  whilst  an  identity  of  the  whole  remains  unafiected, 
may  be  discovered.  "  New  blade,  new  handle.  Same  knife  ?  "  may  be  trivial, 
and  a  quibble.  But  also :  Perpetually  renewed  water  in  "  the  same  river. '^ 
Constant  change  of  the  men  in  a  regiment,  by  losses,  retirements,  recruiting, 
whilst  the  commanding  officer  remains  the  same,  and  in  command  of  "  the  same 
regiment.^^  (Also  the  regimental  "  life  "  is  continuous ;  the  traditions,  and  the 
esprit  de  corps,  keep  up  the  regimental  identity.)  "  The  same  Board,"  "  the  same 
Body  of  trustees,"  empowered  to  fill  up  vacancies  in  their  number  as  they  occur, 
till  at  last  none  of  the  original  members  remain.] 

II.  Considerations  which  require  an  identity  of  some  kind. — 1.  The  whole 
man  is  redeemed.  The  body  is  an  integral,  indispensable  part  of  manhood. 
A  man  is  not  made  up  of  Soul  and  Spirit,  to  which  the  body  is  merely  one  of 
a  number  of  vestments, — "  coats," — natural  or  artificial ;  it  is  not  a  mere  accident 
of  our  earthly  state.  The  Redeemer  of  Man  wore,  and  took  with  Him  into 
glory,  an  entire  Humanity,  its  body  vdth  the  rest.  The  body  has  its  future, 
because  it  has  its  place  in  the  redemption.  It  is  the  lowliest  part  of  the  three- 
fold human  nature  ;  it  waits  longest  for,  and  will  receive  last,  its  share  in  the 
glory  secured  for  redeemed  manhood  in  the  eternal  world  ;  but  it  has  its  claim 
upon  the  Redeemer.  On  the  body  was  set  the  Abrahamic  form  of  the  seal  of  that 
covenant  between  Jehovah  and  His  "  friend,"  which  is  the  surest  basis  of  hope 
for  Abraham's  immortality  (Matt.  xxii.  31,  32,  and  ||s).  [There  is  a  physical 
reception  by  the  body  of  the  seals  and  signs  of  the  new,  the  Gospel,  form  of  the 

^  338 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    1.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xv. 


same  covenant  and  its  contents  of  grace ;  the  body  is  baptized  with  the  physical 
element  of  water,  it  eats  and  drinks  of  a  real  supper  of  bread  and  wine.]  The 
resurrection  of  an  "  identic  body  "  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  greater  fact  of  the 
resurrection  and  after-life  of  the  whole  man.  To  "  raise  "  the  same  immaterial 
part  and  to  provide  it  with  a  new  body,  would  not  be  the  restoration  of  the  same 
man,  the  same  person,  after  the  dissolution  wrought  by  death  and  the  grave. 

2.  Christ's  identic  resurrection  body. — The  great,  palpable,  popular  stumbling- 
block  and  difficulty  is  no  doubt  the  physical,  chemical  dissolution  of  the  corpse 
into  its  primary  elements,  which  again  enter  into  new  combinations  in  other 
organic  structures.  Christ's  body  "  saw  no  corruption."  The  process  which  had 
set  in,  in  the  purely  natural  order,  with  His  friend  Lazarus,  or  with  David 
(Acts  ii.  29-31),  was  not  permitted  to  begin.  He  brought  out  of  Joseph's  tomb  a 
body  which,  whatever  marvellous  changes  in  the  conditions  of  its  life  took  place 
when  it  was  reunited  to  Him  in  His  risen  life,  was  the  same  undissolved  thing 
which  had  been  reverently,  lovingly  deposited  there  on  the  Friday  evening.  In  the 
body's  organised  existence  between  death  and  resurrection  there  had  been  for 
Him  no  such  break  as  death  makes  for  us.  Whatever,  then,  identity  carries,  and 
does  not  carry,  in  the  case  of  His  body,  will  be  the  facts  about  the  identity  of  the 
resurrection  body  of  His  people.     Further — 

3.  The  "  mystery,'^  the  hitherto  hidden  and  unknown  fact,  is  here  (ver.  51), 
authoritatively  published  by  the  Prophet  Paul,  that  at  the  Lord's  coming  the 
believers  then  living  will  be  ^^ changed'^  without  previous  death.  [Or,  as  the  specula- 
tions of  some  would  require  us  to  say,  without  any  such  perceptible  or  extended 
interval  between  the  death  and  the  "  change  "  of  the  body  as  creates  the  popular, 
practical  difficulty  in  connection  with  the  raising  of  the  bodies  of  the  mass  of 
human  kind.]  In  their  case,  therefore,  there  is  no  break,  even  as  brief  as  in  their 
Lord's  case,  in  the  continuity  of  the  union  between  the  same  man  and  his  physical 
part.  In  bodies  which  they  have  never  quitted,  but  which  undergo  some  transfor- 
mation unknown  as  yet  to  us,  they  stand  forth  in  that  eventful  Easter  morning  of 
the  whole  Church.  (2)  and  (3)  enable,  and  require,  us  to  expect  that  the  believers 
who  "  fall  asleep "  in  the  ordinary  course,  and  whose  bodies  are  dissolved  by 
death  and  "  see  corruption,"  shall  be  put  into  the  same  condition  as  their 
brethren  who  are  changed  without  dying,  and  with  bodies  Hke  their  Lord's  risen 
and  glorified  body.  Whatever  He  and  those  are,  without  the  parting  of  soul  and 
body,  or  the  physical  dissolution  of  the  body,  to  that  they  who  die  must  be 
elevated  or  restored.  In  whatever  sense  He  wears  to-day  "  the  same  body  " 
which  trode  the  fields  of  Galilee  or  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  ;  in  whatever  sense  the 
"  changed  "  saints  will  wear  "  the  same  body  "  which  they  never  for  an  instant 
lost ;  in  that  sense  do  we  require  that  our  Resurrection  body  shall  be  "  the  same 
body  "  which  we  wore  on  earth,  and  for  a  while  left  behind  in  the  moment  of  our 
dying.  It  was  part  of  our  Self ;  the  whole,  same,  redeemed  self  must  be  forth- 
coming, when  "  God  brings,  with  Jesus,  them  that  sleep  in  [through]  Jesus  "  and 
are  now  somewhere  a  precious  deposit  in  His  safe  keeping,  "  hid,  with  Christ,  in 
God."  More  than  this  we  cannot  with  confidence  assert.  How  much  this  carries 
with  it  we  do  not  know,  and  have  hardly  sufficient  experience  of  anything 
analogous  to  guide  us  even  in  conjecture.  The  meaning  and  mode  of  the 
"change  "  are  quite  unknown  to  us.  Paul  speaks  of  being  *' clothed  upon  "  in 
2  Cor.  v.  2,  just  as  here  he  speaks  of  ^^ putting  on  incorruption."  In  Rom.  viii.  11 
he  is  express  that  *'  our  mortal  bodies  " — like  Christ's  mortal  body — are  to  be 
quickened,  as  here  he  says  ''  this  mortal  must  put  on."  But  the  -mode  is  no 
clearer  for  all  this.  The  fact,  both  of  the  change  of  some  and  of  the  resurrection 
of  the  body  of  most,  is  matter  of  revelation  on  God's  side  and  of  faith  on  ours. 
The  fact  cannot  be  ruled  out  as  "  impossible."  "  Christ  is  risen  ;  "  there  is  no 
intrinsic  impossibility,  therefore,  to  bar   the   way   of  belief.     The  connection 

339 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L  CORINTHIANS. 


between  the  second,  "  the  last,  Adam,"  and  the  new,  regenerate  human  race  of 
which  He  is  the  Head,  removes  any  intrinsic  improbabihty ;  indeed,  it  makes  it 
probable  that  His  people  shall  rise,  in  soul  and  body  sharing  with,  conformed  to, 
the  conditions  of  His  own  risen  life. 

III.  Difficulties  in  the  way  of  belief  of  the  "  identity  "  of  the  buried  and  the 
risen  body. — Theee  are  to  a  large  extent  occasioned  by  a  faulty  statement  of  the 
doctrine  which  is  demanded  and  established  as  above.  In  the  endeavour  to  grasp 
or  to  imagine  the  inode  of  the  body's  resurrection,  and,  still  more,  to  present  the 
fact  clearly  and  vividly  to  the  ignorant,  the  young,  the  new  convert,  or  the 
heathen,  a  crude,  literal  restoration  of  the  same  particles,  and  even  of  the  same 
hair,  nails,  bones,  etc.,  has  been  insisted  on.  But  this  was  only  the  over-elabora- 
tion of  popular  rhetoric  and  of  undisciplined  imagination.  [As  to  the  difficulty 
presented  on  that  theory  in  the  case  of  a  body  eaten  by  a  cannibal,  whose 
body  also  must  rise  again,  it  would  be  only  fair  to  say  that  there  would  be  no 
absolute  "  unthinkableness  "  or  "  impossibility,"  unless  on  the  supposition  that 
some  or  all  of  the  particles  composing  one  body  at  the  moment  of  its  death  were 
also  the  components  of  another  body  at  the  moment  of  its  death  ;  so  that  they 
would  be  wanted  at  the  resurrection  for  the  restoration  and  completion  of  two 
bodies  at  the  same  time.  An  eventuality  against  which,  if  He  were  pleased  to 
make  that  one  of  the  conditions  of  the  resurrection.  He  could  guard.  It  was  a 
fair  reply  to  say,  "  He  can  do  whatever  He  wills,  and  whatever  He  says  He  will 
do."  But  the  underlying  supposition  which  occasioned  the  objection  was  extreme 
in  statement.  N.B. — The  cannibals  of  Fiji  never  found  the  "  cannibal  "  argu- 
ment an  insuperable  barrier  to  belief  in  a  bodily  resurrection.  "  What  does  God 
say  He  will  do  ?     That  He  can  and  will  do."] 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.-  Verses  55—58. 

Triumph;  Theology;  Duty. 

I.  Does  that  seem  a  descending  series,  with  a  step  yet  lower  to  xvi.  1,  "the 
collection  "  ?  If  it  be  the  stone-like  drop  of  the  lark,  after  her  soaring,  singing, 
jubilant  ascent  into  an  upper  world  of  light  and  freedom,  it  has  nevertheless 
her  justification  ;  she  drops  to  her  nest,  her  young,  her  motherly  duty.  No 
surer  sign  of  a  healthy  spiritual  life  than  the  simple,  easy,  natural  transition 
from  level  to  level  of  thought  and  talk.  Such  a  life  indeed  lifts  all  up  to  the 
spiritual  level.  In  the  Great  House  of  the  soul's  Life,  it  does  not  go  downstairs, 
from  the  Chapel  to  the  Study,  or  to  the  Dining-room  or  the  Kitchen.  These, 
it  may  be,  are  less  stately  and  less  richly  adorned  than  that ;  but  the  soul  passes 
from  one  to  the  other  all  on  the  same  floor. 

II.  The  connection  between  Triumph  and  a  true  Theology  on  the  one  side, 
and  between  a  true  Theology  and  Duty  on  the  other,  is  very  close.  "  Faith  "  lies 
very  near  to  "  The  Faith."  Religion  and  dogma  are  very  intimately  connected. 
If  religion  be  the  Art  of  holy  living,  then  is  theology  its  Science.  Theology 
is  only  the  orderly  statement  of  the  facts  and  truths  presupposed,  whether  in 
the  hopes  and  joys,  or  in  the  duty  and  service,  of  religion.  [Newton  said  he 
liked  his  Calvinism  as  he  liked  his  sugar  in  his  tea — in  solution.  Most  men's 
"  ism "  is  to-day  in  solution  in  their  teaching ;  and  always  was  very  much  in 
solution  in  the  thought  of  the  bulk  of  Christian  people.  But  Newton's  "  sugar" 
distinctly  "  flavoured  his  tea  " ;  it  was  unmistakably  there,  to  anybody  who 
knew  the  taste.  Perhaps  could  have  been  extracted,  weighed,  exhibited  in 
separate,  orderly,  crystalline  form.]  If,  for  instance,  an  earnest  man  is 
accustomed,  as  the  very  foundation  of  much  of  his  religious  life,  to  address 
himself  in  prayer  to  Christ,  let  him  be  asked  and  helped  to  express,  in  precise  and 

340 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTAUY :   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  XV. 


ordered  language,  how  he  supposes  that  this  '*  Christ  "  can  hear  his  words  and, 
much  more,  his  unuttered  thoughts  ;  also,  supposing  that  He  can  hear,  how,  and 
how  far,  he  expects  that  Christ  can  help  him  in  answer  to  his  appeal ;  when  he 
says  at  the  end  of  his  praying  to  the  Father  "  for  Christ's  sake,"  what  relation 
there  is  between  Christ  and  the  Father,  and  between  Christ  and  himself,  that 
"  for  Christ's  sake  "  should  be  a  plea  and  a  reason  with  God ; — the  answers  will 
be  a  very  important  contiibution  to  a  Christology,  whether  a  new  one  of  his  own 
or  that  of  some  other  man  or  of  some  Church.  Indeed,  to  answer  Christ's  own 
question  fully  and  precisely,  "  Whose  Son  is  Christ  ? "  goes  down  to  some  of  the 
obscurest  depths  of  Divine  thought.  Every  saved  sinner  has  an  informal, 
unformulated,  working  "  theory  of  the  Atonement,"  according  to  which  he  has 
laid  hold  of  salvation ;  just  as  every  preacher  or  Sunday-school  teacher  has 
an  unformulated  "  theory  of  Inspiration,"  which  determines  his  treatment  of 
the  Word  of  God,  and  even  his  selection  of  texts.  So  here  the  shout  of  triumph 
will  be  thin  and  hollow,  as  the  dying  saint  says,  "  0  deaths  .  .  .  thy  victory  ?  ,  .  . 
thy  sting  ?  "  if  he  have  any  misgiving  whether,  after  all,  death  is  not  going  to  be 
the  conqueror  ;  whether,  after  all,  he  is  not  still  "  in  his  sins  " ;  whether,  after 
all,  his  Christ  be  not  a  mere  great  name  of  the  past,  the  name  of  a  man  who 
long  centuries  ago  yielded  to  death  just  as  others  do,  and  left  His  body  to 
dissolve  into  dust,  like  other  bodies. 

III.  So  a  right  or  wrong  Theology  will  affect  Duty. — (Discussed  in  part 
under  ver.  32  ;  here  needs  only  to  be  added  :)  No  doubt  as  matter  of  high-level, 
theoretic  virtue,  men  '*  ought "  to  be  righteous  and  diligent  and  all  that  is  good, 
for  the  very  intrinsic  rightness  and  betterness  and  nobleness  of  Good.  So  the 
children  at  school  "  ought "  to  do  their  lessons  well  for  the  reason  that  it  is 
right,  and  duty,  and  the  like  ;  prizes  or  no  prizes,  they  "  ought "  to  be  steadfast, 
unmovable,  always  abounding  in  their  work.  But  the  prizes,  if  illogical  as  a 
motive,  and  indefensible,  are  a  very  practical  incentive  to  diligence,  and  a  very 
real  help  to  even  a  diligent  scholar,  when  the  lessons  are  hard  and  the  play 
is  tempting.  God  knows  His  scholars  in  the  High  School  of  life ;  and,  grown 
men  and  women  though  they  be,  it  will  make  a  difference  to  them  whether 
or  not  there  are  to  be  any  marks  and  any  rewards.  He  knows  that  average 
men  and  women  will  not  go  on  year  after  year  pitching  the  fruit  of  their  labour 
into  a  moral  Chat  Moss,  unless  like  George  Stephenson  they  have  the  confident 
assurance  that  there  is  a  bottom,  and  that  by  and -by  there  will  be  some  solid 
result  to  show  for  their  patient  toil.  They  will,  like  the  engineers  of  a  Portland 
Breakwater,  be  content  to  see  load  after  load  of  solid  "  labour "  disappear 
beneath  the  surface  of  the  ocean,  if  they  too  may  hope  that  some  day  their  toil 
will  appear  in  solid  result  above  the  waters,  none  really  lost.  It  is  of  the  very 
essence  of  death's  **  enmity  "  (ver.  26)  that  it  cuts  off  abruptly,  inopportunely, 
often  disastrously,  the  plans  and  labour  and  hope  of  the  man  who  is  only 
*'  of  the  world,"  and  whose  aims  and  desires  go  no  further  than  the  horizon 
whose  radius  is  the  thirty,  forty,  fifty  years  which  may  happen  to  be  the 
probable  remainder  of  his  earthly  sojourn.  The  Christian  man  has  ^^ hoped" 
that  "  iw  Christ"  (ver.  19)  death  will  only  help  forward  the  attainment  of  all 
his  hopes  and  bring  him  a  stage  nearer  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  new  and  larger 
meaning  he  now  sees  in  "  Life,"  besides  putting  him  into  more  favourable 
conditions  than  were  possible  here  for  both  growth  and  service.  But  if  death 
is  going  to  break  off  in  mid-course  all  his  plans  also,  and  to  frustrate  all  his  hopes 
and  purposes  as  it  does  those  of  the  worldling ;  if  he  is  going  to  find  the  first 
moment  of  eternity  the  first  also  of  an  eternal  disillusion ;  or,  worst  of  all,  if 
Eternity  is  to  be  nothing,  because  he  passes  away  into  Nothing  himself,  and 
there  is  for  him  neither  resurrection  nor  after-life, — well,  then  "  the  game  is  not 
worth  the  candle,"    Who  will  "  after  the  manner  of  men''  fight  with  the  beasts? 

341 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Who  will  in  ascetic  gloom  refuse  to  "  eat  and  drink  "  ?  Why  should  not  he  take 
such  pleasure  as  it  is,  seeing  there  is  nothing  better  ?  Nothing  at  all  at  the  end 
of  all !  Rom.  vii.  13-24,  7-12,  are  our  ver.  56  in  resume.  Plant  ver.  56  in 
mind  and  heart ;  let  prayer  bring  upon  it  the  quickening  Spirit ;  let  experience 
develop  and  record  the  living  germ  of  truth ;  it  will  grow  into  Rom.  vii.  7-24. 
Death  has  no  "  sting  "  unless  it  borrow  one  from  a  guilty  conscience.  Sin 
finds  its  condemnation,  and  its  provocation,  in  a  positive  commandment.  "  In 
Christ "  death  is  only  dying,  and  behind  dying  there  is  no  proper  death.  "  In 
Christ"  the  heart  runs  in  the  way  of  the  commandment;  it  no  longer  conflicts 
with  it,  only  to  its  own  hurt  and  condemnation.  And  "  labour  in  Christ  "  is  the 
labour  of  Christ  Himself  in  His  member.  It  is  really  His  own  "  labour. ^^  How 
can  His  labour  be  "  in  vain  "  ? 


SEPARATE    HOMILIES. 


Vers.  5,  6.  '■^According  to  the  Scrip- 
tures."— Two  points  grow  out  of  this 
phrase  : — 

I.  This  organic  unity  between  Old 
Testament  and  New  Testament,  and 
between  their  separate  component 
parts,  must  not  be  underestimated. 
It  is  a  fact  perceived  by  so  many 
students  of  Scripture,  of  such  various 
types  of  mind  and  training,  and  so 
variously  equipped  with  "  learning," 
possessing  much  or  little  of  it,  or  (in 
the  ordinary  sense)  none ;  it  is  a  fact 
the  evidence  for  which,  whilst  it  can 
be  conclusively  stated  in  broad  outline, 
nevertheless  so  reveals  its  full  force, 
and  the  abundance  of  material  from 
which  it  is  drawn,  only  to  patient  and 
minute  students  of  the  Scripture,  every 
fresh  reading  adding  to  the  evidence 
both  wealth  and  cogency ;  that  it 
cannot  be  dismissed  as  a  mistake,  a 
subjective  fancy,  the  dream  of  a  par- 
ticular, "  mystical,"  cast  of  mind,  or  of 
a  particular  school  of  interpretation. 
All  devout  readers  find  foiced  upon 
them  a  consistent  scheme  and  plan  in  a 
Revelation  developing  from  the  earliest 
ages,  and  from  what  have  hitherto 
been  reputed  the  earliest  books,  to  the 
latest.  Above  all,  they  have  seen  a 
disclosure  of  the  coming  Christ,  grow- 
ing fuller  in  detail,  more  definite  in 
outline,  from  the  beginning  onwards. 
The  fact  has  been  too  often  perceived 
and  verified  by  too  great  a  number  and 
variety  of  students  of  Scripture  to  be 
dismissed  as  an  error.  Part  and  part 
"hang  together";  partand  part  give  and 

342 


receive  light  and  confirmation  in  turn ; 
the  coincidences  between  Old  Testa- 
ment and  New  Testament  are  so  many, 
so  often  incidental,  so  often  '*  trivial " 
— many  times  escaping  notice  at  a  first 
or  many  a  subsequent  reading — that, 
even  mathematically  speaking,  the 
chances  are  infinite  against  the  Coinci- 
dence being  anything  less  than,  any 
other  than,  a  real,  designed,  organic 
Connection.  All  the  results  of  many 
centuries  of  study  of  Scripture  by 
students  of  all  types  have  accumulated 
"  evidence  "  of  internal  harmony,  of  a 
coherent  history,  embodying  a  con- 
sistent, gradually  unfolding  scheme  of 
truth,  and  an  ever  clearer  disclosure  of  a 
Personality,  all  of  which  culminates  in 
Christianity  and  Christ,  and  finds  its 
clearest  expression  in  Him  as  He  is 
expounded  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  All 
this  must  be  taken  account  of  in  the 
present-day  inquiries  into  the  historical 
value  of  (say)  the  earlier  story  of  Israel 
or  of  the  Mosaic  Institute,  and  into 
the  literary  history  of  the  process  by 
which  the  Bible  has  reached  its  present 
form.  Higher  Criticism  approaches 
the  problem  of  the  origin  and  com- 
position of  the  extant  Bible,  simply  as 
dealing  with  an  ancient  literature.  It 
endeavours  to  discover  and  exhibit  the 
constituent  elements  of  those  books 
which  it  believes  to  show  a  composite 
structure  ;  it  hopes  to  trace  the  process 
of  literary  composition,  as  conducted 
by  several  hands  at  several  points  of 
time  ;  it  endeavours  to  trace  and  date 
the  sources  from  which  material  has 


HOMILETIC.  COMMENT ARYi   I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xv. 


been  gathered  for  our  present  books ; 
it  hopes  to  fix  scientifically  the  author- 
ship of  whole  books  or  separate  por- 
tions. Moreover,  it  endeavours  to 
appraise  the  historical  value  or  no- 
value  of  the  contents  of  the  books. 
The  process  of  inquiry  is  perfectly 
legitimate ;  the  Bible  may  be  examined 
from  that  standpoint,  as  from  many 
others.  The  results  arrived  at  are 
reached  under  the  conditions  and  with 
the  risks  attaching  to  all  "  specialist " 
inquiry,  or  any  many-sided  or  complex 
subject  whatsoever.  And  tbey  need 
checking  by  and  co-ordinating  with 
the  results  arrived  at  on  all  other 
lines  of  inquiry,  and  yielded  by  the 
examination  of  all  other  kinds  of 
evidence,  which  may  bear  upon  the 
problem  of  the  literary  origin  and 
history  of  the  composition  of  what,  in 
the  issue,  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Church 
as  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New 
Testament, — the  Bible.  Inquirers  and 
students  who  are  not  competent  to 
attack  the  problem  from  the  side  of 
literary  criticism  can  and  do  attack  it 
from  the  side  and  study  of  the  organic 
connection  and  consistent  development 
of  both  history  and  doctrine  which  is 
found  to  obtain  in  the  extant  Bible. 
When  some  Higher  Criticism  pro- 
nounces that  no  books  in  their  present 
form,  and  no  very  reliable  history 
amongst  their  contents,  date  much 
farther  back  than  (say)  the  days  of 
Josiah,  and  that  very  much  of  the 
Mosaic  Bitual  Law,  and  even  the 
Tabernacle  itself,  is  a  late,  very  late, 
and  not  very  honest,  after-thought  of  a 
priestly  order,  then  the  students  of  the 
organic  structure  and  development  ask 
that  their  results  may  also  be  taken 
into  account  before  the  verdict  on  the 
whole  case  is  finally  given.  They  point 
out,  e.^., that  in  vers.  22,  45-49  a  parallel 
is  brought  out,  and  wrought  out,  between 
Adam  and  Christ  and  their  respective 
relations  to  the  race — a  parallel  which 
is  by  no  means  a  mei-e  Babbinic 
allegorising  of  a  story  which  may  be 
a  pretty  and  serviceable  myth,  but  is 
a  development  of  a  great  idea  of 
God  underlying  the  whole  scheme  of 


ruin  and  redemption,  from  its  incep- 
tion in  Eden  to  its  consummation  in 
glory.  Before  the  early  pages  of 
Genesis  are  dismissed  as  unhistoric, 
the  place  then-  narrative  occupies  in 
the  organically  developing  Divine  plan 
should  be  considered.  If  "  Abraham  " 
be  a  mere  eponymic  personage,  it  is 
difiicult  to  attribute  any  seiious  pre- 
sent-day value  to  the  arguments  in 
Gal.  iii.,  iv.  as  to  the  relation  of  "  the 
covenant  confirmed  to  hint  by  God  in 
Christ  "  to  the  Law  and  to  the  Gospel 
and  the  privileges  of  believers.  If  the 
widely  current  critical  account  of  the 
origin  and  history  of  the  Tabernacle  and 
its  ritual  of  atoning  and  other  sacrifices 
be  true,  what  permanent  worth,  what 
truth  which  would  be  more  than 
pretty  fancies  or  happy  allegorising, 
what  truth  for  which  God  could  be 
held  responsible,  would  there  be  in  all 
the  discoveries  therein,  by  (say)  the 
writer  of  Hebrews,  of  anticipations  of 
the  Great  Sacrifice  and  of  the  whole 
scheme  of  Sin  and  its  Bemedy  ?  The 
whole  story  of  Israel,  and  especially  of 
its  Exodus  from  Egypt  and  its  Eisodus 
into  Canaan,  yields  an  abundant  and 
abundantly  verified  harvest  of  points 
of  spiritual  significance  and  of  paral- 
lelism with  the  I'egenerate  life,  and 
with  even  the  historic  life  of  Jesus 
of  Nazareth.  All  these  separate  and 
very  significant  episodes  of  the  Old 
Testament  story  are  so  used  by  Christ 
and  His  apostles  as  to  briog  them  into 
the  closest  designed  connection  with 
the  one,  whole,  harmonious,  age-long 
unfolding  of  God's  redeeming  idea  and 
its  historical  introduction  into  the 
world.  If  Christ,  if  Redemption,  if 
the  Christian  life  are  aU  '<  according 
to  the  Scriptures," — "  Law,  Prophets, 
Psalms,"  all  (Luke  xxiv.  44), — then 
what  are  the  Scriptures,  even  in  their 
earliest  portions?  If  they  be  not 
history,  then  there  might  have  been 
indeed  a  developing  story  of  a  Be- 
demptive  Work,  but  at  all  events  we 
have  no  leliable  account  of  it.  If 
Adam  and  Abraham  and  Moses  and 
David  are  not  certainly  historical,  then 
all  the  New  Testament  account  of  the 

343 


CHAP.  XV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Old  Testament  preparation  for  Christ, 
in  which  they  are  essential  factors,  has 
no  practically  certain  value. 

II.  Another  suggestion  may  also  be 
of  some  practical  value.  If  the 
Author  of  Nature  be  the  same  with 
the  Author  of  Revelation,  and  if  there 
is  development  apparent  in  the  history 
of  the  process  by  which  Nature  and 
Kevelation  have  reached,  each  of  them, 
their  present  form  and  stage,  it  would 
only  be  in  agreement  with  all  we  know 
of  His  work  in  other  directions  to 
expect  that  the  principle  of  the  develop- 
ment would  be  identical,  though  the 
facts  with  which  in  the  one  case  and  the 
other  it  stands  connected  would  belong 
to  diverse  orders,  whilst  yet  presenting 
some  analogies  to  each  other.  Many  a 
student  of  Scripture  and  Kevelation  can 
pretend  to  no  such  acquaintance  with 
the  facts  of  the  natural  world  as  enable 
him  to  exercise  an  independent  judg- 
ment on  the  methods  or  conclusions  of 
the  man  who  is  a  student  of  biological 
science  ;  but  he  does  claim  a  fairly  com- 
plete knowledge  of  the  facts  of  his  own 
special  field,  where  moreover  the  area 
of  the  field  is  not  too  large  to  be  very 
thoroughly  known.  What  he  finds  to 
be  the  truth  about  development  in  re- 
velation he  would  expect  to  find  to  hold 
true  in  nature — that  and  no  more.  He 
would  expect  to  find  that  the  ultimate 
form  of  the  theory  of  Origins,  accepted 
by  the  students  of  physical  science,  will 
coincide  with  the  result  of  his  own  work- 
ing on  his  own  group  of  facts,  and  in  his 
familiar  field.  He  would  say,  e.g.^  that 
*'  Man  came,  and  is,  '  according  to  the 
Scriptures '  of  the  *  stone  book '  of  the 
earlier  geological  history  of  the  earth, 
just  as  Christ  is,  and  came,  and  died, 
and  rose,  '  according  to  the  Scriptures ' 
of  the  earlier,  the  Old  Testament 
*  strata'  of  the  successive  stages  of 
Revelation."  The  idea  of  the  Creator, 
first  set  forth  in  very  meagre,  simple 
form,  has  in  both  cases  been  more 
and  more  fully  developed.  From  time 
to  time,  never  apart  from  a  distinct 
interposition  of  the  will  of  the  Author 
of  all,  a  new  stage  has  been  reached,  a 
new  departure  has  been  taken,  a  new 

344 


embodiment  of  His  idea  has  been  ex- 
hibited, in  both  Nature  and  Revelation. 
The  new  form  has  always  been  on 
the  same  essential  lines  as  the  older, 
but  with  many  modifications,  with  new 
touches  here  and  there,  with  fuller 
detail  everywhere,  adapting  the  old  to 
new  conditions  and  to  the  requirements 
of  a  new  stage  in  the  ruling  purpose. 
Until  at  last  the  one  series  of  develop- 
ing expositions  of  the  Worker's  thought 
culminated  in  Man,  and  the  other  in 
the  God-man.  [Both  in  the  end  meet 
in  Him  (Heb.  ii.).]  Man  is  the  goal 
of  Creation ;  Christ  of  Revelation. 
Man  sums  up  all  the  creatures  which 
have  preceded  him  ;  Christ  and  His 
history  sum  up  all  the  persons  and  the 
history  which  preceded  them.  The 
development  which  is  verifiable  in 
the  history  that  leads  up  to  Christ 
will  be  found  to  be  the  verifiable 
development  in  the  geological  and 
biological  history  which  has  led  up  to 
man. 

Ver.  19.  "-//*.  .  .  of  all  vnen  most 
miserable^ 

1.  A  few  of  the  facts  which  this 
implies. — 1.  There  is  misery  among 
men  upon  earth.  Obviously.  But 
remember  three  things :  (1)  Not  so 
great  misery  as  man's  sin  deserves. 
(2)  Not  so  great  as  man^s  happiness. 
Days,  weeks,  of  affliction ;  years  of 
health  and  happiness.  (3)  Not  so 
great  as  the  good  it  will  ultimately 
work  out.  SuflTering  in  perdition 
works  no  good ;  here,  under  Media- 
torial rule,  it  is  disciplinary  and 
corrective. 

2.  Misery  amongst  men  exists  in 
different  degrees. — Some  are  ^^most 
miserable."  Calm  and  sunshine  in  one 
lot;  storm  and  darkness  in  another. 
One  knows  nothing  of  sickness  or 
poverty ;  another  nothing  of  health 
and  sufficiency.  Some  followed  by 
consequences  of  sin,  lashed  by  guilty 
conscience ;  some  sin  and  suffer  nothing ; 
some  have  the  Christian  peace.  A  day 
is  coming  when  eternal  justice  must 
balance  the  accounts,  for  earth's  in- 
equalities. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xv. 


3.  The  degree  of  misery  is  sometimes  (Query,  this  over  subtle  ?)]  The  misery 
regulated  by  hope. — Hope  directed  to  of  a  tremendous  disappointment.  [Is 
right  objects,  and  rightly  founded,  not  the  usual,  "  supeificial  "  view  truer, 
will  bear  a  man  up  under  all  the  ills  that  it  is  that  present  loss  and  unhappi- 
of  life,  make  him  calm  in  the  tempest  ness  which  to  the  outside  world  seems 
and  valiant  in  the  fight ;  will  give  him  in  varying  degree  always  to  be  the 
such  a  grasp  on  the  future  as  will  price  of  being  a  Christian  ?  "  The 
prevent  him  from  sinking  under  the  game  not  worth  the  candle."] 
present.  It  will  be  a  firm  anchor,  II.  Several  things  will  tend  to 
holding  his  ship  securely  amidst  the  aggravate  this  disappointment. — 1. 
tumultuous  billows  of  his  stormy  life.  The  hold  which  the  blighted  hope  had 
Yet  does  not  all  disappointment  grow  obtained  over  the  v.')hole  soul.  Solomon 
out  of  hope  ?  What  is  disappoint-  speaks  of  the  loss  of  a  hope  as  "  the 
ment  but  a  hope  lost  ]  And  this,  but  giving  up  of  the  ghost."  His  idea 
a  kind  of  life  lost  %  Loss  of  hope  is  was  that  the  dissolution  of  a  soul  from 
hell.  hope  was  as  terrible  and    distressing 

4.  The  hope  oj  a  Christian,  if  false,  as  the  dissolution  of  soul  from  body. 
will  make  him  ^^  of  all  men  most  Imagine  the  case  of  a  man  who  had 
miserable." — These  words  must  not  be  thrown  his  whole  being  into  Christi- 
taken  to  teach  :  (1)  That  apart  from  anity,  who  had  allowed  its  doctrines 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  man  has  to  absorb  his  thoughts,  its  precepts  to 
no  [kind  or  measure  of]  evidence  of  a  rule  his  life,  its  promises  to  fire  his 
future  state.  "It  is  said  that  the  aspirations,  and  who  sanctified  all  the 
Emperor  Frederick  III.,  hearing  of  comforts,  advantages,  and  honours  of 
the  death  of  a  very  wicked  man,  who  this  life  for  its  sake,  being  met  at  the 
had  lived  in  prosperity,  without  moment  when  his  hopes  were  at  their 
having  had  at  any  time  his  health  or  zenith,  and  when  his  death  was  at 
fortune  impaired,  and  died  at  the  hand,  with  the  conviction  that  all  was 
age  of  ninety-three,  said,  *  See  here  a  delusion  ;  and  you  have  a  man  "  of 
a  proof  of  another  life.'  "     So  whispers  all  men  most  miserable." 

the  rational  instinct  of  all.  (2)  That,  2.  The  deception  which  this  blighted 
on  the  supposition  that  there  is  no  hope  prompted  [Query,  ^Hed"1]  its  subjects 
future  life,  the  practice  of  virtue  here  to  practise. — "  False  witnesses  of  God." 
would  place  man  in  a  worse  condition  The  deception  of  a  hearty  and  practical 
than  vice.  Virtue,  as  embodied  in  believer  in  Christianity  is  earnest.  If 
Christianity,  would  give  a  man  con-  he  believes  in  the  leading  subjects  con- 
siderable advantage  even  in  this  world.  tained  in  the  Gospel,  he  must  become 
"  Ways  of  pleasantness,"  etc.  (3)  That,  an  enthusiastic  propagandist;  the  desire 
apart  from  a  future  state,  a  godly  life  to  make  men  believe  as  he  does  becomes 
is  not  binding  on  man.  So  long  as  the  dominant  passion.  His  deception  is 
man  and  his  Maker  exist  in  relation  systematic,  not  an  occasional  attempt, 
to  each  other,  so  long  his  obligation  to  a  spasmodic  effort,  a  desultory  en- 
love  Him  "  with  all  his  heart,"  etc.,  deavour ;  it  is  the  organised  purpose 
must  continue.  What,  then,  do  they  of  his  life.  It  is  influential.  No 
mean  ?  [The  writer  then  greatly  system  has  proved  itself  more  victori- 
limits  the  truth  of  the  text  to  the  ously  aggressive.  By  it  these  workers 
Apostle  and  his  "  evangelical  contem-  "  turned  the  world  upside  down." 
poraries."  (But  query  this  ?)  Also  To  think,  then,  that  not  only  themselves 
(he  says)  remember  "  that  he  supposes  had  been  the  victims  of  delusion,  but 
the  disappointed  to  survive  the  discovery  had  helped  to  make  others  such,  would 
of  the  delusion."  Else  existence  would  intensify  the  disappointment,  and 
terminate  in,  or  the  next  moment  render  them  "  most  miserable." 
after,  the  discovery  of  the  delusion,  3.  The  destitution  in  which  the 
and  there  would  be  no  misery  at  all.  departu/re  of  the  hope  would  leave  the 

345 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   COBINTIIIANS. 


soul. — Christianity  makes  a  most 
radical  change  in  a  man  :  what  he  once 
loved  he  loathes,  what  he  once  sought 
he  shuns,  once  valued  now  despises, 
what  seemed  gain  to  him  counts  loss. 
On  the  discovery  of  the  delusion,  he 
would  be  left  with  tastes  and  desires 
for  which  there  was  no  pleasure 
correspondent.  Nothing  in  the  old 
to  meet  the  new  proclivities,  and 
the  new  has  melted  away  into  thin 
air. 

Conclusion. — Add  these  things  to- 
gether, and  then — "  most  miserable." 
Thank  God  all  this  only  hypothetic. 
"  But  now  Is  Christ  risen,"  etc. — 
Adapted  from  "  Homilist,"  New  Series, 
iv.  61. 

Ver.  33.  '*  Evil  communications  cor- 
rupt good,  manners." 

I.   1.  Hasty,  crude   thinking  would 
say:    "But  that    is    not    Scripture, 
though  it  is  in  Scripture.     That  is  a 
verse   from   a   heathen  poet ;    not  an 
inspired   saying   at   all."      [As  might 
similarly    be    said    of    the    letter    of 
Claudius   Lysias  (Acts   xxiii.    26-30).] 
But   wherever   an   architect    gets    his 
materials,    from   whatever   quarry   he 
gets  a  stone,  and  whatever  therefore 
be  its  varying  quality  or  character,  if 
he  puts  it  into  his  building,  he  makes 
it   his   own.     It   becomes   part  of  his 
embodiment   of   his   design   and  idea. 
He  is  responsible  for  its  selection  and 
presence  and  use.     He  is  the  author 
of   the  whole   structure  and  of  every 
part   of  it,  whether   he  obtained   the 
constituent  parts  "  ready  made  "  to  his 
hand  and  purpose,  or  had  to  find  them 
in  the  rough  and  fashion  them  himself. 
This  sentence,  like  the  pillars  of  St. 
Sophia  at  Constantinople,  the  spoils  of 
many  more  ancient  temples,  is  fetched 
from  another  earlier  building,  where  it 
had  its  fitness  and  its  strength.     This 
is   a   stone   from    a    heathen    quarry. 
But  the  wise  builder,  Paul,   working 
at  the  growing,  and  nearly  completed, 
structure    of    Bevelation,     under    the 
direction  of  its  Divine  Architect  works 
it  into  the  fabric,  and  when  it  is  once 
there  the  Directing  Mind  is   respon- 

34G 


sible  for  it ;  He  has  made  it  His  own  ; 
it   serves   His   purpose    of    conveying 
with  authority  His  mind  and  will  to 
men.     [No    knowledge — not    even   of 
heathen   proverbs — comes   amiss  to   a 
Christian  teacher  ;  everything  may  be 
made    available.       All    the    quarries, 
all  the  kingdoms,  of  the  earth  belong 
to   our   Christ.       He   will   guide    His 
servants  how  wisely  to  lay  toll  on  them 
all  !]     2.  Whatever  be  its  origin,  the 
saying   is    truth.       He    who    said    it 
formulated   the    bitter   experience    of 
many  a  benevolent  social  reformer,  of 
many  a  parent  filled  with  the  sorrow 
of    hopes    for    his    children    blighted 
into  worse   than  failure,  of  marjy  an 
amiable   theorist   starting   with   some 
"  natural  goodness  of  human  nature," 
only   to  find    that    his   theory   is   no 
cadre   into  which   he   can  fit   all  the 
facts.     [Take  only  a  limited  amount  of 
mental  luggage ;   pack  away  into  the 
portmanteau  of  your  theory  just  a  few 
selected  facts — just  those  you  need — 
and  you  may  walk  away  comfortably, 
triumphantly,  in  your  path  of  hope  and 
endeavour.    But]  take  entire,  universal 
human  nature;  take  entire,  universal 
experiment  and  its  results  ;  and  human 
nature  is  not  to  be  trusted  to  love  and 
follow  and  struggle  for  Good.     It  may 
approve  it,  applaud  it,  love  it  with  a 
very  platonic    sort    of   devotion ;    but 
it  is  divided  against  itself,    and  what 
seems,    unhappily,    the   stronger   part 
gravitates    too     easily     toward     evil. 
There   is  not  even  an  even  balance ; 
the  scale  turning   for   evil   is   loaded. 
3.  Classical   literature   has    its   many 
familiar  confessions  of  the  innate  down- 
ward drag  of  human  nature.     Indeed, 
never  had  every  experiment  that  man 
could  suggest  for  man's  elevation  been 
more    exhaustively    tried,    and    with 
larger  advantage  of  conditions  for  the 
experiment,    than     in    Grecian     and 
Boman  society  in   the   centuries  just 
before  Christ.    Philosophy,  art,  govern- 
ment, material  refinement,  and  cultured 
civilisation,   had   practically   done    all 
that   has   ever    been   possible   to   do ; 
later   ages   scarcely  do  more  than  go 
the  round  of  the  old  experiment ;  man 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  XV. 


had  done  his  best  for  man ;  and  the 
universal  consent  of  those  who  know 
bett  the  age  of  the  world  into  which 
God  thrust  the  leaven  of  the  Gospel  of 
Christ  is  that  never  was  the  failure 
more  complete,  never  were  the  world's 
"  manners "  more  utterly  and  hope- 
lessly "  corrwptr  Every  man  who 
repeats  the  experiment  upon  himself 
comes  at  last  to  the  same  result,  and 
to  the  same  sorrowful  confession  (his 
pride  may  not  always  suffer  him  to 
make  the  avowal  aloud),  that  man 
unaided  by  grace  cannot  keep  man 
pure.  He  finds  that  human  nature  in 
itself  has  its  affinities,  toward  evil,  not 
good,  nor  God ;  that  it  has  a  ready  as- 
similative power  for  evil ;  that  the  evil 
leaven  soon  enters,  and  spreads  widely, 
whilst  God's  leaven  of  a  new  life  is 
slowly  admitted,  and  finds  resistance 
more  probable  than  reception  and 
assimilation.  "  The  dyer's  hand  is 
subdued  to  what  it  works  in."  4.  Yet 
no  man  very  readily  believes  in  the 
affinity  of  human  nature  for,  and  its 
inclination  toward,  evil ;  in  himself, 
at  any  rate.  Or  if  he  half  admit  this, 
he  will  not  consent  to  count  himself  in 
peril.  His  unformulated,  unspoken 
thought  is  that  he,  at  all  events,  is 
independent  of  the  influences  of  his 
surroundings ;  he  can  stand  firm  ;  he 
can  keep  himself  from  corruption. 
From  gross  and  open  acts  of  evil  he 
perhaps  may ;  force  of  character  and 
of  will,  pride,  shame,  self-interest,  and 
the  like,  may  enable  him  to  keep  free 
from,  or  to  break  off,  acts  and  open 
habits.  But  sin  is  deeper  seated  in 
his  nature  ;  its  presence  is  more  subtle 
in  its  diffusion  ;  the  susceptibility  is 
throughout.  The  graver  danger  is 
from  subtle  and  pervasive  evil ;  sin 
is  most  dangerous  where  it  is  only 
an  influence,  an  environment,  always 
present,  unceasing  in  its  deleterious 
power.  It  is  most  perilous  as  an 
atmosphere  producing  a  languor,  a 
torpor  toward  good,  and  predisposing 
the  enfeebled  spiritual  life  to  receive 
the  infection  of  disease.  It  is  oftener 
a  poison  in  the  cup  than  an  open 
wound  in  the  battle.     It  speaks  fair. 


smooth  things,  when  its  "  communi- 
cations"  are  most  full  of  corruption 
and  deadly  mischief.  Man  will  not 
believe  it  of  Man  ;  the  parent  will  not 
believe  it  of  the  "  nice  "  child ;  the  man 
will  not  believe  it  of  himself,  spite  of 
many  a  sharp,  disappointing,  dis- 
heartening lesson.  Paul  says,  "  Be  not 
deceivedr  All  the  marvellous,  fairy- 
tale records  of  modern  science  as  to 
the  assimilative  powers  of  living  things 
in  the  presence  of  any  particular 
environment,  have  their  analogies  in 
the  facts  of  the  spiritual  realm.  As 
the  surroundings  such — naturally,  and 
but  for  the  grace  of  God — is  the  man. 
"  As  the  man  thinketh  in  his  heart  so 
is  he,"  no  doubt.  The  root  of  all  evil 
character  is  ultimately  within.  But 
it  may  be  held  in  check  by  a  holy 
environment.  "  Holy  communications  " 
— especially  between  the  soul  and  its 
Saviour — "  sanctify  evil  manners"  into 
good.  But  more  commonly,  and  with 
greater  facility,  "  evil  communications 
corrupt"  etc.  Let  no  man  flatter  him- 
self that  he  shall  be  any  exception. 
The  best  weapon  of  the  adversary  is 
the  "  deceitfulness  of  sin  "  (Heb.  iii.  13). 
Therefore — 

II.  Mind  what  company  you  keep 
— 1.  No  doubt  the  grace  of  God  can 
keep  Obadiah  in  a  court  where  Jezebel 
is  queen,  and  in  a  place  where  a  Nero 
follows  a  Tiberius,  a  Caligula,  a 
Claudius,  **  saints "  may  be  found. 
But  even  these  need  to  be  on  their 
strictest  guard.  The  very  physician 
who  goes  into  the  midst  of  spiritual 
disease  needs  to  have  a  care  of  his  own 
health.  Only  One  Physician  had 
absolute  immunity  from  danger.  [All 
who  do  "  rescue "  work  should  keep 
within  a  full  spiritual  vigour,  a  heart 
that  ''  hates  even  the  garment  spotted 
by  the  flesh  "  (Jude  23).]  A  Christian 
in  worldly  or  distinctly  evil  company 
is  a  red-hot  ball  of  iron  in  the  midst 
of  blocks  of  ice.  No  doubt  he  may 
melt  them  ;  there  is  grave  danger  lest 
they  chill  him.  2.  For  the  average 
Christian,  worldliness  is  a  more  real 
peril  than  open,  shocking,  repellent 
wickedness.     It  is  also  the  more  ordi- 

347 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS, 


nary  liability.    The  surface  discrepancy  begin  each  day   by  getting  into  very 
between  Christian  and   non- Christian  real  roijOjoori  with  the  Unseen,  and  if ,  by 
is   not  perhaps  great ;    non-Christian  often  intercourse  with  it  during  the  pro- 
life  is  in  many  ways  affected,  shaped,  gress  of  the  hours,  he  keep  his  windows 
restrained,    by    the    moral     standard  open  towards  it-^keep  the  eyesight  of 
obtaining,    in    a    general   way,    in    a  his  soul  keen  and  clear  to  see  it — he 
Christian   land.     But  there  is  a  deep  may   pass   through   unharmed.       But 
chasm  of  separation  in  all  their  under-  the   danger   for   the   young,    of   half- 
lying  principles.    The  "  counsel  of  the  "  formed  principles,  or  of  no  definite  prin- 
non-^od\y  can  never  coincide  with  the  ciples   whatever,    is   that  their   world 
"  law  of  the   Lord  "  (Ps.  i.)  which  is  should  contract  to  the  narrow  limits  of 
"  in  the  heart  "  of  the  Christian  man.  that  of  those  around  them ;  that  their 
Their   lives  may    overlap,    but    they  eye  should  lose  its  keenness  of  vision, 
revolve  in  different  circles,  struck  from  or  that  the  world's  smoke  and  mists 
distinct   centres.       3.  E.g.   the   whole  should   besmirch   their   windows  until 
standard   according  to  which  persons,  they  cannot  see  out  into  the  Infinite, 
motives,  conduct,   are   habitually   dis-  nor  can  the  world  of  the  Infinities,  the 
cussed  and  estimated  in  the  home,  is  Eternities,  the  Divinities,  reach  through 
according  to  man,  not  according  to  God.  to   them.      The   danger    is    that    the 
"  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts ; "  standard   of  judgment,    the   scales  by 
they    may    formulate    no    system    of  which  they  weigh  persons,  character, 
morals  and  philosophy,  but  their  ethics  motives,     aims,     should      receive — by 
of    business  and  their    view    of    life  slight,  but   continually   repeated   con- 
in   the   daily   talk   at   the   table   and  tacts   and   impressions — an    unhappy, 
around  the  fire  are  practically  without  ungodly   adjustment.       It   is  natural, 
God.       The    interests    consulted    for,  and  far  easier,  by  little   and  little  to 
and  by  which  are  regulated  the  plan-  fall  into  worldling  ways   of   thinking 
ning  and  execution  of  their  life-work,  and  speaking  and  action,  more   than 
lie   within  the   narrow   range  of   the  the  Christian  man  is  aware ;  until  one 
horizon  of  the  earthly  life ;  they  know,  day  some    sudden   arrest   of    circum- 
and  care  to  know,  nothing  of  the  re-  stance,  or  some  more  glaring,  startling 
adjustment  of  values  and  proportions  discrepancy  between  the  worldly  and 
which  is  inevitable  as  soon  as  life  is  the  godly  habit  and  standard,  "  pulls 
seen   running   on    in    unbroken    con-  him    up,"    and    reveals    to    him   how 
tinuity  into  an  eternal  duration.     E.g.  far  he  has  travelled,  and  how  widely 
in    the   education   of    their    children,  he  has  diverged  from  the  love  of  the 
or  their   placing  out  in  life,   in  their  law  of  God  and  of  the  ethics  of  the 
marriages,  the  soul  and  its  interests  Gospel   of   Christ.     To   the   Christian 
have  no  consideration  given  to  them  ;  man,    who    of   necessity    must  spend 
society  interests,  good  prospects,  natural  much  of  his  time  with   the  people  of 
congeniality    and     affection — however  the  world,  the  text  comes  as  a  warning 
high  and   worthy   the   type   of   these  lest  his   spirit  catch  the  infection  of 
may    be — are     all.        The     Christian  their  spirit,  lest  with  a  fatal  plasticity 
visitor  in  such  a  home  is  struck,  not  his  conscience  take  their  impress  and 
so  much  by  what  is  said  or  done,  but  mould.    He  must   keep  the  resilience, 
rather  hy  v)hat  he  misses    from    the  the  resistant  power,  the  rigidity,  which 
customary  talk  and  action  and  judg-  comes  of  indwelling  grace.     "  *  Be  not 
ments   of   the   family.      They  are  on  deceived' ;  do  not  be  'liberal,'    *  broad,' 
another,  a  lower,   plane ;  they  are  in  till   you   become  a  true   worldhng   in 
in  closest  daily  association  with  him ;  temper  and  spirit  and  habit  and  judg- 
but  they  and  he  Hve  in  different  worlds  ment.       *  Evil    communications  ' — not 
of  thought  and  feeling  and  judgment.  least  the  daily  talk  (6/xtAtat) ;  which  goes 
4.  He   may    "  endure  as   seeing   Him  on  around  you,  in   the  office,  in  the 
Who  is  invisible  "  (Heb.  xi.  27).     If  he  street,  in    the    house — *  corrupt   good 

348 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  XV. 


manners  !  ' "    (See  Appended  Note  from  prohibition,  the  Christian   readers   of 
Robertson.)  to-day  need  to  hear,  "  Be  not  deceived, 
III.    Mind  what  books  you  read,  evil    communications,"    etc.       3.    In 
and  what  literature. — 1.  In  a  word,  fiction,  for  example,  the    social    code, 
mind  the  mental  companionships  you  the     valuation     of     men     and     cha- 
form,  or   allow   to   yourself.      Openly  racter,    is    seldom    that    of    the    New 
vicious   literature    will   scarcely   come  Testament  ;  in  some,  widely  read  and 
in   the   way   of   the   bulk    of   decent,  favourably  reviewed,  it  is  hardly  Ten 
ordinary  English  people.       If  it  did.  Commandment  morality.     The  masters 
the   first   dose  would    probably  create  of  fiction,  or  the  great  playwrights,  are 
nausea  and  moral  revulsion — though,  not   found    working    on    distinctively 
unhappily,   even  this  may  pass  away  Christian  lines ;  they  never  have  done, 
with    use.      Here   again   the   peril   is  The  relations  between  man  and  woman 
rather  from  the  literature  which  the  in    (say)    a    masterpiece    of    art    like 
Christian  instinct  does  not   so   much  Middlemarch    are    not    according    to 
condemn  for  what   is   present   as   for  Christ's  law.      Vanity  Fair  is  drawn  by 
what   is   missing.      The   literature  of  one  who  is  himself  a  stall-holder  in  the 
the  world,   at   its   best,  "says   in   its  Fair — so  far  as  its  code  for  character 
heart.    No    God."       2.    The    Puritan  shows.        The     Christian     of     strong, 
code  and  the  practice  of  the  men  and  *'  spiritual  "    instincts,    in     whom     is 
womeji    of    all    the    Churches  which  answered  the  prayer  of  Phil.  i.  9-11, 
felt,  and  still  feel,  the  impress  of  the  is  not  at  home  in  his  mental  company, 
Evangelical  revival  of   the  eighteenth  as  he  reads.     He  is  in  continual  mental 
century,    were   strict,    "narrow" — for  and  heart  protest  against  what  they 
themselves  and  for  those  whose  opin-  say   and   do,   and   still    more   against 
ions  and  habits  they  could  control — in  their   principles   of   action   and   judg- 
th©  range  of  literature  they  permitted  ment.     And  the   danger  is  analogous 
for    ordinary    reading.      They    found  to  that  of  actually  living  in  such  an 
that  to  "glorify  their  God  below  and  atmosphere   and   such   company;    the 
find   their    way   to    heaven "    [by   no  danger  of   adjustment  little  by  little, 
means    forgetting     that,     whilst     the  of  assimilation  by  almost  imperceptible 
living    stream    is    making    its    pure,  degrees — only   recognisable    in    their 
bright  way  ta  the  Ocean,  it  needs  to  total    result — to    the    standards    and 
be,  and  cannot  help  being,  a  joy  and  practice   and   heart   of    those    around 
a  blessing  to   all   the   dwellers  along  him.     ["  Some  (poets)  will  tune  their 
its  banks  and  course]  needed  all  their  harps  to  sensual  pleasures,  and  by  the 
best   energies  and   all   the   help   they  enchantment  of  their  genius  will  well- 
could  obtain.     At  their  best,  the  novel,  nigh   commend    their    unholy   themes 
the  play,  most  of  the  poetry,  of  their  to  the  imagination  of  saints  "    (Edward 
day  demanded  the  time  and  gave  no  Irving,  Div.  Oracles,  Oration  I.).]     4. 
help.     Their  intensely  serious  view  of      Most  of  the  reviewing  press,  most  of 
life  was  the  basis  of   adjustment  for  the  influential  literary  judgment,  is  at 
all  their  standard   of   permission  and      its  best  non-Christian   in   its   motives 
perusal.      The    very    newspaper    was      and   its    standards    of    appeal.      The 
often    looked    at    askance.      The    re-      younger,     the     unstable,    the     ill-in- 
action is  upon  us,   in   our  time,  and      structed  Christian  reader  needs  be  on 
is  carrying  Christian  people  quite  far      his  guard,  lest  he  ^^  be  deceived" ;  lest 
enough  in  the  direction  of  freedom.    All      he  be  swept  away  by  the  strong  set 
the  fields  of  literature  are  not  full  of      of  the  prevalent    current  into   habits 
food-bearing,  health-producing  growth  ;      of  judgment  and  esteem  which  would 
yet  the  tendency  is  to  throw  them  open      not    be    those    of     "  life    in    Christ." 
to  the  free  range  of  even  the  youngest.      Beauty,  masterly  workmanship,  in  art 
most  inexperienced  readers.    And  with-      or  poetry  must    not  excuse  or  glorify 
gut  keeping  up  the  old  strictness  of      moral   evil.      To  a  Christian   instinct 

349 


CHAP.  XV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


art  cannot  be  non-moral ;  as  a  fact, 
it  is  not.  The  master- workman  of 
the  modern  world,  Goethe,  is  a  great 
heathen.  Shakespeare,  colossal  in  his 
power,  embodies,  like  his  mistress 
Elizabeth  [see  Green,  History  of  the 
English  People,  ii.  499,  "  a  brilliant, 
fanciful,  unscrupulous  child  of  earth 
and  of  the  Renaissance  "],  the  spirit  and 
code,  not  of  the  Reformation,  but  of 
the  Renaissance,  in  his  attitude  towards 
the  moralities ;  it  needs  a  strong, 
clear,  healthy,  spiritual  tone  to  read 
him  without  some  moral  soil,  and  even 
some  of  the  insensible  mental  adjust- 
ment which  is  the  great  peril.  The 
young  heart  needs  to  read  with  Paul's 
caution  even  in  the  ears,  "  Evil  com- 
munications,^ etc.  Breadth,  liberality, 
which  cultivates  "  toleration,"  indiffer- 
ence to  all  such  aspects  of  literature, 
and  appreciates  and  approves  all  equally 
if  only  power  be  there, — these  belong  to 
a  life  which  lives  and  moves  in  another 
world  than  that  which  is  circumscribed 
by  the  sacred  limit:  "^?^  Christ^  The 
"  man  in  Christ "  needs  in  even  his 
mental  companionships  to  be  on  his 
strictest  guard  when  he  passes  into  the 
"  world "  beyond.  It  is  apt  to  be 
u  QQrjc^-^ipi "  and  "  corrupting y  [Similarly 
the  evolutionary  exposition  of  the  facts 
of  the  natural  world  has  so  got  posses- 
sion of  the  press,  emphemeral  and  more 
permanent  alike ;  has  so  got  current  in 
the  speech  and  thought  of  the  leaders 
of  the  mind  of  the  world  to-day ;  has 
so  boldly  been  carried  through  as  a 
working  explanation  of  the  facts  dealt 
with  in  mental  and  moral  science ; 
that  it  is  difficult  not  to  escape  the 
infection  of  what,  in  its  extremest 
interpreters,  is  a  materialism  without 
a  God ;  difficult  to  come  back  to,  and 
keep,  one's  position  at  the  Great 
Teacher's  feet,  making  His  words, 
"  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,"  the 
key  to  one's  interpretation  and  system 
of  Nature.  Facts  are  welcome,  whoever 
discovers,  reports,  systematises  them. 
The  interpretation  of  the  facts  needs 
watching  lest  it  "  corrupt "  the  habitual, 
instinctive  thought  of  the  heart,  which 
like  Christ  sees  a  world  whose  "laws " 

350 


are  simply  God's  rules  for  His  own 
ordinary,  orderly  action  and  govern- 
ment; whose  "  Force  "  is  ultimately  will 
force  —  that  of  His  will ;  a  world 
full  of  a  personal  God.] 


Ver.  38.  "  God  giveth  it  a  body.'' 
Introduction.  —  In  regard  to  the 
special  topic  discussed  in  this  chapter, 
this  remark  of  Paul  lifts  the  believer 
over  the  stumbling-block  of  the 
"  How  ?  "  by  referring  him  to  one  of 
the  twin  bases  upon  which  the  Saviour, 
more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  before, 
had  set  the  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection 
in  His  memorable  discussion  with  the 
Sadducee  scoffers  of  His  day.  *'  Ye 
do  err,"  He  had  said,  "not  knowing 
the  Scriptures,  nor  the  power  of  God," 
i.e.  His  power  makes  it  certain  that 
He  can,  if  He  will,  raise  the  dead. 
[It  is  not  a  thing  incredible  that  God 
— God — should  raise  the  dead  (Acts 
xxvi.  8).]  And  the  Scriptures  make 
it  certain  that  He  wills  to  do  it 
(Matt.  xxii.  29).  All  preliminary  talk 
about  "  impossibility "  is  swept  away 
so  soon  as  in  any  real,  operative  sense 
God  is  taken  account  of;  and  any 
further  question  as  to  fact  or  pro- 
bability is  met  if  there  is  a  positive 
declaration  which  is  unquestionably 
from  His  mouth.  But  the  words  are 
suggestive  of  what  belongs  to  a  much 
wider  field  of  discussion.  To  a  Christian 
Theist  it  is  as  true  of  the  universal 
natural  order  as  of  the  spiritual,  that 
"  in  all  God  is  all "  (ver.  28). 

I.  God  gave  man  his  present  body. 
— The  little  child  learns  to  say  its 
catechism :  "  ^.  Who  made  you  ? 
A.  God  made  me."  And  all  he  may 
afterwards  learn  of  the  physical  pro- 
cesses of  nature  need  not  take  the 
child's  answer  out  of  the  man's  mouth. 
Creationism  or  Traducianism,  apart, 
as  far  as  regards  the  immaterial  element 
in  us,  it  very  soon  becomes  matter 
of  obvious  knowledge  that  a  man's 
body  is  no  absolutely  new  beginning, 
no  thing  de  novo  fashioned  and  moulded 
by  any  literal  "  hand  "  or  "  fingers  " 
of  God ;  but  that,  on  the  other  hand, 
there  are  many  intermediate  physical 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xv. 


links    of    successive     or     predecessive 
generations  of  parentage  between  any 
individual  of  the  race  to-day  and  the 
body  of  *'  the  first  Adam."     If  a  man's 
special     line     of     study    makes     him 
acquainted   with   the   minutice   of  the 
physiological    processes    between     the 
primal  cell  and  the  new-born  infant, 
if  he  come  to  know  how  very  closely 
many  of   the  earlier  stages  mimic  or 
are  allied  to  those  of  the  starting  into 
growth    in    the    case   of   a   vegetable 
germ ;    yet    all    his    added    detail   of 
knowledge  has  made  it  no  more  diffi- 
cult for  him  to  say  "  God  made  me  " 
than  it  is  for  the  grown  child  or  the 
man  who  merely  sees,  as  far  as  all  see, 
the  physical  organisation  of  the  parents 
interposed  between  God  the  Creator  and 
the  new  product  of  His  power.     What 
difficulty  exists  is  to  both  men  the  same 
in  kind.     Merely  to  be  able  to  follow 
the  intervening  links  of  the  process  into 
fuller  detail,  to  be  permitted  to  follow 
the  Great  Worker  into  the  inner  secrecy 
of    His    workshop,     and     understand 
better   how   exceedingly   complex  and 
beautiful  are  the  methods  He  follows, 
is  not  to  alter  the  nature  of  the  question 
at  all.     It  is  merely  breaking  up  the 
one  obvious  physical  link  into  many, 
very  many  ;  but  to  see  the  simple  fact 
that  our  parents  have  "  given  us"  our 
body  is  as  great  or  as  little  a  difficulty, 
or  as  completely  no  difficulty  at  all,  in 
the  way  of  saying  *'  God  made  me,"  as 
to  see  the  manifold,  multiplied  details 
and  physical  instruments  of  the  Great 
Maker's  work.     And  so,  too,  if  all  that 
is  claimed  for  what  is  popularly  called 
"  Evolution  "    were   demonstrated  ;    if 
the   order   of    developed   scheme    and 
idea  which  it  is  manifestly  possible  to 
arrange  out  of  the  multiform  creatures 
of  earth's  geological  and  historical  ages, 
an  order  leading  up  to,  and  at  every 
stage  more  and  more  frequently  sug- 
gesting,   Man, — if   this   were    demon- 
strably physically   and   historically  a 
genealogical    succession ;    if   thus    be- 
tween the  first   living   thing  and   his 
body  of  to-day  the  Christian  man  of 
science  interposed  an  unbroken  chain 
of     physical    antecedents    and    conse- 


quents,   not   even   interrupted   at    an 
''  Adam  "  of  a  "  Genesis  "  ; — he  would 
still  with  full  intelligence  and  reason- 
ableness reply  to  his  catechist,  "  God 
made  me."     He  again  would  know  that 
his  fuller  acquaintance  with  the  details 
of  the  process,  and  his  belief  that  there 
had  been  no  interposition  of  the  power 
of  God,  de  novo  and  ah  extra,  in  the 
physical  succession  since  the  first  living 
cell  was  endowed  with  Life,  had  made 
no  difference  in  the  essential  shape  of 
the    question.     The   first   modification 
from  the  simplicity  of  the  child's  idea 
of  a  direct  and  immediate  "  making  " 
by    God   to   the   necessary   knowledge 
that  the  "  making  "  had  been  mediate 
through  human  parentage,  is  the  only 
modification  in  kind  ;  all  else  is  matter 
of  completeness  of   understanding  the 
mediating  term.     Between  the  Maker 
and  the  product  there  is  more  elaborate 
machinery  ;  the  thing  is  not  so  simply 
and  directly  "  hand-made  "  as  the  little 
child  supposed  ;  but  that  is  all.     *'  God 
gave  me   my   body :    God   made   Me." 
This  leads  further  afield. 

II.  God  is  active,  operative,  every- 
where, always  in  His  creation. — "  My 
Father  worketh  hitherto,"  said  the  Son 
of  God,  in  vindication  of  His  own  bene- 
ficent Sabbath  labour.  *'  Why  should 
not  men  let  healing  alone  on  the 
Sabbath,  and  neither  the  patients  come, 
nor  the  physician  attend  to  them  if 
they  do  come  ?  Why  not  ?  Why 
should  not  I  cease  such  work  on  the 
Sabbath?  Because  my  Father  does 
not.  The  healing  of  a  woman,  or  the 
setting  of  a  bone,  or  the  growth  of  a 
body,  does  not  cease  on  the  Sabbath, 
and  in  all  the  *  natural  processes ' 
which  are  thus  ceaselessly  and  con- 
tinuously proceeding.  He  is  at  work. 
They  are  full  of  God.  They  are  God 
at  work.  Sabbath  and  weekday." 
And  the  Christian  takes  his  view  of 
God  in  Nature  from  His  Master.  [He 
does  not  shut  Him  out  of  history.  He 
does  not  believe  that  when  Bible  history 
was  completed,  and  the  lives  of  Bible 
saints  were  ended,  God  ceased  to  work 
altogether,  or  to  work  as  really  and 
effectively  in  the  history  and  the  lives 

351 


CHAP.  XV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS, 


of  our  times.  He  uses  the  specimen 
cases  of  the  Bible,  authentically  opened 
up  and  expounded,  to  show  him  how  to 
believe  in,  and  to  look  for,  and  to  see, 
God  in  his  own  life,  or  in  the  history 
of  which  each  morning's  newspaper 
is  the  latest  chapter  of  continuation. 
ii  Worketh  hitherto."]  The  mind  and 
heart  of  man  can  never  be  permanently 
satisfied,  under  normal  conditions,  to 
think  of  the  glorious  kingdom  of  the 
visible  universe  as  without  a  throne 
or  a  Monarch,  or  with  only  an  absentee 
or  indifferent  one ;  it  postulates  a 
Father  and  Head  for  such  a  family 
and  such  a  home.  It  wants  God  near. 
The  many  shades  and  phases  of  Pan- 
theistic thought  find  their  charm  and 
their  strength  in  the  answer  to  this 
demand.  But  they  overdo  it,  and 
bring  Him  too  near,  confounding  and 
identifying  Work  and  Worker  in  one 
undistinguishable  Subsistence.  The 
phrase,  at  any  rate,  of  another  school, 
which  spoke  of  an  Anima  Mundi,  a 
Soul  of  the  World,  was  nearer  the 
truth,  imperfect  as  all  creaturely  and 
human  analogies  must  be.  The  Chris- 
tian thinker  does  not  confound  his  soul 
with  his  body.  He  can  only  speak  of 
either  in  negations  of  the  other;  but 
he  knows  them  distinct.  And  he  asks 
himself  whether  all  this  great,  this 
vast,  physical  frame  of  things  stands 
in  any  similar  relation  to  God  as  his 
own  physical  part  does  to  his  thinking, 
feeling,  willing  part.  The  only  force 
of  which  he  knows  anything  directly 
and  really  is  will  force,  the  force  of 
his  own  will ;  and  though  the  midmost 
meeting-place  and  link  of  connection 
between  mind  and  body  is  veiled  from 
him  under  thickest  darkness,  yet  he 
knows  how  Will  in  him  wields,  and 
moves,  and  can  mould,  his  physical  part, 
and  through  it  the  physical  around 
him.  And  then  he  asks  whether  he 
can  say  or  think  anything  truer  or 
wiser,  or  at  any  rate  more  probable, 
than  that  the  One  Will  wields  and 
moulds  and  moves  all  this  vast  physical 
frame  of  things,  and  that  all  the 
"  forces  "  which  we  count  and  calculate 
and  measure    and  use   are  but  many 

352 


variations  of  the  putting  forth  of  the 
One  Force,  that  of  the  Will  of  Him  who 
long  ago  made  the  matter  of  His 
universe,  and  from  that  time  to  this 
has  never  taken  His  hand  off  the  thing 
He  made.  In  the  case  studied  above, 
suggested  by  Paul,  he  does  not  con- 
ceive that  he  is  really  any  farther  away 
from  God  because  he  sees  the  thing 
''  machine-made  "  rather  than  directly 
"hand-made."  His  Father  *' Who 
worketh  hitherto "  designed  the  ma- 
chine, and  made  it,  and  works  it,  and 
has  His  .hand  upon  it  at  every  inter- 
mediate point  between  Himself  and 
what  He  produces  by  it.  The  **  design 
argument "  loses  none  of  its  force  to 
him,  if  even  he  should  think  that 
"natural  selection"  or  any  other 
combination  of  physical  forces  proves 
to  be  the  method  by  which  the 
Designer  has  effected  His  purpose. 
The  Design  is  there.  The  "  natural  " 
is  of  God  as  really  as  the  "  super- 
natural "  ;  the  "  miraculous "  is  the 
special  for  the  purpose  of  Eevelation ; 
the  "  natural  "  is  the  ordinary,  orderly 
method  by  which  He  chooses  to  proceed 
in  Creation  and  Providence.  If  the 
Idea  of  Creation  gets  a  physical  embodi- 
ment, it  is  because  "  God  giveth  it  a 
body,  as  it  hath  pleased  Him." 

III.  God  gave  Adam  a  body. — Did 
even  the  early  Italian  painters,  of  the 
simplest  ages  of  faith,  really  believe  liter- 
ally in  the  grand,  bearded,  old-man-like 
Creator  Whom  they  represented  bend- 
ing over  a  newly  made  body  moulded 
with  His  literal  fingers  out  of '  dust  ? 
After  the  days  of  his  childhood,  no 
simplest,  most  old-fashioned  believer 
in  a  distinct  creation  of  Adam's  body 
ever  so  conceived  of  it.  They  knew 
and  believed  that  "  no  man  hath  seen 
or  can  see  "  God.  Even  they,  believing 
in  a  direct  and  immediate  new  be- 
ginning with  the  body  of  "  the  first 
Adam,,''  did  not  seriously  and  literally 
think  that  if  they  had  been  present 
at  its  formation  their  eyes  would  have 
beheld  any  visible  Modeller,  with 
literal  hands  shaping  "  the  dust  of  the 
earth."  If  they  had  at  all  pursued  the 
matter  so  far,  they  would  at  most  have 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xv. 


expected  to  see  a  body  growing  into 
shape  before  them,  in  similar  fashion 
to  that  so  vividly  described  by  Huxley. 
"  Of  all  the  perennial  miracles  [Nature] 
offers  to  the  student's  inspection,  per- 
haps the  most  worthy  of  admiration  is 
the  development  of  a  plant  or  of  an 
animal    from    its    embryo.     Examine 
the  recently  laid  egg  of  some  common 
animal,    such   as   a   salamander   or   a 
newt.      It   is   a   minute    spheroid   in 
which  the  best  microscope  will  reveal 
nothing   but  a  structureless   sac,   en- 
closing a  glairy  fluid,  holding  granules 
in  suspension.     But  ...  let  a  mode- 
rate supply  of  warmth  reach  its  watery 
cradle,  and  the  plastic  matter  undergoes 
changes  so  rapid,  and  yet  so  steady  and 
so  purposelike  in  their  succession,  that 
one  can  only  compare  them  to  those 
operated  by  a  skilled  modeller  upon  a 
formless   lump  of   clay.     As  with  an 
invisible    trowel,   the   mass   is  divided 
and  subdivided  into  smaller  and  smaller 
portions,  until  it  is  reduced  to  an  aggre- 
gation of   granules   not   too   large   to 
build  withal  the  finest  fabrics  of  the 
nascent  organism.     And  then,  it  is  as 
if  a  delicate  finger  traced  out  the  line 
to  be  occupied  by  the  spinal  column, 
and  moulded  the  contour  of  the  body  ; 
pinching  up  the  head  at  one  end,  the 
tail  at  the  other,  and  fashioning  flank 
and  limb  into  due  salamandrine  pro- 
portions, in  so  artistic  a  way  that,  after 
watching  the  process  hour  by  hour,  one 
is  almost  involuntarily  possessed  with 
the  notion,  that  some  more  subtle  aid 
to  vision  than   an  achromatic,   would 
show  the  hidden  artist,  with  his  plan 
before     him,     striving     with      skilful 
manipulation    to    perfect    his   work." 
(Huxley,  Lay  Sermons^  260,  261.)    The 
Christian   scientific    observer    believes 
that  under  the  lens  of  his  microscope 
he    actually     is     beholding     Creative 
Power  and  Will  mysteriously  meeting, 
touching,    moulding.    Matter.     God  is 
there  giving  the  salamander  a  body. 


TV.  God  giveth  the  risen  man  His 
body. — We  thus  return  to  our  start- 
ing-point.    There  is  no  real  difficulty 
in  the  question,  '*  How  can  the  dead — 
the  dead,  the  dead !  do  you  see  them  ? 
— he    raised  ?      With   what    (kind    of) 
body  do  they  come  from  their  grave  % " 
That  they  will  come  forth — all  of  them, 
and  not    only  those    ''  in    Christ  " — is 
for   His   disciples   conclusively  settled 
by   one    word  of   the  Master.      They 
"  know  this  Scripture  "  (John  v.  28,  29) 
[where  "in  the  graves"  is  in  very  pre- 
cise and  defining  contrast  with  "  the 
dead"  of  "the  hour  that  now  is  "  in 
ver.  25].    "  How  ?  "    W^hat  need  to  ask 
"  how  "  ?     The    closest    students  have 
not  exhausted  yet  the  whole  range  of 
the  variety  of  His  methods,  nor  seen 
any  suggestion  of  a  limit  to  many  and 
startlingly  novel    possibilities   of   new 
methods,  or  of  new  exertions  of  the  old, 
the  one,  power.    As  He  gave  the  buried 
body,  so  He  must,  and  will,  give  the 
raised- up  body.     Whether  working  on 
His  accustomed  lines  or  in  His  sovereign 
freedom  and  mastery  striking  out  new 
ones   for   Himself,  it  is  but  the  One 
Worker.     And  as  there  has  never  yet 
arisen  a  demand  for  which  He  has  not 
made  adequate  provision,  so   for  the 
new  demand  of  the  new  life,  and  the 
new  environment  of   the   new  world. 
Pie   may   either    make   a   new   thing 
altogether,  or  modify  the  old  thing  and 
the   old   type,    "  as  it  pleases    Him." 
That  is  all  that  can  be  said.     To  the 
intellect  or  the  heart  which  does  not 
know  our  God  that  is  to  say  nothing. 
To    the    intellect    that    acknowledges 
Him,  and  to  the  heart  that  believes  in 
and  loves  Him,  that  is  enough.     "  God 
giveth"   to   the   seeds  of    His   human 
sowing  "  their  body^    "  their  own"  ap- 
propriate "  (kind  of)  body"  "  spiritual 
bodies  "  for  spiritual  men,  who  are  to 
dwell  in  a  spiritual  world,  for  ever  one 
with  Him  who  "  was  made  a  quickening 
Spirit." 


A  A 


353 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  6.  " Fallen  asleep'^ — Sleep  the 
new,  Christian  name  for  Death.  The 
new,  Christian  name  for  a  burial-place  : 
Cc&metery  (  =  Sleeping-place). 

I.  Merely  an  incident  in  a  con- 
tinuous life. — 1.  No  break  at  death 
in  the  personal  life.  The  same  Self 
awakes ;  and,  through  the  night's 
parenthesis  in  consciousness  and  ac- 
tivity, the  same  Self  has  gone  on. 
[No  inference  to  be  drawn  from  the 
tigure,  as  to  any  asserted  loss  of  con- 
sciousness between  death  and  resur- 
rection. Figure  only  suitable  at  all  as 
seen  from  the  spectator's  standpoint, 
not  the  sleeper's.]  "  I  shall  awake— I." 
"  I  shall  see  for  myself,"  etc.  SLall 
answer  the  call  of  the  awakening 
trumpet,  with  the  consciousness  that 
it  is  my  same  Self  which  greets  the 
dawn  of  the  eternal  Day.  2.  As,  of  a 
morning,  the  happy  soul  has  many  a 
time  awoke  eager  to  resume  *'  fellow- 
ship with  the  Father " ;  has  awoke 
to  find  the  Father,  Who  has  been 
waking  whilst  the  child  slept,  still 
there,  just  as  He  was  there,  filling  the 
last  moments  of  last  night's  conscious- 
ness with  the  sense  of  His  presence ; 
so  the  soul  which  closed  its  eyes  in  the 
presence  of  the  Father,  wakes  from 
this  "  Sleep  "  to  say,  as  its  first  glad 
greeting  of  the  Morning  of  Eternity  : 
"  When  I  awake  I  am  still  with  Thee  !  " 
The  same  Self  awakes,  to  find  the  same 
God,  and  to  enjoy  the  same  holy  fellow- 
ship. 

II.  Sleep  has  the  prospect  of  awaken- 
ing.— Bold  unbelief  in  the  French 
Revolution  wrote  upon  the  gate  of 
Pere  la  Chaise,  *'  Death  is  an  eternal 
sleep."  No.  Whatever  Death  may 
introduce  to,  it  is  but  to  a  terminable, 
temporary  experience.  The  "  grave 
is  not  the  goal "  of  life  ;  only  another, 
passing,  stage  towards  the  goal.  [The 
certainty  of  the  awakening  "  in  Christ " 
is  mainly  in  this  chapter.  But  the 
man  out  of  Christ  is  to  remember 
how  temporary  is  the  episode  called 
"  Death  "  ;  how  certain  is  the  awaken- 
ing ;  how  he  then  takes  up  again,  how 

354 


indeed  he  has  all  through  taken  along 
with  him,  the  old  responsibility  and 
guilt.] 

III.  A  brief  passage  in  our  con- 
tinuous existence. — Ps.  xc.  5  reminds 
how  a  night's  sound  sleep  seems  but  as 
a  moment ;  a  man  seems  only  just  to 
have  come  to  rest.  It  will  not  be  long 
before  our  "  sleeping  "  shall  be  broken 
in  upon  by  the  voice  of  one  who  says 
tenderly,  and  yet  mightily,  *'  Talitha 
cumi"  (almost  =  *' Awake  up,  my 
child  ").  Then  also  rest  is  suggested ; 
an  escape  from  the  trouble  and  clamour 
of  life,  and  from  the  tension  which 
strain  brain  and  heart  almost  past 
endurance  (2  Thess.  i.  7). 

IV.  Remember :  "  Asleep  in  Christ ; " 
*'  asleep  through  Jesus." 

Y.  Kemember  the  first  instance  of 
the  phrase  :  Stephen  has  struggled  fo 
his  knees  for  a  prayer,  after  the  crush 
of  the  first  stones,  hurled  upon  his  chest 
by  the  witnesses,  as  he  lay  upon  the 
ground.  Next  he  is  struck  down  again 
by  the  hail  of  stones,  or  sinks  exhausted. 
But  he  sees  his  Lord  "  standing," 
watching  the  scene  with  keen  interest ; 
standing,  as  if  He  could  not  keep  His 
seat  upon  His  throne,  in  His  eager 
restlessness  to  welcome  the  first  to 
follow  Him  through  the  gate  of  blood 
into  heaven's  rest.  And  he  no  longer 
sees  the  scowling,  angry,  murderous 
faces  that  glower  upon  "  the  Nazarene 
blasphemer."  The  shouts  of  execration 
die  out  of  his  ears.  He  perhaps  hardly 
longer  feels  the  stones.  He  sees  the 
Son  of  Man,  and  '•^ falls  asleep^  A 
rough  bed  for  the  death  scene  ! 

Ver.  6.  Some  are  fallen  asleep. — 
The  first  reflection  upon  the  early  rest- 
ing of  one  of  the  ministers  [workers] 
of  Jesus  Christ  comes  most  naturally 
in  the  words  of  His  own  comforting 
question,  "  Are  there  not  twelve  hours 
in  the  day  ?  "  He  gave  it  as  a  reason 
for  not  shrinking  from  the  risk  of 
returning  into  a  dangerous  place  at 
the  call  of  duty.  "  Immortal  till  His 
work  was  done,"  He  would  *'  go  into 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap,  x v. 


Judaea  again."  He  would  "walk  to- 
day and  to-morrow  and  the  day 
following,"  regardless  alike  of  Herod's 
threatening  and  of  Judas's  treachery ; 
the  day  has  twelve  hours,  and  it  will 
surely  see  them  to  their  close.  This 
teaches  us  a  new  measurement  of  time. 
It  is  not  the  accomplishment  of  the 
threescore  and  ten  or  fourscore  years 
which  makes  a  life  complete  in  the 
reckoning  of  God's  sanctuary.  The 
life  of  a  little  child  has  its  twelve 
hours.  It  may  be  a  complete  life,  as 
God  sees  it,  quite  as  truly  as  the  life 
which  has  been  dragged  out  to  its 
utmost  length  of  ninety  years  or  a 
hundred.  It  may  as  perfectly  have 
accomplished  the  thing  whereto  He 
gent  it — it  may  have  borne  as  real 
a  testimony  to  His  loving,  life-giving 
grace — as  if  childhood  bad  lived  on 
into  youth,  and  youth  into  manhood, 
and  manl  ood  into  old  age.  "They 
reckon  not  by  days  and  years,  Where 
he  has  gone  to  dwell."  There  were 
twelve  hours,  even  in  that  life's  biief 
day.  Though  the  constituent  "  hour  " 
may  not  have  been  one  year  long,  still 
— to  apply,  somewhat  inaccurately,  the 
words  of  a  Prophet — still  "  the  child 
may  die,"  in  God's  reckoning,  "  a 
hundred  years  old."  Certainly  there 
may  be  the  twelve  hours  of  a  very  full 
day  in  a  [ministerial]  life  very  brief 
in  years.  Some  of  the  men  of  ever- 
lasting remembrance  in  the  Church  [of 
England]  have  died  at  the  age  of  thirty 
years  or  under.  It  is  the  devotion 
which  counts.  It  is  the  earnestness 
which  tells.  We  do  not  undervalue 
the  testimony  of  a  long  life — a  life 
protracted  into  days  even  of  weakness, 
suffering,  and  silence  in  the  holy 
service.  But  we  say  this,  that  in 
some  respects,  and  for  some  purposes, 
no  testimony  is  like  the  testimony  of 
the  young,  and  no  [life's]  ministry  has 
the  same  astonishment  in  it,  for  the 
world  that  looks  on,  as  [that]  of  one 
who,  with  all  the  life  in  him,  all  the 
impulses  which  drive  others  into  self- 
indulgence  and  sin,  is  seen  firm  in 
principle  and  resolute  in  duty,  having 
"  given  himself  first  to  the  Lord,"  and 


then   all  he  has — all   that  he   might 

have  enjoyed,  and  all  that  he  might 

have  become. 

*  *  *  * 

Brethren,  the  time  is  short  for  the 
youngest  of  us — what  must  it  be  for 
the  one  eldest  ?  .  .  .  Age  advances, 
and  death  must  come ;  let  us  work 
while  it  is  day.  Let  us  help  one 
another  while  we  can.  Let  us  re- 
member them  that  are  fallen  asleep, 
trying  to  follow  them  as  they  followed 
Christ,  "  whose  faith  follow,  as  you 
contemplate  the  end  of  their  conver- 
sation " — their  death,  that  is,  in  the 
faith  of  Jesus  ;  remembering  that  One 
Person  never  dies — "  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  same  yesterday  and  to-day  and  for 
ever."  Let  us  cherish  the  bond  which 
binds  us  to  each  other — a  true  bond, 
powerful  to  knit  hearts.  Let  us  pray 
for  one  another,  that  we  may  all  meet 
at  last,  not  one  missing,  in  that  world 
of  which  it  is  written,  "  These  are  they 
that  have  washed  their  robes  " — they 
were  not  clean  always — "  and  made 
them  white  in  the  blcod  of  the  Lamb. 
Therefore,"  etc. — Extracted  from  ser- 
mon hy  Dean  Vaughan,  "  Rest  Awhile" 
pp.  94-100. 

Ver.  6,  coupled  with  ver.  34. 

I.  There  is  a  death  which  is  only 
a  sleep. 

II.  There  is  a  sleep  [of  sin]  which 
is  a  [moral]  death  (Eph.  v.  14). 

Ver.  10.  Alio/ Grace. 
I.  Our  experience. 

II.  Our  labours. 

III.  Our  success. — [J.  L.] 

Ver.  11.  Two  All-important  Things 
about  the  Preaching. 

I.  Not  the  preacher,  but  the  truth 
preached. — ["  Whether  I  or  they  ;  "  that 
matters  nothing.] 

II.  Not  the  hearing,  but  the  belief 
of  the  truth.— [e/.  L.] 

Ver.  14.  Reverse  the  Proposition, 

I.  Preaching  is  not  in  vain. — It 
has  power.     It  effects  moral  miracles. 

II.  Faith  is  not  vain. — It  brings 
comfort,  pardon,  life.     Therefore — 

III.  Christ  is  risen.— [/.  L.] 

355 


CHAP.  XV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Yer.  26.  The  Sub-final  Act  in  the 
Drama  of  Human  History. 

I.  "  The  last  enemy  "  met  and  sub- 
dued by — 

II.  "  The  last  Adam."— Sentence  of 
deposition  was  long  ago  passed  against 
the  usurping  power.  [Cf.  John  xii.  31 ; 
couple  with  it  the  Temptation  in  the 
Wilderness;  and  Luke  x.  18.]  It  has 
struggled  to  keep  its  hold  on  the  race ; 
but  every  soul  "  fallen  asleep,"  "  not 
seeing  death,"  has  been  a  blow  to  its 
prestige,  a  defeat  in  detail.  Now  Death 
shall  never  seize  another  individual  of 
the  race ;  this  shall  no  longer  be  a 
mortal  stock.  The  other  Death — the 
only  real  "  Death  " — shall  still  hold  its 
captives,  and  shall  hold  them  eternally, 
for  there  shall  be  no  more  dying  hence- 
forward. 

Ver.  31.  ''  I  die  daily." 

I.  Physically.  —  From  the  first 
moment  of  life  we  begin  to  die.  For 
thirty  or  forty  years  the  forces  which 
make  for  Ufe  and  recuperation  out- 
weigh and  hold  in  check  the  forces 
which  make  for  waste,  decay,  death. 
But  after  that  point  the  balance  turns 
against  life  ;  life  fights  a  losing  battle. 
Dying  daily,  dying  from  the  first,  we 
die  at  last. 

II.  Voluntarily. — For  Christ's  sake 
Paul  held  life  as  not  worth  more  than 
a  day's  purchase.  "  Always  hearing 
about  the  dying,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  iv.  10  ; 
observe  the  forcible  Greek  word). 

III.  Experimentally. — Gal.  vi.  14. 
What  does  the  world  matter  to  a 
crucified  man  hanging  there  in  death  ? 
It  can  do  no  more  for  him;  he  cares  no 
more  for  it. 

IV.  Believingly. — In  hope  of  a 
better  life. — Suggested  by  J.  L. 

Vers.  31,  32.  *'  When  will  you  die  ?  " 
I.  The  ignoble  life  says,  **  To- 
morrow we  die  !  " — This  is  the  reck- 
less temper  which  makes  men  take  their 
full  fling  of  riot  and  carouse,  when  the 
city  is  swept  with  the  plague  [Athens, 
London]  ;  or  when  the  enemy  is  at  the 
gate  [Babylon  (Dan.  v.),  Jerusalem 
beleaguered    by    the     Assyrians   (the 

356 


original  of  this  quotation,  Isa.  xxii. 
13)] ;  the  carouse  and  gambling  in 
the  condemned  cell  on  the  morning  of 
the  execution.  ^'  We  die  to-morrow  ;  so 
'  go  it '  to-day  ! "  Or  at  best  the  temper 
which  adjourns  unpleasant  things 
till  *'  to-morrow."  The  characteristic 
word  of  the  Spaniard  is  Manana,  "  to- 
morrow." The  "  natural "  heart  in 
man  says  "  To-morrow "  in  regard  to 
the  claims  of  Christ  (Acts  xxiv.  25), 
to  difficult  duties,  to  preparation  for 
death.  It  shirks  the  irksome,  the 
serious,  the  religious.  "  We  mu^t  die ; 
then  let  it  be  to-morrow." 

II.  The  noble  life  says,  "  I  die  daily 
— to-day. — The  nobler  type,  even  in 
regard  to  natural  character  and  to 
secular  matters,  faces  at  once  the  un- 
pleasing,  the  difficult,  the  obligatory ; 
to  "  shunt "  things  into  to-morrow's 
"  siding  "  is  no  manly  discharge  of  to- 
day's life-work.  There  are  Christian 
"  shufflers "  as  well  as  secular ;  or 
"  happy-go-lucky  "  souls,  who  never 
fully  face  the  Cross  in  their  religious 
life.  Souls  like  Paul — ani  he  is  like  the 
Master^"  take  up  their  cross  daily. ^^ 
When  the  hardest,  sorest  trial  to 
nature  is  thus  met  and  dealt  with, 
character  has  then  gained  in  manli- 
ness and  strength.  There  is  a  subtle 
paralysis  in  having  a  vague  terror  in 
the  background,  or  an  unfulfilled,  out- 
standing obligation  hanging  over  one's 
head.  How  many  lives  are  noble 
because  of  a  daily  crucifixion  of  self 
and  of  all  evil !  None  but  their 
Crucified  Lord  knows  how  keen  is  the 
anguish  as  they  hang  upon  the  daily 
Cross  within,  for  His  sake.  Themselves 
driving  in  the  nails,  waking  every 
morning  to  the  Cross  they  find  pre- 
pared for  them,  which  they  accepted 
long  ago.  ^^  Mortify  your  members," 
etc.  (Col.  iii.  5).  [Also  observe  how 
Paul  almost  ventures  to  parallel  with 
that  of  Christ  his  own  daily  dying  in  its 
effects  to  others.  "  Bearing  about  .  .  . 
the  dying  ...  in  order  that  the  life 
.  .  .  in  you."] 

Ver.  32.  "  WTiat  advantageth  it  me  ?  " 
I.  Seeing  that  the   dead  do    rise, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  XV. 


then  what  advantageth  it  ?  Princi- 
pally there  is  a  future  life  for  me.  For 
this  stands  or  falls  with  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead.  So  then,  as  Dean 
Alford  said,  in  a  letter  printed  in  his 
Life  :  "  When  we  have  one  moment 
said  '  Good  night !  '  here,  the  next  we 
shall  be  met  with  the  welcome,  *  Good 
morning  ! ' "  Then  (as  ver.  58)  I  do 
not  labour  or  suffer  with  the  paralysing 
fear  that  all  my  labour  is  *•  putting 
money  into  a  bag  with  holes,"  "  grind- 
ing the  wind,"  "  ploughing  upon  the 
rock,"  or  whatever  be  the  illustration 
of  useless,  fruitless  labour. 

II.  1.  If  the  dead  do  not  rise  [though 
lor  the  moment,  in  "  most  miserable" 
and  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink"  Paul 
may  adopt  the  tone,  and  speak  with 
the  verdict,  of  mere  natural  men,  care- 
less or  desperate,  yet  even  he  would 
say,  "  Profitable  for  the  life  that  now 
is"\  if  virtue  is  better  than  vice,  bene- 
volence than  selfishness,  truth  than  false- 
hood, then  there  is  yet,  as  even  a  few 
noble  heathen  felt,  still  an  advantage. 
2.  But  this  will  not  stand  the  "  hard 
wear "  of  the  world,  of  the  poor,  or 
tempted,  or  evil-disposed.  A  man 
soon  sinks  below  the  level  where  there 
is  any  advantage  in  being  righteous 
for  its  own  sake.  He  may  easily  sink 
low  enough  to  escape  the  scourge  of 
conscience,  and  to  enjoy  the  "eating 
and  drinking  "  of  the  sensuous,  sensual 
life.     3.  Yet  if  our  faith  be  a  delusion. 


it  is  one  that  serves  well  the  purposes 
of  life.  Faith  in  God  and  Immortality 
and  a  Saviour  has  wrought,  as  nothing 
else  has  done,  for  thousands  whom 
nothing  else  would  have  touched,  peace 
of  conscience,  righteousness  of  life, 
confidence  in  face  of  the  future,  victory 
over  fear  of  death. 

III.  Conclusion. — \.  "Try our  way, 
sinner  ! "  2.  "  Try  your  way,  sinner  ? 
No.  Listen  to  another  *  What 
advantageth  1 '  (Luke  ix.  25)."  [Loyola 
won  Xavier,  the  teacher  of  philosophy 
at  Paris,  by  an  incessant  repetition  of 
his  question,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a 
man  ? "  etc.  Threw  himself  into  his 
every  pursuit ;  into  disputations,  into 
amusements ;  accommodated  himself  to 
every  merriest  mood ;  went  with  him 
for  long  walks ;  and  every  conversation 
led  up  to  the  refrain,  "  What  shall  it 
profit  ? "  etc.  Xavier  lost  his  money 
and  his  pupils  by  his  self-indulgence 
and  folly.  Loyola  regained  for  him 
pupils  and  popularity,  and  came  back 
amidst  all  the  applause  and  excitement 
with  his  burden,  "  What  shall  it  profit  ?  " 
Again  Xavier  squandered  all.  Loyola 
begged  for  him,  and  brought  him  a 
purse,  and  again  pressed  his  question, 
"  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  ?  "  Read 
this  fvilly,  and  the  account  of  Xavier's 
death  on  the  shores  of  China,  in 
Stephen,  Eccles.  Biogr.  ^^  If  the  dead 
rise  not,"  what  did  it  all  advantage 
Xavier  1] 


APPENDED  NOTES. 


Vers.  23,  24.  «  The  coming ;  the  end:'— 
This  "coming"  of  Christ  is. not,  merely  or 
exclusively,  to  establish  His  kingdom,  but 
to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  .  .  .  (com- 
pare 1  Thess.  ii.  19,  iii.  13,  iv.  15,  v.  23,  al.). 
Whether  any,  and,  if  any,  what  interval  is  to 
be  supposed  to  exist  between  this  "  coming  " 
and  "  the  end  "  of  the  following  verse — in 
fact,  between  "  then  "  and  "  then  " — the  sober 
interpreter  cannot  presume  even  to  attempt 
to  indicate.  This  only  may  be  said,  that  the 
language  seems  to  imply  a  kind  of  interval ; 
but  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  particles  or 
in  the  passage  to  warrant  our  conceiving  it 
to  be  longer  than  would  include  the  subju- 
gation of  every  foe  and  every  power  of  evil, 
and  all  that  may  be  immediately  associated 
with  the  mighty  "  end  "  which  is  specified  in 


the  succeeding  verse.  ...  It  must  be  care- 
fully remembered  that  the  Apostle  is  here 
dealing  with  a  single  subject,  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead,  and  not  with  the  connected 
details  of  eschatology.  These  must  be 
gathered  from  other  passages  and  other 
portions  of  Scripture.  ...  The  great  diffi- 
culty in  Christian  eschatology  is  the  exact 
position  which  all  that  is  specified  in 
Rev.  XX.  4  is  to  be  supposed  to  hold  in  the 
sequences  of  the  unfolding  future.  .  .  . 
Perhaps  all  that  can  be  safely  said  is,  that 
neither  here  nor  in  1  Thess.  iv.  16  does  the 
Apostle  preclude  the  conception  of  a  resur- 
rection of  the  just  (compare  Luke  xiv.  14) — 
possibly  gradual ;  that  in  some  passages 
(consider  Rom.  li.  12-15)  he  does  seem  to 
have  looked  for  a  "  flowering  time  "  of  the 

357 


CHAP,  XV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Church  prior  to  the  close  of  human  history  ; 
and  that  here  he  distinctly  implies  a  closing 
conflict  with  all  the  powers  of  evil  (compare 
Eev.  XX.  7,  15)  immediately  prior  to  the  end. 
That  the  millennial  binding  of  Satan  is  to  be 
dated  from  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
our  Lord  has  been  recently  urged,  .  .  .  but 
to  the  detriment,  as  it  would  seem,  of  the 
distinctive  idea  of  the  millennium. — Bishop 
MUcott. 

Ver.  23.  "  His  coming" — Parousia,  indi- 
cating that  when  He  comes  He  will  always 
be  present;  the  time  of  His  absence  will 
have  passed  away  for  ever.  .  .  .  His  pre- 
sence, which  will  then  be  so  different  from 
what  it  is  now  that  the  change  from  the  one 
to  the  other  is  no  less  than  a  coming  again. 
— Pope. 

Ver.  24.  "  The  e7id."— There  will  be  an  end 
and  beginning  of  the  Eedeemer's  Kingdom,  as 
it  is  a  kingdom  of  grace  translated  into  glory. 

I.  The  mediatorial  economy  will  cease  in 
its  relation  to  the  Triune  God  ;  the  redemp- 
tional  Trinity  which  introduced  the  economy 
of  subordination  in  the  Two  Persons  will  be 
again  the  absolute  Trinity.  The  Son  In- 
carnate will  cease  to  mediate  ;  as  Incarnate 
He  will  be  for  ever  subordinate,  but  there 
will  be  nothing  to  declare  His  subordination : 
no  mediatorial  rule  over  enemies,  no  media- 
torial service  or  worship  of  His  people.  The 
Triune  God  will  be  seen  by  all  mankind  in 
the  face  of  Jrsus  Christ,  and  the  mediation 
of  grace  will  become  the  mediation  of 
glory.  The  Intercessor  will  pray  for  us  no 
more,  but  will  reveal  the  Father  openly 
for  ever.  .  .  .  The  prayer  of  our  Lord 
(John  xvii.  21)  will  then  have  been  fulfilled, 
•'  one  in  Us."  Man  taken  up  into  the  Us  of 
the  Triune  God  will  need  a  mediator  no  more. 

II.  The  kingdom  will  cease  because  its 
ends  will  have  been  attained.  "  Then  cometh 
the  end"  ...  to  the  Father  as  the  Kepre- 
sentative  of  the  Trinity;  "  when  He  shall  have 
put  down."  .  .  .  The  process  of  His  victories 
is  declared  in  the  Apocalypse  :  first  and  last, 
the  Anti-Christ,  which  is  a  spirit  of  infidelity, 
Against  Christ,  having  many  forms,  such  as 
the  Beast  and  the  Man  of  Sin,  and  also  a 
final  personal  manifestation  ;  every  descrip- 
tion of  heathenism  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  ; 
the  corruption  of  Christianity,  exhibited  in 
Babylon  and  the  Second  Beast  and  the 
Harlot ;  and  finally  Death,  the  last  enemy 
that  shall  be  destroyed.  In  all  these  con- 
flicts the  Church  is  the  fellowship  of  com- 
panions in  " tribulation"  etc.  (Rev.  i.  9).  We 
are  one  with  our  Lord,  and  He  is  one  with 
us,  in  this  progressive  warfare  and  final 
victory.  It  is  as  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the 
Church"  that  the  Redeemer  exercises  now 
and  will  end  then  His  rule  ;  nor  is  any  other 
supression  of  authority  alluded  to  than  that 
which  opposed  the  designs  of  His  media- 

358 


torial  kingdom.  Moreover,  there  is  nothing 
said  of  the  destruction,  only  of  the  putting 
down  of  all  hostile  authority  and  power. 

III.  The  kingdom  will  have  a  new  begin- 
ning :  new  as  the  kingdom  of  the  "  n£:w 
heavens"  etc.  .  .  .  The  Spirit  of  Christ  will 
be  the  immanent  bond  between  Him  and  us, 
between  us  and  the  Holy  Trinity  (1  Cor.  vi.  17). 
The  Incarnate  Person  will  then  be  glorified 
as  never  before  ;  His  personality  as  Divine 
will  be  no  more  veiled  or  obscured  by  any 
humiliation,  nor  will  it  be  intermittently 
revealed.  God  shall  be  all  in  all,  first  in  the 
Holy  Trinity  and  then  through  Christ  in  us. 
— Pojje,  ''Compend.  of  Theology  "Hi.  425, 426. 

Ver.  27.  "  He  hath  put  all  things  under  His 
feet." — It   has  often    been    asked    whether 
David,  in  ascribing  such  dignity  as  he  here 
does  to  man,  was  speaking  of  man  in  his 
present  condition,  degraded  from  his  supre- 
macy by  the  fall,  or  of  man  as  originally 
made  in  the  image  of  God  and  gifted  with 
dominion  over  the  lower  creation.     Now  the 
language  of  the  Psalm  certainly  points  to 
the  present.     There  is  no  trait  in  it  of  any 
difference    between    man's   original  destiny 
and  his  present  condition,  between  the  ideal 
and  the  actual.      Man  is  king  of  this  lower 
world ;   though,   because  he  has  cast  off  his 
allegiance  to  the  King  of  kings,  his  own  sub- 
jects have  renounced  their  allegiance  to  him, 
so  that  he  rules  by  force,  or  manifold  arts, 
rather  than     by    right    acknowedged    and 
respected.       But    were    there    any    higher 
thoughts  in    David's  mind  ?     Was  he  think- 
ing of  man  as  redeemed  and  restored  in  the 
second  Adam    to   his    rightful   supremacy? 
.    .    .  We,   who    read  these    words   in   the 
light  of  the  Incarnation,  may  see  in  them  a 
significance   which  to  his   own   mind   they 
would  hardly  have  possessed.     Twice  in  the 
New  Testament  passages  of  this  Psalm  are 
applied  to  Christ :  once  by  St.  Paul  rather 
in  the  way  of  allusion  than  of  direct  quota- 
tion (1  Cor.  XV.  27),  where  he  teaches  that 
what  was  said  by  David  of  man  is  in  its 
truest  and  highest  sense  applicable  to  Christ 
as  the  Great  Head  of  Mankind  ;  and,  again, 
by  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
(ii,    6-9),  who,  arguing  that  the  words  [of 
our  verse]  have  not  yet  been  literally  ful- 
filled  of    man,   declares    that   their  proper 
fulfilment  is  to  be  seen  only  in  Jesus  .  .  . 
"  crowned    with    glory   and   honour."      He 
does  not   say  that   the   Psalm  is   a  direct 
prophecy   of    Christ;    but    he    shows    that 
man's   destiny   as    depicted    in    the    Psalm 
is  not  and  cannot   be  accomplished   out   of 
Christ.     He  is  the  true  Lord  of  all.     In  Him 
man  recovers  his  rightful  lordship,  and  shall 
really  be  in  the  new  world  of  Redemption 
what  now   he    is    very   imperfectly,  God's 
vicegerent    ruling    a    subject    creation    in 
peace    and    harmony    and  love. — Perowne, 
" Psalms"  Ps.  viii. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xvi. 


[Much  also  of  the  following  passage  is  a  prophecy,  but  every  clear  vision  of  God's 
illustrative  of  ver.  27 :]  "  The  use  made  of  purpose  is  a  prophecy,  for  none  of  His  pur- 
this  Psalm  in. the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  poses  remain  unfulfilled.  It  was  not  in- 
proceeds  on  the  understanding  that  it  tended  as  a  picture  of  the  Christ,  but  it  is 
describes  ideal  humanity.  Where,  then,  so ;  for  He  and  He  alone  is  the  Man  who 
says  the  writer  of  the  Epistle,  shall  we  answers  to  that  fair  Divine  Ideal,  and  He 
look  for  the  realisation  of  that  ideal  ?  will  make  all  His  people  partakers  of  His 
Do  not  the  grand  words  sound  liker  irony  royalty  and  perfect  Manhood." — Maclaren, 
than  truth?  Is  this  poor  creature  that  '•'■  Psalms y'^  Expositor's  Bible, 
crawls  about  the  world,  its  slave,  dis- 
crowned and  sure  to  die,  the  Man  whom  Who  does  not  know  how  the  tone  of  evil 
the  Psalmist  saw  ?  No.  Then  was  the  fair  has  communicated  itself  ?  Worldly  minds, 
vision  a  baseless  fabric,  and  is  there  nothing  irreverent  minds,  licentious  minds,  leaven 
to  be  looked  for  but  a  dreary  continuance  Society.  You  cannot  be  long  with  persons 
of  such  abortions  dragging  out  their  futile  who  by  innuendo,  double  meaning,  or  lax 
being  through  hopeless  generations  ?  No ;  language  show  an  acquaintance  with  evil, 
the  promise  shall  be  fulfilled  for  humanity,  without  feeling  in  some  degree  assimilated 
because  it  has  been  fulfilled  in  one  man,  the  to  them,  nor  can  you  easily  retain  enthu- 
Man  Christ  Jesus.  He  is  the  realised  ideal,  siasm  for  right  amongst  those  who  detract 
and  in  Him  is  a  life  which  will  be  communi-  and  scoff  at  goodness.  None  but  Christ 
cated  to  all  who  trust  and  obey  Him,  and  could  remain  with  the  impenitent  and  be  un- 
they,  too,  will  become  all  that  God  meant  tainted. — Robertson,  ^' Ux^os.  Lectures"  on 
man  to  be.     The  Psalm  was  not  intended  as  1  Cor.  v.  6. 


CHAPTER  XYI. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  The  collection. — Very  fully  dealt  with  in  2  Cor.  viii.,  ix.  Traceable  thus ;  earlier, 
in  Gal,  ii.  10,  Paul's  original  pledge  that  he  would  "  remember  the  poor,"  which  he  had 
already  led  the  way  in  doing  (Acts  xv.  29) ;  Paul  "  gives  order  "  to  the  Galatian  Church, 
(here)  and  now  to  the  Corinthian ;  he  "  boasts  "  of  the  beginning  made  at  Corinth  to 
the  Thessalonians  and  Philippians  and  Berceans  (2  Cor.  ix.  2) ;  to  be  completed  at 
Corinth  before  his  delayed  visit  {ib.  vers.  3-5  ;  here,  ver.  2) ;  the  collection  made,  or  in 
the  making,  in  Macedonia  and  Corinth,  is,  when  Eomans  is  being  written,  nearly  ready 
to  be  taken  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  (perhaps)  is  mentioned,  as  an  indirect,  suggestive  appeal 
to  the  Romans  for  assistance  (Rom.  xv.  26).  It  duly  reached  Jerusalem  ([Acts  xxi.  19], 
xxiv.  17).  Evidently  a  thing  already  known  of  at  Corinth.  The  saints. — From  Rom.  xv.  26, 
evidently  at  Jerusalem.  The  community  of  goods  (Acts  ii.  44,  iv.  32)  had  not  caused,  but 
had  attempted  for  a  time  to  palliate,  a  chronic  poverty  at  Jerusalem  ;  aggravated  probably 
in  the  case  of  Christians  by  the  loss  of  home  and  friends  and  livelihood  for  Christ's  sake, 
and  by  the  famine  of  Acts  xi.  28-30.  Gave  order. — Acts  xviii.  23.  Notice  "  Churches^'  not 
'•  Church  in  Galatia" 

Ver.  2.  Gatherings. — "  Collectings,^'  as  in  ver.  1.  When  I  come. — To  delay  Paul,  or  divert 
their  attention  from  more  important  things  at  his  visit.  Notice  a  suggestion  here  that 
"  the  first  day  of  the  n'eeh  "  is  becoming  a  day  in  some  way  emphasised  by  Christians.  Cf. 
John  XX.  26  ;  Acts  xx.  7  ;  perhaps  Rev.  i.  10  also;  further  it  is  urged,  as,  e.g.,  by  Bishop 
Bramhall :  "  That  the  Day  of  Pentecost  fell  upon  a  Sunday  is  undeniable  ;  because  the 
"  Resurrection  of  Christ  was  upon  a  Sunday,  and  Pentecost  was  the  fiftieth  day  from  the 
Resurrection." 

Ver.  3. — Co-delegates  of  Paul,  chosen  by  other  Churches  (2  Cor.  viii.  19,  23).  Letters. — 
Such  as  Paul  did  not  need  (2  Cor.  viii.  4). 

Ver.  4.  Meet. — If  the  collection  raised  was  so  large  as  to  make  it  fitting,  or  desirable,  that 
an  apostle  should  escort  it,  or  be  its  "convoy." 

Ver.  5.— This  arrangement  set  aside  an  earlier  plan  (2  Cor.  i.  16)  to  come  direct  to  Corinth 
from  Ephesus  by  ship,  and  tl  ence  to  go  to  Macedonia.  Now  he  will  come  to  Corinth  via 
Macedonia.  This  change  of  plan  now  announced  occasioned  the  misconception  and  mis- 
representation of  2  Cor.  i.  17,  etc.     The  true  reason  was  2  Cor.  i.  23. 

Vers.  6,  6. — "  /  (only)  pass  through  (not  stay  in)  Macedonia ;  I  shall  perhaps  stay,  and 
perhaps  even  winter  with  you."  You. — Emphatic  :  "I  want  that  to  be  uour  help  to  me  : 
I  want  to  have  you  do  it." 

359 


CHAP.  XVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  7.  By  the  way. — I.e.  merely  as  passing  through  Corinth ;  Corinth  should  be  the 
"  objective  "  of  his  journey  "  noTVy"  as  it  was  not  in  the  earlier  plan.  No  sure  argument  to  be 
based  on  this  "  now  "  as  if  it  meant  that  he  had  seen  them  en  passant  on  some  (unrecorded) 
visit,  between  his  first,  long  one  in  Acts  xviii.  and  this  proposed  one. 

Ver.  8. — Then  he  is  writing  in  Ephesus ;  probably  in  the  Spring  [Passover  is  perhaps  about 
due,  or  just  being  celebrated,  v.  7  (where  see)]  ;  by  Pentecost  navigation  would  be  perfectly 
open. 

Ver.  9.  Door. — Col.  iv.  3  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  12  (at  Troas)  ;  Acts  xiv.  27 ;  Kev.  iii.  8,  are  worth  com- 
parison. "  An  opportunity  great  and  already  beginning  to  show  fruit,"  or  "  calling  for 
effective  utilisation."  Yet  '*  many  adversaries,''  whose  opposition  culminated  in  the  riot  of 
Demetrius  (Acts  xix.).     Note,  these  are  a  motive  to  Paul  not  to  fly,  but  to  stay. 

Ver.  10.  If  Timothy  come. — Read  Acts  xix.  21,  22.  But  had  he  not  been  "  sent  specially, 
and  with  definite  instruction  ?  .  .  .  The  Apostle  felt  it  quite  possible  that  his  messenger's 
[who  was  sent  via  Macedonia]  arrival  might  be  delayed,  and  that,  as  appears  really  to  have 
been  the  case,  he  might  not  at  that  time  reach  them  at  all.  Timothy  was  .  .  .  still  in 
Macedonia  when  the  Apostle  wrote  ...  2  Cor.  i.  1  "  (Ellicott).  Without  fear. — Some  years 
after  this  he  was  still  a  young  man  (1  Tim.  iv.  12).  Ellicott  protests  a  little  against  the 
usual  inference  from  these  passages,  and  from  2  Tim.  i.  6,  7,  ii.  1,  as  being  very  precarious 
indeed,  viz.  that  Timothy  was  gentle,  or  even  timid.  For  more  of  Timothy,  see  Phil.  ii. 
20,  22.     The  Lord.— Expounded  as  "  of  Christ  "  (Phil.  ii.  30). 

Ver.  11.  Despise  him. — Timothy  is  to  see  that  he  on  his  part  does  nothing  which  shall 
lead  them  to  do  so  (1  Tim.  iv.  12).  Stronger  word  here  than  there.  The  brethren. — Viz. 
those  travelling  with  the  money  raised  for  the  Relief  Fund,  and  named  or  indicated  in 
2  Cor.  viii.  18,  22,  23  (Stanley).  Or  only  his  companion  Erastus,  with  perhaps  others 
(Acts  xix.  22).     I  expect  him. — I.e.  on  the  supposition  that  he  did  reach  Corinth. 

Ver.  12. — Stanley  continues  his  reading  of  ver.  11  by  supposing  that  Titus  only  became  the 
head  of  the  mission  after  Apollos  had  excused  himself  from  going ;  perhaps  lest  the  self- 
styled,  *'  Apollos  "  party  should  try  to  exploit  him,  to  their  advantage  over  their  rivals. 
Apollos  seems  to  be  hack  again  at  Ephesus,  after  Acts  xix.  1.  See  how  happy  the  relations 
between  him  and  Paul.     The  "  will  "  is  surely  that  of  Apollos  ;  not  of  God  ! 

Vers.  13,  14. — "  The  whole  duty  of  the  Corinthian  convert  [summed  up]  in  the  trying  times 
and  amid  the  varied  temptations  in  which  this  Epistle  would  find  him  "  (Ellicott).  (See 
homiletic  treatment  below.) 

Ver.  15. — Postscript-like  personal  matters  heqin  here.  Aehaia. — This  corrects  the  wrong 
reading  in  Rom.  xvi.  5.  Stephanas'  household. — See  i.  16.  What  a  family  picture  I 
"  Addicted  to,"  etc.  Stanley  (apparently  alone)  thinks  the  Stephanas  of  ver.  17  the  slave  of 
this  one,  who  had  taken  his  master's  name,  by  a  not  unusual  custom ;  Fortunatus  and 
Achaicus  being  his  fellow-slaves. 

Ver.  17. — No  blame  to  the  Corinthians  in  '*  lacking  on  your  part"  -,  they  could  not,  so  far 
away  and  without  opportunity  to  visit  Paul,  do  what  these  had  done,  viz.  ver.  18 
(Phil.  ii.  30,  iv.  10  sqq.). 

Ver.  19.  Church  in  .  .  .  house. — Cf.  i.  2,  xvi.  1  ;  Rom.  xvi.  5.  See  other  cases,  Col.  iv.  15  ; 
Philem.  2.  Observe  "  salute  you  much."  They  had  lived  in  Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  2)  ;  but  are 
at  Ephesus  by  xix.  26. 

Ver.  20.  A  holy  kiss.— Rom.  xvi.  16  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  12  ;  1  Thess.  v.  26.  "  The  common 
form  of  affectionate  Eastern  salutation,  transferred  to  the  forms  of  the  Christian  society, 
and  hence  the  epithet  of  holy.  The  practice  continued  in  Christian  assemblies  chiefly 
at  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist.  The  Apostolical  Constitutions  and  the  Canons 
of  Laodicea  enjoin  that  before  the  Communion  the  clergy  are  to  kiss  the  bishop,  the  men 
amongst  the  laity  each  other,  and  so  the  women.  On  Good  Friday  it  was  omitted,  in 
commemoration  of  the  kiss  of  Judas.  ...  It  is  still  continued  in  the  Coptic  Church.  Every 
member  of  the  congregation  there  kisses  and  is  kissed  by  the  priest.  In  the  "Western  Church 
it  was  finally  laid  aside  in  the  thirteenth  century."     (Stanley.) 

Ver.  21.— The  authenticating  autograph,  vers.  21-24.  So  2  Thess.  iii.  17.  What  shall 
it  be  ?  What  shall  he  write  ?  What  is  worthy  of  his  own  hand,  after  all  this  dictating 
to  an  amanuensis  ?  "  If  any  man"  etc.  (ver.  22).  Note  the  R.V.,  shorter  reading 
arid  punctuation.  Maran  atha. — "  Syriac,"  so-called.  ''^  The  Lord  .  .  .  has?  or  will?  .  .  . 
come"  "  Cometh"  best.  Very  recently  M.  Hal6vy  divides  it  "  Marana  tha,"  and  translates 
"  Our  Lord,  come  !  "  And  in  this  is  supported  by  (the  Syrian)  Archbishop  David,  of  Damascus 
{Expos.,  1889,  p.  240).  Quite  a  separate  word  from  the  word  "  Anathema"  N.B.  "  His  grace ; " 
•*  my  love." 


360 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xvi. 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—4. 

"  Concerning  the  collection." 

I.  Note  the  place  and  the  manner  of  the  introduction  of  the  topic— This 

wonderful  letter  is   drawing  to  a  close.      Might   have   believed  chap.  xiii.  an 

unsurpassable  climax  of  interest  and  beauty  but  that  chap.  xv.  has  followed, 

surpassing  it  at  least  in  the  interest  of  its  amazing  disclosures  of  the  future. 

"  Chap.    XV.  is  certainly  the  climax."     Yes ;   but  this    "  Now   concerning   the 

collection "  is  not  an  anticlimax.     Paul  certainly  did  not  feel  it  so ;  indeed, 

rhetorical  form  in  his  letters  can,  hardly  more  than  in  his  preaching  (ii.  1),  have 

been  any  object  of  endeavour  or  of  thought  to  him.     Chap.  xv.  was  no  "  climax  " 

to  him.     The  climactic  effect  and  magnitude  of  the  chapter  is  in  the  matter  of 

the  chapter.      One  can  hardly  conceive  of  him  as,  so  to  speak,  taking  breath 

after  the  long  climb  to  the  heights  of  chap,  xv.,  and  pausing  to  review  complacently 

the  long  way  up  and  to  take  in  the  height  to  which  he  and  his  readers  have 

attained,  before  dropping  to  another,  lower,  commonplace  level  of  money  matters 

and  route  arrangements  and  personal  talk.     Can  hardly  suppose  that  he  felt 

nothing  of  the  different  magnitude  of  the  topic  now  to  be  dealt  with  ;  yet  clearly 

he    passes   from   the    Kesurrectipn   to   the   Collection    with    no   sense   of   any 

impropriety,   or    incongruity,    or    unworthiness    of    sequence.      There    is    no 

incongruity,  nothing  unworthy ;    both  are  equally  parts  of  Paul's  message  to 

Corinth,  or  rather  of  the  Spirit's  message  by  Paul, — equally,  if  not  of   equal 

importance.     The  passage  from  the  one  to  the  other  is  therefore  made  with  no 

sense  of  shock;  the  thought  and  heart  run  upon  the  new  Unes  with  perfect 

smoothness,  with  the  smoothness  of  entire  naturalness,  the  naturalness  of  a  man 

to  whom  any  smallest  topic  connected  with  his  Lord,  and  His  people,  and  His 

work,  is  as  really  holy  ground  for  thought  and  talk  as  any  largest  and  most 

important  topic.     Nothing  which  affects  or  belongs  to  Christ  or  His  Church  is 

on  a  "  low  level."     The  whole  level  is  high,  though  not  equally  high.     "  Up  "  or 

"  down,"  "  higher  "  or  "  lower,"  in  any  rightful  occupations  of  a  Christian  man's 

time,  or  thought,  or  tongue,  are  not  so  much  ascents  to  some  mountain-top  and 

descents  to  the  plain  at  the  base,  as  variations  of  level  upon  the  surface  of  a 

broad  tableland,  where  all,  even  the  "  lower,"  are  high  together.     Collection  or 

Resurrection,  women's  veils  or  the  glory  of  Charity,  all  are  topics  of  one  and  the 

same  "  higher  life."     Nothing  is  finer  than  the  conversation  in  the  family  circle 

of  a  Christian  hom6,  where  every  life  is  "  in  Christ,"  where  everything  is  judged 

as  by  those  "  in  Christ,"  where  nothing  is  admitted — and  it  leaves  a  wide  range 

of  topics  and  pursuits — which  cannot  find  a  place  within  the  holy  circle  traced  by 

the  words  "in  Christ";  the  talk  passes  "from  grave  to  gay,"  from  earnest  to 

hearty  fun,  from  politics  to  religion,  from  religion  to  anything,  with  the  most 

perfect  naturalness  and  simplicity.     All  is  part  of  one  whole  life,  whose  centre 

and  view-point  is  located  by  the  side  of  Christ.     The  merriment  is  made  holy, 

and  guarded  in  its  outbursts  by  the  sure  instinct  of  a  holy  heart ;  the  transition 

from  topic  to  topic  is  controlled  by  the  supreme  direction  of  all  the  thought  and 

heart  to  the  glory  of  Christ.     The  man  in  Christ  is  as  really  "  marching  through 

Immanuel's  ground  "in  this  chap,  xvi.,  as  when  he  was  in  chap.  xiii.  or  chap.  xv. 

II.  Note    the    characteristics  of  the  collection  and    its    management. — 

1.  Personal  gifts  are  its  support.     ''^  Every  one  of  you."     No  slipping  out  from 

doing  much  or  doing  anything,  because  "  the  whole  Church  is  doing  so  liberally." 

No  man  has  been  left  out  of  God's  blessings ;  no  man  may  be  left  out  of  the 

Church's  giving.     The  "  Unspeakable  Gift "  was  given  to  him  in  his  poverty ; 

his  best  gift  to  the  poverty  of  Jerusalem  fellow-Christians  is  not  too  large  an 

acklowledgment.     Its  value  will  largely  be  in  that  it  is  his  own  gift,  with  his 

361 


CHAP.  XVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I,   CORINTHIANS, 


own  gratitude  and  thought  put  into  it.     The  gift  has  no  vakie  except  as  it 
means  the  man.     And  so  we  have — 

2.  His  personal  thought.     "  In  store." — Then  it  is  no  mere  spasm  of  benevo- 
lence ;  it  has  been  provided  for  and  arranged  with  purpose.     As  in  Eph.  iv.  28, 
to  have  something  to  give  in  charity  and  to  God  is  a  distinct  motive  and  object 
in  the  Christian  life.     [A  remarkable  passage.     Some  Ephesian  Christians  had 
been  thieves ;  of  such  material  does  Christ  make  "  saints "  and  build  up  His 
Church.     Now  every  Ephesian  rogue  must  be  an  honest  man,  if   he  become 
a  Christian.     What  motive  shall  be  urged  to  induce  him  to  take  to  regular 
ways,  and  "to  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  that  is  good"?     The 
dignity  of  labour?     The  "  better  pohcy  "  of  honesty?     The  peaceful  conscience 
of  the  honest  man  ?     The  misery  of  the  thief  ?     And  so  on.     No.    Paul  urges 
this  :  "  Let  him  work,  that  he  may  have  something  to  give  away  to  him  that 
needeth."     So  then  ask,  Why  should  a  Christian  work  to-day  ?     To  keep  up  the 
home  ?     Yes.     To   educate   the    children  ?      Yes.     To   leave   them   enough   to 
exempt  them,  not  from  the  need  of  real  work,  but  from  the  paralysing  pinch 
of  means  so  narrow  as  to  leave  no  margin  for  contingencies  ?     Yes,  perhaps. 
To  have  the  yearly  holiday  and  an  occasional  day  of  recreation  ?     Good  objects 
all.     To  provide  against  sickness  and  old  age  ?     Yes.     But  this  also  is  to  be  put 
in  as  an  object  co-ordinate  in  importance  with  the  rest,  to  have  "  a  store  "  from 
which  there  may  always  be  something  to  give  when  "  need  "  of  any  kind  demands 
it.]     The  ■  "  store "  meant  steady,  thoughtful,   hearty  preparation  to  give.     As 
between  man  and  man,  a  gift  brought  by  the  wealthy  man  who  has  impulsively 
walked  into  the  first  shop  he  came  to,  and  has  bought  the  first  likely  or  unlikely 
thing  which  caught  his  eye,  "  no  matter  about  the  price,"  is  worth  nothing  in 
comparison  with  the  far  humbler  gift  which  has  meant  a  poor  but  grateful  heart, 
which  has  considered  what  will  be  pleasing  or  suitable  or  useful  to  the  receiver, 
and  has  secured  or  made  it,  with  personal  trouble  and  perhaps  work  or  sacrifice. 
The  planning  how  to  have  a  "  store  "  makes  the  gift  one  acceptable  to  God. 
The  most  mercenary  gift,  bestowed  with  a  self-interested  purpose,  does  the  same 
material  service  to  the  collection,  as  Paul  gathers  and  forwards  it.     But  in  the 
subscription  lists  kept  by  the  Lord    Himself,  the    gift  is  differently   appraised 
according  as  it  is  the  mere  haphazard,  impulsive  gift  of  a  hasty,  accidentally 
stirred,  good  nature,  or  as  it  is  the  carefully  treasured  "  store,^'  got  ready  for  the 
claim  of  Christ  and  His  work  or  His  poor,  after  quiet,  conscientious  weighing  of 
all  other  claims  and  their  rightful  adjustment  to  such  other  and  to  this.     The 
smaller  gift  out  of  a  prepared  and  devoted  "  store,"  is  better  than  a  far  larger  one 
which  is  a  mere  chance  "  dip  "  into  whatever  one  may  happen  to  have  within 
reach  and  available.     The  man  and:  his  personal  thought  are  in  it.     The  worth  is 
in  these.     And  the  gift  which  means  a  deliberate  "  sacrifice,"  a  distinct  deferring 
of  something  of  one's  own,  that   the  claim   of  God  may  be  met,  is  the  most 
precious  of  all.     Moreover,  it  is  stored  for  a  special  object.     A  good  giver  thinks 
about  the  destination  of  his  gift,  and  is  interested  in  the  "  Jerusalem  saints." 
Also  it  is — 

3.  A  thank-offering. — Because  "  the  Lord  [or  God]  hath  prospered  him  J'  God 
has  enabled  him  to  get ;  God  has  enabled  him  to  give ;  gratitude  demands  that 
he  should  give.  And  this  by  no  means  as  a  satisfaction  in  full  of  God's  dues, 
leaving  him  free  to  do  as  he  pleases  with  all  the  rest.  *'  Tithe  "or  "  firstfruits," 
whatever  be  the  sj^stem  or  scale  of  giving,  the  part  of  time,  or  money,  or  energy 
first  given  to  God,  does  not  mean  that,  e.g.,  "  Sunday  is  God's  ;  the  rest  of  the  week 
is  now  my  own."  Bather  the  firstfruits,  the  "  Corban,"  means  that  we  gratefully 
offer  a  "  sample,"  where  all  is  God's  own ;  and  that  we  purpose  thankfully  to 
employ  what  He  arranges  we  shall  keep  and  use,  only  as  those  who  are  dealing 
with  what  is  His.     The  gift  is  a  thank-ofiering,  the  first  handful,  the  earliest 

362 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xvl. 


sheaf,  of  the  last  week's  harvest  He  has  privileged  and  aided  us  to  gather  in. 
And  not  only  "  because"  but  " as," — for 

4.  The  "  store "  is  accumulated  on  system ;  there  is  a  principle  governing  the 
manner  of  accumulating.  The  God-given  ^'"prosperity"  not  only  supplies  the 
motive,  but  it  also  fixes  the  measure,  of  the  gift.  Two  ways  then  present 
themselves  of  working  this  "  sliding  scale."  First :  "  The  Lord  is  running  me 
shorter ;  I  must  cut  down  my  gifts  "  ;  and  this  is  done  with  a  promptitude  not 
always  shown  when  the  tide  of  prosperity  turns  in  our  favour, — is  so  turned  by 
Grod.  Second  :  ''  The  Lord  has  not  seen  fit  to  give  me  as  much  this  week,  or 
this  year.  But  He  has  been  very  good.  I  must  trust  Him  a  little  longer 
before  revising  my  gifts  downwards.  I  will  give  the  old  sum  this  time,  once 
more ;  I  may  never  have  the  power  to  do  it  again."  Such  givers  are  not 
imagination,  monsters  of  goodness  created  by  parsons'  fancy  ;  but  are  happily 
found  in  all  the  Churches ;  often  quiet,  unostentatious  people,  in  whose  quiet  life 
such  trustful,  grateful  excelling  of  the  rigid  proportion  is  the  one  piece  of 
romantic  and  heroic.  The  storing  is  systematic,  not  spasmodic  or  emotion-born, 
a  great  "spurt"  of  unmeasured  bounty,  when  some  Paul  ''^ comes"  and  urges 
and  persuades  a  big  ^'"gathering" 

b.  At  a  regular  date  and  after  a  regular  interval.  "  On  the  first  day  of  the 
weeky — Obviously  all  these  details  of  injunction  to  Galatia  and  Corinth  are  not 
so  much  definite  prescription  to  us  to-day,  as  particular  instances,  historic 
examples,  which  carry  a  principle.  The  Sunday  morning  breakfast  table,  or 
the  morning  service  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  in  the  accustomed  sanctuary, 
may  be  the  best  time  and  place  for  the  giving.  No  day  more  suitable ;  not 
many  so  suitable.  But,  as  under  4,  no  "  tenth  "  or  any  other  particular  pro- 
portion is  binding,  whilst  the  proportion  should  increase  faster  than  even  the 
prosperity  increases ;  so  here  no  day,  no  particular  interval,  is  matter  of 
obligation.  The  regularity  of  the  bounty  is  the  important  thing  ;  and  also  that, 
whether  literally  joined  to  the  "  first  day  "  and  its  worship,  the  giving  should 
be  made  "  worship  "  by  its  direct,  grateful  devotion  to  Christ,  in  Whom  God's 
good  mercy  and  bounty  have  most  clearly  shone  forth. 

III.  The  prudent,  business-like  administration  of  this  relief  fund  for 
Jerusalem. — (Very  fully  dealt  with  under  2  Cor.  ix.)  What  is  carefully, 
thoughtfully  collected  must  be  righteously  devoted  to  its  proper  object ;  pains 
taken  to  secure  that  it  reaches  its  destination  ;  [not  like  some  fine  rivers  which 
lose  themselves  in  an  absorbent  desert-sand  before  they  can  reach  their  goal,  the 
sea  ;]  administered  by  trusty  hands  and  wise  hearts. 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  5— U. 

Three  Contrasts. 

A.  *'/  will,"  .  .  .  ''I  do''  (ver.  5),  *'/  will  not"  (ver.  7)—'' It  may  be" 
(ver.  6),  ''  /  trust,"  "  If  the  Lord  permit "  (ver.  7). 

B.  Timothy — Apollos  (vers.  10-12). 

C.  ''  Be  strong"—''  All  .  .  .  with  charity"  (vers.  13,  14). 

A.  A  Christian  mean's  purposing. 

I.  Two  minds,  two  wills,  are  working  together  in  the  ordering  of  Paul's 
life. — A  deep,  a  bottomless,  problem  of  philosophy  how  this  can  be.  In  practice, 
the  devout  heart  makes  no  difficulty.  The  difference  between  Bible  histories 
and  the  history  of  our  own  times,  or  our  own  lives,  is  not  that  God  is  found  more 
actively  interposing  in  them  than  in  ours,  but  that  in  them  we  are  taken  behind 
.  the  scenes,  so  to  speak,  and  permitted  to  see — where  we  usually  must  believe — Him 
at  work.     The  Bible  characters  and  histories  are,  as  it  were,  dissected  examples, 

363 


CHAP.  XVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  CORINTHIANS. 


that  we  may  learn  how  to  think  of  the  ordinary  examples,  where  the  beating 
heart  and  the  complex  machinery  are  all  hidden.  We  are  to  read  them,  and  to 
learn  how  to  look  for,  and  to  see,  God  in  the  newspaper,  in  the  national,  the 
peisonal,  records  of  to-day.  Bible  stories,  Bible  lives,  are  by  no  means  full  of 
miracle.  They  are  full  of  God ;  but  not  more  full  of  God  than  are  ours.  In  the 
Bible  we  see,  in  the  case  of  men  and  in  the  case  of  nations,  how  God  and  man 
work  together  in  weaving  history  on  the  loom  of  Time.  If  we  look  at  the  side 
on  which  man  works  at  the  pattern,  it  all  seems  his  own,  and  he  seems  to  work 
quite  after  his  own  mind  and  will.  If  we  turn  the  fabric,  as  we  always  do  in 
Scripture  narrative,  and  look  at  the  side  where  God  is  working  upon  His  own 
pattern,  we  see  the  same  events  and  incidents  "  showing  through."  Every  one 
is  being  woven  into  God's  own  design ;  but  they  have  a  different  colour  and 
character.  How  man  can  work  in  perfect  freedom,  and  yet  God's  pattern  be 
also  wrought,  is  a  problem  which  the  Bible  only  "  solves,"  so  far  as  is  needful 
for  practical  purposes,  by  showing  us  in  a  few  specimen  cases  both  sides  of  the 
work.  Paul  brings  the  will  and  purpose  of  Christ  still  closer  to  his  own  when 
he  writes  :  ''I  trust  in  the  Loi^d" — i.e.  as  a  man  whose  whole  life  and  its  hopes 
and  plans  are  not  at  all  independent,  but  all  of  them  "  in  the  Lord,"  I  trust, — 
"  that  I  myself  shall  come  .  .  .  shortly  "  (Phil.  ii.  24).  Here  Paul's  plans  are 
not  only  subject  to,  but  full  of,  "  the  Lord  "  Christ's  ^^  per  mission. ^^  All  is  Paul; 
all  is  Christ. 

II.  These  facts  of  revelation  and  experience  emerge :  1.  Man  proposes ^  God 
disposes.  If  Paul's  Master  do  not  arrange  for  his  short  stay  at  Corinth,  then,  as 
he  once  found  in  those  very  regions,  Paul  plans  and  tries  for  an  opening  in 
vain  (Acts  xvi.  6-8).  There  is  no  reason  why  Paul  should  not  "  propose,"  no 
reason  why  he  should  not  argue  that  the  mind  of  his  Master  wa^  that  he  should 
^^  remain  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost,^'  drawing  his  inference  from  the  very  facts, 
that  the  Lord  had  ^''opened  a  door  "  which  claimed  to  be  entered,  and  that  there 
were  ''''many  adversaries"  being  stirred  up  for  the  Gospel,  whose  opposition 
''  needed  "  that  Paul,  the  captain  of  the  host,  should  himself  be  in  that  part  of 
the  fight.  Men  are  most  frequently  left  to  learn  the  plan  of  God  from  such  circum- 
stances as  these.  But  all  needs  God.  [If,  when  Benaiah  says  "Amen,"  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel  do  not  say  "  Amen "  too,  David  appoints  Solomon  to  be 
king  in  vain  (1  Kings  i.  36).  Man's  "Amen"  is  "May  it  be  so";  God's 
"  Amen "  is  "  It  shall  be  so."]  Paul's  plans  only  succeed  when  they  fall  in 
with  Christ's  plan.  Men  strive  against  God's  purposes  in  vain ;  without 
God  they  strive  for  their  own  plan  in  vain.  "  Men  are  architects  of  their 
own  fortune,"  and  they  are  not.  The  plans  of  human  buUders  must  "  pass  His 
office."  If  in  wilfulness  men  persist,  God  willing  or  unwilling,  they  find 
that  their  edifice  has  no  sure  foundation  ;  they  can  mix  no  cement  for  their 
work  which  will  not  crumble  into  utter  weakness.  The  top  stone  can  never  be 
lifted  into  its  place.  If  man's  will  will  not  take  God  into  its  counsels,  yet  it 
cannot  shut  Him  out  of  its  work.  That  work  will  rise  as  He  ^'permits"  and  as 
far  as  He  permits  ;  and  when  He  wills,  the  whole  fabric  of  man's  plan  will 
collapse  into  utter  ruin.  [And  often  the  greatest  mercy  of  a  man's  life  that  it 
does !]  Napoleon's  fall  dated  from  the  day  when,  on  his  way  to  Moscow,  he 
turned  away  from  the  faithful  remonstrance  of  good  Queen  Louise  of  Prussia 
with  his  bold  defiance  of  God  :  "  Madam,  I  propose  and  I  dispose  !  " 

2.  Man  should  propose. — As  above,  no  reason  why  Paul  should  not  make  the 
wisest  arrangements,  and  draw  the  wisest  conclusions,  he  was  able.  No  man  need 
say,  "  Whatever  I  do,  God's  plan  will  be  carried  out ;  I  will,  I  need,  I  can,  do 
nothing."  Human  effort  is  not  so  to  be  paralysed  ;  the  noblest  natures  have 
their  own  logic,  which  sweeps  away  such  Turk-like,  indolence-breeding  fatalism. 
They   often   cannot  give  or  get  demonstration ;    they  often  cannot  detect  the 

364 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xvi. 


fallacy  of  the  fatalistic  reasoning  ;  but  the  nobler  the  man,  the  more  certainly  he 
will  start  up  and  say,  "  I  must  plan ;  Grod  made  me  to  plan.  God  help  me  ! 
Yet  He  has  also  made  me  to  help  myself  ;  I  may  hope  that  He  will."  Prayer- 
fully, submissively  planned  work  for  Christ  may  look  for  His  blessing  of  success. 
[Remark  Prov.  xvi.  3,  "  Commit  thy  works  unto  the  Lord,  and  thy  thoughts 
shall  be  established."  I.e.  what  men  aimed  at  in  their  work  shall  be  surely 
accomplished,  even  though  perhaps  by  the  frustrating  of  their  own  "  works " 
altogether.]  Christ  will  ^^ permit"  Paul's  plans;  He  will  guide  Paul  in  plan- 
ning, so  that  his  plans  fall  in  with,  and  become  part  of,  Christ's  larger  plan  and 
government  of  His  Church  and  of  the  world. 

3.  In  humble  dependence  upon  God. — The  humility  will  save  from  all  fretting 
and  chafing  when  Paul's  own  plans  are  "  revised "  away  altogether  by  the 
Lord's  superior  will ;  and,  still  more,  if  it  even  be  something  set  aside  which  we 
thought  essential,  humility  will  not  simply  bow  to  the  inevitable,  but  will 
acquiesce  in,  and  embrace,  the  Higher  Will.  The  dependence  will  give  hope 
and  heart,  when  planning  difficult  tasks.  Not  left  alone  in  either  our  purposes 
or  our  execution  of  them. 

"  Thou  art  not  only  to  perform  thy  part, 
But  also  mine ;  as  when  the  league  was  writ, 
Thou  didst  at  once  Thyself  indite 
And  hold  my  hand,  while  I  did  write." 

—  George  Herhert. 

B.  Timothy  and  Apollos. — [Much  good  material  in  Dean  Howson's  Scenes 
from  the  Life  of  St.  Paul,  chaps,  vii.,  viii.,  "  The  Companions  of  St.  Paul." 

I.  Two  types  of  worker  and  of  character;  *'of  worker"  because  "of 
character." — As  to  Timothy,  Howson  sums  up  thus  :  "  All  this  reveals  to  us  a 
life  of  incessant  activity  and  toil,  and  a  character  worthy  of  respect  and  affection. 
Not,  indeed,  that  we  need  suppose  that  Timotheus  was  destitute  of  defects. 
From  the  repeated  and  emphatic  injunctions  to  courage  (1  Tim.  i.  18,  iii.  15, 
iv.  14,  V.  21,  vi.  12),  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  there  was  something 
of  timidity  in  his  disposition  [but  see  Critical  Notes  on  ver.  10],  caused,  not 
improbably,  in  some  degree  by  his  delicate  health  ;  and  it  is  no  unreasonable 
fancy  which  ascribes  to  him  a  certain  softness  of  character,  and,  so  to  speak,  a 
*  feminine  piety.'  Nor  is  it  likely  that  this  would  be  any  hindrance  to  the 
continued  and  deep  attachment  which  evidently  subsisted  between  him  and 
St.  Paul ;  but  rather  the  contrary.  Even  in  common  human  friendship  the 
stronger  character  often  finds  its  consolation  in  drawing  the  weaker  character 
close  to  itself."  In  contrast  with  all  this, — which  must  not  be  overpressed  to 
Timothy's  disadvantage;  he  is  a  fine  fellow, — Apollos  does  here  seem  to  stand 
forth  an  example  of  something  more  "  masculine."  Timothy  needs  that  Paul 
should  throw  around  his  youth  and  his  timidity  the  strong  defence  of  his  own 
plea  for  all  consideration  for  him  at  Corinth ;  Apollos  is  a  man  parallel  with  Paul, 
whose  judgment  and  will  match  themselves  against  the  wish  of  Paul ;  whereas 
Paul's  wish  is  command  enough  for  Timothy,  whom  he  sends.  Apollos  has  a 
mind  of  his  own,  and  prefers  his  own  time.  Not,  however,  in  the  slightest  sense 
as  displaying  that  "  independence  "  which  is  only  pride  goading  on  weakness  to 
assert  itself,  or  from  anything  but  absolute  harmony  of  mind  and  soul  with 
Paul.  The  "  refusal "  to  go  argues  a  thorough  loyalty  to  Paul  on  the  part  of 
Apollos.  In  Paul's  absence  he  had,  quite  innocently,  given  a  name  to  a 
party  antagonistic  to  Paul.  For  Paul's  sake,  and  for  his  own  fair  name's  sake, 
he  would  stand  clear  from  these  men,  who,  without  shadow  of  warrant,  used 
his  name  as  the  badge  of  their  party.  His  presence  at  Corinth  *'  at  this  time  " 
seemed  to  him  not  advisable  ;  the  factious  party  should  have  no  semblance,  or 
show  of  sanction,  such  as  might  be,  wrongfully,   based  upon  his  presence  in 

365 


CHAP.  xvi.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


Corinth  just  now.  Under  the  circumstances  Paul,  in  desiring  to  send  him  again 
to  Corinth,  shows  how  utterly  without  jealousy  Paul  was,  and  how  full  of 
generous  trust  in  Apollos  himself  ;  whilst  Apollos'  wish  to  be  excused  just  now 
"  shows  a  prudence  and  self-restraint  and  delicate  consideration  for "  Paul 
which  argues  well  for  Apollos'  character.  There  is  prudence  in  this  "  refusal " 
to  set  foot  in  Corinth  just  at  this  juncture.  Altogether  the  suggestions  of  the 
few  incidental  remarks  we  may  gather  up  as  to  Apollos,  show  us  a  very  fine 
man,  around  whose  name  it  is  a  great  marvel  that  so  few  ecclesiastical  legends- 
have  collected.  [That  he  should  be  suggested  as  the  writer  of  the  Hebrews 
rests  upon  no  surer  foundation  than  this :  The  author's  turn  of  thought,  and 
some  occasional  grammatical  forms,  as  well  as  a  somewhat  rhetorical  form  about 
the  letter,  are  said  to  be  characteristically  "  Alexandrian,"  and,  of  all  Paul's 
"school"  of  disciples,  Apollos  is  the  one  man  we  happen  to  know  who,  coming 
from  Alexandria,  might  be  supposed  to  be  Alexandrian  in  thought  and  style, 
"  eloquent  "  as  he  was,  and  "  mighty  in  the  Scriptures."]  The  practical  suggestion 
is  that  Christ  has  use  for  every  type  of  man  and  of  mind  in  His  Church. 
"  Dependent  ones  "  like  Timothy,  young  and  perhaps  shrinking  from  conflict  and 
friction,  are  not  by  any  means  useless.  They  win  stronger  hearts  for  themselves 
and  then  for  their  Master.  There  are  many  forms  of  labour,  and  many  styles 
of  "  success."  The  workers  of  other  types,  and  on  other  lines,  need  to  be  as  broad 
as  Paul  would  have  the  Corinthians  to  be  in  their  judgment  of  Timothy :  "  He 
worketh  the  work  of  the  Lord,  as  I  also  doT  The  men  of  stronger  type  find 
it  difficult  to  appreciate  such  natures  as  need,  like  clinging  plants,  the  strong 
support  of  a  Paul,  or  his  sheltering,  appealing  love ;  difficult  not  to  "  despise  " 
them,  as  "  poor  creatures,"  "  unmanly,"  and  the  like.  They  laugh  at  the  '''■fear  " 
which  their  own  rough  handling  and  rough  judging  cause,  and  are  apt  to 
crush  and  kill  a  tender  spirit,  intendiog  no  harm.  The  Timothys,  when  put 
to  it,  can  be  entrusted  with  difficult  and  responsible  work  at  Ephesus  or  else- 
where (1  Tim.  i.  3) ;  and  acquit  themselves  well  by  the  grace  of  God  "  enabling 
them  "  {ih.  v.  12),  as  He  "enables  "  the  Pauls,  to  hold  their  own  and  do  their 
Master's  work,  though  they  must  handle  older,  "grave,"  men  {ib.  iii.  1-1 1),  and 
even  "unreasonable  and  wicked,"  or  "blasphemously"  heretical  ones  (2  Thess. 
iii.  2;  1  Tim.  i.  19,  20).  The  very  faculty  of  winning  such  tender  affection  as 
that  which  Timothy  won  and  kept  from  Paul  (2  Tim.  iv.  9-13,  21)  is  a  very  valuable 
gift  to  the  Christian  worker,  and  opens  hearts,  and  opens  doors,  where  the  Paul 
and  the  Apollos  may  not,  or  not  so  readily,  enter.  No  shape  or  temper  of  tool 
comes  amiss  to  the  hand  of  the  Divine  Worker. 

II.  Paul  revealed  in  his  friendships. — 1.  How  hroad  his  sympathies  and  his 
nature,  to  be  able  to  attach  to  himself,  and  to  understand  and  work  with,  and 
love,  such  a  diversified  group  of  friends  as  those  we  see  round  him  in  the  Acts  and 
Epistles.  He  must  himself  have  been  a  many-sided  man,  offering  many  points 
of  attachment,  that  such  different  styles  of  men  always  found  in  him  a  side 
where  they  could  take  hold  and  "  catch  on."  [May  it  be  reverently  suggested 
that  the  polygon  of  character,  with  these  many  sides,  the  more  in  the  nobler  and 
larger  natures  and  lives,  grows  to  the  perfect  circle — the  polygon  of  an  infinite 
number  of  sides — in  the  One  Friend,  in  whom  all  men  find  a  place,  a  side,  where 
they  touch  and  can  grasp  and  can  hold?]  Men  of  such  pronounced  character 
as  Paul  sometimes  pay  the  penalty  of  their  very  strength,  in  an  utter  incapacity 
to  read,  or  work  with,  or  care  for,  or  be  just  to,  any  type  but  what  approaches 
their  own ;  and  in  consequence  they  have  few  friendships,  though  these  are  close 
and  strong,  if  sometimes  undemonstrative,  and  their  life  is  spent  in  an  isolation 
of  greatness  and  strength.  Paul  could  be  strong  enough,  and  could  speak 
strongly  enough  {e.g.  ver.  22);  he  appreciated  strength  highly  (e.g.  ver.  13); 
but  he  won  to  himself  Lydias  and  Marys  (Pom.  xvi.  6)  and  matrons  like  Ruf  us's 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xvi. 


mother  {ih.  ver.  13),  and  clinging  natures  like  Timothy,  and  strong  men  like 
Apollos  and  Titus.     [How  like  the  rugged,  yet  so  lovable  Luther  !] 

2.  A  mans  friendships  bring  out  his  characteristics. — He  is  put  to  the  test  by 
his  friendships.  See  whom  a  man  chooses  as  his  friends,  see  how  he  keeps  them  ; 
you  see  a  long  way  into  the  man.  As  we  have  found,  a  man  is  not  at  all  of 
necessity  simply  mirrored  and  reproduced  in  his  friendships ;  but  he  is  revealed 
by  them.  To  himself  and  to  others  they  are  a  touchstone  of  character.  See,  then, 
how  this  foremost  apostle  is  tenderly  considerate  for  a  young  minister  who 
needs  encouragement,  who  should  indeed  be  respected  by  himself,  and  by  others, 
as  a  fellow-worker  ;  who  shall  not,  if  he  can  help  it,  be  treated  with  anything  but 
respect.  An  old  minister  and  his  young  colleague.  See,  as  between  him  and 
Apollos,  how  utterly,  apostle  though  he  is,  he  holds  aloof  from  anything  like 
dictation.  He  claims  no  right  to  move  men  about  in  the  field  like  so  many 
pieces  on  a  che?s-board.  He  might  perhaps  have  found  Timothy  acquiescent, 
if  he  had  attempted  to  do  so;  Apollos  would,  perhaps,  have  resented  it.  As 
a  fact,  he  has  no  thought  of  it  with  either  of  them.  Timothy  is  "  his  son"  in 
the  Gospel ;  but  in  the  work  they  are  equals  before  their  common  Master. 
Paul  was  a  wise  master-builder  before  Apollos  began  to  learn  from  Aquila  and 
Priscilla  the  rudiments  of  the  Christian  "  trade  " ;  yet  he  respects,  and  bows  to, 
the  judgment  and  will  of  Apollos,  and  his  own  '•^ great  desire"  is  waived.  How 
smoothly  the  work  of  God  progresses  when  the  workers,  all  round,  are  of  this 
temper-  and  style  ! 

C.  Strength  and  love. — (Of.  under  xi.  11,  "  The  Man  "  and  *'  the  Woman.") 
I.  Complementary  graces. — 1.  The  verses  might  almost  stand  as  a  summary 
of  the  suggestions  of  B.  Say  to  Timothy,  "  Watch  ;  .  .  .  stand  fast ;  ...  be 
strong."  Say,  perhaps  to  Apollos,  certainly  to  Corinth,  "  All  things  .  .  ,  with 
charity."  A  good  rule  is  given  earlier  in  the  letter  :  "  All  .  .  .  decently  and  in 
order  "  (xiv.  40).  This  is  as  much  better,  larger,  higher,  as  "  love "  is  higher 
than  "  order."  Order  good  ;  but  love  will  secure,  if  its  working  be  perfect,  all 
that  is  really  of  worth  in  "  order  "  ;  the  "  order  "  of  "  love  "  is  natural,  necessary, 
inevitable,  and  sure.  Strength,  too,  is  good;  but  it  needs  clothing  with  love. 
Speaking  architecturally,  strength  finds  the  construction  in  the  Church  build- 
ing, love  the  ornament.  Ornament  without  strength  is  collapse ;  *'  ornament 
your  construction  "  is  perfect  art.  Strong  men  !  build  lovingly  ;  work  lovingly ; 
save  men  lovingly,  if  you  can.  [There  is  an  evangelism  that  is  hard.  There  is 
benevolence,  aid  to  sickness  and  poverty,  which  is  unsympathetic,  mechanical, 
hard,  and  that  unintentionally  hurts  where  it  means  to  help.]  Loving  men  !  be 
strong,  "  be  men"  (ver.  13,  literally),  be  watchful.  Ver.  13  is  a  soldierly  verse,  a 
campaigning  verse,  a  verse  for  warriors.  Ver.  14  would  Christianise  the  spirit 
of  Wordsworth's  lines  : — 

"  Who,  doomed  to  go  in  company  with  Pain 
And  Fear  and  Bloodshed,  miserable  train  I 
Turns  his  necessity  to  glorious  gain ; 
In  face  of  these  doth  exercise  a  power 
Which  is  our  human  nature's  highest  dower  ; 
Contests  them  and  subdues,  transmutes,  bereaves, 
Of  their  bad  influence,  and  their  good  receives  ; 
By  objects,  which  might  force  the  soul  to  abate 
Her  feeling,  rendered  more  compassionate  ; 
Is  placable — because  occasions  rise 
So  often  that  demand  such  sacrifice ; 


....  more  able  to  endure, 

As  more  exposed  to  suffering  and  distress  ; 

Thence,  also,  more  alive  to  tenderness'' 

— The  Happy  Warrior. 


367 


CHAP.  XVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMElNTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


2.  The  controversial  conflicts  of  the  Church  need  that  the  fighting  be  done  ^^with 
charity, ^^  and,  after  the  fight,  nothing  but  ^^ charity"  though  both  sides  have 
"  quitted  themselves  like  men "  against  each  other,  "  standing  fast  in  the  faith  " 
as  they  each  have  apprehended  it,  *'  knowing,"  all  of  them  (together),  only  "  in 
part"  (xiii.  9).  But  the  very  "  charity  "  must  bo  ready  to  fight  (cf.  ver.  22)  ;  it 
must  not  be  so  "  liberal  "  as  to  believe  that  "  nothing  is  worth  disputing  about." 
There  are  vital  issues  raised,  from  time  to  time ;  there  have  been  "  decisive 
battles  in  the  history  of  the  "  kingdom  of  Christ ;  when  love  without  strength 
would  easily  have  become  treasonable  indifference. 

II.  Complementary  counsels  (ver.  13). — 1.  "  Watch"  ^'standfast,"  when  there 
seems  no  fighting,  and  even  no  foe  in  sight.  In  the  midst  of  the  conflict,  in  the 
presence  of  the  foe,  "6e  strong"  ^'"play  the  man"  2.  "  Watchful;  steadfast;  strong ;" 
a  complete  programme  for  the  Christian  soldier;  [add  "  loving,"  and  it  is  a  com- 
plete programme  for  the  Christian  life].  3.  Watchful ;  there  are  many  foes ;  the 
soldier's  peril  is  to  fall  asleep  ;  all  the  camp  are  on  sentry  duty ;  every  man,  and 
not  official  sentries  only,  is  told  off  to  give  the  alarm  of  treason,  or  of  subtle  or 
open  attack.  Steadfast ;  as  appreciating  the  significance  of  *'  The  Faith,"  the 
value  of  that  Gospel  for  a  lost  world,  which  is  its  heart  and  burden  and  main 
content ;  as  yourselves  believers  of  strong  faith  in  "  The  Faith "  [which  is  a 
thing  believed  and  only  known  or  understood  by  believers.  Faith  is  a  condition 
(sine  qud  non),  without  which  knowledge  is  necessarily  impossible].  Standing 
fast  in  days  when,  as  on  a  memorable  Sunday,  June  18th,  1815,  a  line  of  British 
squares  could  do  nothing  but  doggedly  hold  their  ground  through  the  long  hours 
of  waiting  for  Blucher's  new  help.  As  Napoleon  said  of  them,  "  How  splendidly 
they  fight ;  they  don't  know  that  they  are  really  beaten  !  "  ;  so  the  *'  steadfast" 
Christian  soldiers  have  many  a  time  tenaciously  held  to  a  "  Faith  "  which  had 
been  discredited  by  some  of  its  very  defenders  ["  not  wise,  or  worth  while,  to 
attempt  to  sustain  that  old  position "] ;  themselves  have  been  forsaken  by 
treason  or  fear ;  by  all  rule  and  reason  definitely  pronounced  "  beaten  "  in  the 
judgment  of  the  assailants  ;  yet  doggedly  have  "  unreasonably "  kept  to  their 
substantial  position ;  until  their  tenacity  has  been  ^dndicated  and  crowned  by 
unexpected  reinforcement  raised  up  by  their  Great  Lord,  who  is  Himself  "  The 
Faith"  and  "The  Truth";  unlooked-for  help  has  many  a  time  made  the  long 
struggle  end  in  victory.  All  of  which  has  its  echoes  and  analogies  in  the  struggle 
of  the  personal  life  to  maintain  its  ground,  e.g.,  in  the  workshop,  full  of 
sceptical  and  scofling  workmen,  or  in  the  school  dormitory,  full  of  teasing, 
mocking,  or  angry  fellow-students.  Strong,  whether  in  watching  or  fighting ; 
in  experience  and  purpose ;  and  (not  least)  strong  because  busy  (xv.  58).  4. 
Watchful  against  subtle  danger ;  steadfast  against  persistent  attack ;  manly 
against  "  wise  "  assault ;  strong  against  many-sided  strength  of  evil. 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  15—24. 

Friends  and  Foes. 

I.  Friends. — 1.  Even  in  Ephesus,  and  because  in  Ephesus,  where  there  are 
"  many  adversaries."  A  day  came  when  Paul,  like  his  Master  before  His  judge, 
stood  friendless,  "  when  no  man  stood  by  him,"  not  a  Christian  in  all  Rome 
daring  to  show  himself  as  a  friend  of  Paul  in  court  that  day  (2  Tim.  iv.  10). 
Yet  he  was  not  forsaken  :  "  The  Lord  stood  by  me,  and  strengthened  .  .  .  and 
delivered."  That  is  the  supreme  strength  and  support  of  a  Christian  man.  But 
next  to  that  is  the  "  refreshing  of  spirit "  when,  to  a  hard- worked  toiler  in  a 
dangerous  post  in  Ephesus,  some  Stephanas  or  Fortunatus  or  Achaicus  "  comes," 
bringing  letters  and  tidings  and  supplies.  Others  brought  ill  news  and 
disquieting  (i.  11,  where,  however,  see  note).     Paul's  Master  is  careful  that  His 

368 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xvi. 


servant  shall  not  have  all  disquiet ;  these  bring  "  supplies J'^  It  is  good  to  see 
a  loyal  Corinthian  face  again  !  [See  another  instance  of  God's  loving  considera- 
tion, by  way  of  alleviation  and  compensation  (Phil.  ii.  27),  "  lest  I  should  have 
sorrow  upon  sorrow."]  What  worker  for  Christ  does  not  recall  many  su -h 
instances,  where  the  coming  of  friends  has  been  as  "  cold  water  to  a  thirsty 
soul,"  or  as  a  "  draught  from  a  brook  by  the  wayside  "  (Ps.  ex.  7) ;  a  supply  and 
comfort  which  was  only  typical  of  many  another  up-springing  well  of  comfort 
in  a  very  desert  of  isolated  experience  or  labour.  The  highest  service  that 
friendship  can  be  made  to  render,  next  to  that  of  leading  a  soul  to  seek  the 
Highest  Friendship  of  all. 

2.  A  new  brotherhood  is  springing  up. — "  Greetings  "  fly  across  the  j^gean 
between  Ephesus  and  Corinth.  There  are  "  Churches  in  Asia  "  who  join  hands 
across  the  water  with  a  Church  in  Corinth.  Aquila  and  Priscilla  have  a 
"  Church  in  their  house  "  [as  afterward  they  had  in  Rome  (xvi.  5)],  which  greets 
Corinth.  Paul  ^'greets"  Corinth, — Corinth  and  not  merely  the  party  "of 
Paul."  Corinthian  is  to  greet  Corinthian  "  with  a  holy  Hss,"  though  one  may  be 
a  rich  man  and  the  other  a  slave.  A  new  love  has  been  born  into  the  world, 
which  forgets  that  Aquila  is  a  Pontian  Jew  and  ApoUos  an  Alexandrian  Greek, 
and  that  Stephanas  and  his  friends  are  Corinthians.  "  See  how  these  Christians 
love  another  ! "  See  how  this  Paul  loves  the  Timothy  who  is  "  his  son  in  the 
faith."  See  how  he  loves  this  Stephanas  and  his  household.  They  were  his 
^^Jirstfruits" ;  in  them  he  first  tasted  the  joy  of  harvest  in  the  field  of  "  Achaia." 
Christian  and  Christian,  minister  and  convert,  are  the  closest  "  kin." 

3.  This  new  brotherhood  is  an  organised  thing. — The  friends,  the  brethren, 
form  themselves  into  Churches,  "  m  a  house,"  "  in  Asia."  Of  such  units  of 
construction  "  The  Church  "  is  being  built  up  ;  and  each  unit  in  its  essential 
feature  is  a  miniature  of  the  "Whole  ;  it  is  "  a  Church  "  as  really  as  is  the  whole. 
Precedence  and  sequence  are  beginning  to  show,  as  in  all  human  social  life. 
Some  are  to  "  submit  "  to  others,  but  it  is  only  for  their  worth's  sake  and  their 
work's  sake.  And  their  precedence  is  in  service.  Beyond  most  they  "  set  them- 
selves to  minister  to  the  saints  "  (R.  V.).  ["  Whosoever  would  be  chief  among  you, 
let  him  be  your  servant "  (Matt.  xx.  27).]  In  the  Church  there  should  never  have 
been  office  or  precedence  which  did  not  mean  serviceableness  to  the  welfare  of 
the  whole ;  there  should  never  have  been  an  official  whose  honour  was  not  rooted 
in  this :  "  He  helpeth  with  us,  and  labour eth."  There  should  have  been  no 
faineants  amongst  the  Church's  exalted  names.     "  Working  helpers  "  should  be 

^''acknowledged,"  and  if  needful  ^^ submitted  to."  And  in  the  long-run  recognition 
and  deference  do  come  naturally  to  worth  and  work. 

II.  Foes. — There  is  but  one  foe  :  "  he  who  does  not  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Not  love  Him  1  Think  slowly  over  His  Name  and  full  style :  "  Jesus  " — 
"  Lord  " — "  Christ."  Why  in  His  very  name  Jew,  Gentile,  Man,  have  their 
share  and  place.  Not  love  Him  1  The  embodiment  of  all  moral  Beauty,  Truth, 
Goodness ;  the  True,  the  Beautiful,  the  Good,  after  which  the  philosophers 
sought,  and  of  whose  interrelations  they  disputed  in  endless  discussion — they 
meet  in  Him ;  the  simplest  Christian  is  no  seeker  merely,  he  has  *'  Heureka  ! " 
in  his  mouth,  since  he  got  to  know  "  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  !  Not  love  Him  ? 
Who  has  loved  us  to  the  death ;  Who  for  our  sakes  became  poor  with  a  "  Great 
Renunciation "  which  is,  according  to  any  human  standard,  by  any  human 
calculus,  quite  an  incommensurable  quantity.  Not  love  Him  1  What  is  the 
matter  with  the  heart  that  does  not  love  Him  ?  Is  it  blind,  or  deaf,  or  dead  ? 
Can  it  not  see,  or  know,  or  love  Him  ?  The  unloving  heart  perhaps  admires, 
and  says,  or  sings,  or  writes,  fine  words  about  the  Teacher  of  Nazareth ;  it  may 
gather  up  its  skirts,  with  a  shrinking  that  is  a  reminder  from  former  days  of  a 
real  faith,  or  which  is  only  an  aesthetic  shrinking  from  *'  bad  form,"  when 

BB  369 


CHAP.  xvi.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


some  daring,  outspoken  man  calls  "  Jesus "  plainly  "  accursed "  (xii.  3) ;  but 
Paul  has  no  softer,  lesser  word  for  the  loveless  heart  itself.  Not  love  Him? 
"  Anathema  "  the  loveless  one  !  That  seems  "  unjust "  ?  "  You  cannot  command 
love  ? "  Certainly ;  but  it  can  be  awakened  or  suppressed,  cultivated  or  killed, 
by  the  man  himself.  He  will  cultivate  or  let  it  die,  as  toward  Christ,  according 
to  the  whole  moral  attitude  he  takes  up.  "  Mere  indifference "  to  Christ 
reveals  an  inner  world  of  moral  alienation,  and  at  least  a  possibility  of  the  very 
fiercest  aversion.  Between  the  man,  almost  demoniac,  who  screams,  "  Jesus  is 
Anathema  !  Jesus  is  Anathema  !  "  and  the  man  who  perhaps  would  shrink  from 
saying  it  outright,  but  who  really  feels  no  interest  in,  and  cares  nothing  for, 
Christ,  the  difference  is  rather  one  of  possibility,  of  opportunity,  of  occasion, 
of  provocation.  Press  Christ  and  His  claims  upon  the  *'  merely  indifferent " 
man,  and  you  either  lead  to  submission,  trust,  love,  or  you  provoke  anger  at 
yourself,  and  dislike,  antagonism,  hatred  to  Him.  There  is  no  being  neutral  in 
the  presence  of  Christ  and  His  claim.  "  For  judgment  he  is  come  into  this 
world ;  "  He  is  the  test  of  character,  the  Revealer  of  hearts,  making  a  swift, 
sharp  discrimination  between  friends  and  foes  (John  ix.  39).  There  is  no  trace 
of  a  permission  to  put  mere  sincerity  in  the  place  of  correct  faith,  of  separating 
a  man's  religion  from  a  correct  theology  on  this  topic.  No  man  can  help 
taking  sides  for  or  against  Him  ;  for  better  or  for  worse  no  man  can  remain 
the  man  he  was  before,  after  once  being  really,  clearly,  intelligently  confronted 
with  Christ.  To  say  nothing  of  His  personal  "  character  " ;  He  makes — as  is 
often  urged  by  Christian  controversialists — such  claims  for  Himself ;  He 
assumes,  as  with  perfect,  simple  right,  such  a  position  in  regard  both  to  God  and 
men ;  He  makes  such  assertions  about  Himself  as  are  tanta  mount  to  a  claim 
to  be,  and  to  be  honoured  and  accepted  as.  Divine  in  the  highest,  the  exact,  sense. 
Presuming  His  sanity,  He  leaves  no  alternative :  either  He  is  a  blasphemer, 
and  justly  "  Anathema,"  or  Divine  and  at  once  and  forthwith  to  be  "  honoured 
even  as  men  honour  the  Father."  *'  He  that  is  not  with  Me  is  against  Me." 
Not  to  be  His  friend  is  to  be  a  foe,  and  necessarily  "  under  the  ban."  And  He 
"  Cometh" ! 

III.  Paul's  outburst  of  feeling^. — These  last  verses  (chap,  xvi.)  have  been,  as 
it  were,  gradually  "  subsiding "  from  the  often  highly  wrought  interest  and 
feeling  of  the  body  of  the  letter.  The  thought  and  tone  have  accompanied  each 
other,  as  with  the  settling  of  a  bird  alighting,  not  suddenly,  but  in  a  series  of 
gentle  curves,  each  of  which,  though  rising,  ends  at  a  level  a  little  lower  than  it 
began,  till  one  expects  a  quiet  gliding  in  the  last  to  the  level  ground.  But 
instead  there  is  this  sudden  dash  upward ;  a  volcanic,  eruptive  outburst  of 
feeling.  "  Let  all  be  in  charity,"  Paul  had  just  said  (ver.  14).  What  then  is 
this  ?  It  is  the  Intolerance  of  Love.  [Often  pointed  out  that  the  "  Apostle  of 
love,"  John,  when  a  young  man,  was  "  Boanerges,"  who  would  have  called  down 
fire  upon  the  Samaritan  village  that  would  give  no  hospitality  to  Christ 
(Luke  ix.  54) ;  and  that  the  Boanerges  temper  is  not  extinct  in  the  old  man  of 
ripest  love  and  piety  (1  John  iv.  3  ;  2  John  10).  In  each  case  it  is  to  be 
observed  how  with  John,  as  with  Paul,  it  is  the  very  intensity  of  conviction, 
and  of  devotion  to  Christ,  which  called  out  the  fiery  denunciation.]  A 
man  cannot  be  a  lukewarm  enemy,  nor  a  lukewarm  friend,  of  Jesus  Christ. 
It  is  the  **  Intolerance  of  the  Gospel "  [title  of  a  good  sermon  by  A.  Vinet], 
and  throws  much  light  upon  the  difficult  question  of  the  imprecatory  psalms. 
At  least  it  cannot  be  said  without  much  qualification  that  they  are  wholly  of  an 
*'  Old  Testament  spirit,"  in  strong  antithesis  to  that  of  the  New.  [Look,  e.g.,  at 
2  Tim.  iv.  14,  "  Lord  .  .  .  reward  him  according  to  his  deeds  !  "  (N.B.  reading) ; 
Gal.  V.  10,  "Shall  bear  his  burden";  v.  12,  "Circumcision?  I  would  there 
were  an  excision  ;  a  clean  excision  of  these  men  from  the  body  of  Christ " ;  hear 

370 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xvi. 


Stephen  denounce  the  Sanhedrin  (Acts  vii.  51,  52),  or  Paul  Bar-jesus  (Acts  xiii. 
10,  11) ;  hear  Christ  Himself  denounce  the  Pharisees,  "  Fill  ye  up  the  measure 
of  your  fathers  !"  (Matt,  xxiii.  32);  hear  John,  "I  do  not  say  that  he  shall 
pray  for  it," — as  though  he  had  been  brought  into  such  a  perfect  accord  with 
God's  own  abhorrence  of  sin,  such  a  perfect  acceptance  of  the  righteousness  of 
the  heaviest  judgment  of  God  upon  it,  that  he  anticipates  the  day  when  the 
saved  and  the  heavenly  host  shall  together  stand  in  holy  aloofness  from  the 
condemned  Harlot-evil  of  the  universe,  and,  over  the  very  judgments  of  God, 
shall  solemnly  sing  an  exultant  "Alleluia!"  (Rev.  xix.  1-5).]  The  New 
Testament  cannot  tolerate  indifference  to  Christ  or  the  Truth.  No  Christian 
man  can  leave  it  an  open  question  whether  his  Master  be  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth  " 
or  "  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ^  It  is  no  question  of  exactly  agreeing  about  the 
doctrinal  phraseology  of  a  creed ;  but  of  a  love  to  the  personal  Christ,  which  has 
sometimes  co-existed  with  an  imperfect  creed  about  Him.  {E.g.  Dr  Adam 
Clarke  denied  the  eternity  a  'parte  ante  of  His  Sonship.]  It  is  not  the  iiitelkctnal 
Tightness  of  the.  man  which  is  in  issue,  but  the  moral  state  of  the  man's  heart. 
The  Godhead  of  Christ  is  a  test  question  indeed,  as  men  must  apply  tests  ;  the  moral 
attitude  toward  Christ,  be  He  what  He  may,  is  the  deeper  thing  which  stirs 
Paul's  heart.  "  He  may  not  accept,  or  totidem  verbis  repeat,  my  Christology  ; 
but  does  he  love  my  Christ  1  If  not,  let  him  be  Anathema."  If  we  are  not  so 
outspoken,  or  so  confident  in  oar  condemnation,  we  should  inquire  whether  our 
devotion  to  Christ  is  less  intense  ;  whether  our  convictions  are  as  deep  as  Paul's  ; 
whether  truth  is  of  as  much  certainty  and  importance  to  us.  Loyalty  to  Christ 
may  sometimes  need  to  override  all  considerations  of  conventional  courtesy  and 
"  charity  "  and  liberality.     (See  also  Separate  Homily  under  ver.  22.) 

The  Benediction. 

The  "  bird "  does  "  alight,"  and  very  quietly  !  The  outburst  of  ver.  ^2  is 
quite  compatible  with  a  perfect  peace  and  self-control  within  Paul's  soul.  He 
passes  as  easily  from  it  to  these  words  of  tender  farewell,  as  he  did  from  the 
Resurrection  to  the  Collection  (above).  "  His  grace,  my  first  and  greatest  wish 
for  you  at  Corinth.  My  love,  less,  but  not  less  real,  with  you  also  ;  and  I  wish 
it  not  with  the  mere  good  feeling  of  a  benevolent  heart ;  I  wish  it  *  in  Christ 
Jesus'  "  Paul's  heart  is  full  of  Christ's  heart ;  to  him  "  to  live,"  and  so  to  greeti 
his  Churches,  "  is  Christ." 

SEPARATE    HOMILIES. 

Ver.  9.  An  Opened  Door.  in  and  take  possession,  in  His  name 

I.  Figure  obvious  enough  in  mean-  Who   has    opened   the    door.     2.    On 

ing. — Very  curious  accident  that   the  Paul's  second  missionary  journey,  it  is 

phrase  and  the  figure  are  always  con-  said    (Acts   xvi.     6-12)    that,    having 

nected    with   this     same     Proconsular  passed  through  the  central  tableland  of 

Asia.      1.    In    Rev.   iii.   8   "  an    open  Galatia,  and  having  come  down  to  the 

door  "  is  "  set  before  "  the  Philadelphian  coast,  somewhat  north  of  this  Ephesus, 

Church.      Persecution,  poverty — what-  he  wished  to  open  his  commission  in 

ever  has  shut  up  Philadelphian  Church  this  Roman  ^'  Asia.''     The  Director  of 

into  a  narrow  field  of  life,  are  removed.  his  course,   however — the  Holy  Spirit 

There  is  escape  from  conjiiiement  in  the  — in   some   way   forbade   him.      That 

figure.     Whatever  has  shut  them  out  door   was    shut.       He     turned    away 

from   access   to   their   heathen  neigh-  north-east,  and   "  assayed    to  go   into 

bourhood  around  is  removed.     There  is  Bithynia."      But    no  !      "  The    Spirit 

entrance  into  a  new  sphere.      Circum-  sufiered  him  not."     The  door  is  closed 

stances  now  favour.      They  are  to  go  in  that  direction  also.     His  path  into 

371 


CHAP.  XVI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


new  fields  of  labour  lay  another  way,  Acts   xvi.     The  closed  door  was  just 

and    he   turned   aside    to    Troas   and  then  the  will  of  Paul's  Lord, 
waited.     Then  the  way  became  clear.  2.  To  grasp  this  will  keep  the  spirit 

The  door,  the  way,  opened  into  Mace-  of  the  eager,  devoted  wm^ker  in  peace. — 

donia ;  into  a  Europe  waiting  for  the  Look  at  Phil.  i.  12-18,  21.     To  a  man 

Gospel.  like    Paul,   for    years    the    forefront 

II.  In  all  such  cases  of  providential  evangelist   of    the   Christian   Church, 

leading  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  and  of  a  zeal  bui  ning,  as  steadily  as 

closed  door  is  as  really  a  part  of  God's  intensely,  beyond  that  of  most,  it  must 

leading  as  the  opened  one. — 1.  It  is  a  have  been  no  small  trial  to  have  been, 

real  temptation — though    there   is    an  for  two  years  at  least,  in  confinement 

honourable  side  to    the  feeling — to  a  in  Rome,  '•  reduced  to  "  writing  letters 

soul  full  of  devotion  to  Christ,  eager  to  to  friends  and  Churches,  to  conversa- 

put  the  fervour  of  devotion  into  con-  tion  and  discussion  with  "  callers  "  and 

Crete  shape  in  some  new  activity  in  His  inquirers  ;  to  know,  moreover,  that  the 

cause  ;  full  also  of  sympathy  and  com-  closing  of  the  door  upon  himself  was 

passion  for  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men  being   eagerly  made   the   opportunity 

and  women  for  whom   as   yet  Christ  of  teachers    who    "  preached    Chiist " 

seems  to  have  died  in  vain,  and  with  a  indeed,  but   in  a  presentation   which 

holy  inventiveness  and  organising  gift,  was  not  *'  his  Gospel  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  8  ; 

ever   fertile   in   new    plans   for   doing  Rom.  ii.  16),  and  which  he  regarded  as 

something  fresh  for  these  souls  and  for  "  the  word  of  God  adulterated  "  (2  Cor. 

Christ;  to  chafe  when  these  plans  are  ii.   17);     to  remember   also    that  this 

again  and  again  put  aside  by  insuper-  eager  and  quickened  activity  of  theirs 

able  difiiculties,  or  when  circumstances  was  in  a  large  degree  prompted  by  no 

repeatedly  make  a  hopeful  commence-  kindly  feeling    towards    himself,    but 

ment  hopelessly   abortive   in   its   con-  rather  was  triumphing  inhaving  a  clear 

elusion.     To  stand  and  see  work  that  field  with  him  out  of  the  way  [every 

wants  doing,  souls  that  want  saving,  a  "  dog  "  (iii.  2)  of  them  hoping  that  his 

world  that  needs  Christ's  Gospel,  and  bark   would   irritate    the    caged   lion, 

to  be  powerless  to  do  anything  ;     [to  behind  his  closed  door].     Yet  he  is  not 

stand  upon  the  shore  and  see  the  poor  irritated.     If  the  door  close  for  him, 

fellows   drop    off,   one   after   another,  and  open  for  them, — well,  any  way  men 

from  the  frozen  rigging  of  the  wrecked  are  hearing  of  Christ  who  would  not 

vessel  into  the  surging  waves  ;  no  open  otherwise   hear   of    Him  at   all.      "  I 

door  of  escape  for  them,  and  no  open  therein    do     rejoice,     yea,    and    will 

door  of  help  for  those  who  stand  and  rejoice ! "     And    as   to    any   personal 

watch,  because    there   is   no   boat   or  irritation,  where  should  that  come  in  ? 

rescue  apparatus ;  to  stand  in  power-  "  To  me    to  live   is — not  Paul  but — 

less   idleness   and    watch  the  burning  Christ."     Paul  is  kept  patient  within  a 

house ;  or  the  like  illustration  ;]    is  a  closed  door. 

sharp    trial    to    an    eager,     devoted,  3.  There  are  closed  doors  in  the  per- 

capable  Christian  worker.     No  doubt  sonal  life. — Most    perplexing    to   the 

many   an   obstacle   may   be    removed  understanding;    most  trying  to  faith, 

which     at      first    seems    insuperable.  Every  step  of  the  path  has  been  com- 

Prayer,     tact,     patience,     work,     will  mitted  to  God's  guiding  wisdom  and 

generally  open  a  door.     But  not  always,  love ;    not   a   step    without    prayerful 

Asia  and  Bithynia  are  closed  even  to  *'  consultation  "  with  the  Father.     The 

the  eager  heart  of  a  Paul.     For  that  way  seems  to  clear.     Door  after  door 

journey.      Now    "Asia,"    Ephesus,   is  opens  until — one  stands  closed.   Indeed, 

open.     Then    Philippi,    Bercea,    Thes-  it  looks  as  if  there  were  no  door  at  all, 

salonica,  Athens,  Corinth, — all  needed  to  be  closed  or  opened.     The  way  that 

him  first.     Christ  had  a  larger  plan  seemed    so    clear    has     ended    in   an 

of  campaign  than  even  Paul  saw  in  impasse^  a  cul  de  sac.     There  appears 

373 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  xvi. 


nothing  to  be  done  except  to  retrace 
some  steps,  or  many,  and  try  down 
some  other  path.  But  what  then  of 
all  the  lost  time?  What  of  all  the 
"  lost  "  prayer  ?  What  of  all  the  way 
that  seemed  so  clearly  opened  up  to 
the  last  point  ?  The  full  answer  can 
many  a  time  never  be  given ;  but  the 
triumph  of  faith  is  to  hold  doggedly  to 
the  conviction  that  God  even  in  such  a 
case  has  made  no  false  move  nor  per- 
mitted a  false  start,  but  rather  that 
He  has  some  larger  plan  into  which 
this  journey  down  a  by-lane  that  leads 
to  nowhere,  enters  as  a  needful  and  wise 
detail.  [We  were  perhaps  "  shunted 
on  to  a  siding  "  whilst  danger  passed, 
or  whilst  some  arrangements  for  our 
after- journey  were  being  made,  on  what 
is  after  all  the  main  line  of  His  system 
for  our  life.]  The  closed  door  has  many 
and  many-sided  jowrposes  in  God's  plan, 
and  in  men's  training.  Sometimes  the 
development  of  the  after-path  justifies 
the  doggedly  tenacious  faith  which,  by 
grace,  *'  would  not  "  doubt.  Men  see  and 
praise  God  by-and-by^br  many  a  closed 
door. 

III.  The  open  door  is  :  1.  A  mercy 
to  be  thankful  for;  2.  A  call  to  be 
responded  to ;  3.  A  responsibility  to 
be  assumed  in  Divine  strength. 

1.  A  mercy  not  only  to  the  world  or  to 
the  neighbourhood  waiting  to  be  evan- 
gelised, sitting  in  darkness  and  hunger 
waiting  for  the  Light  and  the  Bread, 
but  also  to  the  Church  itself  and  its 
workers,  for  the  sake  of  the  effect  upon 
their  own  life.  No  greater  calamity 
could  happen  to  a  Church,  or  to  a 
worker,  than  that  they  should  settle 
down  into  easy  contentment  with  what 
has  been  already  accomplished,  not 
attempting  to  do  more  than  retain 
ground  abeady — perhaps  by  a  more 
eager  generation  in  the  past — won 
and  cultivated.  Such  satisfaction  is 
next  door  to  stagnation.  Such  stagna- 
tion is  next  door  to  death.  Let  a 
Church,  or  the  individual,  lose  the 
spirit  of  enterprise,  the  elan  which 
carries  them  forward,  exploring  for 
new  "  opened  doors  " ;  let  [per  impossi- 
bik)  the  Head  of  the  Church  open  none, 


or  entrust  them  with  none ;  the  end 
of  that  Church  would  not  be  far  off. 
O.  W.  Holmes  lays  his  hand  on  a  true 
trait  of  genius, — "  it  is  always  breaking 
out  in  fresh  places."  The  Church 
could  have  no  greater  calamity  happen- 
ing to  it  than  that  it  should  have 
no  inner  impulse  with  a  sanctified 
** genius"  to  break  out  in  fresh  places,  or 
should  be  condemned  to  beat  in  vain 
against  closed  doors  in  every  direction. 
For  not  only  are  the  habit  and  spirit 
of  enterprise  kept  alive  by  open  doors, 
hut  hope.  It  is  easy,  fatally  easy,  for 
Israel  with  an  evil  contentment  to 
build  its  own  city,  under  the  very  walls 
of  a  Jerusalem  held  by  Jebusites  into 
whose  fastness  there  seemed  no  open 
door,  and  which  seemed  to  leave  no 
hope  of  its  being  captured  for  God.  An 
open  door  keeps  alive  that  hopef  ulnei^s 
of  spirit  without  which  no  great  things 
will  ever  be  accomplished  for  the  woik 
of  God.  Quite  obvious  to  add  that  the 
Church  which  has  been  praying  and 
waiting  for  an  opened  door,  praises  its 
Great  Head  with  all  fulness  of  thanks- 
giving, when  at  last,  and  perhaps 
suddenly,  "  the  door  is  opened" 

2.  A  call  to  enter. — (1)  "  Know  ye 
that  Ramoth  in  Gilead  is  ours,  and  we 
be  still  and  take  it  not  out  of  the  hand 
of  Syria  ?  "  Ahab's  spirit  of  enter- 
prise may  be  service  ably  pondered. 
"  Ephesus  is  ours  !  Ephesus  is  Christ's  ! 
It  is  in  the  hands  of  His  enemies  ! 
The  door  is  opened  !  The  opening  is  a 
call !  "  Some  morning  the  ice,  which 
for  weary  months  has  shut  in  as 
with  the  grip  of  death  the  vessel  of  the 
Arctic  explorers,  is  seen  to  be  stirring 
and  heaving  and  splitting  with  the 
swell  of  a  warmer  current  or  the  first 
touch  of  the  returning  summer.  How 
in  an  instant  orders  are  given  to  make 
ready  to  push  into  the  opening  channel 
through  the  enclosing  ice-floes  !  The 
occupations,  work  or  play,  which  have 
beguiled  the  long  weeks  and  the  con- 
tinuous night  of  the  Arctic  winter,  are 
thrust  aside.  The  opened  door  through 
the  ice  is  a  call.  [Queen  Elizabeth  once 
kept  Baleigh  dallying  about  her  at 
Greenwich,    until    one    morning    tb© 

373 


bu 


ti   tilC  ^^Ov«>, 


tjju  L 


ii;ii  Lil  >.i|  ti.i    ii»_-i:v;,  L,w  UutA  k'-.  I'^j^, 


3r6 


CHAP.  XVI.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


wind,  for  which  in  part  he  had  been 
waiting,  to  carry  him  out  of  the  Thames, 
turned  down  stream.  The  Queen 
would  have  kept  him  for  another  day. 
"  Madam,  the  breeze  commands  me 
away  i "  l^he  opened  door  into  the  wide 
sea  and  the  wide  world,  was  an  im- 
perative call  to  set  sail  and  go.]  (2) 
Christ  calls  by  opened  doors.  It  is  the 
most  frequent  fashion  in  which  to-day 
His  voice  is  made  to  reach  His  Church. 
It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  special 
guidance  is  sometimes  directly  given, 
by  the  visions  of  "  men  of  Macedonia," 
for  example.  The  success  has  now  and 
again  vindicated  the  leading  of  a  dream 
that  showed  *'  an  open  door."  Some 
who  have  lived  in  special  nearness  to 
God,  and  in  close  touch  with  His 
Spirit's  least  intimations,  have  proved 
to  be  rightly  guided  by  strong  impres- 
sions that  doors  were  opening.  [Paul's 
experiences  in  Acts  xvi.  6-8  would  be 
more  definite  and  decisive  than  these.] 
But,  ordinarily,  the  sanctified  good 
sense  and  the  consecrated  judgment 
must  co-operate  with  the  look  of  cir- 
cumstances, to  discover  the  will  and 
way  of  Christ.  And  "  the  door  "  which 
commends  itself  as  "  opened "  to  the 
sound,  sanctified  judgment ;  the  cir- 
cumstances which  look  so  promising 
and  so  probably  right; — in  these  the 
Lord  of  the  Church  will  ordinarily 
indicate  His  will,  and  through  these 
utter  His  "call."  [When  Saul  left 
Samuel,  three  special  foreannounced 
signs  should  be  given  him,  tokens  to 
assure  him  that  so  far  he  was  in  the 
way  of  God  for  his  life.  But  after 
that,  no  more  signs,  no  more  special, 
miraculously  announced  tokens  for 
guidance.  His  own  sense  and  the 
opening  of  events  were  to  be  his  guid- 
ance: "  Do  thou  as  occasion  serveth  thee ; 
for  God  is  with  thee"  (1  Sam.  x.  7).] 
"  Occasion"  as  Samuel  called  it ;  the 
*'  opened  door"  as  Paul  calls  it, — these 
are  generally  the  voice  and  call  of  God. 
3.  A  responsibility  to  be  assumed. — 
(1 )  From  the  "  opened  door  "  at  Ephesus, 
Paul  could  not,  dared  not,  turn  away, 
even  to  push  forward  to  Corinth  or 
Jerusalem.     He  was  urgently  wanted 

374 


there,  no  doubt,  but  he  was  wanted 
at  Ephesus.  It  was  at  Ephesus  where 
**  the  door  was  opened."  Ephesus  was 
his  immediate  responsibility.  "  To  do 
one  thing  at  a  time "  is  an  old  and 
true  recipe  for  accomplishing  great 
things,  great  at  least  in  amount,  in  a 
busy  life.  To  attempt  one,  whilst 
harassed  by  the  "claims"  of  two  or 
a  dozen  others,  is  ruin  to  all  steady 
application,  or  thoroughness  of  labour, 
or  peace  of  heart ;  and  without  these 
the  thing  in  band  is  only  half  done 
or  ill  done.  Do  "  open  doors,"  do  the 
claims  of  opportunities,  in  the  deepest 
truth  of  the  matter,  ever  compete  ? 
To  the  man  who  is  going  forward, 
doing  "  what  his  hand  Jlnds  to  do" 
the  nearest  first,  -then  the  next, 
and  the  next,  do  claims  ever  really 
"  clash  "  ?  The  Christian  man,  or  the 
Church,  is  responsible  only  for  the 
door  opened  (as  Paul  says)  "  to  we " ; 
the  door  which  is  next  him.  No  need 
to  be  harassed,  diverted,  divided, 
flurried,  distressed,  about  other  open 
doors,  however  urgently  clamorous 
may  seem  their  claims.  The  Lord 
"  who  openeth  "  (Rev.  iii.  7)  "  doors  " 
will  care  for  those.  The  man,  the 
Church,  for  whom  each  of  these  is 
opened,  is  standing  near  it,  with  the  same 
responsibility  for  entering  through  his 
own.  (2)  This  responsibility  for  one's 
own  "  door "  is  to  be  remembered. 
Thankful  that  one  need  only  be  con- 
cerned with  that,  yet  mindful  that  one 
ought  to  be  concerned  with  that.  The 
worker,  the  work,  the  door  between 
them  closed;  then,  the  door  opens. 
Paul's  argument  with  himself  was, 
"  assuredly  gathering  that  the  Lord 
had  called  us,  for  to  preach  the  Gospel 
unto  them"  (Acts  xvi.  10).  And  we 
might  emphasise  "  us  "  ;  "  its,  and  no 
other  workers."  There  is  an  argu- 
ment, a  call,  a  responsibility,  upon  the 
man  before  whom  "  the  door  opens." 
He  may  not  shirk  it  in  indolence,  or 
fear ;  nor  may  he  in  a  diffidence  of 
himself  which  logically  would  issue 
in  charging  the  Lord  of  the  Workers 
with  having  chosen  the  wrong  man, 
or,  at  least,  not  the  best,  seek  to  find 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  Xvi. 


somebody  "  better  fitted  than  "  himself 
to  enter  in  and  do  the  work.  He  has 
it  to  do.  He  can  do  it ;  he  can  be 
"  made  able "  (2  Cor.  iii.  6).  (3)  In 
dependence  upon  Divine  equipment  and 
aid.  There  is  fighting  to  be  done 
inside  the  door  :  "  Many  adversaries.'* 
[Yet  "  shall  such  a  man  as "  Paul 
"flee"?  (Neh.  vi.  11).  No;  indeed,  it 
is  to  him  an  added  reason  for  staying 
longer  at  Ephesus.  The  captain  must 
be  found  where  the  fight  is  thickest. 
He  has  had  his  taste  of  it  already, 
like  a  man. "fighting  wild  beasts"  in 
the  arena  (xv.  32).]  All  entering  in 
to  open  doors  is  with  something  of 
difficulty,  something  of  danger.  Jabez 
asks  that  his  "  coast "  may  be  "  en- 
larged "  ;  but  enlargement  to  an  early 
settler  in  Canaan  in  his  days  meant 
dispossessing  Canaanite  occupiers  by 
war.  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldst  keep  me 
from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve  me  !  " 
(1  Chron.  iv.  10).  Never  yet  was 
an  opportunity  utilised  without  hard 
work.  And  the  best  workers  best 
know  their  own  insufficiency.  Look 
within,  and  who  will  enter  an  opened 
door  1  Look  up,  and  who  may  not  ? 
"  Let  us  go  up  at  once,  and  possess,  .  .  . 
for  we  are  well  able  ;  ...  the  Lord  is 
with  us ;  fear  them  not  "  (Num.  xiii. 
30,  xiv.  9).  "  But  who  goeth  a  war- 
fare," or  entereth  an  open  door,  "  at 
his  own  charges  ? "  (ix.  7).  The  call 
puts  responsibility  upon  the  man ;  hut 
it  gives  him  a  claim  upon  God.  He 
Who  calls,  and  Who  opens  the  door, 
knows  Who  must  "find  the  where- 
withal," if  the  opening  is  to  be  entered 
and  the  work  to  be  taken  in  hand. 
He  knows  that  He  will  need  to  "  see 
the  workers  through "  with  it.  It  is 
upon  that  understanding,  upon  that 
assumption,  that  He  calls  by  the 
"  opened  door."  He  calls  those  "  who 
have  no  might,"  absolutely"  none  at  all 
of  their  own,  that  in  them  He  may, 
as  He  must,  "  increase  strength  "  and 
wisdom  (Isa.  xl.  29).  "  Suppose  I  enter 
the  door,  what  next  ?  And  if  the  work 
develop  upon  my  hands,  what  then  ? 
Perhaps  I  may  break  down,  or  may  be 
so  placed  that  I  really  am  at  the  end 


of  my  resources,  and  at  my  wits'  end ; 
how  then  ?  "  "  Gro  in  at  the  open 
door.  Leave  the  rest.  Be  thankful 
for  the  pioneer's  honour  put  upon  you. 
Let  the  Master  supply  all  the  need 
of  the  *  next '  and  the  *  then.' " 

Ver.  9.  A  Great  Door  and  Effectual ; 
Many  Adversaries. — [Many  occasions 
in  the  personal  life  of  the  Christian 
man  when  these  words  rush  into  his 
memory  as  exactly  descriptive  of  his 
case  and  its  conditions.  No  mere 
"  happy  adaptation  "  of  language  this ; 
a  real,  closely  connected  analogy.  The 
extension  and  establishment  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  within  the  individual 
run  on  lines  perfectly  parallel  with  those 
which  are  its  characteristics  in  the  case 
of  the  world.  In  the  Johannean  (and 
Pauline)  sense,  there  is  a  little  "  world  " 
within  the  man  which  is  part  of  that 
larger  "  world  "  outside,  which  has  its 
"Prince"  (John  xvi.  11),  etc.,  who, 
whether  within  or  without,  is  to  be 
"  judged  and  cast  out "  by  the  holy 
encroachment  of  the  power  of  the 
kingdom  of  light.  In  both  campaigns, 
in  both  fields, — the  world-wide  and 
racial,  or  the  narrower  and  individual, 
—  there  are  crises  of  opportunity  for 
advance  and  growth  and  victory  and 
extension,  '■^opened  doors"  to  enter 
into  which,  however,  means  the  arous- 
ing and  the  opposition  of  ^'' many  ad- 
versaries." Every  Christian  under- 
s-tands  how,  beneath  the  happy  ap- 
propriateness of  the  language  to  his 
case,  there  is  a  real  analogy,  a  real 
unity,  of  fact.  Taking  them  in  the 
pe:;^  nal,  narrower  application,  let  it 
remind  of  the  "  opened  doors "  of  re- 
moved hindrance,  of  favouring  circum- 
stances, of  inviting  opportunity,  for 
occupying  some  new  ground  in  the 
heritage  of  God's  new  Israel,  holiness.] 

I.  The  privilege  of  beings  brought 
up  to  an  opened  door. — 1.  Eecall  days 
when,  with  all  the  suddenness  of  a 
revelation,  or  the  opening  of  a  door  in 
a  blank  wall,  and  with  unusual  depth 
of  impression,  the  desirability,  and 
necessity,  of  higher  religions  attain- 
ment, of  closer  walk  with  God,  stand 

375 


CHAP.  XVI.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   CORINTHIANS. 


clear  before  the  vision  of  the  heart. 
Like  Moses,  led  up  to  where  the  whole 
Canaan  of  God's  "  rest  for  His  people  " 
(Heb.  iii.,  iv.)  lay  spread  out  attrac- 
tively before  the  eyes,  possibilities  of 
blessing  and  holiness  stretching  away 
in  "  length  and  breadth  "  (Eph.  iii.  18), 
as  never  before  seen ;  unlike  Moses, 
led  up  to  see  a  land  waiting  for  conquest 
and  occupation.  Or  it  is  rather  the 
"  opened  door "  of  the  "  banqueting 
house "  (Cant.  ii.  4),  on  whose  table 
are  spread  in  tempting  array  the 
"  feast  of  fat  things,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxv.  6), 
for  the  children  of  God's  family ;  the 
Christian  is  led  up  to  the  threshold 
and  is  bidden  enter  and  sit  down  and 
*'  tast«  as  well  as  see  "  (Ps.  xxxiv.  8). 
At  such  times  the  very  presence  of  sinful 
tempers  and  inclinations  becomes  un- 
usually painful ;  themselves  become  un- 
usually hateful ;  the  standard  higher 
than  ever ;  holiness,  full  and  perfect, 
more  desirable  than  ever.  2.  A  privilege ; 
for  no  man  seeks  more  grace  with  any 
heartiness  or  hope,  merely  because  he 
ought ;  driven  to  an  "  opened  door  " 
by  a  sense  of  duty.  He  who  is  led  up 
to  it  by  a  quickened  desire,  is  not  far 
from  entrance  and  possession  of  what 
lies  within.  God  is  in  the  quickening 
of  desire ;  the  quickening  is  therefore 
a  pledge  of  further  blessing.  A  privi- 
lege, and  a  mercy ^  remembering  how 
often,  led  thus  far,  the  soul  has  turned 
away  from  the  door  and  the  feast  in 
half  indifference,  saying  great  things 
of  the  feast  and  of  the  bounty  of  the 
Provider,  but  not  caring  enough  about 
it  to  enter  and  partake ;  till  the 
quickened  desire,  imperfect  as  it  was, 
died  away.  A  mercy,  remembering  how 
eagerly  other  things  are  pursued,  other 
open  doors  are  entered,  until  Divine 
things,  thus  dishonoured  and  disre- 
garded, are  crowded  out  of  thought 
and  heart.  It  is  favour  worthy  of  His 
love  when  by  an  "  opened  door  "  atten- 
tion is  again  arrested,  desire  revived, 
hope  excited.  3.  No  greater  calamity 
could  occur  than  a  fatal  satisfaction  with 
present  religious  position  and  status ; 
no  sorer  curse  from  the  "  grieved " 
Spirit  of  God  than  that  the  heart  should 

376  .        .     . 


be  suffered  to  lower  the  standard  into 
adjustment  to  the  facts,  or  should  never 
catch  sight  of  a  larger  life  inviting  the 
soul  through  the  "  opened  door." 

II.  The  responsilility  for  entering 
thus  created. — 1.  Privilege  and  re- 
sponsibility always  go  together.  To 
accept  the  privilege  means  to  accept 
and  fulfil  all  that  belongs  to  it.  Fulfil 
no  conditions,  discharge  no  responsi- 
bility, forfeit  all  privilege  !  "A  man 
will  not  work  ?  Then  neither  shall  he 
eat !  "  (2  Thess.  iii.  10).  (As  true  of 
the  secular  life  as  of  the  spiritual.) 
Do  nothing  for  God  ;  get  nothing  from 
God  !  But  the  responsibility  may  be 
faced  cheerfully.  Three  things  always 
Unked  together :  a  promise ;  a  call  to 
seek  for  its  fulfilment ;  a  further 
promise  of  grace  to  obey  the  call.  The 
door  shall  always  be  an  "  effectual  door  " 
to  the  man  who  endeavours  to  enter. 
2.  There  is  the  responsibility  of  an 
indebtedness  to  Christ.  When  you 
have  been  contriving  and  saving  and 
denying  yourself,  and  giving  time  and 
labour  and  money  to  procure  a  present 
for  one  you  love  ;  if  it  is  received  with 
profusely  worded,  but  evidently  formal, 
thanks,  if  it  is  never  used,  but  put 
away,  only  to  be  now  and  then  decently 
taken  out  and  *  admired '  and  your 
'  great  kindness  '  again  extolled  ;  do 
you  like  it  ?  What  did  it  cost  Christ 
to  secure  for  you  the  possibilities  which 
offer  themselves  through  the  "  c?oor " 
which  "  opened "  so  suddenly,  so  in- 
vitingly, as  you  were  reading,  or  medi- 
tating, or  were  on  your  knees  ?  Ought 
you  not  to  enter  1  3.  If,  then,  the  Spirit 
of  God  shows  some  new  and  higher 
standard  of  Christian  living,  spreads 
out  some  new  breadth  of  Christian 
privilege,  bringing  it  near,  laying  its 
desirableness  upon  the  heart,  filling 
with  desire  for  it ;  that  is  "  a7^  opened 
door  "  into  which  it  is  a  duty  and  re- 
sponsibility to  enter  and  labour,  or 
fight,  or  enjoy.  "  If  ye  know  .  .  .  , 
happy  ...  if  ye  do"  (John  xiii.  17). 
Heavy  the  responsibility  of  all  new 
knowledge,  if  ye  "  do  "  not  !  Indeed, 
heavy  the  condemnation  of  ^^  an  opened 
dow "    refused ;    the   blood    ceases   to 


Oi  u 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xvi. 


cleanse  from  guilt,  if  we  walk  not  in 
all  the  light — much  or  little — that  we 
have  (1  John  i.  7). 

III.  Many  adversaries. — 1.  The  Self 
desires,  and  does  not  desire,  to  enter. 
[Said  "Rabbi"  Duncan:  "When  C. 
Malan  said  to  me,  on  a  never-to  be- 
forgotten  day,  '  You  have  got  God's 
word  in  your  mouth,'  I  felt  as  if  a 
flash  of  spiritual  electricity  had  then 
passed  through  me.  But  the  old 
nature  asserted  itself  right  in  the  face 
of  that  word,  and  refused  for  a  while 
to  receive  the  death-wound.  ...  Now 
that  must  not  be  an  infrequent  ex- 
perience. The  shock  when  all  that  is 
within  rises  up  and  refuses  to  be  slain 
by  the  only  bloodless  Conqueror,  till 
at  length  the  soul  yields,  and  dies  that 
it  may  live.  ...  I  was  conscious  of 
a  revulsion  against  my  renovation " 
(Colloquia  Peripatetica,  77).  The  form 
of  illustration  is  different,  but  the  truth 
is  the  same,  viz.]  the  man's  indolent, 
easy-going,  self-loving,  sin-loving,  man- 
fearing  self  is  the  first  great  ^''adver- 
sary "  and  hindrance  to  his  entering 
Christ's  "  opened  dooi\^^  2.  Sometimes 
there  are  conditions  to  be  fulfilled 
which  seem  arrayed  as  " adversaries" 
because  the  indolent,  or  reluctant,  or 
unbelieving  heart  makes  them  difficul- 
ties. God  can  only  forgive,  ready  as 
He  is  (Neh.  ix.  17),  upon  conditions  ; 
man's  heart  is  not  ready  to  fulfil  the 
conditions.  The  "  opened  door  "  is,  in 
God's  desire  and  intention,  to  be  entered 
at  once ;  but,  on  man's  part,  much 
must  often  be  done,  something  laid 
aside  or  given  up;  and  the  natural 
heart  creates  a  difficulty,  makes  itself 
an  "  adversary y  3.  The  adversaries 
will  sometimes  be  literal  human  op- 
ponents. To  enter  into,  and  possess, 
and  exhibit  the  living  enjoyment  of, 
a  larger,  broader,  brighter,  undoubt- 
ing,  victorious  Christian  life,  will 
arouse  to  scorn  or  displeasure  or 
harassing  controversy  many  average 
or  minimum  Christians,  of  whom  such 
a  life  is  by  its  inevitable  comparison 
an  implicit  condemnation.  The  Great 
Adversary  of  the  kingdom  of  God  will 
not    willingly    see,    not   only   a  soul 


escaping  into  liberty  through  ''  an 
opened  door"  but  a  soul  passing  into 
a  larger  liberty  and  fulness  of  life 
through  "  an  opened  door  "  of  oppor- 
tunity and  promise  and  hope. 

Ver.  22,  connected  with  2  Ep.  i.  20, 
viii.  9,  ix.  15,  may  be  made  the 
occasion  of  a  sermon  on  Undesigned 
Illustrations  of  '"''To  me  to  live  is 
Christ." 

I.  (2  Cor.  i.  20.)  Paul  had  not  kept 
to  the  route  announced  in  the  First 
Epistle — to  Macedonia  vid  Corinth. 
He  had  gone  by  the  direct,  shorter 
road,  vid  Troas.  The  factious  party 
seized  upon  this  change  of  route. 
Said  they  to  the  loyal  ones  :  "  See  this 
Paul  of  yours  !  What  dependence  on 
his  word  ?  He  promises  and  fails ; 
says  he  will  come  and  does  not." 
Others,  with  more  malice  :  "  He  wrote 
a  very  bold  letter,  and  was  going  to 
follow  it  up  with  a  visit ;  but  your 
valorous  apostle  dares  not  come  to 
Corinth."  This  chapter  very  largely 
his  indignant  protest,  his  defence  of 
his  character  and  conduct.  He  appeals 
to  his  conscience  whether  all  his  con- 
duct amongst  them  was  not  "  in  sim- 
plicity and  godly  sincerity."  He  calls 
the  True  God  to  witness  that  he  was 
never  amongst  them  a  *'  Yes  and  No  " 
man,  saying  and  unsaying  in  a  breath, 
affirming  one  day,  the  next  denying 
what  he  had  affirmed,  wavering  in  his 
own  mind  between  "  Yea  "  and  *'  Nay." 
If  he  had  changed  his  plan,  it  was  for 
good  and  sufficient  reasons.  But  this 
vindicating  of  himself  was  uncongenial 
work.  To  him  to  live  was  not  Paul, 
but  Christ.  His  character  as  a  man  is 
to  him  only  a  matter  of  importance  as 
it  afiected  his  character  as  a  preacher 
of  Christ's  Gospel.  Every  word  in  his 
preaching  was  "Yea."  He  was  no 
man  to  preach  doubts  or  hints  of 
doubt,  or  to  give  to  his  readers  opinions 
crudely  formed  or  loosely  held.  And 
then  his  thought  by  instinct  rises  to 
and  rests  in  his  Lord,  the  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever ;  Him- 
self the  great  Promise  and  the  great 
Ratification   of   all    promises    besides. 

377 


lioL      vMiiiii^Jy     fct'.',     i,ol    Oii,j 


ui       i^  .liiicaliuii    oil    ail    \>.>j\. 


377 


CHAP.  XVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   CORINTHIANS. 


This  grand  outburst  in  the  midst  of  all 
this  personal  vindication,  is  a  digression, 
a  parenthesis ;  but  he  cannot  help 
putting  it  in.  Self- vindication  is  irk- 
some. Christ  exaltation  is  ever  wel- 
come. A  word  of  it  relieves  him  before 
he  resumes  the  personal  talk.  To  him 
"  to  live  is  Christ." 

'*  II.  (2  Cor.  viii.  9.)  Paul  puts  the 
Corinthians  on  their  mettle,  and  tries 
to  shame  them  into  diligence.  He  has 
been  telling  all  the  Churches,  up  and 
down  :  "  Achaia  was  ready  a  year  ago." 
With  their  zeal  he  has  been  calling 
out  the  zeal  and  generosity  of  many. 
He  begs  that  they  will  not  shame  his 
boasting  when  the  Macedonian  (and 
other)  delegates  come  with  him  to 
Corinth.  Macedonia  is  a  model  to 
them,  giving  even  "  beyond  their 
power."  'Surely  Corinth  will  not  be 
behindhand.  And  with  appeals  to  such 
motives  many  would  have  stopped. 
Not  so  this  man ;  to  him  "  to  live  is 
Christ,"  and  to  him  the  motive  to  plead 
is,  "  Ye  know  the  grace,"  etc.  In  the 
next  verse  he  is  back  again  to  the 
Fund.  But  the  parenthetic  insertion 
is  significant  as  to  this  man's  habit  of 
heart.  He  gladly  escapes  away  from 
the  Fund  and  laggard  Church  bene- 
volence into  a  world  of  everlasting, 
world-concerning  truth,  and  to  his  best- 
loved  theme — his  Lord  who  became 
a  beggar  to  make  him  eternally  rich. 

III.  (2  Cor.  ix.  15.)  With  startling 
abruptness  he  breaks  out :  "  Thanks 
be  unto  God,"  etc.  The  chapter  has 
been  full  of  small  details  about  the 
Fund,  and  his  plans,  and  the  move- 
ments of  Titus.  What  has  this  out- 
burst to  do  with  the  collection  ? 
Nothing.  Everything.  He  sits  dictating 
his  letter..  In  the  pauses,  whilst  the 
writer  is  doing  his  part,  Paul's  mind 
goes  off  upon  a  well-known  path. 
Every  thought  of  this  benevolence  of 
saints  to  saints  is  pregnant  to  him 
with  suggestion  of  a  greater  bene- 
volence. He  cannot  think  of  these 
gifts  of  Church  to  Church  without  his 
thoughts  flying  off  to  the  ever-welcome 
topic,  God's  Gift  to  sinners.  There  is 
bounty !     There  is  the  root   and  the 

378 


rule  of  all  kindness  between  Christian 
and  Christian  !  And  as  the  amanuensis 
is  finishing  the  last  words  dictated, 
his  friend  and  teacher  breaks  out, 
"Thanks  be  to  God  for,"  etc.  For 
twenty  years  he  had  been  studying 
Christ  from  all  sides :  the  love  that 
did  not  spare  even  Him ;  the  grace  of 
the  Son  which  resigned  such  native 
dignity  and  glory;  the  misery,  here 
and  hereafter,  of  an  unredeemed  world  ; 
the  eternally  growing  blessing  flowing 
from  the  work  of  Christ.  The  twenty 
years  of  pondering  express  their  result 
in  one  word ;  they  are  condensed  into 
this  "  irrelevant,"  parenthetic  cry : 
"  Unspeakable  !  Unspeakable  !  God's 
unspeakable  Gift !  Thank  God  for 
Christ  ! " 

lY.  (Here  1  Cor.  xvi.  22.)  He  is 
in  Ephesus,  getting  his  letter  off.  He 
takes  pen  in  hand  to  add  the  authenti- 
cating autograph  sentence.  Usually  it 
is  a  benediction.  In  this  letter  all  sorts 
of  topics  have  been  discussed :  the  resur- 
rection and  the  collection,  the  Lord's 
Supper  and  the  women's  hair, — grand 
themes  of  eternal  importance,  and  mere 
regulations  no  longer  concerning  men 
except  in  the  underlying  principles  of 
which  they  are  particular,  passing  em- 
bodiments. And  now  the  letter  is 
finished.  What  shall  he  add  "  with  his 
own  hand  "  ?  What  he  does  add  is  :  "  If 
any  man  .  .  .  Anathema  ! "  There  is 
apparently  nothing  to  suggest  it.  But 
Christ  never  needs  "  suggesting "  to 
Paul.  To  him  "to  live  is  Christ." 
Within  him  is  a  heart  of  burning  love 
for  Christ.  The  fire  breaks  out  here 
with  eruptive  force,  but  it  is  always 
burning.  He  loves  Chiist.  Who 
would  not  ?  Not  love  Christ !  Not 
love  the  Christ  he  loves  !  "  Accursed 
be  the  man  who  does  not  love  my 
Christ  ! "  It  is  the  intolerance  of 
devoted  love.  This  spontaneous,  irre- 
levant, fierce  exclamation  is  consum- 
mate proof  that  this  man,  Paul,  has 
only  one  love,  one  thought,  one 
object  in  life.  To  him  to  live  is 
Christ,  Christ,  CHBIST  \—H.  J.  F. 
From  article  in  ^'- Homiletical  Magazins" 
Jan,  1883  (condeiised). 


II.    CORINTHIANS. 

CHAPTER   I. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Timothy. — "  Not  later  (see  1  Cor.  iv.  17)  and  perhaps  rather  earlier  than  he  wrote 
the  First  Epistle,  Paul  sent  (Acts  xix.  22)  Timothy  to  Macedonia,  with  instructions  to  go  on 
to  Corinth  if  he  could,  of  which,  however  (1  Cor.  xvi.  10),  Paul  was  uncertain.  We  now  find 
Timothy  with  Paul  in  Macedonia.  But  Paul's  anxiety  (ii.  13,  vii.  5)  makes  us  quite  certain 
that,  before  his  own  arrival  in  Macedonia  and  his  meeting  with  Titus,  Timothy  had  not 
brought  him  tidings  about  the  reception  of  the  First  Epistle  by  the  Church  at  Corinth.  Now 
the  warmth  of  the  Second  Epistle  suggests  that  it  was  written  very  soon  after  the  arrival  of 
Titus ;  and  its  silence  about  the  coming  of  Timothy  makes  it  unlikely  that  he  arrived  from 
Corinth  with  Titus  or  between  the  arrival  of  Titus  and  the  writing  of  this  letter.  Conse- 
quently, either,  contrary  to  Paul's  expectation,  Timothy  arrived  at  and  left  Corinth  before 
the  First  Epistle,  or  he  was,  for  reasons  unknown  to  us  but  easily  conceivable,  unable  to  go 
there.  In  either  case,  we  have  no  certain  indication  whether  Timothy  Remained  in  Mace- 
donia till  Paul's  arrival,  or  returned  to  Paul  before  he  left  Ephesus,  was  with  him  there 
during  the  tumult,  and  went  with  him  to  Troas  and  to  Macedonia.  But  this  latter  suppo- 
sition  would  more  easily  account  for  the  absence  (except  i,  19)  of  any  further  reference  to 
Timothy  in  this  Epistle.  Doubtless  he  was  with  Paul  when  Titus  arrived.  And  his  close  con- 
nection with  the  founding  of  the  Church  at  Corinth  (i.  19  ;  Acts  xviii.  5)  accounts  sufficiently 
for  the  presence  of  bis  name  here,  supporting  the  Apostle's  earnest  pleading."  (Beet.)  Notice 
margin,  "  the  hr others  Achaia. — Not  the  whole  Roman  province,  but  the  smaller,  classical 
Achaia.  Of  the  former,  not  Stephanas  (1  Cor  xvi.  15),  but  Dionysius  and  Damaris  and 
others  (Acts  xvii.  34)  were  the  "  firstfruits."  Notice  the  evidence  of  a  widespread  work 
beyond  Corinth  (cf.  1  Thess.  i.  7,  8). 

Ver.  3. — John  calls  the  Son  a  ".Comforter"  (1  John  ii.  1).  .Christ  calls  the  Spirit  a  "Com- 
forter "  (John  xiv.  16, "  another  "  also  implying  that  He  Himself  had  been  such  to  the  disciples). 
Here  Paul  calls  the  Father  a  "  Comforter.''  Notice  how  "  comfort "  runs  through  vers.  3-7 
(disguised  as  "  consolation  "  in  A.  V.)  ;  parallel  to  the  repeated  "  affliction  "  (same  in  original  as 
"  tribulation,'"  "  trouble  ").     Mercies.— Also  Rom.  xii.  1 ;  Phil.  ii.  1 ;  Col.  iii.  12 ;  Heb.  x.  28. 

Ver.  5. — Notice  the  contrasted  "  o/"  and  "  throi/gh."  As  to  "  q/","  see  iv.  10;  Heb.  xiii.  13  ; 
Phil.  iii.  10 ;  Col.  i.  24  ;  Mark  x.  38  ;  (Matt.  x.  40  ;  Acts  ix.  4).  (Also  Homily  on  1  Cor.  xii.  27.) 
Notice  "  U7ito  us,"  not  "  i»  "  ;  external  trouble  mainly. 

Ver.  6. — Then  Paul  is  no  such  masterful,  self-seeking,  worthless  man  as  some  at  Corinth 
would  represent  (cf.  ver.  24).  His  **  afflictions  "  as  well  as  the  "  comfort "  are  (not  strictly 
"  vicarious^'  but)  directly,  and  in  the  intention  of  God,  for  the  Corinthians'  sake, — '*  on  behalf 
of  your,''  etc.  Is  effectual. — I.e.  the  "  comfort "  works  out  with  practi^^al  efEect  in  .  .  . 
(^patient)  enduring.  — Good  expository  use  and  example  of  the  word,  and  the  thing, 
*^ patience "  as  exhibited  in  New  Testament ;  there  being  always,  and  here,  an  element 
of  fortitude  in  the  patience. 

Ver.  7.  Stedfast,  knowing,  etc. — Q.d.  **I  speak  hopefully,  as  a  man  who  has  tried  it,  and 
who  knows  what  to  expect  for  you." 

Ver.  8. — No  certainty  as  to  the  "  a^ictio?i "  referred  to,  whether  some  outward  persecution 
at  Ephesus  (query  at  Ephesus  at  all  ?)  known  to  his  readers  (query  that  of  Rom.  xvi.  4  ;  cf. 
1  Cor.  xvi.  9)  ("  brethren  "),  or  such  acute  distress  about  the  state  of  things  at  Corinth  as 
nearly  killed  him,  and  at  any  rate  utterly  broke  down  his  health  and  threatened  to  interrupt 
his  work.  [How  little  the  Acts  tell  of  the  life  of  Paul  ;  cf.  chaps,  iv.,  xi.,  vii.  5.]  Notice 
R.V.,  ^'■roere  roeighed  down  exceedingly,'''  closely  parallel  to  the  original  of  iv.  17. 

Ver.  9. — Little  to  choose  between  *  answer  "  and  "  sentence'^  [In  A.V.  and  R.V.  text  and 
margin  change  places.]  "We  ask  ourselves  'Shall  this  end  in  life  or  in  death?'  Our 
*  answer,'  our  *  sentence '  upon  ourselves,  is  *  Death.' "  "  If  we  live,  it  will  be  a  real  resurrect' 
Hon  by  the  power  of  God."    Cf.  "  I  die  daily  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  31). 

379 


CHAP.  I.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  10. — Notice  in  R.V.,  '■'mill  ^eZ/wr,"  variant  reading  ioi'^doth  deliver."  If  this  be 
accepted,  then  the  latter  clause  only  reiterates  "  will  "  with  an  expression  of  strong  *'  hope." 
The  nature  of  the  ^'deliverance"  is  as  uncertain  to  us  as  is  that  of  the  peril.  ''From  "  is 
almost,  "  out  of  the  hand  of." 

Ver.  11. — Cf.  for  the  thought  Phil.  i.  19.  See  the  Corinthians  working  with  and  for 
Paul.  Gift. — I.e.  the  "  deliverance  "  primarily,  but  not  excluding  the  *'  comfort,''  or  the 
"  trust "  (ver.  9),  which  had  sustained  him  until  deliverance  came  ;  and  all  is  "  grace"  a  real 
*'  chartsm.''  Persons. — Perhaps  too  technical  a  translation  of  what  literally  means  ''faces-  "  ; 
as  if  we  saw  a  whole  company  with  uplifted  eyes  and  hands,  and  upturned  faces,  interceding 
for  Paul.     Also  iv.  15,  ix.  12  are  parallel  in  thought. 

Ver.  12.  Rejoicing. — R.V.  stronger  and  more  correct.  Cognate  word  in  Rom.  v.  2,  3,  11, 
where  notice  tiie  varying  translation  ;  an  exultant,  sometimes  defiantly  exultant,  joy.  The 
"rejoicing"  looks  not  backward  to  ver.  17,  but  forward  to  the  "testimony"  etc.,  which 
occasions  it.  For. —  Q.d.  "You  will  thus  pray,  and  give  thanks,  for  us;  we  are  not  yet 
estranged  ;  I  have  done,  so  far  as  I  know,  nothing  on  my  part  to  estrange  us."  Notice 
"holiness"  by  a  better  reading ;  and  " sincerity  of  God,"  by  a  more  literal  translation;  i.e. 
no  sincerity  of  any  innate  goodness  of  character,  but  such  sincerity  as  is  the  gift  and  work 
"of  God."  "  Unfolded,  oj?en,  patent  motive;  pure  and  holy  simplicity  of  motive;  trans- 
parent  sincerity  of  motive,"  the  three  illustrations.  Fleshly. — See  1  Cor.  iii.  1,  where,  how- 
ever, the  reading  is  discredited.  In  .  .  .  in. — For  "  with  "  and  "  hy  " ;  by  a  more  exact 
translation  and  exposition  of  Paul's  thought  of  the  contrasted  life  elements  in  which  con- 
duct might  be  rooted,  and  from  which  it  might  derive  its  inspirations  and  strength.  Conver- 
sation.— In  the  wide  sense  of  "  conduct "  ;  "  If  we  so  bore  ourselves  to  any  Church,  much  more 
did  we  to  you  at  Corinth,  although  we  be  so  misunderstood  and  misrepresented  amongst 
you." 

Ver.  13. — "  There  is  no  double  sense,  no  under-thought,  no  arriere  pensee^  in  either  what  I 
write,  or  what  you  read  in  the  words.  What  you  yourselves  know  or  by  my  letters  and 
speech  may  know,  of  the  writer ; — that  is  all." 

Ver.  14.  Glorying. — I.e.  the  matter  of  "glorying";  in  ver.  12,  the  act.  "You  were 
once  proud  of  us,  as  you  knew  us;  at  least,  'part'  of  you  were;  you  will  have  as  good 
reason  to  be  proud  of  us,  to  the  end,  I  hope  [cf.  1  Cor.  xiii.  12]  ;  we  were  your  boast,  as  you 
are  ours."  No  insincerity  in  such  words  of  praise.  They  were  true,  and  tliere  was  good 
reason  that  they  should  be  true. 

Vers.  15,  16.  In  this  confidence. — "  I  had  no  reason  to  fear  to  come,  as  some  fancy  and 
allege,  when  I  changed  my  plan."  The  change  of  plan  referred  to  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  6,  7. 
"Before"  going  to  Macedonia,  instead  of  to  Corinth  via  Macedonia.  In  his  original  plan 
he  bad  intended  to  return  to  Corinth  from  Macedonia,  tbus  giving  them  a  "  second''  visit,  a 
"second  grace"  Q'hcnejit").  As  a  fact,  therefore,  they  had  what  was  to  have  been  the 
"  second"  without  having  had  the  "  first."  The  "journey  to  Judcea  "  was  in  Paul's  mind 
in  Acts  xix,  21,  and,  in  spite  of  the  passing  uncertainty  mentioned  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  6,  it  was 
accomplished,  Acts  xxi.  ]5. 

Ver.  17.  Flesh.— Cf.  "fleshly  wisdom"  ver.  12.  "Was  I  a  *  Yes  '  and 'No  '  man  ?  Not 
knowing  my  own  mind,  or  not  keeping  to  my  decisions,  when  I  thought  I  did  know  it." 

Ver.  18. — The  personal  matter  is  of  importance,  because  the  character  of  the  messenger 
may  involve  that  of  the  message.     "  It  was  not  a  •  Yes  '  and  '  No  '  Gospel." 

Ver.  19. — Observe  the  accumulated  names  of  Christ.  No  "  Yes  "  and  "  No  "  Christ  either  ! 
(Cf.  xi.  10.)  Silvanus.— The  ♦♦  Silas  "  of  the  Acts.  Trace  him  in  Acts  xv.  22,  27,  32,  34,  40, 
xvi.  19,  25,  etc.,  xvii.  4,  10,  14,  xviii,  5.  (Cf.  1  Thess  i.  1 ;  2  Thess.  i.  1.)  Then  he  suddenly 
disappears  from  the  Acts  and  Epistles,  unless  he  be  intended  in  1  Pet.  v.  12. 

Ver.  20. — See  Separate  Homily.  R.V.  gives  well  the  corrected  readings  here  and  exact 
translation.     Through  us.— By  whose  instrumentality  all  this  is  proclaimed  to  men. 

Ver.  21. — Notice  the  margin  "into"  for  "  i7i  Christ."  The  process  of  uniting  which  ends 
in  union  with,  and  life  "  in,  Christ  "  is  made  prominent  and,  so  to  speak,  visible.  Cf .  Eph. 
i.  13,  14.  Prefer  the  text  of  A.V.  and  R.V.  to  the  margin  of  the  R.V.  These  are  not,  even 
in  the  order  of  thinking,  respectively  antecedent  and  consequent  blessings,  but  one  blessing, 
one  gift  of  the  Spirit,  under  two  aspects. 

Ver.  23. — Chap.  ii.  should  begin  here;  no  break  after  ver.  24.  Notice  that  the  principle 
of  a  judicial  oath  is  here,  as  in  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64  ;  as  bearing  upon  Matt.  v.  34,  Notice 
"  witness  "  for  '^record"  in  R.V.  To  spare  you. —  Q.d.  the  penalties  he  must  have  inflicted  if 
he  had  come  and  been  witness  of  their  flagrant  offences  against  Church  order  and  even 
morality.  What  an  implied  power  lies  behind  this  restraint !  (1  Cor.  iv.  21).  So  he  felt,  and 
hastens  to  guard  this  claim  to  authority  and  to  power  to  punish,  against  misconception 
and  misrepresentation. 

Ver.  24.  Dominion. — For  the  (original)  word,  cf.  1  Pet.  v.  2,  and  for  the  thought 
Mark  x.  42.  Faith. —  Q.d.  the  personal  life  of  which  faith  is  the  characteristic  (they  ara 
believers  if  they  are  Christians  at  all),  and  the  great  foundation   secret.     No  question 

380 


oou 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  i. 


of  their  "  creed "  here.  Not  "  lords "  over,  but  "  helpers "  with,  that  their  life  might  be 
made  bright  with  '■'^oy "  (an  object  worth  aiming  at  in  itself).  By  faith  ye  stand. — Not, 
as  used  here,  a  general  maxim,  one  of  the  axioms  of  the  Gospel,  but  a  statement  of  fact  in 
regard  to  the  Corinthian&.  I.e.  the  emphasis  is  not  upon  '•^ faith,''  but  upon  ^^ stand  " ;  not, 
"It  is  by  faith  that  you  win  and  keep  your  status,"  but,  "Imperfect  as  you  are,  yet  you 
are  still  so  far  believers  that  you  do  keep  your  standing  in  Christ."  Q.d.  (also)  "  We  cannot 
overthrow  you  ;  you  overthrow  yourselves,  if  ye  be  overthrown  at  all." 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1,  2. 

[This  Salutation  traverses  much  the  same  ground  as  that  of  1  Cor.  i.  1-3, 
which  see.     Dr.  Lyth's  collection  of  Homiletic  Suggestions  gives :] 
Vers.  1,  2.  The  Happiness  of  the  Church. 

I.  Its  ministers  are  messengers  of  Christ ;  are  chosen  by  God ;  are  diversely 
gifted  as  Paul  and  Timothy.  [The  twelve  in  the  ship  (Mark  vi.  45-50)  were  the 
Church  in  germ,  and  in  miniature.  "  The  ship  carried  "  the  Church  "  and  its 
fortunes."  The  diversity  of  the  twelve  men,  all  apostles,  was  anticipatory  and 
typical.  No  type  of  character,  no  diversity,  or  capacity,  or  education,  etc.,  comes 
amiss  to  the  hand  of  the  Great  Builder.  Every  style  of  man  may  be  an  instru- 
ment with  which  He  can  build  something,  if  only  the  man  be  willing  simply 
to  be  used.] 

II.  Its  constitution  is  Divine  ;  holy;  catholic  ["  with  all  the  saints,"  etc.]. 

III.  Its  wealth  of  privilege. — Rich  in  its  variety  ["  grace  and  peace"?].  Diviny 
in  its  communication.  Inexhaustible  in  its  supply.  [Such  a  source  cannot 
"  run  dry."     "All  my  fresh  springs  are  in  Thee"  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  7).] 

Also : — 

Ver.  1.  The  Christian  Ministry  is — 

I.  Ordained  by  the  will  of  God  \i.e.  not  only  the  "  order  of  the  ministry,"  but 
the  man,  Paul  or  other]. 

II.  United  by  bonds  of  brotherhood. — [Pares  all,  though  there  be  a  primus]. 

III.  Devoted  to  the  service  of  the  Church — [I.e.  the  greeting  "  unto  the 
Church  "  is  typical  of  Paul's  whole  relation  to  the  Corinthians.  The  ministry 
is  not  the  Church.  It  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  Church.  It  exists  to  bring 
"  grace  and  peace  "  to  the  Church.  If  it  do  not,  its  raison  d'etre  is  gone.  If  a 
minister  do  not,  his  raison  d'etre  is  gone.] 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  3—7. 

Great  Theme  :  Comfort  and  Affliction. 

1.  Two  counterpart  facts  of  life. — 1.  It  is  a  world  of  "  affliction"  but  over 
it  there  rules  a  God  of  "  comfort."  This  pair  of  facts  is  but  a  special  form  of 
another  pair :  "  sin,"  "  grace."  Directly  or  indirectly,  affliction  springs  from 
sin ;  not  necessarily  a  man's  personal  sin,  but  from  the  presence  of  evil  in  the 
world.  The  Bible  traces  "  evil,"  the  manifest  and  painful  disorder  which  has 
affected  that  which  was  as  manifestly  meant  to  be  God's  beneficent  scheme  of 
things,  to  the  intrusion  of  moral  evil ;  and  in  parallel  fashion,  there  is  no 
"  com/br^ "  which,  directly  or  indirectly,  is  not  ^' grace  " — it  ^^  abounds  through 
Christ,"  just  as  the  "  affliction  "  is  but  a  lower  result  of  the  moral  evil  whose 
climax  was  reached  in  ^^  the  sufferings  of  Christ," — part  of  that  work  of  God  in 
Christ  whose  aim  and  goal  is  a  "  restitution  of  all  things  "  (Acts  iii.   21). 

2.  Accordingly  "  comfort "  is  very  m^uch  more  than  a  palliative  ;  it  is  the  beginning 
of  a  cwre. — ^^ All  comfort"  is  thoroughly  in  Paul's  manner.  It  means  "all 
forms  and  kinds  and  aspects  of  comfort,"  reminding  us  of  the  manysidedness  of 
the  grace.  Such  "  comfort  "  as  God  gives  is  not  merely  an  anodyne  for  a  smart ; 
nor  only  a  balm  for  a  wound,  a  solace  for  sorrow,  rest  for  weariness ;  not  words  of 
reassurance  for  fear  and  for  distressful  thoughts.    It  is  a  mother  folding  her  crying 

381 


CHAP.  I.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    IL    CORINTHIANS. 


babe  to  her  bosom  (Isa.  Ixvi.  13);  but  it  is  more.  It  is  not  merely  tender  help  ;  it 
is  strong  help.  It  gives  not  only  relief  and  ease  ;  it  gives  strength.  It  is  not  only 
that  the  young  one  flies  to  the  mother's  wing  for  shelter  and  cowers  away 
under  it,  almost  as  full  of  ft  ars  there  as  it  was  when  outside.  It  is  the  weak 
man  taking  his  stand  boldly  bj  the  side  of  the  friend  who  has  come  to  his  help 
in  answer  to  his  call,  and  in  the  company  of  his  strong  helper  finding  himself 
strong  to  fight  and  do.  Not  merely  pitying,  sympathetic  words  which  give  solace 
under  crushing  burdens,  so  that  the  spirit  is  not  crushed,  though  the  strength 
may  be  overborne  (vii.  6  ;  Phil.  ii.  27) ;  but  new  strength  given,  and  help  which 
takes  hold  of  the  burden  or  the  cross  along  with  us  at  the  opposite  end  [see  this, 
perhaps,  in  the  work  of  the  "  Comforter  "  in  the  original  word  of  Eom.  viii.  26], 
so  that  we  carry  better  the  load  of  affliction.  And,  which  comes  still  nearer  to 
the  root  purpose  of  all  God's  comfort,  the  "  Comforter  "  gives,  a  transformed  view 
of,  and  meaning  to,  all  ^^  affliction  "  till  at  last  we  *'  rejoice  (exultantly)  in  tribu- 
lations [same  word  as  afflictions  here]  also  '*"  (Eom.  v.  3).  Thus  we  are  not 
simply  conquerors,  but  "  more  than  conquerors,"  of  all  the  *'  affliction  "  of  life  ; 
we  have  not  simply  escaped,  nor  escaped  unharmed,  nor  even  come  ofi*  with 
victory,  but  have  been  served  by  all  that  came  against  us  to  hinder  or  overwhelm ; 
and  this  is  the  beginning  of  a  reconstitution  of  the  broken  order,  so  that  all  things 
once  more  serve  man,  their  designated  king  (Heb.  ii.  7,  8).  HapaKX-rjo-is  in  its 
fullest  range  covers  no  less  than  this.  Strength  must  never  be  omitted  from 
our  conception  and  our  expectation  of  it.  But,  no  doubt,  through  this  section 
the  tenderness  is  very  prominent,  and  it  should  never  be  forgotten  in  our  con- 
ception of  God. 

II.  The  Divine  source  of  comfort. — 1.  Pointed  out  in  the  Critical  Notes  that  here, 
and  here  only,  the  Father  is  made  a  Paraclete,  a  Comforter.  As  how  should  He  not 
be,  seeing  that  He  is  "  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  ?  I.e.  as  we  know  Him 
He  is  the  God,  the  very  thought  of  Whom  is  inseparably  bound  up  with  that  of 
His  love  in  the  gift  of  Christ.  We  never  think  of  Calvary  but  we  think  of 
Him  Whose  love  gave  us  that  Saviour ;  we  never  think  of  that  Mercy  but  our 
quick  heart-instinct  traces  all  up  to  God.  Our  helper  in  *'  afflictions  "  is,  then, 
the  God  Who  is  the  sworn  enemy  of  Sin,  Who  therefore  gives  a  gracious  help 
for  what  is  fundamentally  a  moral  evil.  He  comforts,  as  part  of  the  work  He 
set  Himself  to  accomplish  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

2.  So  His  other  names  here  describe  Him  as  well  as  indicate  Him. — All  the  names 
of  God  do  so.  They  are  in  detail  that  "  Name  "  of  God  which  His  people  know, 
and  trust  in  Him  accordingly  (Ps.  ix.  10).  Each  several  name  is  given  according 
to  the  special  phase  of  His  one  work  of  grace  which  may  happen  to  be  prominent. 
Manifestly  the  name  is  not  here  chosen  at  haphazard,  or  even  for  its  beauty 
["  a  nice  name  to  use "],  but  is  appropriate.  He  has  always  an  appropriate 
*'  name  "  for  every  need  of  our  life.  He  is  "  the  Father,^  Whose  unfailing  cha- 
racteristic is  so  surely  to  be  merciful,  that  mercies  must  spring  from  His  heart  in 
Christ  toward  us.  [What  men  may  find  Him  apart  from  Christ  and  redemption 
grace,  is  another  matter  altogether.]  [Cf.  "root  of  bitterness  "  (Heb.  xii.  15), 
which  is  more  than  "  a  bitter  root."  A  bitter  root  might  bring  forth  pleasant 
fruit  or  flowers.  A  "  root  of  bitterness  "  can  bear  nothing  but  bitterness.  So] 
a  "  God  of  comfort  "  or  "a  Father  of  mercies "  is  much  more  than  a  Father 
Who  is  merciful,  or  a  God  Who  is  merciful,  or  a  God  Who  actually  comforts.  It 
is  a  God,  a  Father,  Who,  as  we  know  Him  in  connection  with  the  "  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  cannot  be  conceived  of  in  any  contrary  association  of  ideas.  As  is  His 
name,  so  is  He. 

3.  What  a  plea  then  is  "For  Thy  Name's  sake  "! — If  He  were  to  deny  His 
*'  comfort "  to  an  "  afflicted  "  soul.  He  would  give  the  lie  to  His  very  Name.  There 
is  a  promise  in  such  a  name  as  this  which  He  has  put  into  Paul's  lips,  for  the 

332 


ROM  [LET IC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  i. 


use  of  the  whole  Church.  The  man  who  in  his  need  calls  to  his  help  the  "  God 
of  all  TrapaKXT^o-ts,"  may  take  his  stand  on  the  very  name  he  invokes.  He  has 
there  a  hold,  so  to  say,  upon  God. 

III.  The  end  of  all  comfort. — 1.  The  immediate  purpose  was  no  doubt  the 
help  of  Paul  himself.  One  man  is  worth  God's  helping  ;  not  only  a  man  '*  of 
so  much  importance  "  to  the  world  as  Paul,  *'  so  necessary  "  to  the  work  of  Christ, 
but  every  man  for  whom  Christ  "  thought  it  worth  while  "  to  die.  "  Through 
Christ"  the  Christ  Who  is  that  man's  Christ  as  truly  as  He  belongs  to  any  other, 
that  humblest,  poorest,  most  obscure  man  may  expect  the  ** comfort"  and  that 
^^  abounding."  2.  But  very  characteristic  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  St.  Paul 
that  he  rather  fastens  attention  upon  the  service  which  both  bis  trials  and  his 
strength  did  to  the  Corinthians  and  to  all  believers.  "  We  live  for  you  "  (iv.  15, 
V.  12,  13);  "we  suffer  affliction  for  your  sake;  we  are  comforted  for  your 
benefit."  The  word  ^^  vicarious"  has  acquired  a  special  application  in  the 
vocabulary  both  of  formal  theology  and  of  the  experimental  life.  It  would  be 
using  words  to  confuse  thought,  therefore,  to  speak  of  Paul's  sufferings  or 
comfort  as  vicarious.  It  would  be  apt  to  set  up  the  idea  of  a  parallel  or  a 
community  where  "  the  sufferings  of  Christ  "  are  unique.  His  are  all  that  Paul's 
are  here.  But  Paul's  sufferings  stop  short  of  being  all  that  His  were  for  the 
Corinthians.  The  suggestion  of  the  very  conception  of  such  a  parallelism  fills 
Paul  with  horror  (1  Cor.  i.  12).  With  that  reservation,  note  how  a  Christian 
is  partaker  with  Christ,  in  that  what  he  suffers,  and  the  help  he  gets,  may  benefit 
— and  are  taken  up  into  the  many-sided  purpose  of  God's  government  "  that " 
they  may  benefit — others  who  are  under  tribulation.  3.  The  martyrdoms  of  the 
Church's  history  have  not  been  waste  of  life,  even  when  some  of  the  choicest  of 
its  men  and  women  have  gone  to  death.  "  Take,  brethren,  for  an  example  of 
suffering  and  of  patience,"  etc.  (Jas.  v.  10).  Their  comfort  "  is  effectual"  in 
that  they  who  behold  them  suffer  and  triumph  are  able  in  their  turn  to  endure 
and  go  through  with  the  Hke  sufferings.  Every  sick  saint,  perhaps  for  years  a 
sufferer,  helpless, — "  useless,"  such  are  tempted  to  say, — has  a  distinct  field  of 
service  open  in  that  he  is  made  the  concrete  example,  the  specimen  case, 
by  which  God  teaches  those  who  wait  upon,  or  who  in  any  way  come  into 
contact  with,  the  sufferer,  how  true  and  how  real  is  the  ^^  comfort  "  of  which  the 
promises  stand  written  in  the  Word  (ver.  20),  and  are  pledged  in  the  very  gift  of 
Christ.  The  careless,  the  young,  the  incredulous,  who  dismiss  preaching  as 
"  professional,"  or  at  best  as  a  beautiful  but  very  chimerical  idea,  the  fearful 
though  believing  Christian, — these  all  see  and  believe  what  they  would  not  hear 
and  expect  for  themselves.  An  afflicted  sufferer,  full  of  the  "  comfort"  is  a  Fact. 
Many  turn  away  from  a  sick-room  with  a  firmer  belief  in  the  supernatural,  and 
Divine,  and  gracious ;  with  a  settled  expectation  that  they  also,  after  all,  shall 
find  sufficient  "  comfort."  Without  a  word  being  spoken,  the  sufferer  is  a  sermon, 
a  message,  a  revelation,  a  gospel,  to  many  a  visitor.  If  words  are  spoken,  with 
what  force  do  they  come !  That  sufferer  is  an  expert.  He  speaks  out  of  the 
fulness  of  knowledge.  You  may  silence  an  advocate,  but  can  do  nothing  against 
a  witness.  Hov)  a  preacher  understands  Paul's  logic  in  ver.  4.  With  such 
specimen  *'  cases "  in  his  mental  note-book,  he  pronounces,  he  preaches,  he 
exhorts,  he  encourages,  he  pledges  "  the  God  of  comfort "  to  the  afflicted  soul, 
with  the  assurance  of  the  experienced  physician  who  has  in  his  own  profession 
studied  a  variety  of  cases,  of  many  types,  ages,  conditions.  He  speaks  no  theories 
merely,  but  verified  truth.  And  if  he  too  has  been  the  subject  upon  whom  the 
Great  Teacher  has  been  pleased  to  make  His  experiment,  by  him  to  teach  the 
students  of  God's  ways  gathered  round  his  sick-bed,  with  what  power  does  he 
afterwards,  in  his  pulpit,  or  in  his  pastoral  round,  "  comfort  others  with  the 
comfort  wherewith"  etc.     Kone  can  speak  with  such  prevalent  authority.     At 

383 


CHAP.  I.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


least,  God  can  make  noblest  use  of,  men  listen  most  readily  to,  the  man  who 
"  knows."  It  is  worth  the  affliction,  to  be  able  to  stand  by  another  afflicted  soul 
and  bring  one's  comfort  to  the  help  of  his  burdened  strength  or  failing  faith. 
Thus  God  designs  to  make  men  "comforters"  of  men. 

IV.  Hope  springing  from  "comfort"  in  " affliction."— [The  R.Y.,  supplying 
"are"  instead  of  the  ''^ shall  ye  be"  of  the  A.V.,  leaves  the  object  of  Paul's  hope 
unexpressed,  and  more  than  a  little  uncertain.  Still,  it  may  perhaps  be 
taken  as  a  hope  of  their  safe  and  victorious  passage  through  the  afflictions 
just  then  pressing  upon  them.  The  difference  between  the  A.V.  and  the 
II.V.  will  simply  be  that  in  the  A.Y.  this  is  expressed,  and  the  ground  of  his 
hope  is  his  own  experience ;  whereas  in  the  R.V.  it  is  left  unexpressed,  and 
the  ground  of  his  hope  is  what  he  knows  to  be  actually  theii^  experience.  In 
either  case  the  general  principle  of  the  argument  remains  the  same.  In  the  words 
of  Horn.  V.  3  sqq.,  "experience  works  hope."]  1.  A  Christian's  ^^ hope"  is  a 
very  much  stronger  thing  than  sometimes  expresses  itself  in  the  very  equivocal 
phrase,  "  /  hope  so  "  ;  very  much  more  than  an  earnest  wish,  a  longing  glance  of 
desire,  with  perhaps  a  half -expectation.  "  Hope  is  everywhere  in  Scripture  the 
inspiring  grace  of  the  great  conflict,  being  both  passive  and  active.  It  is  a  grace 
that,  like  Patience,  has  many  aspects.  The  word  itself  has  a  wide  range  of 
meanings.  .  .  .  Hope  is  one  of  the  theological  graces,  with  Faith  and  Charity, 
being  a  blessed  combination  of  the  two  others.  It  is  Faith  looking  only  to  the 
future^  hut  looking  at  it  with  the  expectation  of  love"  (Pope,  Compendium^  iii. 
214 ;  who  also  says,  p.  118  :)  "  As  it  regards  the  future  faith  is  hope;  its  confi- 
dence somewhat  changes  its  character.  Absolute  confidence  as  to  the  present, 
it  may  increase  as  it  regards  the  future.  ...  It  becomes,  indeed,  the  full 
assurance  of  hope ;  a  subtle  and  most  beautiful  expression  that  only  experience 
can  comprehend  ;  the  substantiation  of  things  hoped  for."  If  faith  gives  strength 
to  expectation,  hope  gives  elasticity.  Faith  upholds  under  pressure  or  in  face 
of  conflict ;  hope  gives  buoyancy  of  spirit,  which  itself  is  a  strength.  2.  Paul 
reminds  us  that  its  "  stedfastTiess  "  is  no  mere  half -enthusiastic  persuasion  up  to 
which  men  "  work  themselves"  until  they  come  to  believe  certain  what  they 
strongly  desire.  It  is  a  m^ost  reasonable  inference  from  facts.  It  rests  (1)  upon 
the  character  of  God,  "  His  Name,"  and  (2)  on  the  accumulated  facts  of  the  past. 
It  says:  "Because  of  what  we  know  in  our  own  life,  and  have  passed  through 
[A.V.],  and  because  of  what  we  see  and  know  in  your  life  [P.V.],  we  have  no  doubt 
as  to  the  future.  What  has  been  will  be.  *  The  God  of  all  comfort '  has  never 
yet  suffered  '  affliction '  to  arrive  unaccompanied.  These  facts  of  life  '  hunt  in 
couples.'  If  '  affliction '  is  near,  comfort  is  not  far  away.  Look  for  it ;  lift  up 
head  and  heart,  and  look  around  for  it ;  you  will  surely  see  it  drawing  nigh. 
You  are  not  going  to  be  left  to  be  overwhelmed.  We  know  the  past  too  well  ! 
And  we  know  Him  too  well !  "  "  Stedfast  !  "  3.  No  surer  sign  that  this  "  hope  " 
is  not  nature  but  grace  than  this,  that  after  long  years  of  "  comfort  "  the  heart 
so  readily  sinks  under  the  newest  pressure  or  in  presence  of  the  latest  tribulation. 
Naturally,  the  Christian  heart  has  perpetually  to  begin  again  with  its  lesson, 
and  after  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  deliverances  quakes  and  fails  at  the 
thousandth  trial.  In  fairness  to  the  accumulated  "  proof "  (Rom.  v.  3)  of 
our  God  through  many  years  of  "experience"  and  "experiment" — indeed,  in 
fairness  to  Him — accumulating  experience  should  work  accumulating  hope,  till 
at  last  the  Christian  man  "  exults  in  tribulations  also,  knowing  that,"  etc.  But 
it  is  not  often  so.  The  heart  argues  with  itself  that  such  growing  confidence 
is  very  logical,  and  condemns  itself  for  doubting  and  fearing  where  it  ought  to 
hope  and  believe.  But  logic  is  powerless.  The  strength  of  hope  is  a  gift,  a 
grace,  a  Divine  thing,  not  natural — the  grace  of  the  "  God  of  hope  "  (Bom.  xv.  13). 

384 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  I. 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.—Verses  8—11. 

Death  and  Deliverance. 

I.  Unrecorded  dangers. — 1.  WJiat  a  glimpse  of  the  life  of  Paul  is  given  here. 
The  Acts  gives  no  "  Life  of  St.  Paul."  It  is  a  chapter  in  the  history  of  the 
growing  "  kingdom  of  God  "  ;  the  things  which  Jesus  went  on  to  do  and  to  teach 
ajter  He  was  taken  up.  [But  this  lays  precarious  emphasis  on  "  began " 
(Acts  i.  1).]  Paul,  like  Peter,  is  introduced,  and  dismissed,  just  when,  and  just 
so  far  as,  the  exigencies  of  that  history  demand.  The  whole  story  of  the 
revelation  and  the  historic  evolution  of  the  Kingdom  is,  in  Old  Testament  and 
New  Testament,  written  historically,  and  very  largely  biogi  aphically .  But  the 
men  are  secondary,  the  kingdom  is  first.  2.  What  adequate  motive  other  than 
devotion  to  a  Christ  for  the  actuality  of  Whose  life  Paul  had  abundant  evidence, 
would  have  carried  him  through  so  much  ?  What  he  had  surrendered  is 
well  known.  What  he  gained  in  exchange  he  is  now,  and  will  eternally  be, 
learning  in  the  presence  of  his  Christ.  But  the  immediate  return  for  the 
exchange  was  to  be  "  in  deaths  oft,"  as  the  climax  of  all  other  hardships.  Yet 
through  how  much  the  love  of  Christ  will  carry  a  man  !  For  wealth,  or  honour, 
or  from  fear  of  disgrace,  men  will  do  great  things  and  will  dare  deaths.  But  to 
live  a  life  of  perpetual,  "  killing  "  hardship  and  peril,  of  obloquy  and  ignominy,  of 
privation,  of  thankless  and  un thanked  labour, — a  "  far  more  exceeding  weight  " 
of  work  and  self-denial  and  shame  and  danger, — the  only  price  with  which  to 
purchase  such  devotion  is  this :  "  The  love  of  Christ  constiaineth  me."  3.  The 
unrecorded  martyrdoms,  the  unrecorded  heroisms,  of  the  Church  are  suggested. 
There  are  martyrdoms  of  daily  life  [''  I  die  daily  "]  in  the  workshop,  where  one 
man  has,  with  all  wisdom  and  beauty  of  life,  for  years  stood  out  a  v^tness 
for,  and  a  servant  of,  Christ ;  in  the  schoolroom  and  dormitory, — and  there  are  no 
ingenuities  of  persecution  and  torture  greater,  in  their  proportion,  than  those 
devised  by  schoolboys  and  schoolgirls  for  a  Christian  confessor  in  their  midst ; 
at  the  table,  where  for  years  the  husband  has  never  broken  a  sullen  silence 
towards  his  faithful  wife  except  to  complain,  or  sneer,  or  stab  with  keen  words, 
because,  and  only  because,  she  is  a  Christian  ;  and  the  like.  It  is  heroic,  and  has 
stirred  the  heart  of  the  very  persecutor,  to  see  men,  or  even  tender  women,  go  to 
the  stake,  with  a  song  or  a  least  a  cheerful  word,  and  stand  quietly  until  the 
spirit  escaped  away,  as  in  a  chariot  of  fire,  out  of  the  midst  of  the  flames  which 
leaped  up  after  it  like  disappointed  hounds  baulked  of  their  prey.  But  the  daily 
burden  that  presses  *'  out  of  measure "  until  the  most  cheerful  begin  to  say, 
*'  This  will  kill  me  "  ;  the  daily  racking  which  tortures  all  that  is  finest  and  most 
sensitive  in  the  nature ;  the  daily  danger  which  is  faced  in  perilous  mission- 
fields  or  in  unhealthy  city  slums,  as  for  Christ's  sake  men  and  women  go  quietly 
forth  morning  after  morning  to  the  daily  round, — this  is  carried,  or  borne,  or  done, 
without  much  comment,  without  indeed  much  notice.  But  One  Heart  knows  it 
and  rejoices  in  it.  There  is  romance  enough,  heroism  enough,  martyrdom 
enough,  in  many  quiet  lives  to  kindle  the  enthusiasm  of  a  Church  or  of  a  world, 
if  it  could  only  be  known  and  read  and  written  as  He  knows  it,  for  Whom  it 
is  undertaken  and  faced  and  wrought.  4.  He  has  a  record  where  nothing  is 
unwritten,  nothing  unrecorded ;  down  to  the  last  detail  all  is  "  entered  up  "  in 
most  perfect  completeness ;  not  a  name  which  has  borne  anything,  or  been 
anything,  for  Him  is  omitted.     So,  too,  there  are — 

II.  Unrecorded  deliverances. — What  a  story  will  some  unknown  saints  have 
to  tell  in  heaven,  of  their  daily  death  indeed,  but  also  of  their  daily  deliverances ! 
Not  alone  such  foremost  heroes  as  Paul,  but  many  a  hard-pressed,  yet  triumphant, 
"  nobody,"  in  the  knowledge  and  reckoning  of  even  their  Christian  fellows,  will 

c  c  385 


CHAP.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.  CORINTHIANS. 


have  a  story  which  is  really  one  of  perpetual  miracle,  a  perpetual  "  rest(/rrectionJ* 
Often,  literally,  "  as  good  as  dead  "  on  all  human  lines  of  estimation,  taking 
death  into  practical,  near  account  every  day,  in  the  laying  out  of  plans  and  the 
undertaking  of  work  for  Chiist.  Each  new  morning  a  new  Easter  morning,  a 
life  renewed  as  by  a  real  raising  up  of  God's  own  hand.  Many  a  burden,  many 
a  battle,  many  a  danger,  is  never  known  outside  the  secrecy  of  the  man's  own 
heart;  and  many  a  deliverance  too.  There  must,  moreover,  be  many  deliver- 
ances unrecorded  in  even  the  privacy  of  the  man^s  own  knowledge.  In  each  day's 
common  life  there  must  be  for  every  man  many  occasions  when  danger,  and  even 
death,  has  been  very  really  near,  but,  just  because  the  deliverance  has  been  so 
complete,  he  has  passed  through  all  in  the  happy,  secure  confidence  of 
ignorance.  Every  ordinary  journey  has  its  peril.  Every  day's  duty  offers  at 
many  points  opportunity  to  "  death."  Men  could  not  bear  to  think  of,  or  to 
know,  through,  and  out  of,  how  much  they  are  daily  being  delivered. 

III.  Indirect  blessing  from  these  experiences. — 1.  We  may  narrow  ver.  9  a 
little,  and  press  its  teaching  with  a  particular  application.     The  near  prospect 
of  death,  if  sanctified,  (1)  Destroys  all  trust  in  ou7'selves.    At  that  moment  the 
vanity  of  all  human  endeavour  and  resistance  to  "  fate,"  is  palpable.      If  the 
grace  of  God  be  yielded  to,  all  trust  in  self  for  salvation  may  at  that  moment 
be  destroyed.      No  lesson  harder    to   learn,  or  more  urgently  necessary  than 
this.     Fundamental  that  the  man  should  learn  to  put  all  reliance  for  salvation, 
not  on  anything  within  the  circle  of  his  own  Hfe  and  character,  but  wholly  and 
entirely  to  make  salvation  depend  upon  Christ  and  His  work.     Yet  not  until  face 
to  face  with  eternity — and  not  always  even  then — is  fully  seen  the  unreliable- 
ness  of  everything  within  the  man  himself — everything  he  has  been  and  has  done, 
or  has  not  been  and  heis  not  done — as  a  resting-place  for  hope  of  acceptance  before 
God.     Thus  it  (2)  Disposes  to  trust  in  God.     "  '  To  whom  should  we  go  ? '    One 
moment  more,  and  the  mystery  of  the  future  will  be  a  mystery  no  longer ;  where 
men  have  hitherto  been  inquiring,  and  speculating,  and  hoping  or  fearing,  I  shall 
know.     One  moment  more  and  the  world  of  which  I  do  know  something  will 
have  slipped  from  me,  and  I  shall  find  myself  in  a  world  of  which  I  know 
nothing.     At  home  here,  I  shall  be  a  stranger  there,  in  a  strange  world.     I  am 
a  sinner,  and  in  one  moment  more,  I  shall  find — what  ?     What  can  I  trust  to 
for  my  '  leap  into  the  darkness ' ;  what  can  assure  me  that  I  shall  '  light  on 
my  feet,'  and  on  sure  ground  of   rest  and  peace?      When   I   loose  my  hold, 
perforce,  of  a  world  of  knowledge,  and  drop  into  a  world  which  is  entirely  a 
matter  of  faith,  what  am  I  to  trust  to  ? "       Nothing,  except  the  promises  of 
God  in  connection  with  the  work  of  Christ.     Invaluable  and  secure,  or  valueless 
and   deceiving,    will   these   in   that    supreme   moment   be.     Trust   in   God,  or 
nothing  except  a  huge  venture  with  an  eternal  risk.     Happy  if  a  man,  thus 
shut  up  to  trusting  in  his  God  in  Christ  does  trust.     But  further  there  is  (3) 
The  hope  of  reswrection.     And  this  rests  securely  on  the  power  and  declared 
will   of   the  "  God  who  raises  the  deadr     "  The  (declarations  of  the)  Scriptures 
and  the  power  of  God  "  were  the  two  "  heads  "  of  an  argument  which  Christ 
presented   for   the   consideration  of    Sadducee    doubters  or  unbelievers  (Matt, 
xxii.  9).     An  argumentum  ad  homines,  of  course,  like  the  appeal  of  Paul  to 
Agrippa.      The   Jew,  such   a   Jew  as   even  Agrippa,  could  hardly   "  think  it 
iucredible  that  God — God — should  raise  the  dead  "  (Acts  xxvi.  8). 

2.  The  knowledge  of  others  is  to  be  enriched  by  our  experience  of  deliverance. — 
"  We  would  not  have  you  ignorant^''  etc.  And  so,  too,  God  would  not  have 
them  ignorant,  and,  for  the  sake  of  the  glory  of  the  God  of  the  deliverance, 
and  for  the  strengthening  of  their  faith,  would  have  His  people  communicate 
their  experiences.     A  widely  applicable  principle.     A  reticence  on  such  sub- 

386 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  I. 


jects,  partly  the  result  of  temperament,  and  partly  a  tradition  in  many 
sections  of  the  Christian  Church,  seals  the  lips  of  many,  whose  experience  of 
the  ways  of  God  is  most  extensive,  and  would  be  most  precious  and  helpful  to 
other  souls.  A  groundless  and  not  very  natural  idea  that  such  things  are 
"  too  sacred  to  speak  about,"  coupled  with  a  dislike,  which  has  its  honourable 
side,  to  be  made  the  object  of  attention  and  to  be  the  subject  of  one's  own 
talk,  robs  the  Church  of  much  testimony  which  would  be  its  wealth.  It  is 
not  a  question  of  speaking  of  such  deliverances  before  unsympathetic  persons, 
*'  casting  pearls  before  swine,"  but  of  imparting  them  to  those  who  are  often  in 
the  like  perils  and  trials,  and  need  the  same  help  and  encouragements.  To 
such  hearers,  often  hungry  for  such  help^as  testimony  of  deliverance  would  afford, 
and  finding  not  their  smallest  difficulty  in  the  thought  that  they  are  singular 
in  their  own  experiences,  it  is  a  revelation  and  an  inspiration  to  hear  a  fellow- 
Christian — crucifying  self,  doing  violence  to  habit  and  temperament,  for  the  sake 
of  glorifying  the  Deliverer  and  of  helping  souls — break  the  silence  and  tell  his 
story  of  ^^ death"  and  ^^deliverance." 

3.  A  wonderful  unity  of  heart  and  effort  is  called  out  by  Paul's  experiences 
(see  fuller  Homily  on  ver.  11).  The  Pauls  always  owe  much  to  the  unknown 
pleaders  in  the  Corinths ;  to  those  who  can  only  "  help  together  "  by  their  pleading 
and  "  supplication."  How  many  deliverances  did  Paul  owe  to  the  fact  that  in 
every  Church  there  were  some  who  loved  him,  and  who  followed  him  wherever 
he  went  with  "  supplications.^^  How  much  of  such  a  man's  success  was  by  the 
Divine  Eye — which  alone  can  analyse  the  intricacies  of  such  a  problem — trace- 
able to  the  many  prayers  put  up  for  Paul  by  grateful  hearts  in  his  many 
Churches.  **  Success  "  is  a  very  complex  thing  in  itself,  and  in  the  causes  which 
contribute  to  it.  But  not  the  least  of  these  are  the  prayers  of  helpers  who 
can  only  help  by  prayers.  Paul  and  his  work,  with  its  accompaniments  of 
danger,  "  death"  ** deliverance"  rises  up  in  a  towering  eminence  in  the  view  of 
the  past  of  the  Church's  history.  But  it  rested  upon  a  broad-spread,  and  in  great 
part  hidden,  base,  not  the  least  solid  stratum  of  which  was  laid  in  the  prayers  of 
his  many  helpers,  "  ioHo-w -wrestlers"  with  each  other  and  with  him,  in  their 
prayers  for  him  (Kom.  xv.  30). 

EOMILETIC  ANALYSIS,— Verses  12—22. 

I.  Observe  how  Paul  meets  criticism. — 1.  Every  public  man  gets  it  j  invites 
it.  We  are  perpetually,  whether  public  persons  or  private,  running  the  gauntlet 
of  somebody's  scrutiny  and  "  judgment."  If  criticism  be  that  of  those  who 
presumably  are  competent  critics,  a  wise  man  will  pocket  his  resentment  at  any 
unfair  animus  which  may  be  associated  with  it,  and,  with  the  aid  of  the  gbjective 
estimate  of  him,  not  too  graciously  furnished,  will  endeavour  to  see  how  much  of 
truth  there  is  in  it.  2.  Paul  shows  no  bitterness  against  his  Corinthian  critics, 
nor  does  he  "  ride  off  on  the  high  horse  "  and  disdain  reply  altogether.  There  is 
a  silence  in  the  presence  of  criticism  which  is  really  obstinacy  and  pride.  *'  If  I 
cannot  be  trusted,  I  will  say  nothing."  To  play  at  "  despising  criticism  "  is  a  game 
at  which  two  parties  can  play,  so  far  as  the  "  despising  "  goes.  Paul  explains. 
It  was  not  an  unreasonable  demand  that  he  should  explain  his  change  of  plan. 
The  Christian  minister,  above  all,  must  not  "  cut "  or  "  drop "  hastily,  or  in 
personal  pique,  even  his  unfairest  critic.  This  may  prove  to  be  the  necessity  of 
the  case  in  the  end.  But  it  should  be  the  last  step,  reluctantly  taken.  If,  more- 
over, he  is  the  man's  pastor,  he  is  under  obligation  to  the  man's  soul,  even  that 
man's.  Better  to  answer  him  temperately,  and  offer  all  reasonable  explanation. 
Anybody  can  cut  men  off  from  friendship  or  from  a  Church.  It  is  a  greater 
thing  to  conquer,  or  keep,  by   winning  the   opponent's  judgment   or   respect 

387 


CHAP.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


and  perhaps  his  esteem  or  affection.  Sometimes — not  always — patience,  trans- 
parent sincerity,  holiness,  and  explanation  will  do  this.  3.  Not  resentfully,  hut 
solemnly,  Paul  offers  his  conduct  to  God's  examination.  "  I  call  God  for  a  witness,'^ 
etc.  He  can  look  himself  in  the  face ;  he  has  "  the  testimony  of  his  conscience," 
etc.  Under  the  penalty  of  God's  judgment  "  upon  his  soul,"  he  can  challenge 
God  to  look  into  his  heart  and  to  examine  his  motives.  We  are  reminded  of 
the  frequent  protestations  of  innocence  made  by  David  in  the  Psalms  [early  in 
his  life],  made  as  before  God.  No  real  difficulty  in  them,  to  any  man  with  any 
practical  experience  of  life.  It  is  one  thing  to  lay  bare  before  God  that  inmost 
life,  which  is  for  the  most  part  only  known  to  God,  and  to  confess  its  sinfulness, 
not  daring  or  desiring  to  do  anything  else ;  it  is  quite  another  thing,  in  regard 
to  the  official  life,  or  even  the  private  life  so  far  as  it  is  known  ("acknow- 
ledged," ver.  14)  to  men  by  ordinary  observation,  and  in  regard  to  particular 
charges,  to  lay  it  before  God  for  His  verdict,  appealing  from  man's  unfair,  or 
prejudiced,  or  malicious,  judgment  of  it  to  His  perfect  knowledge  of  the  inmost 
motive  and  heart.  In  doing  this  there  is  no  Pharisaism,  no  spiritual  pride,  no 
self  righteousness.  God  is  on  the  side  of  right ;  the  man  who  has  walked  in 
*'  holiness  and  sincerity  of  God  "  before  Him  may  claim  His  judgment,  and  will 
not  claim  it  in  vain.  4.  Happy  then  the  man  who  has  the  "  testimony  of  his 
conscience,"  and  can  appeal  even  to  his  very  critics  in  their  honest  mood  (ver.  14). 
If  a  man  will  keep  conscience  and  character  right  before  Grod,  he  may  leave  God 
to  take  care  for  his  reputation  amongst  men.  If  he  can  confront  God,  he 
may  carry  his  head,  not  '*  high,"  but  with  calm  assurance,  in  the  face  of  men. 

II.  Observe  for  what  reason  Paul  is  sensitive  to  criticism. — 1.  For  one  thing 
only.  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  he  cared  nothing  for  the  goodwill,  or 
even  the  good  opinion,  of  his  Corinthian  people.  "  I  don't  care  for  anybody's 
judgment "  need  not  necessarily  be  a  Christian  indifference  (cf.  1  Cor.  iv.  3). 
But  there  is  a  sensitiveness  as  to  "  what  people  think,"  which  is  vanity  and 
pride,  hungry  for  praise.  2.  To  Paul  his  character  is  here  a  matter  of  concern 
chiefly  because  of  his  responsibility  in  connection  with  the  Gospel  he  had  in  trust 
for  God.  *'  I  don't  care  about  the  character  of  the  preacher,  if  I  get  a  good 
sermon  !  "  *'  The  seed  will  grow,  if  it  be  real  and  have  the  life  in  it,  whoever 
sows  it !  "  "  Cannot  God  save — has  He  not  before  now  saved — by  the  word  of 
wicked  men  ? "  All  these  are  heard,  and  have  enough  truth  in  them  to  make 
them  serviceable.  But,  as  usual,  they  need  a  complementary  truth  to  balance 
and  guard  them,  and  to  give  the  whole  round  of  what  is  true  in  the  matter.  Paul 
at  any  rate  felt  that  if  he  were  a  man  whose  promises  could  not  be  relied  upon 
— lightly  made,  lightly  kept,  lightly  broken — there  might  be  a  question 
whether  his  view  of  the  Gospel  had  been  lightly  come  by,  and  accepted ;  whether 
it  were  a  thing  lightly  held.  A  man  who  says  and  unsays  in  a  breath,  or 
in  quick  succession,  who  is  shallow  and  fickle  in  the  simple  matters  of  every- 
day life,  is  he  the  man  to  whom  God  will  really  have  revealed  His  Son  and 
His  Gospel  ?  [For  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  Paul,  like  every  apostle,  was  not 
simply  an  expositor  of  a  fixed  and  complete  body  of  teaching,  a  record  quite 
independent  of  him ;  as  the  modern  preacher  is.  He  was  an  original  source, 
through  which  God  was  giving  new  truth  to  the  world ;  through  Paul,  in  part, 
was  being  given  the  growing  Gospel  of  God  in  Christ.  His  character  therefore 
stood  in  closer  relation  to  his  preaching  than  a  modern  preacher's  can.  Still,  it  is 
true  that]  a  minister  may,  must,  be  specially  jealous  of  his  good  name,  inasmuch 
as,  justly  or  unjustly,  any  imputation  upon  him  will  be  reflected  upon  the  Gospel 
he  preaches.  Equivocation,  falsehood,  acted  deception,  no  dependence  to  be  placed 
upon  principles,  or  character,  or  promises,  are  serious  blots  on  the  ministerial 
character.  The  mere  suspicion  of  such  things  were  serious.  3.  And  this  goes  higher. 
As  the  Gospel,  so  the  Giver  of  the  Gospel.     If  it  were  not  Truth,  absolute,  reliable 

388 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  I. 


(1  Tim.  i.  15),  infallible,  it  might  either  compel  us  to  modify  our  idea  of  the 
Christ  Himself,  or  at  best  might  be  discredited  or  dismissed,  as  not  from  Him  at 
all.  Christ's  character  cannot,  as  Paul's  conceivably  might,  be  dissociated  from 
that  of  the  Gospel.  As  He  is,  it  is.  He  repeatedly — it  is  one  of  the  marked 
characteristics  of  His  teaching — identifies  Himself  with  the  Gospel.  He  is  the 
Gospel.  4.  And  yet  again,  as  is  the  Gospel,  as  is  the  Christ  of  the  Gospel,  so  is  the 
God  who  gives  the  Christ.  God  is  faithful,  Christ  is  faithful,  every  promise  is 
faithful,  the  Gospel  which  contains  them  all  is  faithful,  and  the  very  preachers 
are  not  unworthy  of  the  Gospel  they  represent  and  proclaim. 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES, 


Ver.  10.  The  God  of  Deliverance. — 
Ps.  Ixviii.  28,  "  He  that  is  our  God 
is  the  God  of  Salvation."  An  old 
"  note  "  of  the  God  of  the  Bible ; 
ever   true. 

I.  Our  lesson  in  grammar  in  God's 
school. — 1.  Can  our  heart  conjugate 
the  verb  *'  deliver  "  ?  Yes.  Present : 
**  Doth  deliver  "  [But  query  the 
reading  ^  Past :  "  Hath  delivered." 
Future  tense  :  '*  Will  deliver."  ''  God  " 
in  every  case  the  "  subject."  Whatever 
lesson  we  are  slow  to  learn,  we  have 
had  occasion  enough  to  know  this 
excellently  well.  He  has  given  us 
plenty  of  practice.  Yet  the  future 
tense  does  not  at  all  times  come  very 
readily  to  our  lips;  we  stammer  at  ^^Will 
deliver."  Our  slow  heart  easily  forgets 
"  Hath  delivered."  In  the  story  of 
the  goodness  of  our  life,  we  find  it  hard 
to  pick  out  in  the  sentence,  in  the 
incidents  of  to-day,  the  present  tense 
with  its  nominative :  "  God  doth  de- 
liver." We  will  ask,  as  not  the  least 
mercy  of  His  hand,  a  heart  quick  to 
pick  Him  out  in  the  story,  and  to  see 
His  '*  deliverance  "  in  every  day's 
common,  commonplace,  safety  and 
help.  2.  The  difiiculty  is  not  all  of 
our  own  heart's  creating.  The  very 
completeness  of  the  "  deliverance  " 
in  part  creates  it.  We  are  brought 
through  in  such  complete  safety 
that  we  pass  through  in  happy 
security,  entirely  ignorant  that  danger 
or  need  of  help  has  been  so  near  and 
so  great.  The  monotonously  ordinary 
security  of  a  common  day  is  sometimes 
— if  only  we  saw  it  as  He  does  who 
accomplishes  it — a  most  marvellous 
"  deliverance.^^    [Very  often,  indeed.  He 


spreads  "a  table"  for  His  people  "in 
the  presence  of  "  their  '*  enemies  "  (Ps. 
xxiii.  5).  He  holds  these  back — in  their 
impotent  malice — while  His  guests  eat 
His  banquet  of  plentiful  "  goodness  and 
mercy."  We  see  them,  but  banquet 
in  peace,  crying,  "  See  how  He  doth 
deliver.^']  3.  The  Present  is  so  closely 
linked  with  Past  and  Future  that 
the  present  deliverance  cannot  be  con- 
sidered alone.  It  is  rooted  in  the 
mercy  of  the  past ;  it  projects  itself, 
inserts  itself,  [mortises  itself,]  into  that 
of  the  future.  The  mercy  of  to-day — 
"  doth  deliver  " — is  only  the  newest, 
latest  link  of  a  chain  of  deliverances 
which  reaches  back  to  my  earliest  need, 
and  will  stretch  onward  to  the  latest 
moment  of  my  life's  necessity.  No 
mercy  stands  by  itself  ;  no  deliverance 
is  an  isolated  piece  of  goodness.  No 
matter  where  the  musing  heart  takes 
hold  of  the  mercies  of  life,  at  what- 
ever point  it  locates  the  Present  Tense, 
it  is  led  on  backward,  forward,  by 
links  of  the  closest  association.  Ps. 
lix.  10  gets  quoted  with  more  than  a 
verbal  inaccuracy.  It  is  false  to  the 
thought  to  say,  "  The  God  of  my 
mercies.''  The  Psalmist  says,  and 
feels,  more  justly,  "  of  my  mercy." 
Each  incident  of  mercy  is  so  closely 
linked  with  what  precedes  and  follows, 
they  follow  so  closely  one  upon  another, 
that,  in  the  review,  they  coalesce  into 
one  long  "  mercy  "  (Ps.  xl.  5).  Indeed, 
to  speak  humanly,  in  the  grammar 
of  God's  thought  there  is  no  present, 
past,  future.  We  use  the  words; 
we  distinguish  between  the  times.  The 
deliverances  emerge  and  present  them- 
selves to  us,  in  order  and  temporal 

389 


CHAP.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   IL   CORINTHIANS. 


succession.  But  they  are  by  no  means  Paul  and  all  whom  his  life  may  affect 
separate  and  independent  "  deliver-  and  influence,  the  goal  of  which  is 
ances."  They  are  incidents  in  one  the  perfected  holiness  of  His  people.] 
continuous  deliverance.  It  is  only  Present,  past,  future,  are  our  human 
human  feeling  which  says,  "  Awake  to  expression  ;  the  fact — of  our  deliver- 
help  me ! "  (Ps.  lix.  4).  Our  God  has  ance,  as  of  His  purpose  and  love, 
no  need  to  arouse  Himself  for  each  Who  is  "I  AM " — ^is  a  perpetually 
new  emergency,  to  consider  how  to  extended  present  of  grace  and  power, 
make  at  the  moment  some  new  pro-  II.  Paul's  confidence  rests  upon  the 
vision  for  the  new  demand.  [As  in  God  who  deli  vers. — One  lifelong  deliver- 
Creation,  so  in  Grace, — and  the  two  ance ;  because  One  Mind,  One  Heart, 
are  one  Work, — the  '*  Father  worketh  One  God,  in  all  the  deliverances  of  life, 
hitherto"  (John  v.  17);  He  never  For  this  reason  Paul  counts  upon  de- 
takes  His  hand  from  the  thing  He  is  liverance ;  he  counts  upon  Him  !  The 
creating,  from  the  life  He  is  regulating  future  is  as  certain  as  the  past,  or 
and  guiding.  There  are  no  briefest  present,  because  He  may  as  certainly 
pauses  in  His  attention  and  interest.  be  reckoned  with.  "  He  cannot  deny 
There  is  no  intermission,  even  for  an  Himself  " — i.e.  He  cannot  at  any  point 
instant,  in  His  ceaselessly  operative  be  unfaithful  to  His  pledged  word  in 
activity  to  "  deliver. ^'^^  Must  not  be  so  the  past,  to  His  proved  cJiaracter  in  the 
overpressed  as  to  become  fatalism,  with  past,  to  the  precedents  He  has  set  in 
its  inevitable,  unalterable,  predeter-  the  past.  His  past  acts  and  deliver- 
mined  order  of  incidents  and  persons,  ances  are  "  words  "  from  His  heart ; 
in  a  Christian  man's  life  and  course.  He  has  declared  in  them  what  manner 
But  he  should  thankfully  remember  of  God  He  is,  and  will  be.  He  cannot 
that  the  daily  new  *'  deliverances  "  (in  turn  His  back  upon  the  Self  of  past 
the  widest  sense)  are  parts  of  a  lifelong  days,  or  upon  His  past  principles  of 
Deliverance,  details  in  the  working  out  action.  He  can  do  no  other,  and  can 
of  "a  Purpose"  "to  bring  His  many  be  no  other,  than  His  record  in  the 
sons  unto  glory "  (Rom.  viii.  28 ;  Heb.  past.  Present,  Past,  Future,  therefore, 
ii.  10).  [Should  be  remembered  also  proceed  in  orderly,  secure  development, 
how  central — as  in  the  chapter,  Rom.  He  can  so  guide  and  deliver  His  people 
viii.,  so  in  thought  and  fact^ — is  the  to-day  that  the  present  shall  fit  har- 
v/ord  "  good "  in  ver.  28.  The  mere  moniously  on  to  the  past,  and  prepare 
temporal  "  deliverance, "  from  per-  the  way  for  the  future,  with  perfect 
plexity,  or  persecution,  or  death,  is  sequence  and  adaptation ;  and  the 
not  the  main  thing  in  the  mind  of  future  deliverance  is  a  certainty.  [Has 
the  God  of  our  *'  Deliverance."  These,  stamped  His  own  unity  upon  His  work 
indeed,  are  not  always  granted.  [Some-  in  creation.  This  truth  in  modern 
times  the  real  "  deliverance  "  is  effected  theories  of  "  development "  is  that  no 
rather  by  His  shutting  up  against  us  new  created  thing  is  isolated,  a  mere 
paths,  doors,  which  we  begged  to  be  new  beginning ;  it  is  always  in  close 
allowed  to  enter.]  Such  providential  relation  to  the  past ;  it  is  the  next 
deliverances  are  given  or  withheld,  stage  in  the  unfolding  of  an  Idea  upon 
according  as  will  best  subserve  the  which  the  Creator  is  ceaselessly  at 
"  good,"  the  definition  of  which  is  the  work ;  however  modified,  the  lines  of 
"  conforming "  each  son  of  His  family  the  preceding  forms  are  in  it ;  in  its 
of  adopted  ones  "to  the  image  of  the  turn  it  preludes,  and  suggests,  the 
Son,  the  Firstborn  amongst  many  coming  forms.  So  His  own  unity  is 
brethren."  Such  a  deliverance  from  stamped  upon  the  working  of  His 
danger  as  Paul  is  thinking  of,  is  not  an  delivering  providence.  Deliverance 
unworthy  thing  for  God  to  consult  for,  follows  upon,  grows  out  of,  deliverance ; 
but  its  real  purpose  falls  in  with  His  deUverance  preludes,  and  leads  up  to, 
larger   plan   of  gracious   working,   in  deliverance.      The   heart  that   knows 

390 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  i. 


Grod  finds  the  analogy  run  very  closely ;  hid ;  who  knows  everything,  and  will 

and  the  argument  in  it  is :  "  One  God ;  "  have   its    say,"   and    pronounce    its 

the   God   of   my   mercy."]     [Or,  with  judgment,  upon  everything.]     3.  Very 

another  natural   analogy.      Give   the  little  use  in  discussing  whether  this  be 

astronomer  six  weeks,  six  months,  six  a  distinct  faculty,  or  only  the  judgment 

years — the  longer  the  better — to  make  exercising  itself  upon  moral  questions, 

and  collate  and  study  observations  of  a  as  it  might  upon  the  wisdom  or  un- 

new  planet ;  and  he  will  soon  tell  you  wisdom  of  actions  or  motives.    ''  Words, 

where  it  may  be  looked  for  six  years,  to  no  profit"  (2  Tim.  ii.  14).     Surest 

or  sixty,  or  six  hundred  years  hence,  basis  of  any  attainable  knowledge  is 

He  has  "found  the  law"  of  its  orbit  found  in  the  Scriptural  distinction  be- 

and  its  motion.     Paul  records  :  "  Hath  tween  "  soul "  and  "  spirit."     [Primary 

delivered"  and  *'  doth  deliver."   Not  two  text  on  this  topic,  1  Thess.  v.  23  ;  the 

observations,  but  many  a  thousand,  are  only  complete  enumeration  of  the  ele- 

em bodied  in  that ;  he  has  "  found  the  ments  of  the  (so-called)  trichotomy  of 

law  "   of   the  providence   of   his   God.  man's  nature.     All  three  are  mentioned 

He  says  "  Will  deliver  "  with  all  con-  elsewhere.  Scripture  consistent  through- 

fidence.     He  knows  where  to  look  for  out  in  the  distinctive  use  of  "  soul "  and 

and  to  find  his  God.]  "  spirit,"  in  both  Old  and  New  Testa- 

I.  "  We'll  praise  Him  for  all  that  is  past.  ^f.^^     ^?|[   Paul's  vocabulary   of   the 

II.  We'll  trust  Him  for  all  that's  to  come."  religious  hfe  is  built  up  upon  the  dis- 

— Hymn  by  J.  Hart.  tinction.     Notably  in  1  Cor  ii).]     No 

animal  is  more  than  body  +  "soul." 

Ver.  12.  [May  be  made  the  occasion  The  life  of  "  body  -h  soul,"  with  all  their 

of  a  sermon  upon]  Conscience.  powers  and  faculties,  in  varying  degrees 

I.  1.  Man,  alone  of  God's  earthly  of  development  and  training,  is  the 
creation,  can  know  himself.— Paul  "natural "  life.  The  " natural  man's " 
can  be  the  subject  and  object  of  an  act  life  finds  there  its  range  and  Hmit. 
of  cognition  and  reflection.  Paul  can  What  is  (often  only  in  very  rudi- 
talk  to  himself  about  himself.  One  of  mentary,  but  germinal,  form)  found  in 
the  marks  of  his  personality ;  one  thing  the  activities  of  the  material  and  im- 
which  marks  in  him  the  "image  of  God."  material  part  of  the  animal,  "  from  the 
Also  Godlike  in  this :  can  know  and  oyster  to  the  eagle "  (Alford),  but  de- 
judge  between  "  right  "  and  "  wrong,"  veloped,  cultured,  to  largest  range  and 
in  the  moral  sense,  and  according  to  highest  pitch  of  perfection, — these  are 
God's  standard.  [The  creatures  find  the  Hfe  of  the  "  natural  man,"  except 
out  what  brings  pleasure,  or  what  that  in  him  also  there  remains  per- 
brings  their  master's  punishment,  sonality,  with  its  self-knowledge  and 
Men  quickly  find  what  is  advantageous,  its  self -determining  will, — part  of  the 
or  what  means  pain,  trouble,  loss.  But  "  im^ge  of  God  "  not  lost.  [But  some 
moral  "wrong"  and  "right"  are  more  would  include  this  within  the  life  of 
than  this.]  By  sel^-conscioiosness  man  the  "  spirit  "  also.  The  line  of  demar- 
can  know  himself  ;  by  conscience  can  cation  is  not  easy,  perhaps  not  possible, 
judge  of  himself,  his  thoughts,  words,  to  draw.  Certainly]  the  conscience 
acts.  Conscience  can  even  judge  con-  belongs  to  the  "  spirit,"  the  Godlike, 
science !  [2.  The  "  co^-^-"  is  a  real  God-capable,  side  of  human  nature, 
personification.  A  man  can,  if  he  will.  It  is  its  "  eye  "  (Matt.  vi.  22  ;  Eph.  i.  18 
keep  his  inner  self  a  secret,  locked  up  [N.B.  var.  reading]).  It  is  the  organ 
from  those  who  know  and  love  him  of  all  knowledge  of  "  spiritual  "  things  ; 
best  j  an  inner  shrine  of  privacy  whose  its  possession  puts  man  into  communi- 
door  he  can  close  against  all  comers  cation  with  that  "  spiritual "  world,  in 
(1  Cor.  ii.  11).  "  All,"  except  another  which  God,  sin,  redemption,  guilt, 
Self  who  shares  this  knowledge  along  holiness,  are  ruling  facts.  The  judg- 
with  him  ;  from  whom  no  secret  can  be  ment  of  the  intellect  is  per  se,  neutral, 

391 


CHAP.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


non-moral ;  the  judgment  of  the  con-  it,  whenever  it  is  proposed  to  their 
science  is  moral,  concerned  with  the  judgment, — these  are  the  fruits  of  the 
ethics  whose  basis  is  the  law  of  God.  Redemption  of  the  Eace  by  Christ ; 
II,  In  any  case  a  distinction  part  of  the  "  free  gift  which  has  come 
must,  very  helpfully,  be  drawn  be-  upon  all  men,"  designed  to  issue  in, 
twten  the  faculty  for  knowing  moral  and  lead  *'unto,  justification  of  life" 
differences  and  the  actual  and  correct  (Rom.  v.  18) ;  they  are  rays,  dim  and 
knowledge  of  them. — 1.  Conscience  is  scanty  perhaps,  of  "the  Light  that 
the  Judge  seated  on  the  bench,  ready  to  lighteth  every  man  "  (John  i.  9).  The 
administer,  and  apply  to  any  cases  and  heathen  have  some  (Rom.  ii.  14,  15) ;  it 
questions  proposed,  any  law  supplied  needs  supplementing,  guiding,  train- 
to  It.  It  makes  no  law ;  It  may  ad-  ing,  by  the  use  of  the  written  Word, 
minister  a  bad,  or  imperfect,  or  mistaken  The  inner  light  needs  the  check,  the 
law ;  It  may  judge  by  an  imperfect  direction,  the  interpretation  of  the  ob- 
standard.  It  is  the  Eye,  made  for  the  jective  Standard.  And  if,  of  the  two 
purpose  of  distinguishing  Light  from  selves  and  their  utterances  and  judg- 
Darkness  ;  possessing  the  power  to  ments,  there  can  be  no  doubt  to  a  man 
distinguish,  even  while  there  is  no  in  any  degree  of  spiritual  health  which 
Light  actually  given.  It  can  of  itself  is  the  worthy  and  true ;  if  the  Judge 
supply  no  Light ;  of  itself  it  can  enact  knows  God's  law  at  all,  and  responds 
no  code,  can  establish  no  tests  of  Beauty  to  it,  and  gives  right  judgment  as 
or  Deformity.  It  is  a  Trior al  sense,  before  God ;  if  the  Eye  has  any  light, 
analogous,  say,  to  the  aesthetic  sense  and  recognises  it,  and  loves  it, — this  is 
(Phil.  i.  9,  Greek).  The  Law  and  all  all  grace,  the  working  and  gift  of  the 
knowledge  of  it,  what  actually  is  Holy  Spirit,  Whom  the  death  of  Christ 
Beautiful  or  Evil,  Light  or  Darkness,  has  made  in  some  measure  the  birth- 
— these  must  come,  must  be  given,  to  right  privilege  and  possession  of  every 
Conscience  from  without.    It  recognises,  human  soul. 

but  cannot  by  itself  originate  or  dis-  III.  How  far  are  the  judgments  of 

cover,  truth.    Truth  is  a  revelation y  conscience  authoritative  and  final? — 

Conscience    is    only    organon.      [Said  1.  As  the  aesthetic  sense,  the  sense  for 

Rabbi  Duncan,  similarly,  of  Reason:  beauty,  may,  by  being  accustomed  to 

"  It  is  certainly  more  of  an  instrument  bad  models,  be  perverted  or  depraved, 

of  discovery   than   a   discoverer.      At  until  it  may  even  come  to  prefer  the 

least,  I  don't  think  it  has  discovered  poor,  and  mean,    and   unworthy,  and 

much.     It  is  of  use  to  show  its  own  ugly  \  or  as  it  may  be  developed,  and 

impotence,    and    of    use    to    welcome  its  sensitiveness  may  be  cultivated,  to 

revelation "   (Colloquia   Peripat.,  62).]  a  very  high  pitch  of   delicacy,  till  it 

2.    No  racey  no  man^  is  ever   actually  judges   rightly,  by   a   swift,  infallible 

found  with  nothing  hut  the  hare  faculty  ;  instinct  which  does  not  stop  to  reason, 

the  Judge  is  never  left  without  some  nor  could  always  give  its  "  reasons  " ; 

knowledge  of  the  law  and  will  of  God ;  so  may  the  moral  sense,  the  Conscience, 

the  eye  is  always    visited    with  some  As  the  judge  from  the  bench  may  grow 

light  with  which  to  deal.     But  this  is  accustomed  to  a  bad,  defective,  or  iniqui- 

grace,  not  conscience.     It  is  something  tons  law,  or  may  even  come  to  rejoice 

added  to,  an  endowment  of,  the  bare  in  injustice,  whilst  knowing  it  unjust ; 

faculty.    "  Innate  "  ideas  of  morals  are  or,  as  he  may  get  continually  a  wider 

really    implanted    ideas.       The    most  knowledge    of    a    perfect    Code,    and 

elementary  knowledge  of  "  right  "  and  may  develop  a  growing  readiness  and 

"  wrong "    according   to   the    mind   of  delicacy  of  just  perception  of  its  ap- 

God  ;    the   response   which   the   heart  plicableness  to  particular  cases;  so  may 

and  conscience  sooner  or  later  always  the  inward  judge,  the  Conscience.     The 

make — approving,  accepting,  applaud-  eye  may  grow  diseased  until  the  very 

ing — to  the  "right"  as  God  estimates  light  is  painful,  and  it  seeks  darkness.; 

392 


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  i. 


so  may  the  moral  eye,  the  Conscience,  ceaseless  grace.     The  eye  may  die  with 

[Hence   Paul's  perfectly  conscientious  ill-usage,  or  with  disuse.      The  judge 

persecution  was  sin.    Its  conscientious-  who  is  never  appealed  to,  or  is  disre- 

ness  did  not  make  it  right.     "  Forgive  garded,    may   slumber    on   the    bench 

them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  more  and  more  deeply,  until  he  seems 

do," — but    they    needed    "forgiving."  past    awakening,    or    sits    practically 

Ignorance  in  their  case,  conscientious-  dead  upon   the   very   judgment   seat ; 

ness  in  Paul's,   left  the  door  open  for  representative  of  the  King  though  he  is, 

mercy.     In    him  the  judge  wanted  a  he  may  cease  to  speak,  or  may  be  past 

better  law ;  though  how  much  of  pride,  speech.      Yet   note,  these   are  figures 

self-will,  hatred  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  which  may  be  pushed  until  they  become 

mingled  with  his  conscientious,  zealous  falsehoods.      The  eye  may  seem  dead 

activity  in   persecution,  perhaps   only  from  disease  or  disuse,  yet  we  should 

his  Lord  could  tell.]     Hence  the  need  never  assume  that  it  is  past  awakening 

for    the    objective,    absolute.    Divine  to  its  old  activity.     If  the  light  return, 

Standard.      The   "  light  within "  may  it  may,  except  in  the  rarest  instances, 

"  become    darkness."      The    eye    may  still  be  opened,  and  may  resume  its  old 

cease  to  be  "  single."     ["  Right  by  my  function  of  seeing  and  distinguishing, 

clock."      But   what   of   the   "  clock "  1  Perhaps    the   judge   seldom   or   never 

"Correct  by  my  scales,"  "true  by  my  really   vacates   his   seat;    he   may   be 

yard    measure."      But    what    of    the  roused,  and  indeed  will  rouse  himself, 

"  scales"  and  "measure"?     They  need  at  the  sound  of  the  judgment  trumpet, 

bringing  constantly  before  the  (Divine)  if   not   before.      He   will    resume   his 

Office   of   Weights  and   Measures   for  office,  if  it  be  only  eternally  to  condemn, 

examination,  and  perhaps  adjustment.  [Manhood  came  into  the  world  in  its 

Tell  me  the  moral  company  you  make  complete  equipment,  personal,  capable 

your  Judge  keep — both  in  reading  and  in  of    God,   and   will    go    complete    into 

actual  social  intercourse  ;  he  may  have  eternity.     Children  had   a   conscience 

become  corrupted,  and  be  giving,  not  before  they  knew  it.      The  lost  have 

the  judgments  of  God,  but  the  foolish  not   lost   it.      The    saved    in    heaven 

or  wicked  decisions  of  an  evil  age  or  have  it  still,  though  there  it  has  only 

set,  and  may  even  have  come  to  judge  occasion  to  approve.] 

as  your  own  wicked  heart  desires.     (In  VI.  Conscience  may  approve,  as  well 

some  handicrafts  the  workers  always,  as  condemn ;  may  be  a  real  comfort, 

day  and  night,  wear  gloves,  so  as  to  a  very  effective    strength. — So   here, 

keep  the  delicate  sensitiveness  of  touch  Through  misconceptions  and  misrepre- 

unimpaired).]  sentations  and  opposition  Paul  holds  on 

IV.  Hence  conscience  may  be  his  way.  Men  at  Corinth  or  elsewhere 
trained. — Like  any  other  faculty.  We  may  say  and  do  what  they  please  in 
learn  not  only  to  walk,  but  to  see  with  regard  to  him,  he  can  look  them,  and 
eyes  which,  as&organs  for  sight,^  were  still  more  can  look  himself,  in  the  face 
perfect  at  birth.  Give  more  and  more  and  say,  "  In  simplicity"  etc.  [In  a 
of  knowledge;  keep  the  best  standard  be-  qualified  sense:  "Which  of  you  con- 
fore  conscience  ;  live  in  the  company  of  victeth  me  of  sin  ? "]  Majorities  do  not 
holy  people,  and  of  the  Holy  One  Him-  settle  morals  for  the  Christian  man  ; 
self ;  conscience  will  thus  learn  to  think  he  may  have  to  be  solitary,  singular, 
and  judge  after  the  standard  of  God.  with  nobody  on  his  side,  or  agreeing  with 

V.  The  only  morally  hopeless  man  his  judgment,  except  his  Master  above 
is  the  man  who  has  so  grieved  the  him,  and  his  Judge  within  him.  "  Our 
Spirit  of  God  that  He  has  withdrawn  rejoicing  is  this"  etc.  [May  illustrate 
not  the  capacity,  indeed,  but  the  the  topic  by  the  barometer  on  board 
modicum  of  knowledge — which  was  the  vessel  sailing  between  the  Tropics. 
His  original  gift,  and  was  only  It  is  the  soul's  aneroid,  giving  early, 
maintained,  like  all  "good,"   by   His  decisive  warning  of  danger  otherwise 

393 


CHAP.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


perhaps  unseen.  Or  by  the  little  dog 
which  lies  carved  in  marble  at  the  feet 
of  his  master,  on  the  tomb  of  William 
the  Silent  at  Delft.  By  barking,  and 
scratching  his  face,  he  had  awoke  his 
master  and  so  saved  his  life^  on  the 
occasion  of  a  night  attack  on  the 
tent  of  William  by  the  Spaniards  in 
the  camp  before  Mons.  William  had 
only  just  time  to  escape.  Good  to 
have  such  a  friend.  Men  have,  in 
Conscience.^  [Some  men  have  this 
"  candle  of  the  Lord  "  only  to  put  it 
out,  that  they  may  better  sleep  sin's 
sleep  in  undisturbed  darkness.]  ["  A 
stony,  benumbed,  bribed,  deluded, 
muzzled  conscience  "  (Bunyan).J 

Yer.  20.  Christ  the  "  Yea "  a/nd  the 
"  Amen." 

I.  The  promises  of  God.— 1.  "  How 
many  soever  5e,"  etc.  What  a  sugges- 
tion of  their  number.  No  stint  in  His 
measure  in  this,  as  there  is  in  nothing 
else  which  He  provides  for  man.  He 
gives  promises  "  with  both  hands 
earnestly"  (Mic.  vii.  3).  **  Good 
measure,  pressed  down,  running  over, 
into  our  bosom  "  (Luke  vi.  38).  It  is 
God's  style  of  dealing  with  us.  He 
promises  worthily  of  Himself.  2.  What 
a  suggestion  of  their  variety.  Such 
old-fashioned  books  as  Clarke's 
Faithful  Promiser  may  have  been 
too  mechanical  in  their  tabulation  of 
the  promises,  and  their  apportionment 
to  the  different  needs  and  occasions, 
so  that  the  reader  might  look  for  a 
promise,  as  it  were,  docketed  and  put 
away  in  a  labelled  "  pigeon-hole," 
ready  for  reference  and  production  at 
a  moment's  notice.  But  such  a  book 
was  at  least  the  product  of  a  familiar 
and  thorough  knowledge  of  the  Word  of 
God,  which  had  led  up  to  the  conviction 
that  no  need  could  arise,  or  had  ever 
arisen,  in  the  life  of  a  child  of  God,  but 
it  had  been  anticipated  by  the  Father, 
and  that  for  it  the  Father  had  said 
the  exactly  right  and  sufficient  thing. 
The  style  of  book  may  go  out  of 
fashion — and  may  come  into  fashion 
again — but  the  fact  remains.  St. 
Paul's     Bible  — the     Old    Testament 

394 


Scriptures — is   a   mine  of   wealth  for 
the   heart  of   the  child  of   God.     He 
hardly  had  in  his   thought  here  any 
cento  of  promissory  "  texts "  from  the 
Old  Testament,  though  the  fulness  and 
appropriateness    of    these    is    a    fact 
which  every  year's  fuller  knowledge  of 
the   Word  of   God  will  confirm,  with 
more  abundant  reason  for  strong  con- 
Vict  ion.     In  every  direction  in  which 
need    may  lead   or   drive  us,  we   find 
words  which  "  might  have  been  " — is 
that  all  we  should  say  ? — "  written  for 
the  occasion."     [An  old  missionary  in 
Fiji  (known  to  H.  J.  F.),  crossing  over 
the  island    where   he   resided,  to   his 
Sunday  morning's  work,  found,  at  the 
crest  of  a  long  and  toilsome  hill  which 
he  had  to  climb  in  the  sun's  full  heat, 
and  in  the  enervating,  relaxing  atmo- 
sphere, a  stick  planted  in  the  ground, 
and  to  it  were  attached  two  or  three 
fresh-gathered  cocoa-nuts,  whose  sweet, 
cool    "  milk "   might   refresh    him   on 
his  journey  to  preach.     A  paper  tied 
to  the  stick  explained  that  a  native, 
knowing  that  the  preacher  must  needs 
pass  that  way  that  morning,  had  so 
provided   beforehand   refreshment   for 
his   wearied  teacher.]     [Or   the  illus- 
tration may  be  the  cache  of  preserved 
meats    or    vegetables,    put    away  be- 
neath  a.  cairn    of    stones    by   Arctic 
explorers,  as  a  provision  for  any  lost 
or  starving  party  who  may  pass  that 
way.]     Turn   we  in  any  direction,  in 
the  day  of  any  distress,  a  promise  con- 
fronts us,  made  for  the  occasion.     The 
promise  is  at  any  rate  the  paper  tied 
to  the  stick,  the  flag  left  flying  over 
the  cache,  to  call  attention  to  the  sub- 
stantial  help   which   is    "  laid  up  for 
those  that  fear  God"  (Ps.  xxxi.  19). 
The  promise  is  there,  the  help  is  there. 
[Often    difficult     to    defend     in    cool 
reason  such  a  use  of  a  mere  "  scrap  " 
of  Scripture,  torn  away  from  all  con- 
text  and    history,    as    Bunyan    once 
made,  when   greatly  distressed   as    to 
what   might  become  of  his  family   if 
he  were  taken  from  them.     He  found 
comfort  in  Jer.  xlix.  11,  "Leave  thy 
fatherless  children,  and  let  thy  widows 
trust  in  Me  " ;  words  spoken  to  Edom, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  i. 


the  enemy  of  the  people  of  God.     Yet  passes  from  hand  to  hand,  as  full  of 

such  a  use  of  a  fragment  of  Scripture  value,   not    only    because    "  there    is 

is   but  one  of   innumerable  examples  money  at  the  back  of  it,"  but  because 

in   the   life  and   practice   of  some  of  there  is  a  person  at  the  back  of  it  some- 

the     wisest,    holiest,    most     spiritual  where.     It  is  part   of  that  "transfer 

people  in  every  age  and  Church,  and  is  of  credit  "  which  forms  so  much  of  the 

not  lightly  to  be  despised  or  set  aside  money -settlements  of  modern  business  ; 

as  unwarranted.     Does  not  the  Spirit  the  credit  is  that  of  the  credible  and 

of  God  in  such  cases  guide  the  instincts  solvent   person    somewhere.      So    the 

of  God's  people,  and  give  intuitions  of  heart  does   not  so  much  rely  upon  a 

truth   which  reason  afterwards  justi-  promise  as  upon  a  Promiser.     Behind 

fies?  In  this  particular  instance  there  is  the  word  of   promise  there  is   indeed 

at  any  rate  in  the  words  a  revelation  the  store  of  provision  for  its  redemp- 

of  the  heart  of  God  which,  if  thus  dis-  tion ;    but    the    real    guarantee    and 

posed  even  to  Edomite  enemies,  surely  ground  of  its  helpfulness   is  that  it  is 

warranted  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  His    promise,    who    is   the    ^''faithful 

Banyans     of     all    time.]       No    need  God"  (ver.  18).     There  is  no  ultimate 

without    its    promise    of     supply,    in  rest  in  propositions,  or  in  promises,  but 

infinite  variety.     3.  What  a  suggestion  in  a  Person.     2.   What  a  view  of  God's 

of  the  *'  exceeding  g7'eat  and  precious  character.      May   dwell   with  adoring, 

promises*'  (2  Pet.  i.  4).      Stars  of  first  gi'ateful  wonder  upon  the  reputation 

magnitude  in  the  expanse  of  revealed  He   has  earned   in   the  story  of   the 

mercy,  which  overarches  all  the  need  Church,  or  in  our  personal  life  as  a 

and  weakness  of  man's  life.    [There  are  ''^promise-keeping   God."       Filled   with 

many  of  smaller  magnitude.    With  the  astonishment  as  we  see  how  perfectly, 

trained  eye,  the  closer  scrutiny,  the  more  and  in  face  of  what  **  difficulties  "  (as 

help,  the  more   of   such    "  stars "  are  we  humanly  speak).  He  has  fulfilled 

brought  into  view.     Heaven  would  be  His  promises ;  so  that,  with  accumu- 

poorer  without  any  one  smallest  "  star."  lating  wealth  of  proof,  the  testimony 

Not  the  magnitude,  but  the  steadiness,  always  is,  "  There  failed  not  ought  of 

of  the  pole-star  makes  it  valuable  to  any  good  thing  which  the  Lord  had 

steer  by.]      Extraordinary  promises  of  spoken,  ...  all  came  to  pass  "  (Josh, 

extraordinary   help   for  extiaordinary  xxi.  45).'    *'  There  hath  not  failed  one 

needs,    needs   perhaps    occurring    but  word     of     all     His     good     promise" 

once  in  a  lifetime,  but  not  forgotten  (1   Kings  viii.  56).     But   there  is  an 

or  left   unprovided    against.      [In    a  earlier,    perhaps    a    greater    wonder, 

banker's  private  room  may  now  and  that   He   is  a  ^^promise-making   God." 

again  be  seen  a  «£  10,000  bank-note  ;  a  Moreover,  not  waiting  to  be  asked  to 

rare  thing,   a  curiosity — cancelled,  of  promise    to    help    or    to    save,    but 

course.     *'  I  promise  to  pay,"  etc.     *'  An  promising      ["  answering,"     Isa.     Ixv. 

exceeding  great  and  precious  promise."  24]  before  men  ask  ;  providing  for  our 

There  are  £5  promises,  .£10,  .£100,  in  fears  and  our  needs  before  they  have 

the  Word — and  still  more  truly  in  the  arisen,  and  in  that  fact  binding  Him- 

heart — of  God  ;  and  there  are  £10.000  self  to   help,  or   bless,  or  make  holy, 

promises,  and  these  never  "  cancelled  "  !]  His  are  the  promises  of  a  God  Who  has 

Their    number,    variety,   fulness,    and  volunteered  them  ;  Who  in  His  loving 

sufficiency  are  all  worthy  of,  and  quite  forwardness  towards  us,  proffers  His 

"  natural  "  to  expect  from  help.     And  since  the  words  are  from 

II.    The   God  of   the    promises. —  His  lips,  promises  are  prophecies.     He 

1.    They   are   worth  nothing,  they   are  promises   that   things   shall  be;   then 

nothing,  hut  for  their  connection  with  they  shall  be.     There  is  no  doubt,  so 

Him.     The   cheque  or  the  bank-note  far  as    the    fulfilment   depends   upon 

is  in  itself  a  nearly  valueless  piece  of  a  Him.     And  in  cases  where  man's  own 

lather  special  make  of  paper,  but  it  act  or  his  moral  attitude  is  the  necessary 

395 


CHAP.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS. 


condition  of  the  fulfilment,  then  the  will  and  heart  toward  mankind  is 
very  moment  the  condition  is  fulfilled  Christ.  Which  leads  to 
on  man's  side,  there  is  no  delay,  no  III.  Christ  the  great  Promise  and 
reluctance,  on  God's  side  to  finish  the  the  Ratification  of  all  other  promises 
matter — He  does  not  need  a  moment's  besides. — 1.  "  How  many  .  .  .  be  the 
persuasion  to  induce  Him  to  follow  up  promises,"  they  are  all  in  Him.  All 
the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  by  approach  of  God  to  man  has  always, 
doing  his  own  part ;  He  fulfils  His  part  and  only,  been  in  Christ.  He  is  the 
on  the  instant.  He  is  a  God  Whose  Condition  sine  qua  non  of  all  inter- 
willingness  to  give  is  indicated  by  His  course  between  God  and  man,  in  both 
unsolicited  readiness  to  promise.  A  directions.  In  Him  God  has  ap- 
promise-making  God !  3.  It  may  preached  man,  has  offered  to  man, 
almost  be  said  that  He  is  a  God  of  has  promised  to  man,  not  so  much 
more  promises  than  there  are  in  the  this  or  that  gift  or  grace  or  mercy 
Bible.  Let  the  old-fashioned  book-  or  help,  as  in  effect  all  gifts,  all  grace, 
maker  compile  laboriously,  and  classify,  all  mercy  and  help.  The  whole  atti- 
and  codify,  every  scrap  of  Scripture  tude  of  God  toward  redeemed  Humanity 
language  which  can  be  made  to  exhibit  is  "  bodily-wise  "  (Col.  ii.  9)  expressed 
the  shape  of  a  promise,  yet  the  book  and  exhibited  in  Him  Whose  significant 
would  not  meet  all  needs  of  man's  name  is  "  Immanuel."  A  God  in  His 
life.  So  far  as  finding  an  explicit  holiness  arrayed  against  a  sinful  Race 
and  applicable  "text"  goes,  many  in  necessary  antagonism,  is  a  thing 
an  emergency  may  arise  which  does  more  than  conceivable.  A  God  holding 
not  readily  range  itself  under  any  of  aloof  in  supreme  indifference  would 
the  categories  for  which  corresponding  not  be  an  impossibility.  In  point  of 
promises  have  been  selected.  There  is  happy  fact,  the  God  with  whom  our 
something — if  not  exactly  "  a  text " —  Race  has  had  to  do  has  been  a  "  God 
in  the  many-sided,  perfect  Word  of  with  us."  The  whole  attitude  of  God 
God  for  every  heart  in  every  demand  towards  man,  as  we  know  Him  in 
which  its  life  makes.  But  if  it  should  Christ,  is  a  proffer  and  a  promise, 
not  be  at  once,  or  readily  to  be  found,  containing  within  it  implicitly  a 
at  least  there  is  something  in  God.  promise  for  every  need  of  man's  soul. 
His  very  nature  and  character  are  a  Each  single  promise  with  its  fulfilment 
fruitful  ground  of  new  promises.  If  is  but  a  particular  expression  of  all 
it  were  so,  that  an  absolutely  unique  that  whole  approach,  that  volunteered 
and  novel  need  had  arisen,  not  pro-  offer  of  Himself — with  all  the  infinite 
vided  with  its  discoverable  written  *'  contents "  of  that  thought — which  is 
promise  in  the  storehouse  of  the  Bible,  made  in  the  very  fact  of  the  gift  of 
the  heart  might  turn  with  its  need  to  Christ.  Each  single  promise  and  its 
God.  The  certain,  prompt,  sufficient  fulfilment  is  a  detail  of  the  one  first, 
response  of  the  heart  of  God  would  summarising  gift  and  grace — Christ, 
be,  as  it  were,  a  new  promise  coined  [Rom.  viii.  32  approaches  this,  but 
at  the  instant.  A  promise  is  His  will  translating  the  ineffable  fact  into 
expressing  itself  toward  the  cry  of  human  thought  with  a  difference, 
man's  need.  The  up -leaping  of  His  rather  argues :  "If  He  began  with 
ready  heart  and  will  towards  the  soul  the  greatest  He  had  to  give,  He  has 
that  seeks  Him  with  its  appeal  for  so  set  the  fashion  and  precedent  of  His 
help,  is  an  offer  of  help,  a  promise  of  bounty  that,  after  that  Gift,  man  may 
it.  The  heart  of  the  promise-making  well  expect  anything.  He  who  has 
God  bears  within  itself,  and  brings  given  the  thousands  of  pounds,  will  not 
forth  on  the  occasion,  an  infinite  hesitate  to  add  the  odd  shillings  and 
wealth  of  new  "promises."  In  all  make  them  into  guineas.  After  the 
this  He  is  the  God  the  highest  expres-  first  Gift,  every  smaller  bounty  man 
sion,  and  the  most  complete,  of  Whose  may  need  or  ask,  is  a  trifle."     Here  w© 

396 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  i. 


go  beyond  this.]     Every  new  promise,  heart  of  God  to   be   willing,  and  yet 

and  every  new  gift  or  mercy  or  deliver-  hardly  dare  to  come  with  much  definite 

ance   by   which   it    is   redeemed    and  hope  ?    God  has  said  "  Yes "  beforehand, 

fulfilled,   is   not  here  conceived  of  as  in  the  gift,  and  the  very  person  and 

an  additional  act  of  God's  bounty.     It  work,  of  Christ.    He  gave  the  petitioner 

was  already  given  in  Christ.     To  speak  the  answer,  before  the  petitioner  brought 

in  human   language,    it  would  be  in-  his   prayer.     "  In    Him   is   the    Yea." 

consequent,  illogical,  for  the  God  Who  3.    ^^  Through   Him    is    the    ^Amen.'^' 

gave  "  His  Son  Jesus  Christ"  (ver.  19),  Granted  that  a  man  wins  his  answer, 

to  refuse  to  fulfil  any  word  of  promise  has    his    need   supplied,    his    promise 

which   may  be  pleaded   by   a   soul  in  fulfilled  to  him,  what  guarantee  has  he 

need   of  help.     It   would   be   to    "  go  of  secure  enjoyment,  of  long  possession 

back  upon "  what  was  said  and  done,  of  his   blessing  ?     The  answer  is  once 

upon  "  the  Word  "  which  God  uttered,  more,     "  Christ."       God's     mercy     in 

when  He  sent  His  Son,  "  His  unspeak-  Christ  both  anticipates   the  gift,  and 

able   Gift"  into  the  world.     The  One  rounds  it  off,  when  given,  with  a  holy 

Gift  was  in  elFect  a  Promise  ;  it  anti-  ratification.     The   same   Heart  which 

cipated,  summarised,  pledged,  all  sub-  desired  to  give,  and  actually  gave,  de- 

sidiary    detailed   promises    besides ;  it  sires  that  the  gift  should  be  kept  and 

also   pledged   their   fulfilment.     2.  So  added   to;    desires,    moreover,  to  give 

then    Christ   is    God's    "  Yes."     Men  further  grace  to  keep  the  first  grace, 

come  asking  large  things.    "  Is  it  really  God  clenches  His  gift  with    His  own 

of    any    use     to     ask    or    expect     so  *^  Amen."     If  such  a  distinction  must 

much  ? "    they   say   with   honest  mis-  be    made,     the    Spirit    Himself,    the 

giving.     They  come  asking  again  and  Author   of  all  strength  to  follow  up 

again  ;  He  never  denies  them,  but  their  and  keep  any  grace  given  in,  and  for 

heart  wonders  whether  ''  by  their  con-  the  sake  of,  Christ,  is  a  gift  bestowed 

tinual  coming   they   may   not    weary  "  through "  the  Mediator-work  of   the 

Him."     They  are  filled  with  a  sense  of  Son.     God's   acceptance  of  the  prayer 

un worthiness,  none  more  deeply  than  is  a  very  real  "  Amen  "  to  it,  but  the 

the  holiest  of  His  people :  "  I  am  not  following   it    up    and    sealing   it    by 

fit  to  come,  not  worthy  to  be  heard."  further  grace,  is  a  very  real  ratification 

They  have  ill-employed  grace  given  in  of  the  fulfilled  promise.     And  this  is 

the  past :  "  He  might  justly  '  upbraid '  through  Christ. 

(Jas.    i.    5)   for  our   neglect   or  waste  And     as     such    glorious     truth    is 

of  past  bounty."     And  so  on,  through  preached,  is   it   not    "  to   the  glory   of 

all  the  round  of  the  varying  and  abun-  God  "  ? 
dant  reasons  for  doubt,  for  expect  inj 

nothing.    Here  is  one  abundant  reason  Yers.  21,  22.  A  Fourfold  Grace  of  the 

for    expecting    anything,    everything.  Spirit. — [Three  homilies  may  be  here 

Like   His  own    "in    no   wise"    (John  suggested.] 

vi.  37)  which  anticipates  all  difiiculties,  I.  The   Spirit   gives    strength   and 

answers  beforehand  all  disheartening  stability    to    Christian     character. — 

"reasons,"'  takes  in   every  variety  of  1.  The  figure  here  implied  in  the  word 

case  and  age  and  sin,  among  the  guilty  is   different,  but   the   thought   is   the 

souls  who  "  come  "  to  Him,  so  this  word  same   as   in    "rooted   and   grounded" 

by  anticipation  silences  all  questions,  (Eph.    iii.     17),     "  rooted    and    built 

meets  all  fears,  replies  to  all  misgivings,  up  "    (Col.    ii.    7).      The    Christian   is 

makes  all  unfitness  and  past  unfaithful-  no    "  chaff   driven   before  the   wind  " 

ness  to  be  of  no  practical  bearing  upon  (Ps.  i.  4) ;   he  is  the  "  tree  planted." 

the  matter  in  hand.     Is  there  a  real  He  is  no  tent  or  frail  tabernacle  of 

need  1     Is  there  an  actual  promise  of  boughs,  easily  set  up,  as  easily  struck 

supply  and  help  ?     That  is  all.     Or  do  or  swept   down  by  the  violence  of  a 

men  half  hope  that  they  may  find  the  storm ;  he   is  a  solid  and  substantial 

397 


CHAP.  I.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11,   CORINTHIANS. 


building.  He  is  no  mere  *'  house  upon  real  steadiness  or  stability.  6.  A  false 
the  sand,"  but  "  founded  upon  a  rock."  idea  of  "  humiUty  "  has  often  misled 
2.  Our  word  here  says  that  the  sincere  souls  in  this  matter.  The  will 
grafting  *'  into  Christ  has  made  no  and  grace  of  God,  Who  by  His  Spirit 
temporary  union,  nor  one  easily  de-  *'  stablished  us  in  Christ "  have,  without 
stroyed.  There  is  strength  in  it ;  it  intention,  been  dishonoured.  Men 
gives  strength  to  the  character,  sta-  have  expected  to  fall,  at  least  "  occa- 
bility  and  fixedness  of  purpose  and  sionally."  They  have  supposed  that  only 
principle  and  course.  Men  can  "  count  spiritual  pride  or  presumption  could 
upon  "  such  a  Christian.  They  know  claim  to  have  stood  firm  for  a  whole 
what  to  expect  from  him.  He  is  a  day,  or  still  less  for  a  whole  week  or 
fixed  quantity  in  all  their  reckoning.  year.  It  has  been  deemed  "  humble  "  to 
They  know  that  he  will  always  act  as  understate,  when  bearing  testimony,  the 
"  a  man  in  Christ."  3.  The  man  is,  measure  of  strength  and  stability  which 
to  himself  and  to  others,  reliable.  An  the  Spirit  of  God  has  actually  wrought 
old  pastor  returning  to  his  former  in  them.  But  God's  Spirit  deserves 
Church  is  not  afraid  to  ask  about  him,  the  credit  of  all  He  has  wrought ; 
lest  he  should  have  sadly  to  learn  other  souls  need  the  testimony  to 
that  he  has  fallen  out  of  his  place  in  encourage  and  hearten  them  to  expect 
the  Church  and  " in  Christ"  Rather  larger  possibilities,  a  keeping  and  a 
the  "  tree  planted*"  (Ps.  i.),  "  rooted  strength  not  unworthy  of  the  grace  of 
in "  Christ,  is  like  those  age-old  God.  If  only  all  the  glory  be  given  to 
olives  and  terebinths  of  Palestinian  ''^God  Who  stahlisheth"  the  man  in 
landscape,  which,  amidst  the  ephemeral  Christ  cannot  expect,  or  get,  and 
growths  that  clothe  the  hillsides  for  testify  to,  too  much  of  stability, 
a  few  brief  weeks  after  the  spring  7.  Or  conceive  of  it  as  the  strength 
rains  have  fallen,  stand  ever  in  the  of  full  and  healthy  life ;  the  strength 
same  place  by  "the  rivers  of  water";  of  a  branch  in  a  healthy  vine,  of  a 
Christians  once.  Christians  to  the  end.  vigorous  limb  in  a  healthy  body ;  the 
4.  In  the  jungle  at  the  mouth  of  the  stability  of  a  strength -bringing,  life- 
Ganges  are  whole  forests  of  luxuriantly  giving,  lifelong  union  to  Christ, 
growing  trees  whose  roots  spread  8.  Also  the  connection  between  the 
widely,  but  barely  take  hold  of  the  steadiness  of  union  with  Christ,  and 
soil ;  the  burst  of  the  monsoon  uproots  steadiness  of  belief  in  the  great  doc- 
them  by  the  hundred :  as  the  first  trines  which  are  of  the  foundation  of 
rush  of  temptation  or  persecution  the  Faith,  is  of  the  closest.  The  settled 
sweeps  down  or  roots  up  the  men  in  experience  does  something  to  give  or 
Christ  who  are  not  "  stablished^  Great  to  keep  a  settled  faith.  The  great 
havoc  in  some  Churches  is  wrought  by  doctrines  of  the  Christian  Gospel 
a  time  of  sharp  testing !  5.  How  the  are  by  no  means  matters  of  cor- 
pyramids  of  Egypt  sit  age  after  age  rect  knowledge  only,  even  on  such 
foursquare  to  every  wind,  bearing  in-  supremely  important  themes ;  they  are 
deed  the  marks  of  years  and  violence,  translated  into  experience  in  every 
but  unmoved  by  earthquake  or  time.  spiritual  man.  When  he  speaks  of 
That  broad- based,  immovable  stability  or  engages  in  discussion  or  controversy 
is  the  very  ideal  of  the  steadfastness  about  the  Atonement  or  the  Trinity, 
of  the  Christian  life ;  not  the  unstable  it  is  not  chiefly  his  creed  that  is  in 
equilibrium  of  the  **  pyramid  upon  its  question,  but  his  very  life.  The  articles 
apex"  or  even  of  the  beautiful  but  of  his  Creed  are  the  elements  of  his 
slender  column.  There  are  characters  in  life;  really  "vital"  points.  The  man 
every  Church  which  need  buttress  and  who  year  after  year  is  steadily  "  in 
prop  and  "  under-pinning  " ;  and,  when  Christ  "  is  at  this  immense  advantage 
pastor  and  Church  have  done  all  they  in  controversy,  that  with  a  growing, 
can  for  such,  they  never  arrive  at  any  experimental  knowledge  he  knows  the 

398  . 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   IL  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  I. 


great  foundation  truths  of  Chris- 
tianity to  be  truths  indeed.  He  is  a 
witness,  and  his  testimony  cannot  readily 
be  shaken.  He  himself  is  not  easily 
"  shaken  in  mind,  nor  troubled  neither 
by  spirit,  nor  by  word,  nor  by  letter" 
(2  Thess.  ii.  2).  With  "  an  experience," 
he  may,  if  need  require,  hear  or  read 
what  would  grievously  unsettle  many 
souls.     He  is  ^^  stablished." 

II.  The  Spirit  gives  an  "  anointing." 
—1.  The  foundation  of  this  frequently 
asserted  truth  is  laid  deep  in  the 
community,  the  unity  of  Christ  and 
His  people.  He  is  par  excellence  the 
Anointed  of  God.  It  is  His  Name  as 
Messiah.  All  that  an  Dinting  meant 
in  history,  and  symbol,  and  ritual  in 
Israel ;  all  that  it  meant  to  king  or 
priest  to  receive  the  outpouring  of  the 
sacred  oil, — that  it  meant  in  pre-eminent 
fulness  of  meaning  to  Him.  "  He  is 
anointed  .  .  .  above  His  fellows " 
(Heb.  i.  9  ;  [Ps.  xlv.  7])  indeed,  but  they 
are  *'  His  fellows,"  in  this  as  in  all 
besides.  The  "thing  is  true  in  Him 
and  in  them "  (1  John  ii.  8).  It  is 
one  of  the  many  instances  where 
New  Testament  language,  used  of  the 
Incarnate  Son  of  God,  may  be  applied 
to  and  used  by  the  ^' adoj)ted"  (Rom. 
viii.  1 5)  "  sons  of  God."  In  a  very 
pregnant  sense  they  too  are  "  Christs  "  ; 
anointed  ones,  like  Him.  **  Ye  have 
an  unction  from  the  Holy  One" 
(1  John  ii.  27). 

2.  They  have  a  very  real  ^^priest- 
hood" not  in  heaven  only  [Rev.  i.  6, 
if  this  be  not  retrospective ;  but  see 
again  v.  10,  and  (?  in  the  opposite 
direction)  xx.  6],  but  on  earth.  They 
fulfil  better,  though  not  perfectly,  the 
ideal  which  was  scarcely  more  than 
a  beautiful  ideal  in  ancient  Israel ; 
they  are  a  "  kingdom  of  priests " 
[Exod.  xix.  6 ;  which  Peter  expounds 
correctly  as  "a  royal  priesthood " 
(1  Eph.  iii.  9)],  i.e.  a  royal  dynasty, 
every  one  of  whom  is  a  priest.  The 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  privilege 
and  the  endowment  of  their  high 
character  and  function  amongst  men 
and  toward  God. 

3.  Their  "  royalty  "  is  one  of  dignity 


of  character^  rather   than  of  function. 
"  Royal "  because  their  Father  is  King. 
So   far  as   they  may  be  said  to  rule 
mankind,  it  is  by  moral  force  and  by 
the  power  of  ideas.     So  far   as   each 
Christian  man  is  so  "  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  power  "  that  he  moves 
in  and  out  amongst  his  fellows,  in  the 
home,  or   the  world,  or  the  Church, 
a   power  to    repress    evil   and   banish 
it  by  his  very   presence,  and  a  power 
to   encourage    good   to    declare    itself 
and    be     bold    in    the    assurance    of 
his  support ;  so  far  is  he  king.     [The 
artisan  in  the  workshop,  the  medical 
student   in    the    dissecting-room,    the 
clerk  in  the  oflace,  the  very  schoolboy 
in  the  playground,  who  so  bear  them- 
selves that  foul  language  or  foul  doing 
or   selfishness    are    ashamed   in  their 
presence,  and  hide  themselves  or  are 
silenced,  are  in  their  circle  in  virtue  of 
the  royalty  of  holiness  true  kings.  "The 
meek  shall  inherit  the  earth."     What 
a  real  victory  and  supremacy  does  the 
quiet  but  thorough  Christian  girl  enjoy 
in   many   a    home !]     Christian   ideas 
rule  the  world,  and,  along  with  that 
active,   progressive    civilisation   which 
owes   so    much    to,  and   is   found   in 
so   nearly   exclusive   association   with, 
Christianity,  surely,  though  too  slowly, 
are   taking  possession.     So  far  as  in 
the     senate,    in    the    press,    in    the 
business,  in  the  daily  labour,  in  the 
family  and  personal  life,  each  Christian 
man  is  exhibiting  them,  and  so  is  pro- 
pagating  them,  and   helping  forward 
their   wider  predominance   and  sway, 
so  far  is  he  sharing  in  His  Master's 
dominion     and     royal     rule     in     the 
earth ;    in    his    little    measure    he    is 
*  a   king.      God's   modern  Israel,   with 
their  sacred  deposit  of  Christian  truth, 
are,  like  ancient  Israel  amongst   the 
nations,  and  like  Him  who  gathers  up 
into  Himself  all  the  characteristics  of 
the   Ideal   Israel,  given   for  "  leaders 
and     commanders     to     the    peoples " 
(Isa.  Iv.  4).     There  is  a  very  real  rule 
over  evil  in  their  own  hearts,  exercised 
in  virtue  of  the  Spirit  poured  out  upon 
them.      In    the    dim    perspective    of 
the  future  the  "saints  shall  take  the 

399 


CHAP.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


kingdom  "  (Dan.  vii.   18) ;  and   there  like  Samuel  or  Elijah  might  offer  their 

are  mysterious  suggestions  of  a  share  sacrifices,  though  in,  e.g.^  Samuel's  days 

with  Christ  in  the  royal  rule  of  the  these    were    priests    fully    appointed, 

consummated     "kingdom     of     God"  David    once    wore   the   ephod   of  the 

[e.g.  Rev.  iii.  21  ;  and,  earlier,  Matt,  priesthood  (2  Sam.  vi.  14);  and  there 

xix.  28].  is  no  need  to  reconstruct  the  religious 

Two  things  are  to  be  noted.  First,  history  of  Israel  in  order  to  account 
if  the  character  be  lost,  the  rojalty  for  2  Sam.  viii.  18,  where  David's  sons 
is  lost.  They  are  only  kings  thus,  are  called  "  priests "  [so  literally,  Heb.]. 
in  so  far  as,  and  so  long  as,  the  The  older,  wider,  patriarchal  idea  of 
"  anointing  "  rests  upon  them.  [Saul's  priesthood,  and  the,  true  priesthood 
royalty  lingered  later  in  historical  fact,  of  every  Israelite — perfectly  valid,  al- 
but,  theocratically,  his  royalty  was  though,  as  a  matter  of  convenient  and 
gone  when  *'  the  Spirit  of  God  departed  didactically  serviceable  arrangement, 
from  him."]  There  is  no  caste  of  men  it  had  been  concentrated  in  a  special, 
to-day  by  birth  an  indefeasibly  royal  representative  order  of  men  chosen  out 
Israel.  Secondly,  noblesse  oblige.  The  of  one  tribe — made  it  possible  for  at 
Christian  man  should  live  up  to  his  least  a  titular  honorary  priesthood  to 
character.  With  all  humility  will  he  be  conferred  upon  the  king's  sons, 
wear  his  honour,  because  it  is  all  of  The  analogy  of  all  this  to  the  priest- 
grace  ;  but  he  has  an  honour  to  wear,  hood  of  Christian  men  is  exceedingly 
and  in  his  friendships,  his  pleasures,  close.  The  ministerial  and  teaching 
his  business,  every  occupation  of  his  office  is  seen,  e.g.,  in  1  Cor.  xiv., 
life,  should  remember  that  there  are  early  to  have  begun  to  specialise  and 
things  this  Divine  "  royalty  "  cannot  localise  itself  in  particular  men  amongst 
do,  places  to  which  it  cannot  go,  there  the  whole  body  of  believers.  But  this 
is  company  which  it  cannot  keep,  there  means  no  "  clerical  "  caste  in  the 
are  friends  which  it  may  not  choose  Church ;  it  is  but  a  prudential  and,  as 
to  cultivate.  If  one  of  this  royal  race  things  are,  salutary,  necessary  concen- 
will  persist  in  forgetting  his  high  tration  of  a  ministry  belonging  to  every 
honour,  he  will  grieve,  and  may  grieve  believer.  And  there  is  no  "  priestly  " 
away,  the  Spirit  Whose  anointing  is  caste  at  all  which  has  any  office  or 
his  patent  of  royal  dignity.  prerogative  that  may  not  on  occasion, 

4.  Their  priesthood  is  one  of  function,  at  the  call  of  God,  be  exercised  by  any 

— For    a     special    purpose    the    Law  member  of   a   Church.     It   would   be 

"  came  in  beside,"  came  in  episodically  an  ill  day  for  any  Church  when  the 

(Rom.    V.    20),   in   the  course   of   the  ministry  was  recruited  only  from  the 

development  of  God's  ideas.     Its  spe-  families  of  the  ministry ;  when  minis- 

cialised  priesthood  was  a  necessity,  and  ters'  sons  should,  in  any  degree  as  a 

relatively   a   good   thing.     Absolutely  matter  of  course, 'Hake  up  their  fathers' 

it  was  a  retrogression  from  the  more  profession."       So,     too,     every     "  lay 

perfect   ideal   of   a   priesthood,   which  preacher,"  and  in  lower  degree  every 

belonged     to     manhood,     though     in  Sunday-school  teacher,  every  one  who 

patriarchal    days   it   was   accidentally  speaks  to  a  soul  for  Christ,  keeps  up 

and  prudentially  localised  in  the  father  the  needful  protest  that  the  teaching, 

of  the  family  or  the  head  of  the  tribe,  saving  function  is  no  special  right  of 

Still,  the   idea   was   not  forgotten    in  any   clerical  order.     (As   to   woman's 

Israel.      Not    to   quote   again    Exod.  part  in  public  worship,  see  under  1  Cor. 

xix.    6,   the   slaying   of   the   Passover  xiv.    34.)      In   the   Christian   Church 

lamb  by  the  head  of  the  family  was  manhood-priesthood  is  again  the  order ; 

contemplated  as  a  permanent  point  of  the   original   order,    obscured  by    the 

the  Passover  ritual,  and  the  lamb  was  episodic  priesthood  and  ritual  of  Mosaic 

a  true  sacrifice,  though  not  that  alone  ;  Law,  is  now  once  more  brought  into 

it  had  other  meanings  also.     Prophets  prominence  and  use.     The  priesthood 

400 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  i. 


is  inherent  in  every  " anointed"  every 
"  spiritual"  man. 

5.  With  one  marked  and  emphatic 
reservation. — Christ  does  not  share  with 
His  people  the  atoning  work  of  His 
priesthood.  He  alone  makes  atone- 
ment for  guilt,  Needing  to  make  none 
for  Himself  [unlike  the  old  High  Priest 
(Heb.  ix.  7)],  He  reserves  to  Himself 
the  offering  of  the  one  sacrifice  "  for 
sins  for  ever"  [query,  better  connect 
"for  ever"  with  "sat  down"  (Heb. 
X.  12)].  The  Christian  year  has  become 
one  long  "  Day  of  Atonement " ;  the 
yearly  cycle  of  the  old  sacrificial  order 
has  gathered  itself  up  into  one,  the 
Sin-offering  of  that  Day,  now  made 
perpetual  after  the  one  first  and  final 
consummation  upon  the  Cross.  And,  as 
of  old,  the  sacrifice  and  its  presentation 
in  our  Christian  Day  of  Atonement 
are  the  unshared  act  and  honour  of 
our  High  Priest.  A  guilty  conscience, 
or  a  heart  full  of  fear,  must  look  to, 
and  rely  on,  Him  and  His  good  ofiices 
alone.  Guilty  souls  have  "  their  access 
unto  the  Father "  only  by  Him  (Eph. 
ii.  8,  iii.  12;  Heb.  iv.  14,16). 

6.  But,  ivith  that  exception,  His  people 
share  His  priesthood. — (1)  In  a  very 
true  sense  their  intercession  for  the 
world  around  them  is  effectual  for  the 
world's  great  blessing.  If  the  Church 
ceased  to  pray  for  the  world,  or  were 
removed  from  out  of  it  altogether ;  if 
the  world  were  left  to  its  own  evil, 
godless  heart  (Eph.  ii.  8),  the  very 
world  itself  would  account  it  no  small 
calamity  and  curse.  The  Church  says, 
as  did  Samuel  of  Saul,  "God  forbid 
that  I  should  sin  in  ceasing  to  pray 
for  you  "  (1  Sam.  xii.  23).  One  of  the 
most  precious  prerogatives  of  the  man- 
hood priesthood  of  the  "  anointed " 
believer  is  "to  make  prayers  and  sup- 
plications, and  to  give  thanks  for  all 
men,"  etc.  (1  Tim.  ii.  1-4).  God  would 
have  all  men  saved ;  the  Church  of 
God  should  never  cease  to  have  a  heart 
with  a  world-wide  outlook  and  yearning. 
Priesthood  should  mean  no  aloofness 
or  exalted  separateness  from  the  general 
mass ;  the  truest  priesthood  means  the 
closest  brotherhood,  the  most  intimate 


nearness.  Christ  in  heaven,  His  people 
on  earth,  interceding  for  the  world, — 
in  that  is  the  world's  hope.  Every 
Christian  priest  may  covet  and  culti- 
vate, as  part  of  his  "  anointing  "  for 
his  office,  the  fulness  of  "  the  Spirit  of 
grace  and  supplication  "  (Zech.  xii.  10). 
A  noble  work,  open  to  the  simplest, 
poorest,  humblest ;  and  very  mighty 
are  some  such  in  every  Church  in  their 
pleading,  interceding  prevalence  with 
God.  (2)  Several  passages  bring  out 
other  typical  characteristics  of  the 
priesthood  of  "  anointed  "  believers ; 
e.g.  1  Pet.  ii.  5,  "To  offer  up  spiritual 
sacrifices,"  i.e.  sacrifices  which  are  not, 
as  aforetime  and  now  in  heathen- 
ism, things  fleshly  or  material  at  all. 
They  present  themselves  before  God 
with  hearts  full,  e.g.,  of  praise 
["whoso  offorcth  praise,"  Ps.  1.  23]. 
Any  material  gift  is  valueless  unless 
it  embody  and  express  a  "  spiritual " 
sacrifice.  No  point  more  needful  for 
the  Christian  priest  to  note  and  guard 
than  this.  The  heart  always  gravi- 
tates towards  tho  material ;  it  is  easier 
to  bring  the  gift  than  the  heart. 
[1  Sam.  XV.  22,  where  "  better  than " 
means  that  "  sacrifice,"  be  it  never  so 
costly,  abundant,  slavish  in  its  devotion, 
is  of  no  value  without  ^^  obedience."] 
Heb.  xiii.  1 5  well  comments  on  this : 
"  By  Him  [i.e.  Christ ;  our  praises,  as 
our  prayers,  can  only  come  up  to  God 
in  virtue  of  His  mediation]  let  us  offer 
the  sacrifice  of  praise  continually,  that 
is,  the  fruit  of  our  lips  [cf.  Hosea 
xiv.  2,  which  anticipates  this  thought, 
the  "  calves  of  our  lips  "],  giving  thanks 
to  ["  making  confession  to,"  margin 
and  R.V.]  His  name."  Every  anointed 
priest  has  his  temple,  with  its  altar 
of  this  incense,  within  his  own  heart. 
Within  him  is  a  shrine  in  whose  holy 
secrecy  there  may  go  on  the  perpetual 
offering  of  a  man  who  "  prays  with- 
out ceasing,  and  in  everything  gives 
thanks."  Paul  is  a  priest  at  an  altar 
in  Phil.  ii.  17,  but  with  another 
kind  of  offering.  His  offering,  his 
sacred  service,  is  the  body  of  Philip- 
pian  believers,  or,  more  exactly,  their 
^^ faith"  which,  by  the  blessing  of  his 

i>  401 


CHAP.  T.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


Master,  he  can  bring  and  show  as  the 
fruit  of  his  work  in  Philippi.  He  asks 
his  Master's  gracious  acceptance  of 
their  "  believing "  Hfe  and  character. 
His  life  is  in  danger ;  any  day  may 
see  him  brought  to  trial ;  the  issue 
may  be  death.  If  his  Master  ask  his 
life  as  the  crowning  act  of  a  career  of 
self-devotion,  well  and  good.  Paul  is 
more  than  content ;  he  will  "  rejoice  " 
to  pour  out — as  (in  heathen  phrase)  a 
libation,  or  (in  Hebrew  ritual  order) 
a  drink-offering — by  the  altar,  or  even 
as  it  were  "  over  the  sacrifice  "  which 
he  brings  and  lays  upon  it,  his  very 
life.  The  type  of  a  ^^ priesthood" 
fulfilled  by  many  a  busy,  fruitful 
toiler,  whose  life  may  not,  indeed,  have 
issued  in  a  technical  "  martyrdom," 
but  which  has  not  less  really  been 
*'  spent  and  spent  out  "  over  the  work, 
accumulated  results  of  which  are  the 
offering  with  which  he  appears  at  the 
altar  before  his  Lord.  Unhappy  that 
"priest"  whose  '"^anointing"  has  been 
practically  in  vain,  and  who  appears 
before  God  empty-handed,  having  no 
fruit  to  show,  nothing  to  lay  upon 
the  altar  for  acceptance  and  reward. 
Rom.  xii.  1  takes  up  the  self-devotion 
which  perhaps  culminates  in  some  day 
of  martyrdom,  but  which  in  every  case 
will  have  been  the  keynote  of  the 
whole  life,  the  great  foundation  prin- 
ciple of  it  all :  "  Present  yourselves 
a  living  sacrifice."  [So  the  text  is 
naturally  quoted,  with  a  perfectly  cor- 
rect appreciation  of  its  force.  But 
there  is  terrible  point  and  force  in 
"  present  your  bodies."  Paul's  readers 
were  only  too  familiar  with  fact  that 
(as  in  some  Oriental  cidts  of  to-day) 
women — "  sacred  slaves  " — and  even 
men,  literally  "  presented  their  bodies  " 
to  the  divinity  of  a  temple,  and  en- 
riched its  treasury  with  the  proceeds 
of  abominable  and  unnameable  lusts. 
*'  Present  your  bodies  ...  a  sacrifice 
.  .  .  holy."  Heathen  sin  often  ran 
into  sensual  sin  ;  the  fact  in  part  gives 
a  colour  and  emphasis  to  Paul's  use 
of  the  phrase  *'  the  flesh  "  (see  under 
vii.  1) ;  his  exhortation  here  is  but  the 
summary  of  many  an  injunction  such 

402 


as  Rom.  vi.  12,  13,  xiii.  14.  Heathen 
sin  had  showed  itself  most  obviously  open 
to  observation  and  censure,  in  fleshly 
sins  ;  Christian  holiness  would  most  ob- 
viously begin  and  would  be  appreciable 
in  a  sanctification  of  the  very  body 
itself.  "  Present  your  bodies."^  The 
man  who  thus  "  presents  his  body " 
has  first  offered  much  more ;  he  has 
devoted  himself.  The  offering  of  the 
body  is  the  act  of  a  man  who  is  him- 
self an  offering,  and  is  himself  the 
priest  who  presents  it.  And  such  a 
daily,  detailed  consecration  (John  xvii. 
19)  of  self  and  activities  and  life — 
needs  a  perpetual  "  anointing."  It 
is  the  offering  of  a  man  "  filled  with 
the  Spirit."  In  the  Old  Testament, 
Samuel  was  an  early  and  beautiful 
example  of  a  life  thus  wholly  given  to 
do  nothing  and  to  be  nothing  except  for 
the  Lord,  its  Tabernacle,  its  service. 
His  mother  "  presented  his  body,"  pre- 
sented her  boy,  as  her  offering  to  the 
Lord.  Nor,  we  may  believe,  did  he  go 
back  from  the  spirit  and  the  terms  of 
his  mother's  gift  ["  I  have  returned  him 
to  the  Lord  ;  as  long  as  he  liveth  he  shall 
be  lent  unto  the  Lord"  (1  Sam.  i.  28)], 
when  he  came  out  from  "  dwelling  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  xxiii.  6) 
into  the  busy  life  of  practical  govern- 
ment, and  into  the  "  secularities "  of 
the  life  of  a  family  and  household. 
The  happy  days  spent  in  ceaseless 
ministration  in  the  tabernacle  with 
Eli  were  days  of  a  "  living  sacrifice." 
Happy  those  on  whom  rests  continu- 
ally the  Spirit's  ''  anoiyiting "  for  this 
form  of  priestly  function.  John  xvii.  19, 
above  quoted,  brings  such  a  life  into 
very  close  parallelism  to  that  of  "  God's 
Anointed  One."  Is  not  He — are  not 
His  people — both  Sacrifice  and  Priests  ? 
III.  The  Spirit  is  a  "  seal  "  and  an 
"  earnest." — Upon  this  word  "  sealed" 
thus  simply  introduced  and  left  for  the 
pondering  of  the  Corinthians,  we  may 
cast  the  illumination  of  Paul's  fuller 
explanation  of  his  thought  in  Eph. 
iv.  30,  itself  lighted  up,  as  Ephesian 
listeners  on  whose  ears  the  word  fell 
for  the  first  time  would  instinctively 
light  it   up,   by  i.    13,   14.      Indeed, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  I. 


Eph.  i.  14  is  only  a  little  fuller  state-  of  a  ''^  day  of  redemptions^  i.e.  of  "^Ae 

ment  of   what  is,   evidently,  from  its  redemption  of  the  purchased  possession." 

occurrence   here,  a   sample   of   Paul's  — Thus  is  the  matter  viewed  from  the 

habitual   thought  about   the  work  of  side   of   Him   Who    ^^  seals."     Viewed 

the  Holy  Spirit.  from  our  side  who  are  the  "  sealed  " 

1.  The  ^^ seal  "  is  a  person,  the  same  persons,  that  *'day  of  redemption"  is 
Divine  Person  Who  is  the  "  earnest." —  the  day  of  coming  into  '*  our  in- 
Eph.  iv.  30  contributes  to  make  that  heritance"  (Eph.,  uhi  supr.).  The 
clear.  We  might  not  infer  very  much  "  purchased  possession  "  is  God's  or 
from  the  word  "  grieve,"  if  it  were  an  Christ's  (Acts  xx.  28).  The  "  in- 
isolated  turn  of  phraseology ;  though,  heritance "  is  that  of  His  people, 
whilst  one  could  speak,  not  unnaturally.  When  in  *'  the  Day  "  He  enters  into 
of  "  resisting  "  or  of  "  yielding  to  "  an  full  possession,  they  enter  into  posses- 
influence  or  a  personified  Force,  it  sion  also.  (1)  Man's  "  day  of  redemp- 
would  not  be  as  natural  to  speak  of  tion "  was  the  Friday  of  Calvary ; 
"  grieving  "  it.  Poetically  one  might  Christ's  "  day  of  redemption  "  is  in  the 
speak  of  "  obeying  "  a  force ;  but  men  future.  (See  the  fuUer,  future  sense 
*'  grieve"  a  person.  But  the  expression  of  "  redemption  "  in  1  Cor.  i.  30.)  On 
is  not  isolated.  It  is  a  sample  case  of  the  cross,  for  man's  sake^  was  Christ 
a  whole  group  of  New  Testament  terms  with  His  own  blood  "  paying  down  the 
of  expression,  beginning  with  John  price  "  [an  expression  which  has  hardly 
XV.,  xvi.,  which  assume,  imply,  and  so  more  than  this  one  point  of  contact 
indicate,  a  personal  Holy  Spirit.  Men  and  analogy  with  tlw  fact]  of  man's 
not  infrequently  can  gather  with  utter  freedom  from  the  results  of  the  curse 
certainty — very  frequently  in  a  court  and  penalty  of  sin.  For  His  own  sake 
of  justice  will  a  shrewd  counsel  do  He  was  also  paying  down  the  purchase 
so — from  a  passing  phrase  or  a  single  money  for  a  "  peculiar  people  "  [1  Pet. 
word,  spoken  or  written,  what  is  in  the  ii.  9,  lit.  "a  people  of  possession"],  an 
mind  of  the  speaker  or  writer,  though  Israel  which,  in  a  world  where  all 
he  did  not  intend  it  to  be  discovered.  are  "  His  own,"  should  be  His  "  very 
Very  often  may  be  thus  inferred  a  own "  acquired  for  Himself,  specially 
man's  habitual  opinion  upon  a  topic,  precious  to  His  heart.  In  the  man- 
When  the  disciples  in  the  upper  room  ward  aspect  of  the  "redemption,"  it 
heard  Jesus  speaking  of  "  the  other "  was  complete  at  Calvary,  when  He 
Comforter,  repeatedly  say,  "  He,"  said  "It  is  finished."  Yet  all  that  He 
"  Himself,"  "  Whom,"  they  could  only  intended  "  redemption  "  to  include,  will 
believe  that  to  their  Teacher  the  Com-  not  be  fulfilled  until,  in  the  resur- 
forter  was  not  something,  but  some-  rection  morning,  the  very  body  itself 
body,  another  personal  Friend  for  them  stands,  like  the  whole  redeemed  Man- 
comparable  to  Himself.  [The  geologist  hood,  freed  from  the  latest  trace  and 
may  find  a  deep  lying  and  extensive  touch  of  the  curse  of  sin.  In  the  God- 
stratum  "crop  up"  at  the  surface,  ward,  Christward  aspect,  "redemption" 
only  in  one  very  narrow  area.  He  will  not  be  complete  till  the  whole 
follows  the  indication  of  the  one  single  company  of  those  whose  faith  in  His 
narrow  spot,  and  finds  the  vast  beds  atoning  death  turned  their  "  redemp- 
beneath.  The  silver  mines  of  Peru  tion "  into  "  salvation,"  stand  thus 
were  discovered  because,  where  a  dis-  gloriously  complete  by  His  side  in  their 
lodged  rock  had  rested,  an  Indian  "  inheritance," — that  "  of  the  saints  in 
noticed  the  shining  metal  showing.]  light "  (Col.  i.  12).  [Roughly  illustrate 
In  Paul's  word  "  grieve "  there  is  the  by  the  purchase  in  the  factory  of  a 
cropping  up  of  a  great  underlying  and  vase  of  costly  marble,  which  is  as  yet 
extensive  and  precious  truth,  the  person-  in  the  rough.  Price  paid,  purchase 
ality  of  the  "  sealing "  Spirit.  complete,  ownership   absolute  ;    but  a 

2.  Ths  seeding  has  been  done  in  view  sense  in  which  the  purchaser  does  not 

'~~  403 


CHAP.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


regard  possession  or  ownership  realised 
until  the  finished  vessel  is  safely  de- 
livered at  his  home.  Or  the  buyer  in 
the  cattle  market  chooses,  pays  for, 
becomes  the  owner  of,  sheep  from  the 
"  pens  "  of  several  sellers.  Ownership 
is  "  finished "  before  he  leaves  the 
market.  But  in  a  very  real  sense  he 
looks  forward  to  a  completed  and 
finished  ownership,  when  at  last  thp 
selected  sheep  have  all  been  brought 
safely  home.  The  purchase  was 
**  finished,"  the  sheep  were  "  his 
own,"  in  the  market ;  the  purchase 
is  not  "  finished,"  the  flock  are  not 
assuredly  and  in  fulness  of  possession 
his  own,  until  they  are  safe  in  the 
home-fold  ;  the  two  *'  redemptions."] 
The  presence  and  work  of  the  Spirit  is 
a  significant  thing  for  the  present  of 
our  religious  life,  but  it  is  significant 
also — to  Christ  and  to  His  people, 
both — for  the  future  "  day  "  and  its 
hope.  It  is  the  buyer's  mark  of  owner- 
ship put  upon  the  sheep  he  has  pur- 
chased. It  is  "  the  broad-arrow,"  the 
"  seal  "  of  the  King,  stamped  upon,  to 
identify  and  to  claim.  His  own  pur- 
chased "  vessel."  (2)  To  His  people 
themselves  it  is  the  "ear?ies^,"  i.e.  a 
pledge,  of  some  future  good,  which  con- 
sists in  a  sample  of  that  "  good  "  (Rom. 
viii.  28).  It  is  the  shilling  given  to 
the  recruit  as  the  first  money  of  his 
future  pay.  It  is  the  deposit  paid  on 
account  towards  the  fuller  payment 
of  a  completed  bargain.  It  is,  more 
exactly  in  analogy  with  the  fact  illus- 
trated, the  maintenance  paid  to  the 
minor  under  his  father's  will,  until  he 
comes  of  age,  and  the  whole  estate  is  at 
his  disposal  and  enjoyment.  The  life 
and  grace  and  work  of  the  Spirit  now 
within  the  Christian  man,  are  the 
sample,  the  first  taste,  the  beginnings, 
of  the  fuller  life  of  *'  the  inheritance  " 
when  it  comes.  That  life  hereafter 
and  this  life  here  are  not  two,  but  one. 
This  is  the  eternal  life.  The  division  line 
between  the  old  and  the  new  is  not  before 
the  Christian,  located  at  death  or  judg- 
ment ;  it  is  behind  him,  located  at  con- 
version.    Then  began   one   life  which 


has  become  his  true  life,  the  natural 
life  having  become  a  subsidiary  one, 
which  soon  drops  off  and  leaves  the 
eternal  life  to  go  on  into  eternity 
with  unbroken  continuity.  Further, 
the  fact  of  this  life  binds  the  Divine 
Giver  of  it  to  complete  His  gift  here- 
after. *'  Our  hope  "  does  not  leave  us 
by-and-by  to  wake  up  befooled,  deceived, 
*'  ashamed,"  "  because  the  love  of  God 
is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  [so  here] 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  given  unto  us " 
[E-om.  V.  5  ;  the  whole  argument  of 
"  an  earyiest  "].  If  on  the  Christian's 
own  part  there  be  faithfulness,  kept  up 
in  the  grace  which  is  itself  part  of  the 
"  earnest, ^^  there  will  also  be,  there  is 
pledged,  a  faithfulness  on  the  part  of 
God.  Having  given  the  Spirit,  He 
cannot  go  back  and  withhold  the  "  in- 
heritance." The  sample  binds  Him. 
"  Will  He  give  me  '  glory '  ?  "  ''  Yes  ; 
He  has  given  me  '  grace.' " 

3.  Similarly,  the  seal  is  in  no  arbi- 
trary or  accidental  connection  with  the 
completed  ownership  and  full  posses- 
sion by  Christ  towards  which  it  points. 
A  seal  very  commonly  bears  the 
initials,  it  may  bear  the  image,  of  him 
whose  seal  it  is.  The  presence  and  work 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  "  in  our  hearts " 
are  restoring  "  the  image  of  God " ; 
they  ought  to  bring  out  "  a  conformity 
to  the  image  of  God's  Son "  (Rom. 
viii.  29).  Christlikeness,  inwrought, 
brought  out,  by  the  Spirit,  is,  to  others 
and  to  the  man  himself,  the  seal.  The 
argument  of  ownership  thus  lies  upon 
the  surface :  *'  The  man  belongs  to 
Christ,  for  he  is  like  Christ,  getting 
more  like  Him  day  by  day."  When 
Christ  comes  to  get  His  own  together, 
the  "  Firstborn  "  (Rom.,  ubi  supr.)  will 
look  for  and  claim  the  "many  brethren" 
in  whom  there  shows  that  family 
likeness  of  which  He  is  the  first  and 
best  exponent.  Thus,  then,  the 
"  seal "  may  be  lost ;  the  earnest  may 
be  forfeited.  They — it,  the  complex, 
and  yet  one,  blessing — are  grace  im- 
parted, maintained,  only  by  the  cease- 
lessly renewed  gift  and  indwelling  of  the 
Personal  Spirit  of  God  " in  our  hearts" 


404 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap,  l 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  11.  Two  Features  in  the  Life  of 
Citizens  of  the  Kingdom  of  God. 

I.  **  Circulation  "  in  the  life  of  the 
kingdom  of  God. — The  cycle  of  life 
begins  in,  and  returns  to,  prayer. 
"  Prayer"  first  wins  a  "  Gift  "  ;  then, 
the  *'  Gift "  won,  and  exhibited  in 
its  blessed  fruits,  calls  out  "  Praise." 
Then  the  grateful,  adoring  Church 
begins  the  round  again  :  making  known 
its  fresh  requests  once  moi  e ;  again 
getting  the  new  answer ;  and  then 
again  acknowledging  the  mercy  with 
new  Praise.  [Observe  how  the  ob- 
jective efficacy  of  Prayer  is  here 
assumed ;  prayer  which  is  petition,  and 
not  merely  adoration,  contemplation, 
communion,  with  God, etc.  Prayer — the 
consentaneous  prayer  of  many  persons 
— prevails,  not  only  to  their  own 
blessing,  but  to  secure  for  another 
person,  Paul,  not  merely  a  spiritual 
grace,  but  an  actual  deliverance  from 
very  extreme  peril.] 

II.  Union  in  the  life  of  the  kingdom. 
— The  gift  is  bestowed  in  answer  to 
the  prayers  of  many ;  the  thanks  are 
given  by  many ;  many  then  help  to- 
gether in  praying  for  the  new  deliver- 
ance. 1.  There  is  solitary  prayer 
which  is  of  the  mightiest ;  there  is  an 
offering  of  thanksgiving,  in  the  holy 
privacy  of  the  sanctuary  within  the 
heart,  which  is  grateful  exceedingly  to 
God,  but  is  a  holy  secret  between  the 
heart  and  Himself.  But  united  pi  ayer 
has  a  power  all  its  own  ;  united  thanks- 
giving has  a  beauty  and  value  all  its 
own.  [Cf.  the  strong  figure  in  Rom. 
XV.  30  :  "  that  ye  strive  [wrestle, 
agonise]  together  with  me  in  your 
prayers  for  me."  As  though,  not  one 
*'  wrestling  Jacob,"  but  a  Church 
every  member  of  which  is  a  "  wrestling 
Jacob,"  had  all  taken  hold  of,  and 
were  hanging  upon,  God,  with  "  We 
will  not  let  Thee  go."]  2.  No  Church 
is  strong  unless  its  individual  members 
are  strong,  for  prayer  and  for  work.  It 
is  in  secret  prayer  that  they  learn  to 
pray.  But  the  Church,  meeting  as  such, 
for  prayer  and  for  thanksgiving,  has 


a  mighty  power.  United  waiting  upon 
God  brought  Pentecost ;  united  waiting 
upon  God  had  secured  "  deliverance  "  for 
Paul.  There  is  a  principle  in  the 
Church  prayer  meeting ;  a  special 
promise  belongs  to  it  (Matt,  xviii.  19). 
3.  The  missionary  agents  of  the 
Churches,  in  difficulty  and  peril,  should 
be  remembered  in  Church  prayer, 
and  thanksgiving  rendered  for  their 
"  gift  "  and  mercy.  [4.  All  the  efficacy 
of  Sympathy  is  utilised  by  such  united 
prayer  and  thanksgiving ;  the  Church 
does  well  to  have  its  thanksgiving 
meetings,  as  well  as  its  prayer  meet- 
ings ;  sluggish  hearts  are  stirred, 
flagging  interest  in  one  is  aroused  by 
zeal  in  another;  beginners  learn  to 
pray,  and  learn  to  discover  matter  for 
praise,  as  they  listen  to  the  older  and 
more  experienced  members.]  [Further, 
remember  that  this  "  agreeing  to  ask  " 
is  very  much  more  than  that  a  given 
number  of  persons,  all  convinced  that 
some  certain  object  of  desire  is  laudable 
or  needful,  concur  in  making  request 
for  the  same  thing.  It  goes  deeper ; 
it  is  a  union  of  conviction  and  desire 
and  petition,  born  of  the  common 
presence  in  each  of  them  of  One  and 
the  Same  Spirit  of  prayer.  They  are 
one  in  the  Body  and  in  the  Head.  It 
is  the  one  Mind,  Life,  Heart,  of  the 
Body  breathing  out  its  desire  through 
each  of  the  company  who  "  agree  to 
ask."  ("  Prayer  in  the  Holy  Ghost," 
Jude  20.)] 

Ver.  1 2.  Ths  Testimony  of  Our  Con- 
science.— [A  companion,  complement- 
ary, "■  witness  "  to  that  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  (Rom.  viii.  16).] 

I.  What  is  this  conscience  ? — 1 .  We 
are  made  conscious  beings,  and  can 
perceive  things  past  and  present  re- 
lating to  ourselves,  both  tempers  and 
outward  behaviour.  But  conscience 
implies  somewhat  more :  its  main 
business  is  to  accuse  or  excuse,  to 
approve  or  disapprove,  to  acquit  or 
condemn.  By  some  called  "  moral 
sense.'*    Scripturally  it  is  :  "A  faculty 

405 


CHAP.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


or  power,  implanted  by  God  in  every 
soul  which  comes  into  the  world,  of 
perceiving  what  is  right  or  wrong  in 
his  own  heart  or  life,  in  his  tempers, 
thoughts,  words,  and  actions."  2.  The 
rule  of  conscience  is  (1)  for  heathens, 
"  the  law  written  in  their  hearts " 
(Rom.  ii.  14,  15);  (2)  for  Christians, 
the  Word  of  God,  the  writings  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament ;  the  purpose 
of  which  is  stated  in  2  Tim.  iii.  16. 
**  He  esteems  nothing  good,  but  what 
is  here  enjoined,  either  directly  or  by 
plain  consequence  ;  nothing  evil,  but 
w^hat  is  here  forbidden,  either  in  terms, 
or  by  undeniable  inference.  Whatever 
the  Scripture  neither  forbids  nor  en- 
joins either  directly  or  by  plain  con- 
sequence, he  believes  .  .  .  indifferent, 
...  in  itself  neither  good  nor  evil ; 
this  being  the  whole  and  sole  outward 
rule  whereby  his  conscience  is  to  be 
directed  in  all  things." 

II.  1.  The  testimony  of  conscience, 
— If  (as  here)  approving,  depends  upon 
(1)  a  right  understanding  of  the  Rule, 
the  Word  of  God ;  (2)  a  knowledge  of 
ourselves;  (3)  an  agreement  of  our 
life,  inward  and  outward,  with  the  rule  ;, 
and  (4)  an  inward  perception  of  this 
agreement.  "  This  habitual  perception, 
this  inward  consciousness  itself,  is 
properly  a  good  conscience."  2.  This 
presumes  a  moral  basis,  "a  spiritual 
condition,"  a  saving  faith  in  Christ, 
which  gives  the  "  evidence "  of  Heb. 
xi.  1,  accompanied  by  love  "  shed  abroad 
in  the  heart,"  and  the  fulfilment  in  us 
of  Heb.  viii.  10. 

III.  The  matter  of  the  testimony. — 
1.  Briefly,  "  our  conversation  "  ;  this 
*'  in  the  world"  even  that  of  the  un- 
godly ;  " m simplicity"  all  the  actions 
and  conversation  full  of  the  light  of 
heaven,  love,  peace,  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  eye  of  the  mind  steadily, 
singly,  fixed  upon  God  ;  ''  simplicity  " 
in  intention,  *'  godly  sincerity  "  in  the 
execution  of  it,  much  more  than  heathen 
sincerity  ;  "  not  with  fleshly  wisdom^" 
not  by  the  force  of  good  sense,  good 
nature,  good  breeding;  this  is  only 
attained  to  "5?/  the  grace  of  God."  2. 
This  is  the  ground  of  "  our  rejoicing." 

406 


"  Our "  joy  is  no  natural  joy,  or 
physical  lightness  of  spirits  ;  nor  the 
joy  of  ignorance  of  the  law  which  is 
broken;  nor  that  of  a  dull  or  callous 
conscience.  It  is  the  joy  of  holy  love 
and  happy  obedience. — Wesley,  ^'"Ser- 
mons" xii. 

Ver.  15.  Benefit  (  =  "Grace"). 
To  have  the  Gospel  and  its  ministers 
is — 

I.  An  unspeakable  benefit. 

II.  One  not  easily  exhausted.  ["  A 
second."] 

III.  One  to  be  diligently  improved. 
-[J.  L.] 

For  vers.  23,  24,  see  under  chap.  ii. 

Vers.  15-18.  A  Christian  MavUs 
Prom^ises  are  : —   . 

I.  Sincere. — Duly  considered  in  the 
making;  carefully  worded  (ver.  14, 
"ye  read  ") ;  honestly  intended. 

II.  Held  binding. — In  the  sight  of 
God ;  in  spite  of  inconvenience  and 
self-sacrifice. 

III.  May  sometimes  be  superseded. 
— By  higher  obligations ;  by  circum- 
stances beyond  his  control.^[J^.  Z.] 

[Of  God's  promises  III.  is  never  true  ! 
The  '■^  Amen"  of  completed  fulfilment 
always  crowns  the  "  Yes  "  of  the  initial 
promise !] 

Ver.  \1.  A  Christian  MarCs  Steadfast- 
ness of  Purposes 

I.  What  it  includes. — Due  considera- 
tion ;  the  purpose  must  not  be  lightly 
formed.  Conscientious  prosecution  ;  it 
may  not  be  lightly  given  up.  This 
does  not  exclude  the  propriety  of  a 
change  of  mind  under  the  force  of  new 
and  imperative  circumstances.  [So 
the  true  immutability  of  God  does  not 
consist  in  His  never  altering  His 
course  of  action,  or  what,  speaking 
humanly,  looks  like  changing  his  pur- 
pose toward  the  man;  but  in  His 
never  changing  the  principles  of  His 
dealing  with  men,  with  sin,  with 
holiness.  If  the  man  changes,  then 
God,  remaining  in  Himself  unchanged, 
must  deal  otherwise  with  him  than 
before.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ii. 


II.  Upon  what  it  ought  to  rest. —  Yer.  23.  An  Apostle's  Word  confirmed 
Not  on  worldly  considerations.     ["  Not  by  an  Oath. 

with  fleshly  wisdom."]     "According  to  I.  Under    what    circumstances    an 

the  flesh."     Not  on  the  mere  force  of  oath  admissible  ? 

human  will  [this  may  be  only  pride  or  II.  How  reconcile  with  "  swear  not 

obstinacy],  but  on  Christian  principle,  at  all  "  ? 

III.  Why  it  is  necessary. — As  an  III.  What   is  "  profane  swearing," 
essential  of  Christian   character.     As  therefore  ? — \J.  Z.] 

a  foundation  of  human  confidence. —  [Be  a  Yea,  Yea,  Nay,   Nay,  man; 

\J.  Z.]  but  not  a  Yea,  Nay,  Yea,  Nay,  man.] 


CHAPTER  II. 

CRITICAL  NOTES, 

{N.B. — The  paragraph  really  hegins  at  i.  23.) 

Ver.  1.  Determined. — As  in  1  Cor.  ii.  2.    For  myself. — So  R.V.,  meaning,  "  For  my  own  sake 

as  well  as  for  yours."  Again. — To  be  linked  with  '■'come"  only?  {q.d.  "To  come  again, 
and  to  have  a  sorrowful  visit ")  ;  or  with  "  with  sorrow  "  1  (g.d.  "  a  second  sorrowful  visit," 
like  a  former  one).  Answer  variously  given,  according  as  an  intermediate  visit,  unmentioned 
in  the  Acts,  is  not,  or  is,  supposed.  Agreed  that  the  visit  recorded  in  Acts  xviii.  was  not 
specially  a  sorrowful  visit.  In  heaviness.—"  With  sorrow^'  (R.V.).  Here  also  external  con- 
siderations very  much  decide  whether  this  shall  mean,  "with  sorrow  in  my  heart"  or  "to 
inflict  sorrow  on  you."     [See  Introduction,  more  fully.] 

Ver.  2.  He  that  is  made  sorry. — Probably  not  the  particular  ofiEender  of  these  verses  ;  but 
quite  general.  Paul  can  grieve  them  all ;  each  one  of  them,  thus  grieved,  must  make  him 
glad.     Ver.  3  confirms  this. 

Ver.  3.  This  very  thing. — Viz.  1  Cor.  v.  1  sqq.  (Waite,  in  Speaher,  however,  thinks  rather 
the  decision  announced  in  ver.  1.)     Paul  means,  '■^  I  wrote,  rather  than  come  at  once." 

Ver.  4. — Another  concurrent  and  quite  consistent  reason,  "  I  wrote  with  tears,  in  order 
that,"  etc. 

Ver.  5. — Very  difficult  to  translate  with  any  certainty.  Ambiguous  for  two  reasons :  (1) 
What  does  "  in  j^curV  belong  to  ?  Answer  not  certainly  clear;  (2)  What  is  the  grammatical 
object  of  "  overcharge,"  "  overweight  "  ?  Answer  again  not  certainly  clear.  (2)  is  answered 
in  opposite  ways  by  the  R.V.  and  A.V.,  the  two  being  typical  of  many  more  commentators. 
So  is  (1).  The  A.V.  means,  "  The  grief  has  not  fallen  entirely  and  only  upon  me,  but  on  you 
also.  Not  to  think  so,  would  on  my  part  be  to  charge  upon  you  all  the  heavy  sin  of  indiffer- 
ence to  his  sin."  R.V.  means,  "  But  in  part  (let  me  say) — not  to  make  too  grave  a  matter  of 
it  against  him — he  has  grieved  you  all."     Four  variants  are  supported : 

"  He  hath  not  grieved  me 

"  but  in  part ;  that  I  may  not  overcharge  you  all." 
"  but  in  part,  that  I  may  not  overcharge  (him),  you  all." 
"  but  in  part,  that  I  may  not  overcharge  you,  all  (of  you)." 
"  but  in  part,  that  I  may  not  overcharge  all,  you." 

Ver.  6. — Note,  "  the  many  "  (R.  V.).     The  sentence  was  the  act  of  a  (voting)  majority. 

Ver.  7. — Note  "  His  .  .  .  sorrow."     R.V.  accurately. 

Ver.  9. — How  many,  perfectly  true,  concurrent,  motives  go  to  one  act. 

Ver.  10. — He  concurs  in  what  the  majority  had,  previously  to  his  writing,  determined ; 
"  concurs  "  surely  is  not  the  spirit  of  one  who  "  played  the  Lord  "  over  them  (i.  24).  Choose 
between  ''presence"  and  "person."  [The  homiletics  that  follow  assume  ''person"  because 
of  Matt,  xviii.  20.] 

Ver.  11. — Beet  makes  more  of  Satan's  endeavouring  to  compass  some  harm,  not  to  the  poor 
penitent  offender,  but,  by  means  of  him,  and  using  him  and  other  e\il  circumstances  of  their 
case,  to  the  Church.  Unwise  discipline,  and  tolerated  evil  within,  perhaps  equally  give 
an  open  door  to  the  adversary  of  souls.  [Cf.  1  Cor.  vii.  5  for  the  need  of  wise  watchfulness 
against  a  real,  evil  Personality,  full  of  very  wise  "  devices."']  But  preferable  to  understand 
as  of  Satan  directly  seeking  opportunity  of  harming  the  penitent  man. 

407 


CHAP.  11.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  12.  Troas.— Acts  xx.  1-6.      Note  R.V.,  ^' for  the  Gospel^' liiQmWy  eyi^ici.    Door. Cf. 

1  Cor.  xvi.  9,  and  material  there. 

Ver.  13.— See  Homily,  •'  Conqueror;  Captives;  Incense."  Assumed  in  the  homiletics,  with 
most,  that,  although  festive  processions  in  honour  of  Bacchus  are  closely  connected  with  the 
earliest  root  of  the  word  "  triumph^''  yet  the  word  had  been  borrowed  and  was  in  common 
use  for  the  triumph  of  a  victorious  Koman  general ;  which  Koman  triumph,  moreover,  alone 
supplies  the  figure  with  the  touch  of  ^Hncense."  [See  these  points,  and  nearly  all  others, 
dealt  with  in  the  various  homilies  which  follow.]  Cf.  Luke  xx.  18.  "  Men  must  build 
with  the  Stone,  or  be  crushed  beneath  it."  Also  Luke  ii.  24.  "  This  Child  is  set .  .  .  for  the  fall 
and  for  the  rising  again  of  many."  Men  fall,  or  rise,  whenever  they  come  into  contact  with 
Christ  in  a  faithful  Gospel.  [Happily,  all  who  rise  have  first  "fallen."  The  "fall"  is  the 
first  thing.  Men  may  do  both ;  they  must,  in  order  to  a  full  salvation.]  The  triumph  of 
Memmius,  a  century  earlier,  after  the  sack  of  Corinth,  had  been  a  very  remarkable  and 
famous  triumph,  certain  to  be  in  the  minds  of  Paul's  readers. 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Chap.  i.  23— ii.  11. 

Paul  and  the  Now  Penitent  Offender  of  1  Cor.  v.  1-5. 

I.  The  penitent  man  is  an  instructive  study. — 1.  The  interval  had  been  brief 
since  chap.  v.  of  the  former  letter  was  written,  and  from  that  brief  interval 
must  be  deducted  the  time  from  writing  until  it  was  read  at  Corinth,  and  from 
the  time  of  the  man's  manifest  repentance  until  the  news  of  this  reached  Paul  in 
Ephesus.  But  in  the  brief  interval,  thus  narrowed,  had  occurred  a  marvellous,  a 
revohitionary,  moral  change  in  the  man, — from  a  form  of  fornication  abhorrent 
even  to  Corinthian  heathen  ideas,  to  repentance  so  deep,  that  he  who  was  to  have 
been  "  delivered  to  Satan,"  might  now  safely  be  restored  to  the  Church  and  to 
Christ.  And  not  the  least  remarkable  point  in  the  case  is  that  a  man  living  in 
such  sin,  apparently  with  as  little  sense  as  had  some  of  his  fellow-members,  of  the 
shame  it  brought  upon  the  Church,  should,  by  the  very  fact  of  the  Church  having 
laid  upon  him  a  ^^sufficienf  ^^ punishment"  [though  (perhaps)  one  something  short 
of  the  full  penalty  prescribed  in  the  former  letter ;  his  alarm  and  repentance  may 
have  been  so  quick  and  so  genuine  that  the  need  for  this  was  averted],  have  been 
so  filled  with  *'  sorrov)"  that  there  was  danger  of  a  true  penitent  being  driven  to 
despair,  and  (we  may  say  1)  "  delivered  to  Satan  "  by  the  very  "  overmuch  "  of  his 
grief.  2.  The  case  is  not  an  uncommon  one  in  mission-fields  in  heathen  countries, 
or  even  in  "  home  mission  "  work  amongst  the  lowest  or  the  degraded  population 
of  a  nominally  Christian  land ;  and,  as  one  of  the  typical,  didactic  instances  by 
which,  rather  than  by  abstract  discussions  or  elaborate  theses  upon  given  topics, 
God  has  been  pleased  to  reveal  His  thought,  it  has  many  divinely  authorita- 
tive suggestions.  For  example,  it  reminds  us  how  widely  the  degrees  of  moral 
enlightenment  and  of  moral  sensitiveness  may  differ,  whilst  yet  there  is  equally 
a  relation  to  Christ  which,  though  gravely  imperilled  by  the  sin,  is  worth  caring 
for  and  endeavouring  to  strengthen.  In  a  Christian  land,  in  circles  where 
Christian  standards  of  morality  have  largely  influenced  even  "society"  ethics, 
such  a  sin  as  this  of  the  Corinthian  offender  is  reprobated  with  the  utmost  weight 
of  verbal  and  practical  censure ;  whilst  a  persistent  refusal  to  forgive  a  fellow- 
Christian  for  a  comparatively  small  offence,  is  hardly  condemned  at  all.  No 
doubt  a  practical  difficulty  occurs  in  judging  of  a  sin  "of  spirit"  (vii.  1);  it  is 
not  easy  to  verify  the  facts,  as  can  be  done  in  (say)  a  palpable  lapse  into  sensuality ; 
it  is  not  easy  to  pronounce  judgment  upon  the  moral  worth  of  often  very  complex 
"  feelings  "  [no  virtue,  and  no  sin,  is  single  ;  all  is  complex]  ;  whereas  a  plain  act, 
manifestly  incompatible  with  the  most  elementary  law  of  God,  can  be  both 
verified  and  judged.  But  this  should  not  so  afiect  our  estimate  of  sin,  as  to 
make  us  forget  that  for  a  reclaimed  drunkard  to  fall  back  grossly  into  his  old  sin, 
or  for  a  man  saved  from  profanity  to  break  out,  like  Peter,  in  oaths  and  impre- 
cations, or  for  a  heathen,  half  in  habit  and  heedlessness,  to  be  led  back  into 

408 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  It.   COBINTHIANS.         chap.  rr. 


some  gross  but  customary  sin  of  his  old  life,  may  argue  less  of  downright  evil  of 
heart  than  for  a  professedly  Christian  man  persistently  to  cherish  envy  or  pride,  or 
to  indulge  in  evil-speaking,  or  to  become  thoroughly  of  the  world,  in  principle 
and  spirit,  in  aims  and  affections.  Remembering  the  men,  remembering  the 
history  of  the  men,  their  opportunities,  their  surroundings,  the  worldliness  of  the 
one  may  be  a  more  grievous  "  fall"  than  the  gross  sin  of  the  other.  [The  one  is 
certainly  as  little  compatible  with  the  perfect  law  of  life  in  Christ  as  is  the  other, 
the  open  and  gross.]  Our  relative  estimate  of  sin  and  of  sinners  needs  continu- 
ally reviewing  in  the  light  of  that  holiness  which  condemns  sins  "  of  the  flesh" 
and  "  of  the  spirit"  with  at  least  equal  censure.  Rebellion  in  Saul  may  be  more 
than  the  witchcraft  in  some  wretched  hag  of  Endor  ;  stubbornness  in  Saul  may 
be  a  worse  sin  than  that  idolatry  which  he  had  prosecuted  in  others  with  a 
Puritan  rigour  (1  Sam.  xv.  23).  Sin  may  not  be  extenuated.  [Certainly,  even 
consummate  genius  must  not  excuse  sensualism  and  impurity,  in  poetry  or  art,  or 
laxity  in  morals.]  An  Ananias  and  a  Sapphira  may  so  deliberately  and  dis- 
tinctly **  lie  unto  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Acts  v.  3),  that  there  is  for  them  no  forgive- 
ness, and  nothing  but  excision  from  the  body  [query  Gal.  v.  12]  is  on  all  accounts 
possible.  Such  discipline,  sharp  and  swift,  may  be  the  only  means  of  educating 
a  pure  public  opinion  in  the  Church,  and  for  teaching  a  man  of  low  type  like 
the  fornicator  at  Corinth  to  see  himself  as  others  see  him,  and  as  God  sees  him  and 
his  sin.  An  objective  conscience,  thus  forcing  its  decision  upon  the  attention  of 
the  wrong-doer,  may  be  the  only  awakener  and  educator  of  his  own.  But ' '  Father, 
forgive  them,  for  they  know  what  they  do/'  is  high  authority  for  a  tender 
handling  of  some  whose  actual  sin  is  flagrant  and  open.  They  needed  forgiving, 
but  their  ignorance  left  the  door  open  for  forgiveness.  Their  guilt  who  actually, 
and  perhaps  with  some  coarse  delight  in  giving  pain,  drove  in  the  nails,  was  not  so 
great  as  that  of  Caiaphas,  who  stood  by,  laying  not  a  finger  of  his  unsoiled  hands 
upon  the  Sacred  Sufferer,  yet  who  in  his  heart  was  perhaps  more  truly  than  any 
other  one  man  there  present  His  real  murderer.  There  is  more  grace  in  the  re- 
pentance of  a  Corinlhian  fornicator,  than  in  the  largely  conventional  purity  of  some 
English  or  American  ' '  Christians. ' '  There  is  more  to  love  in  the  repentant  prodigal, 
with  all  his  "  riotous  living"  and  the  waste  of  his  patrimony,  than  in  the  grudging 
elder  brother,  whose  life  is  blameless,  save  for  the  one  lifelong  sin  of  a  loveless 
heart.  This  Corinthian  sinned  grossly,  but  he  repented  graciously.  The  sin 
needed  every  word  of  sternest  rebuke  which  Paul  had  written  ;  the  fair  name  of 
the  Church,  and  of  Christ,  must  at  all  costs  be  kept  clear  before  the  world.  If 
there  had  been  no  repentance,  then  the  mysterious  penalty  of  ''  deliverance  to 
Satan'^  must  righteously  have  been  enforced  to  its  uttermost  of  consequence 
[though  even  this  contemplated  the  '*  saving  of  the  spirit"  (1  Cor.  v.  5)].  But 
gross  and  unexampled  as  was  this  man's  sin,  there  was  much  grace  in  a  man,  and 
hope  for  a  man,  who  so  promptly  and  unreservedly,  with  tears  and  broken  heart, 
bowed  before  the  censure  of  his  pastor  and  his  brethren,  and  in  whom  conscience 
was  so  easily  awakened  and  so  entirely  obeyed.  The  **  bruised  reeds"  (in 
Matt.  xii.  14-21)  were  as  helpless  as  they  were  evil,  in  the  presence  of  the  power 
of  Jesus  ;  the  "  smoking  flax"  of  the  wick  of  the  lamp  of  their  expiring  religious 
life  was  as  offensive  as  it  was  easily  to  be  "  quenched."  But  if  the  "  reed"  is 
humbled  at  its  weakness  and  sin,  if  the  "  smoking  flax"  will  bear  to  be  rekindled, 
Paul  loves  to  restore  such  a  one.  His  sin  was  a  grievous  offence  ;  yet  such  a 
gross,  but  easily  convinced  and  deeply  penitent  offender  as  this  man  of  Corinth, 
is  not  the  greatest  sinner,  nor  the  hardest  to  win  and  keep  or  recover  for  Christ. 
And  all  this  not  indiatinctly  outlines  the  judgment  of  God  in  Christ  upon  some 
*  *  chief  of  sinners. ' ' 

n.  The  ''tears  of"  Paul. — 1.   In  no  letter  do  we  get  so  near  to  Paul  as  in  this 
**  Second"  to  Corinth,  or  see  and  hear  his  very  self.     And,  of  all  the  letter,  this 

409 


CHAP.  n.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


is  truer  of  no  section  more  than  of  i.  23 — ii.  11.     First  and  foremost  stand  his 
^^  tears."     The  Corinthians  had  imagined  "  a  man  lording  it  over  their  faith'' ) 
and  all  the  while  he  was  weeping  over  the  loss  of  their  love  !     They  imagined, 
and  maligned  or  decried,  a  self-seeking  man,  not  above  enriching  himself  and  his 
companions  and  emissaries  out  of  funds  given  to  the  Jerusalem  poor  (viii.  16-23)  ; 
and  all    the   while    this  "masterful,"  "tyrannical,"  "self-seeking"  man    was 
toiling  at  his  tentmaking  in  Ephesus,  and  instead  of  arranging  for  an  imme- 
diate visit  was  dictating  to  his  amanuensis  a  letter  [assuming  with  some  that 
ver.  4  alludes  to  an  intermediate,  **lost"  letter],  because,  if  he  were  to  come,  he 
must  use  an  Apostolic  severity  of  power  such  as  he  was  unwilling  to  inflict  upon 
those  whom  he  had  led  to  Christ,  and  whom  he  loved  as  only  a  spiritual  father 
loves  spiritual  children.    The  unmarried  [or  widower],  childless  Paul  is  as  tender 
as  a  mother.     "  I  am  only  happy  when  I  see  you  happy ;  I  am  sure  that  you 
are  only  happy  when  I  am  so ;  I  could  not  bear  to  think  of  your  making  me 
unhappy  by  your  own  sorrow  (ver.  3) ;  I  must  have  used  the  *  rod '  if  I   had 
come,  and  I  could  not  bear  your  tears."     This  man,  whose  words  thunder  and 
flash   lightnings,  has  written   *'•  out  of  much  affliction  and  anguish  of  heart"; 
[and    according    to   a    strongly    favoured    interpretate    of    i.    8-10    was    quite 
prostrated,  overburdened,  broken-hearted,  fit  for  no  work,  nearly  killed,  by  the 
tidings  of  their  wrong-doing  and  of   their  factious   jealousy   against  himself]. 
They  thought,  or  said,  that  they  found  a  man  strong,  stern,  to  the  point  of  hard- 
ness; we  know  a  man  tender,  tearful,  perhaps  even  constitutionally  timid  [so 
Howson  suggests:  Character  of  St.  Paul,  lecture  ii,  ;  and  if  so,  then  naturally 
drawn  to  Timothy,  around  whom  he  so  often  in  these  letters  throws  the  arm  of 
his  guaranteeing,  guarding,  strengthening  love],  doing  all  he   did  with  a  great 
and  often  violent  strain  upon  himself,  and  all  simply  in  the  strength  of  the 
grace  of  God.     It  is  imperfect  manhood  that  cannot  weep  ;   and  if  in  our  un- 
demonstrative,   self-repressed   days,   tearful   eyes  be  out  of  fashion  for  men,    a 
perfect  man  will  have  a  heart  that  can  weep.     Strong  men  are  tender  ;  tender 
men  are  strong.     Their  very  tenderness  is  a  helpful  strength  to  many  who  lean 
upon  them.     2.  And,  once  more,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Penitent  Wrong-doer, 
there  comes  back  the  lesson  to  he  very  cautious  in  judgment.     Naturally  it  is  not 
easy  for  one  who  is  smarting  under  the  lash,  to  think  very  kind  things  of  him 
who  must  needs  wield  it.     The  child  hardly  appreciates  at  the  moment  the  love 
or  wisdom  which  blames  sharply  or  punishes  severely.     But  the  love  is  there. 
Do  not  sit  in  Corinth  and  hastily  misread  as   a   hard  man  Paul  weeping  at 
Ephesus.     Experience  shows,  as  it  accumulates  with  years,  how  tender  a  heart 
may  guide  a  stern  tongue  or  move  a  strong  hand.     [See  a  tender  delicate  "  weed  " 
springing  up  from  between  the  flagstones  of  a  courtyard.     Under  those  cold, 
hard  stones  its  roots  have  found,  and  now  witness  to,  soft,  moist  soil,  where  it 
may  nourish  its  strength.     So,  see  a  strong,  rough-spoken  man  bending  over  a 
fallen  child  to  pick  it  up,  perhaps  with  an  awkward  kiss  before  he  carries  it  to 
a  place  of  safety.      That  kiss  is  the  "  weed  "  which  tells  of  the  tender  heart 
underneath  the  stone-cold,  stone-hard  surface  of  the  manner  and  the  life.    That 
man  is  not  wholly  bad.     These  few  verses — even  these  two,  3,  4 — with  their 
"  tears"  are  precious ;  they  reveal  the  true  Paul  to  us,  as  we  should  not  have 
known  him  from  the  Acts,  nor  from  the  First  Epistle  to  Corinth.     How  many 
a  worker  must  he  content  to  go  forward  year  after  year   misread,   Tnisjudged, 
and  feeling  in  some  degree  crippled  in   his   usefulness  by   the  wrong   estimate 
formed  of  him  by  those  to  whom  he  would  be  useful !    3.  May  we  not  rise  higher, 
with  the  suggestion  of  Paul's  "  tears  "  whilst  he  writes  words  of  sharp  rebuke, 
to  help  us?     From  Paul's  tears  may  we  not  rise  to  the  tears  of  Christ,   and, 
yet  higher,  once  more  to  the  heart  of  God?     By  no  forced  or  chance  analogy. 
Paul,  like  every  Christian  man,  of  necessity  reproduces  more  or  less  perfectly 

410 


HOMlLETiC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  il. 


his  Pattern,  because  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  within  him  the  Life  of  his  life, 
the  Former  of  his  character.  And  "  he  that  hath  seen "  Christ  "hath  seen 
the  Father."  We  remember  how  Christ  once  at  least  "  looked  around "  on  a 
gathering  in  a  Capernaum  synagogue  with  a  holy  "  anger "  in  His  eyes 
(Mark  iii.  5) ;  but  the  sentence  continues,  "  being  grieved  with  the  hardness  of 
their  hearts."  The  wail  of  disappointed  love  cries,  "  How  often  would  I  have 
gathered.  .  .  .  Ye  would  not "  ;  but  words  of  stern,  irrevocable  doom  follow  : 
"  Your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."  As  we  see  them  in  the  "  Son  who  has 
revealed  Him,"  anger  and  grief  are  never  far  apart  in  God.  He  has  no  love  for 
inflicting  pain.  He  has  no  love  for  the  future  punishment  of  creatures  whom 
He  has  made.  If  it  must  be — if  they  make  it  a  necessity — it  must  and  will  be. 
Holiness  must  be  vindicated ;  sin  is  a  peril  to  the  good  order,  and  so  to  the 
happiness,  of  the  universe.  "  He  must  reign,"  even  if  this  must  mean  "enemies 
put  beneath  His  feet."  But  one  can  believe  that  there  are  tears  in  the  heart 
of  the  very  Judge,  as  He  sets  some  "  on  the  left  hand  "  for  whom  He  shed  His 
blood.  One  may  almost  venture  reverently  to  imagine  Him  following  them  as 
they  "  depart,"  with  His  word,  "  Ye  would  not,  ye  would  not,  come  to  Me  that 
ye  might  have  life ! "  [Can  we  not  see  in  His  face  the  sorrow  of  the  love  of 
Christ,  as  He  follows  with  His  eyes  the  departing  young  ruler,  so  lovable,  and 
yet  so  unready  for  "  eternal  life  "  ?  (Luke  xviii.  23,  24).]  Men  say  of  God,  "  I 
know  Thee,  that  Thou  art  hard,  .  .  .  reaping  where,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxv.  34). 
But  they  "  know  "  God  as  little  as  the  Corinthians  knew  Paul,  the  man  of 
"  many  tears."  They  do  not  know  Him,  as  they  may  see  Him,  if  they  will,  in 
Christ. 

III.  Paul  the  pastor. — 1.  How  careful  he  is  that  his  motives  should  he  under- 
stood. "  /  call  God  fo7'  a  record  upon  my  soul,"  etc.  Quite  consistent  with  all 
said  above  (under  i.  17  sqq.),  that  his  personal  character,  and  what  they  thought 
of  it  and  of  him,  were  only  matters  of  concern  so  far  as  they  might  be  supposed 
to  affect  their  estimate  of  the  Gospel  he  preached,  or  of  the  Christ  Who  is  the 
very  heart  and  burden  of  it.  And  quite  consistent  also  with  the  words  of  the 
Divine  Legislator  for  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  (Matt.  v.  37).  Paul  is  not  a 
"yes  and  no"  man;  but  his  word  here  is  not  simply,  "Yea,  yea;  nay,  nay." 
He  strengthens  it  with  an  affirmation  (cf.  Rom.  i.  9)  which  one  could  have 
supposed  too  serious  for  "  a  mere  personal  matter  "  like  this,  his  motive  in 
making  a  change  in  his  itinerary.  The  Master  had  said,  "Whatsoever  is  more 
than  these  " — the  plain  "  yes  "  and  "  no  " — "  cometh  of  evil."  In  a  world  of  evil, 
where  men  are  evil,  and  where  sin  has  put  the  relations  of  social  intercourse  so 
much  out  of  joint,  a  strengthened  "  Yea  "  or  "  Nay  "  may  be  inevitable.  And  in 
this  particular  instance  it  is  no  "  merely  personal  matter."  It  is  for  the  Gospel's 
sake  still.  A  pastor's  good  understanding  with  his  people  is  to  him  a  power 
which  he  can  use  for  their  sakes.  If  they  distrust  his  character,  or  lose  con- 
fidence in  his  word,  he  will  be  of  little  use  to  them.  A  transparent  simplicity  of 
act  and  word  and  motive  will  give  him  a  hold  upon  their  hearts,  if  even  they 
question,  or  differ  from,  his  judgment.  But  such  a  protest  as  this,  such  a 
purgation  of  himself  on  oath,  is  a  rare  thing ;  Paul's  normal  attitude  is  in 
1  Cor.  iv.  3, — "  A  small  thing  with  me  that  I,"  etc.  Since,  however,  those  words 
were  written,  new  circumstances  had  arisen,  which  wrung  from  him  this  protest, 
for  his  people's  sake  even  more  than  for  his  own.  Says  the  Great  Shepherd  :  "  I 
know  My  sheep,  and  am  known  of  Mine  ! "     Paul  wants  his  flock  to  know  him. 

2.  Not  a  lord  over  faith,  hut  a  helper  of  joy. — (1)  They  are  believers ;  even  these 
Corinthians  are  (i.  24).  He  is  only  a  believer  himself ;  in  Christ,  as  man  and 
man,  every  Corinthian  and  he  have  the  same  standing.  Their  faith  is  the  vital 
link  holding  them  to  Christ ;  every  man  believes  alone — by  and  for  himself.  It 
is  his  own  unshared  act.     And  the  status  in  Christ  is  retained  by  believing; 

411 


CHAP.  11.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.  CORINTHIANS. 


it  may  be  forfeited  by  sin — sin  which  is  fatal  to  faith,  because  grieving  to  the  Spirit 
by  Whose  help  alone  men  do,  or  can,  savingly  believe.  If  not,  "if  we  (continue 
to)  walk  in  the  light  as  He  is.  .  .  .  We  have  fellowship,  and  the  blood  .  .  . 
cleanseth,"  etc. ;  with  a  continuous  efficacy  it  puts  a  bar  between  us  and  our 
native  guilt,  and  we  retain  our  new  status  of  grace.  We  are  "  justified  by 
faith,"  and  by  the  same  faith  "  we  have  our  access  into  grace  whereby  we 
stand  ^^  (Rom.  v.  1,  2)  and  ^^  rejoice."  The  grafting  into  Christ,  the  abiding  in 
Christ,  the  joy  in  Christ, — all  hinge  upon  faith.  No  Paul,  nor  any  other  wise 
pastor,  will  venture  to  '*  lord "  it  over  the  life  of  faith.  "One  is  Master, 
even  Christ ;  the  rest  are  all  brethren  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  8).  (2)  But  it  is  brotherly 
in  the  highest  degree  to  help  the  "joy"  of  another.  "To  add  sunshine  to 
daylight,"  as  Wordsworth  says,  is  no  small  honour  to  a  successful  pastor.  To 
be  able  so  to  bring  a  living,  bright,  realised  Christ  near  to  them,  as  that  fear  gives 
place  to  rest,  and  gloom  to  joy ;  so  to  be  used  to  open  up  Scripture,  with  its 
teachings  as  to  the  "  style  "  of  life  possible  to,  becoming  in,  provided  for,  children 
of  God,  as  that  they  rise  to  the  higher  level,  and  with  a  glad  and  free  heart, 
which  has  lost  everything  of  merely  obligatory  and  mechanical,  all  sense  of 
bondage  and  constraint,  in  religion,  go  forward,  "  glad  in  the  Lord  "  ;  by  his 
own  testimony  and  experience,  so  to  be  helpful  as  to  clear  away  difficulties,  and 
to  encourage  and  embolden  fearful  hearts  to  hope  for  more,  and  to  dare  more, 
in  the  life  of  godliness ; — it  may  well  be  an  ambition  of  a  worthy  pastor,  as, 
when  won,  it  will  be  a  cause  of  unspeakable  thankfulness. 

IT.  The  pastor  exercising  discipline. — 1.  He  does  it  in  the  spirit  just  sketched 
out, — not  as  a  lord,  hut  as  a  helper.     A  pure  Church  is  a  glad  Church.     Offences 
purged   away,  Achans   sought   out    and   put  away,  then  conquests  and  work 
proceed    apace,    and    all    share    the    joy   of    success.      If    also    discipline    be 
exercised  upon  the  individual,  it  is   not  for  his  destruction,  or  even  for  his 
exclusion,  but  for  his  recovery  from  his  fall,  and  his  restoration  to  his  place  in 
Christ ;  and  thus  is  really  working  towards  the  joy  of  even  the  offender.     It 
might  be  difficult,  without  undue  straining,  to  find  any  analogical  suggestion  of 
God  or  Christ  in  Paul's  disclaimer  of  "  lordship  "  over  their  faith ;  though  when 
we  remember  how  sacredly  the  liberty  of  the  will  is  guarded  in  all  the  relations 
between  God  and  man,  and  how  that  most  Godlike  characteristic  of  the  human 
personality  is  (may  we  say  1)  so  "  respected"  by  God  Himself,  that  all  the  loving, 
mighty  constraint  used  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  when  endeavouring  to  lead  a  man 
to  Christ,   always  stops  short  of   compulsion ;    and  when  we  remember  how, 
assisted  though  it  be  by  the  grace  of  God,  the  act  of  believing  is  a  man's  own, 
for  which  he  is  responsible  ;  we  might  almost  say  that  God  Himself  has  chosen 
to   refrain   from   exercising   lordship   over   men's   faith.     There   would   be   no 
morality,  no  value  to  Him,  in  a  compelled  believing,  or  in  a  compulsory  creed — 
a  thing  which,  if  accepted  at  all,  must  be  accepted  by  a  hypocrite  or  a  machine. 
He  would  not  care  for  the  offering  of  such  a  faith.     So  far  as  there  is  surrender 
to  His  yoke,  it  is  the  surrender  of  a  convinced  understanding  or  of  an  instructed 
heart.     But  it  needs  no  forcing  of  analogy  to  see  God  as  the  supreme  "  helper 
of"  His  people's  "joy,"  even  when  exercising   the   discipline   of   rebuke   and 
sharp  chastening.     It  is  the  happy  paradox  of  the  Christian  life  :  "  Count  it  all 
joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers  temptations."     "  We  *  exult '  in  tribulations  also, 
knowing  that,"  etc.  (Jas.  i.  2  ;  Rom.  v.  3).     If  the  foundation  of  the  Christian 
character  be  right,  if  the  heart  be  sound  toward  God,  then  all  His  providential 
discipline  of  habit  and  character,  all  the  keen  pruning  away  of  excrescences  and 
blemishes,  everything  which  smites,  and  delivers  from,  sin, — all  work  together 
for  a  holiness  which  is,  in  part,  joy.    "  The  happy  God  "  [so  literall)'  1  Tim.  i.  11, 
vi  15]  works  towards  His  own  happiness  in  His  children.     He  loves  to  have 
them  "  rejoice  evermore  " ;  it  is  part  of  His  "  will  in  Christ  Jesus  concerning 

412 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap,  ii 


them"  (1  Thess.  v.  16-18).  "That  your  joy  may  be  full"  is  a  distinct  desire 
and  purpose  of  that  Son,  Who  in  all  things  has  revealed  to  us  the  Father,  by 
what  Himself  is,  quite  as  much  as  by  what  He  says  about  the  Father  (John 
xvi.  24).  Cf.  also  xvii.  13  :  "That  they  might  have  My  joy  fulfilled  in  them- 
selves." The  pastoral  ofiice  of  the  Great  Shepherd  may  not  infrequently 
demand  words  as  sharp,  and  discipline  as  severe,  as  those  of  Paul  the  pastor 
towards  his  Corinthians  ;  but  it  aims  at  their  joy.  Their  rehgious  life  can  never 
realise /i6%  how  the  "  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  .  .  .  joy,"  if  there  be,  in  any  degree 
or  form,  sin.  Yet  He  would  have  their  life  not  a  restraint, or  a  series  of  self-denials, 
or  a  round  of  stern  obligations,  nor  even  a  hoping  and  striving  forward  and  up- 
ward, without  ever  being  quite  satisfied ;  but,  rather,  a  "joyous"  life,  full  of  assur- 
ance and  buoyancy  and  victory.  Indeed,  the  "  joy  "  is  not  only  a  thing  desirable 
in  itself  ;  it  is  a  means  to  something  yet  more  desirable.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is 
strength "  to  the  Lord's  people,  as  certainly  now  as  in  the  days  of  Nehemiah 
(viii.  10).  It  is  a  view  of  the  Heavenly  Father  as  unworthy  and  untrue  as  was 
the  Corinthian  view  of  Paul,  to  imagine  Him  without  care  for  His  people's  happi- 
ness. He  is  not  the  God  to  grudge  "  joy  "  to  His  creatures.  They  should  not 
think  of  Him  as,  if  anything,  predisposed  to  take  away  rather  than  to  give  ;  as 
likely  to  meet  their  devotion  to  Him  of  themselves  and  of  all  they  are  and  lave, 
by  a  demand  for  the  surrender  of  something  very  dear.  He  cares  for  their  holiness 
first ;  if  that  can  be  secured,  and  yet  even  their  natural  "  joy  "  be  untouched 
or  enhanced,  He  will  assuredly  so  order  it,  in  His  disposition  of  their  life. 
Holiness  is  before  all;  but  joy  through  holiness  is  certain;  and  He  will  always  work 
towards  this,  with  a  minimum  of  discipline  and  of  pain.  Did  this  passage  in  the 
letter  so  reveal  the  heart  of  the  real  Paul  to  the  Corinthian  Church  that  they 
doubted,  or  maligned  him,  no  more  ?  "  Do  believe  it,  brethren,  that  in  writing 
as  I  did,  and  in  all  I  have  done  for  you,  I  desired  to  be  a  helper  of  your 
joy."  If  His  people  will  look  into  the  heart  of  God,  as  it  has  been  laid  bare 
to  them  in  the  words  and  work,  and  in  the  very  self,  of  His  Son,  they  will  see 
in  Him  also  One  Who  by  all  His  dealings  with  them  heartily  desires  their  joy. 
And  when  at  last  they  "enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord  "  (Matt.  xxv.  21),  the 
"  good  and  faithful  servants  "  will  be  realising  the  fulfilment  of  all  their  Divine 
Master's  purposes  and  leading  in  their  life. 

2.  He  delays^  and  is  reluctant  to  exercise  discipline  at  all.  "  To  spare  you,  I 
came  not  as  yetj''  etc. — Here  again  is  a  trait  of  that  God  in  Christ  Whom  Paul, 
as  it  were,  reproduces,  as  a  consequence  of  the  union,  the  unifying,  the  real 
fellowship  of  life,  which  are  his  "  in  Christ."  Anybody  can  drive  away  or  cut  off 
a  sheep  from  the  flock  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  4,  etc. ;  John  x.  12).  The  "  Wolf  "  can  do 
that  admirably ;  it  is  his  work.  "  We  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices."  If  he 
could  have  picked  up  this  poor  Corinthian  thrust  out  of  the  fold,  nothing 
would  have  served  his  turn  better  than  an  excessive  discipline,  carried  beyond 
what  the  repentance  of  the  ofiender  now  had  made  necessary.  Accordingly, 
Paul  would  have  the  Corinthian  Church  follow  the  lead  of  his  own  action 
towards  them  as  a  whole.  "  A  minimum  of  discipline,  brethren,  and  that 
reluctant,  and  delayed.  Take  your  penitent  back  again.  You  have  chastened 
him  sufficiently.  Your  concurrent  (ver.  6)  censure  has  had  its  effect.  He  is  in 
danger  of  being  swallowed  up  by  the  very  excess  of  the  sorrow  of  his  repentant 
shame.  You  have  been  yourselves  put  to  the  test."  [As  every  case  of  wrong- 
doing in  a  Church  does  put  the  members  to  the  test.  What  is  their  attitude 
towards  sin  1  What  towards  this  particular  sin  ?  Can  it  be  said  by  their  Lord, 
"  Ye  cannot  bear  them  which  are  evil"  ?  (Rev.  ii.  1,  of  the  very  Ephesus  from 
which  Paul  is  writing).  Is  there  that  sure  sign  of  health  in  a  body,  that  it  is 
restless,  and  cannot  suffer  a  wound  to  heal  up,  so  long  as  any  diseased  bone  or 
foreign  body  lodged  in  its  tissues  is  unexpelled?J     "I  wanted  [did  not  their 

413 


CHAP.  II.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


Lord  also  desire  ]]  to  see  whether  you  felt  with  me  about  such  sin,  and 
whether,  indeed,  my  word  would  command  your  obedience."  [Not  ^^  lording  it 
over  "  them,  indeed,  yet  "  having  rule,"  such  rule  as  a  shepherd  must  needs  exer- 
cise over  a  flock  (Heb.  xiii.  7,  17).]  "You  have  stood  the  test  well.  Now  we 
must  not  play  the  game  of  Satan,  and  leave  to  him  a  soul  for  his  prey.  Restore 
the  man  ;  confirm  your  love  toward  him.  As  little  discipline  as  possible ;  as  little 
putting  away  as  possible.  That  was  in  my  heart  towards  yourselves,  when  I 
changed  my  route,  and  did  not  come  direct  to  you.  I  did  not  want  to  be 
necessitated  to  visit  sharply  sin  such  as  I  should  have  found  if  I  had  come  then, 
but  which  you  now  have  put  away."  It  is  wise  pastoral  policy,  it  is  wise 
paternal  rule  in  a  family,  as  it  is  wise  political  government,  to  govern  as  little 
as  possible,  to  punish  as  seldom  as  possible,  to  aim  at  recovery  and  restoration 
rather  than  penal  infliction  or  exclusion.  It  is  the  wisdom,  it  is  the  heart  of 
**  a  good  shepherd ;  "  it  is  once  more  the  heart  of  God.  Again  the  analogy  needs 
no  forcing,  and  it  is  based  upon  a  real  unity  of  purpose  and  life.  As  the  weep- 
ing pastor  at  Ephesus,  so  the  patient,  but  often  deeply  grieved.  Father  in 
heaven :  "To  spare  you  I  came  not,"  etc.  Hear  Him  speaking  of  old :  "  I 
will  not  be  always  wroth,  for  the  spirit  should  fail  before  me,  and  the 
souls  which  I  have  made"  (Isa.  Ivii.  16).  "The  longsuffering  of  God  leadeth 
thee  to  repentance"  (Rom.  ii.  4).  Remembering  the  holy  intensity  of  God's 
necessary  antagonism  ["  hatred "]  to  sin ;  remembering  the  flagrant,  and 
insolent,  offence  to  His  holiness  which  every  day  goes  up  to  Him  from  earth  ; 
remembering  the  fearful  propagatory  power  of  evil  and  of  the  prolonged  life 
of  an  evil-doer ;  do  not  men  naturally  wonder  that  the  just  Judge  "  bears  so 
long"  not  only  with  His  people,  to  whom  all  this  sin  is  an  offence,  a  temptation, 
a  trial,  and  sometimes  an  acute  and  oppressive  persecution,  but  with  the  evil- 
doers themselves  ?  (Luke  xviii.  7).  When  men  have  seen  some  culminating  and 
outrageous  piece  of  cruelty,  or  treachery,  or  fraud  committed,  have  they  not 
primd  facie  reason  to  say,  as  the  wrong-doer  seems  not  only  to  escape  penalty, 
but  even  to  prosper  as  the  fruit  of  his  sin,  "  Him  doth  God  know  1  Is  there 
knowledge  in  the  Most  High  ?  "  [Ps.  Ixxiii.  1 1  ;  but  note  that  the  question  has  in 
that  verse  a  boldly  unbelieving  turn  and  tone  given  to  it].  God  can  afford  to 
wait,  and  to  be  silent,  however  misunderstood  and  misjudged.  ["  Rations, 
quia  seternus"  (Augustine).]  And  His  answer  to  His  Church  in  the  day  of 
His  own  vindication  will  be :  "To  spare  the  sinners,  I  came  not,"  etc.  It  is  the 
appeal  of  His  forbearance  to  the  individual  sinner.  Why  was  he  not  cut  off*, 
cast  off,  the  very  first  time  he  deliberately,  and  with  clear  understanding  of  his 
act,  refused  to  obey  the  will  or  call  of  God  ?  Why  did  not  a  stroke  of  judgment 
make  his  first  sin  his  last — at  any  rate,  his  last  on  (arth?  "To  spare  thee,  I 
came  not,"  etc.  Judgment  must  come  some  day.  God's  patience  is  holy,  and 
therefore  cannot  be  infinite.  But  holy  wrath  lingers.  "The  times  of  this 
ignorance  God  winked  at,  but  now,"  etc.  (Acts  xvii.  30).  How  often  has  Paul's 
turning  aside  from  a  visitation,  which  could  have  had  no  room  in  it  for  anything 
but  punishment,  been  reproduced  on  a  scale  of  Divine  enlargement  of  love 
and  patience,  in  His  turning  aside  from  the  sinner,  desiring  that  respite  and 
delay  might  mean  a  repentance  which  should  make  judgment  needless,  and 
mercy  and  restoration  possible  to  the  Divine  Love  ? 

V.  The  pastor's  absolution. — Two  Gospel  passages  underlie,  or  are  well  illus- 
trated by,  vers.  7,10.  1.  In  Matt,  xviii.  18  a  power  of  "binding"  and 
"  loosing  "  is  made  one  of  the  prerogatives  of  the  Church  of  Christ  within  its  own 
borders.  To  whom  is  such  a  power  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  their  fellow-men  to 
be  entrusted  ?  To  even  "  two  or  three,"  if  they  be  "  met  in  [unto]  the  name  "  of 
their  Lord ;  in  which  case  He  also  is  with  them  "  in  the  midst,"  and  thus,  with 
Him,  two  or  three — with  no  restriction  to  apostles  or  "official  "  members — are  a 

414 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ii. 


quorum  which  may  form  an  assembly  of  the  Church,  valid  for  discipline  whether 
to  bind  or  loose  sentence  and  penalty.  Inherent  in  the  whole  body, — for  the 
terms  are  perfectly  general, — it  may  be  from  time  to  time,  and  from  case  to  case, 
specially  localised  in  the  particular  Church,  or  even  in  the  two  or  three  along 
with  whom  is  the  Fourth,  the  First,  the  Lord.  [So  John  xx.  22,  33,  spoken, 
both  as  to  mission  and  disciplinary  power,  to  a  much  larger  company  than  ^'  the 
twelve."]  Accordingly  "  the  inany  "  at  Corinth  had  "  inflicted  the  punishment. ^^ 
It  is  "  ye  forgive  " ;  Paul  follows  the  lead,  or  adopts  the  act,  of  the  Church. 
There  is  no  need  to  suppose  that,  even  at  a  date  so  early,  there  were  not  elders, 
or  officers  of  some  sort,  at  Corinth,  who  in  the  disciplinary  action  would  be  the 
mouthpiece  of  the  Church.  But  convenience  and  seemly  order,  not  principle, 
would  govern  and  dictate  such  a  specialisation  of  function.  Their  forgiveness 
would  be  the  forgiveness  of  the  whole  Church.  The  Church  has  acted,  without 
waiting  ^  for  Paul,  or  even  for  his  directions  to  forgive  the  man.  2.  Matt, 
xvii.  19,  20  is  also  in  his  mind.  Rather,  it  is  his  working  theory  of 
discipline  in  the  Church,  as  was  seen  in  1  Cor.  v.  3-5.  The  gathering  which 
he  there  instructed  them  to  arrange  for,  in  regard  to  this  very  offender,  was  to  be 
composed  of  the  Church,  plus  Paul's  "  spirit,"  plus  the  power  of  the  presence  of 
"  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Then  their  discipline  became  the  discipline  of  Christ ;  and 
now  that  they  have  forgiven,  Paul  concurs  and  forgives,  just  as  if  he  had  been 
actually  with  them.  But  the  forgiveness  of  the  Church,  met  "  in  that  Name," 
and  the  forgiveness  of  Paul  thus  exercised  to  ratify  theirs,  are  neither  ecclesias- 
tical nor  sacerdotal,  but  representative;  it  is,  as  it  were,  "m  the  person  of 
Christ "  [to  keep  to  the  translation  which  falls  in  so  perfectly  with  the  passage 
in  the  Gospels  and  that  in  the  preceding  Epistle].  As  in  the  original  enactment 
of  this  power  of  "  binding "  and  "  loosing,"  the  act  is  His  Who  is  "  in  their 
midst,"  answering  by  His  very  presence  and  direction  the  prayer  for  guidance,  as 
touching  which  the  little  company  have  "  agreed  to  ask."  Christ  is  the  supreme 
and  sole  fount  of  forgiveness.  All  human  forgiveness  is  declaratory  only. 
The  priest  who  "cleansed"  the  leper  [Ps.  li.  2,  ''cleanse  me";  the  quasi- 
technical  word  for  the  act  of  the  priest  in  such  a  case]  could  only  declare  him 
physically  clean,  and  give  official  recognition  to  the  fact  that  ipso  facto  he  had 
become  released  from  all  the  restrictions  binding  on  a  leper.  "  Loosing  "  him 
meant  declaring  him  '*  loosed."  It  is  a  pastoral  absolution  ;  the  forgiveness  of  a 
shepherd  who  cares  most  that  a  sheep  shall  not  be  thrust  into  the  power  of 
Satan,  the  master  of  many  "  devices,"  subtle  as  of  old. 

HOMILETIC   ANALYSIS.— Verses  12—17. 

(Nearly  all  the  details  of  interpretation  of  vers.  14-16  will  be  found  more 
fully  taken  up  in  the  detailed  Homiletics  which  follow.) 

I.  "Paul  turning  away  from  'an  open  door'!" — 1.  A  marvel!  This  is  the 
man  who  in  his  former  letter  could  not  leave  his  work  at  Ephesus  because  there 
was  "  a  great  door  and  effectual  "  opened  to  him  (1  Cor.  xvi.  9).  In  this  very 
Troad  and  its  neighbourhood  he  had  on  a  former  journey  tried  many  "  doorsj  " 
only  to  find  that  they  were  not  "  open  "  ;  closed  against  him  by  the  "  Spirit  of 
Jesus "  (Acts  xvi.  6-8).  Now  the  door  was  open,  and  apparently  he  did  enter 
and  begin  his  work,  and  in  a  brief  while  with  much  success  ;  for  on  the  return 
journey  from  Corinth  he  found  a  little  Church  in  Troas  with  whom  he  spent  the 
Sunday  (Acts  xix.  5-12).  Yet  he  put  his  work  down,  left  the  open  door,  and 
in  "  restlessness  "  of  spirit,  and  in  anxiety  about  Corinth,  from  which  there  came 
no  tidings,  he  crossed  over  into  the  Macedonian  region  to  meet  Titus,  as  he 
hoped,  the  sooner  [as  he,  in  fact,  did  (vii.  6)]. 

415 


CHAP.  II.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


2.  Such  a  detail  f  with  its  self -revelation,  has  no  small  value  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  historical  student.  Just  such  touches  as  these  make  it  impos- 
sible, without  a  scepticism  which  puts  the  sceptic  altogether  out  of  court,  as 
not  deserving  to  be  listened  to,  to  doubt  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  document 
historically  veracious  to  the  last  degree,  the  real  letter  of  a  real  man,  of  the 
date  which  is  professed  and  claimed  ;  with  all  the  evidential  consequences  which 
flow  from  the  genuineness  and  the  contemporary  testimony  of  such  a  letter  from 
such  a  competent  witness.  Such  details  are  important  credentials  of  a  revela- 
tion which  is  nothing  if  not  historic. 

3.  But  they  are  parts  of  the  revelation. — God  reveals  His  mind  partly  in  selected 
histories  and  biographies,  "  stories  with  a  purpose,"  those  points  being  brought  out 
in  the  telling  which  best  help  the  purpose  of  the  Divine  Karrator.  Plainly,  then, 
the  highest  type  of  worker  is  not  above  "moods"  and  almost  uncontrollable  emotion; 
such  moods  and  deep  emotion  as  may  unsettle  him,  and  even  render  it  iippossible 
for  him  to  continue  his  work.  *'  The  peace  of  God  which  is  to  guard  heart  and 
thoughts"  (Phil.  iv.  7),  standing  sentry,  as  it  were,  at  the  heart's  door  and  pre- 
venting the  entrance  of  distressing  or  mischievous  thought,  is  no  such  mechanical 
defence  as  to  produce  mere  insensibility.  There  is  in  perfect  service  no  such 
mechanical  labour,  no  such  mechanical  fulfilment  of  duty,  as  might  be  got  from  a 
machine  wound  up  to  do  a  set  task,  and  going  rigorously  through  with  it,  without 
interest  or  without  feeling.  "  But,  Paul  cannot  you  trust  your  work  at  Corinth 
in  the  hands  of  your  Master  ?  After  all,  is  it  not  more  His  work  than  yours  ? 
You  did  your  part  at  Corinth  whilst  you  lived  there ;  you  have  done  your  part 
in  this  unhappy  business  about  the  incestuous  man,  by  writing  your  letter  and 
by  sending  Titus.  Cannot  you  now  leave  the  issues,  and  go  quietly  on  with  your 
work  1  We  know,  indeed,  that  your  personal  stake  in  the  matter  is  not  small, 
but  we  know,  too,  that  your  reputation  has  long  ago  been  put  into  the  hands  of 
your  Lord.  What  the  Corinthians  will  have  thought  and  done,  when  they  got  your 
letter,  whether  they  will  obey  you,  or  whether  this  will  have  inflamed  the  factious 
party  into  fresh  opposition,  or  even  have  given  them  a  means  of  bringing  over  to 
their  side  some  who  have  hitherto  been  *  of  Paul,' — we  know  how  little  you 
regard  this  for  your  own  sake.  Cannot  you  *  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently 
for  Him '  ?  and  meanwhile  work  on,  within  this  open  door  in  the  Troad  ?  "  There 
is  nothing  in  such  thoughts  which  is  not  truth,  and  the  high  privilege  of  the  life 
consecrated  so  entirely  to  Christ  that  everything  in  it,  like  the  man  himself,  is 
Christ's,  not  his  own.  No  life  was  ever  more  utterly  removed  from  all  self- 
centering  thought  or  work  or  care  than  was  Paul's :  "to  him  to  live  was 
*  Christ.'  "  Yet  we  love  him  none  the  worse,  nor  is  he  the  less  valuable  a  detail 
of  God's  revealed  will  on  such  matters,  that  his  very  example  here  checks  all 
unhealthy  and  exaggerated  application  of  such  truths  as  were  just  now 
suggested.  There  is  not  the  rigid  support  of,  and  compliance  with,  a  relentless 
code  which  takes  no  account  of  human  nature.  In  the  illustrative  and  didactic 
instance  which  Paul  supplies  there  is  the  perfect  naturalness  and  elasticity 
of  simple,  real  life.  No  man  more  certainly  than  he  would  subordinate  all 
personal  considerations  to  the  interests  of  the  work  of  Christ.  But  neither  did 
His  Lord  expect  him  not  to  feel,  to  feel  acutely,  to  feel  v/ith  a  depth  of  emotion 
which  was  a  real  disqualification  for  going  on  with  his  work  in  Troas.  We 
serve  a  profoundly  reasonable  Master,  Who  knows  exactly  how  much  to 
expect  from  His  servants,  of  submission  in  days  of  sorrow,  of  acquiescence  in 
days  of  disappointment,  of  peace  and  rest  as  well  as  trust  in  days  when, 
naturally,  circumstances  would  keep  brain  and  heart  in  a  whirl  of  anxiety, 
or  strained  to  their  utmost  tension.  After  all,  the  work  of  Christ  at  Corinth 
was  the  main  thing  at  stake.  To  this,  even  in  Paul's  mind,  everything 
else  stood  second.     We  love  Paul  none  the  less,  nor  did  his  Lord,  we  may 

416 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ii. 


well  believe,  condemn  him,  that  his  distress  turned  him  away  from  "  an  open 
door." 

II.  Paul  in  the  train  of  Christ's  triumph. — 1.  Such  details  as  we  have  been 
studying  are  part  of  God's  Revelation,  taken  up  into  it,  made  the  vehicle  of  a 
distinct  addition  to  our  knowledge  of  the  mind  of  God,  and  of  His  will  on  such 
questions  of  the  practical  conduct  of  Christian  men.  So,  similarly,  such  changes 
of  plan,  hingeing  on  such  trivial  occasions,  are  all  parts  of  the  pyrogress  of  the 
Gospel.  They  are  all  contributory  to  the  great  plan  of  campaign,  according  to 
which  Christ  is  subduing  the  world  to  Himself.  They  all  fall  in  with  the  move- 
ment of  His  march  to  ultimate  victory  over  "things  in  earth"  (Phil.  ii.  10). 
They  are  small  details  of  a  great  progress  whose  goal  is  the  day  when  it  shall  be 
proclaimed  that  *'  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  God's 
Christ "  (Rev.  xi.  5).  It  is  a  progress  which  seems  often  retarded.  The  ground 
occupied  in  this  very  Asia  and  Troas  and  Macedonia,  is  hardly  retained  for 
Him  to-day.  It  is  often  difficult  for  faith  to  see  any  movement  at  all ;  more 
difficult  to  see  any  plan  at  all.  The  faith  which  does  see  the  plan,  and  hold  fast 
to  its  hope  in  the  triumph,  is  a  grace,  the  gift  of  the  "  Spirit  of  faith."  It  is  one 
subordinate  manifestation  of  the  supreme  faith,  which  that  Spirit  also  alone  gives, 
that  "  Jesus  is  the  Lord  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  3).  If  that  truth  be  grasped,  all  else  is 
held.  "  We  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  Him.  Though  the  name  of  Christ 
rises  ever  more  loudly  above  the  tumult,  the  day  of  victory  seems  far  off.  But 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  we  know  that  *  nothing  which  ought  not  to  be  need  be.' 
We  look  back  and  see  forms  of  evil  dead — it  may  be  dead  for  ever.  Evil  itself 
lives,  and  may  even  seem  after  some  triumph  of  good  to  close  in  more  pitilessly 
than  before,  but  to  those  who  take  the  large  outlook  it  is  clear  that  progress  is 
being  made.  To  say  that  the  fight  is  hopeless  is  to  deny  the  Lordship  of  Christ. 
.  .  .  There  is  danger  unfathomable  and  unending  in  admitting  that  any  wrong 
is  inevitable,  that  anything  is  too  hard  for  the  Lord  "  (Editorial,  B7'itish  Weekly, 
October  26th,  1893).  Every  conversion  has  this  significance  and  this  importance 
to  the  history  of  the  very  world  itself,  that  one  more  life  which  lay  athwart,  or 
ran  counter  to,  the  line  of  the  movement  of  the  will  of  God,  and  the  progress  of 
King  Jesus  to  His  final  and  universal  victory,  is  brought  into  parallelism,  and 
moves  with  the  Divine  movement.  And  then,  all  the  details  of  that  life,  all  its 
activities  and  aims,  in  proportion  as  they  are  pervaded  with  the  spirit  of 
consecrated  service  and  are  made  a  perpetually  renewed  offering  to  Christ,  for 
His  service  and  glory,  become  details  in  the  triumph  of  the  Great  Conqueror. 
In  the  old  phrase,  all  such  turnings  away  from  Troas  and  crossings  over  into 
Macedonia,  are  ''  overruled  "  for  the  advantage  of  the  work  of  God.  At  the  least, 
the  "  knowledge  of  Christ  and  its  savour  "  are  thus  *'  made  manifest"  in  a  greater 
number  of  cities  and  centres.  No  man  is  on  that  account  to  indulge  "  moods  " 
and  "  feelings  "  ;  to  pick  up  this  work,  or  lay  down  the  other,  according  as  he  may, 
or  may  not,  "  feel  in  the  spirit  of  it " ;  to  enter  one  door  *'  because  he  is  happy  in 
the  work  "  there,  and  turn  aside  from  another,  or  quit  it,  when  he  has  entered  it, 
because  "  he  was  not  happy."  But  Paul's  quick  faith  triumphs  over  the  record 
and  the  memory  of  his  keen  distress  at  Troas.  "  It  is  all  right !  Thank  God  ! 
The  triumph  moves  on  nevertheless.     And  we  with  it  !     Glory  be  to  God  ! " 

2.  The  triumph  sweeps  everybody  into  its  course. — There  are  no  mere  spectators. 
Paul  was  an  enemy  once.  He  is  a  trophy  of  the  Great  Imperator  now.  He  is 
indeed  (by  a  quick  transformation)  a  soldier  sharing,  in  some  humble  part,  the 
triumph.  It  is  Christ's  triumph,  indeed.  The  Lord  is  the  Centre  of  the 
spectacle.  But  every  subaltern  and  private  is  the  object  of  somebody's  regard  ; 
to  them,  he  is  triumphing.  To  himself,  at  any  rate,  he  is  triumphant.  Nobody 
who  comes  into  contact  with  Christ  remains  indifferent.  Triumphed  over,  and 
that  only,  and  dragged  onward  "  to  death  " ;  or  triumphed  over,  and  led  onward, 

£  £  417 


CHAP.  II.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


triumphing  also,  "  to  life.''  If  Christ's  triumph  "  comes  our  way,"  we  must,  in 
one  way  or  another,  "fall  in."  To  Paul  himself  the  '■^savour"  so  far  as  he  knew 
of  it,  was  once  ^''  of  death,  unto  death"  ;  now  "  the  savour"  of  his  living  Lord — 
not  lying  dead  or  corrupting  in  Joseph's  new  tomb — was  "  of  life,''  as,  himself 
"  saved  by  the  Lord  s  life  "  (Rom.  v.  10)  and  diffusing  a  Gospel  **  of  life  "  wherever 
he  went,  he  moved  onward  "  to  life^'  "  to  lay  hold  of  the  life  which  is  Life 
indeed"  (1  Tim.  vi.  19). 

Til.  Paul  a  genuine  man  dispensing  a  genuine  Gospel. — 1.  Other  men  might, 
and  did,  use  an  incense  whose  "  savour  "  was  not  simply  and  only  "  of  Christ." 
There  was  in  most  cases  much  of  Christ  in  it,  or  at  least  something.  [Even  the 
men  at  Home  who  were  preaching  with  "  by-motives,  not  sincerely,"  and  indeed 
in  a  spirit  "  of  contention,"  were  at  least  so  "  preaching  Christ "  that  Paul 
rejoiced  at  their  work,  though  only  with  a  modified  joy  and  satisfaction 
(Phil.  i.  18).]  Whilst  they  bade  men  "Come  buy  and  eat"  (Isa.  Iv.  1),  there 
was  adulteration  in  their  bread,  there  was  admixture  in  their  wine.  [The 
"  milk  "  was  not  "  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  2).]  Like  dishonest 
hucksters,  for  their  own  gain,  or  at  best  for  some  personal  satisfaction,  they 
dealt  in  a  "  Word  of  God  "  which  was  not  "  incorrupt "  [Tit.  ii.  7 ;  but  quite 
another  word  and  figure  from  that  of  the  text  here].  Jewish  admixture  every- 
where ;  half-heathen,  childi&.h  superstition  in  Colosse  ;  rationalising  treatment  of 
fundamental  truths  at  Corinth  ;  "  many  "  dealt  deceitfully  with  the  Word  they 
preached.  [See  Homiletics  on  "  Charity,"  1  Cor.  xiii.  5,  "  thinketh  no  evil."] 
By-motives  in  the  preaching,  even  if  the  truth  preached  were  tolerably  pure. 
"  Many  !  "  What  a  view  of  "  Primitive  Christianity  "  !  [Shall  the  figure  be 
pushed  so  far  as  to  suggest  that  some  diffusers  of  the  incense  try  so  to  compound  it 
that  it  shall  not  be  a  ^^  savour  of  death"  even  to  the  "  natural  "  man  ?  Try  so 
to  flavour  the  wine  that  the  "  natural "  palate  likes  it,  or  at  least  makes  no 
great  objection  to  it?] 

2.  Not  so  Paul. — He  returns  to  the  protest  he  made  in  i.  12,  that  his  whole 
character  and  conduct  had  been  at  the  uttermost  remove  from  any  of  the  self- 
seeking,  the  vacillation,  or  tricky  change  of  purpose  with  which  he  was  charged 
at  Corinth.  But  he  lifts  the  whole  matter  of  his  personal  vindication  up  to 
a  higher  level  here  than  there.  Then  he  protested  his  "  sincerity  "  as  between 
himself  and  them ;  here  he  protests  it  in  respect  of  his  dealing  with  "  the  Word." 
Yet  even  on  that  lower  level  it  was  a  "  sincerity  of  God,"  which  he  here  also 
claims;  his  phrases  here  analysing  that  of  the  earlier  verse.  He  speaks  in 
God  s  hearing,  conscious  of  a  Listener  before  Whom  he  stands,  seen  thrpugh  and 
through,  heard  through  and  through.  No  falsehood  of  heart  but  will  ring  in  the 
voice,  to  that  Ear  !  No  unsoundness,  no  evil  admixture,  in  his  teaching  can  escape 
the  scrutiny  of  that  Eye.  The  Great  Analyst  knows  that  he  does  not  deal  falsely 
with  the  Gospel,  the  "  Word  of  God"  put  into  his  mouth  to  speak.  He  can  "  call 
God  to  witness  upon  his  soul,"  he  said  (i.  23).  He  can  lay  bare  his  inmost  heart 
and  thought,  and  challenge  that  scrutiny.  He  may  well  do  so,  for  his  "sincerity" 
is  a  grace,  a  gift  ''''  of  God"  by  His  Spirit.  Happy  that  teacher  of  Divine  truth 
who  is  sustained  under  calumny,  or  in  the  midst  of  misunderstanding,  by  such  a 
confidence  !  "  The  Lord  God  of  gods,  the  Lord  God  of  gods,  he  knoweth,  and 
Israel  he  shall  know"  (Josh.  xxii.  22).  Happy  if  he  never  be  betrayed  into 
conduct  in  his  office,  if  never  a  word  come  from  his  lips,  concerning  which  he 
needs  to  falter  as  he  faces  his  own  conscience,  and  concerning  which  also,  as 
far  as  man  may,  he  may  not  look  up  into  the  face  of  God,  and  claim  even 
His  witness  that  he  has  not  knowingly  dealt  falsely  with  his  trust,  "  the  Word  " 
which  has  been  given  to  him  to  administer.  What  a  check  upon  everything  but 
supreme  loyalty  to  God's  Truth  !  What  a  defence  against  temptation  to  man- 
pleasing  !      And  against  self -pleasing  !      And  against  any  dishonest   retailing 

418 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ii. 


of  old  formulas  which,  rightly  or  wrongly,  no  longer  represent  a  man's  beliefs  ! 
Honesty,  honesty,  before  all  things  honesty,  in  the  man  who  deals  with  the 
honest,  genuine  "  Word  of  God "  !  Is  any  most  unprincipled,  adulterating 
tradesman  so  base  as  the  man  who  adulterates  the  Bread  by  which  men  live, 
the  "  Word  which  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God  "  ?  Let  the  world  have 
at  least  that  as  genuine  as  the  apostle,  the  prophet,  the  teacher,  can  give  it. 
This  sincere  man  deals  out  a  genuine  Gospel. 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 


Vers.  14-16.  The  triumph;  the  Cap- 
tives ;  the  Incense. — [Probably,  if  not 
certainly,  imagery  derived  from  a 
Roman  triumph.]  One  of  the  grandest 
spectacles  of  ancient  world.  All  Rome 
kept  holiday ;  everybody  in  the  streets. 
Sometimes  the  show  for  three  whole  days 
winding  its  way  along  up  to  the  temple 
of  Jupiter  on  the  Capitol.  All  ranks 
and  ages  watching  the  long  procession 
hour  after  hour,  with  unflagging  in- 
terest. The  Victorious  Army,  with  the 
spoil  heaped  up  upon  long  trains  of 
waggons ;  piles  of  gold  and  silver  coin ; 
magnificent  dresses  and  ornaments ; 
statues  and  pictures,  such  as  Memmius 
had  carried  ofi*  from  plundered  Corinth  ; 
arms  and  armour  from  the  battle-field. 
Then  the  Captives  ;  of  strange  garb  and 
look  and  speech.  Then  the  Conqueror, 
the  man  of  the  Day.  Not  seldom,  in 
golden  fetters,  bound  to,  and  walking 
behind,  his  chariot,  the  unhappy 
general,  or  king,  or  queen  of  the  con- 
quered foes ;  often  overwhelmed  with 
ridicule,  reproach,  abuse,  by  the  merci- 
less, civilised  brutality  of  the  spectators. 
The  procession  moved  along  amidst 
clouds  of  Incense ;  many  in  the  pro- 
cession swung  censers ;  burning  braziers 
of  charcoal  fed  with  it  along  the  line 
of  route ;  a  fragrance  grateful  to  all  ! 
No,  not  to  all.  To  some  of  those 
captives  the  fate  appointed  at  the  end 
of  the  day  is  Death.  To  the  public 
eye  the  end  of  the  spectacle  will  be 
the  conqueror's  sacrifice  in  the  temple 
of  Jupiter.  To  the  victorious  troops, 
dismissal  with  rewards,  each  to  become 
a  hero  in  his  little  home  circle.  To 
the  mass  of  captives,  slavery,  but  life. 
To  the  condemned  ones,  death  in  the 
rock-hewn     dungeons    close    by    the 


Capitoline  Hill.  To  these  the  "grate- 
ful "  incense  smells  foul  as  the  breath 
of  a  charnel-house.  To  all  besides,  "  a 
sweet  savour"  sl  "savour  of  life,"  as 
they  move  on  towards,  at  least  life,  if 
not  liberty.  To  these  "«  savour  of 
death,"  as  they  move  onwards  "  unto 
death."  [Most  of  these  points  are  used 
in  the  passage;  with  some  confusion 
of  metaphor,  or  rather  an  intentional 
change  in  the  use  of  the  illustration, 
characteristic  of  Paul.] 

I.  What  a  Christian's  life  is  to 
himself. — 1.  He  is  being  led,  by  God, 
from  place  to  place,  in  the  triumphal 
procession  of  Christ.  Paul  is  writing 
from  Macedonia.  At  Troas,  just  be- 
fore, he  had  found  "  an  open  door," 
but  had,  strangely,  turned  away  from 
it  and  had  crossed  over  into  Europe. 
Such  a  sudden  change  and  movement 
was  a  sample  of  his  life.  "  Found  no 
rest  for  his  spirit  "  in  Troas ;  found  no 
rest  for  his  body  anywhere  !  His  life 
was  an  incessant  movement.  Antioch 
one  day ;  Ephesus  almost  the  next ; 
Ephesus  to  Corinth ;  Corinth  to 
Jerusalem  ;  Jerusalem  to  Home — the 
other  end  of  the  world  of  that  day  ! 
Traversing  the  Poman  Empire  in 
journeys  which  were  rather  flights 
than  journeys.  To  us  it  seems  a  wear- 
ing, restless,  anxious  life.  To  him 
God's  hand  was  in  all  such  changes. 
Even  a  trivial  change  like  this  in 
question  is  part  of  God's  will  and  plan 
for  Paul's  life.  He  accepted  all  such 
incessant  change  with  acquiescence; 
indeed,  with  thankfulness  and  rejoicing. 
"  Thanks  he  to  God  "  who  is  thus  leading 
him  about  from  place  to  place  in  the 
train  of  the  triumph  of  Jesus  Christ ! 
He  only  waits   to   know   where   God 

419 


CHAP.  II.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


would  have  him  go  next.  He  follows 
gladly,  since  he  follows  Christ  !  2. 
So  for  every  Christian  man.  Id 
every  change  of  station,  of  circum- 
stances, of  abode,  he  should  seek  and 
follow  the  leading  of  God.  Then  even 
the  most  perplexing,  harassing  diver- 
sion from  his  own  plans  will  be  no 
matter  of  chafing  discontent  and  fret- 
ful irritation,  but  of  glorying  acquies- 
cence in  the  plan  of  God.  3.  How 
grand  this  makes  even  the  humblest 
life  I  The  procession,  the  train  of 
Christ's  triumph,  is  moving  onward  with 
majestic  march,  swelling  in  numbers 
as  it  advances.  He  is  sweeping  onward 
in  triumph  ;  the  humblest  of  His  people 
is  moving  on  in  triumph  with  Him — 
onward  to  the  consummate  day  of  His 
triumph.  4.  From  place  to  place  he  is 
being  exhibited  as  one  of  Christ's  trophies. 
Grammatically,  it  may  be  either, 
"  Maketh  us  to  triumph,"  or  "  Triumph- 
eth  over  us."  Both  are  true.  He  is 
shown  in  the  triumph  ;  he  shares  in  the 
triumph.  The  army  and  the  captives 
are  here  one  and  the  same  company. 
Christ  has  been  God's  General,  sent  to 
reduce  rebellious  earth  to  submission. 
Began  the  war  single-handed.  Every 
slain  enemy  becomes  a  living  helper 
and  a  soldier.  Other  conquerors  begin 
with  an  army,  and  lessen  or  lose  it  as 
the  war  proceeds.  Our  Captain  began 
without  an  army,  and  wins  and  makes 
one  as  the  war  goes  on.  Has  no 
victorious  army  but  of  conquered 
captives.  Every  enemy  who  submits, 
falls  into  the  ranks  of  those  who  obey 
His  command.  The  marvel  of  the 
mercy  of  the  Gospel  this.  Every 
soldier  has  been  an  enemy.  Rebels 
not  only  forgiven  and  allowed  to  live, 
but  enlisted,  and  richly  rewarded  for 
service.  Those  over  whom  Christ 
triumphs,  triumph  with  Him  in  His 
march  to  heaven.  By-and-by,  when 
He  enters  in  glory  through  the  "  ever- 
lasting doors  "  the  "  King  of  Glory," 
they  shall  appear  with  Him  in,  and 
with  Him  enter  into,  glory.  5.  The 
victory  of  a  Christian  is  the  victory  of 
one  first  vanquished.  A  soul's  victory 
begins    in    Christ's    victory    over    it. 

420 


"Thanks  to  God  who  triumphs  over 
us  in  Christ,  for  in  Christ  He  makes 
us  to  triumph  with  Christ  too  !  " 

IT.  What  a  Christian's  life  is  to 
God. — 1.  A  grand  exhibition  of  His 
conquering  power,  but  also  of  His 
gracious  heart  in  Christ  towards  all 
who  submit.  His  method  of  advertis- 
ing, of  diffusing  "  in  every  place,  the 
knowledge  of  Christ.'^  Paul  a  con- 
summate example  of  this  principle. 
Did  his  worst  in  rebellion  against 
God's  Christ.  A  pre-eminent  persecutor ; 
a  zealot  of  the  zealots.  Then  what  a 
change  !  Preaches  the  faith  he  once 
destroyed ;  preaches  it,  as  he  persecuted 
it,  "  unto  strange  cities  "  (Acts  xxvi.  11). 
Paul  was  in  himself  a  /ac^  which  was 
a  consummate  testimony  for  Christ. 
In  himself  he  was  text  and  preacher 
and  sermon.  ["  A  pattern,"  1  Tim.  i. 
15,  16.]  To  see  Paul  was  to  see  what 
Christ  could  do.  Not  only  his  preach- 
ing, but  his  exhibition  in  this  place  and 
that,  a  captive  chained  to  the  chariot 
of  Christ,  was  diffusing  "  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  in  every  place.^^  If  God  be 
pleased  so  to  use  him,  so  to  lead  him 
hither  and  thither,  he  acquiesces,  he 
glories.  [Same  turn  of  thought  in 
2  Cor.  X.  5.  Bead  Paul,  and  see  how 
this  Babbi's  whole  system  of  thought — 
doctrinal,  exegetical,  ethical — wears 
the  bonds  of  Christ.  "  Every  thought 
led  captive."  See  Homilies,  in  loco.] 
2.  A  work  for  God  within  the  reach  of 
all.  Let  Christ  conquer ;  put  His  yoke 
upon  natural  pride,  anger — ''  natural  " 
everything ;  subdue,  in  business,  home, 
all ;  then  let  God  exhibit  the  man, 
parade  him  up  and  down  the  world,  an 
example  of  His  conquering  power.  His 
matchless  grace.  The  gieat  business 
of  life.  After  some  great  change  in 
life,  involving  a  new  home,  perhaps,  a 
new  surrounding,  a  new  beginning  in 
everything;  thrust,  perhaps  into  ah 
unintended,  unexpected,  unwelcome 
destination ;  after  the  earliest,  inevit- 
able, adjustment  to  the  new  conditions 
in  which  life  to  be  spent,  livelihood  to 
be  won,  then  ask :  "  Why  am  I  put 
here?  I  have  been  led  here  in  the 
train   of   Christ's   triumph,  to   diffuse 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   IL   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  il. 


here  the  knowledge  of  Christ."  A 
purpose  that,  to  which  every  other 
stands  second.  "  To  he  a  savour" 
Anybody  can  swing,  can  be,  a  censer  ! 
Men  see  the  smoke  of  the  incense. 
Cannot  see  the  *'  savour."  Invisible, 
impalpable,  unmistakable !  So,  how 
fine  to  meet  these  about  whose  every 
act,  word,  movement,  hangs  something 
defying  analysis,  impalpable,  in- 
tangible, U7imistakable,  and  all  Christ ! 
Nothing  so  much  appeals  to  a  non- 
Christian.  [A  "  sweet  savour."  Would 
that  it  were  always  sweet  !  Religion 
real,  obvious,  respected,  in  some  Chris- 
tians, but  not  "  sweet"]  "  Of  Christ ;  " 
this  important.  Many  lives,  lovely, 
beloved,  giving  out  a  sweet  savour. 
What  is  wanting  ?  The  trained  "  scent" 
of  the  spiritual  man  misses  something 
from  the  incense  !     Christ  wanting  ! 

III.  What  a  Christian's  life  is  to 
others. — 1.  Everybody  will  not  like 
the  incense  even  when  its  savour  is 
loveliest,  perfect.  To  the  captives  it 
made  all  the  difference  whether  it  were 
the  accompaniment  of  the  march  "  to 
life"  or  the  march  *'  to  death."  2. 
Note  the  sharp  division  of  mankind  into 
"  those  that  are  being  saved " ;  and 
"  those  that  are  [now]  perishing."  Here 
a  ready  test  is  provided.  When  a  man 
comes  across  the  '*  savour "  of  the 
incense,  does  he  like  it — or  not  ?  To 
"  those  who  are  perishing  "  the  Gospel 
is  loathsome  as  death.  Is  full  of 
"  death."  A  dead  ("  crucified  ")  Christ ; 
*'  dead  in  sins  "  ;  "  dead  to  sin  "  ;  "  dead 
with  Christ."  A  "  savour  of  death " 
seemed  to  such  to  hang  about  all  Paul's 
preaching.  3.  More  than  that,  the 
Christian  man  and  his  testimony  help 
"  to  life,"  or  help  "  to  death"  No  man 
can  be  neutral  in  the  presence  of  Christ, 
or  of  the  Gospel,  or  of  a  true  Christian. 
Better — or  worse — for  knowing  even 
one  such.  [Like  his  Lord,  every 
Christian  man  is  "  come  for  judgment  " 
(John  ix.  39).  I.e.  inevitably  forces 
every  man  w^ith  whom  associated,  to 
take  up  an  attitude,  for  or  against,  God 
and  Christ ;  is  inevitably  a  present  test 
of  character ;  necessarily  ranges  men 
as  either  *'  unto  life  "  or  *'  unto  death."] 


Well  may  Paul  add,  "  Who  is  suffi- 
cient ?  "  The  issues,  the  responsibility, 
of  a  life  full  of  the  savour  of  Christ 
are  terrible !  How  much  more  of 
one  where  the  testimony  is  marred  by 
inconsistency,  the  "  savour "  mingled 
with  what  is  not  "  of  Christ "  ! 

Ver.  16.  "  Who  is  sufficient  ?  " 
T.  The  minister  of  the  Gospel  speaks 
in  these  words,  as  they  stand  in  the 
Epistle.  But  they  leap  to  the  lips, 
they  are  the  sigh  of  the  deepest  heart, 
of  many  another  besides  a  minister. 
— There  are  responsibilities  for  all. 
There  is  no  worthy  life  which  has 
none.  The  self-sufficient  heart  that 
never  feels  them  any  burden,  that  in 
mere  shallow  light-heartedness,  or 
slight-heartedness,  feels  itself  at  a 
moment's  notice  *'  equal  to  anything," 
that  with  the  mechanical  imperturba- 
bility of  a  Nasmy  th  steam-hammer  is  as 
ready  without  a  misgiving  "  to  forge  an 
anchor  as  to  crack  a  nut,"  has  no  sense 
of  the  meaning  of  *'  Life."  The  sense 
of  insufficiency  with  which  worthier 
souls  must  often  go  forward  to  meet 
and  assume  responsibilities,  is  one  of 
the  keenest  and  most  daunting  pains ; 
none  causes  more  exquisite  suffering  to 
a  soul  filled  with  a  tender  conscientious- 
ness. Yet  no  worthy  Man  would  pur- 
chase exemption,  at  the  price  of  less 
sensitiveness  or  a  duller  conscience. 
But  it  makes,  not  dying  hut,  living  the 
awfully  solemn  thing.  It  is  easier  to 
die  once,  and  "  to  die  well "  and  to 
have  done  with  it,  than  to  live,  "  once  " 
indeed  also,  but  a  "  once "  which  is 
extended  over  twenty,  forty,  eighty 
years,  at  every  point  of  which  may  be 
danger  of  failure,  at  every  point  re- 
sponsibility, new  burdens  gathering  as 
we  go,  old  ones  persistently  pressing 
upon  our  heart,  till  life  is  often  one 
long-drawn  strain  upon  the  brain  and 
heart,  themselves  already  tense  with 
the  sense  of  responsibility  and  of  inade- 
quacy. The  solemnity  of  life  is  not 
that  with  un tarrying  pace  it  is  leading 
to  death — death  which  crowns  all  with 
a  swift  and  irreversible  "  judgment "  ; 
nor  that  it  is  doing  so  much  to  deter- 

421 


CHAP.  11.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   XL   CORINTHIANS. 


mine  what  that  death  and  its  issues 
shall  be.  In  the  true  view  of  life,  it 
is  a  continuous  thing,  beginning  here, 
but  stretching  on  unbroken  through 
the  veil  of  *'  death,"  into  the  unseen 
aud  eternal.  It  is  a  continuous  exist- 
ence, in  which  dying  is  a  momentary, 
and  not  the  most  important,  incident, 
one  of  which  the  most  that  can  be  said 
is  that  it  introduces  to,  and  marks  the 
commencement  of,  a  new  section  of  the 
new  hfe — "new"  because  transacted 
in  new  conditions  and  surroundings. 
To  a  Christian  man  dying  has  been 
almost  emptied  of  meaning,  as  well  as 
of  dread.  It  is  not  oniy  that  the 
"  sting "  is  gone ;  tne  thing  itself  is 
practically  "  abolished  "  (2  Tim.  i.  10). 
The  eternal  life  has  begun,  but  its  real 
solemnity  arises  from  the  responsibilities 
of  living,  responsibilities  before  men  and 
towards  God.     There  are  those,  e.g., 

II.  Of  the  individual.  —  1.  Nous 
mourrons  seuls.  One  might  say  with 
equal  truth,  "  We  live  alone."  "  Thou 
art  the  man,"  is  the  word  of  God,  in  all 
rebuke  of  sin,  in  all  calls  to  duty,  in 
all  believing  unto  salvation,  in  the  day 
of  Christ's  judgment  of  men.  God's 
claims,  our  duties — with  them  each 
man  has  singly  to  do ;  for  them  each 
one  of  us  must  *'  give  account  of  him- 
self to  God"  (Rom.  xiv.  12).  As  in 
creation  no  two  atoms  really  touch 
each  other,  so  souls  are  essentially 
apart.  There  are  collective  duties  for 
which  there  is  a  collective  responsibility, 
of  co-extensive  area  of  incidence.  But 
even  then  a  personal  responsibility 
accrues  for  the  assuming  of  one's  own 
share  in  the  collective  work  and  obliga- 
tion. In  the  end,  everything  comes 
back  to  the  individual.  "  When  I 
remember,  in  view  of  this,  with  what 
unmeasured  powers  our  Creator  has 
endowed  us,  and  that  I  am  not  only 
responsible  for  what  is  done  by  them, 
but  for  what  they  might  do  if  I  rightly 
used  them;  when  I  remember  that 
God  has  an  unquestionable  right  to  all 
my  activities,  all  my  thoughts,  all  my 
love  ;  and  when  withal  I  am  conscious 
of  Sin  and  Satan  so  often  engrossing 
and  mastering  me,  that  I   am    daily 

422 


'  robbing  God '  (Mai.  iii.  8)  upon  His 
own  earth,  under  His  very  eye, — in  a 
word,  when  I  think  of  all  that  I  ought 
to  do,  and  all  that  I  ought  to  be,  as 
contrasted  with  what  I  really  am,  I 
feel  that,  in  the  face  of  every  fact 
concerning  my  responsibility  as  an  indi- 
vidual merely,  I  may  well  exclaim  with 
trembling,  *  Who  is  sufficient  for  these 
things  ? '  "  Then  there  are  responsi- 
bilities arising  from — 

2.  His  relationships. — "By  connec- 
tion with  our  fellow- men  none  of  our 
old  obligations  to  God  are  abrogated. 
There  is  not  one  code  of  morals  for  the 
man  and  another  for  the  merchant, 
not  one  law  for  the  individual  and 
another  for  the  statesman,  warrior, 
king.  All  God's  claims  are  binding  on 
us  always — wrong  is  wrong,  right 
is  right,  everywhere.  By  entering 
on  new  relationships  we  can  never  free 
ourselves  from  the  moi'al  laws  that  are 
authoritative  upon  us  as  individuals; 
on  the  contrary,  new  relationships 
create  new  responsibilities.  Who 
can  measure  the  responsibilities  of  a 
parent  ?  To  the  father  and  mother  of 
that  infant  are  committed  most  of  its 
preparation  for  the  stern  and  deadly 
struggle  with  sin,  which  is  to  decide  its 
eternal  destiny.  The  privilege  of  train- 
ing a  child  for  a  beautiful  and  true  life 
here,  and  for  %  yet  more  beautiful  and 
true  life  hereafter,  is  the  most  surpass- 
ingly glorious  a  parent's  heart  can 
desire  ;  the  responsibility  of  having  by 
lip  or  life  ruined  a  child  here,  leaving 
it  to  wander,  lost,  homeless,  for  ever, 
will  be  the  most  crushing  a  parent's 
heart  can  bear."  No  father  or  mother 
who  remembers  how  pliable  and  how 
delicate  a  thing  is  the  young  character, 
but  will  cry  out,  "  Who  is  sufficient  ? " 
A  single  slip  of  the  seal  engi-aver's  tool, 
or  too  deep  a  cutting,  may  mar  the 
labour  of  months.  Parents  are  cutting 
an  image  in  a  most  precious  gem.  A 
weight  or  a  bond  too  many  may  give  a 
warp  to  the  young  branch,  which  shall 
never  be  straightened  out  all  life 
through.  A  wrong  word  or  a  wrong; 
act  may  make  its  indelible  mark  upon 
the  fearfully  "  spoilable  "  material,  and 


HOMlLEfIC  COMMENTAttt :   tt  COUINTHIANS.    chap.  ii. 


yet  80  valuable,  entrusted  to  us  to  upon  one  man's  skill  and  judgment 
work  upon.  And  who  can  measure  and  fidelity,  and  men  pay  accordingly. 
the  responsibilities  of  a  preacher  1  Men  But  for  how  much  **  pay  "  will  a  man 
talk  lightly  ot  the  preacher's  life,  as  intelligently  undertake  to  "  watch  for 
if  he  had  "  light  work,  good  position,  souls  as  one  that  must  give  account  "  1 
good  pay "  !  There  is  honour,  truly.  Stand  at  the  great  **  Day "  by  a 
Every  man  worthy  to  be  in  the  preacher  confronted  with  a  man  once 
ranks  of  the  ministry,  understands  in  his  congregation  who  says,  and 
the  privilege  of  being  the  confidant  truly,  "  I  came  hungry,  or  perplexed, 
and  comforter  of  souls,  and  their  or  indifierent, — or  under  deep  con  vie - 
helper  in  sorrow.  It  is  no  mean  tion  of  sin,  and  you  had  no  word  for 
honour  to  be  in  an  office  where  he  me.  I  passed  on ;  my  disappointed 
may  speak  words  welcome  to  weary  heart  made  me  sceptical.  I  doubted 
hearts  as  water  to  the  thirsty  traveller  God,  or  hated  Him."  Another,  "  I 
in  an  Arabian  desert,  or  words  which  passed  on,  hardening  under  your 
may  send  on  the  hearer  into  the  week  powerless  word,  and  now  am  lost." 
of  worry  and  toil  with  new  energy  and  Another,  "  I,  too,  passed  on,  and  my 
hope.  To  send  away  singing  some  convictions  died  away."  Ceitainly  the 
heart  that  came  sad  ;  to  say  words  responsibility  of  the  loss  of  a  soul  never 
which  in  another  heart  shall  ring  on  lies  entirely  at  a  preacher's  door.  Every 
many  following  days  like  a  trumpet-  man  knows  that,  at  the  very  heart  of 
call  to  duty  ;  or  which  in  a  moment  of  the  matter,  the  responsibility  is  his 
danger  shall  recur  to  another,  perhaps  own,  however  others  may  have  contri- 
te a  young  man  in  his  hour  of  tempta-  buted  to  the  conditions  of  his  life, 
tion,  like  the  gentle  voice  of  a  warning  But  if  in  that  Day  that  minister  says  : 
friend ;  to  be  permited  to  speak  words  "  Ah  !  that  was  the  day  when  I  had 
which  shall  for  many  a  day  feed  made  '  scamped,'  hasty  preparation ; 
men  and  women  as  with  supernatural  when  in  mere  spiritual  indolence  my 
strength,  or  which  may  even  awaken  closet  devotion  had  been  slurred  over, 
some  soul  that  is  slumbering  on,  heed-  when  my  own  tone  was  low,  and 
less  of  its  high  destiny  and  its  awful  I  went  into  the  pulpit  powerless.  It 
progress  toward  eternity,  marking  the  was  my  opportunity  with  that  man ; 
turning-point  of  a  life, — all  this  is  an  I  was  not  that  day  the  man  to  seize  it. 

honour  angels  might  covet ;  the  dignity      I  am  saved   here  ;   but  he "      As 

of  being   God's   ambassador   yields   to  those  that  must  give   account  of  the 

none  other.     But  the  responsibility  of  sermons  of  a  year,  of  a  ministry ;  and 

it !     If  the  congregation  come  and  go  of  that  incessant  ministry  of  pastoral 

and   no   soul   be   cheered,    or    fed,   or  and  personal  character.    For  how  much 

warned ;   if  no  lesson  be  taught,  and  "  pay "   will   a   man   undertake   this  1 

no  impetus  given  to  the  good  in  any  Then,    further,    are   to   be   added  the 

life  ;  what  then  ?    The  man's  "  service  "  considerations   here   specially  pressing 

is  a  failure,  if  no  heart  is  lifted  to  God,  upon    Paul.       On    the    most  faithful 

if  the  sheep  turn  away  hungry  still ;  ministry   of    the   most   spiritual   man 

if  the  children  gather  round  their  elder  hangs  not  only  life,  but  death.     Some 

brother,  and  he  give  them  the  stone  of  hearers  he  will  certainly  not  save ;  as 

mere  lecturing,  or  the  husks  of  mere  certainly  will  their  heart  pervert  his 

brilliance.      There  is  a  partial  failure  ministry  into  the  occasion  of  "  deaths 

if  the  hearer  be  only  instructed,  and  "  For  judgment  Christ  came  into  the 

not   persuaded.      The   heart    may   be  world,"    etc.   (John    ix.    39).       "  For 

moved,  the  intellect  satisfied ;  but,  if  the  judgment"   is   every   man   come   into 

will  be  not  moved  ?    "  Who  is  sufficient  ?  "  the   world.      Every  man   is  a  test  of 

Men  understand  what  it  is  in  business  character,  swift,  decisive,  inevitable,  to 

to  pay  high  salaries  for  trustworthiness  every  other  man  with  whom  he  comes 

and  responsibility.    Money,  life,  depend  into    contact.     Goodness    will    reveal 

423 


CHAP.  11.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


and  help  goodness  ;  but  it  may- 
awaken  and  irritate  into  hatred  the 
evil  which  it  finds.  And  the  minister 
is  a  test,  and  his  word  is  a  test,  to  men 
and  women.  The  more  faithful  he  is 
to  the  ideal  and  the  responsibility  of 
his  office,  the  more  surely  is  he  set 
for  *'  judgment "  amongst  his  fellows. 
Life  and  death  hang  upon  mere  indi- 
vidual living ;  who  dares  live  ?  Life 
and  death  depend  on  parental  wisdom 
and  love ;  who  dares  t7'ain  a  child  ? 
Life  and  death  hang  upon  the  minis- 
try of  the  Gospel ;  who,  dares  speak  in 
the  name  of  Christ  ?  *'  Who  is  sufficient  ?" 
"  Brethren,  pray  for  us  !  " — Slightly 
suggested  hy  "  Homilist,^'  New  Series, 
iv.  385. 

Ver.  16.  "  Who  is  sufficient  ?  " 
I.  These  words  express  a  sense  of 
the    greatness    of  the    work    under- 
taken.— The  ministry  is  a  work 

\.  Great  in  its  nature. — There  is  the 
exposition  of  the  Bible.  In  His  word  He 
has  given  us  the  highest  teaching,  the 
divinest  doctrine.  He  has  taught  us 
concerning  our  own  past,  and  the  world's 
past,  our  own  and  the  world's  future. 
Above  all,  He  has  given  light  on  our 
relationship  to  Himself  ; — ourselves, 
Himself,  and  the  Mediator  between  us. 
Hence  there  is  here  the  greatest  truth 
that  can  possess  man's  mind,  truth 
that  the  angels  desire  to  look  into,  and 
which  take  us  an  eternity  to  under- 
stand ;  truth,  too,  whose  distinguishing 
glory  it  is  to  be  remedial  in  its  nature, 
restorative  in  its  aim.  Every  man  is 
bound  to  be  a  student  of  the  Holy  Book 
and  a  learner  for  himself  at  the  feet 
of  the  Great  Teacher;  the  minister 
pre-eminently  should  acquaint  himself 
with  its  truths,  and  aid  those  around 
him  to  understand  them  and  feel  their 
power.  And  all  this  statement  and 
enforcing  of  truth  must  be  in  Paul's 
spirit, — Christ's.  When  the  study  of 
the  preacher  is  unfaithful,  unfilial,  and 
his  preaching  unloving,  unsympathetic, 
unchristian  ;  when  there  is  medley  doc- 
trine, or  a  forced,  unnatural  earnestness 
in  its  promulgation,  the  pulpit  is  weak. 
Not  only  does  Christ  claim  that  His 

424  ,        .     , 


spirit  shall  be  present  in  the  work 
of  His  servants;  the  very  world  of 
"  society  "  demands  it,  and  triumphs  if 
it  be  absent,  or  lost.  To  misrepresent 
the  truth  of  God,  the  life  of  Christ;  to  be 
erroneous  in  teaching  and  inconsistent 
in  character, — the  possibility  makes  a 
man  cry  :  "  Who  is  sufficient  ? " 

2 .  Great  in  its  influence.  — To  influence 
and  mould  deathless  souls  !  To  have  to 
do  with  the  understanding,  heart,  will, 
of  man,  with  all  their  out  workings  now 
and  for  ever  !  "  The  preaching  is  to 
bless  or  curse  all  who  listen.  It  is  to 
save  those  who  receive  it,  from  sin, 
self,  hell;  to  save  them  by  means  of 
the  truth,  through  the  love  of  Christ, 
by  the  Spirit  of  God.  It  is  to  unshackle 
every  undying  power  of  the  enslaved 
soul.  It  is  to  heal  the  diseased,  to 
raise  the  dead.  But  those  whom  it  will 
not  bless  it  will  curse ;  it  will  harden 
them  in  sin.  It  will  add  to  their 
privileges  and  responsibilities  new  ones 
which  will  utter  for  ever  a  condemning 
cry  against  them.  This  continual, 
inevitable,  twofold  effect  make  the 
work  awfully  responsible,  momentously 
great." 

II.  The  insufficiency  of  man  to 
perform  the  work. — \.  How  inade- 
quate is  man  to  expound  the  Scripture. 
"  Easy  work  to  preach  the  Gospel ;  it 
is  so  simple  !  "  So  they  say  ;  but  is  it  ? 
If  an  intelligent,  harmonious  represen- 
tation of  truth  be  given,  there  is 
material  for  the  highest  thought,  scope 
for  every  faculty.  Every  power  is 
challenged  to  the  work,  for  also,  in  a 
true  sense,  man's  reason  must  be  satis- 
fied ;  the  truth  must  be  so  presented  as 
to  do  homage  to  the  Book  and  persuade 
the  man.  2.  Is  it  "  easy,"  again,  for 
feeble  man  to  cherish  the  spirit  essen- 
tial to  the  work,  a  living  sympathy 
with  all  that  is  holy  and  true,  and  a 
righteous  hatred  to  all  that  is  corrupt 
and  false,  unswerving  loyalty  to  the 
claims  of  God,  unchangeable  love  to 
the  souls  of  men  ?  It  is  impossible  to 
interpret  the  Book  without  a  spirit  too 
real  for  pietism,  too  earnest  for  fear- 
fulness,  too  holy  for  dalliance  with  sin  ; 
is   it   easy   to    retain  such  a  spirit  ? 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  II. 


3.  Who  has  ever  taught  even  a  Sabbath 
scholar,  and,  much  more,  who  has 
tried  to  win  an  adult  for  Christ  by 
direct,  personal  effort,  but  has  learned 
this  lesson,  most  quickly  and  most 
surely  of  all — the  pitiable  powerlessness 
of  human  strength  to  dislodge  Satan 
from  the  hearts  which  we  would  bless  ? 
To  attempt  to  guide  the  judgment  or 
move  the  will  of  some  wayward  youth, 
or  hardened  profligate,  or  utter,  though 
"  blameless,"  worldling, — it  is  a  child's 
attack  upon  a  garrisoned  fortress.  It 
is  hard  to  bless ;  and  if  the  word  do 
not  bless  "  unto  life,'^  it  must  hurt 
"  u7ito  death."    *'  Who  is  sufficient  ?  " 

III.  The  qualification  for  the  work. 
— The  great,  primary  qualification  is 
this  very  spirit  of  conscious  inefficiency. 
"  When  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong." 
The  old  heathen  believed  that  their 
heroes  were  strengthened  to  dare  and 
to  do,  by  becoming  possessed  of  the  skill 


and  might  of  the  gods  of  their  special 
devotion.  Their  dream  may  be  our 
reality.  Only  with  them  the  gods 
favoured  the  cunning,  the  vaunting, 
the  strong ;  our  God  "  increase th 
strength" — for  work,  as  well  as  for 
journeying  or  endurance —  *'  to  them 
that  have  no  might "  (Isa.  xl.  29). 
Depressing  want  of  apparent  success 
may  often  be  needed  to  crush  out 
egoism,  self-sujficiency,  pride,  until  in 
helplessness  the  man  is  at  last  flung 
upon  God  and  His  might.  When  men 
"  have  toiled  all  night  and  have  caught 
nothing,"  then  are  they  ready  to  be 
helped  and  guided  by  their  Master  to 
a  "catch"  whose  success  is  His,  not 
theirs.  To  succeed,  men  must  woik 
and  teach  and  live  in  this  spirit  of 
conscious  insufficiency.  "  That  no  flesh 
should  glory  in  His  presence  I " — 
Founded  on  homily  by  U.  R.  Thomas y 
*'  Homilist"  New  Series,  ii.  387  sqq. 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


"Vers.  15,  16.  Manward  and  Godward 
Aspects  of  the  Gospel  Ministry. 

I.  Manward. — It  may  have  a  vivify- 
ing effect.  It  may  have  a  deadly 
influence.  Because  of  three  unalter- 
able principles  :  1.  The  greater  the 
mercy  abused  the  greater  the  condem- 
nation. 2.  The  susceptibility  to  good 
impressions  decreases  in  proportion  to 
the  resistance  against  them.  3.  Man's 
moral  suffering  will  be  increased  in 
proportion  to  his  consciousness  that  he 
once  had  the  means  of  being  happy. 
["  Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin,"  etc.] 

II.  Godward. — A  true  ministry  is 
unto  God  "  a  sweet  savour,"  whatever 
be  its  effects  upon  humanity.  [Query  is 
this  the  meaning  of  "  unto  God  "  ?  and 
not  rather,  ^^for  God's  purposes  (and 
glory)  1 "]  It  is  in  itself,  therefore, 
for  good,  for  good  exclusively.  It  may 
be  the  occasion  of  evil,  but  it  is  the 
cause  of  good.     [Of.  a  similar,  though 


not  parallel,  thought  in  Rom.  vii.  10.] 
Therefore,  1.  It  saves  by  design  ;  it 
destroys,  if  at  all,  in  spite  of  its  design. 
2.  It  saves  by  its  inherent  tendency ; 
it  injures,  if  at  all,  in  spite  of  that 
tendency.  3.  It  saves  by  Divine 
agency;  it  destroys,  if  at  all,  in  spite  of 
that  agency.  ['*  Ye  do  resist  the  Holy 
Ghost."] — Extracted  with  modifications 
from  "  Hoinilist"  New  Series,  ii.  468. 

Yer.  17.  The  Word  is  Corrupted. 

I.  By  introducing  error,  human 
philosophy,  private  opinions,  irrelevant 
matter,  by  the  omission  or  misrepre- 
sentation of  important  truths,  selfish 
aims. 

II.  How  it  ought  to  be  preached — 
faithfully,  sincerely,  humbly,  earnestly. 

-V-  ^-i 

Or  start  by  inquiring  what  in 
common  life  is  ^^adulteration"  and 
what  are  the  motives  of  it.] 


425 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER  III. 

CRITICAL  NOTES, 

N.B.  A  continuous  outpour  of  argument  and  appeal,  all  "  alive,"  and  quivering,  thrilling, 
with  quick  emotion, /row  ii.  17  to  vi.  10. 

Ver.  1. —  Q.d.  "There,  he  is  at  it  again  !  [ii.  17,  or  perhaps  cf.  1  Cor.  ix.  1-6,  15,  21;  or 
something  he  had  said  at  Corinth,  known  to  his  readers].  Praising  himself  !  "  [Familiarly, 
"Blowing  his  own  trumpet,  since  no  one  else  will  do  it  for  him."]  '■'■Am  J.^"  {q.d.  in 
ii.  17).  Letters  of  commendation. — Such  as  Apollos  brought  to  Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  27)  ;  or 
such  as  this  very  letter  became  to  Titus  (viii.  17-19).  Kom.  xvi.  1  is  a  good  example ;  for 
Phoebe.  These  Christians  travelling  from  Church  to  Church  appear  in  2  John  10,  11, 
3  John  5-9  ["2  wrote  unto  the  Church"].  Seen  also  in  the  Didache,  xii.,  xiii.  Perhaps 
such  as  came  "from  James"  to  Antioch  (Gal.  ii.  12)  carried  such  "letters."  These  became 
a  very  common  institution  in  the  early  Church.  N.B.,  Paul  himself  had  once  asked  the 
"  authority  and  commission  "  of  such  letters  to  the  synagogue  of  Damascus  (Acts  xxvi.  12). 
Note  the  shorter  reading. 

Ver.  2. — "Certainly,  '  to  you^  we  need  none.  We,  who  know  what  place  you  occupy  Hn 
our  hearts,'  know  that  we  do  not ;  you — *  all '  of  you — can  'read '  our  love  to  you,  and  you 
'  know  '  that  we  do  not."     In  our  hearts.—  Others  carry  theirs  in  their  hands. 

Ver.  3. — JVew  turn  given  here  to  thejigure.  The  Corinthians  are  a  letter  of  commendation 
for  him,  not  to  themselves  only,  but  to  other  Churches  and  the  world.  The  Christians  at 
Corinth  are  a  credential  for  him  so  conspicuous  that  it  is  "  liTiown  and  read  of  all  meri." 
Notice  the  adroit,  courteous,  ad  homines  argument.  In  1  Cor.  xv.  he  urges  that  they  cannot 
deny  Christ's  resurrection  without  abandoning  all  hope  of  their  own,  and  all  reality  in  their 
salvation  from  sin.  So  here,  they  cannot  deny  his  apostleship  without  also  denying  the  work 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  their  own  heart.  Ministered. — "  Carried  about,'"  &s  his  rivals  did  their 
letters.  An  epistle  of  Christ. — I.e.  written  by,  and  given  to  His  servant  Paul  by,  Christ  Him- 
self. The  argument  is  that  of  1  Cor.  ix.  2,  3.  In  the  phraseology,  rather  than  in  the 
thought,  are  reminiscences  of  such  Old  Testament  passages  as  Prov.  iii.  3,  vii.  3 ;  Ezek.  xi.  19, 
xxxvi.  26.  So  also  the  application  of  the  metaphor,  like  the  use  of  the  original  figure  of 
"  letters  of  commendation,"  is  modified  almost  from  sentence  to  sentence.  Thus  a  letter 
written  with  "  ink  "  passes  over  into  the  "  tables  of  stone  "  at  Sinai  (Jer.  xxxi.  33).  Flesh  . . . 
stone. — Plainly  not  here  in  any  moral  sense :  '■'•Jieshen  "  [analogous  to  "  wooden  "]  would  exactly 
represent  the  thought.  By  the  Spirit.—  Note  the  capital  letter  rightly  in  the  R.V. ;  His  work, 
the  "  new  creation  "  of  v.  17,  the  experiences  of  their  new  life,— these  are  the  writing  of 
the  "  Living  God.''  Note  the  name,  "  Living  God^'  in  vi.  16  ;  was  Paul  in  Ephesus,  as  once 
he  had  been  in  Athens,  "  stirred  .  .  .  when  he  saw  the  city  full  of  idols  "  ?  [Another  impres- 
sively used  Old  Testament  name  in  vi.  18,  '■^the  Lord  God  Almighty."'] 

Ver.  4. — See  Appended  Note  from  Stanley.  Such  confidence,  etc.—  A  real  answer  to  the  cry 
of  ii.  16,  "  Who  is  sufficient  ? "  etc.  The  word  "  sufficient "  and  its  cognates  is  here  resumed 
in  vers.  5,  6.  [Say,  "  adequate  to,  competent  to,  up  to  the  level  (measure)  of."]  He  looks 
" toward  God"  the  source  of  his  commission,  the  giver  of  adequate  grace  to  fulfil  it,  the 
giver  of  his  success  at  Corinth  or  elsewhere;  he  expects  all  from  God,  the  souvce,''' through 
Christ,"  the  channel. 

Ver.  5.  To  think  ...  of  ourselves. — Misleading  to  our  modern  English  ears ;  clearer  in 
K.V.  Q.d.  "to  give  ourselves  any  such  confident  encouragement,  drawing  our  confidence  of 
sufficiency /ro?;i  any  presumed  resources  within  ourselves." 

Ver.  6. — "Proof  that  this  competency  comes  from  God.  God  gave  him  a  further  and  a 
greater  competency,  which  involves  the  less.  God  made  him  competent  (i.  22)  to  be  a 
minister  of  a  dispensation,  which  from  its  very  nature  must  produce,  when  it  took  effect, 
exactly  such  a  result  as  he  counts  the  Corinthian  Church  to  be  "  (Waite,  in  Speaker). 
Ministers. — Reverts  to  the  word  of  ver.  3  ;  but  the  personal  purposie  of  that  "  ministration  "  is 
gone  from  his  thought ;  he  is  "  carrying  about  and  dispensing  " — "  administering  " — some- 
thing far  greater  and  of  more  importance  than  any  personal  credentials,  even  of  the  best. 
A  New  Covenant— N.B.  this  in  R.V.,  correctly.  To  be  studied  with  Matt.  xxvi.  28  [and 
this  with  Exod.  xxiv.  8]  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  33,  34.  [This  last  in  Heb.  x.  is  the  pivot  around  which 
turns  an  exposition  of  the  "  first  "  and  the  "  second  "  (ver.  9),  and  in  Heb.  viii.  clenches  the 
discussion  as  between  the  "  new  "  and  the  "  old  " ;  both  of  which  comparisons  should  them- 
selves be  compared  with  this  of  "  letter  "  and  "  spirit,"  which  is  also  found  in  Rom.  ii.  27-29, 
vii.  6.]  The  letter. — The  Law  of  Moses,  graven  in  so  many  letters  and  words  on  the 
tables  of  stone.      [The  Decalogue  is,  then,  practically  "  the  Law,"  throwing  light  on  Paul's 

426 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  iil. 


frequent  discussions  of  "  the  law,"  as  afEecting  Christian  thought  and  life.]  The  Spirit. — 
Capital  S ;  the  Holy  Ghost,  Who  is  the  characteristic  and  crowning  glory  of  the  Gospel 
order.  In  the  argument  of  Gal.  iii.  2,  v.  5,  "  the  Spirit "  is  the  summary  gift  of  that  whole 
continuous  •'  covenant "  of  which  believers,  pre-  and  post-Pentecostal  both,  are  Abraham's 
heirs.  Killeth. — He  explains  how,  in  Rom.  iii.  19,  v.  20,  and,  particularly,  vii.  9-24. 
[See  especially  vers.  9,  11,  24,  and  viii.  2,]  of  which  this  verse — this  word — is  a 
summary.  Giveth  life. — John  vi.  63,  1  Cor.  xv.  45  (very  interesting),  Gal.  vi.  8,  cast  light 
on  this ;  as  does  Rom.  viii.  11,  where  the  action  of  the  life-giving  Holy  Ghost  is  carried 
further. 

Ver.  7.  Of  death. — Though  this  was  not  its  purpose  (Rom.  vii.  10),  but  its  incidental  result. 
Keep  "  written  "  distinct  from  ''^graven  on  stones  " ;  not  *'  written  on  stones."  **  Written  "  is 
opposed  to  ^' glorious ^^ ;  lit.  **in  letters,"  "in  glory,"  respectively.  From  this  point  the 
chapter  is  framed  on  the  lines  of  the  narrative  of  Exod.  xxxiv.  28-35  ;  many  words  and  terms 
of  expression  being  borrowed  from  the  LXX. 

Ver.  8.  Glorious. — *'  WUh  glory,"  slightly  changed  from  ver.  7.  Shall  be. — Beet  carries 
this  forward  into  a  future  revelation  of  a  glory  for  believers  analogous  to  that  which  clothed 
Moses'  face.  But  is  the  "  glory  "  in  the  second  case  anything  but  spiritual,  and  analogous 
to  that  in  the  first  ?  "  Shall  be  "  occupies  the  (mental)  point  of  time  just  before  the  advent 
of  the  ^^  glorified  "  order  which  was  just  then  becoming  actual. 

Ver.  9. — Moses  was  a  dispenser,  administrator,  of  "  condemnation,'"  in  that  he  brought  a  Law 
to  men  which  in  issue,  if  not  purpose,  condemned  them. 

Ver.  10. — The  phraseology  here  is  full  of  reminiscences  of  the  LXX.  In  this  respect. — 
Stanley  :  "  In  this  instance  of  Moses  " :  "  In  this  particular  instance  was  fulfilled  the  general 
rule,  that  a  greater  glory  throws  a  lesser  glory  into  the  shade."  Beet :  '■'■  In  this  matter  ; 
in  the  comparison  of  the  two  Covenants."  Waite :  "  In  this  particular  of  comparative  or 
relative  glory."  Conybeare  [and  Howson]  :  "Literally,  For  that  which  has  been  glorified  in 
this  particular,  has  not  been  glorified,  because  of  the  glory  which  surpasses  it."  *'  The  moon 
is  as  bright  after  sunrise  as  before,  but,  practically,  its  brightness  is  set  aside  by  that  of 
the  sun"  (Beet). 

Ver.  11.  Is  done  away. — "  Is  being  done  away,"  now,  historically,  in  that  Pauline  age. 
Prepositions  changed  ;  see  how  R.V.  tries  to  show  this.  "  The  two  prepositions  ...  do  not 
necessarily  express  the  difference  between  transitoriness  and  duration  [?  permanence,  as 
Farrar  and  others],  but  they  may  do  so  as  matter  of  language,  and  the  distinction  is  too 
much  in  accordance  with  the  context  to  be  set  aside  "  (Waite,  in  Speaker).  Beet  says  well: 
"  In  the  history  of  the  world,  as  in  the  experience  of  each  individual,  God  speaks  first  in  the 
form  of  Law, '  Do  this  or  die.'  When  we  hear  the  good  news,  *  He  that  believes  shall  not 
die,'  the  voice  of  condemnation  loses  its  dread  power,  and  comes  to  nought.  But  the  good 
news  of  life  will  remain  sounding  in  our  ears  for  ever." 

Ver.  12.— Returns  to  ver.  4,  but  ^^ confidence  "  is  now  "  filled  out  into  hope'^  Also  he  was 
charged  with  insincerity;  he  repudiates  the  charge,  *'I  speak  openly,  plainly,  confidently; 
there  is  no  concealment,  nothing  underneath." 

Ver.  13. — Note  that  the  A.V.  of  Exod.  xxxiv.  33  inserts  "fi?Z"  ;  reading  the  story  as  that 
Moses  hid  the  refulgence  of  the  glory  whilst  he  was  speaking.  The  LXX.  and  Vulgate 
translate  xxxiv.  33  otherwise.  Paul  follows  for  his  purpose  their  account,  that  Moses  put  on 
the  veil  after  he  had  finished  speaking,  to  hide,  not  the  unbearable  refulgence  of  the  glory, 
but  its  waning  brightness.  In  ver.  13  that  which  was  passing  away  (R.V.)  does  not  very 
definitely  go  beyond  the  literal  glory  mentioned  in  the  narrative.  But  the  further  applica- 
tion to  which  the  words  so  aptly  lend  themselves,  is  beginning  to  come  into  view. 

Ver.  14. — Like  the  "letters  of  commendation,"  or  the  "  triumph  and  the  incense  bearers  " 
(ii.  14),  the  figure  of  the  veil,  even  whilst  he  is  using  it,  suggests  to  Paul  another  distinct, 
but  related,  use  of  it.  Like  the  Tallith — the  curious  fringed  scarf  which  to  this  day  every 
born  Israelite  wears  on  head  or  shoulders  at  public  worship — there  is  a  veil  on  the  heart  of 
Israel  as  they  read  even  the  Law.  Not  merely  is  its  waning  glory  concealed  from  them,  but 
even  its  real  Secret,  "  the  Lord'* 

Ver.  15.  Moses. — As  in- Acts  xv.  21. 

Ver.  16.  Shall  turn. — ♦'  Turn  in,"'  as  Moses  did  (Exod.  xxxiv.  34).  What  is  the  nominative  ? 
Choose  between  (1)  'Ht "  [  =  their  heart] ;  (2)  ''aman,"  R.V.  margin  ;  (3)  "  Moses  "  [  =  The 
Old  Covenant,  or  the  people  of  Israel].  (1)  most  in  favour ;  (2)  and  (3)  are  of  course  true, 
whether  expressed  here  or  not.      Note  :  "  But  whensoever,"  etc.  (R.V.). 

Ver.  17. — *' The  Lord''  in  the  passage  and  story  from  the  Pentateuch  "i^,"  practically, 
"  the  Spirit."  [Query,  "  corresponds  to  the  Spirit  in  my  allegory."  Thus,  accepting  (3), 
As  Moses  turns  in  to  the  Lord  (in  the  narrative),  so  the  Old  Covenant  turns  in  to  "  the 
SpiHt "  (  =  the  New  Covenant,  symbolised  by  its  characteristic  blessing,  as  in  ver.  6).  So 
"  is  "  (Gal.  iv.  25).]  To  Christians  the  Lord  [  =  Jehovah]  of  the  Old  Testament  is  Christ. 
He  who  turns  to  Christ,  finds  that  he  has  met  with,  and  received,  the  Spirit.  Remember 
the  deep  unity  of  Son  and  Spirit  in  the  undivided  Trinity ;  so  that,  e.g.  in  Rom.  viii.  9, 10— 

-         .  427 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENT AnY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


in  redemption  language  and  in  regard  to  redemption  facts,  the  one  may  often  be  inter- 
changed with  the  other.  "  An  administrative,  not  a  personal,  identity  "  (Beet).  Liberty. — 
Once  more,  in  a  word  a  paragraph  of  another  letter  is  condensed :  here  Gal  iv.  1 — v.  1  are 
thus  "  packed  away  "  into  a  single  phrase. 

Ver.  18. — Note  again  the  changing  phrases;  '''■The  Spirit  of  the  Lord"  Christ  is  also 
Himself  **  the  Lord  the  Spirit.'"  The  name  "Lord"  belongs  to  Him  also,  equally  with 
Father  and  Son.  Observe  '*  unveiled"  keeping  up  the  story  of  Exodus.  Also  notice  the 
'■'■face"  not  the  "  heart,'''  is  in  this  instance  without  the  veil.  Difficult,  on  lexical  or  gram- 
matical grounds  only,  to  decide  between  "  heliolding"  and  ^'■reflecting."  Each  is  supported. 
[Winer  (Moulton),  p.  318,  thinks  that  the  middle  voice  fixes  the  sense  as  "  Beholding  (for  our- 
selves) the  glory  of  the  I^ord  (as  in  a  mirror)."]  Both  are  needed  for  the  facts  of  Christian 
experience ;  we  must  first,  like  Moses,  go  in  and  "  behold,"  before  we  can  come  forth  and 
^'reflect."  Paul  is,  however,  insisting  that  he  (  ="we")  has  nothing  to  conceal,  as  Moses 
had  ;  that,  in  fact,  he  had  used  '■'■great  boldness  of  speech.''  Without  a  veil  he  had  let  what 
glory  of  the  New  Covenant  he  had  received,  and  had  to  communicate,  shine  forth  ;  reflect- 
ing it  as  Moses  did,  but  not  veiling  it,  as  did  Moses.  On  the  other  hand,  Farrar,  carrying 
on  the  thought  into  iv.  3,  6  :  "  For  God  had  shone  in  the  hearts  of  His  ministers  only  in 
order  that  the  bright  knowledge  which  they  had  caught  from  gazing,  with  no  intervening 
veil,  on  the  glory  of  Christ,  might  glow  for  the  illumination  of  the  world."  In  favour  of 
'■'beholding  "  is  the  progressive  transformation,  by  assimilation,  into  conformity  to  the  glory 
of  Christ.  [Stanley  makes  '•'■from  glory  "  the  terminus  a  quo  of  the  process ;  "  to  glory  " 
the  terminus  ad  quern ;  the  completeness  rather  than  the  progressive  character  o£  it  being 
in  view,]    iv.  6  fixes,  and  expounds,  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord" 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS— Chap.  iii.  1— iv.  6. 

This  section  has  as  the  unifying  thought,  "  Openness.^^ — We  find 
I.  Open  letters. 
II.  A  law  now  open  [unveiled]. 

III.  An  open  [unveiled]  Gospel. 

IV.  Open  character  and  conduct  of  the  ministers  of  the  Gospel. 

1.  1.  The  Corinthians  are  "  letters  patent  ^^  for  Paul. — Not  credentials  merely  to 
themselves,  assuring  them  of  his  true  Apostolic  standing.  [Nor  are  they  merely 
a  letter  for  his  own  personal  reassurance,  in  any  moment  of  faintness  or  dis- 
couragement.] They  are  carried  about  by  him  unsealed,  "  open,"  to  be  his 
credentials  to  all  who  will  take  pains  to  examine  them.  [When  Sanballat  sent 
"  an  open  letter  "  to  Nehemiah  (Neh.  vi.  5),  the  privacy  of  its  contents  unsecured 
by  a  seal,  it  was,  and  was  meant  to  be,  an  insult.  Paul  is  glad  that,  as  part  of 
the  issues  of  his  work,  men  should  read  "  the  epistle  from  Christ "  with  which 
his  Divine  Master  has  accredited  him.]  Happy  that  ministry  whose  "  fruit " 
guarantees  that  there  has  been  no  mistake  as  to  the  "call."  Happy  that  people 
whose  personal  experience  of  blessing  and  life  received  through  the  human 
messenger,  and  whose  joyful  observation  that  newly  quickened  souls  are  by  his 
words  ever  being  added  to  the  Church,  agree  to  assure  them  that  his  letters  of 
ordination,  his  commission  of  apostleship,  still  run  in  unabated  validity.  No 
need,  as  between  them  and  him,  that  he  should  continually  be  vindicating  his  true 
ministerial  status.  "  We  know  what  he  has  done  for  us  ;  we  can  no  more  doubt 
that  he  is  a  true  minister,  than  that  through  him  we  have  a  place  in  Christ  our- 
selves. Our  Paul  no  true  apostle  ?  Nonsense  !  Look  at  us  !  Read  us  !  You 
who  depreciate  him  may  bring  your  letters  from  Jerusalem  and  James,  [from 
Rome  or  Lambeth,  or  Conference,  or  College]  ;  his  credentials  are  sufficient  for 
us.     We  are  his  seals." 

2.  A  real  reason,  though  not  the  strongest,  ybr  an  open  profession  of  Christ. — • 
"  Secret  discipleship,"  if  such  a  thing  were  long  possible,  would  be  of  no  service  as  a 
"  letter  of  commendation."  Something  is  due  to  the  man,  and  to  the  Church,  by 
whose  instrumentality  the  life-giving  Spirit  has  been  "  ministered  "  to  a  Christian 
man.     [Very  much  is  due,  for  the  sake  of  those  whom  the  preacher  has  still  to 

428 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  ill. 


quicken  by  his  ministry.  "  Let  your  minister  be  manifestly,  and  to  the  gaze  of 
all,  a  many-lettered  man.  They  will  hear  him  the  more  attentively,  if  your 
quickened  life  in  the  Spirit  accredit  him  to  their  heart.  For  their  salvation's 
sake,  be  ye  an  unsealed  '  letter^'  which  all  may  peruse,  if  they  will."]  Some- 
thing is  due  to  Christ  Who  sends  him.  He  also  needs  accrediting  to  the  unsaved. 
[Though  the  words  do  not  mean  "  a  letter  of  commendation  for  Christ "  (ver.  3).] 
A  man's  changed  life  should  be  an  open  letter. 

3.  It  should  he  legibly  and  beautifully  vjritten. — [Drunken  man,  rolling  up 
against  a  bishop  :  ''  You  converted  me."  "  Yes,  it  looks  like  my  work,  not  my 
Master's."]  Too  many  Christians  are  at  their  best  badly  written  letters ;  often  the 
writing — though  true  enough — needs  some  discovering  and  deciphering.  [Like  the 
shabby,  thumbed,  torn  "  references  "  which  the  professional  beggar  brings  out  of 
his  dirty  pocket.]  Some  of  these  open  letters  accredit  nobody,  with  any  satisfac- 
tory evidence.  [Poor  credentials  of  the  Gospel  itself.  When  God's  Love  first 
came  to  men,  with  what  a  perfect  Open  Letter  it  came  *'  commended  "  !  (Rom. 
V.  8).]  Because  they  are  a  letter  not  for  Paul's  sake  only,  he  might  read  fairly 
the  most  faulty  Corinthian  and  understand  him  and  do  him  justice,  recognising 
in  him  a  real  work  of  the  "  quickening  Spirit."  But  others  need  to  read  these 
*' letters,"  and  will  not  always  do  it  with  favourable  eyes. 

4.  Moses  came  down  from  Sinai  hearing  two  God-inscribed  slabs  of  granite^  as 
the  tokens  that  he  had  been  with  God,  Who  made  him  His  Mediator  for  Israel ;  he 
bore  them  in  his  hands.  [As  Paul's  rivals  so  bore  their  imposing  credentials,  perhaps 
from  James.]  "  Look  in  my  heart,  Corinthians.  See  yourselves  written  there, 
deeply  graven  in  my  affection.  '  I  have  you  in  my  heart '  (Phil.  i.  7),  *  in  my 
heart,  to  die  and  live  with  you'  (2  Cor.  vii.  3).  My  love  writes  you  there, 
on  fleshen  tables.  Your  witness,  indeed,  is  not  for  me  only,  or  chiefly.  The 
tables  of  Sinai  accredited  Moses ;  but  they  were  also  Jehovah's  *  testimonies '  to 
His  own  holy  nature  and  will,  and  the  standard  of  the  holiness  required  of  His 
people.  Your  '  quickened '  life — '  quickened  '  by  no  mere  '  letter '  of  my  message, 
but  by  *  the  Spirit '  who  infused  Himself  into  it — not  only  accredits  me,  but  is  a 
witness  for  Christ,  of  His  mind  and  good  pleasure  towards  His  people.  It  is  an 
exposition,  it  ought  to  be  a  standard  of  measurement,  of  the  blessed  purpose  and 
contents  of  the  *  new  Covenant.^  What  is  this  purpose  ?  To  give  life ;  to  give 
the  Spirit  Who  gives  that  life.  The  embodiment  for  the  new  Order  is  no  mere 
formal,  external  Code  of  rules  for  conduct,  but  a  Life,  with  a  new  Life  principle 
in  it.  [A  y8to9  which  is  the  outgrowth  of  a  ^wr;,  as  Gal.  v.  25.]  The  "  letter  " 
of  the  code  will  have  its  office  and  its  necessary  place  in  such  a  life,  at  least 
in  that  life's  earlier,  weaker,  formative  stages.  But  the  '''"glory"  of  the  new 
life,  and  of  the  new  Order  to  which  it  belongs,  will  be  realised,  partly  in  the 
very  independence  of  such  helps  because  of  the  better,  higher,  all-comprehend- 
ing Law  of  the  life  within, — the  life  of  the  Spirit  Who  quickens. 

11.  The  very  Law  itself  was  now  unveiled. — Paul  and  his  readers  were  living 
in  one  of  the  transition  times  of  the  world's  history.  Ceaseless  change,  death 
and  birth,  the  New  springing  out  of  the  Old, — such  are  the  invariable  charac- 
teristics of  the  life  story  of  Man  and  his  World.  But  these  were  times  of  specially 
rapid  and  significant  change.  [There  are  "  times  and  seasons "  (Acts  i.  7), 
periods  of  time,  and  points  of  time  ;  the  stretches  of  duration  wherein  the  great 
clock  is  quietly,  surely  ticking  on,  and  the  marked  moments  when  It  strikes.  Paul 
lived  in  a  "  season  "  ;  at  one  of  the  points  when  the  striking  of  the  clock  pro- 
claimed a  new  "  time  "  begun.]  One  of  those  complete,  but  not  violently,  openly, 
cataclysmatic  abolishings  of  the  Old  was  taking  place.  [At  the  cession  of  Corfu 
by  England  to  the  Greeks,  a  large  and  costly  and  important  fortification  had 
first  to  be  demolished.  Gun-cotton,  then  a  somewhat  new  thing  in  such  use, 
was  the  agent  employed;  much  curiosity  to  know  what  its  action  would  be 

429 


CHAP.  III.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


Fired  by  electricity.  A  dull,  deep  rumbling  heard,  but  no  great,  earth-heaving 
convulsion  seen  or  felt ;  no  masonry  flying  into  the  air.  But  after  a  few- 
moments  it  was  seen  that  the  immense  fortification  had  quietly  disappeared. 
The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  its  temple,  the  historic  cessation  of  the 
sacrifices  and  the  Jewish  polity,  were  more  really  an  end  visible  and  catastrophic ; 
but  these  had  not  yet  taken  place.  Paul  knew  that  on  Calvary  and  at 
Pentecost  the  spark  had  been  fired.  He  saw  the  old  System  disappearing ;  his 
Jewish-Christian  brethren  would  not  see,  and  so  could  not.  "  Their  eyes  were 
blinded."  Such  critical  periods  always  have  men  with  clearer  vision  than  their 
fellows;  before  the  rest  they  discern  the  times.]  The  Old  System,  with  its 
Shekinah -glory,  its  Sacrificial  routine,  its  laws  of  clean  and  unclean,  its  separate 
nation  physically  sealed  by  circumcision,  was  fading  away,  dissolving  before 
men's  eyes,  becoming  plainly  a  shadowy  thing.  There  was  appearing  [projected 
like  a  new  Image,  a  new  picture,  on  Time's  great  screen]  a  New  System,  in 
which  the  one  conspicuous  thing  was  a  Person,  Christ :  "  the  end  of  the  Law." 
The  old  system  was  coming  to  an  end,  because  its  various  lines  of  suggestion  and 
teaching  had  arrived  at  Christ.  The  streams  of  history,  prophecy,  type,  had 
found  their  way  to  the  Sea,  the  end  of  their  journey.  The  very  Decalogue  itself 
had  annved  at  Christ,  to  stand  henceforth  by  His  side,  wdth  a  John  Baptist 
voice  and  office,  pointing,  sending  the  guilty  souls  whom  it  ^^  condemned'^  and 
*'  killed,''  to  the  "  Lamb  of  God  "  with  a  "  Behold  !  "  Moreover,  it  had  reached 
One  in  Whose  "  Day  "  the  Spirit  was  to  secure  for  it  a  new  glory,  a  fulfilment 
such  as  it  had  never  received  while  itself  was  the  distinctive,  central  fact  of  the 
old  order. 

2.  The  old  had  been  a  glorious  system.    The  new  was  to  surpass  it. — In  no  other 
had   God   been   so   clearly  revealed   to   men ;    as  much    as    Mahometanism   is 
vaunted  as  an   advance  upon  African  fetishism    and  idolatry,    so   much   was 
Judaism  more  gloriously  in  advance  of   every  other  system,  past,  present,  to 
come,  except  Christianity.     No  nation  was  "  so  great,  or  had  God  so  near  to 
them,"  as  Israel  (Deut.  iv.   7),  until  in  Christ  God  created  a  Church,  a  new 
Israel,  and  came  nearer  still.     Sin  and  Holiness  had  hardly  any  meaning  outside 
the  Old  Order  of  the  Law ;  holiness  had  hardly  any  existence.     God's  character, 
God's  will,  God's  redeeming  purpose.  His  remedy  for  the  ruin  which  even  the 
heathen  saw,  but  did  not  understand, — the  light  in  Israel,  at  its  most  dim,  had 
on  all  these  points  been  a  "  glory  "  for  the  old  Covenant,  with  which  there  was 
nothing  in  the  world  to  compare.     It  is  not  Christian  thought,  to  depreciate  the 
Old  Testament.     It  had  been  a  moon  and  stars  ruling  and  illuminating  the  deep 
night  of  earth.     Now  the  Sun  was  arisen,  and  moon  and  stars  were  to  lose  their 
lustre  in  competition  with  His.     [It  had  been  a  glorious  illuminant  for  earth's 
night ;  now  one  still  better  had  come.     The  gas-jet  shows  as  a  dull  silhouette, 
when  seen  projected  upon  the  white,  electric-lighted  globe.]     The  revelation  of 
God,  of  Sin  and  its  Remedy,  of  the  significance  and  the  true  goal  of  man's  Life, 
given  to  the  world  in  Christ,  has  no  serious  competitor  amongst  the  religions  of 
the  world.    All  this  was  dramatically  told  upon  the  top  of  Hermon.    For  a  few  brief 
moments  human  eyes  saw  Law,  Prophets,  Christ,  side  by  side,  speaking  together 
of  His  "decease."     Men  saw  and  heard  the  transfer  of  testimony  and  office  from 
the  lesser  to  the  Greater.     The  Shekinah-cloud  enveloped  all  three  in  its  glory ; 
it  belonged  to  them  all.     When  it  was  past,  Moses  was  gone,  and  Elijah.     The 
day  of  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  was  past.     "  Jesus  only  with  themselves." 
Something  of  this  had  been  dramatically  told  at  Sinai.     Moses  had  veiled  his 
resplendent  face ;  the  glory  had  waned  and  waned  away  beneath  the  veil ;  if  men 
might  have  been  permitted  to  see,  they  would  have  seen  an  ending  of  the  glory 
caught  on  the  Mount  of  the  Law ;  though  even  then  it  would  not  have  been 
given  to  them  to  see  the  End  of  that  which  wa^  revealed.     His  day  was  not  yet, 

430         • 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   IL   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iii. 


And  the  Old,  though  God-given  and  *' made  glorious"  became  a  bondage,  became 
an  idol.  Men  gazed  upon  it,  and  saw  nothing  in  it  but  itself.  Men  studied  it ; 
they  had  to  defend  it,  to  die  for  it ;  they  began  to  pique  themselves  upon  being 
its  faithful  guardians.  They  hugged  the  dying  or  dead  thing  the  closer  to  their 
hearts,  when  the  life  was  departing  or  gone.  Their  affection  became  mechanically 
rigid  in  its  grasp.  Their  eye  grew  accustomed  to  the  moonlight  night ;  they 
resented  and  refused  the  day.  Their  devotion  became  a  slavery ;  it  fettered 
thought;  it  blinded  the  eye;  it  wove  a  veil  for  the  very  heart.  [^All  partial 
truth  may.  (To  be  remembered  that  Grod's  "  partial  truth  "  is  absolutely  true  so 
far  as  it  goes.  Unlike  our  "  partial  truth,"  nothing  in  it  needs  unlearning  before 
the  new,  complementary  truth  can  be  added.  Our  *'  partial  truth "  is  often 
false  because  only  relative,  and  is  out  of  proportion,  needing  much  adjustment 
before  it  can  be  made  to  fit  into  a  new  discovery.)  The  eye  must  not  lose  its 
power  to  receive  new  light,  must  not  fill  its  vision  with  the  familiar  and  precious 
thing  so  fully  that  it  can  see  no  new  object.]  How  had  Paul  and  his  Christian 
readers  escaped  ?  "  With  unveiled  face  "  they  beheld  with  equanimity  the  glory 
fading  fast  from  an  unveiled  Law ;  nay,  with  a  new  sense  of  "  liberty  "  and  a 
larger  life.  Why?  The  Spirit  had  led  them  into  the  presence  of  ^^  the  Lord" 
Christ.  [Shall  He  one  day  so  lead  Israel  in,  into  the  Holy  Place  where 
"the  Lord"  dwells?  (ver.  16).]  They  have  come  forth  again,  transformed  into 
the  same  image,  each  of  them  a  Moses  with  resplendent  face;  [albeit  many 
of  them  know  not  how  resplendent.  See  Separate  Homily  on  "Unconscious 
Goodness."]  Their  heart  has  a  strange  new  sense  of  freedom.  The  old  is  still 
interesting,  precious,  glorious,  not  lightly  to  be  cast  away  ;  but  they  have  grown 
into  something  larger.  [The  man  remembers  vividly  the  day  when  the  youth 
found  himself  to  have  grown  past  running  after  his  boyish  hoop ;  the  woman 
the  day  when,  with  a  little  shock,  she  found  herself  grown  too  big  to  play 
with  her  splendid  doll.]  Liberty  has  come  with  the  manhood  of  the  days  of 
the  Spirit. 

3.  They  see  the  ending  of  the  Old^  because  they  see  that  it  has  reached  its  End 
and  has  lost  itself  in  its  Fulfilments. — Now  they  see  and  understand  the  Law, 
indeed  the  entire  Old  Testament,  and  see  it  full  of  Christ.  Familiar  experience 
to  every  Christian  reader  of  Old  Testament.  In  it  he  (say)  reads  some 
passage,  and  passes  on  into  the  New  Testament.  Keturning  to  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, with  his  mind  and  his  vision  filled  with  the  Christ  he  has  seen  there, 
he  comes  across  his  passage  again,  and  finds  himself  saying,  "  Why,  this  might 
be  written  of  Christ.  It  is  truer  of  Christ  than  of  the  man  to  whom  it  origin- 
ally belongs.  Truer  of  Christ  than  of  any  man  besides."  Or,  it  is  an  incident 
of  the  narrative ;  he  rubs  his  eyes  and  looks  wonderingly,  "  Is  this  David's 
history,  or  Jonah's,  that  I  am  reading, — or  Christ's  ? "  Or,  it  is  a  priest,  a  prophet, 
a  man,  a  child ;  familiar  enough  ;  yet,  again  and  again,  when,  with  eyes  and 
heart  full  of  the  Christ  into  Whose  presence  he  has  *'  turned"  he  reads  the  Old 
Testament,  he  finds  the  familiar  features  somehow  transfigured.  The  same,  yet 
somehow  different.  As  if  the  Old  Testament  face  had  become  tenanted,  pos- 
sessed, by  another  personality ;  as  if  Another  looked  out  of  the  eyes  of  the  Old 
Testament  man.  And  this  happens  so  often,  and  with  such  consistency  of 
system  and  harmony,  that  a  principle  establishes  itself,  "  The  Old  Testam^ent  is 
full  of  Christ.'^  A  tentative,  working  hypothesis  at  first,  each  added  fact  that 
falls  in  with  it  strengthens  the  probability  of  its  truth,  till  it  rises  to  a  practical 
certainty.  In  the  end,  the  man  whose  unveiled  heart  has  been  in  and  gazed 
^upon  the  glory  of  Christ  in  the  New  Covenant  revelation — a  glory  which 
does  not  wane  and  die  away  as  we  are  gazing  on  it — finds  the  presence  of 
Christ,  so  constantly  and  so  clearly,  in  the  unveiled  Law;  sees  so  often  the 
glory  of  the  Old  fade  away,  and  almost  the  very  Old  itself,  until  only  Christ, 

431 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS. 


''''the  Lord"  in  His  glory,  is  left  visible;  that  he  wonders  how  any*heart  can 
miss  Him  in  the  Old  Testament,  in  its  reading  and  its  search.  [The  man 
who  has  the  key  is  almost  ashamed  of  proposing  the  riddle  to  another  man, 
it  seems  so  obvious.  The  hidden  face  once  discovered  in  the  puzzle  pictures 
which  amuse  childhood,  it  is  then  impossible  not  to  see  it.]  Sometimes  language 
so  obviously  adapted  to  contain  a  larger  meaning  than  was  contemplated  by 
the  first  who  used  or  wrote  it, — a  vessel  so  obviously  adapted  for  something 
larger  and  fuller  than  its  Old  Testament  contents ;  sometimes  a  *'staringly 
like  "  anticipation  of  Christ's  person,  or  work,  or  Sacrifice,  unexpectedly  flashing 
out  upon  the  New  Testament  reader  of  the  Old  Testament ;  sometimes  a  real, 
but  fitful,  flash  of  resemblance  [like  those  seen  in  a  *'  family  likeness  "J,  seen, 
and  then  disappearing  when  looked  for  with  closer  purpose  to  discover  it ;  some- 
times highways,  sometimes  byways,  of  history  or  suggestion,  leading  with  sur- 
prising and  unlooked-for  directness  to  Christ ; — these  things  so  continually 
occur  and  recur,  that  one  cannot  "  turn  in  unto  "  even  the  Old  Testament  with- 
out at  every  turn  meeting  Him  Who  is  its  End,  and  therefore  its  Ending.  All 
this  pre-eminently  true  of  "The  Law"  in  its  narrower  sense.  Its  ritual  system, 
the  very  details  of  its  Sanctuary,  so  persistently,  so  consistently,  lend  themselves 
to  suggest  Christ  and  the  Gospel ;  and  often  with  such  minuteness  of  complete 
suggestion ;  that,  as  the  instances  accumulate,  it  becomes,  even  mathematically 
calculated,  almost  as  QC  :  1,  that  they  should  merely  be  coincidences;  that  the 
correspondences  should  be  accident,  and  not  Divine  design.  But  to  see  the 
Christ  there,  in  the  midst  of  the  passing  away  of  the  glory  of  the  unveiled 
"  Law  "  needs  the  unveiled  heart,  which  as  yet  Israel  does  not  possess.  Such  a 
heart  is  a  gift,  part  of  the  life  given  by  the  quickening  Holy  Spirit,  Who  is  the 
characteristic  of  the  New  Covenant. 
[III.  and  IV.  belong  to  chap,  iv.] 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  4—6. 

Responsibility  and  Sufficiency. 

I.  The  responsibility  of  ministering  the  "New  Testament." — 1.  The  Re- 
sponsibility of  ministering  the  Old  was  great.  It  was  a  sacred  deposit  from  God  ; 
with  real,  if  incomplete,  truth  in  it.  It  had  a  "  glory  "  of  origin,  of  history,  of 
office,  and  above  all  it  was  the  root  from  which  sprung  Christ  and  the  Gospel 
(Rom.  ix.  4,  5).  Judaism  was  the  providential  nidus  of  Christianity.  When 
the  Virgin  Israel  had  brought  forth  a  Son,  "  born  under  the  Law,"  then  she  had 
done  her  greatest  work.  The  Old  Covenant  had  not  existed  in  vain  when  it 
yielded  up  its  life  in  giving  historic  birth  to  the  New.  The  "  librarians  of  the 
world "  had  had  a  weighty  charge  upon  them  in  that  age  after  age  they 
^^ ministered"  the  written  Truth  and  Law  of  God.  Mosaism  had  been  an  episodic 
fact ;  for  a  special  purpose  it  had  been  grafted  on  to  the  main  stem  of  God's  re- 
deeming purpose  and  work  (Gal.  iii.  19).  It  had  run  its  course  by  the  side  of  that 
main  purpose;  an  "after- thought,"  a  by-thought,  providing  for  a  special  emergency 
which  had  arisen,  so  far  as  we  may  speak  thus  of  any  work  and  thought  of  God. 
Yet  intrinsically  it  had  been  a  great,  a  glorious  system,  and  the  responsibility 
of  its  " ministers"  from  Moses  onward,  had  been  great.  And  because  of  the 
deeper  issue  which  lay  in  the  Law — its  condemning  effect — does  every  Christian 
preacher  feel  a  new  responsibility  of  being  in  any  degree  a  minister  of  the 
*'  killing  letter."  That  it  issued  in  death  was  a  disparagement  to  the  Law,  only 
as  this  stood  compared  with  the  Gospel.  Intrinsically  it  was  an  honour  to  the 
Law  that  it  bore  such  clear,  unflinching  testimony  to  God's  holiness  of  nature 
and  requirement,  and  also,  indirectly,  to  the  honourable  possibilities  of  human 
nature.     ("  Man  was  made  to  live^  then,  up  to  that  standard  !     Man  can  be 

432 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  ill. 


commanded  to  live  up  to  that,  and  the  command  have  the  reasonableness  of 
possibility  ! ")  It  was  no  real  disparagement  to  the  Law  that  it  could  only  guard 
and  train  and  correct  growth,  and  not  give  life.  Law  per  se  can  do  no  more, 
under  any  conditions.  It  is  itself  a  real  forerunner,  "  preparing  the  way  of  the 
Lord  "  Christ,  when  it  "  condemns  "  and  "  kills."  The  Gospel  preacher  of  **  the 
Spirit "  needs  to  build  upon  the  work  of  the  Law.  Just  in  proportion  as  he 
knows  how,  evangelically,  to  *'  minister  the  letter"  is  his  work  thorough.  And  no 
part  of  his  work  presses  more  heavily  upon  the  worthy  minister  than  that  of  so 
preaching  as  to  bring  the  sense  of  sin  home  to  the  conscience.  Nothing  needs 
more  a  sanctified  judgment ;  some  consciences  are  abnormally  indurated,  some 
morbidly  tender ;  under  the  Gospel  the  demand  of  the  Law  must  not  be  over- 
pressed,  any  more  than  it  must  be  understated.  If  his  words  may  not  only  kill 
self -righteousness,  but  may  even  slay  hope,  '''"who  is  sufficient"^  Whether  to 
preach  Law  or  Gospel,  man's  sin  or  God's  grace,  we  feel  keenly :  "  not  sufficient 
of  ourselves  "  etc.     Much  greater,  then, — 

2.  The  responsibility  of  ministering  the  New  is  greater, — The  treasure  entrusted 
to  him  for  distribution  is  more  ^precious  than  the  former.  If  the  Old  order  had 
many  "  goodly  pearls,"  yet  the  New  has  the  "  one  pearl,  of  great  price."  Is  it 
not  easier  to  misrepresent  the  Gospel  of  life  than  the  Law  of  death  ?  Is  there 
not  more  liability  to  make  the  Gospel  too  easy  than  to  make  the  Law  too  stern  ? 
If  a  man  needs  wisdom  and  strength  above  his  own,  to  preach  the  Law  and  to 
bring  men  to  a  sense  of  sin,  how  much  more  to  awaken  their  death  into  life  ! 
To  know  that  men  are  "  dead  "  ;  that  they  must  live  again  in  the  Spirit,  or  must 
abide  in  death  eternally ;  that  upon  his  skill  and  fidelity,  in  some  one  instance, 
or  upon  some  one  occasion,  *'  life  "  (or  death)  may  depend, — brings  him  back 
to  Paul's  burdened  sense  of  inadequateness  for  such  a  task.  A  responsibility  so 
great  becomes  to  some  men  a  real  temptation  not  to  "  use  great  plainness 
of  speech,"  to  soften  their  tongue,  to  conciliate  their  hearers,  to  modify  their 
message. 

3.  There  is  a  "  sufficiency"  however,  even  for  this.  "  Through  Christ,"  "  To  God- 
ward." — Very  graphic.  He  ^'  stands  in  the  presence  of  God."  All  the  minister's 
work  is  done  as  though  He  were  seen  looking  on.  At  every  point  the  worker 
offers  his  work  to  God,  with  a  perpetually  renewed  devotion  of  it  to  His  glory 
and  service.  He  has  himself  been  ^^ converted  to  God"  (Acts  xv.  19),  turned 
about,  and  set  Godward.  He  does  his  work,  facing  Godward  always.  "  Sets 
the  Lord  always  before  him,"  and  so  is  not  "  moved  "  even  by  a  sense  of  personal 
inadequateness  to  his  task,  or  by  the  fear  of  man,  or  by  the  consideration  of  the 
fateful  issues  which  hang  upon  his  ministry.  He  turns  all  his  work  toward 
God ;  seeks  to  give  it  a  Godward  direction.  There  is  a  supply  of  strength,  in 
this  realisation  of  Him  Who  is  invisible.  The  man  whose  life  and  thought 
are  filled  with,  and  lifted  up  to  the  level  of,  *'  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come," 
feels  little  force,  whether  deterrent  or  alluring,  in  the  opinion  of  man,  be  it 
favourable  or  unfavourable.  His  soul  is  liberated  from  the  slavery  to  which 
regard  for  man's  favour  subjects  the  heart.  He  speaks  out  fearlessly,  clearly, 
without  diminishing  or  admixture,  with  ''  great  boldness  of  speech,"  the  message 
he  has  first  heard  from  God.  [He  who  "  sanctifies  Christ  as  Lord  in  his  heart "  will 
not  fear  "  men's  fear  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  14,  15).]  That  man  has  laid  hold  of  the  secret 
of  steadfastness  in  opinion,  of  courage  in  utterance,  of  stability  of  character, 
of  unwearying  continuance  in  labour,  who  has  come  into,  and  abides  in,  the 
presence  of  God,  and  who  directs  himself  and  his  every  act  Godward.  He  sees 
God ;  he  is  blind  to  man.  "  The  Master  praises ;  what  are  men  ?  "  And  this 
is  "  through  Christ."  Paul  comes  in  nowhere !  All  communication  between 
God  and  man  has  from  the  first  been  mediatorial,  "  through  Christ."  All  God's 
advances  toward  man  have  been  made  along  that  path  of  approach ;  man  has 

py  433 


CHAP.  III.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


not — never  has  had — any  way  to  **  a  Father  "  but  this.  Christ  has  all  along  been 
the  great  underlying  Condition,  the  great  Presupposition,  in  all  intercourse 
between  God  and  man.  Paul's  strength,  his  endowment  of  adequacy  for  his 
responsible  task, — he  expects  it,  and  receives  it  through  this  one,  only  Channel. 

He  is 

"  Strong  in  the  strength  which  God  supplies 
Through  His  Eternal  Son." 

This  alone  ever  makes  a  man  " ahh "  as  a  " minister  of  the  new  covenant"  This 
may  co-exist  with,  and  be  the  infused  life  and  efficiency  of,  great  natural  fitness, — 
of  gift,  temperament,  education,  social  position,  sacred  office ;  it  can  make  all 
these  its  vehicles  and  organs,  and  in  so  doing  puts  on  them  their  highest  honour. 
But  it  is  independent  of  these ;  and  whether  with  or  without  them  is  the 
essential  requisite.  There  is  no  "  sufficiency"  where  this  is  not  found.  The 
regard  steadfastly  directed  Godward,  the  ceaselessly  renewed  supply  of  grace 
through  the  one  Channel,  Christ, — these  alone  will  enable  a  man  to  bear  the 
burden  of  the  ministration,  whether  of  Law  or  Gospel ;  certainly  of  the  Gospel, 
and  of  an  ambassadorship  wherein  his  words  force  men  upon  sharp,  decisive 
verdicts  and  issues;  this  alone  will  sustain  a  man  who  bears  about  a  Gospel 
in  whose  words  are  certainly  inherent  a  power  to  kill,  or  to  quicken  with  the 
fulness  of  the  life  of  the  Spirit. 

OUTLINE   OF  HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS,— Verses  7—11. 

"  Glorious  and  More  Glorious. ^^ 

Introduction. — 1.  The  Infinite  Father  has  made  a  special  revelation  of 
Himself  to  His  human  offspring.  2.  This  has  mainly  come  through  two  great 
general  channels — Moses  and  Christ.  3.  The  special  revelation  of  Himself,  as 
it  came  through  Christ,  far  transcends  in  glory  the  form  it  assumed  as  it  came 
through  Moses. 

I.  Glorious  as  it  came  through  Moses. — Evidenced  by  four  things.  1.  The 
wonderful  display  of  Divinity  attending  the  expression  of  it  on  Mount  Sinai. 

2.  The  magnificence  of  its  religious  scenes  and  celebrations.  3.  The  stupendous 
miracles  that  stand  in  connection  with  it.  4.  The  splendid  intellects  which  were 
employed  in  connection  with  it. 

II.  More  glorious  as  it  appears  in  connection  with  Christ. — 1.  The  Christian 
form  of  revelation  is  more  adapted  to  give  life  than  is  the  Mosaic.  "  Millions, 
I  will  hope,  were  quickened  by  "  the  Mosaic.  But  men  frequently  died  spiritually 
under  it.  Cf.  the  effect  of  an  address  from  an  ancient  prophet,  with  the  words 
of  Christ,  spoken  through  Peter  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  2.  The  Christian 
form  of  revelation  is  more  emphatically  spirit  than  the  Mosaic.  In  the  Mosaic 
there  was  spirit ;  the  elements  of  eternal  truth,  ethical  and  religious,  were  there, 
but  nearly  overlaid  with  ceremonial.  In  Christianity  only  Baptism  and  the 
Supper ;  and  it  throbs  through  every  sentence  with  the  eternal  spirit  of  truth. 
[This   is   all   very  inadequate  and   inexact   exegesis.     It   should  be    "  Spirit."] 

3.  Is  more  restorative.  4.  Is  more  lasting.  Moses  is  no  longer  our  Master. 
Christianity  is  the  permanent  system ;  the  final  revelation  of  God  to  our  world. 
There  is  nothing  to  succeed  it. 

Application. — 1.  Do  not  go  to  Moses  to  expound  Christ.  2.  Nor  to  support 
opinions  (e.g.  war,  slavery,  etc.)  which  cannot  be  supported  from  Christ's 
Gospel.  3.  The  immense  responsibility  of  men  who  have  the  Gospel.  4.  The 
glorious  position  of  a  true  Gospel  minister. — In  abstract,  from,  ^^  Homilist"  New 
Series,  ii.  421. 

434 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  iii. 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 


Ver.  6.  The  Deadly  Letter;  the  Life- 
giving  Spirit. 

I.  What  this  does  mean. 

II,  What  it  does  not  mean. 

I.  1.  Like  many  another  phrase  in 
this  chapter,  this  particular  saying  is 
a  summary  of  an  extended  paragraph 
found  elsewhere  in  the  pages  of  St. 
Paul.  Rom.  vii.  is  concentrated  into 
it.  Not  that  this  is  a  germ  afterwards 
deliberately  expanded  into  a  paragraph. 
The  truth  which  underlies  germ  and 
expansion,  is  habitual,  fundamental,  to 
all  Paul's  thinking  about  Christian 
experience.  Here  it  crops  up  at  the 
surface  in  a  phrase;  there  it  lies,  of 
set  purpose  all  laid  bare  and  exposed  to 
examination.  2.  Paul's  own  experience 
is  concentrated  into  it.  Acts  ix.,  with 
its  companion,  complementary,  accounts 
in  xxii.  and  xxvi.,  give  the  externals  of 
Paul's  "  conversion."  In  Phil.  iii.  4-11 
(particularly  ver.  7)  he  analyses  the 
inner  process,  and  in  ver.  7  precisely 
fixes  the  critical  point  around  which  his 
new  relation  to  God  and  the  outflowing 
new  life  turn.  In  Rom.  vii.  7 — viii.  4, 
whilst  no  doubt  sketching  a  universal 
programme  of  the  moral  revolution 
culminating  in  Regeneration,  and  stat- 
ing a  universal  formula  of  the  conver- 
sion process,  he  is  nevertheless  drawing 
upon  his  memories  of  the  heart-search- 
ings  of  the  three  days'  darkness  in 
Damascus,  and  of  the  earlier  days  when 
he  felt  the  prick  of  the  Master's  goad 
and  kicked  against  it.  Every  man's 
conversion  is  "universal."  3.  He  had 
*'  profited  in  the  Jew's  religion  above 
many  his  equals"  (Gal.  i.  14).  He  had 
"  lived  a  Pharisee,"  and  that,  we  may 
believe,  of  the  best  type.  Christ's 
charges  of  hypocrisy  by  no  means  lay 
against  all  Pharisees.  These  were  not 
all  *'  whited  sepulchres."  Yet  *'  blame- 
less as  he  was  in  all  the  righteousness 
of  the  Law," — and,  let  it  be  noted,  it  is 
with  a  Christian  conscience  reviewing 
these  days,  that  he  thus  pronounces 
upon  his  Jewish  Ufe, — the  Talmud 
and  the  New  Testament,  with  fullest 
agreement  in  their  evidence  enable  us 


to  appreciate  how  almost  entirely 
external  was  the  righteousness  he  thus 
recalls ;  how  very  largely  it  amounted 
to  a  minutely  faithful  fulfilment  of 
Rabbinical  refinements  upon  the 
original  legislation  of  Moses,  which 
were  childishly  frivolous,  when  they 
were  not  an  actual  offence  to  the 
Divinity  of  that  sacred  code.  4.  There 
arrived  a  day  when  the  *'  command- 
ment came,"  particularly  the  "  Tenth  " 
of  the  "  Words "  of  the  Decalogue, 
which  in  effect  sums  up  all  the  pro- 
hibitive enactments  of  the  Divine  Law; 
laying  its  forbiding  hand  upon  every 
"  coveting "  of  the  natural  heart  for 
that  which  is  against  the  mind  and 
will  of  God,  and  the  beneficent  moral 
order  of  His  world.  For  the  first  time, 
any  adequate  "  knowledge  of  sin " 
awoke  within  the  heart  of  Paul;  it 
*'  came  by  the  law."  He  had  hardly 
known  that  such  a  thing  as  sin  was  in 
him;  he  had  done  it  so  naturally  that  it 
excited  no  notice.  Now  the  Law  had 
been  the  revealer  of  sin.  In  the  light 
of  this  new  discovery  the  robe  of  his 
own  righteousness  showed  seamy, 
"  shabby,"  utterly  unfit  for  a  garment 
in  which  a  man  might  present  himself 
before  God.  He  discovered  that  whilst 
he  had  been  busy  in  fulfilling  a  round 
of  minutice  of  ordinances,  even  to  learn 
which  was  an  exercise  and  a  study  to  fill 
a  long  and  laborious  lifetime,  he  had 
missed  altogether  the  reality  of  obedi- 
ence; that  sin  and  righteousness  lay 
quite  apart  from  any  mere  mechanical 
fulfilment  of  such  a  code,  or  of  any 
code,  as  such  ;  that  the  very  motives 
of  the  fulfilment,  and  the  complacent 
satisfaction  into  which  it  was  reviewed, 
were  se{/*-centered, — "  gains  to  me  "  ; 
— pride  !  Saul  the  Pharisee  fell  slain 
at  the  feet,  and  by  the  stroke,  of  the 
Law,  as  it  stood  before  him  for  the  first 
time  "  spiritual,"  "holy,  just,  and  good." 
All  self-complacency  was  gone  from, 
and  was  from  that  moment  impossible 
to,  the  man  who  now  learned,  "  I 
am  carnal,  sold  under  sin."  5.  And  a 
further  stage  was  reached  immediately. 

435 


CHAP.  III.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


To  attempt  to  set  things  right  was  the 
death  of  hope;  the  discovery  of  the 
wrong  had  been  the  death  of  peace. 
The  man  discovered  himself  helpless 
and  a  slave.  Sin  held  him  under  its 
power.  Resolve  as  he  might,  hate 
himself  for  his  moral  impotence  as  he 
might,  bewail  the  moral  division  within 
him  as  he  might,  struggle  as  he  might, 
he  seemed  to  have  no  power  but  to  sin. 
The  discrepancy  between  the  holy  Law 
of  God  and  his  own  unholy  life  and 
heart  grew  more  and  more  glaring  as 
the  light  came  more  clear  and  full.  A 
new  sinfulness  was  added  to  sinful  acts, 
in  that  they  were  now  done  in  the  full 
light  of  a  known  command.  And  the 
deepest  depth  of  self -slaying  discovery 
was  touched  when  he  found  the  very 
commandment,  whether  precept  or  pro- 
hibition, arousing  an  innate  opposition 
to  its  holy  requirement ;  adding  a  new 
attractiveness  to  the  forbidden  fruit ; 
and  with  a  consuming  intensity  inflam- 
ing desire  for  it.  And  such  sinfulness 
stood  out  clearly  as  "  death,"  in  the  new 
light  of  the  unveiled  Law.  What  had 
he  ever  done  but  sin !  What  could 
he  hope  to  do  but  sin  !  What  could 
he  promise  or  purpose  or  perform, — he 
whose  very  heart  found  a  new  desire- 
ableness  given  to  prohibited  action ! 
[No  "  bread  so  pleasant  "  as  that  '*  eaten 
in  secret."  ("  But  you  often  want  to 
change  your  baker  ! "  said  Jackson 
Wray.)  No  liquor  so  good  as  that 
which  was  smuggled.  No  garden  so 
fair  as  that  which  is  over  the  fence  !] 
6.  This  a  universal  experience.  Even 
moralists,  who  are  only  half  serious,  like 
Gay  in  his  fable  of  the  young  cock,  or 
whose  society  verse  lapses  into  occasional 
earnestness  like  his  who  cried,  "  Meliora 
video  prohoque,  deteriora  sequor?^  But 
all  noble  souls  feel  it.  "I  certainly  have 
two  souls,  for  if  there  were  only  one,  it 
surely  could  not  be  at  the  same  time 
good  and  bad,  nor  could  it  at  the  same 
time  love  good  and  base  actions,  and 
also  at  the  very  same  time  wish  the 
very  same  thing,  and  not  desire  to  put 
the  wish  into  action;  but  evidently 
there  are  two  souls,  and  if  the  good 
soul  gets  the  upper  hand,  then  good 

436 


will  be  done,  and  if  the  evil  than 
shameful  actions  will  be  perpetrated  " 
(Xenophon,  Cyropedia,  vi.).  Action  is 
always  lower  than  knowledge,  in  the 
noblest  heathen.  "  I  should  have  lived 
better  than  I  have  done,  if  I  had 
always  followed  the  monitions  of  the 
gods  "  (Marcus  Aurelius,  Gonf.).  "  The 
wages  of  sin  is  death."  And  not  that 
only,  but,  "To  he  carvmlly  minded  is 
death."  7.  Why  could  there  not  have 
been  "  a  commandment  given  bringing 
life  "  ?  (cb)  Partly  from  the  very  nature 
and  oflGice  of  Law.  It  is  directory,  educa- 
tional, not  enabling.  It  is  the  model 
which  trains  the  artistic  sense ;  but  the 
artistic  sense  and  faculty  cannot  be 
given  by  the  most  perfect  model.  It  is 
the  standard  which  enables  the  student 
to  measure  his  progress  and  to  set  before 
him  the  goal  at  which  he  is  to  aim. 
But  the  real  conforming  power,  the 
real  source  of  effort  and  endeavour,  are 
within  himself.  Truth,  beauty — at  all 
events,  moral  truth,  moral  beauty — are 
external  to  the  man,  external  to  all 
men  ;  and  are  altogether  independent  of 
personal,  or  racial,  or  interested  esti- 
mate and  approbation.  They  are  of 
no  school,  of  no  age,  of  no  one  heart 
or  intellect ;  they  are  universal,  and  of 
God.  The  Law  is  the  fingerpost  which 
points  out,  the  wall  of  definition  and  of 
defence  on  either  side  of,  the  one  Way 
of  Life,  as  the  Creator  understands 
"  Life  "  and  designed  *'  Life  "  for  man. 
But  the  will  and  power  to  walk  in  the 
"  Way "  are  within  the  man  himself. 
The  Law  declares  with  authority  what 
is  Obedience,  but  only  in  a  secondary 
sense  does  it  offer  any  help  to  Obedience ; 
just  in  that  it  makes  the  path  definite, 
and  would  at  once  indicate  divergence. 
The  actual,  concrete,  Jewish  "  Law  " 
said  little  about  forgiveness,  and  offered 
no  direct  help  to  holiness.  (6)  But  the 
more  effectual  reason  why  not,  is  found 
in  the  morally  perverted  heart  and  will 
of  man.  What  was  in  design  educa- 
tional, for  that  reason  became  in  fact 
condemnatory.  The  directorial  rule 
reveals  and  convicts  the  discrepancies 
of  the  actually  irregular  line  of  life. 
The  rebellion   of    the    heart    against 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iii. 


restraint  makes  theLaw  irksome  instead 
of   helpful.      The  hedge  which  marks 
out  the  path  for  the  willing  traveller 
must    pierce    with    its    sharp    thorns 
the  man  who  is  bent  upon  breaking 
through    into    the    wide    space — the 
"  liberty  " — on    either    hand    beyond. 
The  silly  bird  which  will  take  its  cage 
for  a  prison  instead  of  a  home;  which  will 
dash  itself,  perhaps  even  to  its  death, 
against  bars  which  were  intended  for 
a  protection,  but  in  which  it  will  only 
see  a  restriction  upon  its  freedom  ;  must 
hurt  itself.     If  the  letter  "  kills,"  it  is 
because  the  evil  heart  in  man  will  not 
accept  and  use  it  as  the  guide  of  wise, 
safe,  happy  living,  the  guide  to .  Life ; 
because  the  heart  resents  its  attempt 
to  support  inexperience  and  weakness, 
and  to  educate  the  moral  sense,  and  its 
necessary  exposure  of  moral  immaturity, 
or  failure,  or  revolt.     8.  "  To  be  spirit- 
ually minded — to  mind  the  things  of  the 
Spirit — is  Life."     "  It  is  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth."     He  Who  said  so,  and  also 
that  "  the  Flesh  profiteth  nothing,"  is 
Himself  the  High  Priest  of  a  system,  a 
new  Law,  "  not  of  a  carnal  command- 
ment, but  of  an  endless  life  "  (Heb.  vii. 
16).     "Who  shall  deliver  me  from  the 
body   of  this   death?"      [The   cry   of 
the   shipwrecked    man    straining   his 
eyes  for  the  token  of  a  sail,  or  for  the 
breaking  of  the  day.     It  is  the  eager 
longing  of  Wellington  at  Waterloo  for 
the   promised    Prussian    help.]      The 
answer  comes,   "  Through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord ! "  which  is   expounded   fur- 
ther  on   (viii.    2).     *'  The   law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made 
me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death." 
"  In  Christ  Jesus  ;  "  the  secret  of  Life 
and  of  the  unity  between  Law  and  Life 
is  there.     (More  of  this  under  ver.  17.) 
A  new  motive  springs  up  in  the  heart 
where  "  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad 
by  the  Spirit  which  He  hath  given  " 
(Rom.  V.  5).     "  We  love  Him  because  " 
— as  on  that  Spirit's  authority  we  are 
made  to   know — "He  first  loved  us." 
And  there  is  a  new  hope ;  for  the  same 
Spirit  who  brings    peace,  brings    also 
power.     The  will  is  enabled  with  a  new 
force.     Sin  no  longer  "  has  dominion  " ; 


the  man  is  no  longer  "  sold  under  sin." 
A  new  direction  to  thought;  a  new  attrac- 
tion for  the  affections ;  a  new  bias  and 
bent  to  the  will.  AH  the  life,  all  the 
natural  life,  obeys  a  new  directing 
principle,  and  becomes  interfused  with 
that  yet  truer  life  which  is  Life  indeed. 
Peace,  hope,  Uberty,  victory, — all  by 
the  indwelling  of  the  quickening  Spirit. 
Deep  problems  of  mental  science  under- 
lie the  method  by  which  the  fact  of  the 
adopting  love  of  God  towards  the  peni- 
tent, pardoned  sinner  is  communicated 
to  the  heart;  or  by  which  the  will 
is  reinforced  as  with  a  power  coming 
distinctly  ab  extra.  But  the  fact 
is  abundantly  verified.  Experience 
in  every  Church  and  age,  and  in  thou- 
sands of  cases  of  every  variety  of  type 
and  temperament,  lights  up  the  Scrip- 
ture declaration.  The  Scripture  de- 
clarations guard,  in  their  turn,  from 
the  vagaries  of  unregulated,  extrava- 
gant, or  merely  viciously  personal, 
"experience."  And  that  a  new  idea 
should  be  a  new  motive,  transforming  a 
man,  transfiguring  his  life,  begetting 
a  new  life,  is  but  a  particular  in- 
stance of  a  widely  obtaining  law.  The 
new  idea,  the  new  power,  are  the  gift 
and  work  of  the  Spirit  Who  is  in  the 
man  who  is  in  "  Christ."  "  The  Spirit 
giveth  life^ 

II.  1.  Kingsley  wrote  to  one  of  his 
curates — "  a  very  new  curate  " — what 
has  an  applicability  far  beyond  its 
original  occasion :  "  Let  not  Sweden- 
borg,  or  any  other  man,  argue  you  out 
of  the  scientific  canon  that  to  under- 
stand the  spirit  of  Scripture  or  any 
other  words,  you  must  first  understand 
the  letter.  If  the  spirit  is  to  be  found 
anywhere,  it  is  to  be  found  by  putting 
yourself  in  the  place  of  the  listeners, 
and  seeing  what  the  words  would  have 
meant  to  them.  Then  take  that  mean- 
ing as  an  instance  (possibly  a  lower 
one)  of  a  universal  spiritual  law,  true 
for  all  men,  and  may  God  give  you 
wisdom  for  the  process  of  induction  by 
which  the  law  is  to  be  discovered " 
(Life.,  ii.  95).  Allegorising  has  run 
mad,  and  has  in  some  quarters 
given  a  bad  name  to  everything  but 

437 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


the    barest,  most    meagre,    historical, 
naturalistic     reading     of     what     are 
indeed    ancient    books,    but    are   very 
much  besides.     The  Philonian  method 
dealt   with    the    Old    Testament,   the 
Origenic    dealt    with    New   and    Old, 
in  a  fashion  which  made   the   stories 
of  the  Book  very  little  more  than  so 
much  convenient  framework,  and  the 
persons  so    many    happily   serviceable 
starting-points,    for  fine  theorising  or 
fanciful  moralising,  whose  value  in  no 
way  depended  upon  the  historicity  or 
otherwise   of   the  story  or  the  saying 
which  gave  form  and   colour   to   the 
teaching.         Sound      allegorising      is 
nothing   but    the  sober,    Spirit-guided 
development     of    the     general    prin- 
ciples which  are  carried  by  particular 
instances.     The   Scripture   teaches  by 
the  concrete — the  story,  the  biography 
— rather  than  by  the  abstract.     [E.g. 
we    need,    and    might   have    had,    a 
chapter   in    A    Treatise    of  Christian 
Ethics  headed,  "  The  Relation  between 
Ignorance  and  Responsibility,  and  be- 
tween   Conscientiousness    and   Guilt." 
Instead,    we    have   the    conscientious 
"  chief   of   sinners,"    Saul   of    Tarsus, 
and  the   prayer  of  the   Redeemer  on 
His  cross  for  those  who  "  knew  not " 
what  they  did.]     There  are  widening 
circles  of  application,  all  starting  from 
the  one  central  fact  or  truth,  with  a 
widening    radius.      The    mischievous, 
untrue  allegorising  forsakes  the  centre, 
or  disdains  and  denies  it.    The  "  letter" 
is  the  merely  accidental,  and  more  or 
less  convenient,  literary  vehicle;   the 
"  spirit,"    so   called,   the   truth   to  be 
taught,  is  the  alone  really  valuable  and 
important.     The  erroneous  thing  is,  so 
to   say,    a   literary   Gnosticism   which 
refines  away,    or   denies,   the   historic 
Word,    hoping    to    retain    the    Idea ; 
as   the    theologic    Gnosticism    refined 
away,  or   denied,  the   real   humanity 
of    the    Divine   Christ,    and   tried    to 
retain  a  Divinity  whose  manifestation 
to    man   was    but   a    phantom.  ^Yet, 
as    the     Divinity    of    the    Incarnate 
One    must   not    be    denied,   and   the 
humanity   overprized;    so  the   Letter 
is  not  all. 

438 


2.  Loyalty  to  the  written  Word. — 
There  is  a  "  spirit "  which  has  become 
incarnate  in  the  "  letter."  Whatever 
be  the  philosophic  decision  of  the 
question  whether  or  not  words  are, 
to  the  man  himself,  indispensable  to 
thought ;  as  a  fact  God's  thoughts 
have  come  to  us  in  words.  They  have 
come  to  us  in  a  Book.  The  experiment 
of  the  race  all  goes  to  show  that  out- 
side this  Book  there  is  no  certain, 
no  clear  knowledge,  of  the  mind  and 
will  of  God.  Nature  speaks  with  a 
stammer,  and  is  intelligible,  to  any 
practical  effect,  only  to  those  who  have 
heard  from  the  Book  what  it  is  she 
has  to  say.  As  indistinct,  as  variable, 
as  scanty,  of  as  little  practical  service, 
are  the  utterances  of  the  "  natural " 
conscience.  Its  "  truths,"  *'  innate 
ideas,"  need  interpreting  and  checking 
by  the  external  Word.  The  witness 
of  no  two  consciences  agrees  long 
together.  God,  duty,  right,  the  here- 
after of  man, — if  on  these  topics  men 
forsake  the  written  Word,  there  is 
no  verifiable  truth,  none  authoritative 
except  to  the  man  who  propounds  it — 
if  even  to  him.  It  is  not  slavery  to 
the  "letter,"  to  refuse  to  go  beyond 
the  distinct  teaching  of  the  Bible, 
either  by  direct  statement  or  by 
fair  and  necessary  inference.  That 
Book  certainly  gives  but  a  narrow 
standing  ground  of  dry  land  amidst  a 
far-stretching,  surrounding  ocean  of 
mystery.  It  is  but  a  question  of  a 
step  or  two  more  beyond  his  fellows, 
when,  forsaking  this,  the  tallest  man 
amongst  them  wades  out  into  the 
depths,  and  finds  himself  out  of 
his  depth,  and  progress  impossible. 
Or,  to  change  the  figure,  there  is  no 
sure,  safe  walking  out  into  these 
depths,  except  so  far  as  the  inquirer 
keeps  hold  of  the  rope  which  is  fast  to 
the  Bible.  Practically  all  the  facts 
upon  which  reUgion  can  base  itself, 
have  for  all  the  Christian  centuries 
been  long  complete ;  all  lie  within  the 
area  of  the  completed  "  letter."  No 
new  facts  can  be  looked  for ;  all  that 
can  be  done  is  to  examine  these  with 
ever  fresh   scrutiny,   to   see   whether 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   IL  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  iii. 


there  may  be  in  them  anything  which 
has  hitherto  escaped  discovery.  No 
such  supplement,  no  such  corrective 
appendix,  is  from  time  to  time  issued, 
whether  in  the  larger  knowledge  of  the 
universe,  or  in  the  intuitions  of  man's 
heart,  as  may  yield  us  something, 
or  all,  of  the  original  Work.  Chris- 
tianity can  never  dispense  with  its 
foundation  documents.  The  Christian 
speculator,  during  his  excursions  into 
the  regions  of  the  mysterious  or  the 
unknown,  must  never  lose  touch 
with  his  isase,  as  the  soldiers  say.  To 
be  loyal  to  the  Word  is  not  to  "  kill," 
but  to  assist,  to  nourish,  to  protect, 
knowledge.  Not,  "  What  do  I  think  ? 
what  do  my  intuitions,  my  moral 
sense,  teach  me."  Not,  "  What  do  I 
feel  must  be  true?"  But,  "What 
does  God — not  merely  a  Book — 
say?" 

3.  The  historical  Christ  and  "  the 
Christian  idea.'' — Schelling  (quoted  in 
Luthardt,  Saving  Truths,  p.  252),  on  the 
analogous  hope  to  preserve  the  "  ideas  " 
of  Christianity,  whether  or  not  the 
historical  Christ  be  believed  in  and  re- 
tained, says :  "  How  frequently  has  not 
the  historical  character  of  Christianity 
been  declared  to  be  heathenish  (not  its 
external,  but  its  higher  facts,  e.g.,  the 
p re-existence,  the  pre-mundane  being 
of  Christ,  His  position  as  Son  of  God), 
and  on  that  account,  as  that  which  is 
no  longer  compatible  with  modern 
thought?  The  very  essence  of  Chris- 
tianity is,  however,  its  historical  cha- 
racter, not  the  ordinary  part  of  its 
history,  as,  e.g.,  that  its  Founder  was 
born  under  Augustus,  died  under 
Tiberius,  but  that  higher  history  on 
which  it  properly  rests,  and  which  is 
its  peculiar  matter.  I  call  it  a  higher 
history,  for  the  true  subject-matter  of 
Christianity  is  a  history  in  which 
divinity  is  implicated — a  Divine  his- 
tory. That  would  be  but  a  poor 
explanation,  and  entirely  destructive  of 
the  peculiarity  of  Christianity,  which 
should  distinguish  between  the  doctrinal 
and  the  historical,  and  consider  the 
former  the  essential  and  special  matter, 
and  the  latter  as  mere  form  and  cloth- 


ing. The  history  is  not  merely  inci- 
dental to  the  doctrine,  it  is  the  doctiine 
itself.  The  doctrinal  matter,  which 
might  perhaps  remain  after  the 
excision  of  the  historical,  as,  e.g.,  the 
general  doctrine  of  a  personal  God, 
such  as  even  rational  theology  some- 
times admits,  or  the  morality  of  Chris- 
tianity would  be  nothing  peculiar, 
nothing  distinctive  ;  .  .  .  the  history  is 
the  distinctive  feature  of  Christianity. 
It  is  altogether  incongruous  to  speak 
only  of  the  teaching  of  Christ.  The 
chief  matter  of  Christianity  is  Christ 
Himself ;  not  what  He  says,  but  what 
He  is,  what  He  did.  Christianity  is 
not  directly  a  body  of  doctrine,  it  is  a 
thing,  an  object ;  doctrine  is  but  the 
expression  of  the  thing.''  [Schelling 
in  some  degree  thus  meets  by  anticipa- 
tion the  position  of  Ritschl.  Luthardt 
goes  on  to  speak  of  a  '*  so-called  liberal 
theology,  which  really  sees  nothing 
more  in  Christianity  than  a  certain 
general  religious  feeling,  or  the  mere 
force  of  civilisation."] 

4.  Dogma  and  religion. — There  is  an 
embodiment  of  truth  in  formal  state- 
ments of  doctrinal  confessions  and 
creeds  which  is  sometimes  regarded  as 
not  helpful  to,  but  as  the  death  of, 
religious  life,  and  indeed  of  the  interests 
of  truth  itself.  And  in  this  connec- 
tion the  text  is  often  quoted.  [The 
use  of  this  verse  sometimes  made,  with 
that  application,  is  a  flagrant  instance 
of  the  employment  of  the  mere  words  of 
Scripture,  apart  from  the  context  and 
connection,  and  without  regard  to  the 
rule  which  requires  some  real  analogy 
between  the  primary  meaning  of  the 
passage  and  the  matter  to  which  it  is 
sought  to  apply  it.  It  was  not  because 
the  Law  of  Moses  was  written,  and  so 
was  fixed  in  unchanging  record  upon  the 
tables  of  Sinai,  that  it  wrought  death ; 
the  Spirit  which  works  life  uses  as  His 
instrument  a  written  Word.]  It  is,  in 
reply,  pointed  out  that  what  is  known 
of  any  truth,  can  be  stated  inexact  form, 
and  demands  to  be  so  stated,  and  that 
the  mind  inevitably  seeks  to  system- 
atise its  knowledge — to  unify  it.  It  is 
pointed  out  that  if  truth  be  objective, 

439 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


if,  e.g.,  it  be  a  real  disclosure  of  a  fact 
of  God's  government  of  mankind  in 
Christ,  then  once  made,  once  ascertained 
to  man,  it  abides  true,  and  that  putting 
it  into  formal  shape  and  statement,  or 
embodying  it  in  a  creed,  is  no  more 
than  Science  does  with  its  accumulating 
corpus  of  ascertained  truth.  It  en- 
deavours unceasingly  to  put  into  exact 
expression,  and  to  co-ordinate  into 
systematic  relationship  and  statement, 
the  results  at  which,  from  its  owndata, 
and  by  its  own  proper  methods,  it  from 
time  to  time  definitely  arrives.  It  is 
urged  that  if  Theology  too  be  a  science, 
if  it  deals  with  a  section  of  the  whole 
universe  of  facts  which  is  capable  of 
exact  study,  with  its  own  appropriate 
methods,  then  results  once  arrived  at 
abide  valid,  and  not  less  so  that  formal, 
or  confessional,  expression  has  been 
given  to  them.  If  "Justification  by 
faith  "  be  really  the  method  of  a  sinner's 
acceptance  with  God,  then  it  is  of  no  age 
or  Church ;  and  if  that  formulation  of 
God's  method  be  Scriptural,  it  is  not  to 
be  challenged  or  set  aside  as  a  passing,  or 
only  relatively  true,  form  of  statement. 
If  between  the  death  of  Christ  and  the 
pardon  of  sin  there  once  be  revealed  or 
ascertained  a  relation  which  is  indepen- 
dent of  any  act  or  feeling  or  change  in 
the  sinner  himself,  then  true  once  this 
is  true  always.  In  this  instance  well 
appears  what  gives  occasion  to,  and 
such  justification  as  there  may  be 
found  for,  the  revolt  against  the  letter. 
In  endeavouring  to  state  this  relation 
between  the  death  of  Christ  and  sin, 
it  has  been  forgotten  that  all  the 
phraseology,  even  though  borrowed 
from  Scripture,  is  analogical,  drawing 
from  the  relations  between  man  and 
man,  a  mutually  corrective,  mutually 
expository,  and  complementary  series 
of  illustrations  for  the  relation  between 
the  sinner  and  God.  It  has  been 
forgotten  how  imperfectly  the  whole 
**  scheme  "  of  the  Atonement  is  revealed 
or  comprehensible.  There  has  been 
an  unwise  insistence  on  some  particular 
mode  of  statement ;  there  has  above  all 
been  a  zeal  for  one's  own  particular 
phraseology  and  confessional  form  which 

440 


has  made  the  form  everything,  or  at 
least  has  made  it  overshadow  altogether 
the  truth  which  this  was  designed  to 
express  or  guard.  But  to  remember 
this  is  far  removed  from  any  demand 
that  all  creeds,  and  the  very  statements 
of  Scripture  themselves,  should  be 
thrown  afresh  into  the  melting- 
pot,  and  be  continually  in  a  state  of 
flux,  nothing  ever  cast  into  permanent 
mould ;  and  this  only  lest  instead 
of  the  living,  "growing"  thing,  there 
should  come  out  the  dead  cult,  to  be 
the  object  of  a  truth -dishonouring, 
God -dishonouring  idolatry  of  the 
"letter."  The  "letter"  is  the  body 
of  "  the  spirit."  Can  the  spirit  exist 
without  a  body?  Without  its  own 
body  ?  Is  the  identity  of  the  body  part 
of  the  unchanging  identity  of  the  truth? 
[As  in  the  case  of  the  ceaseless  change 
of  the  component  particles  of  the 
human  body,  whose  ceaseless  flux  does 
not  affect  the  identity,  so  in  this  case 
the  essential  form  remains ;  the 
changing  "body"  does  clothe  the  same 
truth  ;  and  receives  its  shape  from  the 
same  informing  truth.  A  spirit  freed 
from,  and  independent  of,  the  letter 
— is  it  parallel  to  the  grotesque  idea 
of  Carroll  in  Alice  in  Wonderland, 
who  imagines  a  grin  which  remains 
when  the  cat  has  faded  away  ?] 

Ver.  6.  "  Letter  and  spirit." — "  Able 
ministers "  misleading,  to  our  ears. 
Connect  closely  with  "  suflicient," 
"  suflSciency."  "  Killeth  "  cannot  have 
so  inadequate  a  reference  as  to  the 
frequency  of  the  death  penalty  under 
the  Law. 

I.  Divine  commands  alone  cannot 
produce  obedience. — Owing  to  an  im- 
perfection not  in  the  Law,  but  in  human 
nature,  which  does  not  yield  to  the 
obligation.  Conscience  is  on  the  side 
of  the  Law,  but  is  overborne  by  the 
baser  nature.  The  habitual  failure  of 
conscience  produces  habitual  disquiet 
and  misery,  a  constant  sense  of  discoid, 
a  consciousness  of  powerlessness  against 
evil; — Death.  The  Law  even  became 
the  occasion  of  sin.  Prohibition  pro- 
vokes the  natural  heart  and  irritates  it 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  ill. 


to  impatience  of  restraint.  The  restive 
horse  rears  against  the  bridle  ;  at  last 
throws  off  its  rider.  Then  follows  the 
licence  of  self-will,  —  Death.  Chris- 
tianity has  a  quickening  power.  The 
Law  was  inaugurated  by  the  code  of 
the  Ten  Words ;  Christianity  by  the 
code  of  a  Perfect  Human  -Life  ex- 
hibited in  Christ  [written  out  on  the 
fleshen  tables  of  His  heart  and  blame- 
less life].  Christ  not  only  obeyed 
the  Law  with  an  absolutely  perfect 
obedience,  but  showed  its  new  and 
sublimer  meaning.  Thus  the  code  of 
human  duty  is  presented  in  a  form 
most  intimate  and  intelligible  and 
affecting.  Christianity  quickens  hy  a 
secret  influence  on  the  heart.  The  higher 
nature  receives  an  increase  of  power. 
Conscience  is  afresh  enthroned,  and 
governs ;  the  Law  is  obeyed  not  so  much 
because  it  is  obligatory,  but  because  it 
is  loved.  As  natural  weakness  requires 
aid  it  turns  ever  anew  to  the  Divine 
Source  of  strength,  till  the  lower  nature 
becomes  subjugated,  and  the  higher 
triumphant. 

II.  The  intellectual  deficiency  and 
mischievousness  of  mere  writing  as 
a  means  of  instruction. — Correspond- 
ence is  at  best  a  poor  comfort  in 
separation ;  is  often  obscure,  and  open 
to  misinterpretation  ;  the  writer  can- 
not be  appealed  to.  An  ancient 
writing,  a  holy  writing,  and  that  in 
translation,  leaves  many  openings  for 
misunderstanding  and  consequent  mis- 
take. Technical  theological  terms 
sometimes  hinder  spiritual  life  and 
growth,  or  kill  them.  1.  They  were 
perhaps  originally  only  imperfectly 
correspondent  to  the  truth,  and  may 
come  to  be  regarded  with  a  reverence 
which  belongs  only  to  the  words  of 
Scripture,  a  reverence  often  innocent 
of  their  real  sense.  Hearers  do  not 
recognise  old  truth  in  new  phraseology, 
and  crucify  the  preacher.  2.  Know- 
ledge of,  and  sympathy  with,  the  writer 
is  indispensable  to  the  understanding 
of  his  writings.  So  the  knowledge  of 
the  Divine  Author  and  the  inspiration 
of  His  Spirit,  are  necessary  to  the 
interpretation    of    the    Bible.       The 


Christian  man,  and  he  only,  is  in  a 
position  to  understand,  and  live  by,  the 
Scriptures.  In  constant  contact  with 
the  Spirit,  he  is  a  constant  recipient  of 
moral  and  intellectual  life.  3.  Paul  is 
not  only  the  trustee  of  a  Book,  but  the 
dispenser  of  the  Spirit.  What  a  noble 
view  of  the  Christian  ministry  ! — From 
'"''  Homilist^''  Third  Series,  ii.  lOl  sqq. 

Yer.  6.  ^^  Ministers  of  the  New 
Covenant.^* 

I.  Not  of  Naturalism. — Christianity 
is  the  grand  subject  of  all  true  modern 
ministries,  the  one  primary  text  of 
religious  discourses  the  world  over,  the 
ages  through.  Had  man  retained 
primitive  innocence,  Nature  would  have 
been  that  grand  text;  budding  earth, 
sparkling  skies,  murmuring  brook, 
booming  billow,  beasts  of  the  forest, 
fowls  of  heaven.  Men  would  have 
seen  in  Nature  what  they  cannot  see 
now,  true  ideas  of  God;  they  would 
have  found  there  food  for  souls.  All 
the  parts  of  material  nature  would 
have  been  regarded  as  embodiments  of 
Divine  thought  and  symbols  of  eternal 
truth.  But,  as  it  is,  they  cannot 
reach  the  spiritual  significance  of 
nature;  if  they  could,  it  would  not 
meet  their  spiritual  exigencies  or  im- 
prove their  spiritual  condition.  [How 
many  sermons  have  nothing  distinctively 
Christian, — in  the  topics  they  discuss ; 
in  their  method  of  discussing  even 
topics  derived  from  Scripture;  in 
their  standards  of  judgment  of  men  and 
conduct ;  in  their  lessons  inculcated  ! 
Sermons  to  the  Natural  Man  is  a  good 
and  worthy  book;  but  it  is  by  a 
"  spiritual "  man.  There  are  "  Sermons 
by  the  Natural  Man  to  the  Natural 
Man."  The  "  natural "  man  does  not 
mind  "  natural "  preaching.  They 
who  preach  thus  are  sure  of  a  clientele. 
Such  preachers  at  least  rouse  no 
antagonism  in  the  natural  heart. 
Anybody  is  "sufiicient  for"  these 
things!  (Cf.  ii.   16).] 

II.  Not  of  Judaism. — It  flamed,  a 
grand  torch  for  Truth,  breaking  the 
moral  darkness  of  successive  genera- 
tions, and  lighted  great  multitudes  of 

441 


CHAP.  III.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


souls  into  the  calm  heaven  of  eternity. 
But  it  is  "done  away."  [No  man 
formally  preaches  Judaism.  But  there 
is  a  style  of  experience  and  a  scale  of 
enjoyment  in  the  Divine  life  which  is 
Jewish — Old  Testament — not  Christian. 
The  man  who  is  righteous  only  by 
shaping  his  course  and  character  ac- 
cording to  external  commands,  who 
can  do  nothing,  and  decide  nothing, 
without  a  "  text,"  a  positive  plain  rule, 
is  a  Jew,  not  a  Christian,  in  the 
principle  of  his  holiness.  He  who  is 
hoping  to  sin  and  repent  and  find 
pardon,  only  then  to  sin  and  repent 
again,  is  living  in  the  Jewish  order, 
whilst  the  Christian  covenant  has  now 
brought  a  larger,  victorious  grace.  He 
who  is  only  a  penitent,  and  has  not 
found  or  expected  a  peace  which  is  a 
matter  of  consciousness,  has  not  passed 
the  John  Baptist  stage  of  the  order  of 
the  dispensations.  Much  current, 
conventional,  respectable  morality  is 
Jewish,  the  morality  rebuked  and 
superseded  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
by,  "  /  say,  unto  you.'''  The  thinker 
who  only  sees  a  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
is  a  Jew  (perhaps  only  a  Pilate),  not  a 
Christian.  He  who  calls  the  Spirit 
"  it,"  not  "  He  "  (John  xv.,  xvi.),  who 
speaks  of,  and  prays  for,  the  Spirit  to 
be  *'  poured  out,"  and  the  like,  should 
at  least  remember  that  this  is  Old 
Testament  thought  and  language, 
still  employed  although  Christ,  the 
Introducer  of  the  personal  Holy  Ghost 
to  the  Church,  has  spoken  and  done 
His  work.  Preachers  in  their  doctrine, 
their  people  in  their  experience,  need 
still  to  beware  of  making  up  their 
bread,  or  feeding  upon  a  spiritual  staff 
of  life,  with  *Hhe  leaven  of  the 
Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees."  It 
is  still  on  active  sale  in  the  world's 
religious  bread- shops.] — Founded  upon 
a  paragraph  in  '''' Homfiilist^^  Third 
Series,  ix.  122. 

Ver.  17.  The  Liberty  of  the  Spirit. 
"  Where  the  Spirit^'  etc.—''  The  Spirit " 
is  the  Holy  Spirit ;  the  characteristic, 
crowning  privilege  of  the  Christian 
dispensation.     "  The  Lord  "  is  the  Lord 

442 


Christ.  The  verse  is  another  of  the 
incidental,  compi-essed  embodiments  of 
the  habitual  thought  of  Paul.  We  see 
it  expounded  by  him  in  two  leading 
passages. 

I.  The  Law  of  Moses  is  a  system  of 
bondage;  the  Gospel  is  a  system  of 
liberty  (Gal.  iii.  1— v.  6).— 1.  Peter 
on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  would 
have  kept  Moses  and  Elijah  and 
Christ !  Law  and  Prophets  and 
Gospel  !  Daybreak,  Dawn,  Day,  all 
together.  Moon  and  stars  in  all  their 
number  and  glory,  after  the  Sun  was 
risen.  He  "  knew  not  what  he  said," 
indeed.  And  the  Conservative,  old- 
school,  Jewish  Christians  who  followed 
Paul  into  Galatia,  would  have  tried 
the  same  impossible  combination  also. 
They  were  representatives  of  a  large 
class  who,  in  all  times  of  revolutionary 
change,  are  not  indeed  insensible  to  the 
value  and  truth  of  the  new  order,  but 
who  are  also,  from  long  habit  and  honest 
appreciation,  reluctant  to  part  with 
the  old,  and  are  slow  to  take  in  the 
fact  that  the  old  is  hopelessly  past  as 
to  its  form,  whilst  all  that  was  really 
valuable  in  it  is  taken  up  by  and  into  the 
new.  The  first  time  we  hear  of  them, 
their  line  was  definitely  stated :  "  Ex- 
cept ye  [Gentiles]  be  circumcised  .  .  . 
ye  cannot  be  saved"  (Acts  xv.  1,  5). 
After  a  long  conference,  Peter  turned 
the  vote  upon  the  question  by  a  speech 
in  which  he  declared — and  appealed  to 
the  confirmatory  knowledge  of  all  his 
hearers — the  old  system  "  a  yoke  which 
neither  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able 
to  bear."  Paul  will  have  none  of  it 
for  his  Galatians.  It  is  "a  difierent 
gospel";  a  true  heterodiO^j.  2.  The 
case  has  its  analogies  to-day,  wherever 
the  externals  of  religion  are  so  em- 
phasised as  to  become  for  their  own  sake 
matters  whose  observance  is  righteous- 
ness, and  their  neglect  sin.  There  are 
still  consciences  greatly  distressed  if 
one  tittle  of  a  cumbersome  round  of 
external  ordinances  has  by  any  chance 
been  forgotten,  or  has  for  any  reason 
gone  (blamelessly)  unfulfilled.  It  is, 
moreover,  easier  to  perform  a  round  of 
duties,  catalogued  and  prescribed  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap,  hi. 


'*  ticked  off  "  in  the  day's  list  as  each  is 
accompHshed,  than  to  cultivate  the  holy 
life  within,  to  wage  the  unceasing 
warfare  there  and  to  keep  up  the 
incessant  guard  over  one's  own  spirit. 
A  piece  of  external  asceticism  is 
easier  than  an  act  of  merely  inward 
self-denial.  To  keep  the  Galatian 
converts  at  such  a  round  of  externalism 
was  to  keep  them  at  a  low  level,  and 
to  make  their  life  one  of  only  an  elemen- 
tary type.  For  Galatians  to  assume  the 
burden  of  the  Mosaic  ritual,  was  for 
men  to  put  themselves  into  the  position 
of  children  learning  their  ABC; 
it  was  for  the  heir  who  has  come  of 
age  to  put  himself  again  under  the 
tutors  and  governors  and  school-slave. 
These  things  had  had  their  meaning, 
but  the  Gospel  had  evacuated  them  of 
meaning ;  even  the  sacred  sign  and 
seal,  circumcision,  was  now  nothing  but 
a  mutilation  or  a  piece  of  surgery. 
For  the  man  to  tie  himself  to  the 
"  go-cart "  which  had  supported  the 
child's  tottering  steps  into  steady 
walking,  is  not  only  folly ;  the  man 
feels  it  a  bondage.  3.  And  these 
Jewish  teachers  made  the  bondage  a 
more  serious  one  still.  "  Except  .  .  . 
ye  cannot  be  saved."  That  the  tedious, 
burdensome,  often  frivolously  minute. 
Rabbinical  glosses  upon  the  original 
Law,  as  well  as  that  Original  itself, 
should  be  matters  on  which  salvation 
hinged,  was  as  serious  as  that  it  should 
be  supposed  (say)  that  sin  can  with  us 
be  atoned  for  by  any  round  of  external 
or  ascetic  actions.  Serious,  because  it 
seemed  to  imply  that  the  work  of 
Christ  was  not  by  itself  the  sufficient 
ground  of  the  sinner's  safety  ;  that  He 
needed  a  co-ordinate  ground  of  ac- 
ceptance with  God  to  complement  His 
work.  And  serious  because  the  im- 
possibility, too  often  most  sadly  verified 
by  the  most  earnest  souls,  of  keeping 
the  Law,  made  salvation  on  this  basis 
and  condition  impossible.  *'  Away 
with  it  all !  Stand  fast  in  your 
liberty.  ...  Be  not  entangled  again  " 
(Gal.  V.  1).  "The  dispensation  of  the 
Spirit  knows  nothing  of  such  parallel 
requirements  in  addition  to,  in  com- 


petition with,  the  simple  ones  of 
Repentance  and  Faith,  which  He  will 
also  help  you  to  fulfil."  Under  the 
dispensation  of  the  Spirit  there  must 
be  no  entangling  of  the  soul  with  a 
system  of  externalisms  or  ceremonial, 
presumed  in  any  sense  to  have  merit 
attached  to  their  fulfilment.  "  Ye  are 
called  unto  Liberty ! "  4.  Under 
another  aspect  the  Galatian  controversy 
raised  a  wider,  a  universal,  question. 
There  are  always  two  conceivable  ways 
— two  only — of  finding  for  oneself  a 
standing  before  a  holy  God.  The  one 
is  by  doing^  by  our  own  acts  and  their 
merit;  the  other  by  believing,  by 
resting  alone  on  the  act  and  merit  of 
Another.  The  "  Jewish "  and  the 
"  Gospel  "  plan  respectively.  "  Faith 
and  Works "  is  no  stock  theological 
topic  of  discussion.  It  is  no  academic 
issue  which  is  raised.  It  is  the  vitally 
and  perennially  interesting  one,  always 
raised  so  soon  as  a  man  understands  Sin, 
and  himself,  as  a  Sinner.  The  natural 
heart  always  propounds  "  Salvation  by 
Works,"  even  when  it  has  never  heard 
of  the  term.  For  the  acceptance  of  a 
guilty  sinner — his  justification  before 
God — the  way  is  now  shorter.  The 
Spirit  teaches  every  man  who  will 
learn,  that  he  need  not  encumber 
himself — as  it  is  quite  useless  to  do — 
with  any  fancied  store  of  things  he  has 
done — or  has  not  done — of  things  he 
has  been — or  has  not  been.  As  regards 
the  past  and  its  guilt  before  God,  he  is 
now  free  to  find  mercy  and  acceptance 
forthwith  in  the  merit  of  Christ. 

II.  A  larger,  more  generalised, 
thoroughly  universal  treatment  of 
**  bondage  "  and  "  liberty  "  appears  in 
Rom.  viii.  14-16.  The  antithesis  be- 
tween "  servant  "  and  "  son  "  appears 
in  the  Galatian  passage.  But  in  the 
Roman  letter  the  local  colouring,  the 
temporary  shape,  of  the  question  is 
gone.  Nothing  is  left  but  the  sinner, 
whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  passing  from 
the  status  and  experiences  of  a  servant, 
a  bond-servant,  of  God  into  that  of  a 
son  of  God.  There  is  a  new  name  for 
the  man,  "  child " ;  a  new  name  for 
God,   "  Abba."     It  is  the  summation 

443 


CHAP.  in.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


in  the  life-history  of  the  individual 
of  the  moral  education  of  the  race. 
Paul  and  his  readers  stood  historically 
at  the  meeting- place  of  two  stages  in 
God's  leading  of  the  world.  Until  the 
Day  of  the  Spirit  all  God's  most  holy 
and  devoted  people  had  been  His 
servants.  No  most  favoured  one  ever 
ventured,  under  that  earlier  order,  to 
apply  the  name  "  Father"  to  God.  The 
name  "  Father  "  rarely  occurs  at  all, 
and  never  as  the  appellation  of  God 
habitually  on  the  lips  of  an  individual. 
"  Like  as  a  father,  etc.,"  "  Doubtless 
Thou  art  OUr  Father,"  are  rare  ex- 
pressions in  the  Old  Testament,  and  are 
far  beneath  the  privileged  common  use 
of  the  name  "  Abba,"  which  is  for 
those  who  are  no  longer  "servants," 
but  "sons."  David  never  said,  as 
every  Christian  does,  "Father."  And 
the  converted  man  has  his  Old  Testa- 
ment stage  too.  Too  many  earnest 
people  of  God  stop  there,  in  these  days 
of  New  Testament  grace.  They  have 
received  the  Spirit,  indeed.  In  their 
heart  is  many  "  a  good  thing  towards 
the  Lord  their  God."  They  serve  with  a 
dutiful  devotion,  that  after  all  is  only 
"duty. "  They  ought  to  serve ;  they  must 
serve.  "  These  many  years  do  I  serve 
thee."  The  son  who  talks  and  feels 
thus,  is  a  servant  still.  The  Spirit  is  in 
them  a  "  Spirit  of  bondage."  And  pre- 
eminently such  is  He  to  the  awakened 
man,  whose  unavailing  struggle  with 
himself  and  the  sin  of  his  "flesh"  is 
so  graphically  portrayed  in  chap.  vii. 
The  first  impulse  of  the  man  to  whom 
for  the  first  time  comes  the  knowledge 
of  sin  to  any  practical  purpose,  is  to 
reform — to  set  himself  to  do  right  for 
the  future.  And  his  first  and  speedy 
discovery  is  that  he  cannot.  He  is 
not  his  own  master.  He  must  "  serve 
sin."  He  once  neither  knew  nor 
fought  against  sin.  Now  he  knows  and 
fights  and  falls.  Habits  are  iron  bonds 
which  he  cannot  break.  Temptations 
are  assaults  to  which  he  is  dragged  into 
yielding,  as  if  by  a  power  of  evil  within 
him.  It  is  no  "  law  of  Moses "  only, 
or  chiefly.  It  is  a  "  law  of  sin  "  in  his 
members.     Sin    is   known    by    every 

444 


awakened  man  as  not  only  a  guilt  and 
a  defilement,  but  as  a  power,  a  bondage. 
The  new  life  of  the  Spirit,  the  new 
life  in  Christ,  brings  a  new  power  and 
a  new  liberty.  The  bondage  is  broken, 
"  that  henceforth  he  should  not  serve 
sin."  The  Spirit  Who  "  witnesses  "  that 
he  is  "  a  child  of  God,"  and  not  a 
servant  in  his  relation  to  God  any 
longer.  Who  puts  into  his  lips  the  new 
— the  child's — name  for  God,  "  Father," 
and  makes  his  heart  and  love  those  of  a 
child  towards  God,  releases  him  and 
energises  him  for  the  child's  life  and 
service.  The  service  is  not  less  faith- 
ful and  devoted  than  before,  now  that 
he  is  "a  child "  of  God ;  but  the 
"  bondage  "  is  gone  out  of  it.  In  a 
perfect  family  life,  in  perfect  filial  love, 
the  dutiful  "  bondage  "  and  respectful 
"  fear  "  of  the  servants  are  not  found 
in  the  children.  They  have  a  larger, 
freer  life,  one  which,  sure  of  itself  in  the 
happy  instinct  of  a  loving  heart,  has 
not  even  an  overshadowing,  haunting, 
fettering  fear  of  displeasing  the  father. 
The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  a  "  Spirit  of 
adoption  " — of  sonship.  Not  only  are 
the  limbs  free  from  the  fetters  of  habit 
and  from  sin's  power.  The  heart  is  free, 
with  the  natural,  unconscious,  perfect 
liberty  of  the  child  in  the  home.  This 
leads  up  to 

III.  Liberty  from  Law  in  the  Chris- 
tian life. — 1.  James  gives  us,  "  The 
perfect  Law  of  Liberty"  There  is  an 
ideal  of  Christian  life  in  which  the 
soul  is  "filled  with  the  knowledge  of 
God's  will  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual 
understanding  "  [Col.  i.  9,  followed  up 
by  the  happy  consequences  in  life  and 
practice  enumerated  in  ver.  10] ;  in 
which  "  an  unction  from  the  Holy 
One  "  so  "  teaches  all  things  "  that  the 
man  of  God  "needeth  not  that  any  man 
should  teach  him  " ;  in  which  the  very 
instincts  of  the  heart  "renewed  in  know- 
ledge^ after  the  image "  of  God  would 
be  a  sufficient  directory  for  all  Christian 
living,  passing  continually  the  enact- 
ments of  a  perfect  legislation  within 
the  parliament  house  of  the  inner  man ; 
when  the  heart  knows  and  loves, 
always,  and  to  the  last  degree  of  detail, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  hi. 


what  God  wills ;  when  the  law  of  God 
without,  and  the  heart  and  will  within, 
coincide  in  their  promptings ;  when 
the  law  and  the  love  lie  perfectly, 
closely,  side  by  side ;  when  the  heart 
"  runs  in  the  way  of  God's  command- 
ments." It  is  clear  that  such  a  life 
in  ideal  needs  no  external  direction, 
and  feels  no  restraint.  [The  law-abid- 
ing citizen  goes  through  life  ignorant 
of  very  much  of  the  legislation  of  his 
country,  and  finding  nothing  irksome 
or  ungrateful  about  obedience  to  it ; 
so  perfectly  obeying  that  obedience  or 
law  not  are  adverted  to.]  2.  But  that 
is  ideal,  though  approached  more  and 
more  nearly  as  the  life  of  the  *'  son  " 
— not  the  **  servant  " — is  cultivated, 
and  educated  and  developed.  The  posi- 
tive, ab  extra,  legislation  still  has  its 
value  and  office,  and  its  necessity. 
The  early  days  of  the  new  life  are 
days  of  childhood,  with  its  ignorance 
and  its  weakness.  The  "  law  "  trains 
and  refines  the  newly  awakened  per- 
ception of  what  is  sin  and  what  is 
holiness.  It  may  serve,  or  be  needed, 
like  the  stake  which  supports  the  sap- 
ling, until  this  rises  in  established,  self- 
supporting,  self -guarding  strength.  Its 
"  witness "  is  a  defence  against  the 
peril  of  heedlessness  or  of  declining 
watchfulness ;  its  warning  voice  may 
arrest  the  very  beginnings  of  diver- 
gence from  the  ''perfect  way."  It  is 
needed  as  an  absolute  standard,  to 
which  the  subjective  pronouncements 
may  be  continually  referred  for  confir- 
mation, for  revision,  for  the  illumina- 
tion of  unsuspected  error.  There  is  an 
ever  recurrent  need  that  it  should  be 
made  clear  that  Obedience  and  Right 
are  objective,  and  are  obligatory  be- 
cause of  the  Legislator's  will.  No  most 
intense  love,  no  most  utter  trust  in 
Christ,  can  dispense  with  the  need  of 
holiness  in  heart  and  life.  If  the 
"  Law  of  Moses "  do  not  now  bind, 
there  is  a  "  Law  of  Christ "  (Gal.  vi.  2) 
which  does.  Indeed,  in  regard  to 
all  the  abiding  principles  which  in  the 
old  Code  appear  in  local,  national, 
temporary  dress,  the  Christian  man  is 
*'under  the lawto  Christ"  (ICor.  ix.  21). 


3.  Against  the  lawless  freedom  which 
is  licence  and  even  licentiousness,  the 
Apostle's  instinctive  recoiling,  "  God 
forbid,"  is  argument  good  enough. 
For  it,  "  Whose  damnation  is  just," 
is  the  unerringly,  instinctively,  just 
verdict  of  the  healthy  life,  rejoicing  in 
the  most  abundant  freedom  of  the 
Spirit. 

Ver.  17.  The  Freedom  of  the  Spirit. 

I.  General  statement  of  this  truth. 
— ^The  glory  of  the  Old  Covenant,  sym- 
bolised by  the  glowing  face  of  Moses, 
was  of  an  inferior  order  to  that  of  the 
New.  As  a  rule  of  life,  without  the 
Atoning  Blood  to  pardon  sin  and  with- 
out the  grace  of  the  Spirit  to  make 
obedience  possible,  the  Law  had  been 
but  a  ministration  of  condemnation. 
As  a  typical  system,  it  had  been  destined 
to  pass  away  on  the  appearance  of  the 
Antitype  which  fulfilled  it.  The  Gospel 
was,  in  marked  contrast,  endowed  with 
perpetuity  and  was  a  ministration  of 
spiritual  righteousness.  Symbolically, 
and  really,  the  early  dispensation  was 
protected  from  a  too  searching  scrutiny, 
which  might  have  revealed  at  the  very 
moment  of  its  introduction  a  Higher 
Object  beyond  itself  which  was  yet  to 
come.  Those  who  are  converted  to 
Jesus  Christ  have  escaped  from  the 
veil  which  darkened  the  spiritual  in- 
telligence of  Israel.  The  converting 
Spirit  is  the  source  of  positive  illumi- 
nation ;  but  before  He  thus  enlightens. 
He  must  give  freedom  from  the  veil 
of  prejudice  which  denies  to  Jewish 
thought  any  real  insight  into  the 
deeper  sense  of  Scripture.  The  Chris- 
tian student  of  the  ancient  Law  seizes 
that  sense,  because  he  possesses  the 
Spirit,  and  He  gives  liberty,  and  faculty, 
for  inquiry.  The  specific  liberty  here 
is  not  merely  liberty  from  the  yoke  of 
the  Law ;  but  liberty  from  the  tyranny 
of  obstacles  which  cloud  the  spiritual 
sight  of  truth  ;  liberty  from  spiritual 
rather  than  from  intellectual  dulness  ; 
from  a  state  of  soul  which  cannot 
^apprehend  truth.  The  Spirit  still  gives 
this  liberty.  This  is  the  enunciation 
of    a    master-feature   of   the    Gospel. 

445 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS, 


This  liberty  is  the  invariable  accom-  at  once.  And  the  like.  Further,  the 
paniment  of  His  true  action,  the  very  prevalence  of  experimental  methods  of 
atmosphere  of  His  presence.  Nor  is  inquiry  leads  many  minds  tacitly  to 
the  freedom  which  He  sheds  abroad  assume  that  nothing  is  real,  the  truth 
a  poor  reproduction  of  the  restless,  of  which  cannot  be  established  and 
volatile,  self-asserting,  sceptical  temper  tested  by  [physical]  observation.  Yet 
of  Pagan  Greek  life,  adapted  to  the  *'  Dogma "  is  a  neutral,  innocent  word, 
forms  and  thoughts  of  modern  civilisa-  suggesting  lexically  or  by  its  history 
tion,  and  awkwardly  expressing  itself  nothing  untrustworthy  or  discredit- 
in  Christian  phraseology.  He  gives  able.  The  philosophers  who  denounce 
liberty  in  the  broad,  deep  sense  of  that  Christian  "  dogma  "  have  their  own 
word.  He  gives  freedom  from  error  "  dogmas,"  in  the  true  sense,  [and  are 
for  the  reason  ;  freedom  from  con-  sometimes  ''  dogmatic  "  enough,  in  the 
straint  for  the  affections  ;  freedom  for  accidental,  evil  sense].  *'  Dogma  is 
the  will  from  the  tyranny  of  sinful  essential  Christian  truth  thrown  hy 
and  human  wills.  Human  nature  has  authority  [N.B.  this]  into  a  form  which 
imagined  such  a  freedom,  but  has  sighed  admits  of  its  permanently  passing  into 
in  vain  for  the  reality.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  understanding  and  being  treasured 
a  creation  ;  the  sons  of  God  alone  enjoy  by  the  heart  of  the  people."  Accord- 
it.  **  Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  ingly  it  is  found  abundantly  in  the 
there  is  liberty."  New  Testament ;  1  Cor.  xv.  is  largely 
II.  In  more  of  detail. — 1.  Mental  pure  dogma.  "  The  Divine  Spirit, 
liberty. — God  has  from  the  first  con-  speaking  through  the  clear  utterances 
secrated  liberty  of  thought.  He  has  so  of  Scripture,  and  [N.B.]  the  illuminated 
ordered  the  framework  of  human  social  and  consenting  thought  of  Christendom^ 
order  that  society  cannot  force  the  is  the  real  Author  of  essential  dogma.'* 
sanctuary  of  our  thought.  Without  our  Dogma  is  a  restraint  upon  thought, 
consent  society  cannot  enter  within  us  only  where  liberty  is  mischievous  or 
(1  Cor.  ii.  11).  So,  in  the  martyrdoms  impossible.  He  who  believes  that  re- 
of  the  first  three  centuries,  the  strength  vealed  truths  are  true  should  not  dislike 
of  those  who  to  the  death  bore  their  their  being  stated  dogmatically.  To 
witness  for  not  merely  moral,  but  mental  admit  the  truth  of  a  position  of  course 
liberty,  was  strength  given  by  the  takes  away  the  liberty  to  deny  it. 
Spirit.  Their  testimony  was  His  under  Every  new  discovery  of  ascertained 
whose  illumination  Christians  became  truth  takes  something  from  freedom 
conscious  of  a  new  power,  almost  a  new  to  think  otherwise.  The  freest  and 
sense  for  the  supernatural.  To-day  it  most  exact  science  known  to  the  human 
is  supposed  that  the  Churches  and  their  mind  has  atitsbase  axioms  which  cannot 
creeds,  their  ''  dogmas,"  are  enemies  of  be  demonstrated,  yet  cannot  be  rejected, 
religious  freedom.  To  value  dogma  is  Euclid  begins  by  demanding  a  sacrifice 
invidiously  contrasted  with  setting  a  of  mental  liberty.  Refuse  to  submit 
value  on  Christian  character  and  life ;  to,  accept,  use,  these  dogmas ;  a  man 
as  though  he  who  cares  for  the  one  can  go  no  further,  and  arrive  at  nothing, 
must  by  some  necessity  neglect  the  True  or  false,  the  dogmas  of  Christian 
other.  The  Church  of  the  Future  "  will  truth  are  not  discredited  by  being  stated 
dispense  with  dogma."  In  such  talk,  in  dogmatic  form.  Submission  to  re- 
dogma  is  assumed,  rather  than  stated  vealed  truth  [whether  at  the  end  of  a 
in  words,  to  be  untrue.  The  leaven  of  personal  investigation  of  its  claim,  or 
Hegelian  philosophy  is  in  the  current  at  the  bidding  of  a  Church,  or  in  ac- 
talking  and  thinking.  There  is  no  quiescent  following  of  the  custom  of 
recognised  rule  for  reason  ;  in  human  a  man's  circle]  does  involve  some  limi- 
opinion  all  is  true,  and  yet  nothing  is  tation  of  intellectual  licence.  The 
true.  All  truth  is  partial,  limited  \  all  lamps  in  the  streets  do  trench  upon 
statements  of  truth  are  true  and  false  space  where  the  passenger  might  walk. 

446 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  hi. 


In  English  public  and  private  life  the 
supremacy  of  law  curtails,  whilst  it 
gives  and  protects,  personal  freedom. 
''  The  free  intelligence  of  the  Church 
bows  before  the  language  of  the  Creeds, 
because  that  language  guards  a  truth 
which  the  faith  of  the  Church  re- 
cognises as  of  heavenly  origin."  Dogma 
stimulates  thought,  provokes  it,  sus- 
tains it  at  an  elevation  otherwise 
impossible.  Dogma  stimulates  in  its 
earher,  but  petrifies  into  uselessness 
in  its  later,  stage.  Ko  Christian  who 
seriously  believes  that  Jesus  is  God, 
that  His  Death  is  a  World-redeeming 
Sacrifice,  that  the  Eternal  Spirit  sancti- 
fies the  redeemed,  that  Scripture  is  the 
inspired  Word  of  God,  "  that  the  Sacra- 
ments are  the  appointed  channels 
whereby  we  partake  of  the  Life  of 
Jesus,  can  say  that  in  himself  these 
truths  have  petrified,  arrested,  stifled 
thought." 

2.  Moral  liberty. — In  the  kingdom 
of  the  Spirit  alone  is  the  will  free. 
Naturally  we  are  bound  with  fetters 
of  habit,  passion,  prejudice;  we  hug 
our  chains  ;  even  dare  to  promise  men 
Hberty,  etc.  (2  Pet.  ii.  19).  There  is 
no  such  thing  as  a  resurrection  from 
moral  slavery,  except  for  the  soul 
which  has  laid  hold  on  a  fixed  objective 
truth.  When  at  the  breath  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  upon  the  soul  heaven  is 
opened  to  the  eye  of  faith,  and  man 
looks  up  from  his  misery  and  his  weak- 
ness to  the  Everlasting  Christ  upon 
His  throne ;  then  freedom  is  possible, 
for  the  Son  has  taken  flesh,  and  died, 
and  risen  again,  and  interceded  with 
the  Father,  and  given  us  His  Spirit 
"  and  His  Sacraments,"  expressly  that 
we  might  enjoy  it.  *'  On  the  condition 
of  submission  1  "  Yes ;  but  in  obeying 
God,  a  man  acquires  not  only  freedom, 
but  royalty,  in  its  highest  exercise  of  em- 
pire,— command  over  himself,  a  thing 
he  best  learns  by  voluntary  submission. 
Bend  the  knee  to  that  Christ  of  Beth- 
lehem and  Calvary,  listen  to  the  New 
Commandment  as  the  Charter  of  free- 
dom,— rise  a  king  and  priest  to  God  and 
the  Father  !  You  have  free  access  to 
the  courts  of  heaven:   you  serve  One 


Whose  service  alone  is  perfect  freedom  1 
Liberty  of  conscience  and  will  is  the 
greatest  blessing  of  all  ''freedoms."  " It 
is  freedom  from  a  sense  of  sin,  when 
all  is  known  to  have  been  pardoned 
through  the  atoning  blood;  freedom 
from  a  slavish  fear  of  our  Father  in 
Heaven,  when  conscience  is  offered  to 
His  unerring  Eye  morning  and  even- 
ing by  that  penitent  love  which  fixes 
its  eye  upon  the  Crucified;  freedom 
from  current  prejudice  and  false  human 
opinion,  when  the  soul  gazes  by  in- 
tuitive faith  upon  the  actual  truth; 
freedom  from  the  depressing  yoke  of 
feeble  health  or  narrow  circumstances, 
since  the  soul  cannot  be  crushed  which 
rests  consciously  upon  the  Everlasting 
Arms ;  freedom  from  that  haunting 
fear  of  death,  which  holds  all  who 
really  think  upon  death  '  all  their  life- 
time subject  to  bondage,'  unless  they 
are  His  true  friends  and  clients,  Who 
by  the  sharpness  of  His  own  death  has 
led  the  way  and  *  opened  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  to  all  believers.'  It  is  free- 
dom in  time  also,  and  beyond,  freedom 
in  eternity.  In  that  blessed  world,  in 
the  unclouded  Presence  of  the  Emanci- 
pator, the  brand  of  slavery  is  incon- 
ceivable. In  that  world  there  is  a 
perpetual  service ;  yet,  since  it  is  the 
source  of  love  made  perfect,  it  is  only 
and  by  necessity  the  service  of  the  free. 
For  'where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is 
there  is  liberty.' " — Adapted  from  Lid- 
don,  "  University  Sermons"  iv.  This 
last  paragraph  may  itself  suggest  a 
Homily. 

Yer.  17.  Christian  Liberty  and  the 
Law. 

I.  The  bondage. — "  The  condition  of 
believers  under  the  past  dispensation 
...  is  spoken  of  as  a  certain  species 
of  restraint  or  bondage, — not  the 
bondage,  indeed,  of  slaves  [?],  and  mer- 
cenaries, which  belonged  only  to  the 
carnal  as  opposed  to  the  believing  por- 
tion of  the  Church;  but  the  bondage 
of  those  who,  though  free-born  children, 
are  still  in  nonage,  and  must  be  kept 
under  the  restraint  and  discipline  of 
an  external  law.     This,  however,  could 

447 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


in  no  case  be  the  whole  of  the  agency 
with  which  the  believer  was  plied,  for 
then  his  yoke  must  have  been  literally 
the  galling  bondage  of  the  slave.  He 
Tnust  have  had  more  or  less  the 
Spirit  of  life  within,  begetting  and 
prompting  him  to  do  the  things  which 
the  law  outwardly  enjoined,  making 
the  pulse  of  life  in  the  heart  beat  in 
harmony  with  the  rule  of  life  pre- 
scribed in  the  law ;  so  that,  while 
he  still  felt  *  as  under  tutors  and 
governors,'  it  was  not  as  one  needing 
to  be  '  held  in  with  bit  and  bridle,'  but 
rather  as  one  disposed  readily  and  cheer- 
fully to  keep  to  the  appointed  course. 
...  So  it  unquestionably  was  with 
the  Psalmist ;  .  .  .the  law  was  not  a 
mere  outward  yoke,  nor  in  any  proper 
sense  a  burden  :  it  was  '  within  their 
heart,'  they  delighted  in  its  precepts, 
and  meditated  therein  day  and  night : 
to  listen  to  its  instructions  was  sweeter 
to  them  than  honey,  and  to  obey  its 
dictates  was  better  than  thousands  of 
gold  and  silver"  [Fairbairn,  Typology y 
ii.  193,  194.  Does  this  do  justice  as 
to  Acts  XV.  10  ?  He  says  admirably 
as  to] — 

II.  The  liberty.— "  When  the  be- 
liever receives  Christ  as  the  Lord  his 
righteousness,  he  is  not  only  justified 
by  grace,  but  he  comes  into  a  state  of 
grace,  or  gets  grace  into  his  heart  as 
a  living,  reigning,  governing  principle 
of  life.  What,  however,  is  this  grace 
but  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  ? 
And  this  Spirit  is  emphatically  the 
Holy  Spirit ;  holiness  is  the  very 
element  of  His  being,  and  the  essential 
law  of  His  working ;  every  desire  He 
breathes,  every  feeling  He  awakens, 
every  action  He  disposes  and  enables 
us  to  perform,  is  according  to  godliness. 
And  if  only  we  are  sufficiently  pos- 
sessed of  this  Spirit,  and  yield  ourselves 
to  His  direction  and  control,  we  no 
longer  need  the  restraint  and  discipline 
of  the  law  ;  we  are  free  from  it,  because 
we  are  superior  to  it.  Quickened  and 
led  by  the  Spirit,  we  of  ourselves  love 
and  do  the  things  which  the  law  re- 
quires. .  .  ."  [As  in  an  adult  son]  "  the 
mind  has  become  his  from  which  the 

US 


parental  law  proceeded,  and  he  has 
consequently  become  independent  of 
its  outward  prescriptions.  [Strictly 
this  last  is  only  true  in  proportion  as 
he  has  become  possessed  of  the  *  mind.'] 
And  what  is  it  to  be  under  the  grace 
of  God's  Spirit  but  to  have  the  mind  of 
God  ? — the  mind  of  Him  who  gave  the 
law  simply  as  a  revelation  of  what  was 
in  His  heart  respecting  the  holiness  of 
His  people.  So  that  the  more  they 
have  of  the  one,  the  less,  obviously, 
they  need  of  the  other ;  and  if  only 
they  were  complete  in  the  grace  of  the 
Spirit,  they  woidd  he  wholly  independent 
of  the  bonds  and  restrictions  of  the  law." 
(lb. ,  p.  1 90. )  The  law  was  not  made  for 
a  good  man  who  stands  in  a  right  rela- 
tion to  the  law  of  his  country.  So  "  to 
one  who  has  become  a  partaker  of  '  the 
Spirit  of  God '  the  law,  considered 
as  an  outward  discipline  placing  him 
under  a  yoke  of  manifold  commands 
and  prohibitions,  has  for  him  ceased  to 
exist.  But  it  has  ceased  in  that  respect 
only  by  taking  possession  of  him  in 
another"  (76.,  p.  191). 

[Fairbairn  adds  (i6.,  p.  201)  : — 
III.  "  From  the  law  in  its  strict 
and  proper  sense — the  law  of  the  ten 
commandments — the  freedom  enjoyed 
by  the  Christian  is  not  absolute,  but 
relative  only,  just  as  the  Israelites' 
want  of  the  Spirit  was  relative  only. 
But  in  regard  to  what  is  called  the 
ceremonial  law  the  freedom  is  absolute  ; 
and  to  keep  up  the  observance  of  its 
symbolical  institutions  and  services 
after  the  new  despensation  entered 
was  not  only  to  retain  a  yoke  that 
might  be  dispensed  with,  but  also  an 
incongruity  to  be  avoided,  and  even  a 
danger  to  be  shunned.  For,  viewed 
simply  as  teaching  ordinances  .  .  . 
they  were  superseded  ...  by  the  ap- 
pointment of  other  means  more  suitable 
as  instruments  in  the  hand  of  the  Spirit 
for  ministering  instruction  to  .  .  . 
men.  The  change  then  brought  into 
the  Divine  administration  was  charac- 
terised throughout  by  a  more  irnraediate 
and  direct  handling  of  the  things  of  God. 
They  were  now  things  no  longer  hid 
under  a  veil,  but  openly  disclosed  to  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iii. 


eye  of  the  mind.  Ordinances  which  were  ternal  obligation.  The  nearer  obedience 
adapted  to  the  state  of  the  Church  is  to  the  uniformity  of  the  ordinances 
when  neither  was  the  Spirit  fully  given^  of  nature — being  conscious  and  willing 
nor  were  the  things  of  God  [by  Him]  obedience,  though  in  its  perfection  not 
clearly  revealed,  could  not  possibly  be  conscious  of  its  willing — the  nearer  it 
.  .  .  adapted  to  the  Church  of  the  approaches  the  Creator's  end.  ...  In 
New  Testament.  Tlie  grand  ordinance  all  the  economy  of  the  physical  universe 
here  must  be  the  free  and  open  mani-  His  law  works  from  within  outwardly, 
festation  of  the  truth — written  first  in  and  there  is  no  need  of  any  outward 
the  word  of  inspiration,  and  thence-  statute  to  be  registered  for  the  guidance, 
forth  continually  proclaimed  anew  by  of  His  unintelligent  creatures.  The 
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel ;  and  such  Divine  Spirit  in  the  heart  of  the  re- 
symbolical  institutions  as  might  yet  be  generate  man  seeks  to  work  out  in  a 
needed  must  be  founded  upon  the  clear  similar  way  a  perfect  obedience  to  the 
revelations  of  the  word — not  like  those  law  of  love. 

of  the  former  dispensation,  spreading         II.  In  a  loose    and    general  way 

a  veil  over  the  truth,  or  affording  only  this  may  be  called  the  rule  of  con- 

a  dim  shadow  of  better  things  to  come.  '  science   (Acts   xxiv.    13;   but   this  is 

(Ib.f  p.  201.)]  pre-Christian).  .  .  .  We  may  speak  of 

the    internal    law    as    that    of    Self- 

Ver.  17.  Liberty  from  Law  under  government  restored.  The  rule  of 
the  Dispensation  of  the  Spirit. — The  God's  Spirit  in  the  spirit  of  the  re- 
Christian  rehgion  as  the  Perfect  Law  generate,  is  the  administration  of 
of  Liberty  finds  its  perfection  in  the  conscience  or  the  renewed  self,  accord- 
bestowment  through  the  Holy  Spirit  ing  to  the  normal  idea  of  the  Creator, 
of  an  mternal  freedom  from  the  restraint  Men  thus  trusted — under  authority  to 
of  law  which  is  quite  consistent  with  that  Holy  Ghost,  yet  having  their  own 
subjection  to  external  law  as  a  directory  souls  under  them — are  in  the  highest 
of  the  life.  and  puiest  sense  a  law  unto  them^selves 

I.  There    is    nothing    more    cha-  (Eom.  ii.   4).      Yet    this  is  only  as 

racteristic  of  the  Christian  economy  under  the  law  to  Christ  (1  Cor.  ix.  21), 

of    ethics   than   that   it    sets   up   an  Who  is  the  common  Lord  of  all. 
internal    rule  (Rom.    viii.    2). — This         III.  For  there  is  still  an  external 

interior  rule  responds  to  the  exterior,  law  .  .  .  which  is  continued  by  reason 

and  in  a  certain  sense  supersedes  it.  of  the  weakness  of  the  new  nature. — 

The  external  law  ceases  as  a  law  of  1 .  The  external  standard  still  maintains 

death ;  it  has  vanished  with  the  con-  the  dignity  of   law.  .  .  .  We  are  de- 

science    of    sin    removed    in    pardon.  livered  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death, 

And   in    contrast   to   the   Law  which  not  from  the  law  that  directs  to  holiness 

was    against    and    over    the    soul   in  and  life.     Written  on  the  fleshly  tables 

its    impossibility    of     fulfilment,     the  of  the  heart,  the   commandments   are 

Spirit  of  life  within  gives  strength  for  deposited   also  in  an  ark  on  tables  of 

all    obedience ;    and    the    law   to    be  stone    for     common    appeal    amongst 

obey ed  is  set  up  within  us  (Heb.  viii.  10).  probationary    mortals.       The    eternal 

This  is  more  than  the  restoration  of  morals  of   the  old  economy  have  not 

the  almost  effaced  traces  of   the  law  passed   away.      They   are    re-enacted 

engraven  on  the  heart  of  universal  man.  under  other  forms,  and  re-written  in 

.  .  .  This  internal  law  is  supernatural;  the  pages  of  the  New  Testament  as 

it  is  nature  still,  but  nature  restored  [a]  the  Standard  of  requirement,  [b] 

and    more    than    restored ;    a    super-  the  Condition  of  the  Charter  of  privi- 

natural  nature.      This  is  the  interior  leges,  and  [c]  a  Testimony  against  those 

polity   of   holy   government   of   which  who  offend.     [A  good  Homily  in  germ.] 

St.  James  speaks  (Jas.  i.  25) ;  perfect  2.  The  outward   enactments  are  still 

law  becomes  perfect  liberty  from  ex-  the  directory  of  individual  duty.  .  .  , 

GG  449 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


The  best  Christians  need  a  remem- 
brancer ;  they  obey  the  law  within,  but 
are  not  always  independent  of  the 
teaching  of  the  law  without.  3.  The 
external  is  the  safeguard  of  the  internal 
law  :  against  its  only  or  chief  enemy, 
Antinomianism,  which  regards  the  law 
as  abolished  in  Christ,  or  treats  it  as 
if  it  were  so.  Theoretical  or  theological 
Antinomianism  .  .  .  makes  a  Christian's 
salvation  eternally  independent  of  any 
other  obedience  than  that  of  the  Gospel 
oflfer  of  grace.  .  .  .  There  is  a  teaching 
which  holds  that  the  Substitute  of  man 
has  not  only  paid  the  penalty  of  human 
offence,  but  has  fulfilled  the  law  also 
for  the  sinner ;  thus  making  the 
salvation  of  the  elect  secure.  The 
believer  has  in  this  doctrine  [call  it 
"  Vicarious  Holiness  "  ?]  no  more  to  do 
with  a  legal  rule  save  as  a  subordinate 
teacher  of  morality.     He   will  never 


to  all  eternity  stand  before  any  bar  to 
be  judged  by  the  law.  .  ,  .  This  is  the 
very  truth  of  the  Gospel  so  far  as 
concerns  the  demand  of  the  law  for 
eternal  and  unbroken  conformity  with 
its  precepts,  .  .  .  but  there  is  only  a 
step  between  precious  truth  and  perilous 
error  here.  .  .  .  There  is  also  a  pre- 
valent practical  Antinomianism  (Gal. 
v.  13),  sometimes  connected  with  the 
theoretical  renunciation  of  law.  [It 
is]  found  in  all  communities,  the 
disgrace  of  all  creeds  and  confessions. 
.  .  .  The  written  commandments  are 
a  safeguard.  ...  If  Christian  people 
recite  their  Creed  to  keep  in  memory 
the  things  they  surely  believe,  not  less 
necessary  is  it  that  they  should  also 
recite  the  Commandments  to  keep  in 
memory  what  they  must  do  to  enter 
into  life. — Adapted.  See  also  under 
1  Cor.  ix.  21. 


HOMILETIC   SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  2.  ^^ Living  epistles J^ 

I.  What  they  contain.— The  record 
of  ministerial  faithfulness — and  success. 

II.  Where  they  are  written. — In 
the  heart,  as  a  testimony  of  Divine 
approval,  as  a  certain  proof  of  a 
Divine  call. 

III.  By  whom  they  are  read. — By 
all  men — easily  with  intelligent  con- 
viction.— [J.  Z.] 

Yers.  4-11.  The  Glory  of  the  Chris- 
tian Ministry. 

I.  Its  foundation. — Trust  in  God 
through  Christ.  Divine  sufiiciency. 
Suitable  qualifications. 

II.  Its  function. — The  ministration 
not  of  the  letter,  but  of  the  Spirit. 

III.  Its  means. — Not  external,  that 
dazzle  and  then  vanish  away.  But 
the  co-operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

IV.  Its  object. — Not  condemnation 
and  death,  but  righteousness  and  life. 

V.  Its  reward. — Even  now  a  more 
excellent  glory.  Hereafter  a  glory 
everlasting. — \J.  L.] 

Or  thus : — 

The  New  Testament  Ministry  — 

I.  Has  the  vastest  resources. 

450 


II.  Effects  the  greatest  wonders. 
III.  Secures     the     most     enduring 
results. — [J.  L.] 

Ver.  8.  "  The  ministration  of  the 
Spirit." 

I.  Deals  with  "  the  spirit "  in  man. 

II.  Is  effectual  only  when  in  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

III.  Has  for  its  great  purpose  -the 
communication  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the 
characteristic,  distinctive  glory,  and 
privilege  of  the  Christian  dispensation. 


Ver.  9.  The  Ministration  of — 

I.  Condemnation. — Reveals  and  en- 
forces law.  Convinces  of  sin.  Brings 
condemnation. 

II.  Righteousness.  —  Satisfies  the 
law.  Teaches  faith.  Brings  pardon 
and  holiness. 

III.  II.  therefore  exceeds  I.  in 
glory  in  that  it  perfects  the  work  of 
the  latter.  Saves  the  sinner.  Secures 
greater  glory  to  God. — [J.  L.] 

Ver.  18.  Conformity  by  gazing. — 
Foundation  and  building  not  identical, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  iii. 


yet  related.     So  Judaism   and  Chris-  " by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord"  " taking 

tianity.     **  Judaism  contained  not  the  of  the  things   of   Christ,"   etc.      Un- 

completeness   of    Christianity ;    Chris-  veiling  the  mirror  ;  opening  the  eye. 

tianity  halted  not  at  the  beginnings  of  III.    Progressive    conformity. — No 

Judaism."      1.    They  a^ree,  in  source^  hurry  in  God's  working.     "  If  a  young 

God ;    in    purpose,    to    preserve     the  Christian  begin  young,  the  conformity 

knowledge  of  the  true  God  ;  in  matter,  shall  fill  a  life  of  many  years."    "  Even 

a  revelation   of   God's  will ;   Judaism,  God  cannot  create  growth." — Notes  of 

"  coarse,"  rude ;    Christianity,  a   life-  sermon      by      John      Bxvrton,     penes 

inspired   system.      2.  They   differ,    in  H.  J.  F. 
their    method    of    revelation,   by  the 

Mediator   and  the   Master;    in    their  tq^    ^j^^    qj^     Testament    passage 

expositors;  in  the  perpetuity  of  Chris-  underlying  ver.  7— iv.  6,  particularly 

tianity      "After  Adamism,Noachism ;  .  ^^^^^   ^-^^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^j^  ^^^^      .  ^.^ 

after  Noachism,Abrahamism;    after  j^^^   ^j^       .  ^^^    suggestion    may   be 

Abrahamism,  Judaism  ;  alter  Judaism,      useful  • 1 

Christianity;      after     Christianity,—  u  a    -p- ,         ^m       m       »     ru  T^r 

Eternity  !  "     Judaism  limited  ;  Chris-  ^  Picture  of  True  Glory.       ["  Un- 

tianity  universal.     Judaism  veiled  the  conscious  Goodness."] 

light ;    in    Christ  the    veil  is    gone.  I.    Involves    fellowship    with    the 

Text  shows : —  Eternal. — Character  is  formed  on  the 

I.  Religion  in  its  sanctity  of  nature,  principle  of  imitation.  This  process 
— Its  one  object  is  to  change  man  into  perfected  needs  :  a  perfect  m^odel ;  the 
the  image — of  whom?  Of  God?  Of  love  of  a  perfect  model ;  the  knowledge  of 
Christ  ?     No  matter.     God  inconceiv-  a  perfect  model.  " 

able  and  unconceived.     The  study  of  II.  Has  an  external  manifestation. 

His  works  and  even  of  His  words  alone  — Was  it  not  a  reflection  of  the  moral 

only  introduces  man  to  "  a  Voice  in  the  glory   of    his   soul,    glorified   by   com- 

dark."     All  we  can  know,  or  need  to  munion  with  God  ?     The  heart  does — 

know,  is  embodied  in  Christ.     Christ  notwithstanding  the  possibility  and  the 

removes  the  two   barriers — man's  in-  fact    of    successful    hypocrisy — stamp 

capacity,  God's  invisibility.    And  Christ  itself   upon   the  face.     Stephen's  face, 

did  not  come  to  teach  Dogma,  or  merely  And  upon  the  language  yet  more  cer- 

create  a  religious  *'  guild,"  but  to  con-  tainly.     Upon  our  lives  :  "  as  the  man 

form  man  to  Himself     Look  at  Him  thinketh  in  his  heart  so  is  he."     [A 

in  His  many-sided,  symmetrical,  pure  pregnant    saying,    capable     of    many 

spirituality.      See   Him   "  crystalline-  readings :  What  he  means,  though  he 

translucent "   in  conscience.     See  His  expresses  himself  badly  in  word  or  act, 

deliberate,     undeflected      devotedness.  that  is  the  man  to  be  recognised  ;  what 

His  mind,  Divine.  his   heart's   bent   and   love   are,    that 

II.  Manner  of  attaining  conformity,  surely  the  man  becomes  ;  a  man  will 
— 1.  "  Beholding."  '  Not  merely  "  star-  let  slip  a  word,  or  do  instinctively  some 
ing  at."  There  must  be  the  unveiled  action,  which  reveals  the  evil  man 
glass,  and  the  unclosed  eye.  2.  Once  of  the  heart  under  the  plausible  mask 
more,  neither  is  the  study  of  His  works  of  the  face.] 

and  words  enough.  May  read  the  New  III.  Is  never  self-conscious. — 
Testament  once  a  year ;  may  study  But  greatness  drowns  egotism.  The 
critically,  **  with  audacious  freedom."  standard  of  judgment  is  outside  the 
Men,  acute  enough,  saw  His  works :  man's  self.  He  lives  amongst  a  circle 
their  verdict  was  *'  Beelzebub,"  "  Bias-  of  persons  and  things  which  forms  a 
phemer,  enthusiast,  traitor."  3.  Must  true  standard  of  measurement.  Chris- 
bring  Christ  to  study  of  Christ.  May  tian  love,  above  all,  casts  out  egotism  ; 
not  repudiate  His  teaching  and  yet  too  eager  about  others  to  serve,  or  even 
hope  to  understand  Him.    4.  This  only  think  about,  itself. 

451 


CHAP.  III.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


IV.  Commands  the  reverence  of  Guilt  will  bow  the  wrong-doer  in 
society. —  Conscience  will  instinctively  homage  before  it. — More  fully  in 
respect    true,    unconscious    greatness.      "  Homilist,'^  Third  Series,  vi.  343. 


APPENDED  NOTES, 


Chap.  ill.  Openness  of  Apostolical  Service. 
■ — The  whole  argument  of  this  passage  is 
so  interwoven  with  personal  allusions,  and 
with  illustrations  from  a  particular  interpre- 
tation of  a  single  passage  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, that  there  is  a  difficulty  in  deducing 
any  general  truth  from  it  directly.  .  .  . 
It  may  be  worth  while  to  go  through  the 
various  images  which  the  Apostle  has  called 
up.  First,  there  is  the  commendatory  Epistle 
of  the  Corinthian  Church,  written  on  his 
heart.  Next,  the  same  Epistle  written  on 
their  hearts  and  lives,  read  and  re-read  by 
the  wayfarers  to  and  fro,  through  the 
thoroughfare  of  Greece.  Thirdly,  the  con- 
trast between  this  Epistle,  written  on  the 
tender  human  feelings,  on  the  vibrations  of 
the  wind,  by  the  breath  of  the  Spirit ;  carry- 
ing its  tidings  backwards  and  forwards, 
whithersoever  it  will,  with  no  limits  of  time 
or  space,  like  the  sweep  of  the  wind  on  the 
iEolian  harp,  like  an  electric  spark  of  light, 
— and  the  Ten  Commandments  graven  in  the 
granite  blocks  of  Sinai,  hard,  speechless,  life- 
less. Fourthly,  there  rises  into  view  the 
figure  of  Moses,  as  he  is  known  to  us  in  the 
statue  of  Michael  Angelo,  the  light  streaming 
from  his  face,  yet  growing  dim  and  dark  as 
a  greater  glory  of  another  revelation  rises 
behind  it.  Fifthly,  the  same  figure  veiled, 
as  the  light  beneath  the  veil  dies  away  and 
shade  rests  upon  the  scene,  and  there  rises 
around  him  a  multiplication  of  the  figure, 
the  ews  in  their  synagogues  veiled,  as  the 
Book  of  the  Law  is  read  before  them. 
Sixthly,  the  same  figure  of  Moses  once  more, 
but  now  unveiled  as  he  turns  again  to  Mount 
Sinai  and  uncovers  his  face  to  rekindle  its 
glory  in  the  Divine  presence  ;  and  now  again, 
this  same  figure  multiplied  in  the  Apostle  and 
the  Corinthian  congregation  following  him, 
all  with  faces  unveiled,  and  upturned  toward 
the  light  of  Christ's  presence,  the  glory 
streaming  into  their  faces  with  greater  and, 
greater  brightness,  as  if  borne  in  upon  them 
by  the  Spirit  or  breath  of  light  from  that 
Divine  countenance,  till  they  are  transfigured 
into  a  blaze  of  splendour  like  unto  it, — 
Stanley,  pp.  418,  420. 

Ver.  11.  "  That  which  remaineth.^^ — Chris- 
tianity is  connected  with  all  those  religions 
which  have  preceded  it,  and  that  not  merely 
as  one  of  them,  but  as  their  truth,  their  aim, 


as  simply  religion.  Christianity  is  the  abso- 
lute religion— the  only  true  and  intrinsically 
valid  religion.  Such  is  the  pretension  with 
which  it  entered  the  world,  and  which  it 
constantly  maintains.  This  may  be  called 
exclusiveness  and  intolerance,  but  it  is  the 
intolerance  of  truth.  As  soon  as  truth  con- 
cedes the  possibility  of  her  opposite  being 
also  true,  she  denies  herself.  As  soon  as 
Christianity  ceases  to  declare  herself  to  be 
the  only  true  religion,  she  annihilates  her 
power,  and  denies  her  right  to  exist,  for  she 
denies  her  necessity.  The  old  world  con- 
cluded with  the  question,  What  is  Truth  ? 
The  new  world  began  with  the  saying  of 
Christ,  I  am  the  Truth.  And  this  saying  is 
the  confession  of  Christian  faith.  The 
form  which  the  Christian  faith  may  assume 
may  alter ;  the  human  notions  by  which  it 
seeks  to  express  itself  may  change ;  but 
Christian  faith  must  declare  itself  to  be  the 
unchangeable  truth.  It  must  affirm  that 
this  truth  is  the  answer  to  the  old  questions 
of  human  nature,  and  that  all  the  religions 
which  have  been  its  predecessors  were 
mostly  preliminary  and  preparatory,  and  have 
found  in  it  their  aim  and  goal.  Heathenism 
was  the  seeking  religion,  Judaism  the  hoping 
religion  ;  Christianity  is  the  reality  of  what 
heathenism  sought,  and  Judaism  hoped  for. 
— Zuthardt,  *'  Saving  Truths"  p.  20.  He  adds 
in  notes : — 

"  Christianity  is  the  religion  which,  in  the 
person  of  its  Founder,  actually  realises  that 
union  of  man  with  God  which  every  other 
religion  has  striven  after,  but  none  attained ; 
and  from  this  creative  centre,  by  doctrine 
and  moral  influence,  by  redemption  and  re- 
conciliation, restores  the  individual  and 
the  human  race  to  their  true  destiny,  to 
that  true  communion,  to  that  mind  with 
God  in  which  all  that  is  human  is  sanctified 
and  glorified."    (Ullmann.) 

"If  we  consider  the  different  religions 
with  respect  to  this  fundamental  problem 
[of  the  bringing  together  Creator  and  crea- 
ture. Holy  God  and  sinful  man],  we  may  say 
that  heathenism  knows  not  the  problem  ; 
that  Israel  is  living  in  the  problem,  and 
awaiting  its  solution ;  but  that  Christianity 
alone  furnishes  the  solution,  through  its 
Gospel  of  the  Incarnation  of  God  [and  the 
Atonement  of  the  Cross].  (Martensen, 
Dogmatik.) 


m 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II,   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


CHAPTER   IV. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 

-  Ver.  1.  This  ministry.— Viz.  that  in  iii.  3,  6,  7,  8,  9  ;  and  more  definitely  expounded  at  the 
end  of  this  long  section,  in  v.  18,  19,  vi.  3,  4.  Therefore. — Looks  back  to  the  substance  of 
chap,  iii.,  and  returns,  with  a  new  phase  of  connection,  to  iii.  4,  12.  Yet,  again  a  half- 
parenthetical  passage  intervenes  before  "  we  faint  not  "  is  expanded  in  ver.  7  sgq.  Note  the 
comma  in  the  R. V.  after  "  mercy."  See  the  "  mercy  "  and  the  "  ministry  "  closely  connected  in 
1  Tim.  i.  12,  13,  with  the  same  link  of  thought  as  here.  Faint. — Word  peculiar  to  Paul  and 
his  friend  Luke,  in  the  New  Testament.     *'  Flag,  '  give  out.'" 

Ver.  2. — Hidden  things  (of  which  it  is)  shame  (to  speak  or  to  be  guilty).  Yet  hardly  so 
much  as  is  suggested  in  Eph.  v.  12.  Underhand,  insincere,  double-minded  motives,  such  as 
he  was  accused  of.  No  "  veiZ"  on  his  conduct  at  all  events  ;  cf.  "  manifest"  v.  10,  11.  No 
*'veil"  upon  ''the  truth,"  a,s  he  ''ministers"  it.  Handling  deceitfully. — Same  thought  as 
ii.  17.    Commending  ourselves.— True  reply  to  iii.  1. 

Ver.  3. — "Bid"  is  "  veiled,"  q.d.  if  there  be  a  veil  it  is  as  with  Moses  and  Israel,  rather 
upon  "  the  hearts "  of  readers  and  hearers  than  upon  the  minister,  or  than  upon  the  Law 
or  Gospel  themselves.     Note  "  are  perishing  "  (R.V.)  ;  ii.  16. 

Ver.  4.  The  god  of  this  world. — Not  "  Rabbinical "  teaching,  but  absolute  truth  of  the 
revealing  Holy  Ghost.  Christ  leads  the  way  with  His  most  definite  "prince  of  this  world  " 
(John  xii.  31,  xiv.  30).  Paul  follows  in  Eph.  ii.  2,  "the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air"  etc. 
(vi.  12).  "  World  "  is  "  age  "  ;  "  minds  "  may  be  "  thoughts."  [These  are  "  Minded  "  here  ; 
"  hardened  "  in  iii.  14.]  Shine. — "  Dawn  "  (R.V.).  Note,  specially,  tbis  word  is  cognate  with 
"  the  brightness  of  His  glory  "  (Heb.  i.  3).  Also  note  the  fuller,  and  exact,  and  significant 
"  Gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christ."  [So  again,  and  close  to  the  "  ministry  "  and  "  mercy  "  com- 
bination, we  have  the  "  Gospel  of  the  glory"  in  1  Tim.  i.  11.] 

Ver.  5.  "  Lord." — R.V.,  with  most  moderns,  makes  this  a  predicate  :  "  We  preach  Him  as 
Lord"  In  that  case,  obviously,  it  could  not  be  appended  also  to  the  parallel  *'  ourselves"  ; 
unless  in  reply  to  the  charge  of  i.  24  (cognate  word),  "  we  do  not  propose  [proclaim] 
ourselves  to  you  as  masters,  but  Him  as  the  only  Master ;  ourselves  only  your  slaves  [not 
bia-KovoL  as  throughout  chap,  iii.,  in  relation  to  God  and  the  Gospel]  ;  indeed,  we  do  not 
commend  ourselves  to  your  notice  or  acceptance  at  all,  but  Him."  Note  the  variant 
reading  "  through  Jesus." 

Ver.  6. — Gen.  i.  3  is  directly  quoted  (so  R.V.).  Note  how  he  again  contrasts  the  things  of 
"  shame"  and  this  awakening  to  the  "  light"  in  Eph.  v.  11-14. 

Ver.  7. — Gold,  in  a  common  jar  of  earthenware.  Excellency  is  •'  exceeding  greatness  of 
the  power."     Similar  in  cognate  language,  and  in  thought,  to  Eph.  i.  19. 

Ver.  8. — '•  Pressed  for  room,  and  still  having  room "  (Stanley).  "  Perplexed,  but  not 
utterly  perplexed  "  (Beet).     Apparent,  not  real,  contradiction  to  i.  8  (same  word). 

Ver.  9, — "  Pursued  in  our  flight,  but  not  left  behind  as  a  prey  to  our  pursuers ;  struck 
down  (as  with  a  dart,  or  thrown  down  as  in  wrestling),  yet  not  perishing  "  (Stanley). 

Ver.  10.  Dying. — Note  R.V.  margin.     See  under  i.  5  for  the  thought. 

Ver.  11.  Live. — In  more  than  the  physical  sense.  See,  a  few  months  later,  first  clause  of 
this  verse  exemplified  at  Corinth  (Acts  xx.  3). 

Ver.  12. — Might  almost  personify,  and  write  "  Death,"  "Life."  "  The  preachers  daily  felt 
themselves  sinking  into  the  grave  [query,  rather  being  led  by  a  Via  Dolorosa  to  a  cross 
on  a  Calvary] ;  and  their  daily  deliverance  was  daily  working  eternal  life  among  their 
converts  "  (Beet).     The  thoughts  recur  in  1  Cor.  iv.  8-10  and  Phil.  i.  19. 

Ver.  13. — "  The  same  (Holy)  Spirit  of  faith  "  as  is  implied  in  the  thought  of  Ps.  cxvi.  10, 
LXX.  [Perowne  says  this  is  an  impossible  rendering  of  the  Hebrew.  He  submits  (1)  "I 
believe  when  I  speak,"  i.e.  when  I  break  forth  into  the  complaint  which  follows  in  the  next 
clause ;  but  he  prefers  (2)  "  I  believe  " — emphatic,  i.e.  I  do  believe,  I  have  been  taught  trust 
in  God  by  painful  experience — "  for  I  must  speak  "^I  must  confess  it,  "I,  even  1  (pronoun 
emphatic),  was  greatly  afflicted;  T  myself,"  etc.  "The  Psalmist  declares  that  he  stays 
himself  u-pon  God  ('I  believe'),  for  he  had  looked  to  himself  and  there  had  seen  nothing  but 
weakness;  he  had  looked  to  other  men,  and  found  them  all  deceitful,  treacherous  as  a 
broken  reed."]  Is  there  anything  more  intended  than  a  "happy  quotation"  of  a  familiar 
phrase,  quite  apart  from  its  correctness  as  representing  the  Hebrew  ?  Nothing  depends  on 
that  correctness,  though  in  some  phrases  of  the  context  in  the  Psalm  there  is  an  appro- 
priateness to  Paul's  peril  and  deliverance.  As  it  stands  in  the  LXX.,  the  phrase  happily 
expresses  a  very  great  principle. 

453 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  14.  With  Jesus.— Not  "  by,"  or,  as  often,  " iw,"  but  exactly  " along  with'*  as 
1  Thess.  iv.  14.  More  than  "  sharing  His  condition"  (Stanley).  More  truly  Beet  says  :  "  Since 
our  resurrection  is  a  result  of  Christ's  resurrection,  wrought  by  the  same  power,  in  con- 
sequence of  our  present  spiritual  union  with  Christ,  and  is  part  of  that  heritage  which  we 
share  with  Christ,  Paul  overlooks  the  separation  in  time,  and  thinks  of  his  own  resurrection 
and  Christ's  as  one  Divine  act," 

Ver.  15.  All  (these)  things. — "  If  I  live  such  a  life,  it  is  in  order  that  there  may  be  more 
souls  partaking  of  the  grace,  and  then  the  more  to  thank  God  for  it."  Similar  to  i.  11  and 
ix.  12-14. 

Ver.  16.  The  inward  man. — Same  original  as  *'the  inner  man"  in  Eph.  iii.  16,  or 
Rom.  vii.  22 ;  but  hardly  in  the  same  sense ;  the  moral  aspect  is  there  prominent,  here 
only  the  immaterial  character  of  it.  So  "  renewed  "  is  not  prominently  the  moral  renewal 
of  Col.  iii.  10. 

Ver.  17.— Note  the  R.V.  While. — "If  we  cease  to  look,  it  ceases  to  worTi."  This  verse 
helps  to  fix  exegetically  the  meaning  of  "  eternaV  If  Restoration  were  a  certainty  in  the 
ultimate  future  for  the  lost,  they  might  in  hell  quote  vers.  17,  18.  Dean  Plumptre  wrote 
to  Archdeacon  Farrar :  "  I  have  never  been  able  to  attach  any  great  importance  to  the 
discussions  which  have  turned  upon  the  meaning  of  the  word  ai<hvLo%.  I  cannot,  on 
philological  grounds,  agree  with  Mr.  Maurice  in  thinking  that  our  Lord's  teaching  in 
John  xvii.  3  excludes  from  it  the  idea  of  duration,  and  the  whole  history  of  the  word  shows 
that  it  cannot  of  itself  denote,  though  it  may  suggest,  the  idea  of  endlessness."  \S^iriU  in 
Prison,  p.  338.     He  repeats  all  this  expressly,  p.  336  (in  an  essay  ad  hoc).'\ 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—7. 

[Section  continued  from  chap,  iii.] 

III.  An  open  [unveiledj  Gospel. — 1.  Observe  the  phrase,  '^Gospel."  (1)  In 
regard  to  the  Old  Order,  and  to  the  New  alike,  Paul's  phraseology  is  note- 
worthy ;  in  its  variety  of  designations  for  each,  and  in  their  practical  inter- 
changeableness.  Not  that  the  various  designations  are  used  at  haphazard  or 
for  the  mere  sake  of  an  assonance.  There  is  a  propriety  in  the  particular 
phrase  used  in  each  case ;  yet  in  lise  one  readily  passes  over  into  another. 
(2)  There  is  a  strangely  modern  sound  about  the  words,  *'  The  reading  of  the  old 
testament"  It  would  be  going  too  fast  for  the  development  of  Paul's  thought 
and  God's  revealing  order  to  print,  "  The  reading  of  the  Old  Testament " ; 
yet  such  a  meaning  is  coming  fast  into  view;  a  distinct,  complete  Book,  or 
Literature,  which  may  be  called — from  its  main  subject  and  contents — *'  The 
Old  Testament."  As  yet,  however,  the  Subject — the  Old  Covenant — is  to 
the  forefront  in  Paul's  mind.  To  ''  minister  the  old  testament "  and  to  "  minister 
the  new  testament "  [not  yet  *'  New  Testament  "]  are  to  "  minister  condemnation  " 
and  to  "  minister  righteousness  "  respectively ;  these  are  the  issues  of  the  two 
testaments  in  their  effect  upon  those  who  come  into  testing,  decisive  relation 
with  them.  The  characteristic  "  note "  of  the  one  is  that  it  is  "  a  letter,** 
external,  exact,  unalterable,  formvilated  into  a  definite  code  of  rules ;  of  the 
other,  that  it  is  internal  to  the  man,  governing  not  by  rules,  but  by  principles ; 
not  with  the  rigidity  of  half-mechanical,  external  regulation  and  control,  but  the 
elasticity  and  freedom  of  Life  within  ;  unfettered,  yet  not  irregular  or  morally 
abnormal,  because  the  Life  and  the  Liberty  are  those  of  the  indwelling  Spirit 
of  God.  (3)  So  here.  Moses  brought  down  a  Law  from  Sinai ;  Paul  and 
his  brethren  have  received  "  a  Gospel."  This  is  described  more  fully  as  "  the 
Gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christ."  He  is  its  great  Subject ;  His  glory  in  it  puts 
glory  upon  it.  Yet  the  Gospel  which  reveals  Him  reveals  Him  as  Himself  a 
Revealer  of  God  and  of  His  glory.  By  the  help  of  ^'  the  Gospel "  we  know  Christ, 
and,  yet  more,  we  come  to  know  "  God's  glory."  And,  further,  this  Gospel  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  is  "  the  truth."  Then  is  it  good  tidings  to  know 
the  truth  about  God  and  His  glory  ?  It  is,  seeing  that  that  knowledge  comes  to 
men  through  Christ  as  its  medium.  To  come  into  direct  contact  with  the  "  bare," 
unveiled  glory  of  God  were  death  to  sinners.     Israel  saw  the  glory  of  God  On 

454 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   It   CORINTBIANS.  chap.  IV. 


the  face  of  Moses,  absorbed,  reflected ;  we  see  *'  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ"  inherent,  but,  as  it  were,  shining  through  the  humanity. 

2.  The  contents  of  the  Gospel. — (1)  Perfectly  true  as  a  *'  working"  statement, 
that  the  Gospel  reveals  the  way  of  salvation,  *'  God's  righteousness  "  for  sinners. 
But  the  better,  larger,  truer,  whole,  view,  is  that  it  reveals  God.  As  a  redeeming 
God,  for  the  race ;  as  a  pardoning  God,  for  the  penitent  sinner.  **  Have  faith  in 
God "  is,  in  the  deepest  analysis,  the  true  formula  for  saving  faith.  "  Faith  in 
Christ  "  is  the  shape  which  it  naturally  and  serviceably  assumes  in  the  evangelistic 
work  of  the  Church,  and  in  which  it  offers  itself  to  the  sinner's  most  easy 
apprehension.  But  underneath  the  faith  in  Christ  is  a  faith  in  God.  Christ  is 
the  object  of  faith,  truly ;  but  in  laying  hold  of  Him  the  sinner  lays  hold  of 
God's  promise  of  a  mercy  which  is  by  express  proclamation  attached  to  the  act  of 
believing  in  Him.  Chiist  is  God's  Word — of  promise  ;  He  is  a  Promise  incarnate ; 
faith  which  takes  hold  of  Christ,  takes  hold  of  God,  Who  in  Christ  has  expressed 
Himself  and  His  will  and  heart.  (2)  God  reveals  Himself  as  well  as  His  will 
and  heart,  in  the  Gospel.  We  have  seen  "  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  In 
homely  phrase.  He  is  the  Father  *'  over  again."  Whatsoever  things  the  Father 
doeth  [and  saith]  those  things  doeth  [and  saith]  the  Son  likewise  [  =  in  similar 
manner],  John  v.  19.  We  hear  of  God  from  Christ ;  we  also  hear  God  in  the 
words  of  Christ.  The  manner  and  the  principles  of  the  works  of  God  are  seen 
in  those  of  Christ,  e.g.  such  as  belong  to  the  matter  here  in  hand.  The  Son 
pardons  the  sins  of  (say)  the  paralytic  (Mark  ii.)  because  the  Father  pardons  sin ; 
the  act  of  Christ  is  intended  to  reveal  to  men  a  God  Who  pardons.  Study  CLrist 
pardoning  sin,  and  see  how  God  pardons  sin.  The  faith  of  the  friends  of  the 
paralytic  ["  their  faith,"  the  man  being,  no  doubt,  included]  is  closely  connected 
with  the  word  of  Christ,  "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee."  There  is  then  an  efficiency 
about  faith  which  brings  others  to  God  for  pardon.  The  paralytic  comes  to 
Christ  and  finds  forgiveness ;  then  men  may  come  to  God  and  find  forgiveness. 
He  goes  out  from  the  presence  of  Christ,  knowing  that  his  sin  is  forgiven.  Then 
men  may  go  forth  from  the  presence  of  God  also,  knowing  that  sin  is  forgiven. 
Every  miracle  of  Christ  is  more  than  an  act  of  benevolence  toward  suffering 
or  son  ow  or  need ;  it  is  this,  but  also,  and  still  more,  a  carefully  chosen, 
deliberately  done  [and  with  special  authenticity  recorded]  pait  of  Christ's 
whole  revelation  of  God.  Works,  words,  character,  motives,  principles  under- 
lying and  governing  acts  and  words, — in  them  all,  as  we  study  them  in  Christ, 
we  see  God.  (3)  And  this  is  a  revelation  of  the  ''  glory  of  God."  The  only 
*'  glory  "  belonging  to  Him  which  sinners  could  bear  to  see.  The  one  *'  glo7'y  " 
which  they  need  to  see.  To  a  sinner  the  revelation  [as  to  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiii. 
18,  19)]  of  the  "goodness,"  specially  as  "showing  mercy,  pardoning  iniquity," 
etc.,  is  the  revelation  of  God's  truest  "glory"  to  such  as  he.  The  heart  which 
"  turns  to  the  Lord  "  Christ,  goes  into  a  sanctuary  where  it  gazes  upon  a  real 
glory  of  God.  The  written  Gospel  is  such  a  sanctuary.  Not  every  foot  treads 
its  floor,  even  of  those  who  diligently  read  the  evangelical  narratives,  or  even 
write  upon  their  sacred  Topic.  In  reading  this  revelation  of  God,  "  we  have 
our  access,  our  introduction,  unto  the  Father,  through  Christ,  by  the  Spirit" 
(cf.  Eph.  ii.  22). 

3.  The  veiling  of  the  Gospel. — (1)  I^ot  by  its  ministers.  They  ^*  manifest  the 
truth."  '  (a)  They  do  not  obtrude  themselves,  but  ^^ preach  Christ  Jesus  as  Lord." 
To  do  otherwise — as  perhaps  Paul's  rivals  at  Corinth  [or  in  Galatia]  did — would 
be  a  most  efiectual  veiling  of  the  Gospel.  They  would  be  lamps  calling  atten- 
tion to,  and  arresting  it  at,  their  own  form  and  pattern  and  beauty,  instead  of 
to  the  light  which  it  is  their  business  to  exhibit.  The  perfect  lamp  lets  the 
light  shine,  whilst  itself  inviting  the  least  attention  possible.  The  ministry 
is  for  the  sake  of  the  light,  and  for  the  sake  of  those  on  whom  it  needs  to 

455 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


be  shed.  "  Ourselves  your  servants."  And  yet  with  no  slavish  subserviency ; 
not  as  mere  creatures  of  those  to  whom  they  bring  the  illuminating  Gospel. 
"  Yours,  as  being  first  Christ's ;  your  servants,  as,  in  so  serving  you,  fulfilling 
our  service  to  Him  and  bringing  glory  to  Him.  Yours  for  Jesus'  sake." 
The  personality  of  the  man  is  a  valuable  element  in  every  successful  ministry ; 
it  must  needs  stamp  itself  upon  every  real  man's  "  manifestation  of  the  truth." 
[The  burner  will  give  shape  and  size  to  the  gas-flame,  but  it  must  not 
affect  the  quality  of  the  light.]  But  the  moment  the  ministry  becomes  an 
end,  and  not  a  means ;  the  man  a  stopping-point,  and  not  a  point  of  "  new 
departure,"  and  of  assistance,  to  help  men  on  their  way  to  the  knowledge  of 
God  in  Christ ;  the  minister  then  becomes  a  *'  veil "  to  the  Gospel.  (Yet  he  is 
himself  only  a  sinner  who  has  "  obtained  mercy  "  ;  the  personal  mercy  of  accep- 
tance with  God,  and  the  official  mercy  which  has  made  even  him  a  "  minister.") 
Moses  and  his  system  had  thus  become  a  veil  instead  of  a  medium ;  as  a  popular 
man  or  a  Church  system  may  come  to  intervene  between  the  soul  and  God. 
"  Cannot  see  God,  or  hear  the  Gospel,  for  the  Man."  Only  One  may  thus  inter- 
pose Himself ;  Jesus  Christ  may,  did,  preach  Himself  "  I  am  the  Way,"  and 
not  a  hindrance  on  the  way  to  God,  and  to  the  knowledge  of  Him  and  to  the  vision 
of  His  "glory"  of  grace,  {h)  They  use  no  veil  of  reserve  ^  or  insincerity,  or  crafty 
handling  of  the  Word,  in  their  acts  or  teaching.  Have  '"''renounced^'  all  this, 
for  the  Gospel  may  very  effectually  in  that  way  be  "  veiled.'^  There  is  no  arriere 
pensee  about  their  proclamation.  They  have  no  selfish  ends  to  serve,  in  the  way 
they  teach  it.  There  is  no  dishonest  suppression  of  any  part  of  the  whole 
Gospel,  from  a  fear  that  the  whole  truth  might  be  awkward  for  a  theological 
system  or  an  ecclesiastical  theory.  Truth  may  be  made  falsehood,  not  only  by 
positive  additions  of  alleged  "  truth," — perhaps  by  development,  but  by  omitting 
complementary  truth,  or  by  giving  exaggerated  prominence  to  what  needs 
balancing  by  other  aspects  of  the  whole  Divine  revelation.  And  if  this  were 
done /br  the  sake  of  courting  a  reputation  for  being  "  progressive  "  ;  or  of  shun- 
ning the  reproach  of  being  a  "  fossil,"  or  "  retrograde,"  or  "  obscurantist " ;  or,  more 
unworthily, /or  the  sake  q/"  avoiding  "  the  offence  of  the  Cross,"  or  of  winning  the 
good  word  of  the  unchanged  heart ;  it  would  be  a  real,  terrible  '*  veiling  "  of 
"  ^Ae  Gospel"  and  of  its  ''''truths  [A  wise  ministry,  of  course,  practises  a 
(perfectly  honest)  "  economy  "  of  teaching.  The  babes  must  have  milk.  They  do 
not  need  more.  But  this  not  akin  to  the  (technical)  "  Reserve."  True  and  false 
"  development  "  have  been  thus  discussed  :  "  There  is  a  modern  Romisja  *  Theory 
of  Development '  of  which  Newman's  celebrated  essay  is  the  classical  exposition, 
and  there  is  a  rationalistic  theory  which  is  an  application  of  the  hypothesis  of 
evolution  to  the  religious  ideas  of  man.  According  to  the  former,  the  process  of 
development  is  the  expansion,  under  an  infallible  directing  authority,  of  doctrinal 
germs  and  ideas  into  a  variety  of  new  forms  and  aspects,  '  and  the  existing 
belief  of  the  Roman  Communion  is  its  mature  result.'  According  to  the  other 
theory,  all  religious  conceptions  have  their  origin  in  the  human  mind,  and 
Christian  doctrine  is  but  one  branch  of  its  general  progress,  the  Scriptures  them- 
selves, and  all  belief  arising  from  them,  being  the  natural  outgrowth  and 
product  of  the  mind  acted  upon  by  surrounding  conditions.  These  opposing 
theories  have  much  in  common,  and  this  among  the  rest — that  truth  is  not  made 
the  test  of  dogma.  In  the  one  case  authority  is  the  sole  criterion  ;  in  the  other 
there  is  strictly  speaking  no  criterion  at  all,  seeing  that,  from  the  rationalistic 
point  of  view,  dogma  can  possess  no  other  kind  of  truth  than  a  temporary 
and  relative  adaptation  to  the  religious  consciousness  from  which  it  springs. 
Between  these  .  .  .  there  is  room  for  a  theory  of  doctrinal  development  .  .  . 
distinguished  by  the  following  *  notes.'  Firsts  development  does  not  consist  in 
additions  to  the  Revelation  contained  in  Holy  Scripture ;  ...  it  does  not  call 

456  ,      ..    , 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   tl.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


new  doctrines  into  existence  [above  all,  to  support  or  complete  any  dogmatic 
system  or  Church  claim].  Second^  it  is  development,  not  of  doctrine  in  its 
subject-matter,  but  in  the  understanding  and  apprehension  of  the  Church. 
Thirds  neither  for  the  process  nor  for  the  results  ...  is  infallibility  claimed,  or 
anything  beyond  the  general  guidance  and  blessing  [of  the  Church's  great  Head], 
.  .  .  which  .  .  .  does  not  preclude  the  possibility  of  error  in  His  people."  (F.  W. 
Macdonald.)  The  personal  character  of  the  ministry,  too,  as  well  as  all  their 
dealings  with  their  fellows,  show  that  they  have  "  renounced^*  etc.  No  denser 
**  veil "  to  the  Gospel  than  a  questionable  or  damaged  reputation  in  its  ministers, 
in  regard  to  their  transparent  honesty  of  speech,  their  simple  directness  of 
motive,  their  entirely  "  above-board"  action.  Many  seekers  after  God  and  after 
truth  have  failed  to  find  both,  even  in  the  Gospel,  as  they  have  read  it  or  have 
heard  it  preached,  by  reason  of  the  known  ill-repute  of  the  minister.  If  the 
idolised  minister,  or  system,  may  become  a  veil,  the  discredited  or  discreditable,  man, 
or  system  may  as  certainly  be  so.  The  ministers  need  to  be  thoroughly  transparent 
in  life  and  character  and  teaching,  (c)  The  true  ministry  has  hut  one  aim,  — so  to 
let  **  the  light  shins  "  upon  the  path,  and  into  the  mind  and  heart,  of  the  **  lost"  as 
that  they  may  best  be  brought  out  of  their  darkness  and  into  the  presence  of 
"  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ"  It 
originally  *'  shone  out  of  darkness."  The  primal  fact  of  the  material  creation  was 
repeated  in  the  moral.  It  was  the  ray  of  the  dawn  of  a  day,  ever  since  shining 
more  and  more  unto  its  perfection  of  noontide  light.  That  dawn  sprang  forth 
from  the  bosom  of  darkness,  flashing  into  a  world  dark  in  ignorance.  Now  the 
Sun  Himself  was  arisen.  His  light  had  shone  into  the  darkness  of  the  ^^ heart  " 
(and  intellect  and  life)  of  Paul  and  his  fellow -workers ;  into  and  "  in"  for  it  was 
an  abiding  day  within  them.  Now  they  have  but  one  simple,  open,  unveiled 
purpose,  open  to  the  scrutiny  of  men  and  of  God — to  "  manifest  the  truth"  all 
unveiled,  to  every  dark  mind  and  heart  which  could  be  induced  to  gaze.  They 
know  of  no  "  handling  the  Word  of  God  "  but  such  as  will  contribute  to  this  end. 

(2)  Not  by  its  Divine  Author. — He  is  the  God  who  loves  to  "  make  light  shine 
Diet  of"  and  upon,  "  darkness."  A  God  of  light ;  a  God  Who  is  light ;  Whose 
attitude  is,  *'  If  .  .  .  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you  " ;  Who  loves  to  reveal,  rather 
than  to  conceal.  Silent,  He  has  spoken  by  His  Word ;  invisible.  He  has  shown 
Himself  in  His  Image.  God  is  working  in  and  with  the  soul  which  craves  to  see 
the  light. 

(3)  By  the  hearers  themselves. — (a)  The  "  open"  Gospel  needs  to  be  met  by  "  open  " 
thoughts  and  hearts.  The  *'  spiritual  man  "  is  in  thorough  rapport  with  the 
"spiritual"  minister.  ["  He  that  knoweth  God,  heareth  us;  he  that  is  not  of 
God,  heareth  not  us"  (1  John  iv.  6;  where  note  also  the  following  sentence. 
A  noteworthy  claim  !)  A  true  minister  may  borrow  the  words  of  a  Higher 
ITeacher  :  "  My  sheep  know  My  voice ;  .  .  .  they  know  not  the  voice  of 
strangers."]  The  conscience  in  man  leaps  [like  the  unborn  Baptist  at  the 
approach  of  the  unborn  Christ]  in  response  to  the  truth.  Even  in  the  unsaved 
there  is  so  much  of  grace  that  they  know,  and,  at  least  secretly,  honour, 
even  if  they  do  not  love,  the  man  who  plainly  speaks  truth.  Even  in  such 
conscience  has  from  the  beginning  some  power  to  recognise  the  truth  when 
it  meets  with  it.  It  is  an  eye  made  for  the  light.  "  It  is  a  pleasant  thing 
for  this  eye  to  behold  this  Sun."  The  sincere  Nathanael  is  ready  to  welcome 
and  follow  new  Hght.  Much  more  does  the  enlightened  man  respond  to,  and  go 
out  towards,  the  man  whose  truth  commends  him  to  his  conscience.  The  man 
who  is  in  Christ,  and  even  the  sincere  inquirer  for  Christ,  knows  a  true  minister 
of  Christ  when  he  meets  him  and  hears  him ;  for  him  that  minister  carries 
letters  of  ^^commendation  "  of  unimpeachable,  unquestionable  validity.  The  true 
minister  "  commends  himself"  to  such.     He  blamelessly  asks  their  endorsement 

457 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


of  his  credentials,  and  their  acceptance  of  himself  and  his  message.  He  must 
conciliate  the  unsaved  man  if  he  is  to  do  him  good.  If  he  cannot  gain  his  ear, 
he  will  not  make  the  light  reach  his  dark  "  mind."  He  appeals  thus  with  hope 
of  success ;  the  "  conscience  "  in  *'  every  man  "  is  the  preacher's  hope ;  it  is  the 
starting-point  of  his  work.  Were  it  originally  absent ;  let  it  be  blinded  or  killed ; 
the  minister  of  the  Gospel  has  then  nothing  to  appeal  to ;  "  he  cometh  and  hath 
nothing  in  "  the  man.  (b)  It  is  actually  met  with  "  veiled  "  minds.  The  "  veiled  " 
heart  in  the  Israelite  made  the  Law  a  veil,  and  not  a  mirror  or  a  medium  ;  the 
*'  veiled  "  mind  of  ^^  the  world,'^  puts  a  veil  upon  the  Gospel.  Nothing  more  sadly 
wonderful  to  the  man  who  sees,  than  to  find  how  utterly  unable  to  see  what  is  so 
clear  to  him,  are  the  "  lost  "  men  and  women  about  him.  Nothing,  unless  it  be 
that  himself  once  did  not  see  what  is  now  so  plain.  There  may  be  many  causes 
of  blindness.  Prejudice,  whether  induced  by  early  educational  bias,  or — more 
than  a  man  is  always  conscious — by  subtle  love  of  sin  and  dislike  of  holiness. 
["Men  love  darkness  rather  than  light"  (John  iii.  19  sqq.).]  Moral  indolence, 
which  will  not  "  be  bothered  "  about  such  things,  and  turns  away,  with  an 
indifference  that  is  as  weary  as  it  is  worldly,  from  The  Truth  [Pilate-like, 
John  xviii.  38] ;  an  indolence  which  has  an  uncomfortable  misgiving  that  to 
listen  might  involve  inquiry,  and  inquiry  compel  to  action,  and  that  in  a 
direction  in  which  the  heart  has  no  desire  to  look  or  go.  Preoccupation ;  for 
the  mind  and  heart  need  to  be  kept  free  from  entanglement ;  too  eager,  too 
close,  contact  with  any  secular  pursuit  becomes  an  entanglement,  a  bondage, 
a  "  veil "  to  the  heart ;  art,  music,  business,  home,  may  swallow  up  a  man  until 
he  has  neither  leisure  nor  desiie  for  "  the  light P  [The  value  of  the  Sabbath 
to  even  the  "  lost^^  and  to  the  young,  consists  not  a  little  in  this,  that  it  is  a 
"  break  "  in  the  engrossing,  enslaving  round  of  secular  life,  enslaving  even  its 
noblest  types  and  forms.  The  Sabbath  does  something  towards  preventing  the 
*^  veil"  from  becoming  too  densely  impervious  to  the  light.]  Idolatry,  in  its  many 
modern  forms  ;  sensuality,  and  in  its  varying  degrees  even  the  sensuous  ;  any  sinful 
habit  indulged  ;  mental  pride,  which  cannot  brook  "  backing  down  "  from  a  position 
once  openly  taken  up  ;  worldliness  of  life  and  temper,  in  its  widest  sense,  — all  veil 
the  mind  and  heart.  The  "  man  in  Christ "  sees  Christ  in  Law  and  Gospel ;  he 
understands,  too,  why  the  man  who  is  "  lost  "  does  not,  cannot.  And  to  the  man 
living  under  the  gracious  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  there  is  not  infrequently 
given  a  revelation — from  which  he  shrinks  in  horror — of  the  nearness  of  a  Power 
of  Evil, — a  very  "  god  of  this  world."  That  evil  Power  is  behind,  and  in,  all 
the  veiling  of  the  heart,  as  the  good  Spirit  is  analogously  behind,  and  in,  all 
opening  of  the  eyes  and  all  clearness  of  disclosure  and  vision.  In  neither  case  is 
man's  personal  responsibility  destroyed.  The  veiling  is  man's  own  doing,  whilst 
it  is  also  the  work  of  the  great  Anti-God,  "  the  god  of  this  world." 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  7—18. 

I.  The  outer  life  of  an  apostle  (vers.  7-12).  1.  A  distressed  life;  2.  A 
vicarious  Hfe. 

II.  The  inner  life  of  an  apostle  (vers.  13-18).  3.  A  believing  life ;  4.  A 
victorious  life. 

Who  is  in  the  "  succession  "  ? 

I.  1.  Distressed. — (1)  Not  an  unmixed  good  to  get  too  vivid  or  realistic  a 
view  of  the  externals  of  the  earthly  life  of  Jesus.  [See  Homily,  "  Knowing 
Christ  after  the  flesh  "  (2  Cor.  v.  16).]  It  is  a  great,  and  unmixed,  good  to  realise 
the  externals  of  Paul's  life.  ^^  Troubled,''  ^'perplexed,''  ^^  persecuted,"  ^^  cast  down" 
to  a  reader's  heart,  and  for  the  purposes  of  his  practical  encouragement,  gain 

458 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   IL   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iV. 


very  helpful  force,  if  from  (say)  the  Acts,  read  with  such  instructive  side-lights 
as  in  vi.  3-10,  these  words  he  filled  out  hy  the  reahsing  imagination.  *'  Perse- 
cuted" e.g.,  falls  lightly  from  the  lips  of  a  reader,  and  only  lightly  impresses  the 
attention  of  the  hearers.  But  it  should  be  remembered  how  from  the  day  of  his 
conversion  Paul  was  the  object  of  persistent,  deep,  malicious,  murderous  hatred, 
which  never  relaxed  its  pursuit  until  his  head  fell  beneath  the  sword  of  the  exe- 
cutioner, somewhere  on  the  Appian  Way.  [It  was  really  Jewish  persecution 
which  led  to  his  journey  *'  on  appeal "  to  Rome  ;  the  influence  of  Poppsea,  the 
wife  of  Nero,  and  a  Jewish  proselyte,  was  possibly  one  of  the  factors  which  made 
his  imprisonment  to  end  in  death.]  Hunted  out  from  city  to  city.  Not  safe  for 
long  together  anywhere.  "Smuggled  out"  of  Damascus  by  night;  hurried 
secretly  away  from  Thessalonica  [to  Athens  (Acts  xvii.  14)]  ;  stoning  attempted 
(Acts  xiv.  5)  or  actually  accomplished  {ib.  19);  and  the  examples  in  the  Acts 
are  only  the  cases  which  "  happen  "  to  be  mentioned,  out  of  an  unrecorded  mass 
of  facts  illustrative  of  this  word.  [Just  before  this  time  (Acts  xix.  31) ;  a  little 
after  it  (xx.  3).]  He  was  the  fox  hunted  from  hole  to  hole  ;  the  bird  of  the  air 
not  sufiered  to  shelter  long  in  even  a  temporary  nest.  Very  graphic  (see  Critical 
Notes)  are  the  other  words.  "  Troubled  "  ["  tribulated  ;  "  it  is,  radically,  the 
word  so  frequent  in  chap,  i.]  "  in  everything,"  "  at  all  points,"  perpetually  under 
the  threshing-drag ;  within  him,  as  well  as  around  him,  were  the  instruments,  or 
the  occasions  of,  perpetual,  crushing  pressure.  [One  thinks  of  the  martyrdoms  by 
crushing  between  boards  or  plates  of  iron,  under  heavy  weights.  There  are  daily 
martyrdoms,  not  suffered  just  once,  for  a  short,  sharp  hour  or  two  of  agony, 
and  then  done  with,  but  prolonged  through  a  lifetime  of  distress.  See  the 
crowding,  pushing,  pressing,  choking  cares  of  his  life  graphically  illustrated, 
Luke  viii.  45  (cognate  word),  as  also  in  Mark  v.  24,  31.]  To  the  very  limit  of 
endurance.  ["  Patience  "  in  its  New  Testament  sense  of  "  pressing  on,  bearing  up" 
is  the  counterpart  of  this  "  pressure."]  "  Perplexed."  "  What  next  ?  Where 
next  1  Hemmed  in ;  where  is  the  way  of  escape  ?  At  our  wits'  end  ;  what  is 
the  wise  and  right  thing  to  do  ?  Is  there  anything  that  can  be  done  ?  "  And 
this  when  something  '■^must  "  be  done  ;  for  time  is  slipping  on,  circumstances  are 
closing  in  around,  the  last  door  of  escape  will  soon  be  closed  up.  Yet  what  to 
do  ?  To  see  advancing  trouble  or  disaster  draw  nearer  and  nearer,  yet  to  stand 
hanging  down  helpless  hands.  "  Cast  down ;  "  thrown  in  the  wrestle,  struck 
down  in  the  conflict  [as  Christian  by  Apollyon  in  the  Yalley  of  Humiliation]  ; 
lifted,  in  the  strong  grip  of  circumstances  or  of  the  Tempter  himself,  ''  clean  off  " 
one's  feet,  off  one's  foothold  on  the  promises  and  faithfulness  of  God ;  blow  follow- 
ing on  blow,  buffet  raised  on  bufffet  in  quick  succession  ;  *'  facts  "  arising  in  fertile 
crop,  which  seem  to  "  compel "  doubts  and  questions  that  it  is  an  agony  to  be 
obliged  to  entertain,  even  though  only  that  they  may  be  dismissed;  until  all 
strength  to  fight  on,  or  even  to  follow  on,  seems  lost.  Reason,  trust,  hope, 
sinking,  "  stricken  down  "  by  the  quick  succession  of  staggering  "  facts,"  in  even 
the  providential  path  ;  or  of  disheartening  circumstances  in  the  work  of  God. 
Every  reader  adapts  to  his  own  special  circumstances  the  words  of  Paul ;  they  are 
a  frame  which  will  hold  many  a  picture  of  a  distressed  life.  It  is  as  much  his 
personal,  as  his  official,  life  which  is  in  question.  [(2)  In  it  we  meet  the  time-old, 
world-wide  fact,  and  the  problem  which  is  at  its  heart, — how  scant  a  recognition 
the  greatest  men  of  their  time  get ;  how  often  the  truest  benefactors  are  un- 
recognised ;  how  often,  indeed,  goodness,  and  the  holiest  life,  are  only  recognised 
to  be  met  with  rebuff,  to  be  made  to  suffer ;  how  they  are  persecuted  even  to  the 
death.  This  alone  is,  of  course,  no  complete  or  adequate  account  of  the  life  and 
death  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  but,  at  the  least,  it  is  an  account  which  falls  in 
with  and  exemplifies  this  "  law."  If  God's  people  do  not  really  serve  Him  "  for 
nought,"  at  least  they  do  not  serve  Him  for  what  the  earthly  life  has  to  give. 

.  459 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


[Some  lives  only  show  their  full  beauty  when  "  distressed."  The  incense  only 
gives  out  its  full  savour  when  cast  upon  the  burning  coals.]  What  is  the 
rationale  of  persecution  ?  For  no  man  ever  seriously  entertained  the  thought  of 
changing  opinion  by  external,  or  physical,  compulsion.  There  has  been  an 
element  of  political,  governmental  action  in  much  persecution  of  Christianity.  In 
the  Roman  Empire  religiones  illicitce  were  always  obnoxious  to  the  State.  The 
necessary,  regulative  effect  of  Christianity  upon  the  action  and  conduct  of  its 
professors  has  sometimes  inevitably  involved  disobedience  to  some  State  legisla- 
tion, and  very  much  oftener  a  disconformity  to  the  informal,  social,  customary 
legislation  of  the  world  in  which  they  were  citizens.  To  any  form  of  absolute 
government,  individualism,  particularly  such  as  seems  aggressive  and  in  conflict 
with  the  established  order,  is  a  thing  to  be  repressed,  if  it  cannot  be  destroyed. 
But  this  by  no  means  accounts  for  all  persecution,  even  organised  and  quasi- 
governmental.  It  by  no  means  explains  the  elaborated  ingenuity  of  cruelty  in 
punishment  which  is  no  necessary  accompaniment  of  (even  mistaken)  justice.  It 
by  no  means  explains  the  elaborately  ingenious  and  the  subtly  invented  pain  in- 
flicted, in  cases  of  personal,  as  distinguished  from  quasi-ofiicial,  persecution.  One 
sentence  of  Paul  is  a  summary  formula  for  the  answer  to  the  question  proposed. 
"  As  then  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  persecuted  him  that  was  born  after 
the  Spirit,  even  so  it  is  now "  (Gal.  iv.  29).  John  traces  the  matter  further 
back.  In  the  Book  of  Origins — Genesis — he  sees  in  the  slaying  of  Abel  by  Cain 
his  brother  the  origin  and  first  example  of  the  deep,  innate,  inevitable,  murderous 
antipathy  between  "the  world"  and  "the  children  of  God"  (1  John  iii.  12). 
The  Roman  State  persecuted  the  Church  ;  the  heathen  state  in  Madagascar 
persecuted  the  Christian  community ;  the  Romish  Church  persecuted  its  fellow- 
Christian  Albigenses  and  Yaudois ;  the  Greek  Church  persecutes  its  fellow-Chris- 
tians and  fellow-subjects,  the  Stundists ;  Episcopal  Church  government  persecuted 
Presbyterian,  or  Quaker,  or  Methodist  nonconformity  ;  in  the  same  congregation, 
the  lax — "  worldly  " — section  if  in  the  majority,  will  give  practical,  painful, 
penal  effect  to  its  dislike  of  the  spiritual  minority ;  in  the  same  household,  "  the 
world "  pursues  "  the  Church  "  with  its  effective,  pain-dealing  dislike.  It  is,  in 
fac  t,  the  same  "  world  "  everywhere,  though  it  may  be  a  baptized  "  world  "  called 
a  Church  or  a  section  of  one,  hating  "  the  spiritual  ";  it  is  the  same  "  natural" 
heart  everywhere,  which  cannot  simply  be  indifferent  to,  and  leave  alone,  "  the 
spiritual,"  the  pure,  the  holy,  the  Divine.  The  mere  contrast  is  exasperating ; 
it  arouses  antagonism ;  the  antagonism  becomes  active.  And,  finally,  the  deep 
underlying  "  animal "  or  "devil,"  of  which  there  is  too  much  in  every  natural 
heart,  may  make  its  persecution  the  occasion  to  display  its  love  of  inflicting  and 
witnessing  pain.  In  much  persecution  there  has  been  seen  that  "  streak  "  of  the 
cruel,  of  the  savage,  which  is  a  possibility  of  universal  human  nature,  apart  from 
the  grace  of  God.] 

2.  Vicarious.  "  All  things  are  for  your  sakes." — (1)  Living  for  others.  Except 
this  corn  of  wheat  had  fallen  into  the  ground  and  died,  it  would  have  abode  alone. 
Paul  must  be  killed  daily,  so  that  Corinthians,  Galatians,  Ephesians,  Philippian 
gaolers,  Lystran  Timothys  (Acts  xiv.  5,  19,  xvi.  1,  2;  2  Tim.  iii  11 ;  ib.  i.  8,  12, 
ii.  1,  2,  iii.  12,  ii,  11-13;  a  Bible-reading  in  germ),  may  have  life.  "Through 
death  to  life  "  is  the  "  law  "  for  a  man's  own  life.  If  a  man  will  live  for  himself, 
introverting  upon  himself  all  thought  and  action — "  will  save  his  life  "  for  himself 
— he  will  "  lose  it  "  and  die.  [There  is  no  life  that  can  more  utterly  be  selfishness 
and  death  than  that  of  self- culture.]  "  Through  the  death  of  one  to  the  life  of 
others  "  is  the  "  law  "  for  the  life  of  all.  Christ's  death  the  highest  exemplification 
of  this,  though  it  is  unique  qud  the  link  of  connection  between  His  death  and  our 
life;  there  is  no  analogy  in  this  between  the  solitary  case  of  Christ  and  the  common 
cases  of  ordinary  mankind,  though  both  may  be  stated  in  terms  of  the  same  great 

460 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


**  law."    "  For  your  sakes."    Kot  for  Paul's  own  ?    Certainly.    They  no  doubt  had 
a  sanctifying  and  sanctified  efiicacy  in  the  training  and  development  of  his  own 
Christian  life.     [Below,  they  are  seen,  at  the  least,  "  dissolving  the  tabernacle," 
and  "  working  out  the  exceeding  weight  of  glory  "  for  him.]     But  in  the  fulness 
of  his  Christ  likeness  of  affection,  he  for  the  moment  sees  this  no  longer ;  it  dis- 
appears out  of  all  reckoning.     He  approximates  very  closely  to  Him  Who  could 
alone  say  with  full  and  exact  truth,  ^^  All  things  are  for  your  sakes."     [On  lower 
planes  of  illustration  are  seen  instances  of  the  same  "  law  "  at  work.     Some  must 
sacrifice  the  sorely  needed  rest  of  the  Sabbath,  that  others  may  hear  the  Gospel 
and  find  "  life "  on  the  Sabbath.     Any  life  which  is  to  be  a  blessing  and  a 
comfort  and  a  joy  in  a  family,  must  be  continually  putting  aside  its  own  work  or 
plans  or  ease,  giving  itself  up  to  others,  and  indeed,  in  its  highest  types,  be  "  laying 
itself  out  "  with  loving  ingenuity,  to  contrive  the  pleasure  or  the  convenience  of 
others.     Birth,  in  many  ways,  and  in  many  instances,  means  death  to  the  giver  of 
the  new  life.    No  man  permanently  blesses  his  race  with  even  new  thought,  except 
by  sore  pangs  of  mental  "labour."     Etc.]     ^^  For  your  sake."     So  that  in  two 
directions  Paul's  life  is  the  very  opposite  of  self-centered  ;  Christwsird — "  to  me  to 
live  is  *  Christ '" ;  manwsLrd — "all  for  your  sakes"  [cf.  "  beside  ourselves  ...  to 
God;  sober  .  .  .  for  your  cause"  (v.  13)].     Poised  between,  pointing  toward,  these 
two  poles,  the  Paul  who  hangs  central  between  them  is  forgotten  !    (2)  Especially, 
suffering  for  others.     So,  probably,  ver.  12.     The  daily  "dying"  is  the  price — 
by  him  thankfully  paid — for  their  daily  "  life."     (To  extend  Alford's  remark  :) 
God  shows  death  in  the  living  in  order  that  he  may  through  them  awaken  and 
show  life  in  the  dying.     Yet,  as  if  an  instinctive  perception,  that  vicarious  dying 
in  its  fullest  sense  was  the  propriety  of  Christ  alone,  guarded  his  language,  where 
it  trod  on  the  very  precipice-edge  of  error,  he  never  says,  "  We  die  for  you,  or  for 
your  sakes."     Only  this :  "  TTe  are  delivered  daily  unto  death  for  Jesus'  sake." 
[Farrar  does  indeed  paraphrase  :  "So  then  death  is  working  in  us — seeing  that 
for  Christ's  sake  and  for  your  sakes  we  die  daily — but  life  in  you.     The  trials  are 
mainly  ours ;  the  blessings  yours."]     [The  "  vicarious  "  idea  (in  an  inexact  sense 
of  the  word)  is  suggested  in  vers.  5,  6,  7.     The  Gospellers  have  themselves  been 
illumined,  as  from  a  central  fount  of  Light,  that  so  in  their  turn  they   may 
show  light  to,   and   shed  light   upon,  other   dark  hearts.      They   are  filled — 
earthen  vessels  though  they  be — with  treasure,  in  order  that  they  may  "  make 
many  rich."      Or  as  some  see  the  picture  in  the  words,  they  are  the  soldiers 
of  a  greater  captain  than  Gideon,  carrying  each  of  them  his  light  in  his  earthen 
pitcher.     But  "  earthen  "  then  conveys  no  thought  of  disparity  between  means 
used  and  ends  accomplished,  between  contents  and  vessel ;  yet  such  a  disparity 
seems  required  by  the  concluding  clause  of  ver.  7.] 

II.  3.  Believing. —  (1)  With  the  same  faith,  begotten  of  ^^  the  same  Spirit  of 
faith"  which  prompted,  and  breathes  in,  the  declaration  of  the  Psalmist.  The 
whole  drift  of  Heb.  xi.  is  to  exhibit  this  real  unity  of  the  principle  of  faith, 
through  all  the  ages  and  dispensations.  Believers  are  all  of  a  pattern ;  they 
conform  to  a  distinctly  marked  and  permanent  type,  to  whatever  Church  they 
belong,  in  whatever  age  they  live,  how  much  or  how  little  soever  of  light 
they  have  upon  the  matters  for  which  they  exercise  faith,  and  upon  Him 
Who,  to  them  all,  is  the  Object  towards  which  faith  directs  itself,  and  on 
which,  having  reached  It,  faith  rests.  It  may  have  the  distinctly  Gospel 
colouring  and  character,  but  that  is  rather  gained  from  the  matter  with  which 
it  is  concerned.  Concerned  with  "  providential "  things,  or  with  distinctly 
"  evangelical,"  faith's  hand  is  in  either  case  "  subdued  unto  the  colour  "  of  the 
thing  it  works  upon,  but  it  is  the  same  hand,  and  the  same  grasp  upon  the  same 
God.  [Indeed,  it  is  specially  noteworthy  how,  e.g.^  the  faith  of  Noah  is  declared 
to  have  won  for  him  a  grace  which  is  described  in  a  very  "  Pauline  "  phrase, 

461 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


"  Became  heir  of  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  hyfaith.^^  And  so  in  other 
instances.  The  examples  of  Heb.  xi.  are  in  the  closest  connection  with  the  critical 
points  of  the  developing  history  of  Redemption, — the  "  nodes  "  in  the  growing 
stem,  at  which  miracles  (and  prophecy)  and  faith  all  blossom  in  fullest  profusion.] 
Old  Testament  psalmist,  New  Testament  apostle,  both  belong  to  the  same 
"  set " ;  [they  are  of  the  true  Abrahamic  stock ;]  they  are  "  believers."  In 
every  age,  and  in  every  sense,  does  God's  "  just  man  live  by  faith."  In  every 
age,  in  every  believer,  faith's  activity  conforms  to  the  general  formula  of 
Heb.  xi.  1 ;  it  makes  things  hoped  for  and  future  to  be  working  realities,  assumed, 
taken  for  granted,  in  all  reckoning  and  action  in  the  present ;  it  makes  things 
unseen  into  elements  and  factors  in  the  daily  life,  as  powerful  and  as  real  as 
the  things  seen.  [So  ver.  18.]  Indeed,  God  and  His  word  of  faithful  promise 
are  more  certainly  assured  conditions  of  life's  problem,  than  are  man  and  his 
character  or  words.  [E.g.  the  purpose  and  the  protection  of  God  are  more  potent 
considerations  than  is  the  wrath  of  Pharoah  (Heb.  xi.  27).]  *'  Begotten  of  the 
same  Spirit."  Exegesis,  and  the  whole  strain  of  Scripture,  growing  clearer  as  the 
Pentecostal  age  advances,  require  the  "  S."  Faith  is  not  natural  to  the  human 
heart ;  it  is  induced ;  it  is  the  Spirit's  grace.  No  better,  surer  proof  of  this  than 
the  fluctuations  in  its  strength,  of  which  every  believer  is  conscious.  So  unreason- 
able are  they ;  and  yet  so-  little  amenable  to,  or  to  be  put  away  by,  reasoning. 
After  all  the  experiment  of  a  long  lifetime,  with  its  resulting,  accumulated 
"  experience,"  what  more  logical  than  "  hope  "  ?  (Bom.  v.  4).  What  more  reason- 
able, and  right,  than  that  the  One  Friend  Who  has  never  failed  His  people  in  any 
slightest  particular ;  Whose  resources  of  wisdom  and  power,  and  Whose  love 
and  character,  have,  absolutely  without  exception,  always  responded  adequately 
to  every  demand  made  upon  them  by  man's  need  and  faith ;  should  be  met 
with  a  perfectly  restful  trust?  And  yet,  no!  After  years  of  accumulated 
experience ;  in  the  very  presence  of  a  great  deliverance ;  with  the  very 
greatest  mercy  only  a  recent  memory ;  still  the  heart,  ungratefully,  illogically, 
will  doubt  and  be  distressed,  as  if  it  were  only  beginning  to  learn  the  lesson  of 
faith,  instead  of  being  already  a  lifelong  pupil.  Faith  is  a  gift,  a  grace,  to 
be  used  and  cultivated  by  man,  but  needing  to  be  created  by  God's  Spirit. 
Whatever  "  grieves  the  Spirit "  weakens  faith.  (2)  The  immediate  object  of 
Paul's  faith  is  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  accepted  by  faith  as  a 
fact ;  its  consequences  are  also  a  fact  to  faith.  In  His  being  raised  is  con- 
tained and  involved  the  further  miracle  that  Paul  and  his  fellows  shall  be 
raised  up  also.  The  daily  deliverance  from  the  daily,  deadly  peril  is  involved 
in  it  too.  That  peril  is  a  foretaste  of  death ;  the  life,  thus  daily  guarded  and 
renewed,  is,  in  principle  and  in  foretaste,  a  real  raising  up  again.  Whether 
in  now  daily  renewing  and  preserving  that  life,  or  in  raising  it  up  from  the 
grave  hereafter,  He  Who  is  the  God  of  Paul's  life  is  really  doing  one  and 
the  same  great  work.  The  daily  deliverance  is  a  simple  corollary  of  the  truth 
that  the  eternal  life,  in  which  resurrection  is  just  one  episode  and  incident,  is 
already  begun,  and  is  to  be  kept  "  unto  the  Day."  Faith  accepts  the  premiss — 
Christ's  resurrection — as  fact ;  faith  draws  the  inference,  with  its  own  sure  logic ; 
and  accepts,  and  rests  in  the  consequence — Paul  shall  be  raised  up.  This 
strength  of  assurance  affects  his  whole  life ;  in  its  every  expression  of  character. 
Such  a  faith,  resting  on  such  a  God,  "  stiffens  "  the  man  ;  "  puts  a  backbone  " 
into  him.  When  Paul  speaks  he  "  uses  great  boldness  of  speech  "  ;  he  does  not 
need  to  speak  in  equivoque  or  doubt,  with  bated  breath  or  qualified  certainty, 
or  in  "  adulterated  "  Gospel.  [He  is  a  preacher  who  preaches  not  doubts,  or 
speculations,  or  hopes,  but  what  to  him  are  certainties — **  /  believe,  therefore 
have  I  spoken."]     And  so,  finally, 

4.   Victorious. — (1)  The   ^^ earthen  vessel"  is   ^^ troubled"    is    ^^ perplexed"    is 

462 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


^^  persecuted"  is  ^' cast  down" ,  it  ^^  always  bears  about  the  dying  of  Jesus"  ] 
it  '^perishes"  'y  naturally  it  would  ^'' faint."  Yet  it  is  not  "  distressed"  nor  "  in 
despair"  nor  '"''forsaken"  nor  "  destroyed "  ;  the  treasure  enriches  many ;  the 
words  are  bold,  with  a  confidence  victorious  over  doubt  or  any  human  and 
unworthy  motive  whatever  ;  it  "  looks  "  away  from  the  "  seen  "  and  *'  temporal " 
to  the  ^^ unseen"  and  ^^ eternal" y  it  pursues  its  way,  in  the  midst  of  all  and  in  the 
face  of  all,  accounting  all  as  but  "  the  momentary  lightness  of  our  affliction" 
It  is,  on  the  one  side,  the  victory  of  the  vessel  of  frailest  "  earthen  "  mould  and 
material ;  on  the  other,  it  is  the  victory  of  the  resurrection- working  power  of 
God.  The  "  excellency  "  of  the  power  which  works  the  daily  wonder,  guarantees, 
and  will  by-and-  by  make  real,  the  weight  of  glory  which  grows  from  "  excellency  " 
to  ^''excellency."  [Same  words.  ISTote  also  i.  8.]  The  eternal  victory  is  but  the 
present  daily  victory  *'  writ  large."  (2)  "  Not  distressed  ;  "  there  is  always  "  the 
way  of  escape."  The  close-hemming  foes — men  and  circumstances — are  never 
suffered  to  complete  and  close  up  their  environing  circle.  The  thieshing-roller 
has  its  limit  of  weight ;  our  strength  of  patient  endurance  is  always  just  a  little 
more  than  the  heaped -up  burdens.  Frail  as  is  the  vessel,  it  is  always  made 
strong  enough  for  its  purpose.  "  Not  in  despair  ;  "  the  word  is  alway  heard  ; 
*'  I  have  given  thee  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope  "  (Hos.  ii.  15) ;  somehow 
it  is  always  possible  for  the  pilgrims  to  walk  out  of  Giant  Despair's  castle  j  they 
have  a  master  key  for  every  door.  "  Not  forsaken  ;  "  the  army  of  Christ  has  no 
stragglers  who  are  left  behind  to  perish  ;  the  weakest,  who  falls  out  of  the 
ranks  when  the  pursuit  is  hot,  is  never  abandoned.  The  Captain  Himself  is  the 
rear-guard  for  His  host.  "  Not  destroyed ;  "  the  touch  of  mother  earth,  when 
they  are  stricken  down  or  thrown  in  the  wrestle,  seems  to  set  them,  Antaeus-like, 
on  their  feet  again.  The  wrestler  is  flung  upon  the  ground,  but  never  appeals 
in  vain  to  his  King  and  Master,  Who  from  His  throne  is  watching  the  struggle ; 
it  is  not  He  Who,  with  thumb  turned  down,  will  leave  him  to  his  adversary  and 
his  fate.  (3)  "  Worketh  out."  Which  is  more  than  merely  victory,  and  much 
more  than  deliverance.  It  is  the  strain  of  the  paean  of  Rom.  viii.  57,  "  more 
than  conquerors."  The  trials  have  helped  the  afflicted  man.  He  has  not  only 
been  through  them,  but  on  them  has  levied  contribution  toward  his  best 
welfare.  He  has  not  only  escaped,  but  they  have  helped  and  enriched  him; 
"  One  more  such  victory,  and  I  am  ruined,"  cried  Pyrrhus.  There  have  been 
to  this  conqueror,  Paul,  no  victories  "  only  less  calamitous  than "  defeats. 
Conquerors  !  "  More  than  conquerors  !  "  (4)  Whilst  we  look.  ["  Whilst  Peter 
looked  "  at  His  Master,  he  could  tread  the  waves  ;  they  bore  him  toward  his 
Master.]  Let  a  man  become  secular  in  temper  and  view  and  outlook,  he  will 
soon  find  that  life's  burdens  are  becoming  crushing  in  their  ''  weight."  If  he 
focus  (as  the  photographer  says)  for  the  near,  the  distant  will  become  faint  and 
indistinct.  To  get  his  picture  right,  he  must  focus  by  the  things  ^^  eternal."  He 
focusses  for  an  unseen  object,  but  the  earthly,  temporal  foreground  somehow 
always  thus  comes  right.  In  life's  scheme  and  picture  all  is  then  in  due  and 
true  proportion  and  definition. 

SEPARATE  HOMILIES, 

Ver.  2.  The  Sphere  of  the  Pulpit. —  conduct   of    the   men   of  the   coming 

"  Commending  ourselves  to  every  man!s  generation.      They   have    to   do   with 

conscience."      Of    all    who    teach   the  mind,  and  that  in  its  most  impressible 

religious  teacher  occupies  the  highest  condition.       They   may   give   to   very 

position.      Others   are   giving   in    the  much   of    the   stream   of   the   world's 

school  the  lessons  whose  actualisation  moral   and   social  life   a  tinge  and  a 

shall  be  the  principles  and  habits  and  direction,   as  they  please.      But    the 

463 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS, 


religioiLS   teacher  ought  to  be,  might  preacher   nor  the    hearer    should    be 

be — every   faithful   one    is — one   who  satisfied    if    the    intellectual    exercise 

deals  with  the  conscience.  and  the   satisfaction  it  gives,  be  all. 

I.  With  the  conscience  in  every  man.  This  should  be  made  one  of  the  ap- 
— ^Without  the  physical  senses,  I  could  preaches,  one  of  the  "  parallels,"  by 
never  feel  my  connection  with  this  which  the  spiritual  engineer  seeks  to  get 
material  system, —  the  green  earth  be-  near,  that  so  he  may  seize  the  strong- 
neath  my  feet,  and  the  blue  heavens  hold  of  the  conscience  for  his  Master, 
that  encircle  me,  would  be  nothing  Christ.  "  The  weapons  of  our  warfare 
without  these ;  so  without  this  con-  are  not  carnal  "  (x.  4) ;  the  aims  must 
science,  this  moral  sense,  I  could  have  not  be  carnal  either.  In  the  day  of 
no  idea  either  of  moral  government  or  his  "  success  "  and  gathered  applause 
God.  Had  you  no  conscience,  I  might  and  goodwill,  let  the  preacher  ask, 
as  well  endeavour  to  give  to  one  that  "  Did  I  aim  at,  did  I  reach,  the  con- 
is  born  blind  and  deaf  the  idea  of  science  ? "  In  the  day  of  his  "  failure," 
beauty  and  sweet  sounds,  as  to  give  and  accompanying  despondency,  let 
you  the  idea  of  duty  and  God.  To  him  pray  that  the  "  poor  performance  " 
this  the  religious  teacher  appeals.  may — perhaps  the  better  for  its  poverty 
Expect  him  to  appeal  to  it.  Honour  — have  reached  a  conscience.  Let  the 
him  in  proportion  as  he  does.  hearer    ask    for    a    preacher   who   is 

1.  There  is  a  ministry  which  reaches  mighty  with  the  conscience. 
the  conscience   through  the  passions. —  2.  ''^ Every  maris    conscience^ — The 

Hope     and    fear     are    appealed    to ;  torpid;   those   that   have    never   been 

emotions  are  stirred,  tears   flow;    the  awakened,  or   who,  having  been  once 

fear  of  wrath  leads  up  to  a  sense  of  aroused,  have  relapsed  into  insensibility 

sin   and   guilt.     There   is   a    ministry  again.     Unhappily  the  most  commonly 

which  aims  at  the  ^ma^^7^a^^07^.    Beauty  occurring  condition  of  the  conscience, 

is  the  idea.     Whatever  in  thought  or  Turn    over    the    pages    of     universal 

form,  in  sentiment  or  style,  will  please  history ;     look     the    world    through  ; 

the  taste  Or  charm  the  fancy  are  freely  search  its  literature,  institutions,  trades, 

introduced.    Truth  is  cast  into  sonorous  professions,  amusements  ;  you  see  the 

periods,  and  presented  in  poetic  pictures.  flames   of  passion   reddening  the  sky 

No   reason   why   not,   if    only   all   be  of  ages ;  the  creations  of  the  imagination 

consecrated  to  the  use  of  reaching,  in  filling  the  horizon  ;  the  inventions  of 

order  to  awaken,  the  conscience.     The  genius,  the  theories  of   intellect,  piled 

attention  must  first  be  arrested,  some-  mountains  high  on  every  hand ;   but 

how  ;  else  the  preacher  is  a  dead  failure.  the  activity  of  Conscience  all  but  absent 

The  wrong  is  done,  when  the  catching  and  unknown.    The  alarmed  and  guilty 

and    satisfying    of     the    imagination  conscience,    with    its    fear    of    wrath, 

becomes  in  itself  the  goal  of  the  aim  vain    struggles    against    the   tyranny 

of  the  preacher,  and  the  only  desire  of  of  Sin,  all  the  experiences  of  Rom  vii., 

the  hearer.     So  of  the  ministry  which  consciousness   of   accumulating   trans 

aims   mainly  at  the  intellect.     Verbal  gression,  and  so  of  accumulating  guilt, 

criticism,  philosophic  discussions,  subtle  The     peaceful,      victorious     conscience. 

distinctions,  ingenious  hypotheses,  are  From   which   the   sense   of   guilt   has 

the  staple  of   its  discourses,  with  the  been    removed;     which    has     won    a 

accompanying  danger  that    the  whole  conquest  over  all  the  inner  antagonists 

should    be   exclusively   an  intellectual  of  the  soul;  which  soul  has  ascended 

performance.    "  Commending  ourselves  the   throne  within   the   man,  grasped 

to  every  man's  intellect,"  by  all  means.  the  sceptre,  and  is  ever  carrying  out 

Religion  has  nothing  to  fear — revealed  the  will  of  God,  and  rejoicing  in  God 

doctrine    has    nothing   to   fear — from  through    Christ,    by    Whom    it    has 

fair,  sober,  reasonable   reason  and  in-  "received  the  Atonement."     For  each 

tellectual   scrutiny.     But   neither  the  of   these    the    true   pulpit   must    have 

464 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


its  message  ;  the  true  Christian  teacher 
is  the  man  who  has  the  word  for 
each,  which  it  at  once  recognises  as 
the  message  from  God,  just  adapted  to 
its  necessity. 

II.  Through  the  medium  of  "the 
truth." — Paul  saw  "truth"  every- 
where, breathing  in  pagan  systems, 
sparkling  in  philosophic  speculations, 
circulating  in  the  general  current  of 
common  language  and  common  life. 
But  to  his  mind.  The  Truth — that 
which  humanity  wanted  to  raise  it  from 
its  fallen  state — the  sin-correcting,  soul- 
saving  truth,  was  this :  The  special 
revelation  of  God  developed  in  the 
teaching,  embodied  in  the  life,  illustrated 
and  concentrated  and  energised  in  the 
death,  of  Christ.  This  central  Truth 
alone  could  uncover  in  dayhght  the 
awful  heavens  of  being,  and  bless  with 
new  life  and  beauty  this  fallen  earth. 
Paul  could  move,  he  knew,  the  con- 
science of  his  age  by  this  potent 
instrument.  With  this  he  was  an 
Archimedes  who  could  move  a  world. 
Truth  "as  truth  is  in  Jesus"  (Eph. 
iv.  21). 

III.  As  under  the  felt  inspection 
of  Almighty  God. — Paul  *'  set  the  Lord 
always  before  him " ;  he  toiled  and 
suffered  "as  seeing  Him  Who  is 
invisible."  This  abiding  consciousness 
of  the  Divine  inspection  would  remove 
three  hindrances  to  the  work  of  the 
preacher.  1 .  Man  fear.  By  all  means 
let  the  preacher — every  thoughf ul  man 
will — have  a  deep  awe  as  he  stands  in 
the  presence  of  souls,  every  one  of  them 
an  heir  of  the  interminable  hereafter, 
every  one  an  originating  fountain  of 
everlasting,  ever-effective  influence — 
good  or  evil.  He  may  well  tremble  as 
he  presumes  to  influence  for  eternity 
deathless  intelligences,  "/ti  the  sight 
of  God  "  will  deepen  this,  but  it  would 
destroy  the  enervating,  enslaving,  in- 
ordinate over- anxiety  to  avoid  the 
hearer's  disfavour,  and  to  ensure  his 
praise  and  approbation.  2.  Affectation. 
In  the  felt  presence  of  the  conscience, 
and,  still  more,  of  God,  a  man  will 
become,  and  will  be  kept,  real.  3. 
Didness.     The  man  who  is  desperately 


in  earnest  to  get  at,  and  grapple  with, 
the  conscience,  and  that  by  means 
which  he  can  honestly  employ  as  "  in 
the  sight  of  GodJ^  will  never  be  dull. 
And  there  will  be  no  "  commendation  '* 
to  the  best  sense  of  the  hearer  like 
this  of  the  evident  aim,  and  still  more 
of  the  success,  at  reaching  and  blessing 
the  conscience.  That  is  the  type  of 
minister  who  will  always  command  an 
audience.  He  may  offend  some,  may 
lose  many,  but  he  will  be  sought  by 
the  men  of  conscience.  He  will  always 
have  a  clientele.  There  is  always 
amongst  "the  masses"  the  demand 
for  a  man  who  can  reach,  and  teach, 
and  guide  to  rest,  the  conscience  in 
men. — Suggested  by  "  Homilist"  ii.  225. 

Ver.  3.  Veiling  the  Gospel.  —  Two 
noteworthy  things  here  : — 

A.  A  veiled  revelation. 

B.  A  redeemed  man  lost. 

1.  1.  Amazing  !  Two  purposes  of  God 
crossed  and  thwarted.  "  Re-vel-dX\on  %  " 
The  very  word  means  the  drawing 
^ack  of  a  veil.  An  evil  will  is  seen 
inEerposing  a  veil  again !  A  man 
"  for  whom  Christ " — ^mark  that,  no 
other,  no  less,  than  Christ — "  died," 
"lost.*'  Now  in  the  process  of  being 
lost, — such  is  the  force  of  Paul's  present 
participle.  It  is  the  mystery  to  thought ; 
a  mystery  which  sooner  or  later 
"  brings  us  up  "  sharply,  as  if  before  a 
dead  wall  that  stops  all  further  pro- 
gress in  our  knowledge,  in  all  inquiries 
on  moral  questions.  The  Problem  of 
Evil;  the  Problem  of  Will.  The 
marvel  that  the  Creator  has  made  so 
many  of  His  own  handiwork  to  possess 
a  Self  so  like  His  own  in  its  self- 
determining  power,  that  it  can  use  its 
power  to  say  "  No  "  to  its  very  Maker 
and  His  purpose  and  desire. 

2.  The  revelation  is  a  Gospel. — 
Thoroughly,  and  only,  practical  in  its 
object  and  scope ;  not  at  all  to  help 
speculation,  or  merely  to  give  certain 
knowledge,  even  on  the  topics  most 
urgent  to  the  inquiring  intellect. 
For  ages,  behind  the  veil,  God  had 
been  preparing  for  the  day  when  it 
should  please  Him  that  *'the  mystery 

HH  465 


GHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    IL   CORINTHIANS. 


hidden  from  ages  and  generations," 
"  the  mystery  which  had  been  kept 
in  silence  through  times  eternal," 
should  at  last  be  "  made  manifest " 
(Rom.  xvi.  25).  At  last,  like  some 
completed  statue  beneath  its  covering, 
it  stood  waiting  for  the  moment — it 
came  at  Pentecost — when  the  veil 
should  be  lifted,  and  The  Gospel  stand 
out  in  all  its  perfection  of  salvation- 
beauty.  [A  sub-section  of  this  revela- 
tion is  in  Isa.  xxvii.  7,  and  2  Tim.  i.  10. 
All  heathen,  all  natural  life — to  some 
extent  even  Jewish  life — was  spent 
under  the  overspreading  "  shadow  of 
death."  A  terror  and  a  bondage 
(Heb.  ii.  15)  to  thought  and  heart. 
In  the  Gospel  of  Christ — of  the  dying 
and  risen  Christ — the  meaning  of 
death,  and  the  certainty  of  a  life  be- 
yond death,  and  the  hope  of  blessedness 
in  that  life — all  stood  out  in  the  only 
certain,  serviceable  light  which  man- 
kind possesses.  It  was  revelation  of 
the  morning,  when  "Light  shines  out 
of  darkness."  Night  is  a  "  covering  " 
cast  over  all  creation.  What  under 
its  veil  the  great  creative  forces  are 
silently  producing,  is  unseen  till  the 
day  dawns,  and  "  brings  to  light " 
what  was  there  all  the  while,  but  under 
the  veil.] 

3.  The  central  Fact,  the  central  Figure, 
of  the  Gospel  is  Christ. — He  is  in 
Himself  a  Revelation ;  His  very  ap- 
pearance amongst  men  is  a  Gospel. 
The  ambassador  of  England  resident  in 
Paris  is,  in  his  very  residence  there,  a 
token  of  peace  and  amity  between  the 
two  nations.  [His  absence  or  with- 
drawal would  be  understood  to  mean 
ruptured  relations.]  Christ  going  in 
and  out  amongst  men  for  thirty -three 
years  was  in  Himself  a  message  of 
peace,  a  message  of  goodwill,  from 
God  to  men.  [Then,  as  below  in 
ver.  6,  He  discloses  God  to  men's 
mind  and  heart;  in  a  fashion  also 
which  is  "  good-news "  of  God,  as  well 
as  from  Him.] 

II.  But  there  is  a  velation,  over 
against  this  revelation.  There  is  a 
veiler  as  well  as  a  Revealer. 

1.    The    blindness  is  moral.  —  The 

466 


"mmcZ"  is  "blinded";  but  the  mis- 
chief goes  deeper  ;  to  the  "  conscience  " 
(ver.  2),  and  the  "heart"  (ver.  6). 
The  man  who  on  these  topics  is  en- 
lightened in  mind,  knows  that  the  light 
reached  the  mind  through  these 
channels.  "After  all,  it  is  to  moral 
causes  that  we  must  assign  a  main 
influence  in  the  .  .  .  prevalence  of 
unbelief.  *  Our  systems  of  philosophy,' 
said  Fichte,  *are  very  often  but  the 
reflex  of  our  hearts  and  lives.'  .  .  . 
Each  man's  position  towards  Chris- 
tianity is  ultimately  determined  by  the 
inward  condition  of  his  heart  and  will. 
.  .  .  Action  must  go  before  know- 
ledge (John  vii.  17),  and  a  certain 
inward  condition  prepare  the  way  for 
the  Gospel  message.  To  understand 
the  truth  we  must  first  stand  in  it 
(Jer.  xxiii.  18  ;  2  John  9),  or  at  least 
be  willing  to  enter  and  submit  to  it. 
Wherever  there  is  a  real  [ignorance  of 
and]  aversion  to  the  Gospel,  ethical 
causes  have  much  to  do  with  it.  There 
is  something  humiliating  in  the  first 
aspect  of  all  Christian  truth.  It  re- 
minds us  of  personal  responsibility,  of 
personal  shortcomings.  It  wounds  our 
natural  pride  and  self-sufficiency.  .  .  . 
How  hard  it  is  to  many  great  and 
aspiring  spirits  to  come  down  from 
their  high  estate  and  confess  to  guilt 
and  error  !  For  others  Christianity 
has  too  much  that  is  alarming.  It 
makes  of  human  life  so  serious  a  thing  ; 
it  warns  so  solemnly  of  the  nearness  of 
eternity,  and  the  certainty  of  future 
judgment ;  its  sign  of  the  cross  reminds 
us  so  awfully  of  the  Divine  holiness 
and  the  hatefulness  of  sin.  Too  many 
also  are  not  prepared  to  fight  their 
way  through  all  these  terrors  to  real 
and  solid  peace,  and  catch  at  the  idlest 
doubts  and  shallowest  surprises  to 
escape  from  the  pressure  of  unwelcome 
truths.  What  pride  does  for  the 
former  class,  fear  does  for  those  in  de- 
terring them  from  embracing  the  faith 
of  the  Gospel.  And  as  for  both  these 
classes  the  entrance  to  the  way  of  life  is 
found  too  strait,  so  for  many  others  the 
way  itself  has  proved  too  narrow.  Their 
love  of  ease  refuses  to  engage  in  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


striving  after   holiness  ;  their  love  of  and  in  himself  the  antithesis,  of  God — 

gain  and  worldly  honour  shrinks  from  the   anti-God,  the  anti-Christ.     Good 

the  thorny  path  of  humihty  and  self-  Spirit  and  evil, — both  are  disclosures  of 

denial.      With    many,   alas !    sins   of  Revelation.     And,  in  closest  analogy, 

sensuality  are   either   parents  or   off-  just  in  the  same  sense,  and  so  far,  as 

spring  of  unbelief  ;  nay,  every  sin  may  all  good  is  referable  to  the  Holy  Spirit, 

be  regarded  as  a  step  in  that  direction."  without  (in  a  true  sense)  taking  any 

(Christlieb,    Modern     Doubt,    p.    26.)  merit    from    the    man ;    so,    without 

Vice,  worldliness,  self-worship  are  most  taking    any    responsibility   from    the 

common,  and  most  fatally  dense  "  veils."  man,  all  evil  is  referable  to  the  Evil 

[Even  as  renunciation  of  self,  consecra-  Spirit.     Man  blinds  his  own  eyes  ;  yet 

tion   to   Christ,    holy   and   serviceable  "  the  God  of  this  world  blinds  the  eyes  of 

living    amongst    men,    gracious    sub-  them  that  believe  not."    In  all  the  moral 

mission   to   God's   hand   when    under  causes  above  suggested,  he  is  at  work, 

trial,  are  most  fruitful  preparatives  of  III.  "  The  eyes  .  .  .  them    that  be- 

a  heart  for  receiving  the  revelation.]  lieve  not  .  .  .  them   that    are    (being) 

2.  Men  can  blind  their  own  eyes. —  lost." — These  stand  in  closest  connec- 
To  see  requires  light  and  eyes.  God  tion  in  the  text,  and  in  the  closest 
has  given  both.  Man  can  close  his  relation  in  fact.  Man  has  eyes  for  the 
eyes  to  the  light.  [Has  eyelids  as  well  supernatural  world  ;  eyes  which  may 
as  eyes.]  Cannot  give  himself  light ;  "see  God."  To  believe  is  to  use  these 
but  can  make  darkness  for  himself,  eyes.  They  who  see  not,  who  believe 
But —  not,  are  already  "the  lost."     To  have 

3.  Their  action  is  referred  to  a  power,  these  things  eternally  "hidden  from 
a  person,  behind  them,,  "  the  god  of  this  the  eyes  "  is  to  be  "  lost "  for  ever. 
world." — His  culminating  temptation  [Though  this  may  include  more  than  the 
to  the  Representative  of  mankind  was  mere  penalty  of  loss,  the  poena  damni.] 
that   he   should  be  accepted  as  "  the 

God    of    our    Lord     Jesus    Christ  !  "  Ver.  6.  The  Glory  of  God, 

"  Fall  down  and  worship  me  !  "     The  I.  Revealed 

world  is  found  bowing  before  his  seat  II.  Received. 

(Rev.  ii.  13) ;  as  Shadrach,  Meshach,  III.  Reflected. 

Abed-nego  stood  erect  amidst  a  plain-  I.  Revealed  in  the  face  of  Christ. — 

ful  of  prostrate  "  peoples,  nations,  and  We  are  the  gazing  Israel ;    Christ  is 

languages,"  so  the  man   "  not  of  the  more  than  our  Moses.     He  is  showing 

world  even  as  "  his  Master  was   not,  no  reflected  "  glory  "  ;  He  is  an  original 

stands    erect,     exceptional,     singular,  source  of  the  "  glory  "  ;  it  is  His  own. 

to    be   in   consequence   cast   into   the  When,  with  Peter  and  His  brethren, 

furnace  for  his   disconformity.       And  we  are  caught  up  to  some  Mount  of 

the  bait  is  still :  "If  thou  wilt,  .  .  .  Tranfiguration,   and    see  the   face  of 

all    shall    be    thine ! "]      As    behind,  Christ   glorified,    it   is   not   that,   like 

and    in,    and    through,   the   mind  of  Moses'  face.  His  has  been  shone  upon. 

the    inspired    man,    and   the    will   of  It  is  shone  through.     The  native  glory 

the  ordinary   Christian,   there    stands  within — "  the    glory    of    God  " — per- 

and  works  a  Holy  Spirit,   prompting  meates,  penetrates,  irradiates,  the  fea- 

all  good,  giving  all  susceptibility  ;   so  tures.     The  clearest,  fullest,  altogether 

it  is  the  constant,  and  self -consistent,  peculiar,  manifestation  of  God  is  made 

teaching  of  Scripture  that  in  perfect  but  to  "  every  creature  "  in  Christ  and  His 

evil   analogy,  there  stands  and  works  Gospel.     Herein  is — 

behind,    and    in,    and    through,    the  1.  The  one  real  and  direct  expression 

mind,    heart,    will   of    man    an    Evil  of  God. — The   Infinite  brought  down. 

Personality,  an  Evil  Spirit,  who  has  softened,   adapted  to   man's   capacity, 

made  it  his  business   to   counterwork  [Can  bear  to  gaze  at   the  sun  when 

the  work  of  God ;  who  is  the  opponent,  reflected  in  the  still  pool.]     In  nature 

467 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.  CORINTHIANS, 


we  have  the  indirect,  inferential  reve- 
lation of  God  ;  in  Judaism  the  typical, 
illustrated  revelation  ;  in  Jesus  Christ 
i^  the  direct  and  true. 

2.  An  embodiment  of  Divine  excel- 
lencies in  a  living  person, — In  their 
abstract  presentation  the  attributes 
of  God  are  too  little  effective  with  the 
heart  and  conscience.  Men  cannot 
rest  in  abstractions,  nor  j&nd  much 
help  in  them.  They  want  the  con- 
crete ;  they  can  only  rest  in  a  Person. 

3.  This  personal  exhibition  is  human 
in  character. — The  essential  holiness 
proper  to  the  Godhead  is  shown, 
though  in  the  midst  of  the  or- 
dinary conditions  and  surroundings 
ol  humanity. 

4.  All  this  is  in  perfect  exhibition. — 
In  other  revelations  of  God  men 
have  the  divided,  in  some  the  dis- 
torted, beam ;  here  in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ  shines  the  whole,  pure, 
perfect  light  of  God. 

II.  Received  into  human  hearts. — 
Analogy,  Scripture,  Fact,  all  show  the 
necessity  of  a  heart  preparation  for 
receiving  the  glory.  The  light  shines 
*  on  the  material  world;  it  shines  into 
the  adapted  manhood  with  its  eye. 

1.  This  is  specially  a  heart  preparation. 
— The  carnal  mind,  at  enmity  against 
God's  law,  cannot  perceive  the  beauty 
of  holiness ;  how  should  it  ?  Or  how 
should  the  narrow,  petrified,  selfish 
heart  realise   a  love   as   wide   as  the 

7  world,  stooping  from  the  highest  glory 
^to  the  deepest  abasement,  giving  itself 

unto    death    that    others    may    have 

eternal  life  ? 

2.  This  preparation  is  a  great  and 
Divine  work. — *'  Religious  truths  do 
not  grow  out  of  logic  ;  but  pre-suppos- 
ing  certain  spiritual  tendencies  and 
affections,  they  arise  from  immediate 
contact  of  the  soul  with  God,  from  a 
beam  of  God's  light,  penetrating  the 
mind  that  is  allied  to  Him."  The 
heart's  eyes  sometimes  unclose  as  if 
under  the  brightening    beams   of   the 

.morning,  gently  and  almost  uncon- 
sciously. Sometimes  a  lightning-flash 
arouses  and  alarms.  But  the  opening 
of  the  eye  is  of  God.     **  Whose  heart 

468 


the  Lord  [Christ]  opened  "  (Acts  xvi. 
14).  All  the  capacity  for  this  revelation 
found  in  the  child  or  in  the  heathen 
is  of  God,  the  work  of  His  Spirit  upon 
the  universal  heart. 

III.  Eeflected  upon,  and  into,  other 
eyes  and  hearts. — The  Son  of  Righ- 
teousness shines  upon  men  largely 
through  the  instrumentality  of  men. 
All  who  have  received  are  under  obli-  "| 
gation  to  reflect  upon,  and  impart  to,  \ 
others  the  light.  ["  Holding  forth 
the  word  of  life"  (Phil.  ii.  15,  16)  as 
"lights  (  =  light  bearers)  in  the  world," 
suggests  a  company  holding  out  and 
up,  at  arm's  length,  high  above  their 
head,  the  Light  which  may  guide 
other  souls  through  the  darkness  to 
the  source  of  Light  for  themselves. 

"Take  up  the  torch,  and  wave  it  wide, 
The  torch  that  lights  life's  thickest  gloom."] 

— Some  suggestions  from 
"  Homilist;'  vii.  253. 

Ver.  7.  "  Treasure  in  earthen  vessels." 
I.  The  Gospel  a  treasure. — An  un- 
expected, suddenly  new  illustration. 
It  was  ^^  light  ^'  in  ver.  6.  1.  As  there 
it  first  illumined  the  preachers'  hearts, 
so  here  it  is  treasure  which  has  first 
enriched  themselves ;  there,  they  next 
must  endeavour  to  make  it  shine  into 
other  hearts;  here,  they  must  endea- 
vour with  the  Gospel  to  *'  make  many 
rich."  The  preacher  can  only  give 
what  he  has  first  received;  can  only 
enrich  others  with  what  is  first  riches 
to  himself ;  can  only  preach  what  he 
knows,  if  his  preaching  is  to  have  the 
power  even  of  reality,  to  say  nothing 
of  spirituality.  2.  It  is  the  ons  know- 
ledge, happiness,  power,  which  is  an 
eternal  possession  to  man.  All  else  is 
valuable  relatively  to  the  time  and  the 
man,  only  :  this  absolutely,  in  relation 
to  God  and  eternity.  "  Wealth  is  what 
has  exchange  value."  No  other  has 
exchange  value  at  the  bar  of  God,  or 
even  it  the  hour  of  death.  There  are 
men  with  barns  full  to  bursting,  yet 
**  not  rich  toward  God"  (Luke  xii.  21). 
Many  a  wise,  fair,  lovable  life  in  the 
congregation  is  enriched  with  many 
"  goodly  pearls,"   but    not   with   that 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


"  one  pearl  of  great  price,"  with  which 
it  is  natural  to  link  this  text.     "  Cold 
water  to  a  thirsty  soul "  is  this  "  good 
news  from  the  heavenly  country  "  to  an 
anxious  sinner.  What  is  the  "  wealth  " 
of  a  caravan  crossing  a  desert  ?  Water, 
before  all  things  besides ;    water,  just 
then,  and  just  there ;    as  the  Gospel  is 
wealth  to  a  soul  unsatisfied  with  any- 
thing that  earth  can  give.    ["  What  best 
gift  shall  I  get  for  my  children  ? "     See 
to  it  that  they  are  enriched  with  this.] 
It  has    enriched    the    world    with   its 
grandest  ideas  of  God,  of  immortality, 
truth,    purity ;     giving    the    highest 
certainty   and   authority   available   to 
man  in  regard  to  these  high  themes. 
["  What  is  the  world's  greatest  posses- 
sion to-day  ?  "      Before    every    other 
answer,    Paul    would    put    his   own : 
"  The  Gospel  of  God  in  Christ."]     [See 
how  this  enriching  of  the  world  with 
hope,  and  light,  and  moral  power,  and 
God  (Eph.  ii.  12),  is  interwoven  with 
the  rejection  of  Israel  (Rom.  xi.  12).] 
II.  The    preachers    are     earthen 
vessels. — 1.  Like   the    earthen    crock 
in    which,    perhaps,    the    ploughman 
found  the   "treasure  hid  in  a   field." 
It  had  no   value   comparatively,  and 
very   little   intrinsically.       The   lucky 
discoverer   of    the    "  treasure "    would 
not   preserve  the   pot;   if   indeed   his 
ploughshare  did  not,  by  breaking  this, 
reveal  the  gold  within.    [In  the  "  great 
house"  of  2  Tim.  ii.  19,  20  there  are 
"  for    the    master's    use  "    "  vessels  " 
(N.B.    not     necessarily     vases     only  ; 
the  word    is    vaguely   wide   and   aU- 
inclusive)    of    "  gold   and    silver,"    as 
well    as    wooden    and    earthen   ones. 
All    "unto    honour"    and    "fit"   for 
service  if   "  purified,"  those  of  humbler 
material     as     well     as     of     costlier. 
No     necessity     to     force     into     com- 
parison  two   quite    independent    uses 
of  the   same  figure   of   "vessel."     If 
one  is  to   illustrate  the  other  at  all, 
it  may  perhaps  be  said  that  oftener, 
for  the   reason   which   concludes   this 
verse,  God  uses  the  earthen  rather  than 
the   golden   or   silver   vessel,  for  this 
particular  purpose.      (The  golden  and 
the  silver  ones  have  their  use.)]     The 


humble  "  vessel "  may  often  enrich 
with  its  contents  a  soul  of  far  nobler 
calibre  in  all  natural  capacities.  The 
humble  "  local  preacher,"  or  perhaps 
only  "  exhorter  " — in  Primitive  Metho- 
dist terminology — is  forgotten,  was 
forgotten  almost  immediately,  his 
name  a  matter  since  of  vehement 
dispute,  who  "  enriched "  the  soul  of 
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.  Many  a 
man  who  received  the  treasure  from 
Paul  himself  would  hardly  see  more 
than  the  Tarsian  Jew,  the  tent -maker, 
in  poor  health,  full  of  "  tears,"  beyond 
most  men  dependent  upon  sympathy, 
talking  a  provincial  sort  of  Greek, 
scouted  and  hunted  by  his  own 
nationality.  Paul  was  by  no  means 
to  many  converts  the  "vessel  of 
gold "  we  prize  in  him ;  in  himself 
a  real  wealth  to  the  universal  Church ; 
set  high  in  the  "  Great  House  "  as  not 
only  useful,  but  as  a  glorious  adorn- 
ment to  it. 

2.  Treasure  holders. — That  only.  [As 
the  sun  in  Gen.  i.  is  only  a  light-bearer ; 
light  is  independent  of  the  sun,  and 
known  in  Genesis,  as  in  science,  to  be 
anterior  to  it.]  Paul  and  his  fellow- 
workers  do  not  make  the  Gospel  which 
they  carry  about  and  dispense.  The 
"  vessel  "  is  the  mere  "  holder  "  ;  con- 
taining, until  it  can  pour  out,  the  trea- 
sure. Simply  first  filled  and  then  kept 
full,  that  they  may  fill  the  need  of 
others.  Without  intrinsic  value  ;  con- 
tainers ;  and  besides — 

3.  Frail. — Yet,  as  vers.  8-12  show, 
endowed  with  a  wonderful  tenacity, 
kept  by  "  the  excellency  of  the  power  "  ', 
sorely  "  knocked  about  yet  not  broken," 
so  long  as  the  Master  needs  them  to 
hold  and  carry  about  His  "  treasure." 
Still  only  "  earthen^  The  minister  is 
a  man.  The  Spirit  of  God  must  do 
His  work  through  his  manhood,  and 
through  his  particular  type  of  man- 
hood ;  through  his  specialties  (and 
frailties)  of  mental — and  to  some  ex- 
tent of  moral — characteristics.  The 
human  medium  will  afiect  the  Truth 
in  no  small  degree.  This  treasure 
takes  something  from  the  human 
"  vessel "    which    contains    it.       The 

469 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II,   CORINTHIANS. 


make   and    temper   of    the    "  vessel " 
will     affect     the     delivery     of      the 
riches.     (1)  The  minister  will  remem- 
ber  this ;    nor    be    too   absolute   and 
positive,  as  though  he  could  not  err. 
(2)    The   people   will    remember   this; 
nor  expect  anything  but  an  earthen, 
— very  human — vessel.      It  will  save 
mistake  on  both  sides,  and  disappoint- 
ment, to  remember  that  the  "  vessels  " 
are  men.     Committees  and   ordaining 
boards  must  remember  that  no  ideally 
perfect  men  are  to  be  found  for  the 
ministry.     They  must  take  "  earthen 
vessels,"    or   none   at   all.       However, 
thei/  are  frail,  fragile.     The  daily  fail- 
ing  of    the  "earthly    [though,    N.B., 
not    "  earthen,"    as    here]    house    of 
the  tabernacle "  is   already  in  Paul's 
thought.    (See  Critical  Notes,  ver.  12.) 
Every    year    sees    the    "  vessel "    the 
worse   for   wear.     "  He   is   breaking," 
men  say  of  the  old  minister;  whether 
with   a   loving   tenderness   of   charity 
that  understands  and  allows  for  failing 
powers,    or   with   an   impatience  that 
would   hastily   put   the   old    "  vessel " 
aside  for  one  of  a  newer  pattern  or 
stronger  make. 

III.  This  secures  the  fulfilment  of 
a  great  purpose. — It  is  so  plainly  the 
treasure,  and  not  the  "vessel,"  which 
has  value;  it  is  so  manifest  that  the 
man  himself  is  not  an  adequate  explana- 
tion of  the  success  of  the  work,  that  the 
thought  and  heart  of  man  "  enriched  " 
turns  instinctively  elsewhere  for  ex- 
planation. *'  This  is  the  finger  of 
God "  must  be  the  verdict  in  every 
conversion.  Nobody  more  than  the 
true  minister  of  Christ  rejoices  to 
stand  back  and  be  forgotten  in  the 
first  joy  of  the  soul  who  has  found 
the  riches.  "  Earthen  vessels"  so  mani- 
festly inadequate  in  themselves  to 
accomplish  the  evangelising  of  a  world, 
or  even  of  a  Roman  empire,  that  the 
success  of  Christianity  becomes  an 
argument  for  its  Divine  origin.  Now 
that  the  issue  is  no  longer  doubtful, 
Gamaliel's  argument  has  new  point. 

Vers.  17,  18.  A  Contrast  and  a  Con- 
nection.— "  Our  light  affliction"  etc. 

470 


I.      A     contrast.  —  *'  Affliction  ;  " 
"  glory."      "  Light  ;  "    ^^far  more  ex- 
ceeding   weight."   (Observe  in   Critical 
Notes.)    ^' For  a  moment;"  '^eternal." 
1.  What   an   exposition  of  '■^  our  light 
affliction  "  is  given  in  Paul's  own  case 
in  vers.  8-11,  and  more  wonderfully  in 
xi.    23 — xii.    10  !      In   the   experience 
and  observation  of  the  people  of  God 
nothing  puts  greater  strain  upon  faith 
in  the  wisdom  and   love  of  God  than 
the   convergence   of    many,   and   many 
kinds   of,  trial  upon  one  single  head. 
Any  one  would  have  been  enough,  we 
think  ;  yet  they  are  cumulative.     [Be- 
fore the  smart  of  one  stroke  has  ceased 
to  be  acute,  and  whilst  indeed  the  heart 
is    still    smarting,     another    stinging 
stroke  seems  to  fall ;    another  follows 
quickly,  and    sometimes    on   the  same 
place,    on    the    old    wound.]      Faith, 
too,  is  tested  by  the  fact  that  the  ac- 
cumulation is  often  upon  the  head  of 
that   one    of   God's    children    who,    it 
seem  to  others,  might  best  have  been 
spared  any  stroke  at  all ;    who  seems 
to    need   it   least,  for   rebuke   or    for 
education  in  holiness.    The  burdens  are 
heaped,  it  sometimes  appears,  heaviest 
and  most  numerous  upon  the  holiest. 
Paul  says,    "  Our  light   affliction."     2. 
Set   over   against   this   a    "  weight   of 
glory."      Perhaps   not   very   definitely 
conceived    even   in  Paul's  own  mind. 
At  most,  probably,  there  is  suggestion 
of  a  balance,  in  whose  scales  the  Now 
and  the  Then,  the  "  affliction  "  and  the 
''^ glory"   are   poised   one   against    the 
other.     [As   in   Kom.    viii.    18,    "not 
worthy   to    he   compared   with."]     He 
watches  the   scale   heaped  up  on  the 
affliction  side,    yet  rising  outweighed, 
and  he  cries  to  it  triumphantly :  "  Ah  ! 
afflictions   mine,    ye    are   weighed   in 
the    balances    and    found   wanting ! " 
Yet,  as  the  afflictions  are  a  burden, 
so  we  may  suggest  what,  measured  by 
our  earthly   standards    and   strength, 
a  burden  would  even  glory  itself  be. 
The  vessel  often  all  but  breaks,  with 
even  the  foretaste  of  the  future  given 
into  the   heart  of   the   child  of  God. 
Yet  see  how  the  immortal  vigour  of 
that  life  contains,  carries,  that  weight 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  iv. 


of  glory  !  '*  Heavy  "  and  "  light "  are 
relative  terms  to  strength  :  The  "  light 
afflictions "  are  all  but  overwhelming 
to  earthly  powers,  even  when  reinforced 
by  the  grace  of  God.  That  "  exceeding 
weight"  sits  ^^ light"  upon  the  strength 
of  the  life  eternal.  Everything  is  re- 
vised in  the  presence  of  the  eternal 
world  :  "  Whilst  we  look"  etc.  Turn 
away  the  eyes  from  that,  and  every- 
thing adjusts  itself  to  the  earthly 
standard ;  the  strength  reverts  to  the 
earthly  measurement.  The  vision  of 
the  "  things  eternal"  is  a  real  power  to 
us  amidst  "  the  things  temporal."  Let 
a  man  be  lifted  to  the  level  of  those 
and  look  down  upon  these  ;  let  a  man's 
life  be  enlarged  to  the  scale  of  the 
"eternal,"  with  all  his  views  and 
standards  of  judgment  enlarged  ac- 
cordingly, and  he  understands  *'  this 
light  affliction."  He  anticipates  the 
estimate  of  the  eternal  world.  The 
principle  of  the  process  is  seen  at  work 
on  a  small  scale  in  every-day  life.  With 
what  leaden  feet  the  hours  creep  along 
when  aching  temples  count  the  number 
by  their  throbs  !  Or  when  a  man  must 
stand  awaiting  the  fall  of  certain 
calamity,  and  can  only  hang  down 
helpless  hands  and  wait.  Or  when  his 
heart  carries  day  after  day  a  load  of 
anxiety  or  sorrow,  or  smarts  under 
wrong,  or  slander,  or  persecution,  or 
misconception,  or  misrepresentation. 
Or  when,  hour  after  hour,  the  mind  is 
chained  to  thoughts  which  will  not  be 
shaken  off.  Such  a  day  takes  a  great 
deal  of  living  through  !  Every  such 
hour  seems  lengthened  to  a  day;  a  day, 
and  much  more  a  year,  of  perplexity, 
of  tried  faith,  of  walking  in  darkness, — 
they  seem  an  eternity !  By-and-by, 
when  the  cloud  is  gone ;  when  pain  is 
over;  when  all  perplexing  circumstances 
are  resolved  into  clear,  plain  provi- 
dential love;  when  the  year  that' 
seemed  endless  has  become  only  one  of 
the  thirty,  forty,  fifty  in  the  review  of 
the  past  life ;  then  all  becomes  simply 
a  passage  in  the  story  of  life, — "the  tale 
that  is  told," — exceptional  and  brief. 
Even  a  year  becomes  by-and-by  only 
a  bar  of  shadow — rather  broad,  per- 


haps, but  only  a  bar — thrown  across  a 
path  whose  whole  extent  beside  shows 
as  a  line  of  light.  After  a  little  lapse 
of  time  the  proportions  of  things  come 
out  more  clearly  ;  the  "  endless "  day, 
the  "  interminable "  year,  become 
mere  episodes  and  incidental  passages 
in  the  whole  life-story.  Let  a  man 
write  to  a  sympathetic  friend,  out  of 
"  the  thick "  of  it  all ;  he  fills  sheet 
after  sheet ;  every  detail  is  of  import- 
ance. Yet  even  then  he  realises,  and 
almost  resents  the  fact,  that  it  is  more 
to  live  through  than  to  write  about. 
And  in  a  year  he  will  summarise  in  a 
page  or  two  all  that  is  salient  in  the 
review ;  in  a  few  years  all  goes  into  a 
sentence,  or  is  dismissed  in  a  written 
line.  So,  in  the  review  from  the  stand- 
point of  the  things  eternal  ["  whilst  we 
look"  etc. ;  cf.  Kom.  viii.  18],  whether 
actually  occupied  or  only  mentally  / 
and  by  anticipation;  if  the  life  be  all 
shadowed  over ;  if  the  pain  last  as 
long  as  the  man  lasts  ;  if  the  one  crush- 
ing sorrow  never  be  lifted,  an  "  affic- 
tion "  to  the  end ;  if  the  long  strain 
never  be  relaxed ;  yet  a  very  brief 
space  in  eternity,  a  very  short  section 
of  the  story  there,  and  that  whole  long 
life  will  become  dwindled  down  to  a 
mere  episode  in  the  eternally  con- 
tinuous life  of  which  "  death "  is 
also  merely  an  incident  not  far  away 
from  the  commencement  of  its  course. 
The  story  of  the  years  which  meant 
so  much  to  live  through  will  become 
merely  a  page  or  two  prefatory  to 
the  main  story,  to  be  gathered  up 
and  dismissed  in  a  thought,  hardly 
indeed  to  be  accounted  of  at  all  in 
the  longer  review  of  life.  The  burden 
whose  weight  was  carried  along  a  road 
which  itself  was  measured  out  by  its 
painful  steps,  will  have  been  decreased 
"  to  scale,"  to  fit  into  the  new  propor- 
tions of  Uf  e,  and  will  be  remembered  as 
"  that  light  affliction "  which  we  once 
carried  ''^just  for  a  moTnent."  In  view 
of  eternity  nothing  is  long  which  is 
terminable;  in  the  presence  of,  and 
actual  enjoyment  of,  heaven,  nothing  is 
heavy  which  only  belongs  to  the  burdens 
of  earth. 

471 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


II.  A  connection. — The  one  "  works 
out "  the  other.  1.  The  course  of  Paul's 
thought,  especially  as  disclosing  itself 
in  the  opening  of  chap,  v.,  makes  it 
evident  that  he,  at  any  rate,  had  mainly 
in  mind  the  ultimate  release  into 
"glory"  by  reason  of  the  body's 
"death."  Sickness,  a  "thorn  in  the 
flesh,"  hunger,  wounds,  weariness,  all  in 
the  broadest  sense  are  forms  of  death. 
They  hasten — they  are — the  destruc- 
tion of  the  bodily  frame,  each  in  its 
measure.  Not  one  of  them  but  con- 
tributes something  to  expedite  the 
loosing  of  the  immortal  part  from  its 
mortal  companion.  Did  the  young 
generation  of  Israelites  look  with  un- 
friendly eyes  upon  the  last  lingering 
few  of  the  old  generation  who  lived  on 
in  the  wilderness  ?  "  When  will  you 
old  men  die  off?  We  cannot  enter 
into  the  land  whilst  you  live." 
So  the  Christian,  though  honouring 
his  redeemed  body,  yet  says  to  it : 
"  Body,  I  cannot  enter  into  my  glory, 
whilst  I  am  tied  fast  to  you.  You  are 
yourself  a  burden,  and  you  bind  me 
to  a  world  of  '  afflictions  '  each  of  which 
is  a  burden  ! "  Everything  which 
helps  forward  "dissolution"  (ver.  1) 
brings  Paul  nearer  to  the  "  weight  of 
glory "  which  is  before  him ;  every- 
thing which  expedites  bodily  death 
is  not  mourned  over,  shrunk  from, 
counted  an  evil,  but  a  good,  an  assist- 
ance ;  "  works  out "  the  happy  issue 
which  is  "  glory."  2.  That  may  have 
been  his  thought ;  but  the  thought  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  Who  so  guided  the 
true  and  natural  expression  of  a  real 
man's  actual  feeling  that  it  became 
a  saying,  permanent,  normal,  for  all 
Christian  experience,  was  more  than 
this.  More  than  the  quasi-mechanical 
removal  of  a  physical  disability  for 
entering  into  the  awaiting  "  glory." 
When  even  Paul  exclaims,  "  Now  is 
.  .  .  salvation  Clearer,"  etc.  (Rom.  xiii. 
11),  there  is  more  than  the  rejoicing 
that  by  mere  lapse  of  time  it  has  every 
night  come  nearer.  "  A  day's  march 
nearer  home  "  is  true,  but  not  all  the 
truth  of  any  Christian  "  hope  "  worthy 
the    name.      If    some    "lotus-eater" 

472 


Christian  simply  folds  his  arms  and 
lets  his  vessel  drift  with  the  stream  of 
time,  then  if  he  be  finally  saved  at  all, 
it  is  true  that  he  is  each  night  "a 
day's  drift  nearer  home."  The  very 
day's  drift  has  in  that  sense  "  worked 
out "  something  towards  the  attainment 
and  enjoyment  of  the  "glory."  But 
"  nearer  than  when  we  believed  "  in- 
cludes a  ripening  for  the  approaching 
heaven.  Men  grow  readier  as  they 
get  nearer.  And  everything  which 
tends  to  ripen,  to  develop,  to  educate 
character,  and  put  it  upon  what  are 
essentially  "heavenly"  lines  even  here, 
is  ^'■working  out"  the  "glory."  There 
would  be  no  "  glory  "  for  a  man  who  is 
not  made  heaven-like  beforehand.  To 
an  unprepared,  uncongenial,  non-corre- 
lated man  heaven — the  place — would 
be  intolerable,  a  hell.  Everything 
which  makes  the  man  receptive, 
prepared  for  the  ready  hereafter  of  a 
prepared  glory,  is  so  far  "  working  out" 
etc.  3.  There  is  a  suggestion  in  the 
figure  of  a  "  \iie-story"  employed  above. 
The  old  epic,  or  dramatic,  unities 
were  made  a  bondage  to  authors, 
yet  there  was  reason  in  them  when 
they  required  that  a  "plot,"  a  plan, 
a  motive,  should  run  through  and  bind 
together  into  a  real  oneness  every  story, 
or  poem,  or  drama  which  was  to  take 
rank  as  a  work  of  art  and  genius.  So 
in  strictness  no  incident  but  such  as 
would  really  help  forward  this  "  plot " 
to  its  development,  was  rightfully 
admissible ;  it  was  a  redundance, 
perhaps  an  excrescence  or  deformity. 
So,  further,  every  personage  who  comes 
upon  the  page  should  in  some  direct 
way  be  contributory  to  the  unfolding 
and  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  author's 
purpose.  Only  a  childish  reader  of  a 
story  is  plunged  into  inconsolable 
distress  over  the  troubles  of  the  person- 
ages whose  futures  are  being  followed. 
An  "  old  hand "  knows  that  this  is  a 
common  writer's  artifice,  and  reads 
on  calmly,  knowing  that  such  imbro- 
glios of  trouble  always  come  out  right. 
A  seasoned  student  of  such  literature 
knows  that  in  the  midst  of  such  em- 
broilment of  fortunes  and  circumstances 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  iv. 


the  author  is  not  forgetting  his  **  plot "  in   the   story,   and   by  means    of    the 

and  its  destined  ending,  but  is  steadily  "  afflictions  "  of  life  is  helping  forward 

pursuing  his  way  to  it.     Indeed,  he  is  the  accomplishment   of   that  purpose. 

pursuing  it  by  means  of  these.     Such  5y  meaTisq/"  even  the  most  "  untoward" 

pages,  such  incidents,  are  as  really  part  incidents — not  in  spite  of,  or  merely  in 

of  the  whole  machinery  by  which  he  is  the  midst  of  them — He  is  leading  on 

^^  working  out'  for  his  personages  the  His  man  to,  and  making   him  ready 

happy   issue,    as  are  those  where    all  for,  *'  glory  "  designed  for  him.     These 

goes  smoothly  and  without  a  cross.     So  afflictions   are   working   out   the  glory, 

Paul's  faith  is  that,  though  he  is  the  which,  when  it  comes,   shall  prove  so 

maker  and  writer   of  his  life's   story,  preponderantly  great  above  all  earthly 

there  is  a  conjoint,  supreme  Worker  sufiering. 
and  Author,  Who  has  His  own  "  plot " 

HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  4.  "  The  god  of  this  world.'' —  for  help.]     His  need  is  an  appeal ;  the 

[*'  Grandis     et     horribilis      descriptio  very  sight  of  his  need  will  not  fail  to 

Satanse "  (Bengel,  in  loc.)].  move  God's  heart.     [As  the  blind  or 

I.  His  dominion. — Usurped.  Ex-  crippled  street  mendicant  stands  and 
tensive.     Powerful.  says  nothing,  but  simply  shows  himself 

II.  His  subjects. — The  lost.  Who  to  the  gaze  and  heart  of  the  benevolent 
believe  not.  passers-by.      To  show  himself  is  itself 

III.  His      work. — To     blind     their  an  appeal] 

minds.     By  ignorance,  error,  delusion.  II.  Through  Christ. — Can  only  see 

IV.  His  object. — To  hinder  the  God  when  he  gazes  upon  Him  in  Christ, 
grace  of  God.     To  ruin  souls. — [J.  X.]  Can  only  see  God  when  he  looks  in  a 

Christ  ward  direction.     Down  that  road 

Yer.    4.  "  Through    Christ    to    God-  also,  by  that  channel,  must  His  help 

ward."  be  expected  to  reach  Paul.     In  John 

1.  Godward. — 1.  A  Godward  look.  i.  51  all  intercourse  between  heaven 
— Standing  with  face  toward  God.  and  earth  is  "  upon  the  Son  of  Man," 
Having  God  in  full  view  in  all  his  the  New  Testament  Jacob's  ladder, 
life.  Everything  else  then  adjusts  -All  communication  between  man  and 
itself  accordingly ;  everything  falls  into  God  is  through  the  Mediator.  His 
due,  true  proportion ;  truth,  man,  intervention  is  the  middle  term  sup- 
earthly  interests,  etc.  posed  in  every  *'  transaction  "  between 

2.  A  Godward  hope. — [Cf.  1  John  iii.  God  and  man.  Observe  how  this 
21;  different  word  for  "confidence";  makes  all  religious  life  CAWs^mn.  All 
thought  related.]  Hemmed  in  hope-  has  the  Christian  tinge  ;  everything — 
lessly  on  all  sides,  but  can  look  and  hope  included — has  taken  on  a  Chris- 
hope  upwards.     Hated  by  his  Jewish  tian  colour. 

fellow-countrymen ;      mistrusted,     dis- 
liked,   even    hated,    by   many   of    his  y^^^  g.^Q    rp^  Preacher's^ 
fellow-Christians  ;  only  a   few   under-  j    p^j^y 
standing  and  loving  him.     But  One  jj"  Qualifications, 

does  understand  him ;  he  can  commit  -j-jj    Xriumnhs [J  L^ 

his  cause  to  that  One,  and  go  on  in 
hope. 

3.  A  Godward  plea. — Looks  Godward  Vers.  7-10.  The  Weakness  of  the 
for  inspiration ;  looks  toward  Him  for  Agents  contributes  to  the  Furtherance 
help.      His   look  is   an  appeal.      [So  of  the  Gospel. 

Heb.  xii.  is  really  "  looking  at  Jesus,"  I.  In  their  weakness  God's  power  is 

but  leads  up  to  "  looking  unto  Jesus  "  displayed. 

473 


CHAP.  IV.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   COHINTHIANS. 


II.  In  their  afl^ction  God's  help  is 
manifest. 

III.  In  their  dying  the  Divine  life 
is  revealed. — [J.  L.] 

Ver.  14.  [For  Easter.  Much  mate- 
rial under  1  Oor.  xv.]  The  Resurrection 
of  Christ  a  Comfort  in  Affliction. 

I.  The  fact  is  certain.— Christ  was 
raised  up  by  the  power  of  God. 

II.  The  inference  is  just. — God  will 
raise  us  up,  and  present  us  in  glory. 

III.  The  conclusion  is  inevitable. — 
God  will  deliver  us  out  of  all  our 
aflSictions.  He  has  the  power.  In- 
tends to  do  it. 

IV.  The  duty  is  obvious. — To  suffer 
patiently.  [How  easily  a  reader  bears 
the  distress  of  the  entangled  and 
distressful  parts  of  a  story,  when  he 
has  looked  at  the  last  pages  and  knows 
how  it  is  going  to  end  (see  p.  472).  So 
we  know  how  our  life  is  going  to  end. 
"  This  will  kill  me,"  we  say.  No,  it 
will  not.  We  are  being  "kept  .  .  . 
unto  salvation,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  i.  5). 
To  speak  confidently. — \J.  Z.,  in  part. 

Ver.  15.   '^  For  your  sakes." 

I.  A  general  principle. — Vicarious 


sufiering,  the  death  of  one,  the  life  of 
another,  obtains  sometimes  in  nature ; 
often  in  human  life  ;  usually  in  spiritual 
relations  (John  xii.  24) ;  pre-eminently 
in  the  Atonement  of  Christ.  There  is 
a  vicarious  element  in  the  purpose  of 
much  sanctified  suffering.  A  Christian 
lady,  standing  with  a  friend,  by  the 
bedside  of  her  Christian  father,  who  had 
lain  for  two  years  helpless  and  nearly 
speechless,  said  to  her  friend  :  "All 
that,  for  so  long,  is  not  for  him  ;  it  is 
for  us."  Many  times  the  work  seems 
perfected  in  the  suff'erer,  who,  as  we 
think,  "  need  not "  be  kept  longer  out 
of  rest  and  glory  in  heaven ;  but  the 
sufferer  lingers  on  in  pain,  to  be  a 
factor  in  the  training  and  moral 
development  of  those  who  minister  in 
the  sick-room. 

II.  A  particular  application  here. — 
Paul's  [the  Apostolic,  and,  in  some 
degree,  all  Christian]  sufferings  benefit 
others  in  that  they — 

1.  Exhibit  his  Faith. 

2.  Confirm  the  common  Hope. 

3.  Evoke  in  others  a  spirit  of  Love 
and  Praise. 

4.  Exemplify  the  grace  of  Patient 
Endurance. — [J.  Z.,  with  additions.] 


474 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


CHAPTER  V. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1. — Flow  of  thought  quite  continuous  from  iv.  18.  For  (iv.  15).  .  .  .  For  (17).  .  .  . 
For  (v.  1).  .  .  .  For  (2).  .  .  .  For  (4).  .  .  .  For  (10),  etc. ;  a  chain  of  "-fors."  We  know.  — 
Partly  from  having  seen  the  glorified  Christ  wearing  His  resurrection  body  ;  Paul  and  the 
other  Apostolic  "  witnesses  of  the  resurrection  "  (Acts  i.  22)  could  on  this  ground  all  say  "  w^." 
[Note  how  Peter  is  led  from  the  "putting  off"  of  his  own  "•  tabernacle"  (cognate  word)  to 
the  glorified  body  of  Christ  as  seen  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  (2  Pet.  i.  13-18).] 
Earthly. — Belonging  to,  located  upon  this  earth,  contrasted  with  "  in  the  heavens " ;  not 
"  made  of  earth,"  earthen.  If. — Must  not  be  pressed,  to  carry  an  inference  that  Paul  doubted 
whether  he  should  die,  and  indeed  hoped  he  should  not.  2  Thess.  ii.  3,  written  earlier 
than  this,  postpones  into  the  far  future  the  Day  of  the  Lord  ;  and  must  govern  all  exegesis 
of  other  passages  relating  to  the  time  of  the  Parousia.  Tabernacle. — Remember  he  was  a 
tent-maker.  The  garment  and  the  tent  occur  together  in  Ps.  civ.  2.  [In  later  (and  medical) 
Greek  commonly  used  for  the  human  body.]  The  tabernacle  is  a  temporary  dwelling ;  the 
"  building  "  is  for  a  permanence ;  like  "  mansions  "  (=  abiding  dwellings)  in  John  xiv.  2. 
Observe  in  R.V.  '■'■from  G-ud "  ("  an  immediate  outworking  of  His  miraculous  power  ")  ;  and 
also  the  comma  after  "  eternal  ";  "  in  the  heavens"  is  not  merely  appended  to  '■'■  eternal"  but  is 
an  additional  predicate,  parallel  with  "  of  God  "  and  "  eternal."  Building. — Four  current 
-yfews  of  this  :  (1)  Heaven;  (2)  the  Resurrection  Body;  (3)  a  supposed  bodily  organisation 
clothing  the  soul  in  the  interval  between  death  and  the  resurrection  ;  (4)  a  spiritual  endue- 
ment  with  the  image  of  God ;  this  last  a  Rabbinical  use  of  the  idea  of  being  clothed. 
Against  (3)  remember  that  this  would  not  be  "  eternal"  and  that  Paul  only  knows  of  two 
kinds  of  body  (1  Cor.  xv.  44).  For  (4)  is  pleaded  the  simpler  sense  thus  given  to  "  not  be 
found  naked"]  cf.  Ps.  xvii.  15.  For  (1)  such  parallels  are  adduced  as  Heb.  xi.  10,  and  the 
surface  impression  of  the  phrase,  "■in  the  heavens"  coupled  with  John  xiv.  2.  (2)  now 
most  in  favour.  Best  explains  '■'clothed"  '■'clothed  upon"  '■'■unclothed''  (cf.  "bare," 
1  Cor.  XV.  37,  and  38)  ;  better  certainly  than  does  (1).  Difficulty  of  (2)  is  in  "  in  the  heaveris." 
For  this  and  "  wc  have"  choose  between,  e.g.,  Stanley  :  "  The  moment  that  our  present  house 
is  destroyed,  that  very  moment  a  new  habitation  awaits  us  in  heaven  "  ;  and,  e.g.,  Beet :  "  A 
secure  place  in  which  the  dead  have,  though  they  do  not  yet  wear,  the  resurrection  body. 
Cf.  Phil.  iii.  20  ;  1  Pet.  i.  4.  It  is  practically  in  heaven  ;  for  the  power  which  will  raise  it  is 
there.  When  Christ  appears  from  heaven  we  shall  receive  our  permanent  bodily  abode. 
Hence  it  is  .  .  .from  heaven,  ver.  2." 

Ver.  2.  For. — Argument  of  Rom.  viii.  22  sqq.  The  groaning  is  wrought  in  us  by  God's 
Spirit,  and  is  thus  a  ground  for  belief  that  there  is  awaiting  us  a  real  fulfilment  of  our  desire. 
Groan. — "  With  numberless  affiictions,  infirmities,  temptations  "  (Wesley). 

Ver.  3. — The  nearest  Paul's  language  brings  us  to  a  strong  expression  of  hope  that  he 
should  not  know  any  "  unclothed  "  interval  of  existence,  but  should  put  over  him  the  new 
investment  of  his  immaterial  part,  beneath  which,  as  it  were,  the  old  should  be  stripped  off 
or  pass  away.  But  perhaps  desire  rather  tlian  hope.  The  language  is  so  guided  by  the 
Spirit  that  Paul's  expression  of  personal  feeling,  whatever  it  imply,  is  universally  suited  to 
the  longing  of  the  Church,  even  where  there  is  no  expectation  of  survival  to  the  Parousia. 

Ver.  4.  Not  for  that. — Difficult  to  trace  link  of  thought ;  hence  alternative  of  R.V.  margin. 
Stanley :  "  The  groans  .  .  are  uttered,  not  so  much  because  of  the  oppression  of  this  outward 
frame,  not  so  much  from  a  wish  to  be  entirely  freed  from  the  mortal  part  of  our  nature, 
as  from  the  hope  that  it  will  be  absorbed  into  a  better  life."  Swallowed  up. — Recalls 
1  Cor.  XV.  54.     Observe  "  what  is  mortal  " ;  more  exact  than  A.V. 

Ver.  5.  This  very  thing. — Choose  between  (1)  the  change  just  described  ;  (2)  the  yearning 
^or  it ;  (3)  the  spiritual  preparation  for  it.  (3)  is  true,  but  beside  the  mark  here.  Perhaps 
Paul's  thought  wavered  between,  or  comprised,  both  (1)  and  (2).  Earnest. — Rom.  viii.  23, 
V.  5,  viii.  11,  are  apposite,  closely  related,  parallels  to  the  argument  here. 

Ver.  6. — Observe  the  broken  construction :  "  Being  of  good  cowrage  .  .  .  we  are  of  good 
cou/rage."  [The  fact  of  these  Epistles  having  been  dictated  may  (as  Dean  Vaughan  suggests 
in  his  Romans')  account  for  many  of  these  breaks  in  grammatical  sequence  of  clauses.]  Of 
good  conrage. — "  Though  troubles  assail  and  dangers  affright ; "  though  death  be  in  prospect. 
Phil.  i.  20-23  a  good  practical  illustration. 

475 


CHAP.  V.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    IL   CORINTHIANS. 


Ver.  7. — See  Separate  Homily.  Here,  morally,  the  nobler  walk  is  that  of  faith ;  yet  walking 
by  sight  will,  intrinsically,  be  a  nobler  thing  there. 

Ver.  8.  Willing. — With  an  active  desire.  Present. — ''At  home,'"  as  in  ver.  5.  "Absent" 
in  Greek  is  also  cognate  in  root ;  meaning  ''from  home'' 

Vers.  9, 10.  Labour. — "  Make  it  a  point  of  honour  with  ourselves  to  accomplish  this,  viz.," 
etc.  Used  in  Rom.  xv.  20;  1  Thess.  iv.  11  ["  Be  ambitious  to  be  unambitious  "]  "  At  home  or 
from  home  ;  "  in  hoth  their  alternatives  of  meaning  and  relation.  Observe  R.V.,  "  well  pleasing 
to  Blm,''  i.e.  to  Christ,  before  Whose  judgment  seat  (John  v.  22,  27)  "we  must  appear"; 
not  only  standing  there  as  arraigned  before  Him,  but  as  being  read  through  and  through  by 
Him,  and  then  being  by  His  judgment  exhibited  in  our  true  character  ;  whether  as  better 
or  worse  than  men  thought  us.  Illustrate  by  1  John  ii.  28 — iii.  3.  Beceive. — "Reap  the 
fruits  of"  (Stanley).  In  the  body. — Observe  R.V.  margin.  Not  bodily  sins  only,  the  excesses 
of  its  appetites,  or  acts  wrought  hy  the  aid  of  its  members ;  but  wrought  during  the  occupa- 
tion hy  the  soul.  Good  or  bad. — Future  rewards,  as  well  as  future  punishments,  are  part  of 
the  Christian  doctrine  of  retribution.  Judgment  seat. — The  thing  is  Roman,  not  Greek  ;  in 
Greek  the  word  meant  the  orator's  pulpit.  "  The  '  Bema '  was  a  lofty  seat,  raised  on  an 
elevated  platform,  usually  at  the  end  of  the  Basilica,  so  that  the  figure  of  the  judge  must 
have  been  seen  towering  above  the  crowd  which  thronged  the  long  nave  of  the  building  " 
(Stanley).    The  Corinthians  would  remember  Gallic. 

Ver.  11.  Persuade. — "  You  say  we  do,  in  a  bad  sense  [as  Acts  xii.  20,  and  Gal.  i.  10].  I  say 
I  do,  in  a  true  sense,"  viz.  as  1  Cor.  ix.  22 ;  Rom.  xv.  2.  Terror. — "  Fear "  in  R.V.,  with 
many  commentators.  Yet  even  Stanley  says  :  *'  Knowing  that  there  is  this  fearful  aspect  of 
the  Lord."  At  most,  "  conscious  that  we  walk  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord "  [in  the  Old  Tes- 
tament sense]  is  only  half  the  meaning.  "  Remembering  also  what  a  terror  to  the 
ungodly  will  in  that  day  be  the  Lord  Whom  now  we  reverently  fear."  I  hope  also. — 
As  2  Cor.  i.  14,  15. 

Ver.  12.  Commending  ourselves — "  Ourselves  "  emphatic,  q.d.  as  our  enemies  say  we  do, 
because  we  have  no  other  letters  of  commendation  (iii.  1,  iv.  2).  "  He  assumes,  with  some- 
thing of  an  ironical  tone,  that  all  they  wished  was  to  vindicate  him  "  (Stanley). 

Ver.  13. — Takes  up  charges  made  by  his  enemies  at  Corinth.  His  "  madness  "  was  a  fault 
to  some ;  his  "  sobriety "  to  others.  [Cf.  the  generation  whom  nothing  could  please 
(Matt.  xi.  17).]  The  steadily -held  middle  course  is  often  a  rebuke,  and  often  an  offence,  to  the 
extremes  on  either  side.  Unto  God. — Like  a  stream  which  moves  unto  Ocean  but  blesses  all 
along  its  banks  by  the  way,  the  Christian  life  is  unto  God,  but  on  its  way  it  is  for  man's  cause. 
If  not  unto  God,  then,  like  stream  ceasing  to  flow,  it  makes  marsh.and  miasma. 

Vers.  14,  15.  The  love  of  Christ. — Choose  between  (1)  His  love  to  us  ;  (2)  our  love  to  Him; 
(3)  His  love  for  men,  found  in  us  (cf.  Phil.  i.  8).  In  fact,  (3)  is  uppermost,  foremost,  most 
apparent ;  but  grows  out  of  (1)  and  (2).  As  matter  of  experience  the  three  are  never 
dissociated.  Constraineth. — "  Christ's  love  left  him  no  choice  as  to  what  he  should  live  for, 
brought  him  under  the  control  of  an  irresistible  yet  most  gracious  necessity,  hedged  him  in 
on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  controlled  him  with  a  constancy  like  that  with  which  the 
great  forces  of  the  universe  rule  the  planets,  and  determine  the  orbit  in  which  every  one 
of  them  must  move "  (Dale,  Atonement,  p.  260).  Note  the  use  of  the  same  verb  in 
Phil.  i.  23;  and,  most  appositely,  by  Christ  Himself  (Luke  xii.  50).  Judge. — In  Rom. 
vi.  11,  "  reckon."  Paul  does  here  of  himself  and  others  what  he  there  urges  each  to  do 
in  regard  to  himself.  All  died. — See  Appended  Note  from  Dale.  All. — Not  to  be  pressed, 
to  prove  universal,  saving,  efficacy  for  the  death  of  Christ.  Still,  every  man  may  by 
grace  bring  himself  within  the  circle  of  the  "aW  who  "died."  Rom.  vi.  1-11  compares 
throughout  with  this. 

Ver.  16.  After  the  flesh. — As  ordinary  men  do,  in  whom  "the  flesh"  permits  of  no 
apprehension  or  understanding  of  anything  but  what  is  "  natural."  As  His  enemies  knew 
Him ;  as  even  His  earthly  relatives  knew  Him,  until  the  Spirit  taught  them  more  about 
Him ;  as  the  party  "  of  Christ "  at  Corinth  knew  Him  ;  as  His  very  disciples  knew  Him  before 
His  resurrection  (with  such  occasional  flashes  of  a  deeper  insight  as  Matt.  xvi.  17, 
"  Flesh  .  .  .  not  revealed,  ...  but.")  The  same  expression  used  of  the  same  opponents, 
X.  3,  xi.  18  ;  Gal.  vi.  12. 

Ver.  17. — See  Homily.  New  creature. — In  Gal.  vi.  15  also.  Common  Rabbinical  ex- 
pression for  the  conversion  of  a  proselyte.  Observe  the  variant  reading,  which  omits 
"  all."  Passed  away.— Study  with  this  Matt.  xxiv.  35 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10.  Go  back  also  to 
Isa.  xliii.  18,  19,  and  its  New  Testament  derivative,  Rev.  xxi.  4,  5. 

Vers.  18,  19. — See  Homilies.  Reconciled  us  to  Himself. — This  English  phrase,  somewhat 
archaic  in  form,  must  not  be  pressed  into  the  service  of  any  "  Theory  of  the  Atonement " 
which  minifies  or  denies  any  real  "  wrath "  in  God,  and  makes  the  aversion  which  needs 
removing  in  order  to  a  state  of  reconciliation,  only  to  exist  in  man.  1.  The  modern  English 
equivalent  for  the  thought  of  the  older  English  phraseology  would,  indeed,  be  more  nearly 
^^  Reconciled  Himself  to  m." 

476  - 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11,  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  m. 


The  formula  for  our  verse  is  % 

A  reconciles  ^  to  A ;  r^^^  aversion,  the  estrangement,  which  needs 

in   1   barn.    xxix.  4  it  is  V   i    rgj^oying    is,    as    we    now    oftener    think    of 

\KT    ^?f  °^5^^^^  ^  ^^  ^'  \  reconciliation,  in  the  offended  party,  not  in  the 

we  snouia  now  ratner  say,       offending  one. 
C    reconciles    A   to    B,  ° 

D  reconciles  S  to  D.  / 

As  between  older  and  modern  English  the  polarity  of  the  word  has  got  reversed.  2.  So, 
again,  the  formula  for  ver.  20  is :  Let  B  be  reconciled  to  A.  Just  as  for  1  Cor.  vii.  11  it  is, 
Let  Wife  be  reconciled  to  Husband  (see  below).  And  for  Matt.  v.  24,  Let  Oifending  brother 
be  reconciled  to  Offended.  Where  again  the  polarity  needs,  to  our  habit  of  thought, 
reversing.  A  needs  reconciling  to  B.  Heathen  Husband  (unjustly)  offended  needs  reconciling 
to  Christian  Wife.  Offended  (justly)  needs  reconciling  to  Offender.  3.  Clearly,  however, 
'*  Be  reconciled  "  in  these  latter  cases — perhaps  in  all — means  hardly  anything  more  precise 
than,  "  Take  the  steps  needed  on  your  side  to  seek  and  to  enjoy  a  new,  reconciled  relation 
between  yourself  and  the  offended  party."  And,  as  clearly,  the  force  of  the  Greek  word, 
and  not  that  of  the  English  phrase,  carries  with  it  the  final  decision  of  interpretation.  This 
(e.g.  as  Cremer,  Lexicon,  p.  91  sqq.  shows)  rather  lays  stress  upon  the  reconciled,  and  now 
amicable,  relations  arrived  at,  than  upon  the  process  by  which  it  has  been  reached,  and,  still 
less,  upon  the  question  which  of  the  parties  needed  bringing  to  the  other  [or  which  of  them 
made  the  first  move  towards  a  restored,  happier  relationship] .  Of  our  text  he  says : 
"Neither  the  word,  in  and  by  itself,  nor  the  grammatical  connection  can  decide  whether 
God  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  antagonist  of  man  or  man  of  God."  [On  1  Cor.  vii.  11  he 
thinks  that  the  heathen  husband  has  some  cause  of  complaint  that  his  Christian  wife  has 
left  him. J  "It  is  [in  point  of  fact]  God  who  forms  the  relation  between  Himself  and 
humanity  anew  ;  the  part  of  humanity  is  to  accept  this  reinstatement  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  .  .  , 
It  is  a  relation  which  is  changed,  which  God  changes,  in  that  He  desists  from  His  claims." 

Vers.  20,  21. — These  verses  expound  the  method  of  the  reconciliation;  both  so  far  as 
depends  upon  God,  and  so  far  as  depends  on  man. 

HOMILETIC   ANALYSIS— Verses  1—21. 

WishiTig  and  Working. 

A.  Looking  into  the  Future  (vers.  1-10).  Key  words  :  "  Clothed  upon  "  (1-5) ; 
*^At  home,  from  home  "  (6-8) ;  "  Christ  the  Judge  "  (9,  10). 

B.  Labouring  in  the  Present  (vers.  11-21). 

A.  I.  1.  Often  not  a  very  profitable  occupation. — The  Present  is  our  field,  our 
life.  "  Do  with  thy  might  what  thy  hand  findeth — close  at  hand — to  do  "  is 
the  first  direction  for  all  Christian  activity.  Dreaming  over  the  Past — pleasur- 
able, or  mis-spent ;  peering  into  the  Future — in  hope,  or  fear,  or  curiosity ;  may 
be  the  idlest  of  occupations ;  fruitless,  and  diverting  from  the  immediate  fruit- 
bearing  of  to-day.  "  What  shall  this  man  do  ?  What  is  that  to  thee  %  Follow 
thou  Me."  ''  Forgetting  the  things  behind,"  is  a  good  deal  done  towards  securing 
"  This  one  thing  I  do,"  with  its  strength — not  of  "  narrowness,"  but — of 
concentration  and  of  consequent  intensity  and  force.  The  best  life-builder  lays 
to-day's  "  course  "  well  and  strongly,  as  the  best  security  for  the  next,  and  the 
next,  and  all  following  ** courses"  in  his  work.  Yet  not  without  reference 
to  the  superposed  *'  courses  " ;  the  design  running  through  from  foundation  to 
topstone,  will  be  traceable  in  to-day's  work — continued  from  the  lower,  prepara- 
tory for  the  upper.  The  climber  is  helped  to  make  firm  the  step  he  is  actually 
taking,  by  looking  upward.  Living  in  the  future  is  useless,  mischievous,  to  the 
strength  and  activities  of  to-day.  Living /or  the  future  is  essential  to  a  large  life. 
Paul  draws  strength  for  bearing  the  "  burdens  "  of  the  Present,  from  the  hopes 
of  the  Future.  Paul  "  labours  "  in  the  Present,  with  a  prospect  in  the  Future 
which — whether  to  incite  or  encourage — "  keeps  him  up  to  the  mark  "  for 
present   duty. 

2.  Paul  is  a  prophet. — His  teaching,  his  visions,  of  the  future  have  so  become 
the  commonplaces  of  Christian  thought  about  it,  that  it  is  hard  to  realise  what 
amazing  disclosures  they  are.     One  value  of  classical,  philosophical  literature  to 

477 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


our  time  is  that  there  is  recorded  the  utmost  which  man  could  do  for  himself  in 
the  way  of  purifying  life  and  making  it  happy, — the  experiment  whose  results 
stand  recorded  having  been  conducted  by  some  of  the  noblest  minds  of  the  race, 
with  all  material  advantages  for  the  trial,  and  with  the  ability  to  record  in  the  most 
perfect  fashion  their  methods  and  results.  So,  too,  in  regard  to  the  future,  it  records 
for  us,  in  most  perfect  form,  all  the  best  hopes  and  arguments  of  the  best  types  of 
mind  and  heart,  at  the  very  best  of  their  powers,  and  the  "  results,"  such  as 
they  were,  to  which,  under  the  most  favourable  conditions,  they  were  able  to 
arrive.  And  it  is  matter  of  common  knowledge  that  not  one  ever  got  so  far 
as  to  say,  "  We  know  that  if,"  etc.  The  humblest  Christian  has  in  the  fact  of  a 
Kisen  Christ  an  evidence  for,  and  a  sample  and  a  pledge  of,  a  future  life  such  as 
non-Christian  thinkers  and  inquirers,  ancient  or  modern,  have  never  attained. 
Yet  Paul  is  not  merely  falling  back  upon  History.  He  may  have  known  all  the 
little  that  we  know  about  the  Risen  Life,  and  the  Risen  Body  of  the  Lord  Christ, 
during  the  Forty  Days.  The  one  certain  fact  for  us,  in  regard  to  the  "  house  not 
made  with  hands"  is  that  His  Body  is  the  norm  and  pattern  for  ours.  Yet  we 
hardly  assert  even  that  much  without  questions  arising,  and  qualifications  accruing 
around  our  *'  certainty."  We  cannot,  for  example,  be  certain  that  the  Body  of 
the  Forty  Days  has  not  undergone  further  change  and  increase  of  glory  since  it 
passed  into  "  the  heavens!"*  On  this  bare  fact  alone  can  our  hope  or  desire  put  its 
foot :  Whatever  His  body  in  the  heavenly  places  is  to-day,  that  ours  is  to  be 
by-and-by  =  "  fashioned  like  unto  the  body  of  His  glory  "  (Phil.  iii.  21).  Paul  is, 
however,  carried  in  his  confidence  beyond  mere  argument  and  inference.  The  link 
given  in  the  text  just  quoted,  is  one  that  must  have  been  supplied  to  him  as  part 
of  his  prophetic  message.  Matter  of  course  as  it  almost  seems  to  us,  we  could 
have  had  no  assurance  of  that, — he  could  have  had  none,  "  except  it  were  given 
him  from  above."  With  the  facts  of  the  Lord's  Resurrection  and  Glorified  Life  ; 
with  Paul's  revelations ;  with  the  assurance  of  our  being  *'  in  Christ,"  and,  in 
all  the  senses  and  degrees  of  which  our  human  nature  is  capable,  of  becoming  thus 
"  partakers  with  Him  " ;  the  believer  of  to-day  looks  forward  to  the  future  and 
to  death  and  judgment,  saying — singing — "  We  know^*  etc.  He  works  on 
"  until  the  evening  "  (Ps.  civ.  23),  and  then  lies  down  for  the  long  sleep,  saying, 
"  We  know^^  etc. 

3.  Are  we  to  say  of  His  Pattern-Body  that  it  is  ''  not  made  with  hands J^ 
*•  eternal  "  [happily,  yes  !]  "  in  the  heavens  "  ?  It  is  to  "  strive  after  wind  "  to 
attempt  to  fill  out  the  hints  of  Scripture  as  to  the  nature  of  the  "  future  house." 
It  is  to  try  to  solve  a  problem,  where  there  are  hardly  any  data  at  all.  It  is  to 
attempt  to  be  certain,  where  the  scanty  materials  available  to  us  for  considera- 
tion are  themselves  of  uncertain  significance.  Not  that  there  is  gratuitous  or 
arbitrary  reserve.  "  I  would  have  told  you  "  is  entirely  the  mind  of  One  Who  said 
the  strongest  things  He  could,  and  all  He  could — we  may  be  sure — to  comfort 
friends  whose  faces,  as  they  gazed  at  Him  in  a  silence,  which  only  now  and  again 
ventured  to  give  birth  to  a  question,  showed  them  nearly  broken-hearted,  stunned, 
at  the  certainty  now  forced  upon  their  unwilling  heart,  that  they  were  to  lose 
their  Friend.  The  reserve,  the  reticence,  is  unavoidable.  We  have  no  experiences, 
no  things,  to  be  the  alphabet,  or  the  vocabulary,  of  the  language  in  which  a 
Revealer  of  more  would  need  to  speak.  It  is  easy  to  speculate  upon  a  body  in 
which  every  power  now  possessed  by  us  will  be  enhanced,  and  to  which  new 
powers  will  perhaps  be  given  ;  "  percipient  all  over."  It  is  much  to  know  that 
the  "groaning  "  will  be  done  with  ;  that  the  body  will  be  no  "  burden  "  in  itself, 
nor  shall  our  life  need  to  carry  any  "  burden  " ;  to  live  will  be  no  "  burden  "  then, 
as  often,  to  very  many,  it  is  now.  Tears  gone ;  no  pain,  no  death ;  all  such 
hints  full  of  sweetest  suggestion  to  suffering,  weeping,  dying  humanity.  Here 
the  very  work  of  Christ  overwhelms  the  servant  of  Christ  with  physical  weariness, 

478 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


until  he  can  only  drop  his  unfinished  task,  too  exhausted  to  collect  his  jaded 
mind  for  a  word  of  prayer  in  which  to  commend  himself  to  his  Master.  [Your 
strong  arm  and  strong  bow  shoot  its  arrow  up  into  the  air ;  the  perfected  rifle 
may  speed  its  bullet  upward.  Away  they  soar,  as  if  they  had  done  with  earth 
altogether,  and  were  never  going  to  return.  But  gravitation  has  its  grip  upon 
them,  and  slowly,  surely,  asserts  itself  ;  they  slacken,  they  stop,  they  are  dragged 
down  with  accelerating  speed.  In  the  all  eagerness  of  their  upward  rush,  they 
still  belonged  to  earth  !]  The  body  is  made  bitterly  to  feel  the  fetters  of  the 
gravitation  earthward.  But  done  with  then !  The  very  intensity  of  spiritual 
emotion  cannot  long  be  endured ;  body  and  mind  would  break  down  under  long- 
continued  afflux  of  large  communications  from  God. 

4.  ''  In  the  heavens." — Not  to  be  too  precise  in  exposition.  Even  now  "  in  the 
heavens  "  ?  In  what  sense  ?  Anything  more  in  the"  we  ha>ve  "  than  the  confi- 
dent expectation  which  makes  "things  hoped  for"  to  be  substantial,  dealt  with 
as  confidently  in  the  business  of  life,  wrought  into  all  our  calculations  with  as 
much  security,  as  if  they  were  the  actualities  of  to-day  instead  of  the  possibilities 
of  the  morrow  ?  Anything  more  than  the  faith  which  counts  the  reversionary 
interest  present-day  wealth,  an  arithmetic  of  faith  which  makes  no  abatement 
from  the  future  Principal  Sum,  but  reckons  its  Present  Worth  as  equal  to  the 
full  amount  ?  To  faith,  God's  bills  of  longest  date  are  cash  in  hand  without  any 
discount.  As  in  Heb.  xi,  throughout,  the  heroes  of  faith  accept  and  deal  with 
the  things  unseen  or  future,  on  the  assumption  that  they  are  as  certainly  assured 
reaUties  as  any  most  obviously  real  facts  of  the  present  and  the  seen.  "  Wq 
have "  is  faith's  anticipation  ;  overleaping  the  interval,  thinking  itself  into  the 
future,  when  literally  we  shall  " have"  and  shall  be  wearing  and  using  and 
enjoying.  "We  have"  Him  there.  Whose  body  is  the  guarantee  of  our  own. 
Ours  is  a  certainty  because  His  is  a  fact  (iv.  14). 

5.  This  strengthens  us  for  the  burdens  and  the  labour. — "  We  are  saved  by  (our) 
hope."  Hope  gives  a  resilience  to  the  spirit,  so  that  when  the  burden  is  for  the 
moment  lifted  off,  the  elasticity  of  vigorous  life  is  found  unimpaired ;  even 
whilst  under  the  burden  the  spring  is  still  elastic.  The  burdened  Christian  is 
not  broken-spirited.  "  Cast  down,  but  not  destroyed."  From  the  top  of  the 
occasional  Delectable  Mountains  a  descent  must  be  made  to  the  Eiver ;  but  the 
glimpse  of  the  distance  and  its  glory  (in  which  the  central  figure  is  to  Paul  his 
Glorious  Lord,  robed  in  a  glorified  human  nature)  is  a  real  force,  sustaining  and 
urging  onward,  as  the  travellers  go  down  into  the  valley  and  plunge  into  the  river. 
Or,  as  John  (1  John  ii.  28,  iii.  3)  turns  the  truth,  our  hope  is  a  purifying  force. 
[As  the  boy  at  school  in  England  is  continually  hearing  from  his  father  in 
India  :  "  I  am  coming  home  "  at  such  a  date.  "  1  want  to  find  my  son  in  educa- 
tion and  manners  and  character  worthy  of  me.  I  want  to  have  joy  in  him  when 
I  see  him  again."  And  the  boy  responds  :  "Father  is  coming  home  "  at  such  a 
time.  "  I  must  try  and  be  just  such  as  he  would  like  me  to  be."  ("  Found  of 
Him  in  peace,  without  spot  and  blameless,"  2  Pet.  iii.  14).] 

6.  "  Not  for  that  we  would  be  unclothed"  etc. — This  is  not  the  heathen  shrinking 
from  the  very  conception  of  a  disembodied  spirit's  condition,  as  Achilles  scorned 
the  idea  of  being  a  king  amongst  the  "  shades."  [Hardly  to  be  connected  with  the 
craving  for  embodiment,  which  Isaac  Taylor,  [Phys.  Theory,  chap,  xvii.),  sees  sug- 
gested in  the  request  of  the  demons,  dispossessed  from  their  human  abode,  to  be 
allowed  to  enter  into  other  bodies,  though  they  were  only  those  of  swine.]  Paul  has 
grasped  the  New  Testament — Christian — truth  that  the  man  is  no  complete  man 
apart  from  his  body.  It  is  good  to  be  "  at  home  " — even  whilst  disembodied — 
"  with  the  Lord."  But  the  perfected  fellowship  of  the  man  who  is  even  now 
"  in  Christ "  with  that  Risen,  Glorified  God-man,  will  only  begin  in  the  day  of  the 

479 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


Parousia  and  Resurrection.  We  shall  only  have  our  ^^  perfect  consummation  and 
bliss  "  when  it  is  both  "  in  body  and  in  soul." 

7.  The  marvel  of  the  revelation  is  that  in  the  very  "  groaning  "  there  is 
ground  of  hope.  '*  ffe  hath  wrought  us  for  the  selfsame  thing."  [Developed  in 
Rom.  viii.  19-27  ;  where  we  have  a  groaning  *'  creature";  a  groaning  Church, 
even  though  it  is  enriched  with  "  the  firstfruits,"  viz.  "  the  Spirit "  ;  indeed,  the 
very  "  groanings  "  after  full  release  and  full  felicity  are  the  breathings  of  a 
groaning  Holy  Spirit  within  the  "  sons  of  God."]  The  "  groaning "  under  the 
manifold  burden — the  flesh,  the  multiplied  trials  of  the  earthly  lot,  the  burden- 
some conflict  with  the  sin  which  the  saved  man  hates — is  no  mere  sigh  of 
helpless  oppression;  it  is  a  look,  out,  up,  forward,  toward  the  realised  hope. 
What  he  is  made  to  groan  after,  he  is  created  to  enjoy ;  and  he  is  going  to  enjoy 
all  that  he  is  created  to  enjoy.  His  groans  and  his  glory  are  "  all  of  one  piece  "  ; 
they  are  parts  of  one  whole  scheme  of  a  spiritual  education  of  the  children  of  God, 
Whose  goal  for  the  whole  manhood — the  body  included — is  anticipated  and 
assured  in  the  risen  glory  of  the  eternally  embodied  Christ,  "  eternal  in  the 
heavens." 

II.  "At  home  ;  from  home." — ["  Where  is  your  home,  little  one? "  "  Where 
mother  lives."  Not  much  help  in  the  answer  for  one  who  sought  to  restore  to  its 
mother  the  lost  child.  But,  for  the  child  itself,  the  answer  went  to  the  root  of 
the  matter.] 

1.  The  presence  of  Christ  makes  heaven  real,  and  makes  it  dear  to  His  people. 
— ^The  son  of  an  English  family  goes  to  India.  All  the  family  have  learned 
the  geography  of  India ;  what  they  were  taught  at  school  has  been  supple- 
mented by  newspapers  and  by  general  reading.  The  leading  points  are  known. 
But  the  city  to  which  his  Government  appointment  takes  the  son  of  the  house, 
if  even  "  known,"  has  only  been  a  name  on  a  map,  until  he  goes  there.  Then  it 
becomes  real,  for  he  is  real ;  it  is  the  material  setting  of  his  very  "  material  " 
life.  The  streets  are  real,  and  the  people,  for  he  sees  them ;  the  houses  real,  for 
he  lives  in  one  ;  the  village  tank  and  temple, — they  see  them  with  his  eyes.  His 
letters  and  himself  enable  them  almost  to  Uve  there  too.  And  interesting  as 
well  as  real.  If  even  it  were  real  before,  it  had  no  real  hold  upon  them ;  it 
mattered  nothing  to  them,  practically.  Now  every  bit  of  news  of  it  is  noted. 
Even  the  commonest  engraving  of  it  has  a  value.  The  stranger  who  has  seen 
it  is  almost  a  friend  of  the  family.  The  youngest  child  of  the  house  shyly  "  sidles 
up  "  to  the  visitor,  with  a  half-opened  atlas,  abundantly  rewarded  if  he  can 
attract  attention  that  he  may  show  the  map  of  India,  and  point  to  the  strange- 
sounding  name  ;  "  My  brother  lives  there."  So  the  visible,  bodily  departure — 
rather  than  a  mere  vanishing  away,  or  a  quitting  of  the  disciples  after  some  visit, 
never  to  return — has  helped  to  make  heaven  real,  and  full  of  interest  to  the 
Christian.  He  loves  his  Elder  Brother,  and  the  place  where  He  lives  is  dear  for 
His  sake.  It  is  real,  the  real  setting  and  environment  of  a  tangible,  visible 
Body,  which,  in  full  view,  one  fine  May  morning,  went  up  into  the  heaven  from 
the  top  of  Olivet,  and  was  not  lost,  but  only  hidden  behind  a  veil  of  cloud.  We 
hear  the  music  with  His  ears  ;  they  are  filled  with  its  real  melody.  We  see  and 
deal  with  its  very  real  inhabitants,  for  He  very  really  sees  and  deals  with  them. 
His  presence  there  locates  "  home  "  there. 

2.  "  TFe,"  "  w?e." — For  the  man  of  the  world  has  no  practical  interest  in,  no 
sense  of  the  reality  of,  any  world  but  this.  To  the  Christian  man  this  is  the  way 
home ;  to  the  non-Christian  this  is  home,  so  far  as  his  life  has  any  real  home. 
*'  We  are  (only)  journeying  to  the  place.  .  .  .  Come  with  us "  (Num.  x.  29). 
There  were  Amalekites  and  other  desert  tribes,  to  whom  the  wilderness  was  home  ; 
to  Israel  it  was  a  mere  place  of  passing  sojourn.  Canaan  was  Best.  There 
has  been  exaggeration  of  this.     Paul's  feeling  is  the  healthy  one.     If  this  world 

480 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11,   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


were  wholly  and  merely  evil,  he  would  have  been  in  no  "  strait  betwixt  two  " ; 
what  to  choose  he  would  have  known  very  well.  He  is  in  a  difficulty  just  because, 
whilst  that  is  "  better,"  this  is  good.  And  to  live  in  either  is  Christ ;  "  labour  " 
for  Christ,  and  "fruit"  for  Christ,  and  help  to  his  dear  Philippians,  if  he  remain 
here  ;  "  to  be  with  Christ,"  if  he  go.  Either  way,  "  to  live  is  Christ  "  ;  death  only 
divides  the  one  life  in  Christ  into  two  sections  (Phil.  i.  21-24).  The  wise  Christian 
man  will  "  seek  the  peace  of  this  (earthly)  city,"  where  for  a  while  His  Master 
wishes  him  to  reside  and  do  His  work  (Jer.  xxix.  7).  Yet  as  real  an  exaggeration 
to  ridicule  the  "  unworldliness  "  or  "  other  worldliness  "  of  Christian  men.  They 
who  rise  highest  in  *'  conformity  to  the  image  of  "  Christ  feel  most  keenly  the 
profound  cleavage  between  the  very  bases  of  their  life  and  the  bases  of  the 
world's  life ;  they  feel  most  sensitively  the  utter  discrepancy  of  the  whole  direction 
of  their  life  from,  and  its  irreconcilableness  with,  that  of  the  very  men  whose  work 
they  do,  whose  occupations  they  share.  They  often  meet,  as  it  were,  at  the  same 
station,  but  are  going  in  opposite  directions ;  *'  up,"  and  **  down."  As  they  many 
times  stand  side  by  side,  their  hands  engaged  in  the  same  task,  their  faces  are  in 
opposite  directions.  The  spii'it  of  life  is  different.  The  saint  cannot  be  entirely 
*'  at  home  "  (in  the  homely  sense  of  the  phrase)  with  those  to  whom  the  Elder 
Brother  is  nothing,  and  whose  interests  and  life  are  circumscribed  by  the 
horizon  of  time.  The  Christian  man  is  a  faithful  servant  of  his  generation 
(Acts  xiii.  36),  or  he  is  no  true  Christian.  But  he  does  not  belong  to  it.  [Cf.  a 
German  employe  in  a  London  business  house.  Faithful,  competent,  successful, 
taking  a  hearty  interest  in  English  life,  having  a  home  here.  But  "  Where 
is  home  % "  The  eye  kindles  as  you  show  him  a  photograph  of  his  native  place, 
or  of  the  capital  of  the  state  to  which  he  belongs,  or  of  his  Prince.  He  has  a 
house  in  England,  but  Germany  is  "  home."]  "Where  Paul's  Prince  and  Saviour 
and  Elder  Brother  is,  there  is  "  home."  The  Christian  man  should  be 
interested  in,  faithful  to,  busy  for,  this  temporary  dwelling-place  of  his ;  his 
Master  puts  him  here  for  a  while ;  but  he  must  keep  his  spirit  detached ;  not 
rooting  here.  At  length  he  will  be  summoned  to  go  and  live  "  at  home  "  "  with 
the  Lordy 

3.  Here  again  is  "  confidence."  "  We  know." — In  fact,  to  Paul,  "  walking  not  hy 
sight  "  yet,  "  hut  hy  faith  "  this  world,  which  imprisons  the  thought,  and  enslaves 
the  heart,  and  absorbs  all  the  energies  of  the  man  who  belongs  to  it  only,  often 
becomes  the  unreal,  *'  recedes  and  disappears  "  into  shade winess  ;  the  Eternal 
becomes  the  real,  not  only  seen  through,  but  hiding  altogether,  the  world  of 
passing  interests  and  dying  men.  To  him  there  stands  in  clear  vision  the  One 
Man ;  the  circle  which  contains  his  life  is  struck  from  that  Centre.  He  can 
bear  up  under  anything;  he  can  go  through  with  anything;  when  the  best  desire 
of  his  best  life,  to  be  at  home  with  Him,  is  every  moment  being  brought  nearer  to 
its  realisation. 

III.  "  Willing  rather."  And  yet  the  first  fact  of  the  hereafter  is  to  appear 
before  Christ. — 1.  Without  discriminating  between  the  successive  incidents  of 
the  eschatological  programme,  extending  from  death  to  resurrection  and  judg- 
ment, it  is  to  be  remembered  that  a  very  real  discrimination  and  pronouncement 
upon  character,  a  real,  immediate  "  judgment,"  takes  place  as  often,  and  in  so 
far,  as  a  man  is  brought  into  contact  with  Christ.  He  is  even  now  the 
supreme  Test  of  character.  The  touchstone-question  for  an  unsaved  man  is,  *'  What 
thinkest  thou  of  Christ ;  whose  Son  is  He  ? "  (Matt.  xxii.  42).  To  the  Christian 
man  also  is  proposed,  with  perpetual,  searching  reiteration,  the  similar  query, 
*'  Who  say  ye  that  I  am  ? "  Every  man,  saved  and  unsaved,  is  revealed, — > 
perhaps  to  himself — certainly  to  observers  "  taught  of  God  " — by  the  practical 
answer,  as  given  and  written  out  in  his  life.     Every  man  who  comes  into  contact 

n  431 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


with  Christ  is  now  in  that  very  fact  "judged."  Not  only  is  a  very  real  decision 
being  made,  and  a  verdict  being  pronounced  ;  not  only  does  the  man  inevitably  pass 
"  right "  or  "  left "  of  Christ ;  but  a  very  real  sentence  is  being  executed.  Every 
man  receives  already  a  very  real  blessedness  or  punishment,  according  to  the 
attitude  he  takes  up  toward  Christ.  ["  For  judgment  /  am  come"  etc. 
(John  ix.  39).]  Christ  is  even  now  the  Test  of  character,  the  Norm  of  judgment, 
the  Arbiter  of  destiny. 

2.  The  first  fact  of  the  unseen  world  is  the  sight  of  Christ. — A  man  suddenly  cut 
off  in  mid-career,  falling  shot  in  battle,  dropping  with  heart-weakness  upon  the 
flagstones  of  the  Exchange,  in  an  instant  steps  out  of  the  roar  and  rush  of  life's 
busy  street  into  the  hush  and  calm  of  the  solemn  presence-chamber  where  He 
sits,  before  Whom  the  first  and  supreme  question  for  the  new  comer  is,  "  What 
was  your  attitude  toward  Christ,  what  did  you  do  for  Him,  outside  there,  in  that 
busy  world  of  so  many  interests  1  "  Outside  there  men  were  classified  according 
to  all  sorts  of  tests.  Within,  standing  before  Christ,  one  only  basis  of  classifica- 
tion is  known  and  brought  into  use  :  **  How  did  you  stand  related  to  Christ  ?  " 
Men  are  already  being  set  on  "  His  right  hand  "  or  on  "  His  left."  His  final 
revelation  is  only  the  consummation  of  a  judicial  work  which  has  been  ever 
proceeding  in  the  world.     But  further — 

3.  There  is  a  Day  of  Judgment  in  which  the  Central  Figure,  the  Judge,  is 
Christ. — May  strip  away  much  as  we  will  of  the  figurative,  analogical  dress  of 
the  truth  ;  may  acknowledge  how  often  the  continuous,  present  judgment,  and 
the  immediate  judgment  in  the  hour  of  death,  and  the  final,  open  judgment,  are 
hard  to  keep  apart  as  matter  of  exegesis.  Yet  we  cannot  escape  this  irreducible 
minimum  of  fact.  "  Probation  does  not  lead  to  probation,  but  to  issues."' 
"  Devil  and  his  angels  have  hitherto  proved  but  indifferent  reformers "  (Edw. 
Irving,  Oration,  Judgment,  7).  "  The  last  function  of  mediatorial  sway  will  be  the 
final  judgment,  when  the  High  Priest  shall  no  longer  intercede  for  the  world, 
nor  the  Prophet  teach  mankind,  but  the  Son  of  Man  shall  sit  wpon  the  throne  of 
His  glory  .  .  .  all  nations ;  gathered  for  the  first  and  last  time  that  He  may 
separate  thein  again  to  be  united  no  more "  (Pope).  This  is  no  delegation  of 
universal  judgment  to  a  creature.  "  If  the  Pedeemer  were  appointed  Judge  as 
simply  man,  .  .  .  His  function  would  only  be  the  visible  accompaniment  of  the 
judgment  and  sentence  of  the  invisible  God ;  but  that  is  not  the  style  of 
Scripture."  Yet  we  need  the  manhood.  "  In  relation  to  no  part  of  His  office  is 
the  manhood  of  Christ  more  necessary  to  our  failing  hearts,  and  of  no  office  is  it 
more  expressly  declared.  .  .  .  Not  of  like  passions  with  us,  but  flesh  and  blood. 
His  experience  of  temptation — notwithstanding  His  necessary  sinlessness — makes 
Him  a  sympathising  High  Priest  and  a  merciful  Judge,  in  whose  Divine- 
human  soul,  now  and  ever,  to  the  last  extreme  of  what  is  consistent  with 
inscrutable  holiness  and  law,  mercy  rejoiceth  against  judgment."  (Pope.)  Would 
you  not  hear  the  sentence  "  Depart !  "  from  the  lips  of  anybody  rather  than  of 
Christ  1  The  Christ  Who  has  "died  in  vain  for  you"  (cf.  Gal.  ii.  21  j 
1  Cor.  viii.  11),  Who  for  years  lavished  on  you  a  grace  you  would  not  return  or 
rfepay,  etc.  "  The  wrath  of  the  Lamb — the  Lamb  " — is  the  crowning  terror  of 
that  day  (Rev.  vi.  16).  There  is,  even  amongst  men,  no  displeasure  so  terrible 
as  that  of  justly  offended,  slighted,  insulted  goodness, — calm,  judicial,  pitiful,  but 
inexorable,  inflexible;  not  to  be  turned  aside  from  executing  the  necessary 
sentence  which  it  did  not  desire,  and  did  its  best  to  render  unnecessary. 

4.  Those  judged.     *'  We  all." — (1)   What  an  assemblage  is  suggested  !    Wonderful 

for  size.     The  most  impressive  sight  which  London  has  to  offer  is  a  London 

crowd ;  the  tens  of  thousands  of  orderly  people  in  the  streets,  when  some  civic 

pageant  or  royal  procession  is  passing.    But  no  man  ever  saw  all  the  inhabitants 

of  London  gathered  together.    Overwhelming ;  hard  even  to  conceive  five  million 

482 


HOMILEIIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


people  in  one  vast  concourse.  The  mind  is  baffled  as  it  tries  to  conceive  of  a 
thousand  milHons  assembled,  the  present  inhabitants  of  earth.  Yet  to 
realise  this  "  all"  there  must  be  added  all  the  millions  of  the  generations  of 
the  past,  all  those  of  the  future.  Wonderful  for  composition.  Stand  with 
Addison  in  Westminster  Abbey,  and  imagine  the  day  when  these  buried 
dead  that  people  nave,  aisles,  transepts,  chapels,  shall  all  stand  together  to 
be  contemporaries  through  an  eternal  existence.  Hardly  a  mean  person 
among  them.  Kings,  queens,  many  more  of  royal  stock.  The  greater  kings  and 
nobility  of  science,  art,  literature — the  "  pick "  of  the  greatest,  wisest,  most 
eloquent,  most  good — and  the  worst  ! — of  this  richly  dowered  England  for  a 
thousand  years.  In  this  "  all "  are  not  only  the  "  pick,"  but  the  bulk,  of  not  one 
nation  only,  but  of  a  world,  for  all  the  ages  since  men  were  first  found  upon 
earth ;  not  only  the  great,  mighty,  rich,  learned,  good,  but  the  humble,  poor, 
weak,  ignorant,  evil, — everybody.  No  escape  possible.  No  personation  possible. 
No  obtaining  a  substitute.  Writer,  readers ;  preacher,  hearers.  Mary  Queen 
of  Scots  and  Elizabeth  at  the  Abbey.  Pilate,  finding  himself  confronted  with 
Jesus,  and  their  relation  reversed.  [Men  do  not  so  easily  wash  their  hands  of 
wrong  done  to  Christ.]  Judas,  to  get  a  "  look  "  far  other  than  that  with  which 
the  eye  of  Jesus  broke  the  heart  of  Peter.  (2)  "  Every  one."  The  judgment  is 
individual  as  well  as  universal.  It  is  "  the  only  thing  absolutely  both  individual 
and  universal ;  not  even  sin  and  sorrow  can  compare  with  this."  "  It  is  hard  to 
reconcile  the  infinite  detail  with  the  Divine  dignity  ;  but  not  harder  to  receive  a 
special  judgment  than  a  special  providence.  Moreover,  there  is  no  common  con- 
science ;  the  conscience  of  every  living  man  is  the  sure  pledge  and  earnest  of  an 
individual  judgment."  (Pope.)  "Thou  art  the  man "  is  the  word  of  Redemp- 
tion,. Providence,  Mercy,  Judgment.  We  are  born  alone,  we  are  saved  by  a 
personal  faith,  "we  die  alone."  There  is  no  salvation  en  masse.  [There  was 
corporate  redemption.]  There  is  no  judgment  en  masse.  (3)  ^^  Or  bad"  makes 
it  clear  that  the  "  all "  includes  the  wicked,  who  appear  for  punishment.  The 
rebel  citizens  and  the  wicked  servants  (Luke  xix.  14,  22)  are  all  to  be  there. 
Yet  with  an  obvious  distinction  from  the  judgment  of  the  "  saved."  It  will  not 
be  true  hereafter  that  the  righteous  shall  "  scarcely  be  saved  "  (Pope).  Their 
ordeal  will  not  then  have  in  it  anything  of  a  doubtful  issue  ;  its  peculiar  severity 
and  strictness  belong  only  to  the  present  life.  The  righteous  "  shall  not  come 
into  condemnation  "  (John  v.  24).  The  Judge  is  their  Brother  and  Friend,  Whom, 
when  they  awake  from  the  dead,  they  shall  find  upon  the  throne  of  judgment.  It 
is  their  glory  that  in  that  day  judgment  will  to  them  be  only  the  ratification  and 
publication  of  a  deliverance  from  curse  and  condemnation  which  long  before,  in 
the  moment  of  their  faith  in  Christ,  was  passed  in  the  court  of  their  conscious- 
ness. The  real  crisis,  when  they  passed  from  condemnation  to  justification  of 
life,  is  in  their  case  behind  them.  [Just  as,  though  they  were  long  ago  adopted, 
and  received  the  Spirit  of  Adoption,  they  nevertheless  "  wait  for  the  adoption," 
the  publication  in  the  Great  Forum,  in  that  Day,  of  a  gracious  act  which 
the  Father  had  long  ago  intended  and  accomplished,  a  holy  secret  of  love 
between  Him  and  their  soul.]  These  appear  before  the  ^^ judgment  seat  of 
Christ"  without  fear  ;  they  shall  "  stand  in  the  judgment"  ;  these  may  "  dwell 
with  the  devouring  fire"  of  "the  Day,"  which  tests  men  and  their  work 
(Isa.  xxxiii.  14;  1  Cor.  iii.  13).  But,  whether  His  people  or  His  enemies,  all 
"  appear  "  therein,  so  to  speak,  transparent  presence.  An  end  of  all  hypocrisy, 
of  all  misconception  and  mis  judgment  and  misrepresentation.  An  end  of  all 
self-deception.  An  end  of  all  perplexity  about  the  strange  complex  of  one's  own 
motives  and  character  and  status.  Everything — every  man — stands  there, 
revealed  to  himself  and  to  all  standing  around ;  known  at  last  in  the  very 
character  which  God  has  all  along  known.     The  light  of  the  real  world,  the 

48^ 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


light  of  eternity,  is  turned  upon  even  the  hidden  things  of  the  heart.  How 
some  cower  away  from  the  blinding,  searching  scrutiny  of  the  light  of  the 
Presence  of  the  Judge  !  How  some  guilty  ones — their  own  judges — will  shrink 
away  from  themselves  as  they  there  "  appear  "  !  How  amazed  some  humble  one 
to  find  himself  there  "appearing"  in  the  judgment  of  His  Lord  nothing  less 
than  a  "  saint,"  a  "  good  and  faithful  servant "  ! 

4.  Retribution  follows  ;  in  loth  its  phases,  reward  as  well  as  penalty, — [Many 
tests  of  desert ;  many  standards  of  reward ;  many  aspects  in  which  is  presented 
the  connection  between  the  act  and  its  recompense.     Conscience  and  light ;  how 
much  of  the  latter  ]     How  blessed  with,  how  affected  by,  revealed  truth  ?     Faith. 
Works  ;  these  not  as  basis  of  merit,  but  as  indications  of  character,  and  as  measur- 
ing the  amount  of  a  reward  which  is  all  of  grace.]    "  According  to  works,"  ^''By  thy 
words,"  and  the  like  expressions,  all  are  distinct  in  idea  from  this  of  our  paragraph  : 
'''' Shall  receive  the  things  done!^     [Perhaps  over -subtle  to  press  this  too  much; 
yet  in  other  places  more  is  said  than  "  shall  receive  for  the  things  done  "  ;  more 
is  apparently  asserted  here.]     Men's  reward  does  not  only  follow  upon  conduct, 
but  is  a  harvest  from  seed  which  was  sown  by  conduct,  and  springs  out  of  conduct. 
Heaven  and  hell  are  life  continued,  and  intensified,  on  lines  essentially  projected 
here,  in  position  and  direction,  and  only  "  produced  "  eternally  there.     Men  are 
now  making  no  small  part  of  their  own  heaven  and  their  own  hell.     Men  do  here 
literally  often  "  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body.^^      No  worse  specimens  of 
misery  than  old  sinners,  past  the  possibility  of  gratifying  sinful  appetites,  yet 
still  cursed  with  them,  clinging  to  them  ;  squeezing  the  sucked  orange,  in  hope 
of  getting   a  drop   of   the  old   pleasant  juice.     "  Filled  with  his  own  ways " 
(Prov.  xiv.  14),  abandoned  to  the  curse  of  his  own  sins.     Like,  as  Maclaren 
suggests,  the  man  in  Thalaba,  who  suffered  the  devil  to  kiss  bis  shoulders,  and 
from  the  kissed  spot  sprang  serpents,  fed  by,  and  feeding  upon,  his  very  life.    [Not 
the  entire  truth.     There  must  be  some  form  of  punishment  ab  extra,  or  there  is 
in  no  proper  sense  a  pardon  of  sin.     If  the  only  hell    is  that  which  a  sinner 
prepares  for  himself,  within  himself  by  his  alienation  of  his  heart  and  mind  and 
will  from  God,  and  by  the  choosing  and  cherishing  all  things  evil  ("  Myself  am 
hell "),  then  the  only  pardon  possible  is  through,  if  it  is  not  itself,  renewal  and 
regeneration.     The  mere  penalty  of  loss  is  a  true  penalty  ab  extra,  whilst  under- 
neath all  the  symbolism  and  analogic  language  of  judgment  there  is  something 
beyond  "  loss."]     "  Always  the  dreadful  burden  is  laid  upon  the  sinner  himself. 
He  is  viewed  as  the  author  of  his  own  character,  and  as  responsible  for  his  own 
ruin.    In  the  integrity  of  his  body  and  soul  he  reaps  the  fruit  of  his  own  devices ; 
part  of  his  sin  was  the  sensuous  misuse  of  his  body ;  part  .  .   .  the  turning  away 
of  his  spirit  from  God ;  in  the  reunion  of  body  and  soul  he  suffers  the  result. 
.  .  .  The  final  condemnation  is  that  of  a  nature  now  fitted  for  it  [self-"  fitted 
for  destruction "    (Rom.    ix.   22)].      The   harvest  is  the   character  formed   by 
the    seedtime.     .    .    .    Not   that   the   Judge    assigns    eternal   punishment   for 
temporal  sin ;  but  that  sin  is  taken  confirmed  into  eternity.  .  .  .  Not  because 
man   has   sinned   only,    but    because   his    nature  is   turned    away  from    God." 
(1)  [Pope,  Cotnpend.  of  Theol.,   iii.    421.     Remark  the  best  reading  in   Mark 
iii.  29,   "eternal  sin."     Also,  in  connection  with  the  question  raised, — perhaps, 
too  urgently  pressing  the  grapes  in  the  wine-press  of   exegesis, — db  propos  of 
the  Unmerciful  Servant  (Matt,  xviii.  23-34,  with  its  commentary  "so,"  "  thus" 
ver.    35),   whether  sins    once   pardoned  return  upon   the   forgiven  man,  if  by 
new  sin  he  fall  away  from  his  mercy ;  remark  that  men  are  not  punished,  merely 
or  chiefly,  for  having  done  such  and  so  many  sins,  but  for  their  whole  attitude 
towards  God  and  His  Son.     They  are,  in  each  one  single  act,  sinners.     (I.e.  they 
are  so  now  by  their  own  choice,  as  well  as  by  inborn  bias.    It  may  be  questioned 
whether  sin  as  a  birth-principle  is  ever  punished,  now  that  the  race  has  beeu 

484 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


redeemed  by  Christ.)]  Men  have  ** treasured  up  for  themselves  wrath"  [like 
a  huge  reservoir  at  the  head  of  a  valley,  behind  whose  retaining  dam  is  accumu- 
lating a  mass  of  water  which  one  day  bursts  the  barrier  and  sweeps  down, 
carrying  everything  before  the  rush  of  its  irresistible  flood].  "  Their  sin — itself 
— finds  them  out."  On  the  other  hand,  a  man's  life  and  faithful  service  "  returns 
into  his  bosom."  "  Their  works  do  follow  them."  "  They  receive  the  things 
done  ;  "  which  is  according  to  many  analogies  of  God's  methods  of  reward  and 
punishment  on  this  side  of  death.  (2)  It  is  also  suggested  that,  whilst  "  done  in 
the  body  "  limits  the  matter  of  judicial  inquiry  to  the  actions  of  this  earthly  life, 
yet  that  these  may  be  dealt  with,  not  only  in  themselves,  but,  constructively, 
pregnantly  ;  that,  not  the  actions  only,  but  their  fruits,  good  or  evil,  in  other 
characters  and  lives,  reproductive  also  in  successive  generations,  long  after  the 
actor  himself  is  dead,  are  to  be  taken  into  account.  The  time  occupied  in 
committing  a  sin  is  in  no  sort  of  relation  to  the  length  of  the  punishment  which 
it  deserves.  Yet  if  "an  eternal  penalty  for  a  temporal  sin "  be  a  difficulty, 
this  suggestion  may  perhaps  lessen  the  difficulty.  Certainly,  to  make  new 
punishment  continually  accrue  because  of  new  sin  committed  in  eternity,  may  be 
truth  ;  but  our  passage  limits  the  direct  and  immediate  recompense  of  the  Day 
of  Christ's  Judgment  to  the  "  deeds  done  m  the  body"  And  in  any  case  the  con- 
summate reward  is,  to  be  "  accepted  of  Him." 

B.  Labouring  in  the  Present  (vers.  11-21). 

I.  A  new  man  is  labouring  to  bring  other  men  into 
II.  A  new  relation  to  God,  "  reconciliation  "  ;  and  this  from 

III.  New  motives  and  springs  of  action. 

[In  addition  to  the  material  given  under  Separate  Homilies  may  be  said  : — ] 

I.  The  new  creation  of  the  individual  is  no  isolated  act  of  grace. — The 
Church  is  no  aggregate  of  such  individuals  each  of  whom  is  a  specimen  of  God's 
work,  whose  significance  begins  and  ends  with  that  particular  instance.  Each 
single  conversion  is  part  of  a  great  plan.  "  What  does  it  matter  that  I  should 
get  converted  1  What  if  I  do  not  ? "  It  matters  this,  that  God  is  straightening 
out  the  sin-entangled  course  of  human  history,  and  that  each  single  life  is  one  of 
the  threads.  It  must  be  made  to  lie  even  with  the  rest.  The  new  direction  given 
to  the  '*  new  man's  "  life  is  but  one  of  many  lines,  all  convergent  towards  God's 
goal  for  humanity  and  the  world.  [Hence  the  Saviour  justifies  His  act  of 
healing  at  Bethesda,  by  paralleling  it  with  God's  incessant  operativeness  in  the 
world  which  He  has  made,  which  Sin  has  marred,  and  He  is  making  anew.  God  is 
spending  the  Sabbath  of  His  rest  from  creation,  in  ceaseless  recovery  of  man,  soul 
and  body,  from  the  consequence  and  curse  of  the  intruding  Moral  Evil  in  His 
world.  The  healing  of  the  lame  man  was  one  act  of  the  great  Redeeming  Activity, 
which  reproduced  in  the  physical  sphere,  and  on  a  tiny  scale,  the  great  Work  of 
God.  Hence  it  was  suitable  work  for  the  earthly  Sabbath  of  the  Son  of  God 
(John  V.  17-30).]  When  His  voice  sounds  through  "the  new  heaven  and  the 
new  earth  "  the  proclamation  "  I  make  all  things  new,"  these  words  will 
only  be  the  latest,  largest,  grandest,  of  a  series  of  such  utterances.  In  every 
"  new  creature's "  heart  it  will  have  been  anticipated  long  before.  The  man 
*'  in  Christ  "  was  made  *'  a  new  creature,"  that  he  might  fall  in  with  the  march 
and  movement  of  God's  fulfilment  of  His  Redeeming  Purpose,  whose  climax  and 
consummation  and  goal  are  a  new  earth,  peopled  by  a  new  Human  Race,  headed 
up  by  a  new  Adam.  Man  and  environment,  by  a  convergence  of  many  lines  of 
restorative  operation,  then  find  themselves  brought  together,  each  perfectly  fitted 
for  the  other  and  both  for  God. 

II.  Travelling  backward,  the  first  step  of  the  recovery  is  reached. — "^e 
reconciled  to  God."  Man's  relation  to  God,  his  attitude  toward  God,  is  all  awry 
and  out  of  joint.     But  the  Recovery  really  began  farther  back.     God  needed  to 

485 


CHAP.  V.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


make  reconciliation  on  His  own  side.  God's  first  advance  needed  making ;  now 
it  needs  meeting  by  a  responsive  advance  by  men.  The  balance  of  truth  must 
be  held  even.  A  mechanical  scheme — one  which,  at  all  events,  became  stiffened, 
hardened,  into  mechanical — may  have  set  a  wrathful  God  over  against  a  merciful 
Son,  in  an  exaggerated  vividness  of  "  dramatic  "  representation  of  a  transaction 
between  Father  and  Son  re  mankind.  But  all  wrath  must  not  be  denied  to  God. 
The  difficulty  lies  in  adjusting  what  is  true  of  the  timeless  being  of  God,  to  the 
historical  sequence  in  the  story  of  the  world  and  in  the  life-story  of  the  sinner. 
Historically  we  say  that  reconciliation  was  effected  at  Calvary ;  yet  it  was  earlier 
proclaimed,  in  the  Immanuel-Child  of  Bethlehem  ;  and,  as  happy  matter  of  fact, 
the  fallen  race  has  never  had  to  do  with  a  God  out  of — apart  from — Christ. 
All  His  dealings  with  the  race,  all  His  dealings  with  the  individual,  have  had 
reconciliation -grace  as  their  background.  Much  "  broad "  theology,  in  en- 
deavouring to  find  adequate  expression  for  this  truth,  is  apt  to  forget  that  this 
gracious  leaning  of  God  towards  mankind,  and  towards  the  man,  is  from  the 
first  represented  in  Scripture  as  an  altered  relation.  We  cannot  date  the  alteration 
by  our  chronology ;  it  is  certainly  no  later  historically  than  the  protevangelion 
of  Gen.  iii.  15.  "  Then  all  died.'  Who  shall  say,  in  the  profoundest  sense,  ivhenl 
But  in  speaking  of  God  thus  "  reconciling  the  world  to  Himself, '^  we  look,  naturally 
enough,  to  Calvary,  but  we  hear — as  not  fathoming  the  meaning — of  "  a  Lamb 
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  "  (Bev.  xiii.  8).  ["  My  blood  boils  when 
I  see  a  Frenchman,"  said  Nelson,  a  typical  Englishman  of  his  time  in  this. 
God  is  not  Nelson  ;  but  the  words  illustrated  and  exhibited  an  antagonism  not 
against  the  individual  as  such — the  particular  Frenchman  was  not  in  issue — but 
against  the  very  nation  and  race  of  Frenchmen.]  Conceivable — necessary  as  matter 
of  clear  thinking  to  conceive  of — a  wrath  against  the  race  as  such,  to  which 
the  individual  was  of  necessity  obnoxious  and  exposed.  Not  only  conceivable, 
but  certain,  that  now  "  in  Christ  "  the  world  is  so  reconciled,  that  to  be  a  man  is 
no  barrier  to  peace  ;  there  is  no  "  wrath  "  against  the  race  as  such  [the  race  are 
now  "the  men  of  God's  good  will"] ;  nor  any  against  the  individual,  unless  he 
awaken  it  by  his  personal  sin  and  personal  evil  character.  It  is  for  him  now 
to  say  whether  there  shall  be  "  reconciliation."  The  ambassadors  plead,  *'  Be 
reconciled.''^ 

III.  New  motives  actuate  and  urge  them. — And  all  centre  in,  radiate  from, 
converge  towards,  Christ.  "  Constrain  them."  The  love  of  Christ  constrains  them. 
(See  Critical  Notes  on  this  great  word.)  The  *'  new  man  "  now  knows  Christ  in 
a  new  way.  The  very  love  of  Christ  is  in  him.  Love  understands  love.  And 
love  begets  an  overmastering  passion  for  saving  men,  and  makes  the  plea  "  Be 
reconciled  "  intense  in  its  earnestness  of  entreaty.  "  The  terror  of  the  Lord  "  rules 
them.  No  need  to  exclude  either  "  fear "  or  "  terror  "  ;  we  want  both,  for 
faithful  exegesis  and  for  complete  fact.  "  The  Lord  "  is  Christ.  To  the  enemy  His 
holiness  is  a  terror,  or  should  be.  To  the  very  reconciled  man  himself  there  is 
an  awe,  a  reverence,  a  godly  fear,  in  that  same  holiness,  with  all  his  love  for  his 
Master.  He  looks  at  himself  who  was  once  a  rebel ;  he  fears  to  grieve,  or  lose, 
the  love  which  was,  and  is,  such  free  grace.  He  looks  at  the  rebel  who  will  not 
"  be  reconciled  "  ;  and  he  trembles  to  think  of  the  terror  for  him  when,  whether 
he  will  or  nO,  he  must  come  into  contact — conflict — with  the  holiness  of  Christ 
the  Judge.  And  he  therefore  persuades  men ;  runs  through  all  the  gamut  of 
a  *'  changing  voice  "  (Gal.  iv.  20),  if  he  may  win  them  to  surrender  and  re- 
conciliation. No  motion  lower  than  these,  or  less  intense,  will  keep  the 
evangelist-heart  in  perpetual  vigour  in  the  settled  pastor.  The  new  man  must 
see  men  who  are  what  he  was,  with  the  new  eyes ;  must  feel  towards  them  with 
the  new  heart  and  the  new  passion,  which  are  those  of  Christ  Himself.  No 
wonder  that  he  tries  to  be  "  sober"      Still  less  wonder  if  men  call  him  "  mad" 

486 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


Sober  or  mad,  men  are  in  view ;  God  is  in  view ;  that  God  and  those  men  are 
somehow,  it  he  can  compass  it^  to  be  brought  together  "  reconciled."  The  Church, 
the  world,  the  Redeeming  Work  of  God,  want  a  succession  of  such  "  mad- 
anen  " ! 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses   13—17. 

A  Man  in  Christ  a  New  Man. — He  has  three  things  new. 

I.  A  new  imperial  impulse. — Wonderful  is  the  power  of  a  strong  passion  over 

our  natures.     It  fires  the  brain,  stirs  the  blood,  bends  every  energy  to  its  own 

use.     The  love  of  Christ  thus  filled  and  fired,  pressed,  urged,  overbore  Paul.      It 

carried  him  on  like  a  resistless  torrent.    It  was  the  regnant  impulse — everything 

else  was  subject  to  it.    ["  It  is  impossible  to  read  his  EpistleTwitEout  discovering 

that  Christ's  love  had  been  so  revealed  to  him  that  it  had  taken  posset^sion  of  his 

thought  and  of  every  active  energy  of  his  nature,  and  stirred  the  profoundest 

depths  of    his  emotion.      Sometimes  in  a   long  passage   the   name   of   Christ 

occurs  in  almost   every  alternate   line  ;    sometimes  he  breaks   away  from  an 

argument  at  the  bare  mention  of  Christ's  name,  unable  to  govern  the  vehement 

impulse  to  dwell  upon  Christ's  glory  and  grace ;  at  other  times  ^ust  as  a  ship 

is  gradually  swept  out  of  her  course  hy  a  strong  and  silent  current  in  the  sea, 

St.   Paul  is  gradually  carried  away  from  the   point   for   which  he  seemed  to 

be  making,  by  the  habitual  drift  of  all  his  deepest  affections  towards  Christ." 

(Dale,  Atonement,  pp.  260,  261.)]     This  is  incomprehensible  to  those  who  have 

it  not.     The  Apostle's  contemporaries  thought  him,  under  its  influence,  to  be 

"  mad."     They  could  have  understood  ambition.     [Paul's  only  ambition  was  **  to 

be  accepted  of  Christ."]     They  could  have  understood  avarice.     [When  Lord 

Macaulay  went  to  India  it  was  evident  that  he  felt  keenly  the  parting  from 

England  and  his  family  circle.    "  The  pains — acute  enough  sometimes,  God  knows 

— of  banishment."      But  he  went  avowedly  to  make  a  fortune — £10,000  a  year  ; 

could  save  several  thousands  every  year.     Had  hope  of  return  at  end  of  five 

or  six  years.     "  Comfortable,  though  modest,  home  ;  certain  of  a  good  fire,  a 

good  joint  of  meat,  a  good   glass  of  wine,   without   incurring   obligations   to 

anybody,  and  perfectly  indifferent — at  least  as  far  as  our  pecuniary  interest  is 

concerned — to  the  changes  in  the  political  world."     Not  a  bad  set-ofF  to  the 

pangs  of  parting  !     Yet  with  none  of  these  prospects  for  his  days  of  return, 

with  only  isolation  in  his  work,  and  a  status  by  no  means  too  highly  accounted 

of  in  India,  many  a  missionary  has  cast  away  bright  prospects  in  England  or 

Scotland  or  the  States,  and  buried  himself  in  that  same  Indian  land,  because  the 

Love  of  Christ — Christ's  own  love  for  souls — had  got  hold  of  him  with  a  force 

the  man  of  the  world  does  not  understand.     See  Trevelyan,  Life  of  Macaulay.^ 

A  man  must  have  this  feeling  to  interpret  it.     This  love  alone  understands 

itself.     It  arises  from  reflection  upon  the  death  of  Christ.     It  is  not  an  inbred 

passion  or  a  blind  impulse;    it  comes  thus:    "We  thus  judge,"  etc.     ^^  All." 

Take  this  away,  and  it  is  a  mutilated  Gospel.     That  all  are  not  saved  is  no 

objection.     In  material  nature  much  seems  wasted.     Rain  and  dew  fall  on  the 

rock  and  on  the  desert  sand.     Light  falls  day  after  day,  where  no  living  thing 

seems  to  need  or  use  it. 

*'  Full  many  a  gem  of  purest  ray  serene,"  etc. 

—  Gray's '' Elegy.'' 

Fruit  ripens  and  falls  and  rots  where  there  has  never  been  a  man.  Wealth 
sufficient  to  enrich  the  millions  who  die  in  want  is  buried  beneath  the  mountains 
or  the  seas.  Medicine  for  half  the  ills  of  life  is  shut  up  in  minerals  and  plants, 
whilst  generations  die  without  knowing  of  the  remedy  which  nature  has  provided. 
[See  tlus  in  Butler,  Analogy y  part  ii.,  chap.  3.]     There  are  men  coming  after  us  who 

487 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


will  discover  and  enjoy  these ;  and  who  will  similarly  avail  themselves  of  the 
blessings  of  that  atonement  which  generations  have  either  ignorantly  rejected 
or  wickedly  despised.  This  contemplation  suggested  two  strong  reasons  why 
Paul  should  be  so  zealous  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  The  whole  world  was  in  a 
ruined  condition  [see  Critical  Notes  on  this].  The  principle  of  self-sacrifice 
is  the  binding  principle  of  action.  Selfishness  is  the  death  of  the  world.  We 
are  all  "  links  in  being's  endless  chain,"  and  we  cannot  move  without  influencing 
others.  Yet  man  seeks  to  do  so,  and  this  is  his  sin  and  ruin.  He  who  would 
help  the  world  must  get  this  love  of  Christ,  and  work  by  it.  No  other  labour 
is  of  any  service.     Love  to  Christ  is  the  Christian's  royal  passion. 

II.  A  new  social  standard. — The  world  has  a  variety  of  such  standards — 
ranJcj  wealth,  social  influence ;  by  these  canons  it  estimates  and  appraises  men. 
Christianity  regards  such  standards  as  false  and  evanescent.     It  estimates  man 

Joy  his  righteousness,  not  by  his  rank  ;  by  his  principles,  not  by  his  possessions. 
Paul  once  so  knew  men  "  after  the  flesh  " ;  now  he  sees  them  all  in  the  light  of 
the  Cross,  as  sinners  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.     Let  us  try  our  own  religion  hy 
this  test.     What  kind  of  sympathy  have  we  with  Christ  ?     There  are  views  of 
His  material  condition  adapted  to  awaken  our  mere  natural  sympathies.     What 
kind  of  understanding  of  Him  ?     There  is  no  necessary  religion  in  such  sensuous 
sympathy  with  Him,  and  with  the  mere  beauty  of  His  human  life  and  character. 
Our  zeal  for  spreading  Christianity  will  he  regulated  and  guided  by  this  new 
standard.     Sufficient  for  us  to  know  that  men  are  men  and  morally  dead ;  in 
any  count ly,  of  any  faith,  in  any  social  position.      On  this  principle  a  Christian 
will  form  his  friendships.     Godly  people  rather  than  merely  rich  or  influential 
or  cultured  people  will  be  his  choice  for  his  own  friends,  for  his  children's  friends, 
wives,    husbands.      Godliness    and    all    these,    if    he    can    have    them ;    but 
godliness  first.     By  this  new  standard  of  valuation  he  will  regulate  his  activities. 
Principles  before  persons ;  spiritual  considerations  before  material  ones.     When 
we  are  ruled  by  considerations  of  worldly  interest  or  by  the  opinions  of  men, 
merely  because  they  have  secular  influence  or  authority,  we  ^^  judge  after  the 
Hesh."     We  should  "  Tcnow  no  man  after  the  flesh  "  as  authorities  in  creed  or 
conduct;   their   spiritual  excellence  should   alone   influence   us.      [This   wants 
guarding.]  «— «— «^*-.    ,«.—■- 

III.  A  new  spiritual  history. — "  A  new  creation."  1.  Unlike  the  old  in  some 
respects.  That  was  out  of  nothing ;  here  conversion  only  turns  the  head  of  the 
same  vessel  round,  and  gives  it  a  new  direction — [''  converted  to  God  "].  The  same 
essential,  neutral,  natural  manhood  simply  obeys  the  new  law  in  all  its  faculties 
and  their  activities.  The  first  creation  presented  no  difficulties  to  the  Creator. 
"  Spake  :  done."  In  the  moral  change  there  are  resisting  forces ;  the  material  is 
refractory  under  the  Creator's  hand.  2.  Yet  like  the  old  in  some  points.  Something 
new  is  produced.  This  passion  for  Christ,  for  example,  is  a  new  thing  in  the 
universe.  This  new  thing  is  produced  by  Divine  agency.  Man  works  with 
pre-existent  materials ;  he  rearranges  in  new  order ;  makes  ever  new  com- 
binations. But  in  Nature,  or  in  character,  only  God  can  create.  Logic, 
eloquence,  force  of  interest  or  will,  can  reform,  rearrange  a  life,  but  not  call 
forth  a  new  one.  This  new  something  is  produced  according  to  a  Divine  Flan. 
In  the  moral  creation  we  know  not  the  plan,  but  all  beings,  under  the  Great 
Architect,  are  working  for  its  accompHshment.  [History  for  ages  converged 
upon  the  Redemption  of  the  world  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  so  really  also  upon  the 
new  creation  of  the  individual  Christian.]  Heaven,  earth,  matter,  mind,  even 
hell  unwittingly,  working  for  it.  This  is  for  the  Divine  glory.  To  a  gazing 
universe  the  new  Race  in  Christ,  and  the  new  man  '*in  Christ,"  are  the  most 
consummate  exhibition  of  "the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  "  (Eph.  iii.  10,  i.  12,  etc.). 
The  new  creation  is  the  greatest  marvel  of  all  God's  works.     So  then  the  things 

488  .       ,    . 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  V. 


without  do  not  change.  Nature,  society,  events  around, — these  are  only  the 
setting  of  the  man  and  of  life ;  they  may  remain  the  same,  but  the  change  is 
within.  He  sees  with  a  new  eye,  hears  with  a  new  ear,  interprets  all  things 
with  a  new  judgment.  The  moment  we  look  at  the  universe  through  the  new 
medium  of  love  to  Christ,  it  becomes  new,  the  old  universe  passes  away,  a  "  new 
heavens  and  a  new  earth "  appear.  And  all  "  very  good  J' — Founded  upon 
"  Homilist"  Third  Series,  vii.  362,  with  added  material. 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 


Ver.  7.  Faith  v.  Sight. 

I.  The  world  of  "  sight,"  of  ''  ap- 
pearances," revealed  to  sense,  a  very 
narrow  one. — Taste  knows  nothing 
more  distant  than  the  tongue- tip. 
Touch  only  tells  of  a  world  whose 
radius  is  the  reach  of  the  arm. 
Hearing  only  widens  it  by  the  few 
thousand  feet  over  which  the  vibrating 
air  will  still  quiver  with  its  message 
before  trembling  away  into  silence. 
Smell  carries  knowledge  no  farther 
than  the  winds  may  waft  an  odour. 
It  may  bring  to  a  Columbus  in  mid- 
ocean  tidings  of  a  continent  as  yet 
below  the  horizon.  Yet  a  narrow 
world,  at  its  farthest.  But  sight,  queen 
of  the  senses !  It  makes  us  free  of 
worlds  most  distant,  and  puts  us  into 
communication  with  far  depths  in 
space  which  even  the  flashing  light 
needs  years  to  traverse.  It  can  even 
carry  us  back  into  a  world  that  is 
really  past.  Men  have  seen  from  earth 
the  fires  of  a  conflagration  which 
perhaps  long  ages  before  destroyed  a 
world.  The  rays  of  light  have  only 
just  arrived  at  their  eye,  and  make 
them,  as  it  were,  contemporary 
spectators  of  the  climax  of  its  history. 
In  mere  physical  extent  the  world  of 
the  eye  is  widest,  and  vvonderf ully  vast. 
Yet,  how  narrow  !  Within  the  sphere 
swept  by  sight  how  many  things  escape 
it.  How  many  things,  moreover,  are 
hidden  from  each  of  the  senses  in  turn, 
and  known  only  to  some  other  one  of 
the  five.  And  when  man  is  armed 
with  all  five,  and  all  at  their  best, 
they  only  tell  him  of  the  world  of 
space  and  matter  and  time.  There  is 
a  world  close  about  him,  of  which 
these  have  nothing  to  say.  Under- 
neath   the  world    of    "appearances," 


there  lies  another  world  which  does  not 
appear.  The  whole  world  of  mind  is 
there.  Sight  shows  one  man  a  flower  : 
"  A  primrose  by  the  river's  brim,"  etc. 
An  ox  sees  that  much.  Another  man 
sees  it,  and  behind,  beneath,  within  it, 
imagination  reveals  to  him  another 
world.  He  speaks  of  this  in  words 
taught  him  not  by  sense,  and  he  is  a 
poet.  Two  men  look  upon  the  same 
face.  Rays  of  the  same  light  trace 
the  same  [practically,  not  exactly] 
picture  on  the  screen  which  we  call 
the  retina.  One  man  sees,  and  can 
put  upon  the  canvas  his  interpretation 
of  what  he  sees ;  it  is  a  likeness,  and  a 
character  too,  and  a  piece  of  true 
workmanship  which  will  rank  as  one 
of  the  world's  art  treasures.  Poet, 
painter,  musician,  mathematician, 
logician,  all  agree  that  not  only  the 
man  who  lives  for  eating  and  drink- 
ing and  sleeping,  having  no  higher 
pleasure  in  life  than  the  satisfaction 
of  a  craving  or  the  thrill  of  a  nerve, 
but  also  that  the  man  who  knows 
nothing  but  of  material  interests,  who 
never  goes  beyond  immediate  profit, 
and  that  expressible  in  *'  £  s.  d.,"  is 
living  in  a  narrow  world.  2.  But  the 
Christian  man  thinks  even  the  widest 
world  of  these  men  circumscribed. 
Even  these,  unless  they  be  also  Chris- 
tians, miss  a  world  lying  all  around 
them,  revealed  not  to  sense,  nor  to 
intellect,  but  to  faith. 

II.  The  Christian  lives  upon  that 
supposition. — He  is  at  the  very 
opposite  pole  to  the  "  secularist "  who 
(teste  nomine)  says,  "  I  know  of  no 
world  but  this,  now  or  hereafter." 
Such  a  secularist  lives  expressly  and 
professedly  for  this  world,  and  for 
man,  often  spending    life  in   a  very 

489 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    It    CORINTHIANS. 


noble  endeavour  to  bring  man  to  live 
his  worthiest  and  to  attain  to  his 
best  for  this,  his  "  only  "  life.  Man 
is  to  him  the  climax  of  creation, 
and  this  world  is  all.  Paul  says :  "I 
know  of  a  world  above  this,  and  out- 
lasting this  little  life  eternally.  I 
know  of  One  above  me,  to  Whom 
every  one  of  us  must  give  account  of 
himself."  The  Christian  man  shapes  his 
course  accordingly.  It  is  not,  e.g.,  a 
thing  unknown  that  a  Christian  man 
should  refuse  further  extension  of  what 
is  already  a  prosperous  business,  and 
should  say :  "  I  cannot  undertake  more. 
I  have  now  scanty  leisure  and  energy 
for  God  and  for  my  larger,  eternal 
life."  Not  a  mere  idea,  beautiful  but 
chimerical,  that  a  man,  in  life's  prime, 
and  riding  upon  the  very  flood  of  a 
springtide  of  prosperity,  should  say : 
"  I  have  enough  for  the  comfort  of  our 
later  years.  Enough  to  ensure  my  boys 
and  girls  against  the  paralysing  fear  of 
want,  but  not  to  exempt  my  sons  from 
the  ennobling  discipline  of  work. 
"Whilst  strength  and  health  are  yet 
full,  I  will  turn  aside  and  do  something 
directly  and  wholly  for  God."  There  are 
a  few  men  who  educate  their  sons  and 
start  them  in  life,  there  are  mothers  who 
train  their  daughters  and  mate  them 
for  life,  regarding  most  the  soul  and  its 
well-being,  God  and  His  claims;  just  in 
proportion  as  they  are  not  "  secularist  " 
but  Christian,  "  walking  hy  faith,  not 
by  sight"  and  "  looking  not  at  the  things 
which  are  seen,  but  at  the  things 
which  are  not  seen  "  (iv.  18). 

III.  This  gives  a  new  standard  of 
measurement. — Things  are  important 
or  trivial  according  as  they  affect  the 
life  of  God  and  of  eternity.  Whatever 
helps  these  is  to  be  cherished.  What- 
ever even  threatens  to  hinder,  is  to 
be  kept  subordinate  and  secondary. 
Trials  and  sorrows  get  a  new  import- 
ance, a  new  interpretation.  The  man 
of  "  sight "  sees  the  scale  heaped  vip 
with  these,  and  sometimes  sees  no 
counterweight.  The  man  of  faith 
sees  them,  but  sees  heaven  and 
the  compensations  of  grace  and  of 
fellowship    with   God   even  on   earth. 

490 


The  balance  is  seen  to  be  more  than 
redressed.  The  "secular"  temper  in 
its  dark  hour  says,  "  Not  worth  while 
to  live  ! "  The  Christian  temper  en- 
dures, rejoices  in,  all  (Rom.  v.  3). 
"Our  light  affliction,"  etc.  (iv.  17). 
Indeed,  what  a  comment  upon  the 
whole  section  iv.  16 — vi.  10  is  the  whole 
practice  of  Paul.  How  the  per- 
spective of  life  is  adjusted  by  the  new 
standpoint.  How  the  proportions  of 
things  are  regulated,  "^^^ome  with 
the  Lord."  Then  this  is  not  "  home," 
except  as  the  sojourner  in  some  distant 
land  may  call  his  house  for  the  time 
being  his  "  home."  The  real  home  of 
Paul's  heart  is  where  his  Lord  dwells. 
Men  judge  him,  misjudge  him.  But 
there  is  the  judgment  of  another 
world :  "  We  must  all  appear — be 
manifest — before,"  etc.  (ver.  10). 
And  he  bears  it,  and  goes  on  accord- 
ingly. Modern  astronomy  has  long 
transferred  the  centre  of  things  from 
the  earth  to  the  sun.  Christianity 
transfers  the  centre  of  our  life  from 
earth  to  that  world  where  Christ  sits, 
the  Centre  of  all  life  and  love  and 
labour.  This  short  life,  instead  of 
being  central,  and  all  in  all,  takes  its 
true  place  in  the  system  of  God's 
order,  fulfilling  its  little  round,  rotating 
upon  its  own  axis  of  interest,  but  re- 
volving around  God  as  its  true  centre, 
and  having  Eternity  for  the  full 
compass  of  its  orbit ! 

lY.  The  Christian  knows  of  the 
truths  which  belong  to  this  world,  by 
faith. — 1.  He  is  a  believer.  He  walks 
through  the  midst  of  "appearances" 
with  a  vivid  apprehension  of  the  things 
unseen,  by  means  of  faith.  Take  faith 
away,  the  pole-star  of  his  course  is 
hidden  ;  he  steers  in  the  dark.  Take 
faith  away,  all  landmarks  are  gone;  he 
loses  himself  in  a  pathless  world.  Not 
simply  his  lantern  is  taken,  but  his 
eye.  The  very  faculty  for  perceiving 
things  unseen  and  spiritual  is  gone. 
He  does  make  use  of  reason ;  he  does 
not  shut  eyes  and  ears,  and  swallow 
down  any  marvel  proposed  to  him.  It 
is  very  reasonable  to  believe,  on  such 
evidence  as  the  Christian  has.    In  very 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II    CORINTHIANS,    chap.  V. 


weighty  matters,  and  on  the  same  kind 
of  evidence,  often  with  much  less  of  it, 
do  men  act  every  day.  But  there  is  no 
demonstration  J  no  such  evidence  as  can 
compel  assent.  Euclid  can;  the  man 
who  refuses  assent  is  not  capable  of  the 
reasoning.  From  Book  I.,  prop.  1,  to 
Book  XII.,  prop,  last,  is  forged  one 
long  chain  of  demonstration.  But  in 
reasoning  about  Divine  facts  a  link  is 
often  wanting.  Faith  puts  it  in.  Or 
the  chain  is  not  long  enough  to  reach 
to  the  conclusion  we  see  clearly  enough 
to  be  necessary  and  right.  Faith  must 
supply  the  wanting  length.  Our  mind 
tries  to  bridge  over  by  inquiry  the 
gulf  between  known  and  unknown. 
There  are  gaps  in  the  series  of  arches. 
Faith  supplies  those  missing  or  broken. 
Perhaps  the  bridge  of  demonstration 
can  only  bring  us  in  sight  of  the  op- 
posite shore,  and  faith  must  make  a 
leap  to  her  footing  on  the  sure  land  of 
knowledge.  The  arches  are  not  there. 
But  it  is  reasonable  enough  to  complete 
the  -series  by  putting  them  in.  There 
is  room  for  doubt.  There  is  only 
"  moral  "  certainty,  exceedingly  high 
probability,  no  demonstration.  2. 
**  Moral  evidence,"  *'  moral  certainty," 
common  phrases  which  tell  how  often 
believing  or  not  believing  depends  more 
or  less  upon  the  heart  and  will  of  the 
man — upon  his  mood,  or  wish,  or  in- 
terests, or  prepossessions.  If  there  be 
a  bias  against  the  conclusion,  no 
evidence  is  demonstrative.  If  there 
be  an  honest  readiness  to  accept  the 
consequences  of  truth,  then  far  less 
abundant  proof  is  enough.  I  believe 
in  a  God,  and  a  future,  a  soul,  a  judg- 
ment. There  is  much  evidence,  but 
certainty  involves  faith.  3.  Very 
often  by  ordinary,  natural  methods 
we  can  arrive  at  no  knowledge  at  all. 
We  cannot  build  our  bridge,  but  must 
be  lifted  "  clean  over  "  to  the  far  shore, 
must  commit  ourselves  blindfold  and 
helpless  to  One  Whom  we  trust,  and  let 
Him  lift  us  into  knowledge.  Many 
things  of  the  world  of  Divine  facts 
can  never  be  known,  unless  we  yield 
ourselves  utterly  and  simply  to  be  told 
and  taught.     But  faith  is  then  re- 


warded and  crowned  with  knowledge. 
There  is  a  *'  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit "  (1  Cor.  ii.  4,  where  see  Separate 
Homily  and  Analysis)  which  excludes 
doubt,  given  to  the  man  who  has  Him. 
"I  believed  to  see"  (Ps.  xxvii.  13)  is 
a  rule  of  wider  application  than  to 
Providential  deliverances.  4.  Prayer, 
Atonement,  inspiration,  a  Saviour  Who 
is  God, — these  are  to  us  the  bases 
df  life,  but  every  one  of  them  is 
environed  with  mystery.  [See  the 
worshippers  passing  onward  to  an 
Egyptian  temple,  down  an  avenue  of 
towering  statues,  in  the  mist  and  the 
dim  light  of  very  early  morning.  See 
the  band  of  Christians  making  their 
way  homeward,  these  great  truths 
the  way-marks  of  his  path,  on  either 
hand  ranged  in  their  grandeur.  To 
them  it  is  dim  twilight — morning  twi- 
light, but  dim  yet.  Every  Christian 
believes  every  truth  to  have  a  form 
of  perfect  beauty.  But  all  eyes 
are  not  equally  keen  in  the  scanty 
light.  The  best  eyes  see  most  of 
the  Divine  beauty  in  each  truth ; 
many  eyes  see  how  they  range  them- 
selves in  harmony  and  order;  a  few 
give  close  and  careful  examination, 
and  are  repaid  by  fuller  knowledge 
of  their  beauty  and  strength.  But  for 
very  much  all  must  wait  until  the  day 
dawns.  It  is  folly  in  the  critics  of  the 
company,  to  cavil  at  the  order,  or  to 
deny  the  beauty,  and,  above  all,  to  refuse 
to  avail  themselves  of  their  guidance, 
because  they  cannot  see  more.  For 
the  man  who  wants  to  walk  by  them 
there  is  light  enough  ;  he  sees  enough 
to  walk  by.  He  sees  them  dimly,  but 
they  guide  him  safely.  He  is  content 
to  believe  for  the  rest,  and  to  walk 
by  faith.]  [5.  Let  the  "  bridge  "  rather 
be  the  narrow  causeway,  stretching 
away  toward  knowledge,  between  two 
unbounded  deep  seas  of  mystery.  The 
waves  of  mystery  often  sweep  across 
the  very  pathway.  There  are  gaps 
broken  in  the  causeway  itself.  But 
reason  bids  faith  go  forward.  Faith 
makes  her  plunge  from  the  last  bit  of 
clear  foothold  of  knowledge  to  the  next, 
seen  afar  off.   The  eye  sees  no  path,  but 

491 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


faith  sometimes  finds  footing  beneath 
the  waters.  Sometimes  none ;  when  she 
must  swim  for  it,  until  her  foot  touches 
ground  again,  and  so  goes  forward  to 
knowledge.] 

[y.  In  regard  to  God's  providence. — 
All  know  of  the  plunge  from  know- 
ledge and  certainty  and  clear  walking, 
into  dark  waves  of  mysterious  dealing 
which  sweep  over  the  path,  and 
almost  sweep  them  away  also.  Faith 
says :  "  Sight  finds  nothing,  but  I 
know  the  way  lies  right  on.  My 
Father's  path  never  swerves.  I  follow 
straight  forward.  I  may  have  to  swim 
for  it,  but  that  way  lies  dry  land  !  "  The 
experience  is  repeated  again  and  again, 
until  one  last  step,  one  last  plunge,  of 
faith  puts  the  foot  on  the  shore  where 
at  last  men  do  walk  amongst  the 
realities,  by  sight  in  the  glorious  and 
most  worthy  sense.]  [Here  the  men  of 
sight  are  inferior  to  the  men  of  faith. 
There  sight  is  the  nobler,  greater  life.] 

Ver.  16.  Knowing  Christ  after  the 
Flesh 

I.  Manifold  agencies  now  are  at 
work  for  bringing  men's  minds  into 
contact  with  Christ. — 1.  His  life  is 
being  studied  as  never  before,  with 
new  earnestness,  with  new  helps. 
Palestine  is  searched  and  surveyed 
from  end  to  end,  with  the  aid  of  the 
accumulated  learning  of  eighteen  cen- 
turies. The  facts  which  bear  upon  His 
career  are  eagerly  welcomed  and  at 
once  widely  published.  That  career 
is  being  studied  from  all  points  of 
view ;  by  men  actuated  by  the  most 
widely  differing  motives  ;  some  defend- 
ing, some  attacking  and  destroying ; 
with  minds  of  every  cast  and  calibre. 
Every  doubter,  every  enemy,  tries  his 
hand  on  "Jesus  of  Nazareth."  The 
Socialist  endeavours  to  claim  Him  as 
the  first  and  greatest  exponent  of  his 
philanthropic  aims  and  methods. 
[Said  a  French  revolutionary,  "  Le  hon 
sansculotte."^  Everything  conventional 
is  at  a  discount,  and  the  result  is 
that  we  get  a  new,  and  often  a  more 
correct,  idea  of  the  externals  of  Jesus 
and    His     life    than    any    preceding 

492 


generation  could  obtain.     Our  time  is 
full  of  "Lives"  of  Christ.     Men  full 
of     learning,     of     poetical    gifts,     of 
philosophical  power,   are  setting  forth 
in  new   and  beautiful  lights  His  out- 
ward surroundings,  and  the  influences 
which — at   all  events  in   the  case   of 
another,  ordinary  man — would  influence 
and  mould  the  inner  life  and  character. 
His  Galilsean  home,  the  city  of  Jeru- 
salem,  His  countrymen,    their   habits 
of  thought  and  speech, — all  are  helping 
to  make  how  He  lived  almost  as  familiar 
to  our  generation  as  how  ourselves  live. 
Pictorial  illustration,  accurate  as  never 
was  possible  before,  is  helping  to  bring 
all  this  vivid,  realistic  knowledge  home 
to  the  simplest  and  the  youngest  of 
our  people.      And  yet,    with  all  this 
picturesque  and  novel  setting  of   the 
history,  with  all  the  skilful  dissection 
of  motive  and  mental  process,  with  all 
this  appreciative  study  of   His  teach- 
ing, there  is  the  possibility  that  men 
should  only  "  know  Him  after  the  flesh." 
Some  of  the  writers  of  even  "  Lives " 
of   Christ   have   themselves    avowedly 
only  come  into  contact  with  a  human 
teacher,   a   Jewish   Rabbi    of    unique 
independence,  and  of  great  beauty  of 
teaching  and  personal  character,  mar- 
vellously influential   upon  the  world's 
history   and   thought.       But  to  these 
He   is   at   most   the    Greatest   of  the 
world's  greatest  men.      With  some  of 
them  He  is  not  even  the  greatest,  but 
an  amiable,  pleasant  enthusiast,  who 
could   and   did   make  mistakes ;    who 
was  hurried  on,  spite  of  Himself,  into 
unintended,  unexpected   developments 
of  His  action,  and  to  an  entirely  in- 
opportune and  undesired  issue  on  the 
cross.      They  see,  and  present  vividly 
to  their  readers,  a  conception,  more  or 
less   accurate,    of    a   Man   Jesus   who 
lived  and  died  in  the  reigns  of  Augustus 
and  Tiberius.     They  aim  at  doing  this, 
and   so   thoroughly   succeed  in   many 
cases  that  their  readers  see  no  more. 
Writers  and  readers  get  back  into  the 
position  of  a  Nicodemus  or  a  Caiaphas, 
and   see  just   what   a    worshipper  in 
the   synagogue   of    Capernaum   or  of 
Nazareth  saw  and  knew ;  the  brother 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  v. 


whom    *'  His    brethren    and    sisters " 
lived  and  grew  up  with;  the  strange 
Man  with  whom  Pilate  was  one  Friday- 
morning  a  good  deal  "  bothered,"  until 
he  "  washed  his  hands  "  of  the  queer, 
dreamy,   half -crazy    peasant  -  "  king," 
who  was  only  too  near  entangling  him 
in  a  quarrel  with  those  uncertain-tem- 
pered  Jewish  authorities  and  people. 
2.    Such    a    success    in    realising    the 
human  aspects  and   historical  setting 
of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  is  apt  to  be 
too    successful    with    many    Christian 
readers.     It  is   distinctly  reversing   a 
process  whose  results  are  a  remarkable 
characteristic  of  all  the  earliest  Chris- 
tian teaching.      Of  our  text  Stanley 
says  :  "  Startling  as  this  declaration  is, 
...  it  involved  a  general  truth.     It 
is  the  same  profound  instinct  or  feeling 
which   penetrated,    more   or   less,   the 
whole  Apostolical,  and  even  the  succeed- 
ing,  age   with   regard    to   our   Lord's 
earthly  course.     It  is  the  same  feeling 
which  appears  in  the  absence  of  local 
or  personal  traditions  ;  no  authentic  or 
even  pretended  likeness  of  Christ  has 
been  handed  down  from  the  first  cen- 
tury;   the  very  site  of  His  dwelling- 
place  in  Capernaum  has  been  entirely 
obliterated  from  human  memory ;  the 
very  notion  of  seeking  for  relics  of  His 
life  and  death,  though  afterwards  so 
abundant,  did  not  begin  till  the  age  of 
Constantine."      [No  attempt  or  desire 
amongst  the  early  Christians  to  iden- 
tify or  perpetuate  the  memory  of  any 
scene   of    His   life.      God   "  hid "   the 
burial-place  of  Moses.     The  Christian 
Church,    seeing    so    much   more   than 
the    Jesus    "  after   the    flesh,"  let   go 
the  memory  of  birthplace  and  burial- 
place.  ( See  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine, 
p.  471.)  He  also  says  :  "  Something  akin 
to  this  feeling  is  that  which  is  finally 
left  on  the  mind   after  exploring  the 
neighbourhood   of   Jerusalem.      These 
localities  have,  indeed,  no  real  connec- 
tion with  Him.  .  .  .  Their  interest  and 
instruction  are  secondary,  not  primary ; 
their    value   is   imaginative   and    his- 
torical, not  religious.  .  .  .    He    is  not 
here,  He  is  risen."]     ''It  is  the  same 
feeling   which  is    perpetuated  in  the 


fact  that  our  name  ...  is  taken  not 
from  the  Man  *  Jesus,'  but  from  the 
Lord  *  Christ.'      It  is  the  same  feeling 
which,  in  the  Gospel  narratives  them- 
selves, is  expressed  in  the  almost  entire 
absence   of  precision   as  to  time  and 
place — in  the  emphatic  separation   of 
our  Lord  from  His  kinsmen  after  the 
flesh,  even  from  His  mother  herself — 
in  His  own   solemn  warning,   *  What 
and  if  ...  ,  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing ' 
And  this  is  the  more  observable  when 
contrasted  with  the  Apocryphal  Gospels, 
which  do  to  a  great  extent  condescend 
to   the   natural,  or  Judaic,   tendency, 
which  the  Gospels  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment thus  silently  rebuke.     There  we 
find  a   'Gospel  of  the  Infancy,'  filled 
with  the  fleshly  marvels  that  delighted 
afterwards   the   fleshly   minds   of   the 
Bedouin  Arabs ;    there  first  are  men- 
tioned the  local  traditions  of  the  scene 
of  the  Annunciation,  of  the  Nativity, 
of  the  abode  in  Egypt ;  there  is  to  be 
found  the  story,  on  which  so  great  a 
superstructure  has  been  built  in  later 
ages,  of  the  parents  and  birth  of  her 
whom  the  Gospel  history  calls  '  blessed,' 
but    studiously   conceals   from   view." 
{Corinthians,  ipp.  604,  605.)     3.  ''Too 
successful."     For  whilst  the  Humanity 
is  precious,  and  necessary  to  the  Chris- 
tian scheme,  the  Divinity  must  not  be 
obscured    or    forgotten.      The    Christ 
must  be  man,  and  born  of  our  human 
stock,  to   be   the    Redeemer   of   man. 
His  Jewish  birth  is  an  important  link 
in  the  historical  continuity  and  organic 
development  of   the   Redemption   and 
its  story.      His  humanity  assures  all 
suffering  lives  of  His  sympathy.     Be- 
cause He  is  the  Son  of  Man,  He  is  to 
be  the  Judge  of  mankind.    The  Church 
or  the  Christian  who  knows  the  Christ 
of  John  and  Paul,  has  always  gladly 
[and  with  perfectly  natural  ease]  com- 
bined with  that  conception  of  Him  all 
the  humanistic  touches  which  (predomi- 
nantly)   characterise   the    portrait   of 
the  Synoptists.     But  it  will  be  a  diffi- 
culty, and  even  a  disaster,  if  the  very 
success    in    presenting    with    realistic 
fidelity  and  abundant  "  local  colour " 
the  Teacher  of  Galilee  and  Jerusalem, 

493 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS, 


should    issue    in    making     it    almost  humanistic  knowledge  of  the  Saviour 
impossible    to    see   in    Him    anything  is  betrayed   in  the  growing   habit  of 
else.      It   would    be  to  lead  back  the  calling  Him,  in  hymnology  and  devo- 
whole  Christian  world  to  the  position  tional     talk,    "  Jesus  "    rather     than 
of  even  the  disciples  before  the  Resur-  *'  Christ "  and  "  Lord."      The  Church 
rection   and   Pentecost.     It   would  go  lives  in,  as  the  Epistles  in  their  Chris- 
near  to   an    undoing  of  the  work   of  tology   belong   to,  a    stage    far  ahead 
the  Spirit,  Who  from  the  earliest  days,  of  Jewish  neighbours,  or  even  devout 
with  a  wonderful  rapidity  of  education,  disciples,    of   *'  Jesus,   the   Prophet   of 
emancipated  even  the  Apostolic  com-  Nazareth  in  Galilee."      The  Comforter 
pany  from   the   embarrassingly   vivid  is  come,  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ 
memory  of   the   dear  personal   friend,  and  show  them  to  His  people.     John 
and   enabled    them    to    see  a   Person  arrived  at  the  disco  very  that  he  had  "seen 
Whom  they  must   trust   and  worship  and  handled  the  Word  of  Life."     The 
as  God.     After   reading  some  vividly  sinner  who  finds  rest  and  life  in  Christ 
realistic  "  Life  of  Christ,"  the  reader  is  finds,  as  by  a  swift  intuition,  that  he 
apt  to  be  thrust  into  as  close  contact  is  trusting  in  One  Who  must  be  more 
with  the  Man,  as  was  the  crowd  in  the  than  a  "  Christ  after  the  flesh,"  to  be 
narrow   street    of    Capernaum    (Luke  to  him  and  to  do  for  him  all  he  needs, 
viii.  42),  till   the    "  flesh   and   blood "  and   all   Christ   does  and  is.      Whole 
Christ   is   alone   perceived  or  remem-  generations  of   simple   behevers,  with 
bered.      To   know    Christ   too   realis-  no  knowledge  of   Christ   except  what 
tically  as  He  was  "  according   to   the  the  Bible,  often  in  a  translation,  gave 
flesh  "   (Rom.  i.  3),  and   as   men  saw  them,  and  that  Bible  read  without  any 
Him  who  knew  no  more  of  Him  than  "  historic,"  or  literary,  or  antiquarian 
"flesh   and   blood"  (Matt.  xvi.   17) —  appreciation  of  it,  or  of  the  facts  of 
ordinary  human  faculties,  by  ordinary  the  story  of  Christ,  have  more  truly 
observation  and  inference — could  "  re-  known  Christ,  than  did  not  only  Peter, 
veal,"  is  retrogression,  not  growth,  in  or  Nicodemus,  or  Caiaphas,  in  the  days 
the    knowledge    of     our    Lord    Jesus  before  Pentecost,  but  than  does  many 
Christ.       [An   analogous    difficulty   is  an  author  of  a  brilliant  "  Life  of  Christ." 
being  created  in  regard  to  the  Written  The  Church  and  the  individual  do  not 
Word.     The  close  literary  study  of  the  need  to  work  their  way  up  through 
Bible,  its  literary  history,  its  literary  the  human  to  the  Divine.       Nor  do 
component  elements,  the    very  helpful  they   ordinarily   do    so.      The    Spirit 
reading  of  the  Bible  "  as  if  it  were  any  brings  them  directly  into  contact  with 
other  book,"  are  making  it  a  difficulty  the    Divine.       The     "  little     child  " 
to  read  it  as  that  Divine  Book,  in  a  "knows   Him    that    is    true,    and   is 
category  apart  from  all  others,  which,  in  Him  that  is  true "  .  .  .  "  the  true 
with  abundant  and  often-repeated  veri-  God  and  Eternal  Life  "  (1  John  v.  20). 
fication,  the  experiment  of  many  cen-  "  From  the  time  that  we  are  created 
turies  of  Christian  reading,  under  the  anew  in  Christ  Jesus  we  do  not  think 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  has  dis-  or   speak  or   act  with   regard  to  our 
covered  it  to  be.  The  more  appreciative  Lord  as  to  a  mere  man.     We  do  not 
historical  study  of  the  Bible  is  for  many  now  use  any  expression  with  relation 
readers  making  more  difficult  the  abun-  to  Christ  which  may  not  be  applied  to 
dantly    justified    devotional  reading  of  Him,  not  only  as  He  is  man,  but  as 
the  Bible.]     4.  The  heart  that  is  taught  He  is  *  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever.' " 
of  the  Spirit  knows  a  Divine  Christ.  (Wesley,  Works,  vii.  291,  292.) 
"  No  man  can  call  Jesus  '  Lord '  but  II.  [Wesley  also    suggests   another 
by    the    Spirit    of    the    Lord."      The  manifestation  of  the  same  humanistic 
Divine  Son  [like  the  Inspired  Written  feeling    with    regard    to    Christ.]     1. 
"  Word  of  God "]  is  entirely  a  revela-  "Some    of    the    hymns    in     [Watts'] 
tion.       The    tendency    to    a    merely  Horce  Lyricce^  dedicated  to  Divine  Love^ 

494 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  v. 


are  too  amorous^  and  fitter  to  be 
addressed  by  a  lover  to  his  fellow- 
mortal,  than  by  a  sinner  to  the  most 
high  God.  I  doubt  whether,"  he  says, 
*'  there  are  not  some  other  writers  who, 
though  they  believe  in  the  Godhead 
of  Christ,  yet  speak  in  the  same 
unguarded  manner.  Some  will  pro- 
bably think  that  [in  translating  many 
Moravian  Hymns]  I  have  been  over- 
scrupulous with  regard  to  one  par- 
ticular word,  which  I  never  use  myself 
either  in  prose  or  verse,  in  praying 
or  preaching,  though  it  is  very  fre- 
quently used  by  modern  Divines,  both 
of  the  Komish  and  Reformed  Churches. 
It  is  the  word  dear.  Many  of  them 
frequently  say  .  .  .  '  Dear  Lord,' '  Dear 
Saviour ' ;  and  my  brother  used  the 
same  in  many  of  his  hymns,  even  as 
long  as  he  lived.  But  may  I  not  ask. 
Is  not  this  using  too  much  famiharity 
with  the  great  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth?  Is  there  any  Scripture  .  .  . 
which  justifies  this  manner  of  speaking  ? 
...  I  cannot  but  advise  all  lovers  of 
the  Bible,  if  they  use  the  expression  at 
all,  to  use  it  very  sparingly,  seeing  the 
Scripture  afibrds  neither  command  nor 
precedent  for  it."  This  quotation  is 
of  interest,  not  only  as  incidentally  re- 
veaMng  the  writer,  but  as  a  note  of  a 
peril  always  lying  near  to  every  devout, 
warm-hearted  follower  of  Christ;  a 
tendency  and  habit  carried  to  excess 
in  Mystic  devotion  in  every  century. 
Yet  it  is  after  all  a  question  rather  of 
sanctified  good  taste,  or  rather  of  an 
instinct,  "  taught  of  God  "  and  yet  not 
of  necessity  tracing  in  all  cases  the  same 
line  of  division  between  seemly  and 
unseemly ;  only  worth  discussion  just 
so  far  as,  like  that  spoken  of  in  I., 
it  is  both  a  symptom  of,  and  a  help 
to  confirm,  a  h^imanistic  conception  of 
Christ,  which  may  obscure  His  God- 
head or  hide  it  from  the  worshipper  as 
if  behind  a  veil  of  flesh.  The  devotional 
language  of  the  Pentecostal  Church 
must  not  "  put  back  the  clock  "  of  the 
development  of  Revelation  to  the  days 
"after  the  flesh."  A  Divine  Christ 
must  be  our  norm.  From  the  vantage- 
ground  of  the  revelation  of  His  God- 


head, we  may  look  back  upon  and 
incorporate  with  our  knowledge.  His 
manhood,  with  its  sympathy  and  its 
capacity  of  an  atoning  death.  We 
are  arrived  at  St.  John  and  St. 
Paul ;  we  look  back  to,  but  do  not  go 
back  to,  Capernaum  or  Nazareth  or 
even  Bethlehem.  At  least,  knowing 
Him  now  "  after  the  Spirit,"  we  do  not 
dwell  back  in  Nazareth.  The  heart 
"  after  the  flesh "  has  its  overstated 
Kenosis  doctrine,  as  certainly  as  has 
the  intellect  of  the  theologian.  2.  To 
quote  Wesley  again :  "  Are  we  not 
in  private  conversation  especially  apt 
to  speak  of  Him  as  a  mere  man. 
Particularly  when  we  are  describing  His 
suffe7'ings,  how  easily  do  we  slide  into 
this  !  [Cf.  Farrar's  cautionary  note  to 
his  vividly  true  description  of  cruci- 
fixion. Life  of  Christ,  ii.  401.]  We  do 
well  to  be  cautious  in  this  matter. 
Here  is  room  for  indulging  a  warm 
imagination.  I  have  sometimes  almost 
scrupled  singing  (even  in  the  midst  of 
my  brother's  excellent  hymns),  *  That 
dear  disfigured  face,'  or  that  glowing 
expression,  *  Drop  Thy  warm  blood 
upon  my  heart,'  lest  it  should  seem 
to  imply  the  forgetting  I  am  speaking 
of  ^  the  Man  that  is  my  Fellow,  saith 
the  Ijord  of  Hosts.' "  It  is  striking, 
undesigned  illustration  of  the  text,  to 
note  how  little  is  made  even  in  the 
Gospels  of  the  actual  crucifying.  "  And 
they  crucified  Him,"  is  the  brief, 
matter-of-fact  record,  without  special 
comment,  of  (surely)  an  agonising 
experience  to  sympathetic  onlookers. 
[When  John  does  pause  to  comment, 
it  is  upon  another,  incidental,  detail.] 
The  Death  of  Christ,  rather  than  the 
Crucifixion  of  Christ,  is  the  central 
point  of  the  developed  Christian 
theology  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  of 
His  New  Testament  mediums  of  its 
communication.  The  details  of  the 
agony  have  some  of  them  a  value  as 
connecting  the  history  with  prophecy ; 
but  for  their  own  sake  they  are  never 
dwelt  upon  or  lingered  over.  [Simi- 
larly, it  is  a  too  urgent  exegesis,  in 
many  cases,  to  press  the  details  of 
crucifixion,  e.^.,  in  "I  am  crucified  with 

495 


CHAP.  V.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS, 


Christ "  ;  or,  *'  Our  old  man  is  crucified 
with  Him."  Death  with  and  in  His 
death  is  the  main  point ;  as  it  happened, 
His  was  death  by  crucifixion.  But  it 
would  be  very  unlike  the  habit  of  the 
post-Pentecostal  thought  of  the  New 
Testament  to  make  that  of  any  im- 
portance, as  deciding  between  a  gradual 
or  an  instantaneous  death  of  sin,  of 
self,  in  the  believer.  In  many  cases, 
probably  in  most,  any  definite  allusion 
to  crucifixion  might  be  deleted,  and 
the  more  general  "  dying  "or  •*  death  " 
substituted,  without  any  least  injustice 
to  the  thought  of  Paul  or  Peter.]  The 
man  who  is  "  «  new  creation  "  knows 
a  new  Christ,  a  Christ  Who  is  one  of 
the  facts  of  that  world  of  "  spiritual  " 
things  to  which  his  own  life  now 
belongs.  He  does  not  forget  that 
Christ  died.  The  Atonement  made  by 
His  death  is  the  foundation  of  his  own 
hope,  and  the  strong  appeal  with  which 
he  seeks  to  bring  men  to  reconciliation 
with  God.  But  he  sees  and  knows 
and  has  continually  to  deal  with  a 
Christ  who  has  no  "  local  colour,"  Who 
belongs  to  the  world  of  the  universal, 
the  world  of  all  races,  climes,  ages, 
"the  Son"  (Heb.  i.).  This  Son  once 
did,  it  is  true,  live,  and  move,  and 
heal,  and  teach,  as  a  peasant  Eabbi 
of  Galilee  ;  but  the  man  taught  of  the 
Spirit  does  not  advert  most  to  that. 
That  Person  did  hang  upon  a  cross, 
it  is  true.  That  is  precious  truth  to 
him.  He  did  once  fill  the  manger  of 
Bethlehem  as  babe.  True  ;  and  he  is 
grateful  for  the  visible  expression  thus 
given  to  the  truth  in  Immanuel.  But 
as  a  "  man  in  Christ "  he  knows  and  has 
to  do  with,  he  is  joined  to,  and  grafted 
into,  a  Christ  Who  is  on  the  throne  of 
heaven,  the  Lord.  This  knowledge  is 
the  starting-point  of  all  his  judgments 
upon  the  pre-Calvary  Jesus ;  of  all 
devotional  language  respecting  Him  ; 
of  all  experiences  of  the  Divine  life 
in  his  soul.  There  is  nothing  in  Paul 
which  cannot  be  known  by  observation, 
inquiry,  inference.  The  man  *'in 
Paul,"  is  inconceivable.  The  man 
*'in  Christ"  rates  all  that  could  be 
"  known  after  the  flesh "  as  the  least 

496 


part  of  his  knowledge  of  Christ  (Phil, 
iii.  10). 

Ver.  17.   "^  new  creature  [creation] 
in  Christ  Jesus." 
I.  A  condition. 

II.  A  consequence. 

I.  A  condition  :  "  If  .  .  .in  Christ." 
— 1.  The  phrase  almost  the  peculiar 
property  of  Paul.  Of  all  other  New 
Testament  writers  Peter  alone  uses  it, 
once.  Paul's  letters  are  thickly  sown 
with  the  phrase.  When  it  does  not 
appear  in  English,  it  will  often  appear 
in  the  Greek.  When  the  phrase  does 
not  occur,  the  thought  does.  It  is 
interwoven  most  intimately  with  Paul's 
vocabulary  of  the  Christian  life.  It 
lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  his  thought 
about  it.  To  be  "  in  Christ  "  is  almost 
exactly  his  definition  of  a  Christian. 
When  he  desires  to  veil  the  peisonal 
reference — as  John  does  with  his  phrase, 
**  The  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  " — he 
says,  not,  "  A  Christian  man  whom  I 
knew,"  but,  "^  man  in  Christ,  whom  I 
know,  caught  up"  etc.  (xii  2).  The 
salutation  chapter  which  closes  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans  is  fairly  studded 
with  the  equivalent  phrases :  "  in  the 
Lord"  and  "  in  Christ"  Aquila  and 
Priscilla  are  "  helpers  in  Christ" 
Apollos  is  ''^approved  in  Christ" — a 
character  portrait  in  three  strokes. 
And  with  a  kind  of  holy  envy  he  sends 
greetings  to  some  who  '^  were  in  Christ 
before  "  him,  Christians  of  longer  stand- 
ing than  even  himself.  Ask  Paul, 
"  What  makes  a  Christian  ?  "  Baptism  ? 
True,  that  as  between  a  Jewish  child, 
or  heathen,  or  Mahometan,  and  a 
"Christian,"  a  very  real,  and  a  very 
blessed,  distinction  has  been  made  in 
that  water  has  been  applied  to  this 
last  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity.  The 
Lord's  Supper?  True,  that  it  is  the 
rallying  place  of  all  who  '•'•hold  the 
Head"  (Col.  ii.  19),  the  spot  where,  in 
face  of  unbeliever  and  worldling,  they 
avow  their  pledge  to  their  Great,  Divine 
Master,  to  hold  Christian  doctrine,  and 
to  live  out  the  definitely  Christian 
ethical  code.  All  who  gather  there 
confess  Christ.      But  the  water  may 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


be  applied  and  no  inward  washing 
take  place.  There  may  be  fatal 
divorce  between  belief  of  doctrine  and 
faith  in  the  Divine  Centre  and  Sum- 
mary of  doctrine.  The  font,  and  the 
table,  and  the  creed  do  not  alone 
make  a  Christian.  Ask  Paul.  *'  To  he 
in  Christ"  would  be  his  unvaryingly 
consistent  answer,  the  condition 
assumed  in  all  his  letters  and  talk. 
2.  How  much  is  meant  by  the 
phrase  ?  (1)  Men  say  of  a  David  and 
Jonathan  friendship,  that  each  lives 
in  the  other.  Indeed,  "living  in 
another"  is  one  definition  of  Love. 
Take  Jonathan  from  David,  and  to 
David  it  is  all  but  death.  Each  fills 
the  other's  thoughts  during  their  days 
of  separation.  David  is  in  thought 
with  Jonathan  at  court.  Jonathan  is 
ever  picturing  the  life  which  his  friend 
David  is  just  at  that  given  moment 
living,  in  the  wilderness  or  the  cave. 
All  true  of  Christ  and  the  man  ^^in 
Christ"  But  is  that  all?  (2)  Take 
two  friends,  of  one  of  whom  the  whole 
temperament  is  to  be  dependent.  He 
is  distrustful  of  his  own  judgment,  to 
a  fault ;  it  leads  to  indecision  and 
inaction.  He  has  that  shrinking  from 
conflict  which  some  wrongly  confound 
with  cowardice  ;  and  is  moreover  con- 
scious of  his  own  want  of  strength  for 
any  struggle  with  opponents  or  diffi- 
culties of  circumstance.  But  he  has  a 
friend  who  is,  and  has,  all  that  his 
weakness  needs.  He  is  wise  and  bold 
and  self-reliant,  and  on  him  he  leans. 
With  him  near  by  to  apply  to  for 
counsel,  to  decide  for  his  indecision, 
to  stand  by  him  in  conflict,  he  is 
another  man.  Now  that  he  knows  a 
stronger  arm  and  a  clearer  judgment 
and  a  self-reliant  sturdiness  of  cha- 
racter will  be  by  him  and  behind  him, 
to  guide  him,  and  to  see  him  through, 
in  his  friend's  company  he  will  dare 
to  attempt  and  will  persistently  and 
successfully  carry  through,  even 
against  the  strongest  opposition,  what 
he  would  fear  even  to  contemplate  if 
he  were  alone.  All  blessedly  true 
again  of  the  believer  and  his  Lord. 
But  when  he  is  exhorted  to  "  6e  strong 


in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His 
might"  (Eph.  vi.  10),  or  "to  stand 
fast  in  the  Lord"  is  that  all ?  (3)  No. 
All  this  is  true,  because  much  more 
is  true.  There  is  a  closer  union  than 
that  of  thought,  sympathy,  dependence. 
More  than  even  the  strong  metaphor, 
"  The  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  unto 
the  soul  of  David"  (1  Sam.  xviii.  1).  No 
metaphorical  union,  no  figurative  one- 
ness of  life,  but  a  unity,  a  unification, 
so  real,  so  complete,  that  Paul  ex- 
claims :  "I  live  no  longer ;  Christ 
liveth  in  me."  Paul  is  no  independent, 
self-contained  unit;  he  is  but  a 
member  of  the  grand  unit — *<  Christ." 
He  keeps  his  individuality;  that  is 
abundantly  clear.  But  Paul  the 
member  is  merged  in  His  life,  Who  is 
Head,  and  all  in  all.  In  fact,  there  is 
compressed  into  his  phrase  all  the 
teaching  of  John  xv.  and  1  Cor.  xii. 
All  the  Lord's  teaching  about  the 
Vine,  all  Paul's  own  teaching  about 
the  Body,  are  packed  away  into  this 
binomial  of  his  devotional  and  theo- 
logical notation,  "m  Christ."  (4)  Let 
Christians  work  up  from  the  name 
Christian  to  the  thought  ^^in  Christ." 
"Between  Him  yonder  at  court  and 
you  here  in  the  wilderness,  there  is  a 
close  bond.  But  there  is  a  closer. 
Between  Him  on  the  throne,  and  the 
humblest,  weakest,  '  most  obscure 
Christian  on  earth,  it  is  not  simply 
association  of  the  most  intimate,  it 
is  union.  Not  the  attachment  of  a 
follower ;  but  the  grafting  of  a  branch. 
Not  the  approximation  of  a  band  of 
disciples  gathered  round  the  Master ; 
each  is  one  of  many  members  living 
in  Him,  an  active  hand,  a  keen  eye,  a 
swift  foot ;  strong,  intelligent,  laborious, 
in  the  strength  of  a  life  which  is  His 
as  well  as  theirs.  This  Vine  is  not  the 
Stem  and  Root  alone,  any  more  than 
it  is  Branches  alone  ;  but  Stem,  and 
Boot,  and  Branches ;  this  Body  is  not 
the  Head  alone,  but  Head  and  Mem- 
bers ;  so  in  a  very  real,  almost  bottom- 
less sense,  we  say,  '  Ye  are  nothing 
apart  from  Him,  and  He  is  not  com- 
plete without  you.  You,  and  your 
fellow- Christians,  and  your  Christ,  are 

KK  497 


CHAP.  V.     HOMILETIC\  COMMENTARY:    II.    CORINTHIANS. 


the  Church,  the  Christ.'  All  the 
rays  of  illustrative,  of  analogical, 
teaching  are  converged  into  a  smaller 
but  exce-sively  brilliant  focal  spot : 
*  In  Christ'  (5)  Let  believers  think 
of  it,  for  all  hangs  upon  their  faith. 
They  '  live  in  their  faith  in  a  Son  of 
God  who  loved  them,'  etc.  (Gal.  ii.  30)." 
They  did  not  simply  believe  Him,  or  in 
Him,  or  even  on  Him,  with  full  recum- 
bency of  soul  casting  themselves  upon 
His  saving  power.  They  believed  unto 
and  into  Him  {e.g.  John  iii.  18,  36). 
He  accepted  tbem,  grafted  them,  into 
Himself.  There  is  community  of 
interests,  of  joys,  sufferings,  point 
of  view  and  oi  judgment,  because  there 
is  community  of  life.  The  life  of  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.  17;  Phil, 
i.  19),  the  very  life  of  the  corporate 
Christ  Himself,  stirs  in  them.  So 
utterly  new  a  thing  is  that,  so  entirely 
foreign  to  all  the  natural  life  and  its 
possibilities,  that  if  any  man  be  thus  in 
Christ  he  is  a  new  creature. 

II.  The  consequence :  *'  Old  things 
are  passed  away,"  ♦*  all  become  new," 
"  all  of  God." — 1.  The  first  phrase  is 
pictorial.  Winter-time.  Earth  wrapped 
in  winter  garment  of  snow.  It  lies 
stretching  away  mile  after  mile,  round- 
ing off  all  roughness  into  graceful 
curves ;  revealing,  or  concealing,  the 
prominences  of  the  surface  beneath, 
just  as  the  face-cloth  half  conceals, 
half  reveals,  the  face  of  the  dead 
beneath.  That  snow  is  a  face-cloth 
laid  over  the  face  of  a  dead  earth. 
Seeds  are  there,  but  dormant.  No 
sap  stirring  in  trees  or  hedgerows ; 
buds  waiting  their  time.  Cold  winds 
sweep  howling  over  the  open  country, 
as  if  to  bite  back  any  too  adventurous 
growth.  Death  reigns.  Death,  in- 
deed, with  the  seed  of  life  in  its 
bosom,  but  potential  rather  than  actual. 
But  God's  south  wind  blows.  Men 
rise  some  morning,  and  the  pall  is 
gone  from  the  face.  The  snow  has 
passed  away.  Sun  shines  ;  God  "  sends 
forth  His  breath,"  and  in  a  day  or  two 
the  black  soil  of  the  ploughed  fields 
shows  a  delicate  green  "  down  "  upon 
its  face.     Sap  stirring ;  buds  swelling, 


bursting ;  every  tree  and  hedgerow 
arraying  itself  in  the  first  tender  green- 
ness of  spring.  Winter  has  passed 
away.  Those  are  not  last  year's  buds, 
or  sap,  or  verdure.  We  call  spring- 
time a  resurrection.  Rather,  a  new 
creation.  Finish  the  passage  just 
quoted  (Ps.  civ.  30)  :  "  they  are  created, 
and  Thou  renewest  the  face  of  the 
earth."  Old  things  have  passed  away  ; 
all  things  have  become  new ;  there  is  a 
new  creation. 

2.  No  analogy  holds  good  everywhere. 
— This  holds  fairly  well ;  it  is  one  of 
God's  own.  '*  Out  of  Christ "  is  death. 
Happily,  death  with  the  " seeds  of  life" 
in  it.  The  grace  of  Christ  has  so  far 
availed  for  all  men,  that  the  utter 
spiritual  death  of  a  devil,  with  no  hope 
or  possibility  of  life,  has  never — as  an 
initial  stage  of  man's  life  [it  may  be 
thQ  final]— hQQn  more  than  a  necessary 
theological  conception.  "  In  Christ  was 
life,  and  that  life  was  the  light  of  men," 
light  "that  lighteth  " — in  some  degree 
— "  every  man,  coming  into  the  world  " 
(John  i.  4,  9).  And  thus  even  before 
Christ,  and  without  a  preacher,  in  even 
heathen  hearts  is  hidden  what  may 
develop  into  the  new  creation.  Nature 
is  death,  utter,  total;  this  potential 
life  is  grace,  only  grace.  The  "  breath 
of  life  "  goes  forth  from  God  ;  the  Spirit 
of  God  calls  forth  a  new  creature.  The 
new  sap  stirs  in  the  system;  the  new 
buddings,  from  which  will  grow  the 
developed  ''fruit  of  the  Spirit  "  [N.B. 
^^ works  of  the  flesh";  ^^ fruit — not 
fruits— oi  the  Spirit"  (Gal.  v.  19,  22)] 
begin  to  appear.  There  is  life,  new 
life,  a  new  kind  of  life,  everywhere  and 
in  everything.  [Wife  finds  she  has 
a  new  husband.  The  master  a  new 
servant.  The  man  has  new  haunts, 
and  pleasures,  and  company.  New 
class  of  books  and  literature  come  upon 
the  table.  New  point  of  view  from 
which  men  and  conduct  are  judged;  new 
direction  to  his  own  life — God  ward  now 
— and  a  new  way  of  looking  at  other 
men's  lives.  New  view  and  estimate 
of  Christ, — the  point  here.  "  If  you 
don't  believe  I  am  converted,  ask  my 
wife!"      Child,  known  to   H.  J.  F., 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


said,  "Why,  I  feel  as  if  I  were  some-  weakness  and  inexperience  of  infancy, 

body  else  ! "]  with  only  the  tender  strength  of  the 

3.  Science  creates  nothing. — In  nature  natural  growths  of  Spring. 

God  now  ordinarily  creates  nothing.    In  [5.   What  an  illustration  is  Paul  him- 

His  seventh  day  He  rested  from  His  self  of  all  this. — His  affections  no  longer 

work,  and  has  probably  since  then  only  those  of  the  natural  man.     (1)  Joy  is 

upheld  and   maintained   the  life   and  "  in  the  Holy  Ghost"  or  "  in  the  Lord  " 

order    then    established.      [This    is   a  (Rom.  xiv.  17  ;  Phil.  iv.  10).     His  love 

matter  of  evidence  in  any  given  case  is  no  mere  natural  affection  ;  but  subli- 

of   an   apparent    miracle   of    creation,  msited,  sipirituoli^ed  ^^  love  in  the  Spirit" 

E.g.  the  multiplying  of  the  bread  for  the  a   thing   originating   in   God   Himself 

five  thousand.]     The  nearest  approach  (Col.  i.  8).    He  craves  to  see  his  Philip- 

to  a  true  creation  with  which  we  are  pian  friends,  but  with  no  merely  natural 

now  made  familiar  is  the  bringing  of  a  longing  ;  he  "  longs  after  them  all  in 

new,  infant  life  into  the  world.      The  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ"  (Phil.  i.  18). 

new-born  babe  is  perhaps  a  new  crea-  It  is  Christ's  own  love  for  them  stirring 

tion ;  its  life  (fwry)  a  real  addition  to  the  in  Paul.     The  throbs  of  feeling  which 

sum  of  existence.      Certainly  the  new  pulsate  through  his  heart  have   their 

man  "m  Christ"  is  a  new  thing  on  centre  of  origin  in  Christ  Himself.    (2) 

the  face  of  God's  earth  ;  a  distinctly  The  impulses  and  determinations  of  his 

new  product  of  God's  own  power.     A  will  are  the  outflow  of  a  force  which 

Christian    knows    that    no    evolution-  originates  in  another.    Plans,  purposes, 

formula  embraces  all  the  facts  of  life.  — none  are  independent  of  Christ.     He 

It  is  not  true  of  his  life  "m  Christ."  "trusts  in  the  Lord  to  send  Timothy" 

There  is  more  evolved  than  was  even  (Phil.  ii.  19).     (3)  His  intellect  obeys 

potentially  contained  in  the  old.    In  the  new   laws;    he  is  "persuaded  in   the 

man  that  came  from  fallen  Adam,  there  Lord  Jesus"  etc.  (Rom.  xiv.  14).     He 

was  nothing  from  which  the  new  man  has  not  arrived  at  the  conclusion  by 

in  the  second  Adam  could  be  formed.  the  exercise  of  unassisted  human  judg- 

New  in  time.     New  in  kind.  ment.     The   indwelling  life   of  Christ 

4.  Note,  ^^  new"  not  perfect  or  mature,  makes  it  Christ's  judgment  too.  (4) 
— The  Christian  does  not  leap  forth.  Even  old  points  of  character  and  con- 
Minerva-like,  full-grown  at  the  first  duct  have  now  a  new  root  and  motive, 
instant.  The  members  of  the  natural  We  may  suppose  him  to  have  been 
body  possess  from  the  first  all  their  always  truthful  and  honourable  (Acts 
characteristic  aptitudes  and  powers,  but  xxiii.  1).  But  he  does  not  speak  "  on 
they  need  training.  The  eye  needs  to  his  honour,"  or  as  a  truthful  man  ;  he 
learn  how  to  see,  as  certainly  as  foot  or  "  speaks  the  truth  in  Christ"  (Rom. 
hand  need  to  learn  to  do  their  work.  ix.  1).  As  now  a  member  of  Him 
The  foot  is  made  to  support  the  body ;  Who  is  the  Truth,  with  Whom  false- 
it  alone  can  do  it ;  but  it  must  learn  to  hood  cannot  even  in  thought  be  asso- 
do  it.  The  newly  opened  leaf  lives,  but  ciated,  Paul's  word  must  now  be  the 
must  unfold  into  maturity  and  per-  simple  truth,  the  highest  form  of 
fection.  Spring's  new  creation  does  not  asseveration.  (5)  This  verse  (ver.  17) 
mean  leaf  or  flower  or  fruit  perfect  at  a  case  in  point.  Men  accused  Paul  of 
once.  The  analogy  holds  fairly  well  of  want  of  straightforwardness ;  of  mer- 
the  "  nev) "  life  of  the  man  "  in  Christ."  cenary  motives  ;  of  blustering  when 
Quickened  into  "newness  of  life"  absent,  and  speaking  very  humbly 
(Rom.  vi.  4),  because  the  Holy  Spirit  when  present ;  of  fearing  to  come  to 
has  entered  into  and  dwells  in  him.  Corinth.  The  natural  heart  meets 
New  powers,  new  faculties,  suited  to  a  such  charges  with  appeals  to  a  man's 
new  world  (see  on  1  Cor.  ii.  12-16,  honour,  or  with  indignant  or  angry 
Homiletic  Analysis) ;  new  tastes,  repudiation.  He  quietly  says :  "  We 
motives,  work.     All  new,  but  with  the  are  manifest  to  God.     Other  motives 

499 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS. 


altogether  now  rule  us.  We  do  not 
now  regard  men,  their  threats,  their 
favour,  in  that  way.  We  live,  judge, 
plan,  feel,  speak,  as  new  creatures, 
because  in  Christ.  Even  our  view  and 
knowledge  and  estimate  of  Himself  are 
now  new."  Between  Saul  of  Tarsus 
and  Paul  the  Apostle  there  lies  an  act 
of  Divine  power,  there  is  a  new  creation. 
He  is  a  new  creature.  His  life  is  a  new 
life  in  all  its  manifestations.]  ".  .  . 
Those  of  us  whose  infancy  was  sheltered 
from  contamination,  whose  childhood 
was  nurtured  in  holy  doctrine  and 
encouraged  by  saintly  and  sweet  ex- 
ample, whose  youth  was  watched  by 
a  vigilant  ministry  of  inspection  and 
loving  solicitude,  and  yet  the  evil  of 
whose  nature,  and  the  ungodliness 
of  whose  bias,  received  no  effectual 
check.  We  respected  the  restraints 
of  authority  and  family  honour,  and, 
it  may  be,  conveyed  a  mistaken  im- 
pression of  the  moral  side  of  our  life. 
But  we  knew  that  in  spite  of  home 
and  Church  the  heart  within  us  was 
unchanged ;  and  when  the  change  did 
come,  it  was  not  through  any  fact  or 
word  we  did  not  know  before,  it  was 
as  if  a  new  sense  had  been  uncovered  ; 
God  and  Christ  and  heaven  and  hell, 
instead  of  being  images  flitting  through 
the  mind,  were  entities ;  we  lived  in  a 
new  world;  we  walked  by  faith,  and 
not  by  sight ;  life  and  death,  and  duty 
had  each  a  new  meaning;  and  above 
all  and  beyond  all  other  revelations 
there  was  an  indwelling  Christ,  re- 
deeming a  condemned  sinner  from  guilt 
and  saving  a  struggling  soul  from 
defeat.  .  .  .  This  change  was  no  more 
wrought  by  man  than  the  heavens 
were  created  by  man."  ["  And  all 
things  are  of  God."] — From  address  hy 
Rev.  E.  E.  Jenkins,  D.D. 

Ver.  20.  "  The  ministry  of  reconcilia- 
tion." 

I.  Must  go  to  political  world  for 
illustration  of  The  Arrangement,  "  We 
beseech  you  in  Christ's  stead."  1. 
(1)  Queen  frequently  gives  assent  to 
bills  hy  commission.  Lord  Chancellor, 
with   other  noble  lords,  in  due  form 

500 


and  state  appear — as  she  would — and 
signify  her  assent — as  she  would, — 
the  quaint  Norman-French  formula 
being  used,  just  as  if  she  were  per- 
sonally present  and  acting.  The  L(yrd 
Chancellor  and  his  companion-commis- 
sioners are,  for  the  time  and  the 
special  purpose,  the  Queen.  (2)  In  the 
old,  picturesque  days  of  English  his- 
tory there  was  a  great  officer  of  state, 
of  much  importance  in  the  Government 
— the  Lord  High  Treasurer.  There 
has  been  no  Lord  High  Treasurer 
since  Shrewsbury  resigned  his  office  at 
the  accession  of  George  I.  The  office 
is  '•'■  in  commission."  The  duties  are 
discharged  by  commissioners  :  a  First 
Lord  of  the  Treasury  and  several 
Junior  Lords.  They  together  are  the 
Lord  High  Treasurer  of  olden  days. 
(3)  William  lY.,  as  Duke  of  Clarence, 
was  the  last  Lord  High  Admiral. 
The  office  is  in  commission.  First 
Lord  and  Junior  Lords  of  the  Ad- 
miralty are  in  effect  to-day  the  Lord 
High  Admiral,  holding  his  office,  doing 
his  work.  2.  Once  there  dwelt  on  earth 
a  Great  Ambassador.  He  is  back  at 
Court  to-day.  His  office  has  been  in 
commission  ever  since  He  said,  *'  Go 
ye ;  make  disciples  of  all  the  nations." 
That  was  the  issue  of  the  patent,  the 
writ,  constituting  the  commissioners. 
Paul  is  (to  speak  in  the  political 
dialect)  First  Lord  of  the  Ambassador- 
ship. The  ministry  of  the  Churches 
are  his  fellow-commissioners  for  exe- 
cuting the  office  of  the  Great  Am- 
bassador. Paul  and  his  colleagues  and 
successo7's  are  together  the  Great  Ambas- 
sador. In  their  collective  voice  His 
voice  is  heard.  He  pleads  with  men 
individually  in  them.  "  We  pray  you" 
yet  not  on  our  own  account ;  on  His — 
"m  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled." 
3.  [(1)  Congregation  may  help  ministers 
to  remember  this.  For  one  thing,  the 
ministry  is  recruited  from  the  congre- 
gation ;  the  sons  will  bring  with  them 
into  the  sacred  office  the  habitual 
ideas,  canons  of  judgment,  whole 
estimate  of  the  homes  and  circles  from 
which  they  are  drawn.  Also,  it  is 
not  unworthy  of  most  faithful  minister 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


to  feel  that,  if  he  knows  that  the  the  way  for  reconciliation.]  If  "  Pro- 
ambassador's  evangelical  earnestness  pitiation  be  a  true  [though  by  no 
is  expected,  respected,  by  his  people,  he  means  the  complete  or  only]  representa- 
will  find  it  easier  to  cultivate  and  show  tion  of  the  meaning  and  effect  of  the 
it.  If  he  knows  that  they  never  pray  death  of  Christ,  there  must  have  been 
for  him  as  an  ambassador  from  God  that  to  turn  away  which  is  best 
to  guilty,  alienated  men — that  they  expressed  to  us  by  the  human  word 
are  impatient,  intolerant,  of  such  zeal  "  wrath."  **  We  ambassadors  have  peace 
as  becomes  his  office — he  will  still  of  with  God"  [Or,  " Let  us  have "  (Rom. 
course  be  faithful  to  his  commission ;  v.  1).  In  either  case  it  is  a  peace  of 
but  they  will  create  an  added  difficulty,  relation,  not  of  feeling.]  "  When  we  were 
where  already  there  are  many  attaching  enemies,  we  were  reconciled,"  etc.     Then 

to   fidelity   and   success.      The   people  they  who  are  not  yet  reconciled  are ? 

should  pray  for,  listen  to,  him  ;  should  Such  words  all  speak  of  war,  *' enmity," 
train  children,  not  to  criticise,  but  to  antagonism.  2.  The  very  ambassadors 
pray  for  and  listen  to  him;  as  one  who  know,  in  themselves,  that  it  is  nature 
is  speaking  and  appealing  only  in  the  to  sin,  but  grace  to  deny  and  crucify 
name  of  the  Great  Ambassador.  With  self  and  ''  the  flesh  " ;  that  it  is  easy  to 
what  earnestness  would  the  Great  drift  from  God,  but  means  conflict  and 
Ambassador  Himself  plead!]  (2)  Within  struggle  to  keep  by  His  side;  easier  to 
the  Church,  ministers  are  ^^ those  who  be  slack  than  diligent;  easier — and 
bear  rule  over  you,  who  watch  for  your  quite  natural — to  be  worldly  than 
souls  as  those  that  must  give  an  godly.  Nothing  more  wonderful,  or 
account "  (Heb.  xiii.  17);  to  the  Flock  more  significant,  than  to  see  with 
they  are  ^'shepherds"  (Eph.  iv.  11).  what  terrible  facility  a  once  godly  man 
But  to  those  outside  the  fold,  the  may  drop  out  from  good  ways  and  let 
family,  the  kingdom,  the  Church,  they  go  the  religious  habits  of  a  lifetime ; 
are  "  ambassadors  for  Christ."  Christ  no  long  interval  is  required  for  a  fore- 
has  given  to  them  a  ministry  of  dis-  most,  genuine  "  worker  "  to  become  a 
cipline,  of  instruction ;  but,  first  in  merely  formal,  perfunctory  Church 
order,  a  "  ministry  of  reconciliation."  member ;  one  day  of  careless  walking 
II.  "Reconciled." — 1.  What  is  the  will  cost  a  Christian  man  what  weeks 
matter  between  God  and  man  %  Do  of  struggle  and  prayer  will  not  recover 
men  misunderstand  God  %  More.  In-  for  him.  [No  trouble  to  grow  weeds ; 
different  to  His  love  and  claims  ?  much  pains  to  grow  flowers  or  fruit. 
More.  Alienated  from  Him  ?  Yes.  Natural  facts  illustrate  the  spiritual : 
^''The  mind  of  the  fiesh  is  enmity  against  get  twice  the  distance  from  the  centre 
God"  (Rom.  viii.  7).  James  says,  of  light  and  heat,  and  the  light  and 
bluntly,  sternly,  "  Whosoever  will  be  the  heat  are  diminished  ybi*r/b/t^ ;  a  falling 
friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  God"  body  drops  with  rapidly  accelerating 
(Jas.  iv.  4).  Terrible  words  !  And,  velocity,  in  the  second  second  covering 
on  the  other  side,  "  the  wrath  of  God."  three  tijmes  the  space  covered  in  the 
Often  in  so  many  words.  But  it  lies  first,  in  the  third  five  times  the  dis- 
in  the  gracious  word  ^^propitiation."  tance,  and  so  on.  These  are  also  rules 
A  Propitiation  is  nothing  but  a  gift  obtaining  when  a  soul  departs  from  its 
which  appeases  and  turns  away  dis-  Centre,  or  falls  into  sin,]  Such  facts 
pleasure.  [David's  Philistine  comrades  mean  that  religion  is  not  natural,  but 
would  not  have  him  to  go  to  battle  of  grace.  All  disposition  towards  God 
with  them  to  Gilboa  (1  Sam.  xxix.  4).  has  come  from  without.  "  We  (ambas- 
They  feared  his  treachery.  "  Where-  sadors)  were  by  nature  children  of  wrath, 
with  should  he  reconcile  himself  to  his  even  as  the  rest."  3.  Men  know  them- 
master,  Saul  ?  Should  it  not  be  with  selves ;  that  they  do  not  love  religion, — 
our  heads  ?  "  With  such  slain  trophies  not  merely  this  or  that  unfortunate 
should  he  propitiate  his  king,  and  pave  presentation     of    it,    in    persons    or 

501 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


Churches,  but  the  abiding,  constant  between  God  and  men  out  of  joint, 
life  of  fellowship  with  God ;  that  there  Men  out  of  harmony  mth  Him ;  He 
is  a  real  aversion  from  God — latent,  arrayed  against  them  in  holy  "  wrath." 
dormant,  disguised,  so  long  as  no  "  Be  ye  reconciled!^ 
occasion  for  its  awakening  or  display,  III.  "  He  [needed  to  be,  and]  is, 
but  capable  of  being  aroused ;  that  reconciled." — 1.  "  God  was  in  Christ 
prayer  is  really  infrequent  or  uninvit-  reconciling"  etc.  Can  date  the  death 
ing,  the  Bible  unattractive.  Men  on  Calvary  ;  but  cannot  date  the 
know  the  significance  of  these  facts :  ReconciHation  in  Christ.  Assumed 
that  the  conversion  of  wife  or  son  or  and  acted  upon  from  Eden  to  Calvary, 
daughter  would  not  be  most  welcome  whilst  as  yet  there  was  no  Calvary  ;  in 
news  ;  that  to  have  Christ  and  His  the  mind  and  heart  of  God  '-'-from  times 
claims  pressed  with  any  urgency,  arouses  eternal T  As  such  words  are  suggested, 
resistance,  or  even  a  real  anger  which  they  lead  to  a  point  where  we  gaze 
may  sweep  away  all  perfectly  trained,  out  into  hopeless  depths  of  unfathom- 
native  politeness.  \Mr.  Gladstone  told  able  mystery.  [Revolt  alleged  against 
Mr.  Stead  {Review  of  Reviews j  April  doctrine  of  "  wrath  of  God  "  and  the 
1892):  "Lord  Melbourne  was  one  "total"  ruin  of  "fallen  man."  Always 
day  seen  coming  from  church  in  the  has  been  something  of  such  revolt, 
country  in  a  mighty  fume.  Finding  Further,  if  "  Puritan "  theology  and 
a  friend,  he  exclaimed  :  *  It  is  too  bad.  preaching  did  draw  portrait  of  an 
I  have  always  been  a  supporter  of  the  angry  God  and  of  guilty,  helpless,  God- 
Church,  and  I  have  always  upheld  the  hating,  born  sinner, — both  in  too  hard 
clergy  ;  but  it  is  really  too  bad  to  have  lines, — let  this  extenuate  their  "  fault": 
to  listen  to  a  sermon  like  that  we  have  the  holier  a  man  grows,  the  more 
had  this  morning.  Why,  the  preacher  deeply  he  understands  the  intense 
actually  insisted  upon  applying  religion  antagonism  between  holiness  and  sin, 
to  a  man's  private  life.' "]  [Two  God  and  a  sinful  heart ;  the  more 
friends  sitting  silently  smoking  by  the  deeply  does  he  realise  that  stern, 
side  of  a  Scotch  burn,  in  the  quiet  active,  almighty  wrath  against  sin  is  a 
evening,  after  a  day's  hard  fishing.  necessity  of  the  very  nature  of  a  holy 
One  breaks  the  silence :  "  Let  us  get  God ;  he  reads  Bible  with  the  light 
up  and  go.  I  cannot  stand  this.  It  gained  in  a  lifetime,  and  with  the 
makes  me  think  of  God."  (Case  known  instincts  of  a  holy  heart.  Nobody 
to  H.  J.  F.)]  Friends  may  be  of  any  sterner  than  was  John  in  the  ripeness 
creed,  of  any  religion,  except  "spiritual"  of  age,  knowledge,  character.  It  only 
religion ;  such  unwelcome.  Between  needs  that  the  Puritan  portrait  be 
the  pleasures  men  like,  and  the  religion  (not  essentially  altered,  but  the  hard 
which  claims  the  men,  nobody  more  lines)  softened,  and  the  whole  suffused, 
than  the  man  of  the  world  feels  how  with  the  tender  glory  of  the  redeeming 
deep  a  gulf  is  cleft.  "iW  Dieu,  ni  grace  of  a  God  in  Christ  Who  '•'■reGOTv- 
maitre"  "  Our  enemy  is  God,"  are  only  died  the  world  to  Himself."^  As  matter 
extreme  manifestations  of  what  every  of  happy  fact  there  never  has  been 
man  knows  is  a  capability  in  himself,  a  mere  sinner ;  some  good  has  been 
Think  of  the  meaning  of  persecution,  present  from  the  first,  because  some 
ecclesiastical  or  (not  less  significant)  grace  has  been  given  from  the  first, 
domestic.  Good  men  know  that  there  Happily,  also,  men  never  have  to  do 
is  no  distance  from  God  to  which  with  the  mere  wrath  of  God;  never  have 
they  might  not  go,  no  depth  to  which  known  any  God  but  the  God  of  grace,  on 
they  might  not  sink,  no  enmity  to  His  part  reconciled  in  Christ,  ana*! 
Him  of  which  they  would  not  be  waiting  for  men  to  be  reconciled, 
capable,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  were  [Wellington  and  Soult  fought  at  Tou- 
withdrawn,  and  themselves  left  to  the  louse  (April  1814),  in  ignorance  that 
power   of   temptation.      The  relations  an  armistice  had  been  signed  at  Paris. 

502 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


English  sailors  fought  at  New  Orleans  a   theological    training,    or   even    the 

(January    1815),    in    ignorance    that  formative  influence  of  a  Jewish  sacri- 

Treaty   of    Ghent    had    already   been  ficial  system,  which  makes  Paul  almost 

signed  between  England  and   United  Ohristlike  in  his  love  for  his  nation,  as 

States.       So]     men    are    fighting    on  in    **  great    heaviness    and    continual 

against  a  reconciled  God,  most  of  them  t  sorrow  of  heart,"  he  almost  volunteers 

in  heart  ignorance.                                   —*  his  own  ruin,  if  only  it  might  be  ac- 
cepted to  avert  the  eternal  fulfilment 

Ver.  21.  Reconciliation  hy  the  Sinless  of  the  anathema  which  hung  over  the 

Substitute.  Israel  which  would  not  "  love  the  Lord 

I.  The  Substitute.— No  need  to  be  Jesus  Christ"  (Rom.  ix.  2,   3).      "If 

ashamed  of  the  doctrine  of  a  vicarious  my  damnation  would  accomplish  their 

Atonement.     It  has  suffered  much  at      salvation "  ;    it  is  a  daringly  tre- 

the  hands  of  its  friends ;  it  has  been  mendous  conception,  but  it  is  the 
crudely  presented,  and  in  an  untrue  instinct  of  a  true  human  heart.  He 
isolation  of  exhibition,  without  any  had  been  anticipated  long  before 
suggestion  of  other  complementary,  (Exod.  xxxii.  32).  Moses  the  Mediator 
guarding  aspects  of  the  meaning  of  the  begins  to  ask  for  pardon,  but  his  sen- 
Death.  In  the  endeavour  to  give  it  tence  hangs  in  mid-utterance  un- 
such  clear,  vivid  exposition  as  may  finished,  as  if  the  enormity  of  the 
enable  the  untrained  mind  of  the  people's  guilt  came  upon  him,  choking 
young,  the  ignorant,  the  heathen,  to  back  the  request  for  pardon.  And  then, 
apprehend  it  for  the  comfort  and  rest  as  the  river  is  dammed  up  only  to  burst 
of  their  heart  and  conscience,  it  has  forward  with  redoubled  volume  and 
perhaps  been  almost  caricatured.  Yet  force,  there  breaks  out  from  his  heart 
granting  true  all  the  hardest  things  a  yet  more  daring  request.  He  had 
which  have  been  said  of  it,  and  of  halted  in  the  very  midst  of  his  inter- 
those  who  preached  it — they  have  not  cession  a  moment  ago  ;  now  his  instinct 
always  been  fair  and  true — yet  there  of  self-sacrificing  love  for  his  people 
lies  beneath  it  a  deep-seated  instinct  makes  a  bolder  leap  than  before  :  '*  If 
of  the  human  heart — the  instinct  of  not — if  mere  and  simple  forgiveness  be 
Atonement  by  Substitution.  The  doc-  not  possible,  blot  me,  I  pray  Thee,  out," 
trine  has  been  ridiculed,  but  it  has  etc.  It  was  the  nearest  appioach 
survived  the  ridicule ;  it  has  more  any  man  ever  made  to  Ps.  xl.  7,  8. 
than  the  proverbial  "  nine  lives."  It  The  offer  could  not  be  accepted.  It 
has  been  denounced  as  unreasonable,  could  have  availed  nothing  if  it  had  been 
immoral.  [Yet  an  ancient  sage  saw,  accepted.  Still,  to  Moses  the  Mediator 
'*  Volenti  non  fit  injuria  "  ;  see  also  belongs  the  honour  of  being  in  the  ages 
Appended  Note.]  If  it  has  been  deemed  before  Christ  the  one  man  who  had 
slain  and  cast  out  in  argument,  yet  it  volunteered  to  die  to  save  his  brethren, 
has  had  a  wonderful  resurrection  power,  the  guilty  Israel.  But  that  honour  was 
Its  enemies  have  sealed  the  stone  and  reserved  for  the  One  Mediator  only.  Let 
set  the  watch,  but  it  has  always  any  man  read  these  words  to  a  dying 
come  forth  in  perennial  life.  The  man,  who  must  have  the  Gospel  in  a 
instinct  of  substitution  is  rooted  in  all  small  compass,  and  that  quickly ;  let 
hearts,  in  all  ages,  in  all  religions.  him  "  explain "  them  to  a  company  of 
Even  the  base  Caiaphas  could  say,  children,  or  to  a  group  of  degraded, 
with  selfish  policy — though  like  other  drunken  men  or  women  ; — they  will 
prophets,  far  better  men,  there  was  feel,  he  will  feel — perhaps  in  spite  of 
more  in  his  words  than  he  knew  theological  predispositions — that  no 
(1  Pet.  i.  11,  12), — "It  is  expedient  other  thought  than  a  substitution  is 
that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people,  here  [as  in  Gal.  iii.  13]  natural.  No 
and  that  the  whole  nation  perish  not  "  other  reading  will  be  of  any  practical 
(John  xi.  50).     It  is  not  the  result  of  service  to  him,  or  of  any  ready  practical 

503 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


help  to  the  clamorous  conscience  and 
the  burdened  heart. 

II.  A    Sinless   Substitute.— 1.    The 
sinlessness  of  Jesits  makes  Him  solitary/ 
amongst  His  brethren  whose  humanity 
He  wore.     Yet  apologists  rightly  urge 
the  fact,  and  its  forceful  value,  as  lead- 
ing up  to  a  belief  in  His  Godhead,  that 
He  alone  of  all  the  noblest  moral  leaders 
of  our  race,  never  betrays  any  conscious- 
ness of  such  internal  discord  as  makes 
many  noblest  lives  bitter  almost  beyond 
bearing ;    or  of  any  such  discrepancy 
between  His  own  moral  standard,  as 
He  sets  it  before  Himself  or  exhibits 
it  to  others,  and  the  fact  of  His  life  ; 
he  never  seems  to  need  to  distinguish 
between  the  official  utterance  and  the 
personal   performance.      His   teaching 
is  highest,   and  He   apparently  is  all 
He   teaches.     He   never,  though   His 
life   is    prayer,    prays  for   forgiveness. 
Not   a   word   of   moral  regret,   not  a 
moment's   confession   of    the   slightest 
moral  failure,  ever  escapes  Him  or  is 
volunteered.     No  suspicion  of  pride  is 
possible,    yet   He    moves   in    and   out 
amongst  His  fellows,  and  lifts  up  His 
confident  face  to  His  father,  without  a 
trace  of  misgiving  because  of  sin.     No 
room  to  suspect  any  dulness  of  spiritual 
apprehension  or  perception  ;  the  sense 
of  sin  is  always  keenest  in  the  holiest. 
There  are  no  critics  of  themselves  like 
the  saints  of  God.     [When  the  glare 
and  glamour  of  the  world  are  with- 
drawn, as  in  days  of   solitude,   or  of 
sanctified  sickness  or  trouble,  the  soul's 
eye  sees  a  whole  firmamentf  ul  of  sins, 
which  were  indeed  there  all  the  time, 
but  unseen  and  unsuspected.     And  as 
the    astronomer's     eye     grows     more 
sensitive  by  practice,  and  sees  what  it 
could  not  when  it  began  to  observe,  so 
is  there  no  surer  sign    of  growth   in 
the  grace  of  holiness  than  that  the  eye 
of  the  soul  is  becoming  more  sensitive 
to  discover  sin  where  in  earlier  days  it 
condemned,  because  it  saw — nothing.] 
The  closer  a  man  is  drawn  to  God,  the 
more  intimate  and  habitual  the  fellow- 
ship which  God  vouchsafes  to  him,  the 
keener  the  sense  of  unworthiness  and 
imperfection. 

504 


"  Eternal  Light,  Eternal  Light, 

How  pure  that  soul  must  be 
When,  placed  within  Thy  searching  sight, 
It  shrinks  not,  but  with  calm  delight 
Can  live  and  look  on  Thee." 

So  sang  Thomas  Binney.  But  can 
any  soul  1  This  One  Soul  did  ;  the  Sin- 
less Substitute. 

2.  Scripture  assumes  this  of  Him. — 
Heb.  iv.  15  is  typical  in  its  pointed  ex- 
ception of  Him.    Peter  had  known  Him 
as  intimately  as  any  one,  except  perhaps 
John.     Our  friends  know  us,  and  they 
know  us  not  faultless.     A  sine  qua  non 
of  most  friendship  to  choose  not  to  see 
everything.     Grace  does  produce  noble 
characters.       John    Wesley   wrote   of 
John   Fletcher :    "I    was    intimately 
acquainted  with  him  for  above  thirty 
years ;  I  conversed  with  him  morning, 
noon,    and   night,   without   the    least 
reserve,    during   a   journey    of    many 
hundred  miles ;  and  in  all  that  time  I 
never  heard  him  speak  one  improper 
word,    nor   saw   him  do  an   improper 
action.     Many  exemplary  men  have  I 
known,  holy  in  heart  and  life  within 
fourscore  years,  but  one  equal  to  him 
have  I  not  known, — one  so  inwardly  and 
outwardly  devoted  to  God."     (Wesley, 
Worksj  vii.   449.)     Yet  who  does  not 
feel,  when  Peter  says,  *'  Who  did  no 
sin,   neither   was   guile   found  in  His 
mouth  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  22),  that  we  have  a 
testimony  to  a  holiness  of  another  order, 
and  of  a  higher  degree  of  completeness  ? 
It   is   not   merely  Peter's   observation 
of  the   three  memorable  years  of  the 
ministry ;  it  is  the  Spirit's  witness  for 
the  three-and-thirty  years  of  the  incar- 
nate life  on  earth.     If  to  those  who 
know  us  best  our  outward  life  seems 
blameless,  in  our  heart  we  say,  "  They 
don't   know   me   as   I   know  myself." 
[The  world  does  not  understand  this. 
Lady  Huntingdon  profusely,  earnestly 
declared  herself  to  Lord  Chesterfield  "  a 
great  sinner."     Said  he,  with  polished 
sarcasm,  rising  as  if  to  leave  the  room, 
"Excuse   me,  madam,  but  I  am  not 
accustomed   to   keep    such    bad   com- 
pany."]    [F.  W.  Newman's  remarks  in 
Liddon.      See  Appended   Note.]     We 
know  little  of  James ;  what  we  know 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  v. 


is  saintly,  of  an  ascetic  pattern  of 
saintliness.  Yet  no  one  would  credit 
an  assertion  of  sinlessness,  if  made  con- 
cerning James.  *'  No ;  he  is  only  a 
man."  Blamelessness  is  far  less  than 
Sinlessness,  and  blamelessness  is  a 
question  of  the  human  limitation  of 
requirement  and  knowledge.  Paul 
here  much  stronger :  "  Knew  no  sin." 
That  man  knows  nothing  of  himself 
who  does  not  know  that  he  *'  knows 
sin."  The  ripening  hohness  of  a  Chris- 
tian man  passes  through  a  stage  when, 
though  all  torturing  sense  of  guilt  and 
fear  is  gone,  there  is  an  intense  sensi- 
tiveness of  pain  at  the  cleaving,  cling- 
ing, defiling  presence  of  sin  within. 
The  loathing  of  himself  by  the  man 
longing  for  holiness  is  very  deep ;  a 
well -ascertained  fact  of  universal  re- 
ligious experience.  "  Universal,"  but 
not  including  Him.  He  knew  none. 
There  came  early  to  our  race  "  a  know- 
ledge of  good — and  of  evil."  And  men 
know  it,  as  men  know  the  very  sphere 
within  whose  round  and  range  their  life 
is  spent.  But  it  had  never  included 
Him.  The  Tempter  sought  to  avail 
himself  of  the  natural,  neutial,  innocent 
hunger  after  a  long  fast,  and  of  the 
neutraljinnocent,  useful  instinct  to  avoid 
pain ;  there  was  nothing  else  he  could 
appeal  to.  These,  he  found,  were  not  in 
Christ  under  any  law  but  that  of  the 
most  perfect  self -surrender  to  do  the 
whole  will  of  God  His  Father ;  and 
apart  from  these  "  he  had  nothing  in  " 
Christ  on  which  to  begin  his  evil  work 
(John  xiv.  30).  One  of  the  necessary 
preliminaries  of  the  Passover  Sacrifice 
in  the  time  of  Christ  had  become  the 
presentation  of  the  lambs  for  inspection 
by  duly  appointed  Levitical  officers. 
The  Temple  court  was  full  of  lambs 
and  their  offerers.  One  of  the  many 
suggestions  of  the  Transfiguration  scene 
takes  up  that  point.  It  is  plain  that 
about  that  time  the  mind  of  the  Saviour 
was  full  of  Calvary  and  its  sacrifice,  some 
twelve  months  forward  (Luke  ix.  31). 
Csesarea  Philippi  was,  in  other  senses 
as  well  as  the  geographical,  the  farthest 
limit  of  His  journeyings.  Literally, 
from  that  time  onwards  His  life  was 


one  long  "going  up  to  Jerusalem." 
From  that  time  God's  Passover  Lamb 
went  slowly  forward  to  death.  And 
on  the  Mount  the  Father  formally  and 
solemnly  inspected  His  "  Lamb  with- 
out blemish  and  without  spot "  (1  Pet. 
i.  19;  Exod.  xii.  5).  It  was  faultless. 
"  My  beloved, ...  in  Whom  I  am  well 
pleased." 

3.  Thus  then  the  Substitute  stands 
forth  "  apart  from  sin,"  and  apart 
from  us  ;  unique  in  an  unapproachable 
holiness.  In  us  holiness  is  induced; 
in  Him  inherent.  In  us  all  grace  ;  in 
Him  all  nature.  In  us  a  deep  moral 
discord  and  a  paralysing  moral  schism ; 
in  Him  peace.  [Cf.  "  My  peace  I 
give  unto  you  "  ;  in  its  measure  fulfilled 
in  the  Sanctifying  work  of  the  Spirit 
(John  xiv.  27).  The  "God  of  peace" 
is  the  Sanctifier  to  Whom  Paul  appeals 
(1  Thess.  V.  23).]  His  communion 
with  God  was  with  an  unclouded 
vision ;  so  may  ours  be,  but  with  a 
difference.  Behind  Him  is  no  memory 
of  days  when  sin  hid  that  Face.  May  it 
be  said  that  the  inscrutable  anguish  of 
a  Father's  hidden  Face,  upon  the  cross, 
was  the  harder  to  bear  that  He  had 
never  had  even  an  instant's  experience 
of  interrupted  communion  until  that 
moment?  Our  highest  holiness  is  a 
repaired  ruin  ;  His  never  knew  the 
beginning  of  a  fault.  [The  priceless 
Portland  Vase  in  the  British  Museum 
was  once  dashed  into  fragments  by  a 
madman.  With  great  patience  and 
skill,  every  fragment,  down  to  the 
tiniest,  was  recovered  and  all  were  put 
together.  The  vase  stands  to-day  com- 
plete ;  but,  like  our  highest  holiness,  is 
with  the  completeness  of  a  restoration.'\ 
His  had  always,  and  at  Calvary,  the 
completeness  of  what  had  never  known 
a  flaw,  the  completeness  of  an  original 
unviolated.  Divine  integrity.  His. 
holiness  is  manifested  in  all  ordinary 
forms  of  human  life  ;  but  it  is  a  Divine 
holiness  which  chooses  those  forms 
for  its  manifestation.  Our  holiness  is 
relative,  and  we  ourselves  are  accepted 
as  holy,  only  according  to  a  standard  of 
requirement  tempered  by  Evangelical 
grace ;  His  holiness  is  absolute.     Our 

505 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


strength  for  holy  living  and  for 
victorious  conflict  with  evil  is  outside 
ourselves — in  Him  ;  He  bore  Himself 
in  the  wilderness  and  the  world  with 
the  calm  of  self-sufficing  strength 
within.  ["  To  serve  the  present  age" 
a  man  must  belong  to  it ;  yet  he  must 
be  before  it,  above  it,  if  he  is  to  lift  it. 
So]  to  save  our  race  its  Saviour  must 
belong  to  it.  He  did  "  take  hold  on 
the  seed  of  Abraham  "  (Heb.  ii.).  To 
save  our  race  He  must  be  above  it. 
The  uniqueness,  the  isolation,  of  the 
holiness  of  our  Substitute  is  the  very 
prime  necessity  of  His  work. 

III.  The  salvation  through  Him. — 

1.  Two    points    of    exposition    to    be 

noticed:      (1)  "  iSm,"      not      "a     sin 

offering  "  ;  a  possible  meaning  indeed, 

favoured  by  Augustine,  and  from  him 

downward ;     but    not    satisfying    the 

antithesis    to     '"^righteousness."       The 

abstract    words    are   noteworthy.     As 

though    almost — for   one   thing — God 

were  viewed  as  dealing  with  Qualities 

rather   than  with   Personalities.     The 

Substitute     steps    into    the   place    of 

sinners,  indeed ;  but  also  He  is,  as  it 

were,  made  Sin  Embodied.     The  holy 

wiath  and  necessary,  active  antagonism 

between    His   holiness   and   all   moral 

evil  is  all  converging  upon  one  point. 

We — I — ought  to  have  stood  there,  on 

that    spot    of     terrible     convergence. 

What    does    occupy  the    place?     His 

Son  ?     Yes.    But  going  more  deeply — 

"  Sin."     Our  race,   perhaps  the  other 

I'aces  of  the  universe,  are  seeing,  in  a 

fearful  object-lesson.  Holiness  spending 

its  stern  strength  upon  Sin.     (2)  Note 

the   difference :    "  Made  .  .  .  for   us," 

"  Righteousness  in  Him."     The  forensic 

and  the  mystical  theories  of  the  Atoning 

work  of   Christ  meet  here.      There  is 

the  honour  done  to  the  majesty,  the 

supremacy,  the  very  principle  of  moral 

Law,  when  He,  Who  is  the  Lawgiver, 

steps  into  the  place  of  the  lawbreakers, 

and   outraged   Law   is   avenged   upon 

Him   Who  never  broke  it.     There   is 

the  honour  done  to  real  Righteousness. 


The  Salvation  were  not  complete  if 
only  penalty  were  turned  aside,  law 
satisfied,  the  sinner  suffered  to  go 
free.  There  is  no  real  salvation  which 
does  not  work  out  a  real  ''  righteous- 
ness" and  that  manifestly  "  of  God." 
This  also  is  given  for  His  sake, 
certainly  ;  but  only  in  connection  with 
that  living,  life-giving  union  which 
fills  Paul's  phrases  "  in  Christ,"  "  in 
the  Lord."  ["When  St.  Paul  says 
that  we  might  he  made,  etc.,  the  word 
ytvw/xe^a  means  more  than  the  non- 
imputation  of  sin  which  has  been 
spoken  of  before.  That  we  might 
become  :  our  forensic  justification  being 
included  of  necessity,  our  moral  con- 
formity to  the  Divine  righteousness 
cannot  be  excluded.  Those  closing 
words  are  a  resumption,  but  in  a  more 
emphatic  and  enlarged  form,  of  the 
preceding  paragraph,  which  ended  with 
in  Christ  .  .  .  a  new  creature.  The 
righteousness  of  God  in  Him  is  the  full 
realisation  of  the  new  method  of 
conforming  us  to  His  attribute  of 
righteousness.  It  is  impossible  to 
establish  the  distinction  between  in 
Christ  for  external  righteousness  and 
Christ  in  us  for  righteousness  internal. 
These  are  only  different  aspects  of  one 
and  the  same  union  with  Christ.  Still, 
the  distinction  may  be  used  for  illus- 
tration."] 2.  Let  it  be  remembered 
that  this  is  God's  way  of  "  reconcilia- 
tion " ;  that  all  God  designed  and 
desired  is  not  accomplished  when  the 
Substitute  has  stood  and  suffered  where 
the  Sinner  and  his  Son  should  have 
stood  :  to  be  "  in  Christ "  is  part  of 
God's  whole  work  and  purpose.  There 
is  no  true  "  salvation  "  unless  there  is 
a  real  righteousness  flowing,  growing, 
from  a  real  union  with  Him.  He  cast 
in  His  lot  with  us  ;  we  must  have  a 
life  grafted  into  His.  Then  at  last 
the  broken  order  is  readjusted.  Then 
indeed 

"  Peace  on  earth,  and  mercy  mild, 
God  and  sinners  reconciled." 

"  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest  1 " 


506^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  V. 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  1-5.  Our  Present  and  Future 
Houses. 

I.  The  present  house. — The  physical 
structure.  Mind  occupies  body.  This 
house  is:  1.  Earthly.  Consequently 
drags     the    tenant     down     to    earth. 

2.  Movable.  A  tent,  rather  than  a 
house.  And  how  easily  and  quickly 
removable  !     How  frail  while  it  lasts  ! 

3.  Decaying.  Gradually  growing  old, 
decomposing,  ceaselessly  returning  to 
earth.  4.  Inconvenient.  "In  it  we 
groan,  being  burdened."  5.  Inferior. 
Paul  desires  a  better. 

II.  The  future  house. — The  resurrec- 
tion body.  Described  in  1  Cor.  xv. 
This  house  is  :  1.  Superhuman.  "Not 
made  with  hands."  Jehovah  the 
Architect  and  Builder.  So  was  this 
first,  but  it  has  evidently  been  tam- 
pered with ;  and  was  not  meant  for 
permanence.  2.  Eternal.  3.  Unex- 
posed to  the  storms  of  earth.  "  In  the 
heavens,"  where  all  will  contribute  to 
its  constant  preservation  and  increasing 
adornment.  4.  A  ttractive.  Paul  craves 
this.  5.  The  tenant  is  being  prepared 
for  it.  "  Wrought  for  this  selfsame 
thing."  6.  He  has  the  assurance  of  it. 
"  The  earnest  of  the  Spirit."  Have 
you  such  a  house  in  prospect  ? — More 
fully  in  ^^  Homilist,"  Third  Series, 
iii.  33. 

"Vers.  8-10.  The  Philosophy  of  True 
Courage. — Paul's  courage  is  based  on 
three  convictions  ]  that  Death  will  not 
endanger — 

I.  The  interests  of  being. 

II.  The  great  purpose  of  being. 

III.  The  rewards  of  being. — 
Homilistj  iv.  107. 

Yer.  10.  Chrisfs  Great  Assize.  Five 
watchwords  sum  up  the  principles  of 
the  Judgment. 

I.  Test ;  applied  according  to  vary- 
ing measures  of  probationary  privilege. 

II.  Revelation  of  character. — 
[*^ Appear"    is   not   only   comparattre, 


"  present  ourselves  before."  It  is  also 
be  "  made  manifest."  No  man  knows 
himself  "as  he  is  known,"  until  that 
day.] 

III.  Separation  of  classes. 

IV.  Execution  of  the  condemning 
sentence. — "  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  the  term  *  judgment '  is  most 
frequently  connected  with  condem- 
nation ;  this,  in  fact,  is  the  more 
common  meaning  of  KpiVts.  Judg- 
ment determining  the  sentence ;  con- 
demnation pronouncing  it ;  execution 
administering  it ;  are  almost  synony- 
mous terms  with  regard  to  the  wicked  ; 
in  Scripture,  as  in  the  common 
language  of  human  justice." 

V.  Confirmation  or  ratification  of 
the  acceptance  of  the  saved.— A^ee  this 
suggestively  filed  up  in  Pope,  "  Compend. 
of  Theol.,"  416  sqq. 

Yer.  14.  "The  words  are:  'The  love 
of  Christ  constrains  us,  because  this  is 
our  interpretation  of  it :  [Denny  says, 
antea,  p.  106,  "The  work  of  Christ  in 
relation  to  sin  is  not  a  naked  fact,  an 
impenetrable  unintelligible  fact;  it  is 
in  the  New  Testament  a  luminous, 
interpretable,  and  interpreted  fact. 
.  .  .  Says  St.  Paul,  We  thus  judge ; 
i.e.  ...  we  can  and  do  put  a  certain 
intellectual  const  i  uction  upon  it."] 
One  died  for  all;  so  then  all  died.' 
Battles  have  been  fought  heie  over  the 
preposition  'for,'  which  is  virep,  on  behalf 
of,  not  di/Tt,  instead  of.  This,  it  has 
been  said,  excludes  the  idea  of  sub- 
stitution. This  is  a  hasty  inference. 
Paul  might  very  well  wish  to  say  that 
Christ  died  on  our  behalf,  without,  so 
far  as  the  preposition  goes,  thinking 
how  it  was  that  Christ's  death  was  to 
be  an  advantage  to  us.  But  observe 
the  inference  he  draws :  One  died  for 
all ;  so  then  all  died.  That  is  to  say, 
His  death  is  as  good  as  theirs.  That 
is  why  His  death  is  an  advantage  to 
them  ;  that  is  what  rationally  connects 
it  with  their  benefit :  it  is  a  death 
which  is  really  theirs  ;  it  is  their  death 
wliich  has  been  died  by  Him.     If  any 

507 


CHAP.  V.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.    CORINTHIANS. 


one  denies  this,  it  rests  witH   him  to 
explain,  in  the  first  place,  how  Christ's 
death  advantages  us  at  all ;   and,  in 
the  second  place,  how  Paul  can  draw 
from  Christ's  death  the  immediate  in- 
ference, *  so  then  all  died.^     We  do  not 
need  to  fight  about  the  prepositions. 
Christ's  death  benefits  us,  we  are  all 
agreed,   whatever   be   the   preposition 
used  to  express  its  relation  to  us,  or 
to  our  sins,  or  to  our  good ;  but  there 
is  no  coherence  between  the  Apostle's 
premises  and  his  conclusion,  except  on 
the    assumption   that   that   death    of 
Christ  was  really  our  death,  which  had 
come  upon  Him.     It  is  on  this  deeper 
connection  that  all  the  advantages  to 
us  of  that  death  depend.     This  inter- 
pretation is  confirmed  when  we  turn  to 
the  last  verse  of  this  chapter,  which  is 
virtually  the  Apostle's  own  comment  on 
ver.  14 :  '  Him  that  knew  no  sin  God 
made  sin  on  our  behalf,  that  we  might 
become   the   righteousness   of   God  in 
Him.'     We  sometimes  hear  the  Kew 
Testament  doctrine  of  the  atonement 
objected   to,    on   the    ground    of    the 
contradictions  it  involves.      I  do  not 
think   the    objection   is   very  serious. 
St.  Paul,  when  he  wrote  this  sentence, 
had  them  all  in  his  mind,  logical  and 
ethical,   in   their   acutest    form.      He 
probably  felt,  as  most  people  feel  when 
redemption  from  sin  becomes  a  practical 
interest   to  them,   that   the  point   at 
which  God  comes  into  contact  with  sin, 
even  as  a  Redeemer,  must  involve  con- 
tradictions of  every  kind  :  for  it  means 
that  God  is  taking  part  with  us  against 
Himself.     That  in  the  atoning  work  a 
sinless  One  is  made  sin,  and  sinful  ones 
become   the   righteousness   of   God,  is 
not   a  primd  facie   objection    to    the 
work  in  question ;  it  is  the  very  con- 
dition under  which  alone  the  work  can 
be   carried   through.     Paul   condenses 
in  this  proposition,  not  only  the  infinite 
difficulties    of    the    question,    but    its 
adequate  solution ;  it  is  in  these  sharp, 
undisguised  contradictions — if  you  like 
to  say  so,  it  is  in  this  tragic,  appalling 
event,  the  sinless  One  made  sin  by  God 
— that  the  condemned  soul  recognises 
the  very  stamp  and  seal  of  a  real  work 

508 


of  atonement.     That  meeting  of  con- 
tradictories, that  union  of  logical  and 
moral    opposites,    is    here    the     very 
guarantee    of    truth.   .   .   .   The    idea 
underlying  [the  passage]  is  plainly  that 
of  an  interchange  of  states.     Christ  is 
the  Person  who  knew  no  sin ;  i.e.  to 
whose  conscience  and  will,  though  He 
confronted  it  all  His  life,  sin  remained 
an  absolutely  alien  thing.    The  negative 
ixTj  means  that  this  is  conceived  as  the 
judgment  of  another  upon  Christ ;  it 
is  conceived  as  the  judgment  of  God. 
He  it  is  to  whom  Christ  is  sinless.     As 
He  looks  down  from  Heaven,  He  sees 
Him  alone,  among  the  children  of  .men, 
free  from  evil,  and  therefore  free  from 
condemnation.     He  alone  is  absolutely 
good,    the    beloved    with    whom    the 
Father  is  well  pleased.     Yet  Him  God 
made  sin,  that  by  so  doing  He  might 
destroy  sin,  and  have  the  good  news 
of  reconciliation  to  proclaim  to  men. 
What  is  it,  then,  that  this  making  sin 
covers?     What  are  we  to  understand 
by   it?     It   means   precisely   what    is 
meant  in  the  verse  already  quoted :  that 
Christ  died  for  us,  died  that  death  of 
ours  which  is  the  wages  of  sin.     In  His 
death,  all  sinless  as  He  was,  God's  con- 
demnation of  our  sin  came  upon  Him  ; 
a  Divine  sentence  was  executed  upon 
the  sin  of  the  world.     It  is  all-important 
to  observe  that  it  was  God  who  made 
Christ  sin  ;   the  passage  is  habitually 
quoted  *  He  became  sin,'  or,  indefinitely, 
*  He  was  made  sin,'  in  a  vague  sense 
unconsciously  willing  to  leave  God  out ; 
and  then  the  mind  goes  ofi*  at  a  tangent, 
and  seeks  moralising   or  rationalising 
senses   in   which   such    an    expression 
might  be  used.     But  God  is  the  subject 
of    the   sentence :    it  is   God   who  is 
presented    dealing   in   an   awful   way 
with  the  awful  reality  of  sin,  for  its 
removal;  and  the  way  in  which  He 
removes   it  is  to  lay  it  on  His  Son. 
That  is  done,  not  in  anything  else,  but 
in   this   alone,  that   Christ,  by  God's 
appointment,  dies  the  sinner's  death. 
The   doom   falls    upon    Him,   and    is 
exhausted   there.     The   sense    of    the 
Apostle    is   given    adequately  in  the 
well-known  hymn : 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  v. 


"  '  Bearing  shame  and  scoffing  rude, 
In  my  place  condemned  He  stood  ; 
Sealed  my  pardon  with  His  blood  : 
Hallelujah.' " 
— Dr.    Denny,    *'  Studies    in 
Theology;'  pp.  109-112. 

Ver.  17.  May  be  crystallised  around 
four,  all  true,  ways  of  reading  this 
gnomic  sentence. 

I.  If  in  Christ,  there  must  follow  a 
new  creation. 

II.  As  soon  as  in  Christ,  there 
begins  a  new  creation. 

III.  So    long    as  in    Christ,   there 


abides,  and  develops,  a  new  creation. 

IV.  Because  there  is  manifestly  a 
new  creation,  therefore  certainly  the 
man  is  in  Christ. 

N.B. — Nothing  less  than  a  new 
creation  will  do.  The  water  may  open 
the  bud  into  flower,  but  it  cannot 
form  the  bud.  It  can  give  culture,  but 
not  life. 

N.B. — Case  analogous  as  between 
Gen.  i.  and  this:  1.  "In  beginning 
God  created,"  etc.  2.  Spirit  brooding. 
3.  Light.  4.  Order.  5.  Rest  (Heb. 
iv.  7). 


APPENDED   NOTES. 


Ver.  14.  "  Then  all  died:'  —  There  is 
another  way  in  which  the  Death  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  related  to  our  redemption. 
I  approach  it  with  great  hesitation,  because 
it  is  involved  in  great  obscurity.  .  .  . 
These  words  (viz.  ver.  14),  if  they  stood 
alone,  might  perhaps  be  fairly  regarded  as 
a  strong  rhetorical  statement  of  the  effect 
which  ought  to  be  produced  upon  our  hearts 
by  the  infinite  love  of  Christ  in  dying  for  us. 
It  might  be  said  that,  since  He  died  for  us, 
the  greatness  of  His  love  ought  to  dissolve 
all  our  relations  to  this  present  "  evil  world," 
and  bind  us  in  perfect  and  eternal  loyalty  to 
Himself ;  that  we  ought  to  live  as  though 
death  had  already  separated  us  from  the 
common  excitements  and  sorrows  and 
triumphs  of  mankind;  for  us  old  things 
should  have  passed  away,  and  all  things 
become  new.  But  in  several  other  of  his 
Epistles  he  speaks  of  Christ's  Death  as 
though  it  were  a  real  event  in  our  own 
history.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  (vi., 
vii.)  he  rests  his  elaborate  arguments  on 
what  he  takes  for  granted  as  known  to  those 
to  whom  he  is  writing, — the  fact  that  Christ's 
death  was  in  some  sense  their  own  death. 
.  .  .  The  conception  .  .  .  reappears  ...  in 
St.  Paul's  writings  ...  so  frequently,  and 
in  such  forms,  that  it  cannot  be  treated  as 
being  nothing  more  than  a  rhetorical  repre- 
sentation of  the  great  moral  effect  which 
our  belief  in  the  Death  of  Christ  ought  to 
have  on  our  spirit  and  character.  It  seems 
to  have  suggested  the  exhortation  of  St. 
Peter,  to  which  it  is  difficult  to  give  a  very 
exact  interpretation,  "  Forasmuch  then," 
etc.  (2  Pet.  iv.  1,  2),  In  his  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians  St.  Paul  affirms  that  he  himself 
had  thus  died  in  Christ  (Gal.  ii.  20).  And 
many  Christian  persons  have  declared  that 
they  are  conscious  that  in  the  Death  of 
Christ  their  old  and  evil  life  perished.  It  is 
far  less  difficult  to  apprehend  the  fact  that 
we  live  in  the  life  of  Christ  than  the  fact 


that  we  died  in  His  death  ;  but  the  teaching 
of  St.  Paul  seems  to  be  explicit.  The  de- 
struction of  evil  within  us  is  the  effect  and 
fulfilment  in  ourselves  of  the  mystery  of 
Christ's  Death,  as  the  development  of  our 
positive  holiness  is  of  the  power  of  His  life. 
This  is  the  Pauline  doctrine,  and  I  repeat 
that  it  has  been  verified  in  the  consciousness 
of  large  numbers  of  Christian  people.  I 
accept  this  relation  between  the  Death  of 
Christ  and  the  death  of  our  own  evil  self  as 
a  fact,  though  I  may  be  unable  to  offer  any 
explanation  of  it.  The  fact,  however  inex- 
plicable, is  of  great  significance.  .  .  .  How 
many  of  us  have  cried,  in  the  bitterness  of 
our  despair,  *'  There  is  no  redemption  possible 
to  us.  We  have  waited  for  God,  and  He  has 
not  come  to  us.  .  .  .  Would  to  God  that  I 
could  cease  to  be  myself;  that  this  evil 
nature  of  mine  could  be  destroyed  and  leave 
nothing  of  itself  behind  ;  that  I  could  die, 
if  only  I  might  have  a  new  life,  with  better 
instincts,  diviner  impulses — that  the  passion, 
the  sluggishness,  the  selfishness,  the  un- 
belief, which  seem  to  constitute  my  very 
self,  could  be  smitten  with  lightning  from 
heaven,  and  perish — perish  utterly,  and 
perish  for  ever."  .  .  .  The  prayer  receives 
its  answer  in  Christ ;  in  His  Death  our  sin 
dies,  and  in  His  life  the  very  life  of  God  is 
made  our  own.  How  the  Death  of  Christ 
effects  the  destruction  of  our  sin  we  may  be 
unable  to  tell.  Perhaps  that  great  moral  act 
by  which  Christ  consented  to  lose  the  con- 
sciousness of  the  Father's  presence  and  love 
— an  act  different  in  kind  from  any  to  which 
holy  beings,  in  their  normal  relation  to  God, 
can  be  called — rendered  it  possible  for  us  to 
sink  to  that  complete  renunciation  of  self 
which  is  the  condition  of  the  perfect  Chris- 
tian life ;  for  that  renunciation  is  also 
unique,  and  has  no  parallel  in  the  normal 
development  of  a  moral  creature.  But  it  is 
enough  that  we  know  the  fact  that  in  God's 
idea,    and   according   to    the   law    of   the 

509 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


kingdom  of  heaven,  we  are  crucified  in 
Christ.  Sometimes  through  our  union  with 
Him  sin  may  seem  to  perish  as  by  a  sudden 
blow.  More  frequently  it  dies  slowly — dies 
as  those  died  who  were  put  to  death  by 
crucifixion.  .  .  .  But  it  is  actually  crucified, 
if  only  our  union  with  Christ  is  complete;  and 
though  it  may  still  live,  its  power  over  us  is 
gone.  .  .  .  [A]  moral  security  for  the  dis- 
appearance of  sin  has  been  created  by  the 
sufferings  of  Christ  on  the  cross.  The  Death 
of  Christ  is  the  death  of  sin. — Dale,  "  Atone- 
ment;' pp.  425-430.     Cf.  also  pp.  261,  262. 

Ver.  14.  '' Love  of  Christ  constraineth  me'' 
[if  regarded  as  equivalent  to  "  Love  to 
Christ"]. — The  Duke  of  Wellington  regarded 
himself  as  a  "  retained  servant  of  the 
monarch ."  A  customary  phrase  of  his  was, 
"The  King's  government  must  be  carried 
on."  Hence  he  sank  personal  differences  and 
served  under  Peel,  when  Peel  changed  re 
Corn  Laws.  "  Government  is  of  far  greater 
importance  than  any  party  opinions  what- 
ever." So  "  Christ's  government  must  be 
carried  on  " ! 

No  lower,  feehler  motive  is  in  long-run 
sufficient.  Dr.  Hessey  (Boyle  Lectures, 
Moral  Difficulties  of  the  JBible)  tells  of  a 
young  man,  in  a  newly  founded  colony,  who 
went  to  a  Bishop  for  ordination,  professedly 
from  the  highest  motives.  The  Bishop  knew 
the  young  man,  and,  suspecting  an  admixture 
of  lower  motives  (albeit  hardly  known  to  the 
man),  sent  him  to  a  school  for  native  children, 
miles  up-country,  to  teach  them  everything. 
The  test  did  its  work.  In  two  months  the 
young  man  returned,  owning  he  did  not 
know  his  own  heart  fully,  and  no  longer 
deeming  the  ministry  his  life-work. 

Ver.  17.  "A  new  creature'' — If  any  man 
be  in  Christ,  that  is  a  new  creation.  That 
is  enough.  Let  but  this  miracle  be  wrought, 
and  the  spirit  has  not  missed  the  true 
rapture  of  life.  The  outward  order  may  be 
wearily  and  monotonously  the  same.  Reforms 
may  be  driven  back  ;  injustices  may  be  per- 
petuated ;  the  day  of  external  deliverance 
may  be  far  off.  It  is  a  small  thing,  if  the 
soul  is  unchained.  The  slave  who  believed 
was  still  a  slave  to  outward  seeming.  His 
bondage,  it  might  well  be,  was  to  grow  yet 


more  stringent  and  cruel,  and  no  help  would 
reach  him  on  this  side  of  death.  But  he 
was  a  new  creation.  He  beheld  all  things 
with  new  eyes,  inhabited  by  a  new  spirit. 
He  was  no  more  the  sport  of  a  merciless 
master,  but  one  of  the  children  whom  God 
gave  to  Christ.  Though  no  arm  of  rebellion 
was  lifted  to  overthrow  the  tyranny  that 
crushed  him,  he  was  delivered  from  his 
heartbroken  weariness,  and  he  could  do  all 
things  and  bear  all  things  through  Christ 
that  strengthened  him. — Editorial^  "  British 
Weekly;'  October  19th,  1893. 

Ver.  21.  "  Who  hnew  no  sin." — Yet  Jesus 
Christ  never  once  confesses  sin ;  He  never 
once  asks  for  pardon.  .  .  .  He  never  Himself 
lets  fall  a  hint,  He  Himself  never  breathes 
a  prayer,  which  implies  any,  the  slightest, 
trace  of  a  personal  remorse.  From  no  casual 
admission  do  we  gather  that  any,  the  most 
venial,  sin  had  ever  been  His.  Never  for  one 
moment  does  He  associate  Himself  with  any 
passing  experience  of  that  anxious  dread  of 
the  penal  future  with  which  His  own  awful 
words  must  needs  fill  the  sinner's  heart.  If 
His  Soul  is  troubled,  at  least  His  moral 
sorrows  are  not  His  own ;  they  are  a  burden 
laid  on  Him  by  His  love  for  others.  Nay, 
He  challenges  His  enemies  to  convince  Him 
of  sin.  He  declares  positively  that  He  always 
does  the  will  of  the  Father.  Even  when 
speaking  of  Himself  as  Man,  He  always 
refers  to  eternal  life  as  His  inalienable  pos- 
session. It  might,  so  perchance  we  think, 
be  the  illusion  of  a  moral  dulness,  if  only 
He  did  not  penetrate  the  sin  of  others  with 
such  relentless  analysis.  It  might,  we 
imagine,  be  a  subtle  pride,  if  we  did  not 
know  Him  to  be  as  unrivalled  in  His  great 
humility.  This  consciousness  of  an  absolute 
sinlessness  in  such  a  soul  as  that  of  Jesus 
Christ  points  to  a  moral  elevation  unknown 
to  our  human  experience.  It  is,  at  the  very 
least,  suggestive  of  a  relation  to  the  Perfect 
Moral  Being  altogther  unique  in  human 
history. — Liddon,  '' Bampton  Lectures;'  iv. 
1  (a).  (The  two  paragraphs  preceding,  as 
well  as  the  footnote  from  F.  W.  Newman, 
and  Note  C,  will  be  full  of  serviceable  sug- 
gestions to  a  homilist.  Also  if  Luthardt, 
fundamental  Truths,  be  accessible,  lect.  x., 
pp.  311-313,  is  a  good  putting  of  the  case.) 


510 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    IL   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  vi. 


CHAPTER   VI. 

CRITICAL  NOTES,  ' 

This  chapter  wrongly  isolated  at  both  ends  by  the  customary  division  of  the  book. 
Connection  quite  closely  continuous  between  v.  20,  21  and  vi.  1 ;  as  also  between  vi.  17,  18 
and  vii.  1. 

Ver,  1.  Workers  together. — With  whom?  Choose  between  (1)  God,  and  (2)  Christ.  For 
(1)  is  the  repeated  use  of  "  beseech,"  in  v.  20,  vi.  1 ;  for  (2)  the  "  scheme  "  of  the  passage 
(see  Homily  on  v.  20),  according  to  which  Paul  and  his  fellow-ambassadors  are  doing  in  His 
(bodily)  absence  the  work  of  the  Great  Ambassador.  But  for  (1)  it  is  pointed  out  that  what 
Paul  here  urges  is  not  precisely  His  message,  "  Be  reconciled,"  but  an  exhortation  to  those 
who  are  "reconciled."  (Also  cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  9.)  "Receive,"  '■'■acceptable^''  '■'■receive" 
(ver.  17)  [but  not  vii.  2],  have  all  the  same  root,  and  give  a  real  link  of  thought.  Beseech. — 
In  the  (usual)  threefold  sense  of  entreaty,  exhortation  (and  consolation).  In  vain. — 
Cf.  1  Cor.  XV.  13,  17  ;  Gal.  ii.  2 ;  Phil.  ii.  16. 

Ver.  2. — Isa.  xlix.  8,  as  in  LXX.  Paul's  comment  begins  at  "  Beliold"  etc.  A  new  section 
of  Isaiah  begins  at  xlix.  Cheyne  heads  xlix.-lvii.,  "  Vicarious  Atonement "  (cf .  vi.  21). 
Kay,  in  Speaker,  points  out  that  in  Isa.  Iviii.  5  the  Day  of  Atonement  is  joined  with  the  idea 
"day  of  acceptance."  He  adds:  "The  word  fox:  '  answered''  i^  the  same  that  occurs  in 
Ps.  xxii.  21 ;  where  a  8uif erer,  who  had  been  '  a  reproach  of  men  and  despised  of  the  people ' 
(ver.  6),  receives  an  answer  from  God  in  the  crisis  of  His  agony,  and  proclaims  that  '  all  the 
ends  of  the  earth '  shall  remember  and  turn  to  the  Lord  (ver.  27)." 

Ver.  3. — Connect  closely  with  ver.  1  ;  ver.  2  parenthetical.  Giving. — Viz.  Paul  (and  his 
fellow-ambassadors)  ;  not  the  Corinthians.  Offence. — "  Occasion  of  stumbling.''^  Ministry. — 
I.e.  the  administration,  the  discharge,  of  his  function  as  "  an  ambassador."  Note,  close 
(verbal)  parallel  with  viii.  20.  "  The  original  does  not  mean  that  he  succeeds  in  giving  no 
offence,  but  only  that  he  tries  to  give  none  "  (VVaite,  in  Speaker).  Blamed. — By  the  human 
observer,  whether  Christian  or  non-Christian. 

Ver.  4.  Commending. — Cf .  iii.  1 ;  illustrate  by  Rom.  v.  8.  Ministers. — Not  "  the  ministers  " 
(1  Cor.  iii.  5).  Stanley  paraphrases  somewhat :  "  Crushing  afflictions,  pressure  of  difficulties, 
narrow  straits.  The  prevailing  idea  is  of  pressure  and  confinement  ;  each  stage  narrower 
than  the  one  before,  so  that  no  room  is  left  for  movement  or  escape."  [Illustrate  the 
imagery  by  Luke  xii.  50;  Phil.  i.  23;  the  word  is  different,]  Cf.  with  this  enumeration 
xi.  23  sqq^.     The  outer  life  of  an  apostle. 

Ver.  5.  Tumults. — Possibly  " unsettlement  of  life"  (cf.  1  Cor.  iv.  11)  (Stanley).  More 
likely  such  as  Acts  xiv.  5,  19,  xix.  24.  "  These  probably  stand  last  [of  the  hardships 
inflicted  by  men],  partly  because  they  were  attended  with  peril  of  life  and  were  often  designed 
to  destroy  him,  and  partly  because  they  were  the  occasion  of  a  peculiar  injustice,  for  the  first 
Christian  missionaries  were  accused  of  raising  them  and  had  to  bear  the  infamy  and  the 
punishment"  (Waite).  [Examples  of  this  are  in  Acts  xvii.  6  (xxi.  38).]  Watchings. — 
"  Spells  of  sleeplessness  "  (Farrar),  whilst  working  for  bread.  Fastings. — Involuntary,  from 
sheer  poverty.     Cf.  xi.  9;  Phil.  iv.  10-12. 

Ver.  6. —  Stanley  compares  the  rhythmic  form  of  this  whole  passage  with  Rom.  viii.  sub. 
fin,,  and  1  Cor.  xiii.  Here  the  form  of  the  words,  rather  than  the  thought,  governs  the  order. 
"  Each  word  stands  singly  without  any  apparent  connection,  as  it  came  uppermost  in  his 
thoughts  "  (Stanley).  Note,  keep  "  *»,"  as  in  vers.  4,  5;  not  "Jy."  Purity. — Of  conduct 
and  heart  and  motive.  Longsuffering,  kind. — As  in  1  Cor,  xiii.  4.  Unfeigned  love. — As 
Rom  xii.  9. 

Ver.  7.  By. — Accurate  from  ^'■armour''''  onward.  Armour.— See  in  Rom.  vi.  13  (which 
is  literally  "  weapons  [  =  armour  here]  of  unrighteousness  "),  xiii.  12  (where  "  works  "  stands 
contrasted  with  '■^  armour  ^^),  x.  4.  ''Armour"  is,  of  course,  a  soldier's  whole  armament^ 
offensive  and  defensive.  "  In  Paul's  usual  sense  of  righteousness  by  faith  "  (Beet),  is  surely 
too  specialised  a  meaning  ;  rather,  integrity  of  speech  and  action,  are  sword  and  shield,  •'  on 
right  hand  and  on  the  left." 

Ver.  8. — "  By  the  approbation  which  his  conduct  evokes  in  good  men,  and  by  the 
dishonour  it  provokes  from  the  bad,  Paul  recommends  himself.  For  the  approval  of  the 
good  and  the  hostility  of  the  bad  alike  proved  that  he  was  doing  God's  work,"  (Beet.)  He 
had  had  both  "  honour  and  dishonour  "  at  Corinth  (1  Cor.  iv.  12).  Deceivers. — ii.  17,  iv.  2  ; 
the  very  word  is  used  of  him  in  the  Clementine  Homilies,  though  he  is  not  named.      [The 

511 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   IL   CORINTHIANS, 


quotation  and  an  account  of  the  Homilies  are  readily  accessible  in  Stanley,  Apostolic  Age^ 
pp.  378-379.] 

Ver.  9.  Dying.  — "  So  great  is  their  peril  that  they  seem  actually  falling  into  the  grave 

Yet  in  the  moment  of  apparent  destruction  suddenly  comes  deliverance.  .  .  .  Behold.  .  .  . 
Graphic  picture  (as  in  v.  17),  retaining  even  the  exclamation  of  wonder  at  the  unexpected 
deliverance."  (Beet.)  Acts  xiv.  19,  20  almost  exactly  gives  the  sentence  pictorial  embodi- 
ment.    Chastened. — Well  illustrated  by  Isa.  liii.  4  (as  suggested  by  Beet). 

Ver.  11. — "  The  veil,  which  had  hitherto  been  hung  between  the  Apostle  and  his  readers,  is 
suddenly  rolled  away  ;  we  see  them  standing  face  to  face  ;  his  utterance,  so  long  choked  by 
the  counter-currents  of  contending  emotions,  is  now,  for  the  first  time,  clear  and  distinct 
('  our  mouth  is  opened  '),  and  for  the  only  time  in  the  two  Epistles  he  calls  them  by  name. 
With  the  loosing  of  his  tongue  his  heart  opens  also  ;  that  heart,  which  was  '  the  heart  of  the 
world,'  opens  to  receive  in  its  large  capacities  his  thousand  friends :  whatever  narrowness  of 
affection,  whatever  check  to  the  yearnings  of  the  soul,  between  them  might  exist,  was  not  on 
his  part,  but  on  theirs ;  the  only  reward  which  he  claimed  for  his  paternal  tenderness  was 
a  greater  openness  from  them,  his  spiritual  children."    (Stanley.) 

Ver.  12.  Straitened. — Same  word  radically  as  in  ver.  5.  Bowels. — I.e.  practically,  ''^  heart" 
(Phil.  ii.  1). 

Ver.  13.  In  the  same.— "  Jtj  like  hind''  (R.V.). 

Ver.  14. — In  any  voluntary  companionship ;  marriage  is  only  one  particular  case  of  a 
general  rule.  Be  not. — Really  "  become  not^"  as  if  to  assume  that  there  was  as  yet  no  actual 
union  (?).  "Yoked. —  On  a  similar  principle  of  discovering  a  world-wide  principle  in  a 
Levitical  enactment,  as  in  1  Cor.  ix.  9,  here  Deut.  xxii.  10  is  widened,  "  spiritualised." 
[Waite  adduces  Lev.  xix.  19,  and  notes  the  strong  antipathy  of  the  Levitical  code  to  any  inter- 
ference with  the  original  ordinance,  "  after  their  kind."  See  the  '*  Johannean  "  antithesis 
of  "  light  "  and  " darkness"^ 

Ver.  15.  Belial. — Not  really  a  proper  name.  Such  a  use  of  the  word  is  due  to  the 
Vulgate.  Very  frequent  in  the  Old  Testament  for  "worthlessness,"  "  recklessness,"  "law- 
lessness" (see  ver.  14).  '*  The  term  as  used  in  2  Cor.  vi.  15  is  generally  understood  of  Satan, 
as  the  personification  of  all  that  is  bad ;  Bengel  explains  it  of  Antichrist,  as  more  strictly 
the  opposite  of  Christ "  (Smith,  B.D.,  sub.  v.).  Infidel. — Only  means  as  much  as 
*'  unbeliever." 

Ver.  16.  Temple. — "  The,''  not  "a";  1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17  shows  this  symbolism  one  of  the 
"stock" — the  staple — ideas  of  Paul's  religious  thought.  Lev.  xxvi.  11,  12,  freely  quoted 
from  LXX.  ;  part  of  a  solemn  summing  up  of  the  blessings  and  the  real  scope  of  the  Mosaic 
economy. 

Vers.  17,  18. — Isa.  Iii.  11,  freely  quoted  from  LXX.,  and  continued  still  more  freely  with 
reminiscences  of  Ezek.  xx.  34  (which  refers  to  the  same  gathering  out  from  Babylon),  and 
perhaps  of  2  Sam.  vii.  14.  "  Daughters  "  may  be  a  reminiscence  of  Isa.  xliii.  6  ;  the  sexes  are 
equal  "  in  Christ."  [The  manner  of  quotation  has  no  necessary  bearing  upon  the  views  of 
the  New  Testament  writers  re  the  Inspiration  of  the  Old  Testament.  Preachers  and  writers 
who  have  believed  in  the  strictest  "  dictation "  theory  of  Inspiration,  have  nevertheless 
always  felt  free  to  quote  either  freely  from  memory,  or  intentionally  ad  sensum  only,  or 
paraphrastically,  or  with  verbal  exactness,  as  might  be  needed  for  their  purpose.] 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—10. 

The  Work  and  Outer  Life  of  Ambassadors  (v.  20). 

I.  Their  appeal  (vers.  1-3). 
II.  Their  credentials  (vers.  4-10). 

I.  1.  Mark's  Gospel,  as  usually  read,  closes  with  a  good  epitome  of  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles,  and  indeed  of  all  the  subsequent  history  of  the  Christian  Church 
(xvi.  19,  20).  "  He  was  received  up  into  heaven.  .  .  .  They  went  forth  and 
preached  everywhere  .  .  .  the  Lord  working  with  them."  Question  of  exact 
exposition,  rather  than  of  any  practical  moment,  with  whom  these  ''^co-workers  " 
labour  (see  Critical  Notes).  In  point  of  fact  it  is  raised  only  between  two  aspects 
of  the  same  great  truth.  The  earthly  workers  do  not  labour  in  any  isolation  of 
merely  human  strength  or  wisdom.  They  are  not  left  by  their  Divine  Lord  "  to 
their  own  devices,"  or  to  their  own  resources.  They  are  directed  from  above ; 
they  draw  their  supplies  of  strength  from  above ;  the  communication  is  close 
and  continuous  between  the  Great  Ambassador,  Who  in  bodily  presence  has 

512 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vi. 


withdrawn  from  men's  sight,  and  the  human  representatives  who  are  carrying 
on  and  carrying  out  His  work  below  (see  Homily  on  v.  20).  In  all  review  of 
the  conditions  of  the  work,  and  in  all  estimates  of  its  **  chances  "  of  success  at 
any  given  juncture,  or  in  the  face  of  any  given  combinations  of  obstacles,  account 
must  be  taken  of  the  Divine  Worker,  Who  is  not  simply  looking  on  at  the 
workers,  but  is  actively  engaged  in  it  all.  They  are  "  workers  together  with  Him." 
The  appeal^  therefore,  is  not  theirs^  but  His  ;  like  that  in  v.  20. 

2.  (1)  The  appeal  is  to  those  vjho  have  already  responded  to  that  earlier  one. 
They  are  "  reconciled  "  ;  they  have  "  received  the  grace  of  God."  But  that  did 
not  finish  the  work  of  their  ^^ salvation"  "  Salvation  "  in  its  full  sense  only 
began  when  they  were  *' reconciled  to  God"  in  the  moment  of  their  faith  in  the 
Sinless  Substitute.  True  they  were  then  ** saved"  in  regard  to  the  penalty  of 
sins ;  in  that  moment  they  came  into  a  new  relationship  to  God.  But  the  Gospel 
contemplates  a  larger  salvation  than  this  :  **  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  in  Him."  In  the  moment  of — in  Pauline  phrase — their  justification, 
a  work  began,  in  which  they  "  co-operate  "  with  the  Spirit  and  grace  of  God 
throughout  all  their  after-course.  In  Birth  a  Life  began.  To  what  shall  it  grow  ? 
How  far  shall  life  develop  ?  Shall  it  develop  to  nothing  ?  Born  "  in  vain." 
After  many  fights  and  many  victories  shall  life  end  in  defeat  and  death  1  Fight- 
ing "  in  vain."  Shall  the  Exodus  from  Egypt  end  in  death  in  the  wilderness, 
even  seeing  Canaan  from  some  Nebo-top  of  vision  and  yet  not  entering  ?  Brought 
out  of  bondage  *'  in  vain."  Shall  the  Seed  of  the  Great  Sower  be  "  received  "  [a 
related  word,  in  Mark  iv.  20]  in  good  soil,  indeed,  but  so  choked  with  thorns,  or 
so  thin  a  covering  of  the  unbroken  rock,  that,  after  a  hasty,  or  a  rankly  vigorous 
growth,  the  seed  flags  and  withers,  and  the  sower  has  sown  in  these  particular 
hearts  "  in  vain  "  ?  In  the  first  Gift  indeed  were  all  subsequent  gifts  ;  the  first 
Grace  had  in  it  the  possibility  of  all  gifts  besides.  But  it  is  a  Talent,  a  Pound, 
with  which  a  man  must  trade,"  or  it  has  been  received  in  vain.  God's  ivork  well 
begun  may  end  in  '"^failure" — "failure,"  that  is,  so  far  as  the  individual  is  con- 
cerned ;  no  doubt  what  in  their  proximate  purpose  are  **  failures,"  serve  some 
larger  end,  and  contribute  to  the  success  of  God's  whole  Great  Plan.  (2)  "  /w 
vain  "  may  carry  the  analysis  of  failure  further  back.  The  very  message  "  Be 
reconciled  "  may  never  be  responded  to.  It  is  "  grace  "  that  such  a  message  is 
committed  at  all  to  ambassadors  who  may  bear  it  even  to  unwilling,  unready 
ears.  It  is  "  grace "  that  there  ever  was  a  Great  Ambassador,  Who  has  also 
been  "  made  sin  for  us,"  etc.  Very  many  know  the  fact,  hear  the  message, 
but  never  give  any  practical  response  to  it.  So  far  as  they  are  concerned,  and 
for  any  use  they  make  of  it,  Christ's  death  might  have  been  non-existent.  They 
pass  by  the  Cross,  and  ''die  in  their  sins  "  (John  viii.  21,  24).  For  them  the  grace 
of  God  has  been  *'  received  in  vain,"  to  no  purpose.  It  has  ended  in  an  empty 
issue.  (3)  By  persistent  inattention  the  heart  may  lose  its  ear  for  God's  voice. 
By  persistent  worldliness,  and  much  more  by  continued  sins  of  sense,  or  covetous- 
ness,  or  unholy  anger,  and  the  like,  the  Spirit  is  grieved.  He  may  be  grieved 
away.  If  He  withdraw, — the  case  is,  one  hopes,  exceedingly  rare, — the  power  to 
take  the  "  grace  of  God"  offered  as  it  is,  is  gone.  By  neglected  prayer,  by  ill- 
spent  Sabbaths,  by  secret  omissions  of,  perhaps  at  first,  small  duties,  the  Spirit 
of  reconciling  ^^  grace  "  may  be  constrained  to  withdraw  His  aid.  Willing  as  He 
is  to  co-operate,  He  is  never  simply  at  men's  call  and  bidding ;  the  power  to  fulfil 
man's  part  in  making  lastingly  fruitful  use  of  '*  thegrojce  of  God"  is  not  guaranteed 
to  be  always  at  man's  absolute  command.  "  If  we  fail  to  put  to  practical  use  in 
the  details  of  life  the  spiritual  benefits  received  by  the  favour  of  God,  even  His 
favour  to  us  becomes  to  us  a  useless  and  empty  thing.  An  unread  Bible,  a 
wasted  Sunday,  and  such  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  does  not  mould  our  life  are 
the  grace  of  God  received  in  vain."  (Beet.)     (4)  This  appeal  agrees  with  all 

LL  513 


GHAP.  vi.    HOMILEtiC  COMMENTARY:  II.    CORINTHIANS. 


th6se  cautions  and  warnings  of  the  Word  of  God  which  proceed  upon  the  assump- 
tion that  "  the  grace  of  God  "  may  really  be  "  received  "  and  yet  not  be  suffered 
to  issue  in  a  final  salvation.  The  racer  may  run  for  a  great  part  of  his  course, 
a,nd  never  finish  it,  so  missing  the  prize  of  the  calling  which  reached  him  from  on 
tiigh  (I*hil.  iii.  14).     Salvation  wants  "  making  sure," 

3.  the  encouragerhent  they  give  to  their  hearers.— Vrovi^ion  is  abundantly  secured 
for  their  making  *'  a  good  finish  "  ;  provision  against  every  emergency  which  may 
arise.  Prompt,  present,  sufficient  help.  They  need  never  yield,  need  never  be 
overcome,  need  never  be  entangled  or  overwhelmed.  There  is  always  a  "  now  " 
salvation  (see  Separate  Homily). 

4.  Their  appeal  is  TrapaKXrja-Ls. — A  preacher's  matter  needs  to  be  as  varied  as  the 
varied  aspects  of  Divine  truth.  He  must  also  speak  not  only  in  many  portions, 
but  in  many  manners.  A  preacher's  method  must  be  varied  :  entreaty,  exhorta- 
tion, COD  sola tion, — all  will  be  needed  by  the  varying  types  of  hearers,  and  their 
ceaselessly  varying  moods  or  circumstances.  ,  [An  associate  pastorate  ought  to 
supply  this  better  than  any  but  a  few  exceptionally  many-sided  men  can  do:. 
Many  ambassadors  are  needed  to  express  and  represent  the  One  Great,  and  only 
tJniversal,  Ambassador.]  But  he  will  never  be  satisfied,  who  is  a  true  co-woikem- 
with  God,  unless  by  every  variant  of  tone  and  manner  and  method  of  appeal  he^ 
succeeds  in  so  arousing,  or  hastening,  or  heartening  those  to  whom  he  is  sent,  as- 
that  the  ^^  grace"  of  reconciliation  once  ^^  received"  shall  end  in  the  abundant, 
success  of  the  heavenly  life. 

5.  Observable   here,  as  everywhere,  how  Paul  grounds  his  appeals   upon,  or: 
Strengthens  his  instructions  by,  references  to  the  Old  Testament  /Scriptures.     It  is . 
hardly  sufficient  to  say  :  "Of  all  the  Epistles,  however  clear  the  evidence  in  some 
instances  that  they  are  addressed  to  those  who  have  been  originally  heathens, , 
there  is   not   one  which  does  not  imply  a  familiar  acquaintance  with  Jewish. 
Customs  and  with  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament"  (Stanley,  Apostolic  Age,  ^ 
p*  200).     Paul's  practice  is  exactly  that  of  a   modern  missionary  to  a  heathen 
land.     He,  like  Paul,  believes  that  in  even  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  he  has  a  word  i 
of  universal  address ;  an  instrument  of  universal  applicability  and  force ;  a  message, , 
to  listen  to  which  is  an  obligation  upon  all   men,  Jews  or  Gentiles,  and  which, 
as  matter  of  experiment,  has  vindicated  its   universal  cogency  by  the  demon- 
stration of  the  Spirit,  which  accompanied  it,   and  before  which   even  Gentile 
Christians  bowed ;  in  acknowledgment  of  the    Divine  force  of    argument    and 
appeal ;  in   acknowledgment   of   the    Divine   truth  of  a  teaching  which  based 
itself,    even    foi;    them,    upon    Scriptures     which  hitherto    only    their    Jewish 
brethren  had  been  accustomed  to  accept  and  submit  to,  as  being  of  God.     Paul 
knew  no  better  arguments  for  Gentiles  than  those  he  would  have  used,  and  did 
use,  for  his  fellow-Israelites.     It  was  as  illogical,  but  as  self -justifying,  as  the^ 
similar  use  of  the  'same  Scriptures  by  a  Christian  missionary  in  his  appeals  to  a 
heathen  or  a  Mahometan  heart.     The  historical  occasion  or  embodiment  is  local,, 
national,  but  the  teaching  of  the  Old  Testament  is  part  of  God's  revelation  for  all' 
men.     The  principles  of  His  action,  and  especially  of  His  redemptive  action,  never 
change.     In  Old  Testament  or  New  Testament  He  is  the  same  God  in  Christ. 
The  Old  Testament  quotations  of  which  this  chapter  is  so  remarkably  full,  carry 
with  them,  and  contain  within  them,  universal  truth.     Paul  is  no  Jew  merely 
dealing  as  a  Rabbi  with  a  great  literary  monument  of  the  past  of  his  nation.    He 
is  a  Christian  ambassador  who  finds  that   "  every  scripture  inspired  of  God  is 
profitable  "  for  Gentile  as  well  as  for  Jew. 

II.  The  ambassador's  credentials. — 1.  He  carries  credentials.  Paul  claimed 
that  he  needed  no  credentials  to  Corinth,  except  the  witness  in  every  Corinthian 
Christian's  heart  of  the  effectiveness  with  which  the  human  ambassador  had 
discharged  his  function.     Every  "  reconciled  "  Corinthian,  rejoicing  that  he  had 

514 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vi. 


" received  the  grace  of  God"  welcomed  Paul  without  further  " letters  commenda- 
tory" (iii.  1).  But  to  others,  the  ambassador,  ^''the  minister  of  God"  commends 
himself  as  such  by  the  many  tokens  which,  in  almost  rhythmic  array,  he  proceeds 
to  enumerate.  Saved  men  are  seals  to  a  man's  ministry ;  but  until  they  are 
saved,  he  must  have  a  commission  whose  validity  is  attested  by  many  another  seal. 
2.  And  what  a  se7'ies/ — The  first  is  negative,  but  not  a  thing  of  small  moment. 
He  is  careful  that  nothing  in  his  personal  conduct,  and  nothing  in  the  manner  of 
his  official  life,  shall  be  a  stumbling-block  to  Jew  or  Gentile.  No  thoughtless, 
inconsistent,  offensive  behaviour ;  e.g.  no  "  lording  it  over  the  heritage  of 
God  " ;  no  selfish,  self-indulgent  use  of  his  Christian  liberty  or  of  his  Apostolic 
privileges  to  their  fullest  extent,  regardless,  reckless,  of  the  consequences,  direct 
or  indirect,  to  others.  His  life  and  example,  who  is  an  ambassador,  a  minister, 
of  Christ  will  for  that  reason  carry  weight  beyond  those  of  an  ordinary  Christian, 
whether  for  good  or  evil,  for  helpfulness  or  occasion  of  stumbling.  Each 
particular  case  of  inconsiderateness,  or  inconsistency,  or  sin  in  him  will  be 
generalised — as  good  example  will  usually  not  be  ! — and  made  representative  of  the 
class  to  which  he  belongs.  Their  "  administration  "  of  the  commission  to  exhort 
men  to  "  be  reconciled  to  God,"  with  all  that  such  a  reconciliation  carries  with  it, 
will  be  brought  into  disrepute,  and  "  blamed"  if  the  "  ministers  of  Christ "  be 
unworthy  or  unfaithful  in  their  personal  or  official  life.  Note  how  careful  Paul 
is  of  the  reputation  of  the  whole  body  of  fellow- workers.  There  is  none  of  that 
self-centered  strength,  or  pride,  which,  calling  itself  "  independence,"  goes  forward 
on  its  own  course,  whatever  be  the  bearing  of  its  action  upon  the  world's  estimate 
of  the  ministry  and  its  work.  This  noble  man  acts  as  if  put  in  trust  with  the 
reputation  of  the  whole  number.  "  He  felt  that  the  influence  of  Christianity 
upon  the  world  depended  very  much  upon  the  collective  impression  made  by  its 
prominent  advocates,  and  that  this  impression  would  be  determined  in  no  small 
measure  by  his  personal  conduct.  He  was  therefore  careful  so  to  act  in  every- 
thing as  to  cause  no  spiritual  injury  to  any  one,  lest  such  injury  might  lessen 
the  collective  influence  of  the  leaders  of  the  Church."  (Beet.)  He  is  wanting  in 
one  of  the  first  credentials  of  the  true  minister,  who  is  not  sensitive  lest  his  own 
discharge  of  his  function  should  in  any  way  prejudice  his  brethren  in  the  ministry 
of  the  word  of  reconciliation.  The  true  ambassador  will  feel  that  the  honour, 
first  of  the  Great  Ambassador,  and  next  of  his  human  co-workers,  is  in  some 
degree  in  his  hands.     Besponsibility  for  holding  it  high  rests  upon  each  single  man. 

3.  Then  follow,  in  startling  series,  the  positive  seals  of  a  valid  commission^  the 
notes  of  a  true  ambassador.  (Consult  Critical  Notes  upon  these.)  Observe  in 
vers.  4-6  how  the  very  "  penalties  "  of  his  Apostolic  character  and  work,  the  strokes 
of  man's  injustice,  and  even  of  his  own  people's  niggardliness,  are  by  a  wondrous 
alchemy  of  grace  transformed  into  tokens  by  which  he  knows,  and  by  which  others 
know,  himself  a  true  ambassador.  [In  Gal.  vi.  17  the  scars  which  mark  his 
body,  every  one  of  them  with  a  memory  and  a  history  to  himself,  are  the  brands 
of  Christ's  ownership.]  "  If  I  had  none  of  these  troubles,  I  should  begin  to  doubt 
whether  I  were  in  the  ministry.  If  the  world,  or  the  Church,  saw  none  of  these 
things  in  me,  if  I  slipped  through  cheaply,  escaping  all  such  hardships,  they 
might  ask  whether  indeed  I  really  belonged  to  the  body  of  ambassadors."  The 
"popular  preacher  "  who  ^ets  everybody's  good  word  may  well  pray  to  be  kept 
on  his  guard  against  his  Master's  woe  (Luke  vi.  26). 

4.  These  are  credentials  which  others  make  for  him,  though  he  wears  them  as 
his  badge  of  service.  But  next  follow  some  for  which  himself  must  take  thought, 
A  man  needs  to  watch  his  own  spirit  with  closest  vigilance,  in  the  midst  of  the 
persecution  of  the  cruel  world,  under  their  false  accusations,  and  when  even  within 
the  Church  he  is  opposed  by  *'  unreasonable  and  wicked  men  "  (2  Thess.  iii.  2),  when 
an  ungrateful  Church  leaves  him  to  toil  far  into  the  night  for  the  bread  which 

515 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


his  labour  spent  on  them  in  the  daytime  deserved  that  they  should  provide. 
"  Longsuffering  "  will  have  much  occasion  to  train  it  in  full  beauty  and  strength. 
"  Love  unfeigned,"  indeed  "  love "  at  all,  will  be  a  triumphant  vindication  of 
the  grace  of  God  in  a  Paul  whose  apostleship  is  challenged.  He  will  take  care 
that,  so  far  as  depends  upon  himself,  "  the  Holy  Ghost  "  shall  dwell  within  him 
in  fulness  of  power.  In  motive  and  act  he  will  "  keep  himself  pwre."  It  will 
be  a  further  credential,  appealing  to  any  critic  or  opponent  who  will  think,  "  This 
man  is  growing  and  ripening,  day  by  day,  in  knowledge  of  Divine  things.  He  is 
certainly  qualified  to  be  a  minister  of  Christ  to  me."  And,  above  all,  when  such 
an  opponent  sees  an  ungrudging  "  kindness  "  which.  Godlike,  spends  itself  upon 
even  "  the  unthankful  and  the  evil,"  he  says  rebuked  and  self -convicted,  *'  That 
man  is  really  a  minister  of  Christ." 

5.  Then  come  the  many  points  on  which  true  ministers,  whose  commission 
still  runs  in  full  validity,  will  guard  their  own  spirit  and  inner  life.  Misunder- 
stood, condemned  of  men,  they  will  so  keep  themselves  blameless  that,  whilst 
"  righteousness  "  of  motive  and  dealing  may  now  and  then  be  the  weapons  of 
offence  and  defence,  they  may  far  oftener  leave  their  reputation  in  the  hands  of 
Him  Who  knows  them  to  be  no  ^^  deceivers ^^^  etc.,  and  meanwhile  go  steadily  on 
with  their  work  and  "  ministry."  Even  life  itself,  often  endangered,  shall  be  safe 
in  His  keeping.  Who  will  give  many  a  startling  deliverance,  which  shall  be 
rather  a  resurrection  than  a  mere  deliverance.  But  no  credential  will  be  more 
forcible  in  its  appeal  for  recognition  than  this  :  "  PTe  possess  all  things.  We  make 
many  rich."  "Great  poverty,  but  great  peace."  ''^Always  rejoicing!"  Paul's 
Epistle  to  the  Philippians  is  a  fine  illustration  of  the  true  Christian  cheerfulness, 
written  as  it  was  amidst  circumstances  naturally  calculated  to  distress  and 
depress  and  daunt.  [Says  Bradburn,  an  intimate  associate  of  John  Wesley's  later 
days :  "  It  was  almost  impossible  to  be  dull  or  dissatisfied  in  his  company.  .  .  . 
I  never  saw  him  loli^- spirited  in  my  life.  .  .  .  When  speaking  of  any  who 
imagined  religion  would  make  people  morose  and  gloomy,  I  have  heard  him 
say  in  the  pulpit  '  That  sour  godliness  is  the  devil's  religion.'  In  his  answer  to 
a  letter  I  had  written  to  him  (in  a  time  of  strong  temptation)  he  has  these 
words :  *  That  melancholy  turn  is  directly  opposite  to  a  Christian  spirit.  Every 
believer  ought  to  enjoy  life.'  ...  I  heard  him  say,  *  I  dare  no  more  fret  than 
curse  and  swear.' "] 

6.  What  is  the  argument  from  all  these  marks  ?  "  Each  side  of  these  contrasts 
commends  the  apostles  as  ministers  of  God.  That  men  whom  some  decry  as 
deceivers  are  found  to  be  true,  that  men  set  aside  as  unknown  become  day  by 
day  more  fully  known,  that  men  who  seem  to  be  in  the  jaws  of  death  are 
rescued  and  men  apparently  smitten  by  God  live  still,  that  underneath  visible 
sorrow  there  is  constant  joy,  and  that  utter  poverty  is  but  a  mask  hiding  infinite 
wealth,  is  abundant  proof  that  they  in  whom  these  contradictions  meet  are 
indeed  servants  of  God.  Thus  amid  many  and  various  hardships,  in  a  spotless 
and  kindly  life  animated  by  the  Holy  Spirit  and  by  sincere  love  to  men,  and 
armed  with  a  word  which  commends  itself  as  the  truth  and  is  confirmed  by  the 
manifested  power  of  God,  in  everything  Paul  and  his  companions  claim  respect 
and  act  as  becomes  ministers  of  God."   (Beet.) 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verse  14— vii.  1. 

The  paragraph  may  be  gathered  up  round  the  central  figure — 
The  Temple  of  the  Living  God. — The  Church  collectively,  then,  is  : — 
I.  The  scene  of  special  Divine  manifestation. — 1.  His  manifestation  makes 
"  holy  ground."     The  flame  which  played  harmless  around  the  Bush  in  Hor^b 

516 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vi. 


made  a  spot  where,  for  the  nonce,  every  man  must  tread  with  bare  feet.     [I.e.  he 

is  no  better  than  the  poorest  or   than  a  slave  when  he  stands  there  in  the 

presence  of  God ;  seen  from  God's  elevation  all  disparities  of  rank  are  merged  in 

one  common  lowliness.]     So  whilst  God  is  manifest  in  all  His  works, — in  Nature 

to  those  who  have  eyes  opened  to  see  Him  ;  in  mankind, — for  there  is  no  need  to 

deny,  no  honour  done   to  God  or  the   Church  in  denying,  that  God   by  the 

redemptive  Gift  of  the  Spirit,  is  amongst  all  men,  of  every  race  and  religion  and 

age ;  yet  He  is  most  conspicuously  manifest  in  His  choicest  Work,  His  Church. 

So  also  a  Church  has  no  holiness  unless  He  be  in  its  midst,  in  its  means  of  grace, 

in  its  success,  in  its  members  :  all,  in  all.     Solomon  built  his  Palace  for  Jehovah, 

as  Moses*  workmen  had,  long  before,  made  the  Tent ;  but,  until  God  entered, 

and  in  both  " dwelt  amongst  them"  the  one  was  a  Palace  only,  and  not  a  Temple, 

and  the  other  was  only  a  tent,  larger  and  of  more  costly  materials  than  the  others 

round  it,  but  not  the  Tabernacle.     [Of.  even  the  theory  of  classical  heathenism 

(Smith,   Dictionary  of  Antiq.)  :  "  It   was   necessary  then  for   a   temple  to   be 

sanctioned  by  the  gods,  whose  will  was  ascertained  by  the  augurs,  and  to  be 

consecrated  or  dedicated  by  the  will  of  man  (pontiffs).    When  the  sanction  of  the 

gods  had  not  been  obtained,  and  where  the  mere  act  of  man  had  consecrated  a 

place  to  the  gods,  such  a  place  was  only  a  sacrum,,  sacrarium,  or  sacellum."]     So, 

also,  let  there  be  an  organisation  of  the  most  thorough  and  perfect,  part  and  part 

closely  articulated,  wisely  related,  admirably  adapted  to  its  high  purpose ;  let 

wealth,  numbers,  influence,  all  fill  the  Church  roll ;  yet  if  there  be  no  presence  of 

God,  there  is  no  Church.     If  He  be  not  amongst  them,  they  are  not  His  people. 

"  Your  house — not  My — is  left  unto  you,"  was  said  when  the  material  fabric  was  at 

its  culmination  of  beauty  and  glory,  the  treasury  never  better  filled,  the  ritual 

never  better  observed,  the  show  of  religiosity  never  greater  in  all  the  history  of 

Israel.     But  no  Shekinah,  though  a  Holy  of  Holies  was  there  still ;  no  Presence, 

to  be  hid  by  as  splendid  a  Veil  as  had  ever  been  wrought.    Pompey  was  amazed 

to   find   the  inmost  shrine  empty.      The  world  sometimes  makes  proof  of  the 

Church ;  the  inquirer  penetrates  within,  and  within  again ;   is  it  only  to  find 

a  Most  Holy  without  a  God  ?     Then  that  "  Church  "  is  no  Temple  of  God  ;  or  is 

one  no  longer.      The  inquirer  finds  in  even  a  half-organised  Church  like  that  of 

Corinth  :  *'  God  is  among  you  of  a  truth  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  25). 

2.  This  is  the  glory  of  the  Church. — When  Solomon  substituted  Temple  for  Taber- 
nacle, everything  was  new,  with  one  exception ;  everything  but  that  was  more  costly 
and  on  a  larger  scale.  The  same  ark  was  brought  into  the  new  Sanctuary  from 
the  old.  Looked,  perhaps,  small,  unsuitable,  unworthy,  "  mean  " ;  its  art  very 
far  beneath  that  of  the  grand  new  shrine  of  Solomon's  "  advanced  "  days.  But 
he  dared  not  change  that.  The  throne  of  Jehovah,  His  mercy-seat  [  =  "  throne  of 
grace,"  with  the  elements  of  the  name  reversed],  the  testimony  of  His  Law, — all 
these  must  be  the  same.  The  same  God  must  own,  hallow,  inhabit,  the  new  Who 
had  in  that  way  made  the  old  a  dwelling-place  of  God  on  earth.  [As,  then, 
the  continuous  connection  with  the  same  personality  year  after  year  is  no  small 
note  of  the  identity  of  the  body ;  so  also,  that  the  organisation  should,  age  after 
age,  be  the  dwelling-place  (or,  to  change  the  figure,  the  opyavov)  of  the  same 
God,  is  one  of  the  notes  of  the  One  Church,  in  all  the  Churches,  ages,  creeds, 
lands.] 

II.  Separated  that  it  may  be  this. — 1.  Here  again  the  Jewish  idea  coincided 
with  the  heathen  ;  it  was  universal.  In  classical  heathenism,  e.g.,  the  separate- 
ness  was  of  the  essential  of  a  temple.  In  strictness  the  templum,  like  the 
Greek  tc/acvos,  was  the  separated  area,  within  which  usually  rose  the  special 
building  that  came  to  appropriate  the  name  of  Temple.  It  was,  literally,  marked 
off,  as  well  as  hallowed  by  rite  and  sacrifice,  from  the  outside  area  beyond.  Taber- 
nacle and  Temple  in  Israel  had  their  surrounding  court  and  open  space,  as  well 

517 


CHAP.  VI.    SOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   II,   CORINTHIANS. 

as  the  true  shrine  [the  i/aos  of  this  passage]  which  stood  in  its  midst.  [Of.  the 
"  bounds  "  set  round  the  base  of  Sinai.]  If  God  is  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a 
people,  peculiarly  His  own  (Tit.  ii.  14),  His  own  purchased  possession,  they  must 
"  come  out  and  be  separate.^'  2.  Separateness  is  inevitable,  whether  we  start  from 
the  requirement  of  the  nature  of  God,  or  from  the  innate  difference  between  the 
*'  sons  and  daughters  "  and  the  "  enemies  "  of  God  (Jas.  iv.  4).  "  What  communion  ? 
What  fellowship  ?  What  part  ?  "  It  lies  in  the  e/c-  of  ecclesia.  The  congregation 
called  together,  is  first  of  all  called  out  from  the*  world.  Singularity  is  not 
necessarily  the  true  separateness ;  oddity  is  not  certainly  or  invariably  holiness, 
or  a  mark  of  it.  No  virtue  in  mere  disconformity.  But  given  the  holiness,  given 
the  real  heart  separateness,  then  outward  distinction,  of  perhaps  a  very  marked 
type,  is  inevitable.  None  know  it,  or  expect  it,  with  a  more  sure  instinct  than  do  the 
excluded  "  world."  If  the  figure  be  pushed  so  far,  as  it  may,  and — to  correspond 
with  the  facts — must  often  be ;  if,  in  the  very  Temple  of  the  Church  there  be,  as 
in  the  literal  Temple  of  sacred  antiquity,  an  outer  court  of  inferior  holiness,  and 
an  inner  court,  and  again  an  inmost  building,  with  its  shrine ;  yet  even  the  outer 
court  must  have  its  wall.  It  cannot  be  left  the  mere  open  ground,  undistin- 
guishable  from  the  space  beyond.  Certainly  the  Church  is  not  co-extensive 
with  the  redeemed  Kace.  "  Come  out  from  am,ong  them"  3.  The  cus- 
tomary code  of  distinctions  between  Christians  and  non- Christians,  between 
Church  and  world,  —  not  only  formulated  in  registered  membership,  or  in 
attendance  at  the  Lord's  Table,  but  in  amusements,  books,  friendships,  and  the 
Hke, — is  no  gratuitous  limitation  of  liberty  or  pleasure, — which  are  naturally  as 
desirable  to  Christians  as  to  anybody  else ;  it  is  only  the  orderly  statement  of 
the  issue  of  repeated,  numerous,  varied  experiments,  and  these  often  made  by  those 
who  would  not  unwillingly  have  discovered,  if  it  had  been  possible,  a  modus 
vivendi  under  which  Church  and  world  need  not  have  stood  so  sharply  apart.  The 
things  ^^ tabooed"  are  only  so  put  under  ban,  because  often  verified  experiment 
has  shown,  either  that  they  are  the  expressions  of  a  heart-alienation  from  God,  or 
that  they  minister  to  it ;  a  heart  which  cannot  be  that  of  "  sons  and  daughters  of  the 
Lord  God  Almighty"  4.  Particular  case  of  this,  often  drawn  out  from  ver.  14: 
Mioced  marriages.  [Obviously  there  are  many  other  cases,  analogous  in  the 
principle  which  governs  them.]  It  is  a  false  start  in  "  building  the  house  " 
(Ps.  cxxvii.  1),  when  a  young  couple  stand  side  by  side  before  God,  to  "  plight  their 
wedding  troth  either  to  other,"  perfectly  fitted  for  each  other,  physically,  in  educa- 
tion, in  character,  in  social  status, — perfectly,  in  all  but  the  one  thing.  For  years, 
perhaps,  to  have  every  taste,  every  interest,  in  common,  their  two  wills  working 
together  in  perfect  harmony,  the  '*  twain  one," — until  they  come  to  the  deepest 
interest  of  all ;  then,  deeply  sundered  !  Not  a  secret  between  them,  except  here. 
They  can  talk  about  everything  else  together,  with  the  most  open-hearted  con- 
fidence, but  on  the  Dearest  Friendship,  upon  the  deepest  joys  and  sorrows,  the 
closest  interests  of  all,  the  lips  of  one  are  closed.  It  is  a  poor  fulfilment  of  the  ideal 
of  marriage,  when,  as  the  two  travel  side  by  side  on  life's  journey,  there  is  between 
them  the  deep  and  far-reaching  cleavage  which  parts  between  the  new  creation 
and  the  old  nature.  A  poor  finish  to  the  married  life,  when,  after  fifty,  sixty  years, 
during  which  husband  and  wife  have  lovingly  lived  one  life,  the  wife,  perhaps, 
goes  forward  to  her  part  in  the  "  inheritance  incorruptible,"  etc.,  and  he,  to  find 
that  he  has  been  "treasuring  up  wrath  against  the  Day  of  wrath."  Peter 
(1  Pet.  iii.  7)  has  a  fine  expression  :  *'  Heirs  together  of  the  Grace  of  Life,"  i.e. 
heirs  of  the  "  Life  which  is  life  indeed"  (1  Tim.  ii.  15,  best  reading),  and  which  is 
a  *'grac^"  of  God.  An  ideal  marriage  is  suggested  there.  Husband  and  wife 
marrying  with  "great  expectations  "  indeed  !  Jointly  heirs  of  Life  ;  both  with 
Life  eternal  as  a  holy,  glorious  reversion.  Fellow-travellers,  helpers  of  each 
other's  weary  footsteps.     Held  together  by  the  profound  common  understanding 

518 


jHOMILETW  commentary :   II.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  vi. 


which  '•''  spiritual  "  have  with  "  spiritual."  An  "  unequally  yoked  "  marriage 
usually  either  means  "  a  cross "  for  life  for  the  Christian — a  cross  of  his  own 
making,  never  designed  for  him  by  God — or  that  Christian  turning  back  again 
into  the  world. 

Some  Christian  business  men  will  take  no  partner  but  a  Christian,  on  the 
very  intelligible  ground  that,  since  religion  is  to  come  into  business,  as  into  all 
else  in  their  life,  it  may  occur — in  fact,  it  does — that  they  should  on  principle  be 
divided  as  to  the  acceptance  or  non-acceptance  of  a  business  proposal,  or  as  to  the 
following  up,  or  the  turning  aside  from,  a  promising  opening.  In  all  such  matters, 
the  Christian  man  is  accustomed  to  do  nothing  without  reference  to  a  great 
Adviser,  Whose  "  advice,"  once  obtained,  he  is  bound  to  follow.  But  f  his 
partner  can  be  told  nothing  of  this  Divine  Counsellor  1  If  all  such  motives  and 
reasons  seem  to  him  amiable  but  unpractical  "  ideals,"  with  which  he  has  scant 
patience  1  "  What  communion  ?  "  etc.  Take  the  best  specimen  of  the  man  of  the 
world  in  business,  and  take  a  poor  specimen  of  Christian, — it  may  be  possible  to 
show  the  "  worldling  "  more  admirable.  But  take  one  of  the  many  fine  samples 
of  Christian  men  of  business,  one  whose  religion  permeates  and  pervades,  and 
has  a  real  hold  upon,  every  transaction  with  the  outside  world,  and  upon  all  his 
dealings  with  his  employes ;  "  yoke  "  him — not  by  any  means  with  the  worst 
specimen  of  worldly  man,  but — with  a  man  of  fair,  or  very  good,  business 
character  who,  however,  makes  no  claim  or  attempt  to  "  mix  up  religion  with 
business  "  ;  it  is  inevitable,  either  that  the  Christian  man  must  sooner  or  later 
adjust  himself  to  the  standard  of  his  yoke-fellow,  or  that  their  relations  will 
be  strained  till  they  both  discover,  *'  What  'part  hath  he  that  helieveth  ? "  etc. 
"  Unequally  yoked  "  in  pleasure-taking  will  follow  similar  lines.  More  decidedly 
than  in  other  cases  must  the  word  often  be  used  in  regard  to  this,  "  the 
unclean  thing J^  Novels  whose  motif  is  some  irregular  relation  between  man 
and  woman ;  "  irregular  "  being  euphemistic  for  adultery  or  fornication,  at 
least  such  as  is  condemned  in  the  Court  of  the  Great  Judge  of  hearts 
(Matt.  v.  27,  28).  Plays  whose  code  of  morality  will  not  bear  being  laid  by 
the  side  of  the  rule  of  even  the  surface  reading  of  the  Ten  Commandments, 
to  say  nothing  of  their  deeper,  searching  significance,  touching  motive  and  secret 
thought.  Places  whose  atmosphere  and  associations  are  notoriously  unfriendly 
to  the  spiritual  life ;  where  the  non-Christian  does  not  expect  to  find  a  Christian 
man.  Say  to  him :  "  What  are  you  doing,  reading  that  book, — j'-ou,  a  Christian  ? " 
Or,  "  What  affinity  can  bring  you  here, —  you,  a  Christian?"  "What  possible 
liking  can  you  have  for  the  atmosphere  of  this  place  1 "  Of  no  practical  service 
to  discuss  or  defend  what  "  might  be  " ;  to  discuss  ideals  of  books,  pleasures, 
places,  friendships,  which  are  simply  visionary,  and  "  in  the  air."  Of  very  much 
of  the  actual,  concrete  recreation  (in  the  widest  sense)  of  the  non- Christian 
community,  one  must  say  to  the  Christian,  "  Come  out,  .  .  .  he  separate.''^  The 
healthy,  vigorous,  spiritual  life  will  secure,  will  create,  a  definite,  far-reaching 
separateness,  befitting  the  "  temple  of  God."  On  no  Other  conditions  can  God 
dwell  amongst  His  people.  The  Temple  must  be  kept  for  Him,  and  for  Him 
alone. 

III.  The  obligation  lies  on  every  Christian  man  to  keep  the  Temple  separate 
from  sin. — There  are  no  merely  official  guardians  of  the  holiness  of  the  Temple  of 
God.  Christ  made  Himself  a  pattern  of  the  duty  of  every  Christian  to  vindicate 
the  holiness  of  Jehovah's  sanctuary.  He  had  no  official  authority,  to  purify  the 
Temple  courts  as  He  did.  At  most,  it  was  the  extraordinary,  self -vindicating 
prerogative  of  a  Zealot  or  a  Prophet.  But  every  man  who  is  a  member  of 
the  new  Israel  of  God  must  regard  himself  as  a  guardian  of  the  sanctity  of 
Jehovah's  dwelling-place.  The  Temple  is  nothing,  as  distinct  from  its  component 
"  sons  and  daughters  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty."     It  has  indeed  a  corporate 

519 


/ 


ciiAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    It.   CORINTHIANS. 


holiness  which  each  one  of  them  must  guard ;  but  their  personal  holiness  underlies 
the  corporate.  Unholy  Christians  cannot  make  a  holy  Church.  Hence  the 
illustration  of  the  Temple  passes  over  into  that  of  a  holy  Family,  whose  every  "  son 
and  daughter  "  is  to  be  jealous  for  the  family  honour ;  and  this  again  passes  over 
in  vii.  1  to  that  of  a  personal  ^^  cleansing  froon  all  Jilthiness  of  thejlesh  and  spirit." 
The  Temple  in  this  paragraph  is  the  actual  Temple-building  only.  But  it  is 
noteworthy  how  Christ  would  have  even  the  Outer  Court  hallowed.  What  He 
cleansed  was  the  great  marble-paved  Court  of  the  Gentiles.  "  Would  suffer  no 
man  to  carry  any  vessel  through  it "  (Mark  xi.  16).  The  life  of  the  Church,  like 
the  life  of  the  individual  Christian,  has  its  outer  court,  as  well  as  its  inner  and  its 
inmost  shrine.  All  lies  within  the  holy  precinct ;  all  is  part  of  the  Temple  ;  and 
even  the  outer-court  life — the  business-meeting,  the  finance,  the  organisation,  and 
much  more  the  philanthropy  and  social  work — must  be  kept  holy.  "  Separate- 
ness "  is  the  law  throughout ;  "no  touching  of  the  unclean "  thing  must  be 
tolerated,  even  in  these.  The  Church  must,  e.g.,  have  clean  hands  when  she 
touches  money,  and  must  handle  none  which  would  defile  her.  The  Church, 
the  Christian  Temple,  has  its  outer  court  of  personal  attachments.  There  is  a 
Church  within  the  Congregation.  See  in  Acts  xxi.  28,  29  a  vivid  illustration  of 
a  zeal  which  should  find  its  higher,  its  highest,  embodiment  in  the  Christians  to 
whom  our  paragraph  appeals.  They  thought  Paul  had  brought  the  Gentile 
Trophimus,  not  only  into  the  Court  of  the  Gentiles,  but  beyond,  into  the  inner 
court  reserved  for  Israelites.  M.  Clermont  Ganneau  some  years  ago  found  built 
into  a  door-jamb  in  Jerusalem  one  of  the  marble  tablets  which  were  inserted  into 
the  boundary- wall  of  the  Court  of  Israel  in  the  Temple  of  Herod :  "  Let  no 
Man  of  Other  Race  enter  here  on  Pain  of  Death."  Whatever  welcome 
into  its  outer  court  the  Church  may  give  to  all  who  care  to  come  thus  far  from 
the  outside  into  a  holy  precinct  of  approach  to  God,  she  must  have  an  inner 
Court  of  Israel.  If  the  "  unequally  yoked  "  man  may  bring  his  partners  in  the 
yoke  so  far  as  into  the  outer  court,  they  may  come  no  farther.  No  heathen 
alliance  must  find  lodging  within  the  holy  Temple  itself  (Neh.  xiii.  4-9). 
Every  man  will  be  a  Christian  Zealot  for  the  honour  and  the  purity  of  the 
Temple;  every  son  of  God  Almighty  will  regard  himself  as  charged  with  the 
care  of  the  honour  of  the  family  for  holiness ;  he  will  *'  cleanse  himself"  lest  he 
be  the  occasion  of  defilement  or  dishonour  to  the  Temple  in  which  he  has  a  place. 
Note,  that  all  this  is  put  by  way  of  exhortation,  and  not  of  obligation  only. 
Paul  reasons',  God  calls',  He  allures  to  separateness  and  hoUness  hy  gracious 
promises.  Every  man  of  God's  Church  shall  be  a  Solomon,  to  whom  Jehovah 
will  be  "  a  Father."      [Further  material  on  this  Temple  topic  may  be   found 


under  1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17,  vi.  19.] 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 


Ver.  2.  A  "  Now  !  "  Salvation. 

I.  Pivot  word  of  passage. — Make 
pictorial  by  parallel  of  our  tiny 
earth,  crowded  with  its  tiny  dwellers, 
borne  along  in  its  orbit,  hanging  poised 
in  space  ;  infinite  space  above  it,  below 
it,  around  it,  in  every  direction ;  a 
point,  a  minute  island  in  a  sea  of 
space.  So  our  life.  Of  how  much  are 
we  masters  ?  Think  backward, — to 
the  day  of  Adam  ;  of  "  the  beginning  "  ; 
of  the  creation  of  the  "  sons  of  God  '* 

520  .      .. 


who  rejoiced  over  the  birth  of  earth 
(Job  xxxviii.  7).  And  there,  at  the 
Land's  End  of  creaturely  being,  we  gaze 
out  into  limitless,  past  duration.  Think 
forward, — to  Judgment ;  to  the  end  of 
some  vast  measure  of  heavenly  happi- 
ness ;  forward  again ;  stop  anywhere, 
yet  away  there  still  stretches  limitless 
future  duration.  A  midway  paren- 
thesis, the  history  of  Earth  ;  a  midway 
parenthesis  within  this  again,  a  man's 
life — our  own  j  and  of  this  we  possess. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   tt.   CORINTHIAm.   chap.  VI. 


have,  know,  only  the  midmost  point ;  an 
instant,  coming,  here,  gone,  with  more 
than  arrow's  swiftness ;  just  now  the 
earliest  moment  of  the  Future ;  whilst 
we  speak  of  it,  the  Present ;  before  the 
words  are  finished,  the  latest  moment 
Df  the  Past.  Life  to  us  is  "  Now."  The 
present  moment,  hanging  poised,  like 
earth,  midway  in  the  infinite ;  duration 
unmeasured  behind,  duration  un- 
measured before.  "  The  dead  past ; " 
"  the  living  present ;  "  the  future  just 
coming  to  birth.  Our  needs,  dangers, 
temptations,  duties,  all  belong  to  the 
''JVow"  of  life.  God's  ''salvation" 
(in  largest  sense, — all  conceivable,  and 
needed,  grace  and  help)  belongs  ac- 
cordingly to  the  present.  Other  help 
may  be  too  early  or  too  late;  God's 
salvation  is  stamped  with  '*  Now." 
"'Now'  is  the  day  of  salvation;" 
our  necessary  time  is  God's  "  accepted 
time" 

II.  The  elementary  salvation  of 
pardon  is  a  present  blessing. — 
1.  Glorious  Gospel  this,  but  needs 
guarding.  May  not  take  any  chance, 
indifferent,  unaffected  man  who  will 
give  attention  and  intellectual  assent 
to  the  proposition  that  there  is  salva- 
tion through  Jesus  Christ  for  him,  and 
thereupon  assure  him  that  he  is  "saved." 
No  man  who  has  not  learned  his 
sinfulness,  guilt,  peril — only  relieved  by 
the  redeeming  grace  of  Christ — has 
mastered  the  A  B  C  of  religion.  2.  Yet 
even  to  such  a  man  we  might  say, 
"  Come  forthwith — now — ask  for  the 
sense  of  sin."  The  moment  of  beginning 
to  inquire  after  God  is  the  ""now"  of 
salvation,  so  far  as  this  that,  No  seeking 
soul  was  ever  left  to  seek  or  to  perish 
without  finding.  3.  Urge  even  upon 
such,  "  Why  not  seek  now  1  In  peril 
of  *  judgment '  now,  your  need  is  '  now.' 
Terms  will  never  be  more  favourable. 
Conditions  in  yourself  may  become 
less  and  less  favourable.  All  the 
Father's  love ;  all  the  Son's  grace  ;  all 
the  Spirit's  help ;  you  have  them  all, 
— now  ! "  4.  Young  people  speculate  : 
"  Time  enough  !  Many  things  may 
happen  !  Special  wave  of  *  revival ' 
influence,  perhaps,  bearing  many,  and 


ourselves,  with  it,  with  less  of  singu- 
larity when  *  everybody '  is  seeking 
salvation."  5.  True  use  of  PauVs  word 
is  to  an  aroused,  truly  repentant  soul, 
seeking  earnestly ;  to  whom  "  salvation  " 
is  matter  of  urgent  present  concern. 
"  Save  me,  O  God  !  "  "  /  hxive  heard  thee 
in  a  time  accepted  ;  that  time  accepted  is 
Now."  Or,  "  I  must  first  do  this,  or 
that."  "  Now  is  the  day  of  salvation." 
The  moment  salvation  becomes  matter 
of  present  concern  on  the  soul's  part,  it  is 
matter  on  God's  part  of  present,  offered 
grace.  "When  man  says  "Now,"  God 
says  "  Now  "  also. 

III.  The  after,  many-sided,  "  salva- 
tion "  of  the  believer  is  a  "  Now " 
blessing. — 1.  This  nearer  to  the  pur- 
pose of  Paul  here.  Quotes  Isa.  xlix.  8 ; 
addressed  originally  to  Messiah,  dis- 
couraged in  His  work.  Paul  is  encou- 
raging men  who  were  in  danger,  under 
pressure  or  seduction  of  temptation,  of 
making  a  poor  finish  to  the  "  gracious  " 
beginning  of  a  Christian  life,  "  receiving 
grace  of  God  in  vain."  "  You  need  never 
give  way,  or  give  up,  or  fail.  At  every 
moment  of  new  need,  God  will  be  near 
with  new  help."  The  "  salvation "  of 
pardon  only  the  first  link  in  a  chain  of 
"  salvations  "  reaching  up  to  glory  ;  the 
first  round  of  a  Jacob's  ladder  reaching 
to  threshold  of  heaven.  Shall  need 
new  help,  defence,  strength,  at  each 
new  step,  as  well  as  at  the  first  and 
lowest.  At,  with,  in,  each  new  "  now." 
2.  E.g.  Luther  at  Worms.  (Ps.  xlvi., 
"  A  very  present  help  in  time  of 
trouble.")  In  hall  of  Diet ;  greatest 
and  wisest  of  Germany,  of  Europe, 
there ;  greatest  prince  of  the  Continent 
presiding.  For  most  part  hostile ;  many 
itching  to  lay  hands  on  audacious  monk, 
hardly  restrained  by  emperor's  "  safe 
conduct."  Only  a  few  venturesomely 
sympathising.  Luther  had  shrunk  ; 
overheard  in  his  chamber  (D'Aubigne, 
Pt.  ii.,  c.  8)  crying  out  before  God : 
"  How  .  .  .  the  world  .  .  .  gapes  to 
swallow  me  up  !  .  .  .  How  weak  the 
flesh  ! "  etc.  Men  saw  in  the  hall  the 
lion-like  man.  God  saw  in  the  chamber 
the  helpless  soul  laying  hold  of  the 
"  now "     salvation     needed     in     that 

521 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.    CORINTHIAN^. 


supreme  hour.  E.g.,  better,  2  Tim.  iv. 
16-18.  Paul  before  ''  the  lion  "  Nero ; 
life  depending  on  the  drunken  whim 
of  a  deified  monster.  "  No  man 
stood  hy  we."  Peril  so  extreme  that 
not  a  Christian  in  Pome  dared  to  show 
himself  in  Court-house,  {imore  Romano) 
to  stand  by  the  dock,  a  friend  of  the 
prisoner.  But  "  the  Lord "  (not  for- 
getting how  He  once  stood  before  His 
judges,  and  not  a  disciple  dared  show 
himself — except,  perhaps,  John)  "  stood 
by  me,"  took  His  stand  (aor. ;  q.d.  in 
the  dock),  an  unseen,  but  real,  present 
Helper,  and  "  delivered"  at  least  in 
that  ^^ first  appearing  "  for  trial,  with 
a  "  now  "  salvation.  "  /  am  with  you 
always, — all  the  days,  each  successively, 
and  as  each  new  day  needs  Me."  E.g. 
day  of  commercial  reverse.  Mansion 
gives  place  to  modest  villa ;  villa  to 
mere  cottage ;  careless  affluence  ex- 
changed for  close-calculating  straitness ; 
comforts  for  necessaries.  Father  looks 
round  table ;  no  fewer,  nor  less  hungry, 
mouths.  Yet  no  hard  words  about 
"  luck,"  or  God,  or  man.  Strange 
calm  on  faces;  light  in  eyes,  as  if 
rather  some  piece  of  good  fortune  had 
happened.  Why?  "Now  is  day  of 
salvation.^'  E.g.  battling — perhaps  on 
knees — with  our  own  characteristic 
temptation.  Cry,  "  Help  now  !  "  He 
answers,  "  I  have  heard  thee,  .  .  . 
now  !  "  So  always :  with  the  need,  the 
succour  ;  with  the  foe,  the  Friend  ;  with 
the  grief,  the  grace.  Only  one  moment 
to  live  at  once,  and  that  the  moment  of 
God's  "  now  "  salvation. 

IV.  Present  condition — saved  or 
unsaved— is  our  true  standing  before 
God. — "Now,"  not  ^^  yesterday  "  nor 
^^once"  is  the  day  of  any  ^^  salvation" 
that  avails  us.  1.  German  poem : 
Mother  holding  in  arms  dying  child; 
its  breath  going  out  in  short  gaspS; 
mother  clings  tighter,  as  if  to  retain 
the  fleeting  spirit ;  when  all  is  over,  still 
clings,  as  if  refusing  to  believe  that 
she  only  holds  body  of  her  child.  So 
Christian  man  clings  to  old  membership, 
old  routine  of  service  and  worship,  long 
after  "  spirit "  which  gave  these  any 
value  or  meaning  has  departed  ;  clings 

522 


the  more  closely,  as  if  to  silence  the 
misgiving  that  all  is  not  as  it  used 
to  be,  nor  so  well.  Our  Salvation 
status  before  God  is  a  thing  of  "  now." 
2.  Oscillating  hves,  swinging  between 
"Near  to  God,"  "Far  from  God";  "Near 
to  God,"  "  Far  from  God."  Can  photo- 
graph a  swinging  pendulum,  with  in- 
stantaneous shutter  and  rapid  plate. 
What  if  the  "  call "  which  fixes  record  of 
our  relation  to  God  for  ever,  photograph 
us  at  wrong  end  of  the  oscillation  ? 

Ver.  9.  "  Unknown." 

I.  This  ought  never  to  be  true,  abso- 
lutely.— 1.  No  persons  know  this  better y 
or  insist  upon  it  wore  strongly,  than  the 
men  of  the  world.  They  expect  of  a 
Christian  a  character  which  will  not 
let  him  slip  through  the  world  "  un- 
known "  as  a  Christian.  Speak  to  a 
non-professor  about  another,  known  to 
you  as  a  professor  of  religion,  and  with 
whom  he  is  in  daily  business  contact, 
but  whose  religion  is  so  deep  down  in 
the  heart  that  it  never  finds  its  way  to 
the  surface  in  the  life.  Perhaps  you  get 
a  look  of  surprise;  if,  indeed,  all  the 
man's  courtesy  can  repress  a  long- 
drawn  "  Oh  !  "  of  astonished  incre- 
dulity. No  greater  humiliation,  no 
deeper  sorrow,  to  a  Christian  minister, 
who  has  been,  perhaps  warmly,  com- 
mending one  of  his  people,  than  to 
hear  :  "  So-and-so  a  Christian  ?  We 
who  are  with  him  every  day  would 
never  have  found  it  out.  He  can  be 
passionate  with  the  most  hasty  of  us  ! 
Unforgiving  as  the  hardest !  Men 
say  ugly  things  about  his  business  ways 
too  !  Thought  you  Christians  *  re- 
nounced the  world  ' !  But  So-and-so 
is  thoroughly  one  of  us  in  all  our 
amusements.  So  far  as  we  see,  he 
judges  by  our  standards  and  lives  on 
our  principles."  The  world  knows  as 
well  as  the  Church,  that  a  servant 
should  be  more  diligent  and  trusty  for 
being  a  Christian ;  that  a  mother's 
conversion  should  be  known  by  her 
husband  and  family.  They  do  not 
understand  a  "light  of  the  world," 
which  is  not  visible,  nor  makes  per- 
ceptible   difference    in    the    darkness 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   COklNTHIANS.    chap,  vl 


around.     They  will  ask  whether  a  man  3.  The  Lord  is  the  pattern. — "  In  the 

can   be  of  the   "salt   of   the   earth,"  world;    world  knew  Him  not''  (John 

whilst  nobody  tastes  any  saltness  in  his  i.  10).     True ;  but,  literally,  they  knew 

conversation,  and  he  imparts  no  savour  Him   well   enough  !      He  affected  no 

by  his  life.     The  world  demands  that,  singularity   of   dress    or   manners,   as 

if  religion  be  what  preachers  and  Bible  John  did  ;  yet  "  He  could  not  be  hid." 

say  it  is,  the  effects  on  religious  men  The   centre  of  attraction,  whether  of 

should  be  palpable  and  patent,  even  in  love  and  gratitude,   or   of  wonder   or 

the   home  and   in  the  world;  always  hate.      The  best  known,  loved,  hated 

felt  in   the  life ;  sometimes,  at  least,  personage   in    History   to-day.      Best 

heard  from  the  tongue.  known,  loved,  hated  man  in  Palestine 

2.  Christian   is   professedly   seeking  in  His  time.     "As  He  is,  so  are  we 

another  world  than  this  (Heb.  xi.  44).  in  this  world."     "  Unknown,  yet  well 

Go   with   a   crowd;    you   may   escape  known,  by  holiness  in  all  manner  of 

notice.      Go   against   the  direction   of  conversation." 

the  movement  of  a  crowd ;  you  cannot  II.  In  what  sense  the  words  are 
but  attract  attention,  perhaps  not  the  true. — Look  again  at  the  Divine  Pat- 
most  favourable.  Become  "  a  marked  tern.  They  understood  not  His  dignity. 
man  "  at  once.  How  is  he  to  escape  The  boy  in  Nazarene  village ;  the  young 
notice,  and  perhaps  not  too  gentle  or  carpenter  who  had  been  an  ordinary 
friendly  notice,  whose  life-theory  im-  workman  and  synagogue  worshipper 
plies,  "  You  are  going  ruin- wards ;  for  amongst  His  family  and  neighbours ; 
safety  and  life  turn  [be  converted]  and  the  young  teacher  who  admitted  Peter 
go  my  way  "  1  Live  with  American  or  and  his  friends  to  most  familiar  inter- 
German  resident  in  England  for  business  course ; — He  is  God's  Well-beloved  Son 
purposes.  Soon  discoverable  that  these  tabernacling  in  flesh.  A  stupendous 
are  not  English  fellow-countrymen.  fact  this,  claiming  a  stupendous  faith. 
Not  to  speak  of  the  un-English  accent,  Hardly  anybody  around  Him  recognised 
the  talk  is  of  "home" — in  the  States  the  fact.  Brothers  thought  Him  beside 
or  Germany.  The  standard  for  every-  Himself,  and  would  not,  for  a  long  time, 
thing  is  how  things  are  done  in  America  believe  in  Him.  His  mother  knew  the 
or  Germany.  Among  us,  but  evidently  secret  of  His  birth,  yet  never  interposed 
not  of  us.  So  Christians  are  not  without  bringing  on  herself  His  gentle 
seeking  a  country,  "  another  world "  ;  rebuke  for  her  dull,  earthly  concep- 
they  already  belong  to  it.  Phil.  iii.  20,  tions  of  Him  and  of  His  work.  "  His 
"  Citizenship  is  in  heaven."  Speech  own "  Nation  had  expected  Him  for 
should  bewray  them.  The  "  home "  ages,  and  with  unusual  intensity  was 
ought  to  be  yonder  ;  this  only  thetem-  just  then  longing  for  His  Advent.  He 
porary  abode  for  our  Master's  purposes  came,  and  they  gave  God's  Son,  their 
and  business  and  work.  Judge  of  men  King,  only  mockery  and  a  cross.  Not 
and  things  by  that  world's  standards.  a  case  where  "  world  knows  nothing 
In  India,  devotees  have  their  god-mark  of  its  greatest  men  "  until  they  are 
in  ashes  upon  their  foreheads ;  an  ex-  gone  from  its  midst.  A  spiritual  blind- 
perienced  observer  can  tell  at  once  to  ness  hid  Him  from  their  eyes,  and 
what  god  a  man  is  devoted.  "  Servants  made  Him  "  unknown."  Pilate  is 
of  God  sealed,"  even  now,  "  in  their  typical  of  the  universal  "  world."  The 
foreheads."  So  long  as  the  "  spirit  of  King  stood  before  him  in  the  judgment 
world"  (1  Cor.  ii.  12)  and  Spirit  of  hall  of  Herod's  palace.  Pilate  only 
God  are  so  diverse,  they  in  whom  they  saw  a  peasant,  weary  with  a  night  of 
dwell  will  be  as  manifestly  distinct ;  sleeplessness,  anxiety,  mockery.  Eyes 
^^he  man  "  in  Christ  "  and  the  man  weary  ;  face  bruised  with  stripes  and 
**  of  the  world  "  can  never  be  mistaken  blows ;  a  prisoner  with  bound  hands, 
one  for  the  other.  A  Christian  un-  He  speaks  of  His  kingdom.  In  un- 
known  and  unknowable  is  an  anomaly.  feigned  astonishment  Pilate  says,  ^''Thou 

523 


6JHAP.  vi.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


a   king,   then?     Thou!"      When   the 
King  spoke  of  a  kingdom  not  of  this 
world,  a  kingdom  whose  subjects  were 
"  of  the  truth,"  the  secret  came  out. 
"  What  is  Truth  ?     What  do  I  know, 
or  want  to  know,  about  Truth  ?     My 
business  is  politics.      Thy   concern    is 
not  truth,  but  thy  life."     Such  a  King, 
such    a    kingdom,    such    topics,    were 
hidden  from   the  mind   and   heart  of 
His  judges.      "  Unknown."      So  "the 
Christian  is  the  highest  style  of  man  "  ; 
the     humblest    Christian    is    invested 
with  a  true  royalty,  the  highest,  the 
eternal.    "  Partakers  of  Divine  nature  " 
(2  Pet.  i.  4)  ;  free  access  to  the  King  of 
kings ;  all  His  support  and  interest  at 
their  disposal  at  every  step.  "  Great  ex- 
pectations "  indeed,  and  the  title-deeds 
in  their  heart.     The  world  understands 
pride   of  "  birth,"   but  being  born  of 
Cod  is  a  thing  "  unknown  "  to  it.     It 
knows   greatness   based   on  power,  or 
wealth,    or    intellectual    endowments; 
but  a  greatness   based  on  holiness  is 
*'  unknown."     An   inheritance  in   the 
future,  in  heaven,  whose  title-deeds  are 
only  in    the   strong-room    within   the 
heart,  is  dreamy,  visionary,  unpractical, 
outside   its   range,    and  of  value  only 
according   to   a   standard  of  which  it 
knows  nothing  :  it  all  goes  for  nothing, 
w^hen,  indeed,  it  is  not  subject  of  ridicule 
or  contempt.    Sons  of  God  have  a  life 
which    is    a   mystery   to   themselves : 
**  Wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,"  etc. 
To  them,  the  mystery  is  how  it  is ;  to 
the  world,  what  it  is.     Christians  must 
be  prepared  for  misconstruction,  mis- 
representation, scorn,  persecution,  be- 
cause their  life,  experiences,  principles, 
are   "  spiritual   things "   unknown   by 
the    "natural"   man   (1    Cor.  ii.   14). 
Conviction  of  sin  is  an  unaccountable 
melancholy,  a  fuss   without   adequate 
reason.     The  peace  which  follows  and 
crowns   his   faith   in  Christ ;  his  new 
"  sonship  "  and  its  joy,  etc.,  these  are 
enthusiasm.     If  the  world  is  bitter,  it 
denounces    all    these    experiences    as 
delusion  or  worse ;  if  courteous,  it  says, 
as  one  of  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson's  professional 
friends  did  of  him  on  his  conversion, 
"  I  don't  understand  this  new  turn  of 

524 


Simpson's;  yet  he  is  a  man  of  good 
sense."  "  Unknown"  The  ignorance 
may  be  dense  and  full  of  enmity. 
"  Enthusiasm  !  "  "  Hypocrites,  hum- 
bugs." Their  devotion  to  bringing 
men  to  God  "  must  be  interest,  or  money 
profit  of  some  sort "  ;  their  life  is  "  folly  " 
or  "  pretence  "  ;  their  religious  vocabu- 
lary "  cant  " ;  their  abstinence  from 
worldly  pleasures  "  Pharisaism,  mo- 
roseness,  fanaticism  "  ;  their  denuncia- 
tion of  "  worldly "  sin  is  bigotry, 
fanaticism.  The  world  knows  nothing 
of  such  aims,  nothing  of  a  soul's  life 
and  its  dangers,  nothing  of  the  real 
meaning  of  sin.  1.  What,  then,  of  the 
"  Christians  "  who  are  not  in  this  sense 
"  unknown,"  whom  the  world  does 
understand  and  approve  ?  2.  What  of 
such  as  are  known,  rather  by  a  pungent, 
acrid  smoke  emitted  from  the  fire  within 
their  breast,  than  by  any  heat  or  light 
from  it  1  3.  What,  also,  of  the  world 
to  which  Christians  are  "  unknown  "  ? 

Ver.  10.  Rich  Poverty. — How  neces- 
sary to  hear  the  whole  of  a  matter. 
Hearing  only  "  as  poor"  we  should  say  : 
"  Here  is  as  sad  and  drear  a  lot  as 
mortal  ever  inherited.  The  man  has 
lost  all  heart."  If  we  heard  only  the 
second  ;  "  Here  is  Fortune's  favourite, 
intoxicated  with  his  uncounted  trea- 
sures." The  first  part  of  the  text 
must  not  be  explained  away ;  the 
second  cannot  be.  Paul  was  not  even 
owner  of  as  much  land  as  would  serve 
him  for  a  grave ;  yet  was  a  greater 
possessor  than  the  wealthiest  or 
mightiest  of  the  world.  No  juggler 
with  words,  no  maddened  enthusiast, 
rich  only  in  imaginary  possessions,  was 
Paul  ;  the  houseless  wanderer  was 
really  possessor  of  all  things. 
I.  "  Having  nothing."  Then 
1.  The  truly  great  are  not  essentially 
the  visibly  rich. — Needs  proclaiming  in 
our  materialistic  age.  To  a  man 
"  well  off"  many  mansions  open  their 
doors,  whilst  they  exclude  poverty  like 
leprosy.  There  are  circles  where 
wealthy  vice  has  the  ready  entree^  if 
only  the  vice  be  decently  veiled,  or  not 
too  obtrusive,  but  where  virtue  without 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II    CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vi. 


its   £10,000   would    not  be   admitted  things  when  their  only  value  or  desir- 

for  a  moment.     [And  would  not  desire  ableness  is  to  have  them  to  the  exclusion 

to  be  !]     How  often  has  the  Church  in  of  anybody  else,  which  is  what  "owner- 

this  imitated  the  world !     Paul,  as  he  ship  "  too  often  means.     The  man  to 

was,  would  hardly  to-day  excite  notice  whom  they  are  full  of  God,  and  who  is 

or  win  wide  admiration.     Self-impover-  himself  in  right  relation  to  God,  has 

ishment    crowns    with  greatness.     His  the  joy  they  can  give  and  were  meant  to 

poverty  was  voluntarily  incurred,  for  give.     Many  a  man  is  really  immured 

Jesus'  sake.  in  a  real  dungeon  whilst  he  inhabits  his 

2.  It  becomes  us  to  mahe  greater  self-  mansion.  There  is  many  a  man  who 
denials. — There  is  only  worth  in  our  never  walks  under  the  shadow  of 
self-denials  when  ourselves  really  deny  *'  his  "  noble  trees,  or  by  the  side  of 
self.  It  is  not  often  for  the  reason  "his"  lake,  or  through  *'his"  lovely 
that  we  have  taken  it  up,  that  the  cross  gardens,  but  with  an  aching  or  empty 
is  heavy.  heart,  or  with  a  guilty  conscience,  or  a 

3.  God  does  not  reward  His  servants  memory  which  is  a  perpetual  scourge. 
with  material  pay. — He  does  not  attach  The  Christian  labourer  on  **his" 
to  material  possessions  the  importance  estate  has  a  far  more  real  heart  posses- 
we  do.     [If  they  were  the  "  good  "  men  sion  than  has  the  "  owner." 

account  them,  depend  upon  it  "  there  3.  Men  who  fret  for  what  they  have 

would  be  no  want  "  of  that  good  "  to  not  do  not  own  what  they  have. — [Ahab 

them  that  fear  Him."]     He  will  let  us  (1    Kings   xx.)  ;   the  kingdom  has  no 

dare  and  do  for  Him  without  a  bribe.  value   because   the   little   vineyard  of 

4.  God^s    poor   are    the   '*  best    off."  Naboth  is  not  his.] 

The   Master   promised    that    whoever  4.  If   a   man's   nature    is    ripened, 

for  Him  left  houses,  lands,  or  the  like,  enriched  by  things,  what  like  that  can 

should  "  receive  a  hundredfold  "  here,  make  him  in  such  a  great  sense  their 

and  then  "  eternal  life."     If  there  is  owner  ?     Above  all 

a   servant    of    Christ   bemoaning   his  5.  By   holding   a    true    relation    to 

poverty,  let  him  lift  up  his  head,  and  Christ  he  becomes  possessor  of  all  things 

grasp  the   title-deeds   of   his   rightful  (Rom.  viii.  17;Ilev.  iii.  21). — Adapted 

heritage,  and  read  in  them  "  as  having  /rom   H.    Martyn,    ^^  Homilist,"  Third 

nothing,  yet "  Series,  ix.  270. 

II.  "  Possessing  all  things." — 1.  By 

holding   a   true  relation    to   them    all.  Yer.  10.  ^^  Poor,  yet  making  Tnany 

The    true    possession    is   much    more  rich." — Then  want  of  money  is  not  the 

than    ownership,    or    occupation,     or  greatest,    nor    an    insuperable,    hind- 

merely  having.     The  '■''possession "  of  a  ranee   to   the  success   of  the   Gospel, 

series  of  fine  paintings  is  much  more  Else  would  not  He  have  left  the  gold- 

than    that    they    are    in    the    man's  mines  a  legacy  to  the  Church  ?     There 

gallery,  while  he  has  never  felt  their  is  a  something  which  the  Church  may 

power,  or  been  enlarged  and  uplifted  have,  which  will  enable  it  to  do  the 

by  them.     He  is  no  ^^ possessor  "  of  a  work  with  little  or  no  money, 

library  to  whom  his  books  are  unread  I.  "  The  triumphs  of  the  first  ages 

and  unreadable.      His  employe  libra-  were  won  by  men  too  poor  to  claim  a 

rian,  or  his  poor,  scholarly,  neighbour  home.  .   .  .  The  days  of  the  Church's 

who  borrows  them,  has  far  more  truly  temporal   poverty  were  the  brightest 

a  "  possession "  of  them.     The  Chris-  days  of  its  victories.     Never  did  the 

tian  man  may  not  own  a  house  or  an  chariot  of  the  Gospel  move  on  with  such 

acre  ;  but  the  world  is  for  him,  as  much  celerity  and   stately  moral   grandeur, 

as  for  the  owner  who   hath   nothing  as    when    it   rolled   on    undrawn    by 

but   "  the   beholding   with   his   eyes "  golden  chains." 

(Eccles.  V.  11).  II.  Without  this  something  money 

2.  It  is  an  entirely  false  relation  to  will  be  of  no  service. — "  Money  can 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


only  give  machinery;  ...  a  great 
deal  more,  already,  than  is  used. 
Money  is  constantly  creating  new 
machinery  and  tinkering  the  old ;  so 
that  we  hear  more  of  the  creakings  of 
the  human  engines  in  the  Church  than 
of  the  flowing  and  the  soul-stirring 
music  of  a  Divine  life.  Money  can  only 
do  for  religion  what  it  can  do  for  art, 
— it  can  furnish  the  paint,  the  brush, 
the  studio  ;  but  the  genius,  to  create  a 
breathing  beauty  on  the  canvas,  it 
cannot  supply.  The  true  evangel- 
ising genius  [and  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost],  without  which  Churches, 
colleges,  books,  [committees.  Church 
legislation,  organisation]  are  so  much 
cumbrous  machinery,  no  wealth  can 
purchase." 

III.  The  constant  cry  for  money 
indicates  the  want  of  this  necessary 
something. — *'  Real  love  is  communi- 
cative. .  .  .  The  office  of  love  is 
always  that  of  a  priest,  evermore 
presenting  itself  at  the  shrine  of  its 
object.  Don't  ask  me  to  give  to 
objects  I  love;  I  can't  help  it — love 
will  communicate." — Extracted  from 
a  longer  sermon  on  1  Cor.  ix.  12  by 
Dr.  Tliomas,  '•'■  Homilist"  v.  154,  155. 

Ver.  10.  Cf.  "  Such  as  I  have  give  I 
thee  "  (Acts  iii.  6). 

I.  How  much  the  world  owes  to 
Christianity  ! — Some  of  its  noblest  art 
inspirations  and  ideals ;  some  of  the 
most  elevated  and  true  principles  of  a 
real,  healthy  Socialism ;  some  of  its 
best  thoughts  about  God  and  about 
morals.  It  has  given  a  very  real 
"  culture "  to  the  lowest,  and  other- 
wise "dangerous,"  classes,  whom 
nothing  else  would  have  reached  or 
saved  from  narrow,  gross  animalism 
of  life  and  practice.  Its  thoughts  and 
hopes  about  God  and  Christ  and  sal- 
vation and  eternity  must  be  acknow- 
ledged to  be  grand,  enlarging,  ennobling, 
if  even  they  be  not  accepted  as  true. 
The  life  of  an  artisan  or  a  slave  in 
Corinth  could  not  be  mean,  base,  or 
dangerous  to  society,  where  the  teach- 
ings and  life  of  Christianity  were  truly 
apprehended   and  exemplified.      "The 

526 


stone  which  the  builders  rejected,"  even 
many  of  themselves  now  acknowledge 
to  have  been  "  the  head  of  the  corner." 
Christ's  reUgion  is  the  needed  comple- 
tion of  all  science ;  of  all  education ;  of 
all  personal  character.  "Not  even  now 
would  it  be  easy,  even  for  an  un- 
believer, to  find  a  better  translation  of 
the  rule  of  virtue,  from  the  abstract 
to  the  concrete,  than  to  endeavour  so 
to  live  that  Christ  would  approve  our 
life "  (John  Stuart  Mill,  Essays  on 
Religion,  253-255). 

II.  How  much  a  Church  often  owes 
to  its  godly  poor!— These  are  worth, 
in  many  ways,  all  the  money  and  the 
ministrations  spent  over  them.  They 
keep  sympathies  tender  and  active, 
which  might  else  die  for  lack  of  objects 
on  which  to  spend  themselves.  They 
keep  the  Church  hfe  from  growing 
sordidly  rich,  or  hard  and  worldly;  they 
exemplify  another  style  of  "  wealth,'* 
constantly  reminding  their  "  more 
fortunate  "  fellow-members  that  there  is 
another,  larger,  worthier  life  than  that 
which  "consisteth  in  the  abundance 
of  the  things  which  a  man  possesseth." 
Happy  the  wealthy  Church  which 
has  many  poor  members  to  whom 
Wordsworth's  words  may  be  applied : 

"  How  oft  high  service  is  performed  within 

When  all  the   external  man   is  rude  in 
show, — 

Not  like  a  temple  rich  with  pomp  and 
gold, 

But  a  mere  mountain  chapel,  that  pro- 
tects 

Its    simple    worshippers    from    sun    and 
shower." 

— Prelude,  book  xiii. 

How  much  of  blessing  does  a  Church 
owe  to  those  who  can  only  contribute 
their  ceaseless  prayers  to  the  Church's 
wealth  ! 

III.  How  much,  in  a  similar  way, 
does  personal  character  often  owe  to 
contact  with  a  poor,  but  pious  Christian 
life ! — The  Christian  servant  is  made 
an  unspeakable,  eternal  blessing  to 
the  master  or  mistress  or  to  the 
children,  [and  perhaps  through  one  of 
these  to  a  whole  generation  or  age ;  e.g. 
how  many  did  the  Christian  servant 
"  make  rich  "  who  led  to  Chi*ist  the  child 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vi. 


who  became  ^'  Lord  Shaftesbury "  !] 
The  rich  visitor  gets  more  fiom  the 
sick  sufferer,  of  ripe  grace  and  bright 
patience,  than  the  "  money's  worth  " 
of  what  is  given  in  charity  !  How 
many  will  have  to  say,  "  My  life  is 
richer,  infinitely,  than  it  was,  since  I 

knew  ,"  viz.  some  poor   saint  of 

God. 

Ver.   10.  ^*  Poor,  yet  making  many 
rich.     Then — 

1.  The  Gospel  is  a  system  intended  to 
enrich  men. — Some  systems  of  religion 
impoverish  mind,  body,  estate.  They 
invade  a  man's  secular  rights,  and 
extort  the  product  of  his  labour ;  blind 
his  spiritual  sensibilities,  fetter  his  intel- 
lect, warp  his  judgment,  ruin  his  soul. 
The  Gospel  enriches  the  soul  with  noble 
thoughts,  high  purposes,  elevating 
hopes ;  with  Divine  fellowship,  purity 
of  heart,  harmony  of  being.  This  soul- 
wealth  is  inalienable ;  it  becomes  part 
of  the  man ;  Omnia  sua  secum  portat ; 
it  is  a  treasure  laid  up  in  the  imperish- 
able heavens  of  his  spiritual  being.  Its 
value  is  absolute  ;  for  all  worlds  and 
ages,  for  time,  for  eternity. 
1.  It  enriches  man  through  the  agency 
of''''  poor  TRen!^ — Of  men.  The  treasure 
is  put  into  earthen  vessels.  The  man 
who  really  receives  the  Gospel,  more- 
over, becomes  at  once  a  willing  agent 
to  communicate.  Of  poor  men.  The 
poor  can,  and  in  fact  do,  receive  the 
Gospel  to  a  greater  extent  than  any 
other  class.  The  Saviour,  opening  His 
commission  at  Nazareth,  declared  Him- 
self anointed — made  a  Christ — specially 
that  He  might  preach  the  Gospel  to 
the  poor.  There  is  no  special  decree 
indeed  which  places  a  barrier  before 
any  one  class  ;  the  door  of  mercy  is 
thrown  open  to  all.  It  is  that  the 
influence  of  worldly  wealth  biases  the 
heart  against  the  true  riches.  The 
poor  can  become  morally  rich.  And 
it  is  a  more  glorious  fact  that  they  can 
propo^gate  the  Gospel  which  enriches 
them.  The  Master  and  His  fishermen- 
disciples  were  its  first  missionaries ; 
and  in  all  ages  some  of  its  finest  theo- 
logians, organisers,  missionaries,  pastors, 


have  sprung  from  the  ranks  of  the  poor. 
We  see,  then, — 

I.  The  kind  of  instrumentality  on 
which  the  diiFusion  of  God's  Gospel 
necessarily  depends.  —  It  manifestly 
does  not  depend  on  legislative  enact- 
ments, worldly  influence,  high  culture, 
great  literary  attainment.  It  can  use 
these ;  it  puts  their  highest  honour 
upon  them  by  using  these  ;  their  chief 
glory  is  to  serve  the  Gospel  of  Christ. 
Certainly  not  even  money  is  indispens- 
able. It  may  be  well,  and  nobly,  used  ; 
but  Paul  could  dispense  with  it.  It 
can  provide  the  men,  the  means,  the 
machinery,  for  the  work.  With  these 
— but  without  these,  if  need  be — the 
man  filled  with  the  Spirit,  burning 
with  love  to  Christ,  taught  of  God, 
walking  in  all  holiness,  though  he  may 
speak  no  language  but  his  own,  and 
even  that  imperfectly,  has  the  power 
to  propagate  the  Gospel. 

II.  No  Christian  man  is  freed  from 
the  obligation  to  diffuse  the  Gospel  of 
God. — Even  the  poor  man  is  not.  He 
may  not  in  over-diffidence  dream  of 
devolving  what  even  he  can  do, 
upon  the  rich  or  wise  or  great.  The 
responsibility  of  wealth,  of  leisure,  of 
education,  is  very  great ;  they  who 
have  these  must  give  account  for  five 
talents.  But  the  poor  man  must  be  a 
faithful  servant  with  his  one.  The 
poor  can  "  make  many  rich  " ;  then 
their  ability  is  their  responsibility. 

III.  There  is  no  ground  for  self- 
gratulation  upon  success. — When  the 
poorest  and  simplest  men  prove  capable 
of  achieving  the  grandest  spiritual 
results,  there  is  no  alternative  but  to 
trace  success  to  God.  And  then  from 
such  instances  we  learn  to  eliminate 
from  all  combinations  of  contributary 
causes,  God's  power,  as  the  primary  and 
essential  cause.  The  men  in  all  ages 
who  have  been  most  successful  in  im- 
parting spiritual  riches,  have  always 
been  distinguished  by  their  self -abne- 
gating spirit.     Then — 

IV.  This  highest  honour  is  within 
the  reach  of  all. — What  higher  honour 
than   to  be  the  human  instrument  in 

Even  to 


the  regeneration  of  a  soul? 


527 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


awaken  and  train  a  sleeping  intellect 
is  great.  The  patient,  skilful  love 
which  put  the  deaf,  blind,  mute  Laura 
Bridgmaninto  real  communication  with 
a  world  in  which  she  lived,  but  which 
seemed  hopelessly  shut  off  from  her,  was 
no  mean  glory  to  Dr.  Howe,  of  Boston, 
U.S.A.  But  to  awaken  a  soul  to  a 
desire  after  God ;  to  bring  it  into  touch 
with  the  surrounding,  but  unknown, 
spiritual  world  ;  to  bring  it  definitely 
into  the  possession  of  Christ,— is  the 
highest  honour,  and  fills  him  who 
accomplishes  the  task  with  the  purest, 
grandest  joy  which  a  man  can  taste 
outside  heaven's  gate.  To  make  a 
beggar,  orphan,  lost  soul  the  happy 
possessor  of  "  the  unsearchable  riches 
of  Christ,"  the  happy  child  of  the 
Divine  Father,  recovered  from  the 
initial,  present  death  and  ruin  of  sin, 
is  an  honour  angels  might  covet.  But 
it  is  granted  to  men  only :  *'  When 
thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy 
brethren."  It  has  been  again  and 
again  granted  to  poor  men.     All  neces- 


sary ministrations  of  man  to  man  are 
level  to  the  ability  of  every  man  to 
render.  This  most  necessary  ministra- 
tion is  open  to  every  man  who  is  him- 
self a  happy  possessor  of  the  kingdom 
within  his  own  soul. 

Y.  Happily  then  we  may  hope  for 
the  universal  diffusion  of  the  Gospel. 
— For  suitable  instruments,  at  least  in 
one  particular,  are  sure  to  be  always 
available  in  plenty ;  there  will  at  least 
never  be  any  dearth  of  men  who  are 
qualified  to  say,  '"'-  As  having  nothing T 
If,  too,  it  had  depended  on  a  learned 
caste,  or  a  wealthy  class,  or  a  political 
power,  there  might  have  been  justifica- 
tion for  a  priesthood,  an  oligarchy,  an 
Establishment.  To  spread  the  Gospel, 
in  the  first  instance  only  needed  men 
who  had  little,  or  none,  of  such  ac- 
companiments and  accessories  to  their 
work.  And  the  Gospel  can  use  them 
or  can  dispense  with  them  still. — In 
part  adapted  from  "  Homilist"  New 
Series,  iv.  217. 


HOMILETIC   SUGGESTIONS, 


Ver.  '2.  Now  ;  because — 

I.  The  business  is  urgent :  Finding 
God's  salvation.  — Enter  some  Galilaean 
village  in  the  Spring  of  a.d.  27  or  28. 
Whole  village  astir.  Everybody  in 
the  streets.  Some  hobbling  along  on 
crutches  ;  some  tottering  and  shaking 
with  palsied  limbs,  glad  to  lean  on 
some  stronger  arm  ;  some  blind,  groping 
their  way  as  if  in  midnight  darkness ; 
some  minus  a  limb  altogether ;  some 
with  withered  limbs  that  hang  stiff  like 
dead  branches  on  a  living  trunk  ; 
some  dragging  themselves  wearily  ; 
some  borne  on  their  little  mattress- 
"  bed  "  by  sturdy  bearers.  A  field  day 
of  the  cripples  and  the  sick  of  that 
Galilaean  village  !  What  does  it  mean  % 
Why  all  converging  to  one  particular 
house?  Or,  the  Passover  of  a.d.  29. 
Crowds  throng  every  high-road  in 
Palestine.  One  largest  company  of 
pilgrims,  like  a  living  flood,  reaches, 
rolls  through,  and  soon  leaves,  Jericho. 
A  shady  nook  near  the  city  gate ;  a 

523 


beggar — two — blind  Bartimseus  and 
his  companion.  They  hear  the  crowd. 
They  learn  the  cause.  Spite  of  the 
hushing  of  bystanders,  again  and 
again  before  the  Chief  Pilgrim  reaches 
them,  their  shrill  cry  is  raised :  "  Son 
of  David!  Son  of  David!"  Those 
are  "  seeking  the  Lord  whih  He  may 
he  founds  These  latter  are  "  calling 
upon  Him  while  He  is  near"  The 
business  is  urgent.  Try  to  detain  one 
of  those  cripples  or  blind  men  with  a 
good  story ;  tempt  him  to  turn  back 
with  you  for  a  good  dinner  or  a  handful 
of  money.  Not  he  !  It  is  only  sinners 
who  commit  the  folly  of  suffering? 
themselves  to  be  detained  or  diverted 
from  Christ  by  some  tempting  amuse- 
ment, by  sensuous  enjoyment,  by 
worldly  business.  The  bystanders 
sought  to  hush  down  the  beggars.  As 
pride,  or  shame,  or  fear,  or  social  or 
domestic  pressure  put  on,  would  sup- 
press or  silence  the  demonstrative 
concern     and     the     unconventionally 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  vi. 


urgent  outcry  of  a  guilty  soul,  which 
wants  Christ's  help.  "  No ;  I  cannot 
tarry  for  you.  I  cannot  hush  for  you. 
Until  I  have  made  this  sure,  I  have  no 
ear,  no  leisure,  for  anything  else.  What 
must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  Leave  me  to 
find  Christ !  "  Bunyan  not  drawing  a 
fancy  picture  when  he  makes  Christian 
flee  "at  full  stretch "  from  City  of 
Destruction,  fingers  in  ears,  crying, 
''Life!  Life!  Eternal  Life!"  He 
had  known  it  himself.  Every  man 
under  the  Spirit's  conviction  of  sin 
knows  how  urgent  the  business. 

II.  The  time  is  fitting. — Every  stage 
of  life  is ;  youth ;  opening  manhood  and 
womanhood ;  maturity  of  strength  and 
prime  of  vigour  or  beauty  of  character ; 
days  of  waning  power,  but  of  sobering 
thought  and  heart.  No  age  to  which 
this  present  salvation  is  not  congruous. 
Early  morning,  rising  noon,  fulness  of 
afternoon  light  and  warmth,  evening's 
chastened  daylight ;  all  are  right  times. 
But  the  earliest  is  the  best.  Keligion 
never  unsuitable ;  becomes  a  man  at 
any  stage  of  life.  Life  wants  its  final 
touch  of  completeness  and  beauty,  so 
long  as  it  has  not  this.  "  Comes 
harder"  at  each  later  stage.  Numa 
Pompilius  and  the  Sibylline  books. 

III.  The  circumstances  are  favour- 
able.— Particularly  the  primary  con- 
dition of  all.  God  says  "  Now."  He 
is  pledged  to  "  Now,"  but  to  no  other 
time.  On  this  word  a  soul  may  plead : 
"  Remember  this  word  unto  Thy  ser- 
vant, in  which  Thou  hast  caused  me 
to  hope." 

IV.  The  opportunity  is  limited. — 
1.  True  of  nations,  so  far  as  history  can 
he  read  with  human  eyes.  They  have 
their  ''  day  of  salvation  "  (Luke  xix.  44). 
Perhaps,  e.g.,  we  may  think  that 
France  knew  not  of  its  *'  now  "  oppor- 
tunity in  the  sixteenth  century,  when 
Reformation  activities  and  life  and 
grace  were  neglected  and  finally  put 
away  in  massacre  and  murder.  2.  True 
of  individuals.  May  not  limit  the 
power  and  freedom  of  God's  grace 
further  than  He  limits  it.  But  the 
complete  offer  of  the  Gospel  always 
includes,  expressly  or  by  implication, 


M 


a  limit  to  the  availableness  of  the 
offer.  E.g.  in  Isa.  Iv.  6,  7,  referred  to 
above.  Men  may  seek  when  He  is  not 
to  be  found,  may  call  when  He  is 
not  near.  A  limit  seems  irrevocably 
placed  sometimes.  Thus :  Man  co- 
operates with  God  in  this  " salvation" 
by  repentance  and  faith.  What  then 
of  the  senile  decay  of  mind  which 
seems  to  make  the  very  conception  of 
repenting  and  believing  no  longer 
possible,  and  which  makes  it  impossible 
to  arouse  attention  for  the  very  name 
of  Jesus?  What  of  the  breathing, 
but  paralysed  body  and  hopelessly  sense- 
less brain,  to  which  the  minister  is 
sometimes  asked  to  come  in  to  offer 
prayer  beside  it?  What  of  the  fixed 
habits,  the  world-indurated  heart,  im- 
pervious to,  impracticable  for,  man's 
appeal,  and  from  which  the  very  Spirit 
of  God  seems  "  grieved  "  away  ?  Let  it 
be  noted  that  this  closing  of  the  oppor- 
tunity is  never  in  this  life  a  matter  of 
the  mere  (arbitrary)  will  of  God.  As 
in  salvation,  so  in  this  limitation, — 
whenever  it  occurs, — man  has  co- 
operated with  God,  and  has  by  his  own 
choice  and  act  contributed  to  it.  [Also : 
"  Now  "in  "  Remember  now  thy 
Creator,"  etc.,  must  not  be  emphasised 
if  the  appeal  is  being  made  to  the 
young.  It  is  only  the  particle  of 
entreaty,  and  is  not  temporal  in  sense.] 

Yer.  2.  God  hath  spoken  once;  yea, 
twice  have  I  heard  Him." 

I.  An  offer  twice  repeated. — A 
"  time  of  acceptance " ;  a  "  day  of 
salvation." 

II.  A  double  summons  to  attention. 
—''BehoU";  '"behold." 

III.  A  double  indication  of  time. — 
"  Now  !  "  "  now  !  "—[J.  L.] 

Ver.  2.  A  Present  Salvation. 

I.  It  needs  to  be ;  you  want  it  now. 

II.  It  ought  to  be;  God  offers  it 
now. 

III.  It  may  be ;  all  things  are  ready 
nmji). 

IV.  It  must  be;  to-morrow  is  not 
yours. — \J.  Z.] 

Vers.  4-10.  "  Approved "  [N.B.  not 
M  529 


Vl^. 


CHAP.  vii.   HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIAN^. 


the   frequent    Pauline   word    in,    e.g., 
E/Om.  xvi.  ]  0]  Ministers  of  God, 
I.  Their  work. 
II.  Their  trials. 

III.  Their  conduct. 

IV.  Their  consolations. — [/.  Z.] 

Ver.  7.  A  Shield  of  Triple  Brass." 

I.  The   word    of  truth   defends  a 
Christian's  faith. 

II.  The  power  of  God  defends  his 
experience. 

III.  The  armour  of  righteousness 
defends  his  practice. — [J.  L.] 

Vers.  11-13.   What  shall  we  Ministers 
have,  therefore  ? 

I.  Ministerial  zeal, 

II.  Ministerial  disappointment. 

III.  Ministerial  recompense. — [J.L^\ 

Then,  further,  the  passage  may  be 

lifted  to  a  higher  plane.      Thus  does 

God    appeal    to    His    people.       Their 

thoughts,  views,  hopes,  life,  experiences. 


are  narrow.  He  would  have  them 
know,  enjoy,  a  larger  life  and  larger 
hope  and  liberty.  The  narrowness  is 
in  themselves,  not  in  His  heart  or 
design  or  Gospel  provision.  They 
enter  Canaan,  indeed ;  but  having 
taken  their  Jericho,  and  having  won 
their  first  victories,  they  are  content 
to  camp  about  Gilgal ;  whilst  **  there 
remaineth  much  land  to  be  possessed " 
(Josh.  xiii.  1).  Their  enlargement,  both 
of  affection  and  receptiveness,  is  the 
*'  recompense  "  God  desires,  for  all  His 
"  enlarged "  heart  of  merciful  design 
and  provision  for  their  well-beiug. 
Carey's  motto  :  *'  Do  great  things  for 
God ;  expect  great  things  from  God." 
Bring  a  big  vessel  when  you  come 
to  receive  God's  bounty.  "  Open  thy 
mouth  wide  " — i.e.  "  sitting  a  guest  at 
His  table,  let  Him  dip  His  hand  in 
the  dish,  and,  in  token  of  favour  and 
honour,  give  thee  a  large  portion  into 
thy  opened  mouth." 


CHAPTER  VII. 


CRITICAL  NOTES, 


Ver.  1.  Therefore. — This  verse  a  branch  broken  from  vi.  16-18.  This  word  is  like  the  jagged 
fibres  which  tell  of  the  violence,  and  point  back  to  the  parent  stem.  Having. — Observe, 
the  evangelical  generalising  of  the  scope  of,  and  ownership  in,  these  Old  Testament  sen- 
tences (see  Appended  Note).  Cleanse  ourselves. — "  Deliverance  from  sin,  although  .  .  .  God's 
work  in  us,  is  yet  obtained  by  our  own  moral  effort  and  our  own  faith.  It  therefore  depends 
upon  ourselves  whether  we  are  made  clean."  (Beet.)  Beet  adds :  "  The  aor.  subj.  exhorts  us, 
not  to  a  gradual  and  progressive,  but  to  a  completed,  cleansing /?'ow  all  defilement.  So 
Eph.  iv.  22,  25 ;  Col.  iii.  5,  8  ;  1  John  i.  9."  Spirit. — Observe,  even  the  Godward,  most  Godlike 
part  of  our  (tri-partite)  nature  may  be  "  defiled."  All  filthiness. — As  usual  in  St.  Paul,  •'  all " 
is  "  All  kinds,  types,  aspects,  degrees,  of,"  etc.  Not  this  or  that  one  particular  pollution. 
Cf .  condemning  "  sins  we  have  no  mind  to,"  excusing  those  "  we're  most  inclined  to."  A  very 
subtle  temptation  is  this  moral  partiality  when  we  are  cutting  off  our  sins.  [We  "  spare  the 
best  of  the  sheep  and  of  the  oxen,"  etc.  (1  Sam.  xv.  3,  9).] 

Ver.  2.  Beceive. —  Verbally  distinct  from  vi.  17  ;  related  in  suggestion.  R.V.  has  "  open 
your  hearts  to  us  "  ;  cf.  vi.  il-13  and  Acts  xx.  3.  See  how  Paul  repeats  Samuel's  challenge 
of  old  (1  Sam.  xii.  3)  (cf.  also  John  viii.  46).  As  to  these  charges  against  Paul  (perhaps 
not  very  distinctly  formulated,  but  rather  gathered  from  hints,  and  from  their  bearing 
towards  Titus),  see  under  xii.  16-18.    Corrupted. — Perhaps  not  stronger  than  in  1  Cor.  iii.  17. 

Ver.  3. — Observe,  "  I  "  begins  here  in  the  Epistle.  Ye  .  .  .in  our  hearts.  Cf.  the  curiously 
(grammatically)  ambiguous  sentence,  Phil.  i.  7.  Stanley  compares  Horace  :  "  Tecum  vivere 
amem,  tecum  obeam  libens." 

Ver.  4.  Boldness. — Reverts  to  iii.  1 — iv.  6,  particularly  iii.  12.  "To  them  he  speaks  with- 
out reserve  strong  words  of  warning  ;  to  others  he  speaks  about  them  glowing  words  of  joy 
and  confidence  "  (BeeL). 

Ver.  5.—"  Observe,  "  even  "  (Il,V.) ;  the  "  a^ictions  "  of  <*  Asia,"  i.  8-11— the  story  of  which  is 

530 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II,   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  vii. 


continued  up  to  Troas,  in  ii.  13 — were  not  at  an  end  even  when  he  crossed  over  into  Mace- 
donia. No  rest. — Cf.  ii.  13.  "  Rest "  in  the  sense  of  the  unstringing  of  a  bow,  or  of  the  strings 
of  a  lyre;  "wo  relwf  from  the  constant  tension"  (2  Thess.  i.  7).  Fightings. — Human 
opponents,  unknown  to  us  (cf.  1  Cor.  xv.  32).  Fears. — One  can  bear  anything  from  without, 
if  only  the  heart  be  light ;  but  to  h2i.\e  fears  within ! 

Vers.  6,  7. — Observe,  the  Father  a  Paraclete,  as  in  i.  4  [making  Paul  in  his  turn  a  Paraclete  to 
others].  Cast  down. — Note  (as  in  R.V.)  an  adjective — "  the  lowly  " — not  a  participle.  [The 
combination  of  "  affliction,''  "  rest,''  "  comfort  by  the  paronsia  of  Titus,"  recalls  2  Thess.  i.  7 
again.]  Observe,  ** while"  he  was  telling  his  good  news,  and  describing  what  he  had  seen  at 
Corinth,  the  "  comfort "  with  which  Titus  had  left  the  city,  was  visibly  renewed  and  intensified, 
to  the  added  comfort  also  of  Paul  himself,  who  was  already  greatly  cheered  by  the  very 
presence  of  Titus  with  him.  **  Longing  "  for  me ;  "  Mourning  "  that  you  had  grieved  me, 
"  zeal "  to  do  my  wishes. 

Ver.  8.—"  Regret "  (R.V.)  better  than  "  repent "  (A.V.).     My  Epistle.— Viz.  1  Cor.  (v.  1-8). 

Ver.  9. — Sorrow  (like  joy,  or  like  self-denial)  is  of  no  moral  worth  in  itself ;  only  worth 
anything  as  a  means  to  an  end, — here  "  to  repentance."  Asceticism  makes  sorrow  and  self- 
mortification  to  be  ends,  of  worth  in  themselves.  Receive  damage. — "  Suffer  loss  "  (R.V.) ;  i.e. 
"  Had  their  sorrow  been  without  result,  it  would  have  been  an  injury,  a  small  and  under- 
signed one,  caused  to  them  by  Paul.  God  designed  [?]  their  sorrow  to  be  a  means  of  blessing, 
so  that  not  even  in  the  least  degree  they  might  receive  injury  from  the  Apostle."  (Beet.) 

Ver.  10. — Choose  between  (1)  ^* Repentance "  and  (2)  ''Salvation,"  "not  to  be  regretted." 
The  play  upon  the  word  and  thought  turns  the  balance  in  favour  of  (1).  Observe,  **the 
world  "  can  share  in  sorrow ;  God  cannot  sorrow.  Hence  "  the  sorrow  of  the  world  " ;  but 
"  sorrow  according  to  (the  mind  of)  God." 

Ver.  11.  *♦  This  .  . .  thing,  viz.,  that  ye  sorrowed"  etc. ;  " carefulness"  not  now  so  good  a 
word  as  "  earnest  care  "  (R.V.)  ;  "  vehement  desire"  same  word  as  "earnest  desire"  (ver.  7)  ; 
both  give  way  to  "longing"  (R.V.).  "Carefulness"  is  expounded  in  the  six  following 
particulars  (as  in  Conybeare  and  Howson) :  "  What  eagerness  to  clear  yourselves  from  blame, 
what  indignation  (against  the  offender),  what  fear  (of  the  wrath  of  God),  what  longing  (for 
restoration  to  Paul's  approval  and  love),  what  zeal  (on  behalf  of  right  and  against  wrong), 
what  punishm  ent  of  wrong."  Somewhat  differently,  Stanley  draws  out  a  "  conflict  of  feelings  " : 
•*  Self-defence  (for  their  sin),  self -accusation  (against  it),  fear  (of  Paul's  arrival),  longing 
(for  it),  zeal  (against  the  offender),  punishment  (of  his  sin)."  More  briefly  Farrar :  "  Self- 
defence  and  indignation  against  wrong,  and  a  fear  and  yearning  toward  me,  and  zeal  for  God, 
and  punishment  of  the  offender."  Surely  not  (as  some)  that  they  had — even  a  majority  of 
them — been  pure  all  along  in  this  matter ;  else  his  strictures  were  undeserved,  or  his 
informants  had  overstated  the  facts.  Surely  rather,  approved  themselves — manifestly  showed 
themselves — to  be  norc  clear  in  the  matter  of  the  incestuous  person. 

Ver.  12.  His  cause,  etc. — Viz.  the  father  of  the  offender  (1  Cor.  v.  1).  Cf.  again,  the 
many  concurrent,  consistent  motives  in  chap.  ii.  See  how  one  object  out  of  many  is  stated  so 
strongly  as  to  seem  the  only  object,  and  also  how  the  conception  of  an  object  indirectly  secured 
runs  into  that  of  aa  object  distinctly  contemplated.  (Cf.  Winer,  Grammar,  on  tVa,  Part  III., 
§  liii.,  6.)  Observe  the  change  in  R.  V.,  on  account  of  the  reading  which  makes  the  first  and 
second  personal  pronoun  change  places.  For  (1)  the  R.V.  is  the  recurrence  of  the  word  in 
ver.  11  ;  for  (2)  the  A.V.,  the  greater  simplicity  of  sense ;  and  "  unto  you"  is  in  (2)  super- 
fluous, unless  with  some  far-fetched  idea  that  he  desired  to  show  to  the  Corinthians  their 
truer,  better  selves  qud  their  feelings  toward  him. 

Ver.  15. — Cf.  their  reception  of  Titus  with  that  which  Paul  deprecated  in  the  case  of 
Timothy  (1  Cor.  xvi.  10). 

Ver.  16.  I  have  confidence. — Meaning  not,  "  I  trust  in  you,"  but,  "  I  am  now  entirely  re- 
assured about  you." 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS,— Verse  1. 

[1.  Ver.  1  really  belongs  by  all  right  to  the  preceding  chapter,  and  in  any 
continuous  exposition  should  be  taken  along  with  it.  There  is  no  Divine  inspira- 
tion about  the  division  of  the  Bible  into  chapters  and  verses.  Indeed,  there 
seems  sometimes  to  have  been  a  very  sudden  failure  of  human  "  inspiration  " 
«,bout  the  apportionment  of  the  matter  into  such  sections.  1  Cor.  xi.  1  plainly 
belongs  to  chap.  x. ;  the  new  paragraph  before  us  as  plainly  commences  at  ver.  2. 
This  verse  is  just  a  summary  conclusion  drawn  from  several  Old  Testament 
promises  to  Solomon  and  to  Israel,  in  which  Paul,  taught  by  the  guiding  and 

531 


CHAP.  VII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


illuminating  Spirit  of  God,  sees  promises  for  every  man  who  has  become  a  son 
of  God  by  his  faith  in  Christ  Jesus, — every  man  of  the  spiritual  Israel. 

2.  The  gist  of  these  promises  is  that  men  may  be  admitted  into  the  Favour, 
the  Family,  the  Fellowship,  of  God.  "  I  will  be  their  God  ;  they  .  .  .  My  people." 
"  I  .  .  .  their  Father ;  they  My  sons  and  daughters."  "  I  will  be  to  them  an 
indwelling  God ;  they  shall  be,  soul  and  body,  a  temple  for  Me."  Dominion 
and  defence  on  God's  side ;  obedience  and  reverence  and  love  on  man's  side. 
Indeed,  love  on  both  sides ;  fatherly  on  this,  filial  on  that.  Then  comes  the 
indwelling,  bringing  illumination,  purity,  and  glory. 

3.  And  as  Paul  remembers  what  these  Corinthians  had  been,  his  heart  is 
kindled  and  glows  within  him,  as  promise  after  promise  rises  to  his  view  and 
is  dictated  to  his  amanuensis.  He  found  them  without  God,  almost  at  the 
farthest  remove  from  Him  of  all  the  heathen  world.  Yet,  "  I  will  be  their 
God  ;  they  shall  be  My  people."  A  few  years  before  he  had  found  them  utterly 
unholy  ;  unlike,  and  hateful  to,  a  holy  God.  Yet  here  is  an  offer  :  "  I  will  be  a 
Father  to  them;  they,  the  wretched  and  vile,  shall  be  My — My — sons  and 
daughters."  Their  hearts  had  been  the  temples  of  indwelling  devilry ;  they 
should  become  the  shrines  of  indwelling  Deity. 

4.  ^'Having  therefore  these  promises,"  etc.  [Illustrate  by  the  advertisements 
of  unclaimed  dividends ;  of  articles  found  for  which  owners  are  wanted ;  the 
tempting  lists  of  heirs  wanted  for  unclaimed  estates.  So]  shall  these  promises, 
these  so  great  blessings,  such  fellowship  with  God,  lie  unapplied  for,  unclaimed, 
unappropriated?  Shall  the  "sons  of  God"  live  beggars  and  in  want,  when  all 
this  is  open,  and  "  on  offer  "  ? 

5.  Only,  all  "  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit  must  be  put  away."  [This  link  of 
thought  lies  condensed  into  the  one  word  *'for,"  in  1  Pet.  i.  16,  where  God's 
holiness  is  the  foundation  reason  for  the  holiness  of  His  people.  The  "  for  "  may 
be  read:  (1)  Vindicate  your  sonship  ;  show  the  family  likeness,  the  likeness  to 
your  Father.  "  Ye  shall  be,  .  .  .  because  I  am."  (2)  "  Let  us  have  fellowship. 
I  want  it ;  your  heart  needs  it.  But  there  can  be  none  unless  ye  are  holy  ^^for 
I  am  holy."  (3)  "i>o  not  force  Me  to  withdraw  from  the  fellov)ship.  Put  away 
sin,  or  I  must.     Ye  shall  be,  .  .  .  for  I  am,"  etc.] 

6.  "  Flesh  "  and  "  spirit  "  is  only  a  quasi-popular  statement  of  an  all-inclusive 
range  of  requirement.  Perhaps,  if  any  line  of  division  is  to  be  traced,  it  will  be 
this  :  There  are  sins  which  depend  upon  a  bodily  organisation  for  their  occasion 
and  possibility,  whereas  there  are  many  forms  of  sin  which  could  as  easily  be, 
and  actually  are,  committed  by  devils  and  the  disembodied  spirits  of  the  lost.] 

Sm*row  upon  Sorrow  ;  Comfort  upon  Comfort  (vers.  2-7,  13-16). 

I.  Sorrow  upon  sorrow. — 1.  An  apostle  is  himself  "in  heaviness  through 
manifold  temptations"  (Jas.  i.  2).  No  man  certainly  had  a  richer  Christian 
life  than  he.  No  man  understood  more  fully  than  Paul  how  "  the  peace  of 
God — passing  understanding — could  guard  the  heart  and  the  thoughts,  through 
Christ  Jesus "  (Phil.  iv.  7).  No  man  more  fully  accepted  and  embraced  the 
truth  that  "  All  things  work  together  for  good."  Surely  no  man  was  more 
entirely  lifted  above  all  self-centering  of  life  than  he  who  said,  "  Neither  count 
I  my  life  dear  unto  me,"  etc.  (Acts  xx.  24).  Yet  he  is  deeply  "  moved  "  by  the 
experiences  of  these  painful  months.  This  Second  Epistle  is  an  itinerary,  where 
every  step  of  the  way  is  connected  with  trouble.  This  Apostolic  sower  goes  forth 
into  the  field  of  the  world,  with  his  seed  basket  of  precious  seed,  weeping  every  step 
of  the  way  he  just  now  takes.  Many  adversaries  at  Ephesus  ;  trouble  there  until 
he  despaired  of  life  (chap,  i.) ;  himself  going  about  for  weeks  a  man  as  good  as 
sentenced  to  death,  his  life  seeming  to  be  worth  no  longer  purchase  than  that  of 
a  condemned  criminal ;  perhaps  in  poor  health  through  excessive  anxiety  about 

532 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  vn. 


his  Corinthian  Church,  certainly  greatly  distressed  about  the  news  he  has 
received  of  the  condition  of  that  Church.  And  now  he  has  made  for  himself 
a  new  anxiety,  by  sending  his  sharp  letter  of  rebuke  and  disciplinary  instruc- 
tion, the  nature  of  the  reception  of  which  is  a  very  uncertain  matter  indeed. 
His  departure  from  Ephesus  has  been  precipitated  by  the  riot  of  Demetrius 
and  the  guild  of  silversmiths,  though  he  had  intended  in  any  case  soon  to  finish 
his  work  at  Ephesus  (1  Cor.  xvi.  8) ;  at  Troas  he  is  so  distressed  about 
Corinth,  and  at  not  meeting  Titus  there  with  news  from  that  city,  that, 
restless  in  spirit,  he  cannot  settle  down  to  work,  but  with  an  anxious 
heart  hurries  across  to  Macedonia.  And  now  even  Macedonia  is  no  asylum. 
There  is  no  rest  for  his  flesh  there.  ^^  Fightings  vnthout,  fears  within." 
Beset  and  burdened,  he  has  almost  come  to  the  end  of  all  strength.  He  is 
only  just  "not  destroyed"  (iv.  9).  And  to  any  man  of  sensitive  honour,  such 
suspicions  or  accusations  as  are  suggested  in  ver.  1  will  not  be  the  least  heavy 
burden.  True  his  own  conscience  does  not  accuse  him  ;  before  God  he  is  clear ; 
his  reputation  may  be  left  with  God.  Yet  it  were  folly  to  attempt  not  to 
feel  such  charges,  unwelcome  addition  as  they  are  to  the  distresses  of  the  time. 
2.  Such  a  sample  case  is  serviceable  as  a  standard  of  the  possibilities  of  Christian 
experience,  for  the  comfort  of  many  distressed  children  of  God.  Distressed  most 
of  all  by  the  fear  that  their  "  heaviness  "  is  dishonouring  to  God's  grace  and  its 
keeping  and  sustaining  power ;  afraid  that  they  are  grieving  the  Spirit  of  God 
by  not  so  "  rejoicing  evermore  "  that,  though  perhaps  sorrow  be  accumulated 
upon  their  head  and  heart,  or  though  circumstances  be  such  as  to  put  faith  and 
endurance  to  an  uttermost  test,  or  though  they  be  alone,  friendless,  misunder- 
stood by  those  who  ought  to  know  them  and  respect  or  love  them,  they  are  not 
lifted  up  to  a  level  of  insensibility  to,  of  inaccessibility  to,  such  "  natural " 
considerations  and  feelings.  "  Ought  they  not  to  feel  nothing  1  "  they  ask. 
Well,  at  any  rate  there  was  no  such  Stoical  indifference  in  Paul ;  his  was 
no  American  Indian  insensibility  to  torture ;  no  statuesque  impassiveness,  no 
matter  what  happened,  blow  heat,  blow  cold,  be  it  sunshine  or  storm.  Paul 
felt — felt  keenly — with  distressing,  and  almost  killing,  intensity  ;  and  showed  it 
too.  His  heart  hungered  for  human  sympathy.  The  days  seemed  terribly 
long  till  Titus  came  !  "  Ought  not  a  Christian  man  to  be  able  to  disregard  all 
human  opinion,  whether  censure  or  praise;  to  care  nothing  whether  men 
understand  him  or  not,  so  long  as  the  Master  smiles  upon  him  1 "  At  all  events, 
Paul  was  no  such  cast-iron,  machine-made  man  with  a  merely  mechanical  heart, 
to  which  everything  was  simply  a  matter  of  indifference,  and  which,  with 
unaffected  regularity,  went  rigorously  on  with  its  beating,  as  the  man  might  do 
with  his  work.  The  possibihties  of  grace  are  unspeakably  large.  The  peace  of 
God  might  "  keep  "  us,  with  a  power  too  seldom  even  apprehended  by  the  people  of 
God.  Most  of  them  set  the  standard  too  low,  and  hope  for  too  little  ;  and  they 
live  lower  than  even  their  low  standard,  and  on  a  more  narrow  scale  than  even 
their  meagre  hopes.  Yet  exaggerated  expectations  are  an  evil  and  a  mischief. 
Grace  is  above  nature,  and  lifts  nature  up  gloriously ;  but  it  works  through 
nature.  It  does  not  dehumanise  the  saint.  Neither  Paul,  nor  Paul's  Divine 
Master,  was  indifferent  to  pain.  Nor  does  God  expect  His  people  not  to  feel. 
He  is  entirely  reasonable  (to  use  a  human  word)  in  what  He  expects  from  them. 
Heaviness  is  one  thing ;  darkness  is  another.  The  lowliest  child  of  God  need 
never  come  into  darkness.  "  He  that  followeth  Me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness." 
An  apostle  may  be  in  heaviness.  And  no  fulness  of  gifts  or  grace  will,  or  need 
be  expected  to,  exempt  a  man  from  feeling  and  smarting  and  sorrowing.  [All 
will  be  bright  and  warm  and  "tight"  within,  yet  the  storm  that  howls  around 
the  house  and  thunders  against  the  barred  door  and  tightly  closed  shutters  will 
not  be  a  matter  of  indifference  when  its  mighty  force  makes  the  very  house 

533 


CHAP.  vii.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  CORINTHIANS. 


tremble  to  its  foundations,  until  more  than  a  passing  fear  visits  the  heart  of 
those  who  cheer  themselves  with  its  fire  and  light,  lest  their  very  shelter  should 
after  all  fall  about  their  ears.  And  if  "  fears  within  "  seem  to  make  it  hard  to 
keep  the  fire  blazing  and  the  lamp  burning  !]  The  storm  will  indeed  not  disturb 
the  deepest  depths  of  "  the  peace  of  God,"  but  its  **  surface  "  commotion  may  go 
far  down.  There  will  be  a  holy  of  holies  of  peace  and  security  within  a  Paul, 
into  which  no  foot  of  distressing  circumstance  shall  ever  intrude ;  but  all  the 
outer  courts  of  the  temple  of  the  humanity  may,  for  a  while,  be  in  possession  of 
an  overwhelming  mob  of  anxious,  distressing  thoughts.  3.  Yet  there  is  a  limit 
beyond  which  these  shall  not  pass.  [Weights  may  be  heaped  upon  the  strong 
steel  spiral  spring  until  it  snaps,  or  at  least  until  its  elasticity  is  gone,  and  until 
there  is  no  resilient  power  left  when  the  pressure  is  removed.]  *'  Sorrow  upon 
sorrow,"  but  there  is  a  ne  plus  ultra.  [Of.  Phil.  ii.  27  for  a  beautiful  case  in 
point.]  All  but  up  to  the  breaking- point,  but  never  beyond  it.  *'  My  feet  had 
well  nigh  slipped  ;  "  well  nigh,  no  more.  The  night  may  darken,  and  darken,  and 
darken ;  bad  in  Ephesus,  no  better  in  Troas ;  no  relief  in  Macedonia.  But  the 
light  comes  at  last ;  Titus  comes,  for  one  thing.  There  is  always  a  daybreak  to 
a  man  of  God  (Ps.  cxii.  4).  They  who  wait,  even  "  out  of  the  depths,"  watching 
*'  as  they  who  watch  for  the  morning,"  watch  for  what  is  certain  to  come.  An 
apostle,  as  well  as  many  a  humbler  member  of  the  great  Church  of  Christ,  may 
be  brought,  pushed,  driven,  to  '*  man's  extremity."  But  never  beyond !  As  we 
see  here. 

II.  Comfort  upon  comfort. — 1.  The  Lord  of  Paul's  life  knew  the  limit  of  the 
endurance  of  His  servant.  He  knew  him  no  Stoic,  but  keenly  sensitive ;  he 
saw  him  on  the  rack  in  his  anxiety  about  Corinth ;  he  understood  the  hungry 
longing  for  friendship,  and  the  not  unworthy  desire  for  the  favourable  judgment 
of  the  Corinthians  themselves  (ver.  2).  Titus  came  ;  even  to  have  him  back  was 
comfort ;  Paul's  affectionate  nature  made  him  greatly  dependent  upon  human 
friendships.  Then  Titus  brought  good  news ;  the  strain  of  these  long  weeks  upon 
Paul's  spirit  was  off,  the  tension  was  relaxed,  in  a  moment.  In  the  reaction  and 
revulsion  of  feeling,  he  is  overflowing  with  an  exuberant  sense  of  relief,  of  joy 
about  Corinth,  of  affection  for  his  people  there ;  indeed,  he  is  proud  of  them ! 
(vers.  3,  4).  Not  that  the  surrounding  ^^tribulation"  is  any  less,  or  less  real; 
but  he  is  "  exceeding  joyful  in  the  midst  of  it."  Nor  is  this  all.  Whilst  Titus  is 
telling  him  the  good  news, — how  well  himself  had  been  received  as  representing 
Paul,  how  they  "  longed- "  to  see  Paul  also,  how  deep  had  been  the  "  mourning  " 
over  wrong-doing,  whose  aggravated  evil,  and  their  own  complicity  with  which, 
they  had  hardly  appreciated  until  Paul's  stern  letter  gave  them  an  "  outside  " 
view  of  it  (ver.  7), — his  face  glows  whilst  he  "  recalls  "  it  (ver.  16) ;  it  gives  him 
renewed  "  comfort "  to  remember  and  to  tell  of  the  "  comfort "  he  had  received  at 
Corinth.  And  it  is  comfort — added  comfort — to  Paul  to  see  Titus  so  gladdened. 
*'  He  rejoices  with  him  that  doth  rejoice  "  (ver.  12).  Yet  more,  all  his  misgivings 
and  fears  about  Corinth  are  gone.  He  is  entirely  reassured  about  them  (ver.  16). 
Now  he  only  wants  one  thing  more,  and  **  his  joy  will  be  full "  :  will  the 
Corinthians  not  open  their  hearts  to  make  him  room  ?  Love  lives  and  makes  its 
home  in  other  hearts.  And  we  may  believe  that  the  "  God  of  all  comfort "  did 
not  deny  His  hard-pressed  servant  even  this.  2.  "  Sorrow  upon  sorrow  ;  comfort 
upon  cmnfort ;  "  that  is  always  God's  rule,  and  the  latter  half  of  it  obtains  as 
certainly  and  as  universally  as  the  former.  Need  and  supply  always  are  kept 
at  the  same  level.  There  is  neither  sense  nor  faith  in  a  pessimist  view  of  the 
world  or  of  one's  own  life.  And  the  measure  of  the  comfort  is  no  stinted  or 
meagre  one.  "  I  am>  exceedingly  joyful"  "  My  cup  runneth  over."  God's  rule 
for  man's  dealing  with  man  is  what  has  first  of  all  been  His  own  rule  in  dealing, 
with  man :  "  Good  measure,  pressed  down,  running  over "    is  dealt  into  the 

534 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  Vil. 


bosom  (Luke  vi.  38).  There  is  also  neither  sense  nor  grace  in  clinging  to  the 
memory  of  sorrow.  "  Thou  shalt  remember  thy  misery  as  waters  that  have 
passed  away  "  (Job  xi.  16).  But  when  the  flood  has  subsided  there  is  no  need  to 
nurse  the  sorrow  of  the  days  of  inundation.  Be  natural.  Be  thankful  for  the 
comfort.  [Archbishop  Trench's  poem,  in  Appended  Note,  may  be  useful.]  3.  The 
capacity  for  keen  sorrow  like  this  of  Paul  is  the  price  to  be  paid — the  penalty — 
of  a  finely  made  humanity.  Yet  they  need  not  be  envied  who  pass  through  life 
incapable  of  woe ;  to  whom  nothing  seems  greatly  to  matter.  They  have  their 
price  to  pay  too ;  they  are  incapable  of  the  comfort  upon  comfort.  The  very 
avenues  which  permit  the  assault  and  entrance  of  invading  pain  give  access  also 
to  the  relieving  forces  which  bring  God's  comfort.  4.  The  heart  full  of  Christ, 
and  that  loves  His  appearing,  will  catch  at  the  suggestion  of  the  word  ^^  parousia" 
used  by  Paul  in  regard  to  Titus's  arrival  (ver.  6).  As  Paul  longed  for  Titus,  as 
there  are  days  coming  when,  as  never  till  then,  even  in  the  days  of  sharpest, 
darkest  tribulation,  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  Church  shall  look  longingly  for  the 
coming  of  Jesus.  [2  Thess.  ii.  6,  7  has  the  *'  tribulation  "  and  the  "  rest "  of  this 
passage.  And — it  may  be  only  a  coincidence — ^this  passage  was  written  from 
Macedonia,  perhaps  from  Thessalonica  itself.]  The  night  will  have  worn  away 
until  the  *'  third  watch "  (Luke  xii.  38) ;  the  servants  listen  with  strained 
eagerness  for  any  sound  of  His  approach.  For,  strangely,  the  sub-final  times  are 
not  by  any  means  times  of  faith  and  of  favour  for  the  Church,  but  of  persecution 
and  of  daring  blasphemy  against  "all  that  is  called  God  or  is  worshipped." 
Never  so  dark  a  night  for  the  Church  as  that  which  is  broken  in  upon  by  the 
sudden,  lightning- quick  (Matt.  xxiv.  27),  flashing,  blinding  glory  of  the  Dawn  of 
His  Appearing  and  Presence.  Sorrow  upon  sorrow  until  that  moment.  The 
few  faithful  ones  can  hardly  hold  their  footing  amidst  the  rushing  flood  of 
persecution  and  unbelief  and  distress.  But  in  a  moment,  more  welcome  than 
Titus  to  the  strained  heart  of  Paul,  He  comes,  and  "  God,  -who  comforteth  them 
that  are  cast  down,"  shall  give  "  rest^  The  crisis  is  then  for  ever  past ;  the  tension 
is  eternally  removed;  the  ^'■fightings"  cease;  the  ^'' fears"  are  swallowed  up  in 
"  exceeding  joy."  And  may  a  loving  fancy  venture  to  carry  the  parallel  so  far  as 
to  sketch  out  moments  of  happy,  privileged  intercourse,  which  shall  repeat  the 
joy  which  Paul  caught  from  Titus'  face  so  full  of  comfort?  Any  hours  of 
converse,  when  the  face  of  the  servants  shall  light  up  with  new  comfort,  as  they 
hear  and  see  the  Master's  own  complacent  satisfaction  in  the  remembrance  of 
the  welcome  given  Him,  by  the  few  faithful  ones  who  were  waiting  for  Him 
amidst  a  world  of  unfaithful  or  revolted  ones  ?  This,  however,  is  for  the  reverently 
imaginative  heart,  rather  than  for  the  preacher. 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  8—12. 

The  Purification  of  a  Church. — This  is  accomplished — 

I.  By  Paul's  disciplinary  action. 
II.  By  a  thorough  Church  repentance. 

I.  1.  It  was  the  sharp,  stinging  stimulam^t,  applied  not  from  any  love  of  giving 
pain,  but  to  arouse  the  sluggish  Church  life  and  Church  conscience  into  healthier 
activity.  Which  is  exactly  the  purpose  of  all  the  chastening  of  God.  All  pain 
which  He  now  sends  is  disciplinary,  and,  if  it  may  be,  reformatory.  By-and-by 
pain  shall  be — not  vindictive,  but—calm,  righteous,  simple  execution  of  penalty 
and  sentence,  upon  persistent,  impenitent  violators  of  law.  Paul's  action  had  in 
it  the  parental  pain  of  giving  pain  to  those  who,  even  in  their  wrong-doing,  are 
beloved  (ver.  8).  Touchingly  natural  is  this  confession  of  Paul  that,  after  his 
letter  had  been  despatched  he  could  have  wished  he  had  not  despatched  it.    Like 

/)35 


Chap.  vii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  CORINTHIANS. 


the  heart  of  God  [wo  might  say  that  Paul's  writing,  its  motive,  its  result,  were,  like 
the  Corinthian  sorrow,  '*  after  the  mind  of  God  "  (Kara  ®€.6v)\<,  in  its  measure 
did  his  heart  yearn  over  Corinth.  If  less  of  pain,  if  words  less  severe,  might 
have  served  the  purpose,  how  gladly  would  he  have  taken  the  tenderer  course, 
and  abated  his  paternal  sharpness!  [*'God  loved  the  world"  (John  iii.  16); 
where  it  should  be  remembered  how  *'  the  world  "  has  always  an  ethical  colouring 
in  John's  writings.  It  is  not  merely  the  human  race  in  its  entirety  which  God  is 
said  to  have  loved,  but  the  "worldly"  world,  as  John  and  Paul  have  taught 
us  to  speak.  In  its  worldliness,  and  in  its  antagonism  to  God,  He  never- 
theless "  loved"  it.]  Paul  loved  Corinth,  even  when  he  was  threatening  "a  rod," 
and  the  exercise  of  his  powers  of  miraculous  punishment.  2.  When  PauVs 
letter  had  served  its  immediate  turn,  its  usefulness  was  not  exhausted.  Hear  what 
Paul  saith  to  Corinth ;  hear  what  Christ  saith  to  Ephesus  and  the  rest ',  and,  in 
all  this,  "  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  Churches  "  (Rev.  ii.,  iii.).  The  written 
Word  is  the  admonitory,  didactic,  comforting,  stimulant,  disciplinary  letter  to 
the  larger  Church,  of  every  land  and  of  all  time.  3.  A  conjoint  motive  appears. 
'•^  Not  for  his  cause"  etc.  It  seems  narrower,  personal;  but  it  is  not  an 
unworthy  one.  The  letter  would  make  it  ^^  appear"  clearly,  even  to  the  most 
perverse  and  factious  Corinthian  who  said,  **  I  am  of  Cephas,"  that  although  Paul 
had  been  a  long  time  away  from  them,  his  heart  was  unchanged,  his  interest  in 
them  had  not  diminished,  his  "  care  for  them  "  was  still  real,  and  was  felt  as  a 
real  burden  of  obligation  lying  upon  him.  For  he  bore  the  obligation  to  care 
for  them  as  *'  in  the  sight  of  God."  Whether  they  gave  it  recognition  or  not, 
God  did.  Yet  he  was  not  above  desiring  that  it  should  be  recognised  by  them 
also.  Why  not  ?  It  would  be  happier  for  his  own  sake  if  he  thought  that  they 
understood  his  disciplinary  sternness.  And  the  letter  would  have  a  greater  chance 
of  accomplishing  its  object,  if  it  were  seen  to  come  from  a  heart  which  cared  for 
them  even  in  the  fact  of  writing  it.  [Even  the  most  narrowly  restrictive 
commands  of  God  are  "  for  our  good  alway  "  (Deut.  vi.  24).  They  are  proofs  of 
His  "  care  for  us."]  Had  he  no  thought  for  the  wrong-doer  as  well  as  for  the  suffering 
father-in-law  ?  Yes ;  but  an  act  is  never  in  man  [it  is  in  an  animal,  or  in  a 
child  hardly  come  to  a  stage  beyond  that  of  mere  impulse]  the  result  of  one 
single,  direct,  uncombined  motive ;  it  is,  speaking  in  mathematical  phrase,  the 
resultant  of  many  motives.  It  is,  further,  in  the  inscrutable  mystery  of  the 
co-working  of  the  two  free  volitions,  the  human  and  the  Divine,  always  full  of 
the  purpose  and  will  of  God.  Sometimes  the  one  motive  may,  with  perfect 
truth,  be  so  insisted  upon,  that  for  the  time  it  eclipses  or  casts  out  any  other ; 
or  the  Divinely  secured  result  may  be  so  fully  in  view,  that  the  human  motive 
and  purpose  may  sink  out  of  sight  in  comparison.  4.  *'  Corporations  have  no 
conscience  ; "  so  it  is  said,  in  half  pleasantry.  But  the  Church  corporate  has, 
and  a  responsibility,  and  it  may  have  a  corporate  sin  in  that  it  tolerates  sin  in  its 
midst,  and  may  fall  into  a  corporate  indifference  on  all  moral  questions.  The 
letter  of  Paul,  the  written  Word  of  God,  stands  out  an  objective  standard  of 
unalterable  force,  an  abiding  rebuke  or  an  awakening  cry,  and  an  abiding  witness 
to  the  care  which  cannot  simply  or  indifferently  look  on  while  good  is  slackening 
in  its  hatred  toward  evil,  or  is  itself  becoming  corrupted.  The  sharp  surgery  of 
the  excising-knife  which  cuts  off  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  is  God's  care  for  His 
Church,  that  it  should  be  holy,  and  should  share  and  keep  His  own  sensitiveness 
to  sin. 

II.  A  Church  repentance — the  discipliTiary  action  of  a  Church  upon  itself, 
— 1.  A  very  healthy  and  successful  issue.  The  physician  succeeds  best  when  he 
can  awaken  or  stimulate  the  recuperative  force  of  the  body.  That  Church  life  is 
healthiest  which  "  cleanses  itself  from  all  flthiness "  that  may  have  gathered 
around  its  corporate  life,  and  which  indeed  cannot  bear  persons  or  things  that 

536 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  vii. 


are  evil  (Rev.  ii.  2).  The  true  discipline  of  the  Church  is  that  which  grows  out 
of  and  expresses  the  revolt  of  the  Church  conscience  against  evil.  [The  analogy 
between  this  and  personal  holiness  is  obvious  and  close.  The  healthiest  holiness 
is  the  expression  of  a  healthy  moral  life ;  personal  holiness  also  may  need  the 
stimulus  or  the  rebuke  from  the  outside.]  No  discipline  will  long  survive  the 
weakening  or  decay  of  this.  Discipline,  like  any  other  legislation,  cannot  be 
carried  out  far  in  advance  of  public  opinion.  The  officials  of  a  Church  are  but 
the  pre-eminent  exponents  of  its  life.  They  lead  the  Church,  indeed,  or  should 
lead  it ;  but  they  are  of  it,  and  their  disciplinary  zeal  will  never  far  outrun  the 
disciplinary  life  of  the  whole  Church.  The  responsibility  lies,  then,  upon  each 
single  member  of  a  Church,  to  be  himself  so  spiritual,  and  to  keep  himself  in  such 
a  holy  sensitiveness  to  sin,  that  his  contribution  to  the  collective  moral  standard 
is  of  the  very  highest.  Corporate  holiness  is  co-operative  personal  holiness.  Each 
member  is  thus  the  guardian  of  the  purity  of  the  whole.  That  body  is  safest  in 
the  presence  of  infection,  of  which  each  component  unit  is  in  fulness  of  vigour 
and  health.  Paul's  Epistle  is,  under  God,  a  sharp  tonic  which,  happily,  arouses 
*'  carefulness  "  in  this  Corinthian  Christian  body.  2.  The  details  of  the  various 
phrases  used  hy  Paul  are  given  in  the  Critical  Notes,  above.  The  interpretation  of 
some,  as  may  be  seen,  is  variously  given  by  different  readers  of  the  Epistle.  But 
the  general  drift  is  clear,  and  follows  closely  the  lines  of  the  repentance  of  an 
individual  sinner.  There  is  the  same  awakening  of  "  earnest  care^^  where  there  has 
been  a  mortal  torpor,  or  indeed  a  criminal  indifference.  This  awakened  feeling 
is  translated  into  prompt  and  decisive  action,  instead  of  being  allowed  to  spend 
itself  in  mere  "  confessions,"  and  in  deprecations  of  Divine  wrath  ;  and,  above  all, 
the  sorrow  is  "  after  God^  There  is  *'  a  sorrow  of  the  worlds  The  shame  of 
sin  before  men  is  lamented  ;  the  sin  itself  before  God  is  eclipsed  by  the  shame  ; 
there  is  no  real  sense  of  sin.  The  consequences,  rather  than  the  evil  character, 
of  the  act,  are  the  only  matter  of  regret.  The  world's  sorrow  turns  away  from 
God  and  the  very  thought  of  Him,  and  may  easily  harden  either  into  a  more 
hopeless  indifference  than  before,  or  into  a  Judas-like  despair  ;  the  true,  "  godly  " 
affection  turns  the  soul,  with  contrition,  with  confession,  with  appeal,  with  hope, 
to  God.  3.  And  there  is  a  Church  "  salvation."  And  for  a  Church  as  for  the 
individual,  there  is  no  "  salvation  "  where  there  has  been  no  practical  repentance. 
Joshua  lay  prostrate,  in  his  grief  that  Israel  seemed  weak,  and  that  six-and- 
thirty  slain  men  of  Israel  lay  on  the  steep  path  down  from  the  gate  of  Ai. 
The  answer  of  Jehovah  came  with  startling  definiteness  :  "  Get  thee  up  ;  where- 
fore art  thou  fallen  upon  thy  face  ?  Israel  hath  sinned  "  (Josh.  vii.  10).  There 
are  times  when  it  is  of  no  use  to  go  on  confessing,  or  to  go  on  praying ;  when 
the  first  thing  is  to  go  and  seek  out  sin  and  to  cut  off  the  offender.  If  the 
Church  is  to  be  "  saved^^  then  the  self-acting  discipline  of  a  life  of  real,  intense, 
corporate  godliness  must  be  vigorously  at  work,  whether  under  the  stimulus  of  a 
Paul  or  not,  and  making  a  thorough  "  Church  repentance." 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 

Ver.  1 .  Promises^  Purity ,  Perfection,  will ;  put  away   the   sin  which  is   in 

I.  God's   requirement    in   order   to  plain  contradiction  to  His  nature. 
fellowship.  A.  1.  The  principle  of  this,  and  the 

II.  Our  encouragement  in  seeking  necessity  of  this,  are   seen   in  earthly 
to  fulfil  it.  friendships. — Two  cannot  walk  together 

I.  "  Cleanse     yourselves  ;     perfect  unless  they  be  so  far  agreed  that  each 

holiness." — Put   away  the  sins  which  abstains   from   what    he  knows     will 

are  in  plain    contradiction  to    God's  offend  the  other.     There  can   be    no 

537 


CUAP.  VII.   BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.  CORINTHIANS. 


association,  no  bond,  where  each  dis-  insist  upon  the  washing,  and  the 
regards  the  feelings  of  the  other,  and  clothing  in  decent  raiment ;  upon  the 
does  not  hesitate  to  offend  his  preju-  giving  up  of  the  old  associates,  the  slang, 
dices ;  and,  much  more,  if  his  practice  the  profanity,  the  pilfering.  Not  less 
traverse  some  of  the  principles  dearest  must  be  expected  of  God.  Decent 
to  his  convictions.  Indeed,  if  the  people  feel  such  a  child  vulgar,  dis- 
connection is  to  be  at  all  close  and  to  gusting ;  God  feels,  as  we  cannot  feel, 
be  lasting,  there  must  not  only  be  this  man's  sinful  condition  abhorrent.  To 
reciprocal  self-denial ;  there  will  also  feel  less  strongly,  to  abate  His  rigidity 
need  to  be  some  similarity  of  tastes,  of  requirement,  would  be  to  be  untrue 
opinions,  habits,   character.     The  two  to  Himself. 

friends  must  not  be  copies  of  each  3.  The  human  heart  was  designed  to 
other.  The  helpfulness  of  friendship  be  a  temple ;  but  it  cannot  be  a  temple 
lies  just  there,  that  each  contributes  of  two  Gods  jointly.  Certainly  no 
something  to  the  character  of  the  Christian  heart  can  be  like  the  private 
other.  Yet  there  must  be  so  much  in  Pantheon  of  Alexander  Severus,  a 
common  that  neither  shall  have  to  temple  of  all  the  gods,  including 
say,  "  I  cannot  make  a  friend  of  that  Christ.  From  the  first  moment  of 
man.  His  habits  and  tastes  and  whole  a  man's  seeking  Him,  and  throughout 
disposition  are  an  offence  to  me."  the  whole  course  of  his  Christian  life, 
2.  All  this  holds  as  between  men  and  God's  sins  qud  non  is,  **  All,  or  not 
God. — Sins  are  the  negative  of  His  at  all."  [The  need  of  all  this  very 
holy  law  ;  sin  is  the  negative  of  the  patent  in  Corinth.  A  city  exceedingly 
holiness  of  His  nature.  God  and  sin  profligate  in  a  profligate  world.  Old 
are  light  and  darkness.  To  hold  fast  habits  too  strong  for  many  young 
to  worldly  or  sinful  pleasures  or  converts.  Converts  they  were,  but  the 
associates,  and  to  hope  to  be  ranged  heathen  husband,  or  wife,  or  friend 
amongst  the  sons  and  daughters ;  to  often  led  them  astray.  Thoughtlessly 
hope  to  continue  the  prodigal  life  in  or  ignorantly  they  continued,  or  fell 
the  far  country,  or  even  to  remain  a  back  into,  old  habits  and  practices 
swineherd  and  to  eat  the  swinish  which  entangled  them,  and  compro- 
husks,  and  yet  to  hope  for  the  fulness  mised  great  principles  ;  some  were 
of  the  complacent  love  of  the  Father  indulging  in  gross  sin.  Between  them 
and  for  the  life  of  a  son  in  the  Father's  in  their  impurities  and  complicity  with 
home  ;  is  impossible  on  the  very  face  idolatry,  and  even  in  their  party  spirit, 
of  it.  "  The  friendship  of  the  world  is  and  the  holy  God,  there  could  plainly 
enmity  with  God "  (Jas.  iv.  4).  The  be  no  lasting,  perfect  communion.] 
words  came  indeed  from  that  apostle  The  average  world  of  the  member  of  a 
who  has  the  reputation  of  being  the  Christian  congregation  is  widely  re- 
sternest  moralist  of  them  all,  but  they  moved,  and  for  the  better,  from  that 
owe  nothing  to  the  presumed  character  of  a  Corinthian  convert ;  but  there  are 
of  him  who  writes  them  ;  they  simply  still  sins  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  spirit 
lift  up  into  the  higher,  the  spiritual,  to  be  renounced.  The  temptation  to 
region  what  men  feel  is  inevitable  in  idolatry  in  its  coarsest  forms  is  gone, 
all  human  friendships.  Everything  The  temptation  to  impurity  or  gluttony 
must  be  put  away  which  has  about  or  drunkenness  may  be  slight  in  power 
it  even  the  suspicion  of  sin.  "  Cleanse  or  rare  in  occurrence,  with  the  members 
yourselves."  As  he  is,  the  gutter  child  of  an  average  congregation.  Yet 
would  never  be  taken,  to  put  him  there  is  vanity  in  personal  advantages, 
at  the  table,  amongst  the  children.  whether  original  or  acquired  ;  there  is 
With  all  their  pity  for  his  rags  and  the  widely  inclusive  group  of  sins 
misery,  there  is  not  a  father  or  mother  called  in  the  old  Evangelical  dialect 
who  would  not  shrink  from  his  dirt  "softness  and  needless  self-indulgence "  ; 
and  rags  and  depravity.      They  would  there   are    sins    of    eye   and    tongue. 

538 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   It  CORINTHIANS,   chap.  vil. 


There  is  the  heart's  idolatrous  love  of 
the  creature — wife,  or  child,  or  friend 
— more  than  the  Creator  ;  there  is  the 
worship  of  man's  favour  rather  than 
Grod's.  Covetousness  is  a  sin  far  more 
seriously  estimated  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment— in  the  judgment  of  God — 
than  in  the  customary  estimate  of  even 
Christian  judgment ;  it  is  utterly 
unlike  that  God  Who  is  always  giving. 
Who  spared  not  His  costliest,  His  very 
Only-begotten,  for  those  who  could 
give  Him  in  return  nothing  which  was 
not  fii-st  His  gift.  There  is  pride,  of 
all  sins  the  most  of  the  very  nature 
of  the  devil ;  and  anger ;  and  un- 
charitableness  ;  and  indolence, — all 
"  sins  of  the  spirit "  alone.  These 
things,  and  the  like,  are  defilements  of 
the  temple.  If  the  heart  be  unwilling 
that  these  should  be  cleansed  away, 
then  the  Holy  God  cannot  con- 
sent to  enter.  If  His  house  has  once 
been  "  emptied,  swept,  and  garnished/' 
but  these  things  are  again  being 
suffered,  or  perhaps  encouraged,  to 
accumulate.  He  cannot  long  remain, 
or  fulfil  such  promises  as  are  here. 

4.  "  Cleanse  yourselves !  "  —  "  ] 
cannot."  True,  and  not  true.  No 
native  power  is  in  any  man,  to  put 
away  sin  ;  but  in  all  men  is  something  of 
grace,  to  work  along  with,  and  to  work 
upon.  Is  the  will  by  grace  set  upon 
the  cleansing  ?  Then  the  words  mean  : 
"  Use  the  appointed  means  of  cleans- 
ing ;  the  fountain  is  open  for  sin  and  for 
uncleanness."  If  the  man  lying  help- 
less by  the  side  of  the  pool,  desires  to 
plunge  in  and  be  healed,  then  he  has 
a  gracious  Helper  near  at  hand  to 
enable  him.  If  God  has  awakened  the 
will,  He  enables  that  will.  He  lays 
commands  upon  dead  souls,  and  bids 
them  "  Arise,"  and  "  Come  forth  "  ; 
and  with  the  word  there  goes  life  to 
obey.  He  must  give,  and  does  give, 
the  will  and  the  means  to  cleanse ; 
His  grace  is  in  the  resolving,  and 
praying,  and  struggling,  and  lifelong 
^  watchfulness,  and  self-denial,  and  self- 
discipline.  But  a  responsibility  for  all 
these  is  still  upon  men  themselves. 
**  Cleanse  yourselves r 


B.  This  is  only  the  negative  require- 
ment. There  is  a  positive  one.  *'  Per- 
fecting holiness J^ — 1.  The  gutter  child 
not  only  consents  to,  and  assists  in, 
the  stripping  off  of  the  old  clothes, 
and  the  laying  aside  of  the  old  street 
habits  and  talk  and  play  and  friend- 
ships, if  he  is  to  be  adopted  even  into 
the  service  of  the  kitchen,  and  much 
more  into  the  sonship  of  the  drawing- 
room,  but  more  is  required  of  him. 
If  he  is  to  be  a  friend  or  a  son,  if  there 
is  to  be  any  real  communion  between 
him  and  his  adoptive  parents,  then 
day  after  day  he  must  cultivate  his 
mind,  at  least  up  to  their  standard; 
he  must  submit  to,  and  co-operate  in, 
a  training  of  manners  and  habits ;  he 
must  study  the  ways  of  those  about 
him,  until  he  loses  all  the  low,  mean 
mind  of  the  street  Arab,  and  becomes 
so  thoroughly  one  of  the  new  circle, 
that  his  very  instincts  are  theirs.  He 
must  aim  at  copying  the  very  mind 
of  those  who  have  made  him  their  son. 

2.  Paul  brings  out  man's  part  in  the 
sanctification  of  life.  In  the  progress 
of  a  Christian  man's  sanctification  are 
two  closely  related,  but  perfectly  dis- 
tinct, elements — the  creation  of  holiness, 
and  the  cultivation  of  holiness.  The  first 
God  alone  can  effect ;  in  the  second  man 
works  together  with  God  [though  never 
without  Him]  under  His  guidance  and 
relying  on  His  help.  The  plant  is  not 
created  full-grown.  God  never  creates 
at  a  stroke  the  result  of  growth  of 
character.  He  creates  the  seed  in 
nature  ;  He  puts  into  it  the  inscrutably 
mysterious  thing.  Life.  He  creates 
what  man  must  cultivate.  Man  must 
clear  away  weeds  and  give  full  play 
to  all  the  genial  influences  of  air  and 
sun  and  rain  upon  the  soil ;  man  must 
guard  the  growing  seed  from  injury, 
and  must  feed  the  plant,  till  it  expand 
into  full  beauty  of  flower  and  fruit. 
The  work  of  moral  renewal  is  all 
wrought  on  the  lines  of  the  ordinary, 
natural  laws  of  mind.  To  shed 
abroad  in  our  hearts  a  sense  of  His 
love  to  us  (Rom.  v.  5)  is  directly  and 
alone  His.  It  is  in  accordance  with 
the  most  ordinary  and  natural  "  law  " 

539 


CHAP.  VII.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS. 


that  this  should  call  forth  in  us  an 
answering  love  to  Himself  (1  John 
iv.  19).  Only  He  can  create  the 
sense  of  His  love  to  us.  But  the 
answering  love  which  "naturally" 
springs  up  within  us,  is  the  seed-motive, 
and  the  seed-power,  out  of  which  may 
grow  all  the  many-sided  holiness  of 
principle  and  of  practice.  It  is  man's 
business,  then,  to  tend  and  cultivate 
this  new  and  precious  germ.  He  must 
pray  for  "  the  fruitful  rain  from 
heaven " ;  he  must  cleanse  away  all 
the  choking  weeds  of  habit  or  practice 
which,  as  matter  of  experiment  or 
observation  or  instruction,  he  learns, 
do  actually  hinder  the  growth  of  this 
germ-like  love,  and  help  to  keep  his 
holiness  a  dwarfed  and  stunted  thing. 
He  must  do  his  part  to  get  a  ^^  per- 
fected^^ plant. 

3.  God's  creation  of  love,  and  of  per- 
fected love,  may  he  the  work  of  a  moment. 
— The  gracious  communication  of  the 
fact  of  His  own,  and  man's  answering, 
grateful,  love,  may  be  a  graciously 
*'  short  work,"  in  most  perfect  accord 
with  the  normal  working  of  mind  and 
heart.  Man^s  cultivation  of  this  love 
and  its  fruit  will  fill  a  lifetime.  One 
of  the  earliest  and  most  bitter  lessons 
of  a  soul,  full  of  its  *'  first  love  "  and 
striving  to  live  like  Christ  the  pattern, 
is  to  find  that  it  is  full  of  things  which 
hinder  the  attainment  of  even  its  own 
standard  of  a  holy  life.  The  painter 
tries  to  copy  the  Face  he  loves,  but 
at  first  has  not  the  perfect  mastery  of 
brush  and  materials  and  technique,  and 
he  cannot  embody  upon  the  canvas 
what  in  his  awakened  artist  mind  he 
sees  clearly  enough.  And  when  by- 
and-by  artistic  skill  is  perfected,  and  he 
can  at  once  put  upon  the  canvas  all  he 
sees,  he  will  not  stop  there.  No ;  his 
perception  will  grow  finer ;  every  day 
he  will  see  more  to  see ;  he  will  find 
more  in  his  Face — more  beauty,  new 
lines  of  character ;  there  is  no  reason 
why  he  should  not  go  on  growing 
artistically,  and  go  on  ^^  perfecting " 
incessantly  the  transcript  of  what  he 
understands  with  ever  more  "  perfect " 
insight,  and    with  ever    ^^ perfecting " 

540 


skill  can  fix  in  permanent  record.  So 
there  are  many  "  perfect "  stages  in  this 
"  perfecting  "  of  holiness ;  there  is  no 
Tie  plus  ultra  stage  of  ^^ perfection." 
When  full  consecration  on  man's  part 
has  been  met  by  full  acceptance  on 
God's  part,  and  "  a  perfected  love  "  has 
been  given  and  awakened  which  "  casts 
out  fear"  and  the  very  principle  of 
sin  (1  John  iv.  18),  the  work  is  not  by 
any  means  done.  The  man  has  got 
rid  of  all  within  that  hindered  the 
copying  of  the  Divine  Pattern ;  the 
power  is  coming,  has  come,  to  put  into 
life  all  he  sees  in  his  Bible  and  his 
Christ.  But  every  day  will  still  have 
its  external  hindrances ;  every  day, 
moreover,  will  bring  new  insight  into 
duty,  new  sensibility  of  conscience  to 
sin,  new  views  of  God's  will.  And  all 
these  new  discoveries  must  be  put  in ; 
^^ perfecting "  in  the  practical  living 
what  in  germ  God  ^^ perfected"  in  prin- 
ciple in  the  heart.  It  is  one  stage  of 
"  perfection  "  when  the  plant  no  longer 
grows  a  dwarfed  and  stunted  thing, 
but  healthy,  symmetrical,  beautiful, 
not  a  thwarted  growth  about  it.  There 
is  still  open  an  ever  perfecting  perfec- 
tion year  after  year,  of  larger  growth 
and  more  abundant  f ruitf  ulness ;  "  your 
fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  ever- 
lasting life"  (Rom.  vi.  22).  The 
adopted  gutter  lad's  new  life  will  from 
the  first  spring  out  of  his  abounding 
grateful  love  to  his  new  parent.  So 
long  as  the  old  life  has  any  charm  for 
him,  it  will  be  hard  work  to  bring  him- 
self to  the  new,  though  the  love  of  his 
benefactor  will  be  a  perpetually  opera- 
tive force  and  assistance.  Yet,  when 
the  love  of  the  old  life  is  gone,  the 
work  is  not  done ;  the  training  and  the 
educating  may  go  on  without  end, 
though  more  easily  than  before.  The 
''^perfecting  "  is  never  done. 

4.  Hence  learn  what  in  this  business 
is  the  place  of  :  "  In  the  fea/r  of  the 
Lord."  It  would  be  a  long  time  before 
the  lad  would  feel  the  confident  security 
of  a  bom  son ;  for  a  long  time  he  would 
always  remember  his  true  origin,  and 
the  wide  interval  that  once  was  between 
his  new  parents  and  himself.     He  is  in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  vii. 


their  home  by  mere  favour ;  unworthy  to  any  inaccessible  height  if  He  calls 

conduct   or    disobedience    might   in   a  at  all.   Long  fight  ?   Wearisome  climb  ? 

moment  justly  forfeit  all.    His  sense  of  Perhaps ;  but  He  does  not  simply  sit  on 

obligation  would  be  a  strong  motive  to  high   and   watch  :  "  Come  on,   higher 

obedience  ;  and  it  might  be  an  almost  yet ;  I  will  receive  you  ! "     No ;  but  at 

tremulous  sense.     The  remembrance  of  every  point 

the  true  footing  on  which  he  stands  in  4.  He  gives  help  in  obeying y  in  climb- 

the  house,  would  be  a  check  upon  pre-  ing,  in  cleansing  ourselves ^  in  perfecting 

sumption  and  carelessness  in  fulfilling  holiness. — [Prodigal     lad    in  America 

the  wish  of  the  benefactors  to  whom  not    only    hears   from   his    father   in 

he  owes  so  much.     The  little  parable  England,    "  I   will  receive   you ;  come 

needs  no  explanation.   It  is  the '*  reve-  home,"     but     the    father    sends     the 

rence  and  godly  fear  "  with  which  His  passage  money,  that  he  may  respond 

people  "  serve  God  acceptably  "  (Heb.  to  the  invitation.] 
xii.  28).     It  is  the  fear  in  which  they 

^^  perfect  their  holiness.^'  There  is  no  Ver.  10.  Sorrow,  Repentance,  Salva- 
such  reverent  love  as  ''  perfect  love."  tion. — A  quite  general  maxim,  inter- 
II.  Encouragements. — If  the  fear  is  jected  into,  growing  out  of,  a  special 
to  be  the  guard,  and  even  upon  occasion  discussion.  One  of  the  standing  for- 
the  spur,  the  promises  are  to  be  a  lure,  mulce  of  the  philosophy  of  religion. 
Paul  does  not  so  much  feel,  "  If  we  do  I.  Closely  connected,  but  not  by 
not  cleanse  ourselves,  we  shall  have  any  means  identical. — Very  vital  and 
no  fellowship  here  or  hereafter,"  as,  of  practical  necessity  to  keep  them 
"  Here  is  an  honour  for  sinners.  Our  distinct.  Deeply  stiiTod  feeling  is  by 
heart  should  leap  at  the  very  thought  no  means  always  part  of,  or  a  pro- 
of being  Sons  and  Temples  of  the  living  liminary  to,  repentance,  though  true 
God."  repentance   always    begins   in    ^^  godly 

1.  In  order  to  claim  such  promises. —  sorrow."  Even  "  ^oc?^?/ sorrow  "  is  not 
We  cannot  claim  them  without  seeking  "  salvation."  [There  has  always  been 
to  cleanse  ourselves.  preached  in  the  Christian  Church  an 

2.  Stimulated  by  such  honour. — We  "  only  believe "  pattern  of  Gospel, 
cannot,  like  Esther,  win  any  love  or  Very  popular  often,  and  often  very 
favour  by  putting  on  any  finest  ap-  useful.  It  cannot  be,  therefore,  wholly 
parel  of  our  own.  But  at  least  we  a  false  Gospel.  But  it  is  an  imperfect 
should  seek  to  retain  favour  by  putting  one.  It  is  the  exaggeration,  the  un- 
on  the  "  best  robe "  our  Father  has  balanced  presentation,  of  a  truth.  It 
given  us.  [Cf .  1  John  iii.  3  ;  though  is  right,  and  has  its  strength,  here, 
this  strictly  is  in  view  of  the  Coming  The  passage  from  condemnation  to 
of  Christ.]  glory  is  through  repentance  to  faith, 

3.  Staying  our  hearts  on  such  pro-  and  from  faith,  through  all  holiness  of 
mises. — "  We  can,  then,  be  clean  ;  we  heart  and  life,  to  heaven.  Faith  which 
can,  then,  perfect  holiness  in  His  fear."  saves,  thus  stands  guarded  on  the  one 
It  is  hard  to  think  it,  if  men  look  at  hand  by  repentance,  and  on  the  other 
the  world's  sin,  environing  so  closely;  if  by  holiness.  There  is  no  saving  faith 
they  look  at  the  average  success,  or  where  there  has  been  no  sense  of  sin ; 
failure,  of  other  Christian  men ;  if  they  there  is  no  saving  faith  where  a  holy 
remember  how  inadequately  all  their  life  does  not  grow  out  of  "  believing." 
own  effort  and  vowing  and  praying  and  But  the  repentance  which  prepares  for 
determining  have  ended  in  the  past ;  faith  does  not  save.  The  holiness  which 
if  they  see  how  little  others,  even  the  is  the  fruit  of  faith  does  not  save, 
most  successful,  sometimes  hope  for.  The  penitent  man  is  saved  when  he 
They  despond  and  despair.  But  let  believes,  and  not  till  then.  The  holiest 
them  look  at  Him  and  listen  to  His  man  living  is  saved  as  a  sinner  believing 
promises.     He  does  not  bid  us  climb  in  Christ,  and  only  as  a  believer.     The 

541 


CHAP.  VII.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.  CORINTHIANS. 


real  penitent  may  be  cheered  by  "  Only  holding  on  in  an  evil  way,  and  only 
believe."  The  holiest  man  needs  cau-  gives  up  a  sin  as  a  captain  may  alter 
tioning,  "  Only  by  believing."  "  Only  his  course,  and  turn  his  vessel's  head 
believe "  is  no  message  for  the  man  from  a  prize  which  he  cannot  capture, 
who  feels  no  **  godly  sorrow  "  ;  nor  for  and  which  he  may  only  attack  or  con- 
the  careless,  or  inconsistent,  man  who  tinue  to  pursue,  to  his  own  damage  and 
calls  himself  a  Christian,  but  who  is  pei'haps  destruction.  2.  The  difference 
presuming  on  a  past  faith.  "Only  begins  here:  it  is  God-wrought,  Men 
believe "  is  no  medicine  to  be  dealt  take  up  some  specially  characterised 
out  indiscriminately  at  every  stage  of  piece  of  work,  and  say,  "  That  is  in  So- 
spiritual  sickness  or  spiritual  recovery,  and-so's  manner."  Or,  "  That  shows  the 
valuable  and  exactly  suitable  as  it  hand  of  a  master  workman."  Or,  "That 
is  at  a  particular  point.  Similarly,]  speaks  of  great  wealth  of  resource  and 
without  ever  being  formulated  into  a  invention."  So,  to  look  at  a  sample- 
distinct  and  express  type  of  theology  case  of  "  godly  sorrow,"  so  widely  differ- 
or  preaching,  there  is  an  "  only  repent "  enced  from  mere  sorrow  at  the  results 
Gospel.  The  natural  heart  always  of  sin — to  note  its  pattern  (so  to  speak), 
tends  to  find,  and  claim,  merit  in  any  its  depth  and  thoroughness  and  abun- 
right  doing  or  right  feeling.  It  seems  dant  measure — is  to  say,  "  That  shows 
natural  to  rest  and  to  hope  in  the  "godly  the  hand  of  God.  That  is  His  cha- 
sorrow."  But  it  is  "  unto  salvation"  racteristic  method  and  manner."  A 
and  only  "  unto."  It  works  towards  it.  frivolous  nature  made  serious ;  a  world- 
It  leads  a  man  towards  it.  It  need  ling  made  to  know  the  sin  of  mere 
not,  and  does  not  always,  lead  into  it.  worldliness ;  stolid  indifference  stirred 
It  may,  it  is  likely  to,  it  is  meant  to,  to  its  depths  with  shame  and  fear ; 
issue  in  his  salvation ;  but  that  is  all.  a  hardened  heart  suddenly  dissolving 
Examine  in  more  detail —  into  tears  of  uncontrollable  grief  ;  a 
II.  Godly  sorrow. — Literally  "sorrow  proud  man  openly  bowing  in  confession 
according  to  God";  in  contrast  with  that  he  is  " a  great  sinner";  the  high 
the  "  sorrow  of  the  world."  [Dean  walls  of  pride  of  self,  which  have  been 
Vaughan  suggested,  at  a  Greek  Testa-  the  despair  of  preacher  or  godly  friend, 
ment  lecture,  me  prcesente,  H.  J.  F.,]  falling  flat, — all  the  marvels  of  moral 
"God- wise,  God-wrought,  God-ward";  change,  all  the  variants  upon  the  one 
after  the  mind  of  God ;  after  the  theme,  "  Repentance,"  make  an  ob- 
manner  of  God ;  leading  towards  God.  server  say,  "  Only  God's  power  could 
1 .  God's  way  of  looking  at  sin,  at  have  done  that !  That  sorrow  is  after 
everything,  is  different  from  the  world's  God's  manner  of  working  ! "  Tell  a  man 
way ;  the  standard,  the  standpoint,  are  the  right.  Will  he  see  himself  wrong  ? 
different.  God  hates  sin  for  its  own  Not  at  all  of  necessity.  Conscience 
sake;  the  world  hates,  is  angry  at,  will  find  fifty  "refuges  of  lies"  [i.e. 
mourns  over,  its  consequences.  Accord-  refuges  which  are  lies,  and  delusions  to 
ingly  "  godly  " — "  godwise  " — "  sorrow  "  the  sinner  himself  (Isa.  xxviii.  15,  17)], 
sees  sin  with  God's  eyes,  measures  by  His  to  be  shelters  from  condemnation.  The 
standard,  learns  to  hate  with  His  heart ;  hard  heart  will  not  feel,  or  "  fires  up  "  at 
and  this,  even  though  sin  be  pleasant,  reproof.  The  subterfuges  of  conscience, 
or  pay  well,  or  be  trivial,  or  "  done  by  the  blindness  and  perversity  of  the 
everybody."  "  Godly  sorrow  "  makes  a  judgment,  defeat  the  human  rebuke, 
man  grieve  that  he  has  sinned;  the  world,  Suddenly  the  veil  is  torn  away  which 
that  sin  has  brought  suffering.  Even  hid  the  man  from  himself.  "  Secret 
the  abandonment  of  a  sin  is  on  different  faults,"  so  "  secret "  that  they  eluded 
lines  :  this  sorrow  "  according  to  "  God's  the  notice  even  of  the  man's  own  heart 
mind  and  heart  loathes  sin,  and  leaves  (Ps.  xix.  12),  are  set  in  the  condemning 
it  because  it  is  sin ;  the  sorrow  of  the  light  of  the  man's  own  awakened  judg- 
world   fears   hell   and  the  penalty  of  ment.     He  who  could  not  be  awakened 

542 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  vii. 


by  the  roughest  shake  or  the  loudest 
appeal,  now  is  awake  at  a  whisper ;  but 
it  is  a  whisper  of  the  voice  of  God's 
convincing  Spirit.  God  has  done  it ! 
"That  is  God  at  work!"  3.  All 
through,  then,  this  sorrow  is  God-ward. 
God  is  working  to  bring  the  soul  to 
Himself.  It  is  all  "God,  God,  God" 
now.  "I  have  broken  God^s  law;  I 
have  sinned  against  God's  love.  What 
man  thinks,  or  will  do,  is  nothing. 
What  will  God  think  1 "  And  the  pro- 
digal, who  has  "  come  to  himself,"  next 
returns  to  his  Father.  [See  this  pos- 
session of  the  mind  with  the  thought 
of  God  and  God's  holy  displeasure  in 
Ps.  li.  4  :  "  Against  Thee,  Thee  only, 
have  I  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in 
Thy  sight ! "  Had  he  not  sinned,  and 
that  grievously,  against  the  poor  mur- 
dered Uriah  ?  Or  against  Bathsheba 
herself?  For  what  greater  sin  can 
man  do  against  man  than  to  tempt 
him  to  sin,  and  lead  him  into  its  com- 
mittal? Or  against  his  people?  For 
it  is  a  grave  sin  against  the  well-being 
of  a  nation  when  its  very  rulers  do 
evil,  with  all  the  teaching  power  of 
their  position  and  its  great  influence. 
Yes.  But  the  godly  sorrow  has  brought 
David  into  God's  presence  (ver.  11),  to 
God's  feet.  He  sees  God,  and  hears. 
He  is  face  to  face  with  God.  Man 
sinks  back,  is  excluded,  forgotten. 
Bathsheba,  Uriah,  Israel, — these  are 
lost  sight  of.  God  fills  all  the  field  of 
vision,  and  of  David's  thought  and  fear. 
What  man  thinks, — that  is  nothing. 
What  will  God  do  ?  His  sin  has  shut 
him  up  in  a  terrible  isolation,  a  guilty 
soul  alone  with  God.  *'  Thee  only  ! " 
God- ward  sorrow.]  He  returns  in  some 
degree  of  hope.  The  *'  sorrow  of  the 
world"  is  oftener  "despair."  [We 
ma}'-  add  to  Vaughan's  analysis  of  the 
phrase]  4.  Intensified  by  the  worthier 
appreciation  of  God's  holiness  and 
patience  and  love.  Measured  hy  these 
standards,  sin  is  exceeding  sinful. 
On  the  background  of  these  it  shows 
out  the  more  staringly,  glaringly  evil. 
"  Against  Thee  !  "  means  against  such 
love  as  David  had  received  from 
Jehovah.     But  especially  does  (3)  ap- 


prove the  sorrow  the  genuine  work  of 
the  Spirit  of  God.  It  moves  God-ward 
in  an  active  "  repentance.'*  A  real 
repentance  is  always  "  repentance  to- 
wards God"  (Acts  xxi.  21),  just  as 
conversion  is  "  turning  to  God  "  (Acts 
xxvi.  20).  ["  Fruits  meet  for  repent- 
ance;" "  fruit  worthy  of  repentance" 
(R.V.  reading).  Matt  iii.  8.] 

III.  Repentance  growing  out  of 
this. — [This  is  not  formally  theological 
language.  In  the  accustomed  and 
necessary  definitions  of  systematic 
theology,  "  Repentance "  includes  the 
"  godly  sorrow  "  in  the  ground  it  covers. 
But  they  may  be  distinguished.]  The 
tree  may  be  distinguished  from  the 
root ;  the  root  may  be  reckoned  part 
of  the  tree.  Paul's  words  only  distin- 
guish between  what  the  penitent  feels 
and  what  he  does.  The  godly  sorrow 
is  first  indeed  to  awaken,  but  it  runs 
on  side  by  side  with  the  doing,  until 
it  is  swept  away  in  the  "  joy  of  God's 
salvation  "  (Ps.  li.  12).  The  deeper  the 
sorrow  the  more  active  the  doing  and 
the  undoing.  The  exposition  by  Paul 
of  his  own  term,  given  in  ver.  11,  is 
the  pattern  of  a  corporate,  a  Church, 
"  repentance."  But  the  repentance  of 
a  Church  is  traced  on  the  same  lines  as 
the  repentance  of  a  soul.  All  feeling, 
unless  it  is  translated,  and  that  quickly, 
into  action,  evaporates,  leaving  the 
heart  less  susceptible,  less  easily  aroused, 
than  before.  The  new  attitude  of 
thought  and  view  and  feeling  towards 
sin  wants  making  permanent,  wants 
making  the  concrete  habit  of  the  life. 
When  godly  sorrow  goes  no  further 
than  itself,  and  is  not  crowned  by  the 
salvation  which  is  the  designed  goal, 
it  will  frequently  be  found  that  it  has 
been  arrested  in  its  growth,  and  has 
never  been  suffered  to  take  shape  in 
the  activities  which  Paul  here  groups 
under  the  word  "  Repentance."  Peni- 
tent souls  sometimes  lose  their  godly 
sorrow,  because  they  will  not  put  away 
friend,  or  pleasure,  or  practice  in  busi- 
ness, which  they  see  to  be  evil.  The 
penitent,  indeed,  has  not  learned  to 
triumph  over  heart  sin  (Rom.  vii. 
14-24) ;   that  victory   belongs  to   the 

543 


CHAP.  VII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  CORINTHIANS, 


man  who  has  found  salvation.  But 
many  a  soul  loses  even  the  godly- 
sorrow,  because  it  will  not  *■'' dear" 
itself  from  this  friendship ;  or  it  listens 
to  a  plea  for  keeping  that  sin  ;  sparing, 
instead  of  "  revenging  upon,"  itself ; 
and,  indeed,  turning  away  from  the 
light  of  the  leading  Spirit,  from  an 
uncomfortable  misgiving  that  the  road 
to  which  He  invites,  would  lead  to 
some  very  little  welcome  conclusions 
in  the  direction  of  putting  away  sin. 
"  Not  measure  penitence  by  tears,  but 
by  grief.  Grief  not  by  sensitive  trouble, 
but  by  hatred  and  avoidance  of  sin." 

IV.  All  this  is  only  "  preparing  the 
way  of  the  Lord. — Note  the  two 
sequences :  "  So7tow  to  repentance " 
(ver.  9) ;  *'  repentance  to  salvation  " 
(ver.  10).  It  issued  in  a  corporate, 
Church  salvation,  at  Corinth.  But 
the  formula  is  general.  One  gracious 
operation  in  the  purpose  and  working 
of  God,  who  loves  to  finish  His  work. 
[On  all  these  topics  we  are  at  the  very 
heart  of  the  whole  business  of  the 
Gospel  and  of  Redemption.  The  minute 
study  of  this  Divine  directory  of  the 
practice  of  soul-healing,  and  the  minute 
study  of  the  ever-varying  phases  of  the 
one  spiritual  process  in  the  ten  thousand 
"  cases  "  which  come  under  the  notice 
of  the  spiritual  physicians,  have  com- 
pelled an  analysis  of  the  "  plan  of  salva- 
tion "  which,  when  exhibited  in  a  bare, 
tabulated  set  of  results  and  doctrines, 
is  to  many  moods  and  minds  very 
repellent.      But   the  urgency   of    the 


proved  necessity  has  compelled  an 
exact  analysis  of  the  relation  between 
repentance  and  faith,  and  between  both 
and  salvation.  Paul's  formula  is  not, 
nor  is  intended  to  be,  complete ;  he  does 
not  interject  faith  between  repentance 
and  salvation.  [As  in  Acts  xvi.  31,  he 
said  nothing  about  **  repentance."]  His 
analysis  of  the  process  is  the  dissection 
of  the  "  living  subject  "  before  him  in 
Corinth.  The  theologian  is  too  often 
practising  his  dissection  upon  (what  to 
him  are)  dead  dicta  of  a  Bible  page. 
Indeed,  a  living  thing  is  apt  to  die 
under  the  dissecting  process.  But  the 
whole,  co-ordinated  teaching  of  the  New 
Testament  agrees  with,  and  gives  light 
to,  and  receives  Ught  from,  the  ex- 
perience derived  from  an  infinite  variety 
of  co-ordinated  and  closely  studied 
facts,  to  make  it  clear  that  repentance 
only  brings  a  soul  to  the  threshold  of  the 
city  of  refuge,  within  which  is  ''  salva- 
tion." The  one  step  which  definitely 
takes  a  sinner  over  the  threshold  and 
into  safety  is  the  act  of  faith  ;  of  peni- 
tent faith  always,  that  lays  hold  of 
Christ.  The  whole  penitent  heart  is 
in  the  faith  that  saves.  Without,  in 
some  sense,  a  faith  that  hopes  for  the 
mercy  of  God,  repentance  is  despair, 
and  may  be  a  foretaste  of  hell  itself. 
A  degree  of  faith  in  God  goes  hand 
in  hand  with  godly  sorrow.  But  the 
faith  that  exactly  and  precisely  saves, 
is  that  which  lays  an  appropriating, 
desperately  clinging  hand  on  Christ.] 


EOMILETIG  SUGGESTIONS, 


Ver.  10.  Profitable  and  Unprofitable 
Sorrow. — 1.  Paul  suggests  that  not  only 
had  this  Church  sorrow  done  them  no 
harm,  but  it  had  done  them  a  service; 
he  had  done  them  a  service  in  causing 
it  (ver.  9).  Sorrow  is  worth  nothing 
in  itself.  Its  value  and  its  moral 
character  are  fixed  by  (1)  the  origin, 
and  (2)  by  the  issue  of  it.  If  God- 
wrought,  and  sanctified  into  a  pre- 
liminary of  salvation,  it  has  been 
profitable. 

2.  The  worldJs  unprofitable  sorrow. — 

544 


(1)  It  plays  only  on  the  surface  of  the 
matter.  It  only  understands  crime. 
Its  balances  are  not  sensitive  enough, 
the  reagents  of  its  spiritual  chemistry 
are  not  efficient  enough,  to  detect  and 
appraise  sin.  (2)  Its  thought  mounts 
no  higher  than  man.  Shame,  vexation, 
mortification,  annoyance  at  discovery, 
are  often  the  world's  "repentance."  It 
tends  to  make  a  man  careful  only  to 
guard  against  being  betrayed  into  such 
sins  as  are  liable  to  be  found  out. 
Hence  its  standard  of  judgment  is  my 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  vii. 


personal  convenience,  or  social  conven- 
tion. ["  Bad  form  "  is  the  unpardon- 
able sin.] 

3.  The  sorrow  that  is  after  God. — (1) 
Sin^  as  sin,  is  the  trouble.  See  how  in 
the  night  of  Jacob's  wrestling,  as  the 
struggle  proceeds,  Esau  is  lost  sight  of, 
and  the  one  prayer  is,  *^  Tell  me  Thy 
Name."  The  day  breaking  brings  the 
danger ;  no  matter,  "  Let  the  day 
break,  let  Esau  come,  let  him  slay,  let 
him  take  all,  I  will  not  let  Thee  go 
unless,"  etc.  (2)  It  measures  by  God's 
standard,  and  scourges  for  what  was 
not  condemned  at  the  time,  or  was  only 
noted  to  be  defended  and  applauded, 
but  which  now  starts  up,  "  Sin  !  "  It 
is  as  grieved  about  secret,  heart  sins, 
as  about  overt  acts,  which  nevertheless 
man  might  not  know,  or  condemn  if 
he  did  know.  (3)  It  always  leads  to 
the  putting  away  of  sin.  The  people 
cried,  ^' Jehovah^  He  is  the  God  !"  "  Then 
take  the  prophets  of  Baal ;  let  not  one 
escape!^  The  soul  whose  repentance  is 
to  lead  to  salvation,  must  slay  every 
prophet  of  the  Baal-sin  which  has 
ousted  Jehovah  from  His  place  in  heart 
and  life.  Many  a  soul's  godly  sorrow 
evaporates,  because  the  heart  could  not 


put   away   some   one   last   thing,  and 
simply  turn  to  God. 

4.  Repentance  unto  salvation. — (1)  No 
man  is  saved  because  he  repents ;  he  is 
not  saved  unless  he  repents.  He  who 
excuses  himself  excludes  himself.  (2) 
Repentance  is  the  act  of  a  poor  fellow 
bitten  by  a  fiery  serpent  in  the  wilder- 
ness, and  fallen  in  his  last  agony  with 
his  back  towards  the  serpent.  Turn 
him  over  so  that  his  glazing  eye  can  look 
and  he  be  healed.  Turning  toward 
God  in  order  to  look  to  His  mercy  in 
Christ,  that  is  repentance ;  just  as  the 
"  look  "  was  essentially  faith.  The  lame 
man  can  move  no  step  of  the  way  to 
God.  God  meets  him.  His  Spirit  is 
in  the  very  desire  to  meet  God  and  to 
win  His  peace.  That  desire  is  help 
given  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ, 
preparing  the  soul  to  make  an  effort 
to  draw  near  to  God.  It  is  John  Baptist 
coming  before  Christ.  Not  always  lead- 
ing up  to  Christ.  Pointing  Jesus  out, 
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,"  in  order 
that  the  soul  may  go  to  Him  and  find 
rest.  John  Baptist  must  precede  Christ. 
Repentance  is  the  Old  Testament  stage 
of  life, leading  up  to  the  New  Testament, 
the  Gospel,  stage. 


APPENDED    NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Notice  carefully  that  God's 
words  to  Israel  in  the  wilderness  and 
through  Isaiah  are  promises  now  possessed 
by  Christian  believers.  For  God  acts  always 
on  the  same  principles,  and  therefore  His 
words  to  one  man  are  valid  for  all  in  similar 
circumstances.  Moreover,  the  Mosaic  ritual 
and  the  Old  Testament  history  are  symbolic 
of  the  Christian  life.  God's  visible  presence 
in  the  midst  of  Israel  was  an  outward  pattern 
of  His  spiritual  presence  in  the  hearts  of 
Christians  ;  and  the  obligations  which  His 
presence  laid  upon  Israel  [e.g.  in  even  a 
matter  concerning  the  sanitation  of  the 
camp  (Deut.  xxiii.  13,  14)]  were  a  pattern 
of  those  resting  upon  His  people  now.  And 
when,  through  the  pen  of  Isaiah,  God  called 
the  exiles  returning  from  the  dominion  of 
idolaters  His  sons  and  daughters.  He  taught 
plainly  that  in  days  to  come  He  would  receive 
as  such  those  whom  He  rescued  from  sin. 
Indeed,  the  universality  to  believers  of  the 
favour  of  God  in  Gospel  days  makes  His 
promise  to  David  a  promise  of  adoption  for 
all  believers. — J)r.  Beet^ 


See  Homiletic  Analysis  (vers.  2-7),  II.  2. 

"  Oh,  leave  us  to  a  world  of  sin,  unrest, 
And  trouble,  to  be  sad  !  " 
I  spake,  and  thought  to  weep, 
A  settled  grief  to  keep. 
When,  lo,  as  day  from  night — 
As  day  from  out  the  breast  of  night  forlorn — 
So  from  that  sorrow  was  that  gladness  born, 
Even  in  my  own  despite. 

Yet  was  not  that  by  this 
Excluded  [cf .  ver.  4]  ;  at  the  coming  of  that 

joy. 

Fled  not  that  grief,  nor  did  that  grief  destroy 
The  newly  risen  bliss, — 

But  side  by  side  they  flow, 
Two  fountains   flowing   from   one  stricken 

heart, 
And  ofttimes  scarcely  to  be  known  apart — 

That  gladness  and  that  woe. 

And  both  are  sweet  and  calm. 
And  flowers  upon  the  banks  of  either  blow, 
Both  fertilise  the  soil,  and,  where  they  flow, 

Shed  round  them  holy  balm. 

— Archbishop  Trerwh, 


NN 


540 


CHAP.  Till.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.  CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER  YIII. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Observe  :  1.  viii.  1 — ix.  15  is  one  continuous  section,  concerned  with  the  completion  of  the 
Corinthian  contribution  to  Paul's  great  Jerusalem  Christian  Poor  Belief  Fund.  Mentioned 
1  Cor.  xvi.  1.  where  see  for  this  Collection  generally.  2.  The  section  is  characterised  by 
a  specialised  use  of  x'^pi-^  i=  ff'^^^^i  generally,  but   here  also)  "gift,"  or  *^  bounty,''  as   in 

1  Cor.  xvi.  3  <^vers.  1,  4,  6,  7,  19,  ix.  14).  In  lesser  degree  also  by  similar  specialisation 
of  eiXoyia  (=  "blessing,"  but  here)  *^  bounty"  (ix.  5,  6),  and  a  like  turn  given  to  d7r\6T7}i 
(=  ^''Simplicity,'"  *' sincerity"  [cf.  a  '^single"  eye.  Matt.  vi.  22],  but  here)  *^ liberality" 
(ver.  2  ;  ix.  11,  13).  The  key  to  this  specialised  sense  impressed  upon  the  first  pair  of  words 
is  evidently  this :  What  God's  grace  is  to  man,  that  is  the  Corinthians'  grace  to  the  poor 
saints  at  Jerusalem, — a  spontaneous,  unearned,  free  gift,  out  of  a  loving  heart ;  man's 
grace  to  his  fellow-man  is  his  copy  of  God's  grace  to  himself ;  and,  going  deeper,  such  a 
heart  of  grace  in  man  is  thus  expressing  its  sense  of  God's  grace  in  his  own  case  ;  the 
human  grace  has  sprung  from  the  blessed  effect  of  God's  grace  in  the  heart.  Similarly,  as 
to  eiiKoyia.    (See  homiletic  exposition.) 

Ver.  1.  Do  you  to  wit. — See  K.V. ;  or  1  Cor.  xv.  1,  or  Gal.  i.  11,  A.V.  Cf.  the  words 
of  the  old  writs,  "  Scire  facias  A.  B.,"  i.e.  "  You  are  to  let  A.  B.  know,"  etc.,  "  Eaire  savoir.'' 
Grace. — Obviously  in  the  more  usual  sense.  Macedonian  Churches. — From  whose  midst 
he  was  writing.  Writing  the  First  Epistle  from  Ephesus,  and  many  months  earlier,  perhaps 
before  the  Macedonians  had  even  heard  of  the  Fund,  he  speaks  of  setting  the  Galatian 
Churches  to  work  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1).  We  know  of  Philippi,  Bercea,  Thessalonica  ;  there  may 
have  been  others. 

Ver.  2. — Take  the  grammar  of  the  sentence  as,  e.g.,  A.V.  or  R.V.  Something  may  be 
said  for  taking  thus :  "  That  the  abounding  of  their  joy  is  in  the  very  time  of  their  much 
trial  by  their  afflictions,  and  the  depth  of  their  poverty  has  abounded,"  etc.  Trial. — See 
the  same  word  in  Rom.  v.  4,  "experience."  The  word  wavers  between,  or  includes,  the 
trying  and  the  result  of  it;  the  proving  and  the  proof ;  the  "experiment''  (ix.  13)  and  the 
** experience"  acquired  by  the  "experiment."  Here  the  process,  rather  than  the  result 
arrived  at.  The  "trying"  was  going  on.  What  the  ^^afflictions"  were  is  unknown; 
suggestions  may  be  found  in  Acts  xvii.  5  sqq. ;  1  Thess.  ii.  14,  iii.  2,  3,  5  (written  some 
years  earlier).  Abundance. — Notice  this  word  running  through  the  section  (vers.  2,  7, 
ix.  8,  12).  Deep. — "Reaching  deep  down"  (Stanley);  "deep-searching"  {Speaker's  Com- 
Tnentary).  N.B. — "  Abundance  of  .  .  .  poverty  .  .  .  abound  unto  riches  of  liberality  "  (if 
verse  is  so  to  be  construed). 

Ver.  3  Of  their  own  accord. — Beet  suggests:  Moved  by  what  Paul  told  them  of  the 
Corinthian  zeal  (ix.  2),  though  without  his  laying  any  injunction  on  them  to  do  anything 
similar. 

Ver.  4.  Gift. — "  Grace."  The  Macedonian  gift  was  their  "  grace  "  (as  above),  and  was  also 
their  opportunity  and  their  method  of  taking  a  practical  share  in  the  reciprocal  fellowship 
of  all  believers.  No  need  to  distinguish  between  (1)  a  fellowship  with  the  Corinthians  in 
giving,  and  (2)  a  fellowship  manifested  by  the  gift  between  themselves,  though  Gentile 
Christians,  with  the  Jewish  Christians  at  Jerusalem.  "Fellowship"  all  round,  in  widest 
sense,  is  here.     No  new  feeling  in  them  (1  Thess.  ii.  14). 

Ver.  5.  Not  as,  etc.,  but,  obviously  also,  "  better  than."  Hoped  is  more  than  merely 
"  expected."  To  us. — Surely  not  "  as  travelling  companions  "  (Stanley)  ;  meagre,  and  only 
true  of  the  elected  deputation.  "  Not  monej',  but  [also]  themselves ;  not  to  men,  but  [also] 
to  Christ,"  and  this  first.  "  Their  self-surrender  to  Christ  was  also  a  surrender  to  those  whom 
Christ  had  set  in  authority  in  His  Church "  (Beet).     By  the  will  of  God. — As  1  Cor.  i,  1 ; 

2  Cor.  i.  1 ;  a  practical  recognition  of  Paul's  authority  as  an  apostle. 

Ver.  6.  Insomuch  that. — Too  subtle  to  press  this  to  mean  a  real  fulfilment  of  a  Divine 
design.  Not  said  in  First  Epistle  that  Titus  had  initiated  the  local  Fund  at  Corinth.  [Not 
named  at  all  in  First  Epistle.] 

Ver.  7. — There  is  also  "  abundance "  at  Corinth ;  but  how  different.  Love  to  ns. — 
In  vii.  11  we  see  this  happy  effect  of  the  First  Epistle.  Note  the  R.V.  margin. 
Grace. — Inclining  rather  to  the  meaning  of  "gift"  here.  "Abound  in  your  giving  also." 
Also. — Q.d.  "as  well  as  (not  the  good  works  of  vii.  11,  12,  but)  in  these  good  points 
and  qualities  "  just  mentioned. 

646 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  viii. 


Ver.  8.  By  (way  of)  commandment. — They  were  in  a  good  mood  just  now,  even  toward 
himself,  and  had  been  very  obedient  to  his  first  letter ;  but  it  was  very  uncertain  how  far 
they  would  bear  much  "telling"  from  him.  "  I  don't  order  you  to  do  this,  but.  ..."  (See 
under  1  Cor.  vii.  6.)  To  prove. — The  poor  Macedonians  have  had  their  ^^ proof "  (ver.  2)  ;  now 
here  1  have  a  little  proof  for  you  !     Your  love. — That  of  ver.  7,  primarily,  but  not  only. 

Ver.  9. — Cf.  the  appeal  implied  in  ix.  15  ;  a  higher  basis  of  appeal  than  even  that  of  ix.  8. 
[1.  An  Article  of  Faith ;  2.  A  Matter  of  Experience ;  3.  A  Principle  of  Action. — J.  Z.J 
Observe,  "The  Grace  of  .  .  .  ChrisV^  Not,  as  more  often,  "of  QodJ'  Rom.  v.  15  is  a 
remarkable  expository  illustration ;  Gal.  i.  6  [and  ver.  4]  should  be  looked  at.  [Cf.  Col.  iii.  13, 
even  with  the  variant  readiTig,  where  forgiveness  is  attributed  directly  to  Christ.  So  also, 
whilst  the  Father  gave  Him,  the  Son  "  gave  Himself  "  (Tit.  ii.  14  ;  Eph.  v.  25 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6).] 
Poor. — Not  merely  in  His  human  circumstances,  as  dependent  during  His  three  years' 
ministry  upon  charitable  gifts,  but  in  the  far  larger  sense  of  Phil.  ii.  6,  7,  8.  Therefore 
also  "  became  poor "  is  better  than  "  tvas  poor."  [Stanley  refers  to  Milman,  Lat.  Christ., 
Book  XII.,  chap,  vi.,  for  the  wonderful  growth,  at  the  beginning  of  fourteenth  century,  of  the 
Mendicant  Orders,  indirectly,  from  this  verse  ;  and,  more  directly,  of  the  rule  and  life  of 
Francis  of  Assisi,  earlier.] 

Ver.  10.  Advice.— R.V.  is  truer,  "judgment";  1  Cor.  vii.  25.  This  is  expedient. — 
Viz.  (not  "that  I  do  not  command  but  rather  give  my  judgment,"  but)  that  they  "  should 
abound,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  Note,  their  precedence  in  collecting,  and  their  precedence  in  thinking 
of  such  a  collection :  "  ye  were  the  first  to  "  (R.V.).  The  Galatians  were  before  them  only  in 
the  particular  point  of  adopting  the  method  of  weekly  ofiEerings  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1). 

Ver.  11. — As  R.V. ;  also  emphasise  "•now  "  in  contrast  to  "«  year  ago." 

Ver.  12. — See  special  Homily. 

Ver.  13. — "  God  is  just  in  His  requirement ;  so  am  I."  Too  narrow  to  make  this  only 
mean :  "  I  do  not  desire  at  your  expense  to  relieve  the  Macedonian  Churches  from  their  share 
of  giving."  This,  so  far  as  true,  would  only  be  a  particular  incidence  of  his  (supposed) 
principle  of  action.  "I  do  not  want  to  throw  burden — all  the  burden — on  you,  to  the 
exemption  of  others."  The  Jerusalem  Church  could  hardly,  with  any  appropriateness,  be 
included  amongst  those  giving  Churches,  which  were  in  his  mind  in  making  the  remark. 
Yet  ver.  14  seems  to  carry  the  suggestion  that  even  the  then  beneficiary  Church  and  the 
benefactor  Churches  might  in  some  sense,  or  under  some  circumstances,  come  to  change 
places,  and  benefactors  of  to-day  become  the  beneficiaries  in  their  turn.  Best  comment 
is  Rom.  XV.  27. 

Ver.  15. — "  So  far  as  the  Christian  life  permeates  church  members  and  churches  will 
there  be  reproduced  this  ancient  and  beautiful  ideal  of  a  company  in  which  each  has 
sufficient,  an  ideal  never  realised  in  material  good  so  completely  as  in  Israel  in  the  wilderness. 
For  all  men  are  but  gatherers  of  food  freely  given  by  God."  (Beet,  very  admirably.)  More 
than  a  mere  happy  quotation,  or  apt  parallel. 

Ver.  16.  Putteth  into. — Same  phrase  as,  and  well  explains,  ^' given  in"  ver.  1.  More 
earnest. —  Q.d.  "  than  to  need  it." 

Ver.  18. — Quite  uncertain  who  '■'■the  brother"  was.  No  intentional  concealment  of  his 
name ;  the  Corinthians  knew  him,  or  would  very  soon,  when  he  arrived  in  Corinth.  Curious 
old  fancy,  based  on  a  misunderstanding  of  '■'■in  the  Gospel"  that  this  was  Luke.  (So 
Ignat.,  Epp.,  and  Jerome.)  Three  Macedonians  are  mentioned  as  travelling  from  Corinth 
again  (with  the  collection,  probably).  Acts  xx.  4 ;  Stanley  thinks  Tychicus  perhaps  "  the 
brother  "  in  ver.  22,  and,  more  confidently,  Trophimus  here.  N.B. — He  of  ver.  22  is  a  second, 
additional  to,  not  the  same  as  this  of  ver.  19  ;  see  "  brethren,"  ver.  23 ;  Titus  is  mentioned,  and 
two  others.  Probably  he  of  ver.  22  is  not  a  Macedonian,  but  some  usual,  business-like,  useful 
travelling  companion  of  Paul. 

Ver.  20. — Lit.  "taking  in  sail  to  avoid  the  danger  that." 

Ver.  21.  Honest. — In  the  old  sense  :  "What  looks,  and  is,  honourable." 

Ver.  22.  Confidence.— Note  R.V.,  rightly,  "  which  he  hath " ;  perhaps  having  been  to 
Corinth  with  Titus,  and  gained  confidence  from  what  he  had  seen.  This  had  increased  his 
earnestness  in  the  matter. 

Ver.  23.— Good  example  of  the  "letters"  commendatory  (iii.  1).  Messengers. — Really 
"  apostles  "  ;  but  not  yet  in  the  technical,  specialised  sense.  (Cf .  of  Barnabas,  Acts  xiv.  14 ; 
but  not  Rom.  xvi.  7.)  It  had  been  a  Jewish,  official  name  for  such  accredited  messengers 
from  Sanhedrin  or  synagogue,  as,  e.g.,  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  when  sent  to  Damascus.  Glory 
of  Christ. —  Q.d.  "  They  and  their  errand  will  bring  glory  to  Him  and  His  religion  "  (as  ver.  19). 


547 


CHAP.  VIII.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  II.   CORINTHIANS. 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Whole  Chapt&r, 

Four  names  are  the  nuclei  around  which  the  chapter  organises  itself ; — 

A.  Macedonia  (vers.  1-5). 

B.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (vers.  6-11). 

C.  Corinth  (vers.  12-15). 

D.  Titus  (vers.  16-24). 

A.  Macedonia. — We  have,  concerning  the  Macedonian  Churches : — 

I.  Their  circumstances. — They  were  poor,  in  deep  poverty  ;  their  country  was  at 
that  time  notoriously  poor.  The  civil  wars  of  the  preceding  century  [including 
the  battle  of  Philippi]  had  laid  the  country  waste,  and  in  Paul's  day  it  had 
not  recovered.  Thessalonica  was  becoming  a  busy  centre,  but  the  country  had 
petitioned  Tiberius  for  some  relief  from  its  heavy  taxation,  and,  to  lighten  its 
burdens, Macedonia  [with  Greece  ;  but  this  was  restored  by  Claudius  to  the  Senate, 
so  that  Luke  is  right ;  Gallio  ^2^.^  proconsul  (Acts  xviii.  12)]  had  been  made  an 
imperial,  instead  of  a  senatorial,  province.  If  Lydia  were  even  still  at  Philippi, 
she  was  hardly  a  sample  of  Macedonian  Christians  ;  she  was  an  immigrant,  and 
her  dyeing  establishment,  with  its  household  servants,  may  not  have  been  large. 
And  the  rest  were  mostly  humble  people,  in  Thessalonica,  Bercea,  Philippi,  as 
elsewhere.  2.  They  were  being  sorely  tried  by  afflictions.  Lost  to  us  as  this  is  in 
detail,  all  was  then  very  real,  every  detail  was  then  fully  known  to  Paul,  who  was 
writing  in  their  midst.  And  fully  known  to  their  Lord  also.  Who  was  then 
suffering  them  to  be  put  to  the  proof.  [Cf .  Exod.  iii.  7,  "I  have  seen,  I  have 
seen.  ...  I  have  heard.  ...  I  know,"  etc.]  Not  a  stroke  fell  on  them 
without  His  sympathetic  knowledge.  Who  was  making  their  circumstances  His 
testing,  purifying  fire  for  the  gold  of  their  faith  and  patience  (1  Thess.  i.  4). 
With  better  show  of  reason  than  some  Churches,  they  might  have  said :  "  It  is 
of  no  use  coming  to  us  to  beg,  Paul.  We  have  nothing ;  we  are  a  set  of  poor 
people.  And  this  is  a  bad  time" — it  always  is,  to  unwUling  hearts — "to  come 
raising  a  fund  here  ;  we  have  enough  to  think  about,  holding  our  own  amidst 
the  persecution  and  the  steady,  active  disfavour  of  our  neighbours  to  us  as 
Christians."     But  we  have 

II.  Their  generosity. — 1.  Out  of  the  assay er's  furnace,  heated  with  sevenfold 
fires,  flowed — overflowed — a  stream  of  most  precious,  most  pure,  grace,  in  the 
shape  of  a  most  liberal  and  eagerly  spontaneous  gift.  If  there  had  been  any 
tendency  to  selfishness  or  to  the  scanty  giving  of  fearful  hearts  and  narrow  faith, 
their  own  poverty  had  cast  it  out.  They  "  must  "  help  the  deep  poverty  of  their 
brethren  at  Jerusalem.  Much  fear,  narrow  faith  1  How  could  these  live  in 
hearts  full  of  abundant  joy  ?  Did  they  count  it  all  joy  that  they  were  fallen 
"  into  divers  trials  "  ?  ( Jas.  i.  2).  And  "  exult  in  tribulations  also  "  ?  (Bom.  v.  3, 
same  Greek  word).  They  were  ^'■cheerful  givers"  Their  cup  was  abundantly 
full ;  but  their  hearts  were  abundantly  full  also.  They  were  full  to  the  overflow ; 
running  over  in  simple-hearted,  unhesitating  benevolence,  and  that  richly. 
The  fountain  ran  over  in  a  stream  ;  the  very  stream  ran  over  the  banks  of 
expectation,  and  also  of  human  *'  prudence  "  and  ability.  Very  poor,  greatly  tried, 
abundantly  generous  !  2.  ^^  Abundantly."  Measured  by  ^^eiV  joo^^er,  what  could 
have  been  expected  ?  A  small  gift  would  have  been  great  for  them  to  give.  Hardly 
anything  at  all  was  to  be  looked  for,  much  less  hoped  for.  Paul  had  indeed  told 
them  of  the  collection,  and  of  the  eager  zeal  with  which  Corinth  had  taken  the 
matter  up ;  but  not  by  way  of  command,  or  injunction,  or  exhortation,  and 
scarcely  even  of  suggestion.  They  needed  no  suggestion ;  they  were  willing  of 
themselves.  Corinthian  zeal  provoked  very  many  (ix.  2)  in  other  Churches ;  but 
here,  to  mention  the  object  of  the  Fund,  and  the  need  of  the  mother  Church,  was 

54a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  viii. 


sufficient.  The  torrent  of  their  charity  had  poured  over,  from  hearts  that  only 
needed  a  touch  [no  flinty  rock  that  needed  smiting,  perhaps  twice],  and  the  grace 
gushed  forth,  carrying  away  before  it  Paul's  prudence  and  reluctance  and 
care  for  them.  There  was  no  '*  screwing  it  out "  of  unwilling  givers.  There 
was  no  "whipping  up"  the  last  few  pounds,  as  at  Corinth.  No  need  for  it. 
Good  cause  shown ;  then  their  heart  and  hand  were  ready.  Paul  had  tried  to 
stay  it,  or  to  keep  it  within  narrower  bounds.  But  no.  He  must,  and  should, 
let  them  have  a  share  in  the  ministering  to  the  saints.  If  it  did  not  mean  this, 
what  was  the  worth  to  them  of  the  fellowship  and  the  brotherhood  ?  If  really 
"  Jew  "  or  "  Gentile  "  counted  for  nothing  in  Christ,  if  really  Macedonia  as  well  as 
Jerusalem  were  common  partakers  in  the  same  Christ,  then  Paul  must  let  them 
give  their  grace  ;  and  he  must  receive  their  gift,  along  with  the  rest.  They 
begged  him  that  he  would.  They  would  not  be  said  nay.  And  they  gave,  and 
gave  beyond  their  power.  3.  They  gave  with  the  most  blessed  completeness. 
There  was  a  "  finish  "  about  their  benevolence  ;  from  first  to  last  it  was  most 
admirably  thorough ;  intelligent,  orderly,  gracious  principle  ran  through  it  all. 
They  began  at  the  right  place,  and  at  the  right  end.  The  true  gift  is  the 
expression  of  the  man,  as  between  man  and  man  ;  as  between  God  and  man  it  is 
the  embodiment  of  the  man  too.  God  of  old  asked  for  Isaac  ;  but  He  wanted 
Abraham ;  and  Abraham  himself  really  lay  upon  the  altar  by  which  he  stood. 
A  gift  loses  much,  whilst  yet  it  may  be  worth  something  to  man,  if  the  heart  of 
the  giver  be  not  in  it ;  to  God  it  is  worth  nothing,  if  the  man's  self  be  not  in  it. 
All  the  overflowing  readiness  of  the  Macedonians  was,  after  all,  no  such  torrent  of 
resistless,  impetuous  impulse  as  that  they  should  forget,  before  doing  anything  in 
actually  putting  their  gifts  together,  to  devote  themselves  afresh  to  God.  So 
eager  to  begin,  and  to  give,  and  yet  they  pause  [at  the  beginning  of  their 
efibrt,  not  like  the  Corinthians  at  nearly  the  end  of  it]  solemnly  to  consecrate 
themselves  to  the  Giver  of  all  grace.  In  modern  phraseology,  before  a  single 
subscription  was  announced,  the  Church  held  a  consea^ation  meeting.  Then  all  they 
had,  all  their  poverty  too,  was  avowedly  the  Lord's  ;  they  were  His  stewards, 
for  little  or  much;  they  then  proceeded  to  give  "of  His  own"  (1  Chron. 
xxix.  14),  not  their  own.  [A  model  for  all  Church  financial  efforts,  Memorial 
Funds,  Jubilee  Funds,  and  the  like.]  After  that,  it  was  comparatively  a  small 
touch  of  excellence  that  they  unreservedly  put  themselves  under  the  direction  oj 
Paul  in  their  efibrt ;  accepted  him  as  their  almoner  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  in  the 
most  ungrudging,  unquestioning,  unqualified  way  recognised  him  as  Paul  the 
Apostle  by  the  will  of  God  (i.  1),  falling  in  mth  that  will,  in  their  very  act  and 
its  heartiness.  It  was  not  his  first  experience  of  Macedonian  generosity  and 
affection  to  himself  (Phil.  iv.  10-19).  But  he  had  not  looked  for  such  a  display 
of  grace  as  this,  even  in  them.     Of  "  graee"  for 

III.  All  this  was  grace  of  God  bestowed  upon  Macedonia. — Human  nature 
was  not  in  itself  of  different  material  and  quality  in  Macedonia  to  what  it  was 
elsewhere.  It  was  grace  which  had  bred  grace.  Their  open  hand  and  open 
heart  were  the  reflection,  the  offspring,  of  God's  own.  Giving  is  good  for 
Churches  and  for  men,  as  checking  any  tendency  to  selfishness,  and  as  enlarging 
the  heart  and  keeping  sympathy  tender.  No  change  of  medical  opinion  can 
ever  make  this  kind  of  '*  bleeding "  anything  but  good  for  the  soul's  health. 
Good  even  for  the  mind,  to  have  something  to  check  self-centering  of  thought 
and  purpose.  Self-interest  might  conceivably  urge  to  beneficence.  But  before 
the  initial  act,  and  the  impulse  to  it,  can  arise  in  the  heart,  grace  must  have 
begun  its  work.  A  bit  of  beneficence  fills  the  heart  with  blessing,  and  in  turn 
this  full  heart  of  blessing  will  flow  over  in  beneficence.  And  so  on,  in  reciprocal 
action.  But  this  action  and  reaction  needs  starting.  And  this,  grace  must  needs 
do.     All  good  begins  there.     The  grace  of  God  bestowed  upon  the  Church  at  Corinth 

U9 


CHAP.  viii.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  IL  CORINTHIANS. 


(same  words  as  here,  1  Cor.  i.  4)  assumed  a  noble  form,  and  enriched  them  with 
gifts  which  called  forth  Paul's  thanksgiving,  and  made  them  the  paragon  Church 
of  the  world  in   such   endowments.      But  this  grace  of  God  .  .  .  upon  .  .  . 
Macedonia,  was  it  less  noble  or  less  fruitful  ? 
B.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His  grace. 

I.  One  is  ashamed  of  some  of  the  motives  urged  and  methods  employed, 
to  raise  money  for  religious  and  benevolent  purposes.  The  money  is  contami- 
nated by  its  source  and  by  the  process  of  extraction.  See  here  A  model  appeal. 
1.  To  Paul  "to  live  is  Christ,"  and  naturally,  instinctively,  by  the  necessity  of  his 
new  heart,  his  thought  turns  to,  rises  to.  Him.  "  In  Christ "  traces  the  sphere 
within  which  Paul  "lives  and  moves  and  has  his"  soul's  "being."  It  is  no 
narrow  range  which  is  so  traced  out ;  abundance  of  range,  abundance  of  interests, 
a  large,  free,  happy  life ;  and  everything  within  it  is  bound  by  a  happy  gravitation 
to  Christ  the  Sun  and  Centre.  Every  plan  and  purpose  derives  from  that  Source 
motive  and  strength.  In  this,  Paul  is  an  Archimedes  who  has  found  his  place 
to  stand,  and  his  lever  and  his  fulcrum.  With  "  the  Grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ "  he  can  move  the  world,  not  to  say  a  i*eluctant,  or  negligent,  or  laggard 
Church.  2.  This  appeal  is  a  sample  of  the  way  in  which  the  highest  themes 
find  place  in  his  letters,  in  the  midst  of  topics  of  temporary,  and  comparatively 
slighter,  interest.  [Striking  example  of  this  in  1  Cor.  vii.  29-31.]  "Great  texts" 
occur  in  the  midst  of  "  less  useful "  material.  They  occur  suddenly ;  they  occur 
en  passant ;  he  rises  to  them,  and  quits  their  high  level  again,  without  effort  \ 
there  is  no  appearance  of  any  feeling  of  "  rising  "  to  them,  or  of  "  sinking  "  from 
them  to  a  lower  plane  of  thought  or  feeling.  All  his  life,  its  plans,  its  motives, 
its  activities,  are  "of  a  piece."  He  lives  at  the  high  level  [probably  without 
remembering  that  it  was  "high"].  He  can  pass  from  the  temporary  theme 
to  a  topic  of  eternally  vital  interest,  and  can  resume  his  temporary  theme 
without  any  shock  at  the  moment  of  transition.  By  such  motives  as  this  of 
ver.  9  he  regulated  his  own  life ;  by  such  motives  did  he  seek  to  train  his  people 
to  regulate  theirs.  He  did  not  disdain  auxiliary  motives  of  a  lower  order.  As 
we  see,  he  uses  Corinth  to  stir  up  other  Churches  to  zeal  and  liberality  ;  he 
uses  Macedonia  to  spur  on  Corinth.  [So  again,  descending  yet  lower,  but  not 
unworthily,  in  ix.  4.] 

II.  [See  Separate  Homily  on  ver.  9.  But  remark  here :]  The  model  of  all 
beneficence. — Without  much  forcing,  point  by  point  of  parallelism  can  be  found 
between  it  and  the  Macedonian  and  Corinthian  bounty.  1.  Was  He  not 
"  willing  of  Himself'^  ?  The  Father  had  not  spoken  to  Him  "  hy  way  of 
commandment "  ;  He  came  not  to  do  His  own  will,  indeed,  but  had  "  accepted  the 
exhortation,'^  and  willingly  had  been  sent  on  His  Father's  errand.  He  stood 
before  the  throne  a  servant  waiting  for  commands,  with  loving,  eager,  volun- 
teering readiness,  proposing  Himself  for  the  service :  "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I 
come  ...  to  do  Thy  will,  O  God  "  (Ps.  xl.  7,  8) ;  "I  delight  to  do  Thy  will." 
2.  One  cannot  say,  indeed,  "  beyond  His  power,''  but,  very  emphatically,  "  to  His 
power "  was  He  thus  willing.  His  whole  Divine-human  resources  and  heart  of 
love  have  been  unreservedly  drawn  upon  for  us.  There  is  no  limit ;  however 
much  we  may  have  drawn  upon  Him,  we  have  never  even  approached,  much 
less  touched,  any  limit  to  the  suflSciency  of  His  grace  and  power.  A  limit  is 
inconceivable.  In  Him  is  "all  the  fulness  of  God"  (Eph.  iii.  19;  with  Col. 
i.  19,  ii.  9,  10),  in  order  that  we  may  be  filled  with  it.  He  gives  Himself  to  our 
need  unstintingly,  and  to  the  measure  of  His  power  to  bless  and  save.  [May 
even  borrow  another  word  of  human  giving  in  this  chapter,  and  say  that  as 
there  was  readiness  to  will,  so  there  was  a  performance  also  out  of  that  which  He 
had  (ver.  11).  He  did  not  rest,  nor  does  He  find  His  satisfaction,  until  He  can 
say,  "  It  is  finished."]     3.  It  belongs  to  the  bottomless  depths  of  truth  beneath 

550 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  II.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  viil. 


what   we   read   in  this   Book,  and  then  formulate   into  our  doctrine   of   the 
/  Incarnation,  to  jj^,j^hether_there^^  between  the  Son, 

\  the  "  Firstborn  of  all  creation,"  and  our  race,  which  made  possible  His  assumption 
y  of  the  Redemption  fellowship  with  our  race  in  its  deep  need.  At  all  events  He 
has  created  a  fellowship  which  now  appeals  to  Him,  as  the  new  fellowship  in 
Him  did  to  the  Macedonians  and  Corinthians,  and  as  it  should  still  appeal 
to  Christian  judgments  and  hearts.  The  need  itself  is  a  powerful  appeal  to  all 
right  hearts ;  and  to  His  heart  too.  He  cannot  see  need  of  any  kind,  and  only 
see  it.  But  this  was  a  need  of  brethren  in  a  real  fellowship  with  Himself,  and 
He  "  takes  upon  Him  ths  ,  .  .  ministering  to  the  saints."  4.  May  we  venture  to 
use  Ps.  xl.  6,  7  again,  and  say  that  He,  too,  ^^  first  gave  Himself  to  the  Lord,  and 
then  "  ?  etc.  The  psalm  is  the  voice  of  a  human  heart ;  of  all  true  servants  of 
God ;  but  it  belongs  also  to  Him,  in  that  whatever  of  motive  or  excellence  is 
found  in  His  people  is  also  found  in  its  original,  and  most  perfect,  exemplification 
in  Him.  5.  May  we  say  that  the  "  abundance  of  His  joy  and  of  His  deep 
poverty  abounded  to  the  riches,"  etc.  (as  ver.  1)?  Or  that  as  He  ^^  abounded 
in  everything  .  .  .  He  abounded  in  this  grace  also  "  ?  It  would  hardly  be  tracing 
too  minutely  the  ftatures  of  the  correspondence  between  all  highest  Christian 
service  and  charity  and  His,  Who  is  the  Model. 

III.  A  moael  of  Christian  completeness. — 1.  '^Abound  in  this  grace  also.*' 
Every  point  of  Christian  character  needs  cultivating.  All  are  not  equally 
adapted  for  any  one  form  of  Christian  service ;  nor  is  any  given  Christian 
equally  well  adapted  for  all  his  own  forms  of  service.  But  there  should  be  no 
systematic  neglect  or  omission  of  any.  The  aim  of  Church  education  and  of 
Christian  self -culture  should  be  an  all-round,  harmonious  completeness  of  service 
and  character.  Natural  enough  to  do  most  what  we  like  best,  what  costs  least 
of  sacrifice  or  effort,  what  involves  least  of  unpopularity  or  singularity.  In 
many  Churches,  and  in  very  many  Christians,  there  are  exaggerated  graces,  and 
there  are  defective,  imperfectly  developed  graces.  There  are  fashions  in  Christian 
work.  Special  forms  take  the  fancy  of  a  generation,  and  are  pushed  to  the 
ovei shadowing  of  others  very  needful  to  be  kept  up.  "  Abound  in  this  grace 
also."  Hard  to  preserve  the  balance  of  work  and  growth ;  but  any  point 
cultivated  at  the  expense  of  other  good  ones,  is  apt  to  become  a  blemish.  [The 
beautiful  arm  of  the  deformed  boarder  in  The  Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast-table. 
A  noble  head,  upon  a  body  which  has  not  grown  beyond  childish  stature  and 
strength.  And  so  on.]  2.  Specially,  the  showy  gifts  and  activities  must  not  be 
allowed  to  overshadow  or  lead  to  the  neglect  of  less  obtrusive  ones.  **  Faith  .  .  . 
utterance  .  .  .  knowledge  .  .  .  (even)  diligence"  will  not  find  their  completeness 
without  prompt,  perfected  benevolence.  [A  suggestion  of  the  same  danger  may 
be  found  in  a  letter  to  a  Macedonian  Church,  Thessalonica.  1  Thess.  v.  20, 
"  Despise  not  prophesying s  "  ;  a  very  serviceable  gift,  but  then  everybody  could 
understand  the  "  prophet,"  talking  clear  sense  in  ordinary,  intelligible  language, 
though  under  the  special  influence  of  the  Spirit.  On  the  contrary,  "  tongues  "  was 
a  showy  gift,  attracting  attention  to  its  possessor,  who  was  gre^itly  admired  and 
envied,  although  it  was  true  that  only  a  man  with  another  gift,  *'  interpretation 
of  tongues,"  could  understand  him  !]  3.  Above  all,  a  Christian  character  is 
wanting  in  completeness,  if  there  be  no  heart  to  give  and  no  practice  of  giving. 
High  professions,  great  gifts,  even  abundant  activities,  cannot  cover  this  deficiency. 
To  omit  this  is  not  only  to  deny  the  fellowship,  to  lose  the  reflex  blessing  of  giving 
to  the  givers  themselves,  but  it  is  to  leave  out  of  the  *'  Imitation  of  Christ  " 
a  most  conspicuous  feature.  God  is  a  Giver.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  a  Giver. 
Corinthians  must  be  givers  too.  "  Let  Titus  finish  in  you  this  grace  also." 
"  Also  "  is  a  leading  word  in  the  paragraph.  Do  not  forget  the  '*  also  "  in  life 
and  service. 

551 


CHAP.  VIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II   CORINTHIANS^ 


C.  Corinthians,  and  the  true  Christian  communism. 

I.  An  ideal  of  social  supply. — Israel  was  the  "  kingdom  of  God  "  on  earth ; 
amongst  the  other  states  and  monarchies  this  was  His.     When  actual  kings 
were  permitted  to  Israel,  they  were  understood  to  be  only  viceroys ;  the  real  King 
of  Israel  was  Jehovah.     Divine  law  was  State  law  ;  in  the  legislation  of  God  for 
Israel  are  embodied  in  temporary,  occasional  forms  the  great  principles  which 
secure  the  wise  government  and  well-being  of  all  community-life.     The  ideal 
Israel  would  be  an  ideal  state.     But  Israel  never  was  ideal ;  the  ideal  of  a  king- 
dom under  Jehovah  never  existed  outside  Deuteronomy.     Still,  in  the  wilderness 
God  so  ordered  the  life  of  His  own  special  subject-people  that  their  wilderness 
life  becomes  a  perpetual  parable.     Paul's  quotation  is  no  mere  felicitous  parallel, 
adduced  from  an  old  classic  of  this  people's  literature.     He  is  guided  to  fasten 
upon  and  bring  forward  a  case  in  which  the  very  ideal  of  provision  for  the  needs  of  a 
community  was  forcibly  suggested,  and  in  a  small  degree  was  actually  carried  into 
effect.     There  was  no  want,  there  was  no  waste  ;  to-day  had  sufficiency  for  its 
needs,  without  stint,  yet  there  was  nothing  over  for  the  morrow.     Each  day 
brought  its    due  supply,  out  of  God's  fulness    of  resource ;   the  morrow  must 
to-day  be  trusted  for,  but  each  new  morning  justified  the  trust ;  and  ended  it,  for 
the  supply  believed  for  was  there,  waiting  to  be  gathered.     Indeed,  simplicity, 
and  utterness,  of  dependence  upon  God  were  the  very  root  principles  of  living. 
Men  went  forth  morning  by  morning,  not  to  make  anything,  but  to  gather  what 
God  had  made  and  had  brought  to  them.    They  went  morning  by  morning ;  the  act 
of  the  host  said,  *'  Give  us  this  day,  again,  our  bread."     The  faith  which  underlay 
the  dependence  was  kept  alive  in  the  very  fact  that,  whether  they  would  or  not, 
they  could  not  accumulate  anything  over.    It  was  the  simple  life  of  a  great  family, 
where  morning  by  morning  the  children  rise,  counting  upon  finding  the  renewed, 
sufficient  provision  of  the  father.     It  is  the  lovely  ideal  of  Matt.  vi.  25-34,  the 
children   fed   and  clothed  as  the  birds  and  lilies  are,  and  ''  taking  no  "  more 
"  thought  for  the  morrow  "  than  they  do.     [In  fact,  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is 
really  the  great,  fundamental,  Constitutional  Document,  the  Magna  Charta,  of 
a  new  and  more  perfect  embodiment  than  Israel  had  been  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven,  God's  Ideal  State]     The  Ideal  was  again  in  partial  embodiment  for  a 
short  time  after  Pentecost   attempted  in  the  Christian    Church  at  Jerusalem. 
Not    "  attempted "   in   any   sense   of    organising    a    modern    "  movement "    or 
"  scheme."      The  thing  was   the   spontaneous,  instinctive   growth   of   the  new 
life  of  the  Spirit.     Hearts  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  were  filled  with  brother- 
liness  and  charity.      Rich  landowners    like  Barnabas,  and  smaller  people  like 
Ananias — but  with  truer  heart — "  sold  lands  or  houses."     None  of  them  called 
anything  he  had  his  own.     All  was  put  into  the  common  stock.     With  the 
happy  result  that   *'  neither  was   there   among  them  any  that  lacked^      In  so 
far,   it   was    Exod.   xvi.    18    again    realised.      [Acts   ii.   44,   45,   iv.    32,   35.] 
[N.B. — The  general  principle  that  no  Christian  has  any  of  God's  gifts  simply 
for  his  own  use  and  help  and  enjoyment,  goes  very  far.     It  is  true  of  anything 
he  may  have  learned  from   Scripture  or  from  Providence ;  of  any  richer  or 
new  blessing  to  his  own  soul  which  may  really  have  been  a  fresh  disclosure  to 
him  of  the  will  of  God,  or  of  the  possibilities  of  a  holy  life.     His  "  experiences  " 
are  for  the  common  stock  and  the  help  of  others.     Thus  H.  W.  Beecher :  "  I 
always  feel  as  though,  if  a  man  has  a  fine  garden,  it  is  mean  for  him  to  build 
around  it  a  close  fence,  so  that  nobody  but  himself  and  his  friend  can  enjoy 
it.     But,  oh,  it  is  a  great  deal  meaner  when  the  Lord  has  made  a  garden  of 
Eden  in  your  soul,  for  you  to  build  around  it  a  great  dumb  wall,  so  close  and 
so  high  that  nobody  can  look  through  it  or  over  it,  and  nobody  can  hear  the 
birds  singing  in  it.     And  yet  there  are  persons  who  carry  a  heart  full  of  sweet 
gardenesque  experiences  all  the  way  through  life,  only  letting  here  and  there  a. 

552  .... 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  viil. 


very  confidential  friend  know  anything  about  the  wealth  that  is  in  them."]     But 
this  already  is  passing  over  to 

II.  The  real  and  its  supply. — 1.  A  world  or  a  Church  where  none  have  a 
surplus  and  none  want,  where  there  are  neither  "poor"  nor  "rich,"  is  only 
a  beautiful  vision.  The  ideal  kingdom  of  God  will  only  in  the  eternal  world 
be  the  actual;  and  only  there  will  man's  world,  the  world  of  the  new  race 
that  finds  its  head  in  the  new  Adam,  coincide  with  the  kingdom.  The  very 
beneficence  of  Pentecostal  days  was  based  upon  the  fact  that  there  was  not 
"  an  equality  "  ;  there  needed  an  equalisation.  And  the  typical  Christian  remedy  is 
Almsgiving,  in  the  broadest  sense  of  the  word.  Divested  of  all  its  unfortunate 
associations ;  regarded  apart  from  unfortunate  embodiments  and  expressions  of 
the  principle  ;  the  essential  thing,  the  loving  voluntary  overflow  of  fulness  into 
need,  is  the  remedy.  It  is  the  copy  of  the  Divine  benevolence.  It  is  the  Divine 
order.  2.  Political  economy  easily,  and,  fi-om  its  point  of  view,  rightly,  makes 
out  the  economic  unwisdom  of  almsgiving.  Indiscriminately  employed,  it  has 
promoted  an  unhealthy  and  indolent  dependence,  and  even  created  a  new  sense  of 
*'  right  "  to  the  dole.  The  monastery  gate  and  the  squire's  kitchen  have  fostered 
mendicancy.  The  mechanical  almsgiving  of  a  modern  Poor  Law  system  hardens 
giver  and  receiver.  But  the  instinct  of  almsgiving  is  Christian,  and  was  from  the 
first  a  notable  outgrowth  of  the  new  fellowship  and  fraternity  in  the  Church. 
[See,  e.g.,  Cave's  Primitive  Christianity,  Part  III.,  chap.  ii. ;  or,  more  recent, 
Pressense,  Early  Years  of  Christianity,  "Life  and  Practice,"  pp.  412-419.]  The 
Eucharistic  free-will  offertory  frequently  went  to  the  poor.  The  early  Church 
historians  and  biographers  are  full  of  eminently  "  charitable  "  personages,  official 
and  private  members  alike.  Poor  were  charitable,  like  the  rich,  each  according 
to  their  means.  "  The  community  of  spiritual  things  leads  naturally  to  a  com- 
munity also  of  the  inferior  necessaries  of  life.  There  is  no  compulsion,  but  the 
simple  application  of  the  law  of  solidarity,  that  all  those  who  live  by  the  same 
life  of  the  Word  should  have  all  things  in  common."  (Clement,  summarised  by 
Pressense.)  Wealth,  in  the  broadest  sense,  and  of  every  kind, — whatever  one 
has  and  another  needs, — is  held  as  a  trust  from  God,  the  Giver,  for,  not  the 
possessor  only,  but  for  the  sake  of  those  who  need.  And  the  obligation  to  this 
larger  "  Almsgiving  "  lies  equally  upon  those  who  to-day  are  the  receivers.  To- 
morrow they  may  be  able,  in  some  other  way,  to  be  the  givers ;  to-day's  givers  may 
need  to  be  the  receivers.  Spiritual  benefits  may  repay  the  temporal.  Indeed,  true 
charity  brings  its  own  repayment  in  the  enlarged  sympathy,  the  tenderer  heart, 
the  check  to  selfishness.  The  principle  of  our  paragraph  tends  to  a  self-acting 
redress  of  all  need.  As  in  the  ocean,  so  here,  any  inequalities  of  level  tend  always 
to  adjustment  and  equalised  fulness  in  every  direction. 

III.  Unwise  methods  and  motives  are  suggested  by  vers.  8,  10,  13.  E.g. 
*'  not  hy  way  of  commandment." — Compulsory  legislation  ;  violent  reorganisation 
of  the  existing  social  system,  with  all  its  crude  or  selfish  and  unequally  pressing 
methods  of  division  of  comfort  or  "  wealth  "  ;  enforced  Socialism  or  Communism, 
as  a  necessary  preventive  of  undue  poverty  or  undue  riches,  or  as  promising 
perfect  contentment  and  happiness,  and  fairer  sharing  of  labour  and  its  rewards; 
must  all  fail,  for  the  same  reason  that  the  Christian  plan  of  the  benevolence  of 
God's  stewards  towards  God's  needy  ones,  fails  in  securing  an  ideal  society. 
The  fallen  heart  in  man  must  be  taken  into  account.  If  Capital  be  selfish. 
Labour  may  be  selfish  too.  The  social  struggle  is  too  often  poor  selfishness 
organising  itself  against  rich  selfishness.  [Indeed,  the  oldest  political  economies 
formulated  "  laws "  which  proceeded  on  the  supposition  that  self-interest, 
enlightened  or  not,  was  the  one  motive  which  could  be  relied  upon  as  certain, 
always  and  in  all  men,  to  operate.]  There  must  be  no  "  commandmient "  on  the  one 
side;  there  must  be  "the  willing  mind"  on  the  other.     Else  the  issue  may  be,  as 

553 


ciHAP.  viii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS, 


the  aim  of  some  violent  proposals  seems  of  necessity  to  be,  that  a  new  inequality 
may  be  produced,  in  which  the  "  haves  "  and  the  "  have-nots  "  of  the  old  order 
simply  exchange  positions.  Christianity  says  all  round,  "  /  mean  not  that  other 
men  he  eased  and  you  burdened"  To  enrich  a  "  Jerusalem "  by  the  impoverish- 
ment of  a  *'  Corinth  "  ;  to  make  a  "  Corinth  "  bear  all  the  burden  of  helping  a 
"Jerusalem,"  whilst  some  "  Macedonia"  or  "Galatia"  or  "Ephesus"  goes  free, — ^this 
is  as  imperfect  a  social  order  and  supply  as  that  which  it  is  attempted  to  redress. 
In  this  also,  "The  foolishness  of  God" — the  CAWs^my*  "  almsgiving  "  principle, 
condemned  by  the  political  economies,  repudiated  by  the  communising  re- 
organisers  of  the  existing  order  of  society — "  is  wiser  than  men."  If  this 
could  only  pervade  a  society  of  men,  themselves  first  renewed  by  the  grace  of 
God,  then  a  continuously  self-renewing  equalisation  would  be  secured  by  Christian 
benevolence  better  than  by  the  mechanical  equality  of  systems  or  law.  [The 
poorest  give  their  rich  benefactors  very  much,  directly  and  indirectly.] 

D.  Titus  and  his  fellow-deputies. — [For  Titus,  see  Gal.  ii.  3,  uncircumcised,  a 
Gentile ;  converted  by  Paul,  Tit.  i.  4 ;  associated  in  work  with  Paul,  Acts 
XV.  2,  Gal.  iii.  1,2  Cor.  ii.  13,  viii.  23,  xii.  18 ;  sent  to  Crete,  Tit.  i.  5 ;  called  to 
Nicopolis,  Tit.  iii.  12  ;  sent  from  Rome  to  Dalmatia,  2  Tim.  iv.  10  ;  not  named  in 
the  Acts.^  1.  Note  the  remarkable  fact  that  Titus  is  only  known  to  us  by  the 
incidental  references  of  four  letters  of  Paul,  one  of  them  addressed  to  himself. 
Unmentioned  in  the  direct  narrative  of  the  Acts,  and  even  in  the  first  letter  to 
Corinth,  though  he  was,  probably,  one  of  the  bearers  of  it  [1  Cor.  xvi.  11; 
2  Cor.  xii.  18  ;  neither  Timothy  (1  Cor.  xvi.  10),  nor  Apollos  {ib.  12)  was],  and 
not  now  for  the  first  time  associated  with  the  Corinthian  collection  (ver.  6).  Paul's 
^^fellow-helper  concerning"  the  Corinthians.  It  may  also  not  be  too  precarious  a 
conjecture  that  he  was  a  "  stronger  man  "  in  every  way,  except  goodness,  than 
Timothy,  who  is  mentioned  repeatedly  in  the  Acts.  No  such  emphatic  and 
recurrent  words  about  courage  are  addressed  to  him,  as  1  Tim.  i.  18,  iii.  15,  iv.  14, 
v.  21,  vi.  12  (cf.  also  1  Cor.  xvi.  10,  11).  Indeed,  he  had  needed  courage,  as 
much  as  tact,  in  dealing  with  the  Corinthians  and  their  bearing  towards  Paul, 
and,  more  recently,  with  the  business  of  their  lagging  collection.  He  was 
beyond  suspicion,  even  by  the  Corinthians  (xii.  18),  of  any  malversation  in  dealing 
with  their  mo^ey,  or  of  anything  but  most  perfectly  disinterested  and  above- 
board  conduct  in  any  particular.  He  was  plainly  not  only  full  of  affection  for 
Paul,  but  a  warm-hearted,  zealous  man,  troubled  about  wrong,  rejoicing  over 
good,  ^^ comforted"  when  he  saw  it  (vii.  7,  13,  15,  etc.).  One  may  infer  his  good 
sense  from  the  fact  that  he  was  Paul's  trusted  agent  in  the  delicate  task  of 
"  handling "  these  Corinthians  and  their  affairs ;  as,  later  on,  when  he  was 
despatched  to  regulate  the  ill-organised  Churches  of  Crete,  the  native  material 
of  which  was  drawn  from  a  coarse  type  of  nationality  ["  liars,  evil  beasts,  slow 
bellies,"  i.  12].  [Methodist  readers  may  compare  such  men  as  Alexander  Mather, 
— Wesley's  "  right-band  man," — Samuel  Bradburn,  Adam  Clarke,  Henry  Moore, 
William  Thompson,  Joseph  Benson,  Joseph  Bradford,  a  cluster  of  companions  and 
fellow-helpers  around  the  venerable  Wesley  in  his  later  years,  often  sent  on  such 
errands  as  this  of  Titus.]  Significant  and  suggestive  that  such  a  man — with 
strength  of  character,  real  piety,  tact,  courage,  and  altogether  above  the  most 
sensitive  suspicion ;  with  lively  sympathy  for  the  work  of  God  ;  the  very  ideal 
of  a  man  who  must  bear  responsibility  and  carry  out  the  extension  of  the  work  of 
God  (what  pastor  does  not  say,  0  si  sic  omnes  1) — should  be  unmentioned  in  the 
Acts,  and  even  in  the  first  Corinthian  Epistle.  It  is  significant  of  the  character  of 
the  Scripture  record.  It  is  historical ;  its  record  gives  many  a  point  of  verification 
of  the  truth  of  the  history  in  which  the  Revelation  is  rooted.  One  touch  of 
historical  veracity  is  found  in  the  very  informality  of  the  record  and  the 
inequality  of  treatment.      It  is  so  far  presumptively  a  genuine  contemporary 

554 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  11.  CORlNTntANS.  chap.  Viif. 


narrative,  in  that  it  moves  with  the  insoicciance  of  the  consciousness  of  truth  and 
of  transparent  simpHcity  of  purpose,  in  and  out  amongst  historical  personages, 
scenes,  events,  dates  ;  touching  en  passa/tit ;  including  quite  incidentally  ;  dealing 
fully,  or  by  allusion  only  ;  or  omitting  altogether ;  just  as  may  happen,  whilst  it 
pursues  its  course  and  its  simple  purpose.  A  simple,  inartiJBcial  narrative,  such 
as  can  omit  any  mention  of  an  important  worker  like  Titus  without  any 
suspicion  of  design  attaching  to  the  fact,  carries  with  it  a  primd  facie  credential 
of  its  truth.  2.  The  omission  of  Titus  from  the  Acts  is  suggestive  of  much  more 
of  holy,  valuable  labour,  which  has  found  not  even  a  chance  mention  in  an 
Epistle,  and  of  much,  very  much,  the  greater  part  of  the  work  of  the  Church, 
which  finds  no  earthly  record  at  all ;  it  is  suggestive  of  workers  whose  only 
memorial  is  in  the  ''  book  of  life "  (Phil.  iv.  3).  In  the  modern,  true  Acta 
Sanctorum,  the  (holy  "  catholic ")  continuation  of  the  Acta  Apostolorum,  how 
many  Titus-like  men  find  no  mention.  But  their  work  is  no  more  lost  than  his  ; 
they  are  no  more  forgotten  than  he.  3.  This  group  of  Christian  men  is  com- 
pleted by  two  other  character  portraits,  anonymous,  known  only  conjecturally  by 
us,  and  yet  so  vividly  hit  off  in  a  stroke  or  two  that  we  feel  as  if  we  were  very 
well  acquainted  with  them.  Here  is  one  who  has  every  one's  good  word  through- 
out all  the  Churches  for  his  work  in  the  Gospel.  He  is  a  successful  evangelist,  we 
may  presume ;  and  his  gifts  are  not  more  the  praise  of  every  one  than  is  his 
character.  He,  like  Titus,  is  a  trusted  man.  The  **  Churches  " — not  one  only,  but 
several — have  accepted  him  as  their  trustee  to  hold,  and  in  due  course  to  administer, 
the  accumulated  relief  fund.  [There  is  no  greater  honour  which  can  be  paid  to 
character  than  to  give  a  man  one's  trust.  It  *'  honours  him  that  gives  and  him 
that  takes."  The  more  complete  the  trust ;  above  all,  if  it  has  to  be  unusually 
*'  blindfold  "  trust,  or  if  there  be  risk  involved  ;  the  greater  the  honour.  (Trust 
speaks  almost  as  well  for  him  who  gives  it.  The  man  who  seems  to  count  it  a 
virtue  and  a  boast  that  "  He  never  trusts  anybody  any  further  than  he  can  see 
them  " ;  who  poses  as  a  universal  sceptic  as  to  the  existence  of  any  thorough 
and  absolute  honour  and  honesty  in  any  man ;  is  not  himself  the  noblest  type 
of  man.  His  boasted  shrewdness,  which  never  allows  him  to  commit  himself  to 
any  other  man,  reveals  a  narrow,  mean  soul,  which  has  not  even  in  itself  a 
witness  to  anything  nobler  in  human  nature.  He  honours  his  own  heart,  who  can 
and  does  trust,  without  foolish  credulity,  and  without  dishonouring  self -scepticism.) 
(Nothing  pays  greater  honour  to  God's  word  and  character  than  our  faith  ; 
hence,  perhaps,  so  much  is  made  to  turn  upon  Faith.)  Trophimus,  or  any  other, 
— this  man  is  rich  and  honoured  in  the  trust  of  the  Churches.  Is  the  other 
unnamed  portrait  that  of  Tychicus  ?  It  may  be  ;  later  on  (Acts,  ubi  supra)  we 
find  him  and  Trophimus  travelling  together  in  Paul's  company.  (Paul  and  his 
band  of  companions  moving  from  place  to  place  recall  the  Master  and  His 
company  of  twelve  moving  up  and  down  the  land  of  Israel  years  before ; 
personal  attendants,  messengers  on  occasion,  learners,  workers,  friends.)  As 
the  other  is  the  choice  of  the  Churches,  so  is  this  one  the  choice  cf  Paul.  Trusty, 
with  ability  in  practical  affairs  not  now  for  the  first  time  proved  by  Paul ;  the 
very  man  for  the  work  just  now  in  hand.  4.  Men,  all  these,  made  for  the 
work ;  and  many  such  made  by  the  work.  In  every  Church  are  examples  of 
men  whose  abilities  lay  dormant,  hardly  known — even  to  themselves — until  the 
call  and  claim  of  the  work  of  Christ  revealed  them — a  discovery  to  themselves. 
How  much  of  such  many-sided  fitness  lies  obvious  enough,  but  unemployed  and  not 
available ;  because  the  possessors  will  not  hear  the  call,  and  respond  to  the  claim. 
And  the  fitness  is  a  presumptive  call.  In  the  very  correspondence  between  the 
work  and  the  instrument,  lie  a  cogent  argument  and  appeal,  which  a  fit  man 
should  require  a  very  good  reason  indeed  for  declining  to  yield  to.  5.  Such  men, 
with  their  proved  ability,  and,  still  more,  with  their  trusted  character,  are  no  small 

555 


CHAP.  viii.  MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  II.   COHUStTHlANS, 


gift  to  the  Churches.  ^^  Thanks  be  to  God  "  for  them  and  for  their  readiness — like 
that  of  Titus — ^to  present  themselves  living  sacrifices  to  the  Lord  and  His  work. 
It  is  no  small  service  that  such  men,  in  office  and  carrying  responsibility,  turn  the 
edge  of  criticism  and  silence  all  possible  suggestions  affecting  the  honour  of  the 
Church  and  the  fidelity  of  its  administration,  especially  in  the  financial  "abundance 
which  is  administered."  Their  ability  is  a  guarantee  of  the  wisdom,  their  character 
of  the  honesty,  of  the  management.  The  responsible  leaders  in  the  Churches 
not  only  must  stand  clear  before  the  most  searching  light  of  the  scrutiny  of  their 
Lord,  Christ;  they  must  also,  so  far  as  may  be,  "provide"  that  all  commends 
itself  as  "  honest"  honourable,  to  all  reasonable  human  observation  and  examina- 
tion. The  Church  should  be  a  corporation  with  a  more  than  ordinarily  sensitive 
conscience.  The  honour  of  their  Lord  is  involved.  Such  men,  so  administering 
the  Church's  affairs  "  to  the  glory  of  the  same  Lord"  are  not  only  a  strength  and 
a  wealth  to  the  Church,  but  they  "a/re  the  glory  of  Christ."  [1.  The  Churches 
should  have  properly  audited  accounts.  2.  There  needs  be  no  undue  sensitiveness 
about  mere  gossip  or  ill-natured  talk  (such  as  against  Wesley  or  General  Booth 
re  finance).  Do  right,  and  let  the  rest  go  (2  Chron.  xxv.  9).  "  Hew  a  true  line, 
and  let  the  chips  fall  as  they  may  "  (saying  of  Feilden,  the  Lancashire  merchant- 
prince).     There  will  be  plenty  of  criticism,  do  what  the  Church  may.] 


SEPARATE    HOMILIES. 


L 


Ver.  9.  Christ;  Poor,  yet  making 
Many  Rich. 

I.  1.  Apart  from  the  circumstances 
which  are  its  setting,  this  text  is  a 
grm  of  truth.  The  very  stratum  in 
which  it  is  found  has  its  value ;  it  can 
be  worked  to  a  real  spiritual  profit. 
But  the  gem  is  priceless.  2.  It  is 
instructive  as  revealing  (see  Homiletic 
Analysis,  B.)  the  habitual  region  of 
Paul's  thought.  He  enters  and  quits 
such  a  high  theme,  as  one  well  accus- 
tomed to  the  heights ;  his  manner  of 
introducing  and  employing  this  great 
truth  is  incidental  disclosure  of  the  close 
relation  in  which  such  "  doctrinal  " 
grandeurs  stood  in  his  own  life  to 
practical  conduct.  3.  Doctrine  may 
be  presented  with  a  forbidding  rigid- 
ity ;  it  ought  to  underlie,  and  be 
clothed  by,  the  beauty  of  Cferistlike 
living.  It  is  the  firm  basis  of  all 
Christian  hope  and  the  experimental 
life.  [Beneath  the  most  beautiful 
face  is  a  hard,  grinning  skull.  The 
most  beautiful  body  is  built  up  upon 
a  skeleton,  rigid,  hard,  strong ;  which 
may  be  exhibited — as  doctrine  some- 
times has  been — in  its  bareness  and 
rigidity,  stern,  certainly  not  beautiful, 
even  forbidding.     Yet  the  face  needs 

556 


the  skull ;  the  body  needs  the  skeleton .^ 
Teaching  and  experimental  life  which 
have  beneath  them  no  firm,  strong 
skeleton  of  doctrine  are  apt  to  be  feeble, 
fatally  pliable,  shapeless,  unserviceable.] 
4.  Seems  sometimes  "  cruel  "  to  such  a 
text,  to  dissect  it  for  its  underlying 
skeleton.  The  botanist  sacrifices  the 
flower,  as  he  pulls  it  to  pieces  to 
examine  and  exhibit  its  structure. 
Yet  the  first  topic  in  this  text  is — 
II.  The  theology.— 1.  Difficult  to 
use  any  formulated  language  on  this 
topic,  as  on  many  others,  which  is  not 
open  to  legitimate  criticism,  or  which 
would  not,  with  very  slight  variation, 
swerve  right  or  left  into  mischievous 
error.  Difficult  to  use  any  which  is 
not  rather  a  protest  against  the  asser- 
tion, or  acceptance,  of  some  point,  or 
against  some  development  or  "  con- 
sequences," which  are  already,  and  in 
advance,  negatived  by  some  Scripture 
statement.  Difficult  to  allow  for 
the  effect  upon  Scripture  statements 
of  the  fact  that  everything  relating 
to  the  manner  of  the  Divine  existence 
is  exhibited  in  connection  with  the 
activity  of  the  Trinity  in  the  work 
of  human  Redemption.  2.  "He  was 
richf  ,   ,   ,  He  became  poor^'    is  the 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  II.  CORINTHIANS,  chap.  viii. 


practical,     workaday     shape    of    the  or  that  other,  "  The  Word  was  made 

Kenods  of  Phil.  ii.  7.     [The   "  poor "  [became]    flesh."      "  One    element    is 

are    to    have   "  the  Gospel  preached  common    to  them  all  j  ...  a  literal 

to    them";     they    must     have    even  merging   of    the  Divinity  of   the  Son 

its   theology  in  a  form  apprehensible  into  the  finite  spirit  of  the  Man  Christ 

by  the   youngest    and   the    simplest.]  Jesus.     The  general  idea  takes  many 

"  The  Jorm  of  God  "  was  not  eagerly  forms :   sometimes  simply  Pantheistic, 

/clutched  and  retained.  He  forewent  the  Eternal  Spirit  thinking  itself  as  a 
it,  and  presented  Himself  to  human  Person  in  Christ;  sometimes  purely 
I  observation  in  the  "/orm  o/*"  man  Eutychian,  God  the  Son  contracted 
/  the  "  servant "  of  God,  assuming  to  into  humanity,  and  both  growing  to- 
'  Himself,  possessing,  exhibiting,  the  gather  to  perfection ;  sometimes  Apol- 
characteristics  of  manhood,  and  in  linarian,  the  Potency  of  the  Son 
His  intercourse  with  men  normally/  working  dynamically  in  the  psychical 
conforming  Himself  to,  confining  soul  and  flesh  of  Jesus."  (Pope,  Theo- 
Himself  within,  the  conditions  of  log^,  ii.  194.)  Attempts  all  these  to 
man's  life ;  in  many  particulars  of  be  precise  where  precision  is  impossible ; 
His  work  and  mission  submitting  to  where  the  Fact  passes  our  apprehen- 
be  "  a  prophet  raised  up  in  the  midst  '*  sion  altogether.  4.  His  own  words 
of  Israel,  acting  as  the  old  prophets  make  one  thing  clear :  the  "  I  "  Whom 
did,  as  the  servants  of  Jehovah  (Acts  men  heard  and  saw  in  His  ^^ poverty  " 
iii.  22),  [though  He  stands  forth  carries  His  life  backward  [as  our 
as  the  highest  and  most  glorious  text  does]  into  etei'nal  depths  of 
example  of  the  Prophetic  Order,  the  past,  and  forward  into  eternal 
receiving  the  ^ipirit  ^^  without  measu7'e "  distances  of  the  Future,  with  an 
(John  iii.  34),]  only  drawing  upon  unbroken  continuity  of  existence  and 
the  reserve  possibilities  of  His  proper  of  personal  self -consciousness.  "  / 
^^form  of  God,"  and  only  speaking  came  forth.  .  .  .  I  am  come.  .  .  . 
without  a  veil  over  His  face  of  Again  .  .  .  I  go"  (John  xvi.  28).  In; 
glory,  just  so  far  as  might  be  needful  every  sense  is  ^^  Jesus  Christ  the  same 
for  the  accomplishment  of  His  re-  yesterday^  and  to-day,  and  for  ever" 
deeming  errand.  And  He  further  (Heb.  xiii.  8).  Theological  statement 
stooped  to  a  yet  lower  level.  Manhood  must  in  its  rotundity  of  systematised 
was  low,  far  beneath  Godhead ;  man's  completeness  find  room  for  all  such 
death  was  lower ;  the  death  of  a  Scripture  statements  as  make  a  God- 
crucified  man,  cruel,  shameful,  the  head,  "  emptied,"  even  temporarily,  of 
death  of  a  criminal  or  a  slave, — man  those  characteristics  which  are  part  of 
could  even  in  death  hardly  go  lower  the  very  definition  of  God,  untrue  and 
than  that  lowest;  yet  "  evei*  ^o  "  that  inconceivable.  He  was  never  so  "jooo?*" 
point — death,  death  upon  a  cross —  as  to  cease  to  be  Himself.  [Heb. 
did  He  carry  His  **  obedience,"  the  i.  1-4  is  a  Divine  "  Life  of  the  Son  of 
*'  Lord  of  all "  Who  had  consented,  God,"  going  back  to  the  date  when 
had  chosen,  to  become  His  Father's  *'  He "  made  the  world,  and  yet  earlier, 
*'  servant "  for  man's  sake.  Paul  thus  to  those  undated,  dateless  ages  when  He 
expounds,  in  the  passage  where  he  was  (essentially  and  all  along)  Bright- 
most  fully  approaches  the  Incarna-  ness  and  Image;  continuing  through 
tion  topic,  his  words  here.  3.  There  the  years — the  midway  episode — of 
are  depths  beyond  the  sounding  of  the  His  redeeming  work  ;  and  forward  to, 
wisest  beneath  these  quasi-popula/r  ex-  and  past.  His  (resumed)  session  on 
positions  of  the  inscrutable  Divine  Fact,  "the  throne  of  the  Majesty  on  high." 
Subtle  theories  of  wide-spreading  con-  Noteworthy  is  this  :  "  Being  the 
sequence  have  been  spun,  in  spider  Brightness,  .  .  .  upholding,  .  .  .  when 
fashion,  out  of  the  bowels  of  the  He  had  purged,  .  .  .  He  sat  down." 
simple    phrase,    "  Emptied   Himself,"  The  continuous,  native,  inherent  con- 

557 


CHAP.  VIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  II.   CORINTHIANS. 


dition  is  contemporaneous  with  the  acts 
wrought  on  the  stage  of  human  history 
at  a  definite,  earthly  date.     As  though 
the   Royal   Son,    and    Co-regent,   and 
Prime  Minister,  of  a  Sovereign,  with- 
out ceasing  to  be  anything  belonging  to 
his  nature  and  birth,  or  to  his  relation 
to  his  father,  and  without  ceasing  to 
uphold  all  the  empire  by  his  adminstra- 
tion,    should   add   to    his   labours   the 
special  task  of  going  to  a  remote  and 
rebellious    and    ruined    province,   and 
himself  winning,  or  reducing,  its  people 
to  submission.]     Human  illustration  is 
of  course  imperfect.     Peter  the  Great 
of  Russia  is  in  personal  character  not 
even   for   a    moment's    passing    com- 
parison, to  be  put  beside  the  "  Lord  of 
glory."     Yet    he    may   help    to   such 
apprehension  as  may  be  possible,  of  One 
Who,   for    the   sake  of    His    people's 
well-being,  "  became  pocyt^^''  though  all 
the    while    He    never    ceased   to   be 
"  rich "  in  His  own  proper  right  and 
in  fact.     Peter  narrowed   his   life,  in 
all  respects  needful  for  his  purpose — ■ 
in  dress,  in  residence,  [in  a  shipwright's 
cottage  in  Holland,]  in  style  of  living, 
in  manual  labour  as  a  shipyard  opera- 
tive— within  the  conditions  of  the  life 
of  a  working-man.     Yet,  if  need  were, 
for     the     safeguarding    of     his     true 
Imperial   honour   and   the  welfare  of 
his  people,  he  could  and  did,  assert  in 
word   and   act,    and   draw    upon,    his 
state  and  power  and  position  as  Czar 
of    the   Russias.      Becoming    a    ship- 
wright ;    taking   upon   him   the   form 
of  a  servant ;  without  ceasing   to  be 
the    ruler    of     his    empire     and    the 
possessor  of  all  its  resources. 

III.  The  experience. — 1.  The  word 
"  ye  know "  must  not  be  unfairly 
pressed,  to  contain  more  necessarily 
than  *'  Ye  are  aware  of  " ;  "ye  remem- 
ber that  ye  have  been  told  of,"  etc.  Not 
necessarily  more  in  it  than  an  intellec- 
tual apprehension  and  recalling  of  the 
fact.  But  to  serve  Paul's  purpose  the 
knowing  must  not  stop  there.  The 
truth  must  by  the  understanding  be 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  heart,  and,  in 
the  next  step,  upon  the  will,  arousing 
the  flagging  activity  of  the  Corinthian 

5$a 


Church.  No  truth  in  the  whole 
round  of  Christian  doctrine  is  ever 
effective,  if  it  be  merely  admitted 
into  the  region  of  the^  understanding. 
That  is  the  mere  outer~Court  of  the\ 
Gentiles  in  the  temple  -oi  our  being. 
If  it  is  to  affect  practice,  to  assist  the 
life  of  fellowship  with  God,  to  promote 
the  perpetual  offering  of  self  and  life 
upon  the  altar,  it  must  go  into  the 
inner  court,  the  court  of  God's  Israel 
of  to-day,  the  new  Israel  of  the  Spirit. 
It  must  enter  the  heart.  The  hea/rt 
must  *^  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.^'  No  Divine  truth  is 
known  merely  by  the  understanding. 
[Pectus  facit  theologum.]  ^^  Flesh  arid 
blood  had  not  revealed  "  to  Peter  even 
the  momentary  and  imperfect  glimpse 
he  had  gained  of  the  true  dignity  of 
his  Master  (Matt.  xvi.  17).  It  was, 
directly,  from  "  My  Father  which  is  in 
heaven."  A  man  may  carefully  collect 
and  collate  the  statements  of  Scripture 
as  to  the  Deity  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth ; 
he  may  weigh  the  statements  which 
seem,  or  are  made,  difficulties  or 
objections  to  the  truth ;  he  may 
determine  calmly,  coolly,  that  for 
these  there  is  sufficient  explanation ; 
and,  in  the  end,  he  may  regard,  and 
accept,  the  Godhead  of  Jesus  as  the 
teaching  of  Scripture,  arrived  at  by 
fair  induction.  But  he  does  not  know 
the  truth.  *'  No  man  can  call  Jesus 
Lord  but  by  the  Spirit "  (1  Cor.  xii.  3). 
In  like  manner,  no  real  knowledge  of 
the  meaning  of  this  grace  of  Christ, 
which  wrought  His  poverty^  is  ever 
gained  by  reading,  by  induction  from 
Scripture  facts  and  testimonies,  by 
mere  intellectual  apprehension  of  any 
kind.  Knowledge  comes  by  "  the 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit"  (1  Cor. 
ii.  4).  He  takes  of  "  the  things  of 
Christ "  and  "  shows  them  "  to  men 
(John  xvi.  14).  Christ  summarised 
in  a  sentence  the  teaching  of  many 
^'prophets "  "  They  shall  be  all  taught 
of  God"  (John  vi.  45).  The  only  man 
to  whom  "  doctrine  "  is  "  truth  "  is  the 
man  thus  "  convinced "  by  the  Spirit. 
To  him  only  is  it  an  operative  reality, 
and  not  a  speculative  opinion  merely. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  11.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  viii. 


The   man    who    in    himself    is   being  of  our  heritage  of  wealth  through  His 

"  made  rich  "  through  the  poverty  of  poverty,     [If  we  have  given  a  present, 

the  humbled  Christ,  comes  to  the  truth  which  has  cost  (for  us)  not  a  little, 

with  a  new,  peculiar  illumination  upon  and  which  has  only  been  possible  for  us 

it,  with  a  new  and  peculiar  verification  to  give  at  the  price  of  some  self-denial ; 

of   it.      The  road   by  which,  perhaps  into  whose  choosing,  and  perhaps  whose 

intellectually,   he  arrived  at  the  doc-  making,  we  have  put  the  most  valuable 

trine  is  by  him  re-travelled  with  the  new  thing    we    had   to   give, — our    loving 

light  of  heart  knowledge,  and  is  only  thought  and  labour, — how  are  we  dis- 

properly   known   in    that   light  ;    the  appointed   if  the   receiver    thanks   us 

truth  he  arrived  at  was  a  goal  reached  perfunctorily,    or    in    a    conventional 

in  the  dark  or  the  dim  dawning,  only  heartiness   of   phraseology  which   evi- 

seen  clearly  when  the  "  Sun  of  Righ-  dently  covers  an  absence  of  appreciation 

teousness"  Himself  had  ^^  shined  into  his  of  our  gift,  or  of  ourselves;  if  we  find 

^heart  "  (iv.  6).     All  this  may  not  lie  in  it  put  away  into  some  drawer  or  casket, 

the  surface,  argumentative  use  of  the  and  only  now  and  again  for  decency's 

word    by   Paul;  but  it  underlies  the  sake,  or  to  save  our  feeling,  worn  or 

word,    and    is   implicitly   there.     His  used,  whereas  we  hoped  it  might  be  in 

argument  will  have  no  real  force,  where  constant   use,  a  daily  joy   or   service. 

the  knowledge  is  not  that  which  has  Then  what  of  His  "  disappointment " 

been    gained     by    experience ;     it     is  (to  use  a  human   word,  and  to  think 

knowledge  which  has  been  lived  into.  humanly  also)  when  the  "  riches"  which 

IV.  The  purpose  of  the  poverty. —  He  made  available  for  us,  at  such  cost 

1.  The  enrichment  of  His  people.    Such  of  pains  and  sacrifice  and  loving  design, 

*'  enrichment  "  as  in  1   Cor.  i.  5   (and  lie  plainly  little  appreciated,  seldom  ap- 

ver.  7  here)  is  one  aspect,  one  phase,  propriated,  and  never  appropriated  in 

of  the  many-sided   blessing.     But  all  any  full  measure,  even  by  those  who 

the  life  of  grace,  from  its  first  inception  thank  Him  in  a  heart -bet  rajdng,  cold, 

in  a  germinal  life,  through  the  growing  formality   of    eucharistic   phraseology. 

maturity  of  the  '"'' perfect"  ^^ spiritual '*  Let  us  gladden  Him  and  recompense 

man,  until  the  utmost  earthly  wealth  His  love  by  putting  to  the  utmost  ex- 

of  knowledge  and  of  blessing  enlarges  perimental    proof    the    meaning    and 

into  a  new  beginning  of  " enrichment "  contents   of    the    ^^ riches"   which   are 

in  the  world  of  eternity ;  all  its  accom-  His  dear-bought ''grace."]     [N.B. — He 

paniments  of   knowledge,  communion,  does  mean  that  Himself  "  be  burdened 

victory,   light,  peace,   joy, — all   is   in-  and  others  eased."] 

eluded.     All  that  "  grace  "  brings ;  all 

that  '*  glory"  means;  all  that  is  con-  Yer.  12.  A  Collection  Sermon. — In 
tained  in  the  marvel  of  love  *'  that  reading  the  text  the  case  of  the  Widow 
we  should  be  called  sons  of  God " ;  all  and  her  Mite  immediately  recurs  to 
that  is  given  and  is  pledged  in  that  mind,  as  illustrating  and  embodying 
God  calls  Himself  ours  (see  the  argu-  Paul's  statement.  (See  Homiletic 
ment  in  Matt,  xxiii.  32);  all  the  Analysis.)  Like  so  many  other  sayings, 
eternally  unfolding  possibilities  of  a  of  temporary  occasion,  this  embodies  a 
redeemed,  restored  Manhood,  restored  great  principle  of  abiding  and  many- 
after  the  pattern  of  Him  Who  is  sided  applicability  in  our  dealings  with 
the  ^^ firstborn  atnongst  many  [similar  God. 

^* sons"  smdfio]  bi^ethren"  (Rom.  vni.  21)',  I.  1.  The  real  offering  to  God  is 
— all  is  included.  Whether  any  other  the  "  readiness,"  the  "  willing  mind." 
way  of  restoration  and  enrichment  — The  word  "  it "  is  supplied  in  trans- 
were  possible  we  may  hardly,  and  we  lating.  It  must  not  be  insisted  on 
need  not,  inquire.  It  should  be  ours  with  too  definite  a  reference  in  ex- 
to  see  that  we  explore,  and  allow  position.  The  sense  is  general :  "If 
ourselves  to  be  led  into,  all  the  meaning  there  be  ,  ,  .  on  man's  side,  there  is 

559 


CHAP.  VIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   IL  CORINTHIANS, 


an   acceptance  on  God's   side,  accord-  what  spirit ;  lest  in  the  reckoning  we 
ing  to,"  etc.     Yet  whole  diift  of  the  be  amongst  those  whose  gift  or  work  is 
passage  shows  that   the  thing  which  used,  who  are  themselves  blessed  (for 
gives    any   value   to    the   gift   is   the  God  is  no  man's  debtor),  but  who  do 
willing  mind.     It  is  the  gift ;  all  else  is  not  find  the  best  blessing  of  final,  full, 
expression,  accessory,  robing,  drapery,  personal  acceptance.    Indeed,  unwilling 
Unless  "  the  willing  mind "  go  before  and  unwitting   instruments  get  used, 
and  lie  evident  before  God's  eye,  the  Some  are  the  mere  conduit -pipe,  the 
rest  counts  for  nothing.    It  must  infuse  mere  vessel,  conveying  blessing  in  which 
gift  and  service  with  its  own  quahty.  they  have  no  share.     3.  For  our  sakes 
If  this  spirit  of  the  deed  be  absent,  all  — independent  as  He  is  of  our  labour 
else  is  a  dead   thing  to  offer  to   the  or  gifts — God  seeks  our  co-operation, 
living  God.    The  silver  and  the  gold  are  That    there    is    any   acceptance    and 
His ;    He  neither  needs  nor  cares  for  reward  at  all,  is  altogether  a  matter  of 
our  money,  nor  is  benefited  by  it.     He  grace  ;  but  seeing  that  there  is  reward. 
Who   has   all   power   in   heaven    and  He  graciously  allows  us  in  this  way  to 
earth,  and   all  for  the  needs  of   His  determine  how  large  the  reward  shall 
Church,    does    not    depend,    by    any  be,    how    abundant    the    acceptance, 
necessity,  upon  our  puny  labour  or  our  Also  :   Every  time  we  put  the  willing 
gifts.     Of  old  He  did  not  for  Himself  mind   into   practical  embodiment,   we 
want  the  carcases  whose  death  made  cultivate  the  willingness.    The  impulse 
His  Temple  courts  one  great  shambles.  to    do    or    to   give,    which   takes    no 
The  life  was  the  true  offering.     The  practical  shape  is  not  merely  aroused 
willing  mind  is  the  life  of  the  gift  or  in  vain,  but  is  weakened  by  the  vain 
service,  the  one  true   offering.     2.  If  stimulation.     Parents  could  as  well,  or 
we  could  see  tjrod's  copy  of  the  sub-  better,  do  the  little  tasks  which  they 
scription   and   collection    hsts   of    the  give  their  children ;  they  need  some- 
Churches,   we   should   find    that    His  times  after  all  to  be  done  over  again, 
revision   and   appreciation   had   made  But  for  their  sakes  they  *'ask"  their 
marked     discrepancies     between     His  help.     So  the  gift  of  the  willing  mind 
copy    and    ours.      Ciphers    struck    off  is  a  blessing  (ix.   5,   6)   to  him   that 
from  some  swelling  printed  amounts ;  gives  as  really  as  to  him  that  takes, 
thousands  dwindled  to  the  hundreds  or  Every   least    service    done    with    the 
the  tens.     Many  of  the  shillings  and  willing,  devoted  heart,  strengthens  the 
the  pence,  on  the  other  hand,  standing  devotion,   and    helps    to    render    per- 
entered  at  values  which  would  surprise  manent    and    instructive   the   willing 
nobody  more  than  the,  perhaps  humble,  mind.     [4.  Then,  as  in  the  analytical 
givers.     The   cup  of  cold  water,  for-  exposition,  the  characteristics  of  true 
gotten  by  even  the  giver,  remembered  and  acceptable  service  may  be  enlarged 
gratefully   by   Him   Whose   reminder  upon  :  "  Willing  of  themselves ;  "  "  vnth 
and  recognition  call  out  the  unfeigned  much  entreaty  begged"  as  a  privilege, 
amazement  which  cries,  "  Lord,  when  to  be  allowed  to  give ;   "  beyond  their 
saw  we  Thee  thirsty  ? "     It  is  possible  power"  though  this  is  not  required  by 
that  the  life's  work  of  some  prominent  Paul  or  by  God  ;  they  ^^  gave  themselves 
Diotrephes  will  shrivel  up  into  very  fi7^st  to  the  Lord  "  ;  and  the  secret  and 
modest  bulk  and  receive  the  Master's  spring  of  all  was,  they  "  remembered 
barest   thanks.     Yet,    to   be   fair,   re-  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."] 
member :    Let    there    be   the   willing  [If  the  occasion   be  (say)  a  Hospital 
mind  and  the  liberal  gift ;  let  there  be  Sunday,    it    may    be    further    said  :] 
the  thoroughly  right  heart  and  motive  5.  There    may   be    (to-day)    gifts    of 
and    the    abundant    labour ;    such    a  ostentation,  of  rivalry  between  Church 
man's  deed   is   doubly,  gloriously  ac-  and  Church,  for  a  good  place  in  the 
ceptable.     Let  us  have  a  care  how  we  pubhshed   lists ;    gifts    also   springing 
give,  and  why;  how  we  serve,  an4  in  froca  a  iiiere  sejitijnental  admiration 

560 


H0MILE2IC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,  chap.  viii. 


of  the  idea  of  a  united  day  of  charity.  2.  Happily  the  principle  maybe  reversed 

There    is,    manifestly,   work  done    in  in  its  application.     We  serve  a  Master 

the  Church  from  training  and  habit ;  Who  is  thoroughly  acquainted  with  us, 

the  workers   were   early  set   in   their  and  thoroughly  reasonable  (to  speak  as 

groove,  and  have  had  no  strong  tempta-  of  man)  in  what   He  requires.      The 

tion  to  leave  it.     There  is  work  which  trumpet-shaped  funnels  of  the  Temple 

happens  to  be  the  fashion.      *'  Every-  money  chests  rang  with  the  big  gifts 

body  in   our   set   does  it ;   we  must."  of  the  rich ;  the  poor  widow's  two  mites 

To  some,  work  is  a  stern  duty,  often  made  no  noise  as  she  slipped  them  in ; 

a  drudgery ,but  done  because  they  ought,  but  she  gave  a  hundred  per  cent.,  as 

Better    than   many   a    motive,   that;  no  other  had  done.     Ability  could  go  no 

better  far  than  merely  the  desire  or  the  further.     3.  Many  gifts  as  valuable  as 

necessity  to  keep  right  with  a  master,  money,   and   more  necessary :   hearty, 

or  with  some  one  whose  favour  is  to  loving,    personal    effort    for    souls ;   a 

be  desired.    Basest  of  all  is  the  idea  of,  week's  prayer  contributed  to  the  success 

so  to  speak,  earning  so  many  "  good  of  the  Sunday's  teaching ;  the  invita- 

marks  "  in  heaven's  register.    The  gain  tion  of  the  neighbour  to  the  house  of 

is,  materially,  often  the  same  to  the  God.     There  are  willing,   busy  hearts 

Church,  the  hospital,  the  sick,  the  poor,  which  can  give  little  money,  little  weight 

the  sanctuary,  or  the  fund ;  but  to  the  of  influence,  no  very  wise  judgments, 

man  himself  such  gain  is  counted  as  no  preaching  or  teaching  ability.     Yet 

nothing,  or  as  loss.     There  is  not  the  no  humblest  is  to  despond  or  be  idle. 

**  willing  mind."  "  If  there  be,  .  .  .  it  is   accepted,  ac- 

II.  The  willing  mind  is  not  all. —  cording    to   that   a   man  hath.''      God 

1.    The   Corinthian    danger  was   of  a  knows,  and  the  wise  or  wealthy  workers 

failure  between  will  and  deed,  between  and  supporters  should  not  forget,  how 

intention  and   performance,   or,  more  largely  the  success  which  crowns  the 

exactly,   between    the    beginning  and  wisely    planned,    liberally    supported, 

the  completion  of  their   task.     Partly  efiiciently  worked  schemes,  is  the  result 

will  and  partly  deed   can  only  be  ac-  of  the  banded  prayers  of  a  company  of 

cepted  when  no  more  is  possible ;  the  humble,  godly    people,  who   can  con- 

will   for    the  deed  when    no   deed   is  tribute   nothing  else.      A   sick   saint, 

possible.    The  snare  besets  all  workers :  bedridden,  suffering,   year  after  year, 

work    falls    through    after    a   hearty  who  can  only  lie  and  pray,  but  prays 

inception,    for    want     of     a     patient  Tnightilyy  for  the  work  and  the  workers, 

endurance  in   carrying   out.     Easy  to  or   who   grandly   exemplifies  to  every 

begin,   under   the   force  of  a  stirring  visitor,  or  domestic  servant,  the  gain  of 

appeal,  or  the  deep  stirring  of  emotion  godliness  and  the  all-sufficient  grace  of 

by  the  sight  of  a  sad  need ;  even  to  the  Saviour,  is  often  making  an  offering 

begin   energetically.      But    to    go  on  very   large  in   its   acceptableness.     A 

week  by  week  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2),  when  the  plain  man,  who  cannot  argue,  but  can 

first  enthusiasm  has  become  a  memory,  live  and  testify  at  his  work;  whenever 

is    to    some    temperaments   especially  misses  one  of  the  rare  chances  of  speak- 

difficult.     The  enthusiasm  must  not  be  ing  for  His  Master ;  it  is  a  gift  up  to 

allowed  to  become  a  memory ;  the  sense  the  full  level  of  "  that  the  man  hath." 

of  debt  to    "  the  grace    of  our   Lord  [Legend   appended    to    this   Homily.] 

Jesus    Christ "    must    be    perpetually  4.  Let  this  principle  obtain  with  us,  in 

renewed   at  the   Cross.     Paul's  words  our   judgment   of   others.      Like  God, 

gently   hint    that,  to  even   the   most  as    far   as   may  be    let    us    estimate 

willing,   and    the    (apparently)   most  "  what    a  man   hath."      Tempted    to 

active  or  liberal,  the  Lord's  question  think  hardly  of  a  man  who  does  not 

will  be,  not,  "  How  much  did  you  do,  give  as  much  as  we  thought  he  ought, 

or  give  ? "  but,  "  Did  you  do  all  you  But  what  claims  has   he  upon    him  1 

could  ?  "  Five  talents  should  bring  J^ve.  Perhaps  some  of  which  only  His  Master 

0  0  •              561 


CHAP.  Tx.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


knows.  Perplexed  at  the  blemishes, 
the  incongruities,  found  in  the  lives  of 
some  very  earnest,  very  demonstrative, 
very  loud-professing  Christian  men  and 
women.  We  can  hardly  conceive  how 
they  cannot  condemn  these  things 
which  lie  so  obvious  to  our  censure,  and 
to  that  of  the  world.  Are  they  honest  ? 
Or  hypocrites  ?  It  may  well  be  that 
they  are  honest  enough,  though  it  is  a 
great  pity  they  aro  not  more  spiritu- 
ally sensitive  and  enlightened  in  judg- 
ment. But  what  is  the  material  out 
of  which  they  have  been  made  Chris- 
tians? The  class  out  of  which  they 
have  been  drawn  ?  What  their  op- 
portunities, their  surroundings,  their 
training?  The  habit  and  cast  of  their 
mind  ?  Their  own  Master,  looking  into 
their  heart  sees,  as  between  Him  and 
them,  the  pure  white  light  of  a  perfect 
intention ;  but  it  shines  out  to  our 
observation  through  a  poor,  dimmed, 


coloured,  distorted  medium  of  human 
and  personal  limitation.  Conversely, 
too,  the  clear  w^hite  light  of  Divine 
truth  on  these  points  shines  in  upon 
their  judgment  and  conscience  through 
the  same  poor  medium  also.  "  Accord- 
ing to  that  a  man  hath,"  in  His 
Lord's  judgment  of  him. 

[Legend  in  outline. — King  sitting 
daily  at  palace  window  watching  his 
cathedral  rise.  Falls  asleep  ;  dreams  ; 
sees  building  finished;  high  up  on 
tower  the  tablet  which  is  to  record  his 
name  and  gift ;  another  name  there  ! 
A  woman's  name ;  long  inquiry  of  all 
about  him  quite  fruitless  ;  woman  un- 
known. Proclamation  made  through 
the  city  brings  a  poor  widow  to  him  at 
last.  "Your  name?"  "Yes."  "Why 
there?"  "Do  not  know."  "What 
have  you  done  ? "  "  Nothing  but 
carry  water  to  the  masons,  to  refresh 
them  on  hot,  thirsty  days."] 


CHAPTER  IX. 


CRITICAL  NOTES, 


Ver.  1  — Connected,  in  word  [Trep^,  in  both  cases]  and  in  fact,  with  1  Cor.  xv,  1,  which 
belongs  to  the  initiation  of  this  "  collection,"  this  "  ministration  "  for  the  poor  "  saints  "  of 
the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  as  this  does  to  the  conclusion  of  the  financial  effort.  Superfluous. 
— Yet  he  had  been  dealing*  with  it,  in  chap,  viii.,  and  here  urges  motives  to  liberality 
(ver.  6  sqq.').  Was  there  no  need  to  speak  of  it  ?  Was  this  Christian  simplicity  of  truth  ? 
Yes  (see  Homiletic  Analysis).  Connect  viii.  24,  ix.  1,6.  "  Show  ye  them.  ...  I  have  no 
need  to  speak  to  you.  .  .  .   Yet  I  will  remind  you  that,"  etc.     Cf.  1  Thess.  iv.  9,  v.  1. 

Ver.  2.  Forwardness  of  mind. — This  clears  the  "  readiness  "  of  R. V.  from  doubt.  Not 
their  preparedness  of  arrangement  to  make  up  and  send  their  contribution  (viii.  19). 
Provoked. — As  the  occasion  of  the  journey  of  Epapbroditus  to  Rome  once  stirred  up  these 
same  Macedonians,  always  liberal-hearted,  and  proving  it  by  repeated  gifts  to  himself,  and 
called  forth  their  generosity  to  him  in  his  prison  in  Rome,  so  that  the  wdnter-dormant  stem 
of  their  liberality  was  touched  as  with  the  breath  of  spring,  and  "flourished  again,"  i.e. 
broke  out  into  blossom  and  practical  fruit  (Phil.  iv.  10  sqq.,  A.V.).  Your  behalf  (R.V.). — Of 
course  not  implying  any  desire  or  request  of  theirs  that  he  would. 

Ver.  3.  The  brethren. — Viz.  mentioned  in  viii.  16  sqq.  In  this  behalf. — In  this  particular 
detail,  on  this  point,  viz.  your  having  all  in  readiness. 

Ver.  5.  Covetousness. — Which  would  hold  back  even  the  devoted,  promised,  collected 
money  to  the  last  moment;  not  releasing,  or  paying  over,  one  moment  earlier  than  was 
necessary. 

Ver.  6.  Bountifully. — See  R.V.  margin,  and  notice  how  this  verse  takes  up  the  word  for 
"  'bounty''''  in  ver.  5.  Really,  literally,  "  blessing  "  (ver.  5)  ''■with  blessings"  (ver.  8).  Thence, 
makes  "  blessing"  full  of  associations  of  God's  gifts  in  measure  and  manner  of  bestowment, 
lead  on  to  the  style  and  spirit  of  giving  in  ver.  7. 

Ver.  7.  Grudgingly. —  Out  of  {sk  heart  filled  with)  sorrow  at  having  to  part  with  the  gift* 
Prov,  xxii.  8  is  quoted  from  LXX.,  not  the  Hebrew. 

562 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   IL    CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


Ver.  8.  All. — Good  instance  of  Paul's  (instinctive,  not  formal)  rhetoric.  Always  tends  to 
amplificative,  cumulative  phraseology.  Piles  up  prepositions  only  slightly  differentiated, 
or  phrases  nearly  synonymous  {e.g.  Rom.  x.  12),  or  vaguely  large  (as  here,  "all").  '■'■All 
might"  (Col.  i.  11),  ''all  prayer"  (Eph.  vi.  18),  ''all  knowledge"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  2),  "all 
acceptation  "  (1  Tim.  i.  15),  etc. ;  q.d.  "  Whatever  the  meaning  in  which  you  need  to  conceive 
of  it,  whatever  the  form  in  which  it  needs  to  shape  itself  in  manifestation — I  mean  all 
that ! "  Grace. — Here  in  a  special,  narrowed  sense ;  nearly  equivalent  to  "  the  means  where- 
with you  may  be  able  to  give."  Connection  :  "  Do  not  hesitate  to  give  ;  do  what  is  right ; 
God  will  see  to  it  that  your  own  need  is  supplied."  Cf.  the  same  principle  illustrated  in 
Mai.  iii.  10,  and — less  closely  parallel — in  Phil.  iv.  19  :  "  You  have  supplied  all  my  need;  my 
God  will  supply  all  your  need."  [Compare  also  the  four-faced  cherubim  of  the  Chariot, 
Ezek.  i.  15-17;  and  the  really  connected  "foursquare"  of  the  Heavenly  City,  xxi.  16. 
Everything  of  God  is  foursquare  in  its  completeness;  His  City  approachable,  and  giving 
entrance  on  all  sides,  from  all  quarters,  to  redeemed  man.  Similarly,  "  all  grace  "  in  its 
widest  meaning  stands  in  the  midst  of  man's  needs,  foursquare,  exactly  meeting  our  need 
and  our  request,  from  whatever  side  we  approach  it.] 

Ver.  9. — Ps.  cxii.  9,  quoted  from  LXX.  (cxi.).  Abideth. — Q.d.  "is  never  to  be  exhausted" 
(Stanley).     Too  narrow. 

Ver.  10.  Snpplieth. — The  usage  lying  at  the  root  of  this  word  in  Greek  may  furnish  the 
preacher  with  vivid  illustration  of  (say)  Phil.  i.  19.  A  wealthy  Greek  citizen  had  to  assume^ 
as  a  public  duty,  the  whole  expense  of  the  training  and  maintenance  of  the  Chorus  for  a  new 
play.  "  God  will  provide  all  the  needed  expense."  Seed  .  .  .  food. — Clear  reminiscence  of 
Isa.lv.  10.  (See  homiletic  development.)  Kighteousness. — In  the  narrow  sense  of  the  Psalm 
quoted,  primarily. 

Ver.  11. — Difficult  to  choose  between  "  hountifulness  "  and  "  simplicity ^^^  as  in  Rom.  xii.  8  ; 
2  Cor.  viii.  2,  and  ver.  13.  The  direct,  and  simply  open,  mind  runs  close  with  the  simply 
opened  hand ;  no  after-thought,  or  reserve,  or  regret  in  either.  Everything"  .  .  .  all. — A 
cumulative  phrase  again. 

Ver.  12.  Administration. — Same  word,  in  slightly  varied  aspect,  as  "  ministering'''  in  ver.  1. 
Service. — The  word  (classically)  used  of  a  public  burden  assumed  and  discharged  as  in 
ver.  10.  But  must  not  be  pressed  here.  Aboundeth. — Note  how  this  word  recurs,  ver.  1 
(Greek),  ver.  8. 

Ver.  13. — Sense  made  clear  in  R.  V.  "  Professed  "  means  "  openly  avowed  and  confessed  "  ; 
not,  of  course,  "^re^ijTi^e^  subjection."  Distribution. — "Your  contribution,''  'R.Y.  Literally, 
your  "  fellowship,"  or  "  communion."  Word  is  polar ;  at  the  action  eiid  it  is  "  communicating," 
at  the  feeling  end  it  is  "  community  "  of  heart.  Includes  both,  for  the  Corinthian  con- 
tribution was  an  emphatic  expression  of  the  new  community  between  Jew  and  Gentile. 

Ver.  15. — At  first  sight  unsuggested,  irrelevant.  So  much  so,  that  Speaker's  Commentary, 
in  loc,  pronounces  the  application  to  Christ  "too  wide  a  deviation  from  the  immediate 
context "  to  be  admissible.     (But  see  Homily  under  1  Cor.  xvi.  22.) 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— WhoU  Chapter. 

We  have : — 

A.  Christian  courtesy  exemplified  (vers.  1-5). 

B.  Christian  giving  described  (vers.  6-14). 

C.  God's  giving  and  gift  the  model  and  motive  (ver.  15). 

A.  I.  Consistent  with  thorough,  transparent  simplicity  of  truth. — 1.  The 

Christian  is  to  be  courteous  (1  Pet.  iii.  8,  ^o<  to  be  quoted).  Yet  is  to  "  speak  the 
truth"  (and  ''do  the  truth"  also),  though  "in  love"  (Eph.  iv.  15).  Often  a 
real,  practical  difficulty  to  discover  the  exact  line,  between  the  nicely  balanced 
conditions  and  the  closely  pressing,  subtle  perils,  of  unfaithful  kindness,  on  the 
one  side,  and  of  harsh  and  repellent  fidelity  on  the  other.  Truth  at  all  costs, 
and  with  all  risks,  of  course ;  but,  wherever  possible,  loving,  or  at  least  courteously 
spoken,  truth ;  and  this  both  for  the  sake  of  the  person  concerned,  and  for  the 
success  of  rebuke  administered,  or  the  improvement  desired.  A  friend  may 
in  kindness  wound]  an  enemy  may  in  malice  kiss  (Prov.  xxvii.  6).  If  i\iQ  friend 
can  do  his  work  with  a  kiss,  so  much  the  better.  2.  Paul  himself  shows  how 
possible  it  is  to  pay  a  well-turned,  serviceable  compliment  with  the  most  perfect 
truth.     Acts  xxiv.  10  (to  Felix),  xxvi.  2,  3  (to  Agrippa),  were  quite  true  and 

563 


CHAP.  IX.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


appropriate  things  to  say ;  Acts  xxiv.  2,  3  (TertuUus  to  Felix)  was  notoriously 
untrue.  [Very  courteously — accepting  the  correction  (though  not  too  courteously 
made),  and  acknowledging  a  measure  of  fault  in  himself — did  he  recover  himself, 
after  his  outburst  of  not  unjustifiable  indignation  before  the  High  Priest 
(Acts  xxiii.  5).  On  Paul's  courtesy,  see  Howson,  Hulsean  Lectures,  Chmracter 
of  St  Paul,  ii.]  Jowett,  Stanley,  and  others  call  Paul  "a  gentleman,"  who,  in 
1  Cor.  xiii.  4-7,  draws  "  The  Portrait  of  a  Gentleman."  3.  Here  Paul,  dealing 
with  these  suspicious,  proud,  touchy  Corinthians,  some  of  them  not  too  well 
affected  towards  himself,  displays  Tact  amd  Truth.  (1)  "/,  not  to  say  you'^ 
(ver.  4),  delicately  shifts  the  heavier  pressure  of  possible  "shame"  to  the 
shoulders  which  ought  not  to  have  it  to  bear.  (2)  Quite  true  that  both  would 
certainly  have  to  share  the  burden,  if  by  their  unreadiness  they  make  its  incidence 
necessary  at  all ;  his  Christian  love  offers,  as  it  were,  to  assume  the  heavier 
share,  whilst,  suggestively  leaving  the  way  open  to  their  own  love,  to  save 
"  shame "  both  to  him  and  them.  (3)  Also  it  was  quite  true  that,  as  matter  of 
absolute  necessity,  it  was  "  superfluous  "  for  him  to  say  even  as  much  as  he  had 
said  in  chap.  viii.  The  Corinthian  contribution  to  the  Relief  Fund  was  evidently 
substantially  ready,  and  had  been  "ready  a  year  ago."  At  most,  what  was 
wanted  was  the  closing  up  of  the  accounts.  What  he  adds  here  is  to  quicken  the 
finishing  up  of  the  business ;  there  never  had  been  any  need  to  suggest  to,  or 
press  upon,  their  "  forward  mind  "  the  making  of  a  collection.  His  courtesy  is 
perfectly  truthful.  So  also  ver.  6,  "  I  want  you  to  have  what  you  really  deserve, 
the  credit  of  seeming,  not  covetous  but,  liberal." 

II.  Gives  full  recognition  of  excellence. — And  this  both  to  themselves  and  to 
ether  Churches.  [Rising  to  a  higher  example :  The  Head  of  the  Churches 
(Rev.  ii.  3,  passim),  even  in  the  case  of  the  most  unfaithful  Church,  gladly 
acknowledges  every  point  which  can  be  praised,  even  though  He  must  (like  Paul 
here)  complain  of  half -finished  work  (iii.  2,  R.V.).  See  how  He  (to  Ephesus, 
ii.  6,  after  vers.  4,  5)  returns  to  praise  a  point  of  excellence,  so  to  speak 
forgotten  in  vers.  2,  3.J  No  need  for  a  Christian  to  stint  or  grudge  deserved 
praise.  To  many  temperaments  a  very  needful  factor  in  their  improvement. 
May,  as  here,  be  consecrated  to  the  subserving  of  the  interests  of  the  work 
of  God. 

III.  Is  prudent  and  business-like. — 1.  He  has  used  Corinthian  "forwardness  " 
as  his  lever,  to  move  the  not  illiberal  or  tardy,  Macedonian  Churches.  He  now 
lays  his  plans,  and  takes  his  measures,  to  ensure  that  there  shall  be  no  miscarriage, 
after  so  much  has  actually  been  done  towards  the  desired  result.  His  repeated 
and  confident  laudation  of  them  must  not  have  a  not  very  creditable  conclusion 
and  comment,  in  an  only  almost  ready  collection.  "  Befoi^ehamd,  beforehand, 
hefoi^ehand "  is,  and  has  been,  his  watchword  (vers.  5,  6,  Stanley) ;  a  true 
"  business  principle."  [Nelson  said  he  beat  the  French  fleets  by  always  being 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  time.]  No  need  for  a  Christian  man  to  be  worse 
than  a  man  of  the  world,  "  wise  in  (and  for  the  purposes  of)  bis  generation,"  in 
such  points  of  practical  sagacity.  Friction  would  be  saved  within  the  Church, 
and  often  scandal  from  without,  if  business  prudence  and  good  sense  were  always 
consecrated  to  the  management  of  its  finances.  Business  as  well  as  Courtesy 
may  be  sanctified  to  the  highest  ends.  2.  Is  there  any  suggestion  of  prudence 
in  "handling"  even  his  friend  Titus,  in  the  fact  that,  in  regard  to  this  business, 
he  always  speaks  of  ^^ exhorting"  Titus,  rather  than  enjoining  or  directing? 
(viii.  6,  17,  xii.  18  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  12  ;  but  so  also  Timothy,  1  Ep.,  i.  3).  3.  The  need 
of  such  courtesy  of  character,  and  good  sense  and  business  aptitude,  in  the  manage- 
ment of  men  and  aflaii*s  in  the  Church,  is  a*  strong  appeal  and  claim  for  their 
consecration  to  Christ  by  those  who  are  endowed  with  them.  [Cf.  Num.  x.  31  : 
"Thou  (Hobab)  mayest  be  to  us  instead  of  eyesj"   i.e.   his  experience  and 

564 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  IX. 


training  in  desert  life  were  wanted,  though  the  host  had  Jehovah  and  the  Pillar 
in  their  midst.] 

B.  Christian  giving  is  described. — 1.  It  is  literally  "  blessing"  (=  "  bounty"), 
in  this  section  of  the  New  Testament,  and  here  only.  [So  LXX.,  Gen.  xxxiii.  11 ; 
cf.  the  beautiful  Hebrew  of  Prov.  xi.  25,  "  a  soul  of  blessing."]  As  in  the 
similar  use  of  "  grace  "  for  this  Corinthian  gift,  the  Divine  word  is  borrowed  for 
the  expression  of  human  love  between  brethren  and  brethren,  Church  and  Church. 
[So  in  the  Psalm  quoted  (ver.  9),  "his  righteousness  (with  special  application  to 
this  almsgiving)  endureth  for  ever,"  is  the  repetition  as  to  man  of  the  same 
phrase  in  the  preceding  Psalm  (cxi.  3)  used  of  God,  "  His  righteousness  endureth 
for  ever."  (May  we  venture  to  give  this  a  similar  speciality  of  application,  and  say, 
"  His  almsgiving  to  a  needy  world  endureth  unwearied  and  inexhaustible  "  ?)  No 
doubt  "  righteousness  "  means  more  than  this,  in  both  instances.]  The  Christian 
giver  is  God's  almoner  and  representative,  if  his  gift  is  the  outcome  of  a  love  in 
his  heart  for  man  caught  from  God's  philanthropy  (Tit.  iii.  4).  His  gift  mirrors 
God's  gift  on  a  smaller  scale ;  his  giving  should,  in  his  purpose  and  manner,  be 
like  God's  "blessing."  2.  (1)  It  is  "sowing"  ;  a  disposing  of  one's  wealth  which 
brings  back  again  itself  with  interest,  itself  multiplied  manifold.  The  old 
epitaph  has  truth  in  it : — 

"  Here  lies  a  man,  men  thought  him  mad  ; 
The  more  he  gave  the  more  he  had." 

The  giver  is  not  the  poorer  by  so  much,  when  he  has  parted  with  his  gift ;  he  is 
the  richer  by  so  much,  in  that  he  has  that  and  all  it  is  to  bring  by  God's  blessing. 
(2)  Does  the  farmer  return  from  his  field  saying  "  grudgingly"  and  with  a  sorrow- 
ful heart  (ver.  7),  "  There  !  All  that  good  seed  thrown  away  and  lost  "  ?  Yet  some 
Christian  givers  "  go  forth  weeping  bearing  this  precious  seed,"  forgetting  that 
they  may  complete  (in  this  borrowed  sense)  the  sentence  of  the  Psalm.  (3)  The 
wise  sower  does  not  even  sow  "  of  necessity"  only  going  out  to  his  fields  in  the 
Spring  because,  if  he  do  not,  he  will  starve  in  Winter ;  and,  still  less,  because  of 
what  his  neighbour  farmers  are  doing,  and  what  they  will  think  and  say  of  him, 
if  he  too  do  not  scatter  some  seed  !  (4)  The  giver  who  understands  that  he  is  a 
sower  goes  forth  to  his  giving  "  cheerful "  ;  a  holy  hilarity  may  rightly  pervade 
every  heart,  when  a  Church  is  assembled  to  make  some  great  financial  effort 
for  the  cause  of  God.  (5)  Like  sowing,  too,  in  this :  Sowing  and  Harvest  are 
connected  in  two  ways.  In  Gal.  vi.  8  Paul  reminds  the  Galatians  [who,  as 
Caesar  testifies  of  the  Western  Gauls,  their  kindred,  were  inclined  to  be  money- 
loving]  that,  in  kind,  what  a  man  sows  he  reaps.  Here  he  says  that,  in 
measure,  as  a  man  sows  so  he  reaps ;  whether  "  sparingly"  or,  as  God  Himself 
sows  when  He  gives,  "  with  blessings "  (R.V.  margin),  i.e.  with  a  heart  in 
his  sowing,  his  giving,  which  would  gladly  make  all  he  gives,  in  intention  and 
efiect  a  blessing.  Stint  your  field  of  seed,  you  stint  your  barn  of  sheaves.  You 
may  choose  the  measure  of  your  reaping.  3.  Such  almsgiving  is  a  "  service " 
(ver.  12),  a  "liturgy"  in  the  classical  sense,  a  burden  which  is  obligatory  upon 
those  citizens  of  the  kingdom  of  God  whom  God  has  made  able,  and  has  officially 
and  formally  appointed  by  making  them  able,  to  sustain  it  for  the  good  of  others, 
their  less  able  fellow-citizens.  And  yet,  4.  It  is  a  "  ministration"  a  "  diaconate." 
The  wealthy  man,  or  Church,  must  not  remember  too  vividly  his  superiority  in 
ability,  even  whilst  he  serves  and  discharges  his  liturgy  (=  "administers  this 
service,"  ver.  12),  lest  he  become  the  Lord  Bountiful  to  his  poorer  fellow-citizens 
in  the  kingdom  of  God,  instead  of  the  almoner  of  the  true  Bountiful  Lord.  He 
is  the  servant  on  Christ's  behalf,  of  his  brethren,  fulfilling  the  office  which  was 
first,  and  most  gloriously,  held  by  his  Master  (Matt.  xx.  28,  same  root  word). 
Again,   5.   Here  are   the  motives  which  should  encourage  and  regulate  giving. 

565 


CHAP.  IX.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    It.  CORINTHIANS. 


(1)  "  As  he  purposeth  in  his  heart "  (ver.  7),  admirably  expository  of  the  meaning 
"  simplicity  "  (ver.  11)  ;  no  by-motives,  no  consideration  of  any  reflex  effect,  such  as 
winning  the  commendation  of  his  fellows ;  his  giving  should  be  the  simple,  direct, 
unaffected,  unmodified  expression  of  himself  (for  "  as  the  man  thinketh  in  his 
heart  so  is  he,"  Prov.  xxiii.  7).  (2)  If  the  stress  be  laid  upon  "  purposeth,"  there 
come  into  view  some  further  considerations.  There  is  giving  which  is  almost 
without  purpose ;  it  is  done  upon  the  spur  of  the  moment,  the  mere  offspring  of 
the  passing  impulse,  aroused,  and  dying,  with  the  momentary,  accidental  occasion 
which  appealed  to  it.  There  is  no  thought  of  the  gift  before  the  moment  of  its 
bestowal,  hardly  any  a  moment  after.  There  is  no  principle  of  benevolence  appealed 
to  or  trained ;  and  such  giving  easily  becomes  the  refined  selfishness  which 
cannot  bear  to  see  or  hear  of  what  is  painful,  and  merely  buys  off  the  unwelcome, 
momentary  contact  with  it.  There  is  none  of  the  loving,  careful  thought  about 
the  gift  or  the  assistance,  which  often  gives  to  even  a  small  kindness  its  chief 
value  to  the  recipient,  and  is  always  one  of  its  most  valuable  features  to  the 
giver,  in  its  effect  upon  his  own  heart  and  character.  Such  giving  is  not  rooted 
in  character  at  all ;  it  is  the  merest,  hasty,  perishable,  fungoid  growth  upon  the 
surface  of  impulse.  It  does  not  belong  to  a  plan  and  habit  of  benevolence, 
carefully  and  considerately  formed  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  as  an  expression 
of  gratitude  to  Him  and  a  recognition  of  our  stewardship.  [Such  purposeless 
giving  does  some  good,  and  has  sometimes  a  beauty.  But  it  is  only  the  fitful, 
wild,  chance  music  called  forth  from  the  strings  of  an  ^olian  harp  by  the 
variable  force  of  the  breath  of  impulse  or  occasional  appeal.  A  settled,  steady, 
purposeful,  provided-for  benevolence,  which  chooses  its  objects,  and  *'  considereth 
(say)  the  poor,"  is  the  more  beautiful,  ordered,  coherent  melody  and  harmony  of 
a  trained  player  upon  a  well-tuned  heart.]  "  Purposeth  "  speaks,  then,  of  the 
judgment,  as  well  as  of  the  will,  brought  into  consecrated  service.  (3)  The 
**  covetous  "  man  (ver.  6)  does  as  he  purposeth  in  his  heart,  indeed.  Covetousness 
may  betray  itself,  as  Paul  suggests,  not  only  by  entirely  refusing  to  part  with 
anything,  but  by  slowness  to  give,  or  to  redeem  one's  promise  to  give ;  by  not 
making  up  the  last  amounts  of  the  total,  until  the  latest  moment  when  shame 
or  necessity  makes  it  possible  to  keep  the  gift  in  one's  own  power.  The  antidote 
to  this  incipient  covetousness  is  the  heart  of  "  blessing  "  (ver.  6).  (4)  To  encourage 
giving,  the  fulness  of  resource  and  supply  we  have  in  God  is  suggested.  (See 
Separate  Homily.)  Little  faith,  much  fear,  in  regard  to  theii'  own  future  and  its 
supply,  rather  than  little  love  or  benevolence,  may  narrow  the  liberality  of  a 
man  or  a  Church.  *'  Can't  afford  to  part  with  so  much."  Paul's  words  (ver.  8) 
extend  far  beyond  the  immediate  occasion ;  they  are  a  great  principle  opening 
out,  leading  us  out,  in  many  directions ;  in  the  direction  of  every  conceivable 
need ;  but  in  this  place  they  mean  :  "  Do  what  is  right,  what  His  work  or 
the  needs  of  the  poorer  brethren  call  for.  Trust  Him  that,  however  much  you 
spend,  you  shall  not  be  spent  out.  He  is  able  to  supply  you  with  all  needed 
*  grace,'  that  you  may  supply  them  your  gift  and  *  grace.'  No  matter  what 
demand  may  be  made  upon  you,  you  may  cast  back  your  demand  upon  Him ; 
He  will  respond,  and  see  to  it  that,  for  this  requirement,  as  for  *  all '  others,  you 
shall  *  always '  have  *  all  sufficiency.'  Nay,  it  shall  be  no  mere  question  of 
sufficiency,  whether  of  His  giving  or  your  ability.  He  will  give,  and  *  abound,' 
that  you  also  may  *  abound  '  for  and  in  view  of  '  every  good  work '  which  may 
present  its  claim  upon  you.  He  will  not  simply  make  you  a  full  reservoir,  from 
which  others  may  be  supplied.  He  will  fill  you  to  the  overflow,  and  will  make  you 
a  living  well,  which  is  itself  always  full,  and  is  also  ever  flowing  over,  to  supply 
needy  ones  around.  Your  *  righteousness '  [cL  the  variant  readirig  in  Matt.  vi.  1] 
shall  be  an  inexhaustible  fountain  for  others.  Let  His  ability  and  full  supply 
embolden  you  to  large  doing  and  to  large  ventures  in  benevolenc©.     I  called  it 

566 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   It.   COEINTHJANS.    chap.  ix. 


'  sowing,'  and,  even  so,  all  you  *  sow '  shall  not  only  keep  you  in  necessary  '  food ' ; 
it  shall  provide  more  'seed*  for  more  sowing  of  the  same  sort  (ver.  10)." 
[Observe  "  may  abound  w?^^o  every  good  work";  '' enriched  unto  all  bountiful- 
ness."  It  is  an  end  in  itself ^  worthy  that  God  should  provide  you  against  it,  that 
you  should  be  able  to  exercise  benevolence.  Giving  is  no  ad  libitum,  dispensable 
accompaniment  of  a  Christian  life.  The  Christian  should  work  (Eph.  iv.  28), 
plan,  gain,  that  he  may  have  something  to  give.  Also  observe — a  large  general 
principle  also — that  God's  gifts,  of  all  kinds,  are  not  given  only  for  our  own 
sake;  our  temporal  good,  our  gifts  of  character,  of  religious  knowledge  and 
experience,  are  all  to  be  the  means  of  bounty  to  others  ;  they  were  given  for  that.] 
Lastly,  6.  We  have  the  happy  issue  and  effect  of  such  Christian  benevolence. 
The  need  of  the  poor  saints  is  supplied — that  is  much  ;  but  it  is  more  that  God's 
altar  is  loaded  with  the  offering  of  their  thanks.  God  Himself  is  *'  glorified  "  by 
this  abundant  praise,  for  it  is  His  grace  in  you  which  prompts  the  charity ;  you 
are  manifestly  a  triumph  of  the  power  of  the  Gospel,  and  not  least  does  it 
glorify  Him  that,  Jewish  Christians  though  they  are,  their  heart  goes  out  in 
grateful,  admiring,  yearning  affection  to  you  Gentile  Christians.  Your  gift  draws 
closer  the  bounds  of  living,  loving  unity  in  the  Church  of  your  common  Lord. 

C.  God's  giving  and  gift  the  model  and  motive  (ver  15). — 1.  God's  Christ  is 
also,  like  theirs,  a  "  grace "  and  a  "  blessing."  How  it  has  "  enriched  us  "  ; 
and  how  He  Himself  was  first  *'  enriched  unto  all  bountifulness " !  Rich 
beyond  our  expression  or  conception,  but  not  for  Himself  only ;  to  Himself 
it  was  an  end  in  itself  thsit  He  might  "sow"  in  our  needy  world  "bountifully" 
"  with  blessings."  He,  too,  had  "  all  seZ/*-sufficiency  "  [see  the  Greek  word,  ver.  8] 
"  in  all  things  "  which  His  nature  and  happiness  required.  In  Himself  there 
was  (to  speak  in  children's  stammerings)  another  Self,  the  "  Son  of  His  love  " 
(Col.  i.  13),  Who  could  receive  and  give  love,  as  love  must  in  its  very  nature 
desire.  Yet  He  created,  and  so  provided  Himself  with  new  objects  upon 
which  His  heart  might  pour  out  its  "bounty."  He  must  be  giving;  must 
be  going  out  of  Himself  to  make  others  happy.  Further,  2.  (1)  His  gift  is 
the  expression  of  His  "  character."  It  "  sits  well "  upon  him,  this  habit  of 
giving.  He  is  clothed  with  bounty  in  all  His  manifestation  of  Himself,  and 
the  robing  fits  perfectly ;  it  is  the  expression  of  Himself.  He  has  put  Himself 
into  His  unspeakable  Gift,  and  into  the  manner  of  His  giving.  As  the 
Corinthians  should  do.  [Note  also  that  the  consummate  expression  of  God's 
character.  His  greatest  mercy,  is  a  Gift.  His  children  speak  as  if  He  loved  to 
take  away,  rather  than  to  let  them  keep,  anything  dear  to  them.  They  are 
afraid  to  make  full  surrender  of  their  Isaacs,  lest  they  should  really  have  to 
"  slay  their  sons  "  ;  though  God  does  not  want  the  Isaac,  unless  it  has  become  an 
idol ;  He  wants  tJiem,  their  will,  their  whole  heart,  and  whole  self.  They  half- 
look  out  for  some  trial  or  bereavement,  after  a  great  blessing.  Yet  the  one  great 
Precedent  He  has  set  for  all  His  dealing  with  us,  the  one  conclusive  Index  to 
His  real  mind  and  heart  toward  us,  is  a  Gift — an  unspeakable  gift.  He  had 
rather  give,  or  let  us  keep,  than  take  from  us,  if  it  be  safe  for  our  welfare.  He 
had  rather  say  "  Yes"  than  "  No"  to  our  prayers.  He  does  not  value  or  enjoin 
upon  us  sacrifice,  self-denial,  for  their  own  sakes ;  they  are  only  means  to  an 
end.  He  will  accomplish  His  training  of  His  children  with  the  minimum  of 
pain  and  surrender  and  loss.  His  love  is  donative  rather  than  privative.  God 
is  by  His  very  nature  a  Giving  God.]  [Note  also,  1.  A  Gift,  not  a  Loan.  We 
shall  need,  and  may  keep,  the  Christ  He  gives  us,  to  all  eternity.  Neither  in 
Caprice,  nor  in  change  of  plan,  will  He  ever  revoke,  or  take  back.  His  bounty.  We 
may  cast  it  away ;  He  has  no  purpose  to  take  it  away.  2.  A  Gift,  for  which 
nothing  has  to  be  paid  by  us.  Nothing,  of  course,  could  buy  it ;  but  we  may 
have  Christ,  and  all  that  goes  along  with  and  is  contained  in  Him  (2  Cor.  i.  20, 

567 


CHAP.  IX.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


R.V.),  for  the  asking  and  the  taking.]  (2)  He  gives  "  as  He  purposeth."  His 
"  purpose"  (Rom.  viii.,  passim,  etc.)  is  of  course  an  anthropomorphism.  To  Him 
Who  sees  at  once  perfectly,  in  all  its  completeness,  first  and  last,  His  whole 
design,  any  such  word  as  implies  consideration,  possible  modification  of  first 
thoughts,  laborious  comparison  of  ends  with  means,  patient,  persistent  maturing 
of  a  plan,  is  quite  inapplicable.  Yet  we  see  Him  act  as  men  do  when  they 
"  purpose,"  and  in  this  Gift  of  His  we  see  an  end  carefully  considered,  proposed 
to  Himself,  secured  by  admirably  chosen  means,  "  in  the  fulness  of  time,"  after 
being  prepared  for  through  many  centuries,  each  of  which,  in  its  whole  character 
and  conditions,  contributed  something  to  the  perfection  of  the  execution  of  God's 
purposed  bounty  to  fallen  man.  His  was  no  impulsive  Giving,  the  act  of  a 
moment  without  consideration  or  after-care.  (3)  "  In  His  heart."  Human 
language  again.  But  there  is  human  giving  which  is  admirable  and  very 
efiective  in  its  well-judged,  well-timed  assistance,  but  which  is  hard,  stern,  and 
apt  to  become  mechanical.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  giving  which  has  all  these 
elements,  contributed  by  a  perfect  judgment,  but  which  has  them  all  made  warm 
and  tender  with  a  pervasive  love.  The  heart  infuses  itself  into  the  judgment. 
God's  mercy  is  tender  mercy.  (4)  His  bounty  also  "  aboundeth,  by  many  thanks- 
givings, unto  God."  Indeed,  when  human  bounty  calls  them  forth,  it  is 
awakening  part  of  that  great  chorus  of  praise,  whose  increasing  volume  will  fill 
heaven  to  eternity.  3.  His  Gift  is  the  motive  of  all  acceptable,  all  real.  Christian 
feeling.  Other  motives  may  be  consistent,  and  may  co-exist  with  this;  some 
motives  are  entirely  incompatible  with  this,  and  will  either  expel  or  be  expelled 
by  this  ;  e.g.  ostentation,  mere  love  of  praise,  the  deliberate  laying  oneself  out  to 
win  a  reputation  for  bountifulness  [as  did  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  desiring  to  have 
the  praise  which  everybody  was  giving  to  Barnabas,  but  to  have  it  at  the 
cheapest  possible  rate]  ;  the  more  sordid  aim  to  make  a  profit  out  of  such  a 
reputation.  But  even  the  sympathy,  pity,  love,  etc.,  which  are  consistent  with 
it,  lose  their  last  touch  of  perfectness  and  of  acceptableness  with  God,  if  they  are 
not  accompanied  by,  and  indeed  are  not  born  of,  the  grateful  love  which  springs 
from  a  sense  of  our  indebtedness  for  the  Unspeakable  Gift.  To  awaken  real, 
active.  Christian  benevolence  let  men  betake  themselves  to  Calvary,  and  stand 
beneath  the  cross ;  considering  what,  in  all  directions,  it  means  that  He  should 
hang  there.     (See  this  followed  out  in  Separate  Homily.) 

SEPARATE  HOMILIES, 

Ver.  8,  first  clause.     A  general  truth,  future.     It  is  not  one  umbrella,  but 

which    may   be    pressed,   beyond    the  a  stock  of  them,  which  can  alone  give 

particular,    immediate    application    of  them  any  approach  to  rest  and  security 

it  by  Paul.     Widen  also  **  Grace J^  against  the    "  rainy  days  "   which,   to 

*'  God  is  able  .  ,  .  all  grace  abound."  them,    loom    many   and    dark   in   the 

— This  rebukes,  I.  Narrow  Giving. —  future.      Addison   has  acutely  noted 

1.    "God   loveth   a   cheerful    giver;"  in    the    Spectator    how    the    fear    of 

He  has  amongst  His  children   many  seeming  poor  makes  some  men  prodigal 

fearful  ones.     They  restrict  their  gifts  beyond  their  means,  whilst  the  fear  of 

to  religious  and  charitable   purposes,  being  poor  makes  some   save   beyond 

not    because    they   are    niggard,    but  their  need.     It  makes  some  Christians 

because     timid.         [Old,     sadly     true  narrow  in  their  givings.     They  do  not 

witticism    applies    to    many :    "  Some  feel  comfortable  without  a  fair,  growing 

men   give   according  to  their  m^eans ;  reserve   behind    them.      If    they   are 

some    according    to    their   m,eanness.^^  "  close-handed,"    it    is    not    primarily 

Not   so    here,    but]    they   are   appre-  from  want  of  love,  but  from  want  of 

hensive   about  the  possibilities  of  the  faith.     2.  Text   bids  them   remember 

568 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  IX. 


that  they  have  behind  them  a  Reserve,  has  made  provision  for  their  enrich- 
— God ;  and  then  let  them  launch  out  ment.  Or  in  being  hampered  by  evil 
into  all  suitable,  all  needful,  liberality  habits,  enshackled  and  embarrassed 
to  poverty  or  the  cause  of  religion.  Let  and  made  ineffective,  when  God  can 
Him,  His  fulness  of  supply.  His  ability  give,  and  desires  to  give,  liberty  and 
to  provide  in  any  possible  emergency,  victory  (1  John  v.  4,  18,  etc.).  There 
become  real  to  them,  and  their  fearful  is  no  modesty,  or  humility,  if  the  son 
heart  will  readily  yield  to  its  truer,  its  of  a  wealthy  father  lives  in  narrow 
native  instinct,  and  open  their  hand  circumstances,  half-starving,  in  rags, 
more  widely.  [The  possibility  of  being  when  he  may  draw  upon  his  father's 
stripped  of  all,  except  God,  is  however  wealth.  *'  What  cannot  your  Father 
often  met  with  the  same  instinct  of  do  ?  Is  such  a  life  His  probable  ideal 
heart,  as  prompted  the  lady -passenger's  and  purpose  for  His  children  ?  Will 
reply  to  the  captain  of  a  steamer  it  even  enable  them  to  answer  His 
in  great  peril  at  sea  ;  said  he,  "  We  design  in  having  a  Church  1  Is  it  any 
must  now  trust  in  God,  Madam."  Said  glory  to  Him  that  such  should  be  the 
she,  "  Captain,  has  it  come  to  that  1 "]  best  lives  the  world  sees  in  His  family  ? " 
It  rebukes,  II.  Narrow  Living,  in  [This  may  be  enlarged  upon.]  4.  Call 
a  spiritual  sense.  1.  All  Churches  are  things  by  their  right  names.  Some 
weakened,  their  work  is  often  crippled,  things  grace  does  not  pretend  to  remedy 
by  the  meagre,  narrow,  ineffective  life  — these  are  infirmities ;  some  things  it 
of  their  members.  Very  much  of  the  is  meant  to  remedy — these  are  sins,  if 
effort  of  the  pastorate  has  to  be  allowed.  "Shortcomings"  may  mean 
expended  in  keeping  them  not  below  that  Christians  are  human,  or  that 
what  is  the  minimum  of  requirement  they  are  low  down  in  grace ;  these 
and  experience,  if  there  is  to  be  a  latter  grace  is  meant  perfectly/  to 
definitely,  distinctively.  Christian  life  remedy.  "  God  is  able."  There  is  no 
at  all.  2.  Such  members  lament  their  humility  in  repeatedly  yielding  to, 
own  failures,  and  "  shortcomings "  even  though  confessing  and  bewailing, 
(calling  by  this  too-indulgent  name  temptations  or  habits,  which  God  has 
some  plain  faults  and  sins).  Yet  they  made  provision  for  overcoming.  Con- 
have  no  idea  of  being,  or  doing,  better,  nect  with  Christ's  words  :  "  That  they 
They  have  no  hope  of  any  *'  higher  might  have  [life]  more  abundantly." 
life,"  whether  in  the  half-technical  (Same  root  word  as  here.)  Words- 
sense  or  in  any  other.  At  most  that  worth  wrote  to  Lady  Beaumont,  in 
"is  a  beautiful  ideal,  but  quite  un-  May  1807,  of  the  purpose  of  his  poetry  : 
attainable  by  ordinary  people,  under  *'  To  add  sunshine  to  daylight,  by 
the  ordinary  conditions  of  life."  They  making  the  happy  happier."  In  higher 
admire  a  higher,  larger,  fuller,  more  fashion,  that  is  God's  desire  for  us. 
satisfying,  victorious   life  in  a  far-off  Therefore  : 

way,  but  without  making  effort  or  It  rebukes,  III.  Narrow  prayer  and 
extending  hope  towards  it.  With  the  faith. — 1.  Ask  and  expect  large  supplies 
best  type  of  them  it  is  not  spiritual  of  mercy,  peace,  strength,  providential 
indolence,  though  it  may  degenerate  guidance, — everything.  (1)  "Accord- 
in  to  it.  The  confession  of  failure  ingtoHisrichesinglory "  (Phil.  iv.  19). 
may  by  often  repetition  lose  its  As  the  boys  at  a  public  school  are 
original  contrition  or  compunction,  provided  with  clothes,  pocket-money, 
and  even  become  to  them  a  virtuous  etc.,  more  or  less  liberally  as  their 
humility.  *'  They  do  not  pretend  to  fathers  can  afford  to  do  it ;  each 
the  great  things,  the  great  doings,  of  providing  for  his  son  "  according  to  his 
some  people  !  God  forbid  such  spiritual  riches"  greater  or  less.  So  God 
blindness  or  pride  !  "  3.  But  there  is  "  according  to  His  riches."  (2)  "  Ac- 
no  virtue  in  being  poor  in  attainments  cording  to  your  faith,"  "  according  to 
when  God  would  have  them  rich,  and  Thy  word  " ;  couple   these.     See  man 

069 


CHAP.  IX.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II   CORINTHIAN^. 


and  God  looking  into  each  other's 
heart.  Man  sees  the  wilhngness; 
God  sees  the  want.  Utter  need  here  ; 
all  supply  there.  "  Help  me  ;  fill  me  ! " 
"  Let  Me  help  j  let  Me  fill."  Is  aU 
that  infinite,  ready,  pledged  fulness,  to 
be  constrained,  constricted,  hindered, 
measured  by,  the  gauge  of  man's  faith  ? 
An  ocean  can  only  pour  into  the  vessel 
plunged  into  it  what  the  vessel  can 
hold,  or  the  neck  will  admit.  God 
promises;  God  is  able  to  give,  abun- 
dantly to  give  ;  how  large  is,  not  the 
need,  but  the  basket  of  faith?  He 
is  honoured  by  expecting  more  from 
Him.  Elizabeth  said  laughingly  to 
importunate  Raleigh,  ''When  will 
you  have  done  asking  ?  "  "  When  your 
Majesty  has  done  giving !  "  God  loves 
that  kind  of  "  shamelessness  "  (Greek  of 
Luke  xi.  8).  Meer  Jaffier,  Nabob  of 
Bengal,  took  Olive  into  his  treasury  at 
Moorshedabad,  set  open  before  him 
door  after  door  of  treasure-chambers  full 
of  gold,  silver,  gems,  and  bade  him  ask 
for  his  own  present.  Olive,  when 
charged  in  after -years  with  wrongful 
enrichment  at  the  expense  of  native 
princes,  replied,  as  to  this  particular 

instance,  "  By  ,  I  am  astonished 

at  my  own  moderation.  I  asked 
twenty  lacs  of  rupees,  when  a  word 
would  have  made  it  forty."  Paul's 
words  lead  us  into  God's  treasury  of 
"  all  grace,"  and  invite  us  to  ask  and 
receive,  that  our  need  may  be  filled. 
God  is  not  honoured  by  any  "  mode- 
ration "  in  our  prayers  or  faith.  There 
are  limits  to  the  literal,  crudely 
conceived  "  answer  "  to  prayer.  God 
is  not  merely  the  obedient  worker-out 
of  every  erroneous,  selfish,  or  whimsical 
wish  of  His  people  [like  the  familiar 
of  some  mediaeval  Faust].  But,  in  the 
larger  view  of  the  purpose  and  scope 
of  His  promise,  and  provision  of  "  all 
Grace,"  within  the  wide,  all -including, 
lines  of  the  life  of  grace,  there  is 
nothing  needful  we  may  not  ask,  and 
should  not  ask. 

May  add,  IV.  ^^  Not  as  the  world 
giveth  give  //"  true  of  the  Father  as 
of  the  Son.  World  gives  such  gifts 
as    it   has,   up    to   a    certain    point; 

570 


sufficient  for  some  surface  needs  of  our 
nature,  and  going  a  certain  way ;  but 
not  "  all  grace,"  nor  going  all  the  way, 
"  to  the  uttermost."  [In  the  summer 
days  we  may  do  with  an  empty  grate,  or 
gilded  shavings ;  but  when  the  winter 
time  for  age  and  heart  come  upon 
men,  the  world  cannot  give  the  real 
fire  which  alone  can  serve  the  soul's 
necessity.] 

Ver.  15.  The  Unspeakable  Gift. — 
1.  "Unspeakable"  a  wonderful  word. 
The  root  is  also  in  "  exegesis."  The  two- 
fold prefix  to  this  root  is  graphic  in  the 
idea  it  suggests.  "  A  gift  of  whose  whole 
meaning  there  can  b^^jio-^-^dequai^ 
exegesis,"  we  might  say ;  or,  more\ 
exactly,  whose  whole  contents  no  guide ' 
can  explore  and  open  up,  and  exhibit  to 
his  fellow- explorers.  They  may  strike 
paths  across  the  whole  extent  of 
thought  covered  by  it ;  may  strike 
them  out  in  many,  intersecting  direc- 
tions. They  will  discover  much;  on 
either  side  of  any  path  so  marked 
out  and  followed,  will  be  a  wealth  of 
beautiful  and  helpful  truth.  But  they 
are  never  at  an  end  of  all  discovery. 
They  never  will  he.  Even  the  study 
and  scrutiny  of  heaven,  with  its  wider 
knowledge  and  appreciation  of,  not  only 
the  facts  and  the  mercy  in  any  individual 
redeemed  life,  but  of  the  bearings  of 
the  Gift  upon  the  history  of  our 
whole  Race,  and,  perhaps,  of  unknown 
and  unnamed  races  in  other  worlds, 
and  that  study  pursued  with  new  helps, 
and  new  powers,  and  with  Himself 
perpetually  before  their  eyes,  will 
only  bring  mind  and  heart  back  again 
and  again  to  the  same  conclusion, — 
"  Unspeakable." 

2.  (1)  Stand  at  the  Gross  and 
think  backward  along  the  line  of 
His  one  continuous  existence,  in  glory 
which  He  had  with  His  Father  before 
the  world  was,  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  before  all  things  began  to  be 
through  Himself ;  think  forward,  as 
again  He  leaves  the  world  and  goes  to 
the  Father,  and  He  assumes  the  throne 
of  the  majesty  on  high ;  forward 
again   through,    and    past,   the    mys- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  IX. 


terious  moment  when  He  delivers  up  "  the  principalities  and  powers  in  the 
the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father,  heavenly   places,"   and   indeed  of   the 
only  to  receive  and  exercise  the  more  whole    creaturely     Universe?      *' Un- 
glorious  authority  of  a  yet  greater,  an  thinkable,"  not  to  say  "  Unspeakable ! " 
eternal,     kingdom.       At    the     Cross  3.  Yet  where  is  the  wonder,  when  re- 
remember   that    the    three -and-thirty  memDered  that  it  is  "  God's  unspeakable 
years  on  earth  are  an  episode,    a  sub-  gift "  ?     If  He  has  expressed  Himself 
'    section  of  the  whole  unbroken  life  of  in  it,  how  can  the  contents  of  the  gift 
The    Son,    stretching    backward   and  be     put    into     human     thought    and 
forward  with  the  absolute  eternity  of  language  ?     And,  with  a  more  homely 
God.     Remember  that  He  is  at  that  turn  to  the  thought,  "  Such  a  gift  is 
point  touching  His  lowest  of  voluntary  just  like  Him,'^  as  said  an  old  believer 
kenosis  ;  that  that  humiliation  is  the  of    some  "Smaller     and"  yet     heart 
mid-point  of  the  history  of  the  Son  of  astonishing  mercy.    The  principle  of  his 
God,  obedient,  even  to  this  degree,  that  words  is  true  of  this  crowning,  consum- 
He  should  die  on  a  cross,  a  malefactor,  mate   gift.     Only  it   is   not  "  like  all 
and  forsaken  even  of  God.    Remember  else  He  does  " ;   "  All  else  He  does  is 
V  Who  He  is;  whyJELe  is  there,  thus;  what  like  this."      What  shall  we  not  expect 
Pit  means  of  self -surrender  on  His  part,  after  this  !  (Rom.  viii.  32  again).    "  All  > 
J  and  of   devoting  love   (Rom.  viii.  32)  grace,     abounding,"    indeed  !       What  7^ 
^  on    the    Father's     part ; — "  Unspeak-  shall  we  not  do,  and  give,  having  such  / 
able ! "     (2)  Consider — as  He  had  done  an  Example,  and  debtors  for  such   a  \ 
— the  case  of  fallen,  lost  manhood,  in  mercy  ! 
its  sin  ;  and  that  sin  the  source  of  an 

outflowing  stream  of  consequent  misery,  Ver.  15.  (Alternative  suggestion  for 

shame,   fear,  sufibring,  here;  consider  a  Homily.) — We  may  take   the   last 

how  it  must  have  flowed  on  through  subsidiary  thought   suggested  by  this 

eternal  ages,    broadening,    deepening,  verse,  and  follow  on  this  line :  "  This 

darkening,  and  must  still  flow  on,  except  first,  greatest,  unspeakable.  Gift   is  a 

so  far  as  modified  by  His  grace  and  its  measure   of   all    God's    after -gifts   to 

blessed  effects.     Consider  what,  in  even  us.     What,   how   much,  may  we  not 

one  redeemed  life,  here  and  hereafter ;  expect  ? " 

and  what  in  the  totality  of  all  redeemed  I.  God  has  thus  set  a  precedent. — 

humanity ;    are   the   happy   effects  of  The   principle   lies   in    Ps.    Ixviii.    10, 

that  Gift,  another  stream,  broadening,  when  the  whole  verse  is  quoted.     Thus  : 

deepening,  more   and  more  gloriously  The   deliverance  from  Egypt  was  the 

bright,  through   eternal  ages.      "  Un-  birthday,  and  in  a  sense  the  greatest 

speakable !  "      Endeavour  to  conceive  day  of  the  nation's  life.     It   receded 

the  revolutionising  change  which  would  farther  and  farther  into  the  past,  but 

come  over,  and  pervade,  everything  in  never   sank    out   of    sight   below   the 

human   life   and   in   the   world's  con-  horizon   of   the   national   view.      The 

dition,  if  now  the  grace  of  this  Gift,  remotest   distance   of    long    antiquity 

and  its  whole  effect  upon  Life,  History,  never  became  a   dim  distance  in  the 

Providence,   Morals,  were  withdrawn.  case  of  this  event.     It  stood  out,  vast. 

What  a  cataclysmic  deterioration  and  clearly   definite.     That    beginning   of 

/    ruin  of  all !    The  gift  which  ^ives  _so  all  God's  dealings  with  the   covenant 

/     much,    and    holds    back    so   much, —  nation,  as  such,  fixed  the  style  and  the 

V    "  Unspeakable  I "      (3)     Eph.    iii.    10  scale  of  all  His  dealings  with  them.    The 

widens   the   view   almost  beyond  our  prophets,  e.g.,  who  cheered  the  hopes 

grasping.      What   if   the  thirty-three  of  the  Babylonian  exiles,  appealed  to 

years    of    His    earthly    life,   and    if,  this.     It  was  a  Godlike  beginning  of 

especially,   the    Friday    afternoon    of  their  history ;  every  after-step  might 

Calvary,  be  the  central  point,  around  be   expected   to  be   Godlike   too.      So 

which  turns  and  pivots  th«  history  of  Calvary   and   the  Lamb   of   God   ar« 

571 


CHAP.  IX.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS. 


in  thought,  though  not  in  time,  the 
starting-point  of  Grod's  redemption  for, 
not  one  nation,  but  the  race.  That 
was  the  World's  Passover  and  Exodus. 
It  had  been  seen,  dimly,  from  the  gate 
of  Eden.  It  grew  clearer  as  the  race, 
in  its  four  thousand  years'  pilgrimage, 
approached  it.  We  have  passed  it  to- 
day. Time  is  leaving  it  behind.  But 
it,  too,  does  not  grow  dim  in  the 
distance.  And  we  may  measure  every 
hope  of  redemption,  every  petition  for 
mercy,  every  request  for  even  temporal 
deliverance,  by  that  Precedent,  The 
Unspeakable  Gift.  He  began  with 
that !  He  will  not  fall  below  that 
level ! 

II.  Godthen  began  what  He  designed 
and  desires  to  finish. — Jesus  never 
more  Godlike  than  when  He  bowed 
His  head  and  cried,  "  It  is  finished  !  " 
Finished  work  is  the  characteristic  of 
God's  work.  Just  as  the  deliverance 
from  Egypt  (Psalm  quoted  above)  was 
not  intended  to  stand  alone,  but  was  the 
beginning  of  a  great  redeeming  work 
whose  crowning  particular  was  to  be  a 
Settlement  in  Canaan ;  so  that  un- 
speakable gift  and  the  finished  work 
of  Calvary,  with  its  imitative  sequel  in 
the  new  birth  in  our  own  heart,  was 
not  intended  to  stand  alone.  A  per- 
fected moral  renewal,  a  life  in  perfectly 
renewed  surroundings,  and  fitted  for  a 
perfected,  eternal  service — Holiness  in 
Heaven — was  the  intended,  the  implied, 
sequel  of  the  Gift.  "  Into  Canaan  "  was 
the  corollary  of  "  out  of  Egypt."  "  Into 
Holiness,  up  to  Heaven,"  is  the 
corollary  of  the  Gift  on  Calvary.  We 
are  only  asking,  then,  for  what  is  in 
effect  provided  and  assured,  when  we 
ask  for  "all  grace  abounding,"  "all 
sufiiciency,"  etc., — all  needful  to  bring 
us  into  all  the  Holy  Consequences, 
our  whole  Heritage  of  blessing.  God 
laid  such  a  glorious  Foundation;  will 
He  not  finish  the  building  ? 

III.  [Is  it  too  human  to  say  it  ?]  God 
sunk  so  much — invested  so  much — in 
the  gift  of  His  Son  to  our  race,  that 
He  will  not  lose  all,  for  lack  of  follow- 
ing it  up.  We  may  "  receive  the 
grace    of     God    in    vain"    certainly 

572 


(vi.  1).  But  we  may,  at  all  events, 
count  upon  Him.  It  cost  that  much 
to  bring  a  believer  up  to  his  present 
point.  God  will  not  willingly  let  go 
all  that  •  the  God  of  the  Unspeakable 
Gift! 

Ver.  15.  A  subordinate  thought 
may  be  developed  into  a  Christmas 
sermon— 6^oc?'5  Unspeakable  Gift.  The 
benevolence  of  Church  to  Church 
recalled  to  Paul's  mind  the  benevolence 
of  God  to  a  needy,  lost  world ;  the  root 
and  source  of  all  human  benevolence, 
and  especially  of  all  Christian  bounty. 
(Develop  as  in  previous  homiletics.) 
The  bounty  of  the  Christmas  season 
necessarily  recalls  it  to  us.  Christmas 
is  pre-eminently  the  children's  festival. 
The  overflow  of  affection  to  the  children 
at  this  season  is  closely  connected  with 
the  fact  that  when  God  blessed  the 
world  with  His  Unspeakable  Gift, 
that  Gift  was  a  Child,  and  not  at  once 
a  full-grown  man.  Why  ?  The  reason 
is  in  its  fulness  unspeakable^  no  doubt ; 
past  human  exegesis.  Yet  we  may  see 
some  reasons  : — 

I.  He  was  thus  "grafted  into," 
"  welded  to,"  the  race  upon  which  we 
spring. — He  thus  sprang  from  it  also. 
Cf.  the  angels.  They  are  so  many 
independent  creations  of  God's  will ; 
men  spring  generation  out  of  genera- 
tion. Angels  are,  probably,  from  the 
first  all  contemporaries  in  age.  We 
are  successive.  They  are  many ;  we 
are  One.  A  full-grown  Christ  sent 
into  the  world,  would  have  been  one 
more  individual  added  to  the  millions 
of  the  race ;  a  man  with  men.  But 
He  is  born  of  the  race,  Man  with  men. 
Perhaps  He  could  not  really  have  been 
our  Redeemer  had  He  not  thus  been 
of  us. 

II.  His  life  thus  better  parallels 
our  spiritual  life. — He  shares  tempta- 
tion with  us ;  we  share  the  cross  with 
Him.  In  a  Christian  life  as  well  as 
in  Christ's  life  there  are  a  Crucifixion, 
a  Besurrection,  an  Ascension  into 
the  heavenly  places  (Eph.  ii.  6,  etc.). 
Our  life  is  hid  in  God,  along  with 
Christ.      And  to  make   the    parallel 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  ix. 


— the  more  than  a  mere  parallel — 
complete  from  the  first,  there  is  a 
Birth  for  Him,  as  there  is  a  new  birth 
for  us.  It  is  only  in  John's  Gospel 
that  we  find  the  words,  "  Ye  must  be 
born  again."  But  in  the  Synoptics 
Christ  put  the  truth  into  visible  form. 
"  Took  a  little  child  and  set  him  in 
the  midst,  and  said,  *  Except  ...  as 
little  children  ye  shall  not  enter  into 
the  kingdom."  The  man  enters  into 
the  kingdom  as  a  child;  he  must  be 
horn  again.  The  lesson  is  thus  symbol- 
ised to  the  very  eye,  when  we  see  the 
King  entering  the  kingdom  by  the 
gate  of  hirth.  God's  Gift  was  horn 
into  the  world. 

III.  He  has  thus  ennobled  humility. 
— His  religion  has  had  to  ennoble  the 
word  itself.  The  world  scorned  the 
thing  and  depreciated  the  word, 
Christianity  brought  Humility  forth 
from  obscurity,  robed  her  in  honourable 
garments,  and  made  her  a  queen 
amongst  the  virtues,  the  flower  and 
perfecting  of  holiness.  Socially,  Jesus 
chose  to  begin  at  the  lowest  round 
of  the  ladder.  The  child  of  a  country 
carpenter's  wife  is  the  Redeemer 
of  the  race.  Pride  cannot  live 
where  that  fact  tells.  Pride  is  subtle ; 
may  be  strongest  in  the  very  class 
from  which  Christ  sprung.  "No 
pride  like  poor  folks'  pride."  But 
whether  high-class  or  poor-class  pride, 
it  must  die  in  the  presence  of  the  fact 
that  God's  Unspeakable  Gift  made  His 
appearance  amongst  us,  a  peasant's 
swaddled  infant  lying  helpless  in  a 
mere  make-shift  cradle,  a  manger  in 
an  Eastern  khan. 

IV.  He  has  thus  learned,  by  living 
it,  a  perfect  sympathy  with  our  human 
life,  and  that  from  the  beginning  of  it. 
— Has  "  skipped  "  no  stage  of  it,  up 
to  manhood's  prime.  When  man  has 
passed  his  prime,  the  forces  which 
make  for  disintegration  and  death 
begin  to  turn  the  scale  against  those 
which  make  for  recuperation,  nutrition, 

-growth,  life.  The  man  begins  to  die 
from  the  earliest  moment  when  the 
balance  turns  against  life.  Jesus  never 
passed  the  point  of  prime,  but  in  the 


prime  of  manhood  met  Death  in  its 
prime  of  strength  and  conquered  it. 
From  birth  to  manhood  life  is  victorious; 
it  is  the  best  of  our  life.  And  all  that 
hest  He  knew,  knew  from  its  beginning. 
There  is  no  stage  of  our  life — its 
infancy,  its  childhood,  youth,  early  years 
of  gathering  strength,  first  years  of  toil, 
manhood  of  breadwinning  and  respon- 
sibility and  struggle — which  He  has 
not  learned  to  understand,  as  having 
lived  through  it.  When  we  pray  for 
help,  He  has  the  sympathy  of  experience 
with  all  stages,  even  the  earliest. 

V.  Above  all,  the  Gift  thus  became 
the  children's  Christ. — If  Christian 
children  have  so  happy  a  Christmas 
Day,  they  owe  it  to  Christ.  At  the  very 
best,  no  father  or  mother  in  heathen 
lands,  of  old  time  or  now,  quite  think 
of  children  and  deal  with  them  as  true 
Christian  parents  do.  No  classical 
poet  ever  drew  poetry  from  childhood. 
Infanticide  cannot  live  in  lands 
where  a  Christ  is  known,  Who 
was  God's  Unspeakable  Gift,  and  yet 
was  a  baby.  A  baby  is  a  holy  thing 
for  His  sake.  Childhood  is  a  happy 
time  and  holy,  because  of  His  childhood. 
Every  boy  may  feel  that  Christ  under- 
stands him.  And  every  girl  too;  for 
just  as  no  woman  ever  feels  that, 
because  He  is  a  man,  Christ  does  not 
understand  her,  so  no  girl  need  fear 
that,  because  He  was  a  boy,  Jesus 
does  not  understand  her.  In  His 
perfect  manhood  there  was  perfect 
childhood,  boyhood  and  girlhood  all 
in  Him.  Say  to  the  child :  *'  Jesus 
was  once  exactly  of  your  age,  to  a 
minute ;  He  was  exactly  your  height 
once,  to  a  hair's  breadth.  If  you 
had  gone,  a.d.  5  or  6,  into 
Nazareth  to  seek  God's  Unspeakable 
Gift,  you  would  have  found  a  lad  of 
eight  or  nine  at  school,  wearing  a  little 
close-fitting  cap,  and  a  loose  garment 
tied  round  with  a  sash,  sitting  on  the 
ground,  spelling  His  letters  from  a 
passage  copied  out  of  the  Hebrew 
Bible,  or  writing  upon  a  piece  of  board 
with  chalk.  He  understands  about 
going  to  school,  and  holidays,  and  play. 
He  understands  children's  troubles,  and 

573 


CHAP.  X.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    IL   CORINTHIANS. 


what   children's   sins   are,    though  He  V.  The  wonder  of  it !     The  central 

never  did  any.      Gentle  and  obedient,  figure  of  History  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 

patient  and  diligent  and  truthful,  we  God's   Christ.       When   the   time   was 

may  depend  He  was  ;  the  model  of  all  come  to  bring  His  Only  Begotten  into 

that  is  right  for  boys  and  girls,  as  well  the    world,    God    "  took   a  little  Child 

as   for  men  and  women."     God  gave  and  set  Him  in  the  rmdst." 
His  Unspeakable  Gift  to  children. 


CHAPTER  X. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Bemarkable  change  of  tone  here,  and  henceforward.  So  remarkable  that — in  last  century, 
for  the  fii-st  time,  then  in  beginning  of  this,  and  again,  after  a  respite,  during  the  last  fifty 
years — from  time  to  time  Higher  Criticism  has  suggested,  or  claimed,  x. — xiii.  as  a  distinct 
document,  perhaps  a  letter  between  the  two  extant  Epistles.  But  Textual  Criticism 
knows  of  nothing  but  an  unbroken  connection  with  i. — ix.  The  change  [from  "  we  "  to  "  I " 
(generally)  ;  *'  the  conciliatory  and  affectionate  strain  of  entreaty  which  pervaded  the 
first  part  is  here  exchanged  for  a  tone  of  stern  command  and  almost  menace  ;  there  is  still 
the  same  expression  of  devotion  to  the  Corinthian  Church ;  but  it  is  mixed  with  ...  a 
sarcasm  and  irony  "  paralleled  in  the  First  Epistle,  but  not  up  to  this  point  in  the  Second 
(Stanley) ;  also,  "  the  Corinthians  are  no  longer  commended  for  their  penitent  zeal,  but 
rebuked  for  their  want  both  of  love  and  penitence  "  (iJ.).  The  confident  hopes  of  the  first 
part  of  the  letter  give  place  to  gloomy  forebodings]  may  be  sufficiently  accounted  for  by 
supposing  a  pause  here  in  the  writing  of  the  letter.  [Say,  a  new  day's  dictation  beginning 
here  ;  or  a  new  amanuensis  to  be  found  ;  or  anything  else  which  may  conceivably  have  made 
a  break,  during  which  perhaps  new  tidings  may  have  come  from  Corinth  ;  or  Paul's  mood 
may  have  changed,  and  the  darker  aspect  of  matters  may  have  reasserted  a  predominance 
over  a  more  hopeful  view,  during  the  interval.]  Eom.  xiv.,  xv.  in  less  degree  contrast 
with  i. — xiii.  (Farrar).  Vers.  2,  7,  10  [if  translate  literally  "  says  he""],  11,  12,  18,  and 
xi.  4,  by  (e.g.')  Farrar,  Conybeare  and  Howson,  are  supposed,  but  7iot  necessarily,  to  point  out 
some  pre-eminent  opponent  of  Paul.  Have  to  infer  from  Paul's  language — certainly  once 
(ver.  11),  and  perhaps  in  other  cases  {e.g.  ver.  1),  quoting  the  words  and  thoughts  of 
opponents — who  these  were  and  what  were  their  charges  against  him.  [Like  calculating 
the  disturbing  cause — perhaps  a  new  planet — from  the  perturbations  it  originates  in  the 
path  and  movements  of  one  already  known.] 

Ver.  1.  Gentleness. — Same  as  "  moderation"  (Phil.  iv.  5)  ;  also  in  Acts  xxiv.  4;  1  Pet.  ii.  18. 
"  Moderation  which  recognises  the  impossibility  cleaving  to  formal  law,  of  anticipating  and 
providing  for  all  cases  that  will  emerge ;  .  .  .  recognises  the  danger  that  .  .  .  waits  upon 
the  assertion  of  legal  rights,  lest  they  should  be  pushed  into  moral  wrongs  ;  .  .  .  pushes  not 
its  own  rights  to  the  uttermost."  [Phil.  iv.  5  excellent  example.]  **  All"  God's  "going 
back  from  the  strictness  of  His  rights  as  against  men ;  .  .  .  all  His  refusals  to  exact 
extreme  penalties,"  are  the  archetype  and  "pattern  of  this  grace  in  us."  (Trench,  Syn., 
§  xliii.)  Also,  '•  meekness  "  is  passive  ;  seated  in  the  inner  spirit  ;  shown  by  the  superior  to 
the  inferior  ;  '■'■gentleness''  is  active;  exhibited  in  conduct ;  shown  by  man  to  man,  without 
distinction  of  higher  or  lower.  "  Meekness "  is  that  "  temper  of  spirit  in  which  we  accept 
God's  dealings  with  us  without  disputing  or  resisting ;  .  .  .  does  not  fight  against  God,  and 
more  or  less  struggle  and  contend  with  Him."  (Trench,  xiii.)  He  says,  further,  that  this  attitude 
before  God  makes  us  bear  meekly  [e.g.  as  David  from  Shimei]  human  provocation.  See 
this  in  Matt.  xi.  29 ;  hence  Paul's  appeal  here.  Q.d.  "  Let  me  still  have  room  to  exhibit 
towards  you  the  meekness  and  gentleness  of  Christ ;  do  not  oblige  me  to  put  these 
aside  and  bear  myself  otherwise  toward  you."  I  Paul  myself. — *'  Think  of  me,  me,  MB  ;  you 
know  me ;  you  did  love  me  ;  you  owe  much  to  me."  Perhaps  latter  part  to  be  read  as  if 
quoted:  "Who  am  (as  they  go  about  saying)  base."  Base. — R.V.,  "lowly";  this  and 
"meek"  found  together  in  Matt.  xi.  29;  significantly.  This  rendering,  however,  requires 
the  verse  to  be  read  as  Paul's  own  sentiments. 

Ver.  2. — "  I  beseech  you,  so  reform  and  change  [before  I  come]  that,"  etc.    Notice  R.V., 

574 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


"Show  courage";  not  same  word  as  in  ver.  1.  "Count,"  "reckon,"  for  '•'■think'''  "They 
have  formed  their  judgment  of  me  and  my  probable  action  ;  I  too  have  considered  my  plan 
of  campaign  against  these  high-speaking  and  high-exalted  gentlemen  and  their  doings." 

Vers.  3,  4. — Cf.  Gal.  v.  16,  25,  "  Walk  in  the  Spirit."  Paul  not  afraid  of  a  verbal  incon- 
sistency, with  a  real  consistency  underneath.  According  to  (ver.  3),  same  word  as  "  after''* 
(ver.  4).  Cf.  Eom.  viii.  5-9.  Flesh,  here,  for  sake  of  antithesis,  used  first  in  a  morally 
neutral  sense,  and  then  ["  after  the  Jlesh^''\  with  the  more  usual  evil  connotation.  "TVt  the 
Jtesh,'''  more  than  "in  the  body,"  of  course,  but  not  more  than,  "as  conditioned  by  the 
limitations,  liabilities,  weaknesses,  of  innocent,  non-moral,  human  nature  ;  the  conditions 
under  which  all  human  workers  must  do  all  human  work."  Carnal. — See  under  1  Cor.  iii.  1 ; 
2  Cor.  iii.  3.  Weapons. — Includes  defensive  armour ;  not  weapons  of  attack  only. 
"Fleshly  lusts  war  against  the  soul."  Its  "instruments"  (Rom.  vi.  12)  are  literally 
"  roeapons" 

Ver.  5. — Note,  not  to  the  "  obedience  "  of  Paul,  but  "  of  Christ."  Also  "  bringing  into 
captivity "  conveys  more  than  merely  making  captive  ;  rather  "  leading  captive"  as  in  a 
triumphal  procession.  Suggested  that  the  form  of  the  imagery  here  is  local,  with  a  colouring 
drawn  from  the  ruined  hill-forts  of  Rough  Cilicia,  the  western  half  of  the  province.  Paul 
may  have  heard  old  people  in  Tarsus  tell  how,  sixty  years  before  he  was  born,  the  mountains 
were  infested  with  pirates,  who  swept  the  Levantine  seas,  sallying  forth  from  many  little 
ports  and  coves  on  the  coast,  and  retiring  with  their  booty  to  inaccessible  hill-forts  ;  till 
at  last  Pompey  the  Great  had  organised  a  formidable  expedition  and  cleared  out  the  nest 
of  robbers,  reducing  a  hundred  and  twenty  forts  to  ruius,  and  carrying  captive  over  ten 
thousand  prisoners.     [Must  not  make  too  definite  or  precise  ;  language  very  general.] 

Ver.  6. — Note  the  happy  adroitness  of  "  yov/r  " ;  as  if  suggesting,  "  You,  of  course,  will  not 
do  anything  but  obey,  ^fulfilling '  obedience  to  me — and  to  Him — completely.  Those  others, 
who  will  not, — well,  1  shall  be  prepared,"  etc.     A  "  gentlemanly  "  turn  of  thought. 

Ver.  7.  Appearance. — Same  word  as  "in  presence"  (ver.  1).  "They  say  that,  as  to 
appearance,  I  look  to  be  nothing  and  nobody.  .  .  .  These  very  wise  people,  are  they  so 
superficial  in  their  grounds  of  judgment  as  that  ?  Do  they — you — only  go  by  the  surface 
look  of  a  man,  or  of  things  ?  "  [Both  indicative  and  imperative  are  supported  strongly], 
Christ's.— Too  definite  to  refer  this  to  1  Cor.  i.  12:  "J  of  Christ."  Note  [with  Beet]  that 
Paul  does  not  allow  any  personal  feeling,  or  heat  of  controversy,  to  lead  him  to  deny  that 
even  his  opponents  may  be  Christ's  ;  he  himself  is,  at  all  events,  and  that  is  all  he  insists 
upon.  Think. — "Count,"  "reckon,"  as  ver.  2  ;  and  so  "  thoughts"  (ver.  5)  is  "  reckonings." 
Note  small  change  of  reading  and  rendering. 

Ver.  8.  Boast. — First  of  sixteen  occurrences  of  this  word  in  this  section.  More 
abundantly. — Than  even  in  vers.  1-5.  Does  he  revert  to  "  we"  as  expressing  what  is  true  of  all 
apostles  ?     A  significant  characteristic  of  apostolic  authority.     (Repeated  in  xiii.  10.) 

Ver.  9. — Facts  will  justify  Paul.  His  Master  will  see  to  that  for  him,  so  that  his 
"letters  "  (generalised  from  the  First)  may  not  seem  mere  empty  thunder. 

Ver.  10. — Keep  ''say  they";  not  ''says  he"  of  an  individual.  Singular;  but  like  on  dit, 
man  sagt.  R.V. ;  was  "  weighty  and  strong"  ironical  ?  Or  a  real  concession,  not  to  be  refused 
even  by  his  opponents  1  Perhaps  (ironically) :  "  He  writes  very  effectively  and  with 
vigour — does  he  not  ? "  Presence. — His  Parousia  (literally) ;  the  word  used  of  Christ's 
"appearing."  But  "appearance,"  in  our  colloquial  sense,  is  in  the  word,  as  well  as 
"  appearing." 

Ver.  12. — R.V.  tries  to  keep  one  of  Paul's  (favourite)  assonances.  "  Pair,  or  compare  " 
(Waite,  in  Speaker).  His  own  type  of  man,  and,  above  all,  each  man  himself,  was  to  each 
his  standard  of  excellence ;  self -instituted,  self -applied.  "  A  mutual-admiration  and  self- 
admiration  society"  (Waite).  "We  dare  not"  [same  word  as  ver.  2  :  "There  is  one  thing 
I  dare  not  do  "]  "  take  up  our  place  in  the  ranks  of  such  self-satisfied  gentlemen — oh,  dear, 
no  1  "  Note  the  polished  sarcasm  at  the  end :  "  are  not  wise."  One  expects  something  very 
caustic  as  the  conclusion.  "  What  shall  I  say  of  these  brethren  ?  They — they — they — are 
— -without  understanding  !  We  will  not  say  more  I"  The  "  weakness"  of  the  remark  is  its 
strength  and  sting. 

Vers.  13-16. — "Why  do  these  men  come  to  Corinth  at  all  7  They  have  their  province  ;  I 
have  mine."  [Perhaps  appointed  in  Acts  xv. ;  see  Gal.  ii.  7,  9].  Each  of  us  has  his 
"  measwre"  his  "  boundary"  marked  out  as  with  a  "  measuring  rod."  [Cf .  for  the  thought, 
Acts  xvii.  26.  Also,  more  than  a  verbal  coincidence  with  the  A.V.  will  be  found  in 
comparing  Ps.  xix.  4  (Hebrew)  with  Rom.  x.  18.]  Yet  in  Antioch,  in  Galatia,  as  in 
Corinth,  they  dog  my  footsteps,  and  only  work  at  undoing  my  work ;  on  trespass  the  while  ! 
If  I  am  at  Corinth,  or  come  to  it,  I  am  on  my  own  ground  (ver.  14).  God  put  you  clearly  within 
"my  part  of  the  world's  field.  Indeed,  I  am  intending  to  make  you  my  base  of  operations,  if 
you  will  help  me,  for  a  new  venture  into  regions  beyond,  as  yet  untouched  by  anybody,  but 
mine  to  occupy.  See  Rom.  xv.  18,  24.  Illyricum  his  limit.  Nicopolis  in  Epirus  he  did 
perhaps  reach,  (Tit.  iii.  12).     [Suggested  that  his  Greek  language  would  not  carry  him  beyond, 

575 


CHAP.  X.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


into  lUyricum.]     See  this  man,  "  of  no  appearance,"  pushing  back  farther  and  farther  the 
borderland  between  "  Gospel "  light  and  heathen  darkness ! 

Vers.  17,  18. — Another  of  Paul's  parenthetic  escapes,  from  the  oppressiveness  of  an 
unwelcome  topic  into  a  region  of  broader,  clearer,  freer,  spiritual  thought.  "  Away  from 
men's  jealousies,  narrownesses,  enmities,  rivalries ;  away  even  from  my  own  enforced 
boasting  I    Let  us  all  stand  together  a  moment  before  Him.    Who  will  boast  there  ? " 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS,— Whole  Chapter. 

In  these  two  Epistles  Paul  reveals  himself,  more  clearly  than  in  any  other  of 
his  writings.  This  section,  x. — xiii.,  is  pre-eminent  in  this  self -portraiture.  [As 
Rousseau's,  so  these]  Paul's  "  Confessions."  In  this  chapter  two  companion, 
complementary  portraits  of  him  and  his  work.  In  the  first  a  soldier,  armed, 
ready  to  go  on  a  warlike  expedition  against  his  opponents.  In  the  second  a 
pioneer  missionary,  carrying  the  knowledge  of  his  Lord  into  regions  appointed  as 
his  sphere,  where  no  other  had  as  yet  even  named  Him. 

A.  Paul  going  on  campaign  (vers.  1-11). 

1.  This  section  is  really  the  Ultimatum  before  War  is  declared  and  opened. — He 
still  hopes  that  it  may  be  averted.     He  begs  (vers.  1,  2)  that  the  necessity  of 
strong  measures  may  not  be  forced  upon  him.     He  had  rather  come  in  civilian 
than  in  military  array,  wearing  "  the  meekness  and  gentleness  of  Christ. ^^     That 
very  spirit,  indeed,  displayed  for  eighteen  months  when  he  was  amongst  them, 
had  been  misunderstood.     The  very  unobtrusiveness  of  demeanour,   the  very 
silence  as  to  any  Apostolic  claim  to  maintenance,  the  simple,  unadorned  presenta- 
tion of  the  Gospel  of  a  Crucified  Saviour, — had  all  been  perversely  interpreted 
as  a  consciousness  of  ofiicial  and  personal  inferiority  to  some  other  apostles  and 
teachers.     Yet  he  is  loth  to  do  otherwise,  or  to  bear  himself  otherwise  amongst 
them,  if  he  comes  again.     He  is  willing  even  yet  to  hope — against  all  he  hears 
from  his  informants — that  (ver.  6,  latter  clause),  before  he  comes,  all  this  big, 
boastful  talking — so  bitter  against  himself, — and  all  the  many  shameful  and 
disorderly  doings  in  the  very  Church,  will  be  put  away,  and  "  the  obedience  of 
Christ  fulfilled"   by   them,  at   least   by   all   but   an  insignificant   minority  of 
"  disobedient "  ones.      The  very  mildness  of  such  an  appeal  will,  he  knows,  be 
again  misinterpreted  to  his  disadvantage ;  this  very  letter  will  hardly  seem  so 
"  weighty  and  powerfuV  as  usual.     Yet  he  does  not  want  to  "  destroy. ^^     Any- 
body can   cast  a  soul  out  of  the  fellowship ;   nothing  is  easier  than  to  strike 
a  refractory  man  off  a  Church  roll ;  with  a  word  he,  as  an  apostle,  can  "  deliver 
a  m^an  to  Satan"  with  all  the  awful  consequences  of  such  handing  over ;  but  this 
afte»  all  is  not  the  main,  or  his  favoured,  use  of  Apostolic  power  and  authority. 
[So,  very  rarely  did  Christ  use  His  power  otherwise  than  for  beneficent  ends, 
and  never  merely  to  vindicate  Himself,  or  to  punish  an  enemy.]     It  is  given 
"  to  build  up^  not  to  pull  down^^  or  to  ruin  (ver.  8).     It  is  the  glory  of  an  apostle 
"  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them  "  (Luke  ix.  56).     Ahy  hireling  can 
abandon  or  scatter  a  flock ;  a  shepherd  loves  to  collect  or  recover  them,  even  to 
recover  one  obstinate,  persistent  wanderer.     It  is  far  more  difficult  to  keep  a 
waverer,  or  a  fallen  one,  in  connection  with  the  Church,  and  to  bring  him  again 
into  living  union  with  the  Head ;  such  work  is  more  congenial  to  Paul's  heart. 
Why  will  they  force  matters  to  an  extremity  by  their  persistent  wrongdoing  ? 
(ver.  2).     [As  above  suggested,  how  all  this  echoes  and  embodies  the  very  spirit 
and  attitude  of  Christ — and  so  of  God — towards  rebel  sinners.     How  many  an 
"  ultimatum  "  is  sent,  full  of  warning  and  appeal,  before  the  doom  at  last  falls. 
God  wants   peace ;  the  name  "  Immanuel "  is  the  expression  of  His  desire  and 
effort.     If  men  will  have  it  "  God  against  us,"  then  they  must  know  all  the 
fulness  of  His  power,  moving  to  execute  the  sentence  of  His  righteous  "wrath." 
That  power,  too,  is  ''  in  readiness  to  revenue  all  disobedience,  when  the  obedience  of 

576 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS,      chap.  x. 


the  Church  is  fulfilled"  How  mighty  to  destroy;  yet  how  unwilling  to  set 
destruction  in  motion  !  How  lingering  His  anger ;  how  loth  to  strike  !  See,  e.g.^ 
Christ  simply  ^^withdrawing  Himself"  (Matt.  xii.  15),  and  the  occasion  of  it 
(ver.  14),  and  the  reason  (ver.  17).]  He  is  willing  even  to  acknowledge  that 
some  of  his  self -constituted  opponents  are  really  "  Christ's"  (ver.  7),  in  a  sense 
comparable  to  ('*  even  so  ")  that  in  which  he  himself  is  so.  They  should  be  allies,  not 
enemies.  A  very  noble  trait  this  in  Paul's  conduct  of  the  controversy.  A  very 
high  development  of  grace  in  a  man,  that  he  can  hopefully  include  amongst  those 
who,  however  erring  or  mistaken,  belong  to  the  Master,  his  own,  even  bitter, 
personal  opponents.  Difference  of  judgment  too  often  dims  the  eyes  of  love,  till 
it  can  recognise  no  brother  in  the  opposite  ranks. 

2.  (1)  Still  he  can,  if  occasion  demand  it,  and  the  issue  be  forced  upon  him, 
come  to  Corinth  "  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength."  [Like  his  Lord 
again  (Isa.  Ixiii.  1).]  Like  the  Gospel  itself,  his  Apostolic  power  has  two  aspects, 
according  as  it  looks  upon  those  "  who  are  saved "  and  those  "  who  perish " 
(2  Cor.  ii.  15).  [All  goodness  has  its  condemning  aspect.  It  can  kill,  as  well  as 
make  alive.]  He  can  be  the  man  of  daring  boldness  (ver.  2).  The  letters  were 
a  truer  exposition  of  the  man  than  was  that  *'  weak  "  bodily  appearance  because  of 
which  they  had  undervalued  him.  He  has  "  weapons  "  in  his  hand ;  he  is  armed 
for  a  conflict  to  the  uttermost, — if  it  comes  to  that.  (What  is  he  thinking  of  as 
his  weapons  of  warfare  ?  He  could  inflict  sickness,  or  death.  Yet  he  can  hardly 
contemplate  any  extensive  use  of  such  an  awful  prerogative.  When  he  did  use 
it,  there  was  certainly  nothing  personal  in  the  judicial  act ;  but  how  easily  does 
such  excommunication  become  ^^ carnal"  !)  They  will  find  him  fearless  in 
condemnation,  unmoved  by  the  fear  or  the  favour  of  any  in  the  Church  ;  they 
will  find  a  force  of  will  they  hardly  gave  him  credit  for.  The  disorders  in  their 
midst,  the  sensuality,  the  party-spirit,  the  incipient  rationalism  (to  use  the 
modern  word), — ^these  must,  and  should,  be  done  away  with.  "  Authority  " — against 
authority, — he  would  take  care  to  make  his  prevail.  [Again  we  are  reminded 
of  the  certain,  if  delayed,  victory  of  the  holiness  of  God,  let  evil  be  borne  with 
long  as  it  may,  perhaps  only  to  grow  bolder  because  of  the  very  forbearance.  See 
it  **  exalting  itself  against  the  knowledge  of  God"  in  an  extreme,  an  aggravated 
form  just  before  the  final  crisis  (2  Thess.  ii.  8).  So  the  room  in  Jairus's  house 
was  filled  with  scornful  laughter,  not  five  minutes  before  Christ,  with  the  Divine 
ease  of  Omnipotence,  raised  the  maiden  from  death  (Matt.  ix.  24,  and  ||  s).] 
There  are  evil  days  in  every  Church,  when  no  discipline  can  be  too  sharp  or 
prompt,  no  penalty  too  severe.  There  are  cancers  on  the  moral  life  of  the 
Church,  for  which  there  is  only  the  knife.  Gentle  means,  gentle  remonstrance, 
calm  discussion,  are  no  longer  admissible.  We  pity  the  offender,  but  at  all  costs  we 
must  put  him  out  of  the  ministry  or  out  of  the  Church.  So,  also,  we  may  be  very 
sensible  of  the  room  there  is  for  varying  apprehensions  of  the  same  truth,  and 
for  varying  presentations  of  it ;  hardly  any  one  mind,  or  Church,  or  age,  sees  all 
round  it ;  but  there  may  be  "  heresy,"  so  obviously  such,  and  so  deadly  to  all 
spiritual  life,  or  so  full  of  real  dishonour  to  Christ,  that  no  considerations  of 
"  liberality,"  of  "  breadth,"  no  fear  of  being  called  "  uncharitable,"  "  narrow," 
"  heresy-hunter,"  must  prevent  stern  denunciation  of  error,  or  the  most  vigorous 
action  against  its  teachers.  "  Peace  "  is  worth  much,  but  not  worth  the  sacrifice 
of  principle.  [^^ First  pure,  then  peaceable"  (Jas.  iii.  17).]  "Reformation" 
times,  "  Disruption "  times,  all  times  of  conflict  for  Truth,  are  rough  times. 
[Campaigning  always  is.  No  war  is  waged  without  wounds  and  death.]  There 
jmust  be  many  things  to  grieve  those  who  love  peace,  to  whom  anything  like 
conflict  with  brethren  is  anguish.  Bearing  witness  can  always  be  called 
obstinate  self-pleasing.  Discipline  will  always  entail  what  some  will  represent 
^s  hardship  or  ^^ carnal"  revenge.     But  a  Paul  must  go  right  on,  marching 

p  p  577 


CHAP.  X.      HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS. 


against  the  stronghold  of  Falsehood — practical  or  doctrinal ;  the  builder-up 
must  sometimes  be  a  fighter,  a  conqueror,  a  destroyer.  (2)  Yet  as  always 
remembering  that,  however  personal  the  temporary,  accidental  occasions  and 
issues  may  be,  the  deep  underlying  thing  at  stake  is  "  the  obedience  of  Christ." 
Paul  is  only  representative  in  this  matter.  He  stands  only  for  the  ApostoHc 
authority  to  rule  or  teach  or  exercise  discipline.  *'  War "  against  him, 
resistance  to  his  word  and  authority,  is  no  personal  ofience  merely,  or  chiefly ;  it 
is  resistance  to  *'  Christ  speaking  in  him  "  (xiii.  3).  Thoughts  that  exalted  them- 
selves against  himself  only, — they  would  be  nothing  ;  but  they  exalt  themselves 
"  against  the  knowledge  of  God."  Paul  is  the  temporary  embodiment  of  the  two 
principles  of  a  Divine  Revelation  from  God  through  His  Son,  and  by  His  Spirit 
through  His  accredited  human  messengers ;  and,  next,  of  the  Government  of  the 
Church  by  Christ,  through  His  Spirit  and  the  Discipline  of  the  Church, — what- 
ever form  that  may,  from  time  to  time  and  from  Church  to  Church,  assume. 
[Cf.  the  principle  which  explains  many  of  the  imprecations  of  the  Psalms.  In 
assailing  God's  Anointed,  God's  government  was  assailed.  The  righteous  Sufferer 
is  often  suffering,  only  because  men  hate  Pighteousness.  It  is  personal  wrong 
indeed,  but  the  serious  aspect  of  it  is  the  whole  attitude  towards  God  and 
goodness  which  it  reveals ;  and  on  that  account  is  God  appealed  to  to  punish  it.] 
It  is  very  hard  to  be  thus  impersonal,  and  indifferent  qud  the  bearing  of  the 
matter  upon  oneself  ;  but  the  aim  must  not  be  lower  than,  nor  aside  from,  this. 
Paul  is  not  engaging  in  the  campaign  on  his  own  account.  He  is  hardly  the 
Commander,  except  as  under  his  Chief,  and  as  winning  a  victory  for  his  King.  It 
is  hard  to  purify  a  Church,  or  to  engage  in  controvei-sy  for  the  Truth,  and  yet  to 
keep  the  motive  pure  !  Very  difficult  to  war  for  truth  or  for  the  purity  of  the 
Church,  without  warring  '•''after  the  flesh" — very  difficult  for  men  who,  the 
holiest  and  wisest  of  them,  " walk  in  the  flesh"  with  all  the  limitations  and 
liabilities  of  poor  human  nature !  ["  The  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the 
righteousness  of  God  "  (Jas.  i.  20).]  The  "  weapons "  must  not  be  "  carnaV^ 
Passion  must  not  be  met  with  passion  nor  pride  with  pride.  Intemperate 
language  must  be  met  with  temperate  ;  overstated  orthodoxy  will  be  no  defence 
against  overstated,  crude  unbelief.  Discipline  must  be  dispassionate.  Force  will 
be  no  remedy  against  doubt.  Coercion  will  not  save  faith.  Fulmination  of 
anathemas  and  excommunications,  petty  parochial  or  domestic  persecution, — 
"  carnal "  all ! 

3.  The  enemy  is  personal  at  Corinth. — [I.e.  it  is  no  mere  vague  teaching  or  spirit 
he  has  to  deal  with  ;  but  persons,  though  (see  Critical  Notes)  it  is  not  necessary 
to  suppose  that  some  one  prominent  man  is  singled  out  in  these  chapters.]  Yet 
the  Corinthian  opponents  are  as  representative  as  himself.  The  real  enemy  is 
the  "  imaginations "  and  "  high  things "  which  eocalt  and  entrench  themselves 
against  Gcd.  It  is  the  natural  heart  and  the  natural  intellect — vitiated  by  the 
root  sin.  Pride — arraying  themselves  against  Authority,  the  authority  of  God. 
Hence  the  form  of  the  passage  (vers.  4,  5),  which  makes  it  a  declaration  finding 
many  fulfilments,  apart  altogether  from  the  particular,  historical  occasion  and 
exposition.  The  "  imaginations"  the  "  thoughts"  of  the  natural  heart  are  not 
morally  neutral ;  the  heart  is  in  them.  However  it  may  be  in  mathematics  or 
in  natural  science,  in  theology  and  ethics  there  is  no  "  dry  light,"  or  colourless. 
Everything  is  studied,  accepted,  criticised,  rejected,  in  light  which  is  coloured, 
either  at  its  source,  or  by  the  intellectual  or  heart  medium  through  which  it 
passes.  To  bow  to  authority  in  any  sense  is  repugnant,  because  of  the  proud 
heart.  *'  Independence  "  seems  noblest ;  [albeit  a  perfectly  impossible  ideal  for 
life  or  thought ;]  each  man,  each  faculty,  will  set  up  its  own  particular  little 
hill-fort  and  stronghold  within  the  man. 

4.  How  calmly  assured   of   victory  is  this  Paul,   of   no  imposing  presence, 

^79 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II,   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


with  no  rhetorical  address,  coming  to  a  powerful,  numerous,  wealthy  Church 
whose  greater  part  rejected  his  authority  and  sneered  at  his  words,  only 
ironically  indeed  (?)  allowing  his  written  words  to  have  force.  Paul  did  clear 
away  the  hill-fortresses.  Clement's  epistle  to  Corinth  shows  a  Church  of  a 
wholly  different  character  and  temper. 
B.  Paul  a  pioneer  worker. 

I.  He  has  his  province. — 1.  Appointed  by  God  (ver.  13);  2.  Suited  to  his 
natural  capacities  ;  3.  This  he  will  occupy  to  the  fullest  of  its  extent  (ver.  16) ; 
4.  Readily  accepting  co-operation  and  support  (ver.  15). 

II.  His  relations  to  fellow- workers  in  other  fields. — 1.  He  recognises  that 
they  have  a  sphere  appointed  to  them  (ver.  15).  2.  Will  not  interfere  with 
theirs,  and  expects  that  they  shall  not  interfere  with  his  (vers.  13,  14). 
3.  Recognises  theirs ;  not  depreciating  or  envying,  or  boasting  of  his  own 
(vers.  17,  18).  4.  Does  his  own  work,  and  gives  little  or  no  thought  to  any 
comparative  estimating  of  men  or  of  success  (ver.  12). 

III.  Principles  applicable  to:  1.  Churches  and  their  fields  of  labour ;  2.  Different 
types  of  workers  in  same  field ;  3.  Different  orders  of  work  for  God. 

I.  1.  Has  his  province:  ^^ according  to  the  measure"  marked  out  by  God's 
measuring-"  rule "  [rod].  For  special  reasons,  Peter  had  the  honour  of  first 
reaping  in  the  Gentile  harvest-field  (Acts  xv.  7).  He  was  the  real  pioneer  both 
to  Jews  and  Gentiles  (Acts  ii.,  x.).  But  at  and  after  the  Council,  the  field  was 
apportioned  (Gal.  ii.  8,  9).  The  act  of  the  United  Church  only  recognised  and 
ratified  a  Divinely-designed  di^^sion  of  the  world's  great  field.  In  the  central 
highlands  of  Asia  Minor,  on  its  western  coast,  in  Macedonia,  in  Greece,  Paul 
touched  virgin  soil,  dealt  with  untouched  heathenism  [except  so  far  as,  e.^.,  in 
Lydia's  case,  the  presence  of  Judaism  had  sent  some  light  into  the  otherwise 
unrelieved  darkness].  Dangerous  work  ["  have  hazarded  their  lives," — said  of  the 
first  missionary  inroad  into  such  unevangelised  districts  (Acts  xv.  26)],  difiicult 
work,  but  how  honourable  to  bring  the  Gospel,  and  to  mention  the  name  of  Jesus, 
for  the  first  time  to  a  country,  a  city,  a  soul  !  [Like  the  honour  of  the  first 
captain  to  break  through  the  boom  at  Derry  and  to  bring  supplies  to  the  famishing 
people  (Macaulay,  Hist^ry^  chap.  vii.).  Giving  a  joy  like  that  of  the  discoverer 
of  a  new  remedy,  who  offers  it,  and  sees  its  success,  in  some  despairing  and  desperate 
case.]  2.  The  work  and  the  man  were  fitted  for  each  other.  It  is  not  accident 
or  caprice,  what  worker  God  chooses  for  a  task.  For  every  task,  for  every  enter- 
prise, there  is  somewhere  the  very  instrument,  the  man  or  woman  best  of  all 
suited  by  natural  equipment,  or  by  the  training  of  education  and  surroundings, 
to  accomplish  it.  It  is  part  of  the  ever-present,  all-complicating  "  problem  of 
evil,"  that  the  Church — and  even  God — often  seem  to  have  to  do  the  work  with 
"  second-best "  agents.  The  best  are  not  to  hand,  or  discoverable,  by  us ;  He 
knows  indeed  where  they  are,  He  calls  for  their  service,  but  they  in  their  awful 
freedom  disregard  or  refuse  the  call.  Work  seems  sometimes  to  languish, 
because  the — obviously  well-fitted — worker  is  unconverted  altogether,  or,  at  best, 
is  not  entirely  devoted  to  Christ's  cause.  [Given  natural  adaptation,  then  the 
needful  grace  may  be  had,  "  for  the  asking  "  ;  prayer  will  always  win  this.  The 
natural  fitness  is  a  primd  facie  call  from  God.  Esther^ s  fitness  was  God's  claim 
upon  her  (Esth.  iv.  14).  He  had  made  her  beautiful,  and  put  her  upon  the  throne, 
with  unbounded  influence  over  what  heart  Xerxes  had,  "ybr  such  a  time  as  this  "^ 
Paul  had  been  trained  for  his  special  work.  His  Roman  citizenship  put  him  eii 
rapport  with  the  Empire ;  his  thorough  Jewish  culture  gave  him  entree  to  the 
Synagogue  and  the  Jewish  quarter  of  a  town;  the  Greek  influences  of  Tarsian 
boyhood,  and,  still  more,  the  thoroughness  with  which  he  was — beyond  perhaps 
any  other  apostle  or  early  Christian  preacher — emancipated  from  the  prejudice  of 
early  training  and  honest  Jewish  conviction,  so  that  he  apprehended  the  Gospel 

579 


CHAP.  X.      HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


with  more  nearly  Christ's  own  world-wide  view  of  its  adaptation  and  reach  of 
offer,  made  him  the  best  to  be  the  pioneer  in  Gentile  lands.  [Of  natural, 
physical  suitableness,  we  should  have  said  he  had  less  than  some  others.  Perhaps 
of  no  commanding  presence  ;  often  in  poor  health  ;  sensitive  to  slights ;  unhappy 
when  without  sympathetic  companionships;  soon  depressed.  His  very  courage 
is  rather  the  boldness  born  of  grace,  than  any  special  natural  courage,  which 
in,  e.g.,  some  pioneer  travellers  seems  incapable  of  feeling  fear,  or  indeed  of 
appreciating  danger.]  3.  Like  his  Lord,  he  desires  to  say  when  he  lays  work  down, 
"  It  is  finished."  Literally  this  can  never  be.  Work  grows  as  it  is  being  done. 
But,  at  least,  he  desires  that  no  part  of  his  special  province  shall  be  unvisited 
[even  to  utmost  Spain  (Eom.  xv.  24,  28)] ;  no  part  without  its  centre  of  light, 
to  radiate  illumination  through  the  environing  darkness  ;  no  mass  of  population 
without  its  lump  of  the  new  leaven  deposited  in  its  centre.  He  has  a  holy 
ambition  to  be  the  first  to  carry  the  Light  of  "  the  Gospel  of  Christ^  So,  see 
him ;  eagerly  hurrying  hither  and  thither  as  the  work  calls,  and  openings 
(Acts  xvi.  6-10)  invite  ;  never  staying  long  in  any  one  place  [eighteen  months 
in  Corinth  and  three  years  in  Ephesus  were  his  longest  voluntary  residences 
in  any  one  centre]  ;  tasting  continually  the  joy  of  "  firstfruits  "  (Rom.  xvi.  5, 
"^sm";  1  Cor.  xvi.  15,  Achaia)  in  the  harvest-field.  4.  Yet  he  makes 
no  unwise  attempt  to  do  everything  himself.  Even  the  pioneer  will  be 
stronger  and  more  successful,  if  behind  him  there  is  a  company  of  praying, 
sympathising  supporters,  whom  first  he  led  to  faith,  and  whose  ^^ faith  is  "  now 
"  irwreased"  and  who  can  now  spare  him,  and  "  enlarge  "  him,  i.e.  can  set  him  at 
liberty  to  strike  out,  and  can  support  him  "  abundantly  "  with  their  contributions 
whilst  he  strikes  out  into  "  (regions)  beyond  "  Corinth.  [The  pioneer  first  makes 
the  Church,  and  then  uses  it  as  a  basis.  The  Church  should  thank  God  for  its 
pioneer  agents,  prize  them,  stand  by  them,  supply  the  needful  means  for  carrying 
on  and  extending  the  work.  No  more  precious  gift  of  God  to  His  Church  than 
men  suitable  to  be  pioneer-men.] 

II.     L    Sometimes    the   pioneer   is   ensnared   by   his    very   consciousness  of 
pioneer   gifts   and  grace.     He   wants,   with   a   *' covetousness "   which   has   its 
noble    side,    to    cover   all  the  field,   and   not  simply   his   own    special   section 
of  it.     No    man    has  a   monopoly   of   God's   work.     God   has  other  labourers, 
as   well   adapted    to  their  own   apportioned  province  as   he   himself  is   to  his. 
His    intense    preoccupation    with    his  own   work,   and    his   very   consciousness 
of  special   aptitude,  prevent  him  from  appreciating  other  men's  work,  or  from 
recognising  fully  that  he  is  not  himself  fitted  for  every  field  and  for  every  form 
of  service.      Not  so  Paul.     "  Another  man  "  has  also  '*  his  line  "  ;  [not  at  all  in  the 
modern  colloquial  sense,  but]  the  measuring-"  rod "  has  apportioned  a  sectional 
"  field  "  to  bim.     No  one  man — no  one  Church — can  do  everything.     Paul  has 
none  of    that   narrowness,  which,  e.g.,  cannot  say  a  good  word  for  another  man's 
methods   and   work,  and  indeed  cannot  see  them.     2.  Hence   he  refrains  from 
trespassing    upon  their  ground,  though  he  expects  [he  did  not  get  it  !]  the  like 
consideration.      3.  His  "independence"  of  spirit  (ver.  16)  is  by  no  means  the 
subtle  self-com  placency,  the  vanity,  which  makes  a  man  "  boast,"  "  Ah  !  I  was  the 
first  to  enter   Corinth  for  Christ !     No  man  had  proclaimed  Jesus    in    Galatia 
until  I  went  !     Everybody  had  missed  such-and-such  a  man,  until  I  took  him  in 
hand  t"    That  would  be  a  spirit  fatal  to  success,  because  cutting  the  man  off"  from 
the  Spirit  of  God,  in  Whose  strength  he  can  alone  hope  to  succeed.     He  will  not 
boast  of  what  he  is  honoured  to  do  even  within  his  own  "  line."     The  Lord  does  it 
all  /  (vers.   17,  18).    Much  less  will  he  intrude  into  another  man's,  and  then  boast 
of  what  he  has  done  "  without "  (i.e.  outside)  his  "  measure."     [As  the  Judaisers 
did:  "  See  how  many  more  of  Paul's  people  we  have  won  over  to  *  circumcision  as 
well  as  Christ'  !    Gal.  vi.  13  :  "  glory  in  your  flesh."]     Depreciation,  envy,  boast' 

580 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS.     cfiAl».  X. 


ing, — all  these  are  strangers  to  his  work  and  motives.  No ;  it  is  the  Lord's  errand, 
the  Lord's  field,  the  Lord's  work,  the  Lord's  labourers,  the  Lord's  success.  He  will 
"  make  his  boast "  only  *'  in  the  Lord."  4.  He  therefore  simply  goes  on  with  his 
Master's  work.  He  will  neither  make  himself  the  standard  for  others,  nor  for 
himself  ;  his  own  ways  and  plans  and  even  mannerisms  of  success  shall  not  be 
made  the  absolute  Right ;  nor  will  he  trouble  himself  very  much  about  the 
^^  comparison  "  which  men  are  drawing — and  his  own  heart  would  naturally  help 
them — between  him  and  his  fellow-workers.  The  Lord  keep  him  and  them  all 
humble  together,  and  bless  their  labour  with  all  success,  even  as  he  desires  to 
be  blessed  in  his  own  !  [Real  danger  for  workers,  nervously  anxious  about 
their  own  qualifications  and  progress  in  work,  to  be  continually  looking  away 
from  themselves — their  own  spiritual  life  and  their  own  diligence — and  eagerly 
scrutinising  others.  Very  easily  leads  to  distrust  of  God,  to  envy,  to  despondency, 
if  they  suffer  by  comparison;  and  to  self-sufficiency,  if  the  result  of  their 
examination  seem  flattering  to  themselves.  Better  to  leave  others  to  themselves 
and  to  their  work  and  their  Master ;  to  go  quietly  on  with  our  own,  leaving 
nothing  undone  that  we  can  compass,  to  fulfil  our  own  task  and  cultivate  our 
own  special  field.  "  Comparison  "  work  is  poor  work,  ill-spent  time  and  thought !] 
III.  The  Churches  should  carry  out  the  principles,  L  In  the  arrangement 
of  their  work.  In  some  mission-fields,  and  very  often  at  home,  there  is  waste  of 
activity,  of  appliances,  of  plant,  of  men,  by  "  overlapping."  There  are,  indeed, 
calls  to  enter,  which  no  Church  may  refuse  to  listen  to.  "Open  doors"  of 
circumstance  and  providence  compel  new  enterprises  in  towns,  in  mission-fields, 
where  some  workers  at  least  are  already  labouring.  But  usually  the  special, 
temporary  call  (like  that  of  Peter  above)  is  soon  superseded  by  the  paramount 
considerations  which  the  common  sense  and  the  right,  catholic,  heart  of  the  Church, 
being  herein  the  expression  of  the  mind  of  the  Lord,  dictate  ;  securing  some  mutual 
concession  and  arrangement,  dividing  the  field,  leaving  each  Church  in  possession 
of  its  own  "  measure  "  and  "  line  "  and  province.  The  spirit  which  brought  Paul's 
rivals  to  Galatia  and  Corinth, — to  reap  where  he  had  sown — to  pull  up,  rather, 
what  he  had  sown,  in  order  to  put  in  their  own  seed — to  steal  away  from  him  for 
themselves,  and  for  their  own  particular  shape  of  "  the  Gospel,"  the  converts 
whom  he  had  first  won  for  Christ ;  the  selfish  competition  that  follows  into  a 
field  already  brought  under  cultivation,  rather  than  begin  on  the  untouched 
forest  or  the  mere  waste  moorland,  in  some  "  regions  beyond"  the  area  occupied 
by  the  Churches ; — these  have  too  often  had  their  individual  and  their  Church 
embodiment  in  later  ages.  Even  intense  zeal  should  respect  the  (perhaps  very 
different  kind  of)  work  of  other  men.  2.  God  has  embodied  the  principle  of 
apportionment  of  province  and  work,  in  the  history  of  the  Truth  in  His  Church. 
The  Churches — the  local,  national,  confessional  subsections  of  The  Church — have 
in  the  occasions  of  their  divisions,  and  in  their  relations  to  each  other,  given  reason 
for  scorn  to  the  World  and  pain  to  every  heart  which  is  true  to  the  Unity  of  the 
Body.  Yet,  as  always,  the  historical,  providential  fact  has  had  its  Divine  as  well 
as  its  human  aspect.  Namely  this  :  Truth  is  too  large  a  thing  for  any  one  mind, 
or  Church,  or  age  to  grasp  and  present,  in  its  all-round  completeness.  Men, 
Churches,  centuries,  have  been  complementary  in  their  testimony  and  their  work. 
They  have  emphasised  (have  often  had  their  Divine  raison  d'etre  for  origin  and 
continuance  as  separate  communions,  in  the  need  that  they  should  emphasise) 
now  this  aspect,  now  that ;  perhaps  one  which  was  neglected  by  the  rest, 
or  which,  by  an  undue  emphasis  upon  some  complementary  aspect,  had  been 
obscured,  or  thrust  into  unmerited  discredit ;  or  perhaps  one  which  was  specially 
needed  by  the  man  or  the  time.  [Hardly  a  heresy  which  has  not  been  an 
attempt,  at  first,  to  recover  or  express  some  forgotten  phase  or  portion  of  truth ; 
becoming  a  "  heresy,"  erroneous  or  mischievous,  because,  in  its  turn,  crude  or 

1)81 


CHAP.  X.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   IL  CORINTHIANS. 


ill-balanced  in  its  representation,  and  failing  to  do  justice  to  the  part  of  the 
Whole  which  others  saw  and  tried  to  utter.]  We  may  conceivably  hold  a  Church, 
one  in  Creed  and  in  organisation,  to  be  in  ideal  the  Best.  As  matter  of  fact, 
the  Churches,  the  ages,  the  teachers,  have  each  borne  their  witness  to  the  phase 
and  portion  of  the  Truth  which  God's  work  needed.  True  Catholicity  of  spirit 
recognises  that  each  has  a  "  measure"  a  "  ^me,"  a  province.  3.  True  Charity  as 
between  worker  and  worker  demands  the  recognition  of  the  principle,  "  to  every 
man  his  work  "  (Mark  xiii.  34).  The  pulpit  will  understand  the  student's  desk, 
the  student  will  understand  the  preacher,  the  evangelist  the  expositor,  the 
expositor  the  red-hot  evangelist ;  the  worker  amongst  the  facts  of  criticism  of 
Kevelation  will  not  in  his  library  undervalue  the  country  pastor,  with  his 
crudely  simple,  "  old-fashioned  "  views  of  the  Bible,  nor  will  the  plain,  homely, 
believing  worker  be  suspicious  of  the  critic ;  the  theologian  will  give  and  may 
ask  patient,  trustful  respect  for  motives  and  \\  ork,  in  his  relations  with  the  man 
of  science.  Each  is  cultivating  his  own  portion  of  the  field,  for  the  advantage 
of  the  Lord  of  the  Whole  field ;  there  will  therefore  be  mutual  respect, 
reciprocal  non-intrusion  in  any  hostile  sense,  no  mere  self-ceiitered  comparison 
of  worker  and  worker,  with  disparaging -thoughts  and  words  concerning  "the 
other  "  as  the  issue.  There  are  different  types  of  worker  and  different  orders  of 
work  for  God. 

Also  IV.  (vers.  17,  18).  The  end  of  the  day  of  toil  brings  all  the  Churches, 
and  the  workers  in  all  the  ages  and  fields  and  methods,  together  before  their 
Common  Master.  Each  brings  in  his  "  results " ;  converts  won ;  fields  of 
knowledge  and  branches  of  inquiry  secured  for  Christ ;  ages  or  countries  and 
nationalities  Christianised,  in  their  literature,  their  legislation,  their  social  life 
and  its  daily  moralities  ;  each  lays  all  down  before  the  Lord  Christ ;  and  even 
as  His  "  Well  done  "  is  heard,  acknowledges  that  all  the  success  has  been  His 
Gift.  To-day,  and  in  that  day,  the  man,  the  Church  that  glorieth,  must  let  the 
glorying  be  *'m  the  Lord^  ["So  that,  as  in  my  former  letter  (1  Cor.  i.  31), 
I  said  to  you  of  your  own  personal  standing  and  life  in  and  before  God — *  He 
that  glorieth,'"  etc.]  Applause  from  our  own  Church,  or  contemporaries,  or 
coterie,  will  be  valued  only  as  it  bears  bringing  into  the  presence  of  Him  Whose 
"  approval "  is  the  one  absolute,  eternally  true  verdict.  His  "  approval "  after 
His  ^^ proving"  of  the  work  and  the  worker, — that  only  is  the  satisfying,  safe 
ground  of  self-gratulation.  If  He  say,  "Well  done,"  then  only,  whatever  be 
the  verdict  from  others,  may  our  heart  say  to  itself,  "  Well  done." 

SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 

Ver.  5.  The  Conflict  of  Faith  with  2.  Also  fallen    reason     is    generally 

Undue  Exaltation  of  Intellect.  enslaved  to  desire;  not  free,  but  un- 

I.  1.  N.B.  Undue  exaltation.  consciously  working  at  the  secret 
Religion  can  have  no  quarrel  with  bidding  of  an  irritated  passion.  Or, 
really  moral  and  reasonable  intellect,  working  half-conscious  of  its  bondage, 
or  with  human  thought  that  recognises  for  that  reason  asserts  its  freedom  espe- 
its  own  weakness  and  limitations.  The  cially  as  against  the  Revelation  of  God, 
arrogance  of  the  pretensions  of  human  with  nervous,  exaggerated  vehemence, 
thought  speaks  of  a  fall,  an  early,  3.  There  is  (1)  Mercenary  Intellect, 
radical  convulsion  and  upheaval  which  in  bondage  to  sharp  necessity  (as  it, 
has  disturbed  the  original  harmony  sometimes  reluctantly,  thinks),  or  to 
between  reason  and  revelation.  In-  the  mere  spirit  of  gain.  "  Cannot 
tellect  is  the  ally,  and  discoverer,  of  afibrd  to  have  a  conscience."  (2)  Self- 
truth  ;  its  highest  employment  is  to  advertising  Intellect.  Willbe"  original," 
be  the  instrument  of  religious  truth,  at  whatever  cost.     Takes  some  subtle 

512 


JFTOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


delight  in  perturbing  the  religious  world 
with  its  startling  assertions,  made  to 
win  notoriety.  (3)  Sensualised  Intel- 
lect. Whole  literatures,  with  their 
fertility  of  thought,  beauty  of  language, 
ample  power,  aiming  to  excite  basest 
passions.  (4)  Self-reliant,  cynical  In- 
tellect ;  the  slave  of  a  sublime  egotism. 
But  its  enslavement  is  disguised,  and 
its  cold,  clear,  incisive  energy  passes  for 
the  very  bloom  and  majesty  of  perfect 
intellectual  freedom.  4.  True  there 
are  nobler  types  amongst  the  oppo- 
nents. Their  true  house  is  the  Church ; 
but  they  have  not  yet  found  the  way 
to  Damascus.  They  may  safely  be  left 
to  God. 

II.  Note,  intellectual  opposition  to 
Revelation,  in  the  second  generation, 
when  the  great  occasions  are  over,  and 
the  great  captains  are  gone,  oftenest 
takes  refuge  on  some  natural  heights, 
or  behind  some  artificial  earthworks — 
some  unproved  assumption,  some  dis- 
puted principle.  E.g.  (1)  Will  admit 
no  room  for  faith ;  assumes  to  know 
and  command  the  whole  field  of  truth ; 
assumes  that  there  is  no  higher  sphere 
accessible  to  man  than  those  of  sense 
and  reason.  But  science  never  fixes 
limits  to  its  possible  range  of  inquiry 
and  knowledge.  Above  the  reach  of 
telescope,  below  that  of  microscope, 
it  believes  in  regions  of  fact  hitherto 
unexplored.  No  reasonable  ground 
of  jealousy  if  beyond  the  farthest 
reach  of  natural  science  there  be  a 
region  real,  but  unknowable  by  its 
powers  and  instruments  of  observation. 
Reason  can  prove  much  :  an  immaterial 
soul ;  freedom  of  will ;  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  judgment  of  conscience ; 
a  First  Cause,  Who  is  One,  personal, 
infinite,  free,  to  be  obeyed  by  His 
creatures.  This  much,  perhaps ;  with 
a  progress  assisted  by  supernatural 
guidance,  but  also  disputed  at  every 
step.  But  no  more.  Death,  the 
Trinity  in  Godhead,  Sin,  its  removal ; 
of  these  reason  knows  nothing  that 
^an  help  the  deepest  need  of  the  soul 
of  man.  She  should  be  faith's  hand- 
maid, not  its  substitute.  (2)  Granted 
a    supernatural,    revealed    sphere    of 


truth ;  then,  next,  reason  will  have  no 
mystery  in  it,  nothing  un  verifiable 
or  beyond  the  grasp  of  reason.  An 
unreasonable  assumption  to  take ;  wo 
no  judges  beforehand  of  what  a 
Revelation  should  contain.  Further,  a 
mystery  is  a  truth,  though  one  hidden 
from  direct  knowledge  or  unassisted 
inquiry.  Also  nature  is  full  of 
mysteries;  Life  is  a  thing  really  un- 
known to  us.  So  is  Force.  The  higher 
we  mount  in  the  scale  of  being,  the 
more  there  are  of  these  hidden  truths. 
To  have  rid  our  thought  about  these 
great  truths  of  all  objection  because 
they  are  full  of  mystery,  is  to  have  "cast 
down"  an  entrenched  fortress,  with 
great  powers  of  resistance.  (3)  Granted 
a  revelation,  granted  some  mystery 
inevitable ;  then,  next,  reason  will  have 
no  dogmatic  form,  propounded  on 
authority.  But  impossible  to  assert 
definitely  any  one  belief  without  dog- 
matically denying  its  opposite ;  without 
limiting  intellectual  liberty  in  regard 
to  it.  "The  real  crime  of  dogma  is 
that  it  treats  as  settled  and  certain 
that  which  unbelief  would  fain  regard 
as  doubtful  or  false."  Prejudice 
against  dogma  the  last  stronghold  of 
the  enemy.  If  religion  is  to  be 
practical,  it  must  give  truth  in  a  form 
which  will  give  strength  for  motive 
and  resistance.  If  Christian  truth 
had  not  been  definite  and  dogmatic, 
it  would  not  for  eighteen  centuries 
have  satisfied  the  supreme  necessities 
of  the  human  soul. — Condensed  from 
Liddon,  "  Univ.  Sermons"  1869, sermon 
vii. 

Vers.  3-5.  Topic :  The  Victory  of 
Christ  over  Thought;  or,  The  Self- 
sufficiency  of  Christianity  to  fulfil  its 
Mission.  Note,  the  Gospel  defined  as 
"  the  knowledge  of  God  "  ; — knowledge, 
clear,  systematic,  defined,  adapted  to 
the  constitution,  circumstances,  destiny, 
of  man.  Of  God  ;  its  author,  subject, 
end.  Note,  further,  this  Gospel  is  to 
bring  mens  thoughts  into  subjection  to 
Jesus  Christ;  to  enthrone  Christ  in 
the  soul  of  humanity.  Note,  also,  the 
Gospel   recognises    man  as  a   thinker, 

583 


CHAP.  X.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   It.  CORINTHIANS. 


Man's    thought   may   be   regarded   in 
three  aspects : — 

I.  The  distinguishing  attribute  of 
his  nature. — Therefore  in  seeking  to 
purify  and  ennoble  it,  and  through  it 
to  stir  and  rule  the  world,  the  Gospel 
is  performing  a  noble  function. 

II.  The  great  parent  of  his  cha- 
racter.— Man  is  what  his  thoughts  are : 
false,  true,  feeble,  or  vigorous,  inde- 
pendent, progressive, — so  the  man. 
Nations  obey,  first  Force,  and  then, 
as  they  advance.  Thought.  No  durable 
prosperity  where  men's  minds  are 
dormant. 

III.  The  chief  instrument  of  his 
influence.  —  No  influence  man  can 
wield  is  like  this.  Can  only  remove 
corrupt  thought  by  free  arid  loving 
thought.  Christ  set  His  thoughts 
circulating;  is  influencing  by  His 
thought  every  part  of  the  world,  every 
factor  of  the  world's  life.  So,  then, 
the  noblest  task  of  Christianity  is  to 
bring  thought  into  subjection  to  Christ. 
How  1  Not  by  infringing  upon  freedom 
of  thought  or  will.  By  (1)  Arousing 
thought  into  life  and  action.  The  first 
action  of  Christ  on  the  mind  is  to  make 
men  think ;  there  are  some  who  had 
no  thoughts  until  they  knew  Him. 
By  (2)  Removing  obstacles.  Pulling 
down,  "  casting  down,"  "  bringing  into 
captivity,"  human  depravity.  This 
depravity  manifesting  itself  in  (a) 
Sensuous  materialism;  the  despotism 
of  matter  over  mind.  You  cannot 
hope  for,  cannot  touch,  the  sensuous 
man.  {h)  False  philosophy ;  not  this 
or  that  system,  but  the  spirit  of 
all  wrong  systems ;  proud,  mystical, 
arrogant,  forgetting  or  disdaining  the 
necessary  limitations  of  human  mind, 
(c)  Religious  superstition ;  which  is 
indolent;  substitutes  mechanical  action 
for  mental  activity  ("  Don't  think ; 
leave  thinking  to  the  priest,"  etc.) ; 
encourages  idleness  ; — in  every  religion. 
{d)  Secular  authority.  (3)  On  the  other 
hand  :  "  Our  vjeapons"  etc.  " It  is 
no  secular  principle  that  guides  us. 
We  lean  on  no  material,  visible  power 
whatever,  but  the  weapons  we  do  use 
are    *  mighty.'     No   matter   what   the 

684 


stronghold  may  be  called,  its  dimen- 
sions, its  resources,  its  popularity, 
down  it  must  go  !  Mighty  to  *  pull 
down.'  We  have  only  one  thing  to  bear 
in  mind,  namely,  to  be  on  the  side  of 
Christ  and  truth  and  spirituality,  and, 
whatever  may  become  of  us^  our  cause 
must  rise  and  triumph.  Have  we 
confidence  in  spiritual  weapons  for  the 
truth  ?  .  .  .  Shall  policy,  earthly  con- 
siderations and  schemes  and  measures, 
however  well  intended,  be  able  to 
sustain  the  religion  of  Christ,  or  the 
truth  that  came  down  from  heaven  ? 
Shall  the  Bible,  or  shall  something  else, 
be  our  guide  through  the  voyage  of  Hfe  ? 
Thanks  be  to  God,  I  have  no  difiiculty 
in  .  .  .  taking  my  side  as  the  humblest 
of  the  humble  in  this  war,  and  what- 
ever fortifications  may  be  erected 
against  the  truth  a  breach  shall  be 
made.  The  citadel  shall  be  taken,  and 
the  people's  thoughts  be  made  captive 
to  Christ." — Caleb  Morris,  ^^  Homilist^^ 
Third  Series,  vi.  216  (condensed). 

Yers.  4,  5.  True  Soldiership. — The 
warlike  instinct  is  in  its  usual  embodi- 
ment no  more  justified  by  its  persistence 
in  human  nature  than  is  idolatry  or 
falsehood.  Yet  there  is  lawful,  urgent 
use  for  it.  Not  against  his  fellow- 
man,  but,  e.g.,  against  nature,  to  sub- 
ject it  to  his  use;  against  his  physical 
propensities ;  against  ignorance,  crime, 
disease,  poverty.  Plenty  to  fight 
against,  without  fighting  man  !  So 
then : — 

I.  The  weapons  of  true  soldiership. 
— First,  they  are  "  not  carnal "  ;  as 
opposed  to  (1)  Miraculous  agency; 
though  employed  at  first,  miracles  are 
not  the  regular  weapons  with  which 
Christianity  fights  her  battles ;  {2)  All 
coercive  instrumentality,  by  the  civil 
power,  or  other;  (3)  All  crafty  inven- 
tions, anything  which,  to  exalt  a 
man  or  forward  a  sect,  accommodates 
Christianitv  to  the  sensuousness, 
prejudices,  credulity,  superstition,  of 
mankind.  Next,  they  are  ^^  mighty." 
(1)  They  are  of  God — His  produc- 
tions. (2)  They  are  His  instruments. 
Unlike   men    and    their   books,    God 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS.     cHAl>.  x. 


goes  with  His  ideas,  and  works  hy 
them.  Mighty  "  not  through  the 
enactments  of  law,  force  of  eloquence, 
cogency  of  reasoning ;  not  through 
imposing  rituals  and  thrilling  music ; 
not  through  human  zeal,  however 
fervid ;  not  through  human  sacrifices, 
however  costly ;  not  through  human 
efforts,  however  adapted  and  per- 
severing ;  but  through  God." 

II.  The  victories  of  true  soldiership. 
— They  are  (1)  Mental.  A  storm  or  a 
wild  beast  will  more  readily  overcome 
the  body  than  you  will ;  unless  you 
conquer  the  mind,  you  have  not 
conquered  the  man.  (2)  Corrective. 
Pulling  down  the  fortresses;  "preju- 
dices, worldly  maxims,  associations, 
passions,  habits ;  behind  which  the 
mind  entrenches  itself  against  God." 
"Infidel  thinkings,  superstitions,  selfish. 


dishonest,  vain,  sensual  thinkings." 
Every  anti-theistic  feeling  and  passion. 
He  who  strikes  at  these  root-evils  of 
the  world,  pursues  the  best  plan  to 
conquer  all  the  evils  that  afflict 
humanity.  (3)  Christian.  "  The  forms 
of  the  universe  come  to  man  mirrored 
in  his  thoughts.  The  great  God  comes 
to  him  only  in  the  reflections  of  his 
thoughts.  The  million  forms  of  civili- 
sation are  thoughts  embodied.  Of 
thought  man  weaves  his  web  of  destiny, 
cultivates,  his  paradise,  or  kindles  his 
hell ;  it  is  the  millstone  beneath  which 
he  shall  sink,  or  the  pinions  on  which 
he  shall  rise  for  ever.  Now  the  work 
of  a  true  soldier  is  to  bring  this  fontal 
force  into  an  entire  subjection  to  Christ 
— to  make  all  men  like  Christ ;  and 
then,  what  a  world  will  this  be ! " 
— "  Homilist"  iv.  32  (condensed). 


HOMILETIC    SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  1,  2.  ^  Christian — 

I.  Must  expect  reproach. — Can  do 
very  little — certainly  very  little  ex- 
tended work  for  God — in  which  will 
not  occur  many  things  capable  of 
diverse  estimate  and  representation,  by 
opposite  types  of  mind,  by  equally 
honest  judgments,  or  by  those  whose 
acquaintance  with  the  facts  is,  in  vary- 
ing degree,  partial  and  incomplete. 
John  the  Baptist  and  Christ  Himself 
could  not  please  everybody  (Matt.  xi. 
16-19),  nor  were  understood  by  every- 
body. Must  also  take  account  of 
the  world's  distinct  bias  against  the 
spiritual  man ;  it  always  presumes 
the  most  unfavourable  intei'pretation. 
No  undue  perturbation  or  astonish- 
ment, therefore,  if  the  thing  most 
simply  intended,  with  the  most  direct 
aim  at  doing  right,  and  that  as  in  the 
sight  of  God  and  of  Christ,  is  the  very 
thing  made  matter  of  severest  and 
(as  we  feel  and  know)  "  most  unjust  " 
animadversion. 

II.  Must  endure  it  meekly. — Too 
easy  for  self-esteem — wounded,  and 
not  without  cause  of  just  complaint — 
to  ruffle  itself  up,  and  becloud  our  judg- 
ment of  our  critics,   and   put  us  as 


utterly  in  the  wrong  as  they,  in  our 
feelings  towards  them,  or  in  our  words 
about  them,  or  in  the  method  of  our 
self -vindication. 

III.  Yet  may  meet  it  with  the 
courage  of  conscious  integrity. — There 
is  time,  and  occasion,  for  bearing  in 
silence,  and  going  qu^ietly  forward, 
taking  little  heed.  But  there  comes 
time,  and  necessity  for  the  Gospel's 
sake,  for  simple,  direct,  bold  avowal  of 
what  we  know  to  be  the  truth  of  the 
case.    (See  further,  under  1  Cor.  iv.  3.) 

Ver.  3.  Our  Warfare  ;  our  Conditions^ 
OUT  Foes,  our  Weapons. 

I.  In  the  flesh. — Weakness,  ignor- 
ance, infirmity.  Do  not  always  do 
or  say  the  wisest  thing.  "  If  only  we 
knew  better " 

II.  Against  the  flesh. 

III.  Not  after  the  flesh.— ^.^. 
1.  Bodily  austerities  fail  to  subdue  the 
evil  heart.  2.  Physical  coercion,  per- 
secution to  the  death,  are  no  right,  or 
serviceable,  methods  of  securing  right 
opinion  or  right  morals.  3.  Human 
passions  are  no  weapons  for  doing  the 
work  of  our  campaign  against  error  or 
sin. 

585 


OHAP.  X.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


Yer.  3-5.  A  true  application  of  this 
to  the  war  whose  purpose  and  whose 
issue  is  the  subdual  of  our  own  inner 
self  and  its  life  to  the  yoke  of  Christ. 

I.  We  are  part  of  the  "  world " 
which  is  alienated  from,  and  in  revolt 
against,  the  mind  and  will  of  God. 
There  is  a  *'  world "  within  us,  as 
there  is  to  be  a  "kingdom  of  God" 
within  us ;  the  Individual  summar- 
ises, focusses  as  into  a  small,  but 
very  vivid,  picture  the  "  world,"  or 
"  the  kingdom,"  as  seen  on  the  larger 
scale  in  the  Race.  "  Spirit "  and 
"  flesh "  at  ceaseless  war  within. 
[Gal.  V.  17.  Observe,  not,  "  So  that 
ye  are  not  in  fact  able  to,"  etc.,  but, 
"  So  that  ye  may  not,"  etc. ;  each 
aiming  to  restrain  the  natural  aim 
and  action  of  the  other.]  The  "  world  " 
within  us  is  our  first,  hardest  problem. 
We  respond  to  Matt.  xi.  2830,  and 
find  *^  rest "  from  guilty  fear  and  . 
shame,  and  from  any  necessary  (Rom. 
vii.  18,  19,  21,  etc.)  obedience  to  sinful 
impulse  and  habit  (Rom.  vii.  25).  But 
only  to   find   a   new   conflict   arising, 

a  new  and  deeper — deepening — appre- 
ciation of  the  presence  and  evil  of  sin 
cleaving  to  imagination,  judgments, 
purposes,  motives.  Hate  ourselves  for 
the  ignorance,  pride,  envy,  jealousy, 
self-will,  love  of  sin,  indolence  in  ser- 
vice, inertness  towards  God  and  good, 
which  we  discover. 

II.  Enemy  strongly  entrenched. — 
Sin  "  native "  to  us.  A  usurper, 
indeed,  with  no  right  to  possession. 
[Sin  no  designed  or  necessary  accom- 
paniment of  humanity.  Christ's  sin- 
less human  life  "  condemned  sin  in  the 
flesh  "  (Rom.  viii.  3).  The  foundation 
of  all  hope  of  our  ultimate  triumph  in 
the  struggle  lies  there, — "  the  Prince 
of  this  world  "—of  this  little  "  world  " 
within  us — is  "judged,"  and  shall  be 
"cast  out"  (John  xvi.  11).]  But  it 
has  made  nearly  every  faculty  and 
power — bodily  or  mental — a  strong- 
hold. [As,  in  the  days  of  Stephen's 
weak  rule,  the  barons  covered  England 
with  their  strong  castles,  each  of  which 
became  a  centre  of  revolt  against 
authority,  and  of  cruel,  violent  oppres- 

586 


sion.]  Physical  appetites — natural, 
neutral,  necessary,  per  se — ^have  become 
its  seat.  Imagination,  memory,  cu- 
riosity, joy  in  new  conquests  and 
acquirements,  fear,  love,  anger  (which 
has  a  rightful  sphere  and  exercise), 
ambition  (which  in  itself  is  a  tribute 
to  the  nobility  of  human  nature, 
and  has  saved  the  world  from 
stagnation), — all  have  been  fastened 
upon  by  sin  ;  need  reconquering  for 
Christ.  Yet,  to  measure  hope  by 
much  of  our  past  experience,  or  by 
our  observation  of  others,  is  to  say : 
"  The  complete  conquest  is  hopeless  ! 
A  modus  vivendi  is  all  we  can  expect. 
Must  be  content  that  in  the  hill- 
country  of  Canaan  there  will  to  the 
last  remain  many  unsubdued  enemies, 
of  whom  the  most  we  can  expect  is 
that  they  submit  to  tribute,  and  are 
kept  in  fairly  continuous  subjection. 
No  absolute  conquest,  or  perfect  peace, 
until  death  puts  an  end  to  our  strife." 

III.  Weapons  divine. — If  it  de- 
pended upon  our  watching,  praying, 
effort,  our  fidelity  as  against  ourselves, 
our  untiring  zeal  in  the  warfare  ;  then 
there  would  really  be  no  hope  of 
perfect  victory;  the  inner  battle-field 
will  never  thus  be  completely  cleared 
of  enemies.  But  remembering  the 
Captain,  under  Whom  we  wage  the 
war;  the  Spirit,  our  active  Ally 
and  Strength ;  remembering  the  Key 
to  obtain  all  needed  grace,  which,  in 
Faith  and  Prayer,  is  put  into  our 
hands ;  remembering  the  sanctifying 
power  of  the  Truth  (John  xvii.  17); 
there  is  hope,  there  is  certainty,  of 

IV.  Complete  triumph  for  Christ. — 
Everything  intrinsically  and  of  neces- 
sity evil,  cast  out,  cast  down;  every- 
thing in  itself  natural,  neutral,  brought 
under  the  obedience  of  a  new  law — the 
new  thing,  "  love  to  Christ,"  taking 
possession  of,  and  regulating  all  the 
use  and  exercise  of,  every  natural 
endowment,  faculty,  power,  appetite ; 
all  that  is  compatible  with  loving  God 
with  "  all  the  heart,"  used,  cultivated, 
indulged,  within  the  limits  of  His  design 
and  law,  within  the  limits  where  His 
smile  can  rest  upon  us  in  their  indul- 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  X. 


gence  and  use.  Imagination  purified, 
and  turning  away  from  old,  evil 
objects,  with  a  new  repulsion  ;  old 
links  of  association  broken,  and  new  and 
holier  ones  set  up  ;  all  the  necessary 
laws  of  human  thought  made  to  work 
in  new  associations  and  to  serve  new 
purposes.  [In  the  parliament  of  the 
inner  life  of  the  natural  man,  the 
government  in  power  belongs  to  the 
side  of  evil ;  though  there  is  a  small, 
impotent,  protesting  minority  of  votes 
in  opposition  {e.g.  conscience  will  bear 
its  witness  for  God  from  time  to 
time).  In  conversion  Christ  comes 
into  power.  His  "bills"  get  passed, 
sometimes  in  the  face  of  a  dogged 
opposition,  and  by  a  narrow  majority 
of  votes.  When  ^^  every  thought  is 
brought  into  the  obedience  of  Christ" 
the  minority  will  have  disappeared 
or  been  utterly  silenced.  All  the 
votes  then  go  for  Christ,  and  for  His 
will  and  purposes.  He  has  captured 
the  whole  House  by  His  love  and  by 
the  spell  of  His  cross,  and  "  leads 
all  in  His  train"  an  absolute  Master 
of  all.]  [When  Christ  has  captured 
the  fort,  He  will  put  a  garrison  in  it, 
to  keep  it  for  Himself.  Similarly, 
and  in  very  close  analogy,  as  to 
anxious  thoughts,  see  Phil.  iv.  6,  7, 
made  very  clear  in  the  E-.V.] 

Ver.  5.  [Special  application  to] 
"  Wandering  Thoughts!' — Older  sense 
of  phrase  was  wider  than  ours  ;  equiva- 
lent to  "  all  thoughts  which  wandered 
from  God,"  thus  covering  all  the 
workings  of  the  natural  heart.  Cus- 
tomary use  to-day  is  rather  for  "all 
thoughts  which  wander  from  the  point 
in  hand."  Really  the  wandering  of 
attention.  Can  the  attention  be  per- 
fectly "  brought  into  the  obedience  of 
Christ "  ? 

I.  Analyse  the  process. — [Great  re- 
lief to  some  consciences  to  know  that 
very  largely,  very  frequently,  "  wander- 
ing thoughts "  are  not  per  se  sinful, 
hut  are  the  consequence  of  want  of 
that  mental  discipline,  for  which  every 
student,  on  every  subject,  finds  it 
necessary  to  struggle ;  the  acquisition 


of  the  power  of  giving  fixed  attention, 
at  will,  for  any  length  of  time,  being  of 
the  first  necessity  in  all  serious  learn- 
ing, and  accounted  by  a  student  worth 
any  price  to  obtain.]  (Say)  in  prayer. 
In  the  morning,  when  going  to  ask  for 
the  coming  day's  help,  we  consider  the 
circumstances  likely  to  arise,  the  per- 
sons likely  to  be  met  with.  The  thought 
of  no  one  of  these  comes  alone,  but 
linked  with  memories  of  former  occa- 
sions, difiiculties,  deliverances,  failures. 
An  undisciplined  attention  finds  every 
one  of  these  memories  the  possible 
beginning  of  a  train  of  thought  which 
is  followed,  one  thing  suggesting 
another,  until  some  sudden  recollection 
shows  the  person  who  is  bowed  in 
prayer  that,  for  he  hardly  knows 
how  long,  he  has  forgotten  the  matter 
he  began  with,  and  has  reached  a  point 
at  which  he  can  hardly  understand  how 
he  arrived.  Pulls  himself  together  and 
begins  again ;  only  to  find  every  new 
request,  every  memory  of  past  need  or 
help,  becoming  "points"  on  a  railway 
which  "  shunt "  his  mind  on  to  a 
"  siding,"  leaving  him  far  away  from 
his  destination  and  his  business.  Or 
in  reading  the  Word,  or  listening  to  a 
preacher ;  attention  wanders.  [Some- 
times the  preacher's  fault.  Does  not 
know  his  business ;  viz.  how  to  speak  so 
as  to  win  attention  for  his  topic  and 
his  message.  Very  often  result  of  mere 
physical  weariness,  which  God  perfectly 
understands,  and  does  not  condemn. 
Too  weary — quite  blamelessly — after  a 
hard  day,  or  a  hard  week,  to  give  fixed 
attention  to  the  reading  or  the 
sermon.  Easy  to  test  character  of 
such  "  wandering  "  by  seeing  whether 
it  also  applies  equally  to  some  neutral  or 
secular  topic.  Can  attention,  just  then, 
be  any  better  given  to  any  other  book, 
any  other  speaker  1  We  may  not  alto- 
gether exclude  the  possibility  of  direct 
spiritual,  evil  agency,  making  sugges- 
tions, in  order  to  distract  and  divert 
the  attention.] 

II.  Suggest  the  help. — 1.  Do  one's 
utmost  to  acquire  the  power  of  giving 
attention  at  will. .  If,  e.g.,  a  book 
is  worth  reading  at  all,  read  it  with 

587 


CHAP.  X.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.  CORINTHIANS. 


attention,  master  it ;  nor  simply  suffer 
the  author  to  project  so  many  images 
in  succession  upon  the  white  sheet 
of  our  mind,  which  then  pass  away, 
leaving  no  more  permanent  trace  than 
do  the  pictures  of  the  lantern.  So, 
listen  witb  purpose  to  a  speaker, 
watching  oncfself  lest  mere  fortuitous 
suggestion*  t^arry  us  away  with  it. 
Every  efibrt  will  help  a  habit ;  a 
habit  worth  all  the  pains,  especially 
when  on  one's  knees. 

2.  Consider  before  prayer  what  is 
needed.  —  Simply  to  "  plump  "  down 
upon  one's  knees,  without  any  special 
"  wants,"  is  to  invite  "  wandering." 
An  act  of  quiet  recollection  in  entering 
upon  public  worship,  will  do  much  to 
fix  thought. 

3.  Pray  to  Christ.  —  The  idolater 
wants  something  visible,  to  help  to 
make  his  God  real.  To  the  Father  we 
may  attribute  no  form ;  hard,  there- 
fore, for  some  undisciplined  minds  to 
realise  that  they  address  a  Person ; 
prayer  seems  sent  out  into  the  mere 
vacancy  of  space.  To  meet,  blame- 
lessly, the  craving  for  a  visible  object 
is  one  (by-)purpose  of  an  Incarnate 
God.  He  has  a  form  which  we  shall 
one  day  see,  and  may  now,  lawfully, 
image  forth.  It  gives  some  help  to 
fix  attention,  to  pray  to  Him  as  if 
looking  at  Him, — into  His  face.  [Thus 
literally  bringing  thought  into  obe- 
dience 'Ho  Christ."^  [Such  things  as 
the  position  of  the  body,  the  place  in 
the  room,  are  not  trivialities  in  this 
connection.] 

4.  So  far  as  there  is  spiritual 
difficulty  beneath  the  wandering,  the 
remedy  is  in  a  quickened  interest  in 
the  topics  spoken  of,  read  about, 
prayed  for.  What  interests  us  holds 
attention.  We  do  not  "  wander " 
when  we  care  intensely  about  the 
matter  of  our  prayer.  Hence,  again, 
whilst  1,  2,  3  may  seem  '^  carnal 
weapons" — prudential,  natural  helps, 
— 4  is  distinctly  a  "spiritual"  remedy. 
The  heart  wholly  conquered  and 
possessed  by  Christ  will  find — physical 
conditions  being  allowed  for — no  great 
difficulty    with     thoughts    wandering 

588 


from,  or  averse  to,  or  rebelling  against, 
spiritual  things  and  themes. 

Ver.  5.  This  Subjection  of  Thought 
to  Christ  implies  : — 

I.  Forming  all  our  plans  as  subject 
to  His  revision,  or  reversal,  or  super- 
session. [Of.  passing  the  plans  of  a 
new  building  through  the  surveyor's 
office.  Or  a  subordinate,  managing 
his  department  with  constant  reference 
to  the  known  instructions  and  leading 
principles  of  the  Head  of  the  firm.] 
*'  Talking  all  over  with "  Christ,  our 
Friend,  Counsellor,  Master ;  not  be- 
cause we  ought,  but  also  because  we 
love  to  do  so.  Not  chafing,  or  rebel- 
ling, if  He  substantially  modify  them, 
or  set  them  aside  for  something  better 
of  His  own. 

II.  Making  His  revealed  mind  in 
the  New  Testament  the  standard  of 
judgment  and  appeal,  in  all  estimates 
of  persons  and  questions  of  wrong  and 
right.  Not  testing  them  by  the  shifting 
standards  of  our  age,  or  our  "  set,"  or 
the  customary  morality,  or  worldly 
expediency,  which  rules  in  current 
literature  or  business  life.  Bring 
conduct,  persons,  proposals  in  business, 
or  the  like,  into  His  presence  ;  look  at 
them,  speak  of  them,  correspond  about 
them,  as  under  the  eye,  in  the  hearing, 
of  Christ.  "What  would  Christ 
think,  say,  do;  or  wish  me  to  say, 
think,  do?" 

III.  Taking  any  word  of  His  as 
final  and  authoritative,  in  any  ques- 
tion of  revealed  truth,  or  of  Scripture 
history  [or  of  Old  Testament  literary 
history].  Shall  endeavour  to  appre- 
ciate with  fullest  justice  what  He  says ; 
but  His  word  final ;  no  "  going  be- 
hind "  it.  An  unchallengeable  datum 
of  any  problem  into  which  it  enters. 

Ver.  7.  ''  I  am  Christ's." — This  may 
be  a  word  of — 

I.  Simple,  thankful,  trustful  de- 
pendence.— An  honour  (as  Paul  feels 
it)  ;  a  security  (as  the  sheep  feels  under 
the  care  of  the  Shepherd), —  "  I  am 
Thine  [**  therefore  I  pray  Thee,"  or, 
"  therefore  Thou  certainly  wilt  "]  save 
me."    Or  it  may  be  a  word  of — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   IL   CORINTHIANS,     chap.  x. 


II.  Narrow,  exclusive  (though  in- 
directly so)  self-estimation  (as  with 
Paul's  opponents). —  No  monopoly  in 
Christ  for  any  Church,  or  sect,  or 
person  that  holds  him  at  all.  Cannot 
say :  *'  The  light  of  the  sun,  all  of  it, 
and  only,  shines  through  our  one 
particular  window."  There  are  tests 
of  His  presence  and  work  which  ought 
to  be  fully  recognised,  outside  our  circle, 
in  other  patterns  of  Christian  than 
that  which  we  affect  or  exhibit. 

Ver.  8.  Ministerial  Authority,  a 
Reality. 

I.  Not  to  be  "  boasted  of,"  or  need- 
lessly paraded ;  but  may  rightly  and 
"without  shame"  or  reproach  be 
appealed  to  and  brought  into  use. 
[British  officers,  unlike  the  Continental, 
do  not  always  wear  their  uniform ; 
yet  always  invested  with  their 
authority,  and  may  use  it.] 

II.  Always  as  a  trust  "  from  the 
Lord "  of  the  Church.  No  inherent, 
indefectible  dignity  making  the 
minister  something  beyond  a  mere  man. 
But- 
Ill.  A  trust   for  the  "  edification  " 

of  the  Church.  The  minister  has 
authority,  that  he  may  the  more 
effectively  keep,  save,  guide,  the  flock. 
To  use  it  for  *'  destruction," — for  any 
selfish  ends,  or  to  punish  some  personal 
pique  or  wrong, — a  solemn  breach  of 
trust.  "  Have  I  built  up  a  single  soul  1 
No?  Then  my  ministry  a  failure,  if 
no  more." 

Vers.  9-11.  "  '  They  say.'  What  do 
they  say?  Let  them  sayJ^  I  will 
a>ct.  Said  Aristotle :  "If  what  my 
enemies  say  is  false,  I  will  live  so  as 
to  prove  it  so ;  if  true,  I  will  listen 
and  amend."  Paul  had  nothing  to 
learn  from  his  enemies.  But  how  few 
have  not  something  J 

Vers.  14-16.  \^A  True  Missiona/ry 
Policy  may  be  expanded  and  illustrated 
by  timely  facts  in  any  particular 
society,  from  this.] 

I.  There  are  always  "regions  be- 
yond."— Work  to  be  done  always  lies 
neighbour  to  work  accomplished. 
♦*  The  Church  "  is  only  a  small  clearing 


surrounded  by  bush,  or  forest,  or  waste, 
which  wants  taking  in,  reclaiming, 
fencing,  cultivating,  for  Christ. 

II.  There  must  always  be  in  a 
healthy  Church  the  "  hope  "  of  pushing 
farther  hack  the  border  of  the  clearing. 
"  Go  out  into  all  the  world."  Pioneer 
work  which  breaks  new  ground; 
and  quieter,  less  romantic  work, 
which  cultivates  what  would  at  once 
relapse  into  barrenness  or  waste  if  such 
work  were  remitted  ;  are  equally  neces- 
sary and  profitable.  One  undivided, 
indivisible  work.  But  in  a  healthy 
Church  there  must  always  be  the 
passion  for  the  reclaiming  of  the 
"  regions  beyond."  The  Evangelical 
Revival  which  regenerated  England 
sent  forth,  far  and  near,  missionary 
agencies  of  every  type,  in  the  widest 
sense  of  "  missionary." 

III.  The  established  work  is  to  be 
the  basis  of  the  pioneer  work. — A 
flying  column  may  make  a  raid  into 
a  hostile  land ;  but  ordinarily  the 
advance  should  keep  in  close  touch 
with  its  base.  A  solitary  Livingstone 
may  plunge  into  darkest  Africa,  and 
be  lost  sight  of  whilst  he  is  exploring 
and  discovering  what  there  is  to  do 
and  to  be  won.  But  the  permanent 
mission  work  of  the  Church  wants  the 
organised,  established,  liberal  Churches 
at  home.  [Hold  the  ropes  at  top  of 
cUff,  whilst  the  rescue  party  go  over  to 
save  life  in  peril.]  The  obligation,  the 
privilege  of  the  Corinths,  the  Philippis, 
the  Thessalonicas,  is  to  send  forth,  to 
send  supplies  after,  the  pioneer  Pauls. 
The  missionary  on  the  borderland,  or 
pioneering  over  the  border,  is  merely 
the  stay-at-home  Church  embodied. 
In  the  differentiation  of  organ  and 
function  in  the  Body,  he  is  only  the 
particular  organ  of  the  Whole  which 
happens  to  be  best  suited  to  do  a  work 
which  is  the  work,  the  responsibility, 
of  All.  The  whole  Body  must  keep 
itself  healthy,  if  the  Hand  which 
reaches  out  to  gather  from  the 
"  regions  beyond "  is  to  be  strong 
for  its  work.  An  unspiritual  home 
Church  will  not  long  sustain  healthy 
mission- work, 

589 


CHAP.  XL    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


CHAPTER   XI. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1. — Small  change  of  rendering,  "a  hit  of  foolishness,''^  because  of  small  variation  of 
reading.  "  For,  on  my  own  principle  (x.  18),  it  is  foolishness."  To  appreciate  how  *' foolish  " 
such  talking  about  himself  is,  look  at  the  (eight)  occurrences  of  the  word  (or  its  cognates) 
here,  and  in  Rom.  ii.  20  ;  Eph.  v.  17 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  36.  "  Yet  only  a  little  bit  will  I  indulge  in, 
and  that  because  I  love  you."  Choose  between  (indie),  **I  will  not  say  would  that;  ye 
do  "  ;  and  (imper.),  "  Would  that  .  .  .  ;  yea,  I  beg  of  you,  do."    No  **  to  God  "  in  Greek. 

Ver.  2.  Godly.— Lit.  as  margin;  as  2  Cor.  i.  12.  [Cf.  vii.  9,  10,  11  (but  not  Heb.  xii.  28); 
also  cf.  Acts  vii.  20.]  Espoused. — Paul  is  the  Friend  of  the  Bridegroom  (like  the  Baptist, 
John  iii.  29.  The  Babbis  called  Moses  the  "  Friend "  between  Israel  and  God).  The 
Church  is  to  be  the  Virgin- wife  by-and-by.  We  are  here  in  the  interval  between  the 
betrothal,  which  Paul  has  effected,  and  the  actual  bringing  of  the  Bride  to  her  Husband, 
when  his  office  shall  be  perfected.  ["  Between  .  .  .  betrothal  and  .  .  .  marriage  .  .  .  the 
bride-elect  lived  with  her  friends,  and  all  communication  between  herself  and  her  future 
husband  was  carried  on  through  the  medium  of  a  friend  deputed  for  the  purpose,  termed 
the  '  friend  of  the  bridegroom  '  (John  iii.  29).  She  was  now  virtually  regarded  as  the  wife 
of  her  future  husband.  .  .  .  Faithlessness  was  punishable  with  death."  (Smith,  B.  B.,  s.v. 
'•Marriage."]  Hence  Paul's  ^'jealousy."  He  is  responsible  for  bringing  to  the  '^ oTie  man" 
Christ  an  unspotted,  "  virgin  "  Church. 

Ver.  3.  The  "-corrupters'^  being  the  bride's  "friends"  (m^  sw^r.)  or  other  "suitors,"  viz. 
the  rival  teachers  of  Corinth.  Same  idea  of  rival  aspirants  to  a  damsel's  hand  and  heart 
in  Gal.  iv.  17,  "  They  are  hot  in  their  courting,"  etc.  1.  Observe,  he  is  not  concerned  lest 
himself,  Paul,  should  be  robbed   of  their  love,  but  that  the  Husband,  Christ,  should  be. 

2.  Observe,  also,  "  the  purity  "  (by  a  better  reading)  and  "  unto  Christ "  not  "  in''  The  virgin 
simplicity  and  purity  are  to  be  kept  inviolate  for  the  sake  of  the  love  of  the  Husband. 

3.  Observe,  the  story  of  Eve  and  the  serpent  is  (unquestionably)  to  Paul  a  real,  historical  event. 
Not  quoted  merely  as  a  scholar  might  quote  an  apposite  parallel  from  classical  mythology 
in  (say)  Ovid  or  Virgil.  That  the  Holy  Spirit  likewise  sets  His  attestation  upon  it,  also 
follows,  to  all  who  accept  Paul  as  in  these  letters  the  organ  of  the  "  Spirit  unto  the  Churches  " 
(Rev.  ii.,  iii.)  ;  Paul  is  here  used  by  Him  to  trace  in  a  sample  instance  the  daily,  ordinary 
workings  of  evil  back  to  him  whose  first,  and  too  successful,  attempt  has  been  the  pattern 
and  germ  of  all  since.  ["  Serpent  "  only  mentioned  in  Genesis  ;  Wisdom  (ii.  24)  first  makes 
the  serpent  the  Devil ;  cf.  Rev.  xii.  9,  xx.  2.] 

Ver.  4.  Observe, "  Jesus,"  "  Spirit "  (not "  spirit "),  "  Gospel."  Well. — Ironically  (as  perhaps 
Mark  vii.  9).  Conybeare  and  Howson  think,  "  bear  with  we."  Observe  indicative.  Also,  no 
particular  person  meant. 

Ver.  5.  Very  chiefest. — As  in  xii.  11.  Q.d.  "  Therefore  you  should  much  rather  bear  with 
me, /or,"  etc. 

Ver.  6. — Very  old  question,  e.g.  between  Jerome  ("  Yes  ")  and  Augustine  ("  No  "),  whether 
Paul  seriously  means  this,  or  is  only  quoting  his  enemies.  In  any  case  the  want  of  rhetorical 
grace  was  a  voluntary  abnegation  [an  "  emptying  of  himself  "]  (1  Cor.  ii.  1-5).     [Cf.  John 

Wesley  :  "  I  could  even  now  write  as  floridly  and  rhetorically  as  the  admired  Dr.  B ;  but 

I  dare  not ;  because  I  seek  the  honour  that  cometh  of  God  only.  ...  I  dare  no  more  write 
in  Sifine  style  than  wear  a  fine  coat"  {Works,  vi.  186).]  Observe  the  better  reading.  Know- 
ledge.— The  special  ''gift"  (1  Cor.  i.  5,  xiii.  2,  xii.  18). 

Ver.  7.  Or. — Turning  to  another  topic.  Offence. — Lit.  "  5i«."  Freely. — I.e.  ''without 
charge."    Cf.  Phil.  iv.  12. 

Ver.  8.  Other  Churches. — Kg.  Philippi  (Phil.  iv.  15).  But,  for  another  reason,  not  Thessa- 
lonica  (2  Thess.  iii.  8,  9).  Beet  suggests  that  he  accepted  the  second  Philippian  contri- 
bution, which  reached  him  in  Thessalonica,  expressly  with  the  Grecian  journey  and  its 
expenses  in  his  view.  Bobbed. — Cf.  Rom.  ii.  22  ;  Acts  xix.  37.  Wages. — A  soldier's  ''pay" 
as  Rom  vi.  23. 

Ver.  9.  Wanted. — I.e.  "was in  want."  Graphic  touch  of  incidental  fact,  as  to  his  residence 
in  Corinth.  Did  not  (perhaps  his  work  did  not  leave  him  time  to)  earn  enough  for  his  neces- 
sities !  The  man  who  at  that  moment  was  the  most  important  factor  in  the  world's  progress. 
Burdensome. —See  xii.  13,  14  (Separate  Homily). 

Ver.  10.— The  very  truthfulness  of  Christ  Himself.  Like,  "  I  say  the  truth  in  Christ " 
(Rom.  ix.  1).  A  man  who  is  " in  Christ"  who  is  a  member  of  Christ's  very  body, — how  shall 
anything  but  the  true  Christ  who  is  in  him  find  expression  on  his  lips  1 

590 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


Ver.  11.— gome  said,  perversely  :  "Yes  ;  it  shows  plainly  that  you  do  not  care  for  us,  as 
you  do  for  the  Philippians." 

Ver.  12.  Occasion. — General  drift  clear,  particular  application  diflScult,  from  our  ignorance 
of  facts.  Hard  to  reconcile  some  of  the  presumed  cavils  and  accusations ;  which  have  to  be 
inferred  from  Paul's  replies.  But  consistency  in  perversity  is  not  to  be  looked  for.  [Cf.  "  We 
have  piped  ;  ...  we  have  mourned  "  ;  q.d.  "  Whatever  we  do,  there  is  no  pleasing  you  anyway."] 
Last  clause  plainly  means :  "  That  they  and  we  may  be  made  to  stand  on  same  footing,  as  to 
our  worthiness  and  our  rights."  This,  however,  is  ambiguous  to  us,  for  lack  of  the  key  of 
actual  facts.  Found  does  not  mean  ^^ found  out'''  in  any  sense  of  being  "unmasked,"  but 
(as  it  were,  judicially)  "found"  [cf.  the  "findings"  of  a  court]  in  the  opinion  of  others 
(Gal.  ii.  17  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  2,  xv.  15 ;  2  Cor.  v.  3  [?]). 

Ver.  13. — Contrast  with  "  supereminent  app.'^  (ver.  5),  "  I  say,  They  are  no  apostles  at  all ! 
They  say,  I  am  '  catching  you  with  guile.'  Nay,  they  are  workers  full  of  guile  [related  word] 
in  all  they  do."    R.V.  good. 

Ver.  14. — The  only  Jewish  parallel  adduced  is  a  solitary  opinion  of  a  Rabbi  that  the  angel 
who  wrestled  with  Jacob  was  a  so-transformed  evil  spirit !  Perhaps  Job  i.  may  have  been 
in  Paul's  mind.  Or  a  perfectly  general  assertion.  Light. — Cf.  Epb.  v.  8  ;  1  Thess.  v.  5  ; 
1  John  i.  5,  etc.  No  marvel. — "  If  the  Prince  of  Darkness  can  stride  over  the  vast  gulf  which 
separates  his  real  nature  from  the  outward  appearance  of  an  angel  of  light,  his  agents  can 
step  over  the  narrower  chasm  which  divides  them  from  apostles  of  Christ.  .  .  .  Beings  of 
darkness  and  beings  of  light  are  opposites,  whereas  human  beings  are  capable  of  living  and 
moving  in  either  .  .  .  darkness  or  light.  They  are  flexible  to  either  element,  although  they 
cannot  belong  to  both  at  the  same  time.  Satan,  who  is  'the  ape  of  God,'  counterfeits  the 
Divine,  and  his  strategy  is  a  terrible  caricature  of  the  Almighty's  ordinances."  (Waite,  in 
Speaker's  Covimentary.') 

Ver.  15.  Ministers.— Cf.  of  Paul,  ver.  8.     End.— Phil.  iii.  19. 

Ver.  16.  Again. — After  ver.  1.  "  You  can  very  well  let  a  foolish  fellow  like  me  be  in  the 
fashion,  and  do  a  bit  of  boasting." 

Ver.  17.  After  the  Lord. — Not  to  be  compared  with  1  Cor.  vii.  10,  26.  (See  Critical  Notes 
and  Bible-class  Note  there.)  Compare  rather  "  After  Rubens,"  "  After  Reynolds."  Christ  is 
the  model.  But  no  boaster  ever  was,  in  so  doing,  copying  Christ ;  his  conduct  was  no  picture 
"  after  Christ."  In  ver.  10  he  is  speaking  as  conformable  to,  and  partaking  of,  Christ's  own 
truthfulness.     But  not  the  tone,  or  the  mind,  of  Christ — this  self-assertion  and  laudation. 

Ver.  19.  Bitterly  ironical.  "  Your  wisdom  is  rather  set  off  as  by  a  good  foil,  in  these  fools 
whom  you  clever  Corinthians  can  patronisingly  tolerate." 

Ver.  20.  Bitterly  serious.  Bondage. — "  Lord  it  over  you ; "  and  more,  as  in  Gal.  ii.  4 
(cf.  V.  1);  Acts  XV,  10.  Taketh. — See  R.V.  Or  ^'take'"  as  in  a  snare;  such  a  case,  e.g.,  as 
1  Cor.  viii.  9.  Smiteth. — As  Paul,  Acts  xxiii.  2;  Christ,  John  xviii.  22;  1  Kings  xxii.  24; 
perhaps  as  a  piece  of,  assumed,  disciplinary  power.  [As  an  Irish  peasant  will  bear  castigation 
from  his  priest,  or  a  low-caste  Hindoo  a  blow  from  a  Brahmin.] 

Ver.  21.  As  concerning. — Same  word  as  "  after  "  (ver.  17).  "  1  am  speaking  after  the  fashion, 
in  the  strain,  of  your  customary  *  reproach '  (disparagement)  of  me,  as  though  I  acknowledged 
as  fact,"  etc.  [Cf.  Phil.  iii.  4  sqq.  for  a  more  extended  parallel.  "  Counted  loss ; "  and  yet 
how,  on  occasion,  he  can  bring  out,  and  use,  and  find  useful,  for  his  Master's  service,  his 
Roman  citizenship,  or  his  Jewish  advantages.  No  *^ gains'^  to  him,  as  a  sinner  needing 
acceptance,  but  great,  and  frequent,  '* gains''  to  the  Gospel,  of  which  he  was  the  exponent 
and  defender.] 

Ver.  22.  Hebrews. — With  a  little  of  the  implied  contrast  to  Hellenist  Jews  (Acts  vi.  1,  etc.). 
An  old  style.  Conservative  Jew  [sprung  from  old  style.  Conservative  Jews  (Phil.  iii.  5)],  born 
in  a  Greek  city  indeed,  but  keeping  up  the  stricter  ways  of  an  orthodox  Jewish  house,  not  like 
Hellenists,  in  practice  and  in  thought  assimilating  to  Gentile  laxity,  forgetting  even  their 
Hebrew,  and  using  a  Greek  translation  of  the  Word  of  God.  Israelites. — Cf.  John  i.  45. 
"  So  am  7,"  in  a  double  sense.  Seed  of  Abraham. — Cf .  Gal.  iii.  29.  "  So  am  7,"  with  a  new 
and  better  right  also  to  the  name,  as  well  as  that  I  inherited. 

Ver.  23.  Fool. — As  R.V.  Stronger  word  than  (say)  in  ver.  16.  Some  (^e.g.  Beet)  would  press 
more  exactly  than  others  {e.g.  Stanley),  the  word  *'  more."  As  if  "  more  than  these  boasters." 
Observe,  as  to  *'  deaths  "  [=  many  occasions,  and  forms,  of  imminent  peri],  when  life  was 
"  worth  no  purchase  "  at  all,  '*  as  good  as  a  dead  man  "]  there  is  no  comparison  expressed. 
Here  he  is  liors  de  concours ;  he  has  no  competitor,  or  is  beyond  even  apparent  competition. 

Ver.  24.—  Deut.  xxv.  3.  Thirteen  on  the  breast,  thirteen  on  the  right  shoulder,  thirteen  on 
the  left.  One  omitted,  lest  the  law  should  be  transgressed  by  mistake  and  forty  exceeded. 
Picture  Paul  bound,  bent,  to  a  pillar  in  the  synagogue  ;  reader  standing  by,  during  the  flog- 
ging, reading  Deut.  xxviii.  58,  59,  xxix.  8  ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  38.  The  officer  wielding  a  four-tailed 
whip,  two  thongs  of  calf's  skin,  two  of  asses'  skin.  (Sometimes  such  a  scourging  was  fatal.) 
Mve  times  such  a  flogging  1 

Vers.  25-27.  Bods. — Although  a  Roman  citizen  (Acts  xvi.  22,  xxii.  24).    Remember  we 

$9X 


CHAP.  XI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.    CORINTHIANS. 


are  here  only  at  the  date  of  Acts  xix.,  xx.  All  these  sufferings  lie  between  Acts  ix.  and  xix. 
Up  to  this  point,  the  only  record  of  imprisonment  is  Acts  xvi.  24 ;  of  beating  with  rods  of 
lictors — the  Roman  scourging  (ih.) ;  of  stoning,  Acts  xiv.  19  ;  of  perils  from  Jems,  Acts  ix. 
23,  29,  xiii.  50,  xiv.  5,  19,  xvii.  5, 13,xviii.  12;  from  Gentiles  (=  '*  heathen''),  xvi.  20,  xix.  23. 
May  illustrate  '■'■  shipwreck,'''  ^^  night  and  a  day  [lit.  "a  night-day,''  period  of  twenty-four 
hours]  in  deep,"  by  Acts  xxvii.,  which  is  later ;  ^''  perils  from  .  .  .  countrymen"  by  Acts  xxiii. 
20,  21,  later  also  ;  "  rivers"  by  the  Calycadnus,  not  far  from  Tarsus,  a  sudden  flood  in  which 
('*  a  spate,"  such  as  is  common  in  all  such  short-coursed  mountain  streams)  swept  away 
Frederick  Barbarossa ;  ^''  rcatchings  "  (i.e.  sleepless  nights),  by  Acts  xvi.  25,  xx.  7,  11,  and 
(better  still)  by  xx.  31  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  8.     [Much  of  this  well  given  in  Stanley.] 

Ver.  28. — Notice  the  change  of  reading  ;  and  also  choose  between  (1)  R.V.  (or  A.V.),  and 
(2)  R.V.  margin.  See  how  this  daily  interest,  a  burden,  and  an  inrushing  care,  led  him  to 
incessant  prayers  for  them  (Rom.  i.  9  ;  Phil.  i.  4 ;  Col.  i.  3  ;  1  Thess.  i.  2).  [How  happy  Paul, 
how  happy  the  Philippians  !  In  their  case,  every  thought  for  them  was  a  prayer,  every  thought 
of  them  a  joy.] 

Ver  31. — Grammar  makes  certain  that  the  ejaculated  benediction  belongs  to  the  Father. 
He  who  is. — The  emphatic  Greek  recalls  the  Greek  equivalent  for  Jehovah.  Look  at  the 
Divine  present  tense  in  Rom.  ix.  5,  and  in  John  i.  18,  iii.  13,  vi.  46,  viii.  47,  Rev.  i.  4,  8.  I  lie 
not.— Choose  between  (1)  an  asseveration  in  regard  to  what  he  intended  (but  in  fact  has  only 
begun)  further  to  relate  of  his  life ;  and  (2)  "  Ihis  purpose  "  (of  boasting  about  "  weakness  ") 
"  is  from  a  human  point  of  view  so  unlikely,  that  in  asserting  it  Paul  appeals  to  Him  Who 
alone  knows  his  motives"  (Beet). 

Ver.  32.  Aretas  (i.e.  Hareth). — Father-in-law  of  Herod  Antipas ;  his  capital  Petra  (in 
Edom).  Antipas  had  put  away  Aretas'  daughter ;  when  Aretas  cut  off  Herod's  army,  Jewish 
sympathy  with  Aretas  made  it  a  "  judgment  on  him  for  executing  John  the  Baptist."  Help 
under  Vitellius'  command  was  sent  from  Rome  to  Herod.  Just  then  Tiberius  died  ;  Caligula 
(perhaps)  gave  Damascus  to  Aretas,  or  in  the  frontier  wars  Aretas  seized  it  whilst  Vitellius 
was  absent,  occupied  with  the  changes  consequent  on  Tiberius'  death.  Thus  the  same  occu- 
pation of  Damascus  by  a  pro-Jewish  ruler,  which  favoured,  or  occasioned,  Paul's  persecuting 
mission  to  Damascus,  gave  help  to  his  Jewish  enemies  when  he  returned  (combine  Gal.  i.  17 
with  Acts  ix.  22  sqq.)  a  Christian.  Governor. — Lit.  ethnarch,  a  mere  provincial  lieutenant. 
Farrar  says  that  etimarch  was  also  a  title  of  Jewish  governors,  permitted  in  heathen  cities 
to  exercise  an  authority  over  the  Jewish  community ;  e.g.  such  an  official  may  have  ordered 
one  of  Paul's  Jewish  "  scourgings  "  at  Damascus.  No  date  for  Paul's  life  can  be  very  exactly 
fixed  by  all  this  (Tiberius  died,  A.D.  37).  There  are  no  Roman  coins  of  Damascus  belonging 
to  this  period. 

Ver.  33.  Window. —Overhanging  the  town  wall.  Basket. — Not  same  wor^  as  in  Acts  ix.  25, 
where  it  is  that  mentioned  in  the  feeding  of  the  four  thousand.  (Different  word,  again,  for. 
the  "  basket"  of  the  five  thousand.) 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—6. 

We  have  Paul  the  Paranymph  (the  Friend  of  the  Bridegroom). 

I.  His  work. — To  deliver,  in  her  virgin  purity  and  simplicity,  the  betrothed 
Church  to  her  expectant  Lord  and  Husband.  [Of.  ^^  bring  us  to  God"  (1  Pet. 
iii.  18).]  1.  Marriage,  closest  of  earthly  unions,  intended  by  its  Great  Ordainer 
to  be  a  permanent,  lifelong  union,  is  the  suggestive  hint  in  the  world  of  things 
natural  of  that  closest  spiritual  union,  between  Christ  and  His  people,  which 
makes  them  a  Unit,  "Christ"  (Gal.  iii.  16;  1  Cor.  xii.  12).  That  revealed, 
the  key  is  given  to  the  significance  and  sanctity  of  marriage.  [So,  in  connection 
with  counsels  as  to  husbands  and  wives,  Eph.  v.  27,  Paul  says  :  "  To  present  .  .  . 
to  Himself  a  glorious  Church," — as  His  *'  Bride,  the  Lamb's  Wife  "  (Rev.  xxi.  9) 
— "  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  .  .  .  without  blemish."  All 
the  Old  Testament  figurative  language  about  marriage,  adultery,  divorce, 
restoration,  as  regards  God's  people  and  their  relation  to  Him,  is  not  simply 
a  happy  use  of  a  natural  fact,  but  rests  on  this  deep,  original,  designed  fitness  in 
marriage  to  exhibit  the  spiritual  relations.]  2.  What  a  day  of  joyous  memory 
to  the  soul  itself,  and  to  the  human  instrument,  is  that  when  he  stood  by  and 
saw  the  *'  love  of  espousals "  ( Jer.  ii.  2),  when  the  soul  first  got  to  know  its 
Christ,  to  whom  from  that  hour  it  was  to  b^  united ; — the  first  tender  love,  sq 

092 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


sensitive  to  anything  which  would  grieve  Him ;  the  simplicity  of  heart,  judg- 
ment, purpose,  desiring  nothing  but  to  think  what  He  thought,  and  desire 
what  He  desired,  and  to  please  the  new,  and  so  dear,  Friend  in  everything; 
nothing  kept  back,  no  a/fer-thoughts,  or  w?ic?er  thoughts,  nothing  but  a  simple, 
loving,  pure  opening-up  of  all  the  heart  and  lite  to  the  knowledge  and  guidance 
of  Christ.  Then  the  yet  earlier  memories  of  the  incidents,  the  providences,  the 
drawings  of  the  Spirit,  the  half -understood  going-out  of  the  heart,  the  meeting 
with  Paul  or  some  other, — all  leading  up  to  the  introduction  and  espousal.  [How 
Lydia  would  remember  **  the  first  day  "  (Phil.  i.  5).]  One  of  the  earthly  anniver- 
saries never  to  fade  away  into  oblivion,  but  still  to  be  kept  most  joyously  even  in 
eternity  !  3.  What  a  day  of  joyful,  holy  anticipation  that,  when  for  the  first  time 
I  see,  literally  and  "  face  to  face  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12),  the  Christ  of  Whom  I  have 
been  hearing,  thinking,  speaking,  so  long ;  "  Whom  not  having  seen  I  have 
loved  "  (1  Pet.  i.  8),  and  Who  has  loved  me  so  much  better  than  I  have  deserved, 
or  could  ever  have  expected.  How  joyous  to  Him,  "  satisfied "  at  last 
(Isa.  liii.  11),  to  look  into  the  face  of  His  Bride,  '*  resting  in  His  love,  rejoicing 
over  her  with  joy  "  (Zeph.  iii.  17) ;  repaid  at  last  for  Gethsemane  and  Calvary  ; 
reaping  at  last  the  fruit  of  the  age-long  **  purpose  "  of  His  Father's  heart  and  His 
own  (Rev.  xiii.  8  ;  Eph.  iii.  11) ;  tasting  in  full  draught  the  cup  of  "  the  joy  that 
was  set  before  Him  "  (Heb.  xii.  2),  having  now  all  He  desired  and  died  for.  And 
how  joyous  to  the  Paranymph,  glad  to  stand  aside  and  see  Bride  and  Bridegroom 
meet,  she  brought  safely  at  last  to  her  Husband's  home,  himself  forgotten  by 
them  in  their  mutual  joy.  [So  John  Baptist,  **  This  my  joy  is  fulfilled."]  His 
responsibility  is  then  over ;  the  ^^  care  of  the  Churches  "  will  no  longer  press,  even 
as  a  not  ungrateful  burden.  "  I  present  to  Thee,  Lord,  a  chaste,  virgin  Church." 
[In  all  this,  "  Church,"  "  Church,"  practically  means  "  Christian,"  "  Christian." 
The  Church  and  its  history  are  only  multiples  of  the  Christian  and  his  history. 
Or,  conversely,  the  individual  reproduces,  in  miniature  but  complete  copy,  the 
history  of  the  whole.] 

II.  His  feelings:  "jealousy,"  "fear." — 1.  Jealousy  often  has  in  us  an  evil 
connotation  and  colouring.  It  is  selfish.  Pride  is  touched  when  the  transferred 
love,  won  from  us  by  another,  tells  that  we  are  not  first,  or  counted  best.  In 
God  (or  Christ)  it  is  not  "  selfish,"  except  with  the  "  selfishness  "  of  the  king  who 
cannot  tolerate  a  rival  king  in  his  realm  or  on  his  throne.  God  may,  must  (as 
we  may  not),  claim  that  all  the  heart  shall,  unshared,  be  His.  Paul's  jealousy 
has  no  selfish  tinge.  No  great  matter  whether  converts  transfer  their  love  for 
him  to  rival  teachers  or  not,  but  a  great  matter  whether  these  rival  teachers 
come  courting  the  Lord's  betrothed  One,  and  steal  her  love  from  Him ;  a  great 
matter  if  they  tamper  with  the  simple,  pure,  direct  love  of  her  heart  for  Him. 
2.  The  pain  to  a  minister  of  Christ  to  see  his  converts  "  leave  their  first  love,'* 
become  worldly,  return  to,  and  guilefully  plead  for  and  defend,  forms  of  sin  which 
the  healthier  love  of  their  betrothal  condemned  by  instinct,  because  it  grieved  the 
Lord, — it  is  a  great  pain,  not  chiefly  because  his  own  work  seems  ending  in  failure, 
but  iDecause  the  Lord  will  be  *'  so  disappointed,"  and  the  unfaithful  souls  are 
preparing  for  themselves  such  eternal  loss.  3.  Very  well  to  be  tolerant,  broad, 
towards  other  forms  of  teaching  and  other  types,  or  Churches,  of  Christian 
workers ;  but  there  is  no  virtue  in  a  toleration  which  can  stand  by  and  with  silent 
equanimity  see  the  beautiful  promise  of  early,  tender  love  to  Christ  spoiled,  the 
simple  conscience  being  sophisticated  and  entangled  in  worldly  sophistries,  the  life 
being  "  brought  again  into  bondage  "  to  once  forsaken  sins.  4.  Let  the  soul 
itself  beware  of  the  ^^  corrupting  "  process  (1  Cor.  xv.  33).  Lend  no  ear,  Eve- 
like, to  the  arguments,  suggestions,  "  more  liberal  "  reasonings  and  practice  of  the 
world,  or  of  a  worldly  Church  ;  the  old  Serpent  is  in  them  all,  at  his  old  work,  with 
his  old  "  craftiness."     It  is  Eden  and  the  Fall  in  perpetual  repetition.     The  very 

q  q  593 


CHAP.  XL    HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


(necessary)  contact  with  evil  and  evil  men  is  corrupting,  or  at  least  perilous; 
even  mental  contact  with  evil  in  books  is  not  without  danger.  The  tender 
susceptibility  of  conscience  is  easily  impaired ;  it  "  takes  a  fine  edge,"  and  loses 
it  readily.  Let  a  ^^ jealous "  guard  be  kept  over  the  loyalty  of  the  heart  to 
Christ ;  let  the  first  sign  of  a  waning  sense  of  His  being  supremely  "  dear,"  be 
noted,  confessed,  forgiven.  Intercourse  with  Him,  though  He  be  unseen,  must  be 
frequent.  Only  thus  can  love  to  Him  breathe  or  live  in  the  corrupt  atmosphere ; 
only  a  vigorous  inner  life  of  consecration  to  Him  can  throw  off  the  infection  around, 
and  live  through  it  unharmed.  The  sense  of  duty  to  Him  must  be  cultivated — 
''I  am  reserved  for  Him";  every  disregard  of  Duty  dulls  the  perception  of 
Duty.  Acts  make  habits  of  mind  and  heart  [and  body].  Every  betrothed  soul 
*'  that  hath  its  hope  set  upon  Him,  puritieth  itself,"  etc.  (1  John  iii.  3).  [Cf. 
1  John  ii.  28  ;  2  Pet  iii.  14.] 

III.  His  methods.— 1.  He  is  a  "preacher.''  [1  Cor.  i.  21  not  to  be  used  here.] 
2,  He  preaches  a  Jesus,  through  Whom  his  hearers  receive  a  Spirit.  [In  this 
case  the  personal  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  ii.  12).]  3.  His  message  is  a  Gospel.  It  is 
good  news  for  an  outcast  world,  that  God  sends  His  servants  to  say,  "  Come  to 
the  wedding,"  even  as  guests.  Good  news  that  to  alienated  man  it  is  proclaimed 
that  a  [marriage]  fellowship  with  God  is  again  possible,  resting  on  two  great  facts, 
resting  upon  the  work  of  two  Divine  Persons.  Outside  us,  and  abiding  here, 
whether  men  avail  themselves  of  it  or  not,  is  the  work  of  Christ,^ — the  basis  of  all. 
Within  us,  and  depending  for  its  actuality  and  continuity  upon  our  acceptance 
of  it  and  co-operation  with  it,  are  the  gift,  the  indwelling,  the  work,  of  the  Spirit. 
No  fellowship  without  the  Spirit ;  no  Spirit  without  Christ ;  no  Gospel  without  a 
*'  Jesus  "  and  a  "  Holy  Ghost.'*  A  "  Gospel  "  which  should  ignore  either  Person,  or 
His  office  and  work,  would  be  no  Gospel  at  all.  A  "  Gospel "  which  should  under- 
value or  understate  (say)  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit — though,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  should  ^^ proclaim"  the  "  blood,"  the  "  cross,"  the  "  atonement  "  of  Christ 
never  so  loudly  and  earnestly — would  be  an  imperfect  Gospel.  There  can  be 
"another  Gospel"  [not  "another"  i.e.  a  companion,  parallel.  Gospel;  it  is  a 
"  different "  Gospel,  Gal.  i.  6,  7,  and  here,  as  R.Y.],  "  another  Jesus,"  "  another 
Spirit."  [This  last  in  1  Cor.  ii.  12 — in  accordance  with  that  parallelism  of  phrases 
and  facts  which  in  Scripture  obtains  between  the  kingdom  of  light  and  the 
kingdom  of  darkness —  seems  almost  to  imply  an  action  of  the  Evil  One  upon 
the  soul,  comparable  to  that  of  the  Holy  One  upon  it.]  A  "  Gospel "  which 
should  minify  or  suppress  an  Atonement  for  guilt  by  a  Sacrifice  upon  the 
Cross ;  which  should  deal  with  men  as  though  there  were  no  guilt,  and  no 
Sacrifice  were  needed ;  a  "  Gospel "  whose  appeal  to  men  should  assume  that 
they  can,  if  they  will,  rise  out  of  and  above  their  old  and  evil  self,  and  by 
self-originated,  self-sustained  effort  can  improve  some  inherent,  natural 
"  goodness,"  and  that  they  need  no  external.  Divine  help  and  grace  ;  a  "  Gospel " 
which  should  propose  to  renovate  the  world,  to  regenerate  the  man,  by 
sanitation,  art,  music,  intellectual  culture ;  such — true  or  false,  as  their 
exponents  or  opponents  may  deem  them — are  at  all  events  "  different  Gospels  " 
from  that  preached  by,  and  successful  in  the  hands  of,  Paul  and  the  **  Evangelical  " 
preacher.  They  are  proved  such  experimentally  ;  for  they  do  not  bring  about 
any  "  betrothal "  of  the  soul  to  Christ.  Not  the  phrase  only,  but  the  thing,  is 
scouted  by  some  of  the  human  "  Gospels  of  the  age."  There  is  some  help  in 
some  of  them  ;  much  help  in  a  few ;  but  they  miss  the  deepest  need  of  human 
hearts.  They  do  not  take  into  sufficient  account  [e.g.  in  denying  a  vicarious  atone- 
ment] some  instincts  of  human  hearts  which  Paul's — Christ's — Gospel  has  been 
proved  to  meet.  Only  one  Gospel,  yet  men  scarcely  tolerate  it;  many  deceivers 
and  false  Gospels,  and  men  "  bear  them  finely "  !  There  may  be  "  a  different 
Christ."    E.g.  one  something  less  than  Divine  as  the  Father  is  Divine  ;  one  who 

594 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11,   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


is  the  Head,  the  Crown,  the  Flower,  the  mediating  Origin  of  all  creaturely 
existence,  nearest  the  Creator,  and  yet  all  the  great  gulf  between  Creator 
and  Creature  between  him  and  God.  Or  one  who  is  only  "  Jest^s,"  the  very 
flower  of  the  Race,  the  choicest  exponent  and  embodiment  of  all  that  is  most 
lovely  and  noble  in  Manhood,  a  human  teacher,  who  spake  indeed  "as  never 
man  spake  "  save  himself,  but  yet'  with  a  wisdom  and  knowledge  only  different 
in  degree — not  in  kind — from  that  which  "  inspires  "  the  highest  type  of  human 
teachers.  Or,  still  lower,  an  amiable,  well-intentioned,  philanthropic,  enthusiastic 
soul,  in  full  communion  with  nature,  who  could,  and  did,  make  mistakes  in 
conduct  and  judgment ;  who  could  [and  perhaps  did]  sin,  at  least  in  spirit  and 
temper ;  who  was  hurried  into  unadvised,  unintended  courses  by  the  force  of 
circumstances,  and  played  into  the  hands  of  enemies  who  compassed  his  death. 
[The  growing  prevalence  of  the  use  of  "  Jesus  "  instead  of  "  Christ "  is  significant. 
It  means  (frequently,  happily)  a  clearer,  truer  realisation  of  the  historical  side 
of  the  life  and  work  of  the  Incarnate  Redeemer,  with  the  aid  of  a  wealth  of 
geographical,  historical,  literary,  antiquarian  knowledge  which  never  was 
available  untU  to-day,  till  we  see  and  hear  Jesus  of  Nazareth  and  His  surround- 
ings of  persons  and  circumstances,  almost  as  if  we  had  lived  amongst  His 
contemporaries.  A  good  thing,  but  needing  to  be  watched,  lest  we  see  "  Jesus  "  so 
clearly  that  we  cannot  see  the  "  Christ^  The  very  apostles  needed  not  only  that 
the  Spirit  should  purify  their  eyes,  and  enable  them  to  understand  the  true 
dignity  of  their  Divine  Friend,  but  also  that  the  embarrassment  and  obscuration 
of  close  everyday  intercourse  with  the  man,  should  be  removed  by  time  and 
absence,  and  they  be  left  free  to  see  "  their  Lord  and  their  God."  The  change  of 
name  often  means  also  a  "  naturalism  "  of  estimate  and  of  representation  of  Christ 
and  His  work,  whose  tendency  is  so  to  overstate  the  "  emptying  "  of  Phil.  ii.  7 
that  human  limitations,  and  even  liabilities,  leave  too  little  room  for  the  Divine 
Son  in  the  teaching  and  the  work.]  [The  believing  heart  needs  to  watch  against 
the  "  corruption  "  of  the  "  simplicity  "  of  adoring,  worshipping  belief  in  a  Jesus, 
Who  LS  Incarnate  God  as  certainly  as  He  was  the  (to-day  more  vividly  known) 
Jesus  of  Nazareth.  The  closest  intercourse  between  the  soul  and  her  Betrothed 
must  be  kept  up.  The  "  Spirit "  must  take  that  Godhead  of  her  Lord  which 
only  He  can  really  reveal  (1  Cor.  xii.  3),  and  which  is  a  holy  "  secret "  of  love 
between  the  Lord  and  the  soul  (cf.  Ps.  xxv.  14) ;  the  soul's  life  must  so  rest  upon 
a  Divine  Christ,  that  it  can  bear  fo  know  the  historic  Jesus  better,  without  any 
peril  of  knowing  the  Divine,  Redeeming,  Incarnate  Son  of  God  less  well.  Hard 
to  balance,  to  combine,  both.  But  semi-naturalist  "  Lives  of  Christ "  must  not 
leave  us  with  ^^ another  Jesus."^  Paul  in  Phil.  i.  18  is  very  "liberal,"  "broad," 
rejoicing  that  men  who  would  not  otherwise  do  so,  are  hearing  of  Christ,  and  this 
though  the  preachers — many  of  them  his  opponents  the  Judaisers — preach  an 
aspect,  exhibit  a  form,  of  the  Gospel  which  was  by  no  means  his  own,  or  that 
which  he  thought  truest  and  best.  Yet,  with  perfect  consistency,  he  is  very 
"narrow"  and  intolerant  of  another  Gospel  or  another  Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.  11  ; 
Gal.  i.  6-9,  V.  11,  12  ;  and,  in  effect,  here).  The  same  supreme  loyalty  to  Christ, 
the  same  ardent  devotion  to  Him,  rules  in  both  cases,  but  is  conditioned  differently 
in  its  resulting  expression. 

TV.  His  qualifications. — 1.  ^^  Rude  in  speech^  Some  justification  for  this, 
though  the  phrase  is  the  phrase  of  detraction  and  depreciation.  The  portrait 
drawn  by  an  enemy  must  have  some  measure  of  resemblance.  We  know  that 
he  had  deliberately  refused  to  himself  even  the  liberty  to  employ  the  aid  of 
rhetoric  to  win  attention  and  acceptance  for  his  Master  and  his  Message. 
Others,  even  his  friend  ApoUos,  might,  blamelessly,  use  any  rhetorical  power, 
inborn  or  acquired,  laying  it  under  contribution  for  the  service  of  Christ. 
Succeed  or  fail,  he  would  not.     [Too  mucn  must  not  be  made  of  any  supposed 

595 


CHAP.  XI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  CORINTHIANS. 


discouragement  over  a  "  failure "  at  Athens,  just  before  coining  to  Corinth. 
The  address  on  Mars'  Hill  was  not  without  its  converts ;  nor  was  it  specially 
ornate  in  form ;  it  was,  moreover,  just  coming  to  (very  Evangelical)  talk  about 
Resurrection  and  Judgment,  when  it  was  suddenly  broken  off  by  the  hearers' 
outburst  of  laughter.  It  was  not  that  he  had  tried  the  rhetorical  method  at 
Athens,  and  had  failed  to  make  converts  ;  it  was  rather  the  imperviousness  of  the 
intellectual  mood  to  serious  appeal,  manifest  in  the  majority  of  his  Athenian 
audience,  which  made  so  emphatic  his  detei-mination  that  at  Corinth  nothing 
should  even  seem  to  aim  at  flattering  the  "  intellect "  or  tickling  the  "  cultured  " 
ear  of  the  Corinthians.]  [See  further,  under  1  Cor.  ii.  13  ;  and  in  Farrar, 
St.  Paul,  Appendix,  Excursus  I.,  II.,  III.,  are  very  full  discussions  and  quotations 
of  opinion,  as  to  the  style  of  Paul's  writing  (and  so,  probably,  of  his  speaking  also).] 
Ought  we  to  call  this  "  rudeness  "  rather  a  disqualification  ?  No.  He  wished 
to  make  souls  hear  and  love  not  his  voice,  but  the  voice  of  the  Bridegroom. 
[Sometimes  a  preacher  will  preach  so  "  well,"  that,  like  John  Alden  pleading 
for  Miles  Standish,  the  pleader,  all  unintentionally,  wins  the  ear  and  heart  for 
himself,  and  holds  them  back  from  the  Lord  for  Whom  He  pleads.  So  the 
"  execution  "  and  voice  of  the  singer  will  sometimes  make  the  very  song  to  be 
almost  unheeded.  Cf.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  32 ;  the  prophet's  message  went  for 
nothing.]  A  successful  winner  of  souls  may,  should,  bring  every  natural 
or  acquired  ability  into  the  service  of  his  Master.  But  always  with  a  most 
watchful  jealousy  over  himself  lest  he  himself  should  thus  "  corrupt "  his  hearers 
^^from  the  simplicity  and  purity"  and  really  do  the  work  of  the  Tempter. 
Always  with  a  completeness  of  consecration  of  all  gifts  to  the  supreme,  sole,  glory 
Christ ;  and  this  for  some  hearers,  and  with  the  personal  liability  of  some 
preachers,  may  sometimes  mean  the  disuse  of  some  gifts,  or  their  very  sparing 
employment.  The  glory  of  success  will  then  be  manifestly  due,  not  to  the 
eloquence  of  the  preacher,  but  to  the  power  of  God,  [This  all  more  fully 
under  1  Cor.  ut  supr.^  The  man  who  is  wilhng  to  be  nothing,  that  the  Lord  may 
be  everything,  is  qvxilified  for  the  work  of  bringing  souls  and  Christ  together. 
Provided  that  he  be  **  not  rude  in  knovdedge  "  ;  for  above  all  in  the  things  of  God, 
the  man  who  is  shallow  and  crude  will  only  be  a  workman  "  ^o  he  ashamed."  No 
knowledge  ever  comes  amiss  to  a  preacher ;  like  Sir  "Walter  Scott,  he  will  learn 
never  to  talk  to  any  man  without  picking  up  something  which  he  may  turn  to 
good  account ;  he  cannot  know  too  well  men  and  affairs  and  the  world  of  nature 
or  the  arts,  if  only  all  his  knowledge  be  laid  before  Christ  as  gifts  upon  the  altar. 
But  with  or  without  this  he  must  know  "  the  things  of  God."  [The  preacher  who  is 
well-read,  well-informed,  about  everything  except  the  very  subjects  which  are  the 
materials  of  his  "  business,"  makes  a  mistake.  The  Bible  is  the  text-book  of  his 
spiritual  Medicine  ;  Theology  is  the  Science  of  his  Art  of  Healing ;  men  are 
"  cases  "  of  heart-sickness,  for  his  physicianly  study  and  help.  So  far  as  study 
and  hard  work  can  do  it,  he  should  "  qualify,"  "  with  honours  "  if  he  can,  as  a 
soul-physician.  Poor  talk  to  hear  a  preacher  cry  down  *'  theology  " ;  poor  praise 
that  he  be  better  at  everything  than  at  soul-saving  preaching.]  No  premium  must 
be  put  upon  coarseness  or  vulgarity  of  thought  or  expression  ;  this  is  no  qualification 
for  a  minister  of  Christ.  But  want  of  polish,  or  defective  utterance,  is  consistent 
with  real  ability,  deep  knowledge,  great  success.  Many  of  the  least  **  gifted  "  are 
the  very  "  little  children  "  to  whom  is  given  entrance  into,  and  foremost  place  in, 
the  kingdom  of  God  (Matt,  xviii.  1-4).  \Yith  what  persuasive  power  do  some, 
"  little  qualified,"  speak  of  the  blessedness  of  fellowship  with  Christ  into  which 
they  desire  to  bring  other  men.  How  they  **  know  Christ"  with  a  knowledge, 
an  intimacy,  only  given  to  "disciples  whom  Jesus  loves."  Not  only  is  their 
motto,  "  This  one  thing  I  do,"  but,  "  This  one  thing  I  know."  They  are  not 
"  rvde  in "  the  experienced  "  knowledge"  of  Divine  things.     Paul  was  not.     It  is 

596 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  XL 


no  empty  boast  in  ver.  5.  It  is  no  hoast^  in  any  sense  of  self-assertion  or 
exaltation.  It  is  simple  fact  that,  not  only  in  comparison  with  the  "  super- 
eminent"  (but  ''^ false"  "sham")  ^^ apostles"  at  Corinth,  but  in  competition  with 
the  true  apostles  of  Christ,  he  has  left  his  mark  most  deeply  on  the  form  of 
Christian  revelation,  or  is  only  approached  by  John.  More  than  any  other,  did 
he  seem  to  "  know  "  the  mind  and  will  of  Christ.  And,  as  always  happens,  there 
was  a  "  native,"  prearranged  fitness  in  the  "  vessel,"  to  receive  and  convey  the 
truth. 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS,— Verses  7—11. 

[Dr.  J.  Lyth,  Homil,  Treas-,  suggests  : — ] 
I.  Honest  robbery  (ver.  8). 
II.  Honourable  poverty  (ver.  9). 

III.  Honourable  independence  (vers.  7,  9,  10). 

I.  1.  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  "  wages."  [Opposite  to  "  gift"  Rom.  vi.  ult?^ 
A  true  minister  earns  his  stipend ;  though  the  happier,  higher  theory  is  that 
his  people  see  that  he  wants  for  nothing,  whilst,  without  interruption  or  care, 
he  gives  all  his  time  and  strength  to  the  work  of  God.  But  there  are  always 
"  unreasonable  men  "  (2  Thess  iii.  2)  with  whom,  whatever  he  does,  whatever 
course  ho  adopts,  the  minister  always  "  commits  a  sin."  If  he  take,  or  ask,  for 
support,  he  is  ^^ mercenary"  (xii.  17,  18).  If  he  do  not  ask,  or  refuses,  support, 
he  "  does  not  care  for  "  his  people,  or  for  their  love,  and  will  not  let  them  show 
it  (ver.  11).  Again  and  again  he  can  only  carry  his  case  by  appeal  to  a  higher 
court :  "  God  knoweth."  Though,  like  Paul,  he  may  now  and  then  be  compelled 
to  speak  out,  to  explain  and  defend  himself  and  his  conduct, — generally  he  does 
most  wisely  to  see  that  his  character  is  right  before  God,  and  to  leave  God  to  care 
for  his  reputation  before  men.  Paul  takes  or  refuses  as  may  in  any  given  case 
seem  expedient.  His  is  the  true  unchangeableness  [like  God's  own] ;  not  that 
he  never  varies  from  one  line  of  action,  but  that  he  never  varies  from  the 
unchanging  principles  of  his  conduct.  2.  Hence  it  is  quite  honest  to  have 
accepted  the  gifts  of  the  PhUippians.  It  is  part  of  the  privilege  of  the  ministerial 
ofiice  to  live  more  directly  than  does  any  other  man,  not  actually  a  recipient  of 
charity,  upon  the  love  of  human  hearts.  There  can  be  no  "  business  payment  " 
for  what  the  true  minister  of  Christ  has  done  for  a  convert,  or  for  what  he  gives  to 
his  people  in  his  continuous  ministrations.  It  is  no  exchange  of  values,  as  in  business 
payments  or  wages.  The  true  minister,  nevertheless,  does  give  full  value  for  all 
he  receives.  The  people,  on  the  other  hand,  of  their  free-will  and  grateful  love 
"  minister  once  and  again  to  his  necessity"  (Phil.  iv.  16).  If  a  minister  "will 
not  work,  neither  should  he  eat "  (2  Thess.  iii.  10).  But  if  he  do  his  work,  he 
may  take  " wages"  that  are  no  wages,  but  the  gifts  of  love.  3.  Especially  may 
he  receive  what  may  support  him  as  he  strikes  out  (like  Paul  setting  out  for 
work  in  Achaia)  into  regions  where  his  reception  and  maintenance  are  doubtful. 
To  shame  a  people,  so  well  able  to  fulfil  their  obligation  to  the  man  who  has  led 
them  to  Christ  as  were  the  Corinthians,  Paul  may  call  it  a  quasi-sacrilegious 
"  robbery  "  of  the  Church  treasury  at  Philippi.  But  the  Philippians  love  to  see, 
the  Corinthians  ought  to  see,  that  Paul  wants  for  nothing. 

II.  Honourable  poverty. — A  man  like  Paul  in  want,  in  a  city  like  Corinth  ! 
Yet  of  all  men  in  the  empire  then  receiving  their  "  wages,"  this  man — if  only 
the  "  age  "  had  known — was  better  worth  his  "  salt,"  and  his  salt-money — his 
sala/ry — than  the  emperor,  or  his  soldiers,  or  the  philosophers,  or  the  artists. 
It  is  the  old  paradox  of  Providence.  Tiberius  on  the  throne,  feasted  to  the 
weaiiness  of  satiety ;  the  Son  of  God  hungry  in  the  wilderness  I    Truly  "  the 

597 


CHAP.  XL    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  CORINTHIANS. 


world  is  out  of  joint."  The  Maker  of  the  world,  the  Ordainer  of  the  fundamental 
laws  of  human  society,  "  meant  it  not  so."  "  I  know  how  to  ...  be  abased ;  I 
know  how  to  be  .  .  .  hungry  .  .  .  and  to  suffer  need "  (Phil.  iv.  12).  Not 
every  man  does.  It  is  a  grace.  The  "  poverty  "  of  the  ministry  may  mar  a 
man's  character  and  impede  his  usefulness,  if  he  allow  it  to  occasion  a  perpetual 
anxiety,  if  it  feed  a  continual  bitterness  against  God  and  the  Church,  if  he 
nurse  a  continual  sense  of  "  humiliation,"  at  being  "  poor  "  amongst  the  prosperous 
men  in  his  church,  if  he  be  frequently  talking  of  the  "  sacrifice "  he  made  to 
enter  the  Christian  ministry.  Paul  had  "  learned  the  secret."  It  needs  great 
grace  '*  to  be  full "  ;  but  it  needs  great  grace  "to  be  hungry."  The  minister 
"  can  do  all  things  " — even  wear  ministerial  poverty  "  honourably  " — "  through 
Christ  who  strengtheneth  him  "  (Phil,  ut  supr.).  Yet  the  beauty  and  right  of 
such  liberality  as  that  of  the  poor  Macedonians,  the  expression  of  their  sympathy 
and  love,  and  a  precious  fruit  of  their  faith,  remains  equally  honourable; 
whilst  the  wealthy  indifference  of  Corinth,  which  should  have  seen  to  it  that 
the  Apostle  had  no  need  to  practise  the  lesson  of  wearing  poverty  with 
honour,  remains  utterly  selfish  and  blamable. 

III.  Honourable  independence. — 1.  "  Honourable,"  because  it  better  enabled 
Paul  ^'to  do  the  Corinthians  service"  and  to  silence  the  cavillers  whose  suggestions 
and  cavils  might  impinge  upon  his  character,  and,  through  him  representatively, 
upon  that  of  the  ministry  generally.  "  No  man  shall  stop  me  of  this  boasting." 
"  So  will  I  keep  myself."  2.  Such  "  independence "  needs  watching ;  needs 
perpetually  bringing  into  review  in  the  presence  of  Christ.  It  easily  grows  to  be 
really  a  pride  which  will  not  take  the  gifts  of  those  from  whom  real,  or  imaginary, 
slights  may  have  been  received.  Very  easily  does  sin  creep  in  and  make  the 
boast  of  "  independence  "  a  piece  of  self -pleasing,  and  even  of  simple  obstinacy  of 
character.  3.  "  Independence  "  is  only  worth  anything  to  a  Christian  minister 
so  far  as  it  means,  or  ministers  to,  a  perfect  freedom  to  speak  the  message  of 
God  in  its  fulness,  without  regard  to  men's  pleasure  or  displeasure.  If,  for  the 
glory  of  Christ  and  his  freedom  to  be  faithful,  the  minister  seek  or  keep  inde- 
pendence, it  may  be  "  honourable."  It  is  then  a  just  matter  of  "  boasting,"  and 
may  be  worth  keeping  at  any  price.  4.  If  the  "  truthfulness  of  Christ"  that  perfect 
simplicity  and  directness  of  heart  and  judgment  and  will  which  were  part  of  His 
perfect  holiness,  be  in  a  man,  it  will  dignify  and  sanctify  his  "independence"  of 
character,  opinion,  circumstances.  If  a  man's  motives  bear  bringing  under  the 
scrutiny  of  the  eye  of  "  God  Who  knoweth"  then  though  they  be  misjudged, 
as  by  somebody  they  certainly  will  be,  or  maliciously  misrepresented,  he  may  go 
on  his  way  unmoved.  It  is  often  a  good  piece  of  holy  strategy,  by  timely 
foregoing  of  rights — catching  suggestion  even  from  the  very  enemy — to  destroy 
the  very  basis  of  operations,  from  which  the  assault  of  the  unfriendly  criticism  or 
judgment  is  made.  Only,  once  more,  neither  in  the  strategy,  nor  in  the  success 
of  it,  must  Self  find  a  foothold.  All  must  be  for  the  sake  of  Christ  and  to 
facilitate,  or  to  remove  hindrances  to,  His  work. 


HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  12—15. 

"  Like  Master y  like  Servants." 

I.  What  sternness  of  denunciation ! — 1.  Quite  alien  to  the  spirit  of  our  time, 
with  its  "  breadth  "  of  view,  its  "  tolerance  "  of  all  shades  of  opinion  and  of  almost 
all  types  of  practice,  and  with  its  euphemistic  condemnation  when  it  does 
condemn.  It  means  the  intensity  of  conviction ;  the  intolerance  of  loyalty  to 
"  light"  and  truth,  and  Christ ;  the  necessary,  inevitable  detection  and  con- 
demnation of   falsehood   and  ignorance  by   "  knowledge."     [See   "  we   know," 

598 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


four  times,  in  1  John  v.  18-20.  "We  know  .  .  .  sinneth  not"  ("What 
dangerous  spiritual  presumption  !  "  cries  even  the  half-hearted  Church) ;  "  We 
know  ...  we  are  of  God,  .  .  .  world  lieth  in  the  Wicked  One"  ("  What 
wretched  narrowness  of  judgment ;  how  uncharitable  ! ") ;  "  We  know  .  .  . 
Son  of  God  is  come,"  etc.  ("  Yes,"  says  the  agnostic  temper  of  all  ages ; 
"  you  theologians  and  metaphysicians  are  dreadfully  sure  ;  you  *  know '  this,  and 
that,  and  the  other ;  we  don't ;  we  neither  affirm  nor  deny  ") ;  "  We  know  Him 
that  is  true  "  ("  Impossible ;  God  is  unknowable ;  and  His  Son,  if  He  have 
one,  is  unknowable  too  !  ")  Nevertheless,  John  and  the  Church  say,  "  We  know." 
Christ  and  His  people  say,  "We  know"  (John  iii.  11,  ix.  25).]  Need  to  take 
care  lest  our  milder  words,  and  "  more  charitable "  judgments,  betray  a  less 
hearty  allegiance  to  truth  and  holiness,  an  enfeebled  appreciation  of  the 
questions  at  issue,  and  of  their  importance,  or  even  a  degree  of  cool  indifference 
to  the  fundamental  distinctions  which  underHe  the  sharply  defined  judgments  of 
such  words  scs  Paul's.     Yet — 

II.  Any  apparent  change,  any  seeming  approximation  between  good  and 
evil,  is  only  upon  the  surface ;  the  real  distinction  beneath  abides  unalterable. — 
[Remember  the  distinction  between  ^^form"  and  ^^fashion^'  (Trench,  Syn.,  §  Ixx.); 
very  marked  in  Rom.  xii.  1,  2  ;  Phil.  ii.  6-8.  "  Fashion^'  (the  root  of  word  used 
here ;  see  R.  Y.)  is  (Bengel)  "  habitus,  cultus,  vestitus,  victus,  gestus,  sermones  et 
actiones  "  ;  what  offers  itself,  upon  the  surface,  to  observation.]  Satan  cannot  be 
"  transformed  into  "  [A.Y.,  inaccurately]  ;  he  can  only  be  ^^ fashioned  like."  The 
deep  gulf,  the  necessary  antagonism  in  their  very  nature,  between  "  darkness  " 
and  "  light,"  he  can  never  pass,  nor  does  he  desire  to.  At  the  most,  he  can  only 
assume  some  show  of  "light."  His  ministers  can  only  "  be  fashioned  as  ministers 
of  righteousness."  The  Christian  conscience  and  heart  must  not  allow  moral 
distinctions  to  be  obscured  or  confused ;  the  instinct  of  holiness  must  be  kept 
in  full  sensitiveness  of  touch  and  perception  ["quick  of  scent,"  Isa.  xi.  2 
(literally)].  Such  self-fashioning  on  the  part  of  evil  is  a  tribute  to  the  beauty 
of  "  light"  goodness,  holiness.  It  acknowledges,  too,  that  evil  is  no  dress  to  wear 
openly,  or  in  which  to  do  "  Satan's "  work.  Goodness  never  pretends  to  be 
Evil.  The  Tempter  once  dared  shamelessly  to  ask  Incarnate  Purity  to  fall 
down — just  for  a  moment — and  worship  him.  Conversely,  in  the  very  fact 
that  he  must  needs  borrow  the  livery  of  the  servants — angelic  and  human — of 
that  Pure  One,  to  do  some  at  least  of  his  evil  work,  he  is  ever  bowing  before 
Him,  with  a  very  real  acknowledgment  of  supremacy.  "  Hypocrisy  is  the 
homage  Yice  pays  to  Yirtue." 

III.  No  practical  use  in  speculating  as  to  what  particular  case  of  "  trans- 
fashioning"  on  the  part  of  Satan  is  in  Paul's  mind. — The  working  of  the 
principle  of  such  a  change,  such  an  assuming  of  "  goodness,"  is  common  enough, 
and  clear.  1.  Bad  men,  for  selfish,  or  even  malicious  ends,  put  on  the  life, 
speak  the  language,  do  something  of  the  work,  of  the  good.  Not  many  mere, 
and  downright,  hypocrites  in  the  world.  Far  oftener  the  discrepancy  between 
profession  and  fact,  which,  when  discovered,  is  denounced  as  "hypocrisy,"  has 
been  largely  mixed  with  self-deception.  Good  and  evil  are  sharply  distinguishable 
in  their  salient,  conspicuous  examples.  Like  two  neighbouring  mountains  [as 
Guesses  at  Truth  suggests]  which  stand  clearly  apart  so  long  as  attention  is  only 
directed  to  their  summits,  but  are  hard  to  discriminate  lower  down,  where  their 
bases  mingle  in  almost  unapportionable  stretches  of  nearly  level  ground  ;  so  on  the 
ordinary  level  of  common  life,  in  the  thousand  questions  of  the  minute  ethics  of 
daily  conduct  which  are  perpetually  presenting  themselves  for  solution,  right  and 
wrong  are  seldom  so  sharply  divisible  but  that  a  man  may  sometimes  find  some  real 
difficulty  in  keeping  them  apart,  and  in  not  transgressing  across  the  boundary- 
line  ;  whereupon  the  first  step  seems  to  lead  on  to,  or  even  "to  necessitate"  another, 

599 


CHAP.  XI.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.  CORINTHIANS. 


and  that  another ;  till  the  man  is  involved  in  a  position  which  he  never  meant  to 
reach,  and,  to  the  last,  may  try  to  persuade  himself  is  not  wholly  untenable.  He 
is  not  therefore  blameless,  or  to  be  simply  pitied,  but  he  is  hardly  the  mere 
hypocrite.  Yet  there  is  such  a  thing  as  the  life  which  is  the  calculated, 
persistent,  clever,  devilish  lie;  the  garb  of  righteousness  is  worn  for  evil  ends, 
known  from  the  first  to  be  evil,  distinctly  proposed  to  himself  by  the  "  deceitful 
worker"  and  deliberately  followed  up  to  the  last.  Rare,  but  not  unknown. 
So  in  morals,  evil  is  disguised,  made  to  speak  fair,  plausibly  pleaded  for,  or 
excused  until  excuse  passes  over  into  defence ;  until  young,  inexperienced  minds 
and  hearts,  without  fixed  principles,  or  any  definite  principles  at  all,  begin  to 
think  the  sterner  judgments  "narrow,"  "old-fashioned,"  "bigoted,"  "  unfair"  ;  and 
yield  themselves  to  the  blandishments  of  the  "  angel  of  light."  The  poets,  the 
novelists,  the  dramatists,  the  secular  newspapers,  greatly  help  the  dangerous 
disguise  of  evil.  How,  for  example,  has  Lust  been  glorified  under  the  stolen 
name  "  Love  "  !  The  oft-sung  praise  of  "  Wine  "  has  covered  with  "  light "  the 
mere,  animal,  filthy  Drunkenness.  Such  talking  and  writing  readily  catches  the 
public  ear  in  every  age.  The  same  principle  is  at  work  in  the  details  of  individual 
Ufe.  A  business  opening  ;  a  marriage -proposal ;  a  form  of  relaxation ;  essentially 
evil,  but  so  proposed  that  social  advantage,  or  profit,  or  pleasure,  disguises  the 
true  character  of  the  thing ;  and  not  until  the  soul  has  yielded  and  the  "  deceitful 
work  "  is  done,  does  the  disguise  drop  ofi",  and  the  "  darkness  "  stand  revealed. 

IV.  In  the  special  application  of  the  passage  we  note:  1.  ^^ False  apostles'* 
are  self -constituted,  having  no  real  "  call "  from  God  ;  their  real  and  only 
commission  is  from  Satan,  who  puts  his  own  stamp  upon  them,  so  that  they 
work  upon  his  lines,  copying  his  falsehood  of  claim,  and  of  methods,  and  of 
purpose.  They  assume  an  unwarranted  position,  and  have  no  real  authority. 
2.  "aS'iwjA,"  i.e.  they,  like  these  Corinthian  examples,  are  selfish,  ambitious  of 
men's  honour,  malignant  towards  the  real  servants  of  God,  tyrannical  in  their 
assumed  authority  (ver.  20),  preach  error  (ver.  4),  are  full  of  party  spirit. 
["  Then  none  was  for  a  party,  but  all  were  for  the  State," — for  "  the  Church  of 
Christ."]  3.  Yet  their  "  cTid  "  is  a  certain,  swift,  just  detection  and  destruction. 
The  "  wcyi^ld"  with  all  its  evil,  is  even  now  so  far  God's  world  that  the  issue  of 
its  course  and  history  must  be  a  victory  and  a  full  vindication  of  goodness  and 
truth  and  of  God's  Christ.  The  white  robe  must  be  stripped  off  from  the  falsehood 
sooner  or  later,  and  evil  and  evil  men  stand  revealed  in  all  their  native 
"  darkness."  The  servants  share  with  their  Master  "  fire  prepared  for  him." 
Every  Church  should  keep  jealous  watch  over  the  door  into  its  ministry;  and  should 
keep  in  full  working  order  a  door  out  of  the  ministry.  Every  minister  of 
Christ,  every  worker,  of  every  order  and  degree,  should  [not  be  perpetually 
scrutinising,  suspecting  his  neighbours,  but,  better,  like  the  apostles  at  the 
Supper-table]  be  asking,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ? " 


EOMILETIC  ^iOZra/AS'.— Ferses  16— 29,  30— 32. 

Boasting  Dogmatism. 

I.  See  Paul  descending  to  the  level  where  his  adversaries  strut  themselves 

before  their  admirers,  boasting  of  their  credentials  and  super-apostoKc  authority ; 
see  him  snatching  up  their  own  style  of  weapon,  and  on  their  own  ground,  with 
their  own  arms,  vanquishing  them.  Then  (vers.  30-32)  see  him  flinging  away 
the  unaccustomed  weapon  of  parade  of  his  doings,  suflferings,  services,  natural 
advantages,  and  taking  up  a  "  boast "  in  which  none  of  them  will  care  to  follow 
him, — his  "  infirmities."  See  how  this  "  glorying  "  is,  as  it  were,  wrung  out  of 
him,  with  many  a  protest  to  them  and  to  his  own  heart  that  it  is  '"''folly,* 

600 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


and  that  he  knows  it  is.     Indeed,  his  own  severest  word  is  that  such  talk,  such 
enumeration  of  one's  titles  to  honour  and  respect,  is  "  not  after  the  Lord  "  ;  it  is 
*'  after  the  flesh."     [There  is  peril  in  it,  to  a  man  himself.     In  that  arena,  where 
such  boasting  matches  come  off,  there  is  an  unseen  Adversary,  who  may  find  many 
an  unguarded  weakness  of  the  soul  laid  open  to  a  shaft  or  a  thrust,  whilst  the 
Christian  champion  displays  himself.     On  the  morning  of  Trafalgar  Nelson's 
captains  remonstrated  respectfully  with  him  against  his  determination  on  that 
day  to  put  on  his  many  orders — the  tokens  of  his  services  and  successes — fearing, 
as  proved  too  true,  that  these  would  make  him  an  inviting  mark  for  the  enemy's 
fire.]     The   very  "  gentleman "  does  not  willingly  do  it ;  and  how  much  less 
willingly  does  the  Christian.    What  society  stamps  as  against  "good  form,"  religion 
stamps  as  sin, — sin  against  the  Norm    and  Pattern  given  in  Christ.     Social 
"  Modesty  "  is,  in  fact.  Humility  severed  from  its  Christian  root -principle.     [It 
lives  for  a  while,  as  a  cut  flower  may,  in  strength  derived  from  its  root  in  the 
time  of  their  union.     But  only  the  abiding  union  with  Christ  will  for  any  length 
of  time  keep  either  humility  or  its  social  analogue,  modesty,  a  living  feature 
of  character.     In  fact,  Paul's  phrase  finds  its  true,  deep  exposition  in  this :]  The 
traits  in  a  Christian  character  are  the  traits  of  Christ's  character  (to  use  of 
Him  a  word  which  properly  belongs  only  to  His  human  brethren)  manifesting 
themselves    in    it.      They   are    Christ    expressing   Himself    in   the    men   and 
women  who  are  members  of  His  Body.     Their  life,  and  so  their  words,  are  "  in 
Christ."     They  should,  normally,  only  speak  as  He  can  be  conceived  to  have 
spoken.     A  very  comprehensive  test  of — rule  for — speech  !     All  glorification  of 
Self,  all  self-centering  of  thought  and  word,  is  "  after  the  flesh."     The  natural 
heart,  unchanged,  unrenewed  ^^ after"  the  Pattern  of  the  New  Manhood,  speaks 
thus,  and  betrays  its  presence  in  such  self -extolling  phraseology.     It  is  '^  folly  " 
before  God ;  He  knows  how  baseless  it  all  is.     It  is  ^^  folly  "  before  man  ;  men 
"' ^AmA; "  the  boaster  ^^  a  fool,"  and  give  him  no  real  respect;  not  to  say  that 
every  braggart,  by  his  implied  or  openly  claimed  superiority,  wounds  the  self- 
esteem  of  his  hearers, — the  one  unpardonable  offence  to  *'  the  flesh  "  !     And  yet, 
the  inconsequence  of  things  in  the  world  !     The  inconsistency  of  the  natural 
man  !     Let  a  man  only  be  confident  enough  in  himself,  let  him  only  boast  boldly 
enough,  let  him  only  parade  his  credentials  long  enough,  and  the  very  effrontery 
has  a  strange  success.    They  call  the  man  "  a  fool "  ;  they  call  themselves  '•^  fools  " 
pa  themselves  ;  for  openly  they  claim  to  show  "  wisdom  "  in  their  very  ability  to 
estimate   such  a  paragon   of   excellence ;    and   sometimes  in  their   hearts   also 
they  plume  themselves  on  the  "  wisdom  "  with  which  they  can  see  through  all  his 
"  boasting  "  !] — for  submitting  to  such  a  man.     But  they  submit ;  they  "  suffer 
fools  finely  "  !     Men  accept  truth  on  three  grounds, — intuition,  or  ratiocination, 
or  authority.     For  most  the  readiest,  commonest,  and  (to  them)  most   rest- 
giving,  is  Authority.     All  learning  begins  in  accepting,  on  the  authority  of  the 
teacher,  some  necessary  basal  assertions.     These  may  afterwards  be  verifiable  by 
our  cultivated  judgment,  or  sustainable  by  our  wider  knowledge.    But  unless  there 
be  faith  in  the  teacher's  authority,  learning  is  made  impossible  at  the  outset. 
Very  many  never  get  beyond  this  point.     Let  the  Teacher  only  assert  Authority 
long  enough,  loudly  enough,  he  will  find  not  a  small  clientele  who  will  become 
his  faithful,  ready  disciples.     It  is  made  a  reproach  to  Christians  that  they  are 
"  dogmatic  "  ;  in  the  same  (not  too  accurate)  sense,  and  with  the  same  accidental 
associations  attached  to  the  word,  so  are  many  scientific  teachers.     It  is  true 
that,  e.g.,  Sacerdotalism  does  find  that  its  readiest  way  to  secure  acceptance  with 
a  large  class  of  minds  in  a  solemn,  repeated,  emphatic  assertion  of  its  claims. 
It  is  equally  true   that   persistent,   emphatic,  widely  published,  influentially 
supported   assertion   is   the   *'  reason "   for   much   popular  acceptance  of  non- 
Christian   or   even   anti-Christian  unbeUef.      There  are   as   many  disbelievers 

601 


CHAP.  XI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


on  authority  as  there  are  believers  on  authority.  There  is  great  convincint^ 
power  in  such  verbal  "  blows  on  the  face "  as,  "  Every  qualified  person 
thinks,"  etc.,  "  Nobody  with  the  slightest  pretension  to  judge  but  believes,"  etc., 
"  Professor  This,  Doctor  That,  assures  us,"  etc.  Tf  religious  teachers  descend 
to  the  arena  where  such  methods  obtain  of  ^^ bringing  into  bondage"  an 
obedient  following,  they  may  not  complain  if  their  opponents  by  the  sa.me 
methods  obtain  their  following  too.  But  Paul's  caustic  remark  remains  true. 
Down  beneath  the  loudest  vaunt  of  ^^ wisdom"  of  "culture,"  of  "independence 
of  thought,"  there  lie  a  deep-seated  ignorance  and  self-distrust,  which  are 
eager  for  certainty,  and  which  are  only  waiting  for  some  loud  enough  boaster  of 
his  authority  to  claim  and  to  get  their  eagerly  given,  all-enduring,  very  faithful, 
enslaved  obedience  (ver.  20). 

II.  1.  Hear  Paul  conning  over  his  quarterings  of  nobility. — For  the  Jew 
had  been  the  nobleman  amongst  the  Gentile  commoners.  [As  Brahmin  to  low- 
caste  or  no-caste  man,  religiously,  socially,  and  by  birth,  so  (in  his  own  esteem) 
had  been  the  Jew  to  the  Gentile.]  Do  his  adversaries  of  the  Jewish  section  in 
the  Church  boast  of  their  pure  blood,  "  sons  of  Abraham  "  ?  He  can  show  that. 
Or,  of  their  place  in  God's  Israel  ?  He  has  that.  Old  style,  Conservative, 
Hebrew-speaking  Jews — none  of  your  Gentilising  sort,  loose  in  thought,  too  free 
in  practice?  So  were  he  and  his  father  before  him  ["a Hebrew"  sprung  "of 
Hebrews"].  If  birth  in  a  covenant  people — himself  wearing  the  seal  of  the 
covenant  upon  his  very  body  from  earliest  infancy  ;  if  loyal  pride  in  his  people 
and  their  history  ;  if  godly,  strict  education  in  the  Word  and  fear  of  God ;  could 
have  availed  a  man  anything  before  God  or  man  ; — Paul  had  them  all.  What 
Judaiser  amongst  them  could  show  a  fuller  shield  of  arms  than  he — if  a  man  is  to 
found  upon  his  quarterings  of  nobility?  [Note  how,  in  Phil,  iii.,  he  counted,  and 
still  counts,  all  these  as  "loss."  When  it  comes  to  be  a  question  of  finding  a 
ground  of  acceptance  as  a  sinner  before  God,  not  one  of  these,  nor  all  together,  is  of 
any  value  as  a  set-ofi*  against  his  guilt ;  they  may  as  well,  they  must,  be  written 
off — "  loss."  He  must  find  something  else.  He  takes  Christ,  and  relies  wholly 
on  Him.  Yet  (as  in  Critical  Notes)  as  between  him  and  men,  especially  for  the 
Gospel's  sake,  he  can  fetch  out  and  use — what  for  his  own  sake  he  values  at 
nothing — these  early  points  of  national  prestige.  Schiller  one  day  opened  a 
drawer,  and  carelessly  tossed  out  to  a  visitor  standing  by  a  patent  of  nobihty. 
"  *  Yon  Schiller  ! '  Did  you  know  I  was  a  nobleman  ? "  said  he  laughingly.  A 
University  man  may  now  and  again  remind  contemptuous  opponents  that  he  is 
a  scholar  and  a  gentleman  ;  whilst  ordinarily  he  never  invites  attention  or 
remark  to  the  point,  but  quietly  goes  on  with  work  amongst  the  poor,  to  whom 
he  says  nothing  of  his  college  and  his  degrees.] 

2.  In  such  points  he  is  the  equal  of  the  best  of  them.  In  work  for  Christ, 
and  in  titles  to  be  counted  a  fully  credentialled  apostle,  " a  minister  of  Christ" 
none  of  them  is  his  equal.  In  sufferings  for  Christ  he  is  alone;  there  is  no 
competitor,  no  one  to  compare  with  him.  Indeed,  which  of  them  cares  to  enter 
the  lists  here,  and  to  compete  for  the  honour  of  being  accredited  "  a  minister  of 
Christ,"  if  these  be  the  marks  of  an  apostle  ?  (vers.  23-27).  What  an  exposition  of 
his  own  phrase,  "  our  light  afiliction  which  is  but  for  a  moment  "  !  (2  Cor.  iv.  17). 
If  this  accumulation  of  sufferings  be  "  light,"  what  would  "  heavy  "  be  !  What 
a  pre-eminence  amongst  the  servants  of  Christ !  To  have  given  up  what  he  had, 
and  to  bear  all  this,  for  the  sake  of  a  Master  Whom  he  had  barely  seen — if 
there  were  "/o%  "  in  Paul,  the  world  would  so  reckon  this.  [Yet  (whether  he 
wrote  the  Hebrews  or  not),  he  would  have  said,  "  Looking  unto  Jesus,  .  .  .  Who 
.  .  .  endured  the  cross."  In  mere  physical  suffering,  Christ  suffered  less  than 
Paul,  and  was  never  in  such  perils.  Yet  how  unique  are  His  sufferings  in  the 
Word  of  God.     They  have  a  solitary,  unshared,  unapproached  significance.     We 

602 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap,  xl 


feel  that  in  studying  the  sufferings  of  Paul  we  are  on  our  level,  familiar  ground. 
If  in  number  and  aggravation  they  are  more,  in  kind  they  are  the  same,  sufferings 
as  other  men  feel.  But  we  feel  that  Christ's  are  on  another  level,  and  of 
another  order.] 

3.  Yet  such  a  life — this  one  life — has  its  uniqueness,  in  another  sense. 
Take  Stanley's  putting  of  the  point :  "It  represents  a  life  hitherto  without 
precedent  in  the  history  of  the  world.  Self-devotion  at  particular  moments,  if 
for  some  special  national  cause,  had  been  often  seen  before  ;  but  a  self-devotion, 
involving  sacrifices  like  those  here  described,  and  extending  through  a  period  of 
at  least  fourteen  years,  and  in  behalf  of  no  local  or  family  interest,  but  for  the 
interest  of  mankind  at  large,  was,  up  to  this  time,  a  thing  unknown.  The 
motive  of  the  Apostle  may  be  explained  in  various  ways,  and  the  lives  of 
missionaries  and  philanthropists  may  have  equalled  his  in  later  times ;  but  the 
facts  here  recorded  remain  the  same.  Paul  did  all  this,  and  Paul  was  the  first 
man  who  did  it "  (p.  562).  Yet  see  how  the  very  mention  of  all  this  is  wrung 
out  of  the  man  ;  and  with  many  a  protest  against  his  folly  in  letting  himself 
down  thus. 

4.  Where  had  Paul  learned  this  ?  For  "  original "  as  such  a  life-lesson,  a  life- 
example,  may  be,  qud  man  and  man,  our  mind  goes  back  inquiring  where  he 
had  caught  his  inspiration.  He  would  have  said  in  a  moment,  "  To  me  to  live 
is  Christ."  The  scars  and  manifold  physical  traces  upon  him,  which  these 
perilous  and  painful  experiences  had  left,  are  to  him  matters  of  laudable 
self-gratulation.  They  are  the  "  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus "  upon  him 
(Gal.  vi.  17),  the  brand  which  his  Master,  Chiist,  has  set  upon  the  very  body  of 
his  bondman,  in  token  of  His  ownership.  He  almost  parades  them,  on  occasion,  as 
a  veteran  may  on  occasion  display  his  medal  and  its  clasps.  In  quite  as  true  a 
sense  may  we  regard  the  whole  style  of  such  a  life,  its  spirit,  its  purpose  and 
aim, — the  first  so  glorious  an  exhibition  of  a  lifelong,  often  thankless  and 
unthanked,  self-devotion  for  the  sake  of  others  who  had  but  scanty,  or  no,  claim 
for  it,  as  a  "  mark  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Christ  has  set  His  seal,  His  own  likeness, 
upon  such  a  man.  [How  much  of  all  this  is  lost  to  history  !  Yet  the  Paul 
known  by  Christ  knew  all  these ;  in  Christ's  "  Life  of  Paul,  My  Apostle  "  not  an 
item  of  all  these  would  be  omitted.     "  My  times  are  in  Thy  "  knowledge !] 

5.  And  yet  another  mark  of  his  Lord  comes  out :  He  is  daily  beset  with  the 
caring  for  the  Churches.  As  is  his  Master,  Whose  words  these  verses,  28,  29,  might 
well  be.  See  what  had  just  now  come  upon  his  sensitive  spirit,  in  consequence 
of  the  visit  of  "them  of  Chloe's  household"  (1  Cor.  i.  11).  A  letter  which 
proposed  sundry  important  questions  of  practical  Christian  ethics  in  which,  not 
Corinth  only,  but  all  the  Churches,  in  all  the  Christian  centuries,  were  vitally 
interested, — questions  which  needed  careful,  complete  reply  ;  and  still  more 
disquieting  verbal  reports.  These  two  letters  catch  and  exhibit  in  permanent 
photography,  all  the  acute  distress  of  this  sympathetic  Paul,  jealous  for  the 
honour  of  His  Master  and  His  Church,  anxious  about  the  souls  who  were  his 
work  in  the  Lord.  Multiply  such  instances ;  add  such  cases  as  the  Galatian 
Epistle  may  stand  for,  where  his  heart  longs  for  friendship,  and  only  finds  a  fickle 
affection  which  once  burned  hot  and  eager,  but  is  now  as  eagerly  transferring 
itself  to  others  who  made  it  their  business  to  decry  him  and  to  undo  his  work 
(Gal.  i.  6,  iv.  12-20) ;  an  Epistle  where  he  is  seen  to  be  above  all  distressed 
at  hearing  of  the  success  of  teaching  which  seemed  to  him  to  strike  at  the 
very  heart  of  the  Gospel,  and  at  the  honour  of  his  Christ  {ib.  i.  7-9).  Referee, 
arbitrator,  organiser,  pastor,  financier  (chap,  viii.)  ;  "  many  coming  and  going," 
each  with  something  that  needed  swift,  decisive,  just  direction  or  advice ;  letters 
to  be  written,  friends  to  be  guided  ;  his  work  on  the  spot  to  be  kept  going  ;  often 
in  poor  health ;    always  environed  with,  or  liable  to,  such  experiences  as  in 

603 


CHAP.  XI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


vers.  23-27 ;  much  to  try  patience  ;  more  to  daunt  heart ;  often  much  to  wound 
love.  No  wonder  that  he  speaks  of  the  ceaseless  inrush  of  such  cares,  with 
their  incessant  onset,  almost  as  if  every  new-comer  were  an  enemy  bent  upon 
destroying  his  peace.  [Yet  this  man — as  witness  his  letters,  by  their  example 
enforcing  his  own  precept  (1  Thess.  v.  16,  17,  18)  in  the  first  of  them — is  ever 
rejoicing.  His  is  a  bright  life.  These  things  do  not  obscure  or  quench  the  sunshine 
of  the  favour  of  his  Master,  ever  poured  into  his  heart.  Grace  makes  him  a 
victor  in,  and  over,  all.  Nay,  "  more  than  a  conqueror  "  (Rom.  viii.  37).]  No 
man  need  envy  the  man  in  the  front,  or  at  the  head,  of  a  Church  ;  the  focus  of 
all  envy,  jealousy,  grumbling ;  the  first  to  hear,  and  to  feel,  if  anything  goes 
wrong.  [Also  let  this  human  instance  be  a  stepping-stone  to  a  realisation  how 
at  every  moment  everything  reaches  the  Lord  of  the  Church  Himself,  enthroned 
above  it,  watching,  watching  over,  its  welfare.  Every  daily  incident,  the  great 
crisis,  the  trivial  detail, — they  are  alike  flashed  up  to  Him  Who  sits  at  the  Centre 
of  Government  of  the  Universe,  where  all  its  wires  of  Intelligence  converge  at 
His  throne,  and  whence  all  its  lines  of  issued  Command  and  despatched  Force 
radiate.  What  must  He  know,  must  hear,  see,  feel !  The  unfaithfulness  of  a 
Church,  the  break-down  of  a  member,  the  battle  of  the  Truth  for  very  life, 
reaches  Him ;  may  we  say,  hurts  Him  ?  Of  necessity  seeing,  knowing,  all ; 
unable  to  exercise  the  (to  us  merciful)  power  of  ignoring  or  forgetting, — ^the 
care  of  all  His  Churches  coming  upon  Him !] 

6.  And  yet  another  mark  of  his  Lord. — A  tender  sympathy  for  all  who  are 
wronged.  [Cf.  Matthew's  ("targumed")  quotation  in  viii.  17  of  Isa.  liii.  4; 
"infirmities,"  "sicknesses"  put  instead  of  "griefs,"  "sorrows."  As  if  Christ, 
Who  Himself  only  knew  death,  not  sickness,  so  entered  into  the  suffering  of  the 
crowds  thronging  that  night  around  Him  for  healing,  that  He  felt  their  pain  as 
if  it  had  been  His  own.]  (1)  The  ^^  weak"  are  not  always  in  the  right,  or 
deserving  of  unqualified  sympathy  and  defence.  Yet  the  minister  of  Christ  will 
be  ready  to  give  the  presumption  in  their  favour,  until  their  unworthiness  be 
proved.  He  may  not  entertain  an  unreasoning,  partisan  sympathy  with  any  one 
class  [working-men,  or  any  other]  ;  yet  if  the  "  weak  "  have  no  other  champion, 
they  should  find  one  in  him.  (2)  Nothing  should  more  quickly  set  his  righteous 
indignation  "  burning "  than  that  traps  should  be  set,  and  stumbling-blocks 
placed,  in  the  way  of  a  brother  in  Christ,  into  which  or  over  which,  in  ignorance 
or  weakness  he  falls.  (3)  The  man  who  cannot  "  hum "  at  wrong  is  strangely 
deficient  in  qualification  for  a  minister  of  Christ.  Slow  to  take  fire  [not  "  as  the 
flint  bears  fire.  Which  being  struck  gives  out  a  hasty  spark  And  then  grows 
cold  again  :  "  Brutus  (of  himself),  Shakespeare,  Julius  Gcesar\  but  burning  with 
sustained  intensity  of  enkindled  principle.  [See  how  sternly  Christ  could  feel  and 
speak  of  the  "  offender  "  of  even  "  a  little  ons  "  (Matt,  xviii.  G).]  (4)  Every  single 
soul  of  his  flock  will  be  so  dear  to  a  true  shepherd  that  no  greater  wrong  can  be 
done  to  him  and  no  greater  pain  given,  that  nothing  more  surely  will  arouse  a 
holy  indignation  in  him,  than  that  its  weakness  or  ignorance  or  inexperience 
should  be  taken  advantage  of,  e.g.^  by  a  malicious  worldling,  or  (worse)  by  an 
older,  wiser,  but  fallen-hearted  fellow- Christian.  [Or  even  that  an  older 
Christian,  by  sheer,  self -pleasing  laxity  should  ruin  a  soul  not  yet  established 
(Heb.  xii.  13).] 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  30—32. 

An  Unwelcome  Memory  of  the  Fast. 

Perhaps  this  is  only  the  first  item  in  an  intended  recital  of  dangerous  and 
humiliating  experiences,  from  which — the  whole  topic  of  himself  and  his  doings 
being  distasteful — he   turns    aside  when  thus  has  only  begun  to  touch  it. 

604 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xi. 


*'  Damascus  /  "    1.  What  a  name  to  him  !     There  are  days  and  places  known  and 
famous  in  heaven,  but  according  to  a  scale  of  interest  and  importance  very 
different   from    that  which  regulates  the  notice  given  to  days,   and  persons, 
and   places,  in   the   news  of   the  day  or   the   history  of  the   century.      [The 
sites  and   dates   of,   e.g.,    "Decisive    Battles    of    History,"   are   known  there, 
or  are  little  regarded,  according  as  they  bear  upon  the  fate  and  progress   of 
the  kingdom  of   Christ.      That   little   company  travelling   to   Damascus  with 
Saul  ;  that   same   Saul  in  darkness,    bewilderment,  prayerful  repentance;   all 
the    struggle    in    his   heart ; — these    were   watched    in   heaven,   as    no   royal 
pageant,  or  even  dynastic  struggle,   nor  perhaps,  a  famous  fight   or   political 
contest,  would  be.]    There  are  days  and  places  which  even  in  the  eternal  retrospect 
will   stand   out,   never  fading  into   oblivion,   even  when   the   most  permanent 
landmarks  of  earthly  history  are  grown  dim,  or  have  disappeared.     The  soul 
will  never  forget  where,  when,  how,  it  first  met  Christ.     In  heaven  the  interest 
of  the  city  Damascus  is  now,  and  eternally  will  be,  this, — Saul  of  Tarsus  there 
first   bowed  the  knee  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth.     2.  Paul  never  forgot  it.     Yet 
another  memory  is  associated  with  it, — that  of  his  extreme  peril  and  his  escape 
by  the  wall.     Confessedly  a  little  difiicult  to  see  why  this  was  so  distasteful  a 
memory  to  him  ;  why  this  in  particular  should  be  accounted  one  of  his  "  infirm- 
ities."    Perhaps  the  key  to  his  feeling  was  some  detail,  some  matter  of  vivid 
reminiscence,  which  was   clearly  present  to  his  own  mind  as  he  dictated  the 
sentences  to  his  amanuensis,  yet  which  he  forgot  to  mention,  and  the  omission  of 
which   may  have  been  as   perplexing   to  the   Corinthians  as  to  us.      It   was 
certainly  his  first  taste  of  the  deadly  opposition  which  he  was  to  meet  with  from 
his  own  countrymen  and  co-religionists,  now  that  he  had  become  a  Nazarene. 
It  may  be  allowable  to  fill  out  the  brief  narrative  of  Acts  ix.  20-22  and  to 
conceive  of  him  returning  from  "  Arabia  "  full  of  new  convictions  and  knowledge 
and  experience — full  of  his  new  Lord — and  pleading  with  the  Damascene  Jews 
with  an  earnestness  as  full  of  hope  of  success  as  it  was  full  of  zeal.    [As  "  young 
Philip  Melancthon  "  expected  that  his  testimony  and  his  arguments  would  win 
"  Old  Adam  "  in  other  men  for  Christ,  right  away.]    And  then  to  see  him  in  the 
reaction  of  comparative  "  failure " — for  to  confound  men   in  argument,  as  he 
did  abundantly,  is  only  one-half  of  "  success  " ;  to  see  him  obliged  to  go  into 
hiding  and   to   skulk   about,   until  he  could  one  night  be  dropped  stealthily 
over  the  wall   and  fly.      "  After   all,   then,    Rabban   Saul  is  one  thing,   and 
Saul  the  Nazarene  is  another.     Saul  the  Nazarene  is  *  weak '  like  other  men  ; 
even  he  is   not   going  to  take   a   world   by  storm  for  his   new  Christ."     The 
first  check  to  new  zeal,  the  first   disappointment   and  rebuff  to  the  hope  of 
soon  bringing  others  to  Christ;  to   win  victories   in    argument,   and   then   to 
find  that  the  beaten  foe  can  do  mischief,  and  one  must  beat  hasty  retreat; 
— such   are    in    one's    native    "  weakness "    humiliating    lessons   to   a    proud, 
fervid  spirit,   a   hard   breaking-in  for   some   temperaments;   perhaps   for   his. 
[Especially   if   we   know  that   our   Damascene   enemies   are   triumphing   over 
the  flight  of  the  Nazarene  champion ;  and  that  for  years  we   shall  hear  the 
story   told   again   and    again,    to    our   scornful    disadvantage.]      Perhaps   his 
own   feeling,  more  than  appears  on   the  surface  of  the  letter  here,  or  some 
mocking  reference  to  it  [if  it  became  a  sort  of  stock  story  of  his  opponents,  to  be 
told  mirthfully  to  his  prejudice]  at  Corinth,  made  the  very  mental  recurrence 
to  it,  and  much  more  this  direct  reference  to  it  in  writing,  a  painful  thing. 
3.  Yet  Paul  will  snatch  the  incident  from  the  very  mocking  adversary,  or  from  the 
rebelliously  proud  heart  within  him,  which  does  not  like  even  a  reference  to  this. 
If  it  be  a  cross  to  self,  the  better,  then,  to  crucify  self  upon  !    If  his  enemies  taunt 
him  with  the  *'  glorious  retreat "  he  made  from  Damascus,  he  will  make  a  "  glory  " 
of  it.     It  was  a  shame  put  upon  him,  just  because  he  had  become  Christ's.     And 

605 


CHAP.  XI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    CORINTHIANS. 


for  that  reason  only  does  he  refer  to  it.  4.  And  he  makes  oath  and  says,  "  Thus 
and  thus  did  I  escape."  There  was  going  to  be  a  sworn  list  of  painful,  humiHating 
reminders  that  he  was  only  ^^  weakness"  before  God.  But  he  breaks  off ;  the 
first  incident  stands  alone ;  too  small  a  finish  for  the  solemn  exordium.  A  good 
man  speaks  truth  :  (a)  Always:  "  /  lie  not"  neither  habitually,  nor  in  this  special 
instance  ;  (b)  As  standing  before  a  listening  Judge.  Israel's  God  "  shall  know." 
Every  light — every  more  solemnly  serious — word  is  spoken  as  in  the  presence  of 
God.  To  him^  the  very  thought  of  that  God  is,  in  fact,  in  theology,  in  habitual 
memory,  bound  up  with  the  most  loving  expression  of  His  true  Self, — He  is 
"  the  God  of"  His  "  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  His  name  is  "  Father"  Yet  is  He  a 
God  of  truth.  Who  neither  speaks  nor  tolerates  falsehood.  To  Him  lying  is 
awfully  great  in  its  sinfulness;  it  is  mean,  detestable,  mischievous.  He  searches 
hearts ;  He  hates  falsehood  ;  He  will  assuredly  visit  it.  The  character  of  the 
preacher  of  the  Gospel  is  bound  up  with  the  character  of  the  Gospel  itself.  If 
the  preacher  be  only  a  lying  braggart,  how  shall  anything  he  preaches 
claim  acceptance?  (c)  He  can  then,  when  fitting,  call  God  to  witness.  But 
Paul  passes  off ;  something  shunts  him  on  to  another  line,  a  *'  thorn  in  the 
flesh,"  concerning  which  the  truth  of  all  he  says  is  only  too  notoriously  and  (to 
himself)  painfully  obvious.  [The  apologetic  value  of  all  such  very  human  turns 
of  thought  in  these  letters  is  very  great.  These  letters  are  valueless  as  bases  of 
Christian  Faith  unless  they  be  genuine  and  authentic.  In  just  such  traits  as 
these  does  every  competent  student  discover  the  indubitable  marks  of  a  document 
of  unassailable  historical  character  and  value.] 


SEPARATE  HOMILY, 

Ver.   30.  We    have    more    than  a  whole  world  kin."     *' The  gods  of  classic 

revelation  of  Paul's  personal  character  heathendom  knew  nothing  of  sympathy 

here;  we  also  have  a  revelation  of  Divine  with  the  wants  and  woes  of  man  ;  they 

power,  bestowed  through  Christ,  acting  stood  aloof  in  sublime  indifference  ;  had 

upon,  elevating,  that  character.     His  they  possessed  some  touch  of  humanity, 

rebuke  is  chastened  ;    his   boasting  is  they  might  have  gained  a  hold  over  the 

mingled  with  modesty ;  both  show  the  affections  of   the   people,    which   they 

guiding  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  never  possessed.     It  was  left  for  the 

Further,  (1)  he  has  been  permitted  to  Gospel  to  reveal  to  us  a  God  who  could 

suffer,  (2)  he  has  thus  learnt  to  sym-  love  with  so  mighty  and  yearning  a 

pathise.      These   are   his    credentials.  love  that  it  brought  Him  down  .  .  .  that 

So  also  ''  as  One  who  suffers  and  .  .  .  He  might  be  .  i .  of  us.  It  is  in  this  reve- 

who   can   sympathise  .  .  .  our  Lord  is  lation  that  the  Gospel  has  conquered, 

best  known  to  us."  Such  are  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus ; 

I.  As  One  who  suffers. — The  heart-  suffering  and  sympathy.  It  is  of 
broken — where  not  heart-dead — world  these  [?]  St.  Paul  boasts."  Borne  as 
needs  for  its  Loader  One  acquainted  they  were  in  the  spirit  of  his  Master, 
with  grief.  "  To  the  Cross,  to  Geth-  these  sufferings  had  not  made  him 
semane,  to  the  sacred  Face  wet  with  morose  or  hard.  They  had  nourished 
tears  and  furrowed  with  agony,  the  a  tender,  thoughtful  care  for  the  suffer- 
soul  turns  in  its  hours  of  darkness,  ings  of  others,  and  even  for  their  weak- 
and  never  in  vain."  nesses   also.      "  Had   so   entered   into 

II.  In  that  suffering  it  sees  sym-  the  mind  of  Christ  that  he  could  be 
pathy. — Not  merely  suffering  for  us,  tempted  in  all  points  even  as  his 
but  with  us.  The  gracious  purpose  of  brethren  were.  Could  make  himself 
the  Incarnation.  "  The  Incarnation  is  one  with  the  over-scrupulous  man,  in 
that   touch   of  God  which  makes  the  a  matter   which  to  his  own  spiritual 

606 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    IT.   CORINTHIANS,     chap.xi. 


robustness  was  not  of  the  slightest  im- 
portance. Could  so  enter  into  this 
man's  weakness  that  in  sympathy  with 
him  he  was  weak  also,  feeling  the 
grievance  almost  as  if  it  were  his 
own.  Could  feel  another  man's  temp- 
tation, and  battle  with  it,  as  if  it 
attacked  him  personally.  His  rivals 
led  men  with  glib  tongues,  ready 
manner,  flattering  speech ;  Paul  by 
acts  of  sympathy,  not  words.     If  you 


are  called  to  suffer  for  Christ's  sake, 
remember  that  the  Hand  which  is  laid 
upon  you  to  sustain  you  is  a  Hand 
that  has  been  itself  pierced.  Suffering 
and  Sympathy  !  Such  are  the  Arms 
of  the  Cross.  On  these  the  Son  of  Man 
is  stretched  out.  In  these  arms  He 
would  embrace  a  fallen  humanity." — 
From  Canon  Hutton,  *'  Clerical  World" 
i.  353. 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS, 


Yer.  2.  Espoused  to  Christ. 

I.  Your  privilege ; — implies  believ- 
ing union  with  Christ ;  special  duties 
and  enjoyments ;  entire  consecration 
as  to  one  husband. 

II.  Your  espousals  effected  by  the 
grace  of  God ;  through  the  ministry  of 
the  Word. 

III.  Your  obligations,  to  preserve 
your  purity ;  that  we  may  present  you 
to  Christ ;  for  this  we  are  jealous  over 
you.— [J^.  Z.] 

[Cautiously,  use  may  be  made 
of  the  experiences  or  memories  of 
the  days  of  "  engagement,"  to  make 
vivid  the  nature  and  effects  of  the  love 
for  our  absent,  but  real.  Friend.  Is 
there  no  "engagement  ring,"  and  no 
**  marriage  ring,"  between  Christ  and 
His  soal-bride  ?  A  first  pledge  of  love 
and  a  second  given  in  the  beginnings 
of  their  closer  acquaintance  and 
mutual  affection ;  to  be  far  outdone 
by  another  love-token  which  shall  be 
given  when  first  the  Bride  steps 
with  Him  over  the  threshold  into  the 
heaven  which  is  eternally  to  be  their 
Home  together.  How  love  works : — 
There  is  the  frequent  interchange  of 
messages  by  letter  whilst  apart.  Each 
lives  in  the  constant  thought  of  the 
other ;  each  is  prompted  to  be  thinking 
for,  contriving  little  pleasures  for,  the 
other,  even  in  absence.  Each  is  trying 
to  be,  and  to  do,  what  the  other  would 
^ike.  Also  ask  :  "  Soul,  has  thy  Lord 
had  to  give  His  Betrothed  One  a  bill  of 
divorcement,  for  any  unfaithfulness  to 
Him  ? "] 


Yer.  2.  The  work  of  the  Ministry 
needs  for  its  completeness — 

I.  Winning  souls  for  Christ. — Yet 
some  men,  some  Churches,  do  not 
follow  this  up  by — 

II.  Keeping  and  preparing  them 
for  Christ. — [As  Esther  under  the  care 
of  Hegai,  was  being  got  ready  for  the 
day  of  her  actual  marriage  to  the  King.] 
By  thorough  training,  educating,  in 
holiness.  Watching  over  them,  watch- 
ing against  men,  or  habits,  or  books, 
which  would  "  corrupt"  Never  will 
minister  say,  or  Church, ''  It  is  finished," 
until — 

III.  They  are  presented,  none  miss- 
ing, all  pure,  to  Christ.  [Concerning 
some  converts,  many  a  minister  says  : 
"I  am  almost  thankful  to  hear  they 
are  gone  to  heaven.  I  never  felt  safe 
about  them  until  now."] 

Yer.  3.  (Put  on  the  Blachhoard  for 
an  Address :  S[atan].  S[ubtlety]. 
S[implicity.]) 

I.  An  adversary. — Count  on  him 
as  against  you ;  against  all  your  best 
interests;  against  all  that  is  best  in 
your  character;  against  all  which  makes 
Christ  look  with  complacency  on  His 
Bride  that  is  to  be.  Practically  believe 
in  a  devil.  A  fool's  Paradise  for  you 
if  you  don't.  He  comes  even  into 
a  real  Paradise.  No  place  is  sacred 
to  him ;  no  state  of  life,  no  work,  no 
pleasure.  Christian  soldier  is  never 
doing  a  "sham  fight."  Never  can 
afford  to  "stand  at  ease." 

II.  Favourite  weapon  and  method. 

607 


CHAP.  XL    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


— Not   often  open  attack ;  but  bush-  be  no   match    for    Satan.     Simplicity 

fighting  warfare.     Secret  aim ;  deadly  against   subtlety, — you   will    conquer, 

shots  before   we   know   danger    near.  Let  the  oldest  Christian,  with  all  the 

^^ Resist   the   Devil?"     Yes,   when  he  increase  of  knowledge  and  experience 

gives  the  chance.     But  often  has  done  which     years    bring,    keep    the    first 

us    mischief   before   we   knew  of   the  tenderness  of  the   Httle   child    stage ; 

danger.      Hidden   behind   a  plausible  when  the  new-born  love  feared  to  do, 

suggestion  of  excuse  for  doing  less  for  or   say,    anything   that   would    grieve 

Christ,  or  behind  a  plea  for  breadth  ;  Christ, — in       friendships,        business, 

lurking    in    some    natural    affection;  pleasures,  books, 
hidden  in  the  sensuous  fiction,   which 

"everybody  is  reading."  ^^  Having  Ver.  15.  ^^  According  to  their  works. ^* 
done  alV  (Eph.  vi.  13), — when  the  — God's  penalties  are  inflicted.  [In 
open  attack  has  been  foiled,  the  seen  many  forms  directly  and  ah  extra, 
danger  escaped,  the  obvious  sin  refused,  Else  what  is  "forgiveness"?  The  in- 
— when  the  battle  seems  over  and  the  direct  and  providential — "  natural " — 
enemy  has  drawn  off,  and  you,  weary,  penalties  of  sin  are  often  only  very 
want  to  rest  from  the  strain  of  slowly,  and  very  incompletely,  reversed 
incessant  watching, — "  stand  !  "  Just  or  negatived,  even  to  a  pardoned,happy, 
then  have  a  care  of  the  subtlety.  holy  child  of  God.  These  are  taken 
You  have  passed  safely  through  the  up  into  the  sanctified  disciplinary  life 
temptation  of  illness?  Take  care  of  of  the  pardoned  man.]  Yet  never 
the  subtle  temptations  of  recovery.  merely  arbitrary  in  their  connection 
Have  outlived  unpopularity  or  perse-  with  the  sin,  but  congruous. 
cution  ?  Take  heed  of  the  subtle  I.  "  In  kind." — This  most  nearly 
temptations  of  popularity  and  honour  !  Paul's  point  here.  Fruit  corresponding 
etc  ,  etc.  to  seed  sown  ;  prepared  for,  and  grow- 
Ill.  Your  defence,  and  so  his  point  ing  out  of,  seed  sown, 
of  attack,  will  be  your  simplicity.  (See  II.  "  In  measure  "  :  God  never  will 
Homiletic  Analysis.)  "  Singleness  of  overdo  the  penalty.  No  one  indis- 
purpose,  integrity,  generosity,  impar-  criminate  punishment  of  sin;  as  no 
tiality;  that  openness  and  sincerity  indiscriminate,  undistinguishing  reward 
of  heart  which  repudiates  duplicity  in  of  righteousness ;  there  are  degrees  of 
thought  or  action.  No  idea  of  sim-  suffering,  as  of  heavenly  joy,  though 
plicity  in  the  ordinary  use  of  the  word,  in  all  cases  of  equal,  eternal  duration, 
except  .  .  .  simple  concerning  evil,  ["  Many  stripes,  few  stripes."]  May 
simple  in  respect  of  any  attachment  vary  from  something  scarcely  more 
which  might  seduce  them  from  the  than  privation  of  His  favour  and 
singleness  of  devotion,  the  undivided  presence,  up  to  the  most  intense 
homage  and  affection  due  to  Christ."  suffering  of  which  mind  and  body 
(Rev.  W.  Webster,  M.A.)  A  wonder-  in  eternity  capable.  [Doctrine  of 
ful  Ithuriel-spear-like  touch  has  such  rewards  and  penalties  must  be  studied 
a  simplicity  of  thought  and  heart,  in  as  one  indivisible,  homogeneous  subject 
detecting  sin  in  practice  or  proposal,  with  strictly  parallel  branches,  the 
and  even  such  error  in  doctrine  as  principles  in  each  strictly  analogous 
would  affect  the  glory  or  work  of  to  those  in  the  other.] 
Christ.     The  little  child  has  an  instinct 

which   unmasks   the   subtle   Tempter.  Ver.  19.-4  Common  Sequence. 

Let  there  be  no  touching  or  looking  at  I.  "  Wisdom,"  pluming  itself  that  it 

the  "  apple,"  lest  the  heart  be  drawn  is  so  wise. 

aside.     In  the  face  of  Temptation  you  II.  Self-conceit,   which   leaves    the 

are  undone  if  you  reason ;  the  swift,  door  open  for — 

simple    instinct    will  guide  and  save.  III.  Humiliating  slavery  to   egre- 

Subtlety   against  subtlety, — ^you    will  giously  foolish  touching,  to  obviously 

608 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    IL  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xii. 


shallow,    but    very    confident,    loud-  IV.  What  triumph. — [/.  Z.] 

asserting,  leaders  of  opinion  or  prac-  [Notice  how  he  puts  a  godly  ancestry 

tice.     For  self -gratification  how  much  and   a   place    amongst    the   covenant 

will  men  endure ;  for,  and  from,  Christ,  people  of  God,  in  the  very  forefront, 

how  little.  It  may  be  an  occasion  of  everlasting 

thanksgiving  to   a   man.     Or,   like   a 

Vers.  21 — 31.  noble  name  inherited  by  an  unworthy 

I.  What  sufferings.  scion  of  a  great  house,  a  shame  now, 

II.  What  devotion.  and  a  source  of  everlasting  shame.] 
III.  What  faith. 


CHAPTER    XII.  < 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 
QNo  break,  except  that  of  a  nem  paragraph.') 


Ver.  1. — Note  reading  \  probably,  as  in  R.V.  Remember  how  full  is  Paul's  sense  of 
"  expedient "  (1  Cor.  vi.  12,  x.  23,  viii.  10,  here) ;  deep  moral  inexpediency  is  here  involved. 
"  Glory "  here  (almost)  =  "  brag."  Visions,  revelations. — "  Various  kinds  of  visions,  and 
(to  use  a  wider  word)  revelations  in  any  mode,  imparted  by  Christ "  (Beet)  ;  who  also  com- 
pares as  "  interesting  parallels,"  Acts  xxvi.  19,  Gal.  i.  16,  visions  vouchsafed  to  Paul  that 
he  might  make,  or  upon  which  he  made,  a  quasi-revelation  to  men.  But  query  ?  Whole 
section  (vers.  1-10)  moves  in  a  vorld  of  supersensuous  things,  where  knowledge  is  scanty  [even 
Paul's  own  (ver.  2),  and  how  much  more,  then,  ours]  ;  and  where  much  precision  of  interpre- 
tation is  unattainable  [as,  in  ^^  doth  not  yet  appear,"  etc.,  1  John  iii.  2,  it  is  not  altogether, 
or  in  any  great  degree,  an  intentional  concealment  or  withholding,  that  creates  the  mystery. 
Rather  the  impossibility  of  telling  us  more  of  what  has  nothing  in  our  experience  or  in  the 
analogies  of  earth  to  help  us,  even  to  knowledge  "  in  part "].  Choose  between  (1)  revelations 
of  which  Christ  is  the  subject,  and  (2)  revelations  of  which  Christ  is  the  Giver. 

Ver.  2. — Note  "  know  "  (accurately),  more  clearly  connecting  the  (intentionally)  oblique 
reference  with  himself.  I.e.  "  I  knew  the  man  at  the  time,  and  how  he  was  .  .  . ;  and  I  still 
know  the  man  who  was  then,"  etc.  Third  heaven. — Talmudic  references  to  seven  [not 
always  consistently  enumerated]  heavens  are  common.  Quite  uncertain  [since  "  Talmud  " 
unwritten  until  after  this]  whether  this  opinion  is  as  old  as,  or  older  than,  Paul's  day.  There 
is  also  found  a  simpler  Rabbinic  view  based  on  Deut.  x.  14,  making  three  spheres :  (1)  "heaven," 
i.e.  that  of  birds  and  clouds ;  (2)  "  heaven  of  heavens,"  i.e.  the  clear  sky  beyond ;  (3)  the 
invisible  world  beyond.  [Aerial,  astral,  angelic]  Also  it  may  be  a  question  whether  Paul 
makes  "  Paradise  "  a  fourth  sphere,  or  only  the  same  as  the  "  third  heaven. "  Perhaps 
something  behind  the  distinction  of  prepositions  (equivalent  to)  "  up  tOy' "  into.''  ["  Questions 
of  words,  to  no  profit,  but  to  the  subverting  of  (at  best  the  attention  of)  the  hearers" 
(2  Tim.  ii.  14).]  Only  certain  Scriptural  facts  are:  (1)  that  **  heaven  "  is  often  "  heavens,'* 
as  if  a  complex  conception  (e.g.  in  Lord's  Prayer,  Matt.  vi.  9, 10 ;  Eph.  iv.  10)  ;  (2)  Paradise  ; 
most  definite  indication  being  that  to  dying  thief,  Luke  xxiii.  43  (only  use  of  word  by 
Christ,  and  that  rather  as  an  adoption  of  the  man's  standpoint)  ;  also  found  in  Rev.  ii.  7, 
which  probably  (remembering  how  the  symbolism  of  the  Revelation  is  saturated  with 
Old  Testament  histories  and  imagery)  links  the  future  world  of  happiness  with  the  lost 
(ideal)  world  of  unfallen  man  in  Eden.     "  The  present  abode  of  the  faithful  dead  "  (Beet). 

Ver.  4. — "  Unutterable  utteraiices  "  imitates  Paul's  Greek  phrase.  "  Words,  and  no  words  " 
(Stanley).  "Expression  taken  from  the  secrecy  of  the  Greek  mysteries"  (i&.)  ;  but  this, 
taken  with  the  former  phrase  of  Stanley,  combines  (1)  impossible  to  utter,  and  (2)  not  allowable 
to  utter.  Usually,  a  choice  made  between  (1)  and  (2).  He  adds  :  "  Man  cannot  speak  them  ; 
God  may.'' 

Ver.  5. — Waite  (in  Speaker)  makes  '*  sv^ch  a  one  "  (ver.  2)  and  "  such  a  one  "  (ver.  5)  not 
reiterative,  but  cumulative.  "  I  knew  a  man  caught  up  to  third  heaven.  .  .  .  Further,  I 
knew  a  man,  so  caught  up,  also  caught  up  into  Paradise  ;  and  further,  hearing  there.  ...  Of 
^  man  so  caught  up,  and  indeed,  so  caught  up  into  Paradise,  and  there,  moreover,  hearing. 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


...  I  will  glory."  *•  On  behalf  of  one,  who  in  all  this  was  entirely  passive  and  recipient, 
without  exertion  or  merit  of  his  own,  he  will  boast,  but  not  on  behalf  of  his  personal  self, 
his  own  will,  work,  and  service,  except  with  regard  to  his  infirmities." 

Ver.  6. — Oblique  reference  to  the  Corinthian  "boasters."  Q.d.^^li  I  were  disposed  to 
enter  into  a  boasting-match  with  your  braggarts,  I  should  win ;  at  least  (unlike  them)  I 
should  only  need  to  speak  facts  about  such  a  man  as  that "  (cf .  x.  7,  xi.  21  sqq. ;  Phil.  iii. 
4-6).     Of  me.— As  R.V.  ;  not  '■^  about  me,"  but  "■from  me"  (*'  Ms  letters,  say  they"  etc.,  x.  10). 

Ver.  7.  Exceeding  greatness  (R.V.). — Cf.  cognate  words  (and  thoughts)  in  iii.  10,  iv.  17, 
ix.  14 ;  Eph.  i.  19,  ii.  7,  iii.  19,  iv.  7 ;  also  xi.  23,  i.  8 ;  Gal.  i  13  (also  1  Cor.  xii.  31 ; 
Kom.  vii.  13).  Note  also,  the  broken  grammar  (as  in  R.V.),  as  if  the  rush  of  feelings  and 
memories  confused  utterance.  Thorn. — See  Separate  Note  (3).  Lit.  •' '  Thorn '  for  the 
flesh." 

Ver.  8. — As  "  the  Lord  "  had  Himself  done  in  Gethgemane.  [Z.e.  taking  this  as  a  thrice 
repeated  request,  on  some  one  occasion.  Farrar  (and  others)  would  make  three  separate 
occasions  of  recurrence  (perhaps  of  "  special  revelations  "  and)  cf  the  physical  visitation, 
and  three  occasions  of  prayer.  This  depends,  in  part,  on  (precarious)  deductions  as  to  the 
chronology  of  Paul's  life.]  Besought. — Lit.  "  entreated"  ;  vivid  sense  of  personal  communi- 
cation with  Christ.  Clear  case  of  prayer  to  Christ.  Good  illustration  of  meaning  of 
Paraclete  (same  root)  ;  he  called  to  his  aid  Christ  and  His  help. 

Ver.  9.  Said. — "  Hath  said  "  (R.V.).  As  if  the  assuring  word  were  ever  freshly  being 
spoken ;  true  when  first  given,  and  abidingly  true ;  a  standing  law  of  Paul's  continuous  life. 
Sufficient. — Cf.  cognate  word,  ix.  8  [also  (for  thought)  cf.  Phil.  iv.  10-19].  "  Don't  press  thy 
request ;  sufficient  for  thee  that  thou  hast  My  grace."  Made  perfect. — "  Has  its  full  develop- 
ment "  (Conybeare  and  Howson) ;  q.d.  comes  to  its  full-grown,  adult  strength.  Keep 
*^ weakness"  and  ^^ weaknesses"  (for  "■infirmities").  Observe  "My"  (in  "My  strength")  is 
doubtful ;  the  omission  makes  the  passage  a  perfectly  general  truth  (so  Stanley.  But  is 
this  so  generally  true  ?  Is  it  not  true  simply  when  spoken  of  Divine  strength  relatively 
to  human  weakness?).  Eather. — Rather  boast  than  complain  (Stanley);  rather  boast 
than  seek  to  have  removed  (Beet,  Waite).  That. — "A  purpose  which  in  his  boasting 
Paul  cherishes,  and  which  is  to  some  extent  attained  by  his  boasting  "  (Beet).  [  Rather  too 
forced,  too  close,  a  connection  ?  Query,  more  loosely,  "  1  will  not  (I  say)  ask  for  their 
removal ;  that  would  rob  me  of  a  great  honour,  and  blessing,  and  joy ;  I  will  keep  them,  if 
thus  the  power,"  etc.  Rest. — Lit.  * '  tabernacle."  *'  To  come  to  a  place  for  the  purpose  of  fixing 
one's  tent  there  "  (Conybeare  and  Howson).  Cf .  Exod.  xl.  34,  35  (where  both  "  upon  "  and 
**in"  are  found  conjoined  (as  in  Acts  ii.  3,  4,  *'  upon,"  "  filled  with  ")  ;  John  i.  14  ;  Rev.  vii.  15, 
xii.  12,  xiii.  6,  xxi.  3  [John  ii.  21  Qsee  also  11) ;  2  Pet.  i.  13,  14  (also  Matt.  xvii.  4,  and 
parallels]).     [Cf.  iv.  7.] 

Ver.  10. — *'  Four  outward  circumstances  in  which  Paul  often  felt  his  weakness.  .  .  .  Acts 
of  purposeless  cruelty,  repeated  lack  of  the  most  needful  things,  the  repeated  pursuit  of 
enemies,  positions  in  which  there  seemed  no  way  of  escape."  (Beet.)  "  Ibr  Chrisfs  sake  " 
belongs  to  each  of  the  four. 

Ver.  11. — Verdict,  self -pronounced  :  *'  How  foolish  I  am  to  boast."  Yet  "  with  extenuating 
circumstances."  "It  was  your  doing,  not  raine  (you  ought  to  have  saved  me  the  task  of 
commending  myself)  "  (Stanley).  "  For  their  good  he  condescends  to  say  things  which,  but 
for  their  motive,  would  be  unworthy  of  an  intelligent  man.  Than  this,  no  kind  of  self-denial 
is  to  sensible  persons  more  difficult  or  more  noble."  (Beet.)  Return  to  point  quitted  at  x.  7. 
"  This  concluding  section  .  .  .  filled  with  traces  of  the  torrent  which  has  passed  through  his 
mind  in  the  interval "  (Stanley).  Very  chiefest. — "  Ever  so  much  of  apostles  "  (Stanley)  ; 
"superlative  apostles"  {Speaker);  "  super-apostolic  apostles,"  "super-eminent  apostles'* 
(Conybeare  and  Howson).  Nothing. — In  his  own  reckoning  ?  or  theirs  ?  Both  ;  "  as  you  say 
.  .  .  and  I  in  a  deeper  sense  agree  with  you." 

Ver.  12.  Signs,  wonders,  mighty  deeds. — Three  Scripture  words  for  miracles,  in  complete 
enumeration.  Complete  definition  of  a  "  miracle  "  given  by  them.  Signs  of  an  apostle. — I.e. 
characteristic  credentials  of  an  apostle.  Cf.  "  John  heard  in  the  prison  the  "  characteristic 
"  Messiah-works "  reported  as  done  by  Jesus  (Matt.  xi.  2).  In  all  patience. — Meaning, 
probably,  refraining  again  and  again,  when  under  great  provocation  to  use  His  miraculous 
power  to  silence  or  punish  opponents  ?  (Waite,  in  Speaker).  How  easily  and  certainly  would 
this  challenge  have  been  met  and  this  claim  refuted  if  miracle  is  an  impossibility,  or  if  Paul 
had  wrought  none.     His  opponents  could  do  none ;  fell  short  here,  at  least. 

Ver.  13. — Ironical,  '♦  this  wrong P  Forgive  me. — Prospective,  as  well  as  retrospective,  "  for 
I  am  going  to  do  it  again.  Don't  think  of  giving  me  anything,  now  that  we  are  to  be  friends 
again." 

Ver.  14. — Understand,  "  to  corn,e  a  third  time  " ;  not  merely  "  am  ready  a  third  time." 
Two  visits  to  Corinth  ?  Or  three  ?  Most,  "  three."  Some :  two,  viz.  (1)  Acts  xviii.  1 ; 
(2)  The  visit  now  impending,  and,  between,  the  intended  visit  of  i.  15,  16.  "  I  ought  to  do 
this,  as  a  parent.  What  do  children,  then,  give  their  parents  in  return  ?  Children,  give 
me  your  hearts." 

61Q 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xii. 


Ver.  15. — Notice  the  K.V.,  and  its  margin.     How  Christ  may  borrow  these  words  1 

Ver.  16, — "  You  say, — I  will  not  dispute, — I  did  not  ask  you  to  maintain  me.  But  that 
was  only  *  the  depth  of  the  fellow  '  1  It  amounted  to  '  pretty  much  the  same  thing,'  if  I  asked 
you  to  support  my  friends,  Titus  and  the  rest  1  Indeed,  what  if  they  *  all  helped  themselves 
out  of  this  collection  money,'  pretending  to  be  so  extremely  disinterested  I " 

Ver.  18.  Spirit. — As  usual,  the  Holy  Ghost.  Cf.  Gal.  v.  25.  This  secures  the  walking  in 
the  same  "  spirit,"  in  the  feeble,  modern  sense. 

Ver,  19. — Observe  new  and  better  reading,  and  consequent  vivid  rendering.  "  Whilst 
you  have  been  reading  this  (apologetic-seeming)  letter."  "  To  you  1  O  dear  no  I  Not  at  all  I 
Before  a  seeing,  listening  God  I  speak  1 "  Beloved. — A  relapse  into  love ;  cannot  bear  to 
keep  up  the  tone  of  rebuke  or  irony  :  "  Beloved^'' 

Ver.  21. — A  residual  section,  not  even  now  penitent  or  submissive,  as  most  who  had  been 
rebuked  in  the  First  Epistle  now  were. 

FuLLEE  Notes  on  Special  Points. 

1.  [Good  note  in  Stanley  upon  vers.  1-10.  "The  description  of  his  vision  ,  .  ,  throws 
light  upon  similar  ecstasies  ...  as  Acts  x.  10,  viii,  39  ;  and  especially  of  John  in  the 
Apocalypse  (i.  10,  iv.  1,  etc.)  ;  the  *  dreams  and  visions  '  ...  in  Acts  ii.  16  ;  and  the  speaking 
with  tongues  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  2.  The  details  may  be  different,  but  this  description  contains 
their  common  characteristics  ;  the  loss  of  self -consciousness  [?],  the  sense  of  being  hurried 
into  a  higher  sphere,  and  the  partial  and  mysterious  glimpses  of  the  invisible  world.  And 
it  illustrates  especially  the  ecstatic  state  in  which  he  himself  largely  partook,  as  appears 
from  the  attacks  of  his  enemies,  still  preserved  in  the  Clementines.  .  .  .  Compare  also  the 
facts  in  Acts  ix.  12,  xxii.  17,  and  his  expression  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  8.  .  .  .  And  further,  the  strong 
line  of  demarcation  which  he  has  drawn  between  his  ecstasy  and  his  ordinary  state,  is 
a  warrant  to  us  that  he  does  not  needlessly  confound  things  human  and  Divine,  things  earthly 
and  things  spiritual.  What  he  does  say  gives  us  a  picture,  at  least  conceivable,  of  the  mode 
in  which  he  may  have  received  his  *  revelations  from  the  Lord '  (1  Cor.  xi.  23,  xv.  3  ;  Gal. 
i.  12,  16).  What  he  does  not  say — the  silence  respecting  the  things  which  cannot  be  uttered 
— furnishes  a  remarkable  contrast  to  the  elaborate  description  given  by  Mahomet,  of  his 
nocturnal  journey  to  Jerusalem^and  to  paradise  "  (p.  563).] 

2.  [So  also  this  sobriety  of  language  and  thought  marks  ofE  Paul's  experiences  from  those 
* '  parallels  "  often  adduced  to  discredit  him,  as  a  half-epileptic  whose  brain  was  aJSected  by 
his  sickness.  E.g.  as  enumerated  by  Farrar,  p.  713:  **The  trances  of  Socrates,  the  fits  of 
Mohammed,  accompanied  by  foaming  at  the  mouth,  and  followed  by  the  sleep  of  exhaustion, 
the  faintings  and  ecstasies  of  St.  Bernard,  St.  Francis,  and  St.  Catherine  of  Siena,  have  been 
adduced  as  parallels.  .  .  .  We  may  add  the  cases  of  George  Fox,  Jacob  Behmen,  of  Sweden- 
borg,  etc."] 

3.  [Ver.  7.  Thorn  in  flesh.  In  ^q  pulpit ^  the  general  result  of  the  inquiry  is  alone  of 
much  service.    In  the  Bible-class,  the  detailed  process  may  be  useful. 

I.  "  Thorn, "  or  * '  stake."  Some  Eastern  thorns  are  much  larger  than  ours ;  long,  stout  spines, 
capable  of  penetrating  a  thick  leather  boot.  (Force  given  to  Hos.  ii.  6.)  Word  does  mean 
stake,  e.g.,  tor  military  palisade,  ot  for  impaling  criminals.  Also,  literally^  Paul  says,  *'A 
stake /or  the  flesh."  Hence  the  suggestion  that  this  stake  is  practically  (as  the  rvord  was 
lexically)  equivalent  to  a  cross  (which  had  not  necessarily  a  cross  beam)  ;  and  the  thought 
here  is  then  linked  with  '*I  am  crucified  with  Christ."  But  in  Num.  xxxiii.  55  Paul's  word 
is  used  for  **  pricks  in  the  eyes''  In  both  cases,  therefore,  the  idea  may  be  a  thorn  buried  in 
the  flesh,  but  large  enough,  or  giving  pain  enough,  to  be  rather  a  stake  than  a  thorn. 

II.  Nature  of  the  affliction.  Physical  (almost  universal  consensus  of  opinion  amongst 
non-Piomanist  expositors).  But  not  (1)  Sensual  temptation ;  later  Patristic,  monastic, 
Romanist  view.  He  would  not  *^ glory''  in  these,  for  any  reason,  direct  or  indirect. 
Remember  also  how  he  (perhaps)  claims  to  be  little  affected  by  these  (1  Cor.  vii.  8,  9). 
1  Cor.  ix.  27,  Rom.  vii.  23  quite  general  in  reference ;  latter  scarcely  personal.  Also  not  (2) 
Spiritual  temptation,  e.g  stings  of  conscience  abolit  past  life,  temptations  to  pride  [N.B. 
the  thorn  itself  was  a  check  to  pride  in  spiritual  gifts],  or  discouragement,  or  doubt,  in 
connection  with  his  work  (Calvin,  Luther,  Imitation  of  Christy.  No  trace  of  these  in 
his  writings.  Lias  (m  loco)  thinks  Paul  suffered  from  irritability  of  temper,  and  a 
consequent  asperity  of  manner.  But  this  would  not  be  in  "the  flesh,"  in  the  physical 
sense  required  here.  Also,  again,  would  anything,  even  the  glory  of  Christ  (indirectly 
secured),  have  made  him  '■'glory  "  in  these  ?  Further,  not  (3)  Opponents,  particularly  the 
opponent  (possibly)  mentioned  in  x.  7  ;  Greek  fathers'  view.  Not  personal  enough  nor 
definite  enough  for  "thorn,"  ''in  the  flesh.'  Nor  (4)  Afflictions  and  persecutions.  Would  he 
have  prayed — could  he  have  hoped — for  the  removal  of  (3)  or  (4)  ?  (5)  Facts  are :  (a) 
Probably  (not  certainly}  this  to  be  identified  with  Gal.  iv.  14.  (J)  Something  which  made 
his  appearance  less  impressive  than,  for  his  work's  sake,  he  could  have  desired.  [Lystrans 
*^ vailed  Barnabas"  not  Paul,  "/w^i^er," perhaps  as  the  nobler-looking,  as  well  as  because 

611 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


Paul  was  a  better  representative  of  the  eloquent  "  Mercury.'^  Some  foundation  for  what 
Corinthian  depredators  said,  ^^ bodily  presence  weak"  (x.  10).  Observe,  *^ despised  not" 
(Gal.  iv.  14)  ;  he  might  have  expected  that  they  would.]  (c)  This  "  buffeted  "  him.  [Not  the 
boxer's  blow  as  in  1  Cor.  ix.  27  ;  but  the  "  slap  "  as  given  to  Christ  (Matt.  xxvi.  67) ;  and 
1  Cor.  iv.  11,  1  Pet.  ii.  20.]  Not  only,  or  chiefly,  Satan's  hindrance  to  his  work  ;  also,  and 
first,  it  was  expressly  something  from  God,  overruled  as  a  rebuff  and  check  to  (possible) 
spiritual  pride,  (d)  Too  precarious  to  decide  precisely  for  (say)  acute  ophthalmia. 
[Very  common  in  East ;  aggravated  by  the  excessive  light  and  glare ;  very  sharply 
painful,  recalling  Num.  xxxiii.  55  again.]  Not  certain  that  his  three  days'  blindness 
at  Damascus  left  any  effects.  Gal,  iv.  16  does  not  (in  Greek)  say  "your  arvn  eyes," 
but  "your  eyes.'''  Gal.  vi.  11  may  mean  "in  how  large  letters";  but,  even  so,  this 
may  have  been  for  emphasis,  to  exhibit  vividly,  and  call  special  attention  to,  his  unusual 
concern  about  them.  Still,  he  did  for  some  reason  generally  employ  an  amanuensis  ;  a 
defective  sight  well  explains  Acts  xxiii.  (a  saying  for  which  he  never  exprosses  any 
degree  of  regret,  as  he  does  for  another  on  the  same  occasion,  ver.  6,  cf.  xxvi.  5,  as  if 
it  were  not  quite  consistent  with  Christian  sincerity  and  simplicity).  Nothing  must  be 
inferred  from,  e.g.^  xiii.  9,  which  is  used  of  others  also,  (e)  Earliest  Patristic  identifications 
were  headache,  earache,  etc. — all  physical.  Much  modern  favour  toward  epilepsy. 
[Sometimes  with  a  plain  animus.^  A  parallel  with  the  case  of  Alfred  the  Great  (whose 
mysterious  sickness  may  have  been  epilepsy)  very  tempting.  [See  in  Lightfoot,  Galatians. 
Also  Napoleon  said  of  Archduke  Albert,  who,  with  great  tactical  genius,  was  often  at  critical 
moments  in  a  campaign  or  battle  rendered  helpless  by  it,  "  If  it  had  not  been  for  that,  the 
Archduke  would  have  been  the  greatest  general  of  us  all."]  An  acutely  painfal^  visible, 
humiliating,  (hindering),  chronic,  physical  visitation.] 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—10. 

Hv/ntam  Life  circumscribed  by  Limitations. 

I.  (Ver.  1.)  Paul  repeatedly  points  out  how  Expediency  is  a  limitation  upon 
Liberty  (1  Cor.  vi.  12  and  ||  s).  Here  Necessity  is  a  limitation  to,  and  overrules, 
Expediency.  1.  As  a  general,  safe  rule  for  conduct  and  speech,  ^^  glorying '^  is 
*^  inexpedient."  Between  man  and  man  it  is  "bad  form."  The  gentleman 
^'■vaunteth  not  himself"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  4).  This  Modesty — self -suppression,  self- 
effacement — is  a  social  virtue,  sometimes  severed  from  its  true  Christian  root, 
Humility.  The  Christian  is  modest  before  men  because  he  knows  that  before 
God  he  is,  and  has,  nothing  of  himself.  2.  Between  God  and  man  "  glorying  " 
is  out  of  place  altogether ;  a  sin  against  the  very  relation  between  them ; 
of  whom  the  One  is  all  Giver,  the  other  entirely  a  receiver,  and  has,  indeed, 
in  himself  nothing  to  give  statios  before,  or  acceptance  with,  God  at  all. 
3.  Boasting  manifests  self ;  ministers  to  self ;  gives  Devil  an  opening  for  further 
temptation  ;  to  self  exaltation  in  the  man  himself  ;  to  man-worship  in  his  friends 
and  partisans  (ver.  6).  Yet,  4.  May  need  to  do  violence  to  the  instincts  of 
modesty  and  humility,  and  speak  out  plainly  and  fully  one's  character  and 
position.  Principle  may  be  involved.  Paul  is  compelled  to  speak  and  "  glory  "  by 
charges  and  insinuations  which  not  only,  or  principally,  impinged  upon  him,  but 
really  struck  at  Christ,  Who  had  made  him  an  apostle,  and  had  charged  him  with 
work  which  could  only  be  done  if  he  were  really  such.  "  Of  such  a  one,  .  .  . 
hut  not  of  myself"  I  speak  of  him,  because  I  must,  as  if  he  were  some  other 
man,  to  whom  God  was  wonderfully  gracious  (ver.  5).  If  I  begin  about  myself 
I  must  play  on  another  theme,  ^^  weaknesses."  A  man  may  represent  principles. 
A  minister  may  need,  for  his  Church's  sake  and  his  brethren's,  to  defend  his 
status  and  ordination.  For  his  converts'  sake,  he  may  need  to  assert  the  validity  of 
his  and  their  position,  and  the  truth  of  his  preaching.  His  personal  character  may 
have  to  be  asserted.  "  We  were  not  'Yes  and  No'  men  among  you  ;  else,  perhaps, 
you  had  a  'Yes  and  No'  Gospel,  a  'Yes  and  No'  Christ"  (2  Cor.  i.  18  sqq.). 
5.  Above  all,  when  what  one  is,  and  has  become,  and  accomplished,  is  needed  as 
a  testimony  for  Christ.  If  it  will  preach  Him  to  put  oneself  forward ;  if 
others  will  be  encouraged  to  hope  in  Him  for  larger  blessings,  and  through  Him 

612 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  XII. 


to  accomplish  larger  service, — then  one  must  crucify  modesty,  reticence,  reserve, 
and  must  say  out,  and  give  Him  credit  for,  all  He  has  done  in  one's  own  case. 
But  always  reluctantly,  always  with  prayerful  guard  upon  one's  spirit,  and 
always  "dropping"  it,  as  soon  as  may  be  (vers.  1,  5,  6). 

II.  Limitations  of  knowledge.  "/  know  .  .  .  /  know  not"  (vers.  2,  3). — 
1.  Our  known  area  is  very  narrow,  a  little  rock  standing  up  out  of  midst  of 
waves  of  a  sea  of  mystery,  not  absolutely  bottomless,  (ours  infinite  ignorance) ; 
but  soon  too  deep  for  our  stature.  We  wade  out  from  our  little  bit  of  dry 
ground ;  we  soon  are  out  of  our  depth ;  the  only  difference  between  "  wise  "  and 
"  ignorant "  is  that  some  are  taller  than  the  rest,  and  can  go  little  farther  out 
before  losing  their  footing  or  sinking  overhead.  If  we  quit  the  little,  clear,  light 
area,  we  soon  find  ourselves  lost  in  pathless  fog,  and  must  turn  back.  We  soon 
beat  our  wings  against  the  bars  of  our  imprisonment.  [Origin  of  being,  of 
creaturely  being ;  ultimate  meaning  of  "  matter,"  etc.  In  theology,  or  philosophy, 
no  matter  what  track  of  inquiry  is  pursued,  or  in  what  direction,  we  very 
soon  find  ourselves  face  to  face  with  dead  walls,  impassable,  e.g.  the  Problem 
of  Evil.]  2.  Here  an  inspired  man,  super  naturally  assisted,  has  been  led 
to  depths  ordinarily  beyond  man  ;  has  been  taken,  indeed  '*  caught  up"  to  heights, 
as  yet,  usually  inaccessible.  Indeed,  he  has  been  led  through  the  Veil — lifted 
over  one  of  the  highest  of  the  Barrier-walls  that  environ  us — and  now  comes 
back,  knowing  where  he  has  been,  and  what  he  has  seen  and  heard ;  but 
not  knowing  how  he  got  there  ;  nor  whether  indeed  all  of  him  went  there, 
or  whether  the  body  was  left  behind.  And  as  to  telling  his  experiences 
— ^no !  3.  He  cannot ;  or  if  he  could,  he  may  not.  Human  language, 
human  thought,  have  no  vessels  to  hold  and  carry  and  convey  such  contents. 
We  ask  him  many  questions,  but  in  vain ;  and  he  breaks  off,  and  leaves  us  to 
wonder,  and  query,  and  perhaps  to  chafe  against  the  limitations  of  our  knowledge. 
[^''Foolish  and  unlearned  questions  avoid."  See  how  Christ  dealt  with  useless 
inquiries,  impossible  or  unprofitable  to  answer.  (1)  "Few  that  be  saved?" 
"  There  are  many  that  be  lost  !  See  that  thou  enter  in  at  strait  gate."  (2)  "  What 
shall  this  man  do  ?  "  "  Rather,  this  would  I  have  thee  do  :  follow  thou  Me  !  " 
(3)  "  Who  did  sin,  this  man  or  his  parents  ? "  "  We  must  work  the  works  .  .  . 
whilst  it  is  day  ! "  Sir  Henry  Wootton  was  asked,  "  Can  a  Papist  be  saved  %  " 
"  You  may  be  saved  without  knowing  that ;  look  to  yourself."]  3.  Our  inquiries 
may  only  mean  curiosity,  that  (Pilate -like)  plays  with  big  questions,  and  has 
hardly  enough  of  serious  interest  in  them  to  make  us  wait  for  answer.  God 
has  nothing  to  say,  or  show,  or  give,  to  such.  To  equip  a  Paul  He  will  give, 
with  all  their  limitations,  wondrously  large  "  visions  and  revelations  of  the 
Lard." 

III.  Limitations  to  the  blessedness  of  large  and  gracious  communications  from 
God. — Paul  was  soon  brought  back  to  the  body.  He  was  soon  made  to  know 
"  whether  in  the  body"  ordinarily,  or  not.  His  body  will  not  let  him  forget 
it.  The  ^^  thorn"  is  a  perpetual  reminder.  1.  Not  even  Paul  is  to  he  trusted 
to  hold  third-heaven  converse  with  God  and  Divine  things,  without  some 
compensating  abatement.  [So  after  Abraham's  victorious  waiting  in  faith  for 
the  promised  Isaac  during  a  whole  quarter  of  a  century,  we  might  have 
thought  that  he  would  have  been  left  peacefully  alone,  to  enjoy  his  home-life 
with  his  boy.  No,  not  even  God's  tested  "friend"  must  be  left  many  years 
without  some  disciplinary  circumstances.  So,  "  Offer  Isaac  up,  a  burnt 
offering."  If  the  physical  "  thorn "  were  in  any  way  the  result  of  the 
manifestation  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  or  of  the  breaking  down  of  human 
nature  beneath  the  strain  of  ecstatic  feeling;  and  thus  consequent  upon,  and 
not  simply  subsequent  to,  the  "  revelations  " ;  it  would  be  fully  analogous  to  many 
ordinary  experiences  of  believers.    Such  pre-eminent  gifts  bring  their  penalties, 

613 


CHAP.  XII.    BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.  CORINTHIANS, 


or  must  be  had  at  their  price.  A  great  access  of  holy  exaltation  in  the  sanctuary, 
e.g.,  or  at  the  Lord's  Table,  will  exhaust  the  frame,  and  leave  the  system  dead 
to  all  spiritual  impression  for  some  time  after.  The  temperament  capable  of 
much  blessing  is  also  capable  of  and  liable  to  great  depression.  2.  But  the 
limitations  are  safeguards.  They  indicate  no  grudging  of  God  to  see  us 
perfectly  happy ;  no  mere  "  stone  put  by  Him  into  the  other  pocket,"  as  if 
from  any  "evil  eye"  towards  our  pleasure.  He  means  our  safety.  Such 
limitations  remind  us  of  the  "  perishing "  life ;  the  uncertain  tenure  of  all 
our  earthly  good ;  the  vanity  of  self  and  human  strength.  If  known  to 
others,  they  are  a  salutary,  objective  check  upon  self-complacency ;  they  keep 
the  worker  from  any  self-reliance  which  would  dishonour  God's  sole  might 
working  through  him ;  they  train  habits  of  dependence  upon  God.  This  calls  out 
prayer  and  faith  ;  these  secure  Divine  strength.  And,  3.  Best  of  all,  if  on  His 
whole  view  of  the  conditions  of  the  case,  God  sees  that  thus,  and  only  thus,  can 
we  be  best  utilised  for  the  exhibition  and  glory  of  His  grace  ;  if,  to  others,  and  to 
ourselves,  the  results  and  success  of  our  life  are  so  manifestly  not  to  be  accounted 
for  on  '*  natural  "  grounds,  or  by  any  "  natural  "  equipment  and  advantages,  (say) 
of  personal  appearance,  voice,  intellectual  power ;  then  the  limitation  which  in 
one  direction  seems  an  evil  becomes  a  good,  and  a  new  occasion  of  glorying.  And 
the  man  who,  for  such  a  reason,  rejoices  in  his  very  limitations,  or  even  gives 
thanks  for  them,  always  finds  new  power  resting  upon  him. 

IV.  One  thing  in  our  life  is  without  limitation. — The  ^'svfficiency"  of  the 
^^ grace"  oi  Christ.  1.  Generally,  "Sufficient  for  thee,  that  thou  hast  behind 
thee  My  strength."  The  presence  of  Christ  and  His  strength  is  a  background 
on  which  all  the  detailed  working  out  of  life  is  superposed ;  a  general  truth, 
to  be  assumed  and  reckoned  with  in  all  the  working  out  of  the  problem  of 
our  life ;  whatever  ma7/  or  may  not  be,  that  is ;  other  persons  may  enter  into 
or  pass  out  of  my  life;  their  help  may  vary  in  its  adequacy,  or  may  fail 
altogether,  and  that  at  a  critical  moment, — this  is  a  permanent  condition  of 
my  life,  and  as  unvarying  as  permanent.  This  is  a  spring  never  failing,  and 
constant  in  quantity.  I  shall  find  His  supply  accompan3dng  my  Needs,  in 
absolute  continuity,  two  parallel  lines  running  in  continuous  adaptation. 
"  Because  He  ever  liveth"  "  saving  (continuously)  hy  His  (continuous)  life "  ; 
sending  me  continuous,  sufficient,  saving  help,  to  the  uttermost  moment  and 
extent  of  my  need.  2.  In  detail.  Not  merely  a  general  correspondence, 
Need  and  Supply  lying  side  by  side  as  two  series  of  incidents.  They  also 
correspond  in  minute  detail,  new  help  arising,  as  new  needs  are  arrived  at  in 
one's  life-course.  Every  page  in  our  story  shall  have  its  counterpart  page  in  the 
story  of  Christ's  "  sufficient  grace."  Needs  will  be  many,  troublesome,  recurrent, 
petty,  urgent,  unexpected,  unprecedented, — "ZTe  shall  supply  all  your  need." 
No  draft  upon  this  Friend's  supply  is  ever  returned  bearing  the  words, 
"No  effects." 

Vers.  7-10.  The  Thorn  in  the  Flesh. 

I.  Threefold  combination  of  personalities. — Christ ;  Paul ;  Satan.  1.  Per- 
sonality of  last  matter  of  pure  revelation.  Belief  in  it  stands  or  falls  with 
degree  of  final  authority  accorded  to  statements  of  Scripture.  Acknowledged 
that  Scripture  [and  Christ]  assume  a  personal  Devil.  The  "  proof  texts " 
from  Scripture  are  (not  quite  as  abundant  but)  precisely  parallel  in  kind  to 
those  by  which  a  personal  Holy  Ghost  is  established  from  Scripture.  [1.  Personal 
name  given  to  him ;  2.  Personal  will  and  intelligence  ascribed  to  him ; 
3.  Personal  acts  done  by  him.]  In  the  Order  of  Evil  he  is  the  counterpart  of 
God, — "  the  god  of  this  world."  2.  Paul  is  here  midway ;  the  object  of  the  Lord's 
care ;  the  object  of  Satan's  attack.     (Cf.  Luke  xxii.  31.)    Every  man  is  the  centre 

614 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xil. 


of  attention  to  the  unseen  world  of  good  and  the  world  of  evil ;  the  prize  of 
conflict  for  which  they  strive  together.  [Cf.  perhaps,  as  to  the  very  body  of 
Moses  (Jude  9).]  Every  Christian  man  takes  into  account  another  world  and 
another  set  of  agencies,  for  both  danger  and  deliverance,  besides  those  which 
enter  into  the  reckoning  of  the  "  man  of  this  world."  3.  This  Evil  One  is  his 
enemy ;  he  can  (under  permission ;  he  is  a  '*  chained  lion,"  who  may  not  go  beyond 
the  radius  of  activity  his  Maker  and  Master  and  King,  for  Bis  own  larger 
purposes,  permits ;  no  such  co-ordinate  power  of  evil,  an  Ahriman  parallel  to  an 
Ormuzd,  as  in  many  heathen  religions  and  philosophies  was  assumed  or  taught) 
inflict  physical  suft'ering  [assumed  also  in  the  case  of  discipline  (1  Cor.  v.  5)]. 
Or,  at  least,  makes  the  "  natural "  incidence  of  physical  disorder  the  occasion  and 
opportunity  and  basis  of  his  attack.  4.  Christ  is  a  mightier  Eriend.  Observe  how, 
as  by  instinct,  Paul  cries  out  for  help  to  Christ ;  as,  a  very  short  while  before 
the  first  access  .of  Paul's  "  thorn"  he  had  seen  and  heard  dying  Stephen  do.  No 
neglect  of,  or  dishonour  to,  the  Father :  "  all  men  should  honour  the  Son  even  as 
they  honour  the  Father"  (John  v.  23).  To  Paul  "to  live  is  Christ.''  A 
Christian  has  One  most  real,  unseen  Friend,  Whom  some  day  he  shall  actually 
see,  with  Whom  even  now  he  has  most  intimate,  constant  communication.  His 
life,  thought,  heart,  prayers,  turn  (sunflower-like)  towards  Christ.  Christian 
children  have  no  "  God"  but  "Jesus,"  and  the  "perfect  man"  may  be  a  little 
child  in  this.     Expand  this  : 

II.  A  twofold  contrast  of  purposes. — 1.  Same  set  of  physical  circumstances, 
Janus-like,  has  two  faces,  wears  two  aspects.  From  the  Christward  side  they  are  a 
safeguard,  a  piece  of  moral  training,  "  lest  I  should  be  exalted"  etc.  From  the 
Satanward  side,  they  are  an  "  angel "  of  his  "  to  buffet."  2.  All  our  life  is  complex ; 
no  single,  simplest  incident,  but  has  many-sided  relations  to  every  other — equally 
many-sided — incident.  All  is  ethical.  Everything  is  "  a  providence,"  i.e.  an 
item,  a  factor,  in  God's  great  "  providence,"  i.e.  His  wise,  loving  scheme  for  our 
life,  designed,  ordered,  executed  for  our  "  good  "  (Rom.  viii.  28).  Even  physical, 
natural  disadvantages,  which  "  handicap  "  in  the  race,  or  disable  one  hand  for 
the  conflict,  or  make  us  (Jacob-like)  halt  upon  our  thigh  for  the  pilgrimage, 
have  wise,  loving,  high  place  amongst  the  elements  of  the  education  of  God's 
children.  "  Thorns"  are  ^^ given  "  by  God;  but  it  is  the  business  of  the  Evil  One 
to  take  each  of  these  and  endeavour  to  make  it  serve  his  evil  turn.  Thus  each 
iii  of  God,  or  of  Satan,  according  as  it  may  be  regarded.  We  may  say  with 
equal  truth,  and  with  equal  devoutness,  "  God  is  in  this  " ;  or  "  Devil  has  a  hand 
in  this."  (Cf.  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1;  1  Chron.  xxi.  1.)  (How  far  any  of  them  is  per- 
mitted to  originate  with  him,  we  cannot  say.  Part  of  the  insoluble  Problem  of 
Evil  which  sooner  or  later  blocks  the  way  of  moral  inquiry,  in  every  religion,  in 
every  philosophy.)  3.  Particularly,  such  a  sharply  painful  reminder  of  his 
physical  limitations  may  appeal  in  one  of  two  ways  to  an  earnest,  holy  worker 
for  Christ,  [^-g-  excessive  nervousness  which  will  not  allow  the  full  heart  and 
competent  brain  to  deliver  with  any  sort  of  efiect  its  urgently  needed  message ; 
or  want  of  stamina,  which  prevents  any  continuous  or  trying  work  being  under- 
taken, for  which  in  all  other  respects  the  man  is  admirably  qualified,  or  which 
gives  way  even  under  great  spiritual  exaltation  and  blessing  such  as  would 
eflectively  equip  him  for  service,  or  which  perpetually  lays  him  aside  in  the  midst 
of  successful  'work,  or  relegates  him  altogether  to  invalid-couch  or  sick-room  ; 
or  some  actual  disease  or  defect,  blindness,  deafness,  lameness,  skin  affection, 
crippling  or  rendering  free  intercourse  with  others  almost  impossible ;  and  the 
like.]  (1)  It  may  come  like  a  smart  "slap  in  the  face  "to  a  busy  talker,  or 
worker  ;  like  a  sharp  blow  upon  the  ankle  to  the  eager  runner ;  like  the  sharp 
prick  of  a  big  thorn  in  the  hand,  which  makes  the  worker  drop  his  work,  or 
the  carrier  his  vessel.    It  may  "  pull  up,"  by  the  want  of  natural  "  capital,"  the 

615 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  CORINTHIANS. 


man  of  eager,  large  heart,  and  broad  views,  who  sees  how  to  do  a  large  business 
for  Christ.  The  work  must  go  undone,  the  scheme  be  only  in  part  carried  out. 
"  If  only  1  had  So-and-so's  five  talents  of  natural  endowment !  "  Less  work 
seems  done  than  might  otherwise  be :  Satan's  aim  seems  thus  well  served ! 
Then  if  the  man  chafes,  or  begins  to  **  wonder "  about  the  wisdom  and  love  of 
his  limitations — why  he  has  not  five  talents  like  So-and-so,  why  he  must  have 
this  thorn  in  the  flesh,  he  sets  the  door  open  for  Satan  to  find  an  almost  invited 
entrance.  Or  (2)  he  may  rise  higher,  and  so  get  a  broader  view.  "See  the 
perils  of  five  talent  men  !  If  I  had  the  treasure  in  So-and-so's  vessel,  instead  of 
my  poor  earthen  one  (2  Cor.  iv.  7),  I  might  be  tempted  to  ...  !  Perhaps  I 
'  cannot  carry  corn.'  Perhaps  my  Master  knows  that  the  build  of  my  ship  will 
not  let  me  carry  a  large  cargo  of  blessing  and  revelation  without  a  big  ballast  of 
compensating  limitations.  If  I  had  that  man's  personal  presence,  and  address, 
and  social  gifts,  and  clearness  of  thought,  and  readiness  of  utterance,  and  faculty 
of  persuasion,  and  skill  in  organisation,  and  abundant,  unbroken  health,  perhaps 
my  Lord  could  not  also  trust  me  with  the  spiritual  equipment,  the  disclosures  of 
His  heaven,  and  of  Himself,  and  the  unspeakable  words  of  our  close  fellowship, 
which  are  so  often  a  holy  secret  between  Him  and  my  soul ;  and  I  should  from 
that  side  be  disabled  for  the  work  He  honours  me  to  do."  So  rather  he  is 
led  to — 

III.  One  blessed  issue. — Paul  is  saved  from  personal,ispiritual  peril ;  he  is 
brought  down  to  the  perfect  fitness  for  a  display  in  Him  of  Christ's  strength ; 
Christ  is  glorified.  L  Think  of  Paul  in  danger  of  pride,  "boasting  of  what  he 
received,  as  though  he  had  not  received  it "  (1  Cor.  iv.  7),  in  regard  to  his  full 
experiences.  See  how  near  great  blessing  is  to  great  danger ;  "  thin  partitions  do 
the  bounds  divide."  A  man  of  great  "  revelations  "  is  "  in  slippery  places."  No 
great  wonder  if  the  men  of  great  reputation,  or  profession,  sometimes  make  a 
great  fall.  Sin  is  never  far  away,  nor  Satan.  Paul's  physical  disqualifications 
kept  others  from  unduly  exalting  him,  and  kept  him  from  unduly  exalt- 
ing self.  He  learns  to  thank  Christ  for  what  keeps  him  from  going  too 
near  the  giddy  edge.  2.  Better  still,  his  own  manifest  limitations  leave 
the  field  clear  for  the  display  of  Christ's  strength.  He  learns  to  make  a  new 
occasion  of  "  boasting "  out  of  the  very  "  infirmities "  [afflictions,  not  sms], 
which  are  a  foil  the  better  to  set  off  the  "  grace  of  Christ "  in  perfect  display. 
Our  "  strength "  is  sadly  in  the  way  of  our  being  "  successful  " ;  we  cannot 
be  trusted  with  success ;  there  must  not  even  be  the  danger  that  the  glory  of 
"  success  "  should  even  seem  to  be  shared  with  man.  It  must  be  evidently 
Christ,  not  Paul.  Christ  reduces  His  best  workers  to  ''^nothing"  (ver.  11),  that 
they  may  plainly  be  nothing  except  His  instruments.  "  Dost  thou  desire  the 
work  done  perfectly,  in  My  perfected  strength  ? "  "  Yes,  Lord."  "  Then  I  must 
say  '  no '  to  thy  prayer.  Thou  must  keep  thy  *  thorn ' ;  must  do  thy — My — 
work,  conditioned  by  it ;  I  will  perfectly  strengthen  thee ;  thou  shalt  not  be 
useless ;  and  I  shall  be  glorified."  3.  All  leads  up  to  this.  Paul's  prayer 
turns  to  Christ ;  Satan's  bufieting  is  ruled,  conditioned,  utilised  by  Christ ; 
above  all,  Paul's  weakness  sets  him  aside,  so  that  the  figure  in  full  view,  and 
the  strength  in  palpable  evidence,  are  Christ  and  His  strength.  ["  How 
heroic,"  we  say  of  an  ordinary  worker  in  some  secular  field,  who  persist*  and 
triumphs  and  leaves  the  world  better,  in  the  face  of  some  great  natural,  physical, 
painful  limitation.  Paul  was  really  "  heroic,"  to  do  what  he  did,  with  a 
perpetual,  hampering  "  thorn."     Yet  he  says,  not  "  heroism  "  but,  "  g^ce."] 


,616 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   it.  CORINTBlAm,    chap.  Xli. 


SEPARATE  HOMILIES. 

Ver.  7.  "  Lest  .  .  .  UsV^   The  Perils  "  experience,"  and  a  sensuous  self-in- 

of  Great  Grace.  dulgence  in  the  mere  joy  of  the  "  revela- 

I.  The  privilege  of  it. — "Caught  tions."]  Then  comes  peril  lest  Satan 
up  into  Paradise,  hearing  unspeakable  get  advantage,  and  the  Spirit  be  with- 
words."  Whatever  they  meant  to  drawn.  The  fall  of  the  highest  is  the 
Paul,  these  words  suggest  the  many  lowest.  Don't  envy  the  five-talent 
moments  of  wonderful  exaltation  of  man  ;  pray  for  him  !  2.  Yet  even  at  the 
spirit  to  believers  ;  of  close  communion,  price  of  such  a  peril,  we  shall  welcome 
\fh.en  ^^  the  secret  of  the  Lord"  i^  to\di  to  and  glory  in  the  revelations.  "He 
"  them  that  fear  Him  " ;  of  mountain-top  revealed  His  Son  in  me." 
fellowship,  when  the  unseen  is  revealed,  III.  The  safeguard. — Perhaps  1. 
and  Moses  and  Elijah  speak  of  the  Some  "  buffet  in  the  face"  some  "  thorn 
atoning  ^^  decease"  and  hearts  cry,  in  the  flesh.  Note  (1)  Paul  twas  in  fact 
"  Good  to  be  here  !  "  The  Word  speaks  kept  safe  from  the  peril.  Much  grace 
things  to  our  inner  ear,  which  call  up  can  always  be  kept  by  getting  Tnore 
suggestions,  and  waken  hope  and  grace.  No  wecessi^^/ that  after  exaltation 
desire,  "  groanings  which  cannot  be  should  come  pride,  or  self-complacency, 
uttered."  The  Spirit  leads  out  in  desire  or  contempt  and  harsh  judgment  of 
vaguely  large,  too  large  to  be  appre-  others.  Christ  can  keep  the  highly 
bended  or  clothed  in  language,  honoured  man,  though  both  his  own 
Preacher's  heart  gets  filled  with  his  heart  and  Satan  put  him  into  peril, 
theme,  with  yearning  over  his  hearers  Note  (2)  No  need  in  times  of  specially 
beyond  what  is  common.  Regions  "  abundant  revelations "  to  begin  to  look 
where  very  few  walk  j  into  which  very  out  for  the  sending  of  some  "  thorn  in 
few  Christians  penetrate  at  all.  On  the  flesh."  Or  after  some  unusual  bless- 
our  knees,  in  the  Sanctuary,  at  the  ing  to  say,  "  Ah  !  now  I  shall  have 
Lord's  Table.  some  big  trial."     As  if  some  unusually 

II.  The  peril  of  it. — Must  be  re-  bright  weather  in  our  pilgrimage  were 
membered  that  perfect  holiness  would  bound  to  bring  a  storm.  2.  Always 
include  perfect  hwmility.  1.  Lest:  the  grace  of  Christ.  "This  sufiiceth, 
begin  to  carry  head  high,  as  one  of  the  sufflceth,  sufficeth,  for  thy  soul :  viz. 
privileged  ones  who  have  the  entree  into  thou  hast  My  grace  !  Say  no  more ; 
the  Presence,  looking  down  upon  the  fear  no  more ;  rest  there." 

common  run  of  fellow-Christians,  the 

Mordecais  at  the  gate,  who  never  hear,  Ver.  8.  "  Unanswered  Prayer.^* 
see,  get,  care  for,  "  nor  are  capable  of,"  I.  An  apparent  contradiction. — 
such  things;  begin  to  despise  these  How  many  Scripture  passages  run  in 
less  richly  favoured  ones,  or  uncharit-  the  strain  of  :  "  Him  that  cometh  .  .  . 
ably  esteem  them  as  "  less  devoted,  less  /  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  "  Whatso- 
earnest,  a  poor  half-hearted  set  of  ever  things  ye  desire,  .  .  .  believe  that 
people  "  ;  begin  to  forget  that  all  such  ye  receive  them  "  [not  "  will  receive  "  ; 
specialblessing  is  onlya  means  to  greater  indeed,  R.V.  ^^  received  "],  etc.  Yet  did 
usefulness,  that  all  is  given  that  we  may  not  Christ  in  effect  "  cast  out "  the 
give,  not  that  we  may  simply  felicitate  rich  young  ruler  ?  Did  not  Paul 
ourselves,  or  enjoy  our  portion  alone ;  thrice  ask — like  his  Lord  in  Geth- 
such  gifts  are — as  after  Pentecost — to  be  semane — what,  in  the  terms  of  there- 
brought  into  the  common  stock,  for  the  quest,  was  not  granted  ?  Do  not  we  ask 
help  of  the  Church.  [Peril  of  losing  much,  and  strongly  "  believe "  [often 
oneself  and  of  losing  the  blessing  in  this  only  means  strongly  persuade  our- 
over-subtle  analysis  of  "  the  blessing  "  ;  selves]  that  we  shall  have,  yet  we  do 
of  dilettante-Mke  expositions  of  it,  not  receive  it?  Sometimes  we  "ask 
till  nothing  is  left  but  the  aesthetics  of  amiss "  (Jas.  iv.  3).     Sometimes,  like 

617 


CHAP.  XII.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS. 


the  ruler,  we  will  not  accept  our  bless- 
ing upon  Christ's  terms  and  fulfil  His 
conditions.  Such  must  be  cast  out. 
Further : 

II.  The  real  harmony. — 1.  There 
are  no  unanswered  prayers.  "No  "is 
an  answer,  real,  true,  kind.  Prayers, 
petitioners,  are  never  simply  disregarded, 
nor  apply  to  a  God  who  looks,  hears, 
knows,  yet  makes  no  response.  Always 
"  attends  to  our  voice."  God's  refusal 
does  not  mean  indifference  or  rebuff. 
2.  God's  promise  to  hear  prayer,  by  no 
means  binds  Him  to  be  mechanically  at 
the  mere  service  of  His  client's  wish. 
[As  Faust's  "  familiar  "  must  obey  his 
every  command,  however  capricious 
or  foolish.]  3.  Prayer  does  include 
petition;  definite  requests  may  be, 
should  be,  made  ;  to  make  them  honours 
God;  but  they  are  the  requests  of 
children  addressed  to  a  greater,  wiser 
Father.  He  had  rather  say,  *  Yes ' 
than  *  No  ' ;  always  says  '  Yes,'  if  that 
may  fall  in  with  His  purpose  and 
training  for  His  child.  If  He  say  '  No,' 
it  is  that  He  may  take  up  the  desire 
we  imperfectly  clothe  or  conceive,  and 
give  it  a  better  embodiment,  and  one 
consistent  with  His  larger  view  of  the 
present  conditions,  and  the  future 
developments  of  the  particular  life  and 
its  "  education."  4,  Immediately,  and 
for  Paul's  mere  comfort,  the  better  thing 
seemed  to  be  to  take  away  the  "  thorn." 
Remotely,  more  widely,  with  larger 
consequences  of  blessing  to  Paul  and 
to  others,  and  with  more  glory  to  the 
Master  Christ,  it  was  better  to  leave  the 
*'  thorn "  and  to  add  the  *'  sufficient 
graced  Take  in  all  the  conditions,  then 
the  balance  of  advantage,  blessing,  glory 
to  Christ,  is  very  preponderantly  in 
favour  of  saying  "  No  "  to  the  mere 
letter  of  the  request,  and  giving  a  larger 
"  Yes  "  of  eternal  blessing. 

III.  No  wrong  in  repeatedly  urging 
our  request. — Christ  did  it.  Only  be 
careful  not  to  suffer  our  urgency  to  lose 
submissiveness,  and  become  dictation. 
Keep  an  ear,  a  heart,  ready  to  catch 
the  first,  plain,  tender  denial :  "  Don't 
ask  that  any  longer."  Then  *'  he  silent 
unto  the  Lord"  (Ps.  Ixii.  5,  Heb.).    Ac- 

618 


quiesce  in,  until  this  grows  to  embracing 
(ver.  10),  His  will ;  until  this  grows  to 
"  glorying  "  in  the  very  "  infirmities." 
Especially,  if  they  may  be  the  occasion, 
the  vehicle,  the  theatre,  of  a  glorious 
display  of  the  power  of  Christ.  And 
if  the  acquiescence  be  more  than  mortal 
strength  can  compass,  grace  will  bear 
in  upon  the  soul  a  strong  peace.  "  An 
angel  from  heaven  strengthening"  over 
against  the  "  angel  from  Satan  huffet- 
ing.''  [No  need  to  "  take  pleasure" 
or  to  pretend  to  take  pleasure,  in  such 
things  (as  in  ver.  10),  unless  they  be 
"for  Christ's  sake  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  9,  10)]. 

Ver.  9.  "  Tabernacling." — One  of  the 
many  lines  of  reiterated,  recurrent, 
continuous  teaching  by  symbolism 
which  bind  Revelation  and  its  Record 
together  into  an  organic  whole.  One 
Mind  is  in  such  lines  of  symbolism  seen 
pursuing  Its  theme,  fulfilling  Its  pur- 
pose, through  the  ages. 

I.  Bible  begins  and  ends  with  a 
garden,  a  "Paradise  of  God."  God 
vouchsafing,  desiring,  free  intercourse 
with  man  ;  "  walking  in  the  garden  in 
the  cool  of  the  day," — at  the  one  end 
of  one  Book.  At  the  other,  the  garden 
(like  the  Paradises  of  Persian  Kings)  is 
in  a  city.  New  Jerusalem ;  a  great  voice 
proclaims  that  God  and  man  are  in 
perfect  fellowship  again  (Rev.  xxi.  3). 
"  The  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men," 
etc.  (Zech.  viii.  8  is  fulfilled.)  (And 
earlier :  Rev.  vii.  15,  "  tabernacle  upon 
them.")  In  the  earlier  Paradise  the 
idea  of  "  tabernacling  "  does  not  yet, 
of  course,  appear.  The  actual,  illustra- 
tive Tabernacle  is  in  date  midway  be- 
tween the  two  Paradises. 

II.  God  has  boon  all  through  testify- 
ing to  a  desire  for  the  renewal  of 
comin^mion. — 1.  In  Israel's  camp,  Moses 
had  his  teat,  but  there  was  also  another, 
larger,  more  costly  Tent ;  understood  to 
be  Jehovah's  tent ;  the  tent  of  the  True 
Chief  ill  the  camp.  Jehovah  "  spread 
His  tabernacle "  among  them.  Over 
it,  and  within  it,  hung  a  cloud  of  glory, 
the  King's  symbol,  occupying  His  tent 
amidst  the  tents  of  His  nation. 
2,  ^^  When  the  earthly  house  of"  His 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  XII. 


"  tabernacle  was  dissolved"  there  arose  mighty  he   is   for  Christ.      [Shall  we 

^^  a  building  of "  Solomon's.     The  people  call  it  the  official  garment  oi  the  am- 

are  in  houses ;  Solomon  lives  in  a  palace  ;  bassador  for  Christ  ?] 
the  King  must  therefore  no  longer  have 

a  tent,  but  a  Palace.  Again  the  cloud  Vers.  9,11.  Strength  and  Weakness. 
comes  upon  and  abides  within ;  the  King  I.  "A  distinct  principle  is  announced 
is  resident,  and  holds  His  court  in  His  of  universal  significance.  *  Strength 
capital,  Jerusalem.  3.  Just  as  the  is  made  perfect  in  weakness,'  *  When  I 
earthly  house  of  His  dwelling  was  pass-  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong,'  are  ex- 
ing  wholly  away,  to  have  no  structural  pressions  which  have  now  passed  almost 
successor,  there  came  amongst  men  into  the  proverbial  language  of  man- 
"  a  Building  of  God,''  an  Incarnate  kind.  It  was  true,  in  the  highest 
Word,  "  setting  up  His  tabernacle "  sense,  of  Him  that  uttered  it,  that 
(John  i.  14)  "  amongst  usJ"  John  and  ^  His  strength  was  made  perfect  in  the 
his  fellow-believers  are  permitted  to  weakness  of  His  sufferings.'  The  Cross 
enter  and  *'  behold  His  glory,"  the  of  Christ  is,  indeed,  the  strength  of 
Shekinah -cloud  of  Godhead  discernible  Christianity.  [His  sceptre  was  a  reed  ; 
in  Him.  (The  two  veils  were  rent  not  yet  the  rod  of  iron  (Ps.  ii.).]  It 
together.)  No  such  emphatic  sign  of  was  true,  also,  though  not  in  the 
His  desire  and  heart  had  God  hitherto  highest  sense,  yet  still  in  a  sense  so 
given.  This  Word  is  Immanuel,  and,  great  as  to  be  a  lesson  and  an  example 
by  what  He  is,  says  "  Immanuel."  4.  to  all  the  world,  that  His  strength  was 
All  this  is  blessedly  reproduced  in  His  perfected  in  the  weakness  of  the 
people.  We  hsLve^^  seen  the  glory  of  God  Apostles,  above  all,  of  St.  Paul.  *I 
in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  man  thank  Thee,  O  Father,  that  Thou  hast 
in  Christ  has  ^^  the  earthly  house  of  his  concealed  these  things  from  the  wise 
tabernacle  "  (2  Cor.  v.  1),  and  he  looks  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them 
for  a  day  when  he  shall  have  a  body,  unto  babes.'  Who  can  say  how  much 
a  nature,  which  shall  be  no  (temporary)  of  the  purity  and  simplicity,  and  there- 
tent,  but  a  (permanent)  "  building,"  fore  universal  strength  of  the  first 
a  temple,  fitted  to  be  the  eternal  sphere  teaching  of  the  Gospel,  we  owe 
of  a  communion  with  God  which  shall  (humanly  speaking)  to  the  humble 
be  eternal  and  perfect  in  Christ.  station  and  uneducated  character  of 
III.  Meanwhile  he  walks  in  and  the  first  Apostles,  which  thus  received, 
out  amongst  his  fellows,  bearing  in  at  once,  and  without  perversion  or 
himself  a  shrine  ;  being  himself  a  intrusion  of  alien  thoughts,  the  original 
shrine,  in  which  God  dwells  by  His  impression  of  the  Word  made  flesh  i 
Spirit  [or  in  the  person  of  Christ  Who  can  say  how  great  would  have 
(Eph.  iii.  17 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  15)].  He  been  the  loss  to  the  world  had  the 
turns  within,  and  finds  a  light  and  a  Gospel  originated,  not  in  the  weakness 
glory  :  "  God's  Son  revealed  in  him."  of  Palestine  and  Galilee,  but  in  the 
Also  the  power  of  Christ  spreads  a  tent  learning  of  Alexandria  or  the  strength 
over  him  ;  invests  him,  covers  him,  as  of  Rome  1  And  again,  in  St.  Paul 
did  the  glory  which  took  possession  of  himself,  it  might  have  seemed  at  the 
Solomon's  Temple,  with  a  power  and  time  to  all,  as  it  did  on  this  occasion 
an  awful  beauty  of  holiness,  evidently  seem  to  him,  that  the  cause  of  the 
not  his  own.  He  has  been  "  endued  Gospel  would  have  been  better  served, 
with  power  from  on  high  "  (Luke  xxiv.  had  he  been  relieved  from  his  infirmity 
49).  Such  a  life, — as,  for  example,  and  gone  forth  to  preach  and  teach 
Paul's, — no  wonder  that'  it  is  a  centre  with  unbroken  vigour  of  body  and 
of  power  and  prevalent  influence.  It  mind,  his  bodily  presence  strong,  his 
only  rests  upon  him  ;  it  is  not  inherent ;  speech  mighty  and  powerful.  But 
he  can  be  divested  of  it,  if  unfaithful  history  has  answered  the  question 
to  it ;    but   while   he  wears  it,  how  otherwise,  and  has  ratified  the  Divine 

'619 


CHAP  XII.    BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.  CORINTHIANS. 


answer,  in  which  the  Apostle  acquiesced. 
What  the  Apostle  lost  for  himself,  and 
Christianity  lost  for  the  moment,  has 
been  more  than  compensated  by  the 
acknowledgment  that  he  was  beyond 
doubt  proved  to  be,  not  the  inventor 
of  Christianity,  but  its  devoted  and 
humble  propagator.  In  his  own  weak- 
ness lies  the  strength  of  the  cause. 
When  he  was  weakest  as  a  teacher  of 
the  present,  he  was  strongest  as  an 
apostle  of  the  future.  And  what  his 
trial  was  to  him  and  to  the  world  on  a 
large  scale,  that  the  trial  of  each 
individual  Christian  may  have  been 
ever  since,  the  means  in  ways  incon- 
ceivable to  him  now,  of  making  himself 
and  others  strong  in  the  service  of  God 
and  man."  (Stanley,  Corinthians,  569.) 
II.  1.  Compare  also:  "The  meek" 
— not  the  self-assertive,  masterful  men, 
insistent  on  "rights,"  combative  in 
their  assertion  and  maintenance, 
tolerating  no  smallest  slight — ^' shall 
inherit  the  earth,"  Like  their  Lord, 
"  Who  shall  not  strive  nor  cry  .  .  .  until 
(in  the  midst  of,  and  by  means  of,  the 
work  of  *  weakness ')  He  bring  forth 
judgment  unto  victory ^^  The  triumph 
of  Christianity  in  the  Roman  Empire 
was  the  "  victory  of  the  vanquished." 
2.  How  often  the  preacher,  the  teacher, 
the  worker,  do  most  when  they  have 
gone  to  their  work  trembling,  dis- 
couraged, but  the  more  flung  upon  God's 
strength.  History  of  some  men,  some 
ministries,  some  Churches,  is  sum- 
marised in  Hos.  xiii.  1.  ("  Baal  "  has 
been  some  idol  of  self-sufficiency,  or 
human  reliance ;  before  which  they 
have  bowed  down,  turning  aside  from 
Jehovah  to  do  so.)  3.  How  the  women, 
the  very  children,  have  found  all  fear 
vanish,  and  the  flesh  strengthened,  to 
walk  to  the  stake  for  Christ !  Some- 
times even  shaming  the  men !  How 
the  simple  women,  in  Marian  days, 
silenced  the  cavil  and  the  argument, 
strong  in  their  only  learning, — ^the 
Word  of  God !  How  they  will  bear 
the  daily  persecution,  strong  in  their 
very  humility,  till  the  very  mahce  of  the 
world  gives  way,  beaten  !  "  Galilsean, 
thou   hast  conquered ! "     4.  Secret   of 

620 


all  is,  that  conscious  weakness  turns 
to  Infallible  Might.  (Storm  breaks  or 
uproots  the  oak  that  will  not  bend ;  the 
pliant  sapling  escapes,  and  is  the  more 
deeply  rooted  because  of  the  storm.) 
Everything  that  grieves  (as  does  self- 
sufficiency  or  rehance  on  human  wisdom 
or  strength)  the  Spirit,  Whose  indwell- 
ing is  our  only  strength,  weakens  us. 
Everything  that  leaves  room  for  Him 
to  be  exalted,  brings  His  strength 
increasingly.  [Illustrate  by  bar  of  soft 
iron,  forming  the  core  of  an  electro- 
magnet ;  cold,  and  in  itself  powerless 
to  attiact  or  support.  Set  the  current 
circulating  around  it,  it  is  full  of  power, 
— which  disappears,  and  is  gone,  in  an 
instant,  if  the  current  stop.  "  Out  of 
weakness  "  it  "  is  made  strong."] 

Ver.  14,  15.  God's  Appeal  to  the  Soul. 
— May  fairly  borrow  these  Pauline 
words  and  make  them  the  words  of  God 
in  Christ  appealing  to  the  sinner. 
For  "  he  that  hath  seen  a  Christian 
hath  seen  Christ "  (cf .  John  xiv.  9 ; 
more  than  a  mere  rhetorical  parallel). 
He  is  a  replica  of  Christ,  and  so  of 
God.  If  Paul  feels  and  does  this,  he 
has  learned  it  from  Christ.  He  is  "  in 
Christ"  in  it  all. 

1.  God  makes  the  advances;  not 
man  first. — 1.  Always  the  ^^  law"  of 
His  dealings.  "  I  said.  Thy  face  .  .  . 
will  I  seek,  because  thou  saidst  (first). 
Seek  ye  My  face"  (Ps.  xxvii.  8). 
After  sin's  alienation.  He  makes  the  first 
approaches :  ,  "  /  seek  you."  "  The 
Father  seeketh  "  spiritual,  sincere  wor- 
shippers (John  iv.  23).  We  do  not 
solicit  the  mercy  of  a  reluctant  God. 
No  need  to  "  beg  Him  into  the  mind  " 
to  bless.  He  is  forward,  beforehand, 
with  us,  proffering,  pressing  upon  our 
acceptance.  His  love. 

2.  Persistently  does  this. — "This 
third,  tenth,  thirtieth  time  I  am 
coming  to  you,  soul ! "  Through  long 
years  of  merciful  waiting,  rebuffed 
affection,  long-tired  patience.  ["Came 
seeking  fruit  these  three  years."]  If 
His  patience  had  not  been  His,  it  would 
have  given  way  long  ago.  "  Come  to 
me.   .  .  .  /  am  meek,  (and  therefore 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xii. 


have  borne  your  slight  of  my  love)  " 
(Spurgeon).  No  runaway  knock :  "  / 
stand  at  the  door,  and  knock." 

3.  "  Spent,"  is  "  spent  out."—"  *  It 
is  finished ' ;  He  gave  up  the  ghost." 
The  last  was  spent,  and  paid  down 
then. 

"  What  could  your  Redeemer  do, 
More  than  He  hath  done  for  you  ?  " 

The  Father  "  spared  not  His  own 
Son,"  His  unique  One,  the  only  "  Son  " 
of  that  kind,  the  only -begotten.  Our 
sin  and  need  required  even  That  Gift ; 
and  He  would  not  stop  at  even  That, 
when  it  was  a  question  of  our  ^^  souls." 
How  He  lavishes  love ;  as  if  by  His 
gifts  to  awaken  and  win  for  Himself 
our  reluctant,  indifierent  heart ! 

4.  *'  More  abundantly." — Another 
Divine  word.  John  x.  10  ;  Heb.  vi.  17  ; 
Rom.  XV.  13,  V.  15  (our  word  or  its 
cognates).  "  My  cup  "  is  not  simply 
full  but,  "runneth  over."  Man's 
measure  for  man  is  God's  measure  to 
man  (Luke  vi.  38). 

5.  Think  of  the  ages  of  preparation 
for  Christ,  during  which  God  was 
*^  laying  up  for  the  children." 

II.  How  man  meets  the  advances. — 

SThis  is  the  bitter  wail  of  some  aged 
athers,  who  have  slaved,  saved,  given 


life,  for  sons  who  think  the  "  old 
man  "  a  burden  :  "  Why  does  he  not 
take  himself  off  to  heaven  or  some- 
where !  "]  1.  Think  God  a  "  burden." 
[Word  (so  Jerome  in  Stanley)  a  local, 
Cicilian  word,  root  of  which  was  the 
name  of  the  torpedo-fish.]  His  clinging 
love,  hanging  around  our  neck,  caress- 
ing, wooing,  pleading,  is  unwelcome ;  it 
is  counted  a  dead  weight,  the  cling  of  a 
torpedo  that  shocks,  and  paralyses,  and 
spoils  all  our  possibility  of  enjoyment ! 
We  grudge  what  His  house  and  service 
cost  us  !  Grudge  what  He  asks  us  to 
give  up,  if  we  are  to  be  His.  Yet  He 
does  not  want  it,  or  want  to  take  it,  for 
His  own  sake.  He  seeks  "not  yours, 
but  you."  2.  The  more  He  loves,  the 
less  He  is  loved.  Heart  gets  harder 
under  the  very  impact  of  His  streaming 
sunshine  !  How  Nazareth  thrust  back 
into  the  heart  of  Jesus  the  love  that 
came  unsolicited  to  do  "  many  mighty 
works  "  !  3.  Happy  for  us,  that  "  more 
abundantly."  We  build  the  dykes, 
and  shut  the  floodgates  [as  the 
Dutchmen,  for  their  good,  shut  out  the 
ocean] ;  but  the  flood  of  love  flows 
right  over  the  barrier,  and  brings  life 
into  our  barren  death. 


HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS, 


Ver.  10.  ^^ Pleasure!"  1.  Submis- 
sion may  be  much,  and  more  than 
merely  sitting  to  bear  whatever  is 
laid  upon  us,  but  with  an  attitude  of 
heart  that  means,  "  I  would  not  if 
I  had  any  choice.  Must  bear  it ;  all 
right,  I  suppose,  but "  2.  Wonder- 
ful power  of  accepting,  adjusting  self 
to  surroundings.  Can  accommodate, 
accustom  ourselves  to  anything  ;  until 
we  move  amidst  and  under  the  burden 
of  discomfort  or  deprivation,  with  a 
mere  indifference  that  stolidly  holds 
on  its  way,  "  blow,  hail,  shine "  ! 
3.  Embrojcing  the  will  of  God  is 
much  more.  4.  But  "  take  pleasure 
in "  !  Unnatural,  incredible,  impos- 
sible,—True  !  5.  "  For  His  sake " 
makes  the  difference.  What  a  reality, 
and  a  power,  is  Christ  in  Paul's  life  ! 


No  teacher,  no  compeller,  no  enabler, 
fior  unwelcome  burdens  or  impossible 
^asks,  like  Grateful  Love  ! 

Ver.  10.  May  we  make  a  counter- 
part saying,  "  When  Paul  is  strong, 
then  is  he  weak  "  1  Two  suggestions 
then : 

I.  Weakness  in  strength. 
II.  Strength  in  weakness. 

Or:— 

I.  "  Strong  "  have  "  no  need  "  of 
help,  and  do  not  seek  it. 

II.  "  Weak "  know  their  need  and 
lay  hold  of  Almighty  strength. 

Vers.  11-13.  "/^  all  patience." — 
May  be  made  central  word  of  para- 
graph. As  usual,  ^^ patience  "  is  not 
merely  " endurance"  but  " pressing  on 
and  bearing  up." 

621 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


I.  His  own  converts,  who  owe  him 

everything,  will  not  say  a  word  for 
him, — say  many  against  him.  "Be 
patient,  Paul."  Down,  proud  heart ! 
Stoop,  for  the  cause'  sake,  to  commend 
yourself.  Crucify  personal  feeling. 
Be  ''a fool." 

II.  His  enemies  resist  him,  and 
decry,  and  depreciate.  Yet  he  has 
a  credential  none  of  them  possess.  It 
might  become  a  weapon  against  them. 
But  no  !  "  Be  patient,  Paul ! "  Never 
use  miracle-working  power  for  a 
weapon  of  revenge  or  self -vindication  ! 
[Of.  "  Withdrew  Himself  from  ihem^J^ 
when  He  could  have  slain  such  murder- 
ous-hearted wretches,  with  the  same 
power  that  had  healed  the  withered 
hand  (Matt.  xii.  14,  15).  Simply 
went  out  of  their  way  !] 

III.  His  Churches  are  ready  to 
think  the  worst,  if  he  ask  an  apostle's 
rightful  maintenance.  "  Be  patient, 
Paul ! "  -  Let  Philippi  help  thee, 
indeed,  "  once  and  again "  (Phil.  iv. 
16).  But  for  Corinthians  (and  Ephe- 
sians), — well,  thou  hast  a  trade  in  thy 
hand  ;  turn  to  thy  tentmaking  ! 

Ver.  14.  (See  another  line  of  sug- 
gestion homiletically  dealt  with  more 
fully  below.) 

I.  "Not  yours":  your  gifts;  ap- 
plause ;  influence.  "  I  am  your 
minister  for  Christ's  sake," — your 
servant ;  not  "  lording  it "  over  the 
Lord's  "  heritage  "  (1  Pet.  v.  13). 

II.  "  You."  "  Watching  for  your 
souls  as  one  who  must  give  an  account  " 
(Heb.  xiii.  17).  "  Your  love^  for  my 
own  sake.  And  that,  because  I  can- 
not help  you  unless  I  have  it.  Your 
welfare,  here  and  hereafter  ;  by  your 
conversion  and  your  perfecting  in 
holiness." 

Vers.  16-19  (first  clause). 

I.  Self- vindication  sometimes  neces- 
sary for  the  credit  of  religion. — [Cf. 
Samuel's  self  vindication  (1  Sam.  xii. 
2-4).  Yet  higher  Example  :  "  Which 
of  you  convicteth  Me  of  sin  1 "  (John 
viii.  46).  David's  assertions  of  inno- 
cence are  no  personal  boasting ;  they 

622 


are  the  appeal  of  a  smarting  sense  of 
injustice,  involving  the  cause  of  God 
and  its  credit,  to  a  Higher  Court.] 

II.  Man  who  does  it  should  be  very 
sure  that  he  can  oflfer  (I)  a  clear  con- 
science to  the  examination  of  God  ;  and 
(2)  clear  accounts,  and  a  clean  record^ 
to  the  examination  of  man.  1.  ^^  In 
sight  of  God  speak  we."  [Then  use 
may  be  made  of  "  boasting,"  and  of 
irony, — both  edged  tools  to  deal  with, 
and  dangerous  to  a  man's  own  spiritual 
life.  Did  Christ  ever  use  irony  ? 
F.  W.  Robertson  thought  so  ;  "  Full 
well"  (Mark  vii.  9).]  2.  Christian 
men  should  be  more  particular  than 
others  in  money  matters.  Mer- 
cenary motives  will  be  charged; 
because  of  the  misconduct  of  some ; 
because  the  world  understands  no 
higher  motive ;  or  from  pure  malicious- 
ness. Poor  excuse  for  muddle,  hard 
to  distinguish  from  dishonesty:  *'He 
meant  no  wrong  !  "  Particularly  in 
dealing  with  money  of  others,  or  of  the 
Church.  In  even  such  secularities, 
"  temporals,"  Paul  and  Titus  "  walk  in 
the  Spirit."  As  the  early  "  deacons  " 
(Acts  vii.)  were  to  be  "full  ...  of 
the  Holy  Ghost."  Oh  for  spiritual 
treasurers,  secretaries,  stewards  !  3. 
There  are  sins  in  a  man's  past  record 
which,  though  pardoned,  and  not 
affecting  his  present  standing  or  holi- 
ness before  God,  render  it  inex- 
pedient that  he  should  be  in  the 
ministry.  Paul  and  Titus  should  have 
clean  hands,  and  a  clean  record. 
[Rev.  Thomas  Collins,  on  platform  of 
a  meeting  full  of  opponents :  "  Mr. 
Chairman,  Christian  friends,  I  am  a 
man  who  neither  fears  the  frown,  nor 
courts  the  smile,  of  any  living.  I  am 
a  man  through  whose  soul  the  light 
of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  beams 
all  day  and  all  night."  (Coley,  Life 
of  Collins,  308.)  In  similar  circum- 
stances at  Truro  he  said  :  "  [You  say] 
*you  are  designing  men.'  That  is 
true.  I  am  a  designing  man.  .  .  . 
I  have  a  design  to  draw  my  family 
closer  to  God,  and  to  get  my  hearers 
into  the  same  mind.  These  are  my 
chief  designs  at  present.     AH  others 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xiii. 


that  I  have  bow  down  to  them  and 
serve  them.  Could  you  this  moment 
scan  the  naked  hearts  of  my  brethren, 
you  would,  1  doubt  not,  find  some  such 
designs  in  them."  (Ih.  309.)  Very 
close  parallels,  even  in  form,  to  PauVs 
case  here.] 

Yer.  19  (second  clause) — 21.  A 
New  Testament  Nehemiah. 

I.  1.  I  am  coming  to  Corinth  ;  "to 
build  you  up  "  (ver.  19).  2.  I  hear,  and 
fear,  that  I  shall  find  sad  havoc  and 
ruin  in  the  Church  of  God  ;  "  walls 
broken  down "  ;  "  gates  burnt  with 
fire."  3.  I  shall  be  such  as  ye 
would  not :  a  stern,  authoritative, 
authorised  reformer,  sparing  no 
wrong,  or  wrongdoer;  as  every  true 
minister   of  Christ  must  on  occasion 


be.  4.  I  fear  I  shall  have  a  bitter 
hour  of  speechless  humiliation  among 
you  (Neh.  i.  4;  good  parallel  in  Ezra 
ix.  3,  4). 

II.  Man  who  loves,  and  understands, 
the  true  methods  and  meaning  of  the 
Work  of  God,  finds  no  keener  distress, 
no  greater  humiliation  before  God, 
than  in  the  sins  which  are  the  weak- 
ness and  the  shame  of  the  Church. 

III.  How  easily  old  sins,  or  the 
customary  sins  of  our  world  and  our 
time,  regain  ascendency  over  Church 
members,  and  creep  into  the  Church. 
[See  again  how  Sfehemiah  kept  the 
gates,  nor  would  even  suffer  the 
expelled  traders  to  tempt  his  citizens 
by  remaining  even  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  walls  (xiii.  21).] 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Vers.  1-13. — [Good  paraphrase,  exhibiting  connection  of  thought,  from  Stanley :  *'  Once, 
twice,  thrice,  as  in  the  Mosaic  Law  of  the  three  witnesses  ;  by  my  first  visit — by  this  Epistle, 
as  though  I  had  accomplished  my  second  visit — by  the  third  visit,  which  I  now  hope  to 
accomplish  [this  personifying  the  three  (?)  visits  as  three  witnesses,  somewhat  forced  and 
fantastic] — I  warn  you  that  I  shall  not  spare  my  power  when  I  come.  You  are  always 
seeking  for  a  proof  of  my  Apostleship  ;  you  shall  have  it.  For  Christ  who  speaks  in  me, 
though  in  the  weakness  of  humanity  He  died  the  shameful  death  o£  the  cross,  in  the  strength 
of  God  He  lives  and  acts  still ;  and  in  Him,  weak  and  poor  as  I  seem  to  be,  I  shall  still  live 
and  act  towards  you.  But  why  do  I  speak  of  myself  ?  You  yourselves,  my  converts,  are  the 
best  witnesses  of  my  Apostolical  power  ;  and  long  may  you  be  so  !  If,  indeed,  you  should 
have  lost  this  best  proof  of  my  Apostleship  in  the  reformation  of  your  own  lives,  then  indeed 
you  shall  have  the  proof  of  my  severity.  But  my  earnest  prayer  is  that  there  may  be  no 
occasion  for  it.  May  my  power  and  the  proof  of  it  perish  if  you  prove  that  you  do  not  need 
it.  Against  a  true  and  blameless  life  the  highest  Apostolical  power  is  powerless  ;  and  if  you 
have  this  power  of  truth  and  goodness,  I  am  well  content  to  part  with  mine.  It  is  to  draw 
you  to  a  sense  of  this  that  I  write  this  whole  Epistle,  in  the  hopes  that  my  Apostolical 
authority  may  be  turned  to  its  fitting  purpose  of  building  up,  not  of  pulling  down." 

Ver.  1. — Strong  presumption  in  this  verse  of  two  actual  previous  visits ;  second  unre- 
corded in  Acts;  opportunity  for  it  during  the  long  stay  at  Ephesus  (Acts  xx.  31).  Quotation 
from  Deut,  xix.  15.  "  Prepare  for  a  calm,  thorough,  judicial  inquiry  when  I  come,  into  the 
facts  of  all  these  ugly  reports  about  you  which  reach  me." 

Ver.  2.  Before,  foretell,  heretofore ;  only  by  prefixes  to  the  verbs.  Note,  as  to  first 
case,  R.V.  margin  ;  a  very  possible  rendering.  Better  :  *'  Before  my  second  visit  I  said  ; 
and  now,  before  ray  third,  I  say."  Choice  between :  "  As  if  I  were"  etc.,  and  "  When  I  was" 
depends  on  view  taken  as  to  two,  or  three,  visits.  (Best  discussion  of  this  is  Conybeare  and 
Howson,  chap.  xv.  Also  see  Introduction.)  Heretofore,  repeated  from  xii.  21 ;  i.e.  "  up 
to  now,  and  to  the  rest,  if  they  be  inclined  to  follow  the  bad  lead  of  these  first  sinners." 
Cf.  "  I  spare  you  "  (1  Ep.  vii.  28).     Omit,  "  I  write:' 

Ver.  3.  In  me, — Emphatic  in  position  ;  q.d.  ^*  My  opponents  say  He  speaks  in  them,  and 
that  He  does  not  speak  in  me.    You  ask  my  proof  that  He  does."    Observe  the  style  of  an 

(i23 


CHAP.  xiii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


ancient  prophet.  Paul  is  the  mouthpiece  of  Christ,  land,  further,  Christ  is  the  Inspiring  God 
(of.  2  Sam.  xxiii.  2).  (Observe  "  who''  not  "  which.'')  Similarly  Ananias  and  Sapphira 
*'  sought  a  proof"  of  the  Holy  Ghost  speaking  in  Peter.    Notice  "  toward  you  "  and  "  in  you.'* 

Ver.  4. — An  unfaithful  convert  thought :  '*  Not  much  to  fear  from  this  Christ ;  Himself 
He  could  not  save  (cf.  Luke  xxiii.  35);  us  He  cannot  punish."  [Cf.  Sed,  Gal.  iv.  13;  ij^ 
here.]  Weakness. — "As  you  call  it,  and  His  enemies  esteemed  it.  As  we  know  it,  He  was 
so  crucified,  under  conditions  of  humanity  and  its  physical  limitations  which  He  had  chosen 
to  assume  and  submit  to ;  He  died  as  part  of  the  *  emptying '  of  Himself.  He  chose  not 
to  draw  upon  His  Divine  reserve  of  power."  We  also. — iv.  10,  xii.  10.  Paul's  familiar 
thought;  shares  with  our  Lord  in  His  redemption  history.  We  have  our  weakness,  our 
crucifixion,  our  resurrection,  our  strength  as  of  a  heavenly,  enthroned  life. 

Ver.  5.  Connect,  *'■  proof "  (ver.  3);  '■*■  examine"  (here);  '■''  reprohate"  (vers.  5,  6);  '''- ap~ 
proved " ;  all  cognate  in  root ;  evidence  during  trial ;  act  of  trial ;  rejected  after  trial ; 
approved  and  accredited,  as  result  of  standing  the  trial  well.  "  Whether  they  had 
suggested  this  word,  or  the  Apostle  only  attributed  it  to  them,  ...  it  certainly  had  seized 
his  mind,  and  he  dwells  upon  the  idea,  after  his  manner,  with  all  kinds  of  variations.  This 
one  word  '  proof '  is  the  key  to  the  whole  passage,  and  solves  every  difficulty."  (Pope,  Prayers 
of  St.  Paul,  168.)]  [Good  illustration  of  "  approved  "  in  Rom.  xvi.  10  :  "  Apelles  approved 
in  Christ,"  i.e.  a  man  in  Christ  (=  a  Christian)  who  has  been  tried  by  trials,  by  labours, 
by  persecutions,  by  time  (hardest  test  of  all,  to  some !),  and  who  has  come  forth,  not 
"  reprobate  silver "  ( Jer.  vi.  30)  or  gold,  but  (to  coin  a  parallel  word)  approbate,  a  vessel  on 
which  the  Great  Assay-master  can  set  His  hall-mark  "  Approved."~\  Your  (own)  selves. — 
Not  me  (ver.  3).  "  If  you  want  such  z,  proof,  the  test  will  be  that  you  should  turn  out  able 
to  stand  examination." 

Ver.  6.  I  trust. — "  Hope."  Partly  :  "  I  should  like  to  think  that  your  self-examination  will 
so  end  as  to  be  the  best  proof  that  I  am  an  apostle."  Partly,  and  more  sternly  :  "  I  shall  in 
any  case,  if  you  compel  me,  hope  to  show  you  that  I  have  an  apostle's  power  and  authority." 

Ver.  7. — "  The  bearing  of  your  self-examination  upon  me  personally  is,  however,  a  small 
matter.  Let  me  be  '  approved '  or  '  reprobate,'  I  care  not ;  what  I  do  care  about  is,  that  you 
may  really  be  such  as  need  fear  no  scrutiny."  «S?^  would  say  :  "  I  hope  they  may  be  shown 
up  badly ;  and  may  so  vindicate  me,  and  give  me  a  chance  of  punishing." 

Ver.  8.  As  Stanley  above. 

Ver.  9.  Perfecting. — Not  the  riXeios  word,  but  KarapTitoj  word.  Trace  it  from  (literal) 
"Mending  the  nets"  (Mark  i.  19).  "A  body  .  .  .  prepared  Me"  (Heb.  x.  5,  xi.  3); 
through,  e.g.,  Gal.  vi.  1  ("  replace  the  dislocated  member  of  Christ ")  to  1  Thess.  iii.  10 ; 
[a  fearful  use,  in  Rom.  ix.  22]  1  Cor.  i.  10  =  Restoration  to  corporate  perfectness.  "  Perfect 
restoration  to  ecclesiastical  order,  and  . .  .  perfect  recovery  of  moral  purity ;  the  corporate 
or  Church  idea  predominating  in  the  word,  as  its  etymology  . .  .  indicates  "  (Pope,  Prayers 
St.  Paul,  169). 

Ver.  10. — Note  R.V. ;  very  clear.     Repeated  from  x.  8. 

Ver.  11. — Calm  sunset  after  a  stormy  passage  1  Observe  R.V.  margin  (better).  Perfected. 
— As  in  ver.  9.  Comforted. — With  the  fuller  meaning  found,  e.g.,  in  **  Paraclete."  Live  in 
peace. — "  Peacing  it  together,"  like  "  truthing  it "  (Eph.  iv.  15). 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  1—10. 

Three  antitheses : — 

A.  Present  and  absent  (vers.  1,  2,  10) 

B.  Strong  and  weak  (vers.  3,  4,  8,  9). 
0.  Reprobate  and  approved  (vers.  5-7). 

A.  I.  How  hard  to  get  at  truth  !  We  may  be  intentionally  deceived,  or  unde- 
signedly misled.  It  is  not  enough  to  go  upon  what  the  *'  household  of  Chloe  " 
reported.  Very  natural,  in  the  (honourable)  revolt  against  such  sin  as  they 
described,  to  rush  into  an  emphatic  judgment,  which  may  prove,  when  more  facts 
are  known,  too  strong  or  unwarranted  altogether.  Yet  it  is  very  hard  to 
recant,  especially  if  we  have  published  our  judgment  to  the  world.  No  hasty, 
impulsive  judgments;  especially  in  apostles  or  persons  responsible  for  the 
discipline  and  purity  of  a  Church.  Nor  on  mere  hearsay  evidence.  Judge 
gives  the  presumption  on  the  prisoner's  side,  until  he  hears  all.  Weigh,  wait, 
watch  for  new  facts;  inquire  patiently.*  "Against  an  elder,"  etc.  (1  Tim.  v.  19). 
Eliminate  thus  the  personal,  in  regard  to  the  testimony,  and  to  the  verdict, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xiii. 


The  ^^  two  or  three  vntnesses"  were  rather  jury,  assessors  to  the  judge,  than 
witnesses  in  modern  judicial  sense.  Good  rule  also  for  private  conduct,  as  well 
as  for  official  and  disciplinary.  *'  First,  tell  him  his  fault,  between  thee  and 
him  alone  ^'  (Matt,  xviii.  15).  Get  face  to  face  with  the  man,  and,  as  far  as 
possible  thus,  with  the  facts.     "  Then  take  with  thee  one  or  two  more,"  etc.  {ih.). 

II.  When  truth  is  ascertained,  then  action  must  be  decisive.  Sin  is  in  itself 
a  grievous  evil,  and  damaging  to  the  Church;  a  cancer  eating  its  inner  life,  a 
leprosy  making  it  offensive  to  the  outer  world.  Faithfulness  to  God — the  Holy 
— and  faithfulness  to  men,  require  prompt,  decisive  action ;  faithfulness  to  the 
faithful  membership,  to  the  unfaithful  member  (who  may  thus  be  made  to  see  his 
sin,  and  be  led  to  repentance  ;  it  is  no  kindness  to  the  sinner  to  deal  with  his  offence 
with  unholy  tenderness),  and  to  the  outside  world  (to  which  it  is  important  that 
*'  the  Salt "  should  have  its  full  and  unmixed  "  savour  "  of  grace  and  holiress) 
requires  it.  Remedial  measures,  if  it  may  be  ;  excision  (Gal.  v.  12)  if  nothing  less 
severe  will  suffice.  As  of  the  magistrate,  so  of  the  Church  discipline  :  "  Wouldst 
thou  have  no  fear  of  the  power?"  etc.  (Rom.  xiii.  3).  And  all  this  in  the 
presence  of  the  offender,  if  possible.  (The  Apostle  is  a  *'  Visitor  "  in  the  old  Church 
and  college  sense ;  to  inquire  into  abuses,  or  offences,  and  to  remedy  or  punish.) 

III.  Note  how  all  this  reflects  God's  method.  "  Swift  to  hear "  [knowing 
everything  that  can  be  said  for  the  wrong-doer ;  giving  full,  loving,  gracious 
weight  to  it ;  perhaps,  now  and  then,  judging  more  leniently  than  even  the 
awakened  conscience  itself  does].  "  Slow  to  wrath  "  [Paul's  "  longsuffering  " — his 
reluctance  to  hasten  to  Corinth  until  all  wrong  was  put  away — "  leading  them 
to  repentance "  (Rom.  ii.  4)] ;  **  waiting "  if  so  be  He,  "  may  be  gracious " 
(Isa.  xxxix.  8).  Paul  did,  God  does,  we  should,  "  lay  the  axe  at  the  root  of  the 
trees  "  ;  for  use,  if  it  must  be ;  but  also  rather  that  the  tree  may  take  heed  and 
make  the  axe  needless.  But  in  the  "  day  of  visitation  "  (as  above)  He  too  will 
"  use  sharpness."  *'  If  He  come  again  (in  that  day)  He  will  not  spare."  [I.  Christ 
absent ;  II.  Christ  present.]  The  "  wrath "  of  the  tenderest  natures ;  the 
indignation  against  wrong  which  is  born  of  the  deepest  loyalty  to,  and  love  of, 
light  (as  in  Paul)  ;  are  the  most  '*  sharp "  and  terrible.  [^'  Wrath  of  the  Lamb  " 
(Rev.  vi.  16).]  In  all  that  Paul  says,  in  the  lines  on  which  he  acts  and  proposes 
to  act,  we  see  "  Christ  speaking  in  him." 

B.  Paul  is  "  in  Christ. — 1.  He  lives  Christ's  life  over  again  :  "  Crucified  with 
Christ."  And  his  crucified  life  is  modelled  on  the  lines  of  his  Lord's ;  it  was 
"  weakness "  to  suffer  Himself  to  be  crucified ;  it  seems  to  the  wrong-doers  at 
Corinth  ^^  weakness"  in  Paul,  whom  they  may  ignore  or  defy,  that  he  does  not 
come  as  in  the  First  Epistle  he  had  said  he  would,  but  holds  his  hand  from 
executing  the  punishment  he  threatened.  [So  men  think  and  speak  of  God  and 
His  Christ  in  this  the  day  of  forbearance.  "  Weakness  !  "  "  Sentence  .  .  . 
not  executed  speedily"  (Eccles.  viii.  11).  "  Thoughtest  .  .  .  such  a  one  as 
thyself"  (Ps.  1.  21).  He  suffers  them  "  to  crucify  Him  afresh  and  put  Him  to  an 
open  shame"  ;  yet  generally  "  makes  no  sign."  Intellectual  levolt  against  His 
Divine  Authority,  heart  revolt  against  His  holy  Law ;  political  refusal  of 
recognition  of  Christian  principle  in  legislation ;  He  sits,  above  them  all, 
"  keeping  silence."  World  grows  defiant ;  Church  grows  impatient  and  fearful. 
But  no  !  Don't  misinterpret  the  weakness  !]  2.  Notwithstanding  the^  seeming; 
weakness,  behind  and  beneath  there  is  reserve  strength  in  Paul.  Comparable 
to  His  Who  even  now  "  lives  "  again — the  day  of  His  humiliation  and  "  weakness  "' 
over — through  the  power  of  God  ["  through"  for  this  raised  Him  {e.g.  Acts  ii.  33, 
V.  31,  "  by  "  and  "  at  "),  and.  dwells  in  Him,  inherent,  native,  His  own  ]  Com- 
parable to,  and  also  really  derived  from,  connected  with,  it.  **  We  shall  live  "  (in 
the  like  strength)  ^^  with  Him"  (if  we  come  to  Corinth  to  punish).  The 
executive  hand, i3  ^^ strong"  or  ''''weak"  according  as  the  whole  body,  the  whole. 


CHAP.  xm.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


man,  is  "  strong  or  "  weak."  A  twofold  reserve  in  Christ :  "  wrath  treasured  up 
against  day  of  wrath  "  (Rom.  ii.  5)  [as  if  in  a  huge  reservoir,  gathering  behind 
the  dam  of  His  forbearing,  longsuffering  mercy  in  Christ ;  to  burst  some  day 
in  sweeping,  overwhelming  might,  carrying  all  evil  away  before  it] ;  and  a  fulness 
of  '•^  the  power  of  God,''  for  tie  defence  of  His  Church  and  His  Truth,  for  the 
support  of  His  servants  in  their  conflicts,  for  the  vindication  of  the  needful 
authority  of  Church  discipline,  and  for  "bringing  forth  the  judgment"  be- 
tween Him  and  "the  world"  "unto  victory."  A  very  real  "moral"  support 
all  this  to  the  loyal,  righteous  party  in  Church  and  world.  They  may  count 
on  Him  and  His  strength.  The  day  of  His  "  weakness ''  is  really  also  a  day 
of  His  Divine  might.  3.  This  present-day  "  power "  He  would  rather  make 
remedial ;  "  weak  against  you ;  strong  in  you,  if  you  will " ;  would  rather 
^^ edify"  than  ^^  destroy."  The  one  supreme  concern  to  Paul,  to  Christ,  to  all 
who  are  responsible  for  the  government,  the  purity,  of  a  Church,  is  "  that  ye 
do  no  evil"  but  " do  that  which  is  honest."  No  Jonah-like  " anger,"  if  all  the 
threatenings  end  in  nothing,  turned  aside  by  reformation  of  Nineveh,  or 
Corinth.  "  We  are  content  to  be  '  weak,'  helpless,  on  these  conditions.  Do  you 
do  '  the  truth,'  and  then  we  can  do  nothing.  In  that  way  you  can  make  us 
*  powerless.' "  The  very  heart  and  purpose  of  God  are  seen  here  !  "  Not  willing 
that  any  should  perish,  but,"  etc.  (2  Pet.  iii.  9).  "  This  we  wish ;  Your 
perfection."     "Behold  the  Goodness  and  the  Severity  of  God"  (Eom.  xi.  22). 

C.  Reprobate  or  approved. — (See  Separate  Homily  on  ver.  5.)  1.  Can 
the  ministry  stand  its  trial,  and  the  challenge  of  friends  or  foes?  Yes,  if  the 
people  can  !  Does  Christ  speak  in  the  ministry  ?  Well,  answer  by  another 
question, — Is  Christ  in  the  people  !  And  are  they  in  the  faith  ?  A  living  Church 
is  the  best  credential  of  a  real  ministry.  2.  A  faithful  minister  will,  laudably, 
desire  to  be  evidently  "approved"  :  (1)  Before  God,  Who  knows  his  heart,  and 
observes  his  conduct,  and  tries  his  work.  (2)  In  the  knowledge  and  conscience 
of  his  brethren  and  his  people, — by  the  power  which  accompanies  his  word, 
the  immediate  success  which  crowns  his  efforts,  and  the  abiding  fruitfulness 
which  follows  them.  3.  He  will  not  allow  himself  or  his  people  to  have  their 
attention  diverted  to  other  so-called  tests:  "Good  financier";  "Capital  with 
young  people";  "See  the  numerical  increase";  "During  his  pastorate  the 
Church  has  raised  so  much,  has  spent  so  many  thousands  over  building  " ;  "  Great 
influence  in  the  city  "  ;  "  What  an  intellectual  or  wealthy  and  important  con- 
gregation gather  round  him."  All  good,  in  varying  degree ;  every  one  an 
excellence  which  may  be  laid  under  contribution  to  do  admirable  service  for 
Christ ;  all  efficient  equipments,  if  thoroughly  consecrated,  for  a  minister  of 
Christ.  Yet  they  may  only  be  ''^proofs  "  of  an  "able  "  man.  No  true  minister 
will  be  satisfied  to  gather  round  him  a  mere  aggregation  of  hearers  at  a  popular 
preaching  centre,  with  hardly  sufficient  community  of  interest  or  life  to  make 
them  a  congregation ;  and  still  less  to  gather  anything  but  a  real  Church,  whose 
members  are  by  his  ministry  being  led  to  a  life  of  which  the  secret  is  that  they 
"are  in  the  Faith"  and  that  "  Christ  is  in  them."  All  other  may  be  ^^ proofs" 
of  secular,  "  natural "  success,  unsatisfying  to  a  "  spiritual "  man,  or  to  the 
"  spiritual  "  judgment.  Perish  everything ;  even  let  him  be  accounted  "  reprobate  " 
["  a  poor  preacher  ;  ought  never  to  have  entered  the  ministry  !  "],  if  only, 
^'^  strong  "  in  Christ's  ^^  strength"  he  gather  and  train  an  "  approved"  people  ! 

HOMILETIC  ANALYSIS.— Verses  11—14. 

I.  "  Brethren !  " — After  all  he  has  had  to  rebuke,  to  threaten,  to  denounce. 
If  we  wait  for  ideal  men,  or  Churches,  shall  never  have  any  Christian  fellowship. 
In  even  the  most  imperfect  embodiment  of  the  Church  ideal,  or  the  ideal  of 

626 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    IL  CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xiii. 


Christian  manhood,  Christ  sees,  and  the  Christlike  heart  and  judgment  do  not 
undervalue  or  overlook,  possibilities  of  better  things.  Only  Death  is  hopeless  ; 
imperfect  life  may  be  healed,  trained,  perfected.  Ourselves  are  not  ideal ;  we 
need  that  other  "  brethren  "  should  be  patient  with,  helpful  of  us ;  let  us  say  and 
feel,  to  even  the  most  imperfect :  "  Brethren."  Christ  knew,  when  He  first 
accepted  them  (and  us),  and  still  knows,  whilst  He  continues  to  accept  them 
(and  us),  very  much  more  that  is  evil,  than  they  or  we  know  of  each  other  or  of 
ourselves.  How  patient  He  is  ;  remembering  what  (Corinthian)  training  has 
been,  and  (Corinthian)  surroundings  are.  Not  tolerating,  or  conniving  at,  sin  ; 
yet  not  disowning  or  casting  off*  (until  all  help  is  refused,  all  remedial  grace  spent 
in  vain)  His  "  brethren  !  "  It  will  do  us  good,  and  will  often  enable  us  to  help 
otheis  better,  to  overlook,  or  undertook,  the  Actual,  and  believe  in,  and  see,  and 
work  with,  the  Ideal  in  them.  [See  how  taking  the  best  for  granted  is 
made  to  regenerate  the  Eai  1  in  Little  Lord  Fauntleroy.^ 

II.  Yet  this  charity  to  persons  will  not  be  laxity  in  regard  to  principles. — 
The  Ideal  must  be  held  up  in  all  its  beauty — imperiously,  exactingly,  demanding 
that  we  should  "  obey  "  its  truth  (Gal.  iii.  1).  Christian  or  Church  well-being 
means  nothing  less  than,  nothing  lower  than.  Peace.  1.  A  peace  within,  in  the 
renewal  of  our  own  natures.  No  "  peace  "  without  *'  holiness  "  (cf.  1  Thess.  v.  23  ; 
He  who  *'  sanctifies"  is  "  the  God  of  peace, ^'  as  here).  "  Peace"  is  only  absolute 
when  reached  through  ^'"perfection."  [An  artist  says  that  beauty  in  his  work 
includes  and  rests  upon  a  perfect  balance  and  harmony  between  its  parts, 
nothing  jarring  or  discordant ;  corporate  unity  (so  to  speak)  is  secured  in  the 
picture.]  2.  Peace  with  the  fellow- members.  "  Be  (imperative)  of  one  mind  '* 
[men  can  choose  to  be  of  one  mind,  if  they  will,  to  a  larger  extent  than  they  do 
and  are];  "one  hope,"  the  Same  ^''Comforter"  in  them  all;  one  aim;  one 
heart.  3.  Peace  with  the  three-one  God,  through  grace,  by  love,  in  fellowship. 
There  must  be  Personal  Experience,  Unity  with  the  Church,  Fellowship  with 
God  through  His  grace.     (See  Separate  Homilies  on  ver.  14.) 

HOMILETIC  SUGGESTIONS, 

Ver.  5.  The  Faith.  examination.— [So,  in  Gal.  vi.  4,  we 

I.  "In  the  Faith"  may  come  only  have:  1.  Scrutiny  of  self;  2.  Joy  in 
to  mean  that  men  accept  the  Creed,  self;  3.  Responsibility  for  self.] 
{Fides  qucB  creditur.)  Do  not  be  satis-  Corinthians  were  ready  to  put  him  to 
fied  unless  you  are  in  the  bonds  of  the  ^^ proof "  General  rule:  More  ready 
community  whose  unity  rests  on  the  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  others  than 
Faith  which  saves  into,  and  in,  Christ.  upon  ourselves.  [Look  at  1  Cor.  xi. 
{Fides  qud  creditur,  and  more.)  31  ;  Matt.  vii.  1.]     This   ministers   to 

II.  Test  of  this  true  faith  is :  "Is  curiosity,  love  of  gossip,  tends  to  a 
Christ  in  you  ?  "  Evidenced,  to  your  subtle  self-complacency  after  compa- 
own  consciousness,  and  to  the  observa-  rison  of  others  with  ourselves.  Yet 
tion  of  others.  A.11  articles  of  the  really  the  harder  thing.  We  do  know 
Creed  centre  finally  in  Him.  Does  an  some,  if  not  all,  the  facts  about  our- 
indwelling  Christ  make  all  the  articles  selves ;  are,  or  may  be,  cognisant  of  even 
living  truths,  which  you  know  and  our  most  secret  motives,  know  all  that 
believe,  because  you  have  lived,  and  are  would  tell  against,  and  all  that  would 
Hving,  your  way  into  knowledge  and  tell  for,  us,  if  others  knew  us  so  far 
faith.  Are  they  each  verified  by  your  "  completely  "  as  we  ourselves  do. 
experience  ?  We  cannot  know  all  the  facts  about 

others.     Every  man  is  a   problem  to 
Ver.  5.  Self-examination.  himself ;  how  much  more  to  others  who 

I.  Paul's  immediate  point  is  self-     only  know  what  he  chooses  to  allow  to 

627 


CHAP.  XIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS, 


come  to  the  surface  in  character  and 
life.  Sometimes  this  scrutiny  of  others 
is  merely  one  of  many  forms  of  occupa- 
tion for  a  mind  afraid  to  begin  seriously 
to  examine  itself.  How  often  does 
fuller,  subsequent  light  show  how  use- 
less our  judgments  of  others  were,  and 
how  wrong  our  conclusions;  what  waste 
of  time  over  our  inquiry,  and  what 
waste  of  words  and  of  "  heroic  "  display 
of  virtuous  indignation  and  condemna- 
tion !  Utterly  beside  the  mark,  and 
a  great  sin  against  the  Spirit  of  Chrisfc. 
Cannot  help  knowing  many  facts  about 
others ;  cannot  help  passing  judgment 
upon,  and  drawing  conclusions  from, 
the  facts.  But  we  shall  remember  how 
incomplete  our  data,  how  imperfect 
our  methods,  how  little  we  often  are 
really  concerned  in  the  matter.  Self- 
examination  very  profitable;  mere 
curious  examination  of  others  very 
perilous  to  the  soul. 

II.  What  is  self-examination? — 
Two  words  here  found  significantly  to- 
gether :  '•'•examine"  "jorove"  (Treipd^o), 
SoKt/Aofco).  [Good  article  on  them  in 
Trench,  Syn.,  Ixxiv.]  First  is  the 
common  word  for  "  tempt,"  in  the 
original,  neutral  sense  (both  in  Greek 
and  English ;  so  in  Mai.  iii.  10,  15 
"prove  "  and  "  tempt  "  are  same  word), 
as  well  as  with  the  evil  associations 
which  have  gathered  (accidentally) 
around  it.  Second  is  the  technical 
word  in  classical  Greek  for  putting 
money  to  the  proof;  the  foundation 
idea  being  to  prove  whether  a  thing  is  * 
worthy  to  be  received  or  not.  In  New 
Testament  use,  latter  generally  imphes 
a  successful  endurance  of  the  proving, 
and,  indeed,  a  desire  and  hope  and 
purpose  on  the  part  of  the  person 
testing,  that  such  should  be  the  issue  ; 
the  former  predominantly  (evidently 
not  so  here)  suggests  endeavour  and 
hope  to  discover,  awake,  strengthen, 
existing  evil.  [Familiar  illustrations  of 
TTctpa^o)  are  :  boring  to  examine  strata, 
or  find  water  or  minerals  or  gold ; 
putting  in  the  cheese-taster  ("^as^e"  and 
*'  test  "  are  akin).  Of.  SoKt/xaCw,  which 
suggests  the  fire  and  crucible  of  the 
goldsmith,    "  the   refiner  and  purifier 

628 


of  silver  "  (Mai.  iii.  3),  to  show  purity, 
or  to  secure  it  by  removal  of  dioss  or 
alloy ;  the  periodical  Trial  of  the  Pyx 
at  the  Abbey,  Westminster ;  the  test- 
ing of  chains  or  springs  at  the  factory 
before  sending  out  for  use  ;  not  in  order 
to  discover  or  make  flaws  or  weakness, 
but  to  vindicate  soundness  or  strength.] 
Q.d.  "  Bore  down  into  your  life-strata; 
see  what  your  foundation  is,  what  store 
of  worth  and  goodness  grace  has  put 
within  you.  Try  your  quality  and 
your  gracious  *  flavour,'  *  savour.'  See 
whether  you  be  the  genuine  article, 
according  to  the  name  upon  you 
*  Christian ' ;  by  this  time  the  fine  metal, 
or  at  least  getting  purer  by  the  sanctify- 
ing effect  of  the  processes  of  Providence 
and  Life.  Try  your  strength  for  re- 
sistance and  for  weight-carrying,  for 
the  service  of  man  and  of  Christ." 

III.  Need  of  it. — 1.  Same  need,  as  in 
business,  for  going  over  stock,  balanc- 
ing moneys,  watching  wear  and  tear. 
Many  (spiritually)  trading  long  after 
insolvent.  Going  on,  keeping  up  the 
business  name :  "A.  B.,  a  man  in 
Christ";  dealt  with  by  others,  em- 
ployed in  the  Church  on  that  basis,  long 
after  original  capital — the  grace  of 
acceptance  into  Christ  and  the  Family, 
of  regeneration  after  Christ — has  been 
sinned  away  by  the  man  himself,  or 
has  been,  in  his  negligence,  stolen  away 
by  the  world,  or  by  secret,  heart  sins 
which  grieved  the  Spirit.  Constant 
wear  and  tear,  loss  and  gain,  going  on 
in  the  religious  life.  No  headway  is 
ever  made  without  perpetual,  unrelax- 
ing  effort.  [All  our  progress  is  against 
stream  ;  against  all  the  current  of  ten- 
dencies within  and  of  influences  from 
without.  Cease  rowing  vigorously; 
your  boat  slackens,  stops,  is  borne 
backward   and  downward. 

"  Non  aliter  quam  qui  adverse  vix  flumine 
lembum 
Remigiis  subigit ;  si  brachia  forte  remisit, 
Atque  ilium  in  prseceps  prono  rapit  alveus 
amni." 

—  Vlrg.,  Georg.,  J.,  201-203. 

Status  quo  is  not  maintained  with- 
out constantly  new  grace  given,  and 
constant,   watchful,    prayerful    effort. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xiil. 


Old  impressions  fade  ;  old  motives  lose 
power ;  old  vows  are  not  felt  with  old 
obligation.  Ever-wakeful  Enemy,  ready 
to  "  pounce,"  or  to  enter  by  a  long- 
disused,  almost  forgotten  entrance  of 
susceptibility  or  liability.  2.  Easier, 
more  natural,  to  lie,  like  lotus  eaters, 
idly  in  our  boat  and  drift,  not  even 
noticing  the  drift.  "  Drifting  "  the 
subtlest,  commonest  danger  of  the 
ordinary  Christian  life.  To  be  holy  or 
earnest,  even  to  maintain  one's  status 
in  Christ,  means  taking  trouble. 
No  inherent  grace ;  any  implanted 
grace  must  be  renewed  unceasingly ; 
no  possibility  of  accumulating  a  capital 
stock  of  grace  [and  then  "retiring 
from  business,"  "  living  on  the  divi- 
dends" of  the  accumulated  grace  and 
work  of  earlier  Christian  life.  Many 
seem  trying  to  do  so].  Yet  "  deceitful- 
ness  of  sin,"  indolence,  pride,  fear  to 
know  the  unwelcome,  half-suspected 
truth,  incline  a  man  to  slur  over  or  to 
avoid  altogether  any  examination  of 
present  position,  the  only  one  worth 
anything  before  God.  Liability  to 
ignorance  and  error,  dangerous  in  their 
practical  consequences,  to  be  reckoned 
with.  "  Know  ye  not  ?  "  Forgotten  1 
Not  examined  lately  1 

IV.  Methods  and  tests. — 1.  Supreme 
one  this  :  You  prove  me  to  see  whether 
Christ  speaks  through  me.  Look 
within  :  Does  Christ  dwell  in  you  ?  (cf . 
Rom.  viii.  9,  10),  i.e.  by  His  Spirit? 
Have  you  the  *'  witness  "  ?  (Rom.  viii. 
15,  16;  Gal.  iv.  6,  7).  Have  you  the 
*'  fruit  "  ?  [N-^-  one  and  indivisible ; 
not  ^^  fruits  "  ;  a  cluster  of  grapes  on  a 
branch  of  the  Vine  ;  not  so  many  in- 
dependent figs  or  apples.]  *'  The  hope  " 
(Col.  i.  27,  =  "  Christ  in  you,"  or  in- 
separable from  it).  2.  The  Word  is  an 
objective  test ;  our  memory  and  Con- 
sciousness supply  facts  on  which  Con- 
science sits  as  judge  (2  Cor  i.  12  ;  you 
need  the  objective  standard,  unaffected 
by  any  "  personal  equation  "  of  mood, 
or  prejudice,  or  bias — 1  Cor.  iv.  4,  "I 
know  nothing  against  myself,  yet," 
etc.).  Experience  will  often  interpret 
Scripture  to  a  man  ;  Scripture  will 
always  interpret  and  value  experience 


for  him.  3.  Should  be  done  with 
prayer  for  Divine  light  upon  Self  and 
Scripture.  Neither  can  be  understood 
without  the  other.  [Woollen  manu- 
facturer, examining  cloth,  wants  a  north 
window,  with  clear,  open,  steady  light ; 
brings  cloth  to  the  window.]  4.  Should 
be  done  in  solitude,  if  possible ;  soul 
alone  with  God.  The  true  and  useful 
element  in  "  retreats."  ^^  As  of  God, 
in  the  sight  of  God  speak  "  to  ourselves 
in  examining  and  judging  ourselves 
(ii.  17).  Humbling  ourselves  before 
Him  ;  holding  ourselves  ready  to  hear 
all  He  has  to  tell  us,  and  to  act  upon 
it,  following  it  in  any  direction,  to  any 
length  of  consequence.  5.  "  Any  time 
is  no  time."  Some  need  a  fixed  rule 
and  fixed  times.  Some  best  avail 
themselves  of  (say)  birthdays,  times  of 
sorrow,  or  of  blessing ;  some  of  the 
quiet  of  the  House  of  God. 

V.  There  are  dangers  attending. — 
Unwilling  heart,  or  worldly,  exagge- 
rates these  as  "reasons"  for  discon- 
tinuance. Real  danger :  lest  it  grow 
(1)  mechanical,  as  when  done  by  "a 
Method,"  with  scheduled  questions  for 
self-examination,  or,  as  to  time,  become 
a  mere  bit  of  routine,  done  without 
heart  or  earnestness ;  or  (2)  morbid, 
a  very  common  liability  to  the  most 
sensitive  souls,  of  tender,  but  not  very 
enlightened,  conscience  ;  e.g.  they  set  up 
an  impossible  standard,  not  found  in 
Scripture,  drawn  from  their  (perhaps 
mistaken)  interpretation  of  what  they 
hear  or  read  as  the  "experience"  of 
others;  forget  (as  their  profoundly 
reasonable  Lord  never  does)  the  dif- 
ferences of  temperament,  of  training, 
and  in  the  sense  of  value  of  words ; 
scourge  themselves  needlessly  because 
they  do  not  exactly  correspond  with 
their  self-imposed  standard.  Or  they 
are  distressed  because  they  do  not  see 
distinct  "  progress "  as  between  the 
examination  of  one  evening  and  that 
of  the  next.  [This  like  looking  to  see 
growth  in  child  or  plant  after  every 
few  minutes.  Rather  measuie  the 
rising  of  the  tide  after  some  little 
interval,  and  by  the  test  of  some 
definite  mark   upon   the   shore — some 

629 


CHAP.  XIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIAm. 


definite  habit  or  point  of  character ; 
e.g.  can  they  at  a  year's  end  discover 
a  manifest  increase  of  self-control  by 
grace  of  God?]  Yet  greater  danger, 
and  more  ordinary,  is  not  to  examine 
at  all.  Also,  the  broad  lines  which 
mark  and  identify  a  Christian  are 
recognisable  at  any  moment.  It  is 
also  to  himself  a  matter  of  direct  and 
immediate  knowledge  whether  or  not  a 
man  have  "  the  love  of  God  shed 
abroad  in  his  heart." 

VI.  If  we  will  not. — 1.  May  wake 
up  in  eternity  finding  ourselves  bank- 
rupts; with  no  true  foundation  on  the 
Rock.  May  be  "  reprobate "  when 
God  tests  finally,  ''^  castaway  ^^  (same 
word)  when  we  come  before  the  Judge 
hoping  for  a  crown.  2.  Short  of  this 
extreme  issue,  the  Adversary  will  do 
his  "  trying,"  with  his  evil  intention. 
Not  to  *'  tempt  "  ourselves  (so  literally) 
invites  him  to  "tempt"  us.  3.  Also 
God  must  put  us  to  proof,  finally  using 
"fire"  (1  Cor.  iii.  12,  8oKt/xa^w)  upon 
work  whose  quality  we  would  not  our- 
selves test ;  sending,  before  that,  many 
sharp  providences  which  are  the  acids 
and  other  reagents  of  His  Divine 
chemistry,  to  test  or  purify  what, 
though  sadly  alloyed,  is  really  gold. 
(As  Apelles,  Critical  Notes.)  ["  Deus 
tentat,  ut  doceat;  diabolus,  ut  deci- 
piat "  (Augustine).  "  Da,  Domine,  ut 
per  tentationem  probemur,  non  repro- 
bemur  "  (Abelard,  on  Lord's  Prayer).] 

Ver.  8.  Nothing  against,  Everything 
for,  the  Truth. 

I.  1.  Paul's  immediate  meaning. — 
"  Corinthians  who  can  endure  the  self- 
applied,  or  God-applied,  tests ;  who 
have  *  come  forth  as  gold  '  when  tried, 
'  true '  according  to  standard,  have 
nothing  to  fear  from  me.  My  Apostolic 
power  is  for  '  building  up  '  (ver.  10). 
My  work,  my  Master's  design,  is  con- 
structive, not  destructive.  If  I  do 
*  destroy '  (*  cast  down,'  R.V.),  it  is 
only  to  prepare  for  construction.  I 
am  a  helper  of  all  good  men  ;  it  is  their 
fault  if  I  seem  against  evil  ones." 
Every  minister  should  so  bear  himself 
amongst  his  people  that  they  feel  this ; 

630 


he  should  plainly  be  to  them  a  rallying- 
point  and  a  support  of  "  true  "  men  and 
women,  whoever  may  "  bear  hard  upon  " 
them.  They  should  feel  that  he  will 
never,  at  any  rate  in  intention,  frown 
upon,  or  discourage,  persons,  character, 
work,  that  are  ^Hrue."  Will  help  it, 
sympathise  with  it,  encourage  it,  guide 
it,  train  it,  but  never  check  it.  God 
and  Truth  ai  e  on  the  same  side.  The 
Pastor  and  Truth  should  be  on  the  same 
side,  too.  2.  Rise  higher.  "  We  are  of 
the  truth ;  "  therefore  even  the  Law 
of  the  True  God  will  not  condemn,  but 
justify,  us.  [Justification  is  pardon  in 
conformity  to  the  requirements  of  the 
Christ-satisfied  law.]  "  Law  not  made 
for — does  not  lie  against — a  righteous 
man "  (1  Tim.  i.  9).  We  were  by 
nature  false  to  God's  ideal  of  manhood, 
and  in  life  a  living  negation  of  His 
righteous  requirement.  In  Him  Who 
is  "  the  Truth  "  we  are  beins^  brought 
into  fuller  and  fuller  accord  with  the 
Law  of  Righteousness — being  made 
"  true.''  In  the  Day  of  Christ  the 
very  Law  will  say,  "  /  can  do  nothing 
against  the  truth,  but  for  the  truth.'' 

II.  Principle  so  stated  as  to  be  of 
wide,  general  application. — 1.  True 
of  truth  in  art,  natural  science,  every 
embodiment  of  the  true.  There  are 
fashions  in  music  or  form ;  there  is  the 
music,  the  painting,  the  poetry  of  an 
fige,  and  of  that  only.  Author,  painter, 
composer,  each  hits  the  fancy  of  his 
age,  because  he  wears  its  "  dress  "  and 
speaks  its  thought  in  its  dialect.  All 
this  passes  away  with  the  age,  or  the 
country  for  there  are  localisms  in  all 
these  fields  of  work.  Out  of  every 
country,  and  every  land,  out  of  every 
true  artist's  work,  there  emerges  for 
permanent  survival  at  least  one  thing 
that  survives  because  it  is  of  no  one 
age  or  country  or  individual.  It  is 
universal,  true.  New  fashions  come 
and  go,  but  they  can  "  do  nothing 
against "  these  slowly  emerging,  accu- 
mulating masterpieces,  which  command 
the  allegiance  and  growing  admiration 
of  all  qualified  to  judge,  age  after  age. 
Time  can  do  nothing  against  them.  So 
in  our  knowledge  of  the  natural  world. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xiii. 


Hypotheses  and  theories  are  exalted 
or  hardened  into  the  dogmas  of  a 
century  (or  of  a  decade).  Hastily 
formed,  too  eagerly  accepted  ]  the 
acceptance  itself  being  a  fashion,  or 
a  "  craze."  They  are  challenged  in 
their  turn,  discredited  (perhaps  unduly, 
and  without  discrimination),  succeeded 
by  others  as  crudely  true  or  altogether 
baseless.  Or,  more  often,  are  modified 
substantially,  as  new  facts  reward  close 
observation.  (Hardly  any  entirely 
baseless  hypothesis  ever  gets  wide, 
even  though  temporary,  acceptance; 
generally  it  is  a  stammering  endeavour 
to  speak  out  "  truth  "  ;  a  blunderingly 
tentative  groping  after  truth,  stretching 
blind  hands  into  darkness,  grasping 
mingled  truth  and  error.)  After,  and 
out  of,  challenge,  discussion,  modifica- 
tion, rejection ;  out  of  too  eager  triumph 
of  opponents,  too  hasty  fears  of  sup- 
porters ;  whatever  is  truth  emerges ; 
a  growing  corpus  of  ascertained  truth 
accumulates.  Nothing  that  was  really 
true  perished  in  the  process  ;  the 
accidental,  the  experimental  which  did 
not  stand  verification,  the  temporary, 
the  idiosyncrasy  of  the  observer  or  the 
theory-maker,  passed,  and  left  Truth. 
Could  do  nothing  against  it ;  indeed, 
all  worked  for  it.  Christian  should 
remember  this,  even  when  Science  or 
some  scientists  may  seem  arrogantly, 
aggressively,  perilously  antagonistic  to 
Hevelation.  Christian  can  do  nothing 
against  what  is  true  in  Science ;  Science 
also  can  do  nothing  against  what  is 
true  in  Religion.  2.  Note  this  last. 
The  lesson  of  the  experience  of  the 
ages.  The  Bible  emerges  from  the 
special  attack  of  each  century  with 
undiminished,  increased  authority  and 
acceptance.  Whatever  is  Truth  in  its 
statements  about  God  or  man,  or  the 
relations  between  them,  emerges  age 
after  age,  with  a  new  claim  to  accept- 
ance in  the  very  fact  of  its  newest 
survival.  In  any  new  challenge  of 
even  the  historicity  of  the  record,  the 
presumption  derived  from  the  past 
is  that  "  as  the  last  time,  only 
more  so,"  will  again  be  the  end  of 
the  battle.     Each  new  century  sees  it 


win  the  allegiance  of  a  new  set  of 
hearts.  Human  hearts  say,  "  That 
book  is  true ;  it  finds  me  ;  it  is  a  key 
whose  correspondence  with  my  heart 
and  the  facts  of  my  life,  argues  that  it 
was  made  to  unlock  me."  Kepeatedly 
has  attack  upon  historical  details  only 
ended  in  new  verification,  perh'aps  at 
that  very  point.  Unfair  treatment ; 
unwise,  untenable  defence  of  it  by  too 
hasty  friends  ;  open  attack  of  enemies ; 
subtle  or  traitorous  assault ;  have — as 
matter  of  fact — never  done  anything 
against  the  Truth  as  embodied  in 
Bible ;  have  all  worked  for  the  Truth. 
So  the  great  doctrines  of  Christianity 
emerge  time  after  time  unharmed  from 
the  fiery  testing  of  inquiry  and  assault. 
They  take  temporary  fashions  of  state- 
ment, adapted  to  the  need  or  to  the 
assault  of  their  time  or  age ;  now  one, 
now  another,  aspect  of  them  needs 
emphasis;  always  with  the  peril  of  undue 
emphasis,  and  of  discrediting,  or  decry- 
ing the  complementary  aspects,  seen 
and  needed  by  other  Churches  or  ages 
or  men.  Every  Church  creed  or 
confession  gains  something,  loses  some- 
thing, after  every  controversy.  Truth, 
as  God  sees  and  knows  it,  loses  nothing, 
always  gains.  God  is  taking  care  of 
the  Truth.  All  truth  of  every  kind 
is  of  Him.  [With  deep  significance, 
worth  expanding,  one  may  borrow,  and 
say :]  "  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her  ;  she 
shall  not  be  moved."  Often  we  can  do 
nothing  but  "  stand  still  and  know  that 
He  is  God,"  as  we  see  Him  taking  the 
defence  of  Truth  out  of  the  hand  of 
the  Church,  or  of  a  (sectional)  Church, 
and  Himself  vindicating  it.  Enemies 
and  friends  may  say :  ^^  We  can  do 
nothing  against, ^^  etc.  [May  borrow 
again,  with  no  remote  connection,] 
"  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  " 
the  Truth  of  God,  as  a  whole,  and  for 
every  partial  embodiment  of  it.  Pre- 
eminently true  of  Him  Who  is  The 
Truth.  "  Whosoever  shall  fall  upon 
this  Stone  "  (by  way  of  assault)  "  shall 
be  broken."  Ps.  ii.  shows  dramatically 
God  and  His  Anointed  sitting  above 
the  tumult  of  revolt,  and  "  laughing." 
"  Yet — yet— I  have  set  My  King,"  etc. 

631 


CHAP.  XIII.    HOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY:   II.   CORINTHIANS. 


This  shall  be  the  issue  of  the  last  and  assailable.  (Les  ApdtreSf  Introd.)      So 

most   daring   endeavour  against   Him  Emerson,  in  his  dialect,   says :   "  The 

(2  Thess.  ii.  8,  9).     "  Magna  est  Veritas  World-spirit  is  a  good  swimmer,  and 

— artistic,  scientific.  Biblical,  dogmatic,  storms  and  waves  cannot  drown  him."] 
Christ  —  et    prcevalebit."       [(1)    This 

conviction   always    is    a    strong    pre-  Ver.  11.  ^^  The  God  of  peace." — The 

sumption,   fairly   based   on   the    past,  names  of   God   in   Paul's  prayers  are 

(2)  It   is    also  rooted   in    the    reason  never  chosen  at  random — however  true 

of    the   thing.     Whatever   is   part   of  in  themselves — but  always  with  a  close 

God's   Truth,    in   any   special    aspect,  relation  of  appropriateness  to  the  bless- 

may  be   overlaid,   disfigured,   by  tem-  ing  asked  or  the  work  He  does.    So  here, 

porary  accretions,  or  erroneous  addi-  What  a  name  !     No  heathen  divinity 

tions,  by  the  mistake,  or  the  enmity,  ever  wore,  or  at  any  rate  deserved  to 

or  the  misjudged,  misdirected  support  wear,  it.     God  of  Truth,  of  Power,  of 

of  an  Age,  a  Church,  a  Man  ;  but  it  is  Holiness,  of  Peace. 

there,  and  will  survive,  to  stand  clear  I.  Characteristic  of  His  very  being. 

when  all  of  temporary  has  disappeared.  — '*  Internal,"  absolute   harmony   and 

[Cf.  Egyptian  temples  surviving,  and  rest,  because  of  absolute  holiness.    The 

standing  clear  of,  the  less  permanent  *'  peaceful  "  God.     [God  could  not  give 

domestic    edifices    once    built    around  His  peace  to,  or  plant  it  within,  an 

them.       Man    goes,    cities    go ;    they  unholy  nature.     Circumstances  are  not 

stand.]    3.  Whatever  meets  the  peren-  the  root-disquiet  of  our  life ;  our  own 

nial    need    of     man's    intellect,    con-  hearts  and  their  pride,  or  selfishness, 

science,    heart  —  especially    those    of  etc.,  give  us  all  our  real  trouble.] 

sinful    men  —  vindicates    itself    anew  II.    He   loves    peace. — [Profoundly 

perennially,   as   having   Truth    in    it.  significant   that    we   "  like "   what   is 

E.g.  freedom  of  will ;  sense  of  Sin  (no  *'  like  "  us.]     He  is  grieved  at,  and  can 

mere    passing   or   personal    access    of  hardly  "  be  with,"  a   Church   that   is 

emotion) ;  existence  of  a  Creator  and  not  '*  of  one  mind." 

Moral  Governor ;  the  objective  value  of  III.  He  works  for  peace. — All  the 

Prayer ;  an  objective  efiiciency  in  the  drift  of  His  providential  and  redemp- 

death   of   Christ   to   procure   pardon  ;  tive  government  of  the  world  tends  to. 

Vicarious  Sacrifice ;  possibiHty  of  falling  aims  at,  this.     The  Gift  of  Christ  is 

finally ;  all  these,  and  others,  may  have  the  supreme  witness  to  His  heart  in 

their    temporary,    local,    ecclesiastical,  this   respect.     [So  the   ^^peacemakers" 

imperfect  way  of  being  stated.     They  are    pre-eminently    "  the    children   of 

may  be  unwisely  defended.     But  they  God,"   the   Great   Peacemaker   (Matt. 

meet,  under  all  the  varying  fashions  of  v.  9).] 

statement,  the  need  of  the  universal  IV.  He  gives  peace  :  to  our  hearts 

heart  in  man.     They  have  their  root  by  the  Atonement  of  His  Son,  and  by 

deep   in   the   instincts  and  conscience  the   Work   of   His   Spirit.     It  is  the 

of  universal  man.    They  "  are  of  God,"  "peace  of  God  "  which  is   to   "  guard 

and   cannot   be  overthrown  (Acts.  v.  heart     and     thoughts     through    Christ 

38,    39).     They  are   Truth.]     [Renan  Jesus"  (Phil.  iv.  7,  R.V.). 
avows :   "  Quant  au  vrai   Dieu  de  la 

conscience    humaine,    celui-lct    est    in-  Ver.  11.  "  JBe  perfected." — Prayer  for 

attaquable.     II  a  sa  raison  d'etre  dans  restoration  to  corporate  perfectness. 

une   foi   invincible   et    non    dans    les  I.    Negatively.  —  Perfect    recovery 

raisonnements    plus    ou    moins    inge-  which   would   result  from  "  not  doing 

nieux."     Similarly  he  does  not  consider  evil,"  "  doing  what  is  honest  "  (ver.  7). 

religion    "une    duperie    subjective   de  The   vices   which   infected  Corinthian 

notre   nature,"   but    believes    "  qu'elle  Church  exhibit  in  epitome  those  which 

repond     k     une     realite     exterieure."  have  been  the  bane  of  the  Church  of 

Therefore  Religion   also  is  really  un-  Christ  generally  from  the  beginning. 

632 


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xiii. 


(1)  Fundamental  disorder  was  rebellion  liabilities,  in  Divine  service  :  To  take 
against  the  supreme  authority  of  the  away  its  simplicity,  and  discern  in  the 
Divine  Revealer  and  the  Divine  In-  ordinances  more  than  they  have  to 
spirer  and  their  Apostolic  representa-  show  ;  to  rob  everything  external  and 
tive.  Paul's  aim  is  "  to  bring  .  .  .  symbolical  of  its  true  value,  and  re- 
into  captivity"  etc.  (2  Cor.  x.  5).  His  duce  religious  ceremonial  to  the  level 
final  appeal,  in  the  hearing  not  only  of  of  mere  human  arrangement.  Both 
Corinthians,  but  of  Christendom  to  equally  distant  from  Church  ^'' perfec- 
the  end  of  the  world,  is  "  we  have  the  tion."  (4)  Closely  connected  is  the 
mind  of  Christ"  (1  Cor.  ii.  16).  The  spirit  of  faction.  He  sets  no  limit 
Scriptures  of  revelation  contain  this,  to  his  righteous  indignation  against 
Rebellion  against  Paul — against  these  the  disturbers  of  the  unity  of  the 
Scriptures — is  a  virtual  rejection  of  Church.  The  first  paragraphs  of  the 
Christianity.  "  As  a  principle  in  the  First  Epistle  and  the  last  in  the  Second 
individual,  this  is  fatal  to  religious  Epistle  unite  in  this.  The  strong  re- 
stability  and  growth.  As  a  principle  ferences  to  his  severity  as  the  minister 
in  the  Church,  it  is  the  root  of  all  of  the  Saviour's  wrath  .  .  .  explained 
disorganisation  ;  and  it  must  be  put  by  his  resentment  at  this  deadly  sin. 
away,  with  all  its  forms  of  manifesta-  (5)  Violation  of  Christian  morality.  In 
tion,  before  the  community  bearing  xii.  there  is  obvious  reference  to  those 
the   name   of    Christ   can   put  on  its  two  classes  of  moral  offence  from  which 

*  perfection.'  '*  (2)  A  direct  result  of  vii.  1  exhorted  them  to  cleanse  them- 
(1), — a  lax  maintenance  o/*some  of  the  selves.  Sins  "  of  the  spirit  "  are  summed 
vital  doctrines  of  the  Christian  con-  up  here  (xii.  20)  more  completely  than 
fession."  [^.^.  in  1  Cor.  xv.,  with  its  anywhere  else;  and  hei-e  only  as 
bearing  upon  the  Atonement,  and  the  marking  the  conduct  of  professing 
whole  basis  of  Christian  hope  and  Christians.  The  true,  only  means  of 
salvation.]  *'  It  was  not  without  recovery  were  neutralised  by  infidelity 
reference  to  corruptions  of  doctrine  and  the  haughty  spirit  of  nationalism, 
that  the  dejected  Apostle  expressed  II.  Perfection  positively  considered, 
his  fear  (xii.  20).  His  vehement  desire  — His  good  wish  is  not  to  be  limited  to 
to  preserve  them  '  a  chaste  virgin  to  the  removal  of  the  **  evil "  marring 
Christ '  (xi.  2-4),  undefiled  by  doctrinal  ^^ perfection'' ',  he  longed  for  their 
error,  as  he  himself  explains  its  attainment  of  all  the  completeness  that 
meaning,  gives  a  peculiar  tremulousness  may  belong  to  a  Church.  Note  the 
and  tumult  to  his  diction.  .  .  .  The  wonderful  fact  that  such  a  Church 
integrity  of  their  faith  was  in  his  should  be  thought  capable  of  perfect 
thought  when  he  '  prayed  that  they  amendment,  a  restoration  to  soundness 
might  be  perfect '  "  [Jas.  i.  4,  a  good  not  at  some  distant  time,  but  as  it  were 
equivalent  of  the  word].  (3)  '■^Neglect  immediately,  and  by  an  energetic 
and  irreverence  in  the  Divine  service  co-operation  with  Divine  grace.  .  .  . 
invariably  follow  hard  upon  laxity  of  Certain  it  is  that  for  a  season  the 
doctrine."  Disorganisation  in  worship  Corinthian  Church  enjoyed  great  pro- 
...  to  an  extreme  almost  inconceiv-  sperity.  1.  The  bond  of  Church  per- 
able  by  us ;  the  supper  of  the  Lord  fectness  is  ...  a  compact  organisation 
so  desecrated  as  to  call  down  upon  vivified  and  kept  in  living  unity  by 
the  Church  such  visitations  as  sickness  the  Holy  Spirit.  One  regimen  and 
and  death.  Second  Epistle  shows  "  the  discipline  ;  factions  suppressed,  divisions 
same  leaven  at  work  in  other  direc-  abolished ;  all  the  Corinthian  Christian 
tions  ;  and  the  final  prayer  included  sections  one  corporate  body.  To-day, 
the  removal  of  the  spirit  of  disorder  whilst  recognising  the  great  divisions 
and   the   observance   of   all   that  was  of   Christendom,    each   section   should 

*  honourable.'  "  Two  kinds  of  dis-  cultivate  this  unity  within  itself. 
honour    are   actualities,   or   perpetual  Perfection     means     that     lawlessness 

633 


CHAP.  XIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS. 


within     a     Church,     and     bitterness 
toward    other     Churches,     are    gone. 
2.    A   certain    standard   of    perfection 
even     in     order     of    ivorship.       This 
not    unattainable,    or    of    slight    im- 
portance.      3.  "  Perfection  "     includes 
a    noble    theory    of    mutual    help    in 
the   Christian  fellowship.     Corinthian 
Epistles  a  complete  depository  of  the 
social  principles  of  Christianity,  and  of 
the  preceptive  details  of  its  system  of 
mutual  edification.     This  the  purpose 
and  beauty  of  chap,  xiii.,   "  Charity.^' 
"  Every  member  of  the  body  must  in 
his   vocation   and   stewardship  render 
back    to     Christianity     all     that     in 
Christianity  he  receives,  and   give   to 
the  community  the  fullest  advantage 
of  whatever  talent  he  as  an  individual 
may  possess.    ...    A  perfection  not 
attainable  by  the  community  on  earth, 
but  the  nearer  the  approach  to  this, 
the  nearer  the  Church  to  tlie  realisation 
of  its  calling.  .  .  .  No  Apostolical  test  of 
^  perfectness^  in  the  Church  community 
more  easily  applied,  or  more  generally 
forgotten."        4.    High     standard     of 
morality.       "  The    Church    that    does 
not  prosecute  to  [ecclesiastical]  death 
every  capital  offence  against  its  purity 
is  very  far  from  ^  perfection.^     But  the 
more    effectual    discipline    is   a    high 
standard  in  the  common  sentiment  of 
the  people  through  the  sedulous  instruc- 
tion of  the  ministry."     5.  Strong  spirit 
of  charity   in   the    community.     Note 
the  fulness  of   detail,   and   the   great 
interest,  Paul  gives  to  the  "  collection." 
The   "  corporate "  is  only  worked   out 
through    the    ^''personal." — Condensed 
from  Pope,  ^^  Prayers  of  St.  PaulJ^  vii. 

Yer.  14.  Final  Benediction. — In 
homiletic  use  the  stress  may  either  be 
laid  upon  the  threefold  grace  invoked, 
or  upon  the  personal  names  and  their 
theological  suggestions.  Accordingly 
two  lines  of  treatment  are  suggested. 

I.  1.  Verse  like  a  coin  which  often 
needs  calling  in  and  reminting,  in  our 
thought  and  heart.  In  constant, 
current  use,  much  of  the  clearness  and 
sharpness  of  the  impression  upon  it, 
and  something  of  the  weight  and  value, 

634 


are  worn  away  and  lost.     We  tend  to 
use  it  also  without  much  thought ;  as 
we  pass  a   coin  from  hand  to   hand, 
without  very  distinctly  adverting  to  its 
pattern  or  value.      2.    An  important 
text   in    point   of   doctrine    (see   next 
homily).       This    and    the    baptismal 
formula   are   the  two  most  definitely 
orderly  statements  of  what  little  we 
know  [and  perhaps  could  he  told\  about 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  of  Persons 
in  the  Oneness  of  the  Nature  of  God. 
[They  are  lamps  in  our  hand  flashing 
light  backward  upon,  and  downward 
into,  obscurities  in  the  Old  Testament, 
which  otherwise  must  have  remained 
dark.]      Many   texts   guard    us   from 
thinking  of   three  or  of  many  Gods; 
these  two  gather  up  into  a  focus  rays 
of  teaching  found  scattered  and  separate 
elsewhere,  and  give  us  three  personal 
names',    equal,  or   their   co-ordination 
here  would  be  blasphemous ;   Divine, 
for  each  is  here  prayed  to  to  give  His 
characteristic   blessing;  and   yet.   One 
standing  mysteriously^?'s^  amongst  three 
eqvxils,  as  if  having  Godhead  so  pecu- 
liarly His  own,  that   He  is  specially 
called  not  "  the  Father,"  but  *'God." 

II.  Christ's  gift,  grace. — 1.  Bearing 
in  mind  the  close  connection  always 
found  between  the  doctrine  of  Trinity 
and  the  life  of  the  soul,  it  is  easy  to  see 
why  "  grace  "  specially  associated  with 
Christ.      We   might,  we  do,  call    the 
love  of  the  Father  grace,  for  it  is  free, 
unmerited  favour  to  sinners  who  only 
deserved  penalty  and  "wrath."      We 
do  call  the  "  communion  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  "  grace.     We  might,  with  pro- 
priety, speak  equally  freely  of  the  love 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  communion 
with,  and  in,  the  Son  or  the  Father. 
2.  But  Paul,  like  John  (i.  17),  specially 
associates  grace  with  Christ.     A  double 
antithesis  in  John  (loc.  cit.) ;  not  only 
between   grace    under    Christ    taking 
the   place   of   law   under    Moses,   but 
between    "was   given"    and    "came." 
Moses  only  "  gave,"  he  did  not  make, 
nor   do  more   than   hand  on,  as  any 
other   man    appointed    ad  hoc   might 
have    done,    what     he    had    received 
from  God.     But  grace,  though  origi- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    IT,   CORINTHIANS,   chap.  xiii. 


nating  in  the  Father's  **  good  will  to 
man,"  in  as  true  a  sense  sprung  from 
the  Son's  tender  compassion  for  our 
lost  and  unhappy  case.  He  did  not 
simply  convey,  He  wrought  grace,  as 
only  He  could  have  wrought.  Moses 
was  not  indispensable  to  the  Law ; 
Christ  is  indispensable  to  Grace.  3. 
Sin  meant  alienation,  separation,  an- 
tagonism. Christ  reconciled,  bridged 
the  gulf,  made  peace.  To  appreciate 
His  grace,  suppose  Him  and  His  whole 
work  eliminated  from  the  conditions  of 
man's  life  as  related  to  a  holy  God. 
There  must  have  been  despairing 
certainty  of  wrath,  instead  of  hope; 
helplessness,  instead  of  moral  power, 
which  is  from  its  earliest  beginnings, 
through  all  its  growth  and  activities, 
to  its  perfection,  a  thing  entirely  a  gift 
ah  extra,  grace.  To  Him  we  owe  days 
of  grace,  in  a  kingdom  of  grace,  a  life 
in  an  atmosphere  of  grace.  He  is  pre- 
eminently the  Lord  and  Giver  of  Grace. 
4.  Peculiar  emphasis  of  blessing  in  all 
this  to  the  ex-Israelite,  Paul,  remem- 
beiing,  and  sympathetically  under- 
standing, his  Israelite  biethren's  case 
under  the  yoke  of  the  law.  "  Good 
news  for  you  weary  and  heavy  laden 
men  of  Israel.  A  yoke  and  a  burden 
for  you  still,  indeed,  easy  and  light. 
Rest  to  your  souls  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
the  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  in  His 
grace."  [This  is  the  primary  connection 
of  thought  between  Matt.  xi.  28,  and 
the  preceding  part  of  chapter.]  5.  For 
Gentiles,  slaves  of  their  sins,  haunted 
by  conscience,  fearing  the  worst  in 
regard  to  the  unknown,  dark  future, 
morally  impotent  and  condemning 
vainly  their  own  impotence,  he  had  no 
higher  wish  than  :  "  I  pray  that  Jesus 
Christ  may  show  you,  in  all  their 
fullest  reach,  all  the  possibilities  of  His 
Gospel  of  grace ;  that  they  may  be  the 
elements  of  your  habitual  life.  Power, 
perfect  and  continuous ;  peace,  perfect 
and  undoubted  ;  holiness,  perfect  and 
continuously  growing,  till  grace  merges 
in,  broadens  into,  glory." 

III.  The  Father's  gift,  love.— 1.  Ob- 
serve the  significant,  necessary  order. 
The  "  grace  of  ...  ,  [then]  the  love 


of,"  etc.  Picture  broad  valley  lying^ 
parched,  scorched,  beneath  fierce  sun- 
lays  of  weeks  of  unclouded,  unbroken, 
midsummer  weather.  Picture  high  up 
in  hills  at  head  of  valley  huge  reservoir, 
full  of  water,  which  would  save  ard 
fertilise  all  below.  But  no  outlet ; 
dam  is  strong  ;  doors  are  closed  ;  waters 
cannot  flow.  "  Thy  love  unknown  has 
broken  every  barrier  down,  .  .  .  O 
,  Lamb  of  God."  Illustration  so  far  ap- 
plicable as  this,  that  though,  naturally 
and  unhindered,  the  "  gravitation  "  of 
that  love  would  have  meant  an  eager 
outpouring  of  itself  down  to  our  level, 
the  full  heart  of  God  could  only  (so  the 
matter  is  revealed  to  us)  empty  its 
fulness  upon  a  perishing,  dying  world 
through  the  work  of  Christ,  which 
broke  down  the  twofold  "  dam,"  of 
God's  holiness  and  law,  and  of  man's  sin. 
Now,  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  love  of  God,  in  all  its 
Divine  fulness,  may  flow  down  in  free 
unstinted  abundance  into  our  needy  ^ 
life.  2.  Now :  "  May  God  give  you 
the  wealth,  the  honour,  of  His  love  in 
all  its  lavish  fulness,  according  to  your 
need,  *  according  to  His  riches ' ;  His 
love  in  every  form  that  it  can  assume 
or  that  you  may  require  that  it  shall, — 
comfort,  or  rebuke,  or  guidance,  or 
relief  in  difficulty,  or  solution  of  per- 
plexities. God  puts  Himself,  in  all 
that  His  love  can  be  or  do,  at  the  call  of 
your  necessity,  to  bring  all  He  has  into 
operation  for  your  welfare,  if  need  be." 
[Paul  says,  ''My  God"  (Phil.  iv.  19).] 
The  soul  may  say :  "  All  He  has,  and 
is,  is  mine.  Beyond  the  love  I  had 
from  Him  when  I  was  forgetful  and 
rebellious,  I  have  the  love  of  God." 

IV.  1.  The  "  grace,"  and  the  "  love," 
are  personal  blessings ;  a  man  may  enjoy 
them  alone.  The  Spirit's  gift,  fellow- 
ship, reminds  of  a  brotherhood  in  the 
love  of  God,  a  common  sharing  in  the 
grace  of  Christ ;  no  selfish  isolation  in 
the  heritage  of  blessing.  2.  This  is  more 
than  a  prayer  that  all  fellow -Christians 
may  share  together  in  the  gifts  and 
graces  of  the  Spirit.  Not  merely  are 
they  persons  who  have  received  the  like 
gifts  and  blessings ;  not  merely  children 

635 


t^ 


CHAP.  xiii.    BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   It.   CORINTHIANS. 


sitting  at  same  table,  enjoying  each  a 
like  portion  ;  the  bond  is  closer.  All 
Paul's  and  Christ's  teaching  about  the 
unity  of  the  branches  of  a  vine,  the 
limbs  and  parts  of  a  body,  all  is  in  con- 
centrated implication  in  this  :  "  The 
communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
"  The  selfsame  Spirit  who  is  in  me  is 
Himself  also  in  you.  You  and  I  are 
members  of  the  same  '  Christ,'  each  of 
us  alive,  not  with  a  similar  life, — even 
exactly  similar, — but  with  one  and  the 
same  Life -giver,  thrilling  in  you,  stir- 
ring in  me.  [When  your  light  shines, 
and  mine,  it  is  not  as  in  old  days  of 
candles  and  lamps,  each  a  co-ordinate, 
independent  source  of  precisely  similar 
light,  but  as  now,  when  the  basis  of 
the  light-giving  is  concurrently  derived 
from  one  common  reservoir  and  source, 
one  common  element  distributing  itself 
into  each  of  us,  without  division  of 
itself.  (Illustration  to  be  used  with 
caution  in  presentation.)]  If  further, 
e.g.,  you  love  souls  and  I  love  them,  it 
is  the  manifestation  and  working  of 
the  same  Holy  Ghost,  and  consequently 
the  same  '  love  in  the  Spirit '  (Col.  i.  8).'^ 
3.  Happy  fellowship,  closer,  and  bind- 
ing closer,  than  common  interests, 
temperaments,  sympathies,  tastes,  affec- 
tions, blood,  so  that  they  who  have  it 
are  really  nearer  to  strangers  who  have 
it,  than  to  their  very  kin  if  these  have  it 
not.  Wonderful  the  common  under- 
standing it  sets  up,  and  the  oneness 
of  instinct,  love,  purpose.  He  creates 
amongst  these  in  each  and  all  of  whom 
He  dwells.  4.  What  a  remedy  for 
Corinthian  factions,  jealousies  ;  for  all 
class  or  social  divisions  in  any  Church. 
Hand  cunnot  hurt,  and  must  help, 
hand  in  the  same  body.  Foot  and  head 
must  feel  and  work  together  for  each 
other's  life  and  good.  5.  In  a  family  no 
unity  Uke  this  ;  no  such  bond,  no  other 
absolutely  secure  bond  between  husband 
and  wife,  parents  and  children,  em- 
ployers and  servants,  but  this  common 
sharing  in  the  indwelHng  of  the  same 
Holy  Ghost.  6.  Amidst  all  "  conditions 
of  membership,"  whether  proposed  or 
actually  employed,  this  is  to  be  pre- 
supposed.    It  underlies  all.     It  over- 

636 


rides  all  other  methods  of  Church 
discipUne.  He  is  admitted  into  the 
Church  who  has  a  part  in  the  fellow- 
ship ;  he  is  automatically  excluded  who 
loses  it ;  however  the  imperfectly 
accurate,  imperfectly  administered,  ar- 
rangements of  any  particular  Church 
may  affect  him. 

Or  thus  :  the  occasion  of  a  Homily 
upon  The  Trinity  and  Redemption. 

I.  Why  do  men  hold  the  doctrine  ? 
— Because  we  believe  it.  We  believe  it 
because  we  find  it  in  the  Bible.  It  is, 
on  our  part,  entirely  a  case  of  Faith 
in  what,  in  the  other,  is  a  matter  of 
pure  Kevelation.  But  for  the  Bible 
we  should  know  nothing  about  the 
question.  We  know  nothing  of  it 
except  what  we  find  in  the  Bible.  No 
man  can  be  expected  to  receive  it  to 
whom  the  Bible  is  no  final  authority. 
No  man  can  be  compelled  to  believe  it  to 
whom  the  Bible  is  not  supreme.  No 
argument  can  be  held  at  all,  unless  on 
the  common  understanding  that  the 
disputants  are  not  to  go  behind  the 
Bible.  The  question  is  always,  not 
"  What  thinkest  thou  ?  "  but,  "  What 
readest  thou  ?  What  does  the  Book — 
God,  through  the  Book — say?  "  [And, 
Do  read.  Do  not  take  beliefs  on 
authority.  And  do  not  take  doubts 
on  authority,  either !  Be  neither  a 
believer  nor  a  sceptic,  merely  as 
relying  on  some  human  teacher.] 

II.  What  do  wehold?— 1.  First,  we 
find  the  Bible  very  express  in  the 
sense  :  "  One  God,  one  only."  The  Old 
Testament  made  "  Hear,  O  Israel,  the 
Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord  "  (Deut.  vi.  4), 
the  creed  of  an  Israelite.  To  this  day 
it  is  nearly  the  first  lesson  in  the 
instruction  of  a  Jewish  child.  In  the 
midst  of  a  world  given, up  to  multiplying 
its  gods — and  degrading  itself  and  them, 
as  they  were  multiplied — very  nobly, 
in  its  later  history  particularly,  did 
Israel  uphold  that  truth  as  its  testi- 
mony. It  is  the  emphasised  part  of 
the  whole  truth  in  the  Old  Testament. 
In  this  the  Old  Testament  bore  its 
witness  against  Israel  itself.  When 
the  world's  danger  was  polytheism,  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   CORINTHIANS,    chap.  xiii. 


when  Israel  itself  was  always  ready  to 
descend  to  idolatry,  this  was  the  side 
of  the  truth  which  needed  prominence 
and  emphasis.  2.  This  Old  Testament 
testimony  has  never  been  withdrawn 
or  qualified.  When  we  come  to  the 
New  Testament  we  find  just  as 
clearly  its  doctrine,  "  To  us  .  .  .  one 
God,"  etc.  (viii.  6).  Yet  in  our 
text  it  is  the  same  Paul  who  has 
given  to  the  Church  of  Christ  its 
benediction,  beneath  whose  sweet  spell 
the  child  is  baptized,  the  Christian 
man  and  woman  are  wedded,  the  dead 
are  buried,  the  assembly  for  Christian 
worship  is  dismissed.  This  verse, 
with  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  gives  the  most 
complete  and  explicit  summary  form 
of  the  Bible  doctrine.  3.  In  the  clearer 
light  of  the  New  Testament  we  see 
that  Old  Testament  believers  mainly 
knew  God  in  Him  Whom  we  call  "  the 
Father,"  now  that  we  have  seen  and 
known  "  the  Son."  And,  in  fact,  three 
names  have  come  into  view,  "  Father, 
Son,  Holy  Spirit."  Three^  not  more, 
not  fewer.  Here  they  stand  all,  side 
by  side.  They  were  for  the  first  time 
ranged  thus  in  significant  co-ordination 
when  Jesus  spoke  the  words  above 
quoted  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  What  are 
we  to  think  of  them  ?  God  ;  a  man  ; 
an  influence,  which  is  not  even  a 
person  1  Is  that  likely  ?  Or  possible  ? 
Or  are  we  to  think  of  the  third  as 
"  personal,"  as  really  as  the  first  and 
second  ?  And  the  second  and  third, 
are  they  as  truly  Divine  as  the  first  ? 
A  believer  in  "  the  Trinity  "  thinks  he 
finds  this  Book  often  speaking  of  each  of 
the  three  as  we  speak  of  other  personal 
names,  and  as  we  speak  of  the  Divine 
Person  Whom  we  call  "  the  Father." 
Not  always :  but  a  good  reason  can 
in  every  instance  be  found  for  that. 
4.  So,  then,  here  is  the  fact :  From  end 
to  end  this  Book  says,  *'  One  God  ;  one 
only  "  ;  whilst  more  and  more  clearly  as 
the  revelation  draws  near  to  its  close, 
there  emerge  three  Names,  each  a 
person,  each  God.  Questions  start  up  ; 
speculations  multiply ;  a  child  can  see 
difficulties  ;  every  responsible  teacher  of 
the  doctrine  has  had  to  see  and  discuss 


every  one  of  them.  His  position  is 
that  he  bows  before  this  Book,  with 
its  two  groups  of  statements.  Without 
it  he  knows  nothing ;  with  it  he  does 
not  know  much,  but  he  knows  that 
much.  5.  "  Do  not  understand  their 
relations  to  each  other  ?  "  Nor  does 
the  believer  in  the  doctrine.  But  he 
finds  express  statements,  and  teach- 
ings by  the  help  of  mutually  sup- 
plementary, mutually  complementary 
analogies,  which  make  it  reasonable  to 
say  :  "  Begotten  of  the  Father,"  "  Pro- 
ceeding from  the  Father  (and  the 
Son)."  Imperfect  expressions,  and 
needing  guarding  and  qualifying  ex- 
position;  all  very  obvious  to  criticism. 
But  they  have  emerged  from  the 
controversies  of  the  early  centuries, 
surviving  because  found  on  the  whole 
the  fittest.  "  Person,"  e.g.j  is  con- 
fessedly a  very  imperfect  summary 
expression  of  the  facts  it  is  connected 
with.  But  where  we  find  a  personal 
name,  self-knowledge,  and  a  will  which 
can  will  and  can  do  as  it  will, — the  best 
word  we  have  is  "  person,"  though  not 
in  this  particular  case  perfectly  appli- 
cable all  round.  6.  Very  many  of  our 
creed  statements  are  only  negations  of 
assertions  which  overstate  one  aspect 
of  the  whole  Truth,  or  which  omit  to 
take  into  account  some  group  of  Scrip- 
ture sayings  or  facts.  "  You  make 
three  Gods  1  "  No  ;  for  Scripture  which 
reveals  the  Three,  insists  also  upon  the 
One.  "  One  person,  and  that  one  He 
Whom  in  the  flesh  we  know  as  Jesus 
Christ,"  says  the  Swedenborgian  form 
of  the  old  Sabellianism,  varying  from 
its  ancient  model  in  making  the 
Second,  and  not  the  First  of  the  Three, 
that  of  which  the  others  are  aspects 
or  relational  presentations.  No ;  for 
He  says,  *'  The  Comforter,  Whom  the 
Father  will  send  in  My  name,"  as  one 
person  may  speak  of  two  others,  not 
himself.  The  heart  of  the  matter  is 
there. 

III.  Why  do  we  care  to  hold  the 
doctrine? — "What  does  it  matter?" 
1.  Generally,  it  may  be  said  that 
Scripture  never  tells  us  anything  as 
matter  of  mere  correct  doctrine,  and 

637 


CHAP.  XIII.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   CORINTHIANS. 


of  right  information ;  but  always  so 
much,  and  in  such  a  manner,  as  may 
be  of  practical  service  to  our  spiritual 
life.  2.  The  doctrine  under  notice  is 
bound  up  most  closely  with  {a)  our 
distinctively  Christian  Worship,  and 
(6)  our  Christian  Experience,  {a)  The 
Mahometan  and  the  Jew  come  in  wor- 
ship to  our  one  God.  The  latter  will  not 
have  our  Mediator ;  the  former  accepts 
one  who  is  (he  thinks)  a  prophet  come 
from  God  to  reveal  His  will,  but  who 
is  no  priest  to  go  in  for  him  to  God  to 
make  atonement  for  sin.  The  Scheme 
of  Christian  Worship  is :  "  Through 
the  Son  we  have  our  access  by  one 
Spirit  unto  the  Father."  Isaiah 
and  John  both  heard  the  threefold 
note  in  the  heavenly  worship  (Isa.  vi. ; 
Rev.  iv.) ;  earthly  and  heavenly 
worship  agree  in  this.  The  old  con- 
gregations were  dismissed  with  a  three- 
fold blessing  (Num.  vi.  24-26)  ;  as 
our  text  has  for  ages  been  the  best 
formula  whose  lingering  sound  may 
die  away  last  of  all  that  has  been 
said,  into  silence  and  peace,  when  a 
Christian  congregation  breaks  up,  and 
departs  to  suffering,  service,  life. 
(6)  1.  The  most  nearly  external  and 
relative  initiation  into  the  Christian 
life  is  stamped  with  the  Name — three, 
and  one  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  And  if 
the  doctrine  be  not  true,  our  Mediator 
is  only  a  creature,  perhaps  only  a 
man ;  our  Sanctifier  is  only  a  figure 
of  speech,  the  creation  of  our  poetical 
faculty.  2.  But,  most  of  all,  it  is 
not  upon  a  text  here  or  there  that 
the  doctrine  rests.  The  three  names 
pervade,  permeate,  give  form  and 
colour  to,  whole  passages  of  the 
Epistles.  Look  for  them,  and  we  find 
all  the  experimental  work  and  language 
of  the  New  Testament  wrought  with 
their  golden  thread  running  through 
all.  3.  Nearly  all  the  statements 
culled  out,  and  urged  against  the 
doctrine,  are  explained  by  this  fact :  We 
are  told  next  to  nothing  as  to  what,  in 


the  inner  being  of  God  and  i  the  manner 
of  His  existence,  lies  behind  these 
three  names,  and  the  analogies  which 
indicate  or  suggest  the  relations 
between  them  ;  everything  is  exhibited 
in  connection  with  the  working  out 
of  Eedemption.  With  the  slightest 
exceptions  we  only  see  the  gracious 
work  in  process :  "  Let  us  make  man 
anew  in  Our  image."  "  The  Son  says, 
'  The  Father  is  greater  than  I.' "  So 
He  is,  in  the  same  sense  as  a  son, 
admitted  by  his  father  into  a  sub- 
sidiary partnership  in  his  father's  work, 
must  say  it;  because  so  far  as  he 
is  acting  under  orders,  to  that  extent 
he  is  only  an  employe  of  his  father. 
As  to  manhood  and  manhood,  father 
and  son  are  equal.  As  between 
senior,  managing  partner,  and  junior, 
executant  partner;  the  father  is 
greater  than  the  son.  As  to  Godhead 
and  Godhead,  Father  and  Son  are 
equals ;  as  executant  of  *'  not  His 
own  will  [independently,  or  possibly 
divergently]  but  the  will  of  Him  Who 
sent  Him,"  and  as  effectuating  our 
Redemption,  the  Son  yields  precedence 
to  the  Father.  And  the  Spirit  reveals 
Himself  more  clearly  in,  and  to,  the 
soul  He  sanctifies,  than  He  does  in 
those  Scriptures  where  His  self- 
suppressing  work  is  to  exhibit  and 
glorify  Christ.  We  scarcely  know 
anything  of  the  Trinity  except  as 
active  in  the  work  of  Human  Redemp- 
tion. 4.  Our  salvation,  therefore, 
and  our  experimental  life  depend 
most  intimately  upon,  and  are  most 
closely  interwoven  with,  the  specific 
ofiices  of  each  '*  Person  "  of  the  Trinity. 
Our  experimental  life  is  full  of  the 
Trinity.  Experiment  shows  that,  as 
a  rule,  the  doctrine  has  maintained, 
and  been  associated  with,  the  fullest, 
freshest,  most  widely  accepted  hym- 
nology,  devotional  literature,  and 
religious  life.  For  that  reason,  as 
well  as  for  its  truth,  does  the  Church 
ca/re  to  hold  the  doctrine. 


638 


INDEX. 


[Note  :  H  =  Homily  ;  I.  =  Illustration ;  N.  =  Homiletic  Note.] 


Abiding  in  calling,  H.  1  Cor.  167 
Abounding,  grace,  H.  2  Cor.  568 
Absent,  present  and,  H.  2  Cor.  624 
Absolution,  pastor's,  H.  2  Cor.  414 
Abusing  it,  as  not,  H.  1  Cor.  169 
According  to  that  a  man  Lath,  H.  2  Cor.  559  ; 
I.  2  Cor.  562 
to  the  Scriptures,  H.  1  Cor.  342 
to  their  works,  H.  2  Cor.  608 
Act,  sub-final,  in  drama  of  human  history, 

H.  1  Cor.  356 
Adams,  two,  H.  1  Cor.  337 
Advantageth,  what,  it  me  ?  H.  1  Cor.  356 
Adversaries,  manj',  H.  1  Cor.  375 
Affliction,  comfort  and,  H.  2  Cor.  381 

in,  resurrection  of  Christ,  H.  2  Cor.  474 
After-gifts,  God's,  measure  of,  H.  2  Cor.  571 
'Ayairri,  N.  1  Cor.  301 

Agents,  weakness  of,  contributes  to  further- 
ance of  gospel,  H.  2  Cor.  473 
Ages,  ends  of,  H.  1  Cor.  232 
All  died,  then,  N.  2  Cor.  509 

does  death  end  ?  H.  1  Cor.  331 
of  grace,  H  1  Cor.  355 
things.   He   hath    put,   under  His  feet, 
N.  1  Cor.  358 
temperate  in,  H.  1  Cor.  205 
yours,  H.  1  Cor.  93,  98 
to  glory  of  God,  H.  1  Cor.  232 
All-enduring  and  invincible,  love,  H.  1  Cor. 

276 
All-important     and      indispensable,      love, 

H.  1  Cor.  275 
All-outlasting  and  immortal,  H.  1  Cor.  277 
Ambassador's  appeal,  H.  2  Cor.  512 

credentials,  H.  2  Cor.  514 
Ambassadors,    work    and     outer     life     of, 

H.  2  Cor.  512 
Amen,  N.  1  Cor.  317 

Christ,  Yea  and,  H.  2  Cor.  394 
Ancient  piece  of  history  lighting  up  modern 

question  of  conduct,  H.  1  Cor.  214 
Angels  and  men,  judging,  N.  1  Cor.  156 

because  of,  N.  1  Cor.  235 
Animal,   development   of,  from  its  embryo, 

I.  1  Cor.  353 
Answer,  God's,  to  world's  inquiry,  H.  1  Cor.  40 
Antinomianism,  I.  1  Cor.  202 


Apollos  and  Timothy,  H.  1  Cor.  365 

Paul,  God,  H.  1  Cor.  84 
Apostle,  N.  1  Cor.  184 

inner  life  of,  H.  2  Cor.  458 

outer  life  of,  H.  2  Cor.  468 
Apostle's  peril,  H.  1  Cor.  208 

word  confirmed  by  oath,  H.  2  Cor,  407 
Apostolical  service,  openness  of,  N.  2  Cor.  452 
Appeal,  ambassador's,  H.  2  Cor.  512 

God's,  to  soul,  H.  2  Cor.  620 
Appeals,  fatherly,  H.  1  Cor.  109 
Approved  ministers  of  God,  H.  2  Cor.  529 

or  reprobate,  H.  2  Cor.  626 
Asleep,  fallen,  H,  1  Cor.  354 
Aspects  of  gospel   ministry,  manward  and 

Godward,  H.  2  Cor.  425 
Assize,  great,  Christ's,  H.  2  Cor.  507 
Attention,  wandering  of,  H.  2  Cor.  587 
Authority,  ministerial,  a  reality,  H.  2  Cor. 

589 
Away,  old  things  passed,  H.  2  Cor.  498 

Babes  in  Christ,  H,  1  Cor.  81 

Balances,   knowledge   weighed    in,    against 

love,  H,  1  Cor.  178 
Baptism  over- valued,  H.  1  Cor.  25 
Benediction,  H.  1  Cor.  371 

final,  H,  2  Cor.  634 
Benefit,  H,  2  Cor.  406 
Better  than  best,  H.  1  Cor,  271 
Bible-reading,  Easter,  H.  1  Cor.  321 
Blessing,  cup  of,  N.  1  Cor.  212 

twofold,  H.  1  Cor.  17 
Boasted,  N.  1  Cor.  135 
Boasting  dogmatism,  H.  2  Cor.  600 
Bodily  members,  interdependence  of,  H.  1  Cor. 
262 
serviceableness  of,  H   1  Cor.  264 
Body,  God  giveth  it  a,  H,  1  Cor.  350 

of  Christ,  H,  1  Cor.  268 

parable  of,  N.  1  Cor.  254 

sacredness  of,  N.  1  Cor.  157 

unity  of,  H.  1  Cor,  257 
Bond  of  fellowship,  twofold,  H.  1  Cor.  15 
Books,  mind  what,  you  read,  H.  1  Cor,  349 
Brass,  triple,  shield  of,  H.  2  Cor.  630 
Brethren,  H.  2  Cor.  626 
Building  of  God,  N.  2  Cor.  475 

639 


INDEX. 


Building  upon  foundation,  H.  1  Cor.  90 
Burdened,  groaning  being,  I.  2  Cor.  478 
Burdens  and  labour,  strength  for,  1.  2  Cor. 
479 

Call,  twofold,  H.  1  Cor.  11 
Calling,  abiding  in,  H.  1  Cor.  167 
Campaign,  Paul  going  on,  H.  2  Cor.  576 
Captives;  incense;  triumph,  H.  2  Cor.  419; 

N.  2  Cor.  408 
Care,    minister's,     for     his     own   salvation, 

H.  1  Cor.  194 
Carnal,  N.  1  Cor.  80 
Castaway,  I.  1  Cor.  195 
Categories,  two,  H.  1  Cor.  337 
Causes  of  ignorance,  H.  1  Cor.  74 
Celibacy  and  marriage,  H.  1  Cor.  160 
Character  of  Corinth,  proverbial,  N.  1  Cor.  6 
Charity,    Christian,    H.    1    Cor.    275,    300; 

N.  1  Cor  301,  302 
Charities  without  love,  I.  1  Cor.  283 
Childhood  and  manhood,  H.  1  Cor.  292 
Children,  father  is  model  for  his,  I.  1  Cor. 

110 
Christ  and  Father,  H.  1  Cor.  19 

babes  in,  H.  1  Cor.  81 

body  of,  H.  1  Cor.  268 

cross  of,  H.  1  Cor.  37 

espoused  to,  H.  2  Cor.  607 

first  fact  of  unseen  world,  I.  2  Cor.  482 

future  full  of.  H.  1  Cor.  22 

historical,  and  Christian  idea,  I.  2  Cor.  439 

Jesus,  new  creature  in,  H.  2  Cor.  496,  509  ; 
N.  2  Cor.  510 

knowing,  after  flesh,  H.  2  Cor.  492 

living  to,  undesigned  illustrations  of, 
H.  1  Cor.  377 

man  in,  new  man,  H.  2  Cor.  487,  509 

mind  of,  H.  1  Cor.  78 

no  neutrality  in  presence  of,  1.  1  Cor.  370 

our  Passover,  H.  1  Cor.  134 

our  Wisdom,  Kighteousness,  Sanctifica- 
tion.  Redemption,  H.  1  Cor.  45,  49,  50 ; 
N.  1  Cor.  52 

past  full  of,  H.  1  Cor.  21 

poor,  yet  making  many  rich,  H.  2  Cor.  556 

present  full  of,  H.  1  Cor.  21 

resurrection  of,  comfort  in  affliction, 
H.  2  Cor.  474 

through,  to  Godward,  H.  2  Cor.  473 

to  Paul  to  write  was,  H.  1  Cor.  20 

victory  of,  over  thought,  H.  2  Cor.  583, 
588 

Yea  and  Amen,  H.  2  Cor.  394 
Christ's,  being,  H.  2  Cor.  588 

gift— grace,  H.  2  Cor.  634 

great  assize,  H.  2  Cor.  507 

triumph,  Paul  in  train  of,  H.  2  Cor.  417 
Christian  and  litigation,  H.  1  Cor.  138 

charity,  H.  1  Cor.  275,  300  ;  N.  1  Cor.  301 

Church,  public  worship  in,  H.  1  Cor.  305 

communism,  true,  Corinthian  Church  and, 
H.  2  Cor.  552 

courtesy,  H.  2  Cor.  563 

directory  of  relative  duties  in  household 
life,  H.  1  Cor.  163 

640 


Christian  expediency,  H.  1  Cor.  149 
giving,  H.  2  Cor.  559,  565 
idea,  historical  Christ  and,  I.  2  Cor.  439 
liberty,  H.  1  Cor.  160,  163 

and  Law,  H.  2  Cor.  442,  445,  447,  449 
life,    our,    perpetual    Passover-keeping, 

H.  1  Cor.  134 
man's  promises,  H.  2  Cor.  406 
purposing,  H.  1  Cor.  363 
steadfastness   of  purpose,    H.  2   Cor. 
406 
ministry,  H.  2  Cor.  381 

glory  of,  H.  2  Cor.  450 
monotheism,  H.  1  Cor.  180 
name  for  death,  H.  1  Cor.  354 
order,  salutary,  H.  1  Cor.  306 
progress,  H.  1  Cor.  206 
reproach,  H.  2  Cor.  585 
warfare — its    conditions,    foes,  weapons, 
H.  2  Cor.  585,  586 
Christian's  obligation  to  holv  life,  H.  1  Cor. 
155 
Passover  lamb,  1. 1  Cor.  130;  N.  1  Cor.  135 
social  intercourse,  H.  1  Cor.  230 
Christianity  is  liberty,  H.  1  Cor.  142 

self-sufficiency   of,   to    fulfil  its  mission, 
H.  2  Cor.  583 
Church  and  of  God,  judgment  of,  H.  1  Cor. 
135 
at  Corinth,  sermon  to,  H.  1  Cor.  275 
Christian,   public  worship   in,  H.  1   Cor. 

305 
Corinthian,     and     true     Christian    com- 
munism, H.  2  Cor.  552 
discipline  of,  H.  1  Cor.  127 
dishonour  of,  H.  1  Cor.  126 
duty  of,  towards  its  Lord,  H.  1  Cor.  129 

towards  world,  H.  1  Cor.  132 
happiness  of,  H.  2  Cor.  381 
in  Corinth  :  a  wonder,  H.  1  Cor.  32 
on  earth  :  a  wonder,  H.  1  Cor.  32 
purification  of,  H.  2  Cor.  535 
Churches,  Macedonian,  H.  2  Cor.  548 
Circumcision  and   uncircumcision,   indiffer- 
ence of,  H.  1  Cor.  166 
Citizens  of  kingdom  of  God,  two  features  in 

life  of,  H.  2  Cor.  405 
Collection,  concerning  the,  H.  1    Cor.  361 ; 

N.  1  Cor.  359 
Comfort  and  affliction,  H.  2  Cor.  381 

in  affliction,  resurrection   of    Christ,   H. 

2  Cor.  474 
upon  comfort ;   sorrow  upon  sorrow,    H. 
2  Cor.  532  ;  L  2  Cor.  545 
Coming ;  end,  N.  1  Cor.  357,  358 
Commandment,  permission  and,  I.  1  Cor.  171 
Commendation,  letters  of,  N.  2  Cor.  426 
Common  sequence,  H.  2  Cor.  608 
Communications,  evil,  corrupt  good  manners, 

H.  1  Cor.  346 
Communion,  N.  1   Cor.  236 ;  H.  1  Cor.  245, 

248 ;  L  1  Cor.  253 
Communism,    true     Christian,     Corinthian 

Church  and,  H.  2  Cor.  552 
Company,  mind  what,  you  keep,  H.  1  Cor., 
347 


INDEX. 


Compensations  of  life,  H.  I  Cor.  271 
Concerning  the  collection,  H.    1   Cor.  361  • 

N.  1  Cor.  359 
Condemnation,  ministry  of,  H.  2  Cor.  450 
Conduct,  modern  question  of,  ancient  piece 

of  history  lighting  up,  H.  1  Cor.  214 
Confessions,  Paul's,  H.  2  Cor.  576 
Conflict,  H.  1  Cor.  194 

of  faith  with  undue  exaltation  of  intellect, 
H.  2  Cor.  582 
Conformity  by  gazing,  H.  2  Cor.  450 
Connection  and  contrast,  H.  2  Cor.  470 
Conscience,  H.  2  Cor.  891 
rights  of,  H.  1  Cor.  183 
testimony  of  our,  H.  2  Cor.  405 
Constraining  love,  I.  2  Cor.  507 ;  N.  2  Cor. 

510 
Contrast  and  connection,  H.  2  Cor.  470 

great,  H.  1  Cor.  155 
Contrasts,  three,  H.  1  Cor.  363 
Corinth,  Church  in :  a  wonder,  H.  1  Cor.  32 
of,  sermon  to,  H.  1  Cor.  275 
Paul's  visits  to,  I.  1  Cor.  2 
proverbial  character  of,  N.  1  Cor.  6 
Corinthian  Church,  and  true  Christian  com- 
munism, H.  2  Cor.  552 
Corrupted,  Word  is,  H  2  Cor.  425 
Corruptible,  this,  and  this  mortal,  H.  1  Cor. 

337 
Counsels,     six    earnest,    on    race     of    life, 

H.  1  Cor.  210 
Counterpart  facts  of  life,  two,  H.  2  Cor.  381 
Courage,  true,  philosophy  of,  H.  2  Cor.  507 
Courtesy,  Christian,  H.  2  Cor.  563 
Covenant,  I.  1  Cor.  251 

new,  ministers  of,  H.  2  Cor.  441 
Co-workers,  H.  1  Cor.  84 
Creation-history,  Divine  goal  of,   H.  1  Cor. 

333 
Creature,  new.  in  Christ  Jesas,  H.  2  Cor.  496, 

509  ;  N.  2  Cor.  510 
Credentials,  ambassador's,  H.  2  Cor.  514 
Criticism,  Paul  meeting,  H.  2  Cor.  387 
Cross  and  its  victory,  N.  1  Cor.  51,  52 
kenosis  of,  H.  1  Cor.  34 
of  Christ,  H.  1  Cor.  37 
preaching  of,  H.  1  Cor.  37 
summary  of  gospel  preaching,  H.  1  Cor. 
39 
Crowned,  H.  1  Cor.  195 
Cup  of  blessing,  N.  1  Cor.  212 

Daily,  I  die,  H.  1  Cor.  356 
Dangers,  unrecorded,  H.  2  Cor.  385 
Deadly  letter ;  life-giving  Spirit,  H.  2  Cor.  435 
Death  and  deliverance,  H,  2  Cor.  385 

Christian  name  for,  H.  1  Cor.  354 

does,  end  all  ?  H.  1  Cor.  331 

is  yours,  H.  1  Cor.  98 

sleep  of,  H.  1  Cor.  355  . 
Defile  and  destroy,  N.  1  Cor.  81,  93 
Deliverance,  death  and,  H.  2  Cor.  385 

God  of,  H.  2  Cor.  389 
Deliverances,  unrecorded,  H.  2  Cor.  385 
Delusion ;   inclusion ;   exclusion,   H.    1  Cor. 
155 


Demonstration  of   Spirit,  H.  1  Cor.  68  ;   N. 

1  Cor.  54 
Design    and    origin   of   human   differences, 

H.  1  Cor.  118 
Destroy  and  defile,  N.  1  Cor.  81,  93 
Development,  human,  H.  1  Cor.  300 

of  animal  from  its  embryo,  I.  1  Cor.  353 
Devils,  N.  1  Cor.  213 
Die,  when  will  you  ?  H.  1  Cor.  356 
Died,  then  all,  N.  2  Cor.  509 
Diiferences,  human,  their  origin  and  design, 

H.  1  Cor.  118 
Directory,   Christian,    of  relative   duties   in 

household  life,  H.  1  Cor.  163 
Discipline,  fatherly,  H.  1  Cor.  109 
of  Church,  H.  1  Cor.  127 
Paul  exercising,  H.  2  Cor.  412 
Dishonour  of  Church,  H.  1  Cor.  126 
Dispensation   of    Spirit,    liberty  from   Law 

under,  H.  2  Cor.  449 
Disposed  to  go  .  .  .  eat,  if  ye  be,  H.  1  Cor. 

230 
Diversity  of  gifts  and  oflSces,  H.  1  Cor.  255 
Divine  goal  of  creation  history,  H.  1  Cor.  333 
Dogma  and  religion,  I.  2  Cor.  439 
Dogmatism,  boasting,  H.  2  Cor.  600 
Door,  great  and  effectual,  H.  1  Cor.  375 

open,  Paul  turning  away  from,  H.  2  Cor. 

415 
opened,  H.  1  Cor.  371 
Drama   of   human  history,  sub-final  act  in, 

H.  1  Cor.  356 
Duty  of  Church  towards  its  Lord,  H.  1  Cor. 
129 
towards  world,  H.  1  Cor.  132 
triumph;  theology,  H.  1  Cor.  340 
Duties,  relative,  in  household  life.  Christian 

directory  of,  H.  1  Cor.  163 
Dying  daily,  H.  1  Cor.  356 

Eaely  account  of  gospel,  H.  1  Cor.  328 
Earnest    counsels,    six,    on     race    of     life, 

H.  1  Cor.  210 
Earth,  Church  on,  a  wonder,  H.  1  Cor.  32 
Earthen  vessels,  treasure  in,  H.  2  Cor.  468 
Easter  Bible-reading,  H.  1  Cor.  321 
Eat,  and  eat  not,  H.  1  Cor.  232 
Edification,  H.  1  Cor.  312 
Effectual,  great  door  and,  H.  1  Cor.  375 
Embryo,  development   of   animal    from  its, 

I.  1  Cor.  353 
End ;  coming,  N.  1  Cor.  357,  358 
Ends  of  ages,  H.  1  Cor.  232 
Enthusiasm  without  love,  I.  1  Cor.  283 
Environment,  I.  1  Cor.  119 
Epistle,  was  there,  lost  ?  N.  1  Cor.  4, 125,  574 
Epistles,  living,  H.  2  Cor.  450 
Equity,  principles  of,  H.  1  Cor.  210 
Espoused  to  Christ,  H.  2  Cor.  607 
Estate  and  title,  our,  H.  1  Cor.  93 
Evangelist,  Paul,  H.  1  Cor.  324 
Everything     for,     nothing     against,     truth, 

H.  2  Cor.  630 
Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners 

H.  1  Cor.  346 
good  springing  out  of,  H.  1  Cor.  241 


TT 


641 


INDEX. 


Evil,  leaven  of,  N.  1  Cor.  359 

mingling  with  good,  H.  1  Cor.  240 
moral  and  physical,  H.  1  Cor.  253 
thinketh  no,  H.  1  Cor.  285 

Exaltation   of  intellect,   undue,   conflict   of 
faith  with,  H.  2  Cor.  582 

Exalted,  God  alone  must  be,  H.  1  Cor.  26 

Example,  Paul  as,  H.  1  Cor.  210 

Exclusion ;  inclusion ;  delusion,  H.  1  Cor.  155 

Executions,  three,  I.  1  Cor.  37 

Expediency,  Christian,  H.  1  Cor.  149 
worldly,  H.  1  Cor.  151 

Facts  of  life,  two  counterpart,  H.  2  Cor. 
381 

two  worlds  of,  H.  1  Cor.  58 
Faith  and  prayer,  narrow,  rebuked,  H.  2  Cor. 
569 

conflict    of,    with  undue    exaltation    of 
intellect,  H.  2  Cor.  582 

holiness,  repentance,  B,  1  Cor.  134 

hope,  and  love,  N.  1  Cor.  302 

the,  H.  2  Cor.  627 

versus  sight,  H.  2  Cor.  489 
Faithful,  God  is,  H.  1  Cor.  48 

stewardship,  H.  1  Cor.  116 
Fallen  asleep,  H.  1  Cor.  354 
False  and  real  kings,  H.  1  Cor.  106 

prophets,  N.  1  Cor.  272 
Familiar  idolatries,  I.  1  Cor.  227 
Farther,  thus  far,  no !  H.  1  Cor.  222 
Father  and  Christ,  H.  1  Cor.  19 

is  model  for  his  children,  I.  1  Cor.  110 
Father's  gift— love,  H.  2  Cor.  635 
Fatherly  appeals,  H.  1  Cor.  109 

discipline,  H.  1  Cor.  109 
Features,  two,  in  life  of  citizens  of  kingdom 

of  God,  H.  2  Cor.  405 
Feet,   He  hath   put  all  things  under   His, 

N.  1  Cor.  358 
Fellow-deputies,   Titus  and  his,   H.  2  Cor. 

554 
Fellowship-Spirit's  gift,  H.  2  Cor.  635 

twofold  bond  of,  H.  1  Cor.  15 
Final  benediction,  H.  2  Cor.  634 
Finding  God,  seeking  and,  H.  1  Cor.  40 
Fire,  by,  N.  1  Cor.  99 

God's  vengeance  by,  I.  1  Cor.  100 

work  tried  by,  H.  1  Cor.  87 
First  fact  of  unseen  world  is  Christ,  I.  2  Cor. 

482 
Flee  from  idolatry,  H.  1  Cor.  224 
Flesh,  knowing  Christ  after,  H.  2  Cor.  492 

thorn  in,  H.  2  Cor.  614  ;  N.  2  Cor.  611 
Foes  and  friends,  H.  1  Cor.  368 
Foolishness  of   preaching,    H.    1    Cor.    27 ; 

N.  1  Cor.  50 
For  your  sakes,  H.  2  Cor.  474 
Fornication — great  sin,  H.  1  Cor.  143 
Foundation,  building  upon,  H.  1  Cor.  90 
Fourfold  grace  of  Spirit,  H.  2  Cor.  397 
Freedom,  H.  1  Cor.  191 

of  Spirit,  H.  2  Cor.  442,  445,  447,  449 
Friends  and  foes,  H.  1  Cor.  368 
Furtherance  of  gospel,  weakness  of  agents 
contributes  to,  H.  2  Cor.  473 

642 


Future  and  present  houses,  our,  H.  2  Cor. 
507 
full  of  Christ,  H.  1  Cor.  22 
looking  into,  H.  2  Cor.  477 

Gazing,  conformity  by,  H.  2  Cor.  450 
German  legend,  parable  in,  I.  1  Cor.  97 
Gift,  God's  unspeakable,  H.  2  Cor.  570,  572 

of  tongues,  N.  1  Cor.  273 
Gifts  and  offices,  diversity  of,  H.  1  Cor.  255 
Giving  and  gift,  God's,  our  model  and  motive, 
H.  2  Cor.  567 

Christian,  H.  2  Cor.  559,  565 

narrow,  rebuked,  H.  2  Cor.  568 
Glorious  and  more  glorious,  H.  2  Cor.  434 
Glory  of  Christian  ministry,  H.  2  Cor.  450 

of  God,  H.  2  Cor.  467 
all  to,  H.  1  Cor.  232 

true,  picture  of,  H.  2  Cor.  451 
Goal  of  creation-history,  Divine,  H.  1  Cor. 

333 
God,  all  to  glory  of,  H.  1  Cor.  232 

alone  must  be  exalted,  H.  1  Cor.  26 

approved  ministers  of,  H.  2  Cor.  529 

building  of,  N.  2  Cor.  475 

citizens  of  kingdom  of,  two  features  in 
life  of,  H.  2  Cor.  405 

giveth  it  a  body,  H.  1  Cor.  350 

glory  of,  H.  2  Cor.  467 

is  faithful,  H.  1  Cor.  48 

judgment  of  Church  and  of,  H.  1  Cor.  135 

kingdom  of,  H.  1  Cor.  140 

law  of,  H.  1  Cor.  210 

living,  temple  of,  H.  2  Cor.  516,  531 

of  deliverance,  H.  2  Cor.  389 

of  peace,  H.  2  Cor.  632 

of  this  world,  H.  2  Cor.  473 

Paul ;  Apollos,  H.  1  Cor.  84 

Plato's,  N.  1  Cor.  45 

promises  of,  H.  2  Cor.  394 

seeking,  N.  1  Cor.  50 

and  finding,  H.  1  Cor.  40 

speaking,  H.  2  Cor.  529 

temple  of,  H.  1  Cor.  91 ;  N.  1  Cor.  81, 100 

temples  of,  H.  1  Cor.  153 
God's  after-gifts,  measure  of,  H.  2  Cor.  571 

answer  to  world's  inquiry,  H.  1  Cor.  40 

appeal  to  soul,  H.  2  Cor.  620 

giving  and  gift  our  model  and  motive, 
H.  2  Cor.  567 

government,  great  principle  of,  H.  1  Cor. 
26 

promises,  N.  2  Cor.  545 

unspeakable  Gift,  H.  2  Cor.  570,  572 

vengeance  by  fire,  I.  1  Cor.  100 
Godlike,  greatest  because,  H.  1  Cor.  295 
Godward   and   manward   aspects   of    gospel 
ministry,  H.  2  Cor.  425 

through  Christ  to,  H.  2  Cor.  473 
Good,  evil  mingling  with,  H,  1  Cor.  210 

manners,   evil  communications    corrupt, 
H.  1  Cor.  346 

springing  out  of  evil,  H.  1  Cor.  241 

works  without  love,  I.  1  Cor.  283 
Goodness,  unconscious,  H.  2  Cor.  451 
Gospel  did  for  woman,  what,  H.  1  Cor.  314 


INDEX. 


Gospel,  early  account  of,  H.  1  Cor.  328 

furtherance  of,  weakness  of  agents  con- 
tributes to,  H.  2  Cor.  475 

hindering,  H.  1  Cor.  197,  198 

intolerance  of,  I.  1  Cor.  370 

ministry,  manward  and  Godward  aspects 
of,  H.  2  Cor.  425 

open,  H.  2  Cor.  454 

order,  principle  of  law  under,  H.  1  Cor.  199 

Paul  and,  H.  1  Cor.  324 

preaching,  cross  summary  of,  H.  1  Cor.  39 

veiling,  H.  2  Cor.  465 

woe  if  I  preach  not !  H.  1  Cor.  202,  210 
Government,     God's,     great     principle     of, 

H.  1  Cor.  26 
Grace,  H.  2  Cor.  406 

abounding,  H.  2  Cor.  568 

all  of,  H.  1  Cor.  355 

and  peace,  H.  1  Cor.  17 

Christ's  gift,  H.  2  Cor.  634 

great,  perils  of,  H.  2  Cor.  617 

of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  H.  2  Cor.  550 

of  spirit,  fourfold,  H.  2  Cor.  397 
Great  assize,  Christ's,  H.  2  Cor.  507 

contrast,  H.  1  Cor.  155 

grace,  perils  of,  H.  2  Cor.  617 

honour,  H.  1  Cor.  143 

obligation,  H.  1  Cor.  146 

principle,  H.  1  Cor.  142 

of  God's  government,  H.  1  Cor.  26 

Proprietor,  H.  1  Cor.  232 

ransom,  H.  1  Cor.  145 

sin— fornication,  H.  1  Cor.  143 
Greatest  because  Godlike,  H.  1  Cor.  295 
Groaning,  being  burdened,  I.  2  Cor.  478 

Happiness  of  Church,  H.  2  Cor.  381 

He  hath  put  all    things    under    His   feet, 

N.  1  Cor.  358 
Heathenism,  victory  of  cross  over,  N.  1  Cor. 

52 
Heaven,  third,  N.  2  Cor.  609 
Heresy  and  schism,  N.  1  Cor.  273 
Hindering  gospel,  H.  1  Cor.  197,  198 
Historical  Christ  and  Christian  idea,  I.  2  Cor. 

439 
History,  ancient  piece  of,  lighting  up  modern 
question  of  conduct,  H.  1  Cor.  214 
human,  sub-final  act  in  drama  of,  H.  1  Cor. 
356 
Holiness,  repentance,  faith,  H.  1  Cor.  134 

twofold,  H.  1  Cor.  13 
Holy  kiss,  N.  1  Cor.  360 

life,  Christian's  obligation  to,  H.  1  Cor. 
155 
Home,  from  ;  at  home,  H.  2  Cor.  480 
Honest  robbery,  H.  2  Cor.  597 
Honour,  great,  H.  1  Cor.  143 
Honourable  independence,  H.  2  Cor.  598 

poverty,  H.  2  Cor.  597 
Hope  cheering  labour,  H.  1  Cor.  196 

faith,  and  love,  N.  1  Cor.  302 
Household  life,  Christian  directory  of  relative 

duties  in,  H.  1  Cor.  163 
Houses,  our  present  and  future,  H.  2  Cor.  507 
Human  development,  H.  1  Cor.  300 


Human  differences — their  origin  and  design, 
H.  1  Cor.  118 
history,  sub-final  act  in  drama  of,  H.  1  Cor. 

356 
life  circumscribed  by  limitations,  H.  2  Cor. 

612 
wisdom,  H.  1  Cor.  49 
Husband  and  wife,  H.  1  Cor.  160,  163 
sanctified  by,  H.  1  Cor.  165 

I  DIE  daily,  H.  1  Cor.  356 

Identity  of    resurrection-body,    H.    1    Cor. 

337 
Idols,  meat  offered  to,  N.  1  Cor.  172 
Idolatry,  flee  from,  H.  1  Cor.  224 
Idolatries,  familiar,  I.  1  Cor.  227 
If  ye  be  disposed  to  go  .  .  .  eat,  H.  1  Cor. 

230 
Ignorance,  causes  of,  H.  1  Cor.  74 
Illustrations,  undesigned,  of  living  to  Christ, 

H.  1  Cor.  377 
Immortal  and  all-outlasting,  H.  1  Cor.  277 
Immortality,  love's,  H.  1  Cor.  288 
Important  things,  three,  H.  1  Cor.  197 
Incense;  captives;  triumph,  H.  2  Cor.  419; 

N.  2  Cor.  408 
Inclusion ;  exclusion ;  delusion,  H.  1  Cor.  155 
Increase  and  success,  H.  1  Cor.  86 
Independence,  honourable,  H.  2  Cor.  598 

of  minister,  H.  1  Cor.  191 
Indifference  of  circumcision  and  uncircura- 

cision,  H.  1  Cor.  166 
Indispensable      and      all-important,      love, 

H.  1  Cor.  275 
Inner  life  of  apostle,  H.  2  Cor.  458 
Inquiry,  world's,  and  God's  answer,  H.  1  Cor. 

40 
Intellect,   undue   exaltation  of,   conflict   of 

faith  with,  H.  2  Cor.  582 
without  love,  I.  1  Cor.  282 
Intelligent  worship  and  teaching,  H.  1  Cor. 

308 
Intercourse,  Christian's  social,  H.  1  Cor.  230 
Interdependence  of  bodily  members,  H.  1  Cor. 

262 
Intolerance  of  gospel,  I.  1  Cor.  370 

of  love,  I.  1  Cor.  370 
Invincible  and  all-enduring,  love,  H.  1  Cor. 

276 

Jesus  the  Lord,  H.  1  Cor.  267 
Judge  ye  what  I  say,  H.  1  Cor.  228 
Judging  men  and  angels,  N.  1  Cor.  156 
Judgment,  H.  1  Cor.  103 

of  Church  and  of  God,  H.  1  Cor.  135 
Judgments,  temporal,  H.  1  Cor.  253 

Keep  your  piety  strong,  I.  1  Cor.  231 
Kenosis  of  cross,  H.  1  Cor.  34 
Kingdom  of  God,  H.  1  Cor.  140 

citizens  of,  two  features  in  life   of, 
H.  2  Cor.  405 
Kings,  real  and  false,  H.  1  Cor.  106 
Kiss,  holy,  N.  1  Cor.  360 
Knowing  Christ  after  flesh,  H.  2  Cor.  492 
in  part,  H.  1  Cor.  289 

643 


INDEX. 


Knowledge,  teachings  of,  H.  1  Cor.  174 
two  kinds  of,  H.  1  Cor.  60 
way  to,  H.  1  Cor.  76 
weighed  in  balances  against  love,  H.  1  Cor. 

178 

Labour  and  burdens,  strength  for,  I.  2  Cor. 
479 
hope  cheering,  H.  1  Cor.  196 
Labouring  in  present,  H.  2  Cor.  485 
Law,  Christian  liberty  and,  H.  2  Cor.  442, 
445,  447,  449 
of  God,  H.  1  Cor.  210 
principle  of,  under  gospel  order,  H.  1  Cor. 

199 
unveiled,  H.  2  Cor.  429 
Leaven  of  evil,  N.  1  Cor.  359 
Letter,  deadly  ;  life-giving  Spirit,  H.  2  Cor. 

435,  440 
Letters  of  commendation,  N.  2  Cor.  426 

open,  H.  2  Cor.  428 
Liberty,  Christian,  H.  1  Cor.  160,  163 
Christianity  is,  H.  1  Cor.  142 
from  Law  under  dispensation  of  Spirit, 

H.  2  Cor.  449 
of  Spirit,  H.  2  Cor.  442,  445,  447,  449 
Life,  compensations  of,  H.  1  Cor.  271 

human,    circumscribed    by     limitations, 

H.  2  Cor.  612 
is  yours,  H.  1  Cor.  98 
love's  way  of,  H.  1  Cor.  278 
of  apostle,  outer  and  inner,  H.  2  Cor.  458 
of  citizens  of  kingdom  of  God,  two  fea- 
tures in,  H.  2  Cor.  405 
race  of,  six  earnest  counsels  on,  H.  1  Cor. 

210 
two  counterpart  facts  of,  H.  2  Cor.  381 
work  and  outer,  of  ambassadors,  H.  2  Cor. 
512 
Life-giving  Spirit;  deadly  letter,  H.  2  Cor.  435 
Like  master,  like  servants,  H.  2  Cor.  598 
Limitations,   human   life  circumscribed  by, 

H.  2  Cor.  612 
Litigation,  Christian,  H.  1  Cor.  138 
Living  epistles,  H.  2  Cor.  450 

God,  temple  of,  H.  2  Cor.  516,  531 

narrow,  rebuked,  H.  2  Cor.  509 

to    Christ,    undesigned   illustrations   of, 

H.  1  Cor.  377 
unity,  H.  1  Cor.  271 
Looking  into  future,  H.  2  Cor.  477 
Lord,  duty  of  Church  towards  its,  H.  1  Cor. 
129 
Jesus,  H.  1  Cor.  267 

Christ,  our,  grace  of,  H.  2  Cor.  550 
Lord's  Supper,  H.  1  Cor.  245,  248  ;  L  1  Cor. 

253 ;   N.  1  Cor.  236 
Lost  epistle,  was  there  ?  N.  1  Cor.  4,  125,  574 
Love,  H.  1  Cor.  275,  300  ;  N.  1  Cor.  301 

all-enduring  and  invincible,  H.  1  Cor.  276 
all-important  and  indispensable,  H.  1  Cor. 

275 
all-outlasting  and  immortal,  H.  1  Cor.  277 
and  strength,  H.  1  Cor.  367 
constraining,  I.  2  Cor.  507 ;  N.  2  Cor.  510 
Father's  gift  of,  H.  2  Cor.  635 

644 


Love,  greatest,  H.  1  Cor.  298 

hope,  and  faith,  N.  1  Cor.  302 

intolerance  of,  I.  1  Cor.  370 

knowledge  weighed  in  balances  against, 
H.  1  Cor.  178 

teachings  of,  H.  1  Cor.  177 

tbinketh  no  evil,  H.  1  Cor.  285 

without — nothing,  H.  1  Cor.  280 
Love's  immortality,  H.  1  Cor.  288 

way  of  life,  H.  1  Cor.  278 
Love-feasts,  N.  1  Cor.  236 
Loyalty  to  written  Word,  L  2  Cor.  438 

Macedonian  Churches,  H.  2  Cor.  548 
Man  and  woman,  H.  1  Cor.  247 

in  Christ  new  man,  H.  2  Cor.  487,  509 

Jesus,  H.  1  Cor.  267 

worth,  H.  1  Cor.  284 
Man's,  Christian  purposing,  H.  1  Cor.  363 
Manhood  and  childhood,  H.  1  Cor.  292 
Manners,  good,  evil  communications  corrupt, 

H.  1  Cor.  346 
Manward  and  Godward   aspects   of  gospel 

ministry,  H.  2  Cor.  425 
Man-worth,  H.  1  Cor.  284 
Many  adversaries,  H.  1  Cor.  375 
Maran-atha,  N.  1  Cor.  360 
Marriage  and  celibacy,  H.  1  Cor.  160 
Master,  like,  like  servants,  H.  2  Cor.  598 
Measure  of  God's  after-gifts,  H.  2  Cor.  571 
Meat  offered  to  idols,  N.  1  Cor.  172 
Members,      bodily,      interdependence       of, 
H.  1  Cor.  262 

serviceableness  of,  H.  1  Cor.  264 
Memory  of  past,  unwelcome,  H.  2  Cor.  604 
Men  and  angels,  judging,  N.  1  Cor.  156 

of  all,  most  miserable,  H.  1  Cor.  344 

over- valued,  H.  1  Cor.  24 

two  types  of,  H.  1  Cor.  56 
Mind  of  Christ,  H.  1  Cor.  78 

what  books  you  read,  H.  1  Cor.  349 

what  company  you  keep,  H.  1  Cor.  347 

willing,  H.  2  Cor.  559 
Minister,  independence  of,  H.  1  Cor.  191 

stewardship  of,  H.  1  Cor.  112 
Minister's    care     for     his     own     salvation, 

H.  1  Cor.  194 
Ministers  of  God  approved,  H.  2  Cor.  529 

of  new  covenant,  H.  2  Cor.  441 

what  shall  we  have,  therefore  ?  H.  2  Cor. 
530 
Ministerial  authority  a  reality,  H.  2  Cor.  589 
Ministration  of  condemnation,  H.  2  Cor.  450 

of  Spirit,  H.  2  Cor.  450 
Ministry,  Christian,  H.  2  Cor.  381 
glory  of,  H.  2  Cor.  450 

gospel,  manward  an  ^  G  od ward  aspects  of, 
H.  2  Cor.  425 

New  Testame  t,  H.  2  Cor.  450 

of  reconciliation,  H.  2  Cor.  500 

of  righteousness,  H.  2  Cor.  450 

stipendiary,  support  of,  H.  1  Cor.  187 
Miracles,  perpetual,  H.  1  Cor.  148 
Miserable,  of  all  men  most,  H.  1  Cor.  344 
Mission,    self-sufficiency   of  Christianity  to 
fulfil  its,  H.  2  Cor.  583 


INDEX. 


Missionary  policy,  true,  H.  2  Cor.  589 
Model  and   motive,   our,    God's  giving  and 
gift,  H.  2  Cor.  567 
father  is,  for  his  children,  I.  1  Cor.  110 
preacher,  H.  1  Cor.  62 
Modern  question  of  conduct,  ancient  piece  of 

history,  lighting  up,  H.  1  Cor.  214 
Monotheism,  Christian,  H.  1  Cor.  180 
Moral  and  physical  evil,  H.  1  Cor.  253 
More  glorious,  glorious  and,  H.  2  Cor.  434 
Mortal,  this,  and  this  corruptible,  H.  1  Cor. 
337 

Name,  Christian,  for  death,  H.  1  Cor.  354 
Narrow^  giving  rebuked,  H.  2  Cor.  568 

living  rebuked,  H.  2  Cor.  569 

prayer  and  faith  rebuked,  H.  2  Cor.  569 
Natural  and  spiritual,  H.  1  Cor.  56 
Nehemiah,  New  Testament,  H.  2  Cor.  623 
Neutrality,   no,    in  the  presence  of    Christ, 

I.  1  Cor.  370 
New  covenant,  ministers  of,  H.  2  Cor.  441 

creature  in  Christ  Jesus,  H.  2  Cor.  496, 
509;  N.  2  Cor.  510 

man,  man  in  Christ,  H.  2  Cor.  487,  509 

Testament  ministry,  H.  2  Cor.  450 
Nehemiah,  H.  2  Cor,  623 
Not  in  vain,  H.  1  Cor.  355 

yours,  but  yon,  H.  2  Cor.  622 
Nothing     against,     everything    for,     truth, 
H.  2  Cor.  630 

science  creates,  I.  2  Cor.  499 

without  love,  H.  1  Cor.  280 
Now,  H.  2  Cor.  528 

and  then,  H.  1  Cor.  300 

salvation,  a,  H.  2  Cor.  520 

Oath,  apostle's  word  confirmed  by,  H.  2  Cor. 

407 
Obligation,  Christian's,  to  holy  life,  H.  1  Cor. 
155 
great,  H   1  Cor.  146 
Offender,  penitent,  Paul  and,  H.  2  Cor.  408 
Offer,  twice-repeated,  H.  2  Cor.  529 
Offices  and  gifts,  diversity  of,  H.  1  Cor.  255 
Old  things  passed  away,  H.  2  Cor.  498 
One  thing  1  do,  this,  I.  1  Cor.  171 

topic,  Paul's,  H.  1  Cor.  66 
Open  door,  Paul  turning  away  from,  H.  2  Cor. 
415 
gospel,  H.  2  Cor.  454 
letters,  H.  2  Cor.  428 
Opened  door,  H.  1  Cor.  371 
Openness,  H.  2  Cor.  428 

of  apostolical  service,  N.  2  Cor.  452 
Order,     gospel,     principle     of    law    under, 
H.  1  Cor.  199 
salutary  Christian,  H.  1  Cor.  306 
seemly,  H.  1  Cor.  307 
Ordinances,  N.  1  Cor.  234 
Origin   and    design   of  human    differences, 

H.  1  Cor.  118 
Outer  life    and    work   of  ambassadors,    H. 
2  Cor.  512 
of  apostle,  H.  2  Cor.  458 
Over- valuation  of  baptism,  H.  1  Cor.  25 


Over-valuation  of  men,  H.  1  Cor.  24 

Parable  in  German  legend,  I.  1  Cor.  97 

of  body,  N.  1  Cor.  254 
Paranymph,  Paul  the,  H.  2  Cor.  592 
Part,  knowing  in,  H.  1  Cor.  289 
Passover,  Christ  our,  H.  1  Cor.  134 

lamb,  Christian's,  I.  1  Cor.  130;  N.  1  Cor. 
135 
Passover-keeping,our  Christian  life  perpetual, 

H.  1  Cor.  134 
Past  full  of  Christ,  H.  1  Cor.  21 

unwelcome  memory  of,  H.  2  Cor.  604 
Pastor,  Paul  as,  H.  2  Cor.  411 
Pastors  absolution,  H.  2  Cor.  414 
Patience,  in  all,  H.  2  Cor.  621 
Paul  and  gospel,  H.  1  Cor.  324 

and  penitent  offender,  H.  2  Cor.  408 

Apollos;  God,  H.  1  Cor.  84 

as  example,  H.  1  Cor.  210 

as  pastor,  H.  2  Cor.  411 

as  pioneer  worker,  H.  2  Cor.  579 

as  prophet,  I.  2  Cor.  477 

evangelist,  H.  1  Cor.  324 

exercising  discipline,  H.  2  Cor.  412 

going  on  campaign,  H.  2  Cor.  576 

in  train  of  Christ's  triumph,  H.  2  Cor.  417 

meeting  criticism,  H.  2  Cor.  387 

the  paranymph,  H.  2  Cor.  592 

the  sinner  saved,  H.  1  Cor.  326 

to  write  was  Christ,  to,  H.  1  Cor.  20 

turning  away  from  open  door,  H.  2  Cor. 
415 

witness,  H.  1  Cor.  325 
Paul's  confessions,  H.  2  Cor.  576 

one  topic,  H.  1  Cor.  66 

tears,  H.  2  Cor.  409 

visits  to  Corinth,  I.  1  Cor.  2 
Peace  and  grace,  H.  1  Cor.  17 

God  of,  H.  2  Cor.  632 
Penitent  offender,  Paul  and,  H.  2  Cor.  408 
Perfect,  N.  1  Cor.  54 

state,  H.  1  Cor.  300 

wisdom  justified  amongst,  H.  1  Cor.  70 
Perfected,  be,  H.  2  Cor.  632 
Perfection,  promise,  purity,  H.  2  Cor.  537 
Peril,  apostle's,  H.  1  Cor.  208 
Perils  of  great  grace,  H.  2  Cor.  617 
Permission  and  commandment,  I.  1  Cor.  171 
Perpetual  miracles,  H.  1  Cor.  148 
Philosophy  of  true  courage,  H.  2  Cor.  507 
Physical  and  moral  evil,  H.  1  Cor.  253 
Picture  of  true  glory,  H.  2  Cor.  451 
Piety,  keep  your  strong,  I.  1  Cor.  231 
Pioneer  worker,  Paul  as,  H.  2  Cor.  579 
Place,  woman's,  and  woman's  work,  H.  1  Cor. 

313 
Planting*  and  watering,  H.  1  Cor.  85 
Plato's  God,  N.  1  Cor.  45 
Pleasure,  H.  2  Cor.  621 
Policy,  true  missionary,  H.  2  Cor.  589 
Poor,  yet  making  many  rich,  H.  2  Cor.  525, 

527,  556 
Povertv,  honourable,  H.  2  Cor.  597 

ricb,  H.  2  Cor.  524 
Power,  word  and,  H.  1  Cor.  120 

645 


INDEX. 


Prayer  and  faith,  narrow,  rebuked,  H.  2  Cor. 
569 

unanswered,  H.  2  Cor.  617 
Praying  or  prophesying,  women,  N.  1  Cor.  235 
Preach  not  gospel,  woe  if  I !  H.  1  Cor.  202, 

210 
Preacher,  H.  2  Cor.  473 

model,  H.  1  Cor.  62 
Preaching  and  teaching,  N.  1  Cor.  98 

foolishness  of,  H.  1  Cor.  27  ;  N.  1  Cor.  50 

gospel,  cross  summary  of,  H.  1  Cor.  39 

of  cross,  H.  1  Cor.  37 

rhetorical  H.  1  Cor.  35 

scholastic,  H.  1  Cor.  34 

two  all-important  things  about,  H.  1  Cor. 
365 
Presence  of  Christ,  no  neutrality  in,  I.  1  Cor. 

370 
Present  and  absent,  H.  2  Cor.  624 

and  future  houses,  our,  H.  2  Cor.  507 

full  of  Christ,  H.  1  Cor.  21 

labouring  in,  H.  2  Cor.  485 

salvation,  H.  2  Cor.  529 

things,  are  yours,  H.  1  Cor.  98 
Principle,  great,  H.  1  Cor.  142 

of  God's  government,  great,  H.  1  Cor.  26 

of  law  under  gospel  order,  H.  1  Cor.  199 
Principles  of  equity,  H.  1  Cor.  210 
Profession  without  love,  I.  1  Cor.  282 
Profitable  and  unprofitable  sorrow,  H.  2  Cor. 

544 
Progress,  Christian,  H.  1  Cor.  206 
Promise,  purity,  perfection,  H.  2  Cor.  537 
Promises,  Christian  man's,  H.  2  Cor.  406 

of  God,  H.  2  Cor.  394  ;  N.  2  Cor.  545 
Prophesying  or  praying,  women,  N.  1   Cor. 

235 
Prophet,  Paul  as,  I.  2  Cor.  477 
Prophets  and  prophecy,  N.  1  Cor.  271 
Proprietor,  great,  H.  1  Cor.  232 
Propriety,  H.  1  Cor.  237 
Proverbial  character  of  Corinth,  N.  1  Cor.  6 
Public  worship,  H.  1  Cor.  240 

in  Christian  Church,  H.  1  Cor.  305 
PuflEed  up,  N.  1  Cor.  135 
Pulpit,  sphere  of,  H.  2  Cor.  463 
Purification  of  Church,  H.  2  Cor.  535 
Purity,  perfection,  promise,  H.  2  Cor.  537 
Purpose,  steadfastness  of,  Christian  man's, 

H.  2  Cor.  406 
Purposing,  Christian  man's,  H.  1  Cor.  363 

Question  of  conduct,  ancient  piece  of  his- 
tory lighting  up  modern,  H.  1  Cor.  214 

Race    of    life,  six  earnest    counsels    on, 

H.  1  Cor.  210 
Ransom,  great,  H.  1  Cor.  145 
Real  and  false  kings,  H.  1  Cor.  106 
Reality  of  ministerial  authority,  H.  2  Cor. 

689 
Reconciliation  by  sinless  Substitute,  H.  2  Cor. 
503 
ministry  of,  H.  2  Cor.  500 
Redemption,  Christ  our,  H.  1  Cor.  48,  49 
Trinity  and,  H.  2  Cor.  636 

646 


Relative  duties  in  household  life.  Christian 

directory  of,  H.  1  Cor.  163 
Religion  and  dogma,  I.  2  Cor.  439 

temple,  N.  1  Cor.  157 
Remaineth,  that  which,  N.  2  Cor.  452 
Remember,  soul,  H.  1  Cor.  155 
Repentance,  faith,  holiness,  H.  1  Cor.  134 

salvation,  sorrow,  H.  2  Cor.  541 
Reproach,  Christian,  H.  2  Cor.  585 
Reprobate  or  approved,  H.  2  Cor.  626 
Responsibility  and  sufficiency,  H.  2  Cor.  432 
Resurrection,  H.  1  Cor.  321 

body,  identity  of,  H.  1  Cor.  337 

of  Christ,  comfort  in  affliction  H.  2  Cor. 
474 
Revelations  and  visions,  N.  2  Cor.  609,  611 
Reward  of  wotkers,  H.  1  Cor.  86 
Rhetorical  preaching,  H.  1  Cor.  35 
Ricb,  poor,  yet  making  many,  H.  2  Cor.  525, 
527,  556 

poverty,  H.  2  Cor.  524 
Righteousness,  Christ  our,  H.  1  Cor.  47, 50 
Rights  of  conscience,  H.  1  Cor.  183 

ministry  of,  H.  2  Cor.  450 
Robbery,  honest,  H.  2  Cor.  597 

Sacredness  of  body,  N.  1  Cor.  157 
Sakes,  for  your,  H.  2  Cor.  474 
Salutary  Christian  order,  H.  1  Cor.  306 
Salvation,  a  now  !  H.  2  Cor.  520 

minister's  care  for  his   own,  H.   1    Cor. 
194 

present,  H.  2  Cor.  529 

sorrow,  repentance,  H.  2  Cor.  541 
Sanctification,  Christ  our,  H.  1  Cor.  47,  50 
Sanctified  by  husband,  H.  1  Cor.  165 

by  wife,  H.  1  Cor.  165 
Satan's  subtlety  and  our  simplicity,  H.  2  Cor. 

607 
Schism  and  heresy,  N.  1  Cor.  273 
Scholastic  preaching,  H.  1  Cor.  34 
Science  creates  nothing,  L  2  Cor.  499 
Scriptures,  according  to,  H.  1  Cor.  342 
Seeking  and  finding  God,  H.  1  Cor.  40 

God,  N.  1  Cor.  50 
Self-denial  without  love,  I.  1  Cor.  283 
Self-examination,  H.  2  Cor.  627 
Self -judgment,  H.  1  Cor.  261 
Self-sufficiency  of  Christianity  to  fulfil  its 

mission,  H.  2  Cor.  583 
Self -vindication,  H.  2  Cor.  622 
Seemly  order,  H.  1  Cor.  307 
Separation,  H.  1  Cor.  135 
Sequence,  common,  H.  2  Cor.  608 
Sermon  to  Church  of  Corinth,  H.  1  Cor.  275 
Servants,  like,  like  master,  H.  2  Cor.  598 
Service,  apostolical,  openness  of,  N.  2  Cor.  452 
Serviceableness  of  bodily  members,  H.  1  Cor. 

264 
Shield  of  triple  brass,  H.  2  Cor.  530 
Short,  time  is,  H.  1  Cor.  169 
Sight  versus  faith,  H.  2  Cor.  489 
Simplicity,  our,  Satan's  subtlety  and,  H.  2  Cor. 

607 
Sin,  great — fornication,  H.  1  Cor,  143 

who  knew  no,  N.  2  Cor.  510 


INDEX, 


Sinless  Substitute,  reconciliation'by,  H.  2  Cor. 

503 
Sinner  saved,  Paul,  H.  1  Cor.  326 
Six  earnest  counsels  on  race  of  life,  H.  1  Cor. 

210 
Sleep  of  death,  H.  1  Cor.  355 

of  sin,  H.  1  Cor.  355 
Social  intercourse,  Christian's,  H.  1  Cor.  230 
Soldiership,  true,  H.  2  Cor.  584 
Some  are  fallen  asleep,  H.  1  Cor.  354 
Sorrow,  profitable  and  unprofitable,  H.  2  Cor. 
544 
repentance,  salvation,  H.  2  Cor.  541 
upon    sorrow ;    comfort    upon    comfort, 
H.  2  Cor.  532  ;  I.  2  Cor.  545 
Soul,  God's  appeal  to,  H.  2  Cor.  620 

remember,  H.  1  Cor.  155 
Speaking,  God,  H.  2  Cor.  529 
Sphere  of  pulpit,  H.  2  Cor.  463 
Spirit,   demonstration    of,    H.    1    Cor.    68 ; 
N.  1  Cor.  54 
fourfold  grace  of,  H.  2  Cor.  397 
liberty  of,  H.  2  Cor.  442,  445,  447,  449 
life-giving ;  deadly  letter,  H.  2  Cor.  435, 

440 
ministration  of,  H.  2  Cor.  450 
Spirit's  gift — fellowship,  H.  2  Cor.  635 
Spiritual,  N.  1  Cor.  211 

natural  and,  H.  1  Cor.  56 
with  spiritual,  H.  1  Cor.  58 ;  N.  1  Cor.  55 
State,  perfect,  H.  1  Cor.  300 
Steadfastness  of  purpose,   Christian  man's, 

H.  2  Cor.  406 
Stewardship,  faithful,  H.  1  Cor.  116 

of  minister,  H.  1  Cor.  112 
Stipendiary  ministry,  support  of,  H.  1  Cor.  187 
Strength  and  love,  H.  1  Cor.  367 
and  weakness,  H.  2  Cor.  619,  621 
for  burdecs  and  labour,  I.  2  Cor.  479 
Strong  and  weak,  H.  2  Cor.  625 
Sub-final  act  in  drama   of   human  history, 

H.  1  Cor.  356 
Subjection  of  thought  to  Christ,  H.  2  Cor. 

583,  588 
Substitute,  sinless,  reconciliation  by,  H.  2  Cor. 

503 
Subtlety,     Satan's,     and     our     simplicity, 

H.  2  Cor.  607 
Success,  increase  and,  H.  1  Cor.  86 
Succession,  who  is  in  the  ?  H.  2  Cor.  458 
Such  as  I  have  give  I  unto  thee,  H.  2  Cor.  526 
Suffering  and  sympathy,  H.  2  Cor.  606 

and  triumph,  H.  2  Cor.  609 
Sufficiency  and  responsibility,  H.  2  Cor.  432 
Sufficient,  who  is  ?  H.  2  Cor.  421,  424 
Supper,  Lord's,  H.  1  Cor.  245,  248 ;  I.  1  Cor. 

253  ;  N.  1  Cor.  236 
Support  of  stipendiary  ministry,  H.  1  Cor.  187 
Sympathy  and  suffering,  H.  2  Cor.  606 

Tabernacling,  H.  2  Cor.  618 
Teaching  and  preaching,  N.  1  Cor.  98 

and  worship,  intelligent,  H.  1  Cor.  308 

two  ways  of,  H.  1  Cor.  61 
Teachings  of  knowledge,  H.  1  Cor.  174 

of  love,  H.  1  Cor.  177 


Tears,  Paul's,  H.  2  Cor.  409 
Temperance,  H.  1  Cor.  205 
Temperate  in  all  things,  H.  1  Cor.  206 
Temple  of  God,  N.  1  Cor.  81,  100;  H.  1  Cor. 
91 

of  living  God,  H.  2  Cor.  516,  531 

religion,  N.  1  Cor.  157 
Temples  of  God,  H.  1  Cor.  153 
Temporal  judgments,  H.  1  Cor.  253 
Temptation,  H.  1  Cor.  218,  222,  233 
Testimony  of  our  conscience,  H.  2  Cor.  405 
Then  and  now,  H.  1  Cor.  300 
Theology ;  triumph  ;  duty,  H.  1  Cor.  340 
They  say,  H.  2  Cor.  589 
Ihings  present  are  yours,  H.  1  Cor.  98 

to  come  are  yours,  H.  1  Cor.  98 
Third  heaven,  N.  2  Cor.  609 
Thorn  in  flesh,  H  2  Cor.  614  ;  N.  2  Cor.  611 
Thought,  victory  of  Christ  over,  H.  2  Cor 

683,  688 
Thoughts,  wandering,  H.  2  Cor.  587 
Three  contrasts,  H.  1  Cor.  363 

executions,  I.  1  Cor.  37 

important  things,  H.  1  Cor.  197 
Threefold  grace  invoked,  H.  2  Cor.  634 
Through  Christ  to  Godward,  H.  2  Cor.  473 
Thus  far,  no  farther  !  H.  1  Cor.  222 
Time  is  short,  H.  1  Cor.  169 
Timothy,  N.  2  Cor.  379 

and  Apollos,  H.  1  Cor.  366 
Title  and  estate,  our,  H.  1  Cor.  93 
Titus  and  his  fellow-deputies,  H,  2  Cor.  554 
Tongues,  gift  of,  N.  1  Cor.  273 
Topic,  Paul's  one,  H.  1  Cor.  66 
Train  of  Christ's  triumph,  Paul  in,  H.  2  Cor. 

417 
Treasure  in  earthen  vessels,  H.  2  Cor.  468 
Treasure-holders,  I.  2  Cor.  469 
Trinity  and  redemption,  H.  2  Cor.  636 
Triple  brass,  shield  of,  H.  2  Cor.  530 
Triumph  ;  captives  ;  incense  ;  H.  2  Cor.  419  ; 
N.  2  Cor.  408 

Christ's,  Paul  in  train  of,  H.  2  Cor.  417 

suffering  and,  H.  2  Cor.  609 

theology ;  duty,  H.  1  Cor.  340 
True     Christian     communism,     Corinthian 
Church  and,  H.  2  Cor.  552 

courage,  philosophy  of,  H.  2  Cor.  507 

glory,  picture  of,  H.  2  Cor.  461 

missionary  policy,  H.  2  Cor.  589 

soldiership,  H.  2  Cor.  584 
Truth,     nothing    against,    everything    for, 

H.  2  Cor.  630 
Twice-repeated  offer,  H.  2  Cor.  629 
Two  Adams,  H.  1  Cor.  337 

all-important    things    about    preaching, 
H.  1  Cor.  355 

categories,  H.  1  Cor.  337 

counterpart  facts  of  life,  H.  2  Cor.  381 

features  in  life  of  citizens  of  kingdom  of 
God,  H.  2  Cor.  406 

kinds  of  knowledge,  H.  1  Cor.  60 

types  of  men,  H.  1  Ci»r.  56 

ways  of  teaching,  H.  1  Cor.  61 

worlds  of  facts,  H.  1  Cor.  58 
Twofold  blessing,  H.  1  Cor.  17 

647 


INDEX. 


Twofold  bond  of  fellowship,  H.  I'Cor.  15 

call,  H.  1  Cor.  11 

holiness,  H.  1  Cor.  13 
Types  of  men,  two,  H.  1  Cor.  56 

Unanswered  prayer,  H.  2  Cor.  617 

Uncircumcision     and     circumcision,     indif- 
ference of,  H.  1  Cor.  166 

Unconscious  goodness,  H.  2  Cor.  451 

Undesigned  illustrations  of  living  to  Christ, 
H.  1  Cor.  377 

Undue   exaltation   of    intellect,    conflict   of 
faith  with,  H.  2  Cor.  582 

Unity,  living,  H.  1  Cor.  271 
of  body,  H.  1  Cor.  257 

Unknown,  H.  2  Cor.  522 

UnprofitalDle  and  profitable  sorrow,  H.  2  Cor. 
544 

Unrecorded  dangers,  H.  2  Cor.  385 
deliverances,  H.  2  Cor.  385 

Unseen  world,  first  fact  of,  is  Christ,  I.  2  Cor. 
482 

Unspeakable  gift,  God's,  H.  2  Cor.  570,  572 

Unveiled  gospel,  H.  2  Cor.  454 
Law,  H.  2  Cor.  429 

Unwelcome  memory  of  past,  H.  2  Cor.  604 

Use  it  rather,  H.  1  Cor.  167 

Vain,  not  in,  H.  1  Cor.  355 
Veiling  gospel,  H.  2  Cor.  465 
Veils,  women's,  H.  1  Cor.  237 
Vengeance,  God's,  by  fire,  I.  1  Cor.  100 
Vessels,  earthen,  treasure  in,  H.  2  Cor.  468 
Victory,  cross  and  its,  N.  1  Cor.  51,  52 

of  Christ  over  thought,  H.  2  Cor.  583 
Visions  and  revelations,  N.  2  Cor.  609,  611 
Visits  of  Paul  to  Corinth,  I.  1  Cor.  2 

VVandeeing  thoughts,  H.  2  Cor.  587 
Warfare,  our,  its  conditions,  foes,  weapons, 

H.  2  Cor.  585,  586 
Watering,  planting  and,  H.  1  Cor.  85 
Way  of  life,  love's,  H.  1  Cor.  278 

to  knowledge,  H.  1  Cor.  76 
Weak  and  strong,  H.  2  Cor.  625 
Weakness  and  strength,  H.  2  Cor.  619,  621 

of  agents  "contributes  to  furtherance  of 
gospel,  H.  2  Cor.  473 
What  advantageth  it  me  ?  H.  1  Cor.  356 
When  will  you  die  ?  H.  1  Cor.  356 
Where,  indeed !  H.  1  Cor.  49 
Who  is  in  the  "  succession"  ?  H.  2  Cor.  458 

is  sufficient  ?  H.  2  Cor.  421,  424 


32 


407 


Wife,  husband  and,  H.  1  Cor.  160,  163 

sanctified  by,  H.  1  Cor.  165 
Willing  mind,  H.  2  Cor.  559 
Wisdom,    Christ    our,    H.    1    Cor.    45,    49; 
N.  1  Cor.  52 

human,  H.  1  Cor.  49 

justified  amongst  perfect,  H.  1  Cor.  70 
Wishing  and  working,  H.  2  Cor.  477 
Without  love— nothing,  H.  1  Cor.  280 
Witness,  Faul,  H.  1  Cor.  325 
Woe  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel !  H.  1  Cor. 

202,  210 
Woman,  man  and,  H.  1  Cor.  247 

what  gospel  did  for,  H.  1  Cor.  314 
Woman's  place  and  woman's  work,  H.  1  Cor. 

313 
Women  praying  or  prophesying,  N.  1  Cor. 

235 
Women's  veils,  H.  1  Cor.  237 
Wonder :  Church  in  Corinth,  H.  1  Cor. 
Word  and  power,  H.  1  Cor.  120 

apostle's,  confirmed  by  oath,  H.  2  Cor. 

is  corrupted,  H.  2  Cor.  425 

written,  loyalty  to,  I.  2  Cor.  438 
Work     and     outer    life     of     ambassadors, 
H.  2  Cor.  512 

tried  by  fire,  H.  1  Cor.  87 

woman's,  and  woman's  place,  H.  1  Cor.  313 
Works,  according  to  their,  H.  2  Cor.  608 
Worker,  pioneer,  Paul  as,  H.  2  Cor.  579 
Workers,  reward  of,  H.  1  Cor.  86 
Working  and  wishing,  H.  2  Cor.  477 
World,  N.  1  Cor.  55,  135 

duty  of  Church  towards,  H.  1  Cor. 

god  of  this,  H.  2  Cor.  473 

is  yours,  H.  1  Cor.  98 
World's  inquiry  and  God's  answer,  H. 

40 
Worlds  of  fact,  two,  H.  1  Cor.  58 
Worldly  expediency,  H.  1  Cor.  151 
Worship  and  teaching,  intelhgent,  H.  1  Cor. 
308 

public,  H.  1  Cor.  240 

in  Christian  Church,  H.  1  Cor.  305 
Written  Word,  loyalty  to,  I.  2  Cor.  438 

Yea  and  Amen,  Christ,  H.  2  Cor.  394 
Yours,  all  things,  H.  1  Cor.  93,  98 

death  is,  H.  1  Cor.  98 

life  is,  H.  1  Cor.  98 

not,  but  you,  H.  2  Cor.  622 

things  present  are,  H.  1  Cor.  98 
to  come  are,  H.  1  Cor.  98 

world  is,  H.  1  Cor.  98 


132 


1  Cor. 


HOMIIJES   FOR   SPECIAL   OCCASIONS. 

Church  Seasons :  Christmas,  2  Cor.  ix.  15.     Easter,  1  Cor.  v.  7 ;  xv. ;  2  Cor.  iv.  14.     Trinity, 

2  Cor.  xiii.  14. 
Holy  Communion  :  1  Cor.  v.  7 ;  xi.  20.       |      Baptism :  1  Cor.  i.  14. 
Missions  to  Heathen  :  1  Cor.  i.  23 ;  2  Cor.  x.  14-16. 
Special:  Ordination,  and  to  Ministers,  1  Cor.  i.  17;  ii.  2;  iii.  7;  iv.  1,  2;  ix.  16;  27;  2  Cor. 

ii.  16;  iii.  4-11;  6;  ix.  2;  7;  xi.  2.     Workers,  1   Cor.  iii.  13;  2  Cor.  x.     Evangelistic, 

1  Cor.  vi.   20;    2  Cor.  v.   17;    20;    21;    vi.  2;    viii.  9.     Pastoral  Aid,   1   Cor.  ix.  1-14. 

Temperance,  1  Cor.  viii.  13;  ix.  24-27;  x.  23.     Young  People,  1  Cor.  xiii.  11;  xv.  33. 

Marriage,  1  Cor.  vii. ;  xi.  11.      Funeral,  1  Cor.  xv,  6;  50-54.     Almsgiving,  1  Cor.  xvi. 

1   2;  2  Cor.  viii.  12;  ix. 

648 


BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 


3  1197  21020  8044 


